Title: Commentaries on the First Book of Moses, Called Genesis, Vol. I
Creator: John Calvin (Rev. John King, M.A., Translator)
Publisher: Edinburgh: Printed for the Calvin Translation Society, 1847
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: 1847 publication date places this well out of US copyright (179
  years before this session, 2026); independently confirmed by archive.org's
  own copyright-status field ("possible-copyright-status": "NOT_IN_COPYRIGHT").
Source: Internet Archive item commentariesonfi01calvuoft
  (archive.org/details/commentariesonfi01calvuoft), fetched directly (curl,
  raw bytes) from the item's own _djvu.txt full-text file, 2026-09-25, this
  session.
Provenance note: Raw, uncorrected djvu OCR of a mid-19th-century volume. Runs
  of 2+ spaces (a scan-layout artifact) collapsed to one throughout; no
  wording changed. The front matter (a Calvin Translation Society subscription
  notice) and a small number of illustration/plate leaves at the very head and
  tail OCR as near-total garbage (the scanner reading decorative
  engraving/binding, not text) - left as-is per this corpus's standing
  practice for archive.org scans, since it is not part of Calvin's own text.
  The commentary body itself (chapters 1 onward) was directly sampled at
  multiple points (opening, middle, and several points through the volume)
  this session and reads cleanly.
Content note: This is Volume I of a 2-volume work (Genesis, complete, split
  across two physical volumes by the original 1847 publisher). One
  representative volume-pair out of the ~22-volume Calvin Translation Society
  Commentaries series named in the Source Readiness Dossier's Verified
  Acquisition Leads - a deliberate partial acquisition of that series, not
  the whole set; the remaining ~20 volumes (Psalms, the Gospel harmony, Paul's
  epistles, etc.) remain a real, open acquisition opportunity for a future
  pass, not vendored this session.

609€ ZESEN LOLI © 


HNN 











Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2007 with funding from 
Microsoft Corporation 


http://www.archive.org/details/commentariesonfi01 calvuoft 





Pe, 5 
PEOPOSALS 


For Publishing by Subscription, 


J/2 & 


NEW ENGLISH TRANSLATIONS OF 


THE COMMENTARIES OF JOHN CALVIN 


ON THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES 
AND ST PAUL’S EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS. 





In consequence of the dissatisfaction so generally expressed in 
reference to THE Op Enexisn Versions which were circulated during 
the first year by THE CALVIN SOCIETY, and at the special 
request of a number of the Subscribers to that Series, it is intended 
to re-issue New TRANSLATIONS of the above Commentaries ; so that those 
who desire it, may possess A COMPLETE AND UNIFORM SET OF CALVIN’S 
WokRKS IN MODERN ENGLISH. 


Owing to the great importance and value of these ComMENTARIES, 
it is not meant to confine the publication to those who already subscribe 
to the whole of the Calvin Translations. The Public in general are 
respectfully invited to join in promoting the Scheme. 


Those who approve of the present Proposals are requested to send 
their names without delay to the Secretary, Rosrert Pitcairn, F.S.A. 
Sc., 9, Northumberland Street, Edinburgh; and if the number shall prove 
sufficient to defray a considerable portion of the expense, measures will 
be immediately taken to carry the plan into effect, without at all inter- 
fering with the progress of the regular Issues of the Calvin Translations. 


It is expected that these Commentarizes will form Three large 
Volumes, extending to between 500 and 600 pages each, which will be 
accompanied by copious Introductions, Critical Notes, Tables, Indices, 
&e. 


The price to Subscribers will be One Pound, which may be trans- 
mitted either now, or at the commencement of the next year with the 
regular Subscriptions. 


The impression will be limited. The Books to be delivered free in 
London, Dublin, and Edinburgh, at the close of 1848, on the same plan 
with the ordinary Issues. Such copies as remain, after supplying the 
Subscribers, will be sold to Non-Subscribers at 31s. 6d. 





** A List of the Subscribers whose names are sent in previous to 1st 
December will be printed and circulated with the last Issue for 1847 ; and the 
Works will be put to press as soon as Subscriptions to the amount of two- 
thirds of the estimated outlay are received. The MSS. are already far advanced, 
and will be revised and ready for press early in the ensuing summer. 





OFFICE FOR THE CALVIN TRANSLATIONS, 
9, Northumberland Street, Edinburgh.—1si October 1847. 


“alpen 





COMMENTARIES 


ON 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


VOL. I. 


THE CALVIN TRANSLATION SOCIETY, 


e 


INSTITUTED IN MAY M.DCCC.XLIIL 





FOR THE PUBLICATION OF TRANSLATIONS OF THE WORKS OF 
JOHN CALVIN. 

















6 Hii se ‘ow 
: a =< i] ask ‘ i >: 
/ 


a}) 
me 

















NPARIS AVRELETBITYD 
ACADRE MTS 
TV RUISPRVBATITIE DLDGLAF 









ORE TRAST 
AMD XX VT 
DELECTVSs 
ECLESTIAEREFDRMAT ION 
W_AIRITS 














SY 
. 


Sie 





aca 






S yy 
oy 


MEDALS OF CALVIN 


syymen'! | ae ts/J 
xV~LESIS 


COMMENTARIES 


ON 


THE FIRST BOOK OF MOSES 


CALLED 


GENESIS. 


BY JOHN CALVIN. 


TRANSLATED FROM THE ORIGINAL LATIN, AND COMPARED 
WITH THE FRENCH EDITION, 


BY THE REV. JOHN KING, M.A,, 


OF QUEEN’S COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE, INCUMBENT OF CHRIST'S CHURCH, 
HULL. 


ay) 8 


VOLUME FIRST. ni! 
woe 
on ©) 


by 


EDINBURGH : 
PRINTED FOR THE CALVIN TRANSLATION SOCIETY. 


M.DCCC.XLVII. 





ae : . ‘ i cua ms j 


[Enteren at Stationers’ Wall.) 


iti at gore, “ Seve 


as, 





TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE. 


SEVERAL of the COMMENTARIES OF CALVIN on different 
portions of the Holy Scripture having been for some time 
before the public, through the labours of THE CALVIN 
SOcIETY ; it is not improbable that the readers of the follow- 
ing pages will have already become in a great degree familiar 
with the writings of this celebrated Reformer. 


It may, perhaps, therefore be thought an unnecessary, if 
not a presumptuous undertaking, to preface the present work 
with any general observations on the character of CALVIN’s 
EXPOSITORY WRITINGS. But though the Commentary on 
GENESIS was neither the first which Calvin wrote, nor the 
first which the Calvin Society has republished; yet since, in 
the ultimate arrangement of the Commentaries it must take 
the foremost place, the Editor has determined to offer such 
preliminary remarks as may seem desirable for a reader who 
begins to read the Commentaries of Calvin, as he begins to 
read the Bible itself, at the Book of Genesis. If, in taking 
such a course, he is charged with repeating some things which 
have been said by others before him, he will not be extremely 
anxious either to defend himself from the charge or to meet 
it with a denial, 


It seems to be now generally admitted that though, in the 


vi TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE. 
brilliant constellation formed by the master-spirits of the 
REFORMATION, there were those who, in some respects, shone 
with brighter lustre than CaLvIN, yet, as a Commentator on 
Holy Scripture, he far outshines them all. 


There is scarcely anything in which the wisdom of God 
has been more conspicuous, than in his choice of instruments 
for carrying into execution the different parts of that mighty 
revolution of sentiment, which affected, more or less, every 
portion of Europe during the sixteenth century. 


Long before the issue of the movement was seen or appre- 
hended, we behold Erasmus, the most accomplished scholar 
of the age, acting unconsciously as the pioneer of a Reforma- 
tion, which at length he not only opposed, but apparently 
hated. He had been raised up by God to lash the vices of 
the Clergy, to expose the ignorance, venality, and sloth of the 
Mendicant Orders, and to exhibit the follies of Romanism in 
sarcastic invectives rendered imperishable by the elegant La- 
tinity in which they were clothed. But he did still more. 
The world is indebted to him for the first edition of the entire 
New Testament in the Original Greek.! He had also the 
honour of being the first modern translator of the New Tes- 
tament into Latin.? He published a valuable critical Com- 
mentary on the New Testament, which was early translated 
into English, and ordered to be placed in the Churches.® 
Yet, great as the service undoubtedly was which he rendered 
to the cause of truth, he never dared to cast the yoke of 


' Horne’s Introduction, vol. v. Part I. chap. i. sect. iv. London, 1846. 

2 Ibid. vol. v. Part I. chap. i. sect. vii. 

3 The Editor has now before him “ The first tome or volume of the 
paraphrase of Erasmus upon the Newe Testamente,” printed in 1548, 
with a dedication to King Edward VI., and another to Queen Catherine 
Parr, by Nicolas Udal. It appears that Udal translated the Gospels 
oe St Matthew, St Luke, and St John; and Thomas Key, that of St 
“Mark. 


TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE. Vii 


Rome from his own neck, never stooped to identify himself 
with the Protestant Reformers; but lived and died, as there 
is reason to fear, a mean, truckling, time-serving Romanist, 
panting for preferment in a Church, the unsoundness of which 
he had so fearfully exposed. It is not, however, to be de- 
nied that God employed him as a most important instrument 
in shaking the foundations of the Papacy, and in preparing 
the way for the more successful efforts of more sincere and 
devoted servants of God. 


Among these LUTHER and MELANCTHON in one field, 
Catvin and ZuviNe ius in another, occupy posts of the 
greatest responsibility and usefulness; but Luther and Calvin 
are manifestly the great leaders in this cause. 


In qualifications necessary for the commencing of this great 
struggle, we readily yield the palm to LUTHER. His indomi- 
table energy, his noble bearing, his contempt for danger, his 
transparent honesty of purpose, his fiery zeal, his generous 
frankness—though too often degenerating into peremptory 
vehemence of spirit and rudeness of manner—eminently fitted 
him to take the lead in a warfare where so much was to be 
braved, to be endured, and to be accomplished. 


There was still another qualification, which perhaps no man 
ever possessed in so high a degree as the Saxon Reformer, 
and that consisted in the prodigious mastery he had over lus 
own mother-tongue. He seized on the rude, yet nervous and 
copious German of his ancestors, and taught it to speak with 
a combination of melody and force, which it had never known 
before. And his vernacular translation of the Holy Scrip- 
tures, in opening to the millions of the German empire the 
Fount of eternal life, also revealed to them the hitherto 
hidden beauties and powers of their own masculine tongue. _ 


Vill TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE. 


CALYIN, like Luther, was a man of courage; but he wanted 
Luther’s fire, he wanted Luther’s ardent frankness of disposi- 
tion; he wanted, in short, the faculty which Luther possessed 
in a pre-eminent degree, of laying hold on the affections, and 
of kindling the enthusiasm of a mighty nation. 


CALvIn, like Luther too, was a Translator of the Scriptures, 
and it is worthy of remark, that he also wrote in a far purer 
and better style than any of his contemporaries, or than any 
writers of an age near his own. But he had not the honour, 
which God conferred on Luther, of sending forth the sacred 
volume as a whole, through that great nation in which his lan- 
guage was spoken, and of thus pouring, by one single act, a 
flood of light upon millions of his countrymen. 


But whatever advantage may lie on the side of LUTHER in 
the comparison, so far as it has yet been carried, we shall 
find it on the side of CaLvin in grasp of intellect, in dis- 
criminating power, in calmness, clearness and force of argu- 
ment, in patience of research, in solid learning, in every 
quality, in short, which is essential to an Expositor of Holy 
Writ. Weare the better able to institute this comparison, 
because LuTHER himself wrote a Commentary on the Scrip- 
tures; but the slightest inspection of the two Commentaries 
will convince the Reader of Catvin’s intellectual superiority ; 
and will show, that as a faithful, penetrating, and judicious 
Expounder of the Holy Spirit’s meaning in the Scriptures, he 
left the great Leader of the Reformation at an immeasurable 
distance behind.! 


1 Nothing is farther from the Editor’s intention than to speak slight- 
ingly of Luther’s Commentaries. That on the Galatians alone has laid 
the Church of Christ under lasting obligation to its Author. But its 
excellencies are not of the same order with those which mark the exposi- 
tory writings of Calvin. As a defence of the Gospel of Christ against 
the prevailing errors of the day—and, alas! of our own day too—it 





TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE. 1x 


~ The doctrinal system of CALVIN is too well known to 
require explanation in this place. It is however a mistake to 
suppose that, on those points in which Calvinism is deemed 
peculiarly to consist, he went a single step farther than 
LuTHER himself, and the great majority of the Reformers. 
He states his views with calmness, clearness, and precision ; 
he reasons on them dispassionately, and never shrinks from 
any consequences to which he perceives them to lead. But 
it would be the height of injustice to charge him with 
obtruding them at every turn upon his reader, or with 
attempting to force the language of Scripture to bear testi- 
mony to his own views. 


No writer ever dealt more fairly and honestly by the 
Word of God. He is scrupulously careful to let it speak for 
itself, and to guard against every tendency of his own mind 
to put upon it a questionable meaning for the sake of estab- 
lishing some doctrine which he feels to be important, or 
some theory which he is anxious to uphold. This is one 
of his prime excellencies. He will not maintain any doctrine, 
however orthodox and essential, by a text of Scripture which 
to him appears of doubtful application, or of inadequate 
force. For instance, firmly as he believed the doctrine of 
the Trinity, he refuses to derive an argument in its. favour, 
from the plural form of the name of God in the first chapter 
of Genesis. It were easy to multiply examples of this kind, 
which, whether we agree in his conclusions or not, cannot 
fail to produce the conviction, that he is, at least, an honest 
Commentator, and will not make any passage of Scripture 
speak more or less than, according to his view, its Divine 
Author intended it to speak. Catvin has been charged with 


stands forth a masterpiece of sound argument and energetic declamation ; 
and as a balm to wounded consciences, it remains to the present hour 
without a rival. 


x TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE. 


ignorance of the language in which the Old Testament was 
written. Father Simon says that he scarcely knew more of 
Hebrew than the letters! The charge is malicious and ill- 
founded. It may, however, be allowed that a critical exa- 
mination of the text of Holy Scripture was not the end which 
CALVIN proposed to himself; nor had he perhaps the mate- 
rials or the time necessary for that accurate investigation of 
words and syllables to which the Scriptures have more 
recently been subjected. Still his verbal criticisms are 
neither few nor unimportant, though he lays comparatively 
little stress upon them himself. * 


His great strength, however, is seen in the clear, compre- 
hensive view he takes of the subject before him, in the 
facility with which he penetrates the meaning of his Author, 
in the lucid expression he gives to that meaning, in the variety 
of new yet solid and profitable thoughts which he frequently 
elicits from what are apparently the least promising portions 
of the sacred text, in the admirable precision with which he 
unfolds every doctrine of Holy Scripture, whether veiled. 
under figures and types, or implied in prophetical allusions, 
or asserted in the records of the Gospel. As his own mind 
was completely imbued with the whole system of divine 
truth, and as his capacious memory never seemed to lose any- 
thing which it had once apprehended, he was always able to 
present a harmonised and consistent view of truth to hi 
readers, and to show the relative position in which any given 
portion of it stood to all the rest. This has given a complete- 
ness and symmetry to his Commentaries which could scarcely 


1 The reader is referred, for full information on this subject, to a small 
, volume entitled, ‘‘‘The Merits of Calvin as an Interpreter of the Holy 

Scriptures.” By Professor Tholuck of Halle. To which are added, 
‘*‘ Opinions and Testimonies of Foreign and British Divines and Scholars 
as to the Importance of the Writings of John Calvin.” With a Preface 
by the Rey. William Pringle. London, 1845. 


TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE. xi 


have been looked for; as they were not composed in the 
order in which the Sacred Books stand in the Volume of 
Inspiration, nor perhaps in any order of which a clear account 
can now be given. He probably did not, at first, design to 
expound more than a single Book; and was led onward by 
the course which his Expository Lectures in public took, to 
write first on one and then on another, till at length he tra- 
versed nearly the whole field of revealed truth. 


That, in proceeding with such want of method, his work, 
instead of degenerating into a congeries of lax and uncon- 
nected observations constantly reiterated, should have main- 
tained, to a great degree, the consistency of a regular and 
consecutive Commentary, is mainly to be imputed to the 
gigantic intellectual power by which he was distinguished. 
Through the whole of his writings, this power is everywhere 
visible, always in action, ingrafting upon every passing inci- 
dent some forcible remark, which the reader no sooner sees 
than he wonders that it had not occurred to his own mind. 
A work so rich in thought is calculated to call into vigorous 
exercise the intellect of the reader; and, what is the best and 
highest use of reading, to compel him to think for himself. 
It is like seed-corn, the parent of the harvest. f 


It has been objected against CALVIN by Bishop Horstey, 
—no mean authority in Biblical criticism,—that “by his 
want of taste, and by the poverty of his imagination, he was 
a most wretched Expositor of the Prophecies,—just as he 
would have been a wretched expositor of any secular poet.” 


1 See Horsley’s Sermons, vol. i. p. 72. 

In opposition to this testimony, it may be well to refer to that of Fa- 
ther Simon, a Roman Catholic, who says, ‘* Calvinus sublimi ingenio 
pollebat,” Calvin possessed a sublime genius; and of Scaliger, who ex- 
claims, ‘‘ O quam Calvinus bene assequitur menlem prophetarum !—nemo 
melius,” Oh! how well has Calvin reached the meaning of the prophets 
—no one better. 


xil TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE. 


It is true, this censure is qualified by the acknowledgment 
that CALVIN was “a man of great piety, great talents, and 
great learning.’ Yet, after all, it would not, perhaps, be 
difficult to show that, as an expounder of the poetical por- 
tions of Holy Scripture,—the Psalms for instance,—Bishop 
Horsley more frequently errs through an excess of imagina- 
tion, than Calvin does through the want of it. However 
this may be, it is not intended here to assert, either that 
Calvin possessed a high degree of poetical taste, or that he 
cultivated to any great extent the powers of the imagination. 
His mind was cast:in the more severe mould of chastised, 
vigorous, and concentrated thought. They who seek for the 
flowers of poesy must go to some other master; they who 
would acquire habits of sustained intellectual exercise may 
spend their days and nights over the pages of Calvin. 


But that which gives the greatest charm to these noble 
compositions is, the genuine spirit of piety which breathes 
through them. ‘The mind of the writer turns with ease and 
with obvious delight to the spiritual application of his subject. 
Hence the heart of the reader is often imperceptibly raised 
to high and heavenly things. ‘The rare combination of intel- 
lect so profound and reasoning so acute, with piety so fer- 
vent, inspires the reader with a calm and elevated solemnity, 
and strengthens his conviction of the excellence and dignity 
of true religion. . 


On the mode in which THE EpirTor has executed his task 
he may be permitted to say, that he has attempted to be 
faithful as a translator, without binding himself to a servile 
rendering of word for word, unmindful of the idiomatic dif- 
ferences between one language and another. Yet it has been 
his determination not to sacrifice sense to sound, nor to depart 
from the Author’s meaning for the sake of giving to any sen- 





TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE. Xili 


tence a turn which might seem more agreeable to an English 
ear. He has occasionally softened an expression which ap- 
peared harsh in the original, and would appear harsher still 
in our own language and in our own times. But in such 
cases, he has generally placed the Latin expression before 
the reader in a note. He has done the same, when any sen- 
tence appeared capable of a different interpretation from that 
which is given in the translation. A few passages which 
justly offend against delicacy are left untranslated; and one 
it has been thought expedient entirely to omit. Some re- 
marks are, however, made upon it in the proper place. 


Clear as the LATIN STYLE OF CALVIN generally is, yet his 
sententious mode of expressing himself occasionally leaves 
some ambiguity in his expressions. Such difficulties, how- 
ever, have generally been overcome by the aid of the valuable 
FRENCH TRANSLATION, published at Geneva in the year 
1564,—the year of CaLvin’s death,—of which there is no 
reason to doubt that Catvin was the author. Frequent 
references to this translation in the notes will show to what 
extent assistance has been derived from it by the Editor. 


An ENGLISH TRANSLATION of this Commentary on Genesis, 
by Tuomas TyMmg, in black letter, was printed in the year 
1578. It is, upon the whole, fairly executed; but nearly 
every criticism on Hebrew words is entirely passed over; 
and where the Translator has not had the sagacity to omit 
the whole of any such passage, he has betrayed his own 
ignorance of the language, and obscured the meaning of his 
author. Tymme claims for Calvin the credit of being the 
first foreign Protestant Commentator on Genesis who was 
made to speak in the English language.’ 


1 See page xlii. 


xiv TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE. 


The reader will find Catvin’s Latin Version of the 
sacred text placed side by side with our own excellent Au- 
THORISED TRANSLATION.! This was thought the best method 
of meeting the wants of the public. The learned may see 
Calvin’s own words, which they will much prefer to any 
translation of them, however accurate; the unlearned will 
have before them that version of the Scriptures which from 
their youth they have been taught to reverence. Where 
CALVIn’s version materially differs from our own, and espe- 
cially where his comments are made on any such different 
rendering, ample explanation is given in the notes. 


The Editor may be expected to say something respecting 
the notes generally, which he has ventured to append to this 
Commentary. Some may object that they are too few, others 
that they aresuperfluous. It would have been easy tohave made 
them more numerous, had space permitted; and easier still to 
have omitted them altogether. But the writer of them thought 
it would hardly be doing justice to CALVIN to leave everything 
exactly as he found it; for were the distinguished Author of the 
Commentary now alive to re-edit his own immortal work, there 
is no doubt that he would reject every error which the increased 
facilities for criticism would have enabled him to detect, and. 
that he would throw fresh light on many topics which were, 


1 The Translator has pleasure in adducing the following testimony to 
our Authorised version from the pen of that excellent Biblical scholar, 
Albert Barnes of Philadelphia. ‘‘ No translation of the Bible was ever 
made under more happy auspices; and it would now be impossible to 
furnish another translation in our language under circumstances so pro- 
pitious. Whether we contemplate the number, the learning, or the piety 
of the men employed in it; the cool deliberation with which it was exe- 
cuted; the care taken that it should secure the approbation of the most 
learned men in a country that embosomed a vast amount of literature ; 
the harmony with which they conducted their work ; or the comparative 
perfection of the translation ; we see equal cause of gratitude to the great 
Author of the Bible, that we have so pure a translation of his Word. . . 
It has become the standard of our language ; and nowhere can the purity 
and expressive dignity of this language be so fully found as in the Sacred 
Scriptures.”—See Notes, Explanatory and Practical, on the Gospels, page 
17. London 1846. 


TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE. XV 


in his day, dimly seen, or quite misunderstood. And though 
it belongs not to an Editor to alter what is erroneous, or to 
incorporate in his Author’s Work any thoughts of his own, 
or of other men; yet it is not beyond his province,—provided 
he does it with becoming modesty, and with adequate inform- 
ation,—to point out mistakes, to suggest such considerations 
as may have led him to conclusions different from those of 
his Author, and to quote from other Writers passages, some- 
times confirmatory of, sometimes adverse to, those advanced 
in the Work which he presents to the public. Within these 
limits the Editor has endeavoured to confine himself. How 
far he has succeeded, it is not for him but for the candid and 
competent reader to determine. 


As it was possible that a doubt might exist whether the 
version of Scripture used by CALVIN was his own, or whether 
he had borrowed it from some other source; it was thought 
worth the labour to investigate the true state of the case, by 
having recourse to the excellent Library of the British Mu- 
seum. or this purpose the several versions which CaLvIN 
was most likely to have adopted, had he not made one for him- 
self, were subjected to examination. It was not necessary to 
refer to any made by Romanists; and those made by Protest- 
ants into the Latin language, which there was any probability 
he should use, were but two. One by SeBasT1an MunsTeEr, 
printed at Basle with the Hebrew Text, in 1534, from which 
the version of Calvin varies considerably ; the other by Lro 
Juba and other learned men, printed at Zurich in 1543, and 
afterwards reprinted by Robert Stephens in 1545 and 1557. 
_ The last of these editions was made use of in comparing the 
versions of Leo Juda and Calvin; and though there certainly 
are differences, yet they are so slight as to leave the impres- 
sion that Calvin took that of Leo Juda as his basis, and only 
altered it as he saw occasion. To give the reader, however, 


XV1 


TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE. 


the opportunity of judging for himself, a few verses of the 


first chapter of Genesis are transcribed from each. 


THE VERSION OF LEO JUDA., 


1. In principio creayit Deus co- 
lum et terram. 

2. Terra autem erat desolata et 
inanis, tenebreeque erant in superfi- 
cie voraginis : et Spiritus Dei agita- 
bat sese in superficie aquarum. 

3. Dixitque Deus, Sit Lux, et fuit 
lux. 

4, Viditque Deus lucem quod 
esset bona, et divisit Deus lucem 4 
tenebris. 

5. Vocavitque Deus lucem Diem, 
et tenebras vocavit Noctem ; fuit- 
que vespera, et fuit mane dies unus. 


6. Dixit quoque Deus, Sit expan- 
sio, &c. 


THE VERSION OF CALVIN. 


1. In principio creavit Deus cee- 
lum et terram. 

2. Terra autem erat informis et 
inanis, tenebreeque erant in super- 
ficie voraginis : et Spiritus Dei agi- 
tabat se in superficie aquarum. 

5. Et dixit Deus, Sit Lux, et fuit 
lux. 

4, Viditque Deus lucem quod bona 
esset, et divisit Deus lucem & tene- 
bris. 

5. Et vocavit Deus lucem Diem, 
et tenebras vocavit Noctem. Fuit- 
que vespera, et fuit mane dies pri- 
mus. ; 

3 6. Et dixit Deus, Sit extensio, 

c. 


A similar examination was next resorted to, for the purpose 


of ascertaining the source of CaLvin’s FRENCH VERSION. 
The first printed version of the Scriptures into French was 
from the pen of JAcquES LE FEVRE p’EsTaPLeEs; or, as he 
was more commonly called, Jacobus Faber Stapulensis. It was 
Though its 
Author was in communion with the Church of Rome, yet the 


printed at Antwerp, by Martin L’Empereur. 


version is “said to be the basis of all subsequent French 
Bibles, whether executed by Romanists or Protestants.” } 


The first Protestant French Bible was published by Roperr 
PETER OLIVETAN, with the assistance of his relative, the 
illustrious JOHN CALVIN, who corrected the Antwerp edition 
wherever it differed from the Hebrew.? It might have been 
expected that Calvin would have placed this version—made 
under his own eye, and perfected by his own assistance— 
without alteration at the head of his Commentaries. But it 


1 Horne’s Introduction, vol. v. p. 116. 2 Ibid. p. 118. 


Tea y= 


TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE. XVil 


appears that he has not done so, for though he departs but 
little from it, he not unfrequently alters a word or two in the 
translation. 


While on the subject of Versions, it may be added, that in 
THE OLp ENGLisH TRANSLATION by Tymme already alluded 
to, THE GENEVA VERSION is used. This translation was 
made by the learned exiles from England during the Marian 
Persecution, and is sometimes distinguished from others by 
the name of Tue BreecHes BIBLE, on account of the ren-. 
dering of Gen. iii. 7.' 


1 Prejudice has existed in some quarters against this version of the 
Holy Scriptures, on the ground that its Authors were too deeply imbued 
with Calvin’s sentiments. Bishop Horsley thus speaks of it :—‘‘ This 
English translation of the Bible, which is indeed upon the whole a very 
good one, and furnished with very edifying notes and illustrations, (ex- 
cept that in many points they savour too much of Calvinism,) was made 
and first published at Geneva, by the English Protestants, who fled thi- 
ther from Mary’s persecution. During their residence there, they con- 
tracted a veneration for the character of Calvin, which was no more than 
was due to his great piety and his great learning: but they unfortunately 
contracted also a veneration for his opinions—a veneration more than 
was due to the opinions of any uninspired teacher. The bad effects of 
this unreasonable partiality, the Church of England feels, in some points, 
to the present day.” Such language, coming from such a quarter, fur- 
nishes strong testimony to the fact, (often very peremptorily and flip- 
pantly denied,) that the Church of England has, at least, some leaven 
of Calvinism in its composition. More accurate inquiry than Bishop 
Horsley’s prejudice allowed him. to make, would show how largely the 
Reformers as a body were indebted to Calvin, how conscious they were 
of their obligation, and how deeply their writings were tinctured with 
his doctrine. But this is not the place for the discussion of such a 
subject. It is more to the purpose to observe, that the version of which 
we are now speaking, passed through more editions than any other, in 
the early periods of the Reformation ; that it was mainly based upon that 
of the martyr Tyndale, that it was the ordinary Family. Bible of the na- 
tion, and never was superseded till the present Authorised Version was 
produced in the reign of James the First. 

The version in question has generally been spoken of as the produc- 
tion of the Exiles in Geneva; but by an accurate investigation of the 
subject, Mr Anderson has made it appear highly probable, that the chief, 
if not the sole author of this version, was William Whittingham, who 
married the sister of John Calvin; and who, after the Marian persecu- 
tion had ceased, remained a year and a half in Geneva to finish the work. 
On his return to England, he first accompanied the Earl of Warwick on 
a mission to the Court of France, and afterwards was made Dean of 
Durham. His objection to wear the prescribed habits occasioned him 
some trouble. 


VOL. I. B 


XVill TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE. 


To give the reader some notion of the order in which 
Catvin’s ComMENTARIES succeeded each other, the follow- 
ing List, with the dates appended, taken from Senebier’s 
Literary History of Geneva, is submitted to his consideration: 








CoMMENTARY ON THE EpistLE To THE RomANs, ° , . 1540 
ON ALL THE EristiEs oF Pavt,! . ; - : 1548 
——— ‘ON THE EpisTLEe TO THE HEBREWS, AND THE 

EpistLes oF Peter, JOHN, JUDE, AND JAMES, . 1551 

——_ on ISAiAu, . ° ; : . 1551 

—— ON THE ACTS OF THE Messin, ; - ; F 1552 

— oN GENESIS, : . ; s . ‘ - 1554 
——— _ ON THE PsALMs, ‘ : ° , ‘ : 1557 . 

—— _ on Hossa, : ° , ‘ . 1557 

——-_ ON THE TWELVE ces Aap ; * ° 1559 

——_ on DanIeL, . p é ; ° . 3 1561 

on JosHua,? : e : 0 7 eee 

Harmony or Exopvus, Leviticus, ietieendn AND > Dace 1563 

CoMMENTARY ON JEREMIAH, . : 1563 


Harmony OF THREE GOSPELS AND paneer OF Sr J a .. Sieg 


A. fac-simile of the title-page of the French Translation 
of 1563, and of the Dedication to the Duke of Vendome, as a 
specimen of the French style and spelling of the age, and a 
further fac-simile of the title-page of the English Translation 
of 1578, as well as of the Dedication to the Earl of Warwick 
by Thomas Tymme, prefixed to the latter, will be found in 
this edition. An accurate copy of the Map, roughly sketched 


The circulation of this Bible in England was greatly promoted by the 
zealous exertions of John Bodley, Esq., a native of Exeter, an exile, 
during Mary’s reign, at Geneva, and the father of Sir Thomas Bodley, 
the munificent founder of the Bodleian Library at Oxford. John Bodley 
obtained a patent for printing this Bible from Queen Elizabeth, in the 
year 1560. See ‘‘ Annals of the English Bible,” by Christopher "Ander- 
son, vol. ii. pp. 322-324. 

1 Perfect accuracy is, perhaps, not to be expected in all these dates. 
Beza, in his Life of Calvin, says only that six of St Paul’s Epistles were 
published this year, which were the two to the Corinthians, that to the 
Galatians, the Ephesians, the Philippians, and the Colossians. 

2 Beza places the Commentary on Joshua in 1563, and says it was the 

last which Calvin wrote. 


3 Histoire Literaire de Geneve, par Jean Senebier. Tome I. pp. 
254-256. 


ATP Sets | 


ee oa 


TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE. xix 


by Catvrn, for the purpose of explaining his hypothesis 
respecting the situation of the Garden of Eden, and which 
seems to have been the basis of the most approved theories 
on the subject, will be found in its proper place. The same 
Map is given in the French and English translations, and 
also in the Latin edition of Professor Hengstenberg, published 
at Berlin in the year 1838. It may be observed, as a 
coincidence, that the same sketch appears in the Anglo- 
Geneva Bible, to which reference has been made. A more 
elaborate Map accompanies the Amsterdam edition of Calvin’s 
Works, published in 1671. 


The edition now issuing from the press is also enriched by 


an engraving, in the first style of art, of fac-similes of various 
medals of Calvin never before submitted to the British public, 


Hutt, January 1, 1847. 







BOL MRROARE NE. <1 CE shay lbnlaabey itr "Foy Suen paey oh 
aeaaks. Tite hea tails bis {eyes duh Wa at eae 
‘ Betee wat Ny Te hi ih ed oe te sh Vieuy 


‘ ‘ t “£4 f r ’ f 7 | 
CBRE: RADEON ED feet ite OES CEP 





; LN A oe oe | ; .% eee a 
i it hE Pheer IPE TERESA Eee 


al bie 














were Se 


CONTENTS OF THE FIRST VOLUME. 


. Translator’s Preface, 
. Medals of Calvin, ; ; ; : 
. Fac-simile of A dy og to the First French Edi- 


tion, 


. Epistle Dedicatory to the First French Edition, 


in French, 2 ; ‘ ; ; 7 


Fac-simile of Title-page to the aa Transla- 
tion, by Tymme, 


. Epistle of Tymme to the Earl of Warwick, 

. The Epistle Dedicatory to Henry of Navarre, 

. The Argument, : . 3 

. Commentary on Genesis to the end of the Twenty- 


third Chapter, 


XXV 


XXVll 


XXXIxX 
xli 
xlv 


57 


67 










AMY Tentt ANT 10 eta 


rt 


cia as! 












: i Saleem gis er a io @ a) tibet a ake 
: Wee ‘ ty. a a carsiaid bo ae 
ere thebduntaaS ten ods oF Geena bit Tr ating 






arnt gethwin (aly: at sgaqegie’ tT etna 
™ ‘ wt 


r. 





- 


MILER i cate: Teh atte 










ee J biter i th hath 644 od-emmire Ri tae 
wk SREY, To Reels ae l eta oleae. 3 
: ; ‘ 3 RT A | 


<7i09w'l aaht to Sap -ote of createed) ine Tb NS Te 















i ae tte amiged Die 








onto el 
a2 9 
* 





DESCRIPTION OF THE MEDALS OF CALVIN. 


a 


Obverse.—His likeness, along with the name : loHANNES CAL- 
vinus, M:, (which is perhaps to be explained 
Maenuvs,! or great.) The letters signify Andreas 
Karlstein, the name of the artist. 

Reverse.—A. hand issuing from the clouds holds a heart, which 
is shone upon by bright rays from above, with 
the marginal inscription; PROMPTE ET SINCERE 
IN OPERE Domini: Willing and upright in the 
work of the Lord. 


I, 


Obverse.—His likeness set in ornamented borders; on the 
margin are these words: IOANNES CALVINUS 
Picarp[ us]: Noviopun[ENsISs] . ECCLES[1L£]. 
GENEV[ENsIS]. Pastor . That is, John Calvin of 
Noyon in Picardy, Pastor of the Church of Geneva. 

Reverse—Winged Fame blowing a trumpet. In the left 
hand she holds.a roll, the title of which is Doc- 
TRINA. With the right foot she rests on a square 
inscribed virtus. The marginal inscription is: 
DocTRINA ET VIRTUS HOMINES POST FUNERA 
CLARAT: Learning and virtue render men illus- 
trious after death. 


III. 


Obverse.—A similar likeness to No. I. but on a smaller scale, 
with the date 1696, and the letters C. W., which 


1 More probably Minister. 


XXIV DESCRIPTION OF MEDALS. 


represent the initials of the medailleur at Gotha, 
M. Christian Wermuth. The inscription Iohan- 
nes Calvinus, M. 

Reverse.—This inscription, in which Calvin is briefly de- 
scribed: Natvs . Noviopvnt . A[NNo] . 
M.D.Ix. . VI. ID[1BUS]. Iviir. iN. Paris[INA]. 
AVREL[IANENSI] . ET . Bitvri[CENsI] . ACA- 
DEMIIS . [VRISPRVD[ENTILZ]. AC . THEOLOGIZ . 
STUDS. EXCVLTVS . PATRIAM . OB . PERSECVY- 
TIONES . DESERENS . IN. HELVETIAM . ABIIT . 
GENEV . PROFESSOR . ET . PASTOR . ANNO. 
M.D.XXVI. . DELECTYS . ECCLESILZ . REFOR- 
MATIONE . VARIISQVE . SCRIPTIS . ET . CER- 
TAMINIBVS . CELEBRIS . OB[1IT| . A[NNO]. 
M.D.LXIII. VI . K[A]L[ENDARIUM] Ivn[1I. ] 

Born at Noyon in the year 1509, on the 10th 
of July; he pursued the studies of Law and of 
Theology in the Universities of Paris, Orleans, 
and Bourges. Having left his own country on 
account of persecutions, he went into Switzerland. 
He was chosen Professor and Pastor of Geneva 
in the year 1526, and having become celebrated 
by the Reformation of the Church, and also by 
his various writings and controversies; He died 
in the year 1564, on the 27th May.’ 


IV. 


A medal with a milled edging or border, struck on one side 
only, with this inscription: IOANNES . CALVINUS. 
JE([TATIS] . SV . XLVIIT . QVOVSQ[VE] . 

. Domine . A[NNO] . 1552.? 


1 A slight mistake on the part of the Engraver in a letter or two on 
the reverses of No. I. and I. will be detected by a connoisseur. 

2 This medal, struck between eleven and twelve years before Calvin’s 
death, presents fewer marks of age and of premature debility than any 
of the others. 


= 


COMMENTAIRES 
DE M. IEAN CALUIN, 


SUR LES CINQ LIURES DE MOYSE. 


GENESE EST MIS A PART, 


LES AUTRES QUATRE LIURES SONT DISPOSEZ 
EN FORME D’HARMONIE: 


AVEC CINQ INDICES, DONT LES DEVX CONTENANS LES PAS 
SAGES ALLEGUEZ ET EXPOSEZ PAR L’AUTHEUR SONT 
ADIOUSTEZ DE NOUUEAU EN CESTE TRADUCTION. 


f 3 
: X vy, {th ; ! 
east) r\ 


N 
Tet 


* ws 
\. oS & 


=> 
: : rSS\ 
‘ 4 ; 








: A GENEVE. 
-Imprime par Francois Eftiene. 


mM by L XLII. 








Fla Ot Sa ae 


A TRESILLVSTRE PRINCE 


HENRI DUC DE VENDOSME 


ROY HERITIER DE NAUARRE, 


JEAN CALUIN. 


MONSEIGNEVR, si plusieurs reprenent mon entreprise, en 
ce que Yay este si hardi de yous dedier ce mien labeur, afin 
qu'il fust publié sous vostre nom, il ne m’aduiendra rien de 
nouueau et que ie naye preueu. Ils allegueront que ceci sera 
cause d’enflammer de plus en plus la haine que les iniques 
ont desia conceué cotre vous. Mais puis que Dieu vous a 
doué et muni d’yne telle magnanimité, voire en cest aage si 
tendre, et au milieu de beaucoup de frayeurs et menaces, et 
jamais vous n’auez este destourné de faire pure protestation 
et franche de vostre foy: ie ne voy point en quoy ie vous 
puisse nuire ou porter dommage, en confermant par mon 
tesmoignage ce que vous entendez et voulez estre notoire a 
tout le monde. Puis done que vous n’auez point honte de 
lEuagile de Iesus Christ, il m’a semblé que ceste liberté que 
yous monstrez, me’ donnoit iuste matiere de m’enhardir 4 
yous congratuler de-ces cOmencemens tant heureux, et vous 
exhorter en vne constance inuincible pour le temps a venir. 
Car ce qui aduiét aux meilleures natures, assauoir d’estre 
ployables et faciles, est comun aux ieunes gens, iusques 4 ce 
que laage les ait bien du tout meuris. Toutesfois si mon 
affection desplaist 4 quelques vns, moyenant qu’elle soit ap- 


XXVIil EPISTRE. 


prouuee de la Roine vostre mere, il me sera loisible de mes- 
priser tant leur iugement peruers que leurs detractids : pour 
le moins ie ne m’en soucieray gueres. Possible que ie nay 
point este assez bien auisé, en ce que ie ne me suis point 
enquis auparauant quelle seroit sa bonne volonté, afin de ne 
rien attenter sans son congé. Mais s'il y a faute en cest en- 
droit, ’'excuse en est bien facile. Si Yeusse omis de m’ad- 
resser & sa maiesté par nonchalance, ie me condamneroye 
moy-mesme, non seulement d’inconsideration, mais aussi de 
temerité et arrogance. “Au reste, pource que ie n’esperois 
pas que le liure deust estre si tost publié: d’autant que lim- 
primeur me remettoit iusques au prin-temps: ie ne pensoye 
pas pour certaines raisons qu'il fust expedient de me haster. 
Cependant pource quil y auoit d’autres soliciteurs que moy, 
qui pressoyent plus instamment, on m’a signifié tout soudain 
que louurage seroit mis a fin quinze iours apres. Ce que 
jamais ie n’eusse pensé, pource qu’on m’en auoit tant souuent 
fait refus. Or combien que ie n’aye pas este marri d’auoir 
este trompé en cest endroit, si est-ce que le moyen m’a este 
osté, d’en demander permission 4 la Roine vostre mere. 
Combien qu’en cognoissant le zele et desir feruent qu'elle a 
d’auancer la doctrine de Iesus Christ, et la vraye et pure re- 
ligion de sa volonté, ie ne suis pas en grade peine ne souci 
quelle n’approuue volontiers mon faict, et qu'elle ne le de- 
fende et maintiene par son authorité. Et de faict, elle ne 
dissimule pas combien elle est eslongnee de toutes supersti- 
tions et abus, dont la Chrestienté a este desfiguree et souillee. 
Et entre les horribles tempestes dont le royaume de France a 
este agité, on a cognu & bon escient, et par certaines espreuues, 
quwil habitoit en vne femme vn courage plus que viril. 
Parquoy il est bien 4 desirer qu’en la fin elle face honte aux 
hommes, afin qu’ils soyent picquez d’vne bonne enuie, de se 
confermer & son exemple. Car selon qu’elle se moderoit d’yne 
modestie incroyable, 4 grand’ peine on eust pensé qu’elle 
sousteint si doucement, et paisiblement des violences plus 
qu’impetueuses, et cependant quelle les repoussast si cour- 
ageusement. Il y a bien peu de tesmoins qui sachent com- 
bien Dieu l’a viuement exercee en des combats interieurs, et’ 





EPISTRE. XXiX 


Yen suis vn. Quand a vous, Monseigneur, vous n’auez point 
& cercher yn patron meilleur ne plus propre pour vous regler 
4% yne vraye image et entiere de toutes vertus. Et ie vous 
prie de penser que Dieu vous a obligé singulierement d’aspirer 
i. ce but, et vous esuertuer d’y paruenir. Car la nature ex- 
cellente laquelle reluist en vous, seroit pour vous oster toute 
excuse, s'il yous aduenoit de vous fouruoyer : et la nourriture 
et instruction laquelle n’est pas vne petite aide pour auancer 
les bons esprits, est comme vn second lien, pour vous retenir 
en vostre deuoir. Car outre ce que vous auez este enseigné 
en la crainte de Dieu et honnesteté de meeurs, il y a eu la 
doctrine liberale des letres. D’auantage ayant gousté les rudi- 
mens, vous n’auez pas este ennuyé ni fasché des letres pour en 
quitter ’estude: comme quasi tout plain s’y sont accoustu- 
mez. Mais vous poursuyuez tousiours alaigrement 4 polir 
encore mieux vostre esprit. Or Mon seigneur, ce que ray 
mis ce liure en auant sous vostre nom, mon desir a este que 
se fust vn moyen par lequel Dieu vous tendist la main pour 
vous vendicquer a soy derechef, 4 ce que vous faciez tant 
plus libre profession d’estre disciple de Iesus Christ. Et de 
faict, la Roine vostre mere laquelle ne-peut estre assez louee 
pour sez vertus, ne prendra plaisir en rien que vous puissiez 
faire pour luy complaire, qu’en oyant que vous profitez de 
plus en plus en la crainte de Dieu. Or combien qu'il y ait 
plusieurs choses contenues en ce liure, lesquelles surmontent 
la capacité de vostre aage: toutesfois ie ne vous en offre 
point la lecture 4 lestourdie, en vous priant de vous y exercer 
songneusement. Car comme ainsi soit que les ieunes gens se 
delectent 4 cognoistre les choses anciennes, vous approcherez 
tantost du temps, Mon seigneur, auquel l’histoire tant de la 
creation du mode, que de lEglise primitiue pourra occuper 
vostre esprit, auec vn fruict aussi grand que le plaisir. 
Et de faict, si sainct Paul condamne & bon droict la stu- 
pidité peruerse des hommes, en ce quils passent comme 
2% yeux clos ce miroir tant clair et notable de la gloire de 
Dieu, qui se presente assiduellement 4 eux au bastiment du 
monde, et lesargue d’enseuelir iniquement la lumiere de verité: 
Pignorance de lorigine et de la creation du genre humain, 
laquelle a regné quasi de tout temps, n’a pas este moins vilene 


XXX EPISTRE. 


et detestable. Il est bien vray-semblable que tantost apres 
que Babylone fut edifiee, la memoire des choses qui deuoyent 
estre incessamment celebrees et ramentues, s'est comme es- 
uanouye. Car d’autant que la dispersion laquelle adueint alors 
fut comme vn moyen d’emanciper les gens profanes du pur 
seruice de Dieu: il ne leur a point chalu de porter auecques 
eux en quelques regions quils arriuassent, ce quils auoyent 
entendu de leurs peres, tant de la creation du monde, que de 
la restauration apres le deluge. Voyla dont il s’est fait, que 
nul peuple excepté le lignage d’Abraham, n’a cognu par 
lespace de deux mille ans, de quelle source il estoit decédu, 
ou quad le gére humain auoit commécé destre. Car ce que 
le Roy Ptolomee a eu le soin de faire translater en Gree les 
liures de Moyse, ¢’a este yn zele plus louable que profitable 
(au moins pour ce temps-la) veu que la clarté laquelle il s’es- 
toit efforcé de tirer hors des tenebres, n’a pas laissé d’estre- 
tenue cachee, estant estouffee par la paresse des hommes. 
Dont il est aisé & recueillir, que ceux qui deuoyent appliquer 
tousleurs sens, et s’esforcer 4 cognoistre le Createur du monde, 
ont plustost cerché de malice et impieté deliberee, destre 
aueugles 4 leur escient. Cependant les sciences liberales ont 
fleuri, plusieurs nobles esprits ont este renommez, on a com- 
posé des liures de toutes sortes: mais de la creation du monde, 
pas vn seul mot. Mesme Aristote le principal Philosophe, et 
lequel a surmonté tous les autres, tant en subtilité qu’en sauoir, 
en disputant que le monde est eternel, a fait seruir tout ce qwil 
auoit de viuacité, 4 frauder Dieu de sa gloire. Combien que 
Platon son maistre ait eu quelque peu plus de religion en soy, 
et qu'il donne quelque signe d’auoir este embu de quelque 
goust de meilleure cognoissance: toutesfois les principes de 
verité qu'il touche sont si maigres, et il les mesle et corrompt 
de tant de fictions et resueries, que ceste facon contrefaite 
denseigner nuist plus qu’elle ne profite. Au reste, ceux qui 
se sont adonnez a escrire des histoires: combien quils fus- 
sent gens aigus et bien letrez, toutesfois en se vantant & 
plene bouche d’estre bons tesmoins et asseurez de la plus 
haute ancieneté, iusques 4 ce qu’ils soyent venus au siecle de 
Dauid, brouillent leurs escrits de tant de meslinges confus, 


EPISTRE. XXX1 


que ceste lie en oste toute clarté: quand ils veulent monter 
plus haut, ils amassent vn bourbier infini de mensonges: tant 
sen faut quils facent vne deduction pure et liquide pour 
mener les lecteurs 4 la premiere creation du monde. Or 
quwils ayent ignoré a leur escient ce qui n’estoit pas besoin de 
cercher loin, s'ils se fussent estudiez & apprendre, les Egyp- 
tiens, en donnent assez claire approbation : lesquels ayans la 
lampe de la parole de Dieu allumee et luisante & leurs portes, 
ont forgé sans nulle honte des chroniques de leurs actes, les- 
quels ils ont fait accroire estre aduenus quinze mille ans 
deuant que le monde fust creé. La fiction des Atheniens n’a 
pas este moins puerile et sotte, lesquels en se glorifiant estre 
nez de leurs terres, d’autant quils appetoyent de s’atribuer 
vne origine separee d’auec le genre humain, se sont faits 
ridicules mesmes aux plus barbares. Or combien que toutes 
nations ayent este enueloppees au crime d’ingratitude, les 
vnes plus les autres moins, toutesfois il m’a semblé expediét 
de choisir ces deux esquelles l’erreur est moins excusable, en 
ce quelles ont cuidé outrepasser les autres en sagesse. Au 
reste, soit que tous peuples'lesquels ont este iadis, se soyent 
mis yn voile de leur bon gré pour ne voir goutte, ou que 
seulement leur paresse les ait empeschez: Je premier liure de 
Moyse merite bien d’estre tenu pour vn thresor inestimable, 
lequel pour le moins nous donne certitude infallible de la 
creation du monde : sans laquelle, nous ne sommes pas dignes 
que la terre nous soustiene. Ie laisseray pour ceste heure 
histoire du deluge, laquelle contient vn miroir autant espou- 
antable de la vengence de Dieu, en ce que le monde a este 
desfait et ruiné, comme admirable de sa bonté et grace, au 
renouuellement du genre humain. Ceste seule vtilité doit 
faire priser le liure plus qu’on ne sauroit dire, c’est qu’en 
iceluy et non ailleurs nous voyons ce qui est tant et plus ne- 
cessaire 4 cognoistre : assauoir comment Dieu apres la cheute 
mortelle de homme a neantmoins adopté son Eglise. Nous 
apprenons quel a este son vray seruice, et comment les saincts 
Peres se sont exercez en pieté: comment la religion pure, 
estant decheue pour vn temps par la paresse des hommes, a 
este remise en son entier, et reduite en son droit estat: 


XXxli EPISTRE. 


assauoir quand Dieu a eleu vn certain peuple pour luy com- 
mettre comme en depost lalliance gratuite de salut. Nous 
entendons comment vne petite pongnee de gens estant pro- 
uenue d’vn homme sterile et caduque, et quasi demi mort, et 
(comme Isaie le nomme) solitaire, a este soudain augmentee 
en vne multitude admirable: comment Dieu a esleué et 
maintenu par fagons incroyables ceste maison d’ Abraham 
qu'il auoit choisie, combien qu'elle fust poure et desnuee de 
toute protection, exposee & toutes tempestes, et cependant 
assiegee de tous costez de tant de bandes d’ennemis. Que 
chacun iuge par son experience propre, combien il est neces- 
saire de bien cognoistre ces choses. Nous voyds aussi d’autre 
part auec quelle fiereté et tonnerres les Papistes estonnent 
les simples sous vn titre cdtrefait de ’Kglise. Or Moyse nous 
depeint vne forme nayue d’Eglise, laquelle en abatant telles 
illusions, nous deliure de telles vaines frayeurs: d’auantage 
ils rauissent en admiration beaucoup de gens mal auisez par 
leurs masques et pompes, mesme qui plus est, ils les rendent 
hebetez et les enforcellent. Mais si nous iettons les yeux 
aux marques par lesquelles Moyse nous monstre quelle est 
lEglise, toutes ces belles monstres de masquerie ne vaudront 
pas vn festu pour tromper. Souuent nous sommes esbranlez 
et quasi defaillons, voyant le petit nombre de ceux qui suy- 
uent la pure doctrine de Dieu: sur tout quand nous contem- 
plons quelle vogue et estendue ont les superstitions au long 
et au large. Mais comme Dieu commandoit iadis aux Iuifs 
par son Prophete Isaie, de regarder au rocher dont ils auoy- 
ent este taillez, cest 4 dire a leur pere Abraham, qui 
nestoit quyn homme seul: aussi auiourd’huy nous rap- 
pelant par son seruiteur Moyse & vne mesme consideration, 
il nous aduertit combien c’est vn iugement peruers de 
mesurer l’Eglise par la multitude des hommes, comme 
si la dignité dicelle consistoit en grand troupe. Si quelque- 
fois la religion ne fleurit pas si bien par tout comme il 
seroit & souhaitter, si le corps des fideles se dissipe, et que 
Yestat de lEglise qui estoit bien reglé s’en aille en decadence, 
non seulement les cceurs sont estonnez, mais aussi s’escoulent 
du tout. Au contraire, quand ceste histoire de Moyse nous 


EPISTRE. XXXiil 


remonstre vn bastiment fait de ruines, vn recueil et vnion de 
pieces rompues escartees gi et ld, vne telle monstre de la 
grace de Dieu nous doit bien esleuer en meilleur espoir que 
nostre sens ne comprend. Outre plus, veu que les esprits des 
hommes sont si enclins & controuuer des seruices estranges, 
voire mesme fretillent et s’y esgayent, il n’y a rien plus vtile 
pour nous, que d’apprédre la regle de bien et deuément seruir 
Dieu des saincts Patriarches, desquels Moyse voulant louér 
la pieté, insiste principalemét en ceste marque, quils ont de- 
pédu de la seu le parole de Dieu. Car codbien qu'il y ait 
grade diuersité et longue distance entre eux et nous quit 
aux ceremonies externes, toutesfois ce qui doit demeurer im- 
muable est commun & tous deux, assauoir que la religion soit 
reglee au seul decret de Dieu, et & sa volonté. Ie n’ignore 
pas combien il y auroit ici plus ample matiere et riche, et 
cobien tout ce que ie puis dire est bas et au dessous de la 
dignité des choses dont ie parle: mais d’autant qu'il y aura 
lieu plus opportun d’en traitter plus au long et en faire plene 
deduction, combien que ce ne soit pas auec tel ornemét qu'il 
seroit requis: ce m’a este assez pour ceste heure d’aduertir 
brieuement les lecteurs, combien ils auront profité s’ils appre- 
nent d’approprier a leur vsage, le patron de ’Eglise anciéne, 
tel qu'il est exprimé par Moyse. Et de faict, Dieu nous a 
accOpagnez auec les saincts Peres en l’espoir d’vn mesme heri- | 
tage, afin qu’en surmontant la longue distance des aages, la- 
quelle nous diuise les vns des autres, nous marchions hardi- 
ment d’vyn accord mutuel de foy et de patience 4 soustenir 
les mesmes combats. Et d’autant plus sont 4 detester beau- 
coup de phrenetiques, lesquels estans picquez de ie ne say 
quel taon de zele enragé, s’efforcent incessamment de des- 
membrer I’Eglise, laquelle n’est desia que par trop dissipee. 
Ie ne parle point des ennemis declarez, lesquels se iettent et 
ruent de toute leur force et 4 main armee, 4 ruiner et descon- 
fire tant qu'il y a de fideles au monde, et en abolir du tout la 
memoire : mais il y en a mesme de ceux qui sont semblant 
de porter YEuangile, si chagrins et ombrageux, qu’ils ne ces- 
sent de semer tousiours quelque nouuelle matiere de diuorce : 
et de troubler par leur inquietude la paix et concorde, que les 
VOL. I. Cc 


XXXI1V EPISTRE. 


bons seruiteurs de Dieu et doctes nourriroyent volontiers en- 
semble. Nous voyons comment entre les Papistes il demeure 
yne obstination maudite & conspirer contre l Euangile,combien 
qu’en tout le reste ils s’entrebatent comme chiens et chats. 
Il n’est ia besoin de remonstrer combien le nombre de ceux 
qui tienét la pure doctrine de Iesus Christ est petit, si on le 
compare auec leurs grosses bandes. Cependant il se dresse 
d’entre nous de petits folets et outrecuidez, lesquels non seule- 
ment obscurcissent la clarté de la saincte doctrine par leurs 
brouees derreurs, ou bien enyurét les simples qui ne sont 
gueres bien exercez, les abbruuas de leurs resueries : mais 
qui pis est, sous ombre qu’ils se permettét de douter de toutes 
choses, ils se ddnent licéce de renuerser toute la religion. 
Car come s’ils se vouloyent, tournat tout en risees et cauil- 
latios, approuuer estre bons disciples de Socrates, ils n’ont 
nulle maxime plus agreable que ceste-ci, que la foy doit estre 
libre, et que les esprits ne doyuent point estre tenus captifs. 
Kt c’est afin qwil leur soit loisible, en mettat tout en doute 
et en question, tourner et virer l’Escriture & leur poste, et 
en faire vn nez de cire, come on dit en commun prouerbe. 
Or ceux qui sont affriadez de tels allechemens de disputer le 
pro et le contra, come on dit, profiteront si bien en ceste 
escole, qu’en apprenant tousiours, jamais ne paruiendront 4 la 
science de verité. Tay traitté iusques ici selon que le lieu 
le portoit, touchant I’vtilité de Phistoire contenue au liure de 
Genese. Au reste, Vay trauaillé (si ce n’a este auec telle 
grace et dexterité que Yeusse voulu, pour le moins ¢’a este 
fidelement) & ce que la doctrine de la Loy, dont Vobscurité 
a estonné par ci deuant beaucoup de gens, et les a reculez d’y 
lire, fust familierement esclaircie, Ie ne doute pas, qu'il n’y 
en ait qui desireront vne declaration plus ample de quelques 
passages: mais comme ainsi soit que desia de nature ie 
fuye prolixite, Yay este plus restraint en cest ouurage pour 
deux raisons. Car d’autant que ces quatre liures font desia 
peur par leur longueur 4 gens delicats: i’ay craint, que si ie 
m’estedoye libremét & les bié deschiffrer, on ne s’ennuyast 
encore plus pour en estre desgousté. D’auantage pource qu’en 
la procedure i’ay souuent desesperé de viure vn mois, i’aimois 


EPISTRE. XXXV 


_ mieux en auoir recueilli vne exposition sommaire, que de laisser 
vn labeur imparfait. Toutesfois les lecteurs de sain iugement 
etentier, verront assez que ie me suis songneusement donné 
garde de ne rien omettre, ou par astuce, ou par negligéce, 
de ce qui pouuoit estre ambigu ou obscur, et engendrer per- 
plexité. Puis doncques que ay mis peine entant qu’en moy 
estoit desplucher et vuider tous scrupules, ie ne voy point 
pourquoy on se doyue plaindre de brieueté, sind qu’on vueille 
trouuer de mot 4 mot aux Comentaires tout ce qui est a dire 
d’vne matiere. Or ie souffriray volontiers, que telles gens 
qui ne sont iamais rassasiez de langage, se cerchent vn autre 
maistre. Quant 4 vous, Mon seigneur, s’il vous plaist de l’es- 
prouuer, vous cognoistrez par effet, et croirez 4 vous-mesme, 
que ce que ie di est tres vray. Vous estes enfant: mais Dieu 
en commandant que les Rois fissent copier vn volume de la 
Loy a leur propre vsage, n’a point exempté de ce rag le bon 
Iosias: mais plustost a voulu que exemple de cest enfant 
fust comme yn chef d’ceuure memorable, et vn miroir de 
saincte instruction pour redarguer la bestise des vieilles gens. 
Et ce qu’on voit en vous, monstre combieé il est profitable que 
les enfans soyét accoustumez a bien, et duits & vertu, des 
quils vienent & quelque discretion. Car non seulemét le 
germe de la racine viue qu’ont pris les principes de la religion 
dont vous auez este imbu, iette hors sa fleur, mais sent desia 
quelque maturité. Parquoy, Mon seigneur, efforcez-vous de 
tendre auec vne perseuerance inuincible au but qui vous est 
proposé : et que’ vous ne prestiez point laureille 4 ie ne say 
quels gaudisseurs qui t’ascherot & vous desbacher, en vous 
faisant accroire que ce n’est pas encore le temps d’estre si 
sage, et qu’on ne doit point ainsi haster les enfans, Car 
dautrepart yous auez 4 considerer qu'il n’y a rien plus cotraire 
& raison, ne moins a receuoir que de vous priuer et forclorre 
de ce remede contre toutes sortes de corruptions qui vous 
enuironneét. Veu que les delices de Cour gastent mesme et 
deprauent vos seruiteurs, combien les embuches sont-elles 
pus perilleuses aux grans Princes, lesquels regorgent telle- 
ment de toutes superfluitez et delices, que c’est merueille 
quils ne s’escoulét du tout en dissolution? Car de faict 


XXXV1 EPISTRE. 


c’est quasi vne chose repugnante 4 nature, que de iouir 
de tous moyés de voluptez sans volupte. Et il n’ap- 
pert que trop par l’vsage cOmun, que la chasteté ne demeure 
gueres souuét pure entre les delices. Quant & vous, Mon 
seigneur, estimez que cest venin de tout ce qui est pour faire 
croistre en vous les voluptez. Car si vous estes desia main- 
tenant chatouillé, de ce qui est pour estouffer continence et 
attrempance, qu’est-ce que vous ne conuoiterez estant venu 
en aage d’homme? Ceste sentence sera possible trop rude, 
Que tant plus qu’on a de soin de son corps, on est nonchalant 
de vertu: et toutesfois Caton a tresbien iugé parlant ainsi. 
A grand’ peine aussi ceste sentence sera elle receué en yne 
facon deviure tant desbridee qu’on la voit, Ie suis creé & yne 
fin plus noble que d’estre esclaue de mon corps, veu que le 
merspiser est ma droite liberté. Laissons doncques la ceste 
rigueur excessiue, laquelle seroit pour abatre toute ioyeuseté : 
mais il y a trop d’exemples pour monstrer combié le passage 
est glissant & tomber en vne licence de tout desbauchement, . 
quand on est trop endormi, et qu’on se dispense & vanité. Au 
reste, vous n’aurez pas seulement 4 combatre contre la super- 
fluité et les pompes, mais aussi contre beaucoup d’autres vices. 
I n’y arien plus delectable, que vostre humanité et modestie: 
mais il n’y a nul esprit si benin ni debonnaire, lequel estant 
enyuré de flateries, ne se desbauche & vne arrogance et cru- 
auté sauuage. D’auantage, Mon seigneur, puis qu il y a des 
flateurs infinis, lesquels seroyent autant de soufflets pour en- 
flammer vostre courage en diuerses conuoitises: combien yous 
conuient-il estre plus attentif & vous contregarder ? Or en yous 
aduertissant des blandissemens de Cour qui seroyent pour 
vous amadouer, ie ne requier sinon questant armé d’attrem- 
pance, vous soyez inuicible pour n’en estre point surprins. 
Car il a este vrayement dit par vn Payen, que la louange 
d’vn homme n’estoit pas de n’auoir iamais veu Asie, mais d’y 
auoir vescu pudiquement, et s’y estre preserué en continence. 
Or veu que c’est vne chose desirable sur tout, si vous y fau- 
droit-il trauailler quelque difficilité qui y fust,mais Dauid vous 
donne vn bon abregé si vous suyuez son exemple, quand il 
dit que les preceptes de Dieu ont este ses conseilliers. Et de 





EPISTRE. XXXVli 


faict, tout ce qui vous sera suggeré de cdseil et d’auis d’ail- 
leurs, s’esuanouira si vous ne cOmécez par ce bout, 4 sauoir que 
cest de vraye prudence. I reste, Mon seigneur, que ce qui 
est escrit en Isaie du sainct Roy Ezechias vous reuiene tous- 
iours en memoire. Car le Prophete en racontant ses vertus 
notables le loué sur tout de ce titre, que la crainte de Dieu 
sera son thresor. Sur quoy, Mon seigneur, ie prieray Dieu 
yous maintenir en sa protection faire reluire en vous de plus 
en plus ses dons spirituels, et vous enrichir de toutes sortes 
de benedictions. A Geneue, le dernier iour de [uillet. 
M.D.LXIII. 














tia siete Bs bb ree orisa seepauelo se. ill Sim 
aay) Tasias > fod OYE soi: So Raise BMA 
aby) Ce PERT’ LONE iy nebt Sigs) be se EOE | ‘ 4 
ter ORNS or EMO 's ARTO Re Pa ewe Ube « gion h. ans 
Bliss eo Janae eed ariel vs s te e aight 


‘s ‘ per ee 
Bi oly eh etaey ik + Bare Se 2ed- Op fe nod AW. aches 


Neva ? 4 ia * 7 osu Tt « 
ULES as =) |S ad aie IW POLE TOD 
SAE SUY TE ea wp tiny Lave VELGE mOt Pie 
sl ; 4 
Ly ‘ . . Lb y 4 

Vie WS Sick itha ae Ey eae ' y : 


the firft booke of Mofes cal- 
led Genefis : Tranflated out 
of Latine into Englt , by Thomas 
Tymme, Mini/ter. 


SIS 


¢ Imprinted at Lon- 
don, for John Harifon and 
George Bifhop. 


Anno. 1578. 


= io. 
Til i a toh S AFF & i : rm 
ILO NMA “7/7 S BANE? FA. oth 
1 C ; 1 Yoo vit NET Ra MRT 


HUN 
SZ ae " 
ANTM 


tteirrernet Haraterrererey <4 


= 1egerreryne Pet we hn 
. ON TTETUTTT TUFF UT inna 








TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, MY VERIE GOOD 


LORDE AMBROSE, EARLE OF WARWICKE, 


BARON LISLE, MAISTER OF HER MAIESTIE’S ORDINANCE, KNIGHT OF THE 
MOST NOBLE ORDER OF THE GARTER, AND ONE OF HER HIGHNESSE 
PRIUIE COUNSELL, AND TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE LADIE 
HIS WIFE, ENCREASE OF HONOUR, AND TRUE 
KNOWLEDGE IN CHRIST IESVS. 


Ir the Apostle Paule (right honorable) condemne the negli- 
gence of men, because they behold not the euident spectacle. 
of the glorie of Ged which is set before their eyes in the” 
workemanship of the worlde, by which they wickedly suppresse 
the light of trueth: no lesse foule and shameful was that ignor- 
ance of the original and creation of mankind which almost in 
euery age and time so greatly preuailed. The which ignorance 
immediately ensued the building of Babylon by the forgetting 
of those things which ought to haue beene dayly and howerly 
spoken off. For at what time godlesse men were banished 
from their natiue soile and dispersed, they therewithall aban- 
doned the pure worship of God: Insomuch that to what part 
of the earth so euer they came, they had no care to bring 
with them that which they had heard of their forefathers, con- 
cerning the creating and repairing of the worlde. And so it 
came to passe, that no nation, except only the posteritie of 
Abraham, knew by the space of two thousand yeares, either 
from whence or when mankind had his originall. As for the 
labour which Ptolome bestowed in translating the books of 
Moses into the Greeke tongue, it was at that time more laud- 
able than fruitful: when as the light which he went about to 
bring out of darknes, was neuerthelesse through the careles- 
nesse of men extinguished. Whereby wee may perceiue, that 
they which ought to haue endeuored themselues, to knowe 


xlii THE EPISTLE.. 


the workemaister of the worlde, souglit rather by their vngod- 
linesse howe they might’ be wilfully blinde and ignorant. In 
the meane time the liberal Sciences florished, men’s witts were: 
sharpe and quicke, greate paines euery way was taken: and: 
yet nothing was spoken of the creation of the worlde. Aris 
totle,.the: prince of philosophers, dreamed of the eternitie of 
the world. Plato, his schoolmaister, shooting somewhat 
more neere ynto the marke, wandered notwithstanding some- 
what from the trueth. But whether they, and all other 
nations with them, were wilfully blinde, or whether they were 
ignorant through their owne negligence, this booke of Moses 
deserueth to be esteemed as. a: most: precious iewell, which 
certifieth vs not only of the creation of the worlde, but also 
howe, after the mortall fall of man, God adopted a. Church to 
him selfe :: which was the true worship of him, and with what 
exercises of godlinesse the fathers occupied them selues:: howe: 
pure religion, through the wicked negligence of men, was for 
*a time decayed, and afterward restored to her former state : 
when God made a free couenant of eternall saluation with a: 
certeine people: Howe, of one man withered, and almost 
halfe dead, there sprang seede, which sodainly grewe into a 
huge people: and, finally, by what wonderfull meanes God: 
aduanced and defended his chosen familie, though it were 
poore and destitute of al helpe, and enuironed with thousands 
of enemies on euery side. Howe: necessarie the knowledge 
of these thinges is, your Honours by the vse and experience 
thereof may deeme. Therefore, the Argument. being so 
diuine, and accordingly handled by that notable instrument: 
of God’s Church, John Caluine, (whose workes: proclaime his — 
praise,) and no commentarie vpon the same afore this time 
englished, I haue thought good to set forth the same in our 
vulgar tongue, vnder your Honour’s protection, that a more 
general profite being thereby reaped of my countrie men, it 
may bee somewhat the farther from oblivion. And because 
I knowe what godly delight your noble and vertuous Lady 
taketh in reading such bookes, I presume to ioyne her with 
your Honour herein, that others of her sex, hearing of her 
honorable name, may followe her godly steppes with like zeale 
in that religious exercise. For what Christian will not thinke 





THE EPISTLE. xlili 


it a Booke worthie the reading, which he seeth warranted by 
your names? ‘Therefore partely the godly zeale found out 
in you by effect, and partely your Honour’s courteous liking 
afore time of my pains this way taken, harteneth me to 
aduenture the offer of this poore present, as a token proceed- 
ing from a well-wishing minde. Thus hauing bene too tedi- 
ous vnto your Honours, I most humbly take my leaue, be- 
seeching the Lord God to:defend you both with his shield, 
to sustein you with inuincible fortitude, to gouerne you with 
his spirit of prudence, and to powre vpon you all manner of 
blessings. 
Your Honor’s most humble 
Tuomas TYMME. 





he ae ek tainticg cerita of} atte 
Stas i perter 5 alia 5 2b eres ‘ARSE ade eres weit 


t sig a, f 
Tere ¥E B44 PAUSES TAO ms ig ‘ ais ae HO 






















: a ae cetiod Lares 3 Taye aly eee SAGs Vee + 
Bo. ‘web qobhny ts dale fob Fanbih a4? th hath tics 
ae ey ag 5 Ra a Yat ae hiked Ly he 5 Riel ure cb 






¥ 


age Beets Bar Ns. {ar anol GF his, mh tear Pea 


(le sig ike S eRe, bashits 0d tay 











F Rh: : Ape a ER cs Date Se 
ie ie: ih etitees ‘fh hi ets . Cir h So pie Gs See 
* on ‘ P 0 . 


S ; 
RLtER PLE. arog “HL ¥ 










eu y yee reins j tke - deus Tes 


Seid 








THE AUTHOR’S EPISTLE DEDICATORY. 


JOHN CALVIN 


TO THE 


MOST ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE, 


HENRY, DUKE OF VENDOME, 


HEIR TO THE KINGDOM OF NAVARRE.! 


Ir many censure my design, most Illustrious Prince, in pre- 
suming to dedicate this work to you, that it may go forth to 
light sanctioned by your name, nothing new or unexpected 
will have happened to me. For they may object that by 
such dedication, the hatred of the wicked, who are already 
more than sufficiently incensed against you, will be still fur- 
ther inflamed. But since, at your tender age, ? amid various 
alarms and threatenings, God has inspired you with such 
magnanimity that you have never swerved from the sincere 
and ingenuous profession of the faith; I do not see what 
injury you can sustain by having that profession, which you 
wish to be openly manifest to all, confirmed by my testimony. 
Since, therefore, you are not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, 


1 Afterwards the celebrated Henry IV. of France. <A brave and noble- 
spirited Prince, addicted, however, to the frivolities, and enslaved by the 
licentiousness of the age. He was induced to renounce his Protestant 
principles for the Crown of France ; and at length fell by the hand of an 
assassin, on account of his tolerance towards the Hugonots. 

2 He was born in 1543, and therefore in 1563, the date of this dedica- 
tion, he was ten years old. 


xlyi CALVIN’S DEDICATION. 


this independence of :yours has appeared ‘to give me just 
ground of confidence to congratulate you on such an auspi- 
cious.commencement, and to exhort you .to invincible con- 
stancy ‘in future. For that flexibility which belongs to 
superior natures is the common property of the young, until 
their character becomes more formed. But however dis- 
pleasing my labour may be to some, yet if it be approved (as 
I trust it will) by your most noble mother, THE.QUEEN,* I 
can afford to despise both their unjust judgments and their 
malicious-slanders ; at least I-shall not be diverted by them 
from my purpose. In one thing I may have.acted with too 
little consideration, namely,:in not having consulted her, in 
order that I. might attempt nothing-but in accordance with 
her judgment and her wish; yet for this omission I have 
an excuse at hand. If, indeed, I had omitted to consult her 
through negligence, I should condemn myself .as guilty not 
of imprudence only, but of rashness and.arrogance. When, 
however, I had given up all hope of so early a publication, 
because the Printer would put me off till the next spring- 
fairs, I thought it unnecessary, for certain reasons, to hasten 
my work. In the meantime, while others were urging him 
more vehemently on this point than I had done, I suddenly 
received a message, that the work might be finished within 
fifteen days, a thing which had before been pertinaciously 
refused to myself. Thus beyond my expectation, yet not con- 
trary to my wish, I was deprived of the opportunity of ask- 
ing her permission. Nevertheless, that most: excellent Queen is 
animated by such zeal for the propagation of the doctrine of 


1 Jeanne d’Albret, Queen of Navarre, daughter of Henry d’Albret and 
of Margaret of Valois, sister to Francis the First, King of France. Henry 
was her third son, but the two former died in infancy. She and her 
husband, Antony of Bourbon, were both early favourers of the Reforma- 
tion; but Antony, remarkable for his inconstancy, deserted the cause of 
Protestantism in the time of persecution, and at length took arms against 
its adherents, and perished in the contest. Jeanne remained constant to 
the faith she had professed, and proceeded to establish it in her domin- 
ions. In1568 she left her capital Bearne, to join the French Protestants ; 
and presented her son Henry to the Prince of Condé at the age of fifteen, 
together with her jewels, for the purpose of maintaining the war against 
the persecutors of the Reformed faith. She died in 1572, suddenly, at 
Paris, whither she had gone to make arrangements for her son’s projected 
marriage with the sister of Charles IX. It was suspected that she died 
of poison, but no positive proof of the fact has been adduced. 


CALVIN’S DEDICATION. xl vii 


Christ and of pure faith and piety, that I am under no extreme 
anxiety respecting her willingness to approve of this service of 
mine, and to defend it with her patronage. She by no means 
dissembles her own utter estrangement from the superstitions 
and corruptions with which Religion has been disfigured and 
polluted. And in the midst of turbulent-agitations, 1 it has 
been rendered evident by convincing proofs, that she carried 
a more than masculine mind in woman’s breast. And I wish 
that at length even men may be put to-shame, and that use- 
ful emulation may stimulate them to imitate her example. 
For she conducted herself with such peculiar modesty, that 
scarcely any one would have supposed her-capable of thus en- 
during the most violent attacks, and, at the same time, of 
courageously repelling them. Besides, how keenly God 
exercised her with internal conflicts but-few persons are wit- 
nesses, of whom, however, I am one. 

You truly, most Illustrious Prince, need not seek a better 
example, for the purpose of moulding -your own mind to the 
perfect pattern of all virtues. Regard yourself as bound in 
an especial manner to aspire after,:to contend, and to labour 
for the attainment of this object. ‘For, as the heroic disposi- 
tion which shines forth in you, will leave you the less excus- 
able, if you degenerate from yourself, so education, no common 
help to an excellent disposition, is like another bond to retain 
youin yourduty. For liberal instruction has been superadded 
to chaste discipline. Already imbued with the rudiments of 
literature, you have not. cast away (as nearly all are wont to 
do) these studies in disgust, but still advance with alacrity in 
the cultivation of your genius. Now, in sending forth this 
book to the public under your name, my desire is, that it may 
effectually induce you more freely to profess yourself a dis- 
ciple of Christ ; just as if God, by laying his hand upon you, 
were claiming you anew to himself. And truly, you can 
yield no purer gratification to the Queen your mother, who 
cannot be too highly estimated, than by causing her to hear 
that you are making continual progress in piety. 

Although many things contained in this book are beyond 

1 “Et entre les horribles tempestes dont le royaume de France a este 


agité.”—And amid the horrible tempests with which the kingdom of 
France has been agitated.— French Tr. 


xlviii CALVIN’S DEDICATION, 


the capacity of your age, yet I am not acting unreasonably 
in offering it to your perusal, and even to your attentive and 
diligent study. For since the knowledge of ancient things is 
pleasant to the young, you will soon arrive at those years in 
which the History of the Creation of the World, as well as 
that of the most Ancient Church, will engage your thoughts 
with equal profit and delight. And, certainly, if Paul justly 
condemns the perverse stupidity of men, because with closed 
eyes they pass by the splendid mirror of God’s glory which 
is constantly presented to them in the fabric of the world, 
and thus unrighteously suppress the light of truth; not less 
base.and disgraceful has been that ignorance of the origin 
and creation of the human race which has prevailed almost 
in every age. It is indeed probable, that shortly after the 
building of Babel,! the memory of those things, which ought 
to have been discussed and celebrated by being made the 
subjects of continual discourse, was obliterated. For seeing 
that to profane men their dispersion would be a kind of eman- 
eipation from the pure worship of God, they took no care to 
carry along with them, to whatever regions of the earth they 
might visit, what they had heard from their fathers concern- 
ing the Creation of the World, or its subsequent restoration. 
Hence it has happened, that no nation, the posterity of 
Abraham alone excepted, knew for more than two thousand 
successive years, either from what fountain itself had sprung, 
or when the universal race of man began to exist. For 
Ptolemy, in providing at length that the Books of Moses 
should be translated into Greek, did a work which was rather 
laudable than useful, (at least for that period,) since the light 
which he had attempted to bring out of darkness was never- 
theless stifled and hidden through the negligence of men. 
Whence it may easily be gathered, that they who ought to 
have stretched every nerve of their mind to attain a know- 
ledge of The Creator of the world, have rather, by a malig- 
nant impiety, involved themselves in voluntary blindness. In 
the meantime, the liberal sciences flourished, men of exalted 
genius arose, treatises of all kinds were published ; but con- 
cerning the History of the Creation of the World there was 


1 Paulo post conditum Babylonem. 





CALVIN’S DEDICATION. xlix 


a profound silence. Moreover, the greatest of philosophers, ! 
who excelled all the rest in acuteness and erudition, applied 
whatever skill he possessed to defraud God of his glory, by 
disputing in favour of the eternity of the world. Although 
his master, Plato, was a little more religious, and showed 
himself to be imbued with some taste for richer knowledge, 
yet he corrupted and mingled with so many figments the 
slender principles of truth which he received, that this ficti- 
tious kind of teaching would be rather injurious than profit- 
able. They, moreover, who devoted themselves to the pur- 
suit of writing history, ingenious-and highly-cultivated men 
though they were, while they ostentatiously boast that they 
are about to become witnesses to the most remote antiquity, 
yet, before they reach so high as the times of David, intermix 
their lucubrations with much turbid feculence;? and when 
they ascend still higher, heap together an immense mass of 
lies: so far are they from having arrived, by a genuine and 
clear connection of narrative, at the true origin of the world. 
The Egyptians also are an evident proof that men were will- 
ingly ignorant of things which they had not far to seek, if 
only they had been disposed to addiet their minds to the 
investigation of truth; for though the lamp of God’s word 
was shining at their very doors, they would yet without 
shame propagate the rank fables of their achievements, fifteen 
thousand years before the foundation of the world. Not less 
puerile and absurd is the fable of the Athenians, who boasted 
that they were born from their own soil,* maintaining for 
themselves a distinet origin from the rest of mankind, and 
thus rendering themselves ridiculous even to barbarians. 
Now, though all nations have been more or less implicated 
in the same charge of ingratitude, I have nevertheless thought 
it right to select those whose error is least excusable, because 
they have deemed themselves wiser than all others. 

Now, whether all nations which formerly existed, purposely 


? Aristotle. Mesme Aristotle le principal philosophe.—French Tr. 

2 Brouillent leurs escrits de tant des meslinges confus, que ceste lie ont 
oste toute clarté.—They intersperse their writings with such a confused 
mixture, that these dregs have deprived them of all clearness. 

8 Qui se duréxbovas gloriati. 


VOL, I. D 


] CALVIN’S DEDICATION, 


drew a veil over themselves, or whether their own indolence 
was the sole obstacle to their knowledge, the [First] Book of 
Moses deserves to be regarded as an incomparable treasure, 
since it at least gives an indisputable assurance respecting 
The Creation of the World, without which we should be un- 
worthy of a place on earth. I omit, for the present, The 
History of the Deluge, which contains a representation of the 
Divine vengeance in the destruction of mankind, as tremen- 
dous, as that which it supplies of Divine mercy in their restor- 
ation is admirable. This one consideration stamps an inesti- 
mable value on the Book, that it alone reveals those things 
which are of primary necessity to be known; namely, in 
what manner God, after the destructive fall of man, adopted 
to himself a Church; what constituted the true worship of 
himself, and in what offices of piety the holy fathers exercised 
themselves; in which way pure religion, having for a time 
declined through the indolence of men, was restored, as it 
were, to its integrity; we also learn, when God deposited 
with a special people his gratuitous covenant of eternal salva- 
tion; in what manner a small progeny gradually proceeding 
from one man, who was both barren and withering, almost half- 
dead, and (as Isaiah calls him) solitary,! yet suddenly grew 
to an immense multitude; by what unexpected means God 
both exalted and defended a family chosen by himself, al- 
though poor, destitute of protection, exposed to every storm, 
and surrounded on all sides by innumerable hosts of enemies. 
Let every one, from his own use and experience, form his 
judgment respecting the necessity of the knowledge of these 
things. We see how vehemently the Papists alarm the 
simple by their false claim of the title of The Church. Moses 
so delineates the genuine features of the Church as to take 
away this absurd fear, by dissipating these illusions. It is 
by an ostentatious display of splendour and of pomp that 
they (the Papists) carry away the less informed to a foolish 
admiration of themselves, and even render them stupid and 
infatuated. But if we turn our eyes to those marks by which 
Moses designates the Church, these vain phantoms will have 


1 Tsaiah li. 2, “T called him alone, and blessed him.” 


CALVIN’S DEDICATION, li 


no more power to deceive. Weare often disturbed and almost 
disheartened at the paucity of those who follow the pure 
doctrine of God; and especially when we see how far and 
wide superstitions extend their dominion. And, as formerly, 
the Spirit of God, by the mouth of Isaiah the prophet, com- 
manded the Jews to look to the Rock whence they were 
hewn,! so he recalls us to the same consideration, and ad- 
monishes us of the absurdity of measuring the Church by its 
numbers, as if its dignity consisted in its multitude. If some- 
times, in various places, Religion is less flourishing than could 
be wished, if the body of the pious is scattered, and the state 
of a well-regulated Church has gone to decay, not only do 
our minds sink, but entirely melt within us. On the con- 
trary, while we see in this history of Moses, the building of 
the Church out of ruins, and the gathering of it out of broken 
fragments, and out of desolation itself, such an instance of the 
grace of God ought to raise us to firm confidence. But since 
the propensity, not to say the wanton disposition, of the human 
mind to frame false systems of worship is so great, nothing can 
be more useful to us than to seek our rule for the pure and sin- 
cere worshipping of God, from those holy Patriarchs, whose 
piety Moses points out to us chiefly by this mark, that they 
depended on the Word of God alone. For however great 
may be the difference between them and us in external cere- 
monies, yet that which ought to flourish in unchangeable 
vigour is common to us both, namely, that Religion should 
take its form from the sole will and pleasure of God. 

I am not ignorant of the abundance of materials here sup- 
plied, and of the insufficiency of my language to reach the 
dignity of the subjects on which I briefly touch; but since 
each of them, on suitable occasions, has been elsewhere more 
copiously discussed by me, although not with suitable brilli- 
ancy and elegance of diction, it is now enough for me briefly 
to apprize my pious readers how well it would repay their 
labour, if they would learn prudently to apply to their own 
use the example of The Ancient Church, as it is described 


1 These words are here added in the French Translation—‘ C’est a 
dire, & leur pere Abraham, qui n’estoit qu'un, homme seul ;’—that is to 
say, to their father Abraham, who was but one solitary man. 


hi CALVIN’S DEDICATION. 


by Moses. And, in fact, God has associated us with the 
holy Patriarchs in the hope of the same inheritance, in order 
that we, disregarding the distance of time which separates us 
from them, may, in the mutual agreement of faith and patience, 
endure the same conflicts. So much the more detestable, 
then, are certain turbulent men, who, incited by I know not 
what rage of furious zeal, are assiduously endeavouring to 
rend asunder the Church of our own age, which is already 
more than sufficiently scattered. I do not speak of avowed 
enemies, who, by open violence, fall upon the pious to destroy 
them, and utterly to blot out their memory; but of certain 
morose professors of the Gospel, who not only perpetually 
supply new materials for fomenting discords, but by their 
restlessness disturb the peace which holy and learned men 
gladly cultivate. We see that with the Papists, although in 
some things they maintain deadly strife among themselves, ! 
they yet combine in wicked confederacy against the Gospel. 
It is not necessary to say how small is the number of those 
who hold the sincere doctrine of Christ, when compared with 
the vast multitudes of these opponents. In the meantime, 
audacious scribblers arise, as from our own bosom, who not 
only obscure the light of sound doctrine with clouds of error, 
or infatuate the simple and the less experienced with their 
wicked ravings, but by a profane license of scepticism, allow 
themselves to uproot the whole of Religion. For, as if, by 
their rank ironies and cavils, they could prove themselves 
genuine disciples of Socrates, they have no axiom more 
plausible than, that faith must be free and unfettered, so that 
it may be possible, by reducing everything to a matter of 
doubt, to render Scripture flexible (so to speak) as a nose of 
wax.” Therefore, they who being captivated by the allure- 


1 Combien qu’en tout le reste, ils s’entrebatent comme chiens et chats.— 
Though in everything else they quarrel together like dogs and cats.—French 
Tr. 

2 Ils n’ont nulle maxime plus agreable que ceste-ci, que la foy doit 
estre libre, et que les esprits ne doyvent point estre tenns captifs. Et 
c’est afin qu’il leur soit loisible, en metant tout en doute et en question, 
tourner et virer lEscriture a leur poste, et en faire un nez de cire; &e.— 
They have no maxim more agreeable than this, that faith ought to be 
free, and that minds ought not to be held captive. And this is in order 
that they may be permitted, by putting everything into doubt and ques- 


CALVIN’S DEDICATION. liii 


ments of this new school, now indulge in doubtful specu- 
lations, obtain at length such proficiency, that they are always 
learning, yet never come to the knowledge of the truth. 

Thus far I have treated briefly, as the occasion required, of 
the utility of this History. As for the rest, I have laboured 
—how skilfully I know not, but certainly faithfully—that the 
doctrine of the Law, the obscurity of which has heretofore 
repelled many, may become familiarly known. ‘There will be 
readers, I doubt not, who would desire a more ample explica- 
tion of particular passages. But I, who naturally avoid pro- 
lixity, have confined myself in this Work to narrow limits, 
for tworeasons. First, whereas these Four Books [of Moses | 
already deter some by their length, I have feared lest, if in 
unfolding them, I were to indulge in a style too diffuse, I 
should but increase their disgust. Secondly, since in my 
progress I have often despaired of life, I have preferred giving 
a succinct Exposition to leaving a mutilated one behind me. 
Yet sincere readers, possessed of sound judgment, will see that, 
I have taken diligent care, neither through cunning nor negli- 
gence, to pass over anything perplexed, ambiguous, or obscure. 
Since, therefore, I have endeavoured to discuss all doubtful 
points, I do not see why any one should complain of brevity, 
unless he wishes to derive his knowledge exclusively from 
Commentaries. Now I will gladly allow men of this sort, 
whom no amount of verbosity can satiate, to seek for them- 
selves some other master. 

But if you, Sire, please to make trial, you will indeed 
know, and will believe for yourself, that what I declare is 
most true. You are yet a youth; but God, when he com- 
manded Kings to write out the Book of the Law for their 
own use, did not exempt the pious Josiah from this class, 
but choose rather to present the most noble instance of pious 
instruction in a boy, that he might reprove the indolence 
of the aged. And your own example teaches the great 
importance of having habits formed from tender age. 


tion, to turn and twist the Scripture to their purpose, and to make of it 
a nose of wax, &c.—French Tr. 

1 Touchant l’utilité de histoire contenue au livre de Genese.—Touch- 
ing the utility of the history contained in the Book of Genesis.—French Try: 


liv CALVIN’S DEDICATION. 


For the germ springing from the root which the principles of 
Religion received by you have taken, not only puts forth its — 
flower, but also savours ef a degree of maturity. Therefore 
labour, by indefatigable industry, to attain the mark set before 
you. And suffer not yourself to be retarded or disturbed by 
designing men, to whom it appears unseasonable that boys 
should be called to this precocious wisdom, (as they term it.) 
For what can be more absurd or intolerable, than that, when 
every kind of corruption surrounds you, this remedy should 
be prohibited ? Since the pleasures of a Court corrupt even 
your servants, how much more dangerous are the snares laid 
for great Princes, who so abound in all luxury and delicacies, 
that it is a wonder if they are not quite dissolved in lascivious- 
ness? For it is certainly contrary to nature to possess all 
the means of pleasure, and to refrain from enjoying them. 
The difficulty, however, of retaining chastity unpolluted 
amidst scenes of gaiety, is more than sufficiently evident in 
practice. But do you, O most Illustrious Prince, regard 
everything as poison which tends to produce a love of plea- 
sures. For if that which stifles continence and temperance 
already allures you, what will you not covet when you arrive 
at adult age? The sentiment is perhaps harshly expressed, 
that great care for the body is great neglect of virtue, yet 
most truly does Cato thus speak. The following paradox also 
will scarcely be admitted in common life: “Iam greater, and 
am born to greater things, than to be a slave to my body; the 
contempt of which is my true liberty.” Let us then dismiss 
that excessive rigour, by which all enjoyment is taken away 
from life; still there are too many examples to show how 
easy is the descent from security and self-indulgence to the 
licentiousness of profligacy. Moreover, you will have to con- 
tend, not only with luxury, but also with many other vices. 
Nothing can be more attractive than your affability and 
modesty ; but no disposition is so gentle and well-regulated, 
that it may not degenerate into brutality and ferociousness 
when intoxicated with flatteries. Now since there are flat- 
terers without number, who will prove so many tempters to 
inflame your mind with various lusts, how much more does 
it behove you vigilantly to beware of them? But while 1 


CALVIN’S DEDICATION. lv 


caution you against the blandishments of a Court, I require 
nothing more than that, being endued with moderation, you 
should render yourself invincible. For one has truly said, 
He is not to be praised who has never seen Asia, but he who 
has lived modestly and continently in Asia. Seeing, there- 
fore, that to attain this state is most desirable, David pre- 
scribes a compendious method of doing so—if you will but 
imitate his example—when he declares that the precepts of 
God are his counsellors. And truly, whatever counsel may 
be suggested from any other quarter will perish, unless you 
take your commencement of becoming wise from this point. 
It remains, therefore, most noble Prince, that what is spoken 
by Isaiah concerning the holy king Hezekiah should perpe- 
tually recur to your mind. or the Prophet, in enumerating 
his excellent qualities, especially honours him with this 
eulogy, that the fear of God shall be his treasure. 

Farewell, most Illustrious Prince, may God preserve you in 
safety under His protection, may He adorn you more and 
more with spiritual gifts, and enrich you with every kind of 
benediction. 


GENEVA, July 31st, 1563. 





















Heit WW, dh Jatiyin’ b rahi ah: bite tag 
anit hy div (ri, ottmiten 


hein SE i RR BEE BEF 











ne y a cai eee ed: ue 


ya ‘ag 











s - f 
Te i - | “Kay te ay ESP ALE Ak ete ot hae “aR lh 
; Ea é P ti; ¥- 
Py Pe Dear 24 des Rae Toe ‘ ; ‘ ck 
Pues eo a ee : ‘ elias de a Ae 
eset. PM KE Ma %. apres, 7 he ta | a, faxtig. SR. 
& e + " : ee 
| wie « 5 B pa eere: 
rat} RE oe 6.43 Tak ieee fii 7 i ‘ ya . naa) | 
¥ , Lop eee: E ropes ly 
‘ey Souk: weblipy lashigrs 
) i 
é t 
-~ |; “> 
- 
re S * 5 
eS % 
ya 
3 , 
‘ Hye , ; ‘ 
™ 
a wy fright 
~- « = . s a. 
ro el 
Bin ae ‘a 
Wi sh i \ 
a 
“i 4 


ARGUMENT. 


Since the infinite wisdom of God is displayed in the admir- 
able structure of heaven and earth, it is absolutely impossible 
to unfold THe History or THE CREATION OF THE WORLD 
in terms equal to its dignity. For while the measure of our 
capacity is too contracted to comprehend things of such 
magnitude, our tongue is equally incapable of giving a full 
and substantial account of them. As he, however, deserves 
praise, who, with modesty and reverence, applies himself to 
the consideration of the works of God, although he attain 
less than might be wished, so, if in this kind of employment, 
I endeavour to assist others according to the ability given to 
me, I trust that my service will be not less approved by pious 
men than accepted by God. I have chosen to premise this, 
for the sake not only of excusing myself, but of admonishing 
my readers, that if they sincerely wish to profit with me in 
meditating on the works of God, they must bring with them 
a sober, docile, mild, and humble spirit. We see, indeed, 
the world with our eyes, we tread the earth with our feet, 
we touch innumerable kinds of God’s works with our hands, 
we inhale a sweet and pleasant fragrance from herbs and 
flowers, we enjoy boundless benefits; but in those very 
things of which we attain some knowledge, there dwells such 
an immensity of divine power, goodness, and wisdom, as 
absorbs all our senses. Therefore, let men be satisfied if 
they obtain only a moderate taste of them, suited to their 
capacity. And it becomes us so to press towards this mark 


58 ARGUMENT. 


during our whole life, that (even in extreme old age) we 
shall not repent of the progress we have made, if only we 
have advanced ever so little in our course. 

The intention of Mosgs, in beginning his Book with the 
creation of the world, is, to render God, as it were, visible to 
us in his works. But here presumptuous men rise up, and 
scoffingly inquire, whence was this revealed to Moses ? They 
therefore suppose him to be speaking fabulously of things 
unknown, because he was neither a spectator of the events 
he records, nor had learned the truth of them by reading. 
Such is their reasoning; but their dishonesty is easily 
exposed. For if they can destroy the credit of this history, 
because it is traced back through a long series of past ages, 
let them also prove those prophecies to be false in which the 
same history predicts occurrences which did not take place 
till many centuries afterwards. Those things, I affirm, are 
clear and obvious, which Moses testifies concerning the voca- 
tion of the Gentiles, the accomplishment of which occurred 
nearly two thousand years after his death. Was not he, who 
by the Spirit foresaw an event remotely future, and hidden 
at the time from the perception of mankind, capable of 
understanding whether the world was created by God, espe- 
cially seeing that he was taught by a Divine Master? For 
he does not here put forward divinations of his own, but is 
the instrument of the Holy Spirit for the publication of those 
things which it was of importance for all men to know. They 
greatly err in deeming it absurd that the order of the crea- 
tion, which had been previously unknown, should at length 
have been described and explained by him. For he does not 
transmit to memory things before unheard of, but for the first 
time consigns to writing facts which the fathers had deli- 
vered as from hand to hand, through a long succession of 
years, to their children. Can we conceive that man was so 
placed in the earth as to be ignorant of his own origin, and 
of the origin of those things which he enjoyed? No sane 
person doubts that Adam was well-instructed respecting 
them all. Was he indeed afterwards dumb ? Were the holy 
Patriarchs so ungrateful as to suppress in silence such neces- 
sary instruction? Did Noah, warned by a divine judgment 


ARGUMENT. 59 


so memorable, neglect to transmit it to posterity ? Abraham 
is expressly honoured with this eulogy, that he was the 
teacher and the master of his family, (Gen. xviii. 19.) And 
we know that, long before the time of Moses, an acquaint- 
ance with the covenant into which God had entered with 
their fathers was common to the whole people. When he 
says that the Israelites were sprung from a holy race, which 
God had chosen for himself, he does not propound it as 
something new, but only commemorates what all held, what 
the old men themselves had received from their ancestors, 
and what, in short, was entirely uncontroverted among them. 
Therefore, we ought not to doubt that The Creation of the 
World, as here described, was already known through the 
ancient and perpetual tradition of the Fathers. Yet, since 
nothing is more easy than that the truth of God should be 
so corrupted by men, that, in a long succession of time, it 
should, as it were, degenerate from itself, it pleased the 
Lord to commit the history to writing, for the purpose of 
preserving its purity. Moses, therefore, has established the 
credibility of that doctrine which is contained in his writings, 
and which, by the carelessness of men, might otherwise have 
been lost. 


I now return to the design of Moses, or rather of the Holy 
Spirit, who has spoken by his mouth. We know God, who 
is himself invisible, only through his works. Therefore, the 
Apostle elegantly styles the worlds, ra uj ex pasmomévav Brsaé- 
eva, as if one should say, “the manifestation of things not 
apparent,”? (Heb. xi. 3.) This is the reason why the Lord, 
that he may invite us to the knowledge of himself, places the 
fabric of heaven and earth before our eyes, rendering him- 
self, in a certain manner, manifest in them. For his eternal 
power and Godhead (as Paul says) are there exhibited, 
(Rom. i. 20.) And that declaration of David is most true, 
that the heavens, though without a tongue, are yet eloquent 
‘heralds of the glory of God, and that this most beautiful 
order of nature silently proclaims his admirable wisdom, 


1 “ Acsi dicas, spectacula rerum non apparentium.”—Comme si on 
disoit, Un regard, ou apparition de ce qui n’apparoist point.— French Tr. 


60 ARGUMENT. 


(Ps. xix. 1.) This is the more diligently to be observed, 
because so few pursue the right method of knowing God, 
while the greater part adhere to the creatures without any 
consideration of the Creator himself. For men are commonly 
subject to these two extremes ; namely, that some, forgetful 
of God, apply the whole force of their mind to the considera- 
tion of nature; and others, overlooking the works of God, 
aspire with a foolish and insane curiosity to inquire into his 
Essence. Both labour in vain. To be so occupied in the 
investigation of the secrets of nature, as never to turn the 
eyes to its Author, is a most perverted study ; and to enjoy 
everything in nature without acknowledging the Author of 
the benefit, is the basest ingratitude. Therefore, they who 
assume to be philosophers without Religion, and who, by 
speculating, so act as to remove God and all sense of piety 
far from them, will one day feel the force of the expression 
of Paul, related by Luke, that God has never left himself 
without witness, (Acts xiv. 17.) For they shall not be per- 
mitted to escape with impunity because they have been deaf 
and insensible to testimonies so illustrious. And, in truth, it 
is the part of culpable ignorance, never to see God, who 
everywhere gives signs of his presence. Butif mockers now 
escape by their cavils, hereafter their terrible destruction will 
bear witness that they were ignorant of God, only because 
they were willingly and maliciously blinded. As for those 
who proudly soar above the world to seek God in his unveiled 
essence, it is impossible but that at length they should 
entangle themselves in a multitude of absurd figments. For 
God—by other means invisible—(as we have already said) 
clothes himself, so to speak, with the image of the world, in 
which he would present himself to our contemplation. They 
who will not deign to behold him thus magnificently arrayed 
in the incomparable vesture of the heavens and the earth, 
afterwards suffer the just punishment of their proud con- 
tempt in their own ravings. Therefore, as soon as the name 
of God sounds in our ears, or the thought of him occurs to 
our minds, let us also clothe him with this most beautiful 
ornament; finally, let the world become our school if we 
desire rightly to know God. | 


ARGUMENT. 61 


Here also the impiety of those is refuted who cavil against 
Moses, for relating that so short a space of time had elapsed 
since the Creation of the World. For they inquire why it 
had come so suddenly into the mind of God to create the 
world ; why he had so long remained inactive in heaven: 
and thus by sporting with sacred things they exercise their 
ingenuity to their own destruction. In the Tripartite History 
an answer given by a pious man is recorded, with which I 
have always been pleased. For when a certain impure dog 
was in this manner pouring ridicule upon God, he retorted, 
that God had been at that time by no means inactive, 
because he had been preparing hell for the captious. But 
by what reasoning’s can you restrain the arrogance of those 
men to whom sobriety is professedly contemptible and odious? 
And certainly they who now so freely exult in finding fault 
with the inactivity of God will find, to their own great cost, 
that his power has been infinite in preparing hell for them. 
As for ourselves, it ought not to seem so very absurd that 
God, satisfied in himself, did not create a world which he 
needed not, sooner than he thought good. Moreover, since 
his will is the rule of all wisdom, we ought to be contented 
with that alone. For Augustine rightly affirms that injus- 
tice is done to God by the Manichezans, because they demand 
a cause superior to his will; and he prudently warns his 
readers not to push their inquiries respecting the infinity of 
duration, any more than respecting the infinity of space. 
We indeed are not ignorant, that the circuit of the heavens 
is finite, and that the earth, like a little globe, is placed in the 
centre. They who take it amiss that the world was not 
sooner created, may as well expostulate with God for not 


1 De Genesi contra Manich. lib. xi. De Civit. Dei. 

2 The erroneous system of natural philosophy which had prevailed for 
ages was but just giving way to sounder views, at the time when 
Calvin wrote. Copernicus, in the close of the preceding century, had 
begun to suspect the current opinions on the subject; but the fear of 
being misunderstood and ridiculed caused him to withhold for some time 
the discoveries he was making; and it was not till 1543, a few hours 
before his death, that he himself saw a copy of his own published work. 
Up to that period, the earth had been regarded as the centre of the 
system, and the whole heavens were supposed to revolve around it.— 
See Maclaurin’s Account of Sir Isaac Newton’s Discoveries, Book I. 
chap. iii. 


62 ARGUMENT. 


having made innumerable worlds. ‘Yea, since they deem it 
absurd that many ages should have passed away without any 
world at all, they may as well acknowledge it to be a proof 
of the great corruption of their own nature, that, in compari- 
son with fhe boundless waste which remains empty, the 
heaven and earth occupy but a small space. But since both ~ 
the eternity of God’s existence and the infinity of his glory 
would prove a twofold labyrinth, let us content ourselves 
with modestly desiring to proceed no further in our inquiries 
than the Lord, by the guidance and instruction of his own 
works, invites us. 

Now, in describing the world as a mirror in which we ought 
to behold God, I would not be understood to assert, either 
that our eyes are sufficiently clear-sighted to discern what 
the fabric of heaven and earth represents, or that the know- 
ledge to be hence attained is sufficient for salvation. And 
whereas the Lord invites us to himself by the means of 
created things, with no other effect than that of thereby 
rendering us inexcusable, he has added (as was necessary) 
a new remedy, or at least by a new aid, he has assisted the 
ignorance of our mind. For by the Scripture as our guide 
and teacher, he not only makes those things plain which 
would otherwise escape our notice, but almost compels us to 
behold them ; as if he had assisted our dull sight with spec- 
tacles.! On this point, (as we have already observed,) Moses 
insists. For if the mute instruction of the heaven and the 
earth were sufficient, the teaching of Moses would have been 
superfluous. This herald therefore approaches, who excites 
our attention, in order that we may perceive ourselves to be 
placed in this scene, for the purpose of beholding the glory 
of God; not indeed to observe them as mere witnesses, but 
to enjoy all the riches which are here exhibited, as the Lord 
has ordained and subjected them to our use. And he not 
only declares generally that God is the architect of the world, 


>“ Non secus ac hebetes oculi specillis adjuvantur.”—Tout ainsi comme 
si on bailloit des Zunettes ou miroirs & ceux qui ont la veue debile. Just 
as if one gave spectacles or mirrors to those who have weak sight.— 
French Tr. This is the translator’s authority for rendering speciillis spec- 
tacles. 


ARGUMENT. 63 


but through the whole chain of the history he shows how 
admirable is His power, His wisdom, His goodness, and 
especially His tender solicitude forthe human race. Besides, 
since the eternal Word of God is the lively and express 
image of Himself, he recalls us to this point. And thus, 
the assertion of the Apostle is verified, that through no other 
means than faith can it be understood that the worlds were 
made by the word of God, (Heb. xi. 3.) For faith properly 
proceeds from this, that we being taught by the ministry of 
Moses, do not now wander in foolish and trifling speculations, 
but contemplate the true and only God in his genuine image. 

It may, however, be objected, that this seems at vari- 
ance with what Paul declares: “ After that, in the wisdom 
of God, the world through wisdom knew not God, it seemed 
right to God, through the foolishness of preaching, to save 
them who believe,” (1 Cor. i. 21.) For he thus intimates, 
that God is sought in vain under the guidance of visible 
things; and that nothing remains for us but to betake our- 
selves immediately to Christ; and that we must not there- 
fore commence with the elements of this world, but with the 
Gospel, which sets Christ alone before us with his cross, and 
holds us to this one point. I answer, It is in vain for any to 
reason as philosophers on the workmanship of the world, 
except those who, having been first humbled by the preach- 
ing of the Gospel, have learned to submit the whole of their 
intellectual wisdom (as Paul expresses it) to the foolishness of 
the cross, (1 Cor. i. 21.) Nothing shall we find, I say, above 
or below, which can raise us up to God, until Christ shall have 
instructed us in his own school. Yet this cannot be done, 
unless we, having emerged out of the lowest depths, are borne 
up above all heavens, in the chariot of his cross, that there 
by faith we may apprehend those things which the eye has 
never seen, the ear never heard, and which far surpass our 
hearts and minds,! For the earth, with its supply of fruits for 
our daily nourishment, is not there set before us; but Christ 
offers himself to us unto life eternal. Nor does heaven, 


1 Tn this, and the following sentences, Calvin shows an intimate ex- 
perimental acquaintance with the declaration of the Apostle; ‘* And hath 
made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus,” (Eph. ii. 6.) 


64 ARGUMENT. 


by the shining of the sun and stars, enlighten our bodily 
eyes, but the same Christ, the Light of the World and the 
Sun of Righteousness, shines into our souls; neither does the 
air stretch out its empty space for us to breathe in, but 
the Spirit of God himself quickens us and causes us to live. 
There, in short, the invisible kingdom of Christ fills all 
things, and his spiritual-grace is diffused through all. Yet 
this does not prevent us from applying our senses to the 
consideration of heaven and earth, that we may thence seek 
confirmation in the true knowledge of God. For Christ is 
that image in which God presents to our view, not only his 
heart, but also his hands and his feet. I give the name of his 
heart to that secret love with which he embraces us in 
Christ: by his hands and feet I understand those works of 
his which are displayed before our eyes. As soon as ever 
we depart from Christ, there is nothing, be it ever so gross 
or insignificant in itself, respecting which we are not neces- 
sarily deceived. 

And, in fact, though Moses begins, in this Book, with the 
Creation of the World, he nevertheless does not confine us 
to this subject. For these things ought to be connected 
together, that the world was founded by God, and that man, 
after he had been endued with the light of intelligence, and 
adorned with so many privileges, fell by his own fault, and 
was thus deprived of all the benefits he had obtained; after- 
wards, by the compassion of God, he was restored to the life 
he had forfeited, and this through the loving-kindness of 
Christ; so that there should always be some assembly on 
earth, which being adopted into the hope of the celestial life, 
might in this confidence worship God. The end to which 
the whole scope of the history tends is to this point, that the 
human race has been preserved by God in such a manner as to 
manifest his special care for his Church. For this is the argu- 
ment of the Book: After the world had been created, man was 
placed in it as in a theatre, that he, beholding above him and 
beneath the wonderful works of God, might reverently adore 
their Author. Secondly, that all things were ordained for 
the use of man, that he, being under deeper obligation, might 
devote and dedicate himself entirely to obedience towards 





ARGUMENT. 65 


God. Thirdly, that he was endued with understanding and 
reason, that being distinguished from brute animals he might 
meditate on a better life, and might even tend directly to- 
wards God, whose image he bore engraven on his own per- 
son. Afterwards followed the fall of Adam, whereby he 
alienated himself from God; whence it came to pass that he 
was deprived of all rectitude. Thus Moses represents man 
as devoid of all good, blinded in understanding, perverse in 
heart, vitiated in every part, and under sentence of eternal 
death ; but he soon adds the history of his restoration, where 
Christ shines forth with the benefit of redemption. From 
this point he not only relates continuously the singular Pro- 
vidence of God in governing and preserving the Church, but 
also commends to us the true worship of God; teaches 
wherein the salvation of man is placed, and exhorts us, from 
the example of the Fathers, to constancy in enduring the 
cross. Whosoever, therefore, desires to make suitable pro- 
ficiency in this book, let him employ his mind on these main 
topics. But especially, let him observe, that after Adam had 
by his own desperate fall ruined himself and all his posterity, 
this is the basis of our salvation, this the origin of the Church, 
that we, being rescued out of profound darkness, have ob- 
tained a new life by the mere grace of God; that the Fathers 
(according to the offer made them through the word of God) 
are by faith made partakers of this life; that this word itself 
was founded upon Christ; and that all the pious who have _ 
since lived were sustained by the very same promise of sal- 
vation by which Adam was first raised from the fall. 
Therefore, the perpetual succession of the Church has 
flowed from this fountain, that the holy Fathers, one after 
another, having by faith embraced the offered promise, were 
collected together into the family of God, in order that they 
might have a common life in Christ. This we ought care- 
fully to notice, that we may know what is the society of the 
true Church, and what the communion of faith among the 
children of God. Whereas Moses was ordained the Teacher 
of the Israelites, there is no doubt that he had an especial 
reference to them, in order that they might acknowledge 
themselves to be a people elected and chosen by God; and 
VOL, I. E 


66 ARGUMENT. 


that they might seek the certainty of this adoption from the 
Covenant which the Lord had ratified with their fathers, and 
might know that there was no other God, and no other right 
faith. But it was also his will to testify to all ages, that 
whosoever desired to worship God aright, and to be deemed 
members of the Church, must pursue no other course than 
that which is here prescribed. But as this is the commence- 
ment of faith, to know that there is one only true God whom 
we worship, so it is no common confirmation of this faith 
that we are companions of the Patriarchs; for since they 
possessed Christ as the pledge of their salvation when he had 
not yet appeared, so we retain the God who formerly mani- 
fested himself to them. Hence we may infer the difference 
between the pure and lawful worship of God, and all those 
adulterated services which have since been fabricated by the 
fraud of Satan and the perverse audacity of men. Further, 
the Government of the Church is to be considered, that the 
reader may come to the conclusion that God has been its 
perpetual Guard and Ruler, yet in such a way as to exer- 
cise it in the warfare of the cross. Here, truly, the peculiar 
conflicts of the Church present themselves to view, or rather, 
the course is set as in a mirror before our eyes, in which it 
behoves us, with the holy Fathers, to press towards the 
mark of a happy immortality. 


Let us now hearken to MosgEs. 





COMMENTARY 


ON 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


CHAPTER I. 


1. In the beginning God created 
the heaven and the earth. 

2. And the earth was without form 
and void; and darkness was upon the 
face of the deep. And the Spirit of 
God moved upon the face of the 
waters. 

8. And God said, Let there be 
light : and there was light. 

4, And God saw the light, that 7 
was good: and God divided the light 
from the darkness. 

5. And God called the light Day, 
and the darkness he called Night. 
And the evening and the morning 
were the first day. 

6. And God said, Let there be a 
firmament in the midst of the waters, 
and let it divide the waters from the 
waters. 

7. And God made the firmament, 
and divided the waters which were 
under the firmament from the waters 
which were above the firmament: and 
it was so. 

8. And God called the firmament 
Heaven. And the evening and the 
morning were the second day. 

9. And God said, Let the waters 
under the heaven be gathered to- 
gether into one place, and let the dry 
land appear : and it was so. 


1. In principio creavit Deus 
coeelum et terram. 

2. Terra autem erat informis 
et inanis; tenebreque erant in 
superficie voraginis, et Spiritus 
Dei agitabat se in superficie 
aquarum. 

3. Et dixit Deus, Sit lux. Et 
fuit lux. 

4, Viditque Deus lucem quod 
bona esset ; et divisit Deus lucem 
a tenebris. 

5. Et vocavit Deus lucem, 
Diem : et tenebras vocavit Noc- 
tem. Fuitque vespera, et fuit 
mane dies primus. 

6. Et dixit Deus, Sit extensio 
in medio aquarum, et dividat 
aquas ab aquis. 


7. Et fecit Deus expansionem: 
et divisit aquas que erant sub 
expansione, ab aquis que erant 
super expansionem. Et fuit 
ita. 

8. Vocavitque Deus expan- 
sionem Celum. Et fuit vespera, 
et fuit mane dies secundus. 

9. Postea dixit Deus, Congre- 
gentur aque que sunt sub celo, 
in locum unum, et appareat ari- 
da. Et fuit ita. 


68 


10. And God called the dry land 
Earth; and the gathering together of 
the waters called he Seas: and God 
saw that 7 was good. 

11. And God said, Let the earth 
bring forth grass, the herb yielding 
seed, and the fruit tree yielding fruit 
after his kind, whose seed is in itself, 
upon the earth: and it was so. 


12. And the earth brought forth 
grass, and herb yielding seed after 
his kind, and the tree yielding fruit, 
whose seed was in itself; after his 
kind: and God saw that it was good. 


13. And the evening and the morn- 
ing were the third day. 

14. And God said, Let there be 
lights in the firmament of the heaven 
to divide the day from the night ; and 
let them be for signs, and for seasons, 
and for days, and years : 

15. And let them be for lights in 
the firmament of the heaven to give 
light upon the earth: and it was so. 

16. And God made two great lights; 
the greater light to rule the day, and 
the lesser light to rule the night: he 
made the stars also. 

17. And God set them in the firma- 
ment of the heaven to give light upon 
the earth, 

18. And to rule over the day and 
over the night, and to divide the light 
from the darkness: and God saw that 
it was good. 

19. And the evening and the morn- 
ing were the fourth day. 

20. And God said, Let the waters 
bring forth abundantly the moving 
creature that hath life, and fowl that 
may fly above the earth in the open 
firmament of heaven. 

21. And God created great whales, 
and every living creature that moveth, 
which the waters brought forth abun- 
dantly, after their kind, and every 
winged fowl after his kind: and God 
saw that it was good. 


22. And God blessed them, saying, 
Be fruitful, and multiply, and fill the 
waters in the seas, and let fuwl mul- 
tiply in the earth.. 


COMMENTARY UPON 


CHAP. I. 


10. Et vocavit Deus aridam, 
Terram: congregationem vero 
aquarum appellavit Maria. Et 
vidit Dens quod esset bonum. 

11. Postea dixit Deus, Ger- 
minet terra germen, herbam 
seminificantem semen, arborem 
fructiferam, facientem fructum 
juxta speciem suam cui insit 
semen suum super terram. Et 
fuit ita. 

12. Et protulit terra germen, 
herbam seminificantem semen 
juxta speciem suam, et arborem 
facientem fructum cui semen 
suum inesset juxta speciem suam. 
Et vidit Deus quod esset bonum. 

13. Et fuit vespera, et fuit 
mane dies tertius. 

14. Tunc dixit Deus, Sint lu- 
minaria in firmamentum ceeli, ut 
dividant diem a nocte, et sint in 
signa, et stata tempora, et dies, 
et annos : 

15. Et sint in luminaria in 
expansione cceli, ut illuminent 
terram. Et fuit ita. 

16. Et fecit Deus duo lumi- 
naria magna: luminare majus in 
dominium diei, et luminare minus 
in dominium noctis, et stellas. 

17. Posuitque ea Dens in 
expansione cceli, ut iluminarent 
terram : 

18. Et ut dominarentur diei 
ac nocti, et dividerent lucem a 
tenebris: et vidit Deus quod esset 
bonum. : 

19. Et fuit vespera, et fuit 
mane dies quartus. 

20. Postea dixit Deus, Repere 
faciant aque reptile anime vi- 
ventis, et volatile volet super 
terram in superficie expansionis 
ceeli. 

21. Et creavit Deus cetos 
magnos, et omnem animum vi- 
ventem, repentem, quam repere 
fecerunt aque juxta species suas: 
et omne volatile alatum secundum 
speciem cujusque. Et vidit Deus 
quod esset bonum. 

22. Benedixitque eis, dicendo, 
Crescite et multiplicate vos, et 
replete aquas in maribus; et 
volatile multiplicet se in terra. 





CHAP. I. 


23. And the evening and the morn- 
ing were the fifth day. 

24. And God said, Let the earth 
bring forth the living creature after 
his kind, cattle and creeping thing, 
and beast of the earth after his kind: 
and it was so. 


25. And God made the beast of the 
earth after his kind, and cattle after 
their kind, and every thing that 
creepeth upon the earth after his kind : 
and God saw that it was good. 


26. And God said, Let us make 
man in our image, after our likeness : 
and let them have dominion over the 
fish of the sea, and over the fowl of 
the air, and over the cattle, and over 
all the earth, and over every creeping 
thing that creepeth upon the earth. 

27. So God created man in his own 
image, in the image of God created 
he him; male and female created he 
them. 


28. And God blessed them, and 
God said unto them, Be fruitful, and 
multiply, and replenish the earth, and 
subdue it: and have dominion over 
the fish of the sea, and over the fowl 
of the air, and over every living thing 
that moveth upon the earth. 

29. And God said, Behold, I have 
given you every herb bearing seed, 
which zs upon the face of all the earth, 
and every tree, in the which zs the 
fruit of a tree yielding seed ; to you it 
shall be for meat. 


30. And to every beast of the earth, 
and to every fowl of the air, and to 
every thing that creepeth upon the 
earth, wherein there is life, I have 
given every green herb for meat: and 
it was so. 

31. And God saw everything that 
he had made, and, behold, 7 was very 
good. And the evening and the morn- 
ing were the sixth day. 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


69 


23. Et fuit vespera, et fuit 
mane dies quintus. 

24. Postea dixit Deus, Pro- 
ducat terra animam viventem 
secundum speciem suam, jumen- 
tum et reptile, et bestias terre 
secundum speciem suam. Et fuit 
ita. 

25. Fecitque Deus bestiam 
terre secundum speciem suam, 
et jumentum secundum speciem 
suam, et omne reptile terre se- 
cundum speciem suam: et vidit 
Deus quod esset bonum. 

26. Et dixit Deus, Faciamus 
hominem in imagine nostra, se- 
cundum similitudinem nostram ; 
et dominetur piscibus maris, et 
volatili cceli, et jumento, et omni 
terre, et omni reptili reptanti su- 
per terram. 

27. Creavit itaque Deus ho- 
minem ad imaginem suam, ad 
imaginem inquam Dei creavit 
illum: masculum et foeminam 
creavit eos. 

28. Et benedixit illis Deus, 
dixitque ad eos Deus, Crescite, 
et multiplicate vos, et replete 
terram, et subjicite eam, et do- 
minemini piscibus maris, et vola- 
tili coeli, et omni bestiz reptanti 
super terram. 

29. Et dixit Deus, Ecce, dedi 
vobis omnem herbam seminifi- 
cantem semen, que est in super- 
ficie universe terre, et omnem 
arborem in qua est fructus arboris 
seminificans semen: ut vobis sit 
in escam. 

30. Et omni bestix terra, et 
omni volatili coeli, et omni rep- 
tanti super terram in quo est 
anima vivans, omne olus herb 
eritin escam. Et fuit ita. 


31. Et vidit Deus omne quod 
fecerat, et ecce bonum valde. Et 
fuit vespera, et fuit mane dies 
sextus. 


1. In the beginning. To expound the term “ beginning,” 


of Christ, is altogether frivolous. 


For Moses simply in- 


tends to assert that the world was not perfected at its very 


70 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, I. 


commencement, in the manner in which it is now seen, but 
that it was created an empty chaos of heaven and earth. 
His language therefore may be thus explained. When God 
in the beginning created the heaven and the earth, the earth 
was empty and waste.! He moreover teaches by the word 
“created,” that what before did not exist was now made; 
for he has not used the term “¥', (yatsar,) which signifies to 
frame or form, but S83, (Jara,) which. signifies to create.” 
Therefore his meaning is, that the world was made out of 
nothing. Hence the folly of those is refuted who imagine 
that unformed matter existed from eternity ; and who gather 
nothing else from the narration of Moses than that the world 
was furnished with new ornaments, and received a form of 
which it was before destitute. This indeed was formerly a 
common fable among heathens,® who had received only an 
obscure report of the creation, and who, according to custom, 
adulterated the truth of God with strange figments ; but for 
Christian men to labour (as Steuchus does‘) in maintaining 
this gross error is absurd and intolerable. Let this, then, be 
maintained in the first place,’ that the world is not eternal, 
but was created by God. There is no doubt that Moses 
gives the name of heaven and earth to that confused mass 
which he, shortly afterwards, (verse 2,) denominates waters. 
The reason of which is, that this matter was to be the seed 
of the whole world. Besides, this is the generally recog- 
nized division of the world.® 

God. Moses has it Elohim, a noun of the plural number. 
Whence the inference is drawn, that the three Persons of 


1 «Va terre estoit vuide, et sans forme, et ne servoit a rien.”—*' The earth 
was empty, and without form, and was of no use.”—French Trans. 

2x72. It has a twofold meaning,—1. To create out of nothing, as is 
proved from these words, In the beginning, because nothing was made 
before them. 2. To produce sumething excellent out of pre-existent matter ; 
as it is said afterwards, He created whales, and man.—See Fagius, Drusius, 
and Estius, in Poole’s Synopsis. 

3 Inter profanos homines. 

* Steuchus Augustinus was the Author of a work, ‘‘ De Perenni Philo- 
sophia,” Lugd. 1540, and is most likely the writer referred to by Calvin. 
The work, however, is very rare, and probably of little value. 

> “Sit igitur hee prima sententia. Que ceci dont soit premierement 
resolu.”—French Trans. 

6 Namely, into heaven and earth. 


CIIAP. I. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. et 


the Godhead are here noted; but since, as a proof of so 
great a matter, it appears to me to have little solidity, I 
will not insist upon the word; but rather caution readers to 
beware of violent glosses of this kind.!’ They think that they 
have testimony against the Arians to prove the Deity of the ~ 
Son and of the Spirit, but in the meantime they involve 
themselves in the error of Sabellius :? because Moses after- 
wards subjoins that the Elohim had spoken, and that the “ 
Spirit of the Elohim rested upon the waters. If we suppose 
three persons to be here denoted, there will be no distinction 
between them. For it will follow, both that the Son is be- 
gotten by himself, and that the Spirit is not of the Father, 


1 The reasoning of Calvin on this point is a great proof of the candour | 
of his mind, and of his determination to adhere strictly to what he con-~ 
ceives to be the meaning of Holy Scripture, whatever bearing it might 
haye on the doctrines he maintains. It may however be right to direct 
the reader, who wishes fully to examine the disputed meaning of the 
plural word conbs, which we translate God, to some sources of informa- 
tion, whence he may be able to form his own judgment respecting the 
term. Cvcceius argues that the mystery of the Trinity in Unity is con- 
tained in the word; and many other writers of reputation take the same 
ground. Others contend, that though no clear intimation of the ‘Trinity 
in Unity is given, yet the notion of plurality of Persons is plainly implied 
in the term. For a full account of all the arguments in favour of this 
hypothesis, the work of Dr John Pye Smith, on the Scripture testimony 
of the Messiah—a work full of profound learning, and distinguished by 
patient industry and¢ calmly courteous criticism—may be consulted. 
Jt must however be observed, that this diligent and impartial writer has 
not met the special objection adduced by Calvin in this place, namely, | 
the danger of gliding into Sabellianism while attempting to confute ~ 
Arianism.—Ed. 

2The error of Sabellius (according to Theodoret) consisted in his 
maintaining, ‘that the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are one hypos- 
tasis, and one Person under three names;” or, in the language of that 
eminent ecclesiastical scholar, the late Dr Burton, ‘‘ Sabellius divided the 
One Divinity into three, but he supposed the Son and the Holy Ghost to 
have no distinct personal existence, except when they were put forth for 
a time by the Father.’—See Burton’s Lectures on Ecclesiastical History, 
vol. ii. p. 865; and his Bampton Lectures, Note 103. This will 
perhaps assist the reader to understand the nature of Calvin’s argu- 
ment which immediately follows. Supposing the word Elohim to 
denote the Three Persons of the Godhead in the first verse, it also 
denotes the same Three Persons in the second verse. But in this. 
second verse Moses says, the Spirit of Elohim, that is, the Spirit of the © 
Three Persons rested on the waters. Hence the distinction of Persons is 
lost ; for the Spirit is himself one of them; consequently the Spirit is sent 
from himself. The same reasoning would prove tbat the Son was begotten 
by himself; because he is one of the Persons of the Elohim by whom the 
Son is begotten.— Ed. 





72 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. I: 


but of himself For me it is sufficient that the plural num- 
ber expresses those powers which God exercised in creating 
the world. Moreover, I acknowledge that the Scripture, 
although it recites many powers of the Godhead, yet always 
recalls us to the Father, and his Word, and Spirit, as we 
shall shortly see. But those absurdities, to which I have 
alluded, forbid us with subtlety to distort what Moses simply 
declares concerning God himself, by applying it to the 
separate Persons of the Godhead. ‘This, however, I regard 
as beyond controversy, that, from the peculiar circumstance 
of the passage itself, a title is here ascribed to God, expressive 
of that power, which was previously in some way included 
in his eternal essence.’ 


1 The interpretation above given of the meaning of the word conde, 
(Elohim, ) receives confirmation from the profound critical investigations 
of Dr Hengstenberg, Professor of Theology in the University of Berlin, 
whose work, cast in a somewhat new form, and entitled “ Dissertations 
on the Genuineness of the Pentateuch,” appears in an English dress, under 
the superintendence of the CONTINENTAL TRANSLATION Society, while 
these pages are passing through the press. With other learned critics, 
he concludes, that the word is derived from the Arabic root Allah, which 
means to worship, to adore, to be seized with fear. He, therefore, regards 
the title more especially descriptive of the awful aspect of the Divine 
character. 

On the plural form of the word he quotes from the Jewish Rabbis the 
assertion, thatit is intended to signify ‘ Dominus potentiarum omnium,’ 
‘ The Lord of all powers.’ He refers to Calvin and others as having op- 
posed, though without immediate effect, the notion maintained by Peter 
Lombard, that it involved the mystery of the Trinity. He repels the 
profane intimation of Le Clerc, and his successors of the Noological school, 
that the name originated in polytheism ; and then proceeds to show that 
“ there is in the Hebrew language a widely extended use of the plural, 
which expresses the intensity of the idea contained in the singular.” 
After numerous references, which prove this point, he proceeds to argue, 
that “if, in relation to earthly objects, all that serves to represent a whole 
order of beings is brought before the mind by means of the plural form, 
we might anticipate a more extended application of this method of dis- 
tinguishing in the appellations of God, in whose being and attributes 
there is everywhere a unity which embraces and comprehends all multi- 
plicity.” ‘* The use of the plural,” he adds, ‘‘ answers the same purpose 
which elsewhere is accomplished by an accumulation of the Divine names; 
asin Joshua xxii. 22; the thrice holy in Isaiah vi..3; and p54 *74K~ 
in Deut. x. 17. It calls the attention to the infinite riches and the in- 
exhaustible fulness contained in the one Divine Being, so that though 
men may imagine innumerable gods, and invest them with perfections, 
yet all these are contained in the one conde, (Elohim.”) See Dissertations, 
pp. 268-273. 

It is, perhaps, necessary here to state, that whatever treasures of biblical 
learning the writings of this celebrated author contains, and they are un- 


CHAP. I. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 73 


2. And the earth was without form and void. I shall 
not be very solicitous about the exposition of these two 
epithets, yn, (tohu,) and \7\3, (bohu.) The Hebrews use 
them when they designate anything empty and confused, or 
vain, and nothing worth. Undoubtedly Moses placed them 
both in opposition to all those created objects which pertain 
to the form, the ornament and the perfection of the world. 
Were we now to take away, I say, from the earth all that 
God added after the time here alluded to, then we should 
have this rude and unpolished, or rather shapeless chaos.? 
Therefore I regard what he immediately subjoins, that 
“darkness was upon the face of the abyss,”? as a part of that 
confused emptiness : because the light began to give some 
external appearance to the world. For the same reason he 
calls it the abyss and waters, since in that mass of matter 
nothing was solid or stable, nothing distinct. 

And the Spirit of God. Interpreters have wrested this 
passage in various ways. The opinion of some that it means 
the wind, is too frigid to require refutation. They who un- 
derstand by it the Eternal Spirit of God, do rightly; yet all 
do not attain the meaning of Moses in the connection of his 
discourse; hence arise the various interpretations of the par- 
ticiple MEMW9, (merachepeth.) I will, in the first place, 
state what (in my judgment) Moses intended. We have 
already heard that before God had perfected the world it 
was an indigested mass; he now teaches that the power of 
the Spirit was necessary in order to sustain it. For this 


doubtedly great, the reader will still require to be on his guard in studying 
them. For, notwithstanding the author’s general strenuous opposition to 
the anti-supernaturalism of his own countrymen, he has not altogether 
escaped the contagion which he is attempting to resist. Occasions may 
occur in which it will be right to allude to some of his mistakes.—Ed. 

1 The words 473) nn are rendered in Calvin’s text informis et inanis, 
‘¢ shapeless and empty.” ‘They are, however, substantives, and are trans- 
lated in Isaiah xxxiv. 11, ‘‘ confusion” and ‘‘ emptiness.” The two words 
standing in connection, were used by the Hebrews to describe anything 
that was most dreary, waste, and desolate. The Septuagint has doearos 
xa anaraoxevaoros, invisible and unfurnished.—Ed. 

2 Tt is to be remarked, that Calvin does not in his comment always 
adhere to his own translation. For instance, his version here is, ‘in 
superficiem voraginis ;” but in his Commentary he has it, “* super faciem 
abyssi,” from the Latin Vulgate.—£d, 


74 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. I. 


doubt might occur to the mind, how such a disorderly heap 
could stand; seeing that we now behold the world preserved 
by government, or order.! He therefore asserts that this 
mass, however confused it might be, was rendered stable, for 
the time, by the secret efficacy of the Spirit. Now there 
are two significations of the Hebrew word which suit the 
present place; either that the Spirit moved and agitated 
itself over the waters, for the sake of putting forth vigour ; 
or that He brooded over them to cherish them.” Inasmuch 
as it makes little difference in the result, whichever of these 
explanations is preferred, let the reader’s judgment be left 
free. Butif that chaos required the secret inspiration of God 
to prevent its speedy dissolution; how could this order, so 
fair and distinct, subsist by itself, unless it derived strength 
elsewhere? Therefore, that Scripture must be fulfilled, 
‘Send forth thy Spirit, and they shall be created, and thou 
shalt renew the face of the earth, (Ps. civ. 30;) so, on the 
other hand, as soon as the Lord takes away his Spirit, all 
things return to their dust and vanish away, (ver. 29.) 


3. And God said. Moses now, for the first time, intro- 
duces God in the act of speaking, as if he had created the 
mass. of heaven and earth without the Word.* Yet John 
testifies that ‘ without him nothing was made of the things 
which were made, (John i. 3.) And it is certain that the 
world had been begun by the same efficacy of the Word by 
which it was completed. God, however, did not put forth his 


1 Temperamento servari.” Perhaps we should say, “ preserved 
by the laws of nature.”—Ed. 

2 The participle of the verb AM, is here used instead of the regular 
tense. ‘The Spirit was moving,” instead of “the Spirit moved.” The 
word occurs in Deut. xxxii. 11, where the eagle is represented as flutter- 
ing over her young. Vatablus, ‘whom Calvin here probably follows, says, 
the Holy Spirit cherished the earth “by his secret virtue, that it might 
remain stable for the time.”—See Poole’s Synopsis. ‘The word, however, 
is supposed further to imply a vivifying power ; as that of birds br ooding 
over and hatching their young. Gesenius says that Moses here speaks, 
‘* Von der shaffenden und belebenden Kraft Gottes die iiber der chao- — 
tischen wasserbedeckten Erde schwebt gleichsam briitet ’—‘‘ of the cre- 
ative and quickening power of God, which hovered over the chaotic and 
water-covered earth, as if brooding. ” The same view is given by 
Martyr on Genesis ; ‘others, however, are opposed to this interpreter 
Vide Johannes Clericus in loco.—Ed. 

3 **Sans sa Parole”—‘ without his Word.”—French Trans. 


CHAP. I. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 75 


Word until he proceeded to originate light;! because in the 
act of distinguishing? his wisdom begins to be conspicuous. 
Which thing alone is sufficient to confute the blasphemy of 
Servetus. This impure caviller asserts,’ that the first begin- 
ning of the Word was when God commanded the light to 
be; as if the cause, truly, were not prior to its effect. Since, 
however, by the Word of God things which were not came 
suddenly into being, we ought rather to infer the eternity of 
His essence. Wherefore the Apostles rightly prove the 
Deity of Christ from hence, that since he is the Word of 
God, all things have been created by him. Servetus ima- 
gines a new quality in God when he begins to speak. But 
far otherwise must we think concerning the Word of God, 
namely, that he-is the Wisdom dwelling in God,‘ and with- 
out which God could never be; the effect of which, however, 
became apparent when the light was created.® 


1 *¢ Sed Deus Verbum suum nonnisi in lucis origine, protulit.”—“ Mais 
Dieu n’a point mis sa Parole en avant, sinon en la creation de la lumiere.” 
—** But God did not put his Word forward except in the creation of the 
light."—French Trans. 


2 “Tn distinctione.” The French is somewhat different: ‘* Pource que la 
distinction de sa Sagesse commenga lors a apparoir evidemment.”— 
** Because that the distinction of his Wisdom began then to appear evi- 
dently.” The printing of the word Wisdom with a capital, renders it 
probable that by it Calvin means the Son of God, who is styled Wisdom 
in the eighth chapter of Proverbs and elsewhere. Whence it would 
seem that he intends the whole of what he here says as an argument 
in favour of the Deity of Christ.—£d. 


3 *¢ Tatrat hic obsccenus canis.” 


4 “ Mais il faut bien autrement sentir de la Parole de Dieu, assavoir que 
c'est la Sapience residente en luy.”—French Trans. 


5 To understand this difficult and obscure passage, it will be necessary 
to know something of the ground taken by Servetus in his attempt to 
subvert the doctrine of the Trinity. He maintained that Christ was not 
the Son of God as to his divine nature, but only as to his human, and 
that this title belonged to him solely in consequence of His incarnation. 
Yet he professed to believe in the Word, as an emanation of some kind 
from the Deity ; compounded—as he explains it—of the essence of God, 
of spirit, of flesh, and of three uncreated elements. These three elements 
appeared, as he supposes, in the first light of the world, in the cloud, and 
in the pillar of fire. (See Calvin’s Institutes, Book II. ¢. xiv.) This 
illustrates what Calvin means when he says, that Servetus imagines a 
new quality in God when he begins to speak. The distinct personality 
ofthe Word being denied, qualities or attributes of Deity are put in his place. 
Against this Calvin contends. His argument seems to be to the follow- 
ing effect:—The creation of the indigested mass called heaven and earth, 


76 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. I. 


Let there be light. It was proper that the light, by means 
of which the world was to be adorned with such excellent 
beauty, should be first created; and this also was the com- 
mencement of the distinction, [among the creatures.'] It did 
not, however, happen from inconsideration or by accident, that 
the light preceded the sun andthe moon. ‘To nothing are we 
more prone than to tie down the power of God to those in- 
struments, the agency of which he employs. The sun and 
moon supply us with light : and, according to our notions, we 
so include this power to give light in them, that if they were 
taken away from the world, it would seem impossible for any 
light to remain. Therefore the Lord, by the very order of 
the creation, bears witness that he holds in his hand the light, 
which he is able to impart to us without the sun and moon. 
Further, it is certain, from the context, that the light was so 
created as to be interchanged with darkness. But it may be 
asked, whether light and darkness succeeded each other in 
turn through the whole circuit of the world ; or whether the 


in the first verse, was apparently—though not really—without the Word, 
inasmuch as the Word is not mentioned. But when there began to be a 
distinction, (such as light developed,) then the Word was put forward. 
This Word is also the Wisdom of God. 

Servetus asserts that the Word had no existence till God said, “ Let 
there be light.” But Calvin argues, that the Word existed before he 
acted—the cause was prior to its effect. We ought, therefore, to infer 
the eternal existence of the Word, as he contends the Apostles do, from 
the fact that all things were created by Him. Whatever quality God 
possessed when he began to speak, he must have possessed before. His 
Word, or his Wisdom, or his only-begotten Son, dwelt in Him, and was 
one with him from eternity ; the same Word, or Wisdom, acted really in 
the creation of the chaotic mass, though not apparently. But in the 
creation of light, the very commencement of distinguishing, (exordium 
distinctionis,) this divine Word or Wisdom was manifest. 

Having given, to the best of my judgment, an explanation of Calvin’s 
reasoning, truth obliges me to add, that it seems to be an involved and 
unsatisfactory argument to prove— 

1st, That the Second Person of the Trinity is distinctly referred to in 
the second verse of this chapter ; and, 

2d, That He is truly though not obviously the Creator of heaven and 
earth mentioned in the first verse. 

It furnishes occasion rather for regret than for surprise, that the most 
powerful minds are sometimes found attempting to sustain a good cause 
by inconclusive reasoning.—Ed. 

1“ Te la distinction des les creatures.”—French Tr. That is, the beauties 
of nature could not be perceived, nor the distinction between different 
objects discerned without the light—£d. 


CHAP. I. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. Tt 


darkness occupied one half of the circle, while light shone in 
the other. There is, however, no doubt that the order of their 
succession was alternate, but whether it was everywhere 
day at the same time, and everywhere night also, I would 
rather leave undecided ; nor is it very necessary to be known. 


4, And God saw the light. Were God is introduced by 
Moses as surveying his work, that he might take pleasure in 
it. But he does it for our sake, to teach us that God has 
made nothing without a certain reason and design. And we 
ought not so to understand the words of Moses as if God did 
not know that his work was good, till it was finished. But 
the meaning of the passage is, that the work, such as we now 
see it, was approved by God. Therefore nothing remains for 
us, but to acquiesce in this judgment of God. And this ad- 
monition is very useful. For whereas man ought to apply all 
his senses to the admiring contemplation of the works of 
God,” we see what license he really allows himself in Haateeets 
ing from them. 


5. And God called the light. That is, God willed that there 
should be a regular vicissitude of days and nights; which also 
followed immediately when the first day was ended. ForGod re- 
moved the light from view, that night might be the commence- 
ment of another day. What Moses says, however, admits a 
double interpretation ; either that this was the evening and 
morning belonging to the first day, or that the first day con- 
sisted of the evening andthe morning. Whichever interpre- 
tation be chosen, it makes no difference in the sense, for he 
simply understands the day to have been made up of two 
parts. Further, he begins the day, according to the custom 
of his nation, with the evening. It is to no purpose to dis- 
pute whether this be the best and the legitimate order or not. 
We know that darkness preceded time itself; when God 
withdrew the light, he closed the day. I do not doubt that 


- 1 See Note at p. 61. 
2 “Thomme devroit estendere tous ses sens 4 considerer, et avoir en 


admiration les ceuvres de Dieu.”—‘‘ Man ought to apply all his senses in 
considering and having in admiration the works of God.”—French Tr. 


78 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. I. 


the most ancient fathers, to whom the coming night was the 
end of one day and the beginning of another, followed this 
mode of reckoning. Although Moses did not intend here to 
prescribe a rule which it would be criminal to violate; yet 
(as we have now said) he accommodated his discourse to the 
received custom. Wherefore, as the Jews foolishly condemn 
all the reckonings of other people, as if God had sanctioned 
this alone; so againare they equally foolish who contend that 
this mode of reckoning, which Moses approves, is preposterous. 

The first day. Here the error of those is manifestly re- 
futed, who maintain that the world was made in a moment, 
For it is too violent a cavil to contend that Moses distributes 
the work which God perfected at once into six days, for the 
mere purpose of conveying instruction. Let us rather con- 
clude that God himself took the space of six days, for the pur- 
pose of accommodating his works to the capacity of men. 
We slightingly pass over the infinite glory of God, which 
here shines forth; whence arises this but from our excessive 
dulness in considering his greatness? In the meantime, the 
vanity of our minds carries us away elsewhere. For the cor- 
rection of this fault, God applied the most suitable remedy 
when he distributed the creation of the world into successive 
portions, that he might fix our attention, and compel us, as 
if he had laid his hand upon us, to pause and toreflect. For 
the confirmation of the gloss above alluded to, a passage from 
Ecclesiasticus is unskilfully cited. ‘He who liveth for ever 
created all things at once,’ (Ecclus. xviii. 1.) For the Greek 
adverb x07, which the writer uses, means no such thing, nor 
does it refer to time, but to all things universally. * 


6. Let there be a firmament.2, The work of the second 
day is to provide an empty space around the circumference 
of the earth, that heaven and earth may not be mixed to- 
gether. For since the proverb, ‘to mingle heaven and earth,’ 
denotes the extreme of disorder, this distinction ought to be 


_ | So the English translation: ‘‘ He that liveth for ever made all things 
in general.” 


2 “Sit extensio.” In the next verse he changes the word to “‘ expansio.” 
** Fecit expansionem.”—“ He made an expanse.” 





CHAP. I. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 79 


regarded as of great importance. Moreover, the word ¥y'p", 
(rakia,) comprehends not only the whole region of the air, 
but whatever is open above us: as the word heaven is some- 
times understood by the Latins. Thus the arrangement, as 
well of the heavens as of the lower atmosphere, is called Y'", 
(rakia,) without discrimination between them, but sometimes 
the word signifies both together, sometimes one part only, as 
will appear more plainly in our progress. I know not why 
the Greeks have chosen to render the word ¢r:géwua, which 
the Latins have imitated in the term firmamentum ;} for liter- 
ally it means expanse. And to this David alludes when he 
says that ‘the heavens are stretched out by God like a cur- 
tain,’ (Ps. civ. 2.) If any one should inquire whether this 
vacuity did not previously exist, | answer, however true it 
may be that all parts of the earth were not overflowed by the 
waters; yet now, for the first time, a separation was ordained, 
whereas a confused admixture had previously existed. Moses 
describes the special use of this expanse, “to divide the 
waters from the waters,” from which words arises a great 
difficulty. For it appears opposed to common sense, and 
quite incredible, that there should be waters above the heaven. 
Hence some resort to allegory, and philosophize concerning 
angels; but quite beside the purpose. For, to my mind, 
this is a certain principle, that nothing is here treated of but 
the visible form of the world. He who would learn astro- 
nomy,” and other recondite arts, let him goelsewhere. Here 


' See the Septuagint and Vulgate, which have both been followed by 
our English translators. Doubtless Calvin is correct in supposing the 
true meaning of the Hebrew word to be expanse; but the trans- 
lators of the Septuagint, the Vulgate, and our own version, were not 
without reasons for the manner in which they rendered the word. The 
root, ypn, signifies, according to Gesenius, Lee, Cocceius, &c., to stamp 
with the foot, to beat or hammer out any malleable substance; and the 
derivative, y»p4, is the outspreading of the heavens, which, ‘ according to 
ordinary obser vation, rests like the half of a hollow sphere over the earth.” 
To the Hebrews, as Gesenius observes, it presented a crystal or sapphire- 
like appearance. Hence it was thought to be something jirm as well as 
expanded—a roof of crystal or of sapphire. The reader may also refer 
to the note of Johannes Clericus, in his commentary on Genesis, who re - 
tains the word firmament, and argues at length in vindication of the term. 
—kd. 

* Astrologia. This word includes, but is not necessarily confined to 
that empyrical and presumptuous science, (falsely so-called,) which we 


80 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. 1. 


the Spirit of God would teach all men without exception ; 
and therefore what Gregory declares falsely and in vain re- 
specting statues and pictures is truly applicable to the history 
of the creation, namely, that it is the book of the unlearned. 
The things, therefore, which he relates, serve as the garni- 
ture of that theatre which he places before our eyes. Whence 
I conclude, that the waters here meant are such as the 
rude and unlearned may perceive. The assertion of some, 
that they embrace by faith what they have read concerning 
the waters above the heavens, notwithstanding their ignor- 
ance respecting them, is not in accordance with the design 
of Moses. And truly a longer inquiry into a matter open and 
manifest-is superfluous. We see that the clouds suspended 
in the air, which threaten to fall upon our heads, yet leave us 
space to breathe.? They who deny that this is effected by 
the wonderful providence of God, are vainly inflated with the 
folly of their own minds. We know, indeed, that the rain 
is naturally produced ; but the deluge sufficiently shows how 
speedily we might be overwhelmed by the bursting of the 
clouds, unless the cataracts of heaven were closed by the 
hand of God. Nor does David rashly recount this among 
His miracles, that God “layeth the beams of his chambers 
in the waters,” (Ps. civ. 31;) and he elsewhere calls upon 
the celestial waters to praise God, (Ps. cxlviii. 4.) Since, 
therefore, God has created the clouds, and assigned them a 
region above us, it ought not to be forgotten that they. are 


now generally designate by the term astrology. As the word originally 
means nothing but the science of the stars, so it was among our own earlier 
writers applied in the same manner. Consequently, it comprehended the 
sublime and useful science of astronomy. From the double meaning of the 
word, Calvin sometimes speaks of it with approbation, and sometimes 
with censure. But attention to his reasoning will show, that what he 
commends is astronomy, and what he censures is astrology in the present 
acceptation of the word.—£d. 

1 The following are the words of Pope Gregory I. :—‘‘Tdcirco enim pic- 
tura in ecclesiis adhibeter, ut hi qui literas nesciunt, saltem in parietibus 
videndo legant qu legere in codicibus non valent.”—Epis. cix. ad 
Lerenum. 

2 “ Capitibus nostris sic minari, ut spirandi locus nobisrelinquant.” The 
French is more diffuse : ‘‘ Nous menacent, comme si elles devoyent tomber 
sur nos testes; et toutesfois elle nous laissent ici lieu pour respirer.” 
‘‘ They threaten us, as if they would fall upon our heads ; and, neverthe- 
less, they leave us here space to breathe.” 





CHAP. I. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 81 


restrained by the power of God, lest, gushing forth with sud- 
den violence, they should swallow us up: and especially since 
no other barrier is opposed to them than the liquid and yield- 
ing air, which would easily give way unless this word pre- 
valid ‘Let there be an expanse between the waters. Yet 
Mdlson has not affixed to the work of this day the note that 
“ God saw that it was good :” perhaps because there was no 
advantage from it till the terrestrial waters were gathered 
into their proper place, which was done on the next day, and 
therefore it is there twice repeated.' 


9. Let the waters . . . . be gathered together. This 
also is an illustrious miracle, that the waters by their de- 
parture have given a dwelling-place to men. For even 
philosophers allow that the natural position of the waters was 
to cover the whole earth, as Moses declares they did in the 
beginning; first, because, being an element, it must be cir- 
cular, and because this element is heavier than the air, and 
lighter than the earth, it ought to cover the latter in its whole 
circumference.? But that the seas, being gathered together 
as on heaps, should give place for man, is seemingly preter- 
natural ; and therefore Scripture often extols the goodness of 
God in this particular. See Psalm xxxiii. 7, ‘He hath 
gathered the waters together on a heap, and hath laid them 
up in his treasures.’ Also Psalm Ixxviii. 13, ‘He hath col- 
lected the waters as into a bottle”? Jeremiah vy. 22, ‘ Will 
ye not fear me? will ye not tremble at my presence, who have 


1 The Septuagint here inserts the clause, ‘‘ God saw that it was good ;” 
but, as it is found neither in the Hebrew nor in any other ancient version, 
it must be abandoned. The Rabbis say that the clause was omitted, be-. 
cause the angels fell on that day ; but this is to cut the knot rather than 
to untie it. There is more probability in the conjecture of Picherellus, 
who supposes that what follows in the ninth and tenth verses all belonged 
to the work of the second day, though mentioned after it; and, in the 
same way, he contends that the formation of the beasts, recorded i in the 
24th verse, belonged to the fifth day, though mentioned after it. Exam- 
ples of this kind, of Hysteron proteron, are adduced in confirmation of this 
interpretation. See Poole’s Synopsis in loco.—Ed. 

2 This reasoning is to be explained by reference to the philosophical 
theories of the age.—d. 

3 “Velut in utrem ;” from the Vulgate. The English version is, ‘‘He 
made the waters to stand as an heap.” 

VOL. I. F 


82 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. I. 


placed the sand as the boundary of the sea?’ Job xxxviil. 8, 
‘Who hath shut up the sea with doors? Have not I sur- 
rounded it with gates and bars? Ihave said, Hitherto shalt 
thou proceed; here shall thy swelling waves be broken.’ 
Let us, therefore, know that we are dwelling on dry ground, 
because God, by his command, has removed the waters, that 
they should not overflow the whole earth. 


11. Let the earth bring forth grass. Hitherto the earth 
was naked and barren, now the Lord fructifies it by his 
word. For though it was already destined to bring forth 
fruit, yet till new virtue proceeded from the mouth of God, 
it must remain dry and empty. For neither was it naturally 
fit to produce anything, nor had it a germinating principle 
from any other source, till the mouth of the Lord was opened. 
For what David declares concerning the heavens, ought also 
to be extended to the earth; that it was ‘ made by the word 
of the Lord, and was adorned and furnished by the breath 
of his mouth, (Ps. xxxiii. 6.) Moreover, it did not happen 
fortuitously, that herbs and trees were created before the sun 
and moon. We now see, indeed, that the earth is quickened 
by the sun to cause it to bring forth its fruits; nor was God 
ignorant of this law of nature, which he has since ordained: 
but in order that we might learn to refer all things to him, 
he did not then make use of the sun or moon.'! He permits 
us to perceive the efficacy which he infuses into them, so far 
as he uses their instrumentality; but because we are wont 
to regard as part of their nature properties which they 
derive elsewhere, it was necessary that the vigour which they 
now seem to impart to the earth should be manifest before 
they were created. We acknowledge, it is true, in words, 
that the First Cause is self-sufficient, and that intermediate 
and secondary causes have only what they borrow from this 
First Cause; but, in reality, we picture God to ourselves 
as poor or imperfect, unless he is assisted by second causes. 
How few, indeed, are there who ascend higher than the sun 
when they treat of the fecundity of the earth? What there- 


1“ Nullas tunc soli etlunz partes concessit.”—‘ Tl ne s’est point servi 
en cest endroit du soliel ni de la lune.”—French Trans. 





CHAP. I. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 83 


fore we declare God to have done designedly, was indispens- 
ably necessary; that we may learn from the order of the 
creation itself, that God acts through the creatures, not as if 
he needed external help, but because it was his pleasure. 
When he says, ‘ Let the earth bring forth the herb which 
may produce seed, the tree whose seed is in itself, he signi- 
fies not only that herbs and trees were then created, but 
that, at the same time, both were endued with the power of 
propagation, in order that their several species might be per- 
petuated. Since, therefore, we daily see the earth pouring 
forth to us such riches from its lap, since we see the herbs 
producing seed, and this seed received and cherished in the 
bosom of the earth till it springs forth, and since we see 
trees shooting from other trees ; all this flows from the same 
Word. If therefore we inquire, how it happens that the 
earth is fruitful, that the germ is produced from the seed, 
that fruits come to maturity, and their various kinds are 
annually reproduced ; no other cause will be found, but that 
God has once spoken, that is, has issued his eternal decree ; 
and that the earth, and all things proceeding from it, yield 
obedience to the command of God, which they always hear. 


14. Let there be lights! Moses passes onward to the 
fourth day, on which the stars were made. God had before 
ereated the light, but he now institutes a new order in na- 
ture, that the sun should be the dispenser of diurnal light, and 
the moon and stars should shine by night. And He assigns 
them this office, to teach us that all creatures are subject to 
his will, and execute what he enjoins upon them. For Moses 
relates nothing else than that God ordained certain instru- 
ments to diffuse through the earth, by reciprocal changes; 
that light which had been previously created. The only 
difference is this, that the light was before dispersed, but 
now proceeds from lucid bodies ; which, in serving this pur- 
pose, obey the command of God. 

To divide the day from the night. He means the arti- 


1 “ Tuminaria”—“t Luminaries.” Heb. ny xy. Instruments of light, 
from 4x, light, in ver.3. ‘‘ Lighters ; that is, lightsome bodies, or instru- 
ments that show light.”—Ainsworth. 


84 _ COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, I. 


ficial day, which begins at the rising of the sun and ends at 
its setting. For the natural day (which he mentions above) 
includes in itself the night. Hence infer, that the interchange 
of days and nights shall be continual: because the word of 
God, who determined that the days should be distinct from 
the nights, directs the course of the sun to this end. 

Let them be for signs. It must be remembered, that 
Moses does not speak with philosophical acuteness on occult 
mysteries, but relates those things which are everywhere 
observed, even by the uncultivated, and which are in com- 
mon use. A twofold advantage is chiefly perceived from 
the course of the sun and moon; the one is natural, the other 
applies to civil institutions.! Under the term nature, I also 
comprise agriculture. For although sowing and reaping re- 
quire human art and industry ; this, nevertheless, is natural, 
that the sun, by its nearer approach, warms our earth, that 
he introduces the vernal season, that he is the cause of sum- 
mer and autumn. But that, for the sake of assisting their 
memory, men number among themselves years and months; 
that of these, they form dustra and olympiads; that they keep 
stated days ; this, I say, is peculiar to civil polity. Of each 
of these mention is here made. I must, however, in a few 
words, state the reason why Moses calls them signs; because 
certain inquisitive persons abuse this passage, to give colour 
to their frivolous predictions: I call those men Chaldeans and 
fanatics, who divine everything from the aspects of the stars.? 
Because Moses declares that the sun and moon were ap- 
pointed for signs, they think themselves entitled to elicit from 
them anything they please. But confutation is easy: for 
they are called signs of certain things, not signs to denote 
whatever is according to our fancy. What indeed does 
Moses assert to be signified by them, except things belonging 
to the order of nature? For the same God who here ordains 
signs testifies by Isaiah that he ‘ will dissipate the signs of 
the diviners,’ (Isa. xliv. 25;) and forbids us to be ‘dismayed 
at the signs of heaven,’ (Jer. x. 2.) But since it is manifest 


1 “ Altera ad ordinem politicum spectat.” 
2 «Ex siderum presagiis nihil non divinant.” 





CHAP. I. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 85 


that Moses does not depart from the ordinary custom of 
men, I desist from a longer discussion, The word E]y\p, 
(moadim,) which they translate ‘certain times, is variously 
understood among the Hebrews: for it signifies both time 
and place, and also assemblies of persons. The Rabbis com- 
monly explain the passage as referring to their festivals. But 
I extend it further to mean, in the first place, the opportu- 
nities of time, which in French are called saisons, (seasons ;) 
and then all fairs and forensic assemblies! Finally, Moses 
commemorates the unbounded goodness of God in causing 
the sun and moon not only to enlighten us, but to afford us 
various other advantages for the daily use of life. It remains 
that we, purely enjoying the multiplied bounties of God, 
should learn not to profane such excellent gifts by our pre- 
posterous abuse of them. In the meantime, let us admire 
this wonderful Artificer, who has so beautifully arranged all 
things above and beneath, that they may respond to each 
other in most harmonious concert. 


15. Let them be for lights. It is well again to repeat 
what I have said before, that it is not here philoso- 
phically discussed, how great the sun is in the heaven, and 
how great, or how little, is the moon; but how much light 
comes to us from them.” For Moses here addresses himself 
to our senses, that the knowledge of the gifts of God which 
we enjoy may not glide away. Therefore, in order to appre- 
hend the meaning of Moses, it is to no purpose to soar above 
the heavens; let us only open our eyes to behold this light 
which God enkindles for us in the earth. By this method 
(as I have before observed) the dishonesty of those men is 
sufficiently rebuked, who censure Moses for not speaking with 
greater exactness. For as it became a theologian, he had 


1 See the Lexicons of Schindler, Lee, and Gesenius, and Dathe’s 
Commentary on the Pentateuch. The two latter writers explain the 
terms “‘ signs and seasons” by the figure Hendiadys, for ‘‘ signs of sea- 
sons.” ‘ Zu Zeichen der Zeiten.” The word stands—1. For the year. 
2. For an assembly. 3. For the place of assembling. 4. For a signal.—Ed. 

2 * Great lights ;” ‘‘ that is, in our eyes, to which the sun and moon are 
nearer than the fixed stars and the greater planets.”—Johannes Clericus 
in Genesin, p. 10.—Ed. 


86 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. I. 


respect to ws rather than to the stars. Nor, in truth, was he 
ignorant of the fact, that the moon had not sufficient bright- 
ness to enlighten the earth, unless it borrowed from the sun ; 
but he deemed it enough to declare what we all may plainly 
perceive, that the moon is a dispenser of light to us. That 
it is, ag the astronomers assert, an opaque body, I allow to be 
true, while I deny it to be a dark body. For, first, smee it 
is placed above the element of fire, it must of necessity be a 
fiery body. Hence it follows, that it is also luminous; but 
seeing that it has not light sufficient to penetrate to us, it 
borrows what is wanting from the sun. He calls it a “lesser 
light” by comparison; because the portion of light which it 
emits to us is small compared with the infinite splendour of 
the sun.? 


16. The greater light. I have said, that Moses does 
not here subtilely descant, as a philosopher, on the secrets of 
nature, as may be seen in these words. First, he assigns a 
place in the expanse of heaven to the planets and stars; but 
astronomers make a distinction of spheres, and, at the same 
time, teach that the fixed stars have their proper place in 
the firmament. Moses makes two great luminaries; but 
astronomers prove, by conclusive reasons, that the star of 
Saturn, which, on account of its great distance, appears the 
least of all, is greater than the moon. Here lies the differ- 
ence; Moses wrote in a popular style things which, without 
instruction, all ordinary persons, endued with common sense, 
are able to understand; but astronomers investigate with 
great labour whatever the sagacity of the human mind can 
comprehend. Nevertheless, this study is not to be reprobated, 
nor this science to be condemned, because some frantic per- 
sons are wont boldly to reject whatever is unknown to them. 
For astronomy is not only pleasant, but also very useful to 
be known: it cannot be denied that this art unfolds the ad- 
mirable wisdom of God. Wherefore, as ingenious men are 
to be honoured who have expended useful labour on this 
subject, so they who have leisure and capacity ought not to 


'The reader will be in no danger of being misled by the defective 
natural philosophy of the age in which this was written.— Hd. 





CHAP, I. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 87 


neglect this kind of exercise. Nor did Moses truly wish to 
withdraw us from this pursuit in omitting such things as are 
peculiar to the art; but because he was ordained a teacher - 
as well of the unlearned and rude as of the learned, he could 
not otherwise fulfil his office than by descending to this 
grosser method of instruction. Had he spoken of things 
generally unknown, the uneducated might have pleaded in 
excuse that such subjects were beyond their capacity. 
Lastly, since the Spirit of God here opens a common school 
for all, it is not surprising that he should chiefly choose those 
subjects which would be intelligible to all. If the astrono- 
mer inquires respecting the actual dimensions of the stars, 
he will find the moon to be less than Saturn; but this is 
something abstruse, for to the sight it appears differently. 
Moses, therefore, rather adapts his discourse to common 
usage. For since the Lord stretches forth, as it were, his 
hand to us in causing us to enjoy the brightness of the sun 
and moon, how great would be our ingratitude were we to 
close our eyes against our own experience? ‘There is there- 
fore no reason why janglers should deride the unskilfulness 
of Moses in making the moon the second luminary; for he 
does not call us up into heaven, he only proposes things 
which lie open before our eyes. Let the astronomers possess 
their more exalted knowledge; but, in the meantime, they 
who perceive by the moon the splendour of night, are con- 
victed by its use of perverse ingratitude unless they acknow- 
ledge the beneficence of God. 

To rude.‘ He does not ascribe such dominion to the 
sun and moon as shall, in the least degree, diminish the 
power of God; but because the sun, in half the circuit of 
heaven, governs the day, and the moon the night, by turns; 
he therefore assigns to them a kind of goverament. Yet let 
us remember, that it is such a government as implies that 
the sun is still a servant, and the moon a handmaid. In the 
meantime, we dismiss the reverie of Plato, who ascribes rea- 
son and intelligence to the stars. Let us be content with 
this simple exposition, that God governs the days and nights 


1 “Jn dominium.” For dominion. 


88 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. I. 


by the ministry of the sun and moon, because he has them 
as his charioteers to convey light suited to the season. 


20. Let the waters bring forth ... the moving creature.’ 
On the fifth day the birds and fishes are created. The 
blessing of God is added, that they may of themselves pro- 
duce offspring. Here is a different kind of propagation from 
that in herbs and trees : for there the power of fructifying is 
in the plants, and that of germinating is in the seed; but here 
generation takes place. It seems, however, but little con- 
sonant with reason, that he declares birds to have proceeded 
from the waters; and, therefore, this is seized upon by cap- 
tious men as an occasion of calumny. But although there 
should appear no other reason but that it so pleased God, 
would it not be becoming in us to acquiesce in his judgment ? 
Why-should it not be lawful for him, who created the world 
out of nothing, to bring forth the birds out of water? And 
what greater absurdity, I pray, has the origin of birds from 
the water, than that of the light from darkness? Therefore, 
let those who so arrogantly assail their Creator, look for the 
Judge who shall reduce them to nothing. Nevertheless, if 
we must use physical reasoning in the contest, we know that the 
water has greater aflinity with the air than the earth has. 
But Moses ought rather to be listened to as our teacher, who 
would transport us with admiration of God through the con- 
sideration of his works.” And, truly, the Lord, although he 


1 “Repere faciant aque reptile anime viventis.”—‘‘ Let the waters cause 
to creep forth the reptile, (or creeping thing,) having a living soul.” 
This is a more literal translation of the original than that of the English 
version ; yet it does not express more accurately the sense. The word 

“uw, (sheretz,) as a substantive, signifies any worm or reptile, generally 
of the smaller kind, either in land or water; and the corresponding verb 
rendered ‘‘ to creep forth” signifies also “to multiply.” It is well known 
that this class of animals multiply more abundantly than any other. 
The expression 7'n ws, (mepesh chayah,) “a living soul,” does not 
refer (as the word soul in English often does) to the immortal principle, 
but to the animal life or breath, and the words might here be rendered 
** the breath of life.” —Ed. 

2 For other opinions respecting the origin of birds, see Poole’s Synopsis. 
Some argue from chap. ii. 19, that fowls were made of the earth; and 
would propose an alteration in the translation of the verse before us to 
the following effect,—‘‘ and let the fowl fly above the heaven.”—See 
Notes on Genesis, §c., by Professor Bush, in loco. But Calvin's 





CHAP. I. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 89 


is the Author of nature, yet by no means has followed nature 
as his guide in the creation of the world, but has rather 
chosen to put forth such demonstrations of his power as 
should constrain us to wonder. 


21. And God created. A question here arises out of 
the word created. For we have before contended, that be- 
cause the world was created, it was made out of nothing; 
but now Moses says that things formed from other matter 
were created. ‘They who truly and properly assert that the 
fishes were created because the waters were in no way suffi- 
cient or suitable for their production, only resort to a sub- 
terfuge: for, in the meantime, the fact would remain, that the 
material of which they were made existed before; which, in 
strict propriety, the word [created] does not admit. I there- 
fore do not restrict the creation here spoken of to the work 
of the fifth day, but rather suppose it to refer to that shape- 
less and confused mass, which was as the fountain of the 
whole world. God then, it is said, created whales (balenas) 
and other fishes, not that the beginning of their creation is 
to be reckoned from the moment in which they receive their 
form; but because they are comprehended in the universal 
matter which was made out of nothing. So that, with respect 
to species, form only was then added to them; but creation 
is nevertheless a term truly used respecting both the whole 
and the parts. The word commonly rendered whales (cetos 
vel cete) might, in my judgment, be not improperly trans- 
lated thynnus or tunny fish, as corresponding with the He- 
brew word thaninim.” 


view is more generally approved. ‘‘Natantium et volatilium unam ori- 
ginem ponit Moses. 1. Quia aer, (locus avium,) et aqua, (locus piscium,) 
elementa cognata sunt,” &c.—Castulio, Lyra, Menochius, and others, in 
Poole.—Ed. 

1 Heo vero ad opus diei quinti non restringo creationem; sed potius ex 
illa infermi et confusa massa pendere dico, que fuit veluti scaturigo totius 
mundi.” The passage seems to be obscure ; and if the translation above 
given is correct, the Old English version by Tymme has not hit the true 
meaning. The French version is as follows :—‘ Je ne restrain point la 
creation a Pouvrage du cinquieme jour; plustost je di qu’elle depend de 
cette masse confuse qui a este comme la source de tout le monde.”—Ed. 

2 9n. “Significat omnia ingentia animalia tam terrestria ut dracones, 
quam aquatica ut balenas.” “It signifies all large animals, both terrestrial, 


90 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. I. 


When he says that “the waters brought forth,”! he pro- 
ceeds to commend the efficacy of the word, which the waters 
hear so promptly, that, though lifeless in themselves, they 
suddenly teem with a living offspring, yet the language of 
Moses expresses more; namely, that fishes innumerable are 
daily produced from the waters, because that word of God, 
by which he once commanded it, is continually in force. 


22. And God blessed them. What is the force of this 
benediction he soon declares. For God does not, after the 
manner of men, pray that we may be blessed; but, by the 
bare intimation of his purpose, effects what men seek by 
earnest entreaty. He therefore blesses his creatures when he 
commands them to increase and grow; that is, he infuses 
into them fecundity by his word. But it seems futile for 
God to address fishes and reptiles. I answer, this mode of 
speaking was no other than that which might be easily under- 
stood. For the experiment itself teaches, that the force of 
the word which was addressed to the fishes was not transient, 
but rather, being infused into their nature, has taken root, 
and constantly bears fruit. 


24. Let the earth bring forth, He descends to the 
sixth day, on which the animals were created, and then man. 
‘Let the earth, he says, ‘bring forth living creatures.’ But 
whence has a dead element life? Therefore, there is in this 
respect a miracle as great as if God had begun to create out 
of nothing those things which he commanded to proceed from 
the earth. And he does not take his material from the earth, 
because he needed it, but that he might the better combine the 
separate parts of the world with the universe itself. Yet it 
may be inquired, why He does not here also add his bene- 
diction? I answer, that what Moses before expressed on a 
similar occasion is here also to be understood, although he 


as dragons, and aquatic, as whales.”—Poole’s Synopsis. Sometimes it 
refers to the crocodile, and seems obviously of kindred signification with 
the word Leviathan. Schindler gives this meaning among others,—ser- 
pents, dragons, great fishes, whales, thinni.—See also Patrick’s Commen- 
tary, who takes it for the crocodile.—Ed. 

1 Aquas fecisse reptare,” that ‘‘ the waters caused to creep forth." —Ed. 





CHAP. I. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 91 


does not repeat it word for word. I say, moreover, it is suf- 
ficient for the purpose of signifying the same thing, that 
Moses declares animals were created ‘according to their 
species :’ for this distribution carried with it something stable. 
It may even hence be inferred, that the offspring of animals 
was included. For to what purpose do distinct species 
exist, unless that individuals, by their several kinds, may be 
multiplied ? ? 

Cattle? Some of the Hebrews thus distinguish between 
“cattle” and “beasts of the earth,” that the cattle feed on 
herbage, but that the beasts of the earth are they which eat 
flesh. But the Lord, a little while after, assigns herbs to 
both as their common food ; and it may be observed, that in 
several parts of Scripture these two words are used indis- 
criminately. Indeed, I do not doubt that Moses, after he had 
named Behemoth, (cattle,) added the other, for the sake of 
fuller explanation. By ‘reptiles,’ * in this place, understand 
those which are of an earthly nature. 


26. Let us make man. Although the tense here used 
is the future, all must acknowledge that this is the language 
of one apparently deliberating. Hitherto God has been in- 
troduced simply as commanding ; now, when he approaches 
the most excellent of all his works, he enters into consultation. 
God certainly might here command by his bare word what he 
wished to be done: but he chose to give this tribute to the 
excellency of man, that he would, in a manner, enter into 
consultation concerning his creation. This is the highest 
honour with which he has dignified us; to a due regard 


1 Namely, that God’s benediction was virtually added, though not ex- 
pressed in terms. See verse 22.—Ed. 

2 The reader is referred to Note 1, p. 81, for another mode of inter- 
preting these verses ; and also to Poole’s Synopsis on verse 24, where the 
opinion of Picherellus is fully stated, namely, that verses 24, 25, con- 
tain part of the work of the fifth day.—Ed. 

8 Cattle, mona, (Behemah ;) plural, nypnn, (Behemoth.) 

* “Reptiles.” In the English version, “creeping things,” the same 
expression which occurs in verse 20. But the Hebrew word is different. 
In the twentieth verse it is poy, (sharetz,) in the twenty-fourth it is 
win, (remes.) The latter word is generally, (though not always,) as here, 
referred to land animals.—Ed. 

5 “ Faciamus hominem.” 


= 


92 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. I. 


for which, Moses, by this mode of speaking, would excite our 
minds. For God is not now first beginning to consider what 
form he will give to man, and with what endowments it would 
be fitting to adorn him, nor is he pausing as over a work of 
difficulty: but, just as we have before observed, that the 
creation of the world was distributed over six days, for our 
sake, to the end that our minds might the more easily be re- 
tained in the meditation of God’s works: so now, for the pur- 
pose of commending to our attention the dignity of our nature, 
he, in taking counsel concerning the creation of man, testifies 
that he is about to undertake something great and wonderful. 
Truly there are many things in this corrupted nature which 
may induce contempt; but if you rightly weigh all cireum- 
stances, man is, among other creatures, a certain pre-eminent 
specimen of Divine wisdom, justice, and goodness, so that he 
is deservedly called by the ancients mimgéxoowos, “a world in 
miniature.” | But since the Lord needs no other counsellor, 
there can bé no doubt that he consulted with himself. The 
Jews make themselves altogether ridiculous, in pretending 
that God held communication with the earth or with angels.' 
The earth, forsooth, was a most excellent adviser! And to 
ascribe the least portion of a work so exquisite to angels, is a 
sacrilege to be held in abhorrence. Where, indeed, will they 
find that we were created after the image of the earth, or of 
angels? Does not Moses directly exclude all creatures in 
express terms, when he declares that Adam was created after 
the image of God? Others, who deem themselves more 
acute, but are doubly infatuated, say that God spoke of him- 
self in the plural number, according to the custom of princes. 
Asif, in truth, that barbarous style of speaking, which has 
grown into use within a few past centuries, had, even then, 
prevailed in the world. But it is well that their canine wick- 
edness has been joined with a stupidity so great, that they 
betray their folly to children. Christians, therefore, properly 
contend, from this testimony, that there exists a plurality of 
Persons in the Godhead. God summons no foreign coun- 


{ For the various opinions of Jewish writers on this subject, see Poole’s 
Synopsis in loco. See also Bishop Patrick’s Commentary on this verse.— 
Ed. 





CHAP. I. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 93 


sellor; hence we infer that he finds within himself something 
distinct; as, in truth, his eternal wisdom and power reside 
within him." 

In our image, §c. Interpreters do not agree concern- 
ing the meaning of these words. The greater part, and 
nearly all, conceive that the word image is to be distinguished 
from likeness. And the common distinction is, that zmage 
exists in the substance, Uikeness in the accidents of anything. 
They who would define the subject briefly, say that in the 
image are contained those endowments which God has con- 
ferred on human nature at large, while they expound Like- 
ness to mean gratuitous gifts.? But Augustine, beyond all 
others, speculates with excessive refinement, for the purpose 
of fabricating a Trinity in man. For in laying hold of the 
three faculties of the soul enumerated by Aristotle, the in- 
tellect, the memory, and the will, he afterwards out of one 
Trinity derives many. If any reader, having leisure, wishes 
to enjoy such speculations, let him read the tenth and four- 
teenth books on the Trinity, also the eleventh book of the 
“ City of God.” I acknowledge, indeed, that there is some- 
thing in man which refers to the Father, and the Son, and 
the Spirit: and I have no difficulty in admitting the above 
distinction of the faculties of the soul: although the simpler 
division into two parts, which is more used in Scripture, is 
better adapted to the sound doctrine of piety; but a defini- 
tion of the image of God ought to rest on a firmer basis than 
such subtleties. As for myself, before I define the image of 
God, I would deny that it differs from his likeness. For 
when Moses afterwards repeats the same thing, he passes over 


' “Ut certe eterna ejus sapientia et virtus in ipso resident.” The expres- 
sion is ambiguous ; but the French translation renders it, ‘‘ Comme a la 
verité, sa Sapience eternelle, et Vertu reside en luy;” which translation is 
here followed. By beginning the words rendered Wisdom and Power 
with capitals, it would appear that the second and third Persons of the 
Trinity were in the mind of the writer when the passage was written. 
And perhaps this is the only view of it which renders the reasoning of 
Calvin intelligible. See Notes 2 and 5, at page 75.—Hd. 

2 Some here distinguish, and say the image is in what is natural, the 
likeness in what is gratuitous—-Lyra, Others blend them together, and 
say there is an Hendiadys, that is, according to the niiaps most like us 
—Tirinus.—See Poole’s Synopsis.—Ed. 


94 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. I. 


the Likeness, and contents himself with mentioning the cmage. 
Should any one take the exception, that he was merely study- 
ing brevity; I answer,' that where he twice uses the word — 
image, he makes no mention of the likeness. We also know 
that it was customary with the Hebrews to repeat the same 
thing in different words. Besides, the phrase itself shows 
that the second term was added for the sake of explanation, 
‘Let us make,’ he says, ‘ man in our image, according to our 
likeness, that is, that he may be like God, or may represent 
the image of God. Lastly, in the fifth chapter, without 
making any mention of image, he puts likeness in its place, 
(verse 1.) Although we have set aside all difference between 
the two words, we have not yet ascertained what this image 
or likeness is. The Anthropomorphites were too gross in 
seeking this resemblance in the human body ; let that reverie 
therefore remain entombed. Others proceed with a little 
more subtlety, who, though they do not imagine God to be 
corporeal, yet maintain that the image of God is in the body 
of man, because his admirable workmanship there shines 
brightly ; but this opinion, as we shall see, is by no means 
consonant with Scripture. The exposition of Chrysostom is 
not more correct, who refers to the dominion which was 
given to man in order that he might, in a certain sense, act 
as God’s vicegerent in the government of the world. ‘This 
truly is some portion, though very small, of the image of 
God. Since the image of God has been destroyed in us by 
the fall, we may judge from its restoration what it originally 
had been. Paul says that we are transformed into the 
image of God by the gospel. And, according to him, 
spiritual regeneration is nothing else than the restoration of 
the same image. (Col. iii. 10, and Eph. iv. 23.) That he 
made this image to consist in “righteousness and true holi- 
ness,” is by the figure synecdoche ;? for though this is the chief 
part, it is not the whole of God’s image. Therefore by this 
word the perfection of our whole nature is designated, as it 


1 “T answer,” is not in the original, but is taken from the French 
translation.—Ed. 

2 Synecdoche is the figure which puts a part for the whole, or the whole 
for a part.—Ed. 





CHAP. I. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 95 


appeared when Adam was endued with a right judgment, 
had affections in harmony with reason, had all his senses 
sound and well-regulated, and truly excelled in everything 
- good. Thus the chief seat of the Divine image was in his 
mind and heart, where it was eminent: yet was there no 
part of him in which some scintillations of it did not shine 
forth. For there was an attempering in the several parts of the 
soul, which corresponded with their various offices.' In the 
mind perfect intelligence flourished and reigned, uprightness 
attended as its companion, and all the senses were prepared 
and moulded for due obedience to reason; and in the body 
there was a suitable correspondence with this internal order. 
But now, although some obscure lineaments of that image 
are found remaining in us; yet are they so vitiated and 
maimed, that they may truly be said to be destroyed. For 
besides the deformity which everywhere appears unsightly, 
this evil also is added, that no part is free from the infection 
of sin. 

In our image, after our likeness. I do not scrupulously 
insist upon the particles 9, (deth,) and 3, (caph.?) I know 
not whether there is anything solid in the opinion of some 
who hold that this is said, because the image of God was 
only shadowed forth in man till he should arrive at his per- 
fection. The thing indeed is true; but I do not think that 
anything of the kind entered the mind of Moses.* It is also 
truly said that Christ is the only image of the Father, but 
yet the words of Moses do not bear the interpretation that 
“in the image” means “in Christ.” It may also be added, 
that even man, though in a different respect, is called the 
image of God. In which thing some of the Fathers are de- 
ceived who thought that they could defeat the Arians with 
this weapon that Christ alone is God’s image. This further 


1“ Erat erim in singulis anime partibus temperatura que suis numeris 
constabat.” 

2 The two prefixes to the Hebrew words signifying image and likeness ; 
the former of which is translated in, the latter after, or still more cor- 
rectly, according to. This sentence is not translated either in the French 
or Old English version.—£d. 

3 *Tnnuit in homine esse zmaginem Dei, sed imperfectam et qualem 
umbre.”—Oleaster in Poli Synopsi. 


ae 


96 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. I. 


difficulty is also to be encountered, namely, why Paul should 
deny the woman to be the image of God, when Moses honours 
both, indiscriminately, with this title. The solution is short; 
Paul there alludes only to the domestic relation. He there- 
fore restricts the image of God to government, in which the 
man has superiority over the wife, and certainly he means 
nothing more than that man is superior in the degree of 
honour. But here the question is respecting that glory of 
God which peculiarly shines forth in human nature, where 
the mind, the will, and all the senses, represent the Divine 
order. | 

And let them have dominion. Here he commemorates 
that part of dignity with which he decreed to honour man, 
namely, that he should have authority over all living crea- 
tures. He appointed man, it is true, lord of the world; but 
he expressly subjects the animals to him, because they, hay- 
ing an inclination or instinct of their own,? seem to be less 
under authority from without. The use of the plural number 
intimates that this authority was not given to Adam only, 
but to all his posterity as well as to him. And hence we 
infer what was the end for which all things were created ; 
namely, that none of the conveniences and necessaries of life 
might be wanting tomen. In the very order of the creation 
the paternal solicitude of God for man is conspicuous, be- 
cause he furnished the world with all things needful, and 
even with an immense profusion of wealth, before he formed 
man. Thus man was rich before he was born. But if God 
had such care for us before we existed, he will by no means 
leave us destitute of food and of other necessaries of life, 
now that we are placed in the world. Yet, that he often 
keeps his hand as if closed is to be imputed to our sins. 


27. So God created man. The reiterated mention of the 
image of God is not a vain repetition. For it is a remark- 
able instance of the Divine goodness which can never be 
sufficiently proclaimed. And, at the same time, he admo-— 
nishes us from what excellence we have fallen, that he may 


1 « Tominetur.” 
2 Que quum habeant proprium nutum.” 





CHAP. L THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 97 


excite in us the desire of its recovery. When he soon after- 
wards adds, that God created them “male and female,” he 
commends to us that conjugal bond by which the society of 
mankind is cherished. For this form of speaking, “ God 
created man, male and female created he them,” is of the 
same force as if he had said, that the man himself was incom- 
plete. Under these circumstances, the woman was added to 
him as a companion that they both might be one, as he more 
clearly expresses it in the second chapter. Malachi also 
means the same thing when he relates, (ii. 15,) that one man 
was created by God, whilst, nevertheless, he possessed the 
fulness of the Spirit.2. For he there treats of conjugal fidelity, 
which the Jews were violating by their polygamy. Tor the 
purpose of correcting this fault, he calls that pair, consisting 
of man and woman, which God in the beginning had joined 
together, one man, in order that every one might learn to be 
content with his own wife. 


28. And God blessed them. This blessing of God may be 
regarded as the source from which the human race has flowed. 
And we must so consider it not only with reference to the whole, 
but also, as they say, in every particular instance. For we are 
fruitful or barren in respect of offspring, as God imparts his 
power to some and withholds it from others. But here Moses 
would simply declare that Adam with his wife was formed 
for the production of offspring, in order that men might re- 
plenish the earth. God could himself indeed have covered 
the earth with a multitude of men; but it was his will that 
we should proceed from one fountain, in order that our desire 
of mutual concord might be the greater, and that each might 
the more freely embrace the other as his own flesh. Besides, 
as men were created to occupy the earth, so we ought cer- 
tainly to conclude that God has marked, as with a boundary, 
that spaceof earth which would suffice for the reception of men, 
and would prove a suitable abode for them. Any inequality 
which is contrary to this arrangement is nothing else than a 


1 ¢ Acsi virum dixisset esse dimidium hominem.” 
2 On this difficult passage see Lowth, Archbishop Newcome, and Scott, 
who confirm in the main the interpretation of Calvyin.—d:d. 


VOL, I. G 


98 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, T. 


corruption of nature which proceeds from sin. In the mean- 
time, however, the benediction of God so prevails that the 
earth everywhere lies open that it may have its inhabitants, 
and that an immense multitude of men may find, in some 
part of the globe, their home. Now, what I have said con- 
cerning marriage must be kept in mind; that God intends 
the human race to be multiplied by generation indeed, but 
not, as in brute animals, by promiscuous intercourse. For 
he has joined the man to his wife, that they might produce 
a divine, that is, a legitimate seed. Let us then mark whom 
God here addresses when he commands them to inerease, 
and to whom he limits his benediction. Certainly he does 
not give the reins to human passions,' but, beginning at holy 
and chaste marriage, he proceeds to speak of the production 
of offspring. For this is also worthy of notice, that Moses 
here briefly alludes to a subject which he afterwards means 
more fully to explain, and that the regular series of the his- 
tory is inverted, yet in such a way as to make the true suc- 
cession of events apparent. The question, however, is pro- 
posed, whether fornicators and adulterers become fruitful by 
the power of God; which, if it be true, then whether the 
blessing of God is in like manner extended to them? I an- 
swer, this is a corruption of the Divine institute; and whereas 
God produces offspring from this muddy pool, as well as 
from the pure fountain of marriage, this will tend to their 
greater destruction. Still that pure and lawful method of 
increase, which God ordained from the beginning, remains 
firm; this is that law of nature which common sense declares 
to be inviolable. 

Subdue it. He confirms what he had before said re- 
specting dominion. Man had already been created with this 
condition, that he should subject the earth to himself; but 
now, at length, he is put in possession of his right, when he 
hears what has been given to him by the Lord: and this 
Moses expresses still more fully in the next verse, when he 
introduces God as granting to him the herbs and the fruits. 


' “ Certe frenum viris et muliebris non laxavit, ut in vagas libidines 
ruierent, absque delectu et pudore: sed a sancto castoque conjugio inci- 
piens, descendit ad generationem.” 





CHAP. I. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 99 


For it is of great importance that we touch nothing of God’s 
bounty but what we know he has permitted us to do; since 
we cannot enjoy anything with a good conscience, except we 
receive it as from the hand of God. And therefore Paul 

teaches us that, in eating and drinking, we always sin, unless 
faith be present, (Rom. xiv. 23.) Thus we are instructed to 
seek from God alone whatever is necessary for us, and in the 
very use of his gifts, we are to exercise ourselves in meditat- 
ing on his goodness and paternal care. For the words of 
God are to this effect: ‘ Behold, I have prepared food for 
thee before thou wast formed ; acknowledge me, therefore, as 
thy Father, who have so diligently provided for thee when 
thou wast not yet created. Moreover, my solicitude for thee 
has proceeded still further; it was thy business to nurture 
the things provided for thee, but I have taken even this 
charge also upon myself. Wherefore, although thou art, in 
a sense, constituted the father of the earthly family,! it is not 
for thee to be over-anxious about the sustenance of animals.’? 

Some infer, from this passage, that men were content with 
herbs and fruits until the deluge, and that it was even unlaw- 
ful for them to eat flesh. And this seems the more probable, 
because God confines, in some way, the food of mankind within 
certain limits. Then, after the deluge, he expressly grants 
them the use of flesh. These reasons, however, are not sufli- 
ciently strong: for it may be adduced on the opposite side, 
that the first men offered sacrifices from their flocks.? This, 
moreover, is the law of sacrificing rightly, not to offer unto 
God anything except what he has granted to our use. Lastly, 
men were clothed in skins; therefore it was lawful for them 
to kill animals. For these reasons, I think it will be better 

1 “ Paterfamilias in mundo.” 

2 See verses 29, 30, in which God promises the herbs and fruits of the 
earth, and every green herb, to the beasts of the earth for food. The 
reader will perceive that the subsequent observations of Calvin refer more 
especially to these verses.—Ed. 

% It does not appear that there is much force in Calvin’s objections to 
the opinion, that flesh was not allowed for human food till after the deluge. 
For if the sacrifices offered were holocausts, then the skin only would be 
left for the use of man. See notes on the offerings of Cain and Abel 
in the fourth chapter ; and, especially, Dr Magee’s work on the Atonement, 


Dissertation LII., On the date of the permission of animal food to man.— 
Ed. 


Tou COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. I. 


for us to assert nothing concerning this matter. Let it suf- 
fice for us, that herbs and the fruits of trees were given them 
as their common food; yet it is not to be doubted that this 
was abundantly sufficient for their highest gratification. For 
they judge prudently who maintain that the earth was so 
marred by the deluge, that we retain scarcely a moderate por- 
tion of the original benediction. Even immediately after the 
fall of man, it had already begun to bring forth degenerate 
and noxious fruits, but at the deluge, the change became 
still greater. Yet, however this may be, God certainly did 
not intend that man should be slenderly and sparingly sus- 
tained ; but rather, by these words, he promises a liberal 
abundance, which should leave nothing wanting to a sweet 
and pleasant life. For Moses relates how beneficent the Lord 
had been to them, in bestowing on them all things which 
they could desire, that their ingratitude might have the less 
excuse. 


31. And God saw everything. Once more, at the con- 
clusion of the creation, Moses declares that God approved of 
everything which he had made. In speaking of God as seeing, 
he does it after the manner of men; for the Lord designed 
this his judgment to be as a rule and example to us; that no 
one should dare to think or speak otherwise of his works. For 
it is not lawful for us to dispute whether that ought to he 
approved or not which God has already approved; but it 
rather becomes us to acquiesce without controversy. The 
repetition also denotes how wanton is the temerity of man: 
otherwise it would have been enough to have said, once for 
all, that God approved of his works. But God six times 
inculcates the same thing, that he may restrain, as with so 
many bridles, our restless audacity. But Moses expresses 
more than before; for he adds “Ni, (meod,) that is, very. 
On each of the days, simple approbation was given. But 
now, after the workmanship of the world was complete in 
all its parts, and had received, if I may so speak, the last 
finishing touch, he pronounces it perfectly good; that we 
may know that there is in the symmetry of God’s works the 
highest perfection, to which nothing can be-added. 





CHAP. II. 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


101 


CHAPTER II. 


1. Tutus the heavens and the earth 
were finished, and all the host of 
them. 

2. And on the seventh day God 
ended his work which he had made; 
and he rested on the seventh day from 
all his work which he had made. 

8. And God blessed the seventh 
day, and sanctified it: because that 
in it he had rested from all his work 
which God created and made. 

4, These are the generations of the 
heavens and of the earth when they 
were created, in the day that the Lord 
God made the earth and the heavens, 

5. And every plant of the field be- 
fore it was in the earth, and every 
herb of the field before it grew; for 
the Lord God had not caused it to 
rain upon the earth, and there was not 
a man to till the ground. 


6. But there went up a mist from 
the earth, and watered the whole face 
of the ground. 

7. And the Lord God formed man 
of the dust of the ground, and breathed 
into his nostrils the breath of life ; and 
man became a living soul. 


8. And the Lord God planted a 
garden eastward in Eden; and there 
he put the man whom he had formed. 


9. And out of the ground made the 
Lord God to grow every tree that is 
pleasant to the sight and good for 
food; the tree of life also in the midst 
of the garden, and the tree of know- 
ledge of good and evil. 

10. And a river went out of Eden 
to water the garden ; and from thence 
it was parted, and became into four 
heads. 

11. The name of the first is Pison : 
that zs it which compasseth the whole 
land of Havilah, where there is gold; 

12. And the gold of that land zs 
good: there zs bdellinm and the onyx 
stone. 

13. And the name of the second 
river is Gihon: the same zs it that 
compasseth the whole land of Ethiopia. 


1. Perfecti fuerunt igitur cceli 
et terra, et omnis exercitus eo- 
rum. 

2. Perfeceratque Deus die sep- 
timo opus suum quod fecerat, et 
guievit die septimo ab omni opere 
suo quod fecerat. 

3. Benedixit autem diei sep- 
timo, et sanctificavit illum : quod 
in illo quievisset ab omni opere suo 
quod creaverat Deus ut faceret. 

4, Iste sunt generationes cceli 
et terre, quando creati sunt, in 
die qua fecit Jehova Deus terram 
et coelos, 

5. Et omne virgultum agri 
antequam esset in terra, et om- 
nem herbam agri antequam ger- 
minaret: quia nondum pluere 
fecerat Jehova Deus super ter- 
ram,et homo non erat qui coleret 
terram : 

6. Sed vapor ascendebat e 
terra, et irrigabat universam su- 
perficiem terre. 

7. Formaverat autem Jehova 
Deus hominem e pulvere terre ; 
et inspiraverat in faciem ejus 
spiraculum vite, et fuit homo 
in animam viventem. 

8. Plantaverat quoque Jeho- 
va Deus hortum in Heden ab 
Oriente: et posuit ibi hominem 
quem formaverat. 

9. Et germinare fecerat Jeho- 
va Deus e terra omnem arborem 
concupiscibilem visu, et bonam 
ad vescendum; et arborem vite 
in medio horti, et arborem scien- 
tie boni et mali. 

10. Et fluvius egrediebatur ex 
Heden ad irrigandum hortum ; 
et inde dividebatur, eratque in 
quatuor capita. 

11. Nomen unius, Pison: ipse © 
circuit totam terram Havila, ubi 
est aurum : 

12. Et aurum terre illius bo- 
num: ibi est bdellium, et lapis 
onychinus. 

13. Nomen vero fluvii secundi 
Gihon: ipse circuit omnem terram 
ZEthiopiz. 


102 COMMENTARY UPON 


14. And the name of the third river 
is Hiddekel; that is it which goeth 
toward the east of Assyria. And 
the fourth river is Euphrates. 

15. And the Lord God took the 
man, and put him into the garden of 
Eden, to dress it and to keep it. 


16. And the Lord God commanded 
the man, saying, Of every tree in the 
garden thou mayest freely eat: 

17. But of the tree of the know- 
ledge of good and evil, thou shalt not 
eat of it; for in the day that thou 
eatest thereof thou shalt surely die. 

18. And the Lord God said, Jé is 
not good that the man should be alone; 
I will make him an help meet for him. 


19. And out of the ground the 
Lord God formed every beast of the 
field, and every fowl of the air ; and 
brought tiem unto Adam to see what he 
would call them: and whatsoever 
Adam called every living creature, 
that was the name thereof. 

20. And Adam gave names to all 
cattle, and to the fowl of the air, and 
to every beast of the field; but for 
Adam there was not found an help 
meet for him. 

21. And the Lord God caused a 
deep sleep to fall upon Adam, and he 
slept: and he took one of his ribs, and 
closed up the flesh instead thereof ; 

22. And the rib, which the Lord 
God had taken from man, made he a 
woman, and brought her unto the 
man. 

23. And Adam said, This 7s now 
bone of my bones, and flesh of my 
flesh: she shall be called Woman, be- 
cause she was taken out of man. 

24. Therefore shall a man leave his 
father and his mother, and shall cleave 
unto his wife: and they shall be one 
flesh. 

25. And they were both naked, the 
man and his wife, and were not 
ashamed. 


CHAP. Il. 


14. Et nomen fluvii tertii 
Hiddekel; ipse tendit ad orientem 
Assur; et flumen quartum est Pe- 
rath. 

15. Tulit itaque Jehova Deus 
hominem, et posuit eum in horto 
Heden, ut coleret eum, et cus- 
todiret eum. 

16. Precepitque Jehova Deus 
homini, dicendo, De omni arbore 
horti comedendo comedes : 

17. At de arbore scientiz boni 
et mali ne comedas ex illa: quia 
in die quo comederis ex ea, mori- 
endo morieris. 

18, Et dixit Jehova Deus, Non 
est bonum esse hominem solum : 
faciam ei adjutorium quod sit 
coram ipso. 

19. Formaverat autem Jehova 
Deus e terra omnem bestiam agri, 
et omne volatile ceeli; et addux- 
erat ad Adam ut videret quomodo 
vocaret illud: et omne quod yvo- 
cavit illi, 2li anquum, anime vi- 
venti, est nomen ejus. 

20. Vocavit itaque Adam no- 
mina cuique jumento, et volatili 
coeli omnique bestiz agri: Adz 
vero non invenerat adjutorium 
quod esset coram se. 

21. Cadere igitur fecit Jehova 
Deus soporem super Adam, et 
dormivit : et tulit unam e costis 
ejus, et clausit carnem pro ea. 

22. Et exdificavit Jehova Deus 
costam quam tulerat ex Adam 
in mulierem, et adduxit eam ad 
Adam. 

23. Et dixit Adam, Hac vice 
os est ex ossibus meis, et caro ex 
carne mea: et vocabitur Virissa, 
quia ex viro sumpta est ista. 

24. Idcirco relinquet unus- 
quisque patrem suum et matrem 
suam, et adherebit uxori suz, 
eruntque in carnem unam. 

25. Erant autem ambo nudi, 
Adam et uxor ejus: et non pude- 
bat eos. 


1. Thus the heavens and the earth were finished.! Moses 


' The three verses at the commencement of this chapter evidently be- 
long to the first, being a summing up of the preceding history of the 





CHAP. II. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 103 


summarily repeats that in six days the fabric of the heaven 
and the earth was completed. The general division of the 
world is made into these two parts, as has been stated at the 
commencement of the first chapter. But he now adds, “all 
the host of them,’ by which he signifies that the world was 
furnished with all its garniture. This epilogue, moreover, with 
sufficient clearness entirely refutes the error of those who 
imagine that the world was formed in a moment; for it 
declares that an end was only at length put to the work on 
the sixth day. Instead of host we might not improperly 
render the term abundance; for Moses declares that this 
world was in every sense completed, as if the whole house 
were well supplied and filled with its furniture. The heaven, 
without the sun, and moon, and stars, would be an empty 
and dismantled palace : if the earth were destitute of animals, 
trees, and plants, that barren waste would have the appear- 
ance of a poor and deserted house. God, therefore, did not 
cease from the work of the creation of the world till he had 
completed it in every part, so that nothing should be wanting 
to its suitable abundance. 


2. And he rested on the seventh day. The question may 
not improperly be put, what kind of rest this was. Jor it s 
certain that inasmuch as God sustains the world by his 
power, governs it by his providence, cherishes and even pro- 
pagates all creatures, he is constantly at work. Therefore 
that saying of Christ is true, that the Father and he himself 
had worked from the beginning hitherto,’ because, if God 
should but withdraw his hand a little, all things would im 
mediately perish and dissolve into nothing, as is declared in 


creation, and an account of the sabbatical institution on the seventh day 
The remark of Dathe is, ‘‘ Male capita hoc loco sunt divisa. Tres ver- 
sus priores ad primum caput sunt referendi.”—Ed. 

1 “*Copiam,” a questionable rendering, surely, of the word poway. 
The Septuagint gives the word xdésuoc, and the Vulgate, ornatus ; #1 
meaning of both words is “ ornaments,” or garniture. The other versions 
in Walton translate it exercitus, host or army. Fagius, in Poli Synopsi, 
seems the chief maintainer of Calvin’s interpretation. ‘The words of 
Poole are, “ Alii, virtus, copia eorum, quia eis declarat Deus (sicutrex copiis 
suis,) potentiam et sapientiam.”—Ed. 

2 John v.17. This sentence is omitted in Tymme’s English version. 
—Ed. 


104 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. II. 


Psalm civ. 29.". And indeed God is rightly acknowledged 
as the Creator of heaven and earth only whilst their perpetual 
preservation is ascribed to him.? The solution of the difficulty 
is well known, that God ceased from all his work, when he 
desisted from the creation of new kinds of things. But to 
make the sense clearer, understand that the last touch of God 
had been put, in order that nothing might be wanting to the 
perfection of the world. And this is the meaning of the 
words of Moses, From all his work which he had made ; for he 
points out the actual state of the work as God would have it 
to be, as if he had said, then was completed what God had 
proposed to himself. On the whole, this language is intended 
merely to express the perfection of the fabric of the world; 
and therefore we must not infer that God so ceased from 
his works as to desert them, since they only flourish and sub- 
sist in him. Besides, it is to be observed, that in the works of 
the six days, those things alone are comprehended which tend 
to the lawful and genuine adorning of the world. It is sub- 
sequently that we shall find God saying, “ Let the earth bring 
forth thorns and briers,” by which he intimates that the ap- 
pearance of the earth should be different from what it had been 
in the beginning. But the explanation isat hand; many things 
which are now seen in the world are rather corruptions of it 
than any part of its proper furniture. For ever since man 
declined from his high original, it became necessary that the 
world should gradually degenerate from its nature. We 
must come to this conclusion respecting the existence of 
fleas, caterpillars, and other noxious insects. In all these, I 
say, there is some deformity of the world, which ought by no 
means to be regarded as in the order of nature, since it pro- 
ceeds rather from the sin of man than from the hand of God. 
Truly these things were created by God, but by God as an 
avenger. In this place, however, Moses is not considering 
God as armed for the punishment of the sins of men; but as 


' “Thou hidest thy face, they are troubled; thou takest away their 
breath, they die, and return to their dust.” 

2 The word translated preservation is vegetationem, which means an en- 
livening or a quickening motion; to explain this the Old English translation 
here adds, though without authority, ‘‘ According to this saying of the 
apostle, In him we live, and move, and have our being.”—Ed. 


CHAP. II, THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 105 


the Artificer, the Architect, the bountiful Father of a family, 
who has omitted nothing essential to the perfection of his 
edifice. At the present time, when we look upon the world 
corrupted, and asif degenerated from its original creation, let 
that expression of Paul recur to our mind, that the creature 
is liable to vanity, not willingly, but through our fault, 
(Rom. viii. 20,) and thus let us mourn, being admonished of 
our just condemnation. 


3. And God blessed the seventh day. It appears that God 
is here said to bless according to the manner of men, because 
they bless him whom they highly extol. Nevertheless, even 
in this sense, it would not be unsuitable to the character of 
God; because his blessing sometimes means the favour which 
he bestows upon his people, as the Hebrews call that man 
the blessed of God, who, by a certain special favour, has 
power with God. (See Gen. xxiv. 31.) ‘Enter thou 
blessed of God. Thus we may be allowed to describe 
the day as blessed by him which he has embraced with 
love, to the end that the excellence and dignity of his 
works may therein be celebrated. Yet I have no doubt 
that Moses, by adding the word sanctified, wished imme- 
diately to explain what he had said, and thus all ambi- 
guity is removed, because the second word is exegetical 
of the former. For wp, (kadesh,) with the Hebrews, is to 
separate from the common number. God therefore sanctifies 
the seventh day, when he renders it illustrious, that by 
a special law it may be distinguished from the rest. 
Whence it also appears, that God always had respect to the 
welfare of men. I have said above, that six days were 
employed in the formation of the world; not that God, to 
whom one moment is as a thousand years, had need of this 
succession of time, but that he might engage us in the con- 
sideration of his works. He had the same end in view in 
the appointment of his own rest, for he set apart a day 
selected out of the remainder for this special use. Where- 
fore, that benediction is nothing else than a solemn consecra~- 
tion, by which God claims for himself the meditations and 
employments of men on the seventh day. This is, indeed, the 


106 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. II. 


proper business of the whole life, in which men should daily 
exercise themselves, to consider the infinite goodness, justice, 
power, and wisdom of God, in this magnificent theatre of 
heaven and earth. But, lest men should prove less sedulously 
attentive to it than they ought, every seventh day has been 
especially selected for the purpose of supplying what was 
wanting in daily meditation. First, therefore, God 
rested ; then he blessed this rest, that in all ages it might be 
held sacred among men: or he dedicated every seventh day 
to rest, that his own example might be a perpetual rule. 
The design of the institution must be always kept in memory: 
for God did not command men simply to keep holiday every 
seventh day, as if he delighted in their indolence; but 
rather that they, being released from all other business, 
might the more readily apply their minds to the Creator of 
the world. Lastly, that is a sacred rest? which withdraws 
men from the impediments of the world, that it may dedicate 
them entirely to God. But now, since men are so backward 
to celebrate the justice, wisdom, and power of God, and to con- 
sider his benefits, that even when they are most faithfully ad- 
monished they still remain torpid, no slight stimulus is given by 
God’s own example, and the very precept itself is thereby ren- 
dered amiable. For God cannot either more gently allure, or 
more effectually incite us to obedience, than by inviting and 
exhorting us to the imitation of himself. Besides, we must 
know, that this is to be the common employment not of one 
age or people only, but of the whole human race. After- 
wards, in the Law, a new precept concerning the Sabbath 
was given, which should be peculiar to the Jews, and but for 
a season; because it was a legal ceremony shadowing forth 
a spiritual rest, the truth of which was manifested in Christ. 
Therefore the Lord the more frequently testifies that he had 
given, in the Sabbath, a symbol of sanctification to his ancient 
people. Therefore when we hear that the Sabbath was 


' Both in the Amsterdam edition of 1761, and Hengstenberg’s, the 
word is vocatio; but as the French translation gives reste, and the Old 
English one rest, there can be little doubt that the original word was 
vacatio, as the sense of the passage seems to require.— Ed. 

2 “ Sanctificationis symbolum,”—*“ A symbol or sign of sanctification ;” 
that is, a sign that God had set them apart as a holy and peculiar people 


CHAP. II. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 107 


abrogated by the coming of Christ, we must distinguish be- 
tween what belongs to the perpetual government of human, 
life, and what properly belongs to ancient figures, the use 
of which was abolished when the truth was fulfilled. Spiritual 
rest is the mortification of the flesh ; so that the sons of God — 
should no longer live unto themselves, or indulge their own 
inclination. So far as the Sabbath was a figure of this rest, 
I say, it was but for a season; but inasmuch as it was com- 
manded to men from the beginning that they might employ 
themselves in the worship of God, it is right that it should 
continue to the end of the world. ‘ 

Which God created and made. Here the Jews, in their 
usual method, foolishly trifle, saying, that God being antici- 
pated in his work by the last evening, left certain animals 
imperfect, of which kind are fauns and satyrs, as though he 
had been one of the ordinary class-of artificers who have need 
of time. Jtavings so monstrous prove the authors of them 
to have been delivered over to a reprobate mind, as a dreadful 
example of the wrath of God.. As to the meaning of Moses, 
some take it thus: that God created his works in order to 
make them, inasmuch as from the time he gave them being, 
he did not withdraw his-hand from: their preservation. But 
this exposition is harsh.. Nor do I more willingly subscribe 
to the opinion of those who refer the word make to man, 
whom God placed over his-works, that he might apply them 
to use, and in a certain sense perfect them by his industry. 


to himself. ‘* Moreover, also, I gave them my Sabbaths, to be a sign 
between me and them, that they might know that I am the Lord that 
sanctify them,” Ezek. xx. 12.—Ed. 

1* Quod creaverat Deus ut faceret.” Heb. miwyd conde sw. 
* Which God created to make.” For the various opinions and fancies of 
learned men on this passage, the reader is referred to Poole’s Synopsis. 
The morerespectable commentators mainly agree with Calvin. Ainsworth 
says: ‘‘ created to make, that is, to exist and be, and that perfectly and 
gloriously, as by divine power of creation. Or rather, created and made 
perfectly and excellently : for so the Hebrew phrase may be explained.” 
The version of Dathe is “‘creando perfecerat,”—‘ he had perfected in 
creating.” See also Professor Bush in loco. Le Clerc, whose extraor- 
dinary learning and industry render his opinion on merely critical ques- 
tions of great value, notwithstanding his lamentable scepticism, would 
rather translate the expression, ‘‘ which he had begun to make.” But 
the other interpretation is to be preferred. Vide Johannes Clericus in 
Genesin.— Ed. 


108 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. Il. 


I rather think that the perfect form of God’s works is here 
noted; as if he had said, God so created his works, that 
nothing should be wanting to their perfection; or the creation 
has proceeded to such a point, that the work is in all respects 
perfect. 


4, These are the generations.1 The design of Moses was 
deeply to impress upon our minds the origin of the heaven 
and the earth, which he designates by the word generation. 


' A new section of the history of Moses commences at this point ; and, 
from the repetition which occurs of some facts—such as the creation of 
man—which had been recorded in the preceding chapter, as well as from 
certain peculiarities of phraseology, many learned men have inferred, 
that the early portion of the Mosaic history is older than the time of 
Moses, and that he, under the infallible direction of the Spirit of God, 
collected and arranged the several fragments of primeval annals in one 
consistent narrative. One chief argument on which such a conclusion 
rests is, that from the commencement of the first chapter to the end of 
the third verse of the second chapter, God is spoken of only under the 
name of Hlohim; from the fourth verse of the second to the end of the 
third chapter, he is uniformly styled Jehovah Elohim; and in the fourth 
and fifth chapters, the name of Elohim or of Jehovah stands alone. This, 
it is argued, could scarcely have occurred without some cause; and the 
inference has been drawn, that different records had different forms of 
expression, which Moses did not alter, unless truth required him to do so. 
See Dathe on the Pentateuch, Professor Bush on Genesis, and Robertson’s 
Clavis Pentateuchi, where reference will be found to Vitringa and others. 
Against this view, however, Hengstenberg argues with considerable force, 
in his Dissertation ‘‘ onthe Names of God in the Pentateuch;” and if some 
of his reasonings in the use of these names seem too refined for the sim- 
plicity of the Holy Scriptures, and for the comprehension of those to whom 
the Scriptures are chiefly addressed, yet we may discover the germ of 
very important truths, though they may be, in some degree, hidden be- 
neath a variety of fanciful developments. . 

By a very careful examination of the passages in which the terms 
conbs:, (Elohim,) myn, (Jehovah,) and roynbx py, (Jehovah Elohim,) 
occur, he thinks he has ascertained a reason for the use of each in its 
place, so that, with some exceptions, in which he allows one term might 
have been exchanged for the other, the sense of the passage absolutely 
requires the introduction of the very appellation, and no other, which is 
there employed. Believing that a theory so general cannot, with all the 
author’s ingenuity and learning, be applied in every case, we may still 
admit the importance of the distinction he makes, and may readily allow 
that these names are intended to present the Divine character under dif- 
ferent aspects to our view. For instance, we may suppose that Elohim 
and Jehovah have different meanings, arising from their derivations; but 
we are not to infer, that, in reading the Scriptures, we must have this 
diversity, or any diversity at all, in our view, when we meet with these 
different names of Deity. 

‘‘These are the generations.” pyqSyn, (toledoth,) ‘* modo origines 
ejus rei de qua sermo est, modo posteros eorum de quibus agitur, signi- 
ficat. Priori sensu hoc loco sumitur posteriori, cap. y. 1.” “The term 


CHAP. Il. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 109 


For there have always been ungrateful and malignant men, 
who, either by feigning that the world was eternal, or by 
obliterating the memory of the creation, would attempt to 
obscure the glory of God. Thus the devil, by his guile, 
turns those away from God who are more ingenious and skil- 
ful than others, in order that each may become a god unto 
himself. Wherefore, it is not a superfluous repetition which 
inculcates the necessary fact, that the world existed only 
from the time when it was created, since such knowledge 
directs us to its Architect and Author. Under the names of 
heaven and earth, the whole is, by the figure synecdoche, 
included. Some of the Hebrews think, that the essential 
name of God is here at length expressed by Moses, because 
his majesty shines forth more clearly in the completed 
world.' 


signifies, sometimes, the origin of the thing spoken of, sometimes the pos- 
terity of those who are mentioned. It is taken here in the former of 
these senses; and in chap. v. 1, in the latter.”—-Dathe. 

1 The word myn, Jehovah, here first occurs,—that most sacred 
and incommunicable name of Deity, called tetragrammaton, because 
it consisted of four letters, which the Jews, through reverence or 
superstition, refuse to pronounce. The principal meaning of the 
term is self-existence; which is, in truth, necessary existence, as 
opposed to that which is derived from, or is dependent upon, an- 
other. It has been supposed by some that Moses here introduces this 
title of Deity by anticipation ; because, in Exodus vi. 3, God declares 
that he had not been previously known by the name of Jehovah. But 
this, as Dathe forcibly reasons, is to increase difficulties rather than to 
remove them ; for the patriarchs, Abraham and Jacob, are represented 
as using the name; and God himself, in speaking to them, also makes 
use of it. The true solution of the passage in Exodus seems to be, that 
God had not made known to the patriarchs the full import of his name, as 
he was now about todo. An elaborate investigation of the origin and 
import of the name 777), (Jehovah, ) will be found in the work of Hengsten- 
berg, referred to in the preceding note. He begins with putting aside 
the notion of an Egyptian origin, which has been put forth with much 
confidence by those who would trace all the religious peculiarities of the 
Israelites to their connection with Egypt. He then disposes of the fancied 
Pheenician pedigree of the name, founded upon spurious fragments ascribed 
to Sanchoniathon ; and concludes the negative part of his argument, by 
showing that the name was not derived from any heathen source whatever. 
Consequently, it is to be traced to ‘‘a Hebrew etymology.” We need 
not follow him into the discussion on the right pronunciation of the word, 
and the use of the vowel points belonging to 94x, (Adonai ;) it may suf- 
fice to state, that he deduces the name pj), (Jehovah,) from the future of 
the verb myn or myn, to be. Hence the meaning of the appellation may 
be expressed in the words, ‘* He who is to be (for ever.)” This derivation 
of the name Jehovah he regards as being confirmed “ by all the passages 


110 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. IT, 


5. And every plant. This verse is connected with the pre- 
ceding, and must be read in continuation with it; for he an- 
nexes the plants and herbs to the earth, as the garment with 
which the Lord has adorned it, lest its nakedness should 
appear as a deformity. The noun MY, (sicah,') which we trans- 
late plant, sometimes signifies trees, as below, (Gen. xxi. 15.) 
Therefore, some in this place translate it shrub, to which I 
have no objection. Yet the word plant is not unsuitable ; be- 
cause, in the former place, Moses seems to refer to the genus, 
and here to the species. But although he has before related 
that the herbs were created on the third day, yet it is not 
without reason that here again mention is made of them, in 
order that we may know that they were then produced, pre- 
served, and propagated, in a manner different from that which 
we perceive at the present day. For herbs and trees are 
produced from seed; or grafts are taken from another root, 
or they grow by putting forth shoots : in all this the industry 
and the hand of man are engaged. But, at that time, the 
method was different : God clothed the earth, not in the same 
manner as now, (for there was no seed, no root, no plant, 
which might germinate,) but each suddenly sprung into exist- 
ence at the command of God, and by the power of his word. 


of Scripture, in which a derivation of the name is either expressly given 
or simply hinted.” And, beginning with the Book of Revelation, at the 
title ¢ dv xal ¢ qv xal 6 eexomevos, ‘* who is, and was, and is to come,” he 
goes upward through the sacred volume, quoting the passages which bear 
upon the question, till he comes to the important. passage .in Exodus iii. 
13-16, in which God declares his name to be, ‘‘ Iam that Iam.” ‘* Every 
thing created,” he adds, ‘* remains not like itself, but is continually chang- 
ing under circumstances, God only, because he is THE BEING, is always 
the same ; and because he is always the same, is THE BEING.” See Dis- 
sertations, p. 231-265. 

‘‘ The Lord God.”—Jehovah Elohim. The two titles of Deity are here 
combined. ‘‘ Elohim,” says Hengstenberg, ‘‘ is the more general, and 
Jehovah the deep and more discriminating name of the Godhead.” This 
may well be admitted, without accepting all the inferences which the 
author deduces.—Ed. 

‘row. Frutex, stirps; a shrub— cujus pulluli in summa tellure ex- 
patiantur,”—“ whose shoots are spread abroad over the surface of the 
earth.”—Robertscn’s Clavis Pentateuch.—Ed. 

2 «* And the water was spent in the bottle, and she cast the child under 
one of the shrubs.” —English version. 

3 It seems remarkable that Calvin should himself translate the word 
‘‘ virgultum,” and then reason, in his commentary, as if he preferred the 
word ‘‘ planta.”—Ed. 


CHAP. II. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 111 


They possessed durable vigour, so that they might stand by 
the force of their own nature, and not by that quickening in- 
fluence which is now perceived, not by the help of rain, not 
by the irrigation or culture of man; but by the vapour with 
which God watered the earth. For he excludes these two 
things, the rain whence the earth derives moisture, that it 
may retain its native sap; and human culture, which is the 
assistant of nature. When he says, that God had ‘not yet 
caused it to rain, he at the same time intimates that it is God 
who opens and shuts the cataracts of heaven, and that rain 
and drought are in his hand. ; 


7. And the Lord God formed man. He now explains what 
he had before omitted in the creation of man, that his body 
was taken out of the earth. He had said that he was formed 
after the image of God. This is incomparably the highest 
nobility ; and, lest men should use it as an occasion of pride, 
their first origin is placed immediately before them; whence 
they may learn that this advantage was adventitious; for 
Moses relates that man had been, in the beginning, dust of 
the earth. Let foolish men now go and boast of the excel- 
lency of their nature! Concerning other animals, it had 
before been said, Let the earth produce every living creature;! 
but, on the other hand, the body of Adam is formed of clay, 
and destitute of sense; to the end that no one should exult 
beyond measure in his flesh. He must be excessively stupid 
who does not hence learn humility. That which is afterwards 
added from another quarter, lays us under just so much obli- 
gation to God. Nevertheless, he, at the same time, designed 
to distinguish man by some mark of excellence from brute 
animals: for these arose out of the earth in a moment; but 
the peculiar dignity of man is shown in this, that he was 
gradually formed. For why did not God command him im- 
mediately to spring alive out of the earth, unless that, by a 
special privilege, he might outshine all the creatures which 
the earth produced? 


1“ Qmnem animam viventem,”’—‘“ every living sou/.” The word soul is ap- 
plied here, and frequently in the Holy Scriptures, to describe only the sen- 
sitive and animal life, that by which a created being breathes ; and thus 
distinguishes the animal from the vegetative life.—£d. 


a 


112 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. II. 


And breathed into his nostrils. Whatever the greater part 
of the ancients might think, I do not hesitate to subscribe 
to the opinion of those who explain this passage of the 
animal life of man; and thus I expound what they call the 
vital spirit, by the word breath. Should any one object, 
that if so, no distinction would be made between man and 
other living creatures, since here Moses relates only what is 
common alike to all: I answer, though here mention is made 
only of the lower faculty of the soul, which imparts breath to 
the body, and gives it vigour and motion: this does not pre- 
vent the human soul from having its proper rank, and there- 
fore it ought to be distinguished from others.? Moses first 
speaks of the breath; he then adds, that a soul was given to 


_ man by which he might live, and be endued with sense and 
_ motion. Now we know that the powers of the human mind 


are many and various. Wherefore, there is nothing absurd 
in supposing that Moses here alludes only to one of them; 
but omits the intellectual part, of which mention has been 
made in the first chapter. Three gradations, indeed, are to 
be noted in the creation of man; that his dead body was 
formed out of the dust of the earth; that it was endued with 
a soul, whence it should receive vital motion; and that on 
this soul God engraved his own image, to which immortality 
is annexed. 

Man became a living soul2 I take wW53, (nepesh,) for the 
very essence of the soul: but the epithet living suits only 
the present place, and does not embrace generally the powers 
of the soul. For Moses intended nothing more than to ex- 
plain the animating of the clayey figure, whereby it came to 
pass that man began to live. Paul makes an antithesis be- 
tween this living soul and the quickening spirit which Christ 
confers upon the faithful, (1 Cor. xv. 45,) for no other pur- 
pose than to teach us that the state of man was not perfected 
in the person of Adam; but it is a peculiar benefit conferred 
by Christ, that we may be renewed to a life which is celestial, 


1 ** Inspiraverat in faciem.” 

2 Non tamen obstare quin gradum suum obtineat anima, ideoque 
seorsum poni debuerit.” 

5 Factus est in animam viyentem.” 


CHAP. II. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 113 


whereas before the fall of Adam, man’s life was only earthly, 
seeing it had no firm and settled constancy. 


8. And the Lord God planted." Moses now adds the con- 
dition and rule of living which were given to man. And, 
first, he narrates in what part of the world he was placed, 
and what a happy and pleasant habitation was allotted to 


him. Moses says, that God had planted, accommodating 


himself, by a simple and uncultivated style, to the capacity 
of the vulgar. For since the majesty of God, as it really is, 
cannot be expressed, the Scripture is wont to describe it 
according to the manner of men. God, then, had planted 
Paradise in a place which he had especially embellished with 
every variety of delights, with abounding fruits, and with all 
other most excellent gifts. For this reason it is called a 
garden, on account of the elegance of its situation, and the 
beauty of its form. The ancient interpreter has not im- 
properly translated it Paradise ;? because the Hebrews call 
the more highly cultivated gardens D'D"9"%5, (Pardaisim,*) 
and Xenophon pronounces the word to be Persian, when he 
treats of the magnificent and sumptuous gardens of kings. 
That region which the Lord assigned to Adam, as the first- 
born of mankind, was one selected out of the whole world. 
In Eden. ‘That Jerome improperly translates this, from 
the beginning,‘ is very obvious: because Moses afterwards 
says, that Cain dwelt in the southern region of this place. 
Moreover, it is to be observed, that when he describes para- 
dise as in the east, he speaks in reference to the Jews, for 
he directs his discourse to his own people. Hence we infer, 
in the first place, that there was a certain region assigned by 


God to the first man, in which he might have his home. I. 


state this expressly, because there have been authors who 


1 “ Plantaverat quoque Dominus.”—“ The Lord had also planted.” 

2 “ Paradisum.”— Vulgate. 

3p q5p. Baumgarten, Park, &c. ‘‘ Wahrscheinlich aus der Persi- 
schen Sprache, wo es die Lustparks der Kénige bezeichnet.”—‘‘ Orchard, 
Park, &c.—probably from the Persian, where it signifies the pleasure- 
parks of kings.”—Gesenius. 

4“ Plantaverat autem Dominus Deus Paradisum voluptatis 4 prin- 
cipio.”—‘‘ But the Lord God had planted a paradise of pleasure from the 


beginning.” — Vulgate. 
VOL. I. H 


< 


114 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. Il. 


would extend this garden over all regions of the world. 
Truly, I confess, that if the earth had not been cursed on 
account of the sin of man, the whole—as it had been blessed 
from the beginning—would have remained the fairest scene 
both of fruitfulness and of delight; that it would have been, 
in short, not dissimilar to Paradise, when compared with 
that scene of deformity which we now behold. But when 
Moses here describes particularly the situation of the region, 
they absurdly transfer what Moses said of a certain particular 
place to the whole world. It is not indeed doubtful (as I 
just now hinted) that God would choose the most fertile and 
pleasant place, the first-fruits (so to speak) of the earth, as 
his gift to Adam, whom he had dignified with the honour of 
primogeniture among men, in token of his special favour. 
Again, we infer, that this garden was situated on the earth, 
not as some dream in the air; for unless it had been a region 
of our world, it would not have been placed opposite to 
Judea, towards the east. We must, however, entirely reject 
the allegories of Origen, and of others like him, which Satan, 
with the deepest subtlety, has endeavoured to introduce into 
the Church, for the purpose of rendering the doctrine of 
Scripture ambiguous and destitute of all certainty and firm- 
ness. It may be, indeed, that some, impelled by a supposed 
necessity, have resorted to an allegorical sense, because they 
never found in the world such a place as is deseribed by 
Moses: but we see that the greater part, through a foolish 
affectation of subtleties, have been too much addicted to 
allegories. As it concerns the present passage, they speculate 
in vain, and to no purpose, by departing from the literal sense. 
For Moses has no other design than to teach man that he 
was formed by God, with this condition, that he should have 
dominion over the earth, from which he might gather fruit, 
and thus learn by daily experience that the world was subject 
unto him. What advantage is it to fly in the air, and to 
leave the earth, where God has given proof of his beneyo- 
lence towards the human race? But some one may eay, 
that to interpret this of celestial bliss is more skilful. I 
answer, since the eternal inheritance of man is in heaven, it 
is truly right that we should tend thither; yet must we fix 


CHAP. II. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 115 


our foot on earth long enough to enable us to consider the 
abode which God requires man to use fora time. For we 
are now conversant with that history which teaches us that 
Adam was, by Divine appointment, an inhabitant of the 
earth, in order that he might, in passing through his earthly 
life, meditate on heavenly glory; and that he had been 
bountifully enriched by the Lord with innumerable benefits, 
from the enjoyment of which he might infer the paternal 
benevolence of God. Moses, also, will hereafter subjoin that 
he was commanded to cultivate the fields, and permitted to 
eat certain fruits: all which things neither suit the circle of 
the moon, nor the aerial regions. But although we have 
said, that the situation of Paradise lay between the rising of 
the sun and Judea, yet something more definite may be 
required respecting that region. They who contend that it 
was in the vicinity of Mesopotamia, rely on reasons not to 
be despised; because it is probable that the sons of Eden 
were contiguous to the river Tigris. But as the description 
of it by Moses will immediately follow, it is better to defer 
the consideration of it to that place. The ancient interpreter 
has fallen into a mistake in translating the proper name 
Eden by the word “ pleasure.”’ I do not indeed deny that 
the place was so called from its delights; but it is easy to 
infer that the name was imposed upon the place to distinguish 
it from others. 


9. And out of the ground made the Lord God to grow. The 
production here spoken of belongs to the third day of the 
creation. But Moses expressly declares the place to have 
been richly replenished with every kind of fruitful trees, that 
there might be a full and happy abundance of all things. 
This was purposely done by the Lord, to the end that the 
cupidity of man might have the less excuse if, instead of 
being contented with such remarkable affluence, sweetness, 
and variety, it should (as really happened) precipitate itself 
against the commandment of God. The Holy Spirit. also 
designedly relates by Moses the greatness of Adam’s happi- 


1 The Hebrew word juy signifies pleasure, delight, loveliness.—Ed. 


116 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP.-II. 


ness, in order that his vile intemperance might the more 
clearly appear, which such superfluity was unable to restrain 
from breaking forth upon the forbidden fruit. And certainly 
it was shameful ingratitude, that he could not rest in a state 
so happy and desirable: truly, that was more than brutal lust 
which bounty so great was not able to satisfy. No corner of 
the earth was then barren, nor was there even any which was 
not exceedingly rich and fertile: but that benediction of 
God, which was elsewhere comparatively moderate, had in 
this place poured itself wonderfully forth. For not only was 
there an abundant supply of food, but with it was added 
sweetness for the gratification of the palate, and beauty to 
feast the eyes. Therefore, from such benignant indulgence, 
it is more than sufficiently evident, how inexplicable had 
been the cupidity of man. 

The tree of life also. It is uncertain whether he means only 
two individual trees, or two kinds of trees. Either opinion 
is probable, but the point is by no means worthy of conten- 
tion; since it is of little or no concern to us, which of the 
two is maintained. There is more importance in the epithets, 
which were applied to each tree from its effect, and that not 
by the will of man but of God! He gave the tree of life its 
name, not because it could confer on man that life with which 
he had been previously endued, but in order that it might 
be a symbol and memorial of the life which he had received 
from God. For we know it to be by no means unusual that 
God should give to us the attestation of his grace by external 
symbols.? He does not indeed transfer his power into out- 


1 The above passage is wholly omitted in the Old English translation 
by Tymme.—Ed. 

2 ‘¢Scimus minime esse insolens ut virtutem suam Deus externis sym- 
bolis testatam nobis reddat.”—‘‘Nous savons que ce n’est point chose nou- 
velle, que Dieu nous testifie sa vertu par signes exterieurs.”—French 
Trans. Virtus in Latin, and vertu in French, may both signify power, 
virtue, efficacy ; but it seems that the term grace more correctly conveys 
to an English ear the meaning of the Author.—Ed. 

On the sacramental character of the tree of life, which Calvin here 
maintains, but which Dr Kennicott, in his first Dissertation, endeavours, 
with more learning than sound judgment, to set aside, the generality of 
commentators seem to be agreed. See Patrick, Scott, &c. Patrick says, 
—‘* This garden being a type of heaven, perhaps God intended by this 
tree to represent that immortal life which he meant to bestow upon man 
with himself, (Rev. xxii. 2.) And so St Austin, in that famous saying 





CHAP. II. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 117 


ward signs ; but by them he stretches out his hand to us, be- 
cause, without assistance, we cannot ascend tohim. He in- 
tended, therefore, that man, as often as he tasted the fruit of 
that tree, should remember whence he received his life, in 
order that he might acknowledge that he lives not by his 
own power, but by the kindness of God alone; and that life 
is-not (as they commonly speak) an intrinsic good, but pro- 
ceeds from God. Finally, in that tree there was a visible 
testimony to the declaration, that ‘in God we are, and live, 
and move. But if Adam, hitherto innocent, and of an up- 
right nature, had need of monitory signs to lead him to the 
knowledge of divine grace, how much more necessary are 
signs now, in this great imbecility of our nature, since we have 
fallen from the true light? Yet I am not dissatisfied with 
what has been handed down by some of the fathers, as Au- 
gustine and Eucherius, that the tree of life was a figure of 
Christ, inasmuch as he is the Eternal Word of God: it could 
not indeed be otherwise a symbol of life, than by represent- 
ing him in figure. For we must maintain what is declared 
in the first chapter of John, that the life of all things was in- 
cluded in the Word, but especially the life of men, which is 
conjoined with reason and intelligence. Wherefore, by this 
sign, Adam was admonished, that he could claim nothing for 
himself as if it were his own, in order that he might depend 
wholly upon the Son of God, and might not seek life any- 
where but in him. “But if he, at the time when he possessed 
life in safety, had it only as deposited in the word of God, 
and could not otherwise retain it, than by acknowledging 
that it was received from Him, whence may we recover it, 
after it has been lost ? Let us know, therefore, that when we 
have departed from Christ, nothing remains for us but death. 
I know that certain writers restrict the meaning of the expres- 
sion here used to corporeal life. They suppose such a power of 
quickening the body to have been in the tree, that it should never 
languish through age ; but I say, they omit what is the chief 
of his, ‘ Erat ei in ceteris lignis Alimentum, in isto autem Sacramentum. 
In other trees there was nourishment for man; but in this also a sacra- 
ment. For it was both a symbol of that life which God had already be- 


stowed upon man, and of that life which he was to hope for in another 
world, if he proved obedient.”—Ed. 


a 


118 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. It. 


thing in life, namely, the grace of intelligence; for we must 
always consider for what end man was formed, and what 
rule of living was prescribed to him. Certainly, for him to 
live, was not simply to have a body fresh and lively, but also 
to excel in the endowments of the soul. 

Concerning the tree of knowledge of good and evil, we 
must hold, that it was prohibited to man, not because God 
would have him to stray like asheep, without judgment and 
without choice ; but that he might not seek to be wiser than 
became him, nor by trusting to his own understanding, cast 
off the yoke of God, and constitute himself an arbiter and 
judge of good and evil. His sin proceeded from an evil con- 
science ; whence it follows, that a judgment had been given 
him, by which he might discriminate between virtues and 
vices. Nor could what Moses relates be otherwise true, 
namely, that he was created in the image of God; since the 
image of God comprises in itself the knowledge of him who 
is the chief good. Thoroughly insane, therefore, and mon- 
sters of men are the libertines, who pretend that we are re- 
stored to a state of innocency, when each is carried away by 
his own lust without judgment. We now understand what 
is meant by abstaining from the tree of the knowledge of 
good and evil; namely, that Adam might not, in attempting 
one thing or another, rely upon his own prudence ; but that, 


_ cleaving to God alone, he might become wise only by his 


- obedience. Knowledge is here, therefore, taken disparagingly, 


in a bad sense, for that wretched experience which man, 
when he departed from the only fountain of perfect wisdom, 
began to acquire for himself. And this is the origin of free- 
will, that Adam wished to be independent,’ and dared to try 
what he was able to do. 


10. And a river went out. Moses says that one river flowed 
to water the garden, which afterwards would divide itself 
into four heads. It is sufficiently agreed among all, that two 
of these heads are the Euphrates and the Tigris; for no one 
disputes that pwn (Hiddehel) is the Tigris. But there is 


1 “Dum Adam per se esse voluit, et quid valeret tentare ausus est.” 
—Lat. 


CHAP. Il. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 119 


a great controversy respecting the other two. Many think, 
that Pison and Gihon are the Ganges and the Nile; the 
error, however, of these men is abundantly refuted by the 
distance of the positions of these rivers. Persons are not 
wanting who fly across even to the Danube; as if, indeed, the 
habitation of one man stretched itself from the most remote 
part of Asia to the extremity of Europe. But since many 
other celebrated rivers flow by the region of which we are 
speaking, there is greater probability in the opinion of those 
who believe that two of these rivers are pointed out, although 
their names are now obsolete. Be this as it may, the diffi- 
culty is not yet solved. For Moses divides the one river 
which flowed by the garden into four heads. Yet it appears, 
that the fountains of the Euphrates and the Tigris were far 
distant from each other. From this difficulty, some would 
free themselves by saying, that the surface of the globe may 
have been changed by the deluge; and, therefore, they ima- 
gine it might have happened that the courses of the rivers 
were disturbed and changed, and their springs transferred 
elsewhere ; a solution which appears to me by no means to 
be accepted. For although I acknowledge that the earth, 
from the time that it was accursed, became reduced from its 
native beauty to a state of wretched defilement, and to a garb 
of mourning, and afterwards was further laid waste in many 
places by the deluge; still, I assert, it was the same earth 
which had been created in the beginning. Add to this, that 
Moses (in my judgment) accommodated his topography to 
the capacity of his age. Yet nothing is accomplished, unless 
we find that place where the Tigris and Euphrates proceed 
from one river. Observe, first, that no mention is made of a 
spring or fountain, but only that it is said, there was one river. 
But the four heads I understand to mean, both the beginnings 
from which the rivers are produced, and the mouths! by 
which they discharge themselves into the sea. Now the Eu- 
phrates was formerly so joined by confluence with the Tigris, 
that it might justly be said, one river was divided into four 


1 It appears that by the beginnings (principia) and the mouths 
(ostia) of the rivers, Calvin simply means the streams above, and the 
streams below, the site of the garden.—£d. 


120 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. II. 


heads ; especially, if what is manifest to all be conceded, that 
Moses does not speak acutely, nor in a philosophical manner, 
but popularly, so that every one least informed may under- 
stand him. Thus, in the first chapter, he called the sun and 
moon two great luminaries ; not because the moon exceeded 
other planets in magnitude, but because, to common obserya- 
tion, it seemed greater. Add further, that he seems to re- 
move all doubt when he says, that the river had four heads, 
because it was divided from that place. What does this 
mean, except that the channels were divided, out of one con- 
fluent stream, either above or below Paradise? I will now 
submit a plan to view, that the readers may understand where 
I think Paradise was placed by Moses.? 





EA! WS 
SS NEV URAUEMCURNTELE LLL Eff — 


S < ~ - 
<= ‘Z y S SS R\\\ = 4 
S)) \ WO Na = 
* pe oy. TX 











| This is a fac-simile from the Old English translation ; and the same, 
with Latin and French names, are introduced in the early editions of each 
language.— Ed. 


CHAP. II. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 121 


Pliny indeed relates, in his Sixth Book, that the Eu- 
phrates was so stopped in its course by the Orcheni, that it 
could not flow into the sea, except through the Tigris.! 
And Pomponius Mela, in his Third Book, denies that it 
flowed by any given outlet, as other rivers, but says that it 
failed in its course. Nearchus, however, (whom Alexander 
had made commander of his fleet, and who, under his sanc- 
tion, had navigated all these regions,) reckons the distance 
from the mouth of the Euphrates to Babylon, three thou- 
sand three hundred stadia.? But he places the mouths of 
the Tigris at the entrance of Susiana; in which region, 
returning from that long and memorable voyage, he met the 
king with his fleet, as Arrian relates in his Eighth Book of 
the Exploits of Alexander. This statement Strabo also 
confirms by his testimony in his Fifteenth Book. Never- 
theless, wherever the Euphrates either submerges or mingles 
its stream, it is certain, that it and the Tigris, below the 
point of their confluence, are again divided. Arrian, how- 
ever, in his Seventh Book, writes, that not one channel only 
of the Euphrates runs into the Tigris, but also many rivers 
and ditches, because waters naturally descend from higher 
to lower ground. With respect to the confluence, which I 
have noted in the plate, the opinion of some was, that it had 
been effected by the labour of the Prefect Cobaris, lest the 
Euphrates, by its precipitate course, should injure Babylon. 
But he speaks of it as of a doubtful matter. It is more 
credible, that men, by art and industry, followed the guid- 
ance of Nature in forming ditches, when they saw the Eu- 
phrates any where flowing of its own accord from the higher 
ground into the Tigris. Moreover, if confidence is placed 
in Pomponius Mela, Semiramis conducted the Tigris and 
Euphrates into Mesopotamia, which was previously dry; 
a thing by no means credible. There is more truth in the 
statement of Strabo,—a diligent and attentive writer,—in 
his Eleventh Book, that at Babylon these two rivers unite : 


1 «The Orcheni inhabiting a city named Orchoé, caused the diminu- 
tion of the Euphrates, by deriving it through their lands, which could not 
otherwise be watered.”—D’Anville’s Ancient Geography. 

2 About 420 miles. 


122 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. Il. 


and then, that each is carried separately, in its own bed, into 
the Red Sea.'!' He understands that junction to have taken 
place above Babylon, not far from the town Massica, as we read 
in the Fifth Book of Pliny. Thence one river flows through 
Babylon, the other glides by Seleucia, two of the most cele- 
brated and opulent cities. If we admit this confluence, by 
which the Euphrates was mixed with the Tigris, to have 
been natural, and to have existed from the beginning, all 
absurdity is removed. If there is anywhere under heaven a 
region pre-eminent in beauty, in the abundance of all kinds 
of fruit, in fertility, in delicacies, and in other gifts, that is 
the region which writers most celebrate. Wherefore, the 
eulogies with which Moses commends Paradise are such as 
properly belong to a tract of this description. And that the 
region of Eden was situated in those parts is probable from 
Isaiah xxxvii. 12, and Ezekiel xxvii. 23. Moreover, when 
Moses declares that a river went forth, I understand him as 
speaking of the flowing of the stream; as if he had said, 
that Adam dwelt on the bank of the river, or in that land 
which was watered on both sides, if you choose to take 
Paradise for both banks of the river. However, it makes no 
great difference whether Adam dwelt below the confluent 
stream towards Babylon and Seleucia, or in the higher part ; 
it is enough that he occupied a well-watered country. How 
the river was divided into four heads is not difficult to under- 
stand. For there are two rivers which flow together into 
one, and then separate in different directions; thus, it is one 
at the point of confluence, but there are two heads? in its 


1 Mare Rubrum. By the Red Sea, in this place, is not meant the 
Gulf of Suez, which is called by that name in sacred history, and over 
which the Israelites passed in their journey from Egypt to Canaan ; but 
the Indian Ocean, the Mare Erythreum of the ancients, into which the 
Tigris and Euphrates flowed, through the Persian Gulf.—Ed. 

2 Or “ principal streams.” ‘'The river, or single channel, must be 
looked upon as a highway, crossing over a forest, and which may be said 
from thence to divide itself into four ways, whether the division be made 
above or below the forest.”— Wells’ Geography of the Old and New Test., 
vol. i. p. 19. 

The reader is referred to the first chapter of that useful work, for an 
account agreeing in many points with Calvin, though differing from it in 
others. The principal difference in the two accounts lies in this, that Wells 
places the site of Paradise near the Persian Gulf into which the Tigris 


CHAP. Il. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 123 


upper channels, and two towards the sea; afterwards, they 
again begin to be more widely separated. 

The question remains concerning the names Pison and 
Gihon. For it does not seem consonant with reason, to 
assign a double name to each of the rivers. But it is nothing 
new for rivers to change their names in their course, espe- 
cially where there is any special mark of distinction. The 
Tigris itself (by the authority of Pliny) is called Diglito 
near its source; but after it has formed many channels, and 
again coalesces, it takes the name of Pasitigris. There is, 
therefore, no absurdity in saying, that after its confluence it 
had different names. Further, there is some such affinity 
between Pasin and Pison, as to render it not improbable, 
that the name Pasitigris is a vestige of the ancient appella- 
tion. In the Fifth Book of Quintus Curtius, concerning the 
Exploits of Alexander, where mention is made of Pasitigris, 
some copies read, that it was called by the inhabitants 
Pasin. Nor do the other circumstances, by which Moses 
describes three of these rivers, ill accord with this supposi- 
tion. Pison surrounds! the land of Havila, where gold is 
produced. Surrounding is rightly attributed to the Tigris, 
on account of its winding course below Mesopotamia. The 
land of Havila, in my judgment, is here taken for a region 
adjoining Persia. For subsequently, in the twenty-fifth 


and Euphrates discharge themselves, while Calvin fixes it higher up the 
streams, in the vicinity of ancient Babylon. Wells derives his account 
mainly from the celebrated French Bishop, Peter Daniel Huet, who had 
been the intimate friend of the famous Protestant traveller Bochart. 
The following extract from a note in the Clavis Pentateuchi of Robertson 
is added for the reader’s satisfaction :—‘‘ Eden est regio seu in Mesopo- 
tamio, seu non procul inde. Observandum est hancce sententiam Cal- 
vini, quam parum emendaverat clarissimus Huetius, verissimam omnium 
videri: Hoc demonstravit clarissimus Vitringa, qui paululum in quibus- 
dam circumstantiis etiam Huetium emendaverat.”—“ Eden is a region 
either in Mesopotamia, ornearit. It is to be observed, that this opinion 
of Calvin, which the celebrated Huet has slightly amended, seems to be 
the most true of all. The celebrated Vitringa has demonstrated this ; who 
also, in some circumstances, has slightly amended Huet.”—Robertson’s 
Clavis, p. 177.—Ed. 

1 Circuit. It is observed, that the word surrounds, or “ compasses,” 
conveys, to an English reader, more than is meant by the sacred writer. 
He only intends to say, that the river sweeps round in that direction, so 
as to embrace, by its winding, a part of the region of Hayila. Flezuoso 
cursu alluit.—Johannes Clericus in loco.—Ed. 


124 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, II. 


chapter, Moses relates, that the Ishmaelites dwelt from Ha- 
vila unto Shur, which is contiguous to Egypt, and through 
which the road lies into Assyria. Havila, as one boundary, 
is opposed to Shur as another, and this boundary Moses places 
near Egypt, on the side which lies towards Assyria. Whence 
it follows, that Havila [the other boundary] extends towards 
Susia and Persia. For it is necessary that it should lie below 
Assyria towards the Persian Sea; besides, it is placed at a 
great distance from Egypt ; because Moses enumerates many 
nations which dwelt between these boundaries.1. Then it 
appears that the Nabathzans,? of whom mention is there 
made, were neighbours to the Persians. Every thing which 
Moses asserts respecting gold and precious stones is most 
applicable to this district.* 

The river Gihon still remains to be noticed, which, as 
Moses declares, waters the land of Chus. All interpreters 
translate this word Ethiopia; but the country of the Midian- 
ites, and the conterminous country of Arabia, are included 
under the same name by Moses; for which reason, his wife 
is elsewhere called an Ethiopian woman. Moreover, since 
the lower course of the Euphrates tends toward that region, 
I do not see why it should be deemed absurd, that it there 
receives the name of Gihon. And thus the simple meaning 
of Moses is, that the garden of which Adam was the pos- 
sessor was well watered, the channel of a river passing that 
way, which was afterwards divided into four heads.* 


1 That is, the nations peopled by the twelve sons of Ishmael. See 
Gen. xxv. 13-16.—Ed. 

2 The descendants of Nebajoth, the eldest son of Ishmael. Yet, as 
they inhabited the western side of the great desert of Arabia, which lay 
between them and the Euphrates, they cannot, with much propriety, be 
called neighbours to the Persians.— Ed. 

8 “ There is bdellium and the onyx-stone.” It is a question among 
the learned, whether bdellium is an aromatic gum of great value, or a 
pearl. The latter opinion seems to prevail. Dathe, however, renders 
this word ‘ crystal,” and the next, ‘‘ emerald.”—Ed. 

4 It would be wrong to omit all mention of the work of Adrian Reland 
on this subject ; who devoted to it the most profound learning and diligent 
investigation. An abstract of his description is given in Dr Adam 
Clarke’s Commentary. He places Eden in Armenia, near the sources of 
the Euphrates and Tigris, which flow into the Persian Gulf, the Phasis, 
(Pison,) which empties itself into the Euxine, where Chabala, correspond- 
ing with Havila, is famous for its gold; and the Araxes, (Gihon,) which 


CHAP. II. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 125 


15. And the Lord God took the man. Moses now adds, 
that the earth was given to man, with this condition, that he 
should occupy himself in its cultivation. Whence it follows, 
that men were created to employ themselves in some work, 
and not to lie down in inactivity and idleness. This labour, 
truly, was pleasant, and full of delight, entirely exempt from 
all trouble and weariness; since, however, God ordained 
that man should be exercised in the culture of the ground, 
he condemned, in his person, all indolent repose. Where- 
fore, nothing is more contrary to the order of nature, than to 
consume life in eating, drinking, and sleeping, while in the 
meantimé we propose nothing to ourselves to do. Moses 
adds, that the custody of the garden was given in charge to 
Adam, to show that we possess the things which God has 
committed to our hands, on the condition, that being content 
with a frugal and moderate use of them, we should take care 
of what shall remain. Let him who possesses a field, so par- 
take of its yearly fruits, that he may not suffer the ground 
to be injured by his negligence; but let him endeavour to 
hand it down to posterity as he received it, or even better 
cultivated. Let him so feed on its fruits, that he neither 
dissipates it by luxury,'nor permits to be marred or ruined 
by neglect. Moreover, that this economy, and this diligence, 
with respect to those good things which God has given us 
to enjoy, may flourish among us; let every one regard him- 
self as the steward of God in all things which he possesses. 
Then he will neither conduct himself dissolutely, nor corrupt 
by abuse those things which God requires to be preserved. 


16. And the Lord God commanded. Moses now teaches, 
that man was the governor of the world, with this exception, 
that he should, nevertheless, be subject to God. A law is 
imposed upon him in token of his subjection; for it would 
have made no difference to God, if he had eaten indiscrimi-. 
nately of any fruit he pleased. Therefore, the prohibition ot 


runs into the Caspian. The objection to this locality is, that these rivers 
do not actually meet together ; so that they cannot be said to divide into 
four heads, or principal streams in Eden. The learned reader may see 
Dathe’s Commentary on the Pentateuch, p. 23, note (k.)—Ed. 


tetera. pace, 


126 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. II. 


one tree was a test of obedience. And in this mode, God 
designed that the whole human race should be accustomed 
from the beginning to reverence his Deity; as, doubtless, 
it was necessary that man, adorned and enriched with so 
many excellent gifts, should be held under restraint, lest he 
should break forth into licentiousness. ‘There was, indeed, 
another special reason, to which we have before alluded, lest 
Adam should desire to be wise above measure; but this is to 
be kept in mind as God’s general design, that he would have 
men subject to his authority. Therefore, abstinence from 
the fruit of one tree was a kind of first lesson in obedience, 
that man might know he had a Director and Lord of his 


' life, on whose will he ought to depend, and in whose com- 


mands he ought to acquiesce. And this, truly, is the only 
rule of living well and rationally, that men should exercise 
themselves in obeying God. It seems, however, to some as 
if this did not accord with the judgment of Paul, when he 
teaches, that “the law was not made for the righteous,” (1 
Tim. i. 9.) For if it be so, then, when Adam was yet inno- 
cent and upright, he had no need of a law. But the solution 
is ready. or Paul is not there writing controversially ; but 
from the common practice of life, he declares, that they who 
freely run, do not require to be compelled by the necessity 
of law; as it is said, in the common proverb, that ‘ Good laws 
spring from bad manners.’ In the meantime, he does not 
deny that God, from the beginning, imposed a law upon 
man, for the purpose of maintaining the right due to himself. 
Should any one bring, as an objection, another statement of 
Paul, where he asserts that the “law is the minister of 
death,” (2 Cor. iii. 7,) I answer, it is so accidentally, and 
from the corruption of our nature. But at the time of which 
we speak, a precept was given to man, whence he might 
know that God ruled over him. These minute things, how- 
ever, I lightly pass over. What I have before said, since 
it is of far greater moment, is to be frequently recalled to 
memory, namely, that our life will then be rightly ordered, 
if we obey God, and if his will be the regulator of all our affec- 
tions. 

Of every tree. To the end that Adam might the more 





CHAP. II. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 127 


willingly comply, God commends his own liberality. ‘ Be- 
hold,’ he says, ‘I deliver into thy hand whatever fruits the 
earth may produce, whatever fruits every kind of tree may 
yield: from this immense profusion and variety 1 except only 
one tree. Then, by denouncing punishment, he strikes 
terror, for the purpose of confirming the authority of the 
law. So much the greater, then, is the wickedness of man, 
whom neither that kind commemoration of the gifts of God, 
nor the dread of punishment, was able to retain in his duty. 
But it is asked, what kind of death God means in this 
place? It appears to me, that the definition of this death 
is to be sought from its opposite; we must, I say, remember \ 
from what kind of life man fell. He was, in every respect, \ 
happy ; his li life, therefore, had alike respect to his body and | 
his soul, since in his soul a right judgment and a proper 
government of the affections prevailed, there also life reigned ; 
in his body there was no defect, wherefore he was wholly free \' 
from death, His earthly life truly would have been i er 


oe 


without injury. Death, therefore, is now a terror ‘ us 33 | 
first, because there is a kind of annihilation, as it respects the | 
body; then, because the soul feels the curse of God. We | 
must also see what is the cause of death, namely, alienation | 
from God. ‘Thence it follows, that under the name of death © 
is comprehended all those miseries in which Adam involved 

himself by his defection; for as soon as he revolted from 

God, the fountain of life, he was cast down from his former 

state, in order that he might perceive the life of man without 

God to be wretched and lost, and therefore differing nothing 

from death. Hence the condition of man after his sin is not ) 
improperly called both the privation of life, and death. The 

miseries and evils both of soul and body, with which man is — 
beset so long as he is on earth, are a kind of entrance into © 
death, till death itself entirely iéotha him; for the Scripture | 
oth ealls those dead, who, being oppressed by the 
tyranny of sin and Satan, breathe nothing but their own de- 
struction. Wherefore the question is superfluous, how it was 
that God threatened death to Adam on the day in which he 
should touch the fruit, when he long deferred the punishment ? 


128 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. II. 


For then was Adam consigned to death, and death began its 
reign in him, until supervening grace should bring a remedy. 


18. Jt ts not good that the man should be alone. Moses 
now explains the design of God in creating the woman; 
namely, that there should be human beings on the earth who 
might cultivate mutual society between themselves. Yet a 
doubt may arise whether this design ought to be extended to 
progeny, for the words simply mean that since it was not 
expedient for man to be alone, a wife must be created, who/, 
might be his helper. I, however, take the meaning to be this, 
that God begins, Siaduail at the first step of human society, 
yet designs to include others, each in its proper place. The 
commencement, therefore, involves a general principle, that 
man was formed to be a social animal.? Now, the human 
race could not exist without the woman; and, therefore, in 
the conjunction of human beings, that sacred bond is especially 
conspicuous, by which the husband and the wife are combined 
in one body, and one soul; as nature itself taught Plato, and 
others of the sounder class of philosophers, to speak. But 
although God pronounced, concerning Adam, that it would 
not be profitable for him to be alone, yet I do not restrict the 
declaration to his person alone, but rather regard it as a com- 
mon law of man’s vocation, so that every one ought to receive 
it as said to himself, that solitude is not good, excepting only 
him whom God exempts as by a special privilege. Many 
think that celibacy conduces to their advantage,’ and, 
therefore, abstain from marriage, lest they should be mis- 





| 
i 


L 


erable. Not only have heathen writers defined that to be! 


a happy life which is passed without a wife, but the first 
book of Jerome, against Jovinian, is stuffed with petulant 
reproaches, by which he attempts to render hallowed wed- 


1 “ Non est bonum ut sit Adam solus.” This is a variation from Calvin’s 
text, which has man instead of Adam, as the English version has. The 
word rots stands for both. As a proper name, it means Adam; as an 
appellation, it belongs to the human species; as an adjective, it means red ; 
and, with a slight alteration, it signifies the ground.— Ed. 

9 Principium ergo generale est, conditum esse hominem ut sit sociale 
animal.” 

8**Putant multi suisrationibus conducere cclibatum.”—‘ Plusieurs 
estiment que le celibat—leur est plus profitable.”—French Tr 


CHAP. II. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 129 


lock both hateful and infamous.: To these wicked suggestions 
of Satan let the faithful learn to oppose this declaration of 
God, by which he ordains the conjugal life for man, not to 
his destruction, but to his salvation. 

Twill make him an help. It may be inquired, why this is 
not said in the plural number, Let us make, as before in the 
creation of man. Some suppose that a distinction between the 
two sexes is in this manner marked, and that it is thus shown 
howmuchthe man excelsthewoman. But I am better satisfied 
with an interpretation which, though not altogether contrary, 
is yet different ; namely, since in the person of the man the 
human race had been created, the common dignity of our 
whole nature was without distinction, honoured with one 
eulogy, when it was said, “ Let us make man;” nor was it 
necessary to be repeated in creating the woman, who was 
nothing else than an accession to the man. Certainly, it 
cannot be denied, that the woman also, though in the second 
degree, was created in the image of God; whence it follows, 
that what was said in the creation of the man belongs to the 
female sex. Now, since God assigns the woman as a help to 
the man, he not only prescribes to wives the rule of their voca- 
tion, to instruct them in their duty, but he also pronounces that 
marriage will really prove to men the best support of life. We 
may therefore conclude, that the order of nature implies that 
the woman should be the helper of the man. The vulgar pro- 
verb, indeed, is, that she is a necessary evil; but the voice of 
God is rather to be heard, which declares that woman is given 
as a companion and an associate to the man, to assist him to 
live well. I confess, indeed, that in this corrupt state of man- 
kind, the blessing of God, which is here described, is neither 
perceived nor flourishes; but the cause of the evil must be con- 
sidered, namely, that the order of nature, which God had 
appointed, has been inverted by us. For if the integrity of 
man had remained to this day such as it was from the be- 
ginning, that divine institution would be clearly discerned, and 
the sweetest harmony would reign in marriage; because the 
husband would look up with reverence to God; the woman 
in this would be a faithful assistant to him; and both, with 
one consent, would cultivate a holy, as well as friendly and 

VOL, I. I 


j 


130 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. Il. 


peaceful intercourse. Now, it has happened by our fault, 
and by the corruption of nature, that this happiness of mar- 
riage has, in a great measure, perished, or, at least, is mixed 
and infected with many inconveniences. Hence arise strifes, 
troubles, sorrows, dissensions, and a boundless sea of evils; 
and hence it follows, that men are often disturbed by their 
wives, and suffer through them many discouragements. Still, 
marriage was not capable of being so far vitiated by the ;, 
depravity of men, that the blessing which God has once 
sanctioned by his word should be utterly abolished and 
extinguished. Therefore,amidst many inconveniences of mar- 
riage, which are the fruits of degenerate nature, some residue 
of divine good remains; as in the fire apparently smothered, \| 
some sparks still glitter. On this main point hangs another, 
that women, being instructed in their duty of helping their 
husbands, should study to keep this divinely appointed order. 
It is also the part of men to consider what they owe in return 
to the other half of their kind, for the obligation of both sexes 
is mutual, and on this condition is the woman assigned as a 
help to the man, that he may fill the place of her head and 
leader. One thing more is to be noted, that, when the woman 
is here called the help of the man, no allusion is made to that 
necessity to which we are reduced since the fall of Adam; 
for the woman was ordained to be the man’s helper, even | 
although he had stood in his integrity. But now, since the 
depravity of appetite also requires a remedy, we have from 
God a double benefit: but the latter is accidental. | 
Meet for him. In the Hebrew it is 9335, (Aenegedo,) 
“ as if opposite to,” or “over against him.” 5 (caph) in that 
language is a note of similitude. But although some of the. 
Rabbies think it is here put as an affirmative, yet I take it in 
its general sense, as though it were said that she is a kind of 
counterpart, [dyricroxov, or dyricrgopov;*| for the woman is 
said to be opposite to or over against the man, because she 
responds to him. But the particle of similitude seems to me 
to be added because it is a form of speech taken from com- 


= 1 “ Coram ipso,” before him.—‘ Pour luy assister,” to help him.—Fr. 
rans. 


2 Quod “ex adverso ei” respondet, Lud. de Dieu. His counterpart. 


CHAP. I. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 131 


mon usage.! The Greek translators have faithfully rendered 
the sense, Kar’ airév;? and Jerome, “ Which may be like him,”* 
for Moses intended to note some equality. And hence is 
refuted the error of some, who think that the woman was 
formed only for the sake of propagation, and who restrict 
the word “good,” which had been lately mentioned, to the 
production of offspring. They do not think that a wife was 
personally necessary for Adam, because he was hitherto free 
from lust; as if she had been given to him only for the com- 
panion of his chamber, and not rather that she might be the 
inseparable associate of his life. Wherefore the particle 
5 (caph) is of importance, as intimating that marriage ex- 
tends to all parts and usages of life. The explanation given 
by others, as if it were said, “ Let her be ready to obedience,” 
is cold; for Moses intended to express more, as is manifest 
from what follows. 


19. And out of the ground the Lord God formed, &c.4 This 
is a more ample exposition of the preceding sentence, for he 
says that, of all the animals, when they had been placed in 
order, not one was found which might be conferred upon and 
adapted to Adam; nor was there such affinity of nature, 
that Adam could choose for himself a companion for life out 
of any one species. Nor did this occur through ignorance, 
for each species had passed in review before Adam, and he 
had imposed names upon them, not rashly, but from certain 
knowledge; yet there was no just. proportion between 
him and them. Therefore, unless a wife had been given him 
of the same kind with himself, he would have remained des- 
titute of a suitable and proper help. Moreover, what is here 


* “ Quia sit translatitia loquutio.” 

2 A help according to him. See Septuagint. 

8 “ Adjutorium simile sibi,” a help like himself— Vulgate. Meet for him. 
‘*In whose company he shall take delight ; so the Hebrew phrase, as be- 
Sore him, imports, being as much as answerable to him, every way fitted 
for him, not only in likeness of body, but of mind, disposition, and affec- 
eons which laid the foundation of perpetual familiarity and friendship.”— 

atrick. 

4 “* Formaverat autem Deus,’—*“* God had formed,” plainly referring to 
what had already taken place. The Hebrew language has not the same 
distinction of times in its verbs which is common to more modern 
tongues.— Ed. 


132 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. II. 


said of God’s bringing the animals to Adam! signifies nothing 
else than that he endued them with the disposition to obe- 
dience, so that they would voluntarily offer themselves to 
the man, in order that he, having closely inspected them, 
might distinguish them by appropriate names, agreeing with 
the nature of each. This gentleness towards man would 
have remained also in wild beasts, if Adam, by his defection 
from God, had not lost the authority he had before received. 
But now, from the time in which he began to be rebellious 
against God, he experienced the ferocity of brute animals 
against himself; for some are tamed with difficulty, others al- 
ways remain unsubdued, and some, even of their own accord, 
inspire us with terror by their fierceness. Yet some remains 
of their former subjection continue to the present time, as 
we shall see in the second verse of the ninth chapter. Be- 
sides, it is to be remarked that Moses speaks only of those 
animals which approach the nearest to man, for the fishes 
live as in another world. As to the names which Adam im- 
posed, I do not doubt that each of them was founded on the 
best reason; but their use, with many other good things, 
has become obsolete. 


21. And the Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall, §c. Al- 
though to profane persons this method of forming woman 
may seem ridiculous, and some of these may say that Moses 
is dealing in fables, yet to us the wonderful providence of — 
God here shines forth ; for, to the end that the conjunction 
of the human race might be the more sacred, he purposed 
that both males and females should spring from one and the 
same origin. Therefore he created human nature in the 
person of Adam, and thence formed Eve, that the woman 
should be only a portion of the whole human race. This is 
the import of the words of Moses which we have had before, 
(Chap. i. 28,) “ God created man . . . he made them male 
and female.” In this manner Adam was taught to recognise 
himself in his wife, as in a mirror; and Eve, in her turn, to 
submit herself willingly to her husband, as being taken out 


1 «6 Porro istud adducere Dei.” 


CHAP. Il. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 133 


ofhim. But if the two sexes had proceeded from different 
sources, there would have been occasion either of mutual 
contempt, or envy, or contentions. And against what do 
perverse men here object? ‘The narration does not seem 
credible, since it is at variance with custom.’ As if, indeed, 
such an objection would have more colour than one raised 
against the usual mode of the production of mankind, if the 
latter were not known by use and experience.' But they 
object that either the rib which was taken from Adam had 
been superfluous, or that his body had been mutilated by the 
absence of the rib. To either of these it may be answered, 
that they find out a great absurdity. If, however, we should 
say that the rib out of which he would form another body 
had been prepared previously by the Creator of the world, I 
find nothing in this answer which is not in accordance with 
Divine Providence. Yet I am more in favour of a different 
conjecture, namely, that something was taken from Adam, 
in order that he might embrace, with greater benevolence, a 
part of himself. He lost, therefore, one of his ribs; but, in- 
stead of it, a far richer reward was granted him, since he 
obtained a faithful associate of life; for he now saw him- 
self, who had before been imperfect, rendered complete in 
his wife.2 And in this we see a true resemblance of our 
union with the Son of God; for he became weak that he 
might have members of his body endued with strength. In 
the meantime, it is to be noted, that Adam had been plunged 
in a sleep so profound, that he felt no pain; and further, 
that neither had the rupture been violent, nor was any want 
perceived of the lost rib, because God so filled up the vacuity 
with flesh, that his strength remained unimpaired ; only the 
hardness of bone was removed. Moses also designedly used 
the word duzlt,? to teach us that in the person of the woman 
the human race was at length complete, which had before 
been like a building just begun. Others refer the expression 
to the domestic economy, as if Moses would say that le- 

' « Ex putrido semine quotidie gigni homines.” 

2 “ Quum se integrum vidit in uxore, qui prius tantum dimidius erat.” 

3 “ Kt edificavit Jehova Deus costam quam tulerat ex Adam, in mu- 


lierem.”—And Jehovah God built the rib which he had taken out of Adam 
into a woman. }3%), from 793, fo build. 


134 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, II. 


gitimate family order was then instituted, which does not 
differ widely from the former exposition. 


22. And brought her, Sc. Moses now relates that mar- 
riage was divinely instituted, which is especially useful to 
be known; for since Adam did not take a wife to himself at 
his own will, but received her as offered and appropriated t | 
him by God, the sanctity of marriage hence more clearl 
appears, because we recognise God as its Author. The 
more Satan has endeavoured to dishonour marriage, the more 
should we vindicate it from all reproach and abuse, that it 
may receive its due reverence. ‘Thence it will follow that 
the children of God may embrace a conjugal life with a good 
and tranquil conscience, and husbands and wives may live 
together in chastity and honour. The artifice of Satan in 
attempting the defamation of marriage was twofold: first, that 
by means of the odium attached to it he might introduce the 
pestilential law of celibacy; and, secondly, that married persons 
might indulge themselves in whatever license they pleased. ~ 
Therefore, by showing the dignity of marriage, we must re- 
move superstition, lest it should in the slightest degree hin- 
der the faithful from chastely using the lawful and pure or- 
dinance of God; and further, we must oppose the lascivious- 
ness of the flesh, in order that men may live modestly with 
their wives. But if no other reason influenced us, yet this 
alone ought to be abundantly sufficient, that unless we think 
and speak honourably of marriage, reproach is attached to 
its Author and Patron, for such God is here described as 
being by Moses. 


23. And Adam said, &c. It is demanded whence Adam 
ilerived this knowledge, since he was at that time buried in 
deep sleep. If we say that his quickness of perception was 
then such as to enable him by conjecture to form a judg- 
ment, the solution would be weak. But we ought not to 
doubt that God would make the whole course of the affair 
' manifest to him, either by secret revelation or by his word; 
for it was not from any necessity on God’s part that He bor- 
rowed from man the rib out of which he might form the 


CHAP. II. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 135 


woman; but he designed that they should be more closely 
joined together by this bond, which could not have been 
effected unless he had informed them of the fact. Moses 
does not indeed explain by what means God gave them this 
information ; yet, unless we would make the work of God 
superfluous, we must conclude that its Author revealed both 
the fact itself and the method and design of its accomplish- 
ment. ‘The deep sleep was sent upon Adam, not to hide 
from him the origin of his wife, but to exempt him from 
pain and trouble, until he should receive a compensation so 
excellent for the loss of his rib. 

This is now bone of, §c.' In using the expression BYSN, 
(hae vice,) Adam indicates that something had been want- 
ing to him; asif he had said, Now at length I have ob- 
tained a suitable companion, who is part of the substance 
of my flesh, and in whom I behold, as it were, another self. 
And he gives to his wife a name taken from that of man,’ 
that by this testimony and this mark he might transmit a 
perpetual memorial of the wisdom of God. A deficiency in the 
Latin language has compelled the ancient interpreter to ren- 
der FW, (ishah,) by the word virago. It is, however, to 
be remarked, that the Hebrew term means nothing else than 
the female of the man. ) 


24. Therefore shall a man leave. It is doubted whether 
Moses here introduces God as speaking, or continues the 


1 “ Hac vice os est ex ossibus meis.” ESyan mer, (zot haphaam.) These 
words are rendered in the English version by ‘‘ This now,” which very 
feebly and imperfectly expresses the sense of the original; nor does 
the version of Calvin, *“* At this turn,” give the true emphasis of the 
words. It is perhaps scarcely possible to do so without a paraphrase. 
The two words of the original are both intended to be emphatic. ‘‘ This 
living creature (myx}) which at the present time (foypn, Adc vice) passes 
before me, is the companion which I need, for it is bone of my bones, 
and flesh of my flesh.”—Vide Dathe in loco.—Ed. 

2 ‘* Nomen uxori a viro imponit.” pws, (ishah,) from yrs, (tsh,) which 
is the Hebrew word man with a feminine termination; as if we should 
say, ‘She shall be called manness, because she was taken out of the 
man.” Calvin uses the word virissa ; Dathe, after Le Clerc, the word 
vira ; and though neither of them are strictly classical, yet are they far 
preferable to the term virago in the Vulgate, which Calvin justly rejects, 
and which means a woman of masculine character. The English word 
woman is a contraction of womb-man.—Ed. 


136 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, II. 


discourse of Adam, or, indeed, has added this, in virtue of 
his office as teacher, in his own person.'! The last of these 
is that which I most approve. Therefore, after he has re- 
lated historically what God had done, he also demonstrates 
the end of the divine institution. The sum of the whole is, 
that among the offices pertaining to human society, this is 
the principal, and as it were the most sacred, that a man 
should cleave unto his wife. And he amplifies this by a 
superadded comparison, that the husband ought to prefer 
his wife to his father. But the father is said to be deft not 
because marriage severs sons from their fathers, or dispenses 
with other ties of nature, for in this way God would be acting 
contrary to himself. "While, however, the piety of the son 
towards his father is to be most assiduously cultivated, and 
ought in itself to be deemed inviolable and sacred, yet Moses 
so speaks of marriage as to show that it is less lawful to desert 
a wife than parents. Therefore, they who, for slight causes, 
rashly allow of divorces, violate, in one single particular, all 
the laws of nature, and reduce them to nothing. If we should 
make it a point of conscience not to separate a father from 
his son, it is a still greater wickedness to dissolve the bond 
which God has preferred to all others. 

They shall be one flesh? Although the ancient Latin in- 
terpreter has translated the passage ‘ in one flesh, yet the 
Greek interpreters have expressed it more forcibly : ‘ They 
two shall be znéo one flesh,” and thus Christ cites the place 
in Matthew xix. 5. But though here no mention is made of 
two, yet there is no ambiguity in the sense; for Moses had 
not said that God has assigned many wives, but only one to 
one man; and in the general direction given, he had put the 
wife in the singular number. It remains, therefore, that the 
conjugal bond subsists between two persons only, whence it 
easily appears, that nothing is less accordant with the divine 
institution than polygamy. Now, when Christ, in censuring 
the voluntary divorces of the Jews, adduces as his reason for 
doing it, that ‘it was not so in the beginning,’ (Matth. xix. 5,) 


' See Le Clerc on this verse, who takes the same view as Calvin. 
+ * Erunt in carnem unam.”—‘“ In carne una.”"—Vulgate. Ets caexa 
jeiav.—Sept. 


CHAP, III. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 137 


he certainly commands this institution to be observed as a 
perpetual rule of conduct. To the same point also Malachi 
recalls the Jews of his own time: ‘ Did he not make them 
one from the beginning? and yet the Spirit was abounding 
in him.’ (Mal. ii. 15.) Wherefore, there is no doubt that 
polygamy is a corruption of legitimate marriage. 


25. They were both naked. That the nakedness of men 
should be deemed indecorous and unsightly, while that of 
cattle has nothing disgraceful, seems little to agree with the 
dignity of human nature. We cannot behold a naked man 
without a sense of shame; yet at the sight of an ass, a dog, 
or an ox, no such feeling will be produced. Moreover, every 
one is ashamed of his own nakedness, even though other wit- 
nesses may not be present. Where then is that dignity in 
which we excel? The cause of this sense of shame, to which 
we are now alluding, Moses will show in the next chapter. 
He now esteems it enough to say, that in our uncorrupted 
nature, there was nothing but what was honourable; whence 
it follows, that whatsoever is opprobrious in us, must be im- 
puted to our own fault, since our parents had nothing in them- 
selves which was unbecoming until they were defiled with sin. 


CHAPTER III. 


1. Now the serpent was more 
subtil than any beast of the field 
which the Lord God had made. 
And he said unto the woman, Yea, 
hath God said, Ye shall not eat of 
every tree of the garden ? 

2. And the woman said unto the 
serpent, We may eat of the fruit of 
the trees of the garden : 

3. But of the fruit of the tree 
which is in the midst of the garden, 
God hath said, Ye shall not eat of 
it, neithershallye touch it, lestye die. 

4, And the serpent said unto the 
woman, Ye shall not surely die: 

5. For God doth know that in the 


1. Porro serpens erat callidior 
omni bestia agri, quam fecerat 
Jehova Deus: et dixit admulierem, 
Etiamne dixit Deus, Non comedetis 
ex omni arbore horti ? 


2. Et dixit mulier ad serpentem, 
De fructu arborum horti vescimur. 


3. At de fructu arboris que est 
in medio horti, dixit Deus, Non 
comedetis ex ea, neque contingetis 
eam, ne forte moriamini. 

4. Tunc dixit serpens ad mu- 
lierem, Non moriendo moriemini. 

5. Scit enim Deus quod in die 


' * Spiritus abundans in eo erat.” The word abundans has in English the 


force of superabounding.—Ed. 


je 


138 


day ye eat thereof, then your eyes 
shall be opened; and ye shall be as 
gods, knowing good and evil. 

6. And when the woman saw that 
the tree was good for food, and that 
it was pleasant to the eyes, and a 
tree to be desired to make one wise, 
she took of the fruit thereof, and did 
eat, and gave also unto her husband 
with her; and he did eat. 

7. And the eyes of them both 
were opened, and they knew that 
they were naked; and they sewed 
fig leaves together, and made them- 
selves aprons. 

8. And they heard the voice of 
the Lord God walking in the garden 
in the cool of the day: and Adam 
and his wife hid themselves from 
the presence of the Lord God 
amongst the trees of the garden. 

9. And the Lord God called unto 
Adam, and said unto him, Where 
art thou? 

10. And he said, I heard thy voice 
in the garden, and I was afraid, be- 
cause I was naked; and I hid myself. 

11. And he said, Who told thee 
that thou wast naked? Hast thou 
eaten of the tree, whereof I com- 
— thee that thou shouldst not 
eat 

12. And the man said, The woman 
whom thou gavest to be with me, she 
gave me of the tree, and I did eat. 

13. And the Lord God said unto 
the woman, What is this that thou 
hast done? And the woman said, 
Theserpent beguiled me, and I did eat. 

14. And the Lord God said unto 
the serpent, Because thou hast done 
this, thou art cursed above all cattle, 
and above every beast of the field ; 
upon thy belly shalt thou go, and 
dust shalt thou eat all the days of 
thy life. 

15. And I will put enmity be- 
tween thee and the woman, and 
between thy seed and her seed: it 
shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt 
bruise his heel. 

16. Unto the woman he said, I 
will greatly multiply thy sorrow and 
thy conception: in sorrow thou shalt 
bring forth children ; and thy desire 
shall be to thy husband, and he shall 
rule over thee. 


COMMENTARY UPON 


CHAP. III. 


qua comedetis ex ea, aperientur 
oculi vestri, et eritis sicut dii, 
scientes bonum et malum. 

6. Et vidit mulier quod bona 
esset arbor ad vescendum, et quod 
delectabilis esset oculis, et desidera- 
bilis arbor ad intelligendum : et tu- 
lit de fructu ipsius, et comedit: 
deditque etiam viro suo qui erat 
cum ea, et ipse comedit. 

7. Et aperti sunt oculi amborum 
ipsorum, et cognoverunt quod nudi 
essent : ef consuerunt folia ficus, 
feceruntque sibi cingula. 


8. Audierunt autem vocem Je- 
hove Dei deambulantis per hor- 
tum ad auram diei: et abscondit 
se Adam et uxor ejus a facie 
Jehove Dei, in medio arborum 
horti. 

9. Vocavitque Jehova Deus 
Adam, et dixit ei, Ubi es tu? 


10. Et ait, Vocem tuam audivi 
in horto, et timui, quia nudus eram, 
et abscondi me. 

11. Tune dixit, Quis indicavit 
tibi quod nudus esses? nonne ex 
ipsa arbore de qua praceperam 
tibi ne comederes, comedisti ? 


12. Et ait Adam, Mulier quam 
dedisti ut esset mecum, ipsa dedit 
mihi de arbore, et comedi. 

13. Dixitque Jehova Deus ad 
mulierem, Cur hoc fecisti? Et ait 
mulier, Serpens seduxit me, et co- 
medi. 

14. Et dixit Jehova ad serpen- 
tem, Quia fecisti hoc, maledictus 
eris pre omni animali, et pre omni 
bestia agri: super ventrem tuum 
gradieris, et pulverem comedes 
omnibus diebus vite tuze. 


15. Et inimicitias ponam inter 
te et inter mulierem, et inter semen 
tuum et inter semen ejus: ipsum 
vulnerabit te in capite, et tu vul- 
nerabis ipsum in calcaneo. 

16. Ad mulierem dixit, Multipli- 
cando multiplicabo dolorem tuum, 
et conceptum tuum: cum dolore 
paries filios, et ad virum tuum 
erit desiderium tuum, ipseque do- 
minabitur tibi. 


CHAP. Ill. 


17. And unto Adam he said, Be- 
cause thou hast hearkened unto the 
voice of thy wife, and hast eaten of 
the tree, of which I commanded thee, 
saying, Thou shalt not eat of it: 
cursed is the ground for thy sake ; 
in sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the 
days of thy life : 

18. Thorns also and thistles shall 
it bring forth to thee; and thou shalt 
eat the herb of the field. 

19. In the sweat of thy face shalt 
thou eat bread, till thou return unto 
the ground ; for out of it wast thou 
taken: for dust thou art, and unto 
dust shalt thou return. 

20. And Adam called his wife’s 
name Eve; because she was the 
mother of all living. 

21. Unto Adam also and to his 
wife did the Lord God make coats 
of skins, and clothed them. 

22. And the Lord God said, 
Behold, the man is become as one 
of us, to know good and evil: and 
now, lest he put forth his hand, and 
take also of the tree of life, and eat, 
and live for ever : 


' 23. Therefore the Lord God sent 
him forth from the garden of Eden, 
to till the ground from whence he 
was taken. 

24. So he drove out the man; and 
he placed at the east of the garden of 
Eden cherubims, and a flaming sword 
which turned every way, to keep the 
way of the tree of life. 


1. Now the serpent was more subtil. 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


139 


17. Adz vero ait, Quia parnisti 
voci uxoris tux, et comedisti ex 
arbore de qua preceperam tibi, 
dicens, Non comedes ex ea: ma- 
ledicta terra propter te: in labore 
comedes eam cunctis diebus vite 
tue. 


18. Et spinam et tribulum ger- 

minabit tibi, et comedes herbam 
agri. 
19. Insudore vultus tui vesceris 
pane, donec revertaris in terram : 
quia ex easumptus es: nam pulvis 
es, et in pulverem reverteris. 


20. Et vocavit Adam nomen ux- 
oris sue Hava, quia ipsa est mater 
omnis viventis. 

21. Fecitque Jehova Deus Adz 
et uxori ejus tunicas pelliceas, et 
induit eos. 

22. Tunc dixit Jehova Deus, 
Ecce, Adam factus est tanquam 
unus ex nobis, sciendo bonum et 
malum : nune autem ne forte mit- 
tat manum suam, et accipiat etiam 
de arbore vite, et comedat, et 
vivat in seculum. 

23. Et emisit eum Jehova de 
horto Heden, ad colendum terram 
ex qua sumptus fuerat. 


24. Et ejecit Adam, et collocavit 
ab Oriente horti Heden cherubim, 
et laminam gladii versatilis, ad 
custodiendum viam arboris vite. 


In this chapter, Moses 


explains, that man, after he had been deceived by Satan, 
revolted from his Maker, became entirely changed, and so 
degenerate, that the image of God, in which he had been 
formed, was obliterated. He then declares, that the whole 
world, which had been created for the sake of man, fell to- 
gether with him from its primary original; and that, in this 
way, much of its native excellence was destroyed. But here 
many and arduous questions arise. For when Moses says 
that the serpent was crafty beyond all other animals, he 
seems to intimate, that it had been induced to deceive man, 


140 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, III. 


not by the instigation of Satan, but by its own malignity. I 
answer, that the innate subtlety of the serpent did not pre- 
vent Satan from making use of the animal for the purpose of 
effecting the destruction of man. For since he required an 
instrument, he chose from among animals that which he saw 
would be most suitable for him: finally, he carefully contrived 
the method by which the snares he was preparing might the || 
more easily take the mindof Eve bysurprise. Hitherto, he had 
held no communication with men; he, therefore, clothed him- 
self with the person of an animal, under which he might open 
for himself the way of access. Yet it is not agreed among in- 
terpreters in what sense the serpent is said to be BY, (aroom, 
subtle,) by which word the Hebrews designate the prudent as 
well as the crafty. Some, therefore, would take it in a good, 
others in a bad sense. I think, however, Moses does not so 
much point out a fault as attribute praise to nature, because God 
had endued this beast with such singular skill, as rendered it 
acute and quick-sighted beyond all others. But Satan per- 
verted to his own deceitful purposes the gift which had been 
divinely imparted to the serpent. Some captiously cavil, that 
more acuteness is now found in many other animals. To 
whom I answer, that there would be nothing absurd in say- 
ing, that the gift which had proved so destructive to the 
human race has been withdrawn from the serpent: just, as 
we shall hereafter see, other punishments were also inflicted 
upon it. Yet, in this description, writers on natural history 
do not materially differ from Moses, and experience gives the 
best answer to the objection; for the Lord does not in vain 
command his own disciples to be ‘ prudent as serpents,’ 
(Matth. x. 16.) But it appears, perhaps, scarcely consonant 
with reason, that the serpent only should be here brought 
forward, all mention of Satan being suppressed. I acknow- 
ledge, indeed, that from this place alone nothing more can be 
collected than that men were deceived by the serpent. But 
the testimonies of Scripture are sufficiently numerous, in 
which it is plainly asserted that the serpent was only the 
mouth of the devil; for not the serpent but the devil is de- 
clared to be ‘ the father of lies, the fabricator of imposture, 
and the author of death. The question, however, is not yet 


« 


CHAP. III. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 141 


solved, why Moses has kept back the name of Satan. I 
willingly subscribe to the opinion of those who maintain 
that the Holy Spirit then purposely used obscure figures, 
because it was fitting that full and clear light should be re- 
served for the kingdom of Christ. In the meantime, the 
prophets prove that they were well acquainted with the 
meaning of Moses, when, in different places, they cast the 
blame of our ruin upon the devil. We have elsewhere said, 
that Moses, by a homely and uncultivated style, accommo- 
dates what he delivers to the capacity of the people; and for 
the best reason ; for not only had he to instruct an untaught 
race of men, but the existing age of the Church was so puerile, 
that it was unable to receive any higher instruction. There 
is, therefore, nothing absurd in the supposition, that they, 
whom, for the time, we know and confess to have been but as 
infants, were fed with milk. Or (ifanother comparison be more 
acceptable) Moses is by no means to be blamed, if he, con- 
sidermg the office of schoolmaster as imposed upon him, 
insists on the rudiments suitable to children. They who 
have an aversion to this simplicity, must of necessity con- 
demn the whole economy of God in governing the Church. 
This, however, may suffice us, that the Lord, by the secret 
illumination of his Spirit, supplied whatever was wanting ° 
of clearness in outward expressions ; as appears plainly from 
the prophets, who saw Satan to be the real enemy of the human 
race, the contriver of all evils, furnished with every kind of 
fraud and villany to injure and destroy. ‘Therefore, though 
the impious make a noise, there is nothing justly to offend 
us in this mode of speaking by which Moses describes Satan, 
the prince of iniquity, under the person of his servant and 
instrument, at the time when Christ, the Head of the Church, 
and the Sun of Righteousness, had not yet openly shone forth. 
Add to this, the baseness of human ingratitude is more clearly 
hence perceived, that when Adam and Eve knew that all ani- 
mals were given, by the hand of God, into subjection to them, 
they yet suffered themselves to be led away by one of their 
own slaves into rebellion against God. As often as they 
beheld any one of the animals which were in the world, they 
ought to have been reminded both of the supreme authority, 


142 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. Ill. - 


and of the singular goodness of God; but, on the contrary, 
when they saw the serpent an apostate from his Creator, not 
only did they neglect to punish it, but, in violation of all 
lawful order, they subjected and devoted themselves to it, as 
participators in the same apostacy. What can be imagined 
more dishonourable than this extreme depravity? Thus, I 
understand the name of the serpent, not allegorically, as some 
foolishly do, but in its genuine sense. 

Many persons are surprised that Moses simply, and as if 
abruptly, relates that men have fallen by the impulse of 
Satan into eternal destruction, and yet never by a single 
word explains how the tempter himself had revolted from 
God. And hence it has arisen, that fanatical men have 
dreamed that Satan was created evil and wicked as he is 
here described. But the revolt of Satan is proved by other 
passages of Scripture; and it is an impious madness to 
“ascribe to God the creation of any evil and corrupt nature; 
for when he had completed the world, he himself gave this 
testimony to all his works, that they were “very good.” 
Wherefore, without controversy, we must conclude, that 
the principle of evil with which Satan was endued was not 
from nature, but from defection; because he had departed 
from God, the fountain of justice and of all rectitude. But 
Moses here passes over Satan’s fall, because his object is 
briefly to narrate the corruption of human nature; to teach 
us that Adam was not created to those multiplied miseries 
under which all his posterity suffer, but that he fell into 
them by his own fault. In. reflecting on the number and 
nature of those evils to which they are obnoxious, men will 
often be unable to restrain themselves from raging and mur- 
muring against God, whom they rashly censure for the just 
punishment of their sin. These are their well-known com- 
plaints, that God has acted more mercifully to swine and dogs 
than to them. Whence is this, but that they do not refer 
the miserable and ruined state, under which we languish, to 
the sin of Adam as they ought? But what is far worse, they 
fling back upon God the charge of being the cause of all the 
inward vices of the mind, (such as its horrible blindness, con- 
tumacy against God, wicked desires, and violent propensities to 








CHAP, Ill. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 143 


evil;) as if the whole perverseness of our disposition had not 
beenadventitious.! The design, therefore, of Moses wastoshow, 
in a few words, how greatly our present condition differs from 
our first original, in order that we may learn, with humble 
confession of our fault, to bewail our evils. We ought not 
then to be surprised, that, while intent on the history he pur- 
posed to relate, he does not discuss every topic which may 
be desired by any person whatever. 

We must now enter on that question by which vain and 
inconstant minds are greatly agitated; namely, Why God 
permitted Adam to be tempted, seeing that the sad result 
was by no means hidden from him? { That He now relaxes 
Satan’s reins, to allow him to tempt us to sin, we ascribe to 
judgment and to yengeance, in consequence of man’s aliena- 
tion from himself} but there was not the same reason for 
doing so when human nature was yet pure and upright. 
God, therefore,’ permitted Satan to tempt man, who was 
conformed to His own image, and not yet implicated-in any 
crime, haying, moreover, on this occasion, allowed Satan the | 
use of an animal ® which otherwise would never have obeyed — 
him; and what else was this, than to arm an enemy for 
the destruction of man? ‘This seems to have been the 
ground on which the Manichzans maintained the exist- 
ence of two principles.‘ Therefore, they have imagined 
that Satan, not being in subjection to God, laid snares 
for man in opposition to the divine will, and was superior 
not to man only, but also to God himself. Thus, for 


1 “Quasi non accidentalis esset.” Asif it had not. been accidental, where 
the word accidental is used in the sense of the schoolmen and logicians, as 
opposed to the word essential.—kd. 

2 The reader will observe that Calvin is here putting forward the argu- 

ment of an objector.— Ed. 

5 ** Mesme il luy a preste le serpent.”—French Tr. 

4 On the intricate subject of Manichzism, and its various cognate heresies, 
the reader may refer to the Bampton Lectures of the late Dr Burton, 
who, with incredible erudition and industry, has searched the records of 
ancient and modern times, and has examined, with the greatest candour, 
the various conflicting sentiments which have been entertained by learned 
men in reference to this question. The fundamental error of Manes seems 
to have been, that, with nearly all the Oriental philosophers of antiquity, 
he held the necessary and independent existence of matter, which, in his 
view, was the origin of all evil.—See Burton's Bampton Sona p- 294 | 
and Lardner’s Credibility, Sc. part 2, c. 63. 


144 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, III. 


the sake of avoiding what they dreaded as an absurdity, 
they have fallen into execrable prodigies of error; such as, 
that there are two Gods, and not one sole Creator of the world, 
and that the first God has been overcome by his antagonist. 
All, however, who think piously and reverently concerning 
the power of God, acknowledge that the evil did not take 


“ place except by his permission. For, in the first place, it must 


be conceded, that God was not in ignorance of the event 
which was about to occur; and then, that he could have 
prevented it, had he seen fit to do so. But in speaking of 
permission, I understand that he had appointed whatever he 
wished to be done. Here, indeed, a difference arises on the 
part of many, who suppose Adam to have been so left to his 
own free will, that God would not have him fall. They take 
for granted, what I allow them, that nothing is less probable 
than that God should be regarded as the cause of sin, which 
he has avenged with so many and such severe penalties. 
When I say, however, that Adam did not fall without the 
ordination and will of God, I do not so take it as if sin had 
ever been pleasing to Him, or as if he simply wished that the 
precept which he had given should be violated. So far as the 
fall of Adam was the subversion of equity, and of well-con- 
stituted order, so far as it was contumacy against the Divine 
Law-giver, and the transgression of righteousness, certainly 
it was against the will of God; yet none of these things 
render it impossible that, for a certain cause, although to us 
“unknown, he might will the fall of man. It offends the ears 
of some, when it is said God willed this fall; but what else, 
I pray, is the permission of Him, who has the power of pre- 
venting, and in whose hand the whole matter is placed, but 
his will? I wish that men would rather suffer themselves 
to be judged by God, than that, with profane temerity, they 
should pass judgment upon him; but this is the arrogance 
of the flesh to subject God to its own test. I hold it asa set- 
tled axiom, that nothing is more unsuitable to the character 
of God than for us to say that man was created by Him for 
the purpose of being placed in a condition of suspense and 
doubt; wherefore I conclude, that, as it became the Creator, 
he had before determined with himself what should be man’s 


CHAP. III. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 145 


future condition. Hence the unskilful rashly infer, that man 
did not sin by free choice. For he himself perceives, being 
convicted by the testimony of his own conscience, that he 
has been too free in smning. Whether he sinned by necessity, 
or by contingency, is another question ; respecting which see 
the InstiruTION,! and the treatise on PREDESTINATION. 
And he said unto the woman. 'The impious assail this passage 
with their sneers, because Moses ascribes eloquence to an ani- 
mal which only faintly hisses with its forked tongue. And 
first they ask, at what time animals began to be mute, if they 
then had a distinct language, and one common to ourselves 
and them. The answer is ready ; the serpent was not eloquent 
by nature, but when Satan, by divine permission, procured it 
as a fit instrument for his use, he uttered words also by its 
tongue, which God himself permitted. Nor do I doubt that 
Eve perceived it to be extraordinary, and on that account re- » 
ceived with the greater avidity what she admired. Now, ifmen 
decide that whatever is unwonted must be fabulous, God could 
work nomiracle. Here God, by accomplishing a work above 
the ordinary course of nature, constrains us to admire his power. 
Ifthen, under this very pretext, we ridicule the power of God, 
because it is not familiar to us, are we not excessively pre- 
posterous? Besides, if it seems incredible that beasts should 
speak at the command of God, how has man the power of 
speech, but because God has formed his tongue? The Gos- 
pel declares, that voices were uttered in the air, without a 
tongue, to illustrate the glory of Christ; this is less probable 
to carnal reason, than that speech should be elicited from the’ 
mouth of brute animals. What then can the petulance of 
impious men find here deserving of their invective? In 
short, whosoever holds that God in heaven is the Ruler of 
the world, will not deny his power over the creatures, so that 
he can teach brute animals to speak when he pleases, just as 
he sometimes renders eloquent men speechless. Moreover, 
the craftiness of Satan betrays itself in this, that he does not 
directly assail the man, but approaches him, as through a Il 
mine, in the person of his wife. This insidious method of 


< 


’ Calvin’s Institutes, Book III. c. 1. Vol. ii. p. 73, of the Calvin 
Society’s edition. 


VOL. Is K 


146 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, III. 


attack is more than sufficiently known to us at the present 
day, and I wish we might learn prudently to guard ourselves 
against it. For he warily insinuates himself at that point at 
which he sees us to be the least fortified, that he may not be 
perceived till he should have penetrated where he wished. 
The woman does not flee from converse with the serpent, 
because hitherto no dissension had existed; she, therefore, 
accounted it simply as a domestic animal. 

The question occurs, what had impelled Satan to contrive 
the destruction of man? Curious sophists have feigned that 
he burned with envy, when he foresaw that the Son of God 
was to be clothed in human flesh; but the speculation is frivo- 
lous. For since the Son of God was made man in order 
to restore us, who were already lost, from our miserable over- 
throw, how could that. be foreseen which would never have 
happened unless man had sinned? If there be room for con- 
jectures, it is more probable that he was driven by a kind of 
fury, (as the desperate are wont to be,) to hurry man away 
with himself into a participation of eternal ruin. But it be- 
comes us to be content with this single reason, that since he 
was the adversary of God, he attempted to subvert the order 
established by Him, and, because he could not drag God from 
his throne, he assailed man, in whom His image shone. He 
knew that with the ruin of man the most dreadful confusion 
would be produced in the whole world, as indeed it happened, 
and therefore he endeavoured, in the person of man, to obscure 
_ the glory of God.’ Rejecting, therefore, all vain figments, 

‘let us hold fast this doctrine, which is both simple and solid. 

Yea, hath God said? This sentence is variously expounded 
and even distorted, partly because it is in itself obscure, and 
partly because of the ambiguous import of the Hebrew particle. 
The expression ’5 FN, (aph k7,) sometimes signifies “although” 
or “ indeed,” and sometimes, “ how much more.”? David 


* “ Being under a final and irreversible doom, he looked on God as an 
irreconcileable enemy ; and, not being able to injure his essence, he struck 
at his image. He singled out Adam as the mark of his malice, that by 
seducing him from his duty, he might defeat God’s design, which was to 
be honoured by man’s obedience, and so obscure his glory, as if he had 
made man in vain.”—Bates’ Harmony of the Divine Attributes. 

2°3 5s, “‘ Hebreis-tantundem valet interdum ac Latinis, Etiamsi, vel 
enimvero; interdum, quanto magis.” 


CHAP. III. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 147 


Kimchi takes it in this last sense, and thinks that many 
words had passed between them on both sides, before the 
serpent descended to this point; namely, that having ca- 
lumniated God on other accounts, he at length thus con- 
cludes, Hence it much more appears how envious and malignant * 
he is towards you, because he has interdicted you from the 
tree of the knowledge of good and evil. But this exposition 
is not only forced, it is proved to be false by the reply of Eve. 
More correct is the explanation of the Chaldean paraphrast, 
‘Is it true that God has forbidden ?’ &c.' Again, to some this 
appears a simple, to others an zronical interrogation. It would 
be a simple interrogation, if it injected a doubt in the follow- 
ing manner: ‘ Can it be, that God should forbid the eating 
of any tree whatever?’ but it would be ironical, if used fur 
the purpose of dissipating vain fear; as, ‘ It greatly concerns 
God, indeed, whether you eat of the tree or not! It is, there- 
fore, ridiculous that you should think it to be forbidden you!’ 
I subscribe the more freely to the former opinion, because 
there is greater probability that Satan, in order to deceive 
more covertly, would gradually proceed with cautious pre- ~~ 
yarications to lead the woman to a contempt of the divine 
precept. There are some who suppose that Satan expressly 
denies the word which our first parents had heard, to have 
been the word of God. Others think, (with whom I rather 
agree,) that, under the pretext of inquiring into the cause, he 
would indirectly weaken their confidence in the word. And 
certainly the old interpreter has translated the expression, 
‘ Why has God said ?’? which, although I do not altogether 
approve, yet I have no doubt that the serpent urges the 
woman to seek out the cause, since otherwise he would not\\ — 
have been able to draw away her mind from God. Very 
dangerous is the temptation, when it is suggested to us, that 
God is not to be obeyed, except so far as the reason of his 


1 See the Chaldee paraphrase in Walton’s Polyglott. The Latin trans- 
lation is as follows: ‘‘ Verumne est quod dixit Deus, non comedatis ex 
omni arbore horti? Gesenius gives the same explanation: ‘* Sollte denn 
das wahr seyn, dass Gott gesagt hatte?” ‘‘ Can it be true, that God 
has said?” &¢.—Ed. 

2 ‘* Cur precepit vobis Deus,” &«.— Vulgate. 


148 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. Iil. 


command is apparent. The true rule of obedience is, that 
we being content with a bare command, should persuade our- 
selves that whatever he enjoins is just and right. But who- 
soever desires to be wise beyond measure, him will Satan, 
seeing he has cast off all reverence for God, immediately 
precipitate into open rebellion. As it respects grammatical 
construction, I think the expression ought to be translated, 
‘ Hath God even said?’ or, ‘Is it so that God hath said ?’? 
Yet the artifice of Satan is to be noticed, for he wished to 
inject into the woman a doubt which might induce her to 
believe that not to be the word of God, for which a plausible 
reason did not manifestly appear. 

Of every tree of the garden. Commentators offer a double 
interpretation of these words. The former supposes Satan, 
for the sake of increasing envy, to insinuate that all the trees 
had been forbidden. “Has God indeed enjoined that you 
should not dare to touch any tree?” The other interpreta- 
tion, however, is, “‘ Have you not then the liberty granted 
you of eating promiscuously from whatever tree you please ?” 
The former more accords with the disposition of the devil, 
who would malignantly amplify the prohibition, and seems 
to be sanctioned by Eve’s reply. For when she says, We 
do eat of all, one only excepted, she seems to repel the 
calumny concerning a general prohibition. But because the 
latter sense of the passage, which suggests the question con- 
cerning the simple and bare prohibition of God, was more 
apt to deceive, it is more credible that Satan, with his accus- 
tomed guile, should have begun his temptation from this 
point, ‘Is it possible for God to be unwilling that you 
should gather the fruit of any tree whatever? The answer 
of the woman, that only one tree was forbidden, she means 
to be a defence of the command ; as if she would deny that 
it ought to seem harsh or burdensome, since God had only 
excepted one single tree out of so great an abundance and 
variety as he had granted to them. Thus, in these words 
there will be a concession, that one tree was indeed forbid- 
den; then, the refutation of a calumny, because it is not 


1 “ Vertendum censeo, Etiamne, vel Itane? ” 


q 


_ 


CHAP. III. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 149 


arduous or difficult to abstain from one tree, when others 
without number are supplied, of which the use is permitted 
It was impossible for Eve more prudently or more coura- 
geously to repel the assault of Satan, than by objecting 
against him, that she and her husband had been so bounti- 
fully dealt with by the Lord, that the advantages granted 
to them were abundantly sufficient, for she intimates that 
they would be most ungrateful if, instead of being content 


with such affluence, they should desire more than was law-_ 


ful. When she says, God had forbidden them to eat or to 
touch, some suppose the second word to be added for the 
purpose of charging God with too great severity, because he 
prohibited them even from the fouch.1 But I rather under- 
stand that she hitherto remained in obedience, and expressed 
her pious disposition by anxiously observing the precept of 
God; only, in proclaiming the punishment, she begins to 
give way, by inserting the adverb “ perhaps,”? when God 
has certainly pronounced, “ Ye shall die the death.’* For 
although with the Hebrews }5 (pen) does not always imply 
doubt, yet, since it is generally taken in this sense, I will- 
ingly embrace the opinion that the woman was beginning 
to waver. Certainly, she had not death so immediately be- 
fore her eyes, should she become disobedient to God, as she 
ought to have had. She clearly proves that her perception 
of the true danger of death was distant and cold. 


4, And the serpent said unto the woman. Satan now springs 
more boldly forward; and because he sees a breach open 
before him, he breaks through in a direct assault, for he is 
never wont to engage in open war until we voluntarily ex- 
pose ourselves to him, naked and unarmed. He cautiously 
approaches us at first with blandishments ; but when he has 
stolen in upon us, he dares to exalt himself petulantly and 
with proud confidence against God; just as he now, seizing 
upon Eve’s doubt, penetrates further, that he may turn it 


1“ Neither shall ye touch it.” ‘‘ The woman herself adds this, which 
certainly in the divine law we are not permitted to do.”—-Peter Martyr's 
Commentary on Grenesis. 

2 “* Ne forte moriamini,” lest perhaps ye may die. 

3“ Moriendo moriemini.” nyon ny. (Mot tamoot.) 


150 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. ITI. 


into a direct negative. It behoves us to be instructed, by 
such examples, to beware of his snares, and, by making 
timely resistance, to keep him far from us, that nearer access 
may not be permitted to him. He now, therefore, does not 
ask doubtingly, as before, whether or not the command of 
God, which he opposes, be true, but openly accuses God of 
falsehood, for he asserts that the word by which death was 
denounced is false and delusive. Fatal temptation! when, 
while God is threatening us with death, we not only securely 
sleep, but hold God himself in derision ! 


5. For God doth know. There are those who think that 
God is here craftily praised by Satan, as if He never would 
prohibit men from the use of wholesome fruit. But they 
manifestly contradict themselves, for they at the same time 
confess that in the preceding member of the sentence he had 
already declared God to be unworthy of confidence, as one 
who had lied. Others suppose that he charges God with 
malignity and envy, as wishing to deprive man of his highest 
perfection; and this opinion is more probable than the other. 
Nevertheless, (according to my judgment,) Satan attempts 
to prove what he had recently asserted, reasoning, however, 
from contraries :! God, he says, has interdicted to you the 
tree, that he may not be compelled to admit you to the par- 
ticipation of his glory ; therefore, the fear of punishment is 
quite needless. In short, he denies that a fruit which is use- 
ful and salutary can be injurious. When he says, “ God 
doth know,” he censures God as being moved by jealousy, 
and as having given the command concerning the tree, for 
the purpose of keeping man in an inferior rank. 

Ye shall be as gods. Some translate it, ‘Ye shall be like 
angels. It might even be rendered in the singular number, 


t ¢¢ Sumpta 4 contraria ratione.” 

The meaning of the passage seems to be this: Satan had first said in 
plain terms, ‘‘ Ye shall not surely die; ” and then, to confirm his position, 
had argued that, supposing God had forbidden the tree, he must have done 
it out of envy, lest he should be compelled to raise them to an equality 
with himself, and therefore on no possible supposition had they any ground 
to fear; for they had only to eat in order to be beyond the reach of his 
vengeance.—Ed. 


yf 


CHAP. Ill. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 151 


‘Ye shall be as God’ Ihave no doubt that Satan pro- 
mises them divinity; as if he had said, For no other reason 
does God defraud you of the tree of knowledge, than be- 
cause he fears to have you as companions. Moreover, it is 
not without some show of reason that he makes the Divine 
glory, or equality with God, to consist in the perfect know- 
ledge of good and evil; but it is a mere pretence, for the 
purpose of ensnaring the miserable woman. Because the de- 
sire of knowledge is naturally inherent in all, happiness is 
supposed to be placed in it; but Eve erred in not regulating 
the measure of her knowledge by the will of God. And we all 
daily suffer under the same disease, because we desire to know 
more than is right, and more than God allows; whereas the 
principal point of wisdom is a well-regulated sobriety in 
obedience to God. 


6. And when the woman saw. This impure look of Eve, 
infected with the poison of concupiscence, was both the mes- 


senger and the witness of an impure heart. She could pre- — 


viously behold the tree with such sincerity, that no desire to 
eat of it affected her mind; for the faith she had in the word 
of God was the best guardian of her heart, and of all her 
senses. But n now, after the heart had declined from faith, and 


from obedience to the word, she corrupted both herself ahi all- 


her senses, and depravity was diffused through all parts of her 
soul as well as her body. It is, therefore, a sign of impious 
defection, that the woman now judges the tree to be good for 
food, eagerly delights herself in beholding it, and persuades 
herself that it is desirable for the sake of acquiring wisdom ; 
whereas before she had passed by it ahundred times with an un- 
movedand tranquil look. Fornow, having shaken off the bridle, 
her mind wanders dissolutely and intemperately, drawing the 
body with it to the same licentiousness. The word )'5W77, 
(lehashil,) admits of two explanations: That the tree was 
desirable either to be looked upon, or to impart prudence. I 
prefer the latter sense, as better corresponding with the 
temptation. 

And gave also unto her husband with her. From these 
words, some conjecture that Adam was present when his wife 


aay 


152 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. III. 


was tempted and persuaded by the serpent, which is by no 
means credible. Yet it might be that he soon joined her, 
and that, even before the woman tasted the fruit of the tree, 
she related the conversation held with the serpent, and en- 
tangled him with the same fallacies by which she herself had 
been deceived. Others refer the particle My, (émmah,) 
“with her,” to the conjugal bond, which may be received. 
But because Moses simply relates that he ate the fruit taken 
from the hands of his wife, the opinion has been commonly 
received, that he was rather captivated with her allurements 
than persuaded by Satan’s impostures.t’ For this purpose 
the declaration of Paul is adduced, ‘ Adam was not deceived, 
but the woman.’ (1 Tim.1i. 14.) But Paul in that place, as he 
is teaching that the origin of evil was from the woman, only 
speaks comparatively. Indeed, it was not only for the sake 
of complying with the wishes of his wife, that he transgressed 
the law laid down for him; but being drawn by her into 
fatal ambition, he became partaker of the same defection with 
her. And truly Paul elsewhere states that sin came not by 
the woman, but by Adam himself, (Rom. v. 12.) Then, the 
reproof which soon afterwards follows, ‘ Behold, Adam is as 
one of us,’ clearly proves that he also foolishly coveted more 
than was lawful, and gave greater credit to the flatteries of 
the devil than to the sacred word of God. 

It isnow asked, What was the sin of both of them? The 
opinion of some of the ancients, that they were allured by 
intemperance of appetite, is puerile. Forwhen there was such 
an abundance of the choicest fruits, what daintiness could 
there be about one particular kind? Augustine istmore cor- 
’ rect, who says, that pride was the beginning of all evils, and 
that by pride the human race was ruined. Yet a fuller de- 
finition of the sin may be drawn from the kind of temptation 
which Moses describes. Yor first the woman is led away 
from the word of God by the wiles of Satan, through unbelief.” 


- 


1 So our great Poet :— 
He scrupled not to eat 
Against his better knowledge, not deceived, 
But fondly overcome with female charm. 
Paradise Lost, Book IX. 
2 *¢ Per infidelitatem.” 











CHAP. III. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 153 


Wherefore, the commencement of the ruin by which the human 
race was overthrown was a defection from the command of 
God. But observe, that men then revolted from God, when, 
having forsaken his word, they lent their ears to the falsehoods 
of Satan. Hence we infer, that God will be seen and adored 
in his word; and, therefore, that all reverence for him is shaken 
off when his word is despised. A doctrine most useful to be 
known, for the word of God obtains its due honour only with 
few, so that they who rush onward with impunity, in con- 
tempt of this word, yet’ arrogate to themselves a chief rank 
among the worshippers of God. But as God does not mani- 
fest himself to men otherwise than through the word, so neither 
is his majesty maintained, nor does his worship remain secure 
among us any longer than while we obey his word. There- 
fore, unbelief was the root of defection; just as faith alone 
unites us to God. Hence flowed ambition and pride, so that 
the woman first, and then her husband, desired to exalt them- 
selves against God. For truly they did exalt themselves 
against God, when, honour having been divinely conferred 
upon them, they, not contented with such excellence, desired 
to know more than was lawful, in order that they might be- 
come equal with God. Here also monstrous ingratitude 
betrays itself. They had been made in the likeness of God; 
but this seems a small thing unless equality be added. Now, 
it is not to be endured that designing and wicked men should 
labour in vain, as well as absurdly, to extenuate the sin of 
Adam and his wife. For apostacy is no light offence, but a 
detestable wickedness, by which man withdraws himself from 
the authority of his Creator, yea, even rejects and denies him. 
Besides, it was not simple apostacy, but combined with atro- 
cious contumelies and reproaches against God himself. / Satan 
accuses God of falsehood, of envy, and of malignity, and our 
first parents subscribe to a calumny thus vile and execrable.! 
At length, having despised the command of God, they not 
only indulge their own lust, but enslave themselves to the 
devil. If any one prefers a shorter explanation, we may say 
unbelief has opened the door to ambition, but ambition has 
proved the parent of rebellion, to the end that men, having 
cast aside the fear of God, might shake off his yoke. On this 


154 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. III. 


account, Paul teaches us, that by the disobedience of Adam 
sin entered into the world. Let us imagine that there was 
nothing worse than the transgression of the command; we 
shall not even thus have succeeded far in extenuating the 
fault of Adam. . God, having both made him free in every- 
thing, and appointed him as king of the world, chose to put 
his obedience to the proof, in requiring abstinence from one 
tree alone. This condition did not please him. Perverse 
declaimers may plead in excuse, that the woman was allured 
by the beauty of the tree, and the man ensnared by the 
blandishments of Eve. Yet the milder the authority of 
God, the less excusable was their perverseness in rejecting 
it. But we must search more deeply for the origin and 
cause of sin. For never would they have dared to resist 
God, unless they had first been incredulous of his word. 
And nothing allured them to covet the fruit but mad ambition. 
So long as they, firmly believing in God’s word, freely suffered 
themselves to be governed by Him, they had serene and duly 
regulated affections. or, indeed, their best restraint was the 
thought, which entirely occupied their minds, that God is just, 
that nothing is better than to obey his commands, and that to 
be loved by him is the consummation of a happy life. But 
after they had given place to Satan’s blasphemy, they began, 
like persons fascinated, to lose reason and judgment; yea, 
since they were become the slaves of Satan; he held their very 
senses bound. Still further, we know that sins are not esti- 
mated in the sight of God by the external appearance, but by 
the inward disposition. 

Again, it appears to many absurd, that the defection of our 
first parents is said to have proved the destruction of the 
whole race; and, on this account, they freely bring an ac- 
cusation against God. Pelagius, on the other hand, lest, as 
he falsely feared, the corruption of human nature should be 
charged upon God, ventured to deny original sin. But an 
error so gross is plainly refuted, not only by solid testimonies 
of Scripture, but also by experience itself. The corruption 
.of our nature was unknown to the philosophers, who, in other 
respects, were sufficiently, and more than sufficiently, acute. 
Surely this stupor itself was a signal proof of original sin. 








CHAP. III. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 155 


For all who are not utterly blind, perceive that no part of us 
is sound; that the mind is smitten with blindness, and in- 
fected with innumerable errors; that all the affections of the 
heart are full of stubbornness and wickedness ; that vile lusts, 
or other diseases equally fatal, reign there; and that all the 
senses burst forth * with many vices. Since, however, none 
but God alone isa proper judge in this cause, we must acqui- 
esce in the sentence which he has pronounced in the Scriptures. 
In the first place, Scripture clearly teaches us that we are 
born vicious and perverse. The cavil of Pelagius was frivolous, 
that sin proceeded from Adam by imitation. For David, 
while still enclosed in his mother’s womb, could not be an 
imitator of Adam, yet he confesses that he was conceived in 
sin, (Psalm li. 5.) A fuller proof of this matter, and a more 
ample definition of original sin, may be found in the Insri- 
TUTES ;? yet here, in a single word, I will attempt to show 
how far it extends. Whatever in our nature is vicious—since 
it is not lawful to ascribe it to God—we justly reject as sin.* 
But Paul (Rom. iii. 10) teaches that corruption does not re- 
sidein one part only, but pervadesthe wholesoul, and each of its 
faculties. Whence it follows, that they childishly err who re- 
gard original sin as consisting only in lust, and in the inordinate 
motion of the appetites, whereas it seizes upon the very seat 
of reason, and upon the whole heart. ‘To sin is annexed con- 
demnation,‘ or, as Paul speaks, ‘By man came sin, and by 
sin, death,’ (Rom. v. 12.) Wherefore he elsewhere pronounces 
us to be ‘ the children of wrath;’ as if he would subject us to 
an eternal curse, (Ephes. ii. 3.) In short, that we are de- 
spoiled of the excellent gifts of the Holy Spirit, of the light 
of reason, of justice, and of rectitude, and are prone to every 
evil; that we are also lost and condemned, and subjected to 
death, is both our hereditary condition, and, at the same time, 
a just punishment, which God, in the person of Adam, has 
inflicted on the human race. Now, if any one should object, 
that it is unjust for the innocent to bear the punishment of 


1 ‘¢ Seatere,” send forth as from a fountain. 
2 Calvin’s Institutes, Book II., chap. 1, 2, 3. 
8 “‘ Merito in peccatum rejicimus.” 

4“ Peccato annexus est reatus.” 


156 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. III. 


another’s sin, 1 answer, whatever gifts God had conferred 
upon us in the person of Adam, he had the best right to take 
away, when Adam wickedly fell. Nor is it necessary to re- 
sort to that ancient figment of certain writers, that souls are 
derived by descent from our first parents.’ Forthe human race 
has not naturally derived corruption through its descent from 
Adam; but that result is rather to be traced to the ap- 
pointment of God, who, as he had adorned the whole nature 
of mankind with most excellent endowments in one man, so in 
the same man he again denuded it. But now, from the time in 
which we were corrupted in Adam, we do not bear the punish- 
ment of another’s offence, but are guilty by our own fault. 
A question is mooted by some, concerning the time of this 
fall, or rather ruin. The opinion has been pretty generally 
received, that they fell on the day they were created; and, 
therefore, Augustine writes, that they stood only for six hours. 
The conjecture of others, that the temptation was delayed by 
Satan till the Sabbath, in order to profane that sacred day, is 
but weak. And certainly, by instances like these, all pious 
persons are admonished sparingly to indulge themselves in 
doubtful speculations. As for myself, since 1 have nothing 
to assert positively respecting the time, so I think it may be 
gathered from the narration of Moses, that they did not long 
retain the dignity they had received; for as soon as he has 
said they were created, he passes, without the mention of any 
other thing, to their fall. If Adam had lived but a moderate 
space of time with his wife, the blessing of God would not 
have been unfruitful in the production of offspring; but 
Moses intimates that they were deprived of God’s benefits 
before they had become accustomed to use them. I therefore 
readily subscribe tothe exclamation of Augustine, ‘Owretched 
free-will, which, while yet entire, had so little stability !” 


1 * Quod anime ex traduce oriuntur.”—*‘ Que les ames procedent de 
celle d’Adam.” That souls proceed from that of Adam.—French Tr. 

It can be scarcely necessary to inform the reader, that a controversy 
of some magnitude engaged the attention of the learned, on the subject 
to which Calvin here alludes; namely, whether the souls of men are, like 
their bodies, propagated by descent from Adam, or whether they proceed 
immediately from God. The supposed descent of the soul from Adam 
was said to be ex traduce, by traduction.—L£d. 








CHAP. DI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 157 


And, to say no more respecting the shortness of the time, the 
admonition of Bernard is worthy of remembrance: ‘ Since we 
read that a fall so dreadful took place in Paradise, what shail 
we do on the dunghill?’ At the same time, we must keep 
in memory by what pretext they were led into this delusion 
so fatal to themselves, and to all their posterity. Plausible 
was the adulation of Satan, ‘ Ye shall know good and evil; 
but that knowledge was therefore accursed, because it was 
sought in preference to the favour of God. Wherefore, un- 
less we wish, of our own accord, to fasten the same snares 
upon ourselves, let us learn entirely to depend upon the sole 
will of God, whom we acknowledge as the Author of all good. 
And, since the Scripture everywhere admonishes us of our 
nakedness and poverty, and declares that we may recover in 
Christ what we have lost in Adam, let us, renouncing all self- 
confidence, offer ourselves empty to Christ, that he may fill 
us with his own riches. 


7. And the eyes of them both were opened. It was necessary 
- that the eyes of Eve should be veiled till her husband also 
was deceived ; but now both, being alike bound by the chain of 
an unhappy consent, begin to be sensible of their wretchedness, 
although they are not yet affected with a deep knowledge of 
their fault. They are ashamed of their nakedness, yet, though 
convinced, they do not humble themselves before God, nor 
fear his judgments as they ought; they even do not cease to 
resort to evasions. Some progress, however, is made; for 
whereas recently they would, like giants, assault heaven by 
storm; now, confounded with a sense of their own ignominy, 
they flee to hiding-places. And truly this opening of the 
eyes in our first parents to discern their baseness, clearly 
proves them to have been condemned by their own judgment. 
They are not yet summoned to the tribunal of God; there 
is none who accuses them; is not then the sense of shame, 
which rises spontaneously, a sure token of guilt? The 
eloquence, therefore, of the whole world will avail nothing 
to deliver those from condemnation, whose own conscience 
has become the judge to compel them to confess their fault. 
It rather becomes us all to open our eyes, that, being con- 


158 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. III. 


founded at our own disgrace, we may give to God the glory 
which is his due. God created man flexible; and not only 
permitted, but willed that he should be tempted. For he both 
adapted the tongue of the serpent beyond the ordinary use of 
nature, to the devil’s purpose, just as if any one should furnish 
another with a sword and armour; and then, though the un- 
happy event was foreknown by him, he did not apply the 
remedy, which he had the power to do. On the other hand, 
when we come to speak of man, he will be found to have 
sinned voluntarily, and to have departed from God, his Maker, 
by a movement of the mind not less free than perverse. Nor 
ought we to call that a light fault, which, refusing credit to 
the word of God, exalted itself against him by impious and 
sacrilegious emulation, which would not be subject to his 
authority, and which, finally, both proudly and perfidiously 
revolted from him. Therefore, whatever sin and fault there 
is in the fall of our first parents remains with themselves ; but 
there is sufficient reason why the eternal counsel of God pre- 
ceded it, though that reason is concealed from us. We see, 
indeed, some good fruit daily springing from a ruin so dread- 
ful, inasmuch as God instructs us in humility by our miseries, 
and then more clearly illustrates his own goodness; for his grace 
is more abundantly poured forth, through Christ, upon the 
world, than it was imparted to Adam in the beginning. — 
Now, if the reason why this is so lies beyond our reach, it is 
not wonderful that the secret counsel of God should be to us 
like a labyrinth. 

And they sewed fig-leaves together. What I lately said, that 
they had not been brought either by true shame or by seri- 
ous fear to repentance, is now more manifest. They sew 


1To the question, ‘Why God did not create man without a possibility 
of sinning,’ Peter Martyr replies: ‘ Because such a state could not be 
suitable to the nature of any rational creature; since the creature, as a 
creature, remains infirm and feeble; whereas, also, he is not entirely one 
with the rule by which he is to be directed, (otherwise he would be God, 
the chief good, and chief rectitude, ) it follows, that his nature may diverge 
from that rule. It was, however, possible for grace to confirm him so 
that he should not sin, which is believed to be the state of angels and 
of saints in heaven. But that dignity or reward would not be so highly 
esteemed, if this fallible and inconstant state of man had not preceded 
it.’—Peter Martyr, in Gen., fol. 14. Tiguri, 1579.—Ed. 





CHAP, III. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 159 


together for themselves girdles of leaves. For what end? 
That they may keep God at a distance, as by an invincible 
barrier! Their sense of evil, therefore, was only confused, 
and combined with dulness, as is wont to be the case in un- 
quiet sleep. There is none of us who does not smile at their 
folly, since, certainly, it was ridiculous to place such a cover- 
ing before the eyes of God. In the meanwhile, we are all in- 
fected with the same disease ; for, indeed, we tremble, and are 
covered with shame at the first compunctions of conscience ; 
but self-indulgence soon steals in, and induces us to resort to 
vain trifles, as if it were an easy thing to delude God. 
Therefore, unless conscience be more closely pressed, there 
is no shadow of excuse too faint and fleeting to obtain our 
acquiescence ; and even if there be no pretext whatever, we 
still make pleasures for ourselves, and, by an oblivion of three 
days’ duration, we imagine that we are well covered.? In 
short, the cold and faint® knowledge of sin, which is in- 
herent in the minds of men, is here described by Moses, in 
order that they may be rendered inexcusable.*..... . Then 
(as we have already said) Adam and his wife were yet ignorant 
of their own vileness, since with a covering so light they at- 
tempted to hide themselves from the presence of God. 


8. And they heard the voice of the Lord God. As soon as 
the voice of God sounds, Adam and Eve perceive that the 
leaves by which they thought themselves well protected are 
of no avail. Moses here relates nothing which does not re- 


1 «Ex foliis perizomata.” 

* ‘Tmo sinullus fucus suppetat, facimus tamen nobis delicias, et tridui 
oblivione putamus nos bene esse tectos.” 

3 *¢ Semimortua.” 

# What immediately follows is here given in the original :— 

“*Queeritamen potest, si tota natura peccati sordibus infecta est, cur tan- 
tum una in parte corporis deformitas appareat. Neque enim faciem vel 
pectus operiunt Adam et Heva: sed tantum pudenda que vocamus. Hac 
occasione factum esse arbitror ut vulgo non aliam vite corruptelam ag- 
noscerent quam in libidine venerea. Atqui expendere debebant, non 
minorem fuisse in oculis et auribus verecundis causam, quam in parte 
genitali, que peccato nondum fedata erat: quum aures et oculi inqui- 
nassent Adam et Heva, et diabolo quasi arma prebuissent. Sed Deo 
fuit satis, extare in corpore humano aliquam pudendam notam, que nos 
peccati commonefaciat.” 


160 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. IIT. 


main in human nature, and may be clearly discerned at the 
present day. The difference between good and evil is en- 
graven on the hearts of all, as Paul teaches, (Rom. ii. 155) 
but all bury the disgrace of their vices under flimsy leaves, 
till God, by his voice, strikes inwardly their consciences. 
‘ Hence, after God had shaken them out of their torpor, their 
alarmed consciences compelled them to hear his voice. More- 
over, what Jerome translates, ‘at the breeze after mid-day, 
is, in the Hebrew, ‘at the wind of the day;? the Greeks, 
omitting the word ‘wind, have put ‘at the evening.® 
Thus the opinion has prevailed, that Adam, having sinned 
about noon, was called to judgment about sunset. But I 
rather incline to a different conjecture, namely, that being 
covered with their garment, they passed the night in silence 
and quiet, the darkness aiding their hypocrisy ; then, about 
sunrise, being again thoroughly awakened, they recollected 
themselves. We know that at the rising of the sun the air 
is naturally excited ; together, then, with this gentle breeze, 
God appeared; but Moses would improperly have called the 
evening air that of the day. Others take the word as deserib- 
ing the southern part or region; and certainly MM), (ruach,) 
sometimes among the Hebrews signifies one or another re- 
gion of the world. Others think that the time is here spe- 
cified as one least exposed to terrors, for in the clear light 
there is the greater security ; and thus, they conceive, is ful- 
filled what the Scripture declares, that they who have ac- 
cusing consciences are always anxious and disquieted, even 
without any danger. ‘To this point they refer what is added 
respecting the wind, as if Adam was terrified at the sound of 
a falling leaf. But what I have advanced is more true and 
simple, that what was hid under the darkness of the night 


1 *¢ Ad auram post meridiem.” Vulgate. 

* eoyn mynd, (lerwach hayom.) 

3 'To desasvev. Sept. 

* This criticism, it is presumed, cannot be maintained. It seems to 
derive no countenance whatever but from some passages of Scripture, 
which speak of God as scattering his people to the four winds of heaven. 
(See Jer. xlix. 32, and lii. 23.) The common interpretation given in our 
version, ‘‘ the cool of the day,” as applied to evening, is supported by the 
highest authorities, such as Cocceius, Schindler, Gesenius, and Lee. Le 
Clerc, however, adopts the same interpretation as Calvin.—£d. 








CHAP. III. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 161 


was detected at the rising of the sun. Yet Ido not doubt 
that some notable symbol of the presence of God was in that 
gentle breeze; for although (as I have lately said) the rising 
sun is wont daily to stir up some breath of air, this is not op- 
posed to the supposition that God gave some extraordinary 
sion of his approach, to arouse the consciences of Adam and 
his wife. For, since he is in himself incomprehensible, he 
assumes, when he wishes to manifest himself to men, those 
marks by which he may be known. David calls the winds 
the messengers of God, on the wings of which he rides, or 
rather flies, with incredible velocity. (Psal. civ. 3.) But, 
as often as he sees good, he uses the winds, as well as other 
ereated things, beyond the order of nature, according to his 
own will. Therefore, Moses, in here mentioning the wind, 
intimates (according to my judgment) that some unwonted 
and remarkable symbol of the Divine presence was put forth 
which should vehemently affect the minds of our first parents. 
This resource, namely, that of fleeing from God’s presence, was 
nothing better than the former; since God, with his voice alone, 
soon brings back the fugitives. Itis written, ‘ Whither shall I 
flee from thy presence? IfI traverse the sea, if I take wings 
and ascend above the clouds, if I descend into the profound 
abyss, thou, Lord, wilt be everywhere, (Ps. cxxxix. 7.) This 
we all confess to be true; yet we do not, in the meantime, 
cease to snatch at vain subterfuges ; and we fancy that sha- 
dows of any kind will prove a most excellent defence. Nor 
is it to be here omitted, that he, who had found a few leaves 
to be unavailing, fled to whole trees; for so we are accus- 
tomed, when shut out from frivolous cavils, to frame new 
excuses, which may hide us as under a denser shade. When 
Moses says that Adam and his wife hid themselves ‘in the 
midst of the tree! of Paradise,’ 1 understand that the singular 
number is put for the plural; as if he had said, among the 
trees. 


an py qina- (Betok aitz haggan.) “In medio ligni Pardisi.”— Vulgate. 
°"Ey wtow, tov SvAov tov raeadeicov.—Sept. Where the singular number is 
used in each case. It may be translated, ‘‘in the midst of the wood of 
Paradise ;” and wood may be, as in English, used collectively for a num- 
ber of trees, a forest, or a thicket. Calvin, in his version, translates the 
clause, ‘‘ in medio arborum horti.” 
VOL. I. L 


162 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, III. 


9. And the Lord God called unto Adam. They had been 
already smitten by the voice of God, but they lay confounded 
under the trees, until another voice more effectually pene- 
trated their minds. Moses says that Adam was called by the 
Lord. Had he not been called before? The former, how- 
ever, was a confused sound, which had no sufficient force to 
press upon the conscience. ‘Therefore God now approaches 
nearer, and from the tangled thicket of trees! draws him, 
however unwilling and resisting, forth into the midst. In 
the same manner we also are alarmed at the voice of God, as 
soon as his law sounds in our ears; but presently we snatch 
at shadows, until he, calling upon us more vehemently, com- 
pels us to come forward, arraigned at his tribunal. Paul 
ealls this the life of the Law,’ when it slays us by charging us 
with our sins. For as long as we are pleased with ourselves, 
and are inflated with a false notion that we are alive, the law is 
dead to us, because we blunt its point by our hardness; but 
when it pierces us more sharply, weare driven into newterrors. 


10. And he said, I heard thy voice. Although this seems 
to be the confession of a dejected and humbled man, it will 
nevertheless soon appear that he was not yet properly sub- 
dued, nor led to repentance. He imputes his fear to the 
voice of God, and to his own nakedness, as if he had never 
before heard God speaking without being alarmed, and had 
not been even sweetly exhilarated by his speech. His ex- 
cessive stupidity appears in this, that he fails to recognise the 
cause of shame im his sin; he, therefore, shows that he does 
not yet so feel his punishment, as to confess his fault. In 
the meantime, he proves what I said before to be true, that 
original sin does not reside in one part of the body only, but 
holds its dominion over the whole man, and so occupies every 
part of the soul, that none remains im its integrity ; for, not- 
withstanding his fig-leaves, he still dreads the presence of 
God. 


ll. Who told thee that thou wast naked? An indirect re- 


«Ex multiplici arborum complexu.” 
2“ Vitam Legis.” The life or power of the law.—See Rom. vii. 6. 








CHAP. III. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 163 


primand to reprove the sottishness of Adam in not perceiving 
his fault in his punishment, as if it had been said, not simply 
that Adam was afraid at the voice of God, but that the voice 
of his judge was formidable to him, because he was a sinner. 
Also, that not his nakedness, but the turpitude of the vice 
by which he had defiled himself, was the cause of ‘fear; and 
certainly he was guilty of intolerable impiety against God 
in seeking the origin of evil in nature. Not that he would 
accuse God in express terms; but deploring his own misery, 
and dissembling the fact that he was himself the author of it, 
he malignantly transfers to God the charge which he ought 
to have brought against himself. What the Vulgate trans- 
lates, * Unless it be that thou hast eaten of the tree,’! is rather 
an interrogation.2. God asks, in the language of doubt, not 
as if he were searching into some disputable matter, but for 
the purpose of piercing more acutely the stupid man, who, 
labouring under fatal disease, is yet unconscious of his ma- 
lady ; just as a sick man, who:complains that he is burning, 
yet thinks not of fever. Let us, however, remember that 
we shall profit nothing by any prevarications, but that God 
will always bind us by a most just accusation in the sin of 
Adam. The clause, “ whereof I commanded thee that thou 
shouldest not eat,” is added to remove the pretext of igno- 
rance. For God intimates that Adam was admonished in 
time; and that he fell from no other cause than this, that he 
knowingly and voluntarily brought destruction upon him- 
self. Again, the atrocious nature of sin is marked in this 
transgression and rebellion; for, as nothing is more accept- 
able to God than obedience, so nothing is more intolerable 
than when men, having spurned his commandments, obey 
Satan and their own lust. 


12. The woman whom thou gavest to be with me. The-bold- 
ness of Adam now more clearly betrays itself; for, so far 
from being subdued, he breaks forth into coarser blas- 


1“ Nisi quod de arbore,” are the words which Calvin gives. The 
expression of the Vulgate really is—‘ Nisi quod ex ligno.” ‘There is 
no difference in the sense.—£d. 

* « Nonne ex ipsa arbore ... comedisti?” as in our own version. 


\ 


164 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. III. 


phemy. He had before been tacitly expostulating with 
God; now he begins openly to contend with him, and tri- 
umphs as one who has broken through all barriers. Whence 
we perceive what a refractory and indomitable creature man 
began to be when he became alienated from God ; fora lively 
picture of corrupt nature is presented to us in Adam from the 
moment of his revolt. ‘ Every one,’ says James, ‘ is tempted 
by his own concupiscence,’ (James i. 14;) and even Adam, not 
otherwise than knowingly and willingly, had set himself, as a 
rebel, against God. Yet, just as if conscious of no evil, he puts 
‘his wife as the guilty party in his place. ‘Therefore I 
have eaten,’ he says, ‘because she gave.’ And not content 
with this, he brings, at the same time, an accusation against 
God; objecting that the wife, who had brought ruin upon 
him, had been given by God. We also, trained in the same 
school of original sin, are too ready to resort to subterfuges 
of the same kind; but to no purpose; for howsoever incite- 
ments and instigations from other quarters may impel us, 
yet the unbelief which seduces us from obedience to God is 
within us; the pride is within which brings forth contempt. 


13. And the Lord God said unto the woman. God contends 
no further with the man, nor was it necessary; for he aggra- 
vates rather than diminishes his crime, first by a frivolous 
defence, then by an impious disparagement of God, in short, 
though he rages, he is yet held convicted. The Judge now 
turns to the woman, that the cause of both being heard, he 
may at length pronounce sentence. The old interpreter thus 
renders God’s address: ‘ Why hast thou done this?’! But 
the Hebrew phrase has more vehemence ; for it is the language 
of one who wonders as at something prodigious. It ought 
therefore rather to be rendered, ‘ How hast thou done this ?’ ? 
as if he had said, ‘ How was it possible that thou shouldst 
bring thy mind to be so perverse a counsellor to thy husband ?’ 

The serpent beguiled me. Eve ought to have been con- 
founded at the portentous wickedness concerning which she 
was admonished. Yet she is not struck dumb, but, after 


' Quare hoc fecisti? "— Vulgate. 
2 “ Quomodo hoc fecisti?” wy nernp 


_—_— 








CHAP. IIL. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 165 


the example of her husband, transfers the charge to another ; 
by laying the blame on the serpent, she foolishly, indeed, and 
impiously, thinks herself absolved. For her answer comes 
at length to this: ‘I received from the serpent what thou 
hadst forbidden; the serpent, therefore, was the impostor.’ 
But who compelled Eve to listen to his fallacies, and even to 
place confidence in them more readily than in the word of 
God? Lastly, how did she admit them, but by throwing open 
and betraying that door of access which God had sufficiently 
fortified? But the fruit of original sin everywhere presents 
itself; being blind in its own hypocrisy, it would gladly ren- 
der God mute and speechless. And whence arise daily so 
many murmurs, but because God does not hold his peace 
whenever we choose to blind ourselves ? 


14, And the Lord God said unto the serpent. He does not 
interrogate the serpent as he had done the man and the wo- 
man ; because, in the animal itself there was no sense of sin, 
and because, to the devil he would hold out no hope of pardon. 
He might truly, by his own authority, have pronounced sen- 
tence against Adam and Eve, though unheard. Why then 
does he call them to undergo examination, except that he has 
a care for their salvation? This doctrine is to be applied to 
our benefit. There would be no need of any trial of the cause, 
or of any solemn form of judgment, in order to condemn us; 
wherefore, while God insists upon extorting a confession from 
us, he acts rather as a physician thanasajudge. There is the 
same reason why the Lord, before he imposes punishment on 
man, begins with the serpent. For corrective punishments 
(as we shall see) are of a different kind, and are inflicted with 
the design of leading us to repentance; but in this there is 
nothing of the sort. 

It is, however, doubtful to whom the words refer, whether 
to the serpent or to the devil. Moses, indeed, says that the 
serpent was a skilful and cunning animal; yet it is certain, 
that, when Satan was devising the destruction of man, the 
serpent was guiltless of his fraud and wickedness. Where- 
fore, many explain this whole passage allegorically, and plau- 
sible are the subtleties which they adduce for this purpose. 
But when all things are more accurately weighed, readers 


166 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. III. 


endued with sound judgment will easily perceive that the 
language is of a mixed character; for God so addresses the 
serpent that the last clause belongs to the devil. If it seem 
to any one absurd, that the punishment of another's fraud 
should be exacted from a brute animal, the solution is at hand; 
that, since it had been created for the benefit of man, there was 
nothing improper in its being accursed from the moment that it 
was employed for hisdestruction. And by thisact of vengeance, 
God would prove how highly he estimates the salvation of man; 
just as if a father should hold the sword in execration by which 
his son had been slain. And here we must consider, not only 
the kind of authority which God has over his creatures, but 
also the end for which he created them, as I have recently 
said. For the equity of the divine sentence depends on that 
order of nature which he has sanctioned; it has, therefore, 
no affinity whatever with blind revenge. In this manner the 
reprobate will be delivered over into eternal fire with their 
bodies; which bodies, although they are not self-moved, 
are yet the instruments of perpetrating evil. So what- 
ever wickedness a man commits is ascribed to his hands, 
and, therefore, they are deemed polluted; while yet they do 
not move themselves, except so far as, under the impulse of a 
depraved affection of the heart, they carry into execution what 
has been there conceived. According to this method of rea- 
soning, the serpent is said to have done what the deyil did 
by its means. But if God so severely avenged the destruction 
of man upon a brute animal, much less did he spare Satan, 
the author of the whole evil, as will appear more clearly in 
the concluding part of the address. 

Thou art cursed above all cattle. This curse of God has: 
such force against the serpent, as to render it despicable, and 
scarcely tolerable to heaven and earth, leading a life exposed 
to, and replete with, constant terrors. Besides, it is not only 
hateful to us, as the chief enemy of the human race, but, being 
separated also from other animals, carries on a kind of war 
with nature ; for we see it had before been so gentle that the 
woman did not flee from its familiar approach. But what fol- 
lows has greater difficulty, because that which God denounces 
as a punishment seems to be natural; namely, that it should 
ereep upon its belly and eat dust. This objection has induced 








CHAP. III. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 167 


certain men of learning and ability to say, that the serpent had 
been accustomed to walk with an erect body before it had 
been abused by Satan.’ There will, however, be no absurdity 
in supposing, that the serpent was again consigned to that 
former condition, to which he was already naturally subject. 
For thus he, who had exalted himself against the image of 
God, was to be thrust back into his proper rank; as if it had 
been said, ‘ Thou, a wretched and filthy animal, hast dared 
to rise up against man, whom I appointed to the dominion of 
the whole world ; as if, truly, thou, who art fixed to the earth, 
hadst any right to penetrate into heaven. Therefore, 1 now 
throw thee back againto theplace whence thou hast attempted 
to emerge, that thou mayest learn to becontented with thy lot, 
and no more exalt thyself, to man’s reproach and injury.’ In 
the meanwhile, he is recalled from his insolent motions to his 
accustomed mode of going, in such a way as to be, at the same 
time, condemned to perpetual infamy. To eat dust is the sign of 
a vile and sordid nature. This (in my opinion) is the simple 
meaning of the passage, which the testimony of Isaiah also 
confirms, (chap. lxv. 25;) for while he promises, under the 
reign of Christ, the complete restoration of a sound and well- 
constituted nature, he records, among other things, that dust 
shall be to the serpent for bread. Wherefore, it is not ne- 
cessary to seek for any fresh change in each particular which 
Moses here relates. 


15. I will put enmity. I interpret this simply to mean 
that there should always be the hostile strife between the 
human race and serpents, which is now apparent; for, by a 
secret feeling of nature, man abhors them. It is regarded, as 
among prodigies, that some men take pleasure in them; and 
as often as the sight of a serpent inspires us with horror, the 
memory of our fall is renewed. With this I combine in one 
continued discourse what immediately follows: ‘It shall 
wound thy head, and thou shalt wound its heel.” For he 
declares that there shall be such hatred that, on both sides, 
they shall be troublesome to each other; the serpent shall be 


' See Bishop Patrick’s Commentary. 


168 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. IIT. 


vexatious towards men, and men shall be intent on the de- 
struction of serpents. Meanwhile, we see that the Lord acts 
mercifully in chastising man, whom he does not suffer Satan 
to touch except in the heel; while he subjects the head of 
the serpent to be wounded by him. For in the terms head 
and heel there is a distinction between the superior and the 
inferior. And thus God leaves some remains of dominion to 
man; because he so places the mutual disposition to injure 
each other, that yet their condition should not be equal, but 
man should be superior in the conflict. Jerome, in turning 
the first member of the sentence, ‘Thou shalt bruise the 
head ;’} and the second, ‘Thou shalt be ensnared in the 
heel,’? does it without reason, for the same verb is repeated 
by Moses ; the difference is to be noted only in the head and 
the heel, as I have just now said. Yet the Hebrew verb, 
whether derived from me, (shooph,) or from DY, (shapha,) 
some interpret to druise or to strike, others to bite.® I have, 
however, no doubt that Moses wished to allude to the name 
of the serpent, which is called in Hebrew }\5*5v, (shiphiphon,) 
from MSW or Bye." 

We must now make a transition from the serpent to the 
author of this mischief himself; and that not only in the way 
of comparison, for there truly is a literal anagogy ;’ because 
God has not so vented his anger upon the outward instru- 
ment as to spare the devil, with whom lay all the blame. 

1 « Conteres caput.” The version of the Vulgate is, ‘‘ conteret caput.” 
But this does not affect the validity of Calvin’s criticism, his object being 
to show the impropriety of translating the same Hebrew word by Latin 
words of such different meaning as contero and instdior.—Ed. 

2 « Tnsidiaberis calcaneo.” 

8 See Cocceius, Gesenius, and Professor Lee, sub voce pyw.—Ed. 

* There would appear greater force in Calvin’s criticism if this had been 
the name given to the serpent in the narrative of Moses. The word here 
used, however, is yn, (nachash,) which gives no countenance to the sup- 
posed reference ; besides, the word quoted by Calvin only refers toa 
particular kind of serpent, not to the whole species.—£d. 

5 Anagogy. ‘This word is inserted from the original for want of a more 
generally intelligible term in our own language to express the author’s 
meaning. It is from the Greek ’Aveyay%,, which signifies ‘ a raising on 
high, especially elevation of the mind above earthly things to abstract 
speculations, (in ecclesiastical writings,) to the contemplation of the 
sublime truths and mysteries of Holy Scripture.’ The meaning of Cal- 


vin is, that there was an intentional transition from the serpent to the 
spiritual being who made use of it.—Ed. 








CHAP. Ill. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 169 


That this may the more certainly appear to us, it is worth 
the while first to observe that the Lord spake not for the 
sake of the serpent but of the man; fur what end could it 
answer to thunder against the serpent in unintelligible words? 
Wherefore respect was had to men; both that they might 
be affected with a greater dread of sin, seeing how highly 
displeasing it is to God, and that hence they might take con- 
solation for their misery, because they would perceive that 
God is still propitious to them. But now it is obvious to all, 
how slender and insignificant would be the argument for a 
good hope, if mention were here made of a serpent only; be- 
cause nothing would be then provided for, except the fading 
and transient life of the body. Men would remain, in the 
meanwhile, the slaves of Satan, who would proudly triumph 
over them, and trample on their heads. Wherefore, that 
God might revive the fainting minds of men, and restore 
them when oppressed by despair, it became necessary to pro- 
mise them, in their posterity, victory over Satan, through 
whose wiles they had been ruined. ‘This, then, was the only 
salutary medicine which could recover the lost, and restore 
life to the dead. I therefore conclude, that God here chiefly 
assails Satan under the name of the serpent, and hurls against 
him the lightning of his judgment. This he does for a two- 
fold reason: first, that men may learn to beware of Satan as 
of a most deadly enemy ; then, that they may contend against 
him with the assured confidence of victory. 

Now, though all do not dissent in their minds from Satan— 
yea, a great part adhere to him too familiarly—yet, in reality, 
Satan is their enemy; nor do even those cease to dread him 
whom he soothes by his flatteries; and because he knows 
that the minds of men are set against him, he craftily insinu- 
ates himself by indirect methods, and thus deceives them un- 
der a disguised form.’ In short, it is ingrafted in us by na- 
ture to flee from Satan as our adversary. And, in order to 
show that he should be odious not to one generation only, 
God expressly says, ‘between thee and the seed of the wo- 
man, as widely, indeed, as the human race shall be propa- 


¥, **Et les decoit en se masquant de la personne d’autiuy.”—French 
rans. 


170 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. III. 


gated. He mentions the woman on this account, because, as 
she had yielded to the subtlety of the devil, and being first 
deceived, had drawn her husband into the participation of her 
ruin, so she had peculiar need of consolation. 

Tt shall bruise. This passage affords too clear a proof of 
the great ignorance, dulness, and carelessness, which have 
prevailed among all the learned men of the Papacy. The 
feminine gender has crept in instead of the masculine or 
neuter. There has been none among them who would con- 
sult the Hebrew or Greek codices, or who would even com- 
pare the Latin copies with each other.? Therefore, by a 
common error, this most corrupt reading has been received. 
Then, a profane exposition of it has been invented, by apply- 
ing to the mother of Christ what is said concerning her 
seed. 

There is, indeed, no ambiguity in the words here used by 
Moses; but I donot agree with others respecting their mean- 
ing;. for other interpreters take the seed for Christ, without 
controversy ; as if it were said, that some one would arise from 
the seed of the woman who should wound the serpent’s head. 
Gladly would I give my suffrage in support of their opinion, 
but that I regard the word seed as too violently distorted by 
them ; for who will concede that a collective noun is to be 
understood of one man only? Further, as the perpetuity of 
the contest is noted, so victory is promised to the human 
race through a continual succession of ages. I explain, 
therefore, the seed to mean the posterity of the woman gene- 
rally. But since experience teaches that not all the sons of 
Adam by far, arise as conquerors of the devil, we must neces- 
sarily come to one head, that we may find to. whom the vic- 


1 « Tpsum vulnerabit.” 

* See the Vulgate, ‘‘ Jpsa conteret,”—She shall bruise. The following 
judicious note from Professor Lee’s Hebrew Lexicon confirms the criti- 
cism of Calvin :—‘ The attempt that has been made gravely to justify a 
blunder of the Vulgate, which here reads ipsa for ipse, is a melancholy 
proof of the great neglect of the study of Hebrew in this country. Any 
one acquainted with the first elements of the grammar would see that, to. 
make the Vulgate correct, we must substitute qpywn for 4p, and 
mpiwn for ys_ywn,”—that is, both the form and the affixes of the verb 
would require alteration, in order to accommodate themselves to the 
change of gender.— Ed. 


CHAP. III. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 171 


tory belongs. So Paul, from the seed of Abraham, leads us 
to Christ; because many were degenerate sons, and a consi- 
derable part adulterous, through infidelity ; whence it follows 
that the unity of the body flows from the head. Wherefore, 
the sense will be (in my judgment) that the human race, 
which Satan was endeavouring to oppress, would at length 
be victorious.’ In the meantime, we must keep in mind that 
method of conquering which the Scripture describes. Satan 
has, in all ages, led the sons of men “captive at his will,” 
and, to this day, retains his lamentable triumph over them, 
and for that reason is called the “ prince of the world,” (John 
xii. 31.) But because one stronger than he has descended 
from heaven, who will subdue him, hence it comes to pass: 
that, in the same manner, the whole Church of God, under 
its Head, will gloriously exult over him. To this the de- 
claration of Paul refers, “ The Lord shall bruise Satan under 
your feet shortly,” (Rom. xvi. 20.) By which words he sig- 
nifies that the power of bruising Satan is. imparted to faith- 
ful men, and thus. the blessing is the common property of the 
whole Church; but he, at the same time, admonishes us, that 
it only has its commencement in this world; because God 
crowns none but well-tried wrestlers. 


16. Unto the woman he said. In order that the majesty of 
the judge may shine the more brightly, God uses no long dis- 
putation ; whence also we may perceive of what avail are all 
eur tergiversations with him. In bringing the serpent for- 
ward, Eve thought she had herself escaped. God, disre- 
garding her cavils, condemns her. Let the sinner, ‘therefore, 
when he comes to the bar of God, cease to contend, lest he 
should more severely provoke against himself the anger of 
him whom he has: already too highly offended. We must 
now consider the kind of punishment imposed upon the 
woman. When he says, ‘I will multiply thy pains, he 
comprises all the trouble women sustain during pregnan- 


' The judicious reader will hardly acknowledge the reasoning of Calvin 
to be valid. The whole subject here referred to is discussed with great 
learning and acuteness, as well as with great force of language, by Bishop 
Horsley, in his second Sermon on Pet. i. 20, 2i.— Ed. 


ts 


VV 


Gd 


172 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. III. 


cy.!... It is credible that the woman would have brought 
forth without pain, or at least without such great suffering, if 
she had stood in her original condition; but her revolt from ,/ 
God subjected her to inconveniences of this kind. The ex- 
pression, ‘ pains and conception,’ is to be taken by the figure 
hypallage,? for the pains which they endure in consequence 
of conception. The second punishment which he exacts is 
subjection... For this form of speech, “ Thy Se 
unto thy husband,” is of the same force as if he had sai t 
she should not be free and at her own command, but subject 
to the authority of her husband and dependent upon his will; 
or as if he had said, ‘Thou shalt desire nothing but what thy 
husband wishes’. As it is declared afterwards, “ Unto thee 
shall be his desire,” (chap. iv. 7.) Thus the woman, who 
had perversely exceeded her proper bounds, is forced back to 
her own position. She had, indeed, previously been subjec 

to her husband, but that was a liberal and gentle subjection ; \ 
now, however, she is cast into servitude. 


17. And unto Adam he said. In the first place, it is to be ob- 
served, that punishment was not inflicted upon the first 
of our race so as to rest on those two alone, but was extended 
generally to all their posterity, in order that we might know 
that the human race was cursed in their person ; we next ob- 
serve, that they were subjected only to temporal punishment, 
that, from the moderation of the divine anger, they might en- 
tertain hope of pardon. God, by adducing the reason why he 
thus punishes the man, cuts off from him the occasion of mur- 
muring. For no excuse was left to him who had obeyed 
his wife rather than God; yea, had despised God for the sake 
of his wife, placing so much confidence in the fallacies of Satan, 
—whosemessenger and servantshe was,—that he did not hesi- 
tate perfidiously to deny his Maker. But, although God deals 
decisively and briefly with Adam, he yet refutes the pretext 


1 Quum dicit, Multiplicabo dolores, complectitur quicquid molestiz 
sustinent mulieres, ex quo gravide esse incipiunt, fastidium cibi, deliquia, 
lassitudines, aliaque innumera, usque dum ventum est ad partum, qui 
acerbissima tormenta secum affert. Est enim credibile,” &c. 

* The use of one word for another. 











CHAP. IIT. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 173 


by which he had tried to escape, in order the more easily to 
lead him to repentance. After he has briefly spoken of Adam’s 
sin, he announces that the earth would be cursed for his sake. 
The ancient interpreter has translated it, ‘In thy work ;’' but 
the reading is to be retained, in which all the Hebrew copies 
agree, namely, the earth was cursed on account of Adam. Now, 
as the blessing of the earth means, in the language of Scripture, 
that fertility which God infuses by his secret power, so the 
curse is nothing else than the opposite privation, when God 
withdraws his favour. Nor ought it to seem absurd, that, 
through the sin of man, punishment should overflow the earth, 
though innocent. For as the primum mobile? rolls all the 
celestial spheres along with it, so the ruin of man drives 
headlong all those creatures which were formed for his sake, 
and had been made subject to him. And we see how con- 
stantly the condition of the world itself varies with respect to 
men, according as God is angry with them, or shows them his 
favour. Wemay add, that, properly speaking, this whole punish- 
ment is exacted, not from the earth itself, but from man alone. 
For the earth does not bear fruit foritself, but inorder that food 
may be supplied to us out of its bowels. ‘The Lord, however, 
determined that his anger should, like a deluge, overflow all 
parts of the earth, that wherever man might look, the atrocity 
of his sin should meet his eyes. Before the fall, the state of 
the world was a most fair and delightful mirror of the divine 
favour and paternal indulgence towards man. Now, in all 
the elements we perceive that we are cursed. And although 
(as David says) the earth is still full of the mercy of God, 
(Psalm xxxiii. 5,) yet, at the same time, appear manifest 
signs of his dreadful alienation from us, by which, if we are 
unmoved, we betray our blindness and insensibility. Only, 
lest sadness and horror should overwhelm us, the Lord 


1“ Tn opere tuo.” — Vulgate. The Septuagint makes the same mistake : 
Ep rois geyots cov. In thy works. 

2'The primum mobile of ancient astronomy was held to be the ninth 
heaven, which surrounded those of the fixed stars, planets, and the at- 
mosphere, and was regarded as the first mover of all the heavenly bodies. 
These bodies were at that time supposed to be carried round the earth 
by this powerful agent, while the earth itself remained as the centre of 
ae gs The Newtonian philosophy put all such theories to flight. 


174 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. ITI. 


sprinkles everywhere the tokens of his goodness. Moreover, 
although the blessing of God is never seen pure and trans- 
parent as it appeared to man in innocence, yet, if what re- 
mains behind be considered in itself, David truly and properly 
exclaims, ‘ The earth is full of the mercy of God’ 

Again, by ‘eating of the earth, Moses means ‘ eating of 
the fruits’ which proceed from it. The Hebrew word payy, 
(ztsabon,) which is rendered pain,’ is also taken for trouble and 
fatigue. In this place, it stands in antithesis with the pleasant 
labour in which Adam previously so employed himself, that 
in a sense he might be said to play; for he was not formed 
for idleness, but for action. Therefore the Lord had placed 
him over a garden which was to be cultivated. But, whereas 
in that labour there had been sweet delight; now servile work 
is enjoined upon him, as:if he were condemned to the mines. 
And yet the asperity of this punishment also is mitigated by 
the clemency of God, because something of enjoyment is 
blended with the labours of men, lest they should be altogether 
ungrateful, as I shall again declare under the next verse. 


18. Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth. He more 
largely treats of what he had already alluded to, namely, the 
participation of the fruits of the earth with labour and trouble. 
And he assigns as the reason, that the earth will not be the 
same as it was before, producing perfect fruits ; for he declares 
that the earth would degenerate from its fertility, and bring forth 
briers and noxious plants. Therefore, we may know, that what- 
soever unwholesome things may be produced, are not natural 
fruits of the earth, but are corruptions which originate from 
sin. Yet it is not our part to expostulate with the earth for 
not answering to our wishes, and to the labours of its culti- 
vators, as if it were maliciously frustrating our purpose ; but 
in its sterility let us mark the anger of God, and mourn over 
our own sins. It has been falsely maintained by some, that 
the earth is exhausted by the long succession of time, as if 
constant bringing forth bad wearied it. They think more 


' “ Quod vertunt dolorem.” In Calvin’s own text it is, ‘‘ In labore; ” in 
the Vulgate, ‘‘ In laboribus.” Gesenius renders the word “ Saure Arbeit,” 
severe labour.—Ed. 











CHAP. III. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 175 


correctly who acknowledge that, by the increasing wickedness 
of men, the remaining blessing of God is gradually diminished 
and impaired ; and certainly there is danger, unless the world 
repent, that a great part of men should shortly perish through 
hunger, and other dreadful miseries. The words immediately 
following, “Thou shalt eat the herb of the field,” are expounded 
too strictly (in my judgment) by those who think that Adam 
was thereby deprived of all the fruits which he had before 
been permitted to eat. God intends nothing more than that 
he should be to such an extent deprived of his former delicacies 
as to be compelled to use, in addition to them, the herbs which 
had been designed only for brute animals. For the mode of 
living at first appointed him, in that happy and delightful 
abundance, was far more delicate than it afterwards became. 
God, therefore, describes a part of this poverty by the word 
herbs, just as if a king should send away any one of his at- 
tendants from the upper table, to that which was plebeian 
and mean; or, as if a father should feed a son, who had of- 
fended him, with the coarse bread of servants; not that he 
interdicts man from all other food, but that he abates much 
of his accustomed liberality. This, however, might be taken 
as added for the purpose of consolation, as if it had been said, 
‘ Although the earth, which ought to be the mother of good 
fruits only, be covered with thorns and briers, still it shall 
yield to thee sustenance whereby thou mayest be fed.’ 


19. In the sweat of thy face. Some, indeed, translate it 
‘labour ;’ the translation, however, is forced. But by 
“ sweat” is understood hard labour and full of fatigue and 
weariness, which, by its difficulty, produces sweat. It is a 
repetition of the former sentence, where it was said, ‘ Thou 
shalt eat it in labour.’ Under the cover of this passage, cer- 
tain ignorant persons would rashly impel all men to manual 
labour; for God is not here teaching as a master or legisla- 
tor, but only denouncing punishment as a judge. And, 
truly, if a Jaw had been here prescribed, it would be neces- 
sary for all to become husbandmen, nor would any place be 
given to mechanical arts; we must go out of the world to 
seek for clothing and other necessary conveniences of life. 


176 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. III. 


What, then, does the passage mean? Truly God pronounces, 
as from his-judgment-seat, that the life of man shall 
henceforth be miserable, because Adam had proved himself 
unworthy of that tranquil, happy and joyful state for which 
he had been created. Should any one object that there are 
many inactive and indolent persons, this does not prevent the 
curse from having spread over the whole human race. For 
I say that no one lies torpid in such a degree of sloth as not 
to be under the necessity of experiencing that this curse be- 
longs to all. Some flee from troubles, and many more do all 
they can to grasp at immunity from them; but the Lord 
subjects all, without exception, to this yoke of imposed ser- 
yitude. It is, nevertheless, to be, at the same time, main- 
tained that labour is not imposed equally on each, but on 
some more, on others less. Therefore, the labour common 
to the whole body is here described; not that which belongs 
peculiarly to each member, except so far as it pleases the 
Lord to divide to each a certain measure from the common 
mass of evils. It is, however, to be observed, that they who 
meekly submit to their sufferings, present to God an accept- 
able obedience, if, indeed, there be joined with this bearing 
of the cross, that knowledge of sin which may teach them to 
be humble. Truly it is faith alone which can offer such a 
sacrifice to God; but the faithful, the more they labour in 
procuring a livelihood, with the greater advantage are they 
stimulated to repentance, and accustom themselves to the 
mortification of the flesh ; yet God often remits a portion of 
this curse to his own children, lest they should sink beneath 
the burden. To which purpose this passage is appropriate, 
‘Some will rise early and go late to rest, they will eat the 
bread of carefulness, but the Lord will give to his beloved 
sleep,’ (Psal. cxxvil. 2.) So far, truly, as those things which 
had been polluted in Adam are repaired by the grace of 
Christ, the pious feel more deeply that God is good, and en- 
joy the sweetness of his paternal indulgence. But because, 
even in the best, the flesh is to be subdued, it not unfre- 
quently happens that the pious themselves are worn down 
with hard labours and with hunger. There is, therefore, 
nothing better for us than that we, being admonished of the 











CHAP. III. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 177 


miseries of the present life, should weep over our sins, and 
seek that relief from the grace of Christ which may not only 
assuage the bitterness of grief, but mingle its own sweetness 
with it.!. Moreover, Moses does not enumerate all the disad- 
vantages in which man, by sin, has involved himself; for it 
appears that all the evils of the present life, which experience 
proves to,be innumerable, have proceeded from the same 
fountain. |The inclemency of the air, frost, thunders, unsea- 
sonable rains, drought, hail, and whatever is disorderly in 
the world, are the fruits of sin. Nor is there any other pri- 
mary cause of diseases. ‘This has been celebrated in poetical 
fables, and was doubtless handed down, by tradition, from 
the fathers. Hence that passage in Horace :— 
«When from Heaven’s fane the furtive hand 
Of man the sacred fire withdrew, 
A countless host—at God’s command— 
To earth of fierce diseases flew ; 


And death—till now kept far away— 
Hastened his step to seize his prey.”” 


But Moses, who, according to his custom, studies a brevity 
adapted to the capacity of the common people, was content 
to touch upon what was most apparent, in order that, from 


one example, we may learn that the whole order of nature_ 


was subverted by the sin of man. Should any one again ob- 
ject, that no suffermg was imposed on men which did not 
also belong te women: I answer, it was done designedly, to 
teach us, that from the sin of Adam, the curse flowed in com- 
mon to both sexes; as Paul testifies, that ‘all are dead in 
Adam,’ (Rom. v. 12.) 

One question remains to be examined—‘ When God had 


1 Sed etiam dulci temperamento condiat.” 

‘* Laquelle non seulement appaise l’aigreur des douleurs, mais aussi leur 
donne saveur, meslant le sucre parmi le vinaigre.”—Which not only re- 
lieves the sourness of griefs, but also gives them savour, mixing sugar 
with the vinegar.—F'r. Trans. 

2‘ Post ignem ztheria domo 
Subductum, macies et nova febrium 
Terris incubuit cohors ; 
Semotique prius tarda necessitas 
Leti corripuit gradum.”—Hor. Carm. iii. Lib. I. 


VOL. I. M 


x 
Pa: 


178 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. III. 


before shown himself propitious to Adam and his wife,—hay- 
ing given them hope of pardon,—why does he begin anew to 
exact punishment from them? Certainly in that sentence, 
‘the seed of the woman shall bruise the head of the serpent,’ 
the remission of sins and the grace of eternal salvation is 
contained. But it is absurd that God, after he has been re- 
conciled, should actually prosecute his anger.’ To untie this 
knot, some have invented a distinction of a twofold remission, 
namely, a remission of the fault and a remission of the pun- 
ishment, to which the figment of satisfactions was afterwards 
annexed. They have feigned that God, in absolving men 
from the fault, still retains the punishment; and that, ac- 
cording to the rigour of his justice, he will inflict at least 
a temporal punishment. But they who imagined that pun- 
ishments are required as compensations, have been preposter- 
ous interpreters of the judgments of God. For God does 
not consider, in chastising the faithful, what they deserve ; 
but what will be useful to them in future; and fulfils the office 
of a physician rather than of a judge.! Therefore, the abso- 
lution which he imparts to his children is complete and not 
by halves. That he, nevertheless, punishes those who are 
received into favour, is to be regarded as a kind of chastise- 
ment which serves as medicine for future time, but ought not 
properly to be regarded as the vindictive punishment of sin 
committed. If we duly consider how great is the torpor of 
the human mind, then, how great its lasciviousness, how great 
its contumacy, how great its levity, and how quick its forget- 
fulness, we shall not wonder at God’s severity in subduing it. 
If he admonishes in words, he is not heard; if he adds stripes, 
it avails but little; when it happens that he is heard, the flesh 
nevertheless perversely spurns the admonition. That obsti- 
nate hardness which, with all its power opposes itself to God, 
is worse than lasciviousness. If any one is naturally endued 
with such a gentle disposition that he does not disown the 
duty of submission to God, yet, having escaped from the hand 
of God, after one allowed sin, he will soon relapse, unless he 


' “The punishments inflicted by God are the remedies and the restraints 
of our vitiated nature.”—Peter Martyr, in Gen. fol. 17. 








CHAP. III. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 179 


be drawn back as by force. Wherefore, this general axiom is 
to be maintained, that all the sufferings to which the life of 
men is subject and obnoxious, are necessary exercises, by 
which God partly invites us to repentance, partly instructs 
us in humility, and partly renders us more cautious and more 
attentive in guarding against the allurements of sin for the 
future. 

Till thou return. He denounces that the termination of a 
miserable life shall be death; as if he would say, that Adam’ 
should at length come, through various and continued kinds of 
evil, to the last evil of all. Thus is fulfilled what we said 
before, that the death of Adam had commenced immediately 
from the day of his transgression. For this accursed life of 
man could be nothing else than the beginning of death. 
‘ But where then is the victory over the serpent, if death oc- © 
cupies the last place? For the words seem to have no other 
signification, than that man must be ultimately crushed by 
death. Therefore, since death leaves nothing to Adam, the 
promise recently given fails; to which may be added, that 
the hope of being restored to a state of salvation was most 
slender and obscure.’ Truly I do not doubt that these terrible 
words would grievously afflict minds already dejected, from 
other causes, bysorrow. But since, though astonished by their 
sudden calamity, they were yet not deeply affected with the 
knowledge of sin;. it is not wonderful that God persisted the 
more in reminding them of their punishment, in order that he 
might beat them down, as with reiterated blows. Although 
the consolation offered be in itself obscure and feeble, God 
caused it to be sufficient for the support of their hope, lest 
the weight of their affliction should entirely overwhelm them. 
In the meantime, it was necessary that they should be 
weighed down by a mass of manifold evils, until God should 
have reduced them to true and serious repentanee. More- 
over, whereas death is here put as the final issue,’ this ought 
to be referred to man; because in Adam himself nothing but 
death will be found; yet, in this way, he is urged to seek a 
remedy in Christ. 


1 Quasi ultima linea.” ‘* Comme le bout.”—F*. Trans. 


180 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, Ill. 


For dust thou art. Since what God here declares belongs 
to man’s nature, not to his crime or fault, it might seem that 
death was not superadded as adventitious to him. And there- 
fore some understand what was before said, ‘ Thou shalt die, 
in a spiritual sense; thinking that, even if Adam had not 
sinned, his body must still have been separated from his soul, 
But, since the declaration of Paul is clear, that ‘all die in 
Adam, as they shall rise again in Christ, (1 Cor. xy. 22,) 
this wound also was inflicted by sin. Nor truly is the solu- 
tion of the question difficult,—‘ Why God should pronounce, 
that he who was taken from the dust should return to it.’ 
For as soon as he had been raised to a dignity so great, that 
the glory of the Divine Image shone in him, the terrestrial 
origin of his body was almost obliterated. Now, however, 
after he had been despoiled of his divine and heavenly ex- 
cellence, what remains but that by his very departure out of 
life, he should recognise himself to be earth? Hence it is that 
we dread death, because dissolution, which is contrary to na- 
ture, cannot naturally be desired. ‘Truly the first man would 
have passed to a better life, had he remained upright; but 
there would have been no separation of the soul from the body, 
no corruption, no kind of destruction, and, in short, no vio- 
lent change. 


20. And Adam called, §c. There are two ways in which 
this may be read. The former, in the pluperfect tense, 
‘Adam had called.” If we follow this reading, the sense of 
Moses will be, that Adam had been greatly deceived, in 
promising life to himself and to his posterity, from a wife, 
whom he afterwards found by experience to be the intro- 
ducer of death. And Moses (as we have seen) is accustomed, 
without preserving the order of the history, to subjoin after- 
wards things which had been prior in point of time. If, 
however, we read the passage in the preterite tense, it may 
be understood either in a good or bad sense. ‘There are 
those who think that Adam, animated by the hope of a more 
happy condition, because God had promised that the head 
of the serpent should be wounded by the seed of the woman, 


CHAP. III. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 181 


called her by a name implying life.!. This would be a noble 
and even heroic fortitude of mind; since he could not, with- 
out an arduous and difficult struggle, deem her the mother 
of the living, who, before any man could have been born, had 
involved all in eternal destruction. But, because I fear 
lest this conjecture should be weak, let the reader consider 
whether Moses did not design rather to tax Adam with 
thoughtlessness, who being himself immersed in death, yet 
gave to his wife so proud aname. Nevertheless, I do not 
doubt that, when he heard the declaration of God concerning 
the prolongation of life, he began again to breathe and to 
take courage; and then, as one-revived, he gave his wife a 
name derived from fe; but it does not follow, that by a faith 
accordant with the word of God, he triumphed, as he ought 
to have done, over death. I therefore thus expound the 
passage ; as soon as he had escaped present death, being 
encouraged by a measure of consolation, he celebrated that 
divine benefit which, beyond all expectation, he had received, 
in the name he gave his wife.’ 


21. Unto Adam also, and to his wife, did the Lord God make, 
§c. Moses here, in a homely style, declares that the Lord had 
undertaken the labour of making garments of skins for Adam 
and his wife. It is not indeed proper so to understand his 
words, as if God had been a furrier, or a servant to sew 
clothes. Now, it is not credible that skins should have been 
presented to them by chance; but, since animals had before 
been destined for their use, being now impelled by a new 
necessity, they put some to death, in order to cover them- 
selves with their skins, having been divinely directed to 
adopt this counsel ; therefore Moses calls God the Author of 
it. The reason why the Lord clothed them with garments 


1 «* Vocasse eam vivificam.” mete 
2 It is probable, however, that more than this is here meant. The 


Hebrew word pn, (chavah,) Eve, is in the Septuagint rendered Cwm, 
life; and, as Fagius observes, Adam comforted himself in his wife, 
because he should, through Eve, produce a posterity in which (es 
parents in their children) they should be permanently victorious.—Pol, 


Syn.—Ed. 


182 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. III. 


of skin appears to me to be this: because garments formed 
of this material would have a more degrading appearance 
than those made of linen or woollen.’ God thergfore de- 
signed that our first parents should, in such a dress, behold 
their own vileness,—just as they had before seen it in their 
nudity,—and should thus be reminded of their sin.? In the 
meantime, it is not to be denied, that he would propose to us 
an example, by which he would accustom us to a frugal and 
unexpensive mode of dress. And I wish those delicate per- 
sons would reflect on this, who deem no ornament sufficiently 
attractive, unless it exceed in magnificence. Not that every 
kind of ornament is to be expressly condemned ; but because 
when immoderate elegance and splendour is carefully sought 
after, not only is that Master despised, who intended clothing 
to be a sign of shame, but war is, in a certain sense, carried 
on against nature. 


22. Behold, the man is become as one of us. An ironical 
reproof, by which God would not only prick the heart of 
man, but pierce it through and through. He does not, how- 
ever, cruelly triumph over the miserable and afflicted; but, 
according to the necessity of the disease, applies a more vio- 
lent remedy. For, though Adam was confounded and 
astonished at his calamity, he yet did not so deeply reflect 
on its cause as to become weary of his pride, that he might 
learn to embrace true humility. We may add, that God in- 
veighed, by this irony,‘ not more against Adam himself than 
against his posterity, for the purpose of commending modesty 
to allages. The particle, “ Behold,” denotes that the sen- 


1“ Quia [vestes] ex ea materia confecte, belluinum quiddam magis 
saperent, quam linez vel lanez.” 

2 « As the prisoner, looking on his irons, thinketh on his theft, so we, 
looking on our garments, should think on our sins.”—-Trapp. 

For an ample discussion of the reasons why a more comprehensive 
view should be taken of this subject than Calvin here adopts, the reader 
may turn to Dr Magee’s learned ‘‘ Discourses and Dissertations on the 
Scriptural Doctrines of Atonement and Sacrifice ;” where he will see, that 
the origin of the clothing with skins was most probably connected with a 
previous appointment of the sacrifice of animals.—See Magee, note lii.—Ed. 

3“ Adam quasi unus.” 

4‘ Fac subsannatione.” 








CHAP. III. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 183 


tence is pronounced upon the cause then in hand. And, 
truly, it was a sad and horrid spectacle; that he, in whom re- 
cently the glory of the Divine image was shining, should 
lie hidden under fetid skins to cover his own disgrace, and 
that there should be more comeliness in a dead animal than 
inaliving man! The clause which is immediately added, 
“'To know good and evil,” describes the cause of so great 
misery, namely, that Adam, not content with his condition, 
had tried to ascend higher than was lawful; as if it had been - 
said, ‘See now whither thy ambition and thy perverse ap- 
petite for illicit knowledge have precipitated thee. Yet the 
Lord does not even deign to hold converse with him, but 
contemptuously draws him forth, for the sake.of exposing 
him to greater infamy. Thus was it necessary, for his iron 
pride to be beaten down, that he might at length descend 
into himself, and become more and more displeased with 
himself, 

One of us. Some refer the plural number here used to the 
angels, as if God would make a distinction between man, 
who is an earthly and despised animal, and celestial beings ; 
but this exposition seems far-fetched. The meaning will be 
more simple if thus resolved, ‘ After this, Adam will be so 
like ME, that we shall become companions for each other.’ 
The argument which Christians draw from this passage for 
the doctrine of the three Persons in the Godhead is, I fear, 
not sufficiently firm.’ There is not, indeed, the same reason 
for it as in the former passage, ‘“ Let us make man in our 
image,” since here Adam is included in the word us; but, in 
the other place, a certain distinction in the essence of God is 
expressed. 

And now, lest, §c. ‘There is a defect in the sentence which 
I think ought to be thus supplied : ‘It now remains that, in 
future, he be debarred from the fruit of the tree of life ;’ for 
by these words Adam is admonished that the punishment to 


' Bishop Patrick, who contends for the interpretation here opposed, 
says, “ Like one of us. These words plainly insinuate a plurality of Per- 
sons in the Godhead, and all other explications of them seem forced and 
unnatural; that of Mr Calvin’s being as disagreeable to the Hebrew 
phrase as that of Socinus to the excellency of the Divine nature.”—Zd. 


184 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. IIT. 


which he is consigned shall not be that of a moment, or of a 
few days, but that he shall always be an exile from a happy 
life. They are mistaken who think this also to be an irony; 
as if God were denying that the tree would prove advantage- 
ous to man, even though he might eat of it; for he rather, 
by depriving him of the symbol, takes also away the thing 
signified. We know what is the efficacy of sacraments; and 
it was said above that the tree was given as a pledge of life. 
Wherefore, that he might understand himself to be deprived 
of his former life, a solemn excommunication is added; not 
that the Lord would cut him off from all hope of salvation, 
but, by taking away what he had given, would cause man to 
seek new assistance elsewhere. Now, there remained an ex- 
piation in sacrifices, which might restore him to the life he 
had lost. Previously, direct communication with God was the 
source of life to Adam; but, from the moment in which he 
became alienated from God, it was necessary that he should 
recover life by the death of Christ, by whose life he then 
lived. It is indeed certain, that man would not have been 
able, had he even devoured the whole tree, to enjoy life 
against the will of God; but God, out of respect to his own 
institution, connects life with the external sign, till the pro- 
mise should be taken away from it; for there never was any 
intrinsic efficacy in the tree; but God made it life-giving, so 
far as he had sealed his grace to man in the use of it, as, in 
truth, he represents nothing to us with false signs, but always 
speaks to us, as they say, with effect. In short, God resolved 
to wrest out of the hands of man that which was the occasion 
or ground of confidence, lest he should form for himself a 
vain hope of the perpetuity of the life which he had lost. 


23. Therefore the Lord God sent him forth.1 Here Moses 
partly prosecutes what he had said concerning the punishment 
inflicted on man, and partly celebrates the gocdness of God, 
by which the rigour of his judgment was mitigated. God 
mercifully softens the exile of Adam, by still providing for 
him a remaining home on earth, and by assigning to him a 


1 wq9, (gairesh,) to expel, drive out, or eject by force. 





CHAP. III. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 185 


livelihood from the culture—although the laborious culture— 
of the ground; for Adam thence infers that the Lord has 
some care for him, which isa proof of paternal love. Moses, 
however, again speaks of punishment, when he relates that 
man was expelled, and that cherubim were opposed with the 
blade of a turning sword,' which should prevent his entrance 
into the garden. Moses says that the cherubim were placed 
in the eastern region, on which side, indeed, access lay open 
to man, unless he had been prohibited. It is added, to pro- 
duce terror, that the sword was turning or sharpened on both 
sides. Moses, however, uses a word derived from whiteness 
or heat.2 Therefore, God having granted life to Adam, and 
having supplied him with food, yet restricts the benefit, by 
causing some tokens of Divine wrath to be always before his 
eyes, in order that he might frequently reflect that he must 
pass through innumerable miseries, through temporal exile, 
and through death itself, to the life from which he had fallen ; 
for what we have said must be remembered, that Adam was_ 
not so dejected as to be left without hope of pardon. He 
was banished from that royal palace of which he had been the 
lord, but he obtained elsewhere a place in which he might 
dwell; he was bereft of his former delicacies, yet he was still 
supplied with some kind of food; he was excommunicated 
from the tree of life, but a new remedy was offered him in 
sacrifices. Some expound the ‘ turning sword’ to mean one 
which does not always vibrate with its point directed against 
man, but which sometimes shows the side of the blade, for 
the purpose of giving place for repentance. But allegory is 
unseasonable, when it was the determination of God alto- 
gether to exclude man from the garden, that he might seek 
life elsewhere. As soon, however, as the happy fertility and 
pleasantness of the place was destroyed, the terror of the 
sword became superfluous. By cherubim, no doubt, Moses 
means angels, and in this accommodates himself to the capa- 
city of his own people. God had commanded two cherubim 
to be placed at the ark of the covenant, which should over- 


1 ¢ Cum lamina gladii versatilis.” 357 pnd, (lahat hachereb.) 
2 A candore, vel ardore.” 


186 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. III. 


shadow its covering with their wings; therefore he is often 
said to sit between the cherubim. That he would have 
angels depicted in this form, was doubtless granted as an in- 
dulgence to the rudeness of that ancient people ; for that age 
needed puerile instructions, as Paul teaches, (Gal. iv. 3;) and 
Moses borrowed thence the name which he ascribed to angels, 
that he might accustom men to that kind of revelation which 
he had received from God, and faithfully handed down; 
for God designed, that what he knew would prove useful to 
the people, should be revealed in the sanctuary. And cer- 
tainly this method is to be observed by us, in order that we, 
conscious of our own infirmity, may not attempt, without as- 
sistance, to soar to heaven; for otherwise it will happen that, 
in the midst of our course, all our senses will fail. The lad- 
ders and vehicles, then, were the sanctuary, the ark of the 
covenant, the altar, the table and its furniture. Moreover, I 
call them vehicles and ladders, because symbols of this kind 
were by no means ordained that the faithful might shut up 
God in a tabernacle as in a prison, or might attach him to 
earthly elements; but that, being assisted by congruous and 
apt means, they might themselves rise towards heaven. Thus 
Davyid.and Hezekiah, truly endued with spiritual intelligence, 
were far from entertaining those gross imaginations, which 
would fix God in a given place. Still they do not seruple to 
call upon God, who sitteth or dwelleth between the cherubim, 
in order that they may retain themselves and others under 
the authority of the law. 

Finally, In this place angels are called cherubim, for the 
same reason that the name of the body of Christ is transferred 
to the sacred bread of the Lord’s Supper. With respect to 
the etymology, the Hebrews themselves are nct agreed. The 
most generally received opinion is, that the first letter, 5, is 
a servile letter, and a note of similitude, and, therefore, that 
the word cherub is of the same force as if it were said, ‘ like 
a boy”! But because Ezekiel, who applies the word in com- 


14455, (cherub.) An image like a youth, which the Chaldeans call 
95, (rabia.” )—Schindler. Other writers give a different derivation, and 
consequently a different meaning to the word. But Professor Lee says, 
“‘ Tt would be idle to offer anything on the etymology ; nothing satisfactory 
having yet been discovered.”—See Lexicon.—kd. 


CHAP. IV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 187 


mon to different figures, is opposed to this signification ; they 
think more rightly, in my judgment, who declare it to bea 
general name. Nevertheless, that it is referred to angels is 
more than sufficiently known. Whence also Ezekiel (xxviii. 
14) signalizes the proud king of Tyre with this title, com- 


paring him to a chief angel.’ 


CHAPTER IV. 


1. Anp Adam knew Eve his wife; 
and she conceived, and bare Cain, 
and said, I have gotten a man from 
the Lord. 

2. And she again bare his brother 
Abel. And Abel was a keeper of 
sheep, but Cain was a tiller of the 
ground. 

3. And in process of time it came 
to pass, that Cain brought of the fruit 
of the ground an offering unto the 
Lord. 

4, And Abel, he also brought of the 
firstlings of his flock, and of the fat 
thereof. And the Lord had respect 
unto Abel, and to his offering : 


5. But unto Cain and to his offer- 
ing he had not respect. And Cain 
was very wroth, and his countenance 
fell. 

6. And the Lord said unto Cain, 
Why art thou wroth? and why is thy 
countenance fallen? 

7. If thou doest well, shalt thou not 
be accepted? and if thou doest not 
well, sin lieth at the door. And unto 
thee shall be his desire, and thou shalt 
rule over him. 


1 Primario angelo. 


1. Et Adam cognovit Hava 
uxorem stam: que concepit, et 
peperit Cain; et dixit, Acquisivi 
virum aJehova. 

2. Et addidit parere fratrem 
ejus Ebel: fuit autem Ebel pas- 
tor ovium, et Cain fuit cultor 
terre : 

3. Et fuit, a fine dierum ad- 
duxit Cain de fructu terre ob- 
lationem Jehove. 


4. Et Ebel etiam ipse adduxit 
de primogenitis pecudum sua- 
rum, et de adipe earum: et re- 
spexit Jehova ad Ebel, et ad 
oblationem ejus : 

5. Ad Cain vero et ad obla- 
tionem ejus non respexit: iratus 
est itaque Cain valde, et concidit 
vultus ejus. 

6. Et dixit Jehova ad Cain, 
Utquid excanduisti? et utquid 
concidit vultus tuus? 

7. Annon si recte egeris, erit 
acceptatio ? et si non bene egeris, 
in foribus peccatum cubat : et ad 
te erit appetitus ejus, et tu domi- 
naberisei. — 


It is clear that Ezekiel, in the chapter referred to, 


has both the garden.of Eden and the ark of the covenant in his view, 


when speaking of the king of Tyre. 


Thus, in the 17th verse, it is said, 


‘«Thou hast been in Eden, the garden of God ;” and, in the next verse, 
“Thou art the anointed cherub that covereth ;” (namely, that covereth 
the ark,) *‘ and Ihave set thee so; thou wast upon the holy mountain of 
God.” —Ed. 


188 


8. And Cain talked with Abel his 
brother: and it came to pass, when 
they were in the field, that Cain rose 
rp against Abel his brother, and slew 

im. 
9. And the Lord said unto Cain, 
Where is Abel thy brother? And he 
said, I know not. Am I my brother’s 
keeper ? 

10. And he said, What hast thou 
done? the voice of thy brother’s blood 
crieth unto me from the ground. 

11. And now art thou cursed from 
the earth, which hath opened her 
mouth to receive thy brother’s blood 
from thy hand. 

12. When thou tillest the ground, 
it shall not henceforth yield unto thee 
her strength. <A fugitive and a vaga- 
bond shalt thou be in the earth. 

13. And Cain said unto the Lord, 
My punishment zs greater than I can 
bear. 

14. Behold, thou hast driven me 
out this day from the face of the earth ; 
and from thy face shall I be hid; and 
I shall be a fugitive and a vagabond in 
the earth: and it shall come to pass, 
that every one that findeth me shall 
slay me. 

15. And the Lord said unto him, 
Therefore whosoever slayeth Cain, 
vengeance shall be taken on him 
sevenfold. And the Lord set a mark 
upon Cain, lest any finding him should 
kill him. 

16. And Cain went out from the 
presence of the Lord, and dwelt in the 
land of Nod, on the east of Eden. 

17. And Cain knew his wife; and 
she conceived, and bare Enoch: and 
he builded a city, and called the name 
of the city, after the name of his son, 
Enoch. 

18. And unto Enoch was born Irad: 
and Irad begat Mehujael : and Mehu- 
jael begat Methusael: and Methusael 
begat Lamech. 

19. And Lamech took unto him 
two wives: the name of the one was 
Adah, and the name of the other Zil- 
lah. 

20. And Adah bare Jabal: he was 
the father of such as dwell in tents, 
and of such as have cattle. 

21. And his brother’s name was 


COMMENTARY UPON 


CHAP, IV. 


8. Et loquutus est Cain ad 
Ebel fratrem suum: et accidit 
quum essent in agro, insurrexit 
Cain contra Ebel fratrem suum, 
et occidit eum. 

9. Et dixit Jehova ad Cain, 
Ubi est Ebel frater tuus? Et 
ait, Nescio : nunquid custos fra- 
tris mei sum ego ? 

10. Et dixit, Quid fecisti ? vox 
sanguinis fratris tui clamat ad 
me é terra. 

11. Nunc itaque maledictus 
eris é terra, que aperuit os suum 
ut exciperet sanguinem fratris 
tui ¢ manu tua. 

12. Quando coles terram, non 
addet ut det vim suam tibi: va- 
gus et profugus eris in terra. 


13. Et dixit Cain ad Jehovam, 
Major est punitio mea quam ut . 
feram. 

14. Ecce, ejecisti me hodie 4 
facie terre, et a facie tua abscon- 
dar, eroque vagus et profugus in 
terra: et erit, ut quicunque in- 
venerit me, occidat me. 


15. Et dixit ei Jehova, Prop- 
terea quicunque occiderit Cain, 
septuplum vindicabitur. Et po- 
suit Jehova signum in Cain, ne 
percuteret eum ullus qui inve- 
niret eum. 

16. Et egressus est Cain a facie 
Jehove, et habitavit in terra Nod 
ad Orientem Heden. 

17. Cognovit autem Cain uxo- 
rem suam: qu concepit, et 
peperit Hanoch: edificavitque 
civitatem, et vocavit nomen civi- 
tatis nomine filii sui Hanoch. 

18. Porro natus est ipsi Hanoch 
Hirad, et Hirad genuit Mehujael, 
et Mehujael genuit Methusael : et 
Methusael genuit Lemech. 

19. Et accepit sibi Lemech 
duas uxores: nomen unius, Hada, 
et nomen secunde, Silla. 


20. Et genuit Hada Jabel, ipse 
fuit pater inhabitantis tcntorium, 
et pecoris. 

21. Et nomen fratris ejus, 





CHAP. IV. 


Jubal: he was the father of all such 
as handle the harp and organ. 

22. And Zillah, she also bare Tubal- 
cain, an instructor of every artificer in 
brass and iron: and the sister of Tu- 
bal-cain was Naamah. 

23. And Lamech said unto his 
wives, Adah and Zillah, Hear my 
voice ; ye wives of Lamech, hearken 
unto my speech: for I have slain a 
man to my wounding, and a young 
man to my hurt. 

24. If Cain shall be avenged seven- 
fold, truly Lamech seventy and seven- 
fold. 

25. And Adam knew his wife again ; 
and she bare a son, and called his 
name Seth: For God, said she, hath 
appointed me another seed instead of 
Abel, whom Cain slew. 


26. And to Seth, to him also there 
was born a son; and he called his 
name Enos: then began men to call 
upon the name of the Lord. 


1. And Adam knew his wife Eve. 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


189 


Jubal: ipse fuit pater omnis con- 
trectantis citharam et organum. 

22. Et Silla etiam ipsa peperit 
Thubal-Cain, polientem omne 
opificium sxreum et ferreum: et 
soror Thubal-Cain, fuit Nahama. 

23. Et dixit Lemech uxoribus 
suis Hada et Silla, Audite vocem 
meam uxores Lemech, auscultate 
sermonem meum,Quoniam virum 
occidero in vulnere meo, et adole- 
scentem in livore meo. 

24. Quia septuplo vindicabi- 
tur Cain, et Lemech septuagies 
septies. 

25. Cognovit autem Adam 
rursum uxorem suam: que pe- 
perit filium, et vocavit nomen 
ejus Seth, Quia posuit mihi, zn- 
quit, Deus semen alterum pro 
Ebel: quia occidit eum Cain: 

26. Et ipsi Seth etiam natus 
est filius, et vocavit nomen ejus 
Enos: tune ceeptum est invocari 
nomen Domini. 


Moses now begins to 





describe the propagation of mankind; in which history it is 
important to notice that this benediction of God, “ Increase 
and multiply,” was not abolished by sin; and not only so, 
but that the heart of Adam was divinely confirmed, so that 
he did not shrink with horror from the production of off- 
spring. And as Adam recognised, in the very commence- 
ment of having offspring, the truly paternal moderation ot 
God’s anger, so was he afterwards compelled to taste the 
bitter fruits of his own sin, when Cain slew Abel. But let 
us follow the narration of Moses.! Although Moses does not 
state that Cain and Abel were twins, it yet seems to me pro- 
bable that they were so; for, after he has said that Eve, 
by her first conception, brought forth her first-born, he soon 
after subjoins that she also bore another; and thus, while 
commemorating a double birth, he speaks only of one con- 


190 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. IV. 


ception.! Let those who think differently enjoy their own 
opinion; to me, however, it appears accordant with reason, 
when the world had to be replenished with inhabitants, that 
not only Cain and Abel should have been brought forth at 
one birth, but many also afterwards, both males and 
females. 

I have gotten a man. The word which Moses uses signifies 
both to acquire and to possess ; and it is of little consequence 
to the present context which of the two you adopt. It is 
more important to inquire why she says that she has received 
mim’ AN, (eth VYehovah.) Some expound it, ‘with the 
Lord ;’ that is, ‘by the kindness, or by the favour, of the 
Lord ;’ as if Eve would refer the accepted blessing of off 
spring to the Lord, as it is said in Psalm cxxvil. 3, “The _ 
fruit of the womb is the gift of the Lord.” A second inter- 
pretation comes to the same point, ‘I have possessed a man 
from the Lord ;’ and the version of Jerome is of equal force, 
‘Through the Lord”? These three readings, I say, tend to 
this point, that Eve gives thanks to God for having beguny ,. 
to raise up a posterity through her, though she was deserving \| 
of perpetual barrenness, as well as of utter destruction. 
Others, with greater subtlety, expound the words, ‘I have 
gotten the man of the Lord ;’ as if Eve understood that she 
already possessed that conqueror of the serpent, who had 
been divinely promised to her. Hence they celebrate the 
faith of Eve, because she embraced, by faith, the promise 
concerning the bruising of the head of the devil through her 
seed; only they think that she was mistaken in the person or 
the individual, seeing that she would restrict to Cain what had 
been promised concerning Christ. To me, however, this 
seems to be the genuine sense, that while Eve congratulates 
herself on the birth of a son, she offers him to God, as the 
first-fruits of his race. Therefore, I think it ought to be 
translated, ‘I have obtained a man from the Lord,’ which 
approaches more nearly the Hebrew phrase. Moreover, she 
calls a new-born infant a man, because she saw the human 

1“ Tta duplicem partum commemorans, nonnisi de uno concubitu loquitur.” 


2“ Possedi hominem per Deum.”—Vulgate. ‘'’Exrucdmny tvboamoy 
die Tov Ocov.”—Sept. 


CHAP. IV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 191 


race renewed, which both she and her husband had ruined 
by their own fault.! 


2. And she again bare his brother Abel.? It is well known 
whence the name of Cain is deduced, and for what reason it 
was given to him. For his mother said, ‘7°59, (Aaniti,) I 
have gotten a man; and therefore she called his name Cain.® 
The same explanation is not given with respect to Abel.‘ 
The opinion of some, that he was so called by his mother 
out of contempt, as if he would prove superfluous and almost 
useless, is perfectly absurd ; for she remembered the end to 
which her fruitfulness would lead ; nor had she forgotten the 
benediction, “ Increase and multiply.” We should (in my 
judgment) more correctly infer, that whereas Eve had testified, 
in the name given to her first-born, the joy which suddenly 
burst upon her, and celebrated the grace of God; she after- 
wards, in her other offspring, returned to the recollection of the | 
miseries of the human race. And certainly, though the new 
blessing of God was an occasion for no common joy; yet, on 
the other hand, she could not look upon a posterity devoted to 
so many and great evils, of which she had herself been the 
cause, without the most bitter grief. Therefore, she wished 
that a monument of her sorrow should exist in the name she 
gave her second son; and she would, at the same time, hold 
up a common mirror, by which she might admonish her whole 
progeny of the vanity of man. ‘That some censure the judg- 


1 The reader will find a discussion of this remarkable passage worthy 
of his attention in Dr J. P. Smith’s Scripture Testimony to the Messiah, 
vol. i. p. 228. Third edition. 1837. ‘This learned, indefatigable, and 
candid writer, argues with considerable force in favour of the translation, 
‘I have obtained a man, JEHovAn,’ and supposes that Eve really be- 
lieved her first-born to be the incarnate Jehovah. There is, however, 
great difficulty in allowing that she could know so much as is here pre- 
supposed ; and the remark of Dathe seems fatal to this interpretation : 
—‘Si scivit, Messiam esse debere Jovam, quomodo existimare potuit, 
Cainam esse Messiam, quem sciebat esse ab Adamo genitum.’ If Eve 
knew that Messiah must be Jehovah, how could she think that Cain 
was the Messiah, when she knew him to be the offspring of Adam ?—Ed, 

2“ Et addidit parere fratrem ejus Ebel ;” and she added to bring forth 
(or she brought forth in addition) his brother Abel.—Ed. 

3 That is, ** obtained,” or “‘ gotten.” 

+bhon, (Hebel,) signifies vanity.—Ed. 


192 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. IV. 


ment of Eve as absurd, because she regarded her just and holy 
sonas worthy to be rejectedin comparison with her otherwicked 
and abandoned son, is what I do not approve. For Eve had 
reason why she should congratulate herself in her first-born ; 
and no blame attaches to her for having proposed, in her 
second son, a memorial to herself and to all others, of their 
own vanity, to induce them to exercise themselves in diligent 
reflection on their own evils. 

And Abel was a heeper of sheep. Whether both the brothers 
had married wives, and each had a separate home, Moses does 
not relate. ‘This, therefore, remains to us in uncertainty, al- 
though it is probable that Cain was married before he slew 
his brother; since Moses soon after adds, that he knew his 
wife, and begat children: and no mention is there made of 
his marriage. Both followed a kind of life in itself holy and 
laudable. or the cultivation of the earth was commanded 
by God; and the labour of feeding sheep was not less honour- 
able than useful; in short, the whole of rustic life was inno- 
cent and simple, and most of all accommodated to the true 
order of nature. This, therefore, is to be maintained in the 
first place, that both exercised themselves in labours approved 
by God, and necessary to the common use of human life. 
Whence it is inferred, that they had been well instructed by 
their father. The rite of sacrificing more fully confirms this; 
because it proves that they had been accustomed to the wor- 
ship of God. The life of Cain, therefore, was, in appearance, 
very well regulated; inasmuch as he cultivated the duties of 
piety towards God, and sought a maintenance for himself and 
his, by honest and just labour, as became a provident and 
sober father of a family. Moreover, it will be here proper to 
recall to memory what we have before said, that the first men, 
though they had been deprived of the sacrament of divine 
love, when they were prohibited from the tree of life, had yet 
been only so deprived of it, that a hope of salvation was still 
left to them, of which they had the signs in sacrifices. For 
we must remember, that the custom of sacrificing was not 
rashly devised by them, but was divinely delivered to them. 
For since the Apostle refers the dignity of Abel’s accepted sa- 
crifice to fazth, it follows, first, that he had not offered it without 








CHAP. Iv. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 193 


the command of God, (Heb. xi. 4.) Secondly, it has been 
true from the beginning of the world, that obedience is bet- 
ter than any sacrifices, (1 Sam. xv. 22,) and is the parent ofall 
virtues. Hence it also follows, that man had been taught by 
God what was pleasing to Him. Thirdly, since God has been 
always like himself, we may not say that he was ever delighted 
with mere carnal and external worship. Yet he deemed those 
sacrifices of the first age acceptable. It follows, therefore, 
further, that they had been spiritually offered to him: 
that is, that the holy fathers did not mock him with empty 
ceremonies, but comprehended something more sublime and 
secret; which they could not have done without divine in- 
struction.’ For it is interior truth alone? which, in the ex- 
ternal signs, distinguishes the genuine and rational worship 
of God from that which is gross and superstitious. And, 
certainly, they could not sincerely devote their mind to the 
worship of God, unless they had been assured of his bene- 
volence; because voluntary reverence springs from a sense of, 
and confidence in, his goodness; but, on the other hand, 
whosoever regards God as hostile to himself, is compelled to 
flee from him with very fear and horror. We see then that 
God, when he takes away the tree of life, in which he had 
first given the pledge of his grace, proves and declares himself 
to be propitious to man by other means. Should any one object, 
that all nations have had their own sacrifices, and that in these 
there wasno pureand solid religion, the solution is ready: name- 
ly, that mention is here made of such sacrifices as are lawful 
and approved by God; of which nothing but an adulterated 
imitation afterwards descended to the Gentiles. For although 
nothing but the word MMI, (mincha,) is here placed, which 
properly signifies a gift, and therefore is extended generally to 
every kind of oblation; yet we may infer, fortwo reasons, that 
the command respecting sacrifice was given to the fathers from 
- the beginning ; first, for the purpose of making the exercise 
of piety common to all, seeing they professed themselves to 


} ‘« Absque vere liter ally ** without the word.” —Ed. 
? That is, ‘‘ truth received into the heart.”—Ed. 
3 Mincha usually, though not invariably, signifies an “‘ unbloody obla- 
en i ee to yay, (zeba,) a ** bloody sacrifice." —See Gesenius, 
C.——. 


VOL. I. N 


agi CO COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. IY. 


be the property of God, and esteemed all they possessed as 
received from him; and, secondly, for the purpose of ad- 
monishing them of the necessity of some expiation in order 
to their reconciliation with God. When each offers some- 
thing of his property, there is a solemn giving of thanks, as if 
he would testify by his present act that he owes to God 
whatever he possesses. But the sacrifice of cattle and the 
effusion of blood contains something further, namely, that the 
offerer should have death before his eyes; and should, never- 
theless, believe in God as propitious to him. Concerning the 
sacrifices of Adam no mention is made. 


4. And the Lord had respect unto Abel, &c. God is said to 
have respect unto the man to whom he vouchsafes his favour. 
We must, however, notice the order here observed by Moses; 
for he does not simply state that the worship which Abel had 
paid was pleasing to God, but he begins with the person of 
the offerer ; by which he signifies, that God will regard no 
works with favour except those the doer of which is already 
previously accepted and approved by him. And no wonder; 
for man sees things which are apparent, but God looks into 
the heart, (1 Sam. xvi. 7;) therefore, he estimates works no 
otherwise than as they proceed from the fountain of the heart. 
Whence also it happens, that he not only rejects but abhors 
the sacrifices of the wicked, however splendid they may 
appear in the eyes of men. For if he, who is polluted in 
his soul, by his mere touch contaminates, with his own 
impurities, things otherwise pure and clean, how can 
that but be impure which proceeds from himself? When 
God repudiates the feigned righteousness in which the Jews 
were glorying, he objects, through his Prophet, that their 
hands were “ full of blood,” (Isaiah i. 15.) For the 
same reason Haggai contends against the hypocrites. The 
external appearance, therefore, of works, which may de- 
lude our too carnal eyes, vanishes in the presence of God. 
Nor were even the heathens ignorant of this; whose poets, 
when they speak with a sober and well-regulated mind of 
the worship of God, require both a clean heart and pure 
hands. Hence, even among all nations, is to be traced the 
solemn rite of washing before sacrifices. Now, seeing that 


CHAP. Iv. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 195 


in another place, the Spirit testifies, by the mouth of Peter, 
that ‘hearts are purified by faith, (Acts xv. 9;) and seeing, 
that the purity of the holy patriarchs was of the very same kind, 
the apostle does not in vain infer, that the offering of Abel was, 
by faith, more excellent than that of Cain. Therefore, in the 
first place, we must hold, that all works done before faith, 
whatever splendour of righteousness may appear in them, 
were nothing but mere sins, (being defiled from their root,) 
and were offensive to the Lord, whom nothing can please 
without inward purity of heart. I wish they who imagine 
that men, by their own motion of free-will, are rendered meet 
to receive the grace of God, would reflect on this. Certainly, 
no controversy would then remain on the question, whether 
God justifies men gratuitously, and that by faith? For this 
must be received as a settled point, that, in the judgment of 
God, no respect is had to works until man is received into 
favour. Another point appears equally certain; since the 
whole human race is hateful to God, there is no other way 
of reconciliation to divine favour than through faith. More- 
over, since faith is a gratuitous gift of God, and a special 
illumination of the Spirit, then it is easy to infer, that we are 
prevented ' by his mere grace, just as if he had raised us from 
the dead. In which sense also Peter says, that it is God 
who purifies the hearts by faith. For there would be no 
agreement of the fact with the statement, unless God had so 
formed faith in the hearts of men that it might be truly deemed 
his gift. It may now be seen in what way purity is the effect 
of faith. Itis a vapid and trifling philosophy, to adduce this as 
the cause of purity, that men are not induced to seek God as 
their rewarder except by faith. They who speak thus entirely 
bury the grace of God, which his Spirit chiefly commends. 
Others also speak coldly, who teach that we are purified by 
faith, only on account of the gift of regeneration, in order 
that we may be accepted of God. For not only do they 
omit half the truth, but build without a foundation; since, on 
account of the curse on the human race, it became necessary 


1 The word prevented is here used in the sense now rendered somewhat 
obsolete, though retained in the Liturgy and Articles of the Church of 
England. We have, in fact, no other word which so well describes the 
effect of that prevenient grace, which anticipates and goes before every 
thing that is good in man.—Ed, 


196 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. IV. 


that gratuitous reconciliation should precede. Again, since 
God never so regenerates his people in this world, that they 
can worship him perfectly ; no work of man can possibly be 
acceptable without expiation. And to this point the cere- 
mony of legal washing belongs, in order that men may learn, 
that as often as they wish to draw near unto God, purity 
must be sought elsewhere. Wherefore God will then at 
length have respect to our obedience, when he looks upon us 
in Christ. 


5. But unto Cain and to his offering he had not respect. It is 
not to be doubted, that Cain conducted himself as hypocrites 
are accustomed to do; namely, that he wished to appease 
God, as one discharging a debt, by external sacrifices, with- 
out the least intention of dedicating himself to God. But 
this is true worship, to offer ourselves as spiritual sacrifices 
to God. When God sees such hypocrisy, combined with 
gross and manifest mockery of himself, it is not surprising 
that he hates it, and is unable to bear it; whence also it 
follows, that he rejects with contempt the works of those who 
withdraw themselves from him. For it is his will, first to 
have us devoted to himself; he then seeks our works in testi- 
mony of our obedience to him, but only in the second place. 
It is to be remarked, that all the figments by which men 
mock both God and themselves are the fruits of unbelief. 
To this is added pride, because unbelievers, despising the 
Mediator’s grace, throw themselves fearlessly into the presence 
of God. The Jews foolishly imagine that the oblations of 
Cain were unacceptable, because he defrauded God of the 
full ears of corn, and meanly offered him only barren or half- 
filled ears. Deeper and more hidden was the evil; namely, that 
impurity of heart of which I have been speaking; just as, on 
the other hand, the strong scent of burning fat could not con- 
ciliate the divine favour to the sacrifices of Abel; but, being 
pervaded by the good odour of faith, they had a sweet-smell- 
ing savour. . 

And Cain was very wroth. In this place it is asked, whence 
Cain understood that his brother’s oblations were preferred 
to his? The Hebrews, according to their manner, resort to 
divination, and imagine that the sacrifice of Abel was con- 


CHAP. IV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 197 


sumed by celestial fire; but, since we ought not to allow our- 
selves so great a license as to invent miracles, for which we 
have no testimony of Scripture, let Jewish fables be dismissed. 
It is, indeed, more probable, that Cain formed the judgment 
which Moses records, from the events which followed. He 
saw that it was better with his brother than with himself; 
thence he inferred, that God was pleased with his brother, 
and displeased with himself. We know also, that to hypo- 
erites nothing seems of greater value, nothing is more to their 
heart’s content, than earthly blessing. Moreover, in the 
person of Cain is pourtrayed to us the likeness of a wicked 
man, who yet desires to be esteemed just, and even arrogates 
to himself the first place among the saints. Such persons 
truly, by external works, strenuously labour to deserve well 
at the hands of God; but, retaining a heart inwrapped in 
deceit, they present to him nothing but a mask; so that, in 
their laborious and anxious religious worship, there is nothing 
sincere, nothing but mere pretence. When they afterwards 
see that they gain no advantage, they betray the venom of 
their minds; for they not only complain against God, but 
break forth in manifest fury, so that, if they were able, they 
would gladly tear him down from his heavenly throne. Such 
is the innate pride of all hypocrites, that, by the very appear- 
ance of obedience, they would hold God as under obligation 
to them; because they cannot escape from his authority, they 
try to soothe him with blandishments, as they would a child ; 
in the meantime, while they count much of their fictitious 
trifles, they think that God does them great wrong if he does 
not applaud them; but when he pronounces their offerings 
frivolous and of no value in his sight, they first begin to mur- 
mur, and then to rage. Their impiety alone hinders God from 
being reconciled unto them; but they wish to bargain with 


1 It will, perhaps, be admitted that Calvin here deals too hardly with 
the opinions of the Jews. ‘That God did in some way bear public testi- 
mony to his acceptance of Abel’s sacrifice, is recorded by St Paul; and 
there is surely nothing unreasonable in the supposition that he did it, as 
in several other instances, by fire from heaven. ‘The reader may see 
several authorities adduced in Poole; he may also consult Ainsworth 
on the Pentateuch, Dr P. Smith on the Atonement; and especially, 
Faber’s “* Treatise on the Origin of Expiatory Sacrifice.”—Ed. 


198 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, IV. 


God on their own terms. When this is denied, they burn 
with furious indignation, which, though conceived against 


God, they cast forth upon his children. Thus, when Cain © 


was angry with God, his fury was poured forth on his un- 
offending brother. When Moses says, “ his countenance fell,” 
(the word countenance is in Hebrew put in the plural number 
for the singular,) he means, that not only was he seized with 
a sudden vehement anger, but that, from a lingering sadness, 
he cherished a feeling so malignant that he was wasting with 
envy. 


6. And the Lord said unto Cain. God now proceeds against 
Cain himself, and cites him to His tribunal, that the wretched 
man may understand that his rage can profit him nothing. He 
wishes honour to be given him for his sacrifices ; but because 
he does not obtain it, he is furiously angry. Meanwhile, he 
does not consider that through his own fault he had failed to 
gain his wish; for had he but been conscious of his inward evil, 
he would have ceased to expostulate with God, and torage 
against his guiltless brother. Moses does not state in 
what manner God spoke. Whether a vision was presented 
to him, or he heard an oracle from heaven, or was admon- 
ished by secret inspiration, he certainly felt himself bound by 
a divine judgment. To apply this to the person of Adam, 
as being the prophet and interpreter of God in censuring his 
son, is constrained and even frigid. I understand what it is 
which good men, not less pious than learned, propose, when 
they sport with such fancies. Their intention is to honour 
the external ministry of the word, and to cut off the occasion 
which Satan takes to insinuate his illusions under the colour 
of revelation.! Truly I confess, nothing is more useful than 
that pious minds should be retained, under the order of 
preaching, in obedience to the Scripture, that they may not 
seek the mind of God in erratic speculations. But we may 
observe, that the word of God was delivered from the begin- 
ning by oracles, in order that afterwards, when administered 
by the hands of men, it might receive the greater reve- 


1 Et retrancher les occasions que prend Satan, pour faire illusion 
aux hommes, en s’insinuant sous couleur des revelations.”—French Tr. 


CHAP. IV THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 199 


rence. I also acknowledge that the office of teaching was 
enjoined upon Adam, and do not doubt that he diligently 
admonished his children: yet they who think that God only 
spoke through his ministers, too violently restrict the words 
of Moses. Let us rather conclude, that, before the heavenly 
teaching was committed to public records, God often made 
known his will by extraordinary methods, and that here was 
the foundation which supported reverence for the word; 
while the doctrine delivered through the hands of men was 
like the edifice itself. Certainly, though I should be silent, 
all men would acknowledge how greatly such an imagination 
as that to which we refer, abates the force of the divine re- 
primand. Therefore, as the voice of God had previously so 
sounded in the ears of Adam, that he certainly perceived 
God to speak; so is it also now directed to Cain. 


7. If thou doest well. In these words God reproves Cain 
for having been unjustly angry, inasmuch as the blame of the 
whole evil lay with himself. For foolish indeed was his 
complaint and indignation at the rejection of sacrifices, the 
defects of which he had taken no care to amend. Thus all 
wicked men, after they have been long and vehemently 
enraged against God, are at length so convicted by the 
Divine judgment, that they vainly desire to transfer to others 
the cause of the evil. The Greek interpreters recede, in this 
place, far from the genuine meaning of Moses. Since, in 
that age, there were none of those marks or points which the 
Hebrews use instead of vowels, it was more easy, in conse- 
quence of the affinity of words to each other, to strike into 
an extraneous sense. However, as any one, moderately 
versed in the Hebrew language, will easily judge of their 
error, I will not pause to refute it.1_ Yet even those who are 
skilled in the Hebrew tongue differ not a little among them- 
selves, although only respecting a single word; for the 


1 The version of the Septuagint is, Odx éav épdac rpocevéynns, opbas de wy 
dean, Heepres; “If thou shouldst rightly offer, but yet not rightly 
divide, wouldst thou not sin?” See Archbishop Magee’s Discourses, 
&c., No. Ixv., where he ingeniously accounts for the manner in 
which the translators of the Septuagint version may have misunderstood 
the original,—£d. 


200 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. IV. 


Greeks change the whole sentence. Among those who agree 
concerning the context and the substance of the address, 
there is a difference respecting the word ANY, (seait,) which 
is truly in the imperative mood, but ought to be resolved 
into a noun substantive. Yet this is not the real difficulty ; 
but, since the verb NW3, (nasa,') signifies sometimes to exalt, 
sometimes to take away or remit, sometimes to offer, and 
sometimes to accept, interpreters vary among themselves, as 
each adopts this or the other meaning. Some of the Hebrew 
Doctors refer it to the countenance of Cain, as if God pro- 
mised that he would lift it up though now cast down with 
sorrow. Other of the Hebrews apply it to the remission of 
sins; as if it had been said, ‘ Do well, and thou shalt obtain 
pardon. But because they imagine a satisfaction, which 
derogates from free pardon, they dissent widely from the 
meaning of Moses. <A third exposition approaches more 
nearly to the truth, that exaltation is to be taken for honour, 
in this way, ‘There is no need to envy thy brother’s honour, 
because, if thou conductest thyself rightly, God will also raise 
thee to the same degree of honour ; though he now, offended 
by thy sins, has condemned thee to ignominy.’ But even 
this does not meet my approbation. Others refine more phi- 
losophically, and say, that Cain would find God propitious, 
and would be assisted by his grace, if he should by faith 
bring purity of heart with his outward sacrifices. These I 
leave to enjoy their own opinion, but I fear they aim at what 
has little solidity. Jerome translates the word, ‘ Thou shalt 
receive ;’ understanding that God promises a reward to that 
pure and lawful worship which he requires. Having recited 
the opinions of others, let me now offer what appears to me 
more suitable. In the first place, the word ANY means the 
same thing as acceptance, and stands opposed to rejection. 
Secondly, since the discourse has respect to the matter in 
hand,? I explain the saying as referring to sacrifices, namely, 
that God will accept them when rightly offered. They who 


' See Schindler, sub voce, No. iii.; and the Discourses before referred 
to, No. Ixv. 
2 «De re subjecta habitur sermo.” 


CHAP. IV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 201 


are skilled in the Hebrew language know that here is nothing 
forced, or remote from the genuine signification of the word. 
Now the very order of things leads us to the same point: 
namely, that God pronounces those sacrifices repudiated and 
rejected, as being of no value, which are offered improperly ; 
but that the oblation will be accepted, as pleasant and of 
good odour, if it be pure and legitimate. We now perceive 
how unjustly Cain was angry that his sacrifices were not 
honoured, seeing that God was ready to receive them with 
outstretched hands, provided they ceased to be faulty. At 
the same time, however, what I before said must be re- 
called to memory, that the chief point of well-doing is, for 
pious persons, relying on Christ the Mediator, and on the 
gratuitous reconciliation procured by him, to endeavour to 
worship God sincerely and without dissimulation. Therefore, 
these two things are joined together by a mutual connection : 
that the faithful, as often as they enter into the presence of 
God, are commended by the grace of Christ alone, their sins 
being blotted out; and yet that they bring thither true purity 
of heart. 

And if thou doest not well. On the other hand, God pro- 
nounces a dreadful sentence against Cain, if he harden his 
mind in wickedness and indulge himself in his crime ; for the 
address is very emphatical, because God not only repels his 
unjust complaint, but shows that Cain could have no greater 
adversary than that sin of his which he inwardly cherished. 
He so binds the impious man, by a few concise words, that 
he can find no refuge, as if he had said, ‘ Thy obstinacy shall 
not profit thee; for, though thou shouldst have nothing 
to do with me, thy sin shall give thee no rest, but shall 
sharply drive thee on, pursue thee, and urge thee, and never 
suffer thee to escape’ Hence it follows, that he not only 
raged in vain and to no profit; but was held guilty by his 
own inward conviction, even though no one should accuse 
him ; for the expression, “sin lieth at the door,’ relates to 
the interior judgment of the conscience, which presses upon 
the man convinced of his sin, and besieges him on every side. 
Although the impious may imagine that God slumbers in 
heaven, and may strive, as far as possible, to repel the fear 


202 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. IV. 


of his judgment; yet sin will be perpetually drawing them 
back, though reluctant and fugitives, to that tribunal from 
which they endeavour to retire. The declarations even of 
heathens testify that they were not ignorant of this truth ; 
for it is not to be doubted that, when they say, ‘ Conscience 
is like a thousand witnesses,’ they compare it to a most cruel 
executioner. There is no torment more grievous or seyere 
than that which is hence perceived; moreover, God himself 
extorts confessions of this kind. Juvenal says:— 


‘*t Heaven’s high revenge on human crimes behold ; 
Though earthly verdicts may be bought and sold, 
His judge the sinner in his bosom bears, 

And conscience racks him with tormenting cares.”! 


But the expression of Moses has peculiar energy. Sin is 
said to le, but it is at the door; for the sinner is not imme- 
diately tormented with the fear of judgment; but, gathering 
around him whatever delights he is able, in order to deceive 


himself, he walks as in free space, and even revels as in plea-_ 


sant meadows ; when, however, he comes to the door, there he 
meets with sin, keeping constant guard; and then conscience, 
which before thought itself at liberty, is arrested, and receives 
double punishment for the delay.? 


'« Prima est ultio quod se 
Judice, nemo nocens absolvitur, improba quamvis 
Gratia fallacis Preetoris vicerit urnam.” 


Sat. xiii. Lib. y. 


2 The Hebrew word npn, (chatath,) which primarily means sin, is 
also frequently used for sin-offering, and is so translated in various pass- 
ages of our version. The learned Dr Lightfoot was the first who pro- 
posed that it should be so rendered in the present instance. His inter- 
pretation has been controverted, especially by Socinians; but not by 
them only ; the justly celebrated Dr Davison has also attempted to set it 
aside, in his Inquiry into the Origin and Intent of Primitive Sacrifice. 
But the more profound learning of Dr Magee and of Mr Faber has 
placed the interpretation of Lightfoot on a basis not easily to be shaken. 
The translation of the passage will, on this supposition, be, ‘If thou 
doest not well, a sin-offering lieth or coucheth at the door ;’ and the im- 
port of the address will be to this effect, ‘Thou hast only to offer up a 
sacrifice of atonement, and then the defect of thy offering will be supplied, 
and the pardon of thy sin granted.’—See Magee’s Second Discourse, and 
the Dissertations connected with it; also Faber’s Treatise on the Origin of 
Expiatory Sacrifice.—Ed. 


, 


CHAP. IV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 2038 


And unto thee shall be his desire. Nearly all commentators 
refer this to sin, and think that, by this admonition, those 
depraved lusts are restrained which solicit and impel the 
mind of man. ‘Therefore, according to their view, the mean- 
ing will be of this kind, ‘If sin rises against thee to subdue 
thee, why dost thou indulge it, and not rather labour to re- 
strain and control it? for it is thy part to subdue and bring 
into obedience those affections in thy flesh which thou per- 
ceivest to be opposed to the will of God, and rebellious 
against him.’ But I suppose that Moses means something 
entirely different. I omit to notice that to the Hebrew word 
for sin is affixed the mark of the feminine gender, but that 
here two masculine relative pronouns are used. Certainly 
Moses does not treat particularly of the sin itself which was 
committed, but of the guilt which is contracted from it, and 
of the consequent condemnation. How, then, do these words 
suit, ‘ Unto thee shall be his desire?’ There will, however, 
be no need for long refutation when I shall produce the 
genuine meaning of the expression. It rather seems to me a 
reproof, by which God charges the impious man with ingra- 
titude, because he held in contempt the honour of primogeni- 
ture. The greater are the divine benefits with which any 
one of us is adorned, the more does he betray his impiety, 
unless he endeavours earnestly to serve the Author of grace 
to whom he is under obligation. When Abel was regarded 
as his brother’s inferior, he was, nevertheless, a diligent 
worshipper of God. But the first-born worshipped God negli- 
gently and perfunctorily, though he had, by the Divine 
kindness, arrived at so high a dignity ; and, therefore, God 
enlarges upon his sin, because he had not at least imitated 
his brother, whom he ought to have surpassed as far in piety 


1 Faber contends the expression, “‘ Unto thee shall be his (or its) de- 
sire,” refers to the victim which was to be offered as a sin-offering.—See 
his Treatise, p. 129. He also gives the following poetical arrangement of 
God’s address to Cain :-— 

‘« Why is there hot anger unto thee ; 

And why hath fallen thy countenance ? 

Tf thou doest well, shall there not be exaltation ? 

And if thou doest not well, at the door a sin-offering is conching. 
And unto thee is its desire, 

And thou shalt rule over it.” Ed. 


204 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. IV. 


as he did in the degree of honour. Moreover, this form of 
speech is common among the Hebrews, that the desire of the 
inferior should be towards him to whose will he is subject ; 
thus Moses speaks of the woman, (iii. 16,) that her desire 
should be to her husband. They, however, childishly trifle, 
who distort this passage to prove the freedom of the will; 
for if we grant that Cain was admonished of his duty in order 
that he might apply himself to the subjugation of sin, yet no 
inherent power of man is to be hence inferred; because it is 
certain that only by the grace of the Holy Spirit can the 
affections of the flesh be so mortified that they shall not pre- 
vail. Nor, truly, must we conclude, that as often as God com- 
mands anything we shall have strength to perform it, but 
rather we must hold fast the saying of Augustine, ‘Give 
what thou commandest, and command what thou wilt.’ 


8. And Cain talked with Abel his brother. Some understand 
this conversation to have been general; as if Cain, perfidi- 
ously dissembling his anger, spoke in a fraternal manner. Je- 
rome relates the language used, ‘Come, let us go without? In 
my opinion the speech is elliptical, and something is to be 
understood, yet what it is remains uncertain. Nevertheless, 
I am not dissatisfied with the explanation, that Moses con- 
cisely reprehends the wicked perfidy of the hypocrite, who, 
by speaking familiarly, presented the appearance of fraternal 
concord, until the opportunity of perpetrating the horrid 
murder should be afforded. And by this example we are 
taught that hypocrites are never to be more dreaded than 
when they stoop to converse under the pretext of friendship ; 
because when they are not permitted to injure by open vio- 
lence as much as they please, suddenly they assume a feigned 
appearance of peace. But it is by no means to be expected 
that they who are as savage beasts towards God, should sin- 
cerely cultivate the confidence of friendship with men. Yet 
let the reader consider whether Moses did not rather mean, — 
that although Cain was rebuked by God, he, nevertheless, 
contended with his brother, and thus this saying of his would 
depend on what had preceded. I certainly rather incline to the 
opinion that he did not keep his malignant feelings within 


1 Kerediamur foras.”— Vulgate. 





CHAP. IV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 205 


his own breast, but that he broke forth in accusation against 
his brother, and angrily declared to him the cause of his de- 
jection. 

When they were in the field. Hence we gather that al- 
though Cain had complained of his brother at home, he had | 
yet so covered the diabolical fury with which he burned, that 
Abel suspected nothing worse; for he deferred vengeance to 
a suitable time. Moreover, this single deed of guilt clearly 
shows whither Satan will hurry men, when they harden their 
mind in wickedness, so that in the end, their obstinacy is 
worthy of the utmost extremes of punishment. 


9. Whereis Abel? They who suppose that the father made 
this inquiry of Cain respecting his son Abel, enervate the whole 
force of the instruction which Moses here intended to deliver ; 
namely, that God, both by secret inspiration, and by some ex- 
traordinary method, cited the parricide! to his tribunal, as if 
he had thundered from heaven. For, what I have before said 
must be firmly maintained: that, as God now speaks with 
us through the Scriptures, so he formerly manifested himself 
to the Fathers through oracles; and also in the same 
manner, revealed his judgments to the reprobate sons of the 
saints. So the angel spoke to Agar in the wood, after she had 
fallen away from the Church,’ as we shall see in the eighth 
verse of the sixteenth chapter. It is indeed possible that God 
may have interrogated Cain by the silent examination of his 
conscience; and that he, in return, may have answered, 
inwardly fretting and murmuring. We must, however, 
conclude, that he was examined, not barely by the external 
voice of man, but by a Divine voice, so as to make him 
feel that he had to deal directly with God. As often, 
then, as the secret compunctions of conscience invite us to 
reflect upon our sins, let us remember that God himself is 
speaking with us. For that interior sense by which we are 
convicted of sin is the peculiar judgment-seat of God, where 


1 “ Parricidam citaverit.” The word parricide is, contrary to its ori- 
ginal import, applied to the murderer of any near relative.—Ed. 

2 By leaving the family of Abraham, in which alone the true service 
of God was maintained.—Ed. 


206 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. IV. 


he exercises his jurisdiction. Let those, therefore, whose 

econsviences accuse them, beware lest, after the example of 
Cain, they confirm themselves in obstinacy. For this is truly 

to kick against God, and to resist his Spirit; when we repel 

those thoughts, which are nothing else than incentives to 

repentance. But it is a fault too common, to add at length 

to former sins such perverseness, that he who is compelled, 

whether he will or not, to feel sin in his mind, shall yet 

refuse to yield to God. Hence it appears how great is the 

depravity of the human mind; since, when convicted and 

condemned by our own conscience, we still do not cease 

either to mock, or to rage against our Judge. Prodigious 
was the stupor of Cain, who, having committed a crime so 

great, ferociously rejected the reproof of God, from whose 
hand he was nevertheless unable to escape. But the same 

thing daily happens to all the wicked; every one of whom 

desires to be deemed ingenious in catching at excuses. For 
the human heart is so entangled in winding labyrinths, that 

it is easy for the wicked to add obstinate contempt of God 

to their crimes ; not because their contumacy is sufficiently 

firm to withstand the judgment of God, (for, although they 
hide themselves in the deep recesses of which I have spoken, 

they are, nevertheless, always secretly burned, as with a hot 

iron,) but because, by a blind obstinacy, they render them- 

selves callous. Hence, the force of the Divine judgment is 

clearly perceived ; for it so pierces into the iron hearts of the 

wicked, that they are inwardly compelled to be their own 

judges; nor does it suffer them so to obliterate the sense of 
guilt which it has extorted, as not to leave the trace or scar 

of the searing. Cain, in denying that he was the keeper of 
his brother’s life, although, with ferocious rebellion, he 

attempts violently to repel the judgment of God, yet thinks 
to escape by this cavil, that he was not required to give an 

account of his murdered brother, because he had received no 

express command to take care of him. 


10. What hast thou done? The voice of thy brother's blood. 
Moses shows that Cain gained nothing by his tergiversation. 
God first inquired where his brother was; he now more 





CHAP. IV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 207 


closely urges him, in order to extort an unwilling confession. 
of his guilt; for in no racks or tortures of any kind is there 
so much force to constrain evil-doers, as there was efficacy 
in the thunder of the Divine voice to cast down Cain in 
confusion to the ground. For God no longer asks whether 
he had done it; but, pronouncing in a single word that he 
was the doer of it, he aggravates the atrocity of the crime. 
We learn, then, in the person of one man, what an unhappy 
issue of their cause awaits those, who desire to extricate 
themselyes by contending against God. For He, the Searcher 
of hearts, has no need of a long, circuitous course of investi- 
gation; but, with one word, so fulminates against those whom 
he accuses, as to be sufficient, and more than sufficient, for 
their condemnation. Advocates place the first kind of defence 
in the denial of the fact; where the fact cannot be denied, 
they have recourse to the qualifying circumstances of the 
case.! Cain is driven from both these defences; for God 
both pronounces him guilty of the slaughter, and, at the 
same time, declares the heinousness of the crime. And we 
are warned by his example, that pretexts and subterfuges 
are heaped together in vain, when sinners are cited to the 
tribunal of God. 

The voice of thy brother’s blood crieth. God first shows that 
he is cognizant of the deeds of men, though no one should 
complain of or accuse them; secondly, that he holds the life 
of man too dear, to allow innocent blood to be shed with 
impunity ; thirdly, that he cares for the pious not only while 
they live, but even after death. However earthly judges 
may sleep, unless an accuser appeals to them; yet, even when 
he who is injured is silent, the injuries themselves are alone 
sufficient to arouse God to inflict punishment. This is a won- 
derfully sweet consolation to good men, who are unjustly 
harassed, when they hear that their own sufferings, which 
they silently endure, go into the presence of God of their 
own accord, to demand vengeance. Abel was speechless 
when his throat was being cut, or in whatever other manner 
he was losing his life ; but after death the voice of his blood 
was more vehement than any eloquence of the orator. 


'“Ubi negari factum non potest, ad statum qualitatis confugiunt.” 
—‘“ Ils ont recours aux qualitez et circonstances.”—Fr. Trans, 


208 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. IV. 


Thus oppression and silence do not hinder God from judging 
the cause which the world supposes to be buried. This 
consolation affords us most abundant reason for patience 
when we learn that we shall lose nothing of our right, if we 
bear injuries with moderation and equanimity ; and that God 
will be so much the more ready to vindicate us, the more 
modestly we submit ourselves to endure all things; because 
the placid silence of the soul raises effectual cries, which fill 
heaven and earth. Nor does this doctrine apply merely to 
the state of the present life, to teach us that among the innu- 
merable dangers by which we are surrounded, we shall be 
safe under the guardianship of God; but it elevates us by 
the hope of a better life; because we must conclude that 
those for whom God cares shall survive after death. And, 
on the other hand, this consideration should strike terror into 
the wicked and violent, that God declares, that he undertakes 
the causes deserted by human patronage, not in consequence of 
any foreign impulse, but from his own nature; and that he will 
be the sure avenger of crimes, although the injured make no 
complaint. Murderers indeed often exult, as if they had 
evaded punishment ; but at length God-will show that inno- 
cent blood has not been mute, and that he has not said in 
vain, ‘ the death of the saints is precious in his eyes, (Psalm 
exv. 17.) Therefore, as this doctrine brings relief to the 
faithful, lest they should be too anxious concerning their life, 
over which they learn that God continually watches; so does 
it vehemently thunder against the ungodly, who do not 
scruple wickedly to injure and to destroy those whom God 
has undertaken to preserve. 


11. And now art thou cursed from the earth. Cain, haying 
been convicted of the crime, judgment is now pronounced 
against him. And first, God constitutes the earth the minis- 
ter of his vengeance, as having been polluted by the impious 
and horrible parricide: as if he had said, ‘Thou didst just 
now deny to me the murder which thou hast committed, but 
the senseless earth itself will demand thy punishment’ He 
does this, however, to aggravate the enormity of the crime, 
as if a kind of contagion flowed from it even to the earth, for 
which the execution of punishment was required. The ima- 





CHAP. IV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 209 


gination of some, that cruelty is here ascribed to the earth, as 
if God compared it to a wild beast, which had drunk up the 
blood of Abel, is far from the true meaning. Clemency is 
rather, in my judgment, by personification,’ imputed to it; 
because, in abhorrence of the pollution, it had opened its mouth 
to cover the blood which had been shed by a brother’s hand. 
Most detestable is the cruelty of this man, who does not 
shrink from pouring forth his neighbour’s blood, of which the 
bosom of the earth becomes the receptacle. Yet we must not 
here imagine any miracle, as if the blood had been absorbed 
by any unusual opening of the earth; but the speech is figura- 
tive, signifying that there was more humanity in the earth 
than in man himself. Moreover, they who think that, because 
Cain is now cursed in stronger words than Adam had pre- 
viously been, God had dealt more gently with the first man, 
from a design to spare the human race; have some colour for 
their opinion. Adam heard the words, “ Cursed is the ground 
for thy sake :” but now the shaft of divine vengeance vibrates 
against, and transfixes the person of Cain. The opinion of 
others, that temporal punishment is intended, because it is 
said, Thou art cursed from the earth, rather than from hea- 
ven, lest the posterity of Cain, being cut off from the hope of 
salvation, should rush the more boldly on their own damna- 
tion, seems to me not sufficiently confirmed. I rather interpret 
the passage thus: Judgment was committed to the earth, in 
order that Cain might understand that his judge had not to 
- be summoned from a distance; that there was no need for an 
angel to descend from heaven, since the earth voluntarily 
offered itself as the avenger. 


12. When thou tillest the ground. ‘This verse is the 
exposition of the former; for it expresses more clearly what 
is meant by being cursed from the earth, namely, that the earth 
defrauds its cultivators of the fruit of their toil. Should 
any one object that this punishment had before been alike 

inflicted on all mortals, in the person of Adam; my answer is, 
I have no doubt that something of the benediction which had 


1“ Kara reocwrorolay.” 
VOL. I. O 


210 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. IV. 


hitherto remained, was now further withdrawn with respect to 
the murderer, in order that he might privately feel the very 
earth to be hostile to him. For although, generally, God 
causes his sun daily to rise upon the good and the evil, (Matth. 
v. 45,) yet, in the meantime, (as often as he sees good,) he 
punishes the sins, sometimes of a whole nation, and sometimes 
of certain men, with rain and hail, and clouds, so far, at least, 
as is useful to give determinate proof of future judgment; and 
also for the purpose of admonishing the world, by such ex- 
amples, that nothing can succeed when God is angry with 
and opposed to them. Moreover, in the first murder, God 
designed to exhibit a singular example of malediction, the 
memory of which should remain in all ages. 

A fugitive and a vagabond shalt thou be. Another punish- 
ment is now also inflicted; namely, that he never could be 
safe, to whatever place he might come. Moses uses two 
words, little differing from each other, except that the for- 
mer is derived from ¥\}, (noa,) which is to wander, the other 
from $13, (nadad,) which signifies to fice. The distinction 
which some make, that 33, (na,) is he who never has a settled 
habitation, but "13, (nad,) he who knows not which way he 
ought to turn; as it is defective in proof, is with me of no 
weight. The genuine sense then of the words is, that 
wherever Cain might. come, he should be wnsetéled, and a 
fugitive ; as robbersare wont to be, who have no quiet and se- 
cure resting-place; for the face of every man strikes terror mto 
them ; and, on the other hand, they have a horror of solitude. 
But this seems to some by no means a suitable punishment 
for a murderer, since it is rather the destined condition of 
the sons of God; for they, more than all others, feel them- 
selves to be strangers in the world. And Paul complains 
that both he and his companions are without a certain dwell- 
ing-place, (1 Cor. iv. 11.2) To which I answer, that Cain 
was not only condemned to personal exile, but was also sub- 
jected to still more severe punishment; namely, that he 
should find no region of the earth where he would not be of 
a restless and fearful mind ; for as a good conscience is pro- 


1“ orévay nes Teewav.” ‘* Groaning and trembling.”— Sept. 
** Instabiles esse conqueritur.” 








CMAP. IV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 211 


perly called ‘a brazen wall,’ so neither a hundred walls, 
nor as many fortresses, can free the wicked from dis- 
quietude. The faithful are strangers upon the earth, 
yet, nevertheless, they enjoy a tranquil temporary abode. 
Often, constrained by necessity, they wander from place to 
place, but wheresoever the tempest bears them, they carry 
with them a sedate mind; till finally, by perpetual change of 
place, they sorun their course, and passthrough the world, that 
they aré everywhere sustained by the supporting hand of 
God. Such security is denied to the wicked, whom all crea- 
tures threaten; and should even all creatures favour them, 
still the mind itself is so turbulent that it does not suffer 
them to rest. In this manner, Cain, even if he had not 
changed his place, could not have shaken off the trepidation 
which God had fixed in his mind; nor did the fact, that he 
was the first man who built a city, prevent him from being 
always restless, even in his own nest. 


13. My punishment is greater, §c. Nearly all commente- 
tors agree that this is the language of desperation ; becatise 
Cain, confounded by the judgment of God, had no remair- 
ing hope of pardon. And this, indeed, is true, that the re- 
probate are never conscious of their evils, till a ruin, from 
which they cannot escape, overtakes them; yea, truly, when 
the sinner, obstinate to the last, mocks the patience of God, 
this is the due reward of his late repentance, that he feels a 
horrible torment for which there is no remedy,—if, truly, that . 
blind and astonished dread of punishment, which is without 
any hatred of sin, or any desire to return to God, can be called 
repentance ;—so even J udas confesses his sin, but, overwhelmed 
with fear, flies as far as possible from the presence of God. 
And it is certainly true, that the reprobates have no medium ; 
as long as any relaxation is allowed them, they slumber se- 
eurely ; but when the anger of God presses upon them, they 
are broken rather than corrected. Therefore their fear stuns 
them, so that they can think of nothing but of hell and eter- 
nal destruction. However, I doubt not, that the words have 
another meaning. For I rather take the term })Y, (aoon,) in 
its proper signification; and the word XW), (nasa,) Linterpret 








212 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. IV. 


by the word ¢o bear. ‘A greater punishment (he says) is im- 
posed upon me than I can bear.” In this manner, Cain, al- 
though he does not excuse his sin, having been driven from 
every shift; yet complains of the intolerable severity of his 
judgment. So also the devils, although they feel that they are 
justly tormented, yet do not cease to rage against God their 
judge, and to charge him with cruelty. And immediately 
follows the explanation of these words: ‘ Behold, thou hast 
driven me from the face of the earth, and I am hidden from 
thy face”! In which expression he openly expostulates with 
God, that he is treated more hardly than is just, no clemency 
or moderation being shown him. For it is precisely as if he had 
said, ‘ If a safe habitation is denied me in the world, and thou 
dost not deign to care for me, what dost thou leave me? 
would it not be better to die at once than to be constantly 
exposed to a thousand deaths?’ Whence we infer, that the 
reprobate, however clearly they may beconvicted, makeno end 
of storming; insomuch that through their impatience and fury, 
. they seize on occasions of contest ; as if they were able to ex- 
cite enmity against God on account of the severity of their 
own sufferings. This passage also clearly teaches what was the 
nature of that wandering condition, or exile, which Moses had | 
just mentioned ; namely, that no corner of the earth should 
be left him by God, in which he might quietly repose. For, 
being excluded from the common rights of mankind, so as to 
be no more reckoned among the legitimate inhabieegl of the 
earth, he declares that he is cast out from the face of the earth, 
and therefore shall become a fugitive, because the earth will 
deny him a habitation ; hence it would be necessary, that he 
should occupy as a robber, what he did not possess by right. To 
be ‘ hidden from the face of God,’ is to be not regarded by 
God, or not protected by his guardian care. This confession 
also, which God extorted from the impious murderer, is a 
proof that there is no peace for men, unless they acquiesce 
in the providence of God, and are persuaded that their lives 
are the object of his care; it is also a proof, that they can 
only quietly enjoy any of God’s benefits so long as they 


1“ Ecce repulisti me a facie terre, et & facie tua abscondar.” 





CHAP. IV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 213 


regard themselves as placed in the world, on this condi- 
tion, that they pass their lives under his government. How 
wretched then is the instability of the wicked, who know 
that not a foot of earth is granted to them by God! 


14. Every one that findeth me. Since he is no longer 
covered by the protection of God, he concludes that he shall 
be exposed to injury and violence from all men. And he 
reasons justly ; for the hand of God alone marvellously pre- 
serves us amid so many dangers. And they have spoken 
prudently who have said, not only that our life hangs on a 
thread, but also that we have been received into this fleeting 
life, out of the womb, from a hundred deaths. Cain, however, 
in this place, not only considers himself as deprived of God’s 
protection, but also supposes all creatures to be divinely 
armed to take vengeance of his impious murder. This is the 
reason why he so greatly fears for his life from any one who 
may meet him ; for as man isa social animal, and all naturally 
desire mutual intercourse, this is certainly to be regarded as 
a portentous fact, that the meeting with any man was for- 
midable to the murderer. 


15. Therefore, whosoever slayeth Cain. They who think that it 
was Cain’s wish to perish immediately by one death, in order 
thathe might not be agitated by continual dangers, and that the 
prolongation of his life was granted him only as a punishment, 
have no reason, that I can see, for thus speaking. But far 
more absurd is the manner in which many of the Jews mu- 
tilate this sentence. First, they imagine, in this clause, the 
use of the figure dmocmanos, according to which something 
not expressed is understood ; then they begin anew sentence, 
‘ He shall be punished sevenfold,’ which they refer to Cain. _ 
“Still, however, they do not agree together about the sense. 
Some trifle respecting Lamech, as we shall soon declare. 
Others expound the passage of the deluge, which happened 
in the seventh generation. But that is frivolous, since the 
latter was not a private punishment of one family only, but a 
common punishment of the human race. But this sentence 
ought to be read continuously, thus, ‘ Whosoever killeth Cain, 


214 COMMENTARY UPON ‘CHAP. IV. 


shall, on this account, be punished sevenfold.’ And the causal 
particle 195, (lehon,) indicates that God would take care to 
preyent any one from easily breaking in upon him to destroy 
him ; not because God would institute a privilege in favour 
of the murderer, or would hearken to his prayer, but because 
he would consult for posterity, in order to the preservation 
of human life. The order of nature had been awfully violated ; 
what might be expected to happen in future, when the 
wickedness and audacity of man should increase, unless the 
fury of others had been restrained by a violent hand? For 
we know what pestilent and deadly poison Satan presents to 
us in evil examples, if a remedy be not speedily applied. 
Therefore, the. Lord declares, if any will imitate Cain, not 
only shall they have no excuse in his example, but shall be 
more grievously tormented; because they ought, in his person, 
to perceive how detestable is their wickedness in the sight of 
God. Wherefore, they are greatly deceived who suppose 
that the anger of God is mitigated when men can plead 
custom as an excuse for sinning; whereas, it is from that 
cause the more inflamed. 

And the Lord set amark. I have lately said, that nothing 
was granted to Cain for the sake of favouring him; but for 
the sake of opposing, in future, cruelty and unjust violence. 
And, therefore, Moses now says, that a mark was set upon 
Cain, which should strike terror into all; because they might 
see, as in a mirror, the tremendous judgment of God against 
bloody men. As Scripture does not describe what kind of 
mark it was, commentators have conjectured, that his body 
became tremulous. It may suffice for us, that there was 
some visible token which should repress in the spectators 
the desire and the audacity to inflict injury. 


16. And Cain went out from the presence of the Lord. Cain 
is said to have departed from the presence of God, because, 
whereas he had hitherto lived in the earth as in an abode be- 
longing to God, now, like an exile removed far from God’s 
sight, he wanders beyond the limits of His protection. Or 
certainly, (which is not less probable,) Moses represents him 
as having stood at the bar of judgment till he was condemned: 











CHAP. IV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 215 


but now, when God ceased to speak with him, being freed 
from the sense of His presence, he hastens elsewhere and 
seeks a new habitation, where he may escape the eyes of 
God. The land of Nod' without doubt obtaimed its name 
from its inhabitant. From its being situated on the eastern 
side of Paradise, we may infer the truth of what was before 
stated, that a certain place, distinguished by its pleasantness 
and rich abundance of fruits, had been given to Adam for a 
habitation; for, of necessity, that place must be limited, which 
has opposite aspects towards the various regions of the world. 


17. And Cain knew his wife. From the context we may 
gather that Cain, before he slew his brother, had married a 
wife ; otherwise Moses would now have related something 
respecting his marriage; because it would bea fact worthy to be 
recorded, that any one of his sisters could be found, who would 
not shrink with horror from committing herself into the 
hand of one whom she knew to be defiled with a brother's 
blood; and while a free choice was still given her, should 
rather choose spontaneously to follow an exile and a fugitive, 
than to remain in her father’s family. Moreover, he relates 
it as a prodigy that Cain, having shaken off the terror he had 
mentioned, should have thought of having children :* for it is 
remarkable, that he who imagined himself to have as many 
enemies as there were men in the world, did not rather hide 
himself in some remote solitude. It is also contrary to 
nature, that he being astounded with fear, and feeling that 
God was opposed to him, could enjoy any pleasure. Indeed, 
it seems to me doubtful, whether he had previously had 
any children; for there would be nothing absurd in saying, 
that reference is here made especially to those who were born 
after the crime was committed, as to a detestable seed who 
would fully participate in the sanguinary disposition, and the 
savage manners of their father. This, however, is without 
controversy, that many persons, as well males as females, are 
omitted in this narrative; it being the design of Moses 

ta 

‘3 signifies motion, flight, wandering, exile, and is the name of the 


region into which Cain was exiled. 
“ Ad sobolem gignendam animum applicuisse.” 


216 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. IV. 


to follow one line of his progeny, until he should come to 
Lamech. The house of Cain, therefore, was more populous 
than Moses states; but because of the memorable history of 
Lamech, which he is about to subjoin, he only adverts to one 
line of descendants, and passes over the rest in silence. 

He built a city. This, at first sight, seems very contrary, 
both to the judgment of God, and to the preceding sentence. 
For Adam and the rest of his family, to whom God had as- 
signed a fixed station, are passing their lives in hovels, or even 
under the open heaven, and. seek their precarious lodging 
under trees; but the exile Cain, whom God had commanded 
to rove as a fugitive, not content with a private house, 
builds himself a city. It is, however, probable, that the man, 
oppressed by an accusing conscience, and not thinking him- 
self safe within the walls of his own house, had contrived a 
new kind of defence: for Adam and the rest live dispersed 
through the fields for no other reason, than that they are less 
afraid. Wherefore, it is a sign of an agitated and guilty 
mind, that Cain thought of building a city for the pur- 
pose of separating himself from the rest of men; yet, that 
pride was mixed with his diffidence and anxiety, appears, from 
his having called the city after his son. Thus different affec- 
tions often contend with each other in the hearts of the 
wicked. Fear, the fruit of his iniquity, drives him within the 
walls of a city, that he may fortify himself in a manner before 
unknown ; and, on the other hand, supercilious vanity breaks 
forth. Certainly he ought rather to have chosen that his name 
should be buried for ever; for how could his memory be trans- 
mitted, except to be heldinexecration? Yet, ambitionimpels him 
to erect a monument to his race in the name of his city. What 
shall we here say, but thathe had hardened himself against pun- 
ishment, for the purpose of holding out, in inflated obstinacy, 
against God? Moreover, although it is lawful to defend our 
lives by the fortifications of cities and of fortresses, yet the 

first origin of them is to be noted, because it is always profit- 
able for us to behold our faults in their very remedies. When 
captious men sneeringly inquire, whence Cain had brought 
his architects and workmen to build his city, and whence he 
sent for citizens to inhabit it ? I, in return, ask of them, what 











CHAP. IV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 217 


authority they have for believing that the city was constructed 
of squared stones, and with great skill, and at much expense, 
and that the building of it was a work of long continuance ? 
For nothing further can be gathered from the words of 
Moses, than that Cain surrounded himself and his posterity 
with walls formed of the rudest materials: and as it respects 
the inhabitants ; that in that commencement of the fecundity 
of mankind, his offspring would have grown to so great a 
number when it had reached his children of the fourth 
generation, that it might easily form the body of one city. 


19. And Lamech took unto him two wives. We have here 
the origin of polygamy in a perverse and degenerate race ; and 
the first author of it, a cruel man, destitute of all humanity. 
Whether he had been impelled by an immoderate desire of 
augmenting his own family, as proud and ambitious men are 
wont to be, or by mere lust, it is of little consequence to de- 
termine ; because, in either way he violated the sacred law 
of marriage, which had been delivered by God. For God 
had determined, that “ they two should be one flesh,” and 
that is the perpetual order of nature. Lamech, with brutal 
‘contempt of God, corrupts nature’s laws. The Lord, there- 
fore, willed that the corruption of lawful marriage should pro- 
ceed from the house of Cain, and from the person of Lamech, 
in order that polygamists might be ashamed of the example. 


20. Jabal ; he was the father of such as dwell in tents. Moses 
now relates that,-with the evils which proceeded from the 
family of Cain, some good had been blended. For the in- 
vention of arts, and of other things which serve to the com- 
mon use and convenience of life, is a gift of God by no means 
to be despised, and a faculty worthy of commendation. It 
is truly wonderful, that this race, which had most deeply fallen 
from integrity, should have excelled the rest of the pos- 
terity of Adam in rare endowments.! I, however, under- 
stand Moses to have spoken expressly concerning these 
arts, as having been invented in the family of Cain, for 
the purpose of showing that he was not so accursed by 


1 Non penitendis dotibus, pra aliis Adz posteris excelluisse.” 


218 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. IV.” 


the Lord but that he would still scatter some excellent 
gifts among his posterity; for it is probable, that the 
genius of others was in the meantime not inactive; but 
that there were, among the sons of Adam, industrious and 
skilful men, who exercised their diligence in the invention 
and cultivation of arts. Moses, however, expressly celebrates 
the remaining benediction of God on that race, which other- 
wise would have been deemed void and barren of all good. 
Let us then know, that the sons of Cain, though deprived 
of the Spirit of regeneration, were yet endued with gifts of 
no despicable kind; just as the experience of all ages teaches 
us how widely the rays of divine light have shone on unbeliey- 
ing nations, for the benefit of the present life; and we see, at the 
present time, that the excellent gifts of the Spirit are diffused 
through the whole human race. Moreover, the liberal arts and 
sciences have descended to us from the heathen. Weare, in- 
deed, compelled to acknowledge that we have received 
astronomy, and the other parts of philosophy, medicine, and 
the order of civil government, from them. Nor is it to be 
doubted, that God has thus liberally enriched them with excel- 
lent favours that their impiety might have the less excuse. 
But, while we admire the riches of his favour which he has” 
bestowed on them, let us still value far more highly that 
grace of regeneration with which he peculiarly sanctifies his 
elect unto himself. 

Now, although the invention of the harp, and of similar 
instruments of music, may minister to our pleasure, rather 
than to our necessity, still it is not to be thought altogether 
superfluous; much less does it deserve, in itself, to be con- 
demned. Pleasure is indeed to be condemned, unless it be 
combined with the fear of God, and with the common ‘ene- 
fit of human society. But such is the nature of musi », that 
it can be adapted to the offices of religion, and made profit- 
able to men; if only it be free from vicious attractions, and 
from that foolish delight, by which it seduces men from better 
employments, and occupies them in vanity. If, however, we 
allow the invention of the harp no praise, it is well known 
how far and how widely extends the usefulness of the art of the 
carpenter. Finally, Moses, in my opinion, intends to teach 


CHAP. Lv. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 219 


that that race flourished in various and pre-eminent endow- 
ments, which would both render it inexcusable, and would 
prove most evident testimonies of the divine goodness. The 

name of “the father of them that dwell in tents,” is given to 
' him who was the first inventor of that convenience, which 
others afterwards imitated. 


23. Hear my voice, ye wives of Lamech. The intention of 
‘Moses is to describe the ferocity of this man, who was, how- 
ever, the fifth in descent from the fratricide Cain, in order to 
teach us, that, so far from being terrified by the example of 
divine judgment which he had seen in his ancestor, he was 
only the more hardened. Such is the obduracy of the im- 
pious, that they rage against those chastisements of God, 
which ought at least to render them gentle. The obscurity 
of this passage, which has procured for us a variety of in- 
terpretations, mainly arises hence; that whereas Moses 
speaks abruptly, interpreters have not considered what is the 
tendency of his speech. The Jews have, according to their 
manner, invented a foolish fable ; namely, that Lamech was 
a hunter and blind, and had a boy to direct his hand; that Cain, 
while he was concealed in the woods, was shot through by 
his arrow, because the boy, taking him for a wild beast, had 
directed his master’s hand towards him; that Lamech then 
took revenge on the boy, who, by his imprudence, had been 
the cause of the murder. And ignorance of the true state of 
the case has caused every one toallow himself to conjecture what 
he pleased. But to me the opinion of those seems to betrue and 
simple, who resolve the past tense into the future, and under- 
stand its application to beindefinite; asif he had boasted that he 
had strength and violence enough to slay any, even the strong- 
est enemy. I therefore read thus, ‘I will slay a man for my 
wound, and a young man for my bruise,’ or ‘in my bruise 
and wound.’ But, as I have said, the occasion of his holding 
this conversation with his wives is to be noticed. We know 
that sanguinary men, as they are a terror to others, so are 
they everywhere hated by all. The wives, therefore, of La- 
mech were justly alarmed on account of their husband, whose 
violence was intolerable to the whole human race, lest, a con- 


220 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. IV. 


spiracy being formed, all should unite to crush him, as one de- 
serving of public odium and execration. Now Moses, to exhibit 
his desperate barbarity, seeing that the soothing arts of wives 
are often wont to mitigate cruel and ferocious men, declares 
that Lamech cast forth the venom of his cruelty into the 
bosom of his wives. The sum of the whole is this: He boasts 
that he has sufficient courage and strength to strike down any 
who should dare toattackhim. The repetition occurring in the 
use of the words ‘man’ and ‘young man’ isaccordingto Hebrew 
phraseology, so that none should think different persons to be 
denoted by them; he only amplifies, in the second member of 
the sentence, his furious audacity, when he glories that young 
men in the flower of their age would not be equal to contend 
with him: as if he would say, Let each mightiest man come 
forward, there is none whom I will not dispatch. So far 
was he from calming his wives with the hope of his leading a 
more humane life, that he breaks forth in threats of sheer 
indiscriminate slaughter against every one, like a furious wild 
beast. Whence it easily appears, that he was so imbued with 
ferocity as to have retained nothing human. The nouns 
wound and bruise may be variously read. If they be ren- 
dered ‘ for my wound and bruise,’ then the sense will be, ‘I 
confidently take upon my own head whatever danger there 
may be, let what will happen it shall be at my expense; for 
I have a means of escape at hand. Then what follows must 
be read in connection with it, “If Cain shall be avenged 
sevenfold, truly Lamech seventy and seven fold.” If the ab- 
lative case be preferred, ‘In my wound and bruise,’ there 
will still be a double exposition. The first is, ‘ Although I 
should be wounded, I would still kill the man; what then 
will I not do when I am whole?’ The other, and, in my 
judgment, the sounder and more consistent exposition, is, 
‘If any one provoke me by injury, or attempt any act of vio- 
lence, he shall feel that he has to deal with a strong and 
valiant man; nor shall he who injures me escape with im- 
punity.’! This example shows that men ever glide from bad 


1 Tt is clear that Calvin had no perception of the poetical character of 
this speech, or he would more correctly have interpreted its meaning. 
There is, however, and will be, much difference of opinion respecting the 





CHAP. IV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 221 


to worse. The wickedness of Cain was indeed awful; but 
the cruelty of Lamech advanced so far that he was unspar- 
ing of human blood. Besides, when he saw his wives struck 
with terror, instead of becoming mild, he only sharpened and 
confirmed himself the more in cruelty. Thus the brutality 
of cruel men increases in proportion as they find themselves 
hated; so that instead of being touched with penitence, they 
are ready to bury one murder under ten others. Whence it 
follows that they, having once become imbued with blood, 
shed it, and drink it, without restraint. 


24. Cain shall be avenged sevenfold. It is not my intention 
to relate the ravings or the dreams of every writer, nor would 
I have the reader to expect this from me; here and there [ 


real nature of the act spoken of in this obscure poem. Some have thought 
Lamech guilty of savage cruelty in murdering an innocent person ; others 
have deemed the act to be one of justifiable homicide, done in self-defence. 
Others, again, have supposed the expression of Lamech to be a mere 
question, which admitted only ofa negative answer, ‘ Have I slain a man 
for my wound?’ And, lastly, there are those who, with Calvin, take it as 
the language of bravado, ‘I would slay a man for wounding me, if he 
should attempt to do it.’ In Bishop Lowth’s fourth Prelection the 
whole is given in three distiches of Hebrew poetry, of which the following 
is a translation :— 
*¢ Ada and Zillah, hear my voice: 
Ye wives of Lamech, hearken to my speech ; 
Because I have slain a man for my wound, 
And a boy for my bruise: 
If Cain shall be avenged sevenfold, 
Lamech even seventy times seven.” 
De Sacra Poest Hebreorum. 
See also Dr A. Clarke’s Commentary in loco. 
The following translation from Herder is also worthy of notice :— 
‘**Ye wives of Lamech, hear my voice, 
And hearken to my speech ; 
I slew a man who wounded me, 
A youth who smote me with a blow. 
If Cain shall be seven times avenged, 
Then Lamech seventy times seven.” 
Caunter’s Poetry of the Pentateuch, vol. i. p. 81. 
Caunter commends the translation of Bishop Lowth for having got rid 
of the copulative conjunction in the fourth line. This, however, is a mis- 
take into which he has been led by reading Lowth not in the original, 
but in Dr Gregory’s translation. A remark of Michaelis appears worthy 
of attention. Speaking of Lamech and his wives, he says, ‘ It is not to 
be supposed that he addressed them in verse ; the substance of what he 
said has been reduced to numbers, for the sake of preserving it easily in 
the memory.’—Ed. : 


222 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, IV. 


allude to them, though sparingly, especially if there be any 
colour of deception; that readers, being oftenadmonished, may 
learn to take heed unto themselves. Therefore, with respect 
to this passage, which has been variously tortured, I will not 
record what one or another may have delivered, but will con- 
tent myself with a true exposition of it. God had intended 
that Cain should be a horrible example to warn others against 
the commission of murder; and for this end had marked him 
with a shameful stigma. Yet lest any one should imitate his 
crime, He declared whosoever killed him should be punished 
with sevenfold severity. Lamech, impiously perverting this 
divine declaration, mocks its severity ; for he hence takes 
greater license to sin, as if God had granted some singular 
privilege to murderers; not that he seriously thinks so, but 
being destitute of all sense of piety, he promises himself im- 
punity, and in the meantime jestingly uses the name of God 
as an excuse: just as Dionysius did, who boasted that the 
gods favour sacrilegious persons, for the sake of obliterating 
the infamy which he had contracted. Moreover, as the num- 
ber seven in Scripture designates a multitude, so sevenfold is 
taken for a very great increase. Such is the meaning of the 
declaration of Christ, ‘I do not say that thou shalt remit 
the offence seven times, but seventy times seven,’ (Matth. 
XViil. 22.) 

Adam knew his wife again. Some hence infer that our first 
parents were entirely deprived of their offspring when one of 
their sons had been slain, and the other was cast far away 
into banishment. But it is utterly incredible that, when the 
benediction of God in the propagation of mankind was in its 
greatest force, Adam and Jive should have been through so 
many years unfruitful. But rather, before Abel was slain, 
the continual succession of progeny had already rendered the 
house of Adam populous ; for in him and his wife especially 
the effect of that declaration ought to be conspicuous, ‘“ In- 
crease and multiply, and replenish the earth.” What, there- 
fore, does Moses mean? ‘Truly, that our first parents, hor- 
ror-struck at the impious slaughter, abstained for a while 
from the conjugal bed. Nor could it certainly be otherwise, 
than that they, in reaping this exceedingly sad and bitter | 











CHAP. IV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 223 


fruit of their apostacy from God, should sink down almost 
lifeless. ‘The reason why he now passes by others is, that he 
designed to trace the generation of pious descendants through 
the line of Seth. In the following chapter, however, where 
he will say, that “ Adam begat sons and daughters,” he un- 
doubtedly includes a great number who had been born before 
Seth ; to whom, however, but little regard is paid, since they 
were separated from that family which worshipped God in 
purity, and which might truly be deemed the Church of 
God. 

God, saith she, hath appointed me another seed instead of 
Abel, Eve means some peculiar seed; for we have said that 
others had been born who had also grown up before the death 
of Abel; but, since the human race is prone to evil, nearly 
her whole family had, in various ways, corrupted itself; 
therefore, she entertained slight hope of the remaining mul- 
titude, until God should raise up to her a new seed, of which 
she might expect better things. Wherefore, she regarded 
herself as bereaved not of one son only, but of her whole 
offspring, in the person of Abel. 


26. Then began men to call upon the name of the Lord. In the 
verb ‘to call upon,’ there is a synecdoche, for it embraces gene- 
rally the whole worship of God. But religion is here properly 
designated by that which forms its principal part. For God 
prefers this service of piety and faith to all sacrifices, (Psalm 
1, 14.) Yea, this is the spiritual worship of God which 
faith produces. This is particularly worthy of notice, because 
Satan contrives nothing with greater care than to adulterate, 
with every possible corruption, the pure invocation of God, 
or to draw us away from the only God to the invocation of 
creatures. Even from the beginning of the world he has not 
ceased to move this stone, that miserable men might weary 
themselves in vain in a preposterous worship of God. But 
let us know, that the entire pomp of adoration is nothing 
worth, unless this chief point of worshipping God aright be 
maintained. Although the passage may be more simply 
explained to mean, that then the name of God was again 
celebrated; yet I approve the former sense, because it is more 


224 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. V. 


full, contains a useful doctrine, and also agrees with the 
accustomed phraseology of Scripture. It is a foolish fig- 
ment, that God then began to be called by other names; 
since Moses does not here censure depraved superstitions, 
but commends the piety of one family which worshipped 
God in purity and holiness, when religion, among other 
people, was polluted or extinct. And there is no doubt, 
that Adam and Eve, with a few other of their children, were 
themselves true worshippers of God; but Moses means, that 
so great was then the deluge of impiety in the world that 
religion was rapidly hastening to destruction; because it 
remained only with a few men, and did not flourish in any 
one race. Wemay readily conclude that Seth was an upright 
and faithful servant of God. And after he begat a son, like 
himself, and had a rightly constituted family, the face of the 
Church began distinctly to appear, and that worship of God 
was set up which might continue to posterity. Such a 
restoration of religion has been effected also in our time; 
not that it had been altogether extinct; but there was 
no certainly defined people who called upon God; and, no 
sincere profession of faith, no uncorrupted religion could 
anywhere be discovered. Whence it too evidently appears 
how great is the propensity of men, either to gross contempt 
of God, or to superstition; since both evils must then have 
everywhere prevailed, when Moses relates it as a miracle, 
that there was at that time a single family in which the 
worship of God arose. 


CHAPTER V. 


1. Tus is the book of the genera- 1, Iste est liber generationum 
tions of Adam. In the day that God Adam: in die qua creavit Deus 
created man, in the likeness of God hominem, ad similitudinem Dei 
made he him ; fecit illum. 

2. Male and female created he them; 2. Masculum et feminam 
and blessed them, andcalledtheir name creavit eos, et benedixit eis: et 
Adam, in the day when they were vocavit nomen eorum Hominem, 
created. im die qua creati sunt. 


CHAP. V. 


§. And Adam lived an hundred and 
thirty years, and begat a son in his 
own likeness, after his image ; and call- 
ed his name Seth : 


4. And the days of Adam after he 
had begotten Seth were eight hun- 
dred years: and he begat sons and 
daughters : 

5. Andall the days that Adam lived 
were nine hundred and thirty years: 
and he died. 


6. And Seth lived an hundred and 
five years, and begat Enos: 


7. And Seth lived after he begat 
Enos eight hundred and seven years, 
and begat sons and daughters : 


8. And all the days of Seth were 
nine hundred and twelve years: and 
he died. 

9. And Enos lived ninety years, and 
begat Cainan: 

10. And Enos lived after he begat 
Cainan eight hundred and fifteen years, 
and begat sons and daughters : 


11. And all the days of Enos were 
nine hundred and five years: and he 
died. 

12, And Cainan lived seventy years, 
and begat Mahalaleel : 

13. And Cainan lived after he be- 
gat Mahalaleel eight hundred and 
forty years, and begat sons and daugh- 
ters : 

14. And all the days of Cainan were 
nine hundred and ten years: and he 
died. 

15, And Mahalaleel lived sixty and 
five years, and begat Jared : 


16. And Mahalaleel lived after he 
begat Jared eight hundred and thirty 
years, and begat sons and daughters: 


17. And all the days of Mahalaleel 
were eight hundred ninety and five 
years: and he died. 

18. And Jared lived an hundred 
sixty and two years, and he begat 
Enoch : 

VOL. I. 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


223 


3. Et vixit Adam triginta et 
centum annos: et genuit ad si- 
militudinem suam, ad imaginem 
suam jilium, et vocavit nomen 
ejus Seth. 

4, Et fuerunt dies Adam post- 
quam genuit Seth, octingenti 
anni: et genuit filios et filias. 


5. Fuerunt itaque omnes dies 
Adam quibus vixit, nongenti 
anni et triginta anni: et mor- 
tuus est. 

6. Et vixit Seth quinque an- 
nos et centum annos, et genuit 
Enos. 

7. Et vixit Seth postquam 
genuit Enos, septem annos et 
octingentos annos: et genuit 
filios et filias. 

8. Fuerunt itaque omnes dies 
Seth, duodecim anni et nongenti 
anni: et mortuus est. 

9. Et vixit Enos nonaginta 
annos, et genuit Kenan. 

10. Et vixit Enos postquam 
genuit Kenan, quindecim annos 
et octingentos annos, et genuit 
filios et filias. 

11. Fuerunt igitur omnes dies 
Enos, quinque anni et nongenti 
anni: et mortuus est. 

12. Et vixit Kenan septua- 
gintaannos, et genuit Mahalaleel. 

13. Et vixit Kenan postquam 
genuit Mahalaleel, quadraginta 
annos et octingentos annos: et 
genuit filios et filias. 

14. Fuerunt itaque omnes 
dies Kenan, decem anni et non- 
genti anni: et mortuus est. 

15. Et vixit Mahalaleel quin- 
que annos et sexaginta eae 
et genuit Jered. 

16. Et vixit Mahalaleel post- 
quam genuit Jered, triginta an- 
nos et octingentos annos: et 
genuit filios et filias. 

17. Fuerunt igitur omnes dies 
Mahalaleel, quinque anni et oc- 
tingenti anni: et mortuus est. 

18. Et vixit Jered duos et 
sexaginta annos et centum an- 
nos, et genuit Hanoch. 

P 


226 


19. And Jared lived after he begat 
Enoch eight hundred years, and be- 
gat sons and daughters : 

20. And all the days of Jared were 
nine hundred sixty and two years: 
and he died. 

21. And Enoch lived sixty and five 
years, and begat Methuselah : 


22. And Enoch walked with God 
after he begat Methuselah three hun- 
dred years, and begat sons and daugh- 
ters: 

23. And allthe days of Enoch were 
three hundred sixty and five years: 


94. And Enoch walked with God: 


and he was not ; for God took him. 


25. And Methuselah lived an hun- 
dred eighty and seven years, and be- 
gat Lamech : 

26. And Methuselah lived after he 
begat Lamech seven hundred eighty 
and two years, and begat sons and 
daughters : 

27. And all the days of Methu- 
selah were nine hundred sixty and 
nine years: and he died. 


28. And Lamech lived an hundred 
eighty and two years, and begat a 
son: 

29. And he called his name Noah, 
saying, This same shall comfort us 
concerning our work and toil of our 
hands, because of the ground which 
the Lord hath cursed. 

80. And Lamech lived after he 
begat Noah five hundred ninety and 
five years, and begat sons and daugh- 
ters : 


31. And all the days of Lamech 
were seven hundred seventy and seven 
years: and he died. 


82. And Noah was five hundred 
years old: and Noah begat Shem, 
Ham, and Japheth. 


1. This ts the book of the generations of Adam. 


COMMENTARY UPON 


CHAP. VY. 


19. Et vixit Jered postquam 
genuit Hanoch octingentos an- 
nos: et genuit filios et filias. 

20. Fuerunt ergo omnes dies 
Jered duo et sexaginta anni et 
nongenti anni: et mortuus est. 

21. Et vixit Hanoch quinque 
et sexaginta annos, et genuit 
Methuselah. 

22, Et ambulavit Hanoch cum 
Deo, postquam genuit Methu- 
selah, trecentos annos: et gennit 

filios et filias. 

23. Fuerunt itaque omnes 
dies Hanoch, quinque et sexa- 
ginta anni et trecenti anni. 

24, Et ambulavit Hanoch cum 
Deo: et non fuit, quia tulit eum 
Deus. 

25. Et vixit Methuselah sep- 
tem et octoginta annos et cen- 
tum annos, et genuit Lemech. 

26. Et vixit Methuselah post- 
quam genuit Lemech, duos et 
octoginta annos et septingentos 
annos: et genuit filios et filias. 

27. Fuerunt igitur omnes dies 
Methuselah novem et sexaginta 
anni et nongenti anni: et mor- 
tuus est. 

28. Et vixit Lemech duos e 
octoginta annos et centum an- 
nos: et genuit filium. 

29. Et vocavit nomen ejus — 
Noah, dicendo, Iste consolabitur 
nos ab opere nostro, et a dolore 
manuum nostrarum de terra eui 
maledixit Jehova. 

30. Et vixit Lemech post- 
quam genuit ipsum Noah, quin- 
que et nonaginta annos et 
quingentos annos: et genuit 
filios et filias. 

51. Fuerunt itaque omnes 
dies Lemech septem et septua- 
ginta anni et septingenti anni: 
et mortuus est. 

32. Et erat Noah quingento- 
rum annorum, et genuit ipse 
Noah, Sem, Cham, et Jepheth. 


In this 


chapter Moses briefly recites the length of time which had 


CHAP. V. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 227 


intervened between the creation of the world and the deluge; 
and also slightly touches on some portion of the history of 
that period. And although we do not comprehend the 
design of the Spirit, in leaving unrecorded great and memo- 
rable events, it is, nevertheless, our business to reflect on 
many things which are passed over in silence. I entirely 
disapprove of those speculations, which every one frames for 
himself from light conjectures; nor will I furnish readers 
with the occasion of indulging themselves in this respect ; 
yet it may, in some degree, be gathered from a naked and 
apparently dry narration, what was the state of those times, 
as we shall see in the proper places. “ The book,” according 
to the Hebrew phrase, is taken for acatalogue. ‘The 
generations” signify a continuous succession of a race, or a 
continuous progeny. Further, the design with which this 
catalogue was made, was, to inform us, that in the great, 
or rather, we might say, prodigious multitude of men, there 
was always a number, though small, who worshipped God ; 
and that this number was wonderfully preserved by celestial 
guardianship, lest the name of God should be entirely obli- 
terated, and the seed of the Church should fail. 

In the day that God created. He does not restrict these 
“ generations” to the day of the creation, but only points 
out their commencement; and, at the same time, he dis- 
tinguishes between our first parents and the rest of man- 
kind, because God had brought them into life by a singular 
method, whereas others had sprung from a previous stock, and 
had been born of parents.’ Moreover, Moses again repeats 
what he had before stated, that Adam was formed according 
to the image of God, because the excellency and dignity of 
this favour could not be sufficiently celebrated. It was 
already a great thing, that the principal place among the 
creatures was given to man; but.itis a nobility far more 


1 Ti discerne les premiers hommes d’avec les autres, aus quels Dieu 
a prolongé la vie eu une fagon singuliere : combien qu’ils ne fussent de si 
haute ne si noble race."—Fr. Trans. It will be perceived that this 
translation differs materially in sense from that given above; but, after 
the fullest consideration, the Editor adheres to his own, as a more literal 
rendering of the original Latin, and as being more in accordance with 
the reasoning of the Author.— Ed. 


228 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. V. 


exalted, that he should bear resemblance to his Creator, as 
a son does to his father. It was not indeed possible for God 
to act more liberally towards man, than by impressing his 
own glory upon him, thus making him, as it were, a living 
image of the Divine wisdom and justice. This also is of 
force in repelling the calumnies of the wicked, who would 
gladly transfer the blame of their wickedness to their Maker, 
had it not been expressly declared, that man was formed 
by nature a different being from that which he has now 
become, through the fault of his own defection from God. 


2. Male and female created he them. ‘This clause commends 
the sacred bond of marriage, and the inseparable union of the 
husband and the wife. For when Moses has mentioned only 
one, he immediately afterwards includes both under one name. 
And he assigns a common name indiscriminately to both, in 


= ame 


parents were denominated as one person. The trifling inference 
of Jewish writers, that married persons only are called Adam, 
(or man,) is refuted by the history of the creation ; nor truly 
did the Spirit, in this place, mean anything else, than that 
after the appointment of marriage, the husband and the wife 
were like one man. Moreover, he records the blessing pro- | 
nounced upon them, that we may observe in it the wonderful 
kindness of God in continuing to grant it; yet let us know 
that by the depravity and wickedness of men it was, in some 
degree, interrupted. 


3. And begat a son in his own likeness. We have lately said 
that Moses traces the offspring of Adam only through the 
line of Seth, to propose for our consideration the succession 
of the Church. In saying that Seth begat a son after his 
own image, he refers in part to the first origin of our nature: 
at the same time its corruption and pollution is to be noticed, 
which having been contracted by Adam through the fall, has 
flowed down to all his posterity. If he had remained upright, 
he would have transmitted to all his children what he had re- 
ceived: but now we read that Seth, as well as the rest, was 


CHAP. V. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 229 


defiled ; because Adam, who had fallen from his original state, 
could beget none but such as were like himself. If any one 
should object that Seth with his family had been elected by 
the special grace of God: the answer is easy and obvious; 
namely, that a supernatural remedy does not prevent carnal 
generation from participating in the corruption of sin. There- 
fore, according to the flesh, Seth was born a sinner; but 
afterwards he was renewed by the grace of the Spirit. This 
sad instance of the holy patriarch furnishes us with ample 
occasion to deplore our own wretchedness. 


4, And the days of Adam after he had begotten Seth. In 
the number of years here recorded we must especially consi- 
der the long period which the patriarchs lived together. For 
through six successive ages, when the family of Seth had grown 
into a great people, the voice of Adam might daily resound, in 
order to renew the memory of the creation, the fall, and the 
punishment of man; to testify of the hope of salvation which 
remained after chastisement, and to recite the judgments of 
God, by which all might be instructed. After his death his 
sons might indeed deliver, as from hand to hand, what they had 
learned, to their descendants ; but far more efficacious would 
be the instruction from the mouth of him, who had been him- 
self the eye-witness of all these things. Yet so wonderful, 
and even monstrous, was the general obstinacy, that not even 
the sounder part of the human race could be retained in the 
obedience and the fear of God. 


5. And he died. This clause, which records the death of 
each patriarch, is by no means superfluous. For it warns us 
that death was not in vain denounced against men; and that 
we are now exposed to the curse to which man was doomed, 
unless we obtain deliverance elsewhere. In the meantime, 
we must reflect upon our lamentable condition ; namely, that 
the image of God being destroyed, or, at least, obliterated in 
us, we scarcely retain the faint shadow of a life, from which 
we are hastening to death. And it is useful, in a picture of so 
many ages, to behold, at one glance, the continual course and 
tenor of divine vengeance; because, otherwise, we imagine that 


230 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. V. 


God is in some way forgetful; and to nothing are we more 
prone than to dream of immortality on earth, unless death is 
frequently brought before our eyes. 


22. And Enoch walked with God. Undoubtedly Enoch is 
honoured with peculiar praise among the men of his own age, 
when it is said that he walked with God. Yet both Seth 
and Enoch, and Cainan, and Mahalaleel, and Jared, were then 
living, whose piety was celebrated in the former part of the 
chapter.! As that age could not be rude, or barbarous, which 
had so many most excellent teachers ; we hence infer, that the 
probity of this holy man, whom the Holy Spirit exempted 
from the common order, was rare and almost singular. Mean- 
while, a method is here pointed out of guarding against 
being carried away by the perverse manners of those with whom 
we are conversant. For public custom is as a violent tempest ; 
both because we easily suffer ourselves to beled hither and thither 
by the multitude, and because every one thinks what is com- 
monly received must beright and lawful; just as swine contract 
an itching from each other; noristhereany contagion worse, and 
more loathsome than that of evil examples. Hence we ought the 
more diligently to notice the brief description ofa holy life, con- 
tained inthe words, “Enoch walked with God.” Let those, then, 
who please, glory in living according to the custom of others; 
yet the Spirit of God has established a rule of living well and 
rightly, by which we depart from the examples of men who do 
not form their life and manners according to the law of God. 
For he who, pouring contempt upon the word of God, yields 
himself up to the imitation of the world, must be regarded as 
living to the devil. Moreover, (as I have just now hinted,) all 
the rest of the patriarchs are not deprived of the praise of righte- 
ousness; but a remarkable example is set before us in the per- 
son of one man, who stood firmly in the season of most dread- 
ful dissipation ; in order that, if we wish to live rightly and 
orderly, we may learn to regard God more than men. For 
the language which Moses uses is of the same force as if he 
had said, that Enoch, lest he should be drawn aside by the 


1“ Superiori capite.” Doubtless a mistake.—Ed. 


CHAP. V. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 231 


corruptions of men, had respect to God alone ; so that, with a 
pure conscience, as under his eyes, he might cultivate up- 
rightness. 


24. And he was not, for God tookhim. He must be shame- 
lessly contentious, who will not acknowledge that something 
extraordinary is here pointed out. Allare, indeed, taken out 
of the world by death; but Moses plainly declares that Enoch 
was taken out of the world by an unusual mode, and was re- 
ceived bythe Lord ina miraculous manner. For 79, (Jakah,) 
among the Hebrews signifies ‘ to take to one’s self, as well as 
simply to take. But, without insisting on the word, it suffices 
to hold fast the thing itself; namely, that Enoch, in the 
middle period of life, suddenly, and in an unexampled method, 
vanished from the sight of men, because the Lord took him 
away, as we read was also done with respect to Elijah. Since, 
in the translation of Enoch, an example of immortality was 
exhibited; there is no doubt that God designed to elevate 
the minds of his saints with certain faith before their death ; 
and to mitigate, by this consolation, the dread which they 
might entertain of death, seeing they would know that a better 
life was elsewhere laid up for them. It is, however, remark- 
able that Adam himself was deprived of this support of faith 
and of comfort. For since that terrible judgment of God, ‘Thou 
shalt die the death,’ wasconstantly sounding in his ears, he very 
greatly needed some solace, in order that he might in death 
have something else to reflect upon than curse and destruction. 
But it was not till about one hundred and fifty years after his 
death,’ that the translation of Enoch took place, which was 
to be as a visible representation of a blessed resurrection ; by 
which, if Adam had been enlightened, he might have girded 
himself with equanimity for his own departure. Yet, since 


1 Adam died at the age of 930. 

Enoch was born when Adam was 622, Age of the world, 

and was translated when he himself was 365. 987. 
So that Adam had been dead 57 years when Enoch was translated. 
Whence it would appear that either the word ‘‘ centum,” a hundred, had 
slipped by mistake from Calvin’s pen ; or which is more probable, that, 
though the two Latin editions before the Editor, have the mistake, the 
more early ones were free from it. For the French version aid the Old 
English one are correct.—Ed. 


232 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. V. 


the Lord, in inflicting punishment, had moderated its rigour, 
and since Adam himself had heard from his own mouth, 
what was sufficient to afford him no slight alleviation ; con- 
tented with this kind of remedy, it became his duty patiently 
to bear, both the continual cross in this world, and also the 
bitter and sorrowful termination of his life. But whereas 
others were not taught in thesame manner, by amanifest oracle 
to hope for victory over the serpent, there was, in the transla- 
tion of Enoch, an instruction for all the godly, that they 
should not keep their hope confined within the boundaries of 
this mortal life. For Moses shows that this translation was 
a proof of the Divine love towards Enoch, by connecting it 
immediately with his pious and upright life. Nevertheless, 
to be deprived of life is not in itself desirable. It follows, 
therefore, that he was taken to a better abode; and that even 
when he was a sojourner in the world, he was received into 
a heavenly country; as the Apostle, in the Epistle to the 
Hebrews, (xi. 5,) plainly teaches. Moreover, if it be in- 
quired, why Enoch was translated, and what is his present 
condition; I answer, that his transition was by a peculiar 
privilege, such as that of other men would have been, if they 
had remained in their first state.1 For although it was ne- 
cessary for him to put off what was corruptible; yet was he 
exempt from that violent separation, from which nature 
shrinks. In short, his translation was a placid and joyful de-— 
parture out of the world. Yet he was not received into 
celestial glory, but only freed from the miseries of the present 
life, until Christ should come, the first-fruits of those who 
shall rise again. And since he was one of the members of 
the Church, it was necessary that he should wait until they 
all shall go forth together, to meet Christ, that the whole 
body may be united to its Head. Should any one bring as 
an objection the saying of the Apostle, ‘It is appointed 
unto all men once to die,’ (Heb. ix. 27,) the solution is easy, 
namely, that death is not always the separation of the soul 


1 ++ SYils fussent demeurez en leur premier estat.” These words, in the 
French translation, have no corresponding passage in the original, but 
are so obvious an explanation of Calvin’s language, that they are here 
translated.—Ed. 


CHAP. V. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 233 


from the body; but they are said to die, who put off their 
corruptible nature: and such will be the death of those who 
will be found surviving at the last day. 


29. And he called his name Noah, saying, This same shall 
comfort us concerning our work. In the Hebrew language, the 
etymology of the verb M3, (nacham,) does not correspond 
with the noun 9}3, (zoach,) unless we call the letter D, (mem, ) 
superfluous ; as sometimes, in composition, certain letters are 
redundant. M)) signifies to give rest, but DM) to comfort. 
The name Noah is derived from the former verb. Where- 
fore, there is either the transmutation of one letter into 
another, or only a bare allusion, when Lamech says, “ This 
same shall comfort us concerning our work.”! But as to the 
point in hand, there is no doubt that he promises to himself 
an alleviation, or solace, of his labours. But it is asked, 
whence he had conceived such hope from a son whose dis- 
position he could not yet have discerned. The Jews do not 
judge erroneously in declaring Lamech’s expression to be a 
prophecy; but they are too gross in restricting to agriculture 
what is applicable to all those miseries of human life which 
proceed from the curse of God, and are the fruits of sin. I 
come, indeed, to this conclusion; that the holy fathers 
anxiously sighed, when, being surrounded with so many evils, 
they were continually reminded of the first origin of all evils, 
and regarded themselves as under the displeasure of God. 
Therefore in the expression, “the toil of our hands,” there is 
the figure synecdoche ; because under one kind of toil he com- 
prises the whole miserable state into which mankind had 
fallen. For they undoubtedly remembered what Moses has 
related above, concerning the laborious, sad, and anxious life 
to which Adam had been doomed: and since the wickedness 
of man was daily increasing, no mitigation of the penalty 
could be hoped for, unless the Lord should bring unexpected 
succour. It is probable that they were very earnestly look- 


1 See Schindler’s Lexicon, sub voce pany, No. III. and also, sub voce 
M\3, aS @ proper name, where he derives the latter word from the former, 
* jitera tf abjecta, aut, quod consolatio sit quies, recreatio.”—Ld. 


234 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. V. 


ing for the mercy of God; for their faith was strong, and ne- 
cessity urged them ardently to desire help. But that. the 
name was not rashly given to Noah, we may infer hence, that 
Moses expressly notes it asa thing worthy to be remembered. 
Certainly some meaning was couched under the names of 
other patriarchs; yet he passes by the reason why they were 
so called, and’ only insists upon this name of Noah. There- 
fore the contentious reader is not to be allowed hence to pro- 
nounce a judgment, that there was something peculiar in 
Noah, which did not suit others before him. I have, then, no 
doubt that Lamech hoped for something rare and unwonted 
from his son; and that, too, by the inspiration of the Spirit. 
Some suppose him to have been deceived, inasmuch as he 
believed that Noah was the Christ; but they adduce no ra- 
tional conjecture in support of the opinion. It is more pro- 
bable, that, seeing something great was promised concerning 
his son, he did not refrain from mixing his own imagination 
with the oracle; as holy men are also sometimes wont to ex- 
ceed the measure of revelation, and thus it comes to pass, 
that they neither touch heaven nor earth. 


32. And Noah was five hundred years old. Concerning the 


fathers whom Moses has hitherto enumerated, it is not easy to 
conjecture whether each of them was the first born of his family 
or not; for he only wished to follow the continued succession 
of the Church. But God, to prevent men from being elated 
by a vain confidence in the flesh, frequently chooses for him- 
self those who are posterior in the order of nature. I am, 
therefore, uncertain whether Moses has recorded the catalogue 
of those whom God preferred to others; or of those who, by 
right of primogeniture, held the chief rank among their bre- 
thren; I am also uncertain how many sons each had. With 
respect to Noah, it plainly appears that he had no more than 
three sons; and this Moses purposely declares the more fre- 
quently, that we may know that the whole of his family was 
preserved. But they, in my opinion, err, who think that in 
this place the chastity of Noah is proclaimed, because he led 
a single life through nearly five centuries. For it is not said 
that he was unmarried till that time; nor even in what year 


| 


CHAP. VI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 235 


of his life he had begun to bea father. But, in simply men- 
tioning the time in which he was warned of the future deluge, 
Moses. ; also adds, that at the same time, or thereabouts, he was 
the father of three sons ; not that he already had them, but 
because they were born not long afterwards. That he had, 
indeed, survived his five hundredth year before Shem was born, 
will be evident from the eleventh chapter; concerning the 
other two nothing is known with certainty, except that Japheth 
was the younger.' It is wonderful, that, from the time when 
he had received the dreadful message respecting the destruc- 
tion of the human- race, he was not heated: by the great- 
ness of his gri grief, from intercourse with his wife ; but it was 
necessary-that-some remains should survive, because this 
family was destined for the restoration of the second world. 
Although we do not read at what time his sons took wives, I 
yet think it was done long before the deluge; but they were 
unfruitful by the providence of God, who had determined to 
preserve only eight souls. 


CHAPTER VI. 


1. Anp if came to pass, when men 1, Et fuit, quum copis sent 
began to multiply on the face of the homines multiplicari in superfi- 
earth, and daughters were born unto cie terre, filieque natx essent 
them, eis: 


1 Thisinference, that Japheth was the younger son, Calvin seems to have 
drawn from a translation of Gen. x. 21, different from ourown. In our 
version Shem is there called *‘ the brother of Japheth the elder.” Cal- 
vin translates the passage, ‘‘ the elder” brother of Japheth. But com- 
mentators are generally agreed that the English version is right. It 
not only gives the more natural sense of the original, but is confirmed by 
collateral testimony. For it is clear that Noah began to have children 
in his five hundredth year. Shem was one hundred years old two years 
after the flood, and therefore was born when his father was five hun- 
dred and two years old. Some one, then, of Noah’s sons must have 
been born before this. Now we are told that Ham was the younger son, 
(Gen. ix. 24.) Therefore Japheth must have been his first-born.—See 
Patrick's and Bush’s Commentaries, and Wells’ Geography of the Old Tes- 
tament.—Ed. 


236 


2. That the sons of God saw the 
daughters of men that they were fair ; 
and they took them wives ofall which 
they chose. 

8. And the Lord said, My Spirit 
shall not always strive with man, for 
that he also zs flesh: yet his days shall 
be an hundred and twenty years. 


4, There were giants in the earth in 
those days; and also after that, when 
the sons of God came in unto the 
daughters of men, and they bare 
children to them, the same became 
mighty men which were of old, men of 
renown. 

5. And God saw that the wicked- 
ness of man was great in the earth, 
and that every imagination of the 
thoughts of his heart was only evil 
continually. 

6. And it repented the Lord that he 
had made man on the earth, and it 
grieved him at his heart. 

7. And the Lord said, I will de- 
stroy man whom I have created from 
the face of the earth; both man, and 
beast, and the creeping thing, and the 
fowls of the air; for it repenteth me 
that I have made them. 

8. But Noah found grace in the eyes 
of the Lord. 

9. These are the generations of 
Noah: Noah was ajust man and per- 
fect in his generations, and Noah 
walked with God. 

10. And Noah begat three sons, 
Shem, Ham, and Japheth. 

11. The earth also was corrupt be- 
fore God, and the earth was filled with 
violence. 

12. And God looked upon the 
earth, and, behold, it was corrupt; 
for all flesh had corrupted his way 
upon the earth. 

13. And God said unto Noah, The 
end of all flesh is come before me; for 
the earthis filled with violence through 
them ; and, behold, I will destroy them 
with the earth. 

14. Make thee an ark of gopher 
wood ; rooms shalt thou make in the 
ark, and shalt pitch it within and with- 
out with pitch. 

15. And this is the fashion which 
thou shalt make it ef: The length of 


COMMENTARY UPON 


CHAP. VI. 


2. Tunc viderunt filii Dei filias 
hominum quod pulchre essent : 
et acceperunt sibi uxores ex om- 
nibus quas elegerant. 

8. Et dixit Jehova, Non dis- 
ceptabit Spiritus meus cum ho- 
mine in seculum, eo quod sit 
etiam ipse caro: et erunt dies 
ejus centum et viginti anni. 

4. Gigantes fuerunt in terra 
in diebus illis: et etiam post- 
quam ingressi sunt filii Dei ad 
filias hominum, genuerunt eis: 
isti sunt potentes, qui a seculo 

Juerunt viri nominis. 


5. Et vidit Jehova quod multa 
esset malitia hominum in terra, 
et quod omne figmentum cogita- 
tionum cordis eorum tantum- 
modo esset malum omni die: 

6. Tunc peenituit Jehovam 
quod fecisset hominem in terra, 
et doluit in corde suo. 

7. Et dixit Jehova, Delebo ho- 
minem quem creavi, a superficie 
terre, ab homine usque ad 
jumentum, usque ad reptile, et 
usque ad volatile cceli: quia 
poenitet me quod fecerim ea. 

8. Et Noah invenit gratiam 
in oculis Jehove. 

9. Istee sunt generationes 
Noah. Noah vir justus, perfectus 
fuit in generationibus suis: cum 
Deo ambulavit Noah. 

10. Genuit vero Noah tres 
filios, Sem, Cham, et Jepheth. 

11. Et corrupta erat terra 
coram Deo: repleta erat terra 
iniquitate. 

12. Et vidit Deus terram, et 
ecce, corrupta erat: nam cor- 
ruperat omnis caro viam suam 
super terram. 

13. Dixit itaque Deus ad 
Noah, Finis universe carnis venit 
coram me: quia repleta est terra 
iniquitate a facie eorum : et ecce, 
ego disperdam eos cum terra. 

14, Fac tibi arcam e lignis 
gopher, mansiuneulas facies in 
arca, et bituminabis eam intrin- 
secus et extrinsecus bitumine. 

15. Et hee mensura qua facies 
eam: ‘Trecentorum cubitoram 


CHAP. VI. 


the ark shall be three hundred cubits, 
the breadth of it fifty cubits, and the 
height of it thirty cubits. 

16. A window shalt thou make to 
the ark, and in a cubit shalt thou fi- 
nish it above; and the door of the ark 
shalt thou set in the side thereof ; with 
lower, second, and third stories shalt 
thou make it. 

17. And, behold, I, even I, do bring 
a flood of waters upon the earth, to 
destroy all flesh wherein zs the breath 
of life, from under heaven ; and every 
thing that zs in the earth shall die. 

18. But with thee will I establish 
my covenant ; and thou shalt come 
into the ark, thou, and thy sons, and 
thy wife, and thy sons’ wives with 
thee. 

19. And of every living thing of all 
flesh, two of every sort shalt thou 
bring into the ark, to keep them alive 
with thee; they shall be male and 
female. 

20. Of fowls after their kind, and of 
cattle after their kind, of every creep- 
ing thing of the earth after his kind, 
two of every sort shall come unto thee, 
to keep them alive. 


21. And take thou unto thee of all 
food that is eaten, and thou shalt 
gather it to thee; and it shall be for 
food for thee, and for them. 

22. Thus did Noah; according to 
all that God commanded him, so did 
he. 


1. And it came to pass, when men began to multiply. 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


237 


erit longitudo arce, quinqua- 
ginta cubitorum latitudo ejus : et 
triginta cubitorum altitudo ejus. 
16. Fenestram facies arce, et 
in cubito consummabis eam su- 
perne : ostium vero arce in la- 
tere ejus pones: inferiora et se- 
cunda, et tertia facies in ea. 


17. Et ego ecce ego adduco 
diluvium aquarum super terram, 
ut disperdam omnem carnem in 
qua est spiritus vite sub ccelo: 
omne quod est in terra morietur. 

18. Et statuam pactum meum 
tecum, et ingredieris arcam tu, 
et filii tui, et uxor tua, et uxores 
filiorum tuorum tecum. 


19. Et ex omni vivente,. ex 
omni carne, bina ex omnibus in- 
troduces in arcam, ut viva ser- 
ventur tecum, masculus et fo- 
mina erunt. 

20. Ex volatili secundum spe- 
ciem suam, et ex animali secun- 
dum speciem suam, ex omni 
reptili terrz secundum speciem 
suam, bina ex omnibus ingredi- 
entur ad te, ut viva conserventur. 

21. Et tu cape tibi ex omni 
esca que comeditur, et congre- 
gabis tibi, eritque tibi et illis ad 
vescendum. 

22. Et fecit Noah juxta omnia 
que preceperat ei Deus, sic 
fecit. 


Moses, 


having enumerated in order, ten patriarchs, with whom the 
worship of God remained pure, now relates, that their fami- 
lies also were corrupted. But this narration must be traced 
to an earlier period than the five hundredth year of Noah. 
For, in order to make a transition to the history of the de- 
luge, he prefaces it by declaring the whole world to have been 
so corrupt, that scarcely anything was left to God, out of the 
widely spread defection. That this may be the more ap- 
parent, the principle is to be kept in memory, that the world 
was then, as if divided into two parts ; because the family of 
Seth cherished the pure and lawful worship of God, from 


238 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. VI. 


which the rest had fallen. Now, although all mankind had 
been formed for the worship of God, and therefore sincere 
religion ought everywhere to have reigned; yet since the 
greater part had prostituted itself, either to an entire con- 
tempt of God, or to depraved superstitions; it was fitting that 
the small portion which God had adopted, by special privilege, 
to himself, should remain separate from others. It was, 
therefore, base ingratitude in the posterity of Seth, to mingle 
themselves with the children of Cain, and with other pro- 
fane races; because they voluntarily deprived themselves of 
the inestimable grace of God. Yor it was an intolerable pro- 
fanation, to pervert, and to confound, the order appointed by 
God. It seems at first sight frivolous, that the sons of God 
should be so severely condemned, for having chosen for them- 
selves beautiful wives from the daughters of men. But we 
must know first, that it is not a light crime to violate a dis- 
tinction established by the Lord; secondly, that for the wor- 
shippers of God to be separated from profane nations, was a 
sacred appointment which ought reverently to have been ob- 
served, in order that a Church of God might exist upon 
earth; thirdly, that the disease was desperate, seeing that 
men rejected the remedy divinely prescribed for them. In 
short, Moses points it out as the most extreme disorder ; when 
the sons of the pious, whom God had separated to himself 
from others, as a peculiar and hidden treasure, became de- 
generate. 

That ancient figment, concerning the intercourse of angels 
with women, is abundantly refuted by its own absurdity ; and 
it is surprising that learned men should formerly have been 
fascinated by ravings so gross and prodigious. The opinion 
also of the Chaldean paraphrast is frigid; namely, that pro- 
miscuous marriages between the sons of nobles, and the daugh- 
ters of plebeians, is condemned. Moses, then, does not 
distinguish the sons of God from the daughters of men, be- 
cause they were of dissimilar nature, or of different origin ; 
but because they were the sons of God by adoption, whom 
he had set apart for himself; while the rest remained in their 
original condition. Should any one object, that they who had 
shamefully departed from the faith, and the obedience which 








CHAP. VI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 239 


God required, were unworthy to be accounted the sons of God; 
the answer is easy, that the honour is not ascribed to them, 
but to the grace of God, which had hitherto been conspicuous 
in their families. For when Scripture speaks of the sons of 
God, sometimes it has respect to eternal election, which extends 
only to the lawful heirs; sometimes to external vocation, ac- 
cording to which many wolves are within the fold; and though, 
in fact, they are strangers, yet they obtain the name of 
sons, until the Lord shall disown them. Yea, even by giving 
them a title so honourable, Moses reproves their ingratitude, 
because, leaving their heavenly Father, they prostituted 
themselves as deserters. 


2. That they were fair. Moses does not deem it worthy of 
condemnation that regard was had to beauty, in the choice of 
wives; but-that-mere lust reigned. For marriage-is_a thing 
too-sacred to allow that-men-should be induced to it by the 


|__For this union—is-inseparable, comprising 


1 the parts of life; as we have before seen, that the woman 
was crea a helper of the-man.s Therefore our appe- 


tite becomes brutal, when we are so ravished with the charms 
of beauty, that those things which are chief are not taken 
into the account. “Moses more clearly describes the violent 
impetuosity of their lust, when he says, that “ they took wives 
of all that they chose ;” by which he signifies, that the sons of 
_God did not make their choice from those possessed of neces- 


sary endowments, but wandered without discrimination, - 


rushing onward according to their lust. We are taught, 
however, in these words, that temperance is to be used in 
holy wedlock, and that its profanation is no light crime be- 
fore God. For it is not fornication which is here condemned 


~ 


in the sons of the saints, but the too great indulgence of lid \Y 


cense in choosing themselves wives. And truly, it is impos- 
sible but that, in the succession of time, the sons of God should 
degenerate, when they thus bound themselves in the same yoke 
with unbelievers. And this was the extreme policy of Ba- 


1“ Est autem res sanctior conjugium quam ut oculis ferri homines 
debeant ad voluptatem coitus.” 


240 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. VI. 


Jaam ; that, when the power of cursing was taken from him, 
he commanded women to be privily sent by the Midianites, 
who might seduce the people of God to impious defection. 
Thus, as in the sons of the patriarchs, of whom Moses now 
treats, the forgetfulness of that grace which had been divinely 
imparted to them was, in itself, a grievous evil, inasmuch as 
they formed illicit marriages after their own lust ; a still worse 
addition was made, when, by mingling themselves with the 
wicked, they profaned the worship of God, and fell away 
from the faith ; a corruption which is almost always wont to 
follow the former. 


3. My Spirit shall not always strive. Although Moses had 
before shown that the world had proceeded to such a de- 
gree of wickedness and impiety, as ought not any longer to be 
borne; yet in order to prove more certainly, that the ven- 
geance by which the whole world was drowned, was not less 
just than severe, he introduces God himself as the speaker. For 
there is greater weight in the declaration when pronounced by 
God’s own mouth, that the wickedness of men was too de- 
plorable to leave any apparent hope of remedy, and that there- 
fore there was no reason why he should spare them. More- 
over, since this would be a terrible example of divine anger, 
at the bare hearing of which we are even now afraid, it was 
necessary to be declared, that God had not been impelled by 
the heat of his anger into precipitation, nor had been more 
severe than was right; but was almost compelled, by neces- 
sity, utterly to destroy the whole world, except one single 
family. For men commonly do not refrain from accusing 
God of excessive haste ; nay, they will even deem him cruel 
for taking vengeance of the sins of men. ‘Therefore, that no 
man may murmur, Moses here, in the person of God, pro- 
nounces the depravity of the world to have been intolerable, 
and obstinately incurable by any remedy. This passage, 
however, is variously expounded. In the first place, some of 
the Hebrews derive the word which Moses uses from the root 
p73," ( nadan,) which signifies a scabbard. And hence they 


1¢osy. Vagina, in qua gladius est reconditus. Per metaphoram cor- 
pus, cui anima, tanquam gladius vagine, inest.” ‘A scabbard in which 





CHAP. VI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 241 


elicit the meaning that God was unwilling for his Spirit to 
be any longer held captive in a human body, as if enclosed 
like a sword in the scabbard. But because the exposition is 
distorted, and savours of the delirium of the Manichees, as if 
the soul of man were a portion of the Divine Spirit, it is by 
us to be rejected, Even among the Jews, it is a more 
commonly received opinion, that the word in question is 
from the root 7, (doon.) But since it often means to judge, 
and sometimes to litigate, hence also arise different interpre- 
tations. For some explain the passage to mean, that God will 
no longer deign to govern men by his Spirit; because the 
Spirit of God acts the part of a judge within us, when he so 
enlightens us with reason that we pursue what isright. Lu- 
ther, according to his custom, applies the term to the ex- 
ternal jurisdiction which God exercises by the ministry of 
the prophets, as if some one of the patriarchs had said in an 
assembly, ‘ We must cease from crying aloud ; because it is 
an unbecoming thing that the Spirit of God, who speaks 
through us, should any longer weary himself in reproving the 
world.’ This is indeed ingeniously spoken ; but because we 
must not seek the sense of Scripture in uncertain con- 
jectures, I interpret the words simply to mean, that the 
Lord, as if wearied with the obstinate perverseness of 
the world, denounces that yengeance as present, which 
he had hitherto deferred. For as long as the Lord sus- 
pends punishment, he, in a certain sense, strives with 
men, especially if either by threats, or by examples of 
gentle chastisement, he invites them to repentance. In this 
way he had striven already, some centuries, with the world, 
which, nevertheless, was perpetually becoming worse. And 
now, as if wearied out, he declares that he has no mind to 
contend any longer.' For when God, by inviting the unbe- 
lievers to repentance, had long striven with them; the deluge 
put an end to the controyersy. However, I do not entirely 
reject the opinion of Luther, that God having seen the de- 


the sword is concealed. Metaphorically, the body in which the soul is, 
as a sword in its scabbard.”—Schindler.—Ed. 

1 Acsi Gallice quis diceret, c’est trop plaider;’ as if any one should 
say in French, ‘‘ This is to plead too much.” 


VOL, I. Q 


242 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. VI. 


plorable wickedness of men, would not allow his prophets to 
spend their labour in vain. But the general declaration is 
not to be restricted to that particular case. When the Lord 
says, ‘I will not contend for ever, he utters his censure on 
an excessive and incurable obstinacy; and, at the same time, 
gives proof of the divine long-suffering: as if he would say, 
There will never be an end of contention, unless some unpre- 
cedented act of vengeance cuts off the occasion of it. The 
Greek interpreters, deceived by the similitude of one letter to 
another, have improperly read, ‘shall not remain:’! which 
has commonly been explained, as if men were then deprived 
' of a sound and correct judgment; but this has nothing to do 
with the present passage. 

For that he also is flesh. The reason is added why 
there is no advantage to be expected from further conten- 
tion. The Lord here seems to place his Spirit in opposition 
to the carnal nature of men. In which method, Paul declares 
that the ‘ animal man does not receive those things which 
belong to the Spirit, and that they are foolishness unto him, 
(1 Cor. ii. 14.) The meaning of the passage therefore is, 
that it is in vain for the Spirit of God to dispute with the 
flesh, which is incapable of reason. God gives the name of 
flesh as a mark of ignominy to men, whom he, nevertheless, had 
formed in his own image. And this is a mode of speaking — 
familiar to Scripture. ‘They who restrict this appellation to 
the inferior part of the soul are greatly deceived. For since 
the soul of man is vitiated in every part, and the reason of 
man is not less blind than his affections are perverse, the 
whole is properly called carnal. Therefore, let us know, that 
the whole man is naturally flesh, until by the grace of rege- 
neration he begins to be spiritual. Now, as it regards the 
words of Moses, there is no doubt that they contain a griev- 
ous complaint, together with a reproof on the part of God. 
Man ought to have excelled all other creatures, on account 
of the mind with which he was endued ; but now, alienated 
from right reason, he is almost like the cattle of the field. 


1“ Non permanebit.”—Vulgate. ‘ Od uj xaramsivn ro rveved mov.” 
—Sept. See on the word }\4, Poole’s Synopsis in loco, and Professor 
Lee’s Lexicon. 








CHAP. VI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 243 


Therefore God inveighs against the degenerate and corrupt 
nature of men; because, by their own fault, they are fallen to 
that degree of fatuity, that now they approach more nearly 
to beasts than to true men, such as they ought to be, in 
consequence of their creation. He intimates, however, this 
to be an adventitious fault, that man hasa relish only for the 
earth, and that, the light of intelligence being extinct, he fol- 
lows his own desires. I wonder that the emphasis contained 
in the particle DIW5, (eshagam,) has been overlooked by 
commentators ; for the words mean, ‘ on this account, because 
he also is flesh. In which language God complains, that 
the order appointed by him has been so greatly disturbed, that 
his own image has been transformed into flesh. ae 

Yet his days shall be one hundred and twenty years. Certain 
writers of antiquity, such as Lactantius, and others, have 
too grossly blundered, in thinking that the term of human life 
was limited within this space of time ; whereas, it is evident, 
that the language used in this place refers not to the private 
life of any one, but to a time of repentance to be granted to 
the whole world. Moreover, here also the admirable be- 
nignity of God is apparent, in that he, though wearied with 
the wickedness of men, yet postpones the execution of ex- 
treme vengeance for more than a century. But here arises 
an apparent discrepancy. For Noah departed this life when 
he had completed nine hundred and fifty years. Itis however 
said that he lived from the time of the deluge three hundred 
and fifty years. Therefore, on the day he entered the ark he 
was six hundred years old. Where then will the twenty 
years be found? The Jews answer, that these years were cut 
off in consequence of the increasing wickedness of men. But 
there is no need of that subterfuge; when the Scripture 
speaks of the five hundredth year of his age, it does not affirm, 
that he had actually reached that point. And this mode of 
speaking, which takes into account the beginning of a period, 
as well as its end, is very common. Therefore, inasmuch as 
the greater part of the fifth century of. his life was passed, so 
that he was nearly five hundred years old, he is said to seg 
been of that age.’ 


1 The whole of this passage might have been more clearly expressed. 


244 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. VI. 


4, There were giants in the earth. Among the innumerable 
kinds of corruptions with which the earth was filled, Moses 
especially records one in this place ; namely, that giants prac- 
tised great violence and tyranny. I do not, however, sup- 
pose, that he speaks of all the men of this age ; but of certain 
individuals, who, being stronger than the rest, and relying on 
their own might and power, exalted themselves unlawfully, 
and without measure. As to the Hebrew noun, 6°53, 
(nephilim,) its origin is known to be from the verb S53, 
(naphal,) which is to fall; but grammarians do not agree con- 
cerning its etymology. Some think that they were so called 
because they exceeded the common stature ; others, because 
the countenance of men fell at the sight of them, on account 
of the enormoussize of their body; or, because all fell prostrate 
through terror of their magnitude. To me there seems more 
truth in the opinion of those who say, that a similitude is taken 
from a torrent, or an impetuous tempest ; for as a storm and 
torrent, violently falling, lays waste and destroys the fields, 
so these robbers brought destruction and desolation into the 
world.? Moses does not indeed say, that they were of ex- 
traordinary stature, but only that they were robust. Else- 
where, I acknowledge, the same word denotes vastness of sta- 
ture, which was formidable to those who explored the land 
of Canaan, (Josh. xiii. 34.) But Moses does not distinguish — 
those of whom he speaks, in this place, from other men, so 


At the close of chapter v. it is said, “* Noah was five hundred years old : 
and Noah begat Shem, Ham, and Japheth.” In the verse on which 
Calvin here comments, it is stated, that man’s days on earth “shall be 
one hundred and twenty years ;” but in chapter vii. 11, we are told, that 
the deluge came ‘‘ in the six hundredth year of Noah’s life.” This would 
pare down the one hundred and twenty years to one hundred ; and there- 
fore Calvin asks, ‘‘ Where are the remaining twenty to be found?” ‘To 
answer this question, he shows that there was something indefinite in the 
statement of Noah’s age in the first of these passages, and Moses does 
not say that the flood began precisely in that year. He therefore con- 
cludes that, according to a common mode of speaking among the Hebrews, 
Moses states in general terms, that Noah was five hundred years old when 
he was in the fifth century of his life ; and therefore he would infer, that 
Noah was about four hundred and eighty years of age at the time re- 
ferred to: if one hundred and twenty years be added, it will make him 
six hundred years old at the time of his entering the ark.—Ed. 

' “Quia excidissent @ communi statura;” a misprint, undoubtedly, for 
eacedissent.—Ed. 

* « Vatablus in Poli Synopsi.”—£d. 








CHAP. VI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 245 


much by the size of their bodies, as by their robberies, and 
their lust of dominion. In the context, the particle 63), 
(vegam,) which is interposed, is emphatical. Jerome, after 
whom certain other interpreters have blundered, has render- 
ed this passage in the worst possible manner.’ For it is lite- 
rally rendered thus, ‘And even after the sons of God had gone 
in to the daughters of men ;’ as if he had said, Moreover, or, 
‘And at this time. [For in the first place, Moses relates 
that there were giants; then he subjoins, that there were 
also others from among that promiscuous offspring, which was 
produced when the sons of God mingled themselves with the 
daughters of men. It would not have been wonderful if such 
outrage had prevailed among the posterity of Cain; but the 
universal pollution is more clearly evident from this, that the 
holy seed was defiled by the same corruption. That a con- 
tagion so great should have spread through the few families 
which ought to have constituted the sanctuary of God, is no 
slight aggravation of the evil. The giants, then, had a prior 
origin; but afterwards those who were born of promiscuous 
marriages imitated their example. 

The same became mighty men which were of old.? The word 
‘age’ is commonly understood to mean antiquity: as if 
Moses had said, that they who first exercised tyranny or 
power in the world, together with an excessive licentiousness, 
and an unbridled lust of dominion, had begun from this race. 
Yet there are those who expound the expression, ‘ from the 
age, to mean, in the presence of the world: for the Hebrew 
word Dov), (olam,) has also this signification.2 Some think 
that this was spoken proverbially ; because the age imme- 
_ diately posterior to the deluge had produced none like them. 


* “ Gigantes autem erant super terram in diebus illis. Postquam enim 
ingressi sunt,” &c. There were giants on the earth in those days. For 
after the sons of God, &c.—Vulgate. The words which the Vulgate 
translates, ‘ for after,’—plainly accounting for the birth of the giants from 
the intercourse alluded toin the next clause,—are translated in the 
Septuagint, <a! wer éxsivo, ** and after this ;” which favours the inter- 
pretation of Calvin, with which also the English version corresponds. 

2“ Tpsi potentes a seculo.” ‘They were mighty men from the age ;’ 
or, from the old time.—£d. 

3 Vide Schindler's Lexicon, sub voce taby. 


246 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. VI. 


The first exposition is the more simple; the sum of the 
whole, however, is, that they were ferocious tyrants, who 
separated themselves from the common rank. Their first 
fault was pride; because, relying on their own strength, they 
atrogated to themselves more than was due. Pride produced 
contempt of God, because, being inflated by arrogance, they 
began to shake off every yoke. . At the same time, they were 
also disdainful and cruel towards men; because it is not 
possible that they, who would not bear to yield obedience to 
God, should have acted with moderation towards men. Moses 
adds, they were “ men of renown ;” by which he intimates that 
they boasted of their wickedness, and were, what are called, 
honourable robbers. Nor is it to be doubted, that they had 
something more excellent than the common people, which 
procured for them favour and glory in the world. Never- 
theless, under the magnificent title of heroes, they cruelly 
exercised dominion, and acquired power and fame for them- 
selves, by injuring and oppressing their brethren. And this 
was the first nobility of the world. Lest any one should too 
greatly delight himself in a long and dingy line of ancestry ; 
this, I repeat, was the nobility, which raised itself on high, by 
pouring contempt and disgrace on others. Celebrity of name 
is not in itself condemned; since it is necessary that they 
whom the Lord has adorned with peculiar gifts should be 
pre-eminent among others ; and it is advantageous that there 
‘should be distinction of ranks in the world. But as ambition 
is always vicious, and more especially so when joined with a 
tyrannical ferocity, which causes the more powerful to insult 
the weak, the evil becomes intolerable. It is, however, much 
worse, when wicked men gain honour by their crimes; and 
when, the more audacious any one is in doing injury, the 
more insolently he boasts of the empty smoke of titles. More- 
over, as Satan is an ingenious contriver of falsehoods, by 
which he would corrupt the truth of God, and in this 
manner render it suspected, the poets have invented many 
‘fables concerning the giants; who are called by them the 
sons of the Earth, for this reason, as it appears to me, 
because they rushed forward to acquire dominion, without 
any example of their ancestors. 








CHAP. VI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 247 


9. And God saw that the wickedness of man was great. 
Moses prosecutes the subject to which he had just alluded, 
that God was neither too harsh, nor precipitate in exacting 
punishment from the wicked men of the world. And he 
introduces God as speaking after the manner of men, by a 
figure which ascribes human affections to God ;! because he 
could not otherwise express what was very important to be 
known; namely, that God was not induced hastily, or for a 
slight cause, to destroy the world. For by the word saw, he 
indicates long continued patience; as if he would say, that 
God had not proclaimed his sentence to destroy men, until 
after having well observed, and long considered, their case, 
he saw them to be past recovery. Also, what follows has 
not a little emphasis, that ‘ their wickedness was great in 
the earth’ He might have pardoned sins of a less aggra- 
vated character: if in one part only of the world impiety had 
reigned, other regions might have remained free from punish- 
ment. But now, when iniquity has reached its highest point, 
and so pervaded the whole earth, that integrity possesses no 
longer a single corner; it follows, that the time for punish- 
ment is more than fully arrived. A prodigious wicked- 
ness, then, everywhere reigned, so that the whole earth was 
covered with it. Whence we perceive that it was not 
overwhelmed with a deluge of waters till it had first been 
immersed in the pollution of wickedness. 

Every imagination of the thoughts of his heart. Moses has 
traced the cause of the deluge to external acts of iniquity, he 
now ascends higher, and declares that men were not only 
perverse by habit, and by the custom of evil living; but that 
wickedness was too deeply seated in their hearts, to leave any 
hope of repentance. He certainly could not have more 
forcibly asserted, that the depravity was such as no moderate 
remedy might cure. It may indeed happen, that men will 
sometimes plunge themselves into sin, while yet something 
of a sound mind will remain; but Moses teaches us, that the 
mind of those, concerning whom he speaks, was so thoroughly 
imbued with iniquity, that the whole presented nothing but 


' Per dvbparoradeiay. 


248 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. VI. 


what was to be condemned. For the language he employs 
is very emphatical : it seemed enough to have said, that their 
heart was corrupt: but not content with this word, he 
expressly asserts, “every imagination of the thoughts of the 
heart ;” and adds the word “only,” as if he would deny that 
there was a drop of good mixed with it. 

Continually. Some expound this particle to mean, from 
commencing infancy; as if he would say, the depravity of 
men is very great from the time of their birth. But the 
more correct interpretation is, that the world had then be- 
come so hardened in its wickedness, and was so far from any 
amendment, or from entertaining any feeling of penitence, 
that it grew worse and worse as time advanced ; and further, 
that it was not the folly of a few days, but the imveterate 
depravity which the children, having received, as by heredi- 
tary right, transmitted from their parents to their descend- 
ants. Nevertheless, though Moses here speaks of the wicked- 
ness which at that time prevailed in the world, thegeneral doc- 
trine! is properly and consistently hence elicited. Nor do they 
rashly distort the passage who extend it to the whole human 
race. So when David says, ‘That all have revolted, that they 
are become unprofitable, that is, none who does good, no not 
one; their throat is an open sepulchre; there is no fear of 
God before their eyes,’ (Ps. v. 10, and xiv. 3;) he deplores, © 
truly, the impiety of his own age; yet Paul (Rom. iii. 12) 
does not scruple to extend it to all men of every age : and with 
justice ; for it is not a mere complaint concerning a few men, 
but a description of the human mind when left to itself, des- 
titute of the Spirit of God. It is therefore very proper that 
the obstinacy of the men, who had greatly abused the good- 
ness of God, should be condemned in these words; yet, at 
the same time, the true nature of man, when deprived of the 
grace of the Spirit, is clearly exhibited. 


6. And it repented the Lord that he had made man on the 
earth. ‘The repentance which is here ascribed to God does 
not properly belong to him, but has reference to our under- 


1 That is, the “ general doctrine” of man’s total and universal depra- 
vity.—Ed. 





CHAP. VI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 249 


standing of him. For since we cannot comprehend him as 
he is, it is necessary that, for our sake, he should, in a cer- 
tain sense, transform himself. ‘That repentance cannot take 
place in God, easily appears from this single consideration, 
that nothing happens which is by him unexpected or unfore- 
seen. The same reasoning, and remark, applies to what fol- 
lows, that God was affected with grief. Certainly God is 
not sorrowful or sad; but remains for ever like himself in his 
celestial and happy repose: yet, because it could not other- 
wise be known how great is God’s hatred and detestation of 
sin, therefore the Spirit accommodates himself to our capa- | 
city. | Wherefore, there is no need for us to involve ourselves 
in thorny and difficult questions, when it is obvious to what 
end these words of repentance and grief are applied; namely, 
to teach us, that from the time when man was so greatly cor- 
rupted, God would not reckon him among his creatures; as 
if he would say, ‘This is not my workmanship; this is not 
that man who was formed in my image, and whom I had 
adorned with such excellent gifts: I do not deign now to 
acknowledge this degenerate and defiled creature as mine.’ 
Similar to this is what he says, in the second place, concerning 
grief; that God was so offended by the atrocious wickedness 
of men, as if they had wounded his heart with mortal grief. 
There is here, therefore, an unexpressed antithesis be- 
tween that upright nature which had been created by God, 
and that corruption which sprung from sin. Meanwhile, un- 
less we wish to provoke God, and to put him to grief, let us 
learn to abhor and to flee from sin. Moreover, this paternal 
goodness and tenderness ought, in no slight degree, to sub- 
due in us the love of sin; since God, in ordermore effectually to 
pierce our hearts, clothes himself with our affections. ‘This 
figure, which represents God as transferring to himself what 
is peculiar to human nature, is called dvdgwrorddera. | 


7. And the Lord said, I will destroy man whom I have 
created from the face of the earth, both man and beast, §c. He 
again introduces God as deliberating, in order that we may 
- the better know that the world was not destroyed without 
mature counsel on the part of God. For the Spirit of the 


250 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. VI. 


Lord designed that we should be diligently admonished on 
this point, in order that he might cut off occasion for those 
impious complaints, into which we should be otherwise too 
ready to break forth. The word saidhere means decreed; because 
God utters no voice, without having inwardly determined what 
he would do. Besides, he had no need of new counsel, according 
to the manner of men, as if he were forming a judgment con- 
cerning something recently discovered. But all this is said 
in consideration of our infirmity ; that we may never think of 
the deluge, but it shall immediately occur to us that the ven- 
geance of God was just. Moreover, God, not content with 
the punishment of man, proceeds even to beasts, and cattle, 
and fowls, and every kind of living creatures. In which he 
seems to exceed the bounds of moderation: for although the 
impiety of men is hateful to him, yet to what purpose is it 
to be angry with unoffending animals? But it is not wonder- 
ful that those animals, which were created for man’s sake, 
and lived for his use, should participate in his ruin: neither 
asses, nor oxen, ner any other animals, had done evil; yet 
being in subjection to man when he fell, they were drawn 
with him into the same destruction. The earth was like a 
wealthy house, well supplied with every kind of provision in 
abundance and variety. Now, since man has defiled the 
earth itself with his crimes, and has vilely corrupted all the 
riches with which it was replenished, the Lord also designed 
that the monument of his punishment should there be placed : 
just as if a judge, about to punish a most wicked and nefari- 
ous criminal, should, for the sake of greater infamy, command 
his house to be razed to. the foundation. And this all tends 
to inspire us with a dread of sin; for we may easily infer how 
great is its atrocity, when the punishment of it is extended 
even to the brute creation. 


8. But Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord. This is a 
Hebrew phrase, which signifies that God was propitious to 
him, and favoured him. Forso the Hebrews are accustomed 
to speak :—‘ If I have found grace in thy sight, instead of, 
‘ If I am acceptable to thee, or, ‘ If thou wilt grant me thy 
benevolence or favour. Which phrase requires to be noticed, 


CHAP. VI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 251 


because certain unlearned men infer with futile subtlety, 
that if men find grace in God’s sight, it is because they seek 
it by their own industry and merits. I acknowledge, in- 
deed, that here Noah is declared to have been acceptable to 
God, because, by living uprightly and holily, he kept him- 
self pure from the common pollutions of the world ; whence, 
however, did he attain this integrity, but from the preventing 
grace of God? The commencement, therefore, of this 
favour was gratuitous mercy. Afterwards, the Lord, having 
once embraced him, retained him under his own hand, lest 
he should perish with the rest of the world. 


9. These are the generations of Noah. The Hebrew word 
myn, (toledoth,) properly means generation. It has, how- 
ever, sometimes a more extended sense, and applies to the 
whole history of life; this indeed seems to be its meaning in 
the present place. For when Moses had stated that one man 
was found whom God,—when he had determined to destroy 
the whole world,—would yet preserve, he briefly describes 
what kind of person he was. And, in the first place, asserts, 
that he was just and upright among the men of his age: for 
here is a different Hebrew noun, 4)", (dor,) which signifies an 
age, or the time of a life.” The word D'M, (tamim,) which 
the ancient interpreter is accustomed to translate perfect,’ is 
of the same force as upright or sincere; and is opposed to 
what is deceitful, pretended, and vain. And Moses does not 
rashly connect these two things together; for the world, 
being always influenced by external splendour, estimates 
justice, not by the affection of the heart, but by bare works. 
If, however, we desire to be approved by God, and accounted 
righteous before him, we must not only regulate our hands, 
and eyes, and feet, in obedience to his Law ; but integrity of 
heart is above all things required, and holds the chief place 
in the true definition of righteousness. Let us, however, 
know that they are called just and upright, not who are in 


1 See Dathe, in loco. 
2 Though it also means generation.—See Gesenius, Schindler, Sc., sub 


voce 9). 
8 “ Noe vir justus atque perfectus ferit.”"— Vulgate. ‘‘ ppp refers 


chiefly to moral integrity, irreproachable, innocent, honest.” —Gesenius. 


252 : COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. VI. 


every respect perfect, and in whom there is no defect ; but 
who cultivate righteousness purely, and from their heart. 
Because we are assured that God does not act towards his 
own people with the rigour of justice, as requiring of them a 
life according to the perfect rule of the Law ; for, if only no 
hypocrisy reigns within them, but the pure love of rectitude 
flourishes, and fills their hearts, he pronounces them, ac- 
cording to his clemency, to be righteous. 

The clause, “ in his generations,” is emphatical. For he 
has already often said, and will soon repeat it, that nothing 
was more corrupt than that age. Therefore, it was a 
remarkable instance of constancy, that Noah being sur- 
rounded on every side with the filth of iniquity, should hence 
have contracted no contagion. We know how great is the 
force of custom, so that nothing is more difficult than to live 
holily among the wicked, and to avoid being led away by 
their evilexamples. Scarcely is there one in a hundred who 
has not in his mouth that diabolical proverb, ‘ We must 
howl when we are among the wolves;’ and the greater 
part,—framing a rule for themselves from the common prac- 
tice,—judge everything to be lawful which is generally re- 
ceived. As, however, the singular virtue of Noah is here 
commended ; solet us remember that we are instructed what 
we ought to do, though the whole world were rushing to its 
own destruction. H, at the present time, the morals of men 
are so vitiated, and the whole mode of life so confused, that 
probity has become most rare; still more vile and dreadful 
was the confusion in the time of Noah, when he had not 
even one associate in the worship of God, and in the pursuit of 
holiness. If Ae could bear up against the corruptions of the 
whole world, and against such constant and vehement assaults 
of iniquity; no excuse is left for us, unless, with equal fortitude 
of mind, we prosecute a right course through innumerable 
obstacles of vice. It is not improbable that Moses uses the 
word generations in the plural number, the more fully to 
declare what a strenuous and invincible combatant Noah 
was, who, through so many ages, had remained unaltered. 
Besides, the manner of cultivating righteousness, which he 
had adopted, is explained in the context; namely, that he 





CHAP. VI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 253 


had “ walked with God,” which excellency he had also com- 
mended in the holy father Enoch, in the preceding chapter, 
where we have stated what the expression means. When 
the corruption of morals was so great in the earth, if Noah 
had had respect to man, he would have been cast into a pro- 
found labyrinth. He sees, therefore, this to be his only 
remedy ; namely, to disregard men, that he may fix all his 
thoughts on God, and make Him the sole Arbiter of his life. 
Whence it appears, how foolishly the Papists clamour that 
we ought to follow the fathers; when the Spirit expressly 
recalls us from the imitation of men, except so far as they 
lead us toGod. Moses again mentions his three sons, for the 
purpose of showing that, in the greatest sorrow by which he 
_ was almost consumed, he was yet able to have offspring, in 
order that God might have a small remnant of seed for 
himself, 


11. The earth also was corrupt before God. Yn the former 
clause of this verse Moses describes that impious contempt 
of God, which had left no longer any religion in the world; 
but the light of equity being extinct, all men had plunged 
into sin. In the second clause he declares, that the love of 
oppression, that frauds, injuries, rapines, and all kinds of in- 
justice, prevailed. And these are the fruits of impiety, that 
men, when they have revolted from God,—forgetful of mutual 
equity among themselves,—are carried forward to insane fero- 
city, to rapines, and to oppressions of all sorts. God again 
declares that he had seen this ; in order that he may commend 
his long-suffering to us. The earth is here put for its inhabit- 
ants; and the explanation immediately follows, ‘that all 
flesh had corrupted its way.’ Yet the word flesh is not here 
understood as before, in a bad sense; but is meant for men, 
without any mark of censure: as in other places of Scrip- 
ture, ‘ All flesh shall see the glory of the Lord, (Isaiah xl. 5.) 
‘Let all flesh be silent before the Lord,’ (Zech. ii. 13.) 


13. And God said unto Noah. Here Moses begins to re- 
late how Noah would be preserved. And first, he says, that 
the counsel of God respecting the destruction of the world 


254 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. VI. 


was revealed to him. Secondly, that the command to build 
the ark was given. Thirdly, that safety was promised him, 
if, in obedience to God, he would take refuge in the ark. 
These chief points are to be distinctly noted; even as the 
Apostle, when he proclaims the faith of Noah, joins fear and 
obedience with confidence, (Heb. xi. 7.) And it is certain 
that Noah was admonished of the dreadful vengeance which 
was approaching; not only in order that hemight be confirmed 
in his holy purpose, but that, being constrained by fear, 
he might the more ardently seek for the favour offered 
tohim. We know that the impunity of the wicked is some- 
times the occasion of alluring even the good to sin: the de- 
nunciation, therefore, of future punishment ought to be effec- 
tual in restraining the mind of a holy man; lest, by gradual 
declension, he should at length relax to the same lascivious- 
ness. Yet God had special reference to the other point; 
namely, that by keeping continually in view the terrible de- 
struction of the world, Noah might be more and more excited 
to fear and solicitude. For it was necessary, that in utter 
despair of help from any other quarter, he should seek his 
safety, by faith, in the ark. For so long as life was promised 
to him on earth, never would he have been so intent as he 
ought, in the building of the ark; but, being alarmed by the 
judgment of God, he earnestly embraces the promise of life 
given unto him. He no longer relies upon the natural causes 
or means of life; but rests exclusively on the covenant of 
God, by which he was to be miraculously preserved. No 
labour is now troublesome or difficult to him; nor is he broken 
down by long fatigue. For the spur of God’s anger pierces 
him too sharply to allow him to sleep in carnal delights, 
or to faint under temptations, or to be delayed in his 
course by vain hope: he rather stirs himself up, both to flee 
from sin, and to seek a remedy. And the Apostle teaches, 
that it was not the least part of his faith, that through the 
fear of those things which were not seen he prepared an ark. 
When faith is treated of simply, mercy and the gratuitous 
promise come into the account; but when we wish to ex- 
press all its parts, and to canvass its entire force and nature, 
it is necessary that fear also should be joined with it. And, 





CHAP, VI, THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 255 


truly, no one will ever seriously resort to the mercy of God, 

but he who, having been touched with the threatenings of God, 

shall dread that judgment of eternal death which they de- 
nounce, shall abhor himself on account of his own sins, shall 
not carelessly indulge his vices, nor slumber in his pollution ; 
but shall anxiously sigh for the remedy of his evils. This 
was, truly, a peculiar privilege of grace, that God warned 
Noah of the future deluge. Indeed, he frequently commands 
his threatenings to be proposed to the elect, and reprobate, in 
common; that by inviting both to repentance, he may hum- 
ble the former, and render the latter inexcusable. But while 
the greater part of mankind, with deaf ears, reject whatever 
is spoken, he especially turns his discourse to his own people, 
who are still curable, that by the fear of his judgment he may 
train them to piety. The condition of the wicked might at that 
time seem desirable, in comparison with the anxiety of holy 
Noah. They were securely flattering themselves in their 
own delights ; for we know what Christ declares concerning 
the luxury of that period, (Luke xvii. 26.) Meanwhile, the 
holy man, as if the world were every moment going to ruin, 
groaned anxiously and sorrowfully. But if we consider the 
end; God granted an inestimable benefit to his servant, in 
denouncing to him a danger, of which he must beware. 

The earth is filled with violence through them.' God inti- 
mates that men were to be taken away, in order that the 
earth, which had been polluted by the presence of beings so 
wicked, might be purified. Moreover, in speaking only of 
the iniquity and violence, of the frauds and rapines, of which 
they were guilty towards each other; he does it, not as if he 
were intending to remit his own claims upon them, but be- 
cause this was a more gross and palpable demonstration of 
their wickedness. 


14, Make thee an ark of gopher wood. Tere follows the 
command to build the ark, in which God wonderfully proved 
the faith and obedience of his servant. Concerning its 
structure, there is no reason why we should anxiously inquire, 


1 “ Repleta est terra iniquitate & facie eorum.” 


£256 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. VI. 


except so far as our own edification is concerned. First, the 
Jews are not agreed among themselves respecting the kind 
of wood of which it was made. Some explain the word gopher 
to be the cedar; others, the fir-tree ; others, the pine. They 
differ also respecting the stories; because many think that the 
sink was in the fourth place, which might receive the refuse 
and other impurities. Others make five chambers in a triple 
floor, of which they assign the highest to the birds. There 
are those who suppose that it was only three stories in 
height; but that these were separated by intermediate divi- 
sions. Besides, they do not agree about the window: to 
some it appears that there was not one window only, but 
many. Some say they were open to receive air; but others 
contend that they were only made for the sake of light, and 
therefore were covered over with crystal, and lined with pitch. 
To me it seems more probable, that there was only one, not 
cut out for the sake of giving light; but to remain shut, 
unless occasion required it to be opened, as we shall see after- 
wards. Further, that there was a triple story, and rooms sepa- 
rated in a manner to us unknown. ‘The question respecting 
its magnitude is more difficult. For, formerly, certain pro- 
fane men ridiculed Moses, as having imagined that so vast 
a multitude of animals was shut up in so small a space; a 
third part of which would scarcely contain four elephants. 
Origen solves this question, by saying that a geometrical | 
cubit was referred to by Moses, which is six times greater 
than the common one; to whose opinion Augustine assents 
in his fifteenth book on the ‘ City of God, and his first book 
of ‘ Questions on Genesis.’ I grant what they allege, that 
Moses, who had been educated in all the science of the 
Egyptians, was not ignorant of geometry; but since we 
know that Moses everywhere spoke in a homely style, to 
suit the capacity of the people, and that he purposely ab- 
stained from acute disputations, which might savour of the 
schools and of deeper learning; I can by no means per- 
suade myself, that, in this place, contrary to his ordinary 
method, he employed geometrical subtlety. Certainly, in the 
first chapter, he did not treat scientifically of the stars, as 
a philosopher would do; but he called them, in a popular 








CHAP. VI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 257 


manner, according to their appearance to the uneducated, 
rather than according to truth, “two great lights.” Thus 
we may everywhere perceive that he designates things 
of every kind by their accustomed names. But what was 
then the measure of the cubit I know not; it is, however, 
enough for me, that God (whom, without controversy, I 
acknowledge to be the chief builder of the ark) well 
knew what things the place which he described to his 
servant was capable of holding. If you exclude the extra- 
ordinary power of God from this history, you declare that 
mere fables are related. But, by us, who confess that the 
remains of the world were preserved by an incredible miracle, 
it ought not to be regarded as an absurdity, that many won- 
derful things are here related, in order that hence the secret 
and incomprehensible power of God, which far surpasses all 
our senses, may be the more clearly exhibited. Porphyry, or 
some other caviller,! may object, that this is fabulous, because 
the reason of it does not appear; or because it is unusual; or 
because it is repugnant to the common order of nature. But 
I make the rejoinder; that. this entire narration of Moses, 
unless it were replete with miracles, would be cold, and 
trifling, and ridiculous. He, however, who will reflect aright 
upon the profound abyss of Divine omnipotence in thishistory, 
will rather sink in reverential awe, than indulge in profane 


mockery. I purposely pass over the allegorical application * 


which Augustine makes of the figure of the ark to the body 
of Christ, both in his fifteenth book of ‘ The City of God,’ 
and his twelfth book against Faustus; because I find there 
scarcely anything solid. Origen still more boldly sports with 
allegories: but there is nothing more profitable, than to 
adhere strictly to the natural treatment of things. That the 
ark was an image of the Church is certain, from the testi- 


1 Hoc Porphyrius, vel quispiam alius canis, fabulosum esse obgan- 
niet.” Throughout the above passage, Calvin takes for granted, that there 
was a miracle, when a close examination would have convinced him that 
there was none. It has only required the use of a little arithmetic, and 
common sense, to prove that the ark was more than sufficient to con- 
tain all the creatures which Noah was commanded to bring into it, as well 
as provision for the whole time of their residence in it.—See Wells’ Geo- 
graphy of the Old Test., chap. ii.— Ed. 


VOL. I. R 


V 


258 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. VI. 


mony of Peter, (1 Peter iii. 21;) but to accommodate its 
several parts to the Church, is by no means suitable, as 1 
shall again show, in its proper place. 


18. But with thee will I establish my covenant. Since the 
construction of the ark was very difficult, and innumerable 
obstacles might perpetually arise to break off the work when 
begun, God confirms his servant by a superadded promise. 
Thus was Noah encouraged to obey God; seeing that he re- 
lied on the Divine promise, and was confident that his labour 
would not be in vain. For then do we freely embrace the 
commands of God, when a promise is attached to them, 
which teaches us that we shall not spend our strength for 
nought. Whence it appears how foolishly the Papists are 
deceived, who triflingly argue, that men are led away by the 
doctrine of faith from the desire of doing well. For what 
will be the degree of our alacrity in well-doing, unless faith 
enlighten us? Let us therefore know, that the promises of 
God alone, are they which quicken us, and inspire each of 
our members with vigour to yield obedience to God: but 
that without these promises, we not only lie torpid in indo- 
lence, but are almost lifeless, so that neither hands nor feet 
can do their duty. And hence, as often as we become 
languid, or more remiss than we ought to be, in good works, — 
let the promises of God recur to us, to correct our tardiness. 
For thus, according to the testimony of Paul, (Col. i. 5,) 
love flourishes in the saints, on account of the hope laid up for 
them in heaven. It is especially necessary that the faithful 
should be confirmed by the word of God, lest they faint in 
the midst of their course; to the end that they may certainly 
be assured that they are not beating the air, as they say ; 
but that, acquiescing in the promise given them, and being 
sure of success, they follow God who calls them. This 
connection, then, is to be borne in mind, that when God was 
instructing his servant Moses what he would have him do, 
he declares, for the purpose of retaining him in obedience 
to himself, that he requires nothing of him in vain. Now, 
the sum of this covenant of which Moses speaks was, that 
Noah should be safe, although the whole world should perish 








CHAP. VI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 259 


in the deluge. For there is an understood antithesis, that 
the whole world being rejected, the Lord would establish a 
peculiar covenant with Noah alone. Wherefore, it was the 
duty of Noah to oppose this promise of God, like a wall of 
iron, against all the terrors of death; just as if it were the 
purpose of God, by this sole word, to discriminate between 
life and death. But the covenant with him is confirmed, with 
this condition annexed, that his family shall be preserved for 
his sake ; and also the brute animals, for the replenishing of 
the new world; concerning which I shall say more in the 
ninth chapter. 


19. And of every living thing of all flesh. “ All flesh” is the 
name he gives to animals of whatsoever kind they may be. 
He says they went in two and two; not that a single pair of 
each kind was received into the ark, (for we shall soon see 
that there were three pairs of the clean kinds, and one animal 
over, which Noah afterwards offered in sacrifice ;) but whereas 
here mention is made only of offspring, he does not expressly 
state the number, but simply couples males with females, 
that Noah might hence perceive how the world was to be 
replenished. 


22. Thus did Noah. In a few words, but with great subli- 
mity, Moses here commends the faith of Noah. The un- 

_ skilful wonder that the apostle (Heb. xi. 7) makes him 
_ “heir of the righteousness which is by faith.” As if, truly, 
all the virtues, and whatsoever else was worthy of praise in 
this holy man, had not sprung from this fountain. For we 
ought to consider the assaults of temptation to which his 
‘breast was continually exposed. First, the prodigious size 
of the ark might have overwhelmed all his senses, so as 
to prevent him from raising a finger to begin the work. 
Let the reader reflect on the multitude of trees to be felled, 
on the great labour of conveying them, and the difficulty of 
| joining them together. The matter was also long deferred ; 
_ for the holy man was required to be engaged more than a 
hundred years in most troublesome labour. Nor can we 
suppose him to have been so stupid, as not to reflect 

















260 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. VI. 


upon obstacles of this kind. Besides, it was scarcely to be 
hoped, that the men of his age would patiently bear with him, 
for promising himself an exclusive deliverance, attended with 
ignominy to themselves. ‘Their unnatural ferocity has been 
before mentioned ; there can therefore be no doubt that they 
would daily provoke modest and simple-minded men, even ° 
without cause. But here was a plausible occasion for insult ; 
since Noah, by felling trees on all sides, was making the earth 
bare, and defrauding them of various advantages. It isa 
common proverb, that perverse and contentious men will 
dispute about an ass’s shadow. What, then, might Noah 
think, would those fierce Cyclops do for the shadow of so 
many trees; who, being practised in every kind of violence, 
would seize with eagerness on all sides an occasion of exer- 
cising cruelty ? But this was what chiefly tended to inflame 
their rage, that he, by building an asylum for himself, vir- 
tually doomed them all to destruction. Certainly, unless 
they had been restrained by the mighty hand of God, they 
would have stoned the holy man a hundred times ; still it is 
probable, that their vehemence was not so far repressed, as 
to prevent them from frequently assailing him with scoffs and 
derision, from heaping upon him many reproaches, and pur- 
suing him with grievous threats. I even think, that they did 
not restrain their hands from disturbing his work. Therefore, . 
although he may have addressed himself with alacrity to the 
work committed to him; yet his constancy might have failed 
more than a thousand times, in so many years, unless it had 
been firmly rooted. Moreover, as the work itself appeared im- 
practicable, it may be further asked, Whence were provisions 
for the year to be obtained? whence food for so many ani- 
mals? He is commanded to lay up what will suffice for food 
during ten months, for his whole family, for cattle, and wild 
beasts, and even for birds. ‘Truly, it seems absurd, that after 
he has been disengaged from agriculture, in order to build the 
ark, he should be commanded to collect a two years’ store of 
provision; but much more trouble attended the providing 
of food for animals. He might therefore have suspected that 
God was mocking him. His last work was to gather animals 
of all kinds together. As if, indeed, he had all the beasts of 














~ 


_ CHAP. VI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 261 


the forest at his command, or was able to tame them; so 
that, in his keeping, wolves might dwell with lambs, tigers 
with hares, lions with oxen—as sheep in his fold. But the 
most grievous temptation of all was, that he was commanded 
to descend, as into the grave, for the sake of preserving his 
life, and voluntarily to deprive himself of air and vital spirit; 
for the smell of dung alone, pent up, as it was, in a closely 
filled place, might, at the expiration of three days, have 
stifled all the living creatures in the ark. Let us reflect on 
these conflicts of the holy man—-so severe, and multiplied, and 
long-continued—in order that we may know how heroic was 
his courage, in prosecuting, to the utmost, what God had com- 
manded him to do. Moses, indeed, says in a single word 
that he did it; but we must consider how far beyond all hu- 
man power was the doing of it: and that it would have been 
better to die a hundred deaths, than to undertake a work so 
laborious, unless he had looked to something higher than the 
_ present life. A remarkable example, therefore, of obedience 
is here described to us; because, Noah, committing himself 
entirely to God, rendered Him due honour. We know, in 
this corruption of our nature, how ready men are to seek sub- 
terfuges, and how ingenious in inventing pretexts for dis- 
obedience to God. Wherefore, let us also learn to break 
through every kind of impediment, and not to give place to 
evil thoughts, which oppose themselves to the word of God, 
and with which Satan attempts to entangle our minds, that 
they may not obey the command of God. For God espe- 
cially demands this honour to be given to himself, that we 
should suffer him to judge for us. And this is the true proof 
of faith, that we, being content with one of his commands, 
gird ourselves to the work, sothat we do not swerve in our 
course, whatever obstacle Satan may place in our way, but 
are borne on the wings of faith above the world. Moses also 
shows, that Noah obeyed God, not in one particular only, 
but inall. Which is diligently to be observed; because hence, 
chiefly, arises dreadful confusion in our life, that we are not 
able, unreservedly, to submit ourselves to God; but when we 
have discharged some part of our duty, we often blend our own 
feelings with his word. But the obedience of Noah is cele- 


262 


brated on this account, that it 


COMMENTARY UPON 


CHAP. VII. 


was entire, not partial; so 


that he omitted none of those things which God had com- 


manded. 


CHAPTER VII. 


1. Anp the Lord said unto Noah, 
Come thou and all thy house into the 
ark; for thee have I seen righteous 
before me in this generation. 

2. Of every clean beast thou shalt 
take to thee by sevens, the male and 
his female: and of beasts that are 
not clean by two, the male and his 
female. 

8. Of fowls also of the air by se- 
vens, the male and the female ; to keep 
seed alive upon the face of all the 
earth. 

4. For yet seven days, and I will 
cause it to rain upon the earth forty 
days and forty nights ; and every liv- 
ing substance that I have made, will I 
destroy from off the face of the earth. 

5. And Noah did according unto all 
that the Lord commanded him. 

6. And Noah was six hundred years 
old when the flood of waters was upon 
the earth. 

7. And Noah went in, and his sons, 
and his wife, and his sons’ wives with 
him, into the ark, because of the 
waters of the flood. 

8. Of clean beasts, and of beasts 
that are not clean, and of fowls, and 
of every thing that creepeth upon the 
earth, 

9. There went in two and two} 
unto Noah into the ark, the male and 
the female, as God had commanded 
Noah. 

10. And it came to pass after seven 
days, that the waters of the flood were 
upon the earth. 

11. In the six hundredth year of 
Noah’s life, in the second month, the 
seventeenth day of the month, the 
same day were all the fountains of the 
great deep broken up, and the win- 
dows of heaven were opened. 


1. Et dixit Jehova ad Noah, 
Ingredere tu, et omnis domus 
tua arcam: quia te vidi justum 
coram me in etate ista. 

2. Ex omni animali mundo 
capies tibi septena septena, 
virum et foemellam ejus: et ex 
animali quod non mundum est, 
bina, virum et foemellam ejus. 

3. Etiam ex volatili cceli sep- 
tena, masculum et femellam: 
ut vivum conservetur semen in 
superficie omnis terre. 

4. Quia post dies adhue sep- 
tem ego pluam super terram 
quadraginta dies, et quadraginta 
noctes, et delebo omnem substan- 
tiam quam feci, a superficie terre. 

5. Et fecit Noah secundum 
omnia que preeceperat ei Jehova. 

6. Noah antem erat sexcen- 
torum annorum quando diluvium 
fuit aquarum super terram. 

7. Et ingressus Noah, et filii 
ejus, et uxor ejus, et uxores fili- 
orum ejus cum eo in arcam, 
propter aquas diluvii. 

8. Ex animali mundo, et ex 
animali quod non erat mundum, 
et ex volatili, et ex omni quod 
reptat super terram, 

9. Bina bina ingressa sunt ad 
Noah in arcam, masculus et foe- 
mella, quemadmodum precepe- 
rat Deus ipsi Noah. 

10. Et fuit, post septem dies 
aque diluvii fuerunt super ter- 
ram. 

11. In anno sexcentesimo an- 
norum vitz Noah, in mense se- . 
cundo, in septimadecima die 
mensis, die ipsa, rupti sunt omnes 
fontes voraginis magne, et fenes- 
tre coeli aperte sunt. 














CHAP. VII. 


12. And the rain was upon the earth 
forty days and forty nights. 


13. In the self-same day entered 
Noah, and Shem, and Ham, and Ja- 
pheth, the sons of Noah, and Noah’s 
wife, and the three wives of his sons 
with them, into the ark: 

14. They, and every beast after his 
kind, and all the cattle after their kind, 
and every creeping thing that creep- 
eth upon the earth after his kind, and 
every fowl after his kind, every bird 
of every sort. 


15. And they went in unto Noah 
into the ark, two and two of all flesh, 
wherein zs the breath of life. 


16. And they that went in, went 
in male and female of all flesh, as God 
had commanded him: and the Lord 
shut. him in. 


17. And the flood was forty days 
upon the earth; and the waters in- 
creased, and bare up the ark, and it 
was lift up above the earth. 


18. And the waters prevailed, and 
were increased greatly upon the earth ; 
and the ark went upon the face of 

he waters. 

19. And the waters prevailed ex- 
ceedingly upon the earth ; and all the 
high hills, that were under the whole 
heaven, were covered. 

20. Fifteen cubits upward did the 
waters prevail; and the mountains 
were covered. 

21. And all flesh died that moved 
upon the earth, both of fowl, and of 
cattle, and of beast, and of every creep- 
ing thing that creepeth upon theearth, 
and every man: 

22. All in whose nostrils was the 
breath of life, of all that was in the 
dry land, died. 


23. And every living substance was 
destroyed which was upon the face of 
the ground, both man, and cattle, and 
the creeping things, and the fowl of 
the heaven: and they were destroyed 
from the earth: and Noah only re- 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


263 


12. Et fuit pluvia super terram 
quadraginta dies et quadraginta 
noctes. 

13. Ipso eodem die ingressus 
est Noah, et Sem, et Cham, et 
Jepheth, filii Noah, et uxor 
Noah, tresque uxores filiorum 
ejus cum illis, in arcam : 

14. Ipsi, et omnis bestia juxta 
speciem suam, et omne animal 
juxta speciem suam, et omne 
reptile quod reptat super terram, 
secundum speciem suam, et omne 
volatile juxta speciem suam, 
omnis avis, et omne alatum. 

15. Ingressa sunt igitur ad 
Noah in arcam, bina bina ex 
omni carne in qua erat spiritus 
vite. 

16. Kt que ingressa sunt, mas- 
culus et foemina ex omni carne 
ingressa sunt, quemadmodum 
preceperat ei Deus: et clausit 
Jehova super eum. 

17. Et factum est diluvium 
quadraginta dies super terram, 
et multiplicate sunt aque, ele- 
vaveruntque arcam: itaque ele- 
vata est a terra. 

18. Et prevaluerunt aque, et 
multiplicate sunt valde super 
terram, et fluitabat arca super 
faciem aquarum. 

19. Roboraverunt itaque se 
aqne valde super terram, et 
operti sunt omnes montes excelsi 
qui erant sub universo ceelo. 

20. Quindecim cubitis superne 
roboraverunt se aque, ita ut 
operti sint montes. 

21. Et mortua est omnis caro 
que reptabat super terram, tam 
de volatili quam de animali et 
bestia, et omni reptili quod reptat 
super terram, et omni homine. 

22. Omnia in quorum nare erat 
anhelitus spiritus vite, ex omni- 
bus que erant in sicco, mortua 
sunt. 

23. Et delevit omnem substan- 
tiam vivam, que erat super 
faciem terre, ab homine usque 
ad jumentum, usque ad reptile, 
et usque ad volatile coeli: et de- 
leta sunt e terra, et remansit 


264 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. VII. 


mained alive, and they that were with tantum Noah, et qui cum eo erant 
him in the ark. in arca. 

24. And the waters prevailed 24. Et roboraverunt se aque 
upon the earth an hundred and fifty super terram quinquaginta et 
days. centum dies. 


~ 


1. And the Lord said unto Noah. I have no doubt that 
Noah was confirmed, as he certainly needed to be, by oracles 
frequently repeated. He had already sustained, during one 
hundred years, the greatest and most furious assaults; and 
the invincible combatant had achieved memorable victories; 
but the most severe contest of all was, to bid farewell to the 
world, to renounce society, and to bury himself in the ark. 
The face of the earth was, at that time, lovely ; and Moses 
intimates that it was the season in which the herbs shoot 
forth and the trees begin to flourish. Winter, which binds 
the joy of sky and earth in sharp and rugged frost, has now 
passed away; and the Lord has chosen the moment for de- 
stroying the world, in the very season of spring. For Moses 
states that the commencement of the deluge was in the se- 
cond month. I know, however, that different opinions pre- 
vail on this subject; for there are three who begin the year 
from the autumnal equinox; but that mode of reckoning 
the year is more approved, which makes it commence in the 
month of March. However this might be, it was no light 
trial for Noah to leave of his own accord, the life to which he 
had been accustomed during six hundred years, and to seek 
a new mode of life in the abyss of death. He is commanded 
to forsake the world, that he may live in a sepulchre which 
he had been laboriously digging for himself through more 
than a hundred years. Why was this? because, in a little 
while, the earth was to be submerged in a deluge of 
waters. Yet nothing of the kind is apparent: all in- 
dulge in feasts, celebrate nuptials, build sumptuous houses ; 
in short, everywhere, daintiness and luxury prevail; as Christ 
himself testifies, that that age was intoxicated with its own 
pleasures, (Luke xvii. 26.) Wherefore, it was not without 
reason, that the Lord encouraged and fortified the mind of 
his servant afresh, by the renewal of the promise, lest he 
should faint; as if he would say, ‘ Hitherto thou hast 








CHAP. VII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 265 


laboured with fortitude amid so many causes of offence; but 
now the case especially demands that thou shouldst take 
courage, in order to reap the fruit of thy labour: do not, 
however, wait till the waters burst forth on every side from 
the opened veins of the earth, and till the higher waters of 
heaven, with opposing violence, rush from their opened ca- 
taracts; but while everything is yet tranquil, enter into the 
ark, and there remain till the seventh day, then suddenly 
shall the deluge arise.’ And although oracles are not now 
brought down from heaven, let us know that continual medi- 
tation on the word is not ineffectual; for as new difficulties 
perpetually arise before us, so God, by one and another pro- 
mise, establishes our faith, so that our strength being renewed, 
we may at length arrive at the goal. Our duty, indeed, is, 
attentively to hear God speaking to us; and neither, through 
depraved fastidiousness, to reject those exercises, by which 
He cherishes, or excites, or confirms our faith, according as 
he knows it to be still tender, or languishing, or weak; nor 
yet to reject them as superfluous. “ For thee have I seen 
righteous.” When the Lord assigns as his reason for pre- 
_ serving Noah, that he knew him to be righteous, he seems to 
attribute the praise of salvation to the merit of works; for 
if Noah was saved because he was righteous, it follows, that 
we shall deserve life by good works. But here it behoves us 
cautiously to weigh the design of God; which was to place 
one man in contrast with the whole world, in order that, in 
his person, he might condemn the unrighteousness of all men. 
For he again testifies, that the punishment which he was 
about to inflict on the world was just, seeing that only one 
man was left who then cultivated righteousness, for whose 
sake he was propitious to his whole family. Should any one 
object, that from this passage, God is proved to have respect 
to works in saving men, the solution is ready ; that this is not 
repugnant to gratuitous acceptance, since God accepts those 
gifts which he himself has conferred upon his servants. We 
must observe, in the first place, that he loves men freely, 
inasmuch as he finds nothing in them but what is worthy of 
hatred, since all men are born the children of wrath, and heirs 
of eternal malediction. In this respect he adopts them to him- 


266 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. VII. 


self in Christ, and justifies them by his mere mercy. After 
he has, in this manner, reconciled them unto himself, he also 
regenerates them, by his Spirit, to new life and righteousness. 
Hence flow good works, which must of necessity be pleasing 
to God himself. Thus he not only loves the faithful, but also 
their works. We must again observe, that since some fault 
always adheres to our works, it is not possible that they can 
be approved, except as a matter of indulgence. The grace, 
therefore, of Christ, and not their own dignity or merit, is that 
which gives worth to our works. Nevertheless, we do not deny 
that they come into the account before God: as he here ac- 
knowledges, and accepts, the righteousness of Noah which had 
proceeded from his own grace; and in this manner (as 
Augustine speaks) he will crown his own gifts. We may 
further notice the expression, “ I have seen thee righteous 
before me ;” by which words, he not only annihilates all that 
hypocritical righteousness which is destitute of interior sanc- 
tity of heart, but vindicates his own authority ; as if he would 
declare, that he alone is a competent judge to estimate righte- 
ousness. ‘The clause, “in this generation,” is added, as I 
have said, for the sake of amplification ; for so desperate was 
the depravity of that age, that it was regarded as a prodigy, 
that Noah should be free from the common infection. 


2. Of every clean beast. He again repeats what he had 
before said concerning animals, and not without occasion. 
For there was no little difficulty in collecting from woods, 
mountains, and cayes, so great a multitude of wild beasts, 
many species of which were perhaps altogether unknown; 
and there was, in most of them, the same ferocity which we 
now perceive. Wherefore, God encourages the holy man, 
lest being alarmed with that difficulty, and having cast aside 
all hope of success, he should fail. Here, however, at first 
sight, appears some kind of contradiction, because whereas 
he before had spoken of pairs of animals, he now speaks of 
sevens. But the solution is at hand; because, previously, 
Moses does not state the number, but only says that females 
were added as companions to the males; as if he had said, 
Noah himself was commanded not to gather the animals pro- 





CHAP. VII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 267 


miscuously together, but to select pairs out of them for the 
propagation of offspring. Now, however, the discourse is 
concerning the actual number. Moreover, the expression, 
“ by sevens,” is to be understood not of seven pairs of each 
kind, but of three pairs, to which one animal is added for the 
sake of sacrifice.! Besides, the Lord would have a threefold 
greater number of clean animals than of others preserved, 
because there would be a greater necessity of them for the 
use of man. In which appointment, we must consider the 
paternal goodness of God towards us, by which he is inclined 
to have regard to us in all things. . 


3. To keep seed alive upon the face of all the earth. That 
is, that hence offspring might be born. But this is referred 
to Noah; for although, properly speaking, God alone gives 
life, yet God here refers to those duties which he had 
enjoined upon his servant: and it is with respect to his 
appointed office, that God commands him to collect animals 
that he may keep seed alive. Nor is this extraordinary, 
seeing that the ministers of the gospel are said, in a sense, to 
confer spiritual life. Inthe clause which next follows, “ upon 
the face of all the earth,” there is a twofold consolation : 
that the waters, after they had covered the earth for a time, 
would again cease, so that the dry surface of the earth should 
appear; and then, that not only should Noah himself survive, 
but, by the blessing of God, the number of animals should 
be so increased, as to spread far and wide through the whole 
world. Thus, in the midst of ruin, future restoration is pro- 
mised to him. Moses is very earnest in showing that God 
took care, by every means, to retain Noah in obedience to 
his word, and that the holy man entirely acquiesced. This 
doctrine is very useful, especially when God either promises 
or threatens anything incredible, since men do not willingly 
receive what seems to them improbable. For nothing was 


1 Le Clere objects to this interpretation, and supposes that seven of 
each sex of clean, and two of each sex of unclean animals, were admitted 
into the ark. Perhaps a sceptical objection to the use of the seventh 
animal, as a sacrifice, inclined him to adopt this interpretation. Com- 
mentators, however, have generally preferred thesolution here given.—Ed. 


268 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. VII. 


less accordant with the judgment of the flesh, than that the 
world should be destroyed by its Creator; because this was 
to subvert the whole order of nature which he had established. 
Wherefore, unless Noah had been well admonished of this 
terrible judgment of God, he never would have ventured to 
believe it ; lest he should conceive of God as acting in con- 
tradiction to himself. The word pn, (hayekom,) which 
Moses here uses, has its origin from a word signifying to 
stand; but it properly means whatever lives and flourishes. 


5. And Noah did according to all that the Lord commanded. 
This is not a bare repetition of the former sentence; but 
Moses commends Noah’s uniform tenor of obedience in 
keeping all God’s commandments ; as if he would say, that 
in whatever particular it pleased God to try his obedience, 
he always remained constant. And, certainly, it is not be- 
coming to obey one or another commandment of God only, 
so that when we have performed a defective obedience, we 
should feel at liberty to withdraw ; for we must keep in me- 
mory the declaration of James, ‘He who forbade thee to kill, for- 
bade thee also to steal, and to commit adultery,’ (James ii. 11.) 


6. And Noah was six hundred years old. It is not without 
reason that he again mentions the age of Noah. For old age 
has this among other evils, that it renders men more indolent 
and morose ; whence the faith of Noah was the more conspi- 
cuous, because it did not fail him in that advanced period of 
life. And asit wasa great excellence, not to languish through 
successive centuries, so his promptitude deserves no little 
commendation; because, being commanded to enter the ark, 
he immediately obeyed. When Moses shortly afterwards 
subjoins, that he had entered on account of the waters of the 
deluge, the words ought not to be expounded, as if he were 
_ compelled, by the rushing of the waters, to flee into the ark; 
but that he, being moved with fear by the word, per- 
ceived by faith the approach of that deluge which all others 
ridiculed. Wherefore, his faith is again commended in this 
place, because, indeed, he raised his eyes above heaven and 
earth. | 


CHAP, VII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 269 


8. Of clean beasts. Moses now explains,—what had before 
been doubtful,—in which manner the animals were gathered 
together into the ark, and says that they came of their own 
accord. If this should seem to any one absurd, let him recall 
to mind what was said before, that in the beginning every 
kind of animals presented themselves to Adam, that he 
might give them names. And, truly, we dread the sight of 
wild beasts from no other cause than this, that seeing we have 
shaken off the yoke of God, we have lost that authority over 
them with which Adam was endued. Now, it was a kind 
of restoration of the former state of things, when God brought 
to Noah those animals which he intended should be preserved 
through Noah’s labour and service. For Noah retained the 
untamed animals in his ark, in the very same way in which hens 
and geese are preserved in a coop. And it is not superfluously 
added, that the animals themselves came, as God had in- 
structed Noah; for it shows, that the blessing of God rested 
on the obedience of Noah, so that his labour should not be in 
vain. It was impossible, humanly speaking, that in a moment 
such an assemblage of all animals should take place; but be- 
cause Noah, simply trusting the event with God, executed 
what was enjoined upon him; God, in return, gave power to 
his own precept, that it might not be without effect. Pro- 
perly speaking, this was a promise of God annexed to his com- 
mands. And, therefore, we must conclude, that the faith of 
Noah availed more, than all snares and nets, for the capture 
of animals; and that, by the very same gate, lions, and 
wolves, and tigers, meekly entered, with oxen, and with lambs, 
into the ark. And this is the only method by which we may 
overcome all difficulties; while,—being persuaded, that what is 
impossible to us is easy to God,—we derive alacrity from 
hope. It has before been stated that the animals entered in 
by pairs. We have also related the different opinions of 
interpreters respecting the month in which the deluge took 
place. For since the Hebrews begin their year in sacred 
things from March, but in earthly affairs from September ; 
or,—which is the same thing,—since the two equinoxes form 
with them a double commencement of the year, some think 
that the sacred year, and some the political, is here intended. 


270 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. VII. 


But because the former method of reckoning the years was 
Divinely appointed, and is also more agreeable to nature, it 
seems probable that the deluge began about the time of 
spring. 


11. The same day were all the fountains of the great deep 
broken up. Moses recalls the period of the first creation to 
our memory ; for the earth was originally covered with water ; 
and by the singular kindness of God, they were made to 
recede, that some space should be left clear for living crea- 
tures. And this, philosophers are compelled to acknowledge, 
that it is contrary to the course of nature for the waters 
to subside, so that some portion of the earth might rise 
above them. And Scripture records this among the miracles 
of God, that he restrains the force of the sea, as with barriers, 
lest it should overwhelm that part of the earth which is 
granted for a habitationto men. Moses also says, in the first 
chapter, that some waters were suspended above in the 
heaven; and David, in like manner, declares, that they are 
held enclosed as in a bottle. Lastly, God raised for men a 
theatre in the habitable region of the earth; and caused, by 
his secret power, that the subterraneous waters should not — 
break forth to overwhelm us, and the celestial waters should 
not conspire with them for that purpose. Now, however, 
Moses states, that when God resolved to destroy the earth by 
a deluge, those barriers were torn up. And here we must 
consider the wonderful counsel of God; for he might have 
deposited, in certain channels or veins of the earth, as much 
water as would have sufficed for all the purposes of human 
life; but he has designedly placed us between two graves, 
lest, in fancied security, we should despise that kindness on 
which our life depends. For the element of water, which 
philosophers deem one of the principles of life, threatens us 
with death from above and from beneath, except so far as it is 
restrained by the hand of God. In saying that the fountains 
were broken up, and the cataracts opened, his language is 
metaphorical, and means, that neither did the waters flow 
in their accustomed manner, nor did the rain distil from 
heaven; but that the distinction, which we see had been 





CHAP. VII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 271 


established by God, being now removed, there were no longer 
any bars to restrain the violent irruption. 


12. And the rain was upon the earth. Although the Lord 
burst open the flood-gates of the waters, yet he does not 
allow them to break forth in a moment, so as immediately to 
overwhelm the earth, but causes the rain to continue forty 
days; partly, that Noah, by long meditation, might more 
deeply fix in his memory what he had previously learned, by 
instruction, through the word; partly, that the wicked, even 
before their death, might feel that those warnings which they 
had held in derision, were not empty threats. For they who 
had so long scorned the patience of God, deserved to fecl 
that they were gradually perishing under that righteous judg- 
ment of his, which, during a hundred years, they had treated 
as a fable. And the Lord frequently so tempers his judg- 
ments, that men may have leisure to consider with more ad- 
vantage those judgments which, by their sudden eruption, 
might overcome them with astonishment. But the wonderful 
depravity of our nature shows itself in this, that if the anger of 
God is suddenly poured forth, we become stupified and 
senseless; but if it advances with measured pace, we become 
so accustomed to it as to despise it; because we do not 
willingly acknowledge the hand of God without miracles; 
and because we are easily hardened, by a kind of superin- 
duced insensibility, at the sight of God’s works. 


13. In the self-same day entered Noah, and Shem, §c. A 
repetition follows, sufficiently particular, considering the 
brevity with which Moses runs through the history of the 
deluge, yet by no means superfluous. For it was the design 
of the Spirit to retain our minds in the consideration of a 
vengeance too terrible to be adequately described by the ut- 
most severity of language. Besides, nothing is here related 
but what is difficult to be believed; wherefore Moses the 
more frequently inculcates these things, that however remote 
they may be from our apprehension, they may still obtain 
credit with us. Thus the narration respecting the animals 
refers to this point ; that by the faith of holy Noah, they were 


272 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, VII. 


drawn from their woods and caverns, and were collected in 
one place from their wandering courses, as if they had been 
led by the hand of God. We see, therefore, that Moses 
does not insist upon this point without an object; but he does 
it to teach us that each species of animals was preserved, not 
by chance, nor by human industry, but because the Lord 
reached out and offered to Noah himself, from hand to hand, 
(as they say,) whatever animal he intended to keep alive. 


16. And the Lord shut him in. This is not added in yain, 
nor ought it to be lightly passed over. ‘That door must have 
been large, which could admit an elephant. And truly, no 
pitch would be sufficiently firm and tenacious, and no joining 
sufficiently solid, to prevent the immense force of the water 
from penetrating through its many seams, especially in an 
irruption so violent, and in a shock so severe. Therefore, 
Moses, to cut off occasion for the vain speculations which our 
own curiosity would suggest, declares, in one word, that the 
ark was made secure from the deluge, not by human artifice, 
but by divine miracle. It is, indeed, not to be doubted, that 
Noah had been endued with new ability and sagacity, that 
nothing might be defective in the structure of the ark. But 
lest even this favour should be without success, it was ne- 
cessary for something greater to be added. Wherefore, that 
we might not measure the mode of preserving the ark, by the 
capacity of our own judgment, Moses teaches us, that the 
waters were not restrained from breaking in upon the ark, 
by pitch or bitumen only, but rather by the secret power of 
God, and by the interposition of his hand. 


17. And the flood was forty days, §c. Moses copiously in- 
sists upon this fact, in order to show that the whole world 
was immersed in the waters. Moreover, it is to be regarded 
as the special design of this narration, that we should not 
ascribe to fortune, the flood by which the world perished; how- 
ever customary it may be for men to cast some veil over the 
works of God, which may obscure either his goodness or his 
judgments manifested inthem. Butseeingitis plainly declared, 
that whatever was flourishing on the earth was destroyed, we 





CHAP. VII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 273 


hence infer, that it was an indisputable and signal judgment 
of God; especially since Noah alone remained secure, because 
he had embraced, by faith, the word in which salvation was 
contained. He then recalls to memory what we before have 

said ; namely, how desperate had been the impiety, and how 

enormous the crimes of men, by which God was induced to 

destroy the whole world; whereas, on account of his great cle- 
mency, he would havespared hisown workmanship, had he seen 

that any milder remedy could have been effectually applied. 

These two things, directly opposed to each other, he connects 
together ; that the whole human race was destroyed, but that 
Noah and his family safely escaped. Hence we learn how 

profitable it was for Noah, disregarding the world, to obey 

God alone: which Moses states, not so much for the sake of 
praising the man, as for that of inviting us to imitate his 

example. Moreover, lest the multitude of sinners should 

draw us away from God; we must patiently bear that the un- 

godly should hold us up to ridicule, and should triumph over 

us, until the Lord shall show by the final issue, that our 

obedience has been approved by him. In this sense, Peter 

teaches that Noah’s deliverance from the universal deluge 

was a figure of baptism, (1 Pet. ii. 21;) as if he had said, the 

method of the salvation, which we receive through baptism, 

agrees with this deliverance of Noah. Since at this time also, 

the world is full of unbelievers as it was then; therefore it 

is necessary for us to separate ourselves from the greater 

multitude, that the Lord may snatch us from destruction. 

In the same manner, the Church is fitly, and justly, compared 

to the ark. But we must keep in mind the similitude by 
which they mutually correspond with each other; for that is 
derived from the word of God alone; because, as Noah believing 
the promise of God, gathered himself, his wife and his chil- 
dren together, in order that, under a certain appearance of 
death, he might emerge out of death; so it is fitting that we 
should renounce the world and die, in order that the Lord 
may quicken us by his word. For nowhere else is there 
any security of salvation. The Papists, however, act ridicu- 
lously, who fabricate for us an ark without the word. 

VOL, I. S 


274 


COMMENTARY UPON 


CHAP. VIII. 


CHAPTER VIIL. 


1. Anp God remembered Noah, and 
every living thing, and all the cattle that 
was with himin the ark: and God made 
a wind to pass over the earth, and the 
waters asswaged ; 


2. The fountains also of the deep and 
the windows of heaven were stopped, and 
the rain from heaven was restrained ; 

3. And the waters returned from off 
the earth continually: and after the end 
of the hundred and fifty days the waters 
were abated. ¥ 


4. And the ark rested in the seventh 
month, on the seventeenth day of the 
month, upon the mountains of Ararat. 

5. And the waters decreased con- 
tinually until the tenth month: in the 
tenth month, on the first day of the 
month, were the tops of the mountains 
seen. 

6. And it came to pass at the end of 
forty days, that Noah opened the win- 
dow of the ark which he had made: 

7. And he sent forth a raven, which 
went forth to and fro, until the waters 
were dried up from off the earth. 


8. Also he sent forth a dove from him, 
to see if the waters were abated from off 
the face of the ground ; 

9. But the dove found no rest for the 
sole of her foot, and she returned unto 
him into the ark, for the waters were on 
the face of the whole earth: then he put 
forth his hand, and took her, and pulled 
her in unto him into the ark. 


10. And he stayed yet other seven 
days ; and again he sent forth the dove 
out of the ark ; 

11. And the dove came in to him in 
the evening; and, lo, in her mouth was 
an Olive leaf pluckt off: so Noah knew 
that the waters were abated from off the 
earth. 


12. And he stayed yet other seven 
days; and sent forth the dove; which 
returned not again unto him any more. 


1. Recordatus est autem 
Deus Noah, et omnis bestiz, 
et omnis animalis que erant 
cum eo in arca: et transire 
fecit Deus ventum super ter- 
ram, et quieverunt aque. 

2. Et clauserunt se fontes 
abyssi, fenestreeque ceeli, et 
prohibita est pluvia e ceelo. 

3. Et reverse sunt aque a 
superficie terre, eundo et re- 
deundo, et defecerunt aque in 
fine quinquaginta et centum 
dierum. i 

4. Et requievit arca mense 
septimo, septimadecima die 
mensis super montes Ararath. 

5. Et aque ibant et deficie- 
bant usque ad mensem deci- 
mum: in decimo, in prima 
mensis visa sunt cacumina 
montium. 

6. Et fuit, in fine quadra- 
ginta dierum, aperuit Noah 
fenestram arce quam fecerat. 

7. Et misit corvum, et 
egressus est egrediendo et re- 
deundo, donec _ siccarentur 
aque que erant super terram. 

8. Deinde misit columbam 
ase, ut videret an extenuatse — 
essent aque a superficie terre. 

9. Et non invenit columba 
requiem plante pedis sui, et 
reversa est ad eum in arcam: 
quia aquee erant in superficie 
omnis terre: et misit manum 
suam, et accepit eam, intro- 
duxitque eam ad se in arcam. 

10. Et expectavit adhuc 
septem dies alios, et addidit ut 
mitteret columbam ex arca. 

11. Et venit ad eum columba 
tempore vespertino, et ecce, 
folium olive raptum erat in 
ore ejus, et cognovit Noah quod 
extenuatz essent aque a su- 
perficie terre. 

12. Et expectavit adhuc 
septem alios, et misit colum- 
bam: et non addidit ut re- 
verteretur ad eum amplius. 


CHAP. VIII. 


13. And it came to pass in the six 
hundredth and first year, in the first 
month, the first day of the month, the 
waters were dried up from off the earth: 
and Noah removed the covering of the 
ark, and looked, and, behold, the face of 
the ground was dry. 

14, And in the second month, on the 

seven and twentieth day of the month, 
was the earth dried. 
_ 15, And God spake unto Noah, say- 
ao, 
16. Go forth of the ark, thou, and thy 
wife, and thy sons, and thy sons’ wives 
with thee. 

17. Bring forth with thee every livin 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


275 


13. Et fuit, primo et sexcen- 
tesimo anno, primo mense, in 
prima mensis, siccatz sunt 
aque a superficie terre: re- 
movit autem Noah operimen- 
tum arcx, et vidit, et ecce sic- 
cata erat facies terre. 

14. Et in mense secundo, in 
septima et vicesima die mensis, 
aruit terra. 

15. Loquutus est 
Deus ad Noah, dicendo, 

16. Egredere ex arca, tu, et 
uxor tua, et filii tui, et uxores 
filiorum tuorum tecum. 

17. Omnem bestiam que 


autem 


thing that 7s with thee, of all flesh; both | est tecum, ex omni carne, tam 


of fowl, and of cattle, and of every creep- 
ing thing that creepeth upon the earth ; 


that they may breed abundantly in the | 
| se moveant in terra, et cres- 


earth, and be fruitful, and multiply upon 
the earth. 


18. And Noah went forth, and his 


sons, and his wife, and his sons’ wives ~ 


with him : 

19. Every beast, every creeping thing, 
and every fowl, and whatsoever creepeth 
upon the earth, after their kinds, went 
forth out of the ark. 


20. And Noah builded an altar unto 
the Lord ; and took of every clean beast, 
and of every clean fowl, and offered 
burnt-offerings on the altar. 


21. And the Lord smelled a sweet sa- 
vour; and the Lord said in his heart, I 


de volatili quam de animali, 
et omni reptili quod reptat 
super terram educ tecum: ut 


cant, multiplicenturque super 
terram. 
18. Et egressus est Noah, 


‘et filii ejus, et uxor ejus, et 


uxores filiorum ejus cum eo. 

19. Omnis bestid, omne 
reptile et omne volatile, omne 
quod movetur super terram, 
secundum familias eorum e- 
gressa sunt ex arca. 

20. Et edificavit Noah al- 
tare Jehover, et tulit ex omni 
animali mundo, et ex omni 
volatili mundo, et obtulit ho- 
locausta in altari. 

21. Odoratusque est Jehova 
odorem quietis. Et dixit Je- 





will not again curse the ground any more hovain corde suo, Non addam 
for man’s sake; for the imagination of ut maledicam ultra terre 
man’s heart is evil from his youth; propter hominem: quia cogi- 
neither will I again smite any more tatio cordis hominis mala est 
every thing living, as I have done. a pueritia sua: nec addam ul- 
tra ut percutiam omne vivens 
quemadmodum feci. 
22. While the earth remaineth, seed- 22. Posthac omnibus diebus 
time and harvest, and cold and heat, and terre, sementis et messis, et 
summer and winter, and day and night, frigus et estus, et estas et 
shall not cease. hyems, et dies et nox non 
cessabunt. 


1. And God remembered Noah. Moses now descends more 
particularly to that other part of the subject, which shows, 
that Noah was not disappointed in his hope of the salvation 


276 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. VIII. 


divinely promised to him. The remembrance of which Moses 
speaks, ought to be referred not only to the external aspect 
of things, (so to speak,) but also to the inward feeling of 
the holy man. Indeed it is certain, that God, from the time 
in which he had once received Noah into his protection, was 
never unmindful of him ; for, truly, it was by as great a mira- 
cle, that he did not perish through suffocation in the ark, as 
if he had lived without breath, submerged in the waters. 
And Moses just before has said, that by God’s secret closing 
up of the ark, the waters were restrained from penetrating it. 
But as the ark was floating, even to the fifth month, upon the 
waters, the delay by which the Lord suffered his servant to 
be anxiously and miserably tortured, might seem to imply a 
kind of oblivion. And it is not to be questioned, that his 
heart was agitated by various feelings, when he found him- 
self so long held in suspense ; for he might infer, that his life 
had been prolonged, in order that he might be more miser- 
able than any of the rest of mankind. For we know that we 
are accustomed to imagine God absent, except when we have 
some sensible experience of his presence. And although 
Noah tenaciously held fast the promise which he had em- 
braced, even to the end, it is yet credible, that he was 
grievously assailed by various temptations; and God, with- 
out doubt, purposely thus exercised his faith and patience. 
For, why was not the world destroyed in three days? And — 
for what purpose did the waters, after they had covered the 
highest mountains, rise fifteen cubits higher, unless it was to 
accustom Noah, and his family, to meditate the more pro- 
fitably on the judgments of God, and when the danger was 
past, to acknowledge that they had been rescued from a thou- 
sand deaths? Let us therefore learn, by this example, to 
repose on the providence of God, even while he seems to be 
most forgetful of us; for at length, by affording us help, he 
will testify that he has been mindful of us. What, if the 
flesh persuade us to distrust, yet let us not yield to its rest- 
lessness ; but as soon as this thought creeps in, that God has 
cast off all care concerning us, or is asleep, or far distant, let 
us immediately meet it with this shield, ‘The Lord, who has 
promised his help to the miserable, will, in due time, be pre- 





CHAP. VIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 277 


sent with us, that we may indeed perceive the care he takes 
of us.’ Nor is there less weight in what is added, that God 
also remembered the animals; for if, on account of the sal- 
vation promised to man, his favour is extended to brute 
cattle, and to wild beasts; what may we suppose will be his 
favour towards his own children, to whom he has so liberally, 
and so sacredly, pledged his faithfulness ? 

And God made a wind to pass over the earth. Here it ap- 
pears more clearly, that Moses is speaking of the effect of 
God’s remembrance of Noah; namely, that in very deed, and 
by a sure proof, Noah might know that God cared for his 
life. For when God, by his secret power, might have dried 
the earth, he made use of the wind; which method he also 
employed in drying the Red Sea. And thus he would tes- 
tify, that as he had the waters at his command, ready to 
execute his wrath, so now he held the winds in his hand, to 
afford relief. And although here a remarkable history is 
recorded by Moses, we are yet taught, that the winds do not 
arise fortuitously, but by the command of God; as it is said 
in Psalm civ. verse 4, that ‘ they are the swift messengers 
of God; and again, that God rides upon their wings. 
Finally, the variety, the contrary motions, and the mutual 
conflicts of the elements, conspire to yield obedience to God. 
Moses also adds other inferior means by which the waters 
were diminished, and caused to return to their former posi- 
tion. The sum of the whole is, that God, for the purpose of 
restoring the order which he had before appointed, recalled 
the waters to their prescribed boundaries, so that while the 
celestial waters, as if congealed, were suspended in the air; 
others might lie concealed in their gulfs; others flow in se- 
parate channels; and the sea also might remain within its 
barriers. 


3. And after the end of the hundred and fifty days. Some 
think that the whole time, from the beginning of the deluge 
to the abatement of the waters, is here noted; and thus they 
include the forty days in which Moses relates that there was 
continued rain. But I make this distinction, that until the 
fortieth day, the waters rose gradually by fresh additions; then 


278 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. VIII. 


that they remained nearly in the same state for one hundred 
and fifty days; for both computations make the period a little 
more than six months and a half. And Moses says, that about 
the end of the seventh month, the diminution of the waters ap- 
peared to be such that the ark settled upon the highest sum- 
mit of a mountain, or touched some ground. And by this 
lengthened space of time, the Lord would show the more 
plainly, that the dreadful desolation of the world had not 
fallen upon it accidentally, but was a remarkable proof of his 
judgment ; while the deliverance of Noah was a magnificent 
work of his grace, and worthy of everlasting remembrance. 
If, however, we number the seventh month from the be- 
ginning of the year, (as some do,) and not from the time 
that Noah entered the ark, the subsidence of which Moses 
speaks, took place earlier, namely, as soon as the ark had 
floated five months. If this second opinion is received, there 
will be the same reckoning of ten months ; for the sense will 
be, that in the eighth month after the commencement of the 
deluge, the tops of the mountains appeared. Concerning the 
name Ararat, I follow the opinion most received. And I 
do not see why some should deny it to be Armenia, the 
mountains of which are declared, by ancient authors, almost 
with one consent, to be the highest.!. The Chaldean para- 
phrast also points out the particular part, which he calls 
mountains of Cardu,” which others call Cardueni. But whe- 
ther that be true, which Josephus has handed down respect- 
ing the fragments of the ark found there in his time; 
remnants of which, Jerome says, remained to his own age, I 
leave undecided. 


6. At the end of forty days. We may hence conjecture 


1“ As to the opinion, which takes the mountains of Ararat to be si- 
tuated within the country of Armenia, the followers of it (some very few 
excepted) do agree, that the ark of Noah rested in that part of the 
mountains of Ararat, which in Greek and Latin writers is styled the 
Gordian mountains, (or, with some variation, the mountains of the 
Cordyzi, Cordueni, Carduchi, Curdi, &c.,) and which lies near the spring 
of the Tigris.”— Wells’ Geography, vol. i. chap. 2.—Ed. 


2 yy ony Sy. (Al toorai Kardoo,) Super montes Cardu.—Chaldee 
paraphrase.”— Walton. 


CHAP. VIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 279 


with what great anxiety the breast of the holy man was op- 
pressed. After he had perceived the ark to be resting on 
solid ground, he yet did not dare to open the window till the 
fortieth day ; not because he was stunned and torpid, but 
because an example, thus formidable, of the vengeance of God, 
had affected him with such fear and sorrow combined, that, 
being deprived of all judgment, he silently remained in the 
chamber of his ark. At length he sends forth a raven, from 
which he might receive a more certain indication of the dry- 
ness of the earth. But the raven perceiving nothing but 
muddy marshes, hovers around, and immediately seeks to be 
readmitted. I have no doubt that Noah purposely selected 
the raven, which he knew might be allured by the odour of 
carcasses, to take a further flight, if the earth, with the ani- 
mals upon it, were already exposed to view; but the raven, 
flying around, did not depart far. I wonder whence a nega- 
tion, which Moses has not in the Hebrew text, has crept into | 
the Greek and Latin version, since it entirely changes the 
sense.’ Hence the fable has originated, that the raven, hay- 
ing found carcasses, was kept away from the ark, and forsook 
its protector. Afterwards, futile allegories followed, just as 
the curiosity of men is ever desirous of trifling. But the 
dove, in its first egress, imitated the raven, because it flew 
back to the ark; afterwards it brought a branch of olive in 
its bill; and at the third time, as if emancipated, it enjoyed 
the free air, and the free earth. Some writers exercise their 
ingenuity on the olive branch ;? because among the ancients it 
was the emblem of peace, as the laurel was of victory. But 
I rather think, that as the olive tree does not grow upon the 
mountains, and is not a very lofty tree, the Lord had given 
his servant some token whence he might infer, that pleasant 
regions, and productive of good fruits, were now freed from 


1 “sys sey yey, Vayetsa yatso vashoob.” ‘ And went out going and 
returning.” The Vulgate has it, ‘ Qui egrediebatur, et non revertebatur. 
The Septuagint introduces the same negative, so does the Syriac ; but 
the Chaldee paraphrase, the Samaritan text, and the Arabic version, all 
omit the negative. Our translators, in the text, seem to have followed 
the Vulgate, though hesitatingly, but in the margin, they give the ren- 
dering of the original.—See Walton’s Polyglott.—Ed, 

2 ‘*Tn ramo olives quidam philosophantur.” 


280 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. VIII. 


the waters. Because the version of Jerome says, that it was 
a branch with green leaves ; they who have thought, that the 
deluge began in the month of September, take this as a con- 
firmation of their opinion. But the words of Moses have no 
such meaning. And it might be that the Lord, willing to 
revive the spirit of Noah, offered some branch to the dove, 
which had not yet altogether withered under the waters. 


15. And God spake unto Noah. Though Noah was not a 
little terrified at the judgment of God, yet his patience is 
commended in this respect, that having the earth, which 
offered him a home, before his eyes, he yet does not venture 
to go forth. Profane men may ascribe this to timidity, or 
even to indolence; but holy is that timidity which is pro- 
duced by the obedience of faith. Let us therefore know, 
that Noah was restrained, by a hallowed modesty, from 
allowing himself to enjoy the bounty of nature, till he should 
hear the voice of God directing him to do so. Moses winds 
this up in a few words, but it is proper that we should attend 
to the thing itself. All ought indeed, spontaneously, to con- 
sider how great must have been the fortitude of the man, 
who, after the incredible weariness of a whole year, when the 
deluge has ceased, and new life has shone forth, does not yet 
move a foot out of his sepulchre, without the command of 
God. ‘Thus we see, that, by a continual course of faith, the 
holy man was obedient to God ;. because, at God’s command, 
he entered the ark, and there remained until God opened the 
way for his egress; and because he chose rather to lie in a 
tainted atmosphere than to breathe the free air, until he 
should feel assured that his removal would be pleasing to 
God. Even in minute affairs, Scripture commends to us this 
self-government, that we should attempt nothing but with an 
approving conscience. How much less is the rashness of 
men to be endured in religious matters, if, without taking 
counsel of God, they permit themselves to act as they please. 
It is not indeed to be expected that God will every moment 
pronounce, by special oracles, what is necessary to be done; 
yet it becomes us to hearken attentively to his voice, in order 
to be certainly persuaded that we undertake nothing but 





CHAP. VIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 281 


what is in accordance with his word. The spirit of prudence, 
and of counsel, is also to be sought ; of which he never leaves 
those destitute, who are docile and obedient to his commands. 
In this sense, Moses relates that Noah went out of the ark 
as soon as he, relying on the oracle of God, was aware that a 
new habitation was given him in the earth. 


17. That they may breed abundantly, Sc. With these 
words the Lord would cheer the mind of Noah, and inspire 
him with confidence, that a seed had been preserved in the 
ark which should increase till it replenished the whole 
earth. In short, the renovation of the earth is promised to 
Noah; to the end that he may know that the world itself 
was inclosed in the ark, and that the solitude and devasta- 
tion, at the sight of which his heart might faint, would not 
be perpetual. 


20. And Noah builded an altar unto the Lord. As Noah 
had given many proofs of his obedience, so he now presents 
an example of gratitude. This passage teaches us that sacri- 
fices were instituted from the beginning for this end, that 
men should habituate themselves, by such exercises, to cele- 
brate the goodness of God, and to give him thanks. The 
bare confession of the tongue, yea, even the silent acknow- 
ledgment of the heart, might suffice for God; but we know 
how many stimulants our indolence requires. Therefore, 
when the holy fathers, formerly, professed their piety towards 
God by sacrifices, the use of them was by no means super- 
fluous. Besides, it was right that they should always have 
before their eyes symbols, by which they would be admon- 
ished, that they could have no access to God but through 
a mediator. Now, however, the manifestation of Christ has 
taken away these ancient shadows. Wherefore, let us use 
those helps which the Lord has prescribed.!. Moreover, 


‘* Quare adminiculis utamur,” &c. The French translation has it, 
‘Et pourtant usons,” &c. ‘ And, nevertheless, let us use,” &c. The 
meaning of the sentence seems to be, that, as the fathers, in obedience to 
God, used sacrifices, which were afterwards abolished as being of no 
value, so ought we to avail ourselves of those aids (adminicula) which 
might seem to be of no importance, had not God enjoined them.——Ed, 


282 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. VIII. 


when I say that sacrifices were made use of, by the holy fa- 
thers, to celebrate the benefits of God, I speak only of one 
kind: for this offering of Noah answers to the peace-offerings, 
and the first-fruits. But here it may be asked, by what im- 
pulse Noah offered a sacrifice to God, seeing he had no com-. 
mand to doso? I answer: although Moses does not ex- 
pressly declare that God commanded him to do it, yet a 
certain judgment may be formed from what follows, and even 
from the whole context, that Noah had rested upon the 
word of God, and that, in reliance on the divine command, 
he had rendered this worship, which he knew, indubitably, 
would be acceptable to God. We have before said, that one 
animal of every kind was preserved separately; and have 
stated for what end it was done. But it was useless to set 
apart animals for sacrifice, unless God had revealed this de- 
sign to holy Noah, who was to be the priest to offer up the 
victims. Besides, Moses says that sacrifices were chosen from 
among clean animals. But it is certain that Noah did not 
invent this distinction for himself, since it does not depend 
on human choice. Whence we conclude, that he undertook 
nothing without divine authority. Also immediately after- 
wards, Moses subjoins, that the smell of the sacrifice was ac- 
ceptable to God. This general rule, therefore, is to be ob- 
served, that all religious services which are not perfumed 
with the odour of faith, are of an ill-savour before God. Let 
us therefore know, that the altar of Noah was founded in 
the word of God. And the same word was as salt to his 
sacrifices, that they might not be insipid. © 


21. And the Lord smelled a sweet savour. Moses calls that 
by which God was appeased, an odour of rest; as if he had 
said, the sacrifice had been rightly offered. Yet nothing can 
be more absurd than to suppose that God should have been 
appeased by the filthy smoke of entrails, and of flesh. But 
Moses here, according to his manner, invests God with a 
human character, for the purpose of accommodating himself 
to the capacity of an ignorant people. For it is not even to 


1“ Odorem quietis.” ‘‘ A savour of rest.”—Margin of English Version. 


CHAP, VIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 283 


be supposed, that the rite of sacrifice, in itself, was grateful to 
God as a meritorious act; but we must regard the end of 
the work, and not confine ourselves to the external form. 
For what else did Noah propose to himself than to acknow- 
ledge that he had received his own life, and that of the ani- 
mals, as the gift of God’s mercy alone? This piety breathed 
a good and sweet odour before God; as it is said, (Psalm 
exvi. 12,) “ What shall I render unto the Lord for all his 
benefits? I will take the cup of salvation, and will call upon 
the name of the Lord.” 

And the Lord said in his heart. 'The meaning of the pass- 
age is, God had decreed that he would not hereafter curse 
the earth. And this form of expression has great weight : 
for although God never retracts what he has openly spoken 
with his mouth, yet we are more deeply affected when we 
hear, that he has fixed upon something in his own mind; be- 
cause an inward decree of this kind in no way depends upon 
creatures. ‘To sum up the whole, God certainly determined 
that he would never more destroy the world bya deluge. 
Yet the expression, ‘I will not curse,’ is to be but generally 
understood ; because we know how much the earth has lost 
of its fertility since it has been corrupted by man’s sin, and 
we daily feel that it is cursed in various ways. And he ex- 
plains himself a little afterwards, saying, ‘I will not smite 
any more every thing living. for in these words he does 
not allude to every kind of vengeance, but only to that 
which should destroy the world, and bring ruin both on man- 
kind and the rest of animals: as if he would say, that he re- 
stored the earth with this stipulation, that it should not after- 
wards perish by a deluge. So when the Lord declares, (Isa. 
liv. 9,) that he will be contented with one captivity of his 
people, he compares it with the waters of Noah, by which he 
had resolved that the world should only once be over- 
whelmed.} 

For the imagination of man’s heart. This reasoning seems 
incongruous: for if the wickedness of man is so great that it 


1 «Ror this is as the waters of Noah unto me; for as I have sworn 
that the waters of Noah should no more go over the earth, so have I 
sworn that I would not be wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee.” 


284 ‘ COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. VIII. 


does not cease to provoke the anger of God, it must neces- 
sarily bring down destruction upon the world. Nay, God 
seems to contradict himself by having previously declared 
that the world must be destroyed, because its iniquity was 
desperate. But here it behoves us more deeply to consider 
his design; for it was the will of God that there should be 
some society of men to inhabit the earth. If, however, they 
were to be dealt with according to their deserts, there would 
be a necessity for a daily deluge. Wherefore, he declares, 
that in inflicting punishment upon the second world, he will 
so do it, as yet to preserve the external appearance of the 
earth, and not again to sweep away the creatures with which 
he has adorned it. Indeed, we ourselves may perceive such 
moderation to have been used, both in the public and special 
judgments of God, that the world yet stands in its complete- 
ness, and nature yet retains its course. Moreover, since 
God here declares what would be the character of men even 
to the end of the world, it is evident that the whole human 
race is under sentence of condemnation, on account of its 
depravity and wickedness. Nor does the sentence refer only 
to corrupt morals; but their iniquity is said to be an innate 
iniquity, from which nothing but evils can spring forth. I~ 
wonder, however, whence that false version of this passage 
has crept in, that the thought is prone to evil;' except, as 
is probable, that the place was thus corrupted, by those who 
dispute too philosophically concerning the corruption of hu- 
man nature. It seemed to them hard, that man should be 
subjected, as a slave of the devil, to sin. Therefore, by way 
of mitigation, they have said that he had a propensity to vices. 
But when the celestial Judge thunders from heaven, that his 
thoughts themselves are evil, what avails it to soften down 
that which, nevertheless, remains unalterable? Let men 
therefore acknowledge, that inasmuch as they are born of 
Adam, they are depraved creatures, and therefore can con- 
ceive only sinful thoughts, until they become the new work- 
manship of Christ, and are formed by his Spirit to a new life. 


1 Sensus enim, et cogitatio humani cordis in malum prona sunt.”— 
Vulgate. 





CHAP. VIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 285 


And it is not to be doubted, that the Lord declares the very 
mind of man to be depraved, and altogether infected with sin ; 
so that all the thoughts which proceed thence are evil. If 
such be the defect in the fountain itself, it follows, that all 
man’s affections are evil, and his works covered with the same 
pollution, since of necessity they must savour of their origi- 
nal. For God does not merely say that men sometimes think 
evil; but the language is unlimited, comprising the tree with 
its fruits. Nor is it any proof to the contrary, that carnal 
and profane men often excel in generosity of disposition, 
undertake designs apparently honourable, and put forth cer- 
tain evidences of virtue. Tor since their mind is corrupted 
with contempt of God, with pride, self-love, ambition, hypo- 
crisy, and fraud ; it cannot be but that all their thoughts are 
contaminated with the same vices. Again, they cannot tend 
towards a right end: whence it happens that they are judged 
to be what they really are, crooked and perverse. For all 
things in such men, which please us under the colour of vir- 
tue, are like wine spoiled by the odour of the cask. For, 
(as was before said,) the very affections of nature, which in 
themselves are laudable, are yet vitiated by original sin, and 
on account of their irregularity, have degenerated from their 
proper nature ; such are the mutual love of married persons, 
the love of parents towards their children, and the like. And 
the clause which is added, “ from youth,” more fully declares 
that men are born evil; in order to show that, as soon as 
they are of an age to begin to form thoughts, they have radi- 
cal corruption of mind. Philosophers, by transferring to 
habit, what God here ascribes to nature, betray their own 
ignorance. And no wonder; for we please and flatter our- 
selves to such an extent, that we do not perceive how fatal 
is the contagion of sin, and what depravity pervades all our 
senses. We must, therefore, acquiesce in the judgment of 
God, which pronounces man to be so enslaved by sin that he 
can bring forth nothing sound and sincere. Yet, at the same 
time, we must remember, that no blame is to be cast upon 
God for that which has its origin in the defection of the first 
man, whereby the order of the creation was subverted. And 
further, it must be noted, that men are not exempted from — 


286 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. VIII. 


guilt and condemnation, by the pretext of this bondage: be- 
cause, although all rush to evil, yet they are not impelled by 
any extrinsic force, but by the direct inclination of their own 
hearts; and, lastly, they sin not otherwise than voluntarily. 


22. While the earth remaineth By these words the world 
is again completely restored. For so great was the confusion 
and disorder which had overspread the earth, that there was a 
necessity for some renovation. On which account, Peter 
speaks of the old world as having perished in the deluge, 
(2 Pet. iii. 6.) Moreover, the deluge had been an interruption 
of the order of nature. For the revolutions of the sun and 
moon had ceased: there was no distinction of winter and 
summer. Wherefore, the Lord here declares it to be his 
pleasure, that all things should recover their vigour, and be 
restored to their functions. The Jews erroneously divide their 
year into six parts; whereas Moses, by placing the summer 
in opposition to the winter, thus divides the whole year in 
a popular manner into two parts. And it is not to be doubted, 
that by cold and heat he designates the periods already referred 
to. Under the words, “ seed-time,” and “ harvest,” he marks 
those advantages which flow to men from the moderated 
temperature of the atmosphere. If it is objected, that this 
equable temperament is not every year perceived; the answer 
is ready, that the order of the world is indeed disturbed by 
our vices, so that many of its movements are irregular: often 
the sun withholds its proper heat,—snow or hail follow in the 
place of dew,—the air is agitated by various tempests; but 
although the world is not so regulated as to produce per- 
petual uniformity of seasons, yet we perceive the order of 
nature so far to prevail, that winter and summer annually 
recur, that there is a constant succession of days and nights, 
and that the earth brings forth its fruits in summer and 
autumn. Moreover, by the expression, ‘ all the days of the 
earth, he means, ‘ as long as the earth shall last’ 


16 Posthac omnibus diebus terre.” 





CHAP. IX. 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


287 


CHAPTER IX. 


1. Anp God blessed Noah and his 
sons, and said unto them, Be fruit- 
ful, and multiply, and replenish the 
earth. 

2. And the fear of you and the dread 
of you shall be upon every beast of the 
earth, and upon every fowl of the air, 
upon all that moveth upon the earth, 
and upon all the fishes of the sea; into 
your hand are they delivered. 


3. Every moving thing that liveth 
shall be meat for you; even as the green 
herb have I given you all things. 


4, But flesh with the life thereof, which 
is the blood thereof, shall ye not eat. 


5. And surely your blood of your 
lives will I require; at the hand of 
every beast will I require it, and at the 
hand of man; at the hand of every 
man’s brother will I require the life of 
man. 


6. Whoso sheddeth man’s blood, by 
man shall his blood be shed: for in the 
image of God made he man. 


7. And you, be ye fruitful, and mul- 
tiply ; bring forth abundantly in the 
earth, and multiply therein. 

8. And God spake unto Noah, and to 
his sons with him, saying, 


9. And I, behold, I establish my co- 
venant with you, and with your seed 
after you ; 

10. And with every living creature 
that zs with you, of the fowl, of the 
cattle, and of every beast of the earth 
with you; from all that go out of the 
ark, to every beast of the earth. 


11. And I will establish my covenant 
with you ; neither shall all flesh be cut 
off any more by the waters of a flood; 
neither shall there any more be a flood 
to destroy the earth. 


1. Et benedixit Deus Noah, 
et filiis ejus: et dixit ad eos, 
Crescite, et multiplicamini, et 
replete terram. 

2. Et timor vester et pavor 
vester erit super omnem bes- 
tiam terre, et super omne 
volatile cceli, cum omnibus 
que gradiuntur in terra, et 
omnibus piscibus maris: guia 
manui vestre tradita sunt. 

3. Omne reptile quod vivit, 
vobis erit ad vescendum : sicut 
virentem herbam dedi vobis 
omnia. 

4. Veruntamen carnem cum 
anima ejus, sanguine ejus, non 
comedetis. 

5. Et profecto sanguinem 
vestrum, qui vobis est in ani- 
mas, requiram: de manu om- 
nis bestizw requiram illum, et 
de manu hominis, et de manu 
viri fratris ejus requiram ani- 
mam hominis. 

6. Qui effuderit sanguinem 
hominis in homine, sanguis 
ejus effundetur: quia ad ima- 
ginem Dei fecit hominem. 

7. Et vos crescite, et multi- 
plicamini, et generate in terra, 
et multiplicemini in ea. 

8. Et dixit Deus ad Noah, 
et ad filios ejus qui cum eo 
erant, dicendo, 

9. Et ego, ecce ego statuo 
pactum meum vobiscum, et 
cum semine vestro post vos. 

10. Et cum omni anima vi- 
vente qu est vobiscum, tam 
cum volatiliquam cum animali, 
et omni bestia terre vobiscum, 
ab omnibus que egressa sunt 
eX arca: cum omni, inguam, 
bestia terre. 

11. Et statuam pactum me- 
um vobiscum, et non excidetur 
omnis caro ultra ab aquis di- 
luvii, et non erit ultra dilu- 
vium, ut disperdat terram. 


288 


12. And God said, This is the token 
of the covenant which I make between 
me and you, and every living creature 
that 7s with you, for perpetual genera- 
tions: 

13. I do set my bow in the cloud, and 
it shall be for a token of a covenant be- 
tween me and the earth. 

14. And it shall come to pass, when I 
bring a cloud over the earth, that the 
bow shall be seen in the cloud: 

15. And I will remember my cove- 
nant, which zs between me and you and 
every living creature of all flesh; and 
the waters shall no more become a flood 
to destroy all flesh, 


16. And the bow shall be in the 
cloud; and I will look upon it, that I 
may remember the everlasting covenant 
between God and every living creature 
of all flesh that zs upon the earth. 

17. And God said unto Noah, This zs 
the token of the covenant, which I have 
established between me and all flesh 
that zs upon the earth. 

18. And the sons of Noah, that went 
forth of the ark, were Shem, and Ham, 
and Japheth; and Ham 7s the father of 
Canaan. 

19. These are the three sons of Noah : 
and of them was the whole earth over- 
spread. 

20. And Noah began ¢o be an hus- 
bandman, and he planted a vineyard: 

21. And he drank of the wine, and 
was drunken; and he was uncovered 
within his tent. 

22. And Ham, the father of Canaan, 
saw the nakedness of his father, and told 
his two brethren without. 


23. And Shem and, Japheth took a 
garment, and laid 7 upon both their 
shoulders, and went backward, and co- 
vered the nakedness of their father ; and 
their faces were backward, and they saw 
not their father’s nakedness. 


24. And Noah awoke from his wine, 
and knew what his younger son had 
done unto him. 


25. And he said, Cursed de Canaan ; 
a servant of servants shall he be unto 
his brethren. 


COMMENTARY UPON 


CHAP. IX. 


12. Et dixit Deus, Hoc est 
signum foederis quod ego do 
inter me et vos, et omnem ani- 
mam viventem que est vobis- 
cum in generationes seculi: 

13. Arcum meum ponam in 
nube, et erit in signum foederis 
inter me et terram. 

14. Et erit, quum obnubi- 
lavero nubem super terram, 
tunc apparebit arcus in nube. 

15. Et recordabor feederis 
mei quod est inter me et vos, 
et omnem animam viventem 
cum omni carne: et non erit 
ultra aqua ad diluvium, ut 
disperdat omnem carnem. 

16. Et erit arcus in nube, et 
videbo illum, ut recorder pacti 
perpetui inter Deum et omnem 
animam viventem cum omni 
carne que est super terram. 

17. Et dixit Deus ad Noah, 
Hoc est signum foederis quod 
statui inter me et omnem car- 
nem que est super terram. 

18. Erant autem filii Noah 
qui egressi sunt de arca, Sem, 
Cham, et Jepheth: et Cham 
est pater Chenaan. 

19. Tres isti, filii Noah: et 
ab istis dispersa est universa 
terra. 

20. Coepit vero Noah colere 
terram, et plantavit vineam. 

21. Et bibit de vino et ine- 
briatus est, et discooperuit se 
in medio tabernaculi sui. 

22. Et vidit Cham pater 
Chenaan turpitudinem patris 
sui, et nuntiavit duobus fra- 
tribus suis in platea. 

23. Et tulerunt Sem et Je- 
pheth vestimentum, et posue- 
runt super humerum ambo 
ipsi: et euntes retrorsum, ope- 
ruerunt turpitudinem patris 
sui: et facies eorum erant re- 
trorsum, et turpitudinem patris 
sui non viderunt. 

24. Expergefactus autem 
Noah a vino suo, cognovit 
quod fecerat sibi filius suus 
minor. 

25. Et dixit, Maledictus 
Chenaan, servus servorum 
erit fratribus suis. 





CHAP. IX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 289 


26. And he said, Blessed be the Lord 26. Et dixit, Benedictus 
God of Shem; and Canaan shall be his Jehova Deus Sem, et sit Che- 
servant. naan servus eis. 

27. God shall enlarge Japheth, and 27. Dilatet Deus Jepheth, et 
he shall dwell in the tents of Shem; habitet in tabernaculis Sem: 


and Canaan shall be his servant. et sit Chenaan servus eis. 
28. And Noah lived after the flood 28. Et vixit Noah post di- 
three hundred and fifty years. luvium trecentos annos et 


quinquaginta annos. 

29. And all the days of Noah were 29. Fuerunt autem omnes 
nine hundred and fifty years: and he dies Noah nongenti anni et 
died. quinguaginta anni : et mortuus 

est. 


1. Aud God blessed Noah. We hence infer with what 
great fear Noah had been dejected, because God, so often 
and at such length, proceeds to encourage him. For when 
Moses here says, that God blessed Noah and his sons, he 
does not simply mean that the favour of fruitfulness was 
restored to them; but that, at the same time, the design of 
God concerning the new restitution of the world was revealed 
unto them. For to the blessing itself is added the voice of 
God by which he addresses them. We know that brute 
animals produce offspring in no other way than by the blessing 
of God; but Moses here commemorates a privilege which 
belongs only to men. Therefore, lest those four men and 
their wives, seized with trepidation, should doubt for what 
purpose they had been delivered, the Lord prescribes to them 
their future condition of life: namely, that they shall raise 
up mankind from death to life. Thus he not only renews 
the world by the same word by which he before created it ; 
but he directs his word to men, in order that they may 
recover the lawful use of marriage, may know that the care 
of producing offspring is pleasing to Himself, and may have 
confidence that a progeny shall spring from them which 
shall diffuse itself through all regions of the earth, so as to 
render it again inhabited; although it had been laid waste 
and made a desert. Yet he did not permit promiscuous 
intercourse, but sanctioned anew that law of marriage which 
he had before ordained. And although the blessing of God is, 
in some way, extended to illicit connections, so that offspring 
is thence produced, yet this is an impure fruitfulness; that 

VOL. T. ps 


290 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, IX. 


which is lawful flows only from the expressly declared bene- 
diction of God. 


2. And the fear of you. This also has chiefly respect to the 
restoration of the world, in order that the sovereignty over the 
rest of animals might remain with men. And although, after 
the fall of man, the beasts were endued with new ferocity, yet 
some remains of that dominion over them, which God had con- 
ferred on him in the beginning, were still left. He now also 
promises that the same dominionshallcontinue. Wesee indeed 
that wild beasts rush violently upon men, and rend and tear 
many of them in pieces; and if God did not wonderfully 
restrain their fierceness, the human race would be utterly 
destroyed. Therefore, what we have said respecting the 
inclemency of the air, and the irregularity of the seasons, is 
also here applicable. Savage beasts indeed prevail and rage 
against men in various ways, and no wonder; for since we 
perversely exalt ourselves against God, why should not the 
beasts rise up against us? Nevertheless, the providence of 
God is asecret bridle to restrain their violence. For, whence 
does it arise that serpents spare us, unless because he re- 
presses their virulence? Whence is it that tigers, elephants, 
lions, bears, wolves, and other wild beasts without number, 
do not rend, tear, and devour everything human, except that 
they are withheld by this subjection, as by a barrier? There- 
fore, it ought to be referred to the special protection and guar- 
dianship of God, that we remain in safety. For, were it other- 
wise, what could we expect; since they seem as if born 
for our destruction, and burn with the furious desire to injure 
us? Moreover, the bridle with which the Lord restrains the 
cruelty of wild beasts, to prevent them falling upon men, is a 
certain fear and dread which God has implanted in them, to 
the end that they might reverence the presence of men. 
Daniel especially declares this respecting kings ; namely, that 
they are possessed of dominion, because the Lord has put 
the fear and the dread of them both on men and beasts. But 
as the first use of fear is to defend the society of man- 
kind; so, according to the measure in which God has given 
to men a general authority over the beasts, there exists in 








CHAP. IX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 291 


the greatest and the least of men, I know not what hidden 
mark, which does not suffer the cruelty of wild beasts, by its 
violence, to prevail. Another advantage, however, and one 
‘more widely extended, is here noted; namely, that men 
may render animals subservient to their own convenience, 
and may apply them to various uses, according to their 
wishes and their necessities. ‘Therefore, the fact that oxen 
become accustomed to bear the yoke; that the wildness of 
horses is so subdued as to cause them to carry a rider; that 
they receive the pack-saddle to bear burdens; that cows 
give milk, and suffer themselves to be milked; that sheep are 
mute under the hand of the shearer; all these facts are the 
result of this dominion, which, although greatly diminished, 
is nevertheless not entirely abolished. 


3. Every moving thing that liveth shall be meat for you. The 
Lord proceeds further, and grants animals for food to men, 
that they may eat their flesh. And because Moses now first 
relates that this right was given to men, nearly all commen- 
tators infer, that it was not lawful for man to eat flesh before 
the deluge, but that the natural fruits of the earth were his 
only food. But the argument is not sufficiently firm. For 
I hold to this principle; that God here does not bestow on 
men more than he had previously given, but only restores 
what had been taken away, that they might again enter on 
the possession of those good things from which they had been 
_ excluded. For since they had before offered sacrifices to 
God, and were also permitted to kill wild beasts, from the 
hides and skins of which, they might make for themselves 
garments and tents, 1 do not see what obligation should pre- 
vent them from the eating of flesh. But since it is of little 
consequence what opinion is held, I affirm nothing on the 
subject. This ought justly to be deemed by us of greater 


1 The question which Calvin here dismisses as one of little importance, 
has, in modern controversy, assumed a very different position; and most 
commentators have come to a decision, the reverse of that to which he in- 
clines. His argument appears chargeable with the want of firmness, 
which he imputes to others. The inference that the flesh of sacrifices 
was eaten, since otherwise it must have been wasted, is of no force, if we 
suppose the first sacrifices to have been all holocausts, or whole burnt- 


292 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. IX. 


importance, that to eat the flesh of animals is granted to us 
by the kindness of God; that we do not seize upon what our 
appetite desires, as robbers do, nor yet tyrannically shed the 
innocent blood of cattle ; but that we only take what is offered 
to us by the hand of the Lord. We have heard what Paul 
says, that we are at liberty to eat what we please, only we do 
it with the assurance of conscience, but that he who imagines 
anything to be unclean, to him it is unclean, (Rom. xiv. 14.) 
And whence has this happened to man, that he should eat 
whatever food he pleased before God, with a tranquil mind, 
and not with unbridled license, except from his knowing, 
that it has been divinely delivered into his hand by the right 
of donation? Wherefore, (the same Paul being witness,) 
the word of God sanctifies the creatures, that we may purely 
and lawfully feed on them, (1 Tim. iv. 5.) Let the adage 
be utterly rejected which says, ‘that no one can feed and re- 
fresh his body with a morsel of bread, without, at the same 
time, defiling his soul.’ Therefore it is not to be doubted, 
that the Lord designed to confirm our faith, when he ex- 
pressly declares by Moses, that he gave to man the free use 
of flesh, so that we might not eat it with a doubtful and 
trembling conscience. At the same time, however, he in- 
vites us to thanksgiving. On this account also, Paul adds 
“ prayer” to the “ word,” in defining the method of sanctifi- 
cation in the passage recently cited. 
And now we must firmly retain the liberty given us by the 
Lord, which he designed to be recorded as on public tables. 
For, by this word, he addresses all the posterity of Noah, and 
renders his gift common to all ages. And why is this done, 
but that the faithful may boldly assert their right to that 
which, they know, has proceeded from God as its Author ? 
For it is an insupportable tyranny, when God, the Creator of 
all things, has laid open to us the earth and the air, in order 
that we may thence take food as from his storehouse, for 


offerings unto the Lord. The garments or tents referred to as made from 
the skins of animals were, in all probability, those of the very animals 
which were thus sacrificed ; so that there is no reason hence to conclude, 
that flesh was eaten before the deluge. But let the reader refer to Magee 
on the Atonement, Dissertation, No. liii—Zd. 


CHAP. IX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 293 


these to be shut up from us by mortal man, who is not able 
to create even a snail or a fly. I do not speak of external 
prohibition ;! but I assert, that atrocious injury is done to 
God, when we give such license to men as to allow them to 
pronounce that unlawful which God designs to be lawful, 
and to bind consciences which the word of God sets free, 
with their fictitious laws. The fact that God prohibited his 
ancient people from the use of unclean animals, seeing that 
exception was but temporary, is here passed over by Moses. 


4. But flesh with the life thereof, which is the blood thereof. 
Some thus explain this passage, ‘ Ye may not eat a member 
cut off from a living animal,’ which is too trifling. However, 
since there is no copulative conjunction between the two 
words, blood and life, I do not doubt that Moses, speaking of 
the life, added the word blood exegetically,? as if he would 
say, that flesh is in some sense devoured with its life, when 
it is eaten imbued with its own blood. Wherefore, the life 
and the blood are not put for different things, but for the 
same; not because blood is in itself the life, but inasmuch as 
the vital spirits chiefly reside in the blood, it is, as far as our 
feeling is concerned, a token which represents life. And this 
is expressly declared, in order that men may have the greater 
horror of eating blood. For if it be a savage and barbarous 
thing to devour lives, or to swallow down living flesh, men 
betray their brutality by eating blood. Moreover, the ten- 
dency of this prohibition is by no means obscure, namely, that 
God intends to accustom men to gentleness, by abstinence 
from the blood of animals; but, if they should become un- 
restrained, and daring in eating wild animals, they would at 
length not be sparing of even human blood. Yet we must 
remember, that this restriction was part of the old law.’ 
Wherefore, what Tertullian relates, that in his time it was 


' By external prohibition, is probably meant such as might be enjoined 
by the magistrate during a time of scarcity, or for any purely civil pur- 
pose.—£d. 

2 This is apparent in the English version, where the words, ‘‘ which 
is,” are added in Italics, showing that in the judgment of the translators, 
the word following was explanatory of that which preceded.—Ed. 

3 Partem fuisse veteris pedagogix.” 


294 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. IX. 


unlawful among Christians to taste the blood of cattle, 
savours of superstition. For the apostles, in commanding the 
Gentiles to observe this rite, for a short time, did not intend 
to inject a scruple into their consciences, but only to prevent 
the liberty which was otherwise sacred, from proving an oc- 
casion of offence to the ignorant and the weak. 


5. And surely your blood of your lives will I require. In 
these words the Lord more explicitly declares that he does 
not forbid the use of blood out of regard to animals them- 
selves, but because he accounts the life of men precious : and 
because the sole end of his law is, to promote the exercise of 
common humanity between them. I therefore think that 
Jerome, in rendering the particle &, (ach,) For, has done 
better than they who read it as an adversative disjunctive ; 
‘ otherwise your blood willI require; yet literally it may best 
be thus translated, ‘And truly your blood.? The whole 
context is (in my opinion) to be thus read, ‘ And truly your 
blood, which is zx your lives, or which is as your lives, that 
is, which vivifies and quickens you, as it respects your body, 
will I require: from the hand of allanimals will I require it ; 
from the hand of man, from the hand, I say, of man, his bro- 
ther, will I require the life of man. The distinction by which 
the Jews constitute four kinds of homicide is frivolous; for 
I have explained the simple and genuine sense, namely, that 
God so highly estimates our life, that he will not suffer mur- 
der to go unavenged. And he inculcates this in so many 
words, in order that he may render, the cruelty of those the 
more detestable, who lay violent hands upon their neighbours. 
And it is no common proof of God’s love towards us, that 
he undertakes the defence of our lives, and declares that he 
will be the avenger of our death. In saying that he will 
exact punishment from animals for the violated life of men, 
he gives us this as an example. For if, on behalf of man, he 
is angry with brute creatures who are hurried by a blind im- 
pulse to feed upon him; what, do we suppose, will become of 


1 Thus agreeing with the English version. 


CHAP. IX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 295 


the man who, unjustly, cruelly, and contrary to the sense of 
nature, falls upon his brother? 


6. Whoso sheddeth man’s blood.' The clause in man which 
is here added, has the force of amplification. Some expound 
it, ‘ Before witnesses. Others refer it to what follows, 
namely, ‘ that by man his blood should be shed? But all 
these interpretations are forced. What I have said must be 
remembered, that this language rather expresses the atro- 
ciousness of the crime ; because whosoever kills a man, draws 
down upon himself the blood and life of his brother. On the 
whole, they are deceived (in my judgment) who think that a 
political law, for the punishment of homicides, is here simply 
intended. Truly I do not deny that the. punishment which 
the laws ordain, and which the judges execute, are founded 
on this divine sentence; but I say the words are more com- 
prehensive. It is written, ‘Men of blood shall not live out 
half their days,’ (Ps. lv. 25.) And we see some die in high- 
ways, some in stews, and many in wars. Therefore, however 
magistrates may connive at the crime, God sends execu- 
tioners from other quarters, who shall render unto sanguinary 
men their reward. God so threatens and denounces ven- 
geance against the murderer, that he even arms the magis- 
trate with the sword for the avenging of slaughter, in order 
that the blood of men may not be shed with impunity. 

For in the image of God made he man. For the greater 
confirmation of the above doctrine, God declares, that he is 
not thus solicitous respecting human life rashly, and for no 
purpose. Men are indeed unworthy of God’s care, if respect 
be had only to themselves; but since they bear the image of 
God engraven on them, He deems himself violated in their 
person. Thus, although they have nothing of their own by 
which they obtain the favour of God, he looks upon his own 
gifts in them, and is thereby excited to love and to care for 
them. This doctrine, however, is to be carefully observed, 
that no one can be injurious to his brother without wounding 


1 “ Qui effuderit sanguinem hominis in homine.” He who shall have 
shed the blood of man in man. 
2 This is the interpretation of the English version. 


296 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. IX. 


God himself. Were this doctrine deeply fixed in our minds, 
we should be much more reluctant than we are to inflict in- 
juries. Should any one object, that this divine image has 
been obliterated, the solution is easy; first, there yet exists 
some remnant of it, so that man is possessed of no small dig- 
nity ; and, secondly, the Celestial Creator himself, however 
corrupted man may be, still keeps in view the end of his origi- 
nal creation ; and according to his example, we ought to con- 
sider for what end he created men, and what excellence he 
has bestowed upon them above the rest of living beings. 


7. And you, be ye fruitful and multiply. He again turns 
his discourse to Noah and his sons, exhorting them to the 
propagation of offspring: as if he would say, ‘ You see that 
Iam intent upon cherishing and preserving mankind, do you 
therefore also attend to it. At the same time, in commend- 
ing to them the preservation of seed, he deters them from 
murder, and from unjust acts of violence. Yet his chief end 
was that to which I have before alluded, that he might en- 
courage their dejected minds. For in these words is con- 
tained not a bare precept, but also a promise. 


8. And God spake unto Noah. That the memory of the 
deluge might not inspire them with new terrors, as often as 
the sky were covered with clouds, lest the earth should again 
be drowned; this source of anxiety is taken away. And 
certainly, if we consider the great propensity of the human 
mind to distrust, we shall not deem this testimony to have 
been unnecessary even for Noah. He was indeed endued 
with a rare and incomparable faith, even to a miracle; but 
no strength of constancy could be so great, that this most sad 
and terrible vengeance of God should not shake it. There- 
fore, whenever any great and continued shower shall seem to 
threaten the earth with a deluge, this barrier, on which the 
holy man may rely, is interposed. Now, although his sons 
would need this confirmation more than he, yet the Lord 
speaks especially on his account. And the clause which fol- 
lows, ‘ and to his sons who were with him,’ is to be referred 
to this point. Tor how is it, that God, making his cove- 


CHAP. IX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 297 


nant with the sons of Noah, commands them to hope 
for the best? Truly, because they are joined with their 
father, who is, as it were, the stipulator of the covenant, so 
as to be associated with him, ina subordinate place.! More- 
over, there is no doubt that it was the design of God to pro- 
vide for all his posterity. It was not therefore a private co- 
venant confirmed with one family only, but one which is 
common to all people, and which shall flourish in all ages to 
the end of the world. And truly, since at the present time, 
impiety overflows not less than in the age of Noah, it is 
especially necessary that the waters should be restrained by 
this word of God, as by a thousand bolts and bars, lest they 
should break forth to destroy us. Wherefore, relying on 
this promise, let us look forward to the last day, in which the 
consuming fire shall purify heaven and earth. 


10. And with every living creature. Although the favour 
which the Lord promises extends also to animals, yet it is 
not in vain that he addresses himself only to men, who, by 
the sense of faith, are able to perceive this benefit. We en- 
joy the heaven and the air in common with the beasts, and 
draw the same vital breath ; but it is no common privilege, 
that God directs his word to us; whence we may learn with 
what paternal love he pursues us. And here three distinct 
steps are to be traced. First, God, as in a matter of present 
concern, makes a covenant with Noah and his family, lest 
they should be afraid of a deluge for themselves. Secondly, 
he transmits his covenant to posterity, not only that, as by 
continual succession, the effect may reach to other ages; but 
that they who should afterwards be born might also appre- 
hend this testimony by faith, and might conclude that the 
same thing which had been promised to the sons of Noah, 
was promised unto them. Thirdly, he declares that he will 
be propitious also to brute animals, so that the effect of the 
covenant towards them, might be the preservation of their 
lives only, without imparting to them sense and intelligence. 
Hence the ignorance of the Anabaptists may be refuted, who 
deny that the covenant of God is common to infants, because 


1¢¢ Ut secundo loco in societatem accedant.” 


298 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, IX. 


they are destitute of present faith. As if, truly, when God 
promises salvation toa thousand generations, the fathers were 
not intermediate parties between God and their children, 
whose office it is to deliver to their children (so to speak) 
from hand to hand, the promise received from God. But as 
many as withdraw their life from this protection of God 
(since the greater part of men either despise or ridicule this 
divine covenant) deserve, by this single act of ingratitude, 
to be immersed in eternal fire. For although this be an 
earthly promise, yet God designs the faith of his people to 
be exercised, in order that they may be assured that a cer- 
tain abode will, by his special goodness, be provided for 
them on earth, until they shall be gathered together in 
heaven. 


12. This is the tohen of the covenant. A sign is added to 
the promise, in which is exhibited the wonderful kindness 
of God; who, for the purpose of confirming our faith in his 
word, does not disdain to use such helps. And although we 
have more fully discussed the use of signs in the second 
chapter, yet we must briefly maintain, from these words of 
Moses, that it is wrong to sever signs from the word. By 
the word, I mean not that of which Papists boast; whereby 
they enchant bread, wine, water, and oil, with their magical 
whisperings; but that which may strengthen faith: according 
as the Lord here plainly addresses holy Noah and his sons; he 
then annexes a seal, for the sake of assurance. Wherefore, 
if the sacrament be wrested from the word, it ceases to be 
what it is called. It must, I say, be a vocal sign, in order 
that it may retain its force, and not degenerate from its na- 
ture. And not only is that administration of sacraments in 
which the word of God is silent, vain and ludicrous; but it 
draws with it pure satanic delusions. Hence we also infer, 
that from the beginning, it was the peculiar property of sa- 
craments, to avail for the confirmation of faith. For certainly, 
in the covenant that promise is included to which faith ought 
to respond. It appears to some absurd, that faith should be 
sustained by such helps. But they who speak thus do not, 
in the first place, reflect on the great ignorance and imbeci- 
lity of our minds ; nor do they, secondly, ascribe to the work- 





CHAP. IX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 299 


ing of the secret power of the Spirit that praise which is due. 
It is the work of God alone to begin and to perfect faith; 
but he does it by such instruments as he sees good; the free 
choice of which is in his own power. 


13. I do set my bow in the cloud. From these words certain 
eminent theologians have been induced to deny, that there 
was any rainbow before the deluge: which is frivolous. For 
the words of Moses do not signify, that a bow was then 
formed, which did not previously exist ; but that a mark was 
engraven upon it, which should give a sign of the divine fa- 
vour towards men. ‘That this may the more evidently ap- 
pear, it will be well to recall to memory what we have else- 
where said, that some signs are natural, and some preter- 
natural. And although there are many examples of this 
second class of signs in the Scriptures; yet they are peculiar, 
and do not belong to the common and perpetual use of the 
Church. For, as it pleases the Lord to employ earthly ele- 
ments, as vehicles for raising the minds of men on high, so I 
think the celestial arch which had before existed naturally, 
is here consecrated into a sign and pledge; and thus a new 
office is assigned to it; whereas, from the nature of the thing 
itself, it might rather be a sign of the contrary ; for it threatens 
continued rain. Let this therefore be the meaning of the 
words, ‘ As often as the rain shall alarm you, look upon the 
bow. For although it may seem to cause the rain to over- 
flow the earth, it shall nevertheless be to you a pledge of 
returning dryness, and thus it will then become you to stand 
with greater confidence, than under a clear and serene sky,’ 
Hence it is not for us to contend with philosophers respect- 
ing the rainbow; for although its colours are the effect of 
natural causes, yet they act profanely who attempt to deprive 
God of the right and authority which he has over his crea- 
tures. 


15. And I will remember my covenant. Moses, by introduc- 
ing God so often as the speaker, teaches us that the word 
holds the chief place, and that signs are to be estimated by it. 


1“¢ Precipuas esse verbi partes, et inde estimanda signa.”—“‘ Queleprin- 


300 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. IX. 


God, however, speaks after the manner of men, when he 
says, that at the sight of the rainbow he will remember his 
covenant. But this mode of speaking has reference to the 
faith of men, in order that they may reflect, that God, when- 
ever he stretches out his arch over the clouds, is not unmind- 
ful of his covenant. 


18. The sons of Noah. Moses enumerates the sons of 
Noah, not only because he is about to pass on to the follow- 
ing history, but for the purpose of more fully illustrating the 
force of the promise, “‘ Replenish the earth.” For we may 
hence better conceive how efficacious the blessing of God 
has been, because an immense multitude of men proceeded 
in a short time from so small a number; and because one 
family, and that a little one, grew into so many, and such 
numerous nations. 


20. And Noah began to be an husbandman. I do not so 
explain the words, as if he then, for the first time, began to 
give his attention to the cultivation of the fields; but, (in 
my opinion,) Moses rather intimates, that Noah, with a col- 
lected mind, though now an old man, returned to the culture 
of the fields, and to his former labours. It is, however, un- 
certain whether he had been a vine-dresser or not. It is com- 
monly believed that wine was not in use before that time. 
And this opinion has been the more willingly received, as 
affording an honourable pretext for the excuse of Noah’s sin. 
But it does not appear to me probable that the fruit of the 
vine, which excels all others, should have remained neglected 
and unprofitable. Also, Moses does not say that Noah was 
drunken on the first day on which he tasted it. Therefore, 
leaving this question undetermined, I rather suppose, that we 
are to learn from the drunkenness of Noah, what a filthy and 
detestable crime drunkenness is. The holy patriarch, though 
he had hitherto been a rare example of frugality and temper- 
ance, losing all self-possession, did, in a base and shameful 


cipal gist en la parole, et que d’icelle il faut estimer les sacramens.” That 
the principal force is in the word, and that from it we must estimate the 
sacraments.—L’rench Tr. 





CHAP. IX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 301 


manner, prostrate himself naked on the ground, so as to be- 
come a laughing-stock to all. Therefore, with what care 
ought we to cultivate sobriety, lest anything like this, or even 
worse, should happen to us ? Formerly, the heathen philoso- 
pher said, that ‘ Wine is the blood of the earth ;’ and, there- 
fore, when men intemperately pour it down their throats, 
they are justly punished by their mother. Let us, however, 
rather remember, that when men, by shameful abuse, profane 
this noble and most precious gift of God, He himself becomes 
the Avenger. And let us know, that Noah, by the judgment of 
God, has been set forth as a spectacle to be a warning to others, 
that they should not become intoxicated by excessive drink- 
ing. Some excuse might certainly be made for the holy 
man; who, having completed his labour, and being exhilarated 
with wine, imagines that he is but taking his just reward. But 
God brands him with an eternal mark of disgrace. What 
then, do we suppose, will happen to those idle-bellies and in- 
satiable gluttons, whose sole object of contention is who 
shall consume the greatest quantity of wine? And although 
this kind of correction was severe, yet it was profitable to the 
servant of God; since he was recalled to sobriety, lest by 
proceeding in the indulgence of a vice to which he had once 
yielded, he should ruin himself; just as we see drunkards be- 
come at length brutalized by continued intemperance. 


22. And Ham, the father of Canaan. This circumstance is 
added to augment the sorrow of Noah, that he is mocked by 
his own son. For we must ever keep in memory, that this 
punishment was divinely inflicted upon him; partly, because 
his fault was not a light one; partly, that God in his person 
might present a lesson of temperance to allages. Drunken- 
ness in itself deserves as its reward, that they who deface 
the image of their heavenly Father in themselves, should 
become a laughing-stock to their own children. For cer- 
tainly, as far as possible, drunkards subvert their own under- 
standing, and so far deprive themselves of reason as to de- 
generate into beasts. And let us remember, that if the Lord 
so grievously avenged the single transgression of the holy 
man, he will prove an avenger no less severe, against those 
who are daily intoxicated ; and of this we have examples suf- 


302 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. IX. 


ficiently numerous before our eyes. In the meanwhile, Ham, 
by reproachfully laughing at his father, betrays his own de- 
praved and malignant disposition. We know that parents, 
next to God, are most deeply to be reverenced; and if 
there were neither books nor sermons, nature itself constantly 
inculcates this lesson upon us. It is received by common con- 
sent, that piety towards parents is the mother of all virtues, 
This Ham, therefore, must have been of a wicked, perverse, 
and crooked disposition ; since he not only took pleasure in 
his father’s shame, but wished to expose him to his brethren. 
And this is no slight occasion of offence ; first, that Noah, the 
minister of salvation to men, and the chief restorer of the world, 
should, in extreme old age, lie intoxicated in his house; and 
then, that the ungodly and wicked Ham should have proceeded 
from the sanctuary of God.' God had selected eight souls as a 
sacred seed, thoroughly purged from all corruption, for the 
renovation of the Church: but the son of Noah shows, how 
necessary it is for men to be held as with the bridle of God, 
however they may be exalted by privilege. The impiety of 
Ham proves to us how deep is the root of wickedness in men ; 
and that it continually puts forth its shoots, except where the 
power of the Spirit prevails over it. But if, in the hallowed 
sanctuary of God, among so small a number, one fiend was 
preserved; let us not wonder if, at this day, in the Church, 
containing a much greater multitude of men, the wicked are 
mingled with the good. Nor is there any doubt that the 
minds of Shem and Japheth were grievously wounded, when 
they perceived in their own brother such a prodigy of scorn ; 
and, on the other hand, their father shamefully lying prostrate on 
the ground. Sucha debasing alienation of mind in the prince of 
the new world, and the holy patriarch of the Church, could 
not less astonish them, than if they had seen the ark itself 
broken, dashed in pieces, cleft asunder, and destroyed. Yet 
this cause of offence they alike overcome by their magnanimi- 
ty, and conceal by their modesty. Hamalone eagerly seizes the 
occasion of ridiculing and inveighing against his father; just 
as perverse men are wont to catch at occasions of offence in 
others, which may serve as a pretext for indulgence in sin. 


1 Reference is here made to the ark, as the type of the Church.—2d. 


CHAP. IX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 303 


And his age renders him the less excusable; for he was not a 
lascivious youth, who, by his thoughtless laughter, betrayed his 
own folly, seeing that he was already more than one hundred 
years old. Therefore, it is probable, that he thus perversely 
insulted his father, for the purpose of acquiring for himself 
the license of sinning with impunity. We see many such at 
this day, who most studiously pry into the faults of holy and 
pious men, in order that without shame they may precipitate 
themselves into all iniquity; they even make the faults of 
other men an occasion of hardening themselves into a con- 
tempt for God. 


23. And Shem and Japheth took a garment. Here the piety, 
as well as the modesty, of the two brothers is commended ; 
who, in order that the dignity of their father might not be 
lowered in their esteem, but that they might always cherish 
and keep entire the reverence which they owed him, turned 
away their eyes from the sight of his disgrace. And thus 
they gave proof of the regard they paid to their father’s 
honour, in supposing that their own eyes would be polluted, 
if they voluntarily looked upon the nakedness by which he 
was disgraced. At the same time they also consulted their own 
modesty. For (as it was said in the third chapter) there is 
something so unaccountably shameful in the nakedness of 
man, that scarcely any one dares to look upon himself, even 
when no witness is present. They also censure the impious 
rashness of their brother, who had not spared his father. 
Hence, then, we may learn how acceptable to God is that 
piety, of which the example here recorded receives a 
signal encomium of the Spirit. But if piety towards an 
earthly father was a virtue so excellent, and so worthy of 
praise; with how much greater devotedness of piety ought 
the sacred majesty of God to be worshipped? The Papists 
make themselves ridiculous by desiring to cover the filthiness 
of their idol, yea, the abominations of their whole impure clergy, 
with the cloak of Shem and Japheth. I omit to state how 
great is the difference between the disgrace of Noah and the 
execrable vileness of so many crimes which contaminate heaven 
and earth. But it is necessary that Antichrist and his horned 


304 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. IX. 


bishops, with all that rabble, should prove themselves to be 
fathers,' if they wish that any honour should be paid them. 


24. And Noah awoke. It might seem to some that Noah, 
although hehad just cause of anger, still conducted himself with 
too little modesty and gravity ; and that he ought, at least, 
silently to have mourned over his sin before God; and also, 
with shame, to have given proof of his repentance to men: 
but that now, as if he had committed no offence, he fulminates 
with excessive severity against his son.2 Moses, however, 
does not here relate reproaches uttered by Noah, under the 
excitement of rage and anger, but rather introduces him, 
speaking in the spirit of prophecy. Wherefore we ought 
not to doubt, that the holy man was truly humbled (as he 
ought to be) under a sense of his fault, and honestly reflected 
on his own deserts; but now, having received the grant of 
pardon, and his condemnation being removed, he proceeds as 
the herald of Divine judgment. It is not indeed to be doubted 
that the holy man, endued with a disposition otherwise gentle, 
and being one of the best of parents, would pronounce this 
sentence upon his son with the most bitter grief of mind. 
For he saw him miraculously preserved amongst a few, and 
having a place among the very flower of the human race. 
Now, therefore, when, with his own mouth, he is compelled to 
separate him from the Church of God, he doubtless would 
grievously bewail the malediction of his son. But by this 
example, God would admonish us that the constancy of our 
faith must be retained, if at any time we see those fail who 
are most closely united to us, and that our spirits ought not 
to be broken; nay, that we must so exercise the severity 
which God enjoins, as not to spare even our own bowels. 
And whereas, Noah does not pronounce a sentence so harsh, 
except by Divine inspiration, it behoves us to infer from 
the severity of the punishment, how abominable in the sight 
of God is the impious contempt of parents, since it perverts 
the sacred order of nature, and violates the majesty and 


' That is, legitimate fathers. 
2 This is an objection, to which the answer immediately follows. 





CHAP. IX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 509 


authority of God, in the person of those whom he has com- 
manded to preside in his place. 


25. Cursed be Canaan. It is asked, in the first place, why 
Noah, instead of pronouncing the curse upon his son, inflicts 
the severity of punishment, which that son had deserved, upon 
his innocent grandson; since it seems not consistent with the 
justice of God, to visit the crimes of parents upon their chil- 
dren? But the answer is well known; namely, that God, 
although he pursues his course of judgments upon the sons and 
the grandchildren of the ungodly, yet, in being angry with 
them, is not angry with the innocent, because even they them- 
selves are found in fault. Wherefore there isno absurdity in 
the act of avenging the sins of the fathers upon their reprobate 
children ; since, of necessity, all those whom God has deprived 
of his Spirit are subject to his wrath. But it is surprising 
that Noah should curse his grandson ; and should pass his son 


1Tt has been remarked by Bishop Lowth, that nearly all the indica- 

tions of future events in the Holy Scriptures are announced in verse and 
in numbers.—Prei. ii. We have here aremarkable instance of this 
peculiarity. The following is a translation of Bishop Lowth’s version of 
Noah’s prediction :— 

Cursed be Canaan ! 

A servant of servants he shall be to his brethren. 

Blessed be Jehovah, the God of Shem ! 

And let Canaan be their servant. 

May God enlarge Japheth, 

And may he dwell in the tents of Shem ; 

And let Canaan be their servant.—Prel. iv. 


The adoption of some differences of reading has been suggested by later 
critics. It has been especially observed, that the first hemistich is a 
broken or short line, and does not correspond with the next in length or 
rhyme. And on the authority of the Arabic version, (see Walton’s Po- 
lyglott,) many learned men would thus fill up the line— 


‘¢ Cursed be Ham, the father of Canaan.” 


They would also, on the same authority, alter the fourth and sixth lines, 
by inserting the word “father,” thus— 


*¢ And let the father of Canaan be their servant.” 


Yet such alterations are not lightly to be made in the sacred text ; and 
it seems highly probable, that the addition in the Arabic version was 
intended for nothing more originally than a paraphrase to explain the 
translator’s view of the passage. The reader is referred to Caunter on the 
Poetry of the Pentateuch, for further information respecting the poetical 
character of these verses ; and to Bishop Newton’s Dissertations, No. I., 
for its prophetical application. Some excellent remarks, of a practical 
kind, will be found in Bishop Hall’s Contemplations.— Ed. 


VOL. I. U 


306 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. Ix. 


Ham, the author of the crime, over in silence. The Jews 

imagine that the reason of this was to be traced to the special 
favour of God; and that, since the Lord had bestowed on 
Ham so great an honour,' the curse was transferred from him 
to his son. But the conjecture is futile. Certainly, to my 
mind, there is no doubt that the punishment was carried 
forward even to his posterity, in order that the severity of it 
might be the more apparent; as if the Lord had openly pro- 
claimed that the punishment of one man would not satisfy 
him, but that he would attach the curse also to the posterity 
of the offender, so that it should extend through successive 
ages. In the meantime, Ham himself is so far from being 
exempt, that God, by involving his son with him, aggravates 
his own condemnation. 

Another question is also proposed; namely, why among 
the many sons of Ham, God chooses one to be smitten? But 
let not our curiosity here indulge itself too freely; let us 
remember that the judgments of God are, not in vain, called 
“a great deep,” and that it would be a degrading thing for 
God, before whose tribunal we all must one day stand, to be 
subjected to our judgments, or rather to our foolish temerity. 
He chooses whom he sees good, that he may show forth in 
them an example of his grace and kindness; others he ap- 
points to a different end, that they may be proofs of his anger 
and severity. Here, although the minds of men are blinded, 
let every one of us, conscious of his own infirmity, learn 
rather to ascribe praise to God’s justice, than plunge, 
with insane audacity, into the profound abyss. While God 
held the whole seed of Ham as obnoxious to the curse, 
he mentions the Canaanites by name, as those whom he 
would curse above all others. And hence we infer that this 
judgment proceeded from God, because it was proved by the 
event itself. What would certainly be the condition of the 
Canaanites, Noahcouldnot know byhuman means. Wherefore 
in things obscure and hidden, the Spirit directed his tongue. 

Another difficulty still remains: for since the Scripture 
teaches that God avenges the sins of men on the third and 


1 Namely, that of having preserved him in the ark.—Ed. 





CHAP, IX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 307 


fourth generation, it seems to assign this limit to the wrath 
of God; but the vengeance of which mention is now made 
extends itself to the tenth generation. I answer, that these 
words of Scripture are not intended to prescribe a law to 
God, which he may not so far set aside, as to be at liberty to 
punish sins beyond four generations. The thing to be here 
observed is, the comparison instituted between punishment 
and grace; by which we are taught, that God, while he is a 
just avenger of crimes, is still more inclined to mercy. In 
the meantime, let his liberty remain unquestioned, to extend 
his vengeance as far as he pleases. 

A servant of servants shall he be. This Hebraism signifies 
that Canaan shall be the last, even among servants: as if it 
had been said, ‘ Not only shall his condition be servile, but 
worse than that of common servitude.! Yet the thunder of 
this severe and dreadful prophecy seems weak and illusory, 
since the Canaanites excelled in strength and in riches, and 
were possessed of extensive dominion. Where then is this 
servitude? In the first place, I answer, that though God, in 
threatening men, does not immediately execute what he de- 
nounces, yet his threats are never weak and ineffectual. 
Secondly, that the judgments of God are not always exhi- 
bited before our eyes, nor apprehended by our carnal reason. 
The Canaanites, having shaken off the yoke of servitude, 
which was divinely imposed upon them, even proceeded to 
grasp at empire for themselves. But although they triumph 
for a time, yet in the sight of God their condition is not 
deemed free. Just as when the faithful are iniquitously op- 
pressed, and tyrannically harassed by the wicked, their spi- 
ritual liberty is still not extinct in the sight of God. It be- 
hoves us then to be content with this proof of the divine 
judgment, that God promised the dominion of the land of 
Canaan to his servant Abraham, and at length devoted the 
Canaanites to destruction. But because the Pope so ear- 
nestly maintains that he sometimes utters prophecies,—as did 
even Caiaphas, (John xi. 51,)—lest we should seem to refuse 
him everything, I do not deny that the title with which he 


1 Vide Ainsworth in loco, Bishop Newton’s Dissertation i. 


308 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, IX. 


adorns himself was dictated by the Spirit of God, ‘ Let him 
be a servant of servants,’ in the same sense that Canaan was. 


26. Blessed be the Lord God of Shem. Noah blesses his 
other children, but in a different manner. For he places 
Shem in the highest post of honour. And this is the reason 
why Noah, in blessing him, breaks forth in the praise of God, 
without adhering to the person of man. For the Hebrews, 
when they are speaking of any rare and transcendent ex- 
cellence, raise their thoughts to God. ‘Therefore the holy 
man, when he perceived that the most abundant grace of 
God was destined for his son Shem, rises to thanksgiving. 
Whence we infer, that he spoke, not from carnal reason, but 
rather treated of the secret favours of God, the result of 
which was to be deferred to a remote period. Finally, by 
these words it is declared, that the benediction of Shem 
would be divine or heavenly. 


27. God shall enlarge Japheth. In the Hebrew words 75° 
(Japhthe) and 5‘, (Japheth,) there is an elegant allusion. 
For the root of the word is MMS, (pathah,) which, among the 
Hebrews, signifies to entice with smooth words, or to allure © 
in one direction or another. Here, however, nearly all com- 
mentators take it as signifying to enlarge.! If this exposi- 
tion be received, the meaning will be, that the posterity of 
Japheth, which for a time would be scattered, and removed 
far from the tents of Shem, would at length be increased, so 
that it should more nearly approach them, and should dwell 
together with them, as in acommon home. But I rather ap- 
prove the other version, ‘ God shall gently bring back, or 
incline Japheth.’? Moreover, whichever interpretation we 


1“ Nilatet Deus Japheth."—Vulg. “ wrurdvas 6 Oeos.”—Sept. 

2See marginal reading of English version, ‘‘ God will persuade Ja- 
pheth.”—See also Schindler’s Lexicon, sub voce ;mp, and Ainsworth in 
loco. It is however objected, and not without reason, that the word here 
rendered persuade is rarely, if ever, used in a good sense, that it generally 
means to entice, or allure to evil; and, therefore, the most judicious critics 
seem rather inclined to fall back upon the version given in the text of our 
translation, than to accept the marginal reading, with which Calvin 
agrees. See Professor Bush’s note on this place. Dathe gives the pre- 
ference to the Arabic version, which signifies that God will prosper Ja- 
pheth ; but for this there is no sufficient authority.—Ed. 








CHAP. IX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 309 


follow, Noah predicts that there will be a temporary dissen- 
sion between Shem and Japheth, although he retains both in 
his family, and calls both his lawful heirs; and that after- 
wards the time will come, in which they shall again coalesce 
in one body, and haveacommon home. It is, however, most 
absolutely certain, that a prophecy is here put forth concern- 
ing things unknown to man, of which, as the event, at length, 
shows, God alone was the Author. Two thousand years, 
and some centuries more, elapsed before the Gentiles and the 
Jews were gathered together in one faith. Then the sons of 
Shem, of whom the greater part had revolted, and cut them- 
selves off from the holy family of God, were collected 
together, and dwelt under one tabernacle. Also the Gen- 
tiles, the progeny of Japheth, who had long been wan- 
derers and fugitives, were received into the same tabernacle. 
For God, by a new adoption, has formed a people out of those 
who were separated, and has confirmed a fraternal union be- 
tween alienated parties. This is done by the sweet and 
gentle voice of God, which he has uttered in the gospel; and 
this prophecy is still daily receiving its fulfilment, since God 
invites the scattered sheep to join his flock, and collects, on 
every side, those who shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, 
and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven. It is truly no com- 
mon support of our faith, that the calling of the Gentiles is 
not only decreed in the eternal counsel of God, but is openly 
declared by the mouth of the Patriarch ; lest we should think 
it to have happened suddenly, or by chance, that the inherit- 
ance of eternal life was offered generally to all. But the 
form of the expression, ‘ Japheth shall dwell in the taber- 
nacles of Shem,” commends to us that mutual society, which 


1 Allusion here seems to be made to the words quoted by James from 
the prophecy of Amos: ‘I will return, and will build again the tabernacle 
of David, which is fallen down; and I will build again the ruins thereof, 
and I will set it up.”—Acts xy, 16.—Ed. 

? It is not clear whether the original really means that ‘‘ Japheth,” or 
that ‘‘ God,” “shall dwell in the tents of Shem.” If the former, then 
this is a plain prediction of events which have been in aremarkable man- 
ner fulfilled, by the conversion of the Gentiles, and by the diffusion of a 
vast European population over those regions which were originally oc- 
cupied by the descendants of Shem. If the original really means the 
fatter, then it has been fulfilled by the manifestation of God’s glory among 
the Israelites, first through the Shechinah which appeared in the taber- 


310 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. IX. 


ought to exist, and to be cherished among the faithful. For 
whereas God had chosen to himself a Church from the progeny 
of Shem, he afterwards chose the Gentiles together with 
them, on this condition, that they should join themselves to 
that people, who were in possession of the covenant of life. 


28. And Noah lived. Although Moses briefly states the 
age of the holy man, and does not record his annals and the 
memorable events of his life, yet those things which are cer- 
tain, and which Scripture elsewhere commemorates, ought 
to recur to our minds. Within one hundred and fifty years, 
the offspring of his three sons became so numerous, that he 
had sufficient, and even abundant proof of the efficacy of the 
Divine benediction, “ Increase and multiply.” He sees, not 
one city only, filled with his grandchildren, nor his seed ex- 
panded barely to three hundred families ; but many nations 
springing from one of his sons, who should inhabit extensive 
regions. This astonishing increase, since it was a visible re- 
presentation of the divine favour towards him, would doubt- 
less fill him with unbounded joy. For Abraham was nearly 
fifty years old when his ancestor Noah died.’ In the mean- 
time, he was compelled to behold many things, which would _ 
afflict his holy breast with incredible grief. To omit other 
things; he saw in the family of Shem, the sanctuary of God,— 
into which the sons of Japheth were to be received,—destroy- 
ed, or, at least, dilapidated and rent. For whereas the father 
of Abraham himself, having deserted his proper station, had 
erected for himselfa profane tabernacle; a very small portion 
indeed remained of those who worshipped God in the har- 
monious consent of a pure faith. With what tormenting 
pains this terrible confusion affected him cannot be suffi- 
ciently expressed in words. Hence we may know, that his 
eyes of faith must have been exceedingly penetrating, which 


nacle and temple, and then more especially through the advent of the 
Messiah, of whom St John says, ‘‘ The Word was made flesh, and 
dwelt among us; and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only be- 
gotten of the Father, full of grace and truth,’ (John i. 14.)—£d. 

1 Lightfoot places the death of Noah two years before the birth of 
Abraham ; Dr A. Clarke two years after it. ‘These chronological differ- 
ences, however, do not materially affect the general conclusions drawn 
hy Calvin.—Ed. ; 


CHAP. X. 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


311 


did not fail to behold afar off, the grace of God, in preserving 
the Church, at that time overwhelmed by the wickedness of 


men. 


CHAPTER X. 


1. Now these are the generations of 
_ the sons of Noah, Shem, Ham, and Ja- 
pheth: and unto them were sons born 
after the flood. 

2. The sons of Japheth; Gomer, and 
Magog, and Madai, and Javan, and 
Tubal, and Meshech, and Tiras. 

8. And the sons of Gomer; Ashkenaz, 
and Riphath, and Togarmah. 

4. And the sons of Javan; Elishah, 
and Tarshish, Kittim, and Dodanim. 

5. By these were the isles of the Gen- 
tiles divided in their lands; every one 
after his tongue, after their families, in 
their nations. 


6. And the sons of Ham; Cush, and 
Mizraim, and Phut, and Canaan. 

7. And the sons of Cush; Seba, and 
Havilah, and Sabtah, and Raamah, and 
Sabtechah: and the sons of Raamah ; 
Sheba, and Dedan. 

8. And Cush begat Nimrod: he began 
to be a mighty one in the earth. 

9. He was a mighty hunter before 
the Lord: wherefore it is said, Even as 
Nimrod the mighty hunter before the 
Lord. 

10. And the beginning of his kingdom 
was Babel, and Erech, and Accad, and 
Calneh, in the land of Shinar. 

11. Out of that land went forth As- 
shur, and builded Nineveh, and the city 
Rehoboth, and Calah, 

12. And Resen between Nineveh and 
Calah: the same is a great city. 


13. And Mizraim begat Ludim, and 
Anamim, and Lehabim, and Naphtuhim, 


14. And Pathrusim, and Casluhim, 
(out of whom came Philistim,) and 
Caphtorim. 

15. And Canaan begat Sidon his first- 
born, and Heth, 


1. Porro iste sunt genera- 
tiones filiorum Noah, Sem, 
Cham, et Jepheth: quibus nati 
sunt filii post diluvium. 

2. Filii Jepheth, Gomer, et 
Magog, et Madai, et Javan, et 
Thubal, et Mesech, et Thiras. 

3. Et filii Gomer, Ascenas, 
et Riphath, et Thogarmah. 

4, Et filii Javan, Elisah, et 
Tharsis, Chitthim, et Dodanim. 

5. Ab istis separate sunt 
insulz Gentium secundum ter- 
ras suas, singule secundum 
linguam suam, secundum fa- 
milias suas, in gentibus suis. 

6. Et filii Cham, Chus, et 
Misraim, et Phut, et Chenaan. 

7. Et filii Chus, Seba, et 
Havilah, et Sabthah, et Raha- 
mah, et Sabtecha. Filii autem 
Rahamah, Seba, et Dedan. 

8. Et Chus genuit Nimrod: 
ipse coepit esse potens in terra : 

9. Ipse fuit potens in vena- 
tione coram Jehova: idcirco 
dicitur, Sicut Nimrod potens 
venatione coram Jehova. 

10. Et fuit principium regni 
illius Babel, et Erech, et Achad, 
et Chalneh, in terra Sinhar. 

11. E terra illa egressus est 
Assur, et edificavit Nineven, et 
Rehoboth civitatem, et Chelah, 

12. Et Resen inter Nineven 
et inter Chelah ; ipsaest civitas 
magna. 

13. Misraim autem genuit 
Ludim, et Hanamim, et Leha- 
bim, et Naphthuhim, 

14. Et Pathrusim, et Cas- 
luhim, unde egressi sunt Pe- 
listim, et Chaphthorim. 

15. Et Chenaan genuit Si- 
don primogenitum suum, et 
Heth, 


312 


16. And the Jebusite, and the Amo- 
rite, and the Girgasite, 

17. And the Hivite, and the Arkite, 
and the Sinite, 

18. And the Arvadite, and the Zema- 
rite, and the Hamathite: and afterward 
were the families of the Canaanites 
spread abroad. 

19. And the border of the Canaanites 
was from Sidon, as thou comest to Gerar, 
unto Gaza; as thou goest unto Sodom, 
and Gomorrah, and Admah, and Zeboim, 
even unto Lasha. 


20. These are the sons of Ham, after 
their families, after their tongues, in their 
countries, and in their nations. 

21. Unto Shem also, the father of all 
the children of Eber, the brother of Ja- 
pheth the elder, even to him were chil- 
dren born. 

22. The children of Shem; Elam, and 
Asshur, and Arphaxad, and Lud, and 
Aram. 

23. And the children of Aram; Uz, 
and Hul, and Gether, and Mash. 

24. And Arphaxad begat Salah; and 
Salah begat Eber. 

25. And unto Eber were born two 
sons: the name of one was Peleg; for 
in his days was the earth divided; and 
his brother’s name was Joktan. 

26. And Joktan begat Almodad, and 
Sheleph, and Hazarmaveth, and Jerah, 


27. And Hadoram, and Uzal, and 
Diklah, 
28. And Obal, and Abimael, and Sheba, 


29. And Ophir, and MHavilah, and 
Jobab : all these were the sons of Joktan. 

30. And their dwelling was from 
Mesha, as thou goest unto Sephar, a 
mount of the east. 

31. These are the sons of Shem, after 
their families, after their tongues, in their 
lands, after their nations. 


32. These are the families of the sons 


of Noah, after their generations, in their 
nations: and by these were the nations 
divided in the earth after the flood. 


1. These are the generations. 


COMMENTARY UPON 


CHAP. X. 


16. Et Jebusi, et Emori, et 
Girgasi, 

17. Et Hivvi, et Arci, et 
Sini, 
18. Et Arvadi, et Semari, 
et Hamathi: et postea sparse 
sunt familizs Chenaanei. 


19. Et fuit terminus Che- 
naanzi a Sidon ingrediente te 
Gerar usque ad Hazzah, donec 
ingrediaris Sedom et Hamorah, 
et Admah, et Seboim, usque 
ad Lasah. ; 

20. Isti filii Cham per fami- 
lias suas, per linguas suas, in 
terris suis, in gentibus suis. 

21. Ipsi quoque Sem soboles, 
etiam ipse fuit pater omnium 
filiorum Eber, frater Jepheth 
major. 

22. FiliiSem, Helam, et As- 
sur, et Arphachsad, et Lud, et 
Aram. 

23. Et filii Aram, Hus, et 
Hul, et Gether, et Mas. 

24. Et Arphachsad genuit 
Selah, et Selah genuit Eber. 

25. Et ipsi Eber nati sunt 
duo filii: nomen unius Peleg, 
quia in diebus ejus divisa est ter- 
ra: et nomen fratris ejus Joctan. 

26. Et Joctan genuit Almo- 
dad, et Seleph, et Hasarma- 
veth, et Jarah, 

27. Et Hadoram, et Uzal, 
et Diclah, 

28. Et Hobal, et Abimael, 
et Seba, 

29. Et Ophir, et Havilah, et 
Jobab: omnes isti filii Joctan. 

30. Et fuit habitatio eorum 
a Mesah, donec ingrediaris 
Sephar, montem Orientis. 

31. Isti filii Sem per fami- 
lias suas, per linguas suas, in 
terris suis, in gentibus suis. 

82. iste familie filiorum 
Noah per generationes suas in 
gentibus suis: et ab istis di- 
vise sunt gentes in terra post 
diluvium. 


If any one pleases more ac- 


curately to examine the genealogies related by Moses in this 


CHAP, X. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 313 


and the following chapter, I do not condemn his industry. 
And some interpreters have not unsuccessfully applied their 
diligence and study to this point. Let them enjoy, as far as 
I am concerned, the reward of their labours. It shall, how- 
ever, suffice for me briefly to allude to those things which I 
deem more useful to be noticed, and for the sake of which I 
suppose these genealogies to have been written by Moses. 
First, in these bare names we have still some fragment of the 
history of the world; and the next chapter will show how many 
years intervened between the date of the deluge and the time 
when God made his covenant with Abraham. This second 
commencement of mankind is especially worthy to be known ; 
and detestable is the ingratitude of those, who, when they 
had heard, from their fathers and grandfathers, of the wonder- 
ful restoration of the world in so short a time, yet voluntarily 
became forgetful of the grace and the salvation of God. 
Even the memory of the deluge was by the greater part en- 
tirely lost. Very few cared by what means or for what end 
they had been preserved. Many ages afterwards, seeing 
that the wicked forgetfulness of men had rendered them 
callous to the judgment and mercy of God, the door was 
opened to the lies of Satan, by whose artifice it came to 
pass, that heathen poets scattered abroad futile and even 
noxious fables, by which the truth respecting God’s works 
was adulterated. The goodness of God, therefore, wonder- 


*For ample information on this interesting subject, which the ge- 
neral plan of Calvin’s Commentary scarcely allowed him fully to inves- 
tigate, the reader cannot do better than consult Dr Wells’ Geography of 
the Old Testament, chap. iii. From certain expressions contained in the 
Mosaic account here given, of the first settlement of nations after the 
flood, it is clear that the records of the chapter now before us, have refer- 
ence to the state of things after the confusion of tongues at the building 
of the Tower of Babel, though the narration of this event occurs in the 
chapter following ; for the settlements are said to be made “ according to 
their languages.” But we know that before the attempt to build the 
tower, the whole earth was of ‘“‘ one language and of one speech ;” and 
therefore the events here placed first, in the order of narration, were sub= 
sequent in the order of time. It may be proper here to observe, that ac- 
cording to the division of the earth into three great portions, Europe, Asia, 
and Africa, speaking generally, Japheth was the progenitor of the Eu- 
ropeans, Shem of the Asiatics, and Ham of the Africans. Yet this line 
of demarcation is not intended to be accurately drawn. The whole of 
Lesser Asia, for instance, falls within the province of the sons of Japheth; 
and Arabia within that of the sons of Ham.—Ed. 


314 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, X. 


fully triumphed over the wickedness of men, in having 
granted a prolongation of life to beings so ungrateful, brutal, 
and barbarous. Now, to captious men, (who yet do not think 
it absurd to refuse to acknowledgea Creator of the world,) such 
a sudden increase of mankind seems incredible, and therefore 
they ridicule it as fabulous. I grant, indeed, that if we choose 
to estimate what Moses relates by our own reason, it may 
be regarded as a fable; but they act very perversely who do 
not attend to the design of the Holy Spirit. For what else, 
I ask, did the Spirit intend, than that the offspring of three 
men should be increased, not by natural means, or in a com- 
mon manner, but by the unwonted exercise of the power of 
God, for the purpose of replenishing the earth far and wide? 
They who regard this miracle of God as fabulous on account 
of its magnitude, should much less believe that Noah and 
his sons, with their wives, breathed in the waters, and that 
animals lived nearly a whole year without sun and air. 
This, then, is a gigantic madness,’ to hold up to ridicule what 
is said respecting the restoration of the human race: for 
there the admirable power of God is displayed. How much 
better would it be, in the history of these events,—which 
Noah saw with his own eyes, and not without great admira- | 
tion,—to behold God, to admire his power, to celebrate his 
goodness, and to acknowledge his hand, not less filled with 
mysteries in restoring, than in creating the world? We must, 
however, observe, that in the three catalogues which Moses 
furnishes,’ all the heads of the families are not enumerated ; 
but those only, among the grandsons of Noah, are recorded, 
who were the princes of nations. For as any one excelled 
among his brethren, in talent, valour, industry, or other en- 
dowments, he obtained for himself a name and power, so that 
others, resting under his shadow, freely conceded to him the 
priority. Therefore, among the sons of Japheth, of Ham, 


1 “ Hic ergo Cyclopicus est furor.” . 

2 The first relating to the sons of Japheth the elder brother, from 
verse 2 to verse 6; thesecond, to the sons of Ham, from verse 6 to verse 
21; the third, to the sons of Shem, from 21 to the end. Shem, though 
generally named first as a mark of Divine favour, is here placed last, be- 
cause the subsequent history of Moses principally concerns this race; as 
Calvin properly argues.—Ed. 


CHAP. X. ' ‘THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 315 


and of Shem, Moses enumerates those only who had been 
celebrated, and by whose names the people were called. 
Moreover, although no certain cause appears why Moses 
begins at Japheth, and descends in the second place to Ham, 
yet it is probable that the first place is given to the sons of 
Japheth, because they, having wandered over many regions, 
and having even crossed the sea, had receded farther from 
their country: and since these nations were less known to 
the Jews, therefore he alludes to them briefly. He assigns 
the second place to the sons of Ham, the knowledge of 
whom, on account of their vicinity, was more familiar to 
the Jews. But since he had determined to weave the his- 
tory of the Church in one continuous narrative, he postpones 
the progeny of Shem, from which the Church flowed, to the 
last place. Wherefore, the order in which they are men- 
tioned is not that of dignity; since Moses puts those first, 
whom he wished slightly to pass over, as obscure. Besides, we 
must observe, that the children of this world are exalted for a 
time, so that the whole earth seems as if it were made for 
their benefit, but their glory being transient vanishes away ; 
while the Church, in an ignoble and despised condition, as if 
creeping on the ground, is yet divinely preserved, until at 
length, in his own time, God shall lift up her head. I have 
already declared that I leave to others the scrupulous inves- 
tigation of the names here mentioned. The reason of certain of 
them is manifest from the Scripture, such as Cush, Mizraim, 
Madai, Canaan, and the like: in respect to some others there 
are probable conjectures; in others, the obscurity is too 
great to allow of any certain conclusion; and those figments 
which interpreters adduce are, in part, very much distorted 
and forced; in part, vapid, and without any fair pretext. Un- 
doubtedly it seems to be the part of a frivolous curiosity to 
seek for certain and distinct nations in each of these names.' 


1 Doubtless there is truth in these remarks of Calvin. Yet he seems 
to carry his objection too far. For it is one of the strongest possible 
confirmations of the truth of the Mosaic history, that (notwithstanding 
some inevitable obscurity) there should be such a mass of undeniable 
evidence still existing, that the world was really divided in the manner 
here described. Far more nations than Calvin supposed may, with the 
highest degree of probability, be traced upward to the progenitors whose 


8 


316 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, X. 


When Moses says, that the islands of the Gentiles were 
divided by the sons of Japheth, we understand that the regions 
beyond the sea were parted among them. For Greece and 
Italy, and othercontinental lands,—as well as Rhodes and Cy- 
prus,—arecalledislands by the Hebrews, because the sea inter- 
posed. Whencewe infer that we are sprung from thosenations. 


8. And Cush begat Nimrod. It is certain that Cush was 
the prince of the Ethiopians. Moses relates the singular 
history of his son Nimrod, because he began to be eminent 
in an unusual degree. Moreover, I thus interpret the 
passage, that the condition of men was at that time moderate ; 
so that if some excelled others, they yet did not on that 
account domineer, nor assume to themselves royal power ; 
but being content with a degree of dignity, governed others 
by civil laws, and had more of authority than power. For 
Justin, from Trogus Pompeius, declares this to have been 
the most ancient condition of the world. Now Moses says, 
that Nimrod, as if forgetting that he was a man, took pos- 
session of a higher post of honour. Noah was at that time 
yet living, and was certainly great and venerable in the eyes 
of all. There were also other excellent men; but such was 
their moderation, that they cultivated equality with their 
inferiors, who yielded them a spontaneous rather than a 


names are here recorded. See Wells’ Geography, Mede’s Works, and 
Bishop Patrick’s Commentary. A list of the names, with the supposed 
corresponding nations, is also given in the Commentary of Professor Bush 
on this chapter. The following extract from Hengstenberg’s ‘ Egypt, 
and the Books of Moses,’ also bears upon this point :—“‘ It has often been 
asserted that the genealogical table in Gen. x. cannot be from Moses: 
since so extended a knowledge of nations lies far beyond the geographical 
horizon of the Mosaic age. This hypothesis must now be considered as 
exploded. The new discoveries and investigations in Egypt have shown 
that they maintained, even from the most ancient times, a vigorous com- 
merce with other nations, and sometimes with very distant nations. 

But not merely, in general, do the investigations in Egyptian 
antiquities favour the belief that Moses was the author of the account in 
this tenth chapter of Genesis. On the Egyptian monuments, those espe- 
cially which represent the conquests of the ancient Pharaohs over 
foreign nations, . . . not afew names have been found which cor- 
respond with those contained in the chapter before us.” The learned 
author-then proceeds to adduce instances in proof of his position, which 
the reader may consult with advantage.—See Hengstenberg’s Egypt, and 
the Books of Moses, chap. vii. p. 195.—Ed. 


fe 


CHAP, X. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. S17 


forced reverence. The ambition of Nimrod disturbed and 
broke through the boundaries of this reverence. Moreover, 
since it sufficiently appears that, in this sentence of Moses, 
the tyrant is branded with an eternal mark of infamy, we 
may hence conclude, how highly pleasing to God is a mild 
administration of affairs among men. And truly, whosoever 
remembers that he is a man, will gladly cultivate the society 
of others. With respect to the meaning of the terms, 5°Y, 
(tsaid,) properly signifies hunting, as the Hebrew grammarians 
state; yet it is often taken for food.! But whether Moses 
says that he was robust in hunting, or in violently seizing 
upon prey ; he metaphorically intimates that he was a furious 
man, and approximated to beasts rather than to men. The 
expression, “ Before the Lord,”? seems to me to declare that 
Nimrod attempted to raise himself above the order of men; 
just as proud men become transported by a vain self-con- 
fidence, that they may look down as from the clouds upon 
others. 

Wherefore it is said.* Since the verb is in the future tense, 
itmay be thusexplained, Nimrod was so mighty and imperious 
that it would be proper to say of any powerful tyrant, that 
he is another Nimrod. Yet the version of Jerome is satis- 
factory, that thence it became a proverb concerning the 
powerful and the violent, that they were like Nimrod.* Nor 
do I doubt that God intended the first author of tyranny to 
be transmitted to odium by every tongue. 


10. And the beginning of his kingdom was Babel. Moses 
here designates the seat of Nimrod’s empire. He also declares 
that four cities were subject to him ; it is however uncertain 
whether he was the founder of them, or had thence expelled 
their rightful lords. And although mention is elsewhere 


1 “ayy, Metaphoricé cibus venatione partus, aut quovis modo para- 
tus, preter panem.”—Schindler.—Ed. 

2 Some translate it, “ Against the Lord;”’ yet, perhaps, the words 
will hardly bear this rendering.—Ed. ; 

3 “ Qua propter dicetur,” &c., ‘‘ Wherefore it shall be said ” In Calvin’s 
text it is, “ Idcirco dicitur,” ‘‘ Wherefore it is said.” 

4 “Ob hoc exivit proverbium, Quasi Nemrod robustus venator eoram 
Domino.”— Vulgate. 


318 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. X. 


made of Calneh,! yet Babylon was the most celebrated of all. 
I do not however think that it was of such wide extent, or 
of such magnificent structure, as the profane historians relate. 
But since the region was among the first and most fruitful, 
it is possible that the convenience of the situation would 
afterwards invite others to enlarge the city. Wherefore 
Aristotle, in his Politics, taking it out of the rank of cities, 
compares it to a province. Hence it has arisen, that many 
declare it to have been the work of Semiramis, by whom 
others say that it was not built, but only adorned and joined 
together by bridges. The land of Shinar is added as a note 
of discrimination, because there was also another Babylon in 
Egypt, which is now called Cairo.? But it is asked, how 
was Nimrod the tyrant of Babylon, when Moses, in the 
following chapter, subjoins, that a tower was begun there, 
which obtained this name from the confusion of tongues ? 
Some suppose that a hysteron proteron® is here employed, and 
that what Moses is afterwards about to relate concerning the 
building of the tower was prior in the order of time. More- 
over, they add, that because the building of the tower was 
disasterously obstructed, their design was changed to that of 
building a city. But I rather think there is a prolepsis; and . 
that Moses called the city by the same name, which after- 
wards was imposed by a more recent event. The reason 
of the conjecture is, that probably, at this time, the inha- 
bitants of that place, who had engaged in so vast a work, 
were numerous. It might also happen, that Nimrod, soli- 
citous about his own fame and power, inflamed their insane 
desire by this pretext, that some famous monument should 
be erected in which their everlasting memory might remain. 
Still, since it is the custom of the Hebrews to prosecute more 


1 Amos vi. 2. 

2“ Quam hodie Cairum vocant.”—“ Babylon was a habitation formed 
by the Persians, which may with probability be referred to the time of 
the conquest of Egypt by Cambyses. A quarter retaining the name of 
Baboul or Babilon, in the city commonly called Old Cairo, which over- 
looks the Nile at some distance above the Delta, shows its true position.” 
—D’ Anville’s Ancient Geography, vol. ii. p. 152.—Ed. 

3 Jorepoy wporepov, is when that which really comes last in the order 
of time, is for some reason put first in the order of narration.—d. 








ip @ 
I 


CHAP, X. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 319 


diffusely, afterwards, what they had touched upon briefly, I 
do not entirely reject the former opinion.' 


11. Out of that land went forth Asshur. It is credible that 
Asshur was one of the posterity of Shem. And the opinion 
has been commonly received, that he is here mentioned, 
because, when he was dwelling in the neighbourhood of 
Nimrod, he was violently expelled thence. In this manner, 
Moses would mark the barbarous ferocity of Nimrod. And 
truly these are the accustomed fruits of a greatness which 
does not keep within bounds; whence has arisen the old 
proverb, ‘ Great kingdoms are great robberies.’ It is indeed 
necessary that some should preside over others; but where 
ambition, and the desire of rising higher than is right, are 
rampant, they not only draw with them the greatest and 
most numerous injuries, but also verge closely upon the dis- 
solution of human society. Yet I rather adopt the opinion 
of those who say that Asshur is not, in this place, the name of 
aman, but of a country which derived its appellation from 
him ; and thus the sense will be, that Nimrod, not content 
with his large and opulent kingdom, gave the reins to his 
cupidity, and pushed the boundaries of his empire even into 
Assyria, where he also built new cities.” The passage in 
Isaiah (xxiii. 13) is alone opposed to this opinion, where he 
says, ‘ Behold the land of the Chaldeans, the people was not, 
Asshur founded it when they inhabited the deserts, and he 
reduced it to ruin.”® For the prophet seems to say, that 
cities were built by the Assyrians in Chaldea, whereas pre- 


1 A reason why the former of these opinions is to be preferred will be 
found in a note at page 313, where it is stated that the division of tongues 
had already taken place, before these nations were settled.— Ed. 

2 See the marginal reading of the English version—‘ He went out into 
Assyria.’ ; 

3 Bishop Lowth’s translation ofthe passage is as follows :— 

‘“*Behold the land of the Chaldeans ; 
This people was of no account ; 
(The Assyrian founded it for the inhabitants of the desert ; 
They raised the watch-towers, they set up the palaces thereof ;) 
This people hath reduced her to ruin.” 


See also his note on this passage, which accords with Calvin’s supposi- 
tion, that the prophet referred to some subsequent period of history.—£d. 


320 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. X. 


viously, its inhabitants were wandering and scattered as ina 
desert. But it may be, that the prophet speaks of other 
changes of these kingdoms, which occurred afterwards. For, 
at the time in which the Assyrians maintained the sove- 
reignty, seeing that they flourished in unbounded wealth, it 
is credible that Chaldea, which they had subjected to them- 
selves, was so adorned and increased by a long peace, that it 
might seem to have been founded by them. And we know, 
that when the Chaldeans, in their turn, seized on the empire, 
Babylon was exalted on the ruins of Nineveh. 


21. Unto Shem also, the father of all the children of Eber. 
Moses, being about to speak of the sons of Shem, makes a 
brief introduction, which he had not done in reference to the 
others. Nor was it without reason; for since this was the 
race chosen by God, he wished to sever it from other nations 
by some special mark. This also is the reason why he 
expressly styles him the ‘ father of the sons of Eber,’ and the 
elder brother of Japheth.! For the benediction of Shem 
does not descend to all his grandchildren indiscriminately, 
but remains in one family. And although the grandchildren 
themselves of Eber declined from the true worship of God, 
so that the Lord might justly have disinherited them; yet 
the benediction was not extinguished, but only buried for a 
season, until Abraham was called, in honour of whom this 
singular dignity is ascribed to the race and name of Eber. 
For the same cause, mention is made of Japheth, in order 
that the promise may be confirmed, ‘ God shall speak gently 
unto Japheth, that he may dwell in the tents of Shem,’ 
Shem is not here called the brother of Ham, inasmuch as the 
latter was cut off from the fraternal order, and was debarred 
his own right. Fraternity remained only between Shem and 
Japheth ; because, although they were separated, God had 
engaged that he would cause them to return from this dis- 
sension into union. As it respects the name Eber, they who 


1 In the English translation it is, ‘The brother of Japheth the elder.’ 
The balance of proof seems to lie in favour of the English translation, 
and gives the seniority to Japheth. Shem is supposed to be placed first, 
not on account of his age, but because his was the chosen seed.—Ed. 








CHAP. XI. 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


321 


deny it to be a proper name, but deduce it from the word 
which signifies to pass over, are more than sufficiently refuted 


by this passage alone. 


CHAPTER XI. 


1. Anp the whole earth was of one 
language, and of one speech. 


2. And it came to pass, as they jour- 
neyed from the east, that they found a 
plain in the land of Shinar; and they 
dwelt there. 

3. And they said one to another, 
Go to, let us make brick, and burn 
them throughly. And they had brick 
for stone, and slime had they for mor- 
tar. 


4. And they said, Go to, let us build 
us a city and a tower, whose top may 
reach unto heaven; and let us make us 
a name, lest we be scattered abroad 
upon the face of the whole earth. 


5. And the Lord came down to see 
the city and the tower, which the chil- 
dren of men builded. 

6. And the Lord said, Behold, the 
people zs one, and they have all one 
_ language; and this they begin to do: 
and now nothing will be restrained 
from them, which they have imagined 
to do. 

7. Go to, let us go down, and there 

confound their language, that they 
may not understand one another’s 
speech. 
. 8. So the Lord scattered them abroad 
from thence upon the face of all the 
earth: and they left off to build the 
city. 

9. Therefore is the name of it called 
Babel; because the Lord did there 
confound the language of all the earth : 
and from thence did the Lord scatter 
them abroad upon the face of all the 
earth. 

10. These ave the generations of 
Shem: Shem was an hundred years 


VOL. bi 


1. Erat autem universa terra 
labii unius, et verborum eorun- 


‘dem. 


2. Et fuit, quum proficisce- 
rentur ipsi ab Oriente, inve- 
nerunt planitiem in_ terra 
Sinhar, et habitaverunt ibi. 

3. Et dixerunt quisque ad 
proximum suum, Agite, late- 
rificemus lateres, et coquamus 
ad coctionem : et fuit eis later 
pro lapide, et bitumen fuit eis 
pro czemento. 

4 Et dixerunt, Agite, edi- 
ficemus nobis urbem et turrim, 
cujus caput pertingat usque ad 
celum, et faciamus nobis no- 
men, ne forte dispergamur in 
superficiem universe terre. 

5. Et descendit Jehova ut 
videret urbem et turrim, quam 
edificabant filii hominum. 

6. Et dixit Jehova, En, po- 
pulus unus, et labium unum 
est omnibus ipsis: et hoc est 
incipere eorum ut faciant, et 
nunc non prohibebitur ab eis 
quod cogitaverunt ut facerent. 

7. Agite, descendamus, et 
confundamus ibi labium eo- 
rum, ut non audiant unus- 
quisque labium proximi sui. 

8. Et dispersit Jehova eos 
inde per superficiem omnis 
terre, et cessaverunt edificare 
civitatem. 

9. Propterea vocavit nomen 
ejus Babel: quia ibi confudit 
Jehova labium universe ter- 
re, et inde dispersit eos Jeho- 
va in superficiem universe 
terre. 

10. He sunt generationes 
Sem. Sem filius centum an- 


x 


322 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XT. 


old, and begat Arphaxad two years norum genuit Arphachsad 

after the flood: duobus annis post diluvium. 
11. And Shem lived after he begat 11. Et vixit Sem, postquam 

Arphaxad five hundred years, and begat genuit Arphachsad, quingentos 


sons and daughters. annos : et genuit filios et filias. 
12. And Arphaxad lived five and 12. Et Arphachsad vixit 
thirty years, and begat Salah : quinque et triginta annos, et 


genuit Selah. 

13. And Arphaxad lived after he 13. Et vixit Arphachsad, 
-begat Salah four hundred and three postquam genuit Selah, tres 
years, and begat sons and daughters. annos et quadringentos annos: 

et genuit filios et filias. 

14. And Salah lived thirty years, and 14. Et Selah vixit triginta 
begat Eber: annos, et genuit Eber. 

15. And Salah lived after he begat 15. Et vixit Selah, post- 
Eber four hundred and three years, and quam genuit Eber, tres annos 
begat sons and daughters. et quadringentos annos: et 

genuit filios et filias. 

16. And Eber lived four and thirty 16. Et vixit Eber quatuor 
years, and begat Peleg: et triginta annos, et genuit 

Peleg. , 

17. And Eber lived after he begat 7 Et vixit Eber, postquam 
Peleg four hundred and thirty years, genuit Peleg, triginta annos et 
and begat sons and daughters. quadringentos annos : et genuit 

’ filios et filias. 

18. And Peleg lived thirty years,and 18. Et vixit Peleg triginta 
begat Reu : annos, et genuit Rehu. ; 

19. And Peleg lived after he begat 19. Et vixit Peleg, post- 
Reu two hundred and nine years, and quam genuit Rehu, novem an- 
begat sons and daughters. nos et ducentos annos: et ge- 

a nuit filios et filias. 

20. And Reu lived two and thirty 20. Et vixit Rehu duos et — 
years, and begat Serug: triginta annos, et genuit Serug. 

21. And Reu lived after he begat 21. Et vixit Rehu, post- 
Serug two hundred and seven years, quam genuit Serug, septem 
and begat sons and daughters. annos et ducentos annos: et 

genuit filios et filias. 

22. And Serug lived thirty years, and 22. Et vixit Serug triginta 
begat Nahor : annos, et genuit Nachor. 

23. And Serug lived after he begat 23. Et vixit Serug, post- 
Nahor two hundred years, and begat quam genuit Nachor, ducentos 


sons and daughters. annos : et genuit filios et filias. 

24, And Nahor lived nine and twenty 24. Et vixit Nachor novem 

years, and begat Terah: et viginti annos, et genuit 
Thare. 


25. And Nahor lived after he begat - 25. Et vixit Nachor, post- 
Terah an hundred and nineteen years, quam genuit Thare, novemde- 
and begat sons and daughters. cim annos et centum annos: 

, et genuit filios et filias. 

26. And Terah lived seventy years, 26. Et vixit Thare septua- 

and begat Abram, Nahor, and Haran. _ ginta annos, et genuit Abram, 
Nachor, et Haran. 

27. Now these are the generations 27. Et iste sunt genera~ 
of Terah: Terah begat Abram, Nahor, tiones Thare. Thare genuit 
and Haran ; and Haran begat Lot. Abram, Nachor, et Haran: et 

Haran genuit Lot. 





CHAP. XI. 


28. And Haran died before his fa- 
ther Terah in the land of his nativity, 
in Ur of the Chaldees. 


29. And Abram and Nahor took 
them wives: the name of Abram’s wife 
was Sarai; and the name of Nahor’s 
wife, Milcah, the daughter of Haran, 
the father of Milcah, and the father of 
Iscah. 

30. But Sarai was barren; she had 
no child. 

31. And Terah took Abram his son, 
and Lot the son of Haran his son’s 
son, ang Sarai his daughter-in-law, 
his son Abram’s wife; and they went 
forth with them from Ur of the Chal- 
dees, to go into the land of Canaan: 
and they came unto Haran, and dwelt 
there. 


32. And the days of Terah were two 
hundred and five years: and Terah died 
in Haran. 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


323. 


28. Et mortuus est Haran 
coram Thare patre suo in terra 
nativitatis sue, in Ur Chal- 
deze. 

29. Et acceperunt Abram et 
Nachor uxores: nomen uxoris 
Abram, Sarai: et nomen uxo- 
ris Nachor, Milchah, filia Ha- 
ran patris Milchah, et patris 
Ischah. 

30. At fuit autem Sarai 
sterilis : nec erat ei filius. 

31. Tulit autem Thare 
Abram filium suum, et Lot fi- 
lium Haran, filium filii sui, et 
Sarai nurum suam, uxorem 
Abram filii sui: et egressi sunt 
cum eis de Ur Chaldex, ut 
pergerent in terram Chenaan : 
et venerunt usque ad Charan, 
et habitaverunt ibi. 

32. Et fuerunt dies Thare 
quinque et ducenti anni: et 





mortuus est Thare in Charan. 


1. And the whole earth was of one language. Whereas 
mention had before been made of Babylon in a single word, 
Moses now more largely explains whence it derived its name. 
For this is a truly memorable history, in which we may 
perceive the greatness of men’s obstinacy against God, and 
the little profit they receive from his judgments. And although 
at first sight the atrocity of the evil does not appear ; yet the 
punishment which follows it, testifies how highly God was 
displeased with that which these men attempted. They who 
conjecture that the tower was built with the intent that it 
should prove a refuge and protection, if, at any time, God- 
should determine to overwhelm the earth with a deluge, have 
no other guide, that I can see, but the dream of their own 
brain. For the words of Moses signify no such thing: 
nothing, indeed, is here noticed, except their mad ambition, 
and proud contempt of God. ‘ Let us build a tower (they 
say) whose top may reach to heaven, and let us get ourselves 
aname. We see the design and the aim of the undertaking. 
For whatsoever might happen, they wish to have an im- 
mortal name on earth; and thus they build, asif in opposition 
to the will of God. And doubtless ambition not only does . 


324 COMMENTARY UPON CITAP, XI. 


injury to men, but exalts itself even against God. To erect 
a citadel was not in itself so great a crime; but to raise 
an eternal monument to themselves, which might endure 
throughout all ages, was a proof of headstrong pride, joined 
with contempt of God. And hence originated the fable of 
the giants, who, as the poets have feigned, heaped mountains 
upon mountains, in order to drag down Jove from his 
celestial throne. ‘This allegory is not very remote from the 
impious counsel to which Moses alludes; for as soon as 
mortals, forgetful of themselves, are inflated above measure, 
it is certain that, like the giants, they wage war with God. 
This they do not openly profess, yet it cannot be otherwise 
than that every one who transgresses his prescribed bounds, 
makes a direct attack upon God. 

With respect to the time in which this event happened, a 
fragment of Berosus is extant, (if, indeed, Berosus is to be 
accounted the author of such trifles,) where, among other 
things, a hundred and thirty years are reckoned from the 
deluge to the time when they began to build the tower. 
This opinion, though deficient in competent authority, has 
been preferred, by some, to that which commonly obtained 
among the Jews, and which places about three hundred 
and ft years between the deluge and the building of the 
tower. Nor is there anything more plausible in what others 
relate ; namely, that these builders undertook the work, be- 
cause men were even then dispersed far and wide, and many 
colonies were already formed; whence they apprehended 
that as their offspring was daily increasing, they must, in a 
short time, migrate to a still greater distance. But to this 
argument we may oppose the fact, that the peculiar blessing 
of God was to be traced in this multiplication of mankind. 
Moreover, Moses seems to set aside all controversy. For 
after he has mentioned Arphaxad as the third of the sons of 
Shem, he then names Peleg, his great-grandson, in whose 
days the languages were divided. But from a computa- 
tion of the years which he sets down, it plainly appears that 
one century only intervened. It is, however, to be noted, 
that the languages are not said to have been divided imme- 
diately after the birth of Peleg, and that no definite time was 











CHAP. XI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 325 


ever specified.' It must, indeed, have added greatly to the 
weight of Noah’s sufferings, when he heard of this wicked 
counsel, which had been taken by his posterity. And it is 
not to be doubted that he was wounded with the deepest 
grief, when he beheld them, with devoted minds, rushing to 
their own destruction. But the Lord thus exercised the holy 
man, even in extreme old age, to teach us not to be dis- 
couraged by a continual succession of conflicts. If any one 
should prefer the opinion commonly received among the 
Jews; the division of the earth must be referred to the first 
transmigrations, when men began to be distributed in various 
regions: but what has been already recorded in the preced- 
ing chapter, respecting the monarchy of Nimrod, is repug- 
nant to this interpretation.? Still a middle opinion may be 
entertained ; namely, that the confusion of tongues may per- 
haps have happened in the extreme old age of Peleg. Now 
he lived nearly two hundred and forty years; nor will it be 
absurd to suppose that the empire founded by Nimrod en- 
dured two or three centuries. I certainly,—as in a doubtful 
case,—freely admit that a longer space of time might intervene 
between the deluge and the design of buildingthetower. More- 
over, when Moses says, ‘the earth was of one lip,’ he commends 
the peculiar kindness of God, in having willed that the sacred 
bond of society among men far separated from each other 
should be retained, by their possessing a common language 
among themselves. And truly the diversity of tongues is to 
be regarded as a prodigy. For since language is the impress 


1 Yet as the name 95», (Peleg,) signifies division, the probability is, 
that the division took place about the date of his birth, and that the 
name was given him by his parents in consequence of that event. Now 
it appears that Peleg was born in the hundred and first year after the 
flood; see verses11 to 16. This, therefore, seems to set aside Calvin’s 
calculations, doubtingly expressed, respecting the more recent date of the 
confusion of tongues.—Ed. 

2 There is no repugnance, ifit be admitted that the monarchy of Nim- 
rod is mentioned by anticipation in the former chapter, in order that the 
course of the narrative might not be interrupted by a detail of the par- 
ticulars of the confusion of Babel. And then, there is no need for the 
middle opinion which the Author proceeds to state, and which is encum- 
bered with many difficulties. We may easily conceive that the Sacred 
Writer goes back, in the present chapter, to give a detailed account of 
évents, which had been only slightly referred to, or altogether omitted in 
the preceding portion of the narrative.—£d. 


326 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XI. 


of the mind,' how does it come to pass, that men, who are 
partakers of the same reason, and who are born for social 
life, do not communicate with each other in the same lan- 
guage? This defect, therefore, seeing that it is repugnant to ~ 
nature, Moses declares to be adventitious; and pronounces 
the division of tongues to be a punishment, divinely inflicted 
upon men, because they impiously conspired against God. 
Community of language ought to have promoted among > 
them consent in religion ; but this multitude, of whom Moses 
speaks, after they had alienated themselves from the pure 
worship of God, and the sacred assembly of the faithful, 
coalesce to excite war against God. Therefore, by the just 
vengeance of God their tongues were divided. 


2. They found a plain in the land of Shinar. It may be 
conjectured from these words, that Moses speaks of Nimrod 
and of the people whom he had collected around him. If, 
however, we grant that Nimrod was the chief leader in the 
construction of so great a pile, for the purpose of erecting a 
formidable monument of his tyranny: yet Moses expressly 
relates, that the work was undertaken not by the counsel or 
the will of one man only, but that all conspired together, so 
that the blame cannot be cast exclusively upon one, nor 
even upon a few. 7 


3. And they said one to another? That is, they mutually 
exhorted each other; and not only did every man earnestly 
put his own hand to the work, but impelled others also to 
the daring attempt. 

Let us make brick. Moses intimates that they had not been 
induced to commence this work, on account of the ease with 
which it could be accomplished, nor on account of any other ad- 
vantages which presented themselves; herathershows that they 


** Nam quum mentis character sit lingua.” The word character 
means the impression made by a seal upon wax, and the allusion here is 
a very striking one, though the force of it is not adequately conveyed by 
the term impress. The term in Greek is applied to Christ, and is there 
translated ‘‘ express image.” See Heb. i.8.—EHd. 

? “ Dixit vir ad proximum suum,” as it is in the margin of the Eng- 
lish version. ‘ A man said to his neighbour.” 


CHAP. XI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 327 


had contended with great and arduous difficulties ; by which 
means their guilt became the more aggravated. For how is it 
that they harass and wear themselves out in vain on a difficult 
and laborious enterprise, unless that, like madmen, they rush 
impetuously against God? Difficulty often deters us from 
necessary works ; but these men, when they had neither stones 
nor mortar, yet do not scruple to attempt the raising of an 
edifice which may transcend the clouds. We are taught, 
therefore, by this example, to what length the lust of men 
will hurry them, when they indulge their ambition. Even a 
profane poet is not silent on this subject,— 


** Man, rashly daring, full of pride, 
Most covets what is most denied.” ! 


And a little afterwards,— 


** Counts nothing arduous, and tries 
Insanely to possess the skies.” ? 


4. Whose top may reach unto heaven. This is an hyperbo- 
lical form of speech, in which they boastingly extol the lofti- 
ness of the structure they are attempting to raise. And to 
the same point belongs what they immediately subjoin, “ Let 
us make usa name;” for they intimate, that the work would 
be such as should not only be looked upon by the beholders as 
a kind of miracle, but should be celebrated every where to the 
utmost limits of the world. This is the perpetual infatuation 
of the world; to neglect heaven, and to seek immortality on 
earth, where every thing is fading and transient. Therefore, 
their cares and pursuits tend to no other end than that of 
acquiring for themselves a name on earth. David, in the forty- 
ninth psalm, deservedly holds up to ridicule this blind cupi-. 
dity ; and the more, because experience (which is the teacher 
of the foolish) does not restore posterity to a sound mind, 
though instructed by the example of their ancestors; but 


1 Audax omnia perpeti 
Gens humana ruit per vetitum nefas.” 
Hor. Lib. I. Ode 3. 
2 * Nil mortalibus arduum est 
Ceelum ipsum petimus ‘aiaeacat 6 
td. 


a254 ° COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XI. 


the infatuation creeps on through all succeeding ages. The 
saying of Juvenal is known,—‘ Death alone acknowledges how 
insignificant are the bodies of men.’! Yet even death does not 
correct our pride, nor constrain us seriously to confess our 
miserable condition : for often more pride is displayed in fune- 
rals than in nuptial pomp. By such an example, however, we 
are admonished how fitting it is that we should live and die 
humbly. And it is not the least important part of true 
prudence, to have death before our eyes in the midst of life, 
for the purpose of accustoming ourselves to moderation. For 
he who vehemently desires to be great in the world, is first 
contumelious towards men, and at length, his profane pre- 
sumption breaks forth against God himself; so that, after the 
example of the giants, he fights against heaven. 

Lest we be scattered abroad. Some interprotem translate 
the passage thus, ‘ Before we are scattered: but the pecu- 
liarity of the language will not bear this explanation: for the 
men are devising means to meet a danger which they believe 
to be imminent; as if they would say, ‘It cannot be, that 
when our number increases, this region should always hold 
all men; and therefore an edifice must be erected by which 
their name shall be preserved in perpetuity, although they 
should themselves be dispersed in different regions.’ It is 
however asked, whence they derived the notion of their 
future dispersion ? Some conjecture that they were warned of 
it by Noah; who, perceiving that the world had relapsed into 
its former crimes and corruptions, foresaw, at the same tinie, 
by the prophetic» spirit, some terrible dispersion ; and they 
think that the Babylonians, seeing they could not directly 
resist God, endeavoured, by indirect methods, to avert the 
threatened judgment. Others suppose, that these men, by a 
secret inspiration of the Spirit, uttered prophecies concerning 
their own punishment, which they did not themselves under- 
stand. But these expositions are constrained; nor is there 
any reason which requires us to apply what they here say, to 
the curse which was inflicted upon them. They knew that 


te Mors sola fatetur 
Quantula sint hominum corpuscula.” 
Juv. 





‘CHAP, XI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 329 


the earth was formed to be inhabited, and would every where 
supply its abundance for the sustenance of men; and the 
rapid multiplication of mankind proved to them that it was 
not possible for them long to remain shut up within their pre- 
sent narrow limits; wherefore, to whatever other places it 
would be necessary for them to migrate, they design this 
tower to remain as a witness of their origin. 


5. And the Lord came down. The remaining part of the 
history now follows, in which Moses teaches us with what 
ease the Lord could overturn their insane attempts, and 
scatter abroad all their preparations. There is no doubt that 
they strenuously set about what they had presumptuously 
devised. But Moses first intimates that God, for a little 
while, seemed to take no notice of them, in order that, sud- 
denly breaking off their work at its commencement, by the 
confusion of their tongues, he might give the more decisive 
evidence of his judgment. For he frequently bears with the 
wicked, to such an extent, that he not only suffers them to 
contrive many nefarious things, as if he were unconcerned, 
or were taking repose; but even furthers their impious and per- 
verse designs with animating success, in order that he may 
at length cast them down to a lower depth. The descent of 
God, which Moses here records, is spoken of in reference to . 
men rather than to God; who, as we know, does not move 
from place to place. But he intimates that God gradually, and 
as with a tardy step, appeared in the character of an Aven- 
ger. The Lord therefore descended that he might see ; that 
is, he evidently showed that he was not ignorant of the at- 
tempt which the Babylonians were making. 


6. Behold, the people is one. Some thus expound the words, 
that God complains of a wickedness in men so refractory, that 
he excites himself by righteous grief to execute vengeance; 
not that he is swayed by any passions,” but to teach us that 
he is not negligent of human affairs, and that, as he watches 


1 “Sed prius admonet Moses, dissimulasse aliquantisper Deum.” 
2 Non quod in ipsum cadant ulli affectus.” 


350 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP; XI. - 


for the salvation of the faithful, so he is intent on observing 
the wickedness of the ungodly ; as it is said in Psalm xxxiy. 
16, “ The face of the Lord is against them that do eyil, to 
cut off the remembrance of them from the earth.” Others 
think there is a comparison between the less and the greater, 
as if it had been said, ‘They are hitherto few, and only use 
one language; what will they not dare, if, on account of their 
multitude, they should become separated into various nations?’ 
But there rather seems to me to be a suppressed irony, as if 
God would propose to himself a difficult work in subduing 
their audacity: so that the sense may be, ‘ This people is 
compacted together in a firm conspiracy, they communicate 
with each other in the same language, by what method 
therefore can they be broken?’ Nevertheless, he ironically 
smiles at their foolish and hasty confidence; because, while 
men are calculating upon. their own strength, there is nothing 
which they do not arrogate to themselves. 

This they begin to do. In saying that they begin, he inti- 
mates that they make a diligent attempt, accompanied with 
violent fervour, in carrying on the work. Thus, in the way 
of concession, God declares, that supposing matters to be so 
uranged, there would be no interruption of the building. 


7. Go to, let us go down. We have said that Moses has © 
- represented the case to us by the figure hypotyposis,! that the 
judgments of God may be the more clearly illustrated. For 
which reason, he now introduces God as the speaker, who 
declares that the work which they supposed could not be re- 
tarded, shall, without any difficulty, be destroyed. The 
meaning of the words is of this kind, ‘I will not use many 
instruments, I will only blow upon them, and they, through 
the confusion of tongues, shall be contemptibly scattered.’ 
And as they, having collected a numerous band, were con- 
triving how they might reach the clouds; so, on the other 
hand, God summons his troops, by whose interposition he may 


1 Hypotyposis, in rhetoric, a figure whereby a thing is described, or 
painted in such vivid colouring, that it seems to stand before the eyes, and 
to be visible or tangible, rather than the subject of writing, or of dis- 
course.—Ed. 








CHAP. XI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 331 


ward off their fury. It is, however, asked, what troops he 
intends? ‘The Jews think that he addresses himself to the 
angels. But since no mention is made of the angels, and 
God places those to whom he speaks in the same rank with 
himself, this exposition is harsh, and deservedly rejected. 
This passage rather answers to the former, which occurs in 
the account of man’s creation, when the Lord said, “ Let us 
make man after our image.” For God aptly and wisely op- 
poses his own eternal wisdom and power to this great multi- 
tude; as if he had said, that he had no need of foreign auxi- 
liaries, but possessed within himself what would suffice for 
their destruction. Wherefore, this passage is not improperly 
adduced in proof that Three Persons subsist in One Essence 
of Deity. Moreover, this example of Divine vengeance be- 
longs to all ages: for men are always inflamed with the 
desire of daring to attempt what is unlawful. And this his- 
tory shows that God will ever be adverse to such counsels and 
designs ; so that we here behold, depicted before our eyes, 
what Solomon says: ‘ There is no counsel, nor prudence, nor 
strength against the Lord, (Prov. xxi. 30.) Unless the 
blessing of God be present, from which alone we may expect 
a prosperous issue, all that we attempt will necessarily perish. 
Since, then, God declares that he is at perpetual war with 
the unmeasured audacity of men; anything we undertake 
without his approval will end miserably, even though all 
ereatures, above and beneath, should earnestly offer us their 
assistance. Now, although the world bears this curse to the 
present day; yet, in the midst of punishment, and of the 
most dreadful proofs of Divine anger against the pride of 
men, the admirable goodness of God is rendered conspicuous, 
because the nations hold mutual communication among them- 
selves, though in different languages; but especially because He 
has proclaimed one gospel, in all languages, through the whole 
world, and has endued the Apostles with the gift of tongues. 
Whence it has come to pass, that they who before were 
miserably divided, have coalesced in the unity of the faith. 
Tn this sense Isaiah says, that the language of Canaan should 
be common to all under the reign of Christ, (Isaiah xix. 
18;) because, although their language may differ in sound, 


332 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XI. 


they all speak the same thing, while they cry, Abba, Fa- 
ther. 


8. So the Lord scattered them abroad. Men had already 
been spread abroad ; and this ought not to be regarded as a 
punishment, seeing it rather flowed from the benediction and 
grace of God. But those whom the Lord had before distri- 
buted with honour in various abodes, he now ignominiously 
scatters, driving them hither and thither like the members of 
a lacerated body. ‘This, therefore, was not a simple disper- 
sion for the replenishing of the earth, that it might every 
where have cultivators and inhabitants; but a violent rout, 
because the principal bond of conjunction between them was 
cut asunder. 


9. Therefore ts the name of tt called Babel. Behold what 
they gained by their foolish ambition to acquire a name! 
They hoped that an everlasting memorial of their origin 
would be engraven on the tower; God not only frustrates 
their vain expectation, but brands them with eternal disgrace, 
to render them execrable to all posterity, on account of the 
great mischief inflicted on the human race, through their 
fault. They gain, indeed, a name, but not such as they would 
have chosen: thus does God opprobriously cast down the 
pride of those who usurp to themselves honours to which they 
have no title. Here also is refuted the error of those who 
deduce the origin of Babylon from Jupiter Belus.' 


10. These are the generations of Shem. Concerning the 
progeny of Shem, Moses had said something in the former 
chapter: but now he combines with the names of the men, 
the term of their several lives, that we might not be ignorant 
of the age of the world. For unless this brief description 
had been preserved, men at this day would not have known 
how much time intervened between the deluge and the day 

1 455, (Babel,) is derived from $53, (balel,) which signifies to con- 
found. See Schindler’s Lexicon, sub voce 4$y. The name Babel signi- 
fies, as Bishop Patrick says, * confusion; so frivolous is their conceit, 


who make it.to have been called by this name, from Babylon, the son of 
Belus.”-—Ed, 


CITAP. XI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 333 


in which God made his covenant with Abraham. Moreover, 
it is to be observed, that God reckons the years of the world 
from the progeny of Shem, as a mark of honour: just as his- 
torians date their annals by the names of kings or consuls. 
Nevertheless, he has granted this not so much on account of 
the dignity and merits of the family of Shem, as on account 
of his own gratuitous adoption ; for (as we shall immediately 
see) a great part of the posterity of Shem apostatized from 
the true worship of God. For which reason, they deserved 
not only that God should expunge them from his calendar, 
but should entirely take them out of the world. But he too 
highly esteems that election of his, by which he separated 
this family from all people, to suffer it to perish on account 
of the sins of men. And therefore from the many sons of 
Shem he chooses Arphaxad alone; and from the sons of Ar- 
phaxad, Selah alone; and from him also, Eber alone; till he 
comes to Abram; the calling of whom ought to be accounted 
the renovation of the Church. As it concerns the rest, it 
is probable that before the century was completed, they fell 
into impious superstitions. For when God brings it as a 
charge against the Jews, that their fathers Terah and Nahor 
served strange gods, (Josh. xxiv. 2,) we must still remember, 
that the house of Shem, in which they were born, was the 
peculiar sanctuary of God, where pure religion ought most to 
have flourished ; what then, do we suppose, must have hap- 
pened to others, who might seem, from the very first, to 
have been emancipated from this service? Hence truly ap- 
pears, not only the prodigious wickedness and depravity, 
but also the inflexible hardness of the human mind. Noah 
and his sons, who had been eye-witnesses of the deluge, were 
yet living: the narration of that history ought to have in- 
spired men with not less terror than the visible appearance 
of God himself: from infancy they had been embued with 
those elements of religiousinstruction, which relate to the man- 
ner in which God was to be worshipped, the reverence with 
which his word was to be obeyed, and the severe vengeance 
which remains for those who should violate the order pre- 
scribed by him: yet they could not be restrained from being 
so corrupted by their vanity, that they entirely apostatized. 


334 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XI. 


In the meantime, there is no doubt that holy Noah, accord- 
ing to his extraordinary zeal and heroic fortitude, would con- 
tend in every way for the maintenance of God’s glory: and 
that he sharply and severely inveighed, yea, fulminated 
against the perfidious apostacy of his descendants; and 
whereas all ought to have trembled at his very look, they are 
yet moved by no chidings, however loud, from proceeding in 
the course into which their own fury has hurried them. 
From this mirror, rather than from the senseless flatteries of 
sophists, let us learn how fruitful is the corruption of our 
nature. But if Noah and Shem, and other such eminent 
teachers, could not, by contending most courageously, 
prevent the prevalence of impiety in the world; let us not 
wonder, if at this day also, the unbridled lust of the world 
rushes to impious and perverse modes of worship, against all 
the obstacles interposed by sound doctrine, admonition, and 
threats. Here, however, we must. observe, in these holy 
men, how firm was the strength of their faith, how indefati- 
gable their patience, how persevering their cultivation of 
piety ; since they never gave way, on account of the many 
occasions of offence with which they had to contend. Luther 
very properly compares the incredible torments, by which they 
were necessarily afflicted, to many martyrdoms. For such an 
alienation of their descendants from God did not less affect 
their minds, than if they had seen their own bowels not only la- 
cerated and torn, but cast into the mire of Satan, and into hell 
itself. But while the world was thus filled with ungodly 
men, God wonderfully retained a few under obedience to his 
word, that he might preserve the Church from destruction. 
And although we have said that the father and grandfather 
of Abraham were apostates, and that, probably, the defection 
did not first begin with them; yet, because the Church, by 
the election of God, was included in that race, and because 
God had some who worshipped him in purity, and who sur- 
vived even to the time of Abraham, Moses deduces a conti- 
nuous line of descent, and thus enrols them in the catalogue of 
saints. Whence we infer, (as I have a little before observed,) 
in what highestimation God holds the Church, which, though 
so small in number, is yet preferred to the whole world. 


CHAP. XI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 335 


Shem was an hundred years old. Since Moses has placed 
Arphaxad the third in order among the sons of Shen, it is 
asked how this agrees with his having been born in the se- 
cond year after the deluge? ‘The answer is easy. It can- 
not be exactly ascertained, from the catalogues which Moses 
recites, at what time each was born; because sometimes the 
priority of place is assigned to one, who yet was posterior in 

the order of birth. Others answer, that there is nothing 
absurd in supposing Moses to declare that, after the comple- 
tion of two years, a third son was born. But the solution I 
have given is more genuine. 


27. Terah begat Abram. Here also Abram is placed first 
among his brethren, not (as I suppose) because he was the 
first-born; but because Moses, intent on the scope of his 
history, was not very careful in the arrangement of the sons 
of Terah. It is also possible that he had other sons. For, 
the reason why Moses speaks especially of them is obvious ; 
namely, on account of Lot, and of the wives of Isaac and 
Jacob. I will now briefly state why I think Abram was not 
the first-born. Moses shortly afterwards says, that Haran 
died in his own country, before his father left Chaldea, and 
went to Charran.1 But Abram was seventy-five years old 
when he departed from Charran to dwell in the land of 
Canaan.” And this number of seventy-five years is expressly 
given after the death of Terah. Now, if we suppose that 
Abram was born in his father’s seventieth year, we must also 
allow that we have lost sixty years of Terah’s age; which is 
most absurd. The conjecture of Luther, that God buried that 


1 There is evidently a mistake in the original, as it appears in the 
Amsterdam edition of 1671, andin the Berlin edition, by Hengstenberg, 
of 1838. Terah’s name is here put instead of Haran’s, thus, ‘ Thare 
paulo post dicet Moses in patria mortuum esse,’ &c. The Old English 
translation has kept the name, and made nonsense of the passage; but 
Calvin’s French version is right: ‘ Moyse dira un peu apres, que Haran 
mourut en sen pays, devant que Thare son pere s’en allast demeurer en 
Charran.’—See verse 28.—Ed. 

2 See chapter xii. verse 4. 

3 Supposing Terah to be 70 years old at the birth of Abram, and 
Abram 75 at the death of Terah; it would make Terah 145 years 
old when he died, instead of 205, which is a loss of 60 years. The in- 


336 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XT. 


time in oblivion, in order to hide from us the end of the 
world, in the first place is frivolous, and in the next, may be 
refuted by solid and convincing arguments. Others violently 
wrest the words to apply them to a former egress; and think 
that helived together with his father at Charran for sixty years; 
which is most improbable. For to what end should they have 
protracted their stay so long in the midst of their journey? But 
there is no need of laborious discussion. Moses issilentrespect- 
ing the age of Abraham when he left his own country; but 
says, that in the seventy-fifth year of his age, he came into the 
land of Canaan, when his father, having reached the two 
hundredth and fifth year of his life, had died. Who will not 
hence infer that he was born when his father had attained his 
one hundredth and thirtieth year?! But he is named first 
among those sons whom Terah is said to have begotten, when 
he himself was seventy years old. I grant it; but this order 
of recital does nothing towards proving the order of birth, 
as we have already said. Nor, indeed, does Moses declare 
in what year of his life Terah begat sons; but only that he 
had passed the above age before he begat the three sons 
here mentioned. Therefore, the age of Abraham is to be 
ascertained by another mode of computation, namely, from 
the fact that Moses assigns to him the age of seventy-five 
when his father died, whose life had reached to two hundred 
and five years. A firm and valid argument is also deduced 


ference, therefore, is, that Abram was not the first-born of the sons men- 
tioned. See also Patrick’s Commentary, who says, that Terah “‘ was 
seventy years old before he had any children; and then had three sons, 
one after another, who are not set down in the order wherein they were 
born. For Abraham’s being first named doth not prove him to have 
been the eldest son of Terah, no more than Shem’s being first named 
atmnong Noah’s three sons proves him to have been the first-born. For 
there are good reasons to prove that Abraham was born sixty years after 
Haran, who was the eldesé son; having two daughters married to his 
two brothers, Nahor and Abraham ; who seems to have been the youngest 
though named first.” Le Clerc controverts this view, but it seems the 
most free from objections. See, however, his Commentary on Genesis xii. 
1 and 4.—Ed. 

1 Another palpable numerical mistake in the Amsterdam edition, which 
is also perpetuated in that of Hengstenberg, is here corrected as the sense 
requires, and under the sanction of the French and Old English versions. 
In the Latin text it is: ‘t Quis non inde colliget natum fuisse quum pater 
centessimum annum attigisset ? "—Ed. 





CHAP. XI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 337 


from the age of Sarai. It appears that she was not more 
than ten years younger than Abraham. If she was the 
daughter of his younger brother, she would necessarily 
have equalled her own father in age.'| They who raise an 
objection, to the effect that she was the daughter-in-law, or 
only the adopted daughter of Nahor, produce nothing be- 
yond a sheer cavil. 


_ 28. And Haran died. Haran is said to have died before 
the face of his father; because he left his father the survivor. 
It is also said that he died in his country, that is,in Ur. The 
Jews turn the proper name into an appellative, and say that 
‘he died in the fire. For, as they are bold in forging fables, they 
pretend that he, with his brother Abram, were thrown by the 
Chaldeans into the fire, because they shunned idolatry ; but 
that Abram escaped by the constancy of his faith. The 
twenty-fourth chapter of Joshua, however, which I have 
cited above, openly declares, that this whole family was not 
less infected with superstitions than the country itself. I 
confess, indeed, that the name Ur is derived from fire: names, 
however, are wont to be assigned to cities, either from their 
situation, or from some particularevent. Itis possible that they 
there cherished the sacred fire, or that the splendour of the 
sun was more conspicuous than in other places. Others will 
have it, that the city was so named, because it was situated 
in a valley, for the Hebrews call valleys D4, (Uraim.’) 
But there is no reason why we should be very anxious about 
such a matter: let it suffice, that Moses, speaking of the 
country of Abram, immediately afterwards declares it to 
have been Ur of the Chaldeans. 


30. But Sarat was barren. Not only does he say that 
Abram was without children, but he states the reason, namely, 


1 Or at least nearly so. ‘Ergo Haran (si junior fuisset Abrahamo) 
eam genuisset nondum deceni (imo nec octo) annos natus.”—Lightfoot et 
alii in Poli Synopsi. See, however, Lightfoot’s Hebrew and Talmudical 
Ezxercitations upon the Acts, in his Works, vol. ii. p. 666. Fol. London, 
1684.—Ed. 

2 Vide Schindler, sub voce >y~, col. 42, line 54; but it is doubtful 
whether any clear evidence of such a meaning of the word can be adduced. 
—Ld. ! 


west. F, ¥ 


338 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XI. 


the sterility of his wife; in order to show that it was by 
nothing short of an extraordinary miracle that she afterwards 
bare Isaac, as we shall declare more fully in its proper place. 
Thus was God pleased to humble his servant ; and we cannot 
doubt that Abram would suffer severe pain through this priva- 
tion. He sees the wicked springing up everywhere, in great 
numbers, to cover the earth; he alone is deprived of children. 
And although hitherto he was ignorant of his own future 
vocation ; yet God designed in his person, as in a mirror, to 
make it evident, whence and in what manner his Church should 
arise ; for at that time it lay hid, as in a dry root under 


the earth. 


31. And Terah took Abram his son. Here the next chapter 
ought to commence ; because Moses begins to treat of one of 
the principal subjects of his book; namely, the calling of 
Abram. For he not only relates that Terah changed his 
country, but he also explains the design and the end of his 
departure, that he left his native soil, and entered on his 
journey, in order to come to the land of Canaan. Whence 
the inference is easily drawn, that he was not so much the 
leader or author of the journey, as the companion of his son. | 

And it is no obstacle to this inference, that Moses assigns 
the priority to Terah, as if Abram had departed under his 
auspices and direction, rather than by the command of God: 
for this is an honour conferred upon the father’s name. Nor 
do I doubt that Abram, when he saw his father willingly 
obeying the calling of God, became in return the more 
obedient to him. Therefore, it is ascribed to the authority 
of the father, that he took his son with him. For, that 
Abram had been called of God before he moved a foot from 
his native soil, will presently appear too plain to be denied. 
We do not read that his father had been called. It may 
therefore be conjectured, that the oracle of God had been 
made known to Terah by the relation of his son. For the divine 
command to Abram respecting his departure, did not prohibit 
him from informing his father, that his only reason for leay- 
ing him was, that he preferred the command of God to all 
human obligations. These two things, indeed, without con- 


CILAP. XII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 309 


troversy, we gather from the words of Moses; that Abram 
was divinely called, before Terah left his own country : and 
that Terah had no other design than that of coming into the 
land of Canaan; that is, of joining his son as a voluntary 
companion. Therefore, I conclude, that he had left his 
country a short time before his death. For it is absurd to 
suppose, that when he departed from his own country, to go 
directly to the land of Canaan, he should have remained sixty 
years a stranger in a foreign land. It is more probable, that 
being an old man worn out with years, he was carried off by 
disease and weariness. And yet it may be, that God held 
them a little while in suspense, because Moses says he dwelt 
in Charran; but from what follows, it appears that the delay 
was not long: since, in the seventy-fifth year of his age, 
Abram departed thence; and he had gone thither already 
advanced in age, and knowing that his: wife was barren. 
Moreover, the town which by the Hebrews is called Charran, 
is declared by all writers, with one consent, to be Charran, 
situated in Mesopotamia; although Lucan, poetically rather 
than truly, places it in Assyria. The place was celebrated for 
the destruction of Crassus, and the overthrow of the Roman 
army.! 


CHAPTER XII. 


1. Now the Lord had said unto Abram, 
Get thee out of thy country, and from 
thy kindred, and from thy father’s house, 
unto a land that I will show thee: 


2. And I will make of thee a great na- 

tion, and I will bless thee, and make thy 
name great; and thou shalt be a bless- 
ing: 
3. And I will bless them that hless 
thee, and curse him that curseth thee: 
and in thee shall all families of the 
earth be blessed. 


1. Dixerat autem Jehova ad 
Abram, Abi e terra tua, et e-. 
cognatione tua, et e domo pa- 
tris tui, ad terram quam osten- 
dam tibi. 

2. Et faciam te in gentem 
magnam, et benedicam tibi, et 
magnificabo nomen tuum, et 
eris benedictio. 

3. Et benedicam benedicen- 
tibus tibi: et maledicentibus 
tibi maledicam: et benedicen- 
tur in te omnes familiz terre. 


1 See Wells’ Geography of the Old Test., chap. vi. sub sine, and 
D’Anyille’s Compendium, vol. i. 486.—Zd. 


340 


4. So Abram departed, as the Lord 
had spoken unto him; and Lot went 
with him: and Abram was seventy and 
five years old when he departed out of 
Haran. ‘ 


5. And Abram took Saraihis wife, and 
Lot his brother’s son, and all their sub- 
stance that they had gathered, and the 
souls that they had gotten in Haran; 
and they went forth to go into the land 
of Canaan; and into the land of Canaan 
they came. 


6. And Abram passed through the 
land unto the place of Sichem, unto the 
plain of Moreh. And the Canaanite was 
then in the land. 


7. And the Lord appeared unto Abram, 
and said, Unto thy seed will I give this 
land: and there builded he an altar unto 
the Lord, who appeared unto him. 


-8. And he removed from thence unto 
a mountain on the east of Beth-el, and 
pitched his tent, having Beth-el on the 
west, and Hai on the east: and there he 
builded an altar unto the Lord, and call- 
ed upon the name of the Lord. 


9. And Abram journeyed, going on 
still toward the south. 


10. And there was a famine in the 
land: and Abram went down into Egypt 
to sojourn there; for the famine was 
grievous in the land. 

11. And it came to pass, when he was 
come near to enter into Egypt, that he 
said unto Sarai his wife, Behold now, I 
know that thou art a fair woman to look 
upon : : 

12. Therefore it shall come to pass, 
when the Egyptians shall see thee, that 
they shall say, This zs his wife: and they 
will kill me, but they will save thee 
alive. 

13. Say, I pray thee, thou art my 
sister: that it may be well with me for 
thy sake ; and my soul shall live because 
of thee. 

14. And it came to pass, that, when 
Abram was come into Egypt, the Egyp- 


COMMENTARY UPON 


CHAP, XII. 


4, Abiit ergo Abram quem- 
admodum loquutus fuerat ad 
eum Jehova: et perrexit cum 
eo Lot: Abram autem erat 
filius quinque annorum et sep- 
tuaginta annorum, quando eg- 
ressus est de Charan. 

5. Et cepit Abram Sarai 
uxorem suam, et Lot filium 
fratris sui, et omnem substan- 
tiam quam acquisierant, et 
animas quas fecerant in Char- 
an, et egressi sunt ut pergerent 
in terram Chenaan, et vene- 
runt ad terram Chenaan. 

6. Et transivit Abram in 
terram usque ad locum Sechem, 
usque ad quercum Moreh: 
Chenaanzus autem tunc erat 
in terra. 

7. Et. visus est Jehova 
Abre, et dixit, Semini tuo 
dabo terram hance: et edi- 
ficavit ibi altare Jehovee qui 
apparuerat sibi. 

8. Et transtulit se inde ad 
montem ab Oriente ipsi Bethel, 
tetenditque tabernaculum su- 
um: Bethel erat ab Occi- 
dente, et Hai ab Oriente: et 
edificavit ibi altare Jehova, 
et invocavit nomen Jehove. 

9. Profectus est et Abram 
eundo et proficiscendo ad 
Meridiem. 

10. Et fuit fames in terra, 
et descendit Abram in Augyp- 
tum ut peregrinaretur ibi : quia 
gravis fames erat in terra. 

11. Et fuit, quando appro- 
pinquavit ut ingrederetur 
JEgyptum, dixit ad Sarai ux- 
orem suam, Ecce, nune novi 
quod wulier pulchra aspectu sis: 

12. Erit itaque, quum vide- 
rint te Agyptii, dicent, Uxor 
ejus est: et occident me, et te 
servabunt vivam. 


13. Dic nunc quod soror mea 
sis, ut bene sit mihi propter te, 
et vivat anima mea propter te. 


14, Et fuit quum ingredere - 
tur Abram Aigyptum, vide- 


CHAP, XII. 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


34] 


tians beheld the woman, that she was runt Agyptii mulierem quod 


very fair. 

15. The princes also of Pharaoh saw 
her, and commended her before Pharaoh : 
and the woman was taken into Pharaoh’s 
house. 


16. And he entreated Abram well for 
her sake: and he had sheep, and oxen, 
and he-asses, and men-servants, and 
maid-servants, and _ she-asses, and 
camels. 

17. And the Lord plagued Pharaoh 
and his house with great plagues, because 
of Sarai, Abram’s wife. 


18. And Pharaoh called Abram, and 
said, What zs this that thou hast done 
unto me? why didst thou not tell me 
that she was thy wife? 

19. Why saidst thou, She zs my sis- 
ter ? so I might have taken her to me to 
wife: now therefore behold thy wife, 
take her, and go thy way. 

20. And Pharaoh commanded his 
men concerning him: and they sent 
<= away, and his wife, and all that he 
had. 


pulchra esset valde. 

15. Quum igitur vidissent 
eam principes Pharaonis, laud~ 
averunt eam Pharaoni: et 
sublata est mulier in domum 


- Pharaonis. 


16. Et ipsi Abram benefecit 
propter eam: fueruntque ei 
pecudes, et boves, et asini, et 
servi, et ancillz, et asine, et 
cameli. 

17. Percussit autem Jehova 
Pharaonem __ percussionibus 
magnis et domum ejus, causa 
Sarai uxoris Abram. 

18. Vocavitque Pharao 
Abram, et dixit, Cur hoc, fecis- 
ti mihi? utquid non indicasti 
mihi quod uxor tua esset ? 

19. Utquid dixisti, Soror 
mea est? et tuli eam mihi in 
uxorem: et nunc ecce uxor 
tua, cape et vade. 

20. Et precepit super eum 
Pharao viris, et demiserunt 
eum et uxorem ejus, et omnia 
que erant ei. 





1. Now the Lord had said unto Abram. That an absurd 
division of these chapters may not trouble the readers, let them 
connect this sentence with the last two verses of the previous 
chapter. Moses had before said, that Terah and Abram had 
departed from their country to dwell in the land of Canaan. 
He now explains that they had not been impelled by 
levity, as rash and fickle men are wont to be; nor had been 
drawn to other regions by disgust with their own country, as 
morose persons frequently are; nor were fugitives on account 
of crime; nor were led away by any foolish hope, or by any 
allurements, as many are hurried hither and thither by their 
own desires; but that Abram had been divinely command- 
ed to go forth, and had not moved a foot but as he was 
guided by the word of God. They who explain the passage 
to mean, that God spoke to Abram after the death of his fa- 
ther, are easily refuted by the very words of Moses: for if 
Abram was already without a country, and was sojourning 
as a stranger elsewhere, the command of God would have 


342 COMMENTARY UPON: CHAP. XII. 


= 

been superfluous, ‘ Depart from thy land, from thy country, 
and from thy father’s house.’ The authority of Stephen is 
also added, who certainly deserves to be accounted a suitable 
interpreter of this passage: now he plainly testifies, that God 
appeared to Abraham when he was in Mesopotamia, before 
he dwelt in Charran; he then recites this oracle which we 
are now explaining; and at length concludes, that, for this 
reason, Abraham migrated from Chaldea. Nor is that to be 
overlooked which God afterwards repeats, (xv. 7,) ‘I am the 
Lord that brought thee out of Ur of the Chaldees ;’ for we 
thence infer, that the Divine Hand was not for the first time 
stretched out to him after he had dwelt in Charran, but 
while he yet remained at home in Chaldea.’’ Truly this 
command of God, respecting which doubts are foolishly 
entertained, ought to be deemed by us sufficient to disprove 
the contrary error. For God could not have spoken thus, 
except to a man who had been, up to that time, settled in 
his nest, having his affairs underanged, and living quietly and 
tranquilly among his relatives, without any change in his 
mode of life; otherwise, the answer would have been readily 
given, ‘I have left my country, | am far removed from my 
kindred” In short, Moses records this oracle, in order that — 
we may know that this long journey was undertaken by 
Abram, and his father Terah, at the command of God. 
Whence it also appears, that Terah was not so far deluded 
by superstitions as to be destitute of the fear of God. It 
was difficult for the old man, already broken and failing in 
health, to tear himself away from his own country. Some 
true religion, therefore, although smothered, still remained 
in his mind. Therefore, when he knew that the place, from 
which his son was commanded to depart, was accursed, it 
was his wish not to perish there ; but he joined himself as an 
associate with him whom the Lord was about to deliver. 
What a witness, I demand, will he prove, in the last day, to 
condemn our indolence! LHasy and plausible was the excuse 

1 Many learned commentators, Dr A. Clarke among the number, sup- 
pose this to have been a second call from God, and to have taken place 


when he was at Charran. But the objections adduced by Calvin against 
such an interpretation are of great weight, and cannot be easily set aside. 
d. 


CHAP, XII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 343 


which he might have alleged; namely, that he would remain 
quietly at home, because he had received no command. But 
he, though blind in the darkness of unbelief, yet opened his 
eyes to the beam of light which shot across his path; while 
we remain unmoved when the Divine vocation directly shines 
upon us. Moreover, this calling of Abram is a signal instance 
of the gratuitous mercy of God. Had Abram been before- 
hand with God by any merit of works? Had Abram come 
to him, or conciliated his favour? nay, we must ever recall 
to mind, (what I have before adduced from the passage in 
Joshua,) that he was plunged in the filth of idolatry; and 
now God freely stretches forth his hand to bring back the 
wanderer. He deigns to open his sacred mouth, that he may 
show to one, deceived by Satan’s wiles, the way of salvation. 
And it is wonderful, that a man, miserable and lost, should 
have the preference given him, over so many holy worshippers 
of God; that the covenant of life should be placed in his 
possession ; that the Church should be revived in him, and 
he himself constituted the father of all the faithful. But 
this is done designedly, in order that the manifestation of the 
grace of God might become the more conspicuous in his 
person. For he is an example of the vocation of us all; for 
in him we perceive, that, by the mere mercy of God, those 
things which are not are raised from nothing, in order that 
they may begin to be something. 

Get thee out of thy country. This accumulation of words ~ 
may seem to be superfluous. To which also may be added, 
that Moses, in other places so concise, here expresses a plain 
and easy matter in three different forms of speech. But the 
case is quite otherwise. For since exile is in itself sorrowful, 
and the sweetness of their native soil holds nearly all men 
bound to itself, God strenuously persists in his command to 
leave the country, for the purpose of thoroughly penetrating 
the mind of Abram. If he had said in a single word, Leave 
thy country, this indeed would not lightly have pained his 
mind; but Abram is still more deeply affected, when he 
hears that he must renounce his kindred and his father’s 
house. Yet it is not to be supposed, that God takes a cruel 
pleasure in the trouble of his servants; but he thus tries all 


344 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XII. 


their affections, that he may not leave any lurking-places 
undiscovered in their hearts. 'Wesee many persons zealous 
for a short time, who afterwards become frozen; whence is 
this, but because they build without a foundation? There-— 
fore God determined, thoroughly to rouse all the senses of 
Abram, that he might undertake nothing rashly or incon- 
siderately ; lest, repenting soon afterwards, he should veer 
with the wind, and return. Wherefore, if we desire to follow 
God with constancy, it behoves us carefully to meditate on 
all the inconveniences, all the difficulties, all the dangers 
which await us; that not only a hasty zeal may produce 
fading flowers, but that from a deep and well-fixed root of 
piety, we may bring forth fruit in our whole life. 

Unto a land that I will show thee. ‘This is another test to 
prove the faith of Abram. For why does not God imme- 
diately point out the land, except for the purpose of keeping 
his servant in suspense, that he may the better try the truth 
of his attachment to the word of God? as if he would say, 
‘I command thee to go forth with closed eyes, and forbid 
thee to inquire whither I am about to lead thee, until, having 
renounced thy country, thou shalt have given thyself wholly 
tome. And this is the true proof of our obedience, when 
we are not wise in our own eyes, but commit ourselves entirely 
unto the Lord. Whensoever, therefore, he requires anything 
of us, we must not be so solicitous about success, as to allow 
fear and anxiety to retard our course. For it is better, with 
closed eyes, to follow God as our guide, than, by relying on 
our own prudence, to wander through those circuitous paths 
which it devises for us. Should any one object, that this 
statement is at variance with the former sentence, in which 
Moses declared that Terah and Abram departed from their 
own country, that they might come into the land of Canaan : 
the solution is easy, if we admit a prolepsis' in the expression 
of Moses; such as follows in this very chapter, in the use of 
the name Bethel; and such as frequently occurs in the Serip- 


1 Prolepsis is the figure which anticipates in the discourse something 
still future ; as when the word Bethel is used to designate the place which 
at the time was called Luz, and which did not receive this name till it 
was given by Jacob.— Ld. 


CHAP, XII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 345 


tures. They knew not whither they were going; but 
because they had resolved to go whithersoever God might 
eall them, Moses, speaking in his own person, mentions the 
land, which, though hitherto unknown to them both, was after- 
wards revealed to Abram alone. It is therefore true, that they 
departed with the design of coming to the land of Canaan ; 
because, having received the promise concerning a land which 
was to be shown them, they suffered themselves to be go- 
verned by God, until he should actually bestow what he had 
promised. Nevertheless it may be, that God, having proved 
the devotedness of Abram, soon afterwards removed all 
doubt from his mind. For we do not know at what precise 
moment of time, God would intimate to him, what it was his 
will to conceal only for aseason. Itis enough that Abram de- 
clared himself to be truly obedient to God, when, having cast 
all his care on God’s providence, and having discharged, as it 
were, into His bosom, whatever might have impeded him, he 
did not hesitate to leave his own country, uncertain where, at 
length, he might plant his foot; for, by this method, the 
wisdom of the flesh was reduced to order, and all his affec- 
tions, at the same time, were subdued. Yet it may be asked, 
why God sent his servant into the land of Canaan rather 
than into the East, where he could have lived with some 
other of the holy fathers? Some (in order that the change 
may not seem to have been made for the worse) will have it, 
that he was led thither, for the purpose of dwelling with his 
ancestor Shem, whom they imagine to have been Melchizedek. 
But if such were the counsel of God, it is strange that Abram 
bent his steps in a different direction; nay, we do not read 
that he met with Melchizedek, till he was returning from the 
battle in the plain of Sodom. But, in its proper place, we shall 
see how frivolous is the imagination, that Melchizedek was 
Shem. As it concerns the subject now in hand, we infer, 
from the result which at length followed, that God’sdesign was 
very different from what these men suppose. The nations 
of Canaan, on account of their deplorable wickedness, were 
devoted to destruction. God required his servant to sojourn 
among them for a time, that, by faith, he might perceive 
himself to be the heir of that land, the actual possession of 


316 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XII. 


which was reserved for his posterity to a long period after 
his own death. Wherefore he was commanded to cross over 
into that country, for this sole reason, that it was to be eva- 
cuated by its inhabitants, for the purpose of being given to 
his seed for a possession. And it was of great importance, 
that Abram, Isaac, and Jacob, should be strangers in that 
land, and should by faith embrace the dominion over it, 
which had been divinely promised them, in order that their 
posterity might, with the greater courage, gird themselves to 
take possession of it. 


2. And I will make of thee a great nation. Hitherto Moses 
has related what Abram had been commanded to do; now 
he annexes the promise of God to the command; and that 
for no light cause. For as we are slothful to obey, the Lord 
would command in vain, unless we are animated by a super- 
added confidence in his grace and benediction. Although I 
have before alluded to this, in the history of Noah, it will not 
be useless to inculcate it again, for the passage itself requires 
something to be said ; and the repetition of a doctrine of such 
great moment ought not to seem superfluous. For it is 
certain that faith cannot stand, unless it be founded on the © 
promises of God. But faith alone produces obedience. 
Therefore, in order that our minds may be disposed to follow 
God, it is not sufficient for him simply to command what he 
pleases, unless he also promises his blessing. We must mark 
the promise, that Abram, whose wife was still barren, should 
become a great nation. This promise might have been very 
efficacious, if God, by the actual state of things, had afforded 
ground of hope respecting its fulfilment; but now, seeing 
that the barrenness of his wife threatened him with perpetual 
privation of offspring, the bare promise itself would have been 
cold, if Abram had not wholly depended upon the word of 
God; wherefore, though he perceives the sterility of his 
wife, he yet apprehends, by hope, that great nation which is 
promised by the word of God. And Isaiah greatly extols 
this act of favour, that God, by his blessing, increased his 
servant Abram, whom he found alone and solitary, to so 
great a nation, (Isaiah u. 2.) The noun %)j, (goi,) “my 





CHAP. XII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 347 


nation,” (ver. 4,) though detestable to the Jews,’ is in this 
place, as in many others, taken as a term of honour. And 
it is here used emphatically, to show that he should not only 
have posterity from his own seed in great number, but a 
peculiar people, separated from others, who should be called 
by his own name. 

I will bless thee. This is partly added, to explain the preced- 
ing sentence. For, lest Abram should despair, God offers his 
own blessing, which was able to effect more in the way of mi 
racle, than isseen to be effected, in other cases, by natural means. 
The benediction, however, here pronounced, extends farther 
than to offspring ; and implies, that he should have a prosper- 
ous and joyous issue of all his affairs ; as appears from the suc- 
ceeding context, “ And will make thy name great, and thou 
shalt bea blessing.” For such happiness is promised him, as 
_ shall fill all men everywhere with admiration, so that they shall 
_ introduce the name of Abram, as an example, into their for- 
mularies of pronouncing benediction. Others use the term in 
the sense of augmentation, ‘Thou shalt be a blessing,’ that 
is, All shall bless thee.” But the former sense is the more 
suitable. Some also expound it actively, as if it had been 
said, ‘ My grace shall not reside in thee, so that thou alone 
mayest enjoy it, but it shall flow far unto all nations. I 
therefore now so deposit it with thee, that it may overflow 
into all the world.” But God does not yet proceed to that 
communication, as I shall show presently. 


3. And I will bless them that bless thee. Here the extraor- 
dinary kindness of God manifests itself, in that-he familiarly 
makes a covenant with Abram, as men are wont to do with: 
their companions and equals. For this is the accustomed 
form of covenants between kings and others, that they mu- 
tually promise to have the same enemies and the same friends. 
This certainly is an inestimable pledge of special love, that 


1 The dislike which the Jews have to this word arises from the fact, 
that they confine its application to heathens, barbarians, and Christians, 
in short, to all who are not of Israel according to the flesh. They are 
not, however, warranted by Scripture in so doing, as Calvin rightly 
argues.—Ed. 


348 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XII. 


God should so greatly condescend for our sake. For although 
he here addresses one man only, he elsewhere declares the 
same affection towards his faithful people. We may therefore 
infer this general doctrine, that God so embraces us with his 
favour, that he will bless our friends, and take vengeance on 
our enemies. We are, moreover, warned by this passage, 
that however desirous the sons of God may be of peace, they 
will never want enemies. Certainly, of all persons who ever 
conducted themselves so peaceably among men as to deserve 
the esteem of all, Abram might be reckoned among the 
chief, yet even he was not without enemies; because he had 
the devil for his adversary, who holds the wicked in his hand, 
whom he incessantly impels to molest the good. There is, 
then, no reason why the ingratitude of the world should dis- 
hearten us, even though many hate us without cause, and, when 
provoked by no injury, study to do us harm; but let us be con- 
tent with this single consolation, that God engages on our side 
in the war. Besides, God exhorts his people to cultivate fide- 
lity and humanity with all good men, and, further, to abstain 
from all injury. For this is no common inducement to excite 
us to assist the faithful, that if we discharge any duty towards 
them, God will repay it; nor ought it less to alarm us, that he » 
denounces war against us, if we hurt any one belonging to him. 

In thee shall all families of the earth be blessed. Should any 
one choose to understand this passage in a restricted sense, 
as if, by a proverbial mode of speech, they who shall bless 
their children or their friends, shall be called after the name 
of Abram, let him enjoy his opinion ; for the Hebrew phrase 
will bear the interpretation, that Abram shall be called a signal 
example of happiness. But I extend the meaning further; 
because I suppose the same thing to be promised in this place, 
which God afterwards repeats more clearly, (xx. 18.) And 
the authority of Paul brings me to this point; who says, that 
the promise to the seed of Abraham, that is, to Christ, was 
given four hundred and thirty years before the law, (Gal. iii. 
17.) But the computation of years requires us to understand, 
that the blessing was promised him in Christ, when he was 
coming into the land of Canaan, Therefore God (in my 
judgment) pronounces that all nations should be blessed in 





eRe. e? “ 


CHAP. XII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 349 


his servant Abram, because Christ was included in his loins. 
In this manner, he not only intimates that Abram would be 
an example, but a cause of blessing ; so that there should be 
an understood antithesis between Adam and Christ. For 
whereas, from the time of the first man’s alienation from God, 
we are all born accursed, here a new remedy is offered unto 
us. Nor is there any thing contrary to this in the assertion, 
that we must by no means seek a blessing in Abram himself, 
inasmuch as the expression is used in reference to Christ. 
Here the Jews petulantly object, and heap together many 
testimonies of Scripture, from which it appears, that to bless 
or curse in any one, is nothing else than to wish good or evil 
to another, according to him as a pattern. But their cavil 
may be set asile without difficulty. I acknowledge, that 
what they say is often, but not always true. For when it is 
said, that the tribe of Levi shall bless in the name of God, 
in Deut. x. 8; Isa. Ixv. 16, and in similar passages, it is suf- 
ficiently evident, that God is declared to be the fountain of 
all good, in order that Israel may not seek any portion of 
good elsewhere. Seeing, therefore, that the language is am- 
biguous, let them grant the necessity of choosing this, or the 
other sense, as may be most suitable to the subject and the 
occasion. Now Paul assumes it as an axiom which is re- 
ceived among all the pious, and which ought to be taken for 
granted, that the whole human race is obnoxious to a curse, 
and therefore that the holy people are blessed only through 
the grace of the Mediator. Whence he concludes, that the 
covenant of salvation which God made with Abram, is neither 
stable nor firm except in Christ. I therefore thus interpret 
the present place ; that God promises to his servant Abram 
that blessing which shall afterwards flow down to all people. 
But because this subject will be more amply explained else- 
where, I now only briefly touch upon it, 


4, So Abram departed. They who suppose that God was 
now speaking to Abram in Charran, lay hold of these words 
in support of their error. But the cavil is easily refuted ; 
for after Moses has mentioned the cause of their departure, 


350 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XII. 


namely, that Abram had been constrained by the command 
of God to leave his native soil, he now returns to the thread 
of the history. Why Abram for a time should have remained 
in Charran, we do not know, except that God laid his hand 
upon him, to prevent him from immediately obtaining a sight 
of the land, which, although yet unknown, he had neverthe- 
less preferred to his own country. He is now said to haye 
departed from Charran, that he might complete the journey 
he had begun; which also the next verse confirms, where it 
is said, that he took Sarai his wife and Lot his nephew with 
him. As under the conduct and auspices of his father Terah, 
they had departed from Chaldea; so now, when Abram is 
become the head of the family, he pursues and completes 
what his father had begun. Still it is possible, that the Lord 
again exhorted him to proceed, the death of his father haying 
intervened, and that he confirmed his former call by a second 
oracle. It is however certain, that in this place the obedience 
of faith is commended, and not as one act simply, but as a 
constant and perpetual course of life. For I do not doubt, 
but Moses intended to say, that Abram remained in Charran, 
not because he repented, as if he was inclined to swerve from 
the straight ‘course of his vocation, but as having the com- — 
mand of God always fixed in his mind. And therefore I 
would rather refer the clause, “ As the Lord had spoken to 
him,” to the first oracle ; so that Moses should say, ‘ he stood 
firmly in his purpose, and his desire to obey God was not 
broken by the death of his father.’ Moreover, we have here 
in one word, a rule prescribed to us, for the regulation of our 
whole life, which is to attempt nothing but by Divine au- 
thority. For, however men may dispute concerning virtues 
and duties, no work is worthy of praise, or deserves to be 
reckoned among virtues, except what is pleasing to God. 
And he himself testifies, that he makes greater account of 
obedience than of sacrifice, (1 Sam. xv.22.) Wherefore, our 
life will then be rightly constituted, when we depend upon 
the word of God, and undertake nothing except at his com- 
mand. And it is to be observed, that the question is not 
here concerning some -one particular work, but concerning 


CHAP. XII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 351 


the general principle of living piously and uprightly. For 
the subject treated of, is the vocation of Abram, which is a 
common pattern of the life of all the faithful. We are not 
indeed all indiscriminately commanded to desert our country ; 
this point, I grant, is special in the case of Abram; but ge- 
nerally, it is God’s will that all should be in subjection to his 
word, and should seek the law, for the regulation of their life, 
at his mouth, lest they should be carried away by their own 
will, or by the maxims of men. Therefore by the example 
of Abram, entire self-renunciation is enjoined, that we may 
live and die to God alone. 


5. The souls that they had gotten in Haran. Souls signify male 
and female servants. And this is the first mention of servitude : 
whence it appears, that not long after the deluge the wickedness 
of man caused liberty which, by nature, was common to all, to 
perish with respect to a great part of mankind. Whence servi- 
tude originated is not easy to determine, unless according to 
the opinion which has commonly prevailed, it arose from wars ; 
because the conquerors compelled those whom they took in 
battle to serve them; and hence the name of bondman! is 
derived. But whether they who were first slaves had 
been subjugated by the laws of war, or had been reduced 
to this state by want, it is indeed certain, that the order 
of nature was violently infringed ; because men were created 
for the purpose of cultivating mutual society between each 
other. And although it is advantageous that some should 
preside over others, yet an equality, as among brethren, ought 
to have been retained. However, although slavery is con- 
trary to that right government which is most desirable, and 
in its commencement was not without fault ; it does not, on 
this account? follow, that the use of it, which was afterwards 
received by custom, and excused by necessity, is unlawful. 
Abram therefore might possess both servants bought with 
money, and slaves born in his house. For that common say- 
ing, ‘ What has not prevailed from the beginning cannot be 


1“ Mancipii. . . A manucapium, quod ab hostibus manu caperetur ;” 
because taken by the hand by the enemy.—Ed, 


352 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XII. 


rendered valid by length of time,’ admits (as is well known) 
of some exceptions; and we shall have an example in point 
in the forty-eighth chapter. 


6. And Abram passed through the land. Here Moses shows 
that Abram did not immediately, on his entering into the 
land, find a habitation in which he might rest. For the ex- 
pression “passed through,” and the position of the place 
(Sichem) to which he passed, show that the length of his 
journey had been great. Sichem is not far from Mount Geri- 
zim, which is toward the desert of the Southern region. 
Wherefore, it is just as Moses had said, that the faith of 
Abram was again tried, when God suffered him as a wanderer 
to traverse the whole land, before he gave him any fixed abode. 
How hard would it seem, when God had promised to be his 
Protector, that not even a little corner is assigned him on 
which he may set his foot? But he is compelled to wander ina 
circuitous route, in order that he may the better exercise self 
denial. The word NON, (Elon,) is by some translated an oak 
forest, by some a valley ;' others take it for the proper name 
of a place. I do not doubt that Moreh is the proper name of 
the place; but I explain Elon to mean a plain, or an oak, not — 
that it was a single tree, but the singular is put for the plural 
number;? and this latter interpretation I most approve. 

And the Canaanite was then in the land. This clause con- 
cerning the Canaanite is not added without reason; because 
it was no slight temptation to be cast among that perfidious 
and wicked nation, destitute of all humanity. What could 
the holy man then think, but that he was betrayed into the 
hands of these most abandoned men, by whom he might soon 
be murdered ; or else that he would have to spend a disturbed 
and miserable life amid continual injuries and troubles? But 
it was profitable for him to be accustomed, by such discipline, 
to cherish a better hope. For if he had been kindly and 
courteously received in the land of Canaan, he would have 
hoped for nothing better than to spend his life there as a 

1 By othersa plain. Vide Poli Synopsis in loco. See our English ver- 
sion, “ Abram passed through the land unto the place of Sichomy unto 


the plain of Moreh.”—Ed, 
2 That is, an oak is put for an oak grove, or Sorest.—Ed. 





I 





CHAP. XII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 353 


guest. But now God raises his thoughts higher, in order 
that he may conclude, that at some future time, the inhabit- 
ants being destroyed, he shall be the lord and heir of the 
land. Besides, he is admonished, by the continual want of 
repose, to look up towards heaven. For since the inheritance 
of the land was specially promised to himself, and would only 
belong to his descendants, for his sake ; it follows, that the 
land, in which he was so ill and inhumanly treated, was not 
set before him as his ultimate aim, but that heaven itself was 
proposed to him as his final resting-place. 


7. And the Lord appeared unto Abram. He now relates 
that Abram was not left entirely destitute, but that God 
stretched forth his hand to help him. We must, however, 
mark, with what kind of assistance God succours him in his 
temptations. He offers him his bare word, and in such a 
way, indeed, that Abram might deem himself exposed to 
ridicule. For God declares he will give the land to his seed : 
but where is the seed, or where the hope of seed ; seeing that 
he is childless and old, and his wife is barren? This was 
therefore an insipid consolation to the flesh. But faith has 
a different taste; the property of which is, to hold all the 
senses of the pious so bound by reverence to the word, that 
a single promise of God is quite sufficient. Meanwhile, 
although God truly alleviates and mitigates the evils which 
his servants endure, he does it only so far as is expedient for 
them, without indulging the desire of the flesh. Let us 
hence learn, that this single remedy ought to be sufficient for 
us in our sufferings: that God so speaks to us in his word, 
as to cause our minds to perceive him to be propitious; and 
let us not give the reins to the importunate desires of our 
flesh. God himself will not fail on his part; but will, by. the 
manifestation of his favour, raise us when we are cast down. 

And there builded he an altar. This altar was a token of 
gratitude. As soon as God appeared to him he raised an 
altar: to what end? that he might call upon the name of the 
Lord. We see, therefore, that he was intent upon giving of 
thanks; and that an altar was built by him in memory of 
kindness received. Should any one ask, whether he could 

VOL. I. Z 


354 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XII. 


not worship God without an altar? I answer, that the inward 

worship of the heart is not sufficient, unless external profes- 

sion before men be added. Religion has truly its appropriate 

seat in the heart ; but from this root, public confession after- 

wards arises, as its fruit. For we are created to this end, 

that we may offer soul and body unto God. The Canaan- 

ites had their religion; they had also altars for sacrifices : 

but Abram, that he might not involve himself in their 

superstitions, erects a domestic altar, on which he may 

offer sacrifice; as if he had resolved to place a royal throne 

for God within his house. But because the worship of God 

is spiritual, and all ceremonies which have no right and 

lawful end, are not only vain and worthless in themselves, 

but also corrupt the true worship of God by their counterfeited 

and fallacious appearance ; we must carefully observe what 

Moses says, that the altar was erected for the purpose of 
calling upon God. ‘The altar then is the external form of 
divine worship; but znvocation is its substance and truth. 

This mark easily distinguishes pure worshippers from hypo- 
crites, who are far too liberal in outward pomp, but wish 
their religion to terminate in bare.ceremonies. Thus all their 
religion is vague, being directed to no certain end. Their 
ultimate intention, indeed, is (as they confusedly speak) to 
worship God: but piety approaches nearer to God; and 
therefore does not trifle with external figures, but has respect 
to the truth and the substance of religion. On the whole, 

ceremonies are no otherwise acceptable to God, than as they 

have reference to the spiritual worship of God. 

To invoke the name of God, or to invoke in his name, 
admits of a twofold exposition; namely, either to pray to 
God, or to celebrate his name with praises. But because 
prayer and thanksgiving are things conjoined, I willingly in- 
clude both. We have before said, in the fourth chapter, that 
the whole worship of God was not improperly described, by 
the figure syneedoche, under this particular expression; be- 
cause God esteems no duty of piety more highly, and accounts 
no sacrifice more acceptable, than the invocation of his 
name, as is declared in Psalm |]. 23, and Psalm li. 19. As 
often, therefore, as the word altar occurs, let the sacrifices 


CHAP. XII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 355 


also come into our mind; for from the beginning, God would 
have mankind informed, that there could be no access to 
himself without sacrifice. Therefore Abram, from the gene- 
ral doctrine of religion, opened for himself a celestial sanc- 
tuary, by sacrifices, that he might rightly worship God.’ But 
we know that God was never appeased by the blood of beasts. 
Wherefore it follows, that the faith of Abram was directed 
to the blood of Christ.’ 

It may seem, however, absurd, that Abram built himself 
an altar, at his own pleasure, though he was neither a priest, 
nor had any express command from God. I answer, that 
Moses removes this scruple in the context : for Abram is not 
said to have made an altar simply to God, but to God who 
had appeared unto him. The altar therefore had its founda- 
tion in that revelation ; and ought not to be separated from 
that of which it formed but a part and an appendage. Su- 
- perstition fabricates for itself such a God as it pleases, and 
then invents for him various kinds of worship; just as the 
Papists, at this day, most proudly boast that they worship 
God, when they are only trifling with their foolish pageantry. 
Butthe piety of Abram is commended, because, having erected 
an altar, he worshipped God who had been manifested to 
him. And although Moses.declares the design with which 
Abram built the altar, when he relates that he there called 
upon God, he yet, at the same time, intimates, that such a 
service was pleasing to God: for this language implies the 
approval of the Holy Spirit, who thereby pronounces that he 
had rightly called upon God. Others, indeed, confidently 
boasted that they worshipped God; but God, in praising 


1 The sentence seems obscure: “ Ergo Abram ex generali pietatis 
doctrina, sacrificiis cceleste sibi sanctuarium aperuit, ut Deum rite 
coleret.” - The French translation throws little light upon it: ‘ Abram 
done s’est fait ouverture au sanctuaire celeste par une doctrine generale 
de piete, afin de bien servir Dieu.’ The word sacrifice is here entirely omit- 
ted. Nor does the Old English translator seem to have given himself 
much trouble to render it accurately : ‘ Abram, out of a general doc- 
trine of godliness, prepared a heavenly way to himself to offer sacrifices, 
that he might worship God aright.’—£d. 

2 And consequently that he regarded all his own sacrifices as typical 
of the great atoning sacrifice of the cross.—Ed. 


356 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XII. 


Abram only, rejects all the rites of the heathen as a vile pro- 
fanation of his name. 

8. And he removed from thence. When we hear that Abram 
moved from the place where he had built an altar to God, 
we ought not to doubt that he was, by some necessity, com- 
pelled to do so. He there found the inhabitants unpropi- 
tious; and therefore transfers his tabernacle elsewhere. But 
if Abram bore his continual wanderings patiently, our fasti- 
diousness is utterly inexcusable, when we murmur against 
God, if he does not grant us a quiet nest. Certainly, when 
Christ has opened heaven to us, and daily invites us thither 
to dwell with himself; we should not take it amiss, if he 
chooses that we should be strangers in the world. The sum 
of the passage is this, that Abram was without a settled 
residence :1 which title Paul assigns to Christians, (1 Cor. 
iv. 11.) Moreover, there is a manifest prolepsis in the word 
Bethel; for Moses gives the place this name, to accommodate 
his discourse to the men of his own age. . | 

And there he builded an altar. Moses commends in Abram 
his unwearied devotedness to piety: for by these words, he 
intimates, that whatever place he visited, he there exercised 
himself in the external worship of God; both that he might 
have no religious rites in common with the wicked, and that 
he might retain his family in sincere piety. And it is pro- 
bable, that, from this cause, he would be the object of no little 
enmity ; because there is nothing which more enrages the 
wicked, than a religion different from their own, in which they 
conceive themselves to be not only despised, but altogether 
condemned as blind. And we know that the Canaanites were 
cruel and proud, and too ready to avenge insults. This was 
perhaps the reason of Abram’s frequent removals: that his 
neighbours regarded the altars which he built, as a reproach 
to themselves. It ought indeed to be referred to the won- 
derful favour of God, that he was not often stoned. Never- 
theless, since the holy man knows that he is justly required 
to bear testimony that he has a God peculiarly his own, 


1’ Aarardumevos. 


CHAP. XII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 357 


whom he must not, by dissimulation, virtually deny,! he 
therefore does not hesitate to prefer the glory of God to his 
own life. 


9. And Abram journeyed. This was the third removal of 
the holy man within a short period, after he seemed to have 
found some kind of abode. It is certain that he did not 
voluntarily, and for his own gratification, run hither and 
thither, (as light-minded persons are wont to do:) but there 
were certain necessities which drove him forth, in order to 
teach him, by continual habit, that he was not only a stranger, 
but a wretched wanderer in the land of which he was the 
lord. Yet no common fruit was the result of so many 
changes; because he endeavoured, as much as in him lay, to 
dedicate to God, every part of the land to which he had 
access, and perfumed it with the odour of his faith. 


10. And there was a famine in the land. A much more 
severe temptation is now recorded, by which the faith of 
Abram is tried to the quick. For he is not only led around 
through various windings of the country, but is driven into 
exile, from the land which God had given to him and to his 
posterity. It isto be observed, that Chaldea was exceedingly 
fertile ; having been, from this cause, accustomed to opulence, 
he came to Charran, where, it is conjectured, he lived com- 
modiously enough, since it is clear he had an increase of 
servants and of wealth. But now being expelled by hunger 
from that land, where, in reliance on the word of God, he 
had promised himself happy life, supplied with all abundance 
of good things, what must have been his thoughts, had 
he not been well fortified against the devices of Satan? His 
faith would have been overturned a hundred times. And we 
know, that whenever our expectation is frustrated, and things 
do not succeed according to our wishes, our flesh soon harps 
on this string, ‘ God has deceived thee.’ But Moses shows, 
in a few words, with what firmness Abram sustained this 


1 “Ut testetur se peculiarem habere Deum.”—*' Qu’il testifie avoir 
un autre Dieu que celui qui estoit la adoré:” to testify that he has 
another God than that which was there adored.—French Tr. 


358 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XII. 


vehement assault. He does not indeed magnificently pro- 
claim his constancy in verbose eulogies; but, by one little 
word, he sufficiently demonstrates, that it was great even to 
a miracle, when he says, that he ‘went down into Egypt to 
sojourn there.” For he intimates, that Abram, nevertheless, 
retained in his mind possession of the land promised unto 
him; although, being ejected from it by hunger, he fled 
elsewhere, for the sake of obtaining food. And let us be 
instructed by this example, that the servants of God must 
contend against many obstacles, that they may finish the 
course of their vocation. For we must always recall to me- 
mory, that Abram is not to be regarded asan individualmember 
_ of the body of the faithful, but as the common father of them 
all ; so that all should form themselves to the imitation of his 
example. ‘Therefore, since the condition of the present life 
is unstable, and obnoxious to innumerable changes; let us 
remember, that, whithersoever we may be driven by famine, 
and by the rage of war, and by other vicissitudes which oeca- 
sionally happen beyond our, expectation, we must yet hold 
our right course; and that, though our bodies may be carried 
hither and thither, our faith ought to stand unshaken. More- 
over, it is not surprising, when the Canaanites sustained 
life with difficulty, that Abram should be compelled privately 
to consult for himself. For he had not a single acre of land ; 
and he had to deal with a cruel and most wicked people, who 
would rather a hundred times have suffered him to perish 
with hunger, than they would have brought him assistance 
in his difficulty. Such circumstances amplify the praise of 
Abram’s faith and fortitude: first, because, when destitute of 
food for the body. he feeds himself upon the sole promise of 
God; and then, because he is not to be torn away by any 
violence, except for a short time, from the place where he 
was commanded to dwell. In this respect he is very unlike 
many, who are hurried away, by every slight occasion, to 
desert their proper calling. 


11. He said unto Sarat his wife. He now relates the counsel 
which Abram took for the preservation of his life when he was 
approaching Egypt. And, since this place is like a rock, on 


CHAP. XII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 359 


which many strike; it is proper that we should soberly and 
reverently consider how far Abram was deserving of excuse, 
and how he was to be blamed. First, there seems to be 
something of falsehood, mixed with the dissimulation, which 
he persuades his wife to practise. And although afterwards 
he makes the excuse, that he had not lied, nor feigned any- 
thing that was untrue: in this certainly he was greatly 
culpable, that it was not owing to his care that his wife was 
not prostituted. For when he dissembles the fact, that she 
was his wife, he deprives her chastity of its legitimate defence. 
And hence certain perverse cavillers take occasion to object,’ 
that the holy patriarch was a pander to his own wife; and 
that, for the purpose of craftily taking care of himself, he 
spared neither her modesty nor his own honour. But it is 
easy to refute this virulent abuse; because, it may indeed be 
inferred, that Abram had far higher ends in view, seeing that, 

in other things, he was endued with a magnanimity so great. 

Again, how did it happen, that he rather sought to go into 
Egypt than to Charran, or into his own country, unless that, 
in his journeying, he had God before his eyes, and the divine 
promise firmly rooted in his mind? Since, therefore, he never 
allowed his senses to swerve from the word of God, we may 
even thence gather the reason, why he so greatly feared for 
his own life, as to attempt the preservation of it from one. 
danger, by incurring a still greater. Undoubtedly he would 
have chosen to die a hundred times, rather than thus to ruin 
the character of his wife, and to be deprived of the society of 
her whom alone he loved. But while he reflected that the 
hope of salvation was centred in himself, that he -was the 
fountain of the Church of God, that unless he lived, the 
benediction promised to him, and to his seed, was vain; he 
did not estimate his own life according to the private affection 
of the flesh; but inasmuch as he did not wish the effect of the 
divine vocation to perish through his death, he was so affected 
with concern for the preservation of his own life, that he over- 
looked every thing besides. So far, then, he deserves praise, 
that, having in view a lawful end of living, he was prepared 


' ** Atque hinc latrandi materiam protervi quidam canes arripiunt.” 


360 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XII. 


to purchase life at any price. But in devising this indirect 
method, by which he subjected his wife to the peril of adul- 
tery, he seems to be by no means excusable. If he was 
solicitous about his own life, which he might justly be, yet 
he ought to have cast his care upon God. The providence of 
God, I grant, does not indeed preclude the faithful from 
caring for themselves ; but let them do it in such a way, that 
they may not overstep their prescribed bounds. Hence it 
follows, that Abram’s end was right, but he erred in the way 
itself; for so it often happens to us, that even while we are 
tending towards God, yet, by our thoughtiessness in catching 
at unlawful means, we swerve from his word. And this, 
especially, is wont to take place in affairs of difficulty ; 
because, while no way of escape appears, we are easily led 
astray into various circuitous paths. Therefore, although 
they are rash judges, who entirely condemn this deed of 
Abram, yet the special fault is not to be denied, namely, that 
he, trembling at the approach of death, did not commit the 
issue of the danger to God, instead of sinfully betraying the 
modesty of his wife. Wherefore, by this example, we are 
admonished, that, in involved and doubtful matters, we must 
_seek the spirit of counsel and of prudence from the Lord; 
and must also cultivate sobriety, that we may not attempt 
anything rashly, without the authority of his word. 

I know that thou art a fair woman to loohupon.' It is asked, 


1 An aggravation of Abraham’s alarm arose from the complexion of 
his wife,—‘ Thou art a fair woman.’ Though the Egyptian ladies were 
not so dark as the Nubians and Ethiopians, they were of a browner 
tinge than the Syrians and Arabians: we also find on the monuments, 
that ladies of high rank are usually represented in lighter tints than 
their attendants. . . . There is ample evidence, that a fair com- 
plexion was deemed a high recommendation in the age of the Pharaohs. 
This circumstance, so fully confirmed by the monuments, is recorded in 
no history but the book of Genesis ; and it is a remarkable confirmation 
of the veracity of the Pentateuch.”—-Gliddon’s Ancient Egypt, quoted in 
Hengstenberg’s Egypt and the Books of Moses, p. 200. It may here be 
proper to remark, that much learned labour has been expended by the 
Anti-supernaturalist Divines on the Continent, in the fruitless attempt 
to prove that the Pentateuch could not be the work of Moses, nor of the 
age in which he lived; and, consequently, not an inspired production. 
This has led to a deeper investigation of Egyptian antiquities, the result 
of which has been to confirm, in every possible way, the authenticity of 
the Mosaic records. Monuments as ancient as the times of Moses, and 


CHAP. XII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 361 


whence had Sarai this beauty, seeing she was an old woman ? 
For though we grant that she previously had excelled in 
elegance of form, certainly years had detracted from her 
gracefulness; and we know how much the wrinkles of old 
age disfigure the best and most beautiful faces. In the first 
place, I answer, there is no doubt that there was then greater 
vivacity in the human race than there is now; we also know, 
that vigour sustains the personal appearance. Again, her 
sterility availed to preserve her beauty, and to keep her 
whole habit of body entire; for there is nothing which more 
debilitates females than frequent parturition. I do not how- 
ever doubt, that the perfection of her form was the special gift 
of God; but why he would not suffer the beauty of the holy 
woman to be so soon worn down by age, we know not; 
unless it were, that the loveliness of that form was intended 
to be the cause of great and severe anxiety to her husband. 
Common experience also teaches us, that they who are not 
content with a regular and moderate degree of comeliness, 
find, to their great loss, at what a cost immoderate beauty is 
purchased. 


12. Therefore it shall come to pass, that when the Egyptians 
shall see thee, fc. It may seem that Abram was unjust to the 
Egyptians, in suspecting evil of them, from whom he had yet 
received no injury. And, since charity truly is not suspicious ; 
he may appear to deal unfairly, in not only charging them 
with lust, but also in suspecting them of murder. I answer, 
that the holy man did, not without reason, fear for himself 
from that nation, concerning which he had heard many unfa- 
vourable reports. And already he had, in other places, 
experienced so much of the wickedness of men, that he might 
justly apprehend everything from the profane despisers of 
God. He does not however pronounce anything absolutely 


bas-reliefs exhibiting different characters, and persons engaged in dif- 
ferent occupations, all show, that no writer of comparatively modern 
times could have composed these books. We have here an additional 
proof to many which had been given before, that a slight acquaintance 
with facts may lead to scepticism ; but that deep investigation of them 
invariably confirms the testimony of Scripture.—See note at p. 316.—Ed. 


362 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XII 


concerning the Egyptians; but, wishing to bring his wife tc 
his own opinion, he gives her timely warning of what might 
happen. And God, while he commands us to abstain from 
malicious and sinister judgments, yet allows to be on om 
guard against unknown persons; and this may take place 
without any injury to the brethren. Yet I do not deny that 
this trepidation of Abram exceeded all bounds, and that an 
unreasonable anxiety caused him to involve himself in another 
fault, as we have already stated. 


15. And commended her before Pharaoh.’ Although Abram 
had sinned by fearing too much and too soon, yet the eyent 
teaches, that he had not feared without cause: for his wife 
was taken from him and brought to the king. At first Moses 
speaks generally of the Egyptians, afterwards he mentions 
the courtiers; by which course he intimates, that the rumour 
of Sarai’s beauty was everywhere spread abroad ; but that it 
was more eagerly received by the courtiers, who indulge 
themselves in greater license. Whereas he adds, that they 
told the king; we hence infer, how ancient is that corruption 
which now prevails immeasurably in the courts of kings, 
For as all things there are full of blandishments and flatteries, 
so the nobles principally apply their minds to introduce, from 
time to time, what may be gratifying to royalty. Therefore 
we see, that whosoever among them desires to rise high in 
favour, is addicted not only to servile flatteries, but also to 
pandering for their master’s lusts. } 

And the woman was taken into Pharaoh's house. Since she 
was carried off, and dwelt for some time in the palace, 
many suppose that she was corrupted by the king. For it is 
not credible, that a lustful man, when he had her in his 
power, should have spared her modesty. This, truly, Abram 
had richly deserved, who had neither relied upon the grace 


1“ She must therefore have been unveiled. The monuments show, 
that, according to Egyptian customs, she could only so appear in 
public. ‘ We find from the monuments,’ says Taylor, ‘that the Egyptian 
women, in the reign of the Pharaohs, exposed their faces, and were per- 
mitted to enjoy as much liberty as the ladies of modern Europe. But 
this custom was changed after the conquest of the country by the 
Persians.’ "—Hengstenberg’s Egypt and the Books of Moses, p. 199. 


CHAP, XII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 363 


of God, nor had committed the chastity of his wife to His 
faithfulness and care; but the plague which immediately 
followed, sufficiently proves that the Lord was mindful of 
her; and hence we may conclude, that she remained unin- 
jured. And although, in this place, Moses says nothing 
expressly on the subject, yet, from a comparison with a 
similar subsequent history, we conjecture, that the guardian- 
ship of God was not wanting to Abram at this time also. 
When he was in similar danger, (Gen. xx. 1,) God did not 
suffer her to be violated by the king of Gerar; shall we 
then suppose that she was now exposed to Pharaoh’s lust ? 
Would God have thought more about subjecting her, who had 
been once dishonoured, to a second disgrace, than about 
preserving her, who had hitherto lived uprightly and chastely ? 
Further, if God showed himself so propitious to Abram, as to 
rescue his wife, whom he exposed a second time to infamy; 
how is it possible that He should have failed to_obviate the 
previous danger? Perhaps, also, greater integrity still flou- 
rished in that age; so that the lusts of kings were not so 
unrestrained as they afterwards became. Moreover, when 
Moses adds, that Abram was kindly treated for Sarai’s sake ; 
we hence conclude, that she was honourably entertained by 
Pharaoh, and was not dealt with as a harlot. When, there- 
fore, Moses says, that she was brought into the king’s palace ; 
I do not understand this to have been for any other purpose, 
than that the king, by a solemn rite, might take her as his 
wife. 


17. And the Lord plagued Pharaoh. If Moses had simply 
related, that God had punished the king for having committed 
adultery, it would not so obviously appear that he had taken 
care of Sarai’s chastity ; but when he plainly declares, that 
the house of the king was plagued because of Sarai, Abram’s 
wife, all doubt is, in my judgment, removed; because God, 
on behalf of his servant, interposed his mighty hand in time, 
lest. Sarai should be violated. And here we have a remark- 


1“ Non interpretor fuisse factum, ut statim cum rege dormiret, sed ut 
rex solemni ritu eam duceret uxorem.” 


364 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XII. 


able instance of the solicitude with which God protects his 
servants, by undertaking their cause against the most powerful 
monarchs; as this and similar histories show, which are 
referred to in Psalm cy. verse 12-15:—‘ When they were 
but a few men in number; yea, very few, and strangers in it. 
When they went from one nation to another, from one king- 
dom to another people; he suffered no man to do them 
wrong; yea, he reproved kings for their sakes ; saying, Touch 
not mine anointed, and do my prophets no harm. From 
which passage also a confirmation of the opinion just given 
may be derived. For if God reproved Pharaoh, that he 
should do Abram no harm; it follows, that he preserved 
Sarai’s honour uninjured. Instructed by such examples, we 
may also learn, that however the world may hold us in con- 
tempt, on account of the smallness of our number, and our 
weakness ; we are yet so precious in the sight of God, that he 
will, for our sake, declare himself an enemy to kings, and 
even to the whole world. Let us know, that we are covered 
by his protection, in order that the lust and violence of those 
who are more powerful, may not oppressus. But it is asked, 
whether Pharaoh was justly punished, seeing that he neither 
intended, by guile nor by force, to gain possession of another 
man’s wife? I answer, that the actions of men are not always — 
to be estimated according to our judgment, but are rather to 
be weighed in the balances of God ; for it often happens, that 
the Lord will find in us what he may justly punish, while we 
seem to ourselves to be free from fault, and while we absolve 
ourselves from all guilt. Let kings rather learn, from this 
history, to bridle their own power, and moderately to use 
their authority ; and, lastly, to impose a voluntary law of 
moderation upon themselves. For, although no fault openly 
appears in Pharaoh; yet, since he has no faithful monitor 
among men, who dares to repress his licentiousness, the Lord 
chastises him from heaven. As to his family, it was indeed 
innocent ; but the Lord has always just causes, though hidden 
from us, why he should smite with his rod those who seem to 
merit no such rebuke. That he spared his servant Abram, 
ought to be ascribed to his paternal indulgence. 


CHAP. XIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 365 


18. And Pharaoh called Abram. Pharaoh justly expos- 
tulates with Abram, who was chiefly in fault. No answer 
on the part of Abram is here recorded; and perhaps he 
assented to the just and true reprehension. It is, however, 
possible that the exculpation was omitted by Moses; whose 
design was to give an example of the Divine providence in 
preserving Abram, and vindicating his marriage relation. 
But, although Abram knew that he was suffering the due 
punishment of his folly, or of his unreasonable caution ; he, 
nevertheless, relapsed, as we shall see in its proper place, a 
second time into the same fault. 


20. And Pharaoh commanded his men. In giving com- 
mandment that Abram should have a safe-conduct out of the 
kingdom, Pharaoh might seem to have done it, for the sake of 
providing against danger; because Abram had stirred up the 
odium of the nation against himself, as against one who had 
brought thither the scourge of God along with him; but as 
this conjecture has little solidity, I give the more simple 
interpretation, that leave of departure was granted to Abram 
with the addition of a guard, lest he should be exposed to 
violence. For we know how proud and cruel the Egyptians 
were; and how obnoxious Abram was to envy, because, 
having there become suddenly rich, he would seem to be 
carrying spoil away with him. 


CHAPTER XIII. 


1. Ano Abram went up out of 1. Et ascendit Abram ex 
Egypt, he, and his wife, and all gypto, ipse et uxor ejus, et 
that he had, and Lot with him, into the omnia que erant ei, et Lot 


south. cum eo ad Meridiem. 
2. And Abram was very rich in cattle, 2. Et Abram dives erat 
in silver, and in gold. valde pecore, argento et auro. 


3. And he went on his journeys 3. Et perrexit per profec- 
from the south even to Beth-el, unto tiones suas a Meridie usque ad 
the place where his tent had been at Bethel, usque ad locum ubi 
the beginning, between Beth-el and fuerat tabernaculum ejus in 

ai ; principio, inter Bethel et Hai; 
4, Unto the place of the altar, which 4, Ad locum altaris quod 


366 


he had made there at the first : and there 
Abram called on the name of the Lord. 

5. And Lot also, which went with 
Abram, had flocks, and herds, and 
tents. 

6. And the land was not able to bear 
them, that they might dwell together: 
for their substance was great, so. that 
they could not dwell together. 

7. And there was a strife between 
the herdmen of Abram’s cattle and the 
herdmen of Lot’s cattle: and the Ca- 
naanite and the Perizzite dwelled then 
in the land. 

8. And Abram said unto Lot, Let 
there be no strife, I pray thee, between 
me and thee, and between my herd- 
men and thy herdmen; for we be 
brethren. 

9. Js not the whole land before thee ? 
separate thyself, I pray thee, from me: 
if thou wilt take the left hand, then I will 
go to the right; or if thou depart to the 
right hand, then I will go to the left. 

10. And Lot lifted up his eyes, and 
beheld all the plain of Jordan, that it 
was well watered every where, before the 
Lord destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah, 
even as the garden of the Lord, like the 
land of Egypt, as thou comest unto 
Zoar. 

11. Then Lot chose him all the plain 
of Jordan; and Lot journeyed east: 
and they separated themselves the one 
from the other. 

12. Abram dwelled in the land of 
Canaan, and Lot dwelled in the cities 
of the plain, and pitched Azs tent towards 
Sodom. 

13. But the men of Sodom were 
wicked and sinners before the Lord ex- 
ceedingly. 

14. And the Lord said unto Abram, 
after that Lot was separated from him, 
Lift up now thine eyes, and look from 
the place where thou art northward, 
and southward, and eastward, and 
westward: 

15. For all the land which thou 
seest, to thee will I give it, and to thy 
seed for ever. 

16. And I will make thy seed as 
the dust of the earth: so that if a 
man can number the dust of the 
— then shall thy seed also be num- 

ered, 


COMMENTARY UPON 


CHAP. XIII. 


fecerat in principio : et invoca- 
vit ibi Abram nomen Jehovee. 

5. Et etiam ipsi Lot ambu- 
lanticum Abram erant pecu- 
des, et boves, et tabernacula. 

6. Et non ferebat eos terra, 
ut habitarent pariter: quia erat 
substantia eorum multa, ef non 
poterant habkitare pariter. 

7. Et fuit contentio inter 
pastores pecudum Abram, et 
pastores pecudum Lot: et 
Chenaanzus et Pherizeeus tune 
habitabant in terra. 

8. Et dixit Abram ad Lot, 
Ne nunc sit contentio inter me 
et te, et inter pastores meos et 
pastores tuos : quia viri fratres 
sumus. 

9. Numquid non omnis terra 
est coram te? separa te nunc 
ame: si ieris ad sinistram, dex- 
tram tenebo: et si ad dextram 
ieris, sinistram tenebo. 

10. Et levavit Lot oculos 
suos, et vidit omnem planitiem 
Jarden, quod tota esset irrigua, 
antequam disperderet Jehova 
Sedom et Hamorah, sicuti hor- 
tus Jehove, sicut terra Hgypti, 
ingrediente te in Sohar. 

11. Et elegit sibi Lot omnem 
planitiem Jarden, et profectus 
est Lot ad Orientem, et sepa- 
raverunt se alter ab altero. 

12. Abram habitavit in terra 
Chanaan, et Lot habitavit in 
urbibus planitiei, et tetendit 
tabernaculum Sedom usque. 

13. Viri autem Sedom erant 
mali, et scelerati coram Jehova 
valde. 

14. Et Jehova dixit ad 
Abram, postquam separavit se 
Lot ab eo, Leva nune oculos 
tuos, et vide a loco ubi es, ad 
Aquilonem, Meridiem, Orien- 
tem, et Occidentem. 

15. Quia omnem terram, 
quam tu vides, tibi dabo et se- 
mini tuo usque in sezeculum. 

16. Et ponam semen tuum 
sicut pulverem terre: quia si 
poterit quisquam numerare pul~ 
verem terre, etiam semen tuum 
numerabit. 


CHAP. XIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 367 


17. Arise, walk through the land 17. Surge, ambula per ter- 
in the length of it and in the breadth ram in longitudinem ejus, et in 
of it; for 1 will give it unto thee. latitudinem ejus : quia tibi dabo 

eam. 

18. Then Abram removed his tent, 18. Et tetendit tabernaculum 
and came and dwelt in the plain of Abram, et venit, et habitavit 
Mamre, which is in Hebron, and built in quercubus Mamre, que sunt 
there an altar unto the Lord. in Hebron: et exdificavit ibi 


altare Jehovze. 


1. And Abram went up out of Egypt. In the commence- 
ment of the chapter, Moses commemorates the goodness of 
God in protecting Abram ; whence it came to pass, that he 
not only returned in safety, but took with him great wealth. 
This circumstance is also to be noticed, that when he was 
leaving Egypt, abounding in cattle and treasures, he was 
allowed to pursue his journey in peace; for it is surprising 
that the Egyptians would suffer what Abram had acquired 
among them, to be transferred elsewhere. Moses next shows, 
that riches proved no sufficient obstacle to prevent Abram 
from haying respect continually to his proposed end, and 
from moving towards it with unremitting pace. We know 
how greatly even a moderate share of wealth, hinders many 
from raising their heads towards heaven; while they who 
really possess abundance, not only lie torpid in indolence, 
but are entirely buried in the earth Wherefore, Moses 
places the virtue of Abram in contrast with the common vice 
of others; when he relates that he was not to be prevented by 
any impediments, from seeking again the land of Canaan. 
For he might (like many others) have been able to flatter 
himself with some fair pretext: such as, that since God, from 
whom he had received extraordinary blessings, had been 
favourable and kind to him in Egypt, it was right for him to 
remain there. But he does not forget what had been di- 
vinely commanded him; and, therefore, as one unfettered, 
he hastens to the place whither he is called. Wherefore, 
the rich are deprived of all excuse, if they are so rooted in 
the earth, that they do not attend the call of God. Two 
extremes, however, are here to be guarded against. Many 
place angelical perfection in poverty ; as ifit were impossible 
to cultivate piety and to serve God, unless riches are cast 


368 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XII 


away. Few indeed imitate Crates the Theban, who cast hi 
treasures into the sea; because he did not think that he couk 
be saved unless they were lost. Yet many fanatics repel ric] 
men from the hope of salvation ; as if poverty were the onh 
gate of heaven; which yet, sometimes, involves men in mor 
hinderances than riches. But Augustine wisely teaches us 
that the rich and poor are collected together in the samc 
inheritance of life ; because poor Lazarus was received intc 
the bosom of rich Abraham. On the other hand, we must 
beware of the opposite evil; lest riches should casta stumbling- 
block in our way, or should so burden us, that we should the 
less readily advance towards the kingdom of heayen. 


3. And he went on his journeys. In these words Moses 
teaches us, that Abram did not rest till he had returned to 
Bethel. For although he pitched his tent in many places, 
yet he nowhere so fixed his foot, as to make it his permanent 
abode. He does not speak of the south in reference to 
Egypt; he merely means that he had come into the southern 
part of Judea; and that, therefore, he had, by a long and 
troublesome journey, arrived at the place where he had de- 
termined to remain. Moses next subjoins, that an altar had 
before been there erected by him, and that he then also - 
began anew to call upon the name of the Lord: whereby we 
may learn, that the holy man was always like himself in wor- 
shipping God, and giving evidence of his piety. The expla- 
nation given by some, that the inhabitants of the place had 
been brought to the pure worship of God, is neither probable, 
nor to be deduced from the words of Moses. And we have 
stated elsewhere what is the force of the expression, ‘ To 
invoke in the name,’ or, ‘ To call upon the name of the Lord; 
namely, to profess the true and pure worship of God. For 
Abram invoked God, not twelve times only, during the whole 
course of his life; but whenever he publicly celebrated him, 
and by a solemn rite, made it manifest that he had nothing 
in common with the superstitions of the heathen, then he is 
also said to have called upon God. Therefore, although he 
always worshipped God, and exercised himself in daily 
prayers; yet, because he did not daily testify his piety by 











CHAP. XIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 369 


outward profession before men, this virtue is here especially 
commended by Moses. It was therefore proper that in- 
vocation should be conjoined with the altar; because, by 
the sacrifices offered, he plainly testified what God he wor- 
shipped, in order that the Canaanites might know that he 
was not addicted to their common idolatries. 


5. And Lot also, which went with Abram. Next follows the 
inconvenience which Abram suffered through his riches: 
namely, that he was torn from his nephew, whom he ten- 
derly loved, as if it had been from his own bowels. Cer- 
tainly, had the option been given him, he would rather have 
chosen to cast away his riches, than to be parted from him 
whom he had held in the place of an only son: yet he found 
no other method of avoiding contentions. Shall we impute 
this evil to his own excessive moroseness, or to the forward- 
ness of his nephew? I suppose, however, that we must rather 
consider the design of God. There was a danger lest Abram 
should be too much gratified with his own success, inasmuch 
as prosperity blinds many. ‘Therefore God allays the sweet- 
ness of wealth with bitterness; and does not permit the mind 
of his servant to be too much enchanted withit. And when- 
ever a fallacious estimate of riches impels us to desire them 
inordinately, because we do not perceive the great disadvan- 
tages which they bring along with them; let the recollec- 
tion of this history avail to restrain such immoderate attach- 
ment to them. Further, as often as the rich find any trouble 
arising from their wealth; let them learn to purify their 
minds by this medicine, that they may not become exces- 
sively addicted to the good things of the present life. And - 
truly, unless the Lord were occasionally to put the bridle on 
men, to what depths would they not fall, when they overflow 
with prosperity ? On the other hand, if we are straitened with 
poverty, let us know, that, by this method also, God corrects 
the hidden evils of our flesh. Finally, let those who abound 
remember, that they are surrounded with thorns, and must 
~ take care lest they be pricked; and let those whose affairs 
are contracted and embarrassed know, that God is caring for 
them, in order that they may not be involved in evil and 

VOL, I. 2 A- 


370 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XIII, 


noxious snares. This separation was sad to Abram’s mind; 
but it was suitable for the correction of much latent evil, 
that. wealth might not stifle the ardour of his zeal. But if 
Abram had need of such an antidote, let us not wonder, if 
God, by inflicting some stroke, should repress our excesses, 
For he does not always wait till the faithful shall have 
fallen; but looks forward for them into the future. So 
he does not actually correct the avarice or the pride of 
his servant Abram: but, by an anticipated remedy, he 
causes that Satan shall not infect his mind with any of his 
allurements. 


7. And there was a strife. What I hinted respecting 
riches, is also true respecting a large retinue of attendants. 
We see with what ambition many desire a great crowd of 
servants, almost amounting to a whole people. But since 
the family of Abram cost him so dear; let us be well con- 
tent to have few servants, or even to be entirely with- 
out them, if it seem right to the Lord that it should be so. 
It was scarcely possible to avoid great confusion, in a house 
where there was a considerable number of men. And expe- 
rience confirms the truth of the proverb, that a crowd is com- 
monly turbulent. Now, if repose and tranquillity be an ines- — 
timable good; let us know, that we best consult for our real 
welfare, when we have a small house, and privately pass our 
time, without tumult, in our families. We are also warned, 
by the example before us, to beware lest Satan, by indirect 
methods, should lead us into contention. For when he can- 
not light up mutual enmities between us, he would involve us 
in other men’s quarrels. Lot and Abram were at concord with 
each other; but acontention raised between their shepherds, 
carried them reluctantly away ; so that they were compelled 
to separate from each other. There is no doubt that Abram 
faithfully instructed his own people to cultivate peace; yet he 
did not so far succeed in his desire and effort, as to prevent his 
witnessing the most destructive fire of discord kindled in his 
house. Wherefore, itis nothing wonderful, if we see tumults 
often arising in churches, where there is a still greater num- 
ber of men. Abram had about three hundred servants ; it is 


CHAP. XIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 371 


probable that the family of Lot was nearly equal to it :! what 
then may be expected to take place between five or six thou- 
sand men,—especially free men,—when they contend with 
each other? As, however, we ought not to be disturbed 
by such scandals ; so we must, in every way, take care that 
contentions do not become violent. For unless they be 
speedily met, they will soon break out into pernicious dis- 
sension. 

The Canaanite and the Perizzite. Moses adds this for the 
sake of aggravating the evil. For he declares the heat of 
the contention to have been so great, that it could neither be 
extinguished nor assuaged, even by the fear of impending de- 
struction. They were surrounded by as many enemies as 
they had neighbours. Nothing, therefore, was wanting in 
order to their destruction, but a suitable occasion; and this 
they themselves were affording by their quarrels. To such 
a degree does blind fury infatuate men, when once the vehe- 
mence of contention has prevailed, that they carelessly despise 
death, when placed before theireyes. Now, although we are 
not continually surrounded by Canaanites, we are yet in the 
midst of enemies, as long as we sojourn in the world. Where- 
fore, if we are influenced by any desire for the salvation of 
ourselves, and of our brethren, let us beware of contentions, 
which will deliver us over to Satan to be destroyed. 


8. And Abram said unto Lot. Moses first states, that 
Abram no sooner perceived the strifes which had arisen, than 
he fulfilled the duty of a good householder, by attempting to 
restore peace among his domestics ; and that afterwards, by 
his moderation, he endeavoured to remedy the evil by re- 
moving it. And although the servants alone were contend- 


1 “ Familiam Lot minime fuisse parem verisimile est.” The words are 
capable of two opposite renderings according to the different sense in 
which minime is taken. It may either mean ‘‘ by no means,” or ‘ at 
least.” The Old English translation renders it in the former method. 
“« Tt is very likely that the household of Lot was much less.” The French 
version adopts the latter meaning. ‘Il est bien vraye-semblable que 
la famille de Lot n’a pas este moindre.” Neither of the versions give a 
very probable meaning. The context seems almost to demand the trans- 
lation which the Editor has ventured to prefer.-—-Ld. 


372 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XIII. 


ing, he yet does not say in vain, “ Let there be no strife 
between me and thee:” because it was scarcely possible but 
that the contagion of the strife should reach from the domes- 
tics to their lords, although they were in other respects per- 
fectly agreed. He also foresaw that their friendship could 
not long remain entire, unless he attempted, in time, to heal 
the insidious evil. Moreover, he calls to mind the bond of 
consanguinity between them; not because this alone ought 
to avail to promote mutual peace, but that he might more 
easily bend and mollify the mind of his nephew. For when 
the fear of God is less effectual with us than it ought to be ; 
it is useful to call in other helps also, which may retain us in 
our duty. Now, however, since we all are adopted as sons of 
God, with the condition annexed, that we should be mutually 
brethren to each other: this sacred bond is less valued by 
us than it ought to be, if it does not prove sufficient to allay 
our contentions. | 


9. Is not the whole land before thee? Here is that modera- 
tion of which I have spoken; namely, that Abram, for the 
sake of appeasing strife, voluntarily sacrifices his own right. 
For as ambition and the desire of victory’ is the mother 
of all contentions; so when every one meekly and moderately _ 
departs, in some degree, from his just claim, the best remedy 
is found for the removal of all cause of bitterness. Abram 
might indeed, with an honourable pretext, have more perti- 
naciously defended the right which he relinquished, but he 
shrinks from nothing for the sake of restoring peace: and 
therefore he leaves the option to his nephew. 


10. And Lot lifted up his eyes. As the equity of Abram 
was worthy of no little praise; so the inconsideration of Lot, 
which Moses here describes, is deserving of censure. He 
ought rather to have contended with his uncle for the palm 
of modesty; and this the very order of nature suggested ; but 
just as ifhe had been, in every respect, the superior, he usurps 
for himself the better portion; and makes choice of that 


1 Dyrovesxia, 





CHAP. XIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 373 


region which seemed the more fertile and agreeable. And 
indeed it necessarily follows, that whosoever is too eagerly 
intent upon his own advantage, is wanting in humanity to- 
wards others. There can be no doubt that this injustice 
would pierce the mind of Abram; but he silently bore it, lest 
by any means, he should give occasion of new offence. And 
thus ought we entirely to act, whenever we perceive those 
with whom we are connected, to be not sufficiently mind- 
ful of their duty: otherwise there will be no end of tumults. 
When the neighbouring plain of Sodom is compared to the 
paradise of God, many interpreters explain it as simply mean- 
ing, that it was excellent, and in the highest degree fertile ; 
because the Hebrews call anything excellent, divine. I how- 
ever think, that the place where Adam resided at the begin- 
ning, is pointed out. For Moses does not propose a general 
similitude, but says, ‘ that region was watered;’ just as he 
related the same thing respecting the first abode of man; 
namely, that a river, divided into four parts, watered it; he 
also adds the same thing respecting a part of Egypt. 
Whence it more clearly appears, that in one particular only, 
this place is compared with two others. 


13. But the men of Sodom. Lot thought himself happy 
that so rich a habitation had fallen to his share: but he learns 
at length, that the choice to which he had hastened, with a 
rashness equal to his avarice, had been unhappily granted to 
him; since he had to deal with proud and perverse neigh- 
bours, with whose conduct it was much harder to bear, than it 
was to contend with the sterility of the earth. Therefore, see- 
ing that he was led away solely by the pleasantness of the 
prospect, he pays the penalty of his foolish cupidity. Let us 
then learn by this example, that our eyes are not to be trust- 
ed; but that we must rather be on our guard lest we be 
ensnared by them, and be encircled, unawares, with many 
evils; just as Lot, when he fancied that he was dwelling in 
paradise, was nearly plunged into the depths of hell. Butit 
seems wonderful, that Moses, when he wishes to condemn the 
men of Sodom for their extreme wickedness, should say that 
they were wicked before the Lord; and not, rather before 


374 COMMENTARY UPON ~~ CHAP. XIII. 


men; for when we come to God’s tribunal, every mouth 
must be stopped, and all the world must be subject to con- 
demnation ; wherefore Moses may be thought to speak thus 
by way of extenuation. But the case is otherwise: for he 
means that they were not merely under the dominion of those 
common vices which everywhere prevail among men, but 
were abandoned to most execrable crimes, the cry of which 
rose even to heaven, (as we shall afterwards see, ) and demand- 
ed vengeance from God. That God, however, bore with 
. them fora time: and not only so, but suffered them to in- 
habit a most fertile region, though they were utterly unworthy 
of light and of life, affords, as we hence learn, no ground to 
the wicked of self-congratulation, when God bears also with 


them for a time, or when, by treating them kindly, and even © 


liberally, he, by his indulgence, strives with their ingratitude. 
Yet although they exult in their luxury, and even become 
outrageous against God, let the sons of God be admonished 
not to envy their fortune ; but to wait a little while, till God, 
arousing them from their intoxication, shall call them to his 
dreadful judgment. ‘Therefore, Ezekiel, speaking of the men 
of Sodom, declares it to have been the cause of their destruc- 
tion, that, being saturated with bread and wine, and filled 
with delicacies, they had exercised a proud cruelty against 
the poor, (Ezek. xvi. 49.) 


14, And the Lord said unto Abram. Moses now relates 
that after Abram was separated from his nephew, divine con- 
solation was administered for the appeasing of his mind. 
There is no doubt that the wound inflicted by that separation 
was very severe, since he was obliged to send away one who 
was not less dear to him than his own life. When it is said, 
therefore, that the Lord spoke, the circumstance of time re- 
quires to be noted; as if he had said, that the medicine of 
God’s word was now brought to alleviate hispain. And thushe 
teaches us, that the best remedy for the mitigation and the 
cure of sadness, is placed in the word of God. 

Lift up now thine eyes. Seeing that the Lord promises 
the land to the seed of Abram, we perceive the admirable 
design of God, in the departure of Lot. He had assigned 


On ee 


CHAP. XII. = THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 375 


the land to Abram alone; if Lot had remained with him, 
the children of both would have been mixed together. The 
cause of their dissension was indeed culpable; but the Lord, 
according to his infinite wisdom, turns it to a good issue, 
that the posterity of Lot should possess no part of the in- 
heritance. ‘This is the reason why he says, ‘ All the land 
which is before thee, I assign to thee and to thy seed. 
Therefore, there is no reason why thou, to whom a reward 
so excellent is hereafter to be given, shouldst be excessively 
sorrowful and troubled on account of this solitude and priva- 
tion.” For although the same thing had been already pro- 
mised to Abram; yet God now adapts his promise to the re- 
lief of the present sorrow. And thus it is to be remembered, 
that not only was a promise here repeated, which might 
cherish and confirm Abram’s faith; but that a special oracle 
was given, from which Abram might learn, that the interests 
of his own seed were to be promoted, by the separation of 
Lot from him. The speculation of Luther here (as in other 
places) has no solidity; namely, that God spake through 
some prophet. In promising the land “for ever,” he does 
not simply denote perpetuity; but that period which was 
brought to a close by the advent of Christ. Concerning 
the meaning of the word nowy, (olam,) the Jews ignorantly 
contend: but whereas it is taken in various senses in Scrip- 
ture, it comprises in this place (as I have lately hinted) the 
whole period of the law; just as the covenant which the 
Lord made with his ancient people is, in many places, called 
eternal; because it was the office of Christ by his coming to 
renovate the world. But the change which Christ introduced 
was not the abolition of the old promises, but rather their 
confirmation. Seeing, therefore, that God has not now one 
peculiar people in the land of Canaan, but a people diffused 
throughout all regions of the earth; this does not contradict 
the assertion, that the eternal possession of the land was 
rightly promised to the seed of Abram, until the future 
renovation. 


16. And I will make thy seed as the dust. Omitting those 
subtleties, by means of which others argue about nothing, I 


376 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XIII. 


simply explain the words to signify, that the seed of Abram 
is compared to the dust, because of its immense multitude; and 
truly the sense of the term is to be sought for only in Moses’ 
own words. It was, however, necessary to be here added, 
that God would raise up for him a seed, of which he was 
hitherto destitute. And we see that God always keeps him 
under the restraint of his own word; and will have him de- 
pendent upon his own lips. Abram is commanded to look 
at the dust ; but when he turns his eyes upon his own family, 
what similitude is there between his solitariness and the 
countless particles of dust? This authority the Lord 
therefore requires us to attribute to his own word, that 
it alone should be sufficient for us. It may also give oc- 
casion to ridicule, that God commands Abram to travel 
till he should have examined the whole land. To what 
purpose shall he do this, except that he may more clearly 
perceive himself to be a stranger; and that, being exhausted 
by continual and fruitless disquietude, he may despair of any 
stable and permanent possession ? For how shall he persuade 
himself that he is lord of that land in which he is scarcely 
permitted to drink water, although he has with great labour 
dug the wells? But these are the exercises of faith, in order 
that it may perceive, in the word, those things which are far 
off, and which are hidden from carnal sense. For faith is the 
beholding of absent things, (Heb. xi. 1,) and it has the word 
as a mirror, in which it may discover the hidden grace 
of God. And the condition of the pious, at this day, is 
not dissimilar: for since they are hated by all, are exposed 
to contempt and reproach, wander without a home, are some- 
times driven hither and thither, and suffer from nakedness 
and poverty, it is nevertheless their duty to lay hold on the 
inheritance which is promised. Let us therefore walk 
through the world, as persons debarred from all repose, who 
have no other resource than the mirror of the word. 


18. And Abram removed his tent... Here Moses relates 


1“ Et tetendit Abram tabernaculum.” Abram pitched his tent. This 
seems to be the true meaning of the word Spay); yet the term pitched 


CHAP. XIV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 377 


that the holy man, animated by the renewed promise of God, 
traversed the land with great courage, as if by a look alone, 
he could subdue it to himself. Thus we see how greatly the 
oracle had profited him: not that he had heard anything 
from the mouth of God to which he had been unaccustomed, 
but because he had obtained a medicine so seasonable and 
suitable to his present grief, that he rose with collected 
energy towards heaven. At length Moses records that the 
holy man, having performed his circuit, returned to the oak, 
or valley of Mamre, to dwell there. But, again, he com- 
mends his piety in raising an altar, and calling upon God. 
I have already frequently explained what this means: for he 
himself bore an altar in his heart; but seeing that the land 
was full of profane altars, on which the Canaanites and other 
nations polluted the worship of God, Abram publicly pro- 
fessed that he worshipped the true God; and that, not at 
random, but according to the method revealed to him by 
the word. Hence we infer, that the altar of which mention 
is made, was not built rashly by his hand, but that it was 
consecrated by the same word of God. 


CHAPTER XIV. 


1. AND it came to pass in the days of 
Amraphel king of Shinar, Arioch king of 
Ellasar, Chedorlaomer king of Elam, 
and Tidal king of nations ; 

2. That these made war with Bera 
king of Sodom, and with Birsha king of 
Gomorrah, Shinab king of Admah, and 
Shemeber king of Zeboiim, and the king 
of Bela, which is Zoar. 

3. All these were joined together in 
the vale of Siddim, which is the salt 
sea. 


1. Et fuit in diebus Amraphel 
regis Sinhar, Arioch rex Elasar, 
Cedorlaomer rex Helam, et 
Thidhal rex gentium, 

2. Fecerunt bellum cum Berah 
rege Sedom, et Birsah rege Ha- 
morah, Sinab rege Admah, et 
Semeber rege Seboim, et rege 
Belah: ipsa est Sohar. 

3. Omnes isti conjuncti sunt 
in valle Siddim : ipsa est vallis 
Maris salis. 


does not so well agree with the context as the term removed ; in the use 
of which word our translators have followed the Septuagint, (éxocxnyacas,) 
and the Vulgate, (movens igitur tabernaculum.) The Arabic (ac- 
cording to the Latin translation) brings out the same sense, by a peri- 
phrasis, ‘‘ Abram fixed his tent in divers places till he came and dwelt 
in the land of Mamre.” And this is probably the true solution of the 
difficulty.—Ed. 


378 


4. Twelve years they served Chedor- 
laomer, and in the thirteenth year they 
rebelled. 

5. And in the fourteenth year came 
Chedorlaomer, and the kings that were 
with him, and smote the Rephaims in 
Ashteroth Karnaim, and the Zuzims in 
Ham, and the Emims in Shaveh Kiria- 
thaim, 

6. And the Horites in their mount 
Seir, unto El-paran, which zs by the 
wilderness. 

7. And they returned, and came to 
En-mishpat, which 7s Kadesh, and smote 
all the country of the Amalekites, and 
also the Amorites, that dwelt in Haze- 
zon-tamar. 


8. And there went out the king of 
Sodom, and the king of Gomorrah, and 
the king of Admah, and the king of Ze- 
boiim, and the king of Bela, (the same 
ts Zoar;) and they joined battle with 
them in the vale of Siddim ; 

9. With Chedorlaomer the king of 
Elam, and with Tidal king of nations, 
and Amraphel king of Shinar, and 
Arioch king of Ellasar; four kings with 
five. 

10. And the vale of Siddim was full 
of slime-pits; and the kings of Sodom 
and Gomorrah fled, and fell there; and 
they that remained fled to the moun- 
tain. 

11. And they took all the goods of 
Sodom and Gomorrah, and all their 
victuals, and went their way. 


12. And they took Lot, Abram’s 
brother’s son, who dwelt in Sodom, and 
his goods, and departed. 


13. And there came one that had 
escaped, and told Abram the Hebrew ; 
for he dwelt in the plain of Mamre the 
Amorite, brother of Eschol, and brother 
of Aner: and these were confederate 
with Abram. 

14. And when Abram heard that his 
brother was taken captive, he armed 
his trained servants, born in his own 
house, three hundred and eighteen, and 
pursued them unto Dan. 


15. And he divided himself against 
them, he and his servants, by night, and 


COMMENTARY UPON 


CHAP. XIV. 


4. Duodecim annos servie- 
rant Cedorlaomer, et decimo- 
tertio anno defecerant. 

5. Decimoquarto autem anno 
venit Cedorlaomer, et reges qui 
erant cum eo, et percusserunt 
Rephaim in Astheroth Carnaim, 
et Zuzim in Ham, et Emim in 
Saveh Ciriathaim, 

6. Et Hori in monte suo Se- 
hir, usque ad planitiem Pharan, 
que est juxta desertum. 

7. Reversi sunt autem, et 
venerunt ad Hen-misphat, ipsa 
est Cades : et percusserunt om- 
nem agrum Amalecite, et etiam 
Emorzum habitantem in Ha- 
seson-thamar. 

8. Et egressus est rex Sedom, 
etrex Hamorah, et rex Admah, 
et rex Seboim, et rex Belah, 
ipsa est Sohar, et ordinaverunt 
cum eis prelium in valle Sid- 
dim, 

9. Cum Cedorlaomer rege 
Hela, et Thidhal rege gentium, 
et Amraphel rege Sinhar, et 
Arioch rege Elasar: quatuor 
reges cum quinque. — 

10. Vallis autem Siddim — 
plena erat puteis caementi: et 
fugerunt rex Sedom et Hamo- 
rah, projeceruntque se illuc, et 
residui in montem fugerunt. 

11. Et ceperunt omnem sub- 
stantiam Sedom et Hamorah, 
omnemque escam eorum, et 
abierunt. 

12. Ceperunt quoque Lot et 
substantiam ejus, filium fratris 
Abram, et abierunt, quia ipse 
habitabat in Sedom. 

13. Et venit quidam qui 
evaserat, et nuntiavit Abram 
Ebreo, qui habitabat in quer- 
cubus Mamre Emori fratris 
Eschol, fratris Haner, et ipsi 
erant foederati cum Abram. 

14. Audiens autem Abram 
quod captivus ductus esset fra- 
ter suus, armavit a se institutos 
pueros domus sus, octodecim 
et trecentos, et persequutus est 
usque ad Dan. 

15. Et divisit se super eos 
nocte, ipse et servi ejus, et per- 





CHAP. XIV. 


smote them, and pursued them unto 
Hobah, which %s on the left hand of 
Damascus. 

16. And he brought back all the 
goods, and also brought again his bro- 
ther Lot, and his goods, and the women 
also, and the people. 


17. And the king of Sodom went out 
to meet him after his return from the 
slaughter of Chedorlaomer, and of the 
kings that were with him, at the valley 
of Shaveh, which zs the’ king’s dale. 


18. And Melchizedek king of Salem 
brought forth bread and wine: and he 
was the priest of the most high God. 


19. And he blessed him, and said, 
Blessed be Abram of the most high God, 
possessor of heaven and earth: 

20. And blessed be the most high 
God, which hath delivered thine ene- 
mies into thy hand. And he gave him 
tithes of all. 

21. And the king of Sodom said unto 
Abram, Give me the persons, and take 
the goods to thyself. 

22. And Abram said to the king of 
Sodom, I have lift up mine hand unto 
the Lord, the most high God, the pos- 
sessor of heaven and earth, 

23. That I will not take from a thread 
even to a shoe-latchet, and that I will 
not take any thing that zs thine, lest 
thou shouldst say, I have made Abram 
rich: 

24. Save only that which the young 
men have eaten, and the portion of the 
men which went with me, Aner, Eshcol, 
and Mamre; let them take their por- 
tion. 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


379 


cussit eos: persequutusque est 
eos usque ad Ilovah, que est 
a leva Dammesec. 

16. Et reduxit omnem sub- 
stantiam, et etiam Lot fratrem 
suum, et substantiam ejus re- 
duxit, atque etiam mulieres et 
populum. 

17. Et egressus est rex 
Sedom in occursum ejus, post- 
quam reversus est ipse a cx- 
dendo Cedorlaomer, et reges 
qui erant secum, ad Vallem 
Saveh: ipsa est Vallis regis. 

18. Et Melchisedec rex Sa- 
lem protulit panem et vinum: 
et ipse erat sacerdos Deo altis- 
simo. 

19. Et benedixit ei, et dixit, 
Benedictus Abram Deo excelso, 
possessori coeli et terree. 

20. Et benedictus Deus ex- 
celsus, qui tradidit hostes tuos 
in manum tuam: et dedit ei 
decimam de omnibus. 

21. Et dixit rex Sedom ad 
Abram, Da mihi animas, et 
substantiam tolle tibi. 

22. Et dixit Abram ad regem 
Sedom, Levavi manum meam 
ad Jehovam Deum excelsum, 
possessorem cceli et terre, 

23. Sia filo usque ad corri- 
giam calceamenti, si accepero 
ex omnibus que sunt tibi: ne 
dicas, Ego ditavi Abram. 


24. Preter ea tantum que » 
comederunt pueri, et partem 
virorum qui profecti sunt me- 
cum, Aner, Eschol, et Mamre: 
ipsi accipiant partem suam. 


1. And tt came to pass in the days of Amraphel. The history 
related in this chapter is chiefly worthy of remembrance, for 
three reasons: first, because Lot, with a gentle reproof, ex- 
horted the men of Sodom to repentance; they had, however, 
become altogether unteachable, and desperately perverse in 
their wickedness. But Lot was beaten with these scourges, 
because, having been allured and deceived by the richness of 
the soil, he had mixed himself with unholy and wicked men. 


380 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XIV. 


Secondly, because God, out of compassion to him, raised up 
Abram as his avenger and liberator, to rescue him, when a 
captive, from the hand of the enemy; in which act the in- 
credible goodness and benevolence of God towards his own 
people, is rendered conspicuous; since, for the sake of one 
man, he preserves, for a time, many who were utterly un- 
worthy. Thirdly, because Abram was divinely honoured with 
a signal victory, and was blessed by the mouth of Melchizedek, 
in whose person, as appears from other passages of Scripture, 
the kingdom and priesthood of Christ was shadowed forth. 
As it respects the sum of the history, it is a horrible picture 
both of the avarice and pride of man. 

The human race had yet their three progenitors, Shem, 
Ham, and Japheth, living among them; by the very sight of 
whom they were admonished, that they all sprung from one 
family, and one ark. Moreover, the memory of their common 
origin was a sacred pledge of fraternal connection, which 
should have bound them to assist each other, by mutual good 
offices. Nevertheless, ambition so prevailed, that they assailed 
one another on all sides, with sword and armour, and each 
attempted to subdue the rest. Wherefore, while we see, 
at the present day, princes raging furiously, and shaking the 
earth to the utmost of their power; let us remember that the 
evil is of ancient date; since the lust of dominion has, in all 
ages, been too prevalent among men. Let us, however, also 
remark, that no fault is worse than that loftiness of mind, 
which many deem a most heroical disposition. ‘The ambi- 
tion of Chedorlaomer was the torch of the whole war: for he, 
inflamed with the desire of triumphing, drew three others into 
a hostile confederacy. And pride compelled the men of Sodom 
and their allies to take arms, for the purpose of shaking off 
the yoke. 

That Moses, however, records the names of so many kings, 
while Shem was yet living, (although derided by profane men 
as fabulous,) will not appear absurd, if we only reflect that 
this great propagation of the human race, was a remarkable 
miracle of God. For when the Lord said to Noah himself, 
and to his sons, “ Increase and multiply,” he intended to raise 
them to the hope of a far more excellent restoration than 


CHAP. XIV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 381 


would have taken place, in the ordinary course of nature. 
This benediction is indeed perpetual, and shall flourish even 
to the end of the world: but it was necessary that its extra- 
ordinary efficacy should then appear; in order that these 
earliest fathers might know, that a new world had been 
divinely inclosed within the ark. By the Poets, Deucalion with 
his wife, is feigned to have sown the race of men after the 
deluge, by throwing stones behind him.’ But it followed of 
necessity, that the miserable minds of men should be deluded 
with such trifles, when they departed from the pure truth of 
God; and Satan has made use of this artifice, for the purpose 
of discrediting the veracity of the miracles of God. For since 
the memory of the deluge, and the unwonted propagation of 
a new world, could not be speedily obliterated, he scattered 
abroad clouds andsmoke; introducing puerile conceits,in order 
that what had before been held for certain truth, might now 
be regarded as a fable. It is however to be observed, that 
all are called kings by Moses, who held the priority in any 
town, or in any considerable assembly of men. It is asked, 
whether those kings who followed Chedorlaomer dwelt 
at a great distance; because Tidal is called “the king of 
nations?” There are those who imagine that he reigned over 
different nations far and wide; as if he was a king of kings. 
The ancient interpreter fetches Arioch from Pontus ;? which 
is most absurd. I rather think the true reason of the name 
was, that he had a band composed of deserters and vagrants, 
who, having left their own country, had resorted to him. 
Therefore, since they were not one body—natives of his own 
country—but gathered together from a promiscuous multi- 
tude, he was properly called “king of nations.” In saying 
that the battle was fought in the vale of Siddim, or in the 
open plain, which, when Moses wrote, had become the Salt 
Sea, itis not to be doubted that the Dead Sea, or the lake As- 
phaltites, is meant. For he knew whom he was appointed to 
instruct, and therefore he always accommodated his words to 
the rude capacity of the people; and this is his common cus- 


1 See Ovid’s Metamorphosis I. 
2 “ Arioch rex Ponti.”— Vulgate. 


382 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XIV. 


tom in reference to the names of places, as I have previously 
intimated. Before, however, the battle was fought, Moses 
declares that the inhabitants of the region were partially 
beaten. It is probable that all had been scattered, because 

they had no leader, under whose auspices they might fight, 
until five kings advanced to meet them with a disciplined 
army. Now, though Chedorlaomer had rendered so many 
people tributary to him by tyranny, rather than by lawful 
authority, and on that account his ambition is to be con- 
demned ; yet his subjects are justly punished for having rashly 
rebelled. For although liberty is by no means to be despised, 
yet the subjection which is once imposed upon us cannot, 
without implied rebellion against God, be shaken off; because 
‘every power is ordained by God,’ notwithstanding, in its com- 
mencement, it may have flowed from the lust of dominion, 
(Rom. xii. 1.) Therefore some of the rebels are slaughtered — 
like cattle; and others, though they have clothed themselves 
in armour, and are prepared to resist, are yet driven to 
flight ; thus, unhappily to all concerned, terminates the con- 
tumacious refusal to pay tribute. And such narratives are 
to be noticed, that we may learn from them, that all who 
strive to produce anarchy, fight against God. 


10. And the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah fled. Some 
expound that they had fallen into pits: but this is not pro- 
bable, since they were by no means ignorant of the neigh- 
bouring places: such an event would rather have happened 
to foreign enemies. Others say, that they went down into 
them for the sake of preserving their lives. I, however, 
understand them to have exchanged one kind of death for 
another, as is common in the moment of desperation; as if 
Moses had said, the swords of the enemy were so formidable 
to them, that, without hesitation, they threw themselves 
headlong into the pits. For he immediately afterwards 
subjoins, that they who escaped fled to the mountains. 
Whence we infer, that they who had rushed into the pits 
had perished. Only let us know, that they fell, not so much 
deceived through ignorance of the place, as disheartened 
by fear. 


CHAP. XIV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 383 


12. And they took Lot. It is doubtful whether Lot re- 
mained at home while others went to the battle, and was 
there captured by the enemy; or whether he had been 
compelled to take arms with the rest of the people. As, 
however, Moses does not mention him till he speaks of 
the plundering of the city, the conjecture is probable, that at 
the conclusion of the battle, he was taken at home, unarmed. 
We here see, first, that sufferings are common to the good 
and the evil; then, that the more closely we are connected 
with the wicked and the ungodly, when God pours down his 
vengeance on them, the more quickly does the scourge come 
upon us. ? 


13. And there came one that had escaped. This is the second 
part of the chapter, in which Moses shows, that when God 
had respect to his servant Lot, he gave him Abram as his 
deliverer, to rescue him from the hands of the enemy. But 
here various questions arise ; as, whether it was lawful for 
Abram, a private person, to arm his family against kings, and 
to undertake a public war. I do not, however, doubt, that 
as he went to the war endued with the power of the Spirit, 
so also he was guarded by a heavenly command, that he did 
not transgress the bounds of his vocation. And this ought 
not to be regarded as a new thing, but as his special calling ; 
for he had already been created king of that land. And 
although the possession of it was deferred to a future time; 
yet God would give some remarkable proof of the power 
which he had granted him, and which was hitherto unknown 
to men.’ A similar prelude of what was to follow, we read 
in the case of Moses, when he slew the Egyptian, before he 
openly presented himself as the avenger and deliverer of his 
nation. And for this reason the subject ought to be noticed, 
that they who wish to defend themselves by armed force, 
whenever any force is used against them, may not, from this 
fact, frame a rule for themselves. We shall hereafter see 
this same Abram bearing patiently, and with a submis- 
sive mind, injuries which had, at least, an equal tendency 


1 Dieu a voulu donner un patron singulier de la puissance qu’il luy 
avoit baillee, laquelle estoit encore incognue aux hommes.”——French Tr. 


384 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XIV. 


to provoke his spirit. Moreover, that Abram attempted 
nothing rashly, but rather, that his design was approved by 
God, will appear presently, from the commendation of Mel- 
chizedek. We may therefore conclude, that this war was 
undertaken by him, under the special direction of the Spirit. 
If any one should take exception, that he proceeded further 
than was lawful, when he spoiled the victors of their prey 
and captives, and restored them wholly to the men of Sodom, 
who had, by no means, been committed to his protection; I 
answer, since it appears that God was his Guide and Ruler 
in this affair,—as we infer from His approbation,—it is not 
for us to dispute respecting His secret judgment. God had 
destined the inhabitants of Sodom, when their neighbours 
were ruined and destroyed, to a still more severe judgment ; 
because they were themselves the worst of all. He, therefore, 
raised up his servant Abram, after they had been admonished 
by a chastisement sufficiently severe, to deliver them, in order 
that they might be rendered the more inexcusable. Therefore, 
this peculiar suggestion of the Holy Spirit ought no more to 
be drawn into a precedent, than the whole war which Abram 
had carried on. With respecttothe messenger who had related 
to Abram the slaughter at Sodom, I do not accept what some 
suppose, that he wasa pious man. We may rather conjecture 
that, as a fugitive from home, who had been deprived of all his 
goods, he came to Abram to elicit something from his hu- 
manity. That Abram is called a Hebrew, I do not explain 
from the fact of his having passed over the river, as is the 
opinion of some; but from his being of the progeny of Eber. 
For it is a name of descent. And the Holy Spirit here again 
honourably announces that race as blessed by God. 

And these were confederate with Abram. It appears, that in 
the course of time, Abram was freely permitted to enter into 
covenant and friendship with the princes of the land: for the 
heroical virtues_of the man, caused them to regard him as one 
who was not, by any means, to be despised. Nay, as he had 
so great a family, he might also have been numbered among 
kings, if he had not been a stranger and a sojourner. But 
God purposed thus to provide for his peace, by a covenant re- 
lating to temporal things, in order that he never might be 


4 
bi 


a 






CHAP. XIV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 385 


mingled with those nations. Moreover, that this whole 
transaction was divinely ordered we may readily conjecture 
from the fact, that his associates did not hesitate, at great 
risk, to assail four kings, who (according to the state of the 
times) were sufficiently strong, and were flushed with the 
confidence of victory. Surely they would scarcely ever have 
been thus favourable to a stranger, except by a secret impulse 


of God. 


14. When Abram heard that his brother was taken captive. 
Moses briefly explains the cause of the war which was under- 
taken; namely, that Abram might rescue his relation from 
captivity. Meanwhile, what I have before said is to be re- 
membered, that he did not rashly fly to arms; but took them 
as from the hand of God, who had constituted him lord of 
that land. With reference to the words themselves, I know 
not why the ancient interpreter has rendered them, ‘ Abram 
numbered his trained servants.’ For the word 9 (rik) 
signifies to unsheath, or to draw out.' Now Moses calls 
these servants [>'5'3NM, (chanichim,) not as having been edu- 
cated and trained for military service, as many suppose; but 
rather (in my opinion) as having been brought up under 
his own authority, and imbued from childhood with his 
discipline; so that they fought the more courageously, 
being stimulated by his faith, and going forth under his 
auspices ;? and were ready to undergo every kind of danger 
for his sake. But in this great household troop, we must 
notice, not only the diligence of the holy patriarch, but the 
special blessing of God, by which it had been increased be- 

yond the common and usual manner. 


15. And he divided himself against them. Some explain the 
words to mean that Abram alone, with his domestic troops, 
rushed upon the enemy. Others, that he and his three con- 
federates divided their bands, in order to strike greater terror 


1 ** Comme s’il disoit, Il tira hors de sa maison trois cens dixhuit ser- 
viteurs.”—** As if he had said, He drew out of his house three hufidred 
and eighteen servants.”—French Tr. 

* *¢ Animosius sub fide et auspiciis ejus bellarent.” 


rt. T, 2B 


386 COMMENTARY UPON CIIAP. XIV. 


into the foe. A third class suppose the phrase to be a He- 
braism, for making an irruption into the midst of the enemy. 
I rather embrace the second exposition; namely, that he in- 
vaded the enemy on different sides, and suddenly inspired 
them with terror. For the circumstance of time favours this 
view, because he attacked them by night. And although 
examples of similar bravery occur in profane history ; yet it 
ought to be ascribed to the faith of Abram, that with a small 
band, he dared to assail a numerous army elated with victory. 
But that he came off conqueror with little trouble, and with 
-intrepidity pursued those who far exceeded him in number, 
we must ascribe to the favour of God. 


17. And the hing of Sodom went out. Although the king of 
Sodom knew that Abram had taken arms only on account of . 
his nephew, yet he went to meet him with due honour, in order 
to show his gratitude. For it is a natural duty to acknow- 
ledge benefits conferred upon us, even when not intentionally 
rendered, but only from unexpected circumstances and oc- 
casions, or (as we say) by accident. Moreover, the whole 
affair yields greater glory to God, because the victory of 
Abram was celebrated in this manner. He also marks the 
place where the king of Sodom met Abram, namely, “the 
king’s dale,” which I think was so called, rather after some 
particular king, than because those kings met there for their 
pleasure.' 


18. And Melchizedeh hing of Salem brought forth. This is 
the last of the three principal points of this history, that 
Melchizedek, the chief father of the Church, having enter- 
tained Abram at a feast, blessed him, in virtue of his priest- 
hood, and received tithes from him. There is no doubt that 
by the coming of this king to meet him, God also designed 
to render the.victory of Abram famous and memorable to 
posterity. But amore exalted and excellent mystery was, 
at the same time, adumbrated: for seeing that the holy 
patriarch, whom God had raised to the highest rank of honour, 


1“ Quam quod animi causa reges illuc convenirent.” 


CHAP. XIV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 387 


submitted himself to Melchizedek, it is not to be doubted that 
God had constituted him the only head of the whole Church ;! 
for, without controversy, the solemn act of benediction, 
which Melchizedek assumed to himself, was a symbol of pre- 
eminent dignity. If any one replies, that he did this as a 
priest; 1 ask, was not Abram also a priest? Therefore 
God here commends to us something peculiar in Melchizedek, 
in preferring him before the father of all the faithful. But it 
will be more satisfactory to exaiine the passage word by word, 
in regular order, that we may thence better gather the 
import of the whole. That he received Abram and his 
companions as guests belonged to his royalty; but the 
benediction pertained especially to his sacerdotal office. 
Therefore, the words of Moses ought to be thus con- 
nected: Melchizedek king of Salem brought forth bread 
and wine; and seeing he was the priest of ‘God, he blessed 
Abram ; thus to each character is distinctly attributed what 
is its own. He refreshed a wearied and famishing army 
with royal liberality ; but because he was a priest, he blessed, 
by the rite of solemn prayer, the first-born son of God, 
and the father of the Church. Moreover, although I do not 
deny that it was the most ancient custom, for those who were 
kings to fulfil also the office of the priesthood ; yet this ap- 
pears to have been, even in that age, extraordinary in 
Melchizedek. And truly he is honoured with no common 
eulogy, when the Spirit ratifieshis priesthood. We know how, 
at that time, religion was everywhere corrupted, since Abram 
himself, who was descended from the sacred race of Shem and 
Eber, had been plunged in the profound vortex of supersti- 
tion, with his father and grandfather. Therefore, many ima-. 
gine Melchizedek to have been Shem; to whose opinion I 
am, for many reasons, hindered from subscribing. For the 
Lord would not have designated a man, worthy of eternal 
memory, by a name so new and obscure, that he must remain 
unknown. Secondly, it is not probable that Shem had 
migrated from the east into Judea; and nothing of the 
kind is to be gathered from Moses. Thirdly, if Shem had 


1“¢Non dubium est quin illum constituerit unicum totius ecclesie 
caput.”—*“‘ Il ne faut pas douter que Dieu ne lait constitue chef unique 
de toute l’Eglise."—French Tr. 


388 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XIV. 


dwelt in the land of Canaan, Abram would not have wan- 
dered by such winding courses, as Moses has previously re- 
lated, before he went to salute his ancestor. But the declara- 
tion of the Apostle is of the greatest weight; that this Mel- 
chizedek, whoever he was, is presented before us, without 
any origin, as if he had dropped from the clouds, and that his 
name is buried without any mention of his death. (Heb. vii. 3.) 
But the admirable grace of God shines more clearly in a per- 
son unknown ; because, amid the corruptions of the world, he 
alone, in that land, was an upright and sincere cultivator and 
guardian of religion. I omit the absurdities which Jerome, 
in his Epistle to Evagrius, heaps together; lest, without 
any advantage, I should become troublesome, and even offen- 
sive to the reader. I readily believe that Salem is to be taken 
for Jerusalem; and this is the generally received interpreta- 
tion. If, however, any one chooses rather to embrace a con- 
trary opinion, seeing that the town was situated in a plain, I 
do not oppose it. On this point Jerome thinks differently : 
nevertheless, what he elsewhere relates, that in his own times 
some vestiges of the palace of Melchizedek were still extant 
in the ancient ruins, appears to me improbable. 

It now remains to be seen how Melchizedek bore the 
image of Christ, and became, as it were, his representative, © 
(dyrirumog.1) These are the words of David, “The Lord 
sware, and will not repent, Thou art a priest for ever, after 
the order of Melchizedek,” (Psalm cx. 4.) First, he had 
placed him on a royal throne, and now he gives him the 
honour of the priesthood. But under the Law, these two 
offices were so distinct, that it was unlawful for kings to 
usurp the office of the priesthood. If, therefore, we concede 
as true, what Plato declares, and what occasionally occurs in 
the poets, that it was formerly received, by the common cus- 
tom of nations, that the same person should be both king and 
priest ; this was by no means the case with David and his 
- posterity, whom the Law peremptorily forbade to intrude on 
the priestly office. It was therefore right, that what was 
divinely appointed under the old law, should be abro- 
gated in the person of this priest. And the Apostle does 


1 « T] faut voir comment Melchisedech a eula figure de Christ engravee 
en soy, et est comme la representation et correspondance.”—French Tr. 


CHAP. XIV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 389 


not contend without reason, that a more excellent. priesthood 
than that old and shadowy one, was here pointed out ; which 
priesthood is confirmed by an oath. Moreover, we never 
find that king and priest, who is to be pre-eminent over all, 
till we come to Christ. And as no one has arisen except 
Christ, who equalled Melchizedek in dignity, still less who 
excelled him ; we hence infer that the image of Christ was 
presented to the fathers, in his person. David, indeed, does 
not propose a similitude framed by himself; but declares the 
reason for which the kingdom of Christ was divinely ordained, 
and even confirmed with an oath; and it is not to be doubted 
that the same truth had previously been traditionally handed 
down by the fathers. The sum of the whole is, that Christ 
would thus be the king next to God, and also that he should 
be anointed priest, and that for ever; which it is very useful 
for us to know, in order that we may learn that the royal 
power of Christ is combined with the office of priest. The 
same Person, therefore, who was constituted the only and 
eternal Priest, in order that he might reconcile us to God, 
and who, having made expiation, might intercede for us, is 
also a King of infinite power to secure our salvation, and to 
protect us by his guardian care. Hence it follows, that, re- 
lying on his advocacy, we may stand boldly in the presence 
of God, who will, we are assured, be propitious to us; and that 
trusting in his invincible arm, we may securely triumph over 
enemies of every kind. But they who separate one office from 
the other, rend Christ asunder, and subvert their own faith, 
which is deprived of half its support. It is also to. be ob- 
served, that Christ is called an eternal King, like Melchize- 
dek. For since the Scripture, by assigning no end to his 
life, leaves him as if he were to survive through all ages; it 
certainly represents or shadows forth to us, in his person, a 
figure, not of a temporal, but of an eternal kingdom. But 
whereas Christ, by his death, has accomplished the office of 
Priest, it follows that God was, by that one sacrifice, once 
appeased in such a manner, that now reconciliation is to be 
sought in Christ alone. Therefore, they do him grievous 
wrong, and wrest from him, by abominable sacrilege, the honour 


390 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XIV. 


divinely conferred upon him by an oath, who either institute 
other sacrifices for the expiation of sins, or who make other 
priests.1 And I wish this had been prudently weighed by 
the ancient writers of the Church. For then would they not 
so coolly, and even so ignorantly, have transferred to the 
bread and wine the similitude between Christ and Melchize- 
dek, which consists in things very different. They have sup- 
posed that Melchizedek is the image of Christ, because he 
offered bread and wine. For they add, that Christ offered 
his body, which is life-giving bread, and his blood, which is 
spiritual drink. But the Apostle, while in his Epistle to the 
Hebrews, he most accurately collects, and specifically prose- 
cutes, every point of similarity between Christ and Melchize- 
dek, says not a word concerning the bread and wine. If the 
subtleties of Tertullian, and of others like him, were true, it 
would have been a culpable negligence, not to bestow a single 
syllable upon the principal point, while discussing the sepa- 
rate parts, which were of comparatively trivial importance. 
And seeing the Apostle disputes at so great length, and with 
such minuteness, concerning the priesthood; how gross an 
instance of forgetfulness would it have been, not to touch 
upon that memorable sacrifice, in which the whole force of 
the priesthood was comprehended? He proves the honour 
of Melchizedek from the benediction given, and tithes re- 
ceived: how much better would it have suited this argument 
to have said, that he offered not lambs or calves, but the 
life of the world, (that is, the body and blood of Christ,) ina 
ficure?. By thesearguments the fictions of theancientsareabun- 
dantly refuted. Nevertheless, from the very words of Moses a 
sufficiently lucid refutation may be taken. For we do not there 
read that anything was offered to God; but in one continued 
discourse it is stated, ‘ He offered bread and wine; and see- 
ing he was priest of the Most High God, he blessed him,’ 
Who does not see that the same relative pronoun is common 
to both verbs; and therefore that Abram was both refreshed 


1“ Ceux qui dressent d’autres sacrifices pour nettoyer les pechez, ou 
forgent d’autres sacrificateurs.” Those who prepare other sacrifices to 
cleanse from sins, or make others sacrificing priests.—French Tr. 





CHAP. XIV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 391 


with the wine, and honoured with the benediction? Utterly 
ridiculous truly are the Papists, who distort the offering! 
of bread and wine to the sacrifice of their mass. For in 
order to bring Melchizedek into agreement with themselves, 
it will be necessary for them to concede that bread and wine 
are offered in the mass. Where, then, is transubstantiation, 
which leaves nothing except the bare species of the elements ? 
Then, with what audacity do they declare that the body of 
Christ is immolated in their sacrifices? Under what pretext, 
since the Son of God is called the only successor of Melchize- 
dek, do they substitute innumerable successors for him? We 
see, then, how foolishly they not only deprave this passage, 
but babble without the colour of reason. 


19. And he blessed him. Unless these two members of the 
sentence, ‘He was the priest of God, and ‘He blessed,’ 
cohere together, Moses here relates nothing uncommon. 
For men mutually bless each other; that is, they wish well 
to each other. But here the priest of God is described, 
who, according to the right of his office, sanctifies one 
inferior and subject to himself. For he would never have 
dared to bless Abram, unless he had known, that in this respect 
he excelied him. In this manner the Levitical priests are 
commanded to bless the people; and God promises that the 
blessing should be efficacious and ratified, (Num. vi. 23.) So 
Christ, when about to ascend up to heaven, having lifted up 
his hands, blessed the Apostles, as a minister of the grace of 
God, (Luke xxiv. 51;) and then was exhibited the truth of 
this figure. For he testifies that the office of blessing the 
Church, which had been adumbrated in Melchizedek, was 
assigned him by his Father. ) 

Blessed be Abram of the most high God. The design of 
Melchizedek is to confirm and ratify the grace of the Divine 
vocation to holy Abram; for he points out the honour with 
which God had peculiarly dignified him, by separating him 


1 Oblationem ; yet the word ought not to be rendered ob/ation, because 
this term in English always implies that the offering is made to God; 
whereas Calvin speaks of the bread and wine simply as being presented 
by Melchizedek to Abram.—Zd. 


392 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XIV. . 


from all others, and adopting him as his own son. And he 
calls God, by whom Abram had been chosen, “ the Possessor 
of heaven and earth,” to distinguish him from the fictitious 
idols of the Gentiles. Afterwards, indeed, God invests 
himself with other titles; that, by some peculiar mark, he 
may render himself more clearly known to men, who, because 
of the vanity of their mind, when they simply hear of God 
as the Framer of heaven and earth, never cease to wander, 
till at length they are lost in their own speculations. But 
because God was already known to Abram, and his faith was 
founded upon many miracles, Melchizedek deems it sufficient 
to declare that, by the title of Creator,! He whom Abram 
worshipped, is the true and only God. And although Mel- 
chizedek himself maintained the sincere worship of the true 
God, he yet calls Abram blessed of God, in respect of the 
eternal covenant: as if he would say, that, by a kind of 
hereditary right, the grace of God resided in one family and 
nation, because Abram alone had been chosen out of the 
whole world. Then is added a special congratulation on the 
victory obtained; not such as is wont to pass between pro- 
fane men, who puff each other up with inflated encomiums ; 
but Melchizedek gives thanks unto God, and regards the 
victory which the holy man had gained, as a seal of his © 
gratuitous calling. 


20. And he gave him tithes of all. There are those who 
understand that the tithes were given to Abram; but the 
Apostle speaks otherwise, in declaring that Levi had paid 
tithes in the loins of Abram, (Heb. vii. 9,) when Abram 
offered tithes to a more excellent Priest. And truly what 
the expositors above mentioned mean, would be most absurd ; 
because, if Melchizedek was the priest of God, it behoved him 
to receive tithes rather than to give them. Nor is it to be 
doubted but Abram offered the gift to God, in the person of 
Melchizedek, in order that, by such first-fruits, he might 
dedicate all his possessions to God. Abram therefore volun- 


1“ Creationis elogio testari,” &c.—‘t De donner a Dieu ce titre de 
Possesseur du ciel et de la terre.” To give to God this title of Possessor 
of heaven and earth.—French Tr. 


CHAP. XIV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 393 


tarily gave tithes to Melchizedek, to do honour to his 
priesthood. Moreover, since it appears that this was not 
done wrongfully nor rashly, the Apostle properly infers, that, 
in this figure, the Levitical priesthood is subordinate to the 
priesthood of Christ. For other reasons, God afterwards 
commanded tithes to be given to Levi under the Law; but, 
in the age of Abram, they were only a holy offering, given 
as a pledge and proof of gratitude. It is however uncertain 
whether he offered the tithe of the spoils, or of the goods 
which he possessed at home. But, since it is improbable that 
he should have been liberal with other persons’ goods, and 
should have given away a tenth part of the prey, of which he 
had resolved not to touch even a thread, I rather conjecture, 
that these tithes were taken out of his own property. Ido 
not, however, admit that they were paid annually, as some 
imagine, but rather, in my judgment, he dedicated this 
present to Melchizedek once, for the purpose of acknowledging 
him as the high priest of God: nor could he, at that time, 
(as we say,) hand it over ;' but there was a solemn stipu- 
lation, of which the effect shortly after followed. 


21. And the king of Sodom said. Moses having, by the 
way, interrupted the course of his narrative concerning the 
king of Sodom, by the mention of the king of Salem, now 
returns to it again; and says that the king of Sodom came 
to meet Abram, not only for the sake of congratulating him, 
but of giving him a due reward. He therefore makes over 
to him the whole prey, except the men; as if he would say, 
‘It isa great thing that I recover the men; let all the rest 
be given to thee as a reward for this benefit.’ And thus to 
have shown himself grateful to man, would truly have been 
worthy of commendation; had he not been ungrateful to God, 
by whose severity and clemency he remained alike unprofited. 
It was even possible that this man, when poor and deprived of 
all his goods, might, with a servile affectation of modesty, 


1“ Nec tune potuit de manu (quod aiunt) in manum tradcre.”—*‘t Ne 
luy a peu lors builler de main a main, comme on dit.” Nor was he then 
able to commit it to him, from hand to hand, as they say.—French Tr. 


394 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XIV, 


try to gain the favour of Abram, by asking to have nothing 
but the captives and the empty city for himself. Certainly 
we shall afterwards see that the men of Sodom were un- 
mindful of the benefit received, when they proudly and 
contemptuously vexed righteous Lot. 


22. And Abram said to the hing of Sodom, I have lift up 
mine hand, &c.' This ancient ceremony was very appropriate 
to give expression to the force and nature of an oath. » For 
by raising the hand towards heaven, we show that we appeal 
to God as a witness, and also as an avenger, if we fail to 
keep our oath. Formerly, indeed, they raised their hands in 
giving votes; whence the Greeks derive the word xésgoroveni,” 
which signifies to decree: but in the rite of swearing, the 
reason for doing so was different. For men hereby declared, 
that they regarded themselves as in the presence of God, 
and called upon him to be both the Guardian of truth, and 
the Avenger of perjury. Yet it may seem strange that 
Abram should so easily have put himself forward to swear ; 
for he knew that a degree of reverence was due to the 
name of God, which should constrain us to use it but spa- 
ringly, and only from. necessity. I answer, there were two 
reasons for his swearing. First, since inconstant men are 
wont to measure others by their own standard, they seldom 
place confidence in bare assertions. The king of Sodom, 
therefore, would have thought that Abram did not seriously 
remit his right, unless the name of God had been interposed. 
And, secondly, it was of great consequence, to make it 
manifest to all, that he had not carried on a mercenary war. 
The histories of all times sufficiently declare, that even they 
who have had just causes of war have, nevertheless, been 
incited to it by the thirst of private gain. And as men are 
acute in devising pretexts, they are never at a loss to find 
plausible reasons for war, even though covetousness may be 
their only real stimulant. Therefore, unless Abram had 


1A portion of the 22d verse, which is commented upon without being 
given in the original, is here inserted, in order to make the whole more 
clear to the reader ; it also appears in the French Translation.—£d. 

® Literally, to stretch forth the hand. 


CHAP. XIV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 395 


resolutely refused the spoils of war, the rumour would imme- 
diately have spread, that, under the pretence of rescuing his 
nephew, he had been intent upon grasping the prey. Against 
which it was necessary for him carefully to guard, not so 
much for his own sake, as for the glory of God, which would 
otherwise have received some mark of disparagement. Be- 
sides, Abram wished to arm himself with the name of God, 
as with a shield, against all the allurements of avarice. For 
the king of Sodom would not have desisted from tempting 
his mind by various methods, if the occasion for using bland 
insinuations had not been promptly cut off. 


23. That I will not take from a thread even to a shoe-latchet. 
The Hebrews have an elliptical form of making oath, in which 
the imprecation of punishment is understood. In some places, 
the full expression of it occurs in the Scriptures, “The Lord 
do so to me and more also,” (1 Sam. xiv. 44.) Since, how- 
ever, it is a dreadful thing to fall into the hands of the living 
God; in order that the obligation of oaths may be the more 
binding, this abrupt form of speech admonishes men to reflect 
on what they are doing; for it is just as if they should put a 
restraint upon themselves, and should stop suddenly in the 
midst of their discourse. ‘This indeed is most certain, that 
men never rashly swear, but they provoke the vengeance of 
God against them, and make Him their adversary. 

Lest thou shouldst say. Although these words seem to de- 
note a mind elated, and too much addicted to fame, yet since 
Abram is on this point commended by the Spirit, we conclude 
that this was atruly holy magnanimity. But an exception is 
added, namely, that he will not allow his own liberality to be 
injurious to his allies, nor make them subject to his laws. 
For this also is not the least part of virtue, to act rightly, yet 
in such a manner, that we do not bind others to our ex- 
ample, as toa rule. Let every one therefore regard what 
his own vocation demands, and what pertains to his own 
duty, in order that men may not prejudge one another ac- 
cording to their own will. For it is a moroseness too im- 
perious, to wish that what we ourselves follow as right, and 
consonant with our duty, should be prescribed as a law to 
others. 


396 


COMMENTARY UPON 


CHAP, X\ 


CHAPTER XV. 


1. Arrrr these things the word of 
the Lord came unto Abram in a vision, 
saying, Fear not, Abram: I am thy 
shield, and thy exceeding great reward. 


2. And Abram said, Lord God, what 
wilt thou give me, seeing I go childless, 
and the steward of my house zs this 
Eliezer of Damascus? 


3. And Abram said, Behold, to me 
thou hast given no seed: and, lo, one 
born in my house is mine heir. 


4. And, behold, the word of the Lord 
came unto him, saying, This shall not be 
thine heir; but he that shall come forth 
out of thine own bowels shall be thine 
heir. 

5. And he brought him forth abroad, 
and said, Look now toward heaven, and 
tell the stars, if thou be able to number 
them: and he said unto him, So shall 
thy seed be. 

6. And he believed in the Lord; and 
he counted it to him for righteousness. 

7. And he said unto him, I am the 
Lord that brought thee out of Ur of the 
Chaldees, to give thee this land to in- 
herit it. 

8. And he said, Lord God, whereby 
shall I know that I shall inherit it ? 


9. And he said unto him, Take me an 
heifer of three years old, and a she-goat 
of three years old, and a ram of three 
years old, and a turtle-dove, and a young 
pigeon. 

10. And he took unto him all these, 
and divided them in the midst, and laid 
each piece one against another: but the 
birds divided he not. 


11. And when the fowls came down 
upon the carcases, Abram drove them 
away. 

12. And when the sun was going 
down, a deep sleep fell upon Abram ; 
and, lo, an horror of great darkness fell 
upon him. 


1. Post hee fuit verbum 
Jehove ad Abram in visione, 
dicendo, Ne timeas Abram, ego 
scutum ero tibi, merces tua 
multa valde. 

2. Et dixit Abram, Domin- 
ator Jehova, quid dabis mihi? 
et ego incedo orbus, et filius 
derelictionis domus mex erit 
iste Dammescenus Elihezer. 

3. Et dixit Abram, Ecce, 
mihi non dedisti semen: etecce, 
filius domus mez heres meus 
est. 

4. Et ecce verbum Jehove 
ad eum, dicendo, Non erit ha- 
res tuus iste, sed qui egredietur 
de visceribus tuis, ipse heres 
tuus erit. . 

5. Et eduxit eum foras, et 
dixit, Suspice nunc ceelum, et 
numera stellas, si poteris nu- 
merare eas. Et dixit ei, Sic 
erit semen tuum. 

6. Et credidit Jehove, et - 
reputavit illud ei ad justitiam. 

7. Et dixit ad eum, Ego Je- 
hova qui eduxi te de Ur Chal- 
dex, ut darem tibi terram is- 
tam, ut heredites eam. 

8. Et dixit, Dominator Je- 
hova, in quo cognoscam quod 
hereditabo eam ? 

9. Et dixit ad eum, Tolle 
mihi vitulam triennem, et ca- 
pram triennem, et arietem trien- 
nem, et turturem, et pullum co- 
lumbarum. 

10. Et tulit sibi omnia ista, 
et divisit ea per medium, et 
posuit quamlibet partem divi- 
sionis sux e regione sociz sue ; 
sed aves non divisit. 

11. Et descenderunt aves 
super cadavera, et abigebat eas 
Abram. . 

12. Et fuit, sole occumbente 
sopor cecidit super Abram: et 
ecce, terror tenebrosus et mag- 
nus cadens super eum. 





CHAP. XV. 


13. And he said unto Abram, Know 
of a surety that thy seedshall be a stran- 
ger in a land that is not theirs, and shall 
serve them; and they shall afflict them 
four hundred years ; 


14, And also that nation, whom they 
shall serve, will I judge: and afterward 
shall they come out with great sub- 
stance. 

_ 15. And thou shalt go to thy fathers 
in peace; thoushalt be buried in a good 
old age. 

16. But in the fourth generation they 
shall come hither again : for the iniquity 
of the Amorites zs not yet full. 

17. And it came to pass, that, when 
the sun went down, and it was dark, 
behold a smoking furnace, and a burn- 
ing lamp that passed between those 
pieces. 

18. In the same day the Lord made 
a covenant with Abram, saying, Unto 
thy seed have I given this land, from the 
river of Egypt unto the great river, the 
river Euphrates: 


19. The Kenites, and the Kenizzites, 
and the Kadmonites, 

20. And the Hittites, and the Periz- 
zites, and the Rephaims, 

21. And the Amorites, and the Ca- 
naanites, and the Girgashites, and the 
Jebusites. 


1. The word of the Lord came. 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


397 


13. Et dixit ad Abram, Cog- 
noscendo cognosce quod pere- 
grinum erit semen tuum in terra 
non sua: et servient eis, affli- 
gentque eos per quadringen- 
tos annos. 

14. Sed etiam gentem, cui 
servierint, ego judicabo, et 
postea egredientur cum sub- 
stantia magna. 

15. Et tuingredieris ad pa- 
tres tuos in pace, sepelieris in 
canitie bona. 

16. Et generatione quarta 
revertentur huc: quia nondum 
est completa iniquitas Emorei. 

17. Et fuit, sole occumbente 
caligo erat, et ecce furnus fu- 
mans, et lampas ignis que 
transibat inter divisiones ipsas. 


18. In die ipso pepigit, Je- 
hova cum Abram fedus di- 
cendo, Semini tuo dabo terram 
hance, a flumine Zgypti, usque 
ad flumen magnum, flumen 
Euphratem : 

19. Cenzum, et Cenizeum, 
et Cadmoneum, 

20. Et Hittheum, et Peri- 
zeum, et Rephaim, 

21. Et Emoreum, et Che- 
naanzum, et Girgaseum, et 
Jebuszum. 


When Abram’s affairs were 


prosperous and were proceeding according to his wish, this 
vision might seem to be superfluous ; especially since the Lord 
commands his servant, as one sorrowful and afflicted with 
fear, to be of good courage. Therefore certain writers con- 
jecture, that Abram, having returned after the deliverance 
of his nephew, was subjected to some annoyance of which no 
mention is made by Moses; just as the Lord often humbles 
his people, lest they should exult in their prosperity; and 
they further suppose that when Abram had been dejected, 
he was again revived by a new oracle. But since there 
is no warrant for such conjecture in the words of Moses, 
I think the cause was different. First, although he was 
on all sides applauded, it is not to be doubted that various 


398 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XV. 


surmises entered into his own mind. For, notwithstand- 
ing Chedorlaomer and his allies had been overcome in 
battie, yet Abram had so provoked them, that they might 
with fresh troops, and with renewed strength, again attack 
the land of Canaan. Nor were the inhabitants of the land 
free from the fear of this danger. Secondly, as signal suc- 
cess commonly draws its companion envy along with it, Abram 
began to be exposed to many disadvantageous remarks, after 
he had dared to enter into conflict with an army which had 
conquered four kings. An unfavourable suspicion might also 
arise, that perhaps, by and by, he would turn the strength 
which he had tried against foreign kings, upon his neighbours, 
and upon those who had hospitably received him. There- 
fore, as the victory was an honour to him, so it cannot be 
doubted, that it rendered him formidable and an object of 
suspicion to many, while it inflamed the hatred of others; 
since every one would imagine some danger to himself, from 
his bravery and good success. It is therefore not strange, 
that he should have been troubled, and should anxiously have 
revolved many things, until God animated him anew, by the 
confident expectation of his assistance. There might be also 
another end to be answered by the oracle; namely, that God 
would meet and correct a contrary fault in his servant. For 
it was possible that Abram might be so elated with victory 
as to forget his own calling, and to seek the acquisition of 
dominion for himself, as one who, wearied with a wandering 
course of life and with perpetual vexations, desired a better 
fortune, and a quiet state of existence. And we know how 
liable men are to be ensnared by the blandishments of pro- 
sperous and smiling fortune. Therefore God anticipates the 
danger; and before this vanity takes possession of the mind 
of the holy man, recalls to his memory the spiritual grace 
vouchsafed to him, to the end that he, entirely acquiescing 
therein, may despise all other things. Yet because this ex- 
pression, “ Fear not,” sounds as if God would soothe his sor- 
rowing and anxious servant with some consolation ; it is pro- 
bable that he had need of such confirmation, because he 
perceived that many malignantly stormed against his victory, 
and that his old age would be exposed to severe annoyances. 


CHAP. XV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 399 


It might howeyer be, that God did not forbid him to fear, 
because he was already afraid ; but that he might learn coura- 
geously to despise, and to account as nothing, all the favour 
of the world, and all earthly wealth; as if he had said, ‘If only 
I am propitious to thee, there is no reason why thou shouldst 
fear; contented with me alone in the world, pursue, as thou 
hast begun, thy pilgrimage; and rather depend on heaven, 
than attach thyself to earth.’ However this might be, God 
recalls his servant to himself, showing that far greater blessings 
were treasured up for him in God ; in order that Abram might 
not rest satisfied with his victory. Moses says that God spake 
to him “in a vision,” by which he intimates that some visible 
symbol of God’s glory was added to the word, in order that 
greater authority might be given to the oracle. And this 
was one of two ordinary methods by which the Lord was 
formerly wont to manifest himself to his prophets, as it is 
stated in the book of Numbers, (chap. xii. 6.) 

Fear not, Abram. Although the promise comes last in the 
text, it yet has precedence in order; because on it depends 
the confirmation, by which God frees the heart of Abram 
from fear. God exhorts Abram to be of a tranquil mind ; 
but what foundation is there for such security, unless by faith 
we understand that God cares for us, and learn to rest in his 
providence? The promise, therefore, that God will be Abram’s 
shield and his exceeding great reward, holds the first place ; to 
which is added the exhortation, that, relying upon such a 
guardian of his safety, and such an author of his felicity, he 
should not fear. Therefore, to make the sense of the words 
more clear, the causal particle is to be inserted. ‘ Fear not, 
Abram, because 1 am thy shield’ Moreover, by the use of 
the word “ shield,” he signifies that Abram would always be 
safe under his protection. In calling himself his “ reward,” 
He teaches Abram to be satisfied with Himself alone. And 
as this was, with respect to Abram, a general instruction, given 
for the purpose of showing him that victory was not the chief 
and ultimate good which God had designed him to pursue ; 
so let us know that the same blessing is promised to us all, 
in the person of thisone man. For, by this voice, God daily 
speaks to his faithful ones; inasmuch as having once under- 


400 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XV. 


taken to defend us, he will take care to preserve us in safety 
under his hand, and to protect us by his power. Now since 
God ascribes to himself the office and property of a shield, 
for the purpose of rendering himself the protector of our sal- 
vation; we ought to regard this promise as a brazen wall, 
so that we should not be excessively fearful in any dan- 
gers. And since men, surrounded with various and innum- 
erable desires of the flesh, are at times unstable, and are then 
too much addicted to the love of the present life; the other 
member of the sentence follows, in which God declares, that 
he alone is sufficient for the perfection of a happy life to the 
faithful. For the word “reward” has the force of inheritance, 
or felicity. Were it deeply engraven on our minds, that in 
God alone we have the highest and complete perfection of all 
good things; we should easily fix bounds to those wicked 
desires by which we are miserably tormented. The meaning 
then of the passage is this, that we shall be truly happy when 
God is propitious to us; for he not only pours upon us the 
abundance of his kindness, but offers himself to us, that we 
may enjoy him. Now what is there more, which men can 
desire, when they really enjoy God? David knew the force 
of this promise, when he boasted that he had obtained a goodly — 
lot, because the Lord was his inheritance, (Psalm xvi. 6.) 
But since nothing is more difficult than to curb the depraved 
appetites of the flesh, and since the ingratitude of man is 
so vile and impious, that God scarcely ever satisfies them ; 
the Lord calls himself not simply “areward,” but an “ ex- 
ceeding great reward,” with which we ought to be more than 
sufficiently contented. This truly furnishes most abundant 
material, and most solid support, for confidence. For whoso- 
ever shall be fully persuaded that his life is protected by the 
hand of God, and that he never can be miserable while God is 
gracious to him; and who consequently resorts to this havenin 
all his cares and troubles, will find the best remedy for all evils. 
Not that the faithful can be entirely free from fear and care, as 
long as they are tossed by the tempests of contentions and of 
miseries ; but because the storm is hushed in their own breast; 
and whereas the defence of God is greater than all dangers, 
so faith triumphs over fear. 


CHAP. XV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 401 


2. And Abram said, Lord God. The Hebrew text has '}\4& 
mim, (Adonai Jehovah.) From which appellation it is in- 
ferred that some special mark of divine glory was stamped 
upon the vision; so that Abram, having no doubt respecting 
its author, confidently broke out in this expression. For 
since Satan is a wonderful adept at deceiving, and deludes 
men with so many wiles in the name of God, it was neces- 
sary that some sure and notable distinction should appear in 
true and heavenly oracles, which would not suffer the faith 
and the minds of the holy fathers to waver. Therefore, in the 
vision of which mention is made, the majesty of the God of 
Abram was manifested, which would suffice for the confirma- 
tion of his faith. Not that God appeared as he really is, 
but only so far as he might be comprehended by the human 
mind. But Abram, in overlooking a promise so glorious, in 
complaining that he is childless, and in murmuring against 
God, for having hitherto given him no seed, seems to conduct 
himself with little modesty. What was more desirable than 
to be received under God’s protection, and to be happy in 
the enjoyment of Him? The objection, therefore, which 
Abram raised, when disparaging the incomparable benefit 
offered to him, and refusing to rest contented until he re- 
ceives offspring, appears to be wanting inreverence. Yet 
the liberty which he took admits of excuse; first, because 
the Lord permits us to pour into his bosom those cares 
by which we are tormented, and those troubles with which 
we are oppressed. Secondly, the design of the complaint is 
to be considered ; for he does not simply declare that he is 
solitary, but, seeing that the effect of all the promises de- 
pended upon his seed, he does, not improperly, require that a 
pledge so necessary should be given him. For if the bene- 
diction and salvation of the world was not to be hoped for 
except through his seed; when that principal point seemed 
to fail him, it is not to be wondered at, that other things 
should seem to vanish from his sight, or should at least not 
appease his mind, nor satisfy his wishes. And this is the very 
reason why God not only regards with favour the complaint 
of his servant, but immediately gives a propitious answer to 
his prayer. Moses, indeed, ascribes to Abram that affection 

VOL. I. 2 C 


402 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XV. 


which is naturally inherent in us all; but this is no proof 
that Abram did not look higher, when he so earnestly desired to 
be the progenitor of an heir. And certainly these promises 
had not faded from his recollection ; ‘ To thy seed will I give 
this land,’ and ‘In thy seed shall all nations be blessed;’ the 
former of which promises is so annexed to all the rest, that if 
it be taken away, all confidence in them would perish; while 
the latter promise contains in it the whole gratuitous pledge 
of salvation. Therefore, Abram rightly includes in it, every 
thing which God had promised. 

I go childless. The language is metaphorical. We know 
that our life is like a race. Abram, seeing he was of advanced 
age, says that he has so far proceeded, that little of his course 
still remains. ‘Now,’ he says, ‘I am come near the goal; and 
the course of my life being finished, I shall die childless,’ 
He adds, for the sake of aggravating the indignity, ‘that a 
foreigner would be his heir.’ For I do not doubt that Dam- 
ascus is the name of his country, and not the proper name of 
his mother, as some falsely suppose; as if he had said, ‘ Not 
one of my own relatives will be my heir, but a Syrian from 
Damascus.’ For, perhaps, Abram had bought him in Meso- 
potamia. He also calls him the son of DW, (mesek,) concern- 
ing the meaning of which word grammarians are not agreed. 
Some derive it from Pp, (shakak,) which means to run to 
and fro, and translate it, steward or superintendent, because he 
who sustains the care of a large house, runs hither and thither 
in attending to his business. Others derive it from pie, 
(shook,) and render it cup-bearer, which seems to me incon- 
gruous. I rather adopt a different translation, namely, that 
he was called the son of the deserted house, (jilius derelic- 
tionis,!) because DW sometimes signifies to leave. Yet I do 
not conceive him to be so called, because Abram was about 

1% Et filius derelictionis domus mez erit iste Dammescenus Elihezer.” 
That is, according to the usual interpretation of the Hebrew phrase, the 
son or person to whom the house was left in charge by its master; 
though Calvin gives it a different turn. The various ancient versions, 
except the Syriac, agree in this interpretation. Dathe prefers the trans- 
lation of Schultens, who refers the word to an Arabic root, pw, which 
signifies to comb, to dress, or polish, and which he supposes may be applied 


generally to the care which a steward takes of everything in the house. 
But this is fanciful—Zd. 


CHAP. XV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 403 


to leave all things to him ; but because Abram himself had no 
hope left in any other. It is therefore (in my judgment) just 
as if he called him the son of a house destitute of children,’ 
because this was a proof of a deserted and barren house, that 
the inheritance was devolving upon a foreigner who would 
occupy the empty and deserted place. He afterwards con- 
temptuously calls him his servant, or his home-born slave, 
‘the son of my house (he says) will be my heir.’ He thus 
speaks in contempt, as if he would say, ‘My condition is 
wretched, who shall not have even a freeman for my suc- 
cessor. It is however asked, how he could be both a Dam- 
ascene and a home-born slave of Abram? There are two 
solutions of the difficulty, either that he was called the son 
of the house, not because he was born, but only because he 
was. educated in it; or, that he sprang from Damascus, be- 
cause his father was from Syria. - 


4. This shall not be thine heir. We hence infer that God 
had approved the wish of Abram. Whence also follows the 
other point, that Abram had not been impelled by any carnal 
affection to offer up this prayer, but by a pious and holy de- 
sire of enjoying the benediction promised to him. For God 
not only promises him a seed, but a great people, who in 
number should equal the stars of heaven. They who expound 
the passage allegorically ; implying that a heavenly seed was 
promised him which might be compared with the stars, 
may enjoy their own opinion: but we maintain what is 
more solid; namely, that the faith of Abram was increased 
by the sight of the stars. For the Lord, in order. more. 
deeply to affect his own people, and more efficaciously to 
penetrate their minds, after he has reached their ears by his 
word, also arrests their eyes by external symbols, that eyes 
and ears may consent together. Therefore the sight of the 
stars was not superfluous; but God intended to strike the mind 
of Abram with this thought, ‘He who by his word alone 
suddenly produced a host so numerous, by which he might 


1% Acsi vocaret, Filium orbitatis."—'*Comme s’il l’appeloit, Fils de 
la maison, ou il n’y a point denfans.”—French Tr. 


404 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XV. 


adorn the previously vast and desolate heaven; shall not He 
be able to replenish my desolate house with offspring?’ It is, 
however, not necessary to imagine a nocturnal vision, because 
the stars, which, during the day, escape our sight, would then 
appear; for since the whole was transacted in vision, Abram 
had a wonderful scene set before him, which would mani- 
festly reveal hidden things to him. Therefore, though he 
perhaps might not move a step, it was yet possible for him 
in vision to be led forth out of his tent. The question now 
occurs, concerning what seed the promise is to be understood. 
And it is certain that neither the posterity of Ishmael nor of 
Esau is to be taken into this account, because the legitimate 
seed is to be reckoned by the promise, which God determined 
should remain in Isaac and Jacob; yet the same doubt 
arises respecting the posterity of Jacob, because many who 
could trace their descent from him, according to the flesh, 
cut themselves off, as degenerate sons and aliens, from the 
faith of their fathers. I answer, that this term seed is, indis- 
criminately, extended to the whole people whom God has 
adopted to himself. But since many were alienated by their 
unbelief, we must come for information to Christ, who alone 
distinguishes true and genuine sons from such as are illegiti- 
mate. By pursuing this method, we find the posterity of 
Abram reduced to a small number, that afterwards it may be 
the more increased. For in Christ the Gentiles also are 
gathered together, and are by faith ingrafted into the body 
of Abram, so as to have a place among his legitimate sons. 
Concerning which point more will be said in the seventeenth 
chapter. 


6. And he believed in the Lord. None of us would be able 
to conceive the rich and hidden doctrine which this passage 
contains, unless Paul had borne his torch before us. (Rom. 
iv. 3.) But it is strange, and seems like a prodigy, that 
when the Spirit of God has kindled so great a light, yet the 
greater part of interpreters wander with closed eyes, as in 
the darkness of night. I omit the Jews, whose blindness is 
well known. But it is (as I have said) monstrous, that 
they who have had Paul as their luminous expositor, should 


CHAP. XV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 405 


so foolishly have depraved this place. However, it hence 
appears, that in all ages, Satan has laboured at nothing 
more assiduously than to extinguish, or tosmother, the gra- 
tuitous justification of faith, which is here expressly asserted. 
The words of Moses are, “ He believed in the Lord, and he 
counted it to him for righteousness.” In the first place, the 
faith of Abram is commended, because by it he embraced the 
promise of God; it is commended, in the second place, be- 
cause hence Abram obtained righteousness in the sight of 
God, and that by imputation. For the word wm, (chashab,) 
which Moses uses, is to be understood as relating to the 
judgment of God, just as in Psalm evi. 31, where the zeal of 
Phinehas is said to have been counted to him for righteous- 
ness. The meaning of the expression will, however, more 
fully appear by comparison with its opposites.’ In Leviticus 
- vii. 18, it is said that when expiation has been made, iniquity 
‘shall not be imputed’ to a man. Again, in chap. xvii. 4, 
‘ Blood shall be imputed unto that man. So, in 2 Sam. xix. 19, 
Shimei says, ‘Let not the king impute iniquity unto me.’ 
Nearly of the same import is the expression in 2 Kings xii. 
15, ‘They reckoned not with the man into whose hand they 
delivered the money for the work ;’ that is, they required no 
account of the money, but suffered them to administer it, in 
perfect confidence. Let us now return to Moses. Just as 
we understand that they to whom iniquity is imputed are 
guilty before God; so those to whom he imputes righteous- 
ness are approved by him as just persons; wherefore Abram 
was received into the number and rank of just persons, by 
the imputation of righteousness. For Paul, in order that he 
may show us distinctly the force and nature, or quality of 
this righteousness, leads us to the celestial tribunal of God. 
Therefore, they foolishly trifle who apply this term to his 
character as an honest man ;? as if it meant that Abram was 


1“ Melius ex antitheto patebit.”—‘‘Toutefois on entendra mieux par 
Vantithese, c’est a dire, par ce qui est opposite, ce qu’ emporte ceci.”— 
French Tr. 

* The French version is strongly expressed. ‘‘ Et pourtant ceux-la 
gazouillent bien sottement, qui tirent ceci au bruit et renom de preu- 
@hommie.” Especially do they chatter foolishly enough, who draw this 
aside to the fame and renown of honesty.—French Tr. 


406 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XV. 


personally held to be a just and righteous man. They also, no 
‘less unskilfully, corrupt the text, who say that Abram is here 
ascribing to God the glory of righteousness, seeing that he 
ventures to acquiesce surely in His promises, acknowledging 
Him to be faithful and true; for although Moses does 
not expressly mention the name of God, yet the accustomed 
method of speaking in the Scriptures removes all ambiguity. 
Lastly, it is not less the part of stupor than of impudence, 
when this faith is said to have been imputed to him for right- 
eousness, to mingle with it some other meaning, than that the 
faith of Abram was accepted in the place of righteousness 
with God. 

It seems, however, to be absurd, that Abram should be 
justified by believing that his seed would be as numerous as 
the stars of heaven; for this could be nothing but a particu- 
lar faith, which would by no means suffice for the complete 
righteousness of man. Besides, what could an earthly and 
temporal promise avail for eternal salvation? I answer, 
first, that the believing of which Moses speaks, is not to be re- 
stricted to a single clause of the promise here referred to, but 
embraces the whole ; secondly, that Abram did not form his 
estimate of the promised seed from this oracle alone, but 
also from others, where a special benediction is added. Whence 
we infer that he did not expect some common or undefined 
seed, but that in which the world was to be blessed. Should 
any one pertinaciously insist, that what is said in common of 
all the children of Abram, is forcibly distorted when applied 
to Christ; in the first place, it cannot be denied that God 
now again repeats the promise before made to his servant, 
for the purpose of answering his complaint. But we have 
said—and the thing itself clearly proves—that Abram was 
impelled thus greatly to desire seed, by a regard to the pro- 
mised benediction. Whence it follows, that this promise was 
not taken by him separately from others. But to pass all 
this over ; we must, I say, consider what is here treated of, in 
order to form a judgment of the faith of Abram. God does 
not promise to his servant this or the other thing only, as he 
sometimes grants special benefits to unbelievers, who are 
without the taste of his paternal love; but he declares, that 


CHAP. XV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 407 


He will be propitious to him, and confirms him in the confi- 
dence of safety, by relying upon His protection and His 
grace. For he who has God for his inheritance does not 
exult in fading joy; but, as one already elevated towards 
heaven, enjoys the solid happiness of eternal life. It is, in- 
deed, to be maintained as an axiom, that all the promises 
of God, made to the faithful, flow from the free mercy of God, 
and are evidences of that paternal love, and of that gratui- 
tous adoption, on which their salvation is founded. ‘There- 
fore, we do not say that Abram was justified because he laid 
hold on a single word, respecting the offspring to be brought 
forth, but because he embraced God as his Father. And 
truly faith does not justify us for any other reason, than that 
it reconciles us unto God; and that it does so, not by its own 
merit; but because we receive the grace offered to usin the pro- 
mises, and have no doubt of eternal life, being fully persuaded 
that weare loved by God as sons. Therefore, Paul reasons from 
contraries, that he to whom faith is imputed for righteousness, 
has not been justified by works. (Rom. iv. 4.) For whoso- 
ever obtains righteousness by works, his merits come into the 
account before God. But we apprehend righteousness by 
faith, when God freely reconciles us to himself. Whence it 
follows, that the merit of works ceases when righteousness is 
sought by faith; for it is necessary that this righteousness 
should be freely given by God, and offered in his word, in 
order that any one may possess it by faith. To render this 
more intelligible, when Moses says that faith was imputed to 
Abram for righteousness, he does not mean that faith was that 
first cause of righteousness which is called the efficient, but only 
the formal cause ; asif he had said, that Abram was there- 
fore justified, because, relying on the paternal loving-kindness 
of God, he trusted to His mere goodness, and not to himself, 
nor to his own merits. For it is especially to be observed, 
that faith borrows a righteousness elsewhere, of which we, 
in ourselves, are destitute ; otherwise it would be in vain for 
Paul to set faith in opposition to works, when speaking of 
the mode of obtaining righteousness. Besides, the mutual 
relation between the free promise and faith, leaves no doubt 
upon the subject. 


408 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XY. 


We must now notice the circumstance of time. Abram 
was justified by faith many years after he had been called by 
God; after he had left his country a voluntary exile, rendering 
himself a remarkable example of patience and of continence ; 
after he had entirely dedicated himself to sanctity, and after he 
had, by exercising himself in the spiritual and external service 
of God, aspired to a life almost angelical. It therefore fol- 
lows, that even to the end of life, we are led towards the 
eternal kingdom of God by the righteousness of faith. On 
which point many are too grossly deceived. For they grant, 
indeed, that the righteousness which is freely bestowed upon 
sinners, and offered to the unworthy, is received by faith 
alone; but they restrict this to a moment of time, so that he 
who at the first obtained justification by faith, may after- 
wards be justified by good works. By this method, faith is 
nothing else than the beginning of righteousness, whereas 
righteousness itself consists in a continual course of works. 
But they who thus trifle must be altogether insane. For if 
the angelical uprightness of Abram, faithfully cultivated 
through so many years, in one uniform course, did not pre- 
vent him from fleeing to faith, for the sake of obtaining right- 
eousness; where upon earth besides will such perfection be — 
found, as may stand in God’s sight? Therefore, bya considera- 
tion of the time in which this was said to Abram,! we cer- 
tainly gather, that the righteousness of works is not to be 
substituted for the righteousness of faith, in any such way, 
that one should perfect what the other has begun; but that 
holy men are only justified by faith, as long as they live in the 
world. If any one object, that Abram previously believed 
God, when he followed Him at His call, and committed him- 
self to His direction and guardianship, the solution is ready ; 
that we are not here told when Abram first began to be jus- 
tified, or to believe in God; but that in this one place it is 
declared, or related, how he had been justified through his 
whole life. For if Moses had spoken thus immediately on 
Abram’s first vocation, the cavil of which I have spoken would 


1 « Ergo ex ratione temporis certo colligimus.”—‘“‘ Nous recueillons done 
pour certain, selon la raison du temps auquel ceci fut dit & Abram,.”— 
French Tr. 


CHAP. XV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 409 


have been more specious; namely, that the righteousness of 
faith was only initial (so to speak) and not perpetual. But 
now, since after such great progress, he is still said to be jus- 
tified by faith, it thence easily appears that the saints are 
justified freely even unto death. I confess, indeed, that after 
the faithful are born again by the Spirit of God, the method 
of justifying differs, in some respect, from the former.. For 
God reconciles to himself those who are born only of the 
flesh, and who are destitute of all good; and since he finds 
nothing in them except a dreadful mass of evils, he counts 
them just, by imputation. But those to whom he has im- 
parted the Spirit of holiness and righteousness, he embraces 
with his gifts. Nevertheless, in order that their good works 
may please God, it is necessary that these works themselves 
should be justified by gratuitous imputation; but some evil 
is always inherent in them. Meanwhile, however, this is a 
settled point, that men are justified before God by believing 
not by working; while they obtain grace by faith, because 
they are unable to deserve a reward by works. Paul also, in 
hence contending, that Abram did not merit by works the 
righteousness which he had received before his circumcision, 
does not impugn the above doctrine. The argument of Paul 
is of this kind: The circumcision of Abram was posterior to - 
his justification in the order of time, and therefore could not 
be its cause, for of necessity the cause precedes its effect. I 
also grant, that Paul, for this reason, contends that works are 
not meritorious, except under the covenant of the law, of 
which covenant, circumcision is put as the earnest and the sym- 
bol. But since Paulis not here defining the force and nature 
of circumcision, regarded as a pure and genuine institution of 
God, but is rather disputing on the sense attached to it, by 
those with whom he deals, he therefore does not allude to 
the covenant which God before had made with Abram, be- 
cause the mention of it was unnecessary for the present pur- 
pose. Both arguments are therefore of force; first, that the 
righteousness of Abram cannot be ascribed to the covenant 
of the law, because it preceded his circumcision; and, secondly, 
that the righteousness even of the most perfect characters 
perpetually consists in faith; since Abram, with all the excel- 


410 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XV. 


lency of his virtues, after his daily and even remarkable ser- 
vice of God, was, nevertheless, justified by faith. For this 
also is, in the last place, worthy of observation, that what is 
here related concerning one man, is applicable to all the sons 
of God. For since he was called the father of the faithful, 
not without reason; and since further, there is but one method 
of obtaining salvation; Paul properly teaches, that a real and 
not personal righteousness is in this place described. 


7. Lam the Lord that brought thee. Since it greatly con- 
cerns us, to have God as the guide of our whole life, in order 
that we may know that we have not rashly entered on some 
doubtful way, therefore the Lord confirms Abram in the 
course of his vocation, and recalls to his memory the original 
benefit of his deliverance ; as if he had said, ‘I, after I had 
stretched out my hand to thee, to lead thee forth from the 
labyrinth of death, have carried my favour towards thee thus 
far. Thou, therefore, respond to me in turn, by constantly 
advancing ; and maintain stedfastly thy faith, from the begin- 
ning even to the end.’ This indeed is said, not with respect 
to Abram alone, in order that he, gathering together the 
promises of God, made to him from the very commencement 
of his life of faith, should form them into one whole ;! but that 
all the pious may learn to regard the beginning of their vo- 
cation as flowing perpetually from Abram, their common 
father; and may thus securely boast with Paul, that they 
know in whom they have believed, (2 Tim. ii. 12,) and that 
God, who, in the person of Abram, had separated a church 
unto himself, would be a faithful keeper of the salvation de- 
posited with Him. That, for this very end, the Lord declares 
himself to have been the deliverer of Abram, appears hence ; 
because he connects the promise which he is now about to 
give with the prior redemption ; as if he were saying, ‘I do 
not now first begin to promise thee this land. For it was on 
this account that I brought thee out of thy own country, to 
constitute thee the lord and heir of this land. Now there- 


1“ Corpus unum efficeret.”—“ Et les joindre ensemble comme en un 
corps.” And should join them together, as in one body. —French Tr. 


CHAP. XV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 411 


fore I covenant with thee in the same form; lest thou 
shouldst deem thyself to have been deceived, or fed with 
empty words; and I command thee to be mindful of the first 
covenant, that the new promise, which after many years I 
now repeat, may be the more firmly supported.’ 


8. Lord God, whereby shall I know. It may appear absurd, 
first, that Abram, who before had placed confidence in the 
simple word of God, without moving any question concerning 
the promises given to him, should now dispute whether what 
he hears from the mouth of God be true or not. Secondly, 
that he ascribes but little honour to God, not merely by mur- 
muring against him, when he speaks, but by requiring some 
additional pledge to be given him. Further, whence arises 
the knowledge which belongs to faith, but from the word ? 
Therefore Abram in vain desires to be assured of the future 
possession of the land, while he ceases to depend upon the 
word of God. I answer, the Lord sometimes concedes to his 
children, that they may freely express any objection which 
comes into their mind. For he does not act so strictly with 
them, as not to suffer himself to be questioned. Yea, the 
more certainly Abram was persuaded that God was true, and 
the more he was attached to His word, so much the more 
familiarly did he disburden his cares into God’s bosom. To this 
may be added, that the protracted delay was no small obstacle 
to Abram’s faith. For after God had held him in suspense 
through a great part of his life, now when he was worn 
down with age, and had nothing before his eyes but death 
and the grave, God anew declares that he shall be lord of 
the land. He does not, however, reject, on account of its 
difficulty, what might have appeared to him incredible, but 
brings before God the anxiety by which he is inwardly op- 
pressed. And therefore his questioning with God is rather 
a proof of faith, than a sign of incredulity. The wicked, be- 
cause their minds are entangled with various conflicting 
thoughts, do not in any way receive the promises, but the pious, 
who feel the impediments in their flesh, endeavour to remove 
them, lest they should obstruct the way to God’s word ; and 
they seek a remedy for those evils of which they are conscious. 


412 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XV. 


It is, nevertheless, to be observed, that there were some 
special impulses in the saints of old, which it would not now 
be lawful to draw into a precedent. For though Hezekiah 
and Gideon required certain miracles, this is not a reason why 
the same thing should be attempted by us in the present day; 
let it suffice us to seek for such confirmation only as the Lord 
himself, according to his own pleasure, shall judge most 
eligible. 


9. Take me an heifer of three years old. Some, instead of an 
heifer of three years old, translate the passage, ‘ three heifers,’ 
and in each species of animals enumerated, would make the 
number three. Yet the opinion of those who apply the word 
three to the age of the heifer, is more general. Moreover, 
although God would not deny his servant what he had asked ; 
he yet, by no means, granted what would gratify the desire of 
the flesh. For, what certainty could be added to the pro- 
mise, by the slaughter of an heifer, or goat, orram? For the 
true design of sacrifice, of which we shall see more presently, 
was hitherto hidden from Abram. ‘Therefore, by obeying 
the command of God, of which, however, no advantage was 
apparent, he hence proves the obedience of his faith; nor did 
his wish aim at any other end than this; namely, that, the 
obstacle being removed, he might, as was just, reverently 
acquiesce in the word of the Lord. Let us, therefore, learn 
meekly to embrace those helps which God offers for the con- 
firmation of our faith; although they may not accord with 
our judgment, but rather may seem to be a mockery; until, 
at length, it shall become plain from the effect, that God was 
as far as possible from mocking us. 


10. And divided them in the midst. That no part of this sa- 
crifice may be without mystery, certain interpreters weary 
themselves in the fabrication of subtleties; but it is our busi- 
ness, as I have often declared, to cultivate sobriety. I con- 
fess I do not know why he was commanded to take three 
kinds of animals besides birds; unless it were, that by this 
variety itself, it was declared, that all the posterity of Abram, 
of whatever rank they might be, should be offered up in sacri- 


CHAP. XV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 413 


fice, so that the whole people, and each individual, should con- 
stitute one sacrifice. ‘There are also some things, concerning 
which, if any one curiously seeks the reason, I shall not be 
ashamed to acknowledge my ignorance, because I do not 
choose to wander in uncertain speculations. Moreover, this, 
in my opinion, is the sum of the whole: That God, in com- 
manding the animals to be killed, shows what will be the fu- 
ture condition of the Church. Abram certainly wished to be 
assured of the promised inheritance of the land. Now he is 
taught that it would take its commencement from death ; 
that is, that he and his children must die before they should 
enjoy the dominion over the land. In commanding the 
slaughtered animals to be cut in parts, it is probable that he 
followed the ancient rite in forming covenants, whether they 
were entering into any alliance, or were mustering an army, 
a practice which also passed over to the Gentiles. Now, the 
allies or the soldiers passed between the severed parts, that, 
being enclosed together within the sacrifice, they might be 
the more sacredly united in one body. That this method 
was practised by the Jews, Jeremiah bears witness, (xxxiv. 
18,) where he introduces God as saying, ‘ They have violated 
my covenant, when they cut the calf in two parts, and passed 
between the divisions of it, as well the princes of Judah, and 
the nobles of Jerusalem, and the whole people of the land,’ 
Nevertheless, there appears to me to have been this special 
reason for the act referred to; that the Lord would indeed ad- 
monish the race of Abram, not only that it should be likea dead 
carcase, but even likeone torn and dissected.- For theservitude 
with which they were oppressed for a time, was more intoler- 
able than simple death ; yet because the sacrifice is offered to 
God, death itself is immediately turned into new life. And 
this is the reason why Abram, placing the parts of the sacrifice 
opposite to each other, fits them one to the other, because 
they were again to be gathered together from their disper- 
sion. But how difficult is the restoration of the Church, and 
what troubles are involved in it, is shown by the horror with 
which Abram was seized. We see, therefore, that two things 
were illustrated; namely, the hard servitude, with which the 
sons of Abram were to be pressed almost to laceration and 


414 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XV. 


destruction ; and then their redemption, which was to be the 
signal pledge of divine adoption ; and in the same mirror the 
general condition of the Church is represented to us, as it is 
the peculiar province of God to create it out of si” and 
to raise it from death. 


11. And when the fowls came down. Although the sacrifice 
was dedicated to God, yet it was not free from the attack 
and the violence of birds. So neither are the faithful, after 
they are received into the protection of God, so covered with 
his hand, as not to be assailed on every side ; since Satan and 
the world cease not to cause them trouble. Therefore, in 
order that the sacrifice we have once offered to God may not 
be violated, but may remain pure and uninjured, contrary 
assaults must be repulsed, with whatever inconvenience and 
toil. 


12. A deep sleep fell upon Abram. The vision is now 
mingled with a dream. ‘Thus the Lord here joins those two 
kinds of communication together, which I have before related 
from Numbers xii. 6, where it is said, ‘ When I appear unto my 
servants the prophets, I speak to them in a vision or a dream.’ — 
Mention has already been made of a vision: Moses now re- 
lates that a dream was superadded. A horrible darkness in- 
tervened, that Abram might know that the dream is nota 
common one, but that the whole is divinely conducted ; it 
has, nevertheless, a correspondence with the oracle then pre- 
sent, as God immediately afterwards explains in his own 
words, “ Thou shalt surely know that thy seed shall be a 
stranger,” &c. We have elsewhere said, that God was not 
wont to dazzle the eyes of his people with bare and empty 
spectres ; but that in visions, the principal parts always be- 
longed to the word. Thus here, not a mute apparition is 
presented to the eyes of Abram, but he is taught by an 
oracle annexed, what the external and visible symbol meant. 
It is, however, to be observed, that before one son is given to 
Abram, he hears that his seed shall be, for a long time, in cap- 
tivity and slavery. For thus does the Lord deal with his 
own people; he always makes a beginning from death, so 


CHAP. XV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 415 


that by quickening the dead, he the more abundantly mani- 
fests his power. It was necessary, in part, on Abram’s ac- 
count, that this should have been declared; but the Lord 
chiefly had regard to his posterity, lest they should faint in 
their sufferings, of which, however, the Lord had promised a 
joyful and happy issue ; especially since their long continuance 
would produce great weariness. And three things are, step 
by step, brought before them ; first, that the sons of Abram 
must wander four hundred years, before they should attain 
the promised inheritance; secondly, that they should be 
slaves ; thirdly, that they were to be inhumanly and tyran- 
nically treated. Wherefore the faith of Abram was admir- 
able and singular; seeing that he -acquiesced in an oracle so 
sorrowful, and felt assured, that God would be his Deliverer, 
after his miseries had proceeded to their greatest height. 

It is, however, asked, how the number of years here given 
agrees with the subsequent history ? Some begin the compu- 
tation from the time of his departure out of Charran. But 
it seems more probable, that the intermediate time only is 
denoted ;' as if he would say, ‘It behoves thy posterity to 
wait patiently ; because I have not decreed to grant what I 
now promise, until the four hundredth year: yea, up to that 
very time their servitude will continue.’ According to this 
mode of reckoning, Moses says, (Exod. xii. 40,) that the 
children of Israel dwelt in Egypt four hundred and thirty 
years: while yet, from the sixth chapter, we may easily 
gather, that not more than two hundred and thirty years, or 
thereabouts, elapsed from the time that Jacob went down 
thither, to their deliverance. Where, then, shall we find the 
remaining two hundred years, but by referring to the oracle ? 
Of this matter all doubt is removed by Paul, who (Gal. iii. 
17) reckons the years from the gratuitous covenant of life, 
to the promulgation of the Law. In short, God does not in- 
dicate how long the servitude of the people should be from 
its commencement to its close, but how long he intended to 
suspend, or to defer his promise. As to his omitting the 

1 «Sed magis probabile videtur, notari duntaxat tempus intermedium.” 


Calvin evidently means the time which was to intervene between the 
giving of the oracle and the exodus from Egypt— Ed. 


416 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XV. 


thirty years, it is neither a new nor unfrequent thing, where 
years are not accurately computed, to mention only the larger 
sums. But we see here, that for the sake of brevity, the 
whole of that period is divided into four centuries. There- 
fore, there is no absurdity in omitting the short space of time : 
this is chiefly to be considered, that the Lord, for the purpose 
of exercising the patience of his people, suspends his promise 
more than four centuries. 


14. Also that nation whom they serve. A consolation is now 
subjoined, in which this is the first thing, God testifies that 
he will be the vindicator of his people. Whence it follows, 
that he will take upon himself the care of the salvation of 
those whom he has embraced, and will not suffer them to be 
harassed by the ungodly and the wicked with impunity. And 
although he here expressly announces that he will take ven- 
geance on the Egyptians; yet all the enemies of the Church 
are exposed to the same judgment: even as Moses in his song 
extends to all ages and nations the threat that the Lord will 
exact punishment for unjust persecutions.’ ‘ Vengeance is 
mine, I, saith he, will repay,’ (Deut. xxxii. 35.) Therefore, 
whenever we happen to be treated with inhumanity by ty- | 
rants, (which is very usual with the Church,) let this be our 
consolation, that after our faith shall be sufficiently proved 
by bearing the cross, God, at whose pleasure we are thus 
humbled, will himself be the Judge, who will repay to our 
enemies the due reward of the cruelty which they now exer- 
cise. Although they now exult with intoxicated joy, it will 
at length appear by the event itself, that our miseries are 
happy ones, but their triumphs wretched ; because God, who 
careth for us, is their adversary. But let us remember that 
we must give place unto the wrath of God, as Paul exhorts, in 
order that we may not be hurried headlong to seek revenge. 
Place also must be given to hope, that it may sustain us when 
oppressed and groaning under the burden of evils. To judge 


1“ De justis persequutionibus.” Most probably a misprint for injustis ; 
as both the Old French and English translations agree in rendering the 
word unjust. 


| 





CHAP. XV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 417 


the nation, means the same thing as to summon it to judg- 
ment, in order that God, when he has long reposed in silence, 
may openly manifest himself as the Judge. 


15. And thou shalt go to thy fathers in peace. Hitherto the 
Lord had respect to the posterity of Abram as well as to him- 
self, that the consolation might be common to all; but now 
he turns his address to Abram alone, because he had need of 
peculiar confirmation. And the remedy proposed for alleviat- 
ing his sorrow was, that he should die in peace, after he had 
attained the utmost limit of old age. The explanation given 
by some that he should die a natural death, exempt from 
violence; or an easy death, in which his vital spirits should 
spontaneously and naturally fail, and his life itself should fall 
by its own maturity, without any sense of pain, is, in my 
opinion, frigid. ’or Moses wishes to express that Abram 
should have not only a long, but a placid old age, with a cor- 
responding joyful and peaceful death. The sense therefore 
is, that although, through his whole life, Abram was to be de- ° 
prived of the possession of the land, yet he should not be 
wanting in the essential materials of quiet and joy, so that 
having happily finished his life, he should cheerfully depart to 
his fathers. And certainly death makes the great distinction 
between the reprobate and the sons of God, whose condition 
in the present life is commonly one and the same, except that 
the sons of God have by far the worst of it. Wherefore 
peace in death ought justly to be regarded as a singular bene- 
fit, because it is a proof of that distinction to which I have 
just alluded.t. Even profane writers, feeling their way in the. 
dark, have perceived this. Plato, in his book on the Republic, 
(lib. i.) cites a song of Pindar, in which he says, that they 
who live justly and holily, are attended by a sweet hope, 
cherishing their hearts and nourishing their old age; which 
hope chiefly governs the fickle mind of men. Because men, 
conscious of guilt, must necessarily be miserably harassed by 
various torments; the Poet, when he asserts that hope is the 


1 “ Quod nuper attigit,”—should doubtless be attigi; as the sense re- 
quires, and as it is rendered in the French version, with which the Old 


_ English Translation corresponds.—Ed. 


VOL. I. 2p 


418 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XV. 


reward of a good conscience, calls it the nurse of old age.’ 
For as young men, while far removed from death, carelessly 
take their pleasure ;? the old are admonished by their own 
weakness, seriously to reflect that they must depart. Now . 
unless the hope of a better life inspires them, nothing remains 
for them but miserable fears. Finally, as the reprobate in- 
dulge themselves during their whole life, and stupidly sleep 
in their vices, it is necessary that their death should be full 
of trouble ; while the faithful commit their souls into the hand 
of God without fear and sadness. Whence also Balaam was 
constrained to break forth in this expression, ‘ Let my soul 
die the death of the righteous,’ (Numb. xxiii. 10.) Moreover, 
since men have not such a desirable close of life in their own 
power; the Lord, in promising a placid and quiet death to his 
servant Abram, teaches us that it is his own gift. And we see 
that even kings, and others who deem themselves happy in 
this world, are yet agitated in death; because they are visited 
with secret compunctions for their sins, and look for nothing 
in death but destruction. But Abram willingly and joyfully 
went forward to his death, seeing that he had in Isaac a cer- 
tain pledge of the divine benediction, and knew that a better 
life was laid up for him in heaven. 


16. The iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full. The reason 
here given is deemed absurd, as seeming to imply that the sons 
of Abram could not otherwise be saved, than by the destruction 
of others. I answer, that we must with modesty and humility 
yield to the secret counsel of God. Since he had given that 
land to the Amorites, to be inhabited by them in perpetuity, 
he intimates, that he will not, without just cause, transfer the 
possession of it to others; as if he would say, ‘I grant the 
dominion of this land to thy seed without injury to any one. 
The land, at present, is occupied by its lawful possessors, to 
whom I delivered it. Until, therefore, they shall have de- 
served, by their sins, to be rightfully expelled, the dominion 
of it will not come to thy posterity.” Thus God teaches him 


1“ Kam yneoreeQov appellat.” 
2 « Secure delicientur.”—‘ Prenent leurs plaisirs sans.souci ne crainte.” 
—French Tr. 


CHAP. XV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 419 


that the Jand must be evacuated, in order that it may lie open 
to new inhabitants. And this passage is remarkable, as 
showing, that the abodes of men are so distributed in the 
world, that the Lord will preserve quiet people, each in their 
several stations, till they cast themselves out by their own 
wickedness. For by polluting the place of their habitation, 
they in a certain sense tear away the boundaries fixed by the 
hand of God, which would otherwise have remained immove- 
able. Moreover, the Lord here commends his own long-suf- 
fering. Even then the Amorites had become unworthy to 
occupy the land, yet the Lord not only bore with them for a 
short time, but granted them four centuries for repentance. 
And hence it appears, that he does not, without reason, so 
frequently declare how slow he is to anger. But the more 
graciously he waits for men, if, at length, instead of repenting 
they remain obstinate, the more severely does he avenge such 
great ingratitude. Therefore Paul says, that they who in- 
dulge themselves in sin, while the goodness and clemency of 
God invite them to repentance, heap up for themselves a 
treasure of wrath, (Rom. ii. 4;) and thus they reap no advan- 
tage from delay, seeing that the severity of the punishment 
is doubled ; just as it happened to the Amorites, whom, at 
length, the Lord commanded to be so entirely cut off, that 
not even infants were spared. Therefore, when we hear that 
God out of heaven is silently waiting until iniquities shall fill 
up their measure; let us know, that this is no time for torpor, 
but rather let every one of us stir himself up, that we may be 
beforehand with the celestial judgment. It was formerly said 
by a heathen, that the anger of God proceeds with a slow step 
to avenge itself, but that it compensates for its tardiness by 
the severity of its punishment. Hence there is no reason 
why reprobates should flatter themselves, when he seems to 
let them pass unobserved,’ since he does not so repose in 
heaven, as to cease to be the Judge of the world; nor will he. 
be unmindful of the execution of his office, in due time.” We 


1 “* Ko dissimulante.” : 
2 “ Nec officii sui in tempore obliviscatur.” The sense given in the 
translation would perhaps scarcely have been elicited from these words, 


420 COMMENTARY UPON _ CHAP, XY. 


infer, however, from the words of Moses, that though space 
for repentance is given to the reprobate, they are still devoted 
to destruction. Some take the word NY, (ayon,) for punish- 
ment, as if it had been said that punishment was not yet ma- 
tured for them. But the former exposition is more suitable; 
namely, that they will set no bound to their wickedness, until 
they bring upon themselves final destruction. 


17. Behold, a smoking furnace. Again a new vision was 
added, to confirm his faith in the oracle. At first, Abram 
was horror-struck with the thick darkness ; now, in the midst 
of a smoking furnace, he sees a burning lamp. Many suppose 
that a sacrifice was consumed with this fire; but I rather 
interpret it as a symbol of future deliverance, which would 
well agree with the fact itself. For there are two things 
contrary to each other in appearance ; the obscurity of smoke, 
and the shining of a lamp. Hence Abram knew that light 
would, at length, emerge out of darkness. An analogy is 
always to be sought for between signs, and the things sig- 
nified, that there may be a mutual correspondence between 
them. Then, since the symbol, in itself, is but a lifeless 
carcase, reference ought always to be made to the word which 
is annexed to it. But here, by the word, liberty was pro-— 
mised to Abram’s seed, in the midst of servitude. Now the 
condition of the Church could not be painted more to the 
life, than when God causes a burning torch to proceed out of 
the smoke, in order that the darkness of afflictions may not 
overwhelm us, but that we may cherish a good hope of life 
even in death; because the Lord will, at length, shine upon 
us, if only we offer up ourselves in sacrifice to Him. 


18. In the same day the Lord made a covenant. I willingly 
admit what I have alluded to above, that the covenant was 
ratified by a solemn rite, when the animals were divided 
into parts. For there seems to be a repetition, in which he 


without the aid of Calvin’s own French translation, which thus renders the 
passage, ‘ Et ne s’oublie point de faire son office en temps due.’ The Old 
English version, by adhering to a barely literal rendering, deprives the 
sentence of all meaning; “neither doth he in time forget his duty.” 
—Ed. 


CHAP. XVI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 421 


teaches what was the intent of the sacrifice which he has 
mentioned. Here, also, we may observe, what I have said, 
that the word is always to be joined with the symbols, lest 
our eyes be fed with empty and fruitless ceremonies. God 
has commanded animals to be offered to him; but he has 
shown their end and use, by a covenant appended to them. 
If, then, the Lord feeds us by sacraments, we infer, that they 
are the evidences of his grace, and the tokens of those spiri- 
tual blessings which flow from it. 

He then enumerates the nations, whose land God was about 
to give to the sons of Abram, in order that he may confirm 
what he before said concerning a numerous offspring. For that 
was not to be a small band of men, but an immense mul- 
titude, for which the Lord assigns a habitation of such vast 
extent. God had before spoken only of the Amorites, among 
whom Abram then dwelt; but now, for the sake of ampli- 








fying his grace, he recounts all the others by name. 


CHAPTER XVI. 


1. Now Sarai Abram’s wife bare 
him no children: and she had an hand- 
maid, an Egyptian, whose name was 
Hagar. 

2. And Sarai said unto Abram, Be- 
hold now, the Lord hath restrained me 
from bearing: I pray thee, go in unto 
my maid; it may be that I may obtain 
children by her. And Abram hearkened 
to the voice of Sarai. 

3. And Sarai Abram’s wife took Ha- 
gar, her maid the Egyptian, after Abram 
had dwelt ten years in the land of 
Canaan, and gave her to her husband 
Abram to be his wife. 


4, And he went in unto Hagar, and 
she conceived: and when she saw that 
she had conceived, her mistress was 
despised in her eyes. 

5. And Sarai said unto Abram, 
My wrong be upon thee: I have given 
my maid into thy bosom; and when 
she saw that she had conceived, I was 


1. Porro Sarai uxor Abram 
non pepererat ei: erat autem 
ei ancilla Aigyptia, et nomen 
ejus Hagar. 

2. Et dixit Sarai ad Abram, 
Ecce, nune conclusit me Je- 
hova, ne parerem: ingredere 
nunc ad ancillam meam, si forte 
edificer ex ea: et paruit 
Abram voci Sarai. 

3. Et tulit Saraiuxor Abram, 
Hagar Augyptiam ancillam su- 
am in fine decem annorum, 
quibus habitavit Abram in ter- 
ra Chenaan, et dedit eam 
Abram viro suo in uxorem. 

4. Et ingressusest ad Hagar, 
et concepit: et videns quod 
concepisset, despectui habuit 
dominam suam in oculis suis. 

5. Tunc dixit Sarai ad 
Abram, Injuria mea super te: 
ego dedi ancillam meam in sinu 
tuo, et ubi vidit quod conce- 


422 


despised in her eyes: the Lord judge 
between me and thee. 


6. But Abram said unto Sarai, 
Behold, thy maid zs in thy hand; do 
to her as it pleaseth thee. And when 
Sarai dealt hardly with her, she fled 
from her face. 

7. And the angel of the Lord 
found her by a fountain of water in the 
wilderness, by the fountain in the way 
to Shur. 

8. And he said, Hagar, Sarai’s maid, 
whence camest thou? and whither wilt 
thou go? And she said, I flee from the 
face of my mistress Sarai. 

9. And the angel of the Lord said 
unto her, Return to thy mistress, and 
submit thyself under ler hands. 


10. And the angel of the Lord said 
unto her, I will multiply thy seed ex- 
ceedingly, that it shall not be numbered 
for multitude. 

11. And the angel of the Lord said 
unto her, Behold, thou art with child, 
and shalt bear a son, and shalt call his 
name Ishmael; because the Lord hath 
heard thy affliction. 

12. And he will be a wild man; his 
hand will beagainst every man, and every 
man’s hand against him ;. and he shall 
dwell in the presence of all his brethren. 

18. And she called the name of the 
Lord that spake unto her, Thou God 
seest me: for she said, Have I also here 
looked after him that seeth me ? 


14. Wherefore the well was called 
Beer-lahai-roi: behold, 7 zs between 
Kadesh and Bered. 

15. And Hagar bare Abram a son: 
and Abram called his son’s name, which: 
Hagar bare, Ishmael. 


16.. And Abram was fourscore and 


six years old: when Hagar bare Ishmael 
to Abram. 


1. Now Sarai Abram’s wife. 


COMMENTARY UPON 


CHAP. XVI. 


pisset, despectui sum in oculis 
éjus: judicet Jehova inter me 
et te. 

6. Et dixit Abram ad Sarai, 
Ecce, ancilla tna in manu tua, 
fae ei quod bonum est in oculis _ 
tuis: et afflixit eam Sarai, et 
fugit a facie ejus. 

7. Et invenit eam Angelus 
Jehove juxta fontem aque in 
deserto, juxta fontem in via 
Sur. ; 

8. Et dixit, Hagar ancilla 
Sarai, unde venis, et quo vadis ? 
Et dixit, A facie Sarai dominz 
mez ego fugio. 

9. Et dixit ei Angelus Jeho- 
ve, Revertere ad dominam tu- 
am, et humilia te sub manibus 
ejus. 

10. Adhec dixit ei Angelus 
Jehove, Multiplicando multi- 
plicabo semen tuum, et non nu- 
merabitur pre multitudine. 

11. Preterea dixit ei Ange- 
lus Jehove, Ecce, es pregnans, 
et paries filium, et vocabis no- 
men ejus Ismael: quia audivit 
Jehova afflictionem tuam. 

12. Et ipse erit ferus homo, 
manus ejus in omnes, et manus 
omnium ineum: et coram om- 
nibus fratribus suis habitabit. 

13. Et vocavit nomen Jeho- 
ve qui loquebatur sibi, Tu 
Deus videns me: quia dixit, 
Nonne etiam hic vidi post 
videntem me ? 

14. Ideirco vocavit puteum, 
Puteum viventis videntis me. 
Ecce, est inter Cades et Bared. 

15. Et peperit Hagar ipsi 
Abram filium: et vocavit 
Abram nomen filii sui, quem 
peperit Hagar, Ismael. 

16. Abram autem erat oc- 
toginta annorum et sex anno- 
rum, quando peperit Hagar 
Ismael ipsi Abram. 


Moses here recites a new 


history, namely, that Sarai, through the impatience of long 
delay, resorted to a method of obtaining seed by her husband, 
at variance with the werd of Ged. She saw that she was 


CHAP, XVI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 423 


barren, and had passed the age of bearing. And she inferred 
the necéssity of a new remedy, in order that Abram might 
obtain the promised blessing. Moses expressly relates, that 
the design of marrying a second wife did not originate with 
Abram himself, but with Sarai, to teach us that the holy man 
was not impelled by lust to these nuptials; but that, when 
he was thinking of no such thing, he was induced to engage 
in them, by the exhortation of his wife. It is, however, asked, 
whether Sarai substituted her handmaid in her place, through 
the mere desire of having offspring? So it seems to some ; 
yet to me it is incredible, that the pious matron should not 
have been cognizant of those promises, which had been so 
often repeated to her husband. Yea, it ought to be fully 
taken for granted; among all pious persons, that the mother 
of the people of God, was a participator of the same grace 
with her husband. Sarai, therefore, does not desire offspring 
(as is usual) from a merely natural impulse; but she yields 
her conjugal rights to another, through a wish to obtain that 
benediction, which she knew was divinely promised: not 
that she makes a divorce from her husband, but assigns him 
another wife, from whom he might receive children. And 
certainly if she had desired offspring in the ordinary manner, 
it would rather have come into her mind to do it by the 
adoption of a son, than by giving place to a second wife. 
For we know the vehemence of female jealousy. Therefore, 
while contemplating the promise, she becomes forgetful of 
her own right, and thinks of nothing but the bringing forth 
of children to Abram. A memorable example, from which 
no small profit accrues to us. For however laudable was 
Sarai’s wish, as regards the end, or the scope to which it 
tended; nevertheless, in the pursuit of it, she was guilty of 
no light sin, by impatiently departing from the word of God, 
for the purpose of enjoying the effect of that word. While 
she reflects upon her own barrenness and old age, she begins 
to despair of offspring, unless Abram should have children 
from some other quarter; in this there is already some fault. 
Yet, however desperate the affair might be, still she ought 
not to have attempted anything at variance with the will of 
God and the legitimate order of nature. God designed that 


424 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XVI. 


the human race should be propagated by sacred marriage. 
Sarai perverts the law of marriage, by defiling the conjugal 
bed, which was appointed only for two persons. Nor is it an 
available excuse, that she wished Abram to have a concu- 
bine and not a wife; since it ought to have been regarded as 
a settled point, that the woman is joined to the man, ‘ that 
they two should be one flesh.’ And though polygamy had al- 
ready prevailed among many ; yet it was never left to the will | 
of man, to abrogate that divine law by which two persons were 
mutually bound together. Nor was even Abram free from 
fault, in following the foolish and preposterous counsel of his 
wife. Therefore, as the precipitancy of Sarai was culpable, 
so the facility with which Abram yielded to her wish was 
worthy of reprehension. The faith of both of them was 
defective ; not indeed with regard to the substance of the 
promise, but with regard to the method in which they pro- 
ceeded ;' since they hastened to acquire the offspring which 
was to be expected from God, without observing the legiti- 
mate ordinance of God. Whence also we are taught that 
God does not in vain command his people to be quiet, and to 
wait with patience, whenever he defers or suspends the accom- 
plishment of their wishes. For they who hasten before the 
time, not only anticipate the providence of God, but being 
discontented with his word, precipitate themselves beyond 
their proper bounds. But it seems that Sarai had something 
further in view; for she not only wished that Abram should — 
become a father, but would fain acquire to herself mater- 
nal rights and honours. I answer, since she knew that all 
nations were to be blessed in the seed of Abram, it is no 
wonder that she should be unwilling to be deprived of parti- 
cipation in his honour ; lest she should be cut off, as a putrid 
member, from the body which had received the blessing, and 
should also become an alien from the promised salvation. 
Bare him no children. This seems added as an excuse. 
And truly Moses intimates that she did not seek help from 
the womb of her maid, before necessity compelled her to do 
so. Her own words also show, that she had patiently and 


1“ Sed in medio ipso (ut loquunter) vel agendi ratione.”—‘ Mais au 
moyen, et en la facon de proceder.”—French Tr. 


CHAP. XVI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 425 


modestly waited to see what God would do, until hope was 
entirely cut off, when she says, that she was restrained from 
bearing by the Lord. (ver. 2.) What fault then shall we 
find in her? Surely, that she did not, as she ought, cast 
this care into the bosom of God, without binding his. power 
to the order of nature, or restraining it to her own sense. 
And then, by neglecting to infer from the past what would 
take place in future, she did not regard herself as in the 
hand of God, who could again open the womb which he had 
closed. 


2. That I may obtain children by her. This is a Hebrew 
phrase, which signifies to become a mother. Some, how- 
ever, expound the word as simply meaning, fo have a son. 
And certainly }3, (ben,) which, among the Hebrews, signifies 
son, corresponds with the verb here used.” But since sons 
are so called metaphorically, as being the maintainers of the 
race, and thus building up the family, therefore the primary 
signification of the word is to be retained. But Sarai claims 
for herself, by right of dominion, the child which Hagar 
shall bring forth : because bondmaids do not bring forth for 
themselves, since they have not power over their own body. 
By first speaking to her husband, she does not barely allow 
of a concubine, who should be as aharlot ; but introduces and 
obtrudes one. And hence it appears, that when persons are 
wiser in their own eyes than they ought to be, they easily 
fall into the snare of trying illicit means. The desire of 
Sarai proceeds from the zeal of faith; but because it is not 
so subjected to God as to wait his time, she immediately has 
recourse to polygamy, which is nothing else than the corrup- 
tion of lawful marriage. Moreover, since Sarai, that holy 
woman, yet fanned in her husband the same flame of impa- 
tience with which she burned, we may hence learn, how dili- 
gently we ought to be on our guard, lest Satan should sur- 
prise us by any secret fraud. For not only does he induce 


t ‘+ Si forte edificer ex ea.” ‘* If perhaps I may be built up by her.” 
See margin of English version. 
? 7AM: 


426 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XVI. 


wicked and ungodly men openly to oppose our faith; but 
sometimes, privately and by stealth, he assails us through 
the medium of good and simple men, that he may overcome 
us unawares. On every side, therefore, we must be on our 
guard against his wiles; lest by any means he should under- 
mine us. 

And Abram hearkened to the voice of Sarai. Truly the 
faith of Abram wavers, when he deviates from the word of 
God, and suffers himself to be borne away by the persuasion 
of his wife, to seek a remedy which was divinely prohibited. 
He, however, retains the foundation, because he does not 
doubt that he shall, at length, perceive that God is true. By 
which example we are taught, that there is no reason why we 
should despond, if, at any time, Satan should shake our faith ; 
provided that the truth of God be not overthrown in our 
hearts. Meanwhile, when we see Abram, who, through so 
many years, had bravely contended like an invincible com- 
batant, and had surmounted so many obstacles, now yielding, 
in a single moment, to temptation; who among us will not 
fear for himself in similar danger? Therefore, although we 
may have stood long and firmly in the faith, we must daily 
pray, that God would not lead us into temptation. 


3. And gave her to her husband Abram to be his wife. 
Moses states what was the design of Sarai; for neither did 
she intend to make her house a brothel, nor to be the betrayer 
ef her maid’s chastity, nor a pander for her husband. Yet 
Hagar is improperly called a wife; because she was brought 
into another person’s bed, against the law of God. Where- 
fore, let us. know that this connection was so far illicit, as to 
be something between fornication and marriage. The same 
thing takes place with all those inventions which are append- 
ed to the word of God. J*or with whatever fair pretext they 
may be covered, there is an inherent corruption, which de- 
generates. from the purity of the word, and vitiates the 
whole. 


4. Her mistress was despised in her eyes. Here Moses relates 
that the punishment of excessive precipitancy quickly fol- 


CHAP. XVI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 427 


lowed. The chief blame, indeed, rested with Sarai; yet 
because Abram had proved himself too credulous, God chas- 
tises both, as they deserve. Sarai is grievously and bitterly 
tried, by the proud contempt of her handmaid; Abram is 
harassed by unjust complaints; thus we see that both pay 
the penalty of their levity, and that the contrivance devised 
by Sarai, and too eagerly embraced by Abram, fails of suc- 
cess. Meanwhile, in Hagar, an instance of ingratitude is set 
before us; because she, having been treated with singular 
kindness and honour, begins to hold her mistress in con- 
tempt. Since, however, this is an exceedingly common dis- 
ease of the mind, let the faithful accustom themselves to the 
endurance of it; if, at any time, a return so unjust be made 
to them, for their acts of kindness. But especially, let the 
infirmity of Sarai move us thus to act, since she was unable 
to bear the contempt of her maid. 


5. My wrong be upon thee. This also was a part of her pun- 
ishment, that Sarai was brought so low as to forget herself 
for a while; and being vehemently excited, conducted her- 
self with so much weakness. Certainly, to the utmost of her 
power, she had impelled her husband to act rashly ; and now 
she petulantly insults him, although innocent. for she 
adduces nothing for which Abram was to be blamed. She 
reproaches him with the fact, that she had given her maid 
into his bosom ; and complains that she is contemned by this 
maid, without having first ascertained, whether he intended 
to assist the bad cause, by his countenance, or not. Thus 
blind is the assault of anger; it rushes impetuously hither 
and thither; and condemns, without inquiry, those who are 
entirely free from blame. If ever any woman was of a meek 
and gentle spirit, Sarai excelled in that virtue. Whereas,. 
therefore, we see that her patience was violently shaken by a. 
single offence, let every one of us be so much the more re- 
solved to govern his own passions. 

The Lord judge between me and thee. She makes improper 
use of the name of God, and almost forgets that due 
reverence, which is so strongly enforced on those who are 
godly. She makes her appeal to the judgment of God. 


428 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XVI. 


What else is this, than to call down destruction on her own 
head ? for if God had interposed as judge, he must of neces- 
sity have executed punishment upon one or other of them. 
But Abram had done no injury. It remains, therefore, that 
she must have felt the vengeance of God, whose anger she 
had so rashly imprecated upon herself, or her husband. Had 
Moses spoken this of any heathen woman, it might have been 
passed over as a common thing. But now, the Lord shows 
us, in the person of the mother of the faithful; first, how 
vehement is the flame of anger, and to what lengths it will 
hurry men; then, how greatly they are blinded who, in their 
own affairs, are too indulgent to themselves; whence we 
should learn to suspect ourselves, whenever our own concerns 
are treated of. Another thing also is here chiefly worthy of 
remark; namely, that the best ordered families are sometimes 
not free from contentions; nay, that this evil reaches even 
to the Church of God; for we know that the family of 
Abram, which was disturbed with strifes, was the living re- 
presentation of the Church. As to domestic broils, we know 
that the principal part of social life, which God hallowed 
among men, is spent in marriage; and yet various incon- 
veniences intervene, which defile that good state, as with 
spots. It behoves the faithful to prepare themselves to cut 
off these occasions of trouble. For this end, it is of great 
importance to reflect on the origin of the evil; for all the 
troubles men find in marriage, they ought to impute to sin. 


6. Behold, thy maid is in thy hand. The greatness of Abram’s 
humanity and modesty appears from his answer. He does 
not quarrel with his wife; and though he has the best cause, 
yet he does not pertinaciously defend it, but voluntarily dis- 
misses the wife who had been given him. In short, for the 
sake of restoring peace, he does violence to his feelings, both 
as a husband, and a father. For, in leaving Hagar to the 
will of her enraged mistress, he does not treat her as his wife; 
he also, in a certain way, undervalues that object of his hope 
which was conceived in her womb. And it is not to be 
doubted, that he was thus calm and placid in bearing the 
vehemence of his wife ; because, throughout her whole life, he 


CHAP. XVI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 429 


had found her to be obedient. Still it wasa great excellence, 
to restrain his temper under an indignity so great. It may, 
however, here be asked, how it was that his care for the blessed 
seed had then vanished from his mind? Hagar is great with 
child; he hopes that the seed through which the salvation of 
the world is promised, is about to proceed from her. Why 
then does he not set Sarai aside, and turn his love and desire 
still more to Hagar? ‘Truly, we hence infer, that all human 
contrivances pass away and vanish in smoke, as soon as any 
grievous temptation is presented. Having taken a wife 
against the divine command, he thinks the matter is succeed- 
ing well, when he sees her pregnant, and pleases himself in 
foolish confidence ; but when contention suddenly arises, he 
is at his wit’s end, and rejects all hope, or, at least, forgets it. 
The same thing must necessarily happen to us, as often as we 
attempt anything contrary to the word of God. Our minds 
will fail at the very first blast of temptation ;! since our only 
ground of stability is, to have the authority of God for what 
we do. In the meantime, God purifies the faith of his ser- 
vant from its rust; for by mixing his own and his wife's 
imagination with the word of God, he, in a sense, had 
stifled his faith; wherefore, to restore its brightness, that 
which was superfluous is cut off. God, by opposing himself 
in this manner to our sinful designs, recalls us from our stu- 
pidity toa sound mind. A simple promise had been given, 
‘I will bless thy seed.’ Sarai’s gloss supervened,’ namely, 
that she could have no seed but a supposititious one by Hagar: 
this mire of human imagination, with which the promise had 
been defiled, must be purged away, that Abram might derive 
his knowledge from no other source, than the pure word of 
God. 

And Sarai dealt hardly with her.2 The word MJY, (anah,) 
which Moses uses, signifies to afflictandto humble. Ithere- 
fore explain it as being put for reducing Hagar to submis- 


1 “ Ventum trepidationis.”—'t Wind of trembling.” 

2 “ Additamentum Sarai supervenerat.”—‘ L’addition ou glose de 
Sarai estoit survenue.”—French Tr. 

3 ¢ Et afflixit eam Sarai.” ‘‘ And Sarah afflicted her.” See margin of 


English version, 


430 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XVI. 


sion. But it was difficult for an angry woman to keep within 
bounds, in repressing the insolence of her maid. Wherefore, 
it is possible that she became immoderately enraged against 
her; not so much considering her own duty, as revolving the 
means of being avenged for the offences committed. Since 
Moses brings no heavier charge, I confine myself to what is 
certain; that Sarai made use of her proper authority in re- 
straining the insolence of her maid. And, doubtless, from 
the event, we may form a judgment, that Hagar was im- 
pelled to flee, not so much by the cruelty of her mistress, as by 
her own contumacy. Her own conscience accused her; and 
it is improbable that Sarai should have been so greatly 
incensed, except by many, and, indeed, atrocious offences. 
Therefore, the woman being of servile temper, and of indo- 
mitable ferocity, chose rather to flee, than to return to favour, 
through the humble acknowledgment of her fault. 


7. And the angel of the Lord found her. We are here 
taught with what clemency the Lord acts towards his own 
people, although they have deserved severe punishment. As 
he had previously mitigated the punishment of Abram and 
Sarai, so now he casts a paternal look upon Hagar, so that his 
favour is extended to the whole family. He does not indeed 


altogether spare them, lest he should cherish their vices; but 


he corrects them with gentle remedies. It is indeed probable, 
that Hagar, in going to the desert of Sur, meditated a return 
to her own country. Yet mention seems to be made of the 
desert and the wilderness, to show that she, being miserably 
afflicted, wandered from the presence of men, till the angel 
met her. Although Moses does not describe the form of the 
vision, yet I do not doubt, that it was clothed in a human 
body; in which, nevertheless, manifest tokens of celestial 
glory were conspicuous. 


8. And he said, Hagar, Sarai’s maid. By the use of this 
epithet, the angel declares, that she still remained a servant, 
though she had escaped the hands of her mistress; because 
liberty is not to be obtained by stealth, nor by flight, but by 
manumission. Moreover, by this expression, God shows that 


ee 


CHAP. XVI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 431 


he approves of civil government, and that the violation of it 
is inexcusable. The condition of servitude was then hard; 
and thanks are to be given to the Lord, that this barbarity 
has been abolished; yet God has declared from heaven his 
pleasure, that servants should bear the yoke; as also by the 
mouth of Paul, he does not give servants their freedom, 
nor deprive their masters of their use; but only commands 
them to be kindly and liberally treated. (Ephes. vi. 4.) It is 
to be inferred also, from the circumstance of the time, not 
only that civil government is to be maintained, as matter of 
necessity, but that lawful authorities are to be obeyed, for 
conscience’ sake. For although the fugitive Hagar could no 
longer be compelled to obedience by force, yet her condition 
was not changed in the sight of God. By the same argu- 
ment it is proved, that if masters at any time deal too hardly 
with their servants, or if rulers treat their subjects with un- 
just asperity, their rigour is still to be endured, nor is there 
just cause for shaking off the yoke, although they may exercise 
their power too imperiously. In short, whenever it comes into 
our mind to defraud any one of his right, or to seek exemption 
from our proper calling, let the voice of the angel sound in our 
ears, as if God would draw us back, by putting his own hand 
upon us. They who have proudly and tyrannically governed 
shall one day render their account to God; meanwhile, their 
asperity is to be borne by their subjects, till God, whose pre- 
rogative it is to raise the abject and to relieve the oppressed, 
shall give them succour. If a comparison be made, the power 
of magistrates is far more tolerable, than that ancient domin- 
ion was.! The paternal authority is in its very nature 
amiable, and worthy of regard. If the flight of Hagar was 
prohibited by the command of God, much less will he bear with 
the licentiousness of a people, who rebel against their prince ; 
or with the contumacy of children, who withdraw themselves 
from obedience to their parents. 

Whence camest thou? He does not inquire, as concerning 
a doubtful matter, but knowing that no place for subterfuge 


1 For this ancient dominion implied slavery. The French translation 
has it, ‘* Le droit des magistrats est bien plus tolerable, que n’a point este 
ceste ancienne domination sur les serfs.” —Ed. 


432 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XVI. 


is left to Hagar, he peremptorily reproves her for her flight ; 
as if he had said, ‘ Having deserted thy station, thou shalt 
profit nothing by thy wandering, since thou canst not escape 
the hand of God, which had placed thee there.” It might 
also be, that he censured her departure from that house, which 
was then the earthly sanctuary of God. For she was not 
ignorant that God was there worshipped in a peculiar man- 
ner. And although she indirectly charges her mistress with 
cruelty, by saying that she had fled from her presence; still 
the angel, to cut off all subterfuges, commands her to return 
and to humble herself. By which words he first intimates, 
that the bond of subjection is not dissolved either by the too 
austere, or by the impotent dominion of rulers; he then re- 
torts the blame of the evil upon Hagar herself, because she 
had obstinately placed herself in opposition to her mistress, 
and, forgetful of her own condition, had exalted herself more 
insolently and boldly than became a bondmaid. In short, as 
she is justly punished for her faults, he commands her to seek 
a remedy by correcting them. And truly, since nothing is 
better than, by obedience and patience, to appease the severity 
of those who are in authority over us; we must more es- 


pecially labour to bend them to mildness by our humiliation, | 


when we have offended them by our pride. 


10. I will multiply thy seed exceedingly. For the purpose of | 


mitigating the offence, and of alleviating what was severe in 
the precept, by some consolation, he promises a blessing in the 
child which she should bear. God might indeed, by his own 
authority, have strictly enjoined what was right; but in order 
that Hagar might the more cheerfully do what she knew to 
be her duty, he allures her, as by blandishments, to obedience. 
And to this point those promises tend, by which he invites us 
to voluntary submission. For he would not draw us by servile 
methods, so that we should obey his commands by constraint ; 
and therefore he mingles mild and paternal invitations with 
his commands, dealing with us liberally, as with sons. ‘That 
the angel here promises to do what is peculiar to God alone, 
involves no absurdity, for it is sufficiently usual with God to 
invest his ministers whom he sends with his own character, 





CHAP. XVI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 433 


that the authority of their word may appear the greater. I do 
not, however, disapprove the opinion of most of the ancients ; 
that Christ the Mediator was always present in all the oracles, 
and that this is the cause why the majesty of God is ascribed 
to angels.! On which subject I have already touched, and 
shall have occasion to say more elsewhere. 


11. dnd shalt bear a son. The angel explains what he had 
briefly said respecting her seed ; namely, that it should not be 
capable of being numbered on account of its multitude; and 
he commences with Ishmael, who was to be its head and origin. 
Although we shall afterwards see that he was a reprobate, 
yet an honourable name is granted to him, to mark the 
temporal benefit of which Ishmael became a partaker, as 
being a sonof Abram. ForI thus explain the passage, God 
intended that a monument of the paternal kindness, with 
which he embraced the whole house of Abram, should endure 
to posterity. For although the covenant of eternal life did not 
belong to Ishmael; yet, that he might not be entirely without 
favour, God constituted him the father of a great and famous” 
people. And thus we see that, with respect to this present 
life, the goodness of God extended itself to the seed of Abram 
according to the flesh. But if God intended the name of 
Ishmael [which signifies God will hear] to be a perpetual 
memorial of his ¢emporal benefits ; he will by no means bear 
with our ingratitude, if we do not celebrate his celestial and 
everlasting mercies, even unto death. 

The Lord hath heard thy affliction. We do not read that 
Hagar, in her difficulties, had recourse to prayer; and we are 
rather left to conjecture, from the words of Moses, that when 
she was stupified by her sufferings, the angel came of his own _ 
accord. It is therefore to be observed, that there are two 
ways in which God looks down upon men, for the purpose of 
helping them ; either when they, as suppliants, implore his 
aid; or when he, even unasked, succours them in their afflic- 
_ tions. He is indeed especially said to hearken to them who, 


1 See on this subject, Smith’s Scripture Testimony to the Messiah, 
~ Book II. chap. iv. sect. 833.—Ed. 


TOL. I. 2.5 


434 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XVI. 


by prayers, invoke him as their Deliverer. Yet, sometimes, 
when men lie mute, and because of their stupor, do not direct 
their wishes to him, he is said to listen to their miseries. 
That this latter mode of hearing was fulfilled towards Hagar, 
is probable, because God freely met her wandering through 
the desert. Moreover, because God frequently deprives 
unbelievers of his help, until they are worn away with slow 
disease, or else suffers them to be suddenly destroyed ; let 
none of us give indulgence to our own sloth; but being ad- 
monished by the sense of our evils, let us seek him without 
delay. In the meantime, however, it is of no small avail to 
the confirmation of our faith, that our prayers will never be 
despised by the Lord, seeing that he anticipates even the 
slothful and the stupid, with his help; and if he is present to 
those who seek him not, much more will he be propitious 
to the pious desires of his own people. 


12. And he will be a wild man. The angel declares what 
kind of person Ishmael will be. The simple meaning is, (in 
my judgment,) that he will be a warlike man, and so formid- 
able to his enemies, that none shall injure him with impunity. 
Some expound the word "5, (pereh,) to mean a forester, 
and one addicted to the hunting of wild beasts. But the 
explanation must not, it seems, be sought elsewhere than m 
the context; for it follows immediately after, ‘ His hand shall 
be against all men, and the hand of all men against him, It 
is however asked, whether this ought to be reckoned among 
benefits conferred by God, that he is to preserve his rank in 
life by force of arms; seeing that nothing is, in itself, more 
desirable than peace. The difficulty may be thus solved; 
that Ishmael, although all his neighbours should make war 
upon him, and should, on every side, conspire to destroy 
him; shall yet, though alone, be endued with sufficient power 
to repel all their attacks. I think, however, that the angel, 
by no means, promises Ishmael complete favour, but only 
that which is limited. Among our chief blessings, we must 
desire to have peace with all men. Now, since this is denied 
to Ishmael, that blessing which is next in order is granted to 
him; namely, that he shall not be overcome by his enemies; — 





CHAP. XVI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 435 


but shall be brave and powerful to resist their force. He 
does not, however, speak of Ishmael’s person, but of his 
whole progeny ; for what follows is not strictly suitable to one 
man. Should this exposition be approved, no simple or 
unmixed blessing is here promised; but only a tolerable or 
moderate condition; so that Ishmael and his posterity might 
perceive that something was divinely granted to them, for the 
sake of their father Abram. Therefore, it is, by no means, to 
be reckoned among the benefits given by God, that he shall 
have all around him as enemies, and shall resist them all by 
violence: but this is added as a remedy and an alleviation of 
the evil; that he, who would have many enemies, should be 
equal to bear up against them. 

And he shall dwell in the presence of all his brethren. As 
this is properly applicable only to a nation, we hence the 
more easily perceive, that they are deceived who restrict the 
passage to the person of Ishmael. Again, others understand, 
that the posterity of Ishmael was to have a fixed habitation 
in the presence of their brethren, who would be unwilling to 
allow it; as if it were said, that they should forcibly occupy 
the land they inhabit, although their brethren might attempt 
to resist them. Others adduce a contrary opinion; namely, 
that the Ishmaelites, though living among a great number of 
enemies, should yet not be destitute of friends and brethren. 
I approve, however, of neither opinion:*for the angel rather 
intimates, that this people should be separate from others ; 
as if he would say, ‘ They shall not form a part or member 
of any one nation; but shall be a complete body, having a 
distinct and special name.’ 


13. And she called the name of the Lord. Moses, I have no 
doubt, implies that Hagar, after she was admonished by the 
angel, changed her mind: and being thus subdued, betook 
herself to prayer; unless, perhaps, here the confession of the 
tongue, rather than change of mind, is denoted. I rather 
incline, however, to the opinion, that Hagar, who had before 
been of a wild and intractable temper, begins now at length 
to acknowledge the providence of God. Moreover, as to 
that which some suppose; namely, that God is called ‘ the 


436 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XVI. 


God of vision,’! because he appears and manifests himself to 
men, it is a forced interpretation. Rather let us understand 
that Hagar, who before had appeared to herself to be carried 
away by chance, through the desert; now perceives and 
acknowledges that human affairs are under divine govern- 
ment. And whoever is persuaded that he is looked upon by 
God, must of necessity walk as in his sight. 

Have I also here seen after him that seeth me?? Some 
translate this, ‘ Have I not seen after the vision?*? But it 
really is as I have rendered it. Moreover, the obscurity of 
the sentence has procured for us various interpretations. 
Some among the Hebrews say that Hagar was astonished at 
the sight of the angel ; because she thought that God was 
nowhere seen but in the house of Abram. But this is frigid, 
and in this way the ambition of the Jews often compels them 
to trifle; seeing that they apply their whole study to boast- 
ing of the glory of their race. Others so understand the pass- 
age, ‘Have I seen after my vision?’ that is, so late, that during 
the vision I was blind ?* According to these interpreters, the 
vision of Hagar was twofold: the former erroneous; since 
she perceived nothing celestial in the angel; but the other 
true, after she had been affected with a sense of the divine 


1 * Deum visionis.” Though Calvin regards this interpretation as 
forced, it must not be denied that it has the sanction of the highest lite- 
rary authorities. Le Clerc, Peter Martyr, Rosenmiiller, Dathe, Gese- 
nius, Lee, Professor Bush, and many others, all regard the word ‘35, 
(rot,) as a substantive, not as a participle,—and consequently God is here 
spoken of as the God who reveals himself, not as the God who sees.—Ed. 

2 *¢ Nonne etiam hic vidi post videntem me?” ‘* Havel not also here 
looked after him who seeth me?” 

3“ Annon video, (h. @. vivo,) post videntem me, i. e., post visionem 
divinam, vel post visionem videntis me?’ Do I not see, (that is, live,) 
after him who seeth me? that is, after the divine vision, or after the 
vision of him that seeth me.—Junius, Piscator, &c., in Poli Syn. Ains- 
worth gives this version, ‘ Have I also here seen after him that seeth 
me? Where stress is laid on the word here, as is done by Calvin, for 
the purpose of contrasting the desert with Abram’s house. The opinion, 
also, that the term ‘ see’ is equivalent to ‘ live,’ is supported by high 
authority. The meaning of the passage would then be, ‘ Do I see, that 
is, live, after having beheld such a vision ?’—Ed. 

_* Vatablus in Poli Syn. Perhaps the following paraphrase may bring 
out the sense of this obscure interpretation. We may suppose Hagar to 
exclaim: ‘ Have I indeed seen at last? yet, not till after the vision itself 
had passed away ; so that when I saw it literally, I was mentally blind, 
and did not know what I was looking at.’—Zd. 


CHAP. XVI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 437 


nature of the vision. To some it seems that a negative 
answer is implied; as if she would say, I did not see him 
departing; and then from his sudden disappearance, she col- 
lects that he must have been an angel of God. 

Also, on the second member of the sentence, interpreters 
disagree. Jerome renders it, ‘the back parts of him that 
seeth me:’' which many refer to an obscure vision, so that 
the phrase is deemed metaphorical. For as we do not plainly 
perceive men from behind; so they are said to see the back 
parts of God, to whom he does not openly nor clearly mani- 
fest himself; and this opinion is commonly received. Others 
think that Moses used a different figure ; for they take the 
seeing of the back parts of God, for the sense of his anger; 
just as his face is said to shine upon us, when he shows him- 
self propitious and favourable. Therefore, according to 
them, the sense is, ‘I thought that I had escaped, so that I 
should no more be obnoxious to the rod or chastening of 
God; but here also I perceive that he is angry with me. 
_§$o far I have briefly related the opinion of others.? And al- 
though I have no intention to pause for the purpose of refut- 
ing each of these expositions; I yet freely declare, that not 
one of these interpreters has apprehended the meaning of 
Moses. I willingly accept what some adduce, that Hagar 
wondered at the goodness of God, by whom she had been 
regarded even in the desert: but this, though something, is 
not the whole. In the first place, Hagar chides herself, be- 
cause, as she had before been too blind, she even now opened 
her eyes too slowly and indolently to perceive God. For 
she aggravates the guilt of her torpor by the circumstance 
both of place and time. She had frequently found, by many 
proofs, that she was regarded by the Lord; yet becoming. 
blind, she had despised his providence, as if, with closed eyes, 
she had passed by him, when he presented himself before her. 
She now accuses herself for not having more quickly awoke 
when the angel appeared. ‘The consideration of place is also 


1 See Vulgate. 
9 These different interpretations, with others, may be seen in Poole’s 


Synopsis.— Ed. 


438 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XVI. 


of great weight,’ because God, who had always testified that 
he was present with her in the house of Abram, now pursued 
her as a fugitive, even into the desert. It implied, indeed, 
a base ingratitude on her part, to be blind to the presence of 
God; so that even when she knew he was looking upon her, 
she did not, in return, raise her eyes to behold him. But it 
was a still more shameful blindness, that she, being regarded 
by the Lord, although a wanderer and an exile, paying the just 
penalty of her perverseness, still would not even acknow- 
ledge him as present. We now see the point to which her 
self-reproach tends ; ‘ Hitherto I have not sought God, nor 
had respect to him, except by constraint; whereas, he had 
before deigned to look down upon me: even now in the 
desert, where being afflicted with evils, I ought immediately 
to have roused myself, I have, according to my custom, been 
stupified: nor should I ever have raised my eyes towards 
heaven, unless I had first been looked upon by the Lord.’ 


14. Wherefore the well was called.2 I subscribe to the 
opinion of those who take the word Np’, (yekra,) indefi- 
nitely, which is usual enough in the Hebrew language. In 
order that the sense may be the clearer, it is capable of bemg 
resolved into the passive voice, that ‘ the well was called.’* 
Yet I think this common appellation originated with Hagar, 
who, not content with one simple confession, wished that the 
mercy of God should be attested in time to come; and there- 
fore she transmitted her testimony, as from hand to hand. 
Hence we infer how useful it is, that they who do not freely 
humble themselves, should be subdued by stripes. Hagar, 
who had always been wild and rebellious, and who had, at 
length, entirely shaken off the yoke; now, when the hard- 
ness of her heart was broken by afflictions, appears alto- 
gether another person. She was not, however, reduced to 
order by stripes only ; but a celestial vision was also added, 


1 ¢ Loci enim notatio,” is in the French translation rendered, ‘‘ Le 
changement du lieu.” The change of place, as if it had been mutatio.—Ed. 

2 * Tdcirco vocavit puteum, Puteum viventis videntis me.” ‘+ There- 
fore she called the well, The well of him who liveth and seeth me.” 

8 As in the English version. 


CUAP. XVII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 439 


which thoroughly arrested her. And the same thing is 
necessary for us; namely, that God, while chastising us with 
his hand, should also bring us into a state of submissive 
meekness by his Spirit. Some among the Hebrews say that 
thé name of the well was given to it, as being a testimony of 
a twofold favour, because Ishmael was revived from death, 
and God had respect to Hagar, his mother. But they fool- 
ishly mutilate things joined together: for Hagar wished to 
testify that she had been favourably regarded by Him who 
was the Living God, or the Author of life. 


15. And Abram called. Hagar had been commanded to give 
that name to her son; but Moses follows the order of nature; 
because fathers, by the imposition of the name, declare the 
power which they have over their sons. We may easily gather, 
that Hagar, when she returned home, related the events 
which had occurred. Therefore, Abram shows himself to be 
obedient and grateful to God: because he both names his 
son according to the command of the angel, and celebrates 
the goodness of God in having hearkened to the miseries of 
Hagar. 


CHAPTER XVII. 


1. Axp when Abram was ninety years 
old and nine, the Lord appeared to 
Abram, and said unto him, I am the 
Almighty God; walk before me, and be 
thou perfect. 


2. And I will make my covenant be- 
tween me and thee, and will multiply 
thee exceedingly. 

3. And Abram fell on his face: and 
God talked with him, saying, 


4. As for me, behold, my covenant zs 
with thee, and thou shalt be a father of 
many nations. 

5. Neither shall thy name any more 
be called Abram, but thy name shall be 


1. Et fuit Abram nonaginta 
et novem annorum: et visus 
est Jehova Abram, dixitque ad 
eum, Ego Deus Omunipotens, 
ambula coram me, et esto per- 
fectus. 

2. Et ponam pactum meum 
inter me et te, et multiplicabo 
te vehementissime. 

3. Tuncprostravit se Abram 
super faciem suam, et loquutus 
est cum eo Deus, dicendo, 

4. Ego, ecce pactum meum 
tecum, et eris in patrem mul- 
titudinis gentium. 

5. Et non vocabitur ultra 
nomen tuum Abram, sed erit 


440 


Abraham ; for a father of many nations 
have I made thee. 


6. And I will make thee exceeding 
fruitful, and I will make nations of thee, 
and kings shall come out of thee. 

7. And I will establish my covenant 
between me and thee, and thy seed after 
thee, in their generations, for an everlast- 
ing covenant, to be a God unto thee, and 
to thy seed after thee. 


8. And I will give unto thee, and to 
thy seed after thee, the land wherein 
thou art a stranger, all the land of 
Canaan, for an everlasting possession ; 
and I will be their God. 

9. And God said unto Abraham, Thou 
shalt keep my covenant therefore, thou, 
and thy seed after thee, in their genera- 
tions. 

10. This zs my covenant, which ye 
shall keep, between me and you, and thy 
seed after thee; Every man-child among 
you shall be circumcised. 


11. And ye shall circumcise the flesh 
of your foreskin ; and it shall be a token 
of the covenant betwixt me and you. 

12. And he that is eight days old 
shall be circumcised among you, every 
man-child in your generations, he that 
is born in the house, or bought with 
money of any stranger, which zs not of 
thy seed. 

13. He that is born in thy house, and 
he that is bought with thy money, must 
needs be circumcised: and my covenant 
shall be in your flesh for an everlasting 
covenant. 

14. Andthe uncircumcised man-child, 
whose flesh of his foreskin is not cir- 
cumcised, that soul shall be cut off from 
his people; he hath broken my cove- 
nant. 

15. And God said unto Abraham, As 
for Sarai thy wife, thou shalt not call 
her name Sarai, but Sarah shall her 
name be. 

16. And I will bless her, and give 
thee a son also of her: yea, I will bless 
her, and she shall be a mother of nations ; 
kings of people shall be of her. 

17. Then Abraham fell upon his face, 
and laughed, and said in his heart, Shall 
a child be born unto him that is an hun- 


COMMENTARY UPON 


CHAP. XVII. 


nomen tuum Abraham: quia 
patrem multitudinis gentium 
posui te. 

6. Et multiplicabo te valde, 
et ponam te in gentes, et reges 
ex te egredientur. 

7. Et statuam foedus meum 
inter me et te, et inter semen 
tuum post te in generationes 
suas, in foedus perpetuum, ut 
sim tibiin Deum et semini tuo 
post te. 

8. Daboque tibi et semini 
tuo post te terram peregrina- 
tionum tuarum, omnem terram 
Chenaan in possessionem per- 
petuam, et ero eis in Deum. 

9. Preterea dixit Deus ad 
Abraham, et tu pactam meum 
custodies, tu et semen tuum 
post te in generationibus suis. 

10. Hoc pactum meum quod 
custodietis inter me et vos, et 
inter semen tuum post te, ut 
circumcidatur in vobis omnis 
masculus : 

11. Et circumcidetis carnem 
preeputii vestri: et erit in sig- 
num foederis inter me et Vos. 

12. Et filius octo dierum cir- 
cumcidetur in vyobis: omnis 
masculus in generationes ves- 
tras, verna, et emptus argento 
ab omni filio alienigenz, qui . 
non est de semine tuo. 

13. Circumcidendo circum- 
cidetur verna tuus, ef emptus 
argento tuo: et erit pactum 
meum in carne vestra in pac- 
tum perpetuum. 

14. Et preputiatus masculus, 
cui non circumcisa fuerit carno 
preputii sui, exterminabitur 
anima ipsa de populis suis, 
quia pactum meum irritum fecit. 

15. Et dixit Deus ad Abra- 
ham, Sarai uxoris tue non vo- 
cabis nomen Sarai, sed Sarah 
est nomen ejus. 

16. Et benedicam ei, atque 
etiam dabo ex ea tibi filium, 


* cui benedicam, et erit in gentes: 


reges populorum ex ea erunt. 
17. Et prostravitse Abraham 

in faciem suam, et risit, dixit- 

que in corde suo, Numquid 


CHAP. XVII. 


dred years old? and shall Sarah, that is 
ninety years old, bear? 


18. And Abraham said unto God, O 
that Ishmael might live before thee ! 


19. And God said, Sarah thy wife 
shall bear thee a son indeed; and thou 
shalt call his name Isaac: and I will 
establish my covenant with him for an 
everlasting covenant, and with his seed 
after him. 

20. And as for Ishmael, I have heard 
thee: Behold, I have blessed him, and 
will make him fruitful, and will multiply 
him exceedingly ; twelve princes shall 
he beget, and I will make him a great 
nation. 

21. But my covenant will I establish 
with Isaac, which Sarah shall bear unto 
thee at this set time in the next year. 


22. And he left off talking with him, 
and God went up from Abraham. 

23. And Abraham took Ishmael his 
son, and all that were born in his house, 
and all that were bought with his 
money, every male among the men of 
Abraham’s house; and circumcised the 
flesh of their foreskin in the self-same day, 
as God had said unto him. 


24. And Abraham was ninety years 
old and nine when he was circumcised 
in the flesh of his foreskin. 


25. And Ishmael his son was thirteen 
years old when he was circumcised in 
the flesh of his foreskin. 


26. Inthe self-same day was Abraham 
circumcised, and Ishmael his son. 


27. And all the men of his house, 
born in the house, and bought with 
money of the stranger, were circumcised 
with him. 


1. And when Abram was ninety years old and nine. 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


441 


viro centum annorum nascetur 
proles? et an Sarah mulier 
nonaginta annorum pariet ? 

18. Et dixit Abraham ad 
Deum, Utinam Ismael vivat 
coram te. 

19. Et dixit Deus, Vere 
Sarah uxor tua pariet tibifilium, 
et vocabis nomen ejus Isaac: 
et statuam pactum meum 
cum eo in pactum perpetuum, 
et cum semine ejus post eum. 

20. Et pro Ismael audivi te : 
ecce, benedixi ei, et crescere 
faciam eum, et miultiplicare 
faciam eum supramodum: duo- 
decim principes generabit, et 
ponam eum in gentem magnam. 

21. Et pactum meum sta- 
tuam cum Isaac, quem pariet 
tibi Sarah in tempore hoc, an- 
no altero. 

22. Et finivit loqui cum eo, 
et ascendit Deus ab Abraham. 

23. Tune Abraham tulit 
Ismael filium suum, et omnes 
vernas domus sux, et omnem 
acquisitum argento suo: omnis 
masculi in viris domus suze 
circumcidit carnem preputii 
eorum in ipsomet die, sicut lo- 
quutus fuerat cum eo Deus. 

24. Abraham autem erat vir 
nonaginta et novem annorum, 
quando circumcisa fuit carno 
preputii ipsius. 

25. Et Ismael filius ejus erat 
tredecim annorum, quando cir- 
cumcisus est ipse in carne pre- 
putii sui, 

26. In ipsomet die circum- 
cisus est Abraham et Ismael 
filius ejus. 

27. Et omnes viri domus 
ejus, verna domus, et emptus 
argento a filio alienigene, cir- 
cumcisi sunt cum ipso. 


Moses 


passes over thirteen years of Abram’s life, not because nothing 
worthy of remembrance had in the meantime occurred; but 
because the Spirit of God, according to his own will, selects 


those things which are most necessary to be known. 


He 


442 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XVII. 


purposely points out the length of time which had elapsed 
from the birth of Ishmael to the period when Isaac was 
promised, for the purpose of teaching us that he long 
remained satisfied with that son who should, at length, be 
rejected, and that he was as one deluded by a fallacious 
appearance. Meanwhile, we see in what a circuitous course 
the Lord led him. It was even possible that he brought this 
delay upon himself, by his own fault, in having precipitately 
entered into second nuptials; yet as Moses declares no such 
thing, I leave it undetermined. Let it suffice to accept what 
is certain; namely, that Abram being contented with his only 
son, ceased to desire any other seed. The want of offspring had 
previously excited him to constant prayers and sighings; for 
the promise of God was so fixed in his mind, that he was 
ardently carried forward to séek its fulfilment. And now, 
falsely supposing that he had obtained his wish, he is led 
away by the presence of his son according to the flesh, from 
the expectation of a spiritual seed. Again the wonderful 
goodness of God shows itself, in that Abram himself is raised, 
beyond his own expectation and desire, to a new hope, and 
he suddenly hears, that what it never came into his mind to 
ask, is granted unto him. If he had been daily offering up 
importunate prayers for this blessing, we should not so plainly 
have seen that it was conferred upon him by the free gift of © 
God, as when it is given to him without his either thinking of it 
or desiring it. Before however we speak of Isaac, it will repay 
our labour, to notice the order and connection of the words. 

First, Moses says that the Lord appeared unto him, in 
order that we may know that the oracle was not pronounced 
by secret revelation, but that a vision at the same time was 
added to it. Besides, the vision was not speechless, but 
had the word annexed, from which word the faith of Abram 
might receive profit. Now that word summarily contains 
this declaration, that God enters into covenant with Abram: 
it then unfolds the nature of the covenant itself, and finally 
puts to it the seal, with the accompanying attestations. 

Lam the Almighty God... The Hebrew noun £1, which is 


1 ww bx, (El Shaddai,) a title of Jehovah, apparently of plural form. 
Gesenius calls it the plural of majesty. It seems chiefly intended to con- 


CHAP. XVII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 443 


derived from power, is here put for God. The same remark 
applies to the accompanying word ‘&, (shaddai,) as if God 
would declare, that he had sufficient power for Abram’s pro- 
tection: because our faith can only stand firmly, while we are 
certainly persuaded that the defence of God is alone sufficient 
for us,and can sincerely despise everything inthe world which 
is opposed to our salvation. God, therefore, does not boast 
of that power which lies concealed within himself; but of that 
which he manifests towards his children; and he does so, in 
order that Abram might hence derive materials for confi- 
dence. Thus, in these words, a promise is included. 

Walk before me. The force of this expression we have 
elsewhere explained. In making the covenant, God stipu- 
lates for obedience, on the part of his servant. Yet He does 
not in vain prefix the declaration that he is ‘ the Almighty 
God,’ and is furnished with power to help his own people: 
because it was necessary that Abram should be recalled from 
all other means of help,’ that he might entirely devote him- 
self to God alone. For no one will ever betake himself to 
God, but he who keeps created things in their proper place, 
and looks up to God alone. Where, indeed, the power of God 
has been once acknowledged, it ought so to transport us with 
admiration, and our minds ought so to be filled with reve- 
rence for him, that nothing should hinder us from worshipping 
‘him. Moreover, because the eyes of God look for faith and 
truth in the heart, Abram is commanded to aim at integrity. 
For the Hebrews call him aman of perfections, who is not of 
a deceitful or double mind, but sincerely cultivates rectitude. 
In short, the integrity here mentioned is opposed, to hypo- 
erisy. And surely, when we have to deal with God, no place 
for dissimulation remains. Now, from these words, we learn 
for what end God gathers together for himself a church; 


vey the notion of Ommnipotence. Some render the words, ‘ God all-suf- 
ficient ; but the original root of sy conveys the notion, rather of over- 
whelming, than of sustaining power. The word is therefore better ren- 
dered, as in our version, Almighty. It corresponds with the Greek 
ravroxeatoe, and with the Latin Omnipotens.—Ed. 

1“ Ab aliis omnibus.” ‘‘ De tous autresmoyens.” ‘ From all other 
means.”—French Tr. 


444 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XVII. 


namely, that they whom he has called, may be holy. The 
foundation, indeed, of the divine calling, is a gratuitous pro- 
mise; but it follows immediately after, that they whom he 
has chosen as a peculiar people to himself, should devote 
themselves to the righteousness of God.! For on this con- 
dition, he adopts children as his own, that he may, in return, 
obtain the place and the honour of a Father. And as he 
himself cannot lie, so he rightly demands mutual fidelity 
from his own children. Wherefore, let us know, that God 
manifests himself to the faithful, in order that they may live 
as in his sight ; and may make him the arbiter not only of 
their works, but of their thoughts. Whence also we infer, 
that there is no other method of living piously and justly, 
than that of depending upon God. 


2. And I will make my covenant. He now begins more 
fully and abundantly to explain what he had before alluded 
to briefly. We have said that the covenant of God with 
Abram had two parts. The first was a declaration of gratui- 
tous love ; to which was annexed the promise of a happy life. 
But the other was an exhortation to the sincere endeavour to 
cultivate uprightness, since God had given, in a single word 
only, a slight taste of his grace ; and then immediately had de- 
scended to the design of hiscalling; namely, that Abram should 
be upright. He now subjoins a more ample declaration of his 
grace, in order that Abram may endeavour more willingly to 
form his mind and his life, both to reverence towards God, 
and to the cultivation of uprightness; as if God had said, 
‘ See how kindly I indulge thee: for I do not require integ- 
rity from thee simply on account of my authority, which I 
might justly do; but whereas I owe thee nothing, I conde- 
scend graciously to engage in a mutual covenant.’ He does 
not, however, speak of this as of a new thing: but he recalls 
the memory of the covenant which he had before made, and 
now fully confirms and establishes its certainty. For God is 


1 “ Yield yourselves unto God, as those that are alive from the dead, 
and your members as instruments of righteousness unto God.” Rom. 
vi. 13.—Ed. 


CHAP. XVII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 445 


not wont to utter new oracles, which may destroy the credit, 
or obscure the light, or weaken the efficacy of those which 
preceded ; but he continues, as in one perpetual tenor, those 
promises which he has once given. Therefore, by these 
words, he intends nothing else than that the covenant, of 
which Abram had heard before, should be established and 
ratified: but he expressly introduces that principal point, 
concerning the multiplication of seed, which he afterwards 
frequently repeats. 


3. And Abram fell on his face. We know that this was 
the ancient rite of adoration. Moreover, Abram testifies, 
first, that he acknowledges God, in whose presence all flesh 
ought to keep silence, and to be humbled ; and, secondly, that 
he reverently receives and cordially embraces whatever God 
is about to speak. If, however, this was intended as a con- 
fession of faith, we must observe, that the faith which relies 
upon the grace of God cannot be disjoined from a pure con- 
science. God, in offering his grace to Abram, requires of 
him a sincere disposition to live justly and holily. Abram, 
in prostrating himself, declares that he obediently receives 
both.! Let us therefore remember, that in one and the same 
bond of faith, the gratuitous adoption in which our salvation 
is placed, is to be combined with newness of life. And al- 
though Abram utters not a word, he declares more fully by 
his silence, than if he had spoken with a loud and sounding 
voice, that he yields obedience to the word of God. 


4, As for me, behold, my covenant is with thee? They who 
translate the passage, ‘ Behold, I make a covenant with thee,’ 
or, ‘ Behold, I and my covenant with thee ;’ do not seem to 
me faithfully to represent the meaning of Moses. For, first, 
God declares that he is the speaker, in order that absolute 
authority may appear in his words. For since our faith can 
rest on no other foundation than his eternal veracity, it 


1 That is, both the promise of grace, and the command to yield 


obedience.—Ed. 
2 «Ego, ecce pactum meumtecum.” “I, behold, my covenant is with 


thee.” 


446 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XVII. 


becomes, above all things, necessary for us to be informed 
that what is proposed to us, has proceeded from his sacred 
mouth. Therefore, the pronoun I, is to be read separately, 
as a preface to the rest ; in order that Abram might have a 
composed mind, and might engage, without hesitation, in the 
proposed covenant. Whence a useful doctrine is deduced, 
that faith necessarily has reference to God: because, although 
all angels and men should speak to us, never would their 
authority appear sufficiently great to confirm our minds. 
And it cannot but be, that we should at times waver, until 
that voice sounds from heaven, ‘lam.’ Whence also it ap- 
pears what kind of religion is that of the Papacy: where, 
instead of the word of God, the fictions of men are alone the 
subject of boast. And they are justly exposed to continual 
fluctuation, who, depending upon the word of men, act un- 
justly towards God, by ascribing to them more than is right. 
But let us have no other foundation of our faith than this 
word ‘I,’ not as spoken indifferently by any mouth what- 
ever, but by the mouth of God alone. If, however, myriads 
of men set themselves in opposition, and proudly exclaim, 
‘We, we,’ let this single word of God suffice to dissipate the 
empty sound of multitudes. 

And thou shalt be a father of many nations.’ It is asked, 
what is this multitude of nations? It obviously appears, 
that different nations had their origin from the holy Patri- 
arch: for Ishmael grew to a great people: the Idumeans, 
from another branch, were spread far and wide ; large families 
also sprung from other sons, whom he had by Keturah. But 
Moses looked still further, because, indeed, the Gentiles were 
to be, by faith, inserted into the stock of Abram, although not 
descended from him according to the flesh : of which fact Paul 
is to us a faithful interpreter and witness. For he does not 
gather together the Arabians, Idumeans, and others, for the 
purpose of making Abram the father of many nations; but 
he so extends the name of father, as to make it applicable to 
the whole world, in order that the Gentiles, in other respects 
strangers, and separated from each other, might, from all sides, 


1 “Multitudinis gentium.” ‘Of a multitude of nations.” 


CHAP. XVII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 447 


combine in one family of Abram. I grant, indeed, that, for a 
time, the twelve tribes were as so many nations; but only in 
order to form a prelude to that immense multitude, which, at 
length, is collected together as the one family of Abram. And 
that Moses speaks of those sons, who, being regenerate by 
faith, acquire the name, and pass over into the stock of 
Abram, is sufficiently proved by this one consideration. For 
the carnal race of Abram could not be divided into different 
nations, without causing those who had departed from the 
unity, to be immediately accounted strangers. Thus the 
Church rejected the Ishmaelites, the Idumeans, and others, 
and regarded them as foreigners. Abram therefore was not 
called the father of many nations, because his seed was to be 
divided into many nations ; but rather, because many nations 
were to be gathered together unto him. A change also of 
his name is added as a token. For he begins to be called 
Abraham, in order that the name itself may teach him, that 
he should not be the father of one family only; but that a 
progeny should rise up to him from an immense multitude, 
beyond the common course of nature. For this reason, the 
Lord so often renews this promise ; because the very repeti- 
tion of it shows that no common blessing was promised. 


7. And thy seed after thee. There is no doubt that the 
Lord distinguishes the race of Abraham from the rest of the 
world. We must now see what people he intends. Now 
they are deceived who think that his elect alone are here 
pointed out; and that all the faithful are indiscriminately 
comprehended, from whatever people, according to the flesh, 
they are descended. For, on the contrary, the Scripture de- 
clares that the race of Abraham, by lineal descent, had been 
peculiarly accepted by God. And it is the evident doctrine 
of Paul concerning the natural descendants of Abraham, that 
they are holy branches which have proceeded from a holy 
root, (Rom. xi. 16.) And lest any one should restrict this 
assertion to the shadows of the law, or should evade it by 
allegory, he elsewhere expressly declares, that Christ came to 
be a minister of the circumcision, (Rom. xyv.8.) Wherefore, 
nothing is more certain, than that God made his covenant 


448 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XVII. 


with those sons of Abraham who were naturally to be born 
of him. If any one object, that this opinion by no means 
agrees with the former, in which we said that they are reck- 
oned the children of Abraham, who being by faith ingrafted 
into his body, form one family ; the difference is easily recon- 
ciled, by laying down certain distinct degrees of adoption, 
which may be collected from various passages of Scripture. 
In the beginning, antecedently to this covenant, the condi- 
tion of the whole world was one and the same. But as soon 
as it was said, ‘I will be a God to thee and to thy seed after 
thee,’ the Church was separated from other nations ; just as 
in the creation of the world, the light emerged out of the 
darkness. Then the people of Israel was received, as the 
flock of God, into their own fold: the other nations wander- 
ed, like wild beasts, through mountains, woods, and de- 
serts. Since this dignity, in which the sons of Abraham ex- 
celled other nations, depended on the word of God alone, the 
gratuitous adoption of God belongs to them all in common. 
For if Paul deprives the Gentiles of God and of eternal life, 
on the ground of their being aliens from the covenant, (Eph. 
iv. 18,) it follows that all Israelites were of the household of 
the Church, and sons of God, and heirs of eternal life. And 
although it was by the grace of God, and not by nature, 
that they excelled the Gentiles; and although the inherit- | 
ance of the kingdom of God came to them by promise, 
and not by carnal descent; yet they are sometimes said to 
differ by nature from the rest of the world. In the Epistle 
to the Galatians, chap. ii. ver. 15, and elsewhere, Paul calls 
them saints ‘ by nature,’ because God was willing that his 
grace should descend,’ by a continual succession, to the 
whole seed. In this sense, they who were. unbelievers 
among the Jews, are yet called the children of the celestial 
kingdom, by Christ. (Matth. viii. 12.) Nor does what St Paul 
says contradict this; namely, that not all who are from Ab- 
raham are to be esteemed legitimate children; because they 

' Quia continua serie prosequi nolebat Deus, gratiam suam ergo 
totum semen.” So it is, both in the Amsterdam edition, and in that of 
Hengstenberg ; but the word nolebat (was unwilling) seems so contrary 


to the writer’s line of argument, that the French version is followed in 
the translation, which is,‘‘ Pource que Dieu vouloit poursuyure,” &c.—Ed. 





CHAP. XVII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 449 


are not the children of the promise, but only of the flesh. 
(Rom. ix. 8.) For there, the promise is not taken generally 
for that outward word, by which Ged conferred his favour 
as well upon the reprobate as upon the elect; but must be 
restricted to that efficacious calling, which he inwardly seals 
by his Spirit. And that this is the case, is proved without 
difficulty ; for the promise by which the Lord had adopted 
them all as children, was common to all: and in that promise, it 
cannot be denied, that eternal salvation was offered to all. 
What, therefore, can be the meaning of Paul, when he denies 
that certain persons have any right to be reckoned among 
children, except that he is no longer reasoning about the exter- 
nally offered grace, but about that of which only the elect 
effectually partake? Here, then, a twofold class of sons 
presents itself to us, in the Church; for since the whole 
body of the people is gathered together into the fold of God, 
by one and the same voice, all without exception, are, in this 
respect, accounted children; the name of the Church is ap- 
plicable in common to them all: but in the innermost sanc- 
tuary of God, none others are reckoned the sons of God, than 
they in whom the promise is ratified by faith. And although 
this difference flows from the fountain of gratuitous election, 
whence also faith itself springs; yet, since the counsel of God is 
in itself hidden from us, we therefore distinguish the true from 
the spurious children, by the respective marks of faith and of 
unbelief. This method and dispensation continued even to the 
promulgation of the gospel; but then the middle wall was 
broken down, (Ephes. ii. 14,) and God made the Gentiles 
equal to the natural descendants of Abraham. That was the 
renovation of the world, by which they, who had before been 
strangers, began to be called sons. Yet whenever a compari-. 
son is made between Jews and Gentiles, the inheritance of 
life is assigned to the former, as lawfully belonging to them ; 
but to the latter, it is said to be adventitious. Meanwhile, 
the oracle was fulfilled, in which God promises that Abraham 
should be the father of many nations. For whereas pre- 
viously, the natural sons of Abraham were succeeded by their 
descendants in continual succession, and the benediction, which 
began with him, flowed down to his children; the coming of 
Christ, by inverting the original order, introduced into his 
VOL. I. 2¥F 


450 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XVII. 


family those who before were separated from his seed: at 
length the Jews were cast out, (except that a hidden seed of 
the election remained. among them,) in order that the rest 
might be saved. It was necessary that these things concerning 
the seed of Abraham should once be stated, that they may 
open to us an easy introduction to what follows. 

In their generations. ‘This succession of generations clearly 
proves that the posterity of Abraham were taken into the 
Church, in such a manner that sons might be born to them, 
who should be heirs of the same grace. In this way the 
covenant is called perpetual, as lasting until the renovation of 
the world ; which took place at the advent of Christ. I grant, 
indeed, that the covenant was without end, and may with 
propriety be called eternal, as far as the whole Church is 
concerned; it must, however, always remain as a settled 
point, that the regular succession of ages was partly broken, 
and partly changed, by the coming of Christ, because the 
middle wall being broken down, and the sons by nature being, 
at length, disinherited, Abraham began to have a race asso- 
ciated with himself, from all regions of the world. 

To be a God unto thee. In this single word we are plainly 
taught, that this was a spiritual covenant, not confirmed in 
reference to the present life only; but one from which Abraham 
might conceive the hope of eternal salvation, so that being 
raised even to heaven, he might lay hold of solid and per- 
fect bliss. For those whom God adopts to himself, from 
among a people—seeing that he makes them partakers of his 
righteousness and of all good things—he also constitutes heirs 
of celestial life. Let us then mark this as the principal part 
of the covenant, that He who is the God of the living, not 
of the dead, promises to be a God to the children of Abraham. 
It follows afterwards, in the way of augmentation of the grant, 
that he promises to give them the land. I confess, indeed, 
that something greater and more excellent than itself was 
shadowed forth by the land of Canaan; yet this is not at 
variance with the statement, that the promise now made 
was an accession to that primary one, ‘I will be thy God’ 
Now, although God again affirms, as before, that He will 
give the land to Abraham himself, we nevertheless know, 
that Abraham never possessed dominion over it; but the 





CHAP. XVII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 451 


holy man was contented with his title to it alone, although 
the possession of it was not granted him; and, therefore, he 
ealmly passed from his earthly pilgrimage into heaven. God 
again repeats that He will be a God to the posterity of 
Abraham, in order that they may not settle upon earth, but 
may regard themselves as trained for higher things. 


9. Thou shalt keep my covenant. As formerly, covenants 
were not only committed to public records, but were also 
wont to be engraven in brass, or sculptured on stones, in 
order that the memory of them might be more fully recorded, 
and more highly celebrated; so in the present instance, 
God inscribes his covenant in the flesh of Abraham. For 
circumcision was as a solemn memorial of that adoption, by 
which the family of Abraham had been elected to be the 
peculiar people of God. The pious had previously possessed 
other ceremonies, which confirmed to them the certainty of — 
the grace of God; but now the Lord attests the new cove- 
nant with a new kind of symbol. But the reason why He 
suffered the human race to be without this testimony of his 
grace, during so many ages, is concealed from us; except that 
we see it was instituted at the time when he chose a certain 
nation to himself; which thing itself depends on his secret 
counsel. Moreover, although it would, perhaps, be more suit- 
able for the purpose of instruction, were we to give a sum- 
mary of those things which are to be said concerning cir- 
cumcision; I will yet follow the order of the text, which I 
think more appropriate to the office of an interpreter. In the 
first place; since circumcision is called, by Moses, the covenant 
of God, we thence infer that the promise of grace was included 
in it. For had it been only a mark or token of external pro-' 
fession among men, the name of covenant would be by no 
means suitable, for a covenant is not otherwise confirmed, 
than as faith answers to it. And it is common to all sacra- 
ments to have the word of God annexed to them, by which 
he testifies that he is propitious to us, and calls us to the hope 
of salvation; yea, a sacrament is nothing else than a visible 
word, or sculpture and image of that grace of God, which the 
word more fully illustrates. If, then, there is a mutual relation 


452 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XVII- 


between the word and faith; it follows, that the proposed 

end and use of sacraments is to help, promote and confirm 

faith. But they who deny that sacraments are supports to 

faith, or that they aid the word in strengthening faith, must 

of necessity expunge the name of covenant ; because, either 

God there offers himself as a Promiser, in mockery and falsely, 

or else, faith there finds that on which it may support itself, 

and from which it may confirm its own assurance. And 

, although we must maintain the distinction between the word 

and the sign; yet let us know, that as soon as the sign itself 
meets our eyes, the word ought to sound in our ears. There- 

fore, while, in this place, Abraham is commanded to keep the 

covenant, God does not enjoin upon him the bare use of 
the ceremony, but chiefly designs that he should regard the 

end; and certainly, since the promise is the very soul of the 

sign, whenever it is torn away from the sign, nothing remains 

but a lifeless and vain phantom. This is the reason why we 

say, that sacraments are abolished by the Papists; because, the 

voice of God having become extinct, nothing remains with 

them, except the residuum of mute figures. Truly frivolous 

is their boast, that their magical exorcisms stand in the place 

of the word. For nothing can be called a covenant, but what 
is perceived by us to be clearly revealed, so that it may edify 
our faith; these actors, who by gesture alone, or by a confused 
murmuring, play as on pipes, have nothing like this. 

We now consider how the covenant is rightly kept; namely, 
when the word precedes, and we embrace the sign as a testi- 
mony and pledge of grace; for as God binds himself to keep 
the promise given to us; so the consent of faith and of obe- 
dience is demanded from us. What follows further on this 
subject is worthy of nig 

Between me and you. Whereby we are taught that a sa- 
crament has not respect only to the external confession, but is 
an intervening pledge between God and the conscience of 
man. And, therefore, whosoever is not directed to God through 
the sacraments, profanes their use. But by the figure meto- 


' «Inter me et te.’ But in the chapter itself it stands, ‘Inter me et 
vos ;’ as in the English version.—£d. . 


CHAP. XVII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 453 


nymy, the name of covenant is transferred to circumcision, 
which is so conjoined with the word, that it could not be sepa- 
‘rated from it. 


10. Every man-child among you shall be circumcised. Al- 
though God promised, alike to males and females, what he 
afterwards sanctioned by circumcision, he nevertheless con- 
secrated, in one sex, the whole people to himself. For where- 
as, by this symbol, the promise which was given, indiscrimi- 
nately, to males and females, is confirmed, and it is certain that 
females as well as males had need of confirmation, it is hence 
evident, that the symbol was ordained for the sake of both 
sexes. Nor is it of any force in opposition to this reasoning, 
to say that each individual is commanded to communicate in 
the sacraments, if he would derive any benefit from them, 
on the ground that no profit is received by those who neglect 
their use. For the covenant of God was graven on the bodies 
of the males, with this condition annexed, that the females 
also should as their associates be partakers of the same sign. 


11. Ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin. Very strange 
and unaccountable would this command at first sight appear. 
The subject treated of, is the sacred covenant, in which right- 
eousness, salvation, and happiness are promised ; whereby the 
seed of Abraham is distinguished from other nations, in order 
that it may be holy and blessed; and who can say that it is 
reasonable for the sign of so great a mystery-to consist in 
circumcision?! But as it was necessary for Abraham to be- 
come a fool, in order to prove himself obedient to God; so who- 
soever is wise, will both soberly and reverently receive what 
God seems to us foolishly to have commanded. And yet we 
must inquire, whether any analogy is here apparent between 
the visible sign, and the thing signified. For the signs which 
God has appointed to assist our infirmity, should be accom- 
modated to the measure of our capacity, or they would be 
unprofitable. Moreover, it is probable that the Lord com- 
manded circumcision for two reasons; first, to show that 


1 “Tanti mysterii insigne statui in pudendis partibus.” 


454 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XVII. 


whatever is born of man is polluted; then, that salvation 

would proceed from the blessed seed of Abraham. In the 

first place, therefore, whatever men have peculiar to them-— 
selves, by generation, God has condemned, in the appoint- 

ment of circumcision ; in order that the corruption of nature 

being manifest, he might induce them to mortify their 

flesh. Whence also it follows, that circumcision was a sign 

of repentance. Yet, at the same time, the blessing which was 

promised in the seed of Abraham, was thereby marked and 

attested. If then it seem absurd to any one, that the token 

of a favour so excellent and so singular, was given in that 

part of the body, let him become ashamed of his own salvation, 

which flowed from the loins of Abraham; but it has pleased 

God thus to confound the wisdom of the world, that he may 

the more completely abase the pride of the flesh. And hence 
we now learn, in the second place, how the reconciliation 
between God and men, which was exhibited in Christ, was 
testified by this sign. For which reason it is styled by Paula 
seal of the righteousness of faith. (Rom. iv. 11.) Let it suf 
fice thus briefly to have touched upon the analogy between 

the thing signified and the sign. 


12. And he that is eight days old shall be cireumcised.| God 
now prescribes the eighth day for circumcision; whence it 
appears that this was a part of that discipline, under which he 
intended to keep his ancient people; for greater liberty is, at 
this day, permitted in the administration of baptism. Some, 
however, maintain that we must not contend earnestly about 
the number of days, because the Lord spared the children on 
account of their tenderness, since it was not without danger 
to inflict a wound upon those who were newly born. For 
although he might have provided that circumcision should 
produce no harm or injury; yet there would be no absurdity 
in saying, that He had respect to their tender age, in order 
to prove to the Jews his paternal love towards their children. 
To others this seems to be too frigid; therefore they seek a 
spiritual mystery in the number of days. They think that 


' “ Kt filius octo dierum cireumcidetur.”—‘‘ And a son of eight days 
shall be circumcised.” 


CHAP. XVII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 455 


the present life is allegorically signified by the seven days; 
that God commanded infants to be circumcised on the eighth 
day, in order to show that though we must give attention to 
the mortification of the flesh during the whole course of our 
life, it will not be completed till the end. Augustine also 
thinks that it had reference to the resurrection of Christ; 
whereby external circumcision was abolished, and the truth 
of the figure was set forth. It is probable and consonant with 
reason, that the number seven designated the course of the 
present life. Therefore the eighth day might seem to be 
fixed upon by the Lord, to prefigure the beginning of a 
new life. But because such a reason is never given in 
Scripture, I dare affirm nothing. Wherefore, let it suffice to 
maintain what is certain and solid; namely, that God, in this 
symbol, has so represented the destruction of the old man, as 
yet to show that he restores men to life. 

He that is born in the house, or bought with money. When 
God commands Abraham to circumcise all whom he has under 
his power, his special love towards holy Abraham is conspi- 
cuous in this, that He embraces his whole family in His grace. 
We know that formerly slaves were scarcely reckoned among 
the number of men. But God, out of regard to his.servant 
Abraham, adopts them as his owii sons: to this mercy no- 
thing whatever can be added. ‘The pride also of the flesh is 
cast down; because God, without respect of persons, gathers 
together both freemen and slaves. But in the person of 
Abraham, he has prescribed it as a law to all his servants, 
that they should endeavour to bring all who are subject to 
them, into the same society of faith with themselves. For 
every family of the pious ought to be a church. Therefore, 
if we desire to prove our piety, we must labour that every. 
one of us may have his house ordered in obedience to 
God. And Abraham is not only commanded to dedicate 
and to offer unto God these born in his house, but whomso- 
ever he might afterwards obtain. 


13. For an everlasting covenant. The meaning of this ex- 
pression may be twofold: either that God promises that his 
grace, of which circumcision was a sign and pledge, should 


> 


456 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XVII. 


be eternal; or that he intended the sign itself to be perpetu- 
ally observed. Indeed, I have no doubt that this perpetuity 
ought to be referred to the visible sign. But they who hence 
infer, that the use of it ought to flourish among the Jews even 
of the present time, are (in my opinion) deceived. For they 
swerve from that axiom which we ought to regard as fixed; 
that since Christ is the end of the law, the perpetuity which 
is ascribed to the ceremonies of the law, was terminated as 
soon as Christ appeared. The temple was the perpetual 
habitation of God, according to that declaration, ¢ This is 
my rest for ever, here will I dwell,” (Ps. cxxxii. 14.) The 
Sabbath indicated not a temporal but a perpetual sanctifica- 
tion of the people. Nevertheless, it is not to be denied, that 
Christ brought them both to an end. In the same way must 
we also think of circumcision. If the Jews object, that in 
this manner, the law was violated by Christ; the answer is 
easy; that the external use of the law was so abrogated, as 
to establish its truth. For, at length, by the coming of 
Christ, circumcision was substantially confirmed, so that it 
should endure for ever, and that the covenant which God 
had before made, should be ratified. Moreover, lest the 
changing of the visible sign should perplex any one, let that 
renovation of the world, of which I have spoken, be kept in 
mind ; which renovation—notwithstanding some interposed 
variety—has perpetuated those things which would otherwise 
have been fading. Therefore, although the use of circumcision 
has ceased ; yet it does not cease to be an everlasting, or per- 
petual covenant, if only Christ be regarded as the Mediator ; 
who, though the sign be changed, has confirmed the truth. 
And that, by the coming of Christ, external circumcision 
ceased, is plain from the words of Paul; who not only teaches 
that we are circumcised by the death of Christ, spiritually, 
and not through the carnal sign: but who expressly substitutes 
baptism for circumcision; (Col. ii. 11;) and truly baptism 
could not succeed circumcision, without taking it away. 
Therefore in the next chapter he denies that there is any 
difference between circumcision and uncircumcision ; because, 
at that time, the thing was indifferent, and of no importance. 
Whence we refute the error of those, who think that cireum- 


CHAP, XVII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 457 


cision is still in force among the Jews, as if it were a peculiar 
symbol of the nation, which never ought to be abrogated. I 
acknowledge, indeed, that it was permitted to them for a 
time, until the liberty obtained by Christ should be better 
known; but though permitted, it by no means retained its 
original force. For it would be absurd to be initiated into 
the Church by two different signs; of which the one should 
testify and affirm that Christ was come, and the other should 
shadow him forth as absent. 


14. And the uncircumcised man-child. In order that cir- 
cumcision might be the more attended to, God denounces a 
severe punishment on any one who should neglect it. And 
as this shows God’s great care for the salvation of men; so, 
on the other hand, it rebukes their negligence. For since 
God thus benignantly offers a pledge of his love, and of 
eternal life, for what purpose does he add threatenings but 
to rouse the sluggishness of those whose duty it is to run 
with diligence? Therefore, this denunciation of punishment 
virtually charges men with foul ingratitude, because they 
either reject or despise the grace of God. The passage how- 
ever teaches, that such contempt shall not pass unpunished. 
And since God threatens punishment only to despisers, we 
infer that the uncircumcision of children would do them no 
harm, if they died before the eighth day. For the bare 
promise of God was effectual to their salvation. He did not 
so attest this salvation by external signs, as to restrict his 
own effectual working to those signs. Moses, indeed, sets 
aside all controversy on this subject, by adducing as a reason, 
that they would make void the covenant of God: for we 
know, that the covenant was not violated, when the power 
of keeping it was taken away. Let us then consider, that 
the salvation of the race of Abraham was included in that 
expression, ‘I will be a God to thy seed.’ And although 
circumcision was added as a confirmation, it nevertheless did 
not deprive the word of its force and efficacy. But because 
it is not in the power of man to sever what God has joined 
together; no one could despise or neglect the sign, without 
both rejecting the word itself, and depriving himself of the 


458 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XVII. 


benefit therein offered. And therefore the Lord punished bare 
neglect with such severity. But if any infants were deprived 
by death of the tokens of salvation, he spared them, because 
they had done nothing derogatory to the covenant of God. 
The same reasoning is at this day in force respecting baptism. 
Whoever, having neglected baptism, feigns himself to be 
contented with the bare promise, tramples, as much as in him 
lies, upon the blood of Christ, or at least does not suffer it to 
flow for the washing of his own children. Therefore, just 
punishment follows the contempt of the sign, in the privation 
of grace; because, by an impious severance of the sign and 
the word, or rather by a laceration of them, the covenant of 
God is violated. To consign to destruction those infants, 
whom a sudden death has not allowed to be presented for 
baptism, before any neglect of parents could intervene, is 
a cruelty originating in superstition. But that the promise 
belongs to such children, is not in the least doubtful. For what 
can be more absurd than that the symbol, which is added for 
the sake of confirming the promise, should really enervate its 
force? Wherefore, the common opinion, by which baptism is 
supposed to be necessary to salvation, ought to be so moder- 
ated, that it should not bind the grace of God, or the power 


of the Spirit, to external symbols, and bring against God a 


charge of falsehood. 

He hath broken my covenant. For the covenant of God is 
ratified, when by faith we embrace what he promises. Should 
any one object, that infants were guiltless of this fault, because 
they hitherto were destitute of reason: I answer, we ought 
not to press this divine declaration too closely, asif God held 
the infants as chargeable with a fault of their own: but we 
must observe the antithesis, that as God adopts the infant 
son in the person of his father, so when the father repudiates 
such a benefit, the infant is said to cut himself off from the 
Church. For the meaning of the expression is this, ‘He 
shall be blotted out from the people whom God had chosen 
to himself’ The explanation of some, that they who re- 
mained in uncircumcision would not be Jews, and would 
have no place in the census of that people, is too frigid. We 
must go farther, and say, that God, indeed, will not acknow- 


at. 


CHAP. XVII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 459 


ledge those as among his people, who will not bear the 
mark and token of adoption. 


15. As for Sarai thy wife. God now promises to Abra- 
ham a legitimate seed by Sarai. She had been (as I have 
said) too precipitate, when she substituted, without any 
command from God, her handmaid in her own place: Abra- 
ham also had heen too pliant in following his wife, who fool- 
ishly and rashly wished to anticipate the design of God; 
nevertheless, their united fault did not prevent God from 
making it known to them that he was about to give them 
that seed, from the expectation of which, they had, in a 
manner, cut themselves off. Whence the gratuitous kind- 
ness of God shines the more clearly, because, although men 
impede the course of it by obstacles of their own, it never- 
theless comes to them. Moreover, God changes the name 
of Sarai, in order that he may extend her pre-eminence far 
and wide, which in her former name had been more re- 
stricted. For the letter * (yod) has the force among the 
Hebrews of the possessive pronoun: this being now taken 
away, God designs that Sarah should every where, and with- 
out exception, be celebrated as a sovereign and princess.’ 
And this is expressed in the context, when God promises that 
he will give herason, from whom at length nations and kings 
should be born. And although at first sight this benedic- 
tion appears most ample, it is still far richer than it seems 
to be, in the words here used, as we shall see in a little time. 


17. And Abraham fell upon his face. This was in token, not 
only of his reverence, but also of his faith. For Abraham 
not only adores God, but in giving him thanks, testifies that 
he receives and embraces what was promised concerning a 
son. Hence also we infer that he laughed, not because he 


1 Sarah shall her name be. Heb., m7, Sarah. Sarai properly signi- 
fies ‘‘ my princess,” as if sustaining that relation to a single individual or 
toa family. The restriction implied in the possessive ‘‘ my” is now to 
be done away: her limited pre-eminence is to be unspeakably enlarged. 
Thus, instead of ‘‘ my princess,” she is henceforth to bear an appellation 
importing ‘‘ princess of a multitude,” and corresponding with the magni- 
ficent promise made to her, ver. 16.—Bush, Notes on Genesis. 


460 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XVII 


either despised, or regarded as fabulous, or rejected, the pro- 
mise of God ; but, as is commonly wont to happen in things 
which are least expected, partly exulting with joy, and partly 
being carried beyond himself in admiration, he breaks forth 
into laughter. For I do not assent to the opinion of those 
who suppose, that this laughter flowed solely from joy ; but I 
rather think that Abraham was as one astonished ; which his 
next interrogation also confirms, “Shall a child be born to 
him that is an hundred years old?” For although he does 
not reject as vain what had been said by the angel, he yet 
shows that he was no otherwise affected, than as if he had 
received some incredible tidings. The novelty of the thing 
so strikes him, that for a short time he is confounded ; yet 
he humbles himself before God, and with confused mind, 
prostrating himself on the earth, he, by faith, adores the 
power of God. For, that this was not the language of one 
who doubts, Paul, in his Epistle to the Romans, is a witness, 
(iv. 19,) who denies that Abraham considered his body now 
dead, or the barren womb of Sarah, or that he staggered 
through unbelief; but declares that he believed in hope against 
hope. And that which Moses relates, “that Abraham said 
in his heart,” I do not so explain as if he had distinctly con- 
ceived this in his mind: but as many things steal upon us 
contrary to our purpose, the perplexing thought suddenly 
rushed upon his mind, ‘ What a strange thing is this, that a 
son should be born to one a hundred years old!’ This, how- 
ever, seems to some, to be a kind of contest between carnal 
_ reason and faith ; for although Abraham, reverently prostrat- 
ing himself before God, submits his own mind to the’ divine 
word, he is still disturbed by the novelty of the affair. I 
answer, that this admiration, which did not obstruct the 
course of God’s power, was not contrary to faith; nay, the 
strength of faith shone the more brightly, in having sur- 
mounted an obstacle so arduous. And therefore he is not 
reprehended for laughing, as Sarah is in the next chapter. 


18. And Abraham said unto God. Abraham does not now 
wonder silently within himself, but pours forth his wish 
and prayer. His language, however, is that of a mind still 


CHAP. XVII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 461 


perturbed and vacillating, “ O that (or I wish that) Ishmael 
might live!” For, as if he did not dare to hope for all that 
God promises, he fixes his mind upon the son already born ; 
not because he would reject the promise of fresh offspring, 
but because he was contented with the favour already re- 
ceived, provided the liberality of God should not extend fur- 
ther. He does not, then, reject what the Lord offers; but 
while he is prepared to embrace it, the expression, “ O that 
Ishmael!” yet flows from him, through the weakness of his 
flesh. Some think that Abraham spoke thus, because he was 
afraid for his first-born. But there is no reason why we 
should suppose that Abraham was smitten with any such 
fear, as that God, in giving him another son, would take away 
the former, or as if the latter favour should absorb that which 
had preceded. The answer of: God, which follows shortly 
after, refutes this interpretation. What I have said is more 
certain; namely, that Abraham prayed that the grace of God, 
in which he acquiesced, might be ratified and confirmed to him. 
Moreover, without reflection, he breaks forth into this wish, 
when, for very joy, he could scarcely believe what he had 
heard from the mouth of God. ‘To live before Jehovah’ is 
as much as, to be preserved in safety under his protection, or 
to be blessed by Him. Abraham therefore desires of the 
Lord, that he will preserve the life which he has given to 
Ishmael. 


19. Sarah thy wife shall bear thee a son indeed. Some take 
the adverb Son, abal, to mean ‘Truly. Others, however, 
more rightly suppose it to be used for increasing the force of 
the expression. For God rouses the slumbering mind of his 
servant ; as if he would say, ‘ The sight of one favour pre- 
vents thee from raising thyself higher; and thus it happens 
that thou dost confine thy thoughts within too narrow limits. 
Now, therefore, enlarge thy mind, to receive also what I pro- 
mise concerning Sarah. For the door of hope ought to be 
sufficiently open to admit the word in its full magnitude, 

And I will establish my covenant with him. He confines 
the spiritual covenant to one family, in order that Abraham 
may hence learn to hope for the blessing before promised ; 


462 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XVII. 


for since he had framed for himself a false hope, not founded 
on the word of God, it was necessary that this false hope 
should first be dislodged from his heart, in order that he 
might now the more fully rely upon the heavenly oracles, and 
might fix the anchor of his faith, which before had wavered 
in a fallacious imagination, on the firm truth of God. He 
calls the covenant everlasting, in the sense which we have 
previously explained. He then declares that it shall not be 
bound to one person only, but shall be common to his whole 
race, that it may, by continual succession, descend to his pos- 
terity. Yet it may seem absurd, that God should command 
Ishmael, whom he deprives of his grace, to be circumcised. I 
answer ; although the Lord constitutes Isaac the first-born and 
the head, from whom he intends the covenant of salvation to 
flow, he still does not entirely exclude Ishmael; but rather, in 
adopting the whole family of Abraham, joins Ishmael to his 
brother Isaac as an inferior member, until Ishmael cut him- 
self off from his father’s house, and his brother’s society. 
Therefore his circumcision was not useless, until he apostatized 
from the covenant: for although it was not deposited with 
him, he might, nevertheless, participate in it, with his brother 
Isaac. In short, the Lord intends nothing else, by these 
“words, than that Isaac should be the legitimate heir of the 

promised benediction. | 


20. And as for Ishmael. He here more clearly discrimi- 
nates between the two sons of Abraham. For in promising 
to the one wealth, dignity, and other things pertaining to the 
present life, he proves him to be a son according to the flesh. 
But he makes a special covenant with Isaac, which rises above 
the world and this frail life: not for the sake of cutting Ish- 
mael off from the hope of eternal life, but in order to teach 
him that salvation is to be sought from the race of Isaac, 
where it really dwells. We infer, however, from this passage, 
that the holy fathers were by no means kept down to earth, 
by the promises of God, but rather were borne upwards to 
heaven. For God liberally and profusely promises to Ishmael 
whatever is desirable with respect to this earthly life: and 
yet He accounts as nothing all the gifts He confers on him, 


CHAP. XVII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 463 


in comparison with the covenant which was to be established 
inIsaac. It therefore follows, that neither wealth, nor power, 
nor any other temporal gift, is promised to the sons of the 
Spirit, but an eternal blessing, which is possessed only by 
hope, in this world. Therefore, however we may now abound 
in delights, and in all good things, our happiness is still tran- 
sient, unless by faith we penetrate into the celestial kingdom 
of God, where a greater and higher blessing is laid up for us. 

It is however asked, whether Abraham “had respect only 
to this earthly life when he prayed for his son? For this the 
Lord seems to intimate, when he declares that he had granted 
what Abraham asked, and yet only mentions the things we 
have recorded. But it was not God’s design to fulfil the 
whole wish of Abraham on this point; only he makes it plain 
that he would have some respect to Ishmael, for whom Abra- 
ham had entreated; so as to show that the father’s prayer 
had not been in vain. For he meant to testify that he 
embraced Abraham with such love, that, for his sake, he 
had respect to his whole race, and dignified it with peculiar 
benefits. 


22. God went up from Abraham. 'This expression contains 
a profitable doctrine, namely, that Abraham certainly knew 
this vision to be from God; for the ascent here spoken im- 
plies as much. And it is necessary for the pious to be fully 
assured that what they hear proceeds from God, in order 
that they may not be carried hither and thither, but may 
depend alone upon heaven. And whereas God now, when 
he has spoken to us, does not openly ascend to heaven before 
our eyes; this ought to diminish nothing from the certainty 
of our faith; because a full manifestation of Him has been 
made in Christ, with which it is right that we should be 
satisfied. Besides, although God does not. daily ascend up- 
wards in a visible form, yet, in this his majesty is not less 
resplendent, that he raises us upwards by transforming us into 
his own image. Further, he gives sufficient authority to his 
word, when he seals it upon our hearts by his Spirit. 


93. And Abraham took Ishmael. Moses now commends 


464 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XVII. 


the obedience of Abraham, because he circumcised the whole 
of his family as he had been commanded. For he must, of 
necessity, have been entirely devoted to God, since he did 
not hesitate to inflict upon himself a wound attended with 
acute pain, and not without danger of life. To this may be 
added the circumstance of the time; namely, that he does 
not defer the work to another day, but immediately obeys the 
Divine mandate. There is, however, no doubt, that he had . 
to contend with various perplexing thoughts. Not to mention 
innumerable others, this might come into his mind, ‘ As for me, 
who have been so long harassed with many adverse affairs, and 
tossed about in different exiles, and yet have never swerved 
from the word of God; if, by this symbol, he would conse- 
crate me to himself as a servant, why has he put me off to 
extreme old age? What does this mean, that I cannot be 
saved unless I, with one foot almost in the grave, thus mutilate 
myself?’ But this was an illustrious proof of obedience, that 
having overcome all difficulties, he quickly, and without delay, 
followed where God called him. And he gave, in so doing, 
an example of faith not less excellent ; because, unless he had 
certainly embraced the promises of God, he would by no 
means have become so prompt to obey. Hence, therefore, 
arose his great alacrity, because he set the word of God in 
opposition to the various temptations which might disturb — 
his mind, and draw him in contrary directions. 

Two things also here are worthy of observation. First, 
that Abraham was not deterred by the difficulty of the work 
from yielding to God the duty which he owed him. We 
know that he had a great multitude in his house, nearly 
equal toa people. It was scarcely credible that so many men 
would have suffered themselves to be wounded, apparently 
to be made a laughing-stock. ‘Therefore it was justly to be 
feared, that he would excite a great tumult in his tranquil 
family ; yea, that, by a common impulse, the major part of 
his servants would rise up against him ; nevertheless, relying 
upon the word of God, he strenuously attempts what seemed 
impossible. 

We next see, how faithfully his family was instructed ; be- 
cause not only his home-born slaves, but foreigners, and men 


CHAP. XVIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 465 


bought with money, meekly receive the wound, which was 
both troublesome, and the occasion of shame to carnal sense. 
It appears, then, that Abraham diligently took care to have 
them prepared for due obedience. And since he held them 
under holy discipline, he received the reward of his own dili- 
gence, in finding them so tractable in a most arduous affair. 
So, at this day, God seems to enjoin a thing impossible to be 
done, when he requires his gospel to be preached every where 
~ in the whole world, for the purpose of restoring it from death 
to life. For we see how great is the obstinacy of nearly all 
men, and what numerous and powerful methods of resistance 
Satan employs; so that, in short, all the ways of access to 
these principles are obstructed. Yet it behoves individuals 
to do their duty, and not to yield to impediments ; and, finally, 
our endeavours and our labours shall by no means fail of that 
success, which is not yet apparent. 





CHAPTER XVIII. 


1. Anp the Lord appeared unto him 
in the plains of Mamre: and he sat in 
the tent-door in the heat of the day ; 


2. And he lift up his eyes and looked, 
and, lo, three men stood by him: and 
when he saw them, he ran to meet them 
from the tent-door, and bowed himself 
toward the ground, 


3. And said, My Lord, if now I have 
found favour in thy sight, pass not away, 
I pray thee, from thy servant. 


4. Let a little water, I pray you, be 
fetched, and wash your feet, and rest 
yourselves under the tree: 

5. And I will fetch a morsel of bread, 
and comfort ye your hearts; after that 
ye shall pass on: for therefore are ye 
come to your servant. And they said, 
So do as thou hast said. 


6. And Abraham hastened into the 
tent unto Sarah, and said, Make ready 
quickly three measures of fine meal, 
knead 7, and make cakes upon the hearth. 


VOL. I. 


1. Deinde visus est illi Je- 
hova in Querceto Mamre, quum 
ipse sederet in ostio taberna- 
culi, quando incalescebat dies. 

2. Et elevavit oculos suos, 
et vidit, et ecce tres viri stabant 
juxta eum : et vidit, et cucurrit 
in occursum eorum ab ostio 
tabernaculi, et incurvayvit se 
super terram. 

3. Et dixit, Domine mi, si 
nunc inveni gratiam in oculis 
tuis, ne nunc transeas a servo 
tuo. 

4, Tollatur nunc parum 
aque, et lavate pedes vestros, 
et considite sub arbore. 

5. Et capiam buccellam 
panis, et fulcite cor vestrum, 
postea transibitis: quia idcirco 
transiistis ad servum vestrum. 
Et dixerunt, Sicfacias quemad- 
modum loquutus es. 

6. Itaque festinavit Abra- 
ham ad tabernaculum ad Sarah, 
et dixit, Festina, tria sata far- 
inz simile consperge, et fac 
subcinericios panes. 


26 


466 


7. And Abraham ran unto the herd, 
and fetched a calf tender and good, and 
gave zt unto a young man ; and he hast- 
ed to dress it. 

8. And he took butter, and milk, and 
the calf which he had dressed, and set 7 
before them ; and he stood by them un- 
_ der the tree, and they did eat. 


9. And they said unto him, Where 7s 
Sarah thy wife? And he said, Behold, 
in the tent. 

10. And he said, I will certainly re- 
turn unto thee according to the time of 
life; and, lo, Sarah thy wife shall have 
ason. And Sarah heard zz in the tent- 
door, which was behind him. 


11. Now Abraham and Sarah were old, 
and well stricken in age; and it ceased 
to be with Sarah after the manner of 
women. 

12. Therefore Sarah laughed within 
herself, saying, After I am waxed old 
shall I have pleasure, my lord being old 
also ? 

13. And the Lord said unto Abraham, 
Wherefore did Sarah laugh, saying, 
Shall I of a surety bear a child, which 
am old ? 

14. Is any thing too hard for the 
Lord? At the time appointed I will re- 
turn unto thee, according to the time of 
life, and Sarah shall have a son. 

15. Then Sarah denied, saying, I 
laughed not; for she was afraid. And 
he said, Nay; but thou didst laugh. 

16. And the men rose up from thence, 
and looked towards Sodom : and Abra- 
ham went with them, to bring them on 
the way. f 

17. And the Lord said, Shall I hide 
from Abraham that thing which I do; 


18. Seeing that Abraham shall surely 
become a great and mighty nation, and 
all the nations of the earth shall be bless- 
ed in him ? 

19. For I know him, that he will com- 
mand his children and his household 
after him, and they shall keep the way 
of the Lord, to do justice and judgment ; 
that the Lord may bring upon Abraham 
that which he hath spoken of him. 


20. And the Lord said, Because the 


COMMENTARY UPON 


CHAP. XVIII. 


7. Et ad boves cucurrit 
Abraham, et tulit vitulum tene- 
rum et bonum, et dedit puero, 
et festinavit ut pararet eum. 

8. Et tulit butyrum, et lac, 
et vitulum quem paraverat, et 
posuit ante eos: et ipse stabat 
juxta eos sub arbore, et come- 
derunt. 

9. Et dixerunt ad eum, Ubi 
est Sarah uxor tua? Et dixit, 
Ecce, in tabernaculo. 

10. Et dixit, Revertendo 
revertar ad te secundum tempus 
vitze, et ecce, filius erit Sarah 
uxori tus. Sarah autem audie- 
bat in ostio tabernaculi, quod 
erat post eum. 

11. Et Abraham et Sarah 
erant seneset provecte xtatis, 
desieratque esse ipsi Sarah via 
secundum mulieres. 

12. Risit ergo, Sarah intra 
sesse, dicendo, Postquam senui, 
erit mihi voluptas? et dominus 
meus senuit. 

13. Et dixit Jehovaad Abra- 
ham, Utquid risit Sarah dicen- 
do, Num etiam vere pariam, et 
ego senui? 7. 

14. Numquid abscondetur a 
Jehova quicquam ? ad tempus 
revertar ad te secundum tem- 
pus vite, et ipsi Sarah eritfilius. . 

15. Et negavit Sarah, dicen- 
do, Non risi: quia timuit. Et 
dixit, Nequaquam, quia risisti. 

16. Et surrexerunt inde viri, 
et respexerunt contra faciem 
Sedom: et Abraham ibat cum 
eis, ut deduceret eos. 

17. Tune Jehova dixit, An 
ego celabo Abraham quod 
ego facio ? 

18. Et Abraham erit in 
gentem magnum et fortem, et 
benedicent sibi in eo omnes 
gentes terre. 

19. Quia novi eum: prop- 
terea precipiet filiis suis, et 
domui suz post se, et custodi- 
ent viam Jehove, ut faciant 
justitiam et judicium, ut venire 
faciat Jehova super Abraham, 
quod loquutus est super eum. 

20. Itaque dixit Jehoya, 


>, 





CHAP. XVIII. 


ery of Sodom and Gomorrah is great, 
and because their sin is very grievous ; 


21. I will go down now, and see 
whether they have done altogether ac- 
cording to the cry of it, which is come 
unto me; and if not, I will know. 


22. And the men turned their faces 
from thence, and went toward So- 
dom ; but Abraham stood yet before the 
Lord. 

23. And Abraham drew near, and 
said, Wilt thou also destroy the righteous 
with the wicked? 

24. Peradventure there be fifty right- 
eous within the city: wilt thou also de- 
stroy and not spare the place for the 
fifty righteous that are therein ? 


25. That be far from thee to do after 
this manner, to slay the righteous with 
the wicked: and that the righteous 
should be as the wicked, that be far from 
thee. Shall not the Judge of all the earth 
do right ? 

26. And the Lord said, If I find in 
Sodom fifty righteous within the city, 
then I will spare all the place for their 
sakes. 

27. And Abraham answered and said, 
Behold now, I have taken upon me to 
speak unto the Lord, which am but dust 
and ashes : 

28. Peradventure there shall lack five 
of the fifty righteous: wilt thon destroy 
all the city for lack of five? And he 
said, If I find there forty and five, I will 
not destroy zt. 


29. And he spake unto him yet again, 
and said, Peradventure there shall be 
forty found there. And he said, I will 
not do zt for forty’s sake. 


30. And he said unto him, Oh let not 
the Lord be angry, and I will speak : 
Peradventure there shall thirty be found 
there. And he said, I will not do 7, if I 
find thirty there. 

31. And he said, Behold now, I have 
taken upon me to speak unto the Lord : 
Peradventure there shall be twenty 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


467 


Clamor Sedom et Hamorah 
certe multiplicatus est, et pec- 
catum eorum utique aggrava- 
tum est valde. 

21. Descendam nunc, et 
videbo an secundum clamorem 
ejus, qui venit ad me, fecerint 
consummationem : et si non, 
sciam. 

22. Et verterunt se inde viri, 
et perrexerunt in Sedom: ipse 
vero Abraham adhuc stabat 
coram Jehova. 

23. Et accessit Abraham, et 
dixit, Numquid etiam disper- 
des justum cum impio ? 

24. Si forte fuerint quinqua- 
ginta justi intra civitatem 
numquid etiam disperdes, et 
non parces loco propter quin- 
quaginta justos, qui sunt intra 
eam ? 

25. Absit tibi ut facias se- 
cundum rem hanc, ut mori 
facias justum cum impio, et sit 
justus sicut impius: absit tibi, 
an qui judex est omnis terre, 
non faciet judicium ? 

26. Et dixit Jehova, Si 
invenero in Sedom quinqua- 
ginta justos intra civitatem, 
parcam toti loco propter eos. 

27. Et respondit Abraham, 
et dixit, Ecce, nunc ceepi loqui 
ad Jehovam, et sum pulvis et 
cinis : 

28. Si forsitan defuerint de 
quinquaginta justis quinque, 
numquid disperdes propter 
quinque totam civitatem? Et 
dixit, Non disperdam, si in- 
venero ibi quadraginta et quin- 


ue. 

. 29. Et addidit adhuc ut lo- 
queretur ad eum, et dixit, Si 
forte inventi fuerint ibi quadra- 
ginta. Et dixit, Non faciam 
propter quadraginta. 

80. Et dixit, Ne nunc sit 
ira Domino meo, et loquar, Si 
forte inventi fuerint ibi tri- 
ginta? Et dixit, Non faciam, 
si invenero ibi triginta. 

31. Et dixit, Ecce, nunc 
cepi loqui ‘ad Jehovam, Si 
forsitan inventi fuerint ibi 


468 


found there. And he said, I will not 
destroy zt for twenty’s sake. 

32. And he said, Oh let not the Lord 
be angry, and I will speak yet but this 
once: Peradventure ten shall be found 
there. And he said, I will not destroy 
it for ten’s sake. 


33. And the Lord went his way, as 
soon as he had left communing with 
Abraham: and Abraham returned unto 
his place. 


COMMENTARY UPON 


CHAP. XVIII. 


viginti? Et dixit, Non dis- 
perdam propter viginti. 

82. Et dixit, Ne nunc sit 
ira Domino meo, et loquar 
tantummodo semel, Si forsitan 
inventi fuerint ibi deceem? Et 
dixit, Non disperdam propter 
decem. 

33. Et perrexit Jehova, quan- 
do finivit loqui ad Abraham, et 
Abraham reversus est adlocum 
suum. 


1. And the Lord appeared unto him. It is uncertain 
whether Moses says, that God afterwards appeared again unto 
Abraham; or whether, reverting to the previous history, 
he here introduces other circumstances, which he had not 
before mentioned. I prefer, however, the former of these 
interpretations ; namely, that God confirmed the mind of his 
servant with a new vision ; just as the faith of the saints re- 
quires, at intervals, renewed assistance. It is also possible 
that the promise was repeated for the sake of Sarah. What 
shall we say, if in this manner, he chose to do honour to the 
greatness of his grace? or the promise concerning Isaac, 
from whom, at length, redemption and salvation should shine 
forth to the world, cannot be extolled in terms adequate to 
its dignity. Whichever of these views be taken, we perceive 
that there was sufficient reason why Isaac was again promised. 
Concerning the word Mamre we have spoken in the thirteenth 
chapter. Probably a grove of oaks was in that place, and 
Abraham dwelt there, on account of the convenience of the 
situation. | 


2. And, lo, three men stood by him. Before Moses proceeds 
to his principal subject, he describes to us, the hospitality of 
the holy man; and he calls the angels men, because, being 
clothed with human bodies, they appeared to be nothing else 
than men. And this was done designedly, in order that he, 
receiving them as men, might give proof of his charity. For 
angels do not need those services of ours, which are the true 
evidences of charity. Moreover, hospitality holds the chief 
place among these services; because it is no common virtue 
to assist strangers, from whom there is no hope of reward. 


CHAP. XVIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 469 . 


For men in general are wont, when they do favours to others, 
to look for a return; but he who is kind to unknown guests 
and persons, proves himself to be disinterestedly liberal. 
Wherefore the humanity of Abraham deserves no slight praise; 
because he freely invites men who were to him unknown, 
through whom he had received no advantage, and from whom 
he had no hope of mutual favours. What, therefore, was 
Abraham’s object? Truly, that he might relieve the necessity 
of his guests. He sees them wearied with their journey, and 
has no doubt that they are overcome by heat; he considers 
that the time of day was becoming dangerous to travellers ; 
and therefore he wishes both to comfort, and to relieve per- 
sons thus oppressed. And certainly, the sense of nature 
itself dictates, that strangers are to be especially assisted ; 
unless blind self-love rather impels us to mercenary services. 
For none are more deserving of compassion and help than 
those whom we see deprived of friends, and of domestic com- 
forts. And therefore the right of hospitality has been held 
most sacred among all people, and no disgrace was ever more 
detestable than to be called inhospitable. For it is a brutal 
cruelty, proudly to despise those who, being destitute of ordi- 
nary protection, have recourse to our assistance. It is how- 
ever asked, whether Abraham was wont thus to receive in- 
discriminately all kinds of guests? I answer, that, according 
to his accustomed prudence, he made a distinction between 
his guests. And truly the invitation, which Moses here 
relates, has something uncommon. Undoubtedly, the angels 
bore, in their countenance and manner, marks of extraordinary 
dignity ; so that Abraham would conclude them to be worthy 
not only of meat and drink, but also of honour. They who 
think that he was thus attentive to this office, because he had 
been taught, by his fathers, that angels often appeared in the 
world in human form, reason too philosophically. Even the 
authority of the Apostle is contrary to this; for he denies that 
they were, at first, known to be angels either by Abraham, or 
by Lot, since they thought they were entertaining men. (Heb. 
xiii. 2.) This, then, is to be maintained; that when he saw 
men of reverend aspect, and having marks of singular excel- 
lence, advancing on their journey, he saluted them with honour, 


470 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XVIII. 


and invited them to repose. But, at that time, there was 
greater honesty than is, at present, to be found amid the pre- 
vailing perfidy of mankind ; so that the right of hospitality 
might be exercised with less danger. Therefore, the great 
number of inns are evidence of our depravity, and prove it 
to have arisen from our own fault, that the principal duty of 
humanity has become obsolete among us. 

And bowed himself toward the ground. This token of rever~ 
ence was in common use with oriental nations. The mystery 
which some of the ancient. writers have endeavoured to elicit 
from this act; namely, that Abraham adored one out of the 
three, whom he saw, and, therefore, perceived by faith, that 
there are three persons in one God, since it is frivolous, and 
obnoxious to ridicule and calumny, I am more than content 
to omit. For we have before said, that the angels were so 
received by the holy man, as by one who intended to dis- 
charge aduty towards men. But the fact that God honoured 
his benignity, and granted it to him as a reward, that angels 
should be presented to him for guests, was what he was not 
aware of, till they had made themselves known at the conclu- 
sion of the meal. It was therefore a merely human and civil 
honour, which he paid them. As to his having saluted one 
in particular, it was probably done because he excelled the 
other two. For we know that angels often appeared with 
Christ their Head; here, therefore, among the three angels, 
Moses points out one, as the Chief of the embassy. 


3. Pass not away, I pray thee, from thy servant. In asking 
thus meekly, and even suppliantly, there is no doubt that 
Abraham does it, moved by the reason which I have stated. 
For if he had slaughtered calves for all kinds of travellers, 
his house would soon have been emptied by his profuse ex- 
perditure. He, therefore, did honour to their virtue and 
their excellent endowments, lest he should pour contempt 
upon God. ‘Thus, neither was he so liberal as to invite wan- 
derers, or other men of all kinds, who herd together; nor did 
ambition induce him to deal thus bountifully with these three © 
persons, but rather his love and affection for those gifts of 
God, and those virtues which appeared in them. As to his 





CHAP. XVIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 471 


offering them simply a morsel of bread, he makes light of an 
act of kindness which he was about to do, not only for the 
sake of avoiding all boasting, but in order that they might the 
more easily yield to his counsel and his entreaties, when 
they were persuaded that they should not prove too burden- 
some and troublesome to him. For modest persons do 
not willingly put others to expense or trouble. The wash- 
img of feet, in that age, and in that region of the world, was 
very common ; perhaps, because persons travelled with naked 
feet, under burning suns: and it was the great remedy for 
the alleviation of weariness, to wash the feet parched with heat. 


5. For therefore are ye come to your servant. He does not 
mean that they had come designedly, or for the express 
purpose of seeking to be entertained, as his guests; but he 
intimates that their coming had occurred opportunely, as if he 
would say, ‘ You have not slipped into this place by chance; 
but have been led hither by the design and the direction of 
God. He, therefore, refers it to the providence of God, 
that they had come, so conveniently, to a place where they 
might refresh themselves a little while, till the heat of the 
sun should abate. Moreover, as it is certain that Abraham 
spoke thus in sincerity of mind; let us, after his example, 
conclude that, whenever our brethren, who need our help, 
meet us, they are sent unto us by God. 


6. And Abraham hastened into the tent. Abraham’s care in 
entertaining his guests is here recorded; and Moses, at the 
same time, shows what a well-ordered house he had. In 
short, he presents us, in a few words, with a beautiful pic- 
ture of domestic government. Abraham runs, partly, to 
command what he would have done; and partly, to execute 
his own duty, as the master of the house. Sarah keeps with- 
in the tent; not to indulge in sloth, but rather to take her 
own part also, in the labour. ‘The servants are all prompt to 
obey. Here is the sweet concord of a well-conducted family ; 
which could not have thus suddenly arisen, unless each had, 
by long practice, been accustomed to right discipline. A 
question, however, arises out of the assertion of Moses, that 


472 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XVIII. 


the angels “did eat.” Some expound it, that they only 
appeared as persons eating ; which fancy enters their minds 
through the medium of another error; since they imagine them 
to have been mere spectres, and not endued with real bodies. 
But, in my judgment, the thing is far otherwise. In the first 
place, this was no prophetical vision, in which the images 
of absent things are brought before the eyes; but the angels 
really came into the house of Abraham. Wherefore, I do 
not doubt that God,—who created the whole world out of 
nothing, and who daily proves himself to be a wonderful 
Artificer in forming creatures,—gave them bodies, for a time, 
in which they might fulfil the office enjoined them. And as 
they truly walked, spoke, and discharged other functions ; so 
I conclude, they did truly eat; not because they were hun- 
gry, but in order to conceal themselves, until the proper time 
for making themselves known. Yet as God speedily anni- 
hilated those bodies, which had been created for a temporary 
use; so there will be no absurdity in saying, that the food 
itself was destroyed, together with their bodies. But, as it is 
profitable briefly to touch upon such questions; and, as 
religion in no way forbids us to do so; there is, on the other 
hand, nothing better than that we should content ourselves 
with a sober solution of them. 


9. Where is Sarah? Hitherto God permitted Abraham to 
discharge an obvious duty. But, having given him the 
opportunity of exercising charity, God now begins to mani- 
fest himself in his angels. The reason why Moses intro- 
duces, at one time, three speakers, while, at another, he ascribes 
speech to one only, is, that the three together represent the 
person of one God. We must also remember what I have 
lately adduced, that the principal place is given to one; be- 
cause Christ, who is the living image of the Father, often 
appeared to the fathers under the form of an angel, while, at 
the same time, he yet had angels, of whom he was the Head, 
for his attendants. And as to their making inquiry respect- 
ing Sarah ; we may hence infer, that a son is again here pro- 
mised to Abraham, because she had not been present at the 
former oracle. 





CHAP. XVIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 473 


10. Twill certainly return unto thee. Jerome translates it, 
‘J will return, life attending me :’' as if God, speaking in the 
manner of men, had said, ‘I will return if I live’ But it 
would be absurd, that God, who here so magnificently pro- 
claims his power, should borrow from man a form of speech 
which would suppose him to be mortal. What majesty, I 
pray, would this remarkable oracle possess, which treats of the 
eternal salvation of the world? That interpretation, therefore, 
can by no means be approved, which entirely enervates the 
force and authority of the promise. Literally it is, “ accord- 
ing to the time of life.” Which some expound of Sarah; as 
if the angel had said, Sarah shall survive to that period. 
But it is more properly explained of the child ; for God pro- 
mises that He will come, at the just and proper time of bring- 


ing forth, that Sarah might become the mother of a living 
child. 


11. Were old, and well stricken in age. Moses inserts this 
verse to inform us that what the angel was saying, justly ap- 
peared improbable to Sarah. For it is contrary to nature 
that children should be promised to decrepit old men. A 
doubt, however, may be entertained on this point, respecting 
Abraham: because men are sometimes endued with strength 
to have children, even in extreme old age: and especially in 
that period, such an occurrence was not uncommon. But 
Moses here speaks comparatively : for since Abraham, during 
the vigour of his life, had remained with his wife, childless; it 
was scarcely possible for him, now that his body was half- 
dead, to have children ; he had indeed begotten Ishmael in 
his old age, which was contrary to expectation. But that 
now, twelve years afterwards, it should be possible to become 
a father, through his aged wife,? was scarcely credible, 
Moses, however, chiefly insists upon the case of Sarah; be- 
cause the greatest impediment was with her. “It ceased,” 
he says, “to be with Sarah after the manner of women.” 


1 *% Vita comite revertar.” See Vulgate, where the expression is, 
“ Revertens veniam ad te tempore illo, vit&é comite.” 

2“ Patrem ex vetula effoetaque muliere fieri posse.” 

8 The following passage is not translated :—‘‘ Quo genere loquendi 
verecunde menses notat qui mulieribus fluunt. Una autem cum fluxu 
menstruo desinit concipiendi facultas.” 


474 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XVIII. 


12. Therefore Sarah laughed within herself. Abraham had 
laughed before, as appears in the preceding chapter: but 
the laughter of both was, by no means, similar. For Sarah 
is not transported with admiration and joy, on receiving the 
promise of God; but foolishly sets her own age and that of 
her husband in opposition to the word of God; that she may 
withhold confidence from God, when he speaks. Yet she does 
not, avowedly, charge God with falsehood or vanity ; but be- 
cause, having her mind fixed on the contemplation of the thing 
proposed, she only weighs what might be accomplished by 
natural means, without raising her thoughts to the considera- 
tion of the power of God, and thus rashly casts discredit on 
God who speaks to her. Thus, as often as we measure the 
promises and the works of God, by our own reason, and by 
the laws of nature, we act reproachfully towards him, though 
we may intend nothing of the sort. For we do not pay him 
his due honour, except we regard every obstacle which pre- 
sents itself in heaven and on earth, as placed under subjection 
to his word. But although the incredulity of Sarah is not to 
be excused; she, nevertheless, does not directly reject the 
favour of God; but is only so kept back by shame and mo- 
desty, that she does not altogether believe what she hears. 
Even her very words declare the greatest modesty ; ‘ After 
we are grown old, shall we give ourselves up to lust? Where- — 
fore, let us observe, that nothing was less in Sarah’s mind, than 
to make God a liar. But her sin consisted in this alone, that, 
having fixed her thoughts too much on the accustomed order of 
nature, she did not give glory to God, by expecting from him 
a miracle which she was unable to conceive in her mind. 
We must here notice the admonition which the Apostle ga- 
thers from this passage, because Sarah here calls Abraham 
her lord. (1 Peter ii. 6.) For he exhorts women, after her 
example, to be obedient and well-behaved towards their own 
husbands. Many women, indeed, without difficulty, give their 
husbands this title, when yet they do not scruple to bring 
them under rule, by their imperious pride: but the Apostle 
takes it for granted that Sarah testifies, from her heart, what 
she feels, respecting her husband: nor is it doubtful that she 
gave proof, by actual services, of the modesty which she had 
professed in words. 


CHAP. XVIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 475 


13. And the Lord said. Because the majesty of God had 
now been manifested in the angels, Moses expressly mentions 
his Name. We have before declared, in what sense the name 
of God is transferred to the angel; it is not, therefore, now 
necessary to repeat it: except, as it is always important to 
remark, that the word of the Lord is so precious to himself, 
that he would be regarded by us as present, whenever he 
speaks through his ministers. Again, whenever he mani- 
fested himself to the fathers, Christ was the Mediator between 
him and them; who not only personates God in proclaiming 
his word, but is also truly and essentially God. And because 
the laughter of Sarah had not been detected by the eye of 
man, therefore Moses expressly declares that she was repre- 
hended by God. And to this point belong the following 
circumstances, that the angel had his back turned to the 
tent, and that Sarah laughed within herself, and not before 
others. The censure also shows that the laughter of Sarah 
was joined with incredulity. For there is no little weight 
in this sentence, ‘ Can anything be wonderful with God? 
But the angel chides Sarah, because she limited the power of 
God within the bounds of her own sense. An antithesis is 
therefore implied between the immense power of God, and the 
contracted measure which Sarah imagined to herself, through 
her carnal reason. Some translate the word N™5, (pala,) 
hidden, as if the angel meant that nothing was hidden from 
God: but the sense is different; namely, that the power of God 
ought not to be estimated by human reason.’ It is not sur- 
_ prising, that in arduous affairs we fail, or that we succumb to 
difficulties : but God’s way is far otherwise, for he looks down 
with contempt, from above, upon those things which alarm us 
by their lofty elevation. We now see what was the sin of 
Sarah ; namely, that she did wrong to God, by not acknow- 
ledging the greatness of his power. And truly, we also 
attempt to rob God of his power, whenever we distrust his 
word. At the first sight, Paul seems to give cold praise to 
the faith of Abraham, in saying, that he did not consider his 
body, now dead, but gave glory to God, because he was per- 


' Does not the English version fully express this meaning? ‘ Is any- 
thing too hard for the Lord ?’'—£d. 


476 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XVIII. 


suaded that he could fulfil what he had promised. (Rom. iv. 
19.) But if we thoroughly investigate the source of distrust, 
we shall find that the reason why we doubt of God’s promises 
is, because we sinfully detract from his power. For as soon 
as any extraordinary difficulty occurs, then, whatever God 
has promised, seems to us fabulous; yea, the moment he 
speaks, the perverse thought insinuates itself, How will he 
fulfil what he promises? Being bound down, and pre-oceupied 
by such narrow thoughts, we exclude his power, the know- 
ledge of which is better to us than a thousand worlds. In 
short, he who does not expect more from God than he is able 
to comprehend in the scanty measure of his own reason, 
does him grievous wrong. Meanwhile, the word of the Lord 
ought to be inseparably joined with his power; for nothing 
is more preposterous, than to inquire what God can do, to the 
setting aside of his declared will. In this way the Papists 
plunge themselves intoa profound labyrinth, when they dispute 
concerning the absolute power of God. ‘Therefore, unless we 
are willing to be involved in absurd dotings, it is necessary 
that the word should precede us like a lamp; so that his 
power and his will may be conjoined by an inseparable bond. 
* This rule the Apostle prescribes to us, when he says, ‘ Being 
certainly persuaded, that what he has promised, he is able to 
perform,’ (Rom. iv. 21.) The angel again repeats the pro- 
mise that he would come ‘ according to the time of life,’ that 
is, in the revolving of the year, when the full time of bring- 
ing forth should have arrived. 


15. Zhen Sarah denied. Another sin of Sarah’s was, that 
she endeavoured to cover and hide her laughter by a false- 
hood. Yet this excuse did not proceed from obstinate wick- 
edness, according to the manner in which hypocrites are wont 
to snatch at subterfuges, so that they remain like themselves, 
even to the end. Sarah’s feelings were of a different kind; 
for while she repents of her own folly, she is yet so terrified, 
as to deny that she had done, what she now perceives to be 
displeasing to God. Whence we infer, how great is the cor- 
ruption of our nature, which causes even the fear of God,— 
the highest of all virtues,—to degenerate into a fault. More- 





CHAP, XVIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. AT7 


over, we must observe whence that fear, of which Moses 
makes mention, suddenly entered the mind of Sarah ; name- 
ly, from the consideration that God had detected her secret 
sin. We see, therefore, how the majesty of God, when it is 
seriously felt by us, shakes us out of our insensibility. We 
are more especially constrained to feel thus, when God ascends 
his tribunal, and brings our sins to light. 

Nay ; but thou didst laugh. ‘The angel does not contend in 
a multiplicity of words, but directly refutes her false denial 
of the fact. We may hence learn, that we gain no advantage 
by tergiversation, when the Lord reproves us, because he will 
immediately despatch our case with a single word. There- 
fore, we must beware lest we imitate the petulance of those 
who mock God with false pretences, and at length rush into 
gross contempt of Him. However he may seem to leave us 
unnoticed for a time, yet he will fulminate against us with 
that terrible voice, ‘It is not as you pretend.’ In short, it is 
not enough that the judgment of God should be reverenced, 
unless we also confess our sins ingenuously, and without shifts 
or evasions. For a double condemnation awaits those who, 
from a desire to escape the judgment of God, betake them- 
selves to the refuge of dissimulation. We must, therefore, 
bring a sincere confession, that, as persons openly condemned, 
we may obtain pardon. But seeing that God was contented 
with giving a friendly reprehension, and that he did not more 
severely punish the double offence of Sarah; we hence perceive 
with what tender indulgence he sometimes regards his own 
people. Zacharias was more severely treated, who was struck 
dumb for nine months. (Lukei. 9.) But it is not for us to pre- 
scribe a perpetual law to God ; who, as he generally binds his 
own people to repentance by punishments, often sees it good to 
humble them sufficiently, without inflicting any chastisement. 
In Sarah, truly, he gives a singular instance of his compas- 
sion ; because he freely forgives her all, and still chooses that 
she should remain the mother of the Church. Inthe meantime, 
we must observe, how much better it is that we should be 
brought before him as guilty, and that like convicted persons 
we should be silent, than that we should delight ourselves 
in sin, as a great part of the world is accustomed to do. 


478 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XVIII. 


16. And the men rose up from thence. Moses again ealls 
those men, whom he had openly declared to be angels. But 
he gives them the name from the form which they had as- 
sumed. We are not, however, to suppose that they were 
surrounded with human bodies, in the same manner in which 
Christ clothed himself in our nature, together with our flesh; 
but God invested them with temporary bodies, in which they 
might be visible to Abraham, and might speak familiarly with 
him. Abraham is said to have brought them on the way ; 
not for the sake of performing an office of humanity, as when 
he had received them at first, but in order to render due 
honour to the angels. For frivolous is the opinion of some, 
who imagine that they were believed to be prophets, who 
had been banished, on account of the word. He well knew 
that they were angels, as we shall soon see more clearly. But 
he follows those in the way, whom he did not dare to detain. 


17. Shall I hide from Abraham? Seeing that God here 
takes counsel, as if concerning a doubtful matter, he does it 
for the sake of men; for he had already determined what he 
would do. But he designed, in this manner, to render Abra- 
ham more intent upon the consideration of the causes of 
Sodom’s destruction. He adduces two reasons why He 
wished to manifest his design to Abraham, before he carried — 
it into execution. The former is, that he had already granted 
him a singularly honourable privilege; the second, that it 
would be useful and fruitful in the instruction of posterity. 
Therefore, in this expression, the scope and use of revelation 
is briefly noted. 


18. Seeing that Abraham shall surely become a great and 
mighty nation. In Hebrew it is, ‘ And being, he shall be, &c. 
But the copulative ought to be resolved into the causal ad- 
veib.t For this is the reason, to which we have already 
alluded, why God chose to inform his servant of the terrible 

1 “ Copulativa in causalem resolvenda est.”—Vatablus in Poli Syn. 
The meaning of the expression is, that the word ‘‘ and,” at the beginning 
of the verse, should be translated ‘‘for.”” The 4 (vau) not being intended 


as a copulative, simply to connect this sentence with the former, but as a 
causal conjunction, or one which states the reason for the course before 





CHAP. XVIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 479 


vengeance He was about to take upon the men of Sodom; 
namely, that He had adorned him, above all others, with 
peculiar gifts. For, in this way, God continues his acts of 
kindness towards the faithful, yea, even increases them, and 
gradually heaps new favours upon those before granted. And 
he daily deals with us in the same manner. For what is the 
reason why he pours innumerable benefits upon us, in constant 
succession, unless that, having once embraced us with paternal 
love, he cannot deny himself? . And, therefore, in a certain 
way, he honours himself and his gifts in us. For what does 
he here commemorate, except his own gratuitous gifts ? 
Therefore, he traces the cause of his beneficence to himself, 
and not to the merits of Abraham ; for the blessing of Abra- 
ham flowed from no other source than the Divine Fountain. 
And we learn from the passage, what experience also teaches, 
that it is the peculiar privilege of the Church, to know what 
the Divine judgments mean, and what is their tendency. 
When God inflicts punishment upon the wicked, he openly 
proves that he is indeed the Judge of the world; but because 
all things seem to happen by chance, the Lord illuminates 
his own children by his word, lest they should become blind, 
with the unbelievers. So formerly, when he stretched forth 
his hand over all regions of the world, he yet confined his 
sacred word within Judea; that is, when he smote all nations 
with slaughter and with adversity, he yet taught his only 
elect people, by his word through the prophets, that he was 
the Author of these punishments; yea, he predicted. before- 
hand that they would take place; as it is written in Amos, 
(iti. 7,) ‘Shall there be anything which the Lord will hide 
from his servants the prophets?’ Let us therefore remember, 
that from the time when God begins to be kind towards us, 
he is never weary, until, by adding one favour to another, he 
completes our salvation. ‘Then, after he has once adopted 
us, and has shone into our minds by his word, he holds the 
torch of the same word burning before our eyes, that we may, 
by faith, consider those judgments and punishments of ini- 


determined upon. In calling the conjunction an adverb, Calvin follows 
the practice of many writers, who give this as a common title to preposi- 
tions, conjunctions, and interjections—Ed. 


480 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XVIII. 


quity which the impious carelessly neglect. Thus it becomes 
the faithful to be employed in reflecting on the histories of 
all times, that they may always form their judgment from 
the Scripture, of the various destructions which, privately 
and publicly, have befallen the ungodly. But it is asked; 
was it necessary that the destruction of Sodom should be 
explained to Abraham, before it happened? I answer, since 
we are so dull in considering the works of God, this revelation 
was by no means superfluous. Although the Lord proclaims 
aloud, that adversity is the rod of his anger; scarcely any one 
hearkens to it, because, through the depraved imaginations 
of our flesh, we ascribe the suffering to some other cause. 
But the admonition, which precedes the event, does not suffer 
us to be thus torpid, nor to imagine that fortune, or any thing 
else which we may fancy, stands in the place of God’s word. 
Thus it necessarily happened, in former times, that the people, 
although iron-hearted, were more affected by these predictions 
than they would have been, had they been admonished by the 
prophets, after they had received punishment. Wherefore, 
from them, it will be proper for us to assume a general rule, 
in order that the judgments of God, which we daily perceive, 
may not be unprofitable to us. 

The Lord declares to his servant Abraham, that Sodom 


was about to perish, while it was yet entire, and in the full 


enjoyment of its pleasures. Hence no doubt remains, that 
it did not perish by chance, but was subjected to divine pun- 
ishment. Hence also, when the cause of the punishment is 
thus declared before-hand, it will necessarily far more effect- 
ually pierce and stimulate the minds of men. We must 
afterwards come to the same conclusion, concerning other 
things; for although God does not declare to us, what he is 
about to do, yet he intends us to be eye-witnesses of his 
works, and prudently to weigh their causes, and not to be 
dazzled by a confused beholding of them, like unbelievers, 
‘who seeing, see not,’ and who pervert their true design. 


19. For I know him, that he will command his children. The 
second reason why God chooses to make Abraham a partaker 
of his counsel is, because he foresees that this would not be 





CHAP. XVIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 481 


done in vain, and without profit. And the simple meaning 
of the passage is, that Abraham is admitted to the counsel of 
God, because he would faithfully fulfil the office of a good 
householder, in instructing his own family. Hence we infer, 
that Abraham was informed of the destruction of Sodom, not 
for his own sake alone, but for the benefit of his race. Which 
is carefully to be observed; for this sentence is to the same 
effect, as if God, in the person of Abraham, addressed all his 
posterity. And truly, God does not make known his will to 
us, that the knowledge of it may perish with us; but that we 
may be his witnesses to posterity, and that they may deliver 
the knowledge received through us, from hand to hand, 
(as we say,) to their descendants. Wherefore, it is the 
duty of parents to apply themselves diligently to the work of 
communicating what they have learned from the Lord to their 
children. In this manner the truth of God is to be propa- 
gated by us, so that no one may retain his knowledge for his 
own private use ; but that each may edify others, according to 
his own calling, and to the measure of his faith. There is 
however no doubt, that the gross ignorance which reigns in the 
world, is the just punishment of men’s idleness. For whereas 
the greater part close their eyes to the offered light of hea- 
venly doctrine ; yet there are those who stifle it, by not tak- 
ing care to transmit it to their children. The Lord therefore 
righteously takes away the precious treasure of his word, to 
punish the world for its sloth. The expression “after him” 
is also to be noticed ; by which we are taught that we must not 
only take care of our families, to govern them duly, while we 
live; but that we must give diligence, in order that the truth 
of God, which is eternal, may live and flourish after our death; 
and that thus, when we are dead, a holy course of living may 
survive and remain. Moreover, we hence infer, that those 
narratives which serve to inspire terror, are useful to be 
known. For our carnal security requires sharp stimulants, 
whereby we may be urged to the fear of God. And lest any 
one should suppose that this kind of doctrine belongs only to 
strangers, the Lord specially appoints it for the sons of 
Abraham, that is, for the household of the Church. For those 
interpreters are infatuated and perverse, who contend that 
VOL. I. 2H 


482 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XVIII. 


faith is overturned, if consciences are alarmed. For whereas 
nothing is more contrary to faith than contempt and torpor ; 
that doctrine best accords with the preaching of grace, which 
so subdues men to the fear of God, that they, being afflicted 
and famishing, may hasten unto Christ. 

And they shall keep the way of the Lord. Moses intimates, 
in these words, that the judgment of God is proposed, not 
only in order that they who, by negligence, please them- 
selves in their vices, may be taught to fear, and that being 
thus constrained, they may sigh for the grace of Christ; but 
also to the end that the faithful themselves, who are already 
endued with the fear of God, may advance more and more 
in the pursuit of piety. For he wills that the destruction of 
Sodom should be recorded, both that the wicked may be 
drawn to God, by the fear of the same vengeance, and that 
they who have already begun to worship God, may be better 
formed to true obedience. Thus the Law avails, not only for 
the beginning of repentance, but also for our continual pro- 
gress. When Moses adds, “to do justice and judgment,” he 
briefly shows the nature of the way of the Lord, which he 
had before mentioned. This, however, is not a complete 
definition; but from the duties of the Second Table, he 
briefly shows, by the figure synecdoche, what God chiefly re- 
quires of us. And it is not unusual in Scripture, to seek a — 
description of a pious and holy life, from the Second Table of 
the Law; not because charity is of more account than the 
worship of God, but because they who live uprightly and in- 
nocently with their neighbours, give evidence of their piety 
towards God. Inthe names of justice and judgment he com- 
prehends that equity, by which to every one is given what is 
his own. If we would make a distinction, justice is the name 
given to the rectitude and humanity which we cultivate with 
our brethren, when we endeavour to do good to all, and when 
we abstain from all wrong, fraud, and violence. But judg- 
ment is to stretch forth the hand to the miserable and the 
oppressed, to vindicate righteous causes, and to guard the 
weak from being unjustly injured. These are the lawful ex- 
ercises in which the Lord commands his people to be em- 
ployed. 





CHAP. XVIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 483 


That the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he hath 
spoken of him. Moses intimates that Abraham should become 
possessed of the grace promised to him, if he instructed his 
children in the fear of the Lord, and governed his household 
well. But under the person of one man, a rule common to 
all the pious is delivered: for they who are negligent in this 
part of their duty, cast off or suppress, as much as in them 
lies, the grace of God. Therefore, that the perpetual pos- 
session of the gifts of God may remain to us, and survive to 
posterity, we must beware lest they be lost through our ne- 
glect. Yet it would be false for any one hence to infer, that 
the faithful could either cause or deserve, by their own dili- 
gence, that God should fulfil those things which he has pro- 
mised. For it is an accustomed method of speaking in 
Seripture, to denote by the word that the consequence rather 
than the cause. For although the grace of God alone begins 
and completes our salvation; yet, since by obeying the call 
of God, we fulfil our course, we are said, also in this manner, 
to obtain the salvation promised by God. 


20. Theery of Sodom. The Lord here begins more clearly 
to explain to Abraham his counsel concerning the destruction 
of the five cities; although he only names Sodom and Go- 
morrah, which were much more famous than the rest. But 
before he makes mention of punishment, he brings forward 
their iniquities, to teach Abraham that they justly deserved 
to be destroyed: otherwise the history would not tend to 
instruction. But when we perceive that the anger of Godis 
provoked by the sin of man, we are inspired with a dread of 
sinning. In saying that the “cry was great,”! he indicates 
the grievousness of their crimes, because, although the wicked 
may promise themselves impunity, by concealing their evils, 
and although these evils may be silently and quietly borne 
by men; yet their sin will necessarily sound aloud in the 
ears of God. Therefore this phrase signifies, that all our 
deeds, even those of which we think the memory. to be buried, 


1 Clamorem pro scelerum gravitate multiplicatum fuisse.”’ 


484 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XVIII. 


are presented before the bar of God, and that they, even of 
themselves, demand vengeance, although there should be 
none to accuse. 


21. Iwill go down now. Since this was a signal example 
of the wrath of God, which He intends to be celebrated 
through all ages, and to which he frequently refers in the 
Scripture; therefore Moses diligently records those things 
which are especially to be considered in divine judgments ; 
just as, in this place, he commends the moderation of God, 
who does-not immediately fulminate against the ungodly, 
and pour out his vengeance upon them; but who, when affairs 
were utterly desperate, at length executes the punishment 
which had been long held suspended over them. And the 
Lord does not testify in vain, that he proceeds to inflict pun- 
ishment in a suitable and rightly attempered order; because, 
whenever he chastises us, we are apt to think that he acts 
towards us more severely than is just. Even when, with 
astonishing forbearance, he waits for us, until we have come 
to the utmost limit of impiety, and our wickedness has be- 
come too obstinate to be spared any longer; still we com- 
plain of the excessive haste of his rigour. Therefore he pre- 
sents, as in a conspicuous picture, his equity in bearing with 
us, in order that we may know, that he never breaks forth to 
inflict punishment, except on those who are mature in crime. 
Now, if, on the other hand, we look at Sodom; there a horrible 
example of stupor meets our eyes. For the men of Sodom 
go on, as if they had nothing to do with God; their sense of 
good and evil being extinguished, they wallow like cattle in 
every kind of filth; and just as if they should never have to 
render an account of their conduct, they flatter themselves 
in their vices. Since this disease too much prevails i all 
ages, and is at present far too common, it is important to 
mark this circumstance, that at the very time when the men 
of Sodom, having dismissed all fear of God, were indulging 
themselves, and were promising themselves impunity, how- 
ever they might sin, God was taking counsel to destroy them, 
and was moved, by the tumultuous cry of their iniquities, to 
descend to earth, while they were buried in profound sleep. 





CHAP. XVIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 485 


Wherefore, if God, at any time, defers his judgments ; let us 
not, therefore, think ourselves in a better condition ; but be- 
fore the cry of our wickedness shall have wearied his ears, 
may we, aroused by His threats, quickly hasten to appease 
Him. Since, however, such forbearance of God cannot be 
comprehended by us, Moses introduces Him as speaking ac- 
cording to the manner of men. 

Whether they have done altogether according to the cry of it. 
The Hebrew noun abs, (cala,) which Moses here uses, means 
the perfection, or the end of a thing, and also its destruction. 
Therefore, Jerome turns it, ‘If they shall have completed it 
in act.’ I have, indeed, no doubt but Moses intimates, that 
God came down, in order to inquire whether or not their 
sins had risen to the highest point: just as he before said, 
that the iniquities of the Amorites were not yet full. The 
sum ofthe whole then is; the Lord was about to see whether 
they were altogether desperate, as having precipitated them- 
selves into the lowest depths of evil; or whether they were 
still in the midst of a course, from which it was possible for 
them to be recalled to a sound mind; forasmuch as he was 
unwilling utterly to destroy those cities, if, by any method, 
their wickedness was curable. Others translate the passage, 
‘If they have done this, their final destruction is at hand: 
but if not, I will see how far they are to be punished” But 
the former sense is most accordant with the context. 


22. But Abraham stood yet before the Lord. Moses first de- 
clares that the men proceeded onwards, conveying the im- 
pression, that having finished their discourse, they took leave 
of Abraham, in order that he might return home. He then 
adds, that Abraham stood before the Lord, as persons are 
wont to do, who, though dismissed, do not immediately de- 
part, because something still remains to be said or done. 
Moses, when he makes mention of the journey, with pro- 
priety attributes the name of men to the angels; but he does 
not, however, say, that Abraham stood before men, but before 


1 ¢ Fecerint consummationem.” If they have brought it to a con- 
summation. ‘* Assavoir s’ils ontaccompli.” If indeed they have accom- 
plished, &c.—French Tr. 


486 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XVIII. 


the face of God ; because, although, with his eyes, he beheld 
the appearance of men, he yet, by faith, looked upon God. 
And his words sufficiently show, that he did not speak as he 
would have done with a mortal man. Whence we infer, that 
we act preposterously, if we allow the external symbols, by 
which God represents himself, to retard or hinder us from 
going directly to Him. By nature, truly, we are prone to 
this fault ; but so much the more must we strive, that, by 
the sense of faith, we may be borne upward to God himself, 
lest the external signs should keep us down to this world. 
Moreover, Abraham approaches God, for the sake of showing 
reverence. For he does not, in a contentious spirit, oppose 
God, as if he had a right to intercede; he only suppliantly 
entreats: and every word shows the great humility and mo- 
desty of the holy man. I confess, indeed, that at times, 
holy men, carried away by carnal sense, have no self-govern- 
ment, but that, indirectly at least, they murmur against God. 
Here, however, Abraham addresses God with nothing but 
reverence, nor does anything fall from him worthy of cen- 
sure; yet we must notice the affection of mind by which 
Abraham had been impelled to interpose his prayers on behalf 
of the inhabitants of Sodom. Some suppose, that he was more 
anxious concerning the safety of his nephew alone, than for 
Sodom and the rest of the cities; but that, being withheld by 
modesty, he would not requestone man expressly to be given to 
him, while he entirely neglected a great people. But it is, by 
no means, probable that he made use of such dissimulation. I 
certainly do not doubt, that he was so touched with a common 
compassion towards the five cities, that he drew near to God 
as their intercessor. And if we weigh all things attentively, he 
had great reasons for doing so. He had lately rescued them 
from the hand of their enemies; he now suddenly hears that 
they are to be destroyed. He might imagine that he had rashly 
engaged in that war; that his victory was under a divine 
curse, as if he had taken arms against the will of God, 
for unworthy and wicked men; and it was possible that he 
would be not a little tormented by such thoughts. Besides, 
it was difficult to believe them all to have been so ungrateful, 
that no remembrance of their recent deliverance remained 


CHAP. XVIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 487 


among them. But it was not lawful for him, by a single 
word, to dispute with God, after having heard what He had 
determined to do. For God alone best knows what men 
deserve, and with what severity they ought to be treated. 
Why then does not Abraham acquiesce? Why does he ima- 
gine to himself, that there are some just persons in Sodom, 
whom God has overlooked, and whom he hastens to over- 
whelm in a common Jénkneatsoln with the rest? I answer, 
that the sense of humanity by which Abraham was moved, 
was pleasing to God. First, because, as was becoming, he 
leaves the entire cognizance of the fact with God. Secondly, 
because he asks with sobriety and submission, for the sole 
cause of obtaining consolation. There is no wonder that 
he is terrified at the destruction of so great a multi- 
tude. He sees men created after the image of God; he 
persuades himself that, in that immense crowd, there were, 
at least, a few who were upright, or not altogether un- 
just, and abandoned to wickedness. He therefore alleges 
before God, what he thinks ayailable to procure their 
forgiveness. He may, however, be thought to have acted 
rashly, in requesting impunity to the evil, for the sake 
of the good; for he desired God to spare the place, if he 
should find fifty good men there. I answer, that the prayers 
of Abraham did not extend so far as to ask God not to 
scourge those cities, but only not to destroy them utterly ; as 
if he had said, ‘O Lord, whatever punishment thou mayest in- 
flict upon the guilty, wilt thou not yet leave some dwelling- 
place for the righteous? Why should that region utterly 
perish, as long as a people shall remain, by whom it may be 
inhabited?’ Abraham, therefore, does not desire that the 
wicked, being mixed with the righteous, should escape the 
hand of God: but only that God, in inflicting public punish- 
ment on a whole nation, should nevertheless exempt the 
good who remained from destruction. 


23. Wilt thou also destroy the righteous with the wicked? It 
is certain that when God chastises the body of a people, he 
often involves the good and the reprobate in the same pun- 
ishment. So Daniel, Ezekiel, Ezra, and others like them, 
who worshipped God in purity in their own country, were 


488 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XVIII. 


suddenly hurried away into exile, as by a violent tempest : 
notwithstanding it had been said, ‘ The land .vomiteth out 
her inhabitants, because of their iniquities,’ (Lev. xviii. 25.) 
But when God thus seems to be angry with all in common, it 
behoves us to fix our eyes on the end, which shall evidently dis- 
criminate the one from the other. For if the husbandman 
knows how to separate the grains of wheat in his barn, which 
with the chaff are trodden under the feet of the oxen, or are 
struck out with the flail; much better does God know how to 
gather together his faithful people.—when he has chastised 
them for a time,—from among the wicked, (who are like 
worthless refuse,) that they may not perish together; yea, by 
the very event, he will, at length, prove that he would not per- 
mit those whom he was healing by his chastisements to perish. 
For, so far is he from hastening to destroy his people, when 
he subjects them to temporal punishments, that he is rather 
administering to them a medicine which shall procure their 
salvation. JI do not however doubt, that God had de- 
nounced the final destruction of Sodom; and in this sense 
Abraham now takes exception, that it was by no means con- 
sistent, that the same ruin should alike fall on the righteous 
and the ungodly. ‘There will, however, be no absurdity in 
saying, that Abraham, haying good hope of the repentance 


of the wicked, asked God to spare them; because it often 


happens that God, out of regard to a few, deals gently with 
a whole people. For we know, that public punishments are 
mitigated, because the Lord looks upon his own with a be- 
nignant and paternal eye. In the same sense the answer of 
God himself ought to be understood, ‘ If in the midst of So- 
dom I find fifty righteous, I will spare the whole place for 
their sake.’ Yet God does not here bind himself by a per- 
petual rule, so that it shall not be lawful for him, as often as 
he sees good, to bring the wicked and the just together to 
punishment. And, in order to show that he has free power 
of judging, he does not always adhere to the same equable mo- 
deration in this respect. He who would have spared Sodom 
on account of ten righteous persons, refused to grant the 
same terms of pardon to Jerusalem. (Matth. xi. 24.) Let us 
know, therefore, that God does not here lay himself under 
any necessity ; but that he speaks thus, in order to make it 





CHAP. XVIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 489 


better known, that he does not, on light grounds, proceed to 
the destruction of a city, of which no portion remained un- 
polluted. 


25. Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right? He does 
not here teach God His duty, as if any one should say to a 
judge, ‘See what thy office requires, what is worthy of this 
place, what suits thy character;’ but he reasons from the 
nature of God, that it is impossible for Him to intend any- 
thing unjust. I grant that, in using the same form of speak- 
ing, the impious often murmur against God, but Abraham 
does far otherwise. For although he wonders how God should 
think of destroying Sodom, in which he was persuaded there 
was a number of good men; he yet retains this principle, 
that it was impossible for God, who is the Judge of the 
world, and by nature loves equity, yea, whose will is the law 
of justice and rectitude, should in the least degree swerve 
from righteousness. He desires, however, to be relieved from 
this difficulty with which he is perplexed. So, whenever 
different temptations contend within our minds, and some 
appearance of contradiction presents itself in the works of 
God, only let our persuasion of His justice remain fixed, and 
we shall be permitted to pour into His bosom the difficulties 
which torment us, in order that He may loosen the knots which 
we cannot untie. Paul seems to have taken from this place 
the answer with which he represses the blasphemy of those 
who charge God with unrighteousness. ‘Is God unright- 
eous? Far from it, for how should there be unrighteousness 
with Him who judges the world?’ (Rom. ii. 5, 6.) This 
method of appeal would not always avail among earthly 
judges; who are sometimes deceived by error, or perverted 
by favour, or inflamed with hatred, or corrupted by gifts, or 
misled by other means, to acts of injustice. But since God, 
to whom it naturally belongs to judge the world, is liable to 
none of these evils, it follows, that He can no more be drawn 
aside from equity, than he can deny himself to be God. 


27. Which am but dust and ashes. Abraham speaks thus, 
for the sake of obtaining pardon. For what is mortal man 


490 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XVIII. 


when compared with God? He therefore confesses that he 
is too bold, in thus familiarly interrogating God; yet he de- 
sires that this favour may be granted unto him, by the Divine 
indulgence. It is to be noted, that the nearer Abraham ap- 
proaches to God, the more fully sensible does he become of 
the miserable and abject condition of men. For it is only 
the brightness of the glory of God which covers with 
shame and thoroughly humbles men, when stripped of their 
foolish and intoxicated self-confidence. Whosoever, there- 
fore, seems to himself to be something, let him turn his eyes 
to God, and immediately he will acknowledge himself to be 
nothing. Abraham, indeed, was not forgetful that he pos- 
sessed a livingsoul; but heselects what was most contemptible, 
in order to empty himself of all dignity. It may seem, how- 
ever, that Abraham does but sophistically trifle with God, 
when, diminishing gradually from the number first asked, he 
proceeds to his sixth interrogation. I answer, that this was 
rather to be considered as the language of a perturbed mind. 
At first he anxiously labours for the men of Sodom, wherefore 
he omits nothing which may serve to mitigate his solicitude. 
And as the Lord repeatedly answers him so mildly, we 
know that he had not been deemed importunate, nor trouble- 
some. but if he was kindly heard, when pleading for the 
inhabitants of Sodom, even to his sixth petition; much more ~ 
will the Lord hearken to the prayers which any one may 
pour out for the Church and household of faith. Moreover, 
the humanity of Abraham appears also in this, that although 
he knows Sodom to be filled with vilest corruptions, he cannot 
bring his mind to think that all are infected with the contagion 
of wickedness; but he rather inclines to the equitable sup- 
position, that, in so great a multitude, some just persons may 
be concealed. For this is a horrible prodigy, that the filth of 
iniquity should so pervade the whole body, as to allow no 
member to remain pure. We are, however, taught by this 
example, how tyrannically Satan proceeds when once the 
dominion of sin is established. And certainly, seeing the 
propensity of men to sin, and the facility for sinning are so 
great, it is not surprising that one should be corrupted by 
another, till the contagion reached every individual. For 


CHAP. XIX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 491 


nothing is more dangerous than to live where the public 
license of crime prevails; yea, there is no pestilence so de- 
structive, as that corruption of morals, which is opposed 
neither by laws nor judgments, nor any other remedies. And 
although Moses, in the next chapter, explains the most 
filthy crime which reigned in Sodom, we must nevertheless 
remember what Ezekiel teaches, (xvi. 48, 49,) that the men 
of Sodom did not fall at once into such execrable wickedness; 
but that, in the beginning, luxury from the fulness of bread 
prevailed, and that, afterwards, pride and cruelty followed. 
At length, when they were given up to a reprobate mind, 
they were also driven headlong into brutal lusts. Therefore, 
if we dread this extreme of inordinate passion, let us cultivate 
temperance and frugality; and let us always fear, lest a 
superfluity of food should impel us to luxury ; lest our minds 
should be infected with pride on account of our wealth, and 
lest delicacies should tempt us to give the reins to our lusts. 


CHAPTER XIX. 


1. Anp there came two angels to So- 
dom at even; and Lot sat in the gate of 
Sodom: and Lot seeing them rose up to 
meet them ; and he bowed himself with 
his face toward the ground ; 


2. And he said, Behold now, my lords, 
turn in, I pray you, into your servant’s 
house, and tarry all night, and wash your 
feet, and ye shall rise up early, and go 
on your ways. And they said, Nay; 
but we will abide in the street all night. 


3. And he pressed upon them greatly ; 
and they turned in unto him, and entered 
into his house; and he made them a 
feast, and did bake unleavened bread, 
and they did eat. 


4, But before they lay down, the men 
of the city, even the men of Sodom, com- 
passed the house round, both old and 
young, all the people from every quar- 
ter: 


1. Et venerunt duo angeli 
in Sedom vesperi, Lot autem 
sedebat in porta Sedom: et 
vidit Lot et surrexit in occur- 
sum eorum, et incurvavit se 
facie super terram. 

2. Et dixit, Ecce, nunc do- 
mini mei, declinate obsecro ad 
domum servi vestri, et per- 
noctate, et lavate pedes ves- 
tros: et mane surgetis, et per- 
getis in viam vestram. Et 
dixerunt, Nequaquam, sed in 
platea pernoctabimus. 

3. Et vehementer compulit 
eos, et declinaverunt ad eum, 
veneruntque ad domum ejus: 
et fecit eis convivinm, et in- 
fermentata coxit, et comede- 
runt. 

4. Antequam dormirent, viri 
civitatis, viri Sedom gyro 
cinxerunt domum a puero us- 
que ad senem, omnis populus 
ab extremo. 


492 


5. And they called unto Lot, and said 
unto him, Where are the men which came 
into thee this night? bring them out 
unto us, that we may know them. 


6. And Lot went out at the door un- 
to them, and shut the door after him, 


7. And said, I pray you, brethren, 
do not so wickedly. 

8. Behold now, I have two daughters 
which have not known man; let me, I 
pray you, bring them out unto you, and 
do ye to them as zs good in your eyes: 
only unto these men do nothing; for 
therefore came they under the shadow 
of my roof. 


9. And they said, Stand back. And 
they said again, This one fellow came in 
to sojourn, and he will needs be a judge: 
now will we deal worse with thee than 
with them. And they pressed sore upon 
the man, even Lot, and came near to 
break the door. 


10. But the men put forth their hand, 
and pulled Lot into the house to them, 
and shut to the door. 


11. And they smote the men that 
were at the door of the house with blind- 
ness, both small and great: so that they 
wearied themselves to find the door. 


12. And the men said unto Lot, Hast 
thou here any besides? son-in-law, and 
thy sons, and thy daughters, and what- 
soever thou hast in the city, Reine ¢ them 
out of this place: 

13. For we will destroy this ba be- 
cause the cry of them is waxen great 
before the face of the Lord; and the 
Lord hath sent us to destroy it. 


14. And Lot went out, and spake unto 
his sons-in-law, which married his 
daughters, and said, Up, get you out of 
this place ; for the Lord will destroy this 
city. But he seemed as one that mock- 
ed unto his sons-in-law. 


15. And when the morning arose, 
then the angels hastened Lot, saying, 
Arise, take thy wife, and thy two daugh- 


COMMENTARY UPON 


5. Et vocaverunt Lot, et 
dixerunt ei, Ubi sunt viri qui 
venerunt ad te nocte? educ 
eos ad nos, et cognoscemus 
eos. 

6. Et egressus est ad eos 
Lot ad ostium, et ostium clausit 
post se. 

7. Et dixit, Ne queso, fra- 
tres mei, malefaciatis. 

8. Ecce, nunc mihi sunt 
due filize, quee non cognoverunt 
virum, educam nune eas ad 
vos, et facite eis sicut bonum 
erit in oculis vestris: tantum 
viris istis ne faciatis quicquam, 
eo quod venerunt in umbram 
tigni mei. 

9. Verum dixerunt, Accede 
huc. Dixerunt preeterea, Unus 
venit ad perigrinandum, et ju- 
dicabit judicando? nunc magis 
malefaciemus tibi quam ipsis. 
Et vim fecerunt in virum ipsum 
Lot valde: et appropinquave- 
runt ut frangerent ostium. 

10. At miserunt viri manum 
suam, et introduxerunt Lot ad 
se in domum, et ostium clause- 
runt. 

11. Viros autem, qui erant 
ad ostium domus, percusserunt 
cecitate, a minimo usque ad 
maximum, et laboraverunt ut 
invenirent ostium. 

12. Et dixerunt viri ad Lot, 
Adhuc est aliquis tibi hic? 
generum, et filios tuos, et filias 
tuas, et omnia, que sunt tibi 
in civitate, educ de loco: 

13. Quia disperdimus nos 
locum hune, eo quod crevit 
clamor eorum coram Jehova: 
et misit nos Jehova ad perden- 
dum eum. 

14, Et egressus est Lot, et 
loquutus est ad generos suos, 
qui acceperant filias ejus, et 
dixit, Surgite, egredimini de 
loco isto, quia disperdit Jehova 
civitatem : et fuit sicut ludens 
in oculis generorum suorum. 

15. Quum vero aurora as- 
cendisset, instabant angeli ipsi 
Lot, dicendo, Surge, cape ux- 


CHAP. XIX. 


20 


CHAP. XIX. 


ters, which are here; lest thou be con- 
sumed in the iniquity of the city. 


16. And while he lingered, the men 
laid hold upon his hand, and upon the 
hand of his wife, and upon the hand of 
his two daughters ; the Lord being mer- 
ciful unto him: and they brought him 
forth, and set him without the city. 


17. And it came to pass, when they 
had brought them forth abroad, that he 
said, Escape for thy life ; look not behind 
thee, neither stay thou in all the plain; 
escape to the mountain, lest thou be 
consumed. 

18. And Lot said unto them, Oh! not 
so, my lord: 

19. Behold now, thy servant hath 
found grace in thy sight, and thou hast 
magnified thy mercy, which thou hast 
showed unto me in saving my life; and 
I cannot escape to the mountain, lest 
some evil take me, and I die: 


20. Behold now, this city is near to 
flee unto, and it zs a little one: Oh! let 
me escape thither, (¢s it not a little one?) 
and my soul shall live. 


21. And he said unto him, See, I have 
accepted thee concerning this thing also, 
that I will not overthrow this city, for 
the which thou hast spoken. 

22. Haste thee, escape thither ; for I 
cannot do any thing till thou be come 
thither. Therefore the name of the city 
was called Zoar. 


23. The sun was risen upon the earth 
when Lot entered into Zoar. 


24. Then the Lord rained upon Sodom 
and upon Gomorrah brimstone and fire 
from the Lord out of heaven ; 


25. And he overthrew those cities, 
and all the plain, and all the inhabitants 
of the cities, and that which grew upon 
the ground. 

26. But his wife looked back from 
behind him, and she became a pillar of 


salt. 
27. And Abraham gat up early in the 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


493 


orem tuam, et duas filias tuas, 
que adsunt, ne forte pereas in 
punitione civitatis. 

16. Et tardabat: et appre- 
henderunt viri manum eju3, et 
manum uxoris ejus, et manum 
duarum filiarum ejus, eo quod 
parceret Jehova ei: et eduxe- 
runt eum, et posuerunt eum 
extra urbem. 

17. Et fuit, quum eduxis- 
sent ipsi eos foras, dixit, Evade 
pro anima tua, ne respicias post 
te, nec stes in tota planitie: 
in monte serva te, ne forte pe- 
reas. 

18. Et dixit Lot ad eos, Ne 
queso domini mei : 

19. Ecce, nuncinvenitservus 
tuus gratiam in oculis tuis, et 
magnificasti misericordiam tu- 
am, quam fecisti mecum, ut 
vivificares animam meam: et 
ego non potero servare me in 
monte, ne forte hereat mihi 
malum, et moriar : 

20. Ecce, nune civitas ista 
propinqua, ut fugiam illuc, et 
est parva: evadam nunc illuc: 
numquid non parva est, et vivet 
anima mea ? 

21. Et dixit ad eum, Ecce, 
suscepi faciem tuam etiam in 
hoc, ut non subvertam civita- 
tem, ut loquutus es. 

22. Festina, serva te illuc: 
quia non potero facere quic- 
quam, donec ingrediaris illuc : 
idcirco vocavit nomen civitatis 
Sohar. 

23. Sol egressus est super 
terram, et Lot ingressus est 
Sohar. 

24. Et Jehova pluit super 
Sedom et super Hamorah sul- 
phur et ignem a Jehova e ce- 
lis. 
25. Et subvertit civitates 
istas, et omnem planitiem, et 
omnes habitatores urbium, et. 
germen terre. 

26. Et respexit uxor ejus 
post eum, et effecta est statua 
salis. 

27. Et surrexit Abraham — 


494 


morning to the place where he stood be- 
fore the Lord : 

28. And he looked toward Sodom and 
Gomorrah, and toward all the land of 
the plain, and beheld, and, lo, the smoke 
of the country went up as the smoke of 
a furnace. 

29. And it came to pass, when God 
destroyed the cities of the plain, that 
God remembered Abraham, and sent 
Lot out of the midst of the overthrow, 
when he overthrew the cities in the 
which Lot dwelt. 


30. And Lot went up out of Zoar, 
and dwelt in the mountain, and his two 
daughters with him; for he feared to 
dwell in Zoar: and he dwelt in a cave, 
he and his two daughters. 


$1. And the first-born said unto the 
younger, Our father zs old, and there is 
not a man in the earth to come in unto 
us after the manner of all the earth: 


32. Come, let us make our father drink 
wine, and we will lie with him, that we 
may preserve seed of our father. 


33. And they made their father drink 
wine that night: and the first-born went 
in, and lay with her father; and he per- 
ceived not when she lay down, nor when 
she arose. 


34. And it came to pass on the mor- 
row, that the first-born said unto the 
younger, Behold, I lay yesternight with 
my father: let us make him drink wine 

this night also; and go thou in, and lie 
with him, that we may preserve seed of 
our father. 

35. And they made their father drink 
wine that night also: and the younger 
arose, and lay with him; and he per- 
ceived not when she lay down, nor 
when she arose. 


36. Thus were both the daughters of 
Lot with child by their father. 

37. And the first-born bare a son, and 
called his name Moab: the same zs the 
father of the Moabites unto this day. 


38. And the younger she also bare a 


COMMENTARY UPON 


CHAP, XIX. 


mane ad locum, ubi steterat 
coram Jehova. 

28. Et respexit super faciem 
Sedom et Hamorah, et super 
omnem faciem terre planitiei : 
et videt, et ecce, ascendebat fu- 
mus terre sicut fumus fornacis. 

29. Et fuit, quum disper- 
deret Deus urbes planitiei, re- 
cordatus est Deus Abraham, 
et emisit Lot e medio subver~ 
sionis, quando subyertit civi- 
pe in quarum una habitabat 

t 


30. Et ascendit Lot de So- 
har, et habitavit in monte, et 
dus filixe ejus cum eo: quia ti- 
muit habitare in Sohar, et ha- 
bitavit in spelunca, ipse et duze 
filize ejus. 

31. Et dixit primogenita ad 
minorem, Pater noster senex 
est, et vir non est in terra, ut 
ingrediatur ad nos secundum 
morem universe terre. 

32. Veni, potum demus patri 
nostro vinum, et dormiamus 
cum eo, et vivificemus de patre 
nostro semen. 

33. Et potum dederunt patri 
suo vinum, nocte ipsa: et in- 
gressa est primogenita, et dor- 
mivit cum patre suo, qui non 


cognovit, quando dormivitipsa, — 


nec quando surrexit ipsa. 

34. Et fuit postridie, dixit 
primogenita ad minorem, Ecce, 
dormivi heri sero cum patre 
meo: potum demus ei vinum 
etiam hac nocte, et ingredere, 
dormi cum eo, et vivificemus 
de patre nostro semen. 

35. Et potum dederunt etiam 
nocte ipsa patri suo vinum : et 
surrexit minor, etdormivit cum 
eo: nec cognovit quando dor- 
mivit ipsa, nec quando surrexit 
ipsa. 

36. Et conceperunt due filize 
Lot de patre suo. 

37. Et peperit primogenita 
filium, et vocavit nomen ejus 
Moab: ipse est pater Moab 
usque ad diem hance. 

38. Et minor etiam ipsa pe- 


es 








CHAP. XIX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 495 


son, and called his name Ben-ammi: perit filium, et vocavit nomen 

the same 7s the father of the children of ejus Ben-Hammi: ipse est pater 

Ammon unto this day. filiorum Hammon usque ad 
diem hance. 


1. And there came two angels to Sodom. ‘The question 
occurs, why one of the three angels has suddenly disappeared, 
- and two only are come to Sodom? The Jews (with their 
wonted audacity in introducing fables) pretend that one came 
to destroy Sodom, the other to preserve Lot. But from the 
discourse of Moses, this appears to be frivolous : because we 
shall see that they both assisted in the liberation of Lot. 
What I have before adduced is more simple; namely, that it 
was granted to Abraham, asa peculiar favour, that God would 
not only send him two messengers from the angelic host, but 
that, in a more familiar manner, he would manifest himself 
to him, in his own Son. For (as we have seen) one of the 
messengers held the principal place, as being superior to the 
others in dignity. Now, although Christ was always the 
Mediator, yet, because he manifested himself more obscurely 
to Lot than he did to Abraham, the two angels only came 
to Sodom. Since Moses relates, that Lot sat in the gate of ° 
the city about evening, many contend that he did so, according 
to daily custom, for the purpose of receiving guests into his 
house ; yet, as Moses is silent respecting the cause, it would 
be rash to affirm this as certain. I grant, indeed, that he 
did not sit as idle persons are wont to do; but the conjecture 
is not less probable, that he had come forth to meet his shep- 
herds, in order to be present when his sheep were folded. 
That he was hospitable, the courteous invitation which is 
mentioned by Moses clearly demonstrates; yet, why he 
then remained in the gate of the city is uncertain; unless it 
were, that he was unwilling to omit any opportunity of doing 
an act of kindness, when strangers presented themselves, on 
whom he might bestow his services. What remains, on this 
point, may be found in the preceding chapter. 


2. Nay, but we will abide in the street. The angels do not 
immediately assent, in order that they may the more fully 
investigate the disposition of the holy man. For he was 


496 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XIX. 


about to bring them to his own house, not merely for the 
sake of supplying them with a supper, but for the purpose of 
defending them from the force and injury of the citizens. 
Therefore the angels act, as if it were safe to sleep on the 
highway ; and thus conceal their knowledge of the abandoned 
wickedness of the whole people. For if the gates of cities 
are shut, to prevent the incursions of wild beasts and of 
enemies; how wrong and absurd it is that they who are within 
should be exposed to still more grievous dangers? Therefore 
the angels thus speak, in order to make the wickedness of 
the people appear the greater. And Lot, in urging the 
angels to come unto him, for the purpose of protecting them 
from the common violence of the people, the more clearly 
shows, how careful he was of his guests, lest they should suffer 
any dishonour or injury. 


3. And he made them a feast. By these words, and others 
following, Moses shows that the angels were more sumptu- 
ously entertained than was customary: for Lot did not act 
thus, indiscriminately, with all. But, when he conceived, 
from the dignity of their mien and dress, that they were not 
common men, he baked cakes, and prepared a plentiful feast. 
Again, Moses says that the angels did eat: not that they had 
any need to do so; but because the time was not yet come, 
for the manifestation of their celestial nature. 


4. Before they lay down. Here, in a single crime, Moses 
sets before our eyes a lively picture of Sodom. For it is 
hence obvious, how diabolical was their consent in all wicked- 
ness, since they all so readily conspired to perpetrate the 
most abominable crime. The greatness of their iniquity and 
wantonness, is apparent from the fact, that, in a collected 
troop, they approach, as enemies, to lay siege to the house of 
Lot. How blind and impetuous is their lust; since, without 
shame, they rush together like brute animals! how great 
their ferocity and cruelty; since they reproachfully threaten 
the holy man, and proceed to all extremities! Hence also 
we infer, that they were not contaminated with one vice 
only, but were given up to all audacity in crime, so that no 





‘CHAP. XIX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 497 


sense of shame was left them. And Ezekiel (as we have 
above related) accurately describes from what beginnings of 
evil they had proceeded to this extreme turpitude, (Ezekiel 
xvi. 49.) What Paul says, also refers to the same point: 
that God punished the impiety of men, when he cast them 
into such a state-of blindness, that they gave themselves up 
to abominable lusts, and dishonoured their own bodies. (Rom. 
i. 18.) But when the sense of shame is overcome, and the 
reins are given to lust, a vile and outrageous barbarism 
necessarily succeeds, and many kinds of sin are blended 
together, so that a most confused chaos is the result. But 
if this severe vengeance of God so fell upon the men of 
Sodom, that they became blind with rage, and prostituted 
themselves to all kinds of crime, certainly we shall scarcely 
be more mildly treated, whose iniquity is the less excusable, 
because the truth of God has been more clearly revealed 
unto us. 

Both old and young. Moses passes over many things in 
silence which may come unsought into the reader’s mind: 
for instance, he does not mention by whom the multitude had .. 
been stirred up. Yet it is probable that there were some 
who fanned the flame: nevertheless, we hence perceive how 
freely they were disposed to commit iniquity ; since, as at a 
given signal, they immediately assemble. It also shows how 
completely destitute they were of all remaining shame ; for, 
neither did any gravity restrain the old, nor any modesty, 
suitable to their age, restrain the young: finally, he intimates, 
that all regard to honour was gone, and that the order of 
nature was perverted, when he says, that young and old flew 
together from the extreme parts of the city. 


5. Where are the men? Although it was their intention 
shamefully to abuse the strangers to their outrageous appetite, 
yet, in words, they pretend that their object is different. For, 
as if Lot had been guilty of a fault in admitting unknown men 
into the city, wherein he himself was a stranger, they com- 
mand these men to be brought out before them. Some 
expound the word know in acarnal sense ; and thus the Greek 

VOL. I. 21 


498 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XIX. 


interpreters have translated it.! But I think the word has 
here a different meaning; as if the men had said, We wish 
to know whom thou bringest, as guests, into our city. The 
Scripture truly is accustomed modestly to describe an act of 
shame by the word know; and therefore we may infer that 
the men of Sodom would have spoken, in coarser language, 
of such an act: but, for the sake of concealing their wicked 
design, they here imperiously expostulate with the holy man, 
for having dared to receive unknown persons into his house. 
Here, however, a question arises; for if the men of Sodom 
were in the habit of vexing strangers, of all kinds, in this 
manner, how shall we suppose they had acted towards others ? 
For Lot was not now for the first time beginning to be 
hospitable ; and they, too, had always been addicted to lust. 
Lot was prepared to expose his own daughters to dishonour, 
in order to save his guests ; how often, then, might it have 
been necessary to prostitute them before, if the fury of men of 
such character could not be otherwise assuaged ?? Now, truly, 
if Lot had known that such danger was impending; he ought 
rather to have exhorted his guests to withdraw in time. In 
my opinion, however, although Lot knew the manners of the 
city; he had, nevertheless, no suspicion of what really hap- 
pened, that they would make an assault upon his house; this, 
indeed, seems to have been quite a new thing. It was, how- 
ever, fitting, when the angels were sent to investigate the 
true state of the people, that they should all break out into 
this detestable crime. So the wicked, after they have long — 
securely exulted in their iniquity, at length, by furiously 
rushing onward, accelerate their destruction in a moment. 
God therefore designed, in calling the men of Sodom to 
judgment, to exhibit, as it were, the extreme act of their 
wicked life; and he impelled them, by the spirit of deep 
infatuation, to a crime, the atrocity of which would not 
suffer the destruction of the place to be any longer deferred. 
For as the hospitality of the holy man, Lot, was honoured © 
1 Tyg ouyyevaueba avrois.”—Sept. 


2 « Si non alio remedio placari poterat eorum rabies, qui viros ad stu- 
prum flagitabant.” 











CHAP. XIX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. . 499 


with a signal reward; because he, unawares, received angels 
instead of men, and had them as guests in his house; so God 
avenged, with more severe punishment, the shameful lust of 
the others ; who, while endeavouring to do violence to angels, 
were not only injurious towards men; but, to the utmost of 
their power, dishonoured the celestial glory of God, by their 
sacrilegious fury. 


6. And Lot went out at the door unto them. It appears from 
the fact that Lot went out and exposed himself to danger, 
how faithfully he observed the sacred right of hospitality. 
It was truly a rare virtue, that he preferred the safety and 
honour of the guests whom he had once undertaken to 
protect, to his own life: yet this degree of magnanimity is 
required from the children of God, that where duty and fidelity 
are concerned, they should not spare themselves. And al- 
though he was already grievously injured by the besieging of 
his house; he yet endeavours, by gentle words, to soothe 
ferocious minds, while he suppliantly entreats them to lay 
aside their wickedness, and addresses them by the title of 
brethren. Now it appears, how savage was their cruelty, 
and how violent the rage of their lust, when they were in 
no degree moved by such extraordinary mildness. But the 
description of a rage so brutal, tends to teach us that punish- 
ment was not inflicted upon them, until they had proceeded 
to the last stage of wickedness. And let us remember, that 
the reprobate, when they have been blinded by the just judg- 
ment of God, rush, as with devoted minds, through every 
kind of crime, and leave nothing undone, until they render 
themselves altogether hateful and detestable to God and 


men. 


8. Ihave two daughters. As the constancy of Lot, in risk- 
ing his own life for the defence of his guests, deserves no 
common praise; sonow Moses relates that a defect was mixed 
with this great virtue, which sprinkled it with some imperfec- 
tion. For, being destitute of advice, he devises (as is usual in 
intricate affairs) an unlawful remedy. He does not hesitate to 
prostitute his own daughters, that he may restrain the indo- 


500 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XIX. 


mitable fury of the people. But he should rather have 
endured a thousand deaths, than have resorted to such a 
measure. Yet such are commonly the works of holy men: 
since nothing proceeds from them so excellent, as not to be 
in some respect defective. Lot, indeed, is urged by extreme 
necessity ; and it is no wonder that he offers his daughters to 
be polluted, when he sees that he has to deal with wild beasts ; 
yet he inconsiderately seeks to remedy one evil by means of 
another. I can easily excuse some for extenuating his fault; 
yet he is not free from blame, because he would ward off 
evil with evil. But we are warned, by this example, that 
when the Lord has furnished us with the spirit of invincible 
fortitude, we must also pray that he may govern us by the 
spirit of prudence; and that he will never suffer us to be 
deprived of a sound judgment, and a well-regulated rea-~ 
son. © For then only shall we rightly proceed in our course of 
duty, when, in complicated affairs, we perceive, with a com- 
posed mind, what is necessary, what is lawful, and what is 
expedient to be done; then shall we be prepared promptly to 
meet any danger whatever. Tor, that our minds should be 
carried hither and thither by hastily catching at wicked coun- 
sels, is not less perilous than that they should be agitated by 
fear. But when reduced to the last straits, let us learn to 
pray, that the Lord would open to us some way of escape. 
Others would excuse Lot by a different pretext, namely, that 
he knew his daughters would not be desired. But I have no 
doubt that, being willing to avail himself of the first sub- 
terfuge which occurred to him, he turned aside from the 
right way. This, however, is indisputable; although the men 
of Sodom had not yet, in express terms, avowed the base 
desire with which they were inflamed, yet Lot, from their daily 
crimes, had formed his judgment respecting it. If any one 
should raise the objection that such a supposition is absurd ;! 
I answer, that, since by custom they had imagined the crime 
to be lawful, the crowd was easily excited by a few instiga- 
tors, as it commonly happens, where no distinction is main- 
tained between right and wrong. When Lot says, “ There- 


1“ Siquis absurdum esse objiciat, totum populum duos viros ad stu 
prum captasse,” &c. 


CHAP. XIX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 501 


fore came they under the shadow of my roof;” his meaning 
is, that they had been committed to him by the Lord, and 
that he should be guilty of perfidy, unless he esdeavoured to 
protect them.! 


9. And they said, Stand back. 'That Lot, withallhisentreaties, 
than which nothing could be adduced more likely to soothe their 
rage, was thus harshly repelled, shows the indomitable haughti- 
ness of this people. And, in the first place, they threaten that, 
if he persists in interceding, they will deal worse with him 
than with those whom he defends. Then they reproach him 
with the fact, that he, a foreigner, assumes the province of a 
judge. Every word proves the pride with which they swell. 
They place one man in opposition to a multitude, as if they 
would say, ‘By what right dost thou alone challenge to thyself 
authority .over the whole city ?? They next boast that, while 
they are natives, he is but a stranger. Such is, at the present 
time, the boasting of the Papists against the pious ministers 
of God’s word: they allege against us, as a disgrace, the pau- 
city of our numbers, in contrast with their own great multi- 
tude.” Then they pride themselves upon their long succes- 
sion, and contend that it is intolerable for them to be reproved 
by new men.* But however contumaciously the wicked may 
strive, rather than submit to reason, let us know that they 
are exalted only to their own ruin. 


10. But the men put forth their hand. Moses again gives 
the name of men to those who were not so, but who had 
appeared as such; for although they begin to exert their 
celestial force, they do not yet declare that they are angels 


1 Tt will be thought that Calvin has said enough, and more than enough, 
in excuse of this strange conduct of Lot. It serves to show the low 
tone of morals, not only in the world at large, but among those who had 
- enjoyed the advantages of a religious education. At the same time, it 
affords evidence of the kind of chivalrous regard which was paid to stran- 
gers, and of which so much is read in profane writers.—Ed. 

2 « Car ils objectent comme pour reproche, que nous ne sommes que 
om pongnee de gens, et qu’eux sont bien en plus grand nombre.”—French 


2 As the Reformation was styled the new religion, so the reformers 
were stigmatized as new men.—Ed. 


502 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XIX. 


divinely sent from heaven. But here Moses teaches, that the 
Lord, although he may for a time seem regardless, while the 
faithful are engaged in conflict, yet never deserts his own, 
but stretches out his hand, (so to speak,) at the critical mo- 
ment. ‘Thus, in preserving Lot, he defers his aid until the 
last extremity. Let us, therefore, with tranquil minds, 
wait on his providence; and let us intrepidly follow what 
belongs to our calling, and what he commands ; for although 
he may suffer us to be exposed to danger, he will still show, 
that he has never been unmindful of us. For we see, that as 
Lot had shut the door of his house for the protection of his 
guests, so he is repaid, when the angels not only receive 
him again, through the opened door, but by opposing the 
barriers of divine power, prevent the impious men from 
approaching it. For, (as I have before intimated,) they 
afford him not merely human help, but they come to bring 
him assistance, armed with divine power. Whereas, Moses 
says, that the men were smitten with blindness, we are 
not so to understand it, as if they had been deprived of 
eye-sight; but that their vision was rendered so dull, 
that they could distinguish nothing. This miracle was 
more illustrious, than if their eyes had been thrust out, or 
entirely blinded; because with their eyes open, they feel — 
about, just like blind men, and seeing, yet do not see. At the 
same time, Moses wishes to describe their iron obstinacy : 
they do not find Lot’s door; it follows then, that they had 
laboured in seeking it; but, in this manner, they furiously 
wage war with God. This, however, has happened, not 
once only, and not with the men of Sodom alone; but is 
daily fulfilled in the reprobate, whom Satan fascinates with 
such madness, that when stricken by the mighty hand of God, 
they proceed with stupid obstinacy to advance against him. 
And we need not seek far, for an instance of such conduct; 
we see with what tremendous punishments God visits wan- 
dering lusts; and yet the world ceases not, with desperate 
audacity, to rush into the certain destruction which is set 
before their eyes. 


12. Hast thou here any besides? At length the angels de- 


CHAP. XIX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 503 


clare for what purpose they came, and what they were about 
to do. For so great was the indignity of the last act of 
this people, that Lot must now see how impossible it was for 
God to bear with them any longer. And, in the first 
place, they declare, that they are come to destroy the city, 
because “ the cry of it was waxen great.” By which words 
they mean, that God was provoked, not by one act of wick- 
edness only, but that, after he had long spared them, he was 
now, at last, almost compelled, by their immense mass of 
crimes, to come down to inflict punishment. For we must 
maintain, that the more sins men heap together, the higher 
will their wickedness rise, and the nearer will it approach to 
God, to cry aloud for vengeance. Wherefore, as the angels 
testify, that God had been hitherto long-suffering, and of 
great forbearance; so they declare, on the other hand, what 
issue awaits all those, who, having gathered together 
mountains of guilt, exalt themselves with daily increasing 
audacity, as if, like the giants, they were about to assail 
heaven. They, however, explain the cause of this destruction, 
not only that Lot may ascribe praise to the divine righteous- 
ness and equity, but that he, being impressed with fear, may 
the more quickly hasten his departure. For, such is the 
indolence of our flesh, that we slowly and coldly set ourselves 
to escape the judgment of God, unless we are deeply stirred 
by the dread of it: thus Noah, alarmed by the terror of the 
deluge, applied his industry to the framing of the ark. 
Meanwhile, the angels inspire the mind of the holy man with 
hope; lest he should tremble, or should be so possessed by 
fear, and so desponding respecting his deliverance, as to be 
too slow to depart. or they not only promise that he shall 
be safe, but also grant, unasked, the life of his family. And 
truly, he ought not to have doubted respecting his own life, 
when he saw others freely given him, as by a superabundance of 
favour. Itis however asked, ‘ Why was God willing to offer 
his kindness to ungrateful men, by whom he knew it would 
be rejected? The same question may be put respecting the 
preaching of the gospel; for God was not ignorant that few 
would become partakers of that salvation, which, neverthe- 
less, he commands to be offered indiscriminately to all. 


504 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XIX. 
In this way, unbelievers are rendered more inexcusable, when 
they reject the message of salvation. The chief reason, how- 
ever, why Lot is commanded to set before his own family the 
hope of deliverance, is, that he may embrace, with greater con- 
fidence, the offered favour of God, and may strenuously and 
quickly prepare himself to depart, not doubting of his own pre- 
servation. It is, with probability, inferred from this place, that 
he had, then, no sonsin that city; for, in consequence of the ex- 
hortation of the angels, he would immediately have attempted 
to draw them out of it. We have before seen, that he had 
an ample and numerous band of servants; but no mention is 
made of them, since the freemen are here only reckoned. It 
is, nevertheless, probable, that some servants went forth with 
him, to carry provisions and some portion of furniture. For, 
whence did his daughters obtain in the desert mountain, the 
wine which they gave their father, unless some things, which 
Moses does not mention, had been conveyed by asses, or 
camels, or waggons? It was however possible, that, in so 
great a number, many chose rather to perish with the men of 
Sodom, than to become associates and companions of their 
lord, in seeking safety. But it is better to leave as we find 
them, those things which the Spirit of God has not revealed. 


13. The Lord hath sent us to destroyit. This place teaches 
us, that the angels are the ministers of God’s wrath, as well 
as of his grace. Nor does it form any objection to this state- 
ment, that elsewhere the latter service is peculiarly ascribed 
to holy angels : as when the Apostle says, they were appoint- 
ed for the salvation of those whom God had adopted as sons. 
(Heb. i. 14.) And the Scripture, in various places, testifies, 
that the guardianship of the pious is committed to them, (Ps. 
xci. 11;) while, on the other hand, it declares that God exe- 
cutes his judgments by reprobate angels. (Ps. Ixxviii. 49.) For 
it must be maintained, that God causes his elect angels to pre- 
side over those judgments which he executes by means of the 
reprobate. For it would be absurd to attribute to devils, the 
honour of presiding over the judgments of God, since they 
do not yield him voluntary obedience; but rather, while 
raging contumaciously against him, are yet reluctantly com-_ 





CHAP. XIX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 505 


pelled to become his executioners. Let us therefore know, 
that it is not foreign to the office of elect angels, to descend 
armed for the purpose of executing Divine vengeance, and of 
inflicting punishment. As the angel of the Lord destroyed, 
in one night, the army of Sennacherib which besieged Jeru- 
salem, (2 Kings xix. 35;) so also the angel of the Lord 
appeared to David with his drawn sword, when the pestilence 
was raging against the people. (2 Sam. xxiv. 16.) But, as I 
have before said, the angels repeat what they had previously 
said to Abraham, concerning the cry of Sodom, that they may 
the more urgently impel Lot, by a detestation of the place, 
to take his flight, and may induce him, by the fear of the 
wrath of God, to seek for safety. 


14. And Lot went out. The faith of the holy man, Lot, 
appeared first in this, that he was completely awed and 
humbled at the threatenings of God; secondly, that in the 
midst of destruction, he yet laid hold of the salvation promised 
to him. In inviting his sons-in-law to join him, he manifests 
such diligence as becomes the sons of God; who ought to 
labour, by all means, to rescue their own families from de- 
struction. But when Moses says, ‘he appeared as one who 
mocked ;’ the meaning is, that the pious old man was despised 
and derided, and that what he said was accounted a fable; 
because his sons-in-law supposed him to be seized with deli- 
rium, and to be vainly framing imaginary dangers. Lot, 
therefore, did not seem to them to mock purposely, or to have 
come for the sake of trifling with them; but they deemed his 
language fabulous ; because, where there is no religion, and no 
fear of God, whatever is said concerning the punishment of 
the wicked, vanishes as a vain and illusory thing. And hence 
we perceive how fatal an evil security is, which so inebriates, 
yea, fascinates, the minds of the wicked, that they no longer 
think God sits as Judge in heaven; and thus they stupidly 
sleep in sin, till, while they are saying, “Peace and safety,” they 
are overwhelmed in sudden ruin. And especially, the nearer 
the vengeance of God approaches, the more does their obsti- 
nacy increase and become desperate. There is nothing more 
full of fear, and even of terror, than wicked men are, when 


506 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XIX. 


the hand of God presses closely on them; but until, con- 
strained by force, they perceive their destruction to be immi- 
nent, they either reject all threats with proud scorn, or con- 
temptuously pass them by. But their indolence ought to 
awaken us to the fear of God, so that we may be always eare- 
ful; but more especially when some token of the wrath of 
God presents itself before us. 


15. The angels hastened Lot. Waving praised the faith 
aud piety of Lot, Moses shows that something human still 
adhered to him; because the angels hastened him, when he 
was lingering. The cause of his tardiness might be, that he 
thought he was going into exile: thus a multiplicity of cares 
and fears disturb his anxious mind. For he doubts what 
would happen to him, as a fugitive, when, having left his house 
and furniture, naked and in want, he should betake himself 
to some desert place. In the meantime, he does not consider 
that he must act like persons shipwrecked, who, in order that 
they may come safe into port, cast into the sea their cargo, 
and every thing they have. He does not indeed doubt, that 
God is speaking the truth; nor does he refuse to remove 
elsewhere, as he is commanded ; but, as if sinking under his 
own infirmity, and entangled with many cares, he, who ought 
to have run forth hastily, and without delay, moves with slow 
and halting pace. In his person, however, the Spirit of God 
presents to us, as in a mirror, our own tardiness; in order 
that we, shaking off all sloth, may learn to prepare ourselves 
for prompt obedience, as soon as the heavenly voice sounds 
in our ears; otherwise, in addition to that indolence which, 
by nature, dwells within us, Satan will interpose many delays. 
The angels, in order the more effectually to urge Lot forward, 
infuse the fear, lest he should be destroyed in the zniguity, 
or the punishment of the city. For the word NY (ayon) 
signifies both. Not that the Lord rashly casts the innocent 
on the same heap with the wicked, but because the man, who 
will not consult for his own safety, and who, even being 
warned to beware, yet exposes himself, by his sloth, to ruin, 
deserves to perish. 


~ 


ay ees 
ei 


CHAP, XIX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 507 


16. And while he lingered, the men laid hold upon his hand. 
The angels first urged him by words; now, seizing him by 
the hand, and indeed with apparent violence, they compel 
him to depart. His tardiness is truly wonderful, since, 
though he was certainly persuaded that the angels did not 
threaten in vain, he could yet be moved, by no force of words, 
until he is dragged by their hands out of the city. Christ 
says, ‘Though the spirit is willing, the flesh is weak,’ (Matth. 
xxvi. 41:) herea worse fault is pointed out ; because the flesh, 
by its sluggishness, so represses the alacrity of the spirit, that, 
with slow halting, it can scarcely creep along. And, indeed, 
as every man’s own experience bears him witness of this evil, 
the faithful ought to endeavour, with the greater earnestness, 
to prepare themselves to follow God; and to beware lest, as 
with deaf ears, they disregard his threats. And truly, they 
will never so studiously and forcibly press forward as not still 
to be retarded, more than enough, in the discharge of their 
duty. For what Moses says is worthy of attention, that the 
Lord was merciful to his servant, when, having laid hold of 
his hand by the angels, He hurried him out of the city. For 
so it is often necessary for us to be forcibly drawn away from 
scenes which we do not willingly leave. If riches, or honours, 
or any other things of that kind, prove an obstacle to any 
one, to render him less free and disengaged for the service of 
God, when it happens that he is abridged of his fortune, or 
reduced to a lower rank, let him know that the Lord has laid 
hold of his hand; because words and exhortations had not 
sufficiently profited him. We ought not, therefore, to deem 
it hard, that those diseases, which instruction did not suffice 
effectually to correct, should be healed by more violent reme- 
dies. Moses even seems to point to something greater ; 
namely, that the mercy of God strove with the sluggishness 
of Lot; for, if left to himself, he would, by lingering, have 
brought down upon his own head the destruction which was 
already near. Yet the Lord not only pardons him, but, being 
resolved to save him, seizes him by the hand, and draws him 
away, although making resistance. 


17. Escape for thy life. This was added by Moses, to 


508 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XIx. 


teach us, that the Lord not only stretches out his hand to us 
for a moment, in order to begin our salvation ; but that with- 
out leaving his work imperfect, he will carry it on even to 
the end. It certainly was no common act of grace, that the 
ruin of Sodom was predicted to Lot himself, lest it should 
crush him unawares; next, that a certain hope of salvation 
was given him by the angels; and, finally, that he was led by 
the hand out of the danger. Yet the Lord, not satisfied with 
having granted him so many favours, informs him of what 
was afterwards to be done, and thus proves himself to be the 
Director of his course, till he should arrive at the haven of 
safety.! Lot is forbidden to look behind him, in order 
that he may know, that he is leaving a pestilential habitation. 
This was done, first, that he might indulge no desire after it, 
and then, that he might the better reflect on the singular 
kindness of God, by which he had escaped hell. Moses had 
before related, how fertile and rich was that plain; Lot is 
now commanded to depart thence, that he may perceive 
himself to have been delivered, as out of the midst of a ship- 
wreck. And although, while dwelling in Sodom, his heart 
was continually vexed ; it was still scarcely possible that he 
should avoid contracting some defilement from a sink of 
wickedness so profound: being now, therefore, about to be 
purified by the Lord, he is deprived of those delights in which 
he had taken too much pleasure. Let us also hence learn, 
that God best provides for our salvation, when he cuts off 
those superfluities, which serve to the pampering of the flesh ; 
and when, for the purpose of correcting excessive, self-indul- 
gence, he banishes us from a sweet and pleasant plain, to a 
desert mountain. 


18. And Lot said unto them. Here another fault of Lot is 
censured, because he does not simply obey God, nor suffer 
himself to be preserved according to His will, but con- 
trives some new method of his own. God assigns him a 
mountain as his future place of refuge, he rather chooses for 
himself a city. They are therefore under a mistake, who so 
highly extol his faith, as to deem this a perfect example of 


1“ Ad salutis metam.”—* Au port de salut.”"—French Tr. 


OHAP. XIX. _ THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 509 


suitable prayer; for the design of Moses is rather to teach, 
that the faith of Lot was not entirely pure, and free from all 
defects. Tor it is to be held as an axiom, that our prayers 
are faulty, so far as they are not founded on the word. Lot, 
however, not only departs from the word, but preposterously 
indulges himself in opposition to the word ; such importunity 
has, certainly, no affinity with faith. Afterwards, a sudden 
change of mind was the punishment of his foolish cupidity. 
For thus do all necessarily vacillate, who do not submit them- 
selves to God. As soon as they attain one wish, immediately 
a new disquietude is produced, which compels them to change 
their opinion. It must then, in short, be maintained, that 
Lot is by no means free from blame, in wishing for a city as 
his residence ; for he both sets himself in opposition to the 
command of God, which it was his duty to obey ; and desires 
to remain among those pleasures, from which it was profit- 
able for him to be removed. He, therefore, acts just as a 
sick person would do, who should decline an operation, or a 
bitter draught, which his physician had prescribed. Never- 
theless, I do not suppose, that the prayer of Lot was alto- 
gether destitute of faith; I rather think, that though he 
declined from the right way, he not only did not depart far 
from it, but was even fully purposed in his mind to keep it. 
For he always depended upon the word of God; but in one 
particular he fell from it, by entreating that a place should be 
given to him, which had been denied. Thus, with the pious 
desires of holy men, some defiled and turbid admixture is often 
found. I am not however ignorant, that sometimes they are 
constrained, by a remarkable impulse of the Spirit, to depart 
in appearance from the word, yet without really transgressing 
its limits. But the immoderate carnal affection of Lot 
betrays itself, in that he is held entangled by those very 
delights which he ought to have shunned. Moreover, his 
inconstancy is a proof of his rashness, because he is soon 
displeased. with himself for what he has done. 


19. Behold now, thy servant hath found grace in thy sight. 
Though Lot saw two persons, he yet directs his discourse to 
one. Whence we infer, that he did not rely upon the 


510 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XIX. 


angels; because he was well convinced, that they had no 
authority of their own, and that his salvation was not placed 
in their hands. He uses therefore their presence in no other 
way than as a mirror, in which the face of God may be con- 
templated. Besides, Lot commemorates the kindness of God, 
not so much for the sake of testifying his gratitude, as of 
acquiring thence greater confidence in asking for more. For 
since the goodness of God is neither exhausted, nor wearied, 
by bestowing; the more ready we find him to give, the 
more confident does it become us to be, in hoping for what is 
good. And this truly is the property of faith, to take 
encouragement’ for the future, from the experience of past 
favour. And Lot does not err on this point; but he acts 
rashly in going beyond the word for the sake of self-gratifica- 
tion. Therefore I have said, that his prayer, though it flowed 
from the fountain of faith, yet drew something turbid from 
the mire of carnal affection. Let us then, relying upon the 
mercy of God, not hesitate to expect all things from him; 
especially thosé which he himself has promised, and which he 
permits us to choose. 

I cannot escape to the mountain. He does not indeed rage 
against God, with determined malice, as the wicked are wont 
to do; yet, because he rests not upon the word of God, he 
slides, and almost falls away. For why does he fear destruc- 
tion in the mountain, where he was to be protected by the 
hand of God, and yet expect to find a safe abode in that 
place, which is both near to Sodom, and obnoxious to similar 
vengeance, on account of its impure and wicked inhabitants ? 
But this verily is the nature of men, that they choose to seek 
their safety in hell itself, rather than in heaven, whenever 
they follow their own reason. Wesee, then, how greatly Lot 
errs, in fleeing from, and entertaining suspicions of, a mountain 
infected with no contagion of iniquity, and choosing a city 
which, overflowing with crimes, could not but be hateful to 
God. He pretends that it is a little one, in order that he 
may the more easily obtain his request. As if be had said, 
that he only wanted a corner where he might be safely shel- 


1 «¢ Confirmationem patere.” Quere, capere. ‘ Elle prene confirma- 
tion.” —French Tr.—Ed, 





— 
ee 


CHAP. XIX. _ THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 511 


tered. This would have been right, if he had not declined 
the asylum divinely granted to him, and rashly contrived 
another for himself. 


21. See, [have accepted thee concerning this thing also. Some 
ignorantly argue from this expression, that Lot’s prayer was 
pleasing to God, because he assented to his request, and gave 
him what he sought. For it is no new thing for the Lord 
sometimes to grant, as an indulgence, what he, nevertheless, 
does not approve. And he now indulges Lot, but in such a 
way, that he soon afterwards corrects his folly. Meanwhile, 
however, since God so kindly and gently bears with the evil 
wishes of his own people, what will he not do for us if our 
prayers are regulated according to the pure direction of his 
Spirit, and are drawn from his word? But after the angel 
has granted him his wish respecting the place, he again re- 
proves his indolence, by exhorting him to make haste. 


22. I cannot do any thing. Since the angel had not only 
been sent as an avenger to destroy Sodom, but also had re- 
ceived a command for the preservation of Lot; he therefore 
declares, that he will not do the former act, unless this latter 
be joined with it; because it is not at the option of the servant 
to divide those things which God has joined together. I 
am not, however, dissatisfied with the explanation of some, 
who suppose the angel to speak in the person of God. For 
although in appearance the language is harsh, yet there is no 
absurdity in saying, that God is unable to destroy the repro- 
bate without saving his elect. Nor must we, therefore, deem 
his power to be limited, when he lays himself under any such 
necessity ;' or that anything of his liberty and authority is 
diminished, when he willingly and freely binds himself. And 
let us especially remember, that his power is connected by a 
sacred bond with his grace, and with faith in his promises. 
Hence it may be truly and properly said, that he can de 
nothing but what he wills and promises. ‘This is a true and 
profitable doctrine. There will, however, be less ground of 


1 “Dum sibi ipse est necessitas.” Literally, ‘‘ When he is his own 
necessity.” 


512 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XIX. 


scruple if we refer the passage to the angels ; who had a posi- 
tive commandment, from which it was not lawful for them to 
abate the smallest portion. 


24. Then the Lord rained. Moses here succinctly relates, 
in very unostentatious language, the destruction of Sodom 
and of the other cities. The atrocity of the case might well 
demand a much more copious narration, expressed in tragic 
terms; but Moses, according to his manner, simply recites 
the judgment of God, which no words would be sufficiently 
vehement to describe, and then leaves the subject to the 
meditation of his readers. It is therefore our duty to con- 
centrate all our thoughts on that terrible vengeance, the bare 
mention of which, as it did not take place without a mighty 
concussion of heaven and earth, ought justly to make us 
tremble; and therefore it is so frequently mentioned in the 
Scriptures. And it was not the will of God that those cities 
should be simply swallowed up by an earthquake; but in 
order to render the example of his judgment the more con- 
spicuous, he hurled fire and brimstone upon them out of 
heaven. To this point belongs what Moses says, “that the 
Lord rained fire from the Lord.” The repetition is emphatical, 
because the Lord did not then cause it to rain, in the ordinary 
course of nature; but, as if with a stretched out hand, he 
openly fulminated in a manner towhich he was not accustomed, 
for the purpose of making it sufficiently plain, that this rain 
of fire and brimstone was produced by no natural causes. It 
is indeed true, that the air is never agitated by chance; and 
that God is to be acknowledged as the Author of even the 
least shower of rain; and it is impossible to excuse the pro- 
fane subtlety of Aristotle, who, when he disputes so acutely 
concerning second causes, in his Book on Meteors, buries God 
himself in profound silence. Moses, however, here expressly 
commends to us the extraordinary work of God ; in order that 
we may know that Sodom was not destroyed without a manifest 
miracle. The proof which the ancients have endeavoured to 
derive, from this testimony, for the Deity of Christ, is by no 
means conclusive: and they are angry, in my judgment, 
without cause, who severely censure the Jews, because they 


CHAP. XIX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 513 


do not admit this kind of evidence. I confess, indeed, that 
God always acts by the hand of his Son, and have no doubt 
that the Son presided over an example of vengeance so 
memorable; but I say, they reason inconclusively, who hence 
elicit a plurality of Persons, whereas the design of Moses was 
to raise the minds of the readers to a more lively contem- 
plation of the hand of God. And as it is often asked, from 
this passage, ‘ What had infants done, to deserve to be 
swallowed up in the same destruction with their parents?’ 
the solution of the question is easy ; namely, that the human 
race is in the hand of God, so that he may devote whom he 
will to destruction, and may follow whom he will with his 
mercy. Again, whatever we are not able to comprehend by 
the limited measure of our understanding, ought to be sub- 
mitted to his secret judgment. Lastly, the whole of that 
seed was accursed and execrable, so that God could not justly 
have spared, even the least. 
a , 

26. But his wife looked back. Moses here records 
the wonderful judgment of God, by which the wife of 
Lot was transformed into a statue of salt. But-under the 
pretext of this narrative, captious and perverse men ridi- 
cule Moses; for since this metamorphosis has no more 
appearance of truth, than those which Ovid has feigned, 
they boast that it is undeserving of credit. But I rather 
suppose it to have happened through the artifice of Satan, 
that Ovid, by fabulously trifling, has indirectly thrown dis- 
credit on this most signal proof of Divine vengeance. But 
whatever heathens might please to fabricate, is no concern of 
ours. It is only of importance to consider, whether the nar- 
rative of Moses contains anything absurd or incredible. And, 
first, I ask ; Since God created men out of nothing, why may 
he not, if he sees fit, reduce them again to nothing? If this 
is granted, as it must be; why, if he should please, may he 
not turn them into stones? Yea, those excellent philosophers, 
who display their own acuteness, in derogating from the 
power of God, daily see miracles as great in the course of 
nature. For how does the crystal acquire its hardness ? 
and—not to refer to rare examples—how is the living animal 

VOL. I. 2K 


514 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XIX. 


generated from lifeless seed? how are birds produced from 
eggs? Why then does a miracle appear ridiculous to them, 
in this one instance, when they are obliged to acknowledge 
innumerable examples of a similar kind? and how can they, 
who deem it inconsistent, that the body of a woman should be 
changed into a mass of salt, believe that the resurrection will 
restore to life, a carcase reduced to putrefaction? When, 
however, it is said, that Lot’s wife was changed into a statue 
of salt, let us not imagine that her soul passed into the nature 
of salt; for it is not to be doubted, that she lives to be a par- 
taker of the same resurrection with us, though she was sub- 
jected to an unusual kind of death, that she might be made 
an example to all. However, I do not suppose Moses to 
mean, that the statue had the taste of salt; but that it had 
something remarkable, to admonish-those who passed by. It 
was therefore necessary, that some marks should be impressed 
upon it, whereby all might know it to be a memorable pro- 
digy. Others interpret the statue of salt to havewbeen an 
incorruptible one, which should endure for ever; but the 
former exposition is the more genuine. It may now be asked, 
why the Lord so severely punished the imprudence of the 
unhappy woman; seeing that she did not look back, from a 


desire to return to Sodom? Perhaps, being yet doubtful, she — 


wished to have more certain evidence before her eyes; or, it 
might be, that, in pity to the perishing people, she turned 
her eyes in that direction. Moses, certainly, does not assert 
that she purposely struggled against the will of God; but, 
forasmuch as the deliverance of her, and her husband, was 
an incomparable instance of Divine compassion, it was right 
that her ingratitude should be thus punished. Now, if we 
weigh all the circumstances, it is clear that her fault was not 
light. First, the desire of looking back proceeded from in- 
credulity ; and no greater injury can be done to God, than 
when credit is denied to his word. Secondly, we infer from 
the words of Christ, that she was moved by some evil desire ; 
(Luke xvii. 32 ;) and that she did not cheerfully leave Sodom, 
to hasten to the place whither God called her; for we know 
that he commands us to remember Lot’s wife, lest, indeed, 
the allurements of the world should draw us aside from the 


CHAP. XIX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 515 


meditation of the heavenly life. It is therefore probable, that 
she, being discontented with the favour God had granted her, 
glided into unholy desires, of which thing also her tardiness 
was a sign; for Moses intimates, that she was following after 
her husband, when he says, that she looked back from behind 
him ; for she did not look back towards him; but because, 
by the slowness of her pace, she was less advanced, she, there- 
fore, was behind him. And although it is not lawful to affirm 
any thing respecting her eternal salvation; it is nevertheless 
probable, that God, having inflicted temporal punishment, 
spared her soul; inasmuch as he often chastises his own 
people in the flesh, that their soul may be saved from eternal 
destruction. Since, however, the knowledge of this is not 
very profitable, and we may without danger remain in igno- 
rance, let us rather attend to the example which God designs 
for the common benefit of all ages. If the severity of the 
punishment terrifies us ; let us remember, that they sin, at this 
day, not less grievously, who, being delivered, not from Sodom, 
but from hell, fix their eyes on some other object than the 
proposed prize of their high calling. 


27. And Abraham gat up early in the morning. Moses now 
reverts to Abraham, and shows that he, by no means, ne- 
glected what he had heard from the mouth of the angel ; for 
he relates that Abraham came toa place where he might see 
the judgment of God. For we must not suspect that (as 
we have lately said respecting Lot’s wife) he trusted more to 
his own eyes than to the word of God; and that he came 
to explore, because he was in doubt. But we rather infer, 
from the text, that he, being already persuaded that the 
angel had not spoken in vain, sought confirmation, by the 
actual beholding of the event; which confirmation would be 
useful both to himself and to posterity. And it is not to 
be doubted, that during the whole night, he suffered severe 
anguish respecting the safety of his nephew Lot. Whether 
he became satisfied on this point or not, we do not know; 
yet I rather incline to the conjecture, that he remained 
anxious about him. And it is possible that, hesitating be- 
tween hope and fear, he went forward to meet him, in order 


516 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XIX. 


that he might see whether he was delivered or not. And 
although he beholds nothing but the smoke, which generally 
remains after a great fire ; yet this sign is given him from the 
Lord, for a testimony to posterity, of a punishment so memor- 
able. God indeed designed that, in the very appearance of 
the place, a monument of his wrath should exist for ever: but 
because, through the readiness of the world to cast a doubt 
upon the judgments of God, it might be easily believed, that 
such had been the nature of the place from the beginning ; 
or that the change had occurred accidentally ; the Lord was 
pleased to exhibit his act of vengeance before the eyes of 
Abraham, in order that he might discharge the office of a 
herald to posterity. 


29. God remembered Abraham. Although Moses does not 
assert that the deliverance of Abraham’s nephew was made 
known to him ;\yet since he says, that Lot was saved from 
destruction for Abraham’s sake, it is probable that he was not 
deprived of that consolation which he most needed; and 
that he was conscious of the benefit, for which it became him 
to give thanks. If it seems to any one absurd, that the 
holy man Lot should be granted for the sake of another; as 
if the Lord had not respect to his own piety : I answer, these 
two things well agree with each other; that the Lord, since 
he is wont to aid his own people, cared for Lot, whom he had 
chosen, and whom he governed by his Spirit ; and yet that, at 
the same time, he would show, in the preservation of his life, 
how greatly he loved Abraham, to whom he not only granted 
personal protection, but also the deliverance of others. It is 
however right to observe, that what the Lord does gratui- 
tously,—induced by no other cause than his own goodness,— 
is ascribed to the piety or the prayers of men, for this reason ; 
that we may be stirred up to worship God, and to pray to 
him. We have seen, a little while before, how merciful God 
proved himself to be, in preserving Lot; and truly, he would 
not have perished, even if he had not been the nephew of 
Abraham. Yet Moses says, it was a favour granted to Abra- 
ham, that Lot was not consumed in the same destruction 
with Sodom. But if the Lord extended the favour which 


CHAP. XIX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 517 


he had vouchsafed to his servant, to the nephew also, who 
now was as a stranger from his family ; how much more con- 
fidently ought every one of the faithful to expect, that the 
same grace shall, by no means, be wanting to his own house- 
hold? And, if the Lord, when he favours us, embraces others 
also who are connected with us, for our sake, how much 
more will he have respect to ourselves? In saying that Lot 
dwelt in those cities, the figure synecdoche, which puts the 
whole for a part, is used, but it is expressly employed to 
make the miracle more illustrious ; because it happened, only 
by the singular providence of God, that when five cities 
were destroyed, a single person should escape. 


30. And Lot went up out of Zoar. This narration proves 
what I have before alluded to, that those things which men 
contrive for themselves, by rash counsels, drawn from carnal: 
reason, never prosper : especially when men, deluded by vain 
hope, or impelled by depraved wishes, depart from the word 
of God. For although temerity commonly seems to be 
successful at the beginning; and they who are carried away 
by their lusts, exult over the joyful issue of affairs; yet the 
Lord, at length, curses whatever is not undertaken with his 
approval ; and the declaration of Isaiah is fulfilled, ‘Woe to 
them who begin a work and not by the Spirit of the Lord; 
who take counsel, but do not ask at his mouth, (Isaiah xxx. 
1.) Lot, when commanded to betake himself to the moun- 
tain, chose rather to dwell in Zoar. After this habitation 
was granted to him, according to his own wish, he soon re- 
pents and is sorry, for he trembles at the thought that 
destruction is every moment hastening on a place so near to 
Sodom, in which perhaps the same impiety and wickedness 
was reigning. But let the readers recall to memory what I 
have said, that it was only through the wonderful kindness 
of God, that he did not receive either immediate, or very 
severe punishment. For the Lord, by pardoning him at the 
time, caused him finally to become judge of his own sin. 
For he was neither expelled from Zoar by force nor by the 
hand of man; but a blind anxiety of mind dzove him and 
hurried him into a cavern, because he had followed the lust 


518 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XX. 


of his flesh rather than the command of God. And thus 
in chastising the faithful, God mitigates their punishment, so 
as to render it their best medicine. For if he were to deal 
strictly with their folly, they would fall down in utter con- 
fusion. He therefore gives them space for repentance, that 


they may willingly acknowledge their fault. 


31. And the first-born said." 


CHAPTER XX. ; 


~1. Anp Abraham journeyed from 
thence toward the south country, and 
dwelled between Kadesh and Shur, and 
sojourned in Gerar. 


2. And Abraham said of Sarah his 
wife, She is my sister: and Abimelech 
king of Gerar sent, and took Sarah. 


1, Postea profectus est inde 
Abraham ad terram Meridia- 
nam, et habitavit inter Cades 
et Sur, peregrinatusque est in 
Gerar. . 

2. Et dixit Abraham de Sa- 
rah uxore sua, Soror mea esf. 
Et misit Abimelech rex Gerar, 


~ et accepit Sarah. 


3. But God came to Abimelech in a 
dream by night, and said to him, Behold, 
thou art but a dead man, for the woman 
which thou hast taken ; for she 7s a man’s 
wife. 

4, But Abimelech had not come near 
her: and he said, Lord, wilt thou slay 
also a righteous nation ? 


5. Said he not unto me, She zs my sis- 
ter? and she, even she herself said, He 
is my brother: in the integrity of my 
heart and innocency of my hands have I 
done this. 


3. Et venit Jehova ad Abi- 
melech in somnio noctis, et 
dixit ei, Ecce es mortuus, prop- 
ter uxorem quam accepisti: 
quum ipsa maritata sit marito. 

4, Abimelech autem non ap- 
propinquaverat ad eam: itaque 
dixit, Jehova, num gentem eti- 
am justam occides ? 

5. Numquid non ipse dixit 
mihi, Soror mea est: et ipsa 
etiam dixit, Frater meus est? 
in integritate cordis mei, et in 
munditia manuum mearum feci 
hoc. 


.e ”* 


131. “Et dixit primogenita.”—“ Hic prodigium narratur a Mose, 


quod lectores merito obstupefacere debet,” &c. 


The lengthened com- 


ment on this and the following verses, it has been deemed necessary 
entirely to omit. Perhaps the only points worthy of notice in it, are the 
following : 1. Calvin supposes Lot to have been under judicial infatuation 
in consequence of his intemperance on this occasion. ‘“ Ego quidem ita 
omnino statuo non tam vino fuisse obrutum, quam propter suam in- 
temperiem divinitus percussum spiritu stuporis.” 2. He explains, as 
other commentators do, the names of the children of Lot’s daughters ; 
the first 3syp, (Moab,) which signifies “ from a father;” the other 
soy-}3, (Ben-ammi,) which signifies ‘the son of my people.” ‘These 
were the progenitors of the Moabites and Ammonites.—Ed. 


CHAP. XX. 


6. And God said unto him in a dream, 
Yea, I know that thou didst this in the 
integrity of thy heart; for I also withheld 
_ thee from sinning against me: therefore 
suffered I thee not to touch her. 


7. Now therefore restore the man his 
wife ; for he zs a prophet, and he shall 
pray for thee, and thou shalt live: and 
if thou restore her not, know thou that 
thou shalt surely die, thou, and all that 
are thine. 

8. Therefore Abimelech rose early in 
the morning, and called all his servants, 
and told all these things in their ears: 
and the men were sore afraid. 


9. Then Abimelech called Abraham, 
and said unto him, What hast thou done 
unto us? and what have I offended thee, 
that thou hast brought on me and on 
my kingdom a great sin? thou hast 
done deeds unto me that ought not to be 
done. 

10. And Abimelech said unto Abra- 
ham, What sawest thou, that thou hast 
done this thing ? 

11. And Abraham said, Because I 
_ thought, Surely the fear of God is not in 
this place ; and they will slay me for my 

wife’s sake. 

12. And yet indeed she is my sister ; 
she zs the daughter of my father, but not 
the daughter of my mother ; and she be- 
came my wife. 

13. And it came to pass, when God 
caused me to wander from my father’s 
house, that I said unto her, This zs thy 
kindness which thou shalt show unto me; 
at every place whither we shall come, 
say of me, He zs my brother. 


14. And Abimelech took sleep, and 
oxen, and men-servants, and women-ser- 
vants, and gave them unto Abraham, and 
restored him Sarah his wife. 

15, And Abimelech said, Behold, my 
land is before thee : dwell where it pleas- 
eth thee. 

16. And unto Sarah he said, Behold, 
I have given thy brother a thousand 
pieces of silver: behold, he zs to thee a 
covering of the eyes, unto all that are 
with thee, and with all other: thus she 
was reproved. 

17. So Abraham prayed unto God: 


_ THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


519 


6. Et dixit ad eum Deus in 
somnio, Etiam ego novi quod 
in integritate cordis tui fecisti 
hoc, et prohibui etiam ego te, 
ne peccares mihi: idcirco non 
permisi tibi, ut tangeres eam. 

7. Et nune redde uxorem 
viro, quia propheta est, et ora- 
bit pro te, et vives: quodsi tu 
non reddideris, scito quod mo- 
riendo morieris tu et omne quod 
est tibi. 

8. Et surrexit Abimelech 
mane, et vocavit omnes servos 
suos, et loquutus est omnia ver- 
ba ista in auribus eorum, et 
timuerunt viri valde. 

9. Et vocavit Abimelech 
Abraham, et dixit ei, Quid fe- 
cisti nobis? et quid peccavi 
tibi, quia induxisti super me et 
super regnum meum peccatum 
grande? opera que non debent 
fieri, fecisti mecum. 

10. Et dixit Abimelech ad 
Abraham, Quid vidisti quia fe- 
cisti rem hanc ? 

11. Et dixit Abraham, Quia 
dixi, Vere non est timor Dei in 
loco isto: et occident me prop- 
ter uxorem meam. 

12. Et etiam vere soror mea 
filia patris mei est, veruntamen 
non filia matris mex: et fuit 
mihi in uxorem meam. 

13. Et fuit, quando circum- 
duxerunt me Angeli de domo 
patris mei, dixi ei, Hee est 
misericordia tua quam. facies 
mecum, in omni loco ad quem 
veniemus, dic de me, Frater 
meus est. 

14. Et cepit Abimelech pe- 
cudes, et boves, et servos, -et 
ancillas, et dedit Abraham : et 
restituit ei Sarah, uxorem ejus. 

15. Et dixit Abimelech, Ec- 
ce, terra mea coram te, in leco 
bono coram oculis tuis habita. 

16. Et ad Sarah dixit, Ecce, 
dedi mille argenteos fratri tuo: 
ecce, est tibi operimentum ocu- 
lorum, omnibus qui sunt tecum: 
et in omnibus correcta fuit. 


17. Et oravit Abraham ad 


520 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XX. 


and God healed Abimelech, and his wife, Deum, et sanavit Deus Abi- 
and his maid-servants; and they bare melech et uxorem ejus, et an- 
children. cillas ejus, et pepererunt : 

18. For the Lord had fast closed up 18. Quia claudendo clauserat 
all the wombs of the house of Abimelech, Jehova super omnem vulyam 
because of Sarah Abraham’s wife. domus Abimelech propterSarah 

uxorem Abraham. 


1. And Abraham journeyed from thence. What Moses 
related respecting the destruction of Sodom, was a digression. 
He now returns to the continuation of his history, and pro- 
ceeds to show what happened to Abraham ; how he conducted 
himself, and how the Lord protected him; till the promised 
seed, the future source of the Church, should be born unto 
him. He also says, that Abraham came into the South 
country ; not that he travelled beyond the limits of the in- 
heritance given to him, but left his former abode, and went 
towards the South. Moreover, the region which he points 
out fell chiefly, afterwards, to the lot of the tribe of Judah. 
It is, however, unknown what was his intention in removing, 
or what necessity impelled him to change his place: we ought, 
however, to be persuaded, that he had not transferred his 
abode to another place for any insufficient cause; especially 
since a son, whom he had not even dared to wish for, had 
been lately promised him, through Sarah. Some imagine — 
that he fled from the sad spectacle which was continually 
presented before his eyes; for he saw the plain, which had 
lately appeared so pleasant to the view, and so replenished 
with varied abundance of fruits, transformed into a misshapen 
chaos. And certainly, it was possible that the whole neigh- 
bourhood might be affected with the smell of sulphur, as well 
as tainted with other corruptions, in order that men might 
the more clearly perceive this memorable judgment of God. 
Therefore, there is nothing discordant with facts, in the sup- 
position, that Abraham, seeing the place was under the curse 
of the Lord, was, by his detestation of it, drawn elsewhere. 
It is also credible, that (as it happened to him in another 
place) he was driven away by the malice and injuries of those 
among whom he dwelt. For the more abundantly the Lord 
had manifested his grace towards him, the more necessary 
was it, in return, for his patience to be exercised, in order that 


CHAP. XX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 521 


he might reflect upon his condition, as a pilgrim upon earth. 
Moses also expressly declares, that he dwelt as a stranger in 
the land of Gerar. Thus we see, that this holy family was 
driven hither and thither as refuse, while a fixed abode was 
granted to the wicked. But it is profitable to the pious to 
be thus unsettled on earth; lest, by setting their minds on a 
commodious and quiet habitation, they should lose the in- 
heritance of heaven. 


2. And Abraham said of Sarah his wife. In this history, 
the Holy Spirit presents to us a remarkable instance, both 
of the infirmity of man, and of the grace of God. It is a 
common proverb, that even fools become wise by suffering 
evil. But Abraham, forgetful of the great danger which had 
befallen him in Egypt, once more strikes his foot against the 
same stone; although the Lord had purposely chastised him, 
in order that the warning might be useful to him, through- 
out his whole life. Therefore we perceive, in the example 
of the holy patriarch, how easily the oblivion, both of the 
chastisements and the favours of God, steals over us. For it 
is impossible to excuse his gross negligence, in not calling 
to mind, that he had once tempted God; and that he would 
have had himself alone to blame, if his wife had become 
the property of another man. But if we thoroughly exa- 
mine ourselves, scarcely any one will be found who will 
not acknowledge, that he has often offended in the same 
way. It may be added, that Abraham was not free from 
the charge of ingratitude ; because, if he had reflected that 
his wife had been wonderfully preserved to him by the Lord, 
he would never again, knowingly and willingly, have cast 
himself into similar danger. For he makes the former favour 
divinely offered unto him, so far as he is able, of none effect. 
We must, however, notice the nature of the sin, on which 
we have touched before. For Abraham did not, for the 
sake of providing for his own safety, prostitute his wife, (as 
impious men cavil.) But, as he had before been anxious 
to preserve his life, till he should receive the seed divinely 
promised to him; so now, seeing his wife with child, in the 
hope of enjoying so great a blessing, he thought nothing of 


522 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XX. 


his wife’s danger.! Therefore, if we thoroughly weigh all 
things, he sinned through unbelief, by attributing less than 
he ought to the providence of God. Whence also, we are 
admonished, how dangerous a thing it is, to trust our own 
counsels. For Abraham’s disposition is right, while fixing 
his attention on the promise of God; but inasmuch as he does 
not patiently wait for God’s help, but turns aside to the use 
of unlawful means, he is, in this respect, worthy of censure. _ 

And Abimelech sent. 'There is no doubt that the Lord 
purposed to punish his servant, for the counsel he had so 
rashly taken. And such fruits of distrust do all receive, who 
rely not, as they ought, on the providence of God. Some 
perverse men quarrel with this passage; because nothing seems 
to them more improbable than that a decrepit old woman 
should be desired by the king, and taken from the bosom of 
her husband. But we answer, first, that it is not known what 
her appearance was, except that Moses before declared her to 
be a person of singular beauty. And it is possible that she 
was not much worn with age. For we often see some women 
in their fortieth year more wrinkled than others in their seven- 
tieth. But here another thing is to be considered, that, by the 
unwonted favour of God, hercomeliness was pre-eminentamong 
her other endowments. It might also be, that king Abime- 
lech was less attracted by the elegance of her form, than by 
the rare virtues with which he saw her, as a matron, to be 
endued. Lastly, we must remember, that this whole affair 
was directed by the hand of God, in order that Abraham 
might receive the due reward of his folly. And as we find 
that they who are exceedingly acute in discerning the natural 
causes of things, are yet most blind in reference to the divine 
judgments ; let this single fact suffice us, that Abimelech, be- 
ing a minister to execute the divine chastisement, acted un- 
der a secret impulse. 


3. But God came to Abimelech in a dream by night. Here 
Moses shows that the Lord acted with such gentleness, that 


1 There seems too much of special pleading in the reasoning of Calvin, 
both on this occasion, and on that referred to, of a similar kind, in the 
twelfth chapter.—Ed. 


CHAP. XX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 523 


in punishing his servant, he yet, as a father, forgave him: 
just as he deals with us, so that, while chastising us with his 
rod, his mercy and his goodness far exceed his severity. 
Hence also we infer, that he takes greater care of the pious 
than carnal sense can understand; since he watches over 
them while they sleep. This also is to be carefully noticed ; 
that however we may be despised by the world, we are yet 
precious to him, since for our sake he reproves even kings, as 
it is written in Psalm cv. 14. But as this subject was more 
fully discussed in the twelfth chapter, let the readers 
there seek what I now purposely omit. Whereas, God is 
said to have come, this is to be applied to the perception of 
the king, to whom undoubtedly the majesty of God was mani- 
fested ; so that he might clearly perceive himself to be di- 
vinely reproved, and not deluded with a vain spectre. 

Behold, thou art but a dead man. Although God reproved 
king Abimelech, for the sake of Abraham, whom he covered 
with his special protection; he yet intends to show, generally, 
his high displeasure against adultery. And, in truth, here is 
no express mention of Abraham; but rather a general an- 
nouncement is made, for the purpose of maintaining conjugal 
fidelity. ‘Thou shalt die, because thou hast seized upon a 
woman who was joined toa husband.’ Let us therefore learn, 
that a precept was given, in these words, to mankind, which 
forbids any one to touch his neighbour’s wife. And, truly, 
since nothing in the life of man is more sacred than marriage, 
it is not to be wondered at, that the Lord should require 
mutual fidelity to be cherished between husbands and wives, 
and should declare that he will be the Avenger of it, as often 
as itis violated. He now addresses himself, indeed, only to 
one man; but the warning ought to sound in the ears of all, 
that adulterers—although they may exult with impunity for 
a time—shall yet feel that God, who presides over marriage, 
will take vengeance on them. (Heb. xiii. 3.) 


4, But Abimelech had not come near her. Though Abraham 
had deprived himself of his wife, the Lord interposed in time 
to preserve her uninjured. When Moses previously relates, 
that she was taken away by Pharaoh, he does not say whether 


524 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XX. 


her chastity was assailed or not; but since the Lord then also 
declared himself the vindicator of her whom he now saved 
from dishonour, we ought not to doubt that her integrity was 
preserved both times. For why did he now forbid the king 
of Gerar to touch her, if he had previously suffered her to be 
corrupted in Egypt? We see, however, that when the Lord 
so defers his aid as not to stretch out his hand to the faithful, 
till they are in extreme peril, he shows the more clearly how 
admirable is his Providence. 

Wilt thou slay also a righteous nation? 'The explanation 
given by some, that Abimelech here compares himself with 
the men of Sodom, is perhaps too refined. The following 
meaning appears to me more simple; namely, ‘O Lord, 
although thou dost severely punish adultery, shall thy wrath 
pour itself out on unoffending men, who have rather fallen 
into error, than sinned knowingly and willingly ?’ Moreover, 
Abimelech seems so to clear himself, as if he were entirely 
free from blame: and yet the Lord both admits and approves 
his excuse. We must, howevér, mark in what way, and to 
what extent, he boasts that his heart and hands are guiltless. 
For he does not arrogate to himself a purity which is alto- 
gether spotless; but only denies that he was led by lust, either 
tyrannically or purposely, to abuse another man’s wife. We 
know how great is the difference between a crime and a fault ;' 
thus Abimelech does not exempt himself from every kind of 
charge, but only shows that he had been conscious of no such 
wickedness as required this severe punishment. ‘The ‘ sim- 
plicity of heart,’ of which he speaks, is nothing else than that 
ignorance which stands opposed to consciousness of guilt ; 
and ‘the righteousness of his hands,’ is nothing but that self 
government, by which men abstain from force and acts of 
injustice. Besides, the interrogation which Abimelech used, 
proceeded from a common feeling of religion. For nature 
itself dictates, that God preserves a just discrimination in 
inflicting punishments. 


6. Yea, I know that thou didst this in the integrity of thy heart. 


1 “ Tnter scelus et delictum.”—*" Between an act of abandoned wicked- 
ness and a mere fault.”—Ed. 


CHAP. XX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. ~§25 


We infer from this answer of God, (as I have lately remarked,) 
that Abimelech did not testify falsely concerning his own 
integrity. Yet, while God allows that his excuse is true, He 
nevertheless chastises him. Let us hence learn, that even they 
who are pure, according to human judgment, are not entirely 
free from blame. For no error may be deemed so excusable, 
as to be without some deteriorating admixture. Wherefore, 
it is not for any one to absolve himself by his own judgment ; 
rather let us learn to bring all our conduct to the standard 
of God. For Solomon does not say in vain, that ‘ the ways 
of men seem right to themselves, but the Lord pondereth the 
hearts, (Prov. xxi. 2.) But if even they who are unconscious 
to themselves of any evil, do not escape censure; what will 
be our condition, if we are held inwardly bound by our own 
conscience ? 

I also withheld thee. This declaration implies that God had 
respect, not only to Abraham, but also to the king. For 
because he had no intention of defiling another man’s wife, 
God had compassion on him: And it frequently happens, 
that the Spirit restrains, by his bridle, those who are gliding 
into error; just as, on the other hand, he drives those head- 
long, by infatuation, and a spirit of stupor, who, with depraved 
affections and lusts, knowingly transgress. And as God 
brought to the heathen king, who had not been guilty of de- 
liberate wickedness, a timely remedy, in order that his guilt 
should not be increased ; so He proves himself daily to be the 
faithful guardian of his own people, to prevent them from 
rushing forward, from lighter faults to desperate crimes. 


7. Now therefore, restore the man his wife. God does not 
now speak of Abraham as of a common man, but as of one 
who is so peculiarly dear unto himself, that He undertakes 
the defence of his conjugal bed, by a kind of privilege. He 
calls Abraham a prophet, for the sake of honour; as if he 
were charging Abimelech with having injured a man of great 
and singular excellence; that he might not wonder at the 
greatness of the punishment inflicted upon him. And al- 
though the word prophet is properly the name of an office; 
yet I think it has here a more comprehensive import, and 
that it is put for a chosen man, and one who is familiar with 


526 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XX. 


God. For since, at that time, no Scripture was in existence, 
God not only made himself known by dreams and visions, 
but chose also to himself rare and excellent men, to scatter 
abroad the seed of piety, by which the world would become 
more inexcusable. But since Abraham is a prophet, he is 
constituted, as it were, a mediator between God and 
Abimelech. Christ, even then, was the only Mediator; but 
this was no reason why some men should not pray for 
others ; especially they who excelled in holiness, and were 
accepted by God; as the Apostle teaches, that ‘ the fervent 
prayers of a righteous man avail much.’ (James v.16.) And 
we ought not, at this day, to neglect such intercession, pro- 
vided it does not obscure the grace of Christ, nor lead us 
away from Him. But that, under this pretext, the Papists 
resort to the patronage of the dead, is absurd. For as the 
Lord does not here send the king of Gerar to Noah, or to 
any one of the dead fathers, but into the presence of the liy- 
ing Abraham; so the only precept we have on this subject 
is, that, by mutually praying for each other, we should culti- 
vate charity among ourselves. 

And if thou restore her not. Hence we are to learn, the 
intention of those threats and denunciations, with which 
God terrifies men; namely, forcibly to impel those to re- 
pentance, who are too backward. In the beginning of this 
discourse, it had been absolutely declared, ‘Thou art a dead 
man; now the condition is added, ‘ Unless thou restore her’ 
Yet the meaning of both expressions is the same; though at 
first God speaks more sharply, that he may inspire the 
offender with the greater terror. But now, when he is sub- 
dued, God expresses his intention more clearly, and leaves him 
the hope of pardon and salvation. Thus is the knot untied, 
with which many entangle themselves, when they perceive | 
that God does not always, or instantly, execute the punish- 
ments which he has denounced ; because they deem it a sign, 
either that God has changed his purpose, or that he pretends 
a different thing by his word, from that which he has secretly 
decreed. He threatened destruction to the Ninevites, by 
Jonah, and afterwards spared them. (Jonah iii. 4.) The un- 
skilful do not perceive how they can escape from one of two 
absurdities ; namely, that God has retracted his sentence ; or 


CHAP. XX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 527 


that he had feigned himself to be about to do what he really 
did not intend. But if we hold fast this principle, that the in- 
culcation of repentance is included in all threats, the difficulty 
will be solved. For although God, in the first instance, ad- 
dresses men as lost; and, therefore, penetrates them with the 
present fear of death, still the end is to be regarded. For if 
he invites them to repentance, it follows, that the hope of 
pardon is left them, provided they repent. 


8. Therefore Abimelech rose early in the morning. Moses 
teaches how efficacious the oracle had been. For Abimelech, 
alarmed at the voice of God, arose in the morning, not only 
that he himself might quickly obey the command enjoined 
upon him, but that he might also exhort his own people to do 
the same. An example of such ready obedience is shown us 
in a heathen king, that we may no more make excuses for our 
torpor, when we are so little profited by the Divine remon- 
strances. God appeared to him ina dream; but since he daily 
cries aloud in our ears, by Moses, by the prophets, and by the 
apostles, and finally, by his only-begotten Son, it were absurd 
to suppose that so many testimonies should avail less than 
the vision of a single dream. 


9. Zhen Abimelech called Abraham. There are those who 
suppose that the king of Gerar did not make a complaint 
against Abraham; but rather declared his own repentance. 
If, however, we fairly weigh his words, we find confession 
mixed with expostulation. Although he complains that 
Abraham had acted unjustly, he yet does not so transfer the 
blame to him, as to free himself from all fault. And he may, 
with justice, impute part of the blame to Abraham, as he 
does; provided he also acknowledges his own sin. Let us 
therefore know, that this king did not act as hypocrites are 
in the habit of doing. For, as soon as ever a pretext is fur- 
nished for inculpating others, they confidently absolve them- 
selves: they even esteem it a lawful purgation for theinselves, 
if they can draw others into a participation of their crime. 
But Abimelech, while he complains that he had been deceived, 
and had fallen through imprudence, yet does not, mean- 


528 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XX. 


while, scruple to condemn himself as guilty of a great sin, ‘It 
is not,’ he says, ‘ through thee, that I and my whole kingdom 
have been prevented from falling into the greatest wickedness,’ 
No one therefore may exonerate himself from blame, under 
the pretence that he had been induced by others to sin. It is, 
however, to be noted, that adultery is here called a great 
sin; because it binds not one man only, but a whole people, 
asinacommon crime. The king of Gerar could not indeed 
have spoken thus, had he not acknowledged the sacred right of 
matriage. But, at the present time, Christians—at least they 
who boast of the name—are not ashamed jocularly to ex- 
tenuate so great a crime, from which even a heathen shrinks 
with the greatest horror. Let us however know, that Abime- 
lech was a true herald of that divine judgment, which miser- 
able men in vain endeavour to elude by their cavils. And let 
that expression of Paul ever recur to our memory, ‘Be not 
deceived ; because of those things cometh the wrath of God 
upon the disobedient.’ (1 Cor. v. 9; Eph. v. 6.) It is not 
without reason, that he makes this sin common to the whole 
nation; for when crimes are committed with impunity, a 
whole region is, in a certain sense, polluted. And it is 
especially notorious, that the anger of God is provoked against 
the whole body of the people, in the person of the king. — 
Hence, with so much the greater earnestness and care, must 
we beseech God to govern, by his Spirit, those whom he has 
placed in authority over us; and then, to preserve the coun- 
try, in which he has granted us a dwelling-place, exempt and 
pure from all iniquity. 


10. What sawest thou that thou hast done this thing? By 
this question the king provides against the future. He thinks 
that Abraham had not practised this dissimulation incon- 
siderately ; and, since God was grievously offended, he fears 
to fall again into the same danger. He therefore testifies, 
by an inquiry so earnest, that he wishes to remedy the evil. 
Now, it is no common sign of a just and meek disposition in 
Abimelech, that he allows Abraham a free defence. We know 
how sharply, and fiercely, they expostulate, who think them- 
selves aggrieved : so much the greater praise, then, was due 





CHAP. XX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 529 


_ to the moderation of this king, towards an unknown foreigner. 

Meanwhile, let us learn, by his example, whenever we expos- 

_ tulate with our brethren, who may have done us any wrong, 
_ to permit them freely to answer us. 


11. And Abraham said. There are two points contained in 
this answer. For, first, he confesses that he had been induced 
by fear to conceal his marriage. He then denies that he had 
lied for the purpose of excusing himself. . Now, although 
Abraham declares with truth, that he had not concealed his 
marriage with any fraudulent intention, nor for the purpose 
of injuring any one; yet he was worthy of censure, because, 
through fear, he had submitted, so far as he was concerned, 
to the prostitution of his wife. Wherefore, much cannot be 
said in his excuse: since he ought to have been more coura- 
geous and resolute in fulfilling the duty of a husband, by 
vindicating the honour of his wife, whatever danger might 
threaten him. Besides, it was a sign of distrust, to resort 
to an unlawful subtlety. With regard to his suspicion; 
although he had everywhere perceived that a monstrous licen- 
tiousness prevailed; it was, nevertheless, unjust to form a 
judgment so unfavourable of a people whom he had not yet 
known ; for he supposes them all to be homicides. But as I 
have treated, at some length, on these subjects, in the tenth 
chapter ; it may now suffice to have alluded to them, by the 
way. Meanwhile, we come to the conclusion, that Abraham 
does not contend for the justice of his cause before God; 
but only shows his earnestness to appease Abimelech. His 
particular form of expression is, however, to be noticed ; for 
wherever the fear of God does not reign, men easily rush 

onward to every kind of wickedness; so that they neither 
spare human blood, nor restrain themselves from rapine, 
violence, and contumelies. And doubtless it is the fear of 
God alone, which unites us together in the bonds of our 
common humanity, which keeps us within the bounds of 
moderation, and represses cruelty; otherwise we should 
devour each other like wild beasts. It will, indeed, some- 
times happen, that they who are destitute of the fear of 
God, may cultivate the appearance of equity. For God, in 
VOL. I. 2 1 


530 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XX. 


order that he may preserve mankind from destruction, holds 
in check, with his secret rein, the lusts of the ungodly. It 
must, however, be always taken into the account, that the 
door is opened to all kinds of wickedness, when piety and 
the fear of God have vanished. Of this, at the present day, 
too clear a proof is manifest, in the horrible deluge of crime, 
which almost covers the whole earth. For, from what other 
cause than this arise such a variety of deceptions and 
frauds, such perfidy and cruelty, that all sense of justice is 
extinguished by the contempt of God? Now, whenever we 
have a difficult contest with the corruptions of our own age, 
let us reflect on the times of Abraham, which, although they 
were filled with impiety and other crimes, yet did not divert 
the holy man from the course of duty. 


12. And yet indeed she ts my sister. Some suppose Sarah to 
have been Abraham’s own sister, yet not by the same mother, 
but born from a second wife. As, however, the name sister 
has a wider signification among the Hebrews, I willingly 
adopt a different conjecture; namely, that she was his sister 
in the second degree; thus it will be true that they had a 
common father, that is, a grandfather, from whom they had 
descended by brothers. Moreover, Abraham extenuates his 
offence, and draws a distinction between his silence and a 
direct falsehood ; and certainly he professed with truth, that 
he was the brother of Sarah. Indeed, it appears that he 
feigned nothing in words which differed from the facts them- 
selves; yet when all things have been sifted, his defence 
proves to be either frivolous, or, at least, too feeble. For since 
he had purposely used the name of sister as a pretext, lest 
men should have some suspicion of his marriage; he sophis- 
tically afforded them an occasion of falling into error. Where- 
fore, although he did not lie in words, yet with respect to the 
matter of fact, his dissimulation was a lie, by implication. He 
had, however, no other intention than to declare that he had 
not dealt fraudulently with Abimelech; but that, in an affairof 
great anxiety, he had caught at an indirect method of escape 
from death, by the pretext of his previous relationship to 
his wife. 








CHAP. XX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. | 531 


13. When God caused me to wander. Because the verb. is 
here put in the plural number, I freely expound the passage 
as referring to the angels, who led Abraham through his 
various wanderings. Some, with too much subtlety, infer 
from it a Trinity of Persons: as if it had been written, 
The gods caused me to wander. I grant, indeed, that the 
noun obs, (Elohim,) is frequently taken for God in the 
Scripture: but then the verb with which it is connected is 
always singular. Wherever a plural verb is added, then it 
signifies angels or princes.2. There are those who think that 
Abraham, because he was speaking with one who was not 
rightly instructed, spoke thus in conformity with the com- 
mon custom of the heathen ; but, in my opinion, most errone- 
ously. For to what purpose did he, by erecting altars, make 
it manifest that he was devoted to the service of the only 
true God, if it were lawful for him afterwards to deny, in 
words, the very God whom he had worshipped? On which 
subject we have before spoken, as the case required. Abra- 
ham, however, does not complain respecting the angels, 
that he had been led astray by their fallacious guidance: 
but he points out what his own condition formerly was; 
namely, that having left his own country, he had not only 
migrated into a distant land, but had been constantly com- 
pelled to change his abode. Wherefore there is no wonder, 
that necessity drove him into new designs. Should any one 
inquire, why he makes angels the guides of his pilgrimage ? 
the answer is ready; Although Abraham knew that he was 
wandering by the will and providence of God alone, he yet 
refers to angels, who, as he elsewhere acknowledges, were 
given him to be the guides of his journey. The sum of the 
address is of this tendency ; to teach Abimelech, that Abra- 


1 * Quando circumduxerunt me angeli.”—‘t When the angels led me 
about.’ 

2 The reasoning of Calvin is not conclusive. There are cases, though 
but few, in which Elohim, as here, when joined to a verb plural, signifies, 
not angels nor princes, but the true God. See Gen. xxxv. 7. Calvin, 
however, in this passage also, translates the word, “angels.” Still 
there seems no sufficient reason for departing from our own received 
version. Dathe agrees with it. “ Deinde cum Deus me ex patria mea 
migrare juberet.” It is also confirmed by the Septuagint version._-See 
the Commentary of Professor Bush, im loco,—Ed. 


532 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XX. 


ham was alike free from malicious cunning, and from false- 
hood: and then, that because he was passing a wandering 
and unquiet life; Sarah, by agreement, had always said the 
same thing which she had done in Gerar. This wretched 
anxiety of the holy man might so move Abimelech to com- 
passion, as to cause his anger to cease. 


14, And Abimelech took sheep. Abraham had before received 
possessions and gifts in Egypt; but with this difference, that 
whereas Pharaoh had commanded him to depart elsewhere ; 
Abimelech offers him a home in his kingdom. It therefore 
appears that both kings were stricken with no common degree 
of fear. For when they perceived that they were reproved 
by the Lord, because they had been troublesome to Abraham; 
they found no method of appeasing God, except that of 
compensating, by acts of kindness, for the injury they had 
brought on the holy man. The latter difference alluded to 
flowed hence; that Pharaoh, being more severely censured, was 
so terrified, that he could scarcely bear the sight of Abraham : 
whereas Abimelech, although alarmed, was yet soon com- 
posed, by an added word of consolation, when the Lord said 
to him, “ He is a prophet, and he shall pray for thee.” For 
there is no other remedy for the removal of fear, than the 
Lord’s declaration that he will be propitious. It is deed of 
little advantage for the sinner to present to God only what 
fear extorts. But it is a true sign of penitence, when, with 
a composed mind and quiet conscience, he yields himself, as 
obedient and docile, to God. And seeing that Abimelech 
allowed Abraham a habitation in his realm, a blessing of no 
trivial kind followed this act of humanity ; because Isaac was 
born there, as we shall see in the next chapter. 


16. He is to thee a covering of the eyes. Because there is, 
in these words, some obscurity, the passage is variously 
explained. The beginning of the verse is free from difficulty. 
For when Abimelech had given a thousand pieces of silver; 
in order that his liberality might not be suspected, he declares 
that he had given them to Abraham ; and that since Abraham 
had been honourably received, his wife was not to be regarded 
asa harlot. But what follows is more obscure, ‘ He shall bea 





CHAP. XxX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 533 


veil to thee.’ Many interpreters refer this to the oift ; in 
which they seem to me to be wrong. The Hebrews, haying 
no neuter gender, use the feminine instead of it. But Moses, 
in this place, rather points to the husband ; and this best suits 
the sense. For Sarah is taught that the husband to whom 
she is joined was as a veil, with which she ought to be covered, 
lest she should be exposed to others. Paul says, that the 
veil which the woman carries on her head, is the symbol of 
subjection. (1 Cor. xi. 10.) This also belongs to unmarried 
persons, as referring to the end for which the sex is ordained ; 
but it applies more aptly to married women; because they 
are veiled, as by the very ordinance of marriage. I therefore 
thus explain the words, ‘Thou, if thou hadst no husband, 
wouldst be exposed to many dangers; but now, since God 
has appointed for thee a guardian of thy modesty, it behoves 
thee to conceal thyself under that veil. Why then hast 
thou, of thine own accord, thrown off this covering?’ This 
was a just censure; because Sarah, pretending that she was 
in the power of her husband, had deprived herself of the divine 
protection. 

Thus she was reproved. Interpreters distort this clause also. 
The natural exposition seems to me to be, that the Lord had 
suffered Sarah to be reproved by a heathen king, that he 
might the more deeply affect her with a sense of shame. For 
Moses draws especial attention to the person of the speaker ; 
because it seemed a disgrace that the mother of the faithful 
should be reprehended by sucha master. Others suppose that 
Moses speaks of the profit which she had received; seeing that 
she, instructed by such a lesson, would henceforth learn to 
act differently. But Moses seems rather to point out that 
kind of correction of which I have spoken; namely, that 
- Sarah was humbled, by being delivered over to the discipline 


of a heathen man. 


17. So Abraham prayed. In two respects the wonderful 
favour of God towards Abraham was apparent ; first, that, 
with outstretched hand, He avenged the injury done to him; 
and, secondly, that, through Abraham’s prayer, He became 
pacified towards the house of Abimelech. It was necessary 


534 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXI. 


to declare, that the house of Abimelech had been healed in 
answer to Abraham’s prayers; in order that, by such a bene- 
fit, the inhabitants might be the more closely bound to him. 
A question, however, may be agitated respecting the kind of 
punishment described in the expression, the whole house was 
barren. For if Abraham had gone into the land of Gerar, 
after Sarah had conceived, and if the whole of what Moses 
has here related was fulfilled before Isaac was born, how was it 
possible that, in so short a time, this sterility should be mani- 
fest? If we should say, that the judgment of God was then 
made plain, in a manner to us unknown, the answer would 
not be inappropriate. Yet I am not certain, that the series 
of the history has not been inverted. The more probable 
supposition may seem to be, that Abraham had already been 
resident in Gerar, when Isaac was promised to him; but that 
the part, which had before been omitted, is now inserted by 
Moses. Should any one object, that Abraham dwelt in 
Mamre till the destruction of Sodom, there would be nothing 
absurd in the belief, that what Moses here relates had taken 
place previously. Yet, since the correct notation of time does 
little for the confirmation of our faith, I leave both opinions 
undecided. 


CHAPTER XXI. 


1. Anp the Lord visited Sarah as he 
had said, and the Lord did unto Sarah as 
he had spoken. 


2. For Sarah conceived, and bare 
Abraham a son in his old age, at the set 
time of which God had spoken to him. 


3. And Abraham called the name of 
his son that was born unto him, whom 
Sarah bare to him, Isaac. 

4, And Abraham circumcised his son 
Isaac being eight days old, as God had 
commanded him. 


5. And Abraham was an hundred 
years old, when his son Isaac was born 
unto him. 

6. And Sarah said, God hath made 


1. Porro Jehova visitavit Sa- 
rah, quemadmodum dixit: et 
fecit Jehova ipsi Sarah, quem- 
admodum loquutus erat. : 

2. Itaque concepit et peperit 
Sarah ipsi Abraham filium in 
senectute ejus, intempore quod 
illi dixerat Deus. 

3. Et vocavit Abraham no- 
men filii sui, qui natus erat ei, 
quem peperit ei Sarah, Ishac. 


4. Et circumcidit Abraham _ 


Ishac filium saum, filium octo 
dierum, quemadmodum pre- 
ceperat ei Deus. 

5. Abraham autem erat cen- 
tum annorum, quando natus 
est ei Ishac filius suus. 

6. Et dixit Sarah, Risum 








CHAP. XXI. 


me to laugh, so that all that hear will 
laugh with me. 

7. And she said, Who would have said 
unto Abraham, that Sarah should have 
given children suck ? for I have born him 
a son in his old age. 

8. And the child grew, and was wean- 
ed: and Abraham made a great feast the 
same day that Isaac was weaned. 


9. And Sarah saw the son of Hagar 
the Egyptian, which she had born unto 
Abraham, mocking. 

10. Wherefore shesaid unto Abraham, 
Cast out this bondwoman and her son: 
for the son of this bondwoman shall not 
be heir with my son, even with Isaac. 


11. And the thing was very grievous 
in Abraham’s sight because of his son. 


12. And God said unto Abraham, 
Let it not be grievous in thy sight be- 
cause of the lad, and because of thy 
bondwoman; in all that Sarah hath 
said unto thee, hearken unto her voice ; 
for in Isaac shall thy seed be called. 


13. And also of the son of the bond- 
woman will I make a nation, because he 
is thy seed. 

14. And Abraham rose up early in 
the morning, and took bread, and a bot- 
tle of water, and gave iz unto Hagar, 
putting z¢ on her shoulder, and the child, 
and sent her away: and she departed, 
and wandered in the wilderness of Beer- 
sheba. 

15. And the water was spent in the 
bottle, and she cast the child under one 
of the shrubs. 

16. And she went, and sat her down 
over against him a good way off, as it 
were a bowshot: for she said, Let me 
not see the death of the child. And she 
sat over against Aim, and lift up her 
voice, and wept. 

17. And God heard the voice of the 
lad; and the angel of God called to Ha- 
gar out of heaven, and said unto her, 
What aileth thee, Hagar? fear not; for 
God hath heard the voice of the lad 
where he is. 

18. Arise, lift up the lad, and hold 
him in thine hand; for I will make him 
a great nation. 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


535 


fecit mihi Deus: omnis qui 
audierit, ridebit mihi. 

7. Et dixit, Quis nuntiasset 
Abrahz lactare filios Sarah ? 
quia peperi filium in senectute 
ejus. 

8. Et crevit puer, et ablac- 
tatus est: et fecit Abraham 
convivium magnum in die qua 
ablactatus est Ishac. 

9. Et vidit Sarah filium Ha- 
gar Agyptix, quem peperit ipsi 
Abraham, ridentem. 

10. Et dixit ad Abraham, 
Kjice ancillam hanc et filium 
ejus: quia non hereditabit 
filius ancille hujus cum filio 
meo, cum Ishac. 

11. Et displicuit res valde in 
oculis Abraham, propter filium 
suum. 

12. Et dixit Deus ad Abra- 
ham, Ne displiceat in oculis 
tuis super puero, et super an- 
cilla tua: in omnibus que dix- 
erit tibi Sarah, audi vocem ejus: 
quia in Ishac vocabitur tibi 
semen. 

13. Et etiam filium ancille 
in gentem ponam, quia semen 
tuum est. 

14. Diluculo igitur surrexit 
Abraham, et tulit panem, et 
utrem aque, et dedit Hagar, 
et posuit super humerum ejus, 
et puerum: et dimisit eam, et 
perrexit, et erravit in deserto 
Beer-sebah. 

15. Et defecerunt aque de 
utre, et projecit puerum subter 
unam arborum. 

16. Et abiit, et sedit e re- 
gione, elongando se quantum 
est jactus arcus: quia dixit, 
Non videbo quando morietur 
puer : et sedit e regione, et ele- 
vavit vocem suam, et flevit. 

17. Et audivit Deus vocem 
pueri, et clamavit angelus Dei 
ad Hagar de ceelis, et dixit ei, 
Quid tibi Hagar? ne timeas: 
quia audivit Deus vocem pueri 
ex loco ubi est. 

18. Surge, tolle puerum, et 
tene manu tua eum: quia in 
gentem magnam ponam eum. 


536 


19. And God opened her eyes, and 
she saw a well of water; and she went, 
and filled the bottle with water, and 
gave the lad drink. 

20. And God was with the lad; and 
he grew, and dwelt in the wilderness, 
and became an archer. 

21. And he dwelt in the wilderness of 
Paran: and his mother took him a wife 
out of the land of Egypt. 

22. And it came to pass at that time, 
that Abimelech, and Phichol the chief 
captain of his host, spake unto Abra- 
ham, saying, God zs ’ with thee in all that 
thou doest: 

23. Now therefore swear unto me here 
by God, that thou wilt not deal falsely 
with me, nor with my son, nor with my 
son’s son: but according to the kindness 
that I have done unto thee, thou shalt 
do unto me, and to the land wherein 
thou hast sojourned. 

24. And Abraham said, I will swear. 


25. And Abraham reproved Abime- 
lech because of a well of water, which 
Abimelech’s servants had violently taken 
away 

26. "And Abimelech said, I wot not 
who hath done this thing: neither didst 
thou tell me, neither yet heard lofi, but 
to-day. 


27. And Abraham took sheep and 
oxen, and gave them unto Abimelech ; 
and both of them made a covenant. 


28. And Abraham set seven ewe- lambs 
of the flock by themselves. 

29. And Abimelech said unto Abra- 
ham, What mean these seven ewe-lambs 
which thou hast set by themselves ? 


80. And he said, For these seven ewe- 
lambs shalt thou take of my hand, that 
they may be a witness unto me, that I 
have digged this well. 

31. Wherefore he called that place 
Beer-sheba ; because there they sware 
both of them. 

32. Thus they made a covenant at 
Beer-sheba: then Abimelech rose up, 
and Phichol the chief captain of his host, 
and they returned into the land of the 
Philistines. 


COMMENTARY UPON 


CHAP. XXI. 


19. Tune aperuit Deus ocu- 
los ejus, et vidit puteum aque, 
et perrexit et implevit utrem 
aqua, et potum dedit puero. 

20. Et fuit Deus cum puero, 
et crevit, habitavitque in deser- 
to, et fuit jaculator sagittarius. 

21. Et habitavit in deserto 
Param, et accepit ei mater ejus 
uxorem de terra Agypti. 

22. Deinde fuit tempore illo, 
dixit A bimelech et Phicol prin- 
ceps exercitus ejus ad Abra- 
ham, dicendo, Deus tecum est 
in omnibus qu & tu facis : 

23. Nunc itaque jura mihi 
per Deum hic, si mentitus 
fueris mihi,! et filio meo, et 
nepoti meo: secundum mise- 
ricordiam, quam feci tecum, 
facies mecum, et cum terra, in 
qua peregrinatus es. 

24. Et dixit Abraham, Ego 
jurabo. 

25. Et increpayit Abraham 
ipsum Abimelech propter pu- 
teum aque, quem sie ade 
servi Abimelech. 

26. Et dixit Abimelech, 
Non novi quis fecerit hoc, ne- 
que etiam tu indicasti mihi, 
neque etiam ego audivi pree- 
terquam hodie. 

27. Et accepit Abraham pe- 
cudes et boves, et dedit ipsi 
Abimelech, et percusserunt 
ambo foedus. 

28. Et statuit Abraham sep- 
tem agnas pecorum seorsum. 

29. Et dixit Abimelech ad 
Abraham, Quid sunt septem 
agnee iste, quos statuisti seor- 
sum ? 

30. Et dixit, Quia septem 
agnas capies e manu mea: ut 
sit mihi in testimonium, quod 
foderim puteum hunce. 

31. Idcirco vocatus est locus 
ipse Beer-sebah: quia ibi jura- 
verant ambo. 

32. Percusserunt ergo foedus 
in Beer-sebah: et surrexit 
Abimelech, et Phicol princeps 
exercitus ejus, et reversi sunt 
in terram Pelisthim. 


1 Vel, si fefelleris, aut infideliter egeris. 


CHAP. XXI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 537 


33. And Abraham planted a grove in 38. Et plantavit nemus in 
Beer-sheba, and called there onthe name Beer-sebah, et invocavit ibi 


of the Lord, the everlasting God. nomen Jehove Dei sxculi. 
84. And Abraham sojourned in the 34. Et habitavit Abraham 
Philistines’ land many days. . in terra Pelisthim dies multos. 


1. And the Lord visited Sarah. In this chapter, not only is 
the nativity of Isaac related, but because, in his very birth, 
God has set before us a lively picture of his Church, Moses 
also gives a particular account of this matter. And, first, 
he says that God visited Sarah, as he had promised. Because 
all offspring flows from the kindness of God, as it is in the 
psalm, ‘The fruit of the womb is the gift of God; (Psalm 
exxvii. 3;) therefore the Lord is said, not without reason, 
to visit those, to whom he gives children. For although the 
foetus seems to be produced naturally, each from its own kind ; 
there is yet no fecundity in animals, except so far as the 
Lord puts forth his own power, to fulfil what he has said, 
“Increase and multiply.” But in the propagation of the 
human race, his special benediction is conspicuous; and, there- 
fore, the birth of every child is rightly deemed the effect of 
divine visitation. But Moses, in this place, looks higher, 
forasmuch as Isaac was born out of the accustomed course of 
nature. Therefore Moses here commends that secret and 
unwonted power of God, which is superior to the law of 
nature; and not improperly, since it is of great consequence 
for us to know that the gratuitous kindness of God reigned, 
as well in the origin, as in the progress of the Church; and 
that the sons of God were not otherwise born, than from his 
mere mercy. And this is the reason why he did not make 
Abraham a father, till his body was nearly withered. It is 
also to be noticed, that Moses declares the visitation which 
he mentions, to be founded upon promise; ‘ Jehovah visited 
Sarah, as he had promised.’ In these words he annexes the 
effect to its cause, in order that the special grace of God, of 
which an example is given in the birth of Isaac, might be the 
more perceptible. If he had barely said, that the Lord had 
respect unto Sarah, when she brought forth a son; some 
other cause might have been sought for. None, however, 


: 


1 Calvin here adds, ‘‘ Nam communis gignendi ratio, et vis illa quam 
Dominus hominibus indidit, in Abraham et ejus uxore cessaverat.” 


538 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXI. 


can doubt, that the promise, by which Isaac had been granted 
to his father Abraham, was gratuitous; since the child was 
the fruit of that adoption, which can be ascribed to nothing 
but the mere grace of God. Therefore, whoever wishes 
rightly and prudently to reflect upon the work of God, in the 
birth of Isaac, must necessarily begin with the promise. 
There is also great emphasis in the repetition, “ The Lord 
did unto Sarah as he had spoken.” For he thus retains his 
readers, as by laying his hand upon them, that they may 
pause in the consideration of so great a miracle. Meanwhile, 
Moses commends the faithfulness of God; as if he had said, 
he never feeds men with empty promises, nor is he less true 
in granting what he has promised, than he is liberal, and 
willing, in making the promise. 


2. She bare Abraham a son. This is said according to the 
accustomed manner of speaking; because the woman is 
neither the head of a family, nor brings forth, properly for 
herself, but for her husband. What follows, however, is 
more worthy of notice, “In his old age, at the set time,” 
which God had predicted: for the old age of Abraham does, 
not a little, illustrate the glory of the miracle. And now 
Moses, for the third time, recalls us to the word of God, that 
the constancy of his truth may always be present to our 
minds. And though the time had been predicted, alike to 
Abraham and to his wife, yet this honour is expressly attri- 
buted to the holy man; because the promise had been espe- 
cially given on his account. Both, however, are distinctly 
mentioned in the context. 

3. And Abraham called the name. Moses does not mean 
that Abraham was the inventor of the name; but that he 
adhered to the name which before had been given by the 
angel. This act of obedience, however, was worthy of com- 
mendation, since he not only ratified the word of God, but 
also executed his office as God’s minister. For, as a herald, 
he proclaimed to all, that which the angel had committed to 


his trust. 


4, And Abraham circumcised his son. Abraham pursued 


CHAP. XXI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 539 


his uniform tenor of obedience, in not sparing his own son. 
For, although it would be painful for him to wound the 
tender body of the infant ; yet, setting aside all human affec- 
tion, he obeys the word of God. And Moses records that he 
did as the Lord had commanded him; because there is 
nothing of greater importance, than to take the pure word 
of God for our rule, and not to be wise above what is lawful. 
This submissive spirit is especially required, in reference to 
sacraments; lest men should either invent any thing for them- 
selves, or should transfer those things which are commanded 
by the Lord, to any use they please. We see, indeed, how 
inordinately the humours of men here prevail; inasmuch as 
they have dared to devise innumerable sacraments. And to 
go no further for an example, whereas God has delivered only 
two sacraments to the Christian Church, the Papists boast 
that they have seven. As if, truly, it were in their power to 
forge promises of salvation, which they might sanction with 
signs imagined by themselves. But it were superfluous to 
relate with how many figments the sacraments have been 
polluted by them. This certainly is manifest, that there is 
nothing about which they are less careful, than to observe 
what the Lord has commanded. 


5. And Abraham was an hundred years old. Moses again 
records the age of Abraham, the better to excite the minds 
of his readers to a consideration of the miracle. And although 
mention is made only of Abraham, let us yet remember that 
he is, in this place, set before us, not as a man of lust, but as 
the husband of Sarah, who has obtained, through her, a law- 
ful seed, in extreme old age, when the strength of both had 
failed. For the power of God was chiefly conspicuous in this, 
that when their marriage had been fruitless more than sixty 
years, suddenly they obtain offspring.’ Sarah, truly, in order 
to make amends for the doubt to which she had given way, 
now exultingly proclaims the kindness of God, with becoming 
praises. And first, she says, that God had given her occasion 
of joy; not of common joy, but of such as should cause all 


' « Quod quum ultra sexaginta annos sterile illis fuisset conjugium, 
effcetis jam et semimortuis, subito nata est prolis.” 


540 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XXI. 


men to congratulate her. Secondly, for the purpose of am- 
plification, she assumes the character of an astonished inquirer, 
‘Who would have told this to Abraham?’ Some explain 
the clause in question, ‘ will laugh at me,’ as if Sarah had said, 
with shame, that she should be a proverb to the common 
people. But the former sense is more suitable; namely, 
‘Whosoever shall hear it, will laugh with me ; that is, for the 
sake of congratulating me. 


7. Who would have said unto Abraham, that Sarah should 
have given children suck? I understand the future tense to 
be here put for the subjunctive mood. And the meaning is, 
that such a thing would never have entered into the mind of 
any one. Whence she concludes, that God alone was the 
Author of it ; and she now condemns herself for ingratitude, 
because she had been so slow in giving credit to the angel 
who had told her of it. Now, since she speaks of children 
in the plural number, the Jews, according to their custom, 
invent the fable, that whereas a rumour was spread, that the 
child was supposititious, a great numberof infants were brought 
by the neighbours, in order that Sarah, by suckling them, 
might prove herself a mother. As if, truly, this might not 
easily be known, when they saw Isaac hanging on her breast.! 
But the Jews are doubly foolish and infatuated, as not per- 
ceiving, that this form of expression is of exactly the same 
import, as if Sarah had called herself a nurse. Meanwhile, 
it is to be observed, that Sarah joins the office of nurse with 
that of mother; for the Lord does not in vain prepare nutri- 
ment for children, in their mothers’ bosoms, before they are 
born. But those on whom he confers the honour of mothers, 
he, in this way, constitutes nurses; and they who deem it a 
hardship to nourish their own offspring, break, as far as they — 
are able, the sacred bond of nature. If disease, or anything 
of that kind, is the hinderance, they have a just excuse; but 
for mothers voluntarily, and for their own pleasure, to avoid 
the trouble of nursing, and thus to make themselves only 
half-mothers, is a shameful corruption, 


1 Tt is here added, ‘* Ac non clarior, et in promptu fuerit demonstratio, 
si lac digitis expressum ante oculos fluxisset.” 


CHAP. XXI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 5A 


8. And the child grew, and was weaned. Moses now begins 
to relate the manner in which Ishmael was rejected from the 
family of Abraham, in order that Isaac alone might hold the 
place of the lawful son and heir. It seems, indeed, at first 
sight, something frivolous, that Sarah, being angry about a 
mere nothing, should have stirred up strife in the family. 
But Paul teaches, that a sublime mystery is here proposed to 
us, concerning the perpetual state of the Church. (Gal. iv. 
21.) And, truly, if we attentively consider the persons men- 
tioned, we shall regard it as no trivial affair, that the father 
of all the faithful is divinely commanded to eject his first-born 
son; that Ishmael, although a partaker of the same circum- 
cision, becomes so transformed into a strange nation, as to be 
no more reckoned among the blessed seed; that, in appear- 
ance, the body of the Church is so rent asunder, that only 
one-half of it remains; that Sarah, in expelling the son of 
her bondmaid from the house, claims the entire inheritance 
for Isaac alone. Wherefore, if due attention be applied in 
the reading of this history, the very mystery of which Paul 
treats, spontaneously presents itself. 

And Abraham made a great feast. It is asked, why he did 
not rather make it on the day of Isaac’s birth, or circum- 
cision? The subtile reasoning of Augustine, that the day of 
Jsaac’s weaning was celebrated, in order that we may learn, 
from his example, no more to be children in understanding, 
is too constraimed. What others say, has no greater con- 
sistency ; namely, that Abraham took a day which was not 
then in common use, in order that he might not imitate the 
manners of the Gentiles. Indeed, it is very possible, that 
he may also have celebrated the birth-day of his son, with 
honour and joy. But special mention is made of this feast, 
for another reason ; namely, that then, the mocking of Ish- 
mael was discovered. For I do not assent to the conjecture of 
those who think that a new history is here begun; and that 
Sarah daily contended with this annoyance, until, at length, she 
purged the house by the ejection of the impious mocker. It is 
indeed probable, that, on other days also, Ishmael had been 
elated by similar petulance ; yet I do not doubt but Moses ex- 
pressly declares, that his contempt was manifested toward Sarah, 


542 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXI, 


at that solemn assembly, and that from that time, it was pub- 
licly proclaimed. Now Moses does not speak disparagingly of 
the pleasures of that feast, but rather takes their lawfulness 
for granted. For it is not his design to prohibit holy men 
from inviting their friends, to a common participation of en- 
joyment, so that they, jointly giving thanks to God, may 
feast with greater hilarity than usual. Temperance and 
sobriety are indeed always to be observed; and care must be 
taken, both that the provision itself be frugal, and the guests 
moderate. I would only say, that God does not deal so aus- 
terely with us, as not to allow us, sometimes, to entertain our 
friends liberally ; as when nuptials are to be celebrated, or 
when children are born to us. Abraham, therefore, made a 
great feast, that is,an extraordinary one; because he was 
not accustomed thus sumptuously to furnish his table every 
day; yet this was an abundance which by no means degene- 
rated into luxury. Besides, while he was thus liberal in 
entertaining his friends according to his power, he also had 
sufficient for unknown guests, as we have seen before. 


9. And Sarah saw the son of Hagar. As the verb “to 
laugh” has a twofold signification among the Latins, so also 
the Hebrews use, both ina good and evil sense, the verb from 
which the participle pnxio (metsachath) is derived. That it 
was not a childish and innoxious laughter, appears from the 
indignation of Sarah. It was, therefore, a malignant expres- 
sion of scorn, by which the forward youth manifested his 
contempt for his infant brother. And it is to be observed, 
that the epithet which is here applied to Ishmael, and the 
name Isaac, are both derived from the same root. Isaac was, 
to his father and others, the occasion of holy and lawful 
laughter; whence also, the name was divinely imposed upon 
him. Ishmael turns the blessing of God, from which such 
joy flowed, into ridicule. Therefore, as an impious mocker, 
he stands opposed to his brother Isaac. Both (so to speak) 
are the sons of laughter: but in a very different sense. Isaac 
brought laughter with him from his mother’s womb, since he 
bore,—engraven upon him,—the certain token of God’s 
grace. He therefore so exhilarates his father’s house, that 


OHAP, XXI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 543 


joy breaks forth in thanksgiving ; but Ishmael, with canine 
and profane laughter, attempts to destroy that holy joy of 
faith. And there is no doubt that his manifest impiety 
against God, betrayed itself under this ridicule. He had 
reached an age at which he could not, by any means, be ig- 
norant of the promised favour, on account of which his father 
Abraham was transported with so great joy: and yet—proud- 
ly confident in himself—he insults, in the person of his brother, 
both God and his word, as well as the faith of Abraham. 
Wherefore it was not without cause that Sarah was so vehe- 
mently angry with him, that she commanded him to be 
driven into exile. For nothing is more grievous to a holy 
mind, than to see the grace of God exposed to ridicule. And 
this is the reason why Paul calls his laughter persecution ; 
saying, ‘ He who was after the flesh persecuted the spiritual 
seed.’ (Gal. iv. 29.) Was it with sword or violence? Nay, 
but with the scorn of the virulent tongue, which does not 
injure the body, but pierces into the very soul. Moses might 
indeed have aggravated his crime by a multiplicity of words ; 
but I think that he designedly spake thus concisely, in order 
to render the petulance with which Ishmael ridicules the word 
of God the more detestable. 


10. Cast out this bondwoman. Not only is Sarah exaspe- 
rated against the transgressor, but she seems to act more 
imperiously towards her husband than was becoming in a 
modest wife. Peter shows, that when, on a previous occasion, 
she called Abraham lord, she did not do so feignedly ; since he 
proposes her, as an example of voluntary subjection, to pious 
and chaste matrons. (1 Pet. i. 6.) But now, she not only 
usurps the government of the house, by calling her husband 
to order, but commands him whom she ought to reverence, 
to be obedient to her will. Here, although I do not deny 
that Sarah, being moved by womanly feelings, exceeded the 
bounds of moderation, I yet do not doubt, both that her 
tongue and mind were governed by a secret impulse of the 
Spirit, and that this whole affair was directed by the provi- 
dence of God. Without controversy, she was the minister 
of great and tremendous judgment. And Paul adduces this 


544 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXI. 


expression, not as a futile reproach, which an enraged woman 
had poured forth, but as a celestial oracle. But although she 
sustains a higher character than that of a private woman, yet 
she does not take from her husband his power; but makes 
him the lawful director of the ejection. 


11. And the thing was very grievous in Abraham's sight. 
Although Abraham had been already assured, by many oracles, 
that the blessed seed should proceed from Isaac only; yet, 
under the influence of paternal affection, he could not bear 
that Ishmael should be cut off, for the purpose of causing the 
inheritance to remain entire to him, to whom it had been 
divinely granted; and thus, by mingling two races, he en- 
deavoured, as far as he was able, to confound the distinction 
which God had made. It may truly seem absurd, that the 
servant of God should thus be carried away by a blind im- 
pulse: but God thus deprives him of judgment, not only to 
humble him, but also to testify to all ages, that the dispensing 
of his grace depends upon his own will alone. Moreover, in 
order that the holy man may bear, with greater equanimity, 
the departure of his son, a double consolation is promised 
him. For, first, God recalls to his memory, the promise made 
concerning Isaac ; as if he would say, it is enough, and more 
than enough, that Isaac, in whom the spiritual benediction 
remains entire, is left. Ee then promises, that he will take 
care of Ishmael, though exiled from his paternal home; and 
that a posterity shall arise from him which shall constitute a 
whole nation. But I have explained above, on the seven- 
teenth chapter, what is the meaning of the expression, ‘ The 
seed shall be called in Isaac.’ And Paul, (Rom. ix. 8,) by 
way of interpretation, uses the word reckoned, or imputed.’ 
And it is certain that, by this method, the other son was cut 
off from the family of Abraham; so that he should no more 
have a name among his posterity. For God, having severed 
Ishmael, shows that the whole progeny of Abraham should 
flow from one head. He promises also to Ishmael, that he 
shall be a nation, but estranged from the Church; so that 


1“ Ponit verbum royiZecdas, hoc est, censeri vel reputari.” 


CHAP. XXI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 545 


the condition of the brothers shall, in this respect, be differ- 
ent; that one is constituted the father of a spiritual people, 
to the other is given a carnal seed. Whence Paul justly in- 
fers, that not all who are the seed of Abraham are true and 
genuine sons ; but they only who are born of the Spirit. For 
as Isaac himself became the legitimate son by a gratuitous 
promise, so the same grace of God makes a difference among 
his descendants. But because we have sufficiently treated 
of the various sons of Abraham, on the seventeenth chapter, 
the subject is now more sparingly alluded to. 


12. In all that Sarah hath said unto thee. 1 have just said, 
that although God used the ministry of Sarah in so great 
a matter, it was yet possible that she might fail in her method 
of acting. He now commands Abraham to hearken unto his 
wife, not because he approves her disposition, but because he 
will have the work, of which he is Himself the Author, 
accomplished. And he thus shows that his designs are not 
to be subjected to any common rule, especially when the 
salvation of the Church is concerned. For he purposely in- 
verts the accustomed order of nature, in order that he may 
prove himself to be the Author and the Perfecter of Isaac’s 
vocation. But because I have before declared, that this 
history is more profoundly considered by Paul, the sum of 
it is here briefly to be collected. In the first place, he says, 
that what is here read, was written allegorically : not that he 
wishes all histories, indiscriminately, to be tortured to an 
allegorical sense, as Origen does; who, by hunting every where 
for allegories, corrupts the whole Scripture ; and others, too 
eagerly emulating his example, have extracted smoke out of 
light. And not only has the simplicity of Scripture been 
vitiated, but the faith has been almost subverted, and the 
door opened to many foolish dotings. The design of Paul 
was, to raise the minds of the pious to consider the secret 
work of God, in this history; as if he had said, What Moses 
relates concerning the house of Abraham, belongs to the 
spiritual kingdom of Christ ; since, certainly, that house was a 
lively image of the Church. This, however, is the allegorical 
similitude which Paul commends. Whereas two sonswere born 

VOL. I. 2M’ 


546 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXI. 


to Abraham, the one by a bondmaid, the other by a free 
woman ; he infers, that there are two kinds of persons born 
in the Church; the faithful, whom God endues with the 
Spirit of adoption, that they may enjoy the inheritance; and 
hypocritical disciples, who feign themselves to be what they 
are not, and usurp, for a time, a name and place among the 
sons of God. He therefore teaches, that there are certain 
who are conceived and born in a servile manner; but others, 
as from a free-born mother. He then proceeds to say, that 
the sons of Hagar are they who are generated by the servile 
doctrine of the Law; but that they who, having embraced, 
by faith, gratuitous adoption, are born through the doctrine 
of the Gospel, are the sons of the free woman. At length he 
descends to another similitude, in which he compares Hagar 
with mount Sinai, but Sarah with the heavenly Jerusalem. 
And although I here allude in few words to those things, 
which my readers will find copiously expounded by me, in the 
fourth chapter to the Galatians; yet, in this short explanation, 
it is made perfectly clear what Paul designs to teach. We 
know that the true sons of God are born of the incorruptible 
seed of the word: but when the Spirit, which gives life to 
the doctrine of the Law and the Prophets, is taken away, 
and the dead letter alone remains, then that seed is so cor- | 
rupted, that only adulterous sons are born in a state of sla- 
very ; yet because they are apparently born of the word of 
God, though corrupted, they are, in a sense, the sons of God. 
Meanwhile, none are lawful heirs, except those whom the 
Church brings forth into liberty, being conceived by the in- 
corruptible seed of the gospel. I have said, however, that in 
these two persons is represented the perpetual condition of 
the Church. For hypocrites not only mingle with the sons of 
God in the Church, but despise them, and proudly appropriate 
to themselves all the rights and honours of the Church. And 
as Ishmael, inflated with the vain title of primogeniture, har- 
assed his brother Isaac with his taunts; so these men, relying on 
their own splendour, reproachfully assail and ridicule the true 
faith of the simple: because, by arrogating all things to them- 
selves, they leave nothing to the grace of God. Hence we are 
admonished, that none have a well-grounded confidence of sal- 





CHAP. XXI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 547 


vation, but they who, being called freely, regard the mercy 
of God as their whole dignity. Again, the Spirit furnishes 
the consciences of the pious with strong and effective weapons 
against the ferociousness of those who, under a false pretext, 
boast that they are the Church. We see that it is no new 
thing, for persons who are nothing but hypocrites, to occupy 
the chief place in the Church of God. Wherefore, while at 
this day, the Papists proudly exult, there is no reason why 
we should be disturbed by their empty and inflated boasts. 
As to their glorying in their long succession, it just means as 
much as if Ishmael were proclaiming himself the first-born. . 
It is, therefore, necessary to discriminate between the true 
and the hypocritical Church. Paul describes a mark, which 
they are never able, with their cavils, to obliterate. For as 
large bottles are broken with a slight blast; so by this single 
word, all their glory is extinguished, ‘the sons of the hand- 
maid shall not be eternal inheritors. In the meantime, their 
insolence is to be patiently borne, so long as God shall loosen 
the rein to their tyranny. For the Apostles, formerly, were 
oppressed by the Jewish hypocrites of their age, with the same 
reproaches which these men now cast upon us. In the same 
way, Ishmael triumphed over Isaac, as. if he had obtained 
the victory. Wherefore, we must not wonder, if our own age 
also has its Ishmaelites. But lest such indignity should 
break our spirits, let this consolation perpetually occur to us, 
that they who hold the pre-eminence in the Church, will not 
always remain within it. 


14. And Abraham rose up early. How painful was the 
wound, which the ejection of his first-born son inflicted upon 
the mind of the holy man, we may gather from the double 
consolation with which God mitigated his grief. He sends 
his son into banishment, just as if he were tearing out his 
own bowels. But being accustomed to obey God, he 
brings into subjection the paternal love, which he is not 
able wholly to cast aside. ‘This is the true test of faith and 
piety, when the faithful are so far compelled to deny them- 
selves, that they even resign the very affections of their 
original nature, which are neither evil nor vicious in them- 


548 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXI. 


selves, to the will of God. There is no doubt that, during 
the whole night, he had been tossed with various cares; that 
he had a variety of internal conflicts, and endured severe 
torments; yet he arose early in the morning, to hasten his 
separation from his child; since he knew that it was the 
will of God. . 
And took bread, and a bottle of water. Moses intimates, not 
only that Abraham committed his son to the care of his 
mother, but that he relinquished his own paternal right over 
him; for it was necessary for this son to be alienated, that 
he might not afterwards be accounted the seed of Abraham. 
But with what a slender provision does he endow his wife 
and her son? He places a flagon of water and bread upon 
her shoulder. Why does he not, at least, load an ass with a 
moderate supply of food? Why does he not add one of his 
servants, of which his house contained plenty, as a com- 
panion? Truly either God shut his eyes, that, what he 
would gladly have done, might not come into his mind; or 
Abraham limited her provision, in order that she might not go 
far from his house. For doubtless he would prefer to have 
them near himself, for the purpose of rendering them such 
assistance as they would need. Meanwhile, God designed 
that the banishment of Ishmael should be thus severe and 
sorrowful; in order that, by his example, he might strike 
terror into the proud, who, being intoxicated with present gifts, 
trample under foot, in their haughtiness, the very grace to 
which they are indebted for all things. Therefore he brought 
the mother and child to a distressing issue. Yor after they 
have wandered into the desert, the water fails; and the 
mother departs from her son; which was a token of despair. 
Such was the reward of the pride, by which they had been 
vainly inflated. It had been their duty humbly to embrace 
the grace of God offered to all people, in the person of Isaac: 
but they impiously spurned him whom God had exalted to 
the highest honour. The knowledge of God’s gifts ought to 
have formed their minds to modesty. And because nothing 
was more desirable for them, than to retain some corner in 
- Abraham’s house, they ought not to have shrunk from any 
kind of subjection, for the sake of so great a benefit: God now 





CHAP. XXI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 549 


exacts from them the punishment, which they had deserved, 
by their ingratitude. 


17. God heard the voice of the lad. Moses had said before 
that Hagar wept : how is it then, that, disregarding her tears, 
God only hears the voice of the Jad? If we should say, that 
the mother did not deserve to receive a favourable answer to 
her prayers; her son, certainly, was in no degree more 
worthy. For, as to the supposition of some, that they both 
were brought to repentance by this chastisement, it is but an 
uncertain conjecture. I leave their repentance, of which I 
can see no sign, to the judgment of God. The cry of the boy 
was heard, as I understand it, not because he had prayed in 
faith; but because God, mindful of his own promise, was 
inclined to have compassion upon them. For Moses does not 
say, that their vows and sighs were directed towards heaven ; 
it is rather to be believed, that, in bewailing their miseries, 
they did not resort to divine help. But God, in assisting 
them, had respect, not to what they desired of him, but to what 
he had promised to Abraham, concerning Ishmael. In this 
sense Moses seems to say that the voice of the boy was heard ; 
namely, because he was the son of Abraham. 

What aileth thee, Hagar? The angel reproves the ingrati- 
tude of Hagar ; because, when reduced to the greatest straits, 
she does not reflect on God’s former kindness toward her, in 
similar danger; so that, as one who had found him to be a 
deliverer, she might again cast herself upon his faithfulness. 
Nevertheless, the angel assures her that a remedy is prepared 
for her sorrows, if only she will seek it. Therefore in the 
clause, “ What aileth thee ?”? is a reproof for having tor- 
mented herself in vain, by confused lamentation. When he 
afterwards says, “ Fear not,” he invites and exhorts her to 
hope for mercy. But what, we may ask, is the meaning of 
the expression, which he adds, “where he is?”? It may seem 


1 “ Quid tibi est Agar?” 

2 “Ergo in particula, ‘ Quid agis?’ objurgatio est.” The expression, 
* Quid ayis,” does not occur in the text, but is only another form in 
which Calvin puts ‘‘ Quid tibi est ?”—£d. 

3 “ God hath heard the voice of the lad where he is.” English ver- 


- sion. Calvin has it, ‘‘ex loco ubi est.” 


550 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXI. 


that there is a suppressed antithesis between the place where 
he now was, and the house of Abraham; so that Hagar might 
conclude, that although she was wandering in the desert as 
an exile from the sanctuary of God, yet she was not entirely 
forsaken by God; since she had him for a Leader in her 
exile. Or else, the phrase is emphatical; implying, that, 
though the boy is cast into solitude, and counted as one for- 
saken, he nevertheless has God nigh unto him. And thus the 
angel, to relieve the despair of the anxious mother, commands 
her to return to the place where she had laid down her son. 
For (as is usual in desperate circumstances) she had become 
stupified through grief; and would have lain as one lifeless, 
unless she had been roused by the voice of the angel. We 
perceive, moreover, in this example, how truly it is said, 
that when father and mother forsake us, the Lord will take 
us up. 


18. Arise, lift up the lad. In order that she might have 
more courage to bring up her son, God confirms to her what 
he had before often promised to Abraham. Indeed, nature 
itself prescribes to mothers what they owe to their children ; 
but, as I have lately hinted, all the natural feelings of Hagar — 
would have been destroyed, unless God had revived her, by 
inspiring new confidence, to address herself with fresh vigour 
to the fulfilment of her maternal office. With respect to the 
fountain or “ well,”’ some think it suddenly sprung up. But 
since Moses says, that the eyes of Hagar were opened, and not 
that the earth was opened or dug up; I rather incline to the 
opinion, that, having been previously astonished with grief, she 
did not discern what was plainly before her eyes; but now, at 
length, after God has restored her vision, she begins to see 
it. And it is worthy of especial notice, that when God leaves’ 
us destitute of his superintendence, and takes away his grace 
from us, we are as much deprived of all the aids which are 
close at hand, as if they were removed to the greatest distance. 
Therefore we must ask, not only that he would bestow upon 


1 Ver. 19. ‘‘ God opened her eyes, and she saw a well of water.” “ Quod 
ad fontem pertinet,” are Calvin’s words; but in his version it stands, 
‘‘puteum aque,” a well of water.—E£d. 


CHAP. XXI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 551 


_ us such things as will be useful to us, but that he will also 
impart prudence, to enable us to use them; otherwise, it will 
be our lot to faint, with closed eyes, in the midst of fountains. 


20. And God was with the lad. ‘There are many ways in 
which God is said to be present with men. He is present 
with his elect, whom he governs by the special grace of his 
Spirit ; he is present also, sometimes, as it respects external 
life, not only with his elect, but also with strangers, in grant- 
ing them some signal benediction : as Moses, in this place, 
commends the extraordinary grace by which the Lord declares 
that his promise is not void, since he pursues Ishmael with 
favour, because he was the son of Abraham. Hence, how- 
ever, this general doctrine is inferred ; that it is to be entirely 
ascribed to God that men grow up, that they enjoy the light 
and common breath of heaven, and that the earth supplies 
them with food. Only it must be remembered, the prosperity 
of Ishmael flowed from this cause, that an earthly blessing 


_ was promised him, for the sake of his father Abraham. In 


saying, that Hagar took a wife for Ishmael, Moses has respect 
to civil order; for since marriage forms a principal part of 
human life, it is right that, in contracting it, children should 
be subject to their parents, and should obey their counsel. 
This order, which nature prescribes and dictates, was, as we 
see, observed by Ishmael, a wild man in the barbarism of the 
desert ; for he was subject to his mother in marrying a wife. 
Whence we perceive, what a prodigious monster was the 
Pope, when he dared to overthrow this sacred right of nature. 
To this is also added the impudent boast of authorising a 
wicked contempt of parents, in honour of holy wedlock. 
Moreover, the Egyptian wife was a kind of prelude to. the 
future dissension between the Israelites and the Ishmaelites. 


22. And it came to pass at that time. Moses relates, that 
this covenant was entered into between Abraham and Abime- 
lech, for the purpose of showing, that after various agitations, 
some repose was, at length, granted to the holy man. He 
had been constrained, as a wanderer, and without a fixed 
abode, to move his tent from place to place, during sixty 


552 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXI. 


years. But although God would have him to be a sojourner 
even unto death, yet, under king Abimelech, he granted him 
a quiet habitation. And it is the design of Moses to show, 
how it happened, that he occupied one place longer than he 
was wont. ‘The circumstance of time is to be noted; namely, 
soon after he had dismissed his son. For it seems that his 
great trouble was immediately followed by this consolation, 
not only that he might have some relaxation from continued 
inconveniences, but that he might be the more cheerful, and 
might the more quietly occupy himself in the education of 
his little son Isaac. It is however certain, that the covenant 
was not, in every respect, an occasion of joy to him; for he 
perceived that he was tried by indirect methods, and that 
there were many persons in that region, to whom he was 
disagreeable and hateful. The king, indeed, openly avowed 
his own suspicions of him: it was, however, the highest 
honour, that the king of the place should go, of his own ac- 
cord, to a stranger, to enter into a covenant with him. Yet 
it may be asked, whether this covenant was made on just and 
equal conditions, as is the custom among allies? I certainly 
do not doubt, that Abraham freely paid due honour to the 
king; nor is it probable that the king intended to detract 
anything from his own dignity, in order to confer it upon 
Abraham. What, then, did hedo? Truly, while he allowed 
Abraham a free dwelling-place, he would yet hold him bound 
to himself by an oath. 

God is with thee in all that thou doest. He commences in 
friendly and bland terms; he does not accuse Abraham, nor 
complain that he had neglected any duty towards himself, 
but declares that he earnestly desires his friendship; still the 
conclusion is, that he wishes to be on his guard against him. 
It may then be asked, Whence had he this suspicion, or fear, 
first of a stranger, and, secondly, of an honest and moderate 
man? In the first place, we know that the heathen are often 
anxious without cause, and are alarmed even in seasons of 
quiet. Next, Abraham was a man deserving of reverence ; 
the number of servants in his house seemed like a little nation; 
and there is no doubt, that his virtues would acquire for him 
great dignity; hence it was, that Abimelech suspected his 


CHAP. XXI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 553 


power. but whereas Abimelech had a private consideration 
for himself in this matter; the Lord, who best knows how 
to direct events, provided, in this way, for the repose of his 
servant. We may, however, learn, from the example of 
Abraham, if, at any time, the gifts of God excite the 
enmity of the men of this world against us, to conduct our- 
selves with such moderation, that they may find nothing 
amiss in us. 


23. That thou wilt not deal falsely with me.' Literally it is, 
‘If thou shalt lie ;’ for, among the Hebrews, a defective form 
of speech is common in taking oaths, which is to be thus ex- 
plained : ‘If thou shouldst break the promise given to me, we 
call upon God to sit as Judge between us, and to show him- 
self the avenger of perjury.’ But ‘to lie,’ some here take for 
dealing unjustly and fraudulently; others for failing in the con- 
ditions of the covenant. I simply understand it as if it were 
said, ‘Thou shalt do nothing perfidiously with me or with 
my descendants.’ Abimelech also enumerates his own acts of 
kindness, the more effectually to exhort Abraham to exercise 
good faith; for, seeing he had been humanely treated, Abime- 
lech declares it would be an act of base ingratitude if he did 
not, in return, endeavour to repay the benefits he had received. 
The Hebrew word “4DNM, (chesed,) signifies to deal gently or 
kindly with any one.? For Abimelech did not come to im- 
plore compassion of Abraham, but rather to assert his own 
royal authority, as will appear from the context. 


24. And Abraham said, I will swear. Although he had the 
stronger claim of right, he yet refuses nothing which belonged 
to the duty of a good and moderate man. And truly, since 
it is becoming in the sons of God to be freely ready for every 
duty ; nothing is more absurd, than for them to appear re- 


1“ Si mentitus fueris mihi.”"—“‘ If thou-shalt have lied unto me.” In 
the margin Calvin gives, ‘‘ Si fefelleris, aut infideliter egeris.”—‘‘ If thou 
shalt have deceived, or have acted unfaithfully.” See margin of English 
version.— Ed. 

2 “*Secundum misericordiam quam feci tecum facies mecum,” is Cal- 
vin’s version; and the comment is, ‘‘ Misericordiam facere cum aliquo 
Hebreis significat clementer et benigne eum tractare.”—Ed, 


554. COMMENTARY UPON CIPAP, XXI. 


luctant and morose, when what is just is required of them. 
He did not refuse to swear, because he knew it to be lawful, 
that covenants should be ratified between men, in the sacred 
name of God. In short, we see Abraham willingly submit- | 
ting himself to the laws of his vocation. 


25. And Abraham reproved Abimelech. This complaint 
seems to be unjust; for, if he had been injured, why did 
he not resort to the ordinary remedy ? He knew the king to 
be humane, to have some seed of piety, and to have treated 
himself courteously and honourably ; why then does he doubt 
that he will prove the equitable defender of his right? If, 
indeed, he had chosen rather to smother the injury received, 
than to be troublesome to the king, why does he now impute 
the fault to him, as if he had been guilty ? Possibly, however, 
Abraham might know that the injury had been done, through 
the excessive forbearance of the king. We may assuredly 
infer, both from his manners and his disposition, that he did 
not expostulate without cause ; and hence the moderation of 
the holy man is evident ; because, when deprived of the use 
of water, found by his own industry and labour, he does not 
contend, as the greatness of the injury would have justified 
him in doing; for this was just as if the inhabitants of the — 
place had made an attempt upon his life. But though he 
patiently bore so severe an injury, yet when, beyond ex- 
pectation, the occasion of taking security is offered, he guards - 
himself from future aggression. We also see how severely 
the Lord exercised Abraham, as soon as he appeared to be 
somewhat more at ease, and had obtained a little alleviation. 
Certainly, it was not a light trial, to be compelled to contend 
for water ; and not for water which was public property, but 
for that of a well, which he himself had digged. 


27. And Abraham took sheep. Hence it appears that the 
covenant made, was not such as is usually entered into be- 
tween equals: for Abraham considers his own position, and in 
token of subjection, offers a gift, from his flocks, to king Gerar; 
for, what the Latins call paying tax or tribute, and what we 





CHAP. XXI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 555 


eall doing homage, the Hebrews call offering gifts... And 
truly Abraham does not wait till something is forcibly, and 
with authority, extorted from him by the king; but, by a 
voluntary giving of honour, anticipates him, whom he knows 
to have dominion over the place. It is too well known, how 
great a desire of exercising authority prevails among men. 
Hence, the greater praise is due to the modesty of Abraham, 
who not only abstains from what belongs to another man ; 
but even offers, uncommanded, what, in his own mind, 
he regards as due to another, in virtue of his office. A 
further question however arises; since Abraham knew that 
the dominion over the land had been divinely committed 
to him, whether it was lawful for him to profess a sub- 
jection by which he acknowledged another as lord? But 
the solution is easy, because the time of entering into 
possession had not yet arrived; for he was lord, only 
in expectation, while, in fact, he was a pilgrim. Where- 
fore, he acted rightly in purchasing a habitation, till the 
_ time should come, when what had been promised-to him, 
should be given to his posterity. Thus, soon afterwards, as 
we shall see, he paid a price for his wife’s sepulchre. In 
short, until he should be placed, by the hand of God, in 
legitimate authority over the land, he did not scruple to treat 
with the inhabitants of the place, that he might dwell among 
them by permission, or by the payment of a price. 


28. And Abraham set seven ewe-lambs of the flock by them- 
selves. Moses recites another chief point of the covenant; 
namely, that Abraham made express provision for himself 
respecting the well, that he should have free use of its water. 
And he placed in the midst seven lambs, that the king being 
presented with the honorary gift, might approve and ratify 
the digging of the well. For the inhabitants might provoke 
a controversy, on the ground that it was not lawful fora 
private man, and a stranger, to dig a well; but now, when 
the public authority of the king intervened, Abraham’s peace 
was consulted, that no one might disturb him. Many under- 


t « Num pro eo quod dicunt Latini, Pendere vectigal vel tributum, et 
Gallice dicimus, Faire hommage, Hebrei dicunt Munera offerre.” 


556 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXI. 


stand lambs here to mean pieces of money coined in the form 
of lambs, but since mention has previously been made of 
sheep and oxen, and Moses now immediately subjoins that 
seven lambs are placed apart, it is absurd, in this connection, 
to speak of money. 


31. Wherefore he called that place Beer-sheba. Moses has 
once already called the place by this name, but proleptically. 
Now, however, he declares when, and for what reason, the 
name was given; namely, because there both he and Abime- 
lech had sworn; therefore I translate the term ‘ the well of 
swearing. Others translate it ‘the well of seven’ But 
Moses plainly derives the word from swearing; nor is it of 
any consequence that the pronupciation slightly varies from 
grammatical correctness, which in proper names is not very 
nicely observed. In fact, Moses does not restrict the etymo- 
logy to the well, but comprises the whole covenant. I do not, 
however, deny that Moses might allude to the number seven. 


33. And Abraham planted a grove. It hence appears that 
more rest was granted to Abraham, after the covenant was 
entered into, than he had hitherto enjoyed ; for now he begins 
to plant trees, which is a sign of a tranquil and fixed habita- 
tion ; for we never before read that he planted a single shrub. 
Wherefore, we see how far his condition was improved, be- 
cause he was permitted to lead (as I may say) a settled life. 
The assertion, that he “called on the name of the Lord,’ I 
thus interpret; he instituted anew the solemn worship of 
God, in order to testify his gratitude. Therefore God, after 
he had led his servant through continually winding paths, 
gave to him some relaxation in his extreme oldage. And he 
sometimes so deals with his faithful people, that when they 
have been tossed by various storms, he at length permits them 
to breathe freely. As it respects calling upon God, we know 


1 As the word yay means both an oath and the number seven, room is 
left for this difference of interpretation. Calvin seems, however, to allude 
to a notion not uncommon among learned men, that as oaths were often 
made before seven witnesses, which perhaps the seven lambs represented, 
Abraham might have this number as well as the oath in his mind, when 
he called the well Beer-sheba.—£d. 


CHAP. XXII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 5d7 


that Abraham, wherever he went, never neglected this 
religious duty. Nor was he deterred by dangers from pro- 
fessing himself a worshipper of the true God; although, on 
this account, he was hateful to his neighbours. But as his 
conveniences for dwelling in the land increased, he became 
the more courageous in professing the worship of God. And 
because he now lived more securely under the protection of the 
king, he perhaps wished to bear open testimony, that he re- 
ceived even this as from God. For the same reason, the 
title of “the everlasting God” seems to be given, as if Abra- 
ham would say, that he had not placed his confidence in an 
earthly king, and was not engaging in any new covenant, by 
which he would be departing from the everlasting God. The 
reason why Moses, by the figure synecdoche, gives to the wor- 
ship of God the name of znvocation, [have elsewhere explained. 
Lastly, Abraham is here said to have sojourned in that land in 
which he, nevertheless, had a settled abode; whence we learn, 
that his mind was not so fixed upon this state of repose, as to 
prevent him from considering what he had before heard from 
the mouth of God, that he with his posterity should be 
strangers till the expiration of four hundred years. 


CHAPTER XXII. 


1. Anp it came to pass after these 
things, that God did tempt Abraham, 
and said unto him, Abraham: and he 
said, Behold, here I am. 

2. And he said, Take now thy son, 
thine only son Isaac, whom thou lovest, 
and get thee into the land of Moriah ; 
and offer him there for a burnt-offering 
upon one of the mountains which I will 

tell thee of. 

: 38. And Abraham rose up early in 
the morning, and saddled his ass, and 
took two of his young men with him, 
and Isaac his son, and clave the wood 
for the burnt-offering, and rose up, and 
went unto the place of which God had 
told him. 

4, Then on the third day Abraham 


1. Et fuit, posthec Deus 
tentavit Abraham, et dixit ad 
eum, Abraham: qui dixit, 
Ecce ego. 

2. Et dixit, Tolle nunc fili- 
um tuum, unicum tuum, quem 
dilexisti Ishac, et vade ad 
terram Moriah, et offer eum 
ibiin holocaustum super unum 
e montibus, quem dixero tibi. 

3. Et surrexit Abraham 
mane, et stravit asinum suum, 
et cepit duos pueros suos se- 
cum, et Ishac filium suum: et 
scidit ligna holocausti: et 
surrexit, perrexitque ad lo- 
cum, quem dixerat ei Deus. 

4. Die tertia levavit Abra- 


558 


lifted up his eyes, and saw the place afar 
off. 

5. And Abraham said unto his young 
men, Abide ye here with the ass ; and I 
and the lad will go yonder and worship, 
and come again to you. 


6. And Abraham took the wood of 
the burnt-offering, and laid 7 upon Isaac 
his son; and he took the fire in his 
hand, and a knife; and they went both 
of them together. 

7. And Isaac spake unto Abraham 
his father, and said, My father: and he 
said, Here am I, my son. And he said, 
Behold the fire and the wood: but where 
ts the lamb for a burnt-offering ? 


8. And Abraham said, My son, God 
will provide himself a lamb for a burnt- 
offering: so they went both of them to- 
gether. 

9. And they came to the place which 
God had told him of; and Abraham 
built an altar there, and laid the wood 
in order, and bound Isaac his son, and 
laid him on the altar upon the wood. 


10. And Abraham stretched forth his 
hand, and took the knife to slay his son. 


11. And the angel of the Lord called 
unto him out of heaven, and said, Abra- 
ham, Abraham : and he said, Here am I. 


12. And he said, Lay not thine hand 
upon the lad, neither do thou any thing 
unto him: for now I know that thou 
fearest God, seeing thou hast not with- 
held thy son, thine only son, from me. 


13. And Abraham lifted up his eyes, 
and looked, and, behold, behind hima ram 
caught in a thicket by his horns: and 
Abraham went and took the ram, and 
offered him up for a burnt-offering in 
the stead of his son. 


14. And Abraham called the name of 


that place Jehovah-jireh : as it is said to 
_this day, In the mount of the Lord it 
Shall be seen. 

15. And the angel of the Lord called 
unto Abraham out of heaven the second 
time, 

16. And said, By myself have sworn, 
saith the Lord; for because thou hast 


COMMENTARY UPON 


CHAP. XXII. 


ham oculos suos, et vidit locum 
procul. 

5. Et dixit Abraham ad 
pueros suos, Manete hic cum 
asino: et ego et puer pergemus 
usque illuc, et adorabimus, 
revertemurque ad vos. 

6. Et accepit Abraham ligna 
holocausti, et, posuit super 
Ishac filium suum, et accepit 
in manu sua ignem et gladium, 
et perrexerunt ambo pariter. 

7. Dixit autem Ishac ad 
Abraham patrem suum, dixit, 
inquam, Pater mi. Et dixit, 
Ecce ego fili mi. Et dixit, Eece 
ignis et ligna, et ubi pecus in 
holocaustum ? ay 

8. Et dixit Abraham, Deus 
prospiciet sibi pecudem in 
holocaustum, fili mi. Itaque 
perrexerunt ambo pariter. 

9. Et venerunt ad locum, 
quem dixerat ei Deus: ef 
edificavit ibi Abraham altare, 
et ordinavit ligna, et ligavit 
Ishac filium suum, et posuit 
eum super altare super ligna. 

10. Et misit Abraham ma- 
num suam, et accepit gladium 
ut jugularet filium suum. 

11. Et clamavit ad eum an- 
gelus Jehove de ceelo, et dixit, 
Abraham, Abraham. Et dixit, 
Ecce ego. 

12. Et dixit, Ne extendas 
manum tuam in puerum, et ne 
facias ei quicquam : quia nunc 
cognovi quod times Deum, nec 
prohibuisti filium tuum unicum 
a me. 

13. Tunc levavit Abraham 
oculos suos, et vidit, et ecce 
aries post ewm detentus in per- 
plexitate spinarum cornibus 
suis: et perrexit Abraham, et 
accepit arietem, obtulitqueeum 
in holocaustum pro filio suo. 

14. Et vocavit Abraham 
nomen lociipsius, Jehovavide- - 
bit: idcirco dicitur hodie, In 
monte Jehova videbit. 

15. Et clamavit angelus Je- 
hove ad Abraham secundo e 
ceelo, 

16. Et dixit, Per me juravi, 
dixit Jehova, certe pro eo quod 


CHAP, XXII. 


done this thing, and hast not withheld 
thy son, thine only son ; 
17. That in blessing I will bless thee, 


 andin multiplying I will multiply thy 


seed as the stars of the heaven, and as 
the sand+vhich zs upon the sea-shore; and 
thy seed shall possess the gate of his 
enemies : 


18. And in thy seed shall all the na- 
tions of the earth be blessed; because 


~ thou hast obeyed my voice. 


19. So Abraham returned unto his 
young men, and they rose up, and went 
together to Beer-sheba; and Abraham 
dwelt at Beer-sheba. 


20. And it came to pass after these 


‘things, that it was told Abraham, say- 


ing, Behold, Milcah, she hath also born 
children unto thy brother Nahor; 


21. Huz his first-born, and Buz his 
brother, and Kemuel the father of Aram, 


22. And Chesed, and Hazo, and Pil- 
dash, and Jidlaph, and Bethuel. 

23. And Bethuel begat Rebekah : 
these eight Milcah did bear to Nahor, 
Abraham’s brother. 


24. And his concubine, whose name 
was Reumah, she bare also Tebah, and 
Gaham, and Thahash, and Maachah. 


1. And it came to pass. 
morable narrative. 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


559 


fecistirem hanc,et non prohibu- 
isti filium tuum unicum tuum : 

17. Quod benedicendo bene- 
dicam tibi, et multiplicando 
multiplicabo semen tuum sicut 
stellas coeli, et sicut arenam, 
que est juxta litus maris: et 
hereditabit semen tuum por- 
tam inimicorum suorum. 

18. Et benedicentur in se- 
mine tuo omnes gentes terre, 
eo quod obedivisti voci mez. 

19. Postea reversus est 
Abraham ad pueros suos, et 
surrexerunt, perrexeruntque 
pariter in Beer-sebah, et habi- 
tavit Abraham in Beer-sebah. 

20. Et fuit, posthee nun- 
tiatum fuit ipsi Abraham, di- 
cendo, Ecce, peperit Milchah 
etiam ipsa filios Nachor fratri 
tuo. 

21. Hus primogenitum suum, 
et Buz fratrem ejus, et Cemuel 
patrem Aram, 

22. Et Chesed, et Hazo, et 
Pildas, et Idlaph, et Bethuel : 

23. Et Bethuel genuit Rib- 
cah: octo istos peperit Mil- 
chah ipsi Nachor fratri Abra- 
ham. 

24. Et concubina ejus, cu- 
jus nomen Reumah, peperit 
etiam ipsa Tebah, et Gaham, 
et Thahas, et Mahachah. 


This chapter contains a most me- 
For although Abraham, through the 


whole course of his life, gave astonishing proofs of faith and 
obedience, yet none more excellent can be imagined than 
the immolation of hisson. For other temptations with which 
the Lord had exercised him, tended, indeed, to his mortifica- 
tion; but this inflicted a wound far more grievous than death 
itself. Here, however, we must consider something greater 
and higher than the paternal grief and anguish, which being 
produced by the death of an only son, pierced through the 
breast of the holy man. It was sad for him to be deprived 
of his only son, sadder still that this son should be torn away 
by a violent death, but by far the most grievous that he him- 


den 


oo 
th. 


560 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXII. 


self should be appointed as the executioner to slay him with 
his own hand. Other circumstances, which will be noted in 
their proper place, I now omit. But all these things, if we 
compare them with the spiritual conflict of conscience which 
he endured, will appear like the mere play, or shadows of 
conflicts. For the great source of grief to him was not his 
own bereavement, not that he was commanded to slay his 
only heir, the hope of future memorial and of name, the glory 
and support of his family ; but that, in the person of this son, 
the whole salvation of the world seemed to be extinguished 
and to perish. His contest, too, was not with his carnal 
passions, but, seeing that he wished to devote himself wholly 
to God, his very piety and religion filled him with distracting 
thoughts. For God, as if engaging in personal contest 
with him, requires the death of the boy, to whose person 
He himself had annexed the hgpe of eternal salvation. 
So that this latter command was, in a certain sense, the de- 
struction of faith. This foretaste of the story before us, it 
was deemed useful to give to the readers, that they may 
reflect how deserving it is of diligent and constant medita- 
tion. 

After these things God did tempt Abraham. The expression, 
“after these things,” is not to be restricted to his last vision; _ 
Moses rather intended to comprise in one word the various 
events by which Abraham had been tossed up and down; 
and again, the somewhat more quiet state of life which, 
in his old-age, he had lately begun to obtain. He had 
passed an unsettled life in continued exile up to his eightieth 
year; having been harassed with many contumelies and in- 
juries, he had endured with difficulty a miserable and anxious 
existence, in continual trepidation ; famine had driven him 
out of the land whither he had gone, by the command and 
under the auspices of God, into Egypt. Twice his wife had 
been torn from his bosom; he had been separated from his 
nephew ; he had delivered this nephew, when captured in war, 
at the peril of his own life. He had lived childless with his 
wife, when yet all his hopes were suspended upon his having 
offspring. Having at length obtained a son, he was com- 
pelled to disinherit him, and to drive him far from home. 





CHAP. XXII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 561 


Isaac alone remained, his special but only consolation ; he was 
enjoying peace at home, but now God suddenly thundered 
out of heaven, denouncing the sentence of death upon this 
son. The meaning, therefore, of the passage is, that by this 
temptation, as if by the last act, the faith of Abraham was 
far more severely tried than before. 

God did tempt Abraham. James, in denying that any one 
is tempted by God, (James i. 13,) refutes the profane calum- 
nies of those who, to exonerate themselves from the blame of 
their sins, attempt to fix the charge of them upon God. 
Wherefore, James truly contends, that those sins, of which 
we have the root in our own concupiscence, ought not to be 
charged upon another. For though Satan instils his poison, 
and fans the flame of our corrupt desires within us, we are 
yet not carried by any external force to the commission of sin ; 
but our own flesh entices us, and we willingly yield to its 
allurements. This, however, is no reason why God may not be 
said to tempt us in his own way, just as he tempted Abra- 
ham,—that is, brought him to a severe test,—that he might 
make full trial of the faith of his servant. 

And said unto him. Moses points out the kind of tempta- 
tion; namely, that God would shake the faith which the holy 
man had placed in His word, by a counter assault of the word 
itself. He therefore addresses him by name, that there may 
be no doubt respecting the Author of the command. For 
unless Abraham had been fully persuaded that it was the voice 
of God which commanded him to slay his son Isaac, he would 
have been easily released from anxiety; for, relying on the 
certain promise of God, he would have rejected the suggestion 
as the fallacy of Satan; and thus, without any difficulty, the 
temptation would have been shaken off. But now all occasion 
of doubt is removed; so that, without controversy, he ac- 
knowledges the oracle, which he hears, to be from God. 
Meanwhile, God, in a certain sense, assumes a double char- 
acter, that, by the appearance of disagreement and repugnance 
in which He presents Himself in his word, he may distract 
and wound the breast of the holy man. For the only method 
of cherishing constancy of faith, is to apply all our senses to 
the word of God. But so great was then the discrepancy of 
the word, that it would wound and lacerate the faith of 

VOL. I. 2N 


562 . COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXII. 


Abraham. Wherefore, there is great emphasis in the word, 
“‘ said,’! because God indeed made trial of Abraham’s faith, 
not in the usual manner, but by drawing him into a contest 
with his own word.?, Whatever temptations assail us, let us 
know that the victory is in our own hands, so long as we are 
endued with a firm faith; otherwise, we shall be, by no means, 
able to resist. If, when we are deprived of the sword of the 
Spirit, we are overcome, what would be our condition were 
God himself toattack us with the very sword, with which he had 
been wont to arm us? This, however, happened to Abraham. 
The manner in which Abraham, by faith, wrestled with this 
temptation, we shall afterwards see, in the proper place. 

And he said, Behold, here Iam. It hence appears, that the 
holy man was, in no degree, afraid of the wiles of Satan. 
For the faithful are not in such haste to obey God, as to 
allow a foolish credulity to carry them away, in whatever 
direction the breath of a doubtful vision may blow. But 
when it was once clear to Abraham, that he was called by 
God, he testified, by this answer, his prompt desire to yield 
obedience. For the expression before us is as much as if he 
said, Whatever God may have been pleased to command, I am 
perfectly ready to carry into effect. And, truly, he does not 
wait till God should expressly enjoin this or the other thing; 
but promises that he will be simply, and without exception, 
obedient in all things. This, certainly, is true subjection, 
when we are prepared to act, before the will of God is known 
to us. We find, indeed, all men ready to boast that they 
will do as Abraham did; but when it comes to the trial, they 
shrink from the yoke of God. But the holy man, soon after- 
wards, proves, by his very act, how truly and seriously he 
had professed, that he, without delay, and without disputa- 
tion, would subject himself to the hand of God. 


1 “ Quare magna subest emphasis verbo Leinined: 4 

* God’s usual manner of trying the faith of his people is, by causing 
the dispensations of his providence apparently to contradict his word, 
and requiring them still to rely upon that word, notwithstanding the 
apparent inconsistency. But in Abraham’s trial, He proposed a test far 
more severe. For His own command, or word, was in direct contradic- 
tion to what he had before spoken ; His injunction respecting the slaying 
of Isaac could, by no human method of reasoning, be reconciled to his 
promises respecting the future destinies of Abraham’s family, of the 
Church, and of the world.—£d. 


CHAP. XXII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 563 


2. Take now thy son. Abraham is commaiided to immolate 
his son. If God had said nothing more than that his son 
should die, even this message would have most grievously 
wounded his mind; because, whatever favour he could hope 
for from God, was included in this single promise, “ In Isaac 
shall thy seed be called.” Whence he necessarily inferred, 
that his own salvation, and that of the whole human race, 
would perish, unless Isaac remained in safety. For he was 
taught, by that word, that God would not be propitious to 
man without a Mediator. For although the declaration of 
Paul, that ‘all the promises of God in Christ are yea and 
Amen, was not yet written, (2 Cor. i. 20,) it was nevertheless 
engraven on the heart of Abraham. Whence, however, could 
he have had this hope, but from Isaac? The matter had come 
to this; that God would appear to have done nothing but mock 
him. Yet not only is the death of his son announced to him, 
but he is commanded with his own hand to slay him; as if he 
were required, not only to throw aside, but to cut in pieces, 
or cast into the fire, the charter of his salvation, and to have 
nothing left for himself, but death and hell. But it may be 
asked, how, under the guidance of faith, he could be brought 
to sacrifice his son, seeing that what was proposed to him, 
Was in opposition to that word of God, on which it is neces- 
sary for faith to rely? To this question the Apostle answers, 
that his confidence in the word of God remained urshaken ; 
because he hoped that God would be able to cause the pro- 
mised benediction to spring up, even out of the dead ashes of 
his son. (Heb. xi. 19.) His mind, however, must of necessity 
have been severely crushed, and violently agitated, when the 
command and the promise of God were conflicting within him. 
But when he had come to the conclusion, that the God with 
whom he knew he had to do, could not be his adversary ; 
although he did not immediately discover how the contra- 
diction might be removed, he nevertheless, by hope, reconciled 
the command with the promise; because, being indubitably 
persuaded that God was faithful, he left the unknown issue 
to Divine Providence. Meanwhile, as with closed eyes, he 
goes whither he is directed. The truth of God deserves this 
honour; not only that it should far transcend all human 


564 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXII, 


means, or that it alone, even without means, should suffice 
us, but also that it should surmount all obstacles. Here, 
then, we perceive, more clearly, the nature of the temptation 
which Moses has pointed out. It was difficult and painful 
to Abraham to forget that he was a father and a husband; 
to cast off all human affections; and to endure, before the 
world, the disgrace of shameful cruelty, by becoming the 
executioner of his son. But the other was a far more severe 
and horrible thing; namely, that he conceives God to con- 
tradict Himself and His own word; and then, that he sup- 
poses the hope of the promised blessing to be cut off from 
him, when Isaac is torn away from his embrace. For what 
more could he have to do with God, when the only pledge of 
grace is taken away? But as before, when he expected seed 
from his own dead body, he, by hope, rose above what it 
seemed possible to hope for; so now, when, in the death of 
his son, he apprehends the quickening power of God, in 
such a manner, as to promise himself a blessing out of the 
ashes of his son, he emerges from the labyrinth of temptation ; 
for, in order that he might obey God, it was necessary that 
he should tenaciously hold the promise, which, had it failed, 
faith must have perished. But with him the promise always 
flourished; because he both firmly retained the love with 
which God had once embraced him, and subjected to the 
power of God everything which Satan raised up to disturb 
his mind. But he was unwilling to measure, by his own 
understanding, the method of fulfilling the promise, which he 
knew depended on the incomprehensible power of God. It 
remains for every one of us to apply this example to himself. 
The Lord, indeed, is so indulgent to our infirmity, that he 
does not thus severely and sharply try our faith: yet he in- 
tended, in the father of all the faithful, to propose an example 
by which he might call us to a general trial of faith. For 
the faith, which is more precious than gold and silver, ought — 
not to lie idle, without trial; and experience teaches, that 
each will be tried by God, according to the measure of his 
faith. At the same time, also, we may observe, that God 
tempts his servants, not only when he subdues the affections of ~ 
the flesh, but when he reduces all their senses to nothing, that 
he may lead them to a complete renunciation of themselves. 





CHAP. XXII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 565 


Thine only son Isaac, whom thou lovest. As if it were not 
enough to command in one word the sacrifice of his son, he 
pierces, as with fresh strokes, the mind of the holy man. By 
calling him his ony son, he again irritates the wound recently 
inflicted, by the banishment of the other son; he then looks 
forward into futurity, because no hope of offspring would re- 
main. If the death of a first-born son is wont to be grievous, 
what must the mourning of Abraham be? Each word which 
follows is emphatical, and serves to aggravate his grief. 
‘Slay’ (he says) ‘him whom alone thou lovest. And he 
does not here refer merely to his paternal love, but to that 
which sprung from faith. Abraham loved his son, not only 
as nature dictates, and as parents commonly do, who take de- 
light in their children, but as beholding the paternal love of 
God in him: lastly, Isaac was the mirror of eternal life, and 
the pledge of all good things. Wherefore God seems not so 
much. to assail the paternal love of Abraham, as to trample 
upon His own benevolence. ‘There is equal emphasis in the 
name Isaac, by which Abraham was taught, that nowhere 
besides did any joy remain for him. Certainly, when he who 
had been given as the occasion of joy, was taken away, it was 
just as if God should condemn Abraham to eternal torment. 
We must always remember that Isaac was not a son of the 
common order, but one in whose person the Mediator was 
promised. 

Get thee into the land of Moriah. 'The bitterness of grief is 
not a little increased by this circumstance. For God does 
not require him to put his son immediately to death, but 
compels him to revolve this execution in his mind during 
three whole days, that in preparing himself to sacrifice his 
son, he may still more severely torture all his own senses. 
Besides, he does not even name the place where he requires 
that dire sacrifice to be offered, “ Upon one of the mountains,” 
(he says,) “that I will tell thee of.’ So before, when he 
commanded him to leave his country, he held his mind in 
suspense. But in this affair, the delay which most cruelly 
tormented the holy man, as if he had been stretched upon the 
rack, was still less tolerable. There was, however, a twofold 
use of this suspense. For there is nothing to which we are 
more prone than to be wise beyond our measure. Therefore, 


566 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XXII. 


in order that we may become docile and obedient to God, it 
is profitable for us that we should be deprived of our own 
wisdom, and that nothing should be left us, but to resign our- 
selves to be led according to his will. Secondly, this tended 
also to make him persevere, so that he should not obey God by 
a merely sudden impulse. For, as he does not turn back in 
his journey, nor revolve conflicting counsels; it hence appears, 
that his love to God was confirmed by such constancy, that 
it could not be affected by any change of circumstances. 
Jerome explains “the land of Moriah” to be ‘the land of 
vision,’ as if the name had been derived from MS‘, (raha.) 
But all who are skilled in the Hebrew language condemn 
this opinion. Nor am I better satisfied with those who in- 
terpret it the myrrh of God. It is certainly acknowledged, 
by the consent of the greater part, that it is derived from 
the word 7)9', (yarah,) which signifies to teach, or from 
N, (yarai,) which signifies to fear. There is, however, even 
at this time, a difference among interpreters, some thinking 
that the doctrine of God is here specially inculeated. Let us 
follow the most probable opinion; namely, that it is called 
the land of divine worship, either because God had appointed 
it for the offering of the sacrifice, in order that Abraham might 
not dispute whether some other place should not rather be 
chosen; or because the place for the temple was alre 
fixed there; and I rather adopt this second explanation ; 
that God there required a present worship from his servant 
Abraham, because already, in his secret counsel, he had 
determined in that place to fix his ordinary worship. And 
sacrifices properly receive their name from the word which 
signifies fear, because they give proof of reverence to God. 
Moreover, it is by no means doubtful that this is the place 
where the temple was afterwards built.? 


1 This extraordinary interpretation is supposed to be sanctioned by 
Caunticles iv. 6, ‘‘ I will get me to the mountain of myrrh, and to the hill 
of frankincense.”—-Vide Poli Syn. in loc.—Ed. 

2 It may be doubted whether the interpretation of Jerome, which Cal- 
vin rejects, is not preferable to that which he adopts. From the subse~ 
quent explanation in verse 14, it seems highly probable, that ‘the land of 
vision’ is the true explanation of the term in question. But eyen this 
admits of a double construction. The Septuagint calls it ‘ the high land,” 
as if it were merely conspicuous on account of its elevation—the land that 
might be seen afar off. But a more suitable interpretation seems to be, 


ee a ia as 


Chee ee 
a aS 


CHAP. XXII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 567 


3. And Abraham rose up early in the morning. This 
promptitude shows the greatness of Abraham’s faith. Innu- 
merable thoughts might come into the mind of the holy man; 
each of which would have overwhelmed his spirit, unless he 
had fortified it by faith. And there is no doubt that Satan, 
during the darkness of the night, would heap upon him a vast 
mass of cares. Gradually to overcome them, by contending 
with them, was the part of heroical courage. But when they 
were overcome, then immediately to gird himself to the ful- 
filment of the command of God, and even to rise early in the 
morning to do it, was a remarkable effort. Other men, pros- 
trated by a message so dire and terrible, would have fainted, 
and have lain torpid, as if deprived of life; but the first 
dawn of morning was scarcely early enough for Abraham’s 
haste. ‘Therefore, in a few words, Moses highly extols his 
faith, when he declares that it surmounted, in so short a space 


of time, the very temptation which was attended with many 
labyrinths. 


4. And saw the place. He saw, indeed, with his eyes, the 


place which before had been shown him in secret vision. But 


when it is said, that he lifted up his eyes, Moses doubtless 
signifies, that he had been very anxious during the whole of 
the three days. In commanding his servants to remain be- 
hind, he does it that they may not lay their hands upon him, 
as upon a delirious and insane old man. And herein his 
magnanimity appears, that he has his thoughts so well com- 
posed and tranquil, as to do nothing in an agitated manner. 
When, however, he says, that he will return with the boy, he 
seems not to be free from dissimulation and falsehood. Some 
think that he uttered this declaration prophetically ; but since 
it is certain that he never lost sight of what had been pro- 
mised concerning the raising up of seed in Isaac, it may be, 
that he, trusting in the providence of God, figured to himself 
his son as surviving even in death itself. And seeing that 
he went, as with closed eyes, to the slaughter of his son, there 
is nothing improbable in the supposition, that he spoke con- 
fusedly, in a matter so obscure. 

that it was the land favoured by the vision of divine glory, the spot on 


which the angel of Jehovah appeared to David, and on which the temple 
was built by Solomon.—£d. 


568 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXII. 


7. My father. God produces here a new instrument of 
torture, by which he may, more and more, torment the breast 
of Abraham, already pierced with so many wounds. And it 
is not to be doubted, that God designedly both framed the 
tongue of Isaac to this tender appellation, and directed it to 
this question, in order that nothing might be wanting to the 
extreme severity of Abraham’s grief. Yet the holy man 
sustains even this attack with invincible courage; and is so 
far from being disturbed in his proposed course, that he shows | 
himself to be entirely devoted to God, hearkening to nothing 
which should either shake his confidence, or hinder his obe- 
dience. But it is important to notice the manner in which 
he unties this inextricable knot; namely, by taking refuge 
in Divine Providence, “ God will provide himself a lamb.” 
This example is proposed for our imitation. Whenever the 
Lord gives a command, many things are perpetually occurring 
to enfeeble our purpose: means fail, we are destitute of 
counsel, all avenues seem closed. In such straits, the only 
remedy against despondency is, to leave the event to God, 
in order that he may open a way for us where there is none. 
For as we act unjustly towards God, when we hope for 
nothing from him but what our senses can perceive, so we 
pay Him the highest honour, when, in affairs of perplexity, 
we nevertheless entirely acquiesce in his providence. 


8. So they went both of them together. Here we perceive 
both the constancy of Abraham, and the modesty of his son. 
For Abraham is not rendered more remiss by this obstacle, 
and the son does not persist in replying to his father’s answer. 
For he might easily have objected, Wherefore have we 
brought wood and the knife without a lamb, if God has com- 
manded sacrifices to be made to him? But because he sup- 
poses that the victim has been omitted, for some valid reason, 
and not through his father’s forgetfulness, he acquiesces, and 
is silent. 


9. And they came to the place. Moses purposely passes 
over many things, which, nevertheless, the reader ought to 
consider. When he has mentioned the building of the altar, 
he immediately afterwards adds, that Isaac was bound. But 


CHAP. XXII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 569 


we know that he was then of middle age, so that he might 
either be more powerful than his father, or, at least, equal to 
resist him, if they had to contend by force; wherefore, I do 
not think that force was employed against the youth, as 
against one struggling and unwilling to die: but rather, that 
he voluntarily surrendered himself. It was, however, scarcely 
possible that he would offer himself to death, unless he had 
been already made acquainted with the divine oracle: but 
Moses, passing by this, only recites that he was bound. 
Should any one object, that there was no necessity to bind 
one who willingly offered himself to death; I answer, that 
the holy man anticipated, in this way, a possible danger; lest 
any thing might happen in the midst of the act to interrupt 
it. The simplicity of the narrative of Moses is wonderful ; 
but it has greater force than the most exaggerated tragical 
description. The sum of the whole turns on this point ; that 
Abraham, when he had to slay his son, remained always like 
himself; and that the fortitude of his mind was such as to 
render his aged hand equal to the task of offering a sacrifice, 
the very sight of which was enough to dissolve and to destroy 
his whole body. 


11. And the angel of the Lord called unto him. ‘The inward 
temptation had been already overcome, when Abraham intre- 
pidly raised his hand to slay his son; and it was by the special 
grace of God that he obtained so signal a victory. But now 
Moses subjoins, that suddenly, beyond all hope, his sorrow 
was changed into joy. Poets, in their fables, when affairs 
are desperate, introduce some god who, unexpectedly, ap- 
pears at the critical juncture. It is possible that Satan, by 
figments of this kind, has endeavoured to obscure the wonder- 
ful and stupendous interpositions of God, when he has un- 
expectedly appeared for the purpose of bringing assistance to 
his servants. This history ought certainly to be known and 
celebrated among all people; yet, by the subtlety of Satan, 
not only has the truth of God been adulterated and turned 
into a lie, but also distorted into materials for fable, in order 
to render it the more ridiculous. But it is our business, with 
earnest minds to consider how wonderfully God, in the very 
article of death, both recalled Isaac from death to life, and 


570 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXII. 


restored to Abraham his son, as one who had risen from the 
tomb. Moses also describes the voice of the angel, as hav- 
ing sounded out of heaven, to give assurance to Abraham 
that he had come from God, in order that he might withdraw 
his hand, under the direction of the same faith by which he 
had stretched it out. for, in a cause of such magnitude, it 
was not lawful for him either to undertake or to relinquish 
anything, except under the authority of God. Let us, there- 
fore, learn from his example, by no means, to pursue what 
our carnal sense may declare to be, probably, our right course ; 
but let God, by his sole will, prescribe to us our manner of 
acting and of ceasing to act. And truly Abraham does not 
charge God with inconstancy, because he considers that there 
had been just cause for the exercising of his faith. 


12. Now I know that thou fearest God. The exposition of 
Augustine, ‘I have caused thee to know,’ is forced. But how 
can any thing become known to God, to whom all things have 
always been present? Truly, by condescending to the man- 
ner of men, God here says that what he has proved by 
experiment, is now made known to himself. And he speaks 
thus with us, not according to his own infinite wisdom, but 
according to our infirmity. Moses, however, simply means 
that Abraham, by this very act, testified how reverently he 
feared God. It is however asked, whether he had not already, 
on former occasions, given many proofs of his piety ? I answer, 
that when God had willed him to proceed thus far, he 
had, at length, completed his true trial; in other persons a 
much lighter trial might have been sufficient. And as 
Abraham showed that he feared God, by not sparing his own, 
and only begotten son; so a common testimony of the same 
fear is required from all the pious, in acts of self-denial. 
Now, since God enjoins upon us a continual warfare, we 
must take care that none desires his release before the time. 


13. And, behold, behind him a ram. What the Jews feign 


t “ Respondeo, quando hucusque eum progredi volebat Deus, tunc 
vera demum probatione, que in aliis multo levior sufficeret, defunctum 
esse.”—‘‘ Je respond que Dieu vouloit qu’il poursuyvist jusques da; et 
que lors finalement, il s’est acquitté de son espreuve, laquelle eust este 
beaucoup legere en d’auctres, et eust bien suffi."—French Tr. 


CHAP. XXII, THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 571 


respecting this ram, as haying been created on the sixth day 
of the world, is like the rest of their fictions. -We need not 
doubt that it was presented there by miracle, whether it was 
then first created, or whether it was brought from some other 
place; for God intended to give that to his servant which 
would enable him, with joy and cheerfulness, to offer up a 
pleasant sacrifice ; and at the same time he admonishes him 
to return thanks. Moreover, since a ram is substituted in the 
place of Isaac, God shows us, as in a glass, what is the design 
of our mortification; namely, that by the Spirit of God 
dwelling within us, we, though dead, may yet be living sacri- 
fices. I am not ignorant that more subtle allegories may be 
elicited ; but I do not see on what foundation they rest. 


14, And Abraham called the name of that place. He not 
only, by the act of thanksgiving, acknowledges, at the time, 
that God has, in a remarkable manner, provided for him; 
but also leaves a monument of his gratitude to posterity. In 
most extreme anxiety, he had fled for refuge to the providence 
of God; and he testifies that he had not done so in vain. 
He also acknowledges that not even the ram had wandered 
thither accidentally, but had been placed there by God. 
Whereas, in process of time, the name of the place was 
changed, this was done purposely, and not by mistake. For 
they who have translated the active verb, ‘He will see,’ 
passively, have wished, in this manner, to teach that God not 
only looks upon those who are his, but also makes his help 
manifest to them; so that, in turn, he may be seen by them. 
The former has precedence in order; namely, that God, by 
his secret providence, determines and ordains what is best for 
us; but on this the latter is suspended; namely, that he 
stretches out his hand to us, and renders himself visible by 
true experimental tokens. @ 


15. And the angel of the Lord called unto Abraham. 
What God had promised to Abraham before Isaac was born, 
he now again confirms and ratifies, after Isaac was restored 
to life, and arose from the altar,—as if it had been from the 
sepulchre,—to achieve a more complete triumph. The angel 
speaks in the person of God ; in order that, as we have before 


572 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXII. 


said, the embassy of those who bear his name, may have the 
greater authority, by their being clothed with His majesty. 
These two things, however, are thought to be hardly consistent 
with each other; that what before was gratuitously promised, 
should here be deemed a reward. For we know that grace 
and reward are incompatible. Now, however, since the bene- 
diction which is promised in the seed, contains the hope of 
salvation, it may seem to follow that eternal life is given in 
return for good works. And the Papists boldly seize upon this, 
and similar passages, in order to prove that works are deserving 
of all the good things which God confers upon us. But I 
most readily retort this subtle argument upon those who 
bring it. For if that promise was before gratuitous, which is 
now ascribed to a reward; it appears that whatever God 
grants to good works, ought to be received as from grace. 
Certainly, before Isaac was born, this same promise had 
been already given; and now it receives nothing more than 
confirmation. If Abraham deserved a compensation so great, 
on account of his own virtue, the grace of God, which antici- 
pated him, will be of none effect. Therefore, in order that the 
truth of God, founded upon his gratuitous kindness, may stand 
firm, we must of necessity conclude, that what is freely given, 
is yet called the reward of works. Not that God would 
obscure the glory of his goodness, or in any way diminish it; 
but only that he may excite his own people to the love of 
well-doing, when they perceive that their acts of duty are so 
far pleasing to him, as to obtain a reward; while yet he pays 
nothing as a debt, but gives to his own benefits the title of a 
reward. And in this there is no inconsistency. For the 
Lord here shows himself doubly liberal; in that he, wishing 
to stimulate us to holy living, transfers to our works what 
properly belongs to his pure beneficence. The Papists, there- 
fore, wrongfully distortsthose benignant invitations of God, by 
which he would correct our torpor, to a different purpose, 
in order that man may arrogate to his own merits, what is the 
mere gift of divine liberality. 


17. Thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies. He means, 
that the offspring of Abraham should be victorious over their 
enemies ; for in the gates were their bulwarks, and in them 


CHAP. XXII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 573 


they administered judgment. Now, although God often 
suffered the enemies of the Jews tyrannically to rule over 
them; yet he so moderated their revenge, that this promise 
always prevailed in the end. Moreover, we must remember 
what has before been stated from Paul, concerning the 
unity of the seed; for we hence infer, that the victory is 
promised, not to the sons of Abraham promiscuously, but to 
Christ, and to his members, so far as they adhere together 
under one Head. For unless we retain some mark which 
may distinguish between the legitimate and the degenerate 
sons of Abraham, this promise will indiscriminately compre- 
hend, as well the Ishmaelites and Idumeans, as the people 
of Israel: but the unity of a people depends on its head. 
Therefore the prophets, whenever they wish to confirm this 
promise of God, assume the principle, that they who have 
hitherto been divided, shall be united, under David, in one 
body. What further pertains to this subject may be found 
in the twelfth chapter. | 


19. And they rose up, and went together to Beer-sheba. Moses 
. repeats, that Abraham, after having passed through this 
severe and incredible temptation, had a quiet abode in Beer- 
sheba. This narration is inserted, together with what follows 
concerning the increase of Abraham’s kindred, for the pur- 
pose of showing that the holy man, when he had been brought 
up again from the abyss of death, was made happy, in more 
ways than one. For God would so revive him, that he 
should be like a new man. Moses also records the progeny 
of Nahor, but for another reason; namely, because Isaac 
was to take his wife from it. For the mention of women in 
Scripture is rare ; and it is credible that many daughters were 
born to Nahor, of whom one only, Rebekah, is here introduced. 
He distinguishes the sons of the concubine from the others ; 
because they occupied a less honourable place. Not that the 
concubine was regarded as a harlot; but because she was an 
inferior wife, and not the mistress of the house, who had 
community of goods with her husband. ‘The fact, however, 
that it entered into Nahor’s mind to take a second wife, does 
not render polygamy lawful; it only shows, that, from 


574 


COMMENTARY UPON 


CHAP, XXIII. 


the custom of other men, he supposed that to be lawful for 
him, which had really sprung from the worst corruption. 


CHAPTER XXIII. 


1. Anp Sarah was an hundred and 
seven and twenty years old; these were 
the years of the life of Sarah. 

2. And Sarah died in Kirjath-arba ; 
the same zs Hebron in the land of Ca- 
naan: and Abraham came to mourn for 
Sarah, and to weep for her. 


8. And Abraham stood up from before 
his dead, and spake unto the sons of 
Heth, saying, 

4. lama stranger and a sojourner with 
you: give me a possession of a burying- 
place with you, that I may bury my dead 
out of my sight. 


5. And the children of Heth answered 
Abrahaw, saying unto him, 

6. Hear us, my lord: thou art a mighty 
prince among us: in the choice of our 
sepulchres bury thy dead; none of us 
shall withhold from thee his sepulchre, 
but that thou mayest bury thy dead. 


7. And Abraham stood up, and bowed 
himself to the people of the land, even to 
the children of Heth. 

8. And he communed with them, say- 
ing, If it be your mind that I should bury 
my dead out of my sight, hear me, and 
entreat for me to Ephron the son of Zohar, 


9. That he may give me the cave of 


Machpelah, which he hath, which zs in 
the end of his field; for as much money 
as it is worth he shall give it me for a 
possession of a burying-place amongst 


ou. 
> 10. And Ephron dwelt among the chil- 
dren of Heth: and Ephron the Hittite 
answered Abraham in the audience of the 
children of Heth, even of all that went in 
at the gate of his city, saying, 


11. Nay, my lord, hear me: The field 
give I thee, and the cave that zs therein, 


1. Fuit autem vita Sarah 
centum anni et viginti anni et 
septem anni: anni vite Sarah. 

2. Et mortua Sarah in Cir- 
jath-arbah: ipsa est Hebron 
in terra Chenaan. Et venit 
Abraham ad plangendum super 
Sarah, et ad lugendam eam. 

3. Deinde surrexit Abraham 
a facie mortui sui, et loquutus 
est ad filios Heth, dicendo, 

4. Peregrinus et advena sum 
vobiscum: date mihi heredita- 
tem sepulchri vobiscum : et se- 
peliam mortuum meum a facie 
mea. 

5. Et responderunt filii Heth 
ad Abraham, dicendo ei, 

6. Audi nos, domine mi, 
Princeps Dei es in medio nos- 
tri: in electis sepulchris nostris 
sepeli mortuum tuum: nemo 
e nobis sepulchrum suum pro- 
hibebit a te, ne sepelias mor- 
tuum tuum. 

7. Tune surrexit Abraham, 
et incurvavit se populo terre 
filiis Heth. | 

8. Et loquutus est cum eis, 
dicendo, Si est in animis ves- 
tris, ut sepeliam mortuum me- 
um a facie mea, audite me, ét 
intercedite pro me apud Ephron 
filium Sohar : 

9. Ut det mihi speluncam 
duplicem quee est ei in fine agri 
sui: argento pleno det eam 
mihi in medio vestri in heredi- 
tatem sepulchri. 


10. Et Ephron habitabat in 
medio filiorum Heth: et re- 
spondit Ephron Hittheus ad 
Abraham in auribus Heth, in 
auribus omnium ingredientum, 
portam civitatis sux, dicendo, 

11. Non, domine mi, audi 
me, Agrum dedi tibi, et spe- 


q 
7 
a 





CHAP, XXIII. 


I give it thee ; in the presence of the sons 
of my people give I it thee: bury thy 
dead. ~ 


_ 12, And Abraham bowed down him- 
self before the people of the land. 

13. And he spake unto Ephron, in the 
audience of the people of the land, saying, 
But if thou wilt give it, I pray thee, hear 


‘me: I will give thee money for the field; 


take zt of me, and I will bury my dead 
there. 

14. And Ephron answered Abraham, 
saying unto him, 

15. My lord, hearken unto me: the 
land ts worth four hundred shekels of sil- 
ver ; what zs that betwixt me and thee? 
bury therefore thy dead. 


16. And Abraham hearkened unto 
Ephron; and Abraham weighed to Eph- 
ron the silver, which he had named in 
the audience of the sons of Heth, four 
hundred shekels of silver, current money 
with the merchant. 


17. And the field of Ephron, which 


was in Machpelah, which was before 


Mamre, the field, and the cave which was 
therein, and all the trees that were in the 
field, that were in all the borders round 
about, were made sure 


18. Unto Abraham for a possession, in 
the presence of the children of Heth, 
before all that went in at the gate of his 
city. 

19. And after this, Abraham buried 
Sarah his wife in the cave of the field of 
Machpelah, before Mamre: the same is 
Hebron in the land of Canaan. 


20. And the field, and the cave that 
is therein, weremade sure unto Abraham, 
for a possession of a burying-place, by 
the sons of Heth. 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


575 


luncam, que est in eo, tibi dedi 
eam in oculis filiorum populi 
mei, dedi tibi: sepeli mortuum 
tuum. 

12. Et incurvavit se Abra- 
ham coram populi terre : 

15. Et loquutus est ad Eph- 
ron in auribus populi terre, 
dicendo, Veruntamen si tu: 
utinam audias me: dabo ar- 
gentum agri, cape a me, et se- 
peliam mortuum meum ibi. 

14. Et respondit Ephron ad 
Abraham, dicendo ei, 

15. Domine mi, audi me, 
terra quadringentorum siclo- 
rum argenteorum est inter me 
et te, quid est? et mortuum 
tuum sepeli. 

16. Et obedivit Abraham 
ipsi Ephron, et appendit Abra- 
ham ipsi Ephron argentum 
quod loquutusfuerat in auribus 
filiorum Heth, quadringentos 
siclos argenteos transeuntes 
per mercatores. 

17. Et confirmatus est ager 
Ephron, qui erat in spelunca 
duplici, qui erat coram Mamre : 
ager et spelunca, que erat in 
eo, et omnis arbor, que erat in 
agro, que erat in omni termino 
ejus per circuitum : 

18. Ipsi Abraham in posses- 
sionem, in oculis filiorum Heth, 
omnium ingredientum portam 
civitatis ejus. 

19. Et postea sepelivit Ab- 
raham Sarah uxorem suam in 
spelunca agri Guplici coram 
Mamre: hee est Hebron in 
terra Chenaan. 

20. Et confirmatus est ager, 
et spelunca que erat in eo, ipsi 
Abraham in hereditatem se- 
pulchri a filiis Heth. 


1. And Sarah was an hundred and seven and twenty years 


old. 


It is remarkable that Moses, who relates the death of 


Sarah in a single word, uses so many in describing her 
burial: but we shall soon see that the latter record is not 


superfluous. Why he so briefly alludes to her death, I know 


not, except that he leaves more to be reflected upon by his 


1 Literally, ‘* The liv es of Sarah were a hundred years, and twenty 


years, and seven years.” 


576 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXIII. 


readers than he expresses. The holy fathers saw that they, 
in common with reprobates, were subject to death. Never- 
theless, they were not deterred, while painfully leading a life 
full of suffering, from advancing with intrepidity towards the 
goal. Whence it follows, that they, being animated by the 
hope of a better life, did not give way to fatigue. Moses says 
that Sarah lived a hundred and twenty-seven years, and 
since he repeats the word years after each of the numbers, the 
Jews feign that this was done, because she had been as 
beautiful in her hundredth, as in her twentieth year, and as 
modest in the flower of her age, as when she was seven years 
old. This is their custom; while they wish to prove them- 
selves skilful in doing honour to their nation, they invent 
frivolous trifles, which betray a shameful ignorance: as, for 
instance, in this place, who would not say that they were 
entirely ignorant of their own language, in which this kind 
of repetition is most usual? The discussion of others also, 
on the word §'M, (dives,) is without solidity. The reason why 
the Hebrews use the word hives, in the plural number, for lefe, 
cannot be better explained, as it appears to me, than the 
reason why the Latins express some things which are singular 
in plural forms.’ I know that the life of men is manifold, 
because, beyond merely vegetative life, and beyond the sense ~ 
which they have in common with brute animals, they are also 
endued with mind and intelligence. ‘1 his reasoning, therefore, 
is plausible, without being solid. There is more colour of 
truth in the opinion of those who think that the various 
events of human life are signified; which life, since it has 
nothing stable, but is agitated by perpetual vicissitudes, is 
rightly divided into many lives. I am, however, contented 
to refer simply to the idiom of the language; the reason of 
which is not always to be curiously investigated. 


2. And Sarah died in Kirjath-arba. It appears from Josh. 
xv. 54, that this was the more ancient name of the city, which 
afterwards began to be called Hebron. But there is a dif- 
ference of opinion respecting the etymology. Some think 
the name is derived from the fact, that the city consisted of 


1 « Quam quod Latini quadrigas dicant non quadrigam. 





CHAP. XXIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 577 


four parts; as the Greeks call the city divided into three 
orders, Tripoli, and a given region, Decapolis, from the ten 
cities it contained. Others suppose that Arba is the name 
of a giant, whom they believe to have been the king or the 
founder of the city. Others again prefer the notion, that the 
name was given to the place from four! of the Fathers, Adam, 
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, who were buried there with their 
wives. I willingly suspend my judgment on a matter of un- 
certainty, and not very necessary to be known. It more 
concerns the present history to inquire, how it happened 
that Sarah died in a different place from that in which Abra- 
ham dwelt. If any one should reply, that they had both 
changed their abode, the words of Moses are opposed to 
that, for he says that Abraham came to bury his dead. . It is 
hence easily inferred, that he was not present at her death ; 
nor is it probable that they were separated, merely by being 
in different tents; so that he might walk ten or twenty 
paces for the sake of mourning, while a more important duty 
had been neglected. For this reason, some suspect. that he 
was on a journey at the time. But to me it seems more 
likely that their abode was then at Hebron, or at least in the 
vale of Mamre, which adjoins the city. For, after a little 
breathing time had been granted him, he was soon compelled 
to return to his accustomed wanderings. And although 
Moses does not say, that Abraham had paid to his wife, while 
yet alive, the due attentions of a husband; I think that he 
omits it, as a thing indubitably certain, and that he speaks par- 
ticularly of the mourning, as a matter connected with the care 
of sepulture. That they dwelt separately we shall afterwards 
see: not as being in different regions, but because each in- 
habited separate, though contiguous, tents. And this was no 
sign of dissension or of strife, but is rather to be ascribed to the 
size of the family. For as Abraham had much trouble in 
governing so large 9 herd of servants; so his wife would have 
equal difficulty to retain her maids under chaste and honest 
custody. Therefore the great number of domestics, which it 
was not safe to mingle together, compelled them to divide the 
family. 

But it may be asked, what end could it answer to approach 

1 The word pans (arba) signifies four. 
VOL. I. 20 


578 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXIII. 


the body for the sake of mourning over it? was not the death 
of his wife sufficiently sad and bitter to call forth his grief, 
without this additional means of excitement ? It would have 
been better to seek the alleviation of his sorrow, than to 
cherish, and even augment it, by indulgence. I answer, if 
Abraham came to his dead wife, in order to produce excessive 
weeping, and to pierce his heart afresh with new wounds, his 
example is not to be approved. But if he both privately 
wept over the death of his wife, so far as humanity preceribed, 
exercising self-government in doing it; and also voluntarily 
mourned over the common curse of mankind; there is no fault 
in either of these. For to feel no sadness at the contempla- 
tion of death, is rather barbarism and stupor than fortitude of 
mind. Nevertheless, as Abraham was a man, it might be, that 
his grief was excessive. And yet, what Moses soon after 
subjoins, that he rose up from his dead, is spoken in praise of 
his moderation ; whence Ambrose prudently infers, that we 
are taught by this example, how perversely they act, who 
occupy themselves too much in mourning for the dead. Now, 
if Abraham, at that time, assigned a limit to his grief, and put 
a restraint on his feelings, when the doctrine of the resurrec- 
tion was yet obscure; they are without excuse, who, at this 
day, give the reins to impatience, since the most abundant — 
consolation is supplied to us in the resurrection of Christ. 


3. And spake unto the sons of Heth. Moses is silent re- 
specting the rite used by Abraham in the burial of the body 
of his wife: but he proceeds, at great length, to recite the 
purchasing of the sepulchre. For what reason he did this, 
we shall see presently, when I shall briefly allude to the cus- 
tom of burial. How religiously this has been observed in all 
ages, and among all people, is well known. Ceremonies have 
indeed been different, and men have endeavoured to outdo 
each other in various superstitions ; meanwhile, to bury the 
dead has been common to all. And this practice has not 
arisen either from foolish curiosity, or from the desire of fruit- 
less consolation, or from superstition, but from the natural 
sense with which God has imbued the minds of men; a sense 
he has never suffered to perish, in order that men might be 
witnesses to themselves of a future life. It is also incredible 


CHAP. XXIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 579 


that they, who have disseminated certain outrageous ex- 
pressions in contempt of sepulture, could have spoken from 
the heart. Truly it behoves us, with magnanimity, so far to 
disregard the rites of sepulture,—as we would riches and 
honours, and the other conveniences of life,—that we should 
bear with equanimity to be deprived of them; yet it cannot 
be denied that religion carries along with it the care of burial. 
And certainly (as I have said) it has been divinely engraven 
on the minds of all people, from the beginning, that they 
should bury the dead; whence also they have ever regarded 
sepulchres as sacred. It has not, I confess, always entered 
into the minds of heathens that souls survived death, and that 
the hope of a resurrection remained even for their dodies ; nor 
have they been accustomed to exercise themselves in a pious 
meditation of this kind, whenever they had laid their dead 
in the grave; but this inconsideration of theirs does not dis- 
prove the fact; that they had such a representation of a 
future life placed before their eyes, as left them inexcusable. 
Abraham, however, seeing he had the hope of a resurrection 
deeply fixed in his heart, sedulously cherished, as was meet, 
its visible symbol, The importance he attached to it appears 
hence, that he thought he should be guilty of pollution, if he 
mingled the body of his wife with strangers after death. For 
he bought a caye, in order that he might possess for himself 
and his family, a holy and pure sepulchre. He did not desire 
to have a foot of earth whereon to fix his tent; he only took 
. care about his grave: and he especially wished to have his 
own domestic tomb in that land, which had been promised 
him for an inheritance, for the purpose of bearing testimony 
to posterity, that the promise of God was not extinguished, 
either by his own death, or by that of his family; but that 
it then rather began to flourish; and that they who were de- 
prived of the light of the sun, and of the vital air, yet always 
remained joint-partakers of the promised inheritance. For 
while they themselves were silent and speechless, the sepul- 
chre cried aloud, that death formed no obstacle to their 
entering on the possession of it. A thought like this could 
have had no place, unless Abraham by faith had looked up to 
heaven. And when he calls the corpse of his wife, his dead ; 
he intimates that death is a divorce of that kind, which still 


580 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXIII. 


leaves some remaining conjunction. Moreover, nothing but 
a future restoration cherishes and preserves the law of mutual 
connection between the living and the dead. But it is better 
briefly to examine each particular, in its order. 


4. Iama stranger and a sojourner with you. This intro- — 
ductory sentence tends to one or other of these points; either 
that he may more easily gain what he desires by suppliantly 
asking for it; or that he may remove all suspicion of eupidity 
on his part. He therefore confesses, that since he had only 
a precarious abode among them, he could possess no sepulchre, 
unless by their permission. And because, during life, they 
had permitted him to dwell within their territory, it was the 
part of humanity, not to deny him a sepulchre for his dead. 
If this sense be approved, then Abraham both conciliates 
their favour to himself, by his humility, and in declaring that 
the children of Heth had dealt kindly with him, he stimulates 
them, by this praise, to proceed in the exercise of the same 
liberality with which they had begun. The other sense, 
however, is not incongruous ; namely, that Abraham, to avert 
the odium which might attach to him as a purchaser, declares 
that he desires the possession, not for the advantage of the 
present life, not from ambition or avarice, but only in order 
that his dead may not lie unburied ; as if he had said, I do not 
refuse to continue to live a stranger among you, as I have 
hitherto done; I do not desire your possessions, in order that 
I may have something of my own, which may enable me 
hereafter to contend for equality with you; it is enough for me 
to have a place where we may be buried. 


6. Thou arta mighty prince among us.' The Hittites 
gratuitously offer a burying-place to Abraham wherever he 
might please to choose one. They testify that they do this, as 
a tribute to his virtues. We have before seen, that the He- 
brews give a divine title to anything which excels. There- 
fore we are to understand by the expression, ‘a prince of 
God,’ a person of great and singular excellency. And they 
properly signalize him whom they reverence for his virtues, 


1 “* Princeps es Dei.” See margin of English version. Heb., a prinee 
of God.—Ed. 


CHAP. XXIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 581 


with this eulogium ; thereby testifying, that they ascribe to 
God alone, whatever virtues in men are deserving of praise 
and reverence. Now some seed of piety manifests itself in 
the Hittites, by thus doing honour to Abraham, whom they 
acknowledge to be adorned with rare gifts of the Spirit of God. 
For profane and brutal men tread under foot, with barbarous 
contempt, every excellent gift of God, as swine do pearls. 
And yet we know with how many vices those nations were 
defiled; how much greater then, and more disgraceful, is our 
ingratitude, if we give no honour to the image of God, when 
it shines before our eyes? Abraham’s sanctity of manners 
procures him such fayour with the Hittites, that they do not 
envy his pre-eminence among them; what excuse then is 
there for us, if we hold in less esteem those virtues in which 
the majesty of God is conspicuous ? Truly their madness is 
diabolical, who not only despise the favours of God, but even 
ferociously oppose them. 


7. And Abraham stood up. He declines the favour offered 
by the Hittites, as some suppose, with this design, that he 
might not lay himself under obligation to them in so small a 
matter. But he rather wished to show, in this way, that he 
would receive no gratuitous possession from those inhabitants 
who were to be ejected by the hand of God, in order that he 
might succeed in their place: for he always kept all his 
thoughts fixed on God, so that he far preferred His bare pro- 
mise, to present dominion over the land. Moses also com- 
mends the modesty of the holy man, when he says that he 
‘rose up to do reverence to the people of the land.’1 As to 
the use of the word signifying ‘to adore,’ it is simply taken 
for the reverence, which any one declares, either by bowing 
the knee, or any other gesture of the body. This may be 
paid to men, as well as to God, but for a different end; men 
mutually either bend the knee, or bow the head, before each 
other, for the sake of civil honour; but if the same thing be 
done to them, for the sake of religion, it is profanation. For 
religion allows of no other worship than that of the true God. 

1 “Ut adoraret populum terre.’ This is not a correct quotation 


from his own version of the chapter, which is, ‘‘ Incurvavit se populo 
terre,” as inour version, ‘‘ Bowed himself to the people of the land.”—Ed. 


582 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXII, 


And they childishly trifle who make a pretext for their idola- 
try, in the words dulia and latria,' since the Scripture, in 
general terms, forbids adoration to be transferred to men. 
But lest any one should be surprised that Abraham acted so 
suppliantly, and so submissively, we must be aware that it 
was done from common custom and use. For it is well 
known that the Orientals were immoderate in their use of 
ceremonies. If we compare the Greeks or Italians with 
ourselves, we are more sparing in the use of them than they. 
But Aristotle, in speaking of the Asiatics and other barbarians, 
notes this fault, that they abound too much in adorations. - 
Wherefore we must not measure the honour which Abra- 
ham paid to the princes of the land by our customs. 


8. If tt be in your mind. Abraham constitutes them his 
advocates with Ephron, to persuade him to sell the double 
cave. Some suppose the cave to have been so formed, that 
one part was above, and the other below. Let every one be 
at liberty to adopt what opinion he pleases ; I, however, rather 
suppose, that there was one entrance, but that within, the cave 
was divided by a middle partition. It is more pertinent to 
remark, that Abraham, by offering a full price, cultivated and 
maintained equity. Where is there one to be found, who, 
in buying, and in other business, does not eagerly pursue his 
own advantage at another’s cost? For while the seller sets 
the price at twice the worth of a thing, that he may ex- 
tort as much as possible from the buyer, and the buyer, in 
return, by shuffling, attempts to reduce it to a low price, 
there is no end of bargaining. And although avarice has 
specious pretexts, it yet causes those who make contracts 
with each other, to forget the claims of equity and justice. 
This also, finally, deserves to be noticed ; that Abraham often 
declares, that he was buying the field for a place of sepulture. 
And Moses is the more minute in this matter, that we may 
learn, with our father Abraham, to raise our minds to the hope 


1 * Ac pueriliter nugantur qui in vocibus dulie et latrie fucum 
faciunt.”—“ Qui pensent farder leur idolatrie par ces mots de Dulie et 
Latrie.”—French Tr. 

2 Heb. mbpsnyn my, (mearath hummakpelah,) ‘the double cave.’ See 
Septuagint. Our translators have preferred rendering the word Mach- 
pelah as a proper name.—Ed. : 





CHAP. XXIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 583 


of the resurrection. He saw the half of himself taken away ; 
but because he was certain that his wife was not exiled from 
the kingdom of God, he hides her dead body in the tomb, 
until he and she should be gathered together. 


11. Hear me. Although Ephron earnestly insisted upon 
giving the field freely to Abraham, the holy man adheres to 
his purpose, and at length compels him, by his entreaties, to 
sell the field. Ephron, in excusing himself, says that the price 
was too small for Abraham to insist upon giving; yet he esti- 
mates it at four hundred shekels. Now, since Josephus says 
that the shekel of the sanctuary was worth four Attic drachms, 
if he is speaking of these, we gather from the computation of 
Budeeus that the price of the field was about two hundred 
and fifty pounds of French money; if we understand the 
common shekel, it will be half that amount. Abraham was 
not so scrupulous but that he would have received a greater 
gift, if there had not been a sufficient reason to prevent him. 
He had been presented with considerable gifts both by theking 
of Egypt and the king of Gerar, but he observed this rule; that 
he would neither receive all things, nor in all places, nor from 
all persons. And I have lately explained, that he bought the 
field, in order that he might not possess a foot of land, by the 
gift of any man. 


16. And Abraham weighed to Ephron the silver. I know 
not what had come into Jerome’s mind, when he says, that 
one letter was abstracted from Ephron’s name, after he had 
been persuaded, by Abraham’s entreaties, to receive money 
for the field; because, by the sale of the sepulchre, his virtue 
was maimed or diminished: for, in fact, the name of Ephron 
is found written in the very same manner, after that event, 
as before. Nor ought it to be imputed to Ephron as a fault, 
that, being pressed, he took the lawful price for his estate ; 
when he had been prepared liberally to give it. If there was 
any sin in the case, Abraham must bear the whole blame. 
But who shall dare to condemn a just sale, in which, on both 
sides, religion, good faith, and equity, are maintained ? Abra- 
ham, it is argued, bought the field for the sake of having a 
sepulchre. But ought Ephron on that account to give it 


584 COMMENTARY UPON GENESIS. CHAP. XXIII. 


freely, and under the pretext ofasepulchre, to be defrauded of 
his right? We see here, then, nothing but mere trifling. 
The Canonists, however,—preposterous and infatuated asthey 
are,—rashly laying hold of the expression of Jerome, have 
determined that it is a prodigious sacrilege to sell sepulchres. 
Yet, in the meantime, all the Papal sacrificers securely exer- 
cise this traffic: and while they acknowledge the cemetery to 
be a common sepulchre, they suffer no grave to be dug, unless 
the price be paid. | | 
Current money with the merchant. Moses speaks thus, be- 
cause money is a medium of mutual communication between 
men. It is principally employed in buying and selling mer- 
chandise. Whereas Moses says, in the close of the chapter, 
that the field was confirmed by the Hittites to Abraham for 
a possession ; the sense is, that the purchase was publicly 
attested; for although a private person sold it, yet the peo- 
ple were present, and ratified the contract between the two 
parties. 


END OF VOLUME FIRST. 


EDINBURGH: 


THE EDINBURGH PRINTING COMPANY, 
12, South St David Street. 


2 









rh 


7 3 
come 


a 
’ 
a: 
3 
ok 


” 
> 
te ry i 





¥- 
we es 
a 





hy AM 
L 
. ae 
Ni —— oe 
4 
2 3 
pm 









. 
_ - 
< 
dD 
i Oi: 4 
gad J? = 4 
~t is 
+ * ee | 
vo — ; 
MS 
A ‘ of 
F mie Rn a ie a fX rd 
ey Pr i vb Salty he 








i's ‘ 


ni 
se 
fit mel ox 


ape 










ia 
a fas 






























“Site yg 1 
. A hy ray, 
F . D 
a) p 
hud 
F 1 
i 3 * ‘ 
oy ’ 
+ 
\ 
¥ 
*%* 
& 
r 
‘ 
i 
Le 
. 
+ 
A 
= 
4 7 : 
G . oly ay 
*. Ft 
, 
+ Ss 
‘ ~ » 
% ’ eS er.A 
- s > 
' é 
‘ 
: » 
t 
~ 
: Pry a 
’ i -% lla ee 
es } ele) ta 
2 a ‘ ‘ | ly yee, 
i > . te i bs | 
FW ? . > ars 
~ 7 a ‘es ett 
- P d 1. 


—o 


an 
al 
i. 
7 
aan 
> 
x 





<= 
~~ 


ri he 





ae si ota th 
: ete 4 Weep 





Ce ee ead 


we 


4 


a or ce ae an menage, 


‘ 


- 
; 
Cad 
— 
ro a 
r 
~s 
ae 2 
nes 
as - 
. we 
a inal 
es 
re 
Ve 
2 
Zz 


s 


e: 
* 


i kes UF 


Te? a 








PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE 
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET 





UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY 


























































































































PhP “" ' 
Shh vada Neurg, pho hey oy 
hela ’ ‘ : Ji he : 1 2 ‘ © ‘ 
Vite Denes fous, aa 
Bag i NS te tl 
i Ppa ens nde ; 
Dy Aree pine, eye ne , i 
ee ae 7 5; 
7 ¥ ; v7? 
ig” ear , 
: ‘ ’ "as , 7 
f ere 
on | eo ‘ 1 4 
whit : : ‘ , 
(ean oe ane " , ' 
tee lesb aegis bags pe «they 1 
‘ Tatra ren ayy ws) ro ; : 
i hear Aiea Miu ate 7 ‘ t 
fe ape ayy ged hy : ' \ 
Fete ’ Fi ite ‘ iy ar) 
fit he rf) ey ‘ a opt hnebentegs z 7 . f - 
nie pee Nab abe tbe iin i See atat grate. eee t G ' ' 
ALA Rea ay aA oe Cen ‘ erent. Aw 8 Nan 1 - il U 
we etetnrand pin rtnbtace yh ire meg meal sete g iy elias Brag yt as cere 
basen Fe epee e ig ee tea tset Nr hie ge: ‘ eiip its if rn 
ate mie 5) ena urade re ne Arrest SEA *. : 
add ee ERS meee we : 
“ae rl PU CP PERLE DN Es yi syns ‘ an 
AERA RE RLM ahead) i 1 {Rt rT : i 
Pi Ap eed abel y “4 : i b \ 
tata riper: ii eats a * ‘ ; y te 
atin 4 yu, 4 . ' 
eee ' 1 ' ‘ . 
, ’ ha 
eae 
- aati + 1 _t 
Peseye Isert " A 
sates y foe 1? a, 
Ts is wrest ' € by hye 
cppay? y oh 3 ' . 
. ie tek sei a ma ih Fy : ; ; : 
faeye as ee are . 
fae pad t ete 
H ‘ - H 
. +. : 
° mae gO 
vag duet! Rarer a 
re : ; a 
+ of : A 
t in ’ a 
‘ 
oe pin} ' . A 
tbe oie ihe 
sheet iat peed bes ioigece ot y i 
EA Apt aw ob? op lwo ; ’ 
der 1h eal : 
ee : 
ta 7. ax 
i 
‘ Fi . ae 










BF nd 
rhe 





iA é . 
RAs ay 
on he ena: 
















* me 
Ys xu Ne oN 


et sone + “ 
HER 







PINT EL LING! 
Sytner 
phen ee fe 
A * 











Be 


by ’ ‘ 
Sin (be 
ae . 














LPT web | 
wy ‘ A 














































; 
ba 
rt we Rte ee Are 
ines ah 
urts eis: Bea 
ot a] tey/ 1 
: ein ¥, Sait! PEP wok a 
duR ast BRS SEA NS EER AAOR ba be 
“ i) LUE WORMS LT Boa FLSA yt 
Lewisee hte ahaha Redeen sa keray pce ced 
vant ee aaa ee ee 
i he ris 
+ by Sas ris y ; 
ae : eee u ah ‘ Rane wary rane ‘ 
ASAE BAYES ‘ 
nS i ya ne “ANE 7 


yee: 











\ 
Eire A 
Sati aes, 



















tid 7 
yi } 

siutie ei: 

RAN Fo Hy se 





wants 
eae a 






