Title: Catechism of the Council of Trent for Parish Priests, Issued by
  Order of Pope Pius V
Creator: Pope Pius V (Council of Trent) (John A. McHugh, O.P. & Charles J.
  Callan, O.P., Translators)
Publisher: New York: Joseph F. Wagner, 1923
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: Published 1923; public domain in the US by date (rolling
  95-year term, expired 2019). Archive.org item metadata carries no
  access-restricted-item flag, confirming open access, checked directly
  against the item's own metadata, 2026-09-25, this session.
Source: Internet Archive item catechismofcounc0000pope
  (archive.org/details/catechismofcounc0000pope), fetched directly
  (curl, raw bytes, following redirect) from the item's own _djvu.txt
  full-text file, 2026-09-25, this session.
Provenance note: Body text unaltered including its own OCR errors; not
  independently spot-checked for OCR quality beyond the opening pages
  and a mid-document sample this session.

monk Reo Maceniey 
PEA eruae ys 
pe 


s 


ae Pengitebtm ters ayer 
sreaee res 


-2U 
SPE 


193) Chant CF, 


~ CATECHISM OF THE COUNCIL 
OF TRENT 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2023 with funding from 
Kahle/Austin Foundation 


https://archive.org/details/catechismofcouncO000pope 


CATECHISM OF THE COUNCIL 
OF TRENT FOR PARISH 
PRIESTS 


ISSUED BY ORDER OF POPE PIUS V 


TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH 
WITH NOTES 
BY 


JOHN A. McHUGH, O.P. 


AND 


CHARLES J. CALLAN, O.P. 


SECOND REVISED EDITION 
SIXTH PRINTING, SEPTEMBER, 1937 


NEW YORK 
JOSEPH F. WAGNER, Inc. 
LONDON: B. HERDER 


Nihil Obstat Cane 
V. F. O’DANIEL, O. P., S. T. M. 
T. M. SCHWERTNER, O.P., S. T. Lr. 


Admprimi Potest 
J. R. MEAGHER, O. P., S. T. Lr. 


Provinctalss 


Nihil @batat 
A. J. SCANLAN, S27 .D. 


Censor Librorum 


3mprimatur 
YKPATRITIUS J. HAYES, 


Archiepiscopus Neo-Eboracensés 


NeEo-EBORACI, DIE 3 JANUARII, 1923. 


Copyricut, 1934, by Josrpu F. Wacner, Inc., New York 
Printed in U.S.A. 


LI TAF 
CONTENTS 


PAGE 
EERANSEATORS gh INTRODUCTION 3.45.50) Goa sid hk Ro asia ey eee xi 
SER MONBER (OS RAN Cre ey er ay AY cain Bank ea we ce eek oe et XXXix 
CATECHISM OF THE COUNCIL OF TRENT 
INTRODUCTORY 
Needionuvelintousminstric tions) 415 sas on nance tne os AOA ee aortas I 
EEGs LOle le CU CIOUSELNSELUICLIOM sre mrae ai os 4.08, 6 os & case, 41a tte ee Vo To: 5 
Ricans Ole CHOIOUS I NSETUCHON > sy: )sic ity hess os) al ave eases See lect ee 7 
DrvasionhangsUse or this \Catecnisin ays ci). aj21) sara 0g oe ARIS ele oer 9 
PARTAI- THE CREED 
LPH pa hbo SOO noe OC CEN Cr ecreeae RT ee e N e Se S  -2 II 
MONS ECOG a ee meer Satish ols ieee ae Soa) Ss Gov IOS Ooh S Fos) sIee Sie areie Oe eae 12 
ARTICLE I 
MVC ATI POLPATLICIO comp mee cero csr ais chy aiese Tors See ei A Giereieie eibse 16 viglets otanplse, 6) ears ee 14 
BeDNMES CHEV .E geccere te fafa oie tote Si sisi 925 ssid oo is.n0 is law [Ge Fo, 31019. grok Srs/S co's ae, 0 4 Oe ow Be 14 
esa r Cey CA ead Mo eT 6 ei rsa Nal so on ip wlfsscc cero Re sels. ese, « ansilesouniin\ ovale Sheer erecg Suenaiwits 16 
Sepia bhi etmmcteive reer atey ey eye arouses ek te evs beR MR debe we spaces ounsa cus Ry giles o's we aever saa gnahe 20 
Sor ays cota Cpa emer se VITA reas i cpsy onic oie ot stnsionevsns ve be, sige ee cea lela Sie Ga waere gobs, ccs 23 
BO AC OLE POORER RTS eee cased rcs Wate, erste rene se, alisraife eleteb atte oper eriendha ede Saute nee tates 26 
Ogrtoavcueana Marts acta cmc ten sider iecye oie enue eicigcot Oman olen eos-4 camo e 27 
OMA on hingspvisipleand AnVisi ble! cic. mg oe yo sry = SG a ones) sie 00 fe ots sh 29 
ce ocuSTeToOvVidenCe mG) GOVErnmlen Us crsteles eo) (oral acyl) <6 care: stelle) =s Sayers errs ee eas 29 
iSreation thesvworkot the 1 hree "Persons... 5. anes ears a ee maeaee ses nena eee 30 
ARTICLE II 
Tereypeydeaes GREE 4 oriccd.1.9 ono 0% JOO CIN TORII ait OO HOS SI Oks 31 
“TOSS”. 2. b.ao os un no omd0c 6 disia bo /cd CII CERI i Id nero VOR inide scii Scacnea Oc 33 
OC CTR ayes herd cide o ROD 0S 0 Onchg CO LOMO H OEE IORISTG CHE On IEc DI ROITRCNC MBION Reger cic 35 
“8a Onihy SOA” son dane aod ond de cuagdag sed oONEOUn TOO Undo Oe co saamore 36 
EC) Ce TRSOTC eee A EIS DIOR IDR eC aa SAO Die wie Seelale tisie eres Gale ere sake ets 38 
ARTICLE III 
Tespottance Of Article’ <. .scrtese- oe ee eee er eqs « vc mcleis c eisie et wclewe ss 4I 
Cmuno was Conceived by the Holy Ghost)... iia lees cairn ere ences 41 
oo) Baran vole Hove Weta MERI oon Sino 5 3.60 so 506 6 or OU OOO AGO Ds DOR aa 45 
Types and Prophecies........00 eee eee teeta 46 
ReecconsStOlat DISPATLICle mere ere ceetatets o ecayela eisai a siece ren yarn ie Aedade, MS kel 4 47 


iv CONTENTS 


ARTICLE IV 
PAGE 
Tmportanceof Article. ....k55tawe sen sears Sesame. SOAS once eae 50 
“Suffered Under Pontius Pilate, Was Crucified”’...........-. 6. eee eee eee 50 
* Dead wind: Buitiedi” coc oc cee teres ude live. Secalrccesaeas dy ase alesis ora tes fale ened eee 53 
Useful Considerations:on. the Passion:. : 4... < oases oto. oeeloes eeeeeteaers 56 
ARTICLE V 
Trvportance Of Articles, ao 5.0.c%/sreisweia: os erase ss aoe oe) sal he SESS rectene Tors aitaas cesta arene ean 62 
SHe-Dbescended into Helh” ae 5. ievacn Sa ee aie e ae a ee ie late enero 62 
“rhe Third Day He Arose Again,’ €t@:. tek cm ne a's 5 = alae sale tells ear ate ee 66 
Three, UsefullConsiderations on this Article: ) -2..0- wars. ss os «pele oe erie 69 
ARTICLE VI 
Importance of Article ss. «osc. cau otesies oi otn 2) ohana cay ee eee eile eects CCS tet 73 
“He Ascended:into: Heaven” o.00%. eee wow ees Oe see > eee See ete 73 
““Sitteth.at-the Right Hand)” etes a sa.44 sts «<1 ee s eene e e 74 
Reflectionsion the Ascension’ .q.00'ascrsurs cian 5 Meee Gn eee as hae re 75 
ArTICLE VII 
Meaning ok Article: cso icwe ox «ac eit ike iets DOnI st acoin Steer ta Sane er ae 80 
“Krom thence He Shall Gomes" etc. auc cise tore ore erat ere eae rete eee eee 80 
This TruthoRightlyvan Article of the Creed om esac <r arctan tee 83 
Circumstances‘of the udemient ioc cccn scant test dso Ste ee a ee ee 83 
Tmportanceiot Articles c4 isan. as svaiae «sacle 4am Oe Ie sk oie ee eS 86 
ARTICLE VIII 
Importance Of Article. .cdr.o-¢ a5 kis sis sAPeas ciate ctGe Eni te ce ORT ocr 88 
is Ol veal & (Cos Bik © gos) aaa ey SNe cient mar GORE AE UN NT SOR ES eM Ce wad 88 
‘lr Believe-in the Holy Ghost, tes 5. cae cia. eidi Se CR Sr ee 90 
WrorkseAppropmated: to: the olyaGhosti. siete ci et aes cic eee ee en 94 
ARTICLE IX 
Importance Ol Articles ac. cn | sees ae tees he ener eres oR Ine 96 
Ll Belleve inthe oly: Catholic Churches | scree icieierry at icie aera a nee 97 
PRartsiof:the Churen a0). ent «cian cys, eos P daw of hon ee enti= Sher oe RRO ene Cee 99 
Marks of thé Chureny..6 shei.c sic coves aiansc 6 6 acc IeOOIeEeIST ee ee e 102 
Bigures of the Churches 08. tec tvs cuvie no rare errs Pal crerarene Onno ot eee nC Ton 107 
The Communion Of Saints somes ate nce acces. cetaiaie euceeesl verre ne re ert 109 
ARTICLE X 
Importance of Article. coc5 ack ith wantin Seater oa tees Pence eae ete 113 
@he, Church) Has Power toy Rorgive Sins) seers ene aie teen ee 511} 
Extent of this Power sta. sisrcecsa svn i piety reer eee oe II4 
Limitation of. this. Powery.c..0:5s.. 5 /s1¢ melee re 1 cee Te cece env ade 115 


CONTENTS Vv 


ARTICLE XI 

PAGE 

BEN POTLANCE OL ATHICIO Ween Neen Nencrayetc ic oes ome ahaa orar eee loans hid Se cnepetoue'teis 120 
eebnevResiirrechionOmunes BOG Ye 6 ck ac cre io a 6 stern reas, ontop renarhohelS aus, avons 120 
Hart snatch Gckesusrec tore rien a csn tele oe Sl cae BR CNL e Se Ae ot Rkecate 121 
PAM I NELLIS 1 SOs eter ree ura Marana nde B= aici iaic cis. ste aye Saws wid oie kha iad 124 
aiherbody, Shall Rise Substantially the Same... ..<.0% .<e2.+:00.seccecechan 125 
‘he: Condition of the Risen Body Different... 0.5 .60:00000s0c% eee et eens on 1277, 
Wdvantages of Meditation on this Article.:....:....s0cc0ecehsrecesenendan 130 

ARTICLE XII 
Mira OE LAT CE TOMA TUCO Ne rti..8 Syrian ee ree cat itu eee d Phe Sake 132 
BMEMO MEL ASIIO, oct bet n w SISA ate Silo Girard fscaco eistete, count sass Sos Sime 132 
Negative and Positive Elements of Eternal Life.....2.......0.020.000-0000' 135 
COT RETAINED APENTACSS crete ey tate ere eed wets See 8 <a oe ol aS EL OM Gaba ete aac 136 
PNELESCOLY Sid AD DINESS warrantee enetonere ne aS Gataat veo. saci sb 8) OS RICE cao Ree oe 138 
PART II: THE SACRAMENTS 
isaportance of .nstruction on the Sacraments, ......cg....6.c.em ts «© s0e0s 00 0 re re eat 
RERUN OL Cle SACLAIN CT baat sos ersrcP thee Per ctehe lars oh) hay say Lorie) aifel or wes ToNe dey apiehor-e doyehoua, Sos I4I 
Bide titastd OMAOLAL OACTAMIENG Sars sic Teierare ey iors anaiisi ate oe ace nev haa aieken ar auermsuey a diosanousts 143 
Wivatile SAGTAIMENESY WVETE INSEICULEs 2 o'<'orace av spl:ausiius sohe © oie\eexOhe w: Wasi sie) ob emsva ii 148 
GL SLOteL Me =O AGHATING US iy coleha «sane chs) ops a/!5r3 (wie o.0ilss 5 (utse a r-aialian aoaun Suovaranere coyeuelaiopg: e4bore 150 
Ceremonies Used in Administering the Sacraments..................00000- 152 
Past ETAOL MEN SACHA LINE T OS by cae) achor ating) ales atesiotsirak a1 .etV sy WN Shehiah shana heMe ia, a8 esas 152 
Sor PALISONLOL LOE SACTAITIONES i. cyciam orshc) o af hela; a) sy sume rayete: Hie: Sy 5 ah ahs) ohare, ouaS) heim coats 154 
RATE OREO MeN ACT ATIIOLIES Rist Ase letaie yes: 121 oscil: 5) oflai «101 +16" odepatlogoyions seals, ot) aks va) sip elon Sous 154. 
MINASTOLSUOLEL ETO ACEATINCTIES Ha oan ttavetecsrssheler «ans tex! whats oan tered wea are seh share Saud oyar ous. 2 155; 
BSFLECESTOEt NE SACLOITIONLES etal ta: ay. ib iel al ee ore ois otis ia) isc} MISA ole) Ha, SPasai ays ial ho alse ars 157 
BAPTISM 
POSIT 5 ogg add HUsies S05 SOD UR GOOD Can OOOer Raw RCO BONO Tig gn EIOIme Gee 161 
NI eaTeTees CMe MRI Nec reetietoe Stic aie teendee ieralevelecsiensi ana GinG ole euafaselis Boars oie pisreladtere ss 162 
DD StATAT ELOLL MORE Beier Gas TP cue ELE ie ar ec oor ear aia. eos eee apa. Sea touevelsiscers ere eur 163 
Wonstibiemee lem citar tet rotor wares sieve teks evareneaencyovone ste evalael ete croneys fre ay 163 
ARS ET Soret arrete nic ctepecorecche sueter sie ceuavens Sarotemonen senate caveat secon wate qe, acs 164 
TERGSSTRE Ls evap esis Qik SUAS Suse et RO EIU oe SHORE On la acc eae 166 
ING ERAELAE HAS OSA sgt Ain 8 5A SSS Se 16.3.0 BO Bod Ao eSB einIatis aioti> DSA Be easIee 169 
EET SCACULL LOTR EN ee Teter feo nfo reece he ruaiaae lela eioranarciel eusvtinervuncehersiens’ 6 169 
NUL CTSCOLS Meer TTC e snes Tore Rote mane Me te one eka obo (eher steuan Nereus Aisronecovel’ove! evsi8) Bithe asian jad 8 172 
SOLIS OLS ete eis igen iene seers a ell Nr snunnok, © oN VeheMeln olintr Ini nyalointeibfene|e\sl°:e\e\risie/s\ 016 0.6 173 
_ N@OESias se on aeons son nc ee ounoos 7aoRo06n cons sep oNod coma soso wuoaner 176 
Dispositions for Baptism.........--- ++ eee eee eee cece en eees pee ear neat 180 
Diese oe BER Rtils oo age Bh auio s alse Bd coco conomU dao duomecornmareemr 182 
Corsnienttes OF DAM Rts ob ance dnoce0 6000000 CHa e todd obo oU oem nau 192 
CONFIRMATION 
FMPOLtAaNnce..... 0.6 vee eee ee eee eee eee eee ease tees tee eees 199 


Namelotsthis Sacraments a5 ss sa cnanay anes se see eee em ciereiey so elelalene -199 


vi CONTENTS 


PAGE 
Confirmation a Sacrament. cocicscre.se.ctescre once Sis te on ere ciate ale fatten ovetsileisterenctenete 599 
Confirmation Distinct from Baptism. ......... 222+. 5.22 - cece cece eee eee 201 
Institution of Confirmations :auc «21 cio es a= ae ewan chara ace ellen Palle 202 
Component: Parts: ¢ fuji cite © <oe e eas discs bs «ie vie Slew ie slsaesfohen eke ol amet aqeretatarereranials 202 
Minister: Aci, hein oe Crees ew ee Grete ee ey ee ite ee ee ee 205 
Shore soret copscconeddunr ee ie AEA ATS ici 0c 206 
Sub jeetrrs sie ae ale SG bak G8 fe Be retee taheice teeter een tacts fetal fateh iafs ates etet nti a oeele 207 
BAECS oes bie wh a ESS OG ele ee aE Its Shey Ot Ut elie tale earners neeer Sa cyereaer 209 
Ceremonies s fa.ce.cce ne cinree co place cid & oO uo slr ra areca tetenaey avatar etme cea aie eRe 2iI 
THE EUCHARIST 
Importance ss sccaes tot ee.57t a os See hee © eng ee Sg ornare 213 
Tnsti tuitions 6. s)kina Sos 5:4 205 Oy Sik weece Gene erat aes oRS eat ae etcmeteelt ta arc oe eee 213 
Names‘of this:Sacraments.2.:...4546 54.265 +=. 5s <8 OS Sere ea eae eee ete 214 
The Eucharist aiSacraments «2.08 cae oS eS sada d ak ves ore aie ctapoetore eaten eee 216 
Phesbucharist buts One sacrament... sqrce sou lee eae er) ere ene 217 
Mattér’of the Bucharistee i4ces & Se ae thks Se ak a oe eee 219 
Form of ‘the: Bucharistctc, fc cccears an elas seas ees eer eee re are 223 
Three Mysteries’ of the; Bucharisti.. 0572 0... cesta sc. s ecto secu orks oie eee 228 
"The Réal Presence 5 alo fineiccs so ohn © Sins choc Bn wie ay Saisie al re Baran erate ee aera eee 229 
Transubstantiasion s. 2 sac aos aitoch) = salon om Sarees sate ieee as ee oe te eee 235 
The: Accidents ss as ss, o's. Se Fale 2 Pe sha ls cust: are she wise Sale ane steletesst ere caae semen eete 240 
Effects’ ofthe Buchianist: tacco v's Gace seriuin oot nies oe SOUS Oe eerie eee 241 
Recipientiqa ds caves oer ee Ce eas ca tn See e WES W Smee CRI tenet eretetchnenereeeeeeene 245 
Obligation“of Gommunion co .77cr.ie ie o's sols aes aa ae ret rete tet erent 249 
The. Rite of ‘Communion. (jas acs «as cies sie seiee qe cienieryer erin ieee ener 252 
The: Minister of the: Buchariste. . circ srsieirsin) sie siererertaeic wre + cere icienas casteeeaete 253 
The’ Sacrifice of the: Massy oc o.is0islew s a quan ese eras ins rela rein cetee eeaCenne 254 
PENANCE 
Timi portance cies ticaiiitrs i tecsraval gs dara st aceca aca nce ose ot eee RRR ae ae re 261 
The. Word! “Penance.” nix bis oe eccis & Ae Oe Cn orm em ETTORE Uren enn eee 262 
Whe: Virtue of Penance ces ccm «er wrasse or ot shanerch sieve ner ste ete tener ne elena eae 263 
The Sacrament:of. Penance’ (fiery «0 ots cere. stesee ik Coreielaeie oe eae een ee 265 
Trstit ution iw ott tes ® as levcis ws Sire. of ahaa, a Sines ede. STOR Taree et Sree ee 266 
Penanceis.a Sacrament.o.tie: foie WS wos 1s oc ORCI IRENE eet een 266 
‘The Sacrament May. be Repeated)... gcse cc cer ieee neyo 267 
Constituent: Parts mertcic ints ojere.o srccs le oi Sa ai calareac, eee rere ee ore ae oe eee 268 
Rites Sinan coueigie. mais Ss suathinha: y nciosste etecereas fee wis Supercar Aiea 269 
1D) oo CR arc NCI aN oa ANION PREM ines cise oe an do uo k eS bo oan 270 
Necessity s.. i. 655/s!einsraisverss8 each 08 a ouster ene cre hriars remanence 271 
Untegral- Darts... sis, cys.s7e wis Soiy since srelere terever aerate eis Tete ee 272 
Contrition® os see ciara san actor ues verte Oe eRCL eeanee 273 
Oro ho) Oe PEN IRR MEO IO SOO OOO ob muon Goce oc UbSes cel eowcne 281 
Law of Confession si: .css%) od lore clery cretucrree eine tee re ne nee 285 
Qualities of Contession... 15. sxe sna See cern etter oe ea en 287 
Minister of the Sacrament ic smi ae cere eer errr en ree ene 290 
Diities' of the Confessor: /2.sidec esse eee aie ees tne 203 


CONTENTS vii 


EXTREME UNCTION 


HIM POTLANCE Tsoi sacra. SO BONE eats 
Scars, OT ent ie Rea bette Palit Mathes soy snes ates =e 
eraremio riction 4 Sacraments o.oo a oe oc sk ook eke cs chee hc ccna Be 
ee rN ie ea Sar eee ee oe 
ey ee ey ee eee 
[SASS ial NR, ete aie ana Passe SAS WS HO ae GS gy a 
Pee metctiGd eet ene kc oc ir CoA en aye 15 neue at 
Srnec en foe Recent PRG Ouse ue eee LTR =o 
cag EES eat a EE ce det ELT ar tig | ee ie 
ee ae ata 
Hoty ORDERS 

HIDORU ANCE Meta iacls tretietra saa tie sid tex OS 6% US SEI eR Cee 

Requirements in Candidates for Orders. ..........60c0c0000000 00 cell, es 
Bree Orders sad’ lahsdiction..o cn” MESS aay s 
Ren ihe Serreient 6 i coe ss eck ce y cat 6 an 
ks C2) ae SIA lan ect eRe ual ie i iene dy 1s 
PNirriaa ere Ole OTC OLS tere rag: rete ta encarta cess 2 ia cheyay cio el o/ehe\ laghrone’s Sie ross eae esta ceioxs ove ao 323 
SESOTIG EE © AE Roy ode Pens nN eons oto lea hohalch shane epee w SN Tave sy Sia, 4 ale nie wVOte Are 324 
BVUI OTL OLGACES ete, Te Gat rae rato eke et sictetotal stake is: satehobalalsMansaPo hs ba. aie ea 325 
Hubs ore OL STS Schacter eis ente ava aie leet Mal esny nee oh Oe nats aaa A st a oo NE 327 
ew OLOld wettest MOOG ctoe spac sarote's ciate os sie ste oe, wie e steelers otaieterele ere eis aie dapatete, ote 330 
uN CuONS {OM LEV MeSthOOG q.iis hoists se Se ee ee ee Oe ae se oie thes we eee 331 
Degrees Of Ne ELICSENOO aaiare cele cele Ss avai sreiss isis) 4%: S-Srereiia we Pb id 5 6 64 6 apie ere 332 
MMEMISCeR Orel OlyAOrGersan.:.)4ea me eats ts Meh ta in: «Biers Hie) wa tsi aye Wee wc oe 334 
RIECIDIENLEOn EO y, MOLGEnS ae Sac We fetes crete chan «©. Syhone aye a eyoiels Cio ereieroue eye gest esene 334 
raaliCatiOns Ofer fleSENOOG ata yaceyo ccs "ahsfoee os as jaiereid ois <vens-syayeye cece ienels sores rae 335 
He OC ESPOLAELO VA OTC ETS oe ete ensues Weck ofc ratakta ais (ste esos Sree Sue, Sea sta alexa po) aheyah caseekas 337 

MATRIMONY 
[BaepaVey SVE - Sa coma oothO Bo ooo 8 ode om OCC 6 wo oC Ion ReIICR Ro OLEe oeea cen 338 
WNicaE TICE RATIO NV AUTIET Oe nc mete datcc rey na caine ous ot ects cleo nies cata e ts eel Sie ents as teaane 338 
arrmageris a NaturallContrachas jaca e esate aerate stelele els) sje avoys afalald el alsiale etek 342 
Wiaetha 2oib Shorten scons aaaa ape som U pea UDen DC ame cBaTeET duboeroe 345 
Wipes cave selon ClivmGe tan shero doce doco sae Oberon noe oAOo OOOO Ole canons 346 
Unitay anal Ibaeltewelhiloibiny os Sys naee on aeads Joos asunmaue Deeb aes toads 347 
HEMT CEU IESSIN OS: Ol VEATTAAG Cita a) solic sate ora as ne minh aio 016 ee sal a api acm oar tee 350 
Her tiestois WarricGuleople mere icrretre ais ye\cioicie a iets asp ras troun a, oS oi pis eneenibunssheneis 351 
Wawaotthen@ hunch Oneviarnage sreciae aici eis oie cheer eeters crete -yayciere Bic) telecon 353 
Recipient of MatrimiOn yams tee wir eiicieir leis 2 science cle oir nisl eee 354 
PART III: THE DECALOGUE 

RIA MGr ance eee es cle ee ee oe sis ia eacn sence ean cee eet e ned sst 357 
Motives for Observing the Commandments.............--.++2e eee se eee 358 
Promulgation of the Law............-+++-++- Pee lor ciaiie/aretet ontiarsen de aia aleitedee 363 


Way am the Lord thy God” 226-652 cc een es dsc eee ete eee ee neens 366 
--“Who Brought thee," etc... .. 2... eee erect eee eee teen eee ees 366 


viii , CONTENTS 


PAGE 
“Th ou, Salt not Ela vie Stramee Gr OUSy CCC mera ieletetais cialcislel atcha stelelelotoie ielelewele =e 367 
“Thou Shalt not Make to thyself a Graven Thing,” etc.................--- 373 
<OTvam the lord. thy God Mighty, Ct Cire ~, oeisietelecotcns «oie alcesaleliolis otolohenlteleaanend B77 

SECOND COMMANDMENT 
Wihy, Distinet from thet B testi apc ct crs etatetet atetele olan ake ac elraae ot ells eae eal 382 
Tr pOrcvance s oemrace mie a credence syorerei ret etece elcclate spots Rens rele a ola tel for eles ieee tae 382 
POSITIVE PAU Sw dic wie deat ouealn Os teueisiayaiene Sitemntar eile © ein apace (Scale loud lciepeaele Menten een caee aera 383 
INCE AKC.) Ebest leae em eo miaticinics USIGU HUE Sciboe sites ccs Soss 391 
CFT 5 (6) 6 (50 DR ee i Re er PS Ran <r SORE Ri eee goes IRIE Gc 6 394 
THIRD COMMANDMENT 
lBoay forme sols Seer are Hea OCRed bro. ocd Bon Gon Mee cob EER os bt 396 
‘Riemember that thou Keep) Hoky, ete scncaqj <= cls1 9 = easier iene rene aie nore 399 
“Six: Daysipnaltsthow Labour,: “etGns: g<~ersio als ose sailor ie eis eer 401 
“Thou Shalt Dono Work'on It,ete.c.s..cc.cces «ssn sis ee veae eee 403 
Motives for the Observance of this Commandment...............eeeeeeeee 406 
FourTH COMMANDMENT 
lea) fo} aezh oS Ra te ic MO EME OOS fr ae OOS hr om bdo ook aoe s 408 
<“Honourthy Pather andithy Mother) ioc0.. 0... 15029 sem cae 5 kere nae 4II 
“That thom wiayest bewwone-lived, « 6G... cjrclomeeiceiae oie ae einen eee eee 416 
Duties.of Parents toward Their Childrents¢.. 1.0. See aei ate kate ere 418 
FirTH COMMANDMENT 
Er HOrtANCe si.6. sj Sallets wesw ols ote ta sleion ols etciens Neehebe areas CRMs een nro eee eee 420 

Prohibitory: Bart yeh iss eis laialonere wie es fos) eMelle ateracnevel ater cane et ora tet tence ia pee cee ae 421 
PositivesP arte: See.cctsisistaiee aisi.chetaralts le Mtatiel ley olsiehohecehs ens iers-aat IS eee a 425 
How tovPersuade Men to Morgive, eta. asa. a0 aacie ce eee onion ene ree 427 

SIXTH COMMANDMENT 
ewe Ye) ORR COIR CINE KRISS OO oO IIgs co OA kno OOOO Obca sou 431 
Pronibigory Patt vw sracisire wmeie Urol wie Weenie) ereaceserererel tera en nee eran aaa 432 
Bako I). dose al SEs oe ae nck IOS CICA CIO CORON Ao RU COM Gin CRM So dUoeaonmodo 433 
Mears) of Practicing Purity. isc vctmar ccc os waaniicpcinieie atten nc citer arene eee 437 

SEVENTH COMMANDMENT 
Pre PORGATICE Patty terre ait apne Geren si skein casi Ronee tenants ECs OOS MAD O eo bis 440 
IN GB atiVe (PAT, /asscsnsarsivg sr Qh seiles & a! 6) Water chc Guu) MuceMorl este eg ee FORe sa ORR ROR RRR Rn cante aa 441 
POsitiv 6 Part .t creis:-crecicsics Biipcsurrwis erin chase edateesn: ORISA ROR ANOS NE Tec 447 
Sanction ofthe SeventhaCommandment:. ancien mice i en eine: 450 
Pxeases for Stealing: Refuteds jc. scars onc eer irs ares ntene renee ree ane 450 

EIGHTH COMMANDMENT 
Tim portance cig 28 sit ausansiin wiecerenar satel oedelns ey eleat chennai reich Reo Rarer oi ae 454 
Dee R 6 Ao ath ee ROMPRES ct baer a, aS Ci cis 3. SRO tic feo i. 0 CUSGERS loin oS Gritexe 455 
Bositive .Parbydeiiswaie ane oc qloeiy tio a greenery kei nents Ce an ie 460 


CONTENTS ix 


NINTH AND TENTH COMMANDMENTS 


PAGE 
Had POUL ATI CG: eepette MEY. conc Pees Fane start ona treahcy neyo cAI or alisv heeds, oon 466 
BC RALIVGRE ALLE seach ba eRe Tee don cioition erent oeicike ree hovneiod nae octane 469 
IP ORMRTYS 0 REV ees ttn Oe aor a aS Panes Nog Mr ee ny ne a ee 473 
Thoughts which Help to Keep these Commandments.............-eceeee-- 474 
Chief Ways in which these Commandments are Violated................... 475 
PART IV: THE LORD'S PRAYER 
Hem PORE ATIC’ Th Riri taIeK a ete Rian eave An oh Snide AE eceMee tale wea Oe tne: 477 
INECESSIT VDODBE TE VET: Re Ri tya tr dey i) Sts aoa ay clea Sharan Mey Mice hae te Mala is on ee A477 
EDreaa bSLOLRE GAY Ch mpeg a po cestete ie ws aprone hee eee CEI Oe ass ae 479 
LEGS IS) (Che Bs oS One ae eR ee a et eee Oe ee ee 483 
iuinateyVe Shotld Prayifor, Saisie ecs hic s Sora 5 eee eee at land oe 486 
ona One onoOuld Pray. vontyens aatcloac suas dino od ae hunni enema eatoence 488 
PLOMVVAI ONES SHOULG PLAY ncraton vores iarshoaeys soisyaussecitiere Loerie ase apie ee Aoys eee 491 
Pane araiOmenOrienavier an memeoteciede ceteceiC cones sles tcrchabeketoe havavety cca hit e Ne ay 493 
Ato WeLOSE DAVE VVCU eucyscclthetage apse Memmaree s Gaei sera fecehe aver son eat aR occ ee hee te 497 
OPENING WORDS OF THE LORD'S PRAYER 
ISRO AIACO We toys, ee eR eM oFe) lech oh of Suse estab (ania (at aFsV ar aLai'm in care so cal MA ORS) Ole Scbieeete lard «Ges Ee 501 
BREN CINGI ae ory die ier ck oto. ccistiohis ss rei ms POR er Sones ole SRT NG as ALS RINSE i ere ae 501 
BUG trammeyeeiore AO cies Sdisia ie vin ter Sa es VRE AMR oe REE ere Sag oa bara are d 508 
II BAT Cv ATI EL CAN CO be tote aa pigens patiey orcs ico aoirs 0 spovscaie oud dasunr eal’, 3 aie Sek? Sie el Ma REE SII 
First PETITION 
What Sanctification of God’s Name We Pray for.............c.cecceseeeee 515 
What Sanctification, etc., We Should Practice. ...........ccecccscccsseces 517 
SECOND PETITION 
Enel sto CONS, 6s Aone ee SiOd Aa BOE opione Cnd.0 Hom aceon OOO Ono Onctasocanaie 519 
COT agp IRR ede Faroe gab HHO. 60 BO AORaG OmhO Nid BVIGaNy Cho PDO OID OUIO0 COLE c ORC 522 
SEG CRTC cae ER eee re rear sR vaiCore pote, a ect shes Migs s Coca ue ON toyake Tieb sae BELO 523 
Dispositions that Should Accompany this Petition..............+++2+-++0-- 526 
THIRD PETITION 
Neots ay acc oabusbdun 6 de Oeard cos ORO UUOO Dane Ee GOeen piCd pan OOD rn nre 529 
Loup? WU o\S IDYekn) “7, o dic o ctw 0.0 odio G5 8 MEAD OC OIDS BORO Rec adic bom oDicn Orme 533 
Lone aethasit ist bleavemiee ee situs esi cie cia suis eietn erele tees enetenans repay aeitelallets 537 
This Petition Contains an Act of Thanksgiving.......... 6.0 s eee ee eee eeee 538 
Dispositions that Should Accompany this Petition.........-.:+sseeeeeeeeee 538 
FourtTH PETITION 
Nasties ood odd oa syninhe peu dda dnn a bs OOO Ua) 50 000 Coen meio 541 
Inducements to Use this Petition. ...........0 cece cece eee e eee reece eeeee 543 
Sea ene ae ae ee eRe nec tie Poe, sare oY Skaters coteicoues vlcsion nl sVs) ole «6 sis siete Sls 543 
Cele Le id BS Oe ala, 05.019 COA IRR ONY Oe MCR ORS Cael c Mgr ce Ren oe 545 
546 


CONTENTS 


FAGE 
LO GS See ene RE Yo eee OR encIer CO OCCILg 5 ODO O.2 0 aac bo. Oo ORO 547 
1 0 eee ae OO ne aie rene an anc O DOODLE CS DOO Oe CO SO OC an OS oar 547 
SUT is DY. 2 sccvacetonav oPavavonederatedeneseeesehe somes atop ienal o2s/a Per kial Keke eke tekst eat Reece) eke seas 548 
The Spiritual Bread Asked for in this Petition.............-ssseeeeseeeee . 548 

FirtH PETITION 
I Gash olcy qt no\e aR EEOC Mea Eo oO acu nein Bee Ie SE ROOM Sacob oS 552 
Dispositions with Which this Petition Should be Offered................... 553 
SDE ES 2 cree Bh sven or Ss aah ws eae! ohtcante, aceical ala evrotrs eaemek at at ane aes) sits syol sera ere cttats esata ene 557 
“LOG ae tes cosh ase Men ah st sca sek oro ele lr aga rar ae ce cake ape acaba Sh sees kao ected Me eran 558 
“Forgive us as Weub orgive Our Debtors saci crse a <inlaicie wie sila ieualedetiete otitis 559 
This Petition Shouldinotibe: Neglected .- ccm ox «cic arc we cre ann catereerarenstale 561 
How to Make this’ Petition F rustiulja. sie =~ <1 « ol cloicleseleleveleteis state ieyatels avae eESO3 
SrxTH PETITION 
TIM POREATICE 2 lotice. o.o.cie ecoptescesd 4 fale ae IROPS IIIS os ee Swit CS 0 ie ee epee 565 
Necessity s2600.cccss ais oS Wan Mn Greate hs axe SS wah Rr aR Vee Oa alles Sesh eeete 566 
Temptation 's.i05 226% asists Bar aranetetaio cies ie SSO Re Se Se we are Oe eS 570 
“Lead us motiinto Temptations 7-. access. 6 oes one eee ae ete emer rere 571 
Objects: of: the Sixth: Petition 5.14 css crete wdc os chats cele sr ra spel olvelere ecto eer 572 
Dispositions Which Should Accompany this Petition....................... 573 
The Author: of, Victory over, Temptations. c.. 5 oss 00 ods atau esac epiinee 575 
The, Rewards: ob Victor yes c-<.aisierentpsss sare seie rata asta aceienouens eacle ye stale Rete Ree +. 576 
SEVENTH PETITION 
lfhoa: te oonenpD onion aan concen cetno ogee Coc ace boSU6 Do Odo Ne 577 
Howathis’ Petition Should! be Maden. sciceeeccrericnis ee ciiepee tonne 578 
SBrom: Bvih a. acersien-s omieicleis Wales sres-5 6s a Omer dsc aici eRe eT eS Re 580 
ug BAL i2:) al Ok Mane ete eee CCN Ee MATHS CEE CO OURS 8 a Ob ao 582 
Patience and. Joy invAMictiontc.c...nx<iicsssinc Omen ote ermine eens N62 589) 
THE SEAL OF THE LorRD’s PRAYER 

Fruits that; Come:at the Conclusion’of Prayers ase. see eee enn eee eee 585 
Meaning of the Word “Amen? sa <5 02 iis asters cle © ome ee ree eee ee 588 
Advantages of Terminating our Prayer with this Word................... -» 589 


AppenpIx I—Definition of the Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin 
Mary, Given by Pope Pius IX, December 8, 1854........ 591 
AppENDIX II—Definition of the Infallibility of the Roman Pontiff, Given 
in the Vatican Council, Session IV, Chapter 4, July 18, 1870. 592 
APppENDIX II]—The Inseparability of the Contract and Sacrament in Christian 
Marriage, from the Encyclical of Pope Leo XIII, February 
TOs, TSS Of 5 We cin sic equa eenetentne ete eeuete cies ereaea renee eee 593 
AprENDIxX IV—Dispositions for Frequent and Daily Communion from the 


Decree Approved by Pope Pius X, December 20, 1905.... 594 
INDEX: OF SUBJECTS .G nies: otek eee ee eS ee Sorel Mabon, Suis wsitiee « 597, 


INTRODUCTION 


It has been commonly asserted by non-Catholic writers that, 
prior to the religious rebellion of the sixteenth century, cate- 
chisms and catechetical instruction—in fact, all religious educa- 
tion of the people—had long been neglected, and that to Luther 
and the Reformers was due the revival of the practice of the 
ancient Church. From the days of the Apostles and during the 
first centuries very careful attention was given to Christian doc- 
trine ; but in the Middle Ages, we are told, the zealous practices 
of early times were relaxed, instruction was given up, and igno- 
rance of the things of faith prevailed generally among the com- 
mon people. 


CATECHETICS DURING THE EARLY CENTURIES 


That the requirements for admission into the primitive Church 
were exacting and thorough, and that catechetics, or simple in- 
structions in the fundamental teachings of Christianity were 
diligently imparted in those early times are facts too well known 
and universally admitted to require any special proof here. It 
is clear from the writings of the Fathers, from the ancient lit- 
urgies, and from the decrees of the first Councils that the cate- 
chumens before their Baptism were obliged to learn by heart 
the Our Father and the Apostles’ Creed, and had to be instructed 
in the meaning of these formulas.’ In addition, special instruc- 
tion was also given them regarding the Commandments and those 
Sacraments they were about to receive, namely, Baptism, Confir- 
mation, and the Holy Eucharist.? It was to assist the labor of 


1Cf. Didache; St. Cyril of Jer., Catecheses; Apost. Const., iii. 15, 16; 
Peregrinatio Ethereae, vii. 1-5; Pseudo-Diony.; St. Ambrose, De Mys- 
teriis; Counc. of Agdé, can. xiii; Second Counc. of Braga, can. i, etc. 

2On catechumens see Catholic Encycl. iii. p. 430; Dict. de Théol. ii. 2. 
pp. 1877 ff.; pp. 1968 ff.; Duchesne, Christian Worship, pp. 204 ff. 

xi 


xii INTRODUCTION 


catechists that two famous books of instruction were composed 
in the fourth century, the Catechetical Oration of St. Gregory 
of Nyssa and St. Augustine’s De Catechizandis Rudibus.* 

And that instruction was regularly given to all the faithful 
on Sundays during the Eucharistic celebration or Mass we are 
assured by early authorities, such as Justin Martyr, Origen, 
Etheria, the Apostolic Constitutions, and St. Germain.* At Jeru- 
salem, indeed, in the first centuries we know that not one, but 
many sermons were preached after the reading of the Gospel at 
Mass.® ‘ 

Not a few homilies of this early period have come down to us. 
Of these one of the oldest is the work known as the Second 
Epistle of Clement, written about 130 A.D., which was in reality 
an exhortation to lead a Christian life, and was used in the meet- 
ings of the faithful.* Other similar, but more celebrated sermons 
are to be met with in the writings of all the greater Fathers. 
Among the early Popes we find such distinguished preachers as 
Leo the Great and Gregory the Great. In Milan St. Ambrose’s 
eloquence was renowned ; at Hippo St. Augustine delivered short, 
colloquial instructions to his flock every Sunday and Feast Day; 
at Arles St. Caesarius was a zealous advocate of preaching and 
enjoined upon all his priests, both in the cities and in the country, 
to preach the Word to the people; at Antioch and Constantinople 
St. John Chrysostom became the most famous preacher of all 
time, surpassing his illustrious contemporaries, Gregory of Nazi- 
anzen and Basil, who were celebrated as sacred orators through- 
out all the East. It would take too long to enumerate here all 
the great teachers of Christian doctrine that flourished during 
the early centuries, and it is really not necessary, since, as said 
above, it is readily admitted that religious instruction of the 
people was not commonly neglected throughout the Patristic 
period.’ 


*On this work of St. Aug. see Catholic Encycl. v. 77. 

“Justin Mar., Apol. i. 67; Origen, Migne P. G. xii. 1012; Pereg. Eth. 
p. 81; Apost. Const. ii. 57; St. Germ., Migne P. L. Ixxii. 

* Pereg. |. c. 

* Tixeront, Handbook of Patrology, p. 21. 

“On catechetics in the early Church see Catholic Encycl. v. p. 76; 
Vil. p. 443. 


INTRODUCTION ae 


CATECHETICS IN THE MIDDLE AGES 


The whole question, therefore, centers about the Middle Ages, 
that is, from the beginning of the seventh to the sixteenth cen- 
tury. But a glance at this period will also show that there was 
no general neglect of proper instruction even during these cen- 
turies. This is evident in the first place from the many national 
and provincial Councils held in various countries commanding 
priests to instruct their people in the doctrines of faith, especially 
those contained in the Apostles’ Creed and the Pater Noster. 
Already in 529 the Council of Vaison had obliged the priests of 
Gaul to take boys into their household and teach them to read 
“the Psalms and the Holy Scriptures, and to instruct them in the 
law of God.” This same Council refers to a custom of this kind 
already existing in Italy. It was from these priests’ schools 
that the parochial schools of the Middle Ages and of modern 
times took their origin. Mention of such parish schools appears 
in the Acts of several Councils of England, France and Italy 
in the early Middle Ages. For instance, the Council of Clove- 
shoe in England, convened in 749, prescribed that the parish 
priest should always have in his house a school of learners, 
and that he should not demand for this instruction any recom- 
pense from the parents. Likewise Theodulf of Orleans in 797 
decreed that gratuitous instruction should be given by the priests 
in every town and village of his diocese. A similar enactment 
is to be found in the Constitutions of Otto of Vercelli. The 
Council of Mayence in 813 decreed in its forty-fifth canon that 
parents should send their sons to the parish schools to learn in 
the vernacular the Our Father, the Creed, and all else that was 
needful for instruction in the Catholic faith. A Council held 
in Rome in 826 ordained that there should be three kinds of 
schools established throughout Christendom,—episcopal, paro- 
chial, in towns and villages, and others wherever there could be 
found place and opportunity. In the same century we learn 
that both boys and girls attended the schools attached to the 
parish churches in the diocese of Soissons. 

Episcopal schools for the training of clerics and monastic 
centers for the education of the children of the neighborhood 


xiv INTRODUCTION 


go back to the fourth or fifth century. In the sixth century we 
hear of convent schools for girls, as at Arles, and also of open 
schools conducted by nuns for the benefit of the entire neigh- 
borhood. Throughout the Middle Ages monastic schools flour- 
ished all over Europe. The children of the rich and poor alike 
frequented these schools and instruction was imparted gratis; 
nay, we even read that in these institutions the poor children 
were sometimes nourished at the expense of the monastery. 
Toward the close of the medieval period communities of clerics 
were founded for the express purpose of devoting their lives to 
the education of the young. Of these the best known is that 
of the Brothers of the Common Life, founded by Gerard Groot 
(1340-1384). Thomas & Kempis was a member of this com- 
munity. 

Besides the parochial and monastic schools there were still 
others established during the Middle Ages for the purpose of 
instructing children. Such were the Chantry, or endowed Schools, 
where the poor were instructed free of charge. There were also 
Guild, Hospital, and City Schools,—all engaged in the work of 
education under the direction of the Church. 

In short, we may say with the best historians that throughout 
the Middle Ages schools for religious and secular education were 
very numerous and well attended wherever circumstances per- 
mitted. The spirit of the Church during all this period is 
clearly reflected in the words of the third Lateran Council of 
1179 which says: “Since the Church of God, as a pious Mother, 
is bound to provide that opportunity for learning should not be 
withdrawn from the poor, who are without help from patri- 
monial riches, be it ordained that in every cathedral there should 
be a master to teach both clerics and poor scholars gratis.” In 
the period just before the Reformation countless elementary 
schools existed in all the principal countries of Europe, so much 
so that Martin Luther himself said that it was almost impossible 
for a child to go ignorant under the Papacy. Even Mathesius, 
one of the most bitter of the Reformers, admitted that “parents 
and school masters taught their children the Ten Commandments, 


*On medieval schools see Cath Encycl. xiii. p. 554; ets Mores 
Cath. i. p. 600. 


INTRODUCTION XV 


the Creed and the Our Father, as I in my childhood learnt them 
at school and often repeated them with the other children, as 
was the custom in the olden schools.” ® 

Nor was religious instruction in medieval times neglected in 
the home and in the church. From the first centuries great stress 
was laid on religious training in the family. In this connection 
we need only recall.the names of such Christian mothers as 
Monica and Paula to understand how faithfully this duty was 
fulfilled. In the writings of the Fathers also baptismal sponsors 
are frequently reminded of the serious obligations that rested 
upon them of providing for the religious education of their 
god-children. And that these early customs were zealously trans- 
mitted down to the sixteenth century we are assured by conciliar 
decrees and similar documents which repeatedly recalled the 
duties of religious training incumbent on parents and god-parents. 
In Luther’s own day elementary religious training in the home 
was by no means overlooked. Biel in 1510 asks in a sermon 
that parents prepare their children for first Communion; and 
in 1533 Cochlaeus, speaking of customary home instruction in 
Germany, says that the children had “sucked in (their religion), 
as it were, with their mother’s milk, and this is still the case 
to-day among Catholics.” 

As for the instruction given in the churches there can be no 
doubt that the ancient custom of preaching on the Sunday Gos- 
pels and Epistles was not given over during the Middle Ages. 
We may take the practice among the Anglo-Saxons as fairly 
typical of others. There “the parish priest was required to ex- 
pound in English on Sundays the portion of Scripture proper to 
the Mass of the day, and to preach, or if he were unable to preach, 
to read at least from a book some lesson of instruction.” 7° 
Collections of homilies made for purposes of preaching and ser- 
mon books were quite numerous even in the early Middle Ages, 
which goes to show that the ministry of the Word was by no 
means a dead letter.1* And not only were the clergy obliged to 
instruct the people, but the latter were also seriously admonished 


® Historien, Bl. 63. 
®Tingard, Anglo-Saxon Church, c. iv. 
"Cath. Encycl., vii. p. 447. 


Xvi INTRODUCTION 


to be present at sermons, as we learn from such popular man- 
uals of religious instruction as the fifteenth century Dives et 
Pauper. 

Doctrinal discourses on the Our Father and Creed, similar 
to those which the early Fathers had given to the catechumens, 
were also customary. Lenten sermons on the Catechism which 
were an old custom long before Luther, were no doubt a con- 
tinuation of the instruction given to catechumens before Baptism 
in the first ages of the Church.’? 

From the thirteenth century onward we meet with conciliary 
enactments which prescribe frequent exposition of Christian doc- 
trine. Thus at the Synod held under Archbishop Peckham of 
Canterbury in 1281 it was decreed that every parish priest should 
instruct his people in the vernacular four times a year on the 
Creed, the Commandments, the Sacraments, etc. In 1466 a 
Synod of the province of York reiterated this law. The Councils 
of Béziers in 1246, of Albi in 1254, and of Lavour in 1368 went 
still further and required that doctrinal sermons should be given 
in parish churches every Sunday. The last named Synod even 
published a catechism to be used as text-book for instructions by 
the clergy of the dioceses of Languedoc and Gascony. The duty 
of giving similar instructions to the faithful we also find incul- 
cated in the statutes of the Councils of Gran in Hungary in 1114, 
of Gnesen in Poland in 1248, and of Tréves in Germany in 1227. 
In Germany in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries priests were 
often urged to recite from the pulpit every Sunday the Our 
Father and the Creed, and sometimes also the Hail Mary and 
the Decalogue. They were further required diligently to instruct 
the people on these heads. In 1502 the Basle parish priest, 
Johann Sargant, published a work for the use of preachers in 
which these points are developed.*® 

It must also be borne in mind, in this connection, that the 
thirteenth century saw the rise of the great mendicant Orders 
which were expressly founded for the purpose of preaching. 
They very soon spread into every country of Europe, preaching 
in the churches, on the streets, in the lanes and byways, so that 


“ Grisar, Luther, v. p. 4oI. 
~~ Grisar, 1. © 


INTRODUCTION =e 


again it could be said, as in the days of the Apostles, “their 
voice was heard in all the earth.” 14 


CATECHISMS IN THE MIDDLE AGES 


We see, then, that, contrary to the charge often made against 
the Middle Ages, the work of teaching religion and of preaching 
was very far from being neglected in those centuries. But what 
about the further claim that the catechism originated with 
Luther? that the little book of popular religious instruction, 
arranged in the form of question and answer, and comprising 
all the chief heads of Christian doctrine was unknown before 
his Shorter Catechism of 1528? Again a brief glance at the facts 
as they existed will give us a satisfying reply here. 

From the ninth century on, there have come down to us 
numerous works of popular instruction composed in Latin and 
in the newly formed European tongues. Such, for example, 
were the Disputatio Puerorum per Interrogationes et Respon- 
Stones (9th cent.), which explained the principal points of 
Christian doctrine; Notker’s exposition in old German of the 
Lord’s Prayer and the Creed (9th cent.) ; Ottfried’s Catechism, 
also in old German, treating the Lord’s Prayer, the Creed, 
the Symbol of St. Athanasius, a catalogue of mortal sins, and 
the Gloria in excelsis (gth cent.) ; the manual of Dhuoda to his 
son, explaining Christian faith and morality (9th cent.) ; the 
explanation of the Our Father and the Creed by Bruno of Wurz- 
burg (11th cent.). 

Beginning with the twelfth and thirteenth centuries catechisms 
and works of popular instruction were so numerous that we 
must here confine ourselves to a mention of only some of the 
most important. Such were: the Elucidarius of Honorius of 
Autun (12th cent.), arranged in the form of questions and 
answers, and afterwards translated into many modern languages ; 
the Boxhorniana paraphrase of the Creed in old German (12th 
cent.) ; the Septenarium of Hugh of St. Victor in question and 
answer form (12th cent.); Joscelyn of Soissons’ exposition 
of the Creed (13th cent.) ; St. Thomas Aquinas’ explanations 


“On medieval preaching and catechetics see Cath. Encycl. vi. p. 78; 
vii. p. 444; Dict. de Théol. ii. 2. p. 1895. 


XVili INTRODUCTION 


of the Lord’s Prayer, Hail Mary, the Creed, the Ten Command- 
ments and the Sacraments (13th cent.) ; a treatise on Christian 
doctrine for the use of children published in Italian (13th cent.) ; 
the Catechism of Friar Lawrence, or Royal Catechism, em- 
bracing all the principal heads of Christian doctrine, written 
in the thirteenth century and translated into French in 1481. 
In the fourteenth century appeared Cardinal Thoresby’s Lay- 
folk’s Catechism in Latin and English, and a Catechism based 
on the Septenarium which the Archbishop of Toledo addressed 
to his clergy. 

Among the many catechisms and works of popular instruc- 
tion, which appeared between 1400 and the date of Luther’s 
birth in 1483, may be mentioned: Gerson’s A B C of Simple 
Folk, The Ordinary of Christians, The Art of Dying by Mat- 
thew of Cracow, The Treasure of Mankind,—all in French; 
Montanye’s treatise on how to live and die well, written in 
Spanish ; The Christian’s Mirror of Brother Dederich, The Guide 
of the Soul, The Consolation of the Soul, The Table of a Chris- 
tian Life—each in German. Just before Luther’s rebellion in 
I517 appeared in German Lindauwe’s explanation of the Com- 
mandments; in Italy, Savonarola’s expositions of the Our 
Father, the Hail Mary, and the Decalogue; in France, The Art 
of Living Well and of Dying Weill; in England, The Teaching 
of Wisdom, The Maniple of Pastors, The Art of Living Well, 
and The Mirror of a Christian. Two of the most widely known 
works for priests in the thirty years before Luther’s day were 
the Fundamentum Aeternae Felicitatis and the Discipulus de 
Eruditione Christi Fidelium Compendiosus. Both books treat 
the four main points of Christian doctrine, namely, the Creed, 
the Sacraments, the Commandments, and the Lord’s Prayer. 
The former is written in question and answer form; the latter 
contains questions and objections.'® 

Before Luther’s rebellion we know that there was.also a wide- 
spread custorh of printing portions of the catechism on separate 
tablets or sheets to be hung on the wall in order to facilitate 
the learning of religion. Until recently it had been falsely sup- 
posed that Luther was the originator of this form of catechetical 


* Grisar, op. cit. v. p. 492. 


INTRODUCTION xix 


instruction. Numerous prayerbooks and manuals on confession 
containing abundant matter regarding the Sacraments and all 
points of doctrine were another means of disseminating religious 
teaching before Luther’s time.*® 

From the foregoing enumeration, which is only a part of what 
might be given, it ought to be quite plain that before the out- 
break of Protestantism in the sixteenth century, instead of there 
being a dearth of popular religious manuals and literature, there 
was rather, as Zezschwitz says, an “overabundance of material 
in the domain of catechetics.” 17 


FRUITS OF CATECHETICS IN THE MIDDLE AGES 


If to the brief survey so far given of ecclesiastical legislation, 
preaching, schools, and literary production during medieval 
times we add but a casual consideration of the manifestations 
of faith which stamped those ages apart, we shall have a final 
and most convincing argument that popular religious instruction 
could by no means have been generally neglected in the cen- 
turies that preceded the rise of Protestantism. And this is all 
the more remarkable in view of the gigantic task that confronted 
the Church with the downfall of the ancient civilization, on the 
one hand, and of the more or less ceaseless troubles it had to 
encounter thereafter from the attacks of barbarous peoples and 
the hostility of civil rulers, on the other hand. In spite of the 
unparalleled difficulties, far from those ages being times of reli- 
gious ignorance and neglect, there never was a period in which 
the things of the mind and the soul were more highly prized 
and more zealously cultivated. Then it was that, without the 
advantages of printing and of modern conveniences and means 
of transportation, the Scriptures and writings of the Fathers 
were preserved, transcribed and disseminated in thousands of 
copies by the patient labor of the monks; then were erected and 
established the many schools and colleges out of which grew the 
great universities and seats of learning of Europe; then were 
planned and constructed those magnificent churches, chapels and 


* Grisar, op. cit. v. pp. 492, 493. 
7Qn medieval catechisms see Cath. Encycl. y. pp. 78 ff.; Dict. de 


Théol. ii. 2. pp. 1898 ff. 


xx INTRODUCTION 


cathedrals, those masterpieces of religious art, which are at once 
a living testimony of the intelligent, ardent faith of the people, 
and the marvel and admiration of all succeeding ages; then were 
developed in the highest degree the arts of painting, sculpture, 
music, and poetry for the purpose of being used both to revere 
the mysteries of faith and to teach their meaning to the people; 
then it was that the Church sent forth her apostles and the mem- 
bers of her newly founded mendicant Orders to instruct the 
faithful and evangelize the pagans; then it was that, having 
found the races of Europe savage and barbarous, she made them 
civilized, having found them pagan slaves of idol worship, she 
turned them to the service of the true God and of the Crucified; 
then it was that the nations were united in the one true faith 
of Christ, that religion was the dominant factor both in public 
and in. private life, that faith yielded its highest fruits of piety 
and holiness in every rank of society, in king and subject, in 
scholar and peasant, in statesman and soldier, in cleric and lay- 
man; then, indeed, if we can judge by results, must the spirit 
of religion have been perceived and appreciated to a degree un- 
equalled, since at that time appeared its fairest and most varied 
flowers, since faith was then so fruitful as to give its very name 
to those ages.’§ 


CAUSES OF THE PROTESTANT REBELLION 


If now, however, we pause to ask how it was possible, in view 
of the picture we have just drawn of the centuries immediately 
preceding the revolt of Luther, that whole nations should have 
given up the faith of their forefathers, and this in a compara- 
tively short time, the answer is to be found, not in one, but in 
a variety of causes. First, there had been the Great Schism of 
the West and a gradual relaxation of discipline which had weak- 
ened authority and opened the way to many scandals and un- 
punished abuses in the ranks of the clergy. “At the close of the 
Middle Ages and dawn of the new era the Papacy had been too 
eager in the pursuit of humanistic aims, had cultivated too ex- 
clusively merely human ideals of art and learning, and at the 


* Shahan, The Middle Ages, p. 307. 


INTRODUCTION xxi 


same time had become entangled in secular business and politics, 
and was altogether too worldly.” !° Moreover, in Germany at this 
time the Bishops were mostly younger sons of princely or noble 
houses who were quite unfitted for their spiritual work. And as 
for the lower clergy, secular and religious, while many were 
zealous to diffuse religious knowledge by catechetical teaching, 
sermons, instructive publications and educational work in the 
elementary and middle schools, too many others were quite neg- 
lectful of these sacred duties.?° 1n truth, “at the time of Luther’s 
first appearance, in many parts of Germany there was no regular, 
systematic religious instruction of the young by the clergy or in 
the schools, but the children were left to pick up what they 
could in the home or from the public sermons. There were 
indeed regulations in force for the priests and the schools, but 
they were not acted upon.” *4 

Another cause which greatly contributed to the defection was 
that in many places the leaders of the movement against the 
Church were ecclesiastics who before had been acting as the 
people’s guides and whose influence, consequently, could not 
easily be ignored. Thirdly, and especially, the rebellion was 
fomented and fostered by the civil rulers in Germany, Scandi- 
navia, England, and elsewhere, who, taking advantage of the 
disorder, saw in the rebellion a coveted opportunity of gaining 
absolute control over the people and of confiscating the immense 
wealth of the Church, and hence gave to the religious leaders 
a support without which the revolt everywhere would have failed 
utterly. 

Uniting to the above influences the popular unrest and love 
of novelty which characterized the sixteenth century, and the 
discontented and evil elements that are present at all times in 
every society, we can easily understand how the apostasy could 
be so far-reaching in spite of the general diffusion of religious 
knowledge and the devoted zeal of a great part of the clergy 


and of the mass of the people. é has 
Furthermore, there was the recent invention of printing which 


2Grisar, Op, Cit. Vv. D. 427- ‘ 
 Guggenberger, Gen. Hist. of Christ. Era, ii. p. 149. 


™Grisar, op. cit. vi. D. 433. 


Xxii INTRODUCTION 


enabled the heretics to circulate broadcast their perverse teach- 
ings, thus confusing and deceiving the minds of the simple folk. 
Straightway the Reformers set about publishing catechisms 
of their own. About forty different works of this kind were 
produced by disciples of Luther between 1522 and 1529, and in 
1530 appeared Luther’s own larger catechism, called the Deudsch 
Catechismus.22. Besides these, numerous other catechisms were 
published by the different sects, such as that of Bucer in 1534, 
that of Berne in 1552, the Catechism published by Calvin in 
1536, that of the English Church contained in the Book of Com- 
mon Prayer in 1549, and the Heidelberg Catechism of the Dutch 
Reformed Church in 1563, which spread into Switzerland, 
Austria and Holland. One of the most pernicious features of 
the multitude of catechisms which the sectaries circulated far 
and wide was that their errors were so veiled under a semblance 
of piety that the unsuspecting faithful were deceived with in- 
credible facility.** 


COUNTER EFFORTS ON THE PART OF THE CHURCH 


Meanwhile the defenders of the faith were far from being 
idle. Nothing was left undone to stem the tide of error that 
was sweeping over Christendom. In particular the Sunday 
School and the Confraternity of Christian Doctrine were organ- 
ized,** and a great number of catechisms were at once published 
to counteract the baneful influences of those proceeding from 
heresy. In Germany alone we find twenty or more different 
writers of such manuals. One of the most famous of these, 
published at Vienna in 1555, was the Catechism of Peter Cani- 
sius, S. J., which was soon translated into a dozen different lan- 
guages. Works of the same kind appeared in great numbers in 
Holland, France, Italy, Spain, Portugal, Mexico, and wherever 


the civil power was not completely under the control of the 
heretics.® 


* Grisar, op. Cit. v. pp. 483 ff. 

*On Protestant catechisms see Dict. de Théol. ii. 2. pp. 1908 ff. 
“See Cath. Encycl. iii. p. 711. 

* See Dict. de Théol. ii. 2. pp. 1912 ff. 


INTRODUCTION Xxiii 


THE CATECHISM OF TRENT 


But good as were these individual and separate works, the 
Church at the Council of Trent, assembled December 1 2. tans. 
seeing the need of a uniform and comprehensive manual which 
would supply parish priests with an official book of instruction 
for the faithful, ordered the preparation of the work which has 
ever since been variously known as the Catechism of the Council 
of Trent, the Catechism for Parish Priests, the Roman Cate- 
chism, or the Catechism of Pius V. It was some months, how- 
ever, after the opening of the Council before mention was made 
of any kind of catechism. This was during the fourth session, 
on April 5, 1546. Eight days later the draft of a decree was 
read proposing that there be published in Latin and in the ver- 
nacular a catechism to be compiled by capable persons for chil- 
dren and uninstructed adults, “who are in need of milk rather 
than solid food.” The purpose of such a manual was to afford 
instruction for beginners in the primary duties of a Christian 
life and to prepare them for further and higher religious educa- 
tion. The idea met with general approval, but as the Council 
was occupied with matters more pressing, we hear nothing fur- 
ther about it until sixteen years later, in 1562. According to 
some the question of the Catechism was brought up by St. 
Charles Borromeo during the eighteenth session and a commis- 
sion actually appointed on February 26, 1562. What is certain 
is that the Papal Legates, after a protracted discussion, had 
named a committee before the end of that year; for on January 
3, 1563, they informed the procurators of Charles IX and of 
Ferdinand I of the existence of such a committee and assured 
them that work on the Catechism was already under way. The 
principal members of this committee, besides its president, Car- 
dinal Seripandi, O. S. A., were Leonardo Marini, O. P., Arch- 
bishop of Lanciano, Egidio Foscarari, O. P., Bishop of Modena, 
Muzio Calini, Bishop of Zara, and Francesco Foreiro, O. P. 
There were many other collaborators, chief among whom were 
Michael Medina, a Franciscan, and Christopher Sanctotisio, 
O. S. A., who assisted with the fourth and ninth Articles of the 
Creed respectively; four French theologians to whom were as- 


XXiV INTRODUCTION 


signed the first four Commandments; the Dominicans, John dk 
Luderna, Benedict Herba, Eliseus Capys, and the Franciscan, 
Alphonsus Contreras, to whom were given respectively the fifth, 
sixth, seventh, and eighth Commandments; a theologian of 
Granada was entrusted with the last two Commandments of the 
Decalogue. The following appear to have collaborated on the 
Sacraments: three Flemish theologians, on Baptism, Confirma- 
tion, and the Eucharist; Nicholas Ormanetus, on the Sacrament 
of Penance; Peter Fernandez, O. P., on Matrimony; Cosmas 
Damiani, Abbot of the Augustinian Canons Regular, on Orders; 
Arias Montanus, on Extreme Unction. All those who had part 
in the work of the Catechism were instructed to avoid in its com- 
position the particular opinions of individuals and schools, and 
to express the doctrine of the universal Church, keeping espe- 
cially in mind the decrees of the Council of Trent. 

During the twenty-fourth session, the work on the Catechism 
was brought to the attention of the Council itself, at a meeting 
on September 11, 1563. After various discussions a new plan 
was adopted. Instead of a manual for children and uninstructed 
adults, it was decided to prepare a much more extensive and more 
thorough work to be used by parish priests in their instruction 
of the faithful. A final decree regarding such a catechism was 
passed in a general meeting of November 2d, of the same year, 
wherein it was enjoined on all Bishops to see that the Catechism 
should be faithfully translated into the vulgar tongue and ex- 
pounded to the people by all parish priests.*° 

As the Council was about to close, the Catechism committee, 
as it appears, were ordered to submit to the assembled Fathers 
the work they had so far accomplished. This was done at the 
general meetings between the 22d and the 25th of November, 
and as the work was not finished the Holy Father was requested 
to take charge of it and to see that the Catechism was brought 
to completion and published.?” The manuscript was, therefore, 
carried to Rome, and the work was continued with little delay. 
Meanwhile Cardinal Seripandi died, and St. Charles Borromeo 
was appointed to succeed him as president of the Catechism com- 


* Sess. xxiv. De Reform. c. 7. 
1 Sess. Xxv. C. 21. 


INTRODUCTION —_ 


mittee. On December 21, 1564, Bishop Foscarari also died. To 
complete the work the new president enlisted the services of 
several more theologians, such as Gabriel Paleotti and the Portu- 
gese Statius. 

In order that the literary style of the Catechism might be in 
keeping with the sublimity of its doctrine, St. Charles called to 
its service the greatest masters of the Latin tongue of that age. 
These were Paulus Manutius, Giulio Pogiani, Cornelius Amal- 
theus, Silvius Antonianus, and Pietro Galesini. When the work 
was finished a first revision of the style was undertaken. The 
polishing of the first two parts was done by Calini, who had 
already been engaged in the composition of the Catechism. The 
third part was attended to by Galesini, and the fourth by 
Pogiani. This revision seems to have been completed by the 
end of the year 1564. Early in the following year, by order of 
St. Charles, who desired to secure absolute uniformity in the 
style, a second literary revision of the entire work was made by 
Pogiani. 

Meanwhile Pius IV died and was succeeded on January 17, 
1566, by Pius V. One of the first acts of the new Pontiff was 
to appoint a number of expert theological revisors to examine 
every statement in the Catechism from the viewpoint of doctrine. 
Chief among these revisors were Cardinal Sirlet and the two 
Dominicans, Thomas Manriquez and Eustachius Locatelli. By 
July of that year the work on the Catechism was finished. But 
it was not until the close of the year that it appeared under the 
title, Catechismus ex decreto Concilu Tridentim ad Parochos, 
Pu V Pont. Max. jussu editus.”® 


TEXT OF THE TRIDENTINE CATECHISM 


The first editions of the Catechism were printed without head- 
ings of any kind, and with hardly any break in the text beyond 
an occasional paragraph. This arrangement, however, appeared 
unsatisfactory to Pius V who therefore ordered that in subse- 
quent editions the book should be divided into parts, chapters, 

On the history of the Roman Catechism see Dict. de Théol. ii. 2. 


pp. 1917 ff.; Cath. Encycl. v. p. 79; xili. p. 120; v. Skibniewski, Gesch. 
des Rom. Katech. 


XXVi INTRODUCTION 


and paragraphs. The Questions that are found in most editions 
were originally drawn up by A. Le Feévre of Munich, and first 
appeared in the Antwerp edition of 1587. Hence it is clear that 
these Question headings form no part of the original Catechism. 
The same can be said of the Praxis Catechismi, an adaptation 
of the text to the Sunday Gospels and Epistles, found at the 
end of the book in most editions, which we first meet with in the 
edition of Serafino Cruceio, O. S. A., in 1645. This idea, how- 
ever, seems not to have originated with Cruceio, who tells us 
that he got it from a French edition published a few years before 
at Bordeaux. 


EDITIONS 


The original manuscript of the Catechism is not extant. But 
of the innumerable Latin editions that have appeared, the earliest 
are: The Manutian (Rome, 1566), so called because it was 
printed by Paulus Manutius by command of Pope Pius V; that 
published by De Farris (Venice, 1567) ; the Aquensian (Cologne, 
1567); that brought out by Kerver (Paris, 1568); a second 
Venetian edition in 1575; the Ingolstadt edition of 1577; and 
the Fabrician (Antwerp, 1587). Among later Latin editions 
may be mentioned the following issued at Rome: The edition of 
1761, which contains the Encyclical of Clement XIII on the 
excellence and use of the Roman Catechism; the Propaganda 
editions of 1858, 1871, and 1907. As was observed in the Propa- 
ganda edition of 1858, the Manutian text was by far the best. 
Hence the editors of that edition, desiring to produce a critical 
text, used the first Manutian as their basis, diligently comparing 
it with the best among the other Latin editions. 


COMMENTARIES AND ABRIDGMENTS 


From time to time there have appeared various works of the- 
ology and popular instruction grounded on the Catechism of 
Trent. Some of these have taken the form of commentaries, 
enlarging upon the text and doctrine contained in the Catechism; 
others, being intended for practical use, are synoptical in char- 
acter. Among the larger works the best known are those of the 
Barnabite, John Bellarini, and of the Dominican, Natalis Alex- 


INTRODUCTION XXVii 


ander. Bellarini’s commentary is in two volumes, the first of 
which entitled, Doctrina Concilii Tridentini et Catechismi Ro- 
mani, etc. (Brescia, 1603; Milan, 161 5; Lyons, 1683), was 
intended for the instruction of the faithful. The part of this 
work treating the Decalogue was later published in French. The 
second volume, designed for the conversion of heretics, and bear- 
ing the title, Doctrina Catholica ex Sacro Concilio Tridentino 
et Catechismo Romano de Verbo Dei, de Regno Christi, de 
Ecclesia, de Romano Pontifice, de S. Evangelio (Milan, 1620), 
has passed through several editions.?° 

The largest and most famous commentary ever written on the 
Catechism was Natalis Alexander’s Theologia Dogmatica et 
Moralis secundum Ordinem Catechismi Concilit Tridentini in 10 
volumes, octavo (Paris, 1694). This admirable work passed 
through seventeen editions from the time of its first appearance 
down to 1783—the surest sign of its great usefulness and suc- 
cess. Abridgments of it were made by Roselli, O. P. (Rome, 
1773, 1787, 1792, 1837; Venice, 1786), and by Basselier (Rome, 
1705; Bassano, 1767).°° 

Among shorter works on the Catechism the following are 
noteworthy. Partitiones Catechismi Catholici by G. Eder (Co- 
logne, 1571), contained extracts from the Catechism divided into 
sections and subsections and intended as a school manual for the 
instruction of the young. This work was republished at Lyons, 
in 1579, under the title, Methodus Catechismi Catholict. A few 
years later A. Sauli, General of the Barnabites, published in 
Italian an abridgment of the Catechism designed to facilitate 
its use for the clergy (Pavia, 1581; Milan, 1699). At Paris in 
1695 there appeared a small compendium of theology in 439 
pages entitled, Catechismus ad Ordinandos juxta Doctrinam Cate- 
chismi Concilii Tridentini. Three years later a second edition 
of the same work was published. 


TRANSLATIONS 
As said above, it was the desire of the Council of Trent that 
the Catechism should be translated into the vernacular of each 
country. Accordingly it has been done into all the principal 


® See Dict. de Théol. ii. 1. p. 559; Cath. Encycl. ii. p. 411. 
® See Dict. de Théol. i. 1. pp. 769 ff.; Cath. Encycl. 1. p. 206. 


XXVIll INTRODUCTION 


European languages, and even into Arabic. We are told that 
by order of Pius V it was at once translated from the original 
into German, Polish, French, and Italian. This first Italian ver- 
sion was made by Alexis Figliucci, O. P., and appeared in 1566, 
contemporaneously with the first Latin text. Two other Italian 
translations, those of Andreoli and Brazzaco, were published 
about 1804. The chief French versions are that of Bordeaux 
(1567), Gillon’s (Paris, 1578), Coulon’s (Paris, 1670), De Fon- 
tigny’s (Paris, 1673), Simon’s (Lyons, 1683). Among the more 
recent French editions are those of Doney (Dijon, 1840), of 
De Gagey (Dijon, 1854), of De Hallez (Paris, 1862), and of 
Marbeau and Carpentier (Paris, 1905). The first German ver- 
sion was made by Paul Hoffaeus (Dillingen, 1568). Among the 
German translations of the nineteenth century the most notable 
are Rechenmacher’s (Passau, 1839), Smets’ (Bielefeld, 1844), 
and Buse’s (Bidefeld, 1859). A German-Latin edition was 
published at Ratisbon in 1886.*1 

In English the earliest known translation of the Catechism 
was made in 1675, but embraces only parts I and IV. It isa 
very rare work, being found neither in the British Museum nor 
in the Bodleian. The only extant copy of it that we know of 
is in possession of the English Dominican Fathers in London. 
Its title page reads as follows: A Large Summary of the Doc- 
trines Contained in the Catechism Published by the Decree of 
the Council of Trent Which is Here Thus Summarily Translated 
into English. Accommodated to the Use of the Faithful and 
therefore Directed Unto Them. “If he hear not the Church, 
let him be to thee as a Heathen, or Publican.” Mat. 18. 17. 
Printed for A. L. in the Year MDCLXXV. 

Twelve years later, during the reign of James II, there ap- 
peared in London a complete English version of the Catechism 
by John Bromley. Dodd in his Church History tells us that 
Bromley, who had been Anglican curate of St. Giles-in-the- 
Fields, entered the Catholic communion about 1685. After the 
fall of James II in 1688, Bromley opened a school for young 
gentlemen. He died at Madeley, in Shropshire, his native county, 
January 10, 1717. While the diction of this version is good, 


"See Kirchenlexikon vii. p. 303; xi. p. 1054. 


INTRODUCTION XXiX 


Father Waterworth, S. J., says that, as a translation, it is ex- 
tremely inaccurate. The following is Bromley’s title page: The 
Catechism for the Curates Composed by the Decree of the 
Council of Trent and Published by Command of Pope Pius the 
Fifth. Faithfully translated into English. Permissu Superiorum 
London. Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King’s Most 
Excellent Majesty for his Household and Chappel, for him and 
Matthew Turner. MDCLXXXVII. This work is still fairly 
common. Two copies of it are now in the library of Hawkesyard 
Priory, England. 

Several English versions of the Catechism were published in 
Ireland at the beginning of the nineteenth century. The first 
of these, which appeared in 1816, was published by Dowling of 
Dublin. The name of the translator is not given. As this ver- 
sion was very unreliable, it was soon superseded by a new trans- 
lation, published by Richard Coyne, Capel Street, Dublin, and 
by Keating and Brown, London, and printed for the translator 
by W. Folds & Son, Great Shand Street, in 1829. An American 
edition appeared in the same year. The author of this new 
translation was the Reverend Jeremy Donovan, Professor at the 
Royal College, Maynooth. Although the translator, in the first 
edition of this work, aimed at elegance of diction and fidelity 
to the original, it is generally admitted that, while his English 
was flowing and readable, it was singularly devoid of accuracy. 
It is hardly too much to say that its worth did not exceed that 
of a paraphrase, with not a few omissions of things contained 
in the original text. As a considerable revision, therefore, seemed 
necessary, a second edition with notes waseissued at Rome by 
the Propaganda Press in two volumes in 1839. It is dedicated 
to Cardinal Fransonio and signed by the Very Reverend J. 
Donovan, D. D., Professor at Maynooth College, Domestic Prel- 
ate to His Holiness, Gregory XVI, Member of the Archaeo- 
logical Society of Rome, Honourable Member of the Society of 
British Artists, etc. While more faithful to the original, this 
new edition was so slavish, stilted and inelegant as to be at times 
almost unintelligible, and at all times most uninviting, as totally 
bereft of that charm of style so characteristic of the original. 
This second edition seems to have been followed by a third, for 


XXX INTRODUCTION 


the copies of Dr. Donovan’s work now published in Ireland show 
signs of still further revision, as being more accurate, but even 
less elegant than the edition of 1839. 

The next attempt at an adequate English translation of this 
classic work was undertaken by the Anglican, Theodore Alois 
Buckley, B. A., of Christ’s Church, Oxford, who was already 
known as editor of translations of Homer, A*schylus, Sophocles, 
etc., and of the Decrees and Canons of the Council of Trent. His 
version of the Catechism appeared at London in 1852. He 
acknowledges his indebtedness to Donovan in many respects, but 
at the same time deplores the many manifest inaccuracies to be 
found in that translator's work. Buckley certainly gave a better 
rendering of the Latin than did Donovan, but he adheres too 
closely to the idiom of the original for good English, and is not 
everywhere doctrinally correct. He also adds notes to indicate 
the main points of agreement, as well as of difference, between 
Catholic and Protestant teaching, occasionally attacking, some- 
times praising the Catholic standpoint. 

In 1911 the Very Reverend John Hagan, D. D., the present 
Rector of the Irish College in Rome, edited a Compendium of 
Catechetical Instruction in four volumes, containing a new trans- 
lation of the Roman Catechism, together with a translation of 
the Catechism of Pius X and of Raineri’s Instructions. This 
large work is now unfortunately out of print. Dr. Hagan’s 
rendering of the Catechism, though not remarkable for its ele- 
gance, is in every way superior to Buckley’s, combining, as it 
does, the two prime requisites of a translation,—clearness in 
expression and faithfulness to the meaning of the original. It 
is regrettable, however, that all Patristic references and notes 
are wanting in this edition. In a few places also some slight 
inaccuracies are met with which are doubtless due to oversight, 
or to the failure of the printer to observe corrections. The pur- 
pose of Dr. Hagan’s work was to provide abundant matter, drawn 
from the best sources, for catechetical teaching. He therefore 
first gives a chapter of the Roman Catechism as the basis of an 
instruction, and then complements it with the corresponding sec- 
tions of the Catechism of Pius X and of Raineri’s Instructions. 
The order of the Roman Catechism is followed throughout. 


INTRODUCTION XXxi 


But with a view to make the Catechism more readily available 
tor parochial preaching, thereby fulfilling the main purpose for 
which it was written, the present translators prepared in 1920- 
1921 A Parochial Course of Doctrinal Instructions for All Sun- 
days and Holydays of the Year Based on the Teachings of the 
Catechism of the Council of Trent and Harmonized with the 
Gospels and Epistles of the Sundays and Feasts. In that four- 
volume work the order suggested in the Preface to the Catechism 
is followed ; that is,a dogmatic or moral subject, drawn from the 
Gospel or Epistle of the day, is accompanied by the appropriate 
passage of the Roman Catechism in which that subject is ex- 
plained and developed. The sections from the Catechism are all 
supplemented by sermons, both in outline and in developed form, 
and by a copious list of references to a great variety of classic 
and modern sermons, to theologians, Scripturists, liturgists, 
works of devotion, and the like, all bearing on the subject of 
the day. The text of the Catechism used in the first volume of 
that Course is a revision of Dr. Donovan’s translation (Christian 
Press Association, New York, 1905). In the three subsequent 
volumes, however, the editors found it advisable to make a new 
translation based on the Latin edition published by Roger and 
Chernoviz (Paris, 1893). 

Since the publication of the above-mentioned Parochial Course 
there has been a call for a translation of the Catechism in sepa- 
rate form accompanied by notes. In response to this demand 
we have undertaken to give an entirely new English version of 
the work, from the original, using as our basis the Manutian 
text as reflected in the Maredsous edition of 1902, the fourth 
Roman edition of 1907 and the Turin edition of 1914. We have 
also had before us in the execution of the task our previous 
work in the Parochial Course, along with the translations of 
Professor Buckley and Doctor Hagan. Since the Catechism is 
an official work composed with the utmost attention to precision 
of statement and elegance of expression, the purpose in the 
present version has been to reproduce the sense of the original 
as exactly as possible in clear, dignified, modern English. Whether 
this aim has been realized, it remains for others to determine. 

The system of headings employed in this translation is entirely 


XXxii INTRODUCTION 


new. As said above, divisions and headings formed no part of 
the first copies of the Catechism. Moreover, those which were 
later introduced, being arbitrary, and often heedless of con- 
tinuity of thought as well as of leading topics and order, are 
acknowledged to have been to a great extent anything but a help 
to an intelligent understanding of the meaning of the text. They 
simply confused and concealed the truly marvelous arrangement 
of the original, which it has been our effort to bring out and 
emphasize, both in the placing and wording of titles and in the 
different styles of type employed. 

Another drawback of previous English translations lay in the 
footnotes and references, which often promiscuously grouped 
together what was native to the text with matter that was merely 
the work of editors. In addition these editorial notes are now 
mostly unpractical and useless for purposes of reference, as point- 
ing to the Decretals, the Fathers, and other works which very 
few readers would have an opportunity or desire to consult. 
Therefore it has seemed advisable to us first to separate the 
footnotes that belong to the original from the explanations and 
references which we have given, indicating the former by Arabic 
numerals and the latter by letters of the alphabet; and secondly 
to substitute, for those less useful citations, comments and clear 
indications of pertinent passages in St. Thomas, St. Alphonsus, 
the Code of Canon Law, etc., works which the great majority of 
priests and students can reasonably be supposed to possess. 
Should anyone desire further Patristic or Scripture references on 
any particular subject treated in the Catechism, these can easily 
be had by consulting text-books in theology or special works. 

Again, since it is the wish of the Church, expressed in the 
Preface to the Catechism, that pastors in expounding the Gospels 
and Epistles to the people should draw their matter from the 
Catechism, we have given in the forepart of this work an adap- 
tation of its contents to the Gospels and Epistles of all the Sun- 
days and chief Feasts. This plan is identical with that which 
is followed and developed in the Parochial Course above men- 
tioned, and in our more recent work entitled, The Gospels and 
Epistles of the Sundays and Feasts with Outlines for Sermons. 
As it has already received a hearty welcome in those works, it 


INTRODUCTION XXXIiil 


is hoped that its inclusion here will materially contribute to the 
practical usefulness of the admirable Catechism of Trent. 

Finally, in the end of this volume will be found several Ap- 
pendices containing important doctrinal decisions given by the 
Church since the close of the Council of Trent. 


AUTHORITY AND EXCELLENCE 


The Roman Catechism is unlike any other summary of Chris- 
tian doctrine, not only because it is intended for the use of priests 
in their preaching, but also because it enjoys a unique authority 
among manuals. In the first place, as already explained, it was 
issued by the express command of the Ecumenical Council of 
Trent, which also ordered that it be translated into the ver- 
nacular of different nations to be used as a standard source for 
preaching. Moreover it subsequently received the unqualified 
approval of many Sovereign Pontiffs. Not to speak of Pius IV 
who did so much to bring the work to completion, and of St. 
Pius V under whom it was finished, published and repeatedly 
commended, Gregory XIII, as Possevino testifies, so highly 
esteemed it that he desired even books of Canon Law to be 
written in accordance with its contents. In his Bull of June 14, 
1761, Clement XIII said that the Catechism contains a clear 
explanation of all that is necessary for salvation and useful for 
the faithful, that it was composed with great care and industry 
and has been highly praised by all, that by it in former times 
the faith was strengthened, and that no other catechism can be 
compared with it. He concluded then, that the Roman Pontiffs 
offered this work to pastors as a norm of Catholic teaching and 
discipline so that there might be uniformity and harmony in the 
instructions of all. Nor have the Sovereign Pontiffs in our own 
days been less laudatory of the Catechism. Pope Leo XIII, in 
an Encyclical Letter of September 8, 1899, to the Bishops and 
clergy of France, recommended two books which all seminarians 
should possess and constantly read and study, namely, the Summa 
Theologica of St. Thomas and “that golden book,” the Cate- 
chismus ad Parochos. Regarding the latter work he wrote: 
“This work is remarkable at once for the richness and exactness 
of its doctrine, and for the elegance of its style; it is a precious 


XXXIV INTRODUCTION 


summary of all theology, both dogmatic and moral. He who 
understands it well, will have always at his service those aids 
by which a priest is enabled to preach with fruit, to acquit him- 
self worthily of the important ministry of the confessional and 
of the direction of souls, and will be in a position to refute the 
objections of unbelievers.” 

Likewise Pius X in his Encyclical Acerbo nimis of April 15, 
1905, declared that adults, no less than children, need religious 
instruction, especially in these days. And hence he prescribed 
that pastors and all who have care of souls should give cate- 
chetical instruction to the faithful in simple language, and in a 
way suited to the capacity of their hearers, and that for this 
purpose they should use the Catechism of the Council of Trent. 
Still more recently, on February 14, 1921, speaking in the name 
of Benedict XV, Cardinal Gasparri, Papal Secretary of State, 
thus wrote to the Archbishop of New York relative to the latter’s 
Program for A Parochial Course of Doctrinal Instructions, based 
on the Catechism: “It is superfluous to add that the value of 
the work is enhanced by the fact that it has been planned and 
executed in perfect harmony with the admirable Catechism of 
the Council of Trent.” 

Besides the Supreme Pontiffs who have extolled and recom- 
mended the Catechism, so many Councils have enjoined its use 
that it would be impossible here to enumerate them all. Within 
a few years after its first appearance great numbers of provincial 
and diocesan synods had already made its use obligatory. Of 
these the Preface to the Paris edition of 1893 mentions eighteen 
held before the year 1595. In five different Councils convened 
at Milan St. Charles Borromeo ordered that the Catechism should 
be studied in seminaries, discussed in the conferences of the 
clergy, and explained by pastors to their people on occasion of 
the administration of the Sacraments. In short, synods repeat- 
edly prescribed that the clergy should make such frequent use 
of the Catechism as not only to be thoroughly familiar with its 
contents, but almost have it by heart. 

In addition to Popes, and Councils, many Cardinals, Bishops 
and other ecclesiastics, distinguished for their learning and sane- 
tity, vied with one another in eulogizing the Catechism of Trent. 


INTRODUCTION ey 


Among other things they have said that not since the days of the 
Apostles has there been produced in a single volume so com- 
plete and practical a summary of Christian doctrine as this Cate- 
chism, and that, after the Sacred Scriptures, there is no work 
that can be read with greater safety and profit. 

In particular, Cardinal Valerius, the friend of St. Charles 
Borromeo, wrote of the Catechism: “This work contains all that 
is needful for the instruction of the faithful; and it is written 
with such order, clearness and majesty that through it we seem 
to hear holy Mother the Church herself, taught by the Holy 
Ghost, speaking to us. . . . It was composed by order of the 
Fathers of Trent under the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, and 
was published by the authority of the Vicar of Christ.” %? 

Salmanticenses, the great Carmelite commentators on St. 
Thomas, paid the following high tribute to the Catechism: ‘The 
authority of this Catechism has always been of the greatest in 
the Church, because it was composed by the command of the 
Council of Trent, because its authors were men of highest learn- 
ing, and because it was approved only after the severest scrutiny 
by Popes Pius V and Gregory XIII, and has been recommended 
in nearly all the Councils that have been held since the Council 
Of rent.” ** 

Antonio Possevino, an illustrious Jesuit, and the preceptor of 
St. Francis de Sales, said: ‘“The Catechism of the Council of 
Trent was inspired by the Holy Ghost.” *4 

In his immortal Apologia Cardinal Newman writes: “The 
Catechism of the Council of Trent was drawn up for the express 
purpose of providing preachers with subjects for their sermons ; 
and, as my whole work has been a defense of myself, I may here 
say that I rarely preach a sermon but I go to this beautiful and 
complete Catechism to get both my matter and my doctrine.” * 

“Its merits,” says Dr. Donovan, “have been recognized by the 
universal Church. The first rank which has been awarded the 
Imitation among spiritual books, has been unanimously given 


% Ad Acol. Veron., lib. i. 
* Cursus, ix. p. 684. 

* Lib. vii. Bibliot., cap. 12. 
BiGhivs p-12s0- 


XXXV1 INTRODUCTION 


to the Roman Catechism as a compendium of Catholic theology. 
It was the result of the aggregate labors of the most distinguished 
of the Fathers of Trent, . .. and is therefore stamped with the 
impress of superior worth.” ** 

Doctor John Hagan, the present Rector of the Irish College 
in Rome, writes thus: “The Roman Catechism is a work of 
exceptional authority. At the very least it has the same authority 
as a dogmatic Encyclical,—it is an authoritative exposition of 
Catholic doctrine given forth, and guaranteed to be orthodox by 
the Catholic Church and her supreme head on earth. The compi- 
lation of it was the work of various individuals ; but the result of 
their combined labors was accepted by the Church as a precious 
abridgment of dogmatic and moral theology. Official documents 
have occasionally been issued by Popes to explain certain points 
of Catholic teaching to individuals, or to local Christian com- 
munities; whereas the Roman Catechism comprises practically 
the whole body of Christian doctrine, and is addressed to the 
whole Church. Its teaching is not infallible; but it holds a place 
between approved catechisms and what is de fide.” ** 

We are enabled to realize from the foregoing testimonies how 
invaluable is the treasure we possess in the Tridentine Catechism. 
It is a Vade Mecum for every priest and ecclesiastical student. 
In it the latter will find a recapitulation of all the more important 
and necessary doctrines he has learned throughout his theological 
course; while to the priest it is not only a review of his former 
studies, but an ever-present and reliable guide in his work as 
pastor, preacher, counselor, and spiritual director of souls. More- 
over, to the educated layman, whether Catholic or non-Catholic, 
who desires to study an authoritative statement of Catholic doc- 
trine, no better book could be recommended than this official 
manual; for in its pages will be found the whole substance of 
Catholic doctrine and practice, arranged in order, expounded 
with perspicuity, and sustained by argument at once convincing 
and persuasive. 

Finally, it can be said without fear of exaggeration that there 
is no single-volume work which so combines solidity of doctrine 


* Translator’s Pref. p. Io. 
* A Compendium of Catech. Instruction, i. pp. li. lii. 


INTRODUCTION XXXvii 


and practical usefulness with unction of treatment as does this 
truly marvelous Catechism. From beginning to end it not only 
reflects the light of faith, but it also radiates, to an unwonted 
degree, the warmth of devotion and piety. In its exposition of 
the Creed and the Sacraments, while dealing with the profound- 
est mysteries, it is full of thoughts and reflections the most 
fervent and inspiring. The part on the Decalogue, which might 
well be called a treatise on ascetical theology, teaches us in words 
burning with zeal both what we are to avoid and what we are 
to do to keep the Commandments of God. In the fourth, and last 
part of this beautiful work we have what is doubtless the most 
sublime and heavenly exposition of the doctrine of prayer ever 
written. 

The Roman Catechism is, therefore, a handbook of dogmatic 
and moral theology, a confessor’s guide, a book of exposition for 
the preacher, and a choice directory of the spiritual life for pastor 
and flock alike. With a view, consequently, to make it more 
readily available for these high purposes among English-speak- 
ing peoples this new translation has been prepared and is here- 


with respectfully submitted to its readers. 
Joun A. McHueu, O. P. 


CHartes J. Carian, O. P. 


SERMON PROGRAM}! 


First Sunday of Advent 


1, Dogmatic Subject: The Second Coming of Christ—They 
shall see the son of man coming in a cloud with great power and 
majesty (Luke xxi. 27). Pages 80 ff., 519. 

2. Moral Subject: The Sixth Commandment.—Let us walk 
honestly, as in the day: not in rioting and drunkenness, not in 
alii and impurities (Rom. xiii. 13). Pages 473, 534, 535, 
565 ff. 


Feast of the Immaculate Conception 


1. Dogmatic Subject: The Immaculate Conception.—Hail, full 
of grace, the Lord is with thee: blessed art thou amongst women 
(Luke i. 28). Page 4g1. 

2. Moral Subject: The First Part of the Hail Mary.—And the 
angel being come in, said unto her: Hail full of grace, the Lord 
is with thee: blessed art thou amongst women (Luke i. 28). 
Page 491. 


Second Sunday of Advent 


1. Dogmatic Subject: Our Lord, the Expected Redeemer and 
Messiah.—Art thou he that art to come? (Matt. xi. 3). Pages 
31 ff., 60, 504 ff., 520. 

2. Moral Subject: The Virtue of Fortitude—What went you 
out into the desert to see? a reed shaken by the wind? (Matt. 


xi. 7). Pages 61, 530, 538 ff., 566, 569, 572-576, 583. 


This Program embraces a complete course in Christian doctrine. The 
subjects are drawn from the Gospels and Epistles of the Sundays and 
Feasts, and are treated in the pages of this Catechism as referred to. 
For a sermon outline and further development of each of these subjects 
see The Gospels and Epistles of the Sundays and Feasts with Outlines 
for Sermons, and A Parochial Course of Doctrinal Instructions for All 
Sundays and Holydays of the Year (Jos. F. Wagner, Inc., New York). 

XXX1X 


xl SERMON PROGRAM 


Third Sunday of Advent 


1. Dogmatic Subject: Christ the Son of God.—There hath 
stood one in the midst of you whom you know not. The same 
is he that shall come after me, who is preferred before me (John 
i; 26, 27). “Pages 36 11, 506. 

2. Moral Subject: Sin—WMake straight the way of the Lord 
(John i. 23). Pages 118, 493, 553-555, 563. 


Fourth Sunday of Advent 


1. Dogmatic Subject: Christ is Our Lord—Prepare ye the 
way of the Lord, make straight lis paths (Luke iii. 4). Pages 
38-40, 499, 517 ff., 574 ff. 

2. Moral Subject: Conscience—I am not conscious to myself 
of anything: yet I am not hereby justified; but he that judgeth 
me is the Lord (1 Cor. iv. 4). Pages 358, 530, 553- 


Feast of Christmas 


1. Dogmatic Subject: The Conception and Nativity of Christ. 
—And the Word was made flesh and dwelt among us (John 1. 
14). Pages 41 ff. 

2. Moral Subject: The Virtue of Hope.—Looking for the 
blessed hope and conung of the glory of the great God and our 
Saviour Jesus Christ (Titus ii. 13). Pages 481, 495, 510, 537; 
556, 569, 573, 579, 580, 586. 


Sunday after Christmas 


1. Dogmatic Subject: Lessons of the Nativity of Christ —This 
child 1s set for the fall, and for the resurrection of many in Israel 
(Luke ii. 34). Pages 47 ff. 

2. Moral Subject: The Vice of Sloth—Who departed not 
from the temple, by fastings and prayers serving night and day 
(Luke ii. 37). Pages 8, 379, 403, 449, 500, 527, 542, 585. 


Feast of the Circumcision 


1. Dogmatic Subject: Hallowed be thy name.—His name was 
called Jesus, which was called by the angel, before he was con- 
ceived in the womb (Luke ii. 21). Pages 499, 513. 


SERMON PROGRAM xli 


2. Moral Subject: The Second Commandment: Thou shalt 
not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain —His name was 
called Jesus, which was called by the angel, before he was con- 
cewed in the womb (Luke ii. 21). Pages 33-36, 382 ff., 499 ff., 


515, 517. 


Sunday after Circumcision 


1. Dogmatic Subject: Holy Orders—Who arose and took the 
child and his mother and came into the land of Israel (Matt. ii. 
21).—And opening thew treasures, they offered him gifts, gold, 
frankincense, and myrrh (Matt. ii. 11). Pages 317 ff. 

2. Moral Subject: The Fourth Commandment: The Duties of 
Parents to their Children—And entering into the house, they 
found the child with Mary his mother (Matt. ii. 11)—Who 
(Joseph) arose, and took the child and his mother, and came into 
the land of Israel (Matt. ii. 21). Pages 418 ff. 


First Sunday after Epiphany 


1. Dogmatic Subject: The Communion of Saints.—For as in 
one body we have many members, but all the members have not 
the same office; so we being many, are one body in Christ and 
everyone members one of another (Rom. xii. 4, 5). Pages 109 ff. 

2. Moral Subject: The Fourth Commandment: The Duties of 
Children to their Parents—He went down with them, and came 
to Nazareth; and was subject to them (Luke ii. 51). Pages 411 ff. 


Second Sunday after Epiphany 


1. Dogmatic Subject: The Sacrament of Matrimony.—There 
was a marriage in Cana of Galilee (John ii. 1). Pages 345 ff. 

2. Moral Subject: The Duties of Married People——Let love 
be without dissimulation, hating that which is evil, cleaving to 
that which is good. . . . Being of one mind one toward another 
(Rom. xii. 9, 16).—There was a marriage im Cana of Galilee, 
and the mother of Jesus was there. And Jesus also was invited, 
and his disciples, to the marriage (John ii. 1, 2). Pages 351 ff. 


xlii SERMON PROGRAM 


Third Sunday after Epiphany 


1. Dogmatic Subject: Hell—The children of the kingdom 
shall be cast out into exterior darkness; there shall be weeping 
and gnashing of teeth (Matt. viii. 12). Pages 62 ff., 85, 86. 

2. Moral Subject: The Virtue of Faith—And Jesus hearing 
this, marveled; and said to them that followed him: Amen I say 
to you, I have not found so great faith in Israel (Matt. viii. 10). 
Pages 11 ff., 31-33, 77, 108, 109, 181, 195, 232, 368, 384, 481, 
495. 


Fourth Sunday after Epiphany 


1. Dogmatic Subject: God, the Almighty Creator—The winds 
and the sea obey him (Matt. viii. 27). Pages 23 ff., 378, 502. 

2. Moral Subject: The Commandments of God—dHe that 
loveth his neighbour, hath fulfilled the law. For thou shalt not 
commit adultery: Thou shalt not kill: Thou shalt not steal: Thou 
shalt not bear false witness: Thou shalt not covet: and if there 
be any other commandment, it is comprised in this word: Thou 
shalt love thy neighbour as thyself (Rom. xiii. 8, 9). Pages 6, 
267 d1.. 520 if, SG i. 


Fifth Sunday after Epiphany 


1. Dogmatic Subject: The Holiness of the Church—Put ye 
on therefore, as the elect of God, holy, and beloved, the bowels 
of mercy (Col. iti. 12).—The kingdom of heaven is likened to 
a man that sowed good seed in his field (Matt. xiii. 24). Pages 
104, 106. 

2. Moral Subject: The Eighth Commandment: Evilspeaking 
against Our Neighbor.—Above all things have charity, which is 
the bond of perfection; and let the peace of Christ rejoice in 
your hearts, wherein also you are called in one body (Col. iii. 14, 
15).—While men were asleep his enemy came and oversowed 
cockle among the wheat, and went his way (Matt. xiii. 25). 
Pages 454 ff. 


SERMON PROGRAM xliti 


Sixth Sunday after Epiphany 


1. Dogmatic Subject: The Catholicity of the Church—From 
you 1s spread abroad the word of the Lord, not only in Mace- 
donia and Achaia, but also in every place, your faith which is 
toward God, is gone forth (1 Thess. i. 8)—The kingdom of 
heaven 1s likened to a grain of mustard seed which is the least 
indeed of all seeds; but when it is grown up, it is greater than 
all herbs, and becometh a tree, so that the birds of the air come 
and dwell in the branches thereof (Matt. xiii. 31, 32). Page 106. 

2. Moral Subject: The Sins Against the First Commandment. 
—You turned to God from idols, to serve the living and true 
God (1 Thess. i. 9). Pages 368, 369, 374. 


Septuagesima Sunday 


1. Dogmatic Subject: Baptism: Its Nature and Institution.— 
And all in Moses were baptized, in the cloud and in the sea 
(1 Cor. x. 2).—Go you also into my vineyard, and I will give 
you what shall be just (Matt. xx. 4). Pages 161 ff. 

2. Moral Subject: The Vice of Gluttony.—Everyone that 
striveth for the mastery, refraineth himself from all things: and 
they indeed that they may receive a corruptible crown, but we 
an incorruptible one (1 Cor. ix. 25). Pages 437, 439, 500, 534, 


535, 540 ff. 
Sexagesima Sunday 


1. Dogmatic Subject: Angels and Demons.—There was given 
me a sting of my flesh, an angel of Satan to buffet me (2 Cor. 
xii. 7).—The devil cometh, and taketh the word out of thew 
heart, lest believing they should be saved (Luke viii. 12). Pages 
27, 369-373, 502 ff., 537, 567 ff., 582. 

2. Moral Subject: Fasting and Abstinence: Their Advantages. 
—In hunger and thirst, in fastings often (2 Cor. x1. 27). Pages 


500, 545 ff. 
Quinquagesima Sunday 


1. Dogmatic Subject: The Sufferings of Our Lord.—Then 
Jesus took unto him the twelve, and said to them: Behold we go 


xliv SERMON PROGRAM 


up to Jerusalem, and all things shall be accomplished which were 
written by the prophets concerning the son of man. For he shall 
be delivered to the Gentiles, and shall be mocked, and scourged, 
and spit upon: and after they have scourged him, they will put 
him to death; the third day he shall rise again (Luke xviii. 31, 
33). Pages 50 ff., 583. 

2. Moral Subject: The Virtue of Charity—Charity is patient, 
is kind: charity envieth not, dealeth not perversely: . . . is not 
provoked to anger, thinketh no evil, . . . beareth all things, be- 
lieveth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things (1 Cor. 


xiii. 4-8). Pages 368, 482, 489, 496, 509. 


First Sunday of Lent 


1. Dogmatic Subject: The Holy Eucharist—And when he had 
fasted forty days and forty nights, afterwards he was hungry. 
... And behold angels came and ministered to him (Matt. iv. 
2,10)s Pagesr213 dF. 540. 

2. Moral Subject: The Law of Fasting and Abstinence —lV hen 
he had fasted forty days and forty nights, afterwards he was 
hungry (Matt. iv. 2). Pages 500, 545 ff. 


Second Sunday of Lent 


1. Dogmatic Subject: The Effects of Holy Communion.— 
Lord, it is good for us to be here (Matt. xvii. 4). Pages 241 
ff., 549. 

2. Moral Subject: The Seventh Commandment: What it for- 
bids.—This is the will of God . . . that no man overreach, nor 
circumvent his brother in business; because the Lord is the 
avenger of all these things (1 Thess. iv. 3, 6). Pages 440 ff. 


Third Sunday of Lent 


1. Dogmatic Subject: The Holy Sacrifice of the Mass.—Christ 
also hath loved us, and hath delivered himself for us, an oblation 
and a sacrifice to God for an odour of sweetness (Eph. y. 2). 
Pages 254 ff. 

2. Moral Subject: The Ninth and Tenth Commandments.— 
But fornication and all uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not 


SERMON PROGRAM xlv 


so much as be named among you, as becometh saints. . . . For 
know ye this, and understand that no fornicator, or unclean, cr 
covetous person (which is a serving of idols), hath inheritance 
in the kingdom of Christ and of God (Eph. v. 3,5). Pages 466 ff. 


Fourth Sunday of Lent 


1. Dogmatic Subject: The Matter, Form, and Rites of the 
Holy Eucharist—Jesus took the loaves, and when he had given 
thanks, he distributed to them that were sat down (John vi. 11). 
bages 210 ff., 252. 

2. Moral Subject: The Obligation of Receiving Holy Com- 
munion.—Jesus took the loaves, and when he had given thanks, 
he distributed to them that were sat down (John vi. 11). Pages 


249 ff., 550. 


Passion Sunday 


1. Dogmatic Subject: The Circumstances of Our Saviour’s 
Passion.—By his own blood entered once into the holies, having 
obtained eternal redemption (Heb. ix. 12).—They took up stones 
therefore to cast at him. But Jesus hid himself, and went out 
of the temple (John viii. 59). Pages 56 ff., 552, 558. 

2. Moral Subject: The Eighth Commandment: The Sin of 
Lying —And if I shall say that I know him not, I shall be lke 
to you, a liar (John viii. 55). Pages 454 ff. 


Palm Sunday 


1. Dogmatic Subject: The Death of Our Lord—He humbled 
himself, becoming obedient unto death, even to the death of the 
cross. For which cause God also hath exalted him (Philip. i. 
8, 9).—And Jesus crying with a loud voice, yielded up the ghost 
(Matt. xxvii. 50). Pages 53 ff., 552, 558. 

2. Moral Subject: The Vice of Avarice—The disciples seeing 
it, had indignation, saying: To what purpose is this waste? for 
this might have been sold for much, and given to the poor. . 
Then went out one of the twelve, who was called Judas Iscariot, 
to the chief priests. And said to them: What will you give me, 


xlvi SERMON PROGRAM 


and I will deliver him unto you? But they appointed him thirty 
pieces of silver (Matt. xxvi. 8, 9, 14, 15). Pages 466 ff., 475. 


Easter Sunday 


1. Dogmatic Subject: The Resurrection of Christ—He 1%s 
visen, he is not here (Mark xvi. 6). Pages 66 ff., 508. 

2. Moral Subject: Spiritual Resurrection.—Let us feast, not 
with the old leaven, nor with the leaven of malice and wickedness, 
but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth (1 Cor. v. 


8). Pages 72, 95, 157, 159. 


Low Sunday 


1. Dogmatic Subject: The Sacrament of Penance.—Receive ye 
thé Holy Ghost. Whose sins you shall forgive, they are forgwen 
them; and whose sins you shall retain, they are retained (John 
Kx22) 22). Pages 205 1t: 

2. Moral Subject: Contrition—Whose sins you shall forgive, 
they are forgiven them; and whose sins you shall retain, they are 
retained (John xx. 22, 23). Pages 273 ff., 493, 554. 


Second Sunday after Easter 


1. Dogmatic Subject: Ecclesiastical Orders and the Hierarchy 
of the Church—You are now converted to the shepherd and 
bishop of your souls (1 Peter ii. 25).—J am the good shepherd; 
I know mine, and mine know me (John x. 14). Pages 323 ff. 

2. Moral Subject: Duties of the Faithful to their Pastors—— 
I am the good shepherd; I know mine, and mine know me (John 
x. 14). Pages 411, 414, 415, 488. 


Third Sunday after Easter 


1. Dogmatic Subject: Life Everlasting —J/ will see you again, 
and your heart shall rejoice, and your joy no man shall take from 
you (John xvi. 22). Pages 27, 73, 77, 85, 132 ff., 191, 524, 576. 

2. Moral Subject: The Fifth Commandment: The Sin of 
Scandal.—Having your conversation good among the Gentiles: 
that whereas they speak against you as evil doers, they may, by 


SERMON PROGRAM xlvii 


the good works which they shall behold in you, glorify God in 
the day of visitation (1 Peter ii. 12). Pages 420 ff., 517 ff. 


Fourth Sunday after Easter 


1. Dogmatic Subject: The Apostolicity of the Church—With 
whom there is no change, nor shadow of alteration (James i. 17). 
—Alt that time Jesus said to his disciples: When he, the Spirit 
of truth, is come, he will teach you all truth (John xvi. 13). 
Page 107. 

2. Moral Subject: Prayer: Its Nature, Fruits and Parts.— 
Every best gift, and every perfect gift, is from above, coming 
down from the Father of lights, with whom there is no change, 
nor shadow of alteration (James i. 17). Pages 477-486. 


Fifth Sunday after Easter 


1. Dogmatic Subject: God Our Heavenly Father—/f you ask 
the Father anything in my name, he will give it you... . For 
the Father himself loveth you (John xvi. 23, 27). Pages 5o1 ff. 

2. Moral Subject: Prayer: Its Conditions and Circumstances. 
—Amen, amen, I say to you: If you ask the Father anything in 
my name, he will give it you (John xvi. 23). Pages 493-500. 


Feast of the Ascension 


1. Dogmatic Subject: The Ascension of Christ—And the Lord 
Jesus after he had spoken to them was taken up into heaven, 
and sitteth on the right hand of God (Mark xvi. 19). Pages 73 ff. 

2. Moral Subject: The Holy Ghost: His Internal Mission.— 
You shall receive the power of the Holy Ghost coming upon you 
(Acts i. 8). Pages 92, 94, 95, 523. 


Sixth Sunday after Easter 


1. Dogmatic Subject: The Sacrament of Confirmation—When 
the Paraclete cometh, whom I will send you from the Father, 
the Spirit of truth, who proceedeth from the Father, he shall 
give testimony of me (John xv. 26). Pages 199 ff. 

2. Moral Subject: The Fruits of the Holy Ghost—When the 
Paraclete cometh whom I will send you from the Father, the 


xl viii SERMON PROGRAM 


Spirit of truth, who proceedeth from the Father, he shall give 
testimony of me (John xv. 26). Page 94. 


Pentecost or Whit-Sunday 


1. Dogmatic Subject: The Holy Ghost and His Mission in the 
Church.—They were all filled with the Holy Ghost (Acts ii. 4). — 
The Holy Ghost will teach you all things (John xiv. 26). Pages 
88 ff. 

2. Moral Subject: Confirmation: Its Necessity and Ceremonies. 
—They were all filled with the Holy Ghost (Acts ii. 4). Pages 
2074, 211 at, 


Trinity Sunday 


1. Dogmatic Subject: The Triune God.—Going therefore, 
teach ye all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, 
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost (Matt. xxvii. 19). Pages 
16 ir. 

2. Moral Subject: Baptism: Its Ministers, Sponsors and Sub- 
jects.—vlll power is given to me in heaven and in earth. Going 
therefore, teach ye all nations, baptizing them in the name of the 
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost (Matt. xxviii. 
18, 19). Pages 172 ff. 


Second Sunday after Pentecost 


1. Dogmatic Subject: The Wonders of the Eucharist—A 
certain man made a great supper and invited many (Luke xiv. . 
16). Pages 228 ff. 

2. Moral Subject: Dispositions for Holy Communion.—dA cer-~ 
tain man made a great supper, and invited many. And he sent 
his servant at the hour of supper to say to them that were invited, 
that they should come, for now all things are ready (Luke xiv. 
16,17). Pagés.245 ff. 


Third Sunday after Pentecost 


1. Dogmatic Subject: Satisfaction—There shall be joy in 
heaven upon one sinner that doth penance (Luke xv. 7). Pages 


296 ff. 


SERMON PROGRAM xlix 


2. Moral Subject: The Virtue of Penance—There shall be 
joy before the angels of God upon one sinner doing penance 
(Luke xv. 10). Pages 261 ff. 


Fourth Sunday after Pentecost 


1. Dogmatic Subject: The Infallibility of the Pope—Going 
up imto one of the ships that was Simon’s .. . he taught the 
multitude (Luke v. 3). Pages 78, 102, 333. 

2. Moral Subject: The Word of God.—The multitude pressed 
upon him to hear the word of God (Luke v. 1). Pages 9, 384, 


475, 494, 548. 


Fifth Sunday after Pentecost 


1. Dogmatic Subject: Divine Providence-—The eyes of the 
Lord are upon the just, and his ears unto their prayers, but the 
countenance of the Lord upon them that do evil things (1 Peter 
i 82). ages! 20, Som i '522) S23. S40: ff: 

2. Moral Subject: Sins Forbidden by the Fifth Command- 
ment.—Be ye all of one mind, . .. not rendering evil for evil 
(1 Peter iii. 8, 9)—You have heard that it was said to them 
of old: Thou shalt not kill. And whosoever shall kill shall be 
in danger of the judgment. But I say to you that whosoever 
is angry with his brother shall be in danger of the judgment 
(Matt. va 20422).. ‘Pages<421:ff., 494, 560, 564. 


Sixth Sunday after Pentecost 


1. Dogmatic Subject: Baptism: Its Effects—All we, who are 
baptized in Christ Jesus, are baptized in is death. For we are 
buried together with him by baptism into death; that as Christ 
is risen from the dead by the glory of the Father, so we also may 
walk in newness of life (Rom. vi. 3, 4). Pages 182 ff. 

2. Moral Subject: Baptism: Its Rites and Ceremonies.—All 
we, who are baptized in Christ Jesus, are baptized in his death. 
For we are buried together with him by baptism into death; 
that as Christ is risen from the dead by the glory of the Father, 
so we also may walk in the newness of life (Rom. vi. 3, 4). 


Pages 192 ff. 


1 SERMON PROGRAM 


Seventh Sunday after Pentecost 


1. Dogmatic Subject: Thy Will Be Done.—Not everyone that 
saith to me: Lord Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; 
but he that doth the will of my Father who is in heaven, he shall 
enter into the kingdom of heaven (Matt. vii. 21). Pages 529 ff. 

2. Moral Subject: The Sin of Hypocrisy—Beware of false 
prophets, who come to you in the clothing of sheep, but inwardly 
they are ravening wolves: by their fruits you shall know them 
(Matt. vii. 15, 16). Pages 459 ff., 497 ff. 


Eighth Sunday after Pentecost 


1. Dogmatic Subject: Man: A Creature Composed of Body 
and Soul.—We are debtors not to the flesh to live according to 
the flesh (Rom. viii. 12)—Give an account of thy stewardship, 
for now thou canst be steward no longer (Luke xvi. 2). Pages 
20, 48, 120, 487, S21, 522, 540... S40, 541. 544. 

2. Moral Subject: The Seventh Commandment: What It En- 
joins— Make unto you friends of the mammon of iniquity, that 
when you shall fail, they may receive you into everlasting dwell- 
ings (Luke xvi. 9). Pages 447 ff. 


Ninth Sunday after Pentecost 


1. Dogmatic Subject: The Mercy and Justice of God— 
When he drew near to Jerusalem, seeing the city, he wept over 
it, . . . and entering into the temple, he began to cast out them 
that sold therein, and them that bought (Luke xix. 41-45). Pages 
380, 501, 555, 556; 378 ff., 394, 406, 416-418, 436, 457. 

2. Moral Subject: Lead Us Not Into Temptation.—Let no 
temptation take hold on you, but such as is human: and God is 
faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that which 
you are able, but will make also with temptation issue, that you 
may be able to bear it (1 Cor. x. 13). Pages 565 ff. 


Tenth Sunday after Pentecost 


1. Dogmatic Subject: The Sacraments: Their Meaning and 
Purpose.—There are diversities of graces, but the same Spirit; 


SERMON PROGRAM li 


and there are diversities of ministries, but the same Lord; and 
there are diversities of operations, but the same God who work- 
eth all in all (1 Cor. xii. 4, 6). Pages 141 ff. 

2. Moral Subject: Pride and Humility—Everyone that exalt- 
eth himself, shall be humbled: and he that humbleth himself, 
shall be exalted (Luke xviii. 14). Pages 47, 493, 494, 573. 


Eleventh Sunday after Pentecost 


1. Dogmatic Subject: The Sacraments: Their Matter, Form, 
and Number.—And they bring him one deaf and dumb, and they 
besought him that he would lay his hand upon him. And taking 
him from the multitude apart, he put his fingers into his ears 
and spitting, he touched lis tongue; and looking up to heaven, 
he groaned, and said to him: Ephpheta, which is, Be thou opened. 
And immediately his ears were opened, and the string of his 
tongue was loosed, and he spoke right (Mark vii. 32-35). Pages 
151 ff. 

2. Moral Subject: Prayer: Its Objects—They bring to him 
one deaf and dumb, and they besought him that he would lay 
his hand upon him (Mark vii. 32). Pages 486-493. 


Feast of the Assumption 


1. Dogmatic Subject: The Assumption—And I took root in 
an honourable people, and in the portion of my God his inheri- 
tance, and my abode is in the full assembly of the saints (Ecclus. 
xxiv. 16).—Mary hath chosen the best part, which shall not be 
taken away from her (Luke x. 42). Page 491. 

2. Moral Subject: The Second Part of the Hail Mary.—Mary 
hath chosen the best part, which shall not be taken away from 
her (Luke x. 42). Page 491. 


Twelfth Sunday after Pentecost 


1. Dogmatic Subject: The Author, Ministers and Effects of 
the Sacraments.—Such confidence we have through Christ to- 
wards God, ... who also hath made us fit ministers of the new 
testament (2 Cor. iii. 4, 6).—A certain Samaritan being on his 
journey came near him and seeing um, was moved with com- 


li SERMON PROGRAM 


passion. And going up to him, bound up his wounds, pouring 
in oil and wine, and setting him upon his own beast, brought him 
to an inn, and took care of him (Luke x. 33, 34). Pages 154 ff. 

2. Moral Subject: The Fifth Commandment: The Love of 
Our Neighbor and of Ourselves.—Thou shalt love the Lord thy 
God with thy whole heart, and with thy whole soul, and with all 
thy strength, and with all thy mind: and thy neighbour as thy- 
self (Luke x. 27). Pages 408-411, 425 ff., 496, 509, 562. 


Thirteenth Sunday after Pentecost 


1. Dogmatic Subject: The Minister of the Sacrament of Pen- 
ance.—Go, show yourselves to the priests. And tt came to pass 
as they went they were made clean (Luke xvii. 14). Pages 
290 ff. 

2. Moral Subject: Confession—Go, show yourselves to the 
priests (Luke xvii. 14). Pages 281 ff. 


Fourteenth Sunday after Pentecost 


1. Dogmatic Subject: Thy Kingdom Come.—Seek ye, there- 
fore, first the kingdom of God and his justice (Matt. vi. 33). 
Pages 519 ff. 

2. Moral Subject: Give Us this Day Our Daily Bread.— 
Therefore I say to you, be not solicttous for your life, what you 
shall eat, nor for your body, what you shall put on, .. . for your 
Father knoweth that you have need of all these things (Matt. vi. 
25; 32) Pages.sao0: ff, 


Fifteenth Sunday after Pentecost 


1. Dogmatic Subject: The Resurrection of the Body— What 
things a man shall sow, those also shall he reap. For he that 
soweth in the flesh, of the flesh also shall reap corruption. But 
he that soweth in the spirit shall reap life everlasting (Gal. vi. 8). 
—Young man, I say to thee, arise (Luke vii. 14). Pages 120 ff. 

2. Moral Subject: The Fifth Commandment: The Vice of 
Envy.—Let us not be made desirous of vainglory, provoking 
one another, envying one another (Gal. v. 26). Pages 378, 379, 
429, 475. 


SERMON PROGRAM liti 


Sixteenth Sunday after Pentecost 


1. Dogmatic Subject: The Ceremonies of the Mass.—I bow 
my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ (Eph. iii. 14). 
Page 259. 

2. Moral Subject: The Third Commandment: Remember Thou 
‘Keep Holy the Sabbath Day.—And Jesus answering, spoke to 
the lawyers and Pharisees saying: Is it lawful to heal on the 
Sabbath day (Luke xiv. 3). Pages 396 ff. 


Seventeenth Sunday after Pentecost 


1. Dogmatic Subject: The Unity of the Church.—One body 
and one spirit, as you are called in one hope of your calling. 
One Lord, one faith, one baptism (Eph. iv. 4, 5). Pages 102-104. 

2. Moral Subject: The First Commandment: The Love of God. 
—Jesus said to him: Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with thy 
whole heart, and with thy whole soul, and with thy whole mind. 
This is the greatest and the first commandment (Matt. xxii. 37, 
38). Pages 6, 78, 368, 381, 408-411, 483, 500. 


Eighteenth Sunday after Pentecost 


1. Dogmatic Subject: The Forgiveness of Sins——Be of good 
heart, son, thy sins are forgiven thee (Matt. ix. 2). Pages 113 ff., 
POs tis 270, 5520: 

2. Moral Subject: Grace.—I give thanks to my God always 
for you, for the grace of God that is given you in Christ Jesus 
(1 Cor. i. 4). Pages 21, 95, 111, 157, 187, 487, 502 ff., 520, 523, 


529 ff., 536, 575, 579, 580. 


Nineteenth Sunday after Pentecost 


1. Dogmatic Subject: Marriage: Its Nature and Qualities.— 
The kingdom of heaven is likened to a king who made a marriage 
for his son (Matt. xxii. 2). Pages 338 ff. 

2. Moral Subject: Marriage and the Laws of the Church.— 
The kingdom of heaven is likened to a king who made a marriage 
for his son (Matt. xxii. 2). Page 353- 


liv SERMON PROGRAM 


Twentieth Sunday after Pentecost 


1. Dogmatic Subject: The Sacrament of Extreme Unction.— 
There was a certain ruler whose son was sick at Capharnaum. 
He having heard that Jesus was come from Judea into Galilee, 
went to him, and prayed him to come down and heal his son, for 
he was at the point of death (John iv. 46, 47). Pages 307 ff. 

2. Moral Subject: The Virtue of Prudence——See, brethren, 
how you walk circumspectly: not as unwise, but as wise: redeem- 
ing the time, because the days are evil. Wherefore be not unwise ; 
but understanding what is the will of God (Eph. v. 15, 16). 


Pages 388, 464, 480, 507, 520, 530, 531, 535, 575- 


Twenty-first Sunday after Pentecost 


1. Dogmatic Subject: Purgatory and Suffrages for the Dead. 
—And his lord being angry, delivered him to the torturers until 
he paid the debt (Matt. xviii. 34). Pages 259, 414, 490, 581. 

2. Moral Subject: Forgive Us Our Trespasses as We Forgive 
Them That Trespass Against Us.—So also shall my heavenly 
Father do to you, if you forgive not everyone his brother from 
your hearts (Matt. xviii. 3, 5). Pages 552 ff. 


Feast of All Saints 


1. Dogmatic Subject: The Honor and Invocation of the Saints. 
—I saw a great multitude, which no man could number, of all 
nations, and tribes, and peoples, and tongues, standing before the 
throne, and in sight of the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and 
palms in thew hands (Apoc. vii. 9). Pages 371-373, 491, 492, 574. 

2. Moral Subject: The Beatitudes—Blessed are the poor in 
spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are the meek: 
for they shall possess the land (Matt. v. 2). Pages 112, 133, 487. 


Twenty-second Sunday after Pentecost 


1. Dogmatic Subject: The Church—Render to Caesar the 
things that are Caesar’s, and to God the things that are God’s 
(Matt. xxii. 21). Pages 96<f,. 51G,7525: 

2. Moral Subject: The Fourth Commandment: Our Duties to 


SERMON PROGRAM lv 


Temporal Authority—Render to Caesar the things that are 
Caesar's, and to God the things that are God’s (Matt. xxii. 21). 


Pages 415, 489. 


Twenty-third Sunday after Pentecost 


1. Dogmatic Subject: The Resurrection Body—Our conversa- 
tion is in heaven, from whence also we look for the Saviour, Our 
Lord Jesus Christ, who will reform the body of our lowness, 
made like to the body of his glory, according to the operation 
whereby also he is able to subdue all things unto himself (Philip. 
ili. 20, 21).—Lord, my daughter 1s even now dead; but come lay 
thy hand upon her, and she shall live (Matt. ix. 18). Pages 
125 ff. 

2. Moral Subject: The First Commandment: The Worship 
Due to God.—As he was speaking these things unto them, behold 
a certain ruler came up and adored him (Matt. ix. 18). Pages 


306 ff., 515, 578. 


Last Sunday after Pentecost 


1. Dogmatic Subject: The End of the World and the General 
Judgment.—They shall see the son of man coming in the clouds 
of heaven with much power and majesty (Matt. xxiv. 30). Pages 
81 ff., 86, 130, 429. 

2. Moral Subject: Deliver Us from Evil. Amen.—We cease 
not to pray for you, ... that you may walk worthily of God, 
in all things pleasing (Col. i. 9, 10).—Pray that your flight be 
not in the winter, or on the sabbath: for there shall be then great 
tribulation, such as hath not been from the beginning of the 
world until now, neither shall be (Matt. xxiv. 20, 21). Pages 


577 ff. 


CATECHISM OF THE COUNCIL 
OF TRENT 


CATECHISM OF THE COUNCIL 
OF TRENT FOR PARISH 
PRIESTS 


Issued by Order of Pope Pius V 


INTRODUCTORY 
The Necessity of Religious Instruction 


Such is the nature of the human mind and intellect that, 
although by means of diligent and laborious inquiry it has of 
itself investigated and discovered many other things pertaining 
to a knowledge of divine truths; yet guided by its natural lights 
it never could have known or perceived most of those things 
by which is attained eternal salvation, the principal end of man’s 
creation and formation to the image and likeness of God. 

It is true that the invisible things of God from the creation of 
the world are, as the Apostle teaches, clearly seen, being under- 
stood by the things that are made: his eternal power also, and 
divinity* But the mystery which hath been hidden from ages 
and generations so far transcends the reach of man’s under- 
standing, that were it not made manifest by God to His Saints, 
to whom He willed to make known by the gift of faith, the 
riches of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles, which is 
Christ,2, man could by no effort attain to such wisdom. 


Rom 1.20) 
2Coloss. i. 26, 27. 
a On the necessity of revelation see St. Thomas, Summa Theol. i. i. 1. 


INTRODUCTORY 


But, as faith cometh by hearing,® it is clear how necessary at 
all times for the attainment of eternal salvation has been the 
labor and faithful ministry of an authorized teacher; for it is 
written, how shall they hear, without a preacher? And how 
shall they preach unless they be sent? * 

And, indeed, never, from the very creation of the world, has 
God, most merciful and benignant, been wanting to His own; 
but at sundry times and in divers manners spoke to the fathers 
by the prophets,> and pointed out to them in a manner suited 
to the times and circumstances, a sure and direct path to the 
happiness of heaven. But, as He had foretold that He would 
give a teacher of justice to be the light of the Gentiles, that 
His salvation might reach even to the ends of the earth,® in these 
last days he hath spoken to us by his Son,’ whom also by a 
voice from heaven, from the excellent glory, He has commanded 
all to hear and to obey. Furthermore, the Son gave some to be 
apostles, and some prophets, and others pastors and teachers, 
to announce the word of life; that we might not be carried about 
like children tossed to and fro with every wind of doctrine,® but 
holding fast to the firm foundation of the faith, we might be built 
together into an habitation of God in the Spirit.?° 

Lest any should receive the Word of God from the ministers 
of. the Church, not as the word of Christ, which it really is, 
but as the word of man, the same Saviour has ordained that their 
ministry should be invested with so great authority that He says 
to them: He that heareth you, heareth me; and he that despiseth 
you despiseth me.1 These words He spoke not only of those 
to whom His words were addressed, but likewise of all who, by 
legitimate succession, should discharge the ministry of the word, 
promising to be with them all days even to the consummation of 
the world.” 


*Rom. x. 17. IAS ESE AGL 
“Rom. x. 14, 15. * Eph. iv. 11, 14. 
"Heb. i. 1. = Ephyiie 22) 
STsy xlixan6: “Luke x. 16. 


“Hebd daz: % Matt. xxviii. 20. 


RELIGIOUS INSTRUCTION 3 


Need of an Authoritative Catholic Catechism 


But while the preaching of the divine Word should never 
be interrupted in the Church, surely in these, our days, it be- 
tomes necessary to labor with more than ordinary zeal and piety 
to nourish and strengthen the faithful with sound and whole- 
some doctrine, as with the food of life For false prophets 
have gone forth into the world? to corrupt the minds of the 
faithful with various and strange doctrines, of whom the Lord 
has said: I did not send prophets, yet they ran; I spoke not to 
them, yet they prophesied.® 

In this work, to such extremes has their impiety, practiced 
in all the arts of Satan, been carried, that it would seem almost 
impossible to confine it within any bounds; and did we not rely 
on the splendid promises of the Saviour, who declared that He 
had built His Church on so solid a foundation that the gates 
of hell shall not prevail against it,1® we should have good reason 
to fear lest, beset on every side by such a host of enemies and 
assailed and attacked by so many machinations, it would, in 
these days, fall to the ground. 

For—to say nothing of those illustrious States which hereto- 
fore professed, in piety and holiness, the true Catholic faith 
transmitted to them by their ancestors, but are now gone astray, 
wandering from the paths of truth and openly declaring that 
their best claims to piety are founded on a total abandonment 
of the faith of their fathers—there is no region, however re- 
mote, no place, however securely guarded, no corner of Chris- 
tendom, into which this pestilence has not sought secretly to 
insinuate itself. 

For those who intended to corrupt the minds of the faithful, 
knowing that they could not hold immediate personal inter- 


37) Obiieiv.. 1. % Jerem. xxili. 21. 
4 Heb. xiii. 9. %* Matt. xvi. 18. 


a The Protestant Rebellion may be dated from 1520, and the Council 
of Trent was convened Dec. 13, 1545. Meanwhile the heretics were dis- 
seminating their errors far and wide, not only by the spoken word, but 
also by means of catechisms and pamphlets; e.g., Luther’s Enchiridion of 
1529, and Calvin’s “Formulary of Instruction” of 1536. See Introduction 


4 INTRODUCTORY 


course with all, and thus pour into their ears their poisoned 
doctrines, adopted another plan which enabled them to dissemi- 
nate error and impiety more easily and extensively. Besides 
those voluminous works by which they sought the subversion 
of the Catholic faith—to guard against which (volumes) re- 
quired perhaps little labor or circumspection, since their con- 
tents were clearly heretical—they also composed innumerable 
smaller books, which, veiling their errors under the semblance of 
piety, deceived with incredible facility the unsuspecting minds 
of simple folk. 


The Nature of this Work 


The Fathers, therefore, of the General Council of Trent, 
anxious to apply some healing remedy to so great and per- 
nicious an evil, were not satisfied with having decided the more 
important points of Catholic doctrine against the heresies of 
our times, but deemed it further necessary to issue, for the in- 
struction of the faithful in the very rudiments of faith, a form 
and method to be followed in all churches by those to whom 
are lawfully entrusted the duties of pastor and teacher.** 

To works of this kind many, it is true, had already given their 
attention, and earned the reputation of great piety and learning* 
But the Fathers deemed it of the first importance that a work 
should appear, sanctioned by the authority of the Council, from 
which pastors and all others on whom the duty of imparting 
instruction devolves, may be able to seek and find reliable matter 
for the edification of the faithful; that, as there is one Lord, 
one faith,"® there may also be one standard and prescribed form 
of propounding the dogmas of faith, and instructing Christians 
in all the duties of piety.> 


™ Sess. xxiv. c. 7; Sess. xxv, towards the end. 

OLD Ae, thes Gh 
pe Such as “The Lay Folks Catechism” of Cardinal Thoresby (1357), the 
‘Pupilla Oculi” of John de Burgo (1385), and Gerson’s “The A B C of 
Simple Folk,” and the same author’s “Opus Tripartitum.” This latter is 
regarded as the forerunner of the Catechism of the Council of Trent 
(cf. Catholic Encycl. vol. v. pp. 75 ff.). See Introduction. 

ib The proposal of an authoritative Catechism was first made in the Coun- 
cil of Trent in April, 1546, but a committee to direct the work was not 


RELIGIOUS INSTRUCTION 5 


As, therefore, the design of the work embraces a variety of 
matters, it cannot be supposed that the Council intended that 
in one volume all the dogmas of Christianity should be explained 
with that minuteness of detail to be found in the works of those 
who profess to treat the teaching and doctrines of religion in | 
their entirety. Such a task would be one of almost endless labor, 
and manifestly ill suited to attain the proposed end. But, having 
undertaken to instruct pastors and such as have care of souls 
in those things that belong peculiarly to the pastoral office and 
are accommodated to the capacity of the faithful, the Council 
intended that such things only should be treated of as might 
assist the pious zeal of pastors in discharging the duty of instruc- 
tion, should they not be very familiar with the more abstruse 
questions of theology. 


The Ends of Religious Instruction 


Hence, before we proceed to develop in detail the various 
parts of this summary of doctrine, our purpose requires that 
we premise a few observations which the pastor should consider 
and bear in mind in order to know to what end, as it were, all 
his plans and labors and efforts are to be directed, and how this 
desired end may be more easily attained. 


KNOWLEDGE OF CHRIST 


The first thing is ever to recollect that all Christian knowledge 
is reduced to one single head, or rather, to use the words of 
the Apostle, this is eternal life: That they may know thee, the 
only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent.® A 


appointed before February, 1562. The Catechism was completed and pub- 
lished towards the end of the year 1566. The Presidents of the Catechism 
Commission were Cardinal Seripandi, O.S.A., and St. Charles Borromeo. 
The composition of the work was entrusted to more than twenty expert 
theologians, of whom the chiet collaborators were Bishop Muzio Calini 
and the three Dominicans, Leonardo Marini, Egidio Foscarari, and Fran- 
cesco Foreiro. The classic elegance of style for which the Catechism is 
also famous was due to the final polishing of the noted Latinists Manu- 
tius and Pogiani. Cardinal Sirlet and the Dominicans, Manriguez and 
Locatelli, were the theological revisers of the Catechism appointed by 
St. Pius V 


” John xvii. 3. 


6 INTRODUCTORY 


teacher in the Church should, therefore, use his best endeavors 
that the faithful earnestly desire to know Jesus Christ, and him 
crucified,° that they be firmly convinced, and with the most 
heartfelt piety and devotion believe, that there is no other name 
under heaven given to men, whereby we must be saved,”* for 
he is the propitiation for our sins.” 


OBSERVANCE OF THE COMMANDMENTS 


But since by this we know that we have known him, if we 
keep his commandments,” the next consideration, and one inti- 
mately connected with the preceding, is to press also upon the 
attention of the faithful that their lives are not to be wasted 
in ease and indolence, but that we are to walk even as he 
walked,?* and pursue with all earnestness, justice, godliness, faith, 
charity, patience, mildness;?* for He gave himself for us, that 
he might redeem us from all iniquity, and might cleanse to him- 
self a people acceptable, a pursuer of good works.?®> These things 
the Apostle commands pastors to speak and exhort. 


LOVE OF GOD 


But as our Lord and Saviour has not only declared, but has 
also proved by His own example, that the Law and the Prophets 
depend on love,’® and as, according to the Apostle, charity is the 
end of the commandment, and the fulfilment of the law,?" it is 
unquestionably a chief duty of the pastor to use the utmost dili- 
gence to excite the faithful to a love of the infinite goodness of 
God towards us, that, burning with a sort of divine ardor, they 
may be powerfully attracted to the supreme and all-perfect good, 
to adhere to which is true and solid happiness, as is fully expe- 
rienced by him who can say with the Prophet: What have I in 
heaven? and besides thee what do I desire upon earth? 8 


» a . 

mt Cor ua ™ Acts iv. 12. 
ne John ii. 2, 3. “at john, i. 6s 
aele Ditnarvie Die malities 


* Matt. xxii. 40; I Tim. i.5; Rom. xiii. ro. 
1 Tim. i. 5; Rom. xiii. 10. 
= Psalm lexiiee2s: 


RELIGIOUS INSTRUCTION ” 


This, assuredly, is that more excellent way pointed out by 
the Apostle when he sums up all his doctrines and instructions 
in charity, which never falleth away.*° For whatever is pro- 
posed by the pastor, whether it be the exercise of faith, of hope, 
or of some moral virtue, the love of our Lord should at the same 
time be so strongly insisted upon as to show clearly that all the 
works of perfect Christian virtue can have no other origin, no 
other end than divine love.*? 


The Means Required for Religious Instruction 


But as in imparting instruction of any sort the manner of 
communicating it is of highest importance, so in conveying reli- 
gious instruction to the people, the method should be deemed of 
the greatest moment. 


INSTRUCTION SHOULD BE ACCOMMODATED TO THE CAPACITY OF THE 
HEARER 


Age, capacity, manners and condition must be borne in mind, 
so that he who instructs may become all things to all men, in 
order that he may be able to gain all to Christ,*? prove himself 
a dutiful minister and steward,** and, like a good and faithful 
servant, be found worthy to be placed by his Lord over many 
things.** The priest must not imagine that those committed to 
his care are all on the same level, so that he can follow one fixed 
and unvarying method of instruction to lead all in the same way 
to knowledge and true piety ; for some are as new-born infants,* 
others are growing up in Christ, while a few are, so to say, of 
full maturity. Hence the necessity of considering who they are 
that have occasion for milk, who for more solid food,*° and of 
affording to each such nourishment of doctrine as may give 
spirituai increase, until we all meet in the unity of faith, and of 
the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the 
measure of the age of the fulness of Christ.” This the Apostle 


PareCOr cit 30: BAe Cor. -tuk22, se a a Pet. ii. 2. 
Cor X1ll. 6: ate Col ive ee: ST Conse? blebewal2: 


sor xvia 4: 4 Matt. xxv. 23. “UIDave, mies sey 


8 INTRODUCTORY 


inculcates for all by his own example when he says that he is 
a debtor to the Greeks and to the Barbarians, to the wise and to 
the unwise,*® thus giving all who are called to this ministry to 
understand that in announcing the mysteries of faith and the pre- 
cepts of life, the instruction is to be so accommodated to the 
capacity and intelligence of the hearers, that, while the minds 
of the strong are filled with spiritual food, the little ones be not 
suffered to perish with hunger, asking for bread, while there is 
none to break it unto them.*° 


ZEAL 


Nor should our zeal in communicating Christian knowledge 
be relaxed because it has sometimes to be exercised in expound- 
ing matters apparently humble and unimportant, and whose ex- 
position is usually irksome, especially to minds accustomed to the 
contemplation of the more sublime truths of religion. If the 
Wisdom of the eternal Father descended upon the earth in the 
meanness of our flesh to teach us the maxims of a heavenly life, 
who is there whom the love of Christ does not constrain*® to 
become little in the midst of his brethren, and, as a nurse fos- 
tering her children, so anxiously to wish for the salvation of his 
neighbors as to be ready, as the Apostle says of himself, to give 
them not only the gospel of God, but even his own life.* 


STUDY OF THE WORD OF GOD 


Now all the doctrines in which the faithful are to be instructed 
are contained in the Word of God, which is found in Scripture 
and tradition. To the study of these, therefore, the pastor should 
devote his days and his nights, keeping in mind the admonition 
of St. Paul to Timothy, which all who have the care of souls 
should consider as addressed to themselves: Attend to reading, 
to exhortation, and to doctrine,*® for all scripture divinely in- 
spired is profitable to teach, to reprove, to correct, to instruct in 


* Rom. i, 14. © Lamen. iv. 4. 2 AConnvant 
“1 Thess. ii. 7, 8 “7 Timiv13 i 


RELIGIOUS INSTRUCTION 9 


justice, that the man of God may be perfect, furnished to every 
good work.*3 4 


Division of this Catechism 


The truths revealed by Almighty God are so many and so 
various that it is no easy task to acquire a knowledge of them, 
or, having done so, to remember them so well as to be able to 
explain them with ease and readiness when occasion requires. 
Hence our predecessors in the faith have very wisely reduced 
all the doctrines of salvation to these four heads: The Apostles’ 
Creed, the Sacraments, the Ten Commandments, and the Lord’s 
Prayer. 

The part on the Creed contains all that is to be held accord- 
ing to Christian faith, whether it regard the knowledge of God, 
the creation and government of the world, or the redemption 
of man, the rewards of the good and the punishments of the 
wicked. The part devoted to the Seven Sacraments teaches us 
what are the signs, and, as it were, the instruments of grace. 
In the part on the Decalogue is described whatever has reference 
to the law, whose end 1s charity.** Finally, the Lord’s Prayer 
contains whatever can be the object of the Christian’s desires, or 
hopes, or prayers. The expcsition, therefore, of these four parts, 
which are, as it were, the general heads of Sacred Scripture, 
includes almost everything that a Christian should learn. 


How this Work is to be Used 


We therefore deem it proper to inform pastors that, when- 
ever they have occasion, in the ordinary discharge of their duty, 
to expound any passage of the Gospel or any other part of Holy 
Scripture, they will find its subject-matter treated under some 
one of the four heads already enumerated, to which they will 


apy im. iil. 10, 172 a Tectia en sy: 

aOn the qualities of the preacher of the Word of God see Summa 
Theol. 1a. 22. cxi. 4; 2a. 2. clxxvii. 1; Encyc. “Acerbo nimis” of Pius X, 
April 15, 1905; Encyc. “Humani generis” of Benedict XV, June 15, 1917. 


iKe) INTRODUCTORY 


recur, as to the source from which their instruction is to be 
drawn. 

Thus, if the Gospel of the first Sunday of Advent is to be 
explained, There shall be signs in the sun, and in the moon, 
etc.,*° whatever regards its explanation is contained under the 
Article of the Creed, He shall come to judge the living and the 
dead; and by embodying the substance of that Article in his 
exposition, the pastor will at once instruct his people in the Creed 
and in the Gospel. Whenever, therefore, he has to communicate 
instruction and expound the Scriptures, he will observe the same 
rule of referring all to these four principal heads under which, 
as we observed, the whole teaching and doctrine of Holy Scrip- 
ture is contained. As for crder, however, he is free to follow 
that which he deems best suited to the circumstances of persons 
and time. 


“Luke xxi. 25. 


PART I 


THE CREED 
Faith 


In preparing and instructing men in the teachings of Christ 
the Lord, the Fathers began by explaining the meaning of faith. 
Following their example, we have thought it well to treat first 
what pertains to that virtue. 

Though the word faith has a variety of meanings in the 
Sacred Scriptures, we here speak only of that faith by which 
we yield our entire assent to whatever has been divinely revealed. 


NECESSITY OF FAITH 


That faith thus understood is necessary to salvation no man 
can reasonably doubt, particularly since it is written: Without 
faith it 1s impossible to please God! For as the end proposed 
to man as his ultimate happiness is far above the reach of human 
understanding, it was therefore necessary that it should be made 
known to him by God. This knowledge, however, is nothing else 
than faith, by which we yield our unhesitating assent to what- 
ever the authority of our Holy Mother the Church teaches us 
to have been revealed by God; for the faithful cannot doubt 
those things of which God, who is truth itself, is the author. 
Hence we see the great difference that exists between this faith 
which we give to God and that which we yield to the writers of 
human history.> 

‘Heb. xi. 6. 


aOn the meaning of the word “faith” see Catholic Encycl., vol. v. p. 752. 
bOn the necessity of faith see Summa Theol. 2a. 2e. i. 3, 4. 


II 


in THE CREED 


UNITY OF FAITH 


Faith differs in degree; for we read in Scripture these words: 
O thou-of little faith, why didst thou doubt;* and Great is thy 
faith;* and Increase our faith. It also differs in dignity, for 
we read: Faith without works is dead;* and, Faith that worketh 
by charity.© But although faith is so comprehensive, it is yet 
the same in kind, and the full force of its definition applies 
equally to all its varieties. How fruitful it is and how great 
are the advantages we may derive from it we shall point out 
when explaining the Articles of the Creed.? 


The Creed 


Now the chief truths which Christians ought to hold are those 
which the holy Apostles, the leaders and teachers of the faith, 
inspired by the Holy Ghost, have divided into the twelve Articles 
of the Creed. For having received a command from the Lord 
to go forth into the whole world, as His ambassadors, and preach 
the Gospel to every creature,” they thought it advisable to draw 
up a formula of Christian faith, that all might think and speak 
the same thing, and that among those whom they should have 
called to the unity of the faith no schisms would exist, but 
that they should be perfect in the same mind, and in the same 
judgment.§ © 

This profession of Christian faith and hope, drawn up by 
themselves, the Apostles called a symbol; either because it was 
made up of various parts, each of which was contributed by an 
Apostle, or because by it, as by a common sign and watchword, 
they might easily distinguish deserters from the faith and false 
brethren unawares brought in,® adulterating the word of God, 


SIME, BSN GW * Matt. xv. 28. *Luke xvii. 5. 
® James ii. 17, 20. > GaluavenGe 

"2 Cor. v. 18, 19, 20; Mark xvi. 15. “Te Commianl@: 
“Gali. 22) COrs iin Vn veee 


2 On the kinds and degrees of faith see Summa Theol. 2a. 2z. iv. 4; v. 4. 
b On the Creed see Summa Theol. 2a. 2. i. 6-10. 
¢On the Creeds see Catholic Encycl., vol. iv. p. 478; vol. i. pp. 629 ff. 


IN GENERAL 13 


from those who had truly bound themselves by oath to serve 
under the banner of Christ.@ 


DIVISION OF THE CREED 


Christianity proposes to the faithful many truths which, either 
separately or in general, must be held with an assured and firm 
faith. Among these what must first and necessarily be believed 
by all is that which God Himself has taught us as the foundation 
and summary of truth concerning the unity of the Divine Es- 
sence, the distinction of Three Persons, and the actions which 
are peculiarly attributed to each. The pastor should teach that 
the Apostles’ Creed briefly comprehends the doctrine of this 
mystery. 

For, as has been observed by our predecessors in the faith, 
who have treated this subject with great piety and accuracy, 
the Creed seems to be divided into three principal parts: one 
describing the First Person of the Divine Nature, and the stu- 
pendous work of the creation; another, the Second Person, and 
the mystery of man’s redemption; a third, the Third Person, 
the head and source of our sanctification; the whole being ex- 
pressed in various and most appropriate propositions. These 
propositions are called Articles, from a -.comparison frequently 
used by the Fathers; for as the members of the body are divided 
by joints (articuli), so in this profession of faith, whatever is 
to be believed distinctly and separately from anything else is 
rightly and suitably called an Article.> 


a The term “symbol” is from the Greek cvuforor, “sign,” because the 
Creed is a distinctive mark of believers; or from the Greek  cvufod%, 
al peatlecteD, ” because the Creed comprises the principal Articles of faith. 

bFor an explanation of the twelve Articles of the Creed see St. 
Thomas’ “Expositio in Symbolum.” 


ARTICLE I 


“T BeLieve IN GoD, THE FATHER ALMIGHTY, CREATOR OF 
HEAVEN AND EARTH” 


MEANING OF THIS ARTICLE 


The meaning of the above words is this: I believe with cer- 
tainty, and without a shadow of doubt profess my belief in God 
the Father, the First Person of the Trinity, who by His omnipo- 
tence created from nothing and preserves and. governs the 
heavens and the earth and all things which they contain; and 
not only do I believe in Him from my heart and profess this 
belief with my lips, but with the greatest ardor and piety I tend 
towards Him, as the supreme and most perfect good. 

Let this serve as a brief summary of this first Article. But 
since great mysteries lie concealed under almost every word, 
the pastor must now give them a more careful consideration, in 
order that, as far as God has permitted, the faithful may ap- 
proach, with fear and trembling, to contemplate the glory of His 
majesty. 


“T Believe” 


The word believe does not here mean to think, to suppose, 
to be of opimion; but, as the Sacred Scriptures teach, it 
expresses the deepest conviction, by which the mind gives a 
firm and unhesitating assent to God revealing His mysterious 
truths. As far, therefore, as regards the use of the word here, 
he who firmly and without hesitation is convinced of anything 
is said to believe. 


FAITH EXCLUDES DOUBT 


The knowledge derived through faith must not be considered 
less certain because its objects are not seen; for the divine light 


Il4 


“TI BELIEVE IN GOD” 15 


by which we know them, although it does not render them evi- 
dent, yet suffers us not to doubt them. For God, who commanded 
the light to shine out of darkness, hath himself shone in our 
hearts,’ that the gospel be not hidden to us, as to those that 
perish.? 


FAITH EXCLUDES CURIOSITY 


From what has been said it follows that he who is gifted 
with this heavenly knowledge of faith is free from an inquisitive 
curiosity. For when God commands us to believe He does not 
propose to us to search into His divine judgments, or inquire 
into their reason and cause, but demands an unchangeable faith, 
by which the mind rests content in the knowledge of eternal truth. 
And indeed, since we have the testimony of the Apostle that 
God is true; and every man a liar,? and since it would argue 
arrogance and presumption to disbelieve the word of a grave 
and sensible man affirming anything as true, and to demand that 
he prove his statements by arguments or witnesses, how rash 
and foolish are those, who, hearing the words of God Himself, 
demand reasons for His heavenly and saving doctrines? Faith, 
therefore, must exclude not only all doubt, but all desire for 
demonstration. 


FAITH REQUIRES OPEN PROFESSION 


The pastor should also teach that he who says, J believe, 
besides declaring the inward assent of the mind, which is an 
internal act of faith, should also openly profess and with alacrity 
acknowledge and proclaim what he inwardly and in his heart 
believes. For the faithful should be animated by the same spirit 
that spoke by the lips of the Prophet when he said: J beheve, 
and therefore did I speak,* and should follow the example of 
the Apostles who replied to the princes of the people: We can- 
not but speak the things which we have seen and heard.’ They 
should be encouraged by these noble words of St. Paul: J am 
not ashamed of the gospel. For it is the power of God unto 
* Ibid. iv. 3. ® Rom. iii. 4. 


’ : 
2 Cor. iv. 6. : 
® Acts iv. 20. 


* Ps. cxv. I0. 


16 THE CREED 


salvation to every one that believeth;® and likewise by those 
other words; in which the truth of this doctrine is expressly 
confirmed: With the heart we believe unto justice; but with the 
mouth confession is made unto salvation." + 


“In God” 


From these words we may learn how exalted are the dignity 
and excellence of Christian wisdom, and what a debt of gratitude 
we owe to the divine goodness. For to us it is given at once 
to mount as by the steps of faith to the knowledge of what is 
most sublime and desirable. 


KNOWLEDGE OF GOD MORE EASILY OBTAINED THROUGH FAITH 
THAN THROUGH. REASON 


There is a great difference between Christian philosophy and 
human wisdom. The latter, guided solely by the light of nature, 
advances slowly by reasoning on sensible objects and effects, 
and only after long and laborious investigation is it able at length 
to contemplate with difficulty the invisible things of God, to dis- 
cover and understand a First Cause and Author of all things. 
Christian philosophy, on the contrary, so quickens the human 
mind that without difficulty it pierces the heavens, and, illumined 
with divine light, contemplates first, the eternal source of light, 
and in its radiance all created things; so that we experience with 
the utmost pleasure of mind that we have been called, as the 
Prince of the Apostles says, out of darkness into his admirable 
light, and believing we rejoice with joy unspeakable.® 

Justly, therefore, do the faithful profess first to believe in 
God, whose majesty, with the Prophet Jeremias, we declare in- 
comprehensible.® For, as the Apostle says, He dwells in light 
inaccessible, which no man hath seen, nor can see; as God 
Himself, speaking to Moses, said: No man shall see my face and 


* Rom. i. 16. (ROMER TO: 
Tee etrt, Sere eetalino: * Jer. xxi, 10, bas ct DC an os (3 


a For an explanation of the act and habit of faith see Summa Theol. 
Ranier Sian lV, 


“I BELIEVE IN GOD” 17 


live." The mind cannot rise to the contemplation of the Deity, 
whom nothing approaches in sublimity, unless it be entirely dis- 
engaged from the senses, and of this in the present life we are 
naturally incapable.* 


KNOWLEDGE OF GOD OBTAINED THROUGH FAITH IS CLEARER 


But while this is so, yet God, as the Apostle says, left not him- 
self without testimony, doing good from heaven, giving rains 
and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness.” 
Hence it is that the philosophers conceived no mean idea of the 
Divinity, ascribed to Him nothing corporeal, gross or composite. 
They considered Him the perfection and fulness of all good, 
from whom, as from an eternal, inexhaustible fountain of good- 
ness and benignity, flows every perfect gift to all creatures. They 
called Him the wise, the author and lover of truth, the just, the 
most benificent, and gave Him also many other appellations ex- 
pressive of supreme and absolute perfection. They recognized 
that His immense and infinite power fills every place and extends 
to all things.» 


"Exod. xxxiil. 20. 

” Acts xiv. 16. 

aQOn this question see Summa Theol. Ia. xii. 11. 

b Xenophanes (c. 570 B.c.) describes the Deity as “sacred and unutter- 
able mind, flashing through the whole world with rapid thoughts’; he 
teaches the unity, eternity, unchangeableness, sublimity and spirituality of 
God, and that God is all eye, all ear, all intellect. Empedocles (c. 490 
B.c.) also describes God as mind. Anaxagoras (c. 500-430 B.c.) teaches 
that the moving power which formed the world is Mind, and that this 
Mind is distinguished from other things because It alone is simple and 
unmixed, has knowledge about everything, the future as well as the past, 
is self-ruled and has supreme power over all things. Socrates (469-399 
B.c.) held that the order of the world proves the intervention of a supreme 
intelligence, that God is eternal and immense, and that He governs the 
world; that man may enter into communion with Him, and should invoke 
and honor Him. Plato (c. 427-347) freely criticised the anthropomorphic 
notions of God that prevailed in his day. The Divinity, he taught, is 
supremely perfect, the absolute Good, the Idea of goodness, who exercises 
over all things a providence which orders and governs everything for the 
best. He extols God’s wisdom and truthfulness, says He has a care for 
the small as well as the great, and that He wishes all to invoke Him. 
Aristotle (384-322) teaches that God is pure actuality, one, incorporeal 
and indivisible, the intelligence of intelligence; that the divine life con- 
sists in contemplative thought; that God is eternal and unchangeable in 
Himself, the first cause and last end of all things. 


18 THE CREED 


These truths the Sacred Scriptures express far better and 
much more clearly, as in the following passages: God 1s a 
spirit;*® Be ye perfect, even as also your heavenly Father 1s 
perfect; +* All things are naked and open to his eyes;** O the 
depth of the riches of the wisdom and of the knowledge of 
God!1* God is true;?? I am the way, the truth, and the life; *® 
Thy right hand is full of justice;** Thou openest thy hand, and 
fillest with blessing every living creature ;”° and finally: Whither 
shall I go from thy spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy face? 
If I ascend into heaven, thou art there; if I descend into hell, 
thou art there. If I take my wings early in the morning, and 
dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea, etc., and Do I not fill 
heaven and earth, saith the Lord? *# 


KNOWLEDGE OF GOD OBTAINED THROUGH FAITH IS MORE CERTAIN 


These great and sublime truths regarding the nature of God, 
which are in full accord with Scripture, the philosophers were 
able to learn from an investigation of God’s works. But even 
here we see the necessity of divine revelation if we reflect that 
not only does faith, as we have already observed, make known 
clearly and at once to the rude and unlettered, those truths which 
only the learned could discover, and that by long study; but also 
that the knowledge obtained through faith is much more certain 
and more secure against error than if it were the result of philo- 
sophical inquiry. 


KNOWLEDGE OF GOD OBTAINED THROUGH FAITH IS MORE AMPLE 
AND EXALTED 


But how much more exalted must not that knowledge of the 
Deity be considered, which cannot be acquired in common by 
all from the contemplation of nature, but is peculiar to those who 
are illumined by the light of faith? 


’ John iv. 24. *John xiv. 6. 
* Matt. v. 48. sles, odhyth we. 
*® Heb. iv. 13. ™Ps. cxliv. 16. 
MIR: Sah, Se) > Ps. . Cx xvii 7 Reo: 


* Rom. iii. 4. ~ Jer, xxii 24 


“T BELIEVE IN GOD” 19 


This knowledge is contained in the Articles of the Creed, 
which disclose to us the unity of the Divine Essence and the 
distinction of Three Persons, and show also that God Himself is 
the ultimate end of our being, from whom we are to expect the 
enjoyment of the eternal happiness of heaven, according to the 
words of St. Paul: God is a rewarder of them that seek Him.?8 
How great are these rewards, and whether they are such that 
human knowledge could aspire to their attainment, we learn from 
these words of Isaias uttered long before those of the Apostle: 
From the beginning of the world they have not heard, nor per- 
ceived with the ears: the eye hath not seen besides thee, O God, 
what things thou hast prepared for them that wait for thee.**4 


THE UNITY OF NATURE IN GOD 


From what is said it must also be confessed that there is but 
one God, not many gods. For we attribute to God supreme 
goodness and infinite perfection, and it is impossible that what 
is supreme and most perfect could be common to many. If a 
being lack anything that constitutes supreme perfection, it is 
therefore imperfect and cannot have the nature of God. 

The unity of God is also proved from many passages of Sacred 
Scripture. It is written: Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God is 
one Lord;?> again the Lord commands: Thou shalt not have 
strange gods before me,;?* and further He often admonishes us 
by the Prophet: J am the first, and I am the last, and besides me 
there is no God.?* The Apostle also openly declares: One Lord, 
one faith, one baptism.?® 

It should not, however, excite our surprise if the Sacred Scrip- 
tures sometimes give the name of God to creatures. For when 
they call the Prophets and judges gods, they do not speak ac- 
cording to the manner of the Gentiles, who, in their folly and 
impiety, formed to themselves many gods; but express, by a 


Hebi xis O. SIGS, Ibs Zl. 
75 Deut. vi. 4. * Exod. xx. 3. 
SU )iswexlvilion 1275) xliVv. 10; 8 Eph. iv. 5. 


a For a comparison of faith and reason see Summa Theol. Ia. xii. 13. 


20 THE CREED 


manner of speaking then in use, some eminent quality or func- 
tion conferred on such persons by the gift of God.* 


THE TRINITY OF PERSONS IN GOD 


The Christian faith, therefore, believes and professes, as is 
declared in the Nicene Creed in confirmation of this truth, that 
God in His Nature, Substance and Essence is one. But soaring 
still higher, it so understands Him to be one that it adores unity 
in trinity and trinity in unity. Of this mystery we now proceed 
to speak, as it comes next in order in the Creed.> 


“The Father” 


As God is called Father for more reasons than one, we must 
first determine the more appropriate sense in which the word is 
used in the present instance. 


GOD IS CALLED “FATHER” BECAUSE HE IS CREATOR AND RULER 


Even some on whose darkness the light of faith never shone 
conceived God to be an eternal substance from whom all things 
have their beginning, and by whose Providence they are governed 
and preserved in their order and state of existence. Since, there- 
fore, he to whom a family owes its origin and by whose wisdom 
and authority it is governed is called father, so by an analogy 
derived from human things these persons gave the name Father 
to God, whom they acknowledge to be the Creator and Governor 
of the universe. The Sacred Scriptures also, when they wish 
to show that to God must be ascribed the creation of all things, 
supreme power and admirable Providence, make use of the same 
name. Thus we read: Is not he thy Father, that hath possessed 
thee, and made thee and created thee??® And: Have we not all 
one Father? hath not one God created us? *°¢ 


”™ Deut. xxxii. 6. 
* Mal. ii. ro. 


2QOn the unity of God see Summa Theol. ra. xi. 
b On the plurality of Persons in God see Summa Theol. 1a. xxx. 


© More will be said on this subject in the explanation of the opening 
words of the Lord’s Prayer. 


“T BELIEVE IN GOD” 2t 


GOD IS CALLED “FATHER” BECAUSE HE ADOPTS CHRISTIANS 
THROUGH GRACE 


But God, particularly in the New Testament, is much more 
frequently, and in some sense peculiarly, called the Father of 
Christians, who have not received the spirit of bondage again in 
fear; but have received the spirit of adoption of sons (of God), 
whereby they cry: Abba (Father). For the Father hath be- 
stowed upon us that manner of charity that we should be called, 
and be the sons of God,** and if sons, heirs also; heirs indeed 
of God, and joint-heirs with Christ,?? who is the first-born 
amongst many brethren,** and is not ashamed to call us 
brethren.*> Whether, therefore, we look to the common title of 
creation and Providence, or to the special one of spiritual adop- 
tion, rightly do the faithful profess their belief that God is their 
Father. 


THE NAME “FATHER” ALSO DISCLOSES THE PLURALITY OF PERSONS 
IN GOD 


But the pastor should teach that on hearing the word Father, 
besides the ideas already unfolded, the mind should rise to more 
exalted mysteries. Under the name Father, the divine oracles 
begin to unveil to us a mysterious truth which is more abstruse 
and more deeply hidden in that inaccessible light in which God 
dwells, and which human reason and understanding could not 
attain to, nor even conjecture to exist. 

This name implies that in the one Essence of the Godhead is 
proposed to our belief, not only one Person, but a distinction of 
persons; for in one Divine Nature there are Three Persons— 
the Father, begotten of none; the Son, begotten of the Father 
before all ages; the Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and 
the Son, likewise, from all eternity. 


_ ™ Rom. viii. 15. ®y John iii. I. , "Rom. viii. 17. 

* Rom. viii. 20. *ebiii. 11: 

aOn the meaning of the word “Father” see Summa Theol. Ia. xxxiil. 
23s 


22 THE ‘CREED 


THE DOCTRINE OF THE TRINITY 


In the one Substance of the Divinity the Father is the First 
Person, who with His Only-begotten Son, and the Holy Ghost, 
is one God and one Lord, not in the singularity of one Person, 
but in the trinity of one Substance. These Three Persons, since 
it would be impiety to assert that they are unlike or unequal in 
any thing, are understood to be distinct only in their respective 
properties. For the Father is unbegotten, the Son begotten of 
the Father, and the Holy Ghost proceeds from both. Thus we 
acknowledge the Essence and the Substance of the Three Persons 
to be the same in such wise that we believe that in confessing the 
true and eternal God we are piously and religiously to adore 
distinction in the Persons, unity in the Essence, and equality in 
the Trinity. 

Hence, when we say that the Father is the First Person, we 
are not to be understood to mean that in the Trinity there is 
anything first or last, greater or less. Let none of the faithful be 
guilty of such impiety, for the Christian religion proclaims the 
same eternity, the same majesty of glory in the Three Persons. 
But since the Father is the Beginning without a beginning, we 
truly and unhesitatingly affirm that He is the First Person, and 
as He is distinct from the Others by His peculiar relation of 
paternity, so of Him alone is it true that He begot the Son from 
eternity. For when in the Creed we pronounce together the 
words God and Father, it means that He was always both 
God and Father.> 


PRACTICAL ADMONITIONS CONCERNING THE MYSTERY OF THE 
TRINITY 


Since nowhere is a too curious inquiry more dangerous, or 
error more fatal,° than in the knowledge and exposition of this, 
the most profound and difficult of mysteries, let the pastor teach 
that the terms nature and person used to express this mystery 

aSee Preface for the Mass of the Holy Trinity. 

i On the equality of the Persons of the Trinity see Summa Theol. 1a. 
Xi11. 
¢St. Augustine, De Trinit. i. c. 3. 


“T BELIEVE IN GOD” 23 


should be most scrupulously retained; and let the faithful Know 
that unity belongs to essence, and distinction to persons. 

But these are truths which should not be made the subject of 
too subtle investigation, when we recollect that he who is a 
searcher of majesty shall be overwhelmed by glory.® We should 
be satisfied with the assurance and certitude which faith gives us 
that we have been taught these truths by God Himself, to doubt 
whose word is the extreme of folly and misery. He has said: 
Teach ye all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, 
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; ** and again, there are 
three who give testimony in heaven, the Father, the Word, and 
the Holy Ghost; and these three are one.3*# 

Let him, however, who by the divine bounty believes these 
truths, constantly beseech and implore God and the Father, who 
made all things out of nothing, and ordereth all things sweetly,*® 
who gave us power to become the sons of God,*? and who made 
known to the human mind the mystery of the Trinity—let him, 
I say, pray unceasingly that, admitted one day into the eternal 
tabernacles,*? he may be worthy to see how great is the fecundity 
of the Father, who contemplating and understanding Himself, 
begot the Son like and equal to Himself, how a love of charity in 
both, entirely the same and equal, which is the Holy Ghost, pro- 
ceeding from the Father and the Son, connects the begetter and 
the begotten by an eternal and indissoluble bond; and that thus 
the Essence of the Trinity is one and the distinction of the Three 
Persons perfect, 


“Almighty” 


The Sacred Scriptures, in order to mark the piety and devotion 
with which the most holy name of God is to be adored, usually 
express His supreme power and infinite majesty in a variety of 
ways; but the pastor should, first of all, teach that almighty power 
is most frequently attributed to Him. Thus He says of Himself: 


eT OVX Ve 27: * Matt. XXvVili. 19. heen Wie7: 
SOV ViSa Vill. as John i. 12. uke xvi. 9. 


aQn the impossibility of knowing or proving the Trinity from reason 
see Summa Theol. 1a. xxxii. 1. On the necessity of faith in the Trinity 


see Summa Theol. 2a. 2e. ii. 8. 


24 THE CREED 


I am the almighty Lord; * and again, Jacob when sending his 
sons to Joseph thus prayed for them: May my almighty God 
make him favourable to you.*? In the Apocalypse also it is writ- 
ten: The Lord God, who is, and who was, and who is to come, 
the almighty; ** and in another place the last day is called the 
great day of the almighty God.® Sometimes the same attribute 
is expressed in many words; thus: No word shall be impossible 
with God; ** Is the hand of the Lord unable?** Thy power ts 
at hand when thou wilt,*® and so on. 


MEANING OF THE TERM “ALMIGHTY” 


From these various modes of expression it is clearly perceived 
what is comprehended under this single word almighty. By it 
we understand that there neither exists nor can be conceived in 
thought or imagination anything which God cannot do. For not 
only can He annihilate all created things, and in a moment sum- 
mon from nothing into existence many other worlds, an exercise 
of power which, however great, comes in some degree within our 
comprehension; but He can do many things still greater, of 
which the human mind can form no conception. 

But though God can do all things, yet He cannot lie, or deceive, 
or be deceived; He cannot sin, or cease to exist, or be ignorant 
of anything. These defects are compatible with those beings only 
whose actions are imperfect; but God, whose acts are always 
most perfect, is said to be incapable of such things, simply because 
the capability of doing them implies weakness, not the supreme 
and infinite power over all things which God possesses. Thus we 
so believe God to be omnipotent that we exclude from Him 


entirely all that is not intimately connected and consistent with 
the perfection of His nature. 


WHY OMNIPOTENCE ALONE IS MENTIONED IN THE CREED 


The pastor should point out the propriety and wisdom of 
having omitted all other names of God in the Creed, and of 
having proposed to us only that of almighty as the object of 


© Gen vil, I: “Gen. xliii 14. “ Apoc. i. 8. EAPOC.. XVin. 14. 
STotike 0374 SNittmesscie2a) * Wis. xii. 18. 


“T BELIEVE IN GOD” 25 


our belief. For by acknowledging God to be omnipotent, we 
also of necessity acknowledge Him to be omniscient, and to hold 
all things in subjection to His supreme authority and dominion. 
When we do not doubt that He is omnipotent, we must be also 
convinced of everything else regarding Him, the absence of which 
would render His omnipotence altogether unintelligible. 

Besides, nothing tends more to confirm our faith and animate 
our hope than a deep conviction that all things are possible to 
God; for whatever may be afterwards proposed as an object of 
faith, however great, however wonderful, however raised above 
the natural order, is easily and without hesitation believed, once 
the mind has grasped the knowledge of the omnipotence of God. 
Nay more, the greater the truths which the divine oracles an- 
nounce, the more willingly does the mind deem them worthy of 
belief. And should we expect any favor from heaven, we are 
not discouraged by the greatness of the desired benefit, but are 
cheered and confirmed by frequently considering that there is 
nothing which an omnipotent God cannot effect. 


ADVANTAGES OF FAITH IN GOD’S OMNIPOTENCE 


' With this faith, then, we should be specially fortified whenever 
we are required to render any extraordinary service to our 
neighbor or seek to obtain by prayer any favor from God. Its 
necessity in the one case we learn from the Lord Himself, who, 
when rebuking the incredulity of the Apostles, said: If you have 
faith as a grain of mustard seed, you shall say to this mountain: 
Remove from hence thither, and it shall remove; and nothing 
shall be impossible to you; *® and in the other case, from these 
words of St. James: Let him ask in faith, nothing wavering. For 
he that wavereth is like a wave of the sea, which is moved and 
carried about by the wind. Therefore let not that man think that 
he shall receive any thing of the Lord.*° 

This faith brings with it also many advantages and helps. It 
forms us, in the first place, to all humility and lowliness of mind, 
according to these words of the Prince of the Apostles: Be you 
humbled therefore under the mighty hand of God. It also 


Matt axcvil. 10: James i. 6, 7. se DES Gm (6) 


26 THE CREED 


teaches us not to fear where there is no cause of fear, but to fear 
God alone, in whose power we ourselves and all that we have are 
placed; for our Saviour says: I will shew you whom you shall 
fear; fear ye him, who after he hath killed, hath power to cast 
into hell. This faith is also useful to enable us to know and 
exalt the infinite mercies of God towards us. For he who reflects 
on the omnipotence of God, cannot be so ungrateful as not fre- 
quently to exclaim: He that is mighty, hath done great things 
to me.** 


NOT THREE ALMIGHTIES BUT ONE ALMIGHTY 


When, however, in this Article we call the Father almighty, 
let no one be led into the error of thinking that this attribute is so 
ascribed to Him as not to belong also to the Son and the Holy 
Ghost. As we say the Father is God, the Son is God, the Holy 
Ghost is God, and yet there are not three Gods but one God; so 
in like manner we confess that the Father is almighty, the Son 
almighty, and the Holy Ghost almighty, and yet there are not 
three almighties but one almighty.** 

The Father, in particular, we call almighty, because He is the 
Source of all being; as we also attribute wisdom to the Son, 
because He is the eternal Word of the Father; and goodness to 
the Holy Ghost, because He is the love of both. These, however, 
and similar appellations, may be given indiscriminately to the 
Three Persons, according to the teaching of Catholic faith.? 


“Creator” 


The necessity of having previously imparted to the faithful a 
knowledge of the omnipotence of God will appear from what we 
are now about to explain with regard to the creation of the world. 
The wondrous production of so stupendous a work is more easily 
believed when all doubt concerning the immense power of the 
Creator has been removed. 

For God formed the world not from materials of any sort, but 
created it from nothing, and that not by constraint or necessity, 


© Luke xii. 5. * Luke i. 4o. * Athanasian Creed. 
2 On God’s omnipotence see Summa Theol. ta. xxv. 


“T BELIEVE IN GOD” 27 


but spontaneously, and of His own free will. Nor was He im- 
pelled to create by any other cause than a desire to communicate 
His goodness to creatures. Being essentially happy in Himself, 
He stands not in need of anything; as David expresses its J 
have said to the Lord, thou art my God, for thou hast no need 
of my goods.*>@ 

As it was His own goodness that influenced Him when He did 
all things whatsoever He would, so in the work of creation He 
followed no external form or model; but contemplating, and as it 
were imitating, the universal model contained in the divine intelli- 
gence, the supreme Architect, with infinite wisdom and power— 
attributes peculiar to the Divinity—created all things in the be- 
ginning. He spoke and they were made: he commanded and they 
were created.®*> 


“Of Heaven and Earth” 


The words heaven and earth include all things which the 
heavens and the earth contain; for besides the heavens, which the 
Prophet has called the works of his fingers,*" He also gave to the 
sun its brilliancy, and to the moon and stars their beauty; and 
that they might be for signs, and for seasons, and for days and 
years. He so ordered the celestial bodies in a certain and uni- 
form course, that nothing varies more than their continual revolu- 
tion, while nothing is more fixed than their variety.° 


CREATION OF THE WORLD OF SPIRITS 


Moreover, He created out of nothing the spiritual world and 
Angels innumerable to serve and minister to Him; and these He 
enriched and adorned with the admirable gifts of His grace and 


power. 


SOS, Saif FE S12 sSodbh GO), 

Ps, viii. 4. 5 Gen. i. 14. 

aQOn the production of the world from nothing and on the motive of 
creation see Summa Theol. 1a. xliv. 2, 4. 

t'On God as the exemplary cause of creation see Summa Theol. Ia. 


xliv. 3. i 
¢ On creation see Summa Theol. fa. xlv. 


28 THE CREED 


That the devil and the other rebel angels were gifted from the 
beginning of their creation with grace, clearly follows from these 
words of the Sacred Scriptures: He (the devil) stood not in the 
truth.°° On this subject St. Augustine says: In creating the 
Angels He endowed them with good will, that is, with pure love 
that they might adhere to Him, giving them existence and adorn- 
ing them with grace at one and the same time. Hence we are to 
believe that the holy Angels were never without good will, that 1s, 
the love of God.®° 

As to their knowledge we have this testimony of Holy Scrip- 
ture: Thou, my Lord, O king, art wise, according to the wisdom 
of an angel of God, to understand all things upon earth. Finally, 
the inspired David ascribes power to them, saying that they are 
mighty in strength, and execute his word; * and on this account 
they are often called in Scripture the powers and the armies of 
the Lord. 

But although they were all endowed with celestial gifts, very 
many, having rebelled against God, their Father and Creator, were 
hurled from those high mansions of bliss, and shut up in the 
darkest dungeon of earth, there to suffer for eternity the punish- 
ment of their pride. Speaking of them the Prince of the Apostles 
says: God spared not the angels that sinned, but delivered them, 
drawn by infernal ropes to the lower hell, unto torments, to be 
reserved unto judgment.®$ > 


FORMATION OF THE UNIVERSE 


The earth also God commanded to. stand in the midst of the 
world, rooted in its own foundation, and made the mountains 
ascend, and the plains descend into the place which he had 
founded for them. That the waters should not inundate the 
earth, He set a bound which they shall not pass over; neither shall 


© John viii. 44. © De Civit. Dei, lib. xii. ¢. 9. 
2 Kings xiv. 20. = Psiicite 20, 
2 eet. 11, As 


aQOn the Angels see Summa Theol. ta., 1 and following. 


bOn the fall and punishment of the Angels see Summa Theol. 1a. 
Ixiii. Ixiv. 


“T BELIEVE IN GOD” 29 


they return to cover the earth.** He next not only clothed and 
adorned it with trees and every variety of plant and flower, but 
filled it, as He had already filled the air and water, with innumer- 
able kinds of living creatures.@ 


PRODUCTION OF MAN 


Lastly, He formed man from the slime of the earth, so created 
and constituted in body as to be immortal and impassible, not, 
however, by the strength of nature, but by the bounty of God. 
Man’s soul He created to His own image and likeness; gifted him 
with free will, and tempered all his motions and appetites so as to 
subject them, at all times, to the dictates of reason. He then 
added the admirable gift of original righteousness, and next 
gave him dominion over all other animals. By referring to the 
sacred history of Genesis the pastor will easily make himself 
familiar with these things for the instruction of the faithful.» 


“Of all Things Visible and Invisible” 


What we have said, then, of the creation of the universe is 
to be understood as conveyed by the words heaven and 
earth, and is thus briefly set forth by the Prophet: Thine are 
the heavens, and thine is the earth: the world and the fulness 
thereof thou hast founded. Still more briefly the Fathers of 
the Council of Nice expressed this truth by adding in their Creed 
these words: of all things visible and invisible. Whatever exists 
in the universe, whatever we confess to have been created by 
God, either falls under the senses and is included in the word 
visible, or is an object of mental perception and intelligence and 
is expressed by the word invisible. 


God Preserves, Rules and Moves all Created Things 


We are not, however, to understand that God is in such wise 
the Creator and Maker of all things that His works, when once 


OP swiciii ss 6,10: ®Ps, Ixxxviii. 12. 


aQOn the formation of the universe see Summa Theol. Ia. Ixv-Ixxiv. 
bOn the production of man see Summa Theol. ta. xc and following. 


30 THE CREED 


created and finished, could thereafter continue to exist unsup- 
ported by His omnipotence. For as all things derive existence 
from the Creator’s supreme power, wisdom, and goodness, so 
unless preserved continually by His Providence, and by the same 
power which produced them, they would instantly return into 
their nothingness. This the Scriptures declare when they say: 
How could anything endure if thou wouldst not? or be preserved, 
if not called by thee? °% 

Not only does God protect and govern all things by His Provi- 
dence, but He also by an internal power impels to motion and 
action whatever moves and acts, and this in such a manner that, 
although He excludes not, He yet precedes the agency of 
secondary causes. For His invisible influence extends to all 
things, and, as the Wise Man says, reaches from end to end 
mightily, and ordereth all things sweetly.°* This is the reason 
why the Apostle, announcing to the Athenians the God whom, not 
knowing, they adored, said: He is not far from every one of us: 
for in him we live, and move, and are.®* 2 


Creation is the Work of the Three Persons 


Let so much suffice for the explanation of the first Article of 
the Creed. It may not be superfluous, however, to add that crea- 
tion is the common work of the Three Persons of the Holy and 
undivided Trinity,—of the Father, whom according to the doc- 
trine of the Apostles we here declare to be Creator of heaven 
and earth; of the Son, of whom the Scripture says, all things 
were made by him;** and of the Holy Ghost, of whom it is 
written: The spirit of God moved over the waters,” and again, 
By the word of the Lord the heavens were established ; and all the 
power of them by the spirit of his mouth. > 


* Wis. xi. 26. * Wis. viii. 1. ® Acts. xvii. 27, 28. 

Saohneaens: Gen. i. 2. ety siosail, (Oy 

a On the divine government of the world and movement of all things 
see Summa Theol. Ia. ciii and following. 

% On this subject see Summa Theol. ta. xlv. 6. 


ARTICLE II 
“AND IN Jesus Curist, His OnLy Son, Our Lorp” 


ADVANTAGES OF FAITH IN THIS ARTICLE 


That wonderful and superabundant are the blessings which 
flow to the human race from the belief and profession of this 
Article we learn from these words of St. John: Whosoever shall 
confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God abideth in him, and he 
in God;* and also from the words of Christ the Lord, proclaim- 
ing the Prince of the Apostles blessed for the confession of this 
truth: Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-Jona: for flesh and blood 
hath not revealed it to thee, but my Father who is in heaven.? 
For this Article is the most firm basis of our salvation and re- 
demption. 

But as the fruit of these admirable blessings is best known by 
considering the ruin brought on man by his fall from that most 
happy state in which God had placed our first parents, let the 
pastor be particularly careful to make known to the faithful the 
cause of this common misery and calamity. 

When Adam had departed from the obedience due to God and 
had violated the prohibition, Of every tree of paradise thou shalt 
eat: But of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt 
not eat, for in what day soever thou shalt eat of it, thou shalt die 
the death,* he fell into the extreme misery of losing the sanctity 
and righteousness in which he had been placed, and of becoming 
subject to all those other evils which have been explained more 
fully by the holy Council of Trent. 

Wherefore, the pastor should not omit to remind the faithful 
that the guilt and punishment of original sin were not confined to 
Adam, but justly descended from him, as from their source and 


11 John iy. 15. 2 Miatte xvii, *Gen. ii. 16. 
31 


32 THE CREED 


cause, to all posterity. The human race, having fallen from its 
elevated dignity, no power of men or Angels could raise it from 
its fallen condition and replace it in its primitive state. To rem- 
edy the evil and repair the loss it became necessary that the Son 
of God, whose power is infinite, clothed in the weakness of our 


flesh, should remove the infinite weight of sin and reconcile us to 
God in His blood.# 


NECESSITY OF FAITH IN THIS ARTICLE 


The belief and profession of this our redemption, which God 
declared from the beginning, are now, and always have been, 
necessary to salvation. In the sentence of condemnation pro- 
nounced against the human race immediately after the sin of 
Adam the hope of redemption was held out in these words, which 
announced to the devil the loss he was to sustain by man’s re- 
demption: I will put enmities between thee and the woman, and 
thy seed and her seed: she shall crush thy head, and thou shalt 
le in wait for her heel.® 

The same promise God again often confirmed and more dis- 
tinctly manifested to those chiefly whom He desired to make 
special objects of His favor; among others to the Patriarch Abra- 
ham, to whom He often declared this mystery, but more explicitly 
when, in obedience to His command, Abraham was prepared to 
sacrifice his only son Isaac. Because, said God, thou hast done 
this thing, and hast not spared thy only-begotten son for my sake; 
I will bless thee, and I will multiply thy seed as the stars of 
heaven, and as the sand that is by the sea shore. Thy seed shall 
possess the gates of their enemies, and in thy seed shall all the 
nations of the earth be blessed, because thou hast obeyed my 
voice.’ From these words it was easy to infer that He who was 
to deliver mankind from the ruthless tyranny of Satan was to be 
descended from Abraham; and that while He was the Son of 
God, He was to be born of the seed of Abraham according to the 
flesh. 

“Rom. v. 12. 

*Gen. iii. 15. *Gen. xxii. 16-18. 


4 On original sin and the necessity of the Incarnation see Summa Theol. 
Ia. 2. Ixxxi-Ixxxiii; 3a. i; Council of Trent, Sess. v. 


“INGESUS CHRIST” 33 


Not long after, to preserve the memory of this promise, God 
renewed the same covenant with Jacob, the grandson of Abra- 
ham. When ina vision Jacob saw a ladder standing on earth, and 
its top reaching to heaven, and the angels of God ascending and 
descending by it,” as the Scriptures testify, he also heard the 
Lord, who was leaning on the ladder, say to him: J am the Lord 
God of Abraham thy father, and the God of Isaac; the land, 
wherein thou sleepest, I will give to thee and to thy seed. And 
thy seed shall be as the dust of the earth. Thou shalt spread 
abroad to the west, and to the east, and to the north, and to the 
south ; and in thee and thy seed all the nations of the earth shall be 
blessed® 

Nor did God cease afterwards to excite in the posterity of 
Abraham and in many others, the expectation of a Saviour, by 
renewing the recollection of the same promise; for after the 
establishment of the Jewish State and religion it became better 
known to His people. Types signified and men foretold what 
and how great blessings the Saviour and Redeemer, Christ Jesus, 
was to bring to mankind. And indeed the Prophets, whose minds 
were illuminated with light from above, foretold the birth of the 
Son of God, the wondrous works which He wrought while on 
earth, His doctrine, character, life, death, Resurrection, and the 
other mysterious circumstances regarding Him,—and all these 
they announced to the people as graphically as if they were pass- 
ing before their eyes. With the exception that one has reference 
to the future and the other to the past, we can discover no dif- 
ference between the predictions of the Prophets and the preach- 
ing of the Apostles, between the faith of the ancient Patriarchs 
and that of Christians.> 

But we are now to speak of the several parts of this Article. 


“Jesus” 


Jesus is the proper name of the God-man and signifies 
Saviour: a name given Him not accidentally, or by the judgment 


"Gen. xxviii. 12. 5 Gen. xxviii. 13, 14. 
aSee Is. vii. 14; viii. 3; ix. 5; xi. 1-53; Jer. xxiii. 6; xxx. 9; Dan. vii. 
TgYR bss 2s 


bOn the necessity of faith in Christ see Summa Theol. 2a. 22. ii. 7. 


34 THE CREED 


or will of man, but by the counsel and command ot God.? For 
the Angel announced to Mary His mother: Behold thou shalt 
conceive in thy womb, and shalt bring forth a son; and thow shalt 
call his name Jesus. He afterwards not only commanded 
Joseph, who was espoused to the Virgin, to call the child by that 
name, but also declared the reason why He should be so called. 
Joseph, son of David, said the Angel, fear not to take unto thee 
Mary thy wife, for that which is conceived in her is of the Holy 
Ghost. And she shall bring forth a son and thou shalt call his 
name Jesus. For he shall save his people from their sins.*° 

In the Sacred Scriptures we meet with many who were called 
by this name. So, for example, was called the son of Nave, who 
succeeded Moses, and, by special privilege denied to Moses, con- 
ducted into the land of promise the people whom Moses had de- 
livered from Egypt; and also the son of Josedech, the priest.» 
But how much more appropriate it is to call by this name 
our Saviour, who gave light, liberty and salvation, not to 
one people only, but to all men, of all ages—to men oppressed, 
not by famine, or Egyptian or Babylonian bondage, but sitting in 
the shadow of death and fettered by the galling chains ot sin and 
of the devil—who purchased for them a right to the inheritance 
of heaven and reconciled them to God the Father! In those 
men who were designated by the same name we see foreshadowed 
Christ the Lord, by whom the blessings just enumerated were 
poured out on the human race. 

All other names which according to prophecy were to be given 
by divine appointment to the Son of God, are comprised in this 
one name Jesus; for while they partially signified the salvation 
which He was to bestow upon us, this name included the force 
and meaning of all human salvation. 


* Luke i. 31. * Matt. i. 20. 

aQOn the name Jesus see Summa Theol. 3a. xxxvii. 2. 

b Josue, the son of Nave, is called Jesus (Eccl. xlvi. 1), as is also the 
son of Sirach (Eccl. 1. 29). Jesus, the son of Josedech, is mentioned 
often in Esdras, Aggeus and Zacharias, and he it is of whom St. Luke 
speaks (iii, 29) as being descended from Eliezer. 


“IN JESUS CHRIST” 35 


Pcorist 


To the name Jesus is added that of Christ, which signifies 
the anointed. This name is expressive of honor and office, and 
is not peculiar to one thing only, but common to many; for in the 
Old Law priests and kings, whom God, on account of the dignity 
of their office, commanded to be anointed, were called christs. 
For priests commend the people to God by unceasing prayer, offer 
sacrifice to Him, and turn away His wrath from mankind. Kings 
are entrusted with the government of the people; and to them 
principally belong the authority of the law, the protection of 
innocence and the punishment of guilt. As, therefore, both these 
functions seem to represent the majesty of God on earth, those 
who were appointed to the royal or sacerdotal office were anointed 
with oil. Furthermore, since Prophets, as the interpreters and 
ambassadors of the immortal God, have unfolded to us the secrets 
of heaven and by salutary precepts and the prediction of future 
events have exhorted to amendment of life, it was customary to 
anoint them also. 

When Jesus Christ our Saviour came into the world, He as- 
sumed these three characters of Prophet, Priest and King, and 
was therefore called Christ, having been anointed for the dis- 
charge of these functions, not by mortal hand or with earthly oint- 
ment, but by the power of His heavenly Father and with a spiritual 
oil; for the plenitude of the Holy Spirit and a more copious effu- 
sion of all gifts than any other created being is capable of receiv- 
ing were poured into His soul. This the Prophet clearly indicates 
when he addresses the Redeemer in these words: Thou hast 
loved justice, and hated iniquity: therefore God, thy God, hath 
anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows.* The 
same is also more explicitly declared by the Prophet Isaias: The 
spirit of the Lord is upon me, because the Lord hath anointed me: 
he hath sent me to preach to the meek.” 

Jesus Christ, therefore, was the great Prophet and Teacher, 
from whom we have learned the will of God and by whom the 
world has been taught the knowledge of the heavenly Father. 
The name prophet belongs to Him preeminently, because all 


a P Sexi. 0: RS AXE 2: 


36 THE CREED 


others who were dignified with that name were His disciples, sent 
principally to announce the coming of that Prophet who was to 
save all men. 

Christ was also a Priest, not indeed of the same order as were 
the priests of the tribe of Levi in the Old Law, but of that of 
which the Prophet David sang: Thou art a priest for ever ac- 
cording to the order of Melchisedech.* This subject the Apostle 
fully and accurately develops in his Epistle to the Hebrews. 

Christ not only as God, but also as man and partaker of our 
nature, we acknowledge to be a King. Of Him the Angel testi- 
fied: He shall reign in the house of Jacob for ever. And of his 
kingdom there shall be no end* This kingdom of Christ is 
spiritual and eternal, begun on earth but perfected in heaven. He 
discharges by His admirable Providence the duties of King to- 
wards His Church, governing and protecting her against the 
assaults and snares of her enemies, legislating for her and im- 
parting to her not only holiness and righteousness, but also the 
power and strength to persevere. But although the good and the 
bad are found within the limits of this kingdom, and thus all 
men by right belong to it, yet those who in conformity with His 
commands lead unsullied and innocent lives, experience beyond 
all others the sovereign goodness and beneficence of our King. 
Although descended from the most illustrious race of kings, He 
obtained this kingdom not by hereditary or other human right, 
but because God bestowed on Him as man all the power, dignity 
and majesty of which human nature is capable. To Him, there- 
fore, God delivered the government of the whole world, and to 
this His sovereignty, which has already commenced, all things 
shall be made fully and entirely subject on the day of judgment.? 


“His Only Son” 


In these words, mysteries more exalted with regard to Jesus 
are proposed to the faithful as objects of their belief and con- 


PP Swoim 4. Luke dn 323s: 

aOn Christ as Prophet see Summa Theol. 2a. 2x. clxxiv. 4. ad 3; 
ga. vil. 8; xxxi. 2, On the Priesthood of Christ see ibid. 3a. xxii; on 
the Headship of Christ see ibid. 3a. viiii The meaning of the words, 


Ne a of God,” are explained under the second Petition of the Lord’s 
rayer. 


“IN JESUS CHRIST” 37 


templation; namely, that He is the Son of God, and true God, 
like the Father who begot Him from eternity. We also confess 
that He is the Second Person of the Blessed Trinity, equal in all 
things to the Father and the Holy Ghost; for in the Divine Per- 
sons nothing unequal or unlike should exist, or even be imagined 
to exist, since we acknowledge the essence, will and power of all 
to be one. This truth is both clearly revealed in many passages 
of Holy Scripture and sublimely announced in the testimony of 
St. John: In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was 
with God, and the Word was God.® 

But when we are told that Jesus is the Son of God, we are not 
to understand anything earthly or mortal in His birth; but are 
firmly to believe and piously to adore that birth by which, from all 
eternity, the Father begot the Son,—a mystery which reason can- 
not fully conceive or comprehend, and at the contemplation of 
which, overwhelmed, as it were, with admiration, we should 
exclaim with the Prophet: Who shall declare his generation? 
On this point, then, we are to believe that the Son is of the same 
nature, of the same power and wisdom, with the Father, as we 
more fully profess in these words of the Nicene Creed: And in 
one Lord Jesus Christ, his Only-begotten Son, born of the Father 
before all ages, God of God, light of light, true God of true God, 
begotten, not made, consubstantial to the Father, by whom all 
things were made. 

Among the different comparisons employed to elucidate the 
mode and manner of this eternal generation that which is bor- 
rowed from the production of thought in our mind seems to come 
nearest to its illustration, and hence St. John calls the Son the 
Word. For as our mind, in some sort understanding itself, forms 
an image of itself, which theologians express by the term word, 
so God, as far as we may compare human things to divine, under- 
standing Himself, begets the eternal Word. It is better, however, 
to contemplate what faith proposes, and in the sincerity of our 
souls to believe and confess that Jesus Christ is true God and 
true Man,—as God, begotten of the Father before all ages, as 
Man, born in time of Mary, His Virgin Mother. 

Whilatay sh Ab eS. thie, ey 


aQOn the eternal generation and Sonship of Christ see Summa Theol. 
ia. xxvii. 2; xxxiv. 


38 THE CREED 


While we thus acknowledge His twofold Nativity, we believe 
Him to be one Son, because His divine and human natures meet 
in one Person. As to His divine generation He has no brethren 
or coheirs, being the Only-begotten Son of the Father, while we 
mortals are the work of His hands. But if we consider His birth 
as man, He not only calls many by the name of brethren, but 
treats them as such, since He admits them to share with Him 
the glory of His paternal inheritance. They are those who by 
faith have received Christ the Lord, and who really, and by works 
of charity, show forth the faith which they profess in words. 
Hence the Apostle calls Christ, the first-born amongst many 
brethren,™" @ 


“Our icra 


Of our Saviour many things are recorded in Sacred Scripture. 
Some of these, it is evident, apply to Him as God and some as 
man, because from His two natures He received the different prop- 
erties which belong to both. Hence we say with truth that Christ 
is Almighty, Eternal, Infinite, and these attributes He has from 
His Divine Nature; again, we say of Him that He suffered, died, 
and rose again, which are properties manifestly that belong to 
His human nature. 

Besides these terms, there are others common to both natures; 
as when in this Article of the Creed we say our Lord. If, 
then, this name applies to both natures, rightly is He to be called 
our Lord. For as He, as well as the Father, is the eternal God, 
so is He Lord of all things equally with the Father; and as He 
and the Father are not the one, one God, and the other, another 
God, but one and the same God, so likewise He and the Father 
are not the one, one Lord, and the other, another Lord. 

As man, He is also for many reasons appropriately called our 
Lord. First, because He is our Redeemer, who delivered us 
from sin, He deservedly acquired the power by which He truty 
is and is called our Lord. This is the doctrine of the Apostle: 


™ Rom. viii. 20. 


_ 2 These thoughts are further developed in the explanation of the open- 
ing words of the Lord’s Prayer, p. 505. 


“IN JESUS CHRIST” x6 


He humbled himself, becoming obedient unto death, even to the 
death of the cross. For which cause God also hath exalted him, 
and hath given him a name which is above all names: that at the 
name of Jesus every knee should bend, of those that are in heaven, 
on earth, and under the earth: and that every tongue should con- 
fess that the Lord Jesus Christ is in the glory of God the Father.8 
And of Himself He said, after His Resurrection: All power is 
given to me in heaven and in earth.*® 

He is also called Lord because in one Person both natures, 
the human and the divine, are united; and even though He had 
not died for us, He would have yet deserved, by this admirable 
union, to be constituted common Lord of all created things, par- 
ticularly of the faithful who obey and serve Him with all the 
fervor of their souls. 


DUTIES OWED TO CHRIST OUR LORD 


It remains, therefore, that the pastor remind the faithful that 
from Christ we take our name and are called Christians; that we 
cannot be ignorant of the extent of His favors, particularly since 
by His gift of faith we are enabled to understand all these things. 
We, above all others, are under the obligation of devoting and 
consecrating ourselves forever, like faithful servants, to our 
Redeemer and our Lord. 

This indeed, we promised at the doors of the church when 
about to be baptized ; for we then declared that we renounced the 
devil and the world, and gave ourselves unreservedly to Jesus 
Christ. But if to be enrolled as soldiers of Christ we conse- 
crated ourselves by so holy and solemn a profession to our Lord, 
what punishments should we not deserve if after our entrance 
into the Church, and after having known the will and laws of 
God and received the grace of the Sacraments, we were to form 
our lives upon the precepts and maxims of the world and the 
devil, just as though when cleansed in the waters of Baptism, 
we had pledged our fidelity to the world and to the devil, and not 
to Christ the Lord and Saviour! 


PE HileniinO,e10: ® Matt. xxviii. 18. 


40 | THE CREED 


What heart so cold as not to be inflamed with love by the kind- 
ness and good will exercised toward us by so great a Lord, who, 
though holding us in His power and dominion as slaves ransomed 
by His blood, yet embraces us with such ardent love as to call us 
not servants, but friends and brethren? This, assuredly, sup- 
plies the most just, and perhaps the strongest, claim to induce us 
always to acknowledge, venerate, and adore Him as our Lord. 


ARTICLE [ii 


ce 
Wuo Was CoNcEIVED By THE Hoty Guost, Born oF THE. 
VIRGIN Mary” 


IMPORTANCE OF THIS ARTICLE 


From what has been said in the preceding Article, the faithful 
can understand that in bringing us from the relentless tyranny of 
Satan into liberty, God has conferred a singular and surpassing 
blessing on the human race. But if we place before our eyes also 
the plan and means by which He deigned chiefly to accomplish 
this, then, indeed, we shall see that there is nothing more glorious 
or magnificent than this divine goodness and beneficence towards 
us. 


First Part of this Article: 
“Who was Conceived” 


The pastor, then, should enter on the exposition of this third 
Article by developing the grandeur of this mystery, which the 
Sacred Scriptures very frequently propose for our consideration 
as the principal source of our eternal salvation. Its meaning he 
should teach to be that we believe and confess that the same Jesus 
Christ, our only Lord, the Son of God, when He assumed human 
flesh for us in the womb of the Virgin, was not conceived like 
other men, from the seed of man, but in a manner transcending 
the order of nature, that is, by the power of the Holy Ghost ;* 
so that the same Person, remaining God as He was from eternity, 
became man, what He was not before. 

That such is the meaning of the above words is clear from 
the Creed of the Holy Council of Constantinople, which says: 
Who for us men, and for our salvation. came down from heaven, 


2Matt. i. 20; Luke i. 35. 
41 


re THE CREED 


and became incarnate by the Holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary, and 
was made man, The same truth we also find unfolded by St. 
John the Evangelist, who imbibed from the bosom of the Lord 
and Saviour Himself the knowledge of this most profound mys- 
tery. For when he had declared the nature of the Divine Word 
as follows: In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was 
with God, and the Word was God, he concluded: And, the Word 
was made flesh and dwelt among us. 

The Word, which is a Person of the Divine Nature, assumed 
human nature in such a manner that there should be one and the 
same Person in both the divine and human natures. Hence this 
admirable union preserved the actions and properties of both 
natures; and as Pope St. Leo the Great said: The lowliness of 
the inferior nature was not consumed in the glory of the superior, 
nor did the assumption of the inferior lessen the glory of the 
superior.® 


“By the Holy Ghost” 


As an explanation of the words in which this Article is ex- 
pressed is not to be omitted, the pastor should teach that when we 
say that the Son of God was conceived by the power of the Holy 
Ghost, we do not mean that this Person alone of the Holy Trinity 
accomplished the mystery of the Incarnation. Although the Son 
only assumed human nature, yet all the Persons of the Trinity, 
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, were authors of this 
mystery. 

It is a principle of Christian faith that whatever God does out- 
side Himself in creation is common to the Three Persons, and 
that one neither does more than, nor acts without another. But 
that one emanates from another, this only cannot be common to 
all; for the Son is begotten of the Father only, and the Holy 
Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son. Anything, how- 
ever, which proceeds from them extrinsically is the work of the 
Three Persons without difference of any sort, and of this latter 
description is the Incarnation of the Son of God. 

Of those things, nevertheless, that are common to all, the 
Sacred Scriptures often attribute some to one person, some to 


? John i. 1, 14. ®Serm. i. de Nat. c. 2. 


“WHO WAS CONCEIVED” 43 


another. Thus, to the Father they attribute power over all things ; 
to the Son, wisdom; to the Holy Ghost, love. Hence, as the 
mystery of the Incarnation manifests the singular and boundless 
love of God towards us, it is therefore in some sort peculiarly 
attributed to the Holy Ghost. 


IN THE INCARNATION SOME THINGS WERE NATURAL, OTHERS 
SUPERNATURAL 


In this mystery we perceive that some things were done which 
transcend the order of nature, some by the power of nature. 
Thus, in believing that the body of Christ was formed from the 
most pure blood of His Virgin Mother we acknowledge the oper- 
ation of human nature, this being a law common to the formation 
of all human bodies, that they should be formed from the blood 
of the mother. 

But what surpasses the order of nature and human compre- 
hension is, that as soon as the Blessed Virgin assented to the 
announcement of the Angel in these words, Behold the handmaid 
of the Lord; be it done unto me according to thy word,* the 
most sacred body of Christ was immediately formed, and to it 
was united a rational soul enjoying the use of reason; and thus 
in the same instant of time He was perfect God and perfect man. 
That this was the astonishing and admirable work of the Holy 
Ghost cannot be doubted; for according to the order of nature 
the rational soul is united to the body only after a certain lapse 
of time.? 

Again—and this should overwhelm us with astonishment—as 
soon as the soul of Christ was united to His body, the Divinity 
became united to both; and thus at the same time His body was 
formed and animated, and the Divinity united to body and soul. 

Hence, at the same instant He was perfect God and perfect 
man, and the most Holy Virgin, having at the same moment 
conceived God and man, is truly and properly called Mother of 
God and man. This the Angel signified to her when he said: 
Behold thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and shalt bring forth 


*Luke i. 38. 
aSee Summa Theol. Ia. cxviii. 2. 


44 THE CREED 


a son; and thou shalt call his name Jesus. He shall be great, and 
shall be called the Son of the Most High The event verified the 
prophecy of Isaias: Behold a virgin shall conceive, and bear a 
son.® Elizabeth also declared the same truth when, being filled 
with the Holy Ghost, she understood the Conception of the Son 
of God, and said: Whence is this to me, that the mother of my 
Lord should come to me? * 

As the body of Christ was formed of the pure blood of the 
immaculate Virgin without the aid of man, as we have already 
said, and by the sole operation of the Holy Ghost, so also, at the 
moment of His Conception, His soul was enriched with an over- 
flowing fulness of the Spirit of God, and a superabundance of all 
graces. For God gave not to Him, as to others adorned with 
holiness and grace, His Spirit by measure, as St. John testifies,® 
but poured into His soul the plenitude of all graces so abundantly 
that of his fulness we all have received.® 

Although possessing that Spirit by which holy men attain the 
adoption of sons of God, He cannot, however, be called the 
adopted son of God; for since He is the Son of God by nature, 
the grace, or name of adoption, can on no account be deemed 
applicable to Him. 


HOW TO PROFIT BY THE MYSTERY OF THE INCARNATION 


These truths comprise the substance of what appears to de- 
mand explanation regarding the admirable mystery of the Con- 
ception. To reap from them abundant fruit for salvation the 
faithful should particularly recall, and frequently reflect, that it 
is God who assumed human flesh; that the manner in which He 
became man exceeds our comprehension, not to say our powers 
of expression; and finally, that He vouchsafed to become man in 
order that we men might be born again as children of God. When 
to these subjects they shall have given mature consideration, let 
them, in the humility of faith, believe and adore all the mysteries 
contained in this Article, and not indulge a curious inquisitiveness 


wleuken ST, 32. Sse vile tAe Luke i. 43. 
®John iii. 34. ® John i. 16. 
4 On this subject see Summa Theol. 3a. xxiii. 4. 


“WHO WAS CONCEIVED” 45 


by investigating and scrutinizing them—an attempt scarcely ever 
unattended with danger.* 


Second Part of this Article: 
“Born of the Virgin Mary” 


These words comprise another part of this Article. In its 
exposition the pastor should exercise considerable diligence, 
because the faithful are bound to believe that Jesus the Lord 
was not only conceived by the power of the Holy Ghost, but was 
also born of the Virgin Mary. The words of the Angel who first 
announced the happy tidings to the world declare with what joy 
and delight of soul this mystery of our faith should be meditated 
upon. Behold, said the Angel, J bring you good tidings of great 
joy, that shall be to all the people.° The same sentiments are 
clearly conveyed in the song chanted by the heavenly host: Glory 
to God in the highest; and on earth peace to men of good will. 
Then began the fulfilment of the splendid promise made by God 
to Abraham, that in his seed all the nations -of the earth should 
one day be blessed;** for Mary, whom we truly proclaim and 
venerate as Mother of God, because she brought forth Him who 
is at once God and man, was descended from King David. 


THE NATIVITY OF CHRIST TRANSCENDS THE ORDER OF NATURE 


But as the Conception itself transcends the order of nature, so 
also the birth of our Lord presents to our contemplation nothing 
but what is divine. 

Besides, what is admirable beyond the power of thoughts or 
words to express, He is born of His Mother without any diminu- 
tion of her maternal virginity, just as He afterwards went forth 
from the sepulchre while it was closed and sealed, and entered 
the room in which His disciples were assembled, the doors being 
shut;18 or, not to depart from every-day examples, just as the 
rays of the sun penetrate without breaking or injuring in the 
least the solid substance of glass, so after a like but more exalted 
manner did Jesus Christ come forth from His mother’s womb 


Luke ii. Io. “Luke ii. 14. a Genwexxieto eens OUnescx 110) 
aQOn the Conception of Christ see Summa Theol. 3a. xxxi-xxxiv. 


46 THE CREED 


without injury to her maternal virginity. This immaculate and 
perpetual virginity forms, therefore, the just theme of our eulogy. 
Such was the work of the Holy Ghost, who at the Conception and 
birth of the Son so favored the Virgin Mother as to impart to her 
fecundity while preserving inviolate her perpetual virginity.* 


Christ Compared to Adam, Mary to Eve 


The Apostle sometimes calls Jesus Christ the second Adam, 

and compares Him to the first Adam; for as in the first all men 
. die, so in the second all are made alive: ‘* and as in the natural 
order Adam was the father of the human race, so in the super- 
natural order Christ is the author of grace and of glory.*® 

The Virgin Mother we may also compare to Eve, making the 
second Eve, that is, Mary, correspond to the first, as we have 
already shown that the second Adam, that is, Christ, corresponds 
to the first Adam. By believing the serpent, Eve brought male- 
diction and death on mankind, and Mary, by believing the Angel, 
became the instrument of the divine goodness in bringing life and 
benediction to the human race. From Eve we are born children 
of wrath;*® from Mary we have received Jesus Christ, and 
through Him are regenerated children of grace. To Eve it was 
said: In sorrow shalt thou bring forth children." Mary was 
exempt from this law, for preserving her virginal integrity in- 
violate she brought forth Jesus the Son of God without experi- 
encing, as we have already said, any sense of pain. 


Types and Prophecies of the Conception and Nativity 


The mysteries of this admirable Conception and Nativity being, 
therefore, so great and so numerous, it accorded with the plan 
of divine Providence to signify them by many types and prophe- 
cies. Hence the holy Fathers understood many things which we 
meet in the Sacred Scriptures to refer to these mysteries, par- 
ticularly that gate of the sanctuary which Ezechiel saw closed ; 18 
the stone cut out of the mountain without hands, which became a 


ae Cor. xv. 21, 22. * Rom. v. 14. So Esp lagetiens 
Gen. iii. 16. * Ezech. xliy. 2. 


2On the Nativity of Christ see Summa Theol. 3a. xxxv, xxxvi. 


“WHO WAS CONCEIVED” 47 


great mountain and filled the universe, of which we read in 
Daniel ; *® the rod of Aaron, which alone budded of all the rods of 
the princes of Israel;?° and the bush which Moses saw burn 
without being consumed.?# 

The holy Evangelist describes in detail the history of the birth 
of Christ ;** but, as the pastor can easily recur to the Sacred 
Volume, it is unnecessary for us to say more on the subject. 


Lessons which this Article Teaches 


The pastor should labor to impress deeply on the minds and 
hearts of the faithful these mysteries, which were written for our 
learning ; *° first, that by the commemoration of so great a benefit 
they may make some return of gratitude to God, its author, and 
next, in order to place before their eyes, as a model for imitation, 
this striking and singular example of humility. 


HUMILITY AND POVERTY OF CHRIST 


What can be more useful, what better calculated to subdue the 
pride and haughtiness of the human heart, than to reflect fre- 
quently that God humbles Himself in such a manner as to assume 
our frailty and weakness, in order to communicate to us His 
glory; that God becomes man, and that He at whose nod, to use 
the words of Scripture, the pillars of heaven tremble and are 
affrighted,?* bows His supreme and infinite majesty to minister 
to man; that He whom the Angels adore in heaven is born on 
earth! When such is the goodness of God towards us, what, I 
ask, should we not do to testify our obedience to His will? With 
what willingness and alacrity should we not love, embrace, and 
perform all the duties of humility? 

The faithful should also consider the salutary lessons which 
Christ at His birth teaches before He begins to speak. He is 
born in poverty; He is born a stranger under a roof not His 
own; He is born in a lonely crib; He is born in the depth of 
winter! For St. Luke writes as follows: And it came to pass, 
that when they were there, her days were accomplished, that she 


LDN shy Se Num. xvii. 8. 7 Exod. iti. 2. 
2 Tuke ii. s aaROteE XC WanAs * Job xxvi. II. 


48 THE CREED 


should be delivered. And she brought forth her first-born, and 
wrapped him up in swaddling clothes, and laid him in a manger; 
because there was no room for them in the inn.?> Could the 
Evangelist have described under more humble terms the majesty 
and glory that filled the heavens and the earth? He does not say, 
there was no room in the inn, but there was no room for him 
who says, the world is mine, and the fullness thereof.2° As an- 
other Evangelist has expressed it: He came unto his own, and 
his own received him not.?* 


ELEVATION AND DIGNITY OF MAN 


When the faithful have placed these things before their eyes, 
let them also reflect that God condescended to assume the lowli- 
ness and frailty of our flesh in order to exalt man to the highest 
degree of dignity. This single reflection, that He who is true and 
perfect God became man, supplies sufficient proof of the exalted 
dignity conferred on the human race by the divine bounty ; since 
we may now glory that the Son of God is bone of our bone, and 
flesh of our flesh, a privilege not given to Angels, for nowhere, 
says the Apostle, doth he take hold of the Angels: but of the seed 
of Abraham he taketh hold.*® 


DUTY OF SPIRiTUAL NATIVITY 


We must also take care lest to our great injury it should hap- 
pen that just as there was no room for Him in the inn at 
Bethlehem, in which to be born, so likewise now, after He has 
been born in the flesh, He should find no room in our hearts in 
which to be born spiritually. For since He is most desirous of 
our salvation, this spiritual birth is the object of His most earnest 
solicitude. 

As, then, by the power of the Holy Ghost, and in a manner 
superior to the order of nature, He was made man and was born, 
was holy and even holiness itself, so does it become our duty to 
be born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, but of God; 
to walk as new creatures in newness of spirit,®° and to preserve 


Like Ai-; 6, 7: * Ps. sclise. 20 Jonni viennt. 
8 Feb. ii. 16. = Johneiwenes ” Rom. vi. 4, 5; vii. 6 


aad 
“WHO WAS concrivED*” 49 


that holiness and purity of soul which so much becomes men 
regenerated by the Spirit of God. Thus shall we reflect some 
faint image of the holy Conception and Nativity of the Son of 
God, which are the objects of our firm faith, and believing which 
we revere and adore the wisdom of God in a mystery which is 
hidden.*+ 


ET OD TiC 7. 


ARTICLE IV 


“SUFFERED UNDER PONTIUS PILATE, WAS CRUCIFIED, DEAD, AND 
BURIED” 


IMPORTANCE OF THIS ARTICLE 


How necessary is a knowledge of this Article, and how assidu- 
ous the pastor should be in stirring up in the minds of the faithful 
the frequent recollection of our Lord’s Passion, we learn from 
the Apostle when he says that he knows nothing but Jesus Christ 
and him crucified. The pastor, therefore, should exercise the 
greatest care and pains in giving a thorough explanation of this 
subject, in order that the faithful, being moved by the remem- 
brance of so great a benefit, may give themselves entirely to the 
contemplation of the goodness and love of God towards us. 


First Part of this Article: 
“Suffered Under Pontius Pilate, was Crucified” 


The first part of this Article (of the second we shall treat 
hereafter) proposes for our belief that when Pontius Pilate gov- 
erned the province of Judea, under Tiberius Caesar, Christ the 
Lord was nailed to a cross. Having been seized, mocked, out- 
raged and tortured in various forms, He was finally crucified. 


“Suffered” 


It cannot be a matter of doubt that His soul, as to its inferior 
part, was sensible of these torments; for as He really assumed 
human nature, it is a necessary consequence that He really, and 
in His soul, experienced a most acute sense of pain. Hence these 
words of the Saviour: My soul is sorrowful even unto death? 


Gor. ii. 2 > Matt. xxvi. 38; Mark xiv. 34. 
50 


“SUFFERED UNDER PONTIUS PILATE” 51 


Although human nature was united to the Divine Person, He felt 
the bitterness of His Passion as acutely as if no such union had 
existed, because in the one Person of Jesus Christ were preserved 
the properties of both natures, human and divine; and therefore 
what was passible and mortal remained passible and mortal; 
while what was impassible and immortal, that is, His Divine 
Nature, continued impassible and immortal. 


“Under Pontius Pilate” 


Since we find it here so diligently recorded that Jesus Christ 
suffered when Pontius Pilate was procurator of Judea, the pastor 
should explain the reason. By fixing the time, which we find also 
done by the Apostle Paul,? so important and so necessary an 
event is rendered more easily ascertainable by all. Furthermore 
those words show that the Saviour’s prediction was really veri- 
fied: They shall deliver him to the Gentiles, to be mocked and 
scourged and crucified.* 


“Was Crucified” 


The fact that He suffered death precisely on the wood of the 
cross must also be attributed to a particular counsel of God, 
which decreed that life should return by the way whence death 
had arisen The serpent who had triumphed over our first 
parents by the wood (of a tree) was vanquished by Christ on the 
wood of the cross. 

Many other reasons which the Fathers have discussed in detail 
might be adduced to show that it was fit that our Redeemer should 
suffer death on the cross rather than in any other way. But, 
as the pastor will show, it is enough for the faithful to believe 
that this kind of death was chosen by the Saviour because it 
appeared better adapted and more appropriate to the redemption 
of the human race; for there certainly could be none more igno- 
minious and humiliating. Not only among the Gentiles was the 
punishment of the cross held accursed and full of shame and 


21 Lime Ving 13: “Matts xx.) 10! 
a Preface of the Passion. 


52 THE CREED 


infamy, but even in the Law of Moses the man is called accursed 
that hangeth on a tree.® 


IMPORTANCE OF THE HISTORY OF THE PASSION 


Furthermore, the pastor should not omit the historical part of 
this Article, which has been so carefully set forth by the holy 
Evangelists; so that the faithful may be acquainted with at least 
the principal points of this mystery, that is to say, such as seem 
more necessary to confirm the truth of our faith. For it is on 
this Article, as on their foundation, that the Christian faith and 
religion rest; and if this truth be firmly established, all the rest 
is secure. Indeed, if one thing more than another presents dif- 
ficulty to the mind and understanding of man, assuredly it is the 
mystery of the cross, which, beyond all doubt, must be considered 
the most difficult of all; so much so that only with great dif- 
ficulty can we grasp the fact that our salvation depends on the 
cross, and on Him who for us was nailed thereon. In this, how- 
ever, as the Apostle teaches, we may well admire the wonderful 
Providence of God; for, seeing that in the wisdom of God, the 
world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the foolishness 
of preaching, to save them that believe.© It is no wonder, then, 
that the Prophets, before the coming of Christ, and the Apostles, 
after His death and Resurrection, labored so strenuously to con- 
vince mankind that He was the Redeemer of the world, and to 
bring them under the power and obedience of the Crucified. 


FIGURES AND PROPHECIES OF THE PASSION AND DEATH OF THE 
SAVIOUR 


Since, therefore, nothing is so far above the reach of human 
reason as the mystery of the cross, the Lord immediately after 
the fall ceased not, both by figures and prophecies, to signify the 
death by which His Son was to die. 

To mention a few of these types. First of all, Abel, who fell a 
victim of the envy of his brother,? Isaac who was commanded 
to be offered in sacrifice,’ the lamb immolated by the Jews on 


SWeuty xxincg i Galena: 
eT Goris 21. "Gen. iv. 8. ® Gen. xxii. 6-8. 


“SUFFERED UNDER PONTIUS PILATE” §3 


their departure from Egypt,® and also the brazen serpent lifted 
up by Moses in the desert,!? were all figures of the Passion and 
death of Christ the Lord. 

As to the Prophets, how many there were who foretold Christ’s 
Passion and death is too well known to require development here. 
Not to speak of David, whose Psalms embrace all the principal 
mysteries of Redemption, the oracles of Isaias in particular are 
so clear and graphic that he might be said rather to have re- 
corded a past than predicted a future event.114 


Second Part of this Article: 
“Dead, and Buried” 


CHRIST REALLY DIED 


The pastor should explain that these words present for our 
belief that Jesus Christ, after He was crucified, really died and 
was buried. It is not without just reason that this is proposed 
to the faithful as a separate object of belief, since there were 
some who denied His death upon the cross.» The Apostles, there- 
fore, were justly of opinion that to such an error should be 
opposed the doctrine of faith contained in this Article, the truth 
of which is placed beyond the possibility of doubt by the united 
testimony of all the Evangelists, who record that Jesus yielded 
up the ghost. 

Moreover as Christ was true and perfect man, He of course 
was capable of dying. Now man dies when the soul is sepa- 
rated from the body. When, therefore, we say that Jesus died, we 
mean that His soul was disunited from His body. We do not 
admit, however, that the Divinity was separated from His body. 
On the contrary, we firmly believe and profess that when His 
soul was dissociated from His body, His Divinity continued 
always united both to His body in the sepulchre and to His soul 
in limbo. It became the Son of God to die, that, through 

°Exod. xii. 5-7. Num. xxi. 8, 9; John iii. 14. 


4 St, Jerome, Epist. 53 ad Paulin. oe 
= Matt xxvii. 50; Mark xv. 37; Luke xxiii. 46; John xix. 30. 


aQOn the Passion of Christ see Summa Theol. 3a. xlvi-xlix. 
b Christ’s death upon the cross was denied by the Docetae and Theo- 


paschites. 


54 THE CREED 


death, he might destroy him who had the empire of death that 
is the devil, and might deliver them, who through the fear of 
death were all their lifetime subject to servitude.** 


CHRIST DIED FREELY 


It was the peculiar privilege of Christ the Lord to have died 
when He Himself decreed to die, and to have died not so much 
by external violence as by internal assent. Not only His death, 
but also its time and place, were ordained by Him. For thus 
Isaias wrote: He was offered because it was his own will.* The 
Lord before His Passion, declared the same of Himself: J lay 
down my life, that I may take it again. No man taketh it away 
from me: but I lay it down of myself, and I have power 
to lay it down: and I have power to take it again.” As 
to the time and place of His death, He said, when Herod 
insidiously sought His life: Go and tell that fox: Behold 
I cast out devils, and do cures to-day and to-morrow, and the 
third day I am consummated. Nevertheless I must walk to-day 
and to-morrow, and the day following, because tt cannot be that 
a prophet perish out of Jerusalem.*® He therefore offered Him- 
self not involuntarily or by compulsion but of His own free will. 
Going to meet His enemies He said: J am he;* and all the pun- 
ishments which injustice and cruelty inflicted on Him He endured 
voluntarily. 


THE THOUGHT OF CHRIST’S DEATH SHOULD EXCITE OUR LOVE AND 
GRATITUDE 


When we meditate on the sufferings and all the torments of the 
Redeemer, nothing is better calculated to stir our souls than the 
thought that He endured them thus voluntarily. Were anyone to 
endure all kinds of suffering for our sake, not because he chose 
them but simply because he could not escape them, we should not 
consider this a very great favor; but were he to endure death 
freely, and for our sake only, having had it in his power to avoid 
it, this indeed would be a benefit so overwhelming as to deprive 

Se Elebs 1 Om rAser se 


“Isaias liii. 7. * John =x) 17, 18. 
*Luke xiii. 32, 33. * John xviii. 5. 


“SUFFERED UNDER PONTIUS PILATE” 55 


even the most grateful heart, not only of the power of returning 
but even of feeling due thanks. We may hence form an idea of © 
the transcendent and intense love of Jesus Christ towards us, and 
of His divine and boundless claims to our gratitude. 


CHRIST WAS REALLY BURIED 


When we confess that He was buried, we do not make this, 
as it were, a distinct part of the Article, as if it presented any 
new difficulty which is not implied in what we have said of His 
death ; for if we believe that Christ died, we can also easily be- 
lieve that He was buried. The word buried was added in the 
Creed, first, that His death might be rendered more certain, for 
the strongest argument of a person’s death is the proof that his 
body was buried; and, secondly, to render the miracle of His 
Resurrection more authentic and illustrious. 

It is not, however, our belief that the body of Christ alone was 
interred. The above words propose, as the principal object of our 
belief, that God was buried; as according to the rule of Catholic 
faith, we also say with the strictest truth that God died, and that 
God was born of a virgin. For as the Divinity was never sep- 
arated from His body which was laid in the sepulchre, we truly 
confess that God was buried. 


CIRCUMSTANCES OF CHRIST’S BURIAL 


As to the manner and place of His burial, what the holy Evan- 
gelists record on these subjects will be sufficient for the pastor.*® 
There are, however, two things which demand particular atten- 
tion; the one, that the body of Christ was in no degree corrupted 
“in the sepulchre, according to the prediction of the Prophet: 
Thou wilt not give thy holy one to see corruption; *® the other, 
and it regards the several parts of this Article, that burial, Pas- 
sion, and also death, apply to Christ Jesus not as God but as man. 
To suffer and die are incidental to human nature only; yet they 
are also attributed to God, since, as is clear, they are predicated 


# Matt. xxvii. 58; Mark xv. 46; Luke xxiii. 53; John xix. 38. 
® Ps, xv. 10; Acts ii. 31. 


56 THE CREED 


with propriety of that Person who is at once perfect God and per- 
fect man.? 


Useful Considerations on the Passion 


When the faithful have once attained the knowledge of these 
things, the pastor should next proceed to explain those particulars 
of the Passion and death of Christ which may enable them if not 
to comprehend, at least to contemplate, the immensity of so 
stupendous a mystery. 


THE DIGNITY OF THE SUFFERER 


And first we must consider who it is that suffers all these 
things. His dignity we cannot express in words or even conceive 
in mind. Of Him St. John says, that He is the Word which 
was with God.2° And the Apostle describes Him in sublime 
terms, saying that this is He whom God hath appointed heir of 
all things, by whom also he made the world, who being the bright- 
ness of his glory, and the figure of his substance, and upholding 
all things by the word of his power, making purgation of sins, 
sitteth on the right hand of the majesty on high.** In a word, 
Jesus Christ, the God-man, suffers! The Creator suffers for His 
creatures, the Master for His servant. He suffers by whom the 
Angels, men, the heavens, and the elements were made; in whom, 
by whom, and of whom, are all things.?* 

It cannot, therefore, be a matter of surprise that while He 
agonized under such an accumulation of torments the whole 
frame of the universe was convulsed; for as the Scriptures in- 
form us, the earth quaked, and the rocks were rent, there was- 
darkness over all the earth; and the sun was obscured.* If, then, 
even mute and inanimate nature sympathized with the sufferings 
of her Creator, let the faithful consider with what tears they, the 
living stones of this edifice,** should manifest their sorrow. 


*yyohn. 1.) 3008 Hal N16 eG 2 Rom. xi. 36. 
* Matt. xxvii. 51; Luke xxiii. 44. ™1 Peter ii. 5. 


@QOn the death and burial of Christ see Summa Theol. 3a. 1. li. 


“SUFFERED UNDER PONTIUS PILATE” 57 


REASONS WHY CHRIST SUFFERED 


The reasons why the Saviour suffered are also to be explained, 
that thus the greatness and intensity of the divine love towards 
us may the more fully appear. Should anyone inquire why the 
Son of God underwent His most bitter Passion, he will find that 
besides the guilt inherited from our first parents the principal 
causes were the vices and crimes which have been perpetrated 
from the beginning of the world to the present day and those 
which will be committed to the end of time. In His Passion and 
death the Son of God, our Saviour, intended to atone for and blot 
out the sins of all ages, to offer for them to his Father a full and 
abundant satisfaction. 

Besides, to increase the dignity of this mystery, Christ not only 
suffered for sinners, but even for those who were the very 
authors and ministers of all the torments He endured. Of this 
the Apostle reminds us in these words addressed to the Hebrews: 
Think diligently upon him that endured such opposition from 
sinners against himself ; that you be not wearied, fainting in your 
minds.?> In this guilt are involved all those who fall frequently 
into sin; for, as our sins consigned Christ the Lord to the death 
of the cross, most certainly those who wallow in sin and iniquity 
crucify to themselves again the Son of God, as far as in them lies, 
and make a mockery of Him.?* This guilt seems more enormous 
in us than in the Jews, since according to the testimony of the 
same Apostle: If they had known it, they would never have 
crucified the Lord of glory; ?" while we, on the contrary, profess- 
ing to know Him, yet denying Him by our actions, seem in some 
sort to lay violent hands on him. 


CHRIST WAS DELIVERED OVER TO DEATH BY THE FATHER AND BY 
HIMSELF 


But that Christ the Lord was also delivered over to death by 
the Father and by Himself, the Scriptures bear witness. For in 
Isaias (God the Father) says: For the wickedness of my people 
have I struck him.28 And a little before the same Prophet filled 


Heb. xii. 3. *% Heb. vi. 6. Tis Cor. i108; *Tsaias liii. 8. 


58 THE CREED 


with the Spirit of God, cried out, as he saw the Lord covered 
with stripes and wounds: All we like sheep have gone astray, 
every one hath turned aside into his own way: and the Lord hath 
laid on him the iniquity of us all.2® But of the Son it is written: 
If he shall lay down his life for sin, he shall see a long-lived seed.*° 
This the Apostle expresses in language still stronger when, in 
order to show how confidently we, on our part, should trust in 
the boundless mercy and goodness of God, he says: He that 
spared not even his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how 
hath he not also, with him, given us all things? ** 4 


THE BITTERNESS OF CHRIST'S PASSION 


The next subject of the pastor’s instruction is the bitterness of 
the Redeemer’s Passion. If we bear in mind that his sweat 
became as drops of blood, trickling down upon the ground, and 
this, at the sole anticipation of the torments and agony which He 
was about to endure, we must at once perceive that His sorrows 
admitted of no increase. For if the very idea of impending evils 
was overwhelming, and the sweat of blood shows that it was, 
what are we to suppose their actual endurance to have been? 

That Christ our Lord suffered the most excruciating torments 
of mind and body is certain. In the first place, there was no 
part of His body that did not experience the most agonizing tor- 
ture. His hands and feet were fastened with nails to the cross; 
His head was pierced with thorns and smitten with a reed; His 
face was befouled with spittle and buffeted with blows ; His whole 
body was covered with stripes. 

Furthermore men of all ranks and conditions were gathered 
together against the Lord, and against his Christ.33 Gentiles and 
Jews were the advisers, the authors, the ministers of His Passion; 
Judas betrayed Him, Peter denied Him, all the rest deserted Him. 

And while He hangs from the cross are we not at a loss which 
to deplore, His agony, or His ignominy, or both? Surely no 
death more shameful, none more cruel, could have been devised 

aecatacel iia) ®Tsaias liii. 10. * Rom. viii. 32. 

* Luke xxii. 44. SER. ois 2 

aQOn the cause of Christ’s Passion see Summa Theol. 3a. xlvii. 


“SUFFERED UNDER PONTIUS PILATE” 59 


than this. It was the punishment usually reserved for the most 
guilty and atrocious malefactors, a death whose slowness agera- 
vated the exquisite pain and torture! 

His agony was increased by the very constitution and frame 
of His body. Formed by the power of the Holy Ghost, it was 
more perfect and better organized than the bodies of other men 
can be, and was therefore endowed with a superior susceptibility 
and a keener sense of all the torments which it endured. 

And as to His interior anguish of soul, that too was no doubt 
extreme ; for those among the Saints who had to endure torments 
and tortures were not without consolation from above, which 
enabled them not only to bear their sufferings patiently, but in 
many instances, to feel, in the very midst of them, filled with 
interior joy. J rejoice, says the Apostle, in my sufferings for you, 
and fill up those things that are wanting of the sufferings of 
Christ, in my flesh, for his body, which is the church; ** and in 
another place: J am filled with comfort, I exceedingly abound 
with joy in all our tribulations.*®> Christ our Lord tempered with 
no admixture of sweetness the bitter chalice of His Passion but 
permitted His human nature to feel as acutely every species of 
torment as if He were only man, and not also God. 


FRUITS OF CHRIST’S PASSION 


It only remains now that the pastor carefully explain the bless- 
ings and advantages which flow from the Passion of Christ. 
In the first place, then, the Passion of our Lord was our deliver- 
ance from sin; for, as St. John says, He hath loved us, and 
washed us from our sins in his own blood.** He hath quickened 
you together with him, says the Apostle, forgiving you all 
offences, blotting out the handwriting of the decree that was 
against us, which was contrary to us. And he hath taken the 
same out of the way, fastening it to the cross.*" 

In the next place He has rescued us from the tyranny of the 
devil, for our Lord Himself says: Now is the judgment of the 


Colic. 22 1COr. vil. 4: 
© Apoc. i. @ (CGil, ahh, Te aizk, 
aQOn the bitterness of Christ’s Passion see Summa Theol. ga. xlvi. 5-8. 


60 THE CREED 


world; now shall the prince of this world be cast out. And I, 
if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all things to myself.** 

Again He discharged the punishment due to our sins. And as 
no sacrifice more pleasing and acceptable could have been offered 
to God, He reconciled us to the Father, appeased His wrath, and 
made Him favorable to us. 

Finally, by taking away our sins He opened to us heaven, which 
was closed by the common sin of mankind. And this the Apostle 
pointed out when he said: We have confidence in the entering 
into the holies by the blood of Christ2® Nor are we without a 
type and figure of this mystery in the Old Law. For those who 
were prohibited to return into their native country before the 
death of the high-priest *° typified that no one, however just and 
holy may have been his life, could gain admission into the celestial 
country until the eternal High-priest, Christ Jesus, had died, and 
by His death immediately opened heaven to those who, purified 
by the Sacraments and gifted with faith, hope, and charity, be- 
come partakers of His Passion.* 


CHRIST’S PASSION ,—A SATISFACTION, A SACRIFICE, A REDEMPTION, 
AN EXAMPLE 


The pastor should teach that all these inestimable and divine 
blessings flow to us from the Passion of Christ. First, indeed, 
because the satisfaction which Jesus Christ has in an admirable 
manner made to God the Father for our sins is full and complete. 
The price which He paid for our ransom was not only adequate 
and equal to our debts, but far exceeded them. 

Again, it (the Passion of Christ) was a sacrifice most accept- 
able to God, for when offered by His Son on the altar of the 
cross, it entirely appeased the wrath and indignation of the 
Father. This word (sacrifice) the Apostle uses when he says: 
Christ hath loved us, and hath delivered himself for us, an obla- 
tion and a sacrifice to God for an odour of sweetness. 


SSJOnnexiiesl oes SS EHebucs LO: 
Num. xxxv. 25. ID Nia 2h 


aOn the fruits of Christ’s passion see Summa Theol. 3a. xlvi. 


“SUFFERED UNDER PONTIUS PILATE” 61 


Furthermore, it was a redemption, of which the Prince of the 
Apostles says: You were not redeemed with corruptible things 
as gold or silver, from your vain conversation of the tradition of 
your fathers: but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb 
unspotted and undefiled.** While the Apostle teaches: Christ 
hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse 
for us. 

Besides these incomparable blessings, we have also received 
another of the highest importance; namely, that in the Passion 
alone we have the most illustrious example of the exercise of 
every virtue. For He so displayed patience, humility, exalted 
charity, meekness, obedience and unshaken firmness of soul, not 
only in suffering for justice’ sake, but also in meeting death, that 
we may truly say on the day of His Passion alone, our Saviour 
offered, in His own Person, a living exemplification of all the 
moral precepts inculcated during the entire time of His public 
ministry. 


Admonition 


This exposition of the saving Passion and death of Christ the 
Lord we have given briefly. Would to God that these mysteries 
were always present to our minds, and that we learned to suffer, 
die, and be buried together with our Lord; so that from hence- 
forth, having cast aside all stain of sin, and rising with Him to 
newness of life, we may at length, through His grace and mercy, 
be found worthy to be made partakers of the celestial kingdom 
and glory! 

PT metial) 18, 10: S. Gallesittent 3: 


aQOn the manner in which Christ’s Passion effected our salvation see 
Summa Theol. 3a. xlviii. 


ARTICEESV 


“Hr DESCENDED INTO HELL, THE THIRD Day HE Rose AGAIN 
FROM THE DEAD” 


IMPORTANCE OF THIS ARTICLE 


To know the glory of the burial of our Lord Jesus Christ, of 
which we last treated, is highly important; but of still higher 
importance is it to the faithful to know the splendid triumphs 
which He obtained by having subdued the devil and despoiled 
the abodes of hell. Of these triumphs, and also of His Resur- 
rection, we are now about to speak. 

Although the latter presents to us a subject which might with 
propriety be treated under a separate and distinct head, yet fol- 
lowing the example of the holy Fathers, we have deemed it fitting 
to unite it with His descent into hell. 


First Part of this Article: 
“He Descended into Hell” 


In the first part of this Article, then, we profess that imme- 
diately after the death of Christ His soul descended into hell, and 
dwelt there as long as His body remained in the tomb; and also 
that the one Person of Christ was at the same time in hell and in 
the sepulchre. Nor should this excite surprise; for, as we have 
already frequently said, although His soul was separated from 


His body, His Divinity was never parted from either His soul or 
His body. 


Llele 


As the pastor, by explaining the meaning of the word hell 
in this place may throw considerable light on the exposition of 
this Article, it is to be observed that by the word hell is not 


62 


“HE DESCENDED INTO HELL” 63 


here meant the sepulchre, as some have not less impiously than 
ignorantly imagined; for in the preceding Article we learned that 
Christ the Lord was buried, and there was no reason why the 
Apostles, in delivering an Article of faith, should repeat the same 
thing in other and more obscure terms. 

Hell, then, here signifies those secret abodes in which are de- 
tained the souls that have not obtained the happiness of heaven. 
In this sense the word is frequently used in Scripture. Thus the 
Apostle says: At the name of Jesus every knee shall bow, of 
those that are in heaven, on earth, and in hell;* and in the Acts 
of the Apostles St. Peter says that Christ the Lord is again 
risen, having loosed the sorrows of hell. 


DIFFERENT ABODES CALLED “SHELL” 


These abodes are not all of the same nature, for among them 
is that most loathsome and dark prison in which the souls of the 
damned are tormented with the unclean spirits in eternal and 
inextinguishable fire. This place is called gehenna, the bottomless 
pit, and is hell strictly so-called. 

Among them is also the fire of purgatory, in which the souls of 
just men are cleansed by a temporary punishment, in order to be 
admitted into their eternal country, into which nothing defiled 
entereth.? The truth of this doctrine, founded, as holy Councils 
declare,* on Scripture, and confirmed by Apostolic tradition, de- 
mands exposition from the pastor, all the more diligent and fre- 
quent, because we live in times when men endure not sound doc- 
trine. 

Lastly, the third kind of abode is that into which the souls of 
the just before the coming of Christ the Lord, were received, and 
where, without experiencing any sort of pain, but supported by 
the blessed hope of redemption, they enjoyed peaceful repose. 
To liberate these holy souls, who, in the bosom of Abraham were 
expecting the Saviour, Christ the Lord descended into hell. 


Philip, 11,10: WANOC ex X15, 27s 
2 Acts ik 24. SiGe ote renta SeSssaxcXV. 


64 THE CREED 


“He Descended” 


We are not to imagine that His power and virtue only, and 
not also His soul, descended into hell; but we are firmly to 
believe that His soul itself, really and substantially, descended 
thither, according to this conclusive testimony of David: Thou 
wilt not leave my soul in hell.? 

But although Christ descended into hell, His supreme power 
was in no degree lessened, nor was the splendor of His sanctity 
obscured by any blemish. His descent served rather to prove that 
whatever had been foretold of His sanctity was true; and that, 
as He had previously demonstrated by so many miracles, He was 
truly the Son of God. 

This we shall easily understand by comparing the causes of 
the descent of Christ with those of other men. They de- 
scended as captives; He as free and victorious among the dead, 
to subdue those demons by whom, in consequence of guilt, they 
were held in captivity. Furthermore all others descended, either 
to endure the most acute torments, or, if exempt from other pain, 
to be deprived of the vision of God, and to be tortured by the 
delay of the glory and happiness for which they yearned; Christ 
the Lord descended, on the contrary, not to suffer, but to liberate 
the holy and the just from their painful captivity, and to impart 
to them the fruit of His Passion. His supreme dignity and 
power, therefore, suffered no diminution by His descent into hell. 


Why He Descended into Hell 
TO LIBERATE THE JUST 


Having explained these things, the pastor should next proceed 
to teach that Christ the Lord descended into hell, in order that, 
having despoiled the demons, He might liberate from prison those 
holy Fathers and the other just souls, and might bring them into 
heaven with Himself. This He accomplished in an admirable 
and most glorious manner ; for His august presence at once shed 
a celestial lustre upon the captives and filled them with inconceiv- 
able joy and delight. He also imparted to them that supreme hap- 

Par Sev.eIO, 


“HE DESCENDED INTO HELL” 65 


piness which consists in the vision of God, thus verifying His 
promise to the thief on the cross: This day thou shalt be with me 
in paradise.® 

This deliverance of the just was long before predicted by Osee 
in these words: O death, I will be thy death; O hell, I will be thy 
bite;* and also by the Prophet Zachary: Thou also by the blood 
of thy testament hast sent forth thy prisoners out of the pit? 
wherein is no water;* and lastly, the same is expressed by the 
Apostle in these words: Despoiling the principalities and powers, 
he hath exposed them confidently in open show, triumphing over 
them in himself.® 

But the better to understand the efficacy of this mystery we 
should frequently call to mind that not only the just who were 
born after the coming of our Lord, but also those who preceded 
Him from the days of Adam, or who shall be born until the end 
of time, obtain their salvation through the benefit of His Passion. 
Wherefore before His death and Resurrection heaven was closed 
against every child of Adam. The souls of the just, on their 
departure from this life, were either borne to the bosom of Abra- 
ham; or, as is still the case with those who have something to be 
washed away or satisfied for, were purified in the fire of purga- 
tory. 


TO PROCLAIM HIS POWER 


Another reason why Christ the Lord descended into hell is 
that there, as well as in heaven and on earth, He might proclaim 
His power and authority, and that every knee should bow, of 
those that are in heaven, on earth, and under the earth.’ 

And here, who is not filled with admiration and astonishment 
when he contemplates the infinite love of God for man! Not 
satisfied with having undergone for our sake a most cruel death, 
He penetrates the inmost recesses of the earth to transport into 
bliss the souls whom He so dearly loved and whose liberation 
from thence He had achieved.? 

*Luke xxili. 43. *Osee xiii. 14. Apne Zachiix. (11. 

Vole. KP hil 10: 

aQOn Christ’s descent into hell see Summa Theol. 3a. lii. 


66 THE CREED 


Second Part of this Article: 
“The Third Day He arose again from the Dead” 


We now come to the second part of the Article, and how inde- 
fatigable should be the labors of the pastor in its exposition we 
learn from these words of the Apostle: Be mindful that the Lord 
Yesus Christ ts risen again from the dead.* This command no 
doubt was addressed not only to Timothy, but to all others who 
have care of souls. 

The meaning of the Article is this: Christ the Lord expired on 
the cross, on Friday at the ninth hour, and was buried on the 
evening of the same day by His disciples, who with the permission 
of the governor, Pilate, laid the body of the Lord, taken down 
from the cross, in a new tomb, situated in a garden near at hand. 
Early on the morning of the third day after His death, that is, on 
Sunday, His soul was reunited to His body, and thus He who was 
dead during those three days arose, and returned again to life, 
from which He had departed when dying. 


“He arose Again” 


By the word Resurrection, however, we are not merely to 
understand that Christ was raised from the dead, which hap- 
pened to many others, but that He rose by His own power and 
virtue, a singular prerogative peculiar to Him alone. For it is in- 
compatible with nature and was never given to man to raise him- 
self by his own power, from death to life. This was reserved for 
the almighty power of God, as we learn from these words of the 
Apostle: Although he was crucified through weakness, yet he 
liveth by the power of God.2 This divine power, having never 
been separated, either from His body in the grave, or from His 
soul in hell, there existed a divine force both within the body, by 
which it could be again united to the soul, and within the soul, 
by which it could again return to the body. Thus He was able 
by His own power to return to life and rise from the dead. 

This David, filled with the spirit of God, foretold in these 
words: His right hand hath wrought for him salvation, and his 


= Ahee, oh oh = 2) Gora Riliw 


“HE DESCENDED INTO HELL” 67 


arm is holy.* Our Lord confirmed this by the divine testimony 
of His own mouth when He said: J lay down my life that I may 
take it again . . . and I have power to lay it down: and I have 
power to take it up again.* To the Jews He also said, in cor- 
roboration of His doctrine: Destroy this temple, and in three 
days I will raise it up.® Although the Jews understood Him to 
have spoken thus of that magnificent Temple built of stone, yet as 
the Scripture testifies in the same place, he spoke of the temple of 
his body. We sometimes, it is true, read in Scripture that He 
was raised by the Father; ** but this refers to Him as man, just 
as those passages on the other hand, which say that He rose by 
His own power relate to Him as God. 


“From the Dead” 


It is also the peculiar privilege of Christ to have been the first 
who enjoyed this divine prerogative of rising from the dead, for 
He is called in Scripture the first-begotten from the dead," and 
also the first-born of the dead.1* The Apostle also says: Christ is 
risen from the dead, the first-fruits of them that sleep: for by a 
man came death, and by a man the resurrection of the dead. 
And as in Adam all die, so also in Christ all shall be made alive. 
But every one in his own order: the first-fruits Christ, then they 
that are of Christ. 

These words of the Apostle are to be understood of a perfect 
resurrection, by which we are raised to an immortal life and are 
no longer subject to the necessity of dying. In this resurrection 
Christ the Lord holds the first place; for if we speak of resurrec- 
tion; that is, of a return to life, subject to the necessity of again 
dying, many were thus raised from the dead before Christ, all 
of whom, however, were restored to life to die again.2 But Christ 
the Lord, having subdued and conquered death, so arose that He 
could die no more, according to this most clear testimony: Christ 


2 IPs: itt STi aS onnexmt7.0io: * John ii. 109. 

ny cee re nye rh &, Gol iis: 

1 Cor. xv. 20-23. : , b 

a Examples are the child of the widow raised by Elias (3 Kings xviii. 
22), the child of the Sunamite raised by Eliseus (4 Kings iv. 35), and 
the dead man revived at the tomb of Eliseus (4 Kings xiii. 21). 


68 THE CREED 


rising again from the dead, dieth now no more, death shall no 
more have dominion over him.?° 


“The Third Day” 


In explanation of the additional words of the Article, the 
third day, the pastor should inform the people that they must 
not think our Lord remained in the grave during the whole of 
these three days. But as He lay in the sepulchre one full day, a 
part of the preceding and a part of the following day, He is 
said, with strictest truth, to have lain in the grave for three days, 
and on the third day to have risen again from the dead. 

To prove that He was God He did not delay His Resurrection 
to the end of the world; while, on the other hand, to convince us 
that He was truly man and really died, He rose not immediately, 
but on the third day after His death, a space of time sufficient 
to prove the reality of His death. 


“According to the Scriptures” 


Here the Fathers of the first Council of Constantinople added 
the words, according to the Scriptures, which they took from 
St. Paul. These words they embodied with the Creed, because 
the same Apostle teaches the absolute necessity of the mystery of 
the Resurrection when he says: If Christ be not risen again, then 
1s our preaching vain, and your faith is also vain .. . for you 
are yet in your sins.** Hence, admiring our belief of this Article 
St. Augustine says: Jt is no great thing to believe that Christ 
died. This the pagans, Jews, and all the wicked believe; in a 
word, all believe that Christ died. But that He rose from the 
dead is the belief of the Christians. To believe that He rose 
again, this we deem of great moment. 

Hence it is that our Lord very frequently spoke to His dis- 
ciples of His Resurrection, and seldom or never of His Passion 
without adverting to His Resurrection. Thus, when He ‘said: 
The son of man... shall be delivered to the Gentiles, and shall 
be mocked, and scourged, and spit upon; and after they have 
scourged him, they will put him to death; He added: and the 


™ Rom. vi. 9. =) Comexvitaner7: “On PS. exe nd, 


“HE DESCENDED INTO HELL” 69 


third day he shall rise again.2* Also when the Jews called upon 
Him to give an attestation of the truth of His doctrine by some 
miraculous sign He said: A sign shall not be given to them, but 
the sign of Jonas the prophet. For as Jonas was in the whale’s 
belly three days and three nights: so shall the son of man be in 
the heart of the earth three days and three nights.**4 


Three Useful Considerations on this Article 


To understand still better the force and meaning of this Article, 
there are three things which we must consider and understand: 
first, why the Resurrection was necessary ; secondly, its end and 
object ; thirdly, the blessings and advantages of which it is to us 
the source. 


NECESSITY OF THE RESURRECTION 


With regard to the first, it was necessary that Christ should rise 
again in order to manifest the justice of God; for it was most 
congruous that He who through obedience to God was degraded, 
and loaded with ignominy, should by Him be exalted. This is a 
reason assigned by the Apostle when he says to the Philippians: 
He humbled himself, becoming obedient unto death, even to the 
death of the cross. For which cause God also hath exalted him.?° 

He rose also to confirm our faith, which is necessary for justi- 
fication ; for the Resurrection of Christ from the dead by His own 
power affords an irrefragable proof that He was the Son of God. 

Again the Resurrection nourishes and sustains our hope. As 
Christ rose again, we rest on an assured hope that we too 
shall rise again; the members must necessarily arrive at the con- 
dition of their head. This is the conclusion which St. Paul seems 
to draw when he writes to the Corinthians 7° and to the Thessa- 
lonians.2?7. And Peter, the Prince of the Apostles, says: Blessed 
be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who according 
to his great mercy hath regenerated us unto a lively hope, by the 

Luke xviii. 31, 32. * Matt. xii. 30, 40; Luke xi. 29. 
* Philip. ii. 8, 9. aeTeCor xv. 12! a ehessa dv.) 13. 
aQOn our Lord’s Resurrection see Summa Theol. 3a. liii. lvi. 


70 THE CREED 


resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, unto the inheritance 
incorruptible.”® 

Finally, the Resurrection of our Lord, as the pastor should in- 
culcate, was necessary to complete the mystery of our salvation 
and redemption. By His death Christ liberated us from sin; by 
His Resurrection, He restored to us the most important of those 
privileges which we had forfeited by sin. Hence these words of 
the Apostle: He was delivered up for our sins, and rose again for 
our justification.2® That nothing, therefore, may be wanting to 
the work of our salvation, it was necessary that as He died, He 
should also rise again.? 


ENDS OF THE RESURRECTION 


From what has been said we can perceive what important ad- 
vantages the Resurrection of Christ the Lord has conferred on 
the faithful. In the Resurrection we acknowledge God to be 
immortal, full of glory, the conqueror of death and the devil; and 
all this we are firmly to believe and openly to profess of Christ 
Jesus. 

Again, the Resurrection of Christ effects for us the resurrection 
of our bodies not only because it was the efficient cause of this 
mystery, but also because we all ought to arise after the example 
of the Lord. For with regard to the resurrection of the body 
we have this testimony of the Apostle: By a man came death, and 
by a man the resurrection of the dead.*° In all that God did to 
accomplish the mystery of our redemption He made use of the 
humanity of Christ as an effective instrument, and hence His 
Resurrection was, as it were, an instrument for the accomplish- 
ment of our resurrection. 

It may also be called the model of ours, inasmuch as His 
Resurrection was the most perfect of all. And as His body, 
rising to immortal glory, was changed, so shall our bodies also, 
before frail and mortal, be restored and clothed with glory and 
immortality. In the language of the Apostle: We look for the 


S Teeete ees wads ” Rom) iv. 25. 
WOO, Sahay ilk 


ne On the necessity of Christ’s Resurrection see Summa Theol. 3a. 
Ken & : 


“HE DESCENDED INTO HELL” 71 


Saviour, our Lord Jesus Christ, who will reform the body of our 
lowness, made like to the body of his glory.» 

The same may be said of a soul dead in sin. How the Resur- 
rection of Christ is proposed to such a soul as the model of her 
resurrection the same Apostle shows in these words: As Christ 
is risen from the dead by the glory of the Father, so we also may 
walk in newness of life. For if we have been planted together in 
the likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness of his 
resurrection. Again a little further on he says: Knowing that 
Christ rising again from the dead, dieth now no more, death shall 
no more have dominion over him. For in that he died to sin, he 
died once; but in that he liveth, he liveth unto God: so do you 
also reckon, that you are dead to sin, but alive unto God, in 
Christ Jesus.3? 


ADVANTAGES OF THE RESURRECTION 


From the Resurrection of Christ, therefore, we should draw 
two lessons: the one, that after we have washed away the stains 
of sin, we should begin to lead a new life, distinguished by in- 
tegrity, innocence, holiness, modesty, justice, beneficence and 
humility ; the other, that we should so persevere in that newness 
of life as never more, with the divine assistance, to stray from the 
paths of virtue on which we have once entered. 

Nor do the words of the Apostle prove only that the Resurrec- 
tion of Christ is proposed as the model of our resurrection; they 
also declare that it gives us power to rise again, and imparts to 
us strength and courage to persevere in holiness and righteous- 
ness, and in the observance of the Commandments of God. For 
as His death not only furnishes us with an example, but also sup- 
plies us with strength to die to sin, so also His Resurrection 
invigorates us to attain righteousness, so that thenceforward 
serving God in piety and holiness, we may walk in the newness 
of life to which we have risen. By His Resurrection, our Lord 
accomplished this especially that we, who before died with Him 
to sin and to the world, should rise also with Him to a new order 
and manner of life? 


™ Phil. ili. 20, 21. ” Rom. vi. 4, 5, 9-II. 
aOn the advantages of the Resurrection of Christ see Summa Theol. 
3a. vi. 


72 THE CREED 


SIGNS OF SPIRITUAL RESURRECTION 


The principal signs of this resurrection from sin which should 
be noted are taught us by the Apostle. For when he says: Jf 
you be risen with Christ, seek the things that are above, where 
Christ is sitting at the right hand of God,** he distinctly tells us 
that they who desire to possess life, honor, repose and riches, 
there chiefly where Christ dwells, have truly risen with Christ. 

When he adds: Mind the things that are above, not the things 
that are upon the earth, he gives, as it were, another sign by 
which we may ascertain if we have truly risen with Christ. As 
a relish for food usually indicates a healthy state of the body, so 
with regard to the soul, if a person relishes whatever things are 
true, whatever modest, whatever just, whatever holy,?* and ex- 
periences within him the sweetness of heavenly things, this we 
may consider a very strong proof that such a one has risen with 
Christ Jesus to a new and spiritual life. 


* Col. iti, 1. Phils iv. S. 


ARTICLE) VI 


“HE ASCENDED INTO HEAVEN, SITTETH AT THE RIGHT HAND OF 
GoD THE FATHER ALMIGHTY” 


IMPORTANCE OF THIS ARTICLE 


Filled with the Spirit of God, and contemplating the blessed 
and glorious Ascension of our Lord, the Prophet David exhorts 
all to celebrate that splendid triumph with the greatest joy and 
gladness: Clap your hands, all ye nations: shout unto God with 
the voice of joy... . God is ascended with jubilee.2 

The pastor will hence learn that this mystery should be ex- 
plained with the greatest diligence; and that he should take care 
that the people not only perceive it with faith and understanding, 
but that they also strive as far as possible, with the Lord’s help 
to reflect it in their lives and actions. 


First Part of this Article: 
“He Ascended into Heaven” 


With regard, then, to the exposition of this sixth Article, which 
has reference principally to this divine mystery, we shall begin 
with its first part, and point out its force and meaning. 


“Into Heaven” 


This, then, the faithful must believe without hesitation, that 
Jesus Christ, having fully accomplished the work of Redemption, 
ascended as man, body and soul, into heaven; for as God He 
never forsook heaven, filling as He does all places with His 


Divinity. . 


1Ps. xlvi. 1, 6. 
73 


74 THE CREED 


“He Ascended” 


The pastor is also to teach that He ascended by His own power, 
not being taken up by the power of another, as was Elias, who 
was carried to heaven in a fiery chariot;* or, as the Prophet 
Habacuc,* or Philip, the deacon,* who were borne through the 
air by the divine power, and traversed great distances. 

Neither did He ascend into heaven solely by the exercise of 
His supreme power as God, but also by virtue of the power which 
He possessed as man. Although human power alone was insuf- 
ficient to accomplish this, yet the virtue with which the blessed 
soul of Christ was endowed was capable of moving the body as it 
pleased, and His body, now glorified, readily obeyed the behest of 
the soul that moved it. Hence, we believe that Christ ascended 
into heaven as God and man by His own power. 


Second Part of this Article: 
“Sitteth at the Right Hand of God the Father Almighty” 


The words He sitteth at the right hand of the Father form the 
second part of this Article. In these words we observe a figure 
of speech; that is, a use of words in other than their literal sense, 
as frequently happens in Scripture, when, accommodating its 
language to human ideas, it attributes human affections and 
human members to God, who, spirit as He is, admits of nothing 
corporeal. 


“At the Right Hand” 


As among men he who sits at the right hand is considered to 
occupy the most honorable place, so, transferring the same idea 
to celestial things, to express the glory which Christ as man has 
obtained above all others, we confess that He sits at the right 
hand of the Father. 


“Sitteth” 


To sit does not imply here position and posture of body, but 
expresses the firm and permanent possession of royal and su- 


74 Kings ii. 11. * Dani. xiv. 35: * Acts vili. 39. 


“HE ASCENDED INTO HEAVEN” 75 


preme power and glory which He received from the Father, and 
of which the Apostle says: Raising him up from the dead, and 
setting him on his right hand in the heavenly places, above all 
principality, and power, and virtue, and domination, and every 
name that 1s named, not only in this world, but also in that which 
is to come; and he hath subjected all things under his feet. 
These words manifestly imply that this glory belongs to our Lord 
in so special and exclusive a manner that it cannot apply to any 
other created being. Hence in another place the Apostle testifies : 
To which of the angels said he at any time: Sit on my right 
hand.° a 


Reflections on the Ascension: 


ITS HISTORY 


The pastor should explain the sense of the Article more at 
length by detailing the history of the Ascension, of which the 
Evangelist St. Luke has left us an orderly description in the Acts 
of the Apostles.’ 


GREATNESS OF THIS MYSTERY 


In this exposition he should observe, in the first place, that all 
other mysteries refer to the Ascension as to their end and find in 
it their perfection and completion; for as all the mysteries of 
religion commence with the Incarnation of our Lord, so His 
sojourn on earth terminates with His Ascension. 

Moreover the other Articles of the Creed which regard Christ 
the Lord show His great humility and lowliness. Nothing can be 
conceived more humble, nothing more lowly, than that the Son of 
God assumed our weak human nature, and suffered and died for 
us. But nothing more magnificently, nothing more admirably, 
proclaims His sovereign glory and divine majesty than what is 
contained in the present and in the preceding Article, in which we 
declare that He rose from the dead, ascended into heaven, and 
sits at the right hand of God the Father. 


= Eph. i. 20-22. Dele pa ial: T Acts i a 
2QOn the Ascension of Christ see Summa Theol. 3a. lvii. viii. 


76 THE CREED 


REASONS OF THE ASCENSION 


When the pastor has explained these truths, he should next 
accurately show why Christ the Lord ascended into heaven. 

First of all, He ascended because the glorious kingdom of the 
highest heavens, not the obscure abode of this earth, presented a 
suitable dwelling place for Him whose body, rising from the 
tomb, was clothed with the glory of immortality. 

He ascended, however, not only to possess the throne of glory 
and the kingdom which He had merited by His blood, but also to 
attend to whatever regards our salvation. 

Again, He ascended to prove thereby that His kingdom is not 
of this world. For the kingdoms of this world are earthly and 
transient, and are based upon wealth and the power of the flesh; 
but the kingdom of Christ is not, as the Jews expected, earthly, 
but spiritual and eternal. Its resources and riches, too, are 
spiritual, as He showed by placing His throne in the heavens, 
where they are counted richer and wealthier who seek most 
earnestly the things that are of God, according to these words of 
St. James: Hath not God chosen the poor in this world, rich in 
faith, and heirs of the kingdom which God hath promised to them 
that love him? ® 

He also ascended into heaven in order to teach us to follow 
Him thither in mind and heart. For as by His death and Resur- 
rection He bequeathed to us an example of dying and rising again 
in spirit, so by His Ascension He teaches and instructs us that 
though dwelling on earth, we should raise ourselves in desire to 
heaven, confessing that we are pilgrims and strangers on the 
earth, seeking a country?° and that we are fellow-citizens with 
the saints, and the domestics of God," for, says the same Apostle, 
our conversation is in heaven.?? 


RESULTS OF THE ASCENSION 


The extent and greatness of the unutterable blessings which 
the bounty of God has showered on us were long before, as the 
Apostle interprets, sung by the inspired David: Ascending on 


* John xviii. 36. ° James ii. 5. » Heb sie 13,414. 
* Eph. a fo. * Philip. iii. 20, 


“HE ASCENDED INTO HEAVEN” 77 


high, he led captivity captive: He gave gifts to men.% For on 
the tenth day He sent down the Holy Ghost, with whose power 
and plenitude He filled the multitude of the faithful then present, 
and so fulfilled that splendid promise: It is expedient to you that 
I go: for if I go not, the Paraclete will not come to you; but if 
I go, I will send him to you.* 

He also ascended into heaven, according to the Apostle, that 
he may appear in the presence of God for us, and discharge for 
us the office of advocate with the Father. My little children, says 
St. John, these things I write to you, that you may not sin. But 
if any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ 
the just: and he is the propitiation for our sins There is noth- 
ing from which the faithful should derive greater joy and glad- 
ness of soul than from the reflection that Jesus Christ is consti- 
tuted our advocate and the mediator of our salvation with the 
Eternal Father, with whom His influence and authority are 
supreme. 

Finally, by His Ascension He has prepared for us a place, as 
He had promised, and has entered, as our head, in the name of 
us all, into the possession of the glory of heaven.*7 Ascending 
into heaven, He threw open its gates, which had been closed by 
the sin of Adam; and, as He foretold to His disciples at His 
Last Supper, secured to us a way by which we may arrive at 
eternal happiness. In order to give an open proof of this by its 
fulfilment, He introduced with Himself into the mansions of 
eternal bliss the souls of the just whom He had liberated from 
hell. 


VIRTUES PROMOTED BY THE ASCENSION 


A series of important advantages followed in the train of this 
admirable profusion of celestial gifts. In the first place, the merit 
of our faith was considerably augmented; because faith has for 
its object those things which fall not under the senses, but are far 
raised above the reach of human reason and intelligence. If, 

- aes . * we 

ines ae a oe John ii. 1, See aha # Tohn AVE: 


a He was elevated into heaven in order to make us partakers of His 
Divinity (Preface of the Mass of the Ascension). 


78 THE CREED 


therefore, the Lord had not departed from us, the merit of our 
faith would not be the same; for Christ the Lord has said: 
Blessed are they that have not seen, and have believed.** 

In the next place, the Ascension of Christ into heaven con- 
tributes much to confirm our hope. Believing that Christ, as 
man, ascended into heaven, and placed our nature at the right 
hand of God the Father, we are animated with a strong hope that 
we, as members, shall also ascend thither, to be there united to 
our Head, according to these words of our Lord Himself: 
Father, I will that where I am, they also whom thou hast given 
me may be with me.*° 

Another most important advantage is that He has taken our 
affections to heaven and inflamed them with the Spirit of God; 
for most truly has it been said that where our treasure is, there 
also is our heart.2° And, indeed, were Christ the Lord still dwell- 
ing on earth, the contemplation of His human nature and His 
company would absorb all our thoughts, and we should view the 
author of such blessings only as man, and cherish towards Him a 
sort of earthly affection. But by His Ascension into heaven He 
has spiritualized our affection and has made us venerate and love 
as God Him whom, on account of His absence, we see only in 
thought. This we learn in part from the example of the Apostles, 
who while our Lord was personally present with them, seemed to 
judge of Him in some measure in a human light ; and in part from 
these words of our Lord Himself: It is expedient to you that I 
go.** The imperfect affection with which they loved Christ Jesus 
when present had to be perfected by divine love, and that by the 
coming of the Holy Ghost; and therefore He immediately sub- 
joins: If I go not, the Paraclete will not come to you. 


THE ASCENSION BENEFITS THE CHURCH AND THE INDIVIDUAL 


Besides, He thus enlarged His household on earth, that is, His 
Church, which was to be governed by the power and guidance of 
the Holy Spirit. He left Peter, the Prince of the Apostles, as its 
chief pastor and supreme head upon earth; moreover he gave 
some apostles, and some prophets, and other some evangelists, 


*jJohn xx. 290. ™ John xvii. 24. -” Matt. vi. 21. ™ John xvi. 7. 


“HE ASCENDED INTO HEAVEN” 79 


and other some pastors and doctors.” Thus seated at the right 
hand of the Father He continually bestows different gifts on dif- 
ferent men; for as the Apostle testifies: To every one of us is 
given grace, according to the measure of the giving of Christ. 

Finally, what we have already taught of the mystery of His 
death and Resurrection the faithful should deem not less true of 
His Ascension. For although we owe our Redemption and salva- 
tion to the Passion of Christ, whose merits opened heaven to the 
just, yet His Ascension is not only proposed to us as a model, 
which teaches us to look on high and ascend in spirit into heaven, 
but it also imparts to us a divine virtue which enables us to ac- 
complish what it teaches.* 

ABNNs shy Fee AS Neha Ve 


aQOn the advantages of the Ascension of Christ see Summa Theol. 3a. 
tvii. 6. 


ARTICLE VII 


“From THENCE He SHALL COME TO JUDGE THE LIVING AND 
THE DEAD” 


MEANING OF THIS ARTICLE 


For the glory and adornment of His Church Jesus Christ is 
invested with three eminent offices and functions: those of Re- 
deemer, Mediator, and Judge. Since in the preceding Articles it 
was shown that the human race was redeemed by His Passion and 
death, and since by His Ascension into heaven it is manifest that 
He has undertaken the perpetual advocacy and patronage of our 
cause, it remains that in this Article we set forth His character 
as Judge. The scope and intent of the Article is to declare that 
on the last day Christ the Lord will judge the whole human race. 


“From Thence He Shall Come” 


The Sacred Scriptures inform us that there are two comings of 
the Son of God: the one when He assumed human flesh for our 
salvation in the womb of a virgin; the other when He shall come 
at the end of the world to judge all mankind. This latter coming 
is called in Scripture the day of the Lord. The day of the Lord, 
says the Apostle, shall come, as a thief in the night;* and our 
Lord Himself says: Of that day and hour no one knoweth.? 


“To Judge the Living and the Dead” 


In proof of the (last) judgment it is enough to adduce the 
authority of the Apostle: We must all appear before the judg- 


? Thess. v. 2. * Matt. xxiv. 36; Mark xiii. 32. 
. 4On the three offices of Christ see Summa Theol. 3a. xlviii. 4; xxvi; 
ix. 


80 


“FROM THENCE HE SHALL COME” 81 


ment-seat of Christ, that every one may receive the broper things 
of the body, according as he hath done, whether it be good or 
evil. There are numerous passages of Sacred Scripture which 
the pastor will find in various places and which not only establish 
the truth of the dogma, but also place it in vivid colors before the 
eyes of the faithful. And if, from the beginning of the world 
that day of the Lord, on which He was clothed with our flesh, was 
sighed for by all as the foundation of their hope of deliverance; 
so also, after the death and Ascension of the Son of God, we 
should make that other day of the Lord the object of our most 
earnest desires, looking for the blessed hope and coming of the 
glory of the great God.* 


TWO JUDGMENTS 


In explaining this subject the pastor should distinguish two 
different occasions on which everyone must appear in the pres- 
ence of the Lord to render an account of all his thoughts, words 
and actions, and to receive immediate sentence from his Judge. 

The first takes place when each one of us departs this life; for 
then he is instantly placed before the judgment-seat of God, 
where all that he has ever done or spoken or thought during life 
shall be subjected to the most rigid scrutiny. This is called the 
particular judgment. 

The second occurs when on the same day and in the same place 
all men shall stand together before the tribunal of their Judge, 
that in the presence and hearing of all human beings of all times 
each may know his final doom and sentence. The announcement 
of this judgment will constitute no small part of the pain and 
punishment of the wicked; whereas the good and just will derive 
great reward and consolation from the fact that it will then 
appear what each one was in life. This is called the general 


judgment.* 


+2, Cor. vz 10. erties ably te bh 
2On the two judgments see Summa Theol. Suppl. Ixix. 2; Ixxxviii. I. 


82 THE CREED 


REASONS FOR GENERAL JUDGMENT 


It is necessary to show why, besides the particular judgment 
of each individual, a general one should also be passed upon all 
men. 

Those who depart this life sometimes leave behind them chil- 
dren who imitate their conduct, dependents, followers and others 
who admire and advocate their example, language and actions. 
Now by all these circumstances the rewards or punishments of 
the dead must needs be increased, since the good or bad influence 
of example, affecting as it does the conduct of many, is to ter- 
minate only with the end of the world. Justice demands that 
in order to form a proper estimate of all these good or bad actions 
and words a thorough investigation should be made. This, how- 
ever, could not be without a general judgment of all men. 

Moreover, as the character of the virtuous frequently suffers 
from misrepresentation, while that of the wicked obtains the 
commendation of virtue, the justice of God demands that the 
former recover, in the public assembly and judgment of all men, 
the good name of which they had been unjustly deprived before 
men. 

Again, as the just and the wicked performed their good and 
evil actions in this life not without the codperation of the body, 
it necessarily follows that these actions belong also to the body as 
to their instrument. It was, therefore, altogether suitable that the 
body should share with the soul the due rewards of eternal glory 
or punishment. But this can only be accomplished by means of 
a general resurrection and of a general judgment. 

Next, it is important to prove that in prosperity and adversity, 
which are sometimes the promiscuous lot of the good and of the 
bad, everything is done and ordered by an all-wise and all-just 
Providence. It was, therefore, necessary not only that rewards 
should await the just and punishments the wicked, in the life to 
come, but that they should be awarded by a public and general 
judgment. Thus they will become better known and will be 
rendered more conspicuous to all; and in atonement for the 
unwarranted murmurings, to which on seeing the wicked abound 
in wealth and flourish in honors even the Saints themselves, 


“FROM THENCE HE SHALL COME” 83 


as men, have sometimes given expression, a tribute of praise will 
be offered by all to the justice and Providence of God. My feet, 
says the Prophet, were almost moved, my steps had well nigh 
slipped, because I had a zeal on occasion of the wicked, seeing 
the prosperity of sinners; and a little after: Behold! these are 
sinners, and yet abounding in the world, they have obtained 
riches; and I said, Then have I in vain justified my heart, and 
washed my hands among the innocent; and I have been scourged 
all the day, and my chastisement hath been in the morning.’ This 
has been the frequent complaint of many, and a general judgment 
is therefore necessary, lest perhaps men may be tempted to say 
that God walketh about the poles of heaven,® and regards not 
the earth. 


This Truth has Rightly been made an Article of the Creed 


Wisely, therefore, has this truth been made one of the twelve 
Articles of the Christian Creed, so that should any begin to waver 
in mind concerning the Providence and justice of God they might 
be reassured by this doctrine. 

Besides, it was right that the just should be encouraged by the 
hope, the wicked appalled by the terror, of a future judgment; 
so that knowing the justice of God the former should not be dis- 
heartened, while the latter through fear and expectation of 
eternal punishment might be recalled from the paths of vice. 
Hence, speaking of the last day, our Lord and Saviour declares 
that a general judgment will one day take place, and He describes 
the signs of its approach, that seeing them, we may know that the 
end of the world is at hand.? At His Ascension also, to console 
His Apostles, overwhelmed with grief at His departure, He sent 
Angels, who said to them: This Jesus who is taken up from you 
into heaven, shall so come, as you have seen him going into 
heaven.® 


Circumstances of the Judgment: 
THE JUDGE 


That the judgment of the world has been assigned to Christ 
the Lord, not only as God, but also as man, is declared in Scrip- 


5 Ps. Ixxii. 2, 3, 12. *Job xxii. 14. ™ Matt. xxiv. 29. ‘Acts i. 11 


Bf THE CREED 


ture. Although the power of judging is common to all the Per- 
sons of the Blessed Trinity, yet it is specially attributed to the 
Son, because to Him also in a special manner is ascribed wisdom. 
But that as man, He will judge the world, is taught by our Lord 
Himself when He says: As the Father hath life in himself, so 
he hath given to the Son also, to have life in himself ; and he hath 
given him power to do judgment, because he is the son of man.® 

There is a peculiar propriety in Christ the Lord sitting in judg- 
ment; for sentence is to be pronounced on mankind, and they are 
thus enabled to see their Judge with their eyes and hear Him 
with their ears, and so learn their judgment through the medium 
of the senses. 

Most just is it also that He who was most iniquitously con- 
demned by the judgment of men should Himself be afterwards 
seen by all men sitting in judgment on all. Hence when the 
Prince of the Apostles had expounded in the house of Cornelius 
the chief dogmas of Christianity, and had taught that Christ was 
suspended from a cross and put to death by the Jews and rose 
the third day to life, he added: And he commanded us to preach 
to the people, and to testify that this is he, who was appointed of 
God, to be the judge of the living and the dead.?® 


SIGNS OF THE GENERAL JUDGMENT 


The Sacred Scriptures inform us that the general judgment 
will be preceded by these three principal signs: the preaching of 
the Gospel throughout the world, a falling away from the faith, 
and the coming of Antichrist. This gospel of the kingdom, says 
our Lord, shall be preached in the whole world, for a testimony 
to all nations, and then shall the consummation comes! The 
Apostle also admonishes us that we be not seduced by anyone, 
as if the day of the Lord were at hand; for unless there come a 


revolt first, and the man of sin be revealed,” the judgment will 
not come. 


* John v. 26, 27. SActsex. 42, 
Matt. xxiv. 14. 2 Thess un. 2,3 


“FROM THENCE HE SHALL COME” 85 


THE SENTENCE OF THE JUST 


The form and procedure of this judgment the pastor will easily 
learn from the prophecies of Daniel,'® the writings of the Evan- 
gelists and the doctrine of the Apostle. The sentence to be pro- 
nounced by the judge is here deserving of more than ordinary 
attention. 

Looking with joyful countenance on the just standing on His 
right, Christ our Redeemer will pronounce sentence on them with 
the greatest benignity, in these words: Come ye blessed of my 
Father, possess the kingdom prepared for you from the begin- 
ning of the world.* That nothing can be conceived more delight- 
ful to the ear than these words, we shall understand if we only 
compare them with the condemnation of the wicked; and call to 
mind, that by them the just are invited from labor to rest, from 
the vale of tears to supreme joy, from misery to eternal happiness, 
the reward of their works of charity. 


THE SENTENCE OF THE WICKED 


Turning next to those who shall stand on His left, He will pour 
out His justice upon them in these words: Depart from me, ye 
cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his 
angels.2® 

The first words, depart from me, express the heaviest punish- 
ment with which the wicked shall be visited, their eternal banish- 
ment from the sight of God, unrelieved by one consolatory hope 
of ever recovering so great a good. This punishment is called by 
theologians the pain of loss, because in hell the wicked shall be 
deprived forever of the light of the vision of God. 

The words ye cursed, which follow, increase unutterably their 
wretched and calamitous condition. If when banished from the 
divine presence they were deemed worthy to receive some bene- 
diction, this would be to them a great source of consolation. But 
since they can expect nothing of this kind as an alleviation of 
their misery, the divine justice deservedly pursues them with 
every species of malediction, once they have been banished. 

% Dan. vii. 9; Matt. xxiv; xxv; Mark xiii; Rom. ii. 

“4 Matt. xxv. 34. % Matt. xxv. 4I. 


86 THE CREED 


The next words, into everlasting fire, express another sort of 
punishment, which is called by theologians the pain of sense, 
because, like lashes, stripes or other more severe chastisements, 
among which fire, no doubt, produces the most intense pain, it is 
felt through the organs of sense. When, moreover, we reflect 
that this torment is to be eternal, we can see at once that the 
punishment of the damned includes every kind of suffering. 

The concluding words, which was prepared for the devil and his 
angels, make this still more clear. For since nature has so pro- 
vided that we feel miseries less when we have companions and 
sharers in them who can, at least in some measure, assist us by 
their advice and kindness, what must be the horrible state of the 
damned who in such calamities can never separate themselves 
from the companionship of most wicked demons? And yet most 
justly shall this very sentence be pronounced by our Lord and 
Saviour on those sinners who neglected all the works of true 
mercy, who gave neither food to the hungry, nor drink to the 
thirsty, who refused shelter to the stranger and clothing to the 
naked, and who would not visit the sick and the imprisoned. 


Importance of Instruction on this Article 


These are thoughts which the pastor should very often bring 
to the attention of his people; for the truth which is contained in 
this Article will, if accepted with faithful dispositions, be most 
powerful in bridling the evil inclinations of the heart and in with- 
drawing men from sin. Hence we read in Ecclesiasticus: Jn all 
thy works remember thy last end, and thou shalt never sin. 
And indeed there is scarcely anyone so given over to vice as not 
to be recalled to virtue by the thought that he must one day render 
an account before an all-just Judge, not only of all his words and 
actions, but even of his most secret thoughts, and must suffer 
punishment according to his deserts. 

On the other hand, the just man will be more and more en- 
couraged to lead a good life. Even though his days be passed in 
poverty, ignominy and suffering, he must be gladdened exceed- 


* Ecclus. vii. 40. 


4On the circumstances and signs of the last judgment see Summa 
Theol. Suppl. xxv and following; Ixxxvii. 


“FROM THENCE HE SHALL COME” 87 


ingly when he looks forward to that day when, the conflicts of 
this wretched life being over, he shall be declared victorious in 
the hearing of all men, and shall be admitted into his heavenly 
country to be crowned with divine honors that shall never fade. 

It only remains, then, for the pastor to exhort the faithful to 
lead holy lives and practice every virtue, that thus they may be 
enabled to look forward with confidence to the coming of that 
great day of the Lord—nay, as becomes children, even to desire it 
most fervently. 


ARTICLE VIII 
“T BELIEVE IN THE HoLy GHOST” 


IMPORTANCE OF THIS ARTICLE 


Hitherto we have expounded, as far as the nature of the sub- 
ject seemed to require, what pertains to the First and Second Per- 
sons of the Holy Trinity. It now remains to explain what the 
Creed contains with regard to the Third Person, the Holy Ghost. 

On this subject the pastor should omit nothing that study and 
industry can effect; for on this Article, no less than on those 
that preceded, ignorance or error would be unpardonable in a 
Christian. Hence, the Apostle did not permit some among the 
Ephesians to remain in ignorance with regard to the Person of the 
Holy Ghost. Having asked if they had received the Holy Ghost, 
and having received for answer that they did not so much as 
know that there was a Holy Ghost, he at once demanded: Jn 
whom, therefore, were you baptized? to signify that a distinct 
knowledge of this Article is most necessary to the faithful. 

From such knowledge they derive special fruit. For, consid- 
ering attentively that whatever they have, they possess through 
the bounty and beneficence of the Holy Spirit, they begin to 
think more modestly and humbly of themselves, and to place all 
their hopes in the protection of God, which for a Christian is the 
first step towards consummate wisdom and supreme happiness. 


“Holy Ghost” 


The exposition of this Article, therefore, should begin with 
the force and meaning here attached to the words Holy Ghost. 
This appellation is equally true when applied to the Father and 
the Son, since both are spirit, both holy, and we confess that God 

SActsuxicac: 

88 


“T BELIEVE IN THE HOLY GHOST” 89 


is a Spirit; this name may also be applied to Angels, and the 
souls of the just. Care must be taken, therefore, that the faithful 
be not led into error by the ambiguity of the words. 

The pastor, then, should teach that by the words Holy Ghost in 
this Article is understood the Third Person of the Blessed 
Trinity, a sense in which they are used, sometimes in the Old, 
and frequently in the New Testament. Thus David prays: Take 
not thy Holy Spirit from me;? and in the Book of Wisdom we 
read: Who shall know thy thoughts, except thou give wisdom, 
and send thy Holy Spirit from above?* And in another place 
it is said: He created her in the Holy Ghost.4| We are also com- 
manded, in the New Testament to be baptized in the name of the 
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.® We read that 
the most holy Virgin conceived of the Holy Ghost ;® and we are 
sent by St. John to Christ, who baptizeth us in the Holy Ghost.’ | 
There are many other passages in which the words Holy Ghost 
occur. 

No one should be surprised that a proper name is not given 
to the Third, as to the First and Second Persons. The Second 
Person is designated by a proper name, and called Son, because, 
as has been explained in the preceding Articles, His eternal birth 
from the Father is properly called generation. As, therefore, that 
birth is expressed by the word generation, so the Person, emanat- 
ing from that generation, is properly called Son, and the Person, 
from whom he emanates, Father. 

But as the production of the Third Person has no proper name, 
but is called spiration and procession, the Person produced is, 
consequently, designated by no proper name. His emanation has 
no proper name simply because we are obliged to borrow from 
created objects the names given to God and know no other 
created means of communicating nature and essence than that 
of generation. Hence we cannot discover a proper name to 
express the manner in which God communicates Himself entire, 
by the force of His love. Wherefore we call the Third Person 
Holy Ghost, a name, however, peculiarly appropriate to Him who 


RSet 2n. 13: UVV4S. 1%." 17. 
leek ih, Gy ° Matt. xxvili. 19. 
* Matt. i. 20; Luke i. 35. *John i. 33. 


9o THE CREED 


infuses into us spiritual life, and without whose holy inspiration 
we can do nothing meritorious of eternal life.4 


“I Believe in the Holy Ghost” 


THE HOLY GHOST IS EQUAL TO THE FATHER AND THE SON 


The people, when once acquainted with the meaning of His 
name, should first of all be taught that the Holy Ghost is equally 
God with the Father and the Son, equally omnipotent and eternal, 
infinitely perfect, the supreme good, infinitely wise, and of the 
same nature as the Father and the Son. 

All this is obviously enough implied by the force of the word 
in, when we say: I believe in the Holy Ghost; for this preposi- 
tion is prefixed to each Person of the Trinity in order to express 
the exact nature of our faith. 

The Divinity of the Holy Ghost is also clearly established by 
many passages of Scripture. When, in the Acts of the Apostles, 
St. Peter says, Ananias, Why hast thou conceived this thing in 
thy heart? he immediately adds: Thou hast not lied to men, but 
to God,’ calling Him God to whom he had just before given the 
name Holy Ghost. 

The Apostle, also, writing to the Corinthians, interprets what 
he says of God as said of the Holy Ghost. There are, he says, 
diversities of operations, but the same God, who worketh all in 
all; but, he continues, all these things one and the same Spirit 
worketh, dividing to every one according as he will. 

In the Acts of the Apostles also what the Prophets attribute to 
God alone, St. Paul ascribes to the Holy Ghost. Thus Isaias had 
said: I heard the voice of the Lord, saying: Whom shall I send? 

. . And he said: Go, and thou shalt say to this people: Blind 
the heart of this people, and make their ears heavy, and shut their 
eyes, lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears.° 
Having cited these words, the Apostle adds: Well did the Holy 
Ghost speak to our fathers, by Isaias the prophet. 


8 
wacts V. 4. ST Conmpxits 6, 11. 
Isaias vi. 8-10. % Acts xxviii. 25. 


2On the names of the Holy Ghost see Summa Theol. 


Ia. xxxvi- 
XXXVIii. 


“T BELIEVE IN THE HOLY GHOST” 91 


Again, the Sacred Scriptures join the Person of the Holy Ghost 
to those of the Father and the Son, as, for example, when 
Baptism is commanded to be administered in the name of the 
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. There is thus 
no room left us of doubting the truth of this mystery. For if the 
Father is God, and the Son God, we must admit that the Holy 
Ghost, who is united with Them in the same degree of honor, 
is also God. 

Besides, baptism administered in the name of any creature 
can be of no effect. Were you baptized in the name of Paul? # 
says the Apostle, to show that such baptism could have availed 
nothing to salvation. Since, therefore, we are baptized in the 
name of the Holy Ghost, we must acknowledge the Holy Ghost 
to be God. 

This same order of the Three Persons, which proves the 
Divinity of the Holy Ghost, is also found in the Epistle of St. 
John: There are three who give testimony in heaven, the Father, 
the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one;** and 
also in that noble eulogy of the Holy Trinity, with which the 
Divine Praises and the Psalms are concluded: Glory be to the 
Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost. 

Finally, what most strongly confirms this truth is the fact 
that Holy Scripture assigns to the Holy Ghost whatever attri- 
butes we believe proper to God. Wherefore to Him is ascribed 
the honor of temples, as when the Apostle says: Know you not 
that your members are the temple of the Holy Ghost?** Scrip- 
ture also attributes to Him the power to sanctify, to vivify, to 
search the depths of God,!® to speak by the Prophets,*® and to be 
present in all places,’ all of which can be attributed to God 


alone.? 


THE HOLY GHOST IS DISTINCT FROM THE FATHER AND THE SON 


The pastor should also accurately explain to the faithful that 
the Holy Ghost is not only God, but that we must also confess 


air Orwin 13. * y Johny. 7." T.'Gorevis 10: 
a5 hess, in 122s Cori. O37 1 Cor. ii. 10. 
a0 Petii- (21. Wisse 1407. 


aQOn the equality of the three Divine Persons see Summa Theol. Ia. 
xii. 


92 THE CREED 


that He is the Third Person of the Divine Nature, distinct from 
the Father and the Son, and produced by Their will. 

To say nothing of other testimonies of Scripture, the form of 
Baptism, taught by our Redeemer,** shows most clearly that the 
Holy Ghost is the Third Person, self-existent in the Divine Nature 
and distinct from the other Persons. It is a doctrine taught also 
by the Apostle when he says: The grace of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, and the charity of God, and the communication of the 
Holy Ghost, be with you all. Amen.*® 

This same truth is still more explicitly declared in these words 
added to this Article of the Creed by the Fathers of the First 
Council of Constantinople to refute the impious folly of Mace- 
donius: And in the Holy Ghost, the Lord and giver of life, who 
proceedeth from the Father, and the Son; who together with the 
Father and the Son, is adored and glorified; who spoke by the 
prophets. 


“The Lord” 


By confessing the Holy Ghost to be Lord they declare how 
far He excels the Angels, who are the noblest spirits created by 
God; for they are all, says the Apostle, ministering spirits, sent 


to minister for them who shall receive the inheritance of salva- 
tion,?° 


“Life-Giver” 


They also designate the Holy Ghost the giver of life because 
the soul lives more by its union with God than the body is nour- 
ished and sustained by its union with the soul. Since, then, the 
Sacred Scriptures ascribe to the Holy Ghost this union of the 
soul with God, it is clear that He is most rightly called the giver 


of life. 


*® Matt. xxviii. 10. MANGOr ei tS) 

eUEebtearnd4: 

aQOn the distinction of the Holy Ghost from the other Divine Persons 
see Summa Theol. ta. xxx}; xxvii. 3. The words, “and the Son,” sub- 
sequently inserted by the Latins, were not contained in the Creed of 
the First Council of Constantinople (381), nor in that of Nice (325), 
The insertion, however, was not so much an addition as an explanation 
of the faith of both the Latin and the Greek Churches, and was confirmed 
by the latter in the Councils of Lyons (1274) and Florence (1438-1445). 


“TI BELIEVE IN THE HOLY GHOST” 93 


“Who Proceedeth from the Father and the Son” 


With regard to the words immediately succeeding: who pro- 
ceedeth from the Father and the Son, the faithful are to be 
taught that the Holy Ghost proceeds by an eternal procession 
from the Father and the Son, as from one principle. This truth 
is proposed for our belief by the Creed of the Church, from 
which no Christian may depart, and is confirmed by the authority 
of the Sacred Scriptures and of Councils. 

Christ the Lord, speaking of the Holy Ghost, says: He shall 
glorify me, because he shall receive of mine. We also find 
that the Holy Ghost is sometimes called in Scripture the Spirit of 
Christ, sometimes, the Spirit of the Father; that He is one time 
said to be sent by the Father, another time, by the Son,—all of 
which clearly signifies that He proceeds alike from the Father 
and the Son. He, says St. Paul, who has not the Spirit of Christ 
belongs not to him.”? In his Epistle to the Galatians he also calls 
the Holy Ghost the Spirit of Christ: God hath sent the Spirit of 
his Son into your hearts, crying: Abba, Father? In the Gospel 
of St. Matthew, He is called the Spirit of the Father: Jt ts not 
you that speak, but the Spirit of your Father that speaketh in 
you,?4 

Our Lord said, at His Last Supper: When the Paraclete 
cometh, whom I will send you, the Spirit of truth, who proceedeth 
from the Father, he shall give testimony of me.?? On another 
occasion, that the Holy Ghost will be sent by the Father, He 
declares in these words: Whom the Father will send in my 
name.2® Understanding these words to denote the procession of 
the Holy Ghost, we come to the inevitable conclusion that He 
proceeds from both Father and Son. 

The above are the truths that should be taught with regard to 
the Person of the Holy Ghost. 

ve ; z é, se ; 

Sie ao. Sensi) sy otanyeiv26 


a On the procession of the Holy Ghost see Summa Theol. Ia. xxvii. 3, 4; 
XXXVI. 2-4. 


94 THE CREED 


Certain Divine Works are Appropriated to the Holy Ghost 


It is also the duty of the pastor to teach that there are certain 
admirable effects, certain excellent gifts of the Holy Ghost, which 
are said to originate and emanate from Him, as from a perennial 
fountain of goodness. Although the intrinsic works of the most 
Holy Trinity are common to the Three Persons, yet many of them 
are attributed specially to the Holy Ghost, to signify that they 
arise from the boundless charity of God towards us. For as the 
Holy Ghost proceeds from the divine will, inflamed, as it were, 
with love, we can perceive that these effects which are referred 
particularly to the Holy Ghost, are the result of God’s supreme 
love for us. 

Hence it is that the Holy Ghost is called a gift; for by the 
word gift we understand that which is kindly and gratuitously 
bestowed, without expectation of any return. Whatever gifts and 
graces, therefore, have been conferred on us by God—and what 
have we, says the Apostle, that we have not received from 
God? ?*—-we should piously and gratefully acknowledge as be- 
stowed by the grace and gift of the Holy Ghost. 


CREATION, GOVERNMENT, LIFE 


These gifts of the Holy Ghost are numerous. Not to mention 
the creation of the world, the propagation and government of all 
created beings, discussed in the first Article, we have just shown 
that the giving of life is particularly attributed to the Holy Ghost, 
and this is further confirmed by the testimony of Ezechiel: J 
will give you spirit and you shall live.?8 


THE SEVEN GIFTS 


The Prophet (Isaias), however, enumerates the* chief effects 
which are most properly ascribed to the Holy Ghost: The spirit 
of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and fortitude, 
the spirit of knowledge and piety, and the spirit of the fear of the 


or 3 
tT .Cors avery. *Ezech. xxxvii. 6. 


aQOn the appropriation of divine attributes 
XXXix. 7. see Summa Theol. 1a. 


“I BELIEVE IN THE HOLY GHOST” 95 


Lord.*® These effects are called the gifts of the Holy Ghost, and 
sometimes they are even called the Holy Ghost. Wisely, there- 
fore, does St. Augustine admonish us, whenever we meet the 
word Holy Ghost in Scripture, to distinguish whether it means 
the Third Person of the Trinity or His gifts and operations.*° 
The two are as far apart as the Creator is from the creature. 

The diligence of the pastor in expounding these truths should 
be the greater, since it is from these gifts of the Holy Ghost that 
we derive rules of Christian life and are enabled to know if the 
Holy Ghost dwells within us.@ 


JUSTIFYING GRACE 


But the grace of justification, which signs us with the Holy 
Spirit of promise, who is the pledge of our inheritance,** tran- 
scends all His other most ample gifts. It unites us to God in the 
closest bonds of love, lights up within us the sacred flame of piety, 
forms us to newness of life, renders us partakers of the divine 
nature, and enables us to be called and really to be the sons of 
God.*? 

= Isatas' xi. 2) = Deri ring libwexve c. 10) 

SS Epheet: 13: =e Olmeiit) Ueeeebeets 1 Ae 

1QOn the Gifts of the Holy Ghost see Summa Theol. ta. 2. Ixviii; 
aro, viltroixs xix xiv; lus cxxi; cxxxix.—. 

bOn grace see Summa Theol. Ia. 22. cix-cxiv. 


ARTICLE IX 


“T BELIEVE IN THE Hoty CATHOLIC CHURCH ; THE COMMUNION 
oF SAINTS” 


THE IMPORTANCE OF THIS ARTICLE 


With what great diligence pastors ought to explain to the faith- 
ful the truth of this ninth Article will be easily seen, if we attend 
chiefly to two considerations. 

First, as St. Augustine observes, the Prophets spoke more 
plainly and openly of the Church than of Christ, foreseeing that 
on this a much greater number may err and be deceived than on 
the mystery of the Incarnation. For in after ages there would not 
be wanting wicked men who, like the ape that would fain pass 
for a man, would claim that they alone were Catholics, and with 
no less impiety than effrontery assert that with them alone is the 
Catholic Church. 

he second consideration is that he whose mind is strongly 
impressed with the truth taught in this Article, will easily escape 
the awful danger of heresy. For a person is not to be called a 
heretic as soon as he shall have offended in matters of faith; but 
he is a heretic who, having disregarded the authority of the 
Church, maintains impious opinions with pertinacity. Since, 
therefore, it is impossible that anyone be infected with the con- 
tagion of heresy, so long as he holds what this Article proposes to 
be believed, let pastors use every diligence that the faithful, hav- 
ing known this mystery and guarded against the wiles of Satan, 
may persevere in the true faith. 

This Article hinges upon the preceding one; for, it having-been 
already shown that the Holy Ghost is the source and giver of all 
holiness, we here profess our belief that the Church has been 
endowed by Him with sanctity. 

*On Ps. xxx. 15, Expos. II. Serm. ii. 8. 

aOn this Article see St. Thomas, Expositio in Symbolum. 

96 


“T BELIEVE IN THE HOLY CATHOLIC CHURCH” 97 


First Part of this Article: 
“I Believe in the Holy Catholic Church” 


The Latins, having borrowed the word ecclesia (church) from 
the Greeks, have transferred it, since the preaching of the Gospel, 
to sacred things. It becomes necessary, therefore, to explain 
its meaning. 


“Church” 


The word ecclesia (church) means a calling forth. But 
writers afterward used it to signify a meeting or assembly, 
whether the people gathered together were members of a true 
or of a false religion. Thus in the Acts it is written of the people 
of Ephesus that when the town-clerk had appeased a tumultuous 
assemblage he said: And if you inquire after any other matter, 
it may be decided in a lawful church.2, The Ephesians, who were 
worshippers of Diana, are thus called a lawful church (ecclesia). 
Nor are the Gentiles only, who knew not God, called a church 
(ecclesia) ; by the same name at times are also designated the 
councils of wicked and impious men. I have hated the church 
(ecclesiam) of the malignant, says the Prophet, and with the 
wicked I will not sit. 

In common Scripture usage, however, the word was subse- 
quently employed to signify the Christian society only, and the 
assemblies of the faithful; that is, of those who are called by 
faith to the light of truth and the knowledge of God, that, having 
forsaken the darkness of ignorance and error, they may worship 
the living and true God piously and holily, and serve Him from 
their whole heart. In a word, The Church, says St. Augustine, 
consists of the faithful dispersed throughout the world.* 


? Acts xix. 39. NEG, Gee Ele *On Ps. xxiv. Serm. ii. Io. 

a “Ecclesia” is derived from the Greek words é« and xadéw meaning, 
“T call forth.’ The origin of the word goes back to the practice among 
the Athenians of summoning their assemblies by heralds. Rightly, then, 
is this word applied to the society of the faithful, since God calls all te 
join it. 


98 THE CREED 


MYSTERIES WHICH THE WORD “CHURCH”? COMPRISES 


In this word are contained important mysteries. For, in the 
calling forth, which it signifies, we recognize at once the be- 
nignity and splendor of divine grace, and we understand that the 
Church is very unlike all other societies. Other bodies rest on 
human reason and prudence, but the Church reposes on the wis- 
dom and counsels of God who has called us inwardly by the inspi- 
ration of the Holy Ghost, who opens the hearts of men; and out- 
wardly, through the labor and ministry of pastors and preachers. 

Moreover, the end of this vocation, that is, the knowledge and 
possession of things eternal will be at once understood if we but 
remember why the faithful of the Old Law were called a Syna- 
gogue, that is, a flock; for, as St. Augustine teaches, they were 
so called, because, like cattle, which are wont to herd together, 
they looked only to terrestrial and transitory goods.’ Where- 
fore, the Christian people are justly called, not a Synagogue, but 
a Church, because, despising earthly and passing things, they 
pursue only things heavenly and eternal. 


OTHER NAMES GIVEN THE CHURCH IN SCRIPTURE 


Many names, moreover, which are replete with mysteries, have 
been used to designate the Christian body. Thus, by the Apostle, 
it is called the house and edifice of God. If, says he to Timothy, 
I tarry long, that thou mayest know how thou oughtest to behave 
thyself in the house of God, which is the church of the living 
God, the pillar and ground of truth.© The Church is called a 
house, because it is, as it were, one family governed by one father 
of the family, and enjoying a community of all spiritual goods. 

It is also called the flock of the sheep of Christ, of which He is 
the door and the shepherd. It is called the spouse of Christ. I 
have espoused you to one husband, says the Apostle to the Co- 
rinthians, that I may present you as a chaste virgin to Christ;? 


On Ps. Ixxviil. 3; Ixxxi. 1. ‘pi Limi tsi 


a “Synagogue” is derived from the Greek words, ovv 
tiyw, “lead.” 


o2 | Corexia: 
, “together,” and 


“I BELIEVE IN THE HOLY CATHOLIC CHURCH” 99 


and to the Ephesians: Husbands love your wives, as Christ also 
loved the church;*® and of marriage: This is a great sacrament, 
but I speak in Christ and in the church® 

Finally, the Church is called the body of Christ, as may be 
seen in the Epistles to the Ephesians and Colossians.2° Each of 
these appellations has very great influence in exciting the faithful 
to prove themselves worthy of the boundless clemency and good- 
ness of God, who chose them to be the people of God. 


The Parts of the Church 


These things having been explained, it will be necessary to 
enumerate the several component parts of the Church, and to 
point out their difference, in order that the faithful may the better 
comprehend the nature, properties, gifts, and graces of God’s 
beloved Church, and by reason of them unceasingly praise the 
most holy name of God. 

The Church consists principally of two parts, the one called the 
Church triumphant; the other, the Church militant. The Church 
triumphant is that most glorious and happy assemblage of blessed 
spirits, and of those who have triumphed over the world, the flesh, 
and the iniquity of Satan, and are now exempt and safe from 
the troubles of this life and enjoy everlasting bliss. The Church 
militant is the society of all the faithful still dwelling on earth. 
It is called militant, because it wages eternal war with those 
implacable enemies, the world, the flesh and the devil. 

We are not, however, to infer that there are two Churches. 
The Church triumphant and the Church militant are two con- 
stituent parts of one Church; one part going before, and now in 
the possession of its heavenly country; the other, following every 
day, until at length, united with our Saviour, it shall repose in 
endless felicity. 


THE MEMBERS OF THE CHURCH MILITANT 


The Church militant is composed of two classes of persons, the 
good and the bad, both professing the same faith and partaking 


* Eph. y. 25. Nal, We Se Disp 3b, RIB (Coll, a, an 


100 THE CREED 


of the same Sacraments, yet differing in their manner of life and 
morality. 

The good are those who are linked together not only by the 
profession of the same faith, and the participation of the same 
Sacraments, but also by the spirit of grace and the bond of 
charity. Of these St. Paul says: The Lord knoweth who are 
his+ Who they are that compose this class we also may remotely 
conjecture, but we can by no means pronounce with certainty. 
Hence Christ the Saviour does not speak of this portion of His 
Church when He refers us to the Church and commands us to 
hear and to obey her.1? As this part of the Church is unknown, 
how could we ascertain with certainty whose decision to recur to, 
whose authority to obey? 

The Church, therefore, as the Scriptures and the writings of 
the Saints testify, includes within her fold the good and the bad; 
and it was in this sense that St. Paul spoke of one body and one 
spirit.8 Thus understood, the Church is known and is compared 
to a city built on a mountain, and visible from every side.1* As 
all must yield obedience to her authority, it is necessary that she 
may be known by all. 

That the Church is composed of the good and the bad we 
learn from many parables contained in the Gospel. Thus, the 
kingdom of heaven, that is, the Church militant, is compared to 
a net cast into the sea,’ to a field in which tares were sown with 
the good grain,*® to a threshing floor on which the grain is mixed 
up with the chaff,‘7 and also to ten virgins, some of whom were 
wise, and some foolish.1* And long before, we trace a figure and 
resemblance of this Church in the ark of Noah, which contained 
not only clean, but also unclean animals.?° 

But although the Catholic faith uniformly and truly teaches 
that the good and the bad belong to the Church, yet the same faith 
declares that the condition of both is very different. The wicked 
are contained in the Church, as the chaff is mingled with the grain 
on the threshing floor, or as dead members sometimes remain 
attached to a living body. 


2 iment Os * Matt. xviii. 17. Se 

ph. iv. 
* Matt. v. 14. * Matt. xiii. 47. * Matt. ou 24. 
"Luke iii. 17. Matt. xx vamieucs * Gen. vii. 2. 


“T BELIEVE IN THE HOLY CATHOLIC CHURCH” 101 


THOSE WHO ARE NOT MEMBERS OF THE CHURCH 


Hence there are but three classes of persons excluded from the 
Church’s pale: infidels, heretics and schismatics, and excommuni- 
cated persons. Infidels are outside the Church because they never 
belonged to, and never knew the Church, and were never made 
partakers of any of her Sacraments. Heretics and schismatics are 
excluded from the Church, because they have separated from her 
and belong to her only as deserters belong to the army from which 
they have deserted. It is not, however, to be denied that they 
are still subject to the jurisdiction of the Church, inasmuch as 
they may be called before her tribunals, punished and anathema- 
tized. Finally, excommunicated persons are not members of the 
Church, because they have been cut off by her sentence from the 
number of her children and belong not to her communion until 
they repent. 

But with regard to the rest, however wicked and evil they may 
be, it is certain that they still belong to the Church. Of this the 
faithful are frequently to be reminded, in order to be convinced 
that, were even the lives of her ministers debased by crime, they 
are still within the Church, and therefore lose nothing of their 
power.* 


Other Uses of the Word “Church” 


Portions of the Universal Church are usually called churches, 
as when the Apostle mentions the Church at Corinth, at Galatia, 
of the Laodiceans, of the Thessalonians.”° 

The private families of the faithful he also calls churches. 
The church in the family of Priscilla and Aquila he commands 
to be saluted;?! and in another place, he says: Aquila and 
Priscilla with the church that is in their house salute you much 
in the Lord.22. Writing to Philemon, he makes use of the same 
word.”* 

Sometimes, also, the word church is used to signify the 
prelates and pastors of the church. If he will not hear thee, says 

eriCott 29 Gal. weesyColeiy. 163, 1 Thess: 1. 

7 Rom. xvi. 4. rig Con xvinilO: Philemon i. 2. 

aOn the members of the Church see Summa Theol. 3a. viii. 


102 THE CREED 


our Lord, tell the church.2* Here the word church means the 
authorities of the Church. 

The place in which the faithful assemble to hear the Word 
of God, or for other religious purposes, is also called a church. 
But in this Article, the word church is specially used to signify 
both the good and the bad, the governed, as well as the governing. 


The Marks of the Church 


The distinctive marks of the Church are also to be made known 
to the faithful, that thus they may be enabled to estimate the 
extent of the blessing conferred by God on those who have had 
the happiness to be born and educated within her pale. 


“ONE” 


The first mark of the true Chureh is described in the Nicene 
Creed, and consists in unity: My dove is one, my beautiful one 
is one.2®> So vast a multitude, scattered far and wide, is called 
one for the reasons mentioned by St. Paul in his Epistle to the 
Ephesians: One Lord, one faith, one baptism.*® 


UNITY IN GOVERNMENT 


The Church has but one ruler and one governor, the invisible 
one, Christ, whom the eternal Father hath made head over all 
the Church, which is his body; *" the visible one, the Pope, who, 
as legitimate successor of Peter, the Prince of the Apostles, fills 
the Apostolic chair.* 

It is the unanimous teaching of the Fathers that this visible 
head is necessary to establish and preserve unity in the Church. 
This St. Jerome clearly perceived and as clearly expressed when, 
in his work against Jovinian, he wrote: One is elected that, by 
the appointment of a head, all occasion of schism may be re- 
moved. In his letter to Pope Damasus the same holy Doctor 
writes: Away with envy, let the ambition of Roman grandeur 
cease! I speak to the successor of the fisherman, and to the 

* Matt. xviii. 17. * Cant. vis: 

= Eiph. iv. 5} SDN 5h By De. 

2 On the primacy of the Pope see Summa Theol. 3a. viii. 6; cxii. 2. ad 2, 


“T BELIEVE IN THE HOLY CATHOLIC CHURCH” 103 


disciple of the cross. Following no chief but Christ, I am united 
in communion with your Holiness, that is, with the chair of 
Peter. I know that on that rock is built the Church. Whoever 
will eat the lamb outside this house is profane; whoever is not in 
the ark of Noah shall perish in the flood. 

The same doctrine was long before established by Saints Ire- 
naeus,”® and Cyprian.*° The latter, speaking of the unity of the 
Church observes: The Lord said to Peter, I say to thee, Peter! 
thou art Peter: and upon this rock I will build my Church.+ He 
builds His Church on one. And although after His Resurrection 
He gave equal power to all His Apostles, saying: As the Father 
hath sent me, I also send you, receive ye the Holy Ghost; ** yet 
to make unity more manifest, He decided by His own authority 
that it should be derived from one alone, etc. 

Again, Optatus of Milevi says: You cannot be excused on the 
score of ignorance, knowing as you do that in the city of Rome 
the episcopal chair was first conferred on Peter, who occupied it 
as head of the Apostles; in order that in that one chair the unity 
of the Church might be preserved by all, and that the other 
Apostles might not claim each a char for himself; so that now 
he who erects another in opposition to this single chair is a schis- 
matic and a prevaricator.* 

Later on St. Basil wrote: Peter is made the foundation, because 
he says: Thou art Christ, the Son of the Living God; and hears 
in reply that he is a rock. But although a rock, he is not such 
a rock as Christ; for Christ is truly an immovable rock, but Peter, 
only by virtue of that rock. For Jesus bestows His dignities on 
others; He is a priest, and He makes priests; a rock, and He 
makes a rock; what belongs to Himself, He bestows on His 
servants.** 

Lastly, St. Ambrose ** says: Because he alone of all of them 
professed (Christ) he was placed above all. 


28 Contr. Jovin, lib. I. 26; Ep. xv. 2. epist. lvii (falsely ascribed to Basil). 


7° Contr. Haeres. iii. 3. ™ De Unit. Eccl. iv. * Matt. xvi. 18. 
EVAN Sis Biky BA * De Schism. Donat. ii. 2. 
* Hom. 29, De Paenit. S(Com sinmleucy Crixk.1 204 libs x., 175. 


aThis quotation from St. Ambrose is not found in the earliest and 
best editions of the Roman Catechism; apparently the lacuna was due to 
a typographical mistake. The above passage has been supplied from the 


Roman edition of 1761. 


104 . THE CREED 


Should anyone object that the Church is content with one 
Head and one Spouse, Jesus Christ, and requires no other, the 
answer is obvious. For as we deem Christ not only the author 
of all the Sacraments, but also their invisible minister—He it is 
who baptizes, He it is who absolves, although men are appointed 
by Him the external ministers of the Sacraments—so has He 
placed over His Church, which He governs by His invisible Spirit, 
a man to be His vicar and the minister of His power. A 
visible Church requires a visible head; therefore the Saviour 
appointed Peter head and pastor of all the faithful, when He 
committed to his care the feeding of all His sheep,** in such 
ample terms that He willed the very same power of ruling and 
governing the entire Church to descend to Peter’s successors. 


UNITY IN SPIRIT, HOPE AND FAITH 


Moreover, the Apostle, writing to the Corinthians, tells them 
that there is but one and the same Spirit who imparts grace to 
the faithful, as the soul communicates life to the members of 
the body.’* Exhorting the Ephesians to preserve this unity, he 
says: Be careful to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of 
peace; one body and one Spirit.88 As the human body consists 
of many members, animated by one soul, which gives sight to the 
eyes, hearing to the ears, and to the other senses the power of 
discharging their respective functions; so the mystical body of 
Christ, which is the Church, is composed of many faithful. The 
hope, to which we are called, is also one, as the Apostle tells us 
in the same place; *® for we all hope for the same consummation, 
eternal and happy life. Finally, the faith which all are bound to 
believe and to profess is one: Let there be no schisms amongst 
you, says the Apostle.#° And Baptism, which is the seal of our 
Christian faith, is also one. 


“SIOLY” 


The second mark of the Church is holiness, as we learn from 
these words of the Prince of the Apostles: You are a chosen 
generation, a holy nation. 


* John xxi. 15. st Corxiis3, * Ephsivesi ia: 
SE pheive qs pln GCOnsIETOS Sui etait Hs 


“I BELIEVE IN THE HOLY CATHOLIC CHURCH” ros 


The Church is called holy because she is consecrated and dedi- 
cated to God; for so other things when set apart and dedicated to- 
the worship of God were wont to be called holy, even though they 
were material. Examples of this in the Old Law were vessels, 
vestments and altars. In the same sense the first-born who were 
dedicated to the Most High God were also called holy. 

It should not be deemed a matter of surprise that the Church, 
although numbering among her children many sinners, is called 
holy. For as those who profess any art, even though they depart 
from its rules, are still called artists, so in like manner the faith- 
ful, although offending in many things and violating the engage- 
ments to which they had pledged themselves, are still called holy, 
because they have been made the people of God and have conse- 
crated themselves to Christ by faith and Baptism. Hence, St. 
Paul calls the Corinthians sanctified and holy, although it is 
certain that among them there were some whom he severely re- 
buked as carnal, and also charged with grosser crimes.*? 

The Church is also to be called holy because she is united to 
her holy Head, as His body; that is, to Christ the Lord,** the 
fountain of all holiness, from whom flow the graces of the Holy 
Spirit and the riches of the divine bounty. St. Augustine, inter- 
preting these words of the Prophet: Preserve my soul, for I am 
holy,** thus admirably expresses himself: Let the body of Christ 
boldly say, let also that one man, exclaiming from the ends of the 
earth, boldly say, with his Head, and under his Head, I am holy; 
for he received the grace of holiness, the grace of Baptism and 
of remission of sins. And a little further on: Jf all Christians 
and all the faithful, having been baptized in Christ, have put Him 
on, according to these words of the Apostle: “As many of you 
as have been baptized in Christ, have put on Christ” ;* if they are 
made members of his body, and yet say they are not holy, they 
do an injury to their Head, whose members are holy.*° 

Moreover, the Church alone has the legitimate worship of 
sacrifice, and the salutary use of the Sacraments, which are the 
efficacious instruments of divine grace, used by God to produce 
true holiness. Hence, to possess true holiness, we must belong 


Sy Con 1.23 1s AL SEphpive 15,16. “Ps. Ixxxv. 2. 
© Gal) i111, 27. On Ps. Ixscxy. 2: 


106 THE CREED 


to this Church. The Church therefore it is clear, is holy, and 
holy because she is the body of Christ, by whom she is sanctified, 
and in whose blood she is washed. 


“CATHOLIC” 


The third mark of the Church is that she is Catholic; that is, 
universal. And justly is she called Catholic, because, as St. 
Augustine says, she is diffused by the splendor of one faith from 
the rising to the setting sun.** 

Unlike states of human institution, or the sects of heretics, she 
is not confined to any one country or class of men, but embraces 
within the amplitude of her love all mankind, whether barbarians 
or Scythians, slaves or freemen, male or female. Therefore it is 
written: Thou ... hast redeemed us to God, in thy blood, out 
of every tribe, and tongue, and people, and nation, and hast made 
us to our God a kingdom.*® Speaking of the Church, David says: 
Ask of me and I will give thee the Gentiles for thy inheritance, 
and the utmost parts of the earth for thy possession; * and also, 
T will be mindful of Rahab and of Babylon knowing me; *° and 
man is born in her.>+ 4 

Moreover to this Church, built upon the foundation of the 
apostles and prophets,** belong all the faithful who have existed 
from Adam to the present day, or who shall exist, in the pro- 
fession of the true faith, to the end of time; all of whom are 
founded and raised upon the one corner-stone, Christ, who made 
both one, and announced peace to them that are near and to them 
that are far. 

She is also called universal, because all who desire eternal sal- 
vation must cling to and embrace her, like those who entered the 
ark to escape perishing in the flood. This (note of catholicity), 
therefore, is to be taught as a most reliable criterion, by which to 
distinguish the true from a false Church. 


oe we Serm. cexl, ii. 4. Hes v. 9, 10. 
s. li. s. Ixxxvi. 4. 
Tek, Thee, & Dal, wh, Alo} a 


a The Psalmist is proclaiming the glory of the Messianic Kingdom, th 
Church, to which all nations shall be gathered. : Prk 


“I BELIEVE IN THE HOLY CATHOLIC CHURCH” 107 


“APOSTOLIC” 


The true Church is also to be recognized from her origin, 
which can be traced back under the law of grace to the Apostles; 
for her doctrine is the truth not recently given, nor now first 
heard of, but delivered of old by the Apostles, and disseminated 
throughout the entire world. Hence no one can doubt that the 
impious opinions which heresy invents, opposed as they are to the 
doctrines taught by the Church from the days of the Apostles to 
the present time, are very different from the faith of the true 
Church. 

That all, therefore, might know which was the Catholic Church, 
the Fathers, guided by the Spirit of God, added to the Creed the 
word Apostolic. For the Holy Ghost, who presides over the 
Church, governs her by no other ministers than those of Apostolic 
succession. This Spirit, first imparted to the Apostles, has by the 
infinite goodness of God always continued in the Church. And 
just as this one Church cannot err in faith or morals, since it is 
guided by the Holy Ghost; so, on the contrary, all other societies 
arrogating to themselves the name of church, must necessarily, 
because guided by the spirit of the devil, be sunk in the most 
pernicious errors, both doctrinal and moral. 


Figures of the Church 


The figures of the Old Testament have great power to stim- 
ulate the minds of the faithful and to remind them of these most 
beautiful truths. It was for this reason chiefly that the Apostles 
made use of these figures. The pastor, therefore, should not 
overlook so fruitful a source of instruction. 

Among these figures the ark of Noah holds a conspicuous 
place. It was built by the command of God, in order that there 
might be no doubt that it was a symbol of the Church, which God 
has so constituted that all who enter therein through Baptism, 
may be safe from danger of eternal death, while such as are 
outside the Church, like those who were not in the ark, are over- 
whelmed by their own crimes. 

Another figure presents itself in the great city of Jerusalem, 
which, in Scripture, often means the Church. In Jerusalem only 


108 THE CREED 


was it lawful to offer sacrifice to God, and in the Church of God 
only are to be found the true worship and true sacrifice which 
can at all be acceptable to God. 


“I Believe the Holy Catholic Church” 


Finally, with regard to the Church, the pastor should teach how 
to believe the Church can constitute an Article of faith. Although 
reason and the senses are able to ascertain the existence of the 
Church, that is, of a society of men on earth devoted and conse- 
crated to Jesus Christ, and although faith does not seem neces- 
sary in order to understand a truth which even Jews and Turks 
do not doubt; nevertheless it is from the light of faith only, not 
from the deductions of reason, that the mind can grasp those 
mysteries contained in the Church of God which have been partly 
made known above and will again be treated under the Sacrament 
of Holy Orders. 

Since, therefore, this Article, no less than the others, is placed 
above the reach, and defies the strength of the human understand- 
ing, most justly do we confess that we know not from human 
reason, but contemplate with the eyes of faith the origin, offices 
and dignity of the Church. 

This Church was founded not by man, but by the immortal 
God Himself, who built her upon a most solid rock. The Highest 
himself, says the Prophet, hath founded her®* Hence, she is 
called the inheritance of God, the people of God.®* The power 
which she possesses is not from man but from God. 

Since this power, therefore, cannot be of human origin, divine 
faith can alone enable us to understand that the keys of the king- 
dom of heaven are deposited with the Church,® that to her has 
been confided the power of remitting sins,®° of denouncing excom- 
munication,’ and of consecrating the real body of Christ ; ®* and 
that her children have not here a permanent dwelling, but look 
for one above. 

We are, therefore, bound to believe that there is one Holy 
Catholic Church. With regard to the Three Persons of the 
Holy Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, we not 


NPS. Abeer, tg, PADS Seah, Oy * Matt i 
Molva dese, Le). cute Gonmvens: 88 T uke op oe 


“T BELIEVE IN THE HOLY CATHOLIC CHURCH” rog 


only believe them, but also believe in them. But here we make 
use of a different form of expression, professing to believe the 
holy, not im the holy Catholic Church. By this difference of 
expression we distinguish God, the author of all things, from His 
works, and acknowledge that all the exalted benefits bestowed on 
the Church are due to God’s bounty. 


Second Part of this Article: 
“The Communion of Saints” 


The Evangelist St. John, writing to the faithful on the divine 
mysteries, explains as follows why he undertook to instruct them 
in these truths: That you may have fellowship with us, and our 
fellowship may be with the Father, and with his son Jesus Christ.®® 
This fellowship consists in the Communion of Saints, the subject 
of the present Article. 


IMPORTANCE OF THIS TRUTH 


Would that in its exposition pastors imitated the zeal of Paul 
and of the other Apostles. For not only is it a development of 
the preceding Article and a doctrine productive of abundant fruit ; 
it also teaches the use to be made of the mysteries contained in 
the Creed, because the great end to which we should direct all our 
study and knowledge of them is that we may be admitted into 
this most august and blessed society of the Saints, and may 
steadily persevere therein, giving thanks with joy to God the 
Father, who hath made us worthy to be partakers of the lot of the 
saints in light.® . 


Meaning of “The Communion of Saints” 


The faithful, therefore, in the first place are to be informed that 
this part of the Article, is, as it were, a sort of explanation of the 
preceding part which regards the unity, sanctity and catholicity of 
the Church. For the unity of the Spirit, by which she is gov- 
erned, brings it about that whatsoever has been given to the 
Church is held as a common possession by all her members. 


John i. 3. Col wie i2: 


IIo THE CREED 


COMMUNION OF SACRAMENTS 


The fruit of all the Sacraments is common to all the faithful, 
and these Sacraments, particularly Baptism, the door, as it were, 
by which we are admitted into the Church, are so many sacred 
bonds which bind and unite them to Christ. That this com- 
munion of Saints implies a communion of Sacraments, the 
Fathers declare in these words of the Creed: I confess one Bap- 
tism. After Baptism, the Eucharist holds the first place in ref- 
erence to this communion, and after that the other Sacraments ; 
for although this name (communion) is applicable to all the 
Sacraments, inasmuch as they unite us to God, and render us par- 
takers of Him whose grace we receive, yet it belongs in a peculiar 
manner to the Eucharist which actually produces this com- 
munion. 


COMMUNION OF GOOD WORKS 


But there is also another communion in the Church which de- 
mands attention. Every pious and holy action done by one 
belongs to and becomes profitable to all through charity, which 
seeketh not her own. This is proved by the testimony of St. 
Ambrose, who, explaining these words of the Psalmist, J am a 
partaker with all them that fear thee, observes: As we say that 
a limb is partaker of the entire body, so are we partakers with 
all that fear God. Therefore has Christ taught us that form of 
prayer in which we say our, not my bread; and the other Peti- 
tions are equally general, not confined to ourselves alone, but 
directed also to the common interest and the salvation of all. 

This communication of goods is often very aptly illustrated in 
Scripture by a comparison borrowed from the members of the 
human body. In the human body there are many members, but 
though many, they yet constitute but one body, in which each per- 
forms its own, not all the same, functions. All do not enjoy 
equal dignity, or discharge functions alike useful or honorable; 
nor does one propose to itself its own exclusive advantage, but 
that of the entire body.** Besides, they are so well organized 


61 ese see 
1 Cor xii: 5: ee "On Ps. exviii. v. 63. Serm. viii. 
SreCor xliselew ls 


“T BELIEVE IN THE HOLY CATHOLIC CHURCH” 111 


and knit together that if one suffers, the rest likewise suffer on 
account of their affinity and sympathy of nature; and if, on the 
contrary, one enjoys health, the feeling of pleasure is common 
to all. 

The same may be observed in the Church. She is composed of 
various members; that is, of different nations, of Jews, Gentiles, 
freemen and slaves, of rich and poor; when they have been bap- 
tized, they constitute one body with Christ, of which He is the 
Head. To each member of the Church is also assigned his own 
peculiar office. As some are appointed apostles, some teachers, 
but all for the common good; so to some it belongs to govern and 
teach, to others to be subject and to obey.? 


THOSE WHO SHARE IN THIS COMMUNION 


The advantages of so many and such exalted blessings be- 
stowed by Almighty God are enjoyed by those who lead a Chris- 
tian life in charity, and are just and beloved of God. As to the 
dead members; that is, those who are bound in the thraldom of 
sin and estranged from the grace of God, they are not so deprived 
of these advantages as to cease to be members of this body; but 
since they are dead members, they do not share in the spiritual 
fruit which is communicated to the just and pious. However, as 
they are in the Church, they are assisted in recovering lost grace 
and life by those who live by the Spirit ; and they also enjoy those 
benefits which are without doubt denied to those who are entirely 
cut off from the Church. 


COMMUNION IN OTHER BLESSINGS 


Not only the gifts which justify and endear us to God are 
common. Graces gratuitously granted, such as knowledge, 
prophecy, the gifts of tongues and of miracles, and others of the 
same sort, are common also, and are granted even to the wicked, 
not, however, for their own but for the general good, for the 
edification of the Church. Thus, the gift of healing is given not 


aQOn the communion of suffrages in the Church see Summa Theol. 
Suppl. lxxiii. 


112 THE CREED 


for the sake of him who heals, but for the sake of him who is 
healed. 

In fine, every true Christian possesses nothing which he should 
not consider common to all others with himself, and should there- 
fore be prepared promptly to relieve an indigent fellow-creaiure. 
For he that is blessed with worldly goods, and sees his brother in 
want, and will not assist him, is plainly convicted of not having 
the love of God within him.** 

Those, therefore, who belong to this holy communion, it is 
manifest, do now enjoy a certain degree of happiness and can 
truly say: How lovely are thy tabernacles, O Lord of hosts! 
my soul longeth and fainteth for the courts of the Lord... .. 
Blessed are they who dwell in thy house, O Lord.® 


SS De Ohnetiteer7. mlzCe bore sii es Sk 
4 On the “graces gratuitously given” see Summa Theol. 2a. 22. clxxviii. 


ARTICLE X 
““THE FORGIVENESS OF SINS” 


IMPORTANCE OF THIS ARTICLE 


The enumeration of this among the other Articles of the Creed 
is alone sufficient to satisfy us that it conveys a truth, which is 
not only in itself a divine mystery, but also a mystery very neces- 
sary to salvation. We have already said that, without a firm 
belief of all the Articles of the Creed, Christian piety is wholly 
unattainable. However, should that which ought to be clear in 
itself seem to require the support of some authority, the declara- 
tion of our Lord will suffice. A short time previous to His 
Ascension into heaven, when opening the understanding of His 
disciples that they might understand the Scriptures, He bore tes- 
timony to this Article of the Creed, in these words: It behooved 
Christ to suffer, and to rise again from the dead the third day, 
and that penance and remission of sins should be preached, in his 
name, unto all nations, beginning at Jerusalem.* 

Let the pastor but weigh well these words, and he will readily 
perceive that the Lord has placed him under a most sacred obliga- 
tion, not only of making known to the faithful whatever regards 
religion in general, but also of explaining with particular care 
this Article of the Creed. 


The Church Has the Power of Forgiving Sins 


On this point of doctrine, then, it is the duty of the pastor to 
teach that, not only is forgiveness of sins to be found in the 
Catholic Church, as Isaias had foretold in these words: The 
people that dwell therein shall have their iniquity taken away 
from them:? but also that in her resides the power of forgiving 


*Luke xxiv. 46, 47. *Isaias xxxili. 24. 
113 


I14 THE CREED 


sins; and furthermore that we are bound to believe that this 
power, if exercised duly, and according to the laws prescribed 
by our Lord, is such as truly to pardon and remit sins. 


Extent of this Power: 


ALL SINS THAT PRECEDE BAPTISM 


When we first make a profession of faith and are cleansed in 
holy Baptism, we receive this pardon entire and unqualified; so 
that no sin, original or actual, of commission or omission, re- 
mains to be expiated, no punishment to be endured. The grace 
of Baptism, however, does not give exemption from all the in- 
firmities of nature. On the contrary, contending, as each of us 
has to contend, against the motions of concupiscence, which ever 
tempts us to the commission of sin, there is scarcely one to be 
found among us, who opposes so vigorous a resistance to its 
assaults, or who guards his salvation so vigilantly, as to escape all 
wounds.* 


ALL SINS COMMITTED AFTER BAPTISM 


It being necessary, therefore, that a power of forgiving sins, 
distinct from that of Baptism, should exist in the Church, to her 
were entrusted the keys of the kingdom of heaven, by which each 
one, if penitent, may obtain the remission of his sins, even though 
he were a sinner to the last day of his life. This truth is 
vouched for by the most unquestionable authority of the Sacred 
Scriptures. In St. Matthew the Lord says to Peter: J will give 
to thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven; and whatsoever thou 
shalt bind upon earth, shall be bound also in heaven; and what- 
soever thou shalt loose on earth, shall be loosed also in heaven; * 
and again: Whatsoever you shall bind upon earth, shall be bound 
also in heaven; and whatsoever you shall loose on earth, shall be 
loosed also in heaven.* Further, the testimony of St. John assures 
us that the Lord, breathing on the Apostles, said: Receive ye the 


* Matt. xvi. I9. * Matt. xviii. 18. 
4 On the effects of Baptism see Summa Theol. 3a. Ixix. 


“THE FORGIVENESS OF SINS” IIs 


Holy Ghost, whose sins you shall forgive they are forgiven them; 
and whose sins you shall retain, they are retained.®4 


Limitation of this Power: 


IT IS NOT LIMITED AS TO SINS, PERSONS, OR TIME 


Nor is the exercise of this power restricted to particular sins. 
No crime, however heinous, can be committed or even conceived 
which the Church has not power to forgive, just as there is no 
- sinner, however abandoned, however depraved, who should not 
confidently hope for pardon, provided he sincerely repent of his 
past transgressions. 

Furthermore, the exercise of this power is not restricted to 
particular times. Whenever the sinner turns from his evil ways 
he is not to be rejected, as we learn from the reply of our Saviour 
to the Prince of the Apostles. When St. Peter asked how often 
we should pardon an offending brother, whether seven times, 
Not only seven times, said the Redeemer, but till seventy times 
seven.® 


IT IS LIMITED AS TO ITS MINISTERS AND EXERCISE 


But if we look to its ministers, or to the manner in which it is 
to be exercised, the extent of this divine power will not appear 
so great; for our Lord gave not the power of so sacred a min- 
istry to all, but to Bishops and priests only. The same must be 
said regarding the manner in which this power is to be exercised ; 
for sins can be forgiven only through the Sacraments, when duly 
administered. The Church has received no power otherwise to 
remit sin. Hence it follows that in the forgiveness of sins both 
priests and Sacraments are, so to speak, the instruments which 
Christ our Lord, the author and giver of salvation, makes use of, 
to accomplish in us the pardon of sin and the grace of justifica- 
tion. 


5 John xx. 22, 23. * Matt. xviii. 21, 22. 
aQOn the effects of the Sacrament of Penance see Summa Theol. 3a. 
Ixxxvi. 


116 THE CREED 


Greatness of this Power 


To raise the admiration of the faithful for this heavenly gift, 
bestowed on the Church by God’s singular mercy towards us, and 
to make them approach its use with the more lively sentiments 
of devotion the pastor should endeavor to point out the dignity 
and the extent of the grace which it imparts. If there be any one 
means better calculated than another to accomplish this end, it 
is carefully to show how great must be the efficacy of that which 
absolves from sin and restores the unjust to a state of justifica- 
tion. 


SIN CAN BE FORGIVEN ONLY BY THE POWER OF GOD 


This is manifestly an effect of the infinite power of God, of 
that same power which we believe to have been necessary to raise 
the dead to life and to summon creation into existence. But if 
it be true, as the authority of St. Augustine assures us it is,’ that 
to recall a sinner from the state of sin to that of righteousness is 
even a greater work than to create the heavens and the earth 
from nothing, though their creation can be no other than the 
effect of infinite power, it follows that we have still stronger 
reason to consider the remission of sins as an effect proceeding 
from the exercise of this same infinite power. 

With great truth, therefore, have the ancient Fathers declared 
that God alone can forgive sins, and that to His infinite goodness 
and power alone is so wonderful a work to be referred. J am 
he, says the Lord Himself, by the mouth of His Prophet, J am 
he, who blotteth out your iniquities.® 

The remission of sins seems to bear an exact analogy to the 
cancelling of a pecuniary debt. None but the creditor can for- 
give a pecuniary debt. Hence, since by sin we contract a debt 
to God alone—wherefore we daily pray: forgive us our debts °— 
sin, it is clear, can be forgiven by Him alone, and by none else. 


*On John, tr. Ixxii. 3. *Isaias xiii. 25. °* Matt. vi. 1x, 12. 


“THE FORGIVENESS OF SINS” 117 


THIS POWER COMMUNICATED TO NONE BEFORE CHRIST 


This wonderful and divine power was never communicated 
to creatures, until God became man. Christ our Saviour, 
although true God, was the first one who, as man, received this 
high prerogative from His heavenly Father. That you may know 
that the son of man hath power on earth to forgive sins (then 
said he to the man sick of the palsy), rise, take up thy bed, and 
go into thy house.*° As, therefore, He became man, in order 
to bestow on man this forgiveness of sins, He communicated this 
power to Bishops and priests in the Church, previous to His 
Ascension into heaven, where He sits forever at the right hand 
of God. Christ, however, as we have already said, remits sin by 
virtue of His own authority; all others, by virtue of His authority 
delegated to them as His ministers. 

If, therefore, whatever is the effect of infinite power claims 
our highest admiration and reverence, we must readily perceive 
that this gift, bestowed on the Church by the bounteous hand of 
Christ our Lord, is one of inestimable value. 


SIN REMITTED THROUGH THE BLOOD OF CHRIST 


The manner too, in which God, in the fulness of His paternal 
clemency resolved to cancel the sins of the world must power- 
fully move the faithful to contemplate the greatness of this bless- 
ing. It was His will that our offences should be expiated by 
the blood of His Only-begotten Son; that His Son should volun- 
tarily assume the imputability of our sins, and suffer a most cruel 
death, the just for the unjust, the innocent for the guilty.” 

When, therefore, we reflect that we were not redeemed with 
corruptible things, as gold or silver, but with the precious blood 
of Christ, as of a lamb unspotted and undefiled,” we are nat- 
urally led to conclude that we could have received no gift more 
salutary than this power of forgiving sins, which proclaims the 
ineffable Providence of God and the excess of His love towards 
us. This reflection must produce in all the most abundant spirit- 


ual fruit. 


Matt. ix. 6; Mark ii. ite vy a Pet. iii. 18. 
1 Pet. 1. 18, 103 


118 THE CREED 


THE GREAT EVIL FROM WHICH FORGIVENESS DELIVERS MAN 


For whoever offends God, even by one mortal sin, instantly 
forfeits whatever merits he may have previously acquired through 
the sufferings and death of Christ, and is entirely shut out from 
the gate of heaven which, when already closed, was thrown open 
to all by the Redeemer’s Passion. When we reflect on this, the 
thought of our misery must fill us with deep anxiety. But if we 
turn our attention to this admirable power with which God has 
invested His Church; and, in the firm belief of this Article, feel 
convinced that to every sinner is offered the means of recovering, 
with the assistance of divine grace, his former dignity, we must 
exult with exceeding joy and gladness, and must offer immortal 
thanks to God. 

If, when we are seriously ill, the medicines prepared for us 
by the art and industry of the physician are wont to be welcome 
and agreeable to us, how much more welcome and agreeable 
should those remedies prove which the wisdom of God has 
established to heal our souls and restore us to the life of grace, 
especially since they bring with them, not, indeed, uncertain hope 
of recovery, like the medicines that are applied to the body, but 
assured health to such as desire to be cured! 4 


Exhortation: 


THIS REMEDY TO BE USED 


The faithful, therefore, having formed a just conception of the 
dignity of so excellent and exalted a blessing, should be exhorted 
to profit by it to the best of their ability. For he who makes 
no use of what is really useful and necessary must be supposed 
to despise it; particularly since, in communicating to the Church 
the power of forgiving sin, the Lord did so with the view that 
all should have recourse to this healing remedy. As without Bap- 
tism no one can be cleansed, so in order to recover the grace of 
Baptism, forfeited by actual mortal guilt, recourse must be had 


to another means of expiation,—namely, the Sacrament of Pen- 
ance. 


aOn the justification of the sinner see Summa Theol. ta. cxiii. 


“THE FORGIVENESS OF SINS” 119 


ABUSE TO BE GUARDED AGAINST 


But here the faithful are to be admonished to guard against 
the danger of becoming more prone to sin, or slow to repentance, 
from a presumption that they can have recourse to this power of 
forgiving sins which is so complete and, as we saw, unrestricted 
as to time. For, as such a propensity to sin would manifestly 
convict them of acting injuriously and contumaciously to this 
divine power, and would therefore render them unworthy of the 
divine mercy; so this slowness to repentance gives great reason 
to fear that, overtaken by death, they may in vain confess their 
belief in the remission of sins, which by their tardiness and pro- 
crastination they deservedly forfeited. 


ARTICLE. XI 
“Tre RESURRECTION OF THE BoDY” 


IMPORTANCE OF THIS ARTICLE 


That this Article supplies a convincing proof of the truth of 
our faith appears chiefly from the fact that not only is it proposed 
- in the Sacred Scriptures to the belief of the faithful, but is also 
confirmed by numerous arguments. This we scarcely find to be 
the case with regard to the other Articles, which justifies the 
inference that on this doctrine, as on its most solid basis, rests our 
hope of salvation; for according to the reasoning of the Apostle, 
If there be no resurrection of the dead, then Christ is not risen 
again; and if Christ be not risen again, then is our preaching vain, 
and your faith is also vain.* 

The diligence and zeal, therefore, of the pastor in the explana- 
tion of this dogma should not be less than the labor which the 
impiety of many has expended in efforts to overthrow it. That 
eminently important advantages flow to the faithful from the 
knowledge of this Article will be shown further on. 


“The Resurrection of the Body” 


That in this Article the resurrection of mankind is called the 
resurrection of the body, is a circumstance which deserves 
special attention. It was not, indeed, so named without a reason; 
for the Apostles intended thus to convey a necessary truth, the 
immortality of the soul. Lest anyone, despite the fact that many 
passages of “Scripture plainly teach that the soul is immortal, 
might imagine that it dies with the body, and that both are to be 


“Ti NG oyey Say BEE VEL 


_, 2 On the immortality of the soul see Summa Theol. ra. Ixxv. 6; Wis. 
W523); 11. Ay Matin econ ciao cs 


I20 


“THE RESURRECTION OF THE BODY” 121 


restored to life, the Creed speaks only of the resurrection of the 
body. 

Although in Sacred Scripture the word flesh often signifies 
the whole man, as in Isaias, All flesh is grass,? and in St. John, 
The Word was made flesh; * yet in this place it is used to express 
the body only, thus giving us to understand that of the two con- 
stituent parts of man, soul and body, one only, that is, the body, 
is corrupted and returns to its original dust, while the soul 
remains incorrupt and immortal. As then, a man cannot be said 
to return to life unless he has previously died, so the soul could 
not with propriety be said to rise again. 

The word body is also mentioned, in order to confute the heresy 
of Hymeneus and Philetus, who, during the lifetime of the 
Apostle, asserted that whenever the Scriptures speak of the resur- 
rection, they are to be understood to mean not the resurrection of 
the body, but that of the soul, by which it rises from the death 
of sin to the life of grace. The words of this Article, therefore, 
as is clear, exclude that error, and establish a real resurrection 
of the body. 


The Fact of the Resurrection: 


EXAMPLES AND PROOFS DERIVED FROM SCRIPTURE 


It will be the duty of the pastor to illustrate this truth by 
examples taken from the Old and New Testaments, and from 
all ecclesiastical history. In the Old Testament, some were 
restored to life by Elias*® and Eliseus;® and, besides those who 
were raised to life by our Lord,’ many were raised by the 
holy Apostles and by many others.* These many resurrections 
confirm the doctrine taught by this Article; for believing that 
many were recalled from death to life, we are also naturally led 
to believe the general resurrection of all. In fact the principal 
fruit which we should derive from these miracles is to yield to 
this Article our most unhesitating belief. 

To pastors ordinarily conversant with the Sacred Volumes 
many Scripture proofs of this Article will at once present them- 

?TIsaias xl. 6. *John i. 14. $2Miim. ii 17: 


EaUkungsexvile2l, 22. *4 Kings iv. 34. ; 
™ Matt. ix. 25; Luke vii. 14, 15; John xi. 43, 44. *Acts ix. 40; xx. 19. 


122 THEY CREED 


selves. In the Old Testament the most conspicuous are those 
afforded by Job, when he says that in his flesh he shall see his 
God, and by Daniel when, speaking of those who sleep in the 
dust of the earth, he says, some shall awake to eternal life, others 
to eternal reproach.® In the New Testament (the principal 
passages are) those of St. Matthew, which record the disputa- 
tion our Lord held with the Sadducees,?! and those in which the 
Evangelists speak concerning the Last Judgment.1? To these 
we may also add the accurate reasoning of the Apostle on 
the subject in his Epistles to the Corinthians *® and Thessalo- 
nians.74 


ANALOGIES FROM NATURE 


But although the resurrection is most certainly established by 
faith, it will, notwithstanding, be of material advantage to show 
from analogy and reason that what faith proposes is not at vari- 
ance with nature or human reason. 

To one asking how the dead should rise again, the Apostle 
answers: Foolish man! that which thou sowest is not quickened, 
except it die first; and that which thou sowest, thou sowest not 
the body that shall be, but bare grain, as of wheat, or of some of 
the rest; but God giveth it a body as he will; and a little after, 
It is sown in corruption, it shall rise in incorruption.® 

St. Gregory calls our attention to many other arguments of 
analogy tending to the same effect. The sun, he says, is every day 
withdrawn from our eyes, as it were, by dying, and is again 
recalled, as it were, by rising again; trees lose, and again, as it 
were, by a resurrection, resume their verdure; seeds die by putre- 
faction, and rise again by germination.?® 


ARGUMENTS DRAWN FROM REASON 


The reasons also adduced by ecclesiastical writers seem well 
calculated to establish this truth. In the first place, as the soul 


2 \oloy Stabe, Pic), SID EN, SStl, 7, *% Matt. xxii. 23. 
saMatte xxvens te Mae Cores Sie, 1: “1 Thess. iv. 13. 
arte Gone xvel GOme aA ** Moral. xiv. 55. 


aOn the congruity of the resurrection see Summa Theol., Suppl. 
Issey: 


“THE RESURRECTION OF THE BODY” 123 


is immortal, and has, as part of man, a natural propensity to be 
united to the body, its perpetual separation from it must be con- 
sidered as unnatural. But as that which is contrary to nature 
and in a state of violence, cannot be permanent, it appears fitting 
that the soul should be reunited to the body, and consequently that 
the body should rise again. This argument our Saviour Himself 
employed, when in His disputation with the Sadducees He de- 
duced the resurrection of the body from the immortality of the 
soul.*? 

In the next place, as an all-just God holds out punishments to 
the wicked and rewards to the good, and as very many of the 
former depart this life unpunished for their crimes and many 
of the latter unrewarded for their virtues, the soul should be 
reunited to the body, in order, as the partner of her crimes, or 
the companion of her virtues, to become a sharer in her punish- 
ments or rewards. This argument has been admirably treated by 
St. Chrysostom in his homily to the people of Antioch.1® 

To this effect also, the Apostle, speaking of the resurrection, 
says: If in this life only, we have hope in Christ, we are of all 
men the most miserable.° These words of St. Paul cannot be 
supposed to refer to the misery of the soul; for since the soul is 
immortal, it is capable of enjoying happiness in a future life, 
even though the body did not rise again. His words, then, must 
refer to the whole man; for, unless the body receive the due 
rewards of its labors, those who, like the Apostles, endured so 
many afflictions and calamities in this life, would necessarily be 
the most miserable of men. On this subject the Apostle is much 
more explicit in his Epistle to the Thessalonians: We glory in 
the churches of God, for your patience and faith, in all your per- 
secutions and tribulations which you endure—for an example of 
the just judgment of God, that you may be counted worthy of the 
kingdom of God, for which also you suffer; seeing it is a just 
thing with God to repay tribulation to them that trouble you; 
and to you who are troubled, rest with us when the Lord Jesus 
shall be revealed from heaven with the angels of his power, in a 
flame of fire, yielding vengeance to them who know not God, and 
who obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.” 


™ Matt. xxii. 23. “Hom. i. 9. wT Coraxv, 19. 2 Thess: 4: 


ee THE CREED 


Again, while the soul is separated from the body, man cannot 
enjoy that full happiness which is replete with every good. For 
as a part separated from the whole is imperfect, the soul sep- 
arated from the body must be imperfect. Therefore, that nothing 
may be wanting to fill up the measure of its happiness, the resur- 
rection of the body is necessary. 

By these, and similar arguments, the pastor will be able to 
instruct the faithful in this Article.@ 


All Shall Rise 


He should also carefully explain from the Apostle who are to 
be raised to life. Writing to the Corinthians, he (St. Paul) says: 
As in Adam all die, so also in Christ all shall be made alive.?* 
Good and bad then, without distinction, shall all rise from the 
dead, although the condition of all will not be the same. Those 
who have done good, shall rise to the resurrection of life; and 
those who have done evil to the resurrection of judgment.*? 

When we say all we mean those who will have died before 
the day of judgment, as well as those who will then die.» That the 
Church acquiesces in the opinion that all, without distinction, shall 
die, and that this opinion is more consonant with truth, is the 
teaching of St. Jerome ?* and of St. Augustine.*4 

Nor does the Apostle in his Epistle to the Thessalonians dis- 
sent from this doctrine, when he says: The dead who are in 
Christ shall rise first, then we who are alive, who are left, shall 
be taken up together with them in the clouds to meet Christ, into 
the air.> St. Ambrose explaining these words says: In that very 
taking up, death shall take place, as it were, in a deep sleep, and 
the soul, having gone forth from the body, shall instantly return. 
For those who are alive shall die when they are taken up that, 
coming to the Lord, they may receive their souls from His pres- 
ence; because in His presence they cannot be dead.2® This 


at Cor. xv. 22. 2 John y. 20. 
: Epist. cxix. *De Civit. Dei, lib. xx. c. 20. 
I Thess. iv. 15, 16. * Pseudo-Amb. on 1 Thess. iv. 16. 


a On the resurrection of the body see Summa Theol. Suppl. Ixxv. 1. 
bOn this subject see Callan, “The Epistles of St. Pauly voly Lapp. 
420, 421. 


“THE RESURRECTION OF THE BODY” 125 


opinion is supported by the authority of St. Augustine in his book 
On the City of God.?" 4 


The Body Shall Rise Substantially the Same 


But as it is of vital importance to be fully convinced that the 
identical body, which belongs to each one of us during life, shall, 
though corrupt and dissolved into its original dust, be raised up 
again to life, this too is a subject which demands accurate ex- 
planation on the part of the pastor. 

It is a truth conveyed by the Apostle when he says: This cor- 
ruptible must put on incorruption,®® evidently designating by th> 
word this, his own body. It is also clearly expressed in the 
prophecy of Job: In my flesh I shall see my God, whom I myself 
shall see, and mine eyes behold, and not another.?® 

Further, this same truth is inferred from the very definition of 
resurrection ; for resurrection, as Damascene defines it, is a return 
to the state from which one has fallen.*° 

Finally, if we bear in mind the arguments by which we have 
just established a future resurrection, every doubt on the subject 
must at once disappear. 

We have said that the body is to rise again, that every one may 
receive the proper things of the body, according as he hath done, 
whether it be good or evil.*+ Man is, therefore, to rise again in 
the same body with which he served God, or was a slave to the 
devil; that in the same body he may experience rewards and a 
crown of victory, or endure the severest punishments and tor- 
ments. 


RESTORATION OF ALL THAT PERTAINS TO THE NATURE AND ADORN- 
MENT OF THE BODY 


Not only will the body rise, but whatever belongs to the reality 
of its nature, and adorns and ornaments man will be restored. 
For this we have the admirable words of St. Augustine: There 


eu ibe cx C20. 
aT COmex ® Job xix. 26. 


V. $3: ae 3 
” De Fide Orthod., lib. iv. 27. 2aCota yal: 
aOn the universality of the resurrection see Summa Theol., Suppl. 
Ixxv. 2. 


126 40s, (iegd)3ID) 


shall then be no deformity of body; if some have been overbur- 
dened with flesh, they shall not resume its entire weight. All that 
exceeds the proper proportion shall be deemed superfluous. On 
the other hand, should the body be wasted by disease or old age, 
or be emaciated from any other cause, it shall be repaired by the 
divine power of Christ, who will not only restore the body unto 
us, but will repair whatever it shall have lost through the 
wretchedness of this life? In another place he says: Man shall 
not resume his former hair, but shall be adorned with such as 
will become him, according to the words: “The very hairs of your 
head are all numbered.” ** God will restore them according to 
His wisdom.** 


RESTORATION *OF ALL THAT PERTAINS TO THE INTEGRITY OF THE 
BODY 


But the members especially, because they belong to the integrity 
of human nature, shall all be restored at once. The blind from 
nature or disease, the lame, the maimed and the paralyzed in any 
of their members shall rise again with entire and perfect bodies. 
Otherwise the desires of the soul, which so strongly incline it 
to a union with the body, would be far from satisfied; but we 
are convinced that in the resurrection these desires will be fully 
realized. 

Besides, the resurrection, like the creation, is clearly to be 
numbered among the principal works of God. As, therefore, at 
the creation all things came perfect from the hand of God, we 
must admit that it will be the same in the resurrection. 

These observations are not to be restricted to the bodies of the 
martyrs, of whom St. Augustine says: As the mutilation which 
they suffered would prove a deformity, they shall rise with all 
their members; otherwise those who were beheaded would rise 
without a head. The scars, however, which they received shall 
remain, shining like the wounds of Christ, with a brilliancy far 
more resplendent than that of gold and of precious stones? 


™De Civit. Dei, lib. xxii. c. 19-21; Ench. c. 80. The substance, not 
the words of this passage are found in St. Aug. 

* Luke xii. 7. SAU oe dec 

* De Civ. Dei, lib. xxii. ¢. 20. 


“THE RESURRECTION OF THE BODY” 1297 


The wicked, too, shall rise with all their members, even with 
those lost through their own fault. The greater the number of 
members which they shall have, the greater will be their torments; 
and therefore this restoration of members will serve to increase 
not their happiness but their sorrow and misery; for merit or 
demerit is ascribed not to the members, but to the person to whose 
body they are united. To those, therefore, who shall have done 
penance, they shall be restored as sources of reward; and to those 
who shall have contemned it, as instruments of punishment. 

If the pastor gives attentive consideration to these things, he 
can never lack words or ideas to move the hearts of the faithful, 
and enkindle in them the flame of piety; so that having before 
their minds the troubles and calamities of this life, they may look 
forward with eager expectations to that blessed glory of the 
resurrection which awaits the just.? 


The Condition of the Risen Body Shall be Different 


It now remains for the faithful to understand how the body, 
when raised from the dead, although substantially the same body 
that had been dead, shall be vastly different and changed in its 
condition. 


IMMORTALITY 


To omit other points, the chief difference between the state of 
all bodies when risen from the dead and what they had previously 
been is that before the resurrection they were subject to dissolu- 
tion, but when reanimated they shall all, without distinction of 
good and bad, be invested with immortality.> 

This admirable restoration of nature, as the Scriptures testify, 
is the result of the glorious victory of Christ over death. For it 
is written: He shall cast death down headlong for ever,** and, 
O death! I will be thy death.’ Explaining these words the 
Apostle says: And the enemy death shall be destroyed last ; * 
and St. John also says: Death shall be no more.* 


SHIGA, SSigig cok 3 seer ciiat4) = 2° Corsxvy, 26.) °* Apoc: xxi.4. 
aOn the identity and integrity of the risen body see Summa Theol. 


Suppl. Ixxix; Ixxx. 
aon the bodies of the damned see Summa Theol. Suppl. Ixxxvi. 


128 THE CREED 


It was most fitting that the sin of Adam should be far exceeded 
by the merit of Christ the Lord, who overthrew the empire of 
death. It was also in keeping with divine justice, that the good 
should enjoy endless felicity, while the wicked, condemned to 
everlasting torments, shall seek death, and shall not find it, shall 
desire to die, and death shall fly from them.*° Immortality, there- 
fore, will be common to the good and to the bad. 


THE QUALITIES OF A GLORIFIED BODY 


In addition to this, the bodies of the risen Saints will be dis- 
tinguished by certain transcendent endowments, which will 
ennoble them far beyond their former condition. Among these 
endowments four are specially mentioned by the Fathers, which 
they infer from the doctrine of St. Paul, and which are called 
gifts. 


IMPASSIBILITY 


The first endowment or gift is impassibility, which shall 
place them beyond the reach of suffering anything disagreeable 
or of being affected by pain or inconvenience of any sort. 
Neither the piercing severity of cold, nor the glowing intensity 
of heat, nor the impetuosity of waters can hurt them. Jt is sown, 
says the Apostle, in corruption, it shall rise in incorruption.* This 
quality the Schoolmen call impassibility, not incorruption, in order 
to distinguish it as a property peculiar to a glorified body. The 
bodies of the damned, though incorruptible, will not be impas- 
sible; they will be capable of experiencing heat and cold and of 
suffering various afflictions. 


BRIGHTNESS 


The next quality is brightness, by which the bodies of the 
Saints shall shine like the sun, according to the words of our Lord 
recorded in the Gospel of St. Matthew: The just shall shine as 
the sun, in the kingdom of their Father? To remove the possi- 
bility of doubt on the subject, He exemplifies this in His Trans- 


* Apoc. ix. 6, “ry Coruxy.42 © Matt. xiii. 43. 


“THE RESURRECTION OF THE BODY” 129 


figuration.** This quality the Apostle sometimes calls glory, 
sometimes brightness: He will reform the body of our lowness, 
made like to the body of his glory; ** and again, It is sown in dis- 
honour, it shall rise in glory.** Of this glory the Israelites beheld 
some image in the desert, when the face of Moses, after he had 
enjoyed the presence and conversation of God, shone with such 
lustre that they could not look on it.** 

This brightness is a sort of radiance reflected on the body from 
the supreme happiness of the soul. It is a participation in that 
bliss which the soul enjoys, just as the soul itself is rendered 
happy by a participation in the happiness of God. 

Unlike the gift of impassibility, this quality is not common to 
all in the same degree. All the bodies of the Saints will be 
equally impassible ; but the brightness of all will not be the same, 
for, according to the Apostle, One is the glory of the sun, another 
the glory of the moon, and another the glory of the stars, for star 
differeth from star in glory: so also 1s the resurrection of the 
dead.** 


AGILITY 


To the preceding quality is united that which is called agility, 
by which the body will be freed from the heaviness that now 
presses it down, and will take on a capability of moving with the 
utmost ease and swiftness, wherever the soul pleases, as St. Au- 
gustine teaches in his book On the City of God,** and St. Jerome 
On Isaias.*2 Hence these words of the Apostle: Jt is sown in 
weakness, it shall rise in power.°° 


SUBTILITY 


Another quality is that of subtility, which subjects the body 
to the dominion of the soul, so that the body shail be subject to 
the soul and ever ready to follow her desires. This quality we 
learn from these words of the Apostle: Jt is sown a natural body, 
it shall rise a spiritual body.** 


COM eNas. SAigbe, AB Sein 20. ete COMEXV 443: 
Exod. xxxiv. 29; 2 Cor. iii. 7. “1 Cor. xv. 41, 42. 

*De Civ. Dei, lib. xiii, c. 18, 20. “In Isaiam, cap. 40. 

porn COTE XVa 43: eT Corey. 44: 


130 THE CREED 


These are the principal points which should be dwelt on in the 
exposition of this Article.? 


Advantages of Deep Meditation on this Article 


But in order that the faithful may appreciate the fruit they 
derive from a knowledge of so many and such exalted mysteries, 
it is necessary, first of all, to point out that to God, who has 
hidden these things from the wise and made them known to little 
ones, we owe a debt of boundless gratitude. How many men, 
eminent for wisdom or endowed with singular learning, who ever 
remained blind to this most certain truth! The fact, then, that 
He has made known to us these truths, although we could never 
have aspired to such knowledge, obliges us to pour forth our 
gratitude in unceasing praises of His supreme goodness and 
clemency. 

Another important advantage to be derived from reflection on 
this Article is that in it we shall find consolation both for our- 
selves and others when we mourn the death of those who were 
endeared to us by relationship or friendship. Such was the con- 
solation which the Apostle himself gave the Thessalonians when 
writing to them concerning those who are asleep.®? 

Again, in all our afflictions and calamities the thought of a 
future resurrection must bring the greatest relief to the troubled 
heart, as we learn from the example of holy Job, who supported 
his afflicted and sorrowing soul by this one hope that the day 
would come when, in the resurrection, he would behold the Lord 
his God.58 

The same thought must also prove a powerful incentive to the 
faithful to use every exertion to lead lives of rectitude and in- 
tegrity, unsullied by the defilement of sin. For if they reflect that 
those boundless riches which will follow after the resurrection 
are now offered to them as rewards, they will be easily attracted 
to the pursuit of virtue and piety. 


On the other hand, nothing will have greater effect in subduing 


ie Dhessuivels: ® Job txix.12§. 


@On the endowments of the glorified body see Summa Theol. Suppl. 
Ixxxii-lxxxy. 


“THE RESURRECTION OF THE BODY” 131 


the passions and withdrawing souls from sin, than frequently to 
remind the sinner of the miseries and torments with which the 
reprobate will be visited, who on the last day will come forth unto 
the resurrection of judqment.>* 


™ John v. 20. 


ARTIC exch 
“LIFE EVERLASTING” 


IMPORTANCE OF THIS ARTICLE 


The holy Apostles, our guides, thought fit to conclude the 
Creed, which is the summary of our faith, with the Article on 
eternal life: first, because after the resurrection of the body the 
only object of the Christian’s hope is the reward of everlasting 
life; and secondly, in order that perfect happiness, embracing as 
it does the fulness of all good, may be ever present to our minds 
and absorb all our thoughts and affections. 

In his instructions to the faithful the pastor, therefore, should 
unceasingly endeavor to light up in their souls an ardent desire 
of the promised rewards of eternal life, so that whatever difficult 
duties he may inculcate as a part of the Christian’s life, the faith- 
ful may look upon as light, or even agreeable, and may yield a 
more willing and cheerful obedience to God. 


“Life Everlasting” 


As many mysteries lie concealed under the words which are 
here used to declare the happiness reserved for us, they are to 
be explained in such a manner as to make them intelligible 
to all, as far as each one’s capacity will allow. 

The faithful, therefore, are to be informed that the words, life 
everlasting, signify not only continuance of existence, which 
even the demons and the wicked possess, but also that perpetuity 
of happiness which is to satisfy the desires of the blessed. In 
this sense they were understood by the lawyer mentioned in the 
Gospel when he asked the Lord our Saviour: What shall I do 
to possess everlasting life?* as if he had said, What shall I do 

*Matt. xix. 16; Mark x. 17; Luke xviii. 18. 

132 


“LIFE EVERLASTING” 133 


in order to arrive at the enjoyment of perfect happiness? In 
this sense these words are understood in the Sacred Scriptures, 
as is clear from many passages.? 


“EVERLASTING” 


The supreme happiness of the blessed is called by this name 
(life everlasting) principally to exclude the notion that it con- 
sists in corporeal and transitory things, which cannot be ever- 
lasting. The word blessedness is insufficient to express the idea, 
particularly as there have not been wanting men who, puffed 
up by the teachings of a vain philosophy, would place the supreme 
good in sensible things. But these grow old and perish, while 
supreme happiness is to be terminated by no lapse of time. Nay 
more, so far is the enjoyment of the goods of this life from 
conferring real happiness that, on the contrary, he who is cap- 
tivated by a love of the world is farthest removed from true 
happiness; for it is written: Love not the world, nor the things 
which are in the world. If any man love the world, the charity 
of the Father is not in him,’ and a little farther on we read: 
The world passeth away, and the concupiscence thereof.*? 

The pastor, therefore, should be careful to impress these truths 
on the minds of the faithful, that they may learn to despise 
earthly things, and to know that in this world, in which we are 
not citizens but sojourners,® happiness is not to be found. Yet 
even here below we may be said with truth to be happy in hope, 
if denying ungodliness and worldly desires, we . . . live soberly, 
and justly, and godly in this world, looking for the blessed hope 
and coming of the glory of the great God and our Saviour Jesus 
Christ.6 Very many who seemed to themselves wise,” not under- 
standing these things, and imagining that happiness was to be 
sought in this life, became fools and the victims of the most 
deplorable calamities. 

These words, life everlasting, also teach us that, contrary 
to the false notions of some, happiness once attained can never 


? Matt. xxv. 46; John iii. 15; Rom. vi. 22, 

*y John ii. 15. ‘ Sd Oht tise 17. ; 

Si IDE, thls ahd, CADE, abt ey 6%. ™Rom. i. 22. 
aQOn this subject see Summa Theol. Ia. 22. ii. 


134 THE CREED 


be lost. Happiness is an accumulation of all good without 
admixture of evil, which, as it fills up the measure of man’s de- 
sires, must be eternal. He who is blessed with happiness must 
earnestly desire the continued enjoyment of those goods which he 
has obtained. Hence, unless its possession be permanent and cer- 
tain, he is necessarily a prey to the most tormenting apprehen- 
sion. 


“LIFE” 


The intensity of the happiness which the just enjoy in their 
celestial country, and its utter incomprehensibility to all but 
themselves alone, are sufficiently conveyed by the very words 
blessed life. For when in order to express any idea we make 
use of a word common to many things, it is clear that we do so 
because we have no exact term by which to express it fully. 
Since, therefore, to express happiness, words are adopted which 
are not more applicable to the blessed than to all who are to live 
for ever, this proves to us that the idea presents to the mind 
something too great, too exalted, to be expressed fully by a 
proper term. True, the happiness of heaven is expressed in 
Scripture by a variety of other words, such as the kingdom of 
God, of Christ, of heaven, paradise, the holy city, the new Jeru- 
salem, my Father's house;® yet it is clear that none of these 
appellations is sufficient to convey an adequate idea of its great- 
ness. 

The pastor, therefore, should not neglect the opportunity 
which this Article affords of inviting the faithful to the practice 
of piety, of justice and of all the other Christian duties, by hold- 
ing out to them such ample rewards as are announced in the 
words life everlasting. Among the blessings which we in- 
stinctively desire life is certainly esteemed one of the greatest. 
Now it is chiefly by this blessing that we describe the happiness 
(of the just) when we say life everlasting. If, then, there 
is nothing more loved, nothing dearer or sweeter, than this short 
and calamitous life, which is subject to so many and such various 

"Mark ix. 46; Acts xiv. 21; 1 Cor. vi. 9; Eph. v. 5; 2 Pet. i. 2; Matt. 
vii. 21; Luke xxiii. 43; Apoc. ili. 12; xxi. 2, Io. 
®On the meaning of eternity see Summa Theol. ta. x. 


“LIFE EVERLASTING” 138 


miseries that it should rather be called death; with what ardor 
of soul, with what earnestness of purpose, should we not seek 
that eternal life which, without evil of any sort, presents to us 
the pure and unmixed enjoyment of every good? 


Negative and Positive Elements of Eternal Life 


The happiness of eternal life is, as defined by the Fathers, 
an exemption from all evil, and an enjoyment of all good.® 


THE NEGATIVE 


Concerning (the exemption from all) evil the Scriptures bear 
witness in the most explicit terms. For it is written in the 
Apocalypse: They shall no more hunger nor thirst, neither shall 
the sun fall on them, nor any heat; ?° and again, God shall wipe 
away all tears from their eyes: and death shall be no more, nor 
mourning nor crying, nor sorrow shall be any more, for the 
former things are passed away." 


THE POSITIVE 


As for the glory of the blessed, it shall be without measure, 
and the kinds of their solid joys and pleasures without number. 
Since our minds cannot grasp the greatness of this glory, nor 
can it possibly enter into our souls, it is necessary for us to enter 
into it, that is, into the joy of the Lord, so that immersed therein 
we may completely satisfy the longing of our hearts.# 

Although, as St. Augustine observes, it would seem easier to 
enumerate the evils from which we shall be exempt than the 
goods and the pleasures which we shall enjoy;** yet we must 
endeavor to explain, briefly and clearly, these things which are 
calculated to inflame the faithful with a desire of arriving at the 
enjoyment of this supreme felicity. 

But first of all we should make use of a distinction which has 
been sanctioned by the most eminent writers on religion; for they 
teach that there are two sorts of goods, one of which constitutes 
happiness, the other follows upon it. The former, therefore, 

° Chrysost., Ep. I. ad Theod. lapsum; Aug., De Civ. Dei, lib. xxii. cap. 30. 


* Apoc. vii. 16. 4 Apoc. xxi. 4. ” Serm. cxxvii. n. 3) 
2On the last end of man see Summa Theol. Ia. 22. i-v. 


136 THE CREED 


for the sake of perspicuity, they have called essential blessings, 
the latter, accessory. 


Essential Happiness 


Solid happiness, which we may designate by the common ap- 
pellation, essential, consists in the vision of God, and the en- 
joyment of His beauty who is the source and principle of all 
goodness and perfection. This, says Christ our Lord, is eternal 
life: that they may know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, 
whom thou hast sent? These words St. John seems to inter- 
pret when he says: Dearly beloved, we are now the sons of 
God; and it hath not yet appeared what we shall be. We know 
that when he shall appear, we shall be like to him: because we 
shall see him as he isi4 He shows, then, that beatitude consists 
of two things: that we shall behold God such as He is in His 
own nature and substance; and that we ourselves shall become, 
as it were, gods. 


THE LIGHT OF GLORY 


For those who enjoy God while they retain their own nature, 
assume a certain admirable and almost divine form, so as to 
seem gods rather than men. Why this transformation takes 
place becomes at once intelligible if we only reflect that a thing 
is known either from its essence, or from its image and appear- 
ance, consequently, as nothing so resembles God as to afford by 
its resemblance a perfect knowledge of Him, it follows that no 
creature can behold His Divine Nature and Essence unless this 
same Divine Essence has joined itself to us, and this St. Paul 
means when he says: We now see through a glass in a dark 
manner ,; but then face to face.® The words, in a dark manner, 
St. Augustine understands to mean that we see Him in a re- 
semblance calculated to convey to us some notion of the Deity.1® 

This St. Denis* also clearly shows when he says}? that. the 

® John xvii. 3. #1 John iii. 2. pote COLmextiio nize 

De Trin) libs xv. ceo: *De Divin. Nom. c. I. 


a The writings ascribed to Dionysius the Areopagite, while very ancient, 
are not the work of St. Paul’s Athenian convert, according to modern 
patrologists. 


“LIFE EVERLASTING” 137 


things above cannot be known by comparison with the things 
below; for the essence and substance of anything incorporeal 
cannot be known through the image of that which is corporeal, 
particularly as a resemblance must be less gross and more spirit- 
ual than that which it represents, as we easily know from univer- 
sal experience. Since, therefore, it is impossible that any image 
drawn from created things should be equally pure and spiritual 
with God, no resemblance can enable us perfectly to comprehend 
the Divine Essence. Moreover, all created things are circum- 
scribed within certain limits of perfection, while God is without 
limits; and therefore nothing created can reflect His immensity. 

The only means, then, of arriving at a knowledge of the Divine 
Essence is that God unite Himself in some sort to us, and after 
an incomprehensible manner elevate our minds to a higher degree 
of perfection, and thus render us capable of contemplating the 
beauty of His Nature. This the light of His glory will accom- 
plish. Jllumined by its splendor we shall see God, the true light, 
in His own light.@ 


THE BEATIFIC VISION 


For the blessed always see God present and by this greatest 
and most exalted of gifts, being made partakers of the divine 
nature,® they enjoy true and solid happiness. Our belief in this 
happiness should be joined with an assured hope that we too 
shall one day, through the divine goodness, attain it. This the 
Fathers declared in their Creed, which says: I expect the resur- 
rection of the dead and the life of the world to come. 


AN ILLUSTRATION OF THIS TRUTH 


These are truths, so divine that they cannot be expressed in 
any words or comprehended by us in thought. We may, how- 
ever, trace some resemblance of this happiness in sensible objects. 
Thus, iron when acted on by fire becomes inflamed and while it 
is substantially the same seems changed into fire, a different sub- 
stance; so likewise the blessed, who are admitted into the glory 


e2ePete i. 4: 
aOn the “light of glory” see Summa Theol. Ia. xii. 6. 


138 THE CREED 


of heaven and burn with a love of God, are so affected that, with- 
out ceasing to be what they are, they may be said with truth 
to differ more from those still on earth than red-hot iron differs 
from itself when cold.?® 

To say all in a few words, supreme and absolute happiness, 
which we call essential, consists in the possession of God; for 
what can he lack to consummate his happiness who possesses the 
God of all goodness and perfection? @ 


Accessory Happiness 


To this happiness, however, are added certain gifts which are 
common to all the blessed, and which, because more within the 
reach of human comprehension, are generally found more effec- 
tual in moving and inflaming the heart. These the Apostle seems 
to have in view when, in his Epistle to the Romans, he says: 
Glory and honour, and peace to every one that worketh good.”° 


GLORY 


For the blessed shall enjoy glory; not only that glory which 
we have already shown to constitute essential happiness, or to 
be its inseparable accompaniment, but also that glory which con- 
sists in the clear and distinct knowledge which each (of the 
blessed) shall have of the singular and exalted dignity of his 
companions (in glory). 


HONOR 


And how distinguished must not that honor be which is con- 
ferred by God Himself, who no longer calls them servants, but 
friends, brethren and sons of God! Hence the Redeemer will 
address His elect in these most loving and honorable words: 
Come, ye blessed of my Father, possess you the kingdom pre- 
pared for you."* Justly, then, may we exclaim: Thy friends, O 
God, are made exceedingly honourable.2? They shall also re- 


re Anselm., De Simil., c. 67. » Rom. ii. Io. 
Matt. xxv. 34. ™ Ps. CXxXxViii,, 17: 
4 Qn the beatific vision see Summa Theol. 1a. xii; Suppl. xcii. 


“LIFE EVERLASTING” 139 


ceive the highest praise from Christ the Lord, in presence of His 
heavenly Father and His Angels. 

And if nature has implanted in the heart of every man the 
common desire of securing the esteem of men eminent for wis- 
dom, because they are deemed the most reliable judges of merit, 
what an accession of glory to the blessed, to show towards each 
other the highest veneration! 


PEACE 


To enumerate all the delights with which the souls of the 
blessed shall be filled would be an endless task. We cannot even 
conceive them in thought. With this truth, however, the minds 
of the faithful should be deeply impressed—that the happiness 
of the Saints is full to overflowing of all those pleasures which 
can be enjoyed or even desired in this life, whether they regard 
the powers of the mind or of the perfection of the body; albeit 
this must be in a manner more exalted than, to use the Apostle’s 
words, eye hath seen, ear heard, or the heart of man con- 
ceived:?* @ 

Thus the body, which was before gross and material, shall put 
off in heaven its mortality, and having become refined and spirit- 
ualized, will no longer require corporal food; while the soul shall 
be satiated to its supreme delight with that eternal food of glory 
which the Master of that great feast passing will minister to all.*4 

Who will desire rich apparel or royal robes, where there shall 
be no further use for such things, and where all shall be clothed 
with immortality and splendor, and adorned with a crown of 
imperishable glory?> 

And if the possession of a spacious and magnificent mansion 
contributes to human happiness, what more spacious, what more 
magnificent, can be conceived than heaven itself, whici is illu- 
mined throughout with the brightness of God? Hence the 
Prophet, contemplating the beauty of this dwelling-place, and 


1st (Ohi abt Gh SOLE Icemextt 1537 
aQOn the accidental rewards of heaven see Summa Theol. Suppl. xcvi. 
b On the corporal and spiritual adornments of the blessed see Summa 


Theol. Suppl. xcv. 


140 THE CREED 


burning with the desire of reaching those mansions of bliss, ex- 
claims: How lovely are thy tabernacles, O Lord of hosts! my 
soul longeth and fainteth for the courts of the Lord. My heart 
and my flesh have rejoiced in the living God.*® ‘That the faith- 
ful may be all filled with the same sentiments and utter the same 
language should be the object of the pastor’s most earnest desires, 
as it should also be of his zealous labors. For im my Father's 
house, says our Lord, there are many mansions,?* in which shall 
be distributed rewards of greater and of less value according to 
each one’s deserts. He who soweth sparingly, shall also reap 
sparingly: and he who soweth in blessings, shall also reap bless- 
ings.?* @ 


How to Arrive at the Enjoyment of this Happiness 


The pastor, therefore, should not only encourage the faithful to 
seek this happiness, but should frequently remind them that the 
sure way of obtaining it is to possess the virtues of faith and 
charity, to persevere in prayer and the use of the Sacraments, 
and to discharge all the duties of kindness towards their neighbor. 

Thus, through the mercy of God, who has prepared that blessed 
glory for those who love Him, shall be one day fulfilled the words 
of the Prophet: My people shall sit in the beauty of peace, and 
in the tabernacle of confidence, and in wealthy rest.8 


* Ps. Eerie t, (2. * John xiv. 2. #13 Corsix. 6: 
Ist soit, sre 


@On the mansions of the blessed see Summa Theol. Suppl. Ixix; xciii. 


PART II 


THE SACRAMENTS 


IMPORTANCE OF INSTRUCTION ON THE SACRAMENTS 


The exposition of every part of Christian doctrine demands 
knowledge and industry on the part of the pastor. But instruc- 
tion on the Sacraments, which, by the ordinance of God, are a 
necessary means of salvation and a plenteous source of spiritual 
advantage, demands in a special manner his talents and industry. 
By accurate and frequent instruction (on the Sacraments) the 
faithful will be enabled to approach worthily and with salutary 
effect these inestimable and most holy institutions; and the 
priests will not depart from the rule laid down in the divine pro- 
hibition: Give not that which is holy to dogs: neither cast ye 
your pearls before swine.* 


The Word “Sacrament” 


Since, then, we are about to treat of the Sacraments in general, 
it is proper to begin in the first place by explaining the force and 
meaning of the word Sacrament, and showing its various sig- 
nifications, in order the more easily to comprehend the sense in 
which it is here used. The faithful, therefore, are to be informed 
that the word Sacrament, in so far as it concerns our present 
purpose, is differently understood by sacred and profane writers. 

By some it has been used to express the obligation which arises 
from an oath, pledging to the performance of some service; and 
hence the oath by which soldiers promise military service to the 
State has been called a military sacrament. Among profane 


2 Matt. vii. 6. 
14I 


an THE SACRAMENTS 


writers this seems to have been the most ordinary meaning of the 
word. 

But by the Latin Fathers who have written on theological 
subjects, the word sacrament is used to signify a sacred thing 
which lies concealed. The Greeks, to express the same idea, made 
use of the word mystery. This we understand to be the meaning 
of the word, when, in the Epistle to the Ephesians, it is said: 
That he might make known to us the mystery (sacramentum) 
of his will; ? and to Timothy: great is the mystery (sacramentum) 
of godliness;* and in the Book of Wisdom: They knew not the 
secrets (sacramenta) of God.* In these and many other passages 
the word sacrament, it will be perceived, signifies nothing more 
than a holy thing that lies concealed and hidden. 

The Latin Doctors, therefore, deemed the word a very appro- 
priate term to express certain sensible signs which at once com- 
municate grace, declare it, and, as it were, place it before the 
eyes. St. Gregory, however, is of the opinion that such a sign 
is called a Sacrament, because the divine power secretly operates 
our salvation under the veil of sensible things.® 

Let it not, however, be supposed that the word sacrament is 
of recent ecclesiastical usage. Whoever peruses the works of 
Saints Jerome and Augustine will at once perceive that ancient 
ecclesiastical writers made use of the word sacrament, and some- 
times also of the word symbol, or mystical sign or sacred sign, 
to designate that of which we here speak. 

So much will suffice in explanation of the word sacrament. 
What we have said applies equally to the Sacraments of the Old 
Law; but since they have been superseded by the Gospel Law 


and grace, it is not necessary that pastors give instruction con- 
cerning them. 


* Eph. 1, 9. Yat Aron, ahhh, Wey 

Wis. ii. 22. "In Decret. p. "ik. Cause i da © od 

a Examples of this signification of the word “Sacrament” are found in 
the two following passages from Tertullian: “Vocati sumus ad militiam 
Dei vivi, jam tunc cum in sacramenti verba spondimus”; and “Ut sacra- 
mento benedictionis exauctoretur, nunquam in castra ecclesiae reversurus.” 


i 


IN GENERAL 143 


Definition of a Sacrament 


Besides the meaning of the word, which has hitherto engaged 
our attention, the nature and efficacy of the thing which the word 
signifies must be diligently considered, and the faithful must be 
taught what constitutes a Sacrament. No one can doubt that the 
Sacraments are among the means of attaining righteousness and 
salvation. But of the many definitions, each of them sufficiently 
appropriate, which may serve to explain the nature of a Sacra- 
ment, there is none more comprehensive, none more perspicuous, 
than the definition given by St. Augustine and adopted by all 
scholastic writers. d Sacrament, he says, is a sign of a sacred 
thing ;® or, as it has been expressed in other words of the same 
import: A Sacrament is a visible sign of an invisible grace, insti- 
tuted for our justification." 


“A Sacrament is a Sign” 


The more fully to develop this definition, the pastor should ex- 
plain it in all its parts. He should first observe that sensible objects 
are of two sorts: some have been invented precisely to serve as 
signs ; others have been established not for the sake of signifying 
something else, but for their own sakes alone. To the latter class 
almost every object in nature may be said to belong; to the 
former, spoken and written languages, military standards, images, 
trumpets, signals# and a multiplicity of other things of the same 
sort. Thus with regard to words; take away their power of 
expressing ideas, and you seem to take away the only reason for 
their invention. Such things are, therefore, properly called signs. 
For, according to St. Augustine, a sign, besides what it presents 
to the senses, is a medium through which we arrive at the knowl- 
edge of something else. From a footstep, for instance, which we 
see traced on the ground, we instantly infer that some one whose 
trace appears has passed.*® 

*De Civ. Dei, lib. x. c. 5. “St. Bernard, Serm. de Coen. Dom. c. 2. 

®De Doctr. Christ. ii. I. 

a“Et tuba sonante milites vel progredi se, vel regredi, et si quid aliud 


pugna postulat, oportere noverunt.” St. Aug., De Doctr. Christ. ii. 1. Ss 
b“Sicut vestigio viso, transisse animal, cujus vestigium est, cogitamus. 


Se Ange irc: 


144 THE SACRAMENTS 


PROOF FROM REASON 


A Sacrament, therefore, is clearly to be numbered among those 
things which have been instituted as signs. It makes known to 
us by a certain appearance and resemblance that which God, by 
His invisible power, accomplishes in our souls. Let us illustrate 
what we have said by an example. Baptism, for instance, which 
is administered by external ablution, accompanied with certain 
solemn words, signifies that by the power of the Holy Ghost all 
stain and defilement of sin is inwardly washed away, and that the 
soul is enriched and adorned with the admirable gift of heavenly 
justification; while, at the same time, the bodily washing, as we 
shall hereafter explain in its proper place, accomplishes in the 
soul that which it signifies. 


PROOF FROM SCRIPTURE 


That a Sacrament is to be numbered among signs is clearly 
inferred also from Scripture. Speaking of circumcision, a Sacra- 
ment of the Old Law which was given to Abraham, the father 
of all believers,® the Apostle in his Epistle to the Romans, says: 
And he received the sign of circumcision, a seal of the justice of 
the faith° In another place he says: All we who are baptized 
in Christ Jesus, are baptized in his death,“ words which justify 
the inference that Baptism signifies, to use the words of the same 
Apostle, that we are buried together with him by baptism into 
death,?? 

Nor is it unimportant that the faithful should know that the 
Sacraments are signs. This knowledge will lead them more 
readily to believe that what the Sacraments signify, contain and 
effect is holy and august; and recognizing their sanctity they will 
be more disposed to venerate and adore the beneficence of God 
displayed towards us. 


* Gen. xvii. 10. * Rom. iv. 11. 
Rom. vi. 3. * Rom. vi. 4. 


IN GENERAL 145 


“Sign of a Sacred Thing” 
Kind of Sign Meant Here 


We now come to explain the words, sacred thing, which con- 
stitute the second part of the definition. To render this explana- 
tion satisfactory we must enter somewhat more minutely into the 
accurate and acute remarks of St. Augustine on the variety of 
signs.78 


NATURAL SIGNS 


Some signs are called natural. These, besides making them- 
selves known to us, also convey a knowledge of something else, 
an effect, as we have already said, common to all signs. Smoke, 
for instance, is a natural sign from which we immediately infer 
the existence of fire. It is called a natural sign, because it implies 
the existence of fire, not by arbitrary institution, but from experi- 
ence. If we see smoke, we are at once convinced of the presence 
of fire, even though it is hidden. 


SIGNS INVENTED BY MAN 


Other signs are not natural, but conventional, and are invented 
by men to enable them to converse one with another, to convey 
their thoughts to others, and in turn to learn the opinions and 
receive the advice of other men. The variety and multiplicity 
of such signs may be inferred from the fact that some belong to 
the eyes, many to the ears, and the rest to the other senses. Thus 
when we intimate any thing to another by such a sensible sign as 
the raising of a flag, it is obvious that such intimation is conveyed 
only through the medium of the eyes; and it is equally obvious 
that the sound of the trumpet, of the lute and of the lyre— 
instruments which are not only sources of pleasure, but frequently 
signs of ideas—is addressed to the ear. Through the latter sense 
especially are also conveyed words, which are the best medium 
of communicating our inmost thoughts. 


%De Doctr. Christ. lib. ii. c. 1. 


NG THE SACRAMENTS 


SIGNS INSTITUTED BY GOD 


Besides the signs instituted by the will and agreement of men, 
of which we have been speaking so far, there are certain other 
signs appointed by God. These latter, as all admit, are not all 
of the same kind. Some were instituted by God to indicate some- 
thing or to bring back its recollection. Such were the purifica- 
tions of the Law,** the unleavened bread, and many other things 
which belonged to the ceremonies of the Mosaic worship. But 
God has appointed other signs with power not only to signify, but 
also to accomplish (what they signify). 

Among these are manifestly to be numbered the Sacraments 
of the New Law. They are signs instituted not by man but by 
God, which we firmly believe have in themselves the power of 
producing the sacred effects of which they are the signs. 


Kind of Sacred Thing Meant Here 


We have seen that there are many kinds of signs. The 
sacred thing referred to is also of more than one kind. As regards 
the definition already given of a Sacrament, theologians prove 
that by the words sacred thing is to be understood the grace 
of God, which sanctifies the soul and adorns it with the habit 
of all the divine virtues; and of this grace they rightly consider 
the words sacred thing, an appropriate appellation, because by 
its salutary influence the soul is consecrated and united to God. 

In order, therefore, to explain more fully the nature of a 
Sacrament, it should be taught that it is a sensible object which 
possesses, by divine institution, the power not only of signifying, 
but also of accomplishing holiness and righteousness. Hence it 
follows, as everyone can easily see, that the images of the Saints, 
crosses and the like, although signs of sacred things, cannot be 
called Sacraments. That such is the nature of a Sacrament is 
easily proved by the example of all the Sacraments, if we apply 
to the others what has been already said of Baptism; namely, 
that the solemn ablution of the body not only signifies, but has 
power to effect a sacred thing which is wrought interiorly by the 
operation of the Holy Ghost. 


Sey, xiv ite * Exod.exdis> 15, 


IN GENERAL 147 


OTHER SACRED THINGS SIGNIFIED BY THE SACRAMENTS 


Now it is especially appropriate that these mystical signs, 
instituted by God, should signify by the appointment of the Lord 
not only one thing, but several things at once. 


ALL THE SACRAMENTS SIGNIFY SOMETHING PRESENT, SOMETHING 
PAST, SOMETHING FUTURE 


This applies to all the Sacraments; for all of them declare 
not only our sanctity and justification, but also two other things 
most intimately connected with sanctification, namely, the Pas- 
sion of Christ our Redeemer, which is the source of our sancti- 
fication, and also eternal life and heavenly bliss, which are the 
end of sanctification. Such, then, being the nature of all the 
Sacraments, holy Doctors justly hold that each of them has a 
threefold significance: they remind us of something past; they 
indicate and point out something present; they foretell something 
future. 

Nor should it be supposed that this teaching of the Doctors 
is unsupported by the testimony of Holy Scripture. When the 
Apostle says: All we who are baptized in Christ Jesus, are bap- 
tized in his death,* he gives us clearly to understand that Bap- 
tism is called a sign, because it reminds us of the death and Pas- 
sion of our Lord. When he says, We are buried together with 
him by baptism into death; that as Christ is risen from the dead 
by the glory of the Father, so, we also may walk in newness of 
life,7 he also clearly shows that Baptism is a sign which indi- 
cates the infusion of divine grace into our souls, which enables 
us to lead a new life and to perform all the duties of true piety 
with ease and cheerfulness. Finally, when he adds: Jf we have 
been planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall be 
also in the likeness of his resurrection,* he teaches that Baptism 
clearly foreshadows eternal life also, which we are to reach 


through its efficacy. 


BS Rome vie 3 * Rom. vi. 4. * Rom. vi. 5. 


148 THE SACRAMENTS 


A SACRAMENT SOMETIMES SIGNIFIES THE PRESENCE OF MORE 
THAN ONE THING 


Besides the different significations already mentioned, a Sac- 
rament also not infrequently indicates and marks the presence of 
more than one thing. This we readily perceive when we reflect 
that the Holy Eucharist at once signifies the presence of the real 
body and blood of Christ and the grace which it imparts to the 
worthy receiver of the sacred mysteries. 

What has been said, therefore, cannot fail to supply the pastor 
with arguments to prove how much the power of God is dis- 
played, how many hidden miracles are contained in the Sacra- 
ments of the New Law; that thus all may understand that they 
are to be venerated and received with utmost devotion? 


Why the Sacraments were Instituted 


Of all the means employed to teach the proper use of the Sac- 
raments, there is none more effectual than a careful exposition 
of the reasons of their institution. Many such reasons are com- 
monly assigned. 

The first of these reasons is the feebleness of the human mind. 
We are so constituted by nature that no one can aspire to mental 
and intellectual knowledge unless through the medium of sensible 
objects. In order, therefore, that we might more easily under- 
stand what is accomplished by the hidden power of God, the 
same sovereign Creator of the universe has most wisely, and out 
of His tender kindness towards us, ordained that His power 
should be manifested to us through the intervention of certain 
sensible signs. As St. Chrysostom happily expresses it: Jf man 
were not clothed with a material body, these good things would 
have been presented to him naked and without any covering; 
but as the soul is joined to the body, it was absolutely necessary 
to employ sensible things in order to assist in making them under- 
stood.’® 

Another reason is because the mind yields a reluctant assent 


“In Matt. Hom. Ixxxii. n. 4. 


aOn the meaning of the Sacraments see Summa Theol. ] 
Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. vi. 1-6. ig nah 


IN GENERAL ae 


to promises. Hence, from the beginning of the world, God was 
accustomed to indicate, and usually in words, that which He had 
resolved to do; but sometimes, when designing to execute some- 
thing, the magnitude of which might weaken a belief in its 
accomplishment, He added to words other signs, which sometimes 
appeared miraculous. When, for instance, God sent Moses to 
deliver the people of Israel, and Moses, distrusting the help even 
of God who had commissioned him, feared that the burden im- 
posed was heavier than he could bear, or that the people would 
not heed his message, the Lord confirmed His promise by a great 
variety of signs.?? As, then, in the Old Law, God ordained that 
every important promise should be confirmed by certain signs, 
so in the New Law, Christ our Saviour, when He promised 
pardon of sin, divine grace, the communication of the Holy Spirit, 
instituted certain visible and sensible signs by which He might 
oblige Himself, as it were, by pledges, and make it impossible 
to doubt that He would be true to His promises. 

A third reason is that the Sacraments, to use the words of 
St. Ambrose, may be at hand, as the remedies and medicines of 
the Samaritan in the Gospel, to preserve or recover the health 
of the soul.2*_ For, through the Sacraments, as through a chan- 
nel, must flow into the soul the efficacy of the Passion of Christ, 
that is, the grace which He merited for us on the altar of the 
cross, and without which we cannot hope for salvation. Hence, 
our most merciful Lord has bequeathed to His Church, Sacra- 
ments stamped with the sanction of His word and promise, 
through which, provided we make pious and devout use of these 
remedies, we firmly believe that the fruit of His Passion is really 
communicated to us. 

A fourth reason why the institution of the Sacraments seems 
necessary is that there may be certain marks and symbols to dis- 
tinguish the faithful; particularly since, as St. Augustine ob- 
serves, no society of men, professing a true or a false religion, 
can be, so to speak, consolidated into one body, unless united 
and held together by some bond of sensible signs.”* Both these 
objects the Sacraments of the New Law accomplish, distinguish- 


»” Exod. iii. ff. 2M ibe, (Ge, BO)), Wily ab vob AR 
2 Contra Faust. lib. xix. c. ii. 


150 THE SACRAMENTS 


ing the Christian from the infidel, and uniting the faithful by 
a sort of sacred bond. 

Another very just cause for the institution of the Sacraments 
may be shown from the words of the Apostle: With the heart 
we believe unto justice; but with the mouth confession is made 
unto salvation.22 By approaching them we make a public pro- 
fession of our faith in the sight of men. Thus, when we ap- 
proach Baptism, we openly profess our belief that, by virtue of 
its salutary waters in which we are washed, the soul is spiritually 
cleansed. 

The Sacraments have also great influence, not only in exciting 
and exercising our faith, but also in inflaming that charity with 
which we should love one another, when we recollect that, by 
partaking of these mysteries in common, we are knit together in 
the closest bonds and are made members of one body. 

A final consideration, which is of greatest importance for the 
life of a Christian, is that the Sacraments repress and subdue 
the pride of the human heart, and exercise us in the practice 
of humility; for they oblige us to subject ourselves to sensible 
elements in obedience to God, from whom we had before im- 
piously revolted in order to serve the elements of the world.”4 

These are the chief points that appeared to us necessary for 
the instruction of the faithful on the name, nature, and institu- 
tion of a Sacrament. When they shall have been accurately ex- 
pounded by the pastor, his next duty will be to explain the con- 
stituents of each Sacrament, its parts, and the rites and cere- 
monies which have been added to its administration.? 


Constituent Parts of the Sacraments 


In the first place, then, it should be explained that the sen- 
sible thing which enters into the definition of a Sacrament as 
already given, although constituting but one sign, is twofold. 
Every Sacrament consists of two things, matter, which is called 
the element, and form, which is commonly called the word. 

This is the doctrine of the Fathers of the Church; and the 


* Rom. x. IO. (Geil, shy, Gh, 
2QOn the necessity of the Sacraments see Summa Theol. 3a. Ixi. 


IN GENERAL fer 


testimony of St. Augustine on the subject is familiar to all. 
The word, he says, is joined to the element, and it becomes a 
Sacrament.> By the words sensible thing, therefore, the 
Fathers understand not only the matter or element, such as 
water in Baptism, chrism in Confirmation, and oil in Extreme 
Unction, all of which fall under the eye; but also the words which 
constitute the form, and which are addressed to the ear. 

Both are clearly pointed out by the Apostle, when he says: 
Christ loved the Church, and delivered himself up for it, that he 
might sanctify it, cleansing it by the laver of water in the word 
of life.2* Here both the matter and form of the Sacrament are 
expressly mentioned. 

In order to make the meaning of the rite that is being per- 
formed easier and clearer, words had to be added to the matter. 
For of all signs words are evidently the most significant, and 
without them, what the matter for the Sacraments designates 
and declares would be utterly obscure. Water, for instance, has 
the quality of cooling as well as cleansing, and may be symbolic 
of either. In Baptism, therefore, unless the words were added, 
it would not be certain, but only conjectural, which signification 
was intended; but when the words are added, we immediately 
understand that the Sacrament possesses and signifies the power 
of cleansing. 

In this the Sacraments of the New Law excel those of the 
Old that, as far as we know, there was no definite form of ad- 
ministering the latter, and hence they were very uncertain and 
obscure. In our Sacraments, on the contrary, the form is so 
definite that any, even a casual deviation from it renders the 
Sacrament null. Hence the form is expressed in the clearest 
terms, such as exclude the possibility of doubt. 

These, then, are the parts which belong to the nature and sub- 
stance of the Sacraments, and of which every Sacrament is neces- 


sarily composed.? 
eB Tineyloanm tracts IXooc, M3. TN, iis Ay AO 


aQOn the matter and form of the Sacraments see Summa Theol. 3a. 
Ix. 5-8; St. Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. vi. 8-12. 


152 THE SACRAMENTS 


Ceremonies Used in the Administration of the Sacraments 


To (the matter and form) are added certain ceremonies. These 
cannot be omitted without sin, unless in case of necessity; yet, 
if at any time they be omitted, the Sacrament is not thereby 
invalidated, since the ceremonies do not pertain to its essence. 
It is‘not without good reason that the administration of the 
Sacraments has been at all times, from the earliest ages of the 
Church, accompanied with certain solemn rites. 

There is, in the first place, the greatest propriety in manifest- 
ing such a religious reverence to the sacred mysteries as to 
make it appear that holy things are handled by holy men. 

Secondly, these ceremonies serve to display more fully the 
effects of the Sacraments, placing them, as it were, before our 
eyes, and to impress more deeply on the minds of the faithful 
the sanctity of these sacred institutions. 

Thirdly, they elevate to sublime contemplation the minds of 
those who behold and observe them with attention, and excite 
within them faith and charity. 

To enable the faithful, therefore, to know and understand 
clearly the meaning of the ceremonies made use of in the admin- 
istration of each Sacrament should be an object of special care 
and attention. 


The Number of the Sacraments 


We now come to explain the number of the Sacraments. A 
knowledge of this point is very advantageous to the faithful; 
for the greater the number of aids to salvation and the life of 
bliss which they understand to have been provided by God, the 
more ardent will be the piety with which they will direct all the 
powers of their souls to praise and proclaim His singular good- 
ness towards us. 

The Sacraments of the Catholic Church are seven in number, 
as is proved from Scripture, from the tradition handed down to 
us from the Fathers, and from the authority of Councils. Why 
they are neither more nor less in number may be shown, at least 


2On the ceremonies of the Sacraments see Code of Canon Law, 
canon 733. 


IN GENERAL oo 


with some probability, from the analogy that exists between the 
natural and the spiritual life. In order to exist, to preserve 
existence, and to contribute to his own and to the public good, 
seven things seem necessary to man: to be born, to grow, to be 
nurtured, to be cured when sick, when weak to be strengthened ; 
as far as regards the public welfare, to have magistrates invested 
with authority to govern, and to perpetuate himself and _ his 
species by legitimate offspring. Now, since it is quite clear that 
all these things are sufficiently analogous to that life by which 
the soul lives to God, we discover in them a reason to account 
for the number of the Sacraments. 

First comes Baptism, which is the gate, as it were, to all the 
other Sacraments, and by which we are born again unto Christ. 
The next is Confirmation, by which we grow up and are strength- 
ened in the grace of God; for, as St. Augustine?” observes, to 
the Apostles who had already received Baptism, the Redeemer 
said: “Stay you in the city till you be endued with power from 
on high.” ?® The third is the Eucharist, that true bread from 
heaven which nourishes and sustains our souls to eternal life, 
according to these words of the Saviour: My flesh is meat 
indeed, and my blood is drink indeed.?® The fourth is Pen- 
ance, through which lost health is recovered after we have been 
wounded by sin. Next is Extreme Unction, which obliterates 
the remains of sin and invigorates the powers of the soul; for 
speaking of this Sacrament St. James says: If he be in sins, 
they shall be forgiven him.*° Then follows Holy Orders, by 
which power is given to exercise perpetually in the Church the 
public administration of the Sacraments and to perform all the 
sacred functions. The last is Matrimony, instituted to the end 
that, by means of the legitimate and holy union of man and 
woman, children may be procreated and religiously educated for 
the service of God, and for the preservation of the human race. 


7 Epist. Rom. cclxv. Luke xxiv. 49. 
John vi. 55. * James v. IS. 
aQOn the number of the Sacraments see Summa Theol. ga. Ixv. 1. 


154 THE SACRAMENTS 


Comparisons among the Sacraments 


Though all the Sacraments possess a divine and admirable 
efficacy, it is well worthy of special remark that all are not of 
equal necessity or of equal dignity, nor is the signification of all 
the same. 

Among them three are said to be necessary beyond the rest, 
although in all three this necessity is not of the same kind. The 
universal and absolute necessity of Baptism our Saviour has 
declared in these words: Unless a man be born again of water 
and the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the kingdom of Goa.* 
Penance, on the other hand, is necessary for those only who 
have stained themselves after Baptism by any mortal guilt. 
Without sincere repentance, their eternal ruin is inevitable. 
Orders, too, although not necessary to each of the faithful, are 
of absolute necessity to the Church as a whole. 

But if we consider the dignity of the Sacraments, the Eucharist, 
for holiness and for the number and greatness of its mysteries, 
is far superior to all the rest. These, however, are matters 
which will be more easily understood, when we come to explain, 
in its proper place, what regards each of the Sacraments. 


The Author of the Sacraments 


It now remains to inquire from whom we have received these 
sacred and divine mysteries. Any gift, however excellent in 
itself, undoubtedly receives an increased value from the dignity 
and excellence of him by whom it is bestowed. 

The present question, however, is not hard to answer. For 
since human justification comes from God, and since the Sacra- 
ments are the wonderful instruments of justification, it is evi- 
dent that one and the same God in Christ, must be acknowledged 
to be the author of justification and of the Sacraments. 

Furthermore, the Sacraments contain a power and efficacy 
which reach the inmost soul; and as God alone has power to 

"John iii. 5. 


a On the relative importance and necessity of the Sacraments see Summa 
Theol. 3a. lxv. 2-4. 


IN GENERAL 15s 


enter into the hearts and minds of men, He alone, through 
Christ, is manifestly the author of the Sacraments. 

That they are also interiorly dispensed by Him we must hold 
with a firm and certain faith, according to these words of St. 
John, in which he declares that he learned this truth concerning 
Christ: He who sent me to baptize with water, said to me: He, 
upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending, and remaining 
upon him, he it is that baptizeth with the Holy Ghost.3? 


The Ministers of the Sacraments 


But although God is the author and dispenser of the Sacra- 
ments, He nevertheless willed that they should be administered 
in His Church by men, not by Angels. To constitute a Sacra- 
ment, as the unbroken tradition of the Fathers testifies, matter 
and form are not more necessary than is the ministry of men. 


UNWORTHINESS OF THE MINISTER AND VALIDITY 


Since the ministers of the Sacraments represent in the dis- 
charge of their sacred functions, not their own, but the person 
of Christ, be they good or bad, they validly perform and confer 
the Sacraments, provided they make use of the matter and form 
always observed in the Catholic Church according to the insti- 
tion of Christ, and provided they intend to do what the Church 
does in their administration. Hence, unless the recipients wish 
to deprive themselves of so great a good and resist the Holy 
Ghost, nothing can prevent them from receiving (through the 
Sacraments) the fruit of grace. 

That this was, at all times, a fixed and well ascertained doctrine 
of the Church, is established beyond all doubt by St. Augustine, 
in his disputations against the Donatists.** And should we desire 
Scriptural proof also, let us listen to these words of the Apostle: 
I have planted; Apollo watered; but God gave the increase. 
Therefore neither he that planteth nor he that watereth is any 


Selena is Seb Res Lm 
De Bapt. Cont. Don. lib. iii. c. 10; lib. iv. c. 4; lib. v. c. 19; Cont. 


Cres. lib. iv. c. 20. 
aQOn the author of the Sacraments see Summa Theol. 3a. Ixiv. I-4. 


156 THE SACRAMENTS 


thing, but God who giveth the increase.** From these words it is 
clear that as trees are not injured by the wickedness of those 
who planted them, so those who were planted in Christ by the 
ministry of bad men sustain no injury from the guilt of those 
others. 

Judas: Iscariot, as the holy Fathers infer from the Gospel of 
St. John,®* conferred Baptism on many; and yet none of those 
whom he baptized are recorded to have been baptized again. To 
use the memorable words of St. Augustine: Judas baptized, and 
yet after him none were rebaptized; John baptized, and after 
John they were rebaptized. For the Baptism administered 
by Judas was the Baptism of Christ, but that administered 
by John was the baptism of John. Not that we prefer Judas to 
John, but that we justly prefer the Baptism of Christ, although 
administered by Judas, to that of John although administered by 
the hands of John.*® 


LAWFULNESS OF ADMINISTRATION 


But let not pastors, or other ministers of the Sacraments, hence 
infer that they fully acquit themselves of their duty, if, disregard- 
ing integrity of life and purity of morals, they attend only to the 
administration of the Sacraments in the manner prescribed. 
True, the manner of administering them demands particular 
diligence; yet this alone does not constitute all that pertains to 
that duty. It should never be forgotten that the Sacraments, 
although they cannot lose the divine efficacy inherent in them, 
bring eternal death and perdition to him who dares administer 
them unworthily. 

Holy things, it cannot be too often repeated, should be treated 
holily and with due reverence. To the sinner, says the Prophet, 
God has said: Why dost thou declare my justices, and take my 
covenant in thy mouth, seeing that thou hast hated discipline? 37 
If then, for him who is defiled by sin it is unlawful to speak.on 
divine things, how enormous the guilt of that man, who, conscious 
of many crimes, dreads not to accomplish with polluted lips the 
holy mysteries, to take them into his befouled hands, to touch 


ie Cor. iii. 6. * John iv. 2. 
In Joan. tr. v. n. 18. IES saibbre, 30), typ 


IN GENERAL ‘ rs7 


them, and to present and administer them to others? All the 
more since St. Denis says that the wicked may not even touch the 
symbols, as he calls the Sacraments.*® 

It therefore becomes the first duty of the minister of holy 
things to follow holiness of life, to approach with purity the ad- 
ministration of the Sacraments, and so to exercise himself in 
piety, that, from their frequent administration and use, he may 
every day receive, with the divine assistance, more abundant 
grace.* 


Effects of the Sacraments 


When these matters have been explained, the effects of the 
Sacraments are the next subject of instruction. This subject 
should throw considerable light on the definition of a Sacrament 
as already given.> 


FIRST EFFECT: JUSTIFYING GRACE 


The principal effects of the Sacraments are two. The first 
place is rightly held by that grace which we, following the usage 
of the holy Doctors, call sanctifying. For so the Apostle most 
clearly taught when he said: Christ loved the church, and de- 
livered himself up for it; that he might sanctify it, cleansing it 
by the laver of water in the word of life.*® But how so great 
and so admirable an effect is produced by the Sacrament that, to 
use the well-known saying of St. Augustine, water cleanses the 
body and reaches the heart,*°—this, indeed, cannot be compre- 
hended by human reason and intelligence. It may be taken for 
granted that no sensible thing is of its own nature able to reach 
the soul; but we know by the light of faith that in the Sacraments 
there exists the power of almighty God by which they effect that 
which the natural elements cannot of themselves accomplish. 

Lest on this subject any doubt should exist in the minds of 
the faithful, God, in the abundance of His mercy, was pleased, 


De: Eccl Hier: c. I: Sieve Semen: UnmyOal tract. Ixxxe ti, 3: 
a On the ministers of the Sacraments see Summa Theol. 3a. lxiv. 5-10; 


St. Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. vi. 13-18. : 
b On the efficacy of the Sacraments see St. Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. vi. 7. 


158 THE SACRAMENTS 


from the moment when the Sacraments began to be administered, 
to manifest by the evidence of miracles the effects which they 
operate interiorly in the soul. (This He did) in order that we 
may most firmly believe that the same effects, although far re- 
moved from the senses, are always inwardly produced. To say 
nothing of the fact that at the Baptism of the Redeemer in the 
Jordan the heavens were opened and the Holy Ghost appeared 
in the form of a dove,*t to teach us that when we are washed in 
the sacred font His grace is infused into our souls—to omit this, 
which has reference rather to the signification of Baptism than to 
the administration of the Sacrament—do we not read that on the 
day of Pentecost, when the Apostles received the Holy Ghost, 
by whom they were thenceforward inspired with greater alacrity 
and resolution to preach the faith and brave dangers for the 
glory of Christ, there came suddenly a sound from heaven, as of 
a mighty wind coming, and it filled the whole house where they 
were sitting, and there appeared to them parted tongues, as it 
were, of fire?*? By this it was understood that in the Sacrament 
of Confirmation the same Spirit is given us, and such strength 
is imparted as enables us resolutely to encounter and resist our 
incessant enemies, the world, the flesh and the devil. For some 
time in the beginning of the Church, whenever these Sacraments 
were administered by the Apostles, the same miraculous effects 
were witnessed, and they ceased only when the faith had acquired 
maturity and strength. 

From what has been said of sanctifying grace, the first effect 
of the Sacraments, it clearly follows that there resides in the 
Sacraments of the New Law, a virtue more exalted and effica- 
cious than that of the sacraments of the Old Law. Those 
ancient sacraments, being weak and needy elements,* sanctified 
such as were defiled to the cleansing of the flesh,** but not of the 
spirit. They were, therefore, instituted only as signs of those 
things, which were to be accomplished by our mysteries. The 
Sacraments of the New Law, on the contrary, flowing from the 
side of Christ, who, by the Holy Ghost, offered himself un- 
spotted unto God, cleanse our consciences from dead works, to 


4 eek iii. 16; Mark i. 0 ; Luke iii. 22. f 
SINGS ahh 2s, 3h Gal. iv 9. “ Heb. ix. 13. 
“St. Aug. De Civ. Dei. lib. xv. n. 26. abe 


IN GENERAL 159 


serve the living God,** and thus work in us, through the blood 
of Christ, the grace which they signify. Comparing our Sacra- 
ments, therefore, with those of the Old Law we find that they are 
not only more efficacious, but also more fruitful in spiritual ad- 
vantages, and more august in holiness.? 


SECOND EFFECT: SACRAMENTAL CHARACTER 


The second effect of the Sacraments—which, however, is not 
common to all, but peculiar to three, Baptism, Confirmation, and 
Holy Orders—is the character which they impress on the soul. 
When the Apostle says: God hath anointed us, who also hath 
sealed us, and given the pledge of the Spirit in our hearts,*” he 
not obscurely describes by the word sealed a character, the 
property of which is to impress a seal and mark. 

This character is, as it were, a distinctive impression stamped 
on the soul which perpetually inheres and cannot be blotted out. 
Of this St. Augustine says: Shall the Christian Sacraments ac- 
complish less than the bodily mark impressed on the soldier? 
That mark is not stamped on his person anew as often as he 
resumes the military service which he had relinquished, but the 
old one is recognized and approved.** 

This character has a twofold effect: it qualifies us to receive or 
perform something sacred, and distinguishes us by some mark 
one from another. In the character impressed by Baptism, both 
effects are exemplified. By it we are qualified to receive the 
other Sacraments, and the Christian is distinguished from those 
who do not profess the faith. The same illustration is afforded 
by the characters impressed by Confirmation and Holy Orders. 
By Confirmation we are armed and arrayed as soldiers of Christ, 
publicly to profess and defend His name, to fight against our 
internal enemy and against the spiritual powers of wickedness in 
the high places; and at the same time we are distinguished from 
those who, being recently baptized, are, as it were, new-born infants. 
Holy Orders confers the power of consecrating and administering 
the Sacraments, and also distinguishes those who are invested 

Sie eby ioe: Seon in 21, 22: 


Contr. Ep. Parm. lib. ii. c. 13; Epist. clxxxv. c. 6. = 
2On the first effect of the Sacraments see Summa Theol. 3a. Ixii. 


160 THE SACRAMENTS 


with this power from the rest of the faithful. The rule of the 
Catholic Church is, therefore, to be observed, which teaches that 
these three Sacraments impress a character and are never to be 
repeated. 


How to Make Instruction on the Sacraments Profitable 


On the subject of the Sacraments in general, the above are the 
matters on which instruction should be given. In explaining 
them, pastors should keep in view principally two things, which 
they should zealously strive to accomplish. The first is that the 
faithful understand the high honor, respect and veneration due 
to these divine and celestial gifts. The second is that, since the 
Sacraments have been established by the God of infinite mercy 
for the common salvation of all, the people should make pious 
and religious use of them, and be so inflamed with the desire of 
Christian perfection as to deem it a very great loss to be for any 
time deprived of the salutary use, particularly of Penance and 
the Holy Eucharist. 

These objects pastors will find little difficulty in accomplishing, 
if they call frequently to the attention of the faithful what we 
have already said on the divine character and fruit of the Sacra- 
ments: first, that they were instituted by our Lord and Saviour 
from whom can proceed nothing but what is most perfect; fur- 
ther that when administered, the most powerful influence of the 
Holy Ghost is present, pervading the inmost sanctuary of the 
soul; next that they possess an admirable and unfailing virtue to 
cure our spiritual maladies, and communicate to us the inexhaust- 
ible riches of the Passion of our Lord. 

Finally, let them point out, that although the whole edifice of 
Christian piety rests on the most firm foundation of the corner- 
stone; yet, unless it be supported on every side by the preaching 
of the divine Word and by the use of the Sacraments, it is greatly 
to be feared that it may to a great extent totter and fall to the 
ground, For as we are ushered into spiritual life by means of 
the Sacraments, so by the same means are we nourished and 
preserved, and grow to spiritual increase.> 


2 On the sacramental character see Summa Theol. 3a. Ixiii. 
On the respect due the Sacraments see Code of Canon Law, canon 731. 


THE SACRAMENT OF BAPTISM 


IMPORTANCE OF INSTRUCTION ON BAPTISM 


From what has been hitherto said on the Sacraments in gen- 
eral, we may judge how necessary it is, to a proper understanding 
of the doctrines of the Christian faith and to the practice of 
Christian piety, to know what the Catholic Church proposes for 
our belief on each Sacrament in particular. 

Whoever reads the Apostle carefully will unhesitatingly con- 
clude that a perfect knowledge of Baptism is particularly neces- 
sary to the faithful. For not only frequently, but also in language 
the most energetic, in language full of the Spirit of God, he 
renews the recollection of this mystery, declares its divine char- 
acter, and in it places before us the death, burial and Resurrec- 
tion of our Lord as objects both of our contemplation and imita- 
tion.* 

Pastors, therefore, can never think that they have bestowed 
sufficient labor and attention on the exposition of this Sacrament. 
Besides the Vigils of Easter and Pentecost, days on which the 
Church used to celebrate this Sacrament with the greatest devo- 
tion and special solemnity, and on which particularly, according 
to ancient practice, its divine mysteries were to be explained, 
pastors should also take occasion at other times to make it the 
subject of their instructions. 

For this purpose a most convenient opportunity would seem 
to present itself whenever a pastor, being about to administer 
this Sacrament, finds himself surrounded by a considerable num- 
ber of the faithful. On such occasions, it is true, his exposition 
cannot embrace everything that regards Baptism; but it will then 
be much easier to develop one or two points when the faithful 


21 Rom. vi. 3; 1 Cor. vi. 113 xii. 13; Gal. iii. 27; Col. ii. 12, 13. 
161 


162 THE SACRAMENTS 


can contemplate with a pious and attentive mind the meaning of 
those things which they hear and at the same time see it illus- 
trated by the sacred ceremonies of Baptism. Each person, read- 
ing a lesson of admonition in the person of him who is receiving 
Baptism, will call to mind the promises by which he bound himself 
to God when he was baptized, and will reflect whether his life and 
conduct have been such as are promised by the profession of 
Christianity. 


Names of this Sacrament 


In order that the treatment of the subject may be clear, we 
must explain the nature and substance of Baptism, premising, 
however, an explanation of the word itself. 

The word baptism, as is well known, is of Greek derivation. 
Although used in Sacred Scripture to express not only that 
ablution which forms part of the Sacrament, but also every species 
of ablution,? and sometimes, figuratively, to express sufferings ; * 
yet it is employed by ecclesiastical writers to designate not every 
sort of bodily ablution, but that which forms part of the Sacra- 
ment and is administered with the prescribed form of words. In 
this sense the Apostles very frequently make use of the word in 
accordance with the institution of Christ the Lord. 

This Sacrament the holy Fathers designate also by other names. 
St. Augustine informs us that it was sometimes called the Sacra- 
ment of Faith, because by receiving it we profess our faith in all 
the doctrines of Christianity.‘ 

By others it was termed Illumination, because by the faith 
which we profess in Baptism the heart is illumined;*® for as the 
Apostle also says, alluding to the time of Baptism, Call to mind 
the former days, wherein, being illumined, you endured a great 
fight of affictions.s Chrysostom, in his sermon to the baptized,’ 
calls it a purgation, because through it we purge away the old 
leaven, that we may become a new paste.® He also calls it a 
burial, a ‘planting, and the cross of Christ, the reasons for all 

*2 Esdr. iv. 233 Mark vii. 4,8; Heb. ix. ro. 

* Mark x. 38; Luke xii. so. “Epist. xcviii. n. 9, a! 


* Clem. of Alex. lib. i. c. 6; St. Greg. Naz. Or. x1. n. 3. 
* Cato i. tad llliime nm, 2 THeby ac32: 409 COriyiy 


BAPTISM 63 


which appellations may be gathered from the Epistle to the 
Romans.® 

St. Denis calls it the beginning of the most holy Commanda- 
ments, for this obvious reason, that Baptism is, as it were, the 
gate through which we enter into the fellowship of the Christian 
life, and begin thenceforward to obey the Commandments.?° So 
much should be briefly explained concerning the name (of this 
Sacrament). 


Definition of Baptism 


With regard to the definition of Baptism although many can 
be given from sacred writers, nevertheless that which may be 
gathered from the words of our Lord recorded in John, and of 
the Apostle to the Ephesians, appears the most appropriate and 
suitable. Unless, says our Lord, a man be born again of water 
and the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God; 
and, speaking of the Church, the Apostle says, cleansing it by 
the laver of water in the word of life.1? Thus it follows that Bap- 
tism may be rightly and accurately defined: The Sacrament of 
regeneration by water in the word. By nature we are born from 
Adam children of wrath, but by Baptism we are regenerated in 
Christ, children of mercy.4* For He gave power to men to be 
made the sons of God, to them that believe in his name, who are 
born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of 
man, but of God.1*? 


Constituent Elements of Baptism 


But define Baptism as we may, the faithful are to be informed 
that this Sacrament consists of ablution, accompanied necessarily, 
according to the institution of our Lord, by certain solemn 
words.1® This is the uniform doctrine of the holy Fathers, as is 
proved by the following most explicit testimony of St. Augustine: 
The word is joined to the element, and it becomes a Sacrament.” 


®See Rom. vi. 3; 1 Pet. iii. 21. ”De Ecc. Tier. C22. 
4 John iii. 5. = Epheaven2zo: a font itet2)13: 
“4 Matt. xxviii. 19. “Eph. ii. 3. eins loans br el xxxna3: 


aQOn the nature of Baptism see Summa Theol. ga. Ixvi. 1; St. Alphonsus, 
Theol. Mor. vi. 95-I0I. 


164 THE SACRAMENTS 


It is all the more necessary to impress this on the minds of the 
faithful lest they fall into the common error of thinking that the 
baptismal water, preserved in the sacred font, constitutes the 
Sacrament. The'Sacrament of Baptism can be said to exist only 
when we actually apply the water to someone by way of ablution, 
while using the words appointed by our Lord. 


Matter of Baptism 


Now since we said above, when treating of the Sacraments in 
general, that every Sacrament consists of matter and form, it 
is therefore necessary that pastors point out what constitutes 
each of these in Baptism. The matter, then, or element of this 
Sacrament, is any sort of natural water, which is simply and 
without qualification commonly called water, be it sea water, 
river water, water from a pond, well or fountain. 


TESTIMONY OF SCRIPTURE CONCERNING THE MATTER OF BAPTISM 


For the Saviour taught that unless a man be born again of 
water and the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the kingdom of 
God." The Apostle also says that the Church was cleansed by 
the laver of water; *® and in the Epistle of St. John we read these 
words: There are three that give testimony on earth: the spirit, 
and the water, and the blood.*® Scripture affords other proofs 
which establish the same truth. 

When, however, John the Baptist says that the Lord will come 
who will baptize in the Holy Ghost, and in fire,?° that is by no 
means to be understood of the matter of Baptism; but should 
be applied either to the interior operation of the Holy Ghost, or 
at least to the miracle performed on the day of Pentecost, when 
the Holy Ghost descended on the Apostles in the form of fire,” 
as was foretold by Christ our Lord in these words: John indeed 
baptized with water, but you shall be baptized with the’ Holy 
Ghost, not many days hence.?? 


YL \olavey ri, % Eph. v. 26. *1 John v. 8. 
Matte art: = Acts: lines INCI, FR 


BAPTISM 165 


FIGURES 


The same was also signified by the Lord both by figures and 
by prophecies, as we know from Holy Scripture. According to 
the Prince of the Apostles in his first Epistle, the deluge which 
cleansed the world because the wickedness of men was great 
on the earth, and all the thought of their heart was bent upon 
evil,’ was a figure and image of this water.24 To omit the 
cleansing of Naaman the Syrian,?° and the admirable virtue of 
the pool of Bethsaida,?* and many similar types, manifestly sym- 
bolic of this mystery, the passage through the Red Sea, according 
to St. Paul in his Epistle to the Corinthians, was typical of this 
same water.?? 


PROPHECIES 


With regard to the predictions, the waters to which the Prophet 
Isaias so freely invites all that thirst, and those which Ezechiel 
in spirit saw issuing from the Temple,”® and also the fountain 
which Zachary foresaw, open to the house of David, and to the 
inhabitants of Jerusalem: for the washing of the sinner, and of 
the unclean woman,®® were, no doubt, intended to indicate and 
express the salutary waters of Baptism. 


FITNESS 


The propriety of constituting water the matter of Baptism, of 
the nature and efficacy of which it is at once expressive, St. 
Jerome, in his Epistle to Oceanus, proves by many arguments.°** 

Upon this subject pastors can teach in the first place that 
water, which is always at hand and within the reach of all, was 
the fittest matter of a Sacrament which is necessary to all for 
salvation. In the next place water is best adapted to signify the 
effect of Baptism. It washes away uncleanness, and is, therefore, 
strikingly illustrative of the virtue and efficacy of Baptism, which 
washes away the stains of sin. We may also add that, like water 

™ Gen= vi. 5. met Pet. dit 20,21; * 4 Kings v. 14. 


= johns. 2: Fig Corsscml, we: Silsaiasuiva Ts 
29 7 ae 7 h eee aE . t ] . 6 
Ezech. xlvii. I. ach, xiii.) I. pist. Ixix. n. 6. 


166 THE SACRAMENTS 


* 


which cools the body, Baptism in a great measure extinguishes 
the fire of concupiscence. 


CHRISM ADDED TO WATER FOR SOLEMN BAPTISM 


But it should be noted that while in case of necessity simple 
water unmixed with any other ingredient is sufficient for the mat- 
ter of this Sacrament, yet when Baptism is administered in public 
with solemn ceremonies the Catholic Church, guided by Apos- 
tolic tradition, has uniformly observed the practice of adding holy 
chrism which, as is clear, more fully signifies the effect of Bap- 
tism. The people should also be taught that although it may 
sometimes be doubtful whether this or that water be genuine, 
such as the perfection of the Sacrament requires, it can never be 
a subject of doubt that the only matter from which the Sacra- 
ment of Baptism can be formed is natural water.* 


Form of Baptism 


Having carefully explained the matter, which is one of the 
two parts of which Baptism consists, pastors must show equal 
diligence in explaining the form, which is the other essential part. 
In the explanation of this Sacrament a necessity of increased care 
and study arises, as pastors will perceive, from the circumstance 
that the knowledge of so holy a mystery is not only in itself a 
source of pleasure to the faithful, as is generally the case with 
regard to religious knowledge, but also very desirable for almost 
daily practical use. As we shall explain in its proper place, cir- 
cumstances often arise where Baptism requires to be adminis- 
tered by the laity, and most frequently by women; and it there- 
fore becomes necessary to make all the faithful, indiscriminately, 
well acquainted with whatever regards the substance of this 
Sacrament. 


WORDS OF THE FORM 
Pastors, therefore, should teach, in clear, unambiguous lan- 
guage, intelligible to every capacity, that the true and essential form 


a On the matter of Baptism see Summa Theol. ga. Ixvi. 3, 4; St. Alphon- 
sus, Theol. Mor. vi. 102-107; Code of Canon Law, canon mis i 


BAPTISM 169 


of Baptism is: I baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the 
Son, and of the Holy Ghost. For so it was delivered by our Lord 
and Saviour when, as we read in St. Matthew He gave to His 
Apostles the command: Going, .. . teach ye all nations: bap- 
tizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the 
Holy Ghost.?2 

By the word baptizing, the Catholic Church, instructed from 
above, most justly understood that the form of the Sacrament 
should express the action of the minister; and this takes place 
when he pronounces the words, J baptize thee. 

Besides the minister of the Sacrament, the person to be baptized 
and the principal efficient cause of Baptism should be mentioned. 
The pronoun thee, and the distinctive names of the Divine Per- 
sons are therefore added. Thus the complete form of the Sacra- 
ment is expressed in the words already mentioned: J baptize thee 
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. 

Baptism is the work not of the Son alone, of whom St. John 
says, He it is that baptizeth,** but of the Three Persons of the 
Blessed Trinity together. By saying, however, im the name, 
not im the names, we distinctly declare that in the Trinity there 
is but one Nature and Godhead. The word name is here re- 
ferred not to the Persons, but to the Divine Essence, virtue and 
power, which are one and the same in Three Persons. 


ESSENTIAL AND NON-ESSENTIAL WORDS OF THE FORM 


It is, however, to be observed that of the words contained in 
this form, which we have shown to be the complete and perfect 
one, some are absolutely necessary, so that the omission of them 
renders the valid administration of the Sacrament impossible; 
-while others on the contrary, are not so essential as to affect its 
validity. 

Of the latter kind is the word ego (J), the force of which is 
included in the word baptizo (I baptize). Nay more, the Greek 
Church, adopting a different manner of expressing the form, and 
being of opinion that it is unnecessary to make mention of the 
minister, omits the pronoun altogether. The form universally 
used in the Greek Church is: Let this servant of Christ be bap- 


® Matt. xxviii. 10. SS Holmeunes3: 


168 THE SACRAMENTS 


tized in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy 
Ghost.2 It appears, however, from the decision and definition 
of the Council of Florence, that those who use this form admin- 
ister the Sacraments validly, because the words sufficiently ex- 
press what is essential to the validity of Baptism, that is, the 
ablution which then takes place. 


BAPTISM IN THE NAME OF CHRIST 


If at any time the Apostles baptized in the name of the Lord 
Jesus Christ only,°* we can be sure they did so by the inspiration 
of the Holy Ghost, in order, in the infancy of the Church, to 
render their preaching more illustrious by the name of Jesus 
Christ, and to proclaim more effectually His divine and infinite 
power. If, however, we examine the matter more closely, we 
shall find that such a form omits nothing which the Saviour Him- 
self commands to be observed; for he who mentions Jesus Christ 
implies the Person of the Father, by whom, and that of the Holy 
Ghost, in whom, He was anointed. 

And yet, the use of this form by the Apostles seems rather 
doubtful if we accept the opinions of Ambrose ** and Basil,** 
holy Fathers eminent for sanctity and authority, who interpret 
baptism in the name of Jesus Christ to mean the Baptism insti- 
tuted by Christ our Lord, as distinguished from that of John, 
and who say that the Apostles did not depart from the ordinary 
and usual form which comprises the distinct names of the Three 
Persons.» Paul also, in his Epistle to the Galatians, seems to 
have expressed himself in a similar manner, when he says: As 
many of you as have been baptized in Christ, have put on Christ,3" 
meaning that they were baptized in the faith of Christ, but with 
no other form than that which the same Saviour our Lord had 
commanded to be observed.¢ 


* Acts ik, 3S) VINO : *De Spiritu Sancto, lib. i. n. 3. 
* De Spiritu Sancto. lib. ic. 12, ™Gal. iii. 27. : 
a Bamriverat 6 dobdos Too Oeod (4 Selvas) els 7d dvoua, etc. 


b Justin Martyr (Apol. i. 61) says that Christians were baptized in the 
name of the entire Trinity. 


© Qn the form of Baptism see Summa Theol. 3a. Ixvi. 5, 6; St. Alphon- 
sus, Theol. Mor. vi. 108-112; Code of Canon Law, canon 737. 


BAPTISM 169 


Administration of Baptism 


What has been said on the matter and form, which are re- 
quired for the essence of the Sacrament, will be found sufficient 
for the instruction of the faithful; but as in the administration of 
the Sacrament the legitimate manner of ablution should also 
be observed, pastors should teach the doctrine of this point also. 

They should briefly explain that, according to the common cus- 
tom and practice of the Church, Baptism may be administered 
in three ways,—by immersion, infusion or aspersion. 

Whichever of these rites be observed, we must believe that 
Baptism is rightly administered. For in Baptism water is used 
to signify the spiritual ablution which it accomplishes, and on this 
account Baptism is called by the Apostle a laver.2® Now this 
ablution is not more really accomplished by immersion, which was 
for a considerable time the practice in the early ages of the 
Church, than by infusion, which we now see in general use, or by 
aspersion, which there is reason to believe was the manner in 
which Peter baptized, when on one day he converted and gave 
Baptism to about three thousand souls.*® 

It is a matter of indifference whether the ablution be performed 
once or thrice. For it is evident from the Epistle of St. Gregory 
the Great to Leander that Baptism was formerly and may still 
be validly administered in the Church in either way.*° The faith- 
ful, however, should follow the practice of the particular Church 
to which they belong. 

Pastors should be particularly careful to observe that the bap- 
tismal ablution is not to be applied indifferently to any part of the 
body, but principally to the head, which is the seat of all the 
internal and external senses; and also that he who baptizes is to 
pronounce the sacramental words which constitute the form, 
not before or after, but when performing the ablution.? 


Institution of Baptism 
When these things have been explained, it will also be ex- 
pedient to teach and remind the faithful that, in common with 


® Eph, v. 26. * Acts ii. AI. “Lib. i. Epist. xiii. 
aQOn the administration of Baptism see Summa Theol. ga. Ixvi. 7, 8. 


170 THE SACRAMENTS 


the other Sacraments, Baptism was instituted by Christ the Lord. 
On this subject the pastor should frequently teach and point 
out that there are two different periods of time which relate to 
Baptism,—one the period of its institution by the Redeemer ; the 
other, the establishment of the law regarding its reception. 


BAPTISM INSTITUTED AT CHRIST’S BAPTISM 


With regard to the former, it is clear that this Sacrament was 
instituted by our Lord when, having been baptized by John, 
He gave to water the power of sanctifying. St. Gregory Na- 
zianzen *t and St. Augustine*? testify that to water was then 
imparted the power of regenerating to spiritual life. In another 
place St. Augustine says: From the moment that Christ is im- 
mersed in water, water washes away all sins.*® And again: The 
Lord is baptized, not because He had need to be cleansed, but in 
order that, by the contact of His pure flesh, He might purify the 
waters and impart to them the power of cleansing.** 

A very strong argument to prove that Baptism was then in- 
stituted by our Lord might be afforded by the fact the most Holy 
Trinity, in whose name Baptism is conferred, manifested Its 
divine presence on that occasion. The voice of the Father was 
heard, the Person of the Son was present, the Holy Ghost de- 
scended in the form of a dove; and the heavens, into which we are 
enabled to enter by Baptism, were thrown open.*® 

Should anyone desire to know how our Lord has endowed water 
with a virtue so great, so divine, this indeed transcends the power 
of the human understanding. Yet this we can know, that when 
our Lord was baptized, water, by contact with His most holy and 
pure body, was consecrated to the salutary use of Baptism, in 
such a way, however, that, although instituted before the Passion, 
we must believe that this Sacrament derives all its virtue and 
efficacy from the Passion, which is the consummation, as it were, 
of all the actions of Christ. 

* Or. xxxviil. n. 16. 

my Sant Koooaie (hey Eley) cay Ae 

SISCLINGGXoKY, 


“ Serm. xxxvii. de temp. 
“ Matt. iii. 16, 17; Mark i. 10, 11; Luke iii. 21, 22. 


BAPTISM ne 


BAPTISM MADE OBLIGATORY AFTER CHRIST’S RESURRECTION 


The second period to be distinguished, that is, the time when 
the law of Baptism was made, also admits of no doubt. Holy 
writers are unanimous in saying that after the Resurrection of 
our Lord, when He gave to His Apostles the command to go and 
teach all nations: baptizing them in the name of the Father, and 
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,** the law of Baptism became 
obligatory on all who were to be saved. 

This is inferred from the authority of the Prince of the 
Apostles when he says: Who hath regenerated us into a lively 
hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead; ** and 
also from what Paul says of the Church: He delivered himself 
up for tt: that he might sanctify it, cleansing it by the laver of 
water in the word of life.4® By both Apostles the obligation of 
Baptism seems to be referred to the time which followed the 
death of our Lord. Hence we can have no doubt that the words 
of the Saviour: Unless a man be born again of water and the 
Holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God,** refer 
also to the same time which was to follow after His Passion. 


REFLECTION 


If, then, pastors explain these truths accurately, there can be no 
doubt that the faithful will recognize the high dignity of this 
Sacrament and venerate it with the most profound piety, par- 
ticularly when they reflect that each of them receives in Baptism 
by the interior operation of the Holy Ghost the same glorious and 
most ample gifts which were so strikingly manifested by miracles 
at the Baptism of Christ the Lord. 

Were our eyes, like those of the servant of Eliseus,°° opened 
to see heavenly things, who can be supposed so senseless as not 
to be lost in rapturous admiration of the divine mysteries of Bap- 
tism! When, therefore, the riches of this Sacrament are unfolded 
-to the faithful by the pastor, so as to enable them to behold them, 
if not with the eyes of the body, yet with those of the soul illu- 


“Matt. xxviii. 10. erence tat. 3. *Eph. v. 25, 26. 
* John 1115 4 Kings vi. 17. 


172 THE SACRAMENTS 


mined by the light of faith, may we not anticipate similar 
results ? @ 


The Ministers of Baptism 


In the next place, it appears not only expedient, but necessary 
to say who are ministers of this Sacrament; both in order that 
those to whom this office is specially confided may study to per- 
form its functions religiously and holily; and that no one, out- 
stepping, as it were, his proper limits, may unseasonably take 
possession of, or arrogantly assume, what belongs to another ; 
for, as the Apostle teaches, order is to be observed in all things. 


BISHOPS AND PRIESTS THE ORDINARY MINISTERS 


The faithful, therefore, are to be informed that of those (who 
administer Baptism) there are three gradations. Bishops and 
priests hold the first place. To them belongs the administration 
of this Sacrament, not by any extraordinary concession of power, 
but by right of office; for to them, in the persons of the Apostles, 
was addressed the command of our Lord: Go, baptize.** Bishops, 
it is true, in order not to neglect the more weighty charge of 
instructing the faithful, have generally left its administration to 
priests. But the authority of the Fathers and the usage of the 
Church prove that priests exercise this function by their own 
right, so much so that they may baptize even in the presence of 
the Bishop. Ordained to consecrate the Holy Eucharist, the 
Sacrament of peace and unity, it was fitting that they be invested 
with power to administer all those things which are required to 
enable others to participate in that peace and unity. If, therefore, 
the Fathers have at any time said that without the leave of the 
Bishop the priest has not the right to baptize, they are to be 
understood to speak of that Baptism only which was administered 
on certain days of the year with solemn ceremonies. 


DEACONS EXTRAORDINARY MINISTERS OF BAPTISM 

Next among the ministers are deacons, for whom, as numerous 
decrees of the holy Fathers attest it is not lawful without the 
permission of the Bishop or priest to administer this Sacrament. 


+ COLMEIVaIAOs Matt. xxviii. 10. 
4 On the institution of Baptism see Summa Theol. 3a. Ixvi. 2. 


BAPTISM 173 


MINISTERS IN CASE OF NECESSITY 


Those who may administer Baptism in case of necessity, but 
without its solemn ceremonies, hold the last place; and in this 
class are included all, even the laity, men and women, to whatever 
sect they may belong. This office extends in case of necessity, 
even to Jews, infidels and heretics, provided, however, they intend 
to do what the Catholic Church does in that act of her ministry. 
These things were established by many decrees of the ancient 
Fathers and Councils; and the holy Council of Trent denounces 
anathema against those who dare to say, that Baptism, even when 
administered by heretics, in the name of the Father, and of the 
Son, and of the Holy Ghost, with the intention of doing what the 
Church does, is not true Baptism. 

And here indeed let us admire the supreme goodness and wis- 
dom of our Lord. Seeing the necessity of this Sacrament for all, 
He not only instituted water, than which nothing can be more 
common, as its matter, but also placed its administration within 
the power of all. In its administration, however, as we have 
already observed, all are not allowed to use the solemn cere- 
monies; not that rites and ceremonies are of higher dignity, but 
because they are less necessary than the Sacrament. 

Let not the faithful, however, imagine that this office is given 
promiscuously to all, so as to do away with the propriety of ob- 
serving a certain precedence among those who are its ministers. 
When a man is present a woman should not baptize; an ecclesi- 
astic takes precedence over a layman, and a priest over a simple 
ecclesiastic. Midwives, however, when accustomed to its admin- 
istration, are not to be found fault with if sometimes, when a 
man is present who is unacquainted with the manner of its admin- 
istration, they perform what may otherwise appear to belong 
more properly to men.* 


The Sponsors at Baptism 
Besides the ministers who, as just explained, confer Baptism, 
another class of persons, according to the most ancient practice of 


aQn the ministers of Baptism see Summa Theol. 3a. Ixvii. 1-6; St. 
Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. vi. 113-120; Code of Canon Law, canons 738-744. 
On registration of Baptism see Code of Canon Law canons 777-779. 


174 THE SACRAMENTS 


the Church, is admitted to assist at the baptismal font. In former 
times these were commonly called by sacred writers receivers, 
sponsors or sureties, and are now called godfathers and god- 
mothers. As this is an office pertaining almost to all the laity, 
pastors should explain it with care, so that the faithful may 
understand what is chiefly necessary for its proper performance. 


WHY SPONSORS ARE REQUIRED AT BAPTISM 


In the first instance it should be explained why at Baptism, 
besides those who administer the Sacrament, godparents and 
sponsors are also required. The propriety of the practice will at 
once appear to all if they recollect that Baptism is a spiritual 
regeneration by which we are born children of God; for of it 
St. Peter says: As newborn infants, desire the rational milk 
without guile.®* As, therefore, every one, after his birth, requires 
a nurse and instructor by whose assistance and attention he is 
brought up and formed to learning and useful knowledge, so 
those, who, by the waters of Baptism, begin to live a spirittal life 
should be entrusted to the fidelity and prudence of some one from 
whom they may imbibe the precepts of the Christian religion and 
may be brought up in all holiness, and thus grow gradually in 
Christ, until, with the Lord’s help, they at length arrive at perfect 
manhood. 

This necessity must appear still more imperative, if we recol- 
lect that pastors, who are charged with the public care of parishes 
have not sufficient time to undertake the private instruction of 
children in the rudiments of faith. 


ANTIQUITY OF THIS LAW 


Concerning this very ancient practice we have this noteworthy 
testimony of St. Denis: It occurred to our divine leaders (so he 
called the Apostles), and they in their wisdom ordained that in- 
fants should be introduced (into the Church) in this holy manner, 
that their natural parents should deliver them to the care of some 
one well skilled in divine things, as to a master under whom, as 
a spiritual father and guardian of his salvation in holiness, the 

TP iPeteuy at 


BAPTISM 175 


child should lead the remainder of his life.5+ The same doctrine is 
confirmed by the authority of Hyginus.® 


AFFINITY CONTRACTED BY SPONSORS 


The Church, therefore, in her wisdom has ordained that not 
only the person who baptizes contracts a spiritual affinity with 
the person baptized, but also the sponsor with the godchild and 
its natural parents, so that between all these marriage cannot be 
lawfully contracted, and if contracted, it is null and void.@ 


DUTIES OF SPONSORS 


The faithful are also to be taught the duty of sponsors; for 
such is the negligence with which this office is treated in the 
Church that only the bare name of the function remains, while 
none seem to have the least idea of its sanctity. Let all sponsors, 
then, at all times recollect that they are strictly bound by this law 
to exercise a constant vigilance over their spiritual children, and 
carefully to instruct them in the maxims of a Christian life; so 
that these may show themselves throughout life to be what their 
sponsors promised in the solemn ceremony. 

On this subject let us hear the words of St. Denis. Speaking 
in the person of the sponsor he says: I promise, by my constant 
exhortations to induce this child, when he comes to a knowledge 
of religion, to renounce every thing opposed (to his Christian 
calling) and to profess and perform the sacred promises which 
he now makes.*® 

St. Augustine also says: I most especially admonish you, men 
and women, who have acquired godchildren through Baptism, to 
consider that you stood as sureties before God, for those whom 
you received at the sacred font.*" Indeed it preeminently becomes 
every man, who undertakes any office, to be indefatigable in the 
discharge of its duties; and he who promised to be the teacher 
and guardian of another should never allow to be deserted him 


De Eccl. Hier. c. vii. p. 3. ii. “In Grat. p. 3. d. iv. c. 100. 
“Wail, (Ge, Ibshye Grate piesa dist.-dve.c. 105. 


aUnder the New Code of Canon Law the diriment impediment of 
spiritual affinity exists only between: (a) the person baptized and the 
baptizer, (b) the person baptized and the sponsor (canon 1079). 


176 THE SACRAMENTS 


whom he once received under his care and protection as long as 
he knows the latter to stand in need of either. 

Speaking of this same duty of sponsors, St. Augustine sums up 
in a few words the lessons of instruction which they are bound to 
impart to their spiritual children. They ought, he says, to admon- 
ish them to observe chastity, love justice, cling to charity; and 
above all they should teach them the Creed, the Lord’s Prayer, the 
Ten Commandments, and the rudiments of the Christian re- 
ligion.*® 


WHO MAY NOT BE SPONSORS 


It is easy, therefore, to decide who are inadmissible to this holy 
guardianship, that is, those who are unwilling to discharge its 
duties with fidelity, or who cannot do so with care and accuracy. 

Wherefore, besides the natural parents, who, to mark the great 
difference that exists between this spiritual and the carnal bring- 
ing up of youth, are not permitted to undertake this charge, 
heretics, Jews and infidels are on no account to be admitted to 
this office, since their thoughts and efforts are continually em- 
ployed in darkening by falsehood the true faith and in subvert- 
ing all Christian piety. 


NUMBER OF SPONSORS 


The number of sponsors is limited by the Council of Trent to 
one godfather or one godmother, or at most, to a godfather and 
a godmother; because a number of teachers may confuse the 
order of discipline and instruction, and also because it was neces- 
sary to prevent the multiplication of affinities which would 
impede a wider diffusion of society by means of lawful marriage. 


Necessity of Baptism 


If the knowledge of what has been hitherto explained be, as 
it is, of highest importance to the faithful, it is no less important 
to them to learn that the law of Baptism, as established by our 


ee arate bes 
In Grat. dist. iv. c. 120; cf. Serm. clxviii. 3; cclxv. n. 2; cclxvii. n. 4. 


a2QOn the Sponsors in Baptism see Summa Theol. 3a. Ixvii. Seat 
Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. vi. 146-160; Code of Canon Law, ener. 


BAPTISM 174 


Lord, extends to all, so that unless they are regenerated to God 
through the grace of Baptism, be their parents Christians or 
infidels, they are born to eternal misery and destruction. Pastors, 
therefore, should often explain these words of the Gospel: 
Unless a man be born again of water and the Holy Ghost, he 
cannot enter into the kingdom of God.*® 


INFANT BAPTISM: ITS NECESSITY 


That this law extends not only to adults but also to infants 
and children, and that the Church has received this from Apos- 
tolic tradition, is confirmed by the unanimous teaching and au- 
thority of the Fathers. 

Besides, it is not to be supposed that Christ the Lord would 
have withheld the Sacrament and grace of Baptism from chil- 
dren, of whom He said: Suffer the little children, and forbid 
them not to come to me; for the kingdom of heaven is for 
such; °° whom also He embraced, upon whom He imposed hands, 
to whom He gave His blessing.*4 

Moreover, when we read that an entire family was baptized 
by Paul,* it is sufficiently obvious that the children of the family 
must also have been cleansed in the saving font. 

Circumcision,? too, which was a figure of Baptism, affords a 
strong argument in proof of this practice. That children were 
circumcised on the eighth day is universally known. If then 
circumcision, made by hand, in despotling of the body of the 
flesh,®* was profitable to children, it is clear that Baptism, which 
is the circumcision of Christ, not made by hand, is also profitable 
to them. 

Finally, as the Apostle teaches, if by one man’s offence death 
reigned through one, much more they who receive abundance of 
grace, and of the gift, and of justice, shall reign in life through 
one, Jesus Christ.** If, then, through the transgression of Adam, 
children inherit original sin, with still stronger reason can they 
attain through Christ our Lord grace and justice that they may 


8 John iii. 5. © Matt. xix. 14. “ Mark x. 16. 
ad GaP, be 1G INES Said Bey “Colin dt. * Rom. v. 17. 
aQOn the rite of Circumcision see Summa Theol. 3a. Ixx. 


178 THE SACRAMENTS 


reign in life. This, however, cannot be effected otherwise than 
by Baptism. 

Pastors, therefore, should inculcate the absolute necessity of ad- 
ministering Baptism to infants, and of gradually forming their 
tender minds to piety by education in the Christian religion. For 
according to these admirable words of the wise man: A young 
man according to his way, even when he is old, he will not depart 
from 1t.% 


INFANTS RECEIVE THE GRACES OF BAPTISM 


It may not be doubted that in Baptism infants receive the 
mysterious gifts of faith. Not that they believe with the assent 
of the mind, but they are established in the faith of their parents, 
if the parents profess the true faith; if not—to use the words of 
St. Augustine,—then im that of the universal society of the 
saints; °° for they are rightly said to be presented for Baptism 
by all those to whom their initiation in that sacred rite is a source 


of joy, and by whose charity they are united to the communion 
of the Holy Ghost. 


BAPTISM OF INFANTS SHOULD NOT BE DELAYED 


The faithful are earnestly to be exhorted to take care that 
their children be brought to the church, as soon as it can be done 
with safety, to receive solemn Baptism. Since infant children 
have no other means of salvation except Baptism, we may easily 
understand how grievously those persons sin who permit them 
to remain without the grace of the Sacrament longer than neces- 


sity may require, particularly at an age so tender as to be exposed 
to numberless dangers of death. 


BAPTISM OF ADULTS 


With regard to those of adult age who enjoy the perfect use 
of reason, persons, namely, born of infidel parents, the practice 
of the primitive Church points out that a different manner of 
proceeding should be followed. To them the Christian faith is 


TIP MOhis SOdih, O “ Ad Bon. cap. 08, n. 5. 


BAPTISM 179 


to be proposed ; and they are earnestly to be exhorted, persuaded 
and invited to embrace it. 


THEY SHOULD NOT DELAY THEIR BAPTISM UNDULY 


If converted to the Lord God, they are then to be admonished 
not to defer the Sacrament of Baptism beyond the time prescribed 
by the Church. For since it is written, delay not to be converted 
to the Lord, and defer it not from day to day,* they are to be 
taught that in their regard perfect conversion consists in regen- 
eration by Baptism. Besides, the longer they defer Baptism, the 
longer are they deprived of the use and graces of the other Sac- 
raments, by which the Christian religion is practised, since the 
other Sacraments are accessible through Baptism only. 

They are also deprived of the abundant fruits of Baptism, 
the waters of which not only wash away all the stains and defile- 
ments of past sins, but also enrich us with divine grace which 
enables us to avoid sin for the future and preserve righteousness 
and innocence, which constitute the sum of a Christian life, as 
all can easily understand. 


ORDINARILY THEY ARE NOT BAPTIZED AT ONCE 


On adults, however, the Church has not been accustomed to 
confer the Sacrament of Baptism at once, but has ordained that 
it be deferred for a certain time. The delay is not attended with 
the same danger as in the case of infants, which we have already 
mentioned; should any unforeseen accident make it impossible 
for adults to be washed in the salutary waters, their intention 
and determination to receive Baptism and their repentance for 
past sins, will avail them to grace and righteousness. 

Nay, this delay seems to be attended with some advantages. 
And first, since the Church must take particular care that none 
approach this Sacrament through hypocrisy and dissimulation, 
the intentions of such as seek Baptism, are better examined and 
ascertained. Hence it is that we read in the decrees of ancient 


CDR CClaverc: 
aQOn postponing Baptism see Summa Theol. 3a. Ixviii. 3; on time and 
place of Baptism see Code of Canon Law, canons 770-776. 


180 THE SACRAMENTS 


Councils that Jewish converts to the Catholic faith, before ad- 
mission to Baptism, should spend some months in the ranks of 
the catechumens. 

Furthermore, the candidate for Baptism is thus better in- 
structed in the doctrine of the faith which he is to profess, and 
in the practices of the Christian life. Finally, when Baptism is 
administered to adults with solemn ceremonies on the appointed 
days of Easter and Pentecost only greater religious reverence is 
shown to the Sacrament. 


IN CASE OF NECESSITY ADULTS MAY BE BAPTIZED AT ONCE 


Sometimes, however, when there exists a just and necessary 
cause, as in the case of imminent danger of death, Baptism is 
not to be deferred, particularly if the person to be baptized is 
well instructed in the mysteries of faith. This we find to have 
been done by Philip, and by the Prince of the Apostles, when 
without any delay, the one baptized the eunuch of Queen Can- 
dace; the other, Cornelius, as soon as they expressed a wish to 
embrace the faith.®* + 


Dispositions for Baptism 
INTENTION 


The faithful are also to be instructed in the necessary dispo- 
sitions for Baptism. In the first place they must desire and in- 
tend to receive it; for as in Baptism we all die to sin and resolve 
to live a new life, it is fit that it be administered to those only 
who receive it of their own free will and accord; it is to be 
forced upon none. Hence we learn from holy tradition that it 
has been the invariable practice to administer Baptism to no 
individual without previously asking him if he be willing to re- 
ceive it. This disposition even infants are presumed to have, 
since the will of the Church, which promises for them, cannot 
be mistaken. 

® Acts viii. 38; x. 48. 


a On the necessity and recipients of Baptism see Summa Theol. Bas 
Ixviii. 1-3; 9-12; St. Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. vi. 121-139; Code of Canon 
Law, canons 745-754. 


BAPTISM 181 


Insane, delirious persons who were once of sound mind and 
afterwards became deranged, having in their present state no 
wish to be baptized, are not to be admitted to Baptism, unless in 
danger of death. In such cases, if previous to insanity they 
give intimation of a wish to be baptized, the Sacrament is to be 
administered ; without such indication previously given it is not 
to be administered. The same rule is to be followed with regard 
to persons who are unconscious. 

But if they (the insane) never enjoyed the use of reason, the 
authority and practice of the Church decide that they are to be 
baptized in the faith of the Church, just as children are baptized 
before they come to the use of reason. 


FAITH 


Besides a wish to be baptized, in order to obtain the grace of 
the Sacrament, faith is also necessary. Our Lord and Saviour 
has said: He that believes and is baptized shall be saved.*® 


REPENTANCE 


Another necessary condition is repentance for past sins, and 
a fixed determination to avoid all sin in the future. Should any- 
one desire Baptism and be unwilling to correct the habit of sin- 
ning, he should be altogether rejected. For nothing is so opposed 
to the grace and power of Baptism as the intention and purpose 
of tnose who resolve never to abandon sin. 

Seeing that Baptism should be sought with a view to put on 
Christ 7° and to be united to Him, it is manifest that he who pur- 
poses to continue in sin should justly be repelled from the sacred 
font, particularly since none of those things which belong to 
Christ and His Church are to be received in vain, and since we 
well understand that, as far as regards sanctifying and saving 
grace, Baptism is received in vain by him who purposes to live 
according to the flesh, and not according to the spirit. As far, 
however, as the Sacrament is concerned, if the person who is 
rightly baptized intends to receive what the Church administers, 
he without doubt validly receives the Sacrament. 

® Mark xvi. 14. * Gal. iii. 27. "Rom. viii. 4. 


see THE SACRAMENTS 


Hence, to the vast multitude who, in compunction of heart, as 
the Scripture says, asked him and the other Apostles what they 
should do, the Prince of the Apostles answered: Do penance and 
be baptized every one of you;*? and in another place he said: 
Be penitent, therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be 
blotted out."* Writing to the Romans, St. Paul also clearly shows 
that he who is baptized should entirely die to sin; and he there- 
fore admonishes us not to yield our members as instruments of 
iniquity unto sin, but present ourselves to God, as those who are 
alive from the dead.™ 


ADVANTAGES TO BE DERIVED FROM THESE REFLECTIONS 


Frequent reflection upon these truths cannot fail, in the first 
place, to fill the minds of the faithful with admiration for the 
infinite goodness of God, who, uninfluenced by any other con- 
sideration than that of His mercy, gratuitously bestowed upon 
us, undeserving as we are, a blessing so extraordinary and divine 
as that of Baptism. 

If in the next place they consider how spotless should be the 
lives of those who have been made the objects of such munifi- 
cence, they cannot fail to be convinced of the special obligation 
imposed on every Christian to spend each day of his life in such 
sanctity and fervor, as if on that very day he had received the 
Sacrament and grace of Baptism.? 


Effects of Baptism 


To inflame the minds of the faithful, however, with a zeal for 
true piety, pastors will find no means more efficacious than an 
accurate exposition of the effects of Baptism. 

The effects of Baptism should be frequently explained, in order 
that the faithful may be rendered more sensible of the high 
dignity to which they have been raised, and may never suffer 


themselves to be cast down therefrom by the snares or assaults 
of Satan. 


Acts ti. 37. Acts iii. 19. ™ Rom. vi. 13. 
@On the dispositions for Baptism see Summa Theol. 3a. xviii. 4-8. 


BAPTISM 183 


FIRST EFFECT OF BAPTISM: REMISSION OF SIN 


They are to be taught, in the first place, that such is the 
admirable efficacy of this Sacrament that it remits original sin and 
actual guilt, however unthinkable its enormity may seem. 

This was foretold long before by Ezechiel, through whom God 
said: I will pour upon you clean water, and you shall be cleansed 
from all your filthiness.* The Apostle also, writing to the Co- 
rinthians, after having enumerated a long catalogue of sins, adds: 
such you were, but you are washed, but you are sanctified.” 

That such was at all times the doctrine handed down by holy 
Church is clear. By the generation of the flesh, says St. Augus- 
tine in his book On the Baptism of Infants, we contract original 
sin only; by the regeneration of the Spirit, we obtain forgive- 
ness not only of original, but also of actual sins.77 St. Jerome 
also, writing to Oceanus, says: All sins are forgiven in Baptism.” 

To remove all further doubt on the subject, the Council of 
Trent, after other Councils had defined this, declared it anew, 
pronouncing anathema against those who should presume to think 
otherwise, or should dare to assert that although sin is forgiven in 
Baptism, it is not entirely removed or totally eradicated, but is 
cut away in such a manner as to leave its roots still fixed in the 
soul.7® To use the words of the same holy Council, God hates 
nothing in those who are regenerated; for there remains nothing 
deserving of condemnation in those who are truly buried with 
Christ by Baptism unto death, “who walk not according to the 
flesh,” but putting off the old man, and putting on the new, who is 
created according to God, become innocent, spotless, pure, up- 
right, and beloved of God. 


CONCUPISCENCE WHICH REMAINS AFTER BAPTISM IS NO SIN 


We must confess, however, that concupiscence, or the fuel of 
sin, still remains, as the Council declares in the same place. But 
concupiscence does not constitute sin, for, as St. Augustine ob- 
serves, in children who have been baptized the guilt of concu- 

™ Ezech. xxxvi. 25. cert COfeava ill. 


™De pec. merit. et remis. lib. i. c. 15. n. 20. 
Co pista lx. 1141/4. ™ Sess. v. Can. 5. 


184 THE SACRAMENTS 


piscence is removed,* (the concupiscence itself) remains for 
probation; ®° and in another place he says: the guilt of concu- 
piscence is pardoned in Baptism, but its infirmity remains. For 
concupiscence which is the effect of sin is nothing more than an 
appetite of the soul in itself repugnant to reason. But if it is not 
accompanied by the consent of the will or by negligence, it is 
very far from being sin. 

When St. Paul says, J did not know concupiscence, if the law 
did not say: Thou shalt not covet,®* he speaks not of concupiscence 
itself, but of the fault of the will. 

The same doctrine is taught by St. Gregory when he says: 
If there are any who assert that in Baptism sin is but superficially 
effaced, what could be more untrue than their statement? By the 
Sacrament of faith the soul, entirely freed from sin, adheres to 
God alone.®* In proof of this doctrine he has recourse to the 
testimony of our Saviour who says in St. John: He that ts 
washed, needeth not but to wash his feet, but is clean wholly.** 


FURTHER PROOF OF THE FIRST EFFECT OF BAPTISM 


Should anyone desire a striking figure and image (of the 
efficacy of Baptism) let him consider the history of Naaman the 
Syrian leper, of whom the Scriptures inform us that when he 
had washed seven times in the waters of the Jordan he was so 
cleansed from his leprosy that his flesh became like the flesh of a 
child.®® 

The remission of all sin, original and actual, is therefore the 
peculiar effect of Baptism. That this was the object of its insti- 
tution by our Lord and Saviour is clearly stated by the Prince 
of the Apostles, to say nothing of other testimonies, when he 
says: Do penance and be baptized every one of you, in the name 
of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins.8°> 


» De pec. meriet remiss. libdivcjas GRetractialibs ixasj ies: 
is Rom. vii. 7. ' SILT pias Day ond hye 
John xiii. Io. 4 Kings v. 14. * Acts ii. 38. 
a That is, original sin, the cause of concupiscence, is removed. 
>On the first effect of Baptism see Summa Theol. 3a. Ixix. 2. 


BAPTISM 185 


THE SECOND EFFECT OF BAPTISM : REMISSION OF ALL PUNISHMENT 
DUE TO SIN 


In Baptism not only is sin forgiven, but with it all the punish- 
ment due to sin is mercifully remitted by God. To communicate 
the efficacy of the Passion of Christ our Lord is an effect com- 
mon to all the Sacraments ; but of Baptism alone does the Apostle 
say, that by it we die and are buried together with Christ.8” 

Hence holy Church has always understood that to impose those 
works of piety, usually called by the holy Fathers works of satis- 
faction, on one who is to be cleansed in Baptism, would be in- 
jurious to this Sacrament in the highest degree. 

Nor is there any discrepancy between the doctrine here taught 
and the practice of the primitive Church, which of old com- 
manded the Jews, when preparing for Baptism, to observe a fast 
of forty successive days. (The fast thus imposed) was not en- 
joined as a work of satisfaction; but those who had received 
Baptism were thus admonished to devote some time to the unin- 
terrupted exercise of fasting and prayer in honor of so great a 
Sacrament. 


BAPTISM DOES NOT EXEMPT FROM PENALTIES OF THE CIVIL LAW 


Although the remission by Baptism of the punishments due 
to sin cannot be questioned, we are not to infer that it exempts an 
offender from the punishments decreed by civil tribunals for some 
grave crime. Thus a person sentenced to death is not rescued 
by Baptism from the penalty ordained by the law. 

We cannot, however, too highly commend the religion and 
piety of those rulers who remit the sentence of the law, that the 
glory of God may be the more strikingly displayed in His Sacra- 
ments. 


BAPTISM REMITS THE PUNISHMENT DUE TO ORIGINAL SIN AFTER 
DEATH 


Baptism also remits all the punishment due to original sin after 
this life, for through the merit of the death of our Lord we are 


SROMm=nvion Sei 4e 


186 THE SACRAMENTS 


able to attain this blessing. By Baptism, as we have already said, 
we die with Christ. For if, says the Apostle, we have been 
planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall be also in 
the likeness of his resurrection.®* 


BAPTISM DOES NOT FREE US FROM THE MISERIES OF LIFE 


Should it be asked why immediately after Baptism we are not 
exempt in this mortal life from misfortunes and restored by the 
influence of this sacred ablution to that state of perfection in 
which Adam, the father of the human race, was placed before 
his fall, the answer will be that there are two chief reasons for 
this. 

In the first place we who by Baptism are united to, and become 
members of Christ’s body,’® should not be more honored than 
our Head. Now Christ our Lord, although clothed from His 
birth with the plenitude of grace and truth,°° was not divested of 
human infirmity which He assumed, until, having suffered and 
died, He rose to the glory of immortality. It cannot appear 
extraordinary, therefore, if the faithful, even after they have 
received the grace of justification by Baptism, are clothed with 
frail and perishable bodies until, having undergone many labors 
for the sake of Christ, and having closed their earthly career, 
they are recalled to life and found worthy to enjoy with Him an 
eternity of bliss. 

The second reason why bodily infirmity, disease, sense of pain 
and motions of concupiscence remain after Baptism is that in 
them we may have the seed and material of virtue from which 
we shall hereafter receive a more abundant harvest of glory and 
more ample rewards. When, with patient resignation, we bear all 
the trials of life, and, aided by the divine assistance, subject to 
the dominion of reason the rebellious desires of the heart, we 
ought to cherish an assured hope that if, with the Apostle we 
shall have fought a good fight, finished the course, and kept the 
faith, the Lord, the just judge, will render to us on that day a 
crown of justice which is laid up for us. 

Such seems to have been the divine plan with regard to the 
children of Israel. God delivered them from the bondage of 


* Rom. vi. 5. * Ephe v030) © John i. 14. 2) Timiv. 7. 


BAPTISM 184 


Egypt, having drowned Pharaoh and his hosts in the sea; 2 yet 
He did not conduct them immediately into the happy land of 
promise ; He first tried them by a variety and multiplicity of suf- 
ferings. And when He afterwards placed them in possession of 
the promised land and expelled the previous inhabitants from 
their native territories, yet He left a few other nations whom the 
Israelites could not exterminate, in order that His people might 
always have occasion to exercise fortitude and warlike courage.% 

We may add that if, to the heavenly gifts with which the soul 
is adorned in Baptism, were joined temporal advantages, there 
would be good reason to doubt whether many might not approach 
Baptism with a view to obtain such advantages in this life, rather 
than the glory to be hoped for in the next; whereas the Christian 
should always propose to himself, not these delusive and uncertain 
goods which are seen, but the solid and eternal ones which are 
nat seen.” } 


BAPTISM A SOURCE OF HAPPINESS TO THE CHRISTIAN EVEN IN 
THIS LIFE 


This life, however, although full of misery, does not lack its 
pleasures and joys. To us, who by Baptism are engrafted as 
branches on Christ,°> what could be more pleasing or desirable 
than, taking up the cross upon our shoulders, to follow Him as 
our leader, fatigued by no labor, retarded by no danger, in ardent 
pursuit of the rewards of our high vocation; ** some to receive 
the laurel of virginity, others the crown of teaching and preach- 
ing, some the palm of martyrdom, others the honors appropriate 
to their respective virtues?®’ These splendid titles of exalted 
dignity none of us should receive, had we not contended in the 
race of this calamitous life, and stood unconquered in the conflict. 


THIRD EFFECT OF BAPTISM: GRACE OF REGENERATION 


But to return to the effects of Baptism, it should be taught that 
by virtue of this Sacrament we are not only delivered from what 


® Exod. xiv. 27. * Judges ii. 1,2 “2 Cor. iv. 17, '18. " 
*® John xv. 2. * Phil. iii. 14. % Apoc. vii. 9, 14; Dan. xii. 3. 
aQOn the second effect of Baptism see Summa Theol. 3a. Ixix. 2, 3. 


188 THE SACRAMENTS 


are justly deemed the greatest of all evils, but are also enriched 
with invaluable goods and blessings. Our souls are replenished 
with divine grace, by which we are rendered just and children of 
God and are made heirs to eternal salvation. For it is written: 
He that believeth and is baptized, shall be saved,** and the 
Apostle testifies that the Church is cleansed by the laver of water 
in the word of life.°® Now according to the definition of the 
Council of Trent, which under pain of anathema we are bound 
to believe, grace not only remits sin, but is also a divine quality 
inherent in the soul, and, as it were, a brilliant light that effaces 
all those stains which obscure the lustre of the soul, investing it 
with increased brightness and beauty. This is also a clear in- 
ference from the words of Scripture when it says that grace is 
poured forth,’ and also when it usually calls grace, the pledge 
of the Holy Ghost.° 


FOURTH EFFECT OF BAPTISM: INFUSED VIRTUES AND INCORPORA- 
TION WITH CHRIST 


This grace is accompanied by a most splendid train of all 
virtues, which are divinely infused into the soul along with grace. 
Hence, when writing to Titus, the Apostle says: He saved us by 
the laver of regeneration and renovation of the Holy Ghost, 
whom he hath poured forth upon us abundantly, through Jesus 
Christ our Saviour. St. Augustine, in explanation of the 
words, poured forth abundantly, says: that is, for the remission 
of sins and for abundance of virtues.» 

By Baptism we are also united to Christ, as members to their 
Head. As therefore from the head proceeds the power by which 
the different members of the body are moved to the proper per- 
formance of their respective functions, so from the fulness of 
Christ the Lord are diffused divine grace and virtue through all 
those who are justified, qualifying them for the performance of 
all the duties of Christian piety. 

” Mark xvi, 16. | ~ Eph. vy. 26. ™ Sess. vi, vii, De Justific. 

a ROMmnVerSe = Zu COL. aia2 a Dita lies HO 


a How we are made children of God by Baptism is explained also on 
pages 505, 500. 

b These words are found in the Gloss. interlin. taken from St. Ambrose 
on Luke 1. 15. 


‘ 


BAPTISM 189 


WHY THE PRACTICE OF VIRTUE IS DIFFICULT EVEN AFTER BAPTISM 


Though we are thus supported by a powerful array of virtues, 
it should not excite our surprise if we cannot, without much labor 
and difficulty, undertake, or at least, perform acts of piety and of 
moral virtue. If this is so, it is not because the goodness of God 
has not bestowed on us the virtues from which these good works 
proceed; but because there still remains after Baptism a severe 
conflict of the flesh against the spirit, in which, however, it would 
not become a Christian to be dispirited or grow faint. 

Relying on the divine goodness we should confidently hope that 
by a constant habit of leading a holy life the time will come when 
whatever things are modest, whatever just, whatever holy, 
will also prove easy and agreeable. Let these be the subjects of 
our willing consideration, the objects of our cheerful practice, 
that the God of peace may be with us.2%4 


FIFTH EFFECT OF BAPTISM: CHARACTER OF CHRISTIAN 


By Baptism, moreover, we are sealed with a character that can 
never be effaced from the soul. On this point, however, we need 
not speak at length, for what we have already sufficiently said 
on the subject, when treating of the Sacraments in general, may 
be applied here. 


BAPTISM NOT TO BE REPEATED 


Since on account of the nature and efficacy of this character it 
has been defined by the Church that this Sacrament is on no 
account to be reiterated, pastors should frequently and diligently 
admonish the faithful on this subject, lest at any time they may 
be led into error. 

This doctrine is taught by the Apostle when he says: One 
Lord, one faith, one baptism.°° Again, when exhorting the 
Romans, that being dead in Christ by Baptism they should take 
care not to lose the life which they had received from Him, he 


4 Philip. iv. 8. Bes COrmexiiigel I. 106 Eph. iv. 5. 
aQOn the grace and infused virtues of Baptism see Summa Theol. 3a. 
Ixix. 4-6. 


190 THE SACRAMENTS 


says: In that Christ died unto sin, he died once." These words 
seem clearly to signify that as Christ cannot die again, neither 
can we die again by Baptism. Hence the holy Church also openly 
professes that she believes one Baptism. That this agrees with 
the nature of the thing and with reason is understood from the 
very idea of Baptism, which is a spiritual regeneration. As then, 
by virtue of the laws of nature, we are generated and born but 
once, and, as St. Augustine observes, there is no returning to the 
womb ; 1°8 so, in like manner, there is but one spiritual generation, 
and Baptism is never at any time to be repeated. 


IN CONDITIONAL BAPTISM THE SACRAMENT IS NOT REPEATED 


Nor let anyone suppose that it is repeated by the Church when 
she baptizes anyone whose previous Baptism was doubtful, mak- 
ing use of this formula: If thou art baptized, I baptize thee not 
again; but if thou art not yet baptized, I baptize thee in the name 
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. In such 
cases Baptism is not to be considered as impiously repeated, but 
as holily, yet conditionally, administered. 

In this connection, however, there are some matters, in which, 
to the very great injury of the Sacrament, abuses are of almost 
daily occurrence, and which therefore demand the diligent atten- 
tion of pastors. For there are not wanting those who think that 
no sin is committed if they indiscriminately administer conditional 
Baptism. Hence if an infant be brought to them, they think that 
no inquiry need be made as to whether it was previously baptized, 
but proceed immediately to baptize the child. Nay more, 
although they be well aware that the Sacrament was administered 
at home, they do not hesitate to repeat its administration in the 
Church conditionally, making use of the solemn ceremonies of the 
Church. 

This certainly they cannot do without sacrilege and without 
incurring what theologians call an irregularity. According 
to the authority of Pope Alexander the conditional form of Bap- 
tism is to be used only when after due inquiry doubts are enter- 


7 Rom. vi. Io. ultimloanmitract sect wO! 
® This irregularity has been abolished under the Code of Canon Law. 


BAPTISM IQl 


tained as to the validity of the previous Baptism.1°* In no other 
case is it ever lawful to administer Baptism a second time, even 
conditionally. 


SIXTH EFFECT OF BAPTISM: OPENING THE GATES OF HEAVEN 


Besides the other advantages which accrue to us from Baptism, 
the last, to which all the others seem to be referred, is that it 
opens to us the portals of heaven which sin had closed against us. 


EFFECTS OF BAPTISM FORESHADOWED IN THE BAPTISM OF CHRIST 


These effects which are wrought in us by virtue of Baptism 
are distinctly marked by the circumstances which, as the Gospel 
relates, accompanied the Baptism of our Saviour. The heavens 
were opened and the Holy Ghost appeared descending upon 
Christ our Lord in the form of a dove.1?° By this we are given 
to understand that to those who are baptized are imparted the 
gifts of the Holy Spirit, that to them are opened the gates of 
heaven. The baptized, it is true, do not enter heaven immediately 
after Baptism, but in due season. When they shall have been freed 
from all misery which is incompatible with a state of bliss, they 
shall exchange a mortal for an immortal life.> 


MEASURE IN WHICH THOSE EFFECTS ARE OBTAINED 


These are the fruits of Baptism, which, if we consider the 
efficacy of the Sacrament, are, no doubt, equally common to all; 
but if we consider the dispositions with which it is received, it 
is no less certain that all do not share to the same extent in these 
heavenly gifts and graces.° 


2 Decretal. lib. iii. tit. 41. c. 2. 

0 Matt. iii. 16; Mark i. 10; Luke iii. 22. 

aQOn the baptismal character see Summa Theol. 3a. Ixili. 6; Ixci. 9. 

bOn the sixth effect of baptism see Summa Theol. ga. Ixix. 7. 

¢On the measure of the effects of Baptism and the time they are pro- 
duced see Summa Theol. 3a. 1xix. 8-Io. 


192 THE SACRAMENTS 


Ceremonies of Baptism 


THEIR IMPORTANCE 


It now remains to explain, clearly and concisely, what is to be 
taught concerning the prayers, rites, and ceremonies of this Sac- 
rament. To rites and ceremonies may, in some measure, be 
applied what the Apostle says of the gift of tongues, that it is 
unprofitable to speak, unless the faithful understand. They pre- 
sent an image, and convey the signification of the things that are 
done in the Sacrament; but if the people do not understand the 
force and meaning of these signs, there is but little advantage 
derived from ceremonies. Pastors should take care, therefore, 
to make them understood and to impress the minds of the faith- 
ful with a conviction that, although ceremonies are not of abso- 
lute necessity, they are of very great importance and deserve 
great veneration. 

This the authority of those by whom they were instituted, 
who were, no doubt, the Apostles, and also the object of their 
institution, sufficiently prove. It is manifest that ceremonies 
contribute to the more religious and holy administration of the 
Sacraments, serve to place, as it were, before the eyes the exalted 
and inestimable gifts which they contain, and impress on the 


minds of the faithful a deeper sense of the boundless beneficence 
of God. 


THREE CLASSES OF CEREMONIES IN BAPTISM 


In order that the pastor’s instructions may follow a certain 
plan and that the people may find it easier to remember his 
words, all the ceremonies and prayers which the Church uses 
in the administration of Baptism are to be reduced to three 
heads. The first comprehends such as are observed before 
coming to the baptismal font; the second, such as are used at 


the font; the third, those that usually follow the administration 
of the Sacrament. 


BAPTISM 193 


CEREMONIES THAT ARE OBSERVED BEFORE COMING TO THE FONT: 
CONSECRATION OF BAPTISMAL WATER 


In the first place, then, the water to be used in Baptism should 
be prepared. The baptismal font is consecrated with the oil 
of mystic unction; not, howeve-:, at all times, but, accord- 
ing to ancient usage, only on certain feasts, which are justly 
deemed the greatest and the most holy solemnities in the year. 
The water of Baptism was consecrated on the vigils of those 
feasts; and on those days alone, except in cases of necessity, 
it was also the practice of the ancient Church to administer Bap- 
tism. But although the Church, on account of the dangers to 
which life is continually exposed, has deemed it expedient to 
change her discipline in this respect, she still observes with the 
greatest solemnity the festivals of Easter and Pentecost on which 
the baptismal water is to be consecrated. 


THE PERSON TO BE BAPTIZED STANDS AT THE CHURCH DOOR 


After the consecration of the water the other ceremonies that 
precede Baptism are next to be explained. The persons to be 
baptized are brought or conducted? to the door of the church 
and are strictly forbidden to enter, as unworthy to be admitted 
into the house of God, until they have cast off the yoke of the 
most degrading servitude and devoted themselves unreservedly 
to Christ the Lord and His most just authority. 


CATECHETICAL INSTRUCTION 


The priest then asks what they demand of the Church; and 
having received the answer, he first instructs them in the doc- 
trines of the Christian faith, of which a profession is to be made 
in Baptism. 

This the priest does in a brief catechetical instruction, a prac- 
tice which originated, no doubt, in the precept of our Lord 
addressed to His Apostles: Go ye into the whole world, and teach 
all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the 


aAs is evident, infants are “brought,” and adults are “conducted,” to 
the church. 


194 THE SACRAMENTS 


Son, and of the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all things 
whatsoever I have commanded you. From this command we 
may learn that Baptism is not to be administered until, at least, 
the principal truths of our religion are explained. 

But as the catechetical form consists of many interrogations, 
if the person to be instructed be an adult, he himself answers; 
if an infant, the sponsor answers for him according to the pre- 
scribed form and makes the solemn promise. 


THE EXORCISM 


The exorcism comes next in order. It consists of words of 
sacred and religious import and of prayers, and is used to expel 
the devil, to weaken and crush his power.* 


THE SALT 


To the exorcism are added other ceremonies, each of which, 
being mystical, has its own clear signification. When, for in- 
stance, salt is put into the mouth of the person to be baptized, 
this evidently means that, by the doctrines of faith and by the 
gift of grace, he shall be delivered from the corruption of sin, 
shall experience a relish for good works, and shall be delighted 
with the food of divine wisdom. 


THE SIGN OF THE CROSS 


Next his forehead, eyes, breast, shoulders and ears are signed 
with the sign of the cross, to declare, that by the mystery of 
Baptism, the senses of the person baptized are opened and 
strengthened, to enable him to receive God, and to understand 
and observe His Commandments. 


THE SALIVA 


His nostrils and ears are next touched with spittle, and he 
is then immediately admitted to the baptismal font. By -this 


™ Mark xvi. 15; Matt. xxviii. 19, 20. 


; a After the above words some editions of the Catechism add the follow- 
ing: “Wherefore the priest breathes three times into the face of him who 


is to be baptized that he may expel the power of the old serpent, and 
may catch the breath of lost life.” pales 


BAPTISM 195 


ceremony we understand that, as sight was given to the blind 
man mentioned in the Gospel, whom the Lord after He had 
spread clay on his eyes commanded to wash them in the waters 
of Siloe,” so through the efficacy of holy Baptism a light is let 
in on the mind, which enables it to discern heavenly truth. 


THE CEREMONIES OBSERVED AFTER COMING TO THE FONT 


After the performance of these ceremonies the persons to be 
baptized approach the baptismal font, at which are performed 
other rites and ceremonies which present a summary of the 
Christian religion. 


THE RENUNCIATION OF SATAN 


Three distinct times the person to be baptized is asked by the 
priest: Dost thou renounce Satan, and all his works, and all his 
pomps? To each of which he, or the sponsor in his name, re- 
plies, J renounce. Whoever, then, purposes to enlist, under the 
standard of Christ, must first of all, enter into a sacred and 
solemn engagement to renounce the devil and the world, and 
always to hold them in utter detestation as his worst enemies.* 


THE PROFESSION OF FAITH 


Next, standing at the baptismal font, he is interrogated by 
the priest in these words: Dost thou believe in God, the Father 
Almighty? To which he answers: J believe. Being similarly 
questioned on the remaining Articles of the Creed, he solemnly 
professes his faith. These two promises contain, it is clear, the 
sum and substance of the law of Christ. 


4.) ohseixe 7. 

aIn some editions of the Roman Catechism the following passage is 
here inserted: “He is next anointed with the oil of catechumens on the 
breast and between the shoulders. He is anointed on the breast to show 
that through the gift of the Holy Ghost he should lay aside error and igno- 
rance, and receive the true faith, for the just man liveth by faith (James 
ii. 26); on the shoulders, that by the grace of the Holy Spirit he may be 
enabled to shake off negligence and sloth and engage actively in the per- 
formance of good works, for faith without works is dead” (Gal. iti. 11). 


196 THE SACRAMENTS 


THE WISH TO BE BAPTIZED 


When the Sacrament is now about to be administered, the 
priest asks the candidate if he wishes to be baptized. After an 
answer in the affirmative has been given by him, or, if he is an 
infant, by the sponsor, the priest immediately performs the salu- 
tary ablution, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of 
the Holy Ghost. 

As man, by yielding the assent of his will to the wicked sug- 
gestions of Satan, fell under a just sentence of condemnation; 
so God will have none enrolled in the number of His soldiers 
but those whose service is voluntary, that by a willing obedience 
to His commands they may obtain eternal salvation. 


THE CEREMONIES THAT FOLLOW BAPTISM: CHRISM 


After the person has been baptized, the priest anoints the 
crown of his head with chrism, thus giving him to understand, 
that from that day he is united as a member to Christ, His 
Head, and ingrafted on His body; and that he is, therefore, 
called a Christian from Christ, as Christ is so called from chrism. 
What the chrism signifies, the prayers then offered by the priest, 
as St. Ambrose observes, sufficiently explain.1** 


THE WHITE GARMENT 


On the person baptized the priest then puts a white garment, 
saying: Receive this white garment, which mayest thou carry 
unstained before the judgment-seat of our Lord Jesus Christ; 
that thou mayest have eternal life. Instead of a white garment, 
infants, because not formally dressed, receive a white cloth, ac- 
companied by the same words. 

According to the teaching of the Fathers this symbol signifies 
the glory of the resurrection to which we are born by Baptism, 
the brightness and beauty with which the soul, when purified 
from the stains of sin, is invested in Baptism, and the innocence 
and integrity which the person who has received Baptism should 
preserve throughout life. 


™ De Sacram, lib. ii. 7. 


BAPTISM 197 


THE LIGHTED CANDLE 


A lighted taper is then put into the hand of the baptized to 
signify that faith, inflamed by charity, which is received in Bap- 
tism, is to be fed and augmented by the exercise of good works. 


THE NAME GIVEN IN BAPTISM 


Finally, a name is given the person baptized. It should be 
taken from some person whose eminent sanctity has given him 
a place in the catalogue of the Saints. The similarity of name 
will stimulate each one to imitate the virtues and holiness of the 
Saint, and, moreover, to hope and pray that he who is the model 
for his imitation will also be his advocate and watch over the 
safety of his body and soul. 

Wherefore those are to be reproved who search for the names 
of heathens, especially of those who were the greatest monsters 
of iniquity, to bestow upon their children. By such conduct they 
practically prove how little they regard Christian piety when 
they so fondly cherish the memory of impious men, as to wish 
to have their profane names continually echo in the ears of the 
faithful.# 


Recapitulation 


This exposition of the Sacrament of Baptism, if given by 
pastors, will be found to embrace almost everything which should 
be known regarding this Sacrament. We have explained the 
meaning of the word Baptism, the nature and substance of the 
Sacrament, and also the parts of which it is composed. We 
have said by whom it was instituted; who are the ministers neces- 
sary to its administration; who should be, as it were, the tutors 
whose instructions should sustain the weakness of the person 
baptized; to whom Baptism should be administered; and how 
they should be disposed; what are the virtue and efficacy of the 
Sacrament; finally, we have developed, at sufficient length for 

aQOn the ceremonies of Baptism see Summa Theol. 3a. Ixvi. 10; Ixxi.; 
St. Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. vi. 140-145; Code of Canon Law, canons 
755-701. 


198 THE SACRAMENTS 


our purpose, the rites and ceremonies that should accompany its 
administration. 

Pastors should recollect that the chief purpose of all these 
instructions is to induce the faithful to direct their constant at- 
tention and solicitude to the fulfilment of the promises so 
sacredly made at Baptism, and to lead lives not unworthy of the 
sanctity that should accompany the name and profession of a 
Christian. 


THE SACRAMENT OF CONFIRMATION 


IMPORTANCE OF INSTRUCTION ON CONFIRMATION 


If ever there was a time demanding the diligence of pastors 
in explaining the Sacrament of Confirmation, in these days cer- 
tainly it requires special attention, when there are found in the 
holy Church of God many by whom this Sacrament is altogether 
omitted; while very few seek to obtain from it the fruit of 
divine grace which they should derive from its participation. 

Lest, therefore, this divine blessing may seem, through their 
fault, and to their most serious injury, to have been conferred 
on them in vain, the faithful are to be instructed both on Whit- 
sunday, on which day it is principally administered, and also on 
such other days as pastors shall deem convenient. Their instruc- 
tions should so treat the nature, power, and dignity of this Sac- 
rament, that the faithful may understand not only that it is not 
to be neglected, but that it is to be received with the greatest 
piety and devotion. 


Name of this Sacrament 


To begin with the name, it should be taught that this Sacra- 
ment is called by the Church Confirmation because, if there is 
no obstacle to the efficacy of the Sacrament, a baptized person, 
when anointed with the sacred chrism by the Bishop, with the 
accompanying solemn words: I sign thee with the sign of the 
cross, and confirm thee with the chrism of salvation, in the name 
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, becomes 
stronger with the strength of a new power, and thus begins to be 
a perfect soldier of Christ. 


Confirmation is a Sacrament 


That in Confirmation is contained the true and proper nature 
of a Sacrament has always been acknowledged by the Catholic 


199 


200 THE SACRAMENTS 


Church, as Pope Melchiades and many other very holy and very 
ancient Pontiffs expressly declare.t The truth of this doctrine 
St. Clement could not confirm in stronger terms than when he 
says: All should hasten without delay to be born again unto God, 
and afterwards to be signed by the Bishop, that ts, to receive 
the sevenfold grace of the Holy Ghost; for, as has been handed 
down to us from St. Peier, and as the other Apostles taught 
in obedience to the command of our Lord, he who culpably and 
voluntarily, and not from necessity, neglects to receive this Sac- 
rament, cannot possibly be a perfect Christian.2, This same faith 
has been confirmed, as may be seen in their decrees, by Popes 
Urban,? Fabian * and Eusebius,® who, filled with the same spirit, 
shed their blood for the name of Christ. 

The unanimous authority of the Fathers must be added. 
Among them Denis the Areopagite,* Bishop of Athens, when 
teaching how to consecrate and make use of this holy ointment, 
says: The priests clothe the person baptized with a garment 
emblematic of purity, in order to conduct him to the Bishop; 
and the Bishop, signing him with the sacred and truly divine 
oimtment, makes lim partaker of the most holy communion. 
Of such importance does Eusebius of Caesarea™ also deem this 
Sacrament as not to hesitate to say that the heretic Novatus 
could not deserve to receive the Holy Ghost, because, having 
been baptized in a state of severe illness, he was not anointed 
with the sign of chrism. But on this subject we have the most 
distinct testimonies from St. Ambrose in his book On the 
Initiated, and from St. Augustine in his books Against the 
Epistles of Petilian ® the Donatist. 

Both of them were so persuaded that no doubt could exist as 
to the reality of this Sacrament that they even taught and con- 


i Quoted in Gratian, p. 3. dist. v. c. 2; and in Isidore, Epist. ad Episc. 
isp. ll. 


* Quoted in Isidore, Ep. iv. 

ee in Gratian, dist. v. c. 1; and in Isidore, Ep. ad Omnes Christ. 
n. 

lO acted in Isidore, Ep. ii. ad Omnes Orient. "ne 1. 


* Quoted in Gratian, dist. v. c. 4; and in Isidore, Ep. iii. ad Episc. Tusc. 
et Camp. 


®*De Eccl. FRCiS 3G. ais yoru lve 
"Hist. Eccl. vi. 43. 

® Cap. vii, 

™ Lib. ais cape 104, 


CONFIRMATION 201 


firmed the doctrine by passages of Scripture, the one testifying 
that to the Sacrament of Confirmation apply these words of 
the Apostle: Grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, whereby you 
are sealed;’° the other, these words of the Psalmist: Like the 
precious ointment on the head, that ran down upon the beard, 
the beard of Aaron," and also these words of the same Apostle: 
The charity of God is poured forth in our hearts by the Holy 
Ghost, who is given to us.3* 


Confirmation is Distinct from Baptism 


Although said by Melchiades to have a most intimate connec- 
tion with Baptism, Confirmation is still not to be regarded as the 
same, but as a very different Sacrament; for the variety of the 
grace which each of the Sacraments confers, and of the sen- 
sible sign employed to signify that grace, evidently render them 
distinct and different Sacraments. 

Since, then, by the grace of Baptism we are begotten unto 
newness of life, whereas by that of Confirmation we grow to 
full maturity, having put away the things of a child,1* we can 
sufficiently understand that the same difference that exists 
in the natural life between birth and growth exists also between 
Baptism, which regenerates, and Confirmation, by virtue of which 
growth and perfect spiritual strength are imparted to the faithful. 

Besides, as there should be a new and distinct kind of Sac- 
rament when the soul has to encounter any new difficulty, it may 
easily be perceived that as we require the grace of Baptism to 
form the mind unto faith, so is it also of the utmost advantage 
that the souls of the faithful be strengthened by a different grace, 
to the end that they be deterred by no danger, or fear of pains, 
tortures or death, from the confession of the true faith. This, 
then, being accomplished by the sacred chrism of Confirmation, 
it is hence clearly inferred, that the nature of this Sacrament is 
different from Baptism. 

Hence Pope Melchiades accurately evolves the difference be- 
tween them, writing as follows: Jn Baptism man is enlisted into 
the service, in Confirmation he ts equipped for battle; at the 


” Eph. iv. 30. qUDomexx xii 2) ROM. Vv. 5. “Te Gory xii. 01 


202 THE SACRAMENTS 


baptismal font the Holy Ghost imparts fulness to accomplish 
innocence, but in Confirmation he ministers perfection to grace; 
in Baptism we are regenerated unto life, after Baptism we are 
fortified for the combat; in Baptism we are cleansed, after 
Baptism we are strengthened; regeneration of itself saves those 
who receive Baptism in time of peace, Confirmation arms and 
makes ready for conflicts.* 

These are truths not only already recorded by other Councils, 
but specially defined by the holy Council of Trent; so that we 
are therefore no longer at liberty not only to think otherwise, but 
even to entertain the least doubt concerning them. 


Institution of Confirmation 


It was shown above how necessary it is to teach concerning 
all the Sacraments in commion from whom they had their 
origin. Wherefore the same is also to be taught as regards 
Confirmation, in order that the faithful may be impressed with 
a deeper sense of the sanctity of this Sacrament. Accordingly, 
pastors must explain that not only was it instituted by Christ 
the Lord, but that by Him were also ordained, as Pope St. 
Fabian * testifies, the rite of chrism and the words which the 
Catholic Church uses in its administration. This is a fact easy to 
prove to those who acknowledge Confirmation to be a Sacra- 
ment, because all the sacred mysteries exceed the powers of 


human nature and could be instituted by no other than God 
alone.> 


Component Parts of Confirmation 


THE MATTER 


We now come to treat of the component parts of the Sacra- 
ment, and first of its matter. This is called chrism, a word 
borrowed from the Greek language, and which, although used 
by profane writers to designate any sort of ointment, is appro- 


oN Up ae * Ep. ii. ad Episc. Orient. 


2On Confirmation as a distinct Sacrament see Summa Theol. 3a. 
peo, li Poe @ fe 


>On the institution of Confirmation see Summa Theol. Baw ibe ad ar 


) 


CONFIRMATION aes 


priated by common usage among ecclesiastical writers to signify 
that ointment only which is composed of oil and balsam with 
the solemn consecration of the Bishop. A mixture of two mate- 
rial things, therefore, furnishes the matter of Confirmation ; and 
this mixture of different things not only declares the manifold 
grace of the Holy Ghost given to those who are confirmed but 
also sufficiently shows the excellence of the Sacrament itself. 


THE REMOTE MATTER OF CONFIRMATION IS CHRISM 


That such is the matter of this Sacrament the holy Church 
and her Councils have always taught; and the same doctrine 
has been handed down to us by St. Denis ?® and by many other 
Fathers of the gravest authority, particularly by Pope Fabian,}” 
who testifies that the Apostles received the composition of chrism 
from our Lord and transmitted it to us. 


THE APPROPRIATENESS OF CHRISM 


Nor indeed could any other matter than that of chrism seem 
more appropriate to declare the effects of this Sacrament. 
Oil, by its nature rich, unctuous and fluid, expresses the fulness 
of grace, which, through the Holy Ghost, overflows and is 
_ poured into others from Christ the head, like the ointment that 
ran down upon the beard cof Aaron, to the skirt of his gar- 
ment,;*® for God anointed him with the oil of gladness, above 
his fellows,!® and of his fulness we all have received.” 

Balsam, the odor of which is most pleasant, can signify 
nought save that the faithful, when made perfect by the grace 
of Confirmation, diffuse around them such a sweet odor of all 
virtues, that they may say with the Apostle: We are unto God 
the good odour of Christ.21 Balsam has also the power of pre- 
serving from corruption whatever it is used to anoint. This 
property seems admirably suited to express the virtue of the Sac- 
rament, since it is quite evident that the souls of the faithful, 
prepared by the heavenly grace of Confirmation, are easily pro- 
tected from the contagion of sins. 


®%De Eccl. Hier. c. iv. p. 3- nL. CH n PS. CXXXii, (2. 
a BSeexlivenos John i. 16. 2iCor, ins: 


204 THE SACRAMENTS 


CHRISM TO BE CONSECRATED BY THE BISHOP 


The chrism is consecrated by the Bishop with solemn cere- 
monies; for that our Saviour gave this instruction at His last 
supper, when He committed to His Apostles the manner of mak- 
ing chrism, we learn from Fabian,* a pontiff eminently distin- 
guished by his sanctity and by the glory of martyrdom. 

The necessity of this consecration may, however, be shown 
from reason also. In most of the other Sacraments Christ so 
instituted their matter as to impart holiness also to it. For not 
only did He designate water as the element of Baptism, saying: 
Except a man be born again of water and the Holy Ghost, he 
cannot enter the kingdom of God,;?* but He also, at His own 
Baptism, imparted to it the power of sanctifying thereafter. 
Hence these words of St. Chrysostom: The water of Baptism, 
had it not been sanctified by contact with the body of our Lord, 
could not purge away the sins of believers? As, then, our Lord 
did not consecrate this matter of Confirmation by actually using 
and handling it, it is necessary that it be consecrated by holy 
and religious prayers; and this consecration can appertain to 
none save the Bishop, who has been appointed the ordinary 
minister of this Sacrament.> 


THE FORM OF CONFIRMATION 


The other component part of Confirmation; that is, its form 
and the words used at the sacred unction, must also be ex- 
plained. The faithful are to be admonished that in receiving 
this Sacrament they are, in particular on hearing the words pro- 
nounced, to excite their minds to piety, faith and religion, that 
no obstacle may be placed to heavenly grace. 

The form of Confirmation, then, is comprised in these words: 
I sign thee with the sign of the cross, and I confirm thee with 
the chrism of salvation, in the name of the Father, and of the 


al Fa (os 7 [Rolabay sbi, 135 

a The above words are from Chromatius and are found in Gratian, p. 3: 
dist. iv. c. Io. 

b On the matter of Confirmation see Summa Theol. 3a. Ixxii. 2, 3; St. 
Alphonsus, Theol. Mor, yi. 161 ff.; Code of Canon Law, canons 780, 781, 


CONFIRMATION jog 


Son, and of the Holy Ghost. If we call upon reason regarding 
this truth, we may also easily prove the same thing; for the form 
of a Sacrament should comprise all those things that explain the 
nature and substance of the Sacrament itself. But in Confir- 
mation these three things are chiefly to be noted: the divine 
power which, as a principal cause, operates in the Sacrament; 
the strength of mind and soul which is imparted by the sacred 
unction to the faithful unto salvation; and finally, the sign im- 
pressed on him who is to enter upon the warfare of Christ. 
Now of these the first is sufficiently declared by the concluding 
words of the form: Jn the name of the Father, and of the Son, 
and of the Holy Ghost; the second, by the words immediately 
preceding them: J confirm thee with the chrism of salvation; 
and the third, by the words with which the form opens: J sign 
thee with the sign of the cross. 

But were we even unable to prove by reason that this is the 
true and perfect form of this Sacrament, the authority of the 
Catholic Church, under whose guidance we have always been thus 
taught, suffers us not to entertain the least doubt on the subject.? 


Minister of Confirmation 


Pastors should also teach to whom especially has been com- 
mitted the administration of this Sacrament; for as, according 
to the Prophet, there are many who run without being sent, 
it is necessary to teach who are its true and legitimate ministers, 
in order that the faithful may be enabled to receive the Sacra- 
ment and grace of Confirmation. 

Now the Holy Scriptures show that the Bishop alone is the 
ordinary minister of this Sacrament, because we read in the Acts 
of the Apostles that when Samaria had received the Word of 
God, Peter and John were sent to them, who prayed for them 
that they might receive the Holy Ghost: for he was not as yet 
come upon any of them, but they were only baptized.” Here we 
may see that he who had baptized, having been only a deacon, 
had no power to confirm; but that its administration was re- 


yisgecctiaes # * Acts viii. 14. 
aOn the form of Confirmation see Summa Theol. 3a. Ixxii. 4. 


206 THE SACRAMENTS 


served to a more perfect order of ministers, that is, to the 
Apostles. The same may be observed whenever the Sacred Scrip- 
tures make mention of this Sacrament. 

Nor are there wanting in proof of this matter the clearest 
testimonies of the holy Fathers and of Popes Urban,?* Euse- 
bius,2” Damasus, ?* Innocent?® and Leo,®° as is evident from their 
decrees. St. Augustine, also, seriously complains of the corrupt 
practice of the Egyptians and Alexandrians, whose priests dared 
to administer the Sacrament of Confirmation.** 

The thorough propriety of reserving this function to Bishops 
the pastor may illustrate by the following comparison. As in the 
construction of buildings the artisans, who are inferior agents, 
prepare and dispose cement, lime, timbers and the other mate- 
rial, while to the architect belongs the completion of the work; 
so in like manner this Sacrament, which is, at it were, the com- 
pletion of the spiritual edifice, should be performed by no other 
than the chief priest.? 


Sponsors at Confirmation 


A sponsor is also required, as we have already shown to be 
the case in Baptism. For if they who enter the fencing lists 
have need for some one whose skill and counsel may teach them 
the thrusts and passes by which to overcome their adversaries, 
while remaining safe themselves; how much more will the faith- 
ful require a leader and monitor, when, sheathed, as it were, 
in the stoutest armor by this Sacrament of Confirmation, they 
engage in the spiritual conflict, in which eternal salvation is the 
proposed reward. With good reason, therefore, are sponsors 
employed in the administration of this Sacrament also; and 
the same spiritual affinity is contracted in Confirmation, which, 

a ka, 

EPI by, Ke 


* Quoted in Isidore, Ep. v. 
Ep. xxv. (otherwise i) 3 ad Dec.; quoted in Gratian, 3 p. dist. iv. 


110. 
*® Quoted in Isidore, Ep. Ixvi. 
* Quaest. v. (in app.) and N. T. ror. 


4QOn the minister of Confirmation see Summa Theol. 3a. Ixxii. 17: St 
Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. vi. 170-175; Code of Canon Law, canons paniee: 


CONFIRMATION 207 


as we have already shown, is contracted by sponsors in Baptism, 
so as to impede the lawful marriage of the parties. 


The Subject of Confirmation 


It often happens that, in receiving this Sacrament, the faithful 
are guilty of either precipitate haste or a gross neglect and delay ; 
concerning those who have become so impious as to have the 
hardihood to contemn and despise it, we have nothing to say. 
Pastors, therefore, should also explain who may receive Con- 
firmation, and what should be their age and dispositions. 


ALL SHOULD BE CONFIRMED 


First, it is necessary to teach that this Sacrament is not so 
necessary as to be utterly essential to salvation. Although not 
essential, however, it ought to be omitted by no one, but rather, 
on the contrary, in a matter so full of holiness through which 
the divine gifts are so liberally bestowed, the greater care should 
be taken to avoid all neglect. What God has proposed in com- 
mon unto all for their sanctification, all should likewise most 
earnestly desire. 

St. Luke, indeed, describing this admirable effusion of the 
Holy Spirit, says: And suddenly there came a sound from heaven, 
as of a mighty wind coming, and it filled the whole house, where 
they were sitting; and a little after: And they were all filled with 
the Holy Ghost.2*. From these words we may understand that, 
as that house was a type and figure of the Church, the Sacrament 
of Confirmation, which took its beginning from that day, apper- 
tains to all the faithful. 

This may also be easily inferred from the nature of the Sac- 
rament itself. For they ought to be confirmed with the sacred 
chrism who have need of spiritual increase, and who are to be 
led to the perfection of the Christian religion. But this is, with- 

SACS ii. 2514: 

aQOn the sponsor in Confirmation see Summa Theol. 3a. Ixxii. 70; St. 
Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. vi. 185-187; Code of Canon Law, canons 793-797. 


Under the law of the New Code spiritual relationship arises from valid 
Confirmation between the person confirmed and the sponsor (canon 797), 


but this relationship is not an impediment to marriage. 


208 THE SACRAMENTS 


out exception, suited to all; because as nature intends that all 
her children should grow up and attain full maturity, although 
she does not always realize her wishes; so the Catholic Church, 
the common mother of all, earnestly desires that, in those whom 
she has regenerated by Baptism, the perfection of Christian 
manhood be completed. Now as this is accomplished through 
the Sacrament of mystic Unction, it is clear that Confirmation 
belongs alike to all the faithful. 


THE PROPER AGE FOR CONFIRMATION 


Here it is to be observed, that, after Baptism, the Sacrament 
of Confirmation may indeed be administered to all; but that, 
until children shall have attained the use of reason, its admin- 
istration is inexpedient. If it does not seem well to defer 
(Confirmation) to the age of twelve, it is most proper to post- 
pone this Sacrament at least to that of seven years. 

Confirmation has not been instituted as necessary to salva- 
tion, but that by virtue thereof we may be found very well armed 
and prepared when called upon to fight for the faith of Christ; 
and for this conflict no one assuredly will consider children who 
as yet lack the use of reason to be qualified. 


DISPOSITIONS FOR RECEIVING CONFIRMATION 


From this, therefore, it follows that persons of mature age, 
who are to be confirmed, must, if they desire to obtain the grace 
and gifts of this Sacrament, not only bring with them faith and 
piety, but also grieve from their hearts for the serious sins 
which they have committed. 

The pastor should take care that they have previous recourse 
to confession of their sins; should exhort them to fasting and 
other works of piety; and admonish them of the propriety of 
reviving that laudable practice of the ancient Church, of re- 
ceiving this Sacrament fasting. It is to be presumed that to this 
the faithful may be easily persuaded, if they but understand’ the 
gifts and admirable effects of this Sacrament.? 

aQOn the necessity and recipients of Confirmation see Summa Theol. 


3a. Ixv. 4; Ixxii. r ad 3; 8 St. Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. vi. 176-183; 
of Canon Law, canons 786-789. < ; Of. vi. 170-183; Code 


CONFIRMATION 209 


The Effects of Confirmation 


Pastors, therefore, should teach that, in common with the 
other Sacraments, Confirmation, unless some obstacle be present 
on the part of the receiver, imparts new grace. For we have 
shown that these sacred and mystical signs are of such a char- 
acter as to indicate and produce grace. 


THE GRACE OF STRENGTH 


But besides these things, which are common to this and the 
other (Sacraments), it is peculiar to Confirmation first to per- 
fect the grace of Baptism. For those who have been made 
Christians by Baptism, still have in some sort the tenderness 
and softness, as it were, of new-born infants, and afterwards 
become, by means of the Sacrament of chrism, stronger to resist 
all the assaults of the world, the flesh and the devil, while their 
minds are fully confirmed in faith to confess and glorify the 
name of our Lord Jesus Christ. Hence, also, originated the very 
name (Confirmation), as no one will doubt. For the word 
Confirmation is not derived, as some not less ignorantly than 
impiously have pretended, from the circumstance that persons 
baptized in infancy, when arrived at mature years, were of old 
brought to the Bishop, in order to confirm their faith in Christ, 
which they had embraced in Baptism, so that Confirmation would 
seem not to differ from catechetical instruction. Of such a 
practice no reliable testimony can be adduced. On the contrary, 
the name has been derived from the fact that by virtue of this 
Sacrament God confirms in us the work He commenced in 
Baptism, leading us to the perfection of solid Christian virtue. 


INCREASE IN GRACE 


But not only does it confirm, it also increases (divine grace), 
as says Melchiades: The Holy Ghost, whose salutary descent 
upon the waters of Baptism, imparts in the font fulness to the 
accomplishment of innocence, in Confirmation gives an increase 
of grace; ** and not only an increase, but an increase after 


Tc: cf. Gratian, p. 3, dist. v. c. 2 


210 THE SACRAMENTS 


a wonderful manner. This the Scriptures beautifully express 
by a metaphor taken from clothing: Stay you in the city, said 
our Lord and Saviour, speaking of this Sacrament, until you be 
clothed with power from on high.** 

If pastors wish to show the divine efficacy of this Sacrament 
—and this, no doubt, will have great influence in affecting the 
minds of the faithful—it will be sufficient if they explain what 
occurred to the Apostles themselves. So weak and timid were 
they before, and even at the very time of the Passion, that no 
sooner was our Lord apprehended, than they instantly fled ;*° 
and Peter, who had been designated the rock and foundation of 
the Church, and who had displayed unshaken constancy and 
exalted magnanimity, terrified at the voice of one weak woman, 
denied, not once nor twice only, but a third time, that he was a 
disciple of Jesus Christ ;** and after the Resurrection they all 
remained shut up at home for fear of the Jews.*7 But, on the 
day of Pentecost, so great was the power of the Holy Ghost 
with which they were all filled ** that, while they boldly and freely 
disseminated the Gospel confided to them, not only through 
Judea, but throughout the world, they thought no greater hap- 
piness could await them than that of being accounted worthy 
to suffer contumely, chains, torments and crucifixion, for the 
name of Christ.*® 


CHARACTER OF SOLDIER OF CHRIST 


Confirmation has also the effect of impressing a character. 
Hence, as we before said of Baptism, and as will be more fully 
explained in its proper place with regard to the Sacrament of 
Orders also, it can on no account ever be repeated. 

If, then, these things be frequently and accurately explained 
by pastors, it will be almost impossible that the faithful, having 
known the utility and dignity of this Sacrament, should not use 
every exertion to receive it with purity and devotion 


“Luke xxiv. 40. * Matt. xxvi. 56. eee — 
37 John xx. 19. ® Acts ii. 4. ® A cts NE AI. 33; 35; 5 , 69. 


4 On the effects of Confirmation see Summa Theol. Ixxii, ¢-7: 
Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. vi. 160. €ol. 3a. bexil. 5-7; St. 


CONFIRMATION 211 


Ceremonies of Confirmation 


It remains now briefly to glance at the rites and ceremonies 
used by the Catholic Church in the administration of this Sac- 
rament; and pastors will understand the great advantages of this 
explanation, if they revert to what we already said on this sub- 
ject under its proper head. 


THE ANOINTING OF THE FOREHEAD 


The forehead, then, of the persons to be confirmed is anointed 
with sacred chrism ; for by this Sacrament the Holy Spirit infuses 
Himself into the souls of the faithful, and increases in them 
strength and fortitude to enable them, in the spiritual contest, 
to fight manfully and to resist their most wicked foes. Where- 
fore it is indicated that they are to be deterred by no fear or 
shame, the signs of which appear chiefly on the forehead, from 
the open confession of the name of Christ. 


THE SIGN OF THE CROSS 


Besides, that mark by which the Christian is distinguished 
from all others, as the soldier is by certain badges, should be 
impressed on the more conspicuous part of the body. 


TIME WHEN CONFIRMATION SHOULD BE CONFERRED 


It has also been a matter of solemn religious observance in 
the Church of God that this Sacrament should be administered 
principally at Pentecost, because on that day especially were the 
Apostles strengthened and confirmed by the power of the Holy 
Ghost. By the recollection of this supernatural event the faithful 
should be admonished of the nature and magnitude of the 
mysteries contained in the sacred unction. 


THE SLAP ON THE CHEEK 


The person when anointed and confirmed next receives a gentle 
slap on the cheek from the hand of the Bishop to make him 


a On the utility of ceremonies see above, pp. 152 and 192. 


212 THE SACRAMENTS 


recollect that, as a valiant combatant, he should be prepared to 
endure with unconquered spirit all adversities for the name of 


Christ. 


THE PAX 


Lastly, the peace is given him, that he may understand that he 
has attained the fulness of divine grace and that peace which 
passeth all understanding.* # 


Admonition 


Let this, then, serve as a summary of those things which 
pastors are to expound touching the Sacrament of chrism. The 
exposition, however, should not be given so much in empty words 
and cold language, as in the burning accents of pious and glowing 
zeal, so as to seem to imprint them on the souls and inmost 
thoughts of the faithful. 


* Philipp. 1v. 7. 

a On the ceremonies of Confirmation see Summa Theol. 3a. Ixxii. 12; 
St. Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. vi. 184-188; Code of Canon Law, canons 
790-792; 798-800. 


THE SACRAMENT OF THE EUCHARIST 


IMPORTANCE OF INSTRUCTION ON THE EUCHARIST 


As of all the sacred mysteries bequeathed to us by our Lord 
and Saviour as most infallible instruments of divine grace, there 
is none comparable to the most holy Sacrament of the Eucharist; 
so, for no crime is there a heavier punishment to be feared from 
God than for the unholy or irreligious use by the faithful of that 
which is full of holiness, or rather which contains the very 
author and source of holiness. This the Apostle wisely saw, and 
has openly admonished us of it. For when he had declared the 
enormity of their guilt who discerned not the body of the Lord, 
he immediately subjoined: Therefore are there many infirm and 
weak among you, and many sleep. 

In order that the faithful, therefore, aware of the divine honors 
due to this heavenly Sacrament, may derive therefrom abundant 
fruit of grace and escape the most just anger of God, pastors 
should explain with the greatest diligence all those things which 
may seem calculated more fully to display its majesty. 


Institution of the Eucharist 


In this matter it will be necessary that pastors, following the 
example of the Apostle Paul, who professes to have delivered 
to the Corinthians what he had received from the Lord, first of 
all explain to the faithful the institution of this Sacrament. 

That its institution was as follows, is clearly inferred from 
the Evangelist. Our Lord, having loved his own, loved 
them to the end? As a divine and admirable pledge of 
this love, knowing that the hour had now come that He 
should pass from the world to the Father, that He might not 
ever at any period be absent from His own, He accomplished 


aia Cote ien 30: Sohn xii, .1. 
213 


214 THE SACRAMENTS 


with inexplicable wisdom that which surpasses all the order 
and condition of nature. For having kept the supper of the 
Paschal lamb with His disciples, that the figure might yield to 
the reality, the shadow -to the substance, He took bread, and 
giving thanks unto God, He blessed, and brake, and gave to the 
disciples, and said: “Take ye and eat, this is my body which shall 
be delivered for you; this do for a commemoration of me.” In 
like manner also, He took the chalice after he had supped, say- 
ing: “This chalice is the new testament in my blood; this do, 
as often as you shall drink it, in commemoration of me.” ** 


Meaning of the Word “Eucharist” 


Wherefore sacred writers, seeing that it was not at all pos- 
sible that they should manifest by one term the dignity and 
excellence of this admirable Sacrament, endeavored to express 
it by many words. 

For sometimes they call it Eucharist, which word we may 
render either by good grace, or by thanksgiving.» And rightly, 
indeed, is it to be called good grace, as well because it first 
signifies eternal life, concerning which it has been written: 
The grace of God is eternal life;* and also because it contains 
Christ the Lord, who is true grace and the fountain of all favors. 

No less aptly do we interpret it thanksgiving; inasmuch as 
when we immolate this purest victim, we give daily unbounded 
thanks to God for all His kindnesses towards us, and above all 
for so excellent a gift of His grace, which He grants to us in 
this Sacrament. This same name, also, is fully in keeping with 
those things which we read were done by Christ the Lord at 
the institution of this mystery. For taking bread he brake it, 
and gave thanks.’ David also, when contemplating the greatness 
of this mystery, before he pronounced that song: He hath made 
a remembrance of his wonderful works, being a merciful and 
gracious Lord, he hath given food to them that fear him, thought 


* Matt. xxvi. 26; Mark xiv. 22; Luke xxii. 19; 1 Cor. xi. 24. 
sRomanviowe3: 

> Luke xxit.” 105 1 (Coty x on 

4 On the institution of the Eucharist see Summa Theol. 3a. xxiii. Be 


sca Gn word “eucharist” is from the Greek «, good, and xapis, grace, 
anks, 


THE EUCHARIST 215 


that he should first make this act of thanksgiving: His work is 
praise and magnificence.® 


OTHER NAMES OF THIS SACRAMENT 


Frequently, also, it is called Sacrifice. Concerning this 
mystery there will be occasion to speak more at length pres- 
ently. 

It is called, moreover, Communion, the term being evidently 
borrowed from that passage of the Apostle where we read: 
The chalice of benediction which we bless, is it not the com- 
munion of the blood of Christ? And the bread which we break, 
is it not the partaking of the body of the Lord?" For, as Dama- 
scene ® has explained, this Sacrament unites us to Christ, ren- 
ders us partakers of His flesh and Divinity, reconciles and unites 
us to one another in the same Christ, and forms us, as it were, 
into one body. 

Whence it came to pass, that it was called also the Sacrament 
of peace and love. We can understand then how unworthy 
they are of the name of Christian who cherish enmities, 
and how hatred, dissensions and discord should be entirely put 
away, as the most destructive bane of the faithful, especially 
since by the daily Sacrifice of our religion, we profess to pre- 
serve nothing with more anxious care, than peace and love. 

It is also frequently called the Viaticum by sacred writers, 
both because it is spiritual food by which we are sustained in 
our pilgrimage through this life, and also because it paves our 
way to eternal glory and happiness. Wherefore, according to 
an ancient usage of the Catholic Church, we see that none of the 
faithful are permitted to die without this Sacrament. 

The most ancient Fathers, following the authority of the 
Apostle,® have sometimes also called the Holy Eucharist by the 
name of Supper, because it was instituted by Christ the Lord at 
the salutary mystery of the Last Supper. 

It is not, however, lawful to consecrate or partake of the 
Eucharist after eating or drinking, because, according to a custom 
wisely introduced by the Apostles, as ancient writers have re- 


FD oe, Sh ieGore x1. 16. 
*De Fide Orth. iv. 13. Ose (Coy S35 Zo 


216 THE SACRAMENTS 


corded, and which has ever been retained and preserved, Com- 
munion is received only by persons who are fasting.* 


The Eucharist Is a Sacrament Properly So Called 


The meaning of the name having been explained, it will be 
necessary to show that this is a true Sacrament, and one of those 
seven which the holy Church has ever revered and venerated 
religiously. For when the consecration of the chalice is effected, 
it is called a mystery of faith. 

Besides, to omit the almost endless testimonies of sacred 
writers, who have invariably thought that this was to be num- 
bered among the real Sacraments, the same thing is proved from 
the very principle and nature of a Sacrament. For there are in 
it signs that are external and subject to the senses. In the next 
place it signifies and produces grace. Moreover, neither the 
Evangelists nor the Apostle leave room for doubt regarding its 
institution by Christ. Since all these things concur to establish 
the fact of the Sacrament, there is obviously no need of any other 
argument.> 


IN WHAT RESPECT THE EUCHARIST IS A SACRAMENT 


But pastors should carefully observe that in this mystery 
there are many things to which sacred writers have from time 
to time attributed the name of Sacrament. For, sometimes, 
both the consecration and the Communion; nay, frequently also 
the body and blood itself of our Lord, which is contained in the 
Eucharist, used to be called a Sacrament. Thus St. Augustine ¢ 
says that this Sacrament consists of two things,—the visible 
species of the elements, and the invisible flesh and blood of 
our Lord Jesus Christ Himself. And it is in the same sense 
that we say that this Sacrament is to be adored, meaning the 
body and blood of our Lord. 


aSt. Augustine (Ep. liv. ad Januar. c. 6) traces this precept to an 
Apostolic ordinance. 


On the names of the Blessed Sacrament see Summa Theol. 3a. Ixxiii. 4. 
bOn the Eucharist as a Sacrament see Summa Theol. 3a. lxxiii. 1. 


© These words are found in Lanfranc, Adv. Ber.; cf. Gratian, p. ay 
dist. ii. c. 48. 


THE EUCHARIST 207, 


Now it is plain that all these are less properly called Sacra- 
ments. The species of bread and wine themselves are truly and 
strictly designated by this name. 


HOW THE EUCHARIST DIFFERS FROM ALL THE OTHER SACRAMENTS 


How much this Sacrament differs from all the others is easily 
inferred. For all the other Sacraments are completed by the 
use of the material, that is, while they are being administered 
to some one. Thus Baptism attains the nature of a Sacrament 
when the individual is actually being washed in the water. For 
the perfecting of the Eucharist on the other hand, the consecra- 
tion of the material itself suffices, since neither (species) ceases 
to be a Sacrament, though kept in the pyx. 

Again in perfecting the other Sacraments there is no change 
of the matter and element into another nature. The water of 
Baptism, or the oil of Confirmation, when those Sacraments are 
being administered, do not lose their former nature of water and 
oil; but in the Eucharist, that which was bread and wine before 
consecration, after consecration is truly the substance of the 
body and blood of the Lord. 


The Eucharist Is But One Sacrament 


But although there are two elements, as bread and wine, of 
which the entire Sacrament of the Eucharist is constituted, yet 
guided by the authority of the Church, we confess that this is 
not many Sacraments, but only one. 

Otherwise, there cannot be the exact number of seven Sac- 
raments, as has ever beer handed down, and as was decreed by 
the Councils of Lateran, Florence and Trent.» 

Moreover, by virtue of the Sacrament, one mystical body is 


aQOn this subject see Summa Theol. 3a. Ixxiii. 6; St. Alphonsus, Theol. 
Mor. vi. 189-101. 

b The second Lateran Council (1139) does not expressly mention that 
there are seven Sacraments, but this can be gathered from the various 
canons. The sevenfold number of the Sacraments is declared in the 
Decretum ad Armenos (1439) and in the Council of Trent, Sess. vii. 


can. I. (1547). 


218 THE SACRAMENTS 


effected; hence, that the Sacrament itself may correspond to the 
thing which it effects, it must be one. 

It is one not because it is indivisible, but because it signifies 
a single thing. For as food and drink, which are two different 
things, are employed only for one purpose, namely, that the vigor 
of the body may be recruited; so also it was but natural that 
there should be an analogy to them in the two different species 
of the Sacrament, which should signify the spiritual food by which 
souls are supported and refreshed. Wherefore we have been 
assured by our Lord the Saviour: My flesh is meat indeed, and 
my blood is drink indeed.*° 4 


THE EUCHARIST SIGNIFIES THREE THINGS 


It must, therefore, be diligently explained what the Sacrament 
of the Eucharist signifies, that the faithful, beholding the sacred 
mysteries with their eyes, may also at the same time feed their 
souls with the contemplation of divine things. Three things, 
then, are signified by this Sacrament. The first is the Passion of 
Christ our Lord, a thing past; for He Himself said: Do this 
for a commemoration of me, and the Apostle says: As often as 
you shall eat this bread, and drink the chalice, you shall show 
the death of the Lord, until he come.? 

It is also significant of divine and heavenly grace, which is 
imparted at the present time by this Sacrament to nurture and 
preserve the soul. Just as in Baptism we are begotten unto 
newness of life and by Confirmation are strengthened to resist 
Satan and openly to profess the name of Christ, so by the Sac- 
rament of the Eucharist are we nurtured and supported. 

It is, thirdly, a foreshadowing of future eternal joy and glory, 
which, according to God’s promises, we shall receive in our 
heavenly country. 

These three things, then, which are clearly distinguished by 
their reference to past, present and future times, are so well 
represented by the Eucharistic mysteries that the whole Sacra- 

® John vi. 56. "Luke xxii. 10. ait Om a 20) 


4 That the Eucharist is one Sacrament see Summa Theol. 3a. Ixxiii. 2. 


On the numerical unity of the Eucharist see St. Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. 
Vi. IQI. q. 2. 


THE EUCHARIST 219 


ment, though consisting of different species, signifies the three 
as if it referred to one thing only. 


Constituent Parts of the Eucharist 


THE MATTER 


It is particularly incumbent on pastors to know the matter of 
this Sacrament, in order that they themselves may rightly con- 
secrate it, and also that they may be able to instruct the faithful 
as to its significance, inflaming them with an earnest desire of 
that which it signifies. 


THE FIRST ELEMENT OF THE EUCHARIST IS BREAD 


The matter of this Sacrament is twofold. The first element is 
wheaten bread, of which we shall now speak. Of the second 
we shall treat hereafter. As the Evangelists, Matthew, Mark 
and Luke testify, Christ the Lord took bread into His hands, 
blessed, and brake, saying: This is my body; ** and, according to 
John, the same Saviour called Himself bread in these words: 
I am the living bread, that came down from heaven." 


THE SACRAMENTAL BREAD MUST BE WHEATEN 


There are, however, various sorts of bread, either because 
they consist of different materials;—such as wheat, barley, pulse 
and other products of the earth; or because they possess different 
qualities,—some being leavened, others altogether without leaven. 
It is to be observed that, with regard to the former kinds, the 
words of the Saviour show that the bread should be wheaten; 
for, according to common usage, when we simply say bread, 
we are sufficiently understood to mean wheaten bread. This is 
also declared by a figure in the Old Testament, because the Lord 
commanded that the loaves of proposition, which signified this 
Sacrament, should be made of fine flour.75» 


™ Matt. xxvi. 26; Mark xiv. 22; Luke xxii. 10. 


“John vi. 41. * Lev. xxiv. 5. 
aOn the three things signified by the Eucharist see Summa Theol. 3a. 
xs 


b The loaves of proposition, or shew-breads, were twelve loaves of 
unleavened bread placed in the Holy of Holies and renewed every Sat- 
urday. Their purpose was to show forth the gratitude of the twelve 
tribes to the Lord, their sustenance and strength. 


a6 ‘THE SACRAMENTS 


THE SACRAMENTAL BREAD SHOULD BE UNLEAVENED 


But as wheaten bread alone is to be considered the proper 
matter for this Sacrament—a doctrine which has been handed 
down by Apostolic tradition and confirmed by the authority 
of the Catholic Church—so it may be easily inferred from the 
doings of Christ the Lord that this bread should be unleavened. 
It was consecrated and instituted by Him on the first day of 
unleavened bread, on which it was not lawful for the Jews to 
have anything leavened in their houses.’® 

Should the authority of John the Evangelist,?7 who says that 
all this was done before the feast of the Passover, be objected to, 
the argument is one of easy solution. For by the day before 
the pasch John understands the same day which the other 
Evangelists designate as the first day of unleavened bread. He 
wished particularly to mark the natural day, which commences 
at sunrise; whereas they wanted to point out that our Lord 
celebrated the Pasch on Thursday evening just when the days 
of the unleavened bread were beginning. Hence St. Chrysos- 
tom*® also understands the first day of.unieavened bread to 
be the day on the evening of which unleavened bread was to be 
eaten.? 

he peculiar suitableness of the consecration of unleavened 
bread to express that integrity and purity of mind which the 
faithful should bring to this Sacrament we learn from these 
words of the Apostle: Purge out the old leaven, that you may 
be @ new paste, as you are unleavened. For Christ our Pass- 
over 1s sacrificed. Therefore, let us feast, not with the old 
leaven, nor with the leaven of malice and wickedness, but with 
the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth. 


UNLEAVENED BREAD NOT ESSENTIAL 


This quality of the bread, however, is not to be deemed so 
essential that, if it be wanting, the Sacrament cannot exist; 


: Matt. xxvi. 17; Mark xiv. 12; Luke xxii. 7. 
"John xiii. 1. *In Matt. Hom. Ixxxi.n.1. “1 Cor. v. 7. 
a For an explanation of the time when our Lord kept His last Pasch 


ae instituted the Holy Eucharist see Callan, The Four Gospels, pages 
167-171. 


THE EUCHARIST 221 


for both kinds are called by the one name and have the true and 
proper nature of bread. No one, however, is at liberty on his 
own private authority, or rather presumption, to transgress the 
laudable rite of his Church. And such departure is the less war- 
rantable in priests of the Latin Church, expressly obliged as they 
are by the supreme Pontiffs, to consecrate the sacred mysteries 
with unleavened bread only. 


QUANTITY OF THE BREAD 


With regard to the first matter of this Sacrament, let this 
exposition suffice. It is, however, to be observed, that the quan- 
tity of the matter to be consecrated is not defined, since we 
cannot define the exact number of those who can or ought to 
receive the sacred mysteries.? 


THE SECOND ELEMENT OF THE EUCHARIST IS WINE 


It remains for us to treat of the other matter and element of 
this Sacrament, which is wine pressed from the fruit of the vine, 
with which is mingled a little water. 

That in the institution of this Sacrament our Lord and 
Saviour made use of wine has been at all times the doctrine 
of the Catholic Church, for He Himself said: J will not drink 
from henceforth of this fruit of the vine until that day.2° On 
this passage Chrysostom” observes: He says, “Of the fruit 
of the vine,’ which certainly produced wine not water; as if 
he had it in view, even at so early a period, to uproot the heresy 
which asserted that in these mysteries water alone is to be used. 


WATER SHOULD BE MIXED WITH THE WINE 


With the wine, however, the Church of God has always 
mingled water. First, because Christ the Lord did so, as is 
proved by the authority of Councils and the testimony of St. 
Cyprian ; ?? next, because by this mixture is renewed the recollec- 
tion of the blood and water that issued from His side. Waters, 

»” Matt. xxvi. 29; Mark xiv. 25. 217Tn Matt. Hom. Ixxxii. n. 2. 


Alda (Sse ; 
aOn the bread used for the Eucharist see Summa Theol. 3a. xxiv. 1-4. 


222 THE SACRAMENTS 


also, as we read in the Apocalypse,?* signify the people; and 
hence, water mixed with the wine signifies the union of the faith- 
ful with Christ their Head. This rite, derived as it is from Apos- 
tolic tradition, the Catholic Church has always observed. 

But although there are reasons so grave for mingling water 
with the wine that it cannot be omitted without incurring the 
guilt of mortal sin, yet its omission does not render the Sacra- 
ment null. 

Again as in the sacred mysteries priests must be mindful to 
mingle water with wine, so, also, must they take care to mingle 
it in small quantity, for, in the opinion and judgment of eccle- 
siastical writers, that water is changed into wine. Hence these 
words of Pope Honorius ** on the subject: A pernicious abuse 
has prevailed in your district of using in the sacrifice a greater 
quantity of water than of wine; whereas, according to the ra- 
tional practice of the universal Church, the wine should be used 
in much greater quantity than the water? 


NO OTHER ELEMENTS PERTAIN TO THIS SACRAMENT 


These, then, are the only two elements of this Sacrament; 
and with reason has it been enacted by many decrees that, 
although there have been those who were not afraid to do so, it 
is unlawful to offer anything but bread and wine. 


PECULIAR FITNESS OF BREAD AND WINE 


We have now to consider the aptitude of these two symbols 
of bread and wine to represent those things of which we believe 
and confess they are the sensible signs. 

In the first place, then, they signify to us Christ, as the true 
life of men; for our Lord Himself says: My flesh is meat 
indeed, and my blood is drink indeed.*® As, then, the body of 
Christ the Lord furnishes nourishment unto eternal life to those 
who receive this Sacrament with purity and holiness, rightly is 
the matter composed chiefly of those elements by which our 
present life is sustained, in order that the faithful may easily 


 Apoc. xvii. ‘15. * Decret. lib. ili. tit. 41. c. 12. * John: yin5y. 
2 On the wine used for the Eucharist see Summa Theol. 3a. Ixxiv. 5-8. 


THE EUCHARIST fue 


understand that the mind and soul are satiated by the Com- 
munion of the precious body and blood of Christ. 

These very elements serve also somewhat to suggest to men 
the truth of the Real Presence of the body and blood of the Lord 
in the Sacrament. Observing, as we do, that bread and wine are 
every day changed by the power of nature into human flesh 
and blood, we are led the more easily by this analogy to believe 
that the substance of the bread and wine is changed, by the 
heavenly benediction, into the real flesh and real blood of Christ. 

This admirable change of the elements also helps to 
shadow forth what takes place in the soul. Although no change 
of the bread and wine appears externally, yet their substance 
is truly changed into the flesh and blood of Christ; so, in like 
manner, although in us nothing appears changed, yet we are 
renewed inwardly unto life, when we receive in the Sacrament 
of the Eucharist the true life. 

Moreover, the body of the Church, which is one, consists of 
many members, and of this union nothing is more strikingly 
illustrative than the elements of bread and wine; for bread is 
made from many grains and wine is pressed from many clusters 
of grapes. Thus they signify that we, though many, are most 
closely bound together by the bond of this divine mystery and 
made, as it were, one body. 


Form of the Eucharist 


The form to be used in the consecration of the bread is next 
to be treated of, not, however, in order that the faithful should 
be taught these mysteries, unless necessity require it; for this 
knowledge is not needful for those who have not received Holy 
Orders. The purpose (of this section) is to guard against most 
shameful mistakes on the part of priests, at the time of the 
consecration, due to ignorance of the form. 

a On the necessity and fitness of the matter of the Eucharist see Summa 


Theol. 3a. Ixxiv. 1; on the matter of the Eucharist see St. Alphonsus, 
Theol. Mor. vi. 194-219; Code of Canon Law, canons 814-817. 


a THE SACRAMENTS 


FORM TO BE USED IN THE CONSECRATION OF THE BREAD 


We are then taught by the holy Evangelists, Matthew and 
Luke, and also by the Apostle, that the form consists of these 
words: This is my body; for it is written: Whilst they were 
at supper, Jesus took bread, and blessed it, and brake, and gave 
to his disciples, and said: Take and eat, This is my body.”® 

This form of consecration having been observed by Christ the 
Lord has been always used by the Catholic Church. The tes- 
timonies of the Fathers, the enumeration of which would be 
endless, and also the decree of the Council of Florence, which 
is well known and accessible to all, must here be omitted, espe- 
cially as the knowledge which they convey may be obtained from 
these words of the Saviour: Do this for a commemoration of 
me.” For what the Lord enjoined was not only what He had 
done, but also what he had said; and especially is this true, 
since the words were uttered not only to signify, but also to 
accomplish. 

That these words constitute the form is easily proved from 
reason also. The form is that which signifies what is accom- 
plished in this Sacrament; but as the preceding words signify 
and declare what takes place in the Eucharist, that is, the con- 
version of the bread into the true body of our Lord, it there- 
fore follows that these very words constitute the form. In this 
sense may be understood the words of the Evangelist: He 
blessed; for they seem equivalent to this: Taking bread, he 
blessed it, saying: “This is my body.” *8 


NOT ALL THE WORDS USED ARE ESSENTIAL 


Although in the Evangelist the words, Take and eat, precede 
the words (This is my body), they evidently express the use 
only, not the consecration, of the matter. Wherefore, while 
they are not necessary to the consecration of the Sacrament, 
they are by all means to be pronounced by the priest, as is also 
the conjunction for in the consecration of the body and blood. 
But they are not necessary to the validity of the Sacrament, 


* Matt. xxvi. 26; Mark xiv. 22; Luke xxii. 19; 1 Cor. xi. 24. 
* Luke xxii. 10. * Matt. xxvi. 26. 


THE EUCHARIST 225 


otherwise it would follow that, if this Sacrament were not to 
be administered to anyone, it should not, or indeed could not, 
be consecrated; whereas, no one can lawfully doubt that the 
priest, by pronouncing the words of our Lord according to the 
institution and practice of the Church, truly consecrates the 
proper matter of the bread, even though it should afterwards 
never be administered. 


FORM TO BE USED IN THE CONSECRATION OF THE WINE 


With regard to the consecration of the wine, which is the 
other element of this Sacrament, the priest, for the reason we 
have already assigned, ought of necessity to be well acquainted 
with, and well understand its form. We are then firmly to 
believe that it consists in the following words: This is the chalice 
of my blood, of the new and eternal testament, the mystery of 
fatth, which shall be shed for you and for many, to the remis- 
sion of sins.2® Of these words the greater part are taken from 
Scripture; but some have been preserved in the Church from 
Apostolic tradition. 

Thus the words, this is the chalice, are found in St. Luke and 
in the Apostle; *° but the words that immediately follow, of my 
blood, or my blood of the new testament, which shall be shed 
for you and for many to the remission of sins, are found partly 
in St. Luke and partly in St. Matthew.** But the words, eternal, 
and the mystery of faith, have been taught us by holy tradition, 
the interpreter and keeper of Catholic truth. 

Concerning this form no one can doubt, if he here also attend 
to what has been already said about the form used in the con- 
secration of the bread. The form to be used (in the consecra- 
tion) of this element, evidently consists of those words which 
signify that the substance of the wine is changed into the blood 
of our Lord. Since, therefore, the words already cited clearly 
declare this, it is plain that no other words constitute the form. 

They moreover express certain admirable fruits of the blood 
shed in the Passion of our Lord, fruits which pertain in a most 


Decret. Tub. iii. tit. 41. c. 6. Luke xii. 20; 1 Cor. xi. 25. 
*T uke xxii. 20; Matt. xxvi. 28. 


226 THE SACRAMENTS 


special manner to this Sacrament. Of these, one is access to the 
eternal inheritance, which has come to us by right of the new 
and everlasting testament. Another is access to righteousness 
by the mystery of faith; for God hath set forth Jesus to be a 
propitiator through faith in his blood, that he himself may be 
just, and the justifier of him, who is of the faith of Jesus 
Christ.22. A third effect is the remission of sins. 


EXPLANATION OF THE FORM USED IN THE CONSECRATION OF THE 
WINE 


Since these very words of consecration are replete with mys- 
teries and most appropriately suitable to the subject, they demand 
a more minute consideration. 

The words: This is the chalice of my blood, are to be under- 
stood to mean: This is my blood, which is contained in this 
chalice. The mention of the chalice made at the consecration 
of the blood is right and appropriate, inasmuch as the blood is 
the drink of the faithful, and this would not be sufficiently sig- 
nified if it were not contained in some drinking vessel. 

Next follow the words: Of the new testament. These have 
been added that we might understand the blood of Christ the 
Lord to be given not under a figure, as was done in the Old 
Law, of which we read in the Epistle to the Hebrews ** that 
without blood a testament is not dedicated; but to be given to 
men in truth and in reality, as becomes the New Testament.? 
Hence the Apostle says: Christ therefore is the mediator of the 
new testament, that by means of his death, they who are called 
may receive the promise of eternal inheritance.** 

The word eternal refers to the eternal inheritance, the right 
to which we acquire by the death of Christ the Lord, the eternal 
testator. 

The words mystery of faith, which are subjoined, do not ex- 
clude the reality, but signify that what lies hidden and concealed 
and far removed from the perception of the eye, is to be believed 
with firm faith. In this passage, however, these words bear 


” Rom. iii. 25. * Heb, ix. 18. = Heby ixe ie: 


@ Christ is present in the Eucharist not merely in sign or in figure, 
but in truth and in reality. (Council of Trent, Sess. xiii. Cap. Ts) 


THE EUCHARIST bse 


_a meaning different from that which they have when applied also 
to Baptism. Here the mystery of faith consists in seeing by 
faith the blood of Christ veiled under the species of wine; but 
Baptism is justly called by us the Sacrament of faith, by the 
Greeks, the mystery of faith, because it embraces the entire 
profession of the Christian faith. 

Another reason why we call the blood of the Lord the mystery 
of faith is that human reason is particularly beset with difficulty 
and embarrassment when faith proposes to our belief that Christ 
the Lord, the true Son of God, at once God and man, suffered 
death for us, and this death is designated by the Sacrament of 
His blood. 

Here, therefore, rather than at the consecration of His body, 
is appropriately commemorated the Passion of our Lord, by 
the words. which shall be shed for the remission of sins. For 
the blood, separately consecrated, serves to place before the eyes 
of all, in a more forcible manner, the Passion of our Lord, His 
death, and the nature of His sufferings. 

The additional words for you and for many, are taken, some 
from Matthew, some from Luke,*° but were joined together by the 
Catholic Church under the guidance of the Spirit of God. They 
serve to declare the fruit and advantage of His Passion. For 
if we look to its value, we must confess that the Redeemer shed 
His blood for the salvation of all; but if we look to the fruit 
which mankind have received from it, we shall easily find that 
it pertains not unto all, but to many of the human race. When 
therefore (our Lord) said: For you, He meant either those who 
were present, or those chosen from among the Jewish people, 
such as were, with the exception of Judas, the disciples with 
whom He was speaking. When He added, And for many, He 
wished to be understood to mean the remainder of the elect from 
among the Jews or Gentiles. 

With reason, therefore, were the words for all not used, as 
in this place the fruits of the Passion are alone spoken of, and 
to the elect only did His Passion bring the fruit of salvation. 
And this is the purport of the Apostle ** when he says: Christ 
was offered once to exhaust the sins of many; and also of the 


® Matt. xxvi. 28; Luke xxii. 20. * Heb. ix. 28. 


228 THE SACRAMENTS 


words of our Lord in John: J pray for them; I pray not for the 
world, but for them whom thou hast given me, because they are 
thine.** 

Beneath the words of this consecration lie hid many other 
mysteries, which by frequent meditation and study of sacred 
things, pastors will find it easy, with the divine assistance, to dis- 
cover for themselves.* 


Three Mysteries of the Eucharist 


We must now return to an explanation of those truths con- 
cerning the Eucharist about which the faithful are on no account 
to be left in ignorance. Pastors, aware of the warning of the 
Apostle that those who discern not the body of the Lord are 
guilty of a most grave crime,** should first of all impress on the 
minds of the faithful the necessity of detaching, as much as 
possible, their mind and understanding from the dominion of 
the senses; for if they believe that this Sacrament contains only 
what the senses disclose, they will of necessity fall into enormous 
impiety. Consulting the sight, the touch, the smell, the taste 
and finding nothing but the appearances of bread and wine, they 
will naturally judge that this Sacrament contains nothing more 
than bread and wine. Their minds, therefore, are as much as pos- 
sible to be withdrawn from subjection to the senses and excited 
to the contemplation of the stupendous might and power of God. 

The Catholic Church firmly believes and professes that in this 
Sacrament the words of consecration accomplish three wondrous 
and admirable effects. 

The first is that the true body of Christ the Lord, the same 
that was born of the Virgin, and is now seated at the right hand 
of the Father in heaven, is contained in this Sacrament. 

The second, however repugnant it may appear to the senses, 
is that none of the substance of the elements remains in the 
Sacrament. 

The third, which may be deduced from the two preceding, 
although the words of consecration themselves clearly express 


"John xvii. 0. Hie (Gohe, Sal Ao) 


aOn the words of consecration see Summa Theol. 3a. Ixxviii; St. 
Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. vi. 220-224. 


THE EUCHARIST 220 


it, is that the accidents which present themselves to the eyes or 
other senses exist in a wonderful and ineffable manner without 
a subject. All the accidents of bread and wine we can see, but 
they inhere in no substance, and exist independently of any; 
for the substance of the bread and wine is so changed into the 
body and blood of our Lord that they altogether cease to be the 
substance of bread and wine. 


The Mystery of the Real Presence 


To begin with the first (of these mysteries), pastors should 
give their best attention to show how clear and explicit are the 
words of our Saviour which establish the Real Presence of His 
body in this Sacrament. 


PROOF FROM SCRIPTURE 


When our Lord says: This is my body, this is my blood, 
no person of sound mind can mistake His meaning, particularly 
since there is reference to Christ’s human nature, the reality of 
which the Catholic faith permits no one to doubt. The admirable 
words of St. Hilary, a man not less eminent for piety than learn- 
ing, are apt here: When our Lord himself declares, as our 
faith teaches us, that His flesh is food indeed, what room can 
remain for doubt concerning the real presence of His body and 
blood? *° 

Pastors should also adduce another passage from which it 
can be clearly seen that the true body and blood of our Lord 

-are contained in the Eucharist. The Apostle, after having re- 
corded the consecration of bread and wine by our Lord, and also 
the administration of Communion to the Apostles, adds: But let 
a man prove himself, and so eat of that bread and drink of the 
chalice; for he that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and 
drinketh judgment to himself, not discerning the body of the 
Lord.*® If, as heretics continually repeat, the Sacrament pre- 
sents nothing to our veneration but a memorial and sign of the 
Passion of Christ, why was there need to exhort the faithful, 
in language so energetic, to prove themselves? By the terrible 


® De Trinitat. lib. viii. 14. Ot (Core, sak Beh Bo): 


230 THE SACRAMENTS 


word judgment, the Apostle shows how enormous is the guilt 
of those who receive unworthily and do not distinguish from 
common food the body of the Lord concealed in the Eucharist. 
In the same Epistle St. Paul had already developed this doctrine 
more fully, when he said: The chalice of benediction which we 
bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? and the 
bread which we break, is it not the participation of the body of 
the Lord? * Now these words signify the real substance of the 
body and blood of Christ the Lord. 


PROOF FROM THE TEACHING OF THE CHURCH 


These passages of Scripture are therefore to be expounded 
by pastors; and they should especially teach that there is nothing 
doubtful or uncertain about them, All the more certain are 
they since the infallible teaching of God’s Church has inter- 
preted them, as may be ascertained in a twofold manner. 


TESTIMONY OF THE FATHERS 


The first is by consulting the Fathers who flourished in the 
early ages of the Church and in each succeeding century, who 
are the most unexceptionable witnesses of her doctrine. All of 
these teach in the clearest terms and with the most entire una- 
nimity the truth of this dogma. To adduce the individual testi- 
mony of each Father would prove an endless task. It is enough, 
therefore, that we cite, or rather point out a few, whose testi- 
mony will afford an easy criterion by which to judge of the rest. 

Let St. Ambrose first declare his faith. In his book On Those 
Who are Initiated Into the Mysteries * he says that the true body 
of Christ is received in this Sacrament, just as the true body 
of Christ was derived from the Virgin, and that this truth is 
to be believed with the firm certainty of faith. In another 
place *° he teaches that before consecration there is only bread, 
but after consecration there is the flesh of Christ.4# 

St. Chrysostom, another witness of equal authority and gravity, 
professes and proclaims this mysterious truth in many passages, 


2S (Core ee UG): “De Myst. c. 9. “De Sacr. iv. 4. 


“De Sacr. iv. 4; De Iis Qui Myster. Init. c. 9. See also De Consec. dist. 
2 in many places, 


THE EUCHARIST 231 


but particularly in his sixtieth homily, On Those Who Receive The 
Sacred Mysteries Unworthily; and also in his forty-fourth and 
forty-fifth homilies on St. John. Let us, he says, obey, not con- 
tradict God, although what He says may seem contrary to our 
reason and our sight. His words cannot deceive, our senses are 
easily deceived.** 

With this doctrine fully agrees the uniform teaching of St. 
Augustine, that most zealous defender of Catholic faith, par- 
ticularly when in his explanation of the thirty-third Psalm he 
says: To carry himself in kis own hands is impossible to man, 
and peculiar to Christ alone; He was carried in His own hands 
when, giving His body to be eaten, He said, This is my body.*° 

To pass by Justin and Irenzus, St. Cyril, in his fourth book on 
St. John, declares in such express terms that the true body of 
our Lord is contained in this Sacrament, that no sophistry, no 
captious interpretations can obscure his meaning. 

Should pastors wish for additional testimonies of the Fathers, 
they will find it easy to add St. Denis, St. Hilary, St. Jerome, 
St. Damascene and a host of others, whose weighty teaching 
on this most important subject has been collected by the labor 
and industry of learned and pious men.*? 


TEACHING OF THE COUNCILS 


Another means of ascertaining the belief of the holy Church 
on matters of faith is the condemnation of the contrary doctrine 
and opinion. It is manifest that belief in the Real Presence of 
the body of Christ in the holy Sacrament of the Eucharist was 
so spread and taught throughout the universal Church and 
unanimously professed by all the faithful, that when, five cen- 
turies ago, Berengarius presumed to deny this dogma, asserting 
that the Eucharist was only a sign, he was unanimously con- 
demned in the Council of Vercelli, which Leo IX had imme- 
diately convoked, whereupon he himself anathematized his error.* 

* Hom. lx. ad Popul. Antioch. 

Tn Psalm xxiii, Serm. i. n. 10. 

4’ Cyril, In Joan, lib. iv. cc. 13, 14; lib. 1. c. 13; Justin, Apolog. 2; Iren., 


Contra Haer., lib. 5; in Joan, c. 34; Denis, Eccles. Hier. c. 3; Hilar. De 
Trinit., lib. 8; Jerome, Epist. ad Damasum; Damas., De Fide Orth., lib. 4. 


a This Council of Vercelli was held in 1050. 


232 THE SACRAMENTS 


Relapsing, however, into the same wicked folly, he was cof 
demned by three different Councils, convened, one at Tours, 
the other two at Rome; of the two latter, one was summoned 
by Pope Nicholas II, the other by Pope Gregory VII? The 
General Council of Lateran, held under Innocent III, further 
ratified the sentence. Finally this truth was more clearly defined 
and established in the Councils of Florence and Trent.** 


Two Great Benefits of Proving the Real Presence 


If, then, pastors will carefully explain these particulars, they 
will be able, while ignoring those who are blinded by error and 
hate nothing more than the light of truth, to strengthen the weak 
and administer joy and consolation to the pious, all the more as 
the faithful cannot doubt that this dogma is numbered among 
the Articles of faith. 


FAITH IS STRENGTHENED 


Believing and confessing, as they do, that the power of God is 
supreme over all things, they must also believe that His omnipo- 
tence can accomplish the great work which we admire and adore 
in the Sacrament of the Eucharist. And again since they believe 
the Holy Catholic Church, they must necessarily believe that the 
true doctrine of this Sacrament is that which we have set forth. 


THE SOUL IS GLADDENED 


Nothing contributes more to the spiritual joy and advantage 
of pious persons than the contemplation of the exalted dignity 
of this most august Sacrament. In the first place they learn 
how great is the perfection of the Gospel Dispensation, under 
which we enjoy the reality of that which under the Mosaic Law 
was only shadowed forth by types and figures. Hence St. Denis 4° 
divinely says that our Church is midway between the Syna- 

“Decr. pro Armen. C. of Trent, Sess. xiii. 

me Demiccl Fiery cers spent 


a The teachings of Berengarius were condemned at Tours in 10 Th 
I 3 e 
Roman Councils referred to were held in 1059 and 1078. cry 


THE EUCHARIST 233 


gogue and the heavenly Jerusalem, and consequently participates 
of the nature of both. Certainly, then, the faithful can never 
sufficiently admire the perfection of holy Church and her exalted 
glory which seems to be removed only by one degree from the 
bliss of heaven. In common with the inhabitants of heaven, we 
too possess Christ, God and man, present with us. They are 
raised a degree above us, inasmuch as they are present with 
Christ and enjoy the Beatific Vision; while we, with a firm and 
unwavering faith, adore the Divine Majesty present with us, not, 
it is true, in a manner visible to mortal eye, but hidden by a 
miracle of power under the veil of the sacred mysteries. 
Furthermore the faithful experience in this Sacrament the most 
perfect love of Christ our Saviour. It became the goodness of 
the Saviour not to withdraw from us that nature which He 
assumed from us, but to desire, as far as possible, to remain 
among us so that at all times He might be seen to verify the 
words: My delight 1s to be with the children of men.®°4 


Meaning of the Real Presence 


CHRIST WHOLE AND ENTIRE IS PRESENT IN THE EUCHARIST 


Here the pastor should expldin that in this Sacrament are 
contained not only the true body of Christ and all the constitu- 
ents of a true body, such as bones and sinews, but also Christ 
whole and entire. He should point out that the word Christ 
designates the God-man, that is to say, one Person in whom 
are united the divine and human natures; that the Holy Eucha- 
rist, therefore, contains both, and whatever is included in the 
idea of both, the Divinity and humanity whole and entire, con- 
sisting of the soul, all the parts of the body and the blood,— 
all of which must be believed to be in this Sacrament. In heaven 
the whole humanity is united to the Divinity in one hypostasis, 
or Person; hence it would be impious, to suppose that the body 
of Christ, which is contained in the Sacrament, is separated from 


His Divinity. 


SR TOV. Ville ot 
aQOn the fact of the Real Presence see Summa Theol. 3a. Ixxv. I. 


234 THE SACRAMENTS 


PRESENCE IN VIRTUE OF THE SACRAMENT AND IN VIRTUE OF 
CONCOMITANCE 


Pastors, however, should not fail to observe that in this Sac- 
rament not all these things are contained after the same manner, 
or by the same power. Some things, we say, are present in 
virtue of the consecration; for as the words of consecration effect 
what they signify, sacred writers usually say that whatever the 
form expresses, is contained in the Sacrament by virtue of the 
Sacrament. Hence, could we suppose any one thing to be 
entirely separated from the rest, the Sacrament, they teach, 
would be found to contain solely what the form expresses and 
nothing more. 

On the other hand, some things are contained in the Sacrament 
because they are united to those which are expressed in the form. 
For instance, the words This is my body, which comprise the 
form used to consecrate the bread, signify the body of the Lord, 
and hence the body itself of Christ the Lord is contained in the 
Eucharist by virtue of the Sacrament. Since, however, to 
Christ’s body are united His blood, His soul, and His Divinity, 
all of these also must be found to coexist in the Sacrament; 
not, however, by virtue of the consecration, but by virtue of the 
union that subsists between them and His body. All these are 
said to be in the Eucharist by virtue of concomitance. Hence 
it is clear that Christ, whole and entire, is contained in the 
Sacrament; for when two things are actually united, where one 
is, the other must also be. 


CHRIST WHOLE AND ENTIRE PRESENT UNDER EACH SPECIES 


Hence it also follows that Christ is so contained, whole and 
entire, under either species, that, as under the species of bread 
are contained not only the body, but also the blood and Christ 
entire; so in like manner, under the species of wine are truly 
contained not only the blood, but also the body and Christ entire. 

But although these are matters on which the faithful cannot 
entertain a doubt, it was nevertheless wisely ordained that two 
distinct consecrations should take place. First, because they 
represent in a more lively manner the Passion of our Lord, in 


THE EUCHARIST 235 


which His blood was separated from His body; and hence in 
the form of consecration we commemorate the shedding of His 
blood. Secondly, since the Sacrament is to be used by us as the 
food and nourishment of our souls, it was most appropriate that 
it should be instituted as food and drink, two things which obvi- 
ously constitute the complete sustenance of the (human) body. 


CHRIST WHOLE AND ENTIRE PRESENT IN EVERY PART OF EACH 
SPECIES 


Nor should it be forgotten that Christ, whole and entire, is 
contained not only under either species, but also in each particle 
of either species. Each, says St. Augustine, receives Christ the 
Lord, and He is entire in each portion. He is not diminished by 
being given to many, but gives Himself ae and entire to 
each,** 

This is also an obvious inference from the narrative of the 
Evangelists. It is not to be supposed that our Lord consecrated 
the bread used at the Last Supper in separate parts, applying the 
form particularly to each, but that all the bread then used for 
the sacred mysteries was consecrated at the same time and with 
the same form, and in a quantity sufficient for all the Apostles. 
That the consecration of the chalice was performed in this man- 
ner, is clear from these words of the Saviour: Take and divide 
it among you.>? 2 

What has hitherto been said is intended to enable pastors to 
show that the true body and blood of Christ are contained in the 
Sacrament of the Eucharist. 


The Mystery of Transubstantiation 


The next point to be explained is that the substance of the 
bread and wine does not continue to exist in the Sacrament after 
consecration. This truth, although well calculated to excite our 
profound admiration, is yet a necessary consequence from what 
has been already established. 


*% Quoted in Gratian, p. 3, dist. il. c. 77; Ambrosian Mass, Preface for 
Fifth Sunday after Epiph. 

2 Luke xxii. 17. 

aQOn the manner of the Real Presence see Summa Theol. 3a. Ixxvi. 


236 THE SACRAMENTS 


PROOF FROM THE DOGMA OF THE REAL PRESENCE 


If, after consecration, the true body of Christ is present under 
the species of bread and wine, since it was not there before, it 
must have become present either by change of place, or by crea- 
tion, or by the change of some other thing into it. It cannot be 
rendered present by change of place, because it would then cease 
to be in heaven; for whatever is moved must necessarily cease to 
occupy the place from which it is moved. Still less can we sup- 
pose the body of Christ to be rendered present by creation; nay, 
the very idea is inconceivable. In order that the body of our 
Lord be present in the Sacrament, it remains, therefore, that it 
be rendered present by the change of the bread into it. Where- 
fore it is necessary that none of the substance of the bread 
remain. 


PROOF FROM THE COUNCILS 


Hence our predecessors in the faith, the Fathers of the Gen- 
eral Councils of Lateran and of Florence, confirmed by sclemn 
decrees the truth of this dogma. In the Council of Trent it 
was still more fully defined in these words: Jf any one shall say 
that in the most Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist the substance 
of the bread and wine remains, together with the body and blood 
of our Lord Jesus Christ, let him be anathema.®* 


PROOF FROM SCRIPTURE 


The doctrine thus defined is a natural inference from the words 
of Scripture. When instituting this Sacrament, our Lord Him- 
self said: This is my body.** The word this expresses the 
entire substance of the thing present; and therefore if the sub- 
stance of the bread remained, our Lord could not have truly said: 
This is my body. 

In St. John Christ the Lord also says: The bread that I will 
give is my flesh, for the life of the world.®®> The bread which 
He promises to give, He here declares to be His flesh. A little 


Sess. xiii. can. 4. 


* Matt. xxvi. 26; Mark xiv. 22; Luke xxi. 18; 1 Cor. xi. 24, 
® John ‘vi. 52. 


THE EUCHARIST 237 


after He adds: Unless you eat the flesh of the son of man, and 
drink his blood, you shall not have life in you.® And again: 
My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed.®" Since, 
therefore, in terms so clear and so explicit, He calls His flesh 
bread and meat indeed, and His blood drink indeed, He gives 
us sufficiently to understand that none of the substance of the 
bread and wine remains in the Sacrament. 


PROOF FROM THE FATHERS 


Whoever turns over the pages of the holy Fathers will easily 
perceive that on this doctrine (of transubstantiation) they have 
been at all times unanimous. St. Ambrose says: You say, per- 
haps, “this bread is no other than what is used for common 
food.” True, before consecraticn it is bread; but no sooner are 
the words of consecration pronounced than from bread it be- 
comes the flesh of Christ.4 To prove this position more clearly, 
he elucidates it by a variety of comparisons and examples. In 
another place, when explaining these words of the Psalmist, 
Whatsoever the Lord pleased he hath done in heaven and on 
earth,*® St. Ambrose says: Although the species of bread and 
wine are visible, yet we must believe that after consecration, 
the body and blood of Christ are alone there.®® Explaining the 
same doctrine almost in the same words, St. Hilary says that 
although externally it appear bread and wine, yet in reality it is 
the body and blood of the Lord.® 


\ 


WHY THE EUCHARIST IS CALLED BREAD AFTER CONSECRATION 


Here pastors should observe that we should not at all be sur- 
prised, if, even after consecration, the Eucharist is sometimes 
called bread. It is so called, first because it retains the appear- 
ance of bread, and secondly because it keeps the natural quality 
of bread, which is to support and nourish the body. 


® John vi. 54. * John vi. 56. "Ps. cxxxiv. 6, 
BO solv Siete D3) diste 11. 7458 Cre De Myster. ix; Pasch. Radb., 


De Corp. et Sang. Dom. c. I. n. 2. mee 
=De Trin. lib. 8; quoted in Gratian, p. 3. dist. ii. cc. 70, 82. 


aThese words are taken from the work. De Sacr. lib. iv. c. 4; lib. 
v. c. 4. 


238 THE SACRAMENTS 


Moreover, stich phraseology is in perfect accordance with the 
usage of the Holy Scriptures, which call things by what they 
appear to be, as may be seen from the words of Genesis which 
say that Abraham saw three men, when in reality he saw three 
Angels." In like manner the two Angels who appeared to the 
Apostles after the Ascension of Christ the Lord into heaven, 
are called not Angels, but men.® 


The Meaning of Transubstantiation 


To explain this mystery is extremely difficult. The pastor, 
however, should endeavor to instruct those who are more ad- 
vanced in the knowledge of divine things on the manner of this 
admirable change. As for those who are yet weak in faith, 
they might possibly be overwhelmed by its greatness. 


TRANSUBSTANTIATION A TOTAL CONVERSION 


This conversion, then, is so effected that the whole substance 
of the bread is changed by the power of God into the whole 
substance of the body of Christ, and the whole substance of the 
wine into the whole substance of His blood, and this, without 
any change in our Lord Himself. He is neither begotten, nor 
changed, not increased, but remains entire in His substance. 

This sublime mystery St. Ambrose thus declares: You see how 
efficacious are the words of Christ. If the word of the Lord 
Jesus is so powerful as to summon into existence that which did 
not exist, namely the world, how much more powerful is His 
word to change into something else that which already has exist- 
ence? 4 

Many other ancient and most authoritative Fathers have written 
to the same effect. We faithfully confess, says St. Augustine, 
that before consecration it is bread and wine, the product of 
nature; but after consecration it is the body and blood of Christ, 
consecrated by the blessing.°* The body, says Damascene, is 
truly united to the Divinity, that body which was derived from 


“Gen. xviii. 2 SINGS th 
Wl, 2, ») OQ. 
* Quoted in Gratian, p. 3. dist. ii. c. 41. 


4 These words are from the work De Sacr. lib. iv. c. 4. 


THE EUCHARIST 230 


the virgin; not that the body thus derived descends from heaven, 
but that the bread and wine are changed into the body and blood 
of Christ.4 

This admirable change, as the Council of Trent teaches, the 
Holy Catholic Church most appropriately expresses by the word 
transubstantiation.*© Since natural changes are rightly called 
transformations, because they involve a change of form; so 
likewise our predecessors in the faith wisely and appropriately 
introduced the term transubstantiation, in order to signify that 
in the Sacrament of the Eucharist the whole substance of one 
thing passes into the whole substance of another. 

According to the admonition so frequently repeated by the 
holy Fathers, the faithful are to be admonished against curious 
searching into the manner in which this change is effected. It 
defies the powers of conception; nor can we find any example of 
it in natural transmutations, or even in the very work of crea- 
tion. That such a change takes place must be recognized by 
faith; how it takes place we must not curiously inquire. 

No less of caution should be observed by pastors in explaining 
the mysterious manner in which the body of our Lord is con- 
tained whole and entire under the least particle of the bread. 
Indeed, discussions of this kind should scarcely ever be entered 
upon. Should Christian charity, however, require a departure 
from this rule, the pastor should remember first of all to pre- 
pare and fortify his hearers by reminding them that no word 
shall be impossible with God.** 4 


A CONSEQUENCE OF TRANSUBSTANTIATION 


The pastor should next teach that our Lord is not in the Sac- 
rament as in a place. Place regards things only inasmuch as 
they have magnitude. Now we do not say that Christ is in the 
Sacrament inasmuch as He is great or small, terms which belong 
to quantity, but inasmuch as He is a substance. The substance 
of the bread is changed into the substance of Christ, not into 
magnitude or quantity; and substance, it will be acknowledged 


“De Fid. Orth. lib. iv. c. 13. Sess. xiii. c. 4; can. 2. “Luke i. 37. 
aQOn Transubstantiation see Summa Theol. 3a. Ixxv. 2-8. 


240 THE SACRAMENTS 


by all, is contained in a small as well as in a large space. The 
substance of air, for instance, and its entire nature must be pres- 
ent under a small as well as a large quantity, and likewise the 
entire nature of water must be present no less in a glass than 
in a river. Since, then, the body of our Lord succeeds to the 
substance of the bread, we must confess it to be in the Sacra- 
ment after the same manner as the substance of the bread was 
before consecration; whether the substance of the bread was 
present in greater or less quantity is a matter of entire indiffer- 
ence. 


The Mystery of the Accidents without a Subject 


We now come to the third great and wondrous effect of this 
Sacrament, namely, the existence of the species of bread and 
wine without a subject. 


PROOF FROM THE PRECEDING DOGMAS 


What has been said in explanation of the two preceding points 
must facilitate for pastors the exposition of this truth. For, 
since we have already proved that the body and blood of our 
Lord are really and truly contained in the Sacrament, to the 
entire exclusion of the substance of the bread and wine, and 
since the accidents of bread and wine cannot inhere in the body 
and blood of Christ, it remains that, contrary to physical laws, 
they must subsist of themselves, inhering in no subject.®? 


PROOF FROM THE TEACHING OF THE CHURCH 


This has been at all times the uniform doctrine of the Cath- 
olic Church; and it can be easily established by the same au- 
thorities which, as we have already proved, make it plain that 


the substance of the bread and wine ceases to exist in the 
Eucharist. 


* See De Consecr. dist. 2, c. Nos autem; Decretal. lib. 1, tit. de celeb. 
Miss. c. cum Matt. Summa Theol. 3a. Ixxvii. 1. 


aQOn the substantial mode of Christ’s presence in the Eucharist see 
Summa Theol. ga. Ixxvi. 5-8. 


THE EUCHARIST 241 


ADVANTAGES OF THIS MYSTERY 


Nothing more becomes the piety of the faithful than, omitting 
all curious questionings, to revere and adore the majesty of this 
august Sacrament, and to recognize the wisdom of God in com- 
manding that these holy mysteries should be administered under 
the species of bread and wine. For since it is most revolting 
to human nature to eat human flesh or drink human blood, there- 
fore God in His infinite wisdom has established the administra- 
tion of the body and blood of Christ under the forms of bread 
and wine, which are the ordinary and agreeable food of man. 

There are two further advantages: first, it prevents the 
calumnious reproaches of the unbeliever, from which the eating 
of our Lord under His visible form could not easily be defended ; 
secondly, the receiving Him under a form in which He is im- 
pervious to the senses avails much for increasing our faith. For 
faith, as the well known saying of St. Gregory declares, has no 
merit in those things which fall under the proof of reason.® 

The doctrines treated above should be explained with great 
caution, according to the capacity of the hearers and the necessi- 
ties of the times.? 


The Effects of the Eucharist 


But with regard to the admirable virtue and fruits of this 
Sacrament, there is no class of the faithful to whom a knowl- 
edge of them is not most necessary. For all that has been said 
at such length on this Sacrament has principally for its object, 
to make the faithful sensible of the advantages of the Eucharist. 
As, however, no language can convey an adequate idea of its 
utility and fruits, pastors must be content to treat of one or two 
points, in order to show what an abundance and profusion of 
all goods are contained in those sacred mysteries. 


THE EUCHARIST CONTAINS CHRIST AND IS THE FOOD OF THE SOUL 


This they will in some degree accomplish, if, having explained 
the efficacy and nature of all the Sacraments, they compare 

®St. Greg. the Great, Hom. xxvi. in Evang. n. I. 

aQOn the accidents remaining in the Eucharist see Summa Theol. ga. 
Ixxv. 5; Ixxvil. 


242 THE SACRAMENTS 


the Eucharist to a fountain, the other Sacraments to rivulets. 
For the Holy Eucharist is truly and necessarily to be called the 
fountain of all graces, containing, as it does, after an admirable 
manner, the fountain itself of celestial gifts and graces, and the 
author of all the Sacraments, Christ our Lord, from whom, as 
from its source, is derived whatever of goodness and perfection 
the other Sacraments possess. From this (comparison), there- 
fore, we may easily infer what most ample gifts of divine grace 
are bestowed on us by this Sacrament. 

It will also be useful to consider attentively the nature of 
bread and wine, which are the symbols of this Sacrament. For 
what bread and wine are to the body, the Eucharist is to the 
health and delight of the soul, but in a higher and better way. 
This Sacrament is not, like bread and wine, changed into our 
substance; but we are, in some wise, changed into its nature, 
so that we may well apply here the words of St. Augustine: 
I am the food of the grown. Grow and thou shalt eat Me; nor 
shalt thou change Me into thee, as thy bodily food, but thou shalt 
be changed into Me.®® 


THE EUCHARIST GIVES GRACE 


If, then, grace and truth came by Jesus Christ,’ they must 
surely be poured into the soul which receives with purity and 
holiness Him who said of Himself: He that eateth my flesh and 
drinketh my blood abideth in me and I in him. Those who 
receive this Sacrament piously and fervently must, beyond all 
doubt, so receive the Son of God into their souls as to be in- 
grafted as living members on His body. For it is written: 
He that eateth me, the same also shall live by me; also: The 
bread which I will give is my flesh for the life of the world.” 
Explaining this passage, St. Cyril says: The Word of God, unit- 
ing Himself to His own flesh, imparted to it a vivifying power: 
it became Him, therefore, to unite Himself to our bodies in a 
wonderful manner, through His sacred flesh and precious blood, 
which we receive in the bread and wine, consecrated by His 
vivifying benediction." 


», Confess. vil. c. 18. m yohnsderys ™ John vi. 57. 
John vi. 58. “In Joan. (vi. 64) lib. iv. c 3. 


THE EUCHARIST 243 


THE GRACE OF THE EUCHARIST SUSTAINS 


When it is said that the Eucharist imparts grace, pastors must 
admonish that this does not mean that the state of grace is not 
required for a profitable reception of this Sacrament. For as 
natural food can be of no use to the dead, so in like manner the 
sacred mysteries can evidently be of no avail to a soul which 
lives not by the spirit. Hence this Sacrament has been instituted 
under the forms of bread and wine to signify that the object 
of its institution is not to recall the soul to life, but to preserve 
its life. 

The reason, then, for saying that this Sacrament imparts grace, 
is that even the first grace, with which all should be clothed 
before they presume to approach the Holy Eucharist, lest they 
eat and drink judgment to themselves, is given to none unless 
they receive in wish and desire this very Sacrament. For the 
Eucharist is the end of all the Sacraments, and the symbol of 
unity and brotherhood in the Church, outside which none can 
attain grace. 


THE GRACE OF THE EUCHARIST INVIGORATES AND DELIGHTS 


Again, just as the body is not only supported but also increased 
by natural food, from which the taste every day derives new 
relish and pleasure; so also is the soul not only sustained but 
invigorated by feasting on the food of the Eucharist, which gives 
to the spirit an increasing zest for heavenly things. Most truly 
and fitly therefore do we say that grace is imparted by this 
Sacrament, for it may be justly compared to the manna having 
in it the sweetness of every taste.” 


THE EUCHARIST REMITS VENIAL SINS 


It cannot be doubted that by the Eucharist are remitted and 
pardoned lighter sins, commonly called venial. Whatever the 
soul has lost through the fire of passion, by falling into some 
slight offence, all this the Eucharist, cancelling those lesser faults, 
repairs, in the same way—not to depart from the illustration 


este GC OLeext. 030, ™ Wis. xvi. 20. 


244 THE SACRAMENTS 


already adduced—as natural food gradually restores and repairs 
the daily waste caused by the force of the vital heat within us. 
Justly, therefore, has St. Ambrose said of this heavenly Sacra- 
ment: That daily bread is taken as a remedy for daily infirmity.? 
But these things are to be understood of those sins for which no 
actual affection is retained. 


THE EUCHARIST STRENGTHENS AGAINST TEMPTATION 


There is, furthermore, such a power in the sacred mysteries 
as to preserve us pure and unsullied from sin, keep us safe from 
the assaults of temptation, and, as by some heavenly medicine, 
prepare the soul against the easy approach and infection of 
virulent and deadly disease. Hence, as St. Cyprian ™* records, 
when the faithful were formerly hurried in multitudes by tyrants 
to torments and death, because they confessed the name of Christ, 
it was an ancient usage in the Catholic Church to give them, by 
the hands of the Bishop, the Sacrament of the body and blood of 
our Lord, lest perhaps overcome by the severity of their suffer- 
ings, they should fail in the fight for salvation. 

It also restrains and represses the lusts of the flesh, for while 
it inflames the soul more ardently with the fire of charity, it 
of necessity extinguishes the ardor of concupiscence. 


THE EUCHARIST FACILITATES THE ATTAINMENT OF ETERNAL LIFE 


Finally, to comprise all the advantages and blessings of this 
Sacrament in one word, it must be taught that the Holy Eucharist 
is most efficacious towards the attainment of eternal glory. For 
it is written: He that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, 
hath everlasting life, and I will raise him up on the last day.” 
That is to say, by the grace of this Sacrament men enjoy the 
greatest peace and tranquillity of conscience during the present 
life; and, when the hour of departing from this world shall 
have arrived, like Elias, who in the strength of the bread baked 
on the hearth, walked to Horeb,"* the mount of God, they, too, in- 
vigorated by the strengthening influence of this (heavenly food), 
will ascend to unfading glory and bliss. 


7 Ep. liv. oO FOunE vaeusiss %3 Kings xix. 8. 
a These words are taken from the work De Sacr., lib. iv. c. 6. 


THE EUCHARIST 245 


HOW THE EFFECTS OF THE EUCHARIST MAY BE DEVELOPED AND 
ILLUSTRATED 


All these matters will be most fully expounded by pastors, if 
they but dwell on the sixth chapter of St. John, in which are 
developed the manifold effects of this Sacrament. Or again, 
glancing at the admirable actions of Christ our Lord, they may 
show that if those who received Him beneath their roof during 
His mortal life, or were restored to health by touching His ves- 
ture or the hem of His garment, were justly and deservedly 
deemed most blessed, how much more fortunate and happy we, 
into whose soul, resplendent as He is with unfading glory, He 
disdains not to enter, to heal all its wounds, to adorn it with 
His choicest gifts, and unite it to Himself.@ 


Recipient of the Eucharist 


THREEFOLD MANNER OF COMMUNICATING 


That the faithful may learn to be zealous for the better gifts, 
they must be shown who can obtain these abundant fruits from 
the Holy Eucharist, must be reminded that there is not 
only one way of communicating. Wisely and rightly, then, did 
our predecessors in the faith, as we read in the Council of 
Trent,’®> distinguish three ways of receiving this Sacrament. 

Some receive it sacramentally only. Such are those sinners 
who do not fear to approach the holy mysteries with polluted 
lips and heart, who, as the Apostle ®° says, eat and drink the 
Lord’s body unworthily. Of this class of communicants St. 
Augustine says: He who dwells not in Christ, and in whom 
Christ dwells not, most certainly does not eat spiritually Hts 
flesh, although carnally and visibly he press with lis teeth the 
Sacrament of His flesh and blood.** Those, therefore, who re- 
ceive the sacred mysteries with such a disposition, not only obtain 
no fruit therefrom, but, as the Apostle himself testifies, eat and 
drink judgment to themselves.” 


” Sess. xiii. c. 8. i) Gory Xi}, 20, 

%In Joan. Tract. xxvi. 18. “ie (Crayos ashy aie), 

aQOn the effects of the Eucharist see Summa Theol. 3a. Ixxix; St. 
Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. vi. 225-220. 

b Sess. xili. cap. 8. 


546 THE SACRAMENTS 


Others are said to receive the Eucharist in spirit only. They 
are those who, inflamed with a lively faith which worketh by 
charity,®* partake in wish and desire of that celestial bread 
offered to them, from which they receive, if not the entire, at 
least very great fruits. 

Lastly, there are some who receive the Holy Eucharist both 
sacramentally and spiritually, those who, according to the teach- 
ing of the Apostle,** having first proved themselves and having 
approached this divine banquet adorned with the nuptial gar- 
ment,®® derive from the Eucharist those most abundant fruits 
which we have already described. Hence it is clear that those 
who, having it in their power to receive with fitting preparation 
the Sacrament of the body of the Lord, are yet satisfied with a 
spiritual Communion only, deprive themselves of the greatest 
and most heavenly advantages.* 


NECESSITY OF PREVIOUS PREPARATION FOR COMMUNION 


We now come to point out the manner in which the faithful 
should be previously prepared for sacramental Communion. To 
demonstrate the great necessity of this previous preparation, the 
example of the Saviour should be adduced. Before He gave to 
His Apostles the Sacrament of His precious body and blood, 
although they were already clean, He washed their feet ®* to 
show that we must use extreme diligence before Holy Commu- 
nion in order to approach it with the greatest purity and inno- 
cence of soul. 

In the next place, the faithful are to understand that as he 
who approaches thus prepared and disposed is adorned with 
the most ample gifts of heavenly grace; so, on the contrary, 
he who approaches without this preparation not only derives 
from it no advantage, but even incurs the greatest misfortune 
and loss. It is characteristic of the best and most salutary 
things that, if seasonably made use of, they are productive of 
the greatest benefit; but if employed out of time, they prove 
most pernicious and destructive. It cannot, therefore, excite 


eo Gralenys Os “1 Cor. xi. 28. * Matt. xxii. 11. “John xiii. 5. 


2On spiritual and sacramental Communion see Summa Theol. 3a. 
XXX. I-3. 


THE EUCHARIST 247 


our surprise that the great and exalted gifts of God, when re- 
ceived into a soul properly disposed, are of the greatest assistance 
towards the attainment of salvation; while to those who receive 
them unworthily, they bring with them eternal death. 

Of this the Ark of the Lord affords a convincing illustration. 
The people of Israel possessed nothing more precious and it was 
to them the source of innumerable blessings from God; but when 
the Philistines carried it away, it brought on them a most de- 
structive plague and the heaviest calamities, together with eternal 
disgrace.*’ Thus also food when received from the mouth into a 
healthy stomach nourishes and supports the body; but when re- 
ceived into an indisposed stomach, causes grave disorders. 


PREPARATION OF SOUL 


The first preparation, then, which the faithful should make, 
is to distinguish table from table, this sacred table from profane 
tables,®* this celestial bread from common bread. This we do 
when we firmly believe that there is truly present the body and 
blood of the Lord, of Him whom the Angels adore in heaven, 
at whose nod the pillars of heaven fear and tremble, of whose 
glory the heavens and the earth are full.*® This is to discern 
the body of the Lord in accordance with the admonition of the 
Apostle.°° We should venerate the greatness of the mystery 
rather than too curiously investigate its truth by idle inquiry. 

Another very necessary preparation is to ask ourselves if we 
are at peace with and sincerely love our neighbor. Jf, therefore, 
thou offerest thy gift at the altar, and there rememberest that 
thy brother hath anything against thee, leave there thy offering 
before the altar, and go first to be reconciled to thy brother, 
and then coming thou shalt offer thy gift.* 

We should, in the next place, carefully examine whether our 
consciences be defiled by mortal sin, which has to be repented of, 
in order that it may be blotted out before Communion by the 
remedy of contrition and confession. The Council of Trent has 
defined that no one conscious of mortal sin and having an oppor- 

1 Kings v. aha Corsex m2i- 


Psalm xcvi. 7; Job xxvi. 77; Isa. vi. 3; Heb. i. 6; iii. 3. 
O78 (Coins Soh Ze), matter 24 25e 


248 THE SACRAMENTS 


tunity of going to confession, however contrite he may deem him- 
self, is to approach the Holy Eucharist until he has been purified 
by sacramental confession.” 

We should also reflect in the silence of our own hearts how 
unworthy we are that the Lord should bestow on us this divine 
gift, and with the centurion of whom our Lord declared that he 
found not so great faith in Israel, we should exclaim from our 
hearts: Lord, I am not worthy that thou shouldst enter under 
my roof. 

We should also put the question to ourselves. whether we can 
truly say with Peter: Lord, thou knowest that I love thee,* and 
should recollect that he who sat down at the banquet of the 
Lord without a wedding garment was cast into a dark dungeon 
and condemned to eternal torments.®° # 


PREPARATION. OF BODY 


Our preparation should not, however, be confined to the soul; 
it should also extend to the body. We are to approach the Holy 
Table fasting, having neither eaten nor drunk anything at least 
from the preceding midnight until the moment of Communion. 

The dignity of so great a Sacrament also demands that mar- 
ried persons abstain from the marriage debt for some days pre- 
vious to Communion. This observance is recommended by the 
example of David, who, when about to receive the show-bread 
from the hands of the priest, declared that he and his servants 
had been clean from women for three days.°*> 

The above are the principal things to be done by the faithful 
preparatory to receiving the sacred mysteries with profit; and 
to these heads may be reduced whatever other things may seem 
desirable by way of preparation.¢ 


+ OCSS, KHL! G 7, CAN. IT. * Matt. viii. 8, Io. 

= Johnyxscienns: * Matt. xxii. 12, 13. it Anges: Xxis, 4 
aOn prenarane of soul before Communion see Summa Theol. Bat 
xxx. 3-6. 
bOn prebaraun of body before Communion see Summa Theol. ae 
Soka 7h 

© On the preparation for Communion and its time and place see St. 


aaron Theol. Mor. vi. 255-289; Code of Canon Law, canons 853, 


THE EUCHARIST 240 


The Obligation of Communion 


HOW OFTEN MUST COMMUNION BE RECEIVED? 


Lest any be kept away from Communion by the fear that the 
requisite preparation is too hard and laborious, the faithful are 
frequently to be reminded that they are all bound to receive the 
Holy Eucharist. Furthermore, the Church has decreed that 
whoever neglects to approach Holy Communion once a year, at 
Easter, is liable to sentence of excommunication,> 


THE CHURCH DESIRES THE FAITHFUL TO COMMUNICATE DAILY 


However, let not the faithful imagine that it is enough to 
receive the body of the Lord once a year only, in obedience to 
the decree of the Church. They should approach oftener; but 
whether monthly, weekly, or daily, cannot be decided by any 
fixed universal rule. St. Augustine, however, lays down a most 
certain norm: Live in such a manner as to be able to receive 
every day.%" 

It will therefore be the duty of the pastor frequently to ad- 
monish the faithful that, as they deem it necessary to afford 
daily nutriment to the body, they should also feel solicitous to 
feed and nourish the soul every day with this heavenly food. 
It is clear that the soul stands not less in need of spiritual, than 
the body of corporal food. Here it will be found most useful 
to recall the inestimable and divine advantages which, as we have 
already shown, flow from sacramental Communion. It will be 
well also to refer to the manna, which was a figure (of this 
Sacrament), and which refreshed the bodily powers every day.** 
The Fathers who earnestly recommended the frequent reception 
of this Sacrament may also be cited. The words of St. Augus- 
tine, Thou sinnest datly, receive daily, express not his opinion 


* Serm. Ixxxiv. 3. (in app.) ; cf. Ep. liv. 3. 
eBxod, cv 2l, 22.0 4) 
a One the necessity of the Eucharist see Summa Theol. ga. lxxiil. 3; 


sexier taad ite Q 
b This was decreed in the Fourth Lateran Council, 1215. In the New 


Code it is found in can. 859. 


250 THE SACRAMENTS 


only, but that of all the Fathers who have written on the subject, 
as anyone may easily discover who will carefully read them.% 4 

That there was a time when the faithful approached Holy 
Communion every day we learn from the Acts of the Apostles. 
All who then professed the faith of Christ burned with such 
true and sincere charity that, devoting themselves to prayer and 
other works of piety,2° they were found prepared to communicate 
daily. This devout practice, which seems to have been inter- 
rupted for a time, was again partially revived by the holy Pope 
and martyr Anacletus, who commanded that all the ministers 
who assisted at the Sacrifice of the Mass should communicate— 
an ordinance, as the Pontiff declares, of Apostolic institution.*** 
It was also for a long time the practice of the Church that, as 
soon as the Sacrifice was complete, and when the priest himself 
had communicated, he turned to the congregation and invited 
the faithful to the Holy Table in these words: Come, brethren, and 
receive Communion; and thereupon those who were prepared, 
advanced to receive the holy mysteries with the most fervent 
devotion.> 


THE CHURCH COMMANDS THE FAITHFUL TO COMMUNICATE ONCE 
A YEAR 


But subsequently, when charity and devotion had grown so 
cold that the faithful very seldom approached Communion, it 
was decreed by Pope Fabian, that all should communicate thrice 
every year, at Christmas, at Easter and at Pentecost. This decree 


was afterwards confirmed by many Councils, particularly by the 
first of Agdé.*? 


Such at length was the decay of piety that not only was this 
holy and salutary law unobserved, but Communion was deferred 


set, Ixxxiv 3, (in apps) is, Esp. lived: Sa INCI the A 16) 
an ocak in eae Doge Gist tn Go 10. Haas 
e decree of Pope Fabian is found in Gratian, p. 3. dist. ii. c. 16: 
there also is quoted C. of Agdé, c. 18. oe sa 
a Frequent Communion is recommended by the following: Aus i 
g: Aug., Epist. 
TlSioy se letiate Ad Ephes., well before the end; Basil., Epist. Ad ae 
patr.; De Sacr. lib. iii. 4; Chrysost. Hom. 61. ad pop. Antioch; Cypr. 
Epist. 28, ad Lucin. towards the end; Cyril. c. 3. in Joan. c. 37 De 
Consecr. dist. ii. in many chapters on this subject. ; 
bOn daily Communion see Summa Theol. 3a. Ixxx. 10, and Code, can. 863. 


THE EUCHARIST 251 


for years. The Council of Lateran, therefore, decreed that all 
the faithful should receive the sacred body of the Lord, at least 
once a year, at Easter, and that neglect of this duty should be 
chastised by exclusion from the society of the faithful.3 


WHO ARE OBLIGED BY THE LAW OF COMMUNION 


But although this law, sanctioned by the authority of God and 
of His Church, concerns all the faithful, it should be taught 
that it does not extend to those who on account of their tender 
age have not attained the use of reason. For these are not able 
to distinguish the Holy Eucharist from common and ordinary 
bread and cannot bring with them to this Sacrament piety and 
devotion. Furthermore (to extend the precept to them) would 
appear inconsistent with the ordinance of our Lord, for He said: 
Take and eat ***—words which cannot apply to infants, who are 
evidently incapable of taking and eating. 

In some places, it is true, an ancient practice prevailed of 
giving the Holy Eucharist even to infants; but, for the reasons 
already assigned, and for other reasons in keeping with Christian 
piety, this practice has been long discontinued by authority of 
the Church. 

With regard to the age at which children should be given the 
holy mysteries, this the parents and confessor can best determine. 
To them it belongs to inquire and to ascertain from the children 
themselves whether they have some knowledge of this admirable 
Sacrament and whether they desire to receive it.> 

Communion must not be given to persons who are insane and 
incapable of devotion. However, according to the decree of the 
Council of Carthage, it may be administered to them at the close 
of life, provided they have shown, before losing their minds, a 
pious and religious disposition, and no danger, arising from the 
state of the stomach or other inconvenience or disrespect, is 
likely.*% ¢ 


2 Matt. xxvi. 26. *4Fourth Counc. of Carth. 76. 

aQOn the obligation of receiving Communion see Summa Theol. 3a. 
Ixxx. 11. The decree quoted above is found in canon 21 of the Fourth 
Lateran Council. See also St. Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. vi. 192, 193; 290- 
303; Code of Canon Law, canons 859 ff. 

b Regarding the Communion of children see Code, can. 854. 

¢ On the recipients of Holy Communion see Summa Theol. 3a. Ixxx. 9. 


252 THE SACRAMENTS 


The Rite of Administering Communion 


As to the rite to be observed in communicating, pastors should 
teach that the law of the holy Church forbids Communion under 
both kinds to anyone but the officiating priests, without the 
authority of the Church itself. 

Christ the Lord, it is true, as has been explained by the Council 
of Trent,?® instituted and delivered to His Apostles at His Last 
Supper this most sublime Sacrament under the species of bread 
and wine; but it does not follow that by doing so our Lord and 
Saviour established a law ordering its administration to all the 
faithful under both species. For speaking of this Sacrament, He 
Himself frequently mentions it under one kind only, as, for 
instance, when He says: If any man eat of this bread, he shall 
live for ever, and: The bread that I will give is my flesh for the 
life of the world, and: He that eateth this bread shall live for 
euer2°* 


WHY THE CELEBRANT ALONE RECEIVES UNDER BOTH SPECIES 


It is clear that the Church was influenced by numerous and 
most cogent reasons, not only to approve, but also to confirm by 
authority of its decree, the general practice of communicating 
under one species. In the first place, the greatest caution was 
necessary to avoid spilling the blood of the Lord on the ground, 
a thing that seemed not easily to be avoided, if the chalice were 
administered in a large assemblage of the people. 

In the next place, whereas the Holy Eucharist ought to be in 
readiness for the sick, it was very much to be apprehended, were 
the species of wine to remain long unconsumed, that it might turn 
acid. 

Besides, there are many who cannot at all bear the taste or 
even the smell of wine. Lest, therefore, what is intended for 
the spiritual health should prove hurtful to the health of the 
body, it has been most prudently provided by the Church that 
it should be administered to the people under the species of 
bread only. 


#8 Sess. pEXi eC. MI, oarege *$ John vi. 51. 


THE EUCHARIST 253 


We may also further observe that in many countries wine is 
extremely scarce; nor can it, moreover, be brought from else- 
where without incurring very heavy expenses and encountering 
very tedious and difficult journeys. 

Finally, a most important reason was the necessity of opposing 
the heresy of those who denied that Christ, whole and entire, 
is contained under either species, and asserted that the body is 
contained under the species of bread without the blood, and the 
blood under the species of wine without the body. In order, 
therefore, to place more clearly before the eyes of all the truth 
of the Catholic faith, Communion under one kind, that is, under 
the species of bread, was most wisely introduced. 

There are also other reasons, collected by those who have 
treated on this subject, and which, if it shall appear necessary, 
can be brought forward by pastors.? 


The Minister of the Eucharist 


To omit nothing doctrinal on this Sacrament, we now come to 
speak of its minister, a point, however, on which scarcely any- 
one can be ignorant. 


ONLY PRIESTS HAVE POWER TO CONSECRATE AND ADMINISTER THE 
EUCHARIST 


It must be taught, then, that to priests alone has been given 
power to consecrate and administer to the faithful, the Holy 
Eucharist. That this has been the unvarying practice of the 
Church, that the faithful should receive the Sacrament from the 
priests, and that the officiating priests should communicate them- 
selves, has been explained by the holy Council of Trent,’°’ which 
has also shown that this practice, as having proceeded from 
Apostolic tradition, is to be religiously retained, particularly as 
Christ the Lord has left us an illustrious example thereof, having 
consecrated His own most sacred body, and given it to the 
Apostles with His own hands.*° 


™ Sess. xii; cap. 8: ¢..10. F. 
08 Matt. xxvi. 26; Mark xiv. 22; Luke xxii. 19. 


a@QOn Communion under one kind see Summa Theol. 3a. Ixxx. 12. 


254 THE SACRAMENTS 


THE LAITY PROHIBITED TO TOUCH ‘THE SACRED VESSELS 


To safeguard in every possible way the dignity of so august a 
Sacrament, not only is the power of its administration entrusted 
exclusively to priests, but the Church has also prohibited by law 
any but consecrated persons, unless some case of great necessity 
intervene, to dare handle or touch the sacred vessels, the linen, 
or other instruments necessary to its completion. 

Priests themselves and the rest of the faithful may hence 
understand how great should be the piety and holiness of those 
who approach to consecrate, administer or receive the Eucharist. 


THE UNWORTHINESS OF THE MINISTER DOES NOT INVALIDATE 
THE SACRAMENT 


What, however, has been already said of the other Sacraments, 
holds good also with regard to the Sacrament of the Eucharist; 
namely, that a Sacrament is validly administered even by the 
wicked, provided all the essentials have been duly observed. For 
we are to believe that all these depend not on the merit of the 
minister, but are operated by the virtue and power of Christ our 
Lord? 

These are the things necessary to be explained regarding the 
Eucharist as a Sacrament. 


The Eucharist as a Sacrifice 


We must now proceed to explain its nature as a Sacrifice, 
that pastors may understand what are the principal instructions 
which they ought to impart to the faithful on Sundays and holy 
days, regarding this mystery in conformity with the decree of 
the holy Council (of Trent). 


IMPORTANCE OF INSTRUCTION ON THE MASS 


This Sacrament is not only a treasure of heavenly riches, which 
if turned to good account will obtain for us the grace and 


™® Sess. xxii. cap. 8. 


*On the minister of the Eucharist see Summa Theol. 3a. Ixxxii; St. 


Syne: Theol. Mor. vi. 230-254; Code of Canon Law, canons 802 eas 
45 i. 


THE EUCHARIST 255 


love of God; but it also possesses a peculiar character, by which 
we are enabled to make some return to God for the immense 
benefits bestowed upon us. 

How grateful and acceptable to God is this victim, if duly and 
legitimately immolated, is inferred from the following consider- 
ation. Of the sacrifices of the Old Law it is written: Sacrifice 
and oblation thou wouldst not; and again: If thou hadst de- 
sired sacrifice, I would indeed have given it: with burnt-offerings 
thou wilt not be delighted..1 Now if these were so pleasing 
in the Lord’s sight that, as the Scripture testifies, from them 
God smelled a sweet savour,™? that is to say, they were 
grateful and acceptable to Him; what have we not to hope 
from that Sacrifice in which is immolated and offered He Him- 
self of whom a voice from heaven twice proclaimed: This is my 
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. 

This mystery, therefore, pastors should carefully explain, so 
that when the faithful are assembled at the celebration of divine 
service, they may learn to meditate with attention and devotion 
on the sacred things at which they are present. 


Distinction of Sacrament and Sacrifice 


They should teach, then, in the first place, that the Eucharist 
was. instituted by Christ for two purposes: one, that it might be 
the heavenly food of our souls, enabling us to support and pre- 
serve spiritual life; and the other, that the Church might have a 
perpetual Sacrifice, by which our sins might be expiated, and 
our heavenly Father, oftentimes grievously offended by our 
crimes, might be turned away from wrath to mercy, from the 
severity of just chastisement to clemency. Of this thing we 
may observe a type and resemblance in the Paschal lamb, which 
was wont to be offered and eaten by the children of Israel as a 
sacrament and a sacrifice. 

Nor could our Saviour, when about to offer Himself to God 
the Father on the altar of the cross, have given any more illus- 
trious indication of His unbounded love towards us than by be- 
queathing to us a visible Sacrifice, by which that bloody Sacrifice, 


EDT Se Seb VA ae Lakh 1h ite eiGenavilin2t +2) Matt. iit. 17. 


256 : THE SACRAMENTS 


which was soon after to be offered once on the cross, would be 
renewed, and its memory daily celebrated with the greatest 
utility, unto the consummation of ages by the Church diffused 
throughout the world. 

But (between the Eucharist as a Sacrament and a Sacrifice) 
the difference is very great; for as a Sacrament it is perfected 
by consecration; as a Sacrifice, all its force consists in its obla- 
tion. When, therefore, kept in a pyx, or borne to the sick, it is 
a Sacrament, not a Sacrifice. As a Sacrament also, it is to them 
that receive it a source of merit, and brings with it all those 
advantages which have been already mentioned; but as a Sacri- 
fice, it is not only a source of merit, but also of satisfaction. 
For as, in His Passion, Christ the Lord merited and satisfied for 
us; so also those who offer this Sacrifice, by which they com- 
municate with us, merit the fruit of His Passion, and satisfy.? 


The Mass Is a True Sacrifice 


PROOF FROM THE COUNCIL OF TRENT 


With regard to the institution of this Sacrifice, the holy 
Council of Trent ** has left no room for doubt, by declaring that 
it was instituted by our Lord at His Last Supper; while it con- 
demns under anathema all those who assert that in it is not 
offered to God a true and proper Sacrifice; or that to offer means 
nothing else than that Christ is given as our spiritual food. 

Nor did (the Couucil) omit carefully to explain that to God 
alone is offered this Sacrifice. For although the Church some- 
times offers Masses in honor and in memory of the Saints, yet 
she teaches that the Sacrifice is offered, not to them, but to God 
alone, who has crowned the Saints with immortal glory. Hence 
the priest never says: I offer Sacrifice to thee Peter, or to thee 
Paul; but, while he offers Sacrifice to God alone, he renders 
Him thanks for the signal victory won by the blessed martyrs, 

™ Sess. xxii. cap. I, canons I, 2. 


a He who celebrates Mass worthily and he who communicates wortuily 
merit by those personal acts an increase of grace and glory. The 
communicant receives moreover from the Sacrament the fruits explained 
above on pages 241 ff. But Communion does not effect directly, as does 
the Mass, satisfaction for sin. (Summa Theol. 3a. Ixxix. ie) 


THE EUCHARIST 287 


and thus implores their patronage, that they, whose memory we 
celebrate on earth, may vouchsafe to intercede for us in 
heaven,125 


PROOF FROM SCRIPTURE 


This doctrine, handed down by the Catholic Church, concern- 
ing the truth of this Sacrifice, she received from the words of 
our Lord, when, on that last night, committing to His Apostles 
these same sacred mysteries, He said: Do this for a commemo- 
ration of me;® for then, as was defined by the holy Council, 
He ordained them priests, and commanded that they and their 
successors in the priestly office, should immolate and offer His 
body.1*7 

Of this the words of the Apostle to the Corinthians also afford 
a sufficient proof: You cannot drink the chalice of the Lord, 
and the chalice of devils: you cannot be partakers of the table 
of the Lord and of the table of devils. As then by the table 
of devils 8 must be understood the altar on which sacrifice was 
offered to them; so also—if the conclusion proposed to himself 
by the Apostle is to be legitimately drawn—by the table of the 
Lord can be understood nothing else than the altar on which 
Sacrifice was offered to the Lord. 

Should we look for figures and prophecies of this Sacrifice 
in the Old Testament, in the first place Malachy most clearly 
prophesied thereof in these words: From the rising of the sun 
even to the going down, my name is great among the Gen- 
tiles, and in every place there is sacrifice, and there is offered 
to my name a clean oblation; for my name is great among the 
Gentiles, saith the Lord of hosts.™° 

Moreover, this victim was foretold, as well before as after 
the promulgation of the Law, by various kinds of sacrifices ; for 
this victim alone, as the perfection and completion of all, com- 
prises all the blessings which were signified by the other sacri- 
fices. In nothing, however, do we behold a more lively image 


a Aug. -Contra Faust., lib: xx. ¢. 21. 

467 uke xxii. 19; I Cor. xi. 24. 

17 Sess. xxii. De Sac. Missae. c. and cap. 2. 

mort Cleye, ><, 20) ST IMENE 3 tine 


258 THE SACRAMENTS 


of the Eucharistic Sacrifice than in that of Melchisedech; for 
the Saviour Himself offered to God the Father, at His Last 
Supper, His body and blood, under the appearances of bread and 
wine, declaring that He was constituted a priest for ever, after 
the order of Melchisedech.’”° 


Excellence of the Mass 


THE MASS IS THE SAME SACRIFICE AS THAT OF THE CROSS 


We therefore confess that the Sacrifice of the Mass is and 
ought to be considered one and the same Sacrifice as that 
of the cross, for the victim is one and the same, namely, Christ 
our Lord, who offered Himself, once only, a bloody Sacrifice on 
the altar of the cross. The bloody and unbloody victim are not 
two, but one victim only, whose Sacrifice is daily renewed in 
the Eucharist, in obedience to the command of our Lord: Do 
this for a commemoration of me. 

The priest is also one and the same, Christ the Lord; for the 
ministers who offer Sacrifice, consecrate the holy mysteries, not 
in their own person, but in that of Christ, as the words of con- 
secration itself show, for the priest does not say: This is the 
body of Christ, but, This is my body; and thus, acting in the 
Person of Christ the Lord, he changes the substance of the bread 
and wine into the true substance of His body and blood. 


THE MASS A SACRIFICE OF PRAISE, THANKSGIVING AND 
PROPITIATION 


This being the case, it must be taught without any hesitation 
that, as the holy Council 1"? (of Trent) has also explained, the 
sacred and holy Sacrifice of the Mass is not a Sacrifice of praise 
and thanksgiving only, or a mere commemoration of the Sacrifice 
performed on the cross, but also truly a propitiatory Sacrifice, 
by which God is appeased and rendered propitious to us. If, 
therefore, with a pure heart, a lively faith, and affected with 
an inward sorrow for our transgressions, we immolate and offer 
this most holy victim, we shall, without doubt, obtain mercy from 


Se Hebs vate MS SOSS.cxil. Caps aacane ss 


THE EUCHARIST 259 


the Lord, and grace in time of need;1* for so delighted is the 
Lord with the odor of this victim that, bestowing on us the gift 
of grace and repentance, He pardons our sins. Hence this usual 
prayer of the Church: As often as the commemoration of this 
victim is celebrated, so often is the work of our salvation being 
done; *** that is to say, through this unbloody Sacrifice flow to 
us the most plenteous fruits of that bloody victim. 


THE MASS PROFITS BOTH THE LIVING AND THE DEAD 


Pastors should next teach that such is the efficacy of this Sac- 
rifice that its benefits extend not only to the celebrant and com- 
municant, but to all the faithful, whether living with us on earth, 
or already numbered with those who are dead in the Lord, but 
whose sins have not yet been fully expiated. For, according 
to the most authentic Apostolic tradition, it is not less available 
when offered for them, than when offered for the sins of the 
living, their punishments, satisfactions, calamities and difficulties 
of every sort.? 

It is hence easy to perceive, that all Masses, as being conducive 
to the common interest and salvation of all the faithful, are to be 
considered common to all.> 


The Rites and Ceremonies of the Mass 


The Sacrifice (of the Mass) is celebrated with many solemn 
rites and ceremonies, none of which should be deemed useless or 
superfluous. On the contrary, all of them tend to display the 
majesty of this august Sacrifice, and to excite the faithful when 
beholding these saving mysteries, to contemplate the divine things 
which lie concealed in the Eucharistic Sacrifice. On these rites 
and ceremonies we shall not dwell, since they require a more 
lengthy exposition than is compatible with the nature of the 
present work ; moreover priests can easily consult on the subject 


12 Heb. iv. 16. 
“8 Secret prayer of Ninth Sunday after Pentecost. 


a See Council of Trent, Sess. xxii. cap. 6 and can. 8. - : 
b On the Sacrifice of the Mass see Summa Theol. 3a. Ixxxiii. 7; Ixxix. 
5, 7; St. Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. vi. 304 ff.; Code of Canon Law, canons 


802 


260 THE SACRAMENTS 


some of the many booklets and works that have been written 
by pious and learned men.? 

What has been said so far will, with the divine assistance, be 
found sufficient to explain the principal things which regard the 
Holy Eucharist both as a Sacrament and Sacrifice. 


aQOn the ceremonies of the Mass see Summa Theol. Za. Ixxxiii. 2-6; St. 
Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. vi. 340 ff. 


THE SACRAMENT OF PENANCE 


IMPORTANCE OF INSTRUCTION ON THIS SACRAMENT 


As the frailty and weakness of human nature are universally 
known and felt by each one in himself, no one can be ignorant 
of the great necessity of the Sacrament of Penance. If, there- 
fore, the diligence of pastors should be proportioned to the 
weight and importance of the subject, we must admit that in ex- 
pounding this Sacrament they can never be sufficiently diligent. 
Nay, it should be explained with more care than Baptism. Bap- 
tism is administered but once, and cannot be repeated; Penance 
may be administered and becomes necessary, as often as we may 
have sinned after Baptism. Hence the Council of Trent de- 
clares: For those who fall into sin after Baptism the Sacrament 
of Penance is as necessary to salvation as is Baptism for those 
who have not been already baptized The saying of St. Jerome 
that Penance is a second plank,’ is universally known and highly 
commended by all subsequent writers on sacred things. As he 
who suffers shipwreck has no hope of safety, unless, perchance, 
he seize on some plank from the wreck, so he that suffers the 
shipwreck of baptismal innocence, unless he cling to the saving 
plank of Penance, has doubtless lost all hope of salvation.? 

These instructions are intended not only for the benefit of 
pastors, but also for that of the faithful at large, to awaken 
attention, lest they be found culpably negligent in a matter so 
very important. Impressed with a just sense of the frailty of 
human nature, their first and most earnest desire should be to 
advance with the divine assistance in the ways of God, without 
sin or failing. But should they at any time prove so unfor- 


1Sess. vi. de Just. cap. 14; Sess. xiv. De Peenit. cap. 3. 
ha ME, se, 
aQOn the necessity of the Sacrament of Penance see Summa Theol. 3a. 
[besahin Ey (O; 
261 


262 THE SACRAMENTS 


tunate as to tall, then, looking at the infinite goodness of God, 
who like the good shepherd binds up and heals the wounds of 
His sheep, they should not postpone recourse to the most saving 
remedy of Penance. 


Different Meanings of the Word “Penance” 


To enter at once on the subject, and to avoid all error to 
which the ambiguity of the word may give rise, its different 
meanings are first to be explained. By penance some under- 
stand satisfaction; while others, who wander far from the doc- 
trine of the Catholic faith, supposing penance to have no refer- 
ence to the past, define it to be nothing more than newness of 
life. It must, therefore, be shown that the word has a variety 
of meanings. 

In the first place, it is said of those to whom that which was 
before pleasing is now displeasing, whether the object itself was 
good or bad. In this sense all those repent whose sorrow is 
according to the world, not according to God; and therefore, 
worketh not salvation, but death.® 

In the second place, it is used to express that sorrow which 
the sinner conceives, not, however, for the sake of God, but 
for his own sake, concerning some sin of his in which he once 
took pleasure.* 

A third kind of penance is that by which we experience interior 
sorrow of heart, or give exterior indication of such sorrow for 
the sake of God alone. To all these kinds of sorrow the word 
repentance properly applies. 

When the Sacred Scriptures say that God repented,®> the 
expression is evidently figurative. When we repent of any thing, 
we are most anxious to change it; and hence when God has 
resolved to change any thing, the Scriptures, accommodating 
their language to our manner of speaking, say that He repents. 
Thus we read that it repented him that he had made man,° and 
also that He was sorry that He had made Saul king.’ 


+e. Cor. vii. To. ; VEeb. xailn7: 
, Gen. vi, 6} Kings xv. 11; Ps: Cv. 45s Jerry, 3: 
Gen. vi. 6. “tT Kinestxy. 11, 


a This was the teaching of Calvin (Inst: 1. iii. c. 3. n. 4). 


PENANCE 263 


But an important distinction is to be made between these dif- 
ferent significations of the word. The first kind of penance must 
be considered faulty; the second is only the agitation of a dis- 
turbed mind; the third we call both a virtue and a Sacrament. 
In this last sense penance is taken here. 


The Virtue of Penance 


We shall first treat of penance as a virtue, not only because 
it is the duty of the pastor to lead the faithful to the practice 
of every virtue; but also, because the acts which proceed from 
penance as a virtue, constitute the matter, as it were, of Pen- 
ance as a Sacrament, and unless the virtue be rightly under- 
stood, the force of the Sacrament cannot be appreciated. 

The faithful, therefore, are first to be admonished and ex- 
horted to labor strenuously to attain this interior penance of 
the heart which we call a virtue, and without which exterior 
penance can avail them very little. 


MEANING OF PENANCE 


Interior penance consists in turning to God sincerely and from 
the heart, and in hating and detesting our past transgressions, 
with a firm resolution of amendment of life, hoping to obtain 
pardon through the mercy of God. Accompanying this penance, 
like an inseparable companion of detestation for sin, is a sorrow 
and sadness, which is a certain agitation and disturbance of the 
soul, and is called by many a passion. Hence many of the 
Fathers define penance as an anguish of soul. 

Penance, however, in those who repent, must be preceded by 
faith, for without faith no man can turn to God. Faith, there- 
fore, cannot on any account be called a part of penance.* 


PENANCE PROVED TO BE A VIRTUE 


That this inward penance is, as we have already said, a virtue, 
the various commands which have been given regarding it 
clearly show; for the law commands only those actions that are 


virtuous. 


a Council of Trent, Sess. xiv. De Peenit. c. 3. can. 4. 


264 THE SACRAMENTS 


Furthermore, no one can deny that it is a virtue to be sor- 
rowful at the time, in the manner, and to the extent which are 
required. To regulate sorrow in this manner belongs to the 
virtue of penance. Some conceive a sorrow which bears no pro- 
portion to their crimes. Nay, there are some, says Solomon, 
who are glad when they have done evil Others, on the con- 
trary, give themselves to such melancholy and grief, as utterly 
to abandon all hope of salvation. Such, perhaps, was the con- 
dition of Cain when he exclaimed: My iniquity is greater than 
that I may deserve pardon.® Such certainly was the condition 
of Judas, who, repenting, hanged himself, and thus lost soul 
and body.!? Penance, therefore, considered as a virtue, assists 
us in restraining within the bounds of moderation our sense of 
sorrow. 

That penance is a virtue may also be inferred from the ends 
which the true penitent proposes to himself. The first is to 
destroy sin and efface from the soul its every spot and stain. 
The second is to make satisfaction to God for the sins which 
he has committed, which is clearly an act of justice. Between 
God and man, it is true, no relation of strict justice can exist, 
so great is the distance that separates them; yet between them 
there is evidently a sort of justice, such as exists between a 
father and his children, between a master and his servants. The 
third (end of the penitent) is to reinstate himself in the favor 
and friendship of God whom he has offended and whose hatred 
he has earned by the turpitude of sin. The foregoing considera- 
tions sufficiently prove that penance is a virtue. 


THE STEPS WHICH LEAD UP TO THIS VIRTUE 


We must also point out the steps by which we may ascend 
to this divine virtue. The mercy of God first goes before us 
and converts our hearts to Him. This was the object of the 
Prophet’s prayer: Convert us, O Lord, to thee, and we shall 
be converted." 


Mlumined by this light the soul next tends to God by faith. 


«Prov. li, 14. ° Gen. iv. 13. 
Matt. xxvii. 3. * Jerem. Lam. v. 21. 


He that cometh to God, says the Apostle, must believe that he 
is, and is a rewarder to them that seek him.2 

A salutary fear of God’s judgments follows, and the soul, con- 
templating the punishments that await sin, is recalled from the 
paths of vice. To this (state of soul) seem to refer these words 
of Isaias: As a woman with child, when she draweth near the 
time of her delivery, is in pain and crieth out in her pangs, so 
are we become.** 

Then follows a hope of obtaining mercy from God, encour- 
aged by which we resolve on improvement of life. 

Lastly, our hearts are inflamed by charity, whence springs that 
filial fear which good and dutiful children experience; and thus, 
dreading only to offend the majesty of God in anything, we 
entirely abandon the ways of sin. 


FRUITS OF THIS VIRTUE 


Such are, as it were, the steps by which we ascend to this 
most exalted virtue, a virtue altogether heavenly and divine, 
to which the Sacred Scriptures promise the kingdom of heaven; 
for it is written in St. Matthew: Do penance, for the kingdom 
of heaven is at hand."* If, says Ezechiel, the wicked do penance 
for all his sins which he hath commutted, and keep all my com- 
mandments, and do judgment and justice, living he shall live.?® 
In another place: J desire not the death of the wicked, but that 
the wicked turn from his way and live,*® words which are evi- 
dently understood of eternal life.? 


Penance as a Sacrament 


Regarding external penance it will be necessary to show that 
in it the Sacrament properly consists, and that it possesses certain 
outward and sensible signs which denote the effect that takes 


place interiorly in the soul. 


a2 Elieb: ext. 0: “fsa. xxvi. 17: * Matt. iv. 17. 
% Ezech. xviii. 21. 1 Ezech. xxxili. I1. 


aQOn the virtue of repentance see Summa Theol. 3a. Ixxxiy-lxxxix. 


a6 THE SACRAMENTS 


Why Christ Instituted This Sacrament 


In the first place, however, it will be well to explain why it 
is that Christ our Lord was pleased to number Penance among 
the Sacraments. One of His reasons certainly was to leave us 
no room for doubt regarding the remission of sin which was 
promised by God when He said: If the wicked do penance,” 
etc. For each one has good reason to distrust the accuracy of 
his own judgment on his own actions, and hence we could not 
but be very much in doubt regarding the truth of our internal 
penance. It was to destroy this, our uneasiness, that our Lord 
instituted the Sacrament of Penance, by means of which we are 
assured that our sins are pardoned by the absolution of the 
priest; and also to tranquilize our conscience by means of the 
trust we rightly repose in the virtue of the Sacraments. The words 
of the priest sacramentally and lawfully absolving us from our 
sins are to be accepted in the same sense as the words of Christ 
our Lord when He said to the paralytic: Son, be of good heart: 
thy sins are forgiven thee.*® 

In the second place, no one can obtain salvation unless through 
Christ and the merits of His Passion. Hence it was becoming 
in itself, and highly advantageous to us, that a Sacrament should 
be instituted through the force and efficacy of which the blood 
of Christ flows into our souls, washes away all the sins com- 
mitted after Baptism, and thus leads us to recognize that it is 
to our Saviour alone we owe the blessing of reconciliation.* 


Penance Is a Sacrament 


That Penance is a Sacrament pastors can easily show from 
what follows. As Baptism is a Sacrament because it blots out 
all sins, and especially original sin, so for the same reason 
Penance, which takes away all the sins of thought and deed com- 
mitted after Baptism, must be regarded as a true Sacrament in 
the proper sense of the word. 


™Ezech. xviii. 21. *® Matt. ix. 2. 


4 On the institution of the Sacrament of Penance see Summa Theol. Bae 
ees Gf 


PENANCE 267 


Moreover—and this is the principal reason—since what is 
exteriorly done, both by priest and penitent, signifies the inward 
effects that take place in the soul, who will venture to deny that 
Penance is invested with the nature of a proper and true Sac- 
rament? For a Sacrament is a sign of a sacred thing. Now the 
sinner who repents plainly expresses by his words and actions 
that he has turned his heart from sin; while from the words 
and actions of the priest we easily recognize the mercy of God 
exercised in the remission of sins. 

In any event, the words of our Saviour furnish a clear proof: 
I will give to thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven; whatso- 
ever thou shalt loose upon earth, shall be loosed also in heaven.*® 
The absolution announced in the words of the priest expresses 
the remission of sins which it accomplishes in the soul.# 


This Sacrament May Be Repeated 


The faithful should be instructed not only that Penance is to 
be numbered among the Sacraments, but that it is one of the 
Sacraments which may be repeated. To Peter, who had asked 
whether pardon could be given to sin seven times, our Lord re- 
plied: I say not to thee, till seven times; but till seventy times 
seven.”° 

If, then, (the pastor) happens to encounter those who seem 
to distrust the infinite goodness and clemency of God, let him 
endeavor to inspire their minds with confidence, and raise them 
up to the hope of obtaining the grace of God. He will easily ac- 
complish this object by explaining the above and other passages 
which are frequently met with in Holy Writ; as well as by using 
the arguments and reasons which may be found in St. Chrysos- 
tom’s book On the Lapsed, and St. Ambrose’s books On Pen- 


ance.” > 


19 Matt. xvi. 19. © ” Matt. xvili. 22. 
* Chrys., De Laps. Repar. lib. 1. 5, Amb. De Peenit. lib. 1. cc. I, 2. 


a That Penance is a Sacrament is proved in Summa Theol. 3a. lxxxiv. I. 
b On the repetition of the Sacrament of Penance see Summa Theol. 3a. 


Ixxxiv. 10. 


268 THE SACRAMENTS 


The Constituent Parts of Penance 


THE MATTER 


There is nothing that should be better known to the faith- 
ful than the matter of this Sacrament; hence they should be 
taught that Penance differs from the other Sacraments in this, 
that while the matter of the other Sacraments is some thing, 
whether natural or artificial, the matter, as it were, of the Sacra- 
ment of Penance is the acts of the penitent,—namely, contrition, 
confession and satisfaction,—as has been declared by the Council 
of Trent. Now, inasmuch as these acts are by divine institution 
required on the part of the penitent for the integrity of the Sac- 
rament, and for the full and perfect remission of sin, they are 
called parts of Penance. It is not because they are not the real 
matter that they are called by the Council the matter as it were,”? 
but because they are not of that sort of matter which is applied 
externally, such, for instance, as water in Baptism and chrism in 
Confirmation. 

As regards the opinion of some who hold that sins themselves 
are the matter of this Sacrament, it will be found, when care- 
fully examined, that it does not really differ from the explana- 
tion already given. Thus we say that wood which is consumed 
by fire is the matter of fire. In the same way, sins which are 


destroyed by Penance may properly be called the matter of 
Penance.* 


THE FORM OF PENANCE 


Pastors should not neglect to explain the form of the Sacra- 
ment of Penance. A knowledge of it will excite the faithful to 
receive the grace of this Sacrament with the greatest possible 
devotion. Now the form is: J absolve thee, as may be inferred 
not only from the words, whatsoever you shall bind upon earth 
shall be bound also in heaven,?? but also from the teaching of 
Christ our Lord, handed down to us by the Apostles. 


™ Sess. xiv. De Peenit. cap. iii. can. 4. * Matt. xviii. 18. 


2 On the matter of Penance see Summa Theol. 2a. 1 i : a 
sugeTheckn Men a apaenoee eol. 3a. Ixxxiy. 2; St. Alphon 


PENANCE 269 


Moreover, since the Sacraments signify what they effect, the 
words, J absolve thee, signify that remission of sin is effected 
by the administration of this Sacrament; and hence it is plain 
that such is the perfect form of the Sacrament. For sins are, 
so to say, the chains by which the soul is bound, and from which 
it is freed by the Sacrament of Penance. And none the less 
truly does the priest pronounce the form over the penitent who, 
through perfect contrition, accompanied by the desire of confes- 
sion, has already obtained remission of his sins from God. 

Several prayers are added, not that they are necessary to the 
form, but in order to remove every obstacle that can impede the 
force and efficacy of the Sacrament owing to the fault of him 
to whom it is administered. 

How thankful, then, should not sinners be to God for having 
bestowed such ample power on the priests of His Church! Unlike 
the priests of the Old Law who merely declared the leper 
cleansed from his leprosy,** the power now given to the priests 
of the New Law is not limited to declaring the sinner absolved 
from his sins, but, as a minister of God, he truly absolves from 
sin. This is an effect of which God Himself, the author and 
source of grace and justice, is the principal cause. 


The Rites Observed in the Sacrament of Penance 


The faithful should take great care to observe the rites which 
accompany the administration of this Sacrament. In this way they 
will have a higher idea of what they obtain from this Sacrament, 
that is, that they have been reconciled as slaves to their kind 
master, or rather, as children to their best of fathers; and at 
the same time they will also better understand what is the duty 
of those who desire, as everyone should, to show their gratitude 
and remembrance of so great a benefit. 

The sinner, then, who repents, casts himself humbly and sor- 
rowfully at the feet of the priest, in order that by there hum- 
- bling himself he may the more easily be led to see that he must 


ALISA brabiy Gy 
aQOn the form of Penance see Summa Theol. 3a. Ixxxiv. 3; St. Alphon- 
sus. Theol. Mor. vi. 428 ff. 


270 THE SACRAMENTS 


tear up the roots of pride whence spring and flourish all the sins 
he now deplores.. In the priest, who is his legitimate judge, he 
venerates the person and the power of Christ our Lord; for in 
the administration of the Sacrament of Penance, as in that of 
the other Sacraments, the priest holds the place of Christ. Next 
the penitent enumerates his sins, acknowledging, at the same 
time, that he deserves the greatest and severest chastisements ; 
and finally, suppliantly asks pardon for his faults. 

All these rites have a sure guarantee for their antiquity in the 
authority of St. Denis.?°# 


Effects of the Sacrament of Penance 


Nothing will prove of greater advantage to the faithful, noth- 
ing will be found to conduce more to a willing reception of the 
Sacrament of Penance, than for pastors to explain frequently 
the great advantage to be derived therefrom. They will then 
see that of Penance it is truly said that its roots are bitter, but 
its fruit sweet indeed. 

First of all, then, the great efficacy of Penance consists in this, 
that it restores us to the grace of God, and unites us to Him in 
the closest friendship. 

In pious souls who approach this Sacrament with devotion, 
profound peace and tranquillity of conscience, together with in- 
effable joy of soul, sometimes accompany this reconciliation. 
For there is no sin, however great or horrible, which cannot be 
effaced by the Sacrament of Penance, and that not merely once, 
but over and over again. On this point God Himself thus speaks 
through the Prophet: Jf the wicked do penance for all his sins 
which he hath committed, and keep all my commandments, and 
do judgment, and justice, living he shall live, and shall not die, 
and I will not remember all his iniquities that he hath done. 
And St. John says: If we confess our sins, he is faithful and 
just, to forgive us our sins;?" and a little later, he adds:"If any 
man sin,—he excepts no sin whatever,—we have an advocate 
with the Father, Jesus Christ, the just; for he is the propitia- 


*Ep. ad Demphilum. = Ezech. xviii. 21, 22. 1 John i. 9. 
2On the rite of imposition of hands see Summa Theol. Ixxxiv. 4. 


PENANCE 271 


tion for our sins; and not for ours only, but for the sins of the 
whole world.?8 

When we read in Scripture that certain persons did not obtain 
pardon from God, even though they earnestly implored it, we 
know that this was due to the fact that they had not a true and 
heartfelt sorrow for their sins. Thus when we find in Sacred 
Scripture and in the writings of the Fathers passages which 
seem to assert that certain sins are irremissible, we must under- 
stand the meaning to be that it is very difficult to obtain pardon 
for them. A disease is sometimes called incurable, because the 
patient is so disposed as to loathe the medicines that could afford 
him relief. In the same way certain sins are not remitted or 
pardoned because the sinner rejects the grace of God, the only 
medicine for salvation. It is in this sense that St. Augustine 
wrote: When a man who, through the grace of Jesus Chmnist, 
has once arrived at a knowledge of God, wounds fraternal 
charity, and, driven by the fury of envy, lifts up his head agatnst 
grace, the enormity of his sin is so great that, though compelled 
by a guilty conscience to acknowledge and confess his fault, he 
finds himself unable to submit to the humiliation of imploring 
pardon.?® 


The Necessity of the Sacrament of Penance 


Returning now to the Sacrament, it is so much the special 
province of Penance to remit sins that it is impossible to obtain 
or even to hope for remission of sins by any other means; for 
it is written: Unless you do penance, you shall all likewise 
perish.2° These words were said by our Lord in reference 
to grievous and mortal sins, although at the same time lighter 
sins, which are called venial, also require some sort of pen- 
ance. St. Augustine observes that the kind of penance which 
is daily performed in the Church for venial sins, would be abso- 
lutely useless, if venial sin could be remitted unthout penance.* 


oun) i. 1, 2) 
7 Serm. Domini in Mont. lib. 1. c. 44. 
* Tike xiii. (3. * Lib. 1. Hom. 50. 


aOn the necessity of the Sacrament of Penance see Summa Theol. 3a. 
Ixxxiv. 5. 


272 THE SACRAMENTS 


The Three Integral Parts of Penance 


But as it is not enough to speak in general terms when treat- 
ing of practical matters, the pastors should take care to explain, 
one by one, those things from which the faithful can understand 
the meaning of true and salutary Penance. 


THEIR EXISTENCE 


Now it is peculiar to this Sacrament that besides matter and 
form, which it has in common with all the other Sacraments, it 
has also, as we have said, those parts which constitute Penance, 
so to say, whole and entire; namely, contrition, confession and 
satisfaction. On these St. Chrysostom thus speaks: Penance 
enables the sinner to bear all willingly; in his heart ts contrition; 
on his lips confession; in his actions entire humility or salutary 
satisfaction.®? 


THEIR NATURE 


These three parts belong to that class of parts which are neces- 
sary to constitute a whole?) The human body is composed of 
many members,—-hands, feet, eyes and the various other parts; 
the want of any one of which makes the body be justly con- 
sidered imperfect, while if none of them is missing, the body 
is regarded as perfect. In the same way, Penance is composed 
of these three parts in such a way that though contrition and 
confession, which justify man, are alone required to constitute 
its essence, yet, unless accompanied by its third part, satisfaction, 
it necessarily remains short of its absolute perfection. 

These three parts, then, are so intimately connected with one 
another, that contrition includes the intention and resolution of 
confessing and making satisfaction; contrition and the resolu- 


tion of making satisfaction imply confession; while the other two 
precede satisfaction. 


™Serm. i. De Peenit. 


a That the three parts of Penance are not subjective, or i 
‘ otential 
integral parts see Summa Theol. 3a. xc. 3. : a ae 


PENANCE 273 


NECESSITY OF THESE INTEGRAL PARTS 


The reason why these are the integral parts may be thus ex- 
plained. Sins against God are committed by thought, by word 
and by deed. It is, then, but reasonable, that in recurring to 
the power of the keys we should endeavor to appease God’s 
wrath, and obtain pardon for our sins by means of the very same 
things which we employed to offend His sovereignty. 

A further reason by way of confirmation can also be assigned. 
Penance is a sort of compensation for sin, springing from the free 
will of the delinquent, and is appointed by God, against whom 
the offence has been committed. Hence, on the one hand, there 
is required the willingness to make compensation, in which will- 
ingness contrition chiefly consists; while, on the other hand, the 
penitent must submit himself to the judgment of the priest, who 
holds God’s place, in order to enable him to award a punishment 
proportioned to the gravity of the sin committed. Hence the 
reason for and the necessity of confession and satisfaction are 
easily inferred.? 


The First Part of Penance 
CONTRITION 


As the faithful require instruction on the nature and efficacy 
of the parts of Penance, we must begin with contrition. This 
subject demands careful explanation; for as often as we call to 
mind our past transgressions, or offend God anew, so often 
should our hearts be pierced with contrition. 


THE MEANING OF CONTRITION 


By the Fathers of the Council of Trent, contrition is defined: 
A sorrow and detestation for sin committed, with a purpose of 
sinning no more? And a little further on the Council, speaking 
of the motion of the will to contrition, adds: If joined with a 
confidence in the mercy of God and an earnest desire of per- 


33 Sess. xiv. De Peenit. cap. 4. can. 5; Sess. vi, xiv. 
aQOn the parts of Penance see Summa Theol. 3a. xc. 


274 THE SACRAMENTS 


forming whatever is necessary to the proper reception of the Sac- 
rament, it thus prepares us for the remission of sin. 


CONTRITION IS A DETESTATION OF SIN 


From this definition, therefore, the faithful will perceive that 
the efficacy of contrition does not simply consist in ceasing to 
sin, or in resolving to begin, or having actually begun a new life; 
it supposes first of all a hatred of one’s ill-spent life and a desire 
of atoning for past transgressions. 

This is especially confirmed by those cries of the holy Fathers, 
which we so frequently meet with in Holy Scripture. J have 
laboured in my groaning, says David; every night I will wash 
my bed; and again, The Lord hath heard the voice of my weep- 
ing.** I will recount to thee all my years, says another, in the 
bitterness of my soul.8° These and many like expressions were 
called forth by an intense hatred and a lively detestation of past 
transgressions. 


CONTRITION PRODUCES SORROW 


But although contrition is defined as sorrow, the faithful 
are not thence to conclude that this sorrow consists in sensible 
feeling; for contrition is an act of the will, and, as St. Augustine 
observes, grief is not penance but the accompaniment of pen- 
ance.*® By sorrow the Fathers understood a hatred and detes- 
tation of sin; in the first place, because the Sacred Scriptures 
frequently use the word in this sense. How long, says David, 
shall I take counsels in my soul, sorrow in my heart all the day.3* 
And secondly, because from contrition arises sorrow in the in- 
ferior part of the soul which is called the seat of concupiscence. 

With propriety, therefore, is contrition defined a sorrow, 
because it produces sorrow; hence penitents, in order to express 
it, used to change their garments. Our Lord alludes to thi8 cus- 
tom when He says: Woe to thee, Corozain, woe to thee, Beth- 
saida: for if in Tyre and Sidon had been wrought the miracles 


< 3 xe 
PSS Vie 7-0 salam cxocyationisy eaelomiules ne Pswexting2: 


PENANCE 275 


that have been wrought in you, they had long ago done penance 
in sack-cloth and ashes.*® 


NAMES OF SORROW FOR SIN 


To signify the intensity of this sorrow the name contrition 
has rightly been given to the detestation of sin of which we 
speak. The word means the breaking of an object into small 
parts by means of a stone or some harder substance; and here 
it is used metaphorically, te signify that our hearts, hardened by 
pride, are beaten and broken by penance. Hence no other sor- 
row, not even that which is felt for the death of parents, or 
children, or for any other calamity, is called contrition. The 
word is exclusively employed to express the sorrow with which 
we are overwhelmed by the forfeiture of the grace of God and 
of our own innocence. 

Contrition, however, is often designated by other names. 
Sometimes it is called contrition of heart, because the word 
heart is frequently used in Scripture to express the will. As 
the movement of the body originates in the heart, so the will 
is the faculty which governs and controls the other powers of 
the soul. 

By the holy Fathers it is also called compunction of heart, 
and hence they preferred to entitle their works on contrition 
treatises On Compunction of Heart; for as ulcers are lanced 
with a knife in order to allow the escape of the poisonous matter 
accumulated within, so the heart, as it were, is pierced with the 
lance of contrition, to enable it to emit the deadly poison of sin. 

Hence, contrition is called by the Prophet Joel, a rending of 
the heart. Be converted to me, he says, with all your hearts im 
fasting, in weeping, in mourning, and rend your hearts.*° 


Se Miattext 20. Joel ii. 12. 
a On the nature of contrition see Summa Theol., Suppl. 1, 2; St. Alphon- 
sus, Theol. Mor. vi. 434 ff. 


276 THE SACRAMENTS 


Qualities of Sorrow for Sin 
IT SHOULD BE SUPREME 


That sorrow for sins committed should be so profound and 
supreme that no greater sorrow could be thought of will easily 
appear from the considerations that follow. 

Perfect contrition is an act of charity, emanating from what 
is called filial fear; hence it is clear that the measure of contri- 
tion and of charity should be the same. Since, therefore, the 
charity which we cherish towards God, is the most perfect love, 
it follows that contrition should be the keenest sorrow of the 
soul. God is to be loved above all things, and whatever sepa- 
rates us from God is therefore to be hated above all things. It 
is also worthy of note that to charity and contrition the language 
of Scripture assigns the same extent. Of charity it is said: 
Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with thy whole heart.*° Of 
contrition the Lord says through the Prophet: Be converted with 
your whole heart.** 

Secondly, it is true that of all objects which deserve our love, 
God is the supreme good, and it is not less true that of all objects 
which deserve our execration sin is the supreme evil. The same 
reason, then, which prompts us to confess that God is to be 
loved above all things, obliges us also of necessity to acknowledge 
that sin is to be hated above all things. That God is to be loved 
above all things, so that we should be prepared to sacrifice our 
lives rather than offend Him, these words of the Lord clearly 
declare: He that loveth father or mother more than me, is not 
worthy of me;* He that will save his life shall lose it.8 

Further, it should be noted that since, as St. Bernard says, 
there is no limit or measure to charity, or to use his own words, 
as the measure of loving God is to love Him without measure,“* 
there should be no limit to the hatred of sin. 


SORROW FOR SIN SHOULD BE INTENSE 
Besides, our contrition should be not only the greatest, but 
also the most intense, and so perfect that it excludes all apathy 


. Deut. vi. 5. “ Joel ii. 12. “ Mattaxa 37 
Matt. xvi. 25. “Lib. De Diligendo Deo, cap. 1. 47. 


PENANCE 277 


and indifference; for it is written in Deuteronomy: When thou 
shalt seek the Lord thy God, thou shalt find him: yet so if thou 
seek him with all thy heart, and all the affliction of thy soul;** 
and in Jeremias: Thou shalt seek me and shalt find me, when 
thou shalt seek me with all thy heart; and I will be found by 
thee, saith the Lord.*® 

If, however, our contrition be not perfect, it may nevertheless 
be true and efficacious. For as things which fall under the senses 
frequently touch the heart more sensibly than things purely 
spiritual, it sometimes happens that persons feel more intense 
sorrow for the death of their children than for the grievousness 
of their sins. 

Our contrition may also be true and efficacious, although un- 
accompanied by tears. Penitential tears, however, are much to 
be desired and commended. On this subject St. Augustine has 
well said: The spirit of Christian charity lives not within you, 
if you lament the body from which the soul has departed, but 
lament not the soul from which God has departed** To the 
same effect are the words of the Redeemer above cited: Woe 
to thee, Corozain, woe to thee, Bethsaida: for if in Tyre and 
Sidon had been wrought the miracles that have been wrought 
in you, they had long since done penance, in sack-cloth and 
ashes.“8 To establish this truth it will suffice to recall the well- 
known examples of the Ninivites,#® of David, of the woman 
who was a sinner,®! and of the Prince of the Apostles,®? all of 
whom obtained the pardon of their sins when they implored the 
mercy of God with abundant tears. 


SORROW FOR SIN SHOULD BE UNIVERSAL 


The faithful should be earnestly exhorted and admonished to 
strive to extend their contrition to each mortal sin. For it is 
thus that Ezechias describes contrition: J will recount to thee 
all my years in the bitterness of my soul.°* To recount all our 
years is to examine our sins one by one in order to have sorrow 
for them from our hearts. In Ezechiel also we read: Jf the 

* Deut. iv. 20. oF aie, Soibe, Sy. “Ser. xii. De Sanctis. 


# Matt. xi. 21. *® Jonas iti. 3. Pern ls. 
uke vilw 37, 48, 5%. 2 leuke xxii) 62. 8Tsa. xXXvili. 15. 


278 THE SACRAMENTS 


wicked do penance for all his sins, he shall live.** In this sense 
St. Augustine says: Let the sinner consider the quality of his 
sins, as to time, place, variety and person.°° 

In this matter, however, the faithful should not despair of 
the infinite goodness and mercy of God. For since God is most 
desirous of our salvation, He will not delay to pardon us. With 
a father’s fondness, He embraces the sinner the moment he 
enters into himself, turns to the Lord, and, having detested all 
his sins, resolves that later on, as far as he is able, he will call 
them singly to mind and detest them. The Almighty Himself, 
by the mouth of His Prophet, commands us to hope, when He 
says: The wickedness of the wicked shall not hurt him, in what 
day soever he shall turn from his wickedness.*® 


Conditions Required for Contrition 


From what has been said we may gather the chief requisites 
of true contrition. In these the faithful are to be accurately 
instructed, that each may know the means of attaining, and may 
have a fixed standard by which to determine, how far he may 
be removed from the perfection of this virtue. 


DETESTATION OF SIN 


We must, then, in the first place, detest and deplore all our 
sins. If our sorrow and detestation extend only to some sins, 
our repentance is not salutary, but feigned and false. Whoso- 
ever shall keep the whole law, says St. James, but offend in one 
point, is become guilty of all." 


INTENTION OF CONFESSION AND SATISFACTION 


In the next place, our contrition must be accompanied with 
a desire of confessing and satisfying for our sins. Concerning 
these dispositions we shall treat in their proper place. 


PURPOSE OF AMENDMENT 


Thirdly, the penitent must form a fixed and firm purpose of 
amendment of life. This the Prophet clearly teaches in the 


"4 Ezech. xviii. 21 Lib. De Vera et Falsa Relig. ca 
© Ezech. xxxiii. 12. * James ii. 10. site aie 


PENANCE ee 


following words: If the wicked do penance for all his sins which 
he hath committed, and keep all my commandments, and do 
judgment, and justice, living he shall live, and shall not die: 
I will not remember all his iniquities which he hath done. And 
a little after: When the wicked turneth himself away from his 
wickedness which he hath wrought, and doth judgment and jus- 
tice, he shall save his soul alive. Still further on he adds: Be 
converted, and do penance for all your iniquities, and iniquity 
shall not be your ruin. Cast away from you all your trans- 
gressions, by which you have transgressed, and make yourselves 
anew heart and a new spirit.*® To the woman taken in adultery 
Christ our Lord commanded the same thing: Go thy way, and 
sin no more; *® and also to the lame man whom He cured at the 
pool of Bethsaida: Behold, thou art made whole, sin no more.®° 


REASONS FOR THESE CONDITIONS 


That a sorrow for sin and a firm purpose of avoiding sin for 
the future are two conditions indispensable to contrition nature 
and reason clearly show. He who would be reconciled to a 
friend whom he has wronged must regret to have injured and 
offended him, and his future conduct must be such as to avoid 
offending in anything against friendship. 

Furthermore, these are conditions to which man is bound to 
yield obedience ; for the law to which man is subject, be it natu- 
ral, divine, or human, he is bound to obey. If, therefore, by force 
or fraud, the penitent has taken anything from his neighbor, he is 
bound to restitution. Likewise if, by word or deed he has in- 
jured his neighbor’s honor or reputation, he is under an obliga- 
tion of repairing the injury by procuring him some advantage or 
rendering him some service. Well known to all is the maxim of 
St. Augustine: The sin is not forgiven unless what has been 
taken away is restored.** 


FORGIVENESS OF INJURIES 


Again, not less necessary for contrition than the other chief 
conditions is a care that it be accompanied by entire forgiveness 


® Ezech. xviii. 21, 22, 27, 30, 31. *° John viii. 11. 
© John v. 14. “ Epist. v. 4. ad Maced. 


280 THE SACRAMENTS 


of the injuries which we may have received from others. This 
our Lord and Saviour admonishes when He declares: Jf you 
will forgive men their offences, your heavenly Father will for- 
give you also your offences; but if you will not forgive men, 
neither will your Father forgive you your offences.°? 

These are the conditions which the faithful should observe as 
regards contrition. There are other dispositions which, although 
not essential to true and salutary penance, contribute to render 
contrition more perfect and complete in its kind, and which 
pastors will readily discover. 


The Effects of Contrition 


Simply to make known those things which pertain to salvation 
should not be deemed a full discharge of the duty of pastors; 
their zeal and industry should be exerted to persuade the people 
to adopt these truths as their rule of conduct and as the govern- 
ing principle of their actions. Hence it will be highly useful 
often to explain the power and utility of contrition. 

For whereas most other pious practices, such as alms, fasting, 
prayer and similar holy and commendable works, are sometimes 
rejected by God on account of the faults of those who perform 
them, contrition can never be other than pleasing and acceptable 
to Him. A contrite and humble heart, O God, exclaims the 
Prophet, thou wilt not despise.®® 

Nay more, the same Prophet declares elsewhere that, as soon 
as we have conceived this contrition in our hearts, our sins are 
forgiven by God: J said, I will confess my injustice to the Lord, 
and thou hast forgiven the wickedness of my sin.** Of this truth 
we have a figure in the ten lepers, who, when sent by our Lord 
to the priests, were cured of their leprosy before they had reached 
them; °° which gives us to understand that such is the efficacy 
of true contrition, of which we have spoken above, that through 
it we obtain from the Lord the immediate pardon of all sins.> 


@ Matt. vi. 14. SES IE Mio). 

AIRS senate, 1S. Luke xvii. 14. 

2On the qualities of contrition see Summa Theol. Suppl. ii-iv. 
5 On the effects of contrition see Summa Theol. Suppl. v. 


PENANCE 281 


Means of Arousing True Contrition 


To move the faithful to contrition, it will be very useful if 
pastors point, out some method by which each one may excite 
himself to contrition. 

They should all be admonished frequently to examine their 
consciences, in order to ascertain if they have been faithful in 
the observance of those things which God and His Church re- 
quire. Should anyone be conscious of sin, he should immediately 
accuse himself, humbly solicit pardon from God, and implore 
time to confess and satisfy for his sins. Above all, let him sup- 
plicate the aid of divine grace, in order that he may not relapse 
into those sins which he now penitently deplores. 

Pastors should also take care that the faithful be excited to a 
supreme hatred of sin, both because its turpitude and baseness 
are very great and because it brings us the gravest losses and 
misfortunes. For sin deprives us of the friendship of God, to 
whom we are indebted for so many invaluable blessings, and 
from whom we might have expected and received gifts of still 
higher value; and along with this it consigns us to eternal death 
and to torments unending and most severe. 


The Second Part of Penance 
CONFESSION 


Having said so much on contrition, we now come to confes- 
sion, which is another part of Penance. The care and exactness 
which its exposition demands of pastors must be at once obvious, 
if we only reflect that most holy persons are firmly persuaded 
that whatever of piety, of holiness, of religion, has been pre- 
served to our times in the Church, through God’s goodness, must 
be ascribed in great measure to confession. It cannot, therefore, 
be a matter of surprise that the enemy of the human race, in 
his efforts to destroy utterly the Catholic Church, should, through 
the agency of the ministers of his wicked designs, have assailed 
with all his might this bulwark, as it were, of Christian virtue. It 
should be shown, therefore, in the first place that the institution 
of confession is most useful and even necessary to us. 


282 THE SACRAMENTS 


NECESSITY OF CONFESSION 


Contrition, it is true, blots out sin; but who does not know 
that to effect this it must be so intense, so ardent, so vehement, 
as to bear a proportion to the magnitude of the crimes which it 
effaces? This is a degree of contrition which few reach; and 
hence, in this way, very few indeed could hope to obtain the par- 
don of their sins. It, therefore, became necessary that the most 
merciful Lord should provide by some easier means for the 
common salvation of men; and this He has done in His admir- 
able wisdom, by giving to His Church the keys of the kingdom 
of heaven. 

According to the doctrine of the Catholic Church, a doctrine 
firmly to be believed and constantly professed by all, if the 
sinner have a sincere sorrow for his sins and a firm resolution 
of avoiding them in future, although he bring not with him that 
contrition which may be sufficient of itself to obtain pardon, 
all his sins are forgiven and remitted through the power of the 
keys, when he confesses them properly to the priest. Justly, 
then, do those most holy men, our Fathers, proclaim that by the 
keys of the Church the gate of heaven is thrown open, a truth 
which no one can doubt since the Council of Florence has de- 
creed that the effect of Penance is absolution from sin.** # 


ADVANTAGES OF CONFESSION 


To appreciate further the great advantages of confession we 
may turn to a fact taught by experience. To those who have led 
immoral lives nothing is found so useful towards a reformation 
of morals as sometimes to disclose their secret thoughts, all their 
words and actions, to a prudent and faithful friend, who can 
assist them by his advice and codperation. For the same reason 
it must prove most saluitary to those whose minds are agitated 
by the consciousness of guilt to make known the diseases and 
wounds of their souls to the priest, as the vicegerent of Christ 
our Lord, bound to eternal secrecy by the strictest of laws. (In 


“In decree of Eugene IV; De Peenit. dist. vi. c. sacerdos. 
4 On the necessity of confession see Summa Theol. Suppl. vi. 


PENANCE 283 


the Sacrament of Penance) they will find immediate remedies, the 
healing qualities of which will not only remove the present 
malady, but will also have such a heavenly efficacy in preparing 
the soul against an easy relapse into the same kind of disease 
and infirmity. 

Another advantage of confession, which should not be over- 
looked, is that it contributes powerfully to the preservation 
of social order. Abolish sacramental confession, and that 
moment you deluge society with all sorts of secret and heinous 
crimes—crimes too, and others of still greater enormity, which 
men, once that they have been depraved by vicious habits, will 
not dread to commit in open day. The salutary shame that at- 
tends confession restrains licentiousness, bridles desire and 
checks wickedness.? 


DEFINITION OF CONFESSION 


Having explained the advantages of confession, pastors should 
next unfold its nature and efficacy. Confession, then, is defined: 
A sacramental accusation of one’s sins, made to obtain pardon 
by virtue of the keys. 

It is rightly called ax accusation, because sins are not to be 
told as if the sinner boasted of his crimes, as they do who are 
glad when they have done evil; ° nor are they to be related as 
stories told for the sake of amusing idle listeners. They are to 
be confessed as matters of self-accusation, with a desire, as it 
were, to avenge them on ourselves. 

We confess our sins with a view to obtain pardon. In this 
respect the tribunal of penance differs from other tribunals, 
which take cognizance of capital offences, and before which a 
confession of guilt does not secure acquittal and pardon, but pen- 
alty and punishment. 

The definition of confession by the holy Fathers, although 
different in words, is substantially the same. Confession, says 
St. Augustine, is the disclosure of a secret disease, with the hope 
of obtaining pardon, ** and St. Gregory: Confession is a detes- 


* Prov. ii. 14. ® Serm. iv. De Verbis Domini. 
2QOn the effects of confession see Summa Theol. Suppl. x. 


284 THE SACRAMENTS 


tation of sins.® Both of these definitions accord with, and are 
contained in the preceding definition.* 


CONFESSION INSTITUTED BY CHRIST 


In the next place, it is a duty of greatest moment that pastors 
should unhesitatingly teach that this Sacrament owes its institu- 
tion to the singular goodness and mercy of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, who has ordered all things well, and solely with a view to 
our salvation. 

After His Resurrection He breathed on the Apostles, as- 
sembled together, saying: Receive ye the Holy Ghost, whose 
sins you shall forgive, they are forgiven; and whose sins you 
shall retain, they are retained."? Now in giving to priests the 
power to retain and forgive sins, it is evident that our Lord 
made them also judges in this matter. 

Our Lord seems to have signified the same thing when, having 
raised Lazarus from the dead, He commanded His Apostles to 
loose him from the bands in which he was bound.” This is the 
interpretation of St. Augustine. The priests, he says, can now 
do more: they can exercise greater clemency towards those who 
confess, and whose sins they forgive. The Lord, in giving over 
Lazarus, whom He had already raised from the dead, to be 
loosed by the hands of His disciples, wished us to understand 
that to priests was given the power of loosing.” 

To this also refers the command given by our Lord to the 
lepers cured on the way, that they show themselves to the priests, 
and subject themselves to their judgment.” 

Invested, then, as they are, by our Lord with power to remit 
and retain sins, priests are evidently appointed judges of the 
matter on which they are to pronounce; and since, according to 
the wise remark of the Council of Trent, we cannot form an 
accurate judgment on any matter, or award to crime a just 
proportion of punishment without having previously examined 
‘and made ourselves well acquainted with the case, it follows 


. Hom. xl. in Evang. “John xx. 22, 23. “John xi. 44. 
“De Vera et Falsa Peenit. c. 16; Serm. viii. De Verbis Domini. 
™ Luke xvii. 14. 


2On the nature of confession see Summa Theol. Suppl. vii. 


PENANCE 285 


that the penitent is obliged to make known to the priests, through 
the medium of confession, each and every sin.” 

This doctrine the pastors should teach as defined by the holy 
Council of Trent, and handed down by the uniform doctrine of 
the Catholic Church. An attentive perusal of the Fathers will 
present passages throughout their works, proving in the clearest 
terms that this Sacrament was instituted by our Lord, and that 
the law of sacramental confession, which, from the Greek, they 
call exomologesis, and exagoreusis, is to be received as true 
Gospel teaching. 

If we seek figures in the Old Testament, the different ede of 
sacrifices which were offered by the priests for the expiation of 
different sorts of sins, seem, beyond all doubt, to have reference 
to confession of sins. 


RITES ADDED BY THE CHURCH 


Not only are the faithful to be taught that confession was 
instituted by our Lord. They are also to be reminded that, by 
authority of the Church, certain rites and solemn ceremonies 
have been added which, although not essential to the Sacrament, 
serve to place its dignity more fully before the eyes of the peni- 
tent, and to prepare his soul, so that, kindled with devotion, he 
may more easily receive the grace of God. When, with uncov- 
ered head and bended knees, with eyes fixed on the earth and 
hands raised in supplication, and with other indications of Chris- 
tian humility not essential to the Sacrament, we confess our sins, 
our minds are thus deeply impressed with a clear conviction of 
the heavenly virtue of the Sacrament, and also of the necessity 
of most earnestly beseeching and imploring the mercy of God. 


The Law of Confession 


Nor let it be supposed that, although confession was insti- 
tuted by our Lord, He did not declare its use to be necessary. 
The faithful must be impressed with the conviction that he who 
is dead in sin is to be recalled to spiritual life by means of 


sacramental confession. 


4 Sess. xiv. c. 5; can. 7. De Poenit, 


286 THE SACRAMENTS 


PROOF OF THE OBLIGATION 


This truth is clearly conveyed by our Lord Himself, when, 
by a most beautiful metaphor, He calls the power of administer- 
ing this Sacrament, the key of the kingdom of heaven.’ Just 
as no one can enter any place without the help of him who has 
the keys, so no one is admitted to heaven unless its gates be un- 
locked by the priests to whose custody the Lord gave the keys. 
This power would otherwise be of no use in the Church. If 
heaven can be entered without the power of the keys, in vain 
would they to whom the keys were given seek to prevent entrance 
within its portals. 

This thought was familiar to the mind of St. Augustine. Let 
no man, he says, say within himself: “I repent in secret to the 
Lord. God, who has power to pardon me, knows the inmost sen- 
timents of my heart.” Was there, then, no reason for saying 
“whatsoever you loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven’ ;*® 
no reason why the keys were given to the Church of God?™ 
The same doctrine is taught by St. Ambrose in his treatise On 
Penance, when refuting the heresy of the Novatians who as- 
serted that the power of forgiving sins belonged solely to God. 
Who, says he, yields greater reverence to God, he who obeys or 
he who resists His commands? God commands us to obey His 
ministers; and by obeying them, we honor God alone.7® 


THE AGE AT WHICH THE LAW OF CONFESSION OBLIGES 


As the law of confession was no doubt enacted and established 
by our Lord Himself, it is our duty to ascertain, on whom, at 
what age, and at what period of the year, it becomes obligatory. 
According to the canon of the Council of Lateran, which begins: 
Omnis utriusque sexus, no person is bound by the law of con- 
fession until he has arrived at the use of reason,—a time deter- 
minable by no fixed number of years.7? It may, however, be 


* Matt. xvi. 19. Lib. 1. Hom. 4g. ™ Matt. xviii. 18. 

De Poenity liby wy capez: ” Fourth Lateran Council, c. 22 

a This sect originated with Novatian about the middle of the third cen- 
tury. They were condemned by Pope Cornelius in the year 251. In the 
Orient, however, the sect survived until the sixth century. 


PENANCE 287 


laid down as a general principle, that children are bound to go 
to confession as soon as they are able to discern good from evil, 
and are capable of malice; for, when a person has arrived at 
an age when he must begin to attend to the work of his salvation, 
he is bound to confess his sins to a priest, since there is no other 
salvation for one whose conscience is burdened with sin. 


AT WHAT TIME THE LAW OF CONFESSION OBLIGES 


In the same canon holy Church has defined the period within 
which we are especially bound to discharge the duty of confes- 
sion. It commands all the faithful to confess their sins at least 
once a year. If, however, we consult our eternal interests, we 
will certainly not neglect to have recourse to confession as often, 
at least, as we are in danger of death, or undertake to perform 
any act incompatible with the state of sin, such as to administer 
or receive the Sacraments. The same rule should be strictly 
followed when we are apprehensive of forgetting some sin, into 
which we may have fallen; for we cannot confess sins unless we 
remember them, neither do we obtain pardon unless our sins are 
blotted out through sacramental confession.? 


The Qualities of Confession 


But since in confession many things are to be observed, some 
of which are essential, some not essential to the Sacrament, all 
these matters should be carefully treated. Access can easily be 
had to works and treatises from which an explanation of all 
these things can be drawn. 


CONFESSION SHOULD BE ENTIRE 


Pastors should teach, first of all, that care must be exercised 
that confession be complete and entire. All mortal sins must be 
revealed to the priest. Venial sins, which do not separate us 
from the grace of God, and into which we frequently fall, 
although they may be usefully confessed, as the experience of 
the pious proves, may be omitted without sin, and expiated by 


aQOn the obligation of confession see Summa Theol. Suppl. vi; Code 
of Canon Law, canons gor ff. 


288 THE SACRAMENTS 


a variety of other means. Mortal sins, as we have already said, 
are all to be confessed, even though they be most secret, or be 
opposed only to the last two Commandments of the Decalogue. 
Such secret sins often inflict deeper wounds on the soul than 
those which are committed openly and publicly. 

So the Council of Trent 8° has defined, and such has been the 
constant teaching of the Church, as the Fathers declare. St. 
Ambrose speaks thus: Without the confession of his sin, no man 
can be justified from his sin.8+ In confirmation of the same 
doctrine, St. Jerome, on Ecclesiastes, says: If the serpent, the 
devil, has secretly and without the knowledge of a third person, 
bitten anyone, and has infused into him the poison of sin; if 
unwilling to disclose his wound to his brother or master, he 1s 
silent and will not do penance, his master, who has a tongue 
ready to cure him, can render him no service? The same doc- 
trine we find in St. Cyprian, in his sermon On the Fallen. 
Although guiltless, he says, of the heinous crime of sacrificing 
to idols, or of having purchased certificates to that effect; yet, 
as they entertained the thought of doing so, they should confess 
it with grief to the priests of God. In fine, such is the unanimous 
voice and teaching of all the Doctors of the Church. 

In confession we should employ all that care and exactness 
which we usually bestow upon worldly concerns of great moment, 
and all our efforts should be directed to the cure of our soul’s 
wounds and to the destruction of the roots of sin. We should 
not be satisfied with the bare enumeration of our mortal sins, 
but should mention such circumstances as considerably aggra- 
vate or extenuate their malice. Some circumstances are so serious 
as of themselves to constitute mortal guilt. On no account 
whatever, therefore, are such circumstances to be omitted. Thus 
if one man has killed another, he must state whether his victim 
was a layman or an ecclesiastic. Or, if he has had sinful rela- 
tions with a woman, he must state whether the female was 
married or unmarried, a relative or a person consecrated to 
God by vow. These circumstances change the nature of the 
sins; so that the first kind of unlawful intercourse is called by 


~ Sess. xiv. De Poenit. ¢. 5.>et can. 7. 
"Lib. De Paradiso, c. 14. = Capaeo: 


PENANCE 289 


theologians simple fornication, the second adultery, the third 
incest, and the fourth sacrilege. Again, theft is numbered in 
the catalogue of sins. But if a person has stolen one golden 
coin, his sin is less grievous than if he had stolen a hundred or 
two hundred, or an immense sum; and if the stolen money be- 
longed to the Church, the sin would be still more grievous. The 
same rule applies to the circumstances of time and place, but 
the examples are too well known from many books to require 
mention here. Circumstances such as these are, therefore, to 
be mentioned; but those which do not considerably aggravate 
the malice of the sin may be lawfully omitted. 


SINS CONCEALED 


So important is it that confession be entire that if the peni- 
tent confesses only some of his sins and wilfully neglects to 
accuse himself of others which should be confessed, he not only 
does not profit by his confession, but involves himself in new 
guilt. Such an enumeration of sins cannot be called sacramental 
confession; on the contrary, the penitent must repeat his con- 
fession, not omitting to accuse himself of having, under the 
semblance of confession, profaned the sanctity of the Sacrament. 


SINS FORGOTTEN 


But should the confession seem defective, either because the 
penitent forgot some grievous sins, or because, although intent 
on confessing all his sins, he did not examine the recesses of 
his conscience with sufficient accuracy, he is not bound to repeat 
his confession. It will be sufficient, when he recollects the sins 
which he had forgotten, to confess them to a priest on a future 
occasion. 

It should be noted, however, that we are not to examine our 
consciences with careless indifference, or to be so negligent in 
recalling our sins as to seem as if unwilling to remember them. 
Should this have been the case, the confession must by all means 
be made over again. 


CONFESSION SHOULD BE PLAIN, SIMPLE, SINCERE 


In the second place our confession should be plain, simple 
and undisguised ; not artfully made, as is the case with some who 


290 THE SACRAMENTS 


seem more intent on defending themselves than on confessing 
their sins. Our confession should be such as to disclose to the 
priest a true image of our lives, such as we ourselves know them 
to be, exhibiting as doubtful that which is doubtful, and as cer- 
tain that which is certain. If, then, we neglect to enumerate our 
sins, or introduce extraneous matter, our confession, it is clear, 
lacks this quality. 


CONFESSION SHOULD BE PRUDENT, MODEST, BRIEF 


Prudence and modesty in explaining matters of confession are 
also much to be commended, and a superfluity of words is to be 
carefully avoided. Whatever is necessary to make known the 
nature of every sin is to be explained briefly and modestly. 


CONFESSION SHOULD BE MADE PRIVATELY AND OFTEN 


Secrecy as regards confession should be strictly observed, as 
well by the penitent as by the priest. Hence, no one can, on any 
account, confess by messenger or letter, because in those cases 
secrecy would not be possible. 

The faithful should be careful above all to cleanse their con- 
sciences from sin by frequent confession. When a person is in 
mortal sin nothing can be more salutary, so precarious is human 
life, than to have immediate recourse to confession. But even 
if we could promise ourselves a long life, yet it would be truly 
disgraceful that we who are so particular in whatever relates 
to cleanliness of dress or person, were not at least equally care- 


ful in preserving the luster of the soul unsullied from the foul 
stains of sin. 


The Minister of the Sacrament of Penance 
THE USUAL MINISTER 
We now come to treat of the minister of this Sacrament. “That 


the minister of the Sacrament of Penance must be a priest pos- 
sessing ordinary or delegated jurisdiction the laws of the Church 


aOn the qualities of confession see Summa Theol. Suppl. ix: - 
phonsus, Theol. Mor. vi. 465 ff. oP UREa aac 


PENANCE ae 


sufficiently declare. Whoever discharges this sacred function 
must be invested not only with the power of orders, but also 
with that of jurisdiction. Of this ministry we have an illustrious 
proof in these words of our Lord, recorded by St. John: Whose 
sins you shall forgive, they are forgiven them; and whose sins 
you shall retain, they are retained,®* words addressed not to all, 
but to the Apostles only, to whom, in this function of the min- 
istry, priests succeed. 

This is also most fitting, for as all the grace imparted by this 
Sacrament is communicated from Christ the Head to His mem- 
bers, they who alone have power to consecrate His true body 
should alone have power to administer this Sacrament to His 
mystical body, the faithful, particularly as these are qualified 
and disposed by means of the Sacrament of Penance to receive 
the Holy Eucharist. 

The scrupulous care which in the primitive ages of the Church 
guarded the right of the ordinary priest is easily seen from the 
ancient decrees of the Fathers, which provided that no Bishop 
or priest, except in case of great necessity, presume to exercise 
any function in the parish of another without the authority of 
him who governed there. This law derives its sanction from the 
Apostle when he commanded Titus to ordain priests in every 
city,8* to administer to the faithful the heavenly food of doctrine 
and of the Sacraments. 


THE MINISTER IN DANGER OF DEATH 


In order that none may perish, if there is imminent danger 
of death, and recourse cannot be had to the proper priest, the 
Council of Trent teaches that according to the ancient practice 
of the Church of God it is then lawful for any priest, not only 
to remit all kinds of sin, whatever faculties they might other- 
wise require, but also to absolve from excommunication.” 


QUALIFICATIONS OF THE MINISTER 


Besides the powers of orders and of jurisdiction, which are of 
absolute necessity, the minister of this Sacrament, holding as he 


EUionnuxcxs 23" cCalitasiw' 5: 
won, Xiv. g 6. De Peenit.; Code of Canon Law, canon 882. 


292 THE SACRAMENTS 


does the place at once of judge and physician, should be gifted 
not only with knowledge and erudition, but also with prudence. 

As judge, his knowledge, it is evident, should be more than 
ordinary, for by it he is to examine into the nature of sins, and 
among the various kinds of sins to judge which are grievous 
and which are not, keeping in view the rank and condition of 
the person. 

As physician he has also occasion for consummate prudence, 
for to him it belongs to administer to the diseased soul those 
healing medicines which will not only effect the cure, but prove 
suitable preservatives against its future contagion. 

The faithful, therefore, will see the great care that each one 
should take in selecting (as confessor) a priest, who is recom- 
mended by integrity of life, by learning and prudence, who is 
deeply impressed with the awful weight and responsibility of the 
station which he holds, who understands well the punishment 
due to every sin, and can also discern who are to be loosed and 
who to be bound. 


THE CONFESSOR MUST OBSERVE THE SEAL OF CONFESSION 


Since each one is most anxious that his sins and defilements 
should be buried in oblivion, the fatthful are to be admonished 
that there is no reason whatever to apprehend that what is made 
known in confession will ever be revealed by the priest to any- 
one, or that by it the penitent can at any time be brought into 
danger of any sort. The laws of the Church threaten the severest 
penalties against any priests who would fail to observe a per- 
petual and religious silence concerning all the sins confessed to 
them.8° Let the priest, says the great Council of Lateran,? take 
special care, neither by word or sign, nor by any other means 
whatever, to betray in the least degree the sinner.8™> 


* Leo, Epist. 80. 2UGapr2l. 


a The Fourth Lateran Council held in 1215 under Innocent III is gen- 
erally cited in Canon Law as the “General Council of Lateran” without 
further qualification; or, again, as the “Great Council.” 

b On the seal of confession see Summa Theol. Suppl. xi; St. Alphonsus, 
Theol. Mor. vi. 633 ff.; Code of Canon Law, canons 8809 ff. 


PENANCE 293 


Duties of the Confessor towards Various Classes of Penitents 


Having treated of the minister of this Sacrament, the order 
of our matter requires that we next proceed to explain some 
general heads which are of considerable importance with regard 
to the use and practice of confession. 

Many of the faithful, to whom, as a rule, no time seems to 
pass so slowly as that which is appointed by the laws of the 
Church for the duty of confession, are so removed from Chris- 
tian perfection that, far from bestowing attention on those other 
matters which are obviously most efficacious in conciliating the 
favor and friendship of God, they do not even try to remember 
the sins that are to be confessed to the priest. 

Since, therefore, nothing is to be omitted which can assist the 
faithful in the important work of salvation, the priest should be 
careful to observe if the penitent be truly contrite for his sins, 
and deliberately and firmly resolved to avoid sin for the future. 


THE WELL DISPOSED SHOULD BE EXHORTED TO THANKSGIVING AND 
FERSEVERANCE 


If the sinner is found to be thus disposed, he is to be admon- 
ished and earnestly exhorted to pour out his heart in gratitude 
to God for so great and so singular a blessing, and to supplicate 
unceasingly the aid of divine grace, shielded by which he may 
securely combat his evil propensities. 

He should also be taught not to suffer a day to pass without 
devoting a portion of it to meditation on some mystery of the 
Passion of our Lord, and to exciting and inflaming himself to 
the imitation and most ardent love of his Redeemer. The fruit 
of such meditation will be to fortify him more and more every 
day against all the assaults of the devil. For what other reason 
is there why our courage sinks and our strength fails the moment 
the enemy makes even the slightest attack on us, but that we 
neglect by pious meditation to kindle within us the fire of divine 
love, which animates and invigorates the soul? 


204 THE SACRAMENTS 


THE INDISPOSED SHOULD BE HELPED 


But should the priest perceive that the penitent is not truly 
contrite, he will endeavor te inspire him with an anxious desire 
for contrition, inflamed by which he may resolve to ask and 
implore this heavenly gift from the mercy of God. 


THOSE WHO SEEK TO EXCUSE THEIR SINS SHOULD BE CORRECTED 


The pride of some who seek by vain excuses to justify or 
extenuate their offences is carefully to be repressed. If, for 
instance, a penitent confesses that he was wrought up to anger, 
and immediately transfers the blame of the excitement to another, 
who, he complains, was the aggressor, he is to be reminded that 
such apologies are indications of a proud spirit, and of a man 
who either thinks lightly of, or is unacquainted with the enor- 
mity of his sin, while they serve rather to aggravate than to 
extenuate his guilt. He who thus labors to justify his conduct 
seems to say that then only will he exercise patience, when no 
one injures him—a disposition than which nothing can be more 
unworthy of a Christian. Instead of lamenting the state of him 
who inflicted the injury he disregards the grievousness of the 
sin, and is angry with his brother. Having had an opportunity 
of honoring God by his exemplary patience, and of correcting a 
brother by his meekness, he turns the very means of salvation 
to his own destruction. 


THOSE WHO ARE ASHAMED TO CONFESS THEIR SINS SHOULD BE 
INSTRUCTED 


Still more pernicious is the fault of those who, yielding to a 
foolish bashfulness, cannot induce themselves to confess their 
sins. Such persons are to be encouraged by exhortation, and are 
to be reminded that there is no reason whatever why they should 
fear to disclose their sins, that to no one can it appear surpris- 
ing if persons fall into sin, the common malady of the human 
race and the natural consequence of human infirmity. 


THE CARELESS SHOULD BE REBUKED 


There are others who, either because they seldom confess their 
sins, or because they have bestowed no care or attention on the 


PENANCE 295 


examination of their consciences, do not know well how to begin 
or end their confession. Such persons deserve to be severely 
rebuked, and are to be taught that before anyone approaches the 
tribunal of Penance he should employ every diligence to excite 
himself to contrition for his sins, and that this he cannot do with- 
out endeavoring to know and recollect them severally. 


THE UNPREPARED SHOULD BE DISMISSED OR LED TO GOOD 
DISPOSITION 


Should the confessor meet persons of this class entirely un- 
prepared, he should dismiss them without harshness, exhorting 
them in the kindest terms to take some time to reflect on their 
sins, and then return; but should they declare that they have 
already done everything in their power to prepare, and there is 
reason to apprehend that if sent away they may not return, their 
confession is to be heard, particularly if they manifest some dis- 
position to amend their lives and can be induced to accuse their 
own negligence and promise to atone for it at another time by 
a diligent and accurate scrutiny of conscience. In such cases, 
however, the confessor should proceed with caution. If, after 
having heard the confession, he is of the opinion that the penitent 
did not entirely lack diligence in examining his conscience or 
sorrow in detesting his sins, he may absolve him; but if he has 
fotind him deficient in both, he should, as we have already said, 
admonish him to use greater care in his examination of con- 
science, and dismiss him as kindly as he can. 


THE PASTOR SHOULD SHOW THE WRONG OF HUMAN RESPECT 


But as it sometimes happens that females, who may have for- 
gotten some sin in a former confession, cannot bring themselves 
to return to the confessor, dreading to expose themselves before 
the people to the suspicion of having been guilty of something 
grievous or of looking for the praise of extraordinary piety, the 
pastor should frequently remind the faithful, both publicly and 
privately, that no one is gifted with so tenacious a memory as 
to be able to recollect all his thoughts, words and actions; that 
the faithful, therefore, should they call to mind some sin which 


206 THE SACRAMENTS 


they had previously forgotten, should not be deterred from ré- 
turning to the priest? These and many other matters of the 
same nature demand the attention of priests in confession. 


The Third Part of Penance 


SATISFACTION 


Let tis now come to the third part of Penance, which is called 
satisfaction. We shall begin by explaining its nature and efficacy, 
because the enemies of the Catholic Church have on these sub- 
jects taken ample occasion to sow discord and division, to the 
serious detriment of Christians. 


GENERAL MEANING OF THE WORD “SATISFACTION” 


Satisfaction is the full payment of a debt; for that is sufficient 
or satisfactory to which nothing is wanting. Hence, when we 
speak of reconciliation to favor, to satisfy means to do what is 
sufficient to atone to the angered mind for an injury offered; 
and in this sense satisfaction is nothing more than compensation 
for an injury done to another. But, to come to the object that 
now engages us, theologians make use of the word satisfaction 
to signify the compensation man makes, by offering to God some 
reparation for the sins he has committed. 


VARIOUS KINDS OF SATISFACTION TO GOD 


This sort of satisfaction, since it has several degrees, can be 
understood in various senses. 

The first and highest degree of satisfaction is that by which 
whatever we owe to God on account of our sins is paid abun- 
dantly, even though He should deal with us according to the 
strictest rigor of His justice. This degree of satisfaction ap- 
peases God and renders Him propitious to us; and it is a satis- 
faction for which we are indebted to Christ our Lord alone, who 
paid the price of our sins on the cross, and offered to God a 
superabundant satisfaction. No created being could have been 


aOn the minister of confession see Summa Theol. viii; St. Alphonsus, 
Theol. Mor. vi. 539 ff.; Code of Canon Law, canons 871 ff. 


PENANCE 508 


of such worth as to deliver us from so heavy a debt. He is the 
propitiation for our sins, says St. John, and not for ours only 
but also for those of the whole world.’* This satisfaction, there- 
fore, is full and superabundant, perfectly adequate to the debt 
of all sins committed in this world. It gives to man’s actions 
great worth before God, and without it they would be deserving 
of no esteem whatever. This David seems to have had in view 
when, having asked himself, what shall I render to the Lord, for 
all the things that he hath rendered to me? *® and finding nothing 
besides this satisfaction, which he expressed by the word 
chalice, a worthy return for so many and such great favors, 
he replied: J will take the chalice of salvation, and I will call 
upon the name of the Lord.®° 

There is another kind of satisfaction, which is called canonical, 
and is performed within a certain fixed period of time. Hence, 
according to the most ancient practice of the Church, when 
penitents are absolved from their sins, some penance is imposed, 
the performance of which is commonly called satisfaction. 

By the same name is called any sort of punishment endured 
for sin, although not imposed by the priest, but spontaneously 
undertaken and performed by ourselves. 


ELEMENTS OF SACRAMENTAL SATISFACTION 


This, however, does not belong to Penance as a Sacrament. 
Only that satisfaction constitutes part of the Sacrament which, 
as we have already said, is offered to God for sins at the com- 
mand of the priest. Furthermore, it must be accompanied by a 
deliberate and firm purpose carefully to avoid sin for the future. 

For to satisfy, as some define it, is to pay due honor to God; 
and this, it is evident, no person can do, who is not entirely 
resolved to avoid sin. Again, to satisfy is to cut off all occasions 
of sin, and to close every avenue against its suggestions. In 
accordance with this idea of satisfaction some have defined it as a 
cleansing, which effaces whatever defilement may remain in the 
soul from the stains of sin, and which exempts us from the 
temporal chastisements due to sin.* 

%y John ii. 2. CUES. (bale Be: Psa cxvants: 


aOn the nature of satisfaction see Summa Theol. Suppl. xii; St. Al- 
phonsus, Theol. Mor. vi. 506 ff. 


298 THE SACRAMENTS 


NECESSITY OF SATISFACTION 


Such being the nature of satisfaction, it will not be difficult to 
convince the faithful of the necessity imposed on the penitent of 
performing works of satisfaction. They are to be taught that sin 
carries in its train two evils, the stain and the punishment. 
Whenever the stain is effaced, the punishment of eternal death 
is forgiven with the guilt to which it was due; yet, as the Council 
of Trent declares, the remains of sin and the temporal punish- 
ment are not always remitted.® 

Of this the Scriptures afford many conspicuous examples, 
such as are found in the third chapter of Genesis,°? in the twelfth 
and twenty-second of Numbers,®* and in many other places. 
That of David, however, is the best known and most striking. 
Although the Prophet Nathan had announced to him: The Lord 
also hath taken away thy sin, thou shalt not die,** yet David 
voluntarily subjected himself to the most severe penance, im- 
ploring night and day the mercy of God in these words: Wash 
me yet more from my iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin; 
for I know my iniquity, and my sin is always before me.** Thus 
did he beseech the Lord to pardon not only the crime, but also 
the punishment due to it, and to restore him, cleansed from the 
remains of sin, to his former state of purity and integrity. This 
he besought with most earnest supplications, and yet the Lord 
punished his transgression with the loss of his adulterous off- 
spring, the rebellion and death of his beloved son Absalom, and 
with the other chastisements and calamities with which he had 
previously threatened him. 

In Exodus, too, we read that though the Lord yielded to the 
prayers of Moses and spared the idolatrous Israelites, yet He 
threatened the enormity of their crime with heavy chastise- 
ment,°> and Moses himself declared that the Lord would take 
severest vengeance on it, even to the third and fourth genera- 
tions. 

That such was at all times the doctrine of the holy Fathers 
in the Catholic Church, their own testimony most clearly proves. 


Sess. xiv. c. 8, can. 12 et 14. Gen. iii. 17. 
Num. xii. 14, 22, 33, 34. “2 Kings xii. 13. 
Psolieayes: ~ Exed, xxxii.8, 0. 


2QOn the necessity of satisfaction see Code of Canon Law, canon 887. 


PENANCE 299 


Advantages of Satisfaction 
IT IS REQUIRED BY GOD’S JUSTICE AND MERCY 


Why in the Sacrament of Penance, as in that of Baptism, the 
punishment due to sin is not entirely remitted is admirably ex- 
plained in these words of the Council of Trent: Divine justice 
seems to require that they who through ignorance sinned before 
Baptism, should recover the friendship of God in a different 
manner from those who, after they have been freed from the 
thraldom of sin and the devil and have received the gifts of 
the Holy Ghost, dread not knowingly to violate the temple of 
God and grieve the Holy Spirit. It is also in keeping with the 
divine mercy not to remit our sins without any satisfaction, lest, 
taking occasion hence, and imagining our sins less grievous than 
they are, we should become injurious, as it were, and contume- 
lious to the Holy Ghost, and should fall into greater enormities, 
treasuring up to ourselves wrath against the day of wrath. 
These satisfactory penances have, no doubt, great influence in 
recalling from and, as it were, bridling against sin, and in render- 
ing the sinner more vigilant and cautious for the future." 


SATISFACTION ATONES TO THE CHURCH 


Furthermore (these satisfactions) serve as testimonies of our 
sorrow for sin committed, and thus atone to the Church which is 
grievously insulted by our crimes. God, says St. Augustine, 
despises not a contrite and humble heart,;** but, as heartfelt grief 
is generally concealed from others, and is not manifested by 
words or other signs, wisely, therefore, are penitential times ap- 
pointed by those who preside over the Church, in order to atone 
to the Church, in which sins are forgiven.®*° 


SATISFACTION DETERS OTHERS FROM SIN 


Besides, the example presented by our penitential practices 
serves as a lesson to others, how to regulate their lives and 
practice piety. Seeing the punishments inflicted on sin, they 


” Sess. xiv. De Peenit. cap. &. 1B IL aoe 7 Ench.ic: 05: 


506 THE SACRAMENTS 


must feel the necessity of using the greatest circumspection 
through life, and of correcting their former habits. 

The Church, therefore, with great wisdom ordained that when 
anyone had committed a public crime, a public penance should 
be imposed on him, in order that others, being deterred by fear, 
might more carefully avoid sin in future. This has sometimes 
been observed even with regard to secret sins of more than usual 
gravity. 

But with regard to public sinners, as we have already said, 
they were never absolved until they had performed public 
penance. During the performance of this penance, the pastors 
poured out prayers to God for their salvation, and ceased not to 
exhort the penitents to do the same. In this respect, great was 
the care and solicitude of St. Ambrose, of whom it is related 
that many who came to the tribunal of Penance with hardened 
hearts were so softened by his tears as to conceive the sorrow 
of true contrition2°° But in process of time the severity of 
ancient discipline was so relaxed and charity grew so cold, that 
in our days many of the faithful think inward sorrow of soul 
and grief of heart unnecessary for obtaining pardon, imagining 
that a mere appearance of sorrow is sufficient. 


BY SATISFACTION WE ARE MADE LIKE UNTO CHRIST 


Again, by undergoing these penances we are made like unto 
Jesus Christ our Head, inasmuch as He Himself suffered and was - 
tempted.*°*. As St. Bernard observes, nothing can appear so 
unseemly as a delicate member under a head crowned with 
thorns.*°* To use the words of the Apostle: We are joint-heirs 
with Christ, yet so if we suffer with him; and again, If we 
be dead with him, we shall live also with him; if we suffer, we 
shall also reign with him. 


SATISFACTION HEALS THE WOUNDS OF SIN 


St. Bernard also observes that sin produces two effects: a 
stain on the soul and a wound; that the stain is removed through 


im Paulinus, Life of St. Ambrose. Heb. ii. 17. 
Serm. 5, De Omn. Sanct. ** Rom. viii. 17. AG} AM, tbh Te Tes 


PENANCE 301 


the mercy of God, while to heal the wound inflicted by sin the 
remedy of penance is most necessary. When a wound has been 
healed, some scars remain which demand attention; likewise, 
with regard to the soul, after the guilt of sin is forgiven, some 
of its effects remain, from which the soul requires to be cleansed. 

St. Chrysostom fully confirms the same doctrine when he says: 
It is not enough that the arrow has been extracted from the 
body; the wound which it inflicted must also be healed. So 
with regard to the soul, it is not enough that sin has been par- 
doned; the wound which it has left must also be healed by pen- 
ance 

St. Augustine also frequently teaches that penance exhibits at 
once the mercy and the justice of God,—His mercy by which He 
pardons sin and the eternal punishment due to sin; His justice 
by which He exacts temporary punishment from the sinner.}° 


SATISFACTION DISARMS THE DIVINE VENGEANCE 


Finally, the punishment which the sinner endures disarms the 
vengeance of God and averts the punishments decreed against us. 
Thus the Apostle says: If we would judge ourselves, we should 
not be judged; but whilst we are judged, we are chastised by 
the Lord, that we be not condemned with this world*" Tf all 
this is explained to the faithful, it must have great influence in 
exciting them to perform works of penance. 


Source of the Efficacy of Satisfactory Works 


Of the great efficacy of penance we may form some idea, if 
we reflect that it arises entirely from the merits of the Passion 
of Christ our Lord. It is His Passion that imparts to our good 
actions two greatest advantages: the first, that we may merit 
the rewards of eternal glory, so that a cup of cold water given 
in His name shall not be without its reward; 1° the second, that 
we may be able to satisfy for our sins. 

5 Serm. I, in Coena Domini; Hom. 80, ad Pop. Antioch. 

26 Tn Ps. 1. at the words, ‘Ecce enim venit.” 


ee COE Xt. 345052: 
aS Matt. x. 42. 


4a THE SACRAMENTS 


Nor does this lessen the most perfect and superabundant satis- 
faction of Christ our Lord, but, on the contrary, renders it still 
more conspicuous and illustrious. For the grace of Christ is 
seen to abound more, inasmuch as it communicates to us not 
only what He merited and paid of Himself alone, but also what, 
as Head, He merited and paid in His members, that is, in holy 
and just men. Hence it can be seen how such great weight and 
dignity belong to the good actions of the pious. For Christ our 
Lord continually infuses His grace into the devout soul united 
to Him by charity, as the head to the members, or as the vine 
through the branches. This grace always precedes, accompanies 
and follows our good works, and without it we can have no 
merit, nor can we at all satisfy God. 

Hence it is that nothing seems wanting to the just. Through 
their works done by the power of God, they are able, on the one 
hand, to satisfy God’s law, as far as their human and mortal 
condition will allow; and, on the other hand, they can merit 
eternal life, to the fruition of which they will be admitted if they 
die in the state of God’s grace. Well known are the words of 
the Saviour: He that shall drink of the water that I will give 
him, shall not thirst for ever; but the water that I will give him 
shall become in him a fountain of water, springing up into life 
everlasting..° 


Conditions for Satisfaction 


In satisfaction two things are particularly required: the one, 
that he who satisfies be in a state of grace, the friend of God, 
since works done without faith and charity cannot be acceptable 
to God; the other, that the works performed be such as are of 
their own nature painful or laborious. They are a compensation 
for past sins, and, to use the words of the holy martyr Cyprian, 
the redeemers, as it were, of past sins,° and must, therefore, 
in some way be disagreeable. 

It does not, however, always follow that they are painful or 
laborious to those who undergo them. The influence of habit, 
or the intensity of divine love, frequently renders the soul insen- 


® John iv. 14. Lib. 1, Epist. 3, after the middle. 


PENANCE 303 


sible to things the most difficult. Such works, however, do not 
therefore cease to be satisfactory. It is the privilege of the 
children of God to be so inflamed with His love, that while 
undergoing the most cruel tortures, they are either almost insen- 
sible to them, or bear them all with the greatest joy.? 


WORKS OF SATISFACTION ARE OF THREE KINDS 


Pastors should teach that all kinds of satisfaction are reducible 
to three heads: prayer, fasting and almsdeeds, which correspond 
to three kinds of goods which we have received from God, 
those of the soul, those of the body and what are called external 
goods. 

Nothing can be more effectual in uprooting all sin from 
the soul than these three kinds of satisfaction. For since what- 
ever is in the world is the concupiscence of the flesh, the con- 
cupiscence of the eyes, and the pride of life, everyone can 
see that to these three causes of disease are opposed also three 
remedies. To the first is opposed fasting; to the second, alms- 
deeds; to the third, prayer. 

Moreover, if we consider those whom our sins injure, we shall 
easily perceive why all kinds of satisfaction are reduced espe- 
cially to these three. For those (we offend by our sins) are: 
God, our neighbor and ourselves. God we appease by prayer, 
our neighbor we satisfy by alms, and ourselves we chastise by 
fasting. 

As this life is checkered by many and various afflictions, the 
faithful are to be particularly reminded that those who patiently 
bear all the trials and afflictions coming from the hand of God 
acquire abundant satisfaction and merit; whereas those who 
suffer with reluctance and impatience deprive themselves of all 
the fruits of satisfaction, merely enduring the punishment which 
the just judgment of God inflicts upon their sins.? 


ONE CAN SATISFY FOR ANOTHER 
In this the supreme mercy and goodness of God deserve our 


grateful acknowledgment and praise, that He has granted to our 


put) John) 15-10; 
aQOn the conditions of satisfaction see Summa Theol. Suppl. xiv. 
b On the kinds of satisfactory works see Summa Theol. Suppl. xv. 


304 THE SACRAMENTS 


frailty the privilege that one may satisfy for another. This, 
however, is a privilege which is confined to the satisfactory part 
of Penance alone. As regards contrition and confession, no one 
is able to be contrite for another; but those who are in the state 
of grace may pay for others what is due to God, and thus we 
may be said in some measure to bear each other’s burdens.*” 

This is a doctrine on which the faithful cannot for a moment 
entertain a doubt, since we profess in the Apostle’s Creed our 
belief in the Communion of Saints. For since we are all reborn 
to Christ in the same cleansing waters of Baptism and are par- 
takers of the same Sacraments, and, above all, are nourished 
with the same body and blood of Christ our Lord, as our food 
and drink, we are all, it is manifest, members of the same body. 
As then the foot does not perform its functions solely for itself, 
but also for the sake of the eyes, and as the eyes see not only for 
their own sake, but for the general good of all the members, so 
also works of satisfaction must be considered common to us all. 

This, however, is not true in reference to all the advantages 
to be derived from satisfaction. For works of satisfaction are 
also medicinal, and are so many remedies prescribed to the peni- 
tent to heal the depraved affections of the soul. It is clear that 
those who do not satisfy for themselves can have no share in this 
fruit of penance. 

These three parts of Penance, contrition, confession and satis- 
faction, should be fully and clearly explained. 


Duties of the Confessor as Regards Satisfaction 
RESTITUTION MUST BE INSISTED ON 


Above all, priests should be very careful not to give absolution 
to any penitent, whose confession they have heard, without oblig- 
ing him to make full satisfaction for any injury to his neighbor’s 
goods or character for which he seems responsible. No person 


is to be absolved until he has first faithfully promised to restore 
all that belongs to others. 


Py rats Valeweae 


@QOn satisfaction performed for others see Summa Theol. Suppl. xiii. 


PENANCE 305 


But as there are many who readily promise to comply with 
their duty in this respect, yet are deliberately determined never 
to fulfil their promises, these persons should be obliged to make 
restitution, and the words of the Apostle are to be frequently 
pressed upon their minds: He that stole, let him now steal no 
more ; but rather let him labour, working with his hands the thing 
which is good, that he may have something to give to him that 
suffereth need.18 


QUANTITY AND QUALITY OF PENANCES SHOULD BE REASONABLE 


In imposing penance priests should do nothing arbitrarily, but 
should be guided solely by justice, prudence and piety. In order 
to show that they follow this rule, and also to impress more 
deeply on the mind of the penitent the enormity of his sin, it 
will be useful sometimes to remind him of the severe punish- 
ments inflicted by the ancient penitential canons, as they are 
called, for certain sins. The nature of the sin, therefore, will 
regulate the extent of the satisfaction. * 

No satisfaction can be more salutary than to require of the 
penitent to devote, for a certain number of days, some time to 
prayer, not omitting te pray to God in behalf of all mankind, 
and particularly for those who have departed this life in the 
Lord. 


VOLUNTARY WORKS OF PENANCE SHOULD BE RECOMMENDED 


Penitents should also be exhorted to undertake of their own 
accord the frequent performance of the penances imposed by the 
confessor, and thus so to conduct their lives that, having faith- 
fully complied with everything which the Sacrament of Penance 
demands, they may never cease earnestly to practice the virtue 
of penance. 


PUBLIC PENANCES SHOULD SOMETIMES BE GIVEN 


Should it be deemed proper sometimes to visit public crimes 
with public penance, and should the penitent express great reluc- 


43 Ephes. iv. 28. 


306 THE SACRAMENTS 


tance or seek to escape from its performance, he should not 
be listened to too readily, but should be persuaded to embrace 
with cheerfulness and readiness that which will be so salutary to 
himself and to others. 


Admonition 


These things concerning the Sacrament of Penance and its 
several parts should be taught in such a manner as to enable 
the faithful not only to understand them perfectly, but also, 
with the Lord’s help, to resolve to put them in practice piously 
and religiously. 


THE SACRAMENT OF EXTREME UNCTION 


IMPORTANCE OF INSTRUCTION ON EXTREME UNCTION 


In all thy works, the Scriptures teach, remember thy last end, 
and thou shalt never sin, words which convey to the pastor a 
silent admonition to omit no opportunity of exhorting the faith- 
ful to constant meditation on death. The Sacrament of Extreme 
Unction, because inseparably associated with recollection of the 
day of death, should, it is obvious, form a subject of frequent 
instruction, not only because it is right to explain the mysteries 
of salvation, but also because death, the inevitable doom of all 
men, when recalled to the minds of the faithful, represses de- 
praved passion. Thus shall they be less disturbed by the approach 
of death, and will pour forth their gratitude in endless praises 
to God, who has not only opened to us the way to true life in 
the Sacrament of Baptism, but has also instituted that of Ex- 
treme Unction, to afford us, when departing this mortal life, an 
easier way to heaven. 


Names of this Sacrament 


In explaining what is more necessary on this subject we shall 
follow almost the same order observed in the exposition of the 
other Sacraments. Hence we shall first show that this Sacra- 
ment is called Extreme Unction, because among all the unc- 
tions prescribed by our Lord to His Church, this is the last to 
be administered. 

For this reason it was also called by our predecessors in the 
faith, the Sacrament of the anointing of the sick, and also the 
Sacrament of the dying, names which easily turn the minds 
of the faithful to the remembrance of that last hour. 


*Eccles. vii. 40. 
307 


308 THE SACRAMENTS 


Extreme Unction Is a True Sacrament 


That Extreme Unction is strictly speaking a Sacrament, is 
first to be explained ; arid this the words of St. James the Apostle, 
promulgating the law of this Sacrament, clearly establish. Js 
any man, he says, sick amongst you? Let him bring in the priests 
of the church, and let them pray over him, anointing him with 
oil in the name of the Lord: and the prayer of faith shall save 
the sick man; and the Lord shall raise him up; and if he be in 
sins, they shall be forgiven him. When the Apostle says that 
sins are forgiven, he ascribes to Extreme Unction the nature 
and efficacy of a Sacrament. 

That such has been at all times the doctrine of the Catholic 
Church on Extreme Unction, many Councils testify, and the 
Council of Trent denounces anathema against all who presume 
to teach or think otherwise.* Innocent I also recommends this 
Sacrament with great earnestness to the attention of the faithful.* 


Extreme Unction Is But One Sacrament 


Pastors, therefore, should teach that Extreme Unction is a 
true Sacrament, and that, although administered with many 
anointings, each given with a peculiar prayer, and under a pecu- 
liar form, it constitutes not many, but one Sacrament. It is one, 
however, not in the sense that it is composed of inseparable 
parts, but because each of the parts contributes to its perfection, 
as is the case with every object composed of many parts. As a 
house which consists of a great variety of parts derives its per- 
fection from unity of plan, so is this Sacrament, although com- 
posed of many and different things and words, but one sign, 
and it effects only that one thing of which it is the sign.? 


Essential Parts of Extreme Unction 


Pastors should also teach what are the component parts of this 
Sacrament, its matter and form. These St. James does not omit, 
and each is replete with its own peculiar mysteries.® 

* James v. 14. * Sess. xiv. De Extrem. U 

“Ep. 1 ad Eugubin. c. 8. ° James v. 14. nasi Aid i 


a That Extreme Unction is a true Sacrament and but one Sacrament is 
explained in Summa Theol. Suppl. xxix. 1, 2. 


EXTREME UNCTION 309 


THE MATTER OF EXTREME UNCTION 


Its element, then, or matter, as defined by Councils, particu- 
larly by the Council of Trent, consists of oil consecrated by the 
Bishop. Not any kind of oil extracted from fatty or greasy sub- 
stances, but olive oil alone (can be the matter of this Sacra- 
ment). 

Thus its matter is most significant of what is inwardly effected 
in the soul by the Sacrament. Oil is very efficacious in soothing 
bodily pain, and the power of this Sacrament lessens the pain 
and anguish of the soul. Oil also restores health, brings joy, 
feeds light, and is very efficacious in refreshing bodily fatigue. 
All these effects signify what the divine power accomplishes in 
the sick man through the administration of this Sacrament. So 
much will suffice in explanation of the matter. 


THE FORM OF EXTREME UNCTION 


The form of the Sacrament is the word and solemn prayer 
which the priest uses at each anointing: By this Holy Unction 
may God pardon thee whatever sins thou hast committed by 
the evil use of sight, smell or touch. 

That this is the true form of this Sacrament we learn from 
these words of St. James: Let them pray over him... and the 
prayer of faith shall save the sick man.6 Hence we can see that 
the form is to be applied by way of prayer. The Apostle does 
not say of what particular words that prayer is to consist; but 
this form has been handed down to us by the faithful tradition 
of the Fathers, so that all the Churches retain the form observed 
by the Church of Rome, the mother and mistress of all Churches. 
Some, it is true, alter a few words, as when for God pardon 
thee, they say (God) remit, or (God) spare, and sometimes, 
May (God) remedy all the evil thou hast committed. But as 
there is no change of meaning, it is clear that all religiously 
observe the same form. 

It should not excite surprise that, while the form of each of 
the other Sacraments either absolutely signifies what it expresses, 


*James v. 14, 15. 


a THE SACRAMENTS 


such as I baptize thee, or I sign thee with the sign of the cross, 
or is pronounced, as it were, by way of command, as in admin- 
istering Holy Orders, Receive power, the form of Extreme Unc- 
tion alone is expressed by way of prayer. Wisely has it been so 
appointed. For since this Sacrament is administered not only 
for the spiritual grace which it bestows, but also for the recovery 
of health, which, however, is not always obtained, we therefore 
use a deprecative form, in order to implore of God’s mercy what 
the virtue of the Sacrament does not always and uniformly effect. 


THE CEREMONIES OF EXTREME UNCTION 


In the administration of this Sacrament special rites are also 
used, consisting principally of prayers offered by the priest for 
the recovery of the sick person. There is no Sacrament, the 
administration of which is accompanied with more numerous 
prayers; and with good reason, for at that moment more than 
ever the faithful require the assistance of pious prayers. All 
who may be present, and especially the pastor, should pour out 
their fervent aspirations to God, and earnestly commend to His 
mercy the life and salvation of the sufferer. 


Institution of Extreme Unction 


Having thus proved that Extreme Unction is truly and prop- 
erly to be numbered among the Sacraments, we rightly infer 
that it owes its institution to Christ our Lord. It was subse- 
quently made known and promulgated to the faithful by the 
Apostle St. James. 

Our Saviour Himself, however, seems to have given some indi- 
cation of it, when He sent His disciples two and two before 
Him; for the Evangelist informs us that going forth, they 
preached that all should do penance; and they cast out many 


devils, and anointed with oil many who were sick, and healed 
them." . 


oMark vil 12,003: 


aOn the matter and form of Extreme Unction see Summa Theol. 


Suppl. xxix. 4-9; St. Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. vi. 706 ff.; Code of Canon 
Law, canons 945 ff. 


EXTREME UNCTION 208 


This anointing cannot be supposed to have been invented by 
the Apostles, but was commanded by our Lord. Nor did its 
power arise from any natural virtue. Its efficacy, we must 
believe, was mystical, having been instituted to heal the maladies 
of the soul, rather than to cure the diseases of the body. This 
is the doctrine taught by St. Denis, St. Ambrose, St. Chrysostom 
and St. Gregory the Great; so that it cannot be at all doubted 
that Extreme Unction is to be recognized and venerated as one 
of the seven Sacraments of the Catholic Church.? 


The Subject of Extreme Unction 


But although instituted for the use of all, Extreme Unction 
is not to be administered indiscriminately to all. 


THE SUBJECT MUST BE IN DANGER OF DEATH 


In the first place, it is not to be administered to persons in 
sound health, according to these words of St.-James: Js anyone 
sick amongst you?® This is also proved by the fact that Extreme 
Unction was instituted as a remedy not only for the diseases of 
the soul, but also for those of the body. Now only the sick 
need a remedy, and therefore this Sacrament is to be adminis- 
tered to those only whose malady is such as to excite apprehen- 
sions of approaching death. 

It is, however, a very grievous sin to defer the Holy Unction 
until, all hope of recovery being lost, life begins to ebb, and the 
sick person is fast verging into a state of insensibility. It is 
obvious that if the Sacrament is administered while conscious- 
ness and reason are yet unimpaired, and the mind is capable of 
eliciting acts of faith and of directing the will to sentiments of 
piety, a more abundant participation of its graces must be re- 
ceived. Though this heavenly medicine is in itself always salu- 
tary, pastors should be careful to apply it when its efficacy can 
be aided by the piety and devotion of the sick person. 


S James v. 14. 
aQOn the institution of Extreme Unction see Summa Theol. Suppl. 


Nesbe, Zh 


312 THE SACRAMENTS 


THE DANGER MUST ARISE FROM SICKNESS 


Extreme Unction, then, can be administered to no one who is 
not dangerously sick; not even to those who are in danger of 
death, as when they undertake a perilous voyage, or enter into 
battle with the sure prospect of death, or have been condemned 
to death and are on the way to execution. 


THE PERSON ANOINTED MUST HAVE ATTAINED THE USE OF REASON 


Furthermore, all those who have not the use of reason are 
not fit subjects for this Sacrament; and likewise children who, 
having committed no sins, do not need the Sacrament as a remedy 
against the remains of sin. The same is true of idiots and insane 
persons, unless they give indications in their lucid intervals of a 
disposition to piety, and express a desire to be anointed. To 
persons who from their birth never enjoyed the use of reason 
this Sacrament is not to be administered; but if a sick person, 
while in the possession of his faculties, expresses a wish to receive 
Extreme Unction and afterwards becomes delirious he is to be 
anointed. 


Administration of Extreme Unction 


The Sacred Unction is to be applied not to the entire body, 
but to the organs of sense only,—to the eyes, on account of 
sight; to the ears, on account of hearing; to the nostrils, on 
account of smell; to the mouth, on account of taste and speech; 
to the hands, on account of touch. The sense of touch, it is 
true, is diffused throughout the entire body, yet it is more de- 
veloped in the hands. 

This manner of administering Extreme Unction is observed 
throughout the universal Church, and is in keeping with the 
medicinal nature of the Sacrament. As in corporal disease, 
although the malady affects the entire body, yet the cure is 
applied to that part only which is the seat and origin of the dis- 

aQOn the recipient of Extreme Unction see Summa Theol. Suppl. xxxii. 


1-4; St. Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. vi. 712-721; 752, 753; Code of Canon 
Law, canons 940 ff. 


EXTREME UNCTION 313 


ease ; so likewise this Sacrament is applied not to the entire body, 
but to those members in which the power of sensation is most 
conspicuous, and also to the loins, which are, as it were, the 
seat of concupiscence, and to the feet, by which we move from 
one place to another, 

Here it is to be observed that, during the same illness, and 
while the danger of dying continues the same, the sick person 
is to be anointed but once. Should he, however, recover after 
he has been anointed, he may receive the aid of this Sacrament as’ 
often as he shall have relapsed into the same danger of death. 
This Sacrament, therefore, is evidently to be numbered among 
those which may be repeated, 


Dispositions for the Reception of Extreme Unction 


As all care should be taken that nothing impede the grace of 
the Sacrament, and as nothing is more opposed to it than the 
consciousness of mortal guilt, the constant practice of the Cath- 
olic Church must be observed of administering the Sacrament of 
Penance and the Eucharist before Extreme Unction. 

And next, let parish priests strive to persuade the sick person 
to receive this Sacrament from the priest with the same faith 
with which those of old who were to be healed by the Apostles 
used to present themselves. But the salvation of his soul is to 
be the first object of the sick man’s wishes, and after that the 
health of the body, with this qualification, if it be for the good 
of his soul. . 

Nor should the faithful doubt that those holy and solemn 
prayers which are used by the priest, not in his own person, 
but in that of the Church and of our Lord Jesus Christ, are 
heard by God; and they are most particularly to be exhorted 
on this one point, to take care that the Sacrament of this most 
salutary oil be administered to them holily and religiously, when 
the sharper conflict seems at hand, and the energies of the mind 
as well as of the body appear to be failing. 


aQOn the administration and repetition of Extreme Unction see Summa 
Theol. Suppl. xxxii. 5-7; xxxiii; St. Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. vi. 720-730. 
Anointing of loins is now omitted; of feet, may be omitted (Canon 047). 


314 THE SACRAMENTS 


The Minister of Extreme Unction 


Who the minister of Extreme Unction is we learn from the 
same Apostle that promulgated the law of the Lord; for he says: 
Let him bring in the priests®* (presbyters). By which name, 
as the Council of Trent has well explained,’® he does not mean 
persons advanced in years, or of chief authority among the 

people, but priests who have been duly ordained by Bishops with 
‘the imposition of hands. 

To the priest, therefore, has been committed the administration 
of this Sacrament; not, however, to every priest, as holy Church 
has decreed, but to the proper pastor who has jurisdiction, or to 
another authorized by him to discharge this office. 

In this, however, as also in the administration of the other 
Sacraments, it is to be most distinctly remembered that the priest 
is the representative of Christ our Lord, and of His spouse, holy 
Church.> 


The Effects of Extreme Unction 


The advantages we receive from this Sacrament are also to be 
accurately explained, so that if nothing else can allure the faithful 
to its reception, they may be induced at least by its utility; for 
we are naturally disposed to measure almost all things by our 
interests. 

Pastors, therefore, should teach that by this Sacrament is im- 
parted grace that remits sins, and especially lighter, or as they 
are commonly called, venial sins; for mortal sins are removed 
by the Sacrament of Penance. Extreme Unction was not insti- 
‘tuted primarily for the remission of grave offences; only Baptism 
and Penance accomplish this directly. 

Another advantage of the Sacred Unction is that it liberates 
the soul from the langour and infirmity which it contracted from 


® James v. 14. © Sess. XIVs.C. 3 mathe sin 6 


aThe word presbyter literally means “elder,” but according to New 
Testament usage, and that of the early Church, it clearly refers to 
aostien priests. 
On the minister of this Sacrament see Summa Theol. Suppl is 
‘ . ppl. Xxx1; 
a Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. vi. 722-725; Code of Canon eae eee 
938, 939. 


EXTREME UNCTION 315 


sins, and from all the other remains of sin. The time most 
opportune for this cure is when we are afflicted with severe ill- 
ness and danger to life impends, for it has been implanted in man 
by nature to dread no human visitation so much as death. This 
dread is greatly augmented by the recollection of our past sins, 
especially if our conscience accuses us of grave offences; for 
it is written: They shall come with fear at the thought of their 
sins, and their iniquities shall stand against them to convict 
them. Another source of vehement anguish is the anxious 
thought that we must soon afterwards stand before the judg- 
ment seat of God, who will pass on us a sentence of strictest 
justice according to our deserts. It often happens that, struck 
with this terror, the faithful feel themselves deeply agitated ; and 
nothing conduces more to a tranquil death than to banish sad- 
ness, await with a joyous mind the coming of our Lord, and be 
ready willingly to surrender the deposit entrusted whenever it 
shall be His will to demand it back. To free the minds of the 
faithful from this solicitude, and fill the soul with pious and 
holy joy is, then, an effect of the Sacrament of Extreme Unction. 
From it, moreover, we derive another advantage, which may 
justly be deemed the greatest of all. For although the enemy 
of the human race never ceases, while we live, to meditate our 
ruin and destruction, yet at no time does he more violently use 
every effort utterly to destroy us, and, if possible, deprive us of 
all hope of the divine mercy, than when he sees the last day of 
life approach. Therefore arms and strength are supplied to the 
faithful in this Sacrament to enable them to break the violence 
and impetuosity of the adversary, and to fight bravely against 
him; for the soul of the sick is relieved and encouraged by the 
hope of the divine goodness, strengthened by which it bears more 
lightly ail the burdens of sickness, and eludes with greater ease 
the artifice and cunning of the devil who lies in wait for it. 
Finally, the recovery of health, if indeed advantageous, is 
another effect of this Sacrament. And if in our days the sick 
obtain this effect less frequently, this is to be attributed, not to 
any defect of the Sacrament, but rather to the weaker faith of a 
great part of those who are anointed with the sacred oil, or by 


| \WVis. 1.020: 


ak6 THE SACRAMENTS 


whom it is administered; for the Evangelist bears witness that 
the Lord wrought not many miracles among His own, because 
of their unbelief.%* 

It may also be truly said that the Christian religion, since it 
has struck its roots more deeply in the minds of men, stands 
now less in need of the aids of such miracles than it did for- 
merly, at the commencement of the rising Church. Nevertheless, 
faith should be strongly excited in this respect, and whatever 
it may please God in His wisdom to do with regard to the health 
of the body, the faithful ought to rely on a sure hope of attain- 
ing, by virtue of this sacred oil, health of the soul, and of experi- 
encing, should the hour of their departure from life be at hand, 
the fruit of that glorious assurance: Blessed are the dead who 
die in the Lord.**? 


Admonition 


We have thus explained briefly the Sacrament of Extreme 
Unction. But if these points are developed by the pastor at 
greater length and with the care the subject demands, it is not to 
be doubted that the faithful will derive very great fruit of piety 
from his instruction. 


* Matt. xiii. 58. * Apoc. xiv. 13. 


a On the effects of Extreme Unction see Summa Theol. Suppl : 
St. Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. vi. 751. : TO ONUED aoe 


THE SACRAMENT OF HOLY ORDERS 


IMPORTANCE OF INSTRUCTION ON THIS SACRAMENT 


If one attentively considers the nature and essence of the othex 
Sacraments, it will readily be seen that they all depend on the 
Sacrament of Orders to such an extent that without it some of 
them could not be constituted or administered at all; while others 
would be deprived of all their solemn ceremonies, as well as of a 
certain part of the religious respect and exterior honor accorded 
to them. Wherefore in continuing the exposition of the doctrine 
of the Sacraments, it will be necessary for pastors to bear in 
mind that it is their duty to explain with even special care the 
Sacrament of Orders. 

This explanation will be highly advantageous. First of all to 
the pastor himself, then to all those who have entered on the 
ecclesiastical state, and finally to the people in general. To the 
pastor himself, because by treating of this subject he himself 
will be more deeply moved to stir up within him the grace he has 
received in this Sacrament; to those who have been called to the 
portion of the Lord,? partly by animating them with a like spirit 
of piety, and partly by affording them an opportunity of acquir- 
ing a knowledge of such things as will enable them all the more 
easily to advance to higher orders; to the rest of the faithful, 
first, because it enables them to understand the respect due to the 
Church’s ministers, and secondly, because as it often happens that 
many may be present who have destined their children, while yet 
young, for the Church’s service, or who desire to embrace that 
life themselves, it is far from right that such persons should be 
unacquainted with the principal truths regarding this particular 
state. 


a The clerical state is called “the portion of the Lord” because clerics 
choose the Lord for their inheritance (see below, on tonsure). On the 
obligations of clerics see St. Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. vi. 806-830; Code 
of Canon Law, canons 108 ff. 


317 


318 THE SACRAMENTS 


Dignity of this Sacrament 


In the first place, then, the faithful should be shown how great 
is the dignity and excellence of this Sacrament considered in its 
highest degree, the priesthood. 

Bishops and priests being, as they are, God’s interpreters and 
ambassadors, empowered in His name to teach mankind the 
divine law and the rules of conduct, and holding, as they do, 
His place on earth, it is evident that no nobler function than 
theirs can be imagined. Justly, therefore, are they called not 
only Angels, but even gods, because of the fact that they exer- 
cise in our midst the power and prerogatives of the immortal 
God. 

In all ages, priests have been held in the highest honor; yet 
the priests of the New Testament far exceed all others. For 
the power of consecrating and offering the body and blood of 
our Lord and of forgiving sins, which has been conferred on 
them, not only has nothing equal or like to it on earth, but even 
surpasses human reason and understanding. 

And as our Saviour was sent by His Father,t and as the 
Apostles and disciples were sent into the whole world by Christ 
our Lord,? so priests are daily sent with the same powers, for 
the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, and 
the edifying of the body of Christ 


Requirements in Candidates for Orders 
HOLINESS, KNOWLEDGE, PRUDENCE 
The burden of this great office, therefore, should not be rashly 
imposed on anyone, but is to be conferred on those only who 


by their holiness of life, their knowledge, faith and prudence, 
are able to bear it. 


DIVINE CALL 


Let no one take the honour to himself, but he that is called 
by God as Aaron was;* and they are called by God who are 


John viii. 42. * Matt. xxviii. 19. *Eph. iv. 12. *Heb. v. 4. 


HOLY ORDERS 319 


called by the lawful ministers of His Church. It is to those 
who arrogantly intrude themselves into this ministry that the 
Lord must be understood to refer when He says: I did not 
send prophets, yet they ran.° Nothing can be more unhappy 
and wretched than such a class of men as this, and nothing more 
calamitous to the Church of God. 


RIGHT INTENTION 


In every action we undertake it is of the highest importance 
to have a good motive in view, for if the motive is good, the 
rest proceeds harmoniously. The candidate for Holy Orders, 
therefore, should first of all be admonished to entertain no pur- 
pose unworthy of so exalted an office. 

This subject demands all the greater attention, since in these 
days the faithful often sin gravely in this respect. Some there 
are who embrace this state to secure the necessaries of life, and 
who, consequently, seek in the priesthood, just as other men do 
in the lowest walks of life, nothing more or less than gain. 
Though both the natural and divine law lay down, as the Apostle 
remarks, that he who serves the altar should live by the altar; ° 
yet to approach the altar for the sake of gain and money is one of 
the very gravest of sacrileges. 

Some are attracted to the priesthood by ambition and love of 
honors; while there are others who desire to be ordained simply 
in order that they may abound in riches, as is proved by the fact 
that unless some wealthy benefice were conferred on them, they 
would not dream of receiving Holy Orders. It is such as these 
that our Saviour describes as hirelings, who, in the words of 
Ezechiel, feed themselves and not the sheep,’ and whose base- 
ness and dishonesty have not only brought great disgrace on the 
ecclesiastical state, so much so that hardly anything is now more 
vile and contemptible in the eyes of the faithful, but also end in 
this, that they derive no other fruit from their priesthood than 
was derived by Judas from the Apostleship, which only brought 
him everlasting destruction. 

But they, on the other hand, who are lawfully called by God, 


oe P F 
5Jer. xxiii. 21. i PaCorixer3: 
‘John x. 13; Ezech. xxxiv. 2, 3, 10, II. 


320 THE SACRAMENTS 


and who undertake the ecclesiastical state with the single motive 
of promoting the honor of God, are truly said to enter the 
Church by the door. 

This, however, must not be understood as if the same law did 
not bind all men equally. Men have been created to honor God, 
and this the faithful in particular, who have obtained the grace 
of Baptism, should do with their whole heart, their whole soul, 
and with all their strength. 

But those who desire to receive the Sacrament of Orders, 
should aim not only at seeking the glory of God in all things— 
an obligation admittedly common to all men, and particularly 
to the faithful—but also to serve Him in holiness and justice 
in whatever sphere of His ministry they may be placed. Just 
as in the army all the soldiers obey the general’s orders, though 
they all have not the same functions to discharge, one being a 
centurion,? another a prefect, so in like manner, though all the 
faithful should diligently practice piety and innocence, which are 
the chief means of honoring God, yet they who are in Holy 
Orders have certain special duties and functions to discharge 
in the Church. Thus they offer Sacrifice for themselves and for 
all the people; they explain God’s law and exhort and form the 
faithful to observe it promptly and cheerfully; they administer 
the Sacraments of Christ our Lord by means of which all grace 
is conferred and increased; and, in a word, they are separated 
from the rest of the people to fill by far the greatest and noblest 
of all ministries. 


The Twofold Power Conferred by this Sacrament 


Having explained all this, the pastor should now turn his 
attention to the special properties of this Sacrament, so that 
the faithful who desire to enter into the ecclesiastical state may 
understand the nature of the office to which they are called and 
the extent of the power bestowed by God on the Church and her 
ministers, 

This power is twofold: the powers of orders and the power of 


aA centurion was the officer in command of a century or hundred 
soldiers in the Roman army. 


HOLY ORDERS 321 


jurisdiction. The power of orders has for its object the real 
body of Christ our Lord in the Blessed Eucharist. The power 
of jurisdiction refers altogether to the mystical body of Christ. 
The scope of this power is to govern and rule the Christian 
people, and lead them to the unending bliss of heaven. 


THE POWER OF ORDERS 


The power of orders not only embraces the power of conse- 
crating the Eucharist, but also fits and prepares the souls of men 
for its reception. It also embraces all else that can have any refer- 
ence to the Eucharist. Regarding this power numerous passages 
of Sacred Scripture may be adduced; but the weightiest and most 
striking are those which are read in St. John and St. Matthew: 
As the Father, says our Lord, hath sent me I also send you. 
.... Receive ye the Holy Ghost; whose sins you shall forgive 
they are forgiven them, and whose sins you shall retain they are 
retained; and: Amen, I say to you, whatsoever you shall bind 
upon earth shall be bound also in heaven; and whatsoever you 
shall loose upon earth shall be loosed also in heaven.2 These texts, 
when expounded by pastors, in accordance with the teaching and 
authority of the Fathers, will throw great light on this truth. 


GREATNESS OF THIS POWER 


This power far excels that given under the law of nature to 
certain ones who had charge of sacred things. The period pre- 
vious to the written law must have had its priesthood and its 
spiritual power,* since it is certain that it had its law; for these 
two, as the Apostle testifies, are so closely connected that if the 
priesthood is transferred, the law must necessarily be transferred 
also. Guided, therefore, by a natural instinct, men recognized 
that God is to be worshipped; and hence it follows that in every 
nation some, whose power might in a certain sense be called 
spiritual, were given the care of sacred things and of divine 
worship. 

8 John xx. 21-23; Matt. xviii. 18 ° Heb. vii. 12. 


a According to St. Jerome, Abel and all the first-born were priests (In 
Tradit. Haebr.). 


sae THE SACRAMENTS 


This power was also possessed by the Jews; but though it was 
superior in dignity to that with which priests were invested 
under the law of nature, yet it must be regarded as far inferior 
to the spiritual power that is found in the New Law. For the 
latter is heavenly, and surpasses all the power of Angels; it is 
derived not from the Mosaic priesthood, but from Christ our 
Lord who was a priest, not according to the order of Aaron, 
but according to the order of Melchisedech.° For He it is who, 
Himself endowed with the supreme power of granting grace 
and remitting sins, left to His Church this power, although He 
limited it in extent and attached it to the Sacraments. 


Names of this Sacrament 


Hence to exercise this power certain ministers are appointed 
and solemnly consecrated, which consecration is called the Sac- 
rament of Orders, or Sacred Ordination. The Fathers used this 
word, which in itself has a most extensive signification, to show 
the dignity and excellence of God’s ministers. 

In fact, order, when understood in its strict meaning and ac- 
ceptation, is the arrangement of superior and inferior things so 
disposed as to stand in mutual relation towards each other. Now 
as in this ministry there are many grades and various functions, 
and as all these are disposed and arranged according to a definite 
plan, the name Order has been well and properly applied to it. 


Holy Orders Is a Sacrament 


That Sacred Ordination is to be numbered among the Sacra- 
ments of the Church, the Council of Trent *! has established by 
the same line of reasoning as we have already used several times. 
Since a Sacrament is a sign of a sacred thing, and since the out- 
ward action in this consecration denotes the grace and power 
bestowed on him who is consecrated, it becomes clearly evident 
that Order must be truly and properly regarded as a Sacrament. 
Thus the Bishop, handing to him who is being ordained a chalice 
with wine and water, and a paten with bread, says: Receive the 
power of offering sacrifice, etc. In these words, pronounced 


. : ij 
Heb. vii. 11. * Sess. xxiii, cap. 3. 


HOLY ORDERS 323 


along with the application of the matter, the Church has always 
taught that the power of consecrating the Eucharist is conferred, 
and that a character is impressed on the soul which brings with 
it grace necessary for the due and proper discharge of that office, 
as the Apostle declares thus: I admonish thee that thou stir up 
the grace of God which is in thee, by the imposition of my 
hands; for God hath not given us the spirit of fear, but of 
power, axd of love, and of sobriety.1? 


Number of Orders 


Now, to use the words of the holy Council: The ministry of 
so sublime a priesthood being a thing all divine, it is but befitting 
its worthier and more reverent exercise that in the Church’s well- 
ordered disposition there should be several different orders of 
ministers destined to assist the priesthood by virtue of their 
office,—orders arranged in such a way that those who have 
already received clerical tonsure should be raised, step by step, 
from the lower to the higher orders.** 

It should be taught, therefore, that these orders are seven in 
number, and that this has been the constant teaching of the 
Catholic Church. These orders are those of porter, lector, 
exorcist, acolyte, subdeacon, deacon and priest. 

That the number of ministers was wisely established thus may 
be proved by considering the various offices that are necessary 
for the celebration of the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass and the 
consecration and administration of the Blessed Eucharist, this 
being the principal scope of their institution. 

They are divided into major or sacred, and minor orders. 
The major or sacred orders are priesthood, deaconship and sub- 
deaconship; while the minor orders are those of acolyte, exor- 
cist, lector and porter, concerning each of which we shall now 
say a few words so that the pastor may be able to explain them 
to those especially whom he knows to be about to receive any 
of the orders in question.» 


%> Tim. i. 6 ff. Sess. xxiii. De Ord. c. 2. 

aQn the necessity, meaning and sacramental nature of orders see 
Summa Theol. Suppl. xxxiv. 1-3; St. Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. vi. 734-738. 

b On the number of orders see Summa Theol. Suppl. xxxvii. 


Pee THE SACRAMENTS 


Tonsure 


In the beginning should be explained first tonsure, and it 
should be shown that this is a sort of preparation for the recep- 
tion of orders. As men are prepared for Baptism by exorcisms 
and for Matrimony by engagement, so to those who dedicate 
themselves to God by tonsure the way is opened that leads to 
the Sacrament of Orders; for by the cutting off of hair is sig- 
nified the character and disposition of him who desires to devote 
himself to the sacred ministry. 


THE NAME “CLERIC” 


Regarding the name clerics which is then given him for 
the first time, it is derived from the fact that he thereby begins 
to take the Lord for his lot and inheritance, just as those, who 
among the Jews were attached to the service of God, were for- 
bidden by the Lord to have any part of the ground that would 
be distributed in the land of promise: J, he said, am thy por- 
tion and inheritance.** And although these words are true of all 
the faithful, yet it is certain that they apply in a special way to 
those who consecrate themselves to the service of God. 


ORIGIN AND MEANING OF TONSURE 


The hair of the head is cut off in the form of a crown. It 
should be always worn thus, and should be enlarged according 
as one is advanced to higher orders. 

The Church teaches that this usage is derived from Apostolic 
origin, as mention is made of it by the most ancient and authori- 
tative Fathers, such as St. Denis the Areopagite, St. Augustine 
and St. Jerome.?® 

It is said that the Prince of the Apostles first introduced this 
usage in memory of the crown of thorns which was put upon 
our Saviour’s head, so that the devices resorted to by the impious 
for the ignominy and torture of Christ might be used by His 


% Num. xviii. 20. 


* Pseudo-Dionys., De Eccl. Hier. c. 6. p. 2; Aug., Serm. xvii. ad 
Fratres in Eremo; Jerome, on Ezech. xliv. 


a Cleric comes from the Greek, kAfpos, a lot. 


HOLY ORDERS 325 


Apostles as a sign of honor and glory, as well as to signify that 
the ministers of the Church should strive to resemble Christ our 
Lord and represent Him in all things. 

Some, however, assert that by tonsure is denoted the royal 
dignity, that is, the portion reserved especially for those who are 
called to the inheritance of the Lord. It will readily be seen 
that what the Apostle Peter says of all the faithful: You are a 
chosen generation, a kingly priesthood, a holy nation,® applies 
especially and with much greater reason to the ministers of the 
Church. 

Still there are some who consider that by the circle, which is 
the most perfect of ali figures, is signified the profession of a 
more perfect life undertaken by ecclesiastics; while in view of 
the fact that the hair of their heads, which is a kind of bodily 
superfluity, is cut off, others think that it denotes contempt for 
external things, and detachment of soul from all human cares.® 


The Minor Orders 
PORTER 


After tonsure it is customary to advance to the first order, 
which is that of porter. The function (of porter) is to guard 
the keys and doors of the church, and to allow no one to enter 
there to whom access has been forbidden. Formerly the porter 
used to assist at the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass, to see that no 
one approached too near the altar, or disturbed the priest during 
the celebration of the divine mysteries. Other duties were also 
assigned to him, as may be seen from the ceremonies used at 
his ordination. 

Thus the Bishop, taking the keys from the altar, hands them to 
him who is being made porter, and says: Let your conduct be 
that of one who has to render to God an account of those things 
that are kept under these keys. 

How great was the dignity of this order in the ancient Church 
may be inferred from a usage which exists in the Church in these 
times. For the office of treasurer, which is still numbered among 


a Peter 11.20. 
aQOn tonsure see Summa Theol. Suppl. xl. 1-3. 


326 THE SACRAMENTS 


the more honorable functions of the Church, was entrusted to 
porters, and carried with it also the guardianship of the sacristy. 


READER 


The second degree of orders is the office of reader, whose 
duty it is to read in the church in a clear and distinct voice the 
books of the Old and of the New Testament, and especially those 
which are read during the nocturnal psalmody.2 Formerly it 
was also his duty to teach the faithful the first rudiments of the 
Christian religion. 

Hence it is that when ordaining him, the Bishop, in the pres- 
ence of the people, handing him a book in which are set down 
all that regards this office, says: Take, and be you an announce? 
of the word of God; if you faithfully and profitably discharge 
your office, you shall have a part with those who from the be- 
ginning have well ministered the word of God. 


EXORCIST 


The third order is that of exorcists, to whom is given the 
power to invoke the name of the Lord over those who are pos- 
sessed by unclean spirits. Hence the Bishop when ordaining them 
presents to them a book in which the exorcisms are contained, 
and at the same time pronounces this form of words: Take, and 
commit to memory, and have the power of imposing hands over 
the possessed, whether baptized or catechumen. 


ACOLYTE 


The fourth degree is that of acolytes, and it is the last of the 
orders that are called minor and not sacred. Their duty is to 
attend and serve the ministers who are in major orders, that is, 
the deacon and subdeacon, in the Sacrifice of the altar.> They 
also carry and attend to the lights during the celebration of the 
Sacrifice of the Mass, and especially during the reading’ of the 
Gospel, from which fact they are also called candle-bearers. 


a That is, at Matins. 


RePRE. term “acolyte” is taken from the Greek, and means follower or 
companion. 


HOLY ORDERS 327 


Therefore at the ordination of acolytes the Bishop observes the 
following rite: First of all he carefully warns them of the nature 
of their office; then hands to each of them a light, saying: Re- 
ceive this candlestick and candle, and remember that henceforth 
you are given the charge of lighting the candles of the church, 
in the name of the Lord. Then he hands them empty cruets in 
which are presented the wine and water for the Sacrifice, say- 
ing: Receive these cruets to supply wine and water for the 
Eucharist of Christ’s blood, in the name of the Lord.® 


The Major Orders 
SUBDEACON 


From the minor orders, which are not sacred, and of which we 
have been speaking until now, one lawfully enters and ascends to 
major and Sacred Orders. 

Now the subdiaconate is the first degree of (major orders). 
Its function, as the name itself indicates, is to serve the deacon 
at the altar. It is the subdeacon who should prepare the altar- 
linen, the vessels and the bread and wine necessary for the cele- 
bration of the Holy Sacrifice. He also it is who presents water 
to the Bishop or priest when he washes his hands during the 
Sacrifice of the Mass. It is also the subdeacon who now reads 
the Epistle which in former times was read at Mass by the 
deacon. He assists as witness at the Holy Sacrifice, and guards 
the celebrant from being disturbed by anyone during the sacred 
ceremonies. 

The various duties that pertain to the subdeacon are indicated 
by the solemn ceremonies used at his ordination. In the first 
place the Bishop warns him that the obligation of perpetual con- 
tinence is attached to this order, and declares that no one is to 
be admitted among the subdeacons who is not ready and willing 
to accept the obligation in question. Then, after the solemn 
recitation of the Litanies, the Bishop enumerates and explains 
the duties and functions of the subdeacon. Thereupon each one 


2 The four minor orders, as well. as the three major orders, are all 
mentioned in a letter of Pope Cornelius to Fabius of Antioch about the 
year 250. Individual minor orders are also mentioned by Tertullian, 
Cyprian and other early Fathers. 


428 THE SACRAMENTS 


of those who are being ordained receives the chalice and sacred 
paten from the Bishop; and, to show that he is to serve the 
deacon, the subdeacon receives from the archdeacon cruets filled 
with wine and water, together with a basin and towel with which 
to wash and dry the hands. At the same time the Bishop pro- 
nounces these words: See what sort of ministry is entrusted to 
you; I admonish you, therefore, to show yourself worthy to 
please God. Other prayers follow, and finally, when the Bishop 
has clothed the subdeacon with the sacred vestments, for each of 
which there are special words and ceremonies, he gives him the 
book of the Epistles, saying: Receive the book of the Epistles, 
with power to read them in the Holy Church of God, as well 
for the living as for the dead.* 


DEACON 


The second degree of Sacred Orders is that of the deacons, 
whose functions are much more extensive and have always been 
regarded as more holy. His duty it is to be always at the side of 
the Bishop, guard him while he preaches, serve him and the priest 
during the celebration of the divine mysteries, as well as during 
the administration of the Sacraments, and to read the Gospel 
in the Sacrifice of the Mass. In former times he frequently 
warned the faithful to be attentive to the holy mysteries; he 
administered our Lord’s blood in those churches in which the 
custom existed that the faithful should receive the Eucharist 
under both species; and to him was entrusted the distribution of 
the Church’s goods, as well as the duty of providing for all that 
was necessary to each one’s sustenance. To the deacon also, 
as the eye of the Bishop, it belongs to see who they are in the 
city ° that lead a good and holy life, and who not; who are present 
at the Holy Sacrifice and sermons at appointed times, and who 
not; so that he may be able to give an account of all to the 


a Subdeacons are mentioned explicitly in the letter of Pope Cornelius 
referred to above. It cannot be doubted, however, that the subdiaconate 
is older than the third century. 

b The word deacon is derived from the Greek dedxovos, minister. 

©The deacons, being in attendance on the Bishop, would naturally be 
found in the cities. Most churches in the first centuries had only seven 
deacons, even where the Christian community was large. At Rome Pope 
Fabian divided the city into seven regions, each of which had its deacon. 


HOLY ORDERS 6 


Bishop, and enable him to admonish and advise each one pri- 
vately, or to rebuke and correct publicly, according as he may 
deem more profitable. He should also read out the list of the 
catechumens and present to the Bishop those who are to be 
admitted to orders. Finally in the absence of a Bishop or 
priest, he can explain the Gospel, but not from the pulpit, thus 
letting it be seen that this is not his proper office? 

The Apostle shows the great care that should be taken that 
no one unworthy of the diaconate be promoted to this order, 
when in his Epistle to Timothy 17 he sets forth a deacon’s char- 
acter, virtues and integrity. The same point is also gathered 
from the rites and solemn ceremonies which the Bishop employs 
when ordaining him. The Bishop uses more numerous and more 
solemn prayers at the ordination of a deacon than at that of a 
subdeacon, and he also adds other kinds of sacred vestments." 
Moreover, he imposes hands on him, just as we read the Apostles 
used to do when ordaining the first deacons.*® Finally, he hands 
him the book of the Gospels, with these words: Receive the 
power to read the Gospel in the Church of God, both for the 
living and the dead, in the name of the Lord. 


PRIEST 


The third and highest degree of all Sacred Orders is the priest- 
hood. The Fathers of the first centuries usually designated those 
who had received this order by two names. At one time they 
called them presbyters—a Greek word signifying elders, not 
only because of the ripe years very necessary for this order, but 
much more on account of their gravity, knowledge and prudence; 
for it is written: Venerable old age is not that of long time, 
nor counted by the number of years; but the understanding of 
a man is grey hairs, and an unspotted life is old age.*® At other 
times they call them priests,° both because they are conse- 

11 Tim. iii. 8-10. * Acts vi. 6. ™ Wis. iv. 8, 9. 

a That deacons may preach is shown by the example of St. Stephen 


(Acts v), St. Philip (Acts viii) and St. Vincent (Aug., Serm. 2. de 


Sancto Vincentio). yz 
bOn the various ecclesiastical vestments see Summa Theol. Suppl. 


xls > ie. : 
c The word used here in the Latin text is “sacerdos,” which is derived 


from “sacer,” holy, and “dare,” to give. 


330 THE SACRAMENTS 


crated to God, and because to them it belongs to administer the 
Sacraments and take charge of things sacred and divine. 


Twofold Priesthood 


But as Sacred Scripture describes a twofold priesthood, one 
internal and the other external, it will be necessary to have a 
distinct idea of each to enable pastors to explain the nature of 
the priesthood now under discussion. 


THE INTERNAL PRIESTHOOD 


Regarding the internal priesthood, all the faithful are said to 
be priests, once they have been washed in the saving waters of 
Baptism. Especially is this name given to the just who have the 
Spirit of God, and who, by the help of divine grace, have been 
made living members of the great High-priest, Jesus Christ; for, 
enlightened by faith which is inflamed by charity, they offer up 
spiritual sacrifices to God on the altar of their hearts. Among 
such sacrifices must be reckoned every good and virtuous action 
done for the glory of God. 

Hence we read in the Apocalypse: Christ hath washed us from 
our sins mm his own blood, and hath made us a kingdom, and 
priests to God and his Father.*® In like manner was it said by 
the Prince of the Apostles: Be you also as living stones built up, 
a spiritual house, a holy priesthood, offering up spiritual sacri- 
fices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ; + while the Apostle ex- 
horts us to present our bodies a living sacrifice, holy, pleasing 
unto God, your reasonable service. And long before this David 
had said: A sacrifice to God is an afflicted spirit: a contrite and 
humble heart, O God, thou wilt not despise.® All this clearly 
regards the internal priesthood. 


THE EXTERNAL PRIESTHOOD 


The external priesthood, on the contrary, does not pertain to 
the faithful at large, but only to certain men who have been 
ordained and consecrated to God by the lawful imposition of 


*Apoc. i. 5, 6. “2 Peter iis. 7 Romvxut TES, IL toy, 


HOLY ORDERS 331 


hands and by the solemn ceremonies of holy Church, and who 
are thereby devoted to a particular sacred ministry. 

This distinction of the priesthood can be seen even in the Old 
Law. That David spoke of the internal priesthood, we have 
just shown. On the other hand, everyone knows the many and 
various precepts given by the Lord to Moses and Aaron regard- 
ing the external priesthood. Along with this He appointed the 
whole tribe of Levi to the ministry of the Temple, and He for- 
bade by law that anyone belonging to another tribe should dare 
to intrude himself into that function. Hence it was that King 
Ozias ** was afflicted with leprosy by the Lord for having usurped 
the sacerdotal ministry, and had to suffer grave chastisements 
for his arrogance and sacrilege. 

Now as the same distinction (of a twofold) priesthood may 
be noted in the New Law, the faithful should be cautioned that 
what we are now about to say concerns that external priesthood 
which is conferred on certain special individuals. This alone 
belongs to the Sacrament of Holy Orders. 


Functions of the Priesthood 


The office of a priest, then, is to offer Sacrifice to God and to 
administer the Sacraments of the Church. This is proved by the 
very ceremonies used at his ordination. When ordaining a priest, 
the Bishop first of all imposes hands on him, as do all the other 
priests who are present. Then he puts a stole on his shoulders 
and arranges it over his breast in the form of a cross, declaring 
thereby that the priest is clothed with power from on high, 
enabling him to carry the cross of Christ our Lord and the sweet 
yoke of God’s law, and to inculcate this law not only by words, 
but also by the example of a most holy and virtuous life. 

He next anoints his hands with holy oil, and then gives him 
the chalice with wine and the paten with a host, saying at the 
same time: Receive the power to offer Sacrifice to God, and to 
celebrate Masses, both for the living and for the dead. By these 
words and ceremonies the priest is constituted an interpreter 
and mediator between God and man, which indeed must be re- 
garded as the principal function of the priesthood. 


“> Paral. xxvi. 19. 


332 THE SACRAMENT S 


Lastly, placing his hands a second time on the head (of the 
person ordained the Bishop) says: Receive the Holy Ghost; 
whose sins you shall forgive they are forgiven them, and whose 
sins you shall retain they are retained,” thus communicating to 
him that divine power of forgiving and retaining sin which was 
given by our Lord to His disciples. Such, then, are the special 
and principal functions of the sacerdotal order.? 


Degrees of the Priesthood 


PRIESTS 


Now although (the sacerdotal order) is one alone, yet it has 
various degrees of dignity and power. The first degree is that 
of those who are simply called priests, and of whose functions 
we have hitherto been speaking. 


BISHOPS 


The second is that of Bishops, who are placed over the various 
dioceses to govern not only the other ministers of the Church, 
but the faithful also, and to promote their salvation with supreme 
vigilance and care. Hence it is that in Sacred Scripture they 
are often called pastors of the sheep. Their office and duty has 
been well described by St. Paul in his sermon to the Ephesians, 
as we read in the Acts of the Apostles; 7° while St. Peter,?” the 
Prince of the Apostles, has also laid down a divine rule for the 
exercise of the episcopal office. And if Bishops strive to conform 
their actions according to this rule, there can be no doubt that 
they will be good pastors and will be also esteemed as such. 
Bishops are also called pontiffs. This name is derived from 
the pagans, who thus designated their chief priests. 


*% John xx. 22. *® Acts xx. 28. 71 Peter v. 2. 


@QOn the matter and form of orders see Summa Theol. Suppl. xxxiv. 
4, 5; xxxvii. 5; St. Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. vi. 739-759. On the rites and 
ceremonies of ordination see Code of Canon Law, canons 1002 ff 

b Although the episcopate completes the priesthood and forms one 
order with it, Bishops are by divine right superior to priests both in 
the hierarchy of orders and in that of jurisdiction, inasmuch as they are 
the ordinary ministers of Confirmation and ordination, and possess supe- 
rior legislative, judiciary and coercive powers. 


HOLY ORDERS 333 


ARCHBISHOPS 


The third degree is that of Archbishops, who preside over a 
number of Bishops and who are called Metropolitans, because 
they are Bishops of those cities which are regarded as the me- 
tropolis of their respective provinces. Hence they enjoy greater 
dignity and more extensive power than Bishops, although their 
Ordination is the same. 


PATRIARCHS 


In the fourth degree come Patriarchs, that is to say, the first 
and highest of the Fathers. Formerly, besides the Roman Pon- 
tiff, there were in the universal Church only four Patriarchs, 
who, however, were not of equal dignity. Thus Constantinople, 
though it reached the patriarchal honor only after all the others, 
yet it obtained a higher rank by reason of being the capital 
of the Empire. Next in rank came the Patriarch of Alexandria, 
which Church had been founded by St. Mark the Evangelist by 
order of the Prince of the Apostles. The third was that of 
Antioch, where Peter fixed his first See. Finally, that of Jeru- 
salem, a See first governed by James, the brother of our Lord. 


THE POPE 


Above all these, the Catholic Church has always placed the 
Supreme Pontiff of Rome, whom Cyril of Alexandria, in the 
Council of Ephesus, named the Chief Bishop, Father and Patri- 
arch of the whole world. He sits in that chair of Peter in which 
beyond every shadow of doubt the Prince of the Apostles sat 
to the end of his days, and hence it is that in him the Church 
recognizes the highest degree of dignity, and a universality of 
jurisdiction derived, not from the decrees of men or Councils, 
but from God Himself. Wherefore he is the Father and guide 
of all the faithful, of all the Bishops, and of all the prelates, no 
matter how high their power and office; and as successor of 
St. Peter, as true and lawful Vicar of Christ our Lord, he governs 
the universal Church. 

From what has been said, therefore, pastors should teach what 


334 THE SACRAMENTS 


are the principal duties and functions of the various ecclesias- 
tical orders and degrees, and also who is the minister of this 
Sacrament.? 


The Minister of Holy Orders 


Beyond all doubt, it is to the Bishop that the administration 
(of orders) belongs, as is easily proved by the authority of Holy 
Scripture, by most certain tradition, by the testimony of all the 
Fathers, by the decrees of the Councils, and by the usage and 
practice of Holy Church. 

It is true that permission has been granted to some abbots 
occasionally to administer those orders that are minor and not 
sacred; yet there is no doubt whatever that it is the proper office 
of the Bishop, and of the Bishop alone to confer the orders 
called holy or major. 

To ordain subdeacons, deacons and priests, one Bishop suf- 
fices; but in accordance with an Apostolic tradition that has 
been always observed in the Church, Bishops are consecrated by 
three Bishops.> 


The Recipient of Holy Orders 


We now come to indicate who are fit to receive this Sacra- 
ment, and especially the priestly order, and what are the prin- 
cipal dispositions required of them. 

From (what we shall lay down concerning the dispositions 
requisite for the priesthood) it will be easy to determine what 
ought to be observed in conferring the other orders, due account 
being taken of the office and dignity of each. Now the extreme 
caution that should be used in conferring this Sacrament is gath- 
ered from the fact that, while all the other Sacraments impart 
grace to the recipient for his own use and sanctification, he, ' 
on the other hand, who receives Holy Orders is made partaker 
of heavenly grace precisely that by his ministry he may promote 
the welfare of the Church and therefore of all mankind. 


aQOn the various ecclesiastical orders and degrees see Summa Theol. 
Suppl Xxxvil; xl. 4-6. 

On the minister of orders see Summa Theol. Suppl. xxxviii: St 

Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. vi. 760-780; Code of Canon Law, canons os ff. ; 


HOLY ORDERS 335 


Hence we readily uriderstand why it is that ordinations take 
place only on special days, on which, moreover, in accordance 
with a very ancient practice of the Catholic Church, a solemn 
fast is appointed in order that by holy and fervent prayer the 
faithful may obtain from God ministers who will be well qualified 
to exercise properly and to the advantage of the Church the 
power of so great a ministry. 


Qualifications for the Priesthood 
HOLINESS OF LIFE 


The chief and most necessary quality requisite in him who is 
to be ordained a priest is that he be recommended by integrity 
of life and morals: first because, by procuring or permitting his 
ordination while conscious of mortal sin, a man renders himself 
guilty of a new and enormous crime; and secondly, because the 
priest is bound to give to others the example of a holy and inno- 
cent life. 

In this connection pastors should set forth the rules which the 
Apostle laid down to Titus and Timothy,?* and he should also 
explain that those bodily defects, which, by the Lord’s command 
excluded from the service of the altar in the Old Law, should 
for the most part be understood of deformities of soul in the 
New Law. This is why the holy custom has been established in 
the Church that he who is about to be admitted to orders should 
first take great care to cleanse his conscience in the Sacrament of 


Penance. 


COMPETENT KNOWLEDGE 


In the second place there is required of the priest not only 
that knowledge which concerns the use and administration of the 
Sacraments; but he should also be versed in the science of Sacred 
Scripture, so as to be able to instruct the people in the mysteries 
of the Christian faith and the precepts of the divine law, lead 
them to piety and virtue, and reclaim them from sin. 

© Tit. i; 1 Tim. iii. | 

aQOn the recipient of orders see Summa Theol. Suppl. xxxvi; xxxix; 
St. Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. vi. 781-805 ; Code of Canon Law, canons 968 ff. 


336 THE SACRAMENTS 


The priest’s duties are twofold. The first is to consecrate 
and administer the Sacraments properly ; the second is to instruct 
the people entrusted to him in all that they must know or do in 
order to be saved. Hence the words of the Prophet Malachias: 
The lips of the priest shall keep knowledge, and they shall seek 
the Law at his mouth; because he is the angel of the Lord of 
hosts.*° 

Now to fulfil the first of these duties it is enough for him to 
be endowed with a moderate share of knowledge. As for the 
second, it is no mere ordinary, but very special knowledge that 
is required. At the same time, however, it should be remembered 
that a profound knowledge of abstruse questions is not demanded 
of all priests in an equal degree. It is enough that each one 
knows all that is necessary for the discharge of his office and 
ministry. 


CANONICAL FITNESS 


This Sacrament should not be conferred on children, nor on 
the insane or mad, because they are devoid of the use of reason.? 
Yet if it does happen to be administered to them, we must un- 
hesitatingly believe that the sacramental character becomes im- 
pressed on their souls. As for the precise age requisite for the 
reception of the various orders, this will easily be found in the 
decrees of the Council of Trent.°° 

Slaves also are excluded. He who is not his own master and 
who is in the power of another, should not be dedicated to the 
divine service. 

Homicides and men of blood are also rejected, because they 
are excluded by a law of the Church and are declared irregular. 

The same must be said of the illegitimate and of all those not 
born in lawful wedlock. It is only right that those who are dedi- 
cated to the divine service should have nothing in them which 
could expose them to the well-deserved derision or contempt of 
others. 

Finally, those who are notably maimed or deformed should not 


Se \alachn aime ® Sess. xxiii. c. 12, De Reform. 


® On the requisites for Sacred Ordination see the Code of Canon Law, 
canons 968 ff. 


HOLY ORDERS 337 


be admitted. A defect or deformity of this kind cannot but 
offend the eye and stand in the way of the due administration 
of the Sacraments, 


Effects of Holy Orders 


This much being explained, it now remains for pastors to 
point out the effects of this Sacrament. It is evident that the 
Sacrament of Orders, while mainly concerned, as already ex- 
plained, with the welfare and beauty of the Church, nevertheless 
also confers on the soul of him who is ordained the grace of 
sanctification, fitting and qualifying him for the proper discharge 
of his functions and for the administration of the Sacraments, 
in the same way as by the grace of Baptism each one is qualified 
to receive the other Sacraments. 

Another grace is clearly conferred by this Sacrament ; namely, 
a special power with reference to the most Blessed Sacrament 
of the Eucharist. This power is full and perfect in the priest, 
because he alone can consecrate the body and blood of our Lord; 
but it is greater or less in the inferior ministers in proportion as 
their ministry approaches the Sacrament of the Altar. 

This power is also called a spiritual character, because those 
who have been ordained are distinguished from the rest of the 
faithful by a certain interior mark impressed on the soul, by 
which they are dedicated to the divine worship. It is this grace 
which the Apostle seems to have had in view when he said to 
Timothy: Neglect not the grace that is in thee, which was given 
thee by prophecy, with imposition of hands of the priesthood; 
and again: J admonish thee, that thou stir up the grace of God 
which is in thee by the imposition of my hands.** 4 


Admonition 


This much will suffice for the Sacrament of Orders. We have 
aimed at presenting nothing more than the principal points that 
bear on the subject, so as to supply the pastor with sufficient 
matter for instructing the faithful, and directing them to Chris- 
tian piety. 


5 Tim. iv. 14; 2 Tim. i. 6. 
aQOn the effects of orders see Summa Theol. Suppl. xxxv. 


THE SACRAMENT OF MATRIMONY 


IMPORTANCE OF INSTRUCTION ON THIS SACRAMENT 


As it is the duty of the pastor to seek the holiness and perfec- 
tion of the faithful, his earnest desires must be in full accord- 
ance with those expressed by the Apostle when writing to the 
Corinthians: J would that all men were even as myself,’ that is, 
that all should embrace the virtue of continence. No greater 
happiness can befall the faithful in this life than to have their 
souls distracted by no worldly cares, the unruly desires of the 
flesh tranquilized and restrained, and the mind fixed on the 
practice of piety and the contemplation of heavenly things. 

But as, according to the same Apostle, every one hath his 
proper gift from God, one after this manner, and another after 
that; ? and as marriage is gifted with great and divine blessings, 
so much so as truly and properly to hold a place among the 
other Sacraments of the Catholic Church, and as its celebration 
was honored by the presence of our Lord Himself,® it is clear 
that this subject should be explained, particularly since we find 
that St. Paul and the Prince of the Apostles have in many places 
minutely described to us not only the dignity but also the duties 
of the married state. Filled with the Spirit of God (these 
Apostles) well understood the numerous and important advan- 
tages which must flow to Christian society from a knowledge, 
and an inviolable observance by the faithful of the sanctity of 
marriage; while they saw that from ignorance or disregard of 
(its holiness), many and serious calamities and losses must be 
brought upon the Church. 


Nature and Meaning of Marriage 


The nature and meaning of marriage are, therefore, to be first 
explained. Vice not infrequently assumes the semblance of 
ata COlmvileaezs =r Cormcyvay: * John ii, 2. 
338 


MATRIMONY 339 


virtue, and hence care must be taken that the faithful be not 
deceived by a false appearance of marriage, and thus stain their 
souls with turpitude and wicked lusts. To explain this subject, 
let us begin with the meaning of the word itself. 


NAMES OF THIS SACRAMENT 


The word matrimony is derived from the fact that the prin- 
cipal object which a female should propose to herself in mar- 
riage is to become a mother; or from the fact that to a mother 
it belongs to conceive, bring forth and train her offspring. 

It is also called wedlock (conjugium)» from joining to- 
gether, because a lawful wife is united to her husband, as it were, 
by a common yoke. 

It is called nuptials,< because, as St. Ambrose observes, the 
bride veiled her face through modesty—a custom which would 
also seem to imply that she was to be subject and obedient to her 
husband.* 


DEFINITION OF MATRIMONY 


Matrimony, according to the general opinion of theologians, is 
defined: The conjugal union of man and woman, contracted 
between two qualified persons, which obliges them to live together 
throughout life. 

In order that the different parts of this definition may be 
better understood, it should be taught that, although a perfect 
marriage has all the following conditions,—namely, internal con- 
sent, external compact expressed by words, the obligation and tie 
which arise from the contract, and the marriage debt by which 
it is consummated; yet the obligation and tie expressed by the 
word union alone have the force and nature of marriage. 

The special character of this union is marked by the word 
conjugal. This word is added because other contracts, by which 
men and women bind themselves to help each other in considera- 


*De Abraham, lib. 1. c. 9. 
aThe term “matrimony” is derived from matris munus, office of a 


mother. } ; : 
b The word “conjugium” literally means a yoking together. 
¢ The Latin “nuptie” comes from nubere, to veil one’s self. 


340 THE SACRAMENTS 


tion of money received or other reason, differ essentially from 
matrimony. 

Next follow the words between qualified persons; for per- 
sons excluded by law cannot contract marriage, and if they do 
their marriage is invalid. Persons, for instance, within the fourth 
degree of kindred, a boy before his fourteenth year, and a 
female before her twelfth, the ages established by law, cannot 
contract marriage. 

The words, which obliges them to live together throughout 
life, express the indissolubility of the tie which binds husband 
and wife.> 


ESSENCE AND CAUSE OF MARRIAGE 


Hence it is evident that marriage consists in the tie spoken of 
above. Some eminent theologians, it is true, say that it consists 
in the consent, as when they define it: The consent of the man 
and woman. But we are to understand them to mean that the 
consent is the efficient cause of marriage, which is the doctrine 
of the Fathers of the Council of Florence;* because, without 
the consent and contract, the obligation and tie cannot possibly 
exist. 


The Kind of Consent Required in Matrimony 


It is most necessary that the consent be expressed in words 
denoting present time. 


MUTUAL 


Marriage is not a mere donation, but a mutual agreement; 
and therefore the consent of one of the parties is insufficient 
for marriage, the consent of both being essential. 


EXTERNAL 


To declare this consent words are obviously necessary. If 
the internal consent alone, without any external indication, were 


®*Decr. ad Armenos. 


a According to the New Code of Canon Law the impediment of con- 
sanguinity extends to the third degree of the collateral line (c. 1076) 
the ages required for valid marriage in the husband and wife are the 
sixteenth and fourteenth years completed respectively (c. 1067). 


bOn the names and definition of Matrimony. 
Suppl. xliv.; St. Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. vi. is pi ashes ge las 


MATRIMONY 34r 


sufficient for marriage, it would then seem to follow as a neces- 
sary consequence, that were two persons, living in the most sepa- 
rate and distant countries, to consent to marry, they would con- 
tract a true and indissoluble marriage, even before they had 
mutually signified to each other their consent by letter or mes- 
senger—a consequence as repugnant to reason as it is opposed to 
the decrees and established usage of holy Church. 


PRESENT 


Rightly was it said that the consent must be expressed in 
words which have reference to present time; for words which 
signify a future time, promise, but do not actually unite in mar- 
riage. Besides, it is evident that what is to be done has no pres- 
ent existence, and what has no present existence can have little 
or no firmness or stability. Hence a man who has only promised 
to marry a certain woman acquires by the promise no marriage 
rights, since his promise has not yet been fulfilled. Such prom- 
ises are, it is true, obligatory, and their violation involves the 
offending party in a breach of faith. But he who has once 
entered into the matrimonial alliance, regret it as he afterwards 
may, cannot possibly change, or invalidate, or undo what has 
been done. 

As, then, the marriage contract is not a mere promise, but a 
transfer of right, by which the man actually yields the dominion 
of his body to the woman, the woman the dominion of her body 
to the man, it must therefore be made in words which designate 
the present time, the force of which words abides with undi- 
minished efficacy from the moment of their utterance, and binds 
the husband and wife by a tie that cannot be broken. 

Instead of words, however, it may be sufficient for marriage 
to substitute a nod or other unequivocal sign of internal consent. 
Even silence, when the result of female modesty, may be suf- 
ficient, provided the parents answer for their daughter. 


The Essence of Marriage Constituted by the Consent 

Hence pastors should teach the faithful that the nature and 
force of marriage consists in the tie and obligation; and that, 
without consummation, the consent of the parties, expressed in 


a The parties must now express consent in words, if they can speak. 
(Canon 1088. 2.) 


342 THE SACRAMENTS 


the manner already explained, is sufficient to constitute a true 
marriage. It is certain that our first parents before their fall, 
when, according to the holy Fathers, no consummation took 
place, were really united in marriage.®© Hence the Fathers say 
that marriage consists not in its use, but in the consent. This 
doctrine is repeated by St. Ambrose in his book On Virgins." 


Twofold Consideration of Marriage 


When these matters have been explained, it should be taught 
that matrimony is to be considered from two points of view, 
either as a natural union, since it was not invented by man but 
instituted by nature; or as a Sacrament, the efficacy of which 
transcends the order cf nature. 


Marriage as a Natural Contract 


As grace perfects nature, and as that was not first which is 
spiritual, but that which is natural; afterwards that which 1s 
spiritual,’ the order of our matter requires that we first treat of 
Matrimony as a natural contract, imposing natural duties, and 
next consider what pertains to it as a Sacrament. 


INSTITUTED BY GOD 


The faithful, therefore, are to be taught in the first place that 
marriage was instituted by God. We read in Genesis that God 
created them male and female, and blessed them, saying: “In- 
crease and multiply”; and also: “Jt is not good for man to be 
alone: let us make him a help like unto himself.” And a little 
further on: But for Adam there was not found a helper like 
himself. Then the Lord God cast a deep sleep upon Adam; and 
when he was fast asleep, he took one of his ribs, and filled up 
flesh for it. And the Lord God built a rib which he took from 
Adam into a woman, and brought her to Adam; and ‘Adam said: 
“This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh: she shall 


*Gen. ii. 22. *" Caps 6: *r Cor. xv. 46. 


aOn the consent of marriage see Summa Theol. Suppl. xly-xlviii; St. 


Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. vi. 885-806; Code of Canon Law, canons 
1081-1093. 


MATRIMONY 343 


be called woman, because she was taken out of man: wherefore 
a man shall leave father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife; 
and they shall be two in one flesh.” ® These words, according 
to the authority of our Lord Himself, as we read in St. Matthew, 
prove the divine institution of Matrimony.'°4 


MARRIAGE IS INDISSOLUBLE BY DIVINE LAW 


Not only did God institute marriage; He also, as the Council 
of Trent declares, rendered it perpetual and indissoluble.* What 
God hath joined together, says our Lord, let not man separate.” 

Although it belongs to marriage as a natural contract to be 
indissoluble, yet its indissolubility arises principally from its 
nature as a Sacrament, as it is the sacramental character that, in 
all its natural relations, elevates marriage to the highest perfec- 
tion. In any event, dissolubility is at once opposed to the proper 
education of children, and to the other advantages of marriage. 


MARRIAGE NOT OBLIGATORY ON ALL 
The words increase and multiply, which were uttered by the 


Lord, do not impose on every individual an obligation to marry, 
but only declare the purpose of the institution of marriage. Now 
that the human race is widely diffused, not only is there no law 
rendering marriage obligatory, but, on the contrary, virginity 
is highly exalted and strongly recommended in Scripture as supe- 
rior to marriage, and as a state of greater perfection and holi- 
ness. For our Lord and Saviour taught as follows: He that can 
take it, let him take it;1* and the Apostle says: Concerning vir- 
gins I have no commandment from the Lord; but I give counsel 
as having obtained mercy from the Lord to be faithful.’ 


THE MOTIVES AND ENDS OF MARRIAGE 


We have now to explain why man and woman should be joined 
in marriage. First of all, nature itself by an instinct implanted 
® Gen. i. 27, 28; Gen. ii. 18, 21-24. * Matt. xix. 6. 


Sess. xxiv, in the beginning and canons 5, 7. ‘ y 
@ Matt, xix,-6, -* Geni 28. co Matta xt x5 12: 1 COG-nVily 25, 


aQn the necessity and lawfulness of marriage see Summa Theol. 
Suppl. xli. 


(344 THE SACRAMENTS 


in both sexes impels them to such companionship, and this is 
further encouraged by the hope of mutual assistance in bearing 
more easily the discomforts of life and the infirmities of old age. 

A second reason for marriage is the desire of family, not so 
much, however, with a view to leave after us heirs to inherit our 
property and fortune, as to bring up children in the true faith 
and in the service of God. That such was the principal object 
of the holy Patriarchs when they married is clear from Scrip- 
ture. Hence the Angel, when informing Tobias of the means 
of repelling the violent assaults of the evil demon, says: J will 
show thee who they are over whom the devil can prevail; for 
they who in such manner r-ceive matrimony as to shut out God 
from themselves and from their mind, and to give themselves to 
their lust, as the horse and mule which have not understanding, 
over them the devil hath power. He then adds: Thou shalt take 
the virgin with the fear of the Lord, moved rather for love of 
children than for lust, that in the seed of Abraham thou mayest 
obtain a blessing in children.*® It was also for this reason that 
God instituted marriage from the beginning; and therefore mar- 
ried persons who, to prevent conception or procure abortion, have 
recourse to medicine, are guilty of a most heinous crime—nothing 
less than wicked conspiracy to commit murder. 

A third reason has been added, as a consequence of the fall 
of our first parents. On account of the loss of original inno- 
cence the passions began to rise in rebellion against right reason ; 
and man, conscious of his own frailty and unwilling to fight 
the battles of the flesh, is supplied by marriage with an antidote 
by which to avoid sins of lust. For fear of fornication, says 
the Apostle, let every man have his own wife, and let every 
woman have her own husband; ™" and a little after, having recom- 
mended to married persons a temporary abstinence from the 
marriage debt, to give themselves to prayer, he adds: Return 
together again, lest Satan tempt you for your incontinency. 

These are ends, some one of which, those who desire to con- 
tract marriage piously and religiously, as becomes the children 
of the Saints, should propose to themselves. If to these we add 
other causes which induce to contract marriage, and, in choosing 


% Tobias vi. 16, 17, 22. sl Conmyiter. 


MATRIMONY 345 


a wife, to prefer one person to another, such as the desire of 
leaving an heir, wealth, beauty, illustrious descent, congeniality 
of disposition—such motives, because not inconsistent with the 
holiness of marriage, are not to be condemned. We do not find 
that the Sacred Scriptures condemn the Patriarch Jacob for 
having chosen Rachel for her beauty, in preference to Lia.18@ 

So much should be explained regarding Matrimony as a natural 
contract. 


Marriage Considered as a Sacrament 


It will now be necessary to explain that Matrimony is far 
superior in its sacramental aspect and aims at an incomparably 
higher end. For as marriage, as a natural union, was instituted 
from the beginning to propagate the human race; so was the 
sacramental dignity subsequently conferred upon it in order that 
a people might be begotten and brought up for the service and 
worship of the true God and of Christ our Saviour. 

Thus when Christ our Lord wished to give a sign of the inti- 
mate union that exists between Him and His Church and of His 
immense love for us, He chose especially the sacred union of man 
and wife. That this sign was a most appropriate one will readily 
appear from the fact that of all human relations there is none 
that binds so closely as the marriage-tie, and from the fact that 
husband and wife are bound to one another by the bonds of the 
greatest affection and love. Hence it is that Holy Writ so fre- 
quently represents to us the divine union of Christ and the 
Church under the figure of marriage. 


MARRIAGE IS A SACRAMENT 


That Matrimony is a Sacrament the Church, following the 
authority of the Apostle, has always held to be certain and in- 
contestable. In his Epistle to the Ephesians he writes: Men 
should love their wives as their own bodies. He that loveth his 
wife loveth himself. For no man ever hated his own flesh, but 
nourisheth it and cherisheth it, as also Christ doth the church; 
for we are members of his body, of Mus flesh, and of his bones. 


18 Gen. xxix. : 
aQOn the ends of marriage see St. Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. vi. 881-883. 


346 THE SACRAMENTS 


For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and shall 
adhere to his wife, and they shall be two in one flesh. This is 
a great sacrament; but I speak in Christ and im the church.” 
Now his expression, this is a great sacrament, undoubtedly refers 
to Matrimony, and must be taken to mean that the union of man 
and wife, which has God for its Author, is a Sacrament, that 
is, a sacred sign of that most holy union that binds Christ our 
Lord to His Church. 

That this is the true and proper meaning of the Apostle’s 
words is shown by the ancient holy Fathers who have interpreted 
them, and by the explanation furnished by the Council of Trent.?° 
It is indubitable, therefore, that the Apostle compares the hus- 
band to Christ, and the wife to the Church; that the husband 
is head of the wife as Christ is the head of the Church;*? and 
that for this very reason the husband should love his wife and 
the wife love and respect her husband. For Christ loved his 
church, and gave himself for her; ?? while as the same Apostle 
teaches, the church is subject to Christ.?* 

That grace is also signified and conferred by this Sacrament, 
which are two properties that constitute the principal character- 
istics of each Sacrament, is declared by the Council as follows: 
By his passion Christ, the Author and Perfecter of the venerable 
Sacraments, merited for us the grace that perfects the natural 
love (of husband and wife), confirms their indissoluble union, 
and sanctifies them.** It should, therefore, be shown that by 
the grace of this Sacrament husband and wife are joined in the 
bonds of mutual love, cherish affection one towards the other, 
avoid illicit attachments and passions, and so keep their marriage 
honourable in all things, . . - and their bed undefiled.?* 


Marriage before Christ 


IT WAS NOT A SACRAMENT 


How much the Sacrament of Matrimony is superior to the 
marriages made both previous to and under the (Mosaic) Law 


SE phwaveezoure: 

® Sess. xxiv, De Matr., in the beginning, and can. 1. = Eplinnvaecse 

Ep hweve 2s > Ephe ve 2a: hy * Heb. xiii. — 

@ On marriage as a Sacrament see Summa Theol. Suppl. xlii; St. Al- 
phonsus, Theol. Mor. vi. 880, 897-800. 


MATRIMONY 347 


may be judged from the fact that though the Gentiles themselves 
were convinced there was something divine m marriage, and for 
that reason regarded promiscuous intercourse as contrary to the 
law of nature, while they also considered fornication, adultery 
and other kinds of impurity to be punishable offences; yet their 
marriages never had any sacramental value. 

Among the Jews the laws of marriage were observed far 
more religiously, and it cannot be doubted that their unions 
were endowed with more holiness. As they had received from 
God the promise that in the seed of Abraham all nations 
should be blessed,”* it was justly considered by them to be a 
very pious duty to bring forth children, and thus contribute 
to the propagation of the chosen people from whom Christ 
the Lord and Saviour was to derive His birth in His human 
nature. Still their unions also fell short of the real nature 
of a Sacrament. 


BEFORE CHRIST MARRIAGE HAD FALLEN FROM ITS PRIMITIVE 
UNITY AND INDISSOLUBILITY 


It should be added that if we consider the law of nature after 
the fall and the Law of Moses we shall easily see that marriage 
had fallen from its original honor and purity. Thus under the 
law of nature we read of many of the ancient Patriarchs that 
they had several wives at the same time; while under the Law 
of Moses?’ it was permissible, should cause exist, to repudiate 
one’s wife by giving her a bill of divorce. Both these (conces- 
sions) have been suppressed by the law of the Gospel,?* and 
marriage has been restored to its original state. 


Christ Restored to Marriage its Primitive Qualities 
UNITY OF MARRIAGE 


Though some of the ancient Patriarchs are not to be blamed for 
having married several wives, since they did not act thus without 
divine dispensation, yet Christ our Lord has clearly shown that 
polygamy is not in keeping with the nature of Matrimony. These 
are His words: For this cause shall a man leave father and 


*® Gen. xxii. 18. 7 Deut. xxiv. I. = Matt, xix: 0: 


948 THE SACRAMENTS 


mother, and shall cleave unto his wife, and they shall be two in 
one flesh; and He adds: wherefore they are no more two but one 
flesh.2° In these words He makes it clear that God instituted 
marriage to be the union of two, and only two persons. The 
same truth He has taught very distinctly in another passage, 
wherein He says: Whosoever shall put away his wife and marry 
another, committeth adultery against her; and if the wife shall put 
away her husband, and be married to another, she committeth 
adultery.*° For if it were lawful for a man to have several wives, 
there is no reason why he who takes to himself a second wife, 
along with the wife he already has, should be regarded as more 
guilty of adultery than if he had dismissed his first wife and 
taken a second. 

Hence it is that when an infidel who, following the customs of 
his country has married several wives, happens to be converted to 
the true religion, the Church orders him to dismiss all but the 
first, and regard her alone as his true and lawful wife. 


INDISSOLUBILITY OF MARRIAGE 


The self-same testimony of Christ our Lord easily proves that 
the marriage-tie cannot be broken by any sort of divorce. For if 
by a bill of divorce a woman were freed from the law that binds 
her to her husband, she might marry another husband without 
being in the least guilty of adultery. Yet our Lord says clearly: 
Whosoever shall put away his wife and shall marry another com- 
mitteth adultery.** Hence it is plain that the bond of marriage 
can be dissolved by death alone, as is confirmed by the Apostle 
_when he says: A woman is bound by the law as long as her hus- 
band liveth; but if her husband die she is at liberty; let her marry 
whom she will, only in the Lord; ** and again: To them that are 
married, not I but the Lord commandeth, that the wife depart not 
from her husband; and if she depart that she remain unmarried 
or be reconciled to her husband.** To the wife, then, who for a 
just cause has left her husband, the Apostle offers this alternative: 
Let her either remain unmarried or be reconciled to her husband. 


® Matt. xix. 5,0, Matix. tian To: 
™ Luke xvi. 18 Wit Core vile so! 51 Core Vile: 


4On this subject see the Code of Canon Law, canon 1125. 


MATRIMONY 349 


Nor does holy Church permit husband and wife to separate with- 
out weighty reasons. 


ADVANTAGES OF INDISSOLUBILITY 


Lest, however, the law of Matrimony should seem too severe on 
account of its absolute indissolubility, the advantages of this in- 
dissolubility should be pointed out. 

The first (beneficial consequence) is that men are given to 
understand that in entering Matrimony virtue and congeniality 
of disposition are to be preferred to wealth or beauty—a circum- 
stance that cannot but prove of the very highest advantage to the 
interests of society at large. 

In the second place, if marriage could be dissolved by divorce, 
married persons would hardly ever be without causes of disunion, 
which would be daily supplied by the old enemy of peace and 
purity ; while, on the contrary, now that the faithful must remem- 
ber that even though separated as to bed and board, they remain 
_none the less bound by the bond of marriage with no hope of 
marrying another, they are by this very fact rendered less prone 
to strife and discord. And even if it sometimes happens that 
husband and wife become separated, and are unable to bear the 
want of their partnership any longer, they are easily reconciled by 
friends and return to their common life. 

The pastor should not here omit the salutary admonition of 
St. Augustine who, to convince the faithful that they should not 
consider it a hardship to receive back the wife they have put 
away for adultery, provided she repents of her crime, observes: 
Why should not the Christian husband receive back his wife when 
the Church receives her? And why should not the wife pardon 
her adulterous but penitent husband when Christ has already par- 
doned him? ** True it is that Scripture calls him foolish who 
keepeth an adulteress;** but the meaning refers to her who 
refuses to repent of her crime and quit the disgraceful course she 
has entered on. 

From all this it will be clear that Christian marriage is far 
superior in dignity and perfection to that of Gentiles and Jews.* 

%*De Adult. Conjug. lib. ii. cc. 6, 9. mee LO ExXVAlie2: 


aOn the unity and indissolubility of marriage see Summa Theol. Suppl. 
Ixv-Ixvii; St. Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. vi. 956-977; Code of Canon Law, 


canons IITO 


350 THE SACRAMENTS 


The Three Blessings of Marriage 


The faithful should also be shown that there are three blessings 
of marriage: children, fidelity and the Sacrament. These are 
blessings which to some degree compensate for the inconveniences 
referred to by the Apostle in the words: Such shall have tribu- 
lation of the flesh,3* and they lead to this other result that sexual 
intercourse, which is sinful outside of marriage, is rendered right 
and honorable. 


OFFSPRING 


The first blessing, then, is a family, that is to say, children born 
of a true and lawful wife. So highly did the Apostle esteem this 
blessing that he says: The woman shall be saved by bearing chil- 
dren.** These words are to be understood not only of bearing 
children, but also of bringing them up and training them to the 
practice of piety; for the Apostle immediately subjoins: If she 
continue in faith. Scripture says: Hast thou children? Instruct 
them and bow down their necks from childhood.*®* The same is 
taught by the Apostle; while Tobias, Job and other holy Patri- 
archs in Sacred Scripture furnish us with beautiful examples of 
such training. The duties of both parents and children will, 
however, be set forth in detail when we come to speak of the 
fourth Commandment. 


FIDELITY 


The second advantage of marriage is faith, not indeed that 
virtue which we receive in Baptism; but the fidelity which binds 
wife to husband and husband to wife in such a way that they 
mutually deliver to each other power over their bodies, promising 
at the same time never to violate the holy bond of Matrimony.* 
This is easily inferred from the words pronounced by Adam 
when taking Eve as his wife, and which were afterwards con- 
firmed by Christ our Lord in the Gospel: Wherefore a man shall 
leave father and mother and shall cleave to his wife and they 


“a Cor. vil. 28. “2 Timea, 15." Hecliqan as: * Gen. ii. 24. 


MATRIMONY she 


shall be two in one flesh.*° It is also inferred from the words of 
the Apostle: The wife hath not power of her own body, but the 
husband: and in like manner, the husband hath not power of his 
own body but the wife.*t Justly, then, did the Lord in the Old 
Law ordain the most severe penalties against adulterers who 
violated this conjugal fidelity.4? 

Matrimonial fidelity also demands that they love one another 
with a special, holy and pure love; not as adulterers love one 
another but as Christ loves His Church. This is the rule laid 
down by the Apostle when he says: Husbands, love your wives as 
Christ also loved the church.*? And surely (Christ’s) love for 
His Church was immense; it was a love inspired not by His own 
advantage, but only by the advantage of His spouse. 


SACRAMENT 


The third advantage is called the Sacrament, that is to say, the 
indissoluble bond of marriage. As the Apostle has it: The Lord 
commanded that the wife depart not from the husband, and if 
she depart that she remain unmarried or be reconciled to her 
husband ; and let not the husband put away his wife.4* And truly, 
if marriage as a Sacrament represents the union of Christ with 
His Church, it also necessarily follows that just as Christ never 
separates Himself from His Church, so in like manner the wife 
can never be separated from her husband in so far as regards the 
marriage-tie.# 


The Duties of Married People 


The more easily to preserve the holy state (of marriage) from 
dissensions, the duties of husband and wife as inculcated by 
St. Paul and by the Prince of the Apostles must be explained. 


DUTIES OF A HUSBAND 


It is the duty of the husband to treat his wife generously and 
honorably. It should not be forgotten that Eve was called 


CeMattaecixae 5: “1 Cor. vii. 4. [= Num. v. 12 ff. 
Sp lie var25. “Dip (Che, aiabls soy 


a On the three blessings of marriage see Summa Theol. Suppl. xlix. 


352 THE SACRAMENTS 


by Adam his companion. The woman, he says, whom thou 
gavest me as a companion.*® Hence it was, according to the 
opinion of some of the holy Fathers, that she was formed not 
from the feet but from the side of man; as, on the other hand, 
she was not formed from his head, in order to give her to under- 
stand that it was not hers to command but to obey her husband. 
The husband should also be constantly occupied in some honest 
pursuit with a view to provide necessaries for the support of 
his family and to avoid idleness, the root of almost every vice. 
He is also to keep all his family in order, to correct their 
morals, and see that they faithfully discharge their duties. 


DUTIES OF A WIFE 


On the other hand, the duties of a wife are thus summed up 
by the Prince of the Apostles: Let wives be subject to their 
husbands: that if any believe not the word, they may be won 
without the word by the conversation of the wives, considering 
your chaste conversation with fear. Let not their adorning be 
the outward plaiting of the hair, or the wearing of gold, or the 
putting on of apparel: but the hidden man of the heart in the 
incorruptibility of a quiet and meek spirit, which is rich in the 
sight of God. For after this manner heretofore the holy women 
also, who trusted in God, adorned themselves, being in subjection 
to their own husbands, as Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him 
lord.*® 

To train their children in the practice of virtue and to pay par- 
ticular attention to their domestic concerns should also be especial 
objects of their attention. The wife should love to remain at 
home, unless compelled by necessity to go out; and she should 
never presume to leave home without her husband’s consent. 

Again, and in this the conjugal union chiefly consists, let wives 
never forget that next to God they are to love their husbands, to 
esteem them above all others, yielding to them in all things not 
inconsistent with Christian piety, a willing and ready obedience. 


* Gen. iii. 12. “1 Pet. iii. 1 ff. 


MATRIMONY 353 


The Law of the Church on Marriage 


THE RITE TO BE OBSERVED 


Having explained these matters, pastors should next teach 
what rites are to be observed in contracting marriage. There is 
no need, however, that we dwell on these questions here. The 
Council of Trent has laid down fully and accurately what must 
be chiefly observed; and this decree will not be unknown to 
pastors. It will suffice, then, to admonish them to study to make 
themselves acquainted, from the doctrine of the Council, with 
what regards this subject, and to explain it carefully to the 
faithful.* 

But above all, lest young persons, whose period of life is 
marked by extreme indiscretion, should be deceived by a merely 
nominal marriage and foolishly rush into sinful love-unions, the 
pastor cannot too frequently remind them that there can be no 
true and valid marriage unless it be contracted in the presence 
of the parish priest, or of some other priest commissioned by him, 
or by the Ordinary, and that of a certain number of witnesses. 


THE IMPEDIMENTS OF MARRIAGE 


The impediments of marriage are also to be explained, a 
subject so minutely and accurately treated by many grave and 
learned writers on the virtues and vices as to render it an easy 
task to draw upon their labors, particularly as the pastor has 
occasion to have such works continually in his hands. The in- 
structions, therefore, which such books contain, and also the 
decrees of the Council with regard to the impediments arising 
from spiritual relationship, from public honesty, and from forni- 
cation, the pastor should peruse with attention and expound with 
carer = 


4 Sess. xxiv. Decret de Reformat Matrimon. 

svibycacapy 2-4. 

aQOn the impediments of marriage see Summa Theol. Suppl. I-Ixii; St. 
Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. vi. 978-1148; Code of Canon Law, canons 1035 ff.; 
on the form of celebration see canons 1004 ff. 


354 THE SACRAMENTS 


The Recipient of Matrimony 


DISPOSITIONS WITH WHICH THE SACRAMENT IS TO BE APPROACHED 


From the above may be learned the dispositions with which 
the faithful should contract matrimony. They should consider 
that they are about to enter upon a work that is not human but 
divine. The example of the Fathers of the. Old Law, who 
esteemed marriage as a most holy and religious rite, although it 
had not then been raised to the dignity of a Sacrament, shows 
the singular purity of soul and piety (with which Christians 
should approach marriage) .* 


CONSENT OF PARENTS 


Among other things, children should be exhorted earnestly that 
they owe as a tribute of respect to their parents, or to those 
under whose guardianship and authority they are placed, not to 
contract marriage without their knowledge, still less in defiance 
of their express wishes. It should be observed that in the Old 
Law children were always given in marriage by their fathers ; and 
that the will of the parent is always to have very great influence 
on the choice of the child, is clear from these words of the 
Apostle: He that giveth his virgin in marriage doth well; and 
he that giveth her not, doth better.* 


THE USE OF MARRIAGE 


Finally, the use of marriage is a subject which pastors should 
so treat as to avoid any expression that may be unfit to meet the 
ears of the faithful, that may be calculated to offend the piety of 
some, or excite the laughter of others. The words of the Lord 
are chaste words; *° and the teacher of a Christian people should 
make use of the same kind of language, one that is characterized 
by singular gravity and purity of soul. Two lessons of instruc- 
tion to the faithful are, then, to be specially insisted upon. 

The first is that marriage is not to be used for purposes of lust 
or sensuality, but that its use is to be restrained within those limits 


cule (COLa vilars >: ES Sicily 
a On the dispositions for marriage see St. Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. vi. 884. 


MATRIMONY at 


which, as we have already shown, have been fixed by the Lord. It 
should be remembered that the Apostle admonishes: They that 
have wives, let them be as though they had them not,® and that 
St. Jerome says: The love which a wise man cherishes towards 
his wife is the result of judgment, not the impulse of passion; 
he governs the impetuosity of desire, and is not hurried into 
indulgence. There is nothing more shameful than that a husband 
should love his wife as an adulteress.” 

But as every blessing is to be obtained from God by holy 
prayer, the faithful are also to be taught sometimes to abstain 
from the marriage debt, in order to devote themselves to prayer. 
Let the faithful understand that (this religious continence), 
according to the proper and holy injunction of our predecessors, 
is particularly to be observed for at least three days before Com- 
munion, and oftener during the solemn fast of Lent. 

Thus will they find the blessings of marriage to be daily in- 
creased by an abundance of divine grace; and living in the pur- 
suit of piety, they will not only spend this life in peace and tran- 
quillity, but will also repose in the true and firm hope, which 
confoundeth not,* of arriving, through the divine goodness, at 
the possession of that life which is eternal.? 

eT Conn vil 20: ® Contra Iovian. lib. i, ™ Rom. v. 5. 


aQOn the use of marriage see Summa Theol. Suppl. Ixiv; St. Alphonsus, 
Theol. Mor. vi. 900-955. 


PART III 
THE DECALOGUE 


IMPORTANCE OF INSTRUCTION ON THE COMMANDMENTS 


St. Augustine in his writings remarks that the Decalogue is the 
summary and epitome of all laws:1 Although the Lord had 
spoken many things, He gave to Moses only two stone tablets, 
called “tables of testimony,” to be placed in the Ark. For if 
carefully examined and well understood, whatever else is com- 
manded by God will be found to depend on the Ten Command- 
ments which were engraved on those two tables, just as these 
Ten Commandments, in turn, are reducible to two, the love of 
God and of our neighbour, on which “depend the whole law and 
the prophets.” ? 

Since, then, the Decalogue is a summary of the whole Law, 
the pastor should give his days and nights to its consideration, 
that he may be able not only to regulate his own life by its 
precepts, but also to instruct in the law of God the people com- 
mitted to his care. The lips of the priest shall keep knowledge, 
and they shall seek the law at his mouth, because he is the angel 
of the Lord of hosts. To the priests of the New Law this in- 
junction applies in a special manner; they are nearer to God, 
and should be transformed from glory to glory, as by the Spirit 
of the Lord.* Since Christ our Lord has called them light,® it 
is their special duty to be a light to them that are in darkness, 
the instructors of the foolish, the teachers of infants;® and if a 
man be overtaken in any fault, they who are spiritual should 
instruct such a one.’ 

In the tribunal of penance the priest holds the place of a 


1 Questio cxl. super Exod. lib. ii. * Matt. xxii. go. * Mal. ii. 7. 
SDCors its Lo: 5 Matt. v.. 14. SRom«iatO-2O css Galevia iT. 


357 


358 THE COMMANDMENTS 


judge, and pronounces sentence according to the nature and 
gravity of the offence. Unless, therefore, he is desirous that 
his ignorance should prove an injury to himself and to others, 
he must bring with him to the discharge of this duty the greatest 
vigilance and the most practiced acquaintance with the interpre- 
tation of the law, in order to be able to pronounce, according to 
this divine rule, on every act and omission; and, as the Apostle 
says, to teach sound doctrine,® free from error, and heal the 
diseases of the soul, which are sins, in order that the people 
may be acceptable to God, pursuers of good works.°* 


Motives for Observing the Commandments 


In these instructions the pastor should propose to himself and 
to others motives for keeping the Commandments. 


GOD IS THE GIVER OF THE COMMANDMENTS 


Now among all the motives which induce men to obey this law 
the strongest is that God is its author. True, it is said to have 
been delivered by angels,*° but no one can doubt that its author 
is God. This is most clear not only from the words of the 
Legislator Himself, which we shall shortly explain, but also from 
innumerable other passages of Scripture that will readily occur 
to pastors. 

Who is not conscious that a law is inscribed on his heart by 
God, teaching him to distinguish good from evil, vice from virtue, 
justice from injustice? The force and import of this unwritten 
law do not conflict with that which is written. Who is there, 
then, who will dare to deny that God is the author of the written, 
as He is of the unwritten law? 

But, lest the people, aware of the abrogation of the Mosaic 
Law, may imagine that the precepts of the Decalogue are no 
longer obligatory, it should be taught that when God gave the 
Law to Moses, He did not so much establish a new code, as 
render more luminous that divine light’ which the depraved 
morals and long-continued perversity of man had at that time 

eDeLitn Were SU itasiigenes Cenk Stil, Ly 


a On the Decalogue see Summa Theol. 1a. 2x. c.; 2a. 2. exxii. I. 
b That is, the law of nature. 


IN GENERAL 359 


almost obscured. It is most certain that we are not bound to 
obey the Commandments because they were delivered by Moses, 
but because they are implanted in the hearts of all, and have 
been explained and confirmed by Christ our Lord. 

The reflection that God is the author of the law is highly 
useful, and exercises great influence in persuading (to its ob- 
servance) ; for we cannot doubt His wisdom and justice, nor 
can we escape His infinite power and might. Hence, when by 
His Prophets He commands the law to be observed, He pro- 
claims that He is the Lord God; and the Decalogue itself opens: 
I am the Lord thy God; and elsewhere (we read): Jf I am a 
master, where is my fear? ? 

That God has deigned to make clear to us His holy will on 
which depends our eternal salvation (is a consideration) which, 
besides animating the faithful to the observance of His Com- 
mandments, must call forth their gratitude. Hence Scripture, 
in more passages than one, recalling this great blessing, admon- 
ishes the people to recognize their own dignity and the bounty 
of the Lord. Thus in Deuteronomy it is said: This is your 
wisdom and understanding in the sight of nations, that hearing 
all these precepts they may say: Behold a wise and understand- 
ing people, a great nation; 1* again, in the Psalm (we read): 
He hath not done in like manner to every nation, and luis judg- 
ments he hath not made manifest to them.'* 


THE COMMANDMENTS WERE PROCLAIMED WITH GREAT SOLEMNITY 


If the pastor explain the circumstances which accompanied the 
promulgation of the Law, as recorded in Scripture, the faithful 
will easily understand with what piety and humility they should 
receive and reverence the Law received from God. 

All were commanded by God that for three days before the 
promulgation of the Law they should wash their garments and 
abstain from conjugal intercourse, in order that they might be 
more holy and better prepared to receive the Law, and that on 
the third day they should be in readiness. When they had 
reached the mountain from which the Lord was to deliver the 


Exod. xx. 2. 2 Mal. i. 6. 8% Deut. iv. 6. 4 Ps. cxlvii. 20. 


360 THE COMMANDMENTS 


Law by Moses, Moses alone was commanded to ascend the moun- 
tain. Thither came God with great majesty, filling the place 
with thunder and lightning, with fire and dense clouds, and 
began to speak to Moses, and delivered to him the Command- 
ments.7° 

In this the divine wisdom had solely for object to admonish 
us that the law of the Lord should be received with pure and 
humble minds, and that over the neglect of His commands im- 
pend the heaviest chastisements of the divine justice. 


THE OBSERVANCE OF THE COMMANDMENTS IS NOT DIFFICULT 


The pastor should also teach that the Commandments of God 
are not difficult, as these words of St. Augustine are alone suf- 
ficient to show: How, I ask, is it said to be impossible for man 
to love—to love, I say, a beneficent Creator, a most loving Father, 
and also, in the persons of his brethren, to love his own flesh? 
Yet,* “he who loveth has fulfilled the law.’’1" Hence the 
Apostle St. John expressly says that the commandments of God 
are not heavy; *® for as St. Bernard observes, nothing more just 
could be exacted from man, nothing that could confer on him a 
more exalted dignity, nothing more advantageous.1® Hence St. 
Augustine, filled with admiration of God’s infinite goodness, thus 
addresses God: What is man that Thou wouldst be loved by 
him? And if he loves Thee not, Thou threatenest him with 
heavy punishment. Is it not punishment enough that I love Thee 
not? *° 

But should anyone plead human infirmity to excuse himself 
for not loving God, it should be explained that He who demands 
our love pours into our hearts by the Holy Ghost the fervor of 
His love;** and this good Spirit our heavenly Father gives to 
those that ask him.?* With reason, therefore, did St. Augustine 
pray: Give what thou commandest, and command what thou 
pleasest.** As, then, God is ever ready to help us, especially since 


a XOC ei TOMmtt: *Serm. xlvii. de temp. 
* Rom. xiii. 8. Se OuN vee 

* Liber De Diligendo Deo, cap. 1. ™ Confess. lib. i. c. i 
* Rom. v. 5. = Luke xi. 13. 


* Confess. lib. 10, c. 29, 31 et 37; De Dono Persever. c. 20, 


IN GENERAL 261 


the death of Christ the Lord, by which the prince of this world 
was cast out, there is no reason why anyone should be disheart- 
ened by the difficulty of the undertaking. To him who loves, 
nothing is difficult. 


THE OBSERVANCE OF THE COMMANDMENTS IS NECESSARY 


Furthermore, it will contribute much to persuade (obedience 
to the law) if it is explained that such obedience is necessary, 
especially since in these our days there are not wanting those 
who, to their own serious injury, have the impious hardihood to 
assert that the observance of the law, whether easy or difficult, 
is by no means necessary to salvation.? 

This wicked and impious error the pastor should refute from 
Scripture, especially from the same Apostle by whose authority 
they attempt to defend their wickedness. What, then, are the words 
of the Apostle? Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is 
nothing, but the keeping of the commandments of God.** Again, 
inculcating the same doctrine, he says: A new creature, in Christ, 
alone avails.2> By a new creature in Christ he evidently means 
him who observes the Commandments of God; for, he who ob- 
serves the Commandments of God loves God, as our Lord Him- 
self testifies in St. John: Jf anyone love me, he will keep my 
word.® 

A man, it is true, may be justified, and from wicked may be- 
come righteous, before he has fulfilled, by external acts, each of 
the Commandments; but no one who has arrived at the use of 
reason can be justified, unless he is resolved to keep all of God’s 
Commandments. 


THE OBSERVANCE OF THE COMMANDMENTS IS ATTENDED BY MANY 
BLESSINGS 


Finally, to leave nothing unsaid that may be calculated to 
induce the faithful to an observance of the law, the pastor should 
point out how abundant and sweet are its fruits. This he will 

aT Gore vile 10: A(Geik oat, 33 oA lKelebeh Bhi, Au Ae 

a“The Decalogue,” said Luther, “has no right to accuse and terrify the 


conscience, in which Christ reigns through grace, for through Christ those 
laws have become antiquated.” 


362 THE COMMANDMENTS 


easily accomplish by referring to the eighteenth Psalm, which 
celebrates the praises of the divine law. The highest eulogy 
of the law is that it proclaims the glory and the majesty 
of God more eloquently than even the heavenly bodies, whose 
beauty and order excite the admiration of all peoples, even the 
most uncivilized, and compel them to acknowledge the glory, 
wisdom and power of the Creator and Architect of the universe. 

The law of the Lord also converts souls to God; for knowing 
the ways of God and His holy will through the medium of His 
law, we turn our steps into the ways of the Lord. 

It also gives wisdom to little ones;?" for they alone who fear 
God are truly wise. Hence, the observers of the law of God 
are filled with pure delights, with knowledge of divine mysteries, 
and are blessed with plenteous joys and rewards both in this 
life and in the life to come. 

In our observance of the law, however, we should not act so 
much for our own advantage as for the sake of God who, by 
means of the law, has revealed His will to man. If other crea- 
tures are obedient to God’s will, how much more reasonable that 
man should follow it? 


GOD'S GOODNESS INVITES US TO KEEP HIS COMMANDMENTS 


Nor should it be omitted that God has preéminently displayed 
His clemency and the riches of His goodness in this, that while 
He might have forced us to serve His glory without a reward, 
He has, notwithstanding, deigned to identify His own glory with 
our advantage, thus rendering what tends to His honor, condu- 
cive to our interests. 

This is a great and striking consideration; and the pastor, 
therefore, should teach in the concluding words of the Prophet @ 
that in keeping them there is a great reward.*® Not only are we 
promised those blessings which seem to have reference to earthly 
happiness, such, for example, as to be blessed in the city, and 
blessed in the field; *° but we are also promised a great reward 
in heaven,° good measure, pressed down, shaken together and 


HOPS setatbly 4) HES. saith 1) ® Deut. xxviii. 3. aNiattanveni2: 


4 The eulogy of the Law in Psalm xviii begins with verse 8 and ends 
with verse 12. 


IN GENERAL ne 


running over,’ which, aided by the divine mercy, we merit by 
our holy and pious actions. 


The Promulgation of the Law 


I am the Lord thy God who brought thee out of the land 
of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Thou shalt not have 
strange gods before me. Thou shalt not make to thyself a graven 
thing.*?* The Law, although delivered to the Jews by the Lord 
from the mountain, was long before written and impressed by 
nature on the heart of man, and was therefore rendered ob- 
ligatory by God for all men and all times. 


THE PEOPLE TO WHOM THE LAW WAS GIVEN 


It will be very useful, however, to explain carefully the words 
in which it was proclaimed to the Hebrews by Moses, its minister 
and interpreter, and also the history of the Israelites, which is 
so full of mysteries. 


EPITOME OF JEWISH HISTORY 


(The pastor) should first tell that from among the nations of 
the earth God chose one which descended from Abraham; that 
it was the divine will that Abraham should be a stranger in the 
land of Canaan, the possession of which He had promised him; 
and that, although for more than four hundred years he and his 
posterity were wanderers before they dwelt in the promised 
land, God never withdrew from them, throughout their wander- 
ings, His protecting care. They passed from nation to nation 
and from one kingdom to another people; He suffered no man 
to hurt them, and He even reproved kings for their sakes.** 

Before they went down into Egypt He sent before them one 
by whose prudence they and the Egyptians were rescued from 
famine. In Egypt such was His kindness towards them that 
although opposed by the power of Pharaoh who sought their 
destruction, they increased to an extraordinary degree; and when 

1 Tuke vi. 38. CN ayeoral, so.q, A SIGE (Se 10% 


a Some editions of the Catechism add here the remaining words of the 
first Commandment: “nor the likeness of anything,” etc. 


364 THE COMMANDMENTS 


they were severely harassed and cruelly treated as slaves, God 
raised up Moses as a leader to lead them out in a strong hand. 
It is especially this deliverance that the Lord refers to in the 
opening words of the Law: I am the Lord thy God who brought 
thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. 


LESSONS TO BE DRAWN FROM JEWISH HISTORY 


From all this the pastor should especially note that out of all 
the nations God chose only one whom He called His people, and 
by whom He willed to be known and worshipped; ** not that 
they were superior to other nations in justice or in numbers, 
and of this God Himself reminds the Hebrews, but rather 
because He wished, by the multiplication and aggrandizement of 
an inconsiderable and impoverished nation, to display to man- 
kind His power and goodness. 

Such having been their condition, he was closely united to them, 
and loved them,?> and Lord of heaven and earth as He was, 
He disdained not to be called their God. He desired that the 
other nations might thus be excited to emulation and that man- 
kind, seeing the happiness of the Israelites, might embrace the 
worship of the true God. In the same way St. Paul says that 
by discussing the happiness of the Gentiles and their knowledge 
of the true God, he provoked to emulation those who were his 
own flesh.°° 

The faithful should next be taught that God suffered the 
Hebrew Patriarchs to wander for so long a time, and their pos- 
terity to be oppressed and harassed by a galling servitude, in 
order to teach us that none are friends of God except those who 
are enemies of the world and pilgrims on earth, and that an 
entire detachment from the world gives us an easier access to 
the friendship of God. Further He wished that, being brought 
to His service, we should understand how much happier are 
they who serve God, than they who serve the world. Of this 
Scripture itself admonishes us: Yet they shall serve him, that 
they may know the difference between my service and the service 
of the kingdom of the earth.3* 


™ Detit. Vili 6, Jo." S Deutixii5a, geen Ome xia ss eee Paralipiaxiinc 


IN GENERAL 365 


(The pastor) should also explain that God delayed the fulfil- 
ment of His promise until after the lapse of more than four 
hundred years, in order that His people might be sustained by 
faith and hope; for, as we shall show when we come to explain 
the first Commandment, God wishes His children to depend on 
Him at all times and to repose all their confidence in His good- 
ness. 


THE TIME AND PLACE IN WHICH THE LAW WAS PROMULGATED 


Finally, the time and place, in which the people of Israel re- 
ceived this Law from God should be noted. They received it 
after they had been delivered from Egypt and had come into 
the wilderness; in order that, impressed by the memory of a 
recent benefit and awed by the dreariness of the place in which 
they journeyed, they might be the better disposed to receive the 
Law. For man becomes closely attached to those whose bounty 
he has experienced, and when he has lost all hope of assistance 
from his fellow-man, he then seeks refuge in the protection of 
God. 

From all this we learn that the more detached the faithful 
are from the allurements of the world and the pleasures of sense, 
the more disposed they are to accept heavenly doctrines. As the 
Prophet has written: Whom shall he teach knowledge, and whom 
shall he make to understand the hearing? Them that are weaned 
from the milk, that are drawn away from the breasts.*® 


*Tsa. xxviii. 9. 


THE FIRST COMMANDMENT 


“IT am the Lord thy God, who brought thee out of the land of 
Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Thou shalt not have strange 
gods before me. Thou shalt not make to thyself a graven thing, 
nor the likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or in the 
earth beneath, nor of those things that are in the waters under 
the earth. Thou shalt not adore them, nor serve them. I am the 
Lord thy God, mighty, jealous, visiting the iniquity of the fathers 
upon the children, to the third and fourth generation of them that 
hate me, and showing mercy unto thousands of them that love 
me, and keep my commandments.” * 


“TI am the Lord thy God” 


The pastor should use his best endeavors to induce the faithful 
to keep continually in view these words: I am the Lord thy God. 
From them they will learn that their Lawgiver is none other than 
their Creator, by whom they were made and are preserved, and 
that they may truly repeat: He is the Lord our God, and we are 
the people of his pasture and the sheep of his hand.2 The fre- 
quent and earnest inculcation of these words will also serve to 
induce the faithful more readily to observe the Law and avoid sin. 


“Who Brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the 
House of Bondage” 


The next words, who brought thee out of the land of Egypt, 
out of the house of bondage, seem to relate solely to the Jews 
liberated from the bondage of Egypt. But if we consider the 
meaning of the salvation of the entire human race, thosé words 
are still more applicable to Christians, who are liberated by God 
not from the bondage of Egypt, but from the slavery of sin and 


* Exod. xx. 2-6, = cmexchven7s 
366 


FIRST COMMANDMENT 367 


the powers of darkness, and are translated into the kingdom of his 
beloved Son.’ Contemplating the greatness of this favor, Jere- 
mias foretold: Behold the days come, saith the Lord, when it 
shall be said no more: The Lord liveth that brought forth the 
children of Israel out of the land of Egypt; but: The Lord liveth 
that brought the children of Israel out of the land of the north 
and out of all the lands to which I cast them out; and I will bring 
them again into their land which I gave to their fathers. Behold, 
I send many fishers, saith the Lord, and they shall fish them, etc. 
And, indeed, our most indulgent Father has gathered together, 
through His beloved Son, His children that were dispersed,® that 
being made free from sin and made the servants of justice,® we 
may serve before him in holiness and justice all our days." 

Against every temptation, therefore, the faithful should arm 
themselves with these words of the Apostle as with a shield: 
Shall we who are dead to sin live any longer therein?® We are 
no longer our own, we are His who died and rose again for us. 
He is the Lord our God who has purchased us for Himself at 
the price of His blood. Shall we then be any longer capable of 
sinning against the Lord our God, and crucifying Him again? 
Being made truly free, and with that liberty wherewith Christ has 
made us free,® let us, as we heretofore yielded our members to 
serve injustice, henceforward yield them to serve justice to sancti- 
fication.?° 


“Thou shalt not have Strange Gods before Me” ™ 


The pastor should teach that the first part of the Decalogue 
contains our duties towards God; the second part, our duties 
towards our neighbor. The reason (for this order) is that the 
services we render our neighbor are rendered for the sake of 
God; for then only do we love our neighbor as God commands 
when we love him for God’s sake. The Commandments which 
regard God are those which were inscribed on the first table of 


the Law. 


; - 4 
2iGole iiss * Jerem. xvi. 14 ff. John xi. 52. 
*Rom. vi. 18. "Luke i. 74, 75. * Rom. Vie 

* Gal? iv. 31. 7? Rom. vi. 19. Exod. xx. 3. 


368 THE COMMANDMENTS 


THE ABOVE WORDS CONTAIN A COMMAND AND A PROHIBITION 


(The pastor) should next show that the words just quoted 
contain a twofold precept, the one mandatory, the other pro- 
hibitory. When it is said: Thou shalt not have strange gods 
before me, it is equivalent to saying: Thou shalt worship me the 
true God; thou shalt not worship strange gods. 


WHAT THEY COMMAND 


The (mandatory part) contains a precept of faith, hope and char- 
ity. For, acknowledging God to be immovable, immutable, always 
the same, we rightly confess that He is faithful and entirely just. 
Hence in assenting to His oracles, we necessarily yield to Him 
all belief and obedience. Again, who can contemplate His om- 
nipotence, His clemency, His willing beneficence, and not repose 
in Him all his hopes? Finally, who can behold the riches of His 
goodness and love, which He lavishes on us, and not love Him? 
Hence the exordium and the conclusion used by God in Scripture 
when giving His commands: J, the Lord? 


WHAT THEY FORBID 


The (negative) part of this Commandment is comprised in 
these words: Thou shalt not have strange gods before me. This 
the Lawgiver subjoins, not because it is not sufficiently expressed 
in the affirmative part of the precept, which means: Thou shalt 
worship me, the only God, for if He is God, He is the only God; 
but on account of the blindness of many who of old professed to 
worship the true God and yet adored a multitude of gods. Of 
these there were many even among the Hebrews, whom Elias 
reproached with having halted between two sides, and also 
among the Samaritans, who worshipped the God of Israel and the 
gods of the nations.** > 


@3 Kings xviii. 21. *%4 Kings xvii. 33. 

aQOn the virtues of faith, hope, charity and religion see Summa Theol. 
2a. 2x. i-xlvi; Ixxxi and following; St. Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. ii.; Code 
of Canon Law, canons 2314 ff. 

b On the vices opposed to the virtue of religion see Summa Theol. 2a. 
2x. Icii-c.; Code of Canon Law, canons 2320 ff 


FIRST COMMANDMENT 369 


IMPORTANCE OF THIS COMMANDMENT 


After this it should be added that this is the first and principal 
Commandment, not only in order, but also in its nature, dignity 
and excellence. God is entitled to infinitely greater love and 
obedience from us than any lord or king. He created us, He 
governs us, He nurtured us even in the womb, brought us into 
the world, and still supplies us with all the necessaries of life and 
maintenance. 


SINS AGAINST THIS COMMANDMENT 


Against this Commandment all those sin who have not faith, 
. hope and charity. Such sinners are very numerous, for they 
include all who fall into heresy, who reject what holy mother the 
Church proposes for our belief, who give credit to dreams, 
fortune-telling, and such illusions ; those who, despairing of salva- 
tion, trust not in the goodness of God; and those who rely solely 
on wealth, or health and strength of body. But these matters are 
developed more at length in treatises on sins and vices.? 


VENERATION AND INVOCATION OF ANGELS AND SAINTS NOT FOR- 
BIDDEN BY THIS COMMANDMENT 


In explanation of this Commandment it should be accurately 
taught that the veneration and invocation of holy Angels and of 
the blessed who now enjoy the glory of heaven, and likewise the 
honor which the Catholic Church has always paid even to the 
bodies and ashes of the Saints, are not forbidden by this Com- 
mandment. If a king ordered that no one else should set himself 
up as king, or accept the honors due to the royal person, who 
would be so foolish as to infer that the sovereign was unwilling 
that suitable honor and respect should be paid to his magistrates? 
Now although Christians follow the example set by the Saints of 
the Old Law, and are said to adore the Angels, yet they do not 
give to Angels that honor which is due to God alone. 

And if we sometimes read that Angels refused to be worshipped 


a On the first Commandment see Summa Theol. 2a. 2x. cxxii. 2; St. 
Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. ii.; iit. tr. I. 


| 370 THE COMMANDMENTS 


by men,!* we are to know that they did so because the worship 
which they refused to accept was the honor due to God alone. 


IT IS LAWFUL TO HONOR AND INVOKE THE ANGELS 


The Holy Spirit who says: Honour and glory to God alone,*® 
commands us also to honor our parents and elders; and the holy 
men who adored one God only are also said in Scripture to have 
adored, that is, supplicated and venerated kings. If then kings, 
by whose agency God governs the world, are so highly honored,*® 
shall it be deemed unlawful to honor those angelic spirits whom 
God has been pleased to constitute His ministers, whose services 
He makes use of not only in the government of His Church, but 
also of the universe, by whose aid, although we see them not, we 
are every day delivered from the greatest dangers of soul and 
body? Are they not worthy of far greater honor, since their dig- 
nity so far surpasses that of kings? 

Add to this their love towards us, which, as we easily see from 
Scripture,’” prompts them to pour out their prayers for those 
countries over which they are placed, as well as for us whose 
guardians they are, and whose prayers and tears they present 
before the throne of God.t® Hence our Lord admonishes us in 
the Gospel not to offend the little ones, because their angels in 
heaven always see the face of their Father who is in heaven.*® 

Their intercession, therefore, we ought to invoke, because they 
always see the face of God, and are constituted by Him the will- 
ing advocates of our salvation. The Scriptures bear witness to 
such invocation. Jacob entreated the Angel with whom he 
wrestled to bless him;*° nay, he even compelled him, declaring 
that he would not let him go until he had blessed him. And not 
only did he invoke the blessing of the Angel whom he saw, but 
also of him whom he saw not. The angel, said he, who delivers 
me from all evils, bless these boys. 

™ Apoc. xix. 10; Apoc. xxii. 9. 

1 Timea 17st Bxodt xx. 12> levity singe: 

* Gen. xxiii. 7; 2 Kings xxiv. 20; 1 Par. xxix. 20. 

SEIDEN icy 1G) 

* Tob. xii. 12; Apoc. viii. 3. 

® Matt. xviii. Io. 


Gen. xxxii. 26. 
Gen. xIviii. 16. 


FIRST COMMANDMENT 371 


IT IS LAWFUL TO HONOR AND INVOKE THE SAINTS 


From all this we may conclude that to honor the Saints who 
have slept in the Lord, to invoke them, and to venerate their 
sacred relics and ashes, far from diminishing, tends considerably 
to increase the glory of God, in proportion as man’s hope is thus 
animated and fortified, and he himself encouraged to imitate the 
Saints. 

This is a practice which is also supported by the authority of 
the second Council of Nice,?? the Councils of Gangra,?* and of 
Trent,?* and by the testimony of the Fathers. In order, however, 
that the pastor may be the better prepared to meet the objections 
of those who deny this doctrine, he should consult particularly 
St. Jerome against Vigilantius and St. Damascene. To the teach- 
ing of these Fathers should be added as a consideration of prime 
importance that the practice was received from the Apostles, and 
has always been retained and preserved in the Church of God. 

But who can desire a stronger or more convincing proof than 
that which is supplied by the admirable praises given in Scripture 
to the Saints? For there are not wanting eulogies which God 
Himself pronounced on some of the Saints. If, then, Holy Writ 
celebrates their praises, why should not men show them singular 
honor ? *° 

A stronger claim which the Saints have to be honored and 
invoked is that they constantly pray for our salvation and obtain 
for us by their merits and influence many blessings from God. 
If there is joy in heaven over the conversion of one sinner,”* will 
not the citizens of heaven assist those who repent? When they 
are invoked, will they not obtain for us the pardon of sins, and 
the grace of God? 


OBJECTIONS ANSWERED 


Should it be said, as some say, that the patronage of the Saints 
is unnecessary, because God hears our prayers without the inter- 
vention of a mediator, this impious assertion is easily met by the 
observation of St. Augustine: There are many things which God 


BINCELO: 7 Cans cx. 4 Sess. XXv. 
* Eccl. xliv, xlv, xlvi, xlvii, xlviii, xlix; Heb. xi. Luke xv. 7, 10. 


372 THE COMMANDMENTS 


does not grant without a mediator and intercessor." This is con- 
firmed by the well-known examples of Abimelech and the friends 
of Job who were pardoned only through the prayers of Abraham 
and of Job.” 

Should it be alleged that to recur to the patronage and inter- 
cession of the Saints argues want or weakness of faith, what will 
(the objectors) answer regarding the centurion whose faith was 
highly eulogized by the Lord God Himself, despite the fact that 
he had sent to the Redeemer the ancients of the Jews, to intercede 
for his sick servant? ?° 

True, there is but one Mediator, Christ the Lord, who alone 
has reconciled us to the heavenly Father through His blood, and 
who, having obtained eternal redemption, and having entered 
once into the holies, ceases not to intercede for us.*° But it by no 
means follows that it is therefore unlawful to have recourse to 
the intercession of the Saints. If, because we have one Mediator 
Jesus Christ, it were unlawful to ask the intercession of the 
Saints, the Apostle would never have recommended himself with 
so much earnestness to the prayers of his brethren on earth.*? 
For the prayers of the living would lessen the glory and dignity 
of Christ’s Mediatorship not less than the intercession of the 
Saints in heaven. 


THE HONOR AND INVOCATION OF SAINTS IS APPROVED BY MIRACLES 


But who would not be convinced of the honor due the Saints 
and of the help they give us by the wonders wrought at their 
tombs? Diseased eyes, hands, and other members are restored 
to health; the dead are raised to life, and demons are expelled 
from the bodies of men! These are facts which St. Ambrose *? 
and St. Augustine,** most unexceptionable witnesses, declare in 
their writings, not that they heard, as many did, nor that they 
read, as did man” very reliable men, but that they saw. 

But why multiply proofs? If the clothes, the handkerchiefs,*4 
and even the very shadows of the Saints, while yet on earth, ban- 


*" Super Exod. quest. 71. Serm. ii. et iv. De S. Steph. *Gen. xx. 
” Matt. vii. 10; Luke vii. 3. ® Heb. ix, 125 yikes. 

* Rom. xv. 30; Heb. xiii. 18. “Epist. xxii. 

* De Civit. Dei, lib. xxii. c. 8. “Acts xix. 12 et v. 15. 


FIRST COMMANDMENT 373 


ished disease and restored health, who will have the hardihood to 
deny that God can still work the same wonders by the holy ashes, 
the bones and other relics of the Saints? Of this we have a proof 
in the restoration to life of the dead body which was accidentally 
let down into the grave of Eliseus, and which, on touching the 
body (of the Prophet), was instantly restored to life.3>2 


“Thou shalt not make to thyself a graven thing, nor the 
likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or in the 
earth beneath, nor of those things that are in the waters 
under the earth: thou shalt not adore them nor serve 
them” ** 


Some, supposing these words which come next in order to con- 
stitute a distinct precept, reduce the ninth and tenth Command- 
ments to one. St. Augustine, on the contrary, considering the 
last two to be distinct Commandments, makes the words just 
quoted a part of the first Commandment.** His division is much 
approved in the Church, and hence we willingly adopt it. Fur- 
thermore, a very good reason for this arrangement at once sug- 
gests itself. It was fitting that to the first Commandment should 
be added the rewards or punishments entailed by each one of the 
Commandments. 


THE ABOVE WORDS DO NOT FORBID ALL IMAGES 


Let no one think that this Commandment entirely forbids the 
arts of painting, engraving or sculpture. The Scriptures inform 
us that God Himself commanded to be made images of Cheru- 
bim,?® and also the brazen serpent.*® The interpretation, there- 
fore, at which we must arrive, is that images are prohibited only 
inasmuch as they are used as deities to receive adoration, and so 
to injure the true worship of God. 


*%4 Kings xili. 21. 

Exod. xx. 4. 

* Super Exod. quest. 71, and in Ps. XXXii.,Serm ii. 

* Exod. xxv. 18; 3 Kings vi. 23. 

*Num. xxi. 8, 9. 

a On the honor and invocation of the Angels and Saints see Summa 
Theol. 2a. 2x. ciii; Ixxxiii. 4, 11; Code of Canon Law, canons 1276 


374 THE COMMANDMENTS 


THEY FORBID IDOLS AND REPRESENTATIONS OF THE DEITY 


As far as this Commandment is concerned, it is clear that there 
are two chief ways in which God’s majesty can be seriously out- 
raged. The first way is by worshipping idols and images as God, 
or believing that they possess any divinity or virtue entitling them 
to our worship, by praying to, or reposing confidence in them, as 
the Gentiles did, who placed their hopes in idols, and whose 
idolatry the Scriptures frequently condemn. The other way is 
by attempting to form a representation of the Deity, as if He were 
visible to mortal eyes, or could be reproduced by colors or figures. 
Who, says Damascene, can represent God, invisible, as He 1s, 
incorporeal, uncircumscribed by limits, and incapable of being 
reproduced under any shape.*® This subject is treated more at 
large in the second Council of Nice. Rightly, then, did the 
Apostles say (of the Gentiles): They changed the glory of the 
incorruptible God into a likeness of birds, and of four-footed 
beasts, and of creeping things; * for they worshipped all these 
things as God, seeing that they made the images of these things to 
represent Him. Hence the Israelites, when they exclaimed before 
the image of the calf: These are thy gods, O Israel, that have 
brought thee out of the land of Egypt,*8 are denounced as 
idolaters, because they changed their glory into the likeness of a 
calf that eateth grass.*# 

When, therefore, the Lord had forbidden the worship of 
strange gods, He also forbade the making of an image of the 
Deity from brass or other materials, in order thus utterly to do 
away with idolatry. It is this that Isaias declares when he asks: 
To whom then have you likened God, or what image will you 
make for him? *® That this is the meaning of the prohibition con- 
tained in the Commandment is proved, not only from the writings 
of the holy Fathers, who, as may be seen in the seventh General 
Council,? give to it this interpretation; but is also clearly declared 
in these words of Deuteronomy, by which Moses sought to with- 
draw the people from the worship of idols: You saw not, he says, 


“De Fide Orth. lib. iv. c. 17. eAr tat: * Rom. i. 23. 
“*Exod. xxxii. 4. Sa Sucve co! “Isa. xl. 18; Acts vii. 4o. 
@ The second Council of Nice, held in 787. = oh 


FIRST COMMANDMENT 375 


any similitude in the day that the Lord spoke to you in Horeb, 
from the midst of the fire.*® These words this wisest of legis- 
lators spoke, lest through error of any sort, they should make an 


image of the Deity, and transfer to any thing created, the honor 
due to God. 


THEY DO NOT FORBID REPRESENTATIONS OF THE DIVINE PERSONS 
AND ANGELS 


To represent the Persons of the Holy Trinity by certain forms 
under which they appeared in the Old and New Testaments no 
one should deem contrary to religion or the law of God. For 
who can be so ignorant as to believe that such forms are repre- 
sentations of the Deity?—forms, as the pastor should teach, 
which only express some attribute or action ascribed to God. 
Thus when from the description of Daniel God is painted as the 
Ancient of days, seated on a throne, with the books opened 
before him, the eternity of God is represented and also the in- 
finite wisdom, by which He sees and judges all the thoughts and 
actions of men.*? 

Angels, also, are represented under human form and with 
wings to give us to understand that they are actuated by benevo- 
lent feelings towards mankind, and are always prepared to exe- 
cute the Lord’s commands; for they are all ministering spirits, 
sent to minister for them who shall receive the inheritance of 
salvation.* 

What attributes of the Holy Ghost are represented under the 
forms of a dove, and of tongues of fire, in the Gospel *° and in 
the Acts of the Apostles,®° is a matter too well known to require 
lengthy explanation. 


THEY DO NOT FORBID IMAGES OF CHRIST.AND THE SAINTS 


But to make and honor the images of Christ our Lord, of His 
holy and virginal Mother, and of the Saints, all of whom were 
clothed with human nature and appeared in human form, is not 
only not forbidden by this Commandment, but has always been 


Deut. iv. 15, 10. “Dan. vii. 9, 10. _ Viieb i. 14, a 
© Matt. iii. 16; Mark i. 10; Luke iii. 22; John 1. 32. Acts i. 3: 


376 THE COMMANDMENTS 


deemed a holy practice and a most sure indication of gratitude. 
This position is confirmed by the monuments of the Apostolic 
age, the General Councils of the Church, and the writings of so 
many among the Fathers, eminent alike for sanctity and learning, 
all of whom are of one accord upon the subject. 


USEFULNESS OF SACRED IMAGES 


-But the pastor should not content himself with showing that 
it is lawful to have images in churches, and to pay them honor 
and respect, since this respect is referred to their prototypes. 
He should also show that the uninterrupted observance of this 
practice down to the present day has been attended with great 
advantage to the faithful, as may be seen in the work of Damas- 
cene on images,®! and in the seventh General Council, the second 
of Nice. 

But as the enemy of mankind, by his wiles and deceits, seeks 
to pervert even the most holy institutions, should the faithful 
happen at all to offend in this particular, the pastor, in accordance 
with the decree of the Council of Trent,®? should use every exer- 
tion in his power to correct such an abuse, and, if necessary, 
explain the decree itself to the people. 

He will also inform the unlettered and those who may be igno- 
rant of the use of images, that they are intended to instruct in 
the history of the Old and New Testaments, and to revive from 
time to time their memory ; that thus, moved by the contemplation 
of heavenly things, we may be the more ardently inflamed to 
adore and love God Himself. He should, also, point out that the 
images of the Saints are placed in churches, not only to be 
honored, but also that they may admonish us by their examples 
to imitate their lives and virtues. 

= De Fid. Orthod, lib. iv, cap. 17. 

™ Sess. XXv. 


aQOn the veneration of images see Summa Theol. 2a. 2x. XCiV. ; Ixxxi. 
3 ad 3; 3a. xxv. 3, 4, 6; Code of Canon Law, canons 1279 ff. 


FIRST COMMANDMENT 377 


“I am the Lord thy God, mighty, jealous, visiting the iniquity 
of the fathers upon the children, to the third and fourth 
generation of them that hate me, and showing mercy 
unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my com- 
mandments.” 5° 


In this concluding clause of this Commandment two things 
occur which demand careful exposition. The first is, that while, 
on account of the enormous guilt incurred by the violation of the 
first Commandment, and the propensity of man towards its viola- 
tion, the punishment is properly indicated in this place, it is also 
attached to all the other Commandments. 

Every law enforces its observance by rewards and punish- 
ments ; and hence the frequent and numerous promises of God in 
Sacred Scripture. To omit those that we meet almost on every 
page of the Old Testament, it is written in the Gospel: If thou 
wilt enter into life, keep the commandments; ** and again: He 
that doth the will of my Father who is in heaven, he shall enter 
into the kingdom of heaven; ** and also: Every tree that doth not 
yield good fruit shall be cut down and cast into the fire; **° Who- 
soever is angry with his brother shall be guilty of the judgment, *" 
If you will not forgwe men, neither will your Father forgive you 
your offences.°® 


HOW THE SANCTION CONTAINED IN THE ABOVE WORDS SHOULD 
: BE PROPOSED 


The other observation is that this concluding part (of the 
Commandment) is to be proposed in a very different manner to 
the spiritual and to the carnal Christian. To the spiritual who 
is animated by the Spirit of God, and who yields to Him a willing 
and cheerful obedience, it is, in some sort, glad tidings and a 
strong proof of the divine goodness towards him. In it he recog- 
nizes the care of his most loving God, who, now by rewards, now 
by punishments, almost compels His creatures to adore and wor- 
ship Him. The spiritual man acknowledges the infinite goodness 
of God towards himself in vouchsafing to issue His commands to 


PABXOGs Ur 5o0 * Matt. Sebe, UZ, wt vii. fe 
Matt. iii. 10; vii. 19. Matt. v. 23. att. vi. 15. 


378 THE COMMANDMENTS 


him and to make use of his service to the glory of the divine 
name. And not only does he acknowledge the divine goodness, 
he also cherishes a strong hope that when God commands what 
He pleases, He will also give strength to fulfil what He com- 
mands. 

But to the carnal man, who is not yet freed from a servile spirit 
and who abstains from sin more through fear of punishment 
than love of virtue, (this sanction) of the divine law, which 
closes each of the Commandments, is burdensome and severe. 
Wherefore they should be encouraged by pious exhortation, and 
led by the hand, as it were, in the way of the law. The pastor, 
therefore, as often as he has occasion to explain any of the Com- 
mandments should keep this in view. 


“MIGHTY” 


But both the carnal and the spiritual should be spurred on, 
especially by two considerations which are contained in this con- 
cluding clause, and are highly calculated to enforce obedience to 
the divine law. 

The one is that God is called the strong. That appellation 
needs to be fully expounded ; because the flesh, unappalled by the 
terrors of the divine menaces, frequently indulges in the foolish 
expectation of escaping, in one way or another, God’s wrath and 
threatened punishment. But when one is deeply impressed with 
the conviction that God is the strong, he will exclaim with the 
great David: Whither shall I go from thy spirit? or whither shall 
I flee from thy face? *® 

The flesh, also, distrusting the promises of God, sometimes 
magnifies the power of the enemy to such an extent, as to believe 
itself unable to withstand his assaults; while, on the contrary, a 
firm and unshaken faith, which wavers not, but relies confidently 
on the strength and power of God, animates and confirms man. 
For it says: The Lord is my light and my salvation; whom shall 
year 7 © 

“JEALOUS” 

The second spur is the jealousy of God. Man is sometimes 
tempted to think that God takes no interest in human affairs, and 

PS. Gxxvitie 7 © Ps. xxvi. I. 


FIRST COMMANDMENT 379 


does not even care whether we observe or neglect His law. This 
error is the source of the great disorders of life. But when we 
believe that God is a jealous God, the thought easily keeps us 
within the limits of our duty. 

The jealousy attributed to God does not, however, imply dis- 
turbance of mind; it is that divine love and charity by which 
God will suffer no human creature to be unfaithful to Him with 
impunity, and which destroys all those who are disloyal to 
Him. The jealousy of God, therefore, is the most tranquil 
and impartial justice, which repudiates as an adulteress the soul 
corrupted by erroneous opinions and criminal passions. 

This jealousy of God, since it shows His boundless and incom- 
prehensible goodness towards us, we find most sweet and pleas- 
ant. Among men there is no love more ardent, no greater or more 
intimate tie, than that of those who are united by marriage. 
Hence when God frequently compares Himself to a spouse or 
husband and calls Himself a jealous God, He shows the excess of 
His love towards us. 


ZEAL IN THE SERVICE OF GOD 


The pastor, therefore, should here teach that men should be so 
warmly interested in promoting the worship and honor of God 
as to be said rather to be jealous of Him than to love Him, in 
imitation of Him who says of Himself: With zeal have I been 
zealous for the Lord God of hosts,* or rather of Christ Himself, 
who says: The geal of thy house hath eaten me up.°? 


“VISITING THE INIQUITY,” ETC. 


Concerning the threat contained in this Commandment it should 
be explained that God will not suffer sinners to go unpunished, but 
will chastise them as a father, or punish them with the rigor and 
severity of a judge. This was elsewhere explained by Moses 
when he said: Thou shalt know that the Lord thy God 1s a strong 
and faithful God, keeping his covenant and mercy to them that 
love him, and to them that keep his commandments, unto a thou- 
sand generations; and repaying forthwith them that hate him.** 


Staecnes xix, 14. © Ds. Ixviii. 10; John ii.17. Deut. vii. 9, Io. 


380 THE COMMANDMENTS 


You will not, says Josue, be able to serve the Lord; for he is a 
holy God, and mighty and jealous, and will not forgive your 
wickedness and sins. If you leave the Lord and serve strange 
gods, he will turn and will afflict you, and will destroy you.™ 

The faithful are also to be taught that the punishments here 
threatened await the third and fourth generation of the impious 
and wicked; not that the children are always chastised for the 
sins of their ancestors, but that while these and their chil- 
dren may go unpunished, their posterity shall not all escape 
the wrath and vengeance of the Almighty. This happened in the 
case of King Josias. God had spared him for his singular piety, 
and allowed him to be gathered to the tomb of his fathers in 
peace, that his eyes might not behold the evils of the times that 
were to befall Juda and Jerusalem, on account of the wickedness 
of his grandfather Manasses; yet, after his death the divine 
vengeance so overtook his posterity that even the children of 
Josias were not spared.®* 

How the words of this Commandment are not at variance with 
the statement of the Prophet: The soul that sins shall die,®* is 
clearly shown by the authority of St. Gregory, supported by the 
testimony of all the ancient Fathers. Whoever, he says, follows 
the bad example of a wicked father is also bound by his sins; but 
he who does not follow the example of his father, shall not at 
all suffer for the sins of the father. Hence it follows that a 
wicked son, who dreads not to add his own malice to the vices of 
us father, by which he knows the divine wrath to have been 
excited, pays the penalty not only of his own sins, but also of 
those of his father. It is just that he who dreads not to walk in 
the footsteps of a wicked father, in presence of a rigorous judge, 


should be compelled in the present life to expiate the crimes of 
his wicked parent.®* 


“AND SHOWING MERCY,” ETC. 


The pastor should next observe that the goodness and mercy 
of God far exceed His justice. He is angry to the third and 
fourth generation ; but He bestows His mercy on thousands. 

“ Josue xxiv. I9, 20. 


52 Paralip. xxxiv. 28; 4 Kings xxii. 19, 20; xxiii. 26. 
Ezech. xviii. 4. Moral. 15. c. 21. 


FIRST COMMANDMENT 381 


“OF THEM THAT HATE ME” 


The words of them that hate me display the grievousness of 
sin. What more wicked, what more detestable than to hate God, 
the supreme goodness and sovereign truth? This, however, is 
the crime of all sinners; for as he that hath God’s commandments 
and keepeth them, loveth God,®* so he who despises His law and 
violates His Commandments, is justly said to hate God. 


“oF THEM THAT LOVE ME” 


The concluding words: And to them that love me, point out 
the manner and motive of observing the law. Those who obey 
the law of God must needs be influenced in its observance by the 
same love and charity which they bear to God, a principle which 
should be brought to mind in the instructions on all the other 
Commandments.? 


John xiv. 21. 


aQOn the concluding words of this Commandment see Summa Theol. 
Ia. 22. xxviii. 4; Ixxxi. 1; Ixxxvii. 8; 2a. 2x. cvili. 4; 3a. Ixxxiv. 


THE SECOND COMMANDMENT 
“Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain’ * 


WHY THIS COMMANDMENT IS DISTINCT FROM THE FIRST 


The second Commandment of the divine law is necessarily 
comprised in the first, which commands us to worship God in 
piety and holiness. For he who requires that honor be paid him, 
also requires that he be spoken of with reverence, and must for- 
bid the contrary, as is clearly shown by these words of the Lord 
in Malachy: The son honoureth the father, and the servant his 
master; if then I be a father, where 1s my honour? ? 

However, on account of the importance of the obligation, God 
wished to make the law, which commands His own divine and 
most holy name to be honored, a distinct Commandment, ex- 
pressed in the clearest and simplest terms. 


IMPORTANCE OF INSTRUCTION ON THIS COMMANDMENT 


The above observation should strongly convince the pastor that 
on this point it is not enough to speak in general terms; that the 
importance of the subject is such as to require it to be dwelt 
upon at considerable length, and to be explained to the faithful 
in all its bearings with distinctness, clearness and accuracy. 

This diligence cannot be deemed superfluous, since there are 
not wanting those who are so blinded by the darkness of error as 
not to dread to blaspheme His name, whom the Angels glorify. 
Men are not deterred by the Commandment laid down from 
shamelessly and daringly outraging His divine Majesty every day, 
or rather every hour and moment of the day. Who is ignorant 
that every assertion is accompanied with an oath and teems with 
curses and imprecations? To such lengths has this impiety been 


TE olal, O'S, HA a\Y 1 ae ea 
382 


SECOND COMMANDMENT 383 


carried, that there is scarcely anyone who buys, o1 sells, or trans- 
acts business of any sort, without having recourse to swearing, and 
who, even in matters the most unimportant and trivial, does not 
profane the most holy name of God thousands of times. 

It therefore becomes more imperative on the pastor not to 
neglect, carefully and frequently, to admonish the faithful how 
grievous and detestable is this crime.@ 


Positive Part of this Commandment 


But in the exposition of this Commandment it should first be 
shown that besides a negative, it also contains a positive precept, 
commanding the performance of a duty. To each of these a 
separate explanation should be given; and for the sake of easier 
exposition what the Commandment requires should be first set 
forth, and then what it forbids. It commands us to honor the 
name of God, and to swear by it with reverence. It prohibits us 
to contemn the divine name, to take it in vain, or swear by it 
falsely, unnecessarily or rashly. 

In the part which commands us to honor the name of God, the 
command, as the pastor should show the faithful, is not directed 
to the letters or syllables of which that name is composed, or in 
any respect to the mere name; but to the meaning of a word used 
to express the Omnipotent and Eternal Majesty of the Godhead, 
Trinity in Unity. Hence we easily infer the superstition of those 
among the Jews who, while they hesitated not to write, dared 
not to pronounce the name of God, as if the divine power con- 
sisted in the four letters,> and not in the signification. 

Although this Commandment uses the singular number, Thou 
shalt not take the name of God, this is not to be understood to 
refer to any one name, but to every name by which God is gen- 
erally designated. For He is called by many names, such as the 
Lord, the Almighty, the Lord of hosts, the King of kings, the 
Strong, and by others of similar nature, which we meet in Scrip- 
ture and which are all entitled to the same and equal veneration. 

aQOn the second Commandment see Summa Theol. 2a. 2z. cxxii. 3; Ia. 
2x. c. 5; St. Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. iii. tr. 2. 

b The name Yahweh, by which God was called among the Hebrews, 


was written with only four consonants, the vowels being omitted, and is 
therefore called the tetragrammaton. 


384 THE COMMANDMENTS 


Various Ways of Honoring God’s Name 


It should next be taught how due honor is to be given to the 
name of God. Christians, whose tongues should constantly cele- 
brate the divine praises, are not to be ignorant of a matter so im- 
portant, indeed, most necessary to salvation. The name of God 
may be honored in a variety of ways; but all may be reduced to 
those that follow. 


PUBLIC PROFESSION OF FAITH 


In the first place, God’s name is honored when we publicly 
and confidently confess Him to be our Lord and our God; and 
when we acknowledge and also proclaim Christ to be the author 
of our salvation. 


RESPECT FOR THE WORD OF GOD 


(It is also honored) when we pay a religious attention to the 
word of God, which announces to us His will; make it the subject 
of our constant meditation; and strive by reading or hearing it, 
according to our respective capacities and conditions of life, to 
become acquainted with it. 


PRAISE AND THANKSGIVING 


Again, we honor and venerate the name of God, when, from a 
sense of religious duty, we celebrate His praises, and under all 
circumstances, whether prosperous or adverse, return Him un- 
bounded thanks. Thus spoke the Prophet: Bless the Lord, O my 
soul, and never forget all he hath done for thee? Among the 
Psalms of David there are many, in which, animated with singular 
piety towards God, he chants in sweetest strains the divine 
praises. There is also the example of the admirable patience of 
Job, who, when visited with the heaviest and most appalling 
calamities, never ceased, with lofty and unconquered soul, to give 
praise to God. When, therefore, we labor under affliction of 
mind or body, when oppressed by misery and misfortune, let us 


esi Clits 
aOn profession of faith see Summa Theol. 2a. 2. iii. 


SECOND COMMANDMENT 385 


instantly direct all our thoughts, and all the powers of our souls, 
to the praises of God, saying with Job: Blessed be the name of 
the Lord.*4 


PRAYER 


The name of God is not less honored when we confidently 
invoke His assistance, either to relieve us from our afflictions, or 
to give us constancy and strength to endure them with fortitude. 
This is in accordance with the Lord’s own wishes: Call upon me, 
He says, in the day of trouble: I will deliver thee, and thou shalt 
glorify me.’ We have illustrious examples of such supplications 
in many passages of Scripture, and especially in the sixteenth, 
forty-third, and one hundred and eighteenth Psalms. 


OATHS 


Finally, we honor the name of God when we solemnly call 
upon Him to witness the truth of what we assert. This mode of 
honoring God’s name differs much from those already enumer- 
ated. Those means are in their own nature so good, so desirable, 
that our days and nights could not be more happily or more 
holily spent than in such practices of piety. J will bless the Lord 
at all times, says David, his praise shall be always in my mouth.® 
On the other hand, although oaths are in themselves good, their 
frequent use is by no means praiseworthy. 

The reason of this difference is that oaths have been instituted 
only as remedies to human frailty, and a necessary means of 
establishing the truth of what we assert. As it is inexpedient to 
have recourse to medicine unless, when it becomes necessary, and 
as its frequent use is harmful; so with regard to oaths, it is not 
profitable to have recourse to them, unless there is a weighty and 
just cause; and frequent recurrence to them, far from being 
advantageous, is on the contrary highly prejudicial. Hence the 
excellent observation of St. Chrysostom: Oaths were introduced 
among men, not at the beginning of the world, but long after; 
when vice had spread far and wide over the earth; when all 


* Job i. 21. 5Ps, xlix. I5. ®°Ps. xxxiii. 2. 
aQOn praise of God see Summa Theol. 2a. 2x. xci; on gratitude see 
ibid. cvi. 


386 THE COMMANDMENTS 


things were disturbed and universal confusion reigned through- 
out; when, to complete human depravity, almost all mankind 
debased the dignity of their nature by the degrading service of 
idols. Then at length it was that the custom of oaths was intro- 
duced. For the perfidy and wickedness of men was so great that 
it was with difficulty that anyone could be induced to credit the 
assertion of another, and they began to call on God as a witness." 


MEANING OF AN OATH 


Since in explaining this part of the Commandment the chief 
object is to teach the faithful how to render an oath reverential 
and holy, it is first to be observed, that to swear, whatever the 
form of words may be, is nothing else than to call God to witness ; 
thus to say, God is my witness, and By God, mean one and the 
same thing. 

To swear by creatures, such as the holy Gospels, the cross, the 
names or relics of the Saints, and so on, in order to prove our 
statements, is also to take an oath. Of themselves, it is true, such 
objects give no weight or authority to an oath; it is God Himself 
who does this, whose divine majesty shines forth in them. Hence 
to swear by the Gospel is to swear by God Himself, whose truth 
is contained and revealed in the Gospel. (This holds equally true 
with regard to those who swear) by the Saints, who are the 
temples of God, who believed the truth of His Gospel, were 
faithful in its observance, and spread it far and wide among the 
nations and peoples. 

This is also true of oaths uttered by way of execration, such as 
that of St. Paul: J call God to witness upon my soul. By this 
form of oath one submits himself to God’s judgment, who is the 
avenger of falsehood. We do not, however, deny that some of 
these forms may be used without constituting an oath; but even 
in such cases it will be found useful to observe what has been 


said with regard to an oath, and to conform exactly to the same 
rule and standard. 


OATHS ARE AFFIRMATORY AND PROMISSORY 
Oaths are of two kinds. The first is an affirmatory oath, and 
is taken when we religiously affirm anything, past or present. Such 
"Ad. Pop. Antioch. hom. xxvi. A (Corrs 1k Me, 


SECOND COMMANDMENT 387 


was the affirmation of the Apostle in his Epistle to the Galatians: 
Behold, before God, I lie not.° The second kind, to which com- 
minations may be reduced, is called promissory. It looks to the 
future, and is taken when we promise and affirm for certain that 
such or such a thing will be done. Such was the oath of David, 
who, swearing by the Lord his God, promised to Bethsabee his 
wife that her son Solomon should be heir to his kingdom and 
successor to his throne.?° 


CONDITIONS OF A LAWFUL OATH 


Although to constitute an oath it is sufficient to call God to 
witness, yet to constitute a holy and just oath many other condi- 
tions are required, which should be carefully explained. These, 
as St. Jerome observes, are briefly enumerated in the words of 
Jeremias: Thou shalt swear: as the Lord liveth, in truth and in 
judgment, and in justice, words which briefly sum up all the 
conditions that constitute the perfection of an oath, namely, 
truth, judgment, justice. 


FIRST CONDITION: TRUTH 


Truth, then, holds the first place in an oath. What is asserted 
must be true and he who swears must believe what he swears to 
be true, being influenced not by rash judgment or mere conjec- 
ture, but by solid reasons. 

Truth is a condition not less necessary in a promissory than 
in an affrmatory oath. He who promises must be disposed to 
perform and fulfil his promise at the appointed time. As no 
conscientious man will promise to do what he considets opposed 
to the most holy Commandments and will of God; so, having” 
promised and sworn to do what is lawful, he will never fail to 
adhere to his engagement, unless, perhaps, by a change of cir- 
cumstances it should happen that, if he wished to keep faith and 
observe his promises, he must incur the displeasure and enmity 
of God. That truth is necessary to an oath David also declares 


® Gal. i. 20. OS INES 3b Gh, Soy ™ Jerem. iv. 2. 


388 THE COMMANDMENTS 


in these words: He that sweareth to his neighbour, and deceiveth 
noise @ 


SECOND CONDITION: JUDGMENT 


The second condition of an oath is judgment. An oath is not 
to be taken rashly and inconsiderately, but after deliberation and 
reflection. When about to take an oath, therefore, one should 
first consider whether he is obliged to take it, and should weigh 
well the whole case, reflecting whether it seems to call for an 
oath. Many other circumstances of time, place, etc., are also 
to be taken into consideration; and one should not be influenced 
by love or hatred, or any other passion, but by the nature and 
necessity of the case. 

Unless this careful consideration and reflection precede, an 
oath must be rash and hasty; and of this character are the 
irreligious affirmations of those, who, on the most unimportant 
and trifling occasions, swear without thought or reason from the 
influence of bad habit alone. This we see practiced daily every- 
where among buyers and sellers. The latter, to sell at the highest 
price, the former to purchase at the cheapest rate, make no 
scruple to strengthen with an oath their praise or dispraise of 
the goods on sale. 

Since, therefore, judgment and prudence are necessary, and 
since children are not able, on account of their tender years, to 
understand and judge accurately, Pope St. Cornelius decreed 
that an oath should not be administered to children before 
puberty, that is, before their fourteenth year. 


THIRD CONDITION : JUSTICE 


The last condition (of an oath) is justice, which is especially 
requisite in promissory oaths. Hence, if a person swear to do 
what is unjust or unlawful, he sins by taking the oath, and adds 
sin to sin by executing his promise. Of this the Gospel supplies an 
example. King Herod, bound by a rash oath, gave to a dancing 


SR Sexivaelt 


a David is speaking in this Psalm of what kind of men shall dwell in 
the heavenly kingdom. 


SECOND COMMANDMENT 389 


girl the head of John the Baptist as a reward for her dancing." 
Such was also the oath taken by the Jews, who, as we read in 
the Acts of the Apostles, bound themselves by oath not to eat, 
until they had killed Paul.** 


LAWFULNESS OF OATHS 


These explanations having been given, there can be no doubt 
that they who observe the above conditions and who guard their 
oaths with these qualities as with bulwarks, may swear with a 
safe conscience.’® 

This is easily established by many proofs. For the law of 
God, which is pure and holy, commands: Thou shalt fear the 
Lord thy God, and shalt serve him only, and thou shalt swear 
by his name.*® All they, writes David, shall be praised that swear 
by him.** 

The Scriptures also inform us that the most holy Apostles, 
the lights of the Church, sometimes made use of oaths, as appears 
from the Epistles of the Apostle.** 

Even the Angels sometimes swear. The angel, writes St. John 
in the Apocalypse, swore by him who lives for ever.?® 

Nay, God Himself, the Lord of Angels, swears, and, as we 
read in many passages of the Old Testament, has confirmed His 
promises with an oath. This He did to Abraham and to David.” 
Of the oath sworn by God David says: The Lord hath sworn, 
and he will not repent: thou art a priest for ever according to 
the order of Melchisedech.** 

In fact, if we consider the whole matter attentively, and 
examine the origin and purpose of an oath, it can be no difficult 
matter to explain the reasons why it is a laudable act. 

An oath has its origin in faith, by which men believe God to 
be the author of all truth, who can never deceive others nor 
be deceived, to whose eyes all things are naked and open,” who, 
in fine, superintends all human affairs with an admirable 
providence, and governs the world. Filled with this faith we 

*® Mark vi. 28. Acts vexail. 12... Feaxvill. S. * Deut. vi. 13. 


Peat 62-2 Cort, 237 Philem. 4,8; 1 Thess. tito. ”* Apoc. x. 6. 
2” Heb. vi. 17; Gen: xxii. 16; Exod. xxxiii. 1. ” Ps. cix. 4. ” Heb. iv. 13. 


390 THE COMMANDMENTS 


appeal to God as a witness of the truth, as a witness whom it 
would be wicked and impious to distrust. 

With regard to the end of an oath, its scope and intent is to 
establish the justice and innocence of man, and to terminate 
disputes and contests. This is the doctrine of the Apostle in his 
Epistle to the Hebrews.”* 


AN OBJECTION AGAINST OATHS 


Nor does this doctrine at all clash with these words of the 
Redeemer, recorded in St. Matthew: You have heard that it was 
said to them of old: “Thou shalt not foreswear thyself, but 
thou shalt perform thy oaths to the Lord”; but I say to you not 
to swear at all; neither by heaven, for it is the throne of God; 
neither by the earth, for it is his footstool; nor by Jerusalem, 
for it is the city of the great king; neither shalt thou swear by 
thy head, because thou canst not make one hair white or black. 
But let your speech be “yea, yea’; “no, no”; and that which is 
over and above these is of evil.?4 

It cannot be asserted that these words condemn oaths univer- 
sally and under all circumstances, since we have already seen 
that the Apostles and our Lord Himself made frequent use of 
them. The object of our Lord was rather to reprove the per- 
verse opinion of the Jews, who had persuaded themselves that 
the only thing to be avoided in an oath was a lie. Hence in 
matters the most trivial and unimportant they did not hesitate to 
make frequent use of oaths, and to exact them from others. This 
practice the Redeemer condemns and reprobates, and teaches that 
an oath is never to be taken unless necessity require it. For 
oaths have been instituted on account of human frailty. They 
are really the outcome of evil, being a sign either of the incon- 
stancy of him who takes them, or of the obstinacy of him who 
refuses to believe without them. However, an oath can be jus- 
tified by necessity. 

When our Lord says: Let your speech be “yea, yea’; “no, 
no,” ** He evidently forbids the habit of swearing in familiar 
conversation and on trivial matters. He therefore admonishes 


** Heb. vi. 16. * Matt.’ v. 34-37. * Matt. ‘v.'37. 


SECOND COMMANDMENT 391 


us particularly against being too ready and willing to swear; and 
this should be carefully explained and impressed on the minds 
of the faithful. That countless evils grow out of the unrestrained 
habit of swearing is proved by the evidence of Scripture, and the 
testimony of the most holy Fathers. Thus we read in Ecclesias- 
ticus: Let not thy mouth be accustomed to swearing, for in it 
there are many falls; and again: A man that sweareth much shall 
be filled with iniquity, and a scourge shall not depart from his 
house. In the works of St. Basil and St. Augustine against 
lying, much more can be found on this subject.?7 4 


Negative Part of this Commandment 


So far we have considered what this Commandment requires. 
It now remains to speak of what it prohibits; namely, to take 
the name of God in vain. It is clear that he who swears rashly 
and without deliberation commits a grave sin. That this is a most 
serious sin is declared by the words: Thou shalt not take the name 
of thy God in vain, which seem to assign the reason why this 
crime is so wicked and heinous; namely, that it derogates from 
the majesty of Him whom we profess to recognize as our Lord 
and our God. This Commandment, therefore, forbids to swear 
falsely, because he who does not shrink from so great a crime as 
to appeal to God to witness falsehood, offers a grievous injury 
to God, charging Him either with ignorance, as though the truth 
of any matter could be unknown to Him, or with malice and 
dishonesty, as though God could bear testimony to falsehood. 


VARIOUS WAYS IN WHICH GOD’S NAME IS DISHONORED: FALSE 
OATHS 


Among false swearers are to be numbered not only those who 
affirm as true what they know to be false, but also those who 
swear to what is really true, believing it to be false. For since 
the essence of a lie consists in speaking contrary to one’s belief 


Eccl. xxiii. 9-12. : ; 
* Hom. in Ps. xiv. n. 5; Aug., Lib. De Mendacio, c. 14. 


aQOn oaths see Summa Theol. 2a. 2. Ixxxix. xc.; Code of Canon Law, 
canons 1316 ff. 


392 THE COMMANDMENTS 


and conviction, these persons are evidently guilty of a lie, and of 
perjury. 

On the same principle, he who swears to that which he thinks 
to be true, but which is really false, also incurs the guilt of per- 
jury, unless he has used proper care and diligence to arrive at a 
full knowledge of the matter. Although he swears according to 
his belief, he nevertheless sins against this Commandment. 

Again, he who binds himself by oath to the performance of 
anything, not intending to fulfil his promise, or, having had the 
intention, neglect its performance, is guilty of the same sin. This 
equally applies to those who, having bound themselves to God 
by vow, neglect its fulfilment.? 


UNJUST OATHS 


This Commandment is also violated, if justice, which is one 
of the three conditions of an oath, be wanting. Hence he who 
swears to commit a mortal sin, for example, to perpetrate murder, 
violates this Commandment, even though he speak seriously and 
from his heart, and his oath possess what we before pointed out 
as the first condition of every oath, that is, truth. 

To these are to be added oaths sworn through a sort of con- 
tempt, such as an oath not to observe the Evangelical counsels, 
such as celibacy and poverty. None, it is true, are obliged to 
embrace these divine counsels, but by swearing not to observe 
them, one contemns and despises them. 


RASH OATHS 


This Commandment is also sinned against, and judgment? is 
violated when one swears to what is true and what he believes 
to be true if his motives are light conjectures and far-fetched 
reasons. For, notwithstanding its truth, such an oath is not 
unmixed with a sort of falsehood, seeing that he who swears with 
such indifference exposes himself to extreme danger of perjury. 


aOn vows see Summa Theol. 2a. 2. Ixxxviii.; Code of Canon Law, 
canons 1307 ff. 


b Judgment, as was said above, is the second condition of an oath. 


SECOND COMMANDMENT 393 


OATHS BY FALSE GODS 


To swear by false gods is likewise to swear falsely. What 
more opposed to truth than to appeal to lying and false deities 
as to the true God? @ 


IRREVERENT SPEECH 


Scripture when it prohibits perjury, says: Thou shalt not pro- 
fane the name of thy God,®* thereby forbidding all irreverence 
towards all other things to which, in accordance with this Com- 
mandment, reverence is due. Of this nature is the Word of God, 
the majesty of which has been revered not only by the pious, 
but also sometimes by the impious, as is narrated in Judges of 
Eglon, King of the Moabites.?® 

But he who, to support heresy and the teaching of the wicked, 
distorts the Sacred Scriptures from their genuine and true mean- 
ing, is guilty of the greatest injury to the Word of God; and 
against this crime we are warned by these words of the Prince 
of the Apostles: There are certain things hard to be understood, 
which the unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also the other 
Scriptures, to their own destruction.*© 

It is also a foul and shameful contamination of the Scripture, 
that wicked men pervert the words and sentences which it con- 
tains, and which should be honored with all reverence, turning 
them to profane purposes, such as scurrility, fable, vanity, flat- 
tery, detraction, divination, satire and the like—crimes which the 
Council of Trent commands to be severely punished.** 


NEGLECT OF PRAYER 


In the next place, as they honor God who, in their affliction 
implore His help, so they, who do not invoke His aid, deny Him 
due honor; and these David rebukes when he says: They have 
not called upon the Lord, they trembled for fear where there 
was no fear.*? 

2 Wev.ixix 12, © Judges iii. 20. ® 2 Pet. iii. 16. 


5 Sess. iv. at the end. Seks Sabtey GS ubine, Asp 
a On perjury see Summa Theol. 2a. 2x. xcviii. 


394 THE COMMANDMENTS 


BLASPHEMY 


Still more enormous is the guilt of those who, with impure and 
defiled lips, dare to curse or blaspheme the holy name of God— 
that name which is to be blessed and praised above measure by 
all creatures, or even the names of the Saints who reign with 
Him in glory.2. So atrocious and horrible is this crime that the 
Sacred Scriptures, sometimes when speaking of blasphemy use 
the word blessing.** » 


Sanction of this Commandment 


As, however, the dread of punishment has often a powerful 
effect in checking the tendency to sin, the pastor, in order the 
more effectively to move the minds of men and the more easily 
to induce to an observance of this Commandment, should dili- 
gently explain the remaining words, which are, as it were, its ap- 
pendix: For the Lord will not hold him guiltless that shall take 
the name of the Lord his God in vain.** 

In the first place (the pastor) should teach that with very good 
reason has God joined threats to this Commandment. From this 
is understood both the grievousness of sin and the goodness of 
God toward us, since far from rejoicing in man’s destruction, He 
deters us by these salutary threats from incurring His anger, 
doubtless in order that we may experience His kindness rather 
than His wrath. The pastor should urge and insist on this 
consideration with greatest earnestness. in order that the faithful 
may be made sensible of the grievousness of the crime, may detest 
it still more, and may employ increased care and caution to avoid 
its commission. 

He should also observe how prone men are to this sin, since 
it was not sufficient to give the command, but also necessary to 
accompany it with threats. The advantages to be derived from 
this thought are indeed incredible ; for as nothing is more injurious 

“3 Kings?<xl AS JOb a. 42> cule 

el sdoeloyal, sie, 97, 


a On blasphemy see Summa Theol. 2a. 2. xiii. xiv. 

b The expression to bless here is a euphemism meaning to bid 
farewell to, to neglect, to curse. Hence the Hebrew barak of Job 
i. II is translated by the Septuagint kaka 'evevdnoay, 


SECOND COMMANDMENT 395 


than a listless security, so the knowledge of our own weakness 
is most profitable. 

He should next show that God has appointed no particular 
punishment. The threat is general; it declares that whoever is 
guilty of this crime shall not escape unpunished. The various 
chastisements, therefore, with which we are every day visited, 
should warn us against this sin. It is easy to conjecture that 
men are afflicted with heavy calamities because they violate this 
Commandment; and if these things are called to their attention, 
it is likely that they will be more careful for the future. 

Deterred, therefore, by a holy dread, the faithful should use 
every exertion to avoid this sin. If for every idle word that men 
shall speak, they shall render an account on the day of judg- 
ment,®> what shall we say of those heinous crimes which involve 
great contempt of the divine name? 


Matt. = xlise 20: 


THE THIRD COMMANDMENT 


“Remember that thou keep holy the sabbath day, Six days shalt 
thou labour, and do all thy works; but on the seventh day is the 
sabbath of the Lord thy God; thou shalt do no work on it, neither 
thou nor thy son, nor thy daughter, nor thy man-servant, nor thy 
maid-servant, nor thy beast, nor the stranger that is within thy 
gates. For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, and the 
sea, and all things that are in them, and rested on the seventh 
day; wherefore the Lord blessed the seventh day and sanctified 
Ee 

REASONS FOR THIS COMMANDMENT 


This Commandment of the Law rightly and in due order pre- 
scribes the external worship which we owe to God; for it is, 
as it were, a consequence of the preceding Commandment. For if 
we sincerely and devoutly worship God, guided »y the faith and 
hope we have in Him, we cannot but honor Him with external 
worship and thanksgiving. Now since we cannot easily discharge 
these duties while occupied in worldly affairs, a certain fixed time 
has been set aside so that it may be conveniently performed. 


IMPORTANCE OF INSTRUCTION ON THIS COMMANDMENT 


The observance of this Commandment is attended with won- 
drous fruit and advantage. Hence it is of the highest importance 
for the pastor to use the utmost diligence in its exposition.2 The 
word Remember, with which the Commandment commences, 
must animate him to zeal in this matter; for if the faithful are 
bound to remember this Commandment, it becomes the duty of 
the pastor to recall it frequently to their minds in exhortation and 
instruction. 

SEXO. ex xecslly 


4QOn the third Commandment see Summa Theol. 2a. 2x. cxxii. 4: St. 
Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. iii. tr. 3. c. 1; Code of Canon Law, canons ae ff. 


396 


THIRD COMMANDMENT 397 


The importance of its observance for the faithful may be 
inferred from the consideration that those who carefully comply 
with it are more easily induced to keep all the other Command- 
ments. For among the other works which are necessary on holy- 
days, the faithful are bound to assemble in the church to hear the 
Word of God. When they have thus learned the divine justifica- 
tions, they will be disposed to observe, with their whole heart, the 
law of the Lord. Hence the sanctification and observance of 
the Sabbath is very often commanded in Scripture, as may be 
seen in Exodus,’ Leviticus,? Deuteronomy,‘ and in the prophecies 
of Isaias,° Jeremias,* and Ezechiel,’ all of which contain this pre- 
cept on the observance of the Sabbath. 

Rulers and magistrates should be admonished and exhorted to 
lend the sanction and support of their authority to the pastors 
of the Church, particularly in upholding and extending the wor- 
ship of God, and in commanding obedience to the injunctions of 
the priests. 


HOW THE THIRD DIFFERS FROM THE OTHER COMMANDMENTS 


With regard to the exposition of this Commandment, the faith- 
ful are carefully to be taught how it agrees with, and how it dif- 
fers from the others, in order that they may understand why we 
observe and keep holy not Saturday but Sunday. 

The point of difference is evident. The other Commandments 
of the Decalogue are precepts of the natural law, obligatory at all 
times and unalterable.2 Hence, after the abrogation of the Law 
of Moses, all the Commandments contained in the two tables are 
observed by Christians, not indeed because their observance is 
commanded by Moses, but because they are in conformity with 
nature which dictates obedience to them. 

This Commandment about the observance of the Sabbath, on 
the other hand, considered as to the time appointed for its fulfil- 
ment, is not fixed and unalterable, but susceptible of change, and 
belongs not to the moral, but the ceremonial Iaw. Neither is it a 
principle of the natural law; we are not instructed by nature to 


2Exod. xvi. 20, 31. * Lev. xvi. WO), 2 0s * Deut. v. 12. 
SIsq, vi. 58, 66. “Jerem: xvii. 21. “‘Ezech. xx. 22, 23, 46. 


aOn the natural law see Summa Theol. ta. 2. xciii. ff. 


398 THE COMMANDMENTS 


give external worship to God on that day, rather than on any 
other. And in fact the Sabbath was kept holy only from the time 
of the liberation of the people of Israel from the bondage of 
Pharaoh. The observance of the Sabbath was to be abrogated 
at the same time as the other Hebrew rites and ceremonies, that 
is, at the death of Christ. Having been, as it were, images which 
foreshadowed the light and the truth, these ceremonies were to 
disappear at the coming of that light and truth, which is Jesus 
Christ. Hence St. Paul, in his Epistle to the Galatians, when 
reproving the observers of the Mosaic rites, says: You observe 
days and months and times and years; I am afraid of you lest 
perhaps I have laboured in vain amongst you.. And he writes to 
the same effect to the Colossians.® 

So much regarding the difference (between this and the other 
Commandments). 


HOW THE THIRD IS LIKE THE OTHER COMMANDMENTS 


This Commandment is like the others, not in so far as it is 
a precept of the ceremonial law, but only as it is a natural and 
moral precept. The worship of God and the practice of religion, 
which it comprises, have the natural law for their basis. Nature 
prompts us to give some time to the worship of God. This is 
demonstrated by the fact that we find among all nations public 
festivals consecrated to the solemnities of religion and divine 
worship. 

As nature requires some time to be given to necessary functions 
of the body, to sleep, repose and the like, so she also requires that 
some time be devoted to the mind, to refresh itself by the con- 
templation of God. Hence, since some time should be devoted to 
the worship of the Deity and to the practice of religion, this 
(Commandment) doubtless forms part of the moral law. 


THE JEWISH SABBATH CHANGED TO SUNDAY BY THE APOSTLES 


The Apostles therefore resolved to consecrate the first day of 
the week to the divine worship, and called it the Lord’s day. 


SGalws ives TO: 7 ©olaiiaero! ae 
4 On the moral and ceremonial law see Summa Theol. 1a, 22. ¥cixOfh 


THIRD COMMANDMENT» 399 


St. John in the Apocalypse makes mention of the Lora’s day ; 1° 
and the Apostle commands collections to be made on the first day 
of the week," that is, according to the interpretation of St. 
Chrysostom, on the Lord’s day. From all this we learn that even 
then the Lord’s day was kept holy in the Church. 


FOUR PARTS OF THIS COMMANDMENT 


In order that the faithful may know what they are to do and 
what to avoid on the Lord’s day, it will not be foreign to his. 
purpose, if the pastor, dividing the Commandment into its four 
natural parts, explain each word of it carefully. 


First Part of this Commandment 


In the first place, then, he should explain generally the mean- 
ing of these words: Remember that thou keep holy the sabbath 
day. 


“REMEMBER” 


The word remember is appropriately made use of at the begin- 
ning of the Commandment to signify that the sanctification of 
that particular day belonged to the ceremonial law. Of this it 
would seem to have been necessary to remind the people; for, 
although the law of nature commands us to devote a certain 
portion of time to the external worship to God, it fixes no par- 
ticular day for the performance of this duty. 

They are also to be taught, that from these words we may 
learn how we should employ our time during the week; that we 
are to keep constantly in view the Lord’s day, on which we are, 
as it were, to render an account to God for our occupations and 
conduct; and that therefore our works should be such as not to 
be unacceptable in the sight of God, or, as it is written, be to us 
an occasion of grief, and a scruple of heart.” 

Finally, we are taught, and the instruction demands our serious 
attention, that there will not be wanting occasions which may lead 
to a forgetfulness of this Commandment, such as the evil example 
of others who neglect its observance, and an inordinate love of 


10 Apoc. i. I0. ey Cor pxvia 2: 21 Kings xxv. 3I. 


400 THE COMMANDMENTS 


amusements and sports, which frequently withdraw from the holy 
and religious observance of the Lord’s day.* 


“SABBATH” 


We now come to the meaning of the word sabbath. Sabbath 
is a Hebrew word which signifies cessation. To keep the Sabbath, 
therefore, means to cease from labor and to rest. In this sense 
the seventh day was called the Sabbath, because God, having 
finished the creation of the world, rested on that day from all 
the work which He had done.*#? Thus it is called by the Lord in 
Exodus. 

Later on, not only the seventh day, but, in honor of that day, 
the entire week was called by the same name; and in this meaning 
of the word, the Pharisee says in St. Luke: J fast twice in a 
sabbath.* So much will suffice with regard to the signification of 
the word sabbath. 


“KEEP HOLY” 


In the Scriptures keeping holy the Sabbath means a cessation 
from bodily labor and from business, as is clear from the follow- 
ing words of the Commandment: Thou shalt do no work on it. 
But this is not all that it means; otherwise it would have been 
sufficient to say in Deuteronomy, Observe the day of the sab- 
bath; 1° but it is added, and sanctify it; and these additional words 
prove that the Sabbath is a day sacred to religion, set apart for 
works of piety and devotion. 

We sanctify the Sabbath fully and perfectly, therefore, when 
we offer to God works of piety and religion. This is evidently 
the Sabbath, which Isaias calls delightful; 1° for festivals are, as it 
were, the delight of God and of pious men. And if to this 
religious and holy observance of the Sabbath we add works of 
mercy, the rewards promised us in the same chapter are numerous 
and most important. 


The true and proper meaning, therefore, of this Command- 


7 Gen. ii. 3; Exod. xx. 21; Deut. v.12. “Luke xviii. 1. 
Deuteve 12: * Isa. lviii. 13. 


aSee Summa Theol. 1a. 2x. c. 7. ad 5. 


THIRD COMMANDMENT 401 


ment tends to this, that we take special care to set apart some 
fixed time, when, disengaged from bodily labor and worldly 
affairs, we may devote our whole being, soul and body, to the 
religious veneration of God. 


Second Part of this Commandment 


The second part of the precept declares that the seventh day 
was consecrated by God to His worship; for it is written: Sir 
days shalt thou labour, and do all thy works; but on the seventh 
day is the sabbath of the Lord thy God. From these words we 
learn that the Sabbath is consecrated to the Lord, that we are 
required on that day to render Him the duties of religion, and to 
know that the seventh day is a sign of the Lord’s rest. 


“THE SEVENTH DAY IS THE SABBATH OF THE LORD THY GOD” 


This particular day was fixed for the worship of God, because 
it would not have been well to leave to a rude people the choice 
of a time of worship, lest, perhaps, they might have imitated the 
festivals of the Egyptians. 

The last day of the week was, therefore, chosen for the wor- 
ship of God, and in this there is much that is symbolic. Hence in 
Exodus,1” and in Ezechiel 1 the Lord calls it a sign: See that you 
keep my sabbath because it is a sign between me and you in your 
generation, that you may know that I am the Lord who sanctify 
you.7® 

It was a sign that man should dedicate and sanctify himself 
to God, since even the very day is devoted to Him. For the holi- 
ness of the day consists in this, that on it men are bound in a 
special manner to practice holiness and religion. 

It was also a sign, and, as it were, a memorial of the stu- 
pendous work of the creation. Furthermore, to the Jews it was 
a traditional sign, reminding them that they had been delivered 
by the help of God from the galling yoke of Egyptian bondage. 
This the Lord Himself declares in these words: Remember that 
thou also didst serve in Egypt, and the Lord thy God brought thee 
out from thence with a strong hand and a stretched out arm. 


ME xod. xx xi. 13. * Ezech. xx. 12. * Deut. v. 15. 


402 THE COMMANDMENTS 


Therefore hath he commanded thee that thou shouldst observe 
the sabbath day.*° 

It is also a sign of a spiritual and celestial sabbath. The 
spiritual sabbath consists in a holy and mystical rest, wherein the 
old man being buried with Christ, is renewed to life and care- 
fully applies himself to act in accordance with the spirit of Chris- 
tian piety. For those who were once darkness but are now light in 
the Lord, should walk as children of the light, in all goodness and 
justice and truth, having no fellowship with the unfruitful works 
of darkness." 

The celestial sabbath, as St. Cyril observes on these words of 
the Apostle, There remaineth therefore a day of rest for the 
people of God,?* is that life in which, living with Christ, we shall 
enjoy all good, when sin shall be eradicated, according to the 
words: No lion shall be there, nor shall any mischievous beast 
go up by it, nor be found there; but a path shall be there, 
and it shall be called the holy way; ?* for in the vision of God 
the souls of the Saints obtain every good. The pastor there- 
fore should exhort and animate the faithful in the words: Let 
us hasten therefore to enter into that rest.*4 


OTHER FESTIVALS OBSERVED BY THE JEWS 


Besides the seventh day, the Jews observed other festivals and 
holydays, instituted by the divine law to awaken the recollection 
of the principal favors (conferred on them by the Almighty). 


THE SABBATH, WHY CHANGED TO SUNDAY 


But the Church of God has thought it well to transfer the cele- 
bration and observance of the Sabbath to Sunday. 

For, as on that day light first shone on the world, so by the 
Resurrection of our Redeemer on the same day, by whom was 
thrown open to us the gate to eternal life, we were called out of 
darkness into light; and hence the Apostles would have it called 
the Lord’s day. 

We also learn from the Sacred Scriptures that the first day 


sa Detiter ventas 2 Eph, v. 8 Se 
8 Tsa. xxxv. St *“ Heb. iv. 11. eb. iv. 9. 


THIRD COMMANDMENT 403 


of the week was held sacred because on that day the work of 
creation commenced, and on that day the Holy Ghost was given 
to the Apostles. 


OTHER FESTIVALS OBSERVED BY THE CHURCH 


From the very infancy of the Church and in the following 
centuries other days were also appointed by the Apostles and 
the holy Fathers, in order to commemorate the benefits bestowed 
by God. Among these days to be kept sacred the most solemn 
are those which were instituted to honor the mysteries of our 
redemption. In the next place are the days which are dedicated 
to the most Blessed Virgin Mother, to the Apostles, Martyrs and 
other Saints who reign with Christ. In the celebration of their 
victories the divine power and goodness are praised, due honor 
is paid to their memories, and the faithful are encouraged to 
imitate them. 


“STx DAYS SHALT THOU LABOUR AND DO ALL THY WORK” 


And as the observance of the precept is very strongly assisted 
by these words: Six days shalt thou labour, but on the seventh 
day is the sabbath of God, the pastor should therefore carefully 
explain them to the people. For from these words it can be 
gathered that the faithful are to be exhorted not to spend their 
lives in indolence and sloth, but that each one, mindful of the 
words of the Apostle, should do his own business, and work with 
his own hands, as he had commanded them.”® 

These words also enjoin as a duty commanded by God that 
in six days we do all our works, lest we defer to a festival what 
should have been done during the other days of the week, thereby 
distracting the attention from the things of God. 


Third Part of this Commandment 


The third part of the Commandment comes next to be ex- 
plained. It points out, to a certain extent, the manner in which 
we are to keep holy the Sabbath day, and explains particularly 
what we are forbidden to do on that day. 


2 Tar ESS. 1Ve Ele 


404. THE COMMANDMENTS 


WORKS FORBIDDEN 


Thou shalt do no work on it, says the Lord, thou, nor thy son, 
nor thy daughter, nor thy man-servant, nor thy maid-servant, nor 
thy beast, nor the stranger that is within thy gates. 

These words teach us, in the first place, to avoid whatever may 
interfere with the worship of God. Hence it is not difficult to 
perceive that all servile works are forbidden, not because they are 
improper or evil in themselves, but because they withdraw the 
attention from the worship of God, which is the great end of the 
Commandment. 

The faithful should be still more careful to avoid sin, which not 
only withdraws the mind from the contemplation of divine things, 
but entirely alienates us from the love of God. 


WORKS PERMITTED 


But whatever regards the celebration of divine worship, such 
as the decoration of the altar or church on occasion of some festi- 
val, and the like, although servile works, are not prohibited; and 
hence our Lord says: The priests in the temple break the sabbath, 
and are without blame.*® 

Neither are we to suppose that this Commandment forbids 
attention to those things on a feast day, which, if neglected, will 
be lost; for this is expressly permitted by the sacred canons. 

There are many other things which our Lord in the Gospel 


declares lawful on festivals and which may be seen by the pastor 
in St. Matthew and St. John. 


WHY ANIMALS ARE NOT TO BE EMPLOYED ON THE SABBATH 


To omit nothing that may interfere with the sanctification of 
the Sabbath, the Commandment mentions beasts of burden, 
because their use will prevent its due observance. If beasts be 
employed on the Sabbath, human labor also becomes necessary to 
direct them; for they do not labor alone, but assist the labors of 
man. Now it is not lawful for man to work on that day. Hence 
it is not lawful for the animals to work which man uses. 


saMatte xticess 


THIRD COMMANDMENT 405 


But the Commandment has also another purpose. For if God 
commands the exemption of cattle from labor on the Sabbath, 
still more imperative is the obligation to avoid all acts of in- 
humanity towards servants, or others whose labor and industry 
we employ. 


WORKS COMMANDED OR RECOMMENDED 


The pastor should also not omit carefully to teach what works 
and actions Christians should perform on festival days. These 
are: to go to church, and there, with heartfelt piety and devotion, 
to assist at the celebration of the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass; 
and to approach frequently the Sacraments of the Church, insti- 
tuted for our salvation in order to obtain a remedy for the 
wounds of the soul. 

Nothing can be more seasonable or salutary for Christians than 
frequent recourse to confession; and to this the pastor will be 
enabled to exhort the faithful by using the instructions and proofs 
which have been explained in their own place on the Sacrament 
of Penance. 

But not only should he urge his people to have recourse to that 
Sacrament, he should also zealously exhort them again and again 
to approach frequently the Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist. 

The faithful should also listen with attention and reverence to 
sermons. Nothing is more intolerable, nothing more unworthy 
than to despise the words of Christ, or hear them with indiffer- 
ence. 

Likewise the faithful should give themselves to frequent prayer 
and the praises of God; and an object of their special attention 
should be to learn those things which pertain to a Christian life, 
and to practice with care the duties of piety, such as giving alms 
to the poor and needy, visiting the sick, and administering con- 
solation to the sorrowful and afflicted. Religion clean and un- 
defiled before God and the Father is this, says St. James, to visit 
the fatherless and widows in their tribulation.”* + 

James i. 27. 

a This was the practice of the early Christians, as we learn from Justin, 


Apol. 2., and Tertullian, in Apol., in Lib. ad Martyres, and in Lib. ii. ad 
Uxorem. 


406 THE COMMANDMENTS 


From what has been said it is easy to perceive how this Com- 
mandment may be violated.* 


Motives for the Observance of this Commandment 


It is also a duty of the pastor to have ready at hand certain 
main arguments by which he may especially persuade the people 
to observe this Commandment with all zeal and the greatest 
exactitude. 


REASONABLENESS OF THIS DUTY 


To the attainment of this end it will materially conduce, if the 
people understand and clearly see how just and reasonable it is 
to devote certain days exclusively to the worship of God in order 
to acknowledge, adore, and venerate our Lord from whom we 
have received such innumerable and inestimable blessings. 

Had He commanded us to offer Him every day the tribute of 
religious worship, would it not be our duty, in return for His 
inestimable and infinite benefits towards us, to endeavor to obey 
the command with promptitude and alacrity? But now that the 
days consecrated to His worship are but few, there is no excuse 


for neglecting or reluctantly performing this duty, which more- 
over obliges under grave sin. 


THE OBSERVANCE OF THIS COMMANDMENT BRINGS MANY BLESSINGS 


The pastor should next point out the excellence of this precept. 
Those who are faithful in its observance are admitted, as it were, 
into the divine presence to speak freely with God; for in prayer 
we contemplate the divine majesty, and commune with Him; in 
hearing religious instruction, we hear the voice of God, which 
reaches us through the agency of those who devoutly preach on 
divine things; and at the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass, we adore 
Christ the Lord, present on our altars. Such are the blessings 


which they preéminently enjoy who faithfully observe this Com- 
mandment. 


4 On works done on the Sabbath see Summa Theol. 2a. 2. cxxii. 4. ad 3) 


THIRD COMMANDMENT 407 


NEGLECT OF THIS COMMANDMENT A GREAT CRIME 


But those who altogether neglect its fulfilment resist God and 
His Church; they heed not God’s command, and are enemies of 
Him and His holy laws, of which the easiness of the command 
is itself a proof. We should, it is true, be prepared to undergo 
the severest labor for the sake of God; but in this Commandment 
He imposes on us no labor; He only commands us to rest and 
disengage ourselves from worldly cares on those days which are 
to be kept holy. To refuse obedience to this Commandment is, 
therefore, a proof of extreme boldness ; and the punishments with 
which its infraction has been visited by God, as we learn from the 
Book of Numbers,”® should be a warning to us. 


In order, therefore, to avoid offending God in this way, we 
should frequently ponder this word: Remember, and should 
place before our minds the important advantages and blessings 
which, as we have already seen, flow from the religious observ- 
ance of holydays, and also numerous other considerations of the 
same tendency, which the good and zealous pastor should develop 
at considerable length to his people as circumstances may require, 


= Nims x<vs35: 


THE FOURTH COMMANDMENT 


“Honour thy father and thy mother, that thou mayest be long- 
lived upon the land which the Lord thy God will give thee.” * 


RELATIVE IMPORTANCE OF THE PRECEDING AND THE FOLLOWING 
COMMANDMENTS 


The preceding Commandments are supreme both in dignity and 
in importance ; but those which follow rank next in order because 
of their necessity. For the first three tend directly to God; while 
the object of the others is the charity we owe to our neighbor, 
although even these are ultimately referred to God, since we love 
our neighbor on account of God, our last end. Hence Christ 
our Lord has declared that the two Commandments which incul- 
cate the love of God and of our neighbor are like unto each 
other.? 


IMPORTANCE OF INSTRUCTION ON THE FOURTH COMMANDMENT 


The advantages arising from the present subject can scarcely 
be expressed in words; for not only does it bring with it its 
own fruit, and that in the richest abundance and of superior 
excellence, but it also affords a test of our obedience to and 
observance of the first Commandment. He that loveth not his 
brother whom he seeth, says St. John, how can he love God whom 
he seeth not?*® In like manner, if we do not honor and reverence 
our parents whom we ought to love next to God and whom we 
continually see, how can we honor or reverence God, the supreme 
and best of parents, whom we see not? Hence we can easily 
perceive the similarity between these two Commandments. 

The application of this Commandment is of very great extent. 
Besides our natural parents, there are many others whose power, 


‘Exod. xx. 12. * Matt. xii. 39; Mark xii. 31." *1 John iy. 20. 
408 


FOURTH COMMANDMENT 409 


rank, usefulness, exalted functions or office, entitle them to 
parental honor. 

Furthermore (this Commandment) lightens the labor of parents 
and superiors ; for their chief care is that those under them should 
live according to virtue and the divine Law. Now the per- 
formance of this duty will be considerably facilitated, if it be 
known by all that highest honor to parents is an obligation, sanc- 
tioned and commanded by God.@ 


THE TWO TABLES OF THE LAW 


To impress the mind with this truth it will be found useful 
to distinguish the Commandments of the first, from those of the 
second table. This distinction, therefore, the pastor should first 
explain. : 

Let him begin by showing that the divine precepts of the Deca- 
logue were written on two tables, one of which, in the opinion of 
the holy Fathers, contained the three preceding, while the rest 
were given on the second table. 

This order of the Commandments is especially appropriate, 
since the very collocation points out to us their difference in 
nature. For whatever is commanded or prohibited in Scripture 
by the divine law springs from one of two principles, the love 
of God or of our neighbor: one or the other of these is the basis 
of every duty required of us. The three preceding Command- 
ments teach us the love which we owe to God; and the other 
seven, the duties which we owe to- our neighbor and to public 
society. The arrangement, therefore, which assigns some of the 
Commandments to the first and others to the second table is not 
without good reason. 

In the first three Commandments, which have been explained, 
God, the supreme good, is, as it were, the subject matter; in the 
others, it is the good of our neighbor. The former require the 
highest love, the latter the love next to the highest. The former 
have to do with our last end, the latter with those things that 
lead us to our end. . 


aOn the fourth Commandment see Summa Theol. 2a. 2%. cxxii. 5; St. 
Alphonsus, Theol, Mor. iii. tr. 3. c. 2. 


410 THE COMMANDMENTS 


Again, the love of God terminates in God Himself, for God 
is to be loved above all things for His own sake; but the love 
of our neighbor originates in, and is to be regulated by, the love 
of God. If we love our parents, obey our masters, respect our 
superiors, our ruling principle in doing so should be that God is 
their Creator, and wishes to give preéminence to those by whose 
cooperation He governs and protects other men; and as He 
requires that we yield a dutiful respect to such persons, we should 
do so, because He deems them worthy of this honor. If, then, 
we honor our parents, the tribute is paid to God rather than to 
man. Accordingly we read in St. Matthew concerning duty to 
superiors: He that receiveth you, receiveth me; * and the Apostle 
in his Epistle to the Ephesians, giving instruction to servants, 
says: Servants, be obedient to them that are your lords according 
to the flesh, with fear and trembling, in the simplicity of your 
heart, as to Christ: not serving to the eye, as it were pleasing 
men, but as the servants of Christ.® 

Moreover, no honor, no piety, no devotion can be rendered to 
God sufficiently worthy of Him, since love of Him admits of 
infinite increase. Hence our charity should become every day 
more fervent towards Him, who commands us to love Him with 
our whole heart, our whole soul, and with all our strength. The 
love of our neighbor, on the contrary, has its limits, for the Lord 
commands us to love our neighbor as ourselves. 

To outstep these limits by loving our neighbor as we love God 
would be an enormous crime. Jf any man come to me, says the 
Lord, and hate not his father and mother, and wife and children, 
and brethren and sisters, yea, and his own life also; he cannot be 
my disciple.” In the same way, to one who would first attend 
the burial of his father, and then follow Christ, it was said: Let 
the dead bury their dead;* and the same lesson is more clearly 
conveyed in St. Matthew: He that loveth father or mother more 
than me, is not worthy of me.® 

Parents, no doubt, are to be highly loved and respected; but 
religion requires that supreme honor and homage be given to 


* Matt. x. 4o. SEphe vie 5, 6: 
» Deut. vi. 5; Luke x. 273, Matt. xxii. 37-30. 
Luke xiy, 26, ®Luke ix. 60. SIENA 325 207, 


FOURTH COMMANDMENT 4II 


Him alone, who is the Creator and Father of all, and that all 
our love for our earthly parents be referred to our eternal Father 
who is in heaven. Should, however, the injunctions of parents 
be at any time opposed to the Commandments of God, children 
are, of course, to prefer the will of God to the desires of their 
parents, always keeping in view the divine maxim: We ought to 
obey God rather than men. 4 


Explanation of the Fourth Commandment: “Honour” 


After these preliminaries the pastor should explain the words 
of the Commandment, beginning with honor. To honor is to 
think respectfully of anyone, and to hold in the highest esteem 
all that relates to him. It includes love, respect, obedience and 
reverence. 

Very properly, then, is the word honor used here in prefer- 
ence to the word fear or love, although parents are also to 
be much loved and feared. Respect and reverence are not always 
the accompaniments of love; neither is love the inseparable com- 
panion of fear; but honor, when proceeding from the heart, com- 
bines both fear and love.» 


“Thy Father” 


The pastor should next explain who they are, whom the Com- 
mandment designates as fathers; for although the law refers 
primarily to our natural fathers, yet the name belongs to others 
also, and these seem to be indicated in the Commandment, as we 
can easily gather from numerous passages of Scripture. Besides 
our natural fathers, then, there are others who in Scripture are 
called fathers, as was said above, and to each of these proper 
honor is due. 

In the first place, the prelates of the Church, her pastors and 
priests are called fathers, as is evident from the Apostle, who, 
writing to the Corinthians, says: J write not these things to con- 
found you; but I admonish you as my dearest children. For 

® Acts v. 20. 


a On the love of God and of our neighbor see Summa Theol. 2a. 2z. 


XXV-XXvii; xliv. 
bOn honor and reverence see SHinnis Theol. 2a. 22. cil. Cill. 


412 THE COMMANDMENTS 


if you have ten thousand instructors in Christ, yet not many 
fathers. For in Christ Jesus by the gospel I have begotten you.” 
It is also written in Ecclesiasticus: Let us praise men of renown, 
and our fathers in thewr generation.” 

Those who govern the State, to whom are entrusted power, 
magistracy, or command, are also called fathers; thus Naaman 
was called father by his servants.** 

The name father is also applied to those to whose care, fidelity, 
probity and wisdom others are committed, such as teachers, in- 
structors, masters and guardians; and hence the sons of the 
Prophets called Elias ** and Eliseus ** their father. Finally, aged 
men, advanced in years, we also call fathers. 


WHY PARENTS SHOULD BE HONORED 


In his instructions the pastor should chiefly emphasize the 
obligation of honoring all who are entitled to be called fathers, 
especially our natural fathers, of whom the divine Command- 
ment particularly speaks. They are, so to say, images of the 
immortal God. In them we behold a picture of our own origin; 
from them we have received existence, them God made use of 
to infuse into us a soul and reason, by them we were led to the 
Sacraments, instructed in our religion, schooled in right conduct 
and holiness, and trained in civil and human knowledge. 


“And Thy Mother” 


The pastor should teach that the name mother is mentioned 
in this Commandment, in order to remind us of her benefits and 
claims in our regard, of the care and solicitude with which she 


bore us, and of the pain and labor with which she gave us birth 
and brought us up. | 


MANNER OF HONORING PARENTS 


The honor which children are commanded to pay to» their 
parents should be the spontaneous offering of sincere and dutiful 


at COte iv D4-2Os "Eccl. xliv. 3. 


% 4 Kings v. 13. 
“4 Kings ii. 12. een : 


* 4 Kings xiii. 14. 


FOURTH COMMANDMENT 413 


love. This is nothing more than their due, since for love of us, 
they shrink from no labor, no exertion, no danger. Their highest 
pleasure it is to feel that they are loved by their children, the 
dearest objects of their affection. Joseph, when he enjoyed in 
Egypt the highest station and the most ample power after the 
king himself, received with honor his father, who had come into 
Egypt.*® Solomon rose to meet his mother as she approached; 
and having paid her respect, placed her on a royal throne on his 
right hand.174 

We also owe to our parents other duties of respect, such as to 
supplicate God in their behalf, that they may lead prosperous and 
happy lives, beloved and esteemed by all who know them, and 
most pleasing in the sight of God and of the Saints in heaven. 

We also honor them by submission to their wishes and inclina- 
tions. My son, says Solomon, hear the instruction of thy father, 
and forsake not the law of thy mother; that grace may be added 
to thy head, and a chain of gold to thy neck.1* Of the same kind 
are the exhortations of St. Paul. Children, he says, obey your 
parents im the Lord, for this 1s just;+* and also, children, obey 
your parents in all things, for this is well-pleasing to the Lord.*° 
(This doctrine) is confirmed by the example of the holiest men. 
Isaac, when bound for sacrifice by his father, meekly and uncom- 
plainingly obeyed; *1 and the Rechabites, not to depart from the 
counsel of their father, always abstained from wine.” > 

We also honor our parents by the imitation of their good 
example; for, to seek to resemble closely anyone is the highest 
mark of esteem towards him. We also honor them when we 
not only ask, but follow their advice. 

Again we honor our parents when we relieve their necessities, 
supplying them with necessary food and clothing according to 
these words of Christ, who, when reproving the impiety of the 
Pharisees, said: Why do you also transgress the commandments 
of God because of your traditions? For God said: “Honour thy 
father and thy mother,” and “He that shall curse father or mother 
let him die the death.” But you say: “Whosoever shall say to 


(eng xivisiz9. 2 1774) Kings ii, 19. °° Prov. 1.°8, 9. eEiphs vis \X. 
= Colesiiie 20: 1 Gen. xxii. 9. 72 Jerem. xxxv. 6. 
a On the virtue of piety see Summa Theol. 2a. 2e. c. I. 

bOn obedience see Summa Theol. 2a. 2. civ. cv. 


414 THE COMMANDMENTS 


his father or mother, The gift whatsoever proceedeth from me, 
shall profit thee.” And he shall not honour his father or his 
mother; and you have made void the commandment of God for 
your tradition.”® 

But if at all times it is our duty to honor our parents, this duty 
becomes still more imperative when they are visited by severe 
illness. We should then see to it that they do not neglect con- 
fession and the other Sacraments which every Christian should 
receive at the approach of death. We should also see that pious 
and religious persons visit them frequently to strengthen their 
weakness, assist them by their counsel, and animate them to the 
hope of immortality, that having risen above the concerns of this 
world, they may fix their thoughts entirely on God. Thus blessed 
with the sublime virtues of faith, hope and charity, and fortified 
by the helps of religion, they will not only look at death without 
fear, since it is necessary, but will even welcome it, as it hastens 
their entrance into eternity. 

Finally, we honor our parents, even after their death, by attend- 
ing their funerals, procuring for them suitable obsequies and 
burial, having due suffrages and anniversary Masses offered for 
them, and faithfully executing their last wills. 


MANNER OF HONORING OTHER SUPERIORS 


We are bound to honor not only our natural parents, but also 
others who are called fathers, such as Bishops and priests, kings, 
princes and magistrates, tutors, guardians and masters, teachers, 
aged persons and the like, all of whom are entitled, some in a 


greater, some in a less degree, to share our love, our obedience, 
and our assistance. 


THE HONOR DUE TO BISHOPS AND PRIESTS 


Of Bishops and other pastors it is written: Let the priests that 
rule well be esteemed worthy of double honour, especially they 
who labour in the word and doctrine.?4 | 

What wondrous proofs of love for the Apostle must the Gala- 
tians have shown! For he bears this splendid testimony of their 


=a Miatiecyie 3-0: Ag Timieveet7 


FOURTH COMMANDMENT 415 


benevolence: J bear you witness that if ii could be done, you 
would have plucked out your own eyes, and would have given 
them ta me.*® 

The priest is also entitled to receive whatever is necessary for 
his support. Who, says the Apostle, serveth as a soldier at his 
own charges??® Give honour to the priests, it is written in 
Ecclesiasticus, and purify thyself with thy arms; give them their 
portion, as it is commanded thee, of the first fruits and of purifi- 
cations.** 

The Apostle also teaches that they are entitled to obedience: 
Obey your prelates, and be subject to them; for they watch as 
being to render an account of your souls.28 Nay, more. Christ 
the Lord commands obedience even to wicked pastors: Upon the 
chair of Moses have sitten the scribes and Pharisees: all things, 
therefore, whatsoever they shall say to you, observe and do; but 
according to their works do ye not, for they say and do not.?94 


THE HONOR DUE TO CIVIL RULERS 


The same is to be said of civil rulers, governors, magis- 
trates and others to whose authority we are subject. The 
Apostle in his Epistle to the Romans,*° explains at length the 
honor, respect and obedience that should be shown them, and he 
also bids us to pray for them.*? St. Peter says: Be ye subject, 
therefore, to every human creature for God’s sake; whether it be 
to the king as excelling, or to governors as sent by him.* 

For whatever honor we show them is given to God, since 
exalted human dignity deserves respect because it is an image of 
the divine power, and in it we revere the providence of God who 
has entrusted to men the care of public affairs and who uses them 
as the instruments of His power. 

If we sometimes have wicked and unworthy officials it is not 
their faults that we revere, but the authority from God which 
they possess. Indeed, while it may seem strange, we are not 


*Gal--ive 15. lig (Ochs ube. 7h * Ecclus; vii. 33,. 34. 
% Heb. xiii. 17. *® Matt. xxiii. 2, 3. Rom. xili. I. 
hg Alpviny.ht 2. cel@leet. it +13. 


aQOn the honor and obedience due to ecclesiastical superiors see Summa 
Theol. 2a. 2. cii. civ. 5; Code of Canon Law, canon 119, 


416 THE COMMANDMENTS 


excused from highly honoring them even when they show them- 
selves hostile and implacable towards us. Thus David rendered 
great services to Saul even when the latter was his bitter foe, and 
to this he alludes when he says: With them that hated peace I 
was peaceable.** 

However, should their commands be wicked or unjust, they 
should not be obeyed, since in such a case they rule not according 
to their rightful authority, but according to injustice and per- 
versity. 


‘That Thou Mayest be Long-lived,” etc. 


Having explained the above matters, the pastor should next 
consider the reward promised to the observance of this Com- 
mandment and its appropriateness. That reward is great, indeed, 
for it consists principally in length of days. They who always 
preserve the grateful remembrance of a benefit deserve to be 
blessed with its prolonged enjoyment. Children, therefore, who 
honor their parents, and gratefully acknowledge the blessing of 
life received from them are deservedly rewarded with the pro- 
tracted enjoyment of that life to an advanced age. 


REWARD PROMISED FOR OBSERVANCE OF THIS COMMANDMENT 


The (nature of the) divine promise also demands distinct ex- 
planation. It includes not only the eternal life of the blessed, but 
also the life which we lead on earth, according to the interpreta- 
tion of St. Paul: Piety is profitable to all things, having promise 
of the life that now is, and of that which is to come.** 

Many very holy men, it is true, such as Job,°> David,* Paul,3? 
desired to die, and a long life is burdensome to the afflicted and 
wretched ; ** but the reward which is here promised is, notwith- 
standing, neither inconsiderable, nor to be despised. 

The additional words, which the Lord thy God will give thee, 
promise not only length of days, but also repose, tranquillity, and 
security to live well; for in Deuteronomy it is not only said, that 

“PS, CZ: 1 Dimeivec ® Job iii. 

eI streak Philseiie 17, =. Comma: 


@On the honor and obedience due to civil rulers see Summa Theol. 
2a. 22. Clis CLV.00, 


FOURTH COMMANDMENT 417 


thou mayest live a long time, but it is also added, and that it may 
be well with thee,*® words afterwards quoted by the Apostle.?° 


WHY THIS REWARD IS NOT ALWAYS CONFERRED ON DUTIFUL 
CHILDREN 


These blessings, we say, are conferred on those whose piety 
God rewards; otherwise the divine promises would not be ful- 
filled, since the more dutiful child is sometimes the more short- 
lived. 

Now this happens sometimes because it is better for him to 
depart from this world before he has strayed from the path of 
virtue and of duty; for he was taken away lest wickedness should 
alter his understanding, or deceit beguile his soul*1 Or because 
destruction and general upheaval are impending, he is called away 
that he may escape the calamities of the times. The just man, 
says the Prophet, is taken away from before the face of evil,‘ 
lest his virtue and salvation be endangered when God avenges the 
crimes of men. Or else, he is spared the bitter anguish of wit- 
nessing the calamities of his friends and relations in such evil 
days. The premature death of the good, therefore, gives special 
reason for fear. 


PUNISHMENT FOR VIOLATION OF THIS COMMANDMENT 


But if God promises rewards and blessings to grateful children, 
He also reserves the heaviest chastisements to punish those who 
are wanting in filial piety; for it is written: He that curseth his 
father or mother shall die thedeath:** He that afflicteth his father 
and chaseth away his mother, is infamous and unhappy “* He that 
curseth his father and mother, his lamp shall be put out in the 
midst of darkness :** The eye that mocketh at his father, and that 
despiseth the labour of his mother in bearing him, let the ravens 
of the brooks pick it out, and the young eagles eat it.*° There 
are on record many instances of undutiful children, who were 


: ac Me 
Deut. v. 16. “Eph. vi. 3-4, OW, iv--10, 11. 
Sisanelviiet. Exod. xxi, 17; Lev. xx. 9. 
Prov. xix. 26. * Prov. xx. 20. Prov. xxx. 17. 


aQOn the promise attached to the fourth Commandment see Summa 
Theol. 2a. 22. cxxii. 5. ad 4. 


418 THE COMMANDMENTS 


made the signal objects of the divine vengeance. The disobedi- 
ence of Absalom to his father David did not go unpunished. On 
account of his sin he perished miserably, transfixed by three 
lances:#7 

Of those who resist the priest it is written: He that will be 
proud, and refuse to obey the commandment of the priest, who 
ministereth at that time to the Lord thy God, by the decree of the 
judge, that man shall die.** 


Duties of Parents Towards their Children 


As the law of God commands children to honor, obey, and 
respect their parents so are there reciprocal duties which payents 
owe to their children. Parents are obliged to bring up their 
children in the knowledge and practice of religion, and to give 
them the best rules for the regulation of their lives; so that, 
instructed and trained in religion, they may serve God holily and 
constantly. It was thus, as we read, that the parents of Susanna 
actedt? 

The priest, therefore, should admonish parents to be to their 


children guides in the virtues of justice, chastity, modesty and 
holiness.> 


THREE THINGS TO BE-AVOIDED BY PARENTS 


He should also admonish them to guard particularly against 
three things, in which they but too often transgress. 

In the first place, they are not by words or actions to exercise 
too much harshness towards their children. This is the instruc- 
tion of St. Paul in his Epistle to the Colossians: Fathers, he says, 
provoke not your children to anger, lest they be discouraged.®° 
For there is danger that the spirit of the child may be broken, and 
he become abject and fearful of everything. Hence (the pastor) 
should require parents to avoid too much severity and to choose 


rather to correct their children than to revenge themselves upon 
them. 


“2 Kings xvili. 14. * Deut. xvii. 12. 
“Dan, 2ies: “Colt iii, 21, 


2 On love of parents for their children see Summa Theol. 2a. 22. xxvi. 9. 
bOn scandal see Summa Theol. 2a. 22. xliii. 


FOURTH COMMANDMENT 419 


Should a fault be committed which requires reproof and chas- 
tisement, the parent should not, on the other hand, by undue 
indulgence, overlook its correction. Children are often spoiled 
by too much lenity and indulgence on*the part of their parents. 
The pastor, therefore, should deter from such excessive mildness 
by the warning example of Heli, the high-priest, who, on account 
of over-indulgence to his sons, was visited with the heaviest 
chastisements.*? # 

Finally, to avoid what is most shameful in the instruction and 
education of children, let them not propose to themselves aims 
that are unworthy. Many there are whose sole concern is to 
leave their children wealth, riches and an ample and splendid 
fortune; who encourage them not to piety and religion, or to 
honorable employment, but to avarice, and an increase of wealth, 
and who, provided their children are rich and wealthy, are regard- 
less of their good name and eternal salvation. Can anything more 
shameful be thought or expressed? Of such parents it is true 
to say, that instead of bequeathing wealth to their children, they 
leave them rather their own wickedness and crimes for an in- 
heritance; and instead of conducting them to heaven, lead them 
to the eternal torments of hell. 

The priest, therefore, should impress on the minds of parents 
salutary principles and should exhort them to imitate the virtuous 
example of Tobias,®* that having properly trained up their chil- 
dren to the service of God and to holiness of life, they may, in 
turn, experience at their hands abundant fruit of filial affection, 


respect and obedience. 


517 Kings iv. 18. . = Tobias iv. 
aQOn correction see Summa Theol. 2a. 22. xxxiii.; Ixv. 2. 


THE FIFTH COMMANDMENT 
“Thou shalt not kill’ + 


IMPORTANCE OF INSTRUCTION ON THIS COMMANDMENT 


The great happiness proposed to the peacemakers, of being 
called the children of God,? should prove a powerful incentive 
to the pastor to explain to the faithful with care and accuracy the 
obligations imposed by this Commandment. No means more 
efficacious can be adopted to promote peace among mankind, than 
the proper explanation of this Commandment and its holy and 
due observance by all. Then might we hope that men, united in 
the strictest bonds of union, would live in perfect peace and 
concord. 

The necessity of explaining this Commandment is proved from 
the following. Immediately after the earth was overwhelmed in 
universal deluge, this was the first prohibition made by God to 
man. J will require the blood of your lives, He said, at the hand 
of every beast and at the hand of man.* In the next place, among 
the precepts of the Old Law expounded by our Lord, this Com- 
mandment was mentioned first by Him; concerning which it is 
written in the Gospel of St. Matthew: Jt has been said thou shalt 
not kill, etc.* 

The faithful, on their part, should hear with willing attention 
the explanation of this Commandment, since its purpose is to 
protect the life of each one. These words, Thou shalt not kill, 
emphatically forbid homicide; and they should be heard by all 
with the same pleasure as if God, expressly naming each indi- 
vidual, were to prohibit injury to be offered him under a threat 
of the divine anger and the heaviest chastisements. As, then, the 
announcement of this Commandment must be heard with pleas- 


SXOdu xs koe me atbenvaO: * Gen. ix. 5. *Matt. v. 21. 
420 


FIFTH COMMANDMENT 421 


ure, so also should the avoidance of the sin which it forbids give 
pleasure.* 


TWO PARTS OF THIS COMMANDMENT 


In the explanation of this Commandment the Lord points out 
its twofold obligation. The one is prohibitory and forbids us to 
kill; the other is mandatory and commands us to cherish senti- 
ments of charity, concord and friendship towards our enemies, to 
have peace with all men, and finally, to endure with patience 
every inconvenience. 


The Prohibitory Part of this Commandment 


EXCEPTIONS: THE KILLING OF ANIMALS 


With regard to the prohibitory part, it should first be taught 
what kinds of killing are not forbidden by this Commandment. 
It is not prohibited to kill animals; for if God permits man to 
eat them, it is also lawful to kill them. When, says St. Augustine, 
we hear the words, “Thou shalt not kill,’ we do not understand 
this of the fruits of the earth, which are insensible, nor of 
irrational animals, which form no part of human society.® 


EXECUTION OF CRIMINALS 


Another kind of lawful slaying belongs to the civil authorities, 
to whom is entrusted power of life and death, by the legal and 
judicious exercise of which they punish the guilty and protect 
the innocent. The just use of this power, far from involving 
the crime of murder, is an act of paramount obedience to this 
Commandment which prohibits murder. The end of the Com- 
mandment is the preservation and security of human life. Now 
the punishments inflicted by the civil authority, which is the 
legitimate avenger of crime, naturally tend to this end, since they 
give security to life by repressing outrage and violence. Hence 
these words of David: In the morning I put to death all the 
wicked of the land, that I might cut off all the workers of iniquity 
from the city of the Lord.® 


5 De Civit. Dei. lib. i. c. 20; De Morib. Manich. lib. ii. c. 13-15. 

Pseices 

aQOn the fifth Commandment see Summa Theol. 2a. 2x. cxxii. 6; St. 
Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. iii. tr. 4. ¢. I. 


422 THE COMMANDMENTS 


KILLING IN A JUST WAR 


In like manner, the soldier is guiltless who, actuated not by 
motives of ambition or cruelty, but by a pure desire of serving 
the interests of his country, takes away the life of an enemy in 
a just war. 

Furthermore, there are on record instances of carnage exe- 
cuted by the special command of God. The sons of Levi, who 
put to death so many thousands in one day, were guilty of no sin; 
when the slaughter had ceased, they were addressed by Moses in 
these words: You have consecrated your hands this day to the 
Lord." 

KILLING BY ACCIDENT 


Again, death caused, not by intent or design, but by accident, 
is not murder. He that killeth his neighbour ignorantly, says the 
book of Deuteronomy, and who is proved to have had no hatred 
against him yesterday and the day before, but to have gone with 
him to the wood to hew wood, and in cutting down the tree the 
axe slipt out of his hand, and the iron slipping from the handle 
struck his friend and killed him, shall live® Such accidental 
deaths, because inflicted without intent or design, involve no guilt 
whatever, and this is confirmed by the words of St. Augustine: 
God forbid that what we do for a good and lawful end shall be 
imputed to us, if, contrary to our intention, evil thereby befall 
any one.® 

There are, however, two cases in which guilt attaches (to 
accidental death). The first case is when death results from an 
unlawful act; when, for instance, a person kicks or strikes a 
woman in a state of pregnancy, and abortion follows. The con- 
sequence, it is true, may not have been intended, but this does 
not exculpate the offender, because the act of striking a pregnant 
woman is in itself unlawful. The other case is when death is 
caused by negligence, carelessness or want of due precaution. 


KILLING IN SELF-DEFENCE 


If a man kill another in self-defence, having used every means 
consistent with his own safety to avoid the infliction of death, he 
evidently does not violate this Commandment. 


"Exod, xxxii. 20. “Deut. xix. 4. * Epist. cliv, 


FIFTH COMMANDMENT 423 


NEGATIVE PART OF THIS COMMANDMENT FORBIDS MURDER AND 
SUICIDE 


The above are the cases in which life may be taken without 
violating this Commandment; and with these exceptions all other 
killing is forbidden, whether we consider the person who kills, the 
person killed, or the means used to kill. 

As to the person who kills, the Commandment recognizes no 
exception whatever, be he rich or powerful, master or parent. 
All, without exception or distinction, are forbidden to kill. 

With regard to the person killed, the law extends to all. There 
is no individual, however humble or lowly his condition, whose 
life is not shielded by this law. 

It also forbids suicide. No man possesses such power over his 
own life as to be at liberty to put himself to death. Hence we 
find that the Commandment does not say: Thou shalt not kill 
another, but simply: Thou shalt not kill. 

Finally, if we consider the numerous means by which murder 
may be committed, the law admits of no exception. Not only 
does it forbid to take away the life of another by laying violent 
hands on him, by means of a sword, a stone, a stick, a halter, or 
by administering poison; but also strictly prohibits the accom- 
plishment of the death of another by counsel, assistance, help or 
any other means whatever.@ 


SINFUL ANGER IS ALSO FORBIDDEN BY THE FIFTH COMMANDMENT 


The Jews, with singular dullness of apprehension, thought that 
to abstain from taking life with their own hands was enough 
to satisfy the obligation imposed by this Commandment. But the 
Christian, instructed in the interpretation of Christ, has learned 
that the precept is spiritual, and that it commands us not only to 
keep our hands unstained, but our hearts pure and undefiled; 
hence what the Jews regarded as quite sufficient, is not sufficient 
at all. For the Gospel has taught that it is unlawful even to be 
angry with anyone: But I say to you that whosoever is angry 
with his brother, shall be in danger of the judgment. And who- 
soever shall say to his brother, “Raca,” shall be in danger of the 


aOn killing and wounding see Summa Theol. 2a, 2e. Ixiv. Ixv. 


Aad THE COMMANDMENTS 


council. And whosoever shall say, “Thou fool,” shall be in danger 
of hell fire° From these words it clearly follows that he who is 
angry with his brother is not free from sin, even though he con- 
ceals his resentment; that he who gives indication of his wrath 
sins grievously ; and that he who does not hesitate to treat another 
with harshness, and to utter contumelious reproaches against him, 
sins still more grievously.? 

This, however, is to be understood of cases in which no just 
cause of anger exists. God and His laws permit us to be angry 
when we chastise the faults of those who are subject to us. For 
the anger of a Christian should spring from the Holy Spirit and 
not from carnal impulse, seeing that we should be temples of the 
Holy Ghost, in which Jesus Christ may dwell.** 

Our Lord has left us many other lessons of instruction with 
regard to the perfect observance of this law, such as Not to resist 
evil; but if one strike thee on thy right cheek, turn to him also the 
other. And if a man will contend with thee in judgment, and 
take away thy coat, let go thy cloak also unto him; and whosoever 
will force thee one mile, go with him two.1?> 


REMEDIES AGAINST THE VIOLATION OF THIS COMMANDMENT 


From what has been said, it is easy to see how inclined man 
is to those sins which are prohibited by this Commandment, and 
how many are guilty of murder, if not in fact, at least in desire. 
As, then, the Sacred Scriptures prescribe remedies for so danger- 
ous a disease, the pastor should spare no pains in making them 
known to the faithful. 

Of these remedies the most efficacious is to form a just con- 
ception of the wickedness of murder. The enormity of this sin 
is manifest from many and weighty passages of Holy Scripture. 
So much does God abominate homicide that He declares in Holy 
Writ that of the very beast of the field He will exact vengeance 
for the life of man, commanding the beast that injures man to be 


* Matt. v. 22. =F ' Cor. vito: ® Matt. v. 30. 
@QOn contumely, derision and cursing see Summa Theol. 2a. 2x. Ixxii. 
Ixxv. Ixxvi. 


>On anger, hatred and revenge see Summa Theol. ta. 2x. xlvi.-xlviii, 
2a. 22. Clvili., 1a. 2%, xxix5-2a. 2. xxKkiV, 2a. 2ee.. Cvilll c. 1. 


FIFTH COMMANDMENT 425 


put to death.*? And if (the Almighty) commanded man to 
have a horror of blood,!* He did so for no other reason than to 
impress on his mind the obligation of entirely refraining, both in 
act and desire, from the enormity of homicide.» 

The-murderer is the worst enemy of his species, and conse- 
quently of nature. To the utmost of his power he destroys the 
universal work of God by the destruction of man, since God 
declares that He created all things for man’s sake. Nay, as it is 
forbidden in Genesis to take human life, because God created 
man to his own image and likeness, he who makes away with 
God’s image offers great injury to God, and almost seems to lay 
violent hands on God Himself! 

David, thinking of this with a mind divinely illumined, com- 
plained bitterly of the bloodthirsty in these words: Their feet are 
swift to shed blood.*®> He does not simply say, they kill, but, they 
shed blood, words which serve to mark the enormity of that 
execrable crime and to denote the barbarous cruelty of the mur- 
derer. With a view also to describe in particular how the mur- 
derer is precipitated by the impulse of the devil into the commis- 
sion of such a crime, he says: Their feet are swift. 


Positive Part of this Commandment 


LOVE OF NEIGHBOR INCULCATED 
The mandatory part of this Commandment, as Christ our Lord 
enjoins, requires that we have peace with all men. Interpreting 
the Commandment He says: If therefore thou offer thy gift at 
the altar, and there thou remember that thy brother hath any- 
thing against thee; leave there thy offering before the altar, and 
go first to be reconciled to thy brother, and then coming thou 
shalt offer thy gift, etc.* 
CHARITY TO ALL COMMANDED 
In explaining this admonition, the pastor should show that it 
inculcates the duty of charity towards all without exception. In 
3 Gen, is. 5; 0.541) « Gen. ix. 4. IPE Sahl ey ae Mattmvere3) 24° 


aQOn the ecclesiastical penalties for abortion, suicide and duelling, see 


Law, canons 2350 ff. 
Piet ara Testament law forbidding the use of blood see Summa 


Theol. 1a. 2%. cii. 3. ad 8.; 6. ad I. 


426 THE COMMANDMENTS 


his instruction on the precept he should exhort the faithful as 
much as possible to the practice of this virtue, since it is especially 
included in this precept. For since hatred is clearly forbidden by 
this Commandment, as whosoever hateth his brother is a mur- 
derer,! it follows, as an evident consequence, that the Command- 
ment also inculcates charity and love. 


PATIENCE, BENEFICENCE AND MILDNESS COMMANDED 


And since the Commandment inculcates charity and love, it 
must also enjoin all those duties and good offices which follow in 
their train. Charity is patient, says St. Paul.18 We are therefore 
commanded patience, in which, as the Redeemer teaches, we shall 
possess our souls.1® Charity is kind; ®° beneficence is, therefore, 
the friend and companion of charity. The virtue of beneficence 
and kindness has a great range. Its principal offices are to relieve 
the wants of the poor, to feed the hungry, to give drink to the 
thirsty, to clothe the naked; and in all these acts of beneficence 
we should proportion our liberality to the wants and necessities of 
those we help. 

These works of beneficence and goodness, in themselves ex- 
alted, become still more illustrious when done towards an enemy ; 
for our Saviour says: Love your enemies, do good to them that 
hate you, which also the Apostle enjoins in these words: If 
thine enemy be hungry, give him to eat: if he thirst, give him to 
drink. For, doing this, thou shalt heap coals of fire on his head. 
Be not overcome by evil, but overcome evil by good.?? 

Finally, if we consider the law of charity, which is kind, we 
shall be convinced that to practice the good offices of mildness, 


clemency, and other kindred virtues, is a duty prescribed by that 
law.? 


FORGIVENESS OF INJURIES COMMANDED 


But the most important duty of all, and that which is the fullest 
expression of charity, and to the practice of which we should 


“1 John iii, 15. ™1 Cor, xiii. 4. * Luke xxi. 19. * 
out \Consciites ~ Mattitvarna: * Rom. xii. 20. 
aQOn love of neighbor and its effects see Summa Theol. 2a. 2. xxvii.- 


xxiii, On clemency, meekness, modesty, patience see ibid. clyvii, thes 
CXXXVI1, 


FIFTH COMMANDMENT 427 


most habituate ourselves, is to pardon and forgive from the heart 
the injuries which we may have received from others® The 
Sacred Scriptures, as we have already observed, frequently ad- 
monish and exhort us to a full compliance with this duty. Not 
only do they pronounce blessed those who do this, but they also 
declare that God grants pardon to those who really fulfil this 
duty, while He refuses pardon to those who neglect it, or refuse 
to obey it. 


How to Persuade Men to Forgive Injuries 


As the desire of revenge is almost natural to man, it becomes 
necessary for the pastor to exert his utmost diligence not only to 
instruct, but also earnestly to persuade the faithful, that a Chris- 
tian should forgive and forget injuries; and as this is a duty 
frequently inculcated by sacred writers, he should consult them 
on the subject, in order to be able to subdue the pertinacity of 
those whose minds are obstinately bent on revenge, and-he should 
have ready the forcible and appropriate arguments which those 
Fathers piously employed. The three following considerations, 
however, demand particular exposition. 


ALL WE HAVE TO ENDURE COMES FROM GOD 


First, he who thinks himself injured ought above all to be per- 
suaded that the man on whom he desires to be revenged was not 
the principal cause of the loss or injury. Thus that admirable 
man, Job, when violently injured by the Sabeans, the Chaldeans, 
and by Satan, took no account of these, but as a righteous and 
very holy man exclaimed with no less truth than piety: The Lord 
gave, the Lord hath taken away.?* The words and the example 
of that man of patience should, therefore, convince Christians, 
and the conviction is most just, that whatever chastisements we 
endure in this life come from the hand of God, the Father and 
Author of all justice and mercy. He chastises us not as enemies, 
but, in His infinite goodness, corrects us as children. To view the 
matter in its true light, men, in these cases, are nothing more than 


=* Job. 21 
aOn love of enemies see Summa Theol. 2a. 2x. xxv. 8, 9. 


428 THE COMMANDMENTS 


the ministers and agents of God. One man, it is true, may 
cherish the worst feelings towards another, he may harbor the 
most malignant hatred against him; but, without the permission 
of God, he can do him no injury. This is why Joseph was able 
patiently to endure the wicked counsels of his brethren,** and 
David, the injuries inflicted on him by Semei.”° 

Here also applies an argument which St. Chrysostom has ably 
and learnedly handled. It is that no man is injured but by him- 
self.2° Let the man, who considers himself injured by another, 
consider the matter in the right way and he will certainly find that 
he has received no injury or loss from others. For although he 
may have experienced injury from external causes, he is himself 
his greatest enemy by wickedly staining his soul with hatred, 
malevolence and envy. 


ADVANTAGES OF FORGIVENESS 


The second consideration is that there are two advantages, 
which are the special rewards of those, who, influenced by a holy 
desire to please God, freely forgive injuries. In the first place, 
God has promised that he who forgives, shall himself obtain for- 
giveness of sins, a promise which clearly shows how acceptable 
to God is this duty of piety. In the next place, the forgiveness 
of injuries ennobles and perfects our nature; for by it man is in 
some degree made like to God, Who maketh his sun to shine on 
the good and the bad, and raineth upon the just and the unjust.?* 


DISADVANTAGES OF REVENGE 


Finally, the disadvantages which arise from the refusal to par- 
don others are to be explained. The pastor, therefore, should 
place before the eyes of the unforgiving man that hatred is not 
only a grievous sin, but also that the longer it is indulged the more 
deeply rooted it becomes. The man, of whose heart this passion 
has once taken possession, thirsts for the blood of his enemy. 
Filled with the hope of revenge, he will spend his days and nights 
brooding over some evil design, so that his mind seems never to 

* Gen. xiv. 5. *% 2 Kings xvi. Io. 


* Vol. 3. in Hom., “quod nemo leditur nisi a seipso.” 
*™ Matt. v. 45. 


FIFTH COMMANDMENT 420 


rest from malignant projects, or even from thoughts of blood. 
Thus it follows that never, or at least not without extreme diffi- 
culty, can he be induced generously to pardon an offence, or even 
to mitigate his hostility. Justly, therefore, is hatred compared to 
a wound in which the weapon remains firmly embedded. 

Moreover, there are many evil consequences and sins which 
are linked together with this one sin of hatred. Hence these 
words of St. John: He that hateth his brother, is in darkness, and 
walketh in darkness, and knoweth not whither he goeth; because 
the darkness hath blinded his eyes.28 He must, therefore, fre- 
quently fall; for how can anyone view in a favorable light the 
words or actions of him whom he hates? Hence arise rash and 
unjust judgments, anger, envy, detractions, and other evils of the 
same sort, in which are often involved those who are connected 
by ties of friendship or blood; and thus does it frequently happen 
that this one sin is the prolific source of many. 

Not without good reason is hatred called the sin of the devil. 
The devil was a murderer from the beginning; and hence our 
Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, when the Pharisees sought 
His life, said that they were begotten of their father the devil.?® 


REMEDIES AGAINST HATRED 


Besides the reasons already adduced, which afford good 
grounds for detesting this sin, other and most suitable remedies 
are prescribed in the pages of Holy Writ. 

Of these remedies the first and greatest is the example of the 
Redeemer, which we should set before our eyes as a model for 
imitation. For He, in whom even suspicion of fault could not be 
found, when scourged with rods, crowned with thorns, and finally 
nailed to a cross, uttered that most charitable prayer: Father, 
forgive them, for they know not what they do.*° And as the 
Apostle testifies: The sprinkling of his blood speaketh better 
than Abel.*+ 

Another remedy, prescribed by Ecclesiasticus, is to call to mind 
death and judgment: Remember thy last end, and thow shalt 

%y John ii. 11. ™John viii. 44. “Luke xxiii. 34. ™ Heb. xii. 24. 
a On the vices opposed to charity see Summa Theol. 2a. 2«. xxxiv.-xliii. 


430 THE COMMANDMENTS 


never sin.*? As if he had said: Reflect frequently and again and 
again that you must soon die, and since at death there will be 
nothing you desire or need more than great mercy from God, that 
now you should keep that mercy always before your mind. Thus 
the cruel desire for revenge will be extinguished; for you can 
discover no means better adapted, none more efficacious to obtain 
the mercy of God than the forgiveness of injuries and love 
towards those who in word or deed may have injured you or 
yours. 


” Eccl. vii. 40. 


THE SIXTH COMMANDMENT 
“Thou shalt not commit adultery” + 


THE POSITION OF THIS COMMANDMENT IN THE DECALOGUE IS MOST 
SUITABLE : 


The bond between man and wife is one of the closest, and 
nothing can be more gratifying to both than to know that they are 
objects of mutual and special affection. On the other hand, 
nothing inflicts deeper anguish than to feel that the legitimate love 
which one owes the other has been transferred elsewhere. 
Rightly, then, and in its natural order, is the Commandment 
which protects human life against the hand of the murderer, fol- 
lowed by that which forbids adultery and which aims to prevent 
anyone from injuring or destroying by such a crime the holy and 
honorable union of marriage—a union which is generally the 
source of ardent affection and love. 


IMPORTANCE OF CAREFUL INSTRUCTION ON THIS COMMANDMENT 


In the explanation of this Commandment, however, the pastor 
has need of great caution and prudence, and should treat with 
great delicacy a subject which requires brevity rather than 
copiousness of exposition. For it is to be feared that if he ex- 
plained in too great detail or at length the ways in which this 
Commandment is violated, he might unintentionally speak of sub- 
jects which, instead of extinguishing, usually serve rather to 
inflame corrupt passion. 

As, however, the precept contains many things which cannot 
be passed over in silence, the pastor should explain them in their 
proper order and place.* 

axeyeh Sore, Zh, 


aQOn the sixth Commandment see Summa Theol. 2a. 2x. cxxii. 6; St. 
Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. iii. tr. 4. c. 2. 


43t 


432 THE COMMANDMENTS 


TWO PARTS OF THIS COMMANDMENT 


This Commandment, then, resolves itself into two heads; the 
one expressed, which prohibits adultery ; the other implied, which 
inculcates purity of mind and body. 


What this Commandment Prohibits 
ADULTERY FORBIDDEN 


To begin with the prohibitory part (of the Commandment), 
adultery is the defilement of the marriage bed, whether it be one’s 
own or another’s. If a married man have intercourse with an 
unmarried woman, he violates the integrity of his marriage bed; 
and if an unmarried man have intercourse with a married woman, 
he defiles the sanctity of the marriage bed of another. 


OTHER SINS AGAINST CHASTITY ARE FORBIDDEN 


But that every species of immodesty and impurity are included 
in this prohibition of adultery, is proved by the testimonies of 
St. Augustine and St. Ambrose;? and that such is the meaning 
of the Commandment is borne out by the Old, as well as the New 
Testament. In the writings of Moses, besides adultery, other sins 
against chastity are said to have been punished. Thus the book 
of Genesis records the judgment of Judah against his daughter- 
in-law. In Deuteronomy is found the excellent law of Moses, 
that there should be no harlot amongst the daughters of Israel. 
Take heed to keep thyself, my son, from all fornication,® is the 
exhortation of Tobias to his son; and in Ecclesiasticus we read: 
Be ashamed of looking upon a harlot.® 

In the Gospel, too, Christ the Lord says: From the heart come 
forth adulteries and fornications, which defile a man.?_ The 
Apostle Paul expresses his detestation of this crime frequently, 
and in the strongest terms: This is the will of God, your sanc- 
tification, that you should abstain from fornication; *® Fly forni- 

* Amb. lib. Officior. 1. c. 50; Aug. Super Exod. Ques. 71. 


*> Gen. xxxvili. 14. * Deut. xxiii. 17. , Tob. iv. 13. 
MEcolaxlings: * Matt. xv. 19. 2a bhessmive 3: 


SIXTH COMMANDMENT 433 


cation; ° Keep not company with fornicators; 1° Fornication, and 
all uncleanness and covetousness, let it not so much as be named 
among you; ** Neither fornicators, nor adulterers, nor the effem- 
inate, nor sodomites shall possess the kingdom of God.” 


WHY ADULTERY IS EXPRESSLY MENTIONED 


But the reason why adultery is expressly forbidden is because 
in addition to the turpitude which it shares with other kinds of 
incontinence, it adds the sin of injustice, not only against our 
neighbor, but also against civil society. 

Again it is certain that he who abstains not from other sins 
against chastity, will easily fall into the crime of adultery. By 
the prohibition of adultery, therefore, we at once see that every 
sort of immodesty and impurity by which the body is defiled is 
prohibited. Nay, that every inward thought against chastity is 
forbidden by this Commandment is clear, as well from the very 
force of the law, which is evidently spiritual, as also from these 
words of Christ the Lord: You have heard that it was said to 
them of old: “Thou shalt not commit adultery.’ But I say to 
you, that whosoever shall look on a woman to lust after her, hath 
already committed adultery with her in his heart.'® 

These are the points which we have deemed proper matter for 
public instruction of the faithful. The pastor, however, should 
add the decrees of the Council of Trent against adulterers, and 
those who keep harlots and concubines,’ omitting many other 
species of immodesty and lust, of which each individual is to be 
admonished privately, as circumstances of time and person may 
require.? 


What this Commandment Prescribes 


PURITY ENJOINED 


We now come to explain the positive part of the precept. The 
faithful are to be taught and earnestly exhorted to cultivate con- 
tinence and chastity with all care, to cleanse themselves from all 


18. raConuve Os Eepieve 3: 2 yeGor vi. 0: 
inne: es 2702S: 4 Sess. xxiv. c. 8. De Reform. 


2Qn lust and incontinency see Summa Theol. 2a. 2. cliii. cliv. civi. 


434 THE COMMANDMENTS 


defilement of the flesh and of the spirit, perfecting sanctification 
in the fear of God.*® 

First of all they should be taught that although the virtue of 
chastity shines with a brighter lustre in those who make the holy 
and religious vow of virginity, nevertheless it is a virtue which 
belongs also to those who lead a life of celibacy; or who, in the 
married state, preserve themselves pure and undefiled from un- 
lawful desire.? 


Reflections which Help one to Practice Purity 


The holy Fathers have taught us many means whereby to 
subdue the passions and to restrain sinful pleasure. The pastor, 
therefore, should make it his study to explain these accurately to 
the faithful, and should use the utmost diligence in their exposi- 
tion. Of these means some are reflections, others are active 
measures. 


IMPURITY EXCLUDES FROM HEAVEN 


The first kind consists chiefly in our forming a just conception 
of the filthiness and evil of this sin; for such knowledge will lead 
one more easily to detest it. Now the evil of this crime we may 
learn from the fact that, on account of it, man is banished 
and excluded from the kingdom of God, which is the greatest of 
all evils. 


IMPURITY IS A FILTHY SIN 


The above-mentioned calamity is indeed common to every 
mortal sin. But what is peculiar to this sin is that fornicators are 
said to sin against their own bodies, according to the words of the 
Apostle: Fly fornication. Every sin that a man doth is without 
the body; but he that committeth fornication, sinneth against his 
own body.'® The reason is that such a one does an injury to his 
own body by violating its sanctity. Hence St. Paul, writing to 
the Thessalonians, says: This is the will of God, your sanctifica- 


se) (Clore, Nath ih, ile COtanvin tc 


Re ei chastity, virginity and continence see Summa Theol. 2a. 2x. cli. 
clii. clv. 


SIXTH COMMANDMENT 435 


tion; that you should abstain from fornication, that every one of 
you should know how to possess his vessel in sanctification and 
honour ; not in the passion of lust, like the Gentiles that know not 
God? 

Furthermore, what is still more criminal, the Christian who 
shamefully sins with a harlot makes the members of Christ the 
members of an harlot, according to these words of St. Paul: 
Know you not that your bodies are the members of Christ? Shall 
I then take the members of Christ and make them the members 
of a harlot? God forbid. Or know you not, that he who is 
joined to a harlot is made one body? *8 Moreover, a Christian, as 
St. Paul testifies, is the temple of the Holy Ghost;}® and to 
violate this temple is nothing else than to expel the Holy Ghost. 


ADULTERY IS A GRAVE INJUSTICE 


But the crime of adultery involves that of grievous injustice. 
If, as the Apostle says, they who are joined in wedlock are so 
subject to each other that neither has power or right over his or 
her body, but both are bound, as it were, by a mutual bond of 
subjection, the husband to accommodate himself to the will of 
the wife, the wife to the will of the husband; most certainly if 
either dissociate his or her person, which is the right of the other, 
from him or her to whom it is bound, the offender is guilty of an 
act of great injustice and wickedness.” 


ADULTERY IS DISGRACEFUL 


As dread of disgrace strongly stimulates to the performance 
of duty and deters from the commission of crime, the pastor 
should also teach that adultery brands its guilty perpetrators with 
an unusual stigma. He that is an adulterer, says Scripture, for 
the folly of his heart shall destroy his own soul: he gathereth to 
himself shame and dishonour, and his reproach shall not be 
blotted out.?* 


371 Thess. iv. 3-5. E Peoria. 1855110205) 
Seat OO Via LO: 2 Gorawviie: + Provavi. 32: 


436 ‘THE COMMANDMENTS 


IMPURITY SEVERELY PUNISHED 


The grievousness of the sin of adultery may be easily inferred 
from the severity of its punishment. According to the law pro- 
mulgated by God in the Old Testament, the adulterer was stoned 
to death.22 Nay more, because of the criminal passion of one 
man, not only the perpetrator of the crime, but a whole city wat 
destroyed, as we read with regard to the Sichemites.** The 
Sacred Scriptures abound with examples of the divine vengeance, 
such as the destruction of Sodom and of the neighboring cities,” 
the punishment of the Israelites who committed fornication in 
the wilderness with the daughters of Moab,”° and the slaughter of 
the Benjamites.2* These examples the pastor can easily make use 
of to deter men from shameful lust.? 


IMPURITY BLINDS THE MIND AND HARDENS THE HEART 


But even though the adulterer may escape the punishment of 
death, he does not escape the great pains and torments that often 
overtake such sins as his. He becomes afflicted with blindness of 
mind, a most severe punishment; he is lost to all regard for God, 
for reputation, for honor, for family, and even for life; and thus, 
utterly abandoned and worthless, he is undeserving of confidence 
in any matter of moment, and becomes unfitted to discharge any 
kind of duty. 

Of this we find examples in the persons of David and of 
Solomon. David had no sooner fallen into the crime of adultery 
than he degenerated into a character the very reverse of what he 
had been before; from the mildest of men he became so cruel as 
to consign to death Urias, one of his most deserving subjects.?7 
Solomon, having abandoned himself to the lust of women, gave 
tp the true religion to follow strange gods.?8 This sin, therefore, 


as Osee observes, takes away man’s heart and often blinds his 
understanding.?° 


” Levit. xx. 10; John viii. 5. ** Gen. xxxiv. 25. 
* Gen. xix. 24. * Num. xxv. 4. * Judges xx. 
a2) Kings sci. xii. *3 Kings xi. ” Osee iv. II. 


aQOn the ecclesiastical penalties against adultery and other sins of im- 
purity see Code of Canon Law, canons 2356 ff. 


SIXTH COMMANDMENT 437 


Means of Practicing Purity 


AVOIDANCE OF IDLENESS 


We now come to the remedies which consist in action. The 
first is studiously to avoid idleness; for, according to Ezechiel, it 
was by yielding to the enervating influence of idleness that the 
Sodomites plunged into the most shameful crime of criminal 
lust.3° 4 


TEMPERANCE 


In the next place, intemperance is carefully to be avoided. J 
fed them to the full, says the Prophet, and they committed adul- 
tery.** An overloaded stomach begets impurity. This our Lord 
intimates in these words: Take heed to yourselves, lest perhaps 
your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness.*? 
Be not drunk with wine, says the Apostle, wherein is luxury.33 


CUSTODY OF THE EYES 


But the eyes, in particular, are the inlets to criminal passion, 
and to this refer these words of our Lord: Jf thine eye scandalize 
thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee.** The Prophets, also, 
frequently speak to the same effect. J made a covenant with 
mine eyes, says Job, that I would not so much as think upon a 
virgin.®> Finally, there are on record innumerable examples of 
the evils which have their origin in the indulgence of the eyes. It 
was thus that David sinned,** thus that the king of Sichem fell,*” 
and thus also that the elders sinned who calumniated Susanna.** 


AVOIDANCE OF IMMODEST DRESS 


Too much display in dress, which especially attracts the eye, 
is but too frequently an occasion of sin. Hence the admonition of 
Ecclesiasticus: Turn away thy face from a woman dressed up. 


*Ezech. xvi. 49. “Jerem.v.7. | “Luke xxi. 34. ™Ephes. v. 18. 
* Matt. v. 20, 30. ® Job xxxi. I. * 2 Kings xi. 2. 
"Gen. xxxiv. 2. ® Dan. xiii. 8. “OE CCe txacos 


a On sloth see Summa Theol. ta. 2%. Ixxxiv. 4; 2a. 2%. xxxv. clxvili. 2-4. 
bOn temperance in eating and drinking see Summa Theol. 2a. 2x. 


exlviii-cl. 


438 THE COMMANDMENTS 


As women are given to excessive fondness for dress, it will not be 
unseasonable in the pastor to give some attention to the subject, 
and sometimes to admonish and reprove them in the impressive 
words of the Apostle Peter: Whose adorning let it not be the 
outward plaiting of the hair, or the wearing of gold, or the putting 
on of apparel.” St. Paul likewise says: Not with plaited hair, 
or gold, or pearls, or costly attire* Many women adorned with 
gold and precious stones, have lost the only true ornament of 
their soul and body.? 


AVOIDANCE OF IMPURE CONVERSATION, READING, PICTURES 


Next to the sexual excitement, usually provoked by too studied 
an elegance of dress, follows another, which is indecent and ob- 
scene conversation. Obscene language is a torch which lights up 
the worst passions of the young mind; and the Apostle has said, 
that evil communications corrupt good manners.” Immodest and 
passionate songs and dances are most productive of this same 
effect and are, therefore, cautiously to be avoided. 

In the same class are to be numbered soft and obscene books 
which must be avoided no less than indecent pictures. All such 
things possess a fatal influence in exciting to unlawful attractions, 
and in inflaming the mind of youth. In these matters the pastor 
should take special pains to see that the faithful most carefully 


observe the pious and prudent regulations of the Council of 
Trent.*$ 


FREQUENTATION OF THE SACRAMENTS 


If the occasions of sin which we have just enumerated be care- 
fully avoided, almost every excitement to lust will be removed. 
But the most efficacious means for subduing its violence are fre- 
quent use of confession and Communion, as also unceasing and 
devout prayer to God, accompanied by fasting and almsdeeds. 
Chastity is a gift of God.** To those who ask it aright He does 

a Petsiiinse S11) Lim ett OT Cortsy.- 33. 

. Sess. xxv. Decret. De Invocat. et Vener. Sacr. Imagin. 

tT Conpviley, 
a On modesty of dress see Summa Theol. 2a. 2x. clxix. 


SIXTH COMMANDMENT 439 


not deny it; nor does He suffer us to be tempted beyond our 
strength.* 


MORTIFICATION 


But the body is to be mortified and the sensual appetites to be 
repressed not only by fasting, and particularly, by the fasts insti- 
tuted by the Church, but also by watching, pious pilgrimages, and 
other works of austerity. By these and similar observances is the 
virtue of temperance chiefly manifested. In connection with this 
subject, St. Paul, writing to the Corinthians, says: Every one 
that striveth for the mastery, refraineth himself from all things; 
and they indeed that they may receive a corruptible crown, but 
we an incorruptible one.*® A little after he says: I chastise my 
body and bring it into subjection, lest, perhaps, when I have 
preached to others, I myself should become a castaway. And in 
another place he says: Make not provision for the flesh in its 
concupiscence.** 4 


Pt KC. Sieh AIG) IS (Ceres ins ee “ Rom. xiii. 14. 


a On fasting and abstinence see Summa Theol. 2a. 2. cxlvi. cxlvii; St. 
Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. iii. 1004 ff.; Code of Canon Law, canons 1250 ff. 


THE SEVENTH COMMANDMENT 
“Thou shalt not steal’? 


IMPORTANCE OF INSTRUCTION ON THIS COMMANDMENT 


In the early ages of the Church, it was customary to impress 
on the minds of hearers the nature and force of this Command- 
ment. This we learn from the reproof uttered by the Apostle 
against some who were most earnest in deterring others from 
vices, in which they themselves were found freely to indulge: 
Thou, therefore, that teachest another, teachest not thyself: thou 
that preachest that men should not steal, stealest.* The salutary 
effect of such instructions was not only to correct a vice then very 
prevalent, but also to repress quarrels, litigation and other evils 
which generally grow out of theft. Since in these our days men 
are unhappily addicted to the same vices, with their consequent 
misfortunes and evils, the pastor, following the example of the 
holy Fathers and Doctors, should strongly insist on this point and 


explain with diligent care the force and meaning of this Com- 
mandment.* 


THIS COMMANDMENT A PROOF OF THE LOVE OF GOD TOWARDS US 
AND A CLAIM ON OUR GRATITUDE 


In the first place the pastor should exercise care and industry 
in declaring the infinite love of God for man. Not satisfied with 
having fenced round, so to say, our lives, our persons and our 
reputation, by means of the two Commandments, Thou shalt not 
kill, Thou shalt not commit adultery, God defends and places a 
guard over our property and possessions, by adding the prohibi- 
tion, Thou shalt not steal. These words can have no other mean- 


SS eoYOl, Broa, Tay, = Romuniiee2i: 


a Qn the seventh Commandment see Summa Theol. 2a. 2x. cxxii. 6; St 
Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. iii. tr. 5. 


440 


SEVENTH COMMANDMENT 441 


ing than that which we indicated above when speaking of the 
other Commandments. They declare that God forbids our 
worldly goods, which are placed under His protection, to be taken 
away or injured by anyone. 

Our gratitude to God, the author of this law, should be in pro- 
portion to the greatness of the benefit the law confers upon us. 
Now since the truest test of gratitude and the best means of 
returning thanks, consists not only in lending a willing ear to 
His precepts, but also in obeying them, the faithful are to be 
animated and encouraged to an observance of this Commandment. 


TWO PARTS OF THIS COMMANDMENT 


Like the preceding Commandments, this one also is divided 
into two parts. The first, which prohibits theft, is mentioned 
expressly ; while the spirit and force of the second, which en- 
forces kindliness and liberality towards our neighbor, are implied 
in the first part. 


Negative Part of this Commandment 


STEALING FORBIDDEN 


We shall begin with the prohibitory part of the Commandment, 
Thou shalt not steal. It is to be observed, that by the word steal 
is understood not only the taking away of anything from its right- 
ful owner, privately and without his consent, but also the posses- 
sion of that which belongs to another, contrary to the will, 
although not without the knowledge, of the true owner; else we 
are prepared to say that He who prohibits theft does not also 
prohibit robbery, which is accomplished by violence and injustice, 
whereas, according to St. Paul, extortioners shall not possess the 
kingdom of God,® and their very company and ways should be 
shunned, as the same Apostle writes. 


THEFT AND ROBBERY FORBIDDEN 


But though robbery is a greater sin than theft, inasmuch as it 
not only deprives another of his property, but also offers violence 


errors vis. 10: 


442 THE COMMANDMENTS 


and insult to him;* yet it cannot be a matter of surprise that the 
divine prohibition is expressed under the milder word, steal, 
instead of rob. There was good reason for this, since theft is 
more general and of wider extent than robbery, a crime which 
only they can commit who are superior to their neighbor in brute 
force and power. Furthermore, it is obvious that when lesser 
crimes are forbidden, greater enormities of the same sort are also 
prohibited. 


VARIOUS NAMES GIVEN TO STEALING 


The unjust possession and use of what belongs to another are 
expressed by different names, according to the diversity of the 
objects taken without the consent and knowledge of the owners. 
To take any private property from a private individual is called 
theft; from the public, peculation. To enslave a freeman, or 
appropriate the slave of another is called man-stealing. To steal 
anything sacred is called sacrilege-—a crime most enormous and 
sinful, yet so common in our days that what piety and wisdom 
had set aside for the necessary expenses of divine worship, for 
the support of the ministers of religion, and the use of the poor, 
is employed in satisfying individual avarice and the worst pas- 
sions. 


DESIRE OF STEALING FORBIDDEN 


But, besides actual theft, that is, the outward commission, the 
will and desire are also forbidden by the law of God. The law 
is spiritual and concerns the soul, the source of our thoughts and 
designs. From the heart, says our Lord in St. Matthew, come 
forth evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false 
testimonies.® 


GRAVITY OF THE SIN OF STEALING 


The grievousness of the sin of theft is sufficiently seen by the’ 
light of natural reason alone, for it is a violation of justice which 
gives to every man his own. The distribution and allotment of 


1 Cotavirio: * Matt. xv. 19. 


SEVENTH COMMANDMENT 443 


property, fixed from the beginning by the law of nations and 
confirmed by human and divine laws, must be considered as in- 
violable, and each one must be allowed secure possession of what 
justly belongs to him, unless we wish the overthrow of human 
society. Hence these words of the Apostle: Neither thieves, nor 
covetous, nor drunkards, nor railers, nor extortioners, shall pos- 
sess the kingdom of God.® 

The long train of evils which this sin entails are a proof at once 
of its mischievousness and enormity. It gives rise to hasty and 
rash judgments, engenders hatred, originates enmities, and some- 
times subjects the innocent to cruel condemnation. 

What shall we say of the necessity imposed by God on all of 
satisfying for the injury done? Without restitution, says St. 
Augustine, the sin is not forgiven.” The difficulty of making such 
restitution, on the part of those who have been in the habit of 
enriching themselves with their neighbor’s property, we may learn 
not only from personal observation and reflection, but also from 
the testimony of the Prophet Habacuc: Woe to him that heapeth 
together what is not his own. How long also doth he load himself 
with thick clay?® The possession of other men’s property he 
calls thick clay, because it is difficult to emerge and extricate one’s 
self from (ill-gotten goods). 


THE CHIEF KINDS OF STEALING 


There are so many kinds of stealing that it is most difficult to 
enumerate them all; but since the others can be reduced to theft 
and robbery, it will be sufficient to speak of these two. To inspire 
the faithful with a detestation of such grievous crimes and to 
deter them from their commission, the pastor should use all care 
and diligence. Now let us consider these two kinds of stealing. 


VARIOUS FORMS OF THEFT 


They are guilty of theft who buy stolen goods, or retain the 
property of others, whether found, seized, or pilfered. If you 
have found, and not restored, says St. Augustine, you have 


®3 Cor. vi. 10. *Epist. liv. ad Maced. * Habac. ii. 4, 


444 THE COMMANDMENTS 


stolen” If the true owner cannot, however, be discovered, what- 
ever is found should go to the poor. If the finder refuse to make 
restitution, he gives evident proof that, were it in his power, he 
would make no scruple of stealing all that he could lay his 
hands on. 

Those who, in buying or selling, have recourse to fraud and 
lying, involve themselves in the same guilt. The Lord will avenge 
their trickery. Those who sell bad and adulterated goods as real 
and genuine, or who defraud the purchasers by weight, measure, 
number, or rule, are guilty of a species of theft still more 
criminal and unjust. It is written in Deuteronomy: Thou shalt 
not have divers weights in thy bag2° Do not any unjust thing, 
says Leviticus, in judgment, in rule, in weight or in measure. Let 
the balance be just, and the weights equal, the bushel just, and the 
sextary equal.+ And elsewhere it is written: Divers weights are 
an abomination before the Lord; a deceitful balance is not 
good.i2> 

It is, also, a downright theft, when laborers and artisans exact 
full wages from those to whom they have not given just and due 
labor. Again, dishonest servants and agents are no better than 
thieves, nay they are more detestable than other thieves; against 
these everything may be locked, while against a pilfering servant 
nothing in a house can be secure by bolt or lock. 

They, also, who obtain money under pretence of poverty, or 
by deceitful words, may be said to steal, and their guilt is aggra- 
vated since they add falsehood to theft. 

Persons charged with offices of public or private trust, who 
altogether neglect, or but indifferently perform their duties, while 
they enjoy the salary and emoluments of such offices, are also to 
be reckoned in the number of thieves. 

To enumerate the various other modes of theft, invented by the 
ingenuity of avarice, which is versed in all the arts of making 


money, would be a tedious and, as already said, a most. difficult 
task. 


‘; Lib. 50. hom. ix; De Verbis Apost. Serm. xix. 
* Deut. xxv. 13. evs xix35y30 Prov. XX..232 


‘ a It is unnecessary to remind the reader that human laws may affect this. 
ecision. 


b On cheating in trade see Summa Theol. 2a. 22. Ixxvii. 


SEVENTH COMMANDMENT 445 


VARIOUS FORMS OF ROBBERY 


The pastor, therefore, should next come to treat of robbery, 
which is the second general division of these crimes. First, he 
should admonish the Christian people to bear in mind the teaching 
of the Apostle: They that will become rich fall into temptation, 
and the snare of the devil;** and never to forget the rule: All 
things whatsoever you will that men do to you, do you also to 
them; ** and always to bear in mind the words of Tobias: See 
thou never do to another what thou wouldst hate to have done to 
thee by another.® 

Robbery is more comprehensive than theft. Those who pay not 
the laborer his hire are guilty of robbery, and are exhorted to 
repentance by St. James in these words: Go to now, ye rich men, 
weep and howl for your miseries, which shall come upon you. 
He adds the reason for their repentance: Behold the hire of the 
labourers, who have reaped down your fields, which by fraud has 
been kept back by you, crieth: and the cry of them hath entered 
into the ears of the Lord of sabaoth.° This sort of robbery is 
strongly condemned in Leviticus,‘7 Deuteronomy,'® Malachy,’® 
and Tobias.”° 

Among those who are guilty of robbery are also included per- 
sons who do not pay, or who turn to other uses or appropriate to 
themselves, customs, taxes, tithes and such revenues, which are 
owed to the Church or civil authorities. 

To this class also belong usurers, the most cruel and relentless 
of extortioners, who by their exorbitant rates of interest, plunder 
and destroy the poor. Whatever is received above the capital and 
principal, be it money, or anything else that may be purchased or 
estimated by money, is usury ;# for it is written in Ezechiel: He 
hath not lent upon usury, nor taken an increase ; ** and in Luke 
our Lord says: Lend, hoping for nothing thereby.” Even among 
the pagans usury was always considered a most grievous and 


Vy Tim. vicd.. “ Matt. -vitnil2st..p> 0b Jv. LO: % James v. I, 4. 
wiceve xix, 13: * Deut. xxiv. 14. * Mal. iti. 5. 
Tobe tve 15: 1 Ezech. xviii. 8; xxii. 12. 2 Luke vi. 33. 


aMoney, as such; i.e., as a mere medium of exchange is essentially 
unproductive and interest on it is unjust; but to-day money is also cap- 
ital, #.e., an instrument of production and he who lends it has the right 
to a share in its profits by charging a reasonable rate of interest. (See 
Cronin, “The Science of Ethics,” ii. pp. 331-334). 


446 THE COMMANDMENTS 


odious crime. Hence the question, “What is usury?” was 
answered: “What is murder?” And, indeed, he who lends at 
usury sells the same thing twice, or sells that which has no 
real existence.> 

Corrupt judges, whose decisions are venal, and who, bought 
over by money or other bribes, decide against the just claims of 
the poor and needy, also commit robbery. 

Those who defraud their creditors, who deny their just debts, 
and also those who purchase goods on their own, or on another’s 
credit, with a promise to pay for them at a certain time, and do 
not keep their word, are guilty of the same crime of robbery. 
And it is an aggravation of their guilt that, in consequence of 
their want of punctuality and their fraud, prices are raised to the 
great injury of the public. To such persons seem to apply the 
words of David: The sinner shall borrow, and not pay again.*® 

But what shall we say of those rich men who exact with rigor 
what they lend to the poor, even though the latter are not able to 
pay them, and who, disregarding God’s law, take as security even 
the necessary clothing of the unfortunate debtors? For God says: 
If thou take of thy neighbour a garment in pledge, thou shalt 
give it him again before sunset, for that same is the only thing 
wherewith he is covered, the clothing of his body, neither hath 
he any other to sleep in: if he cry to me I will hear him, because 
I am compassionate. Their rigorous exaction is justly termed 
rapacity, and therefore robbery. 

Among those whom the holy Fathers pronounced guilty of 
robbery are persons who, in times of scarcity, hoard up their corn, 
thus culpably rendering supplies scarcer and dearer. This holds 
good with regard to all necessaries of life and sustenance. These 
are they against whom Solomon utters this execration: He that 
hideth up corn, shall be cursed among the people.?®> Such persons 
the pastor should warn of their guilt, and should reprove with 
more than ordinary freedom; he should explain to them at length 
the punishments which await such sins. 

So much for what the seventh Commandment forbids.¢ 


* Ps. xxxvi. 21. * Exod. xxii. 26. * Prov. xiv 20: 


@ This answer was given by Cato in Cicero’s De Officiis, ii. 25. 
>On usury see Summa Theol. 2a. 2x. xxviii. 
¢On stealing see Summa Theol. 2a. 2. Ixvi. 


SEVENTH COMMANDMENT 447 


Positive Part of this Commandment 


RESTITUTION ENJOINED 


We now come to the positive part of this Commandment, in 
which the first thing to be considered is satisfaction or restitu- 
tion; for without restitution the sin is not forgiven.?* 


WHO ARE HELD TO RESTITUTION 


But as the law of making restitution to the injured party is 
binding not only on the person who commits theft, but also on all 
who cooperate in the sin, it is necessary to explain who are indis- 
pensably bound to this satisfaction or restitution. There are sey- 
eral classes (who are thus bound). 

The first consists of those who order others to steal, and who 
are not only the authors and accomplices of theft, but also the 
most criminal among thieves. 

Another class embraces those, who, when they cannot com- 
mand others to commit theft, persuade and encourage it. These, 
since they are like the first class in intention, though unlike them 
in power, are equally guilty of theft. 

A third class is composed of those who consent to the theft 
committed by others. 

The fourth class is that of those who are accomplices in, and 
derive gain from theft; if that can be called gain, which, unless 
they repent, consigns them to everlasting torments. Of them 
David says: If thou didst see a thief, thou didst run with him.”" 

The fifth class of thieves are those who, having it in their 
power to prohibit theft, so far from opposing or preventing it, 
fully and freely suffer and sanction its commission. 

The sixth class is constituted of those who are well aware that 
the theft was committed, and when it was committed; and yet, 
far from mentioning it, pretend they know nothing about it. 

The last class comprises all who assist in the accomplishment of 
theft, who guard, defend, receive or harbor thieves. 

All these are bound to make restitution to those from whom 
anything has been stolen, and are to be earnestly exhorted to the 
discharge of so necessary a duty. 


6 Aug. Ep. liv. HBS. elie, seh 


448 THE COMMANDMENTS 


Neither are those who approve and commend thefts entirely 
innocent of this crime. Children also who steal from their 
parents, and wives who steal from their husbands are not guiltless 
of theft? 


ALMSDEEDS ENJOINED 


This Commandment also implies an obligation to sympathize 
with the poor and needy, and to relieve their difficulties and dis- 
tresses by our means and good offices. Concerning this subject, 
which cannot be insisted on too often or too strongly, the pastor 
will find abundant matter to enrich his discourses in the works of 
St. Cyprian, St. John Chrysostom, St. Gregory Nazianzen, and 
other eminent writers on almsdeeds. 


INDUCEMENTS TO PRACTICE ALMSGIVING 


The pastor, therefore, should encourage the faithful to be will- 
ing and anxious to assist those who have to depend on charity, 
_and should make them realize the great necessity of giving alms 
and of being really and practically liberal to the poor, by remind- 
ing them that on the last day God will condemn and consign to 
eternal fires those who have omitted and neglected the duty of 
almsgiving, while on the contrary He will praise and introduce 
into His heavenly country those who have exercised mercy 
towards the poor. These two sentences have been already pro- 
nounced by the lips of Christ the Lord: Come, ye blessed of my 
Father, possess the kingdom prepared for you; and: Depart from 
me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire.?8 

Priests should also cite those texts which are calculated to per- 
suade (to the performance of this important duty): Give and it 
shall be given to you.2® They should dwell on the promise of 
God, the richest and most abundant that can be conceived: There 
is no man who hath left house, or brethren, etc., that shall not 
receive an hundred times as much now in this time; and in the 
world to come life everlasting ; 8° and he should add these words 
of our Lord: Make unto yourselves friends of the mammon of 


Matt: xxv. 34. ake ® Luke vi. 38. ® Mark x. 29, 30. 
4 On restitution see Summa Theol. 2a. 2x. Ixii. 


SEVENTH COMMANDMENT 449 


iniquity, that when you shall fail, they may receive you into ever- 
lasting dwellings.* 


WAYS OF GIVING ALMS 


They should also explain the parts of this necessary duty, so 
that whoever is unable to give may at least lend to the poor what 
they need to sustain life, according to the command of Christ our 
Lord: Lend, hoping for nothing thereby.*? The happiness of 
doing this is thus expressed by holy David: Acceptable is the man 
that showeth mercy and lendeth.** 

But if we are not able to give to those who must depend on the 
charity of others for their sustenance, it is an act of Christian 
piety, as well as a means of avoiding idleness, to procure by our 
labor and industry what is necessary for the relief of the poor. 
To this the Apostle exhorts all by his own example. For your- 
selves, he says to the Thessalonians, know how you ought to 
imitate us;** and again, writing to the same people: Use your 
endeavour to be quiet, and that you do your own business, and 
work with your own hands, as we commanded you;* and to the 
Ephesians: He that stole, let him steal no more; but rather let 
him labour working with his hands the thing which is good, that 
he may have something to give to him that suffereth need.**? 


FRUGALITY IS ENJOINED 


We should also practice frugality and draw sparingly on the 
kindness of others, that we may not be a burden or a trouble to 
them. The exercise of considerateness is conspicuous in all the 
Apostles, but preéminently so in St. Paul. Writing to the 
Thessalonians he says: You remember, brethren, our labour and 
toil; working night and day lest we should be chargeable to any 
of you, we preached amongst you the gospel of God.** And in 
another place the same Apostle says: In labour and in toil, we 
worked night and day, lest we should be burdensome to any of 
you.38 b 


* Luke xvi. 9. I salle sae ee | URS) sey 2 Thess. iii. 7. 
® i Thess. iv. U. “Eph ivy. 28. “1 Thess. ii.9. “2 Thess..iii. 8. 
a On almsdeeds and liberality see Summa Theol. 2a. 22. xxxii.; Cxvii.; 


CXXXiv. : ; 
b On prodigality see Summa Theol. 2a. 2x. cxix. 


450 THE COMMANDMENTS 


Sanction of this Commandment 


THE PUNISHMENT OF ITS VIOLATION 


To inspire the faithful with an abhorrence of all infamous sins 
against this Commandment, the pastor should have recourse to 
the Prophets and the other inspired writers, to show the detesta- 
tion in which God holds the crimes of theft and robbery, and the 
awful threats which He denounces against their perpetrators. 
Hear this, exclaims the Prophet Amos, you that crush the poor, 
and make the needy of the land to fail, saying: “When will the 
month be over, and we shall sell our wares, and the sabbath, and 
we shall open the corn; that we may lessen the measure, and 
increase the sickle, and may convey in deceitful balances?” *° 
Many passages of the same kind may be found in Jeremias,*° 
Proverbs,*! and Ecclesiasticus.4? Indeed it cannot be doubted 
that such crimes are the seeds from which have sprung in great 
part the evils which in our times oppress society.? 


THE REWARD OF OBSERVING THIS COMMANDMENT 


That Christians may accustom themselves to those acts of gen- 
erosity and kindness towards the poor and the needy which are 
inculcated by the second part of this Commandment, the pastor 
should place before them those ample rewards which God prom- 
ises in this life and in the next to the beneficent and the bountiful. 


Excuses for Stealing Refuted 


As there are not wanting those who would even excuse their 
thefts, these are to be admonished that God will accept no excuse 
for sin; and that their excuses, far from extenuating, serve only 
greatly to aggravate their guilt. 


THE PLEA OF RANK AND POSITION 


How insufferable the vanity of those men of exalted rank who 
excuse themselves by alleging that they act not from cupidity or 

* Amos viii. 4, 5. © Jer. v.j xxi.; xxii. 

i Provxcxt mlicclies 


a On the ecclesiastical penalties against stealing see Code of Canon Law, 
canon 2354. 


SEVENTH COMMANDMENT 451 


avarice, but stoop to take what belongs to others only from a 
desire to maintain the grandeur of their families and of their 
ancestors, whose repute and dignity must fall, if not upheld by the 
possession of another man’s property. Of this harmful error 
they are to be disabused; and they are to be convinced that the 
only means to preserve and augment their wealth and to enhance 
the glory of their ancestors is to obey the will of God and observe 
His Commandments. Once His will and Commandments are 
contemned, the stability of property, no matter how securely set- 
tled, is overturned; kings are dethroned, and hurled from the 
highest stations of honor; while the humblest individuals, men 
too, towards whom they cherished the most implacable hatred, 
are sometimes called by God to occupy their place. 

It is incredible to what degree the divine wrath is kindled 
against such offenders, and this we know from the testimony of 
Isaias, who records these words of God: Thy princes are faith- 
less, companions of thieves; they all love bribes, they run after 
rewards. Therefore, saith the Lord, the God of Hosts, the 
mighty one of Israel: Ah! I will comfort myself over my adver- 
saries; and I will be revenged of my enemies; and I will turn my 
hand to thee, and I will clean purge away thy dross.* 


THE PLEA OF GREATER EASE AND ELEGANCE 


Some there are, who plead in justification of such conduct, not 
the ambition of maintaining splendor and glory, but a desire of 
acquiring the means of living in greater ease and elegance. These 
are to be refuted, and should be shown how impious are the 
words and conduct of those who prefer their own ease to the will 
and the glory of God whom, by neglecting His Commandments, 
we offend extremely. And yet what real advantage can there be 
in theft? Of how many very serious evils is it not the source? 
Confusion and repentance, says Ecclesiasticus, is upon a thief.** 
But even though no disadvantage overtake the thief, he offers an 
insult to the divine name, opposes the most holy will of God, and 
contemns His salutary precepts. From hence result all error, all 
dishonesty, all impiety. 


“Isa. i. 23-20. su cClmval 7 


452 THE COMMANDMENTS 


THE PLEA OF THE OTHER’S WEALTH 


But do we not sometimes hear the thief contend that he is not 
guilty of sin, because he steals from the rich and the wealthy, 
who, in his mind, not only suffer no injury, but do not even feel 
the loss? Such an excuse is as wretched as it is baneful. 


THE PLEA OF FORCE OF HABIT 


Others imagine that they should be excused, because they have 
contracted such a habit of stealing as not to be able easily to 
refrain from such desires and practices. If such persons listen 
not to the admonition of the Apostle: He that stole, let him now 
steal no more,* let them recollect that one day, whether they like 
it or not, they will become accustomed to an eternity of torments. 


THE PLEA OF FAVORABLE OPPORTUNITY 


Some excuse themselves by saying that the opportunity pre- 
sented itself. The proverb is well known: Those who are not 
thieves are made so by opportunity. Such persons are to be dis- 
abused of their wicked idea by reminding them that it is our 
duty to resist every evil propensity. If we yield instant obedience 
to every inordinate impulse, what measure, what limits will there 
be to crime and disorder? Such an excuse, therefore, is of the 
lowest character, or rather is an avowal of a complete want of 
restraint and justice. To say that you do not commit sin, because 
you have no opportunity of sinning, is almost to acknowledge that 
you are always prepared to sin when opportunity offers. 


THE PLEA OF REVENGE 


There are some who say that they steal in order to gratify 
revenge, having themselves suffered the same injury from others. 
To such offenders it should be answered first of all that no one is 
allowed to return injury for injury; next that no person can be 
a judge in his own cause; and finally that still less can it be 
lawful to punish one man for the wrong done you by another. 


“Eph. iv. 28. 


SEVENTH COMMANDMENT 453 


THE PLEA OF FINANCIAL EMBARRASSMENT 


Finally, some find a sufficient justification of theft in their own 
embarrassments, alleging that they are overwhelmed with debt, 
which they cannot pay off otherwise than by theft. Such persons 
should be given to understand that no debt presses more heavily 
upon all men than that which we mention each day in these words 
of the Lord’s Prayer: Forgive us our debts.*® Hence it is the 
height of folly to be willing to increase our debt to God by new 
sin, in order to be able to pay our debts to men. It is much better 
to be consigned to prison than to be cast into the eternal torments 
of hell; it is by far a greater evil to be condemned by the judg- 
ment of God, than by that of man. Hence it becomes our duty to 
have recourse to the assistance and mercy of God from whom we 
can obtain whatever we need. 

There are also other excuses, which, however, the judicious and 
zealous pastor will not find it difficult to meet, so that thus he may 
one day be blessed with a people who are followers of good 
works.47 , 


“ Matt. vi. 12. Wa Wineite ik, 


THE EIGHTH COMMANDMENT 
“Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour” * 


IMPORTANCE OF INSTRUCTION ON THIS COMMANDMENT 


The great utility, nay the necessity, of carefully explaining this 
Commandment, and of emphasizing its obligation, we learn from 
these words of St. James: Jf any man offend not in word, the 
same is a perfect man; and again, The tongue is indeed a little 
member, and boasteth great things. Behold how small a fre, 
what a great wood it kindleth;? and so on, to the same effect. 

From these words we learn two truths. The first is that sins 
of the tongue are very prevalent, which is confirmed by these 
words of the Prophet: Every man is a liar,’ so that it would 
almost seem as if this were the only sin which extends to all man- 
kind. The other truth is that the tongue is the source of in- 
numerable evils. Through the fault of the evil-speaker are often 
lost the property, the reputation, the life, and the salvation of the 
injured person, or of him who inflicts the injury. The injured 
person, unable to bear patiently the contumely, avenges it without 
restraint. The offender, on the other hand, deterred by a per- 
verse shame and a false idea of what is called honor, cannot be 
induced to make reparation to him whom he has offended.? 


THIS COMMANDMENT SHOULD CALL FORTH OUR GRATITUDE 


Hence the faithful are to be exhorted to thank God as much as 
they can for having given this salutary Commandment, not to 
bear false witness, which not only forbids us to injure others, but 
which also, if duly observed, prevents others from injuring us. 


*Exod. xx. 16. * James iii. 2, 5. MIR, Sain, Te 


a On the eighth Commandment see Summa Theol. 2a. 2. cxxii. 6; St 
Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. iti. tr. 6. c. 1. 


454 


EIGHTH COMMANDMENT 455 


TWO PARTS OF THIS COMMANDMENT 


In its explanation we shall proceed as we have done with regard 
to the others, pointing out that in it are contained two laws. The 
first forbids us to bear false witness. The other commands us 
to lay aside all dissimulation and deceit, and to measure our 
words and actions by the standard of truth, a duty of which the 
Apostle admonishes the Ephesians in these words: Doing the 
truth in charity, let us grow up in all things in him.* 


Negative Part of this Commandment 


With regard to the prohibitory part of this Commandment, 
although by false testimony is understood whatever is positively 
but falsely affirmed of anyone, be it for or against him, be it in 
a public court or elsewhere; yet the Commandment specially 
prohibits that species of false testimony which is given on oath in 
a court of justice. Fora witness swears by the Deity, because the 
words of a man thus giving evidence and using the divine name, 
have very great weight and possess the strongest claim to credit. 
Such testimony, therefore, because it is dangerous, is specially 
prohibited ; for even the judge himself cannot reject the testimony 
of sworn witnesses, unless they be excluded by exceptions made 
in the law, or unless their dishonesty and malice are notorious. 
This is especially true since it is commanded by divine authority 
that in the mouth of two or three every word shall stand.® 


“AGAINST THY NEIGHBOUR” 


In order that the faithful may have a clear comprehension of 
this Commandment it should be explained who is our neighbor, 
against whom it is unlawful to bear false witness. According to 
the interpretation of Christ the Lord, our neighbor is he who 
needs our assistance, whether bound to us by ties of kindred or 
not, whether a fellow-citizen or a stranger, a friend or an enemy.® 
It is wrong to think that one may give false evidence against an 
enemy, since by the command of God and of our Lord we are 
bound to love him. 


‘Eph. iv. 15. ® Matt. xviii. 16; Deut. xix. 15. ®Luke x. 36. 


456 THE COMMANDMENTS 


Moreover, as every man is bound to love himself, and is thus, in 
some sense, his own neighbor, it is unlawful for anyone to bear 
false witness against himself. He who does so brands himself 
with infamy and disgrace, and injures both. himself and the 
Church of which he is a member, much as the suicide, by his act, 
does a wrong to the state. This is the doctrine of St. Augustine, 
who says: To those who do not understand (the precept) prop- 
erly, it might seem lawful to give false testimony against one’s 
self, because the words “against thy neighbour” are subjoined in 
the Commandment. But let no one who bears false testimony 
against himself think that he has not violated this Commandment, 
for the standard of loving our neighbour is the love which we 
cherish towards ourselves." 


FALSE TESTIMONY IN FAVOR OF A NEIGHBOR IS ALSO FORBIDDEN 


But if we are forbidden to injure our neighbor by false testi- 
mony, let it not be inferred that the contrary is lawful, and that 
we may help by perjury those who are bound to us by ties of 
kinship or religion. It is never allowed to have recourse to lies or 
deception, much less to perjury. Hence St. Augustine in his book 
to Crescentius On Lying teaches from the words of the Apostle 
that a lie, although uttered in false praise of anyone, is to be 
numbered among false testimonies. Treating of that passage, 
Yea, and we are found false witnesses of God, because we have 
given testimony against God, that he hath raised up Christ whom 
he hath not raised, if the dead rise not again,’ he says: The 
Apostle calls it false testimony to utter a lie with regard to Christ, 
even though it should seem to redound to His praise.® 

It also not infrequently happens, that by favoring one party we 
injure the other. False testimony is certainly the occasion of mis- 
leading the judge, who, yielding to such evidence, is sometimes 
obliged to decide against justice, to the injury of the innocent. 

Sometimes, too, it happens that the successful party, who by 
means of perjured witnesses, has gained his case and escaped 
with impunity, exulting in his iniquitous victory, soon becomes 


"De Civ. Dei, lib. viii, c. 20. Sa Gor iets: 
* Ad Crescentium. cap. 12-14. 


EIGHTH COMMANDMENT 457 


accustomed to the work of corrupting and suborning false wit- 
nesses, by whose aid he hopes to obtain whatever he wishes. 

To the witness himself it must be most grievous that his false- 
hood and perjury are known to him whom he has aided and 
abetted by his perjury; whilst encouraged by the success that fol- 
lows his crime, he becomes every day more accustomed to wicked- 
ness and audacity. 


“THOU SHALT NOT BEAR FALSE WITNESS” 


ALL FALSEHOODS IN LAWSUITS ARE FORBIDDEN 


This precept then prohibits deceit, lying and perjury on the 
part of witnesses. The same prohibition extends also to plaintiffs, 
defendants, promoters, representatives, procurators and advo- 
cates ; in a word, to all who take any part in lawsuits. 


FALSE TESTIMONY OUT OF COURT IS FORBIDDEN 


Finally, God prohibits all testimony which may inflict injury 
or injustice, whether it be a matter of legal evidence or not. In 
the passage of Leviticus where the Commandments are repeated, 
we read: Thou shalt not steal; thou shalt not lie; neither shall 
any man deceive his neighbour.° To none, therefore can it be 
a matter of doubt, that this Commandment condemns lies of every 
sort, as these words of David explicitly declare: Thou wilt 
destroy all that speak a lie. # 


THIS COMMANDMENT FORBIDS DETRACTION 


This Commandment forbids not only false testimony, but also 
the detestable vice and practice of detraction,—a pestilence, which 
is the source of innumerable and calamitous evils. This vicious 
habit of secretly reviling and calumniating character is frequently 
reprobated in the Sacred Scriptures. With him, says David, Mf 
would not eat;32 and St. James: Detract not one another, my 


brethren.** . 
Holy Writ abounds not only with precepts on the subject, but 


USI, Sob iby, 12s. vie7: a eA a 8 James iv. II. 
a On false testimony see Summa Theol. 2a. 2x. Ixviii-Ixxi. 


458 THE COMMANDMENTS 


also with examples which reveal the enormity of the crime. 
Aman, by a crime of his own invention, had so incensed Assuerus 
against the Jews that he ordered the destruction of the entire 
race.* Sacred history contains many other examples of the same 
kind, which priests should recall in order to deter the people from 
such iniquity. 


VARIOUS KINDS OF DETRACTION 


But, to understand well the nature of this sin of detraction, 
we must know that reputation is injured not only by calumniating 
the character, but also by exaggerating the faults of others. He 
who gives publicity to the secret sin of any man, in an unneces- 
sary place or time, or before persons who have no right to know, 
is also rightly regarded as a detractor and evil-speaker, if his 
revelation seriously injures the other’s reputation. 

But of all sorts of calumnies the worst is that which is directed 
against Catholic doctrine and its teachers. Persons who extol 
the propagators of error and of unsound doctrine are guilty of a 
like crime. 

Nor are those to be dissociated from the ranks of evil-speakers, 
or from their guilt, who, instead of reproving, lend a willing ear 
and a cheerful assent to the calumniator and reviler. As we read 
in St. Jerome?® and St. Bernard,?* it is not so easy to decide 
which is more guilty, the detractor, or the listener; for if there 
were no listeners, there would be no detractors. 

To the same category belong those who cunningly foment divi- 
sions and excite quarrels; who feel a malignant pleasure in 
sowing discord, dissevering by fiction and falsehood the closest 
friendships and the dearest social ties, impelling to endless hatred 
and deadly combat the fondest friends. Of such pestilent char- 
acters the Lord expresses His detestation in these words: Thou 
shalt not be a detractor nor a whisperer among the people.” Of 
this description were many of the advisers of Saul, who strove to 
alienate the king’s affection from David and to arouse his enmity 
against him.*8 @ 

“Esth. xiii. 6. “Ep. ad Nepotianum towards the end. 

* De Consider. lib. ii, ad Eugen., at the end. 


“Lev. xix. 16. *% 1 Kings xxiv.; xxvi. 
a On detraction and whispering see Summa Theol. 2a. 2%. Ixxiii. Ixxiv. 


EIGHTH COMMANDMENT 459 


THIS COMMANDMENT FORBIDS FLATTERY 


Among the transgressors of this Commandment are to be num- 
bered those fawners and sycophants who, by flattery and insincere 
praise, gain the hearing and good will of those whose favor, 
money and honors they seek, calling good evil, and evil good, as 
the Prophet says.*® Such characters David admonishes us to 
repel and banish from our society. The just man, he says, shall 
correct me in mercy, and shall reprove me; but let not the oil of 
the sinner fatten my head.*° This class of persons do not, it is 
true, speak ill of their neighbor ; but they greatly injure him, since 
by praising his sins they cause him to continue in vice to the end 
of his life. 

Of this species of flattery the most pernicious is that which 
proposes to itself for object the injury and the ruin of others. 
Thus Saul, when he sought to expose David to the sword and 
fury of the Philistines, in order to bring about his death, ad- 
dressed him in these soothing words: Behold my eldest daughter 
Merob, her will I give thee to wife: only be a valiant man and 
fight the battles of the Lord.*t In the same way the Jews thus 
insidiously addressed our Lord: Master, we know that thou art 
a true speaker, and teachest the way of God in truth.” 

Still more pernicious is the language addressed sometimes by 
friends and relations to a person suffering with a mortal disease, 
and on the point of death, when they assure him that there is no 
danger of dying, telling him to be of good spirits, dissuading him 
from confession, as though the very thought should fill him with 
melancholy, and finally withdrawing his attention from all care 
and thought of the dangers which beset him in the last perilous 
hour.? 


THIS COMMANDMENT FORBIDS LIES OF ALL KINDS 


In a word, lies of every sort are prohibited, especially those that 
cause grave injury to anyone, while most impious of all is a lie 
uttered against or regarding religion. 


= Isa. v.20: ese CX. 5. 
711 Kings xviil. 17. 2 Matt. xxii. 16. 


aQOn flattery see Summa Theol. 2a. 22. cxv. 


460 THE COMMANDMENTS 


God is also grievously offended by those attacks and slanders 
which are termed lampoons, and other defamatory publications 
of this kind. 

To deceive by a jocose’ or officious lie, even though it helps or 
harms no one, is, notwithstanding, altogether unworthy ; for thus 
the Apostle admonishes us: Putting away lying, speak ye the 
truth28 This practice begets a strong tendency to frequent and 
serious lying, and from jocose lying men contract the habit of 
lying, lose all reputation for truth, and ultimately find it neces- 
sary, in order to gain belief, to have recourse to continual swear- 
ing. 


THIS COMMANDMENT FORBIDS HYPOCRISY 


Finally, the first part of this Commandment prohibits dissimu- 
lation. It is sinful not only to speak, but to act deceitfully. 
Actions, as well as words, are signs of what is in our mind; and 
hence our Lord, rebuking the Pharisees, frequently calls them 
hypocrites So far with regard to the negative, which is the first 
part of this Commandment. 


Positive Part of this Commandment 


JUDGES MUST PASS SENTENCE ACCORDING TO LAW AND JUSTICE 


We now come to explain what the Lord commands in the sec- 
ond part. Its nature and purpose require that trials be conducted 
on principles of strict justice and according to law. It requires 
that no one usurp judicial powers or authority, for, as the Apostle 
writes, it were unjust to judge another man’s servant.2* 

Again it requires that no one pass sentence without a sufficient 
knowledge of the case. This was the sin of the priests and scribes 
who passed judgment on St. Stephen.2> The magistrates of 
Philippi furnish another example. They have beaten us publicly, 
says the Apostle, uncondemned, men that are Romans, and have 
cast us into prison; and now do they thrust us out privately.?* 

This Commandment also requires that the innocent be not con- 
demned, nor the guilty acquitted; and that (the decision) be not 

* Eph. iv. 25. * Rom. xiv. 4. * Acts vii. 59. * Acts xvi. '37. 

a On lying, hypocrisy and deceit see Summa Theol. 2a. 2x. cx. ff, 


EIGHTH COMMANDMENT 461 


influenced by money, or favor, hatred or love. For so Moses 
admonished the elders whom he had constituted judges of the 
people: Judge that which is just, whether he be one of your 
country or a stranger. There shall be no difference of persons, 
you shall hear the little as well as the great; neither shall you 
respect any man’s person, because it is the judgment of God?" 


WITNESSES MUST GIVE TESTIMONY TRUTHFULLY 


With regard to an accused person who is conscious of his own 
guilt, God commands him to confess the truth, if he is interro- 
gated judicially.» By that confession he, in some sort, bears 
witness to, and proclaims the praise and glory of God; and of 
this we have a proof in these words of Josue, when exhorting 
Achan to confess the truth: My son, give glory to the Lord the 
God of Israel.?8 

But as this Commandment chiefly concerns witnesses, the 
pastor should give them special attention. The spirit of the pre- 
cept not only prohibits false testimony, but also commands the 
truth to be told. In human affairs, to bear testimony to the truth 
is a matter of the highest importance, because there are innumer- 
able things of which we must be ignorant unless we arrive at a 
knowledge of them on the faith of witnesses. In matters with 
which we are not personally acquainted and which we need to 
know, there is nothing so important as true evidence. Hence the 
words of St. Augustine: He who conceals the truth and he who 
utters falsehood are both guilty; the one, because he is unwilling 
to render a service; the other, because he has the will to do an 
injury.© 

We are not, however, at all times, obliged to disclose the truth ; 
but when, in a court of justice, a witness is legally interrogated 
by the judge, he is emphatically bound to tell the whole truth. 
Here, however, witnesses should be most circumspect, lest, trust- 


ao Demtenaet0: 8 Josue vii. 10. 
aOn the justice required of judges see Summa Theol. 2a. 2e. Ixvii. 
b This decision is conditional, as the judicial forms vary in different 


countries. : f ; 
¢ These words which Gratian cited from St. Augustine are not found 
in the works of the holy Doctor. Something similar is found in Isidore, 


lib. iii, c. 59. 


462 THE COMMANDMENTS 


ing too much to memory, they affirm for certain what they have 
not fully ascertained. 


LAWYERS AND PLAINTIFFS MUST BE GUIDED BY LOVE OF JUSTICE 


Attorneys and counsel, plaintiffs and prosecutors, remain still 
to be treated of. The two former should not refuse to contribute 
their services and legal assistance, when the necessities of others 
call for their aid. They should deal generously with the poor. 
They should not defend an unjust cause, prolong lawsuits by 
trickery, nor encourage them for the sake of gain. As to remu- 
neration for their services and labors, let them be guided by the 
principles of justice and of equity. 

Plaintiffs and prosecutors, on their side, are to be warned not 
to be led by the influence of love, or hatred, or any other undue 
motive into exposing anyone to danger through unjust charges. 


ALL MUST SPEAK TRUTHFULLY AND WITH CHARITY 


To all conscientious persons is addressed the divine command 
that in all their intercourse with society, in every conversation, 
they should speak the truth at all times from the sincerity of their 
hearts; that they should utter nothing injurious to the reputation 
of another, not even of those by whom they know they have been 
injured and persecuted. For they should always remember that 
between them and others there exists such a close social bond that 
they are all members of the same body.* 


INDUCEMENTS TO TRUTHFULNESS 


In order that the faithful may be more disposed to avoid the 
vice of lying, the pastor should place before them the extreme 
lowness and disgrace of this sin. In the Sacred Scriptures the 
devil is called the father of lies; for as, he stood not in the truth, 
he is a liar and the father thereof.*® 

To banish so great a sin, (the pastor) should add the mis- 
chievous consequences of lying; but since they are innumerable, 
he must be content with pointing out the chief kinds of these 
evils and calamities. 

*® John viii. 44. 

aOn the virtue of truthfulness see Summa Theol. 2a. 2%. cix. 


EIGHTH COMMANDMENT 463 


In the first place, he should show how grievously lies and 
deceit offend God and how deeply they are hated by God. This 
he should prove from the words of Solomon: Six things there 
are which the Lord hateth, and the seventh his soul detesteth: 
haughty eyes, a lying tongue, hands that shed innocent blood, a 
heart that deviseth wicked plots, feet that are swift to run into 
mischief, a deceitful witness that uttereth lies, etc.®° Who, then, 
can protect or save from severest chastisements the man who is 
thus the object of God’s special hate? 

Again, what more wicked, what more base than, as St. James 
says, with the same tongue, by which we bless God and the 
Father, to curse men, who are made after the image and likeness 
of God, so that out of the same fountain flows sweet and bitter 
water.*+ The tongue, which was before employed in giving praise 
and glory to God, afterwards, as far as it is able, by lying treats 
Him with ignominy and dishonor. Hence liars are excluded from 
a participation in the bliss of heaven. To David asking, Lord! 
who shall dwell in thy tabernacle? the Holy Spirit answers: He 
that speaketh truth in his heart, who hath not used deceit in his 
tongue.*? 

Lying is also attended with this very great evil that it is an 
almost incurable disease. For since the guilt of the calumniator 
cannot be pardoned, unless satisfaction be made to the calum- 
niated person, and since, as we have already observed, this duty 
is difficult for those who are deterred from its performance by 
false shame and a foolish idea of dignity, we cannot doubt that 
he who continues in this sin is destined to the unending punish- 
ments of hell. Let no one indulge the hope of obtaining the par- 
don of his calumnies or detractions, until he has repaired the 
injury which they have inflicted on the honor or fame of another, 
whether this was done in a court of justice, or in private and 
familiar conversation. 

But the evil consequences of lying are widespread and extend 
to society at large. By duplicity and lying, good faith and truth, 
which form the closest links of human society, are dissclved, con- 
fusion ensues, and men seem to differ in nothing from demons. 

® Prov. vi. 16. * James iii. 9, II. BaP cy exivint,) 63: 


a On the ecclesiastical penalties against detraction and perjury see Code 
of Canon Law, canons 2355, 2323. 


464 THE COMMANDMENTS 


HOW TO AVOID LYING 


The pastor should also teach that loquacity is to be avoided. 
By avoiding loquacity other evils will be obviated, and a great 
preventive opposed to lying, from which loquacious persons can 
scarcely abstain. 


Excuses for Lying Refuted 


THE PLEA OF PRUDENCE 


There are those who seek to justify their duplicity either by 
the unimportance of what they say, or by the example of the 
worldly wise who, they claim, lie at the proper time. The pastor 
should correct such erroneous ideas by answering what is most 
true, namely, that the wisdom of the flesh is death.** He should 
exhort his listeners in all their difficulties and dangers to trust in 
God, not in the artifice of lying; for those who have recourse to 
subterfuge, plainly show that they trust more to their own 
prudence than to the providence of God. 


THE PLEA OF REVENGE 


Those who lay the blame of their own falsehood on others, 
who first deceived them by lies, are to be taught the unlawfulness 
of avenging their own wrongs, and that evil is not to be rendered 
for evil, but rather that evil is to be overcome by good.** Even 
if it were lawful to return evil for evil, it would not be to our 
interest to harm ourselves in order to get revenge. The man who 
seeks revenge by uttering falsehood inflicts very serious injury 
on himself. 


THE PLEAS OF FRAILTY, HABIT, AND BAD EXAMPLE 


Those who plead human frailty are to be taught that it is a 
duty of religion to implore the divine assistance, and not to yield 
to human infirmity. 

Those who excuse themselves by habit are to be admonished 
to endeavor to acquire the contrary habit of speaking the truth; 


Rom. viii. 6. * Rom. xii. 17, 21. 


EIGHTH COMMANDMENT 465 


particularly as those who sin habitually are more guilty than 
others. 

There are some who adduce in their own justification the 
example of others, who, they contend, constantly indulge in false- 
hood and perjury. Such persons should be undeceived by 
reminding them that bad men are not to be imitated, but reproved 
and corrected; and that, when we ourselves are addicted to the 
same vice, our admonitions have less influence in reprehending 
and correcting it in others. 


THE PLEAS OF CONVENIENCE, AMUSEMENT, AND ADVANTAGE 


With regard to those who defend their conduct by saying 
that to speak the truth is often attended with inconvenience, 
priests should answer that (such an excuse) is an accusation, not 
a defence, since it is the duty of a Christian to suffer any incon- 
venience rather than utter a falsehood. 

There remain two other classes of persons who seek to justify 
lying: those who say that they tell lies for the sake of amuse- 
ment, and those who plead motives of interest, claiming that with- 
out recourse to lies, they can neither buy nor sell to advantage. 
The pastor should endeavor to reform both these kinds of liars. 
He should correct the former by showing how strong a habit of 
sinning is contracted by their practice, and by strongly impressing 
upon them the truth that for every idle word they shall render an 
account.®® As for the second class, he should upbraid them with 
greater severity, because their very excuse is a most serious ac- 
cusation against themselves, since they show thereby that they 
yield no faith or confidence to these words of God: Seek first the 
kingdom of God and his justice, and all these things shall be 
added unto you.*® 


* Matt. xii. 36. * Matt. vi. 33. 


THE NINTH AND TENTH COMMANDMENTS 


“Thou shalt not covet thy neighdour’s house: neither shalt thou 
desire his wife, nor his servant, nor his hand-maid, nor his ox, 
nor his ass, nor anything that 1s his.” * 


IMPORTANCE OF INSTRUCTION ON THESE TWO COMMANDMENTS 


It is to be observed, in the first place, that these two pre- 
cepts, which were delivered last in order, furnish a general prin- 
ciple for the observance of all the rest. What is commanded in 
these two amounts to this, that if we wish to observe the preced- 
ing precepts of the law, we must be particularly careful not to 
covet. For he who does not covet, being content with what he 
has, will not desire what belongs to others, but will rejoice in their 
prosperity, will give glory to the immortal God, will render Him 
boundless thanks, and will observe the Sabbath, that is, will enjoy 
perpetual repose, and will respect his superiors. In fine, he will 
injure no man in word or deed or otherwise; for the root of all 
evil is concupiscence, which hurries its unhappy victims into 
every species of crime and wickedness. Keeping these considera- 
tions in mind, the pastor should be more diligent in explaining this 


Commandment, and the faithful more ready to hear (his instruc- 
tion ).3 


WHY THESE TWO COMMANDMENTS ARE EXPLAINED HERE TOGETHER 


We have united these two Commandments because, since their 
subject-matter is similar, they may be treated together. How- 
ever, the pastor may explain them either together or separately, 
according as he may deem it more effective for his exhortations 
and admonitions. If, however, he has undertaken the exposition 

*Exod. xx. 17. j 


aOn the ninth and tenth Commandments see Summa Theol. 2a. 22, 
cxxii. 6; clxx.; St. Alphonsus, Theol. Mor. iii. tr. 6. c. 2. 


466 


NINTH AND TENTH COMMANDMENTS 467 


of the Decalogue, he should point out in what these two Com- 
mandments are dissimilar; how one covetousness differs from 
another—a difference noticed by St. Augustine, in his book of 
Questions on Exodus.? The one covetousness looks only to 
utility and interest, the other to unlawful desire and criminal 
pleasure. He, for instance, who covets a field or house, pursues 
profit rather than pleasure, while he who covets another man’s 
wife yields to a desire of pleasure, not of profit. 


NECESSITY OF PROMULGATING THESE TWO COMMANDMENTS 


The promulgation of these two Commandments was necessary 
for two reasons. The first is to explain the sixth and seventh 
Commandments. Reason alone shows that to prohibit adultery 
is also to prohibit the desire of another man’s wife, because, were 
the desire lawful, its indulgence must be so too; nevertheless, 
many of the Jews, blinded by sin, could not be induced to believe 
that such desires were prohibited by God. Nay, even after the 
Law had been promulgated and become known, many who pro- 
fessed themselves its interpreters, continued in the same error, 
as we learn from these words of our Lord recorded in St. Mat- 
thew: You have heard that it was said to them of old: “Thou 
shalt not commit adultery,” but I say to you, etc.* 

The second reason (for the promulgation) of these two Com- 
mandments is that they distinctly and in express terms prohibit 
some things of which the sixth and seventh Commandments do 
not contain an explicit prohibition. The seventh Commandment, 
for instance, forbids an unjust desire or endeavor to take what 
belongs to another; but this Commandment further prohibits 
even to covet it in any way, even though it could be acquired 
justly and lawfully, if we foresee that by such acquisition our 
neighbor would suffer some loss. 


THESE TWO COMMANDMENTS TEACH GOD’S LOVE FOR US AND OUR 
NEED OF HIM 


But before we come to the exposition of the Commandments, 
the faithful are first to be informed that by this law we are 


2 Ouest. 77: § Matt. v. 28. 


468 THE COMMANDMENTS 


taught not only to restrain our inordinate desires, but also to 
know the boundless love of God towards us. 

By the preceding Commandments God had, as it were, fenced 
us round with safeguards, securing us and ours against injury 
of every sort; but by the addition of these two Commandments, 
He intended chiefly to provide against the injuries which we 
might inflict on ourselves by the indulgence of inordinate desires, 
as would easily happen were we at liberty to covet all things 
indiscriminately. By this law then, which forbids to covet, God 
has blunted in some degree the keenness of desire, which excites 
to every kind of evil, so that by reason of His command these 
desires are to some extent diminished, and we ourselves, freed 
from the annoying importunity of the passions, are enabled to 
devote more time to the performance of the numerous and im- 
portant duties of piety and religion which we owe to God. 

Nor is this the only lesson of instruction which we derive from 
these Commandments. They also teach us that the divine law 
is to be observed not only by the external performance of duties, 
but also by the internal concurrence of the heart. Between divine 
and human laws, then, there is this difference, that human laws 
are fulfilled by an external compliance alone, whereas the laws 
of God, since He reads the heart, require purity of heart, sin- 
cere and undefiled integrity of soul. 

The law of God, therefore, is a sort of mirror, in which we 
behold the corruption of our own nature; and hence these words 
of the Apostle: J had not known concupiscence, if the law did 
not say: “Thou shalt not covet.” * Concupiscence, which is the 
fuel of sin, and which originated in sin, is always inherent in our 
fallen nature; from it we know that we are born in sin, and, 


therefore, do we humbly fly for assistance to Him, who alone 
can efface the stains of sin. 


TWO PARTS OF THESE COMMANDMENTS 


In common with the other Commandments, however, these two 
are partly mandatory, partly prohibitory. 


“Rom. vii. 7. 


NINTH AND ‘TENTH COMMANDMENTS 469 


Negative Part 
“THOU SHALT NOT COVET” 


With regard to the prohibitory part, the pastor should explain 
what sort of concupiscence is prohibited by this law, lest some 
may think that which is not sinful to be sinful. 


WHAT SORT OF CONCUPISCENCE IS NOT FORBIDDEN 


Such is the concupiscence of the spirit against the flesh;* or 
that which David so earnestly desired, namely, to long after the 
justifications of God at all times.® 

Concupiscence, then, is a certain commotion and impulse of 
the soul, urging men to the desire of pleasures, which they do 
not actually enjoy. As the other propensities of the soul are 
not always sinful, neither is the impulse of concupiscence always 
vicious. It is not, for instance, sinful to desire food and drink; 
when cold, to wish for warmth; when warm, to wish to become 
cool. This lawful species of concupiscence was implanted in us 
by the Author of nature; but in consequence of the sin of our 
first parents it passed the limits prescribed by nature and became 
so depraved that it frequently excites to the desire of those things 
which conflict with the spirit and reason. 

However, if well regulated, and kept within proper bounds, 
it is often still the source of no slight advantage. In the first 
place, it leads us to supplicate God continually, and humbly to 
beg of Him those things which we most earnestly desire. Prayer 
is the interpreter of our wishes; and if this lawful concupiscence 
did not exist within us, prayer would be far less frequent in the 
Church of God. It also makes us esteem the gifts of God more 
highly ; for the more eagerly we desire anything, the dearer and 
more pleasing will be its possession to us. Finally, the gratifi- 
cation which we receive from the acquisition of the desired object 
increases the devotion of our gratitude to God. 

If then it is sometimes lawful to covet, it must be conceded 
that not every species of concupiscence is forbidden. St. Paul, 
it is true, says that concupiscence is sin;" but his words are to 


*Gallavent7. ® Ps. cxvili. 20. * Rom. vii. 20. 


470 THE COMMANDMENTS 


be understood in the same sense as those of Moses, whom he 
cites,? as the Apostle himself declares when, in his Epistle to 
the Galatians he calls it the concupiscence of the flesh, for he 
says: Walk in the spirit, and you shall not fulfil the lusts of the 
flesh.® 

Hence that natural, well-regulated concupiscence which does 
not go beyond its proper limits, is not prohibited; still less do 
these Commandments forbid that spiritual desire of the virtuous 
mind, which prompts us to long for those things that war against 
the flesh, for the Sacred Scriptures themselves exhort us to such 
a desire: Covet ye my words,° Come over to me all ye that 
desire me." 


WHAT SORT OF CONCUPISCENCE IS HERE PROHIBITED 


It is not, then, the mere power of desire, which can move 
either to a good or a bad object that is prohibited by these Com- 
mandments; it is the indulgence of evil desire, which is called 
the concupiscence of the. flesh, and the fuel of sin, and which 
when accompanied by the consent of the will, is always sinful. 
Therefore only that covetousness is forbidden which the Apostle 
calls the concupiscence of the flesh, that is to say, those motions 
of desire which are contrary to the dictates of reason and out- 
step the limits prescribed by God. 


TWO KINDS OF SINFUL CONCUPISCENCE 


This kind of covetousness is condemned, either because it de- 
sires what is evil, such as adultery, drunkenness, murder, and 
such heinous crimes, of which the Apostle says: Let us not covet 
evil things, as they also coveted; 1 or because, although the ob- 
jects may not be bad in themselves, yet there is some other reason 
which makes it wrong to desire them, as when, for instance, 
God or His Church prohibit their possession; for it is not per- 
mitted us to desire these things which it is altogether unlawful 
to possess. Such were, in the Old Law, the gold and silver from 
which idols were made, and which the Lord in Deuteronomy 
forbade anyone to covet.?® 


* Exod. xt, * Gal. v. 16. = Wusaevinere: 
Eccl xxivi 20; 1 Comexno! * Deut. vii. 25, 26. 


NINTH AND TENTH COMMANDMENTS 471 


Another reason why this sort of vicious desire is condemned 
is that it has for its object that which belongs to another, such as 
a house, maid-servant, field, wife, ox, ass and many other things, 
all of which the law of God forbids us to covet, simply because 
they belong to another. The desire of such things, when con- 
sented to, is criminal, znd is numbered among the most grievous 
sins. For sin is committed the moment the soul, yielding to the 
impulse of corrupt desires, is pleased with evil things, and either 
consents to, or does not resist them, as St. James, pointing out 
the beginning and progress of sin, teaches when he says: Every 
man is tempted by his own concupiscence, being drawn away 
and allured ; then, when concupiscence hath conceived, it bringeth 
forth sin; but sin, when it is completed, begetteth death.14 

When, therefore, the Law says: Thou shalt not covet, it means 
that we are not to desire those things which belong to others. 
A thirst for what belongs to others is intense and insatiable; for 
it is written: A covetous man shall not be satisfied with money; 
and of such a one Isaias says: Woe to you that join house to 
house, and lay field to field.** 4 


THE VARIOUS OBJECTS WE ARE FORBIDDEN TO COVET 


But a distinct explanation of each of the words (in which this 
Commandment is expressed) will make it easier to understand 
the deformity and grievousness of this sin. 


“THY NEIGHBOUR’S HOUSE” 


The pastor, therefore, should teach that by the word house 
is to be understood not only the habitation in which we dwell, but 
all our property, as we know from the usage and custom of the 
sacred writers. Thus when it is said in Exodus that the Lord 
built houses for the midwives,’ the meaning is that He improved 
their condition and means. 

From this interpretation, therefore, we perceive, that we are 
forbidden to indulge an eager desire of riches, or to envy others 
their wealth, or power, or rank; but, on the contrary, we are 


“James i. 14. 22 Fcclervar0: SIGE We i * Exod. i. 21. 
a On concupiscence see Summa Theol. Ia. 2@. xxx.; 2a. 22. ixxxit) 3. 


472 THE COMMANDMENTS 


directed to be content with our own condition, whether it be high 
or low. Furthermore, it is forbidden to desire the glory of others 
since glory also is comprised under the word house. 


“NOR HIS OX, NOR HIS ASS” 


The words that follow, nor his ox, nor his ass, teach us that not 
only is it unlawful to desire things of greater value, such as a 
house, rank, glory, because they belong to others; but also things 
of little value, whatever they may be, animate or inanimate. 


“NOR HIS SERVANT” 


The words, nor his servant, come next, and include captives as 
well as other slaves whom it is no more lawful to covet than the 
other property of our neighbor. With regard to the free who 
serve voluntarily either for wages, or out of affection or respect, 
it is unlawful, by words, or hopes, or promises, or rewards to 
bribe or solicit them, under any pretext whatever, to leave those 
to whose service they have freely engaged themselves ; nay more, 
if, before the period of their contract has expired, they leave 
their employers, they are to be admonished, on the authority of 
this Commandment, to return to them by all means. 


“THY NEIGHBOUR’S” 


The word neighbour is mentioned in this Commandment to 
mark the wickedness of those who habituaily covet the lands, 
houses and the like, which lie in their immediate vicinity; for 
neighborhood, which should make for friendship, is transformed 
by covetousness from a source of love into a cause of hatred. 


GOODS FOR SALE NOT INCLUDED UNDER THIS PROHIBITION 


But this Commandment is by no means transgressed by those 
who desire to purchase or have actually purchased, at a fair price, 
from a neighbor, the goods which he has for sale. Instead of 
doing him an injury, they, on the contrary, very much assist their 
neighbor, because to him the money will be much more con- 
venient and useful than the goods he sells.? 


aQOn avarice see Summa Theol. 2a. 22. cxvili. 


NINTH AND TENTH COMMANDMENTS 473 


“HIS WIFE” 


The Commandment which forbids us to covet the goods of our 
neighbor, is followed by another, which forbids us to covet our 
neighbor’s wife—a law that prohibits not only the adulterer’s 
criminal desire of his neighbor’s wife, but even the wish to marry 
her. For of old when a bill of divorce was permitted, it might 
easily happen, that she who was put away by one husband might 
be married to another. But the Lord forbade the desire of 
another’s wife lest husbands might be induced to abandon their 
wives, or wives conduct themselves with such bad temper towards 
their husbands as to make it necessary to send them away. 

But now this sin is more grievous because the wife, although 
separated from her husband, cannot be taken in marriage by 
another until the husband’s death. He, therefore, who covets 
another man’s wife will easily fall from this into another desire, 
for he will wish either the death of the husband or the commission 
of adultery. 

The same principle holds good with regard to women who have 
been betrothed to another. To covet them is also unlawful; and 
whoever strives to break their engagement violates one of the 
most holy of promises. 

And if to covet the wedded wife of another is entirely unlaw- 
ful, it is on no account right to desire in marriage the virgin who 
is consecrated to religion and to the service of God. But should 
anyone desire in marriage a married woman whom he thinks to be 
single, and whom he would not wish to marry if he knew she had 
a husband living, certainly he does not violate this Commandment. 
Pharaoh #* and Abimelech,’® as the Scripture informs us, were 
betrayed into this error; they wished to marry Sarah, supposing 
her to be unmarried, and to be the sister, not the wife of Abra- 


ham.? 
Positive Part 


DETACHMENT FROM RICHES ENJOINED 


In order to make known the remedies calculated to overcome 
the vice of covetcusness, the pastor should explain the positive 


% Gen. xii. Gen. xx. 
aOn internal sins of impurity see Summa Theol. 2a. 2. clxx. 


474 THE COMMANDMENTS 


part of the Commandment, which consists in this, that if riches 
abound, we set not our hearts upon them,” that we be prepared 
to sacrifice them for the sake of piety and religion, that we con- 
tribute cheerfully towards the relief of the poor, and that, if we 
ourselves are poor, we bear our poverty with patience and joy. 
And, indeed, if we are generous with our own goods, we shall 
extinguish (in our own hearts) the desire of what belongs to 
another. 

Concerning the praises of poverty and the contempt of riches, 
the pastor will find little difficulty in collecting abundant matter 
for the instruction of the faithful from the Sacred Scriptures and 
the works of the Fathers. 


THE DESIRE OF HEAVENLY AND SPIRITUAL THINGS ENJOINED 


Likewise this Commandment requires us to desire, with all the 
ardor and all the earnestness of our souls, the consummation, not 
of our own wishes, but of the holy will of God, as it is expressed 
in the Lord’s Prayer. Now it is His will that we be made eminent 
in holiness; that we preserve our souls pure and undefiled; that 
we practice those duties of mind and spirit which are opposed to 
sensuality ; that we subdue our unruly appetites, and enter, under 
the guidance of reason ana of the spirit, upon a virtuous course of 
life; and finally that we hold under restraint those senses in par- 
ticular which supply matter to the passions. 


Thoughts which Help one to Keep these Commandments 


In order to extinguish the fire of passion, it will be found most 
efficacious to place before our eyes the evil consequences of its 
indulgence. 

Among those evils the first is that by obedience to the impulse 
of passion, sin gains uncontrolled sway over the soul; hence the 
Apostle warns us: Let not sin, therefore, reign in your mortal 
body, so as to obey the lusts thereof.2* Just as resistance to the 
passions destroys the power of sin, so indulgence of the passions 
expels God from His kingdom and introduces sin in His place. 

Again, concupiscence, as St. James teaches,’ is the source from 


be 5 : : 
Vetere, aart, 7? Rom. vi. 12. James i. 14. 


NINTH AND TENTH COMMANDMENTS 475 


which flows every sin. Likewise St. John says: All that is in the 
world is the concupiscence of the flesh, the concupiscence of the 
eyes, and the pride of life.?* 

A third evil of sensuality is that it darkens the understanding, 
Blinded by passion man comes to regard whatever he desires as 
lawful and even laudable. 

Finally, concupiscence stifles the seed of the divine word, sown 
in our souls by God, the great husbandman. Some, it is written 
in St. Mark, are sown among thorns; these are they who hear the 
word, and the cares of the world, and the deceitfulness of riches, 
and the lust after other things, entering in, choke the word, and it 
ts made fruitless.** 


Chief Ways in which These Two Commandments are 
Violated 


They who, more than others, are the slaves of concupiscence, 
the pastor should exhort with greater earnestness to observe this 
Commandment. Such are the following: those who are 
addicted to improper amusements, or who are immoderately given 
to recreation ; merchants, who wish for scarcity, and who cannot 
bear that other buyers or sellers hinder them from selling at a 
higher or buying at a lower rate; those who wish to see their 
neighbor reduced to want in order that they themselves may profit 
in buying or selling; soldiers who thirst for war, in order to 
enrich themselves with plunder; physicians, who wish for the 
spread of disease; lawyers, who are anxious for a great number 
of cases and litigations; and artisans who, through greed for 
gain, wish for a scarcity of the necessaries of life in order that 
they may increase their profits. 

They too, sin gravely against this Commandment, who, because 
they are envious of the praise and glory won by others, strive to 
tarnish in some degree their fame, particularly if they themselves 
are idle and worthless characters; for fame and glory are the 
reward of virtue and industry, not of indolence and laziness.@ 


337 John ii. 16. *4 Mark iv. 18. 
aQOn internal sins in general see Summa Theol. ta. 2x. Ixxiv. 8; xx. 


? 
Ut wy 


Pi mae 


ci 


Ms wsitol, ale ibe Wee 
ALY. x ve pica fat unt ake At yl pane . shh 
~ 4 —— -_ Frei “iL pee ‘a9 cy 
wg yooh ebrenercayt haat ie aealloa wtithtenumes Tiodkiv yt Sahil 


act 


|. eviews wet yeti (per Try is ain ren Ss " rove 
; © 5 One a emai gana al 
‘elo otras epoca Lame el) jell ayer me Terao t tay the 
Caneibtaer «al 1, samt cs tupeend ‘teary Syl) bold ed vie ae ii! 
: ‘ Ai See eG wm Teer crane? itis rea) tin ‘i é 
“ud-tah ciacultield ne on, at aa si 
7 a ip ite ¢ Verma eal yi ye a itty, nerd ‘iid as ce frothent saab, 


‘i : a & an) aSVN TL oe vat 


“Soa 


“eet Ae sires crtt > pw ft Tre (Pxtabyy ab ven Wk 
boinior'V . 
{ . hut ; Senne! = : 4 ‘ Ae, we 
OS oenquOES: Fo mtrabpcwnl): @aepergeilas | oh fone youkir 
m ‘ 2 nit s O eeh ar y rt yes, babies. napkin 
. oT : ip. = derpmiig npn 
isy nya erie Be el 
a ifipicien cell fe a frvesiermpeg ated 
vhs. | mw) (ha! mak eng un ad § aut eri 
et y 4 Me auacdh ‘sinbey Wwalis fil ‘wonteaprchone eax 
; erpnil). gacth tale yeahs eat ies fem) 
a Cae Tee PWN wi eeltes esti gular 
es Me Sil ov fan if ote eile See sluntites ality any Fat 
i 5 * ys, OL ee ee h Mot ria iwitevded inns. ae 


ak ( . bal 


Avg Vat will ear 


“et | OE drat eo Gt Gh darian aetna & ‘Ay saleton 


Vans j ae | | Cre) te Jing te Ay ¥ ay Le 
ne a i i i Tf e) ee a. “at yah | wh, ai iltogel 
“Ss haley Het? (Pair i) re " > Ai ee tts aut 
en 4 ; 4) ‘ oN fa 
7 be ae oe i" 
4 ve oo v Z < #). 
7 ’ te ot? ly i) wees alc 
DA : 2 y 
vA 
bm ihn U8 
A, > { 


PART IV 


THE LORD’S PRAYER 
PRAYER 


IMPORTANCE OF INSTRUCTION ON PRAYER 


One of the duties of the pastoral office, which is of the highest 
importance to the spiritual interests of the faithful, is to instruct 
them on Christian prayer; the nature and efficacy of which must 
remain unknown to many, if not taught by the pious and faithful 
diligence of the pastor. To this, therefore, should the care of the 
pastor be directed in a special manner, that his devout hearers 
may understand how and for what they are to ask God. 

Whatever is necessary to the performance of the duty of prayer 
is comprised in that divine formula which Christ the Lord 
deigned to make known to His Apostles, and through them and 
their successors to all Christians. Its thoughts and words should 
be so deeply impressed on the mind and memory as to be ever in 
readiness. To assist pastors, however, in teaching the faithful 
concerning this prayer, we have set down from those writers who 
are conspicuous for learning and fulness in this matter, whatever 
appeared to us most suitable, leaving it to pastors to draw upon 
the same sources for further information, should they deem it 


necessary. 


Necessity of Prayer 


In the first place the necessity of prayer should be insisted 
upon. Prayer is a duty not only recommended by way of counsel, 
but also commanded by obligatory precept. Christ the Lord de- 
clared this when He said: We should pray always.‘ This neces- 


1Luke xviii. I. 
477 


478 THE LORD’S PRAYER 


sity of prayer the Church points out in the prelude, if we may so 
call it, which she prefixes to the Lord’s Prayer: Admonished by 
salutary precepts, and taught by divine instruction, we presume 
to say,.ete. 

Therefore, since prayer is necessary to the Christian, the Son 
of God, yielding to the request of the disciples, Lord, teach us to 
pray, gave them a prescribed form of prayer, and encouraged 
them to hope that the objects of their petitions would be granted. 
He Himself was to them a model of prayer; He not only prayed 
assiduously, but watched whole nights in prayer.* 

The Apostles, also, did not omit to recommend this duty to 
those who had been converted to the faith of Jesus Christ. St. 
Peter ® and St. John® are most diligent in their admonitions to 
the devout; and the Apostle, mindful of its nature, frequently 
admonishes Christians of the salutary necessity of prayer. 

Besides, so various are our temporal and spiritual necessities, 
that we must have recourse to prayer as the best means for com- 
municating our wants and receiving whatever we need. For since 
God owes nothing to anyone, we must ask of Him in prayer 
those things we need, seeing that He has constituted prayer as a 
necessary means for the accomplishment of our desires, par- 
ticularly since it is clear that there are blessings which we cannot 
hope to obtain otherwise than through prayer. Thus devout 
praver has such efficacy that it is a most powerful means of cast- 
ing out demons; for there is a certain kind of demon which is not 
cast out but by prayer and fasting.” 

Those, therefore, who do not practice assiduous and regular 
prayer deprive themselves of a powerful means of obtaining gifts 
of singular value. To succeed in obtaining the object of your 
desires, it is not enough that you ask that which is good; your 
entreaties must also be assiduous. Every one that asketh, says 
St. Jerome, receiveth, as it is written. If, therefore, it is not 


given you, this is because you do not ask. Ask, therefore, and 
you shall receive.® 


* Roman Missal. “tices sci) de “Luke vi. 12, 
i Pet. it. 7; iv. 7. | °1 John iii. 21, 22; vy. 14. "Matt. xvii. 20. 
Matt. vii. 8; Luke xi. 10; John xvi. 23, 24; Jerome on Matt. vii. 4. 


PRAYER IN GENERAL 479 


The Fruits of Prayer 


Moreover, this necessity of prayer is also productive of the 
greatest delight and usefulness, since it bears most abundant 
fruits. When it is necessary to instruct the faithful concerning 
these fruits, pastors will find ample matter in sacred writers. 
We have made from these sources a selection which appeared to 
us to suit the present purpose. 


PRAYER HONORS GOD 


The first fruit which we receive is that by praying we honor 
God, since prayer is a certain act of religion, which is compared 
in Scripture to a sweet perfume. Let my prayer, says the 
Prophet, be directed as incense in thy sight.° By prayer we con- 
fess our subjection to God; we acknowledge and proclaim Him to 
be the author of all good, in whom alone we center all our hopes, 
who alone is our refuge, in all dangers and the bulwark of our 
salvation. Of this fruit we are admonished also in these words: 
Call upon me in the day of trouble; I will deliver thee, and thou 
shalt glorify me.’ 


PRAYER OBTAINS WHAT WE REQUEST 


Another most pleasing and invaluable fruit of prayer is that 
it is heard by God. Prayer is the key of heaven, says St. Augus- 
tine; prayer ascends, and the mercy of God descends. High as 
are the heavens, and low as is the earth, God hears the voice of 
man. Such is the utility, such the efficacy of prayer, that 
through it we obtain a plenitude of heavenly gifts. Thus by prayer 
we secure the guidance and aid of the Holy Spirit, the security 
and preservation of the faith, deliverance from punishment, 
divine protection under temptation, victory over the devil. Ina 
word, there is in prayer an accumulation of spiritual joy; and 
hence our Lord said: Ask, and you shall receive, that your joy 
may be full.?? 


VIPS ly 2 PPs-xlix, 15; 
1 Serm. cclxvi. De Temp. * John xvi. 24. 


480 THE LORD’S PRAYER 


PROOF 


Nor can we, for a moment, doubt that God in His goodness 
awaits and is at all times ready to hear our petitions—a truth to 
which the Sacred Scriptures bear ample testimony. Since, how- 
ever, the texts are easy of access, we shall content ourselves with 
citing as an example the words of Isaias: Then shalt thou call, 
and the Lord will hear: thou shalt cry, and he will say, “Here 
I am”; 8 and again, It shall come to pass, that before they call, I 
will hear: as they are yet speaking, I will hear.* With regard to 
instances of persons, who have obtained from God the objects of 
their prayers, they are almost innumerable, and too well known 
to require special mention. 


UNWISE AND INDEVOUT PRAYERS UNHEARD 


Sometimes, indeed, it happens that what we ask of God we 
do not obtain. But it is then especially that God looks to our 
welfare, either because He bestows on us other gifts of higher 
value and in greater abundance, or because what we ask, far 
from being necessary or useful, would prove superfluous and 
injurious. God, says St. Augustine, denies some things in His 
mercy, which He grants in His wrath. 

Sometimes, also, such is the remissness and negligence with 
which we pray, that we ourselves do not attend to what we say. 
Since prayer is an elevation of the soul to God, if, while we 
pray, the mind, instead of being fixed upon God, is distracted, 
and the tongue slurs over the words at random, without atten- 
tion, without devotion, with what propriety can we give to such 
empty sounds the name of Christian prayer? 

We should not, therefore, be at all surprised, if God does not 
comply with our requests; either because by our negligence and 
indifference we almost show that we do not really desire what 


we ask, or because we ask those things, which, if granted, would 
be prejudicial to our interests. 


a an vig ones 
Isa. Iviii. 9. -lsae lxveon" * Serm. xxxiii. De Verb. Domini. 


PRAYER IN GENERAL 481 


TO DEVOUT PRAYER AND DISPOSITIONS GOD GRANTS MORE THAN IS 
: ASKED 


On the other hand, to those who pray with devout attention, 
God grants more than they ask. This the Apostle declares in his 
Epistle to the Ephesians,'® and the same truth is unfolded in the 
parable of the prodigal son, who would have deemed it a kindness 
to be admitted into the number of his father’s servants.2” 

Nay, God heaps His favors not only on those who seek them, 
but also on those who are rightly disposed; and this, not only 
with abundance, but also with readiness. This is shown by the 
words of Scripture: The Lord hath heard the desire of the 
poor.*® For God hastens to grant the inner and hidden desires 
of the needy without awaiting their utterance. 


PRAYER EXERCISES AND INCREASES FAITH 


Another fruit of prayer is, that it exercises and augments the 
virtues of the soul, particularly the virtue of faith. As they who 
have not faith in God, cannot pray as they ought, for how can 
‘they call on him, whom they have not believed?*® so the faith- 
ful, in proportion to the fervor of their prayers, possess a 
stronger and a more assured faith in the protecting providence 
of God, which requires principally that in all needs we have re- 
course to Him. 


PRAYER STRENGTHENS OUR HOPE IN GOD 


God, it is true, might bestow on us all things abundantly, 
although we did not ask them or even think of them, just as 
He bestows on the irrational creation all things necessary for 
the support of life. But our most bountiful Father wishes to be 
invoked by His children; He wishes that, praying as we ought 
each day of our lives, we may pray with increased confidence. 
He wishes that in obtaining our requests we may more and more 
bear witness to and declare His goodness towards us. 


10 Eph. iii. 20. = Luke xv. 
Sek Sa Xt 7- Rom. x. 14 


482 THE LORD’S PRAYER 


PRAYER INCREASES CHARITY 


Our charity is also augmented. In recognizing God as the 
author of every blessing and of every good, we are led to cling 
to Him with the most devoted love. And as those who cherish 
a mutual affection become more ardently attached by frequent 
interviews and conversations, so the oftener the soul prays de- 
voutly and implores the divine mercy, thus holding converse with 
God, the more exquisite is the sense of delight which she expe- 
riences in each prayer, and the more ardently is she inflamed to 
love and adore Him. 


PRAYER DISPOSES THE SOUL FOR DIVINE BLESSINGS 


Furthermore, God wishes us to make use of prayer, in order 
that burning with the desire of asking what we are anxious to 
obtain, we may thus by our perseverance and zeal make such ad- 
vances in spiritual life, as to be worthy to obtain those blessings 
which the soul could not obtain before because of its dryness 
and lack of devotion. 


PRAYER MAKES US REALIZE OUR OWN NEEDFULNESS 


Moreover, God wishes us to realize, and always keep in mind, 
that, unassisted by His heavenly grace, we can of ourselves do 
nothing, and should therefore apply ourselves to prayer with all 
the powers of our souls. 


PRAYER IS A PROTECTION AGAINST THE DEVIL 


The weapons which prayer supplies are most powerful against 
our bitterest foes. With the cries of our prayers, says St. Hilary, 
we must fight against the devil and his armed hosts.?° 


PRAYER PROMOTES A VIRTUOUS LIFE 


From prayer we also derive this important advantage that 
though we are inclined to evil and to the indulgence of various 
passions, as a consequence of our natural frailty, God permits 


*In Ps. Ixiii. 


PRAYER IN GENERAL 483 


us to raise our hearts to Him, in order that while we address 
Him in prayer, and endeavor to deserve His gifts, we may be 
inspired with a love of innocence, and, by effacing our sins, be - 
purified from every stain of guilt. 


PRAYER DISARMS THE DIVINE VENGEANCE 


Finally, as St. Jerome observes, prayer disarms the anger of 
God. Hence, these words of God addressed to Moses: Let me 
alone,** when Moses sought by his prayer to stay the punish- 
ments God was about to inflict on His people. Nothing is so 
efficacious in appeasing God, when His wrath is kindled; nothing 
so effectually delays or averts the punishments prepared for the 
wicked as the prayers of men.* 


The Parts of Prayer 


The necessity and advantages of Christian prayer being ex- 
plained, the faithful should also know how many, and what are 
the parts of which it is composed; for that this pertains to the 
perfect discharge of this duty, we learn from the Apostle. In 
his Epistle to Timothy, exhorting to pious and holy prayer, he 
carefully enumerates the parts of which it consists: J desire 
therefore first of all that supplications, prayers, intercessions, and 
thanksgivings be made for all men.?* Although the shades of 
distinction between these different parts of prayer are delicate, 
yet the pastor, should he deem the explanation useful to his peo- 
ple, should consult, among others, St. Hilary and St. Augustine. 


THE TWO CHIEF PARTS OF PRAYER: PETITION AND THANKSGIVING 


There are two principal parts of prayer, petition and thanks- 
giving, and since these are the sources, as it were, from which 
all the others spring, they appear to us to be of too much im- 
portance to be omitted. For we approach God and offer Him 
the tribute of our worship, either to obtain some favor, or to 
return Him thanks for those with which His bounty every day 
enriches and adorns us. God Himself indicated both these most 


Exod. xxii. I0. TARR ly 16 
aQOn the utility of prayer see Summa Theol. 2a. 2x. Ixxxiii. 2, 15, 16. 


484 THE LORD’S PRAYER 


necessary parts of prayer when He declared by the mouth of 
David: Call upon me in the day of trouble: I will deliver thee, 
and thou shalt glorify me.”* 

Who does not perceive how much we stand in need of the 
goodness and beneficence of God, if he but consider the extreme 
destitution and misery of man? 

On the other hand, all that have eyes and understanding know 
God’s lovingkindness toward man and the liberal bounty He 
exercises in our behalf. Wherever we cast our eyes, wherever 
we turn our thoughts, the admirable light of the divine goodness 
and beneficence beams upon us. What have we that is not the 
gift of His bounty? If, then, all things are the gifts and favors 
bestowed on us by His goodness, why should not everyone, as 
much as possible, celebrate the praises of God, and thank Him 
for His boundless beneficence.* | 


DEGREES OF PETITION AND THANKSGIVING 


Of these duties of petition and thanksgiving each contains many 
subordinate degrees. In order, therefore, that the faithful may 
not only pray, but also pray in the best manner, the pastor should 
propose to them the most perfect mode of praying, and should 
exhort them to use it to the best of their ability. 


THE HIGHEST DEGREE OF PRAYER: THE PRAYER OF THE JUST 


What, then, is the best manner and the most exalted degree of 
prayer? It is that which is made use of by the pious and the 
just. Resting on the solid foundation of the true faith, they rise 
successively from one degree of prayer and virtue to another, 
until, at length, they reach that height of perfection, whence they 
can contemplate the infinite power, goodness, and wisdom of 
God; where, too, they are animated with the assured hope of 
obtaining not only those blessings which they desire in this life, 
but also those unutterable rewards which God has pledged Him- 


self to grant to him who piously and religiously implores His 
assistance. 


cet, pede, aig, 
2 On the kinds of prayer see Summa Theol. 2a. 2z. Ixxxiii. 17. 


PRAYER IN GENERAL 485 


Soaring, as it were, to heaven, on these two wings, the soul 

approaches, in fervent desire, the Divinity ; adores with supreme 
praise and thanksgiving Him from whom she has received such 
inestimable blessings; and, like an only child, animated with sin- 
gular piety and profound veneration, trustfully tells her most 
beloved Father all her wants. 
. This sort of prayer the Sacred Scriptures express by the words 
pouring out. In his sight, says the Prophet, I pour out my 
prayer, but before him I declare my trouble.2* This means that 
he who comes to pray should conceal or omit nothing, but pour 
out all, flying with confidence into the bosom of God, his most 
loving Father. To this the Sacred Scriptures exhort us in these 
words: Pour out thy heart before him,?®> cast thy care upon the 
Lord.*® This is that degree of prayer to which St. Augustine 
alludes when he says in that book entitled Enchiridion: What 
faith believes, that hope and charity implore.** 


THE SECOND DEGREE OF PRAYER: THE PRAYER OF SINNERS 


Another degree of prayer is that of those who are weighed 
down by the guilt of mortal sin, but who strive, with what is 
called dead faith, to raise themselves from their condition and 
to ascend to God. But, in consequence of their languid state and 
the extreme weakness of their faith, they cannot raise themselves 
from the earth. Recognizing their crimes and stung with re- 
morse of conscience, they bow themselves down with humility, 
and, far as they are removed from God, implore of Him with 
penitential sorrow, the pardon of their sins and the peace of 
reconciliation. 

The prayers of such persons are not rejected by God, but are 
heard by Him. Nay, in His mercy, He generously invites such 
as these to have recourse to Him, saying: Come to me, all you 
that labour, and are heavily laden, and I will refresh you.*® Of 
this class was the publican, who, though he did not dare to 
raise his eyes towards heaven, left the Temple, as (our Lord) 
declares, more justified than the Pharisee.”° 


RS vexiit.3, SIRS, [bet 6p = es. liv. 23. 
77 Ench. cap. vii. * Matt. xi. 28. *” Luke xviii. 9. 


486 THE! LORD'S PRAYER 


THE THIRD DEGREE OF PRAYER: THE PRAYER OF UNBELIEVERS 


A third degree of prayer is that which is offered by those who 
have not as yet been illumined with the light of faith; but who, 
when the divine goodness illumines in their souls the feeble 
natural light, are strongly moved to the desire and pursuit of 
truth and most earnestly pray for a knowledge of it. 

If they persevere in such dispositions, God, in His mercy, will 
not neglect their earnest endeavors, as we see verified by the 
example of Cornelius the centurion.2° The doors of the divine 
mercy are closed against none who sincerely ask for mercy. 


THE LOWEST DEGREE OF PRAYER: THE PRAYER OF THE IMPENITENT 


The last degree is that of those who not only do not repent of 
their sins and enormities, but, adding crime to crime, dare fre- 
quently to ask pardon of God for those sins, in which they are 
resolved to continue. With such dispositions they would not 
presume to ask pardon from their fellow-man. 

The prayer of such sinners is not heard by God. It is recorded 
of Antiochus: Then this wicked man prayed to the Lord, of 
whom he was not to obtain mercy.*t Whoever lives in this de- 
plorable condition should be vehemently exhorted to wean him- 
self from all affection to sin, and to return to God in good earnest 
and from the heart. 


What We Should Pray For 


Under the head of each Petition we shall point out in its proper 
place, what is, and what is not a proper object of prayer. Hence 
it will suffice here to remind the faithful in a general way that 
they ought to ask of God such things as are just and good, lest, 
praying for what is not suitable, they may be repelled in these 
words: You know not what you ask.2* Whatever it is lawful 
to desire, it is lawful to pray for, as is proved by the Lord’s 
ample promise: You shall ask whatever you will, and it shall 
be done unto you,** words in which He promises to grant all 
things. 

“Acts x. 4, 31. ™2 Mach. ix. 13. ™ Matt. xx. 22, John xy. as 

aQOn the prayers of sinners see Summa Theol. 2a. 2x. Ixxxiij. 34. 


PRAYER IN GENERAL 487 


SPIRITUAL GOODS 


In the first place, then, the standard which should regulate all 
our wishes is that we desire above all else God, the supreme Good. 
After God we should most desire those things which unite us 
most closely to Him; while those which would separate us from 
Him, or occasion that separation, should have no share whatever 
in our affections. 


EXTERNAL GOODS AND GOODS OF BODY 


Taking, then, as our standard the supreme and perfect Good, 
we can easily infer how we are to desire and ask from God our 
Father those other things which are called goods. Goods which 
are called bodily, such as health, strength, beauty and those which 
are external, such as riches, honors, glory, often supply the 
means and give occasion for sin; and, therefore, it is not always 
either pious or salutary to ask for them. We should pray for 
these goods of life only in so far as we need them, thus referring 
all to God. It cannot be deemed unlawful to pray for those 
things for which Jacob and Solomon prayed. Jf, says Jacob, 
he shall give me bread to eat and raiment to put on, the Lord 
shall be my God.3* Give me, says Solomon, only the necessaries 
of life.*® 

But when we are supplied by the bounty of God with neces- 
saries and comforts, we should not forget the admonition of the 
Apostle: Let them that buy, be as if they possessed not, and 
those that use this world, as if they used it not; for the figure 
of this world passeth away; ** and again, If riches abound, set 
not your heart upon them.*" God Himself teaches us that only 
the use and fruit of these things belong to us and that we are 
obliged to share them with others. If we are blessed with health, 
if we abound in other external and corporal goods, we should 
recollect that they are given to us in order to enable us to serve 
God with greater fidelity, and as the means of lending assistance 
to others. 


% Gen. xxviii. 20. » Prov. xxx. 8. 
"Ti COL, Vil130, 31. Psy tx 7; 


488 THE LORD’S PRAYER 


GOODS OF THE MIND 


It is also lawful to pray for the goods and adornments of the 
mind, such as a knowledge of the arts and sciences, provided 
our prayers are accompanied with this condition, that they serve 
to promote the glory of God and our own salvation. 

The only thing which can be absolutely and unconditionally 
the object of our wishes, our desires and our prayers, is, as we 
have already observed, the glory of God, and, next to it, what- 
ever can serve to unite us to that supreme Good, such as faith 
and the fear and love of God, of which we shall treat at length 
when we come to explain the Petitions.* 


For Whom We Ought to Pray 


The objects of prayer being known, the faithful are next to 
be taught for whom they are to pray. Prayer comprehends 
petition and thanksgiving. We shall first treat of petition. 


THE PRAYER OF PETITION SHOULD BE OFFERED FOR ALL 


We are to pray for all mankind, without exception of enemies, 
nation or religion; for every man, be he enemy, stranger or 
infidel, is our neighbor, whom God commands us to love, and 
for whom, therefore, we should discharge a duty of love, which 
is prayer. To the discharge of this duty the Apostle exhorts 
when he says: I desire that prayer be made for all men. In 
such prayers we should first ask for those things that concern 


spiritual interests, and next for what pertains to temporal wel- 
fare. 


THOSE FOR WHOM WE SHOULD ESPECIALLY OFFER OUR PETITIONS: 
PASTORS 


Before all others the pastors of our souls have a right to our 
prayers, as we learn from the example of the Apostle in his 
Epistle to the Colossians, in which he asks them to pray for him, 
that God may open unto him a door of speech, a request which 

cade bed ev ah gs & * Col. iv. 3. 

4 On the objects of prayer see Summa Theol. 2a. 2. Ixxxiii. Caro: 


PRAYER IN GENERAL 489 


he also makes in his Epistle to the Thessalonians.4? In the Acts 
of the Apostles we also read that prayers were offered in the 
Church without intermission for Peter.*t St. Basil, in his work 
On Morals, urges to a faithful compliance with this obliga- 
tion. We must, he says, pray for those who are charged with 
preaching the word of truth.* 


RULERS OF OUR COUNTRY 


In the next place, as the same Apostle teaches, we should pray 
for our rulers. 

Who does not know what a singular blessing a people enjoy 
in public officials who are just and upright? We should, there- 
fore, beseech God to make them such as they ought to be, fit 
persons to govern others. 


THE JUST 


To offer up our prayers also for the good and pious is a 
practice taught by the example of holy men. Even the good 
and the pious need the prayers of others. Providence has wisely 
ordained it so, in order that the just, realizing the necessity they 
are under of being aided by the prayers of those who are inferior 
to them, may not be inflated with pride. 


ENEMIES AND THOSE OUTSIDE THE CHURCH 


The Lord has also commanded us, to pray for those that per- 
secute and calumniate us.** The practice of praying for those 
who are not within the pale of the Church, is, as we know on 
the authority of St. Augustine, of Apostolic origin.** We pray 
that the faith may be made known to infidels; that idolaters 
may be rescued from the error of their impiety; that the Jews, 
emerging from the darkness with which they are encompassed, 
may arrive at the light of truth; that heretics, returning to sound- 
ness of mind, may be instructed in the Catholic faith; and that 
schismatics may be united in the bond of true charity and may 


HESS VA CSN CLS X1l-4 Se «, Moral. Reg. lib. Ivi. cap. 5. 
* Matt. v. 44. Epist. cvi. 


490 THE LORD’S PRAYER 


return to the communion of their holy mother, the Church, from 
which they have separated. 

Many examples prove that prayers for such as these are very 
efficacious when offered from the heart. Instances occur every 
day in which God rescues individuals of every condition of life 
from the powers of darkness, and transfers them into the king- 
dom of His Beloved Son, from vessels of wrath making them 
vessels of mercy. That the prayers of the pious have very great 
influence in bringing about this result no one can reasonably 
doubt. 


THE DEAD 


Prayers for the dead, that they may be liberated from the fire 
of purgatory, are derived from Apostolic teaching. But on this 
subject we have said enough when explaining the Holy Sacrifice 
of the Mass.? 


SIN NERS 


Those who are said to sin unto death derive little advantage 
from prayers and supplications. It is, however, the part of 
Christian charity to offer up our prayers and tears for them, in 
order, if possible, to obtain their reconciliation with God.» 

With regard to the execrations uttered by holy men against 
the wicked, it is certain, from the teaching of the Fathers, that 
they are either prophecies of the evils which are to befall sinners 
or denunciations of the crimes of which they are guilty, that 
the sinner may be saved, but sin destroyed.¢ 


THE PRAYER OF THANKSGIVING SHOULD BE OFFERED FOR ALL 


In the second part of prayer we render most grateful thanks 
to God for the divine and immortal blessings which He has 
always bestowed, and still continues to bestow every day on the 
human race. 


aQn prayer for the souls in purgatory see Summa Theol. Suppl. Ixxiii 
bOn the remissibility of all sins see Summa Theol. 2a. 2x. ane OK 3a. 
Iboreraish at, oe ie 
¢On the duty of praying for all sinners see Summa Theol. 2a. 2 
Lxxociit, 7, 15: : 


PRAYER IN GENERAL 4or 


OUR THANKSGIVING SHOULD ESPECIALLY BE OFFERED: FOR THE 
SAINTS 


This duty we discharge especially when we give singular 
praises to God for the victory and triumph which all the Saints, 
aided by His goodness, have achieved over their domestic and 
external enemies. 


FOR THE BLESSED VIRGIN MARY 


To this sort of prayer belongs the first part of the Angelic 
Salutation, when used by us as a prayer: Hail Mary, full of 
grace, the Lord is with thee, blessed art thou among women. 
For in these words we render to God the highest praise and 
return Him most gracious thanks, because He has bestowed all 
His heavenly gifts on the most holy Virgin; and at the same 
time we congratulate the Virgin herself on her singular privi- 
leges. 

To this form of thanksgiving the Church of God has wisely 
added prayers and an invocation addressed to the most holy 
Mother of God, by which we piously and humbly fly to her 
patronage, in order that, by her intercession, she may reconcile 
God to us sinners and may obtain for us those blessings which 
we stand in need of in this life and in the life to come. We, 
therefore, exiled children of Eve, who dwell in this vale of tears, 
should constantly beseech the Mother of mercy, the advocate 
of the faithful, to pray for us sinners. In this prayer we should 
earnestly implore her help and assistance; for that she possesses 
exalted merits with God, and that she is most desirous to assist 
us by her prayers, no one can doubt without impiety and wicked- 
ness.# 


To Whom We Should Pray 


TO GOD 


That God is to be prayed to and His name invoked is the 
language of the law of nature, inscribed upon the human heart. 


a On those for whom prayer should be offered see Summa Theol. 2a. 22. 
Ixxxiii. 7, 8. 


492 THE LORD’S PRAYER 


It is also the doctrine of Holy Scripture, in which we hear 
God commanding: Call upon me in the day of trouble.*® By the 
word God, we mean the three Persons (of the adorable Trinity). 


TO THE SAINTS 


We must also have recourse to the intercession of the Saints 
who are in glory. That the Saints are to be prayed to is a truth 
so firmly established in the Church of God, that no pious person 
can experience a shadow of doubt on the subject. But as this 
point was explained in its proper place, under a separate head, 
we refer the pastor and others to that place. 


GOD AND THE SAINTS ADDRESSED DIFFERENTLY 


To remove, however, the possibility of error on the part of 
the unlearned, it will be found useful to explain to the faithful 
the difference between these two kinds of invocation. 

We do not address God and the Saints in the same manner, for 
we implore God to grant us blessings or to deliver us from evils; 
while we ask the Saints, since they are the friends of God, to 
take us under their patronage and to obtain for us from God 
whatever we need. Hence we make use of two different forms 
of prayer. To God, we properly say: Have mercy on us, Hear 
us; but to the Saints, Pray for us. Still we may also ask the 
Saints, though in a different sense, that they have mercy on us, 
for they are most merciful. Thus we may beseech them that, 
touched with the misery of our condition, they would interpose 
in our behalf their influence and intercession before God. 

In the performance of this duty, it is strictly incumbent on 
all not to transfer to any creature the right which belongs exclu- 
sively to God. For instance, when we say the Our Father before 
the image of a Saint we should bear in mind that we beg of the 
Saint to pray with us and to obtain for us those favors which 
we ask of God, in the Petitions of the Lord’s Prayer,—in a.word, 
that he become our interpreter and intercessor with God. That 


Ps xi ise 
a See under first Commandment, page 371. 


PRAYER IN GENERAL 493 


this is an office which the Saints discharge, St. John the Apostle 
teaches in the Apocalypse.*® @ 


Preparation for Prayer 


In Scripture we read: Before prayer, prepare thy soul, and be 
not as a man that tempteth God." He tempts God who prays 
well but acts badly, and while he converses with God allows his 
mind to wander. 

Since, then, the dispositions with which we pray are of such 
vital importance, the pastor should teach his pious hearers how 
to pray. 


HUMILITY 


The first preparation, then, for prayer is an unfeigned humility 
of soul, an acknowledgment of our sinfulness, and a conviction 
that, when we approach God in prayer, our sins render us un- 
deserving, not only of receiving a propitious hearing from Him, 
but even of appearing in His presence. 

This preparation is frequently mentioned in the Scriptures: 
He hath had regard to the prayer of the humble, and he hath not 
despised thew petitions; *® the prayer of him that humbleth 
himself shall pierce the clouds.*® Many other passages of the 
same kind will suggest themselves to learned pastors. Hence we 
abstain from citing more here. 

Two examples, however, at which we have already glanced 
in another place, and which are apposite to our purpose, we shall 
not pass over in silence. The publican, who, standing afar off, 
would not so much as lift up his eyes toward heaven, and the 
woman, a sinner, who, moved with sorrow, washed the feet of 
Christ the Lord, with her tears,** illustrate the great efficacy 
which Christian humility imparts to prayer. 


SORROW FOR SIN 


The next (preparation) is a feeling of sorrow, arising from the 
recollection of our past sins, or, at least, some sense of regret, 

© Apoc. viii. “Eccl. xviii. 23. egP ss ols 18) 

NIG SeeKe ye Sluke Xvitien3: * Luke vii. 37. 

aOn prayer to God and the Saints see Summa Theol. 2a. 2x. Ixxxiii. 4, 
11; Suppl. Ixxiv. 


494 THE LORD’S PRAYER 


that we do not experience that sorrow. If the sinner bring not 
with him to prayer both, or, at least one of these dispositions, he 
cannot hope to obtain pardon. 


FREEDOM FROM VIOLENCE, ANGER, HATRED AND INHUMANITY 


There are some crimes, such as violence and murder, which are 
in a special way obstacles to the efficacy of our prayers, and we 
must, therefore, preserve our hands unstained by outrage and 
cruelty. Of such crimes the Lord says by the mouth of Isaias: 
When you stretch forth your hands, I will turn away my eyes 
from you; and when you multiply prayer, I will not hear, for 
your hands are full of blood.*? 

Anger and strife we should also avoid, for they have great 
influence in preventing our prayers from being heard. Concern- 
ing them the Apostle says:J will that men pray in every place, 
lifting up pure hands, without anger and contention.** 

Implacable hatred of any person on account of injuries received 
we must guard. against; for while we are under the influence of 
such feelings, it is impossible that we should obtain from God 
the pardon of our sins. When you shall stand to pray, He says, 
forgive, if you have aught against any man; ** and, if you will 
not forgive men, neither will your heavenly Father forgive you 
your offences.** 

Hardness and inhumanity to the poor we should also avoid. 
For concerning men of this kind it was said: He that stoppeth 


his ear against the cry of the poor, shall also cry himself, and shall 
not be heard,®® 


FREEDOM FROM PRIDE AND CONTEMPT OF GOD’S WORD 


What shall we say of pride? How much it offends God, we 
learn from these words: God resisteth the proud, and giveth 
grace to the humble." What of the contempt of the divine 
oracles? He that turneth away his ears, says Solomon, from 
hearing the law, his prayer shall be an abomination.®8 

Here, however, we are not to understand that we are forbidden 
to pray for the forgiveness of the injuries we have done, of mur- 


‘! Isa. i. 15. i 1 Tim. ii. 8. * Mark xi. 25. * Matt. vi. 15, 
Prove teree James iv. 6; 1 Pet. v. 5. * Prov. xxviii. 9. 


PRAYER IN GENERAL 495 


der, anger, insensibility to the wants of the poor, of pride, con- 
tempt of God’s word, in fine, of any other sin. 


FAITH AND CONFIDENCE 


Faith is another necessary quality for this preparation of soul. 
Without faith, we can have no knowledge of the omnipotence or 
mercy of the supreme Father, which are the sources of-our con- 
fidence in prayer, as Christ the Lord Himself has taught: All 
things whatsoever you shall ask in prayer, believing, you shall 
receive.*? St. Augustine, speaking of this faith, thus comments on 
the Lord’s words: Without faith prayer is useless.®° 

The chief requisite, therefore, of a good prayer is, as we have 
already said, a firm and unwavering faith. This the Apostle 
shows by an antithesis: How shall they call on him whom they 
have not believed?* Believe, then, we must, both in order to 
pray, and that we be not wanting in that faith which renders 
prayer fruitful. For it is faith that leads to prayer, and it is 
prayer that, by removing all doubts, gives strength and firmness 
to faith. This is the meaning of the exhortation of St. Ignatius 
to those who would approach God in prayer: Be not of doubtful 
mind in prayer; blessed is he who hath not doubted.*? Where- 
fore, to obtain from God what we ask, faith and an assured con- 
fidence, are of first importance, according to the admonition of 
St. James: Let him ask in faith, nothing wavering. 


MOTIVES OF CONFIDENCE IN PRAYER 


There is much to inspire us with confidence in prayer. Among 
these are to be numbered the beneficence and bounty of God, dis- 
played towards us, when He commands us to call Him Father, 
thus giving us to understand that we are His children. Again 
there are the numberless instances of those whose prayers have 
been heard. 

Further we have as our chief advocate, Christ the Lord, who is 
ever ready to assist us, as we read in St. John: Jf any man sin we 
have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ, the just; and he 


SMatt. xxi.) 22: ® Serm. XXXVI. 1 © Rom.cx., 14. 
Ep. x. ad Heronem. James i. 6. 


496 THE LORD’S PRAYER 


is the propitiation for our sins.°* In like manner Paul the Apostle 
says: Christ Jesus, that died, yea, that is risen also again, who is 
at the right hand of God, who also maketh intercession for us.*° 
To Timothy he writes: For there is one God, and one mediator 
of God and men, the man Christ Jesus; °* and to the Hebrews he 
writes: Wherefore, it behoved him in all things to be made like 
unto his brethren, that he might become a merciful and faithful 
high-priest before God.** Unworthy, then, as we are, of obtain- 
ing our requests, yet considering and resting our claims upon the 
dignity of our great Mediator and Intercessor, Jesus Christ, we 
should hope and trust most confidently, that, through His merits, 
God will grant us all that we ask in the proper way. 

Finally, the Holy Ghost is the author of our prayers; and under 
His guiding influence, we cannot fail to be heard. We have re- 
ceived the spirit of adoption of sons, whereby we cry, “Abba, 
(Father).” This spirit succors our infirmity and enlightens our 
ignorance in the discharge of the duty of prayer; nay, even, as 
the Apostle says, He asketh for us with unspeakable groanings.*® 

Should we, then, at any time waver, not being sufficiently strong 
in faith, let us say with the Apostles: Lord, increase our faith; °° 
and, with the father (of the demoniac): Help my unbelief.” 


CORRESPONDENCE WITH GOD’S WILL 


But what most ensures the accomplishment of our desires is 
the union of faith and hope with that conformity of all our 
thoughts, actions, and prayers to God’s law and pleasure. Jf, He 
says, you abide in me, and my words abide in you, you shall ask 
whatever you will, and it shall be done unto you.” 


FRATERNAL CHARITY 


In order, however, that our prayers may have this power of 
obtaining all things from God, we must, as was previously ob- 
served, forget injuries, cherish sentiments of good will, and 
practice kindness towards our neighbor. 


“ie Tehevay MN, Ty ee *® Rom. viii. 34. co 74 Bh 
oF mete they Wh * Rom. viii. 15, 26. ete nes i 
is 1 5; uke xvii. 5. 
Mark ix. 23. . ™ John xv. 7. 


PRAYER IN GENERAL 497 


How to Pray Well 


The manner of praying is also a matter of the highest moment. 
Though prayer in itself is good and salutary, yet if not performed 
in a proper manner it is unavailing. Often we do not obtain 
what we ask, because, in the words of St. James, we ask amiss.” 
Pastors, therefore, should instruct the faithful in the best manner 
of asking well and of making private and public prayer. The 
rules of Christian prayer have been formed on the teaching of 
Christ the Lord. 


WE MUST PRAY IN SPIRIT AND IN TRUTH 


We must, then, pray im spirit and in truth; for the heavenly 
Father seeks those who adore Him in spirit and in truth. He 
prays in this manner whose prayer proceeds from an interior and 
intense ardor of soul. 


MENTAL PRAYER 


This spiritual manner of praying does not exclude the use of 
vocal prayer. Nevertheless, that prayer which is the vehement 
outpouring of the soul, deservedly holds the first place; and, 
although not uttered with the lips, it is heard by God to whom 
the secrets of hearts are open. He heard the silent prayer of 
Anna, the mother of Samuel, of whom we read, that she prayed, 
shedding many tears and only moving her lips. Such was also 
the prayer of David, for he says: My heart hath said to thee, my 
face hath sought thee.® In reading the Bible one will meet 
many similar examples. 


VOCAL PRAYER 


But vocal prayer has also its advantages and necessity. It 
quickens the attention of the mind, and kindles the fervor of him 
who prays. We sometimes, says St. Augustine, in his letter to 
Proba, animate ourselves to intensify our holy desire by having 
recourse to words and other signs; filled with vehement ardor 


: d : 
% James iv. 3. ps John iv. 23. 
Ma Kinesis 10; 13. Ps. xxvi. 8. 


408 THE LORD’S PRAYER 


and piety, we find it impossible at times not to express our 
feelings in words; for while the soul exults with joy, the 
tongue should also give utterance to that exultation."® And surely 
it becomes us to make to God this complete sacrifice of soul and 
body, a kind of prayer which the Apostles were accustomed to 
use, as we learn from many passages of the Acts and of the 
Apostle. 


PRIVATE AND PUBLIC PRAYER 


There are two sorts of prayer, private and public. Private 
prayer is employed in order to assist interior attention and devo- 
tion; whereas in public prayer, which has been instituted to excite 
the piety of the faithful, and has been prescribed for certain fixed 
times, the use of words is indispensably required. 


THOSE WHO DO NOT PRAY IN SPIRIT 


This practice of praying in spirit is peculiar to Christians, and 
is not at all used by infidels. Of these Christ the Lord has said: 
When you pray, speak not much, as the heathens; for they think 
that in their much speaking they may be heard. Be not ye, there- 
fore, like to them, for your Father knoweth what is needful for 
you before you ask him,” 

But though (our Lord) prohibits loquacity, He is so far from 
forbidding continuance in prayer which proceeds from the eager 
and prolonged devotion of the soul that by His own example He 
exhorts us to such prayer. Not only did He spend whole nights 
in prayer,’* but also prayed the third time, saying the self-same 
words.’® The inference, therefore, to be drawn from the pro- 
hibition is that prayers consisting of mere empty sounds are not 
to be addressed to God. 


THOSE WHO DO NOT PRAY IN TRUTH 


Neither do the prayers of the hypocrite proceed from the heart; 
and against the imitation of their example, Christ the Lord warns 


Epis. cxxi. “Matt. vi. 7,8. “Luke vi.12. ™ Matt. xxvi. 44. 
aQOn vocal prayer see Summa Theol. 2a. 2x. Ixxxiii. 12. 


PRAYER IN GENERAL 499 


us in these words: When ye pray, ye shall not be as the hypo- 
crites that love to stand and pray in the synagogues, and corners 
of the streets, that they may be seen by men. Amen I say, to you 
they have received their reward. But thou, when thou shalt pray, 
enter into thy chamber, and having shut the door, pray to thy 
Father in secret; and thy Father who seeth in secret will repay 
thee.*° Here the word chamber may be understood to mean 
the human heart, which we should not only enter, but should also 
close against every distraction from without that could deprive 
our prayer of its perfection. For then will our heavenly Father, 
who sees perfectly our hearts and secret thoughts, grant our 
petitions. 


WE MUST PRAY WITH PERSEVERANCE 


Another necessary condition of prayer is constancy. The great 
efficacy of perseverance, the Son of God exemplifies by the con- 
duct of the judge, who, while he feared not God, nor regarded 
man, yet, overcome by the persistence and importunity of the 
widow, yielded to her entreaties.8t In our prayers to God we 
should, therefore, be persevering. 

We must not imitate the example of those who become tired 
of praying, if, after having prayed once or twice, they succeed 
not in obtaining the object of their prayers. We should never be 
weary of the duty of prayer, as we are taught by the authority of 
Christ the Lord and of the Apostle. And should the will at any 
time fail us, we should beg of God by prayer the strength to 
persevere. 


WE MUST PRAY IN THE NAME OF JESUS CHRIST 


The Son of God would also have us present our prayers to the 
Father in His name; for, by His merits and the influence of His 
mediation, our prayers acquire such weight that they are heard 
by our heavenly Father. For He Himself says in St. John: 
Amen, Amen, I say unto you, if you ask the Father any thing 
in my name, he will give it you. Hitherto you have not asked 
any thing in my name: ask and you shall receive, that your joy 


© Matt. vi. 5, 6. uke xviii. 2, 3. 


500 THE LORD’S PRAYER 


may be full; *? and again: Whatsoever you shall ask the Father 
in my name, that will I do.** 


WE MUST PRAY WITH FERVOR, UNITING PETITION TO 
THANKSGIVING 


Let us imitate the fervor of the Saints in prayer; and to peti- 
tion let us unite thanksgiving, imitating the example of the 
Apostles, who, as may be seen in the Epistles of St. Paul, always 
observed this salutary practice. 


FASTING AND ALMSDEEDS SHOULD BE JOINED TO PRAYER 


To prayer let us unite fasting and almsdeeds. Fasting is most 
intimately connected with prayer. For the mind of one who is 
filled with food and drink is so borne down as not to be able to 
raise itself to the contemplation of God, or even to understand 
what prayer means. 

Almsdeeds have also an intimate connection with prayer. For 
what claim has he to the virtue of charity, who, possessing the 
means of affording relief to those who depend on the assistance 
of others, refuses help to his neighbor and brother? How can he, 
whose heart is devoid of charity, demand asistance from God 
unless, while imploring the pardon of his sins, he at the same 
time humbly beg of God to grant him the virtue of charity? 

This triple remedy was, therefore, appointed by God to aid 
man in the attainment of salvation. For by sin we offend God, 
wrong our neighbor, or injure ourselves. The wrath of God we 
appease by pious prayer; our offences against man we redeem by 
almsdeeds ; the stains of our own lives we wash away by fasting. 
Each of these remedies, it is true, is applicable to every sort of 
sin; they are, however, peculiarly adapted to those three which 
we have specially mentioned.? 


John xvi. 23, 24. *@ John xiv. 14. 
2 On the qualities of prayer see Summa Theol. 2a. 2. Ixxxiii. 13-15. 


OPENING WORDS OF THE LORD’S PRAYER 
“Our Father who art in heaven” 


IMPORTANCE OF INSTRUCTION ON THESE WORDS 


The form of Christian prayer given us by Jesus Christ is so 
composed and arranged that before coming to requests and 
petitions certain words must be used as a sort of preface calcu- 
lated to increase our confidence in God when we are about to 
address Him devoutly in prayer; and this being so it will be the 
pastor’s duty to explain each of these words separately and with 
precision, so that the faithful may have recourse to prayer more 
readily because of the knowledge that they are going to commune 
and converse with a God who is also their Father. Regarding 
this preface, if we merely consider the number of words of which 
it is composed, it is brief indeed; but if we regard the ideas, it is 
of the greatest importance and replete with mysteries. 


“Father” 


The first word, which, by the order and institution of God we 
employ in this prayer, is Father. Our Saviour could, indeed, have 
commenced this divine prayer with some other word, conveying 
more the idea of majesty, such, for instance, as Lord or 
Creator. Yet He omitted all such expressions because they 
might rather inspire fear, and instead of them He has chosen a 
term inspiring confidence and love in those who pray and ash 
anything of God; for what is sweeter than the name Father, 
conveying, as it does, the idea of indulgence and tenderness? The 
reasons why this name Father is applicable to God, can be 
easily explained to the faithful by speaking to them on the sub- 
jects of creation, providence, and redemption.? 


a On the Lord’s Prayer see Summa Theol. 2a. 2x. Ixxxiii. 9; St. Thomas, 


Collationes De Pater Noster. : i 
b On the name “father” as applied to God see Summa Theol. Ia. xxxiil. 


501 


502 THE LORD’S PRAYER 


GOD IS CALLED FATHER BECAUSE HE CREATED US 


Thus having created man to His own image—a favor He ac- 
corded to no other living creature—it is with good reason that, 
in view of this unique privilege with which He has honored man, 
Sacred Scripture calls God the Father of all men; not only of the 
faithful, but also of the unbelieving? 


GOD IS CALLED FATHER BECAUSE HE PROVIDES FOR US 


From His providence also may be drawn an argument. By 
a special superintending care and providence over our interests 
God displays a paternal love for us.> 


GOD’S CARE FOR US IS SEEN IN THE APPOINTMENT OF GUARDIAN 
ANGELS 


But in order to comprehend more clearly the fatherly care of 
God for men, it will be well in the explanation of this particular 
point to say something regarding the guardian Angels under 
whose protection men are placed. 

By God’s providence Angels have been entrusted with the office 
of guarding the human race and of accompanying every human 
being so as to preserve him from any serious dangers. Just as 
parents, whose children are about to travel a dangerous and 
infested road, appoint guardians and helpers for them, so also in 
the journey we are making towards our heavenly country our 
heavenly Father has placed over each of us an Angel under 
whose protection and vigilance we may be enabled to escape the 
snares secretly prepared by our enemy, repel the dreadful attacks 
he makes on us, and under his guiding hand keep the right road, 
and thus be secure against all false steps which the wiles of the 
evil one might cause us to make in order to draw us aside from 
the path that leads to heaven. 


HOW WE ARE HELPED BY THE ANGELS 


And the immense advantage springing from the special care 
and providence of God with regard to men, the execution of 


a Qn man as the image of God see Summa Theol. ta. iv. 3; xxxv; xciii. 
b On divine Providence see Summa Theol. ta. xxii. 


“OUR FATHER” 503 


which is entrusted to Angels, who by nature hold an intermediate 
place between God and man, will be clear from a multitude of 
examples with which Sacred Scripture supplies us in abundance, 
and which show that in God’s goodness it has often happened that 
Angels have wrought wondrous works under the very eyes of 
men. This gives us to understand that many and equally impor- 
tant services, which do not fall under our sight, are wrought by 
our Angels, the guardians of our salvation, in our interest and for 
our advantage. 

The Angel Raphael, the divinely appointed companion and 
guide of Tobias,t conducted him and brought him back safe and 
sound; saved him from being devoured by an enormous fish; 
made known to him the extremely useful properties possessed by 
the liver, gall and heart of the monster; expelled the demon; 
repressed and fettered his power and prevented him from injur- 
ing Tobias; taught the young man the true and legitimate notion 
and use of matrimony; and finally restored to the elder Tobias 
the use of his sight. 

In the same way the Angel who liberated the Prince of the 
Apostles,? will supply copious material for the instruction of the 
pious flock regarding the striking fruits of the vigilance and pro- 
tection of the Angels. The pastor need do no more than depict 
the Angel lighting up the darkness of the prison, touching Peter’s 
side and awakening him from his sleep, loosing his chains, break- 
ing his bonds, ordering him to rise, to take up his sandals and to 
follow; and then the pastor will point out how Peter was led 
forth out of prison by the same Angel, how he was enabled to 
pass without let or hindrance through the midst of the guard, how 
the doors were thrown open, and finally how he was placed in 
safety. 

The historical part of Sacred Scripture, as we have already 
remarked, is full of such examples, all of which go to show the 
extent of the benefits bestowed by God on man through the min- 
istry and intervention of Angels whom He deputes not only on 
particular and private occasions, but also appoints to take care of 
us from our very births. He furthermore appoints them to watch 
over the salvation of each one of the human race. 


Wa Wolo ost yh 2 Acts xii. I-17. 


504 THE LORD’S PRAYER 


This teaching, if carefully explained, will have the effect of 
interesting and compelling the minds of the faithful to acknowl- 
edge and venerate more and more the paternal care and provi- 
dence of God towards them.? 


GOD’S CARE FOR US SEEN IN THE LOVE HE HAS EVER SHOWN TO MAN 


And here the pastor should especially praise and proclaim the 
treasures of God’s goodness towards the human race. Though 
from the time of our first parents and from the moment of our 
first sin down to this very day we have offended Him by countless 
sins and crimes, yet He still retains His love for us and never 
renounces His singular solicitude for our welfare. 

To imagine that He has forgotten us would be an act of folly 
and nothing short of a most outrageous insult. God was angry with 
the Israelites because of the blasphemy they had been guilty of in 
imagining that they had been abandoned by providence. Thus 
do we read in Exodus: They tempted the Lord, saying: “Is the 
Lord amongst us or not?’* and in Ezechiel the divine anger is 
inflamed against the same people for having said: The Lord 
seeth us not: the Lord hath forsaken the earth. These examples 
should suffice to deter the faithful from entertaining the criminal 
notion that God can ever possibly forget mankind. To the same 
effect we may read in Isaias the complaint uttered by the Israelites 
against God; and, on the other hand, the kindly similitude with 
which God refutes their folly: Sion said: “The Lord hath for- 
saken me, and the Lord hath forgotten me.’ To which God 
answers: Can a woman forget her infant, so as not to have pity 
on the son of her womb? And if she should forget, yet will not 
I forget thee. Behold, I have engraven thee in my hands§ 

Although these passages clearly establish the point under dis- 
cussion, yet thoroughly to convince the faithful that never for a 
moment can God forget man or cease to lavish on him tokens 
of His paternal tenderness, the pastor should still further confirm 
this by the striking example of our first parents. They had 
ignored and violated God’s command. When you hear them 
sharply accused and that dreadful sentence of condemnation 


* Exod. xvii. 7. *“Ezech. viii. 12, * Isaaclix, TAs 
aOn the guardian Angels see Summa Theol. 1a. cxi-cxiii. 


“OUR FATHER” re 


pronounced against them: Cursed is the earth in thy work, with 
labour and toil shalt thow eat thereof all the days of thy life; 
thorns and thistles shall it bring forth to thee; and thou shalt eat 
the herbs of the earth; ® when you see them driven out of Para- 
dise ; when you read that to preclude all hope of their return a 
cherub was stationed at the entrance of Paradise, brandishing a 
flaming sword turning every way; and finally, when you know 
that, to avenge the injury done Him, God had afflicted them with 
punishments, internal and external, would you not be inclined 
to think that man’s case was hopeless? Would you not consider 
that not only was he bereft of all divine help, but was even aban- 
doned to every misfortune? Yet, surrounded as he then was by 
so many evidences of divine wrath and vengeance, a gleam of the 
goodness of God towards him is seen to shine forth. For the 
Lord God, says Sacred Scripture, made for Adam and his wife 
garments of skins and clothed them, which was a very clear proof 
that at no time would God abandon man.’ 

This truth, that the love of God can be exhausted by no human 
iniquity, was indicated by David in these words: Will God 
in his anger shut up his mercies?*® It was set forth by 
Habacuc when, addressing God, he said: When thou art angry 
thou wilt remember mercy;® and by Micheas, who thus ex- 
presses it: Who is a God like to thee who takest away iniquity 
and passest by the sin of the remnant of thy inheritance? He 
will send his fury in no more, because he delighteth in mercy.?° 

And thus precisely does it happen. At the very moment when 
we imagine ourselves to be utterly lost and altogether bereft of 
His protection, then it is that God in His infinite goodness seeks 
us out in a special way and takes care of us. Even in His anger 
He stays the sword of His justice, and ceases not to pour out the 
inexhaustible treasures of His mercy. 


GOD IS CALLED FATHER BECAUSE HE HAS GRANTED US 
REDEMPTION 


The creation of the world and God’s providence are, then, of 
great weight in bringing into relief the singular love of God for 


® Gen. iii. 17. ™Gen. ili. 2 . *Ps. Ixxvi. 10. 
i Pabacs 1la(2: Mich. vii. 18. 


a On God’s love and mercy see Summa Theol. Ia. xx, xx1. 


506 THE LORD’S PRAYER 


the human race and the special care He takes of man. But far 
above these two shines the work of redemption, so much so 
indeed that our most bountiful God and Father has crowned His 
infinite goodness towards us by granting us this third favor. 

Accordingly the pastor should instruct his spiritual children 
and constantly recall to their minds the surpassing love of God 
for us, so that they may be fully alive to the fact that having been 
redeemed in a wonderful manner they are thereby made the sons 
of God. To them, says St. John, He gave power to be made the 
sons of God... and they are born of God. 

This is why Baptism, the first pledge and token of our redemp- 
tion, is called the. Sacrament of regeneration; for it is by Baptism 
that we are born children of God: That which is born of the 
Spirit, says our Lord, is spirit; and: You must be born again.” 
In the same way we have the words of St. Peter: Being born 
again, not of corruptible seed, but incorruptible, by the word of 
God who liveth.** 

By reason of this redemption we have received the Holy Ghost 
and have been made worthy of the grace of God. As a conse- 
quence of this gift we are the adopted sons of God, as the Apostle 
Paul wrote to the Romans when he said: Ye have not received 
the spirit of bondage again in fear, but you have received the 
spirit of adoption of sons, whereby we cry: “Abba, Father.” 4 
The force and efficacy of this adoption are thus set forth by St. 
John: Behold what manner of charity the Father hath bestowed 
upon us, that we should be called, and should be the sons of 
God.1>4 


DUTIES WE OWE OUR HEAVENLY FATHER 


These points having been explained, the faithful should be 
reminded of all they owe in return to God, their most loving 
Father, so that they may be aware of the extent of the love, piety, 
obedience and respect they are bound to render to Him who has 
created them, who watches over them, and who has redeemed 
them ; and with what hope and trust they should invoke Him. 

» John See Ree ¥ John iii. 6. *1 Peter i. 23.. 

* Rom. viii. 15. *y John iii. 1. 

aOn divine adoption see Summa Theol. 3a. xxiii. 


“OUR FATHER” aos 


But to enlighten the ignorant and to correct the false ideas of 
such as imagine prosperity and success in life to be the only test 
that God preserves and maintains His love towards us, and that 
the adversities and trials which come from His hand are a sign 
that He is not well disposed towards us and that He entertains 
hostile dispositions towards us, it will be necessary to point out 
that even if the hand of the Lord sometimes presses heavily upon 
us, it is by no means because He is hostile to us, but that by strik- 
ing us He heals us, and that the wounds coming from God are 
remedies. 

He chastises sinners so as to improve them by this lesson, and 
inflicts temporal punishments in order to deliver them from eter- 
nal torments. For though He visits our iniquities with a rod 
and our sins with stripes, yet his mercy he will not take away 
from us.*® 

The faithful, therefore, should be recommended to recognize 
in such chastisements the fatherly love of God, and ever to have 
in their hearts and on their lips the saying of Job, the most patient 
of men: He woundeth and cureth; he striketh and his hands shall 
heal; ** as well as to repeat frequently the words written by Jere- 
mias in the name of the people of Israel: Thou hast chastised 
me and I was instructed, as a young bullock unaccustomed to the 
yoke: convert me and I shall be converted; for thou art the Lord 
my God; 1® and to keep before their eyes the example of Tobias 
who, recognizing in the loss of his sight the paternal hand of God 
raised against him, cried out: J bless thee, O Lord God of Israel, 
because thou hast chastised me and thou hast saved me.1® 

In this connection the faithful should be particularly on their 
guard against believing that any calamity or affliction that befalls 
them can take place without the knowledge of God; for we have 
His own words: A hair of your heads shall not pertsh.2° Let 
them rather find consolation in that divine oracle read in the 
Apocalypse: Those whom I love I rebuke and chastise ;?+ and 
let them find comfort in the exhortation addressed by St. Paul to 
the Hebrews: My son, neglect not the discipline of the Lord; 
neither be thou wearied whilst thou art rebuked by him: for 


Uieey ib iii. 43. "Job v. 18. Jer. xxi 18, 
oH Tobias oe on ®TLuke xxi. 18. 7t Apoc. iii. 19. 


508 THE LORD’S PRAYER 


whom the Lord loveth he chastiseth, and he scourgeth every son 
whom he receiveth. ... But if you be without chastisement, . . . 
then are you bastards and not sons... . Moreover if we have 
had the fathers of our flesh for instructors, and we reverenced 
them, shall we not much more obey the Father of spirits and 
hve? ? 


“Ours 


When we invoke the Father and when each one of us calls 
Him our Father, we are to understand thereby that from the 
privilege and gift of divine adoption it necessarily follows that all 
the faithful are brethren and should love each other as such: 
You are all brethren for one is your Father who is in heaven.?* 
This is why the Apostles in their Epistles address all the faithful 
as brethren. 

Another necessary consequence of this adoption is that not only 
are the faithful thereby united in the bonds of brotherhood, but 
that, the Son of God being truly man, we are called and really 
are his brethren also. Thus, in his Epistle to the Hebrews the 
Apostle, speaking of the Son of God, wrote as follows: He is not 
ashamed to call them brethren, saying: “I will declare thy name 
to my brethren.’ ?* And long before this, David had foretold 
this of Christ the Lord; while Christ Himself thus addresses the 
women in the Gospel: Go, tell my brethren that they go into 
Galilee ; there they shall see me.2*> These words, as we know, He 
pronounced only after His Resurrection and when He had already 
put on immortality, thus showing that no one is at liberty to 
imagine that the bonds of brotherhood with us have been severed 
by His Resurrection and Ascension into heaven. Not only has 
the Resurrection of Christ not dissolved this union and love, but 
we know that one day, when from His throne of glory and majesty 
He shall judge mankind of all ages, He will call even the very 
least of the faithful by the name of brethren. 

Indeed, how can we be other than brethren of Christ, seeing 
that we are called His co-heirs? Doubtless He is the -first- 
begotten, the appointed heir of all things;*° but we are begotten 


2THeb. xii. es 3 Matt. xxiii. 8. Neha, th bay 
* Matt. xxvili. Io. **'Col. i. 18; Heb. 1, 2, 


“OUR FATHER” 509 


in the second place after Him, and are His co-heirs according to 
the measure of heavenly gifts we receive and according to the 
extent of the charity by which we show ourselves servants and co- 
operators of the Holy Ghost. He it is who by His inspirations 
moves and inflames us to virtue and good works, in order that we 
may be strengthened by His grace valiantly to undertake the com- 
bat that must be waged to secure salvation. And if we wisely 
and firmly carry on this combat we shall at the close of our 
earthly career be rewarded by our heavenly Father with the just 
recempense of that crown promised and held out to all those who 
run the same course. God, says the Apostle, is not unjust that 
He should forget your work and love." 


“ec 


DISPOSITIONS THAT SHOULD ACCOMPANY THE WORDS, “OUR 


FATHER”: FRATERNAL REGARD 


How sincere should be the manner in which we ought to utter 
the word our, we learn from St. Chrysostom. God, he says, 
listens willingly to the Christian who prays not only for himself 
but for others; because to pray for ourselves is an inspiration of 
nature; but to pray for others is an inspiration of grace; necessity 
compels us to pray for ourselves, whereas fraternal charity calls 
on us to pray for others. And he adds: That prayer which is 
inspired by fraternal charity 1s more agreeable to God than that 
which is dictated by necessity. 

In connection with the important subject of salutary prayer, the 
pastor should be careful to remind and exhort all the faithful of 
every age, condition and rank, never to forget the bonds of uni- 
versal brotherhood that bind them, and consequently ever to treat 
each other as friends and brothers, and never to seek arrogantly 
to raise themselves above their neighbors. 

Though there are in the Church of God various gradations of 
office, yet this diversity of dignity and position in no way destroys 
the bond of fraternal union; just as in the human body the 
various uses and different functions of our organs in no way 
cause this or that part of the body to lose the name or office 
of an organ of the body. 


7 Heb. vi. 10. 7 Onus Imperf. in Matt., Hom. xiv. 


510 THE LORD’S PRAYER 


Take, for instance, one who wields kingly power. If he is a 
Christian, is he not the brother of all those united in the com- 
munion of the Christian faith? Yes, beyond all doubt; and why? 
Because there is not one God giving existence to the rich and 
noble, and another giving existence to the poor and to subjects. 
There is but one God, the Father and Lord of all; and conse- 
quently we have all the same nobility of spiritual birth, all the 
same dignity, all the same glory of race; for all have been regen- 
erated by the same Spirit through the same Sacrament of faith, 
and have been made children of God and co-heirs to the same 
inheritance. The wealthy and great have not one Christ for their 
God; the poor and lowly, another; they are not initiated by dif- 
ferent Sacraments; nor can they expect a different inheritance 
in the kingdom of heaven. We are all brethren and, as the 
Apostle says in his Epistle to the Ephesians: We are members of 
Christ's body, of has flesh and of his bones.?® This is a truth 
which the same Apostle thus expresses in his Epistle to the Gala- 
tians: You are the children of God, by faith in Jesus Christ; for 
as many of you as have been baptiged in Christ, have put on 
Christ. There is neither Greek nor Jew, neither bond nor free, 
neither male nor female; for you are all one in Christ Jesus.®° 

Now this is a point which calls for accuracy on the part of the 
pastor of souls, and one on which he should purposely dwell at 
considerable length; for it is a subject that is calculated both to 
strengthen and animate the poor and lowly, and to restrain and 
repress the arrogance of the rich and powerful. Indeed it was to 
remedy this latter evil that the Apostle insisted on brotherly 
charity and so often impressed it on the ears of his hearers. 


FILIAL CONFIDENCE AND PIETY 


Do not, then, forget, oh Christian, that when about to address 
this prayer to God, you ought to approach Him as a son to his 
Father ; and hence in beginning your prayers and in pronouncing 
the words Our Father you should consider the rank to which 
God in His goodness has raised you when He commands you to 
fly to Him, not as a timid and fearful servant to his master, but 
willingly and confidently, like a child to its father. 

epi avengo: *Galy i126, 


“OUR FATHER” sit 


In this remembrance and in this thought, consider with what 
fervor and piety you should pray. Endeavor to act as becomes a 
child of God; that is to say, see that your prayers and actions are 
never unworthy of that divine origin with which He has been 
pleased in His infinite bounty to ennoble you. It is to the dis- 
charge of this duty that the Apostle exhorts us when he says: 
Be ye therefore imitators of God as most dear children,** so that 
what the Apostle wrote to the Thessalonians may be truly said of 
us: You are all the children of light, and the children of the 
day.*? 


“Who art in Heaven” 


MEANING OF THESE WORDS 


All who have a correct idea of God will grant that He is every- 
where and in all places. This is not to be taken in the sense that 
He is distributed into parts and that He occupies and governs one 
place with one part and another place with another part. God is 
a Spirit, and therefore utterly incapable of division into parts. 
Who will dare to assign to any particular place or circumscribe 
within any limits that God who says of Himself: Do I not fill 
heaven and earth? ** On the contrary, these words must be taken 
in this sense, that by His power and virtue He embraces heaven 
and earth and all things contained therein; but that He Himself 
is not contained in any place. God is present to all things, either 
creating them, or preserving them after He has created them; 
but He is confined to no place, is limited by no bounds, nor in any 
way hindered from being everywhere present by His substance 
and power, as is indicated by holy David in the words: If I 
ascend into heaven thou art there.** 

But though God is present in all places and in all things, with- 
out being bound by any limits, as has been already said, yet in 
Sacred Scripture it is frequently said that He has His dwelling 
in heaven. And the reason is because the heavens which we see 
above our heads are the noblest part of the world, remain ever 


sD pha ve 1s 1 Thess. v. 5. 
* Jer. xxiii. 24. IES, Geeepghil, oe 


512 THE ,LORD’S PRAYER 


incorruptible, surpass all other bodies in power, grandeur and 
beauty, and are endowed with fixed and regular motion.* 

God, then, in order to lift up the minds of men to contemplate 
His infinite power and majesty, which are so preéminently visible 
in the work of the heavens, declares in Sacred Scripture that 
heaven is His dwelling-place. Yet at the same time He often 
affirms, what indeed is most true, that there is no part of the 
universe to which He is not present intimately by His nature and 
His power. 


LESSONS TAUGHT BY THE WORDS, “WHO ART IN HEAVEN” 


In connection with this consideration, however, let the faithful 
keep before their minds not only the image of the common Father 
of all, but also of a God reigning in heaven; and hence when about 
to pray, let them remember that they should raise heart and soul 
to heaven, and that the more the name of Father inspires them 
with hope and trust, the more should the sublime nature and 
divine majesty of our Father who is in heaven inspire them with 
sentiments of Christian humility and respect. 

These words, furthermore, determine what we ought to ask of 
God in prayer; for every demand regarding the needs and wants 
of this life, if it have not some reference to the goods of heaven 
and if it be not directed to that end, is vain and unworthy of a 
Christian. 

Let the pastor, therefore, instruct his pious hearers regarding 
this particular element of prayer, confirming his own words by 
the authority of the Apostle: If you be risen with Christ, seek 
the things that are above, where Christ is sitting at the right hand 
of God. Mind the things that are above, not the things that are 
upon the earth®*>> 

® Col. iii. 1. 

a Although the heavenly bodies are not incorruptible, as the ancient 
physicists believed, yet, because of their immensity, beauty, number, etc., 


they are fitly described in Scripture as God’s special dwelling place. 
b On the omnipresence of God see Summa Theol. ta. 8. 


THE FIRST PETITION OF THE LORD’S PRAYER 
“Hallowed be thy name” 


WHY THIS PETITION IS PLACED FIRST 


What we are to ask of God and in what order, the Master and 
Lord of all has Himself taught and commanded. For prayer is 
the ambassador and interpreter of our thoughts and desires; and 
consequently we pray well and properly when the order of our 
petitions follows the order in which the things sought are desir- 
able. 

Now, genuine charity tells us to direct our whole soul and all 
our affections to God, for He alone being the one supreme Good, 
it is but reasonable that we love Him with superior and singular 
love. On the other hand, God cannot be loved from the heart 
and above all things else, unless we prefer His honor and glory 
to all things created. For all the good that we or others possess, 
all that in any way bears the name of good, comes from Him, and 
is therefore inferior to Him, the sovereign Good. 

Hence, that our prayers may be made with due order, our 
Saviour has placed this Petition regarding the sovereign Good at 
the head of all the other Petitions of the Lord’s Prayer, thus 
showing us that before asking the things necessary for ourselves 
or for others, we ought to ask those that appertain to God’s honor, 
and to manifest and make known to Him the affections and de- 
sires of our hearts in this regard. Acting thus, we shall be faith- 
ful to the claims and rules of charity, which teaches us to love God 
more than ourselves and to ask, in the first place, those things we 
desire on His account, and next, those things we desire on our 


own. 
OBJECT OF THE FIRST THREE PETITIONS 


But as our desires and petitions concern such things only as 
are needed, and as nothing can be added to God; that is to say, 


5 ES 


514 THE LORD’S PRAYER 


to the Divine Nature, nor can His Divine Substance, which is in- 
effably rich in all perfection, be in any way increased, we must 
remember that the things we ask of God on God’s own account 
are extrinsic and concern His exterior glory. 

Thus we desire and beg that His name may be more and better 
known in the world, that His kingdom may be extended, and that 
each day new servants may come to obey His holy will. These 
three things, His name, His kingdom, and obedience (to His 
will), do not appertain to the intrinsic nature and perfection of 
God, but are extrinsic thereto. 

To enable the faithful to understand still more clearly the force 
and bearing of these Petitions, the pastor should take care to 
point out to them that the words, On earth as it is in heaven, may 
be understood of each of the first three Petitions, as follows: 
Hallowed be thy name on earth as it is in heaven; Thy kingdom 
come on earth as it is in heaven; and, Thy will be done on earth 
as it is in heaven. 


“HALLOWED BE THY NAME” 


In praying that the name of God may be hallowed, our meaning 
is that the sanctity and glory of the divine name may be increased. 


“ON EARTH AS IT IS IN HEAVEN” 


But in this connection the pastor should observe and should 
point out to his pious hearers that our Saviour does not in this 
expression say that the name of God is to be sanctified on earth 
in the same manner as it is in heaven; that is, that its earthly 
sanctification is to be equal in magnificence to its heavenly, a 
thing which is absolutely impossible, but only that such sanctifi- 
cation proceed from love and from the inmost affections of the 
soul. True, indeed, the divine name has in itself no need to be 
sanctified, since it is terrible and holy,’ as God Himself in His 
very Nature is holy, nor can any holiness be attributed Him 
which He has not possessed from all eternity; yet seeing that 

SIE Ors ©; | 


aQOn the order of the Petitions of the Lord’s Prayer see Summa Theol, 
Rea ae Ixxxiii. 9. On the first Petition see also Collationes De Pater 
oster. 


“HALLOWED BE THY NAME” 515 


here below an honor far inferior to that which He deserves is 
rendered to Him, and that sometimes even He is dishonored by 
cursing and blasphemy, we therefore desire and beg that His 
name may be exalted here on earth with praise, honor, and glory, 
after the example of that praise, honor and glory which are given 
Him in heaven. 


What Sanctification of God’s Name we should Pray For 


THAT THE FAITHFUL MAY GLORIFY HIM 


In other words we pray that our minds, our souls and our lips 
may be so devoted to the honor and worship of God as to glorify 
Him with all veneration both interior and exterior, and, after the 
model of the heavenly citizens, to celebrate with all our might the 
greatness, the glory and the holiness of the name of God. 


THAT UNBELIEVERS MAY BE CONVERTED 


Thus, then, as the heavenly spirits with perfect unanimity exalt 
and glorify God, so do we pray that the same be done over all the 
earth ; that all nations may come to know, worship, and reverence 
God; that all without a single exception may embrace the Chris- 
tian religion, may devote themselves wholly to the service of God, 
and may be convinced that in Him is the source of all sanctity 
and that there is nothing pure, nothing holy, that does not proceed 
from the sanctity of His divine name. According to the testi- 
mony of the Apostle, The church is cleansed by the laver of 
water in the word of life’? and the word of life signifies the 
name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost in 
which we are baptized and sanctified. 

And since there is no expiation, no purity, no integrity, in him 
over whom the divine name has not been invoked, we desire and 
pray that all mankind may abandon the darkness of their impious 
infidelity, and, enlightened by the rays of divine light, may come 
to recognize the power of this name and look to it alone for true 
sanctity, and that thus receiving the Sacrament of Baptism in the 
name of the holy and undivided Trinity, they may receive the 
plenitude of sanctity from the right hand of God Himself. 


* Eph. v. 26. 


516 THE LORD’S PRAYER 


THAT SINNERS MAY BE CONVERTED 


Moreover, our desires and our supplications extend equally to 
those, who, stained with sin and wickedness, have lost the purity 
of their Baptism and their robe of innocence, thus permitting the 
unclean spirit to take up his abode once more in their unhappy 
souls. We therefore desire and pray God that in these also His 
name may be sanctified; that they may reénter into themselves 
and, returning to a right frame of mind, may recover their former 
holiness through the Sacrament of Penance, and become once 
more the pure and holy temple and dwelling-place of God. 


THAT GOD MAY BE THANKED FOR. HIS FAVORS 


Finally, we pray that God may make His light to shine on the 
minds of all, so as to enable them to see that every best gift and 
every perfect gift coming from the Father of lights, is conferred 
on us by Him, and consequently that temperance, justice, life, 
health, in a word, all goods of soul, body and possessions, all 
goods both natural and supernatural, must be recognized as gifts 
given by Him from whom, as the Church proclaims, proceed all 
blessings.* If the sun by its light, if the stars by their motion 
and revolutions, are of any advantage to man; if the air with 
which we are surrounded serves to sustain us; if the earth with 
its abundance of produce and its fruits furnishes the means of 
subsistence to all men; if our rulers by their vigilance enable us to 
enjoy peace and tranquillity, it is to the infinite goodness of God 
that we owe these and innumerable blessings of a similar kind,— 
nay, those very causes which philosophers call secondary, we 
should regard as so many hands of God, wonderfully fashioned 
and fitted for our use, by means of which He distributes His 
blessings and diffuses them everywhere in profusion. 


' THAT THE CHURCH MAY BE RECOGNIZED BY ALL 


But what we most particularly ask in this Petition is that all 
may acknowledge and revere the spouse of Jesus Christ, our most 
holy mother the Church, in which alone is to be found the copious 


*James i. 17. “Collect for Fifth Sunday after Easter. 


“HALLOWED BE THY NAME” 5r7 


and inexhaustible fountain that cleanses and effaces all the stains 
of sin, and from which are drawn all the Sacraments of salvation 
and sanctification, those Sacraments through which, like so many 
sacred channels, is diffused over us by the hand of God the dew 
of sanctity. To that Church alone and to those whom she em- 
braces in her bosom and holds in her arms, appertains the invoca- 
tion of that divine name, outside of which there is no other name 
under heaven given to men whereby we must be saved. 


What Sanctification of God’s Name we should Practice 


The pastor should be careful to insist particularly on the fact 
that it is the duty of a good son not only to pray to God his 
Father in words, but also to endeavor by his conduct and actions 
to promote the sanctification of the divine name. And would to 
God there were none who, though continually praying for the 
sanctification of God’s name, yet, as far as in them lies, violate 
and profane it by their deeds, and by whose fault God Himself 
is sometimes blasphemed. It was of such as these that the 
Apostle said: The name of God through you is blasphemed 
among the Gentiles;® and in Ezechiel we read: They entered 
among the nations whither they went, and profaned my holy 
name, when it was said of them: “This 1s the people of the Lord, 
and they are come forth out of his land” ;* for according to the 
sort of life and conduct led by those professing a particular 
religion, so precisely in the eyes of the unlettered multitude will 
be the opinion held of that religion and of its author. 

Those, therefore, who live according to the dictates of the 
Christian religion which they have embraced, and who regulate 
their prayers and actions by its precepts, furnish others with a 
powerful motive for greatly praising, honoring and giorifying the 
name of our heavenly Father. As for us, it is a duty which the 
Lord has imposed on us, to lead others by shining deeds of virtue 
to praise and glorify the name of God. This is how He addresses 
us in the Gospel: Let your light so shine before men, that they 
may see your good works and glorify your Father who is ™ 


SActsivs 12: Rom. ii. 24. "Ezech. xxxvi. 20. 
a On the glory of God see Summa Theol. 2a. 2%. cxxxii. 


518 THE LORD’S PRAYER 


heaven; * and the Prince of the Apostles says: Having your con- 
versation good among the Gentiles, that they may, by the good 
works which they shall behold in you, glorify God.°4 


* Matt. v. 16. 21 ets ieee: 
a On beneficence and scandal see Summa Theol. 2a. 2x. xxxi., xliii. 


THE SECOND PETITION OF THE LORD’S PRAYER 
“Thy kingdom come” 


IMPORTANCE OF INSTRUCTION ON THIS PETITION 


The kingdom of heaven which we pray for in this second 
Petition is the great end to which is referred, and in which 
terminates all the preaching of the Gospel; for from it St. John 
the Baptist commenced his exhortation to penance: Do penance, 
for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.1_ With it also the Saviour 
of the world opened His preaching.? In that admirable discourse 
on the mount in which He points out to His disciples the way to 
happiness, having proposed, as it were, the subject-matter of 
His discourse, our Lord commences with the kingdom of heaven: 
Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of 
heaven.* Again, to those who would detain Him with them, He 
assigns as the necessary cause of His departure: To other cities, 
also, I must preach the kingdom of God; therefore am I sent.* 
This kingdom He afterwards commanded the Apostles to 
preach.’ And to him who expressed a wish to go and bury his 
father, He replied: Go thou, and preach the kingdom of God.® 
And after He had risen from the dead, during those forty days 
in which He appeared to the Apostles, He spoke of the kingdom 
of God." 

This second Petition, therefore, the pastor should treat with 
the greatest attention, in order to impress on the minds of his 
faithful hearers its great importance and necessity.* 


GREATNESS OF THIS PETITION 


In the first place pastors will be greatly assisted towards an 
accurate and careful explanation of this Petition by the thought 


1 Matt. iii. 2. * Matt. iv. 17. ‘atte vans. : “Luke iv. 43. 
J MIANige 3 YF. Luke ix. 60. Acts i. 3. 


aQOn this Petition see Summa Theol. 2a. 2x. Ixxxiiil. 9; Collationes De 
Pater Noster. 
519 


us THE LORD’S PRAYER 


that (the Redeemer Himself) commanded this Petition, although 
united to the others, to be also offered separately, in order that 
we may seek with the greatest earnestness that for which we 
pray; for He says: Seek first the kingdom of God and his jus- 
tice, and all these things shall be added unto you.* 

So great and so abundant are the heavenly gifts contained in 
this Petition, that it includes all things necessary for the security 
of soul and body. The king who pays no attention to those things 
on which depends the safety of his kingdom we should deem 
unworthy of the name. If a man is so anxious for the welfare 
of his kingdom, what must be the solicitude, what the providential 
care, with which the King of kings guards the life and safety 
of man? 

We compress, therefore, within the small compass of this 
Petition for God’s kingdom all that we stand in need of in our 
present pilgrimage, or rather exile, and all this God graciously 
promises to grant us; for He immediately subjoins: All these 
things shall be added unto you. Thus does he declare that He 
is that king who with bountiful hand bestows upon man an abun- 
dance of all things, whose infinite goodness enraptured David 
when he sang: The Lord ruleth me, and I shall want nothing.® 


NECESSITY OF RIGHTLY MAKING THIS PETITION 


It is not enough, however, that we utter an earnest petition for 
the kingdom of God; we must also add to our prayer the use of 
all those means by which that kingdom is sought and found. The 
five foolish virgins uttered earnestly the same petition in these 
words: Lord, Lord, open to us;+° but they used not the means 
necessary to secure its attainment, and were therefore rightly 
excluded. For God Himself has said: Not every one that saith 
to me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven. 


MOTIVES FOR ADOPTING THE NECESSARY MEANS 


The priest, therefore, who is charged with the care of souls, 
should draw from the exhaustless fountain of the divine Scrip- 


* Matt. vi. 33. Sasa sociionte 
Matt. xxv. IT. 4 Matt. vii. 21. 


“THY KINGDOM COME” 521 


tures those powerful motives which are calculated to move the 
faithful to the desire and pursuit of the kingdom of heaven, 
which portray in vivid coloring our deplorable condition, and 
which should make so sensible an impression upon them that, 
entering into themselves, they may call to mind that supreme 
happiness and those unutterable goods with which the eternal 
abode of God our Father abounds. 

Here below we are exiles, inhabitants of a land in which dwell 
those demons whose hatred for us cannot be softened, who are 
the determined and implacable foes of mankind. What shall we 
say of those intestine conflicts and domestic battles in which 
the soul and the body, the flesh and the spirit, are continually 
engaged against each other,?? in which we have always to fear 
defeat, nay, in which instant defeat becomes inevitable, unless 
we be defended by the protecting hand of God? Feeling this 
weight of misery the Apostle exclaims: Unhappy man that I 
am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? 

The misery of our condition, it is true, strikes us at once of 
itself; but if contrasted with that of other creatures, it strikes 
us still more forcibly. Although irrational and even inanimate, 
the lower creatures are seldom seen so to depart from the acts, 
the instincts and the movements imparted to them by nature, as 
to fail of obtaining their appointed and determined end. This 
is so obvious in the case of beasts, fishes and birds that there is 
no need to dwell on it. But if we look to the heavens, do we 
not behold the verification of these words of David? For ever, 
O Lord, thy word standeth firm in the heavens.* Constant in 
their motions, uninterrupted in their revolutions, they never de- 
part in the least from the laws divinely prescribed. The earth, 
too, and universal nature, as we at once perceive, adhere strictly 
to, or at least depart but very little from the laws of their being. 

But unhappy man is guilty of frequent falls. Seldom does he 
carry out his good resolutions; often he abandons and despises 
what he has well commenced; his best purposes which pleased 
for a time, are often suddenly abandoned, and he plunges into 
designs as degrading as they are pernicious. 

What then is the cause of this misery and inconstancy? Mani- 


Gai ie 1 * Rom. vii. 24. > Ps eexvilie SO, 


522 THE LORD’S PRAYER 


festly a contempt of the divine inspirations. We close our ears 
to the admonitions of God, our eyes to the divine lights which 
shine before us; nor do we hearken to those salutary commands 
which are delivered by our heavenly Father. 

To paint to the eyes of the faithful the misery of man’s con- 
dition, to detail its various causes, and to point out the efficacious 
remedies are, therefore, among the objects which should employ 
the zealous exertions of the pastor. In the discharge of this 
duty, his labor will be not a little lightened if he consults what 
has been said on the subject by those holy men, John Chrysos- 
tom and Augustine, and still more if he refers to our exposition 
of the Creed. For with a knowledge of these truths, who will 
be so obstinate in sin as not to endeavor, with the help of God’s 
preventing grace, to rise, like the prodigal son spoken of in the 
Gospel,!® to stand erect, and hasten into the presence of his 
heavenly Father and king? ** 


“Thy Kingdom” 


Having pointed out the advantages to be derived by the faith- 
ful from this Petition, the pastor should next explain the favors 
which it seeks. This becomes the more necessary as the words, 
kingdom of God, have a variety of significations, the exposition 
of each of which will not be found without its advantages in 
elucidating other passages of Scripture, and is necessary to a 
knowledge of the present subject. 


THE KINGDOM OF NATURE 


In their ordinary sense, which is frequently employed by Scrip- 
ture, the words, kingdom of God, signify not only that power 
which God possesses over all men and over the entire universe, 
but, also, His providence which rules and governs all things. 
In las hands, says the Prophet, are all the ends of the, earth." 
The word ends includes those things also which lie buried in 
the depths of the earth, and are concealed in the most -hidden 


®Tuke xv. 20. 


_ “See Chrys. in Ps. cxviii.; Hom. Ixii. ad Pop. Antioch: Aug. Conf 
lib. xix. c. 28. ; : i 
API elerhes A 


“THY KINGDOM COME” 523 


recesses of creation. In this sense Mardocheus exclaims: O 
Lord, Lord, almighty king, for all things are in thy power, and 
there is none that can resist thy will: thou art God of all, and 
there is none that can resist thy majesty.8 


THE KINGDOM OF GRACE 


By the kingdom of God is also understood that special and 
singular providence by which God protects and watches over 
pious and holy men. It is of this peculiar and admirable care 
that David speaks when he says: The Lord rules me, I shall 
want nothing,’® and Isaias: The Lord our king he will save 
uo 

But although, even in this life, the pious and holy are placed, 
in a special manner, under this kingly power of God; yet our 
Lord Himself informed Pilate that His kingdom was not of this 
world,”* that is to say, had not its origin in this world, which 
was created and is doomed to perish. In this perishable way 
power is exercised by kings, emperors, commonwealths, rulers, 
and all whose titles to the government of states and provinces 
is founded upon the desire or election of men, or who have in- 
truded themselves, by violent and unjust usurpation, into sover- 
eign power. 

Not so Christ the Lord, who, as the Prophet declares, is ap- 
pointed king by God,” and whose kingdom, as the Apostle says, 
is justice: The kingdom of God is justice and peace, and joy in 
the Holy Ghost.?8 Christ our Lord reigns in us by the interior 
virtues of faith, hope and charity. By these virtues we are made 
a portion, as it were, of His kingdom, become subject in a special 
manner to God, and are consecrated to His worship and venera- 
tion; so that, as the Apostle could say: J live, yet not I, but 
Christ liveth in me,?4 we too are able to say: I reign, yet not I, 
but Christ reigneth in me. 

This kingdom is called justice, because it has for its basis the 
justice of Christ the Lord. Of it our Lord says in St. Luke: 
The kingdom of God is within you.?® For although Jesus 

2 sth. Stl.0: CUPS sre Sule it, > Isa. XXxii. 22. 


7 John xviii. 36. aeSa it: > Rome xiv: 17: 
a5 Gallaeain 20: * Luke xvii. 21. 


524 THE LORD’S PRAYER 


Christ reigns by faith in all who are within the bosom of our holy 
mother, the Church; yet in a special manner He reigns over those 
who are endowed with a superior faith, hope and charity, and 
- have yielded themselves pure and living members to God. It is 
in these that the kingdom of God’s grace is said to consist. 


THE KINGDOM OF GLORY 


By the words kingdom of God is also meant that kingdom of 
His glory, of which Christ our Lord says in St. Matthew: Come 
ye blessed of my Father, possess the kingdom which was pre- 
pared for you from the beginning of the world.* This kingdom 
the thief, when he had admirably acknowledged his crimes, 
begged of Christ in the words related by St. Luke: Lord, re- 
member me, when thou comest into thy kingdom.*" Of this king- 
dom St. John speaks when he says: Unless a man be born again 
of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom 
of God;*® and of it the Apostle says to the Ephesians: No 
fornicator, or unclean, or covetous person (which is a serving 
of idols) hath inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of 
God.*® To it also refer some of the parables made use of by 
Christ the Lord when speaking of the kingdom of heaven.*° 

But the kingdom of grace must precede that of glory; for 
God’s glory cannot reign in anyone in whom His grace does not 
already reign. Grace, according to the Redeemer, is a fountain 
of water springing up to eternal life;* while as regards glory, 
what can we call it except a certain perfect and absolute grace? 
As long as we are clothed with this frail mortal flesh, as long 
as we wander in this gloomy pilgrimage and exile, weak and far 
away from God, we often stumble and fall, because we rejected 
the aid of the kingdom of grace, by which we were supported. 
But when the light of the kingdom of glory, which is perfect, 
shall have shone upon us, we shall stand forever firm and secure. 
Then shall all that is defective and unsuitable be utterly re- 
moved; then shall every infirmity be strengthened and invigo- 
rated; in a word, God Himself will then reign in our souls and 
bodies. But on this subject we have dealt already at greater 


* Matt. xxv. 34. Luke xxiii. 42. * Johnaiii. 5: 
= Roh. vas. ™ Matt. xiii. * John iv. 14. 


“THY KINGDOM COME” 525 


length in the exposition of the Creed, when speaking of the 
resurrection of the flesh. 


“Come” 


Having thus explained the ordinary acceptation of the words, 
kingdom of God, we now come to point out the particular objects 
contemplated by this Petition. 


WE PRAY FOR THE PROPAGATION OF THE CHURCH 


In this Petition we ask God that the kingdom of Christ, that is, 
His Church, may be enlarged; that Jews and infidels may em- 
brace the faith of Christ and the knowledge of the true God; 
that schismatics and heretics may return to soundness of mind, 
and to the communion of the Church of God which they have 
deserted; and that thus may be fulfilled and realized the words 
of the Lord, spoken by the mouth of Isaias: Enlarge the place 
of thy tent, and stretch out the skins of thy tabernacles; lengthen 
thy cords, and strengthen thy stakes, for thou shalt pass on to 
the right hand and to the left, for he that made thee shall rule 
over thee.*? And again: The Gentiles shall walk in thy light, and 
kings 1 the brightness of thy rising; lift up thy eyes round 
about and see; all these are gathered together, they are come to 
thee; thy sons shall come from afar, and thy daughters shall 
rise up at thy side.** 


FOR THE CONVERSION OF SINNERS 


But in the Church there are to be found those who profess 
they know God, but in their works deny Him; ** whose conduct 
shows that they have only a deformed faith; who, by sinning, 
become the dwelling-place of the devil, where the demon exer- 
cises uncontrolled dominion. Therefore do we pray that the 
kingdom of God may also come to them so that the darkness 
of sin being dispelled from around them, and their minds being 
illumined by the rays of the divine light, they may be restored 
to their lost dignity of children of God; that heresy and schism 
being removed, and all offences and causes of sins being eradi- 


“ Tsasjlivin2, 3,\ 5: *Isaris. 3: ee Lite a. TO: 


526 THE LORD’S PRAYER 


cated from His kingdom, our heavenly Father may cleanse the 
floor of His Church; and that, worshipping God in piety and 
holiness, she may enjoy undisturbed peace and tranquillity. 


THAT CHRIST MAY REIGN OVER ALL 


Finally, we pray that God alone may live, alone may reign 
within us; that death may no longer exist, but may be absorbed 
in the victory achieved by Christ our Lord, who, having broken 
and scattered the power of all His enemies, may, in His might, 
subject all things to His dominion. 


Dispositions that should Accompany this Petition 


The pastor should also be mindful to teach the faithful, as the 
nature of this Petition demands, the thoughts and reflections 
with which their minds should be impressed in order to offer 
this prayer devoutly to God. 


WE SHOULD PRIZE GOD’S KINGDOM ABOVE ALL THINGS 


He should exhort them, in the first place, to consider the force 
and import of that similitude of the Redeemer: The kingdom of 
heaven is like a treasure hidden in a field: which when a man 
hath found he hideth, and for joy thereof goeth and selleth all 
that he hath, and buyeth that field.8® He who knows the riches 
of Christ the Lord will despise all things when compared to them; 
to him wealth, riches, power, will appear as dross. Nothing can 
be compared to, or stand in competition with that inestimable 
treasure. Whoever, then, is blessed with this knowledge will say 
with the Apostle: I esteem all things to be but loss, and count 
them but as dung, that I may gain Christ.° This is that precious 
jewel of the Gospel, and he who sells all his earthly goods to 
purchase it shall enjoy an eternity of bliss.%? 

Happy we, should Jesus Christ shed so much light on us, as to 
enable us to discover this jewel of divine grace, by which He 
reigns in the hearts of those that are His. Then should we be 
prepared to sell all that we have on earth, even ourselves, to pur- 


® Matt. xiii. 44. *Phil. iii. 8. * Matt. xiii. 4s. 


“THY KINGDOM COME” 527 


chase and secure its possession; then might we say with con- 
fidence: Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? 

But would we know the incomparable excellence ot the king- 
dom of God’s glory, let us hear the words and teaching of the 
Apostle: Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath it entered 
into the heart of man, what things God hath prepared for them 
that love him.® 


WE MUST REALIZE THAT WE ARE EXILES 


To obtain the object of our prayers it will be found most help- 
ful to reflect within ourselves who we are,—namely, children of 
Adam, exiled from Paradise by a just sentence of banishment, 
and deserving, by our unworthiness and perversity, to become the 
objects of God’s supreme hatred, and to be doomed to eternal 
punishment. 

This consideration should excite in us humility and lowliness. 
Thus our prayers will be full of Christian humility; and wholly 
distrusting ourselves, like the publican, we will fly to the mercy 
of God. Attributing all to His bounty we will render immortal 
thanks to Him who has imparted to us that Holy Spirit, relying 
on whom we are emboldened to say: Abba (Father) .*° 


WE MUST LABOR TO OBTAIN GOD'S KINGDOM 


We should also be careful to consider what is to be done, what 
avoided, in order to arrive at the kingdom of heaven. For we 
are not called by God to lead lives of ease and indolence. On 
the contrary, He declares that the kingdom of God suffereth 
violence, and the violent bear it away; * and, If thou wilt enter 
into life, keep the commandments.” It is not enough, therefore, 
that we pray for the kingdom of God; we must also use our best 
exertions. It is a duty incumbent on us to cooperate with the 
grace of God, to use it in pursuing the path that leads to heaven. 
God never abandons us; He has promised to be with us at all 
times. We have therefore only this to see to, that we forsake not 
God, or abandon ourselves. 


*® Rom. viii. 35. . _ “Is: kxiv: eee 1.20: 
*# Rom. viii. 15. Matte sxin 12: Ali, SBS, Up 


528 THE LORD’S PRAYER 


In this kingdom of the Church, God has provided all those suc- 
cors by which He defends the life of man, and accomplishes his 
eternal salvation; whether they are invisible to us, such as the 
hosts of angelic spirits, or visible, such as the Sacraments, those 
unfailing sources of heavenly grace. Defended by these divine 
safeguards, not only may we securely defy the assaults of our 
most determined enemies, but may even lay prostrate, and trample 
under foot, the tyrant himself with all his nefarious legions. 


Recapitulation 


To conclude, let us then earnestly implore the Spirit of God 
that He may command us to do all things in accordance with His 
holy will; that He may so overthrow the empire of Satan that it 
shall have no power over us on the great accounting day; that 
Christ may be victorious and triumphant ; that the divine influence 
of His law may be spread throughout the world; that His 
ordinances may be observed; that there be found no traitor, no 
deserter ; and that all may so conduct themselves, as to come with 
joy into the presence of God their King, and may reach the pos- 
session of the celestial kingdom, prepared for them from all 
eternity, in the fruition of endless bliss with Christ Jesus. 


THE THIRD PETITION OF THE LORD’S PRAYER 
“Thy will be done” 


THE RELATION OF THIS PETITION TO THE PREVIOUS ONE 


Whoever desires to enter into the kingdom of heaven should 
ask of God that His will may be done. For Christ the Lord has 
said: Not every one that says to me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into 
the kingdom of heaven; but he that doth the will of my Father 
who is in heaven, he shall enter into the kingdom of heavens 
Consequently this Petition follows immediately after the one 
which prays for the kingdom of heaven. 


Necessity of this Petition 


In order that the faithful may know the necessity of this 
Petition and the numerous and salutary gifts which we obtain 
through it, the pastor should direct their attention to the misery 
and wretchedness in which the sin of Adam has involved man- 
kind. 


MAN’S PRONENESS TO ACT AGAINST GOD’S WILL 


From the beginning God implanted in all creatures an inborn 
desire of pursuing their own happiness that, by a sort of natural 
impulse, they may seek and desire their own end, from which they 
never deviate, unless impeded by some external obstacle. This 
impulse of seeking God, the author and father of his happiness, 
was in the beginning all the more noble and exalted in man 
because of the fact that he was endowed with reason and 
judgment. But, while irrational creatures, which, at their 
creation were by nature good, continued, and still continue 


1Matt. vii. 21. 
529 


530 THE LORD’S PRAYER 


in that original state and condition,* unhappy man went astray, 
and lost not only original justice, with which he had been super- 
naturally gifted and adorned by God, but also obscured that 
singular inclination toward virtue which had been implanted in 
his soul. All, He says, have gone aside, they are become unprofi- 
able together; there is none that doth good, no, not one For 
the imagination and thought of man’s heart are prone to evil from 
his youth Hence it is not difficult to perceive that of himself no 
man is wise unto salvation; that all are prone to evil; and that 
man has innumerable corrupt propensities, since he tends down- 
wards and is carried with ardent precipitancy to anger, hatred, 
pride. ambition, and to almost every species of evil. ; 


MAN’S BLINDNESS CONCERNING GOD’S WILL 


Although man is continually beset by these evils, yet his great- 
est misery is that many of these appear to him not to be evils at 
all. It is a proof of the most calamitous condition of man, that 
he is so blinded by passion and cupidity as not to see that what he 
deems salutary generally contains a deadly poison, that he rushes 
headlong after those pernicious evils as if they were good and 
desirable, while those things which are really good and virtuous 
are shunned as the contrary. Of this false estimate and corrupt 
judgment of man God thus expresses His detestation: Wo to you 
that call evil good, and good evil; that put darkness for light and 
light for darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter.* 

In order, therefore, to delineate in vivid coloring the misery of 
our condition, the Sacred Scripture compares us to those who 
have lost their sense of taste and who, in consequence, loathe 
wholesome food, and prefer that which is unwholesome. 


MAN’S WEAKNESS IN FULFILLING GOD’S WILL 


It also compares us to sick persons who, as long as their malady 
lasts, are incapable of fulfilling the duties and offices proper to 
persons of sound and vigorous health. In the same way neither 
can we, without the assistance of divine grace, undertake actions 

PP Sealiter A: 8 Gen. viii. 21. * Tsanyoreo: 


a Qn the consequences of the Fall in irrational creatures see Summa 
Theol. ra. xcvi. I. ad 2: 2a. 2x. Ixxvi. 2; clxiv. 2. 


“THY WILL BE DONE” 531 


such as are acceptable to God. Even should we, while in this con- 
dition, succeed in doing anything good, it will be of little or no 
avail towards attaining the bliss of heaven. But to love and serve 
God as we ought is something too noble and too sublime for us 
to accomplish by human powers in our present lowly and feeble 
condition, unless we are assisted by the grace of God. 

Another very apt comparison to denote the miserable condition 
ot mankind is that wherein we are likened to children who, if left 
to go their own way, are thoughtlessly attracted by everything 
that presents itself. Truly we are children, thoughtless children, 
wholly devoted to vain conversations and frivolous actions, once 
we become destitute of divine assistance; and hence the reproof 
which divine wisdom directs against us: O children, how long 
will you love childishness, and fools covet those things which are 
hurtful to themselves? *® while the Apostle thus exhorts us: Do 
not become children in sense.® 

Not only this, but our folly and blindness are even greater than 
those of children; for they are merely destitute of human pru- 
dence which they can of themselves acquire in course of time; 
whereas, if not assisted by God’s help and grace, we can never 
aspire to that divine prudence which is so necessary to salvation. 
And if God’s assistance should fail us, we at once cast aside those 
things that are truly good and rush headlong to voluntary ruin. 


REMEDY FOR THESE EVILS 


But should this darkness of spirit be removed with God’s help; 
should we but perceive these our miseries; and, shaking off our 
insensibility, should we take account of the presence of the law 
of the members and recognize the struggle of the senses against 
the law of the spirit; and were we aware of every inclination of 
our nature to evil; how in that event could we fail to seek with 
earnest endeavor a suitable remedy for the great evils with which 
our nature is oppressed, and how fail to sigh for that salutary 
rule in accordance with which every Christian’s life should be 
modelled and guided? 

Now this is what we ask when we address to God these words: 
Thy will be done. We fell into this state of misery by disobeying 


5 Prov. i. 22. ®y Cor. xiv.. 20. 


532 THE’ LORD’S PRAYER 


and despising the divine will. God vouchsafes to propose to us, 
as the sole corrective of such great evils, a conformity to His will, 
which by sinning we despised; He commands us to regulate all 
our thoughts and actions by this standard. Now it is precisely 
His help to accomplish this that we ask when we suppliantly 
address to God the prayer, Thy will be done. 


MAN’S PASSIONS REBEL AGAINST GOD’S WILL 


The same should also be the fervent prayer of those in whose 
souls God already reigns; who have been already illumined with 
the divine light, which enables them to obey the will of God. 

Ithough thus prepared, they have still to struggle against their 
own passions on account of the tendency to evil implanted in 
man’s sensual appetite. Hence even though we are of the number 
of the just, we are still exposed to great danger from our own 
frailty, and should always tear lest, drawn aside and allured by 
our concupiscences, which war in our members, we should again 
stray from the path of salvation. Of this danger Christ the Lord 
admonishes us in these words: Watch ye and pray that ye enter 
not mto temptation; the spirit indeed is willing but the flesh is 
weak." 

It is not in the power of man, not even of him who has been 
justified by the grace of God, to reduce the irregular desires of 
the flesh to such a state of utter subjection that they may never 
afterwards rebel. By justifying grace God no doubt heals the 
wounds of the soul; but not those also of the flesh concerning 
which the Apostle wrote: J know that there dwelleth not in me, 
that is to say, in my flesh, that which is good.® 

The moment the first man forfeited original justice, which 
enabled him to bridle the passions, reason was no longer able to 
restrain them within the bounds of duty, or to repress those 
inordinate desires which are repugnant to reason. This is why 
the Apostle tells us that sin, that is to say, the incentive to sin, 
dwells in the flesh, thus giving us to understand that it does not 
make a mere temporary stay within us as a passing guest, but 
that as long as we live it maintains its abode in our members as 
a permanent inhabitant of the body. 


™Matt. xxvi. 41. ® Rom. vii. 18. 


“THY \WILL: BE. DONE” 533 


Continually beset as we are by our domestic and interior ene: 
mies, it is easy for us to understand that we must fly to God’s 
help and beg of Him that His will may be done in us. 


“Thy Will” 


Though the faithful are not tw be left in ignorance of the 
import of this Petition, yet in this connection many questions 
concerning the will of God may be passed over which are dis- 
cussed at great length and with much utility by scholastic doctors. 
Accordingly we shall content ourselves with saying that by the 
will of God is here meant that will which is commonly called the 
will of sign; that is to say, whatever God has commanded or 
counselled us to do or to avoid. 

Hence, under the word will are here comprised all things 
that have been proposed to us as a means of securing the happi- 
ness of heaven, whether they regard faith or whether they regard 
morals, all, in a word, that Christ the Lord has commanded or 
forbidden either directly or through His Church. It is of this 
will that the Apostle thus writes: Become not unwise, but under- 
stand what is the will of God.°® 


“Be Done” 
WE ASK THAT WE MAY FULFIL WHAT GOD DESIRES OF US 


When, therefore, we pray, Thy will be done, we first of all 
ask our heavenly Father to give us the strength to obey His Com- 
mandments, and to serve Him im holiness and justice all our 
days;?° to do all things according to His will and pleasure; to 
discharge all the duties prescribed for us in Sacred Scripture; 
under His guidance and assistance to perform all that becomes 
those who are born, not of the will of the flesh but of God, thus 
following the example of Christ the Lord who was made obedient 
unto death, even unto the death of the cross; ** finally, to be ready 
to bear all things rather than depart from His holy will in even 
the slightest degree. 

® Eph. v. 17. John i. 13. "Luke i. 75. “Philip. ii. & 

a On the effects of sin see Summa Theol. ra. 2a. Ixxxv. ff. 

b On the will of God see Summa Theol. ta. xix. 


534 THE LORD’S PRAYER 


Assuredly there is no one who burns with a more ardent desire 
and anxiety to obtain (the effect of this Petition) than he who 
has been so blessed as to be able to understand the sublime dignity 
attaching to those who obey God. For such a one thoroughly 
understands how true it is to say that to serve God and obey Him 
is to reign. Whoever, says the Lord, shall do the will of my 
Father who is in heaven, he is my brother and sister and 
mother ; *8 that is to say, to him am I attached by the closest bonds 
of good will and love. 

The Saints, with scarcely a single exception, failed not to make 
the principal gift contemplated by this Petition the object of their 
fervent prayers to God. All, indeed, have in substance made use 
of this admirable prayer, but not unfrequently in different words. 
David, whose strains breathe such wondrous sweetness, pours out 
the same prayer in various aspirations: O! that my ways may be 
directed to keep thy justifications ; 1* Lead me into the path of thy 
commandments ; 1° Direct my steps according to thy word, and let 
no iniquity have dominion over me.1® In the same spirit he says: 
Give me understanding, and I will learn thy commandments; %* 
Teach me thy judgments; *® Give me understanding that I may 
know thy testimonies.® He often expresses and repeats the same 
sentiment in other words. These passages should be carefully 
noticed and explained to the faithful, that all may know and com- 
prehend the greatness and profusion of salutary gifts which are 
comprehended in the first part of this Petition. 


WE ASK THAT WE MAY NOT YIELD TO OUR OWN INORDINATE 
DESIRES 


In the second place, when we say, Thy will be done, we express 
our detestation of the works of the flesh, of which the Apostle 
writes: The works of the flesh are manifest, which are fornica- 
tion, uncleanness, immodesty, lust, etc. ;?° if you live according to 
the flesh you shall die.* We also beg of God not to suffer us to 
yield to the suggestions of sensual appetite, of our lusts, of our 
infirmities, but to govern our will by His will. 

* Matt. xii. 50. Se SHCKVAlGS: ? Ps. fexyilis st: 


* Ps. cxvili. 133. = PSwcxvilimg3: * Ps. cxviii. 108. 
TITAS, Qa WAY ” Gal. v. 19. * Rom. viii. 13. 


“THY WILL BE DONE” 535 


The sensualist, whose every thought and care is absorbed in the 
transient things of this world, is estranged from the will of God. 
Borne along by the tide of passion, he indulges his licentious 
appetites. In this gratification he places all his happiness, and 
considers that man happy who obtains whatever he desires. We, 
on the contrary, beseech God in the language of the Apostle that 
we make not provision for the flesh in its concupiscence,?? but that 
His will be done. 

We are not easily induced to entreat God not to satisfy our 
inordinate desires. This disposition of soul is difficult of attain- 
ment, and by offering such a prayer we seem in some sort to hate 
ourselves. To those who are slaves to the flesh such conduct 
appears folly; but be it ours cheerfully to incur the imputation of 
folly for the sake of Christ who has said: If any man will come 
after me, let him deny himself.?? This is especially so since we 
know that it is much better to desire what is right and just, than 
to obtain what is opposed to reason and religion and to the laws 
of God. Unquestionably the condition of the man who attains 
the gratification of his rash and inordinate desires is less enviable 
than that of him who does not obtain the object of his pious 
prayers. 


WE ASK THAT OUR MISTAKEN REQUESTS BE NOT GRANTED 


Our prayers, however, have not solely for object that God 
should deny us what accords with our desires, when it is clear 
that they are depraved; but also that He would not grant us those 
things for which, under the persuasion and impulse of the devil, 
who transforms himself into an Angel of light, we sometimes 
pray, believing them to be good. 

The desire of the Prince of the Apostles to dissuade the Lord 
from His determination to meet death, appeared not less reason- 
able than religious; yet the Lord severely rebuked him, because 
he was led, not by supernatural motives, but by natural feeling. 

What stronger proof of love towards the Lord than that shown 
by the request of St. James and St. John, who, filled with indig- 
nation against the Samaritans for refusing to entertain their 
Master, besought Him to command fire to descend from heaven 


2 Rom. xiii. 14. 28 Matt. xvi. 24; Luke ix. 23. 


536 THE LORD’S PRAYER 


and consume those hard-hearted and inhuman men? Yet they 
were reproved by Christ the Lord in these words: You know not 
of what spirit you are; the son of man came not to destroy souls 
but to save them.** 


WE ASK THAT EVEN OUR GOOD REQUESTS BE GRANTED ONLY WHEN 
THEY ARE ACCORDING TO GOD’S WILL 


We should beseech God that His will be done, not only when 
our desires are wrong, or have the appearance of wrong. We 
should ask this even when the object of our desire is not really 
evil, as when the will, obeying its instinctive impulse, desires what 
is necessary for our preservation, and rejects what seems to be 
opposed thereto. When about to pray for such things we should 
say from our hearts, Thy will be done, in imitation of the example 
of Him from whom we receive salvation and the science of salva- 
tion, who, when agitated by a natural dread of torments and of a 
cruel death, bowed in that horror of supreme sorrow with meek 
submission to the will of His heavenly Father: Not my will but 
thine be done. 


WE ASK THAT GOD MAY PERFECT IN US WHAT HIS GRACE HAS 
BEGUN 


But, such is the degeneracy of our nature that, even when we 
have done violence to our passions and subjected them to the will 
of God, we cannot avoid sin without His assistance, by which we 
are protected from evil and directed in the pursuit of good. To 
this Petition, therefore, we must have recourse, beseeching God to 
perfect in us those things which He has begun; to repress the tur- 
bulent emotions of passion; to subject our sensual appetites to 
reason ; in a word, to render us entirely conformable to His holy 
will. 


WE ASK THAT ALL MAY KNOW GOD’S WILL 


We pray that the whole world may receive the knowledge of 
God’s will, that the mystery of God, hidden from all ages and 
generations, may be made known to all. 


* Luke ix. 54-56. * Luke xxii. 42. 


"AN WILL BE} DONE” 537 


“On Earth as it is in Heaven” 


We also pray for the standard and model of this obedience, that 
our conformity to the will of God be regulated according to the 
rule observed in heaven by the blessed Angels and choirs of 
heavenly spirits, that, as they willingly and with supreme joy obey 
God, we too may yield a cheerful obedience to His will in the 
manner most acceptable to Him. 

God requires that in serving Him we be actuated by the greatest 
love and by the most exalted charity; that although we devote 
ourselves entirely to Him with the hope of receiving heaven as 
reward, yet the reason we look forward to that reward should be 
that the Divine Majesty has commanded us to cherish that hope. 
Let all our hopes, therefore, be based on the love of God, who 
promises to reward our love with eternal happiness. 

There are some who serve another with love, but who do so 
solely with a view to some recompense, which is the end and aim 
of their love; while others, influenced by love and loyalty alone, 
look to nothing else in,the services which they render than the 
goodness and worth of him whom they serve, and, knowing and 
admiring his qualities consider themselves happy in being able to 
render him these services. This is the meaning of the clause 
On earth as it is in heaven appended (to the Petition). 

It is. then, our duty to endeavor to the best of our ability to be 
obedient to God, as we have said the blessed spirits are, whose 
profound obedience is praised by David in the Psalm in which he 
sings: Bless the Lord, all ye hosts; ye ministers of his that do 
his will.?6 

Should anyone, adopting the interpretation of St. Cyprian,’ 
understand the words in heaven, to mean in the good and the 
pious, and the words on earth, in the wicked and the impious, we 
do not disapprove of the interpretation, by the word heaven 
understanding the spirit, and by the word earth, the flesh, that 
every person and every creature may in all things obey the wil! 
of God. 


7° Ds, cii. 21. 7 In Orat. Dom. 


538 THE LORD’S PRAYER 


This Petition Contains an Act of Thanksgiving 


This Petition also includes thanksgiving. We revere the most 
holy will of God, and in transports of joy celebrate all His works 
with the highest praise and acknowledgment, being assured that 
He has done all things well. It is certain that God is omnipotent ; 
and the consequence necessarily forces itself on the mind that all 
things were created at His command. We also confess the truth 
that He is the supreme Good. We must, therefore, confess that 
all His works are good, for to all He imparted His own goodness. 
But if we cannot fathom in everything the divine plan, let us in 
all things banish every doubt and hesitation from the mind, and 
with the Apostle declare that his ways are unsearchable.*® 

But the most powerful incentive to revere the will of God is 
that He has deigned to illumine by His heavenly light; for, He 
hath delivered us from the power of darkness, and hath translated 
us into the kingdom of the Son of his love.*® 


The Dispositions that should Accompany this Petition 


A SENSE OF OUR OWN WEAKNESS OF WILL 


To close our exposition of this Petition we must revert to a 
subject at which we glanced in the beginning. It is that the faith- 
ful in uttering this Petition should be humble and lowly in spirit: 
keeping in view the violence of their inborn passions whic’). revolt 
against the will of God; recollecting that in this duty (uf obedi- 
ence) man is excelled by all other creatures, of whom it is writ- 
ten: All things serve thee ;*° and reflecting, that he who is unable 
without divine help to undertake, not to say, perform, anything 
acceptable to God, must be very weak indeed. 


APPRECIATION OF THE DIGNITY OF DOING GOD’S WILL 


But as there is nothing greater, nothing more exalted, as we 
have already said, than to serve God and live in obedience to His 
law and Commandments, what more desirable to a Christian.than 
to walk in the ways of the Lord, to think nothing, to undertake 
nothing, at variance with His will? In order that the faithful 


= Romyexin33: Gol, in 13: ES CUI: OF; 


“THY WILL BE DONE” 530 


may adopt this rule of life, and adhere to it with greater fidelity, 
(the pastor) should borrow from Scripture examples of indi- 
viduals, who, by not referring their views to the will of God, 
have failed in all their undertakings. 


RESIGNATION TO GOD’S WILL 


Finally, the faithful are to be admonished to acquiesce in the 
simple and absolute will of God. Let him, who thinks that he 
occupies a place in society inferior to his deserts, bear his lot with 
patient resignation; let him not abandon his proper sphere, but 
abide in the vocation to which he has been called. Let him sub- 
ject his own judgment to the will of God, who provides better for 
our interests than we can even desire ourselves. If troubled by 
poverty, by sickness, by persecution, or afflictions and anxieties 
of any sort, let us be convinced that none of these things can 
happen to us without the permission of God, who is the supreme 
Arbiter of all things. We should, therefore, not suffer our minds 
to be too much disturbed by them, but bear up against them with 
fortitude, having always on our lips the words: The will of the 
Lord be done; ** and also those of holy Job, As it hath pleased 
the Lord, so it is done: blessed be the name of the Lord.*? 


* Acts xxi. 14. ” Job i. 21. 


THE FOURTH PETITION OF THE LORD’S PRAYER 
“Give us this day our daily bread” 


THE RELATION OF THE FOLLOWING PETITIONS TO THOSE THAT 
PRECEDED 


The fourth and following Petitions, in which we particularly 
and expressly pray for the needs of soul and body, are subordinate 
to those which preceded. According to the order of the Lord’s 
Prayer we ask for what regards the body and the preservation of 
life after we have prayed for the things which pertain to God. 
For since man has God at his last end, the goods of human life 
should be subordinated to those that are divine. These goods 
should be desired and prayed for, either because the divine order 
so requires, or because we need them to obtain divine blessings, 
that being assisted by these (temporal things) we may reach our 
destined end, the kingdom and glory of our heavenly Father, 
and the reverential cbservance of those commands which we 
know to emanate from His holy will. In this Petition, there- 
fore, we should refer all to God and His glory. 


HOW TO PRAY FOR TEMPORAL BLESSINGS 


In the discharge of his duty towards the faithful the pastor, 
therefore, should endeavor to make them understand that, in 
praying for the use and enjoyment of temporal blessings, our 
minds and our desires are to be directed in conformity with the 
law of God, from which we are not to swerve in the least. By 
praying for the transient things of this world, we especially trans- 
gress; for, as the Apostle says, We know not what we should 
pray for as we ought.t These things, therefore, we should pray 
for as we ought, lest, praying for anything as we ought not, 
we receive from God for answer, You know not what you ask.? 

*Rom. viii. 26. ? Matt. xx 22. 


@On the order of the Petitions in the Lord’s Prayer see Summa Theol, 
2a, 2%. Ixxxiil. 9. 


540 


“GIVE US THIS DAY OUR DAILY BREAD” 541 


MEANS OF ASCERTAINING PURITY OF INTENTION IN OFFERING THIS 
PETITION 


A sure standard for judging what petition is good, and what 
bad, is the purpose and intention of the petitioner. Thus if a 
person prays for temporal blessings under the impression that 
they constitute the sovereign good, and rests in them as the 
ultimate end of his desires, wishing nothing else, he unques- 
tionably does not pray as he ought. As St. Augustine observes, 
we ask not these temporal things as our goods, but as our 
necessaries.* The Apostle also in his Epistle to the Corinthians 
teaches that whatever regards the necessary purposes of life 
is to be referred to the glory of God: Whether you eat or drink, 
or whatever else you do, do all to the glory of God.*# 


Necessity of the Fourth Petition 


In order that the faithful may see the importance of this 
Petition, the pastor should remind them how much we stand in 
need of external things, in order to support and maintain life; 
and this they will the more easily understand, if he compares the 
wants of our first parent with those of his posterity. 


MAN NEEDS MANY THINGS FOR HIS BODILY LIFE 


It is true that in that exalted state of innocence, from which 
he himself, and, through his transgression, all his posterity fell, 
he had need of food to recruit his strength; yet there is a great 
difference between his wants and those to which we are subject. 
He stood not in need of clothes to cover him, of a house to 
shelter him, of weapons to defend him, of medicine to restore 
health, nor of many other things which are necessary to us for 
the protection and preservation of our weak and frail bodies. 
To enjoy immortality, it would have been sufficient for him to 
eat of the fruit which the blessed tree of life yielded without 
any labor from him or his posterity. 

Nevertheless, since he was placed in that habitation of pleas- 


>Serm. Dom. in Monte, lib. ii. c. 16. pin Coigexe3T 
aQOn prayer for temporal blessings see Summa Theol. 2a. 2. Ixxxiii. 6. 


542 THE LORD’S PRAYER 


ure in order to be occupied, he was not, in the midst of these 
delights, to lead a life of indolence. But to him no employment 
would have been troublesome, no duty unpleasant. From the 
cultivation of those beautiful gardens he would always have 
derived fruits the most delicious, and his labors and hopes would 
never have been frustrated.# 


TO SUPPLY HIS BODILY WANTS MAN MUST LABOR 


His posterity, on the contrary, are not only deprived of the 
fruit of the tree of life, but also condemned to this dreadful 
sentence: Cursed is the earth in thy work; with labour and toil 
shalt thou eat thereof all the days of thy life; thorns and thistles 
shall it bring forth to thee, and thou shalt eat the herbs of the 
earth. In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread, till thou 
return to the earth, out of which thou wast taken; for dust thou 
art, and into dust thou shalt return.® 


WITHOUT GOD’S HELP MAN’S LABOR IS VAIN 


Our condition, therefore, is entirely different from what his 
and that of his posterity would have been, had Adam listened 
to the voice of God. All things have been thrown into disorder, 
and have changed sadly for the worse. Of the resultant evils, 
this is not the least, that the heaviest cost, and labor, and toil, 
are frequently expended in vain; either because the crops are 
unproductive, or because the fruits of the earth are smothered 
by noxious weeds that spring up about them, or perish when 
stricken and prostrated by heavy rains, storms, hail, blight or 
blast. Thus is the entire labor of the year quickly reduced to 
nothing by some calamity of air or soil, inflicted in punishment 
of our crimes, which provoke the wrath of God and prevent 
Him from blessing our efforts. The dreadful sentence pro- 
nounced against us in the beginning remains.® 

Pastors, therefore, should apply themselves earnestly to the 
treatment of this subject, in order that the faithful may know 
that men fall into these perplexities and miseries through their 

®° Gen. ili. 17-19. *Gen. iii. 17, 


20On gs condition of man in the state of innocence see Summa Theol. 
Mey Scie, St, 


“GIVE US THIS DAY OUR DAILY BREAD” 543 


own fault; that they may understand that while they must 
sweat and toil to procure the necessaries of life, unless God 
bless their labors, their hope must prove fallacious, and all their 
exertions unavailing. For neither he that planteth is anything, 
nor he that watereth, but God who giveth the increase;* unless 
the Lord build the house, they labour in vain that build it.2 


Inducements to Use this Petition 


Parish priests, therefore, should point out that the things neces- 
sary to human existence, or, at least, to its comfort, are almost 
innumerable; for by this knowledge of our wants and weak- 
nesses, Christians will be compelled to have recourse to their 
heavenly Father, and humbly to ask of Him both earthly and 
spiritual blessings. 

They will imitate the prodigal son, who, when he began to 
suffer want in a far distant country, and could find no one to 
give him even husks in his hunger, at length entering into him- 
self, perceived that from the evils by which he was oppressed, 
he could expect relief from no one but from his father.® 

Here the faithful will also have recourse more confidently to 
prayer, if, in reflecting on the goodness of God, they recollect 
that His paternal ears are ever open to the cries of His children. 
When He exhorts us to ask for bread, He promises to bestow it 
on us abundantly, if we ask it as we ought; for, by teaching us 
how to ask, He exhorts; by exhorting, He urges; by urging, He 
promises; by promising, He puts us in hope of most certainly 
obtaining our request. 


“Bread” 


When, therefore, the faithful are thus animated and encour- 
aged, (the pastor) should next proceed to declare the objects of 
this Petition; and first, what that bread is which we ask. 

It should then be known that, in the Sacred Scriptures, by 
the word bread, are signified many things, but especially two: 
first, whatever we use for food and for other corporal wants; 
secondly, whatever the divine bounty has bestowed on us for 
the iife and salvation of the soul. 


ra (COrs iils07: ®Ps. cxxvi. 1. ®Luke xv. 14. 


544 THE LORD’S PRAYER 


WE ASK FOR TEMPORAL BLESSINGS 


In this Petition, then, according to the interpretation and 
authority of the holy Fathers, we ask those helps of which we 
stand in need in this life on earth. 


IT IS LAWFUL TO PRAY FOR TEMPORAL BLESSINGS 


Those, therefore, who say that it is unlawful for Christians 
to ask from God the earthly goods of this life, are by no means 
to be listened to; for not only the unanimous teaching of the 
Fathers, but also very many examples, both in the Old and New 
Testaments, are opposed to this error. 

Thus Jacob, making a vow, prayed as follows: If God shall 
be with me, and shall keep me in the way, by which I walk, and 
shall give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on, and I shall 
return prosperously to my father’s house, the Lord shall be my 
God, and this stone, which I have set up for a title, shall be 
called the house of God; and of all things thou shalt give to, 
me, I will offer up tithes to thee® Solomon also asked a certain 
means of subsistence in this life, when he prayed: Give me 
neither beggary nor riches: give me only the necessaries of life.» 

Nay, the Saviour of mankind Himself commands us to pray 
for those things which no one will dare deny appertain to the 
benefit of the body. Pray, He says, that your flight be not in 
the winter, or on the sabbath? St. James also says: Is any 
one of you sad? Let him pray. Is he cheerful in mind? Let 
him sing.** And the Apostle thus addressed himself to the 
Romans: I beseech you, brethren, through our Lord Jesus Christ, 
and by the charity of the Holy Ghost, that you assist me in your 
prayers for me to God, that I may be delivered from the un- 
believers that are in Judea.** As, then, the faithful are divinely 
permitted to ask these temporal succors, and as this perfect form 
of prayer was given us by Christ the Lord, there remains no 
doubt that such a request constitutes one of the seven Petitions. 


% yi ; 
y Gen. xxviii. 20-22. “Prov. xxx. 8. * Matt. xxiv. 20. 
James v. 13. * Rom. xv. 30 


“GIVE US THIS DAY OUR DAILY BREAD” 545 


THE WANTS, NOT THE LUXURIES OF THIS LIFE ARE MEANT BY THE 
WORD “BREAD” 


We also ask our daily bread; that is, the things necessary for 
sustenance, understanding by the word bread, what is sufficient 
for raiment and for food, whether that food be bread, or flesh, 
or fish, or anything else. In this sense we find Eliseus to have 
used the word when admonishing the king to provide bread for 
the Assyrian soldiers, to whom was then given a large quantity 
of various kinds of food.® We also know that of Christ the 
Lord it is written, that He went into the house of a certain prince 
of the Pharisees on the sabbath day to eat bread,*® by which 
words we see are signified the things that constitute food and 
drink. 

To comprehend the full signification of this Petition, it is, more- 
over, to be observed that by this word bread ought not to be 
understood an abundant and exquisite profusion of food and 
clothing, but what is necessary and simple, as the Apostle has 
written: Having food and wherewith to be covered, with these 
we are content;** and Solomon, as said above: Give me only 
the necessaries of life.*® 


“Our” 


Of this frugality and moderation we are admonished in the 
next word; for when we say our, we ask for bread sufficient to 
satisfy our necessities, not to gratify luxury. 

We do not say our in the sense that we are able of ourselves, 
and independently of God, to procure bread; for we read in 
David: All expect of thee that thou give them food in season: 
when thou givest to them they shall gather up: when thou 
openest thy hand they shall all be filled with good;** and in 
another place, The eyes of all hope in thee, O Lord, and thou 
givest them meat in due season.*® (We say our bread, then), 
because it is necessary for us and is given to us by God, the 
Father of all, who, by His providence, feeds all living creatures. 


% 4 Kings vi. 22. *®Tuke xiv. 1. aA Tim. vi. 8. 
> EERO. BOO C3) Tae Se Cilia 27. Ps. cxliv. 15. 


546 THE LORD'S” PRAYER 


It is also called our bread for this reason, that it is to be 
acquired by us lawfully, not by injustice, fraud or theft. What 
we procure in evil ways is not our own, but the property of 
another. Its acquisition or possession, or, at least, its loss, is 
generally calamitous; while, on the contrary, there is in the 
honest and laborious gains of good men peace and great happi- 
ness, according to these words of the Prophet: For thou shalt 
eat the labours of thy hands: blessed art thou, and it shall be 
well with thee.2* Indeed to those who seek subsistence by 
honest labor, God promises the fruit of His kindness in the fol- 
lowing passage: The Lord will send forth a blessing upon thy 
storehouses, and upon all the works of thy hands, and will bless 
thee.” 

Not only do we beg of God to grant us to use, with the aid 
of His goodness, the fruit of our virtuous toil—and that is truly 
called ours-—but we also pray for a good mind, that we may be 
able well and prudently to use what we have honestly acquired. 


“Daily” 


By the word (daily) also is suggested the idea of frugality 
and moderation, to which we referred a short time ago; for we 
pray not for variety or delicacy of food, but for that which may 
satisfy the wants of nature. This should bring the blush of 
shame to those who, disdaining ordinary food and drink, look 
for the rarest viands and wines. 

Nor by this word daily are they less censured to whom Isaias 
holds out those awful threats: Woe to you that join house to 
house, and lay field to field, even to the end of the place: shall 
you alone dwell in the midst of the earth?’ Indeed the cupidity 
of such men is insatiable, and it is of them that Solomon has 
written: d covetous man shall not be satisfied with money.** 
To them also applies that saying of the Apostle: They who 
would become rich fall into temptation, and into the snare of the 
devil.*® 

We also call it our daily bread, because we use it to recruit 


* Bs. Cxxvil. 2. ™=Deut. xxviii. 8. a lsavvies 
Eccles. v. 9. sae itmenvings 


“GIVE US THIS DAY OUR DAILY BREAD” 547 


the vital power that is daily consumed by the natural heat of the 
system. 

Finally, another reason for the use of the word daily is the 
necessity of continually praying to God, in order that we may 
be kept in the practice of loving and serving Him, and that we 
may be thoroughly convinced of the fact that on Him depend 
our life and salvation. 


“Give” 


With regard to the two words give us, what ample matter they 
supply for exhorting the faithful piously and holily to worship 
and revere the infinite power of God, in whose hands are all 
things, and to detest that abominable boast of Satan: To me 
all things are delivered, and to whom I will I give them,?® must 
be obvious to everyone. For it is by the sovereign will of God 
alone that all things are dispensed, and preserved, and increased. 

But what necessity, some cne may say, is there imposed on the 
rich to pray for their daily bread, seeing that they abound in all 
things? They are under the necessity of praying thus, not that 
those things be given them which by the goodness of God they 
have in abundance, but that they may not lose their possessions. 
Hence the Apostle writes that the rich should learn from this 
not to be highminded, nor to trust in uncertain riches, but in 
the living God, who giveth us abundantly all things to enjoy.*" 

St. Chrysostom adduces as a reason for the necessity of this 
Petition, not only that we may be supplied with food, but that 
we be supplied with it by the hand of the Lord,?® which imparts 
to our daily bread so wholesome and salutary an influence as 
to render the food profitable to the body, and the body subject 
to the soul. 


Ad vd 


But why say give us, in the plural number, and not give me? 
Because it is the duty of Christian charity that each individual 
be not solicitous for himself alone, but that he be also active in 
the cause of his neighbor; and that, while he attends to his own 
interests, he forget not the interests of others. 


2 ilenkeniva tae aol) itm. vi. 7- ® Opus Imperf. in Matt. Hom. xiv. 


548 THE LORD’S PRAYER 


Moreover, the gifts which are bestowed by God on anyone are 
given, not that he alone should possess them, or that he should 
live luxuriously in their enjoyment, but that he should impart 
his superfiuities to others. For, as St. Basil and St. Ambrose 
say, It is the bread of the hungry that you withhold; it is the 
clothes of the naked that you lock up; that money you bury under 
ground is the redemption, the freedom of the wretched.” 


“This Day 


The words this day remind us of our common infirmity. For 
who is there that, although he does not expect to be able by his 
own individual exertions to provide for his maintenance during 
a considerable time, does not feel confident of having it in his 
power to procure necessary food for the day? Yet even this 
confidence God will not permit us to entertain, but has com- 
manded us to ask Him for the food even of each successive day; 
and the necessary reason is, that as we all stand in need of daily 
bread, each should also make daily use of the Lord’s Prayer. 

So far we have spoken of the bread which we eat and which 
nourishes and supports the body; which is common to believers 
and unbelievers, to pious and impious, and is bestowed on all by 
the admirable bounty of God, Who maketh his sun to rise on the 
good and the bad, and raineth upon the just and the unjust. °° 


The Spiritual Bread Asked for in this Petition 


It remains to speak of the spiritual bread which we also ask 
in this Petition, by which are meant all things whatever that are 
required in this life for the health and safety of the spirit and 
soul. For as the food by which the body is nourished and sup- 
ported is of various sorts, so is the food which preserves the 
life of the spirit and soul not of one kind. 


THE WORD OF GOD IS OUR SPIRITUAL BREAD 


The Word of God is the food of the soul, as Wisdom says: 
Come, eat my bread, and drink the wine which I have ‘mingled 
for you.** And when God deprives men of the means of hear- 


Das.» Hom. vi. Variorum Arg.; Ambr., Serm. Ixxxi. 
Matt. v. 45. * Provo s: 


“GIVE US THIS DAY OUR DAILY BREAD” 549 


ing His Word, which He is wont to do when grievously pro- 
voked by our crimes, He is said to visit the human race with 
famine; for we thus read in Amos: I will send forth a famine 
into the land, not a famine of bread, or a thirst of water, but of 
hearing the word of the Lord.*? 

And as an incapability of taking food, or of retaining it when 
taken, is a sure sign of approaching death, so is it a strong argu- 
ment for their hopelessness of salvation, when men either seek not 
the Word of God, or, having it, endure it not, but utter against 
God the impious cry, Depart from us, we desire not the knowl- 
edge of thy ways.** This is the spiritual folly and mental blind- 
ness of those who, disregarding their lawful pastors, the Catholic 
Bishops and priests, and, abandoning the Holy Roman Church, 
have transferred themselves to the direction of heretics that 
corrupt the Word of God. 


CHRIST IS OUR SPIRITUAL BREAD, ESPECIALLY IN THE HOLY 
EUCHARIST 


Now Christ the Lord is that bread which is the food of the 
soul. J am, He says of Himself, the living bread which came 
down from heaven.** It is incredible with what pleasure and 
delight this bread fills devout souls, even when they must con- 
tend with earthly troubles and disasters. Of this we have an 
example in the Apostles, of whom it is written: They, indeed, 
went into the presence of the council rejoicing.** The lives of 
the Saints are full of similar examples ; and of these inward joys 
of the good, God thus speaks: To him that overcometh, I will 
give the hidden manna.** 

But Christ the Lord is especially our bread in the Sacrament 
of the Eucharist, in which He is substantially contained. This 
ineffable pledge of His love He gave us when about to return to 
the Father, and of it He said: He that eateth my flesh, and 
drinketh my blood, abideth in me, and I in him,?" Take ye and 
eat: this is my body.** For matter useful to the faithful on this 
subject the pastor should consult what we have already said on 
the nature and efficacy of this Sacrament. 


® Amos viii. 11. ™ Job xxi. 14. «John vi. 4I. SNCES VAT, 
SSA POG eit 7. * John vi. 56. Matt. xxvi. 26; I Cor. xi. 24. 


550 THE LORD’S PRAYER 


The Eucharist is called our bread, because it is the food of the 
faithful only, that is to say, of those who, uniting charity to 
faith, wash away the defilement of their sins in the Sacrament 
of Penance, and mindful that they are the children of God, re- 
ceive and adore this divine Sacrament with all possible holiness 
and veneration. 


WHY THE HOLY EUCHARIST IS CALLED OUR “DAILY” BREAD 


The Eucharist is called daily (bread) for two reasons. The 
first is that it is daily offered to God in the sacred mysteries of 
the Christian Church and is given to those who seek it piously 
and holily. The second is that it should be received daily, or, 
at least, that we should so live as to be worthy, as far as possible, 
to receive it daily. Let those who hold the contrary, and who 
say that we should not partake of this salutary banquet of the 
soul but at distant intervals, hear what St. Ambrose says: If it 
is daily bread, why do you receive it yearly? *°4 


Exhortations 


In the explanation of this Petition the faithful are emphatically 
to be exhorted that when they have honestly used their best 
judgment and industry to procure the necessary means of sub- 
sistence, they leave the issue to God and submit their own wish 
to the will of Him who shall not suffer the just to waver for 
ever? For God will either grant what is asked, and thus they 
will obtain their wishes; or He will not grant it, and that will 
be a most certain proof that what is denied the good by Him 
is not conducive either to their interest or their salvation, since 
He is more desirous of their eternal welfare than they them- 
selves. This topic the pastor will be able to amplify, by explain- 
ing the reasons admirably collected by St. Augustine in his letter 
to Proba.*t 


In concluding his explanation of this Petition the pastor should 


> De Saculibeve cede. Lens generally agreed that St. Ambrose is not the 
author of the “De Sacramentis” included in his writings. The work, how- 
ever, is a product of the fourth or fifth century. 

PIES Athi ec. “Ep. exxx. ¢. 14, 0. 26. 

a On daily communion see Summa Theol. 3a. Ixxx. 10. 


“GIVE US THIS DAY OUR DAILY BREAD” ssr 


exhort the rich to remember that they are to look upon their 
wealth and riches as gifts of God, and to reflect that those goods 
are bestowed on them in order that they may share them with 
the indigent. With this truth the words of the Apostle, in his 
First Epistle to Timothy,*? will be found to accord, and will 
supply parish priests with an abundance of matter wherewith to 
elucidate this subject in a useful and profitable manner. 


aot hii Viewed 7 


THE FIFTH PETITION OF THE LORD’S PRAYER 
“And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors” 


THE IMPORTANCE OF EXPLAINING THIS PETITION 


So many are the things which display at once God’s infinite 
power and His equally infinite wisdom and goodness, that 
wheresoever we turn our eyes or direct our thoughts, we meet 
with the most certain signs of omnipotence and benignity. And 
yet there is truly nothing that more eloquently proclaims His 
supreme love and admirable charity towards us, than the inex- 
plicable mystery of the Passion of Jesus Christ, whence springs 
that never-failing fountain to wash away the defilements of sin. 
(It is this fountain) in which, under the guidance and bounty 
of God, we desire to be merged and purified, when we beg of 
Him to forgive us our debts.? 

This Petition contains a sort of summary of those benefits 
with which the human race has been enriched through Jesus 
Christ. This Isaias taught when he said: The iniquity of the 
house of Jacob shall be forgiven; and this is all the fruit, that 
the sin thereof should be taken away.1 David also shows this, 
proclaiming those blessed who could partake of that salutary 
fruit: Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven.? 

The pastor, therefore, should study and explain accurately 
and diligently the meaning of this Petition, which, we perceive, 
is so important to the attainment of salvation.> 


DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THIS AND THE PRECEDING PETITIONS 


In this Petition we enter on a new manner of praying. For 
hitherto we asked of God not only eternal and spiritual "goods, 


= [Saresexyite ©: ARG See's ik, 


@ On the Passion of Christ as the source of deliverance from sin see 
Summa Theol. 3a. xlix. 1. 
bOn this Petition see St. Thomas, Collationes De Pater Noster. 


552 


“AND FORGIVE US OUR DEBTS” 553 


but also transient and temporal advantages; whereas, we now 
ask to be freed from the evils of the soul and of the body, of 
this life and of the life to come.@ 


Dispositions with which this Petition should be Offered 


Since, however, to obtain what we ask we must pray in a 
becoming manner, it appears expedient to explain the dispo- 
sition with which this prayer should be offered to God. 


ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF SIN 


The pastor, then, should admonish the faithful, that he who 
comes to offer this Petition must first acknowledge, and next 
feel sorrow and compunction for his sins. He must also be 
firmly convinced that to sinners, thus disposed and prepared, 
God is willing to grant pardon. This confidence is necessary to 
sinners, lest perhaps the bitter remembrance and acknowledgment 
of their sins should be followed by that despair of pardon, which 
of old seized the mind of Cain*® and of Judas,* both of whom 
looked on God solely as an avenger and punisher, forgetting 
that He is also mild and merciful. 

In this Petition, therefore, we ought to be so disposed, that, 
acknowledging our sins in the bitterness of our souls, we may 
fly to God as to a Father, not as to a Judge, imploring Him to 
deal with us not according to His justice, but according to His 
mercy. 

We shall be easily induced to acknowledge our sins if we 
listen to God Himself admonishing us through the Sacred Scrip- 
tures in this regard. Thus we read in David: They are all gone 
aside; they are become unprofitable together; there is none that 
doeth good, no not one.® Solomon speaks to the same purpose: 
There is no just man upon earth, that doth good, and sinneth 
not. To this subject apply also these words: Who can say: 
“my heart is clean, I am pure from sin?”" The very same has 
been written by St. John to deter men from arrogance: /f we 

"Gen. iv. 13. * Matt. xxvii. 4, 5. Pee xine ss is 4. 

* Eccles. vii. 21. -PrOVvexk.O: 

a On the order of the Petitions see Summa Theol. 2a. 2. Ixxxiii. 0. 


554 THE LORD’S PRAYER 


say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is 
not in us.8 Jeremias also says: Thou hast said: “I am without 
sin, and am innocent”; and therefore, let thy anger be turned 
away from me. Behold, I will contend with thee in judgment, 
because thou hast said: “I have not sinned.” ® 

Christ the Lord, who spoke by the mouth of all these, con- 
firms their teaching by this Petition in which He commands us 
to confess our sins. The Council of Milevi* forbids us to inter- 
pret it otherwise. Jt hath pleased the Council, that whosoever 
will have it that these words of the Lord’s prayer, “forgive us 
our debts,’ are said by holy men in humility, not in truth, let 
him be anathema. For who can endure a person praying, and 
lying not to men, but to the Lord Himself, saying with the lips 
that he desires to be forgiven, but with the heart, that he has 
no debts to be forgiven? *? 


SORROW FOR SIN 


In making this necessary acknowledgment of our sins, it is 
not enough to call them to mind lightly; for it is necessary that 
the recollection of them be bitter, that it touch the heart, pierce 
the soul, and imprint sorrow. Wherefore, the pastor should treat 
this point diligently, that his pious hearers may not only recollect 
their sins, and’ iniquities, but recollect them with pain and sor- 
row; so that with true interior contrition they may betake them- 
selves to God their Father, humbly imploring Him to pluck from 
the soul the piercing stings of sin. 


MOTIVES FOR SORROW OVER SIN: THE BASENESS OF SIN 


The pastor, however, should not be content with placing before 
the eyes of the faithful the turpitude of sin. He should also 
depict the unworthiness and baseness of men, who, though 
nothing but rottenness and corruption, dare to outrage in a man- 
ner beyond all belief the incomprehensible majesty and ineffable 
excellence of God, particularly after having been created, re- 

8 : 9 7 10 

td ot Tred Sesay sito te et co te: 


a The second Council of Milevi (416) approved by Innocent I (Denzin- 
ger, 107, 108). 


“AND FORGIVE US OUR DEBTS” 555 


deemed and enriched by Him with countless and invaluable 
benefits. 


THE CONSEQUENCES OF SIN 


And for what? Only for this, that separating ourselves from 
God our Father, who is the supreme Good, and lured by the 
most base rewards of sin, we may devote ourselves to the devil, 
to become his most wretched slaves. Language is inadequate to 
depict the cruel tyranny which the devil exercises over those 
who, having shaken off the sweet yoke of God, and broken the 
most lovely bond of charity by which our spirit is bound to God 
our Father, have gone over to their relentless enemy, who is 
therefore called in Scripture, the prince and ruler of the world,” 
the prince of darkness, and king over all the children of pride.1* 
Truly to those who are oppressed by the tyranny of the devil 
apply these words of Isaias: O Lord our God, other lords besides 
thee have had dominion over us.*® 

If these broken covenants of love do not move us, let at least 
the calamities into which we fall by sin move us. The sanctity 
of the soul is violated, which we know to have been wedded to 
Christ. That temple of the Lord is profaned, against the con- 
taminators of which the Apostle utters this denunciation: Jf any 
man violate the temple of God, him shall God destroy.® 

Innumerable are the evils brought upon man by sin, that almost 
infinite pest of which David says: There is no health in my 
flesh, because of thy wrath; there is no peace for my bones, 
because of my. sins.* In these words he marks the violence of 
the plague, confessing that it left no part of him uninfected by 
pestiferous sin; for the poison had penetrated into his bones, that 
is, it infected his understanding and will, which are the two most 
intimate faculties of the soul. This widespread pestilence the 
Sacred Scriptures point out, when they designate sinners as the 
lame, the deaf, the dumb, the blind, the paralyzed. 

But, besides the anguish which he felt on account of the enor- 
mity of his sins, David was afflicted yet more by the knowledge 
that he had provoked the wrath of God against him by his sin. 


” John xii. 31; xiv. 30. is Eph. vi. 12. 4 Job xli. 25. 
“ZIIGEL, Soage diet TaCors 111,17: IDS, SSwgite A 


556 THE. LORD’S PRAYER 


For the wicked are at war with God, who is offended beyond 
belief at their crimes; hence the Apostle says: Wrath and in- 
dignation, tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man that 
worketh evil28 Although the sinful act is transient, yet the sin 
by its guilt and stain remains; and the imminent wrath of God 
pursues it, as the shadow does the body. 

When, therefore, David was pierced by these tormenting 
thoughts, he was moved to seek the pardon of his sins. That 
the faithful, imitating the Prophet, may learn to grieve, that is, 
to become truly penitent, and cherish the hope of pardon, the 
pastor should call to their attention the example of David’s peni- 
tential sorrow, and the lessons of instruction drawn from his 
fiftieth Psalm. 

How great is the utility of this sort of instruction, which 
teaches us to grieve for our sins, God Himself declares by the 
mouth of Jeremias, who, when exhorting the Israelites to re- 
pentance, admonished them to awake to a sense of the evils that 
follow upon sin. See, he says, that it is an evil and a bitter 
thing for thee, to have left the Lord thy God, and that my fear 
1s not with thee, saith the Lord, the God of hosts.® They who 
lack this necessary sense of acknowledgment and grief, are said 
by the Prophets Isaias, Ezechiel and Zachary to have a hard 
heart,?? a stony heart,?* a heart of adamant,?? for, like stone, 
they are softened by no sorrow, having no sense of life, that is, 
of the salutary recognition (of their sinfulness). 


CONFIDENCE IN GOD’S MERCY 


But lest the faithful, terrified by the grievousness of their sins, 
despair of being able to obtain pardon, the pastor ought to en- 
courage them to hope by the following considerations. 

As is declared in an Article of the Creed, Christ the Lord 
has given power to the Church to remit sins. 

Furthermore, ir this Petition, our Lord has taught how great 
is the goodness and bounty of God towards mankind; for if God 
were not ready and prepared to pardon penitents their sins, never 
would He have prescribed this formula of prayer: Forgive us our 


‘ x : ¥ : 
» Rom. ii. 8, 9. Ser aiigeto! *Tsa. xvi. 12, 
Ezech. xxxvi. 26. = Zache viieics 


“AND FORGIVE US OUR DEBTS ” 557 


trespasses. Wherefore we ought to be firmly convinced, that 
since He commands us in this Petition to implore His paternal 
mercy, He will not fail to bestow it on us. For this Petition 
assuredly implies that God is so disposed towards us, as will- 
ingly to pardon those who are truly penitent. 

God it is against whom, having cast off obedience, we sin; the 
order of whose wisdom we disturb, as far as in us lies; whom 
we offend; whom we outrage by words and deeds. But it is 
also God, our most beneficent Father, who, having it in His 
power to pardon all transgressions, has not only declared His 
willingness to do so, but has also obliged men to ask Him for 
pardon, and has taught in what words they are to do so. To 
no one, therefore, can it be a matter of doubt, that under His 
guidance it is in our power to be reconciled to God. And as 
this declaration of the divine willingness to pardon increases 
faith, nurtures hope and inflames charity, it will be worth while 
to amplify this subject, by citing some Scriptural authorities and 
some examples of penitents to whom God granted pardon of the 
most grievous crimes. Since, however, in the introduction to the 
Lord’s Prayer and in that portion of the Creed which teaches the 
forgiveness of sins, we were as diffuse on the subject as circum- 
stances allowed, the pastor will borrow from those places what- 
ever may seem pertinent for instruction on this point, for the 
rest drawing on the fountains of the Sacred Scriptures. 


“Debts” 


The pastor should also follow the same plan which we thought 
should be used in the other Petitions. Let him explain, then, 
what the word debts here signifies, lest perhaps the faithful, de- 
ceived by its ambiguity, pray for something different from what 
should be prayed for. 

First, then, we are to know, that we by no means ask for 
exemption from the debt we owe to God on so many accounts, 
the payment of which is essential to salvation, namely, that of 
loving Him with our whole heart, our whole soul, and our whole 
mind; neither do we ask to be in future exempt from the duties 


a On repentance and contrition see Summa Theol. 3a. Ixxxv.; Suppl. i. ff. 


558 THE LORD’S PRAYER 


of obedience, worship, veneration, or any other similar obligation, 
comprised also under the word debts. 

What we do ask is that He may deliver us from sins. This is 
the interpretation of St. Luke,?* who, instead of debts, makes 
use of the word sins, because by their commission we become 
guilty before God and incur a debt of punishment, which we 
must pay either by satisfaction or by suffering. It was of this 
debt that Christ the Lord spoke by the mouth of His Prophet: 
Then did I pay that which I took not away.?* From these words 
of God we may understand that we are not only debtors, but 
also unequal to the payment of our debt, the sinner being of 
himself utterly incapable of making satisfaction. 

Wherefore we must fly to the mercy of God; and as justice, 
of which God is most tenacious, is an equal and corresponding 
attribute to mercy, we must make use of prayer, and the inter- 
cession of the Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, without which 
no one ever obtained the pardon of his sins, and from which, 
as from its source, have flown all the efficacy and virtue of sat- 
isfaction. For of such value is that price paid by Christ the 
Lord on the cross, and communicated to us through the Sacra- 
ments, received either actually or in purpose and desire, that it 
obtains and accomplishes for us the pardon of our sins, which 
is the object of our prayer in this Petition. 

Here we ask pardon not only for our venial offences, for which 
pardon may most easily be obtained, but also for grievous and 
mortal sins. With regard to grave sins, however, this Petition 
cannot procure forgiveness unless it derive that efficacy from the 
Sacrament of Penance, received, as we have already said, either 
actually or at least in desire? 


“Our” 


The words our debts are used here in a sense entirely different 
from that in which we said our bread. That bread is ours, be- 
cause it is given us by the munificence of God; whereas sins are 
ours, because with us rests their guilt. They are our voluntary 
acts, otherwise they would not have the character of sin. 

Luke xi. 4. “Ps. Lxvill. 5 


aQOn the debts contracted through sin see Summa Theol. 1a. 22. 
Ixxxvi. ff. 


“AND FORGIVE US OUR DEBTS” 559 


Admitting, therefore, and confessing the guilt of our sins, we 
implore the clemency of God, which is necessary for their ex- 
piation. In this we make use of no palliation whatever, nor do 
we transfer the blame to others, as did our first parents Adam 
and Eve.** We judge ourselves, employing, if we are wise, the 
prayer of the Prophet: Incline not my heart to evil words, to 
make excuses in sins.*® 


“Forgive Us” 


Nor do we say, forgive me, but forgive us; because the fra- 
ternal relationship and charity which subsist between all men, 
demand of each of us that, being solicitous for the salvation of 
all our neighbors, we pray also for them while offering prayers 
for ourselves. 

This manner of praying, taught by Christ the Lord, and sub- 
sequently received and always retained by the Church of God, 
the Apostles most strictly observed themselves and taught others 
to observe. 

Of this ardent zeal and earnestness in praying for the salva- 
tion of our neighbors, we have the splendid example of Moses in 
the Old, and of St. Paul in the New Testament. The former 
besought God thus: Either forgive them this trespass; or, if 
thou dost not, strike me out of the book that thou hast written, ?" 
while the latter prayed after this manner: J wished myself to 
be anathema from Christ for my brethren.?® 


“As we Forgive our Debtors” 


The word as may be understood in two senses. It may be 
taken as having the force of a comparison, meaning that we beg 
of God to pardon us our sins, just as we pardon the wrongs 
and contumelies which we receive from those by whom we have 
been injured. It may also be understood as denoting a condi- 
tion, and in this sense Christ the Lord interprets that formula. 
If, He says, you forgive men their offences, your heavenly Father 
will also forgive you your offences; but if you will not forgive 
men, neither will your Father forgive you your sins.?° 


“eS dl. 76 Exod. xxxii. 32. 


as ne 
fe lame = Matte vie G45e15. 


PeROM.i%. 3: 


560 THE LORD’S PRAYER 


Either sense, however, equally contains the necessity of for- 
giveness, intimating, as it does that, if we desire that God should 
grant us the pardon of our offences, we ourselves must pardon 
those from whom we have received injury; for so rigorously 
does God exact from us forgetfulness of injuries and mutual 
affection and love, that He rejects and despises the gifts and 
sacrifices of those who are not reconciled to one another. 


NECESSITY OF FORGIVENESS 


Even the law of nature requires that we conduct ourselves 
towards others as we would have them conduct themselves to- 
wards us; hence he would be most impudent who would ask of 
God the pardon of his own offences while he continued to cherish 
enmity against his neighbor. 

Those, therefore, on whom injuries have been inflicted, should 
be ready and willing to pardon, urged to it as they are by this 
form of prayer, and by the command of God in St. Luke: Jf 
thy brother sin against thee, reprove him; and if he repent, for- 
give him; and if he sin against thee seven times in a day, and 
seven times in a day turn again to thee, saying, “I repent,’ for- 
give him.®° In the Gospel of St. Matthew we read: Love your 
enemies; ** and the Apostle, and before him Solomon wrote: 
If thy enemy be hungry, give him to eat; if he thirst, give him 
to drink ; ** and finally we read in the Gospel of St. Mark: When 
you shall stand to pray, forgive if you have anything against any 


man; that your Father also who is in heaven may forgive you 
your sins.3 


REASONS FOR FORGIVENESS 


But since, on account of the corruption of nature, there is 
nothing to which man brings himself more reluctantly than to 
the pardon of injuries, let pastors exert all the powers and re- 
sources of their minds to change and bend the dispositions of the 
faithful to this mildness and mercy so necessary to a Christian. 


« Luke xvii. 3, 4. * Matt. v. 44. 
Rom. xii. 20; Prov. xxv. 21. * Mark xi. 25. 


“AND FORGIVE US OUR DEBTS” 561 


Let them dwell on those passages of Scripture in which we hear 
God commanding to pardon enemies.** 

Let them also insist on this certain truth, that one of the surest 
signs that men are children of God is their willingness to forgive 
injuries and sincerely love their enemies; for in loving our ene- 
mies there shines forth in us some likeness to God our Father, 
who, by the death of His Son, ransomed from everlasting perdi- 
tion and reconciled to Himself the human race, which before 
was most unfriendly and hostile to Him. 

Let the close of this exhortation and injunction be the com- 
mand of Christ the Lord, which, without utter disgrace and ruin, 
we cannot refuse to obey: Pray for them that persecute and 
calummiate you; that you may be the children of your Father 
who is in heaven.** # 


This Petition Should Not be Neglected 


But in this matter no ordinary prudence is required on the 
part of the pastor, lest, knowing the difficulty and necessity of 
this precept, anyone despair of salvation. 


THOSE UNABLE TO FORGET INJURIES 


There are those who, aware that they ought to bury injuries 
in voluntary oblivion and ought to love those that injure them, 
desire to do so, and do so as far as they are able, but feel that 
they cannot efface from their mind all recollection of injuries. 
For there lurk in the mind some remains of private grudge, in 
consequence of which such persons are disturbed by misgivings 
of conscience, fearing that they have not in simplicity and frank- 
ness laid aside their enmities and consequently do not obey the 
command of God. 

Here, therefore, the pastor should explain the contrary desires 
of the flesh and of the spirit ; that the former is prone to revenge, 
the latter ready to pardon; that hence a continual struggle and 


“Exod. xxiii. 4; Lev. xix. 17; Deut. xxii. 1; 1 Kings xxiv. 5; 
xxvi. 10, 11; Job xxxi. 29; Ps. vii. 5; Prov. xx, 22; Exod. xxv. 12. 


* Matt. v. 44. £ ; 
a On forgiveness see Summa Theol. 2a. 2x. xxv. 8, 9; xxvil. 7; xxxi. 2; 


XXXiv. 


562 THE LORD’S"® PRAYER 


conflict goes on between them. Wherefore he should point out 
that although the appetites of corrupt nature are ever opposing 
and rebelling against reason, we are not on this account to be 
uneasy regarding salvation, provided the spirit persevere in the 
duty and disposition of forgiving injuries and of loving our 
neighbor. 


THOSE WHO DO NOT LOVE THEIR ENEMIES 


There may be some who, because they have not yet been able 
to bring themselves to forget injuries and to love their enemies, 
are consequently deterred by the condition contained in this Peti- 
tion from making use of the Lord’s Prayer. To remove fron: their 
minds this pernicious error, the pastor should adduce the two 
following considerations. 

(In the first place), whoever belongs to the number of the faith- 
ful, offers this prayer in the name of the entire Church, in which 
there must necessarily be some pious persons who have forgiven 
their debtors the debts here mentioned. 

Secondly, when we ask this favor from God, we also ask for 
whatever cooperation with the Petition is necessary on our part 
in order to obtain the object of our prayer. Thus we ask the 
pardon of our sins and the gift of true repentance; we pray for 
the grace of inward sorrow; we beg that we may be able to abhor 
our sins, and confess them truly and piously to the priest. Since, 
then, it is necessary for us to forgive those who have inflicted 
on us any loss or injury, when we ask pardon of God we beg 
of Him at the same time to grant us grace to be reconciled to 
those against whom we harbor hatred. 

Those, therefore, who are troubled by that groundless and 
perverse fear, that by this prayer they provoke still more the 
wrath of God, should be undeceived and should be exhorted to 
make frequent use of a prayer in which they beseech God our 
Father to grant them the disposition to forgive those who have 
injured them and to love their enemies. 


“AND FORGIVE US OUR DEBTS” 563 


How to Make this Petition Fruitful 


PENITENTIAL DISPOSITIONS 


But that this Petition may be really fruitful we should first 
seriously reflect that we are suppliants before God, soliciting 
from Him pardon, which is not granted but to the penitent; and 
that we should, therefore, be animated by that charity and piety 
which are fitting in penitents, whom it eminently becomes to keep 
before their eyes, as it were, their own crimes and enormities and 
to expiate them with tears. 


AVOIDANCE OF DANGERS OF SIN 


To this thought should be joined caution in guarding for the 
future against every occasion of sin, and against whatever may 
expose us to the danger of offending God our Father. With this 
solicitude the mind of David was occupied when he said: My 
sin 1s always before me;** and: Every night I will wash my bed; 
I will water my couch with my tears.** 


IMITATION OF FERVENT PENITENTS 


Let each one also call to mind the ardent love of prayer of 
those who obtained from God through their entreaties the pardon 
of their sins. Such was the publican, who, standing afar off 
through shame and grief, and with eyes fixed on the ground, 
only smote his breast, crying: O God, be merciful to me, a sin- 
ner2® Such was also the woman, a sinner, who, standing behind | 
Christ the Lord, washed His feet, wiped them with her hair, and 
kissed them.*® Lastly, there is the example of Peter, the Prince 
of the Apostles, who going forth wept bitterly.*° 


FREQUENT USE OF THE SACRAMENTS 


They should next consider that the weaker men are, and the 
more liable to diseases of the soul, which are sins, the more 
numerous and frequent are the remedies they need. Now the 


SP Sulass ues Mb Gf te Luke xviii. 13. 
® Luke vii. 38. Matt. xxvi. 75. 


564 THE LORD’S PRAYER 


remedies of a sick soul are Penance and the Eucharist; these, 
therefore, the faithful should frequently make use of. 


ALMSDEEDS 


Next almsdeeds, as the Sacred Scriptures declare, are a medi- 
cine suited to heal the wounds of the soul. Wherefore, let those 
who desire to make pious use of this prayer act kindly to the 
poor according to their means. Of the great efficacy of alms in 
effacing the stains of sin, the Angel of the Lord in Tobias, holy 
Raphael, is a witness, who says: Alms deliver from death, and 
the same is that which purgeth away sins, and maketh to find 
mercy and life everlasting.*t Daniel is another witness, who 
thus admonished King Nabuchodonosor: Redeem thou thy sins 
with alms, and thy iniquities with works of mercy to the poor.*: 


THE SPIRIT OF FORGIVENESS 


The best alms and the most excellent act of mercy is forget- 
fulness of injuries, and good will towards those who have injured 
us or ours, in person, in property, or in character. Whoever, 
therefore, desires to experience in a special manner the mercy of 
God, should make an offering to God Himself of all his enmities, 
remit every offence, and pray for his enemies with the greatest 
good will, seizing every opportunity of doing them good. But 
as this subject was explained when we treated of murder, we 
refer the pastor to that place. 

The pastor ought to conclude his explanation of this Petition 
with this final reflection, that nothing is, or can be conceived, 
more unjust than that he who is so rigorous towards men as to 
extend indulgence to no one, should himself demand that God 
be mild and kind towards him. 


SSO DsalinO! * Dan. iv. 24: 


THE SIXTH PETITION OF THE LORD’S PRAYER 
“And lead us not into temptation.” 


IMPORTANCE OF INSTRUCTION ON THIS PETITION 


When the children of God, having obtained the pardon of 
their sins, are inflamed with the desire of giving to God worship 
and veneration; when they long for the kingdom of heaven; 
when they engage in the performance of all the duties of piety 
towards the Deity, relying entirely on His paternal will and 
providence,—then it is that the enemy of mankind employs the 
more actively all his artifices, and prepares all his resources to 
attack them so violently as to justify the fear that, wavering 
and altered in their sentiments, they may relapse into sin, and 
thus become far worse than they had been before. To such 
as these may justly be applied the saying of the Prince of the 
Apostles: It had been better for them not to have known the 
way of justice, than, after they have known it, to turn back 
from that holy commandment which was delivered to them. 

Hence Christ the Lord has commanded us to offer this Peti- 
tion so that we may commend ourselves daily to God, and im- 
plore His paternal care and assistance, being assured that, if we 
be deserted by the divine protection, we shall soon fall into the 
snares of our most crafty enemy. 

Nor is it in the Lord’s Prayer alone that He has commanded 
us to beg of God not to suffer us to be led into temptation. In 
His address to the holy Apostles also, on the very eve of His 
death, after He had declared them clean, He admonished them 
of this duty in these words: Pray that ye enter not into temp- 
tation.” 

This admonition, reiterated by Christ the Lord, imposes on the 
pastor the weighty obligation of exciting the faithful to a fre- 
?John xiii. 10; Matt. xxvi. 41. 

565 


12 Pet. ii. 21. 


566 THE LORD'S PRAYER 


quent use of this prayer, so that, beset as men constantly are by 
the great dangers which the devil prepares, they may ever ad- 
dress to God, who alone can repel those dangers, the prayer, 
Lead us not into temptation. 


Necessity of the Sixth Petition 


HUMAN FRAILTY 


The faithful will understand how very much they stand in need 
of this divine assistance, if they remember their own weakness 
and ignorance, if they recollect this saying of Christ the Lord: 
The spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak; * if they call to 
mind how grievous and destructive are the misfortunes of men 
brought on through the instigation of the devil, unless they be 
upheld and assisted by the right hand of the Most High. 

What more striking example can there be of human infirmity, 
than the holy band of the Apostles, who, though they had just 
before felt very courageous, at the first sight of danger, aban- 
doned the Saviour and fled. A still more conspicuous example 
is the conduct of the Prince of the Apostles. He who a short 
time before loudly protested his courage and special loyalty to 
Christ the Lord, he who had been so confident in himself as to 
say, Though I should die with thee, I will not deny thee,* became 
so affrighted at the voice of a poor maid-servant that he declared 
at once with an oath that he knew not the Lord. Doubtless his 
courage was not equal to his good-will. But if, by the frailty 
of human nature in which they confided, even the Saints have 


sinned grievously, what have not others to fear, who are so far 
below them in holiness ? > 


THE ASSAULTS OF THE FLESH 


Wherefore, let the pastor remind the faithful of the conflicts 
and dangers in which we are continually engaged, as long as the 
soul is in this mortal body, assailed as we are on all sides by the 
world, the flesh and the devil. 


* Matt. xxvi. 41. * Matt. xxvi. 35. 


a On the sixth Petition see Summa Theol. 2a. 2x. Ixxxiii. 9: Collati 
De Pater Noster. atic 


b On the necessity of grace see Summa Theol. ra. 22. cix. 


“AND LEAD US NOT INTO TEMPTATION ” 567 


_ How few are there who are not compelled to experience at 
their great cost what anger, what concupiscence can do in 
us? Who is not annoyed by these stings? who does not feel 
these goads? who does not burn with these smouldering fires? 
And, indeed, so various are these assaults, so diversified these 
attacks, that it is extremely difficult not to receive some grievous 
wound. 


THE TEMPTATIONS OF THE DEVIL 


And besides these enemies that dwell and live with us, there 
are, moreover, those most bitter foes, of whom it is written: Our 
wrestling 1s not against flesh and blood; but against principalities 
and powers, against the rulers of the world of this darkness, 
against the spirits of wickedness in the high places.» For to our 
inward conflicts are added the external assaults and attacks of 
the demons, who both assail us openly, and also insinuate them- 
selves by stratagem into our souls, so much so that it is only 
with great difficulty that we can escape them. 

The Apostle entitles the demons princes, on account of the 
excellence of their nature, since by nature they are superior to 
man, and to all other visible creatures. He also calls them 
powers, because they excel nct only by their nature, but also by 
their power. He designates them rulers of the world of dark- 
ness, because they rule not the world of light and glory, that is 
to say, the good and the pious, but the world of gloom and dark- 
ness, namely, those who, blinded by the defilement and darkness 
of a wicked life, are satisfied to have for their leader the devil, 
the prince of darkness. He also terms the demons the spirits of 
wickedness, because there is a wickedness of the spirit, as well as 
of the flesh. What is called the wickedness of the flesh inflames 
the appetite to lusts and pleasures, which are perceived by the 
senses; while the wickedness of the spirit are evil purposes and 
depraved desires, which belong to the superior part of the soul, 
and which are so much worse than the wickedness of the flesh 
as mind itself and reason are higher and more excellent (than 
the senses). The wickedness of Satan the Apostle spoke of as 


5 Eph. vi. 12. 


568 THE LORD’S PRAYER 


in the high places, because the chief aim of the evil one is to 
deprive us of our heavenly inheritance. 


AUDACITY OF THE DEMONS 


From all this we may understand that the power of these 
enemies is great, their courage undaunted, their hatred of us 
enormous and unmeasured; that they also wage against us a 
perpetual war, so that with them there can be no peace, no truce. 

How great is their audacity is evidenced by the words of 
Satan, recorded by the Prophet: J will ascend into heaven.® He 
attacked our first parents in Paradise; he assailed the Prophets ; 
he beset the Apostles in order, as the Lord says in the Gospel, 
that he might sift them as wheat.? Nor was he abashed even 
by the presence of Christ the Lord Himself. His insatiable desire 
and unwearied diligence St. Peter therefore expressed when he 
said: Your adversary, the devil, as a roaring lion goeth about, 
seeking whom he may devour.® 


NUMBER OF THE VEMONS 


But it is not Satan alone that tempts men, for sometimes a host 
of demons combine to attack an individual. This that evil spirit 
confessed, who, having been asked his name by Christ the Lord, 
replied, My name is legion;® that is to say, a multitude of 
demons, tormented their unhappy victim. And of another demon 
it is written: He taketh with him seven other spirits more wicked 
than himself, and they enter in and dwell there.’ 


MALIGNITY AND POWER OF THE DEMONS 


There are many who, because they do not feel the assaults of 
demons against them, imagine that the whole matter is fictitious; 
nor is it surprising that such persons are not attacked by demons, 
to whom they have voluntarily surrendered themselves. They 
possess neither piety nor charity, nor any virtue worthy of a 
Christian ; hence they are entirely in the power of the devil, and 


elsagecivente: Luke xxii. 31. ST Petavorss 
° Mark v. 9; Luke viii. 30. * Matt. xii. 45. 


“AND LEAD US NOT INTO TEMPTATION” 569 


there is no need of any temptation to overcome them, since their 
souls have already become his willing abode. 

But those who have dedicated themselves to God, leading a 
heavenly life upon earth, are the chief objects of the assaults 
of Satan. Against them he harbors bitterest hatred, laying snares 
for them each moment. Sacred Scripture is full of examples of 
holy men who, in spite of their firmness and resolution, were 
perverted by his violence or fraud. Adam, David, Solomon and 
others, whom it would be tedious to enumerate, experienced the 
violent and crafty cunning of demons, which neither human pru- 
dence nor human stregth can overcome. 


PRAYER PROTECTS MAN’S WEAKNESS AGAINST THE ENEMIES OF 
HIS SOUL 


Who, then, can deem himself sufficiently secure in his own 
resources? Hence the necessity of offering to God pure and 
pious prayer, that He suffer us not to be tempted above our 
strength, but make issue with temptation, that we may be able 
to bear it. 

But should any of the faithful, through weakness or ignorance, 
feel terrified at the power of the demons, they are to be en- 
couraged, when tossed by the waves of temptation, to take refuge 
in this harbor of prayer. For however great the power and per- 
tinacity of Satan, he cannot, in his deadly hatred of our race, 
“tempt or torment us as much, or as long as he pleases; but all 
his power is governed by the control and permission of God. The 
example of Job is very well known. Satan could have touched 
nothing belonging to him, if God had not said to the devil: 
Behold, all that he hath is in thy hand; while on the other hand, 
had not the Lord added: Only put not forth thy hand upon his 
person,’* Job with his children and possessions, would have been 
at once destroyed by the devil. So restricted is the power of 
demons, that without the permission of God, they could not even 
enter into the swine mentioned by the Evangelists.** 4 

Hse KOfose, Sree ep Obese: 

8 Matt. viii. 31; Mark v. 12; Luke viii. 32. 


aQOn the attacks of demons see Summa Theol. Ia. CXivV. ; Ta. 2%. Ixxx. 
On other causes of sin see Summa Theol. ta. 2x. Ixxvi. 


590 THE LORD’S PRAYER 


“Temptation” 


To understand the meaning of this Petition, it is necessary to 
say what temptation signifies here, and also what it is to be led 
into temptation. 

To tempt is to sound a person in order that by eliciting from 
him what we desire, we may extract the truth. This mode of 
tempting does not apply to God; for what is there that God does 
not know? All things are naked and open to his eyes.™* 

Another kind of tempting implies more than this, inasmuch as 
it may have either a good or a bad purpose. Temptation has a 
good purpose, when someone’s worth is tried, in order that when 
it has been tested and proved he may be rewarded and honored, 
his example proposed to others for imitation, and all may be 
incited thereby to the praises of God. This is the only kind of 
tempting that can be found in God. Of it there is an example in 
Deuteronomy: The Lord your God tries you, that it may appear 
whether you love him or not.** 

In this manner God is also said to tempt His own, when He 
visits them with want, disease and other sorts of calamities. This 
He does to try their patience, and to make them an example of 
Christian virtue. Thus we read that Abraham was tempted to 
immolate his son, by which fact he became a singular example 
of obedience and patience to all succeeding times.t® Thus also 
is it written of Tobias: Because thou wast acceptable to God, it. 
was necessary that temptation should prove thee. 

Men are tempted for a bad purpose, when they are impelled 
to sin or destruction. To do this is the work of the devil, for 
he tempts men with a view to deceive and precipitate them into 
ruin, and he is therefore called in Scripture, the tempter3® At 
one time, stimulating us from within, he employs the agency of 
the affections and passions of the soul. At another time, assail- 
ing us from without, he makes use of external things, as of 
prosperity, to puff us up with pride, or of adversity, to break 
our spirits. Sometimes he has for his emissaries and assistants 
abandoned men, particularly heretics, who, sitting in the chair 


Heb. iv. 13. * Deut. xiii. 3. * Gen. xxii. I. 
Tobrexite 12 = Mattriv. 3: 


“AND LEAD US NOT INTO TEMPTATION” 571 


of pestilence, scatter the deadly seeds of bad doctrines, thus un- 
settling and precipitating headlong those persons who draw no 
line of distinction between vice and virtue and are of themselves 
prone to evil.? 


“Lead us not into Temptation” 


We are said to be led into temptation when we yield to temp- 
tations. Now this happens in two ways. First, we are led into 
temptation when, yielding to suggestion, we rush into that evil 
to which some one tempts us. No one is thus led into temptation 
by God; for to no one is God the author of sin, nay, He hates 
all who work iniquity; *® and accordingly we also read in St. 
James: Let no man, when he is tempted, say that he is tempted 
of God; for God is not a tempter of evils.?° 

Secondly, we are said to be led into temptation by him who, 
although he himself does not tempt us nor cooperate in tempting 
us, yet is said to tempt because he does not prevent us from being 
tempted or from being overcome by temptations when he is able 
to prevent these things. In this manner God, indeed, suffers the 
good and the pious to be tempted, but does not leave them un- 
supported by His grace. Sometimes, however, we fall, being left 
to ourselves by the just and secret judgment of God, in punish- 
ment of our sins. 

God is also said to lead us into temptation when we abuse, to 
our destruction, His blessings, which He has given us as a means 
of salvation; when, like the prodigal son, we squander our 
Father’s substance, living riotously and yielding to our evil de- 
sires. In such a case we can say what the Apostle has said of 
the law: The commandment that was ordained to life, the same 
was found to be unto death to me.” 

Of this an opportune example is Jerusalem, as we learn from 
Ezechiel. God had so enriched that city with every sort of em- 

“bellishment, that He said of it by the mouth of the Prophet: 
Thou wast perfect through my beauty, which I had put upon 
thee. Yet Jerusalem, favored with such an abundance of divine 

WIR, Ais GS 2 James i. 13. Rom. vii. 10. eT zechwexvisll4: 


aQOn temptation see Summa Theol. ta. cxiv. 2, 3; 2a. 2. xcvii; clxv.; 
Bassi, 


572 THE LORD’S PRAYER 


gifts, was so far from showing gratitude to God, from whom she 
had received and was still receiving so many favors, was so far 
from making use of those heavenly gifts for the attainment of 
her own happiness, the end for which she had received them, that 
having cast away the hope and idea of deriving spiritual profit 
from them, she, most ungrateful to God her Father, was content 
to enjoy her present abundance with a luxury and riotousness 
which Ezechiel describes at considerable length in the same chap- 
ter. Wherefore those whom God permits to convert into instru- 
ments of vice the abundant opportunities of virtuous deeds which 
He has afforded them, are equally ungrateful to Him. 

But we ought carefully to notice a certain usage of Sacred 
Scripture, which sometimes denotes the permission of God in 
words which, if taken literally, would imply a positive act on the 
part of God. Thus in Exodus we read: J will harden the heart 
of Pharaoh; ?* and in Isaias: Blind the heart of this people; 
and the Apostle to the Romans writes: God delivered them up 
to shameful affections, and to a reprobate sense.*® In these and 
other similar passages we are to understand, not at all any posi- 
tive act on the part of God, but His permission only. 


Objects of the Sixth Petition 


WHAT WE DO NOT PRAY FOR 


These observations having been premised, it will not be difficult 
to understand the object for which we pray in this Petition. 

We do not ask to be totally exempt from temptation, for 
human life is one continued temptation. This, however, is use- 
ful and advantageous to man. Temptation teaches us to know 
ourselves, that is, our own weakness, and to humble ourselves 
under the powerful hand of God; and by fighting manfully, we 
expect to receive a never-fading crown of glory.2* For he that 
striveth for the mastery is not crowned, except he strive law- 
fully.** Blessed is the man, says St. James, that endureth temp- 
tation; for when he hath been proved, he shall receive the crown 

* Exod. vii. 3. Tea. vas 10; * Rom. i. 26, 28. 

*1 Pet. v. 4, 6. *> Tim. ii. 5. : 


a On the cause of evil see Summa Theol. ta. xlix.; 1a. 2x. Ixxix. ff, 
> This is an allusion to the Septuagint rendering of Job vii. 1. 


“AND LEAD US NOT INTO TEMPTATION ” 573 


of life, which God hath promised to them that love him.28 If 
we are sometimes hard pressed by the temptation of the enemy, 
it will also cheer us to reflect, that we have a high priest to 
help us, who can have compassion on our infirmities, having 
been tempted himself in all things.?° 


WHAT WE PRAY FOR IN THIS PETITION 


What, then, do we pray for in this Petition? We pray that the 
divine assistance may not forsake us, lest having been deceived, 
or worsted, we should yield to temptation; and that the grace 
of God may be at hand to succor us when our strength fails, 
to refresh and invigorate us in our trials. 

We should, therefore, implore the divine assistance, in general, 
against all temptations, and especially when assailed by any par- 
ticular temptation. This we find to have been the conduct of 
David, under almost every species of temptation. Against lying, 
he prays in these words: Take not thou the word of truth utterly 
out of my mouth; *° against covetousness: Incline my heart unto 
thy testimonies, and not to covetousness ;** and against the van- 
ities of this life and the allurements of concupiscence, he prays 
thus: Turn away my eyes, that they may not behold vanity.*” 

We pray, therefore, that we yield not to evil desires, and be 
not wearied in enduring temptation; that we deviate not from 
the way of the Lord; ** that in adversity, as in prosperity, we 
preserve equanimity and fortitude; and that God may never 
deprive us of His protection. Finally, we pray that God may 
crush Satan beneath our feet.** 


Dispositions which should Accompany this Petition | 


The pastor ought next to admonish the faithful concerning the 
chief thoughts and reflections that should accompany this prayer. 


DISTRUST OF SELF AND CONFIDENCE IN GOD 


It will, then, be found most efficacious, when offering this 
Petition that, remembering our weakness, we distrust our own 


*% James i. 12. 7° Heb. iv. 15. * Ps. cxviil. 43. * Ps. cxvili. 36. 
PS eexviti37- 4 Deut, XXx1.)20- Rom. xvi. 20. 


574 THE (LORD'S PRAYER 


strength; and that, placing all our hopes of safety in the divine 
goodness and relying on the divine protection, we encounter the 
greatest dangers with undaunted courage, calling to mind par- 
ticularly the many persons, animated with such hope and reso- 
lution, who were delivered by God from the very jaws of Satan. 

When Joseph was assailed by the criminal solicitations of a 
wicked woman, did not God rescue him from the imminent 
danger, and exalt him to the highest degree of glory?** Did 
He not preserve Susanna, when beset by the ministers of Satan, 
and on the point of being made the victim of an iniquitous sen- 
tence? Nor is this surprising; for her heart, says the Scripture, 
trusted in the Lord.*® How exalted the praise, how great the 
glory of Job, who triumphed over the world, the flesh and the 
devil! There are on record many similar examples to which the 
pastor should refer, in order to exhort with earnestness his pious 
hearers to this hope and confidence. 


REMEMBRANCE OF THE VICTORY OF CHRIST AND HIS SAINTS 


The faithful should also reflect who is their leader against the 
temptations of the enemy; namely, Christ the Lord, who was 
victorious in the same combat. He overcame the devil; He is 
that stronger man who, coming upon the strong armed man, 
overcame him, deprived him of his arms, and stripped. him of 
his spoils.*7 Of Christ’s victory over the world, we read in St. 
John: Have confidence: I have overcome the world; *8 and in 
the Apocalypse, He is called the conquering lion; *® and it is said 
of Him that He went forth conquering that He might conquer, 
because by His victory He has given power to others to conquer. 

The Epistle of St. Paul to the Hebrews abounds with the 
victories of holy men, who by faith conquered kingdoms, stopped 
the mouths of lons, etc.*° While we read of such achievements, 
we should also take into account the victories which are every 
day won by men eminent for faith, hope and charity, in their 
interior and exterior conflicts with the demons,—victories so 
numerous and so signal, that, were we spectators of them, we 

* Gen, See P16, 02.0 Dany sciee: * Luke xi. 22. 


8 John xvi. 33. = ApoG, vast * Heb. xi. 33. 
a Qn Christ’s victory over Satan see Summa Theol. 3a. xli, xlix. 2. 


“AND LEAD US NOT INTO TEMPTATION” 575 


should deem no event of more frequent occurrence, none of more 
glorious issue. It was with reference to such defeats of the 
enemies that St. John wrote: J write unto you, young men, 
because you are strong, and the word of God abideth in you, 
and you have overcome the wicked one.*! 


WATCHFULNESS 


Satan, however, is overcome not by indolence, sleep, wine, 
revelling, or lust; but by prayer, labor, watching, fasting, con- 
tinence and chastity. Watch ye and pray, that ye enter not into 
temptation,* as we have already said, is the admonition of our 
Lord. They who make use of these weapons in the conflict put 
the enemy to flight; for the devil flees from those who resist 
him.** 


The Author of Victory over Temptation 


But from the consideration of these victories achieved by holy 
men which we have mentioned, let no one indulge feelings of 
self-complacency, nor flatter himself that, by his own single 
unassisted exertions, he is able to withstand the temptations and 
hostile assaults of the demons. This is not within the power 
of human nature, nor within the capacity of human frailty. 

The strength by which we lay prostrate the satellites of Satan 
comes from God, who maketh our arms as a bow of brass; by 
whose aid the bow of the mighty is overcome, and the weak 
are girt with strength; who giveth us the protection of salva- 
tion, whose right hand upholdeth us: who teacheth our hands 
to war, and our fingers to battle.** Hence to God alone must 
thanks be given for victory, since it is only through His guid- 
ance and help that we are able to conquer. This the Apostle 
did; for he said: Thanks to God, who hath given us the victory, 
through our Lord Jesus Christ.*° The voice from heaven, men- 
tioned in the Apocalypse, also proclaims God to be the author 
of our victories: Now is come salvation, and strength, and the 
kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ; because the 


ir [folaksy sty Bey Vee “Matt. xxvi. 41. =~? James-iv.:7. 
psa Vitoaean Kanes in 4) Ps, xvil. 30), xiii. “T- Sale COexvn 57. 


576 THE LORD’S PRAYER 


accuser of our brethren is cast forth; and they overcame him 
by the blood of the Lamb.t® The same book declares that the 
victory obtained over the world and the flesh belongs to Christ 
the Lord, when it says: They shall fight with the Lamb, and the 
Lamb shall overcome them.47 But enough has now been said 
on the cause and the manner of conquering (temptation). 


The Rewards of Victories over Temptation 


When these things have been explained, the pastor should 
instruct the faithful concerning the crowns prepared by God, 
and the eternal and superabundant rewards reserved for those 
who conquer. He should quote from the Apocalypse the follow- 
ing divine promises: He that shall overcome shall not be hurt 
by the second death; ** and in another place: He that shall over- 
come, shall thus be clothed in white garments, and I will not 
blot out his name out of the book of life, and I will confess his 
name before my Father, and before his angels.*® A little after, 
our divine Lord Himself thus addresses John: He that shall 
overcome, I will make him a pillar in the temple of my God; 
and he shall go out no more;* and again: To him that shall 
overcome, I will give to sit with me in my throne; as I also have 
overcome, and am set down with my Father in his throne.® 
Finally, having unveiled the glory of the Saints, and the never- 
ending bliss which they shall enjoy in heaven, He adds, He that 
shall overcome shall possess these things. 


vA . a Ae See 
wo SPOc. ibe for~ Apoc, Xvil. 14. * Apoc. ii. TT. # ADOC, Jaligt Ss 
Apoc. iii, 12. Apoc. iii. 21. S Apociaxi7: 


THE SEVENTH PETITION OF THE LORD’S PRAYER 
“But deliver us from evil” 


THE IMPORTANCE OF INSTRUCTION ON THIS PETITION 


This Petition with which the Son of God concludes this divine 
prayer embodies the substance of all the other Petitions. To 
show its force and importance our Lord made use of this Peti- 
tion when, on the eve of His Passion, He prayed to God His 
Father for the salvation of mankind. J pray, He said, that thou 
keep them from evil.1 In this Petition, then, which He not only 
commanded us to use, but made use of Himself, He has epito- 
mized, as it were, the meaning and spirit of all the other Peti- 
tions. For if we obtain what this Petition asks, that is, the pro- 
tection of God against evil, which enables us to stand secure 
and safe against the machinations of the world and the devil, 
then, as St. Cyprian remarks, nothing more remains to be asked.? 

Such, then, being the importance of this Petition, the diligence 
of the pastor in its exposition should be great. The difference 
between this and the preceding Petition consists in this, that in 
the one we beg to avoid sin, in the other, to escape punishment.® 


NECESSITY OF THIS PETITION 


It cannot be necessary to remind the faithful of the numerous 
evils and calamities to which we are exposed, and how much we 
stand in need of the divine assistance. The many. and serious 
miseries of human life have been fully described by sacred and 
profane writers, and there is hardly any one who has not 
observed them either in his own life or in that of others. 


*John xvii. 15. *De Orat. Dom., Serm. vi. 
aQOn this Petition see Summa Theol. 2a. 2x. Ixxxiii. 9; Collationes 
De Pater Noster. 
577 


578 THE LORD’S PRAYER 


We are all convinced of the truth of these words of Job, 
that model of patience: Man, born of woman, and living for a 
short time, is filled with many miseries. He cometh forth lke 
a flower, and is destroyed, and fleeth as a shadow, and never 
continueth in the same state.2 That no day passes without its 
own trouble or annoyance is proved by these words of Christ 
the Lord: Sufficient for the day is the evil thereof. Indeed, the 
condition of human life is pointed out by the Lord Himself, 
when He admonishes us that we are to take up our cross daily 
and follow Him.® 

Since, therefore, everyone must realize the trials and dangers 
inseparable from this life, it will not be difficult to convince the 
faithful that they ought to implore of God deliverance from evil, 
since no inducement to prayer exercises a more powerful influ- 
ence over men than a desire and hope of deliverance from those 
evils which oppress or threaten them. There is in the heart 
of everyone a natural inclination to have instant recourse to God 
in the face of danger, as it is written: Fill their faces with 
shame, and they shall seek thy name, O Lord.® 


How this Petition should be Made 


If, then, in calamities and dangers the unbidden impulse of 
nature prompts men to call on God, it surely becomes the duty 
of those to whose fidelity and prudence their salvation is entrusted 
to instruct them carefully in the proper performance of this duty. 


WE SHOULD SEEK FIRST THE GLORY OF GOD 


For there are some who, contrary to the command of Christ, 
reverse the order of this prayer. He who commands us to have 
recourse to Him in the day of tribulation,’ has also prescribed 
to us the order in which we should pray. It is His will that, 
before we pray to be delivered from evil, we ask that the name 
of God be sanctified, that His kingdom come, and so on through 
the other Petitions, which are, as it were, so many steps by which 
we reach this last Petition. 


* Job xiv. I, 2. *Matt. vi. 34. * Luke ix. 23. 
isk, Iboreshh aye ey, Sate, 1. 


“BUT DELIVER US FROM EVIL” 579 


Yet there are those who, if their head, their side, or their foot, 
ache ; if they suffer loss of property ; if menaces or dangers from 
an enemy alarm them; if famine, war or pestilence afflict them, 
omit all the other Petitions of the Lord’s Prayer and ask only 
to be delivered from these evils. This practice is at variance 
with the command of Christ the Lord: Seek first the kingdom of 
God.® 

To pray, therefore, as we ought, we should have in view the 
greater glory of God, even when we ask deliverance from 
calamities, trials and dangers. Thus, when David offered this 
prayer: Lord, rebuke me not in thine anger, he subjoined a 
reason by which he showed that he was most desirous of God’s 
glory, saying: For there is no one in death that is mindful of 
thee, and who shall confess to thee in hell.2 And again, having 
implored God to have mercy on him, he added: J will teach the 
unjust thy ways; and the wicked shall be converted to thee.’ 


OUR CHIEF HOPE OF DELIVERANCE SHOULD BE IN GOD 


The faithful should be encouraged to use this salutary manner 
of praying and to imitate the example of the Prophet. And at 
the same time their attention should be called to the marked dif- 
ference that exists between the prayers of the infidel and those 
of the Christian. 

The infidel, too, begs of God to cure his diseases and to heal 
his wounds, to deliver him from approaching or impending evils; 
but he places his principal hope of deliverance in the remedies 
provided by nature, or prepared by man. He makes no scruple 
of using medicine no matter by whom prepared, no matter if 
accompanied by charms, spells or other diabolical arts, provided 
he can promise himself some hope of recovery. 

Not so the Christian. When visited by sickness, or other 
adversity, he flies to God as his supreme refuge and defence. 
Acknowledging and revering God alone as the author of all his 
good and his deliverer he ascribes to Him whatever healing 
virtue resides in medicines, convinced that they help the sick 
only in so far as God wills it. For it is God who has given 


5 Matt. vi. 33. SmviaiOs es ib TG. 


580 . THE LORD’S PRAYER 


medicines to man to heal his corporal infirmities ; and hence these 
words of Ecclesiasticus: The most High hath created medicines 
out of the earth, and a wise man will not abhor them.» He, 
therefore, who has pledged his fidelity to Jesus Christ, does not 
place his principal hope of recovery in such remedies; he places 
it in God, the author of these medicines. 

Hence the Sacred Scriptures condemn the conduct of those 
who, confiding in the power of medicine, seek no assistance from 
God. Nay more, those who regulate their lives by the laws 
of God, abstain from the use of all medicines which are not 
evidently intended by God to be medicinal; and, were there even 
a certain hope of recovery by using any other, they abstain from 
them as so many charms and diabolical artifices. 


WE MUST CONFIDENTLY EXPECT HIS HELP 


The faithful, then, are to be exhorted to place their confidence 
in God. Our most bountiful Father has commanded us to beg 
of Him our deliverance from evil, in order that His command 
should inspire us with the hope of obtaining the object of our 
prayers. Of this truth the Sacred Scriptures afford many illus- 
trations, so that they whom reason does not inspire with con- 
fidence may be persuaded to hope by a multitude of examples. 
Abraham, Jacob, Lot, Joseph and David are to all unexcep- 
tional witnesses of the divine goodness; and the instances re- 
corded in the New Testament of persons rescued from the great- 
est dangers, by the efficacy of devout prayer, are so numerous 
as to make it unnecessary to mention special cases. Therefore we 
shall content ourselves with one text from the Prophet, which 
is sufficient to confirm even the weakest: The just cried, and 
the Lord heard them; and delivered them out of all their 
troubles.18 


“From Evil” 


We now come to explain the meaning and nature of the Peti- 
tion. Let the faithful understand that in it we by no means ask 
deliverance frorn every evil. 


» Eccl. xxxvili. 4. "2 Paral. xvi. 12. PS exci ese 


“BUT DELIVER US FROM EVIL” 581 


WHAT WE DO NOT PRAY FOR 


There are some things which are commonly considered evils, 
and which, notwithstanding, are of advantage to those who endure 
them. Such was the sting of the flesh to which the Apostle was 
subjected in order that, by the aid of divine grace, power might 
be perfected in infirmity.4* When the pious man learns the salu- 
tary influence of such things, far from praying for their removal, 
he rejoices in them exceedingly. We pray, therefore, against 
those evils only, which do not conduce to our spiritual interests ; 
not against such as are profitable to our salvation. 


WHAT WE DO PRAY FOR 


The full meaning of this Petition, therefore, is, that having 
been freed from sin and from the danger of temptation, we may 
be delivered from internal and external evils; that we may be 
protected from floods, fire and lightning; that the fruits of the 
earth be not destroyed by hail; that we be not visited by famine, 
sedition or war. We ask that God may banish disease, pestilence 
and disaster from us; that He may keep us from slavery, im- 
prisonment, exile, betrayals, treachery, and from all other evils 
which fill mankind with terror and misery. Finally, we pray 
that God would remove all occasions of sin and iniquity. 

We do not, however, pray to be delivered only from those 
things which all look upon as evils, but also from those things 
which almost all consider to be good, such as riches, honors, 
health, strength and even life itself; that is, we ask that these 
things be not detrimental or ruinous to our soul’s welfare. 

We also beg of God that we be not cut off by a sudden death; 
that we provoke not His anger against us; that we be not con- 
demned to suffer the punishments reserved for the wicked; that 
we be not sentenced to endure the fire of purgatory, from which 
we piously and devoutly implore that others may be liberated. 

This is the explanation of this Petition given by the Church 
in the Mass and Litanies, where we pray to be delivered from 
evil past, present and to come. 


Noy (Core, sath 1h 


582 THE LORD’S PRAYER 


“Deliver Us” 


The goodness of God delivers us from evil in a variety of 
ways. He prevents impending evils, as we read with regard to 
the Patriarch Jacob, whom He delivered from the enemies that 
were stirred up against him on account of the slaughter of the 
Sichimites. For we read: The terror of God fell upon all the 
cities round about, and they durst not pursue after them as they 
went away. 

The blessed who reign with Christ the Lord in heaven have 
been delivered by the divine assistance from all evil; but, as for 
us, although the Almighty delivers us from some evils, it is not 
His will that, while journeying in this, our mortal pilgrimage, 
we should be entirely exempt from all. The consolations with 
which God sometimes refreshes those who labor under adversity 
are, however, equivalent to an exemption from all evil; and with 
these the Prophet consoled himself when he said: According to 
the multitude of my sorrows in my heart, thy consolations have 
rejoiced my soul.*® 

God, moreover, delivers men from evil when he preserves them 
unhurt in the midst of extreme danger, as He did in the case of 
the children thrown into the fiery furnace,’? whom the fire did 
not burn; and of Daniel, whom the lions did not injure.*® 


DELIVERANCE FROM SATAN ESPECIALLY ASKED FOR 


According to the interpretation of St. Basil the Great, St. 
Chrysostom and St. Augustine,’® the devil is specially called the 
evil one, because he was the author of man’s transgression, that 
is, of his sin and iniquity, and also because God makes use of 
him as an instrument to chastise sinful and impious men. For 
the evils which mankind endures in punishment of sin are ap- 
pointed by God; and this is the meaning of these words of Holy 
Writ: Shall there be evil in a city which the Lord hath not 
done?*® and: I am the Lord and there is none else: I form the 
light and create darkness: I make peace and create evil.?% 


4 a a ‘ aS 
Gen. xxxv. 5. Ps. xciii. 10. “Dan: vi, 22. * Dan. ii 36. 


* Basil in Hom. Quod. Deus non Sit Auctor Malorum: Ch i 
Hom. xx.; Aug. De Eccl. Dog. cap. 57. : pes eee 
»» Amos iii. 6. SIREY salhie op 


“BUT DELIVER US FROM EVIL” 583 


The devil is also called evil, because, although we have never 
injured him, he wages perpetual war against us, and pursues us 
with mortal hatred. If we put on the armor of faith and the 
shield of innocence, he can have no power to hurt us; neverthe- 
less he unceasingly tempts us by external evils and every other 
means of annoyance within his reach. Wherefore we beseech 
God to deliver us from the evil one. 

We say from evil, not from evils, because the evils which we 
experience from others we ascribe to the arch enemy as their 
author and instigator. Hence instead of cherishing resentment 
against our neighbor, we should turn our hatred and anger 
against Satan himself, by whom men are instigated to harm us. 

Therefore if your neighbor has injured you in any respect, when 
you pray to God your Father, beg of Him not only to deliver 
you from evil, that is, from the injuries which your neighbor 
inflicts; but also to rescue your neighbor from the power of the 
devil, whose wicked suggestions impel men to wrong. 


Patience and Joy under Continued Affliction 


Next we must remember that if by prayers and supplications 
we are not delivered from evil, we should endure our afflictions 
with patience, convinced that it is the will of God that we should 
so endure them. If, therefore, God hear not our prayers, we 
are not to yield to feelings of peevishness or discontent ; we must 
submit in all things to the divine will and pleasure, regarding 
as useful and salutary to us that which happens in accordance 
with the will of God, not that which is agreeable to our own 
wishes. 

Finally, the pious hearers should be admonished that during 
our mortal career we should be prepared to meet every kind of 
affliction and calamity, not only with patience, but even with 
joy. For it is written: All that will live godly in Christ Jesus 
shall suffer persecution;? and again: Through many tribula- 
tions we must enter into the kingdom of God;** and further: 
Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and so enter into 
his glory? 2 A servant should not be greater than his master ; 


Sebimiiie) 12: SU Acts xiv; 20: “Luke xxiv. 26 


584 THE LORD’S PRAYER 


and as St. Bernard says: Delicate members do not become a 
head crowned with thorns.2® The glorious example of Urias 
challenges our imitation. When urged by David to remain at 
home, he replied: The ark of God, and Israel, and Juda, dwell 
in tents; and shall I go into my house? *® 

If to prayer we bring with us these reflections and these dis- 
positions, although surrounded by menaces and encompassed by 
evils on every side, we shall, like the three children who passed 
unhurt amidst the flames, be preserved uninjured; or at least, 
like the Machabees, we shall bear up against adverse fortune 
with firmness and fortitude. 

In the midst of contumelies and tortures we should imitate 
the blessed Apostles, who, after they had been scourged, re- 
joiced exceedingly that they were accounted worthy to suffer 
reproach for Christ Jesus.?* Filled with such sentiments, we 
shall sing in transports of joy: Princes have persecuted me with- 
out cause; and my heart hath been in awe of thy words; I will 
rejoice at thy words, as one that hath found great spoil.284 


; oerm. v. De Omnibus Sanctis. “2 Kings xi. Ii. 
Acts v. 40. = Ps, Cxviil 1Or 


aOn the virtue of fortitude and on joy see Summa Theol. 2a. 22. 
CXX111.; XXVIII. 


THE SEAL OF THE LORD’S PRAYER 
“Amen” 


NECESSITY OF EXPLAINING THE CONCLUSION OF THE LORD’S 
PRAYER 


St. Jerome in his commentary on St. Matthew rightly calls 
this word what it really is, the seal cf the Lord’s Prayer. As 
then we have already admonished the faithful with regard to 
the preparation to be made before this holy prayer, so we deem 
it necessary that they should also know why we close our prayers 
with this word, and what it signifies; for devotion in concluding 
our prayers is not less important than attention in beginning 
them. 


Fruits that Come at the Conclusion of Prayer 
ASSURANCE THAT WE HAVE BEEN HEARD 


The faithful, then, should be taught that the fruits, which we 
gather from the conclusion of the Lord’s Prayer are numerous 
and abundant, the greatest and most joyful of them being the 
attainment of what we ask. On this point enough has already 


been said.# 


FERVOR AND ILLUMINATION 


By this concluding word, not only do we obtain a propitious 
hearing from God, but also receive other blessings of a higher 
order still, the excellence of which surpasses all powers of de- 
scription. 

For since, as St. Cyprian remarks, by prayer man converses with 
God, it happens in a wonderful manner that the divine Majesty 

*In Matt. vi. 6. 

a On the efficacy of prayer see above, page 470. 

585 


536 THE LORD’S PRAYER 


is brought nearer to those who are engaged in prayer than to 
others, and enriches them with singular gifts. Those, therefore, 
who pray devoutly, may not be inaptly compared to persons who 
approach a glowing fire; if cold, they derive warmth; if warm, 
they derive heat. Thus, also, those who approach God (in 
prayer) depart with a warmth proportioned to their faith and 
fervor; the heart is inflamed with zeal for the glory of God, 
the mind is illumined after an admirable manner, and they are 
enriched exceedingly with divine gifts, as it is written: Thou 
hast prevented him with blessings of sweetness.’ 

An example for all is that great man Moses. By inter- 
course and converse with God he so shone with the reflected 
splendors of the Divinity, that the Israelites could not look upon 
his eyes or countenance.* 


SWEETNESS 


Those who pray with such vehement fervor enjoy in a won- 
derful manner the goodness and majesty of God. In the morn- 
ing, says the Prophet, J will stand before thee, and will see; 
because thou art not a God that willest iniquity.‘ 

The more familiar these truths are to the mind, the more 
piously do we venerate, and the more fervently do we worship 
God, and the more delightfully do we taste how sweet is the 
Lord, and how truly blessed are all who hope in Him.® 


CONFIDENCE AND GRATITUDE 


Encircled by the most clear light from above we also dis- 
cover our own lowliness and how exalted is the majesty of God, 
according to the saying of St. Augustine: Give me to know Thee: 
give me to know myself. Distrusting our own strength, we 
thus throw ourselves unreservedly upon the goodness of God, 
not doubting that He, who cherishes us in the bosom of His 
paternal wondrous love, will afford us in abundance whatever 
is necessary for life and salvation. Thus we shall turn to God 
with the warmest gratitude our hearts can conceive and our lips 


* Ps. $45 * Exod. xxxiv. 35: Pa, ik, 
LA NSS ho Ch. * Solilog,. lib. ii. c. 1. 


“ AMEN ” 587 


express. This we read that holy David did, who commenced 
by praying: Save me from all them that persecute me, and con- 
cluded with these words, J will give glory to the Lord according 
to his ustice, and will sing to the name of the Lord the most 
High.* 


ILLUSTRATIONS FROM THE PSALMS 


There are innumerable prayers of the Saints of the same 
kind, whose beginnings are full of fear, but which end with hope 
and joy. This spirit, however, is eminently conspicuous in the 
prayers of David. 

When agitated by fear he began his prayer thus: Many are 
they who rise up against me: many say to my soul, There is no 
salvation for him in his God; but at length, armed with forti- 
tude and holy joy, he adds: J will not fear thousands of the 
people surrounding me.® 

In another Psalm, after he had lamented his misery, we see 
him towards the end, reposing confidence in God and rejoicing 
exceedingly in the hope of salvation: In peace in the self-same, 
I will sleep, and I will rest.® 

Again, with what fear and trembling must the Prophet not 
have been agitated when he exclaimed: O Lord, rebuke me not 
in thy indignation, nor chastise me in thy wrath! Yet, on the 
other hand, what confidence and joy must not have been his when 
he added: Depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity; for the 
Lord hath heard the voice of my weeping !® 

When filled with dread of the wrath and fury of Saul, with 
what lowliness and humility does he not implore the divine assist- 
ance: Save me, O Lord, by thy name, and judge me im thy 
strength! and yet, in the same Psalm he adds these words of 
joy and confidence: Behold, God is my help; and the Lord is the 
helper of my soul.*? 

Let him, therefore, who has recourse to holy prayer approach 
God his Father, fortified by faith and animated by hope, not 
doubting that he will obtain those blessings of which he stands 
in need. 


PP stevia 2s: esa itl, 377 * DS: iv. 9. 
UTES, Tips ZERO seks lithe ee Ps. liii. 6. 


588 THE LORD’S. PRAYER 


Meaning of the Word “Amen” 


FIRST EXPLANATION 


The word amen, with which the Lord’s Prayer concludes, con- 
tains, as it were, the germs of many of these thoughts and re- 
flections which we have just considered. Indeed, so frequent 
was this Hebrew word in the mouth of the Saviour, that it 
pleased the Holy Ghost to have it retained in the Church of God. 
Its meaning may be said to be: Know that thy prayers are heard. 
It has the force of a response, as if God answers the suppliant, 
and graciously dismisses him, after having favorably heard his 
prayers. 

This interpretation has been approved by the constant usage 
of the Church of God. In the Sacrifice of the Mass, when the 
Lord’s Prayer is said she does not assign the word amen to the 
server who answers: But deliver us from evil. She reserves it 
as appropriate to the priest himself, who, as mediator between 
God and man, answers Amen, thus intimating that God has heard 
the prayers of His people. 

This practice, however, is not common to all the prayers, but 
is peculiar to the Lord’s Prayer. To the other prayers the server 
answers Amen, because in every other this word only expresses 
assent and desire. In the Lord’s Prayer it is an answer, inti- 
mating that God has heard the petition of His suppliant. 


OTHER EXPLANATIONS OF THE WORD “AMEN” 


By many, the word amen is differently interpreted. The Sep- 
tuagint interprets it, So be it; others translate it, Verily; > Aquila 
renders it, Faithfully. Which of these versions we adopt, is a 
matter of little importance, provided we understand the word 
to have the sense already mentioned, namely, that when the priest 
(pronounces Amen), it signifies the concession of what has been 
prayed for. This interpretation is supported by St. Paul in his 
Epistle to the Corinthians, where he says: All the promises of 

aSee the Septuagint of Psalm xli. 13; Ixxii. 19; Ixxxix. 52. Elsewhere 


the Septuagint retains Amen, or renders it truly. 
> For this rendering are cited Sts. Aug., Jerome and Ambrose. 


“ AMEN ” 589 


God are in him, “it is”; 8 therefore also by him, amen to God, 
unto our glory. 


Advantages of Terminating our Prayer with this Word 


To us also this word is very appropriate, containing, as it 
does, some confirmation of the Petitions which we have already 
offered up. It also fixes our attention when we are engaged in 
holy prayer; for it frequently happens that in prayer a variety 
of distracting thoughts divert the mind to other objects. 

Nay, more, by this word we most earnestly beg of God that 
all our preceding Petitions may be granted; or rather, under- 
standing that they have been all granted, and feeling the divine 
assistance powerfully present with us, we cry out together with 
the Prophet: Behold God is my helper; and the Lord is the pro- 
tector of my soul.** 

Nor can anyone doubt that God is moved by the name of 
His Son, and by a word so often uttered by Him who, as the 
Apostle says, was always heard for his reverence.® 

AA Gove, 14 ay galas pe liiiO: SElepmv 7. 

a The meaning is: Through Christ the promises made by God have been 
fulfilled; therefore it is also through Christ that we are able to acknowl- 


edge to God the fulfillment of the promises, to answer Amen to them, 
and thus give glory to God. 


4 


e A 
‘ 
= 
’ 
~ 
4 
- a 
# . 
6 ce 
— 
wiry o 
t% 
. 
' 
s 1 
‘ 
“F 
* r 
‘ Re 
- 


the linigt 


s 


sus By i 3 
. =) , nn 
SRA aoe Sil 


rare 


ued alseienms 
A . a 


mite 


oe 


APPENDIX I 


Definition of the Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin 
Mary, Given by Pope Pius IX, December 8, 1854. 


“For the honor of the Holy and Undivided Trinity, for the glory 
and adornment of the Virgin Mother of God, for the exaltation of 
the Catholic faith and the increase of the Christian religion, We 
declare, pronounce and define, by the authority of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, of the blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, and Our own, that 
the doctrine which holds that the most Blessed Virgin Mary, in the 
first instant of her conception, was, by the singular grace and privi- 
lege of God, in view of the merits of Christ Jesus, the Saviour of 
the human race, preserved free from every stain of original sin, has 
been revealed by God and is therefore to be firmly and constantly 
believed by all the faithful. Wherefore if any should presume, which 
God forbid, to think otherwise in their hearts than We have defined, 
let them know and be certain that they have been condemned by 
their own judgment, that they have made shipwreck in faith, that 
they have fallen away from the unity of the Church; and further- 
more, that, should they dare to manifest in word or writing, or in 
any other external way, what they think in their hearts, they sub- 
ject themselves by this very act to the penalties prescribed by the 
law.” 


591 


APPENDIX II 


Definition of the Infallibility of the Roman Pontiff, Given in the 
Vatican Council, Session IV, Chapter 4, July 18, 1870. 


“Wherefore, adhering faithfully to the tradition received from 
the beginning of the Christian faith, for the glory of God our 
Saviour, for the exaltation of the Catholic religion, and the salva- 
tion of Christian peoples, We teach and define, with the approbation 
of the Sacred Council, that it is a dogma divinely revealed, that 
the Roman Pontiff, when he speaks ex cathedra, that is to say, when 
discharging the functions of Pastor and Doctor of all Christians, 
by virtue of his supreme Apostolic authority, he defines a doctrine 
regarding faith or morals to be held by the universal Church, he 
fully enjoys by the divine assistance promised to him in blessed 
Peter, the same infallibility which our Divine Redeemer intended 
His Church should be endowed with for defining doctrine concerning 
faith or morals; and consequently such definitions of the Roman 
Pontiff are of themselves irreformable, and not from the consent of 
the Church. 

“If any one presume, which God forbid, to contradict this Our 
definition, let him be anathema.” 


592 


APPENDIX III 


The Inseparability of the Contract and Sacrament in Christian Mar- 
riage, from the Encyclical of Pope Leo XIII, February 10, 1880. 


“Let no one be influenced by the distinction made so much of by 
the Regalists, which separates the nuptial contract from the Sac- 
rament, for no other purpose than to reserve to the Church what 
pertains to the Sacrament and to hand over the contract to the power 
and will of civil rulers. Such a distinction, indeed, or more 
truly, division, cannot be proved, since it is certain that in Christian 
marriage the contract cannot be separated from the Sacrament, and 
consequently that a true and lawful contract cannot exist without 
being by that very fact a Sacrament. For Christ the Lord added to 
marriage the dignity of a Sacrament; but marriage is the contract 
itself, provided this has been lawfully made ... Hence, it appears 
that every true marriage among Christians is in itself and of itself 
a Sacrament; and that nothing is further from the truth than that 
the Sacrament is a certain ornament superadded, or a property coming 
from without, which at the will of men can be disassociated and 


separated from the contract.” 


593 


APPENDIX IV 


Dispositions for Frequent and Daily Communion, from the Decree 
Approved by Pope Pius X, December 20, 1905. 


1. Frequent and daily Communion, as a thing most earnestly 
desired by Christ Our Lord, and by the Catholic Church, should 
be open to all the Faithful, of whatever rank and condition of life; 
so that no one who is in the state of grace, and who approaches 
the Holy Table with a right and devout intention, can lawfully be 
hindered therefrom. 

2. A right intention consists in this: that he who approaches the 
Holy Table should do so, not out of routine, or vainglory, or human 
respect, but for the purpose of pleasing God, or being more closely 
united with Him by charity, and of seeking this divine remedy for 
his weaknesses and defects. 

3. Although it is mcre expedient that those who communicate fre- 
quently or daily should be free from venial sins, especially from such 
as are fully deliberate, and from any affection thereto, nevertheless 
it is sufficient that they be free from mortal sin, with the purpose 
of never sinning mortally in future; and, if they have this sincere 
purpose, it is impossible but that daily communicants should grad- 
ually emancipate themselves from even venial sins, and from all 
affection thereto. 

4. But whereas the Sacraments of the New Law, though they take 
effect ex opere operato, nevertheless produce a greater effect in 
proportion as the dispositions of the recipient are better; therefore, 
care is to be taken that Holy Communion be preceded by serious 
preparation, and followed by a suitable thanksgiving according to 
each one’s strength, circumstances, and duties. 

5. That the practice of frequent and daily Communion may be 
carried owt with greater prudence and more abundant merit, the 
confessor’s advice should be asked. Confessors, however, are to be 
careful not to dissuade any one (ne quemquam avertant) from fre- 
quent and daily Communion, provided that he is in a state of grace 
and approaches with a right intention. 


594 


APPENDIX IV 595 


6. But since it is plain that, by the frequent or daily reception of 
the Holy Eucharist, union with Christ is fostered, the spiritual life 
more abundantly sustained, the soul more richly endowed with vir- 
tues, and an even surer pledge of everlasting happiness bestowed 
on the recipient, therefore parish priests, confessors, and preachers— 
in accordance with the approved teaching of the Roman Catechism 
(Part ii, cap. 4, n. 63)—are frequently, and with great zeal, to 
exhort the Faithful to this devout and salutary practice. 

7. Frequent and daily Communion is to be promoted especially 
in Religious Orders ard Congregations of all kinds; with regard to 
which, however, the Decree Quemadmodum, issued on December 17, 
1890, by the Sacred Congregation of Bishops and Regulars is to 
remain in force. It is also to be promoted especially in ecclesiastical 
Seminaries, where students are preparing for the service of the altar; 
as also in all Christian establishments, of whatever kind, for the 
training of youth. 

8. In the case of religious institutes, whether of solemn or simple 
vows, in whose rules, or constitutions, or calendars, Communion is 
assigned to certain fixed days, such regulations are to be regarded 
as directive, and not preceptive. In such cases the appointed num- 
ber of Communions should be regarded as a minimum, and not as 
setting a limit to the devotion of the religious. Therefore, freedom 
of access to the Eucharistic Table, whether more frequently or daily, 
must always be allowed them, according to the principles above laid 
dcwn in this Decree. And in order that all religious of both sexes 
may clearly understand the provisions of this Decree, the Superior 
of each house is to see that it is read in community in the vernacular, 
every year within the octave of the Feast of Corpus Christi. 

9. Finally, after the publication of this Decree, all ecclesiastical 
writers are to cease from contentious controversies concerning the 
dispositions requisite for frequent and daily Communion. 


pia 
7 


va a Sal in 7 i: 
mo 


iy Ag wtel ae 


INDEX OF 


Absolution, 268, 260. 

Accidents of Eucharist, 240. 

Accommodation of instruction to hear- 
ers, 7. 

Accomplices in stealing, 447. 

Acolyte, 326. 

Acknowledgment of sin, 553. 

Adam, 446, 541 ff. 

Administration of Sacraments, 169, 312. 

Adultery, 432, 433. 435, 473 

Adults, Baptism of, 178 ff. 

Affinity, 175, 206, 207. 

Afflictions, 583. 

Age for Sacraments, 208, 286. 

Agility, 129. 

Almsdeeds, 448, 449, 500, 564. 

Amen, 584 ff. 

Amendment, purpose of, 278. 

Angels, 27, 369-373, 502. 

Anger, 423, 424, 494. 

Anointing, 195, 211, 312, 331. 

Apostolicity of the Church, 107. 

Archbishops, 333. 

Ascension of Christ, 73 ff. 

, Spiritual, 79, 

Avarice, 475. 


Baptism, 161 ff. 

, conditional, 190. 

, distinct from Confirmation, 
201. 

, not to be repeated, 189. 

, of adults, 178 ff. 

, of infants, 177 ff. 

Baptismal water, 193. 

Beatific Vision, 137. 

Beneficence, works of, 426. 

Bishops, 204-206, 332, 334, 414. 

Blasphemy, 394. 

Blindness, spiritual, 436, 475, 530. 

Body, resurrection of, 120 ff. 

Bondage of Egypt, 366, 367. 


| 


597 


SUBJECTS 


Bread, 219-221, 543, 548. 
Breathing, in Baptism, 194. 
Bribery, 446. 

Brightness, 128. 

Burial of Christ, 53 ff. 


Calumny, 458. 

Candle used in Baptism, 197. 

Canonical fitness for priesthood, 336. 

Catechetical instruction in Baptism, 
193. 

Catechism, need of authoritative, 3. 

Catholicity of Church, 106. 

Ceremonies, 152, 192, 252, 259, 260, 285, 
310, 353. 

Ceremonial law, 397. 

Certainty of faith, 18. 

Character, sacramental, 159, 189, 210, 
337: 

Charity, 368, 482, 496, 509. 

Chastity, 433 ff., 354. 

Children, end of marriage, 344, 350. 

Chrism, 166, 196, 202. 

Christ, Ascension of, 73 ff. 

, Author of the Sacraments, 154. 

—— , Baptism of, 170, 191, 

——., birth of, 45 ff. 

—— , Conception of, 41 ff. 

—— , crucifixion of, 51 ff. 

—— , death and burial of, 53. 

—— , descent into hell of, 62 ff. 

—— , divine Sonship of, 36-38. 

—— , example of in His Passion, 61. 

—— , forgives sins, 117. 

— , glory of, 74 ff. 

—w— , humility and poverty of, 47. 

—— , our Advocate, 77. 

—— , our Head, 188. 

—— , our Judge, 80 ff. 

—— , our Lord, 38-40. 

—— , our Redeemer, 61. 

—— , Passion of, 50 ff., 552, 558. 


INDEX OF 


598 


Christ, reign of, 526. 

, Resurrection of, 66 ff. 

, sacrifice of, 60. 

, satisfaction of, 60. 

, second coming of, 80. 

, three offices of, 80. 

, victory of, 574. 

Church, benefited by Ascension of 

Christ, 78. 
— , Holy Catholic, 97 ff. 
—— , possesses power to forgive sins, 
113 ff. 

, to be prayed for, 516, 525. 

Cleric, 324. 

Commandments, moral and ceremonial, 
397- 

, necessity of, 467. 

, observance of, 6, 358 
ff. 

, sanction of, 377-388, 
394, 395, 406, 407, 
416-418, 436, 450. 

, two tables of, 408, 411. 

Communion, Holy, 245 ff. 

, daily, 249 ff., 550. 

, Easter, 250. 

, minister of, 253. 

, preparation for, 246-248. 

, tite of, 252. 

, Spiritual, 245. 

, under one species, 252. 

Communion of Saints, 109 ff. 

Concomitance, 234. 

Concupiscence, 183, 184, 469, 470. 

Confession, 281 ff. 

, definition of, 283. 

, institution of, 284. 

, necessity and advantages 
of, 282. 

, obligation of, 285. 

, qualities of, 287 ff. 

, rites of, 285. 

, seal of, 292. 

Confessor, duties of, 293-296. 

——— ,should impose satisfaction, 
304, 306. 

Confidence in God, 495, 510, 556, 573, 
580, 586. 

Confirmation, Sacrament of, 199 ff. 

Consent required in Matrimony, 340- 
342. 


SUBJECTS 


Contract of marriage, indissoluble, 
343. 

—— , instituted by God, 
342. 

, motives and ends 
of, 343-345- 

, not obligatory on 
all, 343. 

Contrition, conditions of, 278 ff. 

, effects of, 280. 

, meaning of, 272. 

, means of arousing, 281. 

Conversation, impure, 438. 

Conversion, 515, 516, 525. 

Covetousness, 470 ff. 

Creation, 20, 30, 94, 502. 

Creditors, defrauding of, 446. 

Creed, 11-13. 

Crucifixion, 51. 


Daily Communion, 249. 

Dances, immodest, 438. 

Dangers of sin to be avoided, 563. 

Deacon, 328. 

Dead, prayers for, 259, 490. 

Death, consolation for, 130. 

of Christ, 53 ff. 

Decalogue, promulgation of, 359, 363- 

366. 

Deliverance from evil, 582. 

Demons, audacity of, 568. 
—— , deliverance from, 582. 

, malignity of, 568. 

, number of, 568. 

, power of, 567. 

, temptations of, 567. 

Descent of Christ intc hell, 64 ff. 

Desires, inordinate, 538. 

Despair, sin of, 369. 

Detraction, sin of, 420, 457, 458. 

Dishonesty, sin of, 444. 

Dispositions for prayer, 526, 538, 553, 
563, 573, 578. 

for the Sacraments, 180 ff., 
208, 246 ff., 313, 318 ff., 
354. 

Distrust of self, 573. 

Divorce, 343, 348, 349. 

Dreams, observance of, 369. 

Dress, immodest, 437. 

Duty of married people, 351, 352. 


INDEX OF SUBJECTS 


Duty, of recourse to the power of the 
keys, 118, 119. 

, of revering and using the Sacra- 
ments, 160. 

—— , of spiritual nativity, 48. 

, owed our heavenly Father, 506. 

, owed our Lord, 39, 4o. 


Easter Communion, 250. 

Effects of the Sacraments, 157, 182 ff., 
200,247 fi., 270; 314,°337, 340. 

Enemies, love of, 489, 562. 

Envy, 429, 475. 

Eternal life, 132 ff., 244. 

Eucharist, a Sacrament, 213 ff. 

ea ORCIICe, 254 it. 
, Our spiritual bread, 549. 


Eve, 46. 

Evil, man’s proneness to, 529. 
Exile from paradise, 527. 
Exorcism in Baptism, 194. 
Exorcist, 326. 

Extreme Unction, 307 ff. 
Eyes, custody of, 437. 


Baith; 11. tt, 31-33,0775 LOS, 100, 1oi, 
195, 232, 368, 384, 481, 495. 

False gods, 368, 393. 

Fasting, 500, 545. 

Father, our heavenly, 20, 501, 500. 

Feast days, 402, 403. 

Fervor, 500, 585. 

Flesh, assaults of, 566. 

Flattery, 459. 

Food of the soul, 240. 

Forgiveness of injuries, 279, 426-430, 
559 ff. 

of sins) 113 ff., 
270. 

Form of the Sacraments, I51, 166, 204, 

224 ff., 268, 269, 309. 

Fornication, 432 ff. 

Fortune-telling, 369. 

Fraud in business, 444. 

Frugality, 449, 545. 


Sa) dey 


Garment, baptismal, 196. 
Gifts of the Holy Ghost, 94. 
Glorified bodies, 128. 

Glory, light of, 136 

, of God, 515, 578. 


599 


Glory, of the Saints, 138. 

God, Almighty, 23-26, 378. 

— , attributes of, 17. 

— , goodness of, 362, 440, 467, 468, 
504, 552, 582. 

— , government of, 29. 

— , immensity of, 511. 

— , jealousy of, 378. 

— , Lawgiver, 358. 

| Mercy 01,1380, 556: 

— , Mover of all things, 29. 

— , our Creator, 20, 26, 502. 

— , our Deliverer, 505, 579. 

— , providence of, 29, 502. 

— ,Temits sin, 116: 

— , spirituality of, 374. 

— , to be prayed to, 491. 

— , Trinity and Unity of, 19 ff. 
Goods, spiritual and temporal, 487. 
Government of the world attributed to 

Holy Ghost, 94. 
Grace gratuitously granted, 111. 
, Justifying, 95, 157-159. 
——, necessity of, 536. 
, of adoption, 21. 
, of regeneration, 187. 
|, sacramentalyaa 5 7 lose eft-,8 200; 
241 ff., 270, 314; 337, 340. 
Gratitude, 586. 


Happiness of heaven, 136 ff. 

Hatred, 429, 494. 

Heaven, 27, 73, 77, 85, 135 ff., 139, 140, 
Igl. 

Hell, 62 ff., 85, 86. 

Heresy, sin of, 369. 

Holiness, of the Church, 104, 106. 

required in priests, 345. 


| Holy Ghost, conception of Christ ap- 


propriated to, 42. 
, His Person and works, 
88 fi. 
Holy Orders, 318 ff. 
Honor due to God’s name, 383. 
parents, 411 ff. 
Saints, 138. 
superiors, 414 ff. 
Hope, 78, 368, 481, 579. 
Humility, 47, 493. 
Husbands, duties of, 351. 
Hypocrisy, 460. 


600 INDEX OF 


Idleness, 437. 

Idolatry, 374. 

Illumination, 585. 

Images, sacred, 373 ff. 

Immortality, of the resurrection body, 
27. 

, the soul, 120. 

Impassibility, 128. 

Impediments of marriage, 353. 

Impenitence, 486. 

Impetration, 479, 585. 

Impurity, 432 ff. 

Incarnation, 43 ff. 

Incorporation in Christ, 188. 

Infant Baptism, 177. 

Inhumanity, 494. 

Injuries, forgiveness of, 279, 561. 

Institution of the Sacraments, 154, 169, 

202, 213, 266, 284, 310, 331, 342. 

Instruction, religious, i ff., 193. 

Intention, purity of, 541. 

required for the Sacraments, 
I80, 181, 196, 319. 


Jewish people, 363-366. 

Joy, spiritual, 232, 243, 583. 

Judges, duties of, 460. 

Judgment, in oaths, 388, 392. 

, particular and general, 81. 
, rash, 429. 

Justice, 388, 392. 

Just men, 484, 489. 


Killing, when allowed, 421, 422. 

Kingdom of glory, 524. 

— God to be labored for, 527. 
—— — God to be prized, 526. 
——— — grace, 523. 

—— == nature; 522% 

Knowledge, concerning Christ, 5. 

God, 16 ff. 

, required in priests, 335. 


Labor, 403, 449, 527, 542. 

Laborers, defrauded of wages, 445. 

Last things, remembrance of, 86, 130, 
131, 420, 430. 

Lawyers, duties of, 462. 

Lessons of Christ’s Nativity, 47. 

Life, attributed to Holy Ghost, 94. 

— everlasting, 192 ff. 


SUBJECTS 


Light of glory, 136. 
Living, the Mass profitable to, 259. 
Loquacity, danger of, 464. 
Love for God, 6, 78, 408-411. 
— of neighbor, 408-411, 425, 426, 
562. 
Luxuries not prayed for, 545. 
Lying, 459, 460, 464. 


Man, 209, 48. 
Marriage, as a contract, 342-345. 
— Sacrament, 345 ff. 
before Christ, 346. 
, blessings of, 350. 
, church law concerning, 353. 
, indissolubility of, 348. 
, recipient of, 354. 
, unity of, 347. 
Mary, Blessed Virgin, 45 ff., 491. 
Mass, 254 ff. 
— ,a true sacrifice, 256-258. 
— , attendance at, 405. 
— , excellence of, 258, 259. 
— , rites and ceremonies of, 259. 
Matrimony, 339. 
Matter of the Sacraments, 150, ISI, 
164 ff., 202, 219-223, 268, 3009. 
Mental prayer, 497. 
Mercy of God, 556. 
Mildness, 426. 
Minister of the Sacraments, 155, 172, 
205, 253, 200 ff., 314, 334. 
Miseries of life not removed by Bap- 
tism, 186, 187. 
Moral law, 397. 
Mortification, 439. 
Murder, 423-425. 
Mysteries of the Eucharist, 228 ff. 


HTT 


Name given in Baptism, 197. 

of God, 382 ff., 515, 517. 

— Jesus Christ, 33-36, 499. 
Names, of Baptism, 162. 

— Eucharist, 214-216, 

—— “— Holy Orders, 322. 

— Matrimony, 339. 
Necessities, bodily, 541. 

Necessity, of prayer, 520, 520, 541, 566. 
— religious instruction, 1, 3 
Neglect of duties, 444. 


INDEX OF SUBJECTS 


Oaths, 385. 
by false gods, 393. 
; conditions of, 387. 
a EN SRO 
—— , lawfulness of, 389. 
—— , meaning of, 386. 
, Tash, 392. 
———— 4 Unjust, 302. 
Obligation, of Baptism, 171, 176 ff. 
— Commandments, 361. 
— Communion, 249 ff. 
— confession, 285-287. 
— Confirmation, 207. 
On earth as it is in heaven, 514, 537. 
Orders, major, 327 ff. 
, minor, 325-327. 
—— , number of, 323. 
Our, meaning of in Lord’s Prayer, 508, 
545, 558. 


| 


Parents, consent of for marriage, 354. 

, duties of, 418, 419. 

, to be honored, 411-414. 

Passion of Christ, 552, 558. 

, bitterness of, 58. 

——— , figures and prophe- 
cies of, 52. 

—— , fruits of, 59. 

——_ , history of, 52. 

——— , remits sin, 117. 

— , useful reflections on, 
56 ff. 

Passions, rebellion of, 532. 

Pastors to be prayed for, 488. 

Patience, 426, 583. 

Patriarchs, 333. 

Pax, given in Confirmation, 212. 

Penance, Sacrament of, 265 ff. 

, virtue of, 263-265. 

Penitential dispositions, 563. 

Penitents, imitation of, 563. 

Perserverance, 490. 

Petitions, 483, 500. 

, good, 536. 

, mistaken, 535. 

Pictures, immodest, 438. 

Piety, filial, toward God, 510. 

Place of heaven, 139. 

Plaintiffs, duties of, 462. 

Pontius Pilate, 51. 

Pope, 102, 333- 


Hilde 


601 


Porter, 325. 
Power of jurisdiction, 320. 
—, Orders, 320 ff. 
Poverty of Christ, 47. 
Praise of God, 258, 384. 
Prayer, 385. 
, a protection, 569. 
, exercises faith, hope and char- 
ity, 481. 
—— , how performed well, 497. 
—— , impetratory, 479. 
—— , in spirit and in truth, 497, 498. 
—— , inthe name of Jesus Christ, 499. 
—— , latreutic, 470. 
—— , mental and vocal, 497. 
———-—— NeICCLIOL EO. 
—— , to be joined with fasting and 
alms, 500. 
, when not heard, 480. 
Presence of Christ in the Eucharist, 
229 ff. 
Presumption, sin of, 369. 
Pride, 494. 
Priesthood, 329. 
, degrees of, 332. 
, functions of, 331. 
, qualifications for, 335-337. 
, to be honored, 414. 
, twofold, 330. 
Profiteering, 446. 
Proneness of man to evil, 529. 
Propagation of Church, 525. 
Prophecies of Conception and Nativity 
of Christ, 46. 
— descent into hell, 65. 
— Passion and death of 


Christ, 52. 

— — Resurrection of Christ, 
66-68. 

—— — the water of Baptism, 
165. 


Propitiation, Mass a Sacrifice of, 258. 

Providence, paternal, 502. 

Psalms, examples of joy in prayer, 587. 

Punishments, remitted in Baptism, 185, 
186. 


Reader, 326. 

Reading, immodest, 438. 

Real Presence of Christ in the Euchar- 
ist, 229 ff. 


602 


Real Presence, benefits of, 232. 
— ,in each part of the ele- 
ments, 235. 
,in virtue of concomi- 
tance, 234. 
—w— ,in virtue of the Sacra- 
ment, 234. 
—— ———, not as in a place, 239, 


240. 

, proofs of, 229 ff. 

, under each species, 234. 

, whole and entire, 233. 

Redemption, 60, 505. 

Regeneration, grace of, 187. 

Reign of Christ, 526. 

Relics, 372,°373- 

Religious instruction, ends of, 5. 

, means of, 7. 

, necessity, I. 

Remedy for human ills, 531. 

Renunciation of Satan, 195. 

Repentance required for Baptism, 181. 

Resignation, 539. 

Restitution, 304, 447. 

Resurrection of the body, 120 ff. 

— ‘Christ, 66ift. 

spiritual, 72. 

Revenge, 428. 

Rewards, 361, 362, 576. 

Rich, 547, 550. 

Riches, detachment from, 473, 474. 

Robbery, 441, 445, 446. 

Rulers to be honored and prayed for, 
415, 480. 


Sabbath, celestial, 402. 

, observance of, 396 ff. 

——., symbolism of, 4or1. 

Sacraments, 110, 141 ff., 438, 563. 

Sacrament and sacrifice, distinction of, 

255% 

Sacrifice of Calvary, 60. 

— the Mass, 254 ff. 

Saints, honor and invocation of, 371— 
373, 491, 492. 

————  eatronwroive 

, victory of, 574. 

Saliva in Baptism, 194. 

Salt in Baptism, 194. 

Satisfaction, advantages of, 299-301. 

, conditions for, 302, 304. 


INDEX OF 


SUBJECTS 


Satisfaction, efficacy of, 302. 

, meaning and kinds of, 206. 

, necessity of, 298. 

, of Christ’s Passion, 60. 

, sacramental, 297. 

Seal of confession, 292. 

Sermons, attendance at, 405. 

Sign of the cross, 194, 211. 

Signs, divine, 146. 

, natural and human, 145. 

Sin, acknowledgment of, 553. 

— , baseness of, 554. 

— , consequences of, 555. 

— , dangers of, 563. 

— , detestation of, 274. 

— , evil of, 118. 

— , forgiveness of, 113 ff., 183, 184, 

243, 270. 

Sinner, 485, 490, 516, 525. 

Slander, 460. 

Slap in Confirmation, 2IT. 

Sorrow, for sin, 275 ff. 

ae preparation for 
prayer, 493. 

, motives of, 554. 

Soul, immortality of, 120. 

Speech, irreverent, 393. 

Sponsors, 173 ff., 206. 


Stealing, 441 ff. 


, desire of forbidden, 442. 

, excuses for, 450-453. 

=, STAViby OL, AAe. 

, kinds of, 443. 

Subdeacon, 327. 

Subjects of the Sacraments, 176 ff., 207, 
208, 245 ff., 285, 311, 334, 354. 

Subtility, 129. 

Suicide, 423. 


‘Sunday, 402. 


Superstition, 360. 
Sweetness, spiritual, 586. 


Taxes, obligation of, 445. 


Temperance, 437. 


‘Temptation, 244, 567, 570. 
Testimony, false, 455 ff. 


Thanksgiving, 258, 384, 441, 454, 483, 
490, 500, 516, 538. 


‘Theft, 441, 443, 444. 


Time for confession, 287. 
— Confirmation, 211. 


INDEX OF SUBJECTS 


Tonsure, 324. 
Transubstantiation, meaning of, 238, 
239. 

, proofs of, 235, 238. 

Truthfulness, 387, 462, 464. 

Types of Christ’s Conception and Na- 
tivity, 46. 

Passion and death, 
52. 

of the Church, 107. 

water of Baptism, 165. 


Unbelievers, 486, 515. 
Unity of the Church, 102-104. 
Usury, 445, 446. 


Vessels, sacred, 254. 
Victory, author of, 575. 
of Christ and the Saints, 574. 
, rewards of, 576. 
Violence, 494. 
Virtues infused in Baptism, 188, 199. 


L/S AG s 
03 


Vision, Beatific, 137. 
Vocal prayer, 497. 
Vocation, 318. 


Watchfulness, 575. 
Water, baptismal, 193. 
Water used for the 
222. 

Weakness of man, 530, 538, 566. 
Whisperers, 458. 
Will of God, 496, 529 ff. 
Wine used for the Eucharist, 221-223. 
Witnesses, duties of, 461. 

Wives, duties of, 352. 

Word of God, 9, 384, 475, 494, 548. 
Works, good, I10, 530, 531. 

of mercy, 400, 405, 426. 

of satisfaction, 301. 
, servile, 401, 404. 
World, formation of, 28. 


Eucharist, 221, 


Zeal, 8, 370. 


Ll 


- 
: 


Liu 


i 


La 


[Si ee 


a0 > 
i * 


wv Os . Ml MM MIE Mal mn 
"8° {RUBIN at 2007 


| Catholic Church. 


} Catechism of the Council of 
Trent for parish priests 


DATE DUE 


op 
ras 


fecgainettn ion 


poyesnas 


pe 


