Title: Enchiridion, or Hand Book: A Hand Book of the Christian Doctrine
  and Religion
Creator: Dirk Philips (1504-1568) (A.B. Kolb, Translator)
Publisher: Elkhart, Indiana: Mennonite Publishing Company, 1910
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: 1910 publication date places this well out of US
  copyright (116 years before this session, 2026); no explicit
  archive.org copyright-status field present on this item, so the
  determination rests on the stated publication date alone, per this
  project's standing PD-by-date rule.
Source: Internet Archive item enchiridionorhan00phil
  (archive.org/details/enchiridionorhan00phil), fetched directly (curl,
  raw bytes) from the item's own _djvu.txt full-text file, 2026-09-24,
  this session.
Provenance note: OCR QUALITY FLAG, disclosed plainly: the opening
  matter (title page and front matter, roughly the file's first ~100
  lines) is severely OCR-garbled, likely from a decorative title-page
  font or an illustration the OCR engine misread as text. Spot-checked
  well into the body (line ~2000) and found clean, readable prose there.
  Every quotation must be independently re-checked character-by-character
  against this file before use, and the front matter specifically should
  not be relied on for any bibliographic claim beyond what this header
  and the dossier's own independent verification already establish. Body
  text otherwise unaltered including its own OCR errors.




hp Sy en he Pry is a eee li the hte to 
juke Ae alata ie Mealy Sx ~The Glickln Hatin Rate st Aba ost ae ptalne da Giath tale ih 
Sethe at het hm He as pti Re ht Hg ig MA Hm Nh hn ne the eh te be ee ae. a ae a ee eee 
pane ey ir laerins ae br tater ee Ae Leia sit Abs Atte hn A i hn a bo aA Aaa Pn tia Naa Bere ee oF ee en aed 
bag a tinh Hertntlyatn Mauls ayant HN annem eterna eedgt ms nnyed Amen rheton Pose een te EES Ge NE eee ee ee Te ne ee ois ahah 
Sat gig Wn ints Cann Kim arth wi tae A ny Mle Mh A i ts Wig Sah E uh NT Ment th gtr OMG Nome Me Aad, Hata hE ad RRO Bs Hah Aer dal Hatema Go tenneY ye ie NE ge et ta eth aM td Oo A aA AT mk fe aR ORI OM BANS Hie 
ica tint aby ta thaRatt At yah att a akg aa atin Pare go Rr RE LE Dt SCOTS OM pe 

GAlpAl iki aM aM set ic hdl etlig neal ket Ah gin MDs eth aH i mth ntl od 




























. 


























erie ae Nga otis ns He Ren atin Honettotionsn haiti Site a A Sete mete ie area Be 

ore ee dent hn tp es tbs ie in Hn A hata ie ntien Bm tan ha Co A ng He ag Hye Pe gy te ir iN Pe ‘Pen D 

Gone ann tee Paci pe eA ITH NE COL taster inti fete Spec Meet cath F Pta ms Re tints Wie We Hm thet ennfpn td) Antes a Hp nn A i“ < Slips Pena Ms An Oe! cain Seb belns netomat Nae. alan eet Math Capea inant 

eee Mh Beets He En et bbe Yr Bic Hie He inn hn be he Bn On Wy Abe He San the Man Hh Ba sn hen an an cs in He Hn om en en Oat Ne tan ow hatte shy Matin Sm POA Tarn Heer Pian ih gg thy A warn 3 ph ir ae Raton ate Re Mt te er 10s saitiatl gg RVs tall othr Aten 6 all H aM: Bin Rint aed nin -<fi stein 

pat hatin tgintoc cent thc er Rathets tea SiR We ESSENSE Oa ona tinttatnAatientin t= ainhxniintin Dette Revista nthe Bett “Pets ee peste MeN er rare Uw He’ PUR ote tnd hah He Mo eee He nade thet hace is gain a Be yA ds ADM ntl A ig athon Hk dhg MBA Os ~ 

Lae het nthe sy etn a the Rh Men the Mar He Thm haath Hin Mm Br en Ba age th than Mh in a tem hen ete AA Me Bie fie Tt» thin Hw Moat th man actin nAhge ang hm OA Menai tt g BH hes hgh enh pM Ng etnies athe sete t wets tte in pee cde tenet: oer Aka tiaiennu trek lbadi ehrlG ot uth g thy int nin OLE bo ered we rene er? 

peso nphatat ta emai theshe thet We falls Bo BaNe Kd gg eth he fier ee st Ha thatin es Aettert obertten Hn te Gn te tie lett Me hatin He Wig im hen eh ew em het Hn th nthe Math Ramin Hig nthe ta etn ter Agta 6 afin eon Gaih< By Mig i ae ign tA he whee te ait A MEO NN oO Giots eh Bh ttre OP ee el og Minin ga Mh AM ig Me 9 Oro Khor et te Nn nh Ah ag aed ee ah gare MA 

Bs pantie tease teh Bate ha dame hastetie ld aAte Eaten de Fate hater t= Se ha ean Dac Martin ig fe i mtg he athe Cn ent Bs Ste ee ewan Rapa Ra metas Ratlaincsheosn Setter hen Ne cee _ aT et Na horny Ah tee ot Ah Ciao int ha Reith eM or ining ttt etn Geol lint at Stet Matig ince addrrtta tr Haleadt Wl ata Bet ah Sey eth eth whe 

. ei eer caer enti deeds tata ten Monty treatin tate reeuig alin apties innit Matigte a tn foWrt-rate Re Na Aetee eh sh Bett, Hays tin ta Hitetie he Sm te a ne i eA tha th We pre ea Te ate ck enaNn cas buftok wiiwhigsreNiaita Ua ntlese at eatin Yint rund Ans oH ene aye ee SY Rab iad arbor be Saket a ape Ah athA Man webb th alt ahah oll gta dia tas te Nal mM inf ond 

h~ Fal Noe Sei i ep ee EE tenia CUM Pett i hn See in hn hn Mn fie Rata ll Kent 8 Bin Ratan Bis Rane eatin Hete Hine tg Barlnts RSE 8S Gin he Ng hed Ons Oat eth ean et eet oda Minh alg Menthe Pn Deh a peg haa OM ahhote RY itt oth Cn tatins pilots, Be Hattne We aH He Ep tre Ee Me alto ee eM tata gs eayaNlnB Att ts ACen siin anal wimarelshaiid Ait ofp 
ee eee cae detainee ght en in a eettn Ag Sine an ttn Watt Bs eB iN nb tha Hihig tn atta Aa ese aed oe ati hs Ba tathm Doli. na ceaeaiehn sean Gui nthe AD MAL AT atc n At ll. m Wine 8 i APES east SoA ee nian etn atlnamttngh Sed aire sit ete iP nllnts chat die knits esate iaD oA tiestytha Mat idm teint atnt sale rte Ben 

- ¥a ad ~ " he ten hg Re Og Katine te ee! Me ten in ho oa ha Og (a ig a A i Al 8 NN a oe hh Hh Hig Spo tg Gig Nae kde he Oe On at et he ho Been tt oS me lita pe ane ait Meth ar tt ath 4 

Bee eee aaa tn hs aose Netatg edetintatigMn annie e-Baks Gi RA A AEN no Ae ln he hig ett Home catetigints aap tad ahr Ot ANE Shh Aten etn en TM in tnt hi atin, Soer then niall wh Siow thanas nh nA AeA tine? an a Am Ba! 

"Cunt nly atiadar Wi bl 2O all nS oA eth at aii Rint rebate ap mmattete 


attg tines iim Mag thn Aes na Oe tena M nF ects attain tglt Hinting Re Watin tant ots ea ueat OAR om ad Oat aire Hada 
se he tg Mit Sieg Mig Cire Ba thy Me ea Aa Ss dieting nti He Qe het ae ee ee ee ee 
Bee cate aa hese tiv atta teeta Santee awn el AS had a Shalini Hn Hl AR 

eating tn hay 5 5~hnn! fa tin hoe hae Wha soho Re AD antes Bhat 












Bigg Bea Rp Be ath He etn nme Ont 






nt at tee ~ 
ee gacs thats Waa tenn Rafe t—ne tan 
Waa n the the Nin, Hath Rime. Kon tag Aa 

ee ths ta tn Hatta = vi Vie in anintio gente Mansa 
fata tas Haalp the Cant pO hatte Sn tinvs heh artaite hetere we ste tel 





aa gm Atiabe oe ena og epee 
noha oe aeigat ence vat aabeHe 
1 B48 it 





Age Rane a gr he man seo 7 ah nthe tte 
pre eeteta inenstiratiaite ta nae tat eg Se hoon 






oc that Sethe sa AS 


Pr he ee 















seona han ese 
Fen TS aetna on He hn thea tae Aodinthadhydye Nettie takin teeta Motemetn 
Se sepa y ape 8 na Tithe hi ip Nay Sp Rn nate Srna tigttatp ea daliriigtaten tata ate NeRaty het Geta n ena mete te heiictnth ds te PuiialeN aint: ae 
ip itn Hn tee her SaMy thn Be onthe nthe on Ha ech hn Maman Sin ge Mae yt en he Lg hth Hig Cee ht ota ntlertgandlene A ettn Hiatt ‘dint n Vn S eS) Cae Win oa EG Ba Algae ie son Rate Re Gn ate Hat oe ee 
hash thls Matte tate tte an Om Feit Ga Neth tinea Ge hn tara Waebas a A Gt ae a Eo AD eR oF Ceo enth, Ant Oeh po a ch ote A ew Pe ee ns 

oo an le ehh ope ttn Gi GET ae paepermrencrenrriesr er ame see rere e ce Dh ee ee Mo ot tha thin ont m OA phd bent ed Maan Wa Gaeta ves ghet uh that ates=*~ Fae. 

th oie pAb eit sha Oe Hpbi bing Baden MMe An Me nine pr RM Stat om Yat a8 that ANA nln tM an etl aK pMtinten tp het nS Athi ent 
tet Bre tie Ain ths gah ple ARN Ol atta Atel gies ott wthodir® 











Loan AM a te Ren Ragthe em me thie Th 


i Te MR Os he Nan age ee Mime Hen ene 


Bi hn Retin Ue ten 
TR nar hye tn Peep weet itn oe atlol 


pig Ghee ph He Ma tala naie ABs re Mente ne tonite 
FR Eo Nie pete sty Vein Oh HY ae Hetis ARs ye rev skint aly i tg awl Pata vte Mie 
Age de 88 eT: A seg tN th 


matunga tegen Sin Mette Hin igh Kr fen ttin ay tte 
ekg be hee ata ea ete chess Nate Ha Sane im 

apserts 1, sh EN Pe perenne) 

Been ap os eanslta Phe Ae tata Bata MOTE t ts Hote ee 

Cad as Vesee Bin tiakngn eit nan WM Vina seat pat alee “tet. © Pichi aye anmesinpsen aioe. Si Het WR Hie 

Oak LAER neste Ga tata ell Tabet Un ie sete 














Sas a mt Bee 
etana tone Pee vase asetaert meee ea Gate Hx on Ng AA then Geta in aly Anthea ihe Hine M6 
Toon Pha hig Ra Rn Bg ond Wa ach Peete Pine Mh Mn a tw a Negra oabn Urtnnesatnutaee tn atan Ratan Mae Tel ANS Ae . 
"i ‘ We the he Ay ot cna hn taaitatpente intra lianmatiatintisiyatnteltn cies nits ruth lt Rptaaiestants Ranke? oan Ain WR eyUatain tiered SoSets BET ALGO tr Hn Che ha Hh Hn 
tn thn Aa iy then Bg pw the hn arth Hw ag taste a gate uite™ Gang eee Wate (ee bikin enon ® eG, Gain eatrn Ga Bam nee Min fish ava Heiter Creat nt Lattin tan M ata seb Naot ata nts Cie a tn La ape 
Ade, Sal alin Raab S Rati gta 05046 tnt $ Behn W EV ade Ret th Renta he ote ee ee Ot ee i mah ae aid Aw tg elt rh 
: hath yond eine Arteta tact cit ahn fats nine etait ait Shah Sek Onl ally aS Med pel thie wwe a ovine Met Mahe oF Mate 2 gate op Rinl gi eg 
“ intl lh Oren? ath ph ton Bogie Pichia RsGE> Fa al Cw ace FT eh eT te 
Lene Suet hatin 


eee ete Yee, Bethan hn tits Tip Or HA A aes 
‘ Gn nema ah Ti Ran teh pean Ure 


Ncsten tag rhc thn pathcchee Aa ahah Cente n MS OES TERE 
its Ha ial Ratan aA Als aitndvion tea sine 8 


Big a Hin teat athe nth he He 
- a tee tan than pee Be iw 








Hn A tn tae tt 
Sates GR a ON nent Fhe - 
Bitar (en Anh g hed 4 st nteh aa tae othe 


Goal Ae nda eane dei ahatnt anoint ams atate tate a cuted Se 
ek Hite eee et oe ote 
cite tah tg the on gta A A GM 


Meee he. HOt tm ate e et he thy tne ete “ 
ig i es A a at ~ oD aaah AS th 5 dt gn « OE! 


AE at she Wat At wld 





a 













Ha HoH atin the Wate ohne tha We hae a a a iad, patra ard 
a thig Age at tu Mairaasto ee Be Tate tte a . 
me para Se ae Se NE RT Le See nse n tig Hae ttecttn dd Raa Ea oat ells Vin ates Vacate tot 
Pecinn th FE Pett py che Barn Rein an Rn ttn that ibe. " a aone nt batatatiaetn Sa baeeeena etalon eS eaececiy ata Votinthate went Fh ate AH te Daan FARIS Naa PRES SP See hate UM nt- tases os 
paris 4 ; ae Cyt ti a Ya i i is Om Ast hg oe ta Aa a nase Dy Vette He Semi hates a San ay Phe ntine yy ato ph he! a! Bi Pie mafe a Atha tage A hreAS ipah Rie wine atte hanna Pel ry ee ee ene 5 - . 

i Winn a Raw Mag in Min Ban Heth Ho nc gt inten Ven ar aha tate Ml pitta batten ntintats Hate taeponnd ah SAU iy no arp te pte hp aA sth +See tenant nati Sa 90 ot ett eti ett at inthe tt ee ip PhO R Med BA Bitin hit ohnaig® 

Huhta te inter apn int ate Retails He Saat Vain ln®, gett parse ate Dt etiam te Bod swaredym-apaadaraonatuls eet at megs hie Hien ts 
ell At ca ph anette ain ein ES 





ee were Leos 


Hh Shige ns eg Battin = He ie Hem et 
The hn Rip Hla A eh ath gs Ain hinge the Mh HES 
gh EH Ren met et eam maw, 


ag ow aa Nt miter Ban tt AR th 

i ht mM hy Sha ty ing Hey ta HS nape Dtha Mela Ata metstattatptintl sa pins Hosta ie! 
are He nha eee gi ell ote ig Se tp me me A 
oan Ath fin aetna i hn ym a ni tb itr ah a ath tig tn 
aha y Her aca ie hah wil nt Piste De st 
nA Nien it A as pHa AR Ate ig thet 9 ar 
Gent cA 5 Bartha Bn ie Mie na Aha nO yA at Mo Re Ty adh athe Lh SHE ye 
tn Ne th th MeO Onin eT Anite tin taiitimtine 

mite Aon Dimi Nt in a etn ht gma =H 
pf ted tne ROA titel pt abet i wAehi ti aindio’ wide «Ake Wat oh Aad 7 nw 
ant anti ptt ann adic tet ot nt ote to ret PC rr ke oe 
amare Ca gE AE Wt Oph GL RAR apf HP 


hy Ah Che aa He ln Han ee 
Ihe Hine thy hha tt Oa vt nTin thin Mn the rt Hw As 
Pe tanh a tg Hn Hin hs on TA ng yn Ne aS 
hse Hr Sayfa te Hn Hee i He thin 


ss ey toe oe Bate Abn in Hef arainnet Bot 
Bat 


VA Ahn Big he He tn oe 
Caan ata allie a sty fate 


(nw oie atm ag NE pe at eee Ba Anteten 
Lh Cit Tina Ay EB He ga ee Gn Oe ote! 
Oem aen Omit elt MaDe OW eth Oo 
Nigh ag ht paces RAM pat m 
Bis ei thn dell Meith Ae tte ait alhe 
Gig th ak Mtath= Mint al an tint ete nt tah mt 
Hed ninalic Datta D9 HaHa eM Pm ALM St At 
Mice aig tet e Mae Rat, ithe Mit aie Mavi eat 
hae gM on Ge gilt it 
ath GENT Nght AE A Pie ove St nt Oh onetime iit 
et De Lith eM ot gid 





1 gy Tag Eo Bis Bm Tae an 
fn Ng Hin Ch et hy i tan ag Hi 
ang oie Hig hs Hg Hn ie ont 


Vien hart tag Kin Hn ti ten Sette thy taint 


Me (he Bath 0 Hintien halted, Kae Vo’ 
Bertie Mie i Pe hn ett 
cn ih we et Mop te hem ta he 
Kin Fhe Hig Hs Nn Ha Han A hae me it es 
Binh the a ew Mn LGN a at 














But Min ie Oa lhe 





stg tat Ay te yt st He Hh eaten 
ig ine Ge Hin TH PHN eth He Me Hertha Ag theta g {tot mtb, 

nig Mets 0 i a acti eg 
ic Rh pte an Bn t8 ith. iy tirnth ec Conphnataot atin ie Ne tie iho git 


he 


hao. Ga hatha, Frm tts Hy Sie en Pa the Ha Ph 
nr 


eit HN it AP orl meat tem a 
a at ened 


th Na han Sm ie a he i 
ia hie Em Tinie Ra re re Rete ih, 
Fatt ata tithe gil tte dt A neha Piel Bien he 
an tig Hin hg a basing tangthes Se hg r= ated cient Alm oth AONE ABI a Hell Hig ti ti 
a Lae MS Mine eed att han yutinc tA 0P neta iat at ae pelo Hdd it yee 

Oy tee see Der ae, st Ae 


nh hm tet hin Hoon? wl gl 





ci ti ings echee hae ttc Enna pe Hye 
Gmc a hn eet ae 2 
es ig a Oa ig a ad 


i ear ho he fhe Rag tinten thet 






































er nection Bo Sst tin Bits Waa Oe wena neaa tds nea Si aeaer te he te tora ee 
“ napa) = pander lr tne Nig Dn Menfinie eotlnivhn Meet inte ne diat= Bs Se tag ean Me ee i inthe Sr Rs Rg 9 NO A ac ASE 
aint Pe Se saan Sea ke Yo am atta tet aietatne Mer Anita Hatictae saa Moylh Ae te Bato. Fa at Miche Hag ge tin F2he H ihe We th Matton ae RB cal 
pe rind ‘ f tee ee sama MeeMa tion tre tien Pies Wn Shan a a ee nin Hog Vinten Hla, Wp etn ty teeth hatte actA ae ie nt th a tm ey Wn teh tion 8h Pam sora Heh oie Cm Neel n Tees Youn belb aaah 

CO eds aR eM lat ph Mata tehatin st Fae wage Hii in ly Gk a roa HH Ni in than BOM at hg Ot elidel aloe eed Ded At Dnt nthe Sal 0-29 a it ee oe ah, 

Fic tach inert Rate hig tt hire Res hes ho at NE is RN tpt dae hott LR eRio Aan ti a Mis atl ae a itt Vinio we: et 
cn tn a ie Pn Sel a i oh Nn ie i Tilt Lahn Nh a Sh hg Aha no ae a a A? ag BV ep Mi Sth al ath ten Bethe Ho 
a and ey Tanti athe Se a Sin gate LS antrn ew that aA Min aM oth oP ell aint 
Behe oie ae tin Ae BtAt 








fe gtleteralhn Ha tall Mattnlintahmsnin le orntine 
i etn Sh At PM a at 

pepneternrirnr = he ee 

thee = 





rere eee ye er 
Clete att aint DAA when thy tlh 


Satpal ndctin te thata tation Cott ot Ane Vy Fal Batall eAoey 
nD yatnn tat eB mRe ed gir Piet hak ped 0oA heme 
Cad ee ZO re tell of eet eM Artiadrer 

<a an as MB es gern Tat By Hh ttA, 








Pan Oe 
MS Lac i Tn ae Sig Pte th te OM 
: Aan he tihge Ratna ie tet Fin tot ANT Hse Hn atheothaFnfP = 
Hie Mateo ha oO. teeth Ret Ee SP’ Reith nt ed et By -- So Rat ph a cA ge SH 2 Bitton 

ety te nea a sheen BD DS mt aa Ric bi hig Sg to Le A the gt NE OA ot 
Pky lates aie Re ERED em EB ae he RM Sed a ote 
eat ean eet tn tgs hen Mt Mot? Bee = he mt ge lad wtb tm tH 
Fg BOM atthe tha ig Nan High ip A hn Rec nt PY shah nren tate Yot ato ot Kuli: ee ee eee ars 
Pe ar heal Aig hina Site 3 sein aE Se Nel - een aig eA, Ani gAbeNt aM ghe RE ait Mab ot 6 ror O OEE Bets Po thn hatin 
ms iat a ate hg nA ae Re RN OA nt Oe tea fan hy ne 
™s “= Og PS el a A ith wt ttt tee T= = nti ete 
Bat et atta 


Lag tn he they Hho hatte Cra hpi ant Ma Rien Aysita sh. Slane aes 
Al Rae th) Ga, tag asp Hint Oo ie nd Ahan sto HOD Se tho tah 

nF a ow Ha HAN, fein en bag Hn Pett Mn ae Win hae Bieter a tA 
Vind tp haart a Mg eM ee Shan tnueten ha Fi shonin. ble 


ee SE 
he Bo eon Aaid thes Bedlng ish eng Ah ett» agi ote am clon tele 





Fite thn Hote 
Aaa taicttind nts. tetteedisRin nM, 

emtig + tnd, Bie Ce hee ay Te he hy 
Ge tin Ae tier terte Ha Rye its’ 
ag ic Ae Ae Sin bin hag Hin the Bhs 


Soa 
os 














oth Pn tis € 


hg et yntte Meee ct Sinden he Bo! 












Fins Un Shin Sigh hm Ht than gm a 









alg Viti ta ean 





Aaa W she Renna eBoy 
sctaatgLiviatia tte es eteatnteg na Ratenele- hate baAe’ oP tight n 


Replies Dg Dentha ten tig Fm Hr atin iy ies te Rain nl) hig hast em ow antes as Khem te the 
timate Te itn Aa Nea tes Sabi hr ita onl ene ttratiae iti fae ne Neat 
E ee ee 


Sin hic ght atin tt en Arteta ag Heh SIA Hn ees 
3 Dee eI nA in Ratton ig lee ttn Hata 












Pe intatat it phntae 
par uerer erent cfr Pe) 
enol edt Big ae gee 9 ob rior Ae Ms 





Bm shate 














EN at lee abdicated 






























a Ante te ta Se 
at Arcana Sap hey Asgte URGE avs Sethe Ven tcting Ma ihetnd Other 
i Ki, ig Hm Did im ag 3 i ig Ee ey AS PDO Mante her eG, Mie hae a the eed Thiet A Me ot ge tae ee et le nk gh onthe 
thee Botm Bin Hg Win Btw nn Hint oth Ao ah hed gO tone © i Ey abl POR Oy an ore 40 nll ht at a Or rt Bin oF shag Oil Ps ot 
pene athe tytn Rene Bobet Wikia on coreg tenis Ca MAAS eet <— gO Bw erp Re 
“ na hihi ta Entinfin Sot akan es Sakae ne é 
Re a Ne ite ris 






gs ag bh a the i in hee 
tg tem Cnet 


B phe ane 





sa Shs Hn hn aetna 









At REF aP eine ePiaR het en 
sta SR oe eS 
eri git ett 











Matte enV ioe ABs 
paper yarser teers re a MET Bet ee ee 
pda SO ng Hanh BO She Hig eM high tre Vaso 





ay chee inh in Ns eh wt 
Madar An ie otto Pg oe 
wicaithg Hitt ec nda the ntge attest 


Fae gh Vem int thn ae oA 








Preemie serstr eer 
ge ayn he hele 





og FE a A nts Oat” 


+ 
aia ar mriesie ere fei Se ee 


fn ee Mott ty Bh 




















tac eg he eg ag hel 
ig te 
hig Migr tig ne Ot a ol FE iin We wish Ratan Pa tatam ne T Ahn tayo ats Wat ataNnt seat ptt nctein Se 
than oe iad Wt to Nhat Me Ra a i Poa Migta! FeO FAD Ah SURE RR sn” Aen Oy mige teeny ape net phage 4 
aitaiihig Hy in in tie ts thi anh 8 er enn Tne Wa anit Opa nll Nitto a beb atiaMiedint at a Maabe tt 
sel Bn tn Dis tt Cpt Ae eet ed ng hi evar teh Mil gal nV wee heel whet gm oH oN ett s Ea Nine 
ep ti eg whet ‘4 








Ih iy ihe tha as Pe 

Fa ig ag i ag oda tng int 
Mpa ag he Hin Ga eet Figg hin Nh te i them tae 
rher tng thw thet Horm 












ha tentty 






nie Be Rete: 
a hton thats om Vig A Ol A ine 
a mtg hee SP a a 

tha Ber apy Hein Mt é 


Hatin Han gy Mh 





Lag Rh th Seah 
tg Ran te he 


antl gs em Mt Rt a Hag Bin atln ¥, 
Dictate SO tenet Tage Penis # antl Gta iy ot 
ag Ba A tp On Be an Phar an Ay a Ft 

Fin Ak He Aig cn pe BO fhe eh ie 


ere) 











Png edie daie® 7 (VeRO Dien y 


(he Ra bation tn 
$e Tr) Min thn? git 


yan ti tn at 
Me Hap ea Mn 


ye gt ln eta ee Mie am 





ates 





aM ptt ome 
aes the eee Oi ath idan Hae a tien ae =F 


sc eg int ment Ogee aig el tee alin» bn p By 0 
a ot 









theitg eetetn rig ® 
Ci hn Mag aes heh Nin the eee ae thet Winton 
cba, aniline 








— opie 9 ili Seal oe 
a Mig hg Aa pelt alg am HF 5 a ag IM min Minn nS Rate Ae 
ha hen ise, hn a Mac On tee a atte He tal ee peter Hae SF in Sig OM Etc Cin that wi 

ee ead ¥ se akg ad ge AR aM at ats Poe 
_ SiMe ators i aed 





hth ppahnr tit 


Baran dna 
set hn ae Restetter 








Lap hae Aw Oe 
Soe 










Gone Mgt tern t Sate 
‘ Ae hatin Se 





eel ata Ae Me 


Mg Agee he sip thn? Tas ig a ag Minn g An hin ei Heath 


Meg hey, Ro Binchntg ave tint attr Nor 
eMart nete® 





Og Be tate ee 
Sen my Me ig gt ewig Tea Att ene ASM 
aA ge He eA gg lly ea Me RW A Mannie om 
asin G ger nrln date Seda te 
ag hhn tne eee a Nin, Mego eg thea they in Rp SOs aces 
Stig a Need halt inn ns Batis Haase he taht 
nag ese Se —tian Gthn tly He Santi Mn tr a Tin uN 
Wei Thee nd Tage Or el Rea te Rata ene RA Ee OES 
Pte 0 ea GN ig att BD eine 
Pig ten eat Saag Hate te tnt in ata thet = ru Fhe 
na sn a thee hg eg Rah nti le a fhe Marien 
Ste ata Rag in Miata ny ane gon a es an Rr 
_ atte ieee Sint Ree hehe Rate ata as tithe Oe 
i to Hin ge 














gh a op a oe 
oe Mg tha te Myra ew 
Baha a Marat Annet ene tyme te: 








Shee RP AO mene, Rated AAO hoe in wll Se 


oP ip heat stem eet Revue atte han, 


ot a, 








otto he Ete tae On 

lente ta totes, 
AoA oe a 
ap in ig instep Rn ai Se a a 
pe BE Re the ing igre Sip Pin 
<tc titg en tae an ta et 


gg a Rul gti Me™ 





Meee Sento Aa aig tenitig hn Ast mite te Othe © 
Hho Bhp tag Mn eee ee en 


eee Peta Oy om 








a nt am atta 


re tag a eo tte dbo, est gee ya A AAO! 


Pawan gt Mate aa Pa Maes sMe 
ee 








ba hae BE ste Hace 


AV a dete ee Pe 








hight eS eg ee eM, 
ce tig i theta eds 











Aap HO Slayer big ig tag hm ttn am Mi 
ee alg ig Tang Hh 








“ 


Ning Fang i gg A em ae Wig Mette he 
a a A hs Ns Ma a 








OA at gt 
2 






a ES a ge Oa 








ohn tain th 





lvoe read ku auSarkendaaneny yen sitwmransyies Stipa bet poset aca Rae UOT et ter Mite 
Won yew ney aioe at RN Ca ANN SHR A i a) Saal SA Presets Fhe 
4 encarta ture BOL SENS YN OTT DoT bn wee 
wyenene ee hey= 8295 Soy Gee an ene en rts en wt tN NEN 
eee ei en Daan wha ravi Hear Nka es ERAN ach AF Ase tia eG a gtu here din tedt: 





ae QrARS” 
een be tae arene ae ahaa 
Ne ee meen herent hee ene ie 




















eis by Uae 
i ce 


hy ae he Raat 
a's oe A OPe 

rT .% ; poate, NM 
7y H 


any 
ha 





-ENCHIRIDION 


OR 


HAND BOOK 


OF THE 








Christian Dod¢trine and Religion, compiled (by the 
grace of God) from the Holy Scriptures for 
the benefit of all lovers of the Truth. 


a 


By DIETRICH PHILIP 





I Thesselonians 5:19 


“Quench not the Spirit; despise not prophesying; prove all 
things; hold fast to the truth. Avoid all appearance of evil.’’ 





Translated from the German and carefully com- 
pared with the Dutch (in which language the book 
was originally written). 


By A. B. KOLB 





ELKHART, INDIANA 
MENNONITE PUBLISHING CO. 
1910 





M 
230,45 
PSBet, 
1q7 
Copyright, 1910, 


by 
A. B. Kolb. 


| 2 ar 


Ss 

2.3 0.43 

5 dex 
/ Gf0 


220 TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE. 


fo 


For a number of years there was a desire on 
the part of the writer to translate into English 
the works of Bishop Dietrich or Dirck (Theodore) 
Philip, contemporary of and co-worker with Menno 
Simons. Lack of time and means prevented the 
performance of this work, but just as the obstacle 
seemed insurmountable, C. M. Myers of Broadway, 
Va., who was moved by the same desire regarding 
the work as the writer, opened up a correspondence, 
and through his liberality and interest the work 
was made possible, and, by the help of God, is now 
for the first time presented to the public in the 
English language, although it had passed through 
numerous editions in the Dutch—in which it was 
originally written and published—and later in Ger- 
man as well as in French, 

The primary aim in this translation has been 
to present as faithfully as possible the exact thought 
of the original, even to the extent of sacrificing 
strict literary style where this was necessary in 
order to render the exact meaning of the original. 
It is hoped, however, that the interested reader will 
find the thoughts so plainly and lucidly stated that 
all may readily comprehend their meaning. 

Bishop Philip did not write for the purpose or 
entertaining the reader with fanciful theories or | 
grandiloquent phrases. He was a teacher, and, al- 
though a scholar that was respected and envied for 
his attainments by his ecclesiastical opponents, yet 
his work needs to be studied as a text book and 
not read merely as a literary work of high merit. 
The translator offers this digressing thought that 


4 Translator’s Preface. 


the reader may from the very outset realize the one 
and only purpose for which the book must be read. 
Nor will the reader proceed far before he will realize 
the marvelous knowledge of the Bible possessed 
by the venerable Philip, and the need of having the 
Bible continually at hand for the sake of referring 
to the many passages quoted or pointed out. 
Trusting that this book may be prayerfully read 
by many thousands who are sincerely seeking for 
the gospel landmarks which our fathers have set, 
and so fulfilling the ardent hopes and prayers of 
him whose financial aid made the publication of 
this work possible, the translator herewith submits 
the book to the public, feeling that while there is 
no earthly fame or fortune in such an effort, there 
is the deeper and more enduring pleasure and satis- 
faction of having in a humble way contributed to 
the perpetuation of the principles, the preservation 
and dissemination of which in past centuries was 
accomplished in the face of dungeon, rack, stake, 


water and the sword. _ 
. AU BICKOESB: 


Elkhart, Indiana, April 29, 1910. 


¢ 


PREFACE 


Inasmuch as many people for good and scriptural 
reasons desire to know what we believe, but many 
because of bitterness, some because of frivolous 
mind, despise and revile our faith, and yet do not 
really know what we believe, but speak of our faith 
as a blind man speaks of colors, we therefore desire 
by the grace of God, according to Peter’s teaching, 
simply and briefly to render an account of and 
-testify to our faith (1 Pet. 3:15), of our blessed 
state of salvation, and whence it comes, of baptism, 
of the communion of our Lord Jesus Christ, and 
how (according' to the gift and measure of the 
Spirit as given to us of God) we regard these things 
(Rom. 12:6). But we desire, by the mercy of God, 
and through the love of Jesus Christ, that every 
one who professes faith in Christ and the gospel, 
read this our confession impartially, and measure 
and judge it by the Holy Scripture as the only 
guide and authority, remembering the word of the 
apostle who says (2 Tim. 2: 24-26) that a servant 
of the Lord must not be contentious, but must be 
gentle as a father toward every one, apt to teach, 
and patient under evil; in meekness instructing 
those who oppose themselves and the truth; that 
perchance God would give them repentance to the 
acknowledging of the truth; and that they may 
extricate themselves from the snare of the devil 
who are taken captive by him at his will. 

If every one who professes that he is a Christian, 


and especially he who is looked upon as a minister 


of God’s word, were thus minded, and had such an 
apostolic spirit, such a Christian nature, and showed 


a 


6 Preface. _ 


his meekness and patience toward his adversaries, 
then Christianity would be of a higher order than 
it is today. | ® 

But now there is clamoring and slandering, 
judging and condemning without measure or end. 
And the whole world directs its rantings, ragings 
and destructive agencies especially against us, ) 
calling us Anabaptists or rebaptizers, fanatics and 
heretics, and can endure and countenance the open 
wickedness and abominable and destructive works 
of the flesh more readily than our faith. 


All this, however, we commend to God and leave 
it to his judgment. No matter, then, how many 
may choose to revile us, the almighty God and Lord, 
who searches the hearts and tries the reins of men 
(Jer. 17:10), and before whom we also have to 
render an account of our faith and life, knows that 
we seek and desire nothing but the glory of God, 
and the salvation of our souls, and all this through 
the grace of Jesus Christ, who is a Savior of all 
who believe (Acts 4:12; 16:31). Nevertheless 
some say that we endeavor to obtain salvation by 
our own works (1 Tim. 1:6), which, however, is 
as far from our faith as heaven is from earth; for 
we believe and confess that we are saved by the 
'grace of our Lord Jesus Christ and obtain remission 
‘of our sins through his blood: (Rom. 11:6). 

But supposing that we were such people (Acts 
4:12)—which by the grace of God we are not— 
and that in our ignorance and human weakness and 
want of understanding made mistakes, should it 
not behoove every Christian to have sympathy 
toward us and pray the Lord in our behalf, and 
remember that Paul had great heaviness and con- 
tinual sorrow. in his heart and could wish that he 
were accursed by Christ for his brethren and 


Preface. 7 


kinsmen in the flesh (Rom. 9:1, 2), who were 
blindly zealous for God and yet did not believe in 
Jesus Christ. Moses likewise prayed for Israel 
(Ex. 32:11); he would even rather that God blot 
him from the book of life than that God should so 
fearfully punish and wholly destroy the children of 
Israel as he purposed to do. : 


But now we believe in Jesus Christ and with 
our whole heart place all our hope in his grace.) 
Neither have we made, nor set up, nor worshiped 
a golden calf, but we honor the one, true, living God 
of heaven and earth, and serve his Son Jesus Christ 
Ponies: 10.5 d>Pet.1- 135 hx. 3224; 1 Thess..1 10% 
Acts 17:24; 1 Cor. 8:5), and know of no idol. 
Should not therefore every Christian manifest such 
patience toward us as did Paul toward the unbeliev- 
ing Jews, and Moses toward idolatrous and apostate 
Israel? 


Above all this Jesus Christ is presented to all 
believers by God the Father as a true and express 
example of charity and patience (Matt. 11:19; 
1 Pet. 2:11), who by word and deed taught and 
exemplified that we should show love and. mercy 
_ toward all men (Matt. 5:44; Luke 6:29), and 
' judge no one unjustly (Matt. 7:1). Hence the 
apostle says: “There is one Lord who is able to 
save and to destroy; who art thou that judgest 
another?” (Jas..4:12; Rom. 14:4); “For he shall 
have judgment without mercy, that hath showed 
no mercy; and mercy rejoiceth against judgment” 
(Jas. 2:18). : : 

We would therefore by the suffering of our 
Lord Jesus beseech and admonish every one that 
he judge no farther than he is commanded to do; 
for it is a terrible thing to fall into the hands of the 
living God cr to assume his judiciary (Heb. 10:31). 


8 3 Preface. 


We say this not to screen ourselves, but for a 
warning to all, for we are, by the grace of our Lord, 
reconciled to suffer, for the sake of the gospel, 
everything that is laid upon us by the Lord, and we 
hope also in his mercy and that he will give us 
power and strength. We care not what the world 
says or thinks of us, but we submit ourselves in 
all humility to the judgment of all true Christians, 
before whom we confess as Paul in his defense 
before the governor confessed and said, “But this 
I confess unto thee that after the Way which they 
call a sect, so worship I the God of my fathers, 
believing all things which are written in the law 
and in the prophets (Acts 24:14). Thus we also 
declare, that, after this Way which many people 
consider and decry as heresy we desire to serve the 
enly and almighty and ever living God and his 
ever blessed Son Jesus Christ, our Lord and Savior; 
that we fully believe Moses and the prophets, Christ 
and his apostles, and hold the entire holy biblical 
scriptures as good and true (Deut. 4:35; Isa. 44:6; 
I Thess. 17-10; “Rom, 9 -3** Deut 18" bs. * hom, 
15:4; 2 Tim. 3:16); as will become evident in the 
following account of our faith and confession and 
of the two sacramental signs of our Lord, if the 
same be read with pure and impartial heart. To 
this end may the almighty God grant his grace unto 
all who desire it. AMEN. 


CONFESSION OF OUR FAITH 


First of all: We believe and confess, that there 
is one only God and Lord, as is fundamentally 
shown and expressly written everywhere in the 
Scripture (Isa. 44:6; 2 Cor. 12:1-4; 1 Tim. 2:5; 
Eph. 4:6; Gen. 1:1; Eccl. 1:6; Isa. 6:1-8; Matt. 
Ider aise sa. yoo. Sls ly aims: 17:5 s whovis 
God alone, a Creator of all creatures, a Ruler of all 
things (Deut. 4:35; 6:4), a great, mighty King, 
a supreme Lord, Jehovah Shaddai, that is, an al- 
mighty and all-sufficient fullness of all that is good, 
a Lord and God of Sabbaoth, that is, of the heavenly 
hosts, a Lord of heaven and earth—one eternal, 
true, holy, living, merciful, righteous, longsuffering, 
benevolent, and only good and wise God (Gen. 
17:1); the First and the Last, who knows all 
things, past, present and future, who alone is a 
Redeemer and Savior, in whom alone we must 
believe, whom alone we must fear and love (Matt. 
10:28; Isa. 41:4; 44:6), whom alone we must 
fear and alone serve, in whom alone we must hope 
and trust, whom alone we must look unto and 
confess as our Lord and God (Isa. 8:8), and in 
him alone hope for reward (Isa. 43:11; Heb. 11:6). 
To him alone be honor and praise forever. AMEN. 
_ This one God and Lord is now and ever will 
be the only God and Lord forever and ever, and is, 
according to his ways, attributes and works, known 
by many names in the Old Testament, but in the 
New Testament (Matt. 28:19) he is called by Jesus 
Christ himself, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, by 
which three names the Divinity (so far as the 
human mind is capable of comprehending) is called 
by the Lord himself, and in which three names 
also the Lord commanded the apostles to baptize 
the believers, from which it is to be clearly under- | 
stood that these aforementioned three names ex- \ 
plicitly make known the one almighty and living 
God in his distinguishable or various attributes. 


10 Confession of our Faith. 


We confess the Father to be the everlasting God 
and heavenly Father, a perfect, self-existent Being, 
all and in all (Eph. 3:15) from whom all that exists 
derives its being (Ex. 3:14; Jer. 2:10), the Foun-. 
tain of all good, from whom all that is good 
originates, emanates and descends (1 Cor. 8:6). ° 
From him his only begotten Son from the beginning 
and from eternity was divinely and inexpressibly 
born and the Holy Spirit proceeds (Mic. 5:2; John 
5: 17-29; Isa. 42:1-8; Gen. 1:1; Psa. 18:381-36; 
Isa. 49:7; Deut. 32:3, 4; Jas. 1:17,18; 1 John 3; 
4:1-14; Psa. 103:1-8). Therefore he also is God 
and Father of aH, the First and the Last, the 
Supreme God, the almighty Creator, Ruler, Gover- 
nor, who sits upon his throne, a reigning God of 
all, who lives from everlasting to everlasting (Eph. 
3:15), and his nature, method, property and attrib- 
utes are those of self-existence, omnipotence, im- 
mortality, eternal life, strength, power, wisdom, 
truth, glory, righteousness, faithfulness, love, kind- 
“ness, benevolence, mercy, patience, gentleness and 
all the virtues (Isa. 44:14). Thus we confess the 
eternal God and Father in his divine existence, in 
his work, nature, attributes and character (Eph. 
4:6). 7 

We confess the Lord Jesus to be the first born, - 
only born and own Son of the almighty Father and 
living’ God: ‘( John’ 1214; ColY 12455 Rom? -3io2. 
Heb. 1:8), and believe that in this same one Jesus 
Christ are two natures—a divine and a human 
nature. In his divine nature he is the Word, of 
whom John writes: “In the beginning was the 
Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word 
was God. The.same was in the beginning with - 
God. All things were made by him; and without 
him there was not anything made that was made.” 
(John 1: 3;.14:1-12; Cok 1:15; Heb: 1233. Rom. 
8:29). In this divine nature he is also the wisdom 
of God, the truth and the light, the first born and 
beginning of God’s creatures, the brightness of the 
eternal light, the image of the invisible God the 
Father and his Person, an immaculate reflection’ of 
divine purity (1 Cor. 1:29), and an express image 


Confession of our Faith. 11 


of his divinity who in the beginning was with the 
Father in divine form, glory and purity. 

But in his human nature it came to pass that 
this aforementioned Word which in the beginning 
was with God, and was God, became flesh, as John 
describes (John 1:14). How this came to pass the 
other evangelists describe thus (Luke 1:31; Matt. 
1:19), namely that the Holy Ghost came upon the 
virgin Mary, and the power of the Highest over- 
shadowed or shone upon her, whereby she con- 
ceived, and that which was conceived in her was 
of the Holy Ghost, and that which was born of 
her is called the Son of the Highest, which is Jesus 
Christ our Lord. And in his human nature he is 
a servant of his Father, to work salvation for us, 
sent from the Father, our Teacher and High Priest, 
our Master and Prophet, our King and Messiah, 
our Redeemer and Savior, our Mediator, Intercessor, 
Advocate and Propitiator, our Peacemaker and 
Mercy-seat before God the Father, the Shepherd 
and Bishop of our souls (Isa. 53:1; Phil. 2:5; Heb. 
dro so0 ye Matt,:.23: Cs: Dential8 £15.44Col; de 22; 
2:14; 1 John 2:1; John 17;° Eph. 2:18;- Exod. 
25:18; Heb. 9:5; John 10:11-14; 1 Pet. 2:25), 
and whatever else the scripture declares of him. 

‘Thus we recognize in Jesus Christ these two 
natures, and because of these two natures he has 
also different names, for in many places in the old 
as well as in the new testament scriptures he is 
called God and Lord (Isa. 42:1; John 8:28; 1 Tim. © 
2:8), and other names as well, which belong or 
may be applied to none but God alone (Rom. 9:5; 
Heb. 1:8; Psa. 45:7; 101: 24). Again, according to 
his human nature, in his service, office, and work, 
he is called a man and a servant, and has many 
other names which testify particularly to his hu- 
manity, to his position as a servant, to his office 
and his work (Phil. 2:5). Nevertheless he is, both 
in his divinity and his humanity, in the Spirit and 
in the flesh, Jesus the Christ, God and man in one 
person. Hence both things are true of him:—1. 
That he is one with his Father (Matt. 28:19), of 
one divine nature in glory, majesty, and work with- 
out difference (John 17:11). Therefore in his name 


12 Confession of our Faith. 


all knees must bow, in heaven and earth, and under 
the earth, and all tongues must glorify and confess 
him, and all people shall praise him and fall down 
before him (Heb. 1:6; Psa. 96:1-18; Eph. 1:20) ; 
yea, all angels worship him and all creatures in 
heaven and on earth ascribe divine honor to him 
even as to the Father (Phil. 2:10,11). 2. It is like- 
wise true of him that he is a man, yea, our brother 
(Heb. i 27173) 525 Deut. 8215) yaikescus aialt 
things except sin and all sinful propensity, for he 
is perfectly innocent, uncorrupted, pure.and holy, 
who knew no sin, neither was there any guile found 
ie his mouth (2 Corse S120 Ao Pet 27229 aetna 
8:28). Moreover he is not of the earth and earthly 
as we are, but is from heaven and heavenly, as it 
is written: “He that is of the earth is earthly, and 
speaketh of the earth; he that cometh from heaven 
is above all. And what he hath seen and heard, 
that he testifieth” (John 3:31, 32). That is, the 
first man is of the earth and earthly, the second man 
_is the Lord from heaven (1. Cor. 15:47). “I am 
the living bread which came down from heaven; if 
any man eat of this bread, he shall live forever; 
and the bread that I will give is my flesh, which I 
will give for the life of the world” (John 6:51). 
Melchisedec, king of Salem, priest of the Most 
High God, is described by the apostle in the epistle 
to the Hebrews as being without father, without 
mother, without descent, having neither beginning 
of days, nor end of life, but remaining a priest per- 
petually. These words should not be made to point 
to the figurative Melchisedec, but must be under- 
stood as referring to Jesus Christ, the Son of the 
Most High God,-our only great High Priest, after 
the order of Melchisedec, for he is a King of right- 
eousness and of peace, who has neither beginning 
of days, nor end of life, for he is Alpha and Omega, 
that is, the first and the last, and has therefore 
neither father nor mother, nor descent on earth, 
like other men, but he came from God, was con- 
ceived of the Holy Ghost in the handmaid Virgin 
Mary, and from her was born a Son of the Most 
High God, a wonderful Child, and above all human | 
‘nature and comprehension. 


Confession of our Faith. 13 


Whoever rightly reads and understands these 
and similar passages of scripture will easily ob- 
serve therefrom the difference between Jesus Christ . 
and us, not alone in his divinity, but also in his 
humanity. | 

The Holy Ghost we confess to be an eternal and 
Holy Spirit, who in spirit is both of the Father and 
of the Son, a Spirit of truth and of all heavenly 
wisdom and of all divine comprehension, and the 
dispenser of faith and of all spiritual gifts (1 Cor. 
12:3; John 14:26; 16:7; 1 Cor.2:10; Rom. 12:3; 
iiCorm 12713)2* a ~Comtorter> ofour | corscience, 
through whom all Christians pray and cry, Abba, 
Father; through whom they are enabled to truly 
call Jesus Christ Lord, through whom they believe 
and upon their faith are baptized into one body, 
through whom they are sealed unto the day of their 
redemption (John 15:26), through whom also Jesus 
Christ reigns in his church, by whom teachers are 
sent out to preach the gospel and bishops and shep- 
herds ordained to feed the church of God (Acts 
20:28), for he is the Paracletus (Intercessor), Com- 
forter and Teacher of whom Christ spoke to his 
_ apostles and said, “And I will pray the Father, and 

he shall give you another Comforter, even the Spirit 
of truth, whom the world cannot receive, because 
it seeth him not, neither knoweth; but we know 
him, for he dwelleth with you, and shall be in you,” 
he will teach you all things, and will declare unto 
you all that which I have told you (John 14:16). 

Thus, then, the Holy Spirit teaches and governs, 
the Christian church, which is a fellowship of saints, 
that is, that of the believers and newborn children 
of God, in which communion there is forgiveness | 
of sins (through the blood of Jesus Christ), and 
at the last day all men who have died, shall be 
awakened from the dead through the power of God: 
the good unto everlasting life, but the evil unto 
eternal damnation (1 Cor. 15: 51: itebhessie4 ytol 
Matt. 24:31; John 5:28; 2 Cor. 5: 10). 

All this, and whatever more is taught by God 
the Father and his only begotten Son Jesus Christ, 
and by his Holy Spirit in the holy, biblical Scrip- 
ture, and previously referred to as being embodied 


14 The Creation, Redemption 


and proven in other articles of our Christian faith 
(to discuss. all of which here would be entirely too 
lengthy), besides all that which has been taught 
and may yet be rightly taught from divine truth 
of this faith, by pious Christians, we do not oppose, 
but accept and acquiesce in; we agree to all of it; 
all of this we believe with all our hearts. Yea, our 
highest glory and joy is the pure and unquestioned 
knowledge of God the Father, and of the Lord Jesus 
Christ, which through the enlightenment of the 
Holy Spirit, by the true faith and (spiritual) com- 
prehension, is graven into our. hearts. We fully 
hope, also, that we have with this our confession, 
_ so far as the articles concern our common Christian 
faith, satisfied every well-intentioned and intelligent 
individual; therefore we will write no more of it. 

But because we are blamed and condemned by 
many as though we desired to justify ourselves and 
sought our salvation through various outward cere- 
monies and works (called sacraments), we desire, 
by the grace of God, to briefly present our Confes- 
sion to which we hold and by which we hope to be 
saved. 


OUR CONFESSION - 
OF THE CREATION, REDEMPTION AND 
SALVATION OF MAN 


We believe and confess, that God, the almighty 
Lord and Creator of all living things, in the begin- 
ning created man in his own image, and after his 
own likeness, unto everlasting life (Gen. 1:27; 2:7; 
Eph. 4:12).. But man did not remain in his first 
_ created estate, but transgressed the Lord’s com- 
- mand, by which he and all his descendants became 
corrupt and fell under condemnation (Rom. 5:12), 
they all became sinners: and a sinful generation. 
Hence we consider ourselves by reason of our first 
or natural birth no different than as the apostle 
says (Eph. 2:3), that we were “by nature the chil- 
dren of wrath, even as others.” We also confess 
from the law of God that in ourselvés we are poor 


and Salvation of Man. © 15 


sinners and that in our flesh dwelleth no good thing 
(Rom. 7:18; 3:20; Rom. 7:7); that-we are all. 
included under the curse of the law, and by our 
sins have richly deserved the punishment of God 
(Galo3243 > Deuts217): 

_. On the other hand we are comforted through the 
mercy of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ and 
believe the gospel of John 3:16, namely, that God 
our heavenly Father in his unfathomable mercy 
has given us his only begotten Son Jesus Christ 
as a Redeemer and Savior, who fulfills for us all 
the righteousness of God, has taken away all our 
sins, appeased the wrath of God, established peace 
_ between God and us, and has conquered Satan, the 
world, hell and death for us, etc. For he is the 
promised Seed who has crushed the serpent’s head, 
the Seed of blessing, in whom all generations of the 
earth are and shall be blessed that believe in his 
name (Mark 1:15; John 3:16; Col. 1:20; Rom. 
Sco, John 1: 1h; .t John 8: a; ..Col.’2;15 5; Rom: 
eas bp 2243- Matt.,12:: 29:3...Gen, 3:15; 12:3; 
22:18). He is the true Messiah, our King and 
High Priest, who by the one holy offering of his 
body and blood has reconciled his people with God. 
He is the Throne of Grace established by God 
for us, whereby we draw nigh to God, and have 
free access unto him by the Holy Spirit. He is the 
horn of our salvation, the hope of our salvation, and 
in short, our eternal life (John 11:25; Heb. 5:1; 
Sethe A of; bi los 1 Pet.) : 19 ;.-F x. 252 17. Heb. 
9; Eph. 2:4; Luke 1:64). For there is no name 
given us under heaven whereby we may be saved 

but by his name alone (John 3:16; Acts 4:12). 

But the means by which we comprehend and 
obtain this grace of God which hath appeared unto 
all men in Jesus Christ—the true righteousness, 
holiness and salvation in and through him—is true 
faith (Heb: 11); that we believe with the whole 
heart and are fully persuaded from God’s word by 
the Holy Spirit, that Jesus Christ with all his 
heavenly riches is ours, our Redeemer and Savior, 
that through him we have peace with God and have 
become children and heirs of God (John 1; 3; 4; 
epr2t; os (9+ slh+; Mark-16: 154, Rom. 737° 4 ¢.5;7Gal» 


16. The Creation, Redemption 


3525.7 Heb: 31+ Col a: 47 (Eph lbs Ronni: 
8:16). For the apostle Paul tells us that from the 
beginning God loved us, by which he predestinated 
us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ 
(Eph. 1:5), and justifies us freely by his grace 
through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus; 
whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation 
through faith in his blood, to declare his righteous- 
ness for the remission of sins that are past, that he 
might be just, and the justifier of all that believe 
in Jesus Christ (Rom. 3: 24-26). 

Such faith, however, is the work of God in man, 
whereby he becomes changed and renewed within, 
partaking of the divine nature, the Christ life, the 
Holy Spirit, and everlasting life, therefore faith 
brings with it true, divine righteousness, and makes 
man spiritual, and places his affections on heavenly 
things, desirous for and prepared unto every good 
work (1 Pet. 1:4; Heb. 3:14; Rom. 5:1; 1 John 
stored > Cols: 2572) tam S15), 

All this the apostle comprehends and declares 
in brief words to the Ephesians saying: “God, who 
is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he 
loved us, even when we were dead in sin, hath 
quickened us together with Christ (by grace we are 
saved;) and hath raised us up together and made 
us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus; 
that in the ages to come he might show the exceed- 
ing riches of his grace in his kindness toward us | 
through Christ Jesus. For by grace are ye saved 
‘through faith; and that not of yourselves: it is 
the gift of God: not of works, lest any man should 
boast. For we are his workmanship, created in 
Christ Jesus unto good works, which God hath 
before ordained that we should walk in them” (Eph. 
2:4-10). 

From these words it is clear that faith is a work 
and a gift of God. But from such faith springs 
love, even as Paul declares: “The end of the com- 
mandment is love out of a pure heart, and of a good 
conscience, and of faith unfeigned” (1 Tim. 1:5; 
Rom. 13: 8). But out of this love follow good 
works, as thé apostle shows i in the following words: 
“In Jesus Christ neither circumcision availeth any- 


CN 


and Salvation of Man. “Re 


thing, nor uncircumcision, but faith which worketh 
by love” (Gal. 5:16). Hence those who claim to 


_ have faith without love and good works, make a 


false claim, their faith is vain, and they are the 
people of whom the Lord declares in the gospel 
(Matt. 7:22, 23): “Many will say to me in that day, 
Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name? 
and in thy name have cast out devils? and in thy 
name done many wonderful works? And then will 
I profess unto them, I never knew you; depart 
from me, ye that work iniquity.” Paul agrees with 


this and says: “Unto them that are defiled and 


unbelieving is nothing pure; but even. their mind 


and conscience is defiled. They profess that they 
‘know God, but in works they deny him, being 


abominable and disobedient, and unto every good 
work reprobate (or void of judgment)” (Tit. 1:15, 
16). The apostle James likewise rebukes all those 
who claim to have faith, but who do not ‘show their 
faith by their works (Jas. 2:14-26). Nevertheless 
faith is not dependent on works or sacraments, but 
upon Jesus Christ alone, trusting in his mercy and 
his merits (Rom. 3:24; 4:1-6). 

In conclusion, then, we confess and believe that) 
we are saved by the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ | 


(Eph. 2:8). But we obtain this salvation by that | 


faith which God worketh in us by his Holy Spirit. 
Moreover by faith we acknowledge the love of 
God our heavenly Father and of our Lord Jesus 
Christ by what he has done for our salvation (1 


John 4:19). From this knowledge of the love of 


God and the kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ 
love is engendered in our hearts, so that God 
becomes precious to us, and we love him because 
of the overwhelming love which he has shown us 
in Jesus Christ (Isa. 53:8). Moreover from the 
love thus kindled in our hearts through the Holy 
Spirit comes the desire to obey in.our weakness the 
commandments of our Lord Jesus Christ (1 John 
4:19), even as he said to his disciples: “If ye love 
me, keep my commandments” (John 14:15). Hence 
“Tf a man love me, he will keep my words.” “He 
that loveth me not, keepeth not my sayings” Gobn 
14: 23, 24). 


2 


18 | Christian Baptism. 


But it is impossible to obey at the same time 
the commandments of God and of men (Matt. 
15:1-9), for God and the world are opposed to 
each other. Christ and Belial do not agree (2 Cor. 
6:15). Hence he who would serve God must for- 
sake the world. He who would follow Christ must 
despise Satan (Luke 16:13). For this reason Paul 
says that he would not be a servant of Christ if he 
yet pleased men (Jas. 4:4; 1 John 2:15), for the 
friendship of this world is enmity with God, and he 
who would be a friend of the world is the enemy 
of God (Gal. 1:10). What the apostle James says, 
Jesus also says’in the gospel, namely: “That which 
is highly esteemed among men is abomination in 
the sight of God” (Luke 16:15). And this is the 
reason why we are not disposed to follow the world 
in obeying the traditions of men that are opposed 
to Christ, or, in other words, false service (sacri- 
_ lege) and idolatry, and all ceremonies and services | 
' of the Romish church (Matt. 15:1-3; 1 Cor. 10:14), 
‘/but we desire in simplicity to follow the plain teach- 
ing and example of Jesus Christ and to conform to 
the pattern given us by the original apostolic church 
(1 Pet. 2:21), as far as the Lord will give us grace 
(Eph. 2:20)./ And since we find, in the first place, 
such abuse, both of baptism and the Lord’s Supper, 
such contempt for, and transgression of the divine 
ordinances, we cannot consent to or practice these © 
things with the Papists, but confess of both ordi- 
nances or sacraments of our Lord Jesus Christ as 
here follows. 


- OF THE BAPTISM OF OUR LORD 
JESUS CHRIST 


We believe and confess that there is a Christian 
baptism which must take place within and without 
—within with the Holy Ghost and with fire (Matt. 
3:11; Mark 1:8; 11:29), but outwardly with 
water (Luke 3:16), in the name of the Father, and 
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost (Matt. 28:19). 
The baptism of the Spirit is administered by Christ 
Jesus himself to penitents and believers, as John 
the Baptist says: f 


Christian Baptism. 19 


“I indeed baptize you with water unto repent- 
ance; but he that cometh after me is mightier than 
I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear; he shall 
baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire” 
(Matt. 3:11). 

Jesus speaks of this when he commanded his 
disciples not to depart from Jerusalem, but to wait 
for the promise of the Father, “which, saith he, ye 
have heard of me” (Acts 1:4; ects 2: LT18s7 Joel 
2:28, 29). 

| “For John truly baptized with Be but ye 
shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many 
days hence” (Acts 1:5). 

Jesus here told them that they should receive 
the Holy Ghost from the Father in heaven and be 
clothed with power from on high (Acts 1:4; 2:1), 
just as it came to pass at Pentecost when Christ 
sent them the promise of the Father and they were 
all abundantly endued with the Holy Ghost (Joel 
2:28). Likewise also Cornelius and all in his house 
who heard and accepted the words of life—the 
gospel of Jesus Christ—by the apostle Peter, were 
baptized with the Holy Spirit from above (Acts 44). 
This was never performed by man, but by the Lord 
Jesus Christ himself. 

But the outward baptism of water, which is a 
sign or type of the spiritual baptism, and an evidence 
of true repentance and a sign of faith in Jesus 
Christ, is administered, by the command of the al- 
mighty Father and his Son Jesus Christ and his 
Holy Spirit (Acts 2:38; 8:11; Matt. 28:19; Mark 
16:15), and in the name of the same eternal God, 
by a messenger and servant of the Lord in the office 
and power of the Spirit, unto those who have 
repented of their sins (Acts 2:41°; Mark 16:15), 
have amended their ways and believe the gospel, 
confess their faith, and thereupon desire to be bap- 
tized, voluntarily presenting themselves to God and 
entering upon a service of righteousness, yea a serv- 
ice unto God and a fellowship with Jesus Christ and 
all the saints (Acts 8:11); 16:15). 

This is plainly to be understood ost. the 
words with which Jesus instituted baptism, for 
according to Matthew, Christ says to his apostles: 


—w 


20 Christian Baptism. 


“Teach all nations, baptizing them in the name 
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy 
Ghost; teaching them to observe all things whatso- 
ever I have commanded you” (Matt. 28:19, 20). 
Mark expresses it thus: “Preach the gospel to every 
creature. He that believeth and is baptized shall 
be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned” 
(Mark 16:15, 16). 

In these words of the Lord is fully com- 
prehended the ordinance of, and law governing, 
Christian baptism, and all that conduces and belongs 
to the completeness of this divine ordinance; for 
Christ is the wisdom of the Father (1 Cor. 1:30; 
John 15:15; 16:30), who has fully and clearly 
instituted and expressly commanded all things, for 
he came down from heaven a Light and Savior of 
all men (John 1:3, 5; 3:2, 15-17; 8:12). 

Hence it is indisputable that the divine ordinance 
of baptism is fully enunciated and comprehended in 
the few words just quoted, and all those have re- 
ceived a proper baptism who have been baptized 
according to this Christian ordinance; that is, those 
who have received and accepted it on their faith. 
For Christ has in explicit language ordained and 
commanded that the teaching of the gospel and 


_ faith shall precede baptism (Mark 16:15). This 


scriptural command must not be broken (Deut. 
28: 1-68), neither may anything be added to or taken - 
from the word of God (Deut. 4:2); yea, not a jot 
or tittle of the gospel may pass away or be changed 
(Gal. 1:8, 9). Hence this divine command and 
ordinance of baptism must likewise remain un- 
changed, for it is a word of God, which abideth for- 
ever (Isa. Ads bowet Linge. 

This is the true, unchangeable ordinance and in- 
stitution of the Lord regarding baptism, as the 
words of Christ, as quoted above from the two 
evangelists, clearly convey and prove (Matt. 28:19; 
Mark 16:15), namely, that the gospel must be 
preached both before and after baptism, that every 
one may, by the grace of God, through the teaching 


“of the gospel, come to the true faith, and be baptized 
‘on his faith, to show thereby his sorrow for sin, 


and his faith (Acts 2:38; 8:11). Thereupon he 


Christian Baptism. 21 


must still at all times hear God’s word and be dili- 

‘gent to obey all the commands of the Lord Jesus 
Christ. For Christ says to his apostles: “Teaching 
them (namely those who believe and are baptized) 
to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded 
you.” 

This divine ordinance and institution of baptism 
was thus observed regularly and with all earnestness 
by the apostles, without adding to or taking from 
the same, as is plainly to be seen and can be proved 
throughout the Acts of the Apostles. For in the 
first place, the apostle Peter answered the Jews, 
when they asked what they should do: 

“Repent (reform you) and be baptized every one 
of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission 
of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy 
Ghost” (Acts 2:38). 

In further proof of this we see that when the 
eunuch, through the direction and instruction of 
| Philip, had come to the true faith, and requested of 
‘him to be baptized, Philip declared to him: “If 

thou believest with all thine heart, thou mayest.” | 
And when the eunuch confessed his faith in Jesus 
Christ the Son of God, Philip baptized him on con- 
fession of his faith (Acts 8:37, 38). 

Further, when Peter preached Jesus Christ in 
the house of Cornelius and spoke the word of life 
(Acts 10: 384-43), “the Holy Ghost fell on all them 
which heard the word.” ‘Then said Peter: 

“Can any man forbid water, that these should 
not be baptized, which have received the Holy 
Ghost as well as we? And he commanded them 
to be baptized in the name of the Lord.” 

Again, Paul and Silas preached the words of 
the Lord to the keeper of the prison and all that 
were in his house. The keeper thereupon was bap- 
tized, and he with all his house rejoiced, believing 
in God (Acts 16: 32-34). 

Again, Paul found certain disciples in Ephesus, 
to whom he said: “Have ye received the Holy 
Ghost since ye believed?” (Acts 19:1,2). They 
said to him: “We have not so much as heard 
whether there be any Holy Ghost.” And he said: 
“Unto what, then, were ye baptized?” They said: 


25 Christian Baptism. 


“Unto John’s baptism.” Then Paul said: “John 
verily baptized with the baptism of repentance, 
saying unto the people that they should believe on 
him which should come after him; that is, on 
Christ Jesus.” When they heard this, they were 
baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. 

Furthermore, Paul himself, when he had been 
struck down by the Lord on the way, and at 
Damascus, upon the command of the Lord, had 
heard from Ananias, and was taught what he must 
do, and had regained his sight, was filled with the 
Holy Ghost (Acts 9:17-22), and had become a 
chosen vessel or instrument, was baptized and 
called upon the name of the Lord. 

From all thts it is evident that the apostles first 
taught the people and preached the gospel, and that 
those who repented and believed the gospel (Mark 
16:15) were, upon confession of their faith, baptized 
by them. Hence it is incontrovertible, both accord- 
ing to the command and instituted ordinance of the 
/ Lord, and the custom of the apostles, that teaching 
the gospel must precede baptism; for from instruc- 
tion in the gospel or the word of God come repent- 
ance and faith, but the true, penitent faith must be 
confessed and proven and sealed, so to speak, by 
Christian baptism. Moreover after baptism must 
follow a consistent, good, pious, Christian life. This 
is the command of the Lord Jesus Christ and the 
custom of the apostles. 

All that has been presented above on the subject 
of baptism is strongly verified and confirmed by 
the sayings and writings of the apostles; for in 
the first place Paul writes to the Romans as follows: 
“Know ye not that so many as were baptized into 
Jesus Christ were baptized into his death? There- 
fore we are buried with him by baptism into death; 
that, like as Christ was raised up from the dead 
by the glory of the Father, even so we also should 
walk in newness of life. For, if we have been 
planted together in the likeness of his death, we 
shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection: 
knowing this, that our old man is crucified with 
him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that 


Christian Baptism. 23 


henceforth we should not serve sin. For he that 
is dead is freed from sin” (Rom. 6: 3-7) 

With these words the apostle makes known 
what Christian baptism signifies to believers, 
namely, dying unto the flesh, or the putting to 
death of the old Adam, the burial of sin (Col. 2:11), 
the putting away of the body of sin, and resurrec- 
tion into newness of life. The reason for this, and 
the finality of the matter rests on the fact that, 
since Christ died and was buried for our sins, and 
was raised again for our justification (Rom. 4:25), 
and we are, in the first place, made members of the 
body of Christ by faith and therefore become par- 
takers of his death, his righteousness, his holiness, 
yea, of all that is his, and, in the second place, are 
in and by baptism confirmed or established in this 
fellowship with him, to which we have been called 
by the grace of God, we must therefore also for his 
sake die unto sin, bury the same and live in right- 
eousness in the Spirit, that we may be true mem- 
bers of his body. 

Paul states this fact clearly to the Colossians 
and says: “And ye are complete in him, that is, 
in Christ Jesus, which is the head of all principality 
and power” (Col. 2:10); “in whom also ye are 
circumcised with the circumcision made without 
hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the 
flesh by. the circumcision of Christ: buried with 
him in baptism, wherein ye also are risen with him 
through the faith of the operation of God, who hath 
raised him from the dead. And you, being dead in 
your sins, and the uncircumcision of your flesh, 
hath he quickened together with him.” 

These words make it abundantly clear to us, 
firstly, that the circumcision of the flesh is not a 
figure or symbol of outward baptism (as the per- 
verted theologians say, and the blind world thinks), 
but of the “circumcision of Christ,’ which was not 
the circumcision of the flesh, but of the heart, not 
performed with knife or stone, but without hands 
by God’s word and the Spirit. 

In the second place, the apostle here declares 
what the baptism of Christ typifies, namely, a put- 
ting off of the body of the sins of the flesh, a burial 


a 


24 Christian Baptism. 


with Christ, and a resurrection by faith to a new, 
spiritual life and being, for in Christ Jesus no out- 
ward sign alone avails anything without the true 


faith (Gal. 5:6; 6:17), without regeneration and 


the true Christian life, for by it man becomes united 
with God, incorporated into the body of Christ and 
a partaker of the Holy Spirit (John 3:4-10). Hence 
outward baptism alone avails nothing if the person 
baptized does not believe (Matt. 3:11; Rom. 6:5), 
is not born anew in God through Christ Jesus, is 
not baptized within with the Holy Ghost and fre, 
has not died unto sin, and does not live unto right- 
eousness (Rom. 6:5). 

Inasmuch as infants know, understand and pos- 
sess nothing of all that baptism signifies, or that 
belongs thereto, hence baptism is not for them, nor 
is it of any benefit to them, because faith, a right 
comprehension, and essence of the sacrament are 
lacking, and the token or evidence does not follow 
that which is indicated thereby and whereupon it 
is received, namely, that we are baptized into Christ 
Jesus and into his death to the intent that we die 
with him, are buried with him and rise to a new 
life. Where this does not take place in and through 
baptism, and follows thereupon in true power, there 
baptism has not been rightly received, although the 
outward token is in evidence. 

In the second place Paul says to the Galatians: 
“Ye are all children of God by faith in Christ Jesus, 
for as many of you as have been baptized into Jesus — 
Christ have put on Christ” (Gal. 3:26, 27). 

Here it may clearly be seen that they must first 
be children of God by faith who are to be properly 
baptized, and that those who are rightly baptized 
have put on Christ. But to put on Christ means to 
become a partaker of Christ and his nature by faith 
(Heb. 3:14), to become united with Christ, a mem- 
ber of his body, yea, to be transformed and changed 
from the carnal Adamic nature into the spiritual, 
heavenly, divine nature of Christ (Rom. 11:17). 
This must take place in all Christians. Through 
Adam man became miserable, poor and naked (Gen. 
Bots “ix 12:.5)0 andstthus: born ptehim, wee 
the contrary, Christ is the Robe of Righteousness. 


Christian Baptism. 25 


yea, the innocent, spotless Lamb of God (John 
1:29; 1 Pet. 1:19), with which every believing, 
baptized Christian is clothed. 

How this comes to pass is portrayed to us in 
Adam and Eve. Before the fall, Adam and Eve 
were in paradise (the garden of Eden), simple, 
virtuous and naked. They needed no garments, for 
they were of divine origin, without guile, and knew 
of no evil. They were made in the image of God 
and in his likeness (Gen.'3:7), and created unto 
eternal life, and the godly nature (integrity) im- 
planted into them by God was their garment with 
which they were beautifully adorned; but as soon 
as they had eaten of the tree of the knowledge of 
good and evil they became conscious of and saw 
their nakedness and were ashamed, and sewed fig- 
leaves together and made themselves aprons (Gen. 
3:7). This, however, could not cover nor hide 
them from God, but they had to stand shamefaced 
before God because of their transgression and 
suffer its punishment therefor. Nevertheless God 
did not leave them comfortless, but in his unfathom- 
able mercy he comforted them in every way; in- 
wardly with the promise of the Christ; outwardly 
with bodily raiment; for God promised them Christ 
Jesus as a Redeemer and Conqueror of the serpent. 
And as an omen he gave them coats of skins and 
clothed them therewith as a testimony that Jesus 
Christ, the Lamb of God (John 1:29), would take 
away and cover the sin of Adam, and the sin of 
the whole world, and that all believers should be 
clothed with him. ao. 

Therefore let no man judge or condemn the sin 
of Adam and Eve, for Christ Jesus by his death 
and blood has taken it away (Rom. 5:11, 12), as 
we shall by God’s help explain more fully later. 
But as sin had its origin in disobedience, and began 
with the knowledge of good and evil in Adam and 
Eve, even so it is also the case with children; for, 
although they all descend from a sinful Adam, 
nevertheless for Christ’s sake original sin (as it is 
_ called) is not imputed against them unto damnation, 
but they are in one respect like Adam and Eve 
were before the fall, namely that they are innocent 


26 Christian Baptism. 


and blameless, understanding neither good nor evil. 
But as soon as they attain to the knowledge of 
good and evil and step out of innocent ignorance 
into known evil, and by their own disobedience and 
transgression of the divine word and command, sin 
against the Lord, then is the proper and appointed 
time that they be first taught (Matt. 28:19), yea, 
be heartily admonished from God’s law to repent 
(Rom. 3:19, 20), that they may amend their ways, 
bewail and confess their sins before God and have 
sorrow because of them (Acts 2:37, 38); after-- 
ward they must be comforted again with the gospel 
(Mark 16:15; Eph. 2:7). But they must believe 
the gospel, and upon confession of their faith they 
must, in the name of Jesus Christ, and by the power 
of the Holy Spirit, be baptized into the fellowship 
of the body of Christ (Mark 16:15, 16; 1 Cor. 
12:13), thus by grace being justified by having 
ascribed to them, and becoming partakers of, his 
righteousness, thus being born again into newness 
cf life, created and renewed in the image of the 
heavenly Father (Gen. 3:15), that is, in Christ, and 
renounce the old, carnal life, and henceforth walk 
in a new spiritual life. This, then, is putting on 
Christ and being clothed in him (Gal. 3:27; Rom. 
13:14). 

How the believers are clothed in or with Christ 
is also shown in the gospel parable of the prodigal 
son, who wasted his inheritance shamefully, and 
returned, miserable and poor, to his father, and in 
all humility begged for mercy. His father received 
him again full of love and joy, and for his sake had 
the fatted calf killed and caused him to be clothed 
with the finest raiment (Luke 15: 12-24). 

Although commonly interpreted to point to the 
| Jews and Gentiles, yet, since all scriptures are 
\written for our learning, our reproof and our com- 
fort (Acts 2:17); Rom. 15:4; 2 Tim. 3:16), there- 
fore this parable may, without distortion, be under- 
stood to teach that whosoever acknowledges his 
deplorable state, confesses his sins in all sincerity 
before God, is truly sorry for the same, humbles 
himself under the mighty hand of God, and reckons 
himself unworthy of any mercy, or of the state of 





Christian Baptism. 27 


sonship (Luke 7:6; 1 Pet. 5:6; Jas. 4:7), and 
yet comes to God in full faith, trusting implicitly 
in his unfathomable grace and mercy, him will God 
the Father receive as his child in Christ Jesus whom 
he has given unto death for our sakes; and clothes 
every Christian therewith, as with the finest -rai- 
ment, makes a covenant of grace with him, and 
rejoices with his heavenly hosts over the salvation 
of a sinner that is lost and has become alive again. 
| Now, since all orthodox and baptized Christians 
jhave put on Christ (Gal. 3:27)—and to put on 
‘ Christ really means to partake of Christ, his life, 
attributes, nature, spirit, and all that is his (Heb. 
3:14), and which cannot be done except by faith, 
and must also as a power and fruit of faith be 
noticeably and feelingly present if baptism is prop- 
erly received—it follows undeniably that baptism 
is for penitents and believers only. 

In the third place, Paul writes to the Ephesians 
that Christ sanctifies and cleanses the church “with 
the washing of water by the word” (Eph. 5:26). 
To Titus he says: “After the kindness and love 
of God our Savior toward man appeared, not by 
works of righteousness which we have done, but 
according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing 
of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost; 
which. he shed on us abundantly through Jesus 
Christ, our Savior; that being justified by his grace 
we should be made heirs according to the hope 
of eternal life” (Tit. 3:4-7). 

These words of Paul are by some construed to 
mean the baptism of the Spirit. Let that be as it is. 
Nevertheless they may also be scripturally compre- 
hended as referring to outward baptism. The rea- 
son is this: Baptism is a washing for the reason 
that it is administered to believers with water in 
the name of the Lord. But the subjoined phrase: 
“by the word” shows that baptism is not simply 
washing, but is linked with the gospel and faith, 
with the promise that “whosoever believeth, and is 
baptized, shall be saved” (Mark 16:16). 

Baptism is also a washing of regeneration, be- 
cause, according to the command and institution 
of the Lord (John 1:28; 3:5), it belongs to or 1s 


Goes, Christian Baptism. 


for regenerated children of God, that is, true be- 
lievers. For what else is the new birth but the 
changing and renewing of man wrought in him by 
God, through faith in Jesus Christ, by the power 
of the Holy Spirit, so that man is created anew in 
God, born of his seed, made in his image, renewed 
in his knowledge (1 Pet. 1:23), partaking of his 
divine nature (2 Pet. 1:4; Col. 3:10; Eph. 4:24), 
and from his Spirit receives the desire and power 
to serve God in a life of the Spirit (John 14:16; 
16:13; 20:22), in holiness and righteousness all 
the days of his life. Where this takes place and is 
operative, there is true regeneration, there is the 
new creature in Christ Jesus (Gal. 6:16; 2. Cor. 
ll; Duke 1275; sfahn3).3). 
“\ The evangelist and apostle John testifies to this 
and says: “As many as received him, to them gave 
he power to become the sons of God, even to them 
that believe on his name; which were born, not of 
blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will 
of man, but of God” (John 1:12, 18). Hence: “If 
ye know that he is righteous, ye know that every 
one that doeth righteousness is born of him” 
(1 John 2:29). And: “Whosoever believeth that 
Jesus is the Christ is born of God” (John 5:1). 
The true believers. in Christ, therefore, are the 
regenerated children of God, but baptism is the 
washing of regeneration (Tit. 1:5), that is, there 
the newborn children of God are bathed and washed, 
but not by the virtue of the elementary or natural 
water, but by the power of the blood and spirit of 
Christ Jesus((1 Pet. 3720); 4 Por rae histis: he-thae 
came by water and blood, even Jesus Christ; not 
by water only, but by water and blood. And it is 
the Spirit that beareth witness, because the Spirit 
is truth. For there are three that bear witness in 
earth, the Spirit, the water and the blood: and 
these three agree in one” (1 John 5:6-8)—the 
Spirit, by which man believes, the water, with which 
he is baptized, and the blood of Jesus Christ, with 
which the soul and conscience of the believing and 
baptized Christians are sprinkled. Of this sprinkling 
of the blood of Jesus Christ (John 19:34; 1 Pet. 
1:2), the apostles in their writings clearly testify, 


Christian Baptism. 29 


and hence Christ on the cross permitted his side 
to be pierced with a spear from which flowed water 
and blood as a testimony to his true humanity, and 
that he has, with his blood, sprinkled, washed, and 
purified his church (which is taken from his side 
and is of his flesh and of his bones, Eph. 5:29, 30) 
from all sin and poured over her the water of the 
Spirit (John 4:2), on account of which baptism is 
a sacramental sign. 

Since, then, the believers are born again of God, * 
and baptism is a washing of this regeneration (Tit. 
3:5), and whereas infants have not attained to this 
new birth so long as they have no understanding 
and faith, therefore baptism is not proper for them, 
for it is for no one—and may be properly admin- 
istered to none—but regenerated children of God, 
that is, to believers who have been renewed within 
—after the image and likeness of God; who deny 
the old Adam, that the new creature, even Christ, 
may, through faith, live and operate in them (Col. 
3:10; Eph. 4:24; 2 Cor. 5:17). Such are proper 
recipients of Christian baptism, for to them it is 
a washing of regeneration and testifies of the new 

creature in Christ Jesus (Gal. 5:6). 
| In the fourth place, the apostle Peter says of 
baptism that “when once the longsuffering of God 
waited in the days of Noah (Gen. 6:3), while the 
ark was preparing, wherein few, that is, eight souls 
were saved by water; the like figure whereunto 
even baptism doth also now save us (not the putting 
away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a 
good conscience toward God), by the resurrection 
of. Jesus Christ”. (1. Pet. 3:20, 21). 

In these words of the apostle we observe that 
Christian baptism is typified and pictured by the 
deluge by which the whole world was punished, 
while Noah and his house were preserved in the ark 
by the same water. Likewise also the children of 
Israel passed through the Red Sea dry shod, thus 
being saved from their enemies, but Pharaoh with 
the Egyptians who pursued them were all engulfed, 
and thus perished in the same water. Thus it is 
with all the works of God. What is life to the 
godly is death to the ungodly, even as Paul testifies 


30 Christian Baptism. 


with these words: “We are unto God a sweet savor 
ef Christ, in them that are saved, and in them that 
perish. To the one we are the savor of death unto 
death; and to the other the savor of life unto life” 
(2 Cor. 15: AGy: 

Now, in order to rightly understand the es 
of the deluge it must be noted that Noah is a figure 
pointing to Christ, the household of Noah to be- 
lieving souls, the ark to the church, and the deluge 
to baptism; for, as Noah was in his time a preacher 
_ of righteousness, so also is Christ Jesus the true 
Preacher of righteousness, and the true School- 
master sent by God (John 8:17; 14:24; 16:5). 
As Noah at God’s command prepared the ark for 
the preservation of his own life and the lives of 
others, so also has Christ Jesus built and prepared 
a spiritual ark, that is, his church, and made and 
set it up through his apostles as workmen, and wise 
master builders (1 Cor. 3:10, 11; 0:9, 10), for the 
eternal preservation and happiness of all his ckuidren 
and household (Eph. 2:17), of whom he himself 
has said: “Behold I and the children which God 
hath given me” (Heb. 2:13; Isa. 8:18). 

Moreover, like as no one outside of the ark of 
Noah was able to preserve his life, but as all that 
were outside of the ark perished from the face of 
the earth by the water (Gen. 14:18), so also no one 
is able to preserve his soul or be saved unless he is 
in the ark of Jesus Christ; for outside of Christ and 
his church there is no salvation nor eternal life 
(Acts 4:12). No man cometh unto the Father but 
by Christ alone (John 14:6). All is concluded in 
him; all grace and truth came by him, and of his 
fullness have we all received, and grace for grace. 

Whoever believes and abides in him has eternal 
life, but whosoever does not believe in him is con- 
demned already (John 3:18); upon him the wrath 
of God abides. And whosoever does not remain in 
him will be cast forth as a withered branch (John 
15:6). Hence as the flood destroyed every living 
creature that was outside of the ark, while the ark 
was preserved by the same water (Gen, 6:17, 18), © 
so also in baptism all carnal desires must perish and 
be. put to death (Rom. 6:2; Col. 2:12, 13), but | 


Christian Baptism. 3 31 


the soul will, by the power of the word, Spirit and 


_blood of Christ, be preserved in his ark unto ever- 


lasting salvation. Moreover, like as few, that is, 
eight souls, were saved in the ark and preserved 
alive (1 Pet. 3:20), so also there are few who, with 
Noah, find favor in the sight of God, in this that 
they truly believe in God, enter the Christian church 
and are so baptized in the name of the Lord that 
they comprehend, possess and preserve the power, 
significance and mysteries of the true faith and of 
the baptism of Christ to the (renunciation of the 
world) dying unto the flesh, and of the resurrection 
unto eternal life, even as the Lord himself testifies, 
that there are few who find the strait and narrow 
way, that few are chosen, that few believe and are 
saved (Matt. 7:13, 14; 20:16). 

On this thought, as to what it means, Peter 
says that baptism, an antitype of the flood, saves 
or preserves us (not the washing off of the filth 
of the flesh, but the answer—or seal—of a good 
conscience toward God), by the resurrection of 
Jesus Christ (1 Pet. 3:21). The apostle here states 
clearly that in baptism the washing or pouring with 
elemental water does not accomplish the matter, 
but that it is the answer of a good conscience to- 
ward God, through the resurrection of Jesus Christ. 
And this is a seal of a good conscience toward God, 
the almighty Lord and merciful heavenly Father, 
that God, in his everlasting love and unfathomable 
mercy, is gracious toward us (Eph. 2:4), loves us, 
makes a covenant with us, that he desires to be a 
Father unto us (2 Cor. 6:16), forgives all our sins, 
saves us from eternal death, has given us eternal 
life, has chosen and accepted us as children and 
heirs of his kingdom, through Jesus Christ (Col. 
1:12; Eph. 1:5), and that we receive this gracious 
covenant with firm faith, again yield ourselves to 
God, to obey him, to remain firm and true to his 
word, to serve him all the days of our life and to 
walk before him with a good conscience (Luke 
269). 

Upon such faith and such confidence in God’s 
erace and mercy, and upon such promises of the 
divine covenant, it is proper to receive Christian 


32 Christian Baptism. 


baptism in the name of the Lord, to live, with good 
conscience, in the covenant of God (1 Pet. 3:21), 
remembering the grace of God, which he has shown 
to us through Jesus Christ, who died for our of- 
fenses and was raised again for our justification 
(Isa. 58:8; Rom. 4:25; 1 Cor. 15:3, 4), thereby 
exemplifying to us the fact that we must die unto 
sin (1 Pet. 2:21) and live unto righteousness, that 
we must be awakened from sleep and raised from 
aeath. (Eph: o:14). 

Inasmuch, then, as to baptism belongs the 
answer or covenant: of.a good conscience toward 
God through Jesus Christ (1 Pet. 3:21), and really 
avails with God, and as there is no good conscience 
without sincere faith (for the grace of God, which 
hath appeared unto us in Christ Jesus, and is ac- 
cepted by true faith, 1 Tim. 1:5, assures the con- 
science, puts joy into the heart and gives one good 
courage), it follows therefore that whosoever is to 
receive Christian baptism must have and keep sin- 
cere faith, a good conscience, and all that the apostle 
Peter here adds to baptism, if the baptism is to be 
right and the words of the apostle are to receive 
due weight (Mark 16:15, 16; Acts 8:12; 1 Pet. 
a7 2d): 

We have now pointed out briefly what baptism 
is, how it was commanded and instituted by Christ 
Jesus, taught and practiced by the apostles and 
must still be practiced and received, and what it 
signifies and points out to, and impresses upon the 
mind of, the believers. On the other hand we shall 
now write a-little of how deplorably this baptism 
is misused and despised by some people. The Lord 
Jesus help us with his grace. Amen. 


In the first place, baptism is shamefully misused 
by those who baptize infants. They abuse this 
baptism (which is a sign and testimony of the true, 
penitent faith) by administering it to ignorant 
children, even though all scripture on baptism 
unanimously shows that those of old who heard 
and received God’s word, yea, who from the law 
learned to know God’s wrath, his stern and right- 
eous judgment of sin, and repented before the Lord, 


Christian Baptism. . 33° 


| and moreover from the gospel learned, by the en- 

| lightenment and power of the Holy Spirit, to know 

| God the Father in his grace and mercy, Christ Jesus 

| the only begotten Son of God in his atoning merits 
(John 1:14; 3:16), and who ‘lay hold of this con- 

| fession with firm faith and confidence and believe 

| with their hearts and confess with their mouths 
| (Rom. 10:9), and present themselves a living sac- 

| rifice; holy, and acceptable unto God—that such 
| were proper subjects for baptism, and should receive 
it, that they might show and prove their faith in 

| God, their sorrow for sin and all that pertains to © 
| baptism. 

This ordinance Christ himself instituted and ~ 
| established, and the apostolic church observed. No 

| man can overthrow or censure it without contra- 
dicting Jesus Christ himself and his apostles (Matt. 

| 28:19, 20; Mark 16:15, 16; Acts 2:38; 16:33; 
| 8:36-88; 19:5). But of infant baptism nothing ~ 
| definite is given in the holy scripture. Though we 
'read the whole New Testament through and 
| through we do not find that Jesus Christ (in whom 

| are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, 

| Col. 2:3, and who declared unto us the perfect will 

| of his heavenly Father, John 15:15), ever spoke a 
single word expressly on infant baptism, or that the 

| apostles ever baptized infants. 

| Therefore we may not accept infant baptism as ~ 
/a command and service of God. The reason is this: 
The holy divine scripture. teaches us everywhere 
that we shall accept, believe, and observe nothing 
but God’s word and command alone, and that we 
‘shall neither add to nor take from God’s word 
(Deut. 4:2), and that God will not be served with 
the doctrines and traditions of men (Matt. 15:9), 
_and that every plant which God the heavenly Father 
_has not planted shall be rooted up (Matt. 15:18), 
and that a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump 
@eiecor.5:6-, Gal. 5: 9). 

| Many ancient and modern teachers have exam- 
ined into and concluded—and therefore also pub- 
licly wrote and declared—that whatever God has 
not commanded, that he has prohibited. Hence all 
worship and service that is not ordained or insti- 























3 


Om. Christian Baptism. 


tuted by an express command of God, is wrong, 
no matter how much gloss or disguise may cover it. 

Hence to undertake to establish a form of wor- 
ship or service according to human reason without 
God’s command is simply setting up idolatry; for 
he will not be superseded by us; he proposes to 
teach and show us how we are to Serve him, his 
word is to be present to enlighten and guide us; 
yea, without his word all is idolatry and mere lies,. 
no matter how glorious and beautiful it may be. 

Therefore let every individual see that he is sure 
that his worship and service is founded on God’s 
word and not on what he himself may consider 
good, or proper, for let him who worships, without 
having the testimony,-know that he is not serving 
the true God, but his own imaginary idol, that 1s, 
his own opinion and false ideas, and hence is serving 
the devil himself; thus wrote Martin Luther in 
his Preface to the Prophets. 

But we have not made this reference to such 
teachers with the idea that it should form the basis 
of our hope or trust. Never! God’s word is unto 
us a sure and all-sufficient and an unwaveringly 
solid foundation of truth. We have merely done 
so on account of our opponents, to show that we are 
not the first who have repudiated the doctrines and 
commandments and ceremonies of men ang looked - 
upon them as idolatry. 

Since the scripture makes no definite expression 
regarding infant baptism, but much more points to 
the contrary, namely the baptism of adults—peni- 
tents and believers (Matt. 28:19, 20; Mark 16: 15, 
16; Acts 2:37-39)—and since God so sternly for- 
bids all human: opinions, strange doctrine (Matt. 
15:9) and traditions and ceremonies of men, all 
false worship and idolatry (1 Cor. 10:7), how, then, 
can we consider infant baptism to be right? And 
who can with any degree of propriety, fairness and 
truth accuse us for adhering simply to the scripture, 
and recognizing the true God and Father, the Lord 
Jesus Christ, the Holy Spirit, one faith, one baptism, 
which is by Christ himself subjoined to the gospel 
and faith (1 Cor. 8:6; Eph. 4:4-6)? 


Christian Baptism. 35 | 


But antichrist will not endure this. The Phari- 
sees and learned divines are forcibly opposing it 
(for they have always despised the counsel of God, 
for which cause even the publicans shall enter the 
kingdom of heaven rather than they), and seek 
various subterfuges to uphold their baptism; but 
as they are all building at the tower of Babel, God 
has confounded their language so that one does not 
understand the other (Gen. 11:7), so that they 
differ widely, are not of one mind on infant baptism, 
and their words do not harmonize; for while some 
acknowledge that the children themselves do not 
believe, nevertheless they would have the children 
baptized upon the faith of the Christian church (as 
they say). The others, like Luther and his ad- 
herents, openly say that the children themselves 
believe and must be baptized on their own faith; 
for he writes in one place: “No one is saved by 
another’s faith or righteousness, but by his own, 
therefore the sacraments may not be received with- 
out faith unto salvation; therefore for those who 
think that infants do not believe, it were altogether 
better that no infants were baptized than to baptize 
without faith, since both the sacrament and God’s 
holy name would be used in vain.” That is, he | 
reprimands or accuses the Waldenses who baptize 
their infants while not believing that they them- 
selves have faith and therefore take and hold the 
name of God in vain. That is, these infants are not 
baptized upon the faith of the church or fathers, 
but upon their own faith, and that sin is forgiven 
through grace, and not by virtue of baptism. In 
other words, that baptism profits no one, and should 
be administered to no one unless he himself believes, 
and without faith no one should be baptized, since 
not the sacrament, but the faith of the sacrament 
justifies. That is, the infant itself must believe, 
or else the fathers must lie, when they say in the 
child’s stead, “I believe.” Hence it were better 
never to baptize a child than to make such mockery 
and hypocrisy of the word of God. Simple-minded 
children then are better qualified to believe than 
are rational adults! 

Then there are others who in all seriousness 


36 Christian Baptism. 


would have the grace of God and faith infused into 
the child through baptism. Read Sebastian Franck 
in his “Chronica.” | 

Since, then, the learned men are and continue 
to be at variance with the common people in the 
matter of infant baptism, they give evidence enough 
therewith that they have and know nothing certain 
about infant baptism, and that there is no founda- 
tidn in scripture for infant baptism, because it is 
practiced on such various grounds, and for such 
various reasons; for all human doctrine is at vari- 
ance with itself, is inconsistent and wavering, exists 
with doubt, is full of contention and bitterness; 
but Christian and apostolic doctrine is harmonious, 
flows from one spirit, and hes a sure and enduring 
foundation, which is Jesus Christ (1 Cor.3:11). 

And although infant baptism has no foundation 
in scripture and our opponents are not in accord 
in the matter, nevertheless they, with one accord, 
endeavor to uphold infant baptism with the scrip- 
ture each one in his own way. Those who say that 
the children should be baptized on the faith of the 
church or the fathers, try to prove their position by 
_the fact that, when several brought a palsied man 
to the Lord, when he saw their faith, the Lord said 
to the man that was sick of the palsy, “Son, thy 
sins be forgiven thee” (Matt. 9:2), and healed him. 
In like manner they show how the centurion and 
the Canaanitish woman by faith and prayer ob- 
tained help and comfort from the Lord Jesus for 
others (Matt 6:5): luke f: 9. Wath ao one eo 
this we answer briefly, that all these intercessors 
or guardians petitioned the Lord Jesus Christ for 
the healing of others and were heard, and that in 
like measure we.also must pray with fervent hearts 
for our neighbor, especially for the salvation of his 
soul, even as Moses prayed to the Lord for Israel, 
for his brother Aaron, and for his sister Miriam. 
Paul writes to the Romans that his heart’s desire 
and prayer to God for Israel is, that they might be 
saved Rom. 10:1). Likewise James teaches us to 
pray for our neighbor, and say: “Is any sick among 
you? Let him call for the elders of the church; 
and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil 


Christian Baptism. 37 


in the name of the Lord; and the prayer of faith 
shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up; 
and if he have committed sins, they shall be for- 
given him” (Jas. 5:14, 15). 

And John says: “If any man see his brother 
sin a sin which is not unto death, he shall ask, and 
he shall give him life for them that sin not unto 
death” (1 John 5:16). Yea, the whole scripture 
teaches everywhere that we shall pray for one 
another, and we have the promise of the Lord that 
whatever we ask of his heavenly Father in his 
name shall be given unto us (John 14:13, 14; Matt. 
7: 7-11). a 

But we have no command or example in all the 
scripture to pray that children shall be baptized 
on the faith of the church or the fathers; but we 
do have in the scripture another example of how 
we are to pray for children, namely, that the be- 
lieving parents brought their children to Christ, 
desiring that their children might be blessed by his 
laying his hands on them (Matt. 19:13-15). Thus 
also we must consecrate our children unto Christ, 
in prayer with firm faith and confidence that in him| 
they have already, as in the promised seed, obtained 
the blessing of eternal life (Gen. 3:15). 

The scripture furthermore shows clearly that 
the just shall live by faith (Hab. 2:4; Heb. 10:38; 
Rom. 1:17), and that every one shall be judged by 
his faith (Gal. 3:11), and that no one by his own 
faith is able to give salvation to another, or pious 
Lot would by his faith have’preserved his wife (Gen. 
19:26). But the Lord, through Ezekiel, says that 
Noah, Daniel and Job could not save the souls of 
sons and daughters, but should deliver only their 
own souls by their righteousness (Ezek. 14:14). 
On this thought Peter says that the righteous shall 
scarcely be saved (1 Pet. 4:18), which fact is also 
to be understood in this that the five wise virgins 
had oil in their lamps for themselves only, but not 
for the others (Matt. 25:1-9). 3 

Hence it is a gross misconception, and entirely 
contrary to the scripture, for people to base infant 
baptism on the faith of the church and the fathers, 
not noting the order and ‘purpose of the Lord Jesus 


38 Christian Baptism. 


Christ, the practice of the apostles, nor thoroughly 
understanding the import of all scripture regarding 
baptism (Matt. 28:19; Mark 16:15; Acts 2:41; 
8:37; 10:47; 16:15; Rom. 6:2-4; Col. 2:12). 
For all these passages unanimously show that every 
person that is to be baptized shall, upon confession 
of his own faith, be baptized in the name of the 
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. 
This ordinance and plan of the Lord Jesus Christ, 
the custom of the apostles, the sense and tenor of 
the divine scripture must remain unmoved and 
unchanged ; for “heaven and earth,” says Christ, 

“shall pass away, but my words shall not pass 
away” (Matt. 5:18; Luke 16:17). 

Further, some say that children themselves have 
faith, because of the statement of the scripture that 
“whosoever believeth not shall be damned” (Mark 
16:16); for, since “without faith it is impossible 
to please God” (Heb-11 26), therefore! they ‘say, 
children must believe or they must be damned, and 
cannot please God. 


ANSWER. 


This is a gross misconception, and thereby the 
scriptures are sadly violated, because, in the first 
place, it is contrary to the scripture to make this 
and other scripture passages apply to children; for 
such scripture passages do not refer to children, 
but to adults and persons with understanding, who 
have “ears to hear” and “hearts to understand.” 
To such Jesus speaks, as he himself says in the 
gospel: “He that hath ears to hear, let him hear” 
Chyistt,1ts15; Luke 8232" Matto <t jes Paere- 
fore it is evident that the eternal, almighty and 
, alone wise God ‘has instituted this ordinance that 
' from the hearing of the word of God, by the power 
of his Spirit, faith shall come and be received, even 
as Paul clearly shows to the Romans, and says that 
“faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word 
of God” (Rom. 10:17). 

Hence faith is, as the apostle describes to us, 
“the substance (or certain confidence) of things 
hoped for, the evidence of things not seen” (Heb. 
11:1). Since then faith is sucha certain confidence 


Christian Baptism. 39 


of the grace of God through Jesus Christ, and is 
always directed toward heavenly things, and seeks 
those things which are above, where Christ sitteth 
at the right hand of God (Col. 3:1), how can infants 
have such faith? Do not both scripture and actual 
facts testify against it? 

Hence we conclude from this that infants do not 
believe, because infants understand neither good 
nor evil, and have no “ears to hear” (Deut. 1:39) ; 
and the scripture therefore does not speak to them, 
and they cannot be taught from it, and if they are 
incapable of being taught, how then can they be 
capable of believing? For does not the apostle say, 
“How shall they believe in him of whom they have 
not heard?” Hence we may justly ask: How can 
infants without understanding, without instruction, 
and without hearing, believe? (Rom. 10:14.) 

But, say some, God is almighty, and could im- 
part faith to infants. To this we reply that God 
is indeed almighty, and could easily impart faith 
to infants, and not faith only, but understanding 
also, with which to grasp faith, and speech with 
which to confess it. But since God gives to infants 
neither understanding nor speech, much less faith 
—which cannot be apprehended without understand- 
ing, nor be confessed without speech—is God there- 
fore not almighty? Never! But. although God is 
omnipotent and does what he will in heaven and 
on earth, he nevertheless in all his works preserves 
an order that pleases him. 

Since then the omnipotent and omniscient God, 
through his eternal wisdom, has decreed and deemed 
proper that infants be simple, without understand- 
ing, speechless and without knowledge of good or 
evil, it stands to reason that humanity should rest 
content therewith (Deut. 1:39); “for who hath 
known the mind of the Lord? or who hath been his 
counsellor?” (Rom. 11:34). Who can break his 
ordinance, or change it? 

But some would cast it into our teeth that 
Jeremiah was sanctified in his mother’s womb (Jer. 
1:5), and that John (the Baptist) in his mother’s 
womb rejoiced in Christ, his Lord and Savior 
(Luke 1:41). 


40 Christian Baptism. 


ANSWER. 

In the case of Jeremiah and John it was a special 
and wonderful work of God, and not the common 
rule, just as Sarah by faith supernaturally conceived 
Isaac (Gen..17: 417 5 Heb.cii:11), and sshis.camento 
pass because he in his godly works and in a figur- 
ative way bore the image of Christ (Rom. 4:19). 
The same is true of Jeremiah and John, namely, 
inasmuch as God desired to perform something 
great and wonderful through these two men, there- 
fore they were, even before birth, filled with the 
Holy Ghost. But not all children are like Jeremiah 
and John. Yea, as little as all children, even of 
believing and God-fearing women, are conceived 
and born out of the: divinely established order and 
in a supernatural way for the reason that it was so 
in the case of Isaac, even so little are all children 
(even of believers) gifted with understanding, or 
show the power of the Spirit and of their faith 
simply because God dealt thus with Jeremiah and 
John, for God does not make miraculous works and 
transactions a common rule, even as he does not, 
by an extraordinary or special command, change 
the general or common law. Of this we have evi- 
dence and examples in the scripture. Hence all 
children cannot be likened, in gift and power of the 
Spirit, to Jeremiah and John. Christ himself testi- 
fies of John that he is more than a prophet, and 
that among them that are born of women there 
hath not risen a greater than John the Baptist 
EUSA ee a se 2 eo BG 

From this it may be clearly seen and understood 
that it does not follow, from the wonderful dealing 
of God with Jeremiah and John, nor can it be veri- 
fied with any degree of truth or propriety, that 
infants believe (John 4:51; Deut. 1:39), for the 
holy scripture expressly testifies to the contrary 
(as has already been sufficiently shown and ex- 
plained) and shows the nature and state of infants 
very differently, for thereby we become aware of 
and find that in infants there is neither faith nor 
the power of faith. Faith, which is a powerful 
work of God-and a gift of the Holy Spirit, may not 
be hidden, or fruitless, or dormant in man (Heb. 


Christian Baptism. 41 


11; Eph. 2:8), as some profess, but it must, in its 
very nature, break forth and become active through 
love, fully trusting in the recompense of God (Gal. 
9:6), and with a certain comprehension of heavenly 
things. Where this is not the case, there is no faith. 

If infants. believe, why then do they know 
nothing of sin, or of the law, or of grace, or of the 
gospel? For they must be taught the first prin- 
ciples of the word of God, and all the articles of 
the Christian faith, as those who know nothing of 
God and of things divine. How then have they 
become so ignorant, and unbelieving, if, when in 
their infancy they had understanding and faith? 
Have they then entirely forgotten all knowledge of 
God, his word and their faith? | 

All that the theologians and worldly-wise and 
their entire retinue say of the faith of infants is 
therefore nothing but the opinions of men; but 
regarding the state of infants (which openly show 
and prove that no knowledge of God and his word, 
no faith or fruit of faith is to be traced or found in 
them), we adhere to the holy scripture which is to 
us surer than all human opinions, which after all 
have no value before God. 

We must-also observe that the grace. of God 
and the power of the Spirit did not lie hidden or 
dormant in John, but became manifest in him while 
yet in his mother’s womb, and that after his birth 
he became strong in spirit, and walked before the 
face of the Lord (Luke 1:17), in the spirit and 
power of Elijah (Luke 1:80); but where can the 
like be traced in common infants? Hence they can 
not be generally likened to John. 

-.Those who would establish infantile faith and 
baptism of infants on Jeremiah and John, contradict 
themselves, and act contrary to their own confession 
when they liken children to Jeremiah and John, 
who were sanctified in the womb (Jer. 1:5; Luke 
1:44), and possessed the Holy Spirit before birth, 
as the scripture declares. From this, then, it must 
follow without contradiction that infants have the 
Holy Spirit, by which they are sanctified. Why, 
_ then, do the champions of infant baptism presume 
to exorcise the evil spirit from infants? The holy 


42 Christian Baptism. 


prophets and people of God did not do this to 
Jeremiah and John, and where does the scripture 
mention such exorcism of the devil at the baptism 
of Jesus? ; 

From all this it is easily understood that they 
err who say that infants themselves believe;. yea, 
it is a great folly to ascribe faith to children who 
are as yet without speech or understanding. A 
still greater folly it is to presume to drive out the 
evil spirit from children who are supposed to be- 
lieve. For, if the children believe, then they must 
without doubt have the Holy Spirit, since no one 
can believe except through the Holy Spirit (1 Cor. 
2:12; 12:3). In this case it is wrong to try to 
drive out the evil spirit. But if they do not believe 
(even as the scripture shows, and experience teaches 
—Deut. 1:35; John 4:51, 52), then it is wrong to 
consider them as believing, and to baptize them on 
such superstition, whereby the true ordinance of 
God is despised, because Christian baptism (accord- 
ing to all evidence of the gospel and apostolic writ- 
ings) cannot be administered or received without 
faith (Matt: 28: 193 Mark 16715; Acts 2: 38%" 8: 37, 
Boe OSG. ao). 

Some one might now think or ask: If infants 
do not believe, why then are they saved and ac- 
ceptable to God? We answer: By grace, through 
Jesus Christ (Rom. 5:2), who through his death 
took away the sin of the whole world, so that adults 
by their penitent faith, and infants in their innocence 
are acceptable to God (John 1:29; 3:16; 1 John 
3:16), so long as they continue therein. Of this 
the Lord himself declares: “Your little ones, which 
ye said should be a prey, and your children, which 
in that day had no knowledge between good and 
evil, they shall go in thither, and unto them will I 
give it, and they shall possess it” (Deut. 1:39). 
You see that what the adult Israelites, because of 
their unbelief and disobedience, could not obtain, 
their children, who had no knowledge of good or 
evil, obtained by the grace of God. Thus also the 
children of the true Israel, that is, of Christian 
believers, obtain and inherit the true promised land 
(Heb. 4:9)—that is, the kingdom of heaven—by 








Christian Baptism. | | 43 


grace through Jesus Christ that the promise of God, 


regarding the seed of Abraham, the children of the 


heavenly Sarah (who are included under the prom- 


ise, Gal. 3:29), may be established by the grace 
and election of God through the merits of Jesus 
Christ, and not by the works or merits of men 
(Eph. 2:7). 

Asan our opponents say: oe not Christ ‘say 
in the gospel, “Suffer the children to come unto me, 
for of such is the kingdom of heaven”? (Matt. 


19:14). By this they try to establish infant bap- 


tism, and say that since the kingdom of heaven is 
theirs, therefore they may also be baptized, etc. 


ANSWER. . 

That the kingdom of heaven belongs to the 
children we believe without a doubt, as we have 
already declared. But that the salvation of children 
lies in their baptism and is dependent upon it we 
do not believe and cannot concede, for Christ ac- 
cepted the children, and through grace and mercy 
promised them the kingdom of heaven, and not on 
account of or by baptism; for he neither baptized 
them nor commanded them to be baptized, but laid 
his hands upon them and blessed them. 

Christ also makes it sufficiently plain to us why 
children are acceptable to God, inasmuch as he sets 
forth the children as an example, and moreover 
admonishes us that we should become like them; 
for he speaks thus to his disciples: “Verily, verily, 
I say unto you, except ye be converted and become 
as little children, ye shall not enter into the king- 
dom of heaven. Whosoever therefore shall humble 
himself as this little child. the same is greatest in 
the kingdom of heaven” (Matt. 3:4; 19:14). 

Since therefore Christ sets the children before 
us aS an example and says that we should become 
like children, and humble ourselves, it follows with- 
out contradiction: First, that children (so long as 
they are in their simplicity) are innocent and 
reckoned by God as being without sin. Second, that 
there is also something good in children (although 


they have become. partakers of the transgression 


and sinful nature of Adam), namely, the simple 


44 Christian Baptism. 


and unassuming and humble nature, in which they 
are pleasing to God (yet purely by grace through 
Jesus Christ) so long as they remain therein; for 
which reason also Christ sets children before us 
as an example that we should in these respects be- 
come like them. 

But many presumptuous people dispute about 
the salvation of children, and by such disputation 

make themselves fools in the sight of God, no mat- 
ter how wise and intelligent they may be considered 
by the world; for they dispute and babble much 
about the salvation of infants, but what concerns 
themselves and is most necessary, namely, to learn 
of the children simplicity and humility as Christ 
admonishes us—of this they think little. 

Since therefore children are saved, are included 
in the grace of God, and are under his hand, and the 
kingdom of heaven is theirs (Matt. 19:14), it is 
therefore a great folly to baptize infants that they 
may thereby be preserved and saved, and to damn 
those infants who die unbaptized. This is openly 
belittling and slandering the grace of God and the 
merits of Jesus Christ; for since through Jesus 
Christ the sin of the whole world is atoned for and 
taken away (John 1:29), and no sin can be imputed 
to infants except that which comes from Adam, how 
then can infants be damned on account of the sin 
of Adam? Yea, who will charge it to the children, 
for whom Jesus Christ shed his precious blood? 
Who would damn the children to whom the Lord 
in his unfathomable grace and mercy. has promised 
the kingdom? (Matt. 19:14; Col. 2:14.) Or, who 
can repudiate the holy scripture which so explicitly 
declares that the sin of Adam and of the whole 
world is taken away, and that the handwriting 
which was against us has been blotted out and 
nailed on the cross (Col. 2:14), so that grace 
abounded more than sin (Rom. 5:20), and life has 
conquered death through Jesus Christ, our Lord and 
Savior? Therefore no one can blame or damn 
infants because of original sin, without repudiating 
the death, blood, and atonement of Jesus Christ. 
For if the infants must be damned through Adam 
or on account of his transgression, then Jesus Christ 


Christian Baptism. 45 


died in vain for them, then the death which fell 
upon us from Adam is not paid by Jesus Christ, 
then grace has not become mightier than sin, then 
life has not overcome death through Jesus Christ. 
But this is nevermore true! Firm and immovable 
stands the scripture, and may never be broken (Tit. 
2:11; 1 Tim. 2:6), which speaks so definitely of 
the great and saving grace of God, which he has so 
richly and abundantly shown unto mankind through 
Jesus Christ (Rom. 5:18). Faithful and true wit- 
nesses of God are the apostles, who testify so clearly 
that all of the curse upon men, and the sin of the 
whole world has been taken away by Jesus Christ 
(Gak 3s Rom. 8: Ly. 

Hence we conclude with the apostles and the 
entire holy scripture, that original sin has been paid 
and taken away by Jesus Christ, and that therefore 
children are not to be judged and damned on ac- 
count of Adam’s transgression (Gen. 6:5; 8:21). 
That the tendency of the child’s nature is toward 
evil, does not damn them (Gen. 6:5; 8:21); yea, 
by the grace of God it is not accounted as sin unto 
them, but so long as they are simple and without 
the knowledge of good and evil, they are pleasing 
and acceptable to God through Jesus Christ. But 
why should many words be necessary? It is true 
and indubitable that children as well as adults— 
the children by their simplicity, the adults by their 
faith—are saved by the grace of our Lord Jesus 
Christ (Acts 15:11). 

It is therefore gross blindness, ignorance and 
nonsense to damn children if they are not baptized _ 
according to papistic ceremonial institutions and 
methods, for Jesus did not die in vain for them. 
However, it is in this matter as the Lord through 
Ezekiel complains of the false prophets, namely, 
that they would slay the souls that should not die, 
and save the souls alive that should not live, and 
this they do for handfuls of barley and for pieces 
of bread for the sake of shameless gain (Ezek. 
13S Y 3 

It should yet be noted that the infant children 
of the Israelites, in the desert (Deut. 1:39), al- 
though they did not believe (for they understood 


46 : Christian Baptism. 


neither good nor bad), and had no outward sign 
(for they were uncircumcised), were nevertheless, 
by the grace of God, acceptable to him in their 
simplicity, ignorance and uncircumcision, and heirs 
of the promised land. Why, then, should not the 
‘ children of Christians be acceptable to God, and 
heirs of his kingdom, even though they do not 
believe and although they are not baptized? Is the 
salvation of children made more dependent upon 
an outward sign in the New Testament than was 
the case in the Old Testament? Or has God’s 
mercy diminished, that he would not be as gracious 
to the children of Christians as he was to the 
children of Israelites? Never! “For the law,” says | 
John, “was given by Moses, but grace and truth 
came by Jesus Christ” (John 1:17). From this 
it follows that grace has now taken precedence 
(Rom. 5:15) and is in full force. 

Therefore, if God in the Old Testament showed 
his grace so abundantly to Israel, and accepted their 
children as heirs of the promised land, when they 
had no faith or any outward sign (Deut. 1: 39), that 
is, at a time when they understood neither good nor 
bad and were uncircumcised, he has far more 
abundantly manifested his grace toward the Chris- 
tians and has chosen and accepted their children 
as heirs of his kingdom through Jesus Christ, not 
considering that they do not believe or are out- 
wardly baptized; but they are baptized, washed 
and purified by the precious blood of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, as has already been sufficiently explained 

(Rom,.3'' 243.9; 1o3.) Heb. 1271243 Pet. abs). 
~ We will now once more return to the above- 
mentioned words of Christ: “Suffer the children | 
to come unto me; for of such is the kingdom of 
heaven,” and leave them in their true, unadulterated 
sense, namely, that the children are saved, and the 
kingdom of heaven is theirs. But of baptism of 
children nothing is said here, for the parents 
brought the children to Jesus, not that they should 
be baptized by the Lord, but blessed by him; and 
Christ did not baptize them either, nor command 
them to be baptized, but blessed them by laying 
his hands upon them (Matt. 19:15). Hence infant 


Christian Baptism. 47 


baptism cannot be proven from this, since the 
children were not baptized, but blessed, by the Lord. 
We let this suffice for us and will not make any 
addition to the acts of Christ, or the example given 
in the scripture, as does the blind world, that we 
may not be under reproof or be found untrue. 

In the third place, our opponents have still an- 
other subterfuge, namely, the words which Christ 
spoke to Nicodemus, saying: “Except a man be 
born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into 
the kingdom of God” (John 3:5). 

From these words they would conclude that 
infants must be baptized, or they cannot enter into 
the kingdom of God. Some also say that since the 
Lord places water before Spirit, therefore children 
may be baptized without faith. 


ANSWER. 


That these words of the Lord concerning the 
new birth, “of water and of the Spirit,’ do not refer 
to infants, but to adults and to intelligent persons 
alone, is not only certain and true, but introvertible. 
The reason lies in the fact that Christ here openly 
speaks of being born again; for he says first to 
Nicodemus: “Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Ex- 
cept a man be born again (or from above), he can- 
not see the kingdom of God” (John 3:3). 

What the new birth is we have already stated, 
and in explanation of Christ’s words to Nicodemus 
we will say again that regeneration cannot take 
place without the word of God, faith, and the Holy 
Spirit, but it takes place in the way described by 
the apostle Peter: “Ye were . . . born again, not 
of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the | 
living word of God” (1 Pet. 1:23). With this the 
apostle James accords and says: “The Father of 
light, with whom is no variableness, neither shadow 
of turning, of his own will begat he us with the 
word of truth, that we should be a kind of first 
fruits of his creatures” (Jas. 1:17, 18). : 

To this regeneration (which is from above or 
of God the heavenly Father, through his eternal 
word by the power of his Holy Spirit, through faith 
in Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1:28), belongs baptism, for 


48 Christian Baptism. 


it is the true ordinance of the Lord that regenerated 
children of God—that is, the believers—shall be 
baptized and receive the gift of the Holy Spirit, as 
Peter says (Acts 2:17, 18). . 

Hence the aforesaid words of the Lord. regarding 
being born of water and of the Spirit must be under- 
stood as giving the new birth the first place, but 
that baptism is the washing of regeneration, and 
that those who are born again and are baptized 
shall receive the gift of the Holy Spirit from God 
through Jesus Christ, to the renewing of the heart, 
the transformation of the mind, and the sealing of. 
our salvation (2 Cor. 1:22; Eph: 4:30). 

- That this view is right and scriptural is proved 
not only by the foregoing words of Jesus, that a 
man must be born from above or again, or he can- 
not see the kingdom of God, but also by the follow- 
ing words; for Christ, in speaking of the new birth 
by water and the Spirit (John 3:5) further says: 
“That which is born of the flesh is flesh; and that 
which is born of the Spirit is spirit. Marvel not 
that I said unto thee, Ye must be born again. The 
wind bloweth where it listeth and thou hearest the 
sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh, 
and whither it goeth. So is every one that is born 
of the-Spirit.” 

With these words Christ gives us clearly to 
know that he speaks especially of the new birth, and 
what a new-born being is, namely, spirit, born of 
the Spirit, just as a natural man is born of the 
flesh. And as the new birth is compared to the 
wind in that, as the wind does not waft or blow 
without its sighing or roaring, which can be heard 
but not seen, so it is in the new birth with the Holy 
Spirit’s power, which can, through the Holy Spirit, 
be recognized in the new-born children of God, but 
cannot be seen with the natural eyes or reason. 
Hence Christ says in the gospel (John 7:37, 38): 
“Tf any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink. 
He that believeth on me, as the scripture hath said, 
out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water.” 
But this he says of the Spirit, whom those should 
receive that believe on his name. And this is to be 
noticed in many, that as soon as they have believed 


Christian Baptism. 49 


and are born anew of God, they have received the 
gift of the Holy Spirit (Acts 2:38), and that he has 
revealed himself in them, of which we have exam- 
ples enough given us in the holy scripture. Now, 
since infants have not attained to this new birth, 
to all that pertains to it, and cannot attain to it 
so long as they are without understanding and 
therefore incapable of exercising faith, the words 
of Jesus above quoted cannot be applied to them, 
just as many other passages of scripture do not 
apply to them; for the scripture speaks to adults 
who have understanding, of which we have already 
said enough (Matt. 13:9; Mark 4:9). 

In the fourth place, our contradictors make the 
challenge that Paul writes thus to the Corinthians: 
“Moreover, brethren, I would not that ye should 
be ignorant, how that all our fathers were under 
the cloud, and all passed through the sea; and were 
all baptized unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea; 
and did all eat the same spiritual meat; and did 
all drink the same spiritual drink; . . . but with 
many of them God was not well pleased; for they 
were overthrown in the wilderness” (1 Cor. 10: 1-5). 
mec malcolm it: O20 17: 6-2 Num.,1O-10* 514 336. 

This passage our opponents understand to mean 
that the exodus of the children of Israel out of 
Egypt through the sea is a figure of outward 
baptism. 

ANSWER. 

The apostle himself says that these things were 
given to the Israelites as an example or figure of 
the true essence of things which is typified thereby. 
Hence it cannot be, taken)-letter for).letter or be 
literally understood—for that is contrary to the 
nature or purpose of the figure and contrary to the 
intent of the scripture—but the letter must be 
changed into the spirit and the shadow into the real 
substance. In other words, the exodus and deliv- 
erance of the children of Israel from Egypt through 
Moses typifies the deliverance of the human race 
through Jesus Christ; for Pharaoh typifies the ruler 
of the world, the prince of darkness (Eph. 2:2), 
Satan, who had power over the human race, whose 
servants we were, being led captive at his will (2 


4 


50 _ Christian Baptism. 


Tim. 2:26). The iron furnace (Deut. 4:20), and 
the house of bondage (Deut. 5:6) signifies the 
prison-house or bondage of sin in which the devil 
held us captive; Egypt typifies the darkness (Ex. 
10:22), in which we sat, for we all had our under- 
standing darkened (Eph. 4:18) and did not know 
God as we should have known him. Moses, who 
at God’s command led Israel out of Egypt (Ex. 
3:18) and went before them as their leader, typifies 
to us Jesus Christ, the author and finisher of our 
faith who opened the way for us and who delivered 
us from the kingdom and power of the devil. The 
Red Sea prefigures the blood of Jesus Christ, 
whereby our souls are baptized, our consciences 
sprinkled, and we are delivered, washed and purified 
from all our sins. Pharaoh and his servants, our 
enemies and persecutors who have ruled over us 
with violence, namely the devil, sin, death and hell, 
are all overcome, drowned and annihilated by the 
blood of Jesus Christ shed on the cross, for God 
has delivered us from all sin, as the apostle says, 
and blotted out the handwriting of ordinances that 
was against us, and’ took it out of the way, nailing 
it to his cross; and having spoiled principalities 
and powers, he made a show of them openly, tri- 
umphing over them in it (Col. 2:14, 15). The 
clouds typify the gift of the Holy Ghost which is 
abundantly shed abroad by God the heavenly Father 
upon the believers through Jesus Christ (Acts 2: 38, 
39; 10:38, 44). Likewise the manna typifies the 
true living bread which came from heaven, that is, 
Jesus Christ, who is food to all believing souls. The 
spiritual drink, that is, the water which flowed from 
the rock that followed Israel when the staff of 
Moses smote the rock, typifies the living water of 
the Holy Spirit which, by the power of the Most 
High, springs from the spiritual Rock, that is, 
Jesus Christ (1 Cor. 10:4), and flows for the 
quenching and quickening of all thirsty souls, for 
they are refreshed in faith unto everlasting life 
(John 4:14; 7:38). 

This is the true signification of this figure, if 
the scripture is to be left entire. For in this way 
the spirit and the letter, the substance and the 


Christian Baptism. 51 


shadow, agree. Or, if one is to be taken literally, 
and as pointing to the outward sign, then the other 
must be understood in the same way. But Egypt, 
Pharaoh, the iron furnace, the house of bondage, 
the manna, the water out of the rock, can be taken 
in no other than the spiritual sense; for how can 
we reconcile them with the truth if the baptism of 
the children of Israel and of Moses in the cloud 
and in the sea are to be literally understood? Be- 
side this, we are not redeemed by outward baptism. 
but by the precious blood of Christ (Rom. 3: 24, 
25), to which sprinkling we have come by faith, and 
are therefore baptized unto Jesus Christ, and into 
his death, of which outward baptism is a sign and 
testimony (Rom. 6:3, 4; 1 Pet. 1:2). 

Now, even though this baptism of the Israelites 
under Moses is literally taken as pointing to out- 
ward baptism, it still cannot be understood or ex- 
plained as referring to any other than adults and 
intellectually responsible beings, that is, to the six 
hundred thousand who went out of Egypt (Ex. 
12:37; Num. 11:21), among which no children, 
but ablebodied men only, were included. The rea- 
son for this is, that the apostle not only says that 
they were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud and 
in the sea (1 Cor. 10:2), but he adds that they 
“did all eat the same spiritual meat; and did all 
drink the same drink.” But with many of them God 
was not well pleased, for they were overthrown in 
the wilderness (Num. 14:29, 32, 35). This can- 
not be considered as applying to the children, but 
to adults alone; for those who sinned were the 
adults who came out of Egypt (Heb. 4:6), and 
they were punished therefor by God, and not al- 
lowed to enter the promised land; but the children 
who came out of Egypt (Deut. 1:39) and those who 
were born in the wilderness, entered in. From this 
it follows that the apostle speaks only of adults. 
Likewise when the scripture says that there went 
out to John, Jerusalem and all Judea, and all the 
regions round about Jordan (Matt. 3:5; Mark 1:5), 
none but adults and people with understanding are 
meant (Luke 3:10-16), as the following words 
show, namely that they “were baptized of him in 


52 Christian Baptism. 


Jordan, confessing their sins” (Matt. 3:6). From 
this it is evident that none were baptized with the 
baptism of John (Luke 3:8; John 1:26) but those 
who believed and confessed their sins, therefore 
children are not included. 

And if it is true that John in his baptism taught 
the people that were baptized of him repentance, 
confession of sins and faith in Jesus Christ (Matt. 
3:5; Mark 1:5), how much more should this be 
taught and demanded of those who receive Chris- 
tian baptism? (Acts 10: 34-48.) 

It is well, also, to note and remember that cer- 
tain disciples who had been baptized with the bap- 
tism of John, but knew nothing of the Holy Spirit, 
were baptized again by Paul, or by his command, 
in the name of Jesus; how much more then should 
those who under Papistry, without any knowledge 
of, or distinction between, good and evil (Acts 
19: 1-5), yea, who without the true knowledge of al- 
mighty God and his only begotten Son Jesus Christ 
(John 3:16), and of the Holy Spirit, are in their 
ignorance baptized in the Papistic way, nevermore 
rest satisfied with that, but should, upon attaining 
a clear knowledge of the Trinity, and upon con- 
fession of their faith, duly receive Christian baptism 
according to the command and ordinance of the 
Lord (Matt. 28:19; 202 Mark 16:,15). 

Further, the fact that the apostle baptized sev- 
eral households—and upon which our opponents 
try to establish infant baptism—must likewise be 
understood the same way as has been above stated; 
that is, although the scripture speaks of households, 
nevertheless believers only are meant, for of the 
household of Stephenas Paul himself says that they 
were the “first fruits of Achaia, and that they have . 
addicted themselves to the ministry of the saints” 
(1 Cor. 16:15). Of the jailer’s household Luke 
writes in the Acts of the Apostles that Paul and 
Silas preached the word of the Lord to the jailer 
and to all that were in his house, and that he 
rejoiced*) that he with all his house believed (Acts 
16: 34). 


*) So rendered in the Froschauer translation of the 
Bible, which was used by Philip.—[Translator. ] 


Christian Baptism. 53 


From this it may be clearly understood what 
kind of households were baptized, that no infant 
children are included, for they are not the kind of 
first fruits of God’s creatures as he has, as the 
apostle says, begotten with the word of truth (Jas. 
1:18), and cannot devote themselves to the ministry 
of the saints; they cannot hear the preached word 
of God, and, in short, they do not believe so long 
as they are infants, and know no difference between 
good and evil (Deut. 1 Bo': 


In the fifth place, our opponents use as an ex- 
pedient to establish infant baptism the words of 
Paul to the Corinthians: “By one Spirit are we all 
baptized into one body; and have been all made 
to drink into one Spirit” (1 Cor. 12:18). 


From this they argue that baptism is an in- 
corporation into the church of Christ, and that out- 
side of this church there is no salvation; therefore 
infants must be baptized or they cannot obtain 
salvation. 


ANSWER. 


That children are not saved by outward baptism, 
. but by the grace of Jesus Christ, we have already 
sufficiently proven with clear and incontrovertible 
evidence from the holy scripture, and will, by God’s 
grace, hereafter explain the same still further; but 
the above quoted statement of the apostle does not 
refer to infants, but to adults and those who have 
understanding. Why? Because the apostle here 
writes expressly of the baptism of the Spirit and 
of incorporation into the church of Christ, which 
takes place through the spirit of faith, for these are 
the words: “By one Spirit are we all baptized into 
one body, and have been all made to drink*) into 
one Spirit.” From these words it is readily seen 
that Paul here speaks specially of that baptism 
which is of the Spirit, and therefore means those 
who understand and believe; for they are qualified 
for such baptism while children are not; for what 
is the baptism of the Spirit other than that we 


*) The word “into” is to be omitted. See Greek Testa- 
ment.—[Translator:] 


—54 Christian Baptism. 


receive from God our heavenly Father, through 
Jesus Christ, the gift of the Holy Spirit (Acts 
2:33), by which we learn to truly know God and 
to truly believe in Jesus Christ, as the apostle testi- 
fies, saying “that no man can say that Jesus is the 
Lord but the Holy Ghost, who divides unto every 
man the gifts of faith and all spiritual gifts sever- 
ally as he will” (1 Cor. 12:3, 11). Faith, therefore, 
is the gift of the Holy Spirit by which all believers 
are gathered into one body, and are then baptized 
as a testimony and proof of the true, real inner life 
and of their spiritual fellowship with Christ and all 
the saints. 

Since, then, infants have not the spirit of faith, 
how are they to be baptized by this same Spirit 
into one body with all believers? Or, if some one 
would (though wrongly and by force) maintain the ~ 
idea of infants having the gift of Spirit and of faith, 
then must infants also by the same Spirit not only 
be baptized with believers into one body, but also 
partake of the Lord’s Supper; for all who have, 
by one Spirit, been baptized into one body and made 
to drink one Spirit, and thus have become one body 
and one bread in Jesus Christ, must also, according 
to the ordinance of the Lord and the teaching of 
the apostles, break bread one with another (1 Cor. 
1p ld 9 }e 

In Goneiicionn this is the idea: If infants must 
be baptized, then they must also observe the com- 
munion of the Lord’s Supper, for the apostles brake 
bread with believing and baptized Christians (Acts 
2:46). And now, since infants are not (and rightly 
so) admitted to the Lord’s Supper, it is openly 
shown that infants are considered as being without 
understanding and faith, exactly as the scripture, 
as well as daily observation amply teaches and 
shows. Or, if infants are credited with understand- 
_ ing and faith (though against the plain words of 
scriptures, Deut. 1:39), then it is wrong to keep 
them from the Lord’s Supper; for to those who 
have true faith in Jesus Christ, and through the 
Spirit have been baptized with all believers into 
one body, the Lord’s Supper may not be denied; 
yea, being one body and one bread with all be- 


Christian Baptism. 5D 


lievers, they must also with them partake of one 
bread. 

Erasmus of Rotterdam writes in his apology to 
the Spanish bishop that a pope with Augustine and 
certain other theologians had decided that infants 
must be made partakers of the sacraments of the 
altar (as they say), even as is now commonly done 
under popery. Against this, the others maintain 
that infants must be baptized, and consider them 
saved when they are baptized, but do not allow them 
to come to the Lord’s Supper. 

Both views are false and wrong, nothing but 
folly and ignorance, all because people will follow 
blind reason and not the expressed words of God; 
for if baptism were for infants, then the Lord’s 
Supper also properly would be for them. But as 
unqualified as they are for the Lord’s Supper, so_ 
unqualified are they for Christian baptism; for 
baptism is as much a sacramental sign as is the 
Lord’s Supper, for the reason that whatever be- 
longs to a sacrament of Christ, namely faith, con- 
fession, the mystery of the sacrament, in a good 
conscience with subsequent strength and the work- 
ing of God unto all godliness, belongs also to bap- 
tism. And as little as it is inimical to the salvation 
of infants not to partake of the sacrament, with all 
Christian believers, so little will it be injurious to 
~ them to remain unbaptized. There is a time for 
all things and we must govern ourselves accord- 
ingly. 

Lastly, our opponents would prove their position 
regarding infant baptism by the covenant which 
God made with Abraham and the rite of circum- 
cision which God gave him as a seal or sign of the 
covenant) (Gen. 15218;..1724-14;:.22:17,,18); and 
liken baptism to circumcision; hence we will also 
briefly present our understanding and conclusion 
on the matter. 

God covenanted with Abraham that he would 
be the God of his seed, and gave him circumcision 
as a sign and seal of the covenant. But circum-- 
cision is a figure showing that in the new-born 
- children of the true Abraham—God, the heavenly 
Father—there must be the circumcision of the heart 


56 Christian Baptism. 


with the living stone Jesus Christ (Col. 2:11; 
Le@orssl024). 

Likewise also before this, God made his cov- 
enant with Noah, giving him the rainbow as a sign 
of the covenant (Gen. 9:13), and through the rain- 
bow Jesus Christ is portrayed to us as a true mark 
of divine grace that is in heaven at the right hand 
of God as a Propitiator and Intercessor for all be- 
lievers before God the eternal Father (1 John 2:3). 

These and other like signs and figures of divine 
grace are given by God in the Old Testament to 
the believers, all of which points to Jesus Christ, 
through whom we all receive grace from God (John 
1:16); for he is the Lamb of God that taketh away 
the sin of the world (John 1:29); he is the only 
Mediator between God and man, he is the Propi- 
tiator and Peacemaker, who by his bitter death and 
precious blood has wrought for us peace, salvation 
end eternal lite( Coll 20371 ‘Pim? * oe paneer 
eet nen). 

Therefore the Abrahamic figure of the true spir- 
itual being is to be understood in a twofold way: 
First, that God, the heavenly Father, is represented 
by Abraham, and that Isaac typifies Christ and all 
Christians; Sarah is a figure of the New. Testa- 
ment; circumcision of the flesh is a figure of the 
_ circumcision of the heart, which is the circumcision 
made by Christ and which is the operation of the ~ 
Spirit, for thus is circumcision everywhere desig- 
nated and explained, as we have already stated. 

This being the case, we must understand in 
God’s dealing with Abraham that God made a 
covenant with Abraham and his seed, that is, with 
all believers, and by grace accepted them as heirs 
of his eternal kingdom, and for our sakes gave 
Jesus Christ, his only begotten Son, unto death 
(John 3:16), a sure sign of divine grace; for in 
this especially is recognized the love and mercy of 
the Father, that he gave his only begotten Son for 
us unto death, that whosoever believeth in him 
shall not perish, but have everlasting life (1 John 
eso. 2 Opn va +46), 

But the pledge and true seal of God and Jesus 
Christ is the Holy Spirit who is poured out by God 


Christian Baptism. 57 


through Jesus Christ into the hearts of believers 
as a witness of the divine covenant, the sealing of 
salvation and the renewing of the spirit and mind 
(John? 14016;;) 1522655 lo: 7; Eph. 4::28> 1218; 
Rom. 8:16; 12:2). 

- This grace, and this covenant of God with all 
believing Christians, is not linked with any outward 
sign, but with Jesus Christ alone. He is the only 
and true sign of grace (Rom. 5:2; Heb. 5:3), and 
faith alone comprehends this through the Holy 
Spirit, who beareth witness with our spirit, that 
we are the children of God (Rom. 8:16). There- 
fore it is a want of understanding in those who do 
not look upon Christ, but upon baptism, as the true 
sign of grace, thus ascribing to baptism what is 
to be ascribed to Christ alone. 

It is true, indeed, that baptism and the Lord’s 
Supper are signs, by which the Lord sets before 
our eyes his grace, his suffering and death, and all 
that he has done for us (Luke 22:17; Mark 14: 22; 
Matt. 26:25; 1 Cor, 11:22), for both baptism and 
the Lord’s Supper are open evidences of God’s love 
and the kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ (Rom. 
3:25; Heb. 5:3). Nevertheless Christ is and ever 
will be the true, only sign of grace (Ex. 25:22), 
and all outward signs point us from them to him, 
that is to Christ, and admonish and remind us of 
him, testify of him, and in the practice or observ- 
ance of those signs nothing is accomplished toward 
our salvation, except what Christ himself worketh 
in us, and we receive and accept by faith (John 
1:11), for it-is Christ who baptizes us within with 
the Holy Ghost and with fire, and receives us into 
fellowship with him and as members of his body, 
who sprinkles our conscience with his blood, 
cleanses and washes away our sins; it is Christ 
who makes us partakers of him in the Supper, who 
feeds us with the true bread of heaven, who gives 
us his flesh to eat and his blood to drink; that is, 
his grace it is, and his work in us (Matt: 3:11), 
that we, through faith, in the Spirit, by the power 
of his word, by his flesh once offered for us on the 
cross, and through his blood, once shed for us. 


58 Christian Baptism. 


have everlasting life (John 19:34; Heb. 9:14; 
John 6:32; Ex. 16:5). 

Thus Christ fulfills in us the signification of the 
sacraments, for, when we practice or receive the 
outward rites of baptism or the Lord’s Supper, we 
look, not upon those outward signs, but pre- 
eminently upon Christ Jesus himself, for of his 
fulness all we receive, and grace for grace, as John 
says (John 1:16). And as it is written that God 
gave the children of Israel a saving sign in the 
wilderness, and that those who looked upon it were 
healed (Num. 21:8, 9), not by the looking on with 
natural eyes, but by the Lord, the Savior of all, so 
also no outward sign will help us, but the Lord 
Jesus Christ by his grace alone. This rule applies 
to all that the scripture says concerning signs, 
although according to the letter it sometimes seems 
to give a different meaning. 

Further, so far as the practice is concerned, 
there is no similarity between baptism and circum- 
cision, for in the first place God expressly com- 
manded in the Old Testament that infants must 
be circumcised, but did not command the giving 
of. any instruction previous to circumcision, nor 
demanded faith, but it was practiced upon children 
who had no understanding, as a figure or sign. But 
of infant baptism Christ Jesus has uttered not one 
specific word. Besides this he commanded and 
demanded instruction and faith prior to baptism 
(Matt. 28:15; Mark 16:15), and no one can give 
scriptural proof that baptism was otherwise prac- 
ticed in the church of Christ. : 

To the statement that as God in the beginning 
gave circumcision to the ancients, and as it was 
afterward practiced with infants, and that therefore 
baptism must be likewise administered to infants, 
we reply briefly that Abraham received circum- 
cision as a seal of the righteousness of his faith, 
and at the same time God commanded him to 
circumcise every man child in all his household. 
Abraham did so and not otherwise (Gen. 17:12, 
23-26). God at that time uttered a specific com- 
mand regarding circumcision, but now Christ has 
instituted baptism for believers, but of infant bap-_ 


Christian Baptism. 59 


tism he has said not a word. If infant baptism were 
_ pleasing to God, and were necessary to the salvation 
of infants (as the perverted world thinks and their 
learned men so beautifully babble), could it be pos- 
sible that Christ Jesus (who came from heaven to 
declare unto us all truth and to make known to us 
all that he had heard of his Father (John 15:15), 
should not in the whole New Testament have 
uttered one definite word and command regarding 
infant baptism, the same as God did in the Old 
Testament regarding the circumcision of infants? 
_ Moreover, Paul shunned not to declare unto us the 
whole counsel of God, but of infant baptism he has 
not written one iota (Acts 20:21). 

Therefore we are certain that Christ does not 
demand baptism of children because he has given 
no command regarding it. He demands no baptism 
of children before they believe, and no faith before 
they have been taught the word of God, and they 
cannot be taught the word of God before they have 
understanding (Matt. 28:19; Mark 16:15; Rom. 
10:14), and they have no understanding so long 
as they are infants, as has already been shown, and 
as the scripture declares. 

The second reason why the practice of circum- 
cision may not be compared to that of baptism is 
that God had appointed a time unto Israel, namely 
the eighth day, when the rite of circumcision was 
to be observed. Christ also appointed a time when 
baptism should be administered, namely, upon con- 
fession of faith (Acts 8:12, 36-38). As at that time 
no infant was to be circumcised before the eighth 
day, so also in the spiritual Israel, in the Christian 
church, no child is to be baptized unless he first 
believe and confess his faith. For baptism is 
divinely appointed to follow faith, as the rite of 
circumcision was appointed for the eighth day 
(Mark 16:15). 

The third reason is that in Israel the male 
infants only were circumcised, but not female in- 
fants, nor was any outward sign given them, and 
yet these latter were just as much God’s children 
in his covenant as were the former. From this it 
is clearly to be understood that circumcision above 


60 Christian Baptism. . 


all things is not a figure of baptism and bears no 
comparison to it, or else boys only would have to 
be baptized; but now baptism is administered to 


boys and girls alike without any distinction of sex.. 


What simularity is there then between the practice 
of circumcision and the practice of Christian bap- 
tism? That male infants alone were circumcised 
in Israel is, according to our understanding, a figure 
pointing to the fact that the spiritual children of 
Abraham, the Israel of God, whose circumcision is 
that of the heart (Rom. 2:29), must possess a 


manly nature, character and power of faith (Gal. — 


6:12-17; Eph. 4:11-15; Col. 2:11). 


The male infants remained uncircumcised seven 


days, yet they were before, as well as after circum- — 


cision, children of God under the covenant, for their 
salvation lay not in circumcision of the flesh, but 
in the grace and mercy of God who in his everlast- 


ing love had elected and chosen them, and had made © 


a covenant with Abraham that he would be the God 


of his seed (Gen. 17:8). It is also clearly under- — 
stood that Ishmael, according to the flesh, was a ~ 


son of Abraham and was also circumcised as well 
as Isaac, nevertheless God did not make his 


covenant with Ishmael, but with Isaac; thus Ish- — 


mael was not an heir in the household of Abraham, 


i 


but Isaac alone who was the child of promise born — 


of Sarah, the freewoman (Rom. 9:7-9; Gal. 4: 22, 


23), and shows us that God, our heavenly Father, — 
has by his grace chosen the children of the spiritual — 
Sarah, that is, of the New Testament; they are the © 
children of promise and are accounted as seed (Gal. | 


3:29), and their salvation rests upon the unfathom- 


able grace and mercy of God, and in the innocent ~ 


death of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ (Eph. 
Keel 3 WGeni 1s 5 Al tes Rem’ ede Ole ia 
Rom. 3:14). ) 


Briefly then, as circumcision was practiced by 


- 
’ 


7 


j 


the Israel of the flesh, so baptism is to be practiced | 


by the spiritual children of Israel, the new-born 
children of God, that is, believers in Christ. For 
as circumcision was commanded by God and was 
appointed for the eighth day, so also baptism has 


| 


RE atliah  e foe, 3) 


Christian Baptism. | 61 


been instituted by Christ and commanded and or- 
dained to follow faith (Mark 16:15; Acts 8:36). 


And as in the Old Testament the salvation of 


children rested upon the grace of God, and not upon 
circumcision in the flesh (Gen, 17:10), even so now, 
in the New Testament, the salvation of children 
rests upon the mercy, love and goodness of our 
heavenly Father, and in the atonement of Jesus 
Christ (Rom. 3:29;°5:1;. 11:6), and .not. upon 
outward baptism. And, lastly, like as the male 
children in Israel who always remained uncircum- 
cised seven days, and in the wilderness remained 
altogether uncircumcised as were the female chil- 
dren, and inasmuch as the lack of this external sign 


was not inimical to their salvation, and they were 


not excluded on this account from the covenant and 
congregation of God, so also it is not inimical to 
the salvation of children of Christians, nor are they 
excluded from the covenant and fellowship of God, 
even though they have not received the outward 
rite of baptism, for they are washed and baptized 
with the blood of Jesus Christ, which saves their 
souls (Heb,.12:14; Rev:.1:6;.1 Pet. 1:19-; 2:24). 
But they are to receive the sign of baptism at the 
appointed time, upon confession of their faith, ac- 
cording to the ordinance and institution of Christ, 
and the custom of the apostles. 

Inasmuch as we have written of the misuse of 
baptism, we will also make a few observations on 
how by some people baptism as an external rite is 
rejected altogether. This, however, neither sur- 
prises us nor causes us to falter; for we confess 
and know full well, by the grace of God, that what 
is Christ-like and according to the gospel is con- 
sidered foolishness and is ridiculed by the world; 
also, that whatsoever is highly esteemed among 
men is an abomination and foolishness with God, 
as Christ himself says in the gospel (Luke 16:15). 
Hence God and the world are opposed to each other 
in this that the wisdom of God is foolishness with 
the world, and that “the natural man receiveth not 


‘the things of the Spirit of God; for they are foolish- 


ness unto him; neither can he know them, because 
they are spiritually discerned.” Likewise the wis- 


62 Christian Baptism. | 


dom of this world is foolishness with God, as the 
apostle shows (1 Cor. 1:18; 2:14). | 
Therefore it is no wonder that baptism is _ 
despised by the world. But what of that? It is 
God’s ordinance, thoroughly grounded in the gos- 
pel, and he that despises it despises not a human 
but a divine ordinance; yea, he derides the name 
of God in whom Christians are baptized; he 
despises Christ Jesus and his death, in which be- 
lievers are baptized (Matt. 28:19; Rom. 6:3; Mark 
16:15), and he disobeys the gospel, because the 
gospel teaches and shows that baptism must be 
received upon confession of faith. 
We will let the world go with all their mockers 
and despisers of divine truth, for they are blind and 
leaders of the blind. But we desire, by the grace 
of God, to follow Christ Jesus, for he is set before 
us by God the Father as an example, that we may 
become like him (Rom. 8:29); yea, he has come 
into the world as the true light, and whosoever 
follows him shall not walk in darkness (John 8:12), 
but will have the light of life. ; 
Since therefore Jesus Christ, our Example Guide | 
and Prince of our faith, himself personally received 
(Matt. 3:13) and instituted baptism and subjoined 
it to the teaching of the gospel and faith (Matt. 
28:19; Mark 16:15; 1 Cor. 1:13-17), we have in 
this only Jesus Christ, the eternal wisdom and truth 
of God, example and evidence sufficient to show 
how necessary baptism is, and that it may by no 
means be derided or considered insignificant (John 
14:21, 24). od 
Moreover the apostle of the Lord at his com- 
mand and in his name taught, extolled and practiced 
baptism as the passages and evidences above re- 
ferred to from the Acts and the Epistles of the 
Apostles clearly show. Therefore both the insti- 
tution of our Lord and the teaching and practice 
of the apostles suffice us to stand firmly thereon 
as upon a sure and immovable foundation of truth, 
-against all who abuse and deride Christian baptism, 
whom we have no desire to follow, but much more 
Christ Jesus and his apostles, and hold baptism as 
an admirable institution of the Lord, and belonging 


Christian Baptism. 63 


to the gospel, linked with faith, and which must, 
according to the example and command of Christ, 
according to the teaching and practice of his 
apostles, be received by every one who believes the 
“gospel, upon confession of his faith. 

We are neither weakened nor disconcerted by 
the fact that some (who, having the nature of 
spiders, turn everything good into evil, yea, change 
_ honey into poison) revile us and ask us what benefit 
baptism is to us and why we suffer persecution 
when we ourselves confess that salvation is not 
dependent upon outward signs. They also say that 
faith and love can break and change all outward 
ordinances and institutions of the Lord, such as 
baptism, the Lord’s Supper, etc.; upbraiding us 
by saying that as Moses in the wilderness discon- 
tinued circumcision, so may also Christians dis- 
continue the practice of baptism and do as they 
please about it. 

Although we pay no attention to those who are 
_ so ingenious in their sallies and questions, and have 
already answered them, nevertheless we will again 
answer this much: First, as in the Old Testament 
salvation was pre-eminently based on the grace of 
God, and not on circumcision (which, as an ordi- 
nance of God, was beneficial to those who obeyed 
the law, see Rom. 3:1, 2), so also now under the 
gospel, salvation is pre-eminently based upon. the 
mercy and grace of God, our heavenly Father, and 
in the atonement of Jesus Christ (Rom. 3:24; 5:1, 
2; 11:4-6; 8:1-3). But on this account, baptism, 
as an ordinance of the Lord Jesus Christ, is none 
the less beneficial and of service to all who believe 
and obey the gospel; for the words of the Lord 
are spirit, and they are life (John 6:63), and man 
liveth by every word that proceedeth out of the 
mouth of God (Deut. 8:3; Matt. 4:4), and the 
signs which Jesus Christ has appended to the word 
are not to be despised. For, inasmuch as they are 
given and commanded, therefore they may not be 
despised without despising God, nor neglected or 
omitted without danger. Therefore faithful Abra- 
ham, whom all believers must imitate and walk in 
the footsteps of his faith, by his faith did not reject 


64 Christian Baptism. 


outward circumcision (Gen. 17:10), although it 


was but a sign and insignificant, but he received — 


and accepted it as a seal of his faith (Rom. 4:11). 
Likewise also should Christians by their faith not 


reject baptism, but faithfully and earnestly receive 


ot ee ae 


— 


and accept it, for they have not Abraham only, but — 


Jesus Christ for an example. 
Therefore those make vain boast of faith and 


love, who in their boasted obedience to the word ~ 
do not follow faithful Abraham, yea, and Jesus — 
Christ, and all that they do aside from and contrary — 
to the practice of the apostles, yea, aside from the ~ 
teaching and institution, example and command of — 
Christ in connection with baptism, are wrong, false © 
and idolatrous; but they who follow Christ, receive © 
baptism according to his word, will not be deceived, — 


for Christ is the truth and the life (John 14:6). 


It is also well to note that the Lord met Moses | 
on his return journey to Egypt while he was in an © 
inn and sought to kill him. Then Zipporah took a ~ 


sharp stone and cut off the foreskin of her son (Ex.. 


4:24, 25), and the Lord left him. If this came — 


upon Moses, what will come upon those despisers 
and revilers of Jesus Christ and his ordinance? 


The fact that Moses discontinued circumcision — 


in the wilderness does not prove that Christian 
baptism may be likewise omitted. For we are not 
to be pre-eminently guided by figures and types, or 
by the imperfections of the law (Heb. 7:11), but 
by the perfect, true essentials and spirit of the 
gospel (Rom. 6:14). We are not under the law, 
but under the gospel (Rom. 7:6). We are not to 


serve in the old ministration of the letter, but in — 


the ministration of the Spirit (2 Cor. 3:6). Lastly, 


we are not disciples of Moses, but of Christ, there- — 


fore also have we received a command of the 
heavenly Father that we shall hear Jesus Christ, 


his beloved Son (Matt. 3:17; 17:5), be obedient. ~ 


to his words, and follow his example. Nevertheless 
we do not mean herewith that we despise Moses 
with his figures and shadows, but behold them with 
spiritual eyes, yea, that we would discern and com- 
prehend them according to the realities of the New 
Testament. | 





Christian Baptism. 65 


Moreover baptism is not now omitted by force 
of necessity, as was the case with circumcision in 
the wilderness, but it has been completely changed 
into an idolatrous abuse; for beside baptism as 
instituted by Christ for penitent believers, and as 
practiced everywhere according to divine injunction 
by the apostles, but now perverted into infant bap- 
tism by antichrist, there is so much of shameful 
practice and idolatrous ceremony in connection with 
infant baptism that it cannot be looked upon as a 
Christian rite or deed by intelligent, God-fearing, 
believing people, but every one who fears God and 
is taught of him may well complain with the 
prophet: “How is the gold (the word of God) 
become dim! How is the fine gold changed!” (Neh. 
4:1). “Thy silver is become dross, thy wine mixed 
with water’ (Isa. 1:22).. The heavenly Father’s 
plant is sadly trampled (Matt. 15:13), and a plant 
that has been planted by human hands is set in its 
place. The blind Pharisees have set the institution 
of the Lord at naught for the sake of their own, 
and this pleases the world well, hence the blind lead 
the blind until both fall into’ the ditch. The al- 
mighty God preserve us through Jesus Christ from 
these blind leaders. Amen. 


CONCLUSION. 

This is our confession of baptism as instituted 
by our Lord Jesus Christ, according to the view 
_ of the scripture, which God in his grace has given 
us. But before God, the righteous Judge, it is 
unjust for certain people, out of malice, some be- 
cause of ignorance, to persecute, villify and abuse 
us on account of baptism, yea, to liken us to the 
Donatists, Munsterites, and other turbulent, erring 
spirits, saying we are of the same kind. A great 
injustice is done tous. But that some hypocrites (the 
same as Judas Iscariot, Simon Magnus and others 
did) receive baptism under false colors and abuse 
the same, causes us heartfelt sorrow, yea, we deplore 
with distress of soul that many people at this time 
are covering their guile in regard to the holy, 
precious name of God with the cloak of false piety 
and with distorted writings, but we are not thereby 


5 


66 | _ Christian Baptism. © 


weakened in our faith, for we have not built upon 
men, but upon the foundation laid by the apostles 
and prophets, of which Jesus Christ is the corner- 
stone, and therefore we say with the apostle: 
“Shall the unbelief of men make the faith of God 
without effect? God forbid: yea, let God be true, 
but every man a liar; as it is written, that thou 
mightest be justified in thy sayings, and mightest © 
overcome when thou art judged” (Rom. 3:8, 4). 

Therefore we maintain that our Lord Jesus 
Christ’s ordinance of baptism is ever pleasing to 
him, and remains as a word and command of God, 
regardless of the fact that some so fearfully misuse 
baptism, or that some despise it, whereby they heap 
upon themselves the wrath of God and will not 
escape his judgment. 

But we thank God, the almighty Father, through 
Jesus Christ, who by his grace has given us a better 
understanding, for we acknowledge one God and 
eternal Father who created us (Eph. 4:5), one 
Lord and Savior, the only begotten Son of the 
living God, who redeemed us, that is, Jesus Christ; 
we acknowledge one Holy Spirit, who is the true 
Comforter and Teacher (John 14:16; 15:16; 16:7; 
Eph. 4:4); we acknowledge one Christian Church, 
one faith, one new birth, one baptism, which is to 
be received upon confession of faith, and the new 
birth, as a seal and sign of faith and as a washing 
of regeneration (Rom. 4:3). 

In short, we hope, by the grace of God, that we 
confess all that the sacred scripture teaches us to 
believe and confess, excepting always human weak- 
ness and imperfection. And we desire in quietness 
to live according to our faith, being obedient to the 
higher powers in all things that are not contrary 
to God (Rom. 13:1), to seek peace and to live 
peaceably with all men, as much as lieth in us 
(Rom. 12:18). Finally, it is our mind and purpose 
to follow Jesus Christ by his grace; God knows— 
for he searches the heart and tries the reins (Jer. 
17:10)—that we do not lie. We will also, with 
God’s help, briefly present our confession of the 
Lord’s Supper. 


The Lord’s Supper. 67 


OUR CONFESSION CONCERNING THE 
LORD’S SUPPER 


We will not undertake a lofty, subtle and 
sophistical dissertation upon the Lord’s Supper, for 
such treatises injure far more than they promote, 
the commemoration of the death of Jesus Christ, 
love and unity, in behalf of which the Lord’s Sup- 
per was divinely instituted. We shall rather present 
our views and belief on this subject in simple and 
clear language, as God gives us grace. 

In the first place, we confess that we must 
believe all that is written of the Lord’s Supper, 
especially what our Lord Jesus Christ in his great 
love commanded the believérs to do in remembrance 
of his death as an admonition to promotion and 
strengthening of Christian love and unity, in such 
form, that he took the bread in his hand, and, after 
blessing it, broke it and gave it to his disciples to 
eat (Mark 14:22; Luke 22:19; Matt. 26:26), and 
said: “This is my body which is given for you.” 
After this he gave his disciples the cup that they 
should all drink out of it, and said: “This cup is 
the new testament in my blood, which is shed for 
you; this do in remembrance of me.” 

This institution and ordinance of our Lord Jesus 
Christ is to be observed by all Christians. At a 
meeting of Christians bread and wine are to be set 
forth, and the death of the Lord is to be proclaimed 
by a minister of the word and taken thoroughly to 
heart by every Christian, and because of which 
thanks are to be given to God, after which the bread 
is to be broken and received and eaten by every 
Christian, and the wine is to be drunk in true faith 
and in remembrance of the fact that Christ Jesus 
gave his body for us and shed his blood for us. This 
must be firmly believed, without doubting, for we 
maintain that above all other things one must be- 
lieve, and that faith must conform to every word 
of God. 

Where this is not the case, human reason must 
prevail and faith perish (John 7:16). 


68 The Lord’s Supper. 


Thus the holy scripture teaches us that at the 
communion supper of our Lord Jesus Christ four 
things or points must be believed and taken to 
heart, viz.: 

Firstly, that Jesus Christ broke the bread, gave 
it to his disciples (1 Cor. 11:23, 24), and said: 
“Take, eat; this is my body which is given for 
you” (Matt. 26:26; Luke 22:19). 

Secondly, that Paul said to the Corinthians: 
‘The cup of blessing, which we bless, is it not the 
communion of the blood of Christ? The bread 
which we break, is it not the communion of the 
body of Christ?’ (1 Cor. 10:16.) 

Thirdly, that the bread and the wine in the sup- 
per is a token of remembrance of the suffering and 
death of Christ, for he -himself says (Luke 22:19; 
1 Cor. 11:24, 26): “As oft as ye do this, ye do it in 
remembrance of me.’ Moreover Paul says: “As 
often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye 
do*) shew the Lord’s death till he come” (1 Cor. 
dds 26): | 

Fourthly, that the Lord says thus of the cup of 
communion: “This cup is the new testament in my 
blood” (1 -Cor. 11:25). Matthew and Mark say: 
“This is my blood of the new testament, which is 
shed for many for the remission of sins” (Matt. 
26:28; Mark 14:24; Luke 22:20). 

All this concerning the Lord’s Supper we believe 
without any doubt, and confess it. And when we 
examine and everywhere look closely into the above 
words of scripturte in order to thoroughly under- 
stand them, and to obtain no other than a true sense 
and comprehension therefrom—that accords in all 
cases with the scriptures, and is contrary to no 
scripture or the faith—we find nothing else than 
that our Lord Jesus Christ, out of love that was 
great to overflowing, gave his body for us, and 
shed his blood for us, and that he instituted and 
left for us asa memorial the supper of bread and 
wine, that we remember with thanksgiving that he 


*) In the Froschauer translation used by Philip, the 
Greek version is more nearly followed and says: “As often 
as ye eat... . ye shall declare (or announce) the Lord’s 
death,” etc.—[Translator. ] 


ee 


The Lord’s Supper. 69 


gave for us the bread of his body, and for us shed 
the wine of his blood.{ Hence the words of Christ 
at the supper: “This is my body,” “this is my blood,” 
must be taken in their spiritual significance) for how 
else could it be that in the Lord’s Supper the bread 
and wine were at the same time bread and wine, 
the body and blood of Christ, the communion of his 
body and blood, and a memorial of his suffering and 
death, a new testament or the blood of the new 
testament, and all scripture be reconciled? We 
will now look carefully into all these scripture pas- 
sages and by God’s grace thoroughly explain them. 

In the first place the Lord Jesus Christ instituted 
his supper with bread and wine, and this accords 
perfectly with the statement, that he is himself the 
living bread, come down from heaven, by which 
souls by faith are spiritually nourished | ato eternal 
life (John 6:33). He is also the true vine (John 
15:7), planted by the true Husbandman, God his 
Father, and his word is the pure wine (Isa. 55:1), 
by which the believing soul is refreshed and made 
to rejoice in the Holy Ghost. Hence as often as 
Christians eat of the bread of the supper they are 
admonished and reminded of this. . 

After giving thanks, Christ broke the bread, gave 
it to his disciples, and said: “Take, eat, this is my 
body which is given for you.” On account of these 
words there is much dispute both among the learned 
and unlearned. Many firmly maintain that Christ 
is bodily in the bread. With this we do not agree, 
and do not understand the words above referred to 
literally, but spiritually. The reasons that lead us 
to this conclusion are many, and we will here pre- 
sent and point out a few: 

1. In the scripture the word eating is often 
synonymous with believing, but the food and drink 
that are eaten and drunk is the bread of heaven, 
the word of God, the water of the Holy Spirit, yea, 
the flesh and blood of Christ. This is evident in 
the sixth chapter of John, where the Savior says: 
“T am the bread of life: he that cometh unto me 
shall never hunger. and he that believeth on me 
shall never thirst” (John 6:35). And again he savs: 
“T am the living bread which came down from 


70 The Lord’s Supper. 


heaven: if any man eat of this bread, he shall live 
forever: and the bread that I will give is my flesh, 
which I will give for the life of the world” (John 
6:51). And again: “My flesh is meat indeed, and 
my blood is drink indeed. He that eateth my flesh, 
and drinketh my blood, dwelleth in me, and I in 
him” (John 6:55, 56). 

From all this it incontrovertibly follows that he 
has eaten the flesh and drunk the blood of Christ 
who believes in Jesus Christ, the Son of the living 
God, who died for us. : 

Thus in the scripture, eating often signifies be- 
lieving, for Jesus is the true bread of heaven (John 
6:33), which is eaten, and the bread of heaven is 
God’s word, and the Word was made flesh (John 
1:14), and the flesh of Christ was sacrificed and 
given for us that the soul of him who believes in 
the crucified Jesus Christ is fed with the bread of 
heaven (John 6:47, 48), with the word of God, yea, 
with the flesh and the blood of Christ; for these 
three—the bread of heaven, the word of God, and 
the flesh and the blood of Christ—are all alike called 
the bread of life, and Jesus himself in the gospel 
speaks of one as of the other without any distinc- 
tion. For in the first place, he speaks at some length 
of the bread of heaven and calls it the bread of life; 
’ then he speaks in the same way and manner of his 


flesh and blood and calls his flesh meat indeed,*) - 


and his blood drink indeed; but lastly—when some 
of his disciples understood his words literally, and 
therefore could not believe or endure them (John 


6: 60)—he explained all that he had said of the bread 


of heaven, of the eating of his flesh and the drinking 
of his blood, and in conclusion said: ‘““The flesh 
profiteth nothing; it is the spirit that quickeneth: 
the words that I speak unto you, they are spirit, 
and they are life” (John 6:63), as much as to say: 
All that I have said of the bread of heaven, likewise 
of eating my flesh and of drinking my blood, is 
said, meant, and is to be understood of my words, 
for they are Spit, and life, and meat for believing 
souls. 


*) The German, like the Greek, renders it ‘True 
Meat” and “True Drink.”—[Translator.] 


EE ae 


The Lord’s Supper. 71 


Therefore whosoever believes in the Lord Jesus 
Christ, the Son of the living God, who was crucified 
and died for us (Matt. 18:5; 26:25), and trusts in 
him, receives Jesus Christ, the word of the Father, 
is fed with the heavenly manna, yea, he eats the 
flesh and drinks the blood of Jesus Christ (John 
1:1; Ex. 16:15; Num. 20:13), but spiritually with 
the mouth of the soul, and not literally, with the 
natural mouth, for spiritual food (that is, the flesh 
and the blood of Christ) must be spiritually re- 
ceived. | 

From this it can be clearly taken that at the} 
Lord’s Supper, Christ, in his statements about eat- 
ing his flesh and drinking his blood, spoke figura- 
tively, and meant them to be spiritually understood. 
For what he here (in the gospel according to John) 
once taught at such length, and impressed upon his 
disciples regarding the spiritual eating of his flesh 
and drinking of his blood, and moreover clearly and 
expressly repudiates and reproves the carnal con- 
ception of eating his natural flesh and drinking his 
natural blood (which idea some, through their lack 
of understanding, have gathered from his words), 
that he surely has not changed in the Lord’s Supper 
(for his word is unchangeable), nor broken (for 
his word may not be broken, Matt. 24:35), nor 
abrogated (for his word endureth forever, 1 Pet. 
1:25), but much more has confirmed and estab- 
lished the same. 

Therefore what Christ entinciated and decreed 
in John, must stand without any doubt or contro- 
versy, namely, that the bread which he gives us to 

-eat, which is also his flesh, and which he has given 

for the life of the world, is the true living bread 
which came down from heaven, God’s word, which 
we receive and accept by faith, so that our souls are 
thereby fed, refreshed and _ strengthened unto 
eternal life. 

2. Jesus explains his own words regarding the 
Lord’s Supper when he says: “Take, eat; this is 
my body which is given (or broken) for you” (Matt. 
26-2670 Mark+14> 22>) Luke 22:19): 

The last words explain the first, for it is certain 
and positively true, and incontrovertible, that not 


12 The Lord’s Supper. 


the bread, but the actual body of Christ which sat 
at the table with the disciples and gave the bread 


and the wine, and said the words: “This is my © 


body’—this body, and no other—was given, broken, 
and offered upon the cross for us. How can we 
believe otherwise when Christ himself says that his 


body, his natural body, that was conceived by the 


Holy Ghost (Matt. 1:18), and born of the virgin 
Mary (Luke 2:7), was given unto death for us, 
but the apostles ate the bread and drank the wine; 
thereby they, with all believers, were assured of 
salvation, which Christ wrought for us with his 
body and blood. 

3. Judas also ate of the bread and drank of the 
wine, yet he did not receive the flesh and blood 
of Christ; for all that God gives us in the use of 
the sacraments we receive by faith, and God works 
in his chosen ones only through his Spirit that 
which the sacraments outwardly signify. There- 
fore it is impossible to partake of Christ and his 
gifts without faith. Still less possible is it for the 
unbelieving and wicked (in whom Satan dwells) 
to receive the pure, spotless and holy flesh and 
precious blood of Christ. Only the soul that hungers 
and thirsts after righteousness is fed and refreshed 
thereby as with spiritual food and spiritual drink, 
and is thereby confirmed and preserved in the fel2 
lowship of Christ, as he himself says: “Whoso 
eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood dwelleth 
in-me, and I in him*¥ (John 6:54, 56). From this 
it follows incontrovertibly that the unbelieving and 
wicked have no more part in the flesh and blood of 
Christ than that they themselves are and dwell in 
Christ, and Christ in them. Although they, like 
Judas, may eat of the bread, they do not thereby 
become partakers of the blood of Jesus Christ, but 
much more, are guilty of (or offenders against) it. 
And this is just what Paul writes to the Corinth- 
ians, namely: “Whosoever shall eat this bread, and 
drink this cup of the Lord, unworthily, shall be 
euiltvy of the body and blood of the Lord” (1 Cor. 
11:27). For to be guilty of the body and blood of 
Christ and to partake of the body and blood of 
Christ are not the same, but are widely different; 


a 


The Lord’s Supper. 13 


for by faith man becomes spiritually a partaker of 
Christ and his gifts, yea, and his flesh and blood; 
but by the misuse of the Lord’s Supper, man be- 
comes guilty of the body and blood of Christ, and 
eats and drinks damnation to himself. 

Of this we have an example in Judas; for al- 
though he ate the bread with the apostles, and drank 
the wine, nevertheless the bread was to him not 
the communion of the body of Christ, nor the cup 
the communion of his blood, as it was to the other 
apostles; for he was before, during, and after the 
Lord’s Supper in the communion of Satan. But 
those who eat Christ, are in his communion, as he 
declares in the foregoing words, and cannot be in 
the communion of Satan. Therefore Paul says: 
“Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup 
of devils; ye cannot be partakers of the Lord’s 
table, and the table of devils’ (1 Cor. 10:21). Now, 
if the cup of the Lord cannot be drunk with the cup 
of devils nor the Lord’s bread be eaten with the 
offering of devils, how much less can the cup and 
bread of the Lord, yea, the flesh and blood of Jesus 
Christ, be eaten and drunk by the wicked in whom 
Satan dwells! 

But as the apostate Christians by their back- 
sliding from God and his word, by their willful sin 
and rejection of the truth and of the Holy Spirit, 
' crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh and 

trample him underfoot (Heb. 6:1; 10:26), so also 
the hypocrites by the misuse of the Lord’s Supper 
become guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. 
But now, although Christ is not again crucified 
bodily in his human person (for he died once for 
our sins, and death has no more dominion over him 
(Rom. 6:10), but he sits personally at the right 
hand of his Father in heavenly places (Eph, 1:20), 
nevertheless he is still crucified by the wicked, as 
the apostle says, for they are co-partners and fol- 
lowers of the bloodthirsty Pharisees and Jews who 
crucified and killed Jesus Christ. 

In the same sense Christ is not eaten bodily by 
the wicked and false Christians, nevertheless they, 
by the misuse of the Lord’s Supper, become guilty 
of the body and blood of the Lord, for they eat the 


74 The Lord’s Supper. 


Lord’s bread without spirit, without faith, without 
love for Christ and the brethren, without discerning 
the body of Christ. Yea, they have evil in their 
minds against the Lord and their neighbor, as may 
be readily seen by their works; therefore it is im- 
possible for them to receive the Lord Jesus Christ 
through the bread, but as with the traitor Judas, 
into whom Satan entered (although he was in him 
before) after Christ had given him the sop (John 
13:27), so it is with these. But Christ has no 
fellowship with Satan, nor with the children of 
unbelief (2 Cor. 6:15), in whom Satan dwells and 
works. All these have neither fellowship with 
Christ, nor Christ with them; yea, where Christ 
enters, Satan must depart, as all gospel parables 
clearly indicate (Matt. 12:29). 

4. The scripture at times speaks figuratively, 
and calls many things otherwise literally than they 
are to be understoid spiritually ‘and in reality. Thus 
the scripture applies the name “the Door to the 
sheepfold,” “the True Vine,” “a Rock” (John 15:1; 
10:7; 1 Cor. 10:4, etc.) and other names to Christ, 
which must be spiritually understood and explained. 

It is also a common mode of speaking, in the 
scriptures, to give to the sign the name of that 
which it indicates or characterizes. 

Thus Christ, in the Lord’s Supper, calls the 
bread his body, and the cup his blood. He does 
not mean that his bodily substance is in the bread 
and the cup, but that both bread and blood signify 
and indicate that Christ gave his body for us and 
shed his blood for us, and that we through the 
power and as a result of his one holy sacrifice— 
namely, the offering of his flesh for us once, and 
the shedding of his blood for our sin once for all 
(Heb. 9:12; 10:10)—in the spirit, by. true faith, 
have eternal life. Therefore when he gave the 
bread and the cup to his disciples, and said, “Take, 
eat; this is my body,” “Drink ye all of it,’ “This 
is my blood of the New Testament,” he added, 
“which is given for you,” or “which is shed for 
you,’ by which he gives us to understand that by 
means of the bread and the cup of the Supper we 
are to remember and be assured of our redemption 


The Lord’s Supper. eee : 3 


and reconciliation with God the Father through the 
offering of the body and blood of Jesus Christ; also 
that thereby we become renewed in and reminded 
of the spiritual fellowship which we have with 
Christ, namely, that through faith he is in us with 
his spirit, and we in him; yea, that he is our head 
(Eph. 5:25) and we his members, flesh of his flesh, 
and bone of his bones, and therefore also partake 
of all that he has wrought by the offering of his 
body and shedding of his blood, which is peace with 
God, forgiveness of sins, righteousness salvation 
and everlasting life. 

We are greatly suprised that people are so fool- 
ish as to try to incorporate and unite the corporeal 
body of Christ with the elements of the bread and 
wine, simply because in the Lord’s Supper he has 
called the bread his body, etc., and do not observe 
that in John he speaks so expressly and much more 
of the eating of his flesh and the drinking of his 
blood, than he does at the Supper; nevertheless he 
meant a spiritual eating, that is, faith, although he 
spoke literally and figuratively of it, which they 
also acknowledge and confess, and yet at the same 
time they on the other hand would understand the 
words regarding the Lord’s Supper in an entirely 
carnal sense, eat the corporeal body of Christ in the 
bread, and receive and drink his natural blood in the 
cup. In this way Christ would be divided and at 
_ variance with himself, even though he is the truth 
itself (John 14:6), and his words everlasting, and 
that shall not pass away, as he himself declares 
(Matt. 24:35). 

5. The scriptures so clearly and Soandnite 
show—and we believe and confess—that Jesus 
Christ was an entirely human person, like us (ex- 
cepting sin and.all sinful characteristics, Heb. 2:14; 
5:2), and is now with the same, not on earth, but 
in heaven, at the right hand of God and will remain 
there until the last day, when he will appear from 
heaven in person in the glory of his Father and his 
angels, to judge the living and the dead (Heb. 
tere an0* 24. saa 110s Li Matt: 16.274 Mark: * 
8: 38: Luke 9: 26). 

This is an article of our Christian faith; this is 


76 | The Lord’s Supper. 


the word of the Lord, which he addressed to his 
disciples, and said: ‘The poor ye have always with 
you; but me- ye. have.not. always’ (Matt. 26:11). 
For, he said: “I came forth from the Father, and 
am come into the world: again, I leave the world, 
and go to the Father” (John 16:28). In proof of 
this the evangelist Luke writes in the Acts of the 
Apostles that Christ, in the presence of his disciples, 
was taken up in a cloud. And, while they looked 
steadfastly toward heaven, as he went up, behold, 
two men stood by them, in white apparel; which 
also said, “Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing 
up into heaven? This same Jesus, which is taken 
up. from you into heaven, shall so come in like 
manner as ye have seen him go into heaven” (Acts 
1:9-11). both Peter and Paul likewise testify that 
Christ sitteth at the right hand of the almighty God 
forever (1) Pet..3.::22-. Col.°3- 1)" until she gmake. its 
enemies his. footstool (Heb. 1:13; 10:13), but 
unto them that look for him shall he appear the 
second time without sin unto salvation*) (Heb. 
20) | 

The theory that some advance, that Christ dwells 
bodily in. all creatures, and therefore also in the 
bread and. wine of the communion, also has no 
value here, but is an, open, barefaced le, and a 
falsification of the scripture, against the plain testi- 
mony of Christ and his apostles. 

It is true that Christ with his divine power is 
in, all things (Heb. 1:3) since all things are made 
and upheld by him, but he is not everywhere in his 
human body (Col. 2:5), nor in all creatures, nor in 
all places, even as the angel declared when he said 
to the women who were standing at the grave of 
our Lord: ‘Fear ye not, for I know that ye seek 
Jesus, which was crucified. He is not here: for 
he is risen, as he said. Come, see the place where 
the Lord lay” (Matt., 28:5, 6). _ But what. is the 
need of writing much about it. Christ himself says 
again and again in the gospel that he had gone to 


*) Another rendering of this verse is: “So also the 
Annointed One . . . . will appear a Second time without 
a Sin-offering to those who are expecting him, in order to 
salvation.”’—[Translator. ] 


The Lord’s Supper. U7 


the Father and that he was no longer in the world, 
which must always be understood as meaning his 
human body and not his spiritual being and divine 
power. 

These and other reasons move, yea, compel us, 
so that we cannot believe that Jesus Christ, the 
only begotten Son of the living God, who is one 
with the Father, is bodily in the bread and cup of 
the Lord’s Supper, but we believe that in divine 
glory and in human form he is personally at the 
right hand of God, his heavenly Father; but in his 
spirit he is in and with his disciples, the true Chris- 
tians, unto the end of the world, as he himself says 
(Matt. 28:20): 

Herewith is explained, in part, why we do not 
believe that Jesus Christ is bodily in the bread and 
cup of the Lord’s Supper. Those who teach that, 
we reject as perverted expounders of holy scripture. 
Moreover we have, in our opinion, sufficiently! 
shown from holy scripture, that to truly believe in 
Christ is to eat his flesh and drink his blood (John 
6:53, 54), yet not naturally, but spiritually} even 
as Christ also had hidden meat of which his dis- 
ciples knew nothing, for he said to his disciples: 
“T have meat to eat that ye know not of” (John 
4:32). Is it a wonder, then, that the blind world 
neither knows anything of, nor understands about, 
the true: nourishment of believers? “My meat is 
to do the will of him that sent me” (John 4:34). 
Hence he has also commanded us to labor for that 
meat, for he’ says’in ‘the’ gospel: “Labor !!).” “for 
that meat which endureth unto everlasting life, 
which the Son of man shall give unto you” (John 
6:27). As it was Christ’s meat to do the will of 
his heavenly Father, so also it is meat which God 
and the Son of man, Jesus Christ, give us, that we 
do the will of God, and do his work, that is, that we 
believe in Jesus Christ, whom he has sent, accept 
and obey his word, for that is God’s work, will, and 
command, as can be read and seen (John 6:29). 

But now is'the world so: blinded and perverted, 
that it does not even think of laboring for such meat 
or to desire it of Christ, but allows itself to imagine 
that if it eats and drinks the bread and wine of the 


78 The Lord’s Supper. 


altar of its own sacrament (as it is called) merely 
- as a matter of custom, although with the false idea 
and the superstitious and idolatrous conception that 
it is receiving Christ bodily, that this is doing the 
work! Oh, no! Those who magine this will find 
themselves deceived when they shall appear before 
the judgment seat of Christ and render an account 
of their faith; for neither bread, nor wine, nor water . 
will bring Christ into the heart, nor cleanse us from 
sin, nor save us; Christ alone does that, if we accept 
him in true faith, hear him, follow him, and thus 
do God’s will. 

In the second place, Paul calls the Bt the 
communion of the body of Christ, and the cup the 
communion of his blood (1 Cor. 10:16). In order 
to thoroughly understand what communion of 
Christ with believers, and of believers with Christ 
is, it may be observed that Christ accepts the be- 
lievers, unites with them in such a manner that he 
is the Head and the believers are his body (Eph. 
5:23), that he may infuse into them his eternal 
life, give them his Spirit, and bestow upon them all 
his riches, and make them partake thereof. 

Thus, then, this communion of Christ and the 
believers is renewed and confirmed by baptism and 
the Lord’s Supper. For all believers are baptized 
by one Spirit into one body (1 Cor. 12:13). Al- 
though they all became one body with Christ by 
faith, even as Paul had, before baptism, been chosen 
ef Christ, and filled with the Holy Chost; likewise 
also Cornelius and the others who in his house 
heard the word of the apostle had received the Holy 
Ghost before they were baptized (Acts 10:44), 
nevertheless they were by one Spirit baptized into 
the communion of the body of Christ, that is, they 
were confirmed therein, reminded thereof, and in 
the outward fellowship of the saints added to the 
Christian Church. 

This communion and incorporation with Christ 
is also confirmed and renewed through the Lord’s 
Supper in that Christians in true unity of the Spirit 
and of faith break the bread and drink the wine 
which signifies to.them, and by which they are 
reminded of, the fellowship of Christ and the par- 


The Lord’s Supper. 79 


ticipation of all his merits, all his righteousness and 
holiness, yea, all that is his, that they partake of all 
this together unto eternal salvation; for this fellow- 
ship consists in this that all the riches are given 
unto, and possessed by, all Christians in common; 
therefore Paul says: “The cup of blessing which 
we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of 
Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the 
communion of the body of Christ? For we being 
many are One bread, and one body; for we are all 
partakers of that one bread” (1 Cor. 10:16, 17). 

This same thought again he explains by an exam- 
ple of the people of Israel and says: “Behold Israel 
after the flesh: are not they which eat of the sacri- 
fices partakers of the altar?” (1 Cor. 10:18). Now, 
as the children of Aaron were partakers of the 
altar, that is, of the sacrifices of the altar, so also 
the children of the spiritual Aaron, Jesus Christ, 
the only true High Priest, are partakers of his altar, 
for they are, by reason of the new birth, of his gen- 
eration, and therefore in the Spirit they by faith 
partake of the spotless sacrifice of Christ (Heb. 
9:14) which he through the Holy Spirit offered for 
us upon the altar of the cross. Hence they break 
the bread and drink the cup as a testimony that they 
_ are in the communion of the body of Christ, into 
which communion they have entered by the grace 
of God and election by faith, and they are confirmed 
therein by the true baptism, in which communion 
they are also preserved and confirmed by the Lord’s 
Supper, by which communion moreover they are 
made partakers of all that belongs to Christ, like 
as the sons of Aaron, who, in partaking of the altar, 
were therefore partakers of all that God had given, 
and prescribed for, Aaron, their father. 5 

In the bread and wine are also portrayed and 
- typified the harmony and fellowship of the believers. 
In order that this fellowship may be better under- 
stood, the Lord used and prescribed such emblems 
in the Supper as are everywhere available, and which 
by their form and composition point to and suggest 
such communion. For as the bread is made of many 
erains broken and ground together, and out of 
many grains has come a loaf of bread, in which 


80 The Lord’s Supper. 


every little kernel has lost its individual body and 
form, and likewise as the little individual grapes, 
by changing their form become a common wine and 
pleasant drink, so also must all Christians be united 
with Christ and with one anothey—first with Christ, 
whom they receive by faith and who becomes their 
nourishment—for there is no closer intimacy nor 
anything more inseparable than the union of food 
with those who are fed; fcr the food is taken and 
becomes changed in its nature, and becomes one 
with or part of, the one fed. Thus also true Chris- 
tians by faith in Jesus Christ are wholly united and 
incorporated in and with him, yea, transformed and 
changed so as to be like him in’ kind and nature. 
Therefore Christ takes such an interest in their 
behalf that he who harms them harms Christ him- 
self (Matt. 25:45; Acts 9:4). Again, he that does 
good to them does it to Christ, as he himself says: 
‘“Tnasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least 
of these my brethren, ye have done it-unto me” 
(Matt. 25:40). 

But through this fellowship and love of Christ 
love must in turn be so enkindled in Christians that 
they consider the infirmities and needs of all Chris- 
tians as being common to all, taking to themselves 
their condition and need and thus making of it a 
common need through the love which bears one 
another’s burdens, and thus fulfills the law of Christ 
(Galt G2): 

O! that is a great sacrament, a great mystery, 
says Paul, that Christ and his church are one flesh 
and one bone (Eph. 5:30), and indeed it is’ a 
marvelous and blessed union where all Christians are 
one bread and one body in Christ Jesus. They are 
one bread of the good seed which the heavenly 
Father has sown in this world (Matt. 13:8), and 
baked by the fire of love. They are one body of 
Christ with many members, baptized by one Spirit 
into one body (1 Cor. 12:13), and must, according 
to the example of a natural body, be one heart and 
one soul, and must serve one another, be helpful 
and comforting one toward another, even as do ioe 
members of a natural body. 

In the third place, the bread and wire in itie 


‘The Lord’s Supper. 81 


Supper are a token of remembrance of the bitter 
suffering and innocent death and shedding of blood 
of Jesus Christ, namely, that in connection with it 
we are reminded that Christ Jesus in his great love 
gave his body for us, and for us shed his blood. 
“He hath made it to be remembered, and the 
gracious, merciful Lord hath given his meat unto 
them that fear him” (Psa. 111:5). He has insti- 
tuted for the believers a supper with the bread and 
wine that thereby they may ever remember his suf- 
fering and death. 

But since the bread and wine are memorial 
tokens of the suffering and death of Jesus Christ, 
therefore they are called by that name which is 
thereby remembered, namely, the body and _ the 
blood of Christ, just as the figurative paschal lamb 
is by God called the passover (Ex. 12:27), because 
the passing over should thereby be brought to 
remembrance, for the reason that Israel was to 
remember the favors and wonders which had come 
to pass in their behalf in Egypt and not forget that 
the angel of the Lord in one night slew all the 
first-born among the Egyptians, but passed over 
their own houses because the lintels had been 
sprinkled with the blood of the paschal lamb, which 
was a token of divine grace or favor. Hence God 
gave them a command that they should eat every 
year a paschal lamb, and this was called the pass- 
over, for it was a token or sign of the Lord’s pass- 
ing over. 

Jesus has done the same for us. He has deliv- 
ered us out of Egypt and the power of the devil, 
therefore he is the true Paschal Lamb, slain upon 
the cross, roasted in the fire of love, and by the 
sprinkling of his blood we are purged and cleansed 
from our sins (1 Cor. 5:7), and protected from the 
destroying angel, from the punishment of God which 
will come upon Egypt, that is, upon the blind world. 
And in order that we may not forget this, but al- 
ways keep: it in remembrance. (1 Pet..1:19), he has 
instituted and left for us the Supper of bread and 
wine, that in the breaking of bread and the drinking 
of the cup we may gratefully remember his body 


ae 


82 The Lord’s Supper. 


which was given and broken for us, and his blood 
which he shed for us. 

This commemoration of the suffering of Christ 
is very necessary for us and teaches us to fear God 
and hate sin; because in the suffering of Christ we 
see and realize the fierce anger and unchangeable 
zeal of the Lord against sin and sinners, that he 
has stricken his most beloved only begotten Son 
so grievously for the transgression of his people, 
as it is written in the prophecy of Isaiah (53:7, 
8, 10)7] That must have been an inexpressible, an 
unendurable zeal that would launch itself against 
such an immeasurably exalted Person, even God’s 
own Son, the eternal wisdom of the Father himself; 
and yet the Father would not release the sinners 
unto him unless he would first make such a great 
atonement for them. 

From this we may get a faint conception of the 
righteousness of God. At the same time we must 
remember that Jesus Christ had to taste so bitter 
a death for our sakes; for on this account it all- 
came to pass. 

Now, when man properly contemplates this he 
is frightened and humilitated by it, he is grief- 
stricken and trembles before the Lord his God, at 
his stern judgment and his great wrath against sin. 
And, remembering how greatly God hates sin and 
show sin was the cause of the bitter suffering and 
the innocent death of Jesus Christ, he will, by God’s 
erace, guard against sin as much as lies in his 
power, thanking Christ for his love and faithfulness 
which he has manifested toward the human race. 
To this end the proper use of the Lord’s Supper 
serves the purpose of reminding us, always bringing 
before our eyes and into remembrance these things, 
that our hearts may be thoroughly concerned there- 
with, which is very necessary, in order to come to 
‘the true knowledge of our condition, to true humil- 
ity, to the true fear of God, contemplation of the 
suffering of Christ, and to the hatred of sin. 

In the fourth place, regarding the cup of the 
Supper, Jesus’ says (Mark 14:22; Matt. 26:25; 
Puke’ 22.219 ;. 1: Cor, Wis 22) « so aihisties the! cup rot 
the new testament in my blood,” or “this cup is 


The Lord’s Supper. 83 


the new testament in my blood.” What that new 
testament is, the prophet Jeremiah and the apostle 
Paul show when they say: “Behold, the days come, 
- saith the Lord (Jer. 31:31-36; Heb. 8: 8-12), that 
I will make a new covenant with the house of 
Israel and with the house of Judah; not according 
to the covenant that I made with the fathers in the 
day that I took them by the hand to bring them 
out of the land of Egypt; because they continued 
not in my covenant, and I regarded them not, saith 
the Lord. But this shall be the covenant that I 
will make with the house of Israel: After those 
days, saith the Lord, I will put my law into their 
inward parts, and write it in their hearts; and I 
will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a 
people: and they shall not teach every man his 
neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know 
the Lord; for all shall know me, from the least to 
the greatest. For I will be merciful to their un- 
righteousness; for I will forgive their iniquity, and 
I will remember their sins no more.” 

From these words it may be readily understood 
what the new testament covenant is, viz,: The word 
of almighty God, our heavenly Father (1 Cor. 3:11; 
1 John 1:1), as declared by Jesus Christ (John 
7:16; 17:8), and written by the Holy Spirit upon 
the hearts of believers by the grace of God which 
hath appeared through Jesus Christ for the in- 
struction and enlightenment of troubled hearts, for 
the forgiveness of sin, for eternal salvation, and for 
the comfort of souls and consciences; for God, the 
eternal and merciful Father, the Giver of all good 
gifts and Dispenser of all heavenly riches, has 
made a new and gracious covenant in which he 
shows overflowing love to us in this that he has 
_ made us a free gift of his only begotten Son (Rom. 
8:32), and with him all things, through whom we 
have received grace, forgiveness of sins, a knowl- 
edge of God and every good gift (John 1:16; Rom. 
Be acta Ve 

This new testament (the word of saving grace, 
the testimony of divine love and the everlasting 
salvation of souls) Jesus Christ as the true Mediator 
of the new covenant (Heb. 12:24), received of God 


84 The Lord’s Supper. 


his Father, declared the same to his chosen apostles 
and all God-fearing people, and by his Holy Spirit 
has written it upon their hearts. ‘Therefore it is 
principally called a testament; for, as a testament 
is the utmost and inmost will of a dying man who 
makes known to his friends his will and desire, has 
it written down, and orders the disposition of his 
goods and chattels among his heirs after his death, 
so Christ before his death called his disciples—his 
beloved friends—to him, revealed his words, and 
declared his will to them, and commanded them 
to preach his gospel, after his death, to all creatures. 
This gospel is the glad tidings of the grace of God 
and the atonement of Christ, namely, that by his 
suffering and bloodshed he has vanquished sin and 
eternal condemnation (Col. 1:18, 14; Mark 16:15), 
conquered Satan and death and wrought salvation 
and eternal life (Rom. 5: 9-11), and has given for 
a possession all his riches (Matt. 28:19, 20); that 
is, his glory, righteousness and salvation is a gift 
to all that believe, and has made us partakers of 
everlasting life. 

And since a testament without death is invalid, 
and the old testament is not established without — 
blood, therefore Christ Jesus dedicated or estab- 
lished the new testament with his innocent death 
-and precious blood (Heb. 9:8-25). And so much 
more precious is the sealing and dedication of the 
new than of the old testament, as that whereas 
Moses sprinkled the old testament with the blood 
of calves (Ex. 24:8), Christ, the true Moses and 
Prince of our faith, who led us out of Egypt, 
through the Red Sea, who received from his Father 
the ministration of the Spirit and the commandment 
of life, and delivered the same to the true Israel, 
and wrote it upon their hearts, confirmed and made 
effective his testament with his own precious blood. 

And for a token and remembrance of this he 
instituted for the apostles and for all believers a 
Supper of bread and wine before his death—calling 
the bread his body, and the cup the new testament 
in his blood—for a true memorial token that he has 
redeemed us with his body, and confirmed or 
validated his testament with his blood. 


3 


The Lord’s Supper. 85 


Then, on the third day, he again rose from the 
dead (1 Cor. 15:4, 20; Matt. 28:6; Mark 16:6; 
2 Cor. 3:6), and appeared to the apostles and made 
them ministers of the new testament, confirmed and 
consecrated them with his Holy Spirit, and com- 
manded them to preach the gospel to every creature 
(Matt. 28:19; Mark 16:15), to baptize the peni- 
tents and believers in the name of the Father, and 
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, and to teach 
them to observe all things which he had commanded 
them. . 

Last of all, he ascended into heaven and is Set 
at the right hand of God his heavenly Father (1 Pet. 
3:23; Col. 3:1) in heavenly glory, and sits there 
personally and eternally (Acts 1:9-11), yet in such 
a way that he is with and in his own with his Spirit 
as long as the world shall last, and on the last day 
he will come from heaven to judge the living and 
the dead (Matt. 28:20). 

From all this it is readily to be observed that 
Christ Jesus is not bodily in the bread and cup of 
the Lord’s Supper. For a testator is not bodily in 
his testament, but he is in it with his power or 
authority, by which his testament is valid and 
effective. Thus also is Christ in his testament with 
his divine power or authority, and with his Spirit 
he comforts and refreshes everywhere the hearts 
of the believers who remain steadfast in his doctrine 
and grace, and observe his Supper as a memorial 
according to the scripture, in which Supper they 
are by faith in the crucified Son of God, Jesus 
Christ, and by the remembrance of his death, com- 
forted in their consciences, admonished and assured 
(1 Cor. 12:13) that they are children of God and 
brethren and sisters of Jesus Christ, incorporated 
into his body and united with him, and justified, 
holy and happy through him (Rom. 5:1), and have 
the right and authority to use and partake with all 
believers—with whom they are one body in him— 
of all that Christ Jesus has commanded and insti- 
tuted (Gal. 3:28). 

We therefore maintain that Christ is in heaven 
in person, but that he has a spiritual existence on 
earth. This spiritual existence of Christ we under- 


86 The Lord’s Supper. 


stand to be the Holy Ghost, by which he lives and 
labors in all his members. This he himself shows 
with these words (Matt. 10:20, 40; Luke 9:48; 
John 17:8): “He that receiveth you receiveth me” ; 
“for it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your 
Father, which speaketh in you.” Therefore Paul 
‘says (Rom. 15:18): “I will not dare speak of any 
of those things which Christ hath not wrought by 
me.” “If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, 
he is none of his” (Rom. 8:9). “Know ye not that 
ye-are the temple: of God?” (1 Cor3.46) 4 hence 
“no man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the 
Holy Ghost’ (Vv Cor. “12:'3). ~ And John: says; 
“Hereby we know that we dwell in him, and he in» 
us, because he hath given us of his Spirit’? (1 John 
4:13). 

Of this spiritual existence Christ speaks to his 
disciples in the Lord’s Supper, that it were better 
for the believers that he go away than that he 
remain personally and bodily with them, viz.: “I 
tell you the truth: it is expedient for you that I go 
away: for if I go not. away, the Comforter will not 
come unto you; but if I depart, I will send him 
unto you” (John 16:7). Hence the words: “TI will 
pray the Father, and he shall give you another Com- 
forter, even the Spirit of Truth, which proceedeth 
from the Father; he shall testify of me” (John 
14:16; 15:26); “glorify. me, reprove the world” 
{John 16:8, 14); “admonish you and guide you 
into all truth; for he shall take of mine, and shall 
‘show it unto you, and he will be with you forever.” 

In this way Christ is with his own unto the end 
of the world; but the idea that he is bodily in the 
bread and wine of the Supper, and is thus eaten and 
received by the wicked as well as the righteous, as 
the blind, perverted world. thinks, is contrary to 
the entire holy scripture, its spirit, sense and idea, 
contrary. to the Christian faith and palpably con- 
trary to the actually known conditions and. experi- 
ence, as well as contrary to the character of the 
natural body of Jesus Christ, as has been sufficiently 
elucidated above. 

Now, if our belief regarding the Lord’s Supper 
tests upon the right foundation and is built upon 


The Lord’s Supper. _ 87 


God’s word, it is necessary to consider well and 
take to heart the proper use of the Supper. for 
what the Lord instituted and commanded us to 
observe must be rightly used as well as understood, 
believed and confessed. But to a right observance 
of the Holy Supper belong the following essentials: 

1. There must be a Christian congregation that. 
has assembled in the name of the Lord and that 
declares and shows the Lord’s death with a true 
faith and sincere, openhearted confession, that just 
as Christ Jesus gave and left to his apostles and all 
believers the eating of the bread and the drinking 
of the wine, so he freely gave them his body and 
blood as a gift for an eternal salvation (1 Cor. 
FOS 165 10521 b23))< | 

To this belongs a calling to remembrance, and 
a thoroughly sincere commemoration of, the suffer- 
ing and death of the Lord, of the conformity to his 
suffering and death, of unity of the Spirit and of 
faith, of love to God and fellow-men, all of which 
belongs especially to the observance of the Lord's 
Supper (Phil, 3 310). 

2. We believe that this Supper must be par- . 
taken with those only who. are the friends of God, 
the true Christians, who have accepted the gospel 
and thereupon have amended their lives, and who, 
upon confession of their faith, have been properly 
baptized in the name of the Father, and of the Son, 
and of the Holy Ghost (Matt. 28:19), and in this 
faith are faithfully solicitous to lead a Christian life, 
and diligently meditate upon conformity to Christ, 
his suffering and death, his burial and resurrection ; 
in short, to be one body with Christ and all the 
saints. These, and no others, are, according to the 
teaching of the gospel, to be reminded by this Sup- 
per and confirmed in the fellowship of Christ and 
all the saints. 

3. This Sus ler is to be observed concordantly 
by all believers (as many as are gathered together) 
and not by one alone, as some do. For thus the 
‘Lord ordained, and thus he desired it to be ob- 
served; all Christians must know how to conform 
thereto; for if it is not right to despise or alter a 
testament executed by man, how much more so is 


88 The Lord’s Supper. 


it to despise the testament of Jesus Christ or to 
break his commandments (Gal. 4:14). 

Moreover the minister is to observe the Supper 
with the congregation, and the bread is to be 
broken; for the Lord did so, and so the apostles 
continued its observance. Hence Paul writes (1 
Cor. 10:16): “The bread which we break.” And 
Luke writes: “And they continued steadfastly in 
the apostles’ doctrine and fellowship, and in break- 
ing of bread, and in prayers. And they, continuing 
daily with one accord in the temple, and breaking 
bread from house to house, did eat” (Acts 2: 42, 46). 
That is, the disciples gathered together to break the 
bread, hence in the Supper the bread must be 
broken, and both parts of the Supper, that is, the 
bread and the cup, must be given, divided and 
received by every one; and not each one eat his 
own bread by himself, as, sad to say, it is done in 
the world; for whoever does this, shows that he is 
eating his own supper, and not the Supper of the 
Lord. 

‘4, Paul admonishes us to “let a man examine - 
himself” before he eat of that bread and drink of 
that cup (1 Cor. 11:28). For whoever has not true 
faith in Jesus Christ, who is not a member of the 
body of Christ, who will not die and live with Christ, 
who has not a genuine love for Christ and his 
fellow-man, can never rightly observe the Supper 
‘(which is a sign of divine and brotherly love and 
unity), nor rightly discern the Lord’s body. For 
in the body of Christ two things are especially 
noted, viz:, the Head and the members. By the 
Head, which is Christ, it must be noted that from 
it we all:receive grace’and, life: (Ephsd: 23% -1- Gor. 
12:12, 27;.10:17), and that one must cleave to the 
Head alone, and also take an example of love there- 
from and remember how faithfully the Lord Jesus 
Christ served us. Then we must take note of the 
members of the body with whom we are one, and 
remember how Christ has served us with his gifts 
and is still serving us, that we likewise, and with 
our gifts which we receive of God—be they natural 
or spiritual—serve our members for the perfecting 
and edifying of the body of Christ (Eph. 4:12), and 


The Lord’s Supper. 89 


all this in love. This, then, is-what it means to 
rightly discern the body of Christ. 

In this investigation it is also very necessary to 
observe how the Israelites ate the figurative paschal 
lamb, namely that in the first place the paschal 
lamb had to be without blemish and be “roasted 
with fire” (Ex. 12:5, 8). This typifies the spotless 
Paschal Lamb Jesus Christ, which in the everlasting 
fire of love is roasted for us upon the cross (1 Cor. 
5:7), which we eat spiritually by faith, and by the 
sprinkling of whose blood we are preserved and 
spared from the punishment that shall come upon 
Egypt, that is, upon the blind world. | 

In the second place, the Israelites were to have 
no leaven in their houses when they observed the 
passover, and the paschal lamb had to be eaten with 
unleavened bread. Paul thus explains this to the 
Corinthians and says: “Purge out therefore the old 
leaven, that ye may be a new lump, as ye are un- 
leavened. For even Christ our Passover is sacri- 
ficed for us: therefore let us keep the feast, not 
with old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice 
and wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of 
sincerity and truth” (1 Cor. 5:7, 8). 

In the third place the Israelites had to eat the 
paschal lamb with bitter herbs (Ex. 12:9), signify- 
ing that our Paschal Lamb Jesus Christ seeks and 
desires a sorrowful soul, which suffers and sorrows 
with him and contemplates with profoundest medi- 
tation his suffering and death, and is filled with 
godly sorrow (Matt. 5:4; 2 Cor. 7:11). 

In the fourth place the Israelites had to gird 
their loins, have their staves in their hands and 
eat the paschal lamb standing and in haste. This 
signifies to us that we must keep the Passover 
(Luke 12.35) in such manner that we gird up the 
loins of our minds (Eph. 6:14; 1 Pet. 1:13), and 
hold in our hand the staff of the divine word and 
comfort, and say with David that though we pass 
through the valley of the shadow of death we will 
fear no evil; fer the Lord is with us, his rod and 
his staff, they comfort us (Psa. 23:4). We must 


90 3 The Lord’s Supper. 


also keep the Passover with hungering heart, 
hungry and desirous for Christ, our Paschal Lamb, 
and have a desire to leave the Egypt of this wicked 
world and enter into the promised land of the 
eternal kingdom of God. 

In the fifth place, no stranger who was uncir- 
cumcised was to eat the figurative paschal lamb. 
How much less, then, may any one observe the 
Passover with Christ unless he is circumcised in 
heart, and is accounted and found in the fellowship 
of the covenant of Christ and all the saints? ; 

Lastly, the children of Israel had to consume the 
paschal lamb entirely, and let nothing of it remain, 
and what was left over was to be burned with fire. 
This signifies to us that we are not to partake of 
Jesus Christ, our Passover, in part, but altogether, 
that is, we must hear and obey all his words, his 
whole doctrine, and not do as some, who accept one 
word and reject the next, but we must believe every 
word that has proceeded out of the mouth of God 
and of Christ, and we must remain steadfast therein 
unto the end, for “man liveth by every word that 
proceedeth out of the mouth of God” (Deut. 8:3; 
Matt. 4:4). That isto say, “He that remains 
steadfast in the doctrine of Christ shall be saved” 
(Matt. 10:22). And since many things in the 
scripture are hard to understand, therefore it is 
_ necessary at all times to ask our heavenly Father 
in the name of Jesus Christ for the gift of the Holy 
Spirit that our hearts may by the burning of the 
consuming fire be kindled with love to God and 
be, by the brightness of the everlasting light, en- 
lightened to a knowledge of him and.to our salva- 
tion. Amen. 

It is well indeed if all this be thoroughly borne 
in mind in partaking of the Lord’s Supper, for al- 
though it is chiefly a figure unto which we by faith 
partake of Jesus Christ, our Paschal Lamb, and 
keep the Passover in the new life of the Spirit, 
nevertheless since this spiritual eating and keeping 
of the Passover is presented to us, brought to our 
remembrance, and renewed in ee Let's Supper, 


The Lord’s Supper. 91 


and we are to remember it, therefore the sign must 
be observed in accordance with the example and 
signification of the true substance. 


When therefore Christians worthily observe the 
Supper with pure heart and in true faith their souls 
will be refreshed by Jesus Christ, who. according 
to his promise (Matt. 18:20) is in the midst of such 
an assembly, they are admonished in their con- 
Sciences and are assured of the grace of God, the 
fellowship of Jesus Christ, and all the saints, yea, 
that they are united with God by Jesus Christ (Rom. 
3:24; 5:1, 2; 8:1), justified and guiltless, mem- 
bers of his body, and temples of the Holy Ghost 
(1 Cor. 3:16), that Christ is their Brother, Bishop, 
Mediator, Advocate and Propitiator (1 John 2:1, 2; 
Heb. 2:17; 5:1), and by his atonement will justify 
them, and will heal all their infirmities and recon- 
cile them by his perpetual offering and ceaseless 
prayer, and govern them by his Holy Spirit and 
lead them into eternal glory. 

The realization that they are tte one with 
the other as members of his body (Rom. 12:14) 
like bread of many grains and wine of many berries 
(1Cor, 10; 17 ; -12:412)> and are therefore partakers 
of all that Christ has wrought in his own person 
and in all believers and still works in them, and, 
moreover, that they have the privilege and authority 
~ to enjoy with all the saints all things that Christ 
instituted. for the hallowing of his name, and the 
promulgation of faith and love, delights and com- 
forts the heart of the Christian, so that, kindled 
with love, both toward God and fellow-man, it wells 
up and becomes fervent, and breaks forth into 
thanksgiving, praises and glorifies God for his grace 
and loving kindness and says with the. prophet: 
“Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within 
me, bless his holy name. . Bless the Lord, O my 
soul, and forget not all his benefits” (Psa. 103:1, 2). 

This is our confession regarding the Supper of 
our Lord Jesus- Christ. But while some revile our 
confession and consider it. fanaticism because we 
believe and confess that Jesus is bodily in heaven 
at the right hand of God, but with his Spirit dwells 


92 The Lord’s Supper. 


and works with all his believers (Acts 1: 9-11; Heb. 
1:13; John 6:62), and is partaken of or received 
spiritually by them, because they believe in him 
and accept and obey his word, we must exercise 
patience. We must not believe contrary to the 
scripture, but according to the scripture (John 7: 
38; Mark 16:15), for faith cometh by the word of 
God (Rom. 10:17) and must in all things conform 
with it. And since the scripture proves so abundantly 
that Jesus Christ is bodily and personally in heaven 
and spiritually on earth (as we have sufficiently 
shown above from the scripture), therefore we be- 
lieve this with all our hearts. And since we believe 
this, and beside this the words of Christ: “This is 
my body,” and all that is written and above referred 
to and explained concerning the Lord’s Supper, 
and endorse it by our confession and believe it to 
be true, therefore we take one concordant view from 
all these scriptures that is in every case conformable 
to the truth and not contradicted by any scripture. 
But we cannot take or come to this view unless we 
understand, believe and confess the words of Christ: 
“This is my body,” etc., in a spiritual sense, that 
Christ can be received by a hungry soul, yea, his 
flesh and blood be spiritually eaten and drunken by 
faith. With this view all scriptures accord and 
remain unbroken. But if we understand the afore- 
said words of Christ literally and in a carnal sense, 
’ then we are reproved in our conscience by many 
scriptures, yea, we are convinced and overcome as 
are those so often who do not believe all the words 
of God. Therefore we maintain what we have here 
confessed regarding the Lord’s Supper, and this in 
all Christian simplicity, according to the true sense 
of the spirit, according to the intent and content of 
the scripture and according to our profoundest con- 
ception and understanding of God’s word, and, in 
short, according to the gift and measure of faith 
we have received from God; anything better and 
surer we cannot confess of or find in it. 

May the almighty God and Father of all. mercy 
and grace, who from the beginning chose the be- 


The Lord’s Supper. 93 


lievers and ordained them unto salvation, enlighten 
all zealous and well-intentioned hearts with the 
glory of his holy Spirit, and gather all the scattered 
sheep into the unity of the true faith under the one 
Good Shepherd and Bishop of all believing souls, 
that is, under Christ Jesus, to whom be praise and 
honor forever. Amen. 
To God alone be glory! 
| 1B izes 





THE 


INCARNATION 


of 


OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST, THE ONLY 
BEGOTTEN SON OF HIS ETERNAL 
AND ALMIGHTY FATHER. 


A Brief Confession by 
Dik. 


The Word was made flesh. John 1:14. 


That which was from the beginning, which we have 
heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which 
we have looked upon and our hands have 
handled, of the Word of life, which was 
with the Father and was mani- 
fested unto us, etc. 
1 John 1:1. 


Great is the mystery of godliness: God was mani- 
Sctextintneaiiesn. Sl him, otis 


PREFACE 


Whereas we are greatly reviled and derided by 
many people on account of our faith, many even 
lying and saying that we do not believe in Jesus 
Christ, simply because we cannot accept the old 
leaven of the Pharisees (who devise and make such 
strange comments upon the scriptures regarding the 
incarnation of Jesus Christ) and are defamed there- 
fore by some as though we did not believe in Jesus 
Christ (2 Tim. 1:12), who nevertheless is our only 
hope before God the Father (Col. 1: 14-20); there- 
fore we will, by the grace of God, briefly declare our 
belief regarding Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son 
of the living God, our Lord and Savior, that every 
one may see, read and hear what views we entertain 
of Jesus Christ, of his divinity and humanity, and 
know that they are neither heretical nor Jewish 
(although the world brands us as heretics and 
Jews), but that we are simply Christians, and be- 
lieve and confess all that the scripture teaches and 
testifies of Jesus Christ; for this is our hope. and 
consolation before God, that we firmly believe in 
Jésus . Christ:_( Eph> (2:.0-_ 8s. Mark” 1651075 fols 
3:16; 1 Pet. 1:3), fully trust and hope in him, have 
been baptized in his name upon confession of our 
faith (Matt. 28:19, 20), and by grace have become, 
and desire to remain, his disciples. But unto the 
eternal God and Father of all mercy, who hath from 
the beginning chosen us to salvation (2 Thess. 2:13; 
1 Pet. 1:2), and has taught us the pure knowledge 
of his only begotten Son, Jesus Christ, through the 
enlightenment of his Holy Spirit, and written it in 
our hearts: To him (2 Tim. 4:18) be everlasting | 
praise and glory in eternity for his inexpressible 
erace and goodness. Amen. 

















OUR CONFESSION OF JESUS CHRIST, 


| The Only Begotten Son of the Living God; and 


of His Incarnation. 


We believe and confess that Jesus is our Lord 


and Savior (John 1:12, 14; 3:16;:1. John 4:9), 
| the first-born and only begotten Son of the living 
| God (Matt. 16:16), the brightness of his glory, and 
| the express image of his Person (Heb. 1:2, 3); 
| from the beginning of the world, and from eternity, 
| divine, and inexpressibly born of the Father, and 
| one Being with the Father, in such manner that 


they are one God and Lord, having equal power, 


_ might, love, glory, work and will together forever 
| (Micah 5: 2-4; Isa. 53:12; John 5:19-27; 8:14-19; 
mo 4210:;15-185. 18:3; 1426-10; 15:1; 17,322). 


But because the Son of God is called the Werd 


| (Greek, Logos; Latin, Sermo or Verbum), it is 
' by no means to be understood that every word that 


| 


| God utters is his Son (John 1:1); for the Son is 
_not a spoken word, but an existant, living Word 
(1 John 1:1), of whom all the words spoken by 


God (which is the holy scripture) bear testimony 
(2 Pet) 1:20) 215) 2. Tim::3:16).~ But: the’ reason, 

and the opinion expressed why the Son of God 1s © 
called the Word is this (according to the under- 
standing of many learned men, and so far as we can 
comprehend the scriptures), that the Son is the 


express image of the mind of the Father (Heb. 1:3), 


as proceeding out of the mouth of the most high 
God (Matt. 4:4); proceeding, we maintain, as a 
personified Word, and as a natural Son of God, one 
in personality, attributes and nature with the Father | 
(John 10:25; 18:3), yea, into whom the Father 


infused the personality of his attributes and his 


express image, wherefore the apostle says that God 
who in time past spake by the prophets, afterward 
spake to us by his Son, the incarnated Word (Heb. 
1:1, 2; Col. 1:15), so that his Son is not a spoken, 


but a speaking Word, and by this Word, that is, | 


T 


‘Sige 


98 The Incarnation of Jesus Christ. 


by the word of. the Son’s power, all things are up-— 
held (Heb. 1:3) and have their being. Therefore 
John declares that the Son is the Word of life, from 
whom the apostles saw and heard all the things 
which they have declared to us (1 John 1:1-3). 
This same Word, namely, this Son of God, was — 
promised by God, in mercy and love, to Adam and 
his descendants (Gen. 3:15) and announced as a 
Savior; therefore he became aman (Phil. 2:6); © 
for since he is a Savior of men and a Mediator 
between God and man (1 Tim. 2:5) therefore he 
must be truly God and man. In his divinity he was 
enabled to forever help us, fully reconcile the Father 
and’ do his will (John 10:17; 17419) 20%" Heb--10 = 
14; Eph. 5. 25-29); yea, the will of the Father is 
also the will of Christ. In his humanity he was 
enabled to offer himself for us a pure, holy, accept- 
able sacrifice, as a sweet-smelling savor unto God 
(Heb. 10:12-14; Eph. 5:2), but to us it was the 
forgiveness and washing away of our sins, because. 
he died innocently for us, and his human nature is 
spotless, without sin (Eph. 1:7; 2:4, 5; 1 Pet. 
pl 8,44 oe ° Se: tebe ao saat : 
Therefore we believe and confess that Jesus 


| Christ is our Redeemer, Savior and Mediator (1 


Tim. 2:5, 6; Gal. 1:4), truly God and man. He 
is truly God from everlasting, and born of the 
Father before the foundation of the world (Micah 
5:1, 2). But he became truly man in these last 
days, yet how his incarnation was brought about 
the evangelists and apostles describe to us in clear 
and express language. Matthew says that the angel 
said unto Joseph: “Fear not to take unto thee Mary © 
thy wife: for that which is conceived in her is of 
the Holy Ghost” (Matt. 1:20). Luke writes that 
the angel said to Mary: “The Holy Ghost shall 


come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall 


overshadow thee: therefore also that holy thing 
which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son — 
of God” (Luke 1:35). And John says: “In the 
beginning was the Word, and the Word was with 
God, and the Word was God. The same was in 
the beginning with God. All things were made by 
him” (John 1:1-3). “And the Word was made 





The Incarnation of Jesus Christ. 99 


‘flesh and dwelt among us... . and is the only 
begotten of the Father . .. . full of grace and 
truth” (John 1:14). And again John says: “That 
which was from the begining, which we have heard, 
which we have: seen with our eyes, which we have 
looked upon, and our hands have handled, of the 
Word of life (for the life was manifested, and we 
have seen it, and bear witness, and shew unto you 
that eternal life, which was with the Father, and 
was manifested unto us), that . . . declare we unto 
you” (John 1:1-3; 4:9). 

In all these words we see and note clearly that 
Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of the living 
God (John 1:18; 3:16), became man in Mary, noty / 
by human seed (which is corruptible, 1 Pet. 1:23), 
but by the eternal, incorruptible seed of God, the 
heavenly Father (1 John 3:9), through the power 
and operation of the Holy Ghost. 

John confirms this and says: “He that is of the 
earth is earthly, and speaketh of the earth; he that 
cometh from heaven (namely, Christ Jesus) is above 
all” (John 3:31). Paul accords with this in his 
epistle to the Corinthians and says: “The first man 
(Adam) is of the earth, earthy; the second man 
(Jesus Christ) is the Lord from heaven” (1 Cor. 
15:45, 47). These words are an explanation of the 
above mentioned words of John, in which a distinct 
difference is made between Christ and Adam, 
namely that Adam is of the earth, while Jesus is 
from heaven (1 Cor. 15:47). 

But if the body of Christ had been formed by 
- Mary (as the world thinks and says with such want 
of understanding regarding it), then there would 
be no difference between the body of Christ and 
that of Adam, because like as Christ was conceived 
of the Holy Ghost in Mary (Luke 1:31, 35; Matt. 
1:20), so also Adam was made by God, and had 
no other father than God. What difference would 
there be, then, between the body of Christ and the 
body of Adam, if the body of Christ had been made 
of the earth, the same as the body of Adam? (Gen. 
1:27); for the body of Christ would necessarily 
have been made of the earth if it had been formed 
of human seed; for because of the body all men 


100 The Incarnation of Jesus Christ. 


are dust and earth (Gen. 2:7; 3:14). It might, 
however, be suggested that Adam was made of pure 
earth by God. But the earth was corrupted by sin, 
and all men were laid under the curse and became 
corrupt in their nature (Rom. 3:10; Gal. 3:10; 
Rom. 5:14). How, then, should Christ have an 
uncorrupted body, if he had been formed of human 
seed (which is corrupt, John 14:4)? Far from it! 
God, the heavenly Father, prepared for Jesus Christ, 
his only begotten Son, a body (Heb. 10:5), not of 
corrupt human seed (Luke 1:35), but of his in- 
corruptible seed, with which he caused Mary, the 
pure virgin, to conceive through the power of his 
Holy Spirit, as the aforequoted statements of the 
evangelists and apostles clearly demonstrate (Matt. 
de 20h oDuke d=81). 

‘Therefore Christ everywhere testifies that he 
came down from heaven, but he speaks of his origin 
especially in John 6:51: “I am the living bread 
‘which came down from heaven: if any man eat of 
this bread, he shall live forever: and the bread that 
I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the 
life of the world.” (See also John 8:23; 15: 19-23; 
266-5 547-73). 

Now, if Christ is the bread of heaven, and if the 
‘bread of heaven moreover is the flesh of Christ, 
it is impossible for the flesh of Christ to be formed 
by Mary; for-neither the seed of Mary, nor that 
“of any earthly creature can by any means be the 
true living bread that came down from heaven, or 
‘be so called. 

Christ says much, according to John, of the 
eating of his flesh and the drinking of his blood 
(John 6: 32-58). It, therefore, behooves us to see 
and consider, how the flesh of Christ shall and must 
[be eaten and his blood drunk, namely thus, that we 
accept and obey the word of God with pure hearts 
and in true faith. Why do we eat the flesh of Christ 
and drink his blood? Because God’s word was made 
flesh (John 1:14), and hence the word of God and 
the flesh of Christ are one and the same, as Christ 
himself shows with these words: “I am the living 
bread which came down from heaven; and the 
‘bread that I will give is my flesh, which I will give 


The Incarnation of Jesus Christ. 101 


for the life of the world” (John 6:51). And the 
living bread—(which is Christ and his flesh) is be-. 
yond all doubt and contradiction the Word of God, . 
and therefore if any man believes and obeys the 
word of God (1 John 2:5), receives Christ, the 
Word of life and the bread of heaven, yea, he eats 
the flesh and drinks the blood of Christ (John 6:54). 
And because of this, Jesus calls his flesh “meat 
indeed,” and his blood, “drink indeed,’ because the 
word of God is really meat for the soul. But inas- 
much as the Word was made flesh (John 1:14), 
and therefore the Word and the flesh of Christ are 
the same, therefore also the flesh of Christ is meat 
indeed, and his blood drink indeed. 

Lastly: Christ Jesus is the living bread which 
came like dew or manna from heaven, and what 
was the food of angels has also become the food 
of men (Psa. 78:25). But the bread, which he 1s 
himself, and gives men—that is, believers—to eat, 
is his flesh, which he has given for the life of the 
world (John 6:51). 

Furthermore it is well to note and to reflect here 
that when man had fallen, there was no way of 
helping him except alone from and through him by 
whom and through whom he was created. therefore 
the eternal and almighty God (who created the first 
Adam and all creatures) in his unfathomable grace 
and mercy promised to fallen and corrupted man his 
eternal Word, and only begotten Son (by whom all 
men and all things are made, 1 Cor. 8:6), and per- 
mitted him in the fullness of time (of grace) to be- 
come a man (Gal. 4:4; John 1:14; Heb. 1:1, 2), 
that through this same Son, by whom he created 
man, he again might and would help to redeem 
man (2 Cor. 5:15), and forever reconcile man with 
him (John 3:16). Therefore John says so expressly: - 
“The Word (by whom all things were made) be- 
came flesh, and dwelt among us” (John 1:14). And 
Paul says that God “spared not his own Son, but 
delivered him up for us all” (Rom. 8:32). So then 
“God sent his own Son in the likeness of sinful 
flesh.” Hence “God was manifest in the flesh, justi- 
fied in the Spirit. seen of angels, preached unto the 
Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into 


102 The Incarnation of Jesus Christ. 


glory” (1 Tim. 3:16). Therefore “let this mind 
be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus: who, 
being in the form of God, thought it not robbery 
to be equal with God; but made himself of no repu- 
tation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and 
was made in the likeness of men; and being found 
in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and be- 
came obedient unto death, even the death of the 
cross” (Phil. 2: 5—8). 

From all this a Christian easily comprehends 
that God’s eternal Word, God’s own only begotten, 
firstborn Son—yea, God himself—became man 
(Rom. 8:32; John 3:16; 1 John 1:1—14), and 
laid aside his divine form, forsook his glory, and 
took upon himself the fashion of a man and a serv- 
-ant; in short, he who was God became man; and 
he who became man‘is God and man (John 1:14; 
Rom. 9:5; 1 John 5:11, 20), and he who is God and 
man, dies as.a man; and he who dies as a man, 
rises as God (John 20:17). 

All the aforesaid confirms the figure regarding 
Melchisedec, of whom the apostle writes to the 
Hebrews (7:1, 2), that this Melchisedec, king of 
Salem, priest of the Most High God, met Abraham 
returning from the slaughter of the kings, and 
blessed him; and Abraham gave him a tenth part 
of all. | | | 
In the first place he is characterized as a king 
of righteousness, after that also king of Salem, that 
is, a king of peace, without father, without mother, 
without descent, having neither beginning of days, 
nor end of life, but made like unto the Son of God, 
and remaining a priést continually. 

This text testifies clearly of the eternal divinity 
and of the humanity of Jesus Christ, the Son of 
God. For the apostle speaks of the person of 
Melchisedec as having neither beginning of days, 
nor end of life, whereby he compares the Son of 
God and his Person, which is eternal; for thus it 
is written of the Person of the Son of God: “His 
goings forth have been from of old, from everlast- 
ing” (Micah 5:2). He is the mighty God, the ever- 
lasting Father, he is God whose throne is for ever 
and ever. He has glory, he had glory with God 


The Incarnation of Jesus Christ. 103 


before the world was, he is before all and all things _ 
are made and upheld by him, he is the Word that 
was in the beginning with God, in him was. life 
(John 1:1-4).. He is the First and the Last, who 
liveth and was dead, and is alive for evermore 
Reever shd eis 2 Sy. See valso Isa? 976341 Psa: 
44:4,5; Heb. 1:8; John 7:6. 

These and similar passages of scripture really 
speak of the divinity of the eternal Son of God; for 
the humanity, the office and priesthood of the Son 
of God are not from everlasting, but the Person of 
the Son of God has always been with God—without 
beginning, the Word of God, the wisdom of God, 
God himself, truly, and in his being, in divine form 
and glorified as God (John 1:1; 1 John 5:20; 
John UT: 5). 

But when the apostle says of Melchisedec that 
he was without father, without mother, without 
descent’ (Heb. ‘7: 3); he himself explains it in an- 
other place (Heb. 7:6, 18), namely, that his descent 
is not counted (mentioned) among men, and this 
was because he was a type and figure of the Son 
of Gcd, the true Priest. For it is always known 
that Melchisedec had a father and mother among 
mankind, since the whole scripture does not once 
say that God created a man without father and 
mother except Adam and Eve; but Melchisedec’s 
descent is kept silent by the Spirit (Heb. 7:3) that - 
he may be truly compared to the Son of God,.to 
that which is true, that he lived and served on earth 
and offered himself up as a man (Gal. 1:4; Eph. 
5:2), and yet not of the earth, but from heaven ; 
born the Son of man, and yet is the life and salva- 
Zion of all men (John 3:16, 31; Tit. 2:14; Heb. 
11-856 1°Cor, 15 745; John ice 1-14; 1 John 1:1- 
14; is Cores ys 

‘Lastly, the apostle concludes that the ree 
Melchisedec, Jesus Christ (Gal. 4:5-8), is God and 
man, the Son of God and of man, God and God’s 
Son from everlasting, but becoming man and the 
Son of man in these last days (Heb. 1:1; Col. 


- 1:15-19), and yet in a way that he has not, and yet 


has, father, mother, and descent; for Mary calls 
Joseph his father (Luke 2:47), and she herself is 


104 The Incarnation of Jesus Christ. 


his mother, and according to the flesh he is born 
of the tribe of Judah (Matt. 1:25; 2:6; Mic. 5:2). 
But he has neither father nor mother nor descent 
among men (Heb. 7:3) in the sense that he should 
be born a man of human seed; for he is the second. 
Adam (1 Cor. 15:45, 47), the Lord from heaven. 
This same Lord from heaven is truly God and man, 
the Son of God and the Son of man, one Jesus 
Christ, our High Priest forever after the order of 
Melchisedec, our eternal King and Prince of peace 
(Romi 934):5) 3.) Heb 2265 ype Bee sala 
who rules in the house of David and in the spiritual 
Salem with the scepter of the divine word (Luke 
2:69; Psa. 45:6; Heb. 1:8), who by his grace 
brings peace to the consciences of the believers, and 
assures unto them the grace of God and everlasting 
salvation. Yea, he makes all his Christians kings 
and priests unto God, his heavenly Father, to whom ° 
be glory) forever... Amen.?(1 Pet. 2: 955 Revita): 

That the scripture calls Christ a seed of a woman 
(Gen. 3:15) does not confound us, as we will, by 
God’s grace, proceed to show as follows :— | 

In the first place the scripture in many places 
speaks figuratively, and calls many things differently 
i by=tletter than theyxare i Spirit(and real napure, 
and. as they need to be understood. Therefore 
Christ has many names in the scripture, which, 
according to the outward being, in no sense belong 
to him. For instance, he is called a Rock (1 Cor. 
10:4),.and.a Vine (John 15:1), not that he is in 
reality a natural rock or vine. but for significance’ 
sake he is so called. By the same token he is called 
the seed of a woman and the seed of Abraham, not 
because he is essentially the natural or carnal seed 
of the woman and of Abraham, but because to Adam 
and Eve and Abraham he is promised as a coming 
Savior who was to be born out of them according 
to (thewlesh (fGen. 3315 222-1 7 Aes: sGal ene 
But if at were) the: case that Christ was a natural 
seed of man, then man would have been holpen by 
God by his own seed, that is, by himself. Far from 
this; for God willed and needed to come to the aid 
of fallen and corrupt man, not by the natural seed 
of fallen’ and corrupted man, but .by his eternal 


The Incarnation of Jesus Christ. 105 


\ord and Son, so that the redemption of man was 
like his creation (John 1:1-3). 

Moreover, all Christians well know that Eve 
is a figure of the Christian Church (Eph. 5: 22, 23), 
which God, the eternal Father, has, through the 
second Adam, Christ Jesus, made his bride, for she 
is flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones, and all 
believing Christians are her children, having been 
born again of the incorruptible seed of God (1 Pet. 
1:23), and between whom and the serpent’s seed, 
that is, all the children of the devil (who are rightly 
called the seed of the serpent), there is constant 
enmity (John 8:44, 45; Gen. 3:15), and by whom 
they are assailed with all craftiness, yet through 
Christ Jesus always triumph and overcome, as Paul 
says: “Thanks be unto God, which giveth us the 
victory through our Lord Jesus Christ” (1 Cor. 
47052) Cor: 2214); 

In the second place, God made a promise to 
Abraham that in his seed all the Gentiles should 
be blessed (Gen. 22:18; Gal. 3:8). Thereupon God 
gave him Isaac his natural son, who bore the image 
of the promised Seed, the true Isaac, Jesus Christ. 
Since then Isaac is a natural son of Abraham and 
a type of Christ, and flesh cannot be signified for, 
or understood as pointing to, flesh, therefore also 
Christ cannot be a natural seed (descendant) of 
Abraham, but is a natural descendant of the spir- 
itual Abraham, his heavenly Father, who was prom- 
ised by grace to the patriarch Abraham by God 
Meneait: 8220; John bilh Gent 22:18 Gales os 
Rom. 4:3). 

Paul also explains the figure of Abraham, Sarah 
and Isaac thus: That Abraham typifies God the 
Father; Sarah, the new testament, and Isaac, Christ 
(Gal. 4: 22-31), and that not Jesus only, but all 
Christians are of the seed of Abraham, and, like 
Isaac, the children of promise, for Paul says: “They 
are not all Israel, which are of Israel; neither, be- 
cause they are the seed of Abraham are they all 
children: but in Isaac shall thy seed be called” 
(Rom. 9: 6-8). “That is, they which are the children 
of the flesh, these are not the children: but the 
children. of the promise are counted for the seed. 


106 The Incarnation of Jesus Christ. 


For this is the word of promise, At this time will 
I come, and Sarah shall have a son” (Rom. 9:8, 9). 

From these words we see clearly that the true 
Christians are alone the children of Abraham, for 
the reason that they believe in Jesus Christ, in 
whom Abraham also believed. But those who are 
Abraham’s children and-believe in Jesus Christ are 
also born of God, and those who are born of God 
are also children of God, the true Abraham, and of 
the eternal heavenly Father (Rom. 4:16,:17), of 
whom the patriarch Abraham was a figure. But 
those who do not believe in Jesus Christ are neither 
the children of Abraham nor of God (Rom. 9:6; 
Gal. 3:8); although born of Abraham after the 
flesh, they are still not included under the promise, 
nor counted for Abraham’s seed—so little does the 
natural pedigree or birth count with God, which is 
of the carnal seed of Abraham, and so wholly does 
the true sonship of Abraham consist in the incor- 
ruptible seed of God (Rom. 9:6; Gal. 3:8; 4:22), 
by which and from which comes the new birth. 
Hence what the scripture says of Abraham and his 
seed has more a spiritual than a natural significance, 
and must therefore be discerned with spiritual 
rather than with natural eyes (1 Pet. 1:23; 1 John 
Brrabss WOT). : 

In the third place all these scripture quotations 
and testimonies referred to regarding the incarna- 
tion of Jesus Christ (Matt. 1: 25)—that the Holy 
Ghost came down from above into Mary (Matt. 
1:35; Luke 1:31), and that that which was con- 
ceived in her was of the Holy Ghost, and that holy 
thing which was born of her is the Son of the Most 
High: and that Christ, the Word of life, whom all 
that the apostles made known to us, heard, saw, 
looked upon and felt with their hands, was made 
flesh (John 1:1-14; 1 John 1:1), and Christ, the 
second Adam, is the Lord himself from heaven, and 
that he is the living bread that came down from 
heaven, and that the living bread is his flesh which 
he has given for the life of the world (John 6:51)— 
all these scripture passages and comparisons, I say, 
which all alike do clearly demonstrate, how, whence, 
and whereby the incarnation of Jesus Christ took 


The Incarnation of Jesus Christ. 107 


_ place, would have to be broken and suffer violence 
if Christ Jesus is looked upon as the natural seed of 
woman and of Abraham. 

Therefore we will hold simply to the afore- \ 
mentioned passages and testimonies of scripture, 
believing and confessing: That Jesus Christ was 
conceived of the Holy Ghost, born of the virgin 
Mary, the holy Son of the Most High, the Word 
of life, the second Adam, the Lord himself from - 
heaven, the living bread which came down from 
heaven (Matt. 1:25; Luke 1:31; John 1:1-3; 1 
John 1:1, 2; John 6:51), which living bread he 
himself calls his flesh, which he has given for the 
life of the world. All this we believe without a 
doubt, without any addition to or subtraction from, 
the word of God, to which nothing may be added 
and from which nothing may be taken (Deut. 4:2; 
122325 “Prov, 30: 6:)i : 

Further, like as Christ is called the seed of the 
woman and of Abraham, in the same manner he is 
also called the fruit of the loins of David (Acts 
2:30), having been promised to him by God, and 
born of his seed according to the flesh, and yet is 
not his natural son; for the natural son of David 
and the natural fruit of his loins, of which the letter 
or *the ‘Scripture ‘text: speaks ‘or . makes’ ‘refererfce,.* 
was Solomon who sat upon the throne of his father 
David (1 Kings 2:12) and was the figure of Jesus | 
Christ, the peaceful Solomon, the everlasting King, 
who rules over the Israel of God : (Isa. .9:6,°7; 
11:1-8; Luke 1: 69-73; Gal. 3:16-18). But Christ 
is not a natural Son of the patriarch David, but of 
the living God (Matt. 16:16), therefore he himself 
said to the Pharisees: “What think ye of Christ? 
Whose son is he? They say unto him, The son 
of David. He saith unto them, How then doth 
David in spirit call him Lord, saying: The Lord 
said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand until 
IT make thine enemies thy footstool (Psa. 110:1). 
If David then call him Lord, how is he his son?” 
(Matt. 22: 41-45). 

With these words Jesus incontrovertibly shows 
that he is not the natural son of David or he could 
not be David’s Lord-and be called so, inasmuch as 


108 The Incarnation of Jesus Christ. 


the son is not the lord of the father, but the father 
is the sire (or lord) of the son. But Jesus Christ 
is the Lord and God of David, therefore he is not 
a natural son, as one who is conceived by his seed 
and becomes a man, but as of one born of his seed 
according to the flesh and has risen out of the tribe 
of Judah (Rom. 1:3, 4; 9:3-8), to which tribe 
David belonged. Those who understand the scrip- 
ture should not be surprised that the scripture calls 
Christ the seed of the woman and of.Abraham, and 
the fruit of the loins of David and of the body 
(womb) of Mary; for inasmuch as the scripture 
calls Christ sin, who knew no sin (Rom. 8:3; 
2 Cor. 5:21), simply because he became a sacrifice 
for sin, why should it be wonderful that this same 
scripture should, for the reasons already given, call 
Christ the seed of the woman, the seed of Abraham, 
the fruit of the loins of David, and of Mary’s womb, 
although essentially he is not, nor can he be con- 
sidered by any Christian as being such. 

Then there are some who reproachfully: tell us 
that the apostle tells the Hebrews that “both he 
that sanctifieth and they that are sanctified, are 
all of one: for which cause he is not ashamed to 
call them brethren, saying, I will declare thy name 
‘unto my brethren, in the midst of the church will 
I sing praise unto thee.” And again: “Forasmuch 
then as the children are partakers of the flesh and 
blood, he also likewise took part of the same” (Heb. 
22 Led, Ay. 

To this we answer briefly thus: That the apostle 
neither said nor meant that Jesus Christ was made 
man of our flesh and blood is clear enough from 
what has already been said regarding the incarnation 
of Christ, and what has been quoted from the holy 
Scripture, for it is neither right nor permissable (as 
some learned men Say it is) that many passages of 
scripture must make way for one single passage, 
and be broken, distorted and altered because of 
one passage, but one passage should give way to 
many and be understood according to many proofs, 
yet all things with definiteness, truth and justice. 

Hence it is true and incontrovertible that the 
words of the apostle above quoted must be under- 


The Incarnation of Jesus Christ. 109 


stood and explained as meaning that both Christ 
that sanctifies and the Christians that are sanctified 


- are not of Adam, but of God, the heavenly Father, 


of whom Christ is born from everlasting (Mic. 
5:2), and of whom all Christians, through Christ 
Jesus, are born in the Holy Spirit (Col. 1:18, 14), 
as Paul says: “Ye are all the children of God by 
faith in Christ Jesus” (Gal. 3:26). And Peter says: 
“Ye... are born again, not of corruptible seed, 
but of incorruptible, by the word of God” (1 Pet. 
1:23). Hence “whosoever believeth that Jesus is 
the Christ, is born of God” (1 John 5:1). There- 
fore all Christians are brethren and sisters of Jesus 
Christ, but not because of the natural birth, but 
because of the spiritual birth (Matt. 13:43; 12:50), 
as Christ himself declares in the gospel (Rom. 
8:29). 

Since then these brethren and sisters—children 
of Christ—have flesh and blood, Christ also partook 
of the same, that is, he became man, like as his 
brethren, sisters and children are (Heb. 2:14). But 
the apostle does not say—nor does he mean—that 
he became man of our human flesh and blood, and 
it cannot be truthfully proven from his words, for 
Christ is the spotless Lamb of God (John 1:36; 
i hetrarig > Rey 5 6y,)without - sin: but his 
brethren, sisters and children are, according to the 
flesh, sinful by nature; yea, what dwells in their 
flesh Paul clearly shows in his epistle to the Romans 
when he says: “I-know that in me (that is, in my 
flesh) dwelleth no good thing” (Rom. 7:18). Hence 
the holy flesh of Christ, which is meat indeed (John 
6:55) and makes alive, did not originally come from 
our flesh and blood, but he (Jesus Christ) was 
graciously given to us and begotten by God, our 
heavenly Father, as a gift and proof of his ever- 
lasting love and unfathomable mercy, and was made 
man (Isa. 7:14) like as we are. How, by what 
means, and whence this came to pass, has been 
sufficiently stated and declared above. 

In order to more thoroughly understand this, let 
us note the analogy and fellowship of God and 
Christ with all believers, namely, that all believers 
are partakers of the divine nature (2 Pet. 1:4), yea, 


110 The Incarnation of Jesus Christ. 


called the possession and offspring of the Most 
High God (Acts 17:28, 29; John 1:12; -Rom., 
Sader Gal. 426, Te: de jobnasa Lats Ar ss. 228 a 
and are in the world as Christ was in the world 
and shall in time to come become like him (John 
10: 28-30, 34-38). Now, although men become par- 
takers of the divine nature, yea, are the possession 
and offspring of the Most High, and shall become 
like Christ in heaven and on earth, they do not in 
their being and in person become what God and 
Christ are. O no! The creature nevermore be- 
comes Creator, and flesh will nevermore become the 
eternal Spirit himself, which is God (John 4: 24; 
2. Cor.-3:6;.17;.1 Cor, 15345), for that.is impos 
sible; but all believers become the possession and 
offspring of the Most High through regeneration 
(John 3:3), the imparting and fellowship of the 
divine nature, holiness. glory, purity and eternal life, 
and shall in the glorified state shine as God, even as 
God is light (John 6:48; 14:3); live as God lives 
eternally; and as God is a Spirit, so they also will 
become spirits and spiritual who are or have been 
in outward being and body earth and flesh, and are 
taken up into glory as God is in glory. But men 
are and remain creatures, and God Creator and 
Ruler; nevertheless they are one, and God all ithe 
all (John 17: 22-24; 1. Cor, 15: 28). 

Now, like as the believers are exalted by Christ, 
transplanted into God, become partakers of the 
divine nature (2 Pet. 1:4), and in glory become 
like Christ, so also Christ for the sake of his 
brethren humbled himself (Phil. 2:5-8; Heb. 2: 14- 
18), that is, inasmuch as his brethren have flesh 
and blood, he likewise partook of the same, and 
thus became like his brethren in lowliness,; Human 
nature, weakness, temptation and mortality, yet 
without .sin, (Heb, 521483 -tls94,083 4-0 coh beers 
2: 21-24; Rom. 8:3), appeared in the form of sinful 
flesh, and upon him as upon a mighty prince were 
laid the infirmities of all his brethren; nevertheless 
he is, in his being, the Word which was made flesh 
(John 1:14), the second Adam, that is, the second 
Man, the Lord himself from heaven (1 Cor. 15: 47). 

Lastly, Christ is like his brethren, and again his 


The Incarnation of Jesus Christ. 1il 


brethren are like him, namely: Christ is God, and 
the Son of God (John 3:16; 1 John 4:9; 5:11, 12); 
his brethren, by the grace of God, through Jesus 
Christ, are gods and the children of the Most High 
(Psa. 82, 63:ufohni07¢34;00 ohn’ acu), 724 eb: 
2:13); and because they have flesh and blood, 
Christ likewise took upon himself the same (Heb. 
2:14). Nevertheless there is a difference between 
Christ and his brethren. 1. Christ is the true and 
natural God and Son of God (1 John 5:1, 5; Eph. 
1:3), while his brethren, by the grace of God, are 
gods and children of God by election, adoption, and 
the imparting of the divine nature and gifts through 
Jesus Christ (2 Thess. 2:13, 14; Rom. 8:3). 2. 
Christ, the eternal Word made flesh, was conceived 
of the Holy Ghost in the virgin Mary and born of 
her (Matt. 1:20; Luke 2:7; John 1:14), there- 
fore also the flesh is pure, spotless, holy and did 
not see corruption (Acts 2:31; Psa. 16:10; John 
6:51), but is the living bread and gives life to the 
world. But his brethren are, according to the flesh, 
of the earth, and to earth they will again return 
(Gen. 3:19; 1 Cor. 15:44), although they shall, 
at the coming of Christ, by the power of God be 
clothed with an incorruptible and glorified body, 
and thus: be like Christ (2 Cor. 5:1; Phil. 3:20). 
They are also by nature evil and of a sinful genera- 
tion, nevertheless by the grace of God through Jesus 
Christ, it is not imputed to them for sin so long as 
they are and remain in him (Rom. 4:5; 8:1; Psa. 
oot 1,32): 

The question is commonly asked: If Christ did 
not receive his flesh and blood from Mary, how then 
could he suffer and die? In reply we ask: If the 
flesh of Christ is of the earth and earthly, of Adam 
and his seed (which was of a sinful nature and laid 
under the curse, Rom. 5:12), how then was the 
Word of God made flesh (John 1:14; 1 John 1:1)? 
How could Christ make an everlasting atonement 
for our sins and pay for them? Therefore the 
scripture everywhere says that God gave his only 
begotten Son, by whom the world and all things 
were made (John: b:3; 5: 10;*:38216;)Heb, 1:5); 
yea, gave him even unto death. - And if any one 


112 The Incarnation of Jesus Christ. 


should ask: Did God die? we answer that neither 
the Father nor the Holy Ghost, but the Son of God 
was made man; laying by his divine form he took 
upon himself the form of a servant and died in the 
flesh, but was made alive by the Spirit, as Peter 
says (1 Pet. 3:18). Therefore Paul says to the 
bishops of the church: “Take heed therefore unto 
yourselves, and to all the flock, over the which the 
Holy Ghost hath made you overseers, to feed (gov- 
ern) the church of God, which he hath purchased 
with his own blood” (Acts 20: 28). 

For us these words of the apostle suffice; we 
will neither add thereto nor take from them, that — 
we be not condemned nor be found untruthful 
(Deuati4:-1; 4:12:32 57>Prova 80: 6). ooNor) iareirwe 
ashamed to openly confess with Paul that God was 
made manifest in the flesh and shed his blood for 
us (Acts 20:28; 1 Tim. 3:16). But if any man 
desires to quarrel with us about it, he does not 
quarrel with us, but with the apostle, and with the 
whole scripture, and moreover with many bishops 
and teachers who unanimously adopted the follow- 
ing resolution against Nestorius, the bishop of Con- 
stantinople: “We confess that God’s Word suffered 
in the flesh and was crucified in the flesh”; that is, 
we say that the flesh of Christ quickens, as Christ 
himself calls his flesh the bread of life (John 6: 48- 
58). Now, it is an established fact that “the Spirit 
quickeneth,”’ and that God’s Word is Spirit and life 
(John 6:63) and alone is food for the soul. Since 
then the flesh of Christ also quickeneth and is food 
for the soul, therefore the flesh of Christ must also 
be the Spirit and the Word of God, and therefore 
also Christ calls his flesh the living bread (which 
is the Word of God, John 1: 1-3), and therefore John 
says: “The Word was made flesh” (John 1:14). 

In conclusion, then, our belief and the confession 
of our hearts before God the Lord, before his angels 
and all true Christians, and before all, is, that Jesus 
Christ is the own, natural, only begotten, firstborn 
Son of the living God, truly GOD and the Son of 
God (John 1:1-10; 3:16; Heb. 1:1, 2, 5, 6, 8-10; 
Mic. 5:2), truly a man, and the Son of man; God. 
and the Son of God, from everlesting with Ged and 


The Incarnation of Jesus Christ. 113 


in God (of whom he is born) from eternity (Rom. 
8:3). But in these last days, according to the 
promise of the Father, by his own, voluntary, re- 
signed submission, obedience, humiliation, he, lay- 
ing aside his divine form, took upon himself the 
form of a man and a servant, he became a man— 
and this out of overflowing love; therefore he is 
also the only true Mediator between God and man, 
for he truly stands between (1 Tim. 2:5), in this 
that he is not only God and the Son of God, but he 
is also man and the Son of man. He is like the 
Father in his divinity (John 10:30), but he is like 
man in his humanity, except sin and all sinful and 
carnal nature of our flesh, for he is the second Adam 
(1 Cor. 15:47),.the Lord from heaven. He gave 
his flesh for us unto death, and commended his 
Spirit into the hands of his Father. . That at the 
death of Christ the sun was darkened (Matt. 27:49; 
Mark 15:33), and yet did not pass away seems to 
show, and may not improperly be taken to point to, 
the fact (since in the scripture God is called a Sun 
‘and is represented as a sun (Psa. 84:11), that the 
Brightness of God’s Glory—Jesus Christ—died ac- 
cording to the ‘flesh (1. Pet. 3:18;: Heb. 1:3) and 
at the same time lives according to the Spirit, as 
he himself says: “I am he that liveth, and was 
dead; and, behold, I am alive for evermore” (Rev. 
ae Sy. 

For three hours, contrary to nature, He sun was 
darkened, and yet did not pass away; for three days 
and three nights Jonah was in the fish (Jonah 1:17) 
and was supernaturally kept alive; so also Christ 
Jesus was dead for three days in the flesh, contrary 
to his divine nature, and he rose again from the 
dead on the third day (1 Cor. 15:4) and was super- 
naturally made alive in the Spirit. » Thus the 
precious grain of Wheat, Jesus Christ, fell into the 
ground (John 12: 24), and by his suffering and death 
brought forth much saving fruit. Thus the faithful 
and only Good Shepherd, Jesus Christ, according 
to and at the command of his heavenly Father, of 
himself laid down his life, and again took it up unto 
himself (John 10:11, 15, 17, 18). Thus the innocent 
Lamb of God, Jesus Christ, which taketh away the 


8 


114 The Incarnation of Jesus Christ. 


sin of the world and who became unto his heavenly 
Father a sweet smelling savor, but unto us ever- 
lasting salvation, was offered upon the cross, for 
this was his own will (Isa. 53:10; John 1:39; 
TePet.-1 299 “Eph ond): 
- This, in brief, is our confession regarding the 
Incarnation of Jesus Christ, the Son of God. Beside 
this we also declare that whoever does not recognize 
and-confess the eternal divinity and true humanity 
of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, is Antichrist (1 John 
5:10), for he does not. believe the record that God 
gave of his Son. Furthermore we say with Paul: 
“Henceforth know we no man after the flesh: yea, 
though we have known Chfist after the flesh, yet 
now henceforth know we him no more” (2 Cor. 
5:16). “Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is 
a new creature: old things are passed away; behold, 
all things are become new” (2 Cor. 5:17). There- 
fore it is not sufficient that we confess that Jesus 
Christ, the Son of the living God, was conceived of 
the Holy Ghost in Mary, and born of her a real 
man, but we also must receive and treasure him 
through the Holy Ghost as the eternal Word (1 
John 1:1) and incorruptible Seed of God, the ever- 
lasting Father (1 Pet. 1:23), and be preserved 
thereby. If not, then all our boasted knowledge 
and faith is of no account (1 John 3:6, 7), for the 
devil also knows and confesses that Jesus is the 
Son of God (Matt. 8:29; Jas. 2:19), but as little 
as such knowledge and confession is of any benefit 
to the devil, so little will the mere oral confession 
of faith benefit us without the living, operating 
power of God (John 8:19), of which all pious 
Christians are the recipients. Therefore Christ 
says: “He that believeth on the Son hath ever- 
lasting life’ (John 11:25; 3:16). Why? Because 
he has received the divine power of the eternal life- 
giving life in his heart (John 3:16; 6:51; 11:25), 
which completely permeates, purifies, renews and 
finally impels, leads into and transforms into its 
origin, from whence it sprang, even into everlasting, 
divine life. 

If any man thus believes in Jesus Christ and has 
received this living power of God and it manifests 


The Incarnation of Jesus Christ. 115: 


itself everywhere in him, he is a true, believing 
Christian, he confesses Christ in the Spirit (John 
3:18), for he is of one Spirit with him (1 Cor. 6:17), 
and he also comprehends what the flesh of Christ 
really is; for he is himself flesh of Christ’s flesh, 
and bone of his bones (Eph. 5:30). Therefore he 
has in Spirit and in true faith eaten the flesh of 
Christ and drunk his blood (John 6:53-55), by 
which union and fellowship he has become one body 
with Christ. This knowledge of God and Christ is 
eternal life; whatever else is said of Jesus Christ, 
without this indwelling power of God, without this 
enlightenment of the Holy Spirit, and without this 
fellowship and partaking of the divine seed, the 
attributes and nature of Christ (John 17:3, 8), all 
is vain babbling, the challenge of a blind man, who, 
according to the old adage, disputes and passes 
judgment on colors that he has never seen and can- 
not see. Therefore we would faithfully admonish 
every one who claims to be a Christian to thus 
learn to know Christ, thus believe in him, thus 
receive him, that in the last day Jesus may acknowl- 
edge and receive him as his brother, sister, mother 
(Matt. 12:50), before God, his Father, and all his 
chosen angels in his everlasting kingdom. Amen. 


‘See oo ne jis 


- puseetk eee Boshi 
Jere ie 


be id ve sige 
uae tines 


— ah 


ee ee 





THE TRUE KNOWLEDGE 


of 


JESUS CHRIST 


ibe NEY peGOEPE NSO N: Cbd Ei les 
MIGHTY ANDER VER LIVING-GOD? 
OUR LORD AND SAVIOR, 


and 
A BRIEF ADMONITION 
on the 
IMMOVABLE, IMMUTABLE FOUNDATION 


OF HIS DOCTRINE OF SALVATION. 


By 
D. P. 


I determined not to know anything among you, 
save Jesus Christ, and him crucified. . 
LEN See ee 


FOREWORD. 


Unto all brethren and sisters whom God hath 
from the beginning chosen to salvation (2 Thess. 
2:13) in Jesus Christ (Rom. 8:29) and hath now 
enlightened by his Holy *Spirit and called through 
the gospel into the fellowship of his Son: Grace, 
peace and mercy from God, our heavenly Father, 
and Jesus Christ, who gave himself for our sins, 
that he might deliver us from this present evil 
world, according to the will of God, his heavenly 
Father, to whom be glory forever and ever. Amen. 

(Gal. 1: 3-5.) 


THE TRUE KNOWLEDGE OF 
JESUS CHRIST. 


Beloved brethren and sisters in Christ Jesus, 
and co-partners in the grace of God and in the 
fellowship of the gospel (Phil. 1:15): Inasmuch 
as these are the perilous times of which Christ and 
his apostles prophesied, namely, that many false 
Christs should arise and deceive many (Matt. 24:4, 
24:-1 iim. 4:3; 2 Fim. 3:1> 2 Pet. 2:1: Jude 4), 
therefore I feel constrained by the debt of Christian 
love to write a little, by the grace of God, concern- 
ing the true knowledge of Jesus Christ, and of the 
immovable foundation of his doctrine of salvation, 
although I have confidence in you that you as the 
children of the new testament are yourselves taught 
of God, by the anointing which you have received 
of him. Nevertheless since (as the apostle says) 
all members have not the same office (Rom. 12:4; 
1 Cor..12:15-19; Eph. 4:16) and they serve one 
another, each member according to his nature, gift, 
and function, and all for the welfare and preservation 
of the body, therefore I desire to serve my beloved 
brethren and sisters, my fellow-members in Christ 
Jesus, with my little gift, to rightly present, point 
out and portray Christ Jesus and his word, inas- 
much as many undertake to lower the high estate 
that belongs to Christ Jesus, one denying his di- 
vinity, another not rightly confessing his incarna- 
tion, and a third rejecting his blessed doctrine, so 
that the only begotten Son of God, Jesus Christ, is 
blasphemed in many different ways (even as the 
Holy Spirit has said; I) Pet..2:6-;.Isas.28:16:.8:14.;.. 
Luke 2:34—that to the unbelievers Christ should 
become a stone of stumbling and a rock of offence, 
and a sign which should be spoken against), there- 
fore love for my Lord and Master, Jesus Christ, 
constrains me (as much as lies in me, his poor 
‘minister and. unprofitable servant) to make my 
confession, first, of his true divinity; secondly, of 
his holy humanity; thirdly, of his doctrine of salva- 


120 The True Knowledge of Jesus Christ. | 


tion; for my heart’s delight is to extol and glorify 
Christ Jesus, in the face of all blasphemers and 
despisers of Christ and his word, who are wise in 
their own eyes and consider themselves men of 
understanding (Jer. 10:1-10; Isa. 5:20, 21), and 
yet who, with all their wisdom, are fools before 
God (Bar. 3:23), in which wisdom the Pharisees 
and scribes, the controversialists of this world, and 
the fabricators of high and incomprehensible things, 
have always made, and are still making, fools of 
themselves, as it is written: “I will destroy the 
wisdom of the wise, and will bring to nothing the 
understanding of the prudent” (1 Cor. 1:19; Isa. 
29:14). Where are the wise, where are the theo- 
logians, where are the controversialists of this 
world? Has not God made the wisdom of this 
world foolishness? | 


Therefore I beseech all my brethren and sisters 
by the mercy of God and the love of the Spirit, not 
to seek to be wise in your own eyes, or prudent in 
yourselves, but that you hold, confess and acknowl- 
. edge Christ Jesus alone as the wisdom of God, that 
all grace came by him and all salvation comes from 
‘him, and that there is no other name given us 
among men whereby we may be saved, but alone 
the name of our LORD JESUS CHRIST (Acts 
$e lO p12 2937:6, 716 )c ae 


But no one can obtain this salvation unless he 
first truly know Christ Jesus. And this is true 
knowledge of Jesus Christ, that we know him both 
in his true divinity, and in his pure, spotless human- 
ity. Of his true divinity the prophet Isaiah testifies 
as follows: “Unto us a child is born, unto us a son 
is given; and the government shall be upon his 
shoulder; and his name shall be called Wonderful, 
Counsellor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, 
the Prince of Peace. Of the increase of his govern- 
ment and peace there shall be no end, upon the 
throne of David, and upon his kingdom, to order it, 
and to establish it with judgment and with justice 
from henceforth even forever” (Isa. 9:6, 7). See 


also Luke 1: 32, 33. 
Again Isaiah says: “Behold, the Lord God will 


The True Knowledge of Jesus Christ. 121 


come with strong hand, and his arm shall rule for 
him, and . . . he shall feed his flock like a shep- 
herd,” etc. (Isa. 40:10, 11). This shepherd of God 
which the heavenly Father promised to the people 
of Israel is Christ Jesus, the true David, the King 
of Israel, Prince and Shepherd, who came to seek 
the lost sheep of the house of Israel (Matt. 10:6). 
Therefore he says of himself: “I am the good 
shepherd: the good shepherd giveth his life for the 
sheep” (John 10:11). And Peter says: “Ye were 
as sheep going astray; but are now returned unto 
the Shepherd and Bishop of your souls” (1 Pet. 
2:25). 

Furthermore Isaiah prophesies of the new 
heavenly Jerusalem (which is the Christian Church) 
saying: “Thy Maker is thine husband; the Lord 
of hosts is his name, and thy Redeemer the Holy 
One of Israel; the God of the whole earth shall 
he be called” (Isa. 54:5). 

This prophecy proves to us sufficiently the true 
divinity and glory of Jesus Christ; for although 
it may be said and plead that God the Father him- 
self is the Lord and Husband of his Church, which 
we also confess and acknowledge, nevertheless it 
is incontestable that Jesus Christ is, in the new 
testament, really the Lord and Bridegroom of. Jeru- 
salem, as he himself testifies in these words: “Can 
the children of the bridechamber mourn as long as. 
the Bridegroom is with them? But the days will 
come when the Bridegroom shall be taken from 
_ them, and then shall they fast” (Matt. 9:15). And 
John the Baptist confesses that he is the friend of 
the Bridegroom, when he says: “He that hath the 
bride is the bridegroom; but the friend of the. 
bridegroom, which standeth and heareth him, re- 
joiceth greatly because of the bridegroom’s voice ;. 
this my joy therefore is fulfilled. He must increase, 
but I must decrease” (John 3:29, 30). And Paul’ 
says to the Corinthians (2 Cor. 11:2): “I have. 
espoused you to one husband, that I may present. 
you as a chaste virgin to Christ.” And John says 
in Revelations: “I, John, saw the holy city, new. 
Jerusalem, coming down from God out of heaven; 
prepared as a bride adorned for her husband. And’ 


122 The True Knowledge of Jesus Christ. 


I heard a great voice out of heaven saying, Behold, 
the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will 
dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and 
God himself shall be with them, and be their God. 
And there came unto me one of the seven angels, 

. saying, Come hither, I will show thee the 
‘bride; the Lamb’s wife. And he carried me away 
in the spirit to a great and high mountain, and 
showed me that great city, the holy Jerusalem, 
descending out of heaven from God, having the 
glory of God” (Rev. 21:2, 3, 9-11). 

From these words it is evident that Jesus, the 
Lamb of God, is also the husband of the new Jeru- 
salem; hence he is also the Redeemer, who loves 
his bride, and gave himself for her, as Paul says: 
“That he might sanctify and cleanse it by the wash- 
ing of water by the word, that he might present - 
it to himself a glorious church, not having spot or 
wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it should be 
holy and without blemish” (Eph. 5: 25-27). 

This accords with what the prophet David says: 
“Hearken, O daughter, and consider, and incline 
’ thine ear; forget also thine own people, and thy 
father’s house; so shall the king greatly desire thy 
beauty: for he is thy Lord; and worship thou him” 
(Psa. 45:10, 11). This king is Christ Jesus, upon 
whose vesture and thigh a name is written, KING 
OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS (Rev. 19: 
16). Therefore also the bride, that is, the Christian 
Church, shall honor and worship him. 

Thus also Jeremiah prophesies of Christ and 
says: “Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that 
I will raise unto David a righteous Branch, and a 
King shall reign and prosper, and shall execute 
judgment and justice in the earth. In his days 
Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely: 
and this is his name whereby he shall be called: 
THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS” (Jer. 23: 
0, 6; 33:15, 16). This name LORD, by which 
the prophet here calls him, is with the Jews the 
inexpressible. name which they call TERTRA- 
‘GRAMMATON, which the holy scripture ascribes 
‘to none but the true GOD and LORD. | ' 
Daniel, in referring to Christ and his kingdom, 


The True Knowledge of Jesus Christ. 123 


speaks of a stone that was cut out of the mountain 
without hands (Dan. 2:45), and which itself became 
a great mountain, and filled the whole earth (Dan. 
2:35). This is a far-reaching prophecy and in- 
contestible evidence of the actual divinity of our 
Lord Jesus Christ (Isa, 53:12); for the taking of 
the stone out of the mountain without hands indi- 
cates to us the wonderful, incomprehensible and 
inexpressible birth of the Son of God, Jesus Christ, 
trom God his heavenly Father, which came to pass 
before the beginning of creation; therefore also all 
creation cannot comprehend or describe the same; 
but for us it is sufficient that we know beyond a 
doubt and firmly believe that Jesus Christ is the 
Son of the living God, born of God from the begin- 
ning and from the dawn of eternity, that his origin 
and descent is from God, as the scripture in many 
places abundantly testifies, whereby then his true 
divinity is sufficiently shown and established; for 
it is undeniable, the testimony of Jesus himself, 
that like produces like (John 3:6), therefore the 
Father and his only begotten Son are of the same 
_ divine order, the same as the mountain and the 
stone that was cut out of it without hands are of 
the same substance, although all creature com- 
parisons are far too insignificant and weak to prop- 
erly portray divine things, for the imperfect creature 
cannot fully express the perfect Creator. The sig- 
nification of the stone which was cut without hands 
out of the mountain and became so great that it 
filled all the earth, is explained thus by Daniel him- 
self: That the God of heaven will bring forth his 
Christ, who shall have all power in heaven and on 
earth (Matt. 28:18), which honor, power and 
glory God the Father will give to no one but alone 
to his only begotten Son, Jesus Christ, who was 
- born of him, proceeded from him, and therefore is 
one with him, so that all that the Father has, the 
Son has also; and what the Son-has, that the Father 
has also; as Christ himself. declares in many places 
in his gospel (Luke 10:22; John 16:15, etc.). Yea, 
the time would be too short for me if I should here 
fully discuss and explain at length from the old 
testament all the passages and testimonies referring 


124 The True Knowledge of Jesus Christ. 


to Jesus Christ, of his true divinity, of his everlast- 
ing kingdom, of his divine honor, power and glory, 
beside all the shadows and types, of Melchisedec, 
of Isaac, of Joseph, of Samson, of Moses, and of 
Aaron’s rod which in one night blossomed and 
yielded almonds; of the manna, and of the rock 
from which flowed water, of the serpent which 
Moses raised as a Saving token in the wilderness, 
of David and Solomon, of the holy of holies, both 
in the tabernacle of Moses and in Solomon’s temple; 
of the golden altar, of the many sacrifices, of the 
mercy-seat and all the other types and figures, all 
of which point to Christ Jesus (Ex. 16:16; Psa. 
182153 Gen 14048,.495* Niume20cii 215 Seem 


21-35): Gen: 36, ete?)!/? Thereioré: 1 (requestathe 


Christian to examine the scripture for himself, even 
as Christ commanded the Jews saying, “Search the 
scripture; for in them ye think ye have eternal life, 
and they are they which testify of me” (John 5: 39), 
and pray to God for wisdom, for he will give it 
(Jas. 1:5). Nevertheless I shall draw attention 
briefly to several passages in the new testament in 
confirmation of the true divinity of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. nt 

In the first place Christ is the firstborn, the only 
begotten and own Son of the almighty and living 
God, which alone is sufficient to prove his true 


‘divinity, as said above; for inasmuch as the Son is 


born of God in a natural and yet inexpressible man- 
ner (Heb. 1:1-3), even as brightness naturally pro- 
ceeds from the sun, and light from the fire, hence 
he is in all things like his Father, so that Jesus 
himself said to Philip: “Philip! he that hath seen 
me hath seen the Father” (John 14:9). Therefore 
also the scripture calls him the image of the invisible 
God (2 Cor. 4:4; Col. 1:15; Heb. 1:3), the bright- 
ness of the everlasting Light, a spotless reflection 
of his divine glory, the brightness of the glory of 
God, and the express image of his Person (Heb. 
1:3), from which it is easily to be understood how 
conformably God is reflected by his Son, how com- 
pletely the Son expresses the Father. Therefore 
Christ says: “No man knoweth the Son, but the — 
Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, save 


The True Knowledge of Jesus Christ, 125 


‘the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal 
chim” (Matt. 11:29). So wholly one are Son and 
Father, and alone know each other as those of like 
‘divine being, who have one will together eternally, 
work all things together, and have all things in 
‘common (John 5:20, 21; 16:14, 15; 17:22, 23). 
John declares this in the beginning of his gospel, 
where, in speaking of the true divinity of Jesus 
‘Christ, he says: “In the beginning was the Word, 
and the Word was with God, and the Word was 
God. And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt 
among us, and we beheld his glory, the glory as of 
the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and 
truth” (John 1:1, 14). 

This is an incontrovertible proof of the eternal 
divinity of Jesus Christ, the only begotten of the 
Father, because he was the Word, in the beginning, 
with God, and God himself was the Word. Christ 
himself confirms this in what he said to the Jews: 
“Verily, verily, I say unto you, Before Abraham 
was, I am” (John 8:58), and when he said in his 
prayer: “Father, glorify thou me with thine own 
self with the glory which I had with thee before 
the world was” (John 17:5). And in Revelations 
of St. John Christ testifies of himself and speaks 
in the same manner as God spoke of himself through 
isaialy-(isay 40243. 43-12, 18: 044:.6);:. “lam ithe 
first-and:the last’? (Rev. *s17): 

John also bears strong testimony to the true 
divinity of Jesus Christ in his epistle in this that he 
calls Christ the Word of Life and eternal life (1 
John 1:1, 2), saying: “That which was from the 
beginning, which we have heard, which we have 
seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, 
and our hands have handled, of the Word of life; 
(for the life was manifested, and we have seen it, and 
bear witness, and shew unto you that eternal life. 
which was with the Father, and was manifested 
unto us)” (1 John 1:1, 2). And again: “We know 
that the Son of God is come, and hath given us an 
understanding, that we may know him that is true, 
and we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus 
Christ. This is the true God, and eternal life’ (1 
John 5:20). : 


126 The True Knowledge of Jesus Christ. 


This harmonizes with what Paul says to the 
Romans of his brethren and kinsmen according to ~ 
the flesh: “Who are Israelites; to whom pertaineth 
the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and 
the giving of the law, and the service of God, and 
the promises; whose are the fathers, and of whom, 
as concerning the flesh, Christ came, who is over 
all, God blessed forever. Amen” (Rom. 9:4, 5). 

To human reason this is incomprehensible and 
must be received by faith alone, that the same 
Christ, who is of the fathers, as concerning the 
flesh, is over all, God blessed: forever. Therefore 
Paul says: “Great is the mystery of godliness: 
God was manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, 
seen of angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed 
on in the world, received up into glory” (1 Tim. 
3:16). This mystery the apostle Thomas could 
not rightly apprehend at first, but after being en- 
lightened by God through the Holy Spirit, and 
rightly taught by experience, and thus came to 
believe truly, he said to Christ: “My Lord and my 
God” (John 20:28). This confession of Thomas 
is not addressed to the Father, but to Christ, and 
therefore cannot be understood as meaning the 
Father, but Christ. 

Paul writes to the Colossians that “by him are 
all things created” (the same as John states in the 
beginning of his gospel, John 1:3) “that are in 
heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, 
whether they be thrones or dominions, or princi- 
palities, or powers: all things were created by him, 
and for him; and he is before all things, and by him 
all things consist” (Col. 1:16, 17). Hence in him 
are hidden all the treasures of the wisdom and the 
knowledge of God; yea, the fullness of the God- 
head dwells in him bodily. Therefore the apostle 
shows so clearly to the Hebrews that the Son up- 
holdeth “all things by the word of his power” (Heb. 
1:3). “And again, when he bringeth in the first- 
begotten into the world, he saith, And let all the 
angels of God worship him” (Heb. 1:6). But what 
this is, Christ explains himself and says: “The 
Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all 
judgment unto the Son: that all men should honor 


The True Knowledge of Jesus Christ. 127 


the Son, even as they honor the Father. He that 
honoreth not the Son honoreth not the Father which 
hath sent him” (John 5:22, 23). The apostle also 
writes in the first chapter to the Hebrews of the 
difference between the Son of God and the angels, 
and says: “He maketh his angels spirits, and his 
ministers a flame of fire. But unto the Son he saith, 
Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever: a scepter 
of righteousness is the scepter of thy kingdom. 
Thou hast loved righteousness, and hated iniquity ; 
therefore God, even thy God, hath anointed thee 
with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. And thou 
Lord, in the beginning hast laid the foundation of 
the earth, and the heavens are the works of thy 
hands: they shall perish, but thou remainest” (Heb. 
74L1; sPsaic45: 6;° 7). 
There are many other passages and testimonies 
in the new testament which ascribe and attribute 
to Christ Jesus all divine honor, might, strength, 
_ power, glory and nature, but it is unnecessary to dis- 
cuss all these here, for from all cf the aforesaid it 
is evident enough who Jesus Christ is, and what he 
is, inasmuch as the prophets and apostles declare 
and testify of him that he is the mighty God, the 
Everlasting Father, the almighty Lord, the Lord 
of hosts (Isa. 9:6), the Holy One of Israel, the 
Lord, the Creator of the ends of the earth (Isa. 
40:28), the Righteous Branch of David, the Lord 
our Righteousness (Jer. 23:5, 6), the only begotten 
Son of the Most High and living God (Matt. 16: 27; 
John 6:69; 1:18), by whom grace and truth has 
come, in whom are hidden all the treasures of the 
wisdom and knowledge of God (Col. 2:3), the 
Word of God, in whom dwelleth all the fullness of 
the Godhead bodily (John 1:1), yea, who is himself 
the wisdom of God and the Word of God (1 Cor. 
1:24; Rev. 19:13); the truth and everlasting life; 
God, whose throne shall endure for ever and ever 
(Psa. 45:6), the Creator of heaven and earth, for 
all things are made by him, and without him was 
not anything made that was made; everything exists 
am bine (Johnah:339:Colel16,.17; Heb k:3),and 
he does what he “‘seeth the Father do” (John 5:19), 
therefore he also has divine glory with the Father, 


128 The True Knowledge of Jesus Christ. 


and sits with him on his throne at his right hand, 
and shall be worshiped by all the angels, and all the 
saints on earth must honor, fear.and love him (Rev. 
Bc2l:. Hebs 1:6;>.Phib 229-kis, l.Petas2 22) even 
as the Father, and believe in him, even as they 
believe in the Father (John 14:1). 

All this, and whatever else the holy scripture 
everywhere teaches and testifies of the true divinity 
of our Lord Jesus Christ we must, above all things, 
and without any doubt, believe (1 John 3:28), for 
in no other. way can we be saved. For it is the 
command of God, says John, that we believe in the 
name of his Son, Jesus Christ. ‘He that believeth 
on him is not condemned: but he that believeth 
not is condemned already, because he hath not be- 
lieved in the name of the only. begotten Son of 
God” (John 3:18). _And again: “He that believeth 
on the Son hath everlasting life; and he that be- 
leveth not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath 
of God abideth on him” (John 3:36). Further: 
“He that believeth on the Son of God hath the wit- 
ness in himself; he that believeth not God hath 
made him a liar, because he believeth not the record 
that God gave of his Son. And this is the record, 
that God hath given to us eternal life, and this life 
is in his Son. He that hath the Son hath life; and 
he that hath not the Son of God hath not life” (1 
John 5:10-12). 

Therefore we must believe in the Son of God, 
or we cannot obtain salvation. And no one can 
truly believe on the Son of God unless he first 
\ acknowledge him as his Lord and God; for it is 
certain that we must believe in the true God alone, 
and no one can believe in God, nor come to him, 
unless he believes that he is God, and a rewarder 
of all them that diligently seek him (Heb. 11:6). 
Since we must believe in the Son just as we believe 
in the Father (as Christ himself teaches his dis- 
ciples and says: “Ye believe in God, believe also 
in me” (John 14:1), therefore the Son must be the 
true God with and in the Father, thus also the 
Father is in the Son, so that they two are one, yea, 
an undivided, incomprehensible, inexpressible, al- 
mighty and living God, and Divinity in everlasting 


The True Knowledge of Jesus Christ. 129 


unity, power and working of the one and eternal, 
true Holy Spirit. Let so much be said in brief of 
the true divinity of our Lord and Savior Jesus 
Christ, as pertaining to the first part of our subject. 

In the second place we must acknowledge the 
incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ, namely, that 
through the power of the Most High, and by the 
Holy Ghost he became a man in the virgin Mary, 
was born of her (Matt. 1:20; Luke 2:7), and was 
wholly exempt from the bite of the serpent (Gen. 
3:1, 15), that is, entirely free from or beyond sin, 
and was not besmirched or polluted by the poison- 
ous root of sinful flesh and sinful nature, so that he 
might bruise the serpent’s head, and make us, who 
were enemies of God and the children of wrath, to 
be children of God and heirs of eternal life (Rom. 
59:10; Eph. 2:16). Therefore he did not become 
a man by the first Adam, who was poisoned and 
made naked by the serpent, but the Word, which 
was in the beginning with God and was God (John 
1:1), was made flesh, so that Jesus Christ, although 
he appeared in the form of sinful flesh, was alto- 
gether without sin and sinful origin, had a pure 
body, prepared for him by God, the heavenly Father, 
by the: Holy wGhost; (Heb.'5: 7 $5.10.-5)5. ‘and ywas 
thus a Paschal Lamb without blemish (1 Cor. 5:7, 
8), and took away our sins, and that we might be 
sprinkled by his blood, delivered from the Egypt 
and Pharaoh of sin, that is, from this blind and 
wicked world, and out of the prison house of Satan, 
and that he might become our Brother, and that we 
might be made in the likeness of his image and 
partake of his being and nature (1 Cor. 5:7; 1 Pet. 
19): 

Thus, then, the only begotten Son of the living 
God, who was glorified with God before the world 
was (John 17:5), became mortal man (2 Cor. 8:9), 
who was rich, yet for our sakes became poor; he 
who was in divine form took upon himself the form 
of a man and a servant, the wisdom that was’born . 
(of God) before the beginning of creation appeared 
upon earth and dwelt among men (Prov. 8: 22, 23) ; 
the Word, which in the beginning was with God 
and which was God, was made flesh (says John), 


3 


130 The True Knowledge of Jesus Christ. 


and dwelt among us, and we beheld his glory, the 
glory as of the only begotten of the Father (John 
1:14). That holy thing which Mary received, and by 
which she conceived and which was impregnated 
in her body, was of the Holy Ghost (Luke 1:31) 
and came into her throgh the overshadowing of the 
divine power, and that which was born of her was 
called the Son of the Most High. ‘The true bread 
of life is given to us of the Father (John 6:51) 
and came down from heaven, which bread is Christ 
Jesus, yea, his flesh, which he has given for the life 
of the world. The second Adam, whvu overcame 
death for us and has brought us life again, is not of 
the earth, of which the first Adam is made, but 
came from God, down from heaven, and is the Lord 
- himself from heaven; he is the first and the last, 
who lives and was dead, and is alive for evermore 
(Rev. 1:17). To sum it up: God was made mani- 
fest in the flesh, and was seen upon earth. The 
Lord of Sabaoth came down from his holy place to ~ 
deliver Zion (Bar. 3:38), and dwelt in the midst ~ 
of Zion (Zech. 20}: 

Then it is necessary for all Christians to Be: 
and to reflect upon the reason why the wisdom of 
God, the Word of God, and the Son of the Most 
High thus humbled himself and became man, 
namely, in the first place, to take away our sin (1 
John 3:5); for since Adam had disobeyed God’s 
word, and contrary to the command:of God ate of. 
the forbidden tree of the knowledge of good and 
evil, he died, according to the words which God 
spake to him: “In the day that thou eatest thereof 
thou shalt surely die” (Gen. 2:17), and with him | 
all his generation to the end of the world, for all’ 
descend from this dead Adam (1 Cor. 15:21, 22),. 
and thus death passed upon all mankind (Rom. 
ee). 

Now, if this sin was to be paid for, this death 
removed, the righteousness of God satisfied, and 
life brought again to dead humanity, Jesus, the 
Son of the Most High, had to appear, become man, 
take cur sin upon himself, die for us (Matt. 1:21; 
Luke 1:31; °2:21;. Rom. 8:1;7 Isa.'53:: 446; 1: Pet. 
2:24; 3:21, 24; 3:18), and by his death and blood 


The True Knowledge of Jesus Christ. 131 


triumph over the devil, sin, death and hell, yea, by 
the one offering of his body, forever reconcile us. 
with God his Father (Heb. 10:10). Therefore John 
says that the Son of God was manifested to take 
away our sins; “and in him is no sin” (1 John 3:5). 
And Paul says: “Christ hath redeemed us from the 
curse of the law; being made a curse for us” (Gal. 
3:13), and again: ‘For what the law could not do, 
in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending 
his own Son in the’ likeness of sinful flesh, and for 
sin, condemned sin in the flesh” (Rom. 8:3). This 
is what the apostle explains in other words, namely, 
that God “made him to be sin for us, who knew no 
sin” (which is Jesus Christ, his only begotten Son) 
—that is, as an offering for sin—“that we might 
be made the righteousness of God in him” (2 Cor. 
5a 21). 

For the sake of this righteousness, that is, that 
we might be justified. Jesus gave himself unto death, 
and became the most despised of all men, even as 
the prophet says: “He hath no form nor comeliness ; 
and when we shall see him, there is no beauty that 
we should desire him. He is despised and rejected 
of men; a man of sorrows, and acquainted: with 
grief: and we hid as it were our faces from him; 
he was despised, and we esteemed him not. Surely 
he hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows: 
yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, 
and afflicted. But he was wounded for our: trans- 
eressions, he was bruised for our iniquities: the 
chastisement of our peace was upon him; and with 
his stripes we are healed,” etc. (Isa. 53:2-5). 

Christ might therefore well say in the time of 
his suffering as David prophesied of him: “I am 
a worm, and no man; a reproach of men, and 
despised of the people. All they that see me laugh 
me to scorn; they shoot out the lip, they shake 
the head” (Psa. 22:6, 7). And again: “Dogs have 
compassed me; the ‘assembly of the wicked have 
enclosed me: they pierced my hands and my feet. 
I may tell all my bones: they look and stare upon 
me. They part my garments among them, and cast 
lots upon my vesture.” 

In this we are given an idea of God’s Peetice: 


132 The True Knowledge of Jesus Christ. 


that he so sorely afflicted and humiliated his only 
begotten Son for the sake of the sins of his people; 
for how terribly God hates sin is shown in the fact 
that he could not reconcile himself for the dis- 
obedience and transgression of one man (by whom 
we all became sinners, Rom. 5:12)—for his right- 
eousness (justice) endureth forever—until he had 
permitted his beloved only begotten Son to be so 
unmercifully maltreated by the ungodly and heathen 
(Matt. 27; John 19), his pure and holy body to be 
thus wounded, to have his head pierced with a 
crown of thorns, and at last to suffer the bitterest 
and most shameful death for us on the cross! Oh, 
how the only begotten Son of God, Christ Jesus, 
our Lord and faithful Savior, suffered for us all! 
{John 3:16). He who is the eternal wisdom and 
truth of God, who cannot lie nor err, him they ac- 
cused asa liar and a deceiver of the people; he who 
is the justifier and sanctifier of all believers (1 Cor. 
1:30), the innocent Lamb of God, who knew no 
‘sin, yea, who taketh away the sin of the world (John 
1:29), him they numbered with the transgressors ; 
he who is the peace of all Christians, and the recon- 
‘ciliation of all that is in heaven and on earth (2 
Cor 5:19; “Isa? 5384465" Eph Dsi0% "2 a4 Seaton 
1:20), him they accused and complained of as a 
turbulent founder of a sect; he who is the bright- 
ness of the eternal light (2 Cor. 4:4), a spotless 
reflection of the divine glory, the express image of 
the “invisible ™God) (Hebi 12) 3-9 Coel, elo jeain 
whose face the angels of God desire to look, and 
in whose brightness all the saints of earth are re- 
flected, from him they hid their faces, and called to 
Pilate: “Away with him! away with him! Crucify 
him!’ Yea, him who is the Lord of the whole earth 
they rejected and would not receive as their King. 
We who clothes all true believers and baptized 
‘Christians with the robe of righteousness and with 
the mantle of salvation, him they stripped and 
nailed naked to the cross, and. cast lots over his 
vesture (Psa. 22:18). He who gives the water of 
life treely to, ali C)Onnye Gals Sia exenee caer 
‘him they gave vinegar to drink when he thirsted 
(John 19:28, 29). He who is the Prince of Life 


The True Knowledge of Jesus Christ. 133 


(Acts 3:15), him they put to death. And all this 
the heavenly Father, the almighty God, laid upon 
his only begotten Son Jesus Christ on account of 
our sins, and yet, sad to say, this is so little thought 
of by the whole world. It is true many people 
claim the atoning merits of Christ’s death and 
blood, but few are found who diligently meditate 
’ upon and take to heart the suffering of our Lord 
that they may be bettered thereby, die unto sin, 
and live unto righteousness. i 

Secondly, God sent his only begotten Son into 
the world that we through him might have life 
(John 3:16; 1 John 5:12), by which act God has 
abundantly shown his love and fatherly favor toward 
us, not because of the good works that any one 
might have done (for we all have sinned (Rom. 
3:23), but because God, who is true to his word, 
desired to faithfully fulfill his promise to Adam, 
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David and the rest of the 
fathers, and to pour out upon us the riches of his 
‘grace and save us, as it is written: “For God so 
loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, 
that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, 
but have everlasting life” :(John 3:16). And Paul 
writes to the Romans: “If God be for us, who can 
be against us? He that spared not his own Son, 
but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not 
with him also freely give us all things” (Rom. 
Sol, 32)2 : | 

Herein was the love of God manifested, as John 
says, that he sent his only begotten Son into the 
world that through him we might have life. 
“Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he 
loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for 
our sins” (1 John 4:8, 9). And God did this for 
us while we were yet enemies, as Paul says: “When 
we were yet without strength, in due time Christ 
died for the ungodly” (Rom. 5:6). And again: 
“God commendeth his love toward us, in that, while 
we were yet sinners, Christ died for us” (Rom. 5:8). 
Hence we may well say with the prophet, that “God 
hath not dealt with us after our sins; nor rewarded 
us according to our iniquities’ (Psa. 103:10). 
Hence we must all confess with Paul: “We all 


184 The True Knowledge of Jesus Christ. 


had our conversation in times past in the lusts of 
our flesh and of the mind; and were by nature the 
children of wrath, even as others” (Eph. 2:3). 
“But,” says the apostle, “God, who is rich in mercy, 
for his great love wherewith he loved us, even when 
we were dead in sins, hath quickened us together 
with Christ, (by grace are ye saved;) and hath 
raised us up together, and made us sit together in — 
heavenly places in Christ Jesus: that in the ages 
to come he might show the exceeding riches of his 
grace in his kindness toward us through Christ 
Jesus. For by grace are ye saved through faith: 
and that not of yourselves: it is the gift of God: 
not of works, lest any man should boast” (Eph. 
2:4-9). 

Now, when we sincerely meditate upon this un- 
fathomable grace and mercy of God the Father 
which was manifested to us through Jesus Christ, 
love to God is kindled in our hearts, for how: could 
we but love such a gracious and merciful God in 
return, who so dearly loved us. Therefore John 
says: “We love him, because he first loved us” 
(1 John 4:19). And hereby we confess that we 
love God, if we keep his commandments (1 John 
5:2, 3), even as Christ himself says to his disciples: 
“If ye love me, keep my commandments.” “He 
that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, 
he it is that loveth me.” That is, “If a man love 
me, he will keep my words,” “but he that loveth 
me not, keepeth not my sayings” (John 14:15, 21, 
23, 24). By this we know that we love God, if we 
sincerely love his children, that is, all true Chris- 
tians; for no one can love God without also loving 
all who are born of God, as John declares (1 John 
4:11-21). ) 

From all of the aforesaid it is now clear what 
constitutes the true knowledge of Jesus Christ, our 
Lord and Savior, both according to his true divinity 
and his humanity, and how we must meditate upon 
both the justice and the love of God as manifested 
to us in Christ Jesus: The justice of God regarding 
sin, which had to be so bitterly atoned for and 
punished in such an exalted person, that is, in the 
only begotten Son of-the living God (Isa. 53: 2-10) ; 


= 


The True Knowledge of Jesus Christ. 135 


but the love of God toward us, that the heavenly 
Father gave his only begotten Son for us, that who- 
soever believeth in him should not perish, but have 
everlasting life (John 3:16). — | 

This, then, is the true knowledge of Christ Jesus, 
which is also eternal life, as Jesus himself says: 
“This is life eternal (O Father), that they might 
know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, 
whom thou hast sent’ (John 17:3). But this 
knowledge is not a historical information regarding 
Christ, as many think, but a quickening and power- 
ful work of God in man, whereby he becomes trans- 
formed, born anew of God, and enlightened and 
endued with the Holy Spirit, so that he is of like 
mind with Christ, whose brother and fellow-heir 
he has, by grace, become through faith and the new 
birth (1 John 3:6, 7). Hence not all know Christ 
who confess him with their mouths; but “hereby 
we do know,” says John, “that we know him, if 
we keep his commandments. He that saith, I know 
him, and keepeth not his commandments, is a liar, 
and the truth is not in him. But whoso keepeth 
his word, in him verily is the love of God perfected. 
He that saith that he abideth in him ought himself 
also so to walk, even as he walked” (1 John 2: 3-6). 

From these words it is easily ascertained who 
truly knows Christ and who does. not. 

Christ, then, is the only begotten Son of the 
living God, truly God and man, and him the 
heavenly Father has given for our Lord and Master, 
and has shown us from heaven that he is his be- 
loved Son, in whom he is well pleased, him shall 
Weriear dedattinodds 2 Leone Pet. Veltcete). 
Thus also ‘the Holy Ghost has testified of Christ 
Jesus: on the one hand, because all that is written 
in the scripture of Christ Jesus he has spoken 
through the apostles and prophets (2 Pet. 1:21: 
Luke 1:70; Acts 1:16; 3:18, etc.); and, on the 
other hand, that he came upon Christ Jesus in the 
bodily and visible form of a dove and remained, 
showing us that the fullness of the Spirit dwells 
bodily in Christ Jesus (John 1:32, 33; Matt. 3:16, 
etc.), for the Father loveth the Son, says John, and 
“siveth not the Spirit by measure unto him” (John 


136 The True Knowledge of Jesus Christ. 


$:33, 34), but it pleased him that in the Son all 
fullness should dwell (Col. 1:19)—yea, “in him 
dwelleth all the fullness of the Godhead bodily” 
(Col. 2:9)—and that in him should be eternal life, 
and that we should receive of his fullness, and grace 
for grace, and that through him and from him we 
should receive eternal life, according to the words 
which Christ himself spoke to. Martha od tamothe 
resurrection, and the life; he that believeth in me, 
though he were dead, yet shall he live: and who- 
soever liveth and believeth in me shall never die” 
(John’3:25, 26). ©, 

Since, then, life is in the Son of God, and he 
upholdeth all things by the word of his power (1 
John 5:11; Heb. 1:3), and all things are made by 
him (John L23% “Colstd: 16717; ete} hence mateo 
mankind exists by him and by his word, so long 
as they by true faith and obedience remain or abide 
in him, as Jesus himself testifies and says: “Verily, 
verily, I say unto you, he that heareth my word, 
and believeth on him that sent me, hath everlasting 
life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is 
passed from death unto life” (John 5:24). And 
again Christ says: “Verily, verily, I say unto you, 
If a man keep my saying, he shall never see death” 
(John 8:51), for the words that Jesus speaks are 
Spirit, and they are life (John 6:63). “The gospel,” 
says Paul, “is the power of God unto salvation to 
every One’ that tbelieveth’ io Romie Gy) lanes, 
1:18). 

The doctrine of Jesus Christ is the word of the 
heavenly Fathers(John 7-163" 3:11" 8: 281984. 
14:10, 24). The doctrine of the Son and the testi- 
mony of the Holy Spirit is above (excels) all the 
teachings of the prophets, and it contains all that 
is necessary and conducive to salvation. Nor can 
the will of the heavenly Father be found anywhere 
so clearly as in the words of Jesus Christ. by whom 
he has in these last days spoken, made known his 
will, and fully expressed it (Heb. 1:2); hence all 
that is contrary, or not conformable, to the words 
of Christ, is not God’s word or will; for “no other 
foundation can be laid, than that is laid, which is 
Jesus Christ” (1 Cor. 3:11). No other gospel may 


The True Knowledge of Jesus Christ. 137 


be preached than that which is preached and left 
to us by Jesus Christ and his apostles. Yea, Paul 
writes to the Galatians: “Though we, or an angel 
from heaven, preach any other gospel unto you than 
that which we have preached, let him be accursed. 
As we Said before, so say I now again: “If any man 
preach any other gospel unto you than that ye have 
received, let him be accursed” (Gal..1:8, 9). 

Let every Christian ponder well these words, that 
an angel of God shall be accursed who teaches other 
than that which Paul and the other apostles taught. 
Hence no doctrine is of any value that does not har- 
monize with the doctrine of Christ and his apostles, 
and man does not live by words which proceed 
from the will or mouth of man, but alone by the 
words of God (Matt. 4:4), which have been made 
known to us by Jesus Christ and his apostles. Here 
is the bread of heaven; here is the water of life; 
if any man hungers after righteousness, he will find 
here the bread of life (Deut. 8:3; Matt. 5:6), and 
whoever eats of it becomes strong and sound in 
Christ; his soul will be satisfied, so that he will no 
longer hunger for the leaven of the Pharisees and 
Sadducees. If any man thirsts for his salvation he 
will find here the purest well of water; and he that 
drinks out of this fountain, in him it shall be a well 
of water springing up into everlasting life (John 
4:14; 7:88), and he will never thirst again for the 
impure waters of the doctrines of men. If anyone 
desires heavenly wisdom, let him come to Christ, 
and learn of him; for he is meek and lowly in heart; 
and he shall find rest unto his soul (Matt. 11:29) ; 
then he shall be taught of God, then he shall obtain 
true wisdom; for Christ is such a teacher, and his 
word is of such nature and power, that whosoever 
receives it with a believing heart and keeps it, shall 
find in the simple doctrine of Jesus Christ the in- 
expressible counsel of the heavenly wisdom, he shall 
find that the preaching of the cross, which at first 
sight seems simple and contemptible (1 Cor. 1:18), 
far excels all human wisdom, no matter how exalted 
and wonderful the latter may appear to be. There- 
fore Paul says to the Corinthians: “I determined 
not to know anything among you, save Jesus Christ, 


138 The True Knowledge of Jesus Christ. 


and him crucified” (1 Cor. 2:2). Every Christian 
must do likewise, and find all his delight in the 
gospel (Psa. 1:2), and make it his business by day 
and by night to familiarize himself with it; for 
then he will find in it sweetness, so that with David. 
~he can say: “O Lord, how sweet are thy words 
unto my taste! Yea, sweeter than honey to my 
mouth !?: (Psa. 119: 108). 

If it is a fact that the prophet tasted such sweet- 
ness in the law (and as he says in another place, 
that the “judgments of the Lord are more to be 
desired than gold, yea, than much fine gold; sweeter 
also than honey and the honeycomb,” Psa. 19:9, 
10), then it is always in order that a Christian 
taste and find such sweetness also in the gospel of 
Jesus Christ, in which God reveals to us all his 
grace and love, all his kindness and benevolence. 
If the figurative bread of heaven was capable of 
satisfying the desires of all, and was agreeable to 
every individual’s taste, and every one could make 
of it what he wished, whether he desired one thing 
or another, as it is written in the Book of Wisdom 
(Sirach 17:20), how much more is the true bread 
of heaven able to satisfy every desire and to give 
a taste of the heavenly sweetness to all hungry 
souls who hunger and thirst after righteousness. 

But no one may really taste the sweetness and 
power of the true bread of heaven, except those who 
hunger and thirst after righteousness, and who can 
say with David: “As the hart panteth after the 
water brooks, so panteth my soul after thee, O God” 
(Psa. 42:1). . And again: “O -God,. thou, art: my 
God; early will I seek thee; my soul thirsteth for 
thee, my flesh_longeth for thee in a dry land, where 
mocwatersi1§) /(Psai.63° 114.98 

Whoever thus thirsts for the living God, hungers 
for the bread of heaven and desires the water of 
life, shall, without a doubt be satisfied, as Christ 
says: “Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst 
after righteousness; for they shall be filled” (Matt. 
5:6). And again Christ says: “I am the bread of 
life: he that cometh to me shall never hunger; and 
he that believeth on me shall never thirst” (John 
6:35). And in the Revelations of John it is writ- 


The True Knowledge of Jesus Christ. 139 


ten: “These are they which came out of great 
tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made 
them white in the blood of the Lamb. ‘Therefore 
are they before the throne of God, and serve him 
day and night in his temple: and he that sitteth on 
the throne shall dwell among them. They shall 
hunger no more, neither thirst any more; neither 
shall the sun light on them, nor any heat. For the 
Lamb which is in the midst of the throne shall feed 
them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of 
waters: and God shall wipe away all tears from 
their eyes” (Rev. 7: 14-17). 

These are they who believe in Jesus Christ, who 
live by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth 
of God and are fed with the heavenly bread; they 
shall never lack of the bread of life, and shall here- 
after be forever satisfied, when God shall be all 
in all. 

On the other hand it is impossible for those who 
have once tasted this sweetness of the word of God 
and the power of the world to come, and have re- 
ceived the Holy Spirit, but depart therefrom and 
sin wilfully—after having confessed and accepted 
the truth, and in their pride despise Christ and his 
word—to be renewed again unto repentance, ac- 
cording to the words of the apostle (Heb. 6: 4-6) ; 
for they crucify to themselves the Son of God 
afresh, and put him to an open shame, yea, they 
trample the Son of God under foot, and count the 
blood of the covenant wherewith they were sanctt- 
fied, an unholy thing, and do despite to the Spirit 
of grace (Heb. 10:29)... Therefore: also there re- 
mains no more sacrifice for their sins, but a certain 
looking for of judgment and fiery indignation, which 
shall devour the adversaries of Christ and his word, 
for our God is a consuming fire (Heb. 10: 27-30; 
12329); 

Therefore it is my brotherly admonition, my 
friendly petition, and my faithful counsel which | 
present to all my beloved brethren and sisters out 
of heartfelt love, that you exercise due vigilance 
over your treasures and faithfully preserve all the 
- understanding which you have received of God, all 
of the light of Christ that has appeared in your 


140 The True Knowledge of Jesus Christ. 


hearts (2 Cor. 4:6), all that has been given you of 
God by his Spirit, all that you have tasted of the 
bread of heaven and drunk of the water of life, out 
of the well of salyation, and that you continue 
therein, increase, and thereby grow up and become 
strong after the inner man, that. you may walk with 
joy in the way of the Lord toward the Promised 
Land, the heavenly Jerusalem, and that you never 
long for the fleshpots of Egypt, the leaven of the 
Pharisees, and the polluted waters of human. wis- 
dom (Matt. 16:6; Jer. 2:13; Ezek. 34:19), but 
that all your desire and hunger may be for the true 
bread of heaven, and that all your thirst may be 
for the water of life. 

Oh, what a precious table that is which the Lord 
has prepared for us in the dry desert of this world! 
It is true, God gave to carnal Israel a figurative 
bread of heaven to eat, and natural water out of the 
rock *todrink > (Ex."16:.16 7) 172 6;29Psa.e78o-20; 
Num. 20:11; 1 Cor. 10:3, 4)—and which without 
doubt was a great miracle of God—but to us God, 
the heavenly Father, has given to eat of the true 
bread of life that came down from heaven (John 
6:51) to feed all hungry souls;. to us he has given 
to drink of the water of life, which springs forth 
from the living Rock, Christ Jesus, for the cooling 
and refreshing of all thirsty souls. Therefore also 
Christ said to the Jews: “Moses gave you not that 
bread from heaven; but my Father giveth you the 
true bread from heaven. For the bread of God 1s 
he which cometh down from heaven, and giveth 
life unto the world” (John 6:32, 33). And Paul 


says: “All our fathers . . .‘didall eat. the same 
spiritual meat; and did all drink the same spiritual 
drink; : | . but with many of them God was not 


well pleased; for they were overthrown in the 
wilderness” (1 Cor. 10:3-5). And Christ Jesus 
says: “If any man eat of this bread (Christ), he 
shall live forever” (John 6:51). “And whosoever 
- drinketh of the water that I shall give him, shall 
never thirst; but the water that I shall give him 
shall be in him a well of water springing: up into 
everlasting life’ (John 4:14). And again Christ 
says: “If any man thirst, let him come unto me 


The True Knowledge of Jesus Christ. 141 


and drink. He that believeth on me, as the scripture 
hath said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living 
mater (olin: 37, 38). 

The Spirit of God said the same thing before this 
through Isaiah: “Ho, every one that thirsteth, come 
ye to the waters, and he that hath no money; come 
ye, buy, and eat; yea, come, buy wine and milk 
without money and without price” (Isa. 55:1). 
Here we hear how those who thirst are invited to 
~ come, but to whom shall they come but to Jesus 
Christ, for he refreshes all who are weary and heavy 
laden, and to those who come to him he gives the 
water of life (which is a refreshing unto their souls) 
freely; to them he gives without price the pure 
wine of his divine Word for the freeing of their 
consciences, and nourishes them with the sincere 
(unadulterated) milk, that they may grow thereby | 
(1 Pet. 2:2); yea, more than this, he gives them 
his flesh to feed their souls, as he himself says: 
“Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except ye eat the 
flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye 
have no life in you. Whoso eateth my flesh, and 
drinketh my blood, hath eternal life; and I will 
raise him up at the last day. For my flesh is meat 
indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. He that eat- 
eth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, dwelleth in, 
me, and I in him. As the living Father hath sent} 
me, and I live by the Father: so he that eateth me). 
even he shall live by me” (John 6: 53-57). i 

How and in what manner Christ is eaten by 
us, that is, that we eat not the material, natural 
bread, but the true, living bread which came down 
from heaven, not eating his flesh in a natural or 
material sense, but spiritually eat his flesh and 
drink his blood, he himself makes sufficiently plain 
- in the gospel according to John; for after having 
spoken at some length on the necessity of our eating 
his flesh and drinking his blood, he said in con- 
clusion: “This is that bread which came down from 
heaven: not as your fathers did eat manna, and are 
dead: he that eateth of this bread shall. live for- 
ever” (John 6:58). And again: “It is the Spirit 
that quickeneth; the flesh profiteth nothing: the 
words that I speak unto you, they are spirit, and 





142 The True Knowledge of Jesus Christ. 


they are life’ (John 6:63). And of this he says: 
“IT am the living bread which came down from 
heaven: if any man eat of this bread, he shall live 
forever: and the bread that I will give is my flesh, 
which I will give for the life of the world” (John 
G21); 

Herewith Christ explains his words which he 
spoke regarding the eating of his flesh and the drink- 
ing of his blood, namely, that it is not to be under- 
stood in a natural, but in a spiritual, sense, and that 
his flesh which he gives us to eat is really the true 
living bread of heaven; whoso receives and eats 
this bread of Jesus Christ, that is, whoever hears, 
-accepts and keeps the words of Christ, and firmly 
believes in Jesus Christ, the Crucified One, that he 
has given his flesh for us and shed his blood for us 
for the forgiveness of our sins (Rom. 3:25; Gal. 
(1:4; Eph. 2:13, etc.), he eats in a spiritual sense 
of the flesh of Jesus Christ, and drinks spiritually 
of his blood, and by virtue of the spiritual food of 
the fiesh and blood of Christ as the true heavenly 
bread, he is nourished and strengthened unto eternal 
life. Therefore every Christian may here well say 
with the prophet: “Bless the Lord, O my soul, and 
forget not all his benefits” (Psa. 103:1, 2). “What 
shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits 
toward us?” (Psa. 116:12). But he who despises 
these inexpressible loving-kindnesses and benefits 
of Christ Jesus and transgresses. his doctrine and 
does not and will not abide therein, will not escape 
the judgment of God, even as it is written: “For 
if the word spoken by angels was stedfast, and 
every transgression received a just recompense of 
reward; how shall we escape if we neglect so great 
salvation; which at the first began to be spoken 
by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them 
that heard him; God also bearing them witness, 
both with signs and wonders, and with divers 
miracles and gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to 
his own will” (Heb. 2: 2-4). And again: “See that 
ye refuse not him that speaketh. For if they es- 
caped not him that spake on earth, much more shall 
we not escape, if we turn away from him that 
speaketh: from heaven” (Heb. 12:25). 


The True Knowledge of Jesus Christ. 143 


Moses perceived in the Spirit that Christ Jesus 
alone must be heard, and that the judgment of God 
shall come upon those who despise and transgress 
the saving doctrine of Jesus Christ, therefore he 
spoke thus to Israel: “The Lord thy God will raise 
up unto thee a Prophet from the midst. of thee, of 
thy brethren, like unto me; unto him ye shall 
hearken. And it shall come to pass that whoso- 
ever will not hearken unto my words which he 
shall speak in my name, shall be destroyed from 
Bamonc. tne “people” “(Deéeut,- 18:15) 18, 19." Acts 
O72). 

This Prophet is Jesus Christ, as Peter and 
Stephen testify. Whosoever therefore hearkens to 
this Prophet, Jesus Christ, the Son of the Most 
High God, believes in him, and keeps his word, shall 
be saved; but whosoever despises him and does 
not receive his word, he already has that which will 
judge him. “The word that I have spoken, the 
same shall judge him in the last day,” says Christ 
(John 12:48). 

Therefore, beloved brethren and sisters and com- 
panions in the faith, I beseech you by the mercies 
of God (Rom. 12:1), that you hold firmly to Christ, 
and know and confess him as the holy scripture 
teaches you, and as I have briefly directed you in 
love, and abide steadfastly in his doctrine, keep his 
commandments in true faith (John 8:31; 15:4), 
follow in his footsteps, serve him with your whole 
heart, love him with all your soul, that when he 
shall appear we may receive the crown of eternal 
Siotyitebet, a.) Lit.2: 135° 2% lim: 458); sie 
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. 
Amen. 


reese 
“EBas ty 


. - Se 
ira rey 7H), BL 


1 oe 
Ks 





: A 
VINDICATION 


against the accusation that we are Anabaptists and 
founders of sects (of which the world, with gross 
injustice, accuses uS), and showing, on the 
other hand, that we are one with the true 
Church of God, which was from the begin- 
ning. Also an instruction on the differ- 
ence between true and false worship, 
and why a Christian must abstain 
from false worship and_ separ- 
ate himself from the fel- 
lowship of idolators. 


Compiled from the holy scripture, by the grace of 
God for the benefit of all lovers of the truth, 
by 
DP: 


Having the same spirit of faith, therefore we 
speak;ett, © 2*Cor.: 4:12. 


Flee from idolatry. 1 Cor. 10:14. 


I say, that the things which the Gentiles sacrifice, 
they sacrifice to devils, and not to God: and I 
would not that ye should have fellowship with 
devils. Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and 
the cup of devils: ye cannot be partakers of the 


Lord’s table, and the table of devils. 
1 Cor) 10:20, °21. 


Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye 
separate, saith the Lord, and touch not 
thesmnclean- thine. 2 Cor.-6 17 


10 


146 A Vindication. 


=> 


The Everlasting Love of God Our Heavenly Father, 
the Peace of Our Lord Jesus Christ, and the 
Communion of the Holy Ghost, Be With 
All Lovers of the Truth. Amen. 

2 Cor. 13:14. 





Beloved brethren and friends in the Lord. Inas- 
much as we are greatly reproached by the world, 
severely accused by the learned and the perverted, 
and cruelly persecuted by the tyrants, as though we 
were an Anabaptist sect and had unjustly and with- 
out cause separated from them, we are therefore 
occasioned and compelled to vindicate ourselves, and 
to give the reason, from the word of Ged, for our 
separation from the world, its false worship, and its 
unfruitful works of darkness (Eph: 5:11) and to 
discuss the same. We desire to make known before- 
hand, however, that no one shall construe or under- 
stand this our vindication as being an effort at 
self-adulation, for we well know that to honor and 
praise one’s self is nothing but folly. But because 
the world so sorely abuses us, men of letters write 
against us and tyrants rage against us, they compel 
us to make this brief and simple vindication 
(defense), just as the false workers (2 Cor. 11:5), 
who were continually despising and disparaging the 
-person of Paul the apostle (who nevertheless was 
poor in spirit and lowly in heart) compelled him to 
defend and commend himself (2 Cor. 11:5). For 
this reason we also speak against the grandiloquent 
and eminent divines who with immense conceit and 
lies of the nature and workings of Satan greatly 
despise, defame and slander us, while with glozing 
words, they make a nice show of themselves, yea, © 
boasting and parading themselves as the people of 
God and the true Christian Church, while at the 
same time, by their false doctrine and their shameful 
idolatry, their many ceremonies, and their magnifi. 
cent churches, with their wicked lives and ungodly 
walk, they prove the contrary, as every one who 
fears God can readily see. 

Therefore we desire, according to our humble 
gifts, to show to all. lovers of the truth that we are 


A Vindication. 147 


not Anabaptists nor sectmakers, but that we are in 
unity with the true Christian apostolic and catholic 
church, and that for highly necessary and important 
reasons and with perfect propriety we separate our- 

selves from all false worship and from the fellowship 
of idolaters. And we are certain and assured by the 
sealing of the Holy Spirit (Eph. 1:13) that we are 
right, and every Godfearing reader who understands 
the scripture shall also from this our humble defence 
understand our position if he reads aright and takes 
it to heart; to which end may the almighty God 
lend his grace. Amen. 

In the first place, so far as the common epithet 
“Anabaptist” (literally Rebaptizer—TIr.) is con- 
cerned, we have already in our confession on Bap- 
tism and of the Lord’s Supper made our vindication, 
and have abundantly shown by the scripture, that 
infant baptism is neither instituted nor commanded 
by our Lord Jesus Christ, nor that it was taught or 
practiced by the apostles, but that true Christian 
baptism is intended -for penitent believers. Hence 
it is unnecessary to discuss this subject here; for if 
anyone desires to know our vindication of this point, 
let him read the foregoing confessions. There he will 
find sufficient information on the matter (2 Thess. 
2:2,3; 1 John 2:18, 19; 2 Cor. 6:16) as to-why we 
have rejected and renounced as not being of God, 
this idolatrous infant baptism, which, adminstered 
by the priests of Baal with frightful injunctions of 
the devil and many idolatrous ceremonies, initiated 
us into the kingdom of Antichrist, into the temple 
of idolaters in the time of our ignorance, when as 
yet we had no knowledge of- good and evil (Deut. 
1:39); and that now, having by the grace of God, 
and by his word which was preached to us—and 
which we heard and heeded—been converted, be- 
come penitent and believing, we were baptized into 
the kingdom of Christ and the temple of the living 
God, according to the example and command of our 
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ and the teaching and 
practice of the apostles, by the messengers of God, 
in the name of, almighty God, the Father, the Son, 
and the Holy Ghost, we have not practiced rebap- } 
tism, but prove and practice thereby the true, only 


148 A Vindication. 


Christian baptism, which avails before God, which 
takes place in Spirit and in truth, which is practiced 
according to the scripture and is. received upon 
confession of faith, the praise for which is not of 
men, but of God (Matt. 18; Matt. 3:1; Mark 
T6190, d0 => Watt, 28.219" Acts’? + Aiea aso sr ele 
Tor Sarde 733287 16). 

Hence if on this account we are called Ana- 
baptists (Rebaptizers) and scandalized as such, it is 
always done unjustly and perforce; however, it has 
always been the lot of all pious people from the 
beginning of the world to be accused and slandered 
with lies and reproach (Psa. 120:2); therefore also 
they besought the Lord that he would deliver their 
souls from lying lips, and from a deceitful tongue, 
and preserve them from evil and violent men; who — 
imagine mischiefs in their hearts, and are continually 
gathered together for war. “They have sharpened 
their tongues like a serpent; adders’ poison is under 
their lips’ (Psa. 140:3), which tongues are bent 
upon doing mischief, and cut with lies as with 
shears, who rather speak evil than good, and rather 
falsehood than truth, who are prone to say that 
_ which tends-to destroy—with false tongues. Never- 

theless they console themselves with the saying that 
an evil tongue shall not prosper on earth, and that 
the Lord will maintain the cause of the afflicted, and 
the right of the poor (Psa. 140:12). With this we 
also comfort ourselves and. rejoice with firm confi- 
dence and a living hope in the grace of God and of 
the Lord Jesus Christ, and we wili wait patiently 
for the times which shall bring us refreshing and 
comfort. “Then shall the righteous man stand in 
great boldness before the face of such as have 
afflicted him, and made no account of his labors. 
When they see it they shall be troubled with terrible 
fear, and shall be amazed at the strangeness of his 
salvation, so far beyond all that they looked for. 
And they, repenting and groaning for anguish of 
spirit, shall say within themselves, This was he, 
whom we had sometimes in derision, and a proverb 
of reproach: we fools accounted his life madness, and 
his end to be without honor: How is he numbered 
among the children of God, and his lot is among the 


A Vindication. | 149) 


saints! Therefore we have erred from the way of 
truth, and the light of righteousness hath not shined 
unto us, and the sun of righteousness rose not upon 
us. We wearied ourselves in the way of wickedness. 
and destruction; yea, we have gone through 
deserts, where they lay no way; but as for the way 
of the Lord, we have not known it. What hath 
pride profited us? or what good hath riches with 
our vaunting brought us? All these things are 
passed by like a shadow, and as a post that hasteth 
by” (Wis. of Sol. 5:1-9). 

When this shall come to pass, and the righteous 
judgment of God shall come upon the world, then 
shall the world know that we are not Anabaptists, 
and that we have been rightly baptized not more 
than once upon the confession of our faith, accord- 
ing to the institution of our Lord Jesus Christ, and 
according to the pattern of the teaching which we 
have received from the apostles (Matt. 28:19, 20;- 
Nari 161 tos l6cr Acts 2:8- 10:16 18522): 

In the second place, in our tract on the Church 
of God, we have described how she may be known 
and distinguished from all sects, what ordinances 
she must keep, and thus prove that she is the Church 
of God. But now let every one notice carefully 
among what people such conditions are found 
(Matt. 3:16; 28:19;-John 3:3: 2 Tim. 3), namely 
a sincere confession of the one eternal God, Father, 
Son, and Holy Ghost, true dividing discernment of 
the teaching of the law and of the gospel: which 
bears fruit; The true new birth, True ministers of 
the holy Word, The right use of the sacraments of 
Jesus Christ, Proper observance of the washing of 
the feet of the saints (John 18; Matt. 18:3; 1 Cor. 
5), true evangelical separation from the world, and, 
in short, who keep all the ordinances and have all 
the characteristics of the Church of God. Read the 
holy scripture and note therein the characteristics 
which designate and portray to us the Church and 
measure us by this plummet and test us with this 
touch-stone, and that shall determine whether: we 
or our opponents are nearer the truth, yea, whether 
we or they can be considered the Christian Church. 
If the kingdom of God consisted in highsounding 


150 A Vindication. 


words, in false, vain boasting, and not in power and 
truth (1 Cor. 4:20), in righteousness and peace, 
and joy in the Holy Ghost, then the false prophets 
‘and false Christians would win the game every time; 
but the Lord looks upon the heart and upon faith, 
and not upon outward appearances or man-made 
ceremonies; therefore he confesses those to be his 
children who do the will of the heavenly Father 
(Matt. 7:21), and these he has chosen and separa- 
ted from the world, as he himself says: “If ye 
were of the world, the world would love his own; 
but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore 
the world hateth you” (John 15:19). And in his 
prayer he says to his Father regarding his disciples: 
“T have given them thy word; and the world hath 
hated them, because they are not of the world, even 
as I am not of the world” (John 17:14). Therefore 
Paul says that our Lord Jesus Christ “gave himself 
for our sins, that he might deliver us from this 
present evil world, accordiing to the will of God” 
(Gal. 1:4.). 

These and other passages with which the script- 
ure abounds show us clearly that the true Christians 
and disciples of the Lord are not one with the world, 
but are chosen and separated therefrom, and there- 
fore can have no fellowship or part in their false 
worship and evil works (2 Cor. 6:14; 1 Cor. 
10: 14; Eph. 5:11), for God has himself com- 
manded and prescribed for his people a true worship, 
and so he would have it observed, as he abundantly 
testifies through Moses and the prophets. For 
Moses speaks to the children of Israel: ‘Now there- 
fore hearken, O Israel, unto the statutes and unto 
the judgments, which I teach you, for to do them, 
that ye may live, and go in and possess the land 
which the Lord God of your fathers giveth you. Ye 
shall not add unto the word which I command you, 
neither shall you diminish aught from it, that ye may 
keep the commandments of the Lord your God 
which I command you” (Deut. 4:1, 2). And again: 
“What thing soever 1 command you, observe to do 
it: thou shalt not add thereto, nor diminish from 
ean Deut: 12° 32). 

The first commandment reads: “I am the Lord 


A Vindication. 151 


thy God, which have brought thee out of the land of 
Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Thou shalt 
have no other gods before me,” etc. (Ex. 20:2, 3). 
That is, thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and 
him only shalt thou serve’ (Matt. 4:10; Deut. 6: 
13; Josh. 24:22). God commanded Israel saying: 
“Cast ye away every man the abominations of his 
eyes, and defile not yourselves with the idols of 
“Egypt” (Ezek. 20:7), and that they should. not 
pollute themselves with strange gods, yea, not touch 
any impure thing, but keep themselves separate 
therefrom and go out from among the ungodly (Gen. 
19st 1 Num. 167°26);) “God. tarther “said “te 
Israel: “Walk ye not in the’ statutes of your 
- fathers, neither observe their judgments, nor defile 
yourselves with their idols: I am the Lord your 
God; walk in my statutes, and keep my judgments, 
and do them” (Ezek. 29:18. See also Isa. 52:11; 
2 Cor 6717): 

From these words it is evident that whatever 
God has not commanded and has not instituted with 
expressed words of scripture, he does not want to 
be observed, nor does he want to be served there- 
with nor will he have his word set aside, nor made 
to suit the pleasure of men, as may be seen in his 
dealings with Saul; for he was disobedient to the 
command of God, and feared his people, and spared 
the best of the fatlings and sheep, and the king of 
the Amalekites, all of which were to be destroyed 
with the edge of the sword (Sam. 15:3,9). Of these 
he wished to offer sacrifices to God, but with this 
God was not pleased; for Samuel said to king Saul: 
“Hath the Lord as great delight in burnt offerings 
and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord? 
Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice, and to 
hearken than to the fat of rams. For rebellion is as 
the sin of witchcraft, and ‘stubbornness is as ini- 
quity and idolatry” (1.Sam. 15:22, 23). 

Therefore true service consists in serving, honor- 
ing and worshiping, fearing and loving God accord- 
ing to his word, abstaining from sin, no longer doing 
evil, to keep God’s word before our eyes, to comfort 
the widow and the orphan, and. to keep ourselves 
unspotted from the world (James 1:27; Deut. 4:2, 


152 A Vindication. 


Ba Jel B22 Sir 45 Ie ge n Saiad oe ee 
the other hand, all sacrifice and work that is accord- 
ing to one’s own opinion is false service and idolatry 
and known as such because God did not command 
it, but that it is, for the purpose of devotion and 
with good intention or for other reasons, instituted 
by man as a substitute for the service and command 
of God and so observed, as did the Pharisees, to 
whom Jesus said: “Why do ye also transgress the 
commandment of God by your tradition? For God 
commanded, saying, Honor they father and mother ; 
and, he that curseth father or mother, let him die 
the death. But ye say, whosoever shall say to his 
father or his mother. It is a gift, by whatsoever thou 
mightest be profited by me; and honor not his 
‘father or his mother, he shall be free. Thus have 
ye made the commandment of God of none effect by 
your tradition” (Matt. 15:3-6). What an adroit 
effort the Pharisees here made in pretending that 
they were doing God a service, although it was 
nothing but hypocrisy! Therefore also Christ said 
to them: “Ye hypocrites, well did Esaias prophesy 
of you, saying, his people draweth nigh unto me 
with their mouth, and honoreth me with their lips; 
but their heart is far from me. But in vain do they 
worship me, teaching for doctrines the command- 
ments of men” (Matt. 15: 7—9; Isa. 29:13). 


Thus it is with all the ceremonies, command- 
ments and traditions of the modern Pharisees. Yea, 
all that human judgment and purpose institutes, 
according to the Pharisaic way, that is inimical to 
the worship and the commandment of God, though 
set up with a beautifully dissembled exterior, as 
though the real purpose were to worship God there- 
with, is nevertheless wrong and hypocrisy in the 
sight of God and he is not worshiped thereby. 
Therefore all Christians must avoid and shun such 
things, and for the following reasons: - 


1. The commandments of men are instituted and 
observed as though it were the desire to please God 
therewith, wash away sin and fulfill righteousness, 
which is a derogation or disparagement of the grace 
of God and our Lord Jesus Christ, for it is an un- 


A Vindication. -153 


questioned fact and a fundamental truth, that we 
are not saved by our own traditions or the cere- 
monies of men, but by the grace of Jesus Christ and 
by faith in his name (Acts 4:10; 15:11; Eph. 1:7; 
2:4). Now it is evident, and well known by all 
who fear God, that the world seeks to gain justifi- 
cation and salvation through the commandments, 
institutions (statutes) and traditions of men, even 
as the Galatians sought to obtain justification by ~ 
circumcision and the law, for which Paul so sternly 
rebuked them and wrote to them that they were 
“foolish and bewitched, that Christ had become of 
no effect unto them, and that they had fallen from 
grace (Gal. 5:4) because they sought to be justified 
by the law. How much more, then, has the world 
lost Christ and fallen from grace when it seeks 
justification by the commandments and traditions 
of men. And if Paul rejected circumcision and the 
ceremonial law—though both were commanded and 
given by God—for the reason that they were fulfilled 
in Christ, and the Galatians sought justification and 
salvation by them, how much more are to be rejected 
the commandments, ceremonies and doctrines of 
men, by which the world means to be saved (Matt. 
Dios eo oy A) 

2.. The ceremonies and statutes of men do not 
serve or tend to the benefit or edification of fellow- 
men, while all Christian activity must tend to and 
serve this purpose. Hence the former give offence 
especially to the weak (Matt. 18:6; Rom. 14:14; 
1 Thess. 5:32), and therefore whoever observes the 
commandments and ceremonies of men, thereby 
erieves and displeases the Church of God, gives the 
appearance of evil example for others, which is a 
great sin, for it is written that evil examples lead 
astray and destroy the good, one in another, and 
that evil desires pervert simple minds (Wis. of Sol. 
4:12). He who by his evil example leads another 
astray and destroys the good in him sins greatly 
against God and his fellowman, as Christ shows in 
the following words: “Woe unto him through whom 
offences come. It were better for him that a mill- 
stone were hanged about his neck, and that he were 
drowned in the depth of the sea, than that he should 


154 A Vindication. 


offend one of the least of those that believe on me” 
(Matici8: 6, T+ Mark Ofer tke ne aes )e 

Those who think so little of offending the Church 
of God, without thinking of how grievously they 
sin and how severely God will punish such sin, 
should well consider this and take it to heart. Paul 
would abstain from eating flesh as long as he livec, 
if by eating he would offend his brother (1 Cor. 
8:13), and gives the reason (Rom. 14:15) as fol- 
lows: Whoever sins against his brother and wounds 
his conscience sins against Christ. If, then, Paul_ 
would give up his Christan liberty of eating all kinds 
of food rather than offend one brother, what of those 
who take liberties which God has not given them, 
and with this false liberty offend the Church of the 
Lord (John 8:38)? 

3. The observance of the commandments and 
ceremonies of men establishes false worship, and 
gives the world cause to boast against Christians ; 
for it is characteristic of idolaters that they want 
their idolatry honored and praised by everybody, 
and compel the people, as Nebuchadnezzar tried to 
compel the three youths, Shadrach, Meshach, and 
Abednego, to honor his image and worship his gods 
(Dan. 3:14). Antiochus did likewise and forced 
the Jews into his idolatry, and many acquiesced 
(1 Mac. 1:48), but those who remained steadfast in 
the faith, and would not forsake the law of God 
(do Mac. Le 13 39 2514-229" 2+ Macy 6k ere a were 
cruelly tormented and put to death, as the books of 
the Maccabees show (2 Mac. 7). And this is the 
devil’s work and propensity in the children of unbe- 
lief, to thus establish and preserve his kingdom 
(Eph. 2:2, 3); for by his ruthless tyranny he inti- 
midates many, that they do not believe or obey the 
truth, causing many to apostatize; then when the 
unbelievers and idolaters see that others who pro- 
fessed the gospel and faith and rebuked their prac- 
tices as idolatry and shunned them for a time, but 
now come back, whether voluntarily or by force, 
they are strengthened thereby in their false worship, — 
and assume that they are right, and thus boast to 
the injury or belittling of true worship and to the 
reproach of all true Christians. 


A Vindication. 155. 


But when they see that Christians separate 
themselves from them, they think it strange, as 
Peter says (Pet. 4:4), that these “run not with 
them to the same excess of riot, speaking evil of 
you,” yea, they revile, as it is written in the Book 
of Wisdom: “Let us lie in wait for the righteous: 
because he is not for our turn, and he is clean con- 
trary to our doings; he upbraideth us with our 
offending the law, and objecteth to our infamy the 
transgressions of our education. He professeth to 
have the knowledge of God, and he calleth himself 
the child of the Lord. He was made to reprove our 
thoughts. He is grievous unto us even to behold; 
for his life is not like other men’s, his ways are of 
another fashion. We are esteemed of him as count- 
erfeits; he abstaineth from our ways as from 
filthiness; he pronounceth the end of the just to be 
blessed, and maketh his boast that God is his 
Fathet” (Wis. of Sol. 2: 12—16). 

That the world may not imagine that the 
Christians are of one mind with them, but know 
that they are opposed to the world, Christians can- | 
not have any fellowship in their ungodly ways and 
their unfruitful works of darkness (Eph. 5:11), but 
much rather must reprove them by departing from 
them, and thus testify that they are evil. 

4. By’ the commandments and ceremonies of 
men gospel truth is obscured and the liberty of 
Jesus Christ is diminished in this that God’s word 
is disregarded or abandoned, and consciences are 
burdened with many useless and unnecessary things 
(Col. 2:16) which through Jesus Christ are made 
free by faith (Luke 1:69), so that they are no 
longer bound to the commandments of men, to the 
things of the world, but to Christ alone. to serve 
him in all obedience, holiness and righteousness. 
For Jesus Christ is ruler of the conscience, there- 
fore it must be free from all that i is not the service of 
Jesus Christ. 

Care must also be taken that that which is built 
by word is not destroyed by deed, hence Jesus 
Sirach says: “When one buildeth, and another 
pulleth down, what profit have they then but labor?” 
(Sir. 34:23). (Another rendering of this passage 


156 A Vindication. 


is: “When one buildeth, and pulleth it down again, 
what profit is his labor?”—Tr.) 

On this matter Paul criticises Peter (Gal. 2:11) 
for withdrawing and separating himself from the 
Gentiles for fear of the Jews which came from 
Jerusalem, and thus breaking down what he had 
previously built up, in this that he had made known 
the truth of the gospel and had fellowshipped with 
the Gentiles, eating food with them which the law 
declared unclean, and afterward he himself does the 
opposite thing and separates himself from the Gen- 
tiles to please the Jews; thus by this separation he 
broke down the gospel liberty which he had, by 
his fellowship with the Gentiles, previously built 
up. By so doing he again builds up the law which 
he had previously broken down, by which he made 
himself censurable as he who is unstable in his 
words and ways, and does not walk according to 
the truth of the Gospel, and by his dissembling 
misleads others. How much more then are those 
censurable who with the mouth profess the word of 
God, reject the commandments, ceremonies and 
doctrines of men and call them wrong, and then 
disregard the word of God, despise the sacraments 
of the Lord, and to please the world, and to take 
away the offence of the cross (Gal. 5:11), observe 
and practice the commandments of men, thereby 
offending many and misleading some by their hypo- 
crisy. How are they going to excuse themselves? 
Peter at least separated himself from the Gentiles 
according to the law, thus doing after the manner of 
the Jews and in deference to the brethren who came 
from James; nevertheless Paul “withstood him to 
the face” for not acting in accordance with evan- 
gelical truth and Christian liberty, and thus becom- 
ing a stumblingblock to the believing Gentiles. But 
these do not act according to the law or the gospel, 
for they observe the commandments and ceremonies 
of men, which both law and gospel reprove, reject 
and forbid _(isaie29-135" Matt. 15 79'en Gaines 1 
etc.), yea, curse as an abomination to God. And 
this they do to please men, although they may not 
please men if they would be the servants of Christ. 


A Vindication. ree Ler: 


Therefore they are ever censurable before God and 
his church. 

5. Christians are in fellowship with Christ and 
all the saints, and so break the bread and drink the 
cup at the Lord’s Supper as a testimony that they 
are one body and bread together in Christ (Matt. 
BO vo. atk 14° 228. Take 221922 Cor oese; 
11:23). Therefore also they must shun all false 
worship and the fellowship of idolatry and idola-. 
trous servants and the ways by which idols are 
served, and not be seen there, even as Paul’s words 
clearly convey when he says: “My dearly beloved, 
flee from idolatry. I speak as to wise men; judge 
ye what I say. The cup of blessing which we bless, 
is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? The 
bread which we break, is it not the communion of 
the body of Christ? For we being many are one 
bread and one body; for we are all partakers of 
that one bread. Behold Israel after the flesh: are 
not they which eat of the sacrifices partakers of the 
altar? What shall I say, then? that the idol is 
anything, or that which is offered to idols is any- 
thing? Nay, but I say, that the things which the 
Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to devils, and not 
to God; and I would not that ye should have fellow- 
ship with devils. Ye cannot drink the cup of. the 
Lord, and the cup of devils; ye cannot be partakers 
of the Lord’s table and of the table of devils. Or 
would ye provoke the Lord to jealousy? Are we > 
stronger than: her ete” (1 Core 10:9) 14-——22)¢ 

In these words we note how that Christians must 
flee idolatry because they are in the fellowship of 
,Christ and one body with all the believers and 
‘saints, which they testify and confirm by the Lord’s 
Supper, as the priests and the sons of Aaron who 
in the Israel after the flesh served at the altar and 
lived thereby were in the fellowship of the altar, 
that is, they were partakers with Aaron and his 
sons of all that God had ordained and commanded 
to be given to the altar. Thus also it is with those 
who with the idolaters eat of their bread, and drink 
of their cup. They are one body with them, and 
hence are in the fellowship of idolaters, yea, with the 
devil himself; for the unbelievers, idolaters and un- 


158 A Vindication. 


godly are one with the prince of darkness and of this 
world, whom they serve; and with the Babylonian 
whore, to whom they adhere and are therefore one 
body with her (Rev. 17:1) and have committed 
much spiritual fornication, that is, idolatry, with 
her; whoever therefore becomes involved with her 
and eats of her idol offerings, that is, observes her 
false worship, has fellowship with her, must expect 
to share her punishment, yea, upon him shall come 
the plagues that shall come upon Babylon, and he 
shall be cast with the dragon into the lake of fire 
~ which burns with fire and brimstone (which is the 
second death) if he does not amend his ways and 
sincerely repent. : 

6. Christians exemplify the living God, as it is 
written: “Know ye not that ye are the temple of 
God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you? 
If any man defile the temple of God, him shall God 
destroy; for the temple of God is holy, which tem- 
ple we-are{ (1 -Gor.23: 16,132: Cora 6) eet enec 
the apostle declares that Christ served in his own 
house as a son; “whose house we are, if we hold 
fast the confidence and the rejoicing of the hope 
firm unto the end” (Heb. 3:6). 

Inasmuch then as the true Christians are a tem- 
ple and a house of God and of the Holy Spirit, they 
must separate themselves from the temples of idola- 
ters, where people run-to the golden calves of Jero- 
boam, where they serve Baal, where Bel and the 
dragon are worshipped, whom Moasin honors (1 
Kings 12:.28'3 18 2263.7 ob. 1. 2bs2 Bel and ras io, 
23), yea, where so many idolatries are committed 
that it is a disgrace to mention it and too long to 
discuss it. Hence also a Christian must shun such 
idolatrous edifices, cleanse and separate himself 
from them, as Paul declares: “Be ye not unequally 
yoked together with unbelievers; for what fellow- 
ship hath righteousness with unrighteousness? and 
what communion hath light with darkness? And 
what concord hath Christ with Belial? or what part 
hath he that believeth with an infidel? And what 
agreement hath the temple of God with idols? for 
ye are the temple of the living God; as God hath 
said, I will live in them, and walk in them; and I 


\ 


A Vindication. 159 


will be their God, and they shall be my people. 
Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye 
separate, saith the Lord, and touch not the unclean 
thing; and I will receive you, and will be a Father 
unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, 
saith the Lord Almighty” (2 Cor. 6: 14-18). 


We have also a clear illustration and example 
in the godfearing Israelites who would not go to the 
golden calves of Jeroboam, but forsook their homes 
and departed out of idolatrous Israel (Kings 19:18; 
Rom. 11:4), living in the cities of Judah and Benja- 
min that they might honor and worship the Lord 
their God at Jerusalem in his temple according to 
his law given by Moses. 


Thus also did the pious Tobit when he was 
among the captive Israelites in Assyria. He did 
_ not forsake the way of truth. When all the others 
went to offer sacrifices to the golden calves which 
‘Jeroboam the king of Israel had made, he alone fled 
from their company and went to Jerusalem into the 
temple of the Lord and there worshipped the God of 
Israel, and faithfully brought his first-fruits and 
tenths of increase; and although all the rest “ate 
of the bread of the Gentiles” he was careful not to 
defile himself by abstaining from eating such food 
Glab. P6,-etc): 

In like manner did the prophets and the sons of 
the prophets and many God-fearing people in Israel 
bowed neither knee, nor heart, nor body to any idol, 
although living among the ungodly and idolatrous 
worshippers, in the time when Baal and cther idols 
of the heathen were worshipped in Israel (Dan. 3: 
12—17; 6:7—10, etc.); but they worshipped and 
honored the God of Israel, the Lord of heaven and 
earth, and hid themselves from the kings and ty- 
rants; yea, God by his grace wonderfully preserved 
them, as he himself spake to Elijah saying: “Yet 
have I left me seven thousand in Israel, all the 
knees which have not bowed unto Baal’ (1 Kings 
19-18. Kom, 11 .), 

Likewise the brave and Godfearing Mattathias 
could not be forced by king Antiochus to do con- 
trary to the law of God; for although many of the 


160 A Vindication. 


people of Israel had forsaken the law of God, and 
worshipped idols,Mattathias cried with a loud voice 
to the messengers of the king: “Though all the 
nations that are under the king’s dominion obey 
him, and fall away every one from the religion of 
their fathers, and give consent to his command- 
ments, yet will I and my sons and my brethren walk 
in the commandments of our fathers. God forbid 
that we should forsake the law and the ordinances. 
We will not hearken to the king’s words, to go from 
our religion, either on the right hand, or on the 
Pett eek “Mac. 2: 19—22). 

Remember also the aged Eleazar. How immov- 
ably he adhered to the law of God. How faith- 
fully he shunned all hypocrisy and all appearance of 
evil, and confessed openly, saying: “It becometh 
not our age in any wise to dissemble, whereby many 
young persons might think that Eleazar, being four- 
score years old and ten, were now gone to a strange 
religion; and so they, through my hypocrisy and 
desire to live a little time and a moment longer, 
should be deceived by me, and I get a stain to mine 
old age, and make it abominable” (2 Mac. 6: 18— 
25). “For,” said he, “though for the present time I 
should be delivered from the punishment of men; 
yet should I not escape the hand of the Almighty, 
neither alive nor dead. Wherefore now, manfully 
changing this life, I will show myself such a one as 
mine age requireth, and leave a notable example to 
such as be young, to die willingly and courageously 
for the honorable and holy laws” (vs. 24, 25).  / 

In the same manner the seven brothers with 
their mother suffered with great patience and stead- 
fastness of their faith all the cruel tyranny of the 
king, and would not act contrary to God’s law, but 
all cheerfully went to their death for it, comforting 
themselves with the future resurrection and the 
glory promised and prepared for them by God “(2 
Mae. 7). 

Note how constant all these remained to the law 
of God, and would in no way dissemble, thereby 
leaving us an example, that we should follow in 
their footsteps; “for,” says the apostle, “whatsoever 
things were written aforetime were written for our 


A Vindication. 161 


learning, that we through patience and comfort of 
_the scriptures might have hope” (Rom. 15:4). 
Beside the instances of separation already re- 


.. ferred to, the necessity for doing so is sufficiently 


~ shown by the two fearful beasts, of which it is 
_ written in the Revelations of John: “And he opened 
his mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme 
his name, and his tabernacle, and them that dwell 
in heaven. And it was given ‘unto him to make war 
with the saints, and to overcome them; and power 
was given him over all kindreds, and tongues, and 
nations. And all that dwell upon the earth shall 
worship him, whose names are not written in the. 
book of life of the Lamb slain from the foundation 
of the world” (Rev. 13: 6—8). And the other beast 
came up out of the earth; “and he had two horns 
like a lamb, and he spake as a dragon. And he exer- 
ciseth all the power of the first beast before him, 
and causeth the earth and them which dwell therein 
to worship the first beast, whose deadly wound was 
healed. And he doeth great wonders, so that he 
maketh fire come down from heaven on the earth 
in the sight of men, and had power to cause that as 
many as would not worship the image of the beast 
should be killed. And he causeth all, both small and 
great, rich and poor, free and bond, to receive a 
mark in their right hand, or in their foreheads; and 
that no man might buy or sell, save he that had the 
mark or the name of the beast, or the number of his 
name. Here is wisdom, etc.” (Rev. 13: 11-—18). 
Now, let him who is wise, intelligent and God- 
fearing consider and take to heart what this signi- 
fies. And‘let him fear; hear, and take to heart what 
the angel said with a loud voice, namely: “If any 
man worship the beast and his image, and receive 
his mark in his forehead, or in his hand, the same 
shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which 
is poured out without mixture into the cup of his 
indignation; and he shall be tormented with fire 
and brimstone in the presence of the holy angels, 
and in the presence of the Lamb; and the smoke of 
their torment ascendeth up for ever and ever; and 
they have no rest day or night, who worship. the 
beast and his image, and whosoever receiveth | the 


1 


162 A Vindication. 


mark of his nome. Here is the patience of the saints: 
here are they that keep the commandments of God, 
and the faith of Jesus, etc.” (Rev. 14: 7—12). Make 
note of it. 

It should also be noted here that the Holy Spirit 
testifies in the scripture that the abomination of 
desolation has entered the holy place, and that it is 
time to flee therefrom, that Antichrist shall rise and 
has already many centuries ago exalted himself 
above all that is called God or that is worshipped, 
claiming to be God and doing his work through the 
power of Satan in them that perish (2 Thess. 2: 
4-10) ; yea, that the great whore of Babylon is sit- 
ting “upon a scarlet colored beast, full of names of 
blasphemy, having seven heads and ten horns. And 
the woman was arrayed in purple and scarlet color, 
and decked with gold and precious stones and pearls, 
having a golden cup in her hand full of abomina- 
tions and filthiness of her fornication; and upon her 
head was a name written, Mystery, Babylon the 
Great, the Mother of Harlots and Abominations of 
the Earth. And I saw the woman drunken with the 
blood of the saints, and with the blood of the 
martyrs of Jesus” (Rev. 17: 3—6); “and she saith 
in her heart, I sit a queen, and am no widow, and 
Shall see no sorrow. Therefore shall her plagues 
come in one day, death, and mourning, and famine; 
and she shall be utterly burned with fire; for strong 
is the Lord who judgeth her, etc.” (Rev. 18:7, 8). 

Therefore all Christians are admonished by a 
voice from heaven which says: “Come out of her, 
my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and 
that ve receive not of her plagues. For her sins 
have reached unto heaven, and God hath remem- 
bered her inquities” (Rev. 18:4). 

_ From all this the indisputable conclusion follows 
that true Christians must serve God according to. 
his word alone, and that they must not be conformed 
to the world (Rom. 12:2), nor observe their false — 
worship; nor have any appearance of evil (even as 
Paul says: “Abstain from all appearance of evil.” 
1 Thess. 5:22), as if they were one with the world 
to have its friendship (which, however, is enmity 
with God, James 4:4), and to avoid bearing the 


A Vindication. | 163 


cross of Christ (in which all Christians glory, Gal. . 
6:14), and to preserve their temporal life, which, 
however, it is impossible to do, but is hurtful and 
forfeits eternal life, as Christ himself says: ‘“Who- 
soever will save his life shall lose it: and whosoever 
will lose his life for my sake shall find it” (Matt. 
16:25; John 12: 25). 

The claim which some make—that one may out- 
wardly take part in false worship, only one must 
not believe in it nor consent to it at heart—is absurd: 
To this claim we reply that such profession is noth- 
ing but deceit, of which Jesus Sirach says: ““To be 
apt in cunning is not wisdom, neither at any time 
the counsel of sinners prudence” (Sir. 19:22). It 
is wickedness and idolatry, and nothing but folly, 
and ignorance; therefore let no man be deceived by 
such a plea. “For with the heart man believeth unto 
righteousness; and with the mouth confession is 
made unto salvation” (Rom. 10:10). The bodies of 
Christians are temples of the living God and his 
holy Spirit (1 Cor. 3:16; 2 Cor. 6:16), and Paul 
says: “Shall I then take the members of Christ, and 
make them the members of an harlot? God forbid’ 
(1 Cor. 6:16). | 
Therefore also in a spiritual sense the members 
of Christ may not be made members of the Baby- 
lonian whore, nor the temple of God to be a temple 
of. idols. Hence all that the scriptures teach about 
separation) (2. Cor! 6710;) 'Ephiol:11;.> «Thess; 
5:22), namely that we separate ourselves from all 
false worship, from the temple of idols, from 
all evil works and appearances, and abstain 
from the same, must be understood as mean- 
ing that we must do this at heart, and show it out- 
wardly by our works. This is the light that is not 
hid under a bushel, but is set upon a candlestick, 
that it may give light to others (Matt. 5:15). This 
is the city that is set on a hill and cannot be hid, 
but is seen by all (Matt. 15:14). This is the elory 
with which Christians glorify the Lord in their 
bodies, and in their spirits, which are God’s (1 Cor. 
6:20). This is the confession with which we con- 
fess, and must confess, Christ before this perverse 
and unbelieving generation, and not be ashamed of 


164 | A. Vindication. 


. him or-his gospel. (Luke S= 26 ; Matt. 10:32; Mark 
8:38). 

Those, Ahern who pretend and teach that. Chris- 
tians are at liberty to play the hypocrite with the 
world and put on an appearance of evil, lie, and de- 
ceive themselves (1 Thess. 5:22), as do those who 
give ear to them; for the truth is not in them. But 
this. is the glorious liberty of the children of God 
that. by: the power of the blood of Christ we poor, 
miserable, depraved beings are delivered from the 
devil, sin, death, and hell (Rom. 3:25; 6:5, 17, 18; 
1 Pet. 1:2), and are, in the sight of God, free; that 
the bondage of sin has been removed; that by faith 
in the Son of God we have been made free from the 
judgment, free from the charge and the debt of sin, 
free from the power of Satan and from the wrath to 
come, have passed from death unto eternal life, and 
are made free by the truth (Heb. 2:14; 1 Thess. 
1:2; John 5:24; Rom. 6:8; 8:2; John 8:32; 
16:33; Col. 2:14), in short, that all our enemies 
have been overcome by the glorious victory of 
Christ, ‘and this is the victory that overcometh the 
world, even our faith” (1 John 5:4). : 

Moreover all that was figurative anda burden to 
the conscience under the law, with the many out- 
ward cerémonies, confined to stated times, days, and 
places, was all annulled and absorbed by the truth 
and the Spirit of Christ, and from which all the 
saints have been made free by faith, so that we are 
now no longer under the law, but under grace 
(Rom. 6:14; 10:4; Gal. 3:24-26; Acts 15:11; 
John 1:17); for Christ is unto us the end and the ful- 
fillment of the law, but by his grace we believe and 
hope to be saved. Nevertheiess, if we have been thus 
made free by Jesus Christ, we have again become 
servants,—of righteousness and of the Lord (Rom. 
6:18) to serve God, our heavenly Father, in all sub- 
missiveness and obedience, according to the example 
of Jesus Christ, to the praise of his holy name and to 
continue wholly in the doctrine of his Son unto the 
end, for he himself says that heaven and earth shall 
pass away, but that his word shall never pass away 
part 56218; 24°35; Isa::9;-Dan. 7; Luke.2:4- 

6:4): He is an everlasting King; and his kingdom 


A Vindication. 165. 


is an everlasting kingdom; he shall sit- upon the 
throne of David and reign in the house of Jacob 
forever. Therefore whatsoever he and his faithful 
servants and ambassadors have taught and testified 
to, by the power of his Spirit, must be rigidly ob- 
served, without change or shifting, to the end of-the 
world, by every one who makes a profession of ‘the 


gospel and of faith in Christ (Matt. 28:20). This .«. 


liberty which Christ and his servants taught ‘and 
practiced, it is the privilege of all true Christians, 
by the grace of God, to asssume and practice, in the 
fear of God, for the promulgation of the glory of 
Jesus Christ and the upbuilding of his church. But 
let every one take heed that he overreach not the 
bounds set by the example of Christ Jesus and his 
faithful followers and the teaching of the scripture, 
and he will not be deceived. 3 

What some people maintain, namely, that out of 
_ love and for the sake of peace one may sham with 
the world, is the real cunning subtlety and the de- 
ceitful lies of the old, wriggling, crooked serpent 
(Gen 3: ¥"2' Cot 1? ay, What genuine love is we 
learn from these words of John: “God is love; and 
he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God 
in him” (1 John 4:16). In other words, “Love is of 
Ged; and every one that loveth is born of God, and 
knoweth God. He that loveth not knoweth ‘not 
God; for God is love” (Vs. 7, 8). And again: 
“This is the love of God, that we keep his command- 
ments; and his commandments are not grievous” (1 
John 5:3). And Paul says: “The end of the com- 
mandments is charity out of a pure heart, and of'a 
good conscience, and of faith unfeigned ; from which 
some having swerved have turned aside unto vain 
jangling; desiring to be teachers of the law; under- 
standing neither what they say, nor whereof they 
affirm” (1 Tim. 1:5—7). 

By means of these words genuine love may be 
recognized, and distinguished from pretense or false 
love. For where God and the new birth are not’ in 
evidence, where the commandments of the Lord are 
not kept, but much rather despised and’ wantonly 
transgressed. where there is no pure heart and good 
conscience and sincere faith, there love does not 


166 A Vindication. 


exist. God is and dwells with those who are of a> 
contrite and humble spirit (Isa. 57:15; 66:2), who 
fear his word and keep it. The new birth or life is 
where one does right and leads a holy life (1 John 
2:29; 1. Pet. 1:22, 23), has a pure heart, a good 
conscience and sincere faith that cometh by the 
word of God (Rom. 10:17), for that purifies the 
heart and seals the conscience, and from this comes 
faith through the operation of the Holy Spirit (John 
15:26). For this reason faith looks unto God and 
his holy word alone (Heb. 11), lightly esteeming 
every oppression endured for the Lord’s sake and 
for the sake of his word, and heeds no creature who 
would hinder it; yea, faith leads and impels man to 
the point where he loves God his Lord above all 
creatures, and even above his life (Matt. 22:36; 
Matt. 16: 24—26). 

This is to be observed and found in faithful Abra- 
ham in the great test to which God put him when 
he said to him: “Take now thy son, thine only son 
- Isaac, whom thou lovest, and get thee into the land 
of Moriah; and offer him there for a burnt offering 
upon one of the mountains which I will tell thee of” 
(Gen. 22:2). Abraham did so, rose up early in the 
morning, and clave the wood for the burnt offering; 
then he journeyed thither with his son. And as they 
were going along together, Abraham carrying the 
knife, and Isaac the wood, for the burnt. offering, 
Isaac said to his father Abraham, as they were ap- 
proaching the place of offering: “My father.” Abra- 
ham answered: “Here am I, my son.” And Isaac 
said: “Behold the fire and the wood; but where 
is the lamb for a burnt offering?” Abraham an- 
swered: “My son, God will provide himself a lamb 
for a burnt offering.” And when they came to the 
place which God had told him of, Abraham, in his 
faith, in his fear of, and his love for, God, built there 
an altar, laid the wood thereon, and bound Isaac 
upon it and took the knife to slay Isaac his son for a 
burnt offering unto.the Lord. Then the angel called 
to him out of heaven and testified to him that he 
feared God because for the sake of his God he, with- 
held not his only son. 

Such manner and degree of faith and love to. God 


A Vindication. 167 


is also to be observed and found in the Levites 
(Exod. 32:27, 28; Deut. 33:9), who spared neither 
father, nor mother, nor brother, nor neighbor, but 
punished the worshippers of the idols and of the 
golden calf according to God’s command, regardless 
of human affections. Phinehas was likewise zealous 
for the Lord, putting brotherly love in the back- 
ground in the case where he thrust the Israelite 
and the Midianitish woman through, thereby stay- 
ing the plague among the children of Israel (Num. 
25: 6-8), by which act Phinehas and his seed re-- 
ceived from God the covenant of an everlasting 
priesthood. 

This was done to them according to the letter of 
the old testament as a figure, yet also as a testi- 
mony of true faith and sincere love to God, and is 
written to teach and admonish us (Rom. 15:4) that 
we should love God above all creatures, even as 
Jesus also teaches us in the gospel, that for his sake 
we must forsake all things; father, mother, brother 
and sister, wife and children, and even our own 
lives, and take up the cross and follow him; and 
that whosoever loves anything more than him 
(Christ and his gospel) is not worthy of him (Matt. 
10237.; Mark: 8:34; . Luke:.9: 23). For this. is the 
first and greatest commandment, in the old as well 
as new testament, that we shall love the Lord our 
God with all our heart, and with all our soul, and 
with all our mind, and with all our strength (Deut. 
6:5; Matt. 22:37; Mark 12:30; Luke 10: 27), and 
this love is confessed by keeping the commandments 
-of God, as Christ himself says: “He that hath my 
commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that 
~ loveth me.” And “he that loveth me not keepeth 
not my sayings” (John 14:21, 24). . Hence the 
apostle says: “Charity rejoiceth not in iniquity, but 
rejoiceth in the truth” (1 Cor. 13:6). 

Love, then, is without dissimulation and Hoes 
not play the hypocrite, nor act deceitfully. Love 
does not transgress the doctrine and ordinances of 
Christ ;. it abhors all false worship, all idolatry, all 
ceremonies and ordinances of men that are against 
or contrary to God, and does not seek the friendship 
of this world, does not desire to please men, know- 


e 


168 A Vindication. 


ing well that all that is highly esteemed among men 
is an abomination to God. Love spares not the 
flesh; seeks not that which is temporal and perish- 
able, and fears not the cross of Jesus Christ, but 
rejoices (glories) in it (Gal. 6: 14). In short, love 
manifests integrity of the divine sort, by the power 
of the Holy Spirit, both toward God and fellowmen ; 
toward God in obedience to the truth and diligent 
Observance of the commands of God (1 Pet. 1:22; 
John 14:15), and toward fellowmen in seeking and 
desiring, above all other things, their salvation, by 
fervent prayer to God, by wholesome instruction, 
reproof and admomition ‘ (John 3: 16), and also in 
showing true friendship and mercy in all temporal 
need, in all sorrow, sickness and trial (James 1: 27; 
2:15-17). In all these things Jesus Christ, Moses, 
Paul, and all holy men of God are a good illustration 
and examplé (Deut. 2; Rom. 9). 

But because some people have been without this 
love and are still without it, they indulge in vain 
pretty prattle about love, of which they boast and 
write much, and claim that for love a man may de- 
part from the word of the Lord, transgress God’s 
commandments and be conformed to the world in 
its idolatrous and ungodly external ways (Rom. 
12:2), that is, in its hypocrisy, which however is 
deceit and lies, and manifestly contrary to God and 
his word, and contrary to the true nature of Chris- 
tian love (1 John 3:16; James 2: 15-17) which does 
not consist in words nor in suggestive attitudes, 
but in the truth and power of God, in diligently 
keeping the commandments of God, and in serving 
our neighbor (1 John 5:2). Where this is not done 
there is no love, but a false profession of love, puffed 
up (inflated). for which one is none the better, and 
which is foolishness with God, and a complete mis- 
conception and profanation of divine things. | 

Some people of this kind also have much to say 


about peace and try to make it a cloak to cover all 


kinds of hypocrisy, idolatry and unrighteousness. 
Hence it is necessary to note and to take into con- 
sideration what constitutes the real peace of God 


-and Christ, and how Christians are to have peace 


among one another (Eph. 4; Rom. 12: 17-21), and 


A ‘Vindication. | 169 


how far they shall seek peace with all men. This 
is the peace of God, that we have peace with God 
the Father through Jesus Christ the true Peace- 
maker and Propitiator with God of all that is in 
heaven and on earth. Paul says to the Romans: 
“Being justified by faith, we have peace with God 
through our Lord Jesus Christ; by whom also we 
have access by faith into this grace wherein we 
stand, and rejoice in the hope of the glory of God” 
(Rom. 5:1, 2). And to the Ephesians: “In Christ 
Jesus ye who sometimes were afar. off are made 
nigh by the blood of Christ. For he is our peace, 
who hath made both one (or, who out of two hath 
made one” Eph. 2:13, 14). And to the Colossians: 
“For it pleased the Father that in him should all 
fulness dwell; and, having made peace through the 
blood of his cross, by him to reconcile all things 
unto himself; whether they be things in earth, or 
things in heaven, etc.” (Col. 1:19). 

This is the true peace of Jesus Christ which he 
gave unto his disciples, as he says: “Peace I leave 
with you, my peace I give unto you; not as the © 
world giveth” (John 14:27). Therefore the peace 
of Jesus Christ is not the peace of this world, but 
peace of conscience which, by the grace and redemp- 
tion and reconciliation of Jesus Christ, has peace 
and joy with God in the Holy Ghost (Rom. 14:17), 
which the world knows not, but reviles, so that the 
peace of Jesus Christ is enmity with the world, and, 
also, that the peace of the world is enmity with 
Jesus Christ, which he testifies when he says: 
“Think not that I am come to send peace on earth; 
I came not to send peace, but a sword. For I am 
come to set a man at variance against his father, 
and the daughter against her mother, and the 
daughter in law against her mother in law. Anda 
man’s foes shall be they of his own household” 
(Matt. 10: 34-36). Such variance Christ causes by 
his gospel, therefore Paul says: “If I yet pleased 
men, I should not be the servant of Christ” (Gal. 
kO5}: 

From this it can be clearly understood how en- 
tirely they have erred and are perverted who would 
make this peace of Jesus Christ to mean that one 


170 A Vindication. 


should seek to keep in peace with the world by 
hypocrisy and fellowship in evil works. This is 
far from true Christianity, for with true Christians _ 
it is abundantly enough that they have peace with 
God through Jesus Christ:(Rom. 5:1), and are rich- 
ly comforted thereby if for righteousness’ sake they 
must be at variance and in discord with the world 
(Rom. 5:11). For, being reconciled to God the 
Father by the blood of his Son (Rom. 5:10), and 
called into one body with all believers (Col. 3:15), 
they seek to have peace one with another, as Christ 
commanded them, saying: “Have salt in yourselves, 
and have peace one with another” (Mark 9:50, and 
as Paul admonished the Ephesians: “Endeavor to 
keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace” 
(Eph. 4:3, and to the Colossians: “Let the peace 
of God rule in your hearts, to which also ye are 
called in one body; and be ye thankful” (Col. 3: 15), 
and to the Philippians: “The peace of God, which 
passeth all undersanding shall keep your hearts and 
minds through Christ Jesus” (Phil. 4:7). 
Christians are also in duty bound to live, so far 
as lies in their power, in peace with all men as the 
apostle says: “If it be possible, as much as lieth in 
_ you, live peaceably with all men” (Rom, 12:18). 
In other words: “Follow peace with all men” 
(Heb. 12:14). But this is not to be understood as 
meaning that we shall, in godly walk and work try, 
by hypocrisy and the appearance of evil, to seek 
peace with the world (which lieth in wickedness. 1 
John 5:19); for both Peter and John testified before 
the Pharisees and scribes that we ought to obey God 
rather than men (Acts 4:19). 

We have here briefly, in our simplicity, answered 
and given the reasons why we separate and have 
separated ourselves from the world and its false 
worship, although we are now, on account of this 
separation, abused by the false prophets and perse- 
cuted by the tyrants, for which we must find com- 
fort in the Lord our God and rejoice in him; for we 
know, and are fully persuaded, by the grace of God 
and the sealing of the. Holy Spirit in our hearts, that 
we are not separating ourselves and have not sepa- 
tated from, the true Christian apostolic chutch or 


A Vindication. 171 


congregation, which was from the beginning. For 
we believe in the one eternal, and almighty God, 
Creator of heaven and earth, who made his covenant 
with Adam, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and with 
all God-fearing people, and promised and gave them 
his only begotten Son Jesus Christ as a Messiah, 
Redeemer and Savior, in whom we also believe, and 
through faith in his name hope to be saved (Gen. 
Oa Saks nts B22 si 28 18-0itsah, 92 be5 Matt, 
1:21; Acts 15:11; Gal. 3:9; Eph. 2:4), and desire 
also in our weakness to serve the Lord Jesus Christ, 
to remain steadfast in his doctrine and nevermore 
accept any strange doctrine (John 10). 

And we. thank almighty God our heavenly 
Father, who by grace called us into the fellowship 
of Jesus Christ and the saints, that we are no more 
strangers and foreigners, but fellow-citizens with 
the saints, that we are of the household of God; 
and are built upon the foundation of the apostles 
and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief 
corner stone (Eph. 2:18-20); yea, that we have 
come unto mount Sion, and unto the city of the 
living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an in- 
numerable company of angels, to the general as- 
sembly and church of the firstborn, which are 
written in heaven, and to God, the Judge of all, and 
to the spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus 
the Mediator of the new covenant, and to the blood 
of sprinkling, that speaketh better things than that 
of Abel (Heb. 12: 22-24). ‘ 

This is the fellowship of God and the saints to 
which we have come through the atonement and 
election and calling of God, and in which we also 
desire to remain, and therein to serve God in obe- 
dience and in truth, and to keep his ordinances... 
Thereby we will not separate ourselves from the 
true Church of God, with which we are one; but 
we will separate ourselves from all sects and from— 
all false worship, from all traditions of men, all 
ceremonies that are contrary to God’s word, and 
from all appearance of evil, so that we will not be 
pretending to please the world. We do this, not 
because of obstinacy, nor because of pride, nor for 
revenge, nor for any other carnal reason, but in 


172 A Vindication. 


faith, through the impelling love of God, in the fear 
of the Lord, for the reasons above given, and by 
which we shall not be brought to shame. For we 
know that this is God’s command and will, and are 
convinced that all plants which the heavenly Father 
has not planted shall be destroyed (Matt. 15:18). 
May God, the Father of all mercy (Col. 1:13; 
2 Cor. 1:3), who has delivered us from the power 
of Satan and translated us into the kingdom of his 
dear Son Jesus Christ, preserve us in the same, and 
gather into it many thousands that they may be 
saved, and bring us all together in one spirit of 
faith, blameless before his face, and keep us for his 
heavenly kingdom, by the power of the.Holy Spirit. 
To this same one, eternal God be praise, honor and 
thanksgiving forever. Amen (Heb. 13:21). 


On the Sending 
OF : 
Preachers or Teachers, 


8 5 Wd Baga ey 


Who are True Teachers, sent of God, and properly 
chosen and called by the Christian Church; 
how they are known, and what kind 
of fruit they bear. 


LIKEWISE 
How False Teachers may be known, and how they 
are to be shunned and not listened to. 


A Brief Admonition 
OUT OF THE HOLY SCRIPTURES. 


Together with an explanation regarding several 
contradictions and slanderous attacks instituted 
against the true ministers of the gospel 
by railing malevolents and libellers. 


iD eae Sy 


He whom God hath sent speaketh the words of God. 
Tohn8 34: 


174 Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 


Unto all Godfearing lovers of the truth, I, ‘oe pee 
who by grace am a fellow-citizen in the faith and of 
the Christian Church, wish true. spiritual wisdom 
and a pure understanding of the divine word, from 
God our heavenly Father, and from Jesus Christ, 
his only begotten Son, our Lord and Savior, through 
the enlightenment of the Holy Spirit. Amen. 


Beloved in the Lord, all you who fear God and 
love the truth :—Whereas there is at this time much 
dissension and variance on the subject of the send- 
ing of ministers, and, further, whereas all teachers. 
no matter who they are, profess the gospel, and 
allow themselves to imagine that they are sent of 
God, whereas this is without any doubt the time of 
which Christ and his apostles prophesied, namely, 
that there should be many false prophets and false 
Christians, and should deceive many (Matt. 24:11; 
1 Tim. 4:1-3; 2 Tim. 3:1-7; 4:3, 4; 2 Pet. 2:1-3; 
Jude 4): 

Therefore I am constrained out of brotherly love 
to give you a brief instruction on the sending of 
true teachers, that you may know how to distinguish 
the true prophets, teachers and Christians from 
the false (Matt. 24:5, 11-13); for it is the nature, 
business and disposition of Satan to transform him- 
self into an angel of light (2 Cor. 11:14), by which 
he hides his deceitfulness and hypocrisy, and with 
which -he disguises and cloaks his servants and 
places them before the world in an agreeable light 
of piety. 

What is there that makes a more engaging ap- 
pearance than Satan in all pharisaical and spiritless, 
sanctimonious make-believes, who seek justification 
by their own works and traditions and parade. them- 
selves with a fine display of words and outward 
show, with many ceremonies and _ ecclesiastical 
grandeur? Who is there that is more presumptuous 
and bolder in the use of boastful language than the 
false, deceitful, lying prophets who go about and 
yet are not sent of the Lord; who prophesy, but ' 
not by the Spirit of the Lord? Who is it that prides 
himself more upon the gospel and Christianity, of 


Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 175 


true theology and knowledge of the scriptures than 
do these far-famed wise men of this world and per- 
verted theologians, who vainly imagine that because 
they have studied in advanced schools (and are 
therefore, as the old adage runs: The more learned, 
the more perverted), they alone are teachers and 
masters of the scripture, when the sad fact of the 
case is that they have not received or taught the ele- 
mentary principles of the divine word, for they have 
never been in the school of Christ, and have not had 
the true schoolmaster, the Holy Spirit, not even 
seen or known him (John 14:26; 15:26, 27; 16: 
7-11), but they speak of scriptures which they do 
not understand; or, even if they do understand 
something, they are not willing to do accordingly. 

These are the downright false Christians and 
false prophets of whom the Lord warns us and _ 
whom he so excellently portrays when he says: 
“Beware of false prophets, which come to you in 
sheep’s clothing, but inwardly they are ravening 
wolves. Ye shall know them by their fruits” (Matt. 
7:15, 16). And again Jesus says: “Not every one 
that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the 
kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of 
my Father which is in heaven” (V. 21), and follows 
with: “Many will say to me in that day, Lord, 
Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name? and in 
thy name have cast out devils? and in thy name 
have done many wonderful works? And then will 
I profess-unto them, I never knew you; depart from 
me, ye that work iniquity” (V. 22, 23). 

From these words it is evident that the false 
Christians and false prophets are those who have 
much to boast about Christ, who chatter nicely 
about the gospel and make a fine show of them- 
selves, and at the same time walk after the flesh, 
and, in their wolfish nature, rend the sheep of Christ 
wherever they can and may. 

Against these Christ has faithfully warned us, 
although there are few who heed this warning of 
Christ; but the people generally are of the same 
mind’ as Ahab, king of Israel, namely, they love 
lies and hate the truth, and cannot bear to have a 
Micaiah come and tell them the truth (1 Kings 22: 8, 


176 Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 
9); therefore also they cannot understand the truth, 
“for fools,” says Sirach, “shall not attain unto wis- 
dom, and sinners shall not see her. For she is far 
from pride (the proud),.and. men that are liars (hy- 
pocrites) cannot remember her” (Sir. 15:7, 8). 
Hence Paul also says: “But if our gospel be hid, it 
is hid to them that are lost; in whom the god of 
this world hath blinded the minds of them which 
believe not, lest the light of the glorious gospel of 
Christ, who is the image of God, should shine unto 
them” (2 Cor. 4:4). 

This is the reason why the false prophets have 
always been so highly esteemed and readily listened 
to by the world, while the true prophets were looked 
upon, defamed and persecuted as deceivers, and it is — 
still the same, for thus can Satan deceive the world, 
so that it takes the shadow for the substance, dark- 
ness for light, and falsehood for truth, yea, utterly 
rejects Christ because he is essentially offensive to 
the world, as he says through Isaiah: “Behold, my 
servant shall deal prudently, he shall be exalted and 
extolled, and be very high. As many were astonied 
at thee; (or, according to another rendering: “so 
that many shall be offended at him, because his 
visage was marred more than any man,” and be- 
cause “he hath no form nor comeliness” Isa. 52:13, 
14; 53:2). And Simeon said to Mary regarding 
Christ: ‘This child is set for the fall and rising 
again of many in Israel; and for a sign which shall 
be spoken against” (Luke 2:34). And Peter says 
that Jesus Christ is the cornor-stone laid by God in 
Sion, precious to those that believe, “but unto them 
which be disobedient, the stone which the builders 
disallowed, the same is made the head of the corner, 
and a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offence, even 
to them which stumble at the word, being disobe- 
dient” (1 Pet. 2: 6-8). 

Hence spiritual discernment, a keen insight and 
clear vision are necessary for all believers, espe- 
cially in our times, so that they may rightly behold 
Christ, recognize his servants with certainty, and 
rightly distinguish them from the servants of Satan. 
For this reason I am moved by the grace of God to 
point out to all believers, from the word of God, 


Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 177 


what teachers are sent of God and how they may 
be known, so that all pious Christians may be 
strengthened in their faith, comforted in their hearts 
and refreshed, and that the mouths of all blas- 
phemers may be stopped, who, to cover their hypoe- 
crisy, slander the true ambassadors and _ faithful 
servants of Christ. To this end may the eternal 
and alone wise God grant us his grace. Amen (1 
Timi Las). 

In the first place, two ways of calling and send- 
ing (by which an individual is called of God to an 
office and sent forth) are given in the scripture. The 
first is by God alone. Thus was Moses called by 
God alone; so also was Aaron chosen of God alone 
(EX 35 103° Ex! 282 te: Num.12 * 5 > Hebs 15748 
and thus likewise were the prophets called by God 
alone, and spake as they were moved by the Holy 
Ghost (2 Pet. 1:21). Thus also were the apostles 
called and chosen by Christ Jesus alone, and by him 
sent forth to preach the gospel to every creature. | 

These were sent forth by God without human 
instrumentality, to prophesy and to teach, and were 
moved by his Spirit. But since Satan also sends 
forth his servants and sometimes drives them ex- 
ceedinely, though making it appear as if they had 
been sent by God and were being moved by his 
Spirit (2 Cor. 11:18, 14), therefore the Lord has 
left us a certain test by which both the true and the 
false prophets shall be known. And this js the test: 

1. If a prophet prophesies something, and it 
does not come to pass, he is false, for thus saith the 
Lord: “The prophet which shall presume to speak 
a word in my name, which I have not commanded 
him to speak, or that shall speak in the name of 
other gods, even that prophet shall die. And if thou 
say in thine heart, How shall we know. the word 
which the Lord hath not spoken? When a prophet 
speaketh in the name of the Lord, if the thing fol- 
low not, nor come to pass, that is the thing which 
the Lord hath not spoken, but the prophet hath 
spoken it presumptuously: thou shalt not marvel 
at him” (Deut. 18: 20-22). 

These are the express words of the Lord, by 
which all prophesyings must be measured and 


12 


178 Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 


judged. Therefore the prophet Jeremiah said to 
Hananiah (who made a false prophecy regarding 
the deliverance of Judah out of Babylon): “The 
prophets that have been before me and before thee 
of old prophesied both against many countries, and 
against great kingdoms, of war, and of evil, and of 
pestilence. The prophet which prophesieth of peace, 
when the word of the prophet shall come to pass, 
then shall the prophet be known, that the Lord 
hath truly sent him” (Jer. 28:8, 9). 

-- 2. Even though the prophet performs signs and 
wonders, and what the prophet foretold comes to 
pass; yet, if he at the same time teaches that we 
shall serve other gods, he is a false prophet, for thus 
saith the Lord: “If there arise among you a prophet, 
or a dreamer of dreams, and giveth thee a sign or 
a wonder, and the sign or the ence come to pass, 
whereof he spake unto thee, and he say, Let us go 
after other gods, which thou hast not known, and 
let us serve them; thou shalt not hearken unto the 
words of that prophet, or that dreamer of dreams: 
for the Lord your God proveth you, to know 
whether ye love the Lord your God with all your 
heart and with all your soul” (Deut. 18: 1-3). 

In these words it is to be seen that although a 
prophet performs signs and wonders, and that comes 
to pass which he has said, that is not enough to 
prove his commission that it is of God, inasmuch 
as his teaching is not blameless, fruitful and whole- 
some. And on this Paul says: “Though we, or an 
angel from heaven, preach any other gospel unto 
you, than that which we have preached unto you, 
let him be accursed” (Gal. 1:8). 

The other method of calling is by cod and his 
church. Thus Paul and Barnabas were first called 
of the Lord, and thereafter this call was. confirmed 
by the church, with the concurrent endorsement of 
the Holy Ghost, as is shown in the Acts of the 
Apostles, namely that the Holy Ghost said to the 
church: “Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the 
work whereunto I have called them.. And when 
they had fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on 
them, they sent them away” (Acts 13:2, 3). 

_° Thus also Paul and Barnabas, with fasting and 


Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 179 


prayer (by thé voice of the church), ordained lead- 
ers and elders in all the churches (Acts 14: 23). 

Thus Paul writes to Timothy: “Neglect not the 
gift that is in thee, which was given thee by proph- 
ecy, with the laying on of the hands of the pres- 
bytery” (1 Tim. 4:14). He likewise commands 
Titus to ordain elders in every city in Crete, as he 
had appointed him to do (Tim. 1:5). So also the 
church in Jerusalem set-seven deacons before the 
apostles, and when ae, had prayed, thiey: laid their 
hands on them (Acts 6 : 6). 

From this it is clear that the apostles and elders, 
with the church, by the power of Jesus Christ, and 
the witness of the Holy Ghost, called, chose’ and 
ordained teachers and ministers; therefore no one 
may assume such office of himself unless’ he is 
called and chosen of God (as were the prophets and 
apostles), or by the Church of God, by the laying 
on of hands (as Timothy, Titus, and others of the 
apostles and elders, with the consent and voice of 
the church, were ordained, and also ordained 
others); for the apostle says: “How shall they 
preach, except they be sent?” (Rom. 10:15). And 
again: “No man taketh this honor unto himself, 
but he that is called of God, as was Aaron” (Heb. 
5:4). Therefore also the Lord brought fearful 
punishment upon Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, and 
their adherents, because they undertook to assume 
the priesthood without being chosen of God (Num. 
16: 1-383), and so the Lord will reject all prophets 
who go forth without being sent of him, who speak 
in his name, but are not moved by his Spirit (Jer. 
Bo): 

Therefore let every one see to it that he run not 
of himself before he is called of the Lord or by his 
church in the prescribed manner. No one is sent 
by the Lord, however, or rightly chosen by the 
church, except by the Holy Spirit; he must touch 
his heart and make him fervent with love to will- 
ingly feed. lead and send forth the church of God 
(John 21:15-17: 1 Pet. 5:2), as it is written of 
Paul and Barnabas, that they departed, being sent 
forth by the Holy Ghost. . And Paul says to the 
elders of the churches:: “Take heed therefore unto 


- 


180 Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 


yourselves, and to all the flock, over the which the 
Holy Ghost hath made you overseers, to. feed the 
church of God, which he hath purchased with his — 
own. blood” (Acts 20 : 28). 

Now, if the true teachers are moved and sent 
forth and set over the churches by the Holy Ghost, 
it is evident, from this alone, how that they must 
be qualified. For it is certain and undeniable that 
the Holy Ghost does not send forth drunkards, nor 
adulterers, nor covetous persons, nor worshippers 
of idols, nor hypocrites, who make a show of piety © 
for the body’s sake and make merchandise of the 
word. of God, for it is written: “The Holy Spirit 
of discipline will flee deceit, and remove from the 
wicked” (Wis. 1:5). Therefore Christ also says 
that the world cannot receive the Holy Spirit, “be- 
cause it seeth him not, neither knoweth him” (John 


14:17); for, “if any man have not the Spirit of 


Christ, he is none of his” (Rom. 8:9). But how 


can those who do not belong to Christ have an 


office in his church, or properly fill it? The apostle 


Says that “no man.can say that Jesus is the Lord 


(or call Jesus Lord) but by the Holy Ghost” (1 Cor. 
12:3). Much less then can he rightly preach Christ 
JESUS except by the Holy Ghost. 

‘The sequence therefore comes forcibly that the 


\ arch PRS of Christ, the. teachers and leaders of his 


church, must have the Holy Ghost, by whom they 


- must, first and above all things, be well instructed 


in. the word of God; for the common people must 
err and walk in darkness if the teachers themselves 
are ignorant. Why? Because Christ calls the teach- 


“ers a light of the world, a salt of the earth (Matt. 


9:18, 14), and how can the world see aright when 
those who should be a light unto the world are 
themselves in entire darkness? That is, how should 
the world rightly understand and know the holy 
scripture and the power of God when those who 
ought.to be the salt of the earth have lost the savor 
of: the divine word and do not themselves know 


what a good Christian ought to know? How could 


not.the. world but err when those who by all means 
should be the city that is built on a ul to show 


Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 181 


lead? Therefore I say again that the teachers 
themselves must, above all things, be thoroughly 
informed. and instructed in the word of God, as it 
is written: “The priest’s lips should keep knowl: 
edge, and they should seek the law at his mouth: 
for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts” (Mal. 
2:7). And Paul says: “A bishop must be blame- 
less, . . . . holding fast the faithful word as he 
hath been taught, that he may be able by sound 
doctrine both to exhort and to convince the gain- 
sayers” (Tit. 1:7-9). 

Moreover the teachers of God’s word must teach 
true and unadulterated doctrine, as the gospel de- 
clares: “He whom God hath sent speaketh the 
words of God” (John 3:34). And Paul says: “I 
will not dare to speak of any of those things which 
Christ hath not wrought by me” (Rom. 15:18); 
and in another place: “We are not as many, which 
corrupt the word of God; but as of sincerity; but 
as of God, in the sight of God speak we in Christ” 
(2 Cor. 2:17; 4:1-4).° For, he says, “we are am- 
bassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech 
you by us: we pray you in Christ’s stead, be ye 
reconciled to God” (2 Cor. 5:20); “for. our ex- 


hortation was not of deceit, nor of uncleanness, nor 


in guile; but as we were allowed of God to be put 
in trust with the gospel, even so we speak; not as 
pleasing men, but God, which trieth our hearts” 
(1 Thess. 2:3, 4). The apostle Peter says: “If any 
man speak, let him speak as the oracles of God” 
(1 Pet.4:11). Therefore also the Lord says 
through Jeremiah: “The prophet that hath a dream, 
let him tell a dream; and he that hath my word, 
let him speak my word faithfully. For what is the 
chaff to the wheat? saith the Lord. Is not my word 
like a fire? saith the Lord; and like a hammer 
that breaketh the rock in pieces?” (Jer. 23:28, 29). 
From these and similar passages of holy scrip- 
ture it is easy to recognize the true teachers, espe- 
cially so far as the true doctrine is concerned, 
namely if they teach the word of God rightly, 
whereby they seek the glory of God and the salva- 
tion of men, jif they ate spiritually minded, if they 
have renounced all earthly and perishable things, 


182 Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 


if.they know no man after the flesh (2 Cor. 5:16), 
if they love God above all else and carry on his 
work without deceit and hypocrisy; for such. min- 
isters God desires, as Moses says: “Who said unto 
his father and to his mother, I have not seen him 
(or: I see you not); neither did he acknowledge 
his brethren, nor knew his own children: for they 
have observed thy word, and kept thy covenant. 
They shall teach Jacob thy judgments, and Israel 
thy law” (Deut. 33:9, 10). Therefore also Jesus 
chose such apostles and sent them out to preach, 
who first of all had forsaken all, and had followed 
him (Matt. 4:19; 19:27; Luke 5: 115; 18:28), and 
who continued with him in his temptations (Luke 
22:28). These the Father gave him out of the 
world, and to these he first revealed his Father’s 
name, as he says: “I have manifested thy name 
unto the men which thou gavest me out of the 
world: thine they were, and thou gavest them me; 
and they have kept thy word” (John 17:6). Christ 
also himself chose and separated these from the 
world, as he says: “Ye have not chosen me, but I 
have chosen you, and ordained you, that you should 
go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should 
remain” (John 15:16). These also Jesus com- 
mended to his heavenly. Father, saying: “I pray 
for them: I pray not for the world, but for them 
which thou hast given me; for they are thine. And 
all mine are thine, and thine are mine; and I am 
glorified in them. Holy Father, keep through thine 
own name those whom thou hast given me, that 
they may be one, as we are. I have given them thy 
word; and the world hath hated them, because they 
are not of the world, even as I am not of the world” 
(John 17: 9-14). 

These divinely taught, divinely chosen, separated- 
from-the-world disciples Christ sent forth and said 
to them: “As my Father hath sent me, even so send 
I. you” (John 20:21; 17:18; 3:16, -etc.). How 
Christ was sent by the Father, how he left all 
things, how he relinquished all his glory, and how, 
as a faithful Messenger of his Father, he did not do 
his own will, nor spake his own words, nor sought 
his own glory, but said and did what the Father 


Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 183 


commanded, the holy scripture shows so abundantly, . 
both in the old and the new testament, that we do 
not consider it necessary to discuss it here (Isa. 
53:1, etc.; Jer. 23:5; Ezek. 34:15; John Las 
3:11; 519: 10: 14; 12: 49, etc.) eas, 

As Christ was sent by his Father, axa was 
entirely faithful in his office and work, so also must 
all his servants be faithful according to the example 
of their Lord and Master, count all earthly things 
as nothing, renounce the world, seek after heavenly 
things (Heb. 3:1-6), and not their own glory, but 
the glory of Christ who has sent them. On this 
point Christ says: “He that speaketh of himself 
seeketh his own glory; but he that seeketh his 
glory that sent him, the same is. true, and no un- 
righteousness is in him” (John 7:18). Therefore 
without dcubt those are sent of God who rightly 
teach God’s word, and who with the whole heart 
seek God’s glory and praise, as Paul did; “for,” 
says he, “neither at any time used we flattering 
words, as ye know, nor a cloke of covetousness ; 
God is witness: nor of men sought we glory, neither 
of you, nor yet of others, when we might have been 
burdensome, as the apostles of Christ. But we were 
gentle among you, even as a nurse cherisheth her 
children: so being affectionately desirous of you, 
we were willing to have imparted unto you, not the 
gospel of God only, but also our own souls, because 
ve were dear unto us” (1 Thess. 2: 4-8). 

In these words it can be plainly seen how the 
apostle Paul was. minded, and what he really sought, 
namely, the glory of God and the salvation of souls. 
But no hypocrites and false prophets do this, but 
they seek their own glory; they are after money 
and wealth, they preach for hire, and serve their 
belly, and are enemies of the cross of Christ (Rom. 
16:18; Phil. 3:17-19); therefore they can neither 
do nor preach righteousness, as it is written: “An 
ungodly man cannot teach aright; for it cometh 
not from God: for unto right teaching belongeth 
wisdom; thereunto God giveth grace” (Wis.15:13). 
vil ~ Since, then, an ungodly man cannot teach aright, 
, ‘and he is really an ungodly man who transgresses 

and abideth not in the doctrine of Christ, as: John 


184 Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 


-says (2 John 1:9), it follows incontrovertibly that 
no one can teach God’s word aright unless he him- 
self abides in Christ and in his doctrine. But no 
one may understand the doctrine of Christ, much 
less abide therein, except through the Holy Ghost; 
and no one has the Holy Ghost but those who are 
no longer carnally minded, but spiritually minded, 
as Paul savs: “But ye are not in the flesh, but in 
the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in 
you. Now, if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, 
he is none of his. And if Christ be in you, the body 
is dead because of sin; but the Spirit is life because 
of righteousness” (Rom. 8:9, 10). Therefore who- 
soever has not died unto sin, and does not live unto 
righteousness, has not the Spirit of God. But who- 
ever has not the Spirit of God does not comprehend 
the word of God, and cannot discern spiritual things. - 
How, then, can he rightly teach God’s word or 
rightly dispense the gift of the Spirit? Therefore 
let every one take heed that he assume not the office 
of the ministry unless he is first taught of God and 
enlightened by the Holy Spirit, so that he may 
“rightly preach God’s word. 

Furthermore the holy scripture shows that a 
true teacher must bear fruit; for where the word 
of God is implanted in the human heart and _ pro- 
claimed in the power of the Spirit, it must, accord- 
ing to its nature, be effective, active and fruitful. 
For this purpose also the true teachers are chosen 
and ordained of Christ, namely, that they go forth 
and-bring forth fruit, and that their fruit remain. 
Now, the fruit which all true teachers must’ bring 
forth by God’s word and Spirit are of two kinds: 

The first is, that when the word of God is spoken 
by the Holy Spirit (Matt. 13:3-8; Luke 8:4-8), 
it is fruitful and not dormant, as the gospel parable 
of the sower and the seed shows, in which parable 
the fact is made known to us that his word is not 
without fruit; for although the greater part of the | 
seed falls upon evil ground and brings forth no fruit 
(which therefore is not the fault of the good seed, 
but of the bad soil), nevertheless at least a part falls 
upon good ground, and brirgs forth much fruit. 
By this the Lord would make known to us two ~ 


‘Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 185 


facts: (1), That there are always but few Christians | 
upon earth, although many bear the name of Christ 
and. profess the gospel, as he also says: ‘Wide 1s 
the gate, and broad is the way, that leadeth to 
destruction, and many there be which go in thereat: 
because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, 
which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find 
it” (Matt: 7:13, 14). (2), That although the greater 
part remains evil, his word nevertheless is not with- 
out fruit; for there is here and there still a good 
spot, upon which the seed of the word of God is 
cast, springs up, and brings forth fruit, which fact 
God has also declared through Isaiah: “As the rain 
cometh down, and the snow from heaven, and re- 
turneth not thither, but watereth the earth, and 
maketh it bring forth the bud, that it may give seed 
to the sower, and bread to the eater; so shall my 
word be that goeth forth out of my mouth: it shall 
not return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that 
which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing 
whereto I sent it” (Isa. 55:10, 11). 

_——JTnasmuch then as God’s word is the seed which 
is sown by God into the human heart, and good soil 
is desirable and necessary, it is also necessary that 
the field of the heart, by the grace of God, be 
properly cultivated, that all weeds are cleaned out 
and rooted up, so that the soil may. be capable of 
receiving the divine seed and made fit for the pro- 
duction of fruit, as James says: “Lay apart all 
filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, and receive 
with meekness the engrafted word, which is able 
to save your souls” (Jas. 1:21). 

For this purpose (the cultivation and prepara- 
tion of the field of the heart) the law of God is 
especially useful; therefore the true teachers must — 
first of all and above all else preach and proclaim 
repentance to men (as did Jesus and his apostles, 
Matt. 3:28; Acts 2:38; 24:25, etc.), and from the 
law teach them to truly know God’s wrath and stern 
judgment against sin, but from the gospel teach 
them to know God in his eternal love (John 3:16) 
and boundless mercy, Jesus Christ is his grace and 
atonement, through the co-operation of the Holy 
Spirit, that the hearts may be crushed and broken, 


186 Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 


and by the gospel again comforted and. refreshed ; 
‘for this is the nature, characteristic and power of 
the word of God when it is properly spoken, and by 
the impulse of the Holy Spirit, when hearts as hard 
as stone will be crushed (Jer. 23:29), cold hearts 

will be made fervent and sorrowing hearts com- 
forted.. 

It is also the true teacher’s office and incite 
according to Christ’s command, to first preach law, 
and then gospel; but the false teachers preach to 
the people, even to the impenitent, nothing but 
grace and proclaim peace to them, and, as Ezekiel 
says, they lay pillows under the people’s arms and 
cushions under their heads and shoulders, whereby 
they. strengthen the hands of the wicked, so that 
they will not return from their wicked ways (Ezek. 
13: 18-22). This is daily in sufficient evidence. But 
if no one is converted, then they are not sent of God, 
nor have they God’s word, for thus saith the Lord: 
“T have not sent these prophets, yet they ran: I 
have not spoken to them, yet they prophesied. But 
if they had stood in my counsel, and had caused 
my people to hear my words, then they should have 
turned them from their evil way, and from the evil 
of their doings’ (Jer. 23: 21, 22). 

These words plainly show us that those have 
the word of God and rightly teach and proclaim it 
walle: and that those who do not do this have not 
the word of God. They may have the letter of the 
scripture, but they have not the living, powerful, 
fervent word of God that is sharper than any two- 
edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder 
of soul and spirit (Heb. 4:12). They may make 
many words, but inasmuch as the Lord has not 
purged their lips with fire, as he did the lips of 
Isaiah (Isa. 6:7), and put his word into their mouth, 
as he did to Jeremiah (Jer. 1:9), that they may 
root up, break down and destroy, and build up and 
plant, hence they are not sent. by the Lord, and will 
accomplish nothing, as may be seen in many in the 
present day who pose as evangelical preachers, but 
who have never vet broken away from the idolatrous 
ceremonies and institutions of men and accepted 


Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 187 


the true service and ordinances of God. There may 
be some who with Jehu go so far as to hate the 
whoredoms and witchcraft of Jeezebel (2 Kings 
9:22) and be zealous against the prophets and 
priests of Baal, and yet continue to walk in the sins 
of Jeroboam and allow the golden calves (which 
were raised up by the ungodly king instead of divine 
worship) to remain as a judgment. against them- 
selves and a stumbling-block and ruin to others. 
Thus the blind lead the blind until both shall fall 
into the ditch (Matt. 15:14). , 

2. The other kind of fruit which a true teacher 
brings forth is a blameless life, walking in accord- 
ance with the gospel. For the kingdom of God is 
not in word, but in power of wisdom (1 Cor. 4:20), 
which must open the mouth of the teacher in the 
congregation, and which does not enter into a 
malicious soul (Wis. 1:4), nor will it dwell in a 
body that is subject unto sin. Therefore James 
says: “Who is a wise man and endued with knowl- 
edge among you? let him show out of a good 
conversation his works with meekness of wisdom” 
(Jas. 3:13). This is what Paul did, as he. himself 
says: “I keep under my body, and bring it into 
subjection: lest that by any means, when I have 
preached to others, I myself should bea castaway” 
(1 Cor. 9:27). 
~~ Nothing is accomplished, or is it of any avail, 
when a man babbles much and is conceited, but, 
says the apostle, “He that glorieth, let him ‘elory 
Mathie. ord y() Corsleshsajfercd.:-23;-24.5.2, Cor. 
10:17). For he is not praised who praises himself, 
but he whom the Lord praises. But the Lord 
praises the righteous who praise and honor him, 
as he himself says: “Them that honor me I will 
honor” (1 Sam. 2:30), “and they that despise me 
shall be lightly esteemed.” What truly honoring 
God really is, is explained by Christ in these words: 
“Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much 
fruit; so shall ye be my disciples” (John 15:8). 
And what constitute the fruits of the Spirit, Paul 
enumerates to the Galatians:. “Love, joy, peace, 
longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, 
temperance” (Gal. 5:22, 23).. Those who constitute 


188 Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 


his true disciples he describes himself, thus: “If ye 
continue in my word, then are ye my disciples in- 
deed; and ye shall know the truth, and the truth 
shall make you free” (John 8:31, 32). But no one 
continues in Christ and in his doctrine except he 
who walks as Christ also walked (1 John 2:6), but 
whosoever does not thus walk, does not abide in 
Christ; yea, he has not seen Christ, neither known 
him, as John clearly enunciates in his epistle (1 
John 3:6). ! i 

Therefore true Christians and especially the 
teachers must, as disciples of Christ, lead a Chris- 
tian life and faithfully follow Christ. If men do not 
do this, then Christ has not sent them, for he says. 
that we shall know the false prophets by their fruits, 
even though they come to us in sheep’s clothing 
(Matt. 7:15). And he teaches us this by a parable 
and says: “Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs 
of thistles? Even so every good tree bringeth forth 
good fruit: but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil 
fruit. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, 
neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. 
Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn 
down, and cast into the fire. Wherefore by their 
fruits ye shall know them” (Matt. 7: 16-20). 

In these words Jesus likens every good Christian 
(but especially a sincere teacher, since he speaks 
especially of the teachers) to a good tree, and a 
false teacher to a corrupt tree. Now, just as a good 
tree brings forth good fruit, thereby showing its 
nature or kind, and supplies man’s need and bodily 
sustenance, so also a good teacher brings forth good 
fruit, by which he shows his Christian nature or 
condition, and that he has been sent of God; but 
to the others, that is, the kind-hearted hearers and 
lovers of truth, he becomes instrumental in their 
salvation, as Paul says to Timothy: “Take heed 
unto thyself, and unto the doctrine; continue in 
them: for in doing this thou shalt both save thyself, 
and them that hear thee” (1 Tim. 4:16). 

Again, just as a corrupt tree cannot produce 
good fruit, and just as grapes are not gathered from 
thorns, or figs from thistles, so also a false prophet 
cannot teach or do right. The false prophet may 


s 


Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 189 


profess the gospel, but for him to rightly teach or 
proclaim the gospel, and bring forth the fruit of the 
_ Spirit is impossible; leaves he is, and leaves he 
remains, that is, a useless vocation in fine appear- 
ance, in all his teaching, simulation and activity. 

Now then, if by special grace of God the gospel 
(which has keen vision and looks not upon the 
sheep’s clothing, but upon the inner nature, and 
asks not for leaves, but for the fruit of the tree) 
has come to light and has been revealed to us, and 
has given us to know the tree by its fruits out 
of the word of God, let each one take heed and 
beware of the false prophets, that he be not deceived 
by them. 

How a teacher is to be qualified, Paul beautifully 
describes both to Timothy and to Titus. There is 
given a true description, yea, an explicitly delineated 
type of the evangelical teacher. And Peter says: 
“The elders which are among you I exhort, who 
am also an elder, and a witness of the sufferings 
of Christ, and also a partaker of the glory that shall 
be revealed: Feed the flock of God which is among 
you, taking the oversight thereof, not by constraint, 
but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready 
mind; neither as being lords over God’s heritage, 
but being ensamples to the flock. And when the 
chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a crown 
of glory that fadeth not away” (1 Pet. 5:1-4). 

Peter here gives all elders, leaders and teachers 
good instruction as to how they shall be qualified, 
and says among other things that they shall feed 
the flock of. Christ with a willing mind, and not for 
filthy lucre’s sake, for he well knew that the Lord 
Jesus had asked him three times, saying: “Peter, 
lovest thou me? Then feed my sheep” (John 21: 
15-17). Thus also must all ministers of the word 
of Christ teach the word of God in its purity be- 
cause of true love, without desire for debasing 
pleasures, for the scripture teaches us to shun them. 

But how many there are at this time who assume 
the office of teacher without thinking of these words 
of Peter! But it is according to the prophet’s words, 
namely. that the priests teach for: hire,-and the 
prophets for money: yet. they desire to: be looked 


190 Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 


upon as those who lean upon the Lord, and say, 
“Is not the Lord among us? none evil can come 
upon us. Therefore shall Zion for your sake be 
plowed as a field, and Jerusalem shall become heaps, 
and the mountain of the house (temple) as the high 
places of the forest” (Mic. 3:11, 12). The prophet 
also says in another place, concerning the false 
prophets: “He that putteth not into their mouths, 
they even prepare war against him” (Mic. 3:5). 
In like manner God complains through Ezekiel re- 
garding the false prophets that for handfuls of bar- 
ley and for pieces of bread they would slay the souls 
that should not die, and save the souls alive that 
should not live (Ezek. 18:19). That is, they con- 
demn the innocent and those who fear God, and 
justify the ungodly, and this they do for a handful 
of barley and a piece of bread. And this still takes 
place every day, and is in full swing; yea, Balaam, 
the son of Beor (Num. 22:23, 24), who loved the 
wages of unrighteousness (2 Pet. 2:15), still has 
many followers and companions, and although the 
Lord openeth the mouth of the ass that he might 
reprove such Balaamites, yet they are so obdurate 
and blinded that they cannot give up their avarice, 
and in the face of all this they want to be looked 
upon as faithful servants of Christ and use the 
privilege which Christ has accorded to the true min- 
isters of the gospel (namely, that they might live 
of the gospel to supply their temporal needs (1 Cor. 
9:14), as a cloak for their avarice. But it is a 
shameful thing to seek after money and wealth 
under cover of the gospel (which . everywhere 
teaches the despising of things temporal). For a 
man to assume to teach the word of God, without 
intending to obey it himself, is an abomination in 
the sight of God. To such the Lord says: “What 
hast thou to do to declare my statutes, or that thou 
shouldest take my covenant into thy mouth? See- 
ing thou hatest instruction, and castest my words | 
behind thee. When thou sawest a thief, then thou 
consentedst with him, and hast been partaker with 
adulterers” (Psa. 50: 16- 18). And Paul says: “Thou 
art confident that thou thyself art a guide of the 
blind, a light of them which are in darkness, an 


aw 


Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 191 


instructor of the foolish, a teacher of. babes, which 
hast the form of knowledge and of the truth in the 
law. Thou therefore which teachest another, teach- 
est thou not thyself? Thou that preachest that a 
man should not steal, dost thou steal? Thou that 
sayest a man should not commit adultery, dost thou 
commit adultery? Thou that abhorrest idols, dost 
thou commit sacrilege? Thou that makest thy boast 
of the law, through breaking of the law dishonour- 
est thou God? For the name of God is blasphemed 
among the Gentiles through you” (Rom, 2: 19-24). 

‘Oh, that many who assume the ministerial office 
and yet are avaricious, proud, sacrilegious and live 
ungodly, would take these words into serious con- 
sideration and properly meditate upon how greatly 
the scripture everywhere laments over false proph- 
ets and shepherds, with proof that the ruin of the 
people is mostly traceable to them; for the shep- 
herds are to feed the sheep, as Christ commanded 
Peter, and Peter commanded the elders (John 21: 
15; 1 Pet.5:1). But what is to be done when the 
shepherds trample the precious pasture of the divine 
word under foot (Ezek 34:18), and then give that 
which they have trodden with their feet to the flock 
to eat? .The shepherds should draw the water of 
divine doctrine from the wells of salvation and give 
it to the flock to drink; but how lamentable it is 
when the shepherds become Philistines and close up 
the fountain or the source of the living water by 
casting in earth; yea, when they themselves are 
wolves, and do not spare the flock, eat the pasture 
themselves and scatter and kill the flock (Acts 
20:29), that is when they are such as the prophet 
Hosea describes: “The company of priests murder 
in the way, and wait for a man; for they commit 
lewdness” (Hos. 7:9); and as Isaiah says, in speak- 
ing of Israel: “His watchmen are blind; they are 
all ignorant, they are all dumb dogs, they cannot 
bark; sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber. Yea, 
they are greedy dogs which can never have enough, 
so they are shepherds that cannot understand: they 
all look to their own way, every one for his gain, 
from his quarter. Come ye, say they, I will fetch 
wine, and we will fill ourselves with strong drink; 


192 Sending of Preachers or Teachers: 


and tomorrow shall be as this day, and much more 
abundant” (Isa. 56: 10-12). 

3 O God! how numerous have the false prophets, 
priests and shepherds been at all times in the world, 
and of the righteous how few! Opposed to so many 
hundreds of prophets and priests of Baal after much 
labor one Elijah is to be found; among all the lying 
prophets of Ahab there is barely one Micaiah to 
be had (1 Kings 18:22; 22:5-10). How often, too, 
the sin of the people deserves nothing better than 
that God permits a hypocrite and idolater instead 
of a true shepherd to rule; for when people are 
disposed to hold wholesome doctrine in disdain, as 
Paul says. and have such sensitive ears that they 
would rather listen to censurable teaching than to 
that which brings fruit, they will choose such 
teachers as will tickle their ears (2 Tim. 4:3). And 
this is done, even as the Lord says through the 
prophet: “A wonderful and horrible thing is com- 
mitted in the land; the prophets prophesy falsely, 
and the priests bear rule by their means; and my 
people love to have it so: and what will ye do in 
the end thereof?” (Jer. 5:30, 31). “Woe unto you, 
when all men shall speak well of you! for so did 
their fathers to the false prophets” (Luke 6:26). 
On the other hand, “Blessed are ye, when men shall 
revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all man- 
ner of evil against you falsely for my sake. Rejoice, 
and be exceeding glad; for great is your reward in 
heaven; for so persecuted they the prophets which 
were before you” (Matt. 5:11, 12). 

Therefore it is certain that the true teachers 
must be tried by the cross, because in their words 
and actions they desire to be different from the 
world. For this reason the world hates them, as 
it is written in the Book of Wisdom: “Let us lie 
in wait for the righteous; because he is not for our 
turn, and he is clean contrary to our doings: he 
upbraideth us with our offending the law, and ob- 
jecteth to our infamy the transgressions of our 
education. He professeth to have the knowledge of 
God, and he calleth himself the child of the Lord. 
He was made to reprove our thoughts. He is 
grievous unto us even to behold: for his life is not 


Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 193 


like other men’s, his ways are of another fashion. 
We are esteemed of him as counterfeits; he ab- 
staineth from our ways as from filthiness: he pro- 
nounceth the’ end of the just to be blessed, and 
maketh his boast that God is his Father” (Wis. 
Sol. 2: 12-16). 

Thus was Christ dealt with, as he himself says: 
“The world hateth me, because I testify of it, that 
the works thereof are evil” (John 7:7). He prom- 
ises the same to all his disciples, and says: “Behold, 
I sent you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves: 
be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as 
doves” (Matt. 10:16). “And ye shall be hated of 
all men for my name’s sake” (V. 22). “But if the 
world hate you, ye know that it hated me before it 
hated you. If ye were of the world, the world 
would love his own: but because ye are not of the 
world, but I have chosen you out of the world, 
therefore the world hateth you. Remember the 
word that I said unto you, The servant is. not 
greater than his lord. If they have persecuted me, 
they will also persecute you; if they have kept my 
saying, they will keep yours. also. But all these 
things will they do unto you for my name’s sake, 
because they know not him that sent me” (John 
15: 18-21). 

To sum it up: How all true prophets and right- 
eous teachers were persecuted from the beginning, 
and will be persecuted to the end of the world; yea, 
how the mightiest of all prophets and masters, Jesus 
Christ, the Son of the living God, had to suffer, and 
thus enter into his glory (Luke 24:26), is shown 
in both old and new testament scriptures so fully 
that it is needless to further discuss or write about 
_ it. Hence those are not the servants of Christ who 
are so greatly and highly esteemed by the world, 
who sit in the highest places and persecute others; 
for it is foreign to Christ Jesus and his meek nature, 
and it is also foreign to all Christians who have the! 
mind and Spirit of Christ; for it is not Christlike, | 
but tyrannical, to persecute and scatter and kill the 
people for the sake of the Christian faith and of 
religion (Matt. 13:28; Luke 9:22), and those who 
do so are certainly the survivors of the Pharisaic 


13 


194 Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 


generation, to whom Stephen said: “Ye stiffnecked 
and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always 
resist the Holy Ghost: as your fathers did, so do 
ye. Which of the prophets have not your fathers 
persecuted? and they have slain them which 
showed before of the coming of the Just One; of 
whom ye have been now the betrayers and mur- 
derers: who have received the law by the dis- 
position of angels, and have not kept it” (Acts 
. 7:61-53). 

Oh, how many boast at this time that they have 
received the gospel by the grace of God, and yet 
do so little, yea, nothing, in accord with it! They 
want to pose as great masters in the scriptures, 
and be called evangelical preachers, but they do not 
know Jesus Christ, the crucified One (1 Cor. 2:2), 
for Christ himself was poor, and chose poor dis- 
ciples, who had to deny themselves for the sake 
of the Lord, and forsake all things for the sake of 
the gospel (Matt. 8-19 ;.-Luke-9 1585 2 Gerrsilas 
Matt. 10:9; 16:24; 4: -18- 22; 719: 21, 27; etc; } gate: 
become a spectacle unto the world, the world’s 
refuse and offscouring (1 Cor. 4: 9-13). But. these 
are rich and powerful; therefore pride compasseth 
them about as a chain; violence covereth them as 
a garment (Psa. 73:6). Christ said to his disciples: 
“Be not ye called Rabbi: for one is your Master, 
even Christ. He that is greatest among you shall 
be your servant. For whosoever shall exalt himself 
shall be abased: and he that shall humble himself 
shall be exalted” (Matt. 23:8-12). But these, on 
account of the gospel and of their ministerial office, 
allow themselves to be called Masters, Doctors, 
Reverend Fathers and Lords in Christ. How beauti- 
fully (?) this accords with the above-quoted words 
of. Christ! However, these words are of no sig- | 
nificance to them; they do not regard them, but 
they are puffed-up bodies, as the prophet says: 
“They have more than heart could wish. They are. 
corrupt, and speak wickedly concerning oppression: 
they speak loftily. .They set their mouth against 
the heavens, and their tongue walketh through the 
earth” (Psa. 73:7-9). “What they say must be 
understood as having been spoken from heaven, 


wee i ee 


Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 195 


and what they ordain and institute must be author- 
ity on earth; for they think and also say: “With 
our tongue we will prevail; our lips are our own: 
who is lord over us?” (Psa. 12:4). But let them 
take heed of that which shall follow such presump- 
tion and pride, and what shall come upon them. 
/ The scripture shows clearly that Jezebel, though 
ruling for a time (Rev. 2:20), feeding her prophets 
with lavish luxuries and keeping them in great 
splendor, must at last be brought to shame together 
with all her followers. And although the whore 
of Babylon has made all the heathen drunk with 
the wine of her fornication, and is therefore proud, 
and says in her heart: “I sit a queen, and am no 
_widow, and shall see no sorrow” (Rev. 18:7), yet 
therefore shall her plague come in one day. 
: We have now briefly shown which teachers are 
sent of God; that is, those who are sent according \ 
to scriptural teaching, who teach God’s word aright, 
-_ who are conformed to the image of Christ and his 
saints, and that what they yet lack they seek with 
all zeal at the fount of all grace, Jesus Christ. All 
such are without doubt sent of God. | 
On the other hand, those who are differently 
_disposed, whose words and actions are different 
_ from what is seen in the aforenamed and delineated 
picture of the prophets, and of Christ and his 
apostles, are not sent of God, neither can they 
teach good things, nor preach God’s word rightly, 
for that must be spoken by the Holy Spirit, as 
Christ says to his disciples: “It is not ye that speak, 
but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh in 
you” (Matt. 10:20). And Peter says: “The proph- 
—ecy came not in old time by the will of man: but 
holy men of God spake as they were moved by the 
_ Holy Ghost” (2 Pet. 1:21). Hence all that these 
Spiritless men preach has no power and brings 
forth no fruit; yea, and though they could speak 
with the tongues of angels, it still would be nothing 
_ but sounding brass and a tinkling cymbal (1 Cor. 
Weis: 1). 
} oe beseech and admonish every one, whether 
_he be preacher or hearer, to take due heed of this. 
_ The preacher may readily see whose servant he 1s, 





196 Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 


by what spirit he is moved, whether Christ dwells 
and works in him, whether he presents and portrays 
to the people the living word of God in open testi- 
mony of the holy scripture, causes fruit to grow. 
thereby and walks in accordance therewith. Let 
the hearer take due heed unto himself, that he 
believe not every spirit, but that he at all times 
know the teacher by his doctrine and his fruits 
(1 John 4:1), and prove the doctrine by the plum- 
met of the divine word; likewise note, prove and 
judge the fruits, not by outward appearance and 
splendid show, but by the spirit and the real life, 
and when he recognizes and finds a teacher to be 
false, let him beware of him and not listen to him, 
but shun him, as God has commanded through 
Jeremiah (Jer. 23:16), namely: “Hearken not unto 
the words of the (false) prophets that prophesy 
unto you,” and as Christ commanded in the gospel 
(Matt. 7:15; John 10:4), viz, that his sheep know 
his voice, and a stranger they will not follow, but 
will flee from him; yea, that all who enter not by 
the door into the sheepfold, but climb up some 
other way, the same are thieves and robbers, who 
come for no other purpose than to rob, to kill, and 
to destroy; therefore Christ’s sheep fear such 
thieves, murderers and destroyers. 

The claim which some make that the scripture 
does not forbid the hearing of false prophets with 
the outward ear, but only with the inward ear, is 
subtlety and philosophy, yea, an open falsification 
of the divine word, for it is certain and true beyond 
a doubt that the scripture comprehends two kinds 
of hearing; an inward hearing, which is faith, and 
which comes from the outward hearing of the word 
of God through the co-operation and enlightenment 
of the Holy Spirit, as may be clearly understood 
from the following words of Paul: “How then shall 
they call on him in whom they have not believed? 
and how shall they believe in him of whom they 
have not heard? and how shall they hear without 
a preacher? And how shall they preach except they 
be sent? as it is written, How beautiful are the feet — 
of them that preach the gospel of peace, and bring 
glad tidings of good things. But they have not all 


Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 197 


obeyed the gospel (Isa. 52:7; 53:1), for Esaias 
saith, Lord, who hath believed our report? So then 
faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word 
of God. But I say, Have they not heard? Yea, 
verily, their sound went into all the earth, and their 
words unto the ends of the world” (Rom. 10: lt 18; 
Psa. 19:4). 

. The apostle here speaks expressly of the Satan 
ear, by which the preaching of the gospel, the sound 
of the apostles’ voices and their words, were heard 
by every creature under heaven (Mark 16:15; Col. 
1:5, 6), by which also many believed, yet all by 
grace, through the inward working of God by his 
Holy Spirit. Now, just as God uses the outward 
ear aS a means by which faith is wrought in his 
chosen ones, so does Satan work by means of the 
outward hearing of his false doctrine for the work- 
ing of unbelief in his children. Hence the holy 
scripture admonishes us (John 5:24; 8:47-52; 
10:27, etc.) to hear God’s word, which is to be 
understood as meaning that we shall hear the word 
of God with the outward ear, and believe in it with 
the heart. That is what it means to rightly hear 
God’s word. To the same extent the holy scripture 
forbids listening to false teachers (Jer. 23:16; Psa. 
1:1; ‘John’ 10:5; 2°Cor. 6:17), and presents the 
idea that we should not run after the false teachers 
into the houses of idolatry where they stand on the 
throne of pestilence, falsifying God’s word, and that 
we should not hear or believe their words. That is 
what the scripture calls not giving ear to the false 
teachers, shunning the strangers and fleeing from 
them (John 10:5). On this thought the apostle 
John says: “They (the false teachers) are of the 
world: therefore speak they of the world, and the 
world heareth them’; but the true teachers “are 
of God: he that knoweth God heareth them; he 
that is not of God heareth them not,” and that 
hereby we know the spirit of truth and the spirit 
of error (1 John 4:5, 6). This we have now said 
in brief on the subject of sending forth of teachers. 

Thére are, however, many gainsayers here now. 
In the first place some say that no one may teach 
and restore again the decadent worship of God 


198 Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 


unless he is called of God by a living voice from 
heaven, just as Elijah (they say) did not punish 
the priests of Baal or restore again in Israel the 
worship of God which had fallen into decay, until 
he had received a command of the Lord and was 
sent to Ahab (1 Kings 18:1), and like as Joshua 
did not resume the practice of circumcision (which 
had been discontinued for a time in the wilderness) 
before the time that the Lord commanded him to 
do so (Josh. 5:1-8). 


ANSWER. 


God does not at the present time speak to us 
in an audible voice from heaven, nor by visions and 
dreams, as he did in old testament times, but he 
now speaks to us by his Son Jesus Christ. But 
Jesus speaks to us by his word, and the word of 
Christ is Spirit and it is life (Heb. 1:2; John 6:63). 
Now, when Christ puts his living word into the 
heart of some person and thereby calls him, he is 
without any doubt called of the Lord by his word. 
But how we may know that a certain person is 
called of God by the living word and by the Spirit 
of Christ, we have explained above, viz, if he 
rightly speaks the word of God (John 3: 34), brings 
forth fruit, and seeks the glory of Christ and the 
salvation of souls with all diligence (Isa. 55: 11-18; 
John 7:16). 

We have furthermore also spoken ait of the 
fact that the apostles and elders, together with the 
church by the power of Jesus Christ (Acts 6:1-4), 
called and ordained teachers and deacons (Acts 

(13:1, 2). Now, whatever the Christians did in 
those times that was proper is not forbidden or 
denied the Christians at this time, but the Christians 
}must now conform and adjust themselves to the 
| practices of the primitive church. Why? Because 
other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, 
which is Jesus Christ (1 Cor. 3:11). Therefore . 
as the ruined temple at Jerusalem was rebuilt upon 
the old foundation, and all worship was re-estab- 
lished and practiced therein according to the law, 
so also must the house of God, that is, the Christian 
church, which has fallen inte decay, be now rebuilt 


———— ee 


Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 199 


upon the original foundation of the apostles and 
prophets (of which Jesus Christ is the chief corner- 
stone, 1 Tim. 3:14; Heb. 3:6; Eph. 2:20), and all 
things therein must be dealt with and done accord- 
ing to the order established by Christ and his 
apostles. 

Since then the apostles and elders, together with 
the Church of God through Christ, chose leaders 
and ministers and ordained and confirmed them in 
their office, therefore also the Christians of the 
present time must choose and ordain preachers ac- 
cording to the example of the apostolic church, 
Necessity demands this, for it is certain and in- 
controvertible that a Christian church cannot be 
gathered, built up and established without true 
teachers, faith and baptism, and furthermore that 
it cannot be maintained without the Lord’s Supper, 
admonition, reproof, expulsion or separation ;.) for 
where God’s word is not taught in its purity, and 
the gospel of Jesus Christ is not preached, how shall 
the people believe? as the apostle says: ‘How shall 
they believe in him of whom they have not heard?” 
(Rom. 10:14). But where faith that comes by 
hearing the preaching of the word of God through 
the co-operation of the Holy Spirit, does not take 
root in the heart, how can baptism in such case be 
properly administered and received, inasmuch as 
baptism is commanded and ordained by the Lord 
himself to be administered upon confession of faith, 
and was thus administered by the apostles? (Matt. 
28:19, 20; Mark 16:15, 16). Where Christian 
baptism is not properly practiced, how can a person 
be baptized into Jesus Christ, into his death and 
into the fellowship of his body with the Holy 
Ghost? (Acts 2:41; 8:35; 10:47.) How can the 
dying unto the flesh, the burying of sin and the 
resurrection into newness of life be properly con- 
templated and accomplished? (Rom. 6:3; Col. 
Dees Cor d2613 5 etc.) 

Moreover, where the Lord’s Supper is not prop- 
erly observed, how can his word and command, 
viz: that in the breaking of bread we shall proclaim 
his death and do it in remembrance of him—be 
satisfactorily obeyed? (Matt. 26: 26-29; Mark 14: 


200 Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 


99.95: Luke .22:19, 20¢-31:. Cor #40216 35-8122) 
how can the communion of the body and blood of 
Christ be rightly comprehended and taken to heart? 
How can brotherly love and unity be properly 
manifested and established? Where admonition is 
not administered in its full strength, there love, 
both toward God and fellow-man generally grows 
cold; and where discipline is not properly adminis- 
tered, there one will commit sin with another. 
Therefore the Lord says: “Thou shalt not hate thy 
brother in thine heart: thou shalt in any wise re- 
buke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him” 
(Lev. 19:17). That is to say, that where expulsion 
or the ban is not carried out according to the gospel, 
there one will corrupt another, as Paul says: “Know 
ye not that a little leaven leaveneth the whole 
lump?” (1 Cor. 5:5). 

If the church of God cannot exist or be main- 
tained without all the afore-named requisites—and 
whatever else the Lord has ordained for the up- 
building and preservation of his church—then there 
must also be ministers of the word in the church, 
for it is not every man’s office to teach God’s word, 
and to administer the sacraments of Christ, but in 
this matter it is as Paul says: “As we have many 
members in one body, and all members have not ~ 
the same office: so we, being mariy; are one body 
in Christ, and every one members one of another; 
having gifts differing according to the grace that is | 
given unto us” (Rom, 12:46). In other words: 
“There are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit. 
And there are differences of administrations, but 
the same Lord. And there are diversities of opera- 
tions, but it is the same God which worketh all in all. 
But the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every 
man to profit withal” (1 Cor. 12:4-7). And beside 
this the apostle says: “Unto every one of us is 
given grace according to the measure of the gift 
of Christ. And he gave some, apostles; and some, 
prophets; and some, evangelists; and some. pastors 
and teachers;- for the perfecting of the saints, for 
the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the 
body of Christ: -till we all come in the unity of the 
faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto 


Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 201 


a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of 
the fulness of Christ” (Eph. 4:7, 11-13). And Peter 
says: “As every man hath received the gift, even 
so minister the same one to another, as good stew- 
ards of the manifold grace of God. If any man 
speak, let him speak as the oracles of God; if any 
minister, let him do it as of the ability which God 
giveth: that God in all things may be glorified 
through Jesus Christ, to whom be praise and 
dominion for ever and ever. Amen” (1 Pet. 4: 
10, 11). 

From all these passages it is to be readily 
understood : 

1. That God supplies his ministers in his church 
and administers manifold gifts ; 

2. How necessary it is to have ministers in 
the church, and what constitutes their work and 
ministry ; 

3. That the chases being one with Christ, has 
authority to choose teachers and ministers accord- “J 
ing to the scripture. ~ 
- But what constitutes the church of Christ which 
has received from Christ the authority, not only to 
choose teachers and leaders, but, what is still more, 
to bind and to loose (Matt. 16:19; 18:18), and to 
remit and to retain sin (John 20:23), is clearly 
shown by the scripture in many passages, namely, 
that it s"8 CAE rae of believers, that is, of 
quickened (Eph. 2:1, 5), holy and regenerated peo- 
ple, who wholly believe the word of God (John 
8:30; Josh. 14:8; Jas. 2:10), rightly teach the 
same and make it fruitful, who properly use the 
sacraments of Christ, properly keep the ban, walk 
in love, and in all things deal and do according to 
the gospel ; yea, the church of Christ is the fellow- 
ship of saints, elected by the grace of Jesus Christ 
according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, 
through sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of 
the truth (1 Pet. 1:2; 2 Thess. 2:13), brought 
together by the preaching of the gospel, and bap- 
tized, united and welded together by one Spirit into 
one body (1 Cor. 12:13; Eph: 4:4, 5), so that it 
is the body of Christ, his ‘bride, taken from his side, 
made of one flesh and bone, washed in his blood - 


202 Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 


(Eph. 5:30), sanctified and cleansed with the wash- 
ing: of water by the word (Eph. 5:26) and with the 
Spirit (Col. 1:14); for therefore he permitted his 
side to be opened and pierced upon the cross, letting 
water and blood flow therefrom (John 19:34) that 
he might gather, purify and save his church. There- 
fore, also, she is his virgin bride, his chief joy, the 
holy city, the new Jerusalem, coming down from 
God out of heaven, and he illuminates her with the 
glory of God and of the Lamb (Rev. 19:7, 8; 21:2). 
} This church has power through Jesus Christ 
, (from whom it receives all things) to choose lead- 
“ers and ministers. Should any one ask: Where is 
this church? we answer: Wherever God’s word is 
rightly taught, believed and obeyed; for they are 
Christ’s disciples who have, believe and keep his 
word (John 8:31; 17:6). Where such disciples 
of Christ are gathered in his name, there he is in 
the midst of them (Matt. 18:20; Luke 24:14, 15). 
Now, if Christ is in the midst of them, then they 
are a church of Christ; and if they are a church of 
Christ, then they must also have the power or 
authority which Christ gave to his church. But 
the power which Christ has given his church 
(namely, not only to choose teachers and ministers © 
of the word, but also to bind and loose, to forgive 
and retain sin,) has already been sufficiently treated 
and explained above (Matt. 16:19; 18:18; ese 
20:28). 

Hence we conclude that since the word of God 
has now come to the light, there must also be a 
church of God; for the word of God does not 
remain void (Isa. 55:10, 11). Or, if some one says 
that there is no church of God, he must also say 
that there is no believer on earth, yea, that God’s 
word is nowhere on earth; for where the word 
of God is, there is also a church of God, whether 

Mit be small or great. Moreover the church of God 
, is not invisible only (as some allow themselves to 
\imagine, and thus fancy to themselves an invisible 
Christian body), but also visible; for the believers 
know one another and consort with those of their 
kind, just as the whole animal world does (accord- 
ing to Sir. 13: 15-18), and love one another, because 


Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 203 


they are the children of the same heavenly Father, 
are born of the same God, are begotten of the same 
seed, and partakers of the same divine nature, and 
endued with the same Holy Spirit (John 1:13; 
1 John 5:6; 1 Pet. 1:23). From this comes the 
difference between brotherly love or kindness and 
universal love or charity (2 Pet. 1:7), and for this 
reason the apostles addressed all their epistles to 
Christians, to their brethren and fellow-believers 
and not to the world, which would not have been 
the case if they had not known the Christians, nor 
recognized any difference between the Chritsians 
and the world. 

The Christian church is also, in one respect, 
manifest to the world, even as Abraham by his 
faith, righteousness and excellent deeds according 
to God’s word is manifest to the world (Gen. 15:6; 
\ 22:1-12) and has been left to us in the scripture as 
an example, for our instruction and admonition, that 
we should follow in his steps (Rom. 4:3; Gal. 3:6, 
7; Jas. 2:23), in sincere trust and fruitfulness of 
Wonks as God commands. Yea, Christ Jesus, our 
Lord and Master (Matt. 23:8), who opened for us 
the way and is the author and finisher of our faith 
(Heb. 12:2), by word and work manifested himself 
to the world, and taught and commanded his dis- 
ciples to do so, saying: “Let your light so shine 
before men, that they may see your good works, 
and glorify your Father which is in heaven” (Matt. 
5:16). Paul also admonishes the believers to so 
walk that their good conversation might become 
manifest to the unbelievers, and says: “Do all 
things without murmurings and disputings: that 
ye may be blameless and harmless, the sons of God, 
without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and per- 
verse nation, among whom ye shine as lights in the 
world; holding forth the word of life” (Phil. 2: 14- 
16). And Peter says that the ungodly and blas- 
phemers know the Christians when they no longer 
run with them, as in time past, in their abominable, 
riotous and ungodly ways (1 Pet. 4:3, 4). 

Herewith is shown sufficiently that the church 
of God is not only invisible, but also visible, and 
in part manifest to the world. Moreover it is not 


204 Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 


in one particular place or location, like the figura- 
tive Jerusalem, which was at no other place but in 
\the land of Judah alone, but the heavenly Jerusalem 
‘is everywhere, wherever God’s word is rightly 
‘taught, believed and obeyed, and the sacraments 
of Christ are rightly observed according to the 
word; for the Lord has added the sacraments to 
his gospel and made them dependent thereon, and 
commanded that not only should his gospel be 
preached, but that this sacraments also should be 
observed and kept (Gal. 4:26; Rev. 21:2; Matt. 
28:16-20; Mark 16:15,.16; Matt. 26: 26-28; Mark 
14: 22-25; Luke 22:19, 20; 1 Cor. 11: 23-26). Thus 
did the Lord ordain, and thus it shall remain to the 
end; “for,” says Christ, “heaven and earth shall 
pass away, but my words shall not pass away” 
(Matt. 24:35). Hence we will yet say that where 
God’s word is rightly taught, believed and kept, and 
the sacraments of Christ are properly observed, 
there is the heavenly Jerusalem, there God the al- 
mighty Lord and the Lamb dwell (Rev. 21:2; Heb. 
12:22), even as Christ himself testifies, saying: 
“He that hath my commandments, and keepeth - 
them, he it is that loveth me: and my Father will 
love him, and we will come unto him, and make our 
abode with him” (John 14: 21, 23). And in another 
place God says: “I-will dwell in them, and walk in 
them; and I will be their God, and they shall be 
my people’ (Lev. 26:12: ‘Ezek. 36:28; 12) Cor. 
6:16). 

In the second place some say that teachers shall 
give evidence, with signs and wonders, that they 
are sent, as the apostles did. 

To this we reply that to require signs, and not 
to be satisfied with the word, is an evidence of un- 
belief, as Christ shows in these words: “Except ve 
see signs and wonders, ye will not believe” (John 
4:48). Therefore we may well say that those 
have not the true faith who beside the word of God 
also demand and request signs. Would that they 
had such faith as the centurion, who said: “Lord, 
trouble not thyself: for I am not worthv that thou 
shouldest enter under my roof: wherefore neither 
thought I myself worthy to come unto thee: but 


Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 205 


say in a word, and my servant shall be healed” 
(Luke. 7:6,.7).'. We repeat >. had ihey. such faith; 
then they would believe the words of Christ, and 
not demand a sign, but would rest satisfied with 
the fact that Christ first, and the apostles afterward, 
sufficiently confirmed the doctrine of the gospel 
with signs and miracles. 

And supposing that they did see signs and won- 
ders. Perhaps they would then do like the Phari- 
sees, namely, ascribe the work of God to the devil, 
or seek for another reason for reviling God’s work. 
But now, seeing no signs, they say with the Phari- 
sees: “We would see a sign” (Matt. 12:38). But 
what answer did Jesus give the Pharisees?—“An 
evil and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign; 
and there shall no sign be given to it, but the sign 
of the prophet Jonas” (Matt. 12:39). And what 
answer did Abraham give to the rich man, who 
requested him to send Lazarus to his father’s house 
to testify to his brethren, that they might not also 
come to his place of torment?—‘“‘They have Moses 
and the prophets; let them hear them.” But he 
said: “Nay, father Abraham: but if one went unto 
them from the dead, they would repent.” But 
Abraham said: “If they hear not Moses and the 
prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though 
one rose from the dead” (Luke 16: 27-31). And 
Paul says: “The Jews require a sign, and the Greeks 
seek after wisdom: but we preach Christ crucified, 
unto the Jews a stumbling-block, and unto the 
Greeks foolishness; but unto them which are called, 
both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God, 
and the wisdom of God” (1 Cor. 1: 22-24). 

From these and similar passages in the holy 
scripture we may readily note what kind of people 
they are who demand signs and are not satisfied 
with the word; also, that we must rather believe 
God’s word than signs and wonders, and that there 
is no help for those who will not hear Moses and 
the prophets. But if there is no help for these, 
what help is there for those who will not hear 
Christ and his apostles? But if they will hear, why 
then do they demand signs? 


206 Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 


It is true that the miracles and wonders testify 
to the gospel and the divine word, and that they 
confirm and verify the same. Moreover the miracles 
induced the people to believe, but with this provi- 
sion, not that the teaching which was already ac- 
cepted and confirmed, but that all the new doctrine 
was thereby proven to be of God. MHence signs. 
are not necessary in these times as they were in the 
time of Christ and his apostles for the reason that 
Christ, being the end of the law (Rom. 10:4), and 
a Mediator of the new covenant (Heb. 7:11; 8:6; 
mM4as 3 20" 6 Hebi °122 24) his “doctrines hadototbe 
confirmed by mighty signs and wonderful works, 
just as the old testament is confirmed by signs and 
miracles. But now, inasmuch as the doctrine of 
Christ has been once confirmed, and no other 
doctrine is or may be taught, yea, inasmuch as he 
who teaches another gospel shall be accursed (Gal. 
1:9), therefore signs are not necessary. The law 
was not confirmed more than once by signs (Ex. 
19:16), and was testified to by the blood of bulls 
and goats (Ex. 24:5-8; Heb. 9:13), and when for 
a time it was obscured and hidden (2 Kings 22: 8) 
and again found and thus came to the light, it was 
not reconfirmed by signs. Neither did the godly 
Josiah, when he heard the book of the law read, 
demand a sign, but the word of the law was suf- 
ficient for him (2 Kings 23:3), and he did and 
carried out all things according to it and observed 
the Passover as no king in Israel had done. 

Now, inasmuch as the gospel has been confirmed 
with such glorious miracles, the like of which had 
never been wrought, and has the added endorse- 
ment of the innocent death and precious blood of 
the spotless Lamb Jesus Christ (Heb. 9:14), and 
has been obscured for a long time, but has now, 
by the grace of God, again come to the light, there- 
fore all pious Christians must rest satisfied there- 
with, and whoever still demands a sign, must hear 
the words: “An evil and adulterous generation 
seeketh aiter a sign” (Matt. 12:39). 

We must also re-establish and observe all the 
ordinances of God according to the gospel. To this 
end God reveals his word to us, namely, that we 


Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 207 


might thereby learn to know his will, and be con- | 
verted to God, abstain from sin, sincerely believe, | 
lead a Christian life, and keep all his command- 
ments, as Christ says to his apostles: “Teaching 
them to observe all things whatsoever I have com- 
mafided you” (Matt. 28:20). But just as we accept 
and must accept the gospel without signs (Jas. 
1:21) if we would be saved, so we must also accept 
and recognize without signs the teachers who pro- 
claim this doctrine unto us. The work praises the 
master, as does the blameless doctrine and walk 
the Christian teacher. But although the teacher 
is blameless, yet the hypocritical and pharisaical 
generation will not believe the gospel. 

False teachers also can often perform signs and 
wonders. It is well known how the Egyptian sor- 
cerers withstood Moses, and what they performed 
with .their..sorceries: (BH x!.,.14 143512. (2; Tim. 378k 
And Christ says that “many false prophets and false 
Christs shall arise and shall show great signs and 
wonders; insomuch that, if it were possible, they 
shall deceive the very elect” (Matt. 24:24). And 
Paul says that the coming of antichrist shall be 
after the manner of the working of Satan with all 
power and signs and lying wonders, and with all 
deceivableness of unrighteousness in them _ that 
perish (2 Thess. 2:9, 10). Therefore a Christian 
must not look for signs alone, but much more to 
God’s word, which is always sure and true (John 
hes 9 siete 

But if signs will still be required, they must be 
required, not of the teachers alone, but of all be- 
lievers, for Christ says: “Verily, verily, I say unto 
you, he that believeth on me, the works that I do 
shall he do also; and greater works than these 
shall he do; because I go unto my Father” (John 
14:12). And in another place Christ savs: “These 
signs shall follow them that believe; in my name 
shall they cast out devils; they shall speak with 
new tongues; they shall take up serpents; and if 
they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them: 
they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall 
recover” (Mark 16:17, 18). But we do not at this 
time see any one doing such outward works as 


208 Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 


these; who will therefore say that no one believes? 
Far from it. Does not Paul say: “Are all workers 
of miracles?” (1 Cor. 12:29). Therefore, as out- 
ward signs do not at this time follow faith, and 
nevertheless without doubt faith is found in some 
people, so also outward signs do not follow those 
divinely sent; notwithstanding this there are, with- 
out any doubt some who are sent forth of God to 
preach his word, which may be proven and known, 
not by signs (which are often false and deceptive), 
but by their wholesome doctrine and by their fruits 
(which are never found in false prophets and false 
Christians). 

Paul also explicitly describes how a bishop shall 
be qualified, but he does not say that he must also 
perform signs. Nor do we read anywhere in the 
scripture that Timothy, Titus and others, who also 
were men full of the Holy Ghost, performed one 
sign (1 Tim. 3:1-7; Tit. 1:7-9). Therefore a man 
may be a bishop, and yet not perform any sign. A 
bishop’s office or duty is to preach the gospel, and 
thus feed the flock of Christ (Acts 20:28; 1 Pet. 
5:2). But preaching the gospel is more than dis- 
pensing the sacramental tokens, yet Jesus puts one 
with the other in his command, as shown above 
(Matt. 28:20; Mark 16:15). 

From this it.clearly follows that a teacher may 
be sent of God, preach God’s word, serve the church 
of Christ, and yet not perform any signs. ‘There- 
fore they err who insist upon signs and want to wait 
for the coming of performers of miracles. Let them 
beware lest they accept and receive Satan (who is 
very cunning and hides all his wickedness under 
the disguise of hypocrisy) for the Christ (2 Cor. 
11:13), and it will be with them as it was with the 
Jews, to whom Jesus said: “I am come in my 
Father’s name, and ye receive me not: if another 
shall come in his own name, him ye will receive” 
(John 5: 48). 

In the third place, some declare that the teacher 
that is sent of God shall not teach secretly, but 
openly proclaim God’s word before all people. 


Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 209 


ANSWER. 


The same thing occurred to Jesus, for the evan- 
gelist declares that his brethren said to him: “De- 
part hence, and go into Judea, that thy disciples. 
also may see the works that thou doest. For there 
is no man that doeth anything in secret, and he 
himself seeketh to be known openly. If thou do 
these things, show thyself to the world. For neither 
did his brethren believe in him” (John 7:3-5). 
This is what the unbelieving and evil world and the 
backsliding and false brethren say at this time, viz, 
that teachers, if they are of God, should make them- 
selves known to the world. But what answer did 
Christ give his brethren who did not believe on 
him (and therefore desired that he should make 
himself known to the world)? ‘My time is not yet 
come: but your time is alway ready. The world 
cannot hate you; but me it hateth, because I testify 
of it, that the works thereof are evil,’ etc. (John 
7:6, 7). Likewise must all disciples of Christ now 
keep themselves quiet and accommodate themselves 
to time and circumstances (yet not in a manner 
that is contrary to God’s word) and not heed what 
the perverted and ungodly say; for the world has 
at all times defamed the work of God, and cannot 
look upon,.it with kindly eye. It must always be 
made to look evil, no matter how good that is which 
the good Lord Jesus Christ does; therefore he also 
says in the gospel: “Whereunto shall I liken this 
generation? It is like unto children sitting in the 
markets, and calling unto their fellows, and saying, 
We'have piped unto you, and ye have not danced; 
we have mourned unto you, and ye have. not 
lamented. For John came neither eating nor drink- 
ing, and they say, He hath a devil. The Son of man 
came eating and drinking, and they say, Behold a 
man gluttonous, and a winebibber, a friend of pub- 
licans and sinners. But wisdom is justified of her 
children” (Matt. 11:16-19; Luke 7:31-35). 


From this the evil, hypocritical generation. may 
be known, who are ever seeking cause against 
Christ, and yet never find any. From this it may be 
clearly seen that the perverted and evilminded, who 


14 


210 Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 


hate the gospel, whether sweet (according to Jesus) 
or sour (according to John), but always give it an 
evil turn, so that they may revile the doctrine of 
the gospel. Before the Jews the apostle Paul must 
needs be found an instigator of strife, and before 
Festus as insane (Acts 21:38; 22:22; 26:24). 
Thus has the world always been perverted, as it 
still is, and deals in a perverse way with Christians ; 
for, if they make themselves known and come out 
openly and proclaim God’s word, the world above 
all other things cannot endure it, and reviles them 
as fanatics and agitators and persecutes them with 
sword, water and fire; whereas, if they keep them- 
selves hidden and practice their faith in quietness, 
the world reviles them none the less, and calls them 
factious spirits, hedge-preachers, and cannot. find 
despicable enough terms with which to revile them. 
Is not this a perverse generation which thus reviles 
Christians when they remain hidden, and when they 
come out in public will not endure a single one? 
Hence there is nothing for Christians to choose but 
to be persecuted by the world when they work in 
public, or to be reviled and despised when they keep 
themselves hidden. This is what the Lord prom- 
ised them, as all Christians and those who fear God 
well know; therefore they do not care what the 
world and the false brethren say (Matt. 5:10: 
10:16; 24:9; John 15:18). However, we will, 
for the benefit of all well- disposed people and as an 
answer for our ministers, by the grace of God give 
further instruction in the matter, and say: 

Firstly, that we have given many plain scriptural - 
evidences above, by which a true teacher may be 
known and be distinguished from a false teacher- 
Now, whoever is the kind of teacher as tke scrip- 
ture portrays a true teacher to be, and is always 
seeking to be conformed to Christ his Lord and 
Master, -yea, whose fervent love to God and fellow- 
man drives him into the ministry, he is without 
doubt sent of God, whether he teach secretly or 
openly ( Cor 313 b= Phileas de 

“Yes,’”’ some opponent will now say, “Christ ane | 
his apostles taught openly.” | 


Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 211 


| ANSWER. 

Christ was promised to the Jews, and was sent 
to the lost sheep of the house of Israel (Matt. 10:6; 
15: 24) ; to them he made known his Father’s word, 
and did such works among them as no one else had 
done, that they should believe on him, or, if not, 
that they should have no excuse. Moreover Jesus 
was able to escape from the midst of his enemies 
(Luke 4:30), yea, by his mighty word he laid them 
prostrate at his feet (John 18:6), and no one could 
lay hands on him before his hour was come. Never- 
theless he hid himself, not trusting the people; for, 
says John, he knew what was in man (John 2: 24, 
29). 

The apostles were chosen and sent by Christ to 
preach the gospel to every creature (Mark 16:15; 
Matt. 28:16), and to be witnesses for Christ unto 
the ends of the earth (John 15:27; Acts 1:22). 
Hence God dealt wonderfully with them; but he 
does not deal thus with all teachers, for they are 
not like the great apostles; neither does God pro- 
pose: to accomplish through all teachers what he 
accomplished through the apostles; and therefore 
he has not imposed upon all teachers what he im- 
posed upon the apostles. 

The apostles were commanded by the Lord to 
preach the gospel to every creature (Matt. 28:16; 
Mark 16:15), which, by the grace of God, they did 
(Col. 1:6). If this were to be followed out, then 
the teachers now would have to preach not only 
_ to the Christians as mentioned (1 Pet. 5:2), but 
also to the Jews, Turks, and all the heathen. But 
Paul declares to the teachers and bishops of the 
church that they shall take heed unto themselves, 
and to all the flock, over the which the Holy Ghost 
had made them overseers (Acts 20:28). On the 
day of Pentecost the apostles spake with mies 
of fire, and every one understood them (Acts 2:4). . 
This never came to pass before that time, nor has 
it come to pass since. God also wonderfully de- 
livered the apostles out of prison (Acts 5:19; 12:7; 
16:26). Now let him who would say that teachers 
should preach openly as Christ and his apostles did, 


_. remember that Christ could deliver himself from 


212 Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 


the hands of his enemies whenever he wished, and 
that God dealt miraculously with his apostles. The 
one must always be borne in mind with the other, 
so that without any discrimination every teacher 
has not imposed upon him what was laid upon 
Christ and his apostles; but every one must hold 
himself accountable—and be so held by the church 
—according to the measure of the Spirit and of 
faith which the Lord has administered to him (1 
Cor. 12:5),-and the special ministry which the 
Lord has given him. 

“Yes,” says an opponent, “God’s hand is not 
shortened; he is still mighty to succor his own, just 
as he did the apostles.” 


ANSWER. 


We know this very well and believe it. The 
disciples at Damascus also knew that God is al- 
mighty; nevertheless they let Paul down from the 
wall by night (Acts 9:25), so that he thus escaped 
the authorities of Damascus. So also did the Chris- 
tians at Corinth believe and know that God is 
almighty and could preserve Paul from his enemies ; 
yet they would not allow Paul to go among the 
people to answer for himself (Acts 19:30).. But 
now some..would have the teachers: thrust out into 
the midst of their enemies, even when it has been 
shown before their eyes and they have had evidence 
enough, how fearfully bloodthirsty the world 1s, 
and with what barbarous tyranny it persecutes the 
teachers unto death. But, what manner of spirit 
such people have may be easily understood from 
the example of the disciples at Damascus and. at 
Corinth. 

Elijah also knew that God is almighty; he also 
had confidence in his God and. Lord, that he could 
preserve him; nevertheless he feared Jezebel, and 
fled into the wilderness (1 Kings 19:3); but Jezebel 
could not have had a baser purpose toward Elijah 
than the world now has against all Christians, and 
especially against the true teachers and preachens 
of the gospel. 

Above all this, Jesus Christ left the land of 
Judea when he heard that Herod had thrown John 


Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 213 


into prison (Matt. 14:13). If, then, Elijah hid from 
Jezebel, and Jesus from Herod, why may not a true 
teacher do likewise? 

An opponent will say: Elijah showed himself 
before Ahab and Jezebel and unto all Israel (1 
Kings 18:1), and Jesus did not always remain out- 
side of the land of Judea. 


ANSWER. 


It was God’s will that Elijah should show him- 
self; therefore he was impelled to it by the Spirit 
of the Lord. When God desires that the teachers 
come out in public, and not fear the murderous 
Jezebel, the Lord will no doubt arouse and move 
them to do it. 

“Yes,” an opponent will now say, “since at this 
time teachers are not moved by the Spirit of the 
Lord to show themselves to the world, therefore 
they should keep silent, and not presume to teach, 
to dispense the sacramental emblems of Christ, and 
thus gather together a church.” 


ANSWER. 


If the apostles, for fear of the Jews, came to- 
gether secretly, and held their meetings behind 
barred doors, taught, baptized and brake bread in 
the houses, not by day only, but also by night (John 
20:19; Acts 1:13; 2:46; 20:7), why may this not 
be done now? Or are the apostles to be blamed 
and censured? Or is it a sin now, and deserving 
of censure, what at that time was right and bene- 
ficial ?, 7 

“But,” declares an opponent, “Christ says in the 
gospel: ‘Every one that doeth evil hateth the light, 
neither cometh to the light, lest his deeds should be 
reproved. But he that doeth truth cometh to the 
light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that 
they are wrought in God’ (John 3:20, 21).” - 

To this we reply, that these words are not 
against us, for they are spoken by Christ with the 
purpose of showing that evildoers hate the light 
of the divine word and elude it so as not to be 
reproved and put to shame by it. Therefore the 
apostle says to the Thessalonians: “Ye are all the 


214 Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 


children of light, and the children of the day: we 
are not of the night, nor of darkness. Therefore 
let us not sleep, as do others; but let us watch and 
be sober. For they that sleep sleep in the night; 
and they that be drunken are drunken in the night” 
(1 Thess. 5:5-7). To the Romans he says: “The 
night is far spent, the day is at hand: let us there- 
fore cast off the works of darkness, and let us put 
on the armor of light. Let us walk honestly, as in 
the day,” etc. (Rom. 43% 12413); 

Therefore the aforementioned words of Christ 
are not to be understood as meaning that the word 
of God may not be taught secretly (for there is 
sufficient scriptural proof to the contrary), but that 
the unbelievers and evildoers hate and flee from the 
true light, that is, God’s word, for the reason that 
God’s word reproves and judges, and is, as the 
apostle says, sharper than any twoedged sword, 
piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and | 
spirit, and of joints and marrow, and is a discerner 
of the thoughts and intents of the heart. Neither 
is there any creature that is not manifest in his 
sight” (Heb. 4:12, 13)... 

Because the word of God thus pierces, reproves 
and judges, therefore evildoers hate the light of the 
divine word, that they may not be reproved and 
judged by it; for the ungodly hate reproof, and 
seek a hiding-place to secrete themselves in. They 
prefer the darkness, and do not like to be seen, be- 
cause they do in secret what is a shame even to 
speak of, as the apostle writes to the Ephesians 
(Epis ba). 

Let us note intelligently what it signifies, and 
what the Lord would teach us by sending Elijah 
to the widow at Sarepta in the time of famine, and 
there keeping him safe from Ahab and Jezebel, and 
with a little meal and oil feeding, sustaining and 
preserving him and the widow (1 Kings 17:9). 
The Lord could easily have fed and preserved 
Elijah, even though he had not sent him to the 
widow; he could easily have comforted the widow, 
even though Elijah had not come; but it pleased 
the Lord to feed Elijah at the home of the widow, 
and the widow with Elijah, with a little meal and 


Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 215 


oil, as already said. What this signifies, we will 
leave to the consideration of all God-fearing people. 
According to our understanding this example, like 
all others, is written for our learning (Rom. 15:4), 
that we through patience and comfort of the scrip- 
tures might have hope, namely, that God will not 
forsake his own, but that he helps them in all their 
troubles, and nourishes them by means of others, 
so that in quietness and seclusion they may live 
together according to their belief, preserved from 
Ahab and Jezebel, and fed and sustained by God 
and his word and spirit; for “the Lord forsaketh 
not his saints” (Psa. 37:28), but in the evil time 
they shall be preserved, and in the time of famine 
they shall be filled; the rich shall suffer want, and 
shall hunger (Psa. 34:9, 10), but they that fear the 
Lord shall not want any good thing (Psa. 121). 
And what does Christ say?—‘T tell you of a truth, 
many widows were in Israel in the days of Elias, 
when the heaven was shut up three years and six 
months, when great famine was throughout all the 
land; but unto none of them was Elias sent, save 
unto Sarepta, a city of Sidon, unto a woman that 
was a widow” (Luke 4:25, 26). It is the same 
now. Ahab and Jezebel are now in authority, and 
have brought Baal into Israel, thereby making Israel 
sin against the Lord; therefore the Lord’s wrath is 
turned against Israel, and he has sent a famine— 
that is, a lack and dearth of his word—upon the 
earth. As Israel in Elijah’s time was in want of 
the natural bread, and as Elijah alone was sent to 
the widow at Sarepta, so now but few are found 
with whom the Lord is pleased, so that they receive 
comfort and refreshment for their souls from God 
through his word and Spirit through the co-opera- 
tion of the servants and ministers of Jesus Christ. 
That Elijah had to keep in hiding, and that he was 
not sent by God to many, but only to the widow at 
Sarepta, was not his fault, but the fault of others. 
Likewise the fact that teachers must at this time 
keep themselves in seclusion and are not sent by 
God into the world is not the fault of the Lord (for 
the Lord desires that all men should be saved— 
Ezek. 18: 23+ 1-Tim: 2:4: 2°Pet:'3:9), nor of the 


216 Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 


sincere teachers (for they are kindly disposed, and 
desirous of ministering unto all), but of the wicked 
world, who will not hear or tolerate them. 

Lastly: Since Jezebel so furiously rages and 
fumes against all servants of God, it is therefore 
better to serve God in seclusion than to bow the 
knee openly before Baal; it is better to teach the 
word of God secretly among those who have a 
desire for the truth and cause it to bring fruit, than 
to keep altogether silent; it is better to teach the 
mysteries of the kingdom of God and to secretly 
explain, accept and understand them as Christ and 
his apostles did (Matt. 13:11-14), than to listen to 
the open misinterpretation of the law from the 
throne of iniquity (Psa. 94:20). It is also better 
to observe the sacraments of Christ secretly with 
the pious and true believers than to publicly misuse 
or despise them with unbelievers and false Chris- 
tians, or to abandon them entirely, as do the erring 
and famed thinkers who fancy and unblushingly 
say they are rich and increased with goods, and 
have need of nothing, and know not that they are 
wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and 
naked (Rev. 3:17). 

The scripture HS AAS clearly shows that 
(we may not speak on the word of God when and 
where we will, but only when and where the Lord 
will. Now, the Lord desires his word to be preached 
where it will bring forth fruit; on the other hand 
he does not desire his word proclaimed where it 
will bring forth no fruit. Hence we read in Sirach: 
“Pour not out words (speak not—Ger. Tr.) where 
they hear not diligently” (Sir. 32:4). And Christ 
says to the apostles: “Give not that which is holy 
unto the dogs, neither cast ye. your pearls before 
swine, lest they trample them under their feet, and 
turn again and rend you” (Matt. 7:6). These 
words make it sufficiently known to us that God’s 
word (which is that which is holy, and pearls) is 
not to be preached to the persecutors of the truth 
(who are the dogs which gnash at the righteous 
with their teeth, Psa. 37:12), nor to the impure, 
who are intoxicated with carnal pleasures (and are 
the swine mentioned, Matt 7:6). Moreover it is 


Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 217 


well to note that the Holy Ghost forbade Paul to 
preach the word in Asia, but sent him to Macedonia 
there to preach the word (Acts 16: 6-10) ; therefore 
the same apostle says: “Let no corrupt communica- 
tion proceed out of your mouth, but that which is 
good to the use of edifying, that it may minister 
grace unto the hearers. And grieve not the Holy 
Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the 
day of redemption” (Eph. 4:29, 30). 

Christ himself. was not willing to answer the 
Pharisees’ questions or answer one word to all of 
Herod’s questions. Moreover Christ often spoke to 
the people in parables, but the mysteries of the 
gospel he explained secretly to his disciples (Matt. 
13:10, 11; Mark 4:10, 11), to whom he-says: “It 
is given unto you to know the mysteries of the 
kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given” 
(Matt. 13:11), as it is written, “He made known 
his ways unto Moses, his acts unto the children of 
-Israel” (Psa. 108:7); and further: “He showeth 
his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his judgments 
unto Israel” (Psa. 147:19). And Paul says that 
God’s word, that is, the mystery which had been 
hid from ages and from generations, is now made 
manifest to his saints; “to whom God would make 
known what is the riches of the glory of this mys- 
tery among the Gentiles; which is Christ in you,” 
etc. (Col. 1:26, 27). Therefore Christ says: “I 
thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, 
because thou hast hid these things from the wise 
and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes. 
Even so, Father: for so it seemed good in thy 
sight” (Matt. 11:25, 26; Luke 10:21). And again 
Christ says: “He that hath my commandments, 
and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me; and he 
that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I 
will love him and will manifest myself to him. 
Judas saith unto him, not Iscariot: Lord, how is it 
that thou wilt manifest thyself unto us, and not 
unto the world?” etc. (John 14,5 21,22). 

From all these words it is easy to see that God 
himself hid his word from the world, that Christ 
spoke: to the people in obscure parables, that the 
Holy Ghost forbade Paul to preach God’s word 


218 Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 


in Asia, and that God revealed his word to his 
saints, and not to the world. How then can the © 
ministers of the Word be in any sense justly ac- 
cused when they are but following these examples 
in these perilous times, in keeping the mysteries 
of the gospel hidden and revealing them quietly to 
the well-disposed, and speaking that which is good 
to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace 
unto the hearers, that they grieve not the Holy 
Spirit of God? (Eph. 4:29, 30). 

To sum it up: How a teacher shall be proven 
and known by his doctrine and his fruits has been 
sufficiently explained above, but the matter of 
teaching openly or secretly has no bearing on the 
question; for to teach publicly is good and right 
according to the opportunity of.the time; to teach 
secretly is not forbidden, according to the circum- 
stances of the hour. Public teaching, if false, is 
not made good merely because it is public; for | 
what is false must be and remain false, though 
it were taught a thousand times in public and 
adorned ever so much with beautiful language. On 
the other hand, secret teaching is not made false, 
merely because it is secret; for righteousness must 
remain righteousness, says the prophet, and they 
who fear God shall inherit it. And God’s word is 
and remains the truth, whether it be taught secretly 
or openly. And if it were the case that the true 
teachers might teach openly, they should still not 
preach and teach us anything but the same: word 
of God which by the grace of the Lord is revealed 
and taught us. Hence there is here no room for 
excuse, no looking about for another gospel, if both 
men and angels shall be accursed if they preach 
another gospel than that which we have received 
from Jesus and his apostles (Gal. 1:8). Therefore 
let us, according to the word of the prophet, give 
God the glory and take heed unto the light, before 
the darkness come, and our feet stumble upon the 
dark mountain (Jer. 13:16). 

It is also plainly to be seen how much more 
perilous the times are now than in the time of the 
apostles, for at that time the apostles and Christians 
could flee from one city to another, but now nearly — 


Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 219 


all powers and potentates, cities and countries have 


formed an alliance against us; at that time heathen 


governments did not concern themselves much 
about matters of faith and the Christian religion 
(Acts 17:9; 18:14, 15; 23:22-24), but now almost 
every one would be a ruler of another man’s con- 
Science and a judge of faith (which belongs to 
Christ alone). Now papacy and all it includes per- 
secutes our faith as cruelly as Antiochus ever per- 
secuted the godfearing Jews. And especially does 
the surviving generation of Pharisees and perverted 
scribes, the haughty wisdom and intelligence of 
this world (Isa. 5:21) rage and rave against us. 
They are of the seed of Cain, and not of Abel, 
therefore they persecute and kill the righteous (Gen. 
4:8; 1 John 3:12, 13), and although they have 
often been warned and instructed from the word 
of God, both with tongue and pen, yet they remain 
obdurate in their blindness, wickedness and hideous 


-tyranny. How then can these scorners and per- 


secutors of the word of God escape the fate that 
befell the obstinate, wicked and unbelieving Jews, 
namely, that the kingdom of God shall not come to 
them, or shall be taken away from them, because 
they do not bring forth the fruits thereof? (Matt. 
21:43). : | 

And why say much more about this?) The world, 
absolutely refuses to hear God’s word anyway,| 


therefore it is not worthy of hearing it. It despises 
‘righteousness, therefore this also has become en- — 


tirely foreign to it; it persecutes Christ, and will 


have none of him, therefore also Christ will not 


have it; the world will not forsake evil, and there- 
fore also will not take reproof from God’s word; 
the world hates the truth just as Ahab did, there- 


fore it is misled by the spirit of falsehood, which 


is in the mouths of all the prophets of Baal (1 Kings 
22:22). The world will not tolerate the true teach- 


ers, therefore the Lord sends to it false prophets in 


droves, who speak what it loves to hear. In short, 
it is as Isaiah laments, namely, “that this is a rebel- 
lious people, lying children, children that will not 
hear the law of the Lord; which say to the seers, 


See not; and to the prophets, Prophesy not unto 


~\ 


| 


220 Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 


us right things; speak unto us smooth things, 
prophesy deceits: get you out of the way, turn aside 
out of the path, cause the Holy One of Israel to 
cease from before us” (Isa. 30: 9-11). 

Since, then, the world desires such prophets, the 
Lord sends it such prophets as it desires, but they 
shall be brought to shame, as the Lord says through 
Ezekiel: “And if the prophet be deceived when he 
hath spoken a thing, I, the Lord, have deceived that 
prophet, and I will stretch out my hand upon him, 
and will destroy him from the midst of my people 
Israel. And they shall bear the punishment of their 
iniquity: the punishment of the prophet shall be 
even as the punishment of him that seeketh unto 
him” (Ezek. 14:9, 10). Of this same thing Jere- 
miah also, in his lament concerning Jerusalem, that 
it is so miserably deceived by false prophets, and 
has been brought into captivity, says: “O daughter 
of Jerusalem, what shall I equal to thee, that I may 
comfort thee, O virgin daughter of Zion? for thy 
breach is great like the sea: who can heal thee? 
Thy prophets have seen vain and foolish things for 
thee: and they have not discovered thine iniquity, 
to turn away thy captivity; but have seen for thee 
false burdens and causes of banishment” (Lam. 

eS eae) 

Thus the false prophets deceived Israel, brought 
it into Babylon, and landed there themselves; yea, 
some received terrible punishment for their false 
prophecies (Jer. 28:12-17). Thus it will be with 
the world and its false prophets, if they do not 
repent. But may the Lord turn them that they may 
sincerely repent and be converted unto the living 
God, and come out of darkness into the true light, 
that they may be saved. 

| Observe, beloved brethren, that we have in. 
| brotherly love written you a little by the grace of 
God, on the sending of gospel teachers ; ‘and we 
\kindly ask you to accept it in good part and test it 
-by the plummet of Holy Writ. We could write 
‘much more on the subject, but we hope we have 
satisfied the reasonable and well-disposed; there is 
no help for the perverse and wicked, even though 
an angel from heaven preached the truth. But may 


Sending of Preachers or Teachers. 221 


almighty God, the Fatner of all mercy, and God 
of all grace enlighten, strengthen and establish all 
true teachers and ministers of his holy word (2 Cor. 
1:3; 1 Pet. 5:10), whom he has placed over his 
church through Jesus Christ by his Spirit, that they 
may remain steadfast in the evangelical doctrine, 
showing themselves approved unto God, workmen 
that need not be ashamed, rightly dividing the word 
of truth (2 Tim. 2:15), that at the Lord’s appear- 
ing they may receive the crown that fadeth not 
away (1 Pet. 5:4). 

And you, beloved brethren in the. Lord, who 
were as sheep going astray, but are now returned 
unto the Shepherd and Bishop of your souls, Jesus 
Christ (1 Pet. 2:25), continue steadfast in his doc- 
trine, give ear to his voice alone, and follow in his 
footsteps (John 10:27), and be at peace with your 
teachers and leaders who rightly instruct you in 
God’s word, that the God of peace may be with you, 
and that the Lord Jesus Christ may at the last day 
acknowledge you as his sheep, and place you at his 
right hand and say to you, “Come, ye blessed of my 
Father, inherit the kingdom of your Father, which 
was prepared for you from the foundation of the 
world” (Matt. 25:34). To this end may the eternal 
God help us all through Jesus Christ. Amen. 


D. P. 


Cy 
en eyed ey 
OORT 
isieo Deen 
prow's foekinds 


ee 


- 
eee, 
| 





_ A Loving Admonition 


FROM 


The Word of the Lord 


in which is distinctively and plainly taught and 
discussed the way in which the Christian Church 
is to deal with those who, having entered into 
the fellowship of the saints, are openly doing 
the corrupt works of the flesh, into which 


they have fallen and are found. 


I command you, brethren, ir the name of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw yourselves 
from every brother that walketh disorderly. 
2 Thess. 3:6. 


If any man that is called a brother be a forni- 
-cator, or covetous, or an idolator, or a railer, or 
-a drunkard, or an extortioner (robber); with such 


-an one no not to eat. 1 Cor. 5:11. 





224 A Loving Admonition. 


The grace of God, our heavenly Father, and the 
peace of our Lord Jesus Christ be increased 
in you, by the power and operation 
of the Holy Spirit. Amen. 


Beloved. brethren and sisters and friends in the 
Lord :—I thank almighty Godin this that I hear 
of your faith, of your love for the Lord Jesus Christ 
and for his saints, and of your patience and stead- 
fastness in all the persecutions you endure, as an 
assurance of your salvation, which is a manifest 
token of the righteous judgment of God, who will 
recompense tribulation to them that trouble you, if 
they will not amend and sincerely repent. But you 
he will quicken and refresh when the Lord Jesus 
shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty 
angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them 
that know not God, and that obey not the gospel 
of our Lord Jesus Christ: who shall be punished 
with everlasting destruction from the presence of 
the Lord, and from the glory of his power; when 
he shall come to be glorified in his saints, and be 
admired in all of them that believe (2 Thess. 1: 
7-10), who by the power of their faith have for- 
saken and overcome the world, who for the sake 
of the gospel now despise all perishable and tem- 
poral things and seek those things which are above 
(2 Cor. 4:18; Col. 3:1), where Christ sitteth on 
the right hand of the Father, and who now for 
righteousness’ sake are so unmercifully persecuted 
and put to death by tyrants and. bloodthirsty men. 
For this is now the time when the heathen are come 
into the Lord’s inheritance, defiling his holy temple, 
giving the dead bodies of his servants to be meat 
to the fowls of the heaven, and roasting the flesh 
of his saints on spits and offering it as prey and 
game to the wild beasts of the field. Their blood 
have they shed like water round about Jerusalem, 
and there was none to bury them (Psa. 79:1-3), 
and all because the great Babylonian harlot thirsts 
so greatly for the blood of the saints and witnesses 


A Loving Admonition. 229 


of Jesus (Rev. 17:5; 18:24), and cannot be satis- 
fied until she is fully drunken and the number of 
the servants of God (all of whom must be put to 
death for the sake of his word) is fulfilled (Rev. 
6:11). Then shall the almighty God judge and 
punish the Babylonian harlot, because she is the 
mother of all abominations on earth (Rev. 17:5), 
~-and.the blood of all the saints is found in her (Rev. 
18:24); because she has deceived the world with 
her beautiful appearance (being arrayed in purple 
and scarlet color, and decked with gold and precious 
stones and pearls, having a golden cup in her hand 
full of all abominations and gives all her lovers and 
paramours to drink thereof) ; and because the kings 
of the earth have committed fornication with her, 
and all nations have been made drunk with the wine 
of her fornication and sorcery. Therefore God shall 
punish her, and her plagues shall come unawares, 
and all who adhere to her and will not separate 
from her shall not go unpunished. O Lord! how. 
will those then tremble and fear who now so haught- 
ily revile the Lord and take Truth captive (Isa. 
59:14, 15), who serve the Babylonian whore so 
faithfully, protecting her and for her sake put the 
true Christians to death with fire, water and the 
sword. On the other hand, how will the servants 
of the Lord rejoice, who have not received or ac- 
cepted the mark of the beast, but who are sealed 
with the seal of the living God on their foreheads, 
of which it is written in the Revelations of John: 
namely that John saw a great number of the serv- 
ants of God who were sealed in their foreheads by 
the angel with the seal of the living God from 
among all the tribes of the children of Israel (Rev. 
7:2-4). And after this he saw a great multitude, 
which no man could: number, of all nations, and 
kindreds, and people, and tongues, standing before 
_ the throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white 
robes, and with palms in their hands, crying with 
a loud voice, saying: “Salvation to our God which 
sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb. And 
all the angels stood round about the throne, and 
about the elders and four beasts, and fell-before the 
throne on their faces, and worshipped .God, saying, 


15 


226 A Loving Admonition. 


Amen: Blessing, and’ glory, and wisdom, and 
thanksgiving, and honor, and power, and might, 
be unto our God forever and ever. Amen. ‘3 

“And one of the elders answered, and said unto 
me, What are these which are arrayed in white 
robes? and whence came they? And I said unto 
him, Sir, thou knowest. And he said unto me, 
These are they which came out of great tribulation, 
and have washed their robes, and made them white 
in the ‘blood of the Lamb. Therefore are they be- 
fore the throne of God, and serve him day and night 
in his temple: and he that sitteth on the throne 
shall dwell among them. They shall hunger no 
more, neither thirst any more; neither shall the 
sun light: on them, nor any heat. For the Lamb 
which is in the midst of the throne shall feed them, 
and shall lead them unto living fountains of waters: 
and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes” 
(Rev. 7: 9-17). 

My dearly beloved friends and brethren, who, 
for the sake of the truth, have now become the 
laughing-stock and a byword of the whole world, 
and are hated and persecuted to death by the mon- 
strous beast (which has opened his mouth to speak 
blasphemies against God, and his tabernacle, and 
them that dwell therein, Rev. 18:6); comfort your- 
selves with these and like glorious promises of God, 
and await with patience (Matt. 16:27) the glory 
that shall’ be revealed in you (Rom. 8:17; Tit. 
2:13) at the coming and appearing of our Lord and 
Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us, that 
he might deliver us from this present evil world, 
according to the will of God and our Father (Gal. 
1:4), and make us children of God and heirs of 
eee life, if so be that we suffer with him (Rom. 

8:17), continue steadfast in his doctrine. (John 

8:31), and with unwavering faith follow in his 
steps. (17 Pet 25.21). 

And blessed be God, the avert Father, the 
God of all mercies (2 Cor. 1:3), who has chosen | 
and elected you and called you through the gospel 
to salvation through sanctification of the Spirit and | 
belief of the truth (Eph.1:3; 2 Thess, 2:13; 2 Pet. 
5:10) to the obtaining of the glory of our Lord 


Assbeyiags Adinonition, 227 


jesus Christ, and to be members of his church 


Gromit 1234 <li Cor. 12642):3,1):Cor., 12:9)..;,, There- 
fore also be always at peace with the Christian 
church (Eph. 4:3), and remember that our God is 
a God of peace in all his churches (1. Cor. 14:33), 
and that Jesus Christ has left and bestowed upon 
us his peace (John 14:27), and that the apostle so 
earnestly admonishes us to peace and says: “The 
peace of God, which passeth all understanding, shall 
keep your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus” 
(Phil. 4:7); or, as he says in another place: “Let 


the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which 


also ye are called in one body; and be ye thankful” 


(Col. 3:15). 

With such and similar scriptures be admonished 
and instructed by the Holy Spirit to seek the true 
Christlike peace as far as is possible for you. And 
take heed that no contention and sectarianism be 
found among you, one claiming to be of Cephas; 
another, of Paul; a third, of Apollos; and a fourth, 


of Christ (1 Cor. 1:18), but that you be of one heart 
-and of one soul with one another in Christ Jesus 


(Acts 4:32). And beware of wanton and highly 
lauded spirits (persons) who parade themselves 


with glozing words and despise others, that they 
may gain a reputation among the ignorant, no mat- | 


ter what their kind, who revile the church of God 
among you, and compare the servants of. Christ 
with the foolish shepherds of whom the prophet 
says that they shall not seek those that are lost, 


nor heal that that is broken, nor feed that that stand- 


eth still; but he shall eat the flesh of the fat (Zech. 
11:16; Ezek. 34:4); and this they do because 
these servants of Christ with the word of God 
rightly and properly separate the open sinners and 


carnal men from the church. 


O God! how thy holy word is at all times 


| spoken against! And those who know and confess 


it, keep it before their eyes and obey it, must suffer 
on account of it and be despised; who stake life 
and limb, goods and blood and are killed all the day 
long (Psa. 44:22; Rom. 8:36; 2.Cor.:4: 11), yet 


not regarding all this, so that they may win many 


c 


4 


souls for Christ Jesus, and yet must hear that they 


228 A Loving Admonition. 


are not seeking the lost. They who desire neither 
gold nor silver, and do not feed the flock for the 
milk and the wool, but of a ready mind (1 Pet. 
5:21); they who so zealously apply the bandage 
and. the ointment of the word of God (which is the 
true healing balm) and the comfort of the Holy 
Spirit (Jas. 5:14; Rev. 3:18), are derided and 
decried as those who eat the flesh of the fat, as if 
they were devouring the sheep just as the false 
prophets do; yea, what is still more, they them- 
selves who, out of brotherly love, and at the request 
of the God-fearing people, and even at their own 
solicitation and request, have so treated these blas- 
phemers and slanderers and so instructed and con- 
vinced them out of the scripture that they thanked 
them for their good instruction, are now reviled by 
these same persons, not with tongue alone, but also 
with pen, and their words distorted, perverted and 
misconstrued. O merciful, eternal God and Father! 
pity such blindness, if it be thy holy will, and for- 
give the sins and blasphemies of those who know not 
what they do. This is my heart’s desire and prayer. 

But to you, dear brethren and fellow-believers 
of our Christian faith, I shall by the grace of God 
give brief instruction from the scripture on what 
was the divine order in the beginning regarding 
the punishment of the wicked, and the separation 
of open transgressors and despisers of the divine 
word from the church, and how very necessary this 


| separation is, and what true repentance is that avails 
before God and that is valid before his church 


according to the scripture. 
In the first place, the holy scripture everywhere : 
testifies that God is just, and therefore loves 


righteousness and hates unrighteousness, that he 


is gracious toward the penitent and the godly 
(Psa. 45:7), but stern and full of anger to- 
ward the’ wicked (Psa: 7:11; 9:5); yea, that 
he visits the iniquity of the fathers upon the 
children unto the third and fourth generation of 
them that hate him, and showing mercy unto thou-— 
sands of them that love him and keep his com- 
mandments (Ex. 20:6; 14:8; Num. 14:18; Deut. 
7:9). Therefore John’ says that “God is licht, and 


A Loving Admouuition. 229 


in him is no darkness at all. If we say that we 
have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, 
we lie,and do not the truth: but if we walk in the 
light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one 
with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ, his Son, 
cleanseth us from all sin’ (1 John 5:7). And 
again: “Hereby we do know that we know him, if 
we keep his commandments. He that saith, I know 
him, and keepeth not his commandments, is a liar, 
and the truth is not in him. “ But whoso keepeth his 
word, in him verily is the love of God perfected: 
hereby we know that we are in him. He that saith 
he abideth in him ought himself also so to walk, 
even as he walked” (1 John 2:3-6), That is: 
“Whosoever committeth sin transgresseth also the 
law: for sin is the transgression of the law. And 
ye know that he was manifested to take away our 
sins; and in him is no sin. Whosoever abideth in 
him sinneth not: whosoever sinneth hath not seen 
him, neither known him. Little children, let no 
man deceive you: he that doeth righteousness is 
righteous, even as he is righteous. He that com- 
mitteth sin is of the devil; for the devil sinneth 
from the beginning. For this purpose the Son of 
God was manifested, that he might destroy the 
works of the devil: Whosoever is born of God doth 
not commit sin; for his seed remaineth in him: 
and he cannot sin, because he is born of God. In 
this the children of God are manifest, and the 
children of the devil: whosoever doeth not right- 
eousness is not of God, neither he that loveth not 
his brother,” etc. (1 John 3:4-10). 

In order to properly understand these statements 
of the apostle it is necessary to know what dark- 
nesses and sins (which separate us from God) the 
apostle means. The open works of the flesh, which 
God judges and punishes with death, are such dark- 
nesses and sins, and not the weaknesses and mis- 
takes which still cling to all men, otherwise the 
apostle would contradict himself when he confesses 
and says: “If we say that we have no sin, we 
deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us. If 
we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive 
us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteous- 


230 A Loving Admonition. 


ness. If we say that we have not sinned, we make 
him a liar, and his word is not in us” al John Ac 
8-10). 

Hence all these words above quoted must be 
discriminatingly understood, namely, that all those 
who are carnally minded, who do the works of the 
flesh (Rom. 825; 'Gal..5319 3) Eph: 5:5)i/and: there; 
fore sin against God, have no fellowship with him, 
do not know Jesus Christ (1 John 1:6; 3:4), and 
are not of God, but of the devil (Jas. 4: 4). There- 
fore the apostle Paul says: “To be carnally minded 
is death, . . . and enmity against God” (Rom. 
8:6, 7), and those who live after the flesh must © 
die, for the wages of sin is death (Rom. 6: 23). 

But if a person through human weakness makes 
a mistake and is overtaken in a fault (Gal. 6:3), 
sin is not imputed to him, but is forgiven and 
covered through the righteousness of our Lord 
Jesus Christ (Psa. 32:1; Rom. 4:7; 8:1), as it 
is written, that Christ is the propitiation for our 
sins (1 John 2:2; 4:10), and that a man is saved 
' whose transgression is forgiven and whose sin is 
covered, and that “blessed is the man unto whom 
the Lord imputeth not iniquity” (Psa: 32:1, 2); 
for “there is therefore now no condemnation to 
them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after 
the flesh, but after the Spirit”? (Rom. 8:1). 

In the second: place, God has testified and con- 
firmed that he has instituted an offering for the sin 
of ignorance and of error (Lev. 11; 12; 13; Num. 
15), but wilful sinners and evildoers, such as mur- 
derers, adulterers, idolaters, blasphemers, sorcerers 
and like transgressors, he commanded to be pun- 
ished with death-(Deut. 13), and thus exterminated 
from Israel. No partiality was shown, whether 
prince or judge, man or woman, nor even for a 
whole city; but all who did evil, or in the sight of 
the God of Israel transgressed his law, and served 
other gods, or committed other gross sins, had to 
die, and of such wicked people Israel had to be 
cleansed (Lev. 10; Deut. 17:7). 

Besides this, God the Lord presents to us many 
and varied beautiful symbols of purity in Israel, 
for they were not to eat any unclean food, nor touch 


A Loving Admonition. 3 reed 


any unclean thing. The people-were to be clean 
(Lev. 11; 12; 18; 14), likewise the houses; and 
no one was allowed to defile. the camp of Israel 
(Deut. 23); for the Lord walked through their 
camp; therefore their camp must be clean and holy, 
that no abomination be seen therein, that the Lord 
would not turn from them. and they die in their 
uncleanness, even as God spake to Moses. and 
Aaron, namely, that they should warn the children 
of Israel of their uncleanness; “that they die not in 
their uncleanness, when they defile the tabernacle of 
the Lord that is among them” (Lev. 15:31). And 
to Israel God said: “Sanctify yourselves, and be ye 
holy: for I am the Lord your God. And ye shall 
keep my statutes, and do them: for I am the Lord 
which sanctify you” (Lev. 20:7, 8). 

Therefore also Miriam, Moses’ sister, when she 
was stricken of the Lord with leprosy because she 
had murmured against Moses, was shut out from 
the camp of Israel (Num. 12:15), nor did it avail 
that Moses himself cried unto the Lord, saying: 
‘““Heal her now, O God!” for the Lord answered 
him thus: “If her father had but spit in her face, 
should she not be ashamed seven days? Let her be 
shut out from the camp seven days, and after -that 
let her be received in again.” So Miriam was shut 
out from the camp seven days: and the people 
journeyed not till Miriam was brought in again 
(Num. 12:14, 15). 

Herein is prefigured. and made known to us how 
holy and pure the church of the, Lord must be, even 
as Peter admonishes us and says: “Gird up the 
loins of your mind, be sober, and hope. to the end 
for the grace that is to be brought unto you at the 
revelation of Jesus Christ; as obedient children, 
not fashioning yourselves according to the former 
lusts in your ignorance: but as he which hath called 
you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of con- 
versation; because it is written, Be ye holy; for 
Deano (lal etek hog) doe Vink 44), « | 
_ The apostle admonishes us in his letter to the 
Hebrews that “we ought to give the more earnest 
heed to the things which we have heard, lest at any 
time we should let them slip. For if the word 


232 A Loving Admonition. 


spoken by angels was steadfast, and every transgres- 
sion and disobedience received a just recompense 
of reward; how shall we escape, if we neglect so 
great salvation; which at the first began to be 
spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us 
by them that heard him; God also bearing them 
witness, both with signs and wonders, and with 
divers miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost, ac- 
cording to his own will?’ (Heb. 2:1-4). And 
again: “See that ye refuse not him that speaketh. 
For if they escaped not who refused him that spake 
on earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn 
away from him that speaketh from heaven” (Heb. 
12:25). 

These words make it sufficiently plain to us that 
the transgressors and despisers of the doctrine of 
salvation and the saving grace of our Lord Jesus 
Christ shall much less escape the punishment of 
God than those escaped who sinned against the 
Mosaic law; therefore also evil and carnal people 
cannot be tolerated in the church of Christ, as the 
apostles distinctly declare; for Paul writes thus to 
the Corinthians: “Know ye not that the unright- 
eous shall not inherit the kingdom of God? Be not 
deceived: neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor 
adulterers, nor effiminate, nor abusers of themselves 
with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunk- 
ards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit 
the kingdom of God” (1" Cor. 6:9 10) 1 hus spe 
works of the flesh are manifest, which are these: 
Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, 
idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, 
wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, murders, 
drunkenness, revelings, and such like: of the which 
I tell you before, as I have also told you in times 
past, that they which do such things shall not in- 
herit the kingdom of God” (Gal. 5:19-21). More- 
over: “This ye know, that no whoremonger, nor 
unclean person, nor covetous man, who is an 
idolater, hath any inheritance in the kingdom of 
Christ and of God” (Eph. 5:5). Also: “The un- 
godly shall not stand in the judgment, nor sinners 
in the congregation of the righteous” (Psa. 1:5). 
Therefore also the holy scripture says in Revela- 


A Loving Admonition. 233 


tions that without, that is, outside of the church of 
God, “are dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, 
and murderers, and idolaters, and whatsoever loveth 
and maketh a lie” (Rev. 22:15). 

Since both the old and the new testament places 
the above mentioned transgressors and others like 
them outside the church of God as such that do not 
belong to God so long as they live in such sins and 
have not truly repented of them, therefore they can 
not be considered as members in the church, but 
must be separated therefrom and bear the punish- 
ment they deserve until such time as they repent . 
and are reconciled to God and the church, just as 
Paul sternly rebuked the fornicator at Corinth and 
by the power of Christ separated him from the 
church, that his flesh might be mortified thereby, 
but his spirit saved in the day of the Lord Jesus 
(1) Cor. Dit Oy, 

Thereby he teaches expressly that believers shall 
have nothing to do with one who calls himself a 
brother, but is a fornicator, or covetous, or idolater 
(image worshipper), or a reviler, or a drunkard, or 
a thief; with such the Christians shall have no 
tellowsitp, (hy Gord: 7,29, .11, 135.25. hess.43:6), 
and not even to eat with them, but they must put 
them away, and afterward shun them, and this for, 
three principal reasons: First, that the church may’ 
not become a partaker of the strange sins, and that 
the little leaven leaven not the whole lump (2 John 
De livecGal 82 0e> 2.46Gr. pb); woecondly,. thatthe 
person who has sinned may be ashamed and his 
flesh be mortified thereby, but his spirit saved in 
the day of the Lord Jesus: (1, Cor. 5:5; 2. Thess. 
3:14, 15); Thirdly, that the church of God be not 
evil spoken of on account of wicked members in it, 
and be not censurable on their account before the 
Lord. (Ezek, 36:17-28; Rom.) 2:24;.. Josh, 7:20). 

From all this it follows that the wicked and open 
sinners must be separated from the church of the 
Lord; for if their fellowship is not with God, if 
they are banished from, separated, and rooted out 
of the literal Israel (1 John 1:3; Deut. 13: 6-11; 
17: 2-7; 19: 16-21), if they know “not Jesus Christ 
(2 John 1:7), if they have no part in the kingdom 


Boas A Loving Admonition. 


of God and Christ (Eph. 5:5), if they are not to 
inherit or possess the same. (Gal. 5:21), and if 
Christians are to have nothing to do with them 
(1 Cor. 5:9-13; 2 Thess. 3:6), how then may they 
continue to be in the Christian church, be called 
holy brethren (Heb. 3:1), be greeted with the 
peace of Jesus Christ and the kiss of love? (Rom. 
1G: 355: 6,871 15 = Cor*16* 20"Colt 414 Tat ness: 
e263 John t 714;ete-) oY ea, how, can ‘ey oe 
the pure bride of the Lamb and members of the 
body of Christ? (Rev. 21:2; Rom. 12:4, 5; 1 Cor, 
12:27; Eph. 4:4). Or do we not know that 
Christians are members of Christ, and their body 
the temple of the Holy Ghost? (1 Cor. 3:16; 6:19; 
2 Cor. 6:16, etc.).. Or shall whoremongers, adult- 
erers, idolaters and other evildoers be counted as 
members of Christ and as the temple of God? Far 
from it, for Jesus Christ has no such unclean mem-. 
bers, and the temple of the Holy Ghost is holy 
‘(1 Cor. 6:19); yea, the church, which is now his 
bride, his body, flesh of his flesh and bone of his 
bones (Eph. 5:30), which at one time lay naked 
and loathsome in her blood, who was not salted at 
all, and her navel was not cut (Ezek. 16:4-6; Hosea 
2:3, 4), Christ Jesus has in mercy adopted and in. 
Fis eternal love chosen to be his bride, cleansed her 
by the washing of water by the word (Eph. 5:26; 
Tit. 3:5), washed away all her sins with his pre- 
cious blood (1 Pet. 1:18, 19; Rev. 1:5), salted her 
with the salt of divine wisdom (Matt. 5:18), cir- 
cumcised her with the word of his power (Col. 
2:11), anointed her with the oil of gladness (1 John 
2:20, 27), and crowned her with a crown of glory, 
clothed her in the fine linen robe of righteousness 
and the mantle of salvation (Rev. 19:8), that, being 
justified by his grace (Tit. 3:7), she might be pre- 
sented to God the Father blameless and unreprov- 
able (Eph.~d: 273° Col, 1722) Hénce it 48a case 
of gross ingratitude and a fearful sin for this bride 
of the Lord to forsake Jesus Christ, the lovely 
Bridegroom, and commit adultery against him, 
that is, to fall in love with the world, live after the 
flesh, Wworshia idols, and commit other sins which 
are an abomination to the Lord. 


A Loving Admonition. 235 


Now, some will say that when a man has com- 
mitted fornication, or adultery, or some sin of like 
kind, and laments and repents of it and promises 
_ to do better, his sin is already forgiven him by God, 
and that therefore he should not be excommuni- 
cated. To this we reply briefly that the kingdom 
of God is not in word, but in power, as the apostle 
says (1 Cor. 4:20). Hence true repentance consists 
not in words alone, but in three characteristics and 
evidences by which it may be known. The first is, 
that the sinner heartily deplores his sin before God, 
and grieves over his sin, and is in continual distress 
because of his sin, as the prophet says: “My sin is 
ever before me” (Psa. 51:3; 32:3-5). The second 
is, that he confesses his sin to God with a broken 
and contrite spirit, implores God for forgiveness, 
with firm confidence in the grace of God through 
Jesus Christ, and with the prophet says: ‘Have 
mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving 
kindness: according to the multitude of thy tender 
mercies blot out my transgressions. Wash me thor- 
oughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from 
my sin. For I acknowledge my transgressions: 
and my sin is ever before me” (Psa. 51:1-3, 9; 
32:5). The third is that he forsakes sin and does 
righteousness, as the prophet says: “To depart 
from wickedness is a thing pleasing to the Lord; 
and to forsake unrighteousness is a propitiation” 
(Sesto eee te ee) 28E 3e to 19 

Hence no repentance avails before God that 
shows no fruits of repentance, as John confesses 
when he says: “And now also the ax is laid unto 
the root of the tree: therefore every tree which 
bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and 
cast into the fire” (Matt. 3:10). 

Furthermore, what does Christ say in the gos- 
pelr—“If thy brother shall trespass against thee, 
go and tell him his fault between thee and him 
alone,’ etc. (Matt. 18:15). This is not said of or 
to be tnderstood as meaning open works of the 
flesh, but of secret errors, wherein one brother 
transgresses against another, wherefore Peter asked 
the Lord, saying: “Lord, how often shall. my 
brother sin against me, and I forgive him? till 


236 A Loving Admonition. 


seven times?” To this Jesus replied: “I say not 
unto thee, Until seven times: but, Until seventy 
times seven” (Matt. 18:21, 22), and as often as he 
nenitently asks forgiveness (Luke 17:4), _ Now, 
no one who has been taught of God is so ignorant 
but that he fully understands what kind of sins 
Jesus here means, namely, such mistakes and short- 
comings as often occur through human weakness, 
and are not accounted as works of the flesh, which 
are mortal sins. 

That Jesus did not condemn the adulteress to 
death (John 8:1-11), is to be explained by the fact 
that she was not in the church of Christ, but in'the 
synagogue of the Jews, and the Pharisees would 
not have her condemned according to the gospel, 
but according to the law. But Jesus did not come 
to condemn man and put him to death according to 
or by the law, but to convert sinners and save them 
by the gospel and through faith in his name (Matt. 
9:13). Therefore he did not institute a ban that 
required the transgressor of his word to be put to 
death, but one that demanded his expulsion from 
the church, and this that he might be bettered and 
again resurrected into newness of life. 

But, some will say, the prophet David, the 
apostle Peter, and several others also sinned, and 
yet remained in the church of God, and were not 
separated therefrom. 


ANSWER. 


Ecclesiasticus has well’said that an ungodly man 
will not take reproof, but falls back upon the exam- 
ple of other people to justify his undertaking (Sir. 
21). Thus the drunkards have recourse to Noah 
and Lot; the fornicators and adulterers, to David: 
which is no evidence of their penitence and piety, 
but much more of their ungodliness and perverse- 
ness. But if one wishes to understand the examples 
given in the holy scriptures in the way Paul says, 
namely: “Whatsoever things were written afore- 
time were written for our learning, that we through 
patience and comfort of the scriptures might have 
hope” (Rom. 15:4), then onlv are they rightly 
understood. 


A Loving Admonition. 237 


Therefore the aforementioned examples of the 
Scripture give us no licefse to commit sin, or to 
stand sponsor for others in their sins; but we are 
to learn therefrom that God is gracious and merci- 
ful, longsuffering, and of great mercy (Num. 14:18; 
Psa. 103: 3). 

Now, if some one sins as did David and Peter, 
and repents as they did, and gives evidence of his 
repentance before God by his fruits, toward him 
God will, without doubt, be merciful, and the church 
also will deal with him in love and with Christian 
discretion. But to compare base, open sinners and 
carnal men with David and Peter, and therefore 
not separate them from the church, is an open con- 
tradiction of the scripture and command of the 
Lord, and militates against the power and effect of 
the evangelical ban, as has been sufficiently stated 
above (1. Cor. 5:4,.5%. 2 Thess: 36). 

Moreover, one who truly repents will be well 
satisfied to have imposed upon him-by God and the 
church the punishment that belongs to him and 
which he richly deserves, just as David was patient 
when God punished him for his sins. When Shimei 
cursed him, when Absalom, his son, persecuted him’ 
and sought his life (2 Sam. 15:14), David confessed) 
that it was God’s righteous punishment that had 
come upon him, and he was perfectly resigned to 
God, to return again into his kingdom, or not to re- 
turn, just as it pleased the Lord. Should then one 
who has sinned before God and desires to repent not 
be content that the church of the Lord punish and 
mortify him a little in his flesh according to the 
word of the Lord for his sins that his soul may not 
be destroyed and lost? Does not Moses openly 
declare that the Lord forgives iniquity, yet by no 
means clears, or lets go unpunished, the guilty? 
(Num. 14:18). The ban is a punishment of sin, 
imposed by God upon the sinner; therefore he must 
bear it and accept it for his amendment. 

Lastly, the idea is this, that if any one commits 
fornication, adultery- or sins of like nature, he is 
separated from God by the sin, as the prophet says: 
“Your iniquities have separated between you and 
your God” (Isa. 59:2), and as an evidence of this 


238 A Loving Admonition. 


he is put away from the church of God (1 Cor. 
5:1-5). On the other hand, when one truly repents 
he is again in mercy received by God, and as an 
evidence and proof of this, he is again received and 
reinstated with joy by the church (2 Cor. 2:7, 8; 
7:9-11). This is a fixed rule of God’s word, by 
which none may be deceived. 

Therefore, my beloved brethren and friends in 
the Lord, my companions in the faith, in the king- 
dom, in persecution, in the patience of Jesus Christ 
(Rev. 1:9), remember that the mighty God with 
his powerful hand and outstretched arm has de- 
livered you out of the spiritual Egypt and led you 
through the Red Sea (Ex. 14:14-22) when you 
were baptized into Jesus Christ, and into his death 
(Rom. 6:3; Acts 16:31), when you received the 
gift of the Holy Ghost, when all your enemies were 
drowned and brought to nought by the glorious 
victory of Jesus Christ, who by the death of his 
cross wrought a triumph over the prince of- this 
world and over the powers of darkness (Eph. 2:13; 
Col. 2:15); remember, I say, what grace the merci- 
ful God has shown you herein and how you received 
the Lord Jesus Christ (Col. 2:6), when you bowed 
your knees before the most high God and received 
the mark of the Lord (Ezek. 9:4), and the seal of 
the living God in your foreheads (Rev. 7:3). At 
that time no persecution could frighten you, you 
paid no heed to the stern mandates of the tyrants, 
you renounced the devil with all his works, you 
forsook antichrist with all his idolatrous ways and 
false worship, you overcame the world and all that 
is in it by your faith (1 John 5:4), you crucified 
flesh and blood with its lusts and affections (Gal. 
9:24), you presented your bodies living sacrifices 
unto God (Rom. 12:1), you exposed yourselves to 
fire, water, and the sword, for the witness of Jesus 
Christ, you have made your covenant with God, by 
denying self (Matt. 16: 24), to serve him in holiness 
and righteousness all the days of your lives, you 
have surrendered yourselves to the Holy Spirit to 
be obedient: to him and be governed by him. And 
when this was done how strong your faith: was at 
that time, so that even the gates of hell could not 


A Loving Admonition: 239 


prevail against it (Matt. 16:18), how your hearts 
then burned with love to God, how your consciences. 
were then comforted with the everlasting comfort 
of the grace of God, and what joy there was then 
with God and his angels in heaven and with his 
saints on earth over your repentance, when you 
were converted from unrighteousness to the living 
God .¢(inke:lo./ >; Matt. 18:13: 41.-Dhess-- 1.9), 
when you forsook the Babylonian harlot and came 
to your Father, who in mercy took you in, yea, into 
the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ, killed the 
fatted calf (1 Cor. 1:9; Luke 15:23), arrayed you 
in the best robe, put a ring on your hands and re- 
joiced with the heavenly host that you who were 
dead are alive again; and that you who were lost, 
are found; for the faithful Shepherd Jesus Christ, 
who came from heaven to seek the lost sheep, 
sought and found us poor, wandering lambs in the 
desert (Ezek. 34:22, 23; John 10:11), yea, he took 
us upon his shoulders when he bore our sins (Isa. 
53:6; 1 Pet. 2:24, 25) in his own body on the tree, 
and thus brought us into the sheepcote (fold) of 
Israel, that is, the church of God. 

_ It is therefore my loving desire and brotherly 
‘admonition to you, that you take heed to your call- 
ing and regulate your walk according to the gospel, 
‘in the fear of the Lord, and hear not the false 
\prophets, of whom the apostle Peter writes: “These 
are wells without water, clouds that are carried 
with a tempest; to whom the mist of darkness is 
reserved forever. For when they speak great swell- 
ing words of vanity, they allure through the lusts 
of the flesh, through much wantonness, those that 
were clean escaped from them who live in error. 
While they promise them liberty, they themselves 
are the servants of corruption: for of whom a man 
is overcome, of the same is he brought in bondage. 
For if after they have escaped the pollutions of the 
world through the knowledge of the Lord and 
Savior Jesus Christ, they are again - entangled 
therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse with 
them than the beginning. For it had been better 
for them not to have known the way of righteous- 
ness, than, after they have known it, to turn from 


240 A Loving Admonition. 


the holy commandment delivered unto them. But 
it is happened unto them according to the true 
proverb, The dog is turned to his own vomit again; 
and the sow that was washed to her wallowing in 
the mire” (2 Pét. 2:17-22). 

Heed well this apostolic teaching and witness 
of the Holy Spirit, and beware of sins, yea, beware 
of sin, as Sirach teaches you, saying: “My son, 
hast thou sinned? do so no more, but ask pardon 
for thy former sins. Flee from sin as from the face 
of a serpent; for if thou comest too near, it will 
bite thee: the teeth thereof are as the teeth of a. 
lion, slaying the souls of men. All iniquity is asa 
two-edged sword, the wounds whereof cannot be 
healed” (Sir. 21:1-3). The apostle admoninshes 
us likewise: “Take heed, brethren, lest there be in 
any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing 
from the living God. But exhort one another daily, 
while it is called today; lest any of you be hardened 
through the deceitfulness of sin. For we are made 
partakers of Christ, if we hold the beginning of our 
confidence steadfast unto the end” (Heb. 3: 12-14). 

Dear brethren, since we, alas, have in our blind- 
ness and ignorance sinned greatly, and have done | 
evil against our Lord and God, so that we may well 
say with the prophet: “O Lord, remember not the 
sins of my youth, nor my transgressions: according 
to thy mercy remember thou me for thy goodness’ 
sake” (Psa. 25:7), and God has now pardoned us 
in Christ Jesus whom we have accepted (Col. 2:6), 
and hold fast the beginning of his confidence (Heb. 
3:6, 14), let us be found fruitful in him; for he 
says in the gospel: “Every branch in me that bear- 
eth not fruit he (my Father) taketh away: and 
- every branch that beareth fruit, he purgeth it, that 
it may bring forth more fruit” (John 15:2). And 
again: “If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth 
as a branch, and is withered; and men gather them, 
and cast them into the fire, and they are burned” 
(John 15:6). Hence it is a terrible thing not to 
remain in Christ Jesus, that is, to transgress his 
doctrine, and not- continue therein, as John says: 
“Whosoever transgresseth, and abideth not in the 
doctrine of Christ, hath not (or no) God. He that 


A Loving Admonition. 241 


abideth in the doctrine of Christ, he hath both the 
Father and the Son” (2 John 1:9). 

Therefore let us remain firm and immovable in 
Christ Jesus and his doctrine, and not look back, 
with Lot’s wife, toward Sodom (Luke 17:32; Gen. 
19: 26), nor long for the fleshpots of Egypt; and if 
others do so, and with the stubborn Israelites take 
a dislike to the bread of heaven (Ex. 16), and with 
the disciples at Capernaum are offended at the 
Word of God (which nevertheless is Spirit and life) 
and call Jesus’ words “an hard saying” (John 6:60) 
—which is nevertheless full of divine sweetness and 
spiritual nourishment (Psa. 19:11; 119:103)—and 
therefore turn away from him; let us say with Peter: 
“Lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast the words 
of eternal life. And we believe and are sure that 
thou art that Christ, the Son of the living God” 
(John 6:66, 67). What Jeremiah says accords with 
this: “O Lord, . . . all that forsake thee shall be 
ashamed, and they that depart from me shall be 
written in the earth, because they have forsaken the 
Lord, the fountain of living waters” (Jer. 17:13). 
Therefore Solomon also says that the man that 
turns aside from the path of wisdom shall remain 
in the congregation of the dead, that is, in the 
church in which antichrist rules, where Satan dwells 
and where the second death dominates (2 Thess. 
2275 Réev20: 6). 

But God, the Father of mercies (2 Cor. 1:3), 
who hath quickened you from the dead (Eph. 2:5), 
and hath begun a good work in you (Phil. 1:6), 
the same will also complete it in you and make you 
fruitful in all righteousness, and present you un- 
blamable before his face, protect you from all evil 
and preserve you unto his heavenly kingdom. Amen. 
To him, the almighty, eternal and only God, I com- 
mend you at all times. The love of God the Father, 
the peace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the com- 
fort of the Holy Ghost be with you forever. Amen. 

Written in brotherly love for the benefit of those 
who fear the Lord. 

February 5, 1558. | 
CY BMRA) petea Ces MEAL) Edel. 
JANY BCOUWENS),. 


16 


a Shi grea 8 ee. n 


= oh Phare Feige fries oa) mas 
oF: * ea ay Heediog 
| iw ates io hs sre iouie 7 
re see ee 
os 4 BE i £ SEAR AEE ISI Ia, 
| oe (Ge igitur: fee 
oe 


be ear 
ails fo tee onalte ae 


ep a mle oa te 


£4 Ry ioe Pex eh 





A FRIENDLY ADMONITION 
and 
BRIEF INSTRUCTION 


on the 


True Knowledge of God 


BY D. P. 


He that heareth my word (says Christ), and 
believeth on him that sent me, hath everlasting life. 


John 5:24. 


This is life eternal, that they might know thee, 
the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou 


hast sent. John 17:3. 


GREETING. 


Unto the beloved and faithful brethren and 
sisters who have obtained like precious faith with 
us (2 Pet. 1:1), we wish much grace, peace, and 
mercy, from God our heavenly Father, and from 
Jesus Christ, our only Lord,-Redeemer and Savior, 
who gave himself for us, that he might deliver us 
from this present evil world, according to the will 
of God and our Father, to whom be praise for ever. 
Amen. Gal. 1:4. 


AN ADMONITION 
on the 


TRUE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD. 


I thank the Lord, the most high God of heaven 
and earth, and rejoice in my inmost soul, that I 
hear of your faith in God, of your knowledge of 
Jesus Christ, and the Holy Spirit, and of your love 
toward all believers (Col. 1:3, 4; 2 Thess. 1:3), 
and I pray God, the eternal Father, through Jesus 
Christ, that he would preserve you to the end in the 
true faith, in a fervent spirit and in pure love, that 
you may daily grow and increase therein, that you 
may be unblamable in the day of the Lord, full 
of all good works and righteousness which are ob- 
tained through Jesus Christ, to the honor and glory 
of God. | 

I admonish you by the love of the Spirit that 
you thank God at all times for his unfathomable 
mercy which he has so abundantly manifested to 
us. Remember that in time past (Eph. 5:8) you 
_ sat in Egypt (that is, in darkness), that you were 


\ 


True Knowledge of God. . 245 


the servants of sin, led captive by the devil accord- 
ing to his will, and how wonderfully God delivered 
you. Take to heart the fact that you were so deeply 
in debt, and could not pay, and that God graciously 
forgave and remitted all. Remember that with the 
prodigal son you were long estranged from your 
heavenly Father (Luke 15:13-24), that you com- 
mitted much fornication (that is, idolatry) with the 
Babylonian harlot, and that God in his goodness 
and long-suffering so graciously received you and 
made an everlasting covenant with you, gave you 
Jesus Christ as a free gift, and rejoiced with all 
the angels of heaven over your conversion. 

Therefore take heed to yourselves that you have 
not received the grace of God in vain (2 Cor. 6:1), 
but remember that you have been called of God 
out of darkness into his marvelous light (Eph. 5:8), 
for this purpose that you might walk as children of 
light, and that therefore many sins have been for- 
given you (John 8:11; Eph. 4:32; 1 Pet. 2:24), 
and that you should no longer sin, and that you 
have been graciously received by God, the heavenly 
Father, to the end that you should serve him in 
holiness and righteousness all the days of your 
lives; for this reason God has chosen, called and 
accepted you in Christ Jesus. This is also pre- 
figured to us in the gospel by the many whom Jesus 
healed and commanded to go in peace and sin no 
more lest a worse thing befall them. 

For this reason I have undertaken to admonish 
you briefly, and to present to you by God’s grace 
the principal articles (fundamental principles) of 
our salvation, namely the true knowledge of God, 
true faith, sincere, unadulterated love and a living 
hope; for, where there is ‘no knowledge of God 
there is gross ignorance, and there evil predominates 
(Wis. of Sol. 15:38-14); where there is no faith 
it is impossible to please God (Heb. 11:6); he that — 
has not love abides in death (1 John 2:11; 3:14); 
and where there is no living hope toward God and 
of eternal salvation there is a despondent mind and 
a troubled conscience (1 John 3:20). 

In the first place we must rightly know God 
the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ, and the Holy 


246 True Knowledge of God. 


Ghost (John 17:3). In the knowledge of God the 
Father three things are primarily comprehended: | 
1. His eternal omnipotence and omniscience, by 

which he created all things. 

2. His eternal, divine justice, by which he so 
sternly punishes sin in both men and angels (2 Pet. 
2:4-6). 

3. His unfathomable and fatherly mercy, in 
that he gave us Jesus Christ as a Redeemer and 
Savior (John 3:16). 

A knowledge of the almighty power and wisdom 
of God teaches us how we shall at all times trust 
in God alone (Psa. 33:16-20), from him alone to 
seek, pray for and desire help, protection, salvation 
and all good gifts, and not of any creature in heaven 
or on earth (Psa. 111: 2-10), for there is none that 
can help us but the almighty God alone, who said 
to Abraham: “I am the almighty God” (Gen. 
17:1), “thy shield” (Gen. 15:1), that is, One having 
all authority, the perfection of goodness, who said 
to Israel: “I am thy Lord and Savior, the Holy One 
of Israel, the righteous God and Savior, and there 
is no God beside me.’ 

A knowledge of God’s justice feachbs us to fear 
God, to sincerely repent, to forsake sin, to be terri- 
fied at God’s wrath and judgment, and to seek after 
righteousness, that we may not fall into the hands 
of the living God, for because of this God so openly 
showed his justice toward his angels in heaven 
which sinned (2 Pet. 2:2), toward Adam and Eve 
in Paradise (Gen. 3), toward the cities of Sodom 
and Gomorrah (Gen. 19:24), and toward many 
others, that he might thereby make public examples 
of his eternal justice,:that we might learn to fear 
and behold him as a just God and Judge, yea, as 
an invincible God and as a consuming fire (Heb. 
421229). 

~ A knowledge of the mercy of Gad teaches us to 
love God, because he so loved us, that he gave his 
only begotten Son unto death for us, that ‘through 
him we might live forever (John 3:16; 1 John 
4:10); “for God so loved the world,” says John, 
“that he gave his only begotten Son, that whoso- 
ever believeth in him should not perish, but have 


True Knowledge of God. 247 


everlasting life.’ In other words: “In this was 
manifested the love of God toward us, because that 
God sent his only begotten Son into the world, that 
we might live through him” (1 John 4:9). In short, 
God’s love is revealed to us from heaven in this 
that he gave us such a precious treasure, his most 
beloved Son, as a gift, together with all the heavenly 
riches as a possession. 

In the knowledge of Jesus Christ also there are 
three things especially to be noted and remembered: 

1. His true divinity, in which he was born of 
God from the beginning, and is one with the Father 
from all eternity (Mic.-5:2; John 1:1; 10:30; 
14:9, 105):1721). 

2. His pure, spotless humanity which, of the 
word, by the operation of the Holy Ghost, was 
made flesh (Matt. 1:20; Luke 12353-2273; John 
1:14), and not by the flesh and blood of any man. 

3. His grace, wisdom, righteousness, holiness, 
redemption and salvation (Jer. 23:6; John 17: 23, 
24; 1 Cor. 1:24; Col. 2:38). 

The knowledge of the true divinity of Jesus 
Christ teaches us to look upon him as our only 
Redeemer and Savior, and to believe in him as our 
Lord and God, that through him we may be saved 
. (1 Tim. 2:3-5; John 14:1; 14-28); for this is the 

will of God that he that sees the Son and believes 
on him may have everlasting life (John 6:40); but 
he that does not believe shall not see life; “but the 
wrath of God abideth on him” (John 3:36; 1 John 
5:10). Now, no one can believe in the Son Jesus 
Christ without a right knowledge of his true divin- 
ity; for we may believe in no one but God alone, 
and without faith there is no salvation (Heb. 11:6; 
John 6:40). (I speak of adults and intelligent per- 
sons). Hence the knowledge of the true divinity 
of our Lord Jesus Christ is pre-eminently necessary 
to salvation. 

The knowledge of the holy humanity of Jesus 
Christ teaches us to consider and comprehend the 
overflowing riches of God’s grace, that for us he 
sent and delivered his only first-born and only be- 
gotten Son, his eternal and almighty Word in the 
likeness of sinful flesh to the most ignominious 


248 True Knowledge of God. 


death of the cross (Eph. 2:6, 7; John 1:14; 3:16; 
Rom. 8:32; John 1:1; Rom: 8:3; Eph. 2: 13-16; 
Phil. 2:8). He also assures us that through him 
we have free access to the Father by the Holy Spirit 
(Eph, 2:18), since he has become our brother, like 
us in all things except sin (Heb:-2:11))125« 522); 
that he, our faithful High Priest, Reconciler and 
Mediator with God, might succor us and have com- 
passion on us in our human weakness (Heb. 2:17, 
18; 1 Tim. 2:5; Heb. 8:1; 10:19); for we needed 
such a Mediator who was both God and man, that 
in his true divinity he might be fully able to help 
us, and in his true humanity also have patience with 
our weakness, inasmuch as he is a man, tempted in 
all points, yet without sin, which he never knew 
(Heb. 2:14, 18). 


The knowledge of the grace of our Lord Jesus 
Christ teaches us that we cannot be saved by our 
own works or any other means, nor to seek our 
salvation otherwise than through the merits of Jesus 
Christ (Eph. 2:4-6); for he is made:unto us wis- 
dom, righteousness, sanctification and eternal life 
(1 Cor. 2:30); he is our Redeemer, Advocate, 
Reconciler, Savior, and Mercy-Seat (1 Tim. 2:5; 
1 John 2:1, 2; Rom. 3: 24-27) through faith in his 
blood (Col. 1:14; 2:13-15); his suffering is our 
joy, his cross our triumph and glory, his death our 
life, his resurrection from the dead our resurrection 
to everlasting glory (1 Cor. 15:22, 23), his ascen- 
sion our way to the Father; his union with us is 
our union with the Father and makes us partakers | 
of the divine nature and of immortality (John 17: 
2b? Pet. 124). 

In the knowledge of the Holy Ghost also three 
things are to be noted: 


1. His truly divine being, in which he proceeds 
from the Father and the Son (John 16:13; 14:17; 
15: 26). 

2. His efficacy in all believers; for he com- 
forts, strengthens, and seals unto the day of re- 
demption (Eph. 4:30); he teaches them to fear 
God, to believe in God, to call upon him and pray 
to him as we ought (Rom. 8: 26,27: Wis. of Sol. 


True Knowledge of God. 249 


9:17; 1 Cor. 12:3); in short, he bestows all good, 
spiritual gifts, according to his will. 

3. His reproof of the sin of the world, that is, 
of unbelief, of false righteousness, of the unjust 
judgment which the world passes upon the children 
of God and upon all divine things (John 16: 8-11). 

The knowledge of the divinity of the Holy Ghost 
teaches us that we shall believe his teaching and his 
witness, because he is God, who alone is true, and 
can not err (Rom. 3:4); therefore all that the Holy 
Ghost has declared and spoken through the prophets 
and apostles, yea, through Jesus Christ himself (2 
Pet. 1:21) is the eternal and abiding truth and the 
testimony of God (Psa. 111:8). . 

The knowledge of the power and work of the 
Holy Ghost in all believers teaches at all times to 
‘pray to God through Jesus Christ for the Holy 
Spirit that he would lead us into all truth (Matt. 
7:7; Yohn 14: 26; 127:16;°16:13;°17:3; 1 John 
2:20, 27), make us partakers of all his spiritual 
gifts, comfort, strengthen and preserve us in the 
wholesome doctrine of Jesus Christ, in the true faith 
unto the end and help us to enter into the kingdom 
of our heavenly Father. 

The knowledge of the reproof or conviction of 
the Holy Ghost teaches us to recognize the unbelief 
of the world, its false righteousness and its unjust 
judgment; for the Holy Ghost reproves the world 
through the children of God and through the wit- 
nesses of Jesus Crhist, of its unbelief, that it does 
not believe in Jesus Christ, because it rejects his 
word, his doctrine and his testament, and accepts, 
believes and follows the doctrines of men instead. 

The Holy Ghost reproves the world of the false 
righteousness in this that, with the Jews, they seek 
to establish their own righteousness (Rom. 10: 3-6) 
by such works and ceremonies as have been in- 
vented, devised and instituted by men; therefore 
they will not submit themselves to the ‘righteous- 
ness that comes by faith in Jesus Christ, and which ~ 
avails before God (Rom. 10:3, 4). 

The Holy Ghost reproves the world of judgment. 
because they praise and justify the ungodly, and 
reproach and condemn those who fear God, because 


250 True Knowledge of God. 


they call good, evil; and evil, good; because they 
take light for darkness, and darkness for light, so 
that neither Jesus with his kindness and fellowship, 
nor John with his sternness and seclusion satisfies 
them, but they constantly slander and. reproach 
unjustly the godly (Matt. 11:18, 19; Isa. 5:20), 
condemn and kill them as heretics, even imagining 
that they are thereby doing God a service. All this 
the Holy Ghost reproves in his operation, that is, 
in the pious Christians in whom he performs his 
work. 

Hence we must rightly know the Father, Son, 
and Holy Ghost (Matt. 3:16, 17; 28:19; 1 John 
5:4-7), that they. are the true, living God, beside 
whom there is none other, neither in heaven nor on 
earth. This God has created us, has redeemed us, 
has taught and enlightened us; he is our fortress 
and our deliverer, our Savior and our All (Psa. 
18:2); in him we must believe. And what true 
faith is, the apostle describes for us to the Hebrews 
as follows: “Faith is the substance of things hoped 
for, the evidence of things not seen” (Heb. 11:1). 
That is, faith trusts in the invisible God, and hopes 
for his grace, and seeks after the things that are not 
seen and eternal (2 Cor. 4:18;,Col. 3:2); for faith 
has three characteristics by which it may be known 
and rightly distinguished from all unbelief. 

The first characteristic is that nothing but God’s 
word is believed, for faith comes by ‘the hearing of 
the word of God (Rom. 10:17; Psa. 116:10, 11), 
and not from the doctrine of men; for faith looks 
to God alone, and believes him faithful and true in 
all his words and promises, and all carnal men 
deceitful (Jer. 17:9); hence faith judges not by 
the word of men, however plausible and good it 
might appear to be, but by God’s word alone. . 

The second characteristic is that faith believes 
all God’s words, and makes no exceptions; for all 
God’s words are as a fire (Jer. 23:29), and a shield 
to all who put their trust in him (Psa. 119: 114), 
and God has so earnestly commanded that nothing 
should be added to or taken from his word (Deut. 
4:2; 12:32; Josh. 1:7; Prov. 30:6; Rev. 22:18, 
19, etc.), but to do according to all his words and 


True Knowledge of God. 251 


commands. And Christ says in the gospel: “Man 
shall live . .. by every word that proceedeth out 
of the mouth of God” (Matt. 4:4; Luke 4:4; Deut. 
8:3; Psa. 104:29). Therefore all words of God 
must be believed, and not only some, according to 
our fancy, and the others rejected. 

The third characteristic of true faith is that faith 
seeks God alone and eternal salvation (Col. 3:1, 2), 
seeks those things which are invisible and heavenly, 
lays aside everything that is temporal and 
transitory, knows no man after the flesh (2 Cor. 
0:15), seeks not things human, but things divine, 
and looks not upon man’s work and righteousness, 
but on Jesus Christ alone (Matt.'16:12, 16). 

Such faith had Abraham, the father of all the 
faithful (Rom. 4:16; Gal. 5:6); for he believed 
God above nature in the birth and offering of Isaac 
GGens $365 22917 5 1752; 16; 195-18 10. he 
1, 2), he also believed all God’s words although it 
was a sore trial to the flesh, as may be noted in the 
matter of the circumcision, and his readiness to 
offer Isaac unto the Lord, also that he did not re- 
gard temporal things, but left his father’s house at | 
the Lord’s command, looking for another city, which 
has its foundations in heaven, whose builder and 
maker is God (Heb. 11: 8-10), as the apostle says. 

From this it is evident that those who have true 
faith reject all the doctrines and opinions of men, 
and trust in God alone, take his word as truth, and 
confess all God’s word as being right, and obey it, 
and with all diligence seek heavenly things. On 
the other hand, those who set the doctrines of men 
above or on a par with God’s word, seek temporal 
things more than the kingdom of God and his right- 
eousness (Matt. 6:33; 1 Tim. 4:8, etc.), are un- 
believers, and however beautifully they may speak 
of the scriptures and of faith, it is mere vanity and 
has no weight. From this faith springs love, which 
is the greatest, highest and first command, both in 
the law and in the gospel, namely, that we shall 
love the Lord with all our heart, with all our soul, 
with all our might and all our strength, and the 
second is like unto it, namely, that we shall love our 
neighbor as ourselves; for on these two commands, 


252 True Knowledge of God. 


says Christ, hang all the oe and the prophets 
ABeUt, 907 Oy Matt. 22: 37-40). 

The love of God must have precedence, so that 
we for God’s sake will leave all creatures, all the 
things that are seen, yea, father and mother, broth- 
ers and sisters, wife and children, and even our own 
lives (Deut. 33: 8,9; Matt. 10: 37-39; Luke 14:26), 
as the scripture very plainly teaches us, both by 
word and by example; for God, who is a jealous 
God and a lover also’ (Ex. 20:53 Deut: 6:95: Psa: 
88:18; Jer. 31:3, etc.), will have us love and 
cherish him thus, because he has thus shown his 
love toward us, as the apostle says, that Jesus 
Christ, his only begotten Son, died for us ungodly 
beings, that he gave us his Holy Spirit, prepared 
his eternal kingdom for us, called us unto the 
knowledge of his word, in short, has given us all 
good! things *CRom. 5463177 5: 1) Car. 1: 2-5 3 Pith 
3:46; Psa. 84:11; Rom. 8: 32), therefore we must 
in return love him above all else that is in heaven 
and on earth. And we must prove this love by dili- 
gent obedience to all his commands, as Christ him- 
self teaches in plain words, otherwise it is not love, 
but a vain pretense of love (John 14:21: 15:10; 
1 John 5:2). 

/ Next to this we must love the brethren. Of 
this brotherly love the scripture, Christ and his 
apostles teach us so abundantly that it is unneces- 
sary to write more about it. This love is not merely 
that which supplies a poor brother’s temporal need, 
but that we remember the brethren and sisters in 
all our prayers, beseeching God in their behalf, and 
being concerned about their souls, and that when 
we see some one erring from the way of truth we 
shall in meekness of spirit admonish them from the 
word of God that we may win their souls and save 
them from destruction (Rom. 12: 9-13; Col. 3:12- 
14: Eph. 5:2; 42153) .1 -Pet..478:10; Oi Pet 127% 
Aaal. 6:5, 6; Jas. 5:16, 19, 20; 1 John 5716, etce.). 
‘ Where this love exists, there all that is good is 
found, yea, there God is, who himself is love (1 John 
4:8); there Christ dwells, there the Holy Spirit 
abides, there is the lovely gathering of brethren and 
sisters who are of one heart and one soul (Acts 


True Knowledge of God. 253 


2:44; 4:32; Psa. 183:1); there the anointment 
of the holy oil of gladness flows from the head of 
Christ upon all his members (Psa. 45:7; Heb. 1:9; 
Psa. 183:1); there the dew of divine grace falls 
upon Mount Zion, making fruitful in righteousness 
and holiness all who are pleasing to God; there God 
_ bestows his heavenly benediction and gives life 
eternal; there is true joy, not carnal, but spiritual; 
there is the beautiful Jerusalem which is above 
(Gal. 4:26; Rev. 22:2), which is builded as a city 
(Psa. 122:4), that is, compact together; there the 
tribes of Israel gather to praise God; there the 
Holy Spirit brings rest and peace to the consciences 
and hearts of the believers in true Christian love 
and unity; there also is found the living hope, 
whereby the believer hopes for salvation through 
the grace of Jestis Christ, yea so that he is assured 
and certain that he is being sanctified, and that he 
has the witness of the Holy Spirit in his heart 
(Rom. 8:16), whereby he is assured that he is the 
child of God, that Jesus Christ is his brother, and 
that he has the fellowship of the Holy Ghost (2 Cor. 
13:14). | 
Thereby the believer becomes so light of heart, 
so comforted and so full of joy, that he is rich in 
-the midst of poverty, that in danger, persecttion, 
prison, yea, in the midst of death, he rejoices and 
says with Paul: “I know whom I have believed, 
and am persuaded that he is able to keep that which 
I have committed unto him (namely the crown of 
righteousness) against that day” (2 Tim. 1:12). 
This accords with what the prophet. says: “The 
Lord is my light and my salvation; whom shall I 
fear? The Lord is the strength of my life; of 
whom shall I be afraid?” (Psa. 27:1). In other 
words: “God is our refuge and strength, a very 
“present help in trouble. Therefore will we not fear, 
though the earth be removed, and though the moun- 
tains be carried into the midst of the sea; though 
the waters thereof roar and be troubled, though the 
mountains shake with the swelling thereof. There 
is a river, the streams whereof shall make glad the > 
city of God, the holy place of the tabernacle of the 
Most High. God is in the midst of her; she shall 


254 _ True Knowledge of God. 


not be moved: God shall help her, and that right 
early” (Psa. 46:1-5). And the prophet yet says: 
“QC Lord, ... . whom have I in heaven but thee? 
and there is none upon earth that I desire beside 
thee. My flesh and my heart faileth: but God is 
the strength of my heart, and my portion forever” 
(Psa: 13% 25, 26)2 7 3 

This liberty of the mind brings about the living 
hope in God, and the certain assurance of the grace 
of Jesus Christ and the sealing of the Holy Spirit 
unto eternal salvation, by which the heart becomes 
so joyful that the believer is comforted under all 
circumstances to be with the. Lord, and in the real 
life to come into full possession of all that he by 
faith looks forward to in hope, and which he now 
sees but darkly as through a glass and knows from 
words more or less dark (1 Cor. 13:12). 

Therefore, my beloved and cherished friends in 
the Lord, and chosen of God in Christ Jesus, take 
heed to the true knowledge of God, continue stead- 
fast in the faith, love God and the brotherly fellow- 
ship of Jesus Christ, and hope for his grace, and 
you will never be brought to shame. Beware of all 
false doctrine (Matt. 7:15), all idolatry (1 Cor. 
10:14), all appearance of evil (1 Thess. 5:22), do 
not allow yourselves to be terrified on account of 
tyrants and persecutors, fear not mortal men, but 
fear the almighty, living God (Luke 12:4, 5), who 
created you, gave you body and soul, and has called 
you to his everlasting kingdom that shall never 
pass away. Think of the great joy and glory that 
shall be revealed in you (Rom. 8:17, 18; 1 Pet. 
1:3, 4) in time to come at the appearing of our 
Lord Jesus Christ. Take an example of patience 
from all the holy people of God who have lived since 
the beginning of the world (Jas. 5:10; Heb. 12:1) 
and have suffered, and follow in their faith. 

Now the God of all grace, and the Father of all 
mercy, who has chosen you unto everlasting glory 
through Christ Jesus, strengthen, confirm and estab- 
lish you in his eternal truth, perfect you in faith 
and in all good works and preserve you unto his 
heavenly kingdom, that you may inherit and pos- 
sess it with all the saints forever. Amen. (1 Pet. 
ao sl ebi dae} D. P. 


A VERY BEAUTIFUL AND TRUE 


EXPLANATION AND INTERPRETATION OF 


The Tabernacle 


OF MOSES, 


In which many beautiful and necessary figures of 
the Old Testament are discussed and harmonized 
with the spirit of the New Testament. 


For the use and benefit of all lovers of the truth, 
who seek and desire to comprehend the 
spirit of the letter. 


The Lord said to Moses: “See that thou make 
_all things according to the pattern shewed to thee 
| in the mount.” Heb. 8:5. 


: 


GREETING. 


Grace, peace, and the true knowledge of the 
divine word, be multiplied in all true Christians 
and lovers of the eternal truth of God, our heavenly 
Father, and Jesus Christ, our Lord and Savior, 
through the power of the Holy Ghost. Amen. 


All brethren and fellow-believers in our Chris- 
tian faith are in one sense well aware that for some 
time an unusual and remarkable, yea, even strange 
doctrine has been taught and introduced by certain 
persons regarding the tabernacle of Moses, and 
regarding some passages of scripture, which, 
according to the letter, seem to be contradictory. 
These doctrines have, in our estimation, and as we 
have also ascertained, produced no amendment of 
life, no love, and no faith, but rather many sects, 
ereat errors and grievous offences, both in and out 
of the Christian church have originated therefrom. 
For this reason we shall, according to the grace 
given us of God, write against this misleading doc- 
trine, not for our praise and exaltation (for he who 
seeks his own honor is not the messenger of God, 
—John 7:18—nor a witness of the truth), but to 
_the honor of God alone and to seek Christian unity ; 
for our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is a God of 
peace, of love and unity in all his churches, and has 
declared and left. us the doctrine of salvation out 
of the mouth of the Most High God. This doctrine 
is the sure way, the eternal truth, and immortal life 
(John 14:6). And if so be that we all alike believe 
this doctrine with the whole heart, continue therein, 
and diligently keep it, we shall never be brought to 
shame, yea, the Holy Ghost, which is poured out 
upon us by the Father, will remain with us, abide 
‘in us and dwell among us and will bring and estab- 
lish peace and unity, and will not depart from us 
so long as we abide with Christ (John 14:16) and 
keep his doctrine, for it is the office and work of the 
Holy Ghost to reveal Christ and to make known 
his doctrine to man; therefore also he has a desire 


The Tabernacle of Moses. 257 


for those who walk in the peace of God, in real 
unity of the true faith and the saving doctrine of 
Jesus Christ and obey it. 

But those who are contentious with Christ and 
his church and introduce heretical or strange doc- 
trines contrary to the gospel of Jesus Christ—from 
such the Holy Ghost departs and has no communion: 
with them (Wis. of Sol. 1:5). Therefore all their 
plots and plans are unsuccessful, all their teaching 
is impotent and fruitless, and they will not stand 
in the judgment of God (Psa. 1:5). Therefore all 
our desire and prayer to God is that he would give 
us his grace that we may abide in Jesus Christ, his 
beloved Son, continue in his doctrine and follow in 
his steps. He is our Shepherd, and we are the 
sheep of his pasture (Isa. 40:11; Ezek. 34:28). 
He is our Lord and Master, and we are his servants 
and disciples (Matt. 10:12-14; John 10:26, 27; 
Matt. 23:8-10; John 13:13), to serve him in all 
obedience, and to keep his commandments. 

Now, since we are all the sheep of Jesus Christ, 
the only Good Shepherd (John 10:11; Isa. 40:11; 
Ezek. 34:12, 23; Heb. 13:20, etc.), we must there- 
fore all pass along the same way and follow one 
Shepherd. If we are all servants and disciples of 
the one Lord and Master, we must hear his doctrine 
alone, and keep his commandments only (John 14: 
21; 15:10; 1 John 2:5; 5:3); for both his word 
and his command are “Spirit, and they are life” 
(John 6:63), and “the power of God unto salvation | 
to every one that believeth” (Rom. 1:16), and lives 
according to it (1 Cor. 1:18). 

Therefore we must wholly believe the doctrine 
of Jesus Christ; first of all keeping his command- 
ments, and in the next place not introduce nor 
accept any strange doctrine, so that true peace may 
be and remain with us. For hereunto are we called; 
_ yea, for this reason Christ reconciled us to God by 
his precious blood that we might have peace with ~ 
God and one another in truth and in righteousness 
(Rom. 5:1; Eph. 2: 138-16), and for this reason we 
are all baptized by one Spirit into one body (1 Cor. 
12:13).. Yea, for this reason Christ is the head of 
us all (Eph. 4: 15), and his Holy Ghost is the life 


17 


258 The Tabernacle of Moses. 


of all, so that we should all alike hold fast to Christ, 
become conformed to him (Rom. 8:29), move for- 
ward in the same one Holy Spirit, speak through 
him. alone, and by him be brought into- all true 
peace and into the fulness of love and unity. But 
there are at this time many who with the heathen 
are seeking after wisdom and are not satisfied with 
the doctrine of the gospel, even though in Christ 
Jesus are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and 
the knowledge of God (Col. 2:2, 3), wherefore also 
Paul gloried in not knowing anything but Jesus 
Christ and him crucified (1 Cor. 2:2). | 

We also beseech and desire of every one who 
professes faith in Christ, that with Paul and with 
all true Christians he would hold Christ and his. 
doctrine in such regard that he would shun all 
strange doctrine that is contrary to the gospel, no 
matter how plausible it may appear to be, and fol- - 
low after peace (Rom. 12:18; 14:19), not seeking 
his own honor, but that he might say with the 
prophet: “Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but 
unto thy name give glory” (Psa. 115:1). 

We would also beseech and admonish all breth- 
ren by the mercy of God and the love of Jesus 
Christ (Rom. 12:1) to read our writings with single 
and sincere eyes and with unbiased heart, and 
measure them by the plummet of the divine word; ] 
for we desire nothing but that all honor be given 
to God, and that the truth may prevail, and that all 
eyes may behold the glory of God. May he, the 
eternal, almighty, merciful and alone wise God, 
grant us and all our brethren wisdom and under- 
standing to distinguish righteousness from unright- 
eousness, light from darkness and truth from false- 
hood, that we may be preserved from all error and 
be kept in the saving doctrine of Christ. 

The eternal, almighty and alone wise God (1 

Tim. 1:17) commanded Moses, his servant, to build 
-a sanctuary or tabernacle after the pattern that he 
had seen (Ex. 25:8). This tabernacle was divided 
into three parts: The court, the holy place. and the 
holy of holies. This was a figurative way in which 
God dealt with Israel, a shadow pointing to things 
to come (Heb. 10:1); for the law was a shadow 


The Tabernacle of Moses. 259 


of good things to come, but was not the substance © 
itself, as the apostle explains to the Hebrews, and 
likewise to the Corinthians, that many things hap- 
pened to the Israelites as examples, but are written 
for our instruction (1 Cor. 10:11; Heb. 9:9). So 
also this tabernacle of Moses that was built accord- 
ing to God’s command is no doubt a figure and 
image of the true thing that is typified thereby, for 
it was not built at God’s command in vain or with- 
out purpose by Moses, but the Lord desired to make 
known therewith something special; yea, the truth 
of the new testament is established thereby, and it 
is then a firm and immovable foundation when the 
shadows and declarations of the law accord and 
agree with the truth of the gospel. Therefore Christ 
says in the gospel: “Every scribe which is in- 
structed unto the kingdom of heaven is like unto 
a man. that is an householder, which bringeth forth 
out of his treasure things new and old” (Matt.13 :52). 

But now the figures of the old testament must 
be carefully examined and be understood, not ac- 
cording to human opinion, but just as they came 
from, were spoken and given by God through the 
Holy Spirit, so also must they, by the same Spirit, 
be revealed, taught and explained (2 Pet. 1:21). 
Therefore we have no thought of writing anything 
strange or new on the tabernacle of Moses, but the 
apostolic interpretation is the foundation upon 
which we build, and if we explain some things a 
little further than the apostles did, there is reason 
for doing so. But the present need, and the mis- 
_ conception in the minds of some brethren occasion 
us to explain the matter further, although the 
apostle is our teacher in the matter, and we will 
follow his explanation, for it came by the Holy 
Spirit, and by that we desire to abide. 

In the first place we will quote the words of the 
apostle to the Hebrews, in which words he reveals 
the true conception of the tabernacle, for he says: 

“Now when these things were thus ordained, the 
priests went always into the first tabernacle, accom- 
plishing the service of God. But into the second 
went the high priest alone once every year, not 
without blood, which he offered for himself, and 


260 The Tabernacle of Moses. 


for the errors of the people: the Holy Ghost this 
signifying, that the way into the holiest of all was 
not yet made manifest, while as the first tabernacle 
was yet standing: which was a figure for the time 
then present, in which were offered both gifts and 
sacrifices, that could not make him that did the 
service perfect, as pertaining to the conscience; 
which. stood only in meats, and drinks, and divers 
washings, and carnal ordinances, imposed on them 
until the time of reformation” (Heb. 9: 6-10). 

These words give us a clear conception of the 
tabernacle, therefore they must be carefully exam- 
ined. In the first place, the apostle speaks of two 
tabernacles, that is, the holy place and the holiest 
of all. Of the court he makes no special mention, 
because that was the entrance to the tabernacle: 
The first tabernacle, he says, was a figure for the: 
time then present, thus pointing out to us that the 
two tabernacles signify two eras, viz, the era of 
the law and the era of the gospel; for, just as the 
tabernacle of Moses built according to God’s com- 
mand, was one tabernacle and one sanctuary di- 
vided into two parts, each having its own vessels, 
sacrifices or offerings and glory, so also the law 
and the gospel are one word and one truth of God, 
even though they also are divided, namely, the law 
contained the shadow of good things to come (Heb. 

_10:1), but in the gospel is contained the substance, 

of the things themselves. The law had many figures 
and ceremonies, which were all fulfilled in Christ 
(Col. 2:17), but the gospel has the clear, steadfast 
truth, which shall endure forever. The law is the 
letter that killeth, but the gospel is the Spirit that 
giveth life (2 Cor. 3:6; John 6:63; Rom. 3:20; 
4:15; 8:2, etc.). 

So then the gospel and the law are divided, so 
far as the figures, shadows and the letter of the law 
are concerned, which are all done away by the 
gospel. But it is essential that we take heed to the 
spirit of the law (for the law is spiritual, as Paul 
says, Rom. 7:14). We will then find that the sig- 
nification, purport and real meaning of the law ac- 
cords and agrees in every way with the gospel, yea, 
that it is one and the same truth. For, as there is 


The Tabernacle of Moses. 261 


but one God, so there is but one truth, for God him- 
self is the truth; but the letter (in which the truth 
is hidden) comes to an end. ‘Thus the literal com- 
mand of the Lord regarding circumcision of the 
flesh has come to an end, but the command regard- 
ing the spiritual circumcision of the heart remains 
(Rom. 2: 25-29; Phil. 3:3; Col. 2:11).. Thus all 
symbols of the law (which are too numerous to 
speak of here) have come to an end so far as the 
letter is concerned, nevertheless the true and essen- 
tial signification of these same figures remains and 
accords with the gospel, so that the apostle very 
properly and with due discretion compares the taber- 
_nacle of the Lord (which was divided into two 
parts, and yet was one tabernacle) to the law and 
the gospel, the two testaments, which nevertheless 
in spirit are one truth and are connected. ‘There- 
fore the apostle says that the believing Israelites 
and we have the same spirit of faith. Thus the 
apostles and even the Lord Jesus Christ himself 
many times proved and confirmed the truth of the 
‘gospel with sayings and testimonies of the law and 
the prophets, thereby showing us that the truth of 
the gospel is embodied in the law and the prophets. 
In the second place the apostle says that the 
priests went always (or daily) into the first taber- 
nacle, for they had to offer sacrifices every day, 
which signifies the incompleteness of the law, as 
the apostle says in the same epistle (Heb. 7:18) 
that the law made nothing perfect; but the bringing 
in of a better hope did; by the which we draw nigh 
unto God. But into the holiest of all, says the 
apostle, the high priest went alone once every year, 
and there offered a sacrifice. This signifies to us 
-that Jesus Christ made one offering (bv which we 
are reconciled with God), and this offering shall 
not be made again, for its efficacy endures forever, 
and suffices for the sin of the whole world, and it 
is typified by the one offering which the high priest 
alone made every vear in the holiest of all (Heb. 
9:7), and in this that none of the priests, Levites 
and all the people of Israel might enter the holiest 
of all to make this one annual offering of atonement 
to God but the high priest alone, who was appointed 


262 The Tabernacle of Moses. 


thereto by God (Heb. 9:7; Ex. 30:10; Lev. 16:2, 
etc.). Hence no man could reconcile us to God but 
Jesus Christ alone, the true High Priest, who was 
anointed by God his Father with the Holy Ghost, 
and ordained after the order of Melchisedec (Heb. 
6:6: Psaj ab10 +45 Hebe etirdiy 21). is, 

In the third place the apostle says that the 
priests went at all times into the first tabernacle, 
accomplishing the service of God, but that into the 
second went the high priest alone, once every year, 
and never without blood, which he offered for him- 
self, and for the errors of the people: the Holy 
Ghost this signifying that the. way into the holiest 
of all was not yet made manifest, while as the 
tabernacle was yet standing (Heb. 9:6-8). This 
has reference not only to the one offering of Christ, 
as already mentioned above, but also to the fact that 
so long as the law of Moses was in force and took 
its proper course true gospel grace, while promised 
through Jesus Christ, had not yet appeared or been 
revealed; but-when it was made manifest the letter 
of the law of Moses had to make way for, and cul-_ 
minated in, Christ Jesus. For, when Jesus Christ, 
the true High Priest, came, he entered into the 
holiest of all and there offered his own flesh and 
blood unto God for a sweet smelling savor for the 
sin of the whole world (Eph. 5:2; Heb. 7:27; 
9:14), by which offering he has opened to all them 
that believe in him a new and living way to the 
holiest of all (that is, into the mystery and fellow- 
ship of- divine and heavenly riches, even to heaven 
itself). And while he, by his death, conquered 
death, and by sin (that iS, by his offering for sin, 
2 Cor. 5: 21) condemned sin (Rom. 5:10; 8:3), 
he also by his flesh took away the vail from the 
holiest of all (Matt. 27:51; Mark 15:38; Luke 
23:45). It is to be clearly observed here, that with 
the death of Jesus the vail of the temple was rent, 
a sure sign that through Jesus Christ the vail that 
obscured the face of Moses (2 Cor. 3:7; Ex. 34: 
29-35)—because the children of Israel could not 
endure the shining glory of his countenance—was 
taken away, and that his death became the portal 
and entrance to eternal life, to the kingdom of 


The Tabernacle of Moses. 263 


heaven, and that the most precious and glorious 
of all God’s gifts was thereby given to us as a gift 
and revealed to us so that we now have free access 
to God, who speaks to us from the Mercyseat, that 
is, through Jesus Christ, who reconciled us unto 
God by his flesh and blood, which he offered up in 
the holiest of all as the true, only and holiest of all 
sacrifices (1 Pet. 1:18, 19), and all who believe in 
Christ are come thereunto by faith in his name in 
the Holy Spirit (Heb. 10:19, 20; 12:22). 

Thus in the priests and Levites, and the sanc- 
tuary in which they served, we see typified Moses 
and his law and the era of the old testament; but 
in the high priest and the most holy place into 
which he entered once every year and made ar 
offering for himself and for the sins of the people 
we see typified Jesus Christ, our High Priest, his 
death and offering and the era or dispensation of 
grace (Tit. 2:11; 3:4, 5), which has been ushered 
in by God through Jesus Christ for the everlasting 
comfort and salvation of all penitent or converted 
and believing souls. 

There was also placed between the tabernacle 
of the congregation and the altar a laver, and in it 
was put water for washing, for Aaron and his sons 
washed their hands and their feet therein (Ex. 
30:18; 40:7, 30), for they had to wash themselves 
when they wished to enter the tent of the congrega- 
tion or come to the altar, as the Lord had com- 
manded them. This typifies to us that all who would 
go into the house of the Lord to serve God and 
-make an offering unto the Lord, must purify them- 
selwés from all the’ filthiness of the spirit and the 
flesh, and must lift up holy hands unto God, and 
must wash away all evil lusts and desires, which 
war against the soul, with the water of the Holy 
Ghost; for he who would serve God and make an 
offering to him must do so with a pure heart, and 
with a good conscience, and with unfeigned faith, 
yea, in Spirit and in truth, or it is an abomination 
and a sacrilege to God. Hence it is written: “Keep 
thy foot when thou goest to the house of God, and 
be more ready to hear, than to give the sacrifice of 
fools: for they consider not that they do evil” 


264 The Tabernacle of Moses. 


(Prov. 5:1). And “the sacrifice of the wicked is 
an abomination to the Lord” (Prov. 15:8; 21:27). 
Also “unto them that are defiled and unbelieving is 
nothing pure” (Tit. 1:15), and an evil man cannot 
say or do that which is good (Matt. 7:18). 

Furthermore it must be remembered that in the 
holy of holies was a golden candlestick with its 
seven branches and with its seven lights or candles, 
which were continually burning before the Lord 
and were never put out. This candlestick clearly 
prefigures Christ Jesus. The pure gold of the 
candlestick represents (according to our’ under- 
standing) the Most Holy, both the divinity and 
humanity of Jesus Christ. The seven branches of 
the candlestick represent the seven spirits resting 
upon Jesus, of which the prophet Isaiah says: 
“There shall come forth a rod out of the stem of 
Jesse, and a Branch shall grow out of his roots: 
and the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the 
spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of 
counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of 
the fear of the Lord; and shall: make him quick of 
understanding in the fear of the Lord” (Isa. 11: 1-3). 

These seven spirits rest upon Jesus, and are 
represented by the seven branches of the candle- 
stick. The seven burning lights of the candlestick 
represent the seven powers of the seven spirits of 
Christ, as well as the glory or brightness of his 
divine word, which is an everlasting and true light, 
as jthe.. prophet :says.(Psa.,.19.;7; 11939053 Tsa. 
60:19, 20, etc.). And the fact that this candlestick 
is an tnti-type of Christ, although it stood in the 
first sanctuary or holy place, indicates to us that in 
the law there are embodied shadows, promises and 
prophecies of Christ. | 

In the first sanctuary was also the golden table, 
and on the table the shew-bread continually before 
the Lord, and no one was permitted to eat thereof 
but the priest alone and the sons of Aaron (Ex. 
23: 23-30; Matt. 12:4; Ex. 29:32, 33, etc.). This 
table with the shew-bread represents the holy scrip- 
ture and God’s word, which is the bread of life and 
food for the soul (Psa. 23:5: John 6:48-58). And 
that no one was permitted to eat of the shew=bread 


The Tabernacle of Modes. 265 


but the priests and the sons of Aaron alone shows 
us that God’s word is for none but true Christians, 
all of whom have been made kings and priests unto 
Christe (Rews2 :63:'5110 3+ Pet; 22.5509; etes),) and 
are given to him of God as children, as he himself 
says: “Behold, I and the children whom the Lord 
hath given me” (Isa. 8:18; Heb. 2:18). 

These children of the spiritual Aaron, Jesus 
Christ, have God’s word for food and the holy 
scripture as a table prepared by the Lord, as the 
prophet says: “Thou preparest a table before me in 
the presence of mine enemies” (Psa. 23:5). But 
those who are not of the generation and seed of 
Christ have no part at this table or in the shew- 
bread. Hence Jesus said to his disciples: “It is 
given to you to know the mysteries of the kingdom 
of heaven, but to them it is not given” (Matt. 
AS <1): 

In the first sanctuary there was also the golden 
altar upon which the high priest offered the costly 
incense unto the Lord as a sweet smelling savor. 
This points out to us that Jesus Christ, the true 
High Priest, offered his precious flesh and blood 
for us unto God as a sweetsmelling savor (Heb. 
Bi 25016: 20 pri8: ly Eph: 5:2), by ithe fire: of his 
love, and that by grace we have become a royal 
priesthood, and that according to the example of 
Christ we should therefore bring and offer unto God 
our heavenly Father spiritual and living sacrifices 
which through Jesus Christ are acceptable to him 
(Rom. 12:1; 1 Pet. 2:5). 

All these figures were in the first sanctuary, and 
this for the afore-mentioned reason that through 
them the law points to Christ, by means of patterns, 
promises and prophecies, and are the “bringing in 
of a better hope” (Heb. 7:19). 

But in the holiest of all was the ark of shittim 
(accacia) wood, overlaid with pure gold, and is a 
figure of the Christian Church, as was also the ark 
of Noah ' (Ex:' 25:10; Gens 6214-163 )1 -Pet. +3: 20, 
21). In this ark were the tables (tablets) upon 
which God had written the ten commandments with 
his finger, and this signifies to us that God has given 
his law into the hearts of Christians and has written 


266 The Tabernacle of Moses. 


his law therein by the Holy Spirit as upon tables 
of flesh (Jer. 31:33; 2 Cor. 3:3; Heb. 8:10). In 
the ark was also the pot of manna, a figure pointing 
to Christ Jesus, the true bread of heaven and the 
everlasting Word of the Father (John 1:1; 6:51; 
1 John 1:1), by which the soul shall live (Matt. 
4:4). The figurative bread of heaven was in a 
golden vessel, which signifies to us that the hearts 
of believers, wherein God’s word shall abide, must 
be pure, clean and unalloyed. 

In the ark was also the rod of Aaron, which, 
among all the twelve rods of the twelve tribes of 
Israel, was the only one that became green or 
budded (Num. 17:10; Heb. 9:4), although it had 
been dead, which signifies and reminds that Jesus 
Christ was chosen of God as a High Priest above 
all his brethren and fellows (Psa. 45:7; Heb. 1:9), 
and that through him the curse of the law was re- 
moved (Gal. 3:13, 14) and has been changed into 
blessing, so that instead of the law, which struck 
terror and fear into mankind, we have received the 
comforting and saving gospel (Rom. 3:23). 

Upon the ark also there stood the mercy-seat 
(Ex. 25:17), which was made of pure gold, and is 
a figure pointing to Christ Jesus, who is given us 
of God a Mercy-seat and exalted the Head of the 
Church (Rom. 3:25; Heb. 5:3; Eph. 1:22; 4:15), 
the same as the mercy-seat was placed on top of 
the ark; and over the mercy-seat, between the two 
cherubims, was the place where God through Moses 
gave Israel his commandments, which signifies to 
us that God spoke through Jesus Christ and through 
him gave his.commandments to all Christians and 
that the doctrine of the gospel originally came from 
the invisible God through Jesus Christ (Heb. 1:1, 
23~ John 5+ 30,37: (P2163 828 18 40 deed) 

The two chérubiné. moreoune were made of 
pure gold and covered the mercy-seat with their 
wings, their faces looking one toward the other (Ex. 
25:20), which signifies the two testaments, which 
agree one with the other and unitedly point us to 
Christ, who is embodied in both testaments—the 
es the old and the beginning of the new (Rom. 


The Tabernacle of Moses. 267 


Now, whoever: will examine into these figures 
and their signification will clearly understand and 
know that the two sanctuaries, that is, the holy 
place and the holiest of all, portray and represent 
the two dispensations, that is, the dispensation of 
the law and that of the gospel; yea, the apostle has 
(as above stated) distinctly represented the first 
sanctuary and the sacrifices which were offered 
therein, and yet were imperfect, and therefore could 
make no one just or perfect (Heb. 9:9), as pointing 
to the dispensation of the law (Heb. 9:1); but the 
high priest and the offering made by him once every 
year in the holiest of all, he represents as pointing 
to Jesus Christ and to his one offering, from which 
it follows incontrovertibly that Jesus Christ made 
his offering in the holiest of all, and that therefore 
also the holiest of all, without doubt, represents the | 
dispensation of the new testament and of grace. 

But there are some who have not examined 
these figures, and have, moreover, not been satisfied 
with the apostolic explanation of the tabernacle or 
tent, but have found and devised a strange ex- 
planation, namely, that by the tabernacle they make 
a distinction between Christians. Some they place 
into the court, some into the holy place. and some 
into the holiest of all. For these they have found 
two names, viz, those whom they place into the 
court and into the holy place they call the children 
of Esau, those whom they place into the holiest of 
all they call the children of Jacob. The children of 
Esau they call warriors, carnal and firstborn chil- 
dren of God; the thildren of Jacob they call con- 
quefrors, spiritual and newborn children of God. 

But this explanation of the tabernacle is in every 
way contrary to the sacred scripture and not in 
conformity with the gospel; for, in the first place, 
Esau is not figurative of the Christians, but of the 
Jews or Israelites; but Jacob is a type of Christian- 
ity, for when Rebecca had conceived by Isaac and 
the children struggled together within her womb, 
and she was troubled because of it, the Lord God 
said to her: “Two nations are in thy womb, and 
two manner of people shall be separated from thy 
bowels; and the one people shall be stronger than 


268 The Tabernacle of Moses. 


the other (overcome the other) people; and the 
elder shall serve the younger” (Gen. 25:23). These 
words must be carefully noted, namely, what God 
says of two nations, and that the two nations shall 
be divided, and that one people should be stronger 
than (or overcome) the other, and lastly says that 
the elder shall serve the younger. 

In the first place God speaks of two nations, 
therefore these words are not spoken of Christians 
only, for the reason that Christians are one united, 
holy nation, a chosen generation, a royal priesthood 
(Gal. 3:28; 1 Pet. 2:9; Eph. 4:4; -Ex,.19:6),\a 
church having one God, one Lord, one Holy Spirit. 
one Christian faith, one baptism, the same promise 
and the same hope of salvation. 

Since then there is such unity among true Chris- 
tians, yea, since they are one body in Christ Jesus 
(Rom: 12: 455 3:-deCor. 10:17 3... Eph. <1.23,-ete)), 
therefore they cannot be divided among themselves 
or constitute two separate nations or peoples. But 
the two nations of whom the Lord spoke to Rebecca 
are the Edomites and the Israelites, who descend 
from Esau and Jacob or Israel, between whom 
there was great and strong enmity. Hence it is not 
compatible with truth to call some Christians the 
children of Esau and some the children of Jacob. 
In the second place God said to Rebecca that 
two manner of people should be separated from her 
bowels. This is said literally of Esau and Jacob; 
for the Edomites were the enemies and persecutors 
of the Israelites, as the prophet laments to the Lord 
over Edom, saying: “Remember, O Lord, the chil- 
dren of Edom in the day of Jerusalem; who said, 
Rase it, rase it, even to the foundation thereof” 
(Psa. 187:7). For this reason God threatens the 
Edomites through Obadiah, saying: “Thy mighty 
men, O Teman, shall be dismayed, to the end that 
every one of the mount of Esau may be cut off by 
slaughter, for thy violence against thy brother 
Jacob” (Obad. 1:9, 10). 

Since then matters stood thus between Israel 
and Edom, how can a Christian be compared to 
Esau? For Christians are never two separate peo- 
ples who hate and persecute one another as Esau 


The Tabernacle of Moses. 269 


hated and persecuted Jacob, but they are called of 
God to peace (1 Cor. 7:15), yea, they are baptized 
by one Spirit into one body (1 Cor. 12:13), and are 
thus knit together, and whoever is not of one heart, 
soul and spirit with the body of Christ is no Chris- 
tian. Moreover, of two people, that is, of the Jews 
and Gentiles, Christ, by his death and precious 
blood, has made one (Eph. 2:14); he has gathered 
all his sheep into one fold (John 10:16), which is 
readily understood to mean the unity of Christians, 
and that therefore no Christian may be considered 
an Edomite or a son of Esau. 

In the third place the Lord God said to Rebecca 
that one people should be stronger than (or over- 
come) the other people. This came to pass in a 
literal and in a spiritual sense; for, speaking liter- 
ally, the children of Jacob overcame the children of 
Esau and ruled over them, as may be read in the 
Books of Kings and the Chronicles. And, in a 
spiritual sense, the children of Jacob, that is, the 
true Christians, have superseded the children of 
Esau, that is, the Jews; for the royal sceptre is 
taken from the Jews, their temple is destroyed, the 
priesthood together with the altar and the sacrifice 
is all lost (Hos. 3:4). Beside this, because of their 
unbelief and disobedience, the kingdom of God was 
taken from the Jews and given to the Gentiles 
(Matt. 21:43; Acts 13:46), who by their faith in 
Jesus Christ have obtained all the righteousness of 
the Jews (which they sought to obtain by the works 
of the law); for the victory of Christians over all 
their enemies is their pure faith in Jesus Christ 
(1 John 5:4), and the righteousness that avails 
before God does not come by the works of the law, 
but by faith in Jesus Christ (Rom. 3: 20-22), and 
those who have such faith are the true children of 
Abraham (Rom. 9:7-11; Gal. 3:16), and in the 
true Isaac, the promised Seed (Christ Jesus), shall 
they be called and blessed; they are the spiritual 
Israel, who have for their King Jesus Christ, whose 
name is called Wonderful, Counsellor, the Mighty 
God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace. 
Of the increase of his government and peace there 
shall be no end, upon the throne of David, and upon 


270 The Tabernacle of Moses. 


his kingdom, to order it and to establish it with 
judgment and with justice from henceforth even 
forever (Isa. 9:6, 7), and the sceptre of his kingdom 
is an everlasting sceptre (Psa. 45:6, 7; Heb. 1:8). 
Thus have the Christians overcome the Jews by 
their faith in Jesus Christ, who is a King forever, 
and the sceptre of his kingdom is an everlasting 
sceptre, that shall not be taken away, as was the 
sceptre of the Jews (Gen. 49:10). 

- In the fourth place, God said to Rebecca: “The 
elder (or greater) shall serve the younger” (lesser) 
(Rom. 9:12). In a literal sense this became true 
in the case of Jacob and Esau, but in a spiritual 
sense it is true of Jews and Christians.. According 
to the letter, and the figure, Esau was the elder 
and greater, while Jacob was the younger and 


smaller, or less; nevertheless Esau was made the > 


servant of his brother Jacob by their father Isaac 
(Gen. 27:37). In the case of the Jews and the 
Christians, God, the heavenly Father, originally 
chose the Jews or the children of Israel for his 
people above all nations of the earth and loved them 
as a firstborn son (Mal. 1:2, 3; Deut. 21:15), even 
as Isaac loved Esau, and adorned them with glory, 
even as Esau had costly garments (Bar. 4), and 
confided and revealed his word to them. 

But they looked only upon the outward works 
of the law and the letter of the prophecies, and 
imagined that they could obtain the promised bless- 
ing of God by their own righteousness, not knowing 
that Jesus Christ is the true promised Seed, of 
whom God said to the patriarch Abraham: “In thy 
seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed” 
(Gen. 22:18). This seed is Christ; as Paul tells 
the Galatians (Gal. 3:16). 

_ This Jesus the Jews in their materialistic con- 
ception of the scripture rejected, and sought to 
establish their own righteousness, thus not being 
obedient to the true, divine righteousness (Rom. 
10: 3-10), for in their pursuit after the righteousness 
that is by the law they failed to obtain the real 
blessing, just as Esau with all his pursuit and catch- 
ing of game was unable to obtain the chief blessing 
of his father; but Jaeob obtained it ‘and came into 


The Tabernacle of Moses. 271 


the estate of Esau, that is, the Gentiles by their 
faith in Christ Jesus are accepted and have become 
the true children and heirs of God. On this matter 
God says, through the prophet: “It shall come to 
pass, that in the place where it was said unto them, 
Ye are not my people, there it shall be said unto 
them, Ye are the sons of the living God” (Hos. 
1:10)). And Paul says to the Romans: “What 
shall we say then? That the Gentiles which fol- 
lowed not after righteousness, have attained unto 
righteousness, even the righteousness which is of 
faith. But Israel, which followed after the law of 
righteousness, hath not attained to the law of right- 
eousness. Wherefore? Because they sought it not 
by faith, but as it were by the nS of the law” 
(Rom. 9: 30-32). 

These words clearly testify to the overthrow of 
the. Jews because of their unbelief, and to the 
choosing of the Gentiles because of their faith in 
Jesus Christ, whereby they obtained the blessing of 
God, the heavenly Father; for as Isaac, when he 
smelled the savory and pleasent odor of the raiment 
in which Jacob was clothed, blessed him, so also 
God, the Lord and heavenly Father, however slight 
the savory odor of the offerings of Jesus Christ 
with whom the Gentiles, who by their faith and true 
baptism accepted him, have clothed themselves and 
have become reconciled, blessed them and made 
them: children and heirs of his kingdom (Gen. 
27: 27). 

From all these words it is evident that Esau was 

a figure of the Jews and Jacob a figure of the 
Christians. In order to show this still more clearly 
we will briefly present three other figures which 
have a bearing upon and point to the figures of 
Esau and Jacob. 

The first is the figure of Hagar and Sarah, to- 
gether with their two sons, Ishmael and Isaac. Of 
these Ishmael was the firstborn son of Abraham, 
while Isaac was born after him; but inasmuch as 
Ishmael was born of the bondmaid and Isaac of 
the freewoman (Gal. 4:22), the elder had to serve 
the younger; for Ishmael with his mother was cast 
forth out of the house of Abraham (Gen. 21:14), 


272 The Tabernacle of Moses. 


while Isaac with his mother remained and became 
the rightful heir. 

This figure of the two wives of Abraham and 
their sons the apostle Paul explains as signifying 
the two covenants (Gal. 4: 24-26), Hagar and her 
son Ishmael answering to the old testament and 
the Jews, but Sarah with her son Isaac answering 
to the new testament and the Christians. Now, 
just as Hagar was superseded by Sarah and on her 
account was sent out of Abraham’s house, and just 
as Ishmael, although a son of Abraham, had to give 
way to Isaac, the true heir, so.also the Mosaic law 
of figures and shadows had its end in Christ Jesus, 
and at the advent of the Christian Church the Jew- 
ish synagogue had to become the smaller or lesser; 
just as is the case with maidservant and housewife, 
so the synagogue had to make way and be put away 
entirely. 

The second figure is that of Pharez and Zarah, 
the twin sons of Judah. When these were about 
to be born, Zarah put forth his hand, and the mid- 
wife took and bound upon his hand a scarlet thread, 
when he again withdrew his hand, after which 
Pharez came forth first ; hence he was called Pharez, 
because he parted the middle wall between him and 
his brother. Afterwards Zarah was born who had 
the scarlet thread upon his hand which the midwife 
had tied there. Zarah, who at the time of birth 
showed himself first, but was born last, represents 
the Jews who, from being the first, became the last, 
as Jesus testifies in the gospel, saying: “The last 
shall be first, and the first last” (Matt. 20:16; 
19:30; Luke 13:30). With these words Jesus 
really meant the Jews and Gentiles, for the Jews 
were the first, yea, they were the chosen people of 
God. Therefore also Jesus said to his disciples 
when he sent them forth the first time: ‘Go not 
into the way of the Gentiles, and into any city of 
the Samaritans enter ye not: but go rather to the 
lost sheep of the house of Israel” (Matt. 10:5, 6). 

Thus the Jews were the first, and the grace of 
God was offered to them first; but they rejected 
Christ, therefore they became the last (Acts 13: 46). 
It must also be noted that Zarah, who in his birth 


The Tabernacle of Moses. 273 


had a scarlet thread bound to his hand, signifies to 
us that to the Jews was given a law that punishes 
and kills, for according to the law (by which many 
sins were punished with death, 2 Cor. 3:6-9) much 
blood was shed, which shedding of blood and the 
sternness of the law are represented and prefigured 
by the scarlet thread which Zarah had upon his 
hand. 

But Pharez represents the Christians, for be- 
cause of him the middle wall of partition between 
him and his brother was parted, therefore his name 
was called Pharez. Thus also for the sake of the 
Christians the middle wall of partition which was 
between the Jews and the Gentiles was taken away 
by Jesus Christ, who of two people made one (Eph. 
2:14-17), and as Pharez at the time of birth, from 
being the last, became the first by breaking the 
middle wall that was between the two (for so long 
as it was not broken he could not become the first), 
and in like manner as the Gentiles accepted Jesus 
and believed in him were born of God unto the 
Christian Church, which is the mother of all Chris- 
tians (Gal. 4:26), and as Christ by his death took 
away all that separated them from God, so they, 
by the death of Christ and by their faith in his 
name, have, from being the last, come to be first. 

The third figure is that of Manasseh and Eph- 
raim, the two sons of Joseph, who, when he brought 
them before his father that he might bless them, 
put Manasseh, who was the elder, at Jacob’s right 
hand and Ephraim at the left. But Jacob crossed 
his hands, placing the-right hand upon the head of 
the younger, and the left hand upon the head of 
the elder. When Joseph saw it he was displeased 
and tried to change his father’s right hand from the 
head of Ephraim to the head of Manasseh (Gen. 
48:17), and said to his father: ‘Not so, my father, 
for this (Manasseh) is the firstborn; put thy right 
hand upon his head. And his father refused and 
said, I know it, my son, I know it: he (Manasseh) 
shall also become a people, and he also shall be 
great; but truly his younger brother shall be greater 
than he, and his seed shall become a multitude of 
nations” (Gen. 48:18, 19). 


18 


274 The Tabernacle of Moses. 


This came to pass literally and spiritually, for 
_ in a literal sense Ephraim surpassed and super- 
seded Manasseh, for the ark of the covenant was 
at Shiloh, where therefore the worship of God was 
conducted, and according to the law Israel had to 
gather there, and the rulership of Israel in the time 
of the judges was mostly under Ephraim; but 
because of sin Shiloh was destroyed and Ephraim 
rejected, and the tribe of Judah was chosen by the 
Lord, and the temple built at Jerusalem. The same 
thing, in a spiritual sense, also came to pass with 
the Jews and the Gentiles, as has already been 
sufficiently explained above. 

Thus these four figures, viz, of Ishmael and 
Isaac. of Esau and Jacob, of Pharez and Zarah, and 
of Manasseh and Ephraim, are in complete accord. 
If one is understood, all are understood, but we 
have presented them all that the figure of Esau and 
Jacob might be more easily understood. 

Since we have thus explained the figure of Esau 
and Jacob according to the humble gift given us 
of God, we will continue to write a little more on 
the same, inasmuch as some (we know not for what 
reason or by what scripture) have divided the 
Christians into warriors and conquerors, into the 
carnal and firstborn, and the spiritual and regen- 
erated children of God. 

They divide the Christians into warriors and 
conquerors, but we maintain that by the grace of 
God all pious Christians are both warriors and con- 
querors. The warfare of the Christians is of many 
kinds, for they have to war against their own flesh, 
against sin, and against Satan and his servants. 
Of the strife against the flesh Paul writes thus to 
the Galatians: “The flesh lusteth against the Spirit: 
and the Spirit against the flesh: and these are con- 
trary the one to the other: so that ye cannot do 
the things that ye would” (Gal. 5:17). 

Christians have also to fight against besetting 
sins (Heb. 12:1), against the world, against Satan 
and his servants. Of this warfare Paul speaks to 
the Ephesians, as every one may there read (Eph. 
6:12). Such a strife Paul had when he said: “Lest 
I should. be exalted above measure through the 


The Tabernacle of Moses. 275 


abundance of the revelations, there was given to 
-me a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to 
buffet me, lest I should be exalted above measure. 
For this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that it 
might depart from me. And he said unto me, My 
grace is sufficient for thee: for my strength is made 
perfect in weakness” (Eph. 6: 7-9). 

In these words of the apostle we note that God 
permits his saints to be tempted of Satan, to the 
end that they may learn to recognize their human 
weakness, and submit themselves under the mighty 
hand of God and trust in the grace of God, for then 
they will be strengthened by the grace of the Lord, 
and all Satan’s temptations.cannot harm them. Yea, 
Jesus Christ, our Lord and Savior, to whom be 
praise forever, himself strove with Satan and over- 
came him. For, when he had been baptized of 
John he was led by the Spirit into the wilderness 
to, be tempted of the devil. There Satan came to 
him and assailed him with three kinds of tempta- 
tion, but the Lord Jesus Christ successfully resisted 
all the attacks and sophistries of the devil with the 
sword of the Spirit (Matt. 4:1-11). 

This came to pass for the instruction and ad- 
monition of all pious Christians, that they may 
know how they must be baptized with Christ, how 
they must be led by the Spirit into the wilderness, 
and how they must strive with Satan and overcome 
him. Of this victory John writes: “I have written 
unto you, young men, because ye are strong, and 
the word of God abideth in you, and. ye have over- 
come the wicked one” (1 John 2:14). And again: 
“Whatsoever is born of God overcometh the world; 
and this is the victory that overcometh the world, 
even our faith” (1 John 5:4). And in Revelations 
it is written that the true Christians overcame the 
dragon and his angels by the blood of the Lamb, 
and the testimony of Jesus Christ (Rev. 12:16, 17). 

Therefore it is to be understood by every Chris- 
tian that Christians may not be divided into war-_ 
riors and conquerors, as though some Christians 
were continually fighting and never overcoming, 
while others had made a complete conquest and no 
longer needed to strive. This is not the case, for 


276 The Tabernacle of Moses. 


striving and overcoming rightly belong one to an- 
other, for that striving is in vain where there is no 
conquering, and no one may conquer unless he 
strive lawfully. In short, every Christian has his 
temptations (for the life of man on earth is a 
battle), from the temptations comes the strife, but 
he that strives manfully and lawfully overcomes, 
and he that overcomes receives the crown, and 
shall with Christ inherit and possess all things 
(Rev..2:7, Ji, 17: 3-2) 4. burthen, «we id ve onl 
ready said that some strangely divide Christians 
into spiritual and carnal children of God; the car- 
nal they call the firstborn children of God and the 
spiritual they call the regenerated children of God. 
To this we say, in the first place, that we do not 
read or find anything in the scriptures about carnal 
children of God, for Christ himself says: ° “God 
is a Spirit”; “and that which is born of the Spirit 
is spirit’ (John 4:24; 3:6). Now it is clear and 
evident that all Christians are born of God (who 
is a Spirit), therefore they also are spiritual, yea, 
partakers of the divine nature, as the apostle Peter 
says: “Whereby are given unto us exceeding great 
and precious promises: that by these ye might be 
the partakers of the divine nature, having escaped 
the corruption that is in the world through lust” 
(2 bet. bi). 

Thus then Christians are one in Spirit. with 
God, of whom they are born. But here some raise 
the objection that Paul writes to the Corinthians 
(who were also Christians): “I, brethren, could 
not speak unto you as unto spiritual, but as unto 
carnal, even as unto babes in Christ. I have fed 
you with milk, and not with meat: for hitherto ye 
were not able to bear it, neither yet now are ye 
able. For ye are yet carnal: for whereas there is 
among you envying, and strife, and divisions, are 
ye_not carnal, and walk as men?” (1 Cor. 3=1-3y. 

From these words of Paul some would prove 
that weak and young Christians are and should be 
called the carnal children of God. But we say that 
Paul’s words are not to be thus understood. The 
reason why Paul called the Corinthians carnal was 
because they were in one sense carnally minded, 


The Tabernacle of Moses. space’. 4 


as the apostle James says: “From whence come 
wars and fightings among you? Come they not 
- hence, even of your lusts that war in your mem- 
bers ?” (Jas..4:1). 

Carnal desires and ignorance having been found 
to exist among the Corinthians and in one respect 
had prevailed over the Spirit, therefore Paul calls 
them carnal; nevertheless, so far as the new birth, 
faith, and receiving the gift of the Holy Spirit were 
concerned, they were also spiritual, according to 
the words of the Lord: “That which is born of the 
Spirit is spirit” (John 3:6); for “he that is joined 
to the Lord:is one spirit” (1 Cor. 6:17), and “ye 
are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that 
the Spirit of God dwell in you. Now if any man 
have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his” 
(Rom. 8:9). From all this it is readily to be under- 
stood that all Christians are spiritual, although they 
are assailed by the flesh, yea, overrun and assailed 
with human weaknesses and mistakes. 

Further, some (as above noted) make a division 
of firstborn and newborn children of God. They 
call those firstborn who are still weak and young 
in the faith; but those who are strong and manly 
in faith they call the regenerated children of God. 
But we contradict this and for this reason: The 
entire holy scripture speaks of one new birth of 
God which takes place through the incorruptible 
seed of God (1 Pet. 1:23), through the power of 
the Holy Spirit, by true faith in Jesus Christ; for 
he that believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born of 
God, as John says (1 John 5:1).. This new birth 
is also called regeneration in the scripture, for the 
reason that in the first place man is born of Adam 
in the flesh, and in the Spirit born again of God. 
Hence it is that the scripture also speaks of an out- 
ward and an inner man; the outward is called 
carnal, earthly, corruptible, being corrupt and sin- 
ful in kind and nature (Col. 3:5), but the inner 
the scripture calls the hidden man of the heart 
(1 Pet..3:4), who after God is created in righteous- 
ness, holiness and truth, and therefore is spiritual, 
heavenly, incorruptible, yea, partaking of the divine 
in kind and nature (Eph. 4:24; 2 Pet. 1:4). 


278 The Tabernacle of Moses. 


Thus Christians are born (or regenerated) once 
of God, after which they grow in righteousness un- 
til they become men in faith (Eph. 4:13) and in ~ 
the knowledge of Jesus Christ, the Son of God. 
Just as the natural child after the natural birth, by 
God’s blessing and in the course of nature, grows 
up and increases by means of food and drink, so 
also Christians are born once of God, after which 
they grow by partaking of the bread of life, and by 
the sincere (or unadulterated) milk, that is, the 
word of God, as Peter says: “Laying aside all 
malice, and all guile, and hypocrisies, and envies, 
and all evil speakings, as newborn babes, desire 
the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow 
‘thereby «(1 Pet 2152) 

Thus the children of God grow, and become con- 
tinually stronger and more manly in faith and more 
perfect in the knowledge of God and of his Son 
Jesus Christ. But they are not born of God more 
than once, and hence young and weak Christians 
cannot be called firstborn children of God; for, if 
we look at and note the letter of the law, we see 
that in the old testament the first child (in the 
family) was the greatest in importance, but if we 
observe the spirit of the new testament we see that 
the apostles were the firstborn children of God, 
partly because they were the first chosen by Christ 
to be called unto faith and the ministry and to come 
into the fellowship of the gospel, and partly also 
because they received the first, that is, the most 
glorious and greatest gifts of the Holy Spirit, as 
Paul says: “Ourselves also, which have the first- 
fruits of the Spirit” (Rom. 8:23). And James says: 
The Father of lights . . . . begat us with the word 
of truth, that we should be a kind of firstfruits of 
his creatures” (Jas. 1:17, 18). We read also in 
Revelations of one hundred and forty and four 
thousand who were redeemed from among men, as 
the firstfruits unto God and to the Lamb, and these 
firstfruits are pure virgins or maidens, in whose 
mouth was found no guile, and who are without 
fault before the throne of God (Rev. 14:3-5). From 
all this it is evident that young and weak Christians 
are not to be called firstborn children of God, but 


The Tabernacle of Moses. 279 


that this name much more properly belongs to the 
strong and full-grown than to the weak and im- 
niature. ; 

There are some, also, who maintain that afte 
the day of Pentecost the apostles no longer sinned, 
yea, that they could not sin, and that all who with 
the apostles have received the Pentecostal Spirit 
(as they say) and have attained unto the victory 
and regeneration of God, can no longer sin. To 
this we answer that the scripture has included all 
mankind under sin and considers not one (except 
Jesus Christ alone) as being free from sin, for thus 
says Ecclesiastes: “There is not a just man upon 
earth, that doeth good and sinneth not” (Eccl. 
7:20). That is, Solomon says: There is not a man 
that does not sin (1 Kings 8:46). And David says: 
“Lord, . . . enter not into judgment with thy 
servant: for in thy sight shall no man living be 
justified” (Psa. 148: 2). 

But now some think that these scriptures refer 
only to young and weak Christians who are still 
new in the faith, and have not yet received a strong 
spirit of faith and knowledge of Jesus Christ. But 
against all such opinions, David, the great prophet 
of God, testifies and declares: “I acknowledged my 
sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid. 
I said, I will confess my transgressions unto the 
Lord; and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. 
For this shall every one that is godly pray unto 
thee in a time when thou mayest be found” (Psa. 
32:5, 6).. David was a man of God, and was gifted 
‘of God with great wisdom, yea, with a spirit of 
prophecy’; nevertheless even he sinned, confessed 
his sin before God, and prayed for forgiveness of 
his sin, and also testified that every one that is godly 
should do likewise. Jesus himself confirmed this in 
the gospel, for he taught his apostles a prayer in 
which they continually, as often as they offered it, 
had to confess their debt before God the Father and 
ask him for forgiveness (Matt. 6:12), and this 
Jesus did to teach all his disciples humility, and to 
take away all false righteousness out of their hearts; 
for “God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace to 
the humble” (1 Pet. 5:5), yea, a broken heart and 


280 The Tabernacle of Moses. 


a contrite spirit that is humbled and grieved because 
of its sin, seeks grace and mercy of God, doubts 
self and trusts wholly in God’s infinite goodness, 
is a pleasing and acceptable sacrifice and a sweet 
savor unto God (Psa. 34:19; 51:17; Isa. 57:15). 

Therefore all godly people have thus humbled 
themselves before God and acknowledged them- 
selves sinners; for the Spirit of God, which is a 
spirit of wisdom and of humility, put it into them 
and taught them to do so. By this Spirit the 
prophet called unto the Lord, saying: “If thou, 
Lord, shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord, who shall 
stand?” (Psa. 180:3). By the same Spirit the 
apostles testified (also after the day of Pentecost), 
as James says: “In many things we offend (or 
stumble) all” (Jas. 3:2). Moreover, Paul in clear 
language testifies to Peter’s error (also after the 
day of Pentecost) and says that he walked not up- 
rightly according to the truth of the gospel, “in- 
asmuch that Barnabas also was carried away with 
their dissimulation” (Gal. 3:11-14), and for this 
reason he openly rebuked Peter. And John says: 
“If we say we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, 
and the truth is not in us. If we confess our sins, 
he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and 
to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. If we say 
that we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and 
his word is not in us” (1 John 1: 8-10). 

From these words of the apostle it may be 
readily understood what evil comes from false and 
self-righteousness, viz, a man, if he will not con- 
fess himself a sinner, deceives, firstly, himself (ac- 
cording to the apostle’s word), for he considers 
himself more pious than he is and does not heed 
the grace of God; secondly, the truth is not in him, 
for he lies before God when he says that he has no 
sin; thirdly, he makes God a liar; for the eternal 
and true God has testified by the mouth of his 
saints that all men are sinners, as the above quoted 
words clearly show. 

The scripture then includes all men (except 
Jesus Christ alone) under sin (Rom. 3:10; Gal. 
3:22). Again the scripture says: ‘Whosoever is 
born of God doth not commit sin; for his seed re- 


The Tabernacle of Moses. 281 


maineth in him: and he cannot sin, because he is 
born of God” (1 John 3:9). Hence it must be 
remembered that a Christian has two beings in 
him: a carnal and sinful, which he inherits from 
Adam, and a spiritual and divine, which is infused 
and imparted by God through Jesus Christ; for 
the Lord Jesus Christ himself says: “That which 
is born of the flesh is flesh: that which is born of 
the Spirit, is spirit” (John 3:6). Now, since both 
births take place in all Christians, that is, since 
they, on the one hand, are born of the flesh, and 
on the other hand, of the Spirit, therefore they must 
have both a carnal and a spiritual nature; accord- 
ing to the outward man they are carnally minded, 
but according to the inner man they are spiritually 
minded; through their carnal nature they fall and 
sin; but after the spiritual nature they have a de- 
sire for righteousness and to do God’s will. The 
carnal nature must be overcome by the Spirit of 
God; yet flesh and blood retains its nature as long 
as life lasts; therefore, although a man has partaken 
of the spiritual and divine nature, he still remains 
weak and sinful, for he remains human, he is flesh 
-and blood, and therein no good thing dwells, as 
Paul says (Rom. 7:18); for through the disobedi- 
ence of the first man it is corrupt, sinful and de- 
sirous of evil, so that no living man can be entirely 
innocent before God, and this because of his wicked 
nature and his carnal lusts which assail him and 
adhere to him. For this reason even the righteous 
are reproved by the scripture. 

Again, after the justified person is born of God 
and thus has become a partaker of the divine nature 
(2 Pet. 1:4), after he is a member of Jesus Christ 
and is of one Spirit with the Lord, and by faith 
Christ dwells in the heart (Rom. 12:4; 1 Cor. 
12:27) and the Holy Spirit has been given him of 
God as an assurance or seal of salvation (2 Cor. 
1:22; Eph. 4:4; 1 Cor. 6:17), he may no longer 
be charged thus; for “who shall lay anything to the 
charge of God’s elect?” (Rom. 8:33), who is united 
with God, who has God for a merciful Father, Jesus 
‘Christ as an Advocate, Mediator, Intercessor and 
High Priest, and who is sealed and assured unto 


a 


989 The Tabernacle of Moses. 


God unto the day of redemption? Therefore Paul 
says: “There is therefore now no condemnation to 
them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after 
the flesh, but after the Spirit’ (Rom. 8:1), Hence, 
“who shall lay anything to the charge of God’s 
elect? It is God that justifieth. Who is he that 
eondemneth? It is Christ that died, yea, rather, 
that is risen again, who is even at the right hand 
of God, who also maketh intercession for us” (Rom. 
8:33, 34). 

It must therefore be recognized that every 
Christian has sin, and must confess himself a sin- 
ner, that he may humble himself under the mighty 
hand of God and pray the Lord for his mercy. Thus 
the scripture remains true and unbroken which puts 
all men under condemnation and reproves them as 
sinners; but sin is not imputed to Christians, but 
has been forgiven them through the innocent death 
of Jesus Christ and is covered with his everlasting 
love, by which he offered himself up for us for an 
everlasting atonement for our sins, taking upon 
himself our burden, and paying our debt with his 
bitter suffering, and making us a free gift of all 
that he has, so that he is one with us and we with 
him, whereby we are made acceptable unto God, 
yea, accounted as saints of God. Therefore David 
savs: “Blessed is he whose transgression is for- 
given, whose sin is covered. Blessed is the man 
unto whom the Lord imputeth not iniquity” (Psa. 
$21; 2). : 

On this subject enough has now been said for 
those who are kindly disposed, sympathetic and 
reasonable. We will further explain several pas- 
sages of scripture (which according to the letter 
seem to contradict one another), and by the grace 
ef God show Christians for their instruction how 
scripture must be treated, and not handle it with 
unclean hands, as some do. 

Christ says in the gospel: “He that cometh unto 
me shall never hunger; and he that believeth on 
me shall nevermore thirst” (John 6:35). In Ec- 
elesiasticus or Jesus Sirach the wisdom of God 
says: “They that eat me shall yet be hungry, and 
they that drink me shall yet be thirsty” (Sir. 24: 


The Tabernacle of Moses. 283 


21). In order to understand these scripture pas- 
Sages properly, it must be observed that Christ in 
reality speaks of that satisfying and quenching 
which all Christians at all times enjoy through 
God’s word and by the Holy Spirit and which they 
shall hereafter enjoy forever in all fullness; for 
since Christ is in them, and the Holy Spirit abides 
in them, they have at all times the bread of life 
for their soul-hunger, and for their thirst the water 
of the Holy Spirit; for Christ is the true bread of 
heaven, and he that eats of this bread, that is, he that 
believes the words of Christ and keeps them, his 
soul shall nevermore suffer hunger nor have lack 
of the bread of life. Christ also gives the water of 
life as an everlasting refreshing and quickening of 
souls, as he declared to the woman of Samaria: 
“Whosoever drinketh of this water shall thirst 
again: but whosoever drinketh of the water that 
I shall give him shall never thirst; but the water 
that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water 
springing up into everlasting life’ (John 4:13, 14). 
And again Jesus says: “He that believeth on me, 
as the scripture hath said, out of his belly shall 
flow rivers of living water” (John 7:38). But this 
he spake of the Spirit, as John says, “which they 
that believe on him should receive” (John 7:39). 
Now all true Christians, after having received 
the words of Christ, which is the bread of life; 
and the Spirit, which is the water of life, cannot 
suffer hunger or thirst so long as the word and 
Spirit of Christ abide in them. -But the real, per- 
fect, true satisfying and quenching they will not 
obtain until they will have been delivered from all 
tribulation and have entered into the fulness of the 
heavenly life and God is all in all, as Paul says, 
and as it is written of them in the book of Revela- 
tions (1 Cor. 15:28; Rev. 7:14-17): “These (which 
are clothed with white robes, v. 9) are they which | 
have come out of great tribulation, and have 
washed their robes, and made them white in the 
blood of the Lamb. Therefore are they before the 
throne of God, and serve him day and night in his 
temple: and he that sitteth on the throne shall 
dwell among them. And they shall hunger no more, 


284 The Tabernacle of Moses. 


neither thirst any more; neither shall the sun light 
on them, nor any heat. For the Lamb which is in 
the midst of the throne shall feed them, and shall 
lead them unto living fountains of waters: and God 
shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.” 

From these words it is clear and plain that the 
true satisfying and quenching shall come to the 
Christian after his tribulations have ended, when 
he has entered the everlasting habitation. This is 
the satisfying of hunger of which Jesus spoke; but 
Ecclesiasticus speaks of a hunger and thirst which 
ever remains in the Christian (Sir. 24:21), even 
though he has taken of the bread and water of life. 
This is the reason: A Christian who is of the right 
sort has at all times a desire to hear the word of 
God, that the gifts of the Holy Spirit may be in- 
creased in him, that he may grow in the knowledge 
of the Lord, and that he may become more right- 
-eous, purer and holier. Of such hunger and thirst 
‘Christ also speaks (Matt. 5:6): “Blessed are they 
which do hunger and thirst after righteousness: 
for they shall be filled.” In line with this thought 
Jesus says: “He that is of God, heareth the word 
of God.” And in Revelations the Spirit says: “He 
that is righteous, let him be righteous still; and 
he that is holy, let him be holy still” (Rev. 22:11). 
(German rendering: “Let him become more right- 
eous, . . . . let him become more holy’). So then 
a Christian always hungers for God’s word and 
thirsts after righteousness, for he finds therein great 
sweetness and good fruit, as David says: “The 
judgments of the Lord are true and righteous alto- 
gether. More to be desired are they than gold, yea, 
than much fine gold: sweeter also than honey and 
the honeycomb” (Psa. 19:9, 10). Again the same 
prophet David says: “How sweet are thy words 
unto my taste! Yea, sweeter than honey to my 
mouth!” (Psa. 119: 103). 

So then the words of Jesus Christ and the words 
of Jesus Sirach or Ecclesiasticus agree in this way 
that Christ ‘speaks of the eternal appeasing of hun- 
ger which shall come alone in the hereafter, while 
Ecclesiasticus speaks of the hunger and thirst which 
Christians have in this world for righteousness 


The Tabernacle of Moses. 985 


We will now, by God’s help, explain some other 
passages of scripture, which by some are wonder- 
fully and strangely interpreted and explained. 
The patriarch Jacob says: “I have seen God 
face to face” (Gen. 32:30). The evangelist and 
apostle says: “No man hath seen God at any time” 
(John 1:18). It must be here taken into considera- 
tion, in the first place, that God did not himself 
appear personally to the patriarch Jacob, but it 
was the angel of the Lord whom he saw and with 
whom he wrestled, and of whom he said: “I have 
seen God face to face.” And it is commonly known 
in the scripture that the angels, being messengers 
and ministers of God, stand in the place of God, 
and speak as in his person, and this because of their 
office and work which they perform. Thus the 
angel of the Lord spoke to Moses by the burning 
bush: “I am the God of thy father, the God of 
Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob” 
(Ex. 3:6). These words were not spoken by the 
Lord himself in person, but by the angel, who spoke 
in the person of the Lord, for thus says Stephen: 
“There appeared to him (Moses) in the wilderness 
of Mount Sinai an angel of the Lord in a flame of 
fire in a bush” (Acts 7:30), and spoke to him, and 
also that the law was given by the disposition 
of angels (Acts 7:53). Paul confirms this (Gal. 
3:19), and yet the scripture says that the Lord 
descended from heaven upon Mount Sinai with fire 
(Ex. 19:18) and gave the law, and said: “I am the 
Lord thy God, which have brought thee out of the 
land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage” (Ex. 
20:1). The Lord then did not personally come 
down from heaven, but an angel came in the Lord’s 
stead, and delivered the law to Moses. It was also 
an angel whom the patriarch Jacob saw, for Moses 
also saw the Lord face to face and spoke with him 
(Ex. 33:11), and yet he said to the Lord: “Shew 
me thy glory.” But the Lord said: “Thou canst 
not see my face: for there shall no man see me, 
and live.’ And the Lord. said further: “Behold, 
there is a place by me, and thou shalt stand upon 
a rock: and it shall come to pass, while my glory 
passeth by, that I will put thee in a clift of the rock, 


286 The Tabernacle of Moses. 


and will cover thee with my hand while I pass by: 
and I will take away my hand, and thou shalt see 
my back parts: but my face shall not be seen” 
(Ex. 33:18-23). For this reason John says that 
“no man hath seen God at any time.” Paul says 
that God is the “King of kings, and Lord of lords; 
who only hath immortality, dwelling in a light 
which no man can approach unto; whom no man 
hath seen, nor can see” (1 Tim. 6:15, 16). 

So now the words of the patriarch Jacob and 
of the evangelist and apostle agree beautifully; for 
the one says that he saw the Lord, that is, the 
angel of the Lord, face to face, while the other 
speaks of the eternal and invisible God, whose 
brightness and glory cannot be beheld by the eye 
of flesh. And what is true of the letter of the 
afore-mentioned passages of scripture is likewise 
true according to the Spirit, namely, as God in 
times past permitted the shadow of his ineffable 
glory to be seen by men through his angels, so 
also in these last times he has revealed his invisible 
Person and his divine nature through Jesus Christ, 
for Jesus is the brightness of the Father’s glory and 
the express image of his Person (2 Cor. 4:4; Col. 
1:15; Heb. 1:3). Therefore also he said to Philip: 
“He that hath seen me-hath seen the Father” (John 
14:9). Thus the invisible God is seen and known 
through Jesus Christ, his image; nevertheless 
Christians, because of the weakness of the flesh, 
are hindered and prevented so that they cannot at- 
tain to the perfect knowledge of the invisible God 
and his glory; for “eye hath not seen, nor ear 
heard, neither have entered into the heart of man 
the things which God hath prepared for them that 
love him” (Isa. 64:5; 1 Cor. 2:9). And in the 
Book of Wisdom it is written: “What man is he 
that can know the counsel of God? or who can 
think what the will of the Lord is? For the 
thoughts of mortal men are miserable, and our de- 
vices are but uncertain. For the corruptible body 
presseth down the soul, and the earthly tabernacle 
weigheth down the mind that museth upon many 
things. And hardly do we guess aright at the 
things that are upon earth, and with labor do we 


The Tabernacle of Moses. ~ 287 


find the things that are before us: but the things 
in heaven, who hath searched them out?” (Wis. of 
Sol. 9:13-16). Therefore the apostle says: “O 
the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and the 
knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his 
judgments, and his ways past finding out!” (Rom. 
11:33). And therefore the same apostle says: “We 
know in part, and we prophesy in part. But when 
that which is perfect is come, then that which is in 
part shall be done away. For now we see through 
a glass, darkly; but then face to face” (1 Cor. 
1329, 10,12). ~ 

From these words it is easy enough to under- 
stand that we shall see and know God more clearly, 
for it is now coming to pass what John says: “We 
know that, when Christ shall appear, we shall be 
like him; for we shall see him as he is” (1 John 
3:2). Therefore those err entirely who would try 
to prove or make it appear from the afore-men- 
tioned words of the patriarch Jacob that a man may 
attain to a perfect knowledge of God in this life. 
They try to verify this by several passages, viz, 
the words of the prophet Isaiah: “And all thy chil- 
dren shall be taught of the Lord” (Isa. 54:13; Jer. 
31:34, etc.). Also: “This shall be the covenant 
that I will make with the house of Israel: I will 
put my law into their inward parts, and write it in 
their hearts; and I will be their God, and they shall 
be my people.. And they shall teach no more every 
man his neighbor, and every man his brother, say- 
ing, Know the Lord: for they shall all know me, 
from the least of them unto the greatest of them” 
(Jer. 31: 33, 34; Heb. 10:16). They also say that 
in Revelations it is written that the city, that is, 
the heavenly Jerusalem, “had no need of the sun, 
neither of the moon, to shine in it; for the glory 
of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light 
thereof” (Rev. 21:23). 

This scripture they explain as pointing Xo the 
fact that a Christian could arrive at that stage in 
this world where he would need no more instruc- 
tion or admonition, but that God’s word was writ- 
ten in-his heart, and that he is taught inwardly 
through the Spirit without any outward words. But 


288 The Tabernacle of Moses. 


we say that Christians must hear the word of God 
continually as long as they live; for God’s word 
forever remains to all believers the power of God 
unto everlasting salvation (Isa. 40:5; 1 Pet. 1:25; 
1 Cor. 1:24; Rom. 1:16); but to all unbelievers 
unto condemnation and testimony against them; 
for “heaven and earth,” says Christ, “shall pass 
away, but my words shall not pass away” (Matt. 
5:18; 24:15). And David says: “Forever, O Lord, 
thy word is settled in heaven’ (Psa. 119: 89). 
We declare further, that a Christian has always 
plenty to learm in God's word, for the apostle says 
we must grow in the knowledge of the Lord (2 Pet. 
3:18); for, “if any man think that he knoweth 
anything, he knoweth nothing yet as he ought to 
know” (1 Cor. 8:2), but deceives himself. 

Therefore we must not so understand the fore- 
going scripture, or pervert and distort it as some 
do; for Christ himself makes the first passage 
(“they shall all be taught of God,” Isa. 54:13, etc.) 
apply to all believers in Christ; for they must all 
be taught of God if they would come to Christ, as 
Christ said to the Jews: “Every man therefore that 
hath heard, and hath learned of the Father, cometh 
unto me” (John 6:45). Following this, Christ ex- 
plained the passage from the prophets, that they all | 
should be taught of God, for no one may by his own 
reason or by his natural comprehension believe in 
Jesus Christ, but he must be taught of God. 

The other passage referred to, viz, “This shall 
be the covenant that I will make with the house of 
Israel” (Jer. 31:34; Heb. 10:16, etc.), some explain 
in a most remarkable way, as follows: That the 
teaching of the gospel should already cease in this 
time or world. But we understand this prophetic 
declaration to mean that God has written his law 
with his finger, that is, by his Spirit, into the heart 
of all pious Christians, just as God, when he gave 
his law unto Moses, wrote the law with his finger 
on tables of stone (Ex. 20:3-17; 31:18). Thus he 
wrote the gospel, which he gave us through Jesus 
Christ, by his Spirit in the hearts of all Christians, 
pouring it therein. Of this Paul says to the Corinth- 
ians: “Ye are manifestly declared to be the epistle 


The Tabernacle of Moses,’ 289. 


of Christ ministered by us, written not with ink, 
but with the Spirit of the living God; not in tables 
of stone, but in fleshly tables of the heart” (2 
EOLA D 0.)r 

Thus God will not now first write his law in 
the hearts of Christians, for he has already inscribed 
it by his Spirit when teaching them to know Jesus 
Christ. So also God, for the sake of Christ Jesus, 
who suffered the bitter death for sin and shed his 
precious blood because of it, will no more remember 
the past sins and ignorance of Christians. Also, 
there is among Christians (to whom this passage 
really refers) no one who does not confess God the 
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost to be the 
eternal, true and living God, so that no one in this 
matter may teach his neighbor to know the Lord. 
Nevertheless Christians, having learned to know 
the Lord, teach and admonish one another to a good 
life that conforms to the gospel of Christ, even as 
the apostle through the power of the Holy Spirit 
taught men from the word of God to know God and > 
Jesus Christ, but he also admonished and incited 
them to love and good works, and to steadfastness 

in the faith. Therefore the words of the prophet, 
as noted above, are not to be understood as mean- 
ing that teaching the gospel among the Christians 
should already cease in this world, but that God’s 
word shall remain and be taught among Christians 
until the time of the appearing of our Lord Jesus 
Christ (Matt. 24:35; 1 Pet.-1:25), as the entire 
scripture sufficiently testifies. 

The third passage, taken from Revelations, as 
noted above, concerning the glorious city of Jeru- 
salem (Rev. 21:23), speaks, in its proper inter- 
pretation; of the glory and splendor of the new 
heavenly Jerusalem and of the glory which shall 
yet be revealed; for the sun, the moon and the 
stars shall not pass away so long as this world 
stands, but at the second coming of Christ thev 
shall pass away and melt with fervent heat (2 Pet. 
3:10), for all things shall be made new; for we look 
for new heavens and a new earth, says Peter, in 
which God himself shall be the light, and with his 
3 ‘ineffable glory shall cause everything to be glorious, 


b: i9 
4 | 


290 The Tabernacle of Moses. 


and all the godly and righteous shall shine forth as 
the sun (Matt. 13:43), and shall shine as the bright- 
ness of the firmament, and as the stars for ever 
and ever (Dan. 12:3). 

Hence due heed must be taken to the scripture, 
where it speaks of things to come, that such pas- 
sages be not explained as referring to this present 
time, since many are deceived thereby; for, after 
they had thus misinterpreted several passages in 
Isaiah and Revelations as referring to this present 
time and the church on earth, when they really 
speak of the glory and splendor of the heavenly 
Jerusalem that shall be (although in the Spirit this: 
condition begins here), they have in their mis- 
conception of things to come gone so far as to pre- 
sume to far surpass the apostles in wisdom. The- 
Lord preserve us from such misconception of the 
scripture and endue us with true spiritual wisdom 
and an humble heart to his glory and: our salvation. 
Amen. 


CONCLUSION. 


We have now declared our conception regarding 
the tabernacle of Moses, as well as reconciled and 
explained in part several figures and passages of 
scripture which according to the letter seem con- 
tradictory, so far as it has been given us of God. 
so to do and as was necessary to write on the sub- 
ject; and we hope we have arrived at the simple- 
truth, and that we have not written more than can, 
by the grace of God, be proved by the evangelical 
and apostolic scripture, and we would be glad to 
see that every one who professes the gospel would 
stand immovably bv the saving doctrine of Jesus 
Christ and his apostles; for God’s word isssure and 
true, but human reason is deceptive, therefore also 
many have greatly erred, because they have not 
continued in the apostolic doctrine and explanation 
of the tabernacle of Moses. 

We also beseech all brethren, by the mercies of 
God, that they would receive these our writings 
kindly, as written for our common instruction and 
admonition; for we seek not our own glory, but we 
look upon ourselves as poor and unprofitable serv- 


The Tabernacle of Moses. 291 


ants of Jesus Christ, and as brethren of all Christian 
believers, with whom we desire to be in fellowship 
and unity forever. And that we have written 
against the strange doctrine and explanation regard- 
ing the tabernacle of Moses, was done solely to 
remove all misconception or want of understanding 
on the subject and to seek and establish peace 
among the brethren so far as it lies in our power. 
But may God, who alone is wise, and who reveals 
his wisdom to the simple and humble (1 Tim. 1:17; 
Matt. 11:25), teach, strengthen and comfort us 
with his Holy Spirit that we may remain steadfast 
in the truth of the gospel unto the end. Amen. 


DEP: 


hate: 
sith 2 = E20) ¥ 
TS am es US a 


. Sa. ait D as Se lt ngs ° 
it Se BOT 9 A 
“ Pies 3 
‘a ittee : 


os ae) tye? ® 
Le. Weties 





A 
BRIEF ADMONITION AND INSTRUCTION 
FROM THE HOLY SCRIPTURE 


ON 


Regeneration and the New 
Creature. 


BY Use. 


John 3:3. 
Except a man be born again, he cannot see the 
kingdom of God. 


Dy COT. 3. 
If any man be in Ghrist, he is a new creature: old 
things are passed away; behold, all things 
are become new. 


GREETING. 


The eternal, almighty and merciful God grant 
you his grace, through Jesus Christ, his only be- 
eotten Son. (1. Pet;:o:d0;>“Ephi37 1473 Fite 
our Lord and Savior, and strengthen, endue and 
renew you after the inner man, by his Holy Spirit, 
to the glory of his name, and to your salvation. 
Amen. 


A BRIEF ADMONITION CONCERNING 
REGENERATION 
AND THE NEW CREATURE. 


Beloved brethren and sisters in the Lord:— 
There are many people at the present time who 
profess regeneration, they babble much about the 
new creature, and always come forward with the 
statement of Paul that “in Christ Jesus neither cir- 
cumcision availeth anything, nor uncircumcision, 
but a new creature” (Gal. 6:17). But in only a 
few is found the true regeneration and the nature 
’ of the new creature; but the cunning and deceptive 
Satan, who is able to transform. himself into. an 
angel of light (2 Cor. 11:14), manifests himself in 
great power in his ministers, who make a fine show 
of themselves, and speak in lofty and arrogant 
language of divine and spiritual things (though it 
is all hypocrisy), and glory much about regenera- 
tion and of the new creature, and of the true inner 
life, whereby they present a dazzling’ appearance 
to some, for they charm them and blind their eyes 
with their flowery and embellished rhetoric and 
with the beautiful appearance of their false piety. 

Therefore Christian love constrains me to warn 
against such false Christians and messengers of 
Satan, and by God’s grace to write you and give 
you a little admonition concerning regeneration and 
the new creature, showing that not every one who 
professes regeneration and babbles much of the 
new creature is therefore a newborn creature born 
of God, but only he that has partaken of the divine 
nature (1 Pet. 1:3; Heb. 3:14), and of the at- 
tributes of Jesus Christ and the power and char- 
_ acter of the Holy Spirit and has become conformed 
to the image of Christ, and serves God in all sub- 
missiveness, obedience and righteousness (1 John 
4:13; Rom. 9:30). In short, an orthodox Chris- 
tian is a new man and a new creature in Christ 
Jesus; hence it is necessary to observe how regen- 


296 Regeneration and the New Creature. 


eration takes place, whence it comes, by what means 
it occurs, how effective it is, and what fruits it 
will bear. 


In the first place it must be noted that God 
created the first man in his own image and likeness 
unto eternal life, as the holy scipture testifies in 
many places (Gen. 1:26; 5; 9:6; Psa. 100:3; Eccl. 
7:29 Acts 17:26, 28; 29; 1 Cor. 11:7; Eph. 4:24; 
Col. 3:10; Jas. 3:9, etc.), an upright, immortal and 
divine being, yea, in the image and likeness of his 
only begotten Son Jesus Christ, for he is the 
brightness of the eternal light, the brightness of 
the glory of God, an image of his Person, a reflection 
of the divine glory, and an image of the invisible 
God. (Wis. of Sol: F262 Cols 1: To > Mepo-1 3. er 
Therefore when Philip requested of Christ to see 
the Father, Christ answered him and said: “Have 
I been so long time with you, and yet hast thou not 
known me, Philip? He that hath seen me hath seen 
the Father” (John 14:9). 


Hence Christ Jesus is the image of God, after 
whom Adam was created by God. But man did not 
remain in his first estate in which he was created 
(Gen. 3:6), but transgressed the command of God, 
and there became subject to death and corruption; 
but God who is rich in mercy (Eph. 2:4), according 
_to his great mercy took pity on fallen and corrupt 
man and gave him a comforting promise regarding 
the seed of the woman (Gen. 3:15) concerning his 
only begotten Son Christ Jesus as the coming Re- 
deemer and Savior of the human race, who should 
deliver from Satan and all his tyrannical power all 
who believe in him (John 3:16; Col. 1:13; John 
Li 42D). 


Through this promise, yea, through this gracious 
gospel of Jesus Christ, man is again, comforted, yea, 
renewed in the image of God, and is begotten again 
unto eternal life; for God desired in the beginning, 
and still desires, to have men who are made in his 
image, therefore he created man in his image in the 
beginning, as it is written: “God created man im-- 
mortal, and made him to be an image of his own 

eternity” (that is, of God) (Wis. of Sol. 2: 23). 


Regeneration and the New Creature. 297 


After man was created by God the Father after 
his own image and likeness, that is, in the image ot 
Christ, and, after the fall in mercy by the obedience 
and righteousness of the Son of God has been re- - 
stored and lifted up (Rom. 5:18), therefore every 
individual (after having come to the age of discre- 
tion, and is enabled to distinguish good from evil) 
must by the enlightenment, operation and manifesta- 
tion of the Holy Spirit be transformed into a new 
divine being, yea, into the fellowship and likeness of 
Jesus Christ, born again, and transformed into the 
same image, from glory to glory, yet all by the 
Spirit of the Lord (2 Cor. 3:18), and thus by the 
Holy Spirit created anew in the image and likeness 
of God through Jesus Christ. 

Therefore Christ said to Nicodemus: “Verily, 
verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born again, 
he cannot see the kingdom of God” (John 3:38). 
And again: “Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except 
a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot 
enter into the kingdom of God” (John 3:5). Let 
everyone take these words of Christ well to heart, 
because he openly and utterly refuses the kingdom 
of heaven to all who are not born again, that is, who 
have not put off the old man with his works, and put 
on the new man, which after God is created in right- 
eousness and true holiness (Eph. 4:24; Col. 3:10), 
and is likewise renewed unto the knowledge and 
likeness of him who has created him. 

But how this regeneration and renewing takes 
place the testimony of the apostle Peter shows in 
these words: “Being born again, not of corruptible 
seed, but of incorruptible, by the word of God which 
liveth and abideth forever” (1 Peter 1:23). James 
accords with this and says: Every good gift and 
every perfect gift is from above, and cometh down 
from the Father of lights, with whom is no variable- 
ness, neither shadow of turning. Of his own’ will 
begat he us with the word of truth, that we should 
be a kind of firstfruits of his creatures” (James 1:17, 
18). And Paul says to Titus that God has saved us, 
“by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of 
the Holy Ghost; which he shed on us abundantly 
through Jesus Christ our Savior; that being justi- 


298 Regeneration and the New Creature. 


fied by his grace, we should be made heirs according _ 
to the hope of eternal life’ (Tit. 3: 5-7). 

In the words just quoted we learn that regenera- 
tion of man takes place by the word of truth, and his 
renewing by the Holy Spirit in such a way that all 
who through hearing of the gospel through the 
cooperation of the Holy Spirit believe in Jesus 
Christ the only begotten Son of the living God, our 
Lord and Savior, are born of God, enlightened and 
taught by the Holy Spirit, and are children of God, 
as Paul confesses in these words: “Ye are all the 
children of God by faith in Christ Jesus” (Gal. 
3:26). And John says: “As many as received him 
(Christ), to them gave he power to become the sons 
of God, even to them that believe on his name: 
which were born, not of blood, nor of the will of the 
flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God” (John 1:. 
12, 13). And again John says: “Whosoever be- 
lieveth that Jesus is the Christ is born of God” 
(1 John 5:1). And yet again: “Whatsoever is born 
of God overcometh the world: and this is the vic- 
tory that overcometh the world, even our faith. 
Who is he that overcometh the world, but the that 
believeth that Jesus is the Son of God?” (1 John 
5:4, 5). 

From all this it is evident that regeneration is 
really the work of God in man, by which he is born 
again of God in the Holy Spirit, by faith in Jesus 
Christ; for the heavenly Father begets or brings 
forth the new creature, but the Word of the heaven- 
ly Father is the seed from which the new creature is 
born (James 1:18, 1 Peter 1:23), and the Holy 
Spirit renews, sanctifies and keeps the new creature 
in the divine life (1 John 3:9; Tit. 3:5); therefore 
such a regeneration is a mighty and fruitful work of 
God that emanates from the almighty and most high 
God through Jesus Christ, in the Holy Spirit. 

Of this power and fruit of regeneration the apos- 
tle James says, that the believers in Christ are be- 
gotten of God, the Father of lights, with his word 
of truth, that we should be a kind of firstfruits of 
his creatures (James 1:17, 18). But what the word 
firstfruits signifies is plainly typified or portrayed 
to us by the figures, in the old testament, of the first 


Regeneration and the New Creature. 299 


fruits, which were holy unto the Lord; for as in 
Israel the first fruits were holy unto the Lord, and 
were offered up to him, so also, the apostles were the 
first to be called by Christ Jesus unto the faith and 
the apostolic office; therefore they also beyond all 
doubt possessed the most glorious gifts of the Holy 
Ghost, even as Paul writes to the Romans: “Our- 
selves also, which have the first fruits of the Spirit, 
even we ourselves groan within ourselves, waiting | 
for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body” 
CRom:. 8 #28): 

Consequently all Christians are a peculiar DEE 
of God (Eph. 1:4), chosen from among mankind, | 
and bought with the precious blood of the Lamb 
Jesus Christ, sanctified or set apart by the Holy 
Spirit unto God as a sweet savor and an acceptable 
sacrifice (Tit..2:14; 1. Peter 1:19; 1 Cor. 6:12), 
and therefore they also are called the firstfruits of 
the creatures of God, as John testifies in Revelations 
with these words: “I looked, and lo, a Lamb stood 
on the mount Sion, and with him a hundred forty 
and four thousand, having his Father’s name written 
in their foreheads. And I heard a voice from 
heaven, as the voice of many waters, and as the 
voice of a great thunder: and I heard the voice of 
harpers harping with their harps: and they sung as 
it were a new song before the throne, and before the 
four beasts, and the elders: and no man could learn 
that song but the hundred and forty and _ four 
thousand, which were redeemed from the earth. 
These are they which were not defiled with women: 
for they are virgins. These are they which follow — 
the Lamb whithersoever he goeth.. These were re- 
deemed from among men, being the firstfruits unto 
God and to the Lamb. And in their mouth was 
found no guile: for they are without fault before 
the throne of God” (Rev. 14:,1-5). 

From all these words it is clear who are the first- 
fruits of God’s creatures, namely those who with 
Christ Jesus the Lamb of God stand upon Mount 
Sion, that is, in his church, marked in their fore- 
heads with the name of the heavenly Father, whom | 
they confess in true faith, whose name they bear 
(Qo Bsdrast 2-42 «is: Heb. 12; 22> Revi #2 9);-whoem 


300 Regeneration and the New Creature. 


they praise without ceasing, singing a new song; 
for they speak with new tongues, and have a new 
Spirit, they are also virgins or maidens, a pure, 
virgin bride of the Lamb come down from heaven, 
radiant with the glory of God; they are also chosen 
from among all mankind to be a peculiar and holy 
people of God in Christ Jesus. In short, they are 
without fault before the throne of God, and this by 
grace alone, through the atoning merits of our Lord 
esus Christ (1 Peter 1:1; 2:9; Rev. 5:9). 

Hence regeneration, by which such firstlings are _ 
‘born of God, is a mighty and effectual work of God, 
and makes man a new creature in Christ Jesus. For 
this reason such regeneration may not be attributed 
to innocent and ignorant children (Deut. 1:39; 
John 4:11), although some do, to whom one may 
speak in the same definite terms in which the Lord 


addressed the Sadducees: “Ye do err, not knowing ~ 


the scriptures, nor the power of God” (Matt. 22: 29), 
for those who ascribe regeneration, faith and bap- 
tism to simple, ignorant infant children, that are 
without speech, cannot know what regeneration is, 
. what constitutes faith, and what baptism is and 
‘signifies. Yea, what is written in Wisdom of Solo- 
mon may well be applied to them, namely, that they 
are “most foolish, and are more miserable than very 
babes” (Wis. of Sol. 15:14), for they must be 
wholly ignorant who insist that children, who know 
neither good nor evil, can have faith (Deut. 1:39; 
John 4:11), seeing that faith and the true know- 
ledge of God the Father and of his only begotten 
Son Jesus Christ (John 17:3) is taught and im- 
pressed upon men by the Holy Spirit, and this by 
hearing of the word of God,]as the apostle says: 
“Faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word | 
of God” (Rom. 10:17). Yea, the apostle says that 
“faith is the substance of things hoped for, the 
evidence of things not seen” (Heb. 11:1). That is, 
faith is a living hope, a sure confidence in God’s 
grace, and presses forward toward the things that 
are not seen, that are eternal and heavenly. | 
Since infants lack understanding and cannot He 
taught the word of God (for the scripture speaks 
to those who have ears to hear and hearts to under- 


Regeneration and the New Creature. 301 


stand), IJ therefore ask with the apostle: “How 
shall they believe in him of whom they have not 
heard?” (Rom: 10:14). But if they do not believe, 
how then are they born of God without faith, in 
view of the fact that true faith in Christ Jesus is_ 
really the work of God in man? (Eph. 1:19; 2:4; 
od wentGoks 27 12h: Phihock: 63. -22:13 pyefohnty di12)) 
whereby he becomes changed and a new-born child 
of God (1 John 5:1), so that he is brought to a 
knowledge of self and learns to realize his sinfulness 
and unrighteousness, repent of the same and pray 
for mercy (Psa. 32:5; Matt. 3:6; Mark 1:5; Acts 
2:37; 10:30; 16:30; 20:21), and moreover love’ 
God as the supreme and greatest treasure, put all 
confidence in him, and thenceforth by the grace of 
God shun evil and learn to do good, by which he 
shows his gratitude to God, and brings forth the 

' sincere fruits of repentance, and shows love toward 
God and his fellowman, and bears the fruits of the 
Spirit. 

Children without understanding have not this 
faith, as every one that has been taught of God well 
knows, seeing that the scripture gives such clear 
testimony and daily experience gives such clear 
evidence, that infants have no faith (Deut. 1:39; 
John 4:11); nevertheless they are saved by grace 
through Jesus Christ and are acceptable to God in 
their childishness and simple, innocent state (Matt. 
18:1; 1 Cor. 14:20), just the same as adults are 
by their faith pleasing to God; therefore both Christ 
and Paul set forth the children as an example and . 
prototype, not that we shall be children in under- 
standing, but in malice, and men in understanding. 
ever remembering the simplicity and humility of 
children, that we may conduct ourselves accordingly 

_(Rom. 5:2; Matt. 18:1; 1 Cor. 14:20). 





+——But regeneration, which is of God the heavenly 
_ [Father and is wrought through Jesus Christ to the 
~ itransformation and renewing of man by the Holy 
‘Spirit, is essentially proper for intelligent beings. 
They must be born from above, of water and of the 
Spirit, of the incorruptible seed, that is, of the word 
of the living God (John 3:5; 1 Peter 1:23; James 
1:18), they must be cleansed by the washing of 


302 Regeneration and the New Creature. 


regeneration by the word, and transformed by the 
renewing of the Holy Ghost (Eph. 5:26; Tit. 3:5) ; 
they must put off the old Adam and be renewed 1n 
the spirit of their minds (Eph. 4:22; Col. 3:10), 
and put on the new man, yea, the Lord Jesus Christ ; 
all of which together tells us that when a man has 
attained to the years of accountability, and to the 
‘knowledge of good and evil, he must hear the word 
‘of God, amend his life, believe the gospel, and, upon 


\eonfession of his faith, be baptized in the name of 


the Lord, receive the gift of the Holy Spirit and be 
renewed in his mind after the image of him that 
created him (Col.:3:10; Matt. 3:2; 28:19; 16:25; 
Mark 1:4; Luke 3:3; Acts 2:38), that is, in Jesus 
Christ, who is the express image of the invisible 
God, an example to all Christians, the Beginning of 
the creation of God (Col. 1:15; Rom. 8:29; Rev. 
3:15), through whom also all new creatures, that is, 
all orthodox Christians, are born of God in the Holy 
Ghost, that they might be conformed to the image of 
his only begotten Son, Jesus Christ, that he might 
be the firstborn among’ many brethren. 


~~ Therefore we must take note of and keep in mind 


how obedient Jesus was to his Father in all his life 
and labor, how faithfully he did his Father’s will 
(Phil. 2:5; Heb. 5:2) and spake this words, yea, 
how he fulfilled all righteousness both of the old 
and the new testament perfectly. He was circum- 
cised according to the law, and for him an offering 
was made in the temple (Luke 2:21), yea there is 
not one letter of the law that he did not fulfill ac- 
cording to the intent and will of his Father, as he 
himself says: “Think not that Iam come to destroy 
the law, or the prophets: I am not come to destroy, 
but to fulfill. For verily I say unto you, Till heaven © 
and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise 
pass from the law, till all be fulfilled” (Matt. 
5:17, 18). | | 

In this respect also Jesus as the true Mediator 
of the new testament has opened the way for us in 
which we should walk, namely, he came to John the 
Baptist, and was baptized of him, and said: “Suffer 
it to be so now; for thus it becometh us to fulfill 
all righteousness” (Matt. 3:15). 


Regeneration and the New Creature. 303 


But if it became Christ to be baptized of John, 
how much more it behooves or becomes us to be 
baptized with the baptism of Christ; the baptism of 
Christ however is this that we are baptized by Christ 
within with the Holy Ghost and with fire (Matt. 
S21by John 3733 ;Matt.28 219 » Mar: 16215), and 
outwardly baptized, on confession of our own faith, 
by a true messenger of Christ, in the name of the 
Father, and of the Son,and of the Holy Ghost. There- 
fore they err and miss the true way, both they who ~ 
believe in the inward baptism alone and reject the. 
outward, and they who look upon the outward sign 
alone and forget the true figure and inner life; for, 
as nothing avails before God without faith, without 
regencration, without the Holy Spirit, without the. 
true Christian life (Heb. 11:6), so also the outward 
-signs (called sacraments) such as baptism and the 
Lord’s Supper and such other ordinances of the 
Lord must be practiced in their completeness, and 
must not be neglected nor belittled, for the eternal 
wisdom of Christ Jesus has not spoken one word 
in vain, and man liveth by every word that pro- 
ceedeth out of the mouth of God (Matt. 4:4). The 
only begotten Son of the Most High did nothing 
but what his Father commanded him; yea, all that 
Christ Jesus taught and commanded is without any 
doubt the perfect will and counsel of God, which 
the eternal and alone wise God through Jesus Christ 
(who is the wonderful counselor) determined, and 
revealed to us by his Holy Spirit (Isa. 9:5; Deut. 
Sao pi foln tcl F Oy 822835127494 ae 0) oad 

Therefore we may neither begin nor finish any- ~ 
thing but what Jesus Christ has taught us by word 
and example for he is the Beginning and End of all 
things, he is the Captain of our faith unto whom 
we must look, he is the true light come into the 
world that we should follow him (Rev. 1:8; 22:3; 
Hebsl2a1 72): Wohniaa 3: 6202 9253 4B ite 
is the only way to the Father, he is the true Door 
to the sheep; whosoever enters by him is brought 
into the true fold and finds the pasture of eternal 
life; but whosoever does not enter by him, but 
climbs up by some other way, the same is a thief and 
a robber (John 10:1; 14:6), as Christ himself says. 


—_— 


304 Regeneration and the New Creature. 


But those who do not enter by Christ, but as thieves 
and robbers climb in through some opening, try to 
be saved by some other way and means than by 


Christ Jesus alore, or who desire to serve God in. 


some other manner than that which they have 
received from the commands, doctrine and example 
of Christ Jesus and his apostles, for without Christ 
Jesus there is neither wisdom nor righteousness, 
nor holiness, nor salvation, nor truth, nor life. 
Therefore John says: “He that believeth on the 
Son hath everlasting life: and he that believeth not 
the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God 
abideth on him” (John 3:36). That is: “Whoso- 
ever transgresseth, and abideth not in the doctrine 
of Christ, hath not God. He that abideth in the 
doctrine of Christ, he hath both the Father and the 
Son.” 


_-~T have now briefly said these things concerning 


Christ Jesus, partly for the comfort and assurance 
of my brethren and sisters that it is the true grace 
of God wherein you stand, and the right way, in 
which you walk so long as you follow Christ; 
partly also that I may warn my brethren and sisters 
against the wanton spirits that rise up in these days, 
making great professions regarding the new creature 
and yet at heart are thorough hypocrites, puffed up 
individuals, haughty despisers of the words and 
commands of Christ, who have forsaken the way of 
truth and are going in the way of apostate Israel; 
they serve Baal to please the infamous Jezebel, and 
they play the hypocrite or run with the world for 
the belly’s sake; for they have no regard for the 
baptism which Christ himself instituted, and which 


the apostles so earnestly practiced, and to. which: 
the scipture gives such a prominent place (Matt. - 


28:19; Mark 16:15). The Lord’s Supper, which 
is a memorial sign of his suffering and death, yea, a 
spiritual communion of his body and his blood, is 
of no significance to them (Matt. 26:25: 1 Cor. 
10:16). To wash feet, as the Lord Jesus Christ 
himself did, and which example he so earnestly 
enjoined and commanded his disciples to follow 
(John 13:14-17), is by them looked upon almost 
or altogether as folly. The evangelical ban, without 


—A 
‘ 


Regeneration and the New Creature. 305 


which the church of God cannot continue, is to 
them disgrace and a mockery (Matt. 18:8, 9, 15-18; 
1 Cor.-5:9;°2 Thess. 3:6, 14). And; what’ more 
shall I say? They despise every saving doctrine 
and ordinance of the Lord Jesus Christ, and they 
are so wise, so intelligent and so smart in their own 
eyes and consider themselves so full of the true ~ 
inner life that they think and unblushingly declare \ 
\that they have no need of observing the outward | 
ceremonies, as they call the institutions and ordi- 
nances of the Lord. ; 

Such things they declare, and err, for their 
wickedness has blinded them so that they know 
not the mystery of the wisdom of God (which to 
the ungodly is a hidden treasure (Sir. 1:25), neither 
do they see that they have been overtaken and 
deceived by the devil, yea wholly submerged in 
pride, as well as in unbelief and in base ingratitude 
toward God, so that they loathe and are tired of 
the gospel; they have itching ears and desire to 
hear something different and new; they are already | 
(so they imagine) judges and masters (Matt. 23:10; 
James 3:1) of Christ Jesus and of the Holy Ghost, 
for they despise his doctrine and profess that they 
have no need of observing his ordinances. 

O! what condition have these poor, miserable 
people reached who would set themselves above. 
God the Lord! What will they do, where will they 
be when the Lord shall come upon them? They 
mav imagine now that they are wise young virgins, 
and that they have enough oil in their lamps; but 
when the Bridegroom shall come they will stand 
as did the foolish virgins who had no oil (Matt. 
25:3), and therefore they will not be able to enter 
with the Bridegroom to his marriage. They think 
it great wisdom (as is the way of slothful servants) 
that they bury their Master’s talent in the earth 
(Matt. 25:25), but when the Lord shall come to 
reckon with them they will have to hear an awful 
sentence and be punished with a fearful punishment, 
because they have hidden their Lord’s talent and 
have not put it to usury and have gained nothing 
with it. They are also like the church at Laodicea, 
which said: “I am rich, and increased with goods, 


20 


306 Regeneration and the New Creature. 


-and have need of nothing” (Rev. 3:17), and knew 
not that she was wretched, and miserable, and poor, 
and blind, and naked; therefore she was counseled 
of the Lord to buy of him gold tried in the fire, 
that she might be rich; and white raiment, that she 
might be clothed, and that the shame of her naked- 
ness might not appear; and anoint her eyes with 
eyesalve, that she might see. 

These words they might properly and in all 
sincerity take earnestly to heart who are now in 
their imagination so rich that they have need of 
nothing and do not realize their wretchedness and 
misery. They should also heed the counsel of the 
Lord and buy of the pure refined gold of the word 
of God, the rich and precious pearl of evangelical 
gospel truth that they may become rich in faith 
(Matt. 13:45, 46; Col. 3:9). They should put off 
the old Adam and by their faith overcome the world 
and all that is therein (1 John 5:4) that the Lord 
might clothe them in white raiment, that at his 
coming they might not be put to shame. They 
should anoint their eyes well with eyesalve (Rev. 
3:18) that they might see that the kingdom of God 
is not in word, but in power and in action (1 Cor. 
4:20), and that therefore all the conceited and high 
- sounding words and all the pretty prattle about the 
_ new creature and the inner life is of no avail before 
the Lord so long as the individual continues and 
walks in the old life of the flesh. The Jews boasted 
before Christ that they were of the seed of Abra- 
ham, and that God was their Father, but what was 
Christ’s answer to them: “If ye were Abraham’s 
children, ye would do the works of Abraham,” and 
‘if God were your Father, ye would love me: for 
I proceeded forth and came from God” (John 
8:39, 42). 

Therefore it is of no avail, yea, an abomination 
to God, that these despisers of Christ and his word 
make a profession of the inner life and the new 
birth, because they will not do what Christ himself. 
taught, commanded and did; therefore their pro- 
fession also is vain and false; for if they were new 
creatures in Christ Jesus they would hold the begin- 
ning of their confidence steadfast unto the end (Heb. 


ere? et 


Regeneration and the New Creature. 307 


3:14). But this confidence in Christ-is the divine 
nature and the new life or creature (which is 
righteousness, holiness, truth, faith, love, kindness, 
hospitality, and all the higher virtues) which the 
Holy Ghost brings about in us; but the true begin- 
ning of the Christian life in us is that we truly 
repent, and that we show genuine fruits of repent- 
ance, believe the gospel, and, upon confession of 
our faith, are baptized in the name of the Father, 
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost (Matt. 3:8; 
28:19; Mark 16:15); for thus Christ himself began 
to teach and to say: “Repent ye, and believe the 
gospel; for the kingdom of heaven is at hand” 
(Matt. 4:17; Mark 1:14, 15). He likewise com- 
manded his apostles at his final departure and said 
to them: “All power is given unto me in heaven 
and in earth. Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, 
baptizing them in the name of the Father, and the 
Son, and of the Holy Ghost: teaching them to 
observe all things whatsoever I have commanded 
you. 4 Matt’ 28: 19,20). 

But since these neither do nor desire to do such 
a thing, therefore what they say about regeneration 
and the new creature, and what they prefess and 
propound regarding the inner life, is nothing but vain 
babbling; for, if they were born of God they would 
not despise the washing of regeneration (Tit. 3:5) ; 
if they were baptized within by Christ Jesus with 
the Holy Ghost and with fire they would not refuse 
to receive the rite of outward baptism, according 
to the exaniple, figure, and, beside this, the command 
of Jesus Christ. 

The apostle Paul was also specially chosen of 
the Lord, and filled with the Holy Ghost, neverthe- 
less Ananias said to him: “Why tarriest thou? 
Arise, and be baptized and wash away thy sins, 
calling on the ‘name of. the Lord” (Acts 22:16). 
Also, when Peter preached Christ in the house of 
Cornelius, the Holy Ghost fell upon all them which 
heard the word. And when Peter saw it he said: 
“Can any man forbid water, that these should not 
be baptized, which have received the Holy Ghost 
as well as we? And he commanded them to be 
baptized in the name of the Lord” (Acts 10: 44-47). 


308 Regeneration and the New Creature. 


From these and similar examples and testimonies of 
the scripture we may clearly see that we are not 
hindered by the Holy Ghost (who inaugurates the 
new life in the individual) from water baptism, but 
that we are in every way impelled and incited 
thereto, for it is really the office or function of the 
Holy Ghost to lead believers into all truth and obe- 
dience, and glorify Christ, for he shall receive of his, 
and shall show it unto us (John 16:14). 

But this glorifying or exalting of Christ through 
the Holy Ghost is really accomplished in his disci- 
ples who accept and keep his word in true faith, as 
he himself says: “I am glorified in them” (that is, 
in my disciples) (John 17:10). Now, the Christ 
is glorified in his disciples in the same way as the 
Father is glorified in him; but the Father is glori- 
fied in Christ in this that he manifests his Father’s 
name to his disciples, spake his Father’s word, 
did his will, and finished his work, as he himself 
says: “I have glorified thee on the earth (O 
Father): I have finished the work which thou 
gavest me to do (John 17:4). Hence his disciples 
also must keep his doctrine, do his will and finish 
his work that Christ may be glorified in them. But 
this is the beginning and the end of the preaching 
of Jesus Christ (as said above), that. we sincerely 
repent, believe the gospel, are baptized in the name 
of the holy Trinity, that is, in the name of the 
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, and 
are diligent by the grace of God to observe all that 
Christ has commanded us (Matt. 28:20). 

Therefore whoever refuses to follow Jesus 
Christ, and disobeys his word, or whoever deals 
with the ordinances and the truth of Christ in a 
different manner than he himself taught and did, 
does not fear God, because he disbelieves and 
opposes his word (Sir. 2:17), and shall therefore 
not escape the judgment of God; for whoever des- 
pises Christ and rejects his word, him will the word 
5: ay has spoken judge at the last day (John 

But to the objection which some boasters and 
loosetongued despisers here raise, saying that “in 
Christ Jesus neither circumcision availeth anything, 


q 


d 
7 


Regeneration and the New Creature. 309 


nor uncircumcision, but a new creature” (Gal. 6: 
15), I reply, firstly: That the apostle Paul did not 
write these words with the idea that thereby the 
words and ordinances of the Lord should be altered 
or anulled. Far from it! But he does want to 
make it known that now in the new testament the 
outward circumcision no longer avails, and that 
between circumcision and uncircumcision, that is, 
between Jews and Gentiles, there is no difference 
with God, as the apostle Peter testified, when he 
saw that the gift of the Holy Ghost was poured 
out upon the Gentiles also, and said: “Of a truth 
I perceive that God is no respecter of persons: but 
in every nation he that feareth him, and worketh 


- righteousness, is accepted with him” (Acts 10:34, 


35). These words of Peter convey the same sense 
or idea as do the aforesaid words of Paul, nameiy, 
that whether they be Jews or Gentiles, circumcised 
or uncircumcised, if they fear God, believe in Jesus 
Christ, and work righteousness, they are children 
of God, acceptable to him and heirs of his kingdom, 
according to the promise which God made to 
Abraham, saying: “In thy seed (which is Christ) 
shall all the nations of the earth be blessed” (Gen. 
22:18; Gal. 3: 16-18). 

Secondly: It is wrong and a false exposition 
of the words of Paul as already quoted, to make a 
comparison of one single ordinance and institution 
of the Lord with circumcision or uncircumcision 
of the flesh. The reason is this: Circumcision of 
the flesh was a figure of the spiritual circumcision, 
and uncircumcision represents the uncircumcised 
and unbelieving Gentiles who lived in heathendom; 
hence both circumcision and uncircumcision of the 
flesh are and had to be changed to a _ spiritual 
circumcision, that is, a circumcision of the heart, 
which is-made without hands, by the word of God, 
by the putting off of the sinful body of flesh. But 
what our Lord Jesus Christ taught and commanded 
in the new testament is and remains the eternal, 
unchangeable truth; therefore Christ himself says, 
that heaven and earth shall pass away, but his word 
shall not pass away (Matt. 24: 35). 

Thirdly: Paul himself explains his statement 


310 Regeneration and the New Creature. 


(namely, that “in Christ Jesus neither circumcision 
availeth Pe nor uncircumcision, but a new 
creature” (Gal. 6:15), sufficiently in the words 
following: “And as many as walk according to this 
rule (that is, according to the rule, standard and 
ordinance of Christ Jesus), peace be on them, and 
mercy, and upon the Israel of God.” And in the 
preceding chapter (Gal. 5:6) he says: “In Jesus 
Christ neither circumcision availeth anything, nor 
uncircumcision; but faith which worketh by love.” 
And to those of Corinth he says: “Circumcision 
is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing, but the 
keeping of the commandments of God” (1 Cor. 7: 
19). But if the keeping of his commandments avails 
with God; if in Christ Jesus faith which worketh - 
by love avails, and if the peace of God comes upon 
those who walk according to the rule of Jesus 
Christ, where shall they appear who disregard God’s 
commands and the institutions of Jesus Christ, yea, 
who do as did the Pharisees, to whom Jesus said: 
“Why do ye transgress the commandment of God 
by your tradition?’ (Matt. 15:3). 

Thus also do these loose despisers reject every 
saving doctrine and every ordinance of the Lord 
Jesus Christ and help to strengthen the traditions 
and ceremonies of men, even though God will not 
be served nor honored with them, as he himself 
says by Isaiah, and which Christ speaks of and 
confirms in the gospel (Isa. 29:13; Matt. 15:8). 
This they do for hypocrisy’s sake, to please the 
world, for they are the enemies of the cross of 
Christ and would rather be honored of men than of 
God. Moreover they despise us; yea, they make 
us a mockery and a byword, because we maintain 
true views on and confess baptism, the Lord’s Sup- 
per and other ordinances of the Lord aut suffer 
persecution therefor, 

Very well, if one slanders us and aoe perse- 
cutes us, they do it for no other reason, thank ‘God, 
than because of our faith and the truth of Jesus 
Christ; but we commend our case into the hands 
of the righteous Judge and will gladly suffer the © 
mockery of those who are so wise in their own 
eyes and so smart among themselves that they, 


Regeneration and the New Creature. 311 


with the Pharisees, reject the counsel of God (Luke 
7:30). We leave every one to be wise and smart 
according to his own opinions, will and idea and let 
him exalt himself (Rom. 12:16), but we desire. to 
condescend to men of low estate, that that may not 
come upon us of which the prophet speaks: “Woe _ 
unto them that are wise in their own eyes, and 
prudent in their own. sight” (Isa. 5:21). Also, 
“Seest thou a man wise in his own conceit? there 
is more hope of a fool than of him” (Prov. 26:12). 
Hence, “he that exalteth himself shall be abased” 
(Luke 18:14). Therefore we desire to humble 
ourselves under the mighty hand of God, to walk 
humbly and righteously, well knowing that therein 
we shall not be deceived, for it is written: “He 
that walketh uprightly walketh surely” (Prov. 10: 
9). Therefore the prophet beseeches the Lord, 
saying: “Let integrity and uprightness preserve 
me, for I wait on thee” (Psa. 25:21). So we also 
desire of the Lord that in integrity and uprightness 
we might be preserved in true humility, simplicity 
and piety and that he guard us against assumed wis- 
dom and self-conceit, yea, that he would give us such 
a mind that we would gladly be fools here for 
Christ’s sake, according to the words of Paul: “Tf 
any man among you seemeth to be wise in this 
world, let him become a fool, that he may be wise. 
For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with 
(sod (or Ss Soy: 

We would also rather be persecuted for right- 
eousness’ sake and be saved, than play the hypocrite 
with the world and be damned; for we know that 
hypocrites have no part in the kingdom of God 
and of Christ (Matt. 24:51; Prov.1:31). Knowing 
that the commandments and ceremonies of men are 
an abomination to God, no matter how beautiful 
they may appear to be (for what is highly exalted 
among men is an abomination before God, as Christ 
says, Luke 16:15), we therefore will not play the 
hypocrite with the world, neither have we any 
regard for their commandments and _ ceremonies, 
and we have no thought whatever of keeping them 
or helping to establish them. But what Christ 
Jesus, the Son of the living God, our Lord and 


312 Regeneration and the New Creature. 


Savior has commanded and confirmed by his inno- 
cent death and precious blood, that we desire by 
his grace to do, yea, thereby to live and die, and_ 
if because of this the world hates, slanders and 
persecutes us, we are comforted in God our Savior 
and Helper. 


| But although we, as poor, unprofitable servants, 

desire to be diligent to do God’s will by his grace, 
yet let no one think or imagine nor say of us that 
we seek our salvation in any other way than in the 
grace of God and in the merits of Christ alone; 
for we firmly believe and openly confess that we 
are saved by the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, - 
as the apostle Peter confessed to the church of 
Jerusalem (Acts 15:11). Therefore we also, ac- 
cording to the doctrine of the same apostle, place 
our whole hope in the grace of God which hath 
appeared unto us in Jesus. Christ (1 Peter 1:19), 
which grace is also called by Paul a saving grace, 
or a grace that bringeth salvation (Tit. 2:11), in- 
asmuch as it brings to us and works in us ever- 
lasting salvation through Jesus Christ. 


» We confess and know full well, that the holy 
scripture has concluded all men under sin (Gal. 
3:22). Solomon says in his prayer to God that 
there is no man that does not sin (1 Kings 8:46). 
In the book of Job it is written: “Shall a mortal 
man be more just than God? Shall a man be more 
pure than his Maker? Behold, he put no trust 
in his servants; and his angels he charged with 
folly” (Job. 4:17, 18). And in another place he 
says: “What is man, that he should be considered 
clean? and he which is born of a woman, that he 
should be righteous? Behold, he putteth no trust 
in his saints; yea, the heavens are not clean in his 
sight. How much more abominable and filthy is 
man, which drinketh iniquity like water?’ (Job. 
lo: 14, 15). And the prophet David says: “Hear 
my prayer, O Lord, give ear to my supplications: 
in thy faithfulness answer me, and in thy righteous- 
ness. And enter not into judgment with thy serv- 


ant: for in thy sight shall no man living be justi- 
fed. (Psa- 143 71 22)! 


Regeneration and the New Creature. 313 


Therefore we confess ourselves to be poor 
sinners and unprofitable servants of the Lord, and 
with the prophets bewail the fact that our sins 
have risen around us higher than our heads and 
that as a burden they have become too great for us, 
yea, more in number than the hairs of our heads, 
and that if the grace of God had not overtaken our 
sins and abounded daily still through Jesus Christ, 
it would be all over with us. But as it is written 
in the Book of the Wisdom of Solomon, 16:5-7 
(see also Num, 21:8; John 3:14), that the children 
of Israel, when they had sinned and were therefore 
afflicted by the Lord with poisonous serpents, they 
had a sign of salvation which was given them by 
the grace of God, namely the serpent which Moses 
at God’s command raised among them; and those 
who turned their faces toward the sign were healed, 
not by that which they looked upon, but by the 
Lord, the Savior of all mankind. So we also confess 
- that ‘we of ourselves are poor sinners, born of 
Adam according to the flesh (Rom. 5:12), bitten 
and poisoned by the serpent, and all who come of 
him are partakers of his sinful nature, against which 
poisoning of the serpent and the sinful nature of 
the flesh the merciful, heavenly Father has given . 
us a true, saving sign, namely, his only begotten 
and beloved Son Jesus Christ, who has been raised 
up and exalted above the earth, that whosoever 
looks upon him in true, sincere faith, shall not 
perish, but have everlasting life (John 3:16; 12: 
32). And as no herb nor salve could cure or heal 
the Israelites when they had been bitten by the 
serpent, but they had to be healed and restored by 
the word of the Lord alone (Wis. of Sol. 16:12), 
which healeth all things, so also Jesus Christ alone 
makes us whole, and there is no other means of 
salvation, yea, there is no other name given us 
is heaven whereby we may be saved (Acts 

a LAy | 

But if Christ Jesus is to heal and save us we 
must- believe in him and obey him, for whosoever 
will not believe shall be damned (Mark 16:16), 
yea, he is already condemned (John 3:18) and 
disobedience, or rebellion, is as the sin of witch- 


314 Regeneration and the New Creature. 


craft, and stubbornness is as iniquity and idolatry 
(1 Sam. 15:23). If Noah had not believed the word 
of God and had not built the ark according to the 
command of the Lord he would have died in the 
waters of the flood with all the rest of the world 
(Gen. 7 and 8). If the Israelites in the wilderness 
had not looked upon the saving sign which God in 
his mercy gave them, they would without doubt 
not have recovered. If leprous Naaman of Syria 
had not washed himself seven times in the Jordan 
according to the command of the prophet he would 
never have been cleansed of his leprosy (2 Kings 
5:10), because he would have despised the Lord’s 
word which he had to believe and obey in order to 
be cleansed. Had the blind man not desired to go 
to the pool of Siloam and wash himself, he would 
have remained blind (John 9:4). The scripture 
is full of similar examples. 

Now all these were not made whole by one 
single outward thing, but by God’s word which they 
believed. ‘Therefore the Lord says: ‘Man liveth 
not by bread alone, but by every word that pro- 
ceedeth out of the mouth of God” (Matt. 4:4; 
Deut. 8:3; Wis. of Sol. 16:26). But the life of 
man by the word of God comes by faith, as it is 
written: “The just shall live by his faith’ (Heb. 
2744) John 23236; . Rom. 13173) Gali -Beddieaeieb: 
10:38). According with this is the scripture which 
says: “It is not the growing of fruits that nourishes 
man: but it is thy word, O Lord, which preserveth 
them that put their trust in thee” (Wis. of Sol. 26). 

Of this power of the word of God, Christ also 
says in the gospel: “Blessed are they that hear the 
word of God, and keep it” (Luke 11:28); and: 
“Verily, verily, I say unto you, If a man keep my 
sayings, he shall never see death’ (John 8:51). 
And to his disciples he says: “Ye are clean through 
the word which I have spoken unto you” (John 
15:3). And Paul says: “The sospel ee. geet 
power of God unto salvation to every one that 
believeth” (Rom. 1:16), And James says: - “Lay 
apart all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, 
and receive with meekness the ingrafted word, 
which is able to save our souls” (James 1:21). 


Regeneration and the New Creature. 315 


In short: God’s Word preserves men, but only 
those who put their trust in him (Wis. of Sol. 16: 
26). God’s word is spirit and it is life (John 6:63; 
15:3) and gives us life, but those only: who believe 
it. God’s word cleanses souls, but only those who 
obey God’s word (1 Peter 1:22, 23). Yea, God’s 
word is a divine power and saves, but only those 
who hear it and keep it (1 Cor. 1:16; James 1:21, 
22; Luke 8:21). But he that despises the word 
despises God himself; he rejects Christ Jesus, he 
withstands the Holy Spirit who testifies of the word. 

Now, in order to return to my original proposi- 
tion and primary intentions regarding regeneration 
and the new creature, I will say in conclusion that 

(they are the regenerated children of God who are 
new creatures in Christ Jesus, born of God the 
heavenly Father through Christ Jesus (John 1:12; 
1 Peter 1:23), and renewed and sanctified by the’ 
Holy Ghost; who have become partakers of the 
‘divine nature and being of Jesus Christ and the 
attributes of the Holy Ghost (2 Peter 1:4; Heb. 
3:14); who have died unto sin, and are daily 
dying more and more, and live unto righteousness 
who glory in nothing but alone in the cross of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, by which the world is crucified , 
unto them and they unto the world (Gal. 6:14; |: 
Rom. 6:6); who in true faith walk according to the / 
rule of Christ and follow his footsteps; know no\ 
man after the flesh (1 Pet. 1:21; 2 Cor. 5:16); who’ 
savor not the things that are of men, but the things 
that are of God (Matt. 16:23); in short: those who - 
are righteous and do righteousness, as God of whom 
they are born—(1 John 2: 29) is righteous, in whom 
is the mind which was also in Christ Jesus (Phil. 
2:5), and who are moved by the Holy Spirit (Rom. 
8:14).—Where this is the case, there will be seen 
the kingdom of God, there one enters the kingdom 
of heaven, there is a new creature in Christ Jesus 
(John 3:3; Gal. 6:15), 

L~ Such new creatures all the saints of God have 
been from the beginning, e. g. Abel, Seth, Noah, 
who by their faith made a freewill offering to God 
and walked uprightly (Gen. 4:4; 6:8, 9), and who 
were submissive and obedient to God. 


316 Regeneration and the New Creature. 


Such new creatures were also Abraham, Isaac 
and Jacob, who, at the command and will of God 
by faith cheerfully left the land of their fathers, 
going forth and dwelling in tabernacles (Heb. ll: 
9) and being content therewith, confessing that they 
were strangers and pilgrims on earth, and desiring 
a better country, that is, a heavenly, and looking 
for a city, which hath foundations, whose builder 
and maker is God;- wherefore God is not ashamed 
to be called their God: for he hath prepared for 
them: aicity. (Heb. 1k: 16): 

The great prophet Moses was of the same mind, 
for when he was come to years (Heb. 11:24) he 
refused to be called the son of Pharaoh’s daughter, 
choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people 
of God than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a sea- 
son;  esteeming the reproach of Christ greater 
riches than the treasures of Egypt, for he had 
respect unto the recompense of the reward. 

Paul was of the same sort. Whatsoever things 
in Judaism were gain for him, these he counted loss 
for Christ; “yea, doubtless,” said he, “I count all 
_ things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge 
of Christ Jesus, my Lord: for whom I have suffered 
the loss of all things, and do count them but dung, 
that I may win Christ, and be found in him, not 
having mine own righteousness, which is of the law, 
but that which is through the faith of Christ, the 
righteousness which is of God by faith’- (Phil. 
3: 7-9). 

In these pious and holy men of God, and in all 
pious believers who have lived before us we can 
learn and plainly see the nature of the new birth 
and the power of faith, that they knew God in the 
Spirit and served him in the Spirit, feared him and 
trusted in him, loved him above all things, despising 
all transitory. things and seeking the . heavenly 
things, for their reward is with the Lord, and in his 
grace they trusted, well knowing that the Lord is 
the portion of his saints and that the Most High 
is their reward, as the prophet also realized when 
he said: “O Lord, whom have I in heaven but 
thee? and there is: none upon earth that I desire 
beside thee. . My flesh and my heart faileth: but 


Regeneration and the New Creature. 317 


God is the strength of my heart, and my portion 
forever” (Psa. 73: 25,26; Wis. of Sol.-5:15). 
These are the words of a regenerated man; these 
are the fruits of the new creature, and we are to 
take an example therefrom and follow it by the | 
grace of God and be thus minded and find our com-_ 
fort in God if so be that we are born of God and are 
new creatures in Christ Jesus, and desire to profess 
the same. 
, And _above all ac I ‘have said’ and. declared 
above, and say it again, that Jesus Christ the only 
begotten Son of God, the brightness of his glory, 
and the express image of his Person is ordained 
of the Father to be an example to all Christians 
(Heb. 1:3; Rom. 8:29) that we might be con- 
formed to his image; for the divine life, after which 
we must pattern our lives, is shown or revealed in 
its perfection in him. Therefore all who profess 
regeneration must have the characteristics and na- 
ture of Christ and hold fast the beginning of his 
confidence unto the end (Phil, 2:5; Heb. 3:14). 


These then are the regenerated children of God, 
bern again unto everlasting life, and renewed after 
the image of God, and sanctified through the Holy 
Spirit; for God the heavenly Father is holy (Isa. 
6:3; Rev. 4:8), and therefore will have holy chil- 
dren. Jesus Christ the Son of the Most High is 
holy, therefore he will have holy brethren and 
sisters (Matt. 12:50). The Holy Ghost is holy, 
therefore he wills that his temple wherein he is to 
Uwelebenholy JC .Oor, e165 62.19 » 2° Cor. Gob: 
‘Bphe-2r21,.22), 

Therefore Paul says: “Blessed be the God and 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath blessed 
us, with all spiritual blessing in heavenly places in 
Christ: -according as he hath chosen us in him 
before the foundation of the world, that we should 
be holy and without blame before him in love: 
having predestinated us unto the adoption of chil- 
dren by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the 
good pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory | 
af his grace, la he hath made us accepted in 
the beloved” (Eph. 1: 3-6). 


ean 


arena 


318 | Regeneration and the New Creature. 


In these words we hear how holy and blameless 
the cildren of God must be. Therefore also the 
Lord says to his disciples: “Be ye holy; for | am 
holy” (Lev. 11:44; 19:2; 1 Peter 1:16). And 
moreover Christ says to his disciples: ‘Be ye there- 
fore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven 
is perfect (Matt. 5:48). And John says: “Whoso- 
ever is born of God doth not commit sin; for his 
seed (of which he is born and is therefore made a 
partaker of the characteristics and nature of the 
holy seed, according to the words of Christ: ‘that 
which is born of the Spirit is spirit’ John 3:6) 
remaineth in him: and he cannot sin, because he 
is born of God” (1 John 3:9). Therefore: “We know 
thet whosoever is born of God sinneth not; but 
he that is begotten of God keepeth himself, and that 
wicked one toucheth him not” (1 John 5:18). 

Nevertheless this must be understood with due 
discretion; for that Christians are to be holy even 
as God is holy, and perfect even as the Father in 
heaven is perfect, can and must not be understood 
aS meaning that Christians can or may become as 
holy in this temperal life as God is; but that they 
are to seek holiness with all earnestness, as Paul 
the apostle did when he said that his whole aim and 
leffort was to know Christ and the power of his 
\resurrection, and the fellowship of his_sufferings, 


Being made conformable unto his death;}if by any - 


means he might attain unto the resurrection of the 
dead (Phil. 3:9, 11). “Not as though I had already 
attained, either were already perfect: but I follow 
after, if that I may apprehend that for which also 
I am apprehended of. Christ Jesus. Brethren, I 
count not myself to have apprehended: but this one 
thing I do, forgetting those things which are behind, 
and reaching forth unto those things which are 
before, I press forward for the prize of the high 
calling of God in Christ Jesus” (Phil. 3: 12-14). 
Likewise also all Christians must with Paul seek 
to know Jesus, to apprehend him and become con- 
formable to him; they must also with the apostle 
confess and realize, that they have not yet attained, 
nor as yet have become perfect. 

Futhermore John’s words: “Sinneth not,” “Can- 


of 


Regeneration and the New Creature. 319 


not sin” (1 John 3:9) must not be understood that 

| Christians have no sin whatever, for the same John 
says: “If we say that we have no sin, we deceive 
ourselves, and the truth is not in us. If we confess 
Sour sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our 
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. 
If we say that we have not sinned, we make him a 
liar and his word is not in us” (1 John 1: 8-10). 

Therefore all Christians are still sinners before "=~ 
the Lord, and must confess their sins, and ask God 
for-forgiveness of sins, as David says: “I acknow- 
ledged my sin unto thee and mine iniquity have I 
not hid. I said, I will confess my transgressions 
unto the Lord; and thou forgavest the iniquity of 
my sins. For this shall everyone that is Godly pray 
unto thee in a time when thou mayest be found” 
(Psa. 32:5, 6). Hence Christ also teaches us to 
pray: “Forgive us our debts, as we forgive our 
debtors” (Matt. 6:12). But since Christians are in 
Christ, and Christ in them, sin is not imputed unto 
them by the Lord, as David says: “Blessed is he 
whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is 
covered. Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord 
imputeth not iniquity” (Psa. 32:1, 2). 

But this blessedness comes upon all those who 
believe int Christ Jesus (Rom. 3:22; 5:1); through 
him they have forgiveness of sins; they are washed 
in his blood; all their sins and their infirmities are 
covered by his righteousness (Eph. 2:7; Rev. 1:6) 
for Christ is made of God unto us wisdom, and 
righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption, 
as Paul writes to the Corinthians (1 Cor. 1:30). 
And to the Colossians he writes: ‘You, that were 
sometime alienated and enemies in your mind by 
wicked works, yet now hath he reconciled in the 
body of his flesh through death, to present you holy 
and unblameable and unreproveable in his sight: 
if ye continue in the faith grounded and settled, 
and be not moved away from the hope of the 
gospel, which ye have heard” (Col. 1:21-23). In 
short: Christ sanctified himself for the sake of his 
own, that they also might be sanctified by the truth 
(John 17:19). That is, he made an offering for 
sin that should endure forever, and with one offer- 


320 Regeneration and the New Creature. 


ing he made those perfect forever who are sanctified: 
therefore no one may lay anything to their charge 
or condemn them, even: as Paul says: “If God be 
for us, who can be against us? He that spared 
not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, 
how shall not he with him also freely give us all 
things? Who shall lay anything to the charge of 
God’s elect? It is God that justifieth. Who is he 
that condemneth? It is Christ that died, yea rather, 
that is risen again, who is even at the right hand 
of God, who also maketh intercession for us” (Rom. 
‘8: 31-34). 

, You see, my beloved brethren and sisters, my 
companions in the grace of God and of the Lord 
Jesus Christ, and in the fellowship of the Holy 
Spirit (Phil. 1:5), I have according to the humble 
eift that has been given me by the Lord, written 
a little concerning regeneration and the new crea- 
ture and warned you against the evil spirits and 
despisers of Jesus Christ, and instructed you in the 
fellowship of Jesus Christ and his word, and I kindly 
request that you will receive this my humble effort 
kindly, and that -you will use all diligence to guard 
against deceitful workers and earnestly strive that 
you may indeed be found genuinely new creatures 
in Christ Jesus. 

Now to Him who from the beginning hath 
elected and chosen you and hath begotten you. by 
the word of truth and renewed and sanctified you - 
by his Holy Spirit in his unfathomable grace and 
mercy) (Rom, (82.295 <1 Bplng lA? Thess 2 ides 
James 1:18; Tit. 3:5); to the same everlasting 
and almighty God, our Lord and Savior be praise, 
glory and ‘honor forever, Amen (Rom. 16:26; 1 
him.76. AG" i Rev, 6244.7 .7¢ 10): 

DisP; 


OF 
Spiritual Restitution 


‘That is’ 


CHRIST JESUS HAS SPIRITUALLY FUL- 
FILLED, RESTORED AND MADE RESTI- 
TUTION FOR ALL THE THINGS | 
THAT WERE DONE FROM 

THE BEGINNING } 


Aerio it lAN AND SCRIPTURAL 
MEDITATION 


Compiled From the Holy Scripture For the 
Benefit of 


ALL LOVERS OF THE TRUTH 
By 


Des. 


21 


All things must be fulfilled, which were written 
in the law of Moses, and in the prophets, and in Ye 
Psalms. Luke 24: 44. 


He shall send Jesus Christ, ... whom the heaven 
must receive until the times of restitution (or re- 
storation) of all things, which God hath spoken by 
the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world 
besan: Acts. 3:21, 


Old things are passed away; behold, all things > 
are become new. .2.Cor, 5:17 





PREFACE 


In view of the fact that the holy, divine scripture 
mentions or testifies much regarding the restitution 
or restoration, in Jesus Christ, of all things which 
have come to pass since the world began, as Peter 
says, that the heaven must receive Christ until the 
times of restitution of all things, which God hath 
spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since 
the world began (Acts 3:21); and inasmuch as 
many errors have arisen concerning it so that every 
one has misinterpreted this restitution according 
to his own carnal fancy and reason, therefore I 
have undertaken by the erace of God to briefly dis- 
cuss all the things that were done since the world 
began, that in Christ and his kingdom all these 
things have been in a spiritual sense restored, to the 
end that simple minds may be thereby instructed 
and that they may not be deceived by the false 
prophets who embellish and disguise their deceptive 
doctrine with the old leaven of the letter as shadows 
and figures; for whatever of the new testament 
they cannot defend they try to prove with the old 
testament and with the letter of the prophecies. 
From this fallacy many sects have come; many 
false forms of worship have been established; yea, 
out of this same fountain especially have flowed 
forth the sacrilegious ceremonies and display of 
the church of Antichrist and the deplorable errors 
of the turbulent sects which in our time have, under 
the guise of the holy gospel, of faith and of the 
Christian religion, done much injury and much mis- 

chief. fie 
: Therefore, in the same way as we by God’s help 
gave some little explanation regarding the taber- 


324 Spiritual Restitution. 


nacle of Moses and the things that were therein, 
and showed their spiritual signification, so we also 
desire, by the aid of the Spirit of Christ to explain 
_the aforementioned restitution, or at least to give 
our simple understanding of the matter for the 
reflection of all Christians, and thus give the honest- 
ly simple a little direction on the proper understand- 
ing of the scripture, and to consider well all things, 
not according to the flesh, but according to the 
Spirit; for the kingdom of God is not of this world, 
but is within among all true, upright Christians; for 
to be carnally minded is death; but to be spirit- 
ually minded is life and peace (John 6:15; 18:36; 
Luke 17:28; Rom. 8:6), and the flesh profiteth 
nothing, but it is the Spirit that quickeneth, and the 
words of Christ are spirit, and they are life (John 
6:63). May the eternal, almighty, alone wise God 
grant us through Jesus Christ a true and scriptural 
comprehension in all things, to his praise, to the 
rejoicing and quickening of our consciences and to 
the edification of his church. Amen. 


SPIRITUAL RESTITUTION 


Christ Jesus is the spirit and the substance of 
all the types and figures that have passed away, 
the end and fulfillment of the law of types, figures 
and shadows, but the beginning of the true sub- 
stance and completeness (John 6:63; 14:6; Rom. 
10:4); for in Christ Jesus, says the apostle, is the 
truth (Eph. 4:21); in him are hid all the treasures 
of wisdom and knowledge of God (Col. 2:3); yea, 
in him dwelleth the fulness of the Godhead bodily, 
and all shadows and figures are fulfilled in him. He 
is the bright and morning star (Rev. 22:16), the 
Sun of Righteousness (Wis. of Sol. 5:6) that illumi- 
nates everything. The brightness that caused the 
face of Moses to shine (which: glory was to be done 
away, and signified the law) (2 Cor. 3:7) is no 
glory like that of Jesus Christ and his holy gospel; 
the veil that hid the face of Moses, and which still 
veils the eyes and the hearts of the Jews so that 
they cannot understand Moses and the prophets, is 
taken away by Christ, as Paul says (2 Cor. 3:16). 
Therefore all things are changed in Christ and are 
transfigured and made new by him, that is, changed 
from the letter to the Spirit, from the carnal to the 
real, from the old to the new, from the figure into 
the true abiding substance and clear reality, and 
from the transitory to the eternal and heavenly. 
It is necessary to know this, in order that we may 
seek all truth, righteousness, holiness, salvation, 
vea all divine wisdom, gifts, virtues, powers and 
activity in Christ Jesus alone, and not from any 
etherfsource(In Gory 1:24 ; Jer. 23:6) 9 Eph died; 
Col. 2:3), and that all those may be made ashamed 
who in these last perilous times have so presumptu- 
ously and impudently set themselves up as though 
they were about to take possession of the kingdom 
and restore all things to order, which however can 
nevermore be done by any one but the Lord Jesus 
Christ alone, who is the fulness of all wisdom, truth 
and righteousness, who has a name which is above 


326 ss Spiritual Restitution. 


every name (Phil. 2:9) that can be spoken in this 
world or in the world to come, who is the Head of 
all principalities and powers, in short, by whom all 
things are made and upheld, who with God doth 
all things, and without whom nothing divine is per- _ 
formed (John 1:38). ) mi 

In the first place, in Christ Jesus has been 
restored the creation of heaven and earth; for God 
has made new heavens, namely, the believers, in 
whom God dwells, and especially the apostles and 
all sincere teachers, in whom Christ Jesus, the Sun _ 
of righteousness shines everywhere (Wis. Sol. 5:6) 
and enlightens, yea, makes fruitful in all manner 
of fruits of the Spirit the new earth, that is, the 
hearts of Christians, into which the seed of the 
word of God has been sown (Matt. 13:8), and 
which have been renewed by the grace of God and 
the power of the Holy Ghost. 

This is readily observed from the words of the 
prophet when he says: “The heavens declare the 
glorv of God; and the firmament sheweth his: han- 
dywork. Day unto day uttereth speech, and night 
unto night sheweth knowledge. There is no speech 
nor language, where their voice is not heard. Their 
line is gone out through all the earth, and their 
words to the end of the world. In them hath he 
set a tabernacle for the sun, which is as a bride- 
groom coming out of his chamber, and rejoiceth as 
a strong man toruna race. His going forth is from 
the end of the heaven, and his circuit unto the ends 
of it: and there is nothing hid from the heat there- 
of” (Psa. 19: 1-6). 

This is a prophecy.of the gospel which went 
forth and was preached in the whole earth, as Paul 
testifies (Rom. 10:18). Hence these heavens, which 
declare the glory of God, and in whom a tabernacle 
has been set for the sun that shines everywhere, 
are the apostles and all sincere teachers and Chris- 
tians, who make known the word of God, and in 
whom God has his dwelling (Eph. 3:5; 2 Cor 
BP 1645 616): 

Here is also the new moon, and lights this new 
firmament, namely, the sure word of prophecy, that 
shines in.a dark place (2 Peter 1:19); here also: 


_ Spiritual Restitution. 327 


are the new stars, the righteous, who are instructing 
others in godliness, who shine as the brightness 
of the firmament, and as the stars for ever and ever 
(Dan 12:3), here through the brightness of the 
— word of God, and hereafter, through the transform- 
ing power of Christ, in the heavenly realm. 

Therefore the church of God is also represented 
as a woman with child, clothed with the glory of 
Christ and his word, compared to and represented 
by the sun, and having the moon under her feet 
(Rev. 12:1, 2), for the church is founded on the 
sure word of prophecy (2 Peter 1:19) which Moses 
and the prophets through the Holy Spirit testified 
of Jesus (Eph. 4:11-17), and she has upon her head 
a golden crown of twelve stars (Rev. 12:1), which 
stars represent the pure, clear, unadulterated and 
. true doctrine of the holy apostles, with which the 
church of God is adorned, and she is impregnated 
or made fruitful by the seed of God, by the word 
of the heavenly Father (Matt. 13:8) which seed 
she has received, and which she brings forth with 
great travail and distress, and is therefore also so 
sorely persecuted by the dragon (Rev. 12:13-17). 

Thus is the creation of the heavens and the 
earth restored spiritually in Christ, until the time 
of the consummation of the great change from the 
corruptible to the eternal, incorruptible and glori- 
fied state, and all believers shall inherit and possess 
the new heavens and new earth (which God will 
make, and for which we look, and wherein righteous- 
ness shall dwell)-forever (2: Peter 3:13). 

In Christ Jesus is also renewed the creation of 
man; for after man had sinned, and thereby the 


image of God, in which he had been created, was | 
destroyed (Gen. 3:6), a renewing of man, yea, a. 


ncaa” 


new creation had to take place, and this through | 


Jesus Christ, by whom God performs all things. 


But the image of God is the spiritual being of the . 


invisible God, his eternal wisdom, power, righteous- 
ness and eternal life (Wis. of Sol. 7: 25-27; 2 Cor. 
4:4) which is Jesus Christ, the express image of 
the Person of his heavenly Father, the brightness 
of his glory (Heb. 1:3; Col. 1:15) and a spotless 
mirror of the brightness of God, whom Abraham 


328 © Spiritual Restitution. 


saw, not with natural eyes, but in Spirit, as all 
believers must behold and know him. 

According to this image of God the first of the 
human race, Adam and Eve, were created (Wis. of 
Soli 2:23. Gens 1:27; 5:19 Sir. 17:33; James, 3:9), 
and were made in the likeness of the divine image, 
endued with superior understanding and the know- 
ledge of God and all creatures, beside a high degree 
of righteousness and holiness, in which they loved 
God, and were endued with a godly and blameless 
life in Paradise, unto an eternal life in heaven. 

But when man did not remain in his first estate, 
but by his disobedience lost the image of God, man 
had to be created anew by Christ Jesus, for to this 
end the Son of God was promised to Adam (Gen. 
3:15), and appeared to all men that he might 
destroy the works of the devil (1 Cor. 15:25, 26; 
Rom. 5:18; 1 John 3:5) and restore in man the 
lost image of God, that is, that he might take away 
the sin of the world (John 1:29), swallow up death 
(1 Cor. 15:54) and by his resurrection and victory 
purchase everlasting life for man (Heb. 2:14; Rom. 
3:23; 8:3), and by his word and Spirit make new 
creatures here in this life and hereafter at his glori- 
ous appearing in the resurrection prepare perfect 
creatures after his image in holiness and righteous- 
ness (John 3:3; Gal. 6:8; Phil. 3:21), who shall 
be glorified and shine as the sun in the kingdom of 
their Father (Matt. 13:43; Dan. 12:3), conformed 
in their nature to the angels and partakers of the 
divine glory (Matt. 22:30). Thus has a new crea- 
tion, a new birth of man been brought about through 
Christ Jesus (John 12:16; 17: 2-10). 

In Jesus Christ matrimony was likewise renewed 
and restored to its proper relation, which did not 
continue in the original divine order established in 
Paradise of one man with one woman, with like 
persons, that is, such as were created in the image 
of God and joined together by God (Gen. 2:23; 
6:2) but was, through the corrupt nature and the 
evil lusts of the flesh entirely subverted and abused 
before the flood by the sons of God, and thereafter 
(as was the case with Abraham and others (Gen. 
16:3) partly because of the sake of the allegory 


Spiritual Restitution. 329 


(Gal. 4:24), and partly because of the hardness of 
heart of the people of Israel the institution of 
matrimony was suffered by God and by Moses, his 
servant, to change and degenerate into a wrong 
way and pratice; but now Christ comes and points 
out to us the original purpose of God, which was 
in the beginning in the garden of Eden, or Paradise, 
and says: “Have ye not read, that he which made 
them at the beginning, made them male and female, 
and said, For this cause shall a man leave father 
and mother, and shall cleave to his wife: and they 
twain shall be one flesh? What therefore God hath 
joined together, let not man put asunder” (Matt. 
19; 42Gen. 11 927 3 Eph. 5d: 315::1 Cora 6:16), 


So then matrimony was restored by Christ to 
its original form and order, namely, that matrimony 
is a joining together, by God, of two persons, that 
- is, of one man and one woman (Gen. 2:21; Matt. 19: 
4-6), so that they shall be one flesh, and that they 
must both be persons that are created of God after 
his own image, i. e. they must be born of God (John 
3:3), conformed unto Christ, and renewed after 
the inner man by the Holy Spirit (Eph. 4:23; Col. 
3:10); they must come together in Paradise, that 
is, in the congregation of the Lord (Rev. 2:7) and 
God must unite them. This, then, is true matrimony 
in the sight of God, in which he himself participates, 
and which is consummated according to his will 
and in his name. This is what Paul calls marrying 
in.the Lord (1 Cor. 7:39), and to this form Christ 
has restored matrimony, and whatever is done out- 
side of or contrary to this is wrong in the sight of 
God, no matter how beautifully elaborate or em- 
bellished the ceremony may be. 


Moreover the symbolical wedlock between Adam 
and Eve is also spiritually restored in Christ Jesus; 
for he is the second and new Adam, and his bride 
who has been taken from his side, flesh of his flesh, 
and bone of his bones (Rom. 5:18; 1 Cor. 15:45; 
Eph. 5:80) is the spiritual Eve, the mother of all 
believing Christians, and from this union has sprung 
a new world, a new race, new regenerated children 
of God, from his incorruptible seed, that is, born 


330 ‘Spiritual Restitution. 


anew by his living and powerful word (1 Peter1: 
23° d\Johno: 13 "Jamiegtd* 18)¢ 

But like as among the children of the first Adam, 
envy, malice and wantonness brought about apos- 
tasy, that is, that murderous Cain slew righteous 
Abel (Gen. 4:8), wickedness prevailed and all flesh 
became perverse in his sight, that the sons of God 
saw the daughters of men that they were fair; and 
they took them wives of all which they chose (Gen. 
6:1, 2). The same fate befell the children of the 
second and spiritual Adam, for the righteous children 
of God were slain by Cain’s seed, that is, by the 
ungodly and apostates. The beautiful forms of the 
daughters of men, the wicked lust of the flesh, the 
externally grand appearance .of the idolatrous 
church, the great Babylonian whore and the false 
prophets of Jezebel have deceived the children of 
God. (Rev. 17:1; 2:20) and led them into idolatry, 
and thus the world once more lies altogether in 
wickedness under Antichrist (1 John 5:19), and 
everything is made desolate by the son of perdition 
(2 Thess. 2:3); nevertheless a branch of the right- 
eous children of God has remained who have found 
grace in his: sight, to enter with Noah into the ark 
and have their souls preserved forever (Gen. 8:1; 
1 Peter 3:20). 

In Christ Jesus is also repeated God’s dealing 
regarding Noah and the ark, the flood, and the 
saving. of the few souls (1 Peter’3:19); for Christ 
is the true, spiritual Noah, the preacher of right- 
eousness, and the members of his household are the 
children of God (Matt. 12:49), the true Christians ; 
he has proclaimed to the corrupt world the divine 
wrath that is to come, and has threatened the 
impenitent and unbelievers with the judgment and 
condemnation (Matt. 3:2; 4:17; 11:20; 23% 1-37) ; 
he has hereby also built an ark, that is, the holy 
Christian church for the protection and preservation 
of all believing souls, and all who willfully despise 
God’s word and have rejected the proffered mercy 
of God, have closed their eyes to the light of thie 
gospel, and therefore have remained outside of the 
ark (John 5:38; 8:24), are destroyed by the 
punishment of God; yea, upon them will come the 


Spiritual Restitution. 331 


wrath and indignation of heaven, in that day when 
God shall judge the world by Jesus Christ (Rom. 
2:8, 9). But as many as have received Christ (John 
1:12) in true faith and have entered into his ark, 
they will be preserved therein unto eternal life, and _ 
the covenant of God will be renewed and confirmed 
to them by the rainbow, which represents Jesus 
Christ the true sign of grace in heaven, at the right 
hand of the almighty Father (John 3:36; 6:47; 
8:31; 11226;-14: 21; Heb. 1:3;)Gen; 9:13; Eph. 
1:3), and they will be blessed of God with heavenly 
blessings, to grow spiritually (1 Peter 3:9); and 
to increase, winning many children through the 
gospel of Jesus Christ (Gal. 3:26; 4:6) even as the 
apostle did, converting many thousands to God by 
the preaching of the word of God and operation of 
the Holy Spirit (Acts 2:41; 4:32; 8:11; 10:44; 
16:5). From these again an evil seed sprang up 
through the mocker Ham (Gen. 9: 22-25), a proto- 
type of the false brethren (Dan. 11:24), the Anti- 
christ (a wicked seed remaining in Canaan), who 
in the time of the apostles went out from the church 
of God (Rom.:16:17, 18; 1 John 2:18,:19; .2:John 
8; 3 John 9) despising, belittling and mocking Jesus 
Christ and greatly troubling the saints; for there- 
fore Paul says that there must be heresies among 
Christians, that they which are approved may be 
made manifest (1 Cor. 11:19). Thus it has been 
from the beginning, in the time of Adam, Noah, 
Lot, in the Israel of the flesh, in the church of the 
apostles and everywhere (Tit. 1: 10-13, 16). 

In Christ Jesus, moreover, is repeated in Spirit 
and in 1eality God’s dealing with Abraham, Isaac 
and all Israel, for the spiritual Abraham’s God, the 
heavenly Father himself, with his two wives, which 
tvpify the two covenants (Gal. 4:24), of which 
the first was for a long time barren, until the time 
of promise. Meanwhile the bondservant Hagar, that 
is, the literal, figurative, subservient synagogue, 
produces its seed and race, namely, the Jewish race 
and Levitical priesthood with its imperfect cere- 
monies and offerings, which could make no one 
perfect or righteous (Heb. 8:7; 9:9); thereafter 
the free child Isaac, Jesus Christ, was supernaturally 


332 Spiritual Restitution. 


born, God’s word was made flesh (John 1:14), the 
only begotten Son of the Father came into the 
world, the beginning of the new creation of God 
(1 John 1:1; Rev. 3:14), the firstborn among many 
brethren which are born of the free Sarah, of the 
heavenly Jerusalem (Gal. 4:26) and in Isaac are 
counted as the seed of promise, and with whom 
Ishmael quarrels, derides him, and is therefore cast 
out (Gal. 4:28-31) and cannot be an heir. That is, 
the Jews rejected, derided and persecuted Christ 
and his own and would not receive him (John 1:11; 
Luke 19:14), therefore also the kingdom of God 
was taken from them and given to the Gentiles, 
and they cannot receive a heritage so long as they 
continue in their unbelief (Matt. 22:7, 18; Rom. 
ii pers ewe 

But between Abraham and Isaac comes the king 
and priest of the Most High God, Melchisedec, a 
beautiful figure of Jesus Christ (Gen. 14:18, etc; 
Psa. 110:4; Heb. 7:1), of his everlasting kingdom 
and priesthood; for Melchisedec is described by the 
apostle as a king of righteousness and of peace, a 
priest of the Most High, who was greater than 
Abraham and Levi, for he blessed Abraham, and 
Levi gave him a tenth; yea, because he prefigured 
Christ he is described as having neither father nor 
mother, nor descent, without beginning of days, or 
end of life, and is likened to the Son of God. 

All this is found true in Christ Jesus,—that he 
is the king of everlasting righteousness and of all 
divine peace. (Psa, 45216, 74° Io Goro dle 30% Epheed: 
14; Heb. 1:8; John 8:58); indeed, he is peace 
and righteousness itself unto all believers; he is 
greater than Abraham, for he was before Abraham ; 
he took away the Levitical priesthood and has him- 
self become our only High Priest (Psa. 110: 4); 
ordained and installed with a solemn and: precious 
oath, and sits at the right hand of God in heaven 
OCH ebe123%" Ephrt1:20> Hebmi0.d2 eie aise 1s 

without father, without mother and without descent 
upon earth, for he came forth from God, his heaven- 
ly Father (John 8:42; 16:27; 17:8, 25), was con- 
ceived by the Holy Ghost in Mary through the 
overshadowing of the power of God (Matt. 1:20), 


Spiritual Restitution. 333 


became a man, and was born of her a Son of the 
Most High, the first and the last, the firstborn of 
every creature, yea, eternal life itself (Luke 2:21; 
Rev. oliv8 5 “Cok elon john t4:6)i 

Here also is repeated the manner of dealing with 
Sodom, the angels and Lot (Gen. 19:1) and his 
wife; for the spiritual Sodom, by whom the Lord 
and Savior Jesus Christ was crucified, is the wicked 
world (Rev. 11:8; 16:8, 9) full of pride, of abomi- 
nations and beastly pollution; out of this Sodom 
will be led by the angels of God all who with Lot 
desire to fear God, who are acceptable to him and 
who are ordained unto eternal life; but the world 
will pass away with its wicked lusts, desires and 
works (1 John 1:17) even as Sodom and Gomorrah 
passed away (2 Esd. 2:41; 2 Peter 2:6), and the 
unbelievers, who, with Lot’s wife look back, and 
are therefore not fit for the kingdom, will remain 
standing, they will be blinded and hardened (Acts 
28:27; Rom. 1:28) and given over by the Lord 
to a reprobate mind, so that they cannot escape the 
punishment of the Lord. Therefore Christ says in 
the gospel: “Remember Lot’s wife” (Luke 17: 32). 

In Christ Jesus moreover is also renewed and 
fulfilled the symbolical sacrifice of Isaac, who car- 
ried the wood and the fire up to the mount where 
his father offered him upon the altar, and yet he 
did not die (Gen. 22:10), but a ram was offered in 
his stead, which signifies to us that Jesus Christ 
remained obedient to his heavenly Father unto death 
(Phil. 2:8), and because of his fervent love to us 
bore the wood of the cross upon his body and was 
offered for us upon the altar of the cross (1 Peter 
2: 21-24; Isa. 53:6, 7), and yet in the Spirit was 
not put to death, but died according to the flesh 
(1 Peter 3:18). And as Abraham received Isaac 
from the altar as one who had come to life from 
the dead, as a type or figure of the resurrection, so 
also Christ Jesus, after he had offered himself up 
for us to God as a sweetsmelling savor (Heb 1:3), 
rose from the dead (Heb. 11:19) and became the 
established and confirmed heir of all the possessions 
of his heavenly Father Abraham, together with his 
everlasting seed, that is, with all true Christians. 


334 Spiritual Restitution. 


In Christ furthermore is renewed and restored 
spiritually the figure of Isaac and Rebecca, as fol- 
lows: Abraham made his servant swear and exacted 
from him an oath that he would not take a wife unto 
his son Isaac from any other but his own kindred 
(Gen. 24:3, 4). The servant did so, and brought the 
willing Rebecca to his lord Isaac, her bridegroom. 
So also is the spiritual wooing of the bride of Christ 
(John 3:29), by John the Baptist, by the apostles 
and by other faithful servants of the Lord; for to 
this end are the faithful servants of the most high 
God sent out, bound by a solemn promise that they 
will seek and bring to Christ Jesus the true Isaac, 
the rightful heir of all the riches of his heavenly 
Father, a freewill Rebecca (who by faith and the 
new birth has become of his kindred, of his kind 
and nature, Acts 17:28; Eph. 5:30; 1 Peter 2:9), 
namely, the church which he loved, and which he. 
has gloriously adorned with . spiritual gifts, with 
which church he has propagated the children of 
the kingdom, born again of the word of God, and 
therefore also have become his brethren and com- 
panions by grace through acceptance into sonship 
math “Godt ¢(Gal.i3" 283. 4e%eu de Pet, tk 23 5 phe 
12 Ronis 2 17 por ebse2 cAl2)p 

* Isaac caused the wells of living water (which 
the Philistines out of envy had filled up with earth) 
that had been dug by the servants of Abraham to 
be reopened and cleansed by his servants (Gen. 
26:15, etc.) ; for this reason the servants of Gerar 
strove with Isaac’s herdsmen. So also God the 
heavenly Father by his faithful messengers the 
good prophets has given us the wells of living 
water, that is, his pure, divine word; but the false 
prophets with the corrupt doctrines of men and the 
wisdom of this world stopped them, and corrupted 
the pure word of God, of which the prophets griev- 
ously complain, namely, that the false prophets have 
trampled under foot the good pasture with which 
the flock was to be fed (Ezek. 34:2, etc.), and with: 
their feet have polluted the clear waters which the 
flock was to drink, so that the flock ate and drank 
that which had been trampled and polluted. That is, 
instead of the word of God, they listened to and 


Spiritual Restitution. 335 


accepted corrupt human teaching, and thus have 
been led astray. 

But Christ Jesus, the true Isaac, reopened the 
closed up wells of holy writ, again brought to the 
light of day the obscured word of God, and caused 
the pure and clear gospel to be preached everywhere 
by his servants and apostles (John 1:5; 5:26; 8: 
Peieee dl? 914.510 Salo so8,16:28: 4e ths Matt. 
28.219, 20; 16:15;,; Romy 10:.15).:~ But: .the..uncir- 
cumcised Philistines, the scribes and Pharisees, who 
are uncircumcised in heart (Acts 7:51), Antichrist 
and the false teachers are setting themselves against 
it and are striving with Isaac’s herdsmen, with the 
servants (ministers) of Jesus Christ because of the 
wells of living water, which they count as being 
theirs; for they alone want to be the expositors of 
scripture, and proudly say: “With our tongue will 
we prevail; our lips are our own; who is lord over 
Usa, tPsagudl? 4 11811 a+) Lhereiores; thes.strite 
between the servants of Jesus Christ and the false 
teachers, who are the real Philistines, and who are 
the enemies of the gospel and of the spiritual Israel, 
continues. 

Furthermore in Christ is reiterated the patriarch 
Jacob by many beautiful figures, which have been 
in part explained in the chapter on the Tabernacle 
of Moses, for I wrote much in that concerning Esau 
and Jacob, but I will here briefly state that Jacob 
was sent by his father Isaac to Laban (Gen. 28:2), 
the brother of his mother Rebecca. On the way, 
when the sun had gone down, the Lord appeared 
to him at Bethel. He fell into a deep sleep, and in 
a dream he saw a ladder that reached up to heaven, 
and God stood above it and said: “I am the Lord 
God of Abraham, thy father, and the God of Isaac: 
the land whereon thou liest, to thee will I give it;and 
to thy seed. And thy seed shall be as the dust of 
the earth, and thou shalt spread to the west, and 
to the east, and to the north, and to the south: 
and in thee and in thy seed shall all the families 
of the earth be blessed. And, behold, I am with 
thee, and will keep thee in all places whither thou go- 
est, and will bring thee again into this land; for I will 
not leave thee, until 1 have done that which I have 


336 Spiritual Restitution. 


spoken to thee of” (Gen. 28:13-15). And when he 
awoke from his sleep he said: “Surely the Lord 1s 
in this place; and I knew it not.’ And he was 
afraid and said: “How dreadful is this place! this 
is none other but the house of God, and this is the 
gate of heaven” (Gen. 28:16, 17). 

This ladder signifies Jesus Christ, who is the 
only way to the Father and into the kingdom of 
heaven; through him the believers come to God 
(John 14:6). Here is also typified the promise of 
the gospel through the angels on the ladder; for 
the angels also proclaimed the gospel from heaven 
(Luke 2:10). Here is the renewing of the divine 
covenant through Jesus Christ, who is the promised 
seed, in whom all those shall be blessed who shall 
follow in the steps of the faith of Abraham (Gen. 
22:18; Gal. 3:9; Rom. 4:11, 12), not the Jews 
only, but also the Gentiles who believe in Jesus 
Christ. Here surely the Lord is in the midst of his 
church, here is the house of God, and the gate of 
heaven, for here is given the new and comforting 
promise through Jesus Christ (Matt. 17:4; 18:20) 
of the glorious spiritual kingdom and heritage, of 
the blessed rest in the true promised land of Canaan 
(1 Tim. 3:15) that is, in the eternal kingdom with 
God in heaven (Heb. 4: 9) to which the Lord Jesus 
Christ ascended, to prepare us a place (John 14:2), 
a tabernacle, a house, not of this building, but 
another one, not made with hands (John 16:25; 17: 
24; 2 Cor. 5:1), whose builder and maker is God 
(Heb. 11:10), and the Lord Jesus Christ will come 
again and take us to himself, that we may be where 
he is, and behold his glory (John 12:46; 14:2; 
16:5; 17:24) and become partakers of the same 
in eternity. 

Unto Jacob were born the twelve patriarchs from 
whom come the twelve tribes of Israel. These 
twelve patriarchs represent to us the twelve apostles 
who are born again of the Spirit (Luke 24:47; 
Acts 1:13) and endued with power from on high; 
the spiritual fathers who by the gospel (1 Cor. 3:5; 
Gal. 2:8; 4:19; 6:18) and by faith in Jesus Christ 
have begotten the Israel of God; for such believing 
Christians are the true spiritual Israelites and seed 


Spiritual Restitution. 337 


of Abraham (Rom..4:12) whom they have won to 
Christ by the word of God, these are the fathers 
as the apostles themselves testify ; for they call them- 
selves the fathers, and the believers, children (2 Cor. 
3:6;-Eph. 397; 1 John.2:1, 12; 5:213°3° John 4; 
2 Cor. 6:138% Eph, 4:6; Phil 2:22; 2 Thess. 2:11: 
1 Tim. 5:1), and this all of God, who is the true 
Father of all and above all in heaven and on earth 
as Paul declares. | 

In Christ Jesus is furthermore spiritually ful- 
filled the figure of Joseph. For as Joseph was sent 
forth to his brethren by his father Jacob, who in 
their exceeding envy sold him (Gen 37:28) and he 
was thus brought into Egypt and because of his 
piety and innocence was thrown into prison, and by 
God’s providence and because of his wisdom was- 
again delivered out of it and was brought before 
Pharaoh, and after the interpretation of the dream 
was set up and exalted to be a ruler over all Egypt: 
so also according to the Spirit it was done to Christ. 
He was sent by God his heavenly Father into this 
world to his brethren, that is, to the Jews (of whom 
he was born according to the flesh, John 1:11; Rom. 
9:5); but they would not receive him, nor suffer 
him to be their Lord (Matt. 21:39) ; yea, they hated, 
persecuted, betrayed, sold, arrested, crucified and 
killed him (Luke 22 and 23); nevertheless he, the 
Lord Jesus, by the right hand of God is exalted 
above all principalities, and powers, and thrones, 
and ‘doninion. (Acts..2:33.~ 5 :31)%) and* 1s" viven 
a name which is above every name (Phil. 2:9) in 
this world and in the world to come (Eph. 1: 20, 21: 
Heb. 1:4), unto him is given all power in heaven 
and on earth to dispense spiritual gifts (Matt. 28:18; 
Col. 1:16) and he has received from his heavenly 
Father all judgment over the living and the dead 
that they may honor the Son, even as they honor the 
Father, and fall down before him and worship him, 
for he sits at the right hand of his heavenly Father 
in heavenly glory, one Lord gma es with his 

Father and the Holy Spirit.. 

Here is also to be seen the renewing of the 
divine covenant with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob 
through Jesus Christ, who is the promised seed, 


22 


338 Spiritual Restitution. 

in whom shall be blessed all those who walk in the 
steps of that faith of Abraham (Gen. 22:18; Gal. 
3:16; Rom. 4:12), not the Jews only, but the 
Gentiles also who believe in Jesus Christ, who are 
also circumcised, not in the foreskin of the flesh 
(Rom. 2:14; 4:12; 8:2), but in heart, namely by 
‘the circumcision of Christ, which is done without 
hands, in the Spirit, by the putting off of the body 
of sinful flesh, the putting to death of the old man 
and the burying of sin, and the resurrection to new- . 
ness of life (Col. 2:11; Rom. 6:4). 

To these is also given by Jesus Christ the com- 
forting promise of the glorious spiritual, kingdom 
and heritage, of the blessed rest in the land of 
Canaan, the eternal, imperishable kingdom, with 
God in heaven (Heb. 3:18; 4:9; John 14:3; 17: 
24), where Jesus has gone to prepare a place for us, 
a temple; a building of God, a house not made with 
human hands, whose builder and maker is God (Heb. 
11:10; 2 Cor. 5:1; 2 Peter 1:13, 14; John 17: 24), 
and from whence he will come again and take us 
unto himself, that where he is, we may be also 
(John 14:2), and behold his glory, and become 
partakers of the same forever. 

Beside this we find here also the spiritual Egypt, 
the land of darkness, just as was the material Egypt 
long before (Rev. 11:8). For just as the people 
of God, the children of Israel were grievously 
burdened and distressed in Egypt by Pharaoh and 
his servants, and as God in a wonderful way, by 
the hand of Moses, with many signs and wonders, 
yea, with his mighty hand and his outstretched arm 
delivered them from Egyptian bondage (Ex. 3:7, 
etc.), led them through the Red Sea into the wilder- 
‘ness, by a>pillar of cloud by day and a pillar of 
fire by night, and fed them with heavenly bread 
(1 Cor. 10:4), and gave them drink with water 
from the rock and finally led the survivors into the 
promised land, so also we were burdened under the 
bondage of sin, of unrighteousness and of death 
under the hellish Pharaoh Satan (Heb. 4:15), but 
have been delivered by Jesus Christ the true Moses, 
baptized into his death, in the cloud and in the sea 
(Eph. 2:1, 2; Col)-2: 12s Rom..5:9; .6:3),;: that 1s, 


Spiritual Restitution. 339 


with his precious shed blood (with which our con- 
sciences are sprinkled and our sins are washed 
away) and with the Holy Ghost, which is poured 
out upon us by God through Jesus Christ (1 John 
aooSael Peterdcd: -Heb. 12 shy; 4 But-Phardoh-- 
with all his servants, riders and chariots, our 
enemies and persecutors, that is, the devil, hell, 
sin and death are all overcome by the blood of the 
cross of Christ, and by our faith in his name (1 
John 5:4, 5; 1 Cor..15: 24-27; Col. 2:10), and thus 
we have come into the wilderness on the west tor? 
the promised land. 

In Christ Jesus is also fulfilled the figure of the 
Paschal lamb. ‘That is, as the children of Israel 
roasted the Passover lamb in the fire and ate it, and 
with the blood of the Passover lamb sprinkled the 
lintels and the doorposts of their dwellings that the 
destroying angel of the Lord, when he saw the 
blood of the Passover lamb, would pass over and 
not slay them when he slew all the firstborn in 
Egypt (Ex. 12:7, etc.) ; likewise also Jesus Christ 
our Passover, was roast for us by his fervent love 
upon the wood of the cross, and this Passover 
Lamb we must eat spiritually by faith (1 Cor. 5: 4), 
and with his blood our hearts must be sprinkled 
from an evil conscietice (1 Peter 1:19; Heb. 10: 
22), against the wrath of God which is to come 
upon the blind world (Heb. 12:29). Whoever de- 
sires a further elucidation of this subject let him 
read our confession on the Lord’s Supper. 

In Christ is also fulfilled the figure of the bread 
-of heaven (or manna) with which God fed Israel 
in the wilderness (Ex. 16:4), which is also called 
angels’ food in the scripture (Psa. 78:25), for Christ 
Jesus is the true living bread come down from 
heaven, the bread of God which giveth life to the 
world, food for all hungry souls, yea, everlasting 
life, by which angels im heaven and the believers 
on earth are sustained (John 6:31, etc.; 14:6; Col. 
Way saitteb..4 216,57); 

In Christ is likewise restored or repeated the 
figure of the Rock which supplied Israel with water 
when Moses smote it with the staff which he had 
in his hand (Num. 20:11; 1 Cor. 10:4); for Jesus 


340 Spiritual Restitution. 


is the precious corner stone laid by God in Zion 
(1 Peter 2:6), the living Rock upon which the 
church is built (Matt. 16:18), from which also by 
the power of God which is represented by the staff 
of Moses the living waters of the Holy Spirit flow 
for the refreshing of all thirsty souls (John 4:11; 
SL Erisics s 

In Christ is also fulfilled the figure of the angel 
of the Lord which went before Israel, guiding them 
by night with a pillar of fire, and by day with a 
pillar of cloud (Exo. 13:22; Psa. 78:14; 105:39), 
for Jesus Christ is our Guide who with his divine 
word shows us the way in the darkness of this 
world and protects, comforts and refreshes us from 
the heat of tribulation with the refreshing of his 
Holy Spirit, so that we are not consumed, and he 
teaches us at all times what to do and what not to 
do.(Psa.2108: 14; Johni1263 8: 12-12 74674436). 
Thereforé-we should not prestime tO undertake or 
begin anything without having Jesus Christ before 
us to guide and lead us with his doctrine, example 
and Spirit. Where ‘anything is done otherwise he 
that doés it errs’in the dark and misses the right 
way in the wilderness of this world, and cannot find 
the right way. 

Here the bitter waters of Mara (that is, the 
waters of sorrow, affliction and persecution) are 
sweetened by the tree of life that is in the midst 
of: the paradise of God (Exo: 15:25; Rev. 2:7) 
that is, by Jesus Christ and by his comforting 
gospel; for he is at all times with all his disciples 
in all the dangers with which they meet, and his 
word is their comfort (Matt. 28:10) and sweetness 
GOS AN Set Re Ss Le hy 

Here then begins the spiritual warfare against 
Amalek and against other enemies surrounding 
Israel, that 1s, here we must fight and overcome 
the princes of this world, the powers of evil, Satan, 
with the armor of God, the weapons of the Spirit 
(phe 6327143 sis shy the uplifted hands of Jesus 
Christ, which do not become weary (as the hands 
of Moses became heavy (Exo. 17:12) whereby the 
weakness and imperfection of the law may be 
readily understood Heb.-8:6; 9:9; 10:1), namely 


Spiritual Restitution. 341 


by the eternal sacrifice and holy, perfect prayer of 
Christ (Rom. 8:34) who sits at the right hand of 
the almighty Father making intercession for us. 
He has conquered all our enemies for us and our 
faith in his name is the victory that overcomes the 
world (John 16:33; 1 John 5:4), as John says. 

But many transgress and sin against the Lord, 
therefore they are struck down in the wilderness, 
even as it came to pass as an example for us in the 
figurative Israel; that is, many who have been 
enlightened, who have come to the knowledge of 
the truth and are delivered out of Egypt, turn away 
again from the living God. This takes place in 
many different ways; for many are overcome with 
a desire for the flesh-pots of Egypt and become 
dissatisfied and tired of the heavenly bread (Exo. 
16:4; Ps: 78:18), that is, they become carnally 
minded and desirious of the false doctrines of men 
which itches their ears; they despise the word of 
God and the living bread of heaven Jesus Christ; 
therefore they must perish and be punished by God. 

Some, moreover, worship the molten image of 
the calf (Exo. 32:4) desiring visible gods, and for- 
sake Moses who tarries on the mountain; that is, 
they turn away from the living God (1 Cor. 10:7), 
and from the Lord Jesus Christ who ascended to 
heaven and is delaying his return, as they imagine; 
therefore they degenerate into a strange worship, 
and choose unto themselves gods who are visible 
(Rom. 1:23) playing and leaping about the golden 
calf. For whoever loves or honors any creature 
more than the Creator, or instead of, God; whoever . 
looks upon any doctrine of men as being equal to 
or above the word of God, and trusts, seeks, or 
hopes for righteousness or salvation in any kind 
of false worship which God has not instituted by 
an express declaration in God’s word, without doubt 
worships the molten calf, and is counted by the 
Lord as an idolater. However gloriously he may 
embellish or adorn his idolatry with the appearance 
of holiness, calling it true worship, before the Lord, 
it is nevertheless nothing but idolatry (Deut. 5:6; 
12:4); for God will be God and Lord alone and 
acknowledged as such; neither will he be served 


342 Spiritual Restitution. 


according to our own notions, but according to his 
word alone (Isa. 28: 93:/Matt<15: 2,3). 

But some commit fornication with the daughters 
of Moab (Num. 25:1; 1 Cor. 10:8); that is, they 
allow themselves to be deceived by false prophets 
and idolatrous churches so that they are overcome 
by a whorish spirit and sink into a carnal, ungodly 
life and worldly ways. With Zimri they care not 
that the church mourns over such sins and abomi- 
nations and is sorrowful before the Lord, but they 
wantonly continue therein, that is, in their wicked- 
ness; therefore they are punished by the Lord and 
put out of the church of God, so that the whole 
Israel of God be not plagued on their account. 

The modern Balaamites also existed in the time 
of the apostles and shortly afterward (Jude 11; 
1‘ john=1 sib; d° Peter 2:169% 2 Peter 2:45) sand 
they still continue unto the present day, namely the | 
false teachers, who love the wages of unrighteous- 
ness, and therefore cannot see the angel of the Lord 
standing in the way with flaming sword; nor will 
they be turned or rebuked by the ass whose mouth 
God opened (Num. 22:28); that is, they will not 
accept the Lord’s rebuke from the simple and hum- 
ble, through whom God speaks and works; but they 
go ahead, and would gladly curse and pronounce 
maledictions upon Israel; but God will not hear 
them, and blesses his people so much the more, so 
that even the enemies marvel at the glorious dwel- 
ling of Jacob and the camp of Israel. 

Some raise themselves with Korah, Dathan and 
Abiram against Moses and Aaron and are therefore 
swallowed up alive by the earth (Num. 16: 32) ; that 
is, they become contentious spirits in the church of 
God, wanton despisers, mockers, and transgressors 
of the doctrine of salvation by Jesus Christ; they 
cause dissension and heresies, they assume a minis- 
try that has not been enjoined upon them, and they 
are therefore brought into fearful judgment by the 
Lord; yea, out of eternal life they go into eternal 
death, out of the kingdom of God into hell unless 
they repent, which however in many cases can 
hardly occur; for a contentious and heretical per- 
son, says Paul, “is subverted, and sinneth, being 


Spiritual Restitution, 343 


condemned of ‘himself’ (Tit. 3:11). Yea, many 
crucify unto themselves the Son of God afresh, and 
put him to an open shame (Heb. 6:6), and count 
the blood of the covenant, wherewith they were 
sanctified, an unholy thing, and do despite to the 
Spirit of grace (Heb. 10: 29), which now, alas, some 
are known to do. Some murmur against the Lord. 
They are impatient under trial (1 Cor. 10:10), when 
they might very properly praise the Lord for it; 
therefore they are destroyed by the Destroyer. 
Some tempt Christ, and are therefore bitten by 
serpents (Num. 20:3), poisoned with deadly sins, 
so that they must perish unless they repent and 
again look upon the Symbol of grace, Jesus Christ, 
with the eye of faith (John 3:14); for the figurative 
brazen serpent in the wilderness is spiritually re- 
stored in Jesus Christ; for as the brazen serpent in 
the wilderness had the form, but not the poison of 
serpents, but was a sign of salvation, so that all 
who looked upon it were restored by the Lord 
(Wis. of Sol. 16:6), who is the Savior of all; so 
also was Jesus Christ sent in the form of sinful 
flesh; yet he knew no sin (Rom. 8:3); but he is 
the innocent and spotless Lamb of God that taketh 
away the sin of the world (John 1:29; 1 John 2:2), 
'‘he is the true saving Symbol of all grace and of 
eternal life (John 3:15; 1 Peter 2:24). 

Let us here meditate upon the twelve men who 
were sent forth by Moses to spy out the land, and 
that they altogether became fainthearted and were 
frightened at the strong people of the land, the 
children of Anak, and at the towering walls of the 
cities; that is, all except Joshua and Caleb, who 
remained courageous in the Lord, and encouraged 
the congregation, therefore the others declared they 
ought to be stoned. But the people provoked the 
_ Lord, and he declared that not one of all those that 

had murmured against him, and had disbelieved 
and disobeyed his word, should possess the goodly 
land, save Joshua and Caleb alone, who had re- 
mained steadfast in faith (Num. 14:30). . 

By these spies are prefigured the teachers and 
leaders of the church, of whom, alas, many fall 
‘away from God, and will not trust in God, but are 


344 Spiritual Restitution. 


afraid of men, and also discourage the rest. Against 
this condition the godfearing ministers array them- 
selves and comfort and encourage the church with 
the word of God,—and are made to suffer many 
things at the hands of their own brethren, Never- 
theless the Lord knows not only how to deliver his 
own out of temptation, but also how to punish the 
recreant, and disobedient and unbelieving, as he 
has given us an example-in the case of the children 
of Israel.-Therefore the apostle says: “With whom 
was the Lord grieved forty years? Was it not 
with them that had’ sinned, whose carasses fell in 
the wilderness? And to whom sware he that they 
should not enter into his’ rest, but to them that 
believed not? So we see that they could not enter 
in because of unbelief” (Heb. 3:17-19). “Let us ~ 
therefore fear, lest, a promise being left us of enter- 
ing into his rest, any of you should seem to come 
short of it. For unto us was the gospel preached, 
as well as unto them: but the word preached did 
not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them 
that heard it. But we which have believed do enter . 
into his rest” (Heb. 4: 1-3). 

All God’s dealings with Moses, from the taber- 
nacle or tent and its preparation, equipment and 
adornment, was figurative, to the time of the law, 
which was present, and to the time of grace and 
truth which was to come, and which appeared by 
Jesus Christ, as may be read in the Epistle to the 
Hebrews and in our chapter on the Tabernacle of 
Moses (Heb. 7 and 8). 

It must also be noted here, that both Moses and 
Aaron died in the wilderness, and were not per- 
mitted to possess the promised land, because they 
had displeased the Lord. But Joshua had to lead 
the people in and divide the land (Deut. 34:5; 
Num. 20:28; Deut. 34:9). .This signifies to us 
that both the law and the Levitical priesthood, with 
all their ceremonies, had to cease and have their 
end in Christ, and could never make the comers 
thereunto perfect (Heb. 8:6; 10:1), nor take away 
sin, nor give righteousness, nor save. But the 
spiritual Joshua, Christ Jesus, the Author of our 
faith and Perfecter of our salvation (Heb. 12:2) 


Spiritual Restitution. 345 


brings us into the true promised land, the ever- 
lasting kingdom of God, here in the Spirit, in the 
power of the new birth, and abundance of spiritual 
riches, and hereafter into the eternal glory of heaven 
and the possession of all things incorruptible, when 
we shall have become like him and see him face 
to face in the perfection of the life to come (Rev. 
2:10; 3:4,5;.1 John 3:2; 1-Cor. 15: 42-44). 
Hence it is also proper to observe here how the — 
promised land and rest must be possessed (Heb. 
4:9), namely, that we have to pass through the 
Jordan, where the great waters are heaped up high, 
and are fearful to behold. This signifies to us that 
we have to enter the kingdom of God through many 
crosses and trials and through the portal of tem- 
poral death; for the righteous must suffer much, 
and die daily (Acts 14:19, 20; Ps; 44:22; Rom; 
8:36), at the prospect of which human nature is 
terrified; but the priests are ahead, standing in the 
midst of the Jordan with the ark of God, they com- 
fort us with the sanctuary (Josh. 3:17), that is, 
with the word of God, for it is our comfort and the 
strength of our life in the midst of death, until we 
shall leave this world (Ps. 23:4; Prov. 18:10), 
and reach the haven of the heavenly land, in the 
blessed rest, where we shall rest with God from all 
our labors, our cares, and our work, forever. 
So then we first come out of Egypt through the 
sea into the wilderness, as when we are converted 
' from darkness to the light and delivered from the: 
kingdom of Satan, freed from sin, hell and death 
and placed upon the right way that leads to eternal 
fifese ( Gohsihe 13s = hehe 2:55 Matertila gale 
Thereafter we pass through the Jordan into the 
promised land when‘we depart out of this world 
and enter into the blessed rest (Heb. 4:9; Rev. 
14:13). But that Joshua, at the command of God, 
circumcised with stone knives the young Israelites 
who had been born in the wilderness and were 
uncircumcised, before they might enter and possess 
the land (Josh. 4:3), signifies to us that all true 
Israelites must be circumcised in the foreskin of 
their hearts with the circumcision of Christ by the 
putting away of the sinful body in the flesh before 


346 Spiritual Restitution. 


they may enter into everlasting blessedness in the 
kingdom of their heavenly Father. 

Further there follows now the figurative ruler- 
ship of the judges who delivered Israel many times 
out of the hands of the Philistines and other ene- 
mies, establishing peace in the land and judging 
the people (Judg. 6:14; 7:21; 13:24; etc), all of 
which is spiritually repeated or restored in Jesus 
Christ, for he is the mighty Warrior and Conqueror 
who delivers his people from all enemies and has 
made peace in their consciences and is now the right- 
eous Judge in his church (Heb. 12:2, 3; John 16: 
33; Rom. 8:37; Eph. 2:14; Heb. 2:8-10; Rom. 
5:1) with his word and Spirit, and at the last day 
he will judge the living and the dead (Acts 17:31; 
10:42; Rom, 2:16;.14:10; 1 Tim. 6:14; 1 Peter 
4:5). 

In Christ is.also restored the figure of Samson. 
He was a Nazarene of God and a judge in Israel, 
who took a daughter of the Philistines for a wife. 
But his father and mother did not understand this, 
and did. not know that it was of the Lord. Samson 
it was who tore the young lion to pieces; who, 
with the jawbone of an ass slew a thousand Philis- 
tines, who took upon his shoulders the gates of the 
city of Gaza and carried them up on a hill (Judg. 
14:3, 4; 16:4) near Hebron. He also fell in love 
with other strange women, and on their account 
lost his strength; he fell into the hands of his ene- 
mies, who put out his eyes, and had their sport 
with him until his hair grew long again and he 
had recovered his strength, and when the lords of 
the Philistines had come together to offer a great 
sacrifice to Dagon, their god, and rejoice because 
Samson, their enemy, was a prisoner, and had to 
make sport for them, then Samson grasped the two 
middle pillars that supported the house, one in his 
right hand and the other in his left hand, and he 
bowed himself with all this might, and the house 
fell down, so that in his death he destroyed more 
enemies than he had destroyed in his life. 

This figure is spiritually fulfilled in Christ, for 
he is the true Nazarene, the holy son of the Most 
. High (Matt. 2:21; Luke 2:34), and the Judge of 


Spiritual Restitution. 347 


the Israel of God, who took unto himself the 
heathen and choose therefrom a church and 
gathered it by the preaching of the gospel, espoused 
to him by faith, which the Jews did not understand, 
not knowing: that it had been thus planned and 
ordained by the Lord (Rom. 11:25; Acts 10: 44, 
452 logd4:- Gal 228,921 Peter: 52:8. 92> Heb: 
2:8; Hos. 2:19, 20). He overcame the young 
lion, the adversary of Christians, that is, Satan, out 
of which conquest has come all the sweetness of 
divine grace, all comfort and refreshing of the soul; 
with the jawbone of an ass, that is, with his unedu- 
cated apostles, who in the eyes of the world were as 
stupid as asses, he vanquished the uncircumcised 
of heart. (1 Cor. 1: 26-28; 3:19), the worldly wise 
and the scribes, the enemies of the gospel, and out 
of the humble word of the cross God gives to all 
true worshipers the living water of the Holy Spirit 
that by faith the thirsty soul may be refreshed 
(Acts 7:54; John 4:11; 7:38). 

He destroyed the gates of hell, and led captivity 
captive; he bore with his own body the sins of 
the world upon the wood of the cross; he laid 
aside his divine form and divested himself of his 
eternal glory and in his love which he had for us 
Gentiles who walked in all manner of idolatry, he 
humbled himself (John 1:29; Eph. 4:8; 1 John 
222-2) Peter 2724; Phils 2:7, 8)' and ‘thus in the 
providence of his heavenly Father and for the sake 
of our salvation fell into the hands of his enemies, 
the lords of the Philistines, Annas and Caiaphas, 
with the Pharisees and Jews and the congregation 
of the Gentiles (1 Peter 1:23; 4:1; Matt. 26:56: 
Mark 14:46; Luke 22:52-54), who took him pri- 
soner, blinded, mocked, and maltreated him and 
rejoiced at his sufferings. Nevertheless the Lord 
Jesus Christ the faithful Savior avenged himself of 
his enemies. By his suffering and death he over- 
came them all, deprived the devil of his power, 
conquered death, and wrought and brought life and 
eternal salvation to us, yea, he destroyed death and 
conquered hell (Hos. 18:14; 1 Cor. 15:54). But 
the Jews would not have the Lord Jesus Christ to 
rule over them; he punished them, made their city 


348 Spiritual Restitution. 


desolate, dispersed them among the Gentiles, and 
they must still bear the guilt and vengeance of the 
innocent and righteous blood which they shed 
Cliigke:1 9:14. johny bel siMattiv2?: 2a). 

After this comes the figurative kingdom of 
David, the son of Jesse who was the least or 
youngest among his brethren, and the shepherd of 
his father’s flock (1 Sam. 16:11, 12), who was taken 
from the flocks and was anointed by the prophet 
Samuel to be a king of Israel, who killed a lion and 
a bear, who rescued the lost sheep and who killed 
the giant Goliath, a champion of the Philistines, 
an enemy, a mocker and a despiser of Israel, with 
his own sword, whereby great joy was brought to 
Israel, because their greatest enemy was slain, and. 
for which they praised God with harps and cymbals 
and tabrets and psalteries (1 Sam. 17:49-18:7). 
Therefore David out of anger and jealousy was 
persecuted by Saul, and for a long time had to 
wander among mountains and caves and remain in 
hiding; nevertheless he finally became a mighty 
King over all Israel. All of this figure is spiritually 
repeated or restored in Christ Jesus. For he is the 
true root of the stem of Jesse the Branch or Off- 
spring of David, the Plant of righteousness, es- 
teemed the least among the children of men (Isa. 
des? Reve 22:6" s J epi2d oA eter as mimes 
32:1) the only true shepherd of the sheep of his 
heavenly Father who delivered the lost sheep of 
the human race out of the jaws of the lion and out 
of the claws of the bear and is anointed of God with 
the oil of gladness above all his fellows (John 10: 
11; 1 Peter 2:24), who overcame the giant Goliath, 
that is, Satan, by his death and the blood of the 
Cross (Psa. 44:6; Heb. 1:8). Therefore the Israel 
of God rejoices that the greatest enemy of Chris- 
tians, the diabolical Satan, the antagonist of the 
children of God has been overcome by our spiritual 
David, Jesus Christ, who by his divine righteous- 
ness put away sin, and by his eternal life destroyed 
death (Col. 2:14; Heb. 2:8; 1 Peter 5:4; 2 Cor. 
5:19), and by his saving grace took away condem- 
nation. That is a joyous gospel, full of all comfort, 
where the Holy Ghost comforts all repentant and 


Spiritual Restitution. 349 | 


troubled hearts (John 1:14; 14:6); for this we 
thank God; we sing and play unto the Lord in our 
hearts with great rejoicing in the Spirit (Eph. 5:20; 
Cols: £6). 

Christ was also persecuted by the ungodly and 
unbelieving Jews, by the perverted Pharisees and 
Scribes, and often had to flee from Judea, and hide in 
the wilderness, and thus escape from their hands 
(Luke 4:29; John 8:59; 10:31; Rom. 3:24; 7:4); 
nevertheless he took possession of his kingdom and 
was installed and established by God his Father a 
mighty King upon Mount Zion (Psa. 2:6), and God 
has given him the throne of David, and he shall 
reign in the house of Jacob forever, and his king- 
dom shall have no end. . 

He has also come forth as the peaceful Solomon, 
our peace and hope with God the Father. Through’ 
his apostles, who on the day of Pentecost were 
endued with power from on high, he built the tem- 
ple in Jerusalem, i. e., the Christian Church, and 
adorned it with many spiritual gifts, as was the case 
with the apostolic church, and as the scripture very 
clearly shows (Acts 2:1-5; 4:31) that the promise 
to Solomon is applied by the apostles to Christ. 
For what God promised David—that the fruit of 
his loins should sit upon his throne after him (Psa. 
132:12; Luke 1:69; Acts 2:30)—was literally ful- 
filled, for Solomon became king of Israel in David’s 
stead, as may be clearly seen in the scripture, and 
as Solomon himself testifies. But spiritually this 
must be understood of the true Solomon, Jesus 
Christ, who has a throne that shall endure forever, 
and he is the King of his Church, over all the 
spiritual Israel (1 Kings 8:20; Psa. 45:6; 93:2; 
Heb..1: 8). ; 

That the figurative temple of Solomon in Jerusa- 
lem was dedicated signifies to us that the church of 
the Lord is sanctified by God through Jesus Christ 
with the Holy Spirit, and is therefore a holy temple, 
a house of the living God, and a pillar and founda- 
mon) Greteuth 1} Cor.73 217? 92 “Cor. (65 163 a Tim. 
3:15). In this temple God desires to be worshiped 
in Spirit, and in truth; here God desires sacrifices 
to be offered; here are the true priests and Levites, 


350 Spiritual Restitution. 


the chilren and descendants of the spiritual Aaron, 
our only High Priest, Jesus Christ; here is the 
sanctuary of our God, the Ark of the Covenant, the 
pure and holy word of the gospel, with all the 
gracious promises of God (John 4:23; Heb. 3:1; 
5:4; 8:1; 10:1) regarding the forgiveness of sin, 
reconciliation with God, and eternal life through 
Jesus Christ. Here is the mystery of godliness, of 
the symbols of the sacrament, of baptism and the 
Lord’s Supper, which have been left by Christ for 
all believers (Matt. 26:26; 28:19; Mark 14:24; 
16% 153 "Euke 22:19 > 24 : 25-51 Gore Oise ie23). 

Into this temple we must come to keep the feast 
of the Passover, the feast of Pentecost and the feast 
of the Tabernacle, spiritually unto the Lord. We 
keep the Passover feast when we preach Jesus 
Christ our paschal Lamb which was sacrificed for us, 
believe in him, purge out the old leaven of malice 
and wickedness, and become a new lump, and thus 
spiritually eat our Paschal Lamb of the unleavened 
bread of sincerity and truth (1 Cor. 5:7, 8; John 
6:35, 54), remembering our grievous bondage in 
Egypt under Satan who is the prince of darkness 
(Eph. 2:17, 19) and that we have been delivered 
by the mighty hand of God, and that we have had 
our hearts and consciences sprinkled with the pre- 
cious blood of the spotless Paschal Lamb Jesus 
Christ .(1'Peter 1:19; Heb, 9: 12014; o Rev. 1529), 
and are thus saved and preserved from the punish- 
ment which shall come upon the blind world (1 
Thess. 1:10). 

We keep the feast of Pentecost when we come 
before God and confess that we have been in bond- 
age in Egypt under the hellish Pharaoh, and that 
God has wonderfully delivered us’and has accepted 
and chosen us to be the first fruits of his creatures 
and fellow-heirs of his eternal kingdom in heaven, 
and has richly endowed and blessed us with-hea- 
venly riches, for which we praise and thank God, 
and offer him the fruits of righteousness, the thanks- 
giving of our lips which confess his name (Heb. 
18:15; James 1:17; ) Rev. 14:4; Rom.;8: 1; S Eph. 
1:7; Gal. 3:5). And it is very necessary that we 
sincerely confess through Jesus Christ our ignor- 


Spiritual Restitution. 351 


ance, blindness, and the burden of sin with which 
we were cumbered, and on the other hand the riches 
of the grace of God which has been poured out upon 
met ph to... 224 4:10 sb 14y 4 Rome) ahs), 
and that we meditate upon this, that we may praise 
God, and thank him for his unspeakable gift of 
which through his loving kindness we have become 
the recipients (Rom. 11:33). 

We keep the feast of Tabernacles unto the Lord 
when we confess that we are pilgrims in this world 
and have no continuing city here (1 Peter 1:17; 
2:11; Heb. 11:13), but are journeying toward the 
promised land and have a desire for it, that we 
might enter into. the blessed rest, into the hea- 
venly Jerusalem (Heb. 4:9; 12:22; John 14:2), | 
into the city of the living God, where Jesus Christ 
has prepared a place for us, where we have a house 
not made with hands, eternal in the heavens (2 Cor. 
5:1; 1 Cor. 15:49), with which we shall be clothed 
when our earthly tabernacle shall be broken, that 
is, when we have laid down this corruptible and 
mortal flesh and shall be clothed with an incorrupt- 
able, immortal, glorified body. 

In Christ Jesus is also spiritually restored the 
glory of the kingdom of Solomon, in great riches, 
in superabundance of gold and silver, in peace, in 
great wisdom, and in many other gifts, so that the 
_ servants were called blessed who stood before them 
(1 Kings 1: 34-40; 2:45; 3:12, 13) and heard the 
words of wisdom from his mouth. All of this is 
spiritually renewed in Christ Jesus; for through 
him are poured out upon us the riches of divine 
grace, through him we have the unadulterated and 
pure word of God (Eph. 1:2; Psa. 12:6; 119:140; 
Jer. 4:14), which is compared to gold and silver 
(Perel 210 1107 7° 1 or 3s 12 tsa aioe LAG), 
through him we have peace with God in our con- 
sciences (Eph. 2:14, 15), he has become our wis- 
dom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption 
(1 Cor. 1:30), and blessed are his: servants who 
minister unto him, who stand before him, who hear 
his words and keep them (Luke 11: 28). 

Here are also the twelve officers or rulers in the 
royal court of Christ, namely, the twelve apostles 


352 Spiritual Restitution. 


of the Lord who-have authority and dominion in 
the Spirit over all nations and who supply the house- 
hold of the King (Matt. 22:3, 8), that is, the 
Christian church with the bread and meat of the 
word of God, and have at the proper time dispensed 
the food of souls, which was done when _ they 
preached the gospel to all creatures, baptized the 
penitent and believing, and brake the bread of the 
Lord with those who were baptized, fed the 
hungry souls with the word of Christ (Matt. 28:19; 
Mark 16 15%: Col. 1 :24* Acts*2°38* 4:33)"and as 
spiritual conquerors with the weapons of righteous- 
ness have destroyed all powers (2 Cor. 10:4, 5; 
Eph. 6: 12-18), and taking captive every thought to 
obedience, and casting down imaginations and every 
high thing that exalteth itself against the know- 
ledge of God, and with the two-edged sword of 
the Spirit have put to death and slain all enmity 
and all opposition (Heb. 4:12) and with the sharp 
arrows of God’s wrath have pierced the hearts of 
penitents and with the chain of the righteous judg- 
ment of God have bound unto eternal destruction 
and punishment the disobedient, the contrary, and 
obstinate, and thus have occupied the spiritual 
dominion, yea, filled the royal and priestly office in 
the peace and power of the Spirit to the end of the 
world (1 Peter 2:9): 

Such princes, priests and ministers the peaceful 
Jesus Christ had in his goverment. There were also 
at the time many Israelite men, warriors and 
fathers, namely, the glorious company of the apos- 
tles, pastors, shepherds and elders who are helpers 
and builders at the holy temple (1 Tim. 3:8). The 
cities and villages of the country composing this 
realm are the spiritual congregations. The goodly 
land and kingdom that bears all manner of good 
fruit, and that flows with milk and honey is the 
renewed people that brings all manner of spiritual 
sweetness. The good trees in the land are the 
preachers of righteousness adorned with many kinds 
of ‘giits '(Psal Pose Jere li 8 Hzek. 47212 "Mate 
13:33). There was great comfort and fruit in Zion, 
not in the flesh, but in the Holy Ghost; there harps 
were played, and drums rolled, and trumpets 


Spiritual Restitution. 353 


sounded, and joyful praises were ascribed to the 
Lord in the Spirit and in the hearts of all true 
Psraciites... (ont, »t4 47) Eph. 54192 9/Cola37 16% 
James 5:13). There was preparation and adorn- 
ment with purple and fine linen in honor of Jesus 
Christ the King with spiritual virtue and gifts, in 
the power of faith, there they adorned themselves 
with the oil of gladness, ate and drank the heavenly 
bread and the best wine in the sanctuary (Psa. 
45:8, 9; Heb. 1:3; John 6:35) for the strength- 
ening and eternal quickening of the heart. There 
also the daughter of Pharaoh and the daughters of 
other foreign lands, yea, the host of Kings and of 
women have come to the royal throne and chamber 
in Zion, which represents the host of the churches 
of Jesus Christ, of the apostles and teachers from 
among all Gentiles and races brought to him and 
united with him (1 King 3:1; 2 Cor. 11:6). 
Here in Christ and his church is also repeated 
_ Solomon’s Song, of the King and his bride (Sol. 
Song 1 and 2). Here the Bridegroom, Christ, kisses 
his bride with the holy kiss of peace and rejoices 
at her beauty, and the fine fragrance of her oint- 
ments, that is, of the inner gifts, virtues, and anoint- 
ment of the Holy Spirit with which she is adorned 
and anointed (Psa. 45:12-15; Rev. 19:7, 8; 1 John 
2:27). Here the full spiritual significance of the 
figure is brought out in the words of the Bride- 
groom to the bride: “Rise up, my love, my fair 
one, and come away. For, lo, the winter is past, 
the rain is over and gone; the flowers appear on 
the earth; the time of the singing of birds is come, 
and the voice of the turtledove is heard in our land; 
the fig-tree putteth forth her green figs, and the 
vines with tender grapes give a good smell” (Sol. 
Song 2:10-13). That is, the dispensation of the 
law has passed away, the wrath of God is appeased. 
the punishment of the Lord has been taken away, 
(Rom. 6:10, 11, 14; 11:25, 26), the joyful dispen- 
sation of grace has come, the comforting gospel 
is heard, the sweet fruits of righteousness are in 
bloom, the land is fruitful in faith and in the know- 
ledge of God, the plants of the Lord are ‘shooting 
forth, the branches of the vine Jesus Christ are 


23 


354 Spiritual Restitution. 


budding, and give forth a sweet fragrance or savor 
of life (Isa. 6:13; John 15:2), through the power 
of Christ which is in them. Thus it was in the 
time of the primitive apostolic church, and still is 
every day at this time with all believers. | 

Here also, in a spiritual sense, are the threescore 
valiant men of Israel round about Solomon’s bed, 
and every man has his sword upon his thigh because 
of fear in the night (Sol. Song 3:7, 8); that is, 
round about the chamber of Christ and his bride, 
where they rest in all sweetness, happiness and 
love of the Spirit. These are the ministers of the 
word, the preachers of the gospel (Acts 2:14), who 
are chosen from among the valiant in faith in 
Israel, who watch over the flock of Christ and are 
armed with the sword of the Spirit against the art- 
ful attacks of Satan (Eph. 6:13-17; Heb. 4:12) 
and against the pestilence that walketh in darkness, 
and the arrow that flieth by day, so that they will 
not be struck by the spirit of darkness (Psa. 91:5, 
6). In short, the entire Song of Solomon is repeated 
in Christ and his church. 

Here'can also be seen the eternal spiritual and 
heavenly kingdom of Christ, in the power of God, 
and in the Holy. Ghost, where the true Solomon, the 
‘Prince and King of peace, Jesus Christ, reigns in 
full power in heaven and on earth, and sits upon 
the throne of his. glory at the right hand of God, 
and reigns upon mount Sion (Psa. 45:6; Matt. 
Words: Goltsc1 2) Acts,.2.983 .-Psa. 2-6). tages 
in his church, with the unconquerable scepter of his 
divine word (Eph. 1: 19-22), by which. he crushes 
the hearts of the Gentiles and breaks them in pieces 
(Jer. 23:5), but judges and punishes the unbe- 
_lievers. And in this great and glorious kingdom 
the righteous and believers triumph (Wis. of Sol. 
3:1), they rest in the true peace of Jesus Christ, 
and have joy in the Holy Ghost (Rom. 14:17; 1 
John 5:4),-as victors through. faith, full of all 
heavenly riches and possessions. 

Then, as there was a falling away from the king 
of Solomon through Jeroboam and he forsook the 
true worship of God and chose a false warship 
for himself, setting up two calves, one at Bethel 


Spiritual Restitution. (355 


and one at Dan, and ordained and installed priests 
and Levites from the lowest classes (1 King 12:31), 
filled their hands, made an altar, offered sacrifices 
thereon and thus led Israel astray and caused them 
to sin until they were carried away captive by the 
king of Assyria (2 Kings 17:6, 7); so also in like 
measure there was, spiritually, a falling away from 
the kingdom of Christ by a departure from the 
doctrine and a decline of the faith through Antichrist, 
who forsook the true worship in the temple of Jeru- 
salem and set up for himself false worship (2 Thes. 
2:3); for all that Christ taught and commanded 
he imitated, in hypocritical manner and in appear- 
ance with his priests, altars sacrifices, worship and 
with a great show and with abominable desecration 
of the sacraments of Jesus Christ; and this he has 
adorned with perverted scripture passages just as 
if it were true worship, and as if the almighty. God 
of heaven were being served therein. But when it 
is instituted, it is nothing but abominable idolatry 
and- sacrilege; for all of it is manifestly contrary 
to the gospel of Christ just as that which Jereboam 
did according to his own notions was contrary to 
the law of Moses. Therefore also those who fear 
God cannot go to his calves nor worship them, but 
with all Godfearing Israelites they must shun the 
humanly devised, false worship of the spiritual 
Jeroboam, that is, the Antichrist (Tob. 1:6; 2 Cor. 
6:14,.15) and journey to the heavenly Jerusalem, 
up to the church of the Lord, there to worship and 
honor the Most High in his temple according to 
his command. .. 

Beside the golden calves of Jeroboam and his 
‘false worship in the apostate Israel of the flesh, 
various idolatries with Baal and other gods of. the 
heathen were set up. Although some of the pro- 
_phets and kings rebuked these practices so that they 
were partly overthrown, nevertheless both calves 
remained until the captivity of Israel (2 Kings 17: 
12-23). So also under the reign of Antichrist in 
time many abominable idolatries and heresies have 
been introduced, and again opposed and _ discon- 
_ tinued by some, but the two golden calves of Jero- 
_boam, the shameful misuse of holy baptism, and — 


356 Spiritual Restitution. 


the desecration of the Holy Supper of Jesus Christ 
have remained, for even salvation is made to appear 
as depending upon them, and righteousness 1s 
sought therein (Rom. 3: 22, 23), thereby grossly de- 
spising grace and the precious blood of Jesus Christ 
(Galo 2°16 -Ephi di: 73) Golda 14).5 

As there was a falling away in Israel through 
Jeroboam, so there was also a falling away in Judah. 
That is, in the first falling away many pious Chris- 
tians continued in God and.in his word; for this 
apostasy was evident in the time of the apostles; 
many antichrists and apostates being at work (2 
Thes. 2:3; 1 Tim. 4:1-8; 1 John 2:18), but many 
continued to hold fast to the house and temple at 
Jerusalem, that is, to the kingdom of Christ and his 
true worship. But in time apostasy also entered 
there, so that all their descendants were led 
astray, until at last they also were carried into cap- 
tivity in Babylon among Antichrist. Nevertheless, 
just as in the time of the apostasy in Israel and 
Judah there remained some faithful prophets, God- 
fearing priests, Israelites and Jews who had nothing 
to do with the false worship, so there are without 
doubt some remaining in the spiritual apostasy whe 
have not followed Antichrist, as may be clearly 
understood from. the book of Revelations (Rev. 14: 
AGE VAT BR AO eee 20s aker Osa 

Thus has the glorious kingdom of the spiritual 
Solomon, the beautiful church of Jesus Christ, as 
it existed in the time of the apostles and afterward 
upon the earth, been so grievously devastated and 
blighted, and the Holy City given over into the power 
of the heathen, the Antichrist, to be represented by 
him, just as it came to pass literally in the case of: 
Israel and Judah, namely, after the temple was 
built, after the long sovereignty of the kings, after 
many sins, apostasies and abominations which in 
time crept in, God gave his people into the hands 
of the kings of Babylon, and the Holy City and the © 
temple were ruined and devastated. This devas- 
tation of the Holy City and the temple was accom- — 
plished by Antichrist, by the whore of Babylon, — 
who has perverted all divine institutions, who is 
adorned with purple and silk and scarlet and gold,~ 


Spiritual Restitution. 357 


who holds the golden cup in her hand full of abomi- 
nations, who is drunk with the blood of the saints, 
and with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus Christ, 
and who has made all the inhabitants of the earth 
drunk with the wine of her fornication and her 
sorcery (Rev. 17:2-6); whose merchants have 
waxed rich through the power of her delicacies, 
her merchandise and her methods; the kings of the 
earth have committed fornication with her (Rev. 
18:3), and are still doing it; in short, she is the 
‘mother of all abominations upon the earth, and all 
who love their souls and desire to be saved must 
forsake this whore and depart out of Babylon, as 
the scripture says: “Flee out of the midst of Baby- 
lon, and go forth out of the land of the Chaldeans, 
my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and 
that ye receive not of her plagues” (Jer. 50:8; 
516 3) 2.°Cor; 6:17 ;-, Rev.:.18: 4)... .‘Forher sins 
have reached unto heaven, and God hath remem- 
bered her iniquities” (Rev. 18:5). 

Now, it is necessary to note here that Israel was 
twice in captivity, twice delivered, and twice entered 
into a glorious kingdom, also that the temple was 
twice built in the same shape and on the same 
foundation. Of the first bondage or captivity in 
Egypt and their deliverance, of the kingdom of 
David and of Solomon, of the glory, and of the 
building of the first temple, mention has already 
been made. But now we have come to the second 
deliverance out of Babylon, now we have come to 
the building of the second temple and the City of 
Jerusalem, for now God delivers his people every 
day in a wonderful way out of the spiritual cap- 
tivity of Babylon, now he delivers his chosen ones 
from all the abominations of the Babylonian whore 
with faithful admonitions from the Holy Scriptures, 
and by his messengers, to come out of Babylon, and 
touch not the unclean things (Rev. 18:4; Jer. 50: 
8; 2 Cor. 6:17), and return with rejoiceing to Jeru- 
salem and to build again the ruined temple and the 
destroyed city, that is, the church of Christ, as may 
(God be praised) be very plainly seen. 

It must also here be remembered that the Jews 
and children of Israel who had taken unto them- 


358 Spiritual Restitution. 


selves heathen wives in Babylon, had done contrary 
to the law of God (Ezra 10:44) and had to put 
them away again and depart from them and such 
as were born to them (Ezra 10:2, 3, 11), that they 
might be cleansed from the abominations of the 
heathen. This signifies and teaches two things.: In 
the first place, that all Christians must withdraw 
themselves from all Babylonian idolatry and fellow- 
ship, and cleanse themselves from all filthiness of 
the flésh and Spirit:(2 Cor. 62175. 7: 1;°Rev: 182 4) 
that they may be a holy people unto the Lord and ~ 
properly qualified to serve him. This cannot be 
the case. unless there be first a separation from all 
the abominations of the Gentiles and Babylon (Lev. 
18:30; 19:4, etces; 1-Peter 2:9). In the second. 
place, that marriage between the people of God and 
heathen women, entered upon contrary to the law, 
uid net stand before God (Lev. 19). Hence it was 
broken by Ezra, because it was unclean in the eyes 
of the Lord (Ezra 10:11, 12), and was therefore so 
sorely punished by God upon the children of God 
in the antedeluvian world, and thereafter so sternly 
forbidden by Moses (Gen. 7:23; Deut:7;2). In 
view of the fact that such unclean matrimonial] alli- 
ances and mixed marriages between the children of 
God and the unbelievers could not stand under the 
imperfect dispensation of the law, how could. it 
stand before God and his coneregation under the 
- perfect dispensation of the Christian age of the 
gospel. Let every one meditate upon and consider 
this matter. . 

The temple of our Lord and the city of the living 
God is now being rebuilt, and as it was literally in 
the second building of the figurative temple of 
Jerusalem, so it is now spiritually; for the temple 
then was built on the same lines and foundation 
as the first; then the adversaries of Judah and 
Benjamin wanted to build with Zerubbabel. But 
Zerubbabel and the chief of the fathers in Israel 
answered them: “Ye have nothing to do with us to 
build a house unto our God; but we ourselves 
together will build unto the Lord God of Israel, 
as king Cyrus the king of Persia hath commanded 
us” (Ezra 4:3). The heathen mocked Nehemiah 


Spiritual Restitution. 359 


and his brethren and scoffed the idea of building 
the city (Neh. 2:10; -4:1-3) and were ready ‘to . 
- oppose them with violence and break down the 
walls of the city. But Nehemiah and all the other 
Jews rose up against them and worked on the 
walls of the city, half of them standing guard and 
the other half working on the building having their 
swords at their sides prepared for strife (Neh. 4: 
14-18). 

This: same condition now exists spiritually, for 
the temple of the Lord, the church of God, is now 
being built upon the first foundation (Eph. 2: 20-22; 
Wore BO S10 e442 Peter i245" vl Cord2: 
28), upon the foundation of the apostles and proph- 
ets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner 
stone. The living stones which are now lying 
Scattered here and there are again gathered and 
built together into the habitation of God. There 
are now true ministers of the holy word, true 
preachers of the gospel of Jesus Christ; all divine 
ordinances and apostolic doctrines are restored and 
observed with a thorough restoration and renewing 
by sincere repentance, faith in God, true knowledge 
of Jesus Christ and the Holy Ghost, Christian 
baptism, the right use of the Lord’s Supper, a 
godly life of brotherly love and fidelity among all 
the saints, evangelical separation or the ban and 
all ordinances of God by the power of the Spirit 
Cr Peter2cs' -Mattr-3:4)  tHeb, 6:33 John E7717; 
VJohn 2:1; Matt. 26:26, 27; 28:10; Mark 14:23; 
16:15; Matt. 18:18).. Now there is singing unto 
the Lord with great joy in the Spirit (Col. 3:16), 
now there are offered unto the Lord living, holy, 
and acceptable sacrifices which is a reasonable and 
right service (Rom. 12:1; Eph. 4:12, 13, 16) which 
is rendered to the God of heaven. Now are brought 
to the Lord fervent prayers as a sweet smelling 
savor, and the lifting up of holy hands for the 
evening sacrifice (Psa. 184:2; 1 Tim. 2:8). Thus 
the temple of the Lord, the hapitation of the living 
God, now stands upon the first foundation and in 
the original form and glory. 

The adversaries of Judah and Benjamin who 
want to build at the house of the Lord with Zerub- 


360 Spiritual Restitution. 


babel are those who falsely profess the gospel and 
make a hypocritical pretense, just as if they also 
desired to serve God, but their heart is divided and 
they are not the true builders and workers in Israel, | 
and therefore the sincere Christians have no desire 
to build with them, for no one is qualified for such 
work unless he be a Jew or Israelite of the seed of 
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob (1 Cor. 3:9-11; 1 Peter 
2:6); that is, he must be a newborn man of God, 
born anew of the heavenly Father through Jesus 
Christ in the Holy Spirit. 

The heathen also come now and scoff at and 
ridicule the elders at the thought of this rebuilding 
of the Holy City of Jerusalem. They consider them 
far too weak and small; they speak sarcastically 
and very blasphemously; for to the exalted. ones 
of this world, to the educated and preverted ones, the 
idea that such a poor, cast-off people should presume 
to rebuild the devastated and ruined Jerusalem, the 
church of Christ, and to restore the walls, is a huge 
joke. They forget that Christ built his) church 
through the instrumentality of simple and unedu- 
cated apostles, and brought it into such a glorious 
condition, neither do they realize that Christ says 
in the gospel: “I thank thee, O Father, Lord of 
heaven and earth, because thou hast hid these 
things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed 
them unto babes. Even so, Father: for so it seemed 
good in thy sight” (Matt. 11:25, 26); and Paul says 
to the Corinthians that the wisdom of this world 
is foolishness with God (1 Cor. 1:20). God testified 
to that fact through Isaiah with these words: “I 
will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will bring 
to nothing the understanding of the prudent. Where 
is the wise? Where is the scribe? Where is the 
disputer of this world? Hath not God made foolish 
the wisdom of this world?” (1 Cor. 1:19, 20; Isa. 
29:14), and at still another place: “Behold, ye 
despisers, and wonder, and perish: for I work a 
work in your days which ye shall in no wise believe; 
though a man declare it unto you” (Acts 13: 41; Isa. 
29:14). | 

When these mockers of Israel see, then, that 
their ridicule is not noticed and that the work of 


Spiritual Restitution. 361 


the Lord, the building of the Holy City, proceeds 
in spite of it, they become quite angry (Neh. 4:1) 
they make a league among each other against the 
Lord and his church and try to prevent Jerusalem 
- from being rebuilt;—the tyrants by their stern 
mandates, with water, fire and sword; the learned 
ones with their philosophy, craftiness and ingenuity 
in perverting the scripture with writing and preach- 
ing and by arousing the government, demanding 
that the builders of the City of Jerusalem should be 
dispersed, throttled and killed, just so the Lord’s 
work will be hindered. But against this the Lord’s 
people arm themselves, not with carnal weapons, 
as unfortunately some, for want of understanding 
have erroneously done, but with the armor of God, 
with the weapons of righteousness on the right hand 
and. on the left, with the helmet of salvation and 
the shield of faith, with which to quench the fiery 
darts of Satan (Eph. 6:14-16), with the powerful 
twoedged sword of God (Heb. 4:12; Luke 11:11), 
and with Christian patience, with which to posess 
their souls, and thus overcome all their enemies 
(Heb. 12:1; Rom. 12:12), and build the walls of 
Jerusalem with such equipment for war, with such 
bold and manly hearts, with the comforting assur- 
ance that the God of heaven is their helper in time 
of need, and that the hand of his Christ is with 
them, and that the heathen (who have no part in 


the house of the Lord nor in the city of Jerusalem), © 


with all their power cannot prevent the building 
of both city and temple; for the Lord is with his 
people and will faithfully help his servants. Amen. 

The second figurative temple and rebuilt city of 
Jerusalem remained standing until the first coming 
of Christ. In the meantime the Jews suffered many 
trials and persecutions, and were terribly plagued 
and slaughtered by Antiochus and other tyrants 
because they would not forsake the law of God nor 
worship the idols of the heathen (1 Mac. 8, 7). 
Many also fell away and hypocritically served the 
ungodly tyrants and authorities. These often became 
the first and worst enemies, renegades, betrayers 


and persecuters of the godfearing Jews, as can be: 


i 


362 Spiritual Restitution. 


read all throught the books of the Maccabees, and 
as can be found in many well written histories. : 

In the same way the second, spiritual temple 
and holy city of Jerusalem will remain standing 
until the second coming and appearing of our Lord 
Jesus Christ; for unto the people of God under 
heaven is given an everlasting kingdom, and the 
kingdom of our Lord Christ has no end (Dan. 7:18, 
22,°27-" UCuke 17°33; Rev. 11: 15)" Nevertheless all 
who would live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer 
persecution (2 Tim. 3:12). Christians are robbed, 
their houses are burned, they are ridiculed by the 
heathen, they are despised, they are looked upon as 
foolish, their life is considered fanaticism (Psa. 44: 
22: Wis. of Sol. 5:3, 4), the bodies of the servants 
of God are given to the birds of the air for food and 
the flesh of the saints to the beasts of the earth; 
innocent blood is shed like water, and there is none 
to burv the dead. In short, Antiochus is exceeding 
mad and insane beyond measure toward the godly, 
who believe the gospel, and desire to live according 
to-the gospel. But those’ who honor and lead in 
the worshin of his Maosim (Merodach), the un- 
known idol, the false humanly devised worship, 
them he raises to positions of honor and bestows 
rich gifts upon them, as may be readily seen every 
day. 

From all this it is evident that all things are 
restored and shall be repeated, spiritually, in Christ 
Jesus and in the time of his dominion until the 
time of his coming and appearing, as the apostle 
says (1 Peter 1:5; Acts 3:20). Therefore we need 
not expect any other restitution or repitition of all 
things in any other than in a spiritual sense in 
Christ Jesus who is the Alpha and Omega, the 
beginning and the end of all creation (Rev. 1:8, 11, 
17) and the perfection and completion of all the 
works of God, here in the Spirit and hereafter in the 
perfect life (1 Cor. 13:10), as that which is renewed 
and restored and changed and transformed into the 
eternal as a final reward and rulership of all be- 
lievers and saints in that place where God the 
Father, and the Lord Tesus Christ, together with 
the Holy Ghost and with all the holy angels shall 


Spiritual Restitution. 363 


be forever and forever (John 14:1-8; 17:24; 1 
Thes. 4:17). All that the prophets have prophesied 
and declared regarding the rebuilding of the house 
of David, of the kingdom of ‘Christ and its glory 
(Acts 9:15), of the wrath of God against Babylon 
(Jer. 50:1-3), and of the rebuilding of the temple 
and of the city of Jerusalem, in short, the restitu- 
tion of all things must be thus understood and be 
changed from the letter to the Spirit. Thereby the 
foundation of our most holy Christian faith is 
greatly strengthened and strongly confirmed, as we 
clearly see and understand that all which we believe 
and confess is in the first place presented by many 
beautiful figures, and thereafter revealed, explained, 
testified and confirmed by the eternal Truth itself, 
that is, through Jesus Christ (John 1:4; 14:6). 

May the eternal, almighty God, who from the 
beginning wrought and made provision for all 
things, firstly in figure or symbol, and thereafter 
in the true substance by his eternal word, by his 
only begotten Son Jesus Christ, preserve us in his 
truth, by his unfathomable mercy. May he renew 
us in the inner man and preserve us in uprightness 
of life unto our end (Col. 1:14; Heb. 1:5) that we 
may appear with joy before the judgment seat of 
Jesus Christ when he shall come with the angels 
of his power with flaming fire to execute wrath 
upon all them who knew not God and who have not 
been. obedient to his gospel, and to be glorified in 
his saints and gloriously revealed (2 Thes. 1: 8-10), 
and admired in all them that believe (Phil. 3:11), in 
the resurrection and revelation of the heavenly 
glory with which they shall be clothed by the power 
of Christ, that with him they may enter and possess 
forever the eternal, incorruptible glory in the per- 
fect life (Matt. 13: 36). 


Soli Sapienti Deo Gloria. 





THE 


CHURCH OF GOD 


HOW IT WAS IN THE BEGINNING, BY 
WHAT MEANS IT IS KNOWN, AND 
DISTINGUISHED FROM ALL 
SECTS 


A 


BRIEF CONFESSION 


By 


Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, . 
and that the temple of God is holy, which temple 
yerate i Corot 165-17. 


Glorious things are spoken of thee, O city of God. 
Psa. 87.:4. 


Ye are the temple of the living God. 2 Cor. 6:16. 


2 


These things I write unto thee, ... that thou 
mayest know how thou oughtest to behave thyself 
in the house of God, which is the church of the 
living God, the pillar and ground of the truth. 

Pen: <3: 14, 15. 3 


Christ is set by God his Father above all things, 
and is given to be the head over all things to the 
church, which is, his body, the fulness of him that 
Allethcall in-all- “Eph. V'222; 23° 


If any man defile the temple of God (that is, the 
church), him shall God destroy. 1 Cor. 3:17. 


-—™~% 


PREFACE 


I, D. P., by grace a fellow-believer in Jesus 
Christ and-a member of the Christian church, wish 
the Christian reader much wisdom, understanding, 
peace and mercy from God our heavenly Father, 
and from Jesus Christ the only begotten Son of God, 
in love and truth, as an everlasting blessing. Amen. 
2. John 3. Fee 

Having according to my humble gift written a 
simple and brief treatise giving my views regarding 
spiritual restitution, giving the gentle reader direc- 
tions by which he may, according to the measure 
of the Spirit and of faith given him, meditate still! 
further upon the subject and take it to heart, that 
in Christ Jesus all things have been renewed and 
restored, yea, that the era of reality has begun (2 
Cor. 5:17), the church of God brought together, 
established, and brought into a glorious condition 
(Col. 1:9-11), I must therefore now also write 
briefly of the church of God, how it was in the 
beginning, by what means it was established, how it 
was gathered from all nations, how it may be recog- 
nized, and distinguished from all sects, what ordin- 
ances it has of God, how the ministers must be 
qualified, how every member must walk, how beau- 
tiful and glorious the church is. For since all 
mankind is invited into the church of God, and 
every one says, “Lo, here is Christ” (Matt. 24:23). 
“The temple of the Lord, are these” (Jer. 7:4; Mic. 
3:11), and all sects presume to be the church of 
Christ and desire to be known as such, therefore 
it is necessary for all lovers of the truth to know 
which is the true Christian church, and that they 


368 The Church of God. 


must ally themselves with this same church if they 
desire to be saved; for those who now reject the 
proffered grace of God, who will not repent, believe , 
the gospel nor obey it, despise the ordinances of . 
God and will not enter into the communion of the 
body of Jesus Christ (Matt. 3:2; 22:7; 23:12; 
Mark 1:4; Luke 3:4; 1 Cor. 12:12, 13), will 
hardly be able to escape the judgment of God, for- 
asmuch as Christ himself says that no man can 
come unto the Father but by him (John 14:6), and 
that whosoever abides in him shall bear much fruit ; 
but that whosoever does not abide in him is as a 
withered branch of a vine (John 15:2-7), and that 
he that believes not in him is condemned already, 
etc. (John 3:18). Therefore let every one hasten to 
Christ, to the hill of Zion, and go to the house of 
the living God to hear the law of the Lord and the 
gospel, that they may be grafted into Christ and 
preserve their souls unto eternal blessedness. Amen. 
(John 3:36; 10:38; 1 John 5:10). 


THE CHURCH OF GOD 


The church of God was originally begun by God 
in heaven with the angels, who were created spirits 
and flaming fire (Psa. 104:4; Heb. 1:7), to stand 
before the throne of God praising and serving him, 
and also that they should minster to and be fellow- 
servants of the believers (Rev. 21:9). For, although 
they are such high and exalted creatures of God, 
they are nevertheless one and all ministering spirits, 
as the apostle says, “sent forth to minister for them 
who shall be the heirs of salvation”. (Heb, 1:14). 
For they guard the children of God, they encamp 
round about those who fear God (Psa. 34:7). They 
went before Israel, they led Lot out of Sodom (Gen. 
19616 *+Psa 534: 22 2°99 15910382 205" Matt 28: 10; 
Luke 1:19; Acts 12:7, etc.). In short, they serve the 
saints and chosen people of God, they preserve 
them in all their ways, yet always beholding the 
face of the Father in heaven. Hence the church had, 
its origin in the angels in heaven. 

Afterward the church of God was begun in. 
Paradise with Adam and Eve, who were created 
after the image of God and in his likeness (Gen. 
5:2), upright and pure creatures of God, incorrupt- 
ible and immortal (Gen. 2:7; Wis. of Sol. 2:23), 
and endowed with a godly nature and divine attri- 
butes, and. in whom was a true knowledge of God 
and the love and fear of God so long as they re- 
mained in their first estate and bore the image of 
God (Sir. 10:12, 13). 

Therefore the church of God is a. church of paid 
beings, namely, of the angels in heaven and of the/! 
believing regenerated men on earth, who have been 
renewed in the image of God. These are all united 
together in Jesus Christ (Eph. 3:6; Col. 1:27), as 
Paul explains in his epistles, especially to. the 
Hebrews, when he writes: “Ye are come unto 
mount Sion, and unto the city of the living God, 
the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable com- 
pany of angels, to the general assembly and church 


24 


370 | The Church of God. 


of the firstborn, which are written in heaven, and to 
God, the Judge ofall, and to the spirits of just men 
made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the new 
covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling, that speak- 
eth better things than that of Abel” (Heb. 12: 
22-24). 

From these words it is to be clearly understood 
that the innumerable company of angels, the general 
assembly and church of the firstborn, which are 
written in heaven, and the spirits of just men made 
perfect, together with all believers which have been 
added thereto, all together comprise the church of 
God, over which God, the righteous Judge, rules, 
of which Christ is the Head, and in which the Holy 
Spitit- dwells” (Eph. 21 222.93""1" Cor. © 10% > atoe 
Con 6.105 Ppa 2.2L Ose). 


~The first apostasy of the church occurred among 
the angels in heaven, who sinned (Job 4:18) and 
were untrue to their Creator, and were therefore 
cast out of heaven, and bound with chains of dark- 
ness (2 Peter 2:4), so that they can no longer do 
anything but what God suffers them to do (Luke 
9:1), although they are evil spirits and angels, 
princes or rulers of the power of the air (Eph. 2:2), 
warring against Christians, seeking to destroy them 
(Matt. 4:2; 1 Peter 5:8; James 4:7, etc.), working 
in the children of disobedience and unbelief and 
occupying the world; but they are reserved unto 
the day of judgment, unto eternal pain and damna- 
tion, yea, unto hell-fire, which shall never be 
quenched (Matt. 25:30; 2 Peter 2:4). 


The second apostasy in the church occurred 
through Adam and Eve in Paradise, who were de- 
ceived by the subtility of the serpent (Gen. 3:6) 
and corrupted by sin, by which they lost the image 
of God, ‘the immaculate holiness and their superior 
understanding, their exalted wisdom and knowledge 
of God and of all creatures, in which they had been 
created (Rom. 5:12; 1 Cor. 15:21) and which was 
fervent in love and obedience to God. From right- 
eousness they fell into unrighteousness, from their 
uncorrupted condition into corruption and condem- 
nation, and out of eternal life into eternal death. 


The Church of God. : 371 


~ The first step in the restoration of corrupt man, 
and renewing in him of the image of God, and the 
reestablishment of the ruined church of God occurred 
in the promise of the coming seed (Gen. 3:16) of 
the woman, which should bruise the serpent’s head. 
This seed is Jesus Christ, and he is called the seed 
of the woman because he was promised to Adam 
and Eve by God and is, oe to the flesh, born 
of a woman (Matt. 1: 25 ; Luke 2:7). For although 
| Mary conceived him by the Holy Ghost and brought 
him forth as a pure virgin, she is nevertheless called 
a woman in the scripturés (Luke 2:5; Gal. 4:4), 
and in the same way Ghrist is also called her seed 
and the fruit of her womb. And this Jesus Christ is 
the Crusher and Conqueror of the crooked old ser- 
pent (John 16:37), who by his death redeemed the 
human race from the tyrannical power of Satan, sin 
and eternal death (Rom.. 5:1; Col. 1:20; Heb. 
2:14). 

This was the first preaching of the gospel of 
Jesus Christ, the only Redeemer and Savior of the 
world, by whom Adam and Eve were again restored 
and again received the image of God which they 
had lost (John 3:36; 1 Tim. 2:4-6); for they were 
created anew of God, born anew of him, because 
they accepted the eracious promise of the gospel in 
true faith by the power and enlightening indluenice 
of the Holy Ghost. 

Of this Adam and his wife Eve came Cain i 
Abel, two brothers, one godly, the other ungodly 
(Gen. 4:1, etc.); Abel, a son of God and a member 
of the Church of Christ; Cain, a child of the devil 
(1 John 3:12) and having fellowship with him. The 
godly and righteous Abel was hated by the wicked 
and murderous Cain and slain because of the envy 
of his wicked heart. This is a clear demonstration 
and proof that from that time on there were two 
| kinds of people, two kinds of sons or children, two 
Ykinds of churches on earth, namely, the people of 
God and the people of the devil, the children of 
God and the children of the devil, the church of God 
and the synagogue or congregation of Satan, and 
that the children of God had to suffer persecution, 
- and that the church of God must be suppressed, 


372 The Church of God. 


dispersed and put to death by the church of the 
Antichrist (Matt. 23:37; John 8:44), which fact 
God also made known in this that he puts enmity 
between the serpent’s seed and the seed of the 
woman, and that the serpent’s seed would lay a 
snare for the seed of the woman, or bruise his heel ; 
for Christ Jesus is the true promised seed of the 
woman, as said above (and I say again, of a 
promised seed, and not of a natural seed, or else 
the serpent’s seed also would be natural (John 16: 
33), and he is the only conqueror of the devil. Be- 
side this all believers are the seed of the crooked 
old serpent, and that in a spiritual sense. And 
between the children of the aforenamed Eve and 
the serpent there is an eternal enmity, so that the 
children of the devil forever hate, envy and perse- 
cute the children of God (Gen. 3:25), and on the 
other hand, that the children of God overcome the 
Serpent and its. seed, the warld and all that is in it, 
by the blood of the Lamb, by their faith in Jesus 
Christ, by their confession and testimony to the 
truth, and by their steadfastness in the word of 
God unto death (Rev. 7:14; 12:12; 1 John 5:4). 


Further, God gave Adam and Eve another son 
in Abel’s stead, the godly Seth (Gen. 4:25), and 
from him descended other godly people, until Noah, 
who found favor with God at the time when God pun- 
ished with a deluge the children of men with those 
sons of God who had intermarried with the daugh- 
ters of men and thus:transgressed, thus destroying, 
removing and annihilating all flesh except Noah and 
those that were with him in the ark. What this 
figure signifies however, we have explained in our 
confession on baptism and in the chapter on Spirit- 
ual Restitution. 


God made a covenant with Noah and his two 
sons Shem and Japheth or at least renewed it, and 
these at that time constituted his church. But Ham, 
the third son of Noah, though he had been in the 
ark and came out with the others, mocked his father 
‘and was cursed by him, and so, in Cain’s stead, 
became a new progenitor of the synagogue of Satan} 


~ upon earth, the father of Canaan and his seed, the 


The Church of God. 373 


wicked children, who have always tormented and 
mocked the children of God and opposed God. 

Abraham, the father of the faithful, was a 
descendant of Shem. With him God renewed and 
confirmed his covenant (Gen. 15:2; 17:1; 22:16) 
—and included therein are all believers and their 
children in the covenant of God—that in his seed 
(that is, in Jesus Christ, the spiritual Isaac, the 
promised Seed of blessing, who proceeded and came 
forth from his heavenly Father and was promised 
the patriarch Abraham), all the nations of the earth 
should be blessed, and that Abraham should be the 
father of all the faithful, not alone of all those that 
are born of him according to the flesh and were 
circumcised, but also of the Gentiles (Sir. 24: 8-12)’ 
who were uncircumcised, and yet walked in the 
footsteps of the faith of Abraham and still walk 
therein, for they are counted for seed, as the apostle 
testifies (Rom. 4 :12-°9* 7). 

So then the covenant of God with all its gracious 
promises descended from Abraham to Isaac and 
Jacob, upon the twelve patriarchs, and afterward 
upon Moses and Aaron, upon David, and upon all 
who feared God, who lived then and afterward and 
who in sincere faith served God. These constituted 
the church of God, the commonwealth of Israel 
(Eph. 2:11, 12), the temple of the Lord, the testa- 
ment and sanctuary of the Most High. Here wis- 
dom had her abode in Jacob and. her heritage in 
Israel (Sir. 24:8) until the time of Christ, in which, 
time there were many devout and godfearing people 
among the Jewish nation in Jerusalem and through- 
out~Judea, such as Zacharias and Elizabeth, Joseph 
and Mary, the aged Simeon and the aged widow 
Anna the prophetess, etc. 

Beside these there were many godfearing people 
among the Gentiles, such as Melchisedec, king of 
Salem, a priest of the Most High, whose pedigree 
is suppressed by the Spirit; Abimelech, king of ~ 
Gerar. (Gen, 14: 178*° 19%: 2; Heb. pth i Gen. 2079)’; 
Job an Idumean, his friends, and many others. 
_ Therefore Paul says that “when the Gentiles, which 
have not thé law, do by nature the things contained 
in the law, these, having not the law, are a law unto 


374 | The Church of God. 


themselves; which shew the work of the law 
written in their hearts, their conscience also bearing 
witness, and their thoughts the meanwhile accusing 
or else excusing one another; in the day when God 
shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ ac- 
cording to my gospel” (Rom. 2:14-16). “Therefore 
if the uncircumcision keep the righteousness of the 
law, shall not his uncircumcision be counted for 
circumcision? And shall not uncircumcision which 
is by nature, if it fulfiill the law, judge thee, who by 
the letter and circumcision dost transgress the law? 
For he is not a Jew, which is one outwardly; 
neither is that circumcision, which is outward in 
the flesh: but he is a Jew, which is one inwardly; 
and circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit, 
and not in the letter; whose praise is not of men, 
but of God” (Rom. 2: 26-29). 

Moreover the promise of God to Abraham was, 
that in his seed all the nations of the earth should 
_be blessed, and that he should become the father of 
“all nations and of the Gentiles. Therefore God 
changed his name, so that he should be no longer 
called Abram, but Abraham (Gen. 15:5; 17:3-5; 
22:18). There are likewise also many prophesies 
in the Pentateuch, the Psalms and the Prophets 
concerning the Gentiles, that they should be called 
by Jesus Christ into the fold of Israel, and that 
many should believe in God and obey the gospel 
(Rom. 11:25; Luke 21:24; Rev. 7:9; Psa. 17:44; 
66:3; 81:15; Deut. 38: 29, etc.) 

Therefore the Jews and Israelites cannot be 
‘counted alone as the church of God, but all who 
‘truly confessed, feared, honored God, lived accord- 
ing to his will, by the law of nature written by God 
in their hearts, and all those from heathendom who 
have believed in Jesus Christ, are in their uncircum- 
cision of the flesh and in their heathendom counted 
as the spiritual seed of Abraham and of promise 
(Rom. 2:26; Gal. 3:20). Hence it follows that 
they belonged to God and to Christ. 

Thus the church of God from the beginning — 
existed in Christ, by whom all things are renewed, 
yea, that there is united into one body all that are 
in heaven and on earth (Col. 1:16, etc.), by whom 


The Church of, God. 375 | 


the church of God was made more glorious and | 
more numerous, for then shadows, types and figures | 
had an end, but the true realities came into being 
(Col. 2:9; Rom. 10:4); grace and truth came by 
Jesus Christ (John 1:17). Then were sought the 
lost sheep of the house of Israel and led by Christ 
into the right fold (Matt. 10:6; Isa 53:6; Jer. 50: 
6,17; 1 Peter 2:25, etc.). Then did the Gentiles 
of all nations come unto mount Sion to learn the 
law of the Lord our God, and to hear the gospel of 
Jesus Christ, and to walk in the way of the Lord. 
Then was the prophecy fulfilled that the desolate 
should be comforted, and the shame and contempt 
of the unfruitful be forgotten (Isa. 54:1) because 
her Maker became her husband, his name is the 
Lord Sabaoth, the Redeemer and Savior of Israel, 
the Lord and God of the whole earth. Then. did 
Jerusalem arise and shine and the glory of God rise © 
upon her and cause her brightness to shine, so that 
the Gentiles could walk in her light, and the people 
of the earth in the brightness that had risen upon 
her. Then were given to the believers, through the 
-knewledge of Jesus Christ, by God, the most pre- 
cious promises, that they should be made partakers 
of the divine nature, if so be that they have escaped 
the corrupting lusts of this world (2 Peter 1:5). 
In short, then appeared the true knowledge of God 
and Christ like a bright and morning star (Rev. 
22:16), then grace flowed like a living stream out 
from the paradise of God, then was the Holy Spirit 
poured out abundantly by God upon his sons and 
daughters, then was the new testament begun (Rev. 
12:1; Joel 2:28; Acts 2:17) according to his 
promise by the prophet Jeremiah; yea, then was 
_the church extended and the kingdom of God in- 
creased throughout the whole world (Matt. 28:19; 
Mark 16:15) by the true messengers of the Lord 
(Col. 1:28), filled and endowed with many precious 
promises and ordinances, thus becoming a glorious 
house of the living ‘God. 

But how this came to pass, and how the building 
| of the church of Jesus Christ was accomplished the 
\scripture shows us with great clearness, namely by 
ithe right teaching of the word of God, and by the 


376 The Church of God. 


faith that cometh by the hearing of the word of 
God (Rom. 10:17, 18) and the enlightenment of 
the Holy Spirit; ‘for no one can enter into the 
‘kingdom of God, into the heavenly Jerusalem, that 
is, the church of Jesus Christ, unless he from the 
heart amend his ways, sincerely repent and believe 
the gospel (Matt. 3:2; Gal. 4:6-9); yea, just as 
God founded his church on earth in Paradise with 
pure and holy people, who had been created in his 
image and after his likeness (Gen. 1:26; 2:8), so 
he still desires such as are created in Christ Jesus 
and have been renewed by the Holy Ghost in his | 
church; for although the salvation promised to man) 
has been wrought by Jesus Christ the Savior, and 
although the forfeited life has been redeemed by the 
blood of the one offering, and is offered to all man- 
kind'by the gospel’-(Tit. 2:13; -Heb: 2:2,3:+3:12 
15; 5:1-3;- 10:18-20), mavertheless not all men 
enjoy this eternal salvation and eternal life, but 
those alone who in this lifé are born again by the 
word of Jesus Christ, who allow themselves to be 
sought and found by the light of the word of God, 
and who obey the voice of their Shepherd (1 Peter 
136-253 James 1 218)" 19 Sefohn’ SB i S82 ee, 
46), who are enlightened with the true knowledge 
of God and his will and in sincere faith accept the 
righteousness that is in Christ. 

Jesus testifies of this to Nicodemus and says: 
¢ Verily, verily, I say unto thee; Except ’a man be 
born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. 
Verily, verily, I-say unto thee, Except a man be 
born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into - 
the kingdom of God” (John 3:3, 5). 

Here the kingdom of God is absolutely denied 
to all who are not born again of God, and who are 
‘not created by him anew after the inner man in 
his image. Hence those who desire to enter the 
kingdom of God must be born again. (I here speak 
of intelligent beings). 

This regeneration is not external, but in the 
mind, reason, and heart of man; in the reason or 
intelligence, and mind, in this that he learns to know 
the eternal, true and gracious God in Jesus Christ, 
who is the eternal image of the Father (2 Cor. 3: 


The Church of God. 317 


oo Golti: 155 -2°Cor, £54 "Heb lL: 3)Siand the 
brightness and express image of the Person of God. 
In the heart, in this that man loves this same al- 
mighty and living God, fears, honors and believes 
in him, ‘trusts in his promises; which cannot be 
without the power of the Holy Spirit, who must 
“innoculate into the heart, as it were, with divine 
power, giving faith, fear, love, hope and all a 
divine virtues. 


Neither are we ‘regenerated ne flesh ig blood, 
nor by any. temporal or corruptible things, but— 
‘as Peter and James testify—by the word of-the 
living God (1 Peter 1:23; James 1:18).—See chap- 
ter on The Néw Creature —(D. Fr.) 29. .we have 
written sométhing on Regeneration in the chapter 6n 
‘The New Creature, and every one who desires, may 
read there. 


Moreover the word of God is twofold, viz., aie 
fecal and the gospel. The law is the word of com- 
mand, given by God through Moses on mount Sinai 
-with such terrible noises, quakings, smoke, thunder 
and lightning (Ex. 19:16-18) that the children of 
Israel could not bear it, but said to Moses: “Speak 
thou with us, and we will hear: but let not God 
speak with us, lest we die’ (Ex. 20:19). Even 
Moses himself had become afraid and trembled 
(Heb. 12:21), which shows the sternness of the 
law, for it shows to us sin and condemnation, be- 
cause it-demands perfect righteousness in the inner 
man (Rom. 4:18-15; Deut. 4:1-6; 6:1-3; Matt. 
19:17-21), perfect holiness inwrought in the human 
nature, exalted understanding, full of true know- 
ledge of God, and added to this a holy, pure heart 
that is fervent in love to God. 


_ Moreover the law condemns the inwardly cor- 
rupt nature, that is, the corruption and loss of the 
inwrought wisdom and knowledge of God and the 
righteousness which has been implanted in the heart 
i Psa ol :-6-123*° RK phy 22123). e1t.“eondemns’ “the 
wicked desires and tendencies that are contrary to 
the word of God; for whoever reads the law with 
unveiled face must be terrified at God’s wrath (Rom. 
B20 OT 247 © 62 Cores = 13-16) -Exio3d4: 3335) and 


3718 The Church of God. 


be humbled, just as was Israel and even Moses 
himself. 

Therefore the law is given, not that it might 
bring with it to man perfect righteousness, salva- 
tion and eternal life (for by the deeds of the law 
shall no flesh be justified—Rom, 3:20; Gal. 2:16; 
3:11), but that it might, by revealing sin, teach 
man to fear God, to know and humble himself under 
the mighty hand of God, and thus be prepared with 
penitent heart to accept Jesus Christ the only Savior 
and by his grace and merit alone seek and hope for 
salvation (1 Peter 5:6; James 4:10; 1 Tim. 2:6; 
Eph. 2:13; Acts 14:14, etc.; 15:3). 

f- Inasmuch then as the law ‘teaches the knowledge 
'of sin and as from such knowledge comes the fear 
‘of the Lord, which is the beginning of all wisdom 
(Rom. 7:7; Prov. 1:7), without whom no man 
may: be justified, and as from the’fear of the Lord 
comes a broken and contrite and humbled heart, 
which is acceptable to the Lord (Psa. 51:17), there- 
fore the law serves, or is conducive in part, to the 
new birth, in view of the fact that no one can be 
born again or spiritually quickened.and no one can 
believe the gospel, except he first sincerely repent, 
as the Lord Jesus Christ himself testifies; for he 
taught the people repentance first of all, and then 
faith, and so he also commanded his apostles to do 
(Matt. 4:17; Luke 24: 47). 

The Gospel is the word of grace. It is the joyful 
message of Jesus Christ the only begotten Son of 
God, the only Redeemer and Savior (1 Tim. 2:5; 
Tit. 2:14, who gave himself for us that we might 
be ransomed from the power of Satan, sin and eter- 
nal death, and made us children and heirs of our 
heavenly Father, to be a royal priesthood (Gal. 1:4; 
Heb. 2:15; Rom. 8:14; Eph. 1:5), to be a holy 
nation and a chosen people and a possession of God 
in the Spirit (1 Peter 2:9); therefore he also says 
in the gospel: “Come unto me, all ye that labor and 
are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Learn of 
me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall 
find rest unto your souls. Take my yoke upon you; 
for my yoke is easy, and my burden is light” (Matt. 
11: 28-30). “Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that 


The Church of God. 379 


heareth my word, and believeth on him that sent 
me, hath everlasting life, and shall not come into 
condemnation; but is passed from death unto life” 
(John 5:24). “I am the resurrection, and the life: 
he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet 
shall he live: and whosoever liveth and believeth 
in me shall never die” (John 11: 25, 26). “For God © 
so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten 
Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not 
perish, but have everlasting life. For God sent not 
his Son into the world to condemn the world; but 
that the world through him might be saved. He 
that believeth on him is not condemned”, etc. (John 
3: 16-18). | 

This is the true gospel, the pure doctrine of our 
God, full of grace and mercy, full of comfort, salva- 
tion. and eternal life, given to us without any merits 
of our own works of the law, for the sake of our 
eternal and precious Savior Jesus Christ, who be- 
came subject to the law for our sakes and became 
the end and fulfillment of the law unto eternal 
salvation for all believers, if so be that we accept 
it in true faith. 

In this doctrine is presented to us as a gift by 
the heavenly Father Jesus Christ with all spiritual 
gifts (Isa. 9:6, 7) with all his wisdom, righteousness, 
holiness, truth and eternal life (Jer. 23:6; 1 Cor. 
1:30), yea, with all that is Christ’s and God’s, as 
it is written: “If God be for us, who can be against 
us? He that spared not his own Son, but delivered 
him up for us all, how shall he not with him also 
freely give us all things,” etc. (Rom. 8:31, 32). And 
again: “All things are yours; and ye are Christ’s; 
and. Christ is God’s” (1 Cor. 3:22, 23). And Christ 
says in his prayer to the Father, that he had given 
to them the words which he had received of the 
Father, together with the glory which the Father 
had given him, that they might be one, even as he 
and the Father are one (John 17:14, 22), Christ in 
them, and the Father in Christ; that they might 
be made perfect in one; and that the world might 
know that the Father had sent him and loved them, 
as he loved Christ. 

Now, all who from the teaching of the law learn 


380 The Church of God. 


to fear God, get a knowledge of sin, sincerely repent, 
turn away from their sinful and ungodly life and 
with penitent heart believe the gospel and accept 
Jesus Christ as their Savior (Matt. 3:8; Mark 1:5; 
Luke 3:8), are born anew of God by his eternal 
word (1 Peter 1:23) in the power of his Holy 
Spirit, by whom they are renewed and also sealed 
tinto the day of their redemption, and have free 
access to God and to the throne of grace by faith 
in Jesus Christ (James t*: 18; Eph. 4:30; Heb. 5: 
3; ‘Rom. 3:15), 

_Here the law, which once condemned, now it 
comes silent. Here are silenced the peals of thun- 
der, the earthquake, the smoke and the dreadful 
manifestations on ‘mount Sinai (Ext 995 SBS hicre 
shines the brighter light of the gospel and the Sun 
of ‘righteousness into the hearts of the believers 
| (John 3:9; 12:46), here is an entirely new man, 
new in heart, soul and mind or spirit, a child of God, 
and an heir ‘of the kingdom of heaven united with 
God, born anew of God, strengthened by his power 
and made ready for everlasting life (Wis. of Sol. 
i. 6)3 

And this spiritual regeneration by the word of 
God, whereby the lost image of the knowledge of 
God, of ‘his will, and the image of the divine right- 
eousness, is restored in us (1 Peter 1:23; James 
1:18; John 3:15) wherby we, through Jesus Christ, 
are able to stand before God. And this is the will 
‘of God, so the Lord has ordained, that thus we 
should be born again by the word of God, and grow 
daily in the knowledge of God, in faith, in love 
(Eph. 4:15), and continue in all obedience to the 
word of God, to the praise of the Lord and to our 
salvation ( Matt. 10: 22). 

Essentially connected with this regeneration is 
a true knowledge of the only God, that is, of the 
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost (Matt. 28:19; 1 John 
5:8). The Father is the Source of all good (Ex. 
3:6), the Essence of all things, the Creator of all 
beings, the eternal, invisible God, who dwelleth 
in light (as the apostle says, 1 Tim. 6:16) which 
no man can approach unto; whom no man hath 
seen, nor can see; neither Moses on mount Sinai, 


The Church of God. . 381 | 


nor John the Baptist at the Jordan, nor the apostle 
on mount Tabor, nor Paul in the third heaven (Ex. 
202 lee Matt, 8.2216 3117 29.:* 2-Cor 212: 1-38): butiin 
a devout and pious condition of mind have the 
believers always beheld and confessed God in Christ 
Jesus, who is the image of the invisible God, the 
brightness of his glory, the express image of his 
Person, the only begotten of the Father, the Word, 
by whom all things are made, in whom is life, the 
Life that is the light of men (2 Cor. 4:4; Col. 1: 
toe ebsites 33. Wis. of Sol.4,: 265, John. 1:3s,ete.}, 
and which has come into the world and shineth into 
the darkness, and the darkness comprehendeth it 
not. This Word was made flesh, was conceived in 
Mary by the Holy Ghost, and was born of her a 
Son of the Most High (Matt. 1:18; Luke 2:7), 
but the world did not comprehend the great mystery 
of God revealed in the flesh (1 Tim. 3:15), that 
wisdom has appeared upon the earth (Bar. 3: 20- 
23), and that the Word of life was made man (1 
John 1:1), and yet remained the Word of life; for 
since he was to be the Mediator between God and 
man, and also make reconcilation between us and 
the Father (1 Tim. 2:5; Eph. 2:16), therefore he 
had to be both God and man in one person. Inas- 
much as he was to take away the sin of the world 
(John 1:29) and with his righteousness destroy 
all unrighteousness and cause death to be swallowed 
up in victory (1 John 2:1; 1 Cor. 1:29), therefore 
he had to be the personification of righteousness, 
eternal life and salvation. Inasmuch as he was to 
give his flesh for the life of the world, therefore his: 
flesh had to make alive. For ,this reason Christ 
himself calls his flesh the bread of life, that came 
down from heaven (John 6:33), therefore it is not 
of. the earth, nor of the flesh and blood of mortal 
man. | 

In this great work of redemption, by which God 
redeemed the lost human race there is shown us 
and set before our eyes the picture of divine 
majesty, wisdom, righteousness, mercy, and kind- 
ness, i. e. in this that God sent his only begotten 
Son, who was in the form of God (Phil. 2:6), in 
the form of sinful. flesh, made him subject to the 


389 The Church of God. 


law, made him to be sin and put him under the 
curse, and he who was immortal, yea, he who rules 
all things by the word of his power became weak 
and “mortal (Gal "44 "“Rom. 833 "2 sCors, ais 
Gal. 3:18; Heb. 1:3), nevertheless he rose again 
from the dead, and by his divine power he over- 
came all his enemies (Rom. 4:25; 2 Cor. 15:25). 

“This is not the wisdom of the world, nor yet of 
the angels in heaven, but is the wisdom of God, 
hidden in mystery, which was preached by the. 
apostles, not with words of human wisdom, but 
with such words as the Holy Spirit taught them 
(1 Cor. 2:6, 7). It is also the stern, exalted, and 
_ valorous, yea, eternal justice OF Mod: that he 
_ punished and expiated our sin (which could be 
atoned for and taken away by no other means) in 
his own beloved Son. That is not human love and 
mercy, but it is God’s eternal love, God’s fathom- 
less grace and mercy, that Jesus Christ died for us 
when we were sinners, ungodly, and enemies of 
God (Isa. 53:5-11; 1 Peter 2:24; Gal. 1:4; Rom. 
0:8, 10). This is the mystery of godliness that is 
so great and so wonderful, of which Paul writes 
(1 Tim. 3:16), which cannot be apprehended excep 
by the Holy Spirit, which searches all things, vel 
the deep things of God. And since the world cannot 
receive the Holy ; Spirit (as Christ says, John 14:7, 
because it sees him not, neither knows him), 
therefore also it does not understand the mystery 
of Godliness in its power, it does not rightly know 
Jesus Christ, and does not believe in him, as the 
scripture says; but some deny his true divinity, 
some argue against his holy, spotless humanity, and 
some reject his doctrine of salvation. 

The Holy Ghost is the third name, person, power 
and agency in the Godhead, one Being with the 
Father and the Son (Matt. 28 : 19); for he proceeds 
from the Father through the Son and with them 
was an active agency in the creation, and he is the 
Spirit of truth, a Comforter of the conscience (1 
John 5:8; John 16:18), and a Dispenser of all 
spiritual oifts, which are poured by God the Father 
through Jesus Christ into the hearts of believers 
(1 Cor. 12:11), by whom they are enlightened, 


The Church of God. _ 383 


renewed and sanctified (Tit. 3:6; 1 Cor. 3:11) and 
_ become a possession of God (Eph. 1:14), and new 
creatures in Christ, and kept unto everlasting life, 
and without whom no one knows God, nor believes 
in Jesus Christ; for all good gifts come from the 
eternal Wather?(2: Cor, de 16207 s*sJas ib he At Cor, 
4:7), and are divided to us by the Holy Spirit 
CiMatte7 211): 

The Father, Son and Holy Ghost, then, is the 
only true and living God and Lord (Isa. 40:28; 
42:5), beside whom there is no other God and 
Lord, neither in heaven nor upon earth; the first 
and the last, the only, eternal, wise and just God, 
Redeemer ‘and Savior: (Revi :f:17;) 22:18): And 
this knowledge of God must exist in connection 
with the new birth, in a good conscience with true 
faith in the word of God (John 3:36), compre- 
hended by the enlightenment of the Holy Spirit, 
of which we have written at more length at another 
place. Of such regenerated people and new crea- 
tures Jesus Christ has gathered his church, and for 
them he has established a number of rules or ordin- 
ances, and given them a command that they must 
keep them, and thereby be known as his church. 

. The first rule of order is that the church above 

all other things maintain the pure and unadul- 
terated doctrine of the word of God (Matt. 28:19, 
20) and along with this have true ministers who 
are properly called and chosen by the Lord and the 
church. What the true and plain word of God is, 
and that it is twofold, namely, the law and the gos- 
pel, we have already explained above; likewise the 
manner in which the calling, choosing and ordaining 
is to be done is taught by the scripture very clearly, 
where it speaks of the calling of the prophets by 
God, the sending forth of the apostles by Jesus 
Christ, and the ordaining of the elders by the Holy 
Ghost and the Christian Church, by the united, com- 
mon voice of the church, over the flock of God, to 
feed and care for them (Matt. 10:9; 20:22, 23; 
overs gS 2593s: )-20 228. els Fim, 23's 2-75 Tite aks 6): 
In our booklet on the Sending of Ministers we have 
_ written and explained, and will here again say 
_ briefly, that the true ministers of the word of God 


\ 


384 The Church of God. 


are easily recognized by the doctrine of salvation 
by Jesus Christ, by their godly walk and by the 
fruits which they bear, and moreover by the perse- 
cution which they must suffer for truth’s and right- 
eousness’ sake; for whoever speaks the word of 
God is sent of God (John 3:34), and he that doeth 
righteousness is born of God (1 John 2:29), and he 
that converts men from unrighteousness to the 
living God remains in the counsel of God and de- 
clares to the people the word of God (Jer. 23:3, 4). 
and he that is persecuted because he teaches and 
bears witness to the truth fares just as the scripture 
says, and as all good prophets and apostles, yea, 
as the Lord himself fared (Matt. 5:11, 12; 10: 22- 
25:12:14; 21:46; John:15: 19, etc.). 

How the ministers are appointed or ordained 
and how they must be qualified may be readily ob- 
served and understood from the old testament 
figures of Aaron and his sons. When they. were 
about to be ordained as priests of the Lord, Moses 
was commanded to first wash their bodies with 
clean water, offer sacrifices for them, and take of 
the blood of the sacrifice and put it upon the tip 
of the right ear (Ex. 29:20), and upon the thumb 
of their right hand, and upon the great toe of their 
right foot, and he put closefittinge garments on them 
and girded them with girdles and bound bonnets 
upon their heads and took the anointing oil and the 
blood upon the altar and sprinkled it upon Aaron 
and his clothes, and upon his sons and their clothes, 
thus consecrating Aaron and his~garments, and his 
sons and their garments (Ex. 29:7, etc.). Upon 
Aaron he put the yellow coat and the robe of the 
ephod, and the ephod, and the breastplate, and upon 
the breastplate the symbols of light and perfection 
(Ex. 28:36), and set the mitre upon his head, and 
upon the mitre the holy crown. This was done to 
Aaron and his sons as-a figure or symbol, pointing 
to the reality, to the teachers in the church of God; 
epecially so far as the sons of Aaron are concerned: 
for Aaron is really a figure of Jesus Christ, our only 
High Priest (Heb. 2:17; 3:7; 8:1; 10:11). Never- 
theless, in view of the fact that Christ sends forth 
his ministers, even as the Father sent him (John 


The Church of God. 385 


20:21) it follows that the ministers of his holy word 
must be conformed to his image (Rom. 8:28, 29). 
Hence the figure of Azron and his sons may pro- 
perly be understood, according to the Spirit, to 
mean that the ministers of Christ who preach his 
word and proclaim his gospel must be washed with 
the pure water of the Holy Ghost and sprinkled 
with the precious blood of the spotless Lamb Jesus 
Christ who offered himself for us (Heb. 10: 18-22; 
John 1:29; 1 Peter 1: 22, 23), first on the right ear,~ 
that the ears of their understanding may be opened 
to hear what God speaks to them; secondly, on the 
thumb, of-their right hand :(Heb.»12:12, 13). that* 
they may lift up holy hands to God (1 Tim. 2:8), 
and thirdly, on the great toe of their right foot, 
that they may walk uprightly before the Lord, in 
the way of righteousness. They must be clothed ~ 
with Christ Jesus (Rom. 13:14; Gal. 3:27; Eph. 
4:24; 5:5; 6:11), girded with the band of love 
and of truth, and adorned with the pure linen of 
righteousness (Rev. 19:8), the breastplate of light ° 
and righteousness (Urim and Thummim), and the 
twelve precious stones must be hung upon them, that 
is, they must have the treasure of the word of God in 
their hearts, for they are ministers of the Lord 
(Gal. 6:14-17) unto the spiritual Israel, to teach 
_ Jacob the law of God, and Israel his judgments 
(Deut. 33:10). The mitre with the gold crowned 
frontlet is upon their head, that is, they rightly 
divide the word of God between the old and new 
testaments, between the letter and the Spirit, with 
a clear understanding of the mystery of Godliness 
(iMate o. bert Limi 29s Eph.s.6:-L9), chey have 
also a living hope of salvation, and there is laid up 
for them the crown of righteousness for that day 
(2 Tim. 4:8). -They enter the sanctuary of the 
Lord and offer the living sacrifices for the church .- 
of the Lord (Rom. 12:1; 1 Peter 2:5), and their 
prayers tinkle and are heard by the Most High, so 
that he remembers his church. The anointing oil 
is poured upon them, for they have received the 
anointing of him who is holy, and they are thereby 
sanctified (1 John 2:27). 

Such are.the ministers whom Christ has chosen 


25 


386 _. The Church of God. ‘ 
and sent forth to make known his word, to preach 
repentance and forgiveness of sins unto all who 
believe the gospel (Luke 24:46; John 20:23) and 
obey it. But faith must be cenuine, that is, of such 
‘nature and power, and may be recognized in this 
‘that every word of God is believed, all doctrines 
of man are rejected, all hope is, with the whole 
pheart, placed upon the grace of Jesus Christ, all 
| earthly things are cast aside, self is denied and 
| heavenly things are sought after with all diligence. 

| Spent 4-492. 10:92 de Perera gi Heb aie aos 
Col Bs 26 Phil. 3: 20; 2. Cor. 4: 13:)3 and out of pure 
fear of the Lord they hate sin and love righteous- 
ness (Psa. 45:7; Heb. 1:9), and thus show forth > 
the fruits of the Holy Spirit. Where this is the 
case, there is true faith; but where this is not the 
case, there is a vain and false profession of faith 
CGaln 6 1-95" 

The second rule or order which Christ estab- 
lished in his church is the proper, scriptural use of 
the sacraments of Jesus Christ, that is, of baptism 
and the Lord’s Supper. For the penitent, believing 
and regenerated children of God must be baptized, 
and for them the Lord’s Supper is ordained (Matt. 
oo; 282193 “Mark 1S Acts 2 4s ae ee 
48; 16:15; 18:8; 22:16). These two symbols 
Christ gave and left behind and subjoined to the — 
gospel because of the unspeakable grace of God and 
his covenant, to remind us thereof with visible sym- 
bols, to put it before our eyes and to confirm it; 
‘in the first place by baptism, to remind us that he 
{himself baptizes within and in mercy accepts sinners, 
forgives them all their sins, cleanses them with his 
blood (Matt. 3:11; John 3:5), bestows upon them 
all his righteousness and the fulfilling of the law, 
and sanctifies them with the Spirit (Rev. 1:5; 1 
Cor. 3:23). In the second place, by the Lord’s 
Supper, which testifies to divine acceptance and 
redemption by Jesus Christ (Matt. 26: 26-28; Mark 
14:22; Luke 22:19), namely, that all believing 
hearts, who are sorry for their sins, hasten to the 
throne of grace Jesus Christ, believing and confess- 
ing that the Son of God died for them and has 
shed his blood for* us (Rom: 3: 25; 42255 3873). 


° The Church of God. Par ¥) 
obtain forgiveness of sin, deliverance from the law, 
everlasting justification and salvation, by grace, 
through Jesus Christ (Gal. 3:13; Eph. 1:7; Rom. 
11:6). 

These two symbols are left us by the Lord that 
| they might admonish us to a godly walk (Col. 2:6; 
| Rom. 16:18), to a crucifixion of the flesh, the burial 
‘of sin, a resurrection into newness of life, to thanks- 
giving for the great benefits which we have received 
of the Lord, to a remembrance of the bitter suffer- 
ing and death of Christ, to the renewing and con- 
firming of brotherly love, unity and fellowship 
(Matt. 26:26: Mark 14:23; Luke 22:20; 1 Cog. 
10:17; 11:25); in other words, that they shall dis- 
tinguish the church of God from all other sects, 
who do not make right, scriptural use of the sym-| 
bols of the sacrament of the Lord Jesus Christ, 
although they have the appearance of doing so, anid 
in their hypocrisy profess much about it, and com- 
mit shameful sacrilege with it; for they do not use 
the sacraments of Christ according to his word, nor 
according to his command and example, nor accord- 
ing to the precepts and practices of the apostles, 
but according to the world’s traditions and the ideas 
of men. Beside this they remain impenitent in the 


-/ old sinful life, full of unrighteousness, covetous- 


ness, corruption, pride, envy, slander and all manner 
of wickedness, which is a sure evidence that they 
have not the pure word of God and the true faith, 
the proper use of baptism and the Lord’s Supper 
according to the scripture. For, wherever the holy 
gospel that is testified to with such solemn vows 
of God, confirmed by the precious blood of Jesus 
Christ, and sealed by the Holy Spirit, is rightly 
taught and believed, and the sacraments of the Lord 
are thereupon received with true faith in heartfelt 
devotion and meditation upon the mystery which 
‘is hidden therein, as this should be done, there the 
‘Holy Spirit will enter the heart, there he renews 
daily the lost image of God, he imparts the know- 
ledge of the Father in his image, Christ, he increases 
faith, hope, love, patience, and all the divine virtues 
Gitehn Gi: a tviteniclo2 28 Jaohn'3:16+--5:43seActs 
2:46;>Tit. 3:5; Eph. 4:23; Rom, 3:24; Gal. 4:5; 


388 ; The Church of God. 


Gal. 5:22). He comforts the consciences, cleanses 
the hearts and makes them fruitful in the know- 
ledge of God and Christ and endows them with all 
manner of spritual wisdom and understanding in 
heavenly things, he gives boldness to the mind to 
call upon God and to address the exalted majesty 
of God, saying, Abba, Father (Col. 1:9; Rom. 8: 
9-11; Gal. 4:5, 6). He teaches true humility, meek- 
ness, patience, kindness and speaks the peace of 
God to the conscience (Gal. 5:22, 23). Here, then, 
the adversary, the devil, must flee, here the flesh is 
crucified with its lusts and desires (Jas. 4:7; Gal. 
6:14, 16); here by the power of faith in Jesus 
Christ the world lies prone under’ foot (1 John 
5:4). Where this does not take place and cannot 
be seen, there is neither God, nor Christ, nor Holy 
Spirit, nor gospel, nor faith, nor true baptism, nor 
the Lord’s Supper, in short, there is no church of 
(sod. 

The third ordinance is the washing of feet of the 
saints, which Jesus Christ commanded his disciples 
to observe (John 18: 4-17), and this for two reasons. 
First, he would have us know that he himself must 
cleanse us after the inner man, and that we must 
allow him to wash away the sins which beset us 
(Heb. 12:1) and all filthiness of the flesh and the 
spirit (Ezek. 36:25; 2 Cor. 7:1), that we may 
become purer from day to day, as it is written (the 
literal translation is here givén.—Tr.): He that is 
righteous, let him become more righteous; and he 
that is holy (or pure), let him become more holy 
(or purer) (Rev. 22:11). and this is necessary, 
yea, it must be done, if we would be saved; there- 
fore Christ says to Peter: “If I wash thee not, thou 
hast no part with me” (John 13:8). Then Peter 
answered: “Lord, not my feet only, but also my 
hands and my head.” To this Jesus replied: He 
that is washed needeth not save to wash his feet, 
and is clean every whit” (John 13:10). 

By this Christ makes it evident that the washing 
of feet (wherewith Christ washes us) is very neces- 
sary, and what it signifies, inasmuch as those whom 
he does not wash shall have no part with him, and — 


\ that those who have been washed by him need no 


The Church of God. 389 


more than that their feet are washed, and they are 
clean every whit or wholly clean, for it is Christ 
who must cleanse us from our sins with his blood, 
and he that is sprinkled and washed therewith needs 
have no more than that the earthly members, the 
evil lusts and desires of the flesh, be put to death 
or mortified and overcome for him, and by grace he 
is wholly clean and no sin is imputed to him (Rom. - 
O24 iE ph. 1 42FieCols dvd 3 11 - John: 74 Rev. 
1:5; Rom. 8:18). 

The second reason why Jesus instituted the or- 
dinance of footwashing is that we shall humble our- 
selves among one another (Rom. 12:10; Phil. 2:3; 
1 Peter 5:5; James 4:10, 11), and that we hold 
our fellow-believers in the highest respect, for the 
reason that they are the saints of God and members 
of the body of Jesus Christ, and that the Holy Ghost 
dwells’ in them (Rom. 12:10; Col. 3:13: 7 Cor. 
3:16), which Jesus teaches us in these words: “Ye 
call me Master and Lord: and ye say say well: 
forsol am. If I then, your Lord and Master, have 
washed your feet; ye also ought to wash one 
another’s feet. For I have given you an example, 
that ye should do as I have done to you, Verily, 
verily, I say unto you, The servant is not greater 
than his lord; neither he that is sent greater than 
he that sent him. If ye know these things, happy 
(or blessed—Gr. tr.) are ye if ye do them” (John 
13: 13-17). 

Now, if they are happy or blessed who know and 
do this, how void of blessing those remain who 
profess to be apostles or messengers of the Lord 
and do not know these things; or, if they know, do 
not do them nor teach others to do them. But their 
heart is altogether too proud and puffed up, so that 
they will not humble themselves according to the 
command and example of Christ. They are either 
ashamed to do so, or else it appears like folly to 
them (exactly as the wisdom of God has always 
been looked upon by the world as foolishness, 1 
Cor. 1:18-21; 2:14). But they greatly prefer to 

have the honor of men; they love to be called 
, Doctors, Masters and Sirs (John 5:11); for the 
Vhonor that comes from God, and which is obtained 


390 The Church of God. 


by genuine faith and a holy life they do not aspire 
to, yet they want to be the church of Church and be 
so known, yea, held exclusively as such. But God, 
who resisteth the proud and giveth grace to the 
humble (1 Peter 5:5; James 4:10), knows them 
well, and will at the last day make it evident what 
kind of a church (or one might more properly say 
~ sect) they have been. 

The fourth rule or ordinance is evangelical 
separation, without which the church of God can- 
not stand or be maintained. For if the unfruitful 
branches of the vine are not pruned away they will 
injure the good and fruitful branches (John 15: 2-6). 
If offending members are not cut off, the whole 
body must perish (Matt. 5:30; 18:7-9; that is, if. 
open sinners, transgressors and disobedient are not 
excluded, the whole body must perish (1 Cor. 5: 9- 
13; 1 Thess. 5:14), and if false brethren are re- 
tained in the church we become partakers of their 
sins. Of this we have many examples and evidences 
in the scripture (1 John 1:10; 2 John 1:10). 

In the book of Joshua we have the terrible ex- 
ample of Achan who had stolen some of the con- 
demned or accursed goods in Jericho and hidden 
them in his tent (Josh. 7:1). Because of this the 
Lord’s anger was stirred against Israel, so that he 
permitted a number in Israel to be slain in battle, 
and among other things he said to Joshua: “The 
children of Israel could not stand before their ene- 
mies, but turned their backs before their enemies, 
because they were accursed: neither will I be with 
you any more, except ye destroy the accursed from 
among you” (Josh. 7:12). Therefore Achan and 
all that belonged to him were destroyed and rooted 
out of Israel, Joshua saying to him: “Why hast 
thou troubled us? The Lord shall trouble thee this 
day” (Josh. 7:25). And all Israel stoned him with 
stones. 

We have likewise in the book of Numbers a 
notable example in Dathan, Abiram and Korah, 
who set themselves up against Moses and Aaron, 
and many of the most prominent or righteous in 
Israel took their part. But Moses said to the con+ 
gregation of the Lord: “Depart, I pray you, from 


The Church of God. 391 


’ the tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing 
of their’s, lest ye be consumed in all their sins” 
(Num. 16:26). 

From such and like historical incidents and ex- 
amples given in holy writ it may be easily observed 
and understood that no church or congregation can 
be maintained before God that does not properly 
and earnestly exercise the ban or separation accord- 
ing to the command of Christ and the teaching and 
example of the apostles, but that they will fare 
according to the old proverb that “a little leaven 
leaveneth the whole lump”, and that “one black (or 
scabbed) sheep will mar the whole flock” (1 Cor. 
9:6); yea, “like people, like priest” (Hosea 4:9). 

Separation or exclusion must also be practice 


for the reason that thcreby the offender may be 


mortified in the flesh and be made ashamed, and so 
may repent that he may be saved in the day of 
the Lord Jesus’ (1 Cor. 5:5), which is the highest 
love, and the best remedy for his poor soul, as may 
be observed in the case of the Corinthian fornica- 
tor. Moreover necessity demands that there be a 
separation from apostates and wicked persons, that 
the name of God, the gospel of Jesus Christ and the 
church of the Lord be not on their account put to 
shame (Psa. 50:21; Ezek. 36: 20-24; Rom. 2:24). 

Now, what those sins are which must be pun- 
ished with the ban are shown us by the evangelists 
and apostles in express words (Matt. 18:13-17; 
Ronkee!6 BEd Cord 310: )1-Thess: 5 2145, 1. Tim 
3:1-7; Tit. 3:10; 2 John 10), and we have also 
in our confession regarding the evangelical ban 
carefully explained it. And what the church of 
the Lord thus passes judgment upon by the word 
of God, the same is judged before God, for Christ 
gave his church the keys of the kingdom of heaven 


(Matt. 16:19) that they might punish, exclude and , 
put away the wicked and receive the penitent and 


believing. What the church thus binds upon earth 
shall be bound in heaven, and, on the other hand, 
what she looses on earth shall be loosed in heaven. 
This must not be understood as meaning that men 
have power to forgive sins or to retain them (John 
20:23), as some imagine, and therefore deal with 


392 The Church of God. 


f the confessional and absolution as with merchandise. 
' No minister of Christ is to do this, neither is the 
church of the Lord to admit any Simonites (Acts 
8:9, 18, 18), for no prophet or apostle on earth has” 
presumed to forgive sin, to hear confession and to 
grant absolution to the people, although Christ said 
to his disciples: ‘Receive ye the Holy Ghost: 
whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto 
them; and whose soever sins ye retain, they are re- 
tained” (John 20:22, 23). The holy men of God 
did not assume divine honor, but were perfectly 
conscious of the fact, through the indwelling of the 
Holy Ghost, that God alone forgives and can for- 
give sin, as the scripture unanimously testifies. But 
the church has received the Holy Ghost and the 
gospel from Jesus Christ (Matt. 9:6; Psa. 51:4) 
in which is proclaimed and promised forgiveness of 
sins, reconciliation with God, and eternal life to all 
who truly repent and believe in Jesus Christ; on 
the other hand, disfavor, wrath and damnation are 
threatened and promised toward all unbelievers, dis- 
obedient and perverted ones. These words, together 
with the Holy Spirit, are the judge in the church 
against all false brethren (Rom. 16:17, 18; 1 Cor. 
5:3-5; 2 Tim. 2:3; Tit: 3:10), against all heretics 
and all disorderly and disobedient persons who after 
sufficient admonition do not repent; and on the 
judgment dav no other sentence will be pronounced, 
as the Lord himself says; and this word the church 
has received from God, by which, in the name of 
Jesus Christ, and in the power of the Holy Spirit 
she testifies, judges, receives and expels, and what 
she thus binds or looses on earth with the word and 
Spirit of the Lord, is bound or loosed in heaven. 
The fifth ordinance is the command of love 
which Christ gave his disciples, saying: “A new 
commandment I give unto you, That ye love one 
another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one 
another. By this shall all men know that ye are 
my disciples, if ye have love to another’ (John 13: 
34, 35; 15:12, 17). From this it is easy to under- 
stand that pure brotherly love is a sure sign of 
genuine faith and true Christianity. But this is 
true brotherly love, that our chief desire is one 


The Church of God. 393 


another’s salvation, by our fervent prayers to God, 
-by scriptural instruction, admonition and rebuke, 
that thereby we may instruct him who is overtaken 
in a fault, in order to win his soul, and all this with 
Christian patience (Gal. 6:3; 2 Thess. 1:11; James 
5:19; 1 John 5:16), and thus having forbearance 
toward the weak and not simply pleasing ourselves. 
Then again brotherly love is shown in this that 
among one another we cheerfully bear one another’s 
burdens, not only in spiritual matters, but also with 
temporal gifts, which we have received from the 
Lord, that we minister to the necessity of the saints 
(Rom. 12:13), and give liberally according to our 
ability; yea, that it be done among us as it was 
done in the Israel of old, namely, he that gathered 
much manna had nothing over, and he that gathered 
nideshadtnic ReovtEx 6918372 Cori! 8Sv1b jp oSo0 
then the rich, who have received many temporal 
possessions from the Lord, are to minister to the 
poor therewith (Rom. 15:27; 1 Cor. 8:10) and 
supply their lack, or minister to their needs, so that 
the poor in turn serve them as they may have need 
of their. services. Therefore Christ says in the gos- 
pel: “Make to yourselves friends of the mammon 
of unrighteousness; that, when ye fail, they may 
receive you into everlasting habitations.” (Luke 16: 
9). And Paul writes to Timothy: “Charge them that 
are rich in this world, that they be not highminded, 
nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, 
who giveth us richly all things to enjoy; that they 
do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to 
distribute, willing to communicate; laying up in 
store for themselves a good foundation against the 
time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal 
life’ (1 Tim. 6:17-19). And John writes in his 
epistle: “Hereby perceive we the love of God, be- 
cause he laid down his life for us: and we ought 
to lay down our lives for the brethren. But whoso 
hath this world’s good, and seeth his brother have 
need, and shutteth up his bowels of compassion 
from him, how dwelleth the love of God in him? 
My little children, let us not love in word, neither 
in tongue; but in deed and in truth” (1 John 3: 
16-18). 3 


394 The Church of God. 


How necessary love is, the apostles show us 
everywhere in all their writings, especially Paul to. 
the Corinthians, when he writes: “Though I speak 
with the tongue of men and of angels, and have not 
charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a tink- 
ling cymbal. And though I have the gift of proph- 
ecy, and understand all mysteries, and all know- 
ledge; and though I have all faith, so that I could 
remove mountains, and have not charity, I am 
nothing. And though I bestow all my goods to 
feed the poor, and though I give my body to be 
burned, and have not charity, it profiteth me noth- 
ing’ (1 Cor. 18: 1-4). 

From this it may be easily understood how 
widely those differ from the genuine faith and 
Christianity who do not love one another, who do 
not show their love toward one another by their 
works, but allow their poor to suffer want and 
openly beg for bread, against the command of the 
Lord (Deut: 15:4; Rom. 12:18; 2 Cor. 8:14; Gal. 
6:8), contrary to all Christian nature and contrary 
to brotherly love and fidelity. And, what is worse, 
they quarrel, hate, envy, backbite, scold, blaspheme, 
persecute, throttle and kill. one another, as is plain- 
ly seen before our eyes and their deeds show; and 
although they do this, nevertheless they want to be 
called Christians and the church of God. But if 
they do not repent they will find out, on that day 
when they appear before the judgment seat of 
Christ, what fine (?) Christians they have been; for 
where love is not, God is not (1 John 4:8), seeing 
that God is love, as John says: “He that dwelleth 
in love dwelleth in God, and God in him” (1 John 
4:16). But he that dwells not in love “is in dark- 
ness, and walketh in darkness, and knoweth not 
whither he goeth, because that darkness hath 
blinded his eyes” (1 John 2:11). 

The sixth ordinance which Christ has instituted 
for his church is the keeping of all his command- 
ments (Matt. 28:20), for he demands of all his 
disciples a godly life, that they walk according to 
the gospel, openly confess the truth before men (1 
. Cor. 7:19; Phil. 1:27; Matt. 10.10:32), deny self, 
and faithfully follow in his footsteps, voluntarily 


The Church of God. 395 


take up his cross, forsake all things and earnestly 
seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness 
(Matt. 16:25; 1 Peter 2:22; Matt. 6:16, 20), the 
unseen heavenly things and eternal life. He also 
teaches his disciples to be poor in spirit (Matt. 5:3), 
have godly sorrow, meekness, purity of heart, mercy, 
peacemaking, patience in persecution for righteou- 
ness’ sake and to rejoice in conscience when they 
are despised and rejcted for his name’s sake (Luke 
9:23; 17:33). He also instructs his own in true 
humility and warns them faithfully against all spirit- 
ual and carnal pride. Moreover he holds before 
them the fact that they must hear and keep God’s 
word, hunger and thirst after righteousness, beware 
of false prophets (Luke 8:14; John 8:47; Matt. 
5:6), not follow the hireling and flee from the 
strange voice (Matt. 16:6; John 10:12); also that 
they are to fast, and to pray without ceasing, that 
they ‘are to guard against gluttony, drunkenness, 
and anxiety regarding bodily food and raiment 
(Matt. 6:5; Luke 21:34); that they must watch, 
and prepare for his appearing (Matt. 24:32; 25:13), 
that they. must beware of the leaven of the Phari- 
sees, which is hypocrisy (Matt. 16:6), so that they 
will not glory in their own works and seek a false 
righteousness therein; that they shall not watch 
for the mote in their brother’s eye and not be aware 
of the beam in their own eye (Matt. 7:3); also, 
not to swallow camels while they strain at gnats, 
etc. Yea, he prescribes to his own the rule of per-; 
fection, to “love your enemies; bless them that 
curse you, do good unto them that hate you, and) 
pray for them that despitefully use you, and perse-' 
cute you” (Matt. 5:44), and from the heart to for- 
give them their debts; not to avenge themselve 

but to leave the matter to God, to whom all venge- 
ance belongs (Rom. 12:19). Also, that they are 
not only to guard against the works of the flesh 
which are manifest, such as. murder, adultery, false 
swearing, etc. (Matt. 5:22), but also against anger, 
evil speaking, inordinate lusts and desires of the 
heart, and that they are to guard against all kinds 
of swearing (Matt. 5:34), and not to do this in any 
manner, on pain of hell-fire, as may be seen in the 





396 ~The Church of God. 


gospel according to Matthew. The apostles likewise 
teach in their epistles that Christians must in all 
things show themselves obedient children of their 
heavenly Father as the elect and chosen ones of a 
holy’ God | (Cols 3712571 Peter 121562 Cor. 6:4)7as 
the servants of the Lord Jesus Christ, as the instru- 
ments of the Holy Ghost, as a royal priesthood, as 
a chosen generation (1 Peter 2:9), as a people | 
owned by God, a peculiar people, zealous of good 
works (Eph. 5:27; Tit. 2:14), as the children of 
light, who must walk no longer in darkness, but in 
the light, having been called out of darkness into 
the wonderful light that they might declare the 
power of God, and are therefore delivered from the 
hand of their enemies to serve God in holiness and 
in righteousness all the days of their lives (Luke 
2:70). . 

This is the philosophy of heaven, which Jesus 
Christ, the Son of God, received of his Father, 
brought down from heaven and taught his disciples, 
This is the counsel and will of God, the saving 
doctrine of Jesus Christ (Acts 20:27), and the 
testimony of the Holy Spirit; and in all this the 
Lord Jesus Christ is to his own a Master sent of 
God, whom they must hear (Matt. 3:17; 17:5); 
a Sheperd or Prior, whom they must follow (1 Peter 
2:25); an Example, to which they must conform 
themselves (Rom. 8:29). This is the rule of Chris- 
tianity, of which Paul writes: “As many as walk 
according to this rule, peace be on them, and mercy, 
and upon the Israel of God” (Gal. 6:16). But those 
who will not walk according to this rule are not 
Christians, let them profess what they will. 

The seventh ordinance or rule is that all Chris- 
tians must suffer and be persecuted, as Christ has 
foretold and promised them; saying: that the world 
shall have joy, but “ye shall have tribulation” (John 
16:33): “but be of good cheer,” for “your. sorrow 
shall be turned into joy.” “Ye shall be hated of all 
nations for my name’s sake” (Matt. 24:9); yea, 
the time cometh, that whosoever killeth you will 
think that he doeth God service” (John 16:2). Paul 
concurs with this and says: “If so be that we suffer 
with him, we shall also be glorified together,’ and 


The Church of God. 397 


inherit our heavenly Father’s kingdom (Rom. 8:17; 
2 Tim. 2:12). “Yea, all that will live godly in 
Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution” (2 Tim. 3:12). 
Thus Paul and Barnabas testified in all the churches 
that they must through much persecution and 
suffering enter the kingdom of God (Acts 13:50). 
In short, the entire holy scripture testifies that the 
righteous must suffer much, and possess his soul 


in patience (Luke 21:19). Where there is a godly 


Abel there does not fail to be a wicked Cain (Gen. 
4:1, 2, etc.); where there is a chosen David there 
is also a rejected Saul to persecute him (1 Sam. 18: 
11); where Christ is born, there is a Herod who 
seeks his life (Matt. 2:16); where he openly 
preaches and works, there Annas and Caiaphas, 
together with the bloodthirsty Jews, gather together 
and hold counsel against him (Matt. 26:3,4; Mark 
14:1; Luke 22:1; Acts 4:6), nor can they cease 
until they have killed him, and force Pilate to do 
their will. 

Thus must the true Christians here be persecuted 
for the sake of truth and righteousness, but the 
Christians persecute no one on account of his faith. 
For Christ sends his disciples as sheep in the midst 
of wolves (Matt. 10:16); but the sheep does not 
devour the wolf, but the wolf the sheep. Hence 
they can nevermore be counted as a church of the 
Lord who persecute others on account of their 
faith; for, in the first place, God, the heavenly 
Father has committed all judgment unto Jesus 
Christ (John 5:22), to be a Judge of the souls and 
consciences of men and rule in his church with the 
scepter of his word forever (Luke 2: 68-79). In the 
second place, it is the office or work of the Holy 
Spirit to reprove the world of the sin of unbelief 
(John 16:8). Now, it is evident that the Holy 
Spirit through the apotles and all pious witnesses 
of the truth did not administer this reproof by 
violence or with the material sword, but by God’s 
word and power. In the third place the Lord Jesus 
Christ gave his church the power and established 
the rule to separate from her, avoid and shun the 


false brethren, disorderly and disobedient, content- 


ious and heretical people, yea, all in the church who 


398 7 The Church of God. 


are found wicked, as has already been said (Rom. 
1621624 Cor: SP10Se1 Chess. 71365 fie 
what is done over and above this is not Christian, 
evangelical nor apostolical. 

In the fourth place the parable of the Lord in 
the gospel proves clearly to us that he does not 
permit his servants to pull up the tares so that 
thereby the wheat be not pulled up also; but they 
are to let the wheat and the tares grow together 
in the world until the Lord shall command his reap- 
ers, that is, his angels, to gather the wheat into his 
barn and cast the tares into the fire (Matt. 24:30). 

From this it is evident that no church may exer- 


' cise dominion over the consciences of men with the 
\ carnal sword, or seek by violence, to force unbe- 


lievers to believe, nor to kill the false prophets with 
sword and fire; but that she must with the word 
of God judge and expel those in the church who are 
found wicked; and what is done over and above 
this is not Christian, nor evangelical, nor apostoli- 
cal. And if some one ventures to assert-that the 
powers that be have not received the sword in vain 
(Rom. 18:1), and that God through Moses com- 
manded that the false prophets be put to death 
(Deut. 13:5), I will give this answer in brief: The 
higher power has received the sword or authority 
from God, not that it shall judge therewith in spirit- 
ual matters (for these things must be judged by the 
spiritual, and spiritually, 1 Cor. 2:13), but to main- 
tain a proper policy and good order among its 
subjects, to protect the good and punish the evil. 
‘And God’s command through Moses to put the false 
prophets to death is a command of the old, and not 
the new, testament. Contrasted to this we have 


- received another command from God that we are 


to take heed of false prophets, that we are not to 
give ear to them, that we are to shun a heretic, and 
thereby commit them to the judgment of God (Matt. 
7:13; John 10:5; Tit. 3:10). Now, if, according 
to the old testament command, false prophets were 
to be put to death, then this would have to be carried 
out, first of all, with those who are looked upon as 
false prophets and antichrists by almost the whole 
world. Likewise the higher powers would be 


The Church of God. 399 


obliged to put to death not only the false prophets, 
but also all image worshippers, and those who serve 
idols, and who counsel other people to commit 
sacrilege (Deut: 13:1; (Ex.° 22:18); and all’ who 
blaspheme the name of the Lord, and who swear 
falsely by that name, all who curse father or mother 
and profane the Sabbath (Ex. 20:7-10; Deut. 27: 
17); for they are all alike condemned to death by 
the law as well as the false prophets.are. 


It is therefore nothing but an effort to sew fig- 
leaves together to hide their shame, on the part of 
those who would decorate their tyranny with scrip- 
ture and propose that they. do not put Christians to 
death, but only heretics, and that God thus com- 
manded through Moses. The world even looks 
upon the most pious Christians as the most wicked 
heretics, just as all good prophets were always 
looked upon by the world as liars, agitators, fanatics 
and deceivers (Jer. 11:21; Amos. 2:9; Matt. 5:11; 
23:30; Acts 6:14), and Christ himself was num- 
bered with the transgressors (Matt. 26:55), and the 
apostles are set forth as the least, and as it were 
appointed unto death, made a spectacle unto the 
world, as a byword, reproach and the offscouring 
of the world (Psa. 44:18, 14; 1 Cor. 4:9), and this 
is still the case with all genuine Christians; but 
they are comforted herein, for they trust in the Lord 
their God, ,and comfort themselves with the glorious 
promise given them by God, namely, that they are 
blessed or saved, Matt. 5:10-12), that theirs is the 
kingdom of heaven, and that the Spirit of God rests 
upon them when they are persecuted for righteous- 
. ness’ sake, when men say all manner of evil against 
them falsely and for the sake of the name of Christ, 
if they have become partakers of the sufferings of 
Christ and for his sake are despised, knowing that 
they shall also be made partakers of his glory (Matt. 
Dario itabeter 4°14: Rom. 87 14:2 Tim, 2:12): 


I have now briefly pointed out and discussed 
what the church of God is, how and by what means 
it is built up, what ordinances and rules are included, 
by what symbols it is portrayed, how it may be 
recognized, and how distinguished from all sects: 


400 The >Chureh sof God: 


for in all false and antichristian churches these 
things are not found, namely,-no real new birth, 
no real distinction between law and gospel, that 
brings. forth fruit, and by which people truly repent 
and are converted from unrighteousness unto God 
(Matt. 3:8; Luke 3:8), no true knowledge of the 
only and eternal God, who is life eternal, the fullness 
of wisdom and of righteousness, that is manifested 
by the keeping of the. commandments of Christ 
(John 17:3; Wis. of Sol. 15:3), no true knowledge 
of the pure, holy, and spotless humanity of Jesus 
Christ, no faith that produces fruits, no scriptural 
baptism or Lord’s Supper, no Christian washing of 
the feet of saints (John 13:5-17) in the quietness of 
true humility, no key to the kingdom of heaven, no 
evangelical ban or separation, no shunning of the 
temples of idolatry and of false worship, no undis- 
simulated brotherly love, no godfearing life, no 
keeping of the commands of Christ, no persecution 
for righteousness’ sake. All these ordinances and 
evidences of true Christianity are found in no anti- 
christian churches in true form and condition, but 
everywhere the reverse, as may be clearly seen in 
these days, if so be that a man has eyes to see, ears 
to hear, and a heart to understand (Matt. 13:9; 
Meee. Fgh): 

Futhermore the church of the Lord is easily 
recognizable from its description, namely, “the holy 
city, new Jerusalem, coming down from God out of 
heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her hus- 
band” (Rev. 21:2), “having the glory of God: and 
her light was like unto a stone most precious, even 
like a jasper stone, clear as crystal; and had a wall 
ereat and high, and had twelve gates, and at the 
eates twelve angels, and names written thereon, 
which are the names of the twelve tribes of the 
children of Israel” (Rev. 21:11, 12); and the build- 
ing of the wall of it was of Jasper: and the city 
was pure gold, like unto clear glass. And the foun- 
dations of the wall of the city were garnished with | 
all manner of precious stones” (Rev. 21:18, 19); 


and the twelve gates were twelve pearls; every 


several gate was of one pearl: and the street of the 
city was pure gold, as it were transparent glass. 


The Church of God. 401 


And I saw no temple therein: for the Lord God 
Almighty and the Lamb are the temple of it. And 
the city had no need of the sun, neither of the moon, 
to shine in it; for the glory of God did lighten it, 
_and the Lamb is the light thereof. And the nations 
of them which are saved shall walk in the light of 
it: and the kings of the earth do bring their glory 
and honor into it. And the gates of it shall not be 
shut at all by day: for there shall be no night there; 
and a pure river of water of life, clear as crystal, 
proceeds out of the throne of God and of the Lamb. 
In the midst of the street of it, and on either side of 
the river, was there the tree of life, which bare 
twelve manner of fruits, and yielding her fruit every 
month: and the leaves of the tree were for the 
healing of the nations. And the throne of God and 
of the Lamb shall be in it, yea, the tabernacle of 
God is with men, and he dwells with them, and 
they are his people, and he himself with them is 
their God, and the glory and honor of the nations 
shall be brought into this same city. And there 
shall in no wise enter into it anything that defileth, 
neither whatsoever worketh abomination, or maketh 
a lie: but they which are written in the Lamb’s 
book of life. And his servants shall serve him: and 
they shall see his face; and his name shall be in 
their foreheads; and they shall reign forever and 
ever.” 

This is a description or lifelike portrait of the 
Christian church, as she exists here in Spirit, and 
hereafter in the perfection of heavenly existence. 
For, in the first place the holy city is the church, 
whose citizens are the Christian believers and mem- 
bers of the household of God (Eph. 2:19), and it is 
called a city for the reason that as in a city there 
must be concord, the citizens must hold firmly to- 
gether, living and acting according to the same 
policy, ordinances and law, if the city is to continue 
to exist, so it must also be in the church. Thee 
must be unity of spirit and of faith (1 Cor. 1:9); 
10:21; Rom. 12:16); there the same rule of the 
divine word must govern the walk and conversation 
of its members, and the divine policy which this city 
has received of God must be concordantly observed. 


26 


402 The Church of God. 


Therefore also the prophet declares that Jerusalem 
is built as a city that is compact together (Psa. 122: 
3), whose citizens are united, whereby there is por- 
trayed to us the unity of the church of God, of which 
the scripture says much (Psa. 128: 6-9; Eph. 4:3; 
Colh 32162 Gall 3428 "jonni? a5 etc.) 

In the second place the church is the new Jeru- 
salem (Rev. 21:2); because all things have become 
new through Jesus Christ (Rom. 7:6); the oldness 
of the letter and of the flesh has passed away, and 
* the newness of the Spirit has been ushered in by 
Jesus Christ (2 Cor. 5-17). Jerusalem is as much 
as to say a vision of peace, and therefore the church 
of the Lord is the true Jerusalem, for it is at peace 
with God through Jesus Christ, and peace is within 
her walls, and no disturbers or those who cause 
contention against evangelical teaching may be suf- 
fered to remain therein; for God is a God of peace 
in all his churches; Christ is the Prince of peace 
and has given and left with us his peace; the Holy 
Ghost gives peace and joy to the consciences of 
believers, and the apostles admonish us to this peace 
in all their epistles, that it rule and reign in our 
hearts*(Rom) 5:'3-83" 165165 T1t/'3 212; 1 Corea4s 
30;- john 15:6; Rom. 14: g; T2196 Heb. 12: 15; 
Eph. 4:4; Gol" thet Phil. 4: Ay: 

In the’ third place this new Jerusalem has come 
down from heaven, for the Christians are not of 
this world, just as Christ also is not of this world 
‘(John 17:14), but they are born from above, there- 
fore also they are not carnally, but spiritually 
minded and by faith seek those things which are 
above (John 3:6; Rom. 8:5; Col. 11:2), where 
Christ sitteth at the right hand of the Father. With 
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob they are content to dwell 
in tents, and to be strangers here on earth; for they 
seek for a city which hath foundations, whose 
builder and maker is God (1 Peter1:1; 2:11; Heb. 
11:11). Those who by the grace of the Lord and 
by the power of their faith are thus minded are the 
church of God, the Jerusalem that is above, of which 
Paul writes to the Galatians (Gal. 4:16). 

In the fourth place the church is prepared as a 
bride adorned for her husband; for by faith she is 


ca ee ee 


The Church of God. 403 


espoused and wedded to Jesus Christ, and is the 
glorious, beautiful bride of the Lamb, adorned with 
many godly virtues and gifts of the Holy Ghost 
(Hos. 2:19; 2 Cor. 11:4). Here is the great mys- 
tery of Christ and his church, of which Paul writes 
to the Ephesians, namely, that “Christ is the the 
head of the church” (Eph. 5:23; 1:22), flesh of 
his flesh, and bone of his bones; therefore he loved 
it and gave himself for it, and cleansed it with the 
washing of water by the word, that he might present 
it to himself a glorious church, not having spot or 
wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be 
holy and without blemish, yea, partaking of the 
divine nature (Eph. 5: 25-32; 2 Peter 1:4), if we 
hold the beginning or our confidence steadfast unto 
the end (Heb. 3:14). Therefore also the church in 
turn must love Christ and surrender herself wholly 
to him, for his sake forsake everything and cleave 
unto him alone, fleeing all spiritual adultery, that is, 
shunning all idolatry (Matt. 10:17; 16:24; 1 Cor. 
6:18; 2 Cor..10:14).....: 

In the fifth place this holy city has in it the 
glory of God, and she has no need of the sun nor 
moon to give light unto her, for the glory of God 
lightens her, and her light is like the most precious 
stone, like a jasper stone, clear as cystal; and the 
nations of them which are saved shall walk in the 
light of it (Rev. 21:11, 12, etc.); that is, the church 
is a kingdom of the Most High, exalted above all 
the kingdoms of the earth, in which the saints shall 
have spiritual dominion (Dan. 7:27), and are the 
victory over the whole world by their faith, and 
Jesus Christ, the brightness of the everlasting light, 
the express image of the Person of God; is the light 
of his church, which is enlightened by his appearing, 
yea, with the glory of his word, so that she needs 
no other light, and the Gentiles which shall be saved 
are called from darkness to this light, and walk in 
this light, as children of light, and shine as lights 
in the world in this that they hold fast to the word 


of life (1 John 5:4; Wis. of Sol. 7:26; Heb. 1:38; 


teeter: 9024 ph. 5 :9%. <Phily:2: 15): Dheretore 
also Tobit says in his sorg of praise: “O Jerusalem, 
thou holy city, thou shalt shine in glorious bright- 


404 The Church of God. 


ness, and all generations shall praise thee with great 
joy” (Tob. 13: 9-18). 

In the sixth place this city of j censaiens has 
walls great and high, and the building of the wall 
is of Jasper, and the foundations of the wall of the 
city are garnished with all manner of precious 
stones (Rev. 21:12, 18, 19). This represents to us 
that the church is built upon the precious founda- 
tion of the apostles and prophets, of whom Jesus 
Christ is the chief cornerstone (Eph. 2:19); and 
this same church has had from the beginning many 
glorious ministers, preachers of righteousness (1 
Cor. 3:5; 1 Peter 5:1), adorned with exalted spirit- - 
ual gifts, which are like a wall round about the city 
of God to protect them from her enemies, and as a 
fence round about the vineyard of the Lord, because 
of the little foxes, that is, to keep out of it the false 
prophets who would creep in, so that they destroy 
not the vinevard of the Lord (Isa. 5:1; Sol. Song 
aD pee 

In the seventh place, there are twelve gates to 
this city Jerusalem, and twelve angels, and names 
written thereon, which are the names of the twelve 
tribes of the children of Israel, which indicates to 
us that the church of the Lord has the doctrine of 
the twelve apostles, which leads to the heavenly 
Jerusalem, and that there is entrance by no other 
way; for the apostles have preached to us the true 
gospel, and beside this no other may be preached 
(Gal. 1:9). And if we would enter into the church 
of the Lord we must enter in through these gates, . 
for Christ is the only way to the Father, the only 
door to the sheepfold, that is, the only means of 
entrance into the church, and into the kingdom of 
God (Luke 13: 22; John'10:73°14:7) 2 And in 
view of the fact that the apostles preached Christ, 
proclaimed the gospel, and thus brought the people 
to Christ, they are therefore called gates, by which 
one enters into the holy city. They are also angels, 
and the messengers of the Most High, the sealed 
servants of God, and the names of the twelve tribes 
of the children of Israel are written upon them 
(Mal. 3:1; Psa. 103:20), for to them they were 
sent first by Christ, and they were first called to the 


We a 


The Church of God. 405 


fellowship of the gospel, they had the preference, 
and from them came the apostles of the Lord. 

In the eighth place this city is of pure gold, as it 
were transparent glass, and there is no temple 
therein, for the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb 
are the temple of it. This reveals to us the fact that 
the church of the Lord is pure and clean, purified 
by much tribulation (Sir. 2:5; Wis. of Sol. 3:6), 
even as the scripture points out to us that God tries 
his saints, as gold is tried in the fire, with many 
trials, that the trial of thein faith, being much more 
precious than of gold that perisheth, though it be 
tried with fire, might be found unto praise and 
honor and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ 
(1 Peter 1:7). Neither does the church need any 
external temple made with hands, which does not 
avail before God, and therefore none is found in the 
church, but the tabernacle of God is with them 
(Acts 7:48; 17:24), and the dwellings of the Most 
High are therein (Psa. 48:14; Rev. 21:22). More- 
over the church herself is the temple of the living 
God, as it is written: “I will dwell in them, and 
walk in them; and I will be their God, and they 
shall be_my people” (2 Cor. 6:16; 1 Cor. 3:16; 
6:19, etc.). 

In the ninth place the gates of the city shall not 
be closed by day; and there is no night there. That 
is, the entrance to the church of God is always open 
to penitents and believers; for them the door of 
grace is always open, for them the day of salvation 
always shines (2 Cor. 6:2), and there is no dark- 
ness; for God, who dwells in light, and in whom 
is no darkness nor variableness, nor shadow of turn- 
ing, is in his church and enlightens her with his 
divine glory, here in the heart, by his word and 
Spirit, which is accepted in true faith, and hereafter 
in the eternal kingdom, in which the righteous shall 
shine as the sun forever and ever. 

In the tenth place a stream of living water, clear 
as crystal, proceeds from the throne of God and of’ 
the Lamb through the midst of the streets of the 
heavenly Jerusalem, and on either side of the stream 
are the trees of life, which bear fruit every month, 
and whose leaves are for the healing of the nations. 


406 The Church of God. 


This clear stream of living water represents the 
Holy Ghost which proceeds from the eternal Father 
(John 15:26) through the Son and is a Spirit of the 
Father and the Son, and he is in the church, .he 
quickens and comforts the believing souls with the 
everlasting comfort of the grace of God, and by this 
same Spirit Jesus Christ is glorified (1 Peter 1:11, 
12; John 16:15), the word of life, the comforting 
gospel is proclaimed, which becomes fruitful in the 
hearts of the believers, and is conducive and profit- 
able for eternal salvation to all who have been 
converted from heathendom to God and _ received 
into his church (1 Cor. 2:10). . 


In the eleventh place into this holy city shall 
be brought the glory and honor of the nations. And 
there shall in no wise enter into it anything that 
defileth, neither whatsoever worketh abomination, or 
maketh a lie: but they which are written in the 
Lamb’s book of life (Rev. 21:26, 27). That is, the 
Gentiles who through the hearing of the gospel that 
was preached to them (Rom. 10:17) have, by the 
power and working of the Holy Spirit believed, have 
praised God (as the prophets testify in many places, 
Rom. 15:9; Deut. 32:48) and have made the church 
of God glorious, because many thousands of Gen- 
tiles have been added to the church; but the impure 
and liars, and those that work abomination cannot 
enter into this holy city; for the ungodly, says the 
prophet, shall not stand in the judgment, nor 
sinners in the congregation of the righteous (Psa. 
1:5). Yea, they shall have their part with the 
dragon in the lake that burneth with fire, as it is 
written: “But the fearful, and unbelieving, and the 
abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and 
sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, shall have 
their part in the lake which burneth with fire and 
brimstone: which is the second death” (Rev. 21:8). 
O Lord! where shall those appear who now with 
such proud and haughty words profess to be the 
church of the Lord, and yet are wholly intoxicated 
with carnal pleasures and are openly the wor- 
shippers of idols, and liars against the truth and 
commit all manner of abomination before God? 


SPST On Tee 


The Church of God. 407 


Lastly, the servants of the Lord in this holy city 
serve the Most High, and his name is in their fore- 
heads, and they shall see his face, and shall reign 
forever and ever (Rev. 22:3-5). These servants 
are the true Christians who serve the Lord faith- 
fully in his church, who have yielded their members 
servants to righteousness unto holiness (Rom. 6: 
19) and in the end have everlasting salvation for 
their souls (1 Peter 1:9). These have the mark 
on their foreheads, the name of their God; they 
openly confess the truth as those whom the Holy 
Spirit has sealed, and rejoice in the mercy of the 
Lord and are not ashamed of their faith (Sir. 51:29) ; 
they do what God has commanded them to do, with 
sincere confidence. Fherefore God will reward them 
in due season, and the Lord Jesus will glorify them, 
and they shall: be like him, for they shall see him 
face to face, in the resurrection of the just, and shall 
reign with him for ever and ever (John 12:28; 17: 
eee gros late Philos 22by, 

Thus has the Holy Spirit portrayed to us in the 
scripture the church of Jesus Christ, from which 
we may understand how the church here must be 
qualified, how glorious she is, and how she shall be 
eternally in heaven, when all these things shall 
come to pass and be fulfilled in the fullness of power 
and glory. And now, in whatever church this is 
begun and may be seen and found, there is the true 
church of the Lord, the city of the living God, the 
new Jerusalem, come down from above. Blessed 
are they that do his commandments, that they may 
have right to the tree of life, and may enter in 
through the gates into the city. “For without are 
dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and mur- 
derers, and idolaters, and whosoever loveth and 
maketh a lie’ (Rev. 29: 14, 15). 

May God, the Father of all mercy, who by his 
grace has called us into the church of his dear Son 
preserve us therein and strengthen us unto his 


heavenly kingdom, through Jesus Christ. Amen. 


Deus est, qui cperatur omne quod bonum est in 


omnibus. 


5 | 
iy 3a 
‘ we 


. 
' 


ae 
A ae * 


ee Ee ok ~~) €.4 
i tea ey ya 
Natio Fe aie 


¢ ial 





‘Three Well-Grounded 


Admonitions or Epistles 


WRITTEN IN BROTHERLY LOVE 
to the 


CHURCH OF GOD 


For the strengthening and comfort of their minds, 
that they walk steadfastly in the voluntarily 
confessed and accepted truth, in true faith, 
and in firm confidence, in a pious, 
blameless and godly walk void 
of offence unto the end. 


Bye DvP; 


Zareter-aLidas, 13. 


Wherefore I will not be negligent to put you always 
in remembrance of these things, though ye 
know them, and be established in the 
present truth. Yea, I think it meet, 
as long as I am in this tabernacle, 
to stir you up by putting you 
in remembrance. 


GREETING 


The unfathomable grace, love and mercy of God 
our heavenly Father; the peace, righteousness, holi- 
ness of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the al- 
mighty and living God; the comfort, joy and power 
of the Holy Ghost; the communion of this only 
and eternal God, with all his spiritual gifts and 
blessings with which he endues and blesses all true 
Christians who believe in his name, who fear and 
love him, be with you all evermore, Amen. 2 Cor. 
V2 erp. 4 Gor. 1:3;9Rom 14:17; 1 Peter 
1:3. 


A LOVING ADMONITION OR EPISTLE 
TO THE CHURCH OF GOD 


‘Beloved friends in the Lord, cordially beloved 
brethren and sisters in the Spirit, my companions 
in the grace of God, in the fellowship of the gospel, 
in faith, in suffering, in the kingdom and patience of 
- Jesus Christ: With the apostle Paul I thank my 
God (2 Thess. 2:13) that “he hath from the begin- 
ning chosen you to salvation through sanctification 
of the Spirit and in belief of the truth, to which he 
has called you through the teaching of the gospel 
(Tit. 2:11, 12) to the possession of the glory of 
our Lord Jesus Christ. O what grace has appeared 
to you from God! (1 John 3:1). O what love the 
heavenly Father has shown you in Christ Jesus! © 
O what a treasure God has given you! (Matt. 13: 
44). O how precious is the pearl which you have 
found! well worth losing all things for the sake of 
it. You can now say with the prophet: “‘O Israel, 
how happy are we; for things that are pleasing to 
God are made known unto us” (Baruch 4:4). Re- 
member in what ignorance, blindness and darkness 
you once walked, in what gross wickedness, un- 
righteousness and shameful idolatry you lived (1 
Peter 4: 2-4), how your course was directed toward 
eternal damnation, and the way in which you 
walked led to the abyss of hell, and how graciously 
the merciful Father overlooked the time of your 
ignorance (Acts 17:30), and called you out of dark- 
ness into his wonderful light (1 Peter 2:9), made 
you alive from the dead, delivered you out of hell 
and set you into heavenly places, and thus had 
abundant mercy on you in Christ Jesus, whom he 
hath set forth to be a propitiation forever by faith 
in his blood (Rom. 3:25; Rev. 1:6), with which 
he has washed away your sins, restored your souls, 
healed all your diseases and borne all your sins in 
his body on the tree (1 Peter 2:24; 1 John 4:10), 
and still bears them daily (Heb. 9:12; 10:11) and 
makes propitiation before the Father by the offering 


412 Admonitions and Epistles. 


of his body and blood, and with his incessant inter- 
cession; who constantly feeds and satisfies your 
souls with his word through faith, and renews you 
after the inner man by the power of his Spirit, so 
that you are born anew of God, become partakers of 
the divine nature (John 3:3; 2 Peter 1:4), trans- 
formed into the immortal, heavenly life, and have 
come into eternal life (John 3:16; 5:24; 6:40; 8: 
Sleds: Doh 41 2250) 

Thank God therefore, for his inexpressible grace, 
and remember whereunto you have been called of 
God, upon what condition Christ Jesus has accepted 
and chosen you as his disciples, namely, that you 
suffer and die with him, that you may be glorified 
with him;(Rom. 8:17; 2 Tim. 2:12). And now 
is the time, as I hear, when your faith must be 
examined, your love tested, your patience mani- 
fested and verified. Now is the day of temptation, 
which will.make every man’s work manifest, which 
will refine and purify the gold, silver and precious 
stones and burn the hay, straw and stubble; now 
is the time of joy, that all those who at this time 
suffer persecution and shame for the word of God, 
and for the testimony of Christ (1 Cor. 3:16; Matt. 
6:11; Luke 6:22) may rejoice in the Spirit that 
they are worthy to suffer for the Lord’s sake, for 
great is their reward in heaven. Now is the day of 
_ salvation, in which all are saved by grace who are 
persecuted for righteousness’ sake (Matt. 5:10), 
when the chosen of God will be made manifest, 
and they are purified as gold in the fire (2 Esd. 16: 
73). You will now fare according to the word of 
the Lord, according to his promises and prophecies: 
for he says to his disciples: “I send you forth as 
sheep in the midst of wolves” (Matt. 10:16), “and 
ye shall be hated of all men for my name’s sake” 
(Matt. 10:22). “These things have I spoken unto 
you, that ye should not be offended. They shall 
put you out of the synagogues: yea, the time 
cometh, that whosoever killeth you will think that 
he doeth God service. And these things will they 
do unto you, because they have not known the 
Father, nor me” (John 16:1-3). Now is the time 
of which Christ says to. his disciples: “Verily, 


Admonitions and Epistles. 413 


verily, I say unto you, That ye shall weep and 
lament, but the world shalf rejoice: and ye shall 
be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned into 
joy’ (John 16:20). For whosoever suffers with 
Christ here shall rejoice with him forever. He that 
loses his life here for the Lord’s sake shall find it in 
eternity. 

- O my beloved in the Lord, be comforted, and 
remember the comforting words with which God 
comforts his people and says: “But thou, Israel, 
art my servant, Jacob, whom I have chosen, the 
seed of Abraham my friend. Thou whom I have 
taken from the ends of the earth, and called thee 
from the chief men thereof, and said unto thee, 
Thou art my servant; I have chosen thee, and not 
cast thee away. Fear thou not; for I am with thee: 
be not dismayed, for I am thy God: I will 
strengthen thee, yea, I will help thee; yea, I will 
uphold thee with the right hand of my righteous- 
ness. Behold, all they that were incensed against 
thee shall be ashamed and confounded: they shall 
be as nothing; and they that strive with thee shall 
perish. Thou shalt seek them, and shalt not find 
them, even them that contended with thee: they 
that war against thee shall be as nothing, and as 
a thing of nought. For I the Lord thy God will 
hold thy right hand, saying unto thee, Fear not; I 
will help thee. Fear not, thou worm Jacob, and ye 
men of Israel; I will help thee, saith the Lord, and 
thy redeemer, the Holy One of Israel” (Isa. 41: 8- 
14). And again: “Thus saith the Lord that created 
thee, O Jacob, and he that formed thee, O Israel, 
Fear not: for I have redeemed thee, I have called 
thee by name; thou art mine. When thou passest 
through the waters, I will be with thee; and 
through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee: 
when thou walkest through the fire, thou shalt not 
be burned; neither shall the flames kindle upon 
thee. For I am the Lord thy God, the Holy One 
of Israel, thy Savior’ (Isa. 43:1-3). And this is 
what the prophet says: “Many are the afflictions of © 
the righteous: but the Lord delivereth him out of 
them all. He keepeth all his bones: not one of 
them is broken” (Psa. 34:19, 20); for the body 


414 Admonitions and Epistles. 


(says the apostle) which is here sown in dishonor, 
contempt and pain shall be raised in glory, incor- 
ruptible, and be made like unto the glorified body | 
of Christ (1 Cor. 15:43, etc.). Therefore also Christ 
says in the gospel that the righteous in the resur- 
rection shall “shine forth as the sun in the kingdom 
of their Father” (Matt. 13:48). And in the Revela- 
tions of John it is written that they which are 
arrayed in white robes “are they which came out of 
ereat tribulation, and have washed their robes, and 
made them white in the blood of the Lamb. There- 
fore are they before the throne of God, and serve 
him day and night in his temple: and he that sitteth 
on the throne shall dwell among them. And they 
shall hunger no more, neither thirst anymore; 
neither shall the sun light on them, nor any heat. 
For the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne 
shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living 
fountains of waters: and God shall wipe away all 
tears from. their eyes” (Rev. 7: 18-17). 

With such and like comforting passages of holy 
scripture comfort and admonish one another, and do 
not allow yourselves to be terrified by the tyrants 
_and persecutors (1 Thess. 2:2), but remember the 
words of the apostle that unto you it is given in the 
behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also 
to suffer for his sake, and that you must have the 
same conflict which the Lord and all his followers 
have had (Phil. 1: 28-30). Now, when you look at 
the suffering of our Savior Jesus Christ, your suffer- 
ing is not to be compared with his; for he was 
rich (as the apostle says),’ yet for our sakes he 
became poor (2 Cor. 8:9; Matt. 8:20); that he had 
less than the birds of the air (Luke 9:58), and the 
foxes of the earth, that we through his poverty 
might become rich. What wonder is it then, if we 
for his sake forsake all things, and lose our temporal 
possessions, if we have a better possession in hea- 
ven. Christ was in the form of God, and made him- 
self of low degree, and took upon him the form of 
a servant, and became the most despised among 
men; he humbled himself, was obedient to the 
Father, even to the death of the cross (Phil 2: 6-8). 
Why then should his disciples be otherwise minded, 


Admonitions and Epistles. 415 


and not become conformed to his image? (Heb. 1: 
3; Wis. of Sol. 7:26). Christ was glorified with 
his Father as the Brightness of the everlasting 
light, and the express image of the Person of the 
Father, the brightness of the glory of God, and a 
spotless mirror or reflection of the divine glory, 
and he was brought to such humiliation and con- 
tempt that the prophet by his Spirit, in his person 
thus laments and says: “I am a worm, and no man; 
a reproach of men, and despised of the people. 
All they that see me laugh me to scorn: they 
shoot out the lip, they shake the head” (Psa. 22:6, 
7). And Isaiah prophesies of him: “We hid as it 
were our faces from him; he was despised, and 
we esteemed him not” (Isa. 53.53); 

Why then should the world highly esteem his 
disciples? Or, why should his disciples seek and 
desire the honor of men? Christ is the peace of 
all Christians, the wisdom of all who fear God, the 
righteousness, redemption and salvation of all be- 
lievers (Eph. 2:14; 1 Cor. 1:21); moreover the 
Pharisees and scribes with the Jews so blasphemed 
him. calling and charging him with being a tur- 
bulent deceiver, fanatic, Samaritan, that is, one 
who had been excluded from their society, a chief ~ 
or prince of devils, that is, Beelzebub; how then 
can these modern Pharisees and perverted doctors 
of divinity treat the true Christians differently? 
(Matt. 12:24; John 10:20, 21; 8:48). They will 
ever come up to the measure of their fathers. Christ 
so loved the world that he came down from heaven 
to save it,-and showed all kindness, love and mercy 
toward it; but in return for this the world hated 
him, persecuted, martyred, crucified and killed him, 
and so the blind world still does, it still treats all 
true Christians the same, dispersing and destroying 


_ them wherever it can and may. 


Vee 40 °e->-9 


Notice, moreover, the conflict and suffering of 
all saints from the beginning of the world, from the 
time of righteous Abel up to the present time, and 
you will find how all godfearing people had to suffer 
much, as the apostle writes to the Hebrews, namely, 
how other pious people of God were tortured, not 
accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a 


416 Admonitions and Epistles. 


better resurrection: and others had trial of cruel 
mockings and scourgings, yea, moreover, of bonds 
and imprisonment: they were stoned, they were 
sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the 
sword: they wandered about in sheepskins and 
goatskins; being destitute, afflicted, tormented; (of 
whom the world was not worthy): they wandered 
in deserts and in mountains, and in dens and caves 
of the earth (Heb. 11: 35-38). “Wherefore,” says 
the apostle, “seeing we also are compassed about 
with so great a cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside 
every weight, and the sin which doth so easily 
beset us, and let us run with patience the race that 
is set before us, looking unto Jesus the author and 
finisher of our faith; who for the joy that was set 
before him endured the cross, despising the shame, 
and is set down at the right hand of the throne of 
God. For consider him that endured such contra- 
diction of sinners against himself, lest ye be wearied 
and faint in your minds. Ye have not yet resisited 
unto blood striving against sin. And ye have for- 
gotten the exhortation which speaketh unto you as 
unto children, My son, despise not thou the chasten- 
ing of the Lord, nor faint when thou are rebuked 
of him: for whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, 
and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth” (Heb. 
bo dG HProveia sl.) 

Dear brethren in Christ, the time has now come 
when the heavenly Father reveals his love and 
paternal nature in this that he tries and chastens 
you as he has done with all his children and those 
dear to him. Now, “if ye endure chastening, God 
dealeth with you as with sons; for what son is he 
whom the father chasteneth not? But if ye be with- 
out chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then 
are ye bastards, and not sons” (Heb. 12:7, 8). 
Therefore you may well rejoice in your chastenings, 
which are an evidence that you are the friends and 
children of God, and receive them patiently, fully 
conscious that they are for your good, and that the 
Father of all mercies and the God of all grace 
chastens you for your profit, that you might be 
partakers of his holiness, and live. For, if it is 
grievous to the flesh, it is joyous to the Spirit, as 





Admonitions and Epistles. 417 


_ the apostle testifies and says: “For which cause 
(namely, in our suffering for the cause of Christ) 
_ we faint not; but though our outward man perish, 
_ yet the inward man is renewed day by day. For 
our light affliction, which is but for a moment, 
_worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal 
weight of glory; while we look not at the things 
which. are seen, but at the things which are not 
seen: for the things which are seen are temporal; 
but the things which are not seen are eternal’ (2 
Cor. 4:16-18). On this thought Paul also writes to < 
the Hebrews: “Now no chastening for the present 
seemeth to be joyous, but grievous: nevertheless 
afterward it yieldeth the peaceable fruit of right- 
-eousness unto them which are exercised thereby”’ 
(Heb. 12:11). 
Remember how brief and uncertain human life 
is. Why then should you seek to preserve this 
temporal life to the forfeiture of. the eternal life? 
For the Lord himself says that he that loves his 
life and desires to keep it,—that is, he that loves 
his own life more than Christ and the gospel, as 
_all hypocrites and backsliders do—must lose it for- 
ever (Matt. 10:39; .Mark 8:35; John 12:25). 
_ Therefore it is necessary here to always remember 
what the Lord says: “I say unto you my friends, 
Be not afraid of them that kill the body, and after 
that have no more that they can do. But I will 
forewarn you whom ye shall fear: Fear him, which 
after he hath killed hath power to cast into hell; 
yea, I say unto you, Fear him. Are not five spar- 
‘rows sold for two farthings, and not one of them 
is forgotten before God? But even the very hairs 
of-your head are all numbered. Fear not, therefore: 
ye are of more value than many sparrows. Also I 
Say unto you, Whosoever shall confess me before 
‘men, him shall the Son of man also confess before 
the angels of God: but he that denieth me before 
men Shall be denied before the angels of God” 
(Luke 12:4-8). Therefore do not be deceived by 
the love and desires of this temporal life, for you 
‘do not know when the Son of man will come and 
“you must pass from hence; and although the world 


: 


418 Admonitions and: Epistles. 


promises you life, you are not certain of your life _ 


for one moment. 

The aged godly Eleazar recognized this fact, 
therefore he would not preserve his life by hypo- 
crisy (2 Mac. 6:18-31); and said to his adversaries, 
as he desired them straightway to send him to the 
grave: “It becometh not our age in any wise to 
dissemble, whereby many young persons might 
think that Eleazar, being fourscore years old and 
ten, were gone to a strange religion; and so they 
through my hypocrisy, and desire to live a little 
time and a moment longer, should be deceived by 
me, and I got a stain to mine old age, and make 
it abominable. For though for the present time I 
should be delivered from the punishment of men; 
yet should I not escape the hand of the Almighty, 
neither alive nor dead. Wherefore now, manfully 
changing this life, I will show myself such a one 
as mine age requireth, and leave a notable example 
of courage to such as be young, to die willingly 
and courageously for the honorable and holy laws” 
(2 Mac. 6: 23-28). 

Take an example from this godly, courageous 
and manly Eleazar, and learn from him to disregard 
this temporal, perishable life, which is so brief, and 
which is assured or certain for not even one hour. 
Sirach declares that although a man lived a hundred 
years, yet even a thousand years are to eternity 
what a drop of water is to the sea, or a grain of 
sand in comparison to the sand of the sea (Sir. 
182.9510); 

Consider herewith how your life is in the hands 


of God and no one may touch or harm you without | 


his will, without the permission of your heavenly 
Father, as Christ himself declares in the passage 
already quoted. The prophet declares the same 
fact: “I was a reproach among all mine enemies, 


but especially among my neighbors, and a fear to~ 


mine acquaintance: they that did see me without 
fled from me. I am forgotten as a dead man out 
of mind: I am like a broken vessel. For I have 
heard the slander of many: fear was on every side: 
while they took counsel together against me, they 
devised to take away my life. But I trusted in 


— ep ee 





Admonitions and Epistles. 419 


thee, O Lord: I said, Thou art my God. My times 
are in thy hand; deliver me from the hand of mine 
enemies, and from them that persecute me” (Psa.- 
31:11-15). And in another place: “The wicked 
plotteth against the just and gnasheth upon him 
with his teeth, etc. But the Lord will not leave him 
in his hand, nor condemn him when he is judged” 
(Psa. 37: 12-33). Hence: “If the Lord had not been 
on our side, now may Israel say; if it had not been 
the. Lord who was on our side, when men rose up 
- against us; then they had swallowed us up alive, 
when their wrath was kindled against us’, etc. (Psa. 
124:1-3). 

From these and other words of the scripture it 
is evident that men may not do anything whatever 
against Christians unless the Lord permits it; all 
depends upon that; therefore also the Lord alone 
is to be feared, and not men, who are dust and ashes, 
and perish like the grass, and are eaten up of worms 
and moths (Sir. 10:11; 11:15; Isa. 49:6; James 
1:10). Moreover be not terrified at the pangs and 
pains of death, at the torture (although they are 
horrible) which the tyrants and ungodly may bring 
upon you; if it is the providence and will of God. . 
But comfort yourselves, dearly beloved, with the 
thought that the Lord will be with you in all your 
extremities (Isa. 48:1-5) ; goes with you into prison, 
fire, and water, suffers with you, is with you in 
life and death, and will never forsake you; so that 
you can say with the prophet: “The Lord is my 
light and my salvation; whom shall I fear? The 
Lord is the strength of my life; of whom shall I 
be afraid? (Psa. 27:1). Hence, though “my flesh 
and my heart faileth: yet God is the strength of 
my heart, and my portion forever” (Psa. 73:26). 
And Paul says: “Who shall separate us from the 
love of Christ? shall. tribulation, or distress, or 
persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or 
the sword? as it is written (Psa. 44:22): For thy 
sake are we killed all the day long; we are ac- 
counted as sheep for the slaughter. Nay, in all these 
things we are more than conquerors through him 
that loved us. For I am persuaded, that neither 
death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor 


420 Admonitions and Epistles. 


powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor 
height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be 
able to separate us from the love of God, which is 
in Christ Jesus our Lord” (Rom. 8:35-39). 

I hope, my cordially beloved brethren and sisters 
in the Lord, that such love to God is hidden in 
your hearts, therefore be not afraid of oppression, 
torture, rack, butchery and death and all that the 
godless, tyrannical men can do to you, when the 
Lord permits them to do it (Heb. 10:31); but 
think how terrible it is to fall into the hands of the 
living God, and how excruciating is the fire of hell 
(Matt. 25:42) which is prepared for the devil and 
all his angels, and all unbelieving, and abominable, 
and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers. 
and idolaters, and all liars, and all who do not 
remain steadfast in the word of the Lord (Rev. 
21:8), but who depart from it and again cleave to 
the Babylonian harlot and the world; they shall 
have their part in the lake which burneth with fire 
and brimstone: which is the second death (Rev. 
12:8), and upon such the angel of the Lord pro- 
nounced judgment with a loud voice, saying: “If 
any man worship the beast and his image, and 
receive his mark in his forehead, or in his hand 
(that is, sanctions idolatry, or confesses it to be 
right, has anything to do with it or practices it), 
the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of 
God, which is poured out without mixture into the 
cup of his indignation; and he shall be tormented 
with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy 
angels, and in the presence of the Lamb.” And 
the smoke of their torment ascendeth up forever 
and ever: and they have no rest day nor night, 
-whoe worship the beast and his image, and whoso- 
ever receiveth the mark of his name. Here is the 
patience of the saints: here are they that keep the 
commandments of God. and the faith of Jesus” 
(Rev. 14: 9-12). 

Therefore take heed and look not upon the 
slight pangs of temporal death, but upon the hor- 
rible agonies of eternal death and of the lake of 
fire; yea, of that a man may rightly be terrified 
and take an example of the rich man, who, when 


a 


Admonitions and Epistles. 421 


he was in pain and torment, lifted up his eyes and 
saw Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom, 
and cried, saying: “Father Abraham, have mercy 
on me and send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip 
of his finger in water and cool my tongue; for I 
am tormented in this flame. But Abraham said, 
Son, remember that thou in thy lifetime receivedst 
thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things: . 
but now he is comforted, but thou art tormented” 
(Luke 16: 23-25). Think of, and suffer a little with 
poor Lazarus here, so that, when you depart out of 
this world, you may go to Abraham’s bosom and 
have eternal joy and comfort, and love not, with 
the rich man, the perishing lusts of the flesh, SO 
that you are not with him compelled to suffer and 
pay for it eternally in hellfire (Matt. 8:12; 22:13; 
24:51; 25:42; 2 Esd. 9:9), and -be tormented 
therefor in outer darkness where the worm dieth 
not and the fire is not quenched. 

Over against this, picture to yourselves the in- 
effable glory of the eternal kingdom which God has 
prepared from the beginning for those who love 
him. Ever bear in mind the word of comfort which 
says: “To him that overcometh will I give to eat 
of the tree of life, which is in the midst of the 
paradise of God” (Rev. 2:7). “To him that over- 


* cometh will I give to eat of the hidden manna, 


and will give him a white stone, and in the stone 
a new name written, which no man knoweth saving - 
him that receiveth it” (Rev.-2- 17). “And he’ that 
overcometh, and keepeth my works unto the end, 
to him will I give power to rule over the nations; 
and he shall rule them with a rod of iron; as the 
vessels of a potter shall they be broken to pieces: 
even as I received of my Father. And I will give 
him the morning star” (Rev. 2: 26-28). “He that 
overcometh, the same shall be clothed in white 
raiment, and I will not blot out his name out of the 
book of life, but will confess his name before the 
Father, and before his angels” (Rev. 3:5). Him 
that overcometh will I make a pillar in the temple 
of my God, and he shall go no more out; and I 
will write upon him the name of my God, and the 
name of the city of my God, which is new Jerusa- 


422 Admonitions and Epistles. 


lem, which cometh down out of heaven from my 
God: and I will write him my new name” (Rev. 
3:12). “To him that overcometh will 1 grant to 
sit with me in my throne, even as I also overcame, 
and am set down with my Father in his throne” 
(Revi-:3.21); To® sumiity ap?) He athatremams 
steadfast and faithful unto the end and unto death, 
shall receive the crown of life, which ‘he shall 
possess. The righteous shall live forever, and their 
reward is with the Lord, and the care of them is 
with the Most High. Therefore shall they receive 
a glorious kingdom, and a beautiful crown from 
the Lord’s hand (Wis. of Sol. 5:15, 16). Lastly: 
“The sufferings of this present time are not worthy 
to be compared with the glory which shall be 
revealed in us,” as the apostle writes to the Romans 
(8:18). 

Be diligent therefore, my most beloved by the 
grace of God, to bear the cross of Jesus Christ with 
patience, and look with the eye of faith to the joy 
and glory which is prepared for you. Walk con- 
tinually worthy of the gospel and of your calling, 
according to the rule of apostolic doctrine, in one 
Spirit and mind, and beware of the false prophets, 
which preach to you smooth things and lead you 
into all manner of carnal license by which the 
offence of the cross is removed, and observe what - 
is true Christian liberty, namely, as Jesus says in 
the gospel: “If ye continue in my word, then are 
ye my disciples indeed; and ye shall know the 
truth, and the truth shall make you free” (John 
8:31, 32). | 

There is then no Christian liberty outside of the 

} truth, which is God’s word. Now this is the real 
\true Christian liberty, firstly, that:Christ Jesus by 
‘bis suffering and death freed us from the devil, 
hell, death and sin, as Paul says: “Forasmuch then 
as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he 
also himself likewise took part of the same; that 
through death be might destroy him that had the 
power of death, that is, the devil; and deliver them 
who through fear of death were all their lifetime 
subject to bondage” (Heb. 2:14, 15). We should 
therefore “give thanks unto the Father, which hath 


= 


H 
j 


iz made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance 


= 


Admonitions and Epistles. 423 


of the saints in light: who hath delivered us from 
the power of darkness, and hath translated us into 
the kingdom of his dear Son: in whom we have 
redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness 
of sins” (Col. 1:12-14). And in the Revelations 


_ of John it is written that “the four beasts and four 


and twenty elders fell down before the Lamb, 
having every one of them harps, and golden vials 
full of odors, which are the prayers of saints. And 
they sung a new song, saying, Thou art worthy 
to take the book, and to open the seals thereof: 
for thou wast slain, and hast redeemed us to God 
by thy blood out of every kindred, and tongue, 
and people, and nation; and hast made us unto 
our God kings and priests’, etc. (Rev. 5: 8-10). 
Thus we are in the first place delivered by 
Christ from Satan, hell, death and sin, if so be that 


“we truly believe in him and continue in his word. 
In the second place we are made free from the law 


to every one that believes in him (Rom. 10:4). 
Therefore Paul declares that we are not under the 
law, but under grace (Rom. 6:14). Paul very 
beautifully teaches this liberty to the Romans and 
Galatians when he speaks of Abraham and his two 
sons (Rom. 9:7; Gal. 4:24), of whom one was by 
a bondwoman and the other by the free woman 
Sarah, the one born after the flesh. the other after 
the Spirit. And these two wives of Abraham, Paul 
says, signify or represent the two testaments; the 


- two sons the two races of both testaments: Ishmael, 


the Jews, and Isaac, the Christians. To this Paul 
adds: “So then, brethren, we are not children of 


‘the bondwoman, but of the free. Stand fast there- 


fore in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made us 
free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of 
bondage” (Gal. 4:31; 5: 1}: 

This then is the liberty of the otiiiien of God, 
into which they have been placed by God through 
Jesus Christ, and this liberty is nowhere except 
where there is the sonship of God and the Spirit of 
the Lord. Therefore this liberty does not consist 
in license to commit sin or to walk after the flesh 
or to be conformed to the world, but to serve God 


424 Admonitions and Epistles. 


and neighbor. For this Christian liberty, of which 
we now speak, is really that of serving God and 
neighbor, as the apostle Peter says: “For so is the 
will of God, that with well doing ye may put to 
silence the ignorance of foolish men: as free, and 
not using your liberty for a cloke of maliciousness, 
but as the servants of God” (1 Peter 2:15, 16). 
And Paul. says: “Know ye not, that to whom ye 
yield yourselves servants to obey, his servants ye 
are to whom ye obey; whether of sin unto death, 
or of obedience unto righteousness?” (Rom. 6:16). 
Hence Christians must serve one another, as the 
apostle says: “Ye have been called unto liberty ; 
only use not liberty for an occasion to the flesh, but 
by. love serve one another” (Gal. 5:13). Thus Paul 
himself did, as he says: “Though I be free from all 
men, yet have I made myself servant unto all, that 
I might gain. the more” (41 Cor. 9:19). Therefore, 
“oive none offence, neither to the Jews, nor to the 
Gentiles,. nor to the church of God: even as I 
please all men in all things, not seeking mine own 
profit, but the profit of many, that they may be 
saved” (1 Cor. 10: 382, 33). 

From all this it is evident what real Christian 
liberty is, of what it consists, how through love, it 
is a service to God and fellowman, and that there 
is a false liberty which seeks opportunity according 
to the flesh for occasion to sin, for its own profit, 
and in short, something different to that which 
concerns God and fellowman—the salvation of the 
soul and conscience. It is therefore a base error, 
a gross ignorance, and a horrible deception that so 
many think Christian liberty stands for license’ to 
go into the temples of the idolaters and give ear-to 
the false prophets, and not separate from the false 
worship outwardly, but only at heart, which is 
wrong and false. ‘For with the heart man believeth 
unto righteousness,” as the apostle says; ‘and with 
the mouth confession is made unto salvation” (Rom. 
10:10); for God must be glorified in body and in 
spirit, which are God’s (1 Cor. 6:20). And if we 
desire to rightly understand Paul’s words: “What 
‘agreement hath the temple of God with idols? . . | 
Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye 


Admonitions and Epistles. 425 


Separate, . . . and touch not the unclean thing,” 
‘etc. (2 Cor. 6:16, etc.), we must recognize his own 
explanation, when he says: “Ye are the temple of 
the living God” (1 Cor. 3:16); as God says, “I will 
dwell in them and walk in them, and they shall be 
my people, and I will be their God.” And in an- 
other place: “Know ye not that your body is the 
temple of the Holy Ghost which is in you, which ye 
have of God, and ye are not your own?” (1 Cor. 
6:19). In other words: “Ye are the body of Christ, 
and members in particular’ (1 Cor. 12: 27). 

Now, from this it may be easily deducted and 
clearly understood that there must be a separation 
from the temple of idols, from all ungodly preachers 
when they stand in the pulpit and pervert the word 
of God; and from all false worship, not in heart and 
Spirit only, but also in body. Therefore those who 
profess such false liberty, as above referred to, lie 
against the truth, deceive themselves and others. 
These are they of whom Jesus Sirach says: ‘Woe 
be to fearful hearts, and faint hands, and the sinner 
- that goeth two ways! Woe unto him that is faint- 
hearted! for he believeth not; therefore shall he 
not be defended” (Sir. 2:12, 18). These are they 
of whom Peter says: “These are wells without 
water, clouds that are carried with a tempest; to 
whom the mist of darkness is reserved for ever. 
_ For when they speak great swelling words of vanity, 
they allure through the lusts of the flesh, through 
much wantonness, those that were clean escaped 
from them who live in error. While they promise 
them liberty, they themselves are the servants of 
eerruption’’:(2 Peter.2:17-19). 

Those are inconstant and apostate Israelites who 
try to carry water on both shoulders and swerve 
from side to side (1 Kings 18:22), who try to 
partly serve God and partly Baal. And thus they 
are led astray by the splendor and lecherous spirit 
of the priests of Jezebel. They persuade them that 
sin is not sin, that unrighteousness is no unright- 
eousness (Rev. 2:20); but let every one take heed 
and beware of these priests of Jezebel. Let no one 
be deceived by them; for the Lord will cast all them 
who have committed fornication with her into ex- 


426 Admonitions and Epistles. 


tremest torment, if they do not repent, and the 
whole church shall confess that he is the Lord, who 
will reward every man according to his works. 


Therefore take due heed in the fear of the Lord 
your God that you use no carnal license in your 
church attendance, and sanction and accept no hear- 
ing of the false teachers. The seducing spirits will 
approach you with great craftiness and conceit, 
especially at this particular time of distress (2 Cor. 
11:18-15), to draw you away from the simplicity 
that is in Christ Jesus (2 Cor. 11:3); but as you 
love God and the salvation of your souls, beware! 
Mark also them which cause divisions and offences 
contrary to the doctrine of Christ and his apostles 
regarding the ban and will not shun the backsliding 
brethren and sisters according to the scriptures, but 
continue to maintain outward fellowship with them. 
But I testify to you by the Lord, from his clearly 
expressed words which he himself spake by the 
mouth of his apostles and faithful messengers, with 
the power, operation and impulse of his Holy Spirit, 
that those who, after sufficient scriptural admoni- 
tions, have, by the power of. Jesus Christ by his 
word, been separated from the church of God and 
placed into the ban, must be shunned by you; you 
must avoid their person in eating and drinking, in 
dealings and in walk, and if any one does differently 
and despises these commands of God, let him take 
an example of Achan (Josh. 7:20), who had secretly 
taken a little of the accursed goods of Jericho, and 
see what befell him. And let no one imagine that 
he should escape the punishment of God, whether 
it fall upon him here or hereafter; for if Achan was 
so severely punished because of a little of the ac- 
cursed goods which were found with him, what 
shall overtake the wilful despisers of the ordinances 
of God, who act toward excluded members contrary 
to the scriptures? And those persons who have 
been excluded are no less an abomination before God 
than are accursed goods; hence to deal with a per- 
son in the ban contrary to the rule of God’s word is 
no less, but rather more, sinning against God than 
Achan did who stole some of the accursed goods, 
and whoever does this becomes a-partaker of his 


Admonitions and Epistles. 427 


evil deeds (2 John 11), and has fellowship with the 
evil works of apostates, yea, he defiles the whole 
church, according to the example of Achan and 
according to the words of Paul, namely, that “a 
little leaven leaveneth the whole lump” (1 Cor. 
5:6). Now, as you love Christ and his church and 
your salvation, beware of expelled, apostate, false 
brethren and sisters, keep yourselves from their 
fellowship, and commend them unto the Lord to 
the time of their repentance. 

I have written this brief admonition out of 
brotherly love, because you are my brethren and 
sisters in the Lord, and we have one fatherland both 
in heaven and on earth, and I cordially love you 
in Christ Jesus. I trust also that you will accept 
my admonition in love, although you have your- 
selves been taught of God (2 Pet. 1:12) and are 
confirmed by God in this present truth. May the 
‘God of all grace (1 Pet. 5:10) fill you with all 
- spiritual wisdom and prudence and preserve you 
from all evil, that you may be fruitful in all good 
works (Col. 1:6) and. walk blameless, and thus 
appear at the last day before the judgment seat of 
Christ. The Lord be with you all. Amen. 


THE SECOND ADMONIT:ON OR EPISTLE, 
WRITTEN IN BROTHERLY LOVE TO 
THE CHURCH OF GOD, BY D. P. 





May grace and peace from God, our heavenly 
Father, and from Jesus Ohrist, his only begotten 
Son, increase among you by the power of the Holy 
Ghost. “Amen. : 





Blessed be God and Father of all mercies, that 
according to his unfathomable grace and everlasting 
love he hath from the beginning chosen you to 
salvation (2 Cor. 1:3; 2 Thess. 2:13), and ordained 
you unto eternal life, and now in these last times 
hath called:you out of darkness into his marvelous 
light, yea, chosen you to be his children and ac- 
cepted you as heirs of all his riches in Christ Jesus, 
whereby the merciful God has so abundantly shown 
his fatherly love toward you and you have received- 
such benefits from him that you may well say with 
the prophet: What shall we render unto the Lord 
for all his benefits unto us? And while I was with 
you I had great joy and my soul was refreshed in 
the Lord when I saw your fervency and steadfast- 
ness in faith, your love to God and his truth, your 
Christian peace, your brotherly unity, and the good 
order observed among you, and that God’s word 
there is so fruitful and so many are added to the 
church of the Lord, so that it seems to me as if 
a special blessing had come from God upon my 
fatherland. Who would in time past have thought 
or imagined that Jerusalem (Rev. 21:22); which 
John in the Spirit saw descending from heaven, 
should have been established there, that the taber- 
nacle of God with men and the sanctuary of the 
Lord should be set up there? Yea, like Bethlehem, 
the little town in Judah, became so glorious because 
the Prince in Israel was born therein and came 
therefrom, so also is the little despised country, 


Admonitions and Epistles. 429 


insignificant as compared with the greatest king- 
doms and principalities, come into great favor and 
glory before God because of the chosen ones who 
ate therein, (Micah 6:2. <Matt.::2:,6)..)“Bherefore 
I thank almighty God for you, my beloved in the 
Lord, and rejoice because of my fatherland. I 
rejoice thereat from the bottom of my heart for the 
rich blessings of God in heavenly riches, namely 
that the peaceable fruits of righteousness grow 
there, that there the vineyard of the Lord is bloom- 
ing and emitting a fragrant odor (Sol. Song 2:13); 
the roses are pushing forth in the valley, the lily 
stands so beautifully among the thorns, the honey 
and milk of the unadulterated truth flows there. 
In short, all plants of all manner of fruits of the 
Spirit are there, and not there only, but also in the 
adjacent countries. Oh, what great blessings of 
God! Oh, what a change and difference, that such 
a barren waste has become such a fruitful land, 
such a blessed country, yea, such a garden of the . 
Lord and a paradise of God! Where once there 
was no water, streams of living water now flow 
(Isa. 44:4); where once nothing was known of 
God, there it is now full of the pure knowledge of 
God; where once men ran after dumb idols, the 
living God, the Lord of heaven and earth, is now 
worshipped (1 Thess. 1:9); where men once lay 
in bondage under Antichrist, they are now free 
under Jesus Christ; where men were once driven 
by false shepherds, to eat and drink that which had 
been trodden under foot and made foul (Ezek. 
34:18, 19), there the one good Shepherd, Jesus 
Christ himself, now feeds his sheep (John 10:11) 
and leads them to the fountains of living water; 
where formerly men were forced to drink out of the 
cup of the abominations of the Babylonian harlot, 
which is full of all fornication and sorcery, Jesus 
now pours out freely to all who thirst the pure 
wine of his divine word and the water of life (Rev. 
18:3; 22:1; John 4:10). Therefore I again thank 
the Most High God for his inexpressible gifts, and 
beseech him in all humility in the name of Jesus 
Christ that he would pour out his blessings yet 
more abundantly upon you, and increase your 


430 Admonitions and Epistles. 


erowth in righteousness, to the praise of his holy 
name, and to the salvation of your souls. And 
although I trust in the mercy of God, and-have all 
good confidence in you people, yet I cannot, be- 
cause of a feeling of duty and brotherly love toward 
you, abstain from writing a little to you and to 
admonish you, whereby you will recognize the sym- 
pathetic state of my mind toward you people; for 
God knows what a place you fill in my heart, and 
that I remember you people in my prayers, and 
by God’s grace shall not cease to pray for you in 
my weakness, that the merciful eternal Father 
would preserve you from all evil, and preserve you 
in the true faith, and keep you for his heavenly 
kingdom (1 Thess. 5: 23). I am concerned for you 
with godly concern; for I have in many years seen 
and experienced, that is, ascertained, that the wicked 
Satan is very industrious in his efforts to scatter 
and destroy the church of God by many false doc- 
trines and heresies which he propagates and sets’ 
upie(2 Goer. 152183 Coles): 18) s2and <all this under 
the charming guise of the specially elect ecclesias- 
tics, whom he adorns with perverted scripture; for 
it is his nature, art and disposition to adulterate 
the word of God and make it a covering for his lies 
(2 Cor. 11:12, 16). He does not appear as Satan 
in his messengers and servants, but as an angel of 
light, cowled in an outward show of false piety and 
devotion. He sends his priests forth in sheep’s 
clothing, but within: they are ravenous wolves 
(Matt. 7:15), who seek for nothing but to devour 
Christ’s sheep. Therefore they come with great 
swelling words and give the impression that they 
are full of the Spirit, and that all true Christians, 
who have been taught of God and oppose them, are 
but novices and apprentices, so blind are they in 
their spiritual pride, which is the origin and begin- 
ning of all destruction, and I hear that they are given 
a hearing by some and are doing harm, and this is 
such a pain and anguish to my soul that I can not 
describe it to you. What are the miserable people 
thinking who allow themselves to be so lamentably 
deceived by Satan (Heb. 3:15) that they turn away 
from the living God, that they depart from the way 


Admonitions and Epistles. 431 


of truth, because it is narrow, and the way of the 
cross (Matt. 7:14), and enter upon the broad way 
that leads to damnation, and do not once take to 
heart the fact that it is written: ‘There is a way 
that seemeth : right~ unto a» man; but -the. end 
thereof are the ways of death” (Prov: 14:12; 16: 
25)? He that turns and errs from the way of wis- 
dom, shall remain in the congregation of the dead. 

Now, I know very well that all sects claim to 
be right, and are industrious in their ability to 
pervert the scripture according to the way of Satan, 
in order to embellish their-evil things and hide their 
wickedness, and do not see the blindness of their 
heart with which they are stricken by God, that 
they deny the confessed and accepted truth, that 
they despise and change the unchangeable counsel 
of God, revealed by Jesus Christ in the gospel and 
witnessed by the Holy Spirit, that they seek alto- 
gether the friendship of the world, which yet is 
enmity with God (James 4:4), that they try to 
preserve the temporal life, and therefore, according 
to the Lord’s own word, must lose eternal life (John 
12:25), that with Esau they sell their birthright 
for a morsel of meat (Heb. 12:16), and shall pos- 
sibly never afterward be able to obtain it, yea, that 
they are again in their former uncleanness, which 
Jesus Christ had washed away by his blood and by 
the washing of water by the word (Rev. 1:6; Eph. 
5:26), and that the common proverb applies to 
them: “The dog is turned to his own vomit again; 
and the sow that was washed to her wallowing in 
thenmine y(2Pet. 25.22); 

Oh, it were better that they had never known 
the way, that they had remained in ignorance, that 
they had never come to the knowledge of the truth. 
But now they have come to it, now they have been 
enlightened, now the unclean spirit has departed 
out of them, and because he has found the garnished 
house still unoccupied (I say unoccupied in regard 
to the true faith, true love to God, the pure fear 
of the Lord and other virtues with which the house 
was formerly adorned), he has again entered with 
seven other evil spirits, and the last estate of that 
man is worse than the first. Therefore 1 bow my 


432 ~ Admonitions and Epistles. 


knees to God the Father, and before the throne of 
grace (Col. 1:3; Eph. 3:14), praying and entreat- 
ing for you, as the apostle did for the Colossians 
and for all Christians, that you may be filled with 
all spiritual wisdom and understanding, that you 
may prove and know what is the good, and holy, 
and perfect will of God (Rom. 12:3), and that you 
may remain steadfast in the truth of the gospel. 
And beware of the bombastic and honor-seeking 
spirits, by whom the exalted majesty of God is blas- 
phemed; for whoever speaks in his carnal minded- 
ness and human wisdom (which is foolishness with 
God, 1 Cor. 1:18) against the wholesome doctrine 
of Jesus Christ, and despises his ordinances, de- 
- spises God himself, even as Christ says: “He that 
despiseth me despiseth him that sent me” (Luke 
10:16). And again: “He that receiveth me-re- 
ceiveth him that sent me” (John 13:20). Moreover 
Christ says: “He (the Holy Ghost) shall glorify 
me: for he shall receive of mine, and shall shew it 
unto you” (John 16:14). From this it follows in- 
evitably that he that despises God, rejects Jesus 
Christ, and opposes the Holy Spirit, breaks the di- 
vine ordinances, changes them and acts contrary to 
them; therefore John says in his epistle: “Who- 
soever transgresseth, and abideth not in the doctrine 
of Christ, hath not God. He that abideth in the 
doctrine of Christ, he hath both the Father and the 
Son” (2 John 9). 

Notice and understand what an abomination. it 
is and how ungodly before God, to transgress the 
doctrine of Jesus Christ and not to remain therein. 
Therefore take heed to yourselves that you be not 
influenced by the frivolous, wavering and apostate 
and fall away from your steadfastness, but grow 
in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and 
Savior Jesus Christ, and remember what the apostle 
writes to the Galatians: “But though we, or an 
angel from heaven, preach any other gospel unto 
you than that which we have preached unto you, 
let him be accursed” (Gal. 1:8); “for other founda- 
tion can no man lay than that is laid, which is 
Jesus Christ” (1 Cor. 3:11). Upon this foundation 
you people are framed, upon this substructure you 


Admonitions and Epistles. 433 


are built; now take heed that in the day of tempta- 
tion you be not found built upon hay, wood or 
stubble, but much rather upon silver, gold and 
precious stones, even as | also hope of you by the 
grace of God. : 

In the second place I admonish you with the 
apostle Paul, “that ye walk worthy of the vocation 
wherewith ye are called” (Eph. 4:1); always 
pleasing unto the Lord, and that you are fruitful in 
all good works; for it behooves those who have 
been enlightened of God, and have been called to 
the true knowledge of Jesus Christ, to walk worthily 
- of the gospel and of the heavenly calling (Heb. 
3:1), and to remember that the believers are, as 
the apostle Peter writes, elect according to the fore- 
knowledge of God the Father through sanctification 
and enlightenment of the Spirit, unto obedience and 
sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ (1 Pet. 1:2). 
Thus also the beloved Paul writes to the Corinth- 
ians: “But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, 
but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, 
and by the Spirit of our God” (1 Cor. 6:11). Now, 
inasmuch as you have attained unto this grace, take 
heed that you have not received it in vain. Remem- 
ber the apostle’s words (Heb. 6:7): “The earth 
which drinketh in the rain that cometh oft upon it, 
and bringeth forth herbs meet for them by whom 
it is dressed, receiveth blessing from God: but that 
which beareth thorns and briers is rejected, and is 
nigh unto cursing; whose end is to be burned” 
(Heb. 6:7, 8). Therefore take heed to the grace 
of God and to the gifts of the Holy Spirit which 
you have received, and take to heart what is written 
(1 Cor. 7:19), how that in Jesus Christ nothing 
avails but the keeping of the commandments of 
God; for the faith that worketh by love, and a new 
creature that despises all earthly things and seeks 
only heavenly things, who with Paul counts all 
earthly things but loss compared with the pure 
knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, who with 
Moses despises all the pomp and glory of Egypt and 
would rather suffer affliction with the people of 
Goma (Gal b-65 66417 yiPhil,, 347: Heb: 1 bs25); 
for a new creature and regenerated man of God 


28 


434 Admonitions and Epistles. 


who is renewed and created by the Holy Ghost by 
faith, after the image and in the likeness of God, 
is spiritually minded, he is united with God, and 
has become a partaker of his nature; therefore also 
he does not sin, }ust as John says: ‘Every one that 
doeth righteousness is born of him” (1 John 2:29), 
“He that committeth sin is of the devil; for the 
devil sinneth from the beginning. For this purpose 
the Son of God was manifested, that he might 
destroy the works of the devil. Whosoever is born 
of God doth not commit sin; for his seed remaineth 
in him; and he cannot sin, because he is born of 
God. In this the children of God are manifest, and 
the children of the devil” (1 John 3: 8-10). 

From these words it may be readily understood 
who are the true Christians, namely, those who do 
righteously; they are believers, they are born of 
God, they do not sin, for after the inner man they 
are in God, and are ruled by the Spirit of the Lord, 
yea, led into all truth and obedience (Rom. 8:19), 
and therefore they hate all unrighteousness, as Jo- 
seph in Egypt hated adultery, Daniel and the three 
youths in Babylon, idolatry; yea, all Godfearing 
people have hated and shunned the works of the 
flesh, and everything that is contrary to God’s word, 
not alone with the heart, but also with the body; 
for a Christian cannot be one within only, but he 
must show himself a Christian outwardly and every-_ 
where. - (John (16:438<Gen) 39210 ;" Dane aodig 
6:10). A Christian’s body is the temple of the 
Holy Ghost; a Christian’s members are the mem- 
bers of Jesus Christ (1 Cor. 3:23; 6:19; John 
3:7); a Christian is born of the Spirit to a spiritual 
being and united with God who is a Spirit. There- 
fore his nature is like God’s nature, he loves that 
which God loves, and hates what God hates, for 
he is not his own, but belongs to God (2 Pet. 1:2); 
he lives unto God and not unto himself; he remem- 
bers and takes to heart how holy, how righteous, 
how godly one must live in this evil world (2 Cor. 
5:15; Eph. 1:4; 1 Pet. 1:16), looking for the 
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, who gave himself 
for us (Tit. 2:12), that he might redeem us from 
all unrighteousness, and purify unto himself a pecu- 


Admonitions and Epistles. 435 


liar people, zealous unto good works, with the mind 
set upon heavenly things, that seeks God and his 
righteousness (Col. 3:3; Matt. 6:33) above all 
other things, remembering how all Christians must 
lead a holy life inasmuch as they profess a holy 
God, and after whom the saints are called (Isa. 6:3; 
Rom. 1:19). Therefore the angel says to John: 
“He that is righteous, let him be righteous still:- 
and he that is holy, let him be holy still” (Rev. 
22:11). For how would it be possible for anything 
that is unclean to enter, much less, remain in, the 
new Jerusalem, which is so beautiful, where the 
streets are of pure gold, and the walls and gates of 
precious stones, where the throne of God is, where 
the Most High lights the city with his glory, where 
the streams of living water flow clearer than crystal 
from the throne of God, as John openly testifies 
(Revi 21 221; 22:1): Therefore: let every.’ ‘one 
cleanse himself from all filthiness of the flesh and 
Spirit (2 Cor. 7:1) in the fountain that is opened 
to the house of David and the inhabitants of Jeru- 
salem, for all uncleanness, to wash them therewith, 
and be made a people acceptable to the Lord, that 
his exalted name might thereby be praised. 

In the third place, it is not only my faithful 
admonition to you, but also my heartfelt petition 
and desire to God that you may be strengthened in 
the Spirit by the mighty working of God, unto all 
patience and longsuffering with joyfulness (Col. 
1:9); for the strengthening and power of faith is 
very necessary for all pious Christians in this 
erievous time in which Satan is unbound, as it 
seems, to deceive the whole world and to trouble 
those who fear God (Rev. 20:3). He gathers all 
the heathen together to wage war against the holy 
city, to destroy it. No Nebuchadnezzar could have 
made his mandates more binding to worship his 
image (Dan. 3:6); no Antiochus was more venge- 
ful against the Jews who remained steadfast in the 
faith (2 Mac. 6:10); no Babylonian and Egyptian 
dealt more mercilessly with the people of God (Ex. 
4; 5; 6: 7) than many tyrants with persecution 
and all kinds of horrible martyrdoms have for some 
time been raging and are still raging against the 


436 .Admonitions and Epistles. 


Christians, so that one may well say with the 
prophet: “O God, the heathen are come into thine 
inheritance; thy holy temple have they defiled; 
they have laid Jerusalem in heaps. The dead bodies 
of thy servants have they given to be meat unto 
the fowls of the heaven, the flesh of thy saints unto 
the beasts of the earth. Their blood have they shed 
- like water round about Jerusalem,” etc. (Psa. 79: 
1-7). The chiefs of the people had to mourn and 
weep over their children, the priests and Levites 
who carry on the true worship of God in the temple, 
who burn incense before the Lord, and prepare the 
sacrifices and make offerings upon the altar, are 
captured and killed, the congregations are robbed 
of their faithful ministers. O Lord God, have mercy 
and strengthen thy servants; go thou before thy 
tabernacle, and lead thy people through this bleak 
wilderness, that all who fear thee and put their trust 
in thee may come into eternal rest (Heb. 4:11). 
And you, my most dearly beloved in the Lord, pray 
diligently to almighty God in behalf of all the dear 
brethren and companions of our most holy faith. 
that God would strengthen them with his Holy 
Spirit, and give them patience in the hour of suf- 
fering; “for ye have need of patience,” says the 
apostle, “that, after ye have done the will of God, 
ye might receive the promise. For yet a little while, 
and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry. 
Now the just shall live by faith: but if any man 
draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him. 
But we are not of them who draw back unto perdi- 
tion, but of them that believe to the saving of the 
soul” (Heb. 10: 36-39). It is a great privilege to suffer 
a little here with Christ (Rom. 8:18), to be patient 
and cheerful in it all, that hereafter we may become 
partakers of his eternal j joy and glory (1 Pet. 4:13). 
Therefore the cross of Christ is the glory of all 
Christians, who say with the apostle: “God forbid 
that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto 
me, and I unto the world” (Gal. 6:14). And while 
the cross of Christ is at this time not everywhere 
alike heavy (Matt. 11:29), yet according to the will 
of God it may come suddenly. Therefore my ad- _ 


Admonitions and Epistles. 437 


monition to all you who have bowed the neck under :' 
the easy yoke of Christ (Matt. 11:30) is, that you 
be at all times prepared to suffer, and possess your 
souls in patience, for no one shall succeed in per- 
secuting Jesus of Nazareth in his: members and 
kicking against the pricks (Acts 9:5); therefore 
be strong and of good comfort in the Lord. And 
further, do not allow yourselves to be frightened 
by opponents and apostates, but resist manfully as 
those well equipped with the armor of God (Eph. 
6:14), for they cannot accomplish anything. What 
was ungodly Jeroboam with all his offscouring and 
ungodly host able to do against Abijah and Judah? 
“Ye think to withstand the kingdom of the Lord,” 
said Abijah among other things to Jeroboam and 
Israel, “in the hand of the sons of David; and ye 
be a great multitude, and there are with you golden 
calves, which Jeroboam made you for gods. Have 
ye not cast out the priests of the Lord, the sons of 
Aaron, and the Levites, and have made you priests 
after the manner of the nations of other lands? so 
that whosoever cometh to consecrate himself with 
a young bullock and seven rams, the same may be 
a priest of them that are no gods. But as for us, 
the Lord is our God, and we have not forsaken 
him; and the priests which minister unto the Lord, 
are the sons of Aaron, and the Levites wait upon 
their business: and they burn unto the Lord every 
morning and every evening burnt sacrifices and 
sweet incense: the shewbread also set they in order 
upon the pure table; and the candlestick with the 
lamps thereof, to burn every evening: for we keep 
the charge of the Lord our God; but ye have for- 
saken him. And, behold, God himself is with us 
for our captain, and his priests with sounding 
trumpets to cry alarm against you. O children of 
Israel, fight ye not against the Lord God of your 
fathers; for ye shall not prosper’ (2 Chron. 18: 
8-12). 

Thus also may we glory in the Lord against all 
sects, namely, that the true and pure gospel of Jesus 
Christ is with us, the true priesthood with its true 
worship of God, the true ordinances of ‘God, as those 
that have come down from heaven, given by God 


438 Admonitions and Epistles. 


the Father, taught and commanded by Jesus Christ, 
testified to and confirmed by the Holy Ghost (Matt. 
3:17), and practiced and declared by the apostles. 
But with our adversaries and the apostates are the 
golden calves of Jeroboam and his priests (Rev. 3) 
which he made contrary to the command of God. 
There offerings are made in the high places, there 
Baal is worshipped, the priestess Jezebel reigns with 
her false doctrine, there the doctrine and way of 
Balaam is followed, who raised up an offence before 
the children of Israel, so that they committed for- 
nication with the daughters of Moab, and wor- 
shipped Baal-peor (Num. 25:1-5). So also do these 
modern Balaamites, who practice hypocrisy to please 
the world and to mislead others, and use all dili- 
gence to destroy the church of God. Therefore let 
us sound the trumpet as one voice, and blow the 
trumpets of God, and the enemies shall be terrified 
when they shall hear the sound of the trumpets of 
God (Judges 7: 19-23); yea, then will the cake of 
barley. bread tumble into the host of Midian and 
overturn their tents and destroy them, if so be that 
we sound the trumpet and break the earthen pitchers 
in pieces and let our light shine and strive manfully 
for the truth of God; then all who oppose the truth 
or depart from it and grieve and oppress the church 
of God must come to shame. For, because Pharaoh 
oppressed the children of Israel he was drowned in 
the Red Sea (Ex. 14: 23). And because Jannes and 
Jambres withstood Moses (2 Tim. 38; Ex. 7:11), 
they were brought to shame. And how many 
tyrants have been punished by God because they 
tyrannized over God’s people; and how many false 
prophets who set themselves against the true. 
prophets have been brought to shame! “They shall 
proceed no further,” says the apostle, “for their 
folly shall be made manifest unto all men” (2 Tim. 
3:9). Again, “as the mountains are round about 
Jerusalem, so the Lord is round about his people 
from henceforth even forever.” And “he that goeth 
forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall 
doubtless come again with rejoicing’ (Psa. 125:2;. 
126:6). All those then who believe the truth and 
remain steadfast and immoveably by it, and love 


Admonitions and Epistles. 439 


the church of God shall be forever blessed (Psa. 
118: 7-15). For the reason that the ark of the 
covenant was in the house of Obed-Edom, God the 
Lord blessed him and all his house (2 Kings 6:10). 
Therefore the psalmist says: “Pray for the peace 
.of Jerusalem: they shall prosper that love thee” 
(Psa.d22:,6),, 

In the fourth place I admonish you to a Christian 
thanksgiving, that you thank God for his unspeak- 
able gift which he has bestowed upon you; firstly, 
that he has made you “meet to be partakers of the 
- inheritance of the saints in light” (Col. 1:12); yea, 
that you (I say it with the apostle) “who in time 
past were not a people, but are now the people of 
God: which had not obtained mercy, but now have 
Olaaimed. jimercy ?.;(1\ Pet, \.2,;.10),;:and. are. called 
children of the living God; so that you may well 
say with John: “Behold, what manner of love the 
Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be 
called the sons of God: therefore the world know- 
eth us not, because it knew him not. Beloved, now 
are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear 
what we shall be: but we know that, when he shall 
appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him 
as he is’ (1 John 3:1, 2). Therefore Paul says 
that Christians are dead, and our life is hid with 
Christ in God. “When Christ, who is our life, shall 
appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory” 
(Col. 3:3, 4). 

Now, therefore, thank almighty God at all times 
with the patriarch Jacob (Gen. 32:9, etc.), that he 
would preserve your going out and your coming 
in, and protect you from the hand of Esau; also 
that he has richly blessed you with heavenly riches 
in Christ Jesus. And never forget this goodness 
of God. Say with the psalmist: “Bless the Lord, 
O, my soul; and all that is within me, bless his 
holy name. Bless the Lord, O, my soul, and forget 
not all his benefits: who forgiveth all thine 
iniquities; who healeth all thy diseases; who re- 
deemeth thy life from destruction; who crowneth 
thee with lovingkindness and tender mercies; who 
satisfieth thy mouth with good things; so that thy 
youth is renewed like the eagle’s” (Psa. 103: 1-5). 


440 -~—« Admonitions and Epistles. 


All this the Lord has done for you. He has for- 
given you your sins, he has healed your souls with 
his heavenly medicine, he has redeemed your lives 
from everlasting destruction (Rom. 3:5, 8; Matt. 
9:13). He has given you eternal life (Rom. G55 
Tit. 3:6); the crown of righteousness is prepared 
for you; your food is the finest of the wheat, the 
living bread of heaven that is full of divine sweet- 
ness (John 6:52; Wis. of Sol. 16:20), and is 
angels’ food, and the life of all believers; your 
youth is renewed in regeneration, the old life of the 
flesh is put away, and the new life of the Spirit in 
Christ has come into you, of which it is written in 
the epistle to the Hebrews: “We are made par- 
takers of Christ, if we hold the beginning of our 
confidence steadfast unto the end” (Heb. 3:14). 
That is, we have become partakers of Christ, as 
members of his body, as branches of the vine (1 Cor. 
12:12; John 15:5), and have received of his Spirit, 
and his life (that is holiness, righteousness, godli- 
ness, love, peace, patience, goodness, mercy, and all 
the divine virtues) has begun in you since you 
through the hearing of the word of God, by the 
power and enlightenment of the Holy Ghost, have 
believed. If you remain constant herein you now 
belong to Christ; you have also become partakers 
of Christ and all his heavenly riches (Rom. 10:10), 
of his grace and truth, his eternal life, his divine 
nature and glory, here in the Spirit by faith, and 
hereafter in the resurrection and renewing of all 
things we shall become partakers of the same in 
all its completeness (2 Pet. 1:4; 1 Thess. 5:23; 
1 Cor. 15:53; Matt. 13:58); for our conversation 
is in heaven; from whence also we look for the 
Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ: who shall change 
our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto 
his glorious body, according to the working whereby 
he is able even to subdue all things unto himself 
OPH se 20e20y% 

Thus, you see, the believers have become par- 
takers of Christ, and shall be like him, and shall 
appear with him in glory, if so be that they now 
remain in him as members of his body, as branches 
of the vine, and are not through unbelief and 


Admonitions and Epistles. 441 


apostasy from God’s word cut away from it. There- 
fore take heed to the admonition of the apostle: 
“As ye have therefore received: Christ Jesus the 
Lord, so walk ye in him: rooted and built up in 
him, and stablished in the faith, as ye have been 
taught, abounding therein with thanksgiving” (Col. 
2:6, 7), with the prophet thanking God always that 
he has so wonderfully made you, preserved you 
from earliest infancy, and yet more wonderfully 
redeemed your lives from this present evil world in 
these perilous times, and has called you out of so 
many thousands into the fellowship of Jesus Christ 
(Gal. 1:4), and shown his“fatherly love in you (1 
John 3:1), and bestowed upon us the exceeding 
riches of his grace, for which praise be to his name 
forever; Amen (Eph. 2:7). 

Lastly, I beseech and admonish you, my dearly 
beloved and desired in the Lord, through the cruci- 
fied Jesus Christ, who reconciled us unto God, and 
has wrought everlasting peace with his Father, and 
left us the same (Eph. 2:15; John 20:20) ;—I be- 
seech and admonish you, I say—to be at peace one 
with another in Jesus Christ, and remember that 
you are children of one heavenly Father, who is God, 
the true Father of ‘all. (Eph. 3:15); and of one 
mother, who is the spiritual Sarah, the new Jeru- 
_ salem, the bride of the Lamb (Eph. 4:3; Isa. 30:2; 
Gal. 4:26-31). Therefore let this regeneration be 
actual and powerful in you, and be diligent to keep 
the unity of the Spirit through the bond of peace; 
and undertake nothing without the word of God, 
and without the counsel of the Holy Spirit; and 
do not rate your wisdom or understanding too 
highly (Rom. 12:3), but fear God and ask him for 
true wisdom ; search the scriptures diligently, under- 
stand them thoroughly, measure all things by the 
gospel plumb-line, prove all spirits by the character, 
nature-and spirit of Christ, and you shall easily dis- 
cern which spirit is of God, and thus you will 
never have contention ; for it is impossible, wherever 
the new birth—that comes by the word of God and 
by faith—has taken place, where through his birth 
the divine nature has been partaken of, where the 
fear of the Lord has implanted in the heart the 


4492, Admonitions and Epistles. 


beginning of wisdom, and where brotherly love 
is without dissimulation (John 1:14; 1 John 5:2; 
2° Pets Li43. Eccl.i2e%eRomedZ 29s Galeais): 
for any carnal contention and dissension to be found 
there. Therefore prove by your Christian peace, 
by your brotherly love and unity, that you are 
Christians (John 15:9; 1 John 4:6); and the God 
of peace, who is the embodiment of love, will be 
with you forever. Amen. . 

As above stated I have written this out of pure 
love as a friendly greeting and memorial that you 
;may know thereby how my heart and mind turns 
‘to you all as to my dearly beloved brethren and 
sisters, and to-my—fatherland, yea to all who fear 
God; and if I could do more for you God knows 
what is in my heart. You are my chosen ones, yea 
my most beloved with all others who fear God in 
Christ Jesus. I should indeed write especially to 
several acquaintances, but they must have patience, 
for I have much that concerns me, my work in the 
church is not unknown to you, cross and suffering, 
anxiety and distress likewise keep pace with other 
things. God be thanked that he esteems me worthy 
of these things; within is labor and anxiety; with- 
out is strife and persecution, by the world and by 
my enemies, so that I may well say with the Psalm- 
ist: “Lord, how are they increased that trouble 
me! many are they that rise up against me. Many 
there be which say of my soul, There is no help 
for him in God” (Psa. 3:1, 2). And again: “Con- 
sider mine enemies; for they are many; and they 
hate me with cruel hatred,” that is, vindictiveness, 
wickedness and envy of heart. 

Therefore I make this friendly request to you 
to remember me and all ministers in your prayers, 
that God would graciously look upon us, strengthen 
and comfort us with his Holy Spirit that we may 
strive valiantly for the truth, finish our course in 
the fear of the Lord; keep the faith and receive the 
crown of righteousness from the Son of God upon 
Mount Zion with all who confess God and over- 
come (2 Tim. 4:5-8; 4 Esd. 2:48). Pray also for 
those in authority and for all men, that God accord- 
ing to his good will would have mercy upon them 


- Admonitions and Epistles. 443 


and enlighten them that they may come to the 
knowledge of the truth and be saved. 

Herewith I commend you all to the almighty 
eternal God. May he strengthen you and me and 
all who from the heart desire it, in his truth, make 
us fruitful in all good works, and preserve us unto 
his heavenly kingdom. Amen. | 

And as I wrote in my letter to the church in H.., 
so I also write to you, namely: If so be that the 
Lord will take me out of time, and deliver me out 

of this evil world (let his holy will be done), I 
herewith take Christian leave of you all, rejoicing 
that I have seen your faces, and hoping to see them 
again with joy in the kingdom of our heavenly 
Father. But if the Lord should so direct that we 
should meet again in this life, it must be in the 
- name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to his praise and 
to the joy and refreshing of us all in the Lord. All 
the elders of our church greet you with the peace 
of God, as does also my co-laborer who is well 
known to you. The grace of Jesus Christ be with 
you all. Amen. 


THE THIRD ADMONITION OR EPISTLE. 
WRITTEN IN BROTHERLY LOVE TO 
THE CHURCH OF GOD, BY D. P. 


Grace, peace, mercy, Christian wisdom, and 2 
true understanding of the word of God, unfeigned 
faith and steadfast mind in the truth I wish unto 
all the chosen saints, our beloved brethren, friends 
and companions, from God, our heavenly Father, 
and from Jesus Christ, our Lord and Savior, to 
whom be blessing forever. Amen. 


With the apostle Paul (2 Thess. 1:3) I thank 
the Lord, my God, because I have not only heard, 
but have been an eye witness, of your faith in God 
and in the Lord Jesus Christ, of your love to all the: 
saints, of your patience in all manner of anxiety, 
trouble and persecution which you are suffering for 
the sake of the gospel, and of your courage and 
constancy in the faith. The eternal almighty God 
be praised and his holy name adored that he has 
thus endued you through Jesus Christ with the 
power of the Holy Ghost, and begun the good work 
in you (Phil. 1:6; 2:18). _I rest in the hope of 
his unfathomable grace that he will also fulfil the 
‘ same in you to his praise and your everlasting 
salvation. This is all the desire of my heart before 
God that it should thus come to pass. And inas- 
much as these are perilous times, and so many 
false prophets and antichrists arise, so many haughty 
and honor-seeking spirits are abroad who proudly 
vaunt against the Holy Scripture, who deny Jesus 
Christ, the only begotten Son of the living God, 
that is, contradict his own truth, break and alter 
his divine ordinances, and beside this introduce their 
false and blasphemous doctrine and carnal license, 
I cannot forbear as an obligation of Christian love, 
and desire of the mind, to warn you against all such 


Admonitions and Epistles. 445 


conceited spirits and to admonish you with the 
word of God, although I have this confidence in 
you that you are taught of God, and are firmly and 
immovably rooted and grounded in the saving 
doctrine of Jesus Christ and his apostles. Never- 
theless I must, according to the humble gift that 
is given me of God, cite you anew to the foundation 
of our Christian faith, to the covenant of God, and 
how we should lead a godly life in the same, to 
the praise of the Lord, and to several evidences 
and proofs that we believe and are born anew of 
God, by faith in Jesus Christ in the power of the 
Holy Ghost; for it is my greatest joy to hear and 
see that the church of the Lord stands firm in the 
true knowledge of Jesus Christ, and rightly con- 
fesses his truth, forasmuch as there is given us 
no other name under heaven whereby we may be 
saved but his name alone (Matt. 24:12; 1 Tim. 
Aen ee? Limes lum Oerete 2h it tony sfuderwal as 
Ponn eho l2sor8 3%) (Gal, oir22e01 “Johneas 1s nAcs 
4:12). There is likewise also no othér truth than 
that which Jesus brought out of heaven and for 
which he besought his Father (John 17:17), that 
his disciples might be sanctified thereby. For this 
reason, first of all, my faithful and earnest admoni- 
tion to you comes from my inmost soul, and I 
beseech you by the mercies of God that you do 
not allow yourselves to be moved or turned away 
from our most holy faith (Rom. 12:1) by any one’s 
proud, vain and great swelling words (Jude 1:16), 
but believe the scripture, and remember that it is 
written there that God, by whom the Holy Scripture 
is given by inspiration and from whom it comes, 
alone is true (Psa. 116:11; Rom. 3:4; John 3:38), 
and that all men (who speak of themselves and not 
the word of the Lord through his Spirit) are liars. 
And since the true God has given us his only be- 
gotten Son Jesus Christ as a Lord and Master, 
Redeemer and Savior, set him as an example, and 
testified of him saying: “This is my beloved Son, 
in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him” (Matt. 
17:5), therefore do not think that a Christian should 
believe and do otherwise than that which Jesus 

taught, yea, brought out of heaven from his Father 


446 Admonitions and Epistles. 


in the power of the Holy Spirit (John 14: 6-14) - 
and did himself. He is and remains the only way 
to the Father (John 14:6), and the only truth 
through whom all believers are sanctified by God. 
For as the glory of God the Father is that he is an 
eternal, almighty, self-existent Being, the fountain 
and head from which all good springs, from which 
all that is good has its origin, being and source, that 
he is the eternal Light and the Father of lights 
(Bx 3223's JasLod ise Maite 19 ot el eka 
from whom all good gifts come and are bestowed, 
so also it is the glory of Jesus Christ that he is the 
Word, the wisdom and the power of God (John 
1:1; Rom. 1:16), the truth and the life, the image 
of the invisible God, and the express image of his 
Person (1 Cor. 1:16; Heb. 1:3), the brightness 
of the everlasting light, and the spotless reflection 
of the divine glory which has its origin from the 
beginning and from everlasting from God the 
Father, the only begotten Son of the Most High 
and living God (Micah 5:1); therefore also he has 
received from the Father a name that is above 
every other name, not only in this present world, 
but also in the world to come; for his name is 
God’s Word, namely the Word of whom John 
writes: “In the beginning was the Word, and the 
Word was with God, and the Word was God (John 
dis tRew19214;Ephail 212% Phils) joe tom 
this it follows incontrovertibly that Jesus Christ, the 
only begotten Son of the almighty God is one and 
inseparable with his Father in divine existence, 
and therefore in his name every knee must bow, 
every tongue must confess that he is the Lord 
(Phil. 2:10), all nations must praise him and fall 
down before him; yea, he is worshipped by all the 
angels, and, like his Father, truly honored with 
divine honor by all creatures under heaven (Heb. 
1:6; John 5:21; John 15:8); and he is honored 
and likewise his ‘heavenly Father glorified, in this 
that we become his disciples; and those are his 
disciples who abide in his doctrine and continue in 
his Word (John 8:31), who deny themselves, take 
up their cross and follow the Lord in regeneration 
by a true faith, through which they receive and 


Admonitions and Epistles. 447 


obtain the promised salvation. For it is the nature 
and power of faith to believe with the whole heart 
and rest assured from God’s word and promise, 
through the seal of the Spirit, that Jesus Christ, 
though he was in the form of God (Phil. 2:5), rich 
and glorious with the Father before the beginning 
of the world, was, in the providence of God the 
Father (1 Pet. 1:20), through the working of his 
Holy Spirit, made man in the virgin Mary (Matt. 
1:20; Luke 2:7; John 1:14), and born of her, a 
Son of the Most High. Therefore he is a heavenly 
being, and not of earth, yea, he is the living bread 
come down from heaven, as he himself declares 
(John 6:51), he is the bread of God, and gives life 
to the world. For he himself says, in the Gospel 
by John: “The bread that I will give is my flesh, 
which I will give for the life of the world” (John 
6:51). Oh, what a holy and heavenly, yea, divine 
and life-giving flesh is the flesh of Jesus Christ, the 
Son of God!. And this because it originated in the 
Word, as the evangelist. testifies and says: “The 
Word was made flesh” (John 1:14). Christ con- 
firms this testimony of John in the words already 
quoted, namely when he says that he is “the living 
bread which came down from heaven” (John 6:51). 

Now it is forever true without a doubt that 
God’s Word is this living bread of heaven, this 
spiritual manna, which God permitted to come from 
heaven as meat for all believing souls (John 6:53- 
56). This manna and bread, I say (which Jesus 
Christ calls his flesh), is from heaven and not from 
the earth, like the mercy-seat which stood upon the 
ark of the covenant was of pure gold, while the ark 
itself was of shittim-wood (Ex. 25: 10-24), and over- 
laid with gold. That the ark is a symbol of the 
church, all those who have been taught of God 
know. The shittim-wood is a symbol of human 
weakness, in which the church (since it also has 
flesh and blood from sinful Adam) is enveloped; 
the gold signifies the pure word of God, and the 
power of the Holy Ghost, with which the church 
through the new birth of God is adorned and clothed 
_ from on high. For “that which is born of the Spirit, 
is spirit” (John 3:6), as Christ himself says. And 


448 _Admonitions and Epistles. 


Paul says: “He that is joined unto the Lord is one 
spirit” (1 Cor. 6:17). Understand, with the Lord. 

Thus the ark, that is, the ark of the covenant, 
was made of two substances, as an exemplification 
of the fact that the church also is composed of two 
different materials. That is, it is of the earth 
through the natural birth that is of Adam; and it is 
from heaven, through the second birth that is of 
God (John 3:5; 1 Cor. 15:43; Eph. 5:8; Song of 
Sol. 2:1-3); it is weak and infirm in itself, and it 
is glorious and beautiful by the grace of Jesus 
Christ. But it is not thus with the mercy-seat, for 
it is one substance, and that is pure gold, and the 
Father thereby represents to us Jesus Christ the 
head of the church and the true mercy-seat (Rom. 
3:25; Heb. 5:3) by faith in his blood, as the apostle . 
says, through whom God speaks to us. This is the 
pure word of God within and without, through and 
through; therefore also his flesh did not see nor 
suffer corruption (John 1:2; 8:40). John ex- 
pressly declares this in his epistle and says: “That 
which was from the beginning, which we have 
heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which 
we have looked upon, and our hands have handled, 
of the Word of life; (for the life was manifested, 
and we have seen it, and bear witness, and show 
unto you that eternal life, which was with the 
Father, and was manifested unto us;) that which 
we have seen and heard declare we unto you” (1 
John 1:1-3). In like manner the brazen serpent, 
which Christ himself signifies and explains as point- 
ing to himself (as a figure to the true substance, 
and as the letter to the spirit), was made of one 
kind of material and was a saving sign of the grace 
of God (John 3:14). Who can truthfully contra- 
dict this? Yea, who can doubt? After such and 
like mysteries, figures and definite words, it is so 
evident that Jesus Christ is the only Christ and the 
indivisible Son of God, not half heavenly and half 
earthly, not half of Adam and half of God, yea, not 
half holy and half sinful, as many educated (I 
might well say perverted) people have falsely and 
in shameless manner claimed; but he is entirely 
heavenly (John 3:13;6:62), entirely of God, en- 


Admonitions and Epistles. ‘ 449 


tirely holy, who also by the one offering of his 


- spotless flesh and precious blood (Heb. 10:14) has 


sacrificed for and made perfect all those who believe ~ 
in his name; for it behooved him or became him 
to pay with his innocence for all the debt of the 
transgressor Adam (Rom. 5:1), destroy all our 
unrighteousness with his righteousness, swallow up 
death by his life, and as the one innocent Lamb of 
God, take away the sin of the world (John 1:29; 
1 John 2:2; 3:5) and fulfill the wonderful work 


of our redemption. Who, after this, can doubt that 


he must be a divine being, yea, true God and man 
in one person; for in his divinity he was able to 
help us, and in his humanity he was able, as the 
one High Priest, annointed. and ordained by God 
after the order of Melchisedec, to offer himself for 
us through the Holy Spirit and burn the precious 
incense with the fire of his unfathomable love to 
us upon the altar of the cross. (Heb. 5:1; 9:11) 
as a sweet savor unto the Father and for our recon- 
ciliation with God (Eph. 5:1) and for the forgive- 
ness of our sins. Likewise who can doubt that in 
him who revealed to us the utmost will and the 
whole counsel of God, opened to us the treasury 
of divine mysteries, and prepared the way to the 
holy of holies, must lie hidden all the mysteries 
of wisdom and of the knowledge of God (Col. 2:2), 
that in him must dwell all the fullness of the God- 
head bodily, that ‘he out of the fullness of his grace 
and truth could bestow the same upon all those who 
seek such things of him or desire them of him (John 
Pee OL 19’. 2) Hence two thingsedre 
readily seen in him, namely (1.) that he is the 
Redeemer of the human race, our Propitiator, our 
Righteousness, Sanctification and Peace, our Medi- 


- ator and Advocate, our High Priest with the Father, 


our Throne of grace, our Mercy-seat, the Horn ot 


our salvation, and the Hope of our life (Matt. 1:21; 


S11 John 2:2; Heb. 5:1; Test SE) Aptos tales 


=(2) that he is the true Teacher of the truth, a wit- 
ness of heavenly things which he has seen and 


heard of his Father, a living example of the nature | 


and attributes of his Father in all his words and 


works (John 3:2; Heb. 1:3). With his grace he 


oe 


20 


450 - Admonitions and Epistles. 


suffices for our salvation, and with his truth he 
shows us the way to everlasting life (John 1:16; 
14:6; Rom. 8:32). 

And like as they are cursed who build upon and 
trust in their own works, merits and false righteous- 
ness, so also all those are accursed and excluded 
who preach or accept any other gospel than that 
which our Lord Jesus Christ brought from heaven 
and sealed with his blood (Gal. 1:8). To all this 
the scripture testifies very clearly, and faith also 
comprehends it all, which faith is a work of God 
in man, whereby he is born again of God (Eph. 
2:8), as it is written: “Whosoever believeth that 
Jesus is the Christ, is born of God” (1 John 5:1): 
and he that is born of God is one spirit with God 
(1 John 3:6). yea, God is in him, and he in God, 
Jesus Christ dwells by faith in his heart, and he is 
sealed with the Holy Spirit (Eph. 3:17). There- 
fore he rejoices in this grace and mercy of God, 
which he by faith confesses, and his heart is kindled 
with divine and brotherly love when he remembers 
and considers that God so loved us and gave his 
only Son for us unto death (John 3:16), that we 
through him might live, and that Jesus Christ 
offered himself for us that we through his one offer- 
ing might be sanctified forever (Heb. 10:11; John 
17:17). Because of this—I repeat—the Christian's 
heart 1s moved to respond in love to God, because 
he so dearly loved us, and also to serve our fellow- 
men, like as Jesus served us. And this is a true 
faith, which is at all times fruitful, active and 
operative in love, both toward God and toward 
neighbor, otherwise it is no faith (Gal. 5:6). To 
this belong the commands and ordinances of the 
Lord; for they attest to and confirm faith. _Never- 
theless faith looks upon Jesus Christ alone, com-- 
forts itself in his grace and merits, for this is an 
undeniable and true word, that shall not pass away; 
it is the firm foundation of God, that shall stand 
forever; it is also the greatest comfcrt of all Chris- 
tians, their highest joy and safest refuge, that they 
are--saved: by. grace (Eph. 2:7), and that Jesus 
Christ is our Savior, and that there is no other 
name given under heaven whereby we may be saved, 


_Admonitions and Epistles. 451 


and that he is our Guide, the only good Shepherd 
-and Bishop of our souls (Matt. 1:28; Acts 4:12; 
Se john 14:6; 10:1; 1 Pet: 2:25), whose voice we 
_ must hear, and whose steps we must follow. Who- 
~ ever will not believe and do this, shall never come 
unto God. This is my belief and confession before 
almighty God, and before Jesus Christ and his 
angels, and before all people on earth, especially 
_ before those who from the heart desire to fear God 
-and to walk in his ways. ° 
Further, I must write to you a little concerning 
’ God’s covenant (Gen. 17:2), in which all believers. 
are included (in which is shown us the grace of 
God the Father and of his only begotten Son Jesus 
_ Christ—faith, love, the fear of the Lord, obedience 
_ to his word, and the keeping of the commandments 
' of God are demanded and desired of us), for the 
reason that God’s holy writ speaks much of it and 
} sets before the eyes of all who fear God what 
preally is God’s covenant.. Hence it is necessary 
for all Christians to know what is God’s covenant, 
namely, that God covenants and unites himself with 
: us, promises us all that is good, that he will be our 
God and Faither, and that we shall be his people, 
‘his sons and daughters, the sheep of his pasture,. 
_and receive blessings from him through Jesus Christ. 
: And this covenant was instituted when God said 
to the serpent: “I will put enmity between thee 
_and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; 
; it shall bruise thy Head: Geto — oyu iis cov 
_enant was afterward renewed and confirmed by 
: God with the patriarch Noah and his sons, to whom 
God said: “Behold, I establish my covenant with 
Fyou” (Gen. 9:9). Moreover, God spoke of and 
established this covenant with Abraham, to whom 
God said: “I am the almighty God,” that is, an 
eee sufficiency and fullness of all good; 
“walk before me, and be thou perfect. And I will 
“make my covenant between me and thee.” And 
God talked further with him, saying:* “Behold, my 
covenant is with thee, and thou shalt be a father 
f many nations. I will establish my covenant 
between me and thee, and thy seed after thee” (Gen. 
17: 1-8). 





y Bo 1S 







452 Admonitions and Epistles. | 


With this are included all the promises of God— 
his grace, love, faithfulness, mercy, kindness, and 
of Jesus Christ, our Lord and Savior, through whom 
are vouchsafed the blessings (in spiritual and 
heavenly riches), the forgiveness of sin, and eternal 
salvation ‘(Gal:-379%. Eph, 123).> “And this setue 
first article in the covenant of God, so far as God 
is concerned, and is embodied in the promises of 
God. The second article therein concerns us, namely 
that we accept the proffered grace of God by faith, 
that we fear, love, honor and worship God, serve 
him and obey him, and remain firm and steadfast 
in his word, continuing therein with firm resolve, 
and with the help of God walk according thereto; 
and that is the answer of a good conscience with 
God through Jesus Christ. And to this end all the 
commandments of God serve, teaching and com- 
manding us as to what relation we should maintain 
and manifest toward God. 

To this end also the two rites or signs of the 
Lord—baptism and the Lord’s Supper—are insti- 
tuted, namely to testify to and remind us of this 
covenant. For although the real and true saving 
sign of the gracious covenant of God is Jesus Christ 
(John 3:14; 1 John 4:13), and the Holy Ghost 
is the sealing of all the promises of God (Eph. 
4:30), nevertheless the almighty God at all times 
gave testimony to and confirmed his covenant with 
outward signs. For when God comforted Adam 
and Eve with the promise of the coming Savior and 
Conqueror of the serpent he gave them a coat of 
skins and clothed them therewith (Gen. 3:21), and 
this signifies that Jesus Christ is the cloke of right- 
eousness and the mantle of salvation, with which 
all believers and baptized Christians are clothed 
and their sins covered, Gal. 3:24), that they might | 
be assured of the grace and promise of God. For | 

the fact that God yet covered their nakedness and — 
- shame after they had sinned, was a sure sign, and | 
God thereby openly showed that he had not turned 
his fatherly heart away from them, but that he still | 
nourished and provided for them in his fathomless | 
mercy and love, even with bodily clothing, that they | 
might ever find their refuge with such a gracious | 











Admonitions and Epistles. 453 


God. In like manner God gave Noah the rainbow 
~and Abraham circumcision as a sign of his covenant 
(Gen. 9:12; 17:9), and both these signs picture 
to us Jesus Christ, who is an evidence of our peace, 
in heaven, at his Father’s right hand (Eph. 2:15), 
and his circumcision is the true circumcision made 
without hands (Col. 2:11), with the stone knife of 
the divine word, in the foreskin of the heart, by the 
laying off of the sinful flesh, that is, all evil desires, 
lusts and works that come from the flesh. There- 
fore Paul says: “He is not a Jew, which is one 
outwardly; neither is that circumcision which is 
outward in the flesh: but he is a Jew, which is one 
inwardly; and circumcision is that of the heart, in 
the spirit, and not in the letter, whose praise is not 
of men, but of God” (Rom. 2: 28, 29). 

In like manner the almighty God instituted, gave 
and left baptism and the Lord’s Supper for us 
Christians, that we therewith and thereby might 
be admonished and reminded of the divine covenant, 
and.of our debt which we owe to God; for the 
gospel which is taught us prior to baptism presents 
and pictures to us the overflowing grace of God and 
the death of Jesus Christ, namely that God has 
chosen us to be his children, and has graciously 
forgiven all our sins through Jesus Christ (Eph. 
Ptoe Ol, Oteo,, 0.1); -8-1),: with whose bload 
he has sprinkled, washed and cleansed our con- 
Serences -(1 -Pet. 1: 18;: Heb. 9:12: 12:2). “And 
this is declared to us from the gospel, for the reason 
that we should repent, cease from sin, confess them 
before God, believe the gospel, and be baptized on 
confession of our faith, not only within by Jesus 
Christ himself, with the Holy Ghost and with fire, 
but also outwardly by a minister of the Lord, in 
his church with water, in the name of the Father, 
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, as in the 
name of the one God and Lord, as a testimony that 
we are then recorded and counted in the number 
and fellowship of the saints and the saved, whom 
God the Father has accepted as his children, whom | 
Jesus Christ has redeemed with his innocent death 
and bought with his precious blood, and enlightened 
by the Holy Ghost, has brought unto eternal salva- 


454 Admonitions and Epistles. 


tion. (Matts 28:19 "Romy, 85.107 2c of.n0] fey ek 
Pet. 1:18). Therefore as the chosen children of 
the heavenly. Father, as the holy brethren and com- 
panions of Jesus Christ (Heb. 3:1), as those who 
are sealed with the Holy Spirit, amd marked with 
the sign of the living God, we are under obligation, 
from the time when we received baptism in the 
most praiseworthy and adorable name of God, to 
serve God as the Lord giyes us grace, in his 
covenant with a good conscience, die unto sin, bury 
the old Adam, and go forth in newness of life (1 
Pet. 3:21). And this is what the apostle means — 
when he writes to the Romans: “Know ye not 
that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus 
Christ were baptized into his death?’ (Rom. 6:3). 
The apostle means that believers and penitents are 
baptized into the fellowship of the death of Christ; 
firstly, in this that they become partakers and bene- 
ficiaries of his suffering and death, and all that he 
thereby wrought with God his Father and accom- 
plished for our salvation; secondly, that they die 
with ‘him and become conformable to his suffering, 
and walk in a new, spiritual and Christian life. 
Thus also the Lord’s Supper is a token of the 
love of God to us (Matt. 26: 25), and a commemora- 
tion of the suffering and death of Jesus Christ and 
reminds us of the great love and of the exceeding 
great riches of the grace of God the Father, that 
he gave his only begotten Son as a propitiation for 
our sins (John “3:16; “Rom. 8332-15 fon stam 
It also portrays to us the bitter, innocent suffering, 
the shameful death and the agonizing torture of 
Jesus Christ, with admonition and portrayal of how 
we should in return love God our heavenly Father 
and his Son Jesus Christ, and be thankful for all 
Denefits. Moreover we are also admonished by the 
Lord’s Supper to brotherly love, loyalty and unity, 
and that with all true believing Christians we must 
live in harmonious, peaceable, loving and friendly 
relations in the covenant of God, in the church of 
the Lord, serving and loving one another, even as 
Jesus Christ served and loved us. 
_ These things I presented to you when I was 
with you, and I rejoiced in spirit when I saw how 


' Admonitions and Epistles. 455 


- many were added to the church of God, and that 
with such Christian unity you broke the bread of 
the Lord with us. May the God of all mercy and 
the God of all grace give you strength through his 
Holy Spirit to continue in the good work and re- 
main constant therein unto the end. And ever 
remember the first love and fervor of your hearts 
(Rev. 2:4; 3:15), how love to God and his church 
glowed in you, how fervent you were in Spirit when 
you entered into covenant relation with God, when 
you united with the Lord and his church, and there 
made a promise to the Most” High God, upon the 
bowed knees of your hearts and bodies, and ex- 

{pressed in full confession with your mouths that 
you would serve the Lord in -his church with all 

Cae in peace and in one spirit of faith (Eph. 

9; Gal. 6:16), and walk uprightly according to 
the one rule of the divine word, as becomes all 
regenerated children of Gad. And for this reason 
I have said this regarding the covenant of God that 
you might ever remember the inexpressible love 
of God, by which he chose you to be his children 
and made you his heirs, through his beloved Son 
Jesus Christ (Eph. 1:3), and has given into your 
hearts the Holy Spirit as a pledge of the promised 
salvation, and how that you should at all times 
thank God for such glorious gifts and benefits, and 
walk and live with all those who fear God in godly 
unity. 

Therefore, my most beloved, since you have been 
called of God to the true knowledge and fellowship 

/ of his Son Jesus Christ, and have by grace become 
allied with God, I beseech and, admonish you that 
you seek with all diligence to prove yourselves in 

\ all things, that is, to walk worthy of the vocation 
wherewith you are called, or as becomes your call- 
me (en. 4k Gals 621630 Phill? 27, ete) And 
remember how faithfully the apostles of the Lord 
admonished all Christians to a holy life that is con- 
formed to and worthy of the gospel, and say: 

“Holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling, 

_ consider the Apostle and High Priest of our pro- 
fession, Christ Jesus; who was faithful to him that 
sappomted nim” ‘(Heb.3: 12). And: “1, “Paul the 


456 Admonitions and Epistles. 


prisoner of the Lord, beseech you that ye walk 
worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called, 
with all lowliness and meekness, with longsuffering 
forbearing one another in love; endeavoring to 
keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace” 
(Eph. 4:1-38). And again: “Let your conversation 
be as it becometh the gospel of Christ: that whether 
I come and see you, or else be absent, I may hear 
of your affairs, that ye stand fast in one spirit, with 
one mind striving for the faith of the gospel” (Eph. 
1:27). Moreover the apostle Peter, after first speak- 
ing of the kindness of God, which according to his 
abundant mercy has begotten us again unto a lively 
hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the — 
dead, admonishes us with these words: “Wherefore 
gird up the loins of your mind, be sober, and hope 
to the end for the grace that is to be brought unto 
you at the revelation of Jesus Christ; as obedient 
children, not fashioning yourselves according to the 
former lusts in your ignorance: but as he which 
hath called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner 
of conversation; because it is written, Be ye holy; 
for Iam holy” (1 Pet. 1:13-16). The apostle John 
likewise admonishes us and says: “This then is 
the mesage which we have heard of him, and declare 
unto you, that God is light, and in him is no dark- 
ness at all. If we say that we have fellowship with 
him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the 
truth: but if we walk in the light, as he is in the 
light, we have fellowship one with another, and the 
blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all 
sin” (1 John 1:5-7). And so the entire holy scrip- 
ture admonishes us to a godly life, and shows us 
that God’s kingdom is not in word, but in power 
(1 Cor. 4:20), and that those alone who believe are 
Christians, and that those shall be saved who do 
the will of God, as Jesus Christ himself expressly 
declares in the gospel. 


Therefore, my cordially beloved brethren and 
sisters in the Lord, I beseech and admonish you yet 
again, by the mercy of God, that you diligently 
heed these and like admonitions of the apostles that 
you as orthodox and baptized Christians may walk 
with a good conscience (1 Pet. 3:21) in Christian 


Admonitions and Epistles. 457 


peace and in brotherly unity, and always remember 
\ the words of the apostle James, who says: ‘Who 
\is a wise man and endued with knowledge among 
you? let him show out of a good conversation his 
works with meekness of wisdom. But if ye have 
bitter envying and strife in your hearts, glory not, 
and lie not against the truth. This wisdom de- 
scendeth not from above, but is earthly, sensual, 
devilish. For where envying and strife is, there 1s 
confusion and every evil work. But the wisdom 
that is from above is first pure, then peaceable, 
gentle, and easy to be intreated, full of mercy and 
good fruits, without partiality, and without hypoc- 
risy. And the fruit of righteousness is sown in 
peace of them that make peace” (Jas. 3: 13-18). 


The apostle here means the peace of God, and 
not the peace of this world. Therefore beware of 
all unstable and frivolous spirits who give freedom 
and indulgence to the flesh against the gospel and 
apostolic admonitions, and even against the whole 
divine truth, and with hypocritical pretense seek 
peace in the world. Beware of them, for they are 
the enemies of the cross of Christ (Phil. 3:18); 
they serve their belly, and they are carnally minded. 
But take an example of all the holy people of God 
who lived from the beginning and note how they 
avoided all false worship, all hypocrisy and all 
appearance of evil and the fellowship of idolaters. 
Think of this, take it to heart and note the end of 
the godly (Heb. 13:7), and fellow their faith, and 
the God of all grace will be with you for ever. 
Amen. 

Lastly, my beloved in the Lord, inasmuch as I 
heard that after our departure persecution and 
anxiety came upon the Christians at several places, 
I cannot forbear writing you a little about it, that 
vou should be comforted in the Lord and be strong 
through the power of God which he has manifested 
in you in this that he resurrected you from the dead, 
made you alive. and set you in heavenly places in 
Jesus Christ (Eph. 1:3). Now, show that you are 
grounded firmly as Mount Zion (Psa. 124:1) and 
therefore may nevermore be moved from the founda- 
tion of the apostles and prophets (Eph. 2:19). 


458 Admonitions and Epistles. 


Remember now the words of Jesus Christ: “And 
fear not them which kill the body, but are not able 
to kill the soul: but rather fear him which is able 
to destroy both soul and body in hell” (Matt. 
10:28). You know very well, and are taught, not 
only by the scripture, but also by experience, that 
all who would live godly must suffer persecution, 
and that through much tribulation we must enter 
into the kingdom of God, and that the Father 
chastens all the children whom he loves (2 Tim. 
3:12; Acts 14:22) and whom ‘he embraces in his 
arms, and that all who are without chastisement, 
such as all true children receive, are bastards and 
not sons (Heb. 12:6). Therefore every Christian 
should cheerfully take upon himself the cross of 
Christ and be satisfied with God’s will and remem- 
ber that all persecution comes upon Christians un- 
expectedly, but is, through the unwavering counsel 
of God, permitted and laid upon them by the grace 
and love of God, and that all the ungodly tyrants 
can of themselves do no harm to those. who fear 
God; for Satan could not attack the pious and sin- 
cere Job without God’s permission (Matt. 6:27; 
~ TOe8e fob: 1) Christsaid tte ieilate > 3" Woes 
_couldest have no power at all against me, except 
it were given thee from above” (John 19:11). 


In how many instances has not God shown this 
fact in his saints whom he delivered out of the 
power of death and out of the hands of the tyrants! 
(Dan. 3:23; 6:19)—the three youths out of the 
fiery furnace in Babylon, Daniel out of the lions’ 
den, Susanna out of the greatest need in shame and 
death, the city of Bethulia from the haughty Holo- 
fernes through the devout Judith, the Jews from 
the ungodly Haman through Esther, and Jerusalem 
from Sennacherib through the angel, who in one 
night slew so many thousand Assyrians (Susan. 44; 
Judith 12; 18; Esth. 6; 7). And this is what the 
prophet David means when he says: “The Lord 
bringeth the counsel of the heathen to naught: he 
maketh the devices of the people of none effect. 
The counsel of the Lord standeth forever, the 
thoughts of his heart to all generations” (Psa. 33: 
10, 11). 


Admonitions and Epistles. 459 


The Ziphites brought information to Saul re- 
garding innocent David (Sam. 26:1), that they 
might perform a courtier-service to the king ; but the 
Lord provides unto all the way of escape. There- 
fore the holy scripture comforts all the godly who 
suffer persecution here and says that though “the 
wicked plotteth against the just, and enasheth upon 
him with his teeth, the Lord shall. laugh ahd cee eee 
for he seeth that his day is coming. The wicked 
have drawn out the sword, and. have bent their 
bow, to cast down the poor and needy, and to slay 
such as be of upright cofversation. Their word 
shall enter into their own hearts, and their bows ~ 
shall be broken” (Psa. 37:12-15). The Lord will 
Dreakethertecth or the -unrodly ( Psar.3 (rene wee 
a little while, and the wicked shall not be: yea, 
thou shalt diligently consider his place, and it shall 
not be” (Psa. -87:10). But the righteous shall 
flourish like the palm tree; he shall grow like a 
cedar in Lebanon. Those that be planted in the 
house of the Lord shall flourish in the courts of 
oucetsou (Sa. 92 13). 

Observe, my chosen friends, how comforting 
God’s word is to all who fear God, and how alto- 
gether nothing all devices and persecutions of the 
tyrannical people are that are conducted and di- 
rected against the church of God; for in the end 
they are brought to shame and come to: naught 
who strive against the Lord’s will, who rage against 
and do evil against him (Isa. 43:1). The time will 
come when they shall see and feel whom they are 
persecuting and whom they have pierced and the 
apple of whose eye they have touched (Zach. 2:8). 
But you, my beloved brethren and companions in 
the kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ, be of 
good cheer and waver and swerve not, for your 
salvation and deliverance is near at hand (Rev. 1:9; 
7:14), so that you who are now tempted in various 
ways and must suffer much because your robes 
have been made white and your garments have been 
washed in the blood of the Lamb, yea, because you 
bear in your foreheads the mark of the living God. 
and therefore may not worship the abominable 
beast nor receive his mark; that you, I say, shall 


460 Admonitions and Epistles. 


be delivered out of all tribulation and enter into 
everlasting joy, where you shall never more hunger 
nor thirst, and where the Lamb is in the midst of 
the throne and shall feed them and lead them to 
fountains of living water, and God shall wipe away 
all tears from their eyes (Rev. 7:16, 17). Herewith 
comfort one another, so that no one may become 
discouraged or despondent (Rev. 2:25; 3:11), and 
that no one may lose that which he has and another 
receive your crown. And now I commend you all 
to the Lord and to the word of his grace, and greet 
you all with the peace of Jesus Christ, from the 
full desire of my heart that peace may remain with. 
you and rule always in your hearts (Eph. 4:3; 
Col. 3:15), and that you may increase and grow 
in faith, in love, and in all the virtues, to the praise 
and glory of God and the salvation of your souls. 
Written out of pure brotherly love and given 
as a valedictory or Christian adieu. If I should 
not see you again in this flesh, IJ herewith take a 
godly departure from you all out of this world, and 
hope to see and to find you with joy in the resur- 
rection of the just at the right hand of our Lord 
and only good Shepherd Jesus Christ, as the sheep 
of-one.iold (John: 10:11; -Matt,, 25:32, 33). -But 
if it be God’s will that we should meet once more 
in this life, I hope in the grace of the Lord that you 
will find me as I have presented you out of God’s 
~word according to my humble simple gift, and that 
I shall find you as you were in my presence, naniely, 
that - you desire with all your hearts to fear God in 
one spirit, with one heart and stand with us in 
unity of soul and mind, and help us to strive for the 
truth of the gospel, and not be terrified by the 
adversary, which confidence I have in you. ‘The 
Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit. Amen. 


DAREPLY:-TO AND 


Retutation of Two Letters 


BY 


| Sebastian Franck 


BRIEFLY COMPILED FROM THE HOLY 
SCRIPTURE | 


BY 


D.>P: 


Brethren, be followers together of me, and mark 
them which walk so as ye have us for an ensample. 
(For many walk, of whom I have told you often, 
and now tell you even weeping, that they are the 
enemies of Christ: whose end is destruction, whose 
God is their belly, and whose glory is their shame, 
who-mind: earthly-things. «Phil. 3:17, 18. 


As Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do 
these also resist the truth: men of corrupt minds, 
reprobate concerning the faith. But they shall pro- 
ceed no further: for their folly shall be manifest 
unto all men, as their’s also was. 2 Tim: 328, +9. 


-FOREWORD 
TOG 
THE CHRISTIAN READER. 


By grace, a companion of the faith in Jesus 
Christ wishes to all devout readers and lovers of 
the truth, peace, mercy and a. spiritual insight into 
the word of the Lord, from God the Father, through 
Jesus Christ, in the power and enlightenment of 
the Holy Spirit. Amen. 


I cannot conceal from my beloved brethren and 
all who fear God that a book written several years 
ago by Sebastian Franck has come into my hands. 
This book is sent to me by several bishops and 
brethren for the reason and with the idea that I 
should by the grace of God write something against 
it, and for. the sake of the simple and sincere answer 
the same. Therefore, although because of my 
weakness and want of opportunity I am _ poorly 
fitted, and because in other of my writings, and 
especially in my “Reply” I have (in my opinion) 
clearly answered and given reasons why one must 
separate from all false worship and hypocritical 
doings, and do that only which the Lord has com- 
manded; yet at the same time for the explanation 
and confirmation of all this, and for the instruction 
of all sincere hearts who desire to thoroughly con- 
sider the matter, I wish, as above stated, at the 
request of my cordially beloved and chosen friends, 
to reply briefly to this book, so far as God shal! 
grant me grace. Amen. 


REPLY TO 
THE PREFACE OF THE PRINTER ON TWO 
LETTERS BY SEBASTIAN FRANCK. 


In the first place the printer prepared an intro- 
duction to the book in question, in which he speaks 
“of how necessary in these perilous times are the 
gifts of the Holy Spirit, Isa. 11, (to-wit: wisdom, 
understanding, counsel, judgment, strength, tact or 
knowledge and the fear of the Lord,) in every 
Christian, in order to distinguish the many and 
varied opinions in Christian doctrine and religion. 
I endorse this confession of the printer, with this 
distinction, that Isaiah in the passage referred to 
really spoke of Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son 
of God. For his words are as follows: “And there 
shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and 
a Branch shall grow out of his roots: and the 
Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit 
of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel 
and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear 
of the Lord; and shall make him quick of under- 
standing in the fear of the Lord: and he shall not 
judge after the sight of his eyes, neither reprove 
after the hearing of his ears: but with righteous- 
ness shall he judge the poor, and reprove with 
equity for the meek of the earth: and he shall smite 
the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the 
breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked. And 
righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and 
faithfulness the girdle of his reins” (Isa. 11:1-5). 

That this prophecy applies entirely to Christ, 
no one can doubt who has been taught of God; none 
the less Christians must also have the same Spirit ; 
for while all the gifts of the Holy Spirit rest upon 
Jesus Christ in the fullness of their perfection, as 
is also described (Matt. 3:16) that the Holy Spirit 
came down upon him in the bodily form of a dove 
and abode upon him, and the oil of joy was so 
abundantly poured out upon the spiritual Aaron, 


464 Refutation of Two Letters. 


our only High Priest, by God the Father that it 
ran down upon his beard and garments, hence it 
is readily to be understood from this that the Spirit 
of the Lord which rests upon Jesus Christ without 
measure and in all divine fullness, also comes upon 
all his Christians, and in formal order first upon his 
ministers, through whom he speaks, and his word 
is in their mouth; and thereafter follow all his 
members which are united to the Head, for the Holy 
Spirit divides unto them his gifts according to his 
will. But the gifts of the Holy Spirit of which 
Isaiah speaks are mentioned above, and of these | 
desire by the grace of God to give some instruction 
to all who fear God. 

The first gift is wisdom, which comes from the 
fear ob God “(Sir 1! 143"Prov.- Te ise. 
distinguishes good from evil, the sweet from the 
bitter, light from darkness, yea, this gift teaches 
us to rightly know Christ (Col. 2:2) and to under- 
stand that in him are hid all the treasures of wisdom 
and knowledge, that in him dwelleth all the fullness 
of the Godhead bodily, that from his fullness we 
receive grace and truth, whereby we recognize the 
Everlasting Light and God himself, and therefore 
set aside all worldly and human wisdom, philosophy, 
reason and opinion (John 1:16; 1 Cor. 1: 18-30), 
and count it foolishness as against the divine wis- 
dom, which teaches us to recognize ‘Jesus Christ 
the only begotten Soni of the Father, as he is made 
unto us of God, wisdom (that is, that we recognize 
and know Ged, his power and truth, which knowl- 
edge is perfect wisdom) ; and righteousness (that is, 
that. we by faith in his name are justified); and 
redemption (that is, that through him we are re- 
deemed and made free from sin, hell, the devil and 
eternal*death; ‘Like 2*309‘E ph. >: 26°41-Cor. 6214). 
and sanctification (that is, that he has washed us 
with the washing of water by the word), and has 
sanctified us by his Spirit (which is the true wisdom 
which God through Jesus Christ bestows upon all 
Christians in the Holy Spirit). 

The second gift of the Holy Spirit is understand- 
ing, which comes from the fear and the wisdom of 
God, so that the individual takes heed to God’s 


Refutation of Two Letters. 465 


word, and diligently gives attention to the impres- 
.*sions or suggestions of the divine will through the 
Holy Spirit, that no error or deception. enter in 
beside the truth, for Satan is able to transform him- 
self into an angel of light (2 Cor. 11:14, and his 
servants have learned the art and mastery from him, 
so that they come transformed as apostolic messen- 
gers, and the wolf covers himself with sheep’s cloth- 
ing (Matt. 7:15), that he may the more readily 
accomplish his evil and ravenous desires upon the 
innocent sheep and lambs of Jesus Christ. There- 
- fore it is necessary for all Christians to understand 
the word of God, beware of the wiles of Satan, know 
the mind of Christ, and always put their understand- 
ing captive under the mind and obedience of the 
Lord, and they will remain undeceived. 

Of these two gifts of the Holy Spirit the apostle 
Paul writes to the Colossians (Col. 1:9), giving 
them to understand that he was praying God with- 
out ceasing for them that they might be filled with 
all spiritual wisdom and understanding, which 
clearly portrays the fact to us that wisdom and 
understanding belong together (Sir. 18: 27-29), al- 
though they differ a little; for wisdom is'to know 
God truly and from the heart to fear him; but the 
fear of the Lord, says Jesus Sirach, will cause a man 
to be wise in all he does, and the word of God 
teaches him to be wise in all his acts. Cunning 1s 
not wisdom, and the frivolity of the ungodly is not 
sagacity, for it is wickedness and sacrilege, and vain 
error, and not wisdom. Understanding is that which 
puts to proper use the divinely received wisdom, 
and makes a prudent investment of the Lord’s talent 
and makes it productive, so that we may receive the 
divine plaudit of being a faithful servant (Matt. 
Bo 12d). 

On the contrary, worldly wisdom and _ under- 
standing is ignorance or folly, vanity and despising 
of God’s word. To those of this kind of wisdom 
and understanding Christ speaks in his thanks- 
giving, when he thanked his Father, the Lord of: 
heaven and earth, that he had hid the mystery of 
faith from the wise and prudent, and according to 
his divine will and good pleasure revealed it to the 


30 


466 Refutation of Two Letters. 


humble and simple (Matt. 11:25), for by the grace _ 
of God they are qualified or fitted to teach wisdom 
and discipline, understanding, prudence, righteous- 
ness in simplicity and sincerity, as Solomon in the 
preface to his proverbs says (Prov. 4), they are 
ready to receive counsel (understand, from the word 
of God), that they comprehend the sayings and their 
explanation, the teaching of the wise and also the 
opposite. 

Hence there follows from this the third gift of 
the Holy Spirit, and it is advisable to know that the 
wise and prudent are reasonable and circumspect 
in all things, especially asking counsel of God, and 
doing nothing without divine counsel. Of this we 
have many beautiful illustrations and examples in 
the old testament, how the God-fearing patriarchs, 
when they were about to begin or do something 
special, first asked counsel of God. To this end 
also the mercy-seat was ordained of God and set in 
the most holy place (Ex. 25:17), that God himself 
might speak and answer there. So is Jesus Christ 
our mercy-seat now set forth unto us of the Father 
in the most holy place, that is, in the time of grace 
(Rom 37252 -Heb. dz 5-9 + Gol 37 je Peteeeeee 
yea, in heaven itself at the right hand of the majesty 
of God who through him has spoken to us and has 
given him a name that is called Wonderful, Coun- 
sellor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the 
Prince of Peace (Isa. 9:6). That the name given 
‘the Son by the Father includes that of Counsel or 
Counsellor signifies that this Wisdom counselled 
with God in the creation of all creatures and the 
arrangement of all things (Prov. 8: 12-31), and that 
God through his wisdom made and appoints all 
things well and good. Hence it is always proper 
that all who fear God and love righteousness and 
truth, counsel with this Wisdom and accept nothing 
but that which this Wisdom (which is Jesus Christ) 
has taught and commanded, for in him are included 
and concluded all things, and it is the Father’s 
pleasure that in him all fullness should dwell (Col. 
1:19; 2:9; Eph. 4:3), and that no one can come 
unto God but by him. Whoever ponders this rightly 
has counseled with God in Christ Jesus by the 


Refutation of Two Letters. 7 467 


inspiration of the Holy Spirit. Whoever does dif- 
ferently, will fare as this Wisdom declares to us 
and threatens those who despise him, namely, 
“When your fear cometh as desolation, and your 
destruction cometh as a whirlwind; when distress 
and anguish cometh upon you. Then (says Wis- 
dom) shall they call upon me, but I will not answer ; 
they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me: 
for that they hated knowledge, and did not choose 
the fear of the Lord: they would none of my coun. 
sel: they despised all my reproof. Therefore shalt 
they eat of the fruit of their.own way, and be filled 
with their own devices” (Prov. 1:27-31). From 
this it is easily understood how the despisers of 
Wisdom will fare and how they shall come to ever- 
lasting shame. Although they are wise in their 
own eyes and think they have understanding, this 
will not help them; they are to be compared (espe- 
cially those who at one time confessed and accepted 
the truth) to the foolish and unwise virgins; those 
who think they will enter in through the door of 
grace will find it shut, because they have neglected 
and rejected the grace of the Lord or received it 
in vain, 

The fourth gift of the Holy Spirit is power, that 
“is, the individual is strengthened by the power of 
God in the inner man. Of this power the holy 
scripture speaks and testifies in many places, both 
in figures and in realities. In figures it is often 
portrayed, especially in the examples of the children 
erisriel( Hx; 165: étc;), andtof Elijah: fori asthe 
children of Israel were fed with the figurative bread 
of heaven for many years in the wilderness and 
strengthened thereby, entered the promised land, 
and as the prophet Elijah in the strength derived 
from the food (which had been brought ha by the 
angel) traveled through the wilderness for forty 
days and forty nights (1 Kings 19) until he reached 
Horeb, the mount of God, so also will the true 
Israelites be strengthened by the living Bread of 
heaven (John 6:51), and by the baked bread 
which the angel of the Lord laid by Elijah’s head, 
and by the cruse of water, that is, by the gospel of 
Jesus Christ (which is held in small esteem by the 


468 Refutation of Two Letters. 


self-conceited and the wise of this world, and even 
despised by them), and by the power of the Holy 
Spirit, to enter into the promised blessed rest of 
the kingdom of God. 

In this connection mention may be made of the 
figure of the sixty valiant men who stood about the 
bed of Solomon (Sol. Song 3:7). “They all hold 
swords, being expert in war: every man hath his 
sword upon his thigh because of fear in the night.” 
This signifies that round about the church of Jesus 
Christ stand those who are strong in faith, who are 
clad in the armor of God to protect the church with 
the help of the Lord against all the terrors of the 
night, that is, against all errors and spirits of dark- 
ness that are secretly bent on deceiving the 
cuileless. 

It is further necessary to note here and to con- 
sider that there are three stages in the new spiritual 
birth, namely, childhood, youth and adult age (1 
John. 2:12-14). Childhood signifies Christian sim- 
plicity, of which Jesus Christ speaks in the gospel, 
and says to his disciples: Verily, I say unto you, 
Except ye be converted, and become as little chil- 
dren, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven” 
(Matt. 18:3). , 

In accord with this is what Paul writes to the 
Corinthians: “Brethren, be not children in under- 
standing: howbeit in malice be ye children, but in 
understanding be men” (1 Cor. 14:20). And the 
apostle Paul calls the Christians the newborn babes 
or first born children of God (1 Pet. 2:2) who desire 
the sincere milk of the word, that they may grow 
thereby. Youth signifies the power of faith, as the 
apostle John says: “I have written unto you, young 
men, because ye are strong, and the word of God 
abideth in you, and ye have overcome the wicked 
one” (1 John 2:14). Adult age or the age of man- 
hood signifies the experienced mind which is in- 
clined to know and prove or discern good and evil, 
of which the epistle of Paul to the Corinthians and 
that to the Hebrews makes mention and testifies 
(Heb. 5:14: Eph 25% ITP etca): 

Hence Piese te Sh des or stages must be found 
in every Christian, that is, childlike simplicity or 


Refutation of .Two Letters. 469 


innocence as regards evil, the power or strength 
of youth in faith in the truth, and manhood’s wis- 
dom and experience in discretionary knowledge and 
discernment or judgment. 

The fifth gift of the Holy Spirit is knowledge, 
namely to recognize and know that all good gifts 
come down from above (Jas. 1:17) from the Father 
of the Everlasting Light, through Jesus Christ, in 
the Holy Ghost, and is therefore brought again to 
its First Origin, yea, to the Fount of all good, that 
is, to-the eternal and only. God, and must be ascribed 
to him alone (Jer. 2:27-30). This is as much as 
to say and mean that the knowledge of the Spirit 
consists in this that to God alone all honor is given, 
and that no creature accept or assume any, but God 
alone, and the word of his grace, but that one ever 
says with the prophet: “Not unto us, O Lord, not 
unto us, but unto thy name give glory” (Psa. 
115:1). It is also the true function of the Holy 
Spirit to know God in his eternal wisdom and order 
through opposition or the opposite, that is, by con- 
trasts or contrarities, namely, by contrasting good 
with evil, the Spirit with the flesh, righteousness 
against unrighteousness, light with darkness, faith 
against unbelief, Christ with Belial, and the temple 
of God with the temple of idols, and discerning or 
distinguishing one from the other (2 Cor. 6: 14-16). 
This is especially necessary in these perilous times, 
because so many spirits of error are abroad who 
throw everything into a confused mass and mixture, 
without sense, reason or difference. Hence a Chris- 
tian can do no better than to lay everything upon 
the troy-weight scales of the Holy Spirit: and test 
it thereby to see what is right or wrong, in accord 
with or contrary to truth, for in this way alone 
will he remain undeceived. 

The sixth gift of the Holy Spirit is the fear of 
the Lord. Of this the holy scripture gives abundant 
testimony. Ecclesiasticus especially in his Book 
of Wisdom writes much about it: (Sir. 2), all of 
which may be comprehended in the summarized 
statement that “the fear of the Lord is the begin- 
ning of wisdom and is in its true reality in the 
righteous and believers. The fear of the Lord is 


470 | Refutation of Two Letters. 


true worship. It preserves and makes the-~heart 
godly and happy, .brings joy and everlasting bless- 
ing. To fear God is the wisdom that enriches, and 
brings with it all that is good; it fills the whole 
house with its gifts, and all chambers with its 
treasures. ‘The fear of the Lord is a crown of wis- 
dom, and gives abundantly peace and happiness. 
This wisdom makes men truly wise and prudent. 
‘To fear the Lord is the true root of wisdom, and its 
branches bloom forever. The fear of the Lord 
drives out sin; but he that is without fear does 
not please God.” 

But the true fear of the Lord is earnest inquiry 
into, contemplation of and seeking after the good, 
holy and perfect will of God (Rom. 12:1, 2), and 
a careful watchfulness of self in all one’s thoughts, 
words and actions, that he may be pleasing to God, 
for the nature and inclination of the fear of the Lord 
is to shun the evil and to follow after that which 
is good. Such fear of the Lord brings the un- 
adulterated, pure knowledge of the only and eternal 
almighty God and his divine nature, attributes and 
existence, that is, that man truly knows God the 
Father and his only begotten Son Jesus Christ our 
Lord, and his Holy Spirit in name, power, offices 
and workings. From such knowledge comes faith, 
that is that happy, delightful and firm trust in God 
and in his word, a certain comprehension of heavenly 
-and unseen things (Heb: 11:1 5° Gali 262125 Eph. 
a1 3-lb,); Dy which faith we ‘become children of 
‘God, made in his image, by Jesus Christ, in the 
Holy Ghost, and become partakers of his divine 
nature. And when we have become thus united 
with him, we must love him as the most precious 
treasure and greatest riches (Deut. 6:5; Matt. 
22:37), in certain assurance and living hope, that 
God is a rewarder of all them that diligently seek 
him (Heb. 11:6). 

The fear of the Lord therefore is truly the be- 
‘ginning of wisdom (Prov. 1:7; 9:10) and teaches 
‘man to deny himself (Matt. 16: 24), and with child- 
like reverence, veneration and obedience serve God 
in holiness and righteousness which is pleasing to 
God (1 Pet): 14), and in all Tecieraon place his 


Refutation of Two Letters. 471 


entire Eonieate in the living God, patiently await- 
ing anything that God may wll or do, even as 
Abravamodid (Gen, 22° "Heb11=8" 17), when, be- 
cause he feared God he offered up his son unto ‘the 
Lord in his faith, in the unwavering hope that 
because of the promise of God he should receive 
him again. Therefore he is also given us by -God 
as an example of the resurrection, with the testi- 
mony that he truly feared the Lord, because he 
spared not his own Son for the Lord’s sake. From 
all this it may be easily. observed what great good 
the fear of the Lord accomplishes. 

Whoever has the gifts of the Holy Spirit as 
above mentioned is always spiritually minded (1 
Cor. 12:3, etc.), and is therefore enabled also with 
God’s word and Spirit to judge all things, so that 
the crooked old serpent, no matter how crafty it 
-may be, cannot deceive him or turn him away from 
the simplicity that is in Christ Jesus; for where this 
is the case, there the word of God is written with 
his finger in the table of the heart and imprinted 
with the Holy Spirit, there the candle is lighted and 
is set upon the candle-stick (Matt. 5:15), and be-. 
fore its brightness the darkness must flee. The 
mustard seed is there planted in the garden or 
court and has grown so tall that the birds of the 
air can build their nests under its branches, and 
dwell in safety (Matt. 18:31); there the pearl of 
great price has been bought at the expense and 
forsaking of all temporal things (Matt. 13:46), and 
hence it can never be given back again; there is 
the treasure hid in a field among the seeds of God 
(Matt. 13:44), which preserves the regenerated 
maneirom allvevil (1-Johne3 +9 >> 1, Pet..1 223). ein 
short, there is the man that is united with God, 
taught of God, returned unto Jesus Christ, the only 
Shepherd and Bishop of our souls (1 Pet. 2:25), 
whose voice he well knows, and can distinguish 
from the strange voice, yea, from the howling of 
the wolf (John 10:5)—I mean the false scribes, 
teachers and dreamers by whatever names they 
may be known who adorn their work with high 
sounding and covert allusions and pervert them 
with dark sayings. Therefore neither Sebastian 


472 Refutation of Two Letters. 


Franck nor any other crafty or sophistical spirit 
can easily mislead a true Christian; for his con- 
fidence rests in God, he sits under the shadow of 
the Almighty (Psa. 91:1) and dwells in the secret 
place of the Most High. Truth is his shield, so that 
he is not afraid for the terror by night, nor for the 
arrow that flieth by day, nor for the pestilence that 
walketh in darkness, nor for the destruction that 
wasteth at noonday, nor for the devil, that is, for 
the self-appointed ecclesiastics with the assumed 
form of holiness that has a beautiful outside appear- 
ance and yet is an abomination before God. 

I have desired with Christian well meaning in- 
tent to present this much as an introduction to the 
preface of the book for the benefit of the simple 
and kindly disposed reader, so that what follows 
might be better understood. May God add his 
grace. Amen. | 


REPLY TO TWO LETTERS BY SEBASTIAN 
FRANCK. 


Before beginning a reply to this book it is 
(according to my understanding) very necessary 
to have a true test by which to prove all things 
(1 Cor. 1), a measuring rod by which to measure 
everything, yea, to lay a good foundation, upon 
which everything may be well built and grounded 
(1 Cor. 3:11). But the only touchstone and the: 
only measuring rod is God’s word, and the only/ 
foundation is Jesus Christ; therefore for the man 
who seeks and desires salvation there is nothing 
better or safer than to confess and believe from 
God’s word, that saving grace, the steadfast, im- 
movable truth, and a righteous and perfect life is 
embodied’ in and comes from Jesus Christ (John 
1:17; Tit. 2:11), and that therein there can be no 
change whatever, for his words are Spirit, and they 
are, lite (john 6263 5°15: 3).°-' And “int this’ manner 
God the heavenly Father has revealed his inner 
will and whole counsel to us, and nothing else (that 
is contrary to or not in conformity with the doctrine 
of Jesus Christ) may ever be brought forth either 
by men or angels or it will be accursed, as Paul 
expressly declares (Gal..1:8). Beside this no mis- 
use of the ordinances of the Lord can wholly re- 
move or stay it; for “heaven and earth shall pass 
away, but my words shall not pass away,” says the 
Lord himself in the gospel (Matt. 24:35). 

Therefore what Sebastian Franck professes is 
wrong and erroneous, namely, that after the primi- 
tive and apostolic church fell into decay and Anti- 
christ destroyed everything and perverted every- 
thing into abuse, all ordinances of the Lord (or 
ceremonies or sacraments, as Sebastian Franck 
calls them) should therefore cease or be no longer 
regarded. To this I reply in Christian simplicity 
that I properly hold these proud invectives of 
Sebastian. Franck’s in much less regard than ‘he 
erroneously and in puffed-up self-conceit rejects and 


474 Refutation of Two Letters. 


despises the ordinances of the Lord Jesus Christ 
and testifies to with the Lord’s own words. Besides 
this it is well to note that in the beginning God 
blessed all his work and called it good (Matt. 5: 
17-19; Gen. 1:31; 2:3), and while through the 
devil’s cunning and envy abuses have been intro- 
duced and found their way into the work of the 
Lord (Wis. of Sol. 2:24), so that it was destroyed 
or rendered unclean in part, yet not wholly taken 
away, for man also is the work of the Lord (Gen. 
2:7), originally created in integrity by God, in his 
own image and after his likeness, but through the 
serpent’s guile man was deceived and brought to 
destruction; nevertheless God did not on this ac- 
count cast him off entirely, nor leave him in his 
ruined estate, because he is his handiwork, but after 
the first creation he created him anew by Jesus 
Christ and the Holy Spirit, through faith, in the 
regeneration, so that after the inner man he is once 
more made in the image of God, in righteousness 
and struth.,.. (ph..22 1-10 sfolniy ss 9 5 es lites ae 
i tohn 41). 

Circumcision was likewise given by God to 
Abraham as a sign of his covenant (Gen. 17:2, 
9-14), yet afterward through ignorance and Jewish 
superstition or conceit it was not properly practiced 
nor understood; for they sought to obtain right- 
eousness by it, as the prophets complain so often, 
and as the epistle to the Romans testifies (Rom. 
2: 24-29). Nevertheless circumcision remained and 
was practiced according to the original purpose of 
God by the believing Jews upon their children; for 
it is clearly evident that John the Baptist, and even 
the child Jesus himself, were circumcised on the 
eighth day, according to the will and ordinance of 
God (Luke 2: 22-27). Therefore no ordinance of 
the Lord should be rejected or allowed to fall into 
‘disuse merely because of misuse, but it should be 
rightly observed according to the command of the 
Lord in its original form. For if circumcision 
(which was figurative) continued to be properly 
practiced among the God-fearing Jews (as above 
stated), until Jesus fulfilled the law and took away 
the figures, types and shadows and replaced them 


Pe age TART Or ner 
Re 


Refutation of Two Letters. 475 


by instituting the true essential, how much more 
must the ordinances of the Lord (which are true) 
be perpetuated and remain unbroken, inasmuch as 
after Christ no one will come with authority to 
change one jot or tittle in his doctrine, work and 
commandments; for, says the apostle, “Jesus Christ 
is the same yesterday, and today, and forever. Be 
not carried about with divers and strange doctrines” 
tied; 13% 8,, 9). | 

For such reasons baptism and the Lord’s Supper 
have, by the grace of God, been ‘restored according 
to the former divine institution, and it becomes all 
penitents and believers to receive it just as John and 
Christ accepted circumcision. There is also that in 


the book which is more horrible, yea, it rises out 


of the depths of the pit as a fuming smoke that 
hides the brightness of the sun, namely Sebastian 
Franck’s idea that the ordinances of the Lord, 
especially baptism and the Lord’s Supper, are baby- 
things and childs-play (for these are his own words), 
and that no more was taken from the children than 
dolls and childs-play, with which they had been 


‘playing long enough, and that God had permitted, 


yea, even given these outward signs as baby-things 
to the infant church; not that they were necessary 
for the kingdom ‘of God, but that because God him- 
self had for so many years baptized with his own 
Spirit, therefore it was unnecessary to use longer 
these weak elements.—Thus far Franck. 

To this I reply: I am grieved in the depths of 
my heart that I am obliged to reply to and deal 
with such coarse blasphemy, yet if perchance I may 
by God’s grace be of service to some one, I desire 
with the help of the Lord to make a brief reply. 

In the first place it is certain and undoubtedly 
true that Jesus Christ is the only begotten Son of 
the living God, the brightness of the everlasting 


Light, the image of God, and the express image of 


the divine glory; for the Father has implanted the 
express image of himself in his Son, and demands 
to be seen and known through him (John 1; Heb. 
eet owas Wis: of Sol. 1)-: Therefore did the Lord 
say to Philip: “He that hath seen me hath seen 
the Father” (John 14:9). 


476 Refutation of Two Letters. 


This Jesus Christ has been set forth to us by 
the Father as a mercy-seat and example unto whom 
we are to be conformed; him has the Father given 
us as a Lord and Master, and testified of him that 
he is his beloved Son, in whom he is well pleased; 
him shall we hear as the only begotten of the 
Father, full of grace and truth, and of whose full- 
ness we have received, and grace for grace (Matt. 
3:17; John 1:14-16). 

This is the first-born of all creatures, Lord of 


all principalities and powers, who are created by. 


him, the Head of his church, the Light: of the 
world; whosoever follows him shall not walk in 
darkness, but shall have the light of everlasting life. 


For this reason the apostle Paul in his epistles 
has dwelt at such length upon the fact that the full- 
ness of the Godhead dwells bodily in Christ Jesus 
(Col..2:9; 1:9; John 1:14), that he.was from) the 
beginning, that all things are made by him, that 
he is the Savior of his body, and the Author and 
Finisher of our salvation. By this he makes known 
that neither angels nor men, nor any other creature 
is able to do anything against the Son of God, the 
Word, Wisdom and Power of the almighty Father; 
for all things are made by ‘the Son, he is from the 
beginning, as stated above, he rules and preserves 
all things with the word of his power. ‘Therefore 
there is no wisdom, nor truth, nor righteousness, 
nor help, nor comfort or hope of salvation to be 
sought or found outside of him (John 16:3-7; 
le, ABs le Gone hid Heb. leek), , 

This Jesus Christ also himself says that he is 
the way, the truth, and the life, and that no man 
can come unto the Father but by him alone. From 
this it follows that no one can come to God, nor 
be saved, unless he accept the Lord Jesus Christ, 
believe in him, and follow in his footsteps; for he 
is the way that with his holy life and example 
teaches and directs us to be his followers. He is 
the truth in his wholesome doctrine, which he 
brought out of heaven from his Father (John 17:8; 
Col. 1215, 916, ‘ete.; “Ephs 109)8 ) Weis ethe nites, 
means of his grace, by his merits, yea, by his inno- 


Refutation of Two Letters. 477 


~ cent death (which is our life), and by his precious 
_ blood, by which we obtain forgiveness of sins. 

Herewith there is proof and evidence sufficient 
that Sebastian Franck speaks as a man that is in- 
discreet and lacking in sense when he says the 
signs and sacraments of the Lord are baby-things 
and childs-play. More than this, he says that inas- 
much as the outward services and sacraments 
(through Antichrist, who destroys and ruins every- 
thing) were not wholly observed after the apostles, 
but were misused and contaminated, therefore God 
- through his spiritual churches, ‘by the Spirit of 
truth, began to put all things into proper order, 
which were simply indicated by the foregoing signs 
that had been instituted by the Lord, and permitted 
the external devil to have his will regarding the 
outward and misused sacraments. 


REPDY. 

Where has ever a God-fearing man who has. 
been taught of God and received his anointing, 
spoken or written so shamefully and blasphemously 
of the holy commandments and ordinances of the 
Lord as Sebastian Franck does here? Or where did 
God ever permit the “external devil” to carry out 
his wanton will with the external and misused 
sacraments? Or where did God ever give permis- 
sion, because his ordinances had been profaned and 
misused by Antichrist (1 Cor. 6; Gal. 5; Rev. 11), 
that a Christian should therefore be allowed to 
take part in such profaned use or practice or have 
fellowship therein? What does the scripture say 
regarding the idolaters and wicked, who play the 
hypocrite for the belly’s sake? Will they not have 
their part in the lake of fire, that burns with fire 
and brimstone; which is the second death? And 
now I am certain that many years ago I saw and 
read a letter from Sebastian Franck which had been | 
written to one of his particular and especial friends, | 
from which I understood readily that he exonerated 
‘infant baptism and hypocrisy with the world, all 
because of the fear of man, that is, in order to 
maintain peace with the world, although it is im- 
possible to please both God and men at the same 
' time, or to have the peace of God and of the world, 


478 Refutation of Two Letters. 


as Christ himself says to his disciples: “Peace 1 
leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as 
the world giveth, give I unto you” (John 14:27). 
And in another place he says to his disciples: “In 
me ye... . have peace. In the world ye shall 
have tribulation” (John 16:33). And the apostle 
James testifies in express words that the “friendship 
of the world is enmity with God”; and that who- 
ever “therefore will be a friend of the world is the 
enemy of God” (Jas. 4:4).. EES 
But this is entirely contrary to the opinion of 
the arrant Sebastian Franck, who lays pillows under - 
the people’s heads and cushions under their arms: 
he strengthens the hands of the wicked, so that none 
will repent of their unrighteousness; he proclaims 
peace to those who have no peace and promises life 
to those who shall not have life unless they repent 
of their idolatry, dissimulation and other unfruitful 
works of darkness, which they have done (Ezek. 
19:26; 18; <Jers.62145) Eph. 5: 12)., sHesteaches 
men a wide and broad way, and he opens and leads 
the way himself. It is pleasing to the. flesh, it is 
true, therefore he has many adherents, readers and 
pupils, whose ears itch after such false liberty and 
who seek pasture according to the desires of the 
flesh. But what does Solomon say? “There is a 
way that seemeth right unto a man; but the end 
thereof are the ways of death’ (Prov. 14:12; 
16:25). Both Ecclesiasticus and the Lord Jesus 
himself testify to this, and Solomon further says 
that there is a generation or class that thinks itself 
pure and yet is not cleansed of its impurities. These 
are the false prophets of whom the apostle Peter 
writes that they “speak great swelling words of 
vanity,’ who promise liberty to others, while “they 
themselves are the servants of corruption,” and 
draw or allure to themselves the wanton, those that 
“were clean escaped from the corruption of the 
world,” and are again entangled therein and over- 
come, so that the common proverb may be applied 
to them: “The dog is returned to his own vomit 
again; and the sow that was washed to her wallow- 
ing in the mire” (2 Pet. 2:18-22). Alas, how many 
in our time have fared thus! bt ge 


ks fae tes 


Pune PEP ON tee 


Refutation of Two Letters. 479 


But now comes the cunning serpent and pro- 
fesses—in order to cover up the carnal life of com- 
fort with beautiful words, and to spare the cross- 
abhorring flesh—that God does not require any 
outward things, but accomplishes everything in the 


. Spirit of truth, baptizes and nourishes all with 


Spirit and Word, and that the children are deprived 
of nothing but their dolls, with which play has now 


_ proceeded long enough. 


REPLY: 


I confess indeed that God is a Spirit, and that 
he who would worship him must worship him in 
Spirit and in truth; but here follows the question: 
Are not the words of Jesus Christ Spirit and life? 


Now, if the word of the Lord is Spirit and truth, 


it follows that it is all spiritual and true (John 
5: 32-39) what the word of Jesus Christ teaches 
and that that is right which is done according to 
it: for that which comes of the Spirit, must be 
spiritual, and that which the truth of the new 
testament presents is true and abiding. 


Was not John the Baptist, the forerunner and 


| messenger, filled with the Holy Ghost from his 


mother’s womb? Did he not go forth in the spirit 
and power of Elijah to put things in order and pre- 


pare the way of the Lord, convert the hearts, that 


he might prepare a people that would be pleasing 
unto the Lord? He was also sent by God to baptize 


© with water unto repentance (Acts 1:5; Matt. 3: 


1-6), and to teach men to believe in the Lord Jesus. 
Was not even Jesus. Christ himself baptized by 
John? And his apostles likewise, whom he so 
earnestly admonished to baptize those who repented 


_and believed, and to teach those who were baptized 


to observe all things whatsoever he had commanded 


@ihem?. (Matt. 28:19, 20; Mark 16:15, 16). . Was 





i 


the Lord Jesus not the teacher, baptizer, sustainer 
and nourisher, and all in all in and with the believ- 


ers then the same as he is now, or may be at any 


time? Did not the apostles lay their hands upon the 


_. baptized believers and they received the Holy 


Spirit? Did not the apostle Paul command those 


_ to be baptized again who had already been baptized 
: . 


480 Refutation of Two Letters. 


by John, but had not known or received the Holy 
Spirit, that they after being baptized might, by the 
laying on of hands, receive the Holy Spirit, as the 
apostle Peter testifies? (Acts 2:38; John 1:33; 
Matt. 3:11; Col. 2; Rom. 8, etc.) But why are 
many words necessary when Jesus ‘himself, in whom 
dwells the fullness of the Spirit, and his messengers 
who were the first recipients of the Spirit, and were 
clothed with great power from on high, received the 
sacramental tokens of the Lord, practiced the same 
and commanded the believers to practice them. 

It is therefore an unendurable blasphemy for 
Sebastian Franck, a scorner of God and his ordi- 
nances, in the presumptuousness of his heart, to 
write that the children are deprived of nothing but 
their dolls or rag babies, to look upon the primitive 
apostolic church as children who played with dolls 
or rag babies, while he assumes for himself the wis- 
dom, courage and perfection of manhood, as if there. 
had been no spirit of truth neither in John, Jesus 
Christ himself, nor in his apostles, nor in the primi- 
tive apostolic church, because they used these out- 
ward signs. Are then these tokens of the Lord 
so utterly nothing and powerless, that there is 
neither Spirit nor truth in them, insofar as they 
are rightly observed in connection with true faith 
and all that belongs thereto? What abominable 
conceit, presumption and blindness! What does not 
dust and ashes presume! Faithful and God-fearing 
Abraham feared to speak with the Lord in prayer 
and supplication, because he recognized his own 
nothingness as against the most high divine 
Majesty; but this Sebastian Franck is wise in his 
own eyes, yet before God and all who have true 
understanding he is foolish. The man who criticises 
every one but does not see his own shortcomings 
and weaknesses, will not be afraid to contradict the 
Lord Jesus Christ, and reject his ordinances or look 
upon them as child’s play. Oh, vain presumption! 
Oh, what foolishness of heart! 

Furthermore, Sebastian Franck’s book declares 
that the church of the Lord declined immediately 
\ after the time of the apostles, and that thereby 
\ Antichrist had destroyed everything; but that no 


> 


Refutation of Two Letters. 481 


one should undertake to restore the worship of God 
to its primitive state, unless he have a special call 
from God to do so (Matt. 24:36; Acts 1:6; Matt. 
24:3, etc.). And since in his opinion no one has 
been called to this, he is therefore to continue in 
the antichristian and idolatrous misuse of the sacra- 
ments, and let the devil have his way in the matter. 


REPLY. 


That the church of the Lord became corrupt 
after the time of the apostles I readily confess to 
you, for the holy scripture testifies of this in many 
places (2 ‘Tim. 3; 2°Pet..2; 1 John 2; 4; Acts-20; 
Psa. 18; Deut. 4; 12, etc.). But that because of 
this, false worship should be perpetuated and prac- 
ticed. is wrong and a root of idolatry. The reason 
is this: What God has commanded he also wants 
to be observed, as it is written that God has given 
strict orders regarding the ordinances which he has 
commanded, and that nothing shall be added thereto 
nor taken therefrom, from which it follows that 
God permits no misuse of ‘his ordinances and that 
no Christian is to have any part therein (Prov. 30; 
Eph. 5), because the misuse is contrary to the word 
and command of God, that is, it is wicked. “He 
that is not with me is against me,” says the Lord 
in the gospel, “and he that gathereth not with me 
scattereth abroad” (Matt. 12:30). In other words, 
“no man can serve two masters; for either he will 
hate the one, and love the other; or else he will 
hold to the one, and despise the other” (Matt. 6: 24). 
It is vain to try to serve God with the doctrines 
and commandments of men, yea, it is an abomina- 
tion to God, for that which is highly esteemed 
among men is abomination before God. Now, the 
doctrines, traditions and commandments of men are 
highly esteemed by the world, for on their account 
is the word of God set aside (Matt. 15), as the Lord 
showed to the Pharisees; therefore they are an 
abomination to God. The history of Saul, as well 
as do other biblical and scriptural accounts, bring 
clear testimony on this matter, therefore it is un- 
necessary to write much about it. 

Further as regards the divine calling, my simple 
reply to Sebastian Franck’s position on the subject 


21 


482 Refutation of Two Letters. 


rot whether a teacher is sent of God or not, is, that 


/ it must be known and seen whether he is properly 


called by his church, whether he is fervent in love. 


and cannot keep silence, whether he teaches God's 
| word aright, causes it to bear fruit, and in’ his 


weakness by God’s grace walks according to it, as 
I have sufficiently shown, from God’s word, with 
the help of God the Almighty, in my book on the 
Sending of Preachers; therefore I shall let that 
suffice, for sensible people are satisfied with the 
simple truth, but you can do nothing that will be 
agreeable to the contentious, obstinate and perverse. 
Therefore I let them go, and say with the prophet: 
“Let them perish who will perish,’ and as it is 
written in Revelations: “He that is unjust, let him 
be unjust still: and he which is filthy, let him be 
filthy still” (Rev. 22:11). 

Elijah is mentioned several times by Sebastian 
Franck in his writings, how: that he did not restore 
the corrupt worship in Israel without a special com- 
mand of God. To this I reply that Elijah did no 
more than to show and testify to apostate Israel 
that God the Lord, that is, the God of Abraham, 
Isaac and Jacob, was made manifest, and that they 
were under obligations to serve him alone, as he had 
commanded them. Now in the time of Elijah it 
was a matter of outward offerings and sacrifices, 
which were instituted by God to prefigure the true 
substance. This worship Elijah restored, and no 
other, and thus testifies and proves to Israel that 
the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob is the only 


true and living God and Lord, and that Baal was 


an idol, and that all his prophets and priests were 
false. 

All those therefore who in godly zeal and calling 
follow the example of Elijah, seek the honor of God 
and the salvation of souls. How can any one with 
any scriptural discretion and truth look upon and 
consider these otherwise than as being sent of God 
and impelled by the Spirit? Has it ever been heard 
of or found, from the beginning of the world, that 
a false prophet who went forth of his own accord, 
taught aright, and sought the honor of God therein? 
Does not the Lord compare the false prophets to 


Refutation of Two Letters. 483 


ravenous wolves, who come in sheep’s clothing 
(Matt.7; John 10), that is, with a pretense of piety, 
and yet seeking nothing else than to rend the sheep? 
“For a thief,’ (that is, a false prophet), says the 
Lord, “cometh not but for to steal, and to kill, and 
to destroy” (John 10:10). In short, a false prophet’s 
purpose is and ever will be, to turn the people away 
from the living God, and to turn them to idolatry. 
On the other hand the true prophets are bent on 
tearing down and rooting up all plants which God 
the Father has not planted, and to plant and rear 
again all that God has commanded (Jer. 1; Matt. 
15 213); 

Lastly, he would have the church of God in- 
visible among all people, that is, scattered under the 
name Christians, Jews, heathen and Turks, and ad- 
monishes those of Campanum and the Eyfel that 


they take every one who fears God, among all | 
people, as a brother, even though he has never even | 


heard the word baptism, and even nothing of the 
‘history or scripture of the Lord Jesus Christ. Let 
any one who will, read the words of Sebastian 
Franck for himself, for it grieves me to speak of 
them, because they are to me abominable, and I 
make this brief reply thereto: 

The church of the Lord, although: existing in 
spirit and in truth, is nevertheless also visible, as 
I explained in my book on The Sending of Preach- 
ers, and still declare. The reasons are as follows: 
1. The name church or congregation indicates that 
it is not only invisible, but also visible, for the term 
used is “ecclesia,” that is, a gathering or meeting 
or congregating together, and the‘term applied to 
the person addressing the congregation is “Ecclesi- 
astes.” Hence Solomon is called ‘Ecclesiastes’ 
(preacher), because he spoke to the congregation 
or church of Israel. Now, it .is certain and in- 
controvertible that as Solomon was, as a preacher, 
visible, so the church also was visible to whom he 
addressed his words. 2. Christ Jesus himself chose 
his apostles (John 15:16), and gathered them to- 
gether as a church, and was not always invisible in 
Jerusalem and Judea. 3. The apostles, according 
to the command of the Lord, through the preaching 


484 Refutation of Two Letters. 


of the gospel, in faith and truth, and by proper 
Christian baptism, and the power and unity of the 
Holy Spirit, gathered a church out of all nations 
(Matt. 28:19, 20; Mark 16:15, 16). This was not 
an invisible body, for they did not write nor send 
their epistles in a general or indiscriminate way to 
all people, but specifically denominating the believ- 
ers and God-fearing people, and designating many 
places and calling many persons by name. How. is 
it possible for all this to be invisible? 
Furthermore several gospel parables bear testi- 
mony to all that has already been said, namely that 
of the seine or net, that was cast into the sea and 
enclosed all kinds of fish (Matt. 13:47), and of the 
King who made a marriage for his Son (Matt. 
22:2), and sent forth his servants to call so many 
people (good and bad), so that his house might be 
filled; also that of the nobleman who, when about 
to leave for a distant country, called his servants 
and delivered to them his goods (Matt. 25:14), and 
said to them: “Occupy: till I come” (Luke 19:18). 
One of the servants, however, was indifferent or 
negligent, and a knave, and hid his Lord’s money 
in the earth. Also of the ten virgins, of whom five 
were wise and five foolish (Matt. 25:1, etc.). 
Now, since Jesus Christ himself likens or makes 
comparisons of the kingdom of heaven, that is, de- 
clares or indicates the preaching of the gospel, the 
church and the entrusted grace of God, in the 
aforementioned parables, it follows incontrovertibly, 
that not only the God-fearing, but the wicked also. 
are found in the church; but these latter will not 
remain in the church, for they are separated and 
excommunicated here on earth, so far as the church 
can accomplish it, and hereafter this will take place 
in its completeness when the sheep shall stand at 
the right: hand and the goats at the left hand and 
shall hear the sentence or judgment that differs so 
widely for the two. Therefore the church of the 
Lord cannot be invisible, because the wicked are 
separated therefrom and the good remain therein. 
Above all this, the almighty God sent his only 
begotten Son Jesus Christ into the world (John 
3:16; 1 John 3:6, etc.), that whosoever believes 


Refutation of Two Letters. 485 


on him shall be saved and have everlasting life; but 
that whosoever does not believe in him is con- 
demned already, and shall not see life, because the 
wrath of God abideth on him. Read the gospel 
according to John, yea, the entire holy scripture of 
the new testament (for to treat all of which would 
be too lengthy) and it will be found that no one 
can come to God and be saved, but alone through 
Jesus Christ, that is, by true faith in his name. 

From this it follows that it is nothing but foolish 
presumption for Sebastian Franck to profess and 
advise, that heathen, Turks, Jews and even all those 
who have no historical or scriptural knowledge of 
the Lord Jesus Christ, be acknowledged as brethren 
if they fear God. Dear reader, how shall a man 
who does not know God fear him? Or how shall 
or can a man fear God the Father who does not 
believe in Jesus Christ whom the Father gave as 
a Savior and Propitiator? (John 1; 1 John 5). Or 
how can a man be born of God except by faith in 
Jesus Christ? Or how can a man become our brother 
and fellow-member in Christ Jesus (1 John 2) who 
is not born of God? For this birth can not take 
place in any other way than in the way already 
mentioned, namely, that to as many as received the 
Word and Light, Jesus Christ, to them gave he 
power to become the children of God (John 1:12). 
And again: “Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the 
Christ (and the Son of God) is born of God” (1 
John 5:1). 

From all this it may be readily understood, that 
the two epistles by Sebastian Franck are nothing 
but blasphemies, entirely contrary to truth and 
faith, full of deadly poison and woven together out 
of many crafty and subtle artifices by a self-exalted 
spirit that would soar above all others. 


Finally, this is the sum and substance of all that 
has been said: 

1. The gospel of Jesus Christ is the real truth 
and the only foundation, upon which everything | 
must be grounded and built (1 Cor. 3:11). Beside 
the truth and this foundation there is nothing that 
will stand before God. 


486 Refutation of Two Letters. 


2. Faith and the true knowledge of God and 
Jesus Christ consists in this that a man obeys his 
commandments and walks even as he walked, and 
that he continue in his doctrine (John 17; 1 John 2; 
2 John 2); for whosoever transgresses and abideth 
not in the doctrine of Jesus Christ has not God. 

3. Jesus with his doctrine, life and example is 
our Teacher, Leader and Guide, him we must hear 
and follow; he is the true light that has come into 
the world: whosoever follows him shall hot walk 
in darkness, but shall have the light of everlasting 
life (Luke 12; John 14; Matt. 15; John 18). 

4. The words of the Lord. Jesus Christ are spirit 
and life, therefore they show their nature in all 
believers, bring the Holy Spirit into the heart (John 
6) and give eternal life, for the Spirit quickeneth, 
and in the Word there is life, and the Life is the 
light and salvation of mankind. If a man accept 
the Word, he is enlightened thereby of God, he is 
saved and blessed, and is an heir of everlasting life. 

5. The church’ is a congregation of penitent, 
God-fearing, believing and regenerated people of 
God, who obey the Gospel of God and are baptized 
by one Spirit into one body (1 Cor. 12; Gen. 3); 
the spiritual Eve, of the heavenly Adam; the free 
Sarah who receives the seed of the divine word from 
God the Father, the true Abraham (Rom. 5; Gal. 
3), from which the children are born through true 
faith in Jesus Christ, without which faith it ‘is cer- 
tain and true that no man can please God, nor be 
saved. 

Herewith I commend my writing to all God- 
fearing readers, my beloved brethren and friends 
in the Lord Jesus Christ, and kindly request that 
my simple reply to the two scandalous letters by 
Sebastian Franck will be received in good part and 
read with devout heart (1 Pet. 5; 1 Tim. 3)...May 
the God of all grace, and the alone wise God grant 
wisdom and understanding in all divine things unto 
all who from the heart desire it. Amen. 

D. P. 


Christian Matrimony 
AS 


INSTITUTED AND COMMANDED BY GOD 
AND AS IT MUST BE MAINTAINED 
AND PRACTICED ACCORDING 
TO THE SCRIPTURE BY 
BELIEVERS. 


A SCRIPTURAL PROOF 


For the use of all believers against all who oppose 


and contradict the truth. 


ALSO A POSTHUMOUS TREATISE 


ON THE 


Evangelical Ban and Shunning. 
Written by 


DIETRICH PHILIP. 


Know ye not that your bodies are the members 
of Christ? Shall I then take the members of Christ, 
and make them the members of an harlot? God 
forbid: Uscor.b 210, 


The wife is bound by the law as long as her 
husband liveth; but if her husband be dead, she is 
at liberty to be married to whom she will; only 
inithne-dcord 21 sGores oe: 


PREFACE. 


To all believers and those who fear God in — 
Christ Jesus, our cordially beloved brethren, sisters 
and friends in the Lord and companions of. our 
Christian faith and partakers of the fellowship of 
the gospel (Rom. 16; 2 Thess. 1; 1 Cor. 1), we 
wish much grace, peace, mercy and a spiritual in- 
sight into the word of God, ears to hear and hearts 
to understand what is God’s will, and this all from 
God the heavenly Father, from whom all good gifts 
come; and from Jesus Christ, our Lord, who is the 
Word, wisdom and truth of the Father, and by the 
power of the Holy Spirit. Amen. (Matt. 12; Jas. 
1; 1 Cor. 1; John 14.) 

We thank almighty God for you, dear brethren 
and friends, for we hope that we have, according 
to the providence of God the Father, come to the 
knowledge of his only begotten Son Jesus Christ 
(Rom. 8). We also beseech the eternal God for you 
and for all believers, that you might altogether con- 
tinue steadfast therein, and that the Most High God 
would preserve you and us in these perilous times 
from all evil, and especially protect us from the 
same (Matt. 24), and that he would keep you in his 
grace and truth for ever. For it seems and has the 
appearance as if there were neither bound nor end 
to dissension, variance, hatred and strife, wandering 
and turning away from God’s word on both sides, 
that is, to the right and to the left, yea, that the 
words of Jesus Christ are in full effect, namely that 
if it were possible the very elect would be led astray 
(Matt. 24); for he himself asks (Luke 18:8): 
“When the Son of man cometh, shall he find faith 
on the earth?” Daily observation and experience 
shows this to be the case that many are called (but 
it is greatly to be feared that according to the 
Lord’s own words, Matt. 22:14), but few are 
chosen and shall be saved. For the kingdom of 
God is not in word, but in power (1 Cor. 4:20), in 
righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Ghost 


490 Christian Matrimony. 


(Rom. 14:17). Whoever serves Christ therein is 
pleasing to God and worthy of the esteem of men. 
Many, however, profess to be in the kingdom of 
God, and yet know little of it. Many also imagine 
that they are earnestly serving God, yet it is to be 
feared that many of them are of those of whom the 
Lord speaks in the gospel, namely: “Strive to enter 
in at the strait gate: for many, I say unto you, will 
seek to enter in, and shall not be able’ (Luke 
13:24), and this because they do not begin: their 
service in the right way, and are much less able to 
finish or perform it; for whoever desires to come 
to the Lord Jesus Christ must first of all hear and 
know the voice of God the Father, and must hunger 
and thirst after righteousness (John 6:27; Matt. 
5:6), and seek nothing but the glory of God and 
his own soul’s salvation; and whosoever comes to 
the Lord in this way, him will the Lord accept and 
cause to enter through the right door into the fold 
and lead him in and out, so that he will find the 
pasture of everlasting life, that is, accept the pure, 
clean and unadulterated word of the gospel by faith 
(John 10:1, etc.; 1 Cor. 1:18, etc.) in the power 
of the Holy Ghost, which is his salvation and ever- 
lasting life. Oh, that all who profess to be Chris- 
tians were thus minded! Oh, how well and how 
pleasant it would be then in the church of the Lord! 
But it is a matter of anxiety and fear that there are 
many at this time, as well as in the time of the 
apostle Paul who seek and love self more than they 
do Jesus Christ (Phil. 2), and that their own honor 
is dearer to them and more sought than the honor 
of God and the welfare, advancement and edification 
of his church, for they would like to introduce and 
uphold a strange and false liberty, outside the ordi- 
nance and church, as regards matrimony. 

If that which they try to uphold would continue, 
then the church would go to rack and ruin, and 
would perish. Hence we can not readily refrain 
from writing our inmost reason and understanding 
on the matter, and reveal, make known and explain 
to all who are kindly disposed and who love the 
truth, what it means when a brother or sister takes 
and marries a person of the world. For we have 


Christian Matrimony. 491 


during the time of our ministry had many great 
trials, difficulties and sorrow in connection with this 
matter, and have suffered much because of it, and 
have, together with seven ministers, with and by 
the word of God been concordantly decided on this 
matter for more than twenty years, and it is still 
our view today, as we hope by the grace of God 
hereafter to explain more fully. We humbly be- 
seech and admonish all who fear God, through the 
Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of the Spirit, that 
you would accept our plain and simple writing in 
good part, and interpret and understand it accord- 
ing to the unadulterated love and scriptural truth 
(Rom. 12:9), and exclude all human opinion, rea- 
soning and subtlety, and take counsel with the word 
of God alone, as we hope all who fear the Lord will 
do. For God knows that we wrote this with a pure 
heart and with a burdened mind and conscience, 
inasmuch as we see that among some unrighteous- 
ness is increasing, which we by the grace and help 
of the Lord would like to prevent, and seek to 
defend righteousness and truth. Beside this we are 
aged, infirm and ill in the body, and are looking to 
the Lord for our deliverance that we may enter into 
the blessed rest. We have discussed this subject 
many times, and spoken of, confessed and given ad- 
monitions regarding it in our congregations, and 
have also written on it many years ago, so that no 
one can imagine or say that we have but recently 
accepted or professed this point of doctrine. There- 
fore we believe and hope it is the will of God, and 
that he will give us understanding, power, and 
strength once more before our death to bring this 
subject and tenet thoroughly into the light of day, 
and to reveal our mind and clear our conscience 
before God and to testify to the truth. With this 
we desire to appear before the judgment bar of Jesus 
Christ, and we do not doubt that we shall be able 
to stand therewith at his coming by his grace, for 
God knows, that we seek nothing but his glory and 
the salvation of his church. To this end may the 
most high and alone wise God help us through 
Jesus Christ, with the power and working of the 
Holy Spirit. Amen. 


CHRISTIAN MATRIMONY. 


It is well to note, first of all, how and in what 
manner God himself instituted and commanded 
wedlock between two persons in Paradise, namely 
between one man and’one woman, both of whom — 
had been created in the image of God. God united 
these two and blesed them and made them fruitful 
(Gen. 2), and it is still his will today that wedlock 
be begun and maintained according to the first 
example, for God does not want:man through! carnal 
mindedness to break or hinder the fulfillment of his 
commandments and ordinances, and to do so is an 
abomination to him (Matt. 15). And this is what 
God means when he says through Moses and in 
other places, that nothing shall be added to his 
words nor anything taken therefrom (Deut. 4:12), 
but that all and everything that God has com- 
manded and prescribed shall be kept and that alone 
(Prov. 30), that a man be not punished nor be found 
untrue. Hence it is very necessary that in con- 
nection with the ordinances and commandments of 
the Lord the following points be well noted and 
taken to heart: 

1. How he is who commanded and. instituted 
the ordinance. 

2. What the ordinance in itself is. 

3. Why God ordained this relation. 


By these man must abide. There must be no 
change, for it is a truly Pharisaic disposition (Matt. 
15) to change the institutions, ordinances and com- 
mandments of the Lord, and set them upon a 
strange basis and order. Nothing but evil can 
result therefrom, for by such changes. good would 
be changed to evil, light into darkness, the divine 
to the human, and the spiritual to the carnal, and 
thus make misuse of everything, and misuse de- 
stroys all that is good. Observe in the ordinarices 
of the Lord what has come to pass through misuse, 
yea, what abominable idolatry is practiced there- 
with. Therefore let every one take heed and re- 


Christian Matrimony. 493 


member that the almighty and eternal God will-be 
commanded by no one nor have his ordinances 
altered or broken, for he is alone wise, Teacher and 
Judge. And the same God is alone Author and 
Institutor of this ordinance of matrimony, of which 
we are speaking. This ordinance is a wedding or 
uniting together of two persons who are born pure 
and holy of the Father through faith in Jesus Christ 
(1 Tim. 1; John 6; Heb. 12) and by the Holy 
Ghost. Thé reason for this ordinance is that by the 
blessing and benediction of the Lord there may be 
growth and increase. This then is true Christian 
wedlock, which is consistent with the laws of God 
and his church, for thus it was instituted in the 
beginning in Paradise by God himself. The fact 
that gradually, in the course of time this good, 
divine ordinance was changed into a gross misuse 
is chargeable to carnality (Gen. 6), as will presently 
be shown. 

In the second place, the abuse of the ordinance 
of God regarding matrimony began when the sons 
of God looked upon the daughters of men, that they 
were fair and beautiful of form, and “they took them 
wives of all which they chose,” and heeded not the 
ordinance of God as originally instituted by God 
with Adam and Eve in Paradise, but looked much 
more upon the beauty of the daughters of men, for 
they had become carnally corrupt, therefore they 
followed the wanton instincts of the flesh. Now, 
when God saw this (Gen. 6), he said: “My spirit 
shall not always strive with man, for that he also 
is flesh: yet his days shall be an hundred and 
twenty years” (Gen. 6:3). Again, when he saw 
that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, 
and that every imagination of the thoughts of his 
heart was only evil continually, and it repented the 
Lord that he had made man on the earth, and it 
grieved him at his heart, he said: “I will destroy 
man whom I have created from the face of the 
earth; both man and beast, and the creeping thing, 
and the fowls of the air; for it repenteth me that 
I have made them” (Gen. 6:5-7). “But Noah found 
grace in the eyes of the Lord.” This shows plainly 
what a great abomination it is before the Lord to 


494 Christian Matrimony. 


break his ordinance and to set it at defiance. And 
it is astonishing that with such open, notable and 
awful examples and testimonies in the holy and 
divine scriptures of God’s anger and displeasure 
against the violators of his divine ordinance, there 
should yet be any one who claims to be a Christian 
that does not heed this, but wantonly, proudly and 
insolently opposes God and his word, anid this be- 
cause of the evil desires of his selfish, stubborn 
flesh, and commits such offence, and so grieve and 
distress the church of the Lord as a true, God- 
fearing Christian, brother or sister never can do, 
and which for all that is under heaven he should 
never want or be able to do, but rather with the 
help of the Lord die, remembering how awful it is 
to cause offence in the church of God because of 
his guilt. Hence it may well be said that the man 
who does this and allows himself to do so wantonly 
is already sufficiently forsaken of and separated 
from God (Matt. 8). Yea, we may well complain, 
mourn and sigh as we ask such persons: “Where 
is now your fear of God? Where is your faith in 
Jesus Christ? Where is now the promise which 
you made to God? Where is now your love for 
the church of the Lord with which you united and 
promised allegiance, and in which you resolved to 
walk in peace, love and unity of the Spirit all the 
days of your lives? Where is your concern for your 
own soul and salvation? How shamefully you, with 
carnal Esau, are selling your birthright for a mess 
of pottage?”’ (Heb. 12). If these and other things 
were more thought of and taken to heart it would 
never come so far that any one who is called a 
brother or sister would take and marry an un- 
believing person in the world, if there were still any 
thought of being saved in the person who might be 
inclined to do such a thing. 

In the third place God still further revealed and 
confirmed all of the matter already spoken of by 
his faithful servant Moses, who, at the command 
of the Lord said to Israel: “Thy daughter thou 
shalt not give unto his (that is, the heathen in- 
habitant of Canaan’s) son, nor his. daughter shalt 
thou take unto thy son. For they will turn away 


Christian Matrimony. 495 


thy son from following me, that they may serve 
other gods: so will the anger of the Lord be 
turned against you, and destroy thee suddenly” 
(Deut. 7:3, 4). 

From these words it is ever clearly to be under- 
stood how great a sin it is and how greatly souls 
are endangered when a believer accepts a heathen, 
that is, an unbelieving person; for God. himself 
says expressly through Moses that the unbelievers, 
the heathen daughters, shall overcome and mislead 
the believers, who once confessed and accepted the 
truth, and were counted with the number of the 
saints, so that they would be turned away from the 
living God to idols. 

It is also clear that the children of Israel, whom 
their Moabitish wives had brought so far that they 
served and sacrificed to Baal-peor and subjected 
themselves to him, clearly showed thereby that they 
had become one flesh and one people with the Moab- 
ites, and that they had the same form of worship, 
which is another terrible example to those who seek 
unbelieving persons, outside of the church of God 
and carnally unite with them. Let them use this 
example as a looking-glass for their own benefit. 

In the fourth place all that has already been 
spoken of is still more vividly shown by the fact 
that when Ezra heard from the chief men that the 
people of Israel were not inclined to turn away from 
the heathen abomination (for they had taken their 
daughters for themselves and their sons and thereby 
made the holy seed common and impure with the 
people of the land, 1 Ezra 18), he rent his clothes 
and plucked out the hair of his head and beard. 
He mourned and wept bitterly before the Lord his 
God, and among other things which he implored 
he said also the following words: “And now, O 
our God, what shall we say after this? for we have 
forsaken thy commandments, which thou hast com- 
manded by thy servants the prophets, saying, The 
land unto which ye go to possess it, is an unclean 
land, with the filthiness of the people of the lands, 
with their abominations, which have filled it from 
one end to another with their uncleanness. Now 
therefore give not your daughters unto their sons, 


496 Christian Matrimony. 


neither take their daughters unto your sons, nor 
seek their peace or their wealth forever,” etc. (Ezra 
9:10-12). 

Here one can see and hear how the pious and 
God-fearing were affected at heart and grieved that 
any one who claimed to be a believer or bore the 
name of Christian should take unto himself an 
unbelieving person against God’s expressed word; 
for it is an open rejection of the ordinances of God, 
and a wanton transgression of his holy: command- 
ment; and the way in which, sad to say, some highly 
esteemed and notable persons have been deceived 
and have turned away from God, we will let every 
one take to heart and contemplate for himself in 
the fear of God. , 

We have now presented this our ground regard- | 
ing matrimony outside of God’s people, with strange 
and heathen people, from the old testament, and 
have proven by the authority of the scripture, how 
God the Lord himself instituted and commanded 
matrimony in Paradise (Gen. 2), and it is still his 
will that matrimony be entered upon according to 
his ordinance and institution, in his fear and in 
faith, by two persons who are of one mind in Christ 
Jesus, after the example of Adam and Eve, as God 
himself set before us in Paradise. Then, too, we 
are shown how severely God punished the trans- 
gressors of his ordinance (Deut. 7), that is, how 
God confirmed his ordinances with an express com- 
mand by his servant Moses, and of the transgression 
of which Ezra so bitterly laments and complains, 
because the children of Israel took to thémselves © 
heathen wives (Ex. 9). It is well to consider and 
remember in this connection the valuable and in- 
structive example of Tobias and Sara (Tob. 3), 
who. were also under the law. They stand even 
today a beautiful pattern and example for all hus- 
bands and wives, as to how they should enter upon 
anid maintain the marriage relation. Beside this it 
is well also to reflect upon what God permitted to 
come upon the seven men who in their wicked, 
carnal passions desired Sara, and had utterly shut 
God out of their hearts, and what power Asmodeus 
had over them. Let every one who seeks and loves 


Christian Matrimony. 497 


his salvation meditate well upon this; for it is for 
the third time a terrible example to those who com- 
mit and have committed this sin of matrimony out- 
side of the church. And those who marry outside 
of the church shall not go unpunished. 
} However, that no one may say that we main- 
tain this aforesaid position on the authority of the 
old testament alone, and have no other evidence 
in the holy scripture, we hope also by the help of 
God to prove this matter regarding matrimony by 
the new testament. ; 

In the fifth place, then, Jesus Christ points us 
to the first creation of a man and woman who were 
united by God (Gen. 2), and this as a sure evidence 
that we must ever look upon the first example, and 
that matrimony among believers may and must not 
be entered upon in any other way than that in 
which God himself began, inaugurated, instituted 
and commanded it. Along with this it is also well 
to remember that if transgressions in this respect 
could not be- tolerated under the old testament law, 
which was imperfect (Heb. 8:10), how much less 
can it be valid or allowable now under the gospel 
dispensation? (Matt. 6). For the gospel of our 
Lord Jesus Christ teaches us in all certainty and 
perfection, decidedly and truly, that a man may be 
perfect and qualified for every good work. And 
since the Lord Jesus Christ points to matrimony 
in its original institution and form, how it was 
ordained and instituted by God the heavenly Father 
in Paradise from the beginning, and is now again 
placed and restored or reformed to its original 
form, therefore no other marital relation can’ be 
accepted or entered upon than that which is in 
accordance with the first marriage, which was first 
instituted by God in Paradise, and afterward re- 
newed and confirmed by his beloved Son Jesus 
Christ, that is, between one man and one woman 
(Gen. 2; Matt. 19), namely, between two believing 
persons whom God himself joins together. This 
then is true wedlock, and from this every one who 
fears God may understand how improper, how 
wrong, yea, how utterly ungodly it is to act so 
vainly and wantonly upon the impulse of flesh and: 


32 


498 Christian Matrimony. 


blood against the pure, good and holy ordinance of 
the Lord, that is, of the eternal heavenly Father 
and of his own, only begotten Son Jesus Christ. 
And when it is done, the attempt is made to cover 
the gross sin and shame with a fig-leaf, that is, to 
embellish and adorn the wicked, sinful thing with 
perverted scripture and distorted words. Here cun- 
ning, craftiness and subtlety must be brought into 
1equisition, and yet all this accomplishes nothing, 
for truth triumphs over all (Eph. 5); for all that 
is to stand before God and his church must be pure 
(Col. 1.) Nothing that is impure, or that maketh 
a lie or is abominable, shall. enter into the new 
Jerusalem, but only those which are written in the 
book of life; and none shall dwell with the eternal 
and consuming Fire but those who from the heart 
fear the Lord and have his word before their eyes, 
and have a humble spirit (Isa. 55; 57; 66; Acts 
19). Read Psa. 15 and Micah 6 and many other 
passages in holy writ, for it is a mistake to deal 
scornfully and insolently with God’s word, for God 
is a righteous judge and an avenger of sin and 
wickedness in this life and hereafter eternally, and 
let every one know and learn to govern himself 
accordingly. Whatever each man sows here (as 
the apostle says), that he will have to reap (Gal. 
6). He that soweth to the flesh, shall of the flesh 
reap corruption; but he that soweth to the Spirit, 
Shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting. All those 
who are carnally minded and live after the flesh, 
always sow to the flesh (Rom. 8), while those who 
are spiritually minded, and by the Spirit crucify 
and mortify the flesh with all evil lusts and desires 
(which war against the flesh), sow to the Spirit 
(GEL ASE 

In the sixth place we claim or adduce as proof 
the words of Paul to the Romans (Rom. 7), namely, 
that the woman which hath an husband is bound 
by the law to her husband so long as he liveth; 
but if the husband be dead, she is loosed from the 
law of her husband to marry and enter into wed- 
lock with whomsoever she will, but only in the Lord 
(1 Cor. 7). This apostolic word we set down as'a 
sure and certain foundation for the matter under 


Christian Matrimony. 499 


discussion; yea, we hold it as an incontrovertible 
testimony to the truth to which we cling, and as an 
unconquerable argument, proposition and point 
against all who gainsay us. This is the reason: 
The apostle gives liberty to persons who are free 
and not bound by the law governing matrimony to 
change their state and to marry again; but with 
this reservation, that it be done “in the Lord”; and 
that which is done “in the Lord” can and may not 
be done contrary to his word and will. To this 
point the words of Paul to the Corinthians apply 
as deserving of note and our earnest consideration 
(1 Cor. 6), namely, that we are not to be unequally 
yoked together with unbelievers, etc. Read these » 
words and understand them well. The apostle like- 
wise admonishes the Ephesians, and writes among 
other things the following words: “Let no man 
deceive you with vain words; for because of these 
things cometh the wrath Of God upon the children 
of disobedience. Be ye not therefore partakers with 
them. For ye were sometimes darkness, but now 
are ye light in the Lord: walk as children of light 
(for the fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness and 
righteousness and truth); proving what is accept- 
able unto the Lord. And have no fellowship with 
the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove 
them,” etc. (Eph. 5:6-11). This accords and agrees 
with what the apostle writes to the Romans: ‘The 
night is far spent, the day is at hand: let us cast 
off the works of darkness, and let us put on the 
armor of light. Let us walk honestly, as in the 
day; not in rioting and drunkenness, not in cham- 
bering and wantonness, not in strife and. envying. 
But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not 
provision for the flesh, to fulfil the lusts thereof” 
(Rom. 13:12-14)... Now let every one who fears 
God, and who has the glory of God and the welfare 
and upbuilding of his church at heart, remember 
how openly and wantonly these and similar other 
faithful admonitions and warnings of the apostles 
regarding matrimony with those outside of the 
church are disregarded (1 Thess. 4). “And if the 
truth be confessed, what else is sought and looked 
for in matrimonial alliances outside of the church? 


~ 


500 Christian Matrimony. 


And what else is the purpose than to yield to the 
evil, wanton flesh, which does not want to be 
obedient to the Spirit of God? And this for the 
reason that it is not sufficiently disciplined and 
mortified, but is nurtured too much in wantonness 
and is allowed to yield to the unseemly lusts. And 
what can result therefrom but often offences and 
evil examples? The Lord Jesus says in the gospel 
(Matt.” 185 "Luke 1 Marke Sys" “AV hosoosieet 
offend one of the least of these that believe in me, 
it were better for him that a millstone were hanged 
about his neck, and that he were drowned in the 
depth of the sea.” From this it is to be gathered 
that if it is such an awful and punishable sin to 
offend one of the Christian believers, even though 
it be one of the least of them, how much greater 
the abomination when by contracting a marriage 
with one outside of the church. not only one, but 
many pious hearts are offended, grieved and troubled 
unto death? Beside this, the scripture says (Wis. 
of Sol. 2) that evil communications (examples) cor- 
rupt good manners and pervert innocent hearts. 
Then when brethren and sisters who have been in 
the faith for some time do such a thing and unite 
with unbelievers without God, does not this open 
the door and clear the way for young brethren and 
sisters to commit such sins and transgressions be- 
fore the Lord? The aged Eleazar took this fully 
into consideration (2 Macc. 6) and therefore he 
would not play the hypocrite, but would rather die 
than offend the younger brethren and leave behind 
him a bad example for posterity. Let every one 
consider this well. And this is really the idea, 
namely that there is‘no liberty among Christians 
to enter upon matrimony in any other way than 
that prescribed by Paul (1-Cor. 7), that is, in the 
Lord. Now, whatever is done in the Lord is done 
and must be according to his divine will. Again, 
whatever is done without the Lord is not right, and 
all unrighteousness is sin and of the devil; for he 
sinned from the beginning (1 John 3:8). But the 
Son of God was manifested to take away our sins, 
and in him is no sin, and whosoever abideth in him 
sinneth not (1 John 3:5, 6). But he that commit- 


Christian Matrimony. 501 


teth sin hath neither seen him nor known him, as 
John clearly testifies. 

In the seventh place we set forth as an im- 
movable foundation of truth (1 Cor. 3:11) that 
which the apostle declares (1 Cor. 6:19): “Know 
ye not that your body is the temple of the Holy 
Ghost which is in you, which ye have of God, and 
ye are not your own?” And again: “Know ye not 
that your bodies are the members of Christ?” (1 
Cor. 6:15). From this it follows most conclusively 
that a Christian is not the master of his own body 
to take the same from the Lord and give it to an 
unbeliever. Inasmuch as the body of a Christian 
belongs to the Lord, and is a temple of the Holy 
Ghost, how then can it be given to an unbeliever 
out of Jesus Christ, without his word and will, and 
without or out of the church? And the above 
quoted words of the apostle clearly declare that a 
Christian’s body is the Lord Jesus Christ’s body, 
and it is also evident and manifest that he is by 
faith united and espoused to the Lord, as is very 
clearly shown and proved by many beautiful ac- 
counts, figures and passages in both old and new 
testament scriptures (Hos. 2). But why multiply 
words? The church is, in its entirety, the virgin 
and the bride or wife that is given in marriage to 
the Husband, the bride and wife of the Lamb; so 
also is every pious Christian individually. Now, 
a wedded virgin, bride or wife has no power to give 
her body to another, for, according to the words 
of Paul, “the wife hath not power of her own body, 
but the husband” (1 Cor. 7:4); how much less, 
then, has the Christian. But the Lord has; for a 
Christian belongs to the Lord, and is his with all 
that he has received of God (Eph. 1:23; 1 Cor. 7), 
for the Lord Jesus by grace received him when he 
was miserable, and naked, and blind, and poor (Rev. 
3); the Lord spread over him the cloak or robe of 
righteousness and salvation, when he lay in the 
blood of his sins; by faith he was espoused to him 
(Hos. 2), yea, he redeemed and purchased him and 
helped or succored him out of all the unrighteous- 
ness of this world, according to his Father’s will, 
and took him unto himself as a chosen bride (1 Pet. 


502 Christian Matrimony. 


1). Hence the bride has no power against the will 
of her Bridegroom, of herself, or to give her body 
to a stranger and unbeliever; for whoever takes 
from the Lord what belongs to him does him vio- 
lence and an injustice (Rev. 1; Eph. 5). -For if a 
man be deprived of that which is his own, it is 
counted for violence, and is punished ; how much 
more deserving of punishment is he who takes that 
from the Lord Jesus which belongs to him and 
gives it to a stranger, yea, a heathen! Let every 
one consider this well. But a believer may rightly, 
in the fear of the Lord, take for his wife one who 
believes and give her his body; for the spiritual 
union between Jesus Christ and his bride does not 
take away the liberty between two believing per- 
sons to be wedded, but allows it to remain a Chris- 
tian liberty or privilege. But carnal and wanton 
waywardness that seeks strange and carnal com- 
panionship is forbidden in the sternest terms. 


And for the further and fuller explanation and 
confirmation of all that has been said and referred 
to here and heretofore, we present this also as an 
incontrovertible foundation and argument on our 
subject of matrimony with those outside of the 
church, that it is wrong and impure in itself, that 
the punishment of the ban must be imposed. And 
why is it punished with the ban? Is it not because 
of the transgression of the divine command of God? 
And wherein lies the transgression? Is it not in 
this that believers unite with unbelievers, and 
thereby, contrary to God’s ordinance, become one 
flesh with them? And so long as the transgressor 
continues to be. and remain one flesh with the 
unbeliever, and deals and does as if she were his 
true and lawfully wedded wife’ that has been given 
him of God, when God has nothing to do with it, 
how shall such an one be able to truly repent, while 
he. continues to lie in sin and unrighteousness? 
Therefore he is justly punished by God and his. 
church with the ban and exclusion. 

Miriam, Moses’ sister, could not be permitted 
to return to the camp of Israel until she was first 
cleansed of her leprosy (Num. 12). And although 
the insinuation is made to us that the transgressor 


Christian Matrimony. 503 


by repentance and confession of sorrow and regret, 
and acknowledgment of his guilt is already cleansed, 
we reply that no one can truly repent and still live 
in sin (Rom. 16) ; and this is the reason (Ezek. 18) : 
True repentance always includes the following 
points and characteristics (called proprietates), 
namely, a sincere sorrow and regret for the sins 
that have been committed (Matt. 3; Psa. 33; Rom. 
3; Heb. 5), and, afterward an open, sincere con- 
fession of sin, groans, tears and prayers to God; 
falling down at the throne of grace and with true 
faith imploring forgiveness of sins, and with firm 
confidence in God’s fathomless grace and mercy. 
But above all there must be a firm resolve to sin 
no more and to quit sin entirely. This, then, is 
true repentance that avails before God, namely, that 
there be a quitting of or turning away from sin; 
yea, this is true worship and service, which is 
pleasing to God; and to cease from unrighteous- 
ness is the true sin-offering. From this we conclude 
that if the transgression of uniting in matrimony 
with one outside of the church is not so great that 
it is necessary to exercise the ban, then the trans- 
gressor may not be excommunicated; but if it 
deserves the ban (as all God-fearing hearts must 
acknowledge and confess), then it is impossible for 
the apostate to come again into the church of God, 
if he continues to remain in his sin and uncleanness 
(for which he is punished and excommunicated) 
and is not cleansed therefrom. 


Dear friends, brethren and companions of our 
faith in Christ Jesus, you who fear God and love 
the truth: here you have our inmost understanding, 
our sincerest opinion and open confession regarding 
the wooing and marrying outside of the church; 
and by this we desire by the grace of God to live 
and die, and hope, without any doubt, to stand 
thereby at the great and terrible day of the Lord 
Jesus Christ, by his help and support. ; 

Now we desire also to present, discuss and, as 
the Lord gives grace, reply to the points, arguments 
and opposing statements or objections of our op- 
ponents. 

In the first place, our opponents claim that the 


504 Christian Matrimony. 


children of God took to themselves the daughters 
of men for wives whom they would (Gen. 6:2), 
because of their beauty. Herewith they introduce 
and try to verify the Lord’s declaration in the 
gospel (Luke 17) of how the people in the time 
of Noah ate, drank, married and were given in 
marriage, etc. By this they would conclude, verity 
and prove that when a brother takes an unbelieving 
person as his wife (although it is against God’s will 
and ordinance), she is nevertheless his wedded wife, 
and with the aforesaid scripture, that two unequal 
persons, a believer and an unbeliever, who have 
come together in unrighteousness, must remain 
together, for they are husband and wife, and com- 
fort the people in their unrighteousness, and so 
strengthen the hands of the ungodly, that no one 
will turn away from his wickedness and sin (Ezek 
13). To this we reply simply that since our op- 
ponents themselves so openly confess that it is an 
unrighteous and unclean union, we are greatly sur- 
prised that they try to prove, verify and justify an 
unrighteous thing that is also unclean, whereby 
they must certainly be brought to shame. If it is 
wrong it cannot stand before the righteous God, 
who hates all ungodly things and is the enemy of 
all unrighteousness (Psa. 7; 44; Heb. 1). There- 
fore the apostle John writes: “If ye know that God 
is righteous, ye know that every one that doeth 
righteousness is born of him” (1 John 2:29). “He 
that committeth sin is of the devil.” Therefore 
whatever is unclean cannot be maintained or al- 
lowed or introduced in the church of the Lord, © 
for the church is pure and holy. 


It ‘is ‘therefore a’ ‘great’ “safprisé’ to ts) that 
brethren should be found who use every artifice, 
worldly wisdom and cunning to defend the sinful, 
wicked thing, yea, who would call wrong right and 
uncleanness clean (Eph. 5), that is, they profess 
_ that the children of God took the daughters of men 
as wives, choosing whoever they would. With this 
they try to say and prove that that is still matri- 
mony which was first commanded by Moses and 
afterward by the Lord Jesus Christ (Gen. 6; Luke 
17); that it is therefore a union and wedlock, and 


Christian Matrimony. 505: 


must therefore remain. ©O Lord! The kind of 
union and wedlock that this was is amply shown by 
the terrible examples and the terribly severe punish- 
ment of the Lord which came.upon all flesh and 
destroyed them. If such union could have stood 
in the eyes of the Lord, then it would not have been 
so sorely punished by God, but it was punished by 
the Lord for the reason that it was to him an 
abomination. And that the picture of the times 
of Noah regarding marrying and giving in marriage 
is presented or set before us by Jesus in the gospel, 
simply means that as the world in the time of Noah 
was corrupt and that but few righteous people 
remained who were preserved in the ark, so also 
will the world be corrupt in every form and manner 
at the coming of the Son of man, and that but few 
who are righteous shall be found then (Luke 17; 
1 Pet. 3; Luke 18). 


And although much is said and great importance 
placed upon the term marriage, although very pre- 
sumptuously and wrongfully, we declare on the 
other hand, that Esau took of the daughters of the 
Hittites to be his wives (Gen. 26:34), “which were 
a grief of mind unto Isaac and Rebeccah,” because 
they were both disobedient, so that Rebecca said 
to Isaac: “I am weary of my life because of the 
daughters of Heth: if Jacob take a wife of the 
daughters of Heth, such as these which are the 
daughters of the land, what good shall my life do 
me?” (Gen. 27:46). It is true that every one 
readily hears and understands from this that Esau 
took the daughters of Heth to be his wives, but 
the kind of union which this was, and the kind of 
example Esau would be is plainly shown by the 
epistle to the Hebrews (Heb. 12), where the apostle 
writes and says: “Follow peace with all men, and 
holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord: 
looking diligently lest any man fail of the grace of 
God; lest any. root of bitterness springing up 
trouble you, and thereby many be defiled; lest there 
be any fornicator, or profane person,’ as Esau, who 
for one morsel of meat sold his birthright. For 
ye know how that afterward, when he would have 
inherited the blessing, he was rejected: for he 


506 Christian Matrimony. 


found no place of repentance, though he sought it 
carefully with tears.” From this it is easy to 
understand what God, as well as Isaac and Rebekah, 
thought of this union which Esau made when he 
took daughters of Heth to be his wives. What is 
set forth and contended regarding Herodias, Philip’s 
wife, and that John the Baptist rebuked Herod 
(Matt. 14) and said to him: “It is not lawful for 
thee to have thy brother’s wife” (Mark 6:18), we 
do not contradict, for we leave the conjugal alli- 
ances of this world as they are, as Paul wrote con- 
cerning them to the Corinthians; we are not dis-— 
cussing that subject, but we are discussing the mat- 
ter of how one shall be dealt with who at this time, 
while in the faith and brotherhood, takes to himself 
an unbelieving person and joins himself to her— 
what repentance is necessary for them and what 
is necessary to be done. 

In the second place our opponents declare (al- 
though without reason), in their effort (according 
to their own ideas and confession) to defend wrong 
and unclean conjugal union, how Jesus says in the 
gospel that in the beginning God created one man 
and one woman (Matt. 19:4; Gen. 1:27; 5:2), 
and that a man shall leave father and mother and 
cleave to his wife: and they twain shall be one 
flesh, etc. To this we reply we acknowledge all 
this to be right and to be true; but we are heartily 
grieved that the holy ordinance of God is made and 
degraded into an entirely carnal and ungodly trans- 
action. Is not this sacrilege? Let every one soberly 
reflect upon this, for the Lord Jesus says in the 
same passage just referred to (Matt. 19:6): “What 
therefore God hath joined together, let not man put 
asunder.” Now, if any one will venture to say that 
this carnal transaction—namely when a believing 
person takes an unbelieving person in conjugal 
union—that it is a joining together by God, let him 
come forward and answer this. We think, how- 
ever, yea, we are very sure, that no one can ever 
truthfully do that; but we confess openly before 
God and all God-fearing people, that it is no union 
wrought by God, but a carnal joining together and 
union, with which God the Lord will have nothing 


Christian Matrimony. 507 


to do, for it is an abomination to him, even as he 
(God) showed in the antediluvean world by means 
of the deluge. 

Beside this it is well to remember what the 
apostle writes to the Corinthians (1 Cor. 7:10): 
“Unto the married I command, yet not I, but the 
Lord, Let not the wife depart from ther husband: 
but and if she depart, let her remain unmarried, or 
be reconciled to her husband: and let not the hus- 
band put away his wife.” From this it is easy to 
understand that the Lord speaks.of two believing 
persons, and to make it appear as if the aforesaid 
words of the Lord had reference to the union of an 
unbelieving person with a believer or to make his 
words the basis for this argument so as to make the 
two cases appear parallel—when the fact is that 
these words refer only to the union of two believers 
and do not point or apply to an unbeliever and 
apostate—is a gross misconception. The Lord grant 
that no wilful perversion be found at any time. 


To compare the union entered upon in the time 
of unbelief and ignorance between two unbelievers 
according to the manner and custom of the world, 
with the union between one who calls himself a 
brother and a worldly person, is to wrest or distort 
the scripture. For it cannot be proven in the whole 
new testament scripture even with one word or 
passage that there is anything more than the matri- 
monial union between two believers of which the 
Lord speaks, and the union that is contracted in 
unbelief and is consummated according to the man- 
ner of the world, but where after a while one of the 
two becomes a believer, that the believer may then 
continue to dwell with the unbeliever yet with the 
proviso or condition enunciated by the apostle (1 
Cor. 7: 12-16), who acknowledges it as a union that 
is consummated in unbelief. But of such a union 
as the one where a believing person takes an un- 
believer the whole new testament says nothing, and 
it is nothing but human imagination, cunning and 
reason, and an open perversion of holy scripture, 
and we hope not to endorse such a view all the days 
of our life. 

In the third place our opponents claim that the 


508 Christian Matrimony. 


betrothal or mutual promise alone constitutes matri- 
mony, and they try to prove it by Deut. 22: 23-29, 
namely that if a man lie carnally with a betrothed 
damsel he is punished.as an adulterer. Another 
proof of theirs is the fact that Mary the virgin was 
betrothed to Joseph, and yet it is considered wed- 
lock (Matt. 1; Luke 2). Reply: We do not, and- 
cannot, truthfully contradict this; but it is well 
to note that the mere betrothal or mutual promise 
does not constitute matrimony, for unknown con- 
ditions may exist that would render such betrothal 
void or invalid. .We do acknowledge, however, that 
matrimony consists, above all, in this that the hearts 
and minds of both persons are inclined and directed 
thereto, and if they, with fasting and devoutness, 
have prayed to God, and they commit themselves 
no farther to each other than about this, that if it 
be pleasing to the Lord and his church, then they 
are mutually content, with this reservation, that 
in the meantime, before the union and joining to- | 
gether by God, they remain in Christian tranquility. 
To understand this better, this comparison or paral- 
lel must be noted: A person who desires admission 
to the church of God and hopes to be identified and 
to unite with the same will not act or conduct him- 
self, in all things that are contrary to God’s word 
and the faith, different than he would if he were 
already received. Likewise also a person that is 
betrothed or espoused will not do differently than 
she would if the bond between her and her future 
husband were already confirmed or formally con- 
summated. For as an applicant is not reckoned as 
a fellow-believer or a member of the body unless 
he have first received the sacred rite, and has been 
formally received as a fellow-member with the hand 
and the kiss of peace and of love, so also the be- 
trothal in part constitutes the marriage bond and 
is the beginning thereof, and without the mutual 
promise or betrothal the marriage bond is not con- 
firmed or established. Fully consummated wedlock 
is really the cordial consent or acquiescence of both 
persons with promise and proviso, as above men- 
tioned, and confirmed by the clasping of hands, to- 
gether with all that the Lord has included therewith, 


Christian Matrimony. 509 


and for which purpose the Lord has instituted the 
ordinance of matrimony. This takes all the force 
out of the statement that the promise constitutes 
wedlock. And even if this were true, and we 
acknowledged it, our opponents are not thereby 
strengthened in their position, although they pro- 
fess and say: That was in Israel and Judah, that 
is, in the church of God, and therefore does. not 
originate with the daughters of the heathen. What 
similarity or comparison is there then between 
the representations and objections in the matter 
under discussion? However, Solomon says that he 
that is inclined to sow dissension finds something 
to condemn every day, and sets himself against 
everything that is good (Wis. of Sol. 18); but he 
that walks in simplicity and sincerity walks safely. 
When a man has opposed God’s word it is usually 
as Sirach says, namely, that a man would rather 
do his worst than lose his honor, and he does it 
for the sake of ungodly people. Therefore let every 
one take heed that by the grace of God he walks 
uprightly, and he will not need to play the hypocrite 
to please the ungodly and apostate. 

In the fourth place our opponents claim and 
declare that Paul acknowledges to the Corinthians 
(1 Cor. 7) that a believer may dwell with an 
unbeliever if the unbeliever is willing to live in 
peace with the believer, that is, so that the con- — 
science of the believer may not be troubled or 
violated, and that the unbelieving husband or wife 
may be sanctified by the believing partner. With 
this they want to draw the conclusion that when a 
brother or sister marries an unbeliever, then the 
unbeliever is or will be sanctified by this apostate 
who wilfully acted in opposition to God and the 
church and afterward deplores it, expresses sorrow 
and promises to amend, etc. We refute this as a 
false position, on the following ground with this 
evidence, namely, that Paul here. wrote nothing 
more than this: that when two persons, a man 
and a woman, have, in the time of ignorance and 
unbelief, come together, agreed or consented to 
wed, have married and lived together as husband 
and wife, they shall not separate because of the 


510 Christian Matrimony. 


eospel and the faith, nor break their troth which 
they have mutually plighted (although in unbelief), 
nevertheless always with the aforesaid understand- 
ing and provision. But the case of where a person 
calling himself a brother or sister in the church 
of the Lord takes an unbelieving person in the 
world, is very widely different from that which the 
apostle says or means in the aforesaid words—in 
fact, the very opposite; for what is done in ignor- 
ance, the Lord ascribes to ignorance; but what is 
done after confessing and accepting the truth, and 
committed wilfully against it, is an abomination 
before God. We do not believe that any one is 
so void of understanding that he does not know 
and understand this unless he would wilfully speak 
or act in direct opposition to God’s word, against 
that which he knows is right ane against his own 
- conscience. 

From this we conclude and decide that it is a 
wrong and an unscriptural comparison and repre- 
sentation to compare these cases as said above. 
That the unbeliever is to be sanctified by the be- 
liever is to be understood as meaning nothing more 
than conjugal association or relation and communion 
before God, as all those who fear God, well know, 
and are taught therein of God that it can nevermore 
be made to signify or indicate that an unbelieving 
person who is taken in the world by a brother or 
sister should, in this manner, be pure and holy, after 
an act that is so manifestly contrary to God’s word; 
for in all the new testament we have not more than 
two kinds of matrimony, namely, that between two 
believing persons who have come together in the 
faith, whom God has joined together, and that of 
two persons who have come together in unbelief, 
and of whom one of the two becomes a believer. 
How this is to be looked upon or reconciled by 
the church, and that the bond be not broken be- 
cause of the faith, but shall continue (Matt. 19), 
is shown by the apostle, yet always with this under- 
standing and meaning, as he writes. Finally this 
is the idea: As little as an apostate wife, or a 
brother who is her husband, is pure and free be- 
cause of her apostasy, so little is an unbelieving 


Christian Matrimony. 511 


and worldly person pure and free from or to him 
who took her in the time of unbelief, and if he 
would truly repent he must cease from all that 
which he has begun and done contrary to God’s 
word, and sin no more; for that which is’ not 


properly begun in the Lord can hardly come and. 


be brought to a good end. 

It is further claimed by some that they have a 
suggestion for consideration, namely: When one 
in the time of his apostasy still further trespasses 
and takes a worldly person, it may not be compared 
with this as though both had taken place in the 
time of unbelief. 

Replys « bo:7sin. (Still) further inthe time; of 


apostasy does not excuse the apostate or back- | 


slider, but only makes his apostasy greater, because 
one sin cannot make another sin less or better, but 
makes it so much greater and worse, for it is writ- 
ten in the book of Wisdom that to sin once is much. 
Sin is to give rein to the will against the most high 
and righteous God, who. is displeased with all un- 
godly life and ways (Psa. 7), who hates all unright- 
eousness and loves all righteousness (Heb. 1; Psa. 
44). Therefore sin has, from the very beginning, 
been an abomination to God, and still is (2 Pet. 2), 
and was severely punished (Gen. 2), in heaven 
among the argels, as well as upon earth among 
men, although they were created in the image of 
God. But to sin twice is much worse, and to sin 
three times brings punishment. From this let a 
Christian remember and take to heart that back- 
sliding from God and his word is a great and 
terrible abomination (Sir. 23)); and to sin yet more 
during the backslidden state is still more abom- 
inable. 

This is to be clearly observed in the figurative 
Israel. When they had been disobedient and stub- 
born before God so many times, then they desired 
a golden calf; then the manna was innutritious and 
unpalatable food (Ex. 32); then they followed the 
ungodly faction of Korah, Dathan and Abiram 
(Num. 16); then they wanted to stone Joshua and 
Caleb- because they opposed the other spies (Num. 
14); then they murmured against Moses and Aaron. 


= 


512 Christian Matrimony. 


And along many similar lines they sinned, to 
mention all of which is unnecessary (Ex. 16; 17, 
Num. 11, etc.). 


When they, above all these things, took to 
themselves the daughters of Moab and had carnal 
intercourse with them (Num. 25), they were com- 
mitting so much the more wickedness, and all this 
before the Lord, so that they were the more severely 
punished by him. When Balaam was pleased with 
the presents of King Balak and therefore journeyed 
alorg to the land of Moab with evil purpose, his 
way was perverse and his heart had departed and 
turned away from God. But when God thwarted 
Balaam’s evil plan, and changed his intended curse 
into a blessing, he (Balaam) yet at his departure 
gave the wicked, false advice as to how Moab should 
deceive Israel (Num. 22; 24; 31), and for this he 
had to die, and, at the command of God through 
Moses he was put to death by Israel. From this 
it is to be observed that his last misdeed. was not 
less, but, in our opinion, greater than the first were. 
Saul, the first king of Israel, turned away from 
God at Gilgal (1 Sam. 13), when he made an offer- 
ing, because he feared the people would fall away 
from him: for he did not wait for the prophet 
Samuel. That was the beginning of his apostasy. 
After this he departed still farther away from God - 
in this that he did not accomplish and obey the 
word of the Lord regarding the Amalekites. and 
this was so much worse, because-he played the 
hvpocrite before Samuel (1 Sam. 15), being desirous 
of retaining his honor with the people, We might 
mention manv similar instances, from all of which 
it can be readily understood that apostasy from God 
produces all that is evil and nothing that is good, 
and that one sin follows another, as daily ex- 
perience teaches us. 


There is still another objection and contradiction 
from our opponents, namely: If a person, while 
a believer, transgresses by marrying a worldly per- 
son and afterward repents and is sorry, and heartily ~ 
desires to make amends. but is unable to bring this 
about on the part of the unbelieving partner, nor 


Christian Matrimony. 513 


bring said partner into the church, what course 
shall the penitent backslider then be advised to take? 

Reply: We confess before God, and have fre- 
quently declared before this, that during all the 
time we have believed and been in the ministry, 
so far as our knowledge and consent is concerned, 
no one who has thus strayed into the world and 
taken a conjugal partner, that is, that he, while a 
‘member in the church, and taking a worldly part- 
ner, came again to the church of God and was 
received into her communion, except where the 
unbelieving partner was first converted and was 
also received as a fellow-member in the faith. In- 
asmuch as we have seen and heard nothing different 
from this in the church of God we might well have 
right and reason for rejecting or curtly dismissing 
such unprofitable, idle questions./ What is sought 
or intended by asking such questions God knows, 
and those who fear God also may well conjecture. 
There would be time enough to speak of it if such 
a case were in hand, and even then to wait until 
help, comfort and counsel had been sought of God 
the Lord, and thereafter united prayer was offered 
by all the bishops, teachers and ministers that could 
be gathered, in order that by discussion and counsel 
it might be decided what should and must be done 
in this matter. But for a few brethren, or a few 
ministers to perform this according to their own 
way of thinking is censurable, for it does not com- 
pare or accord with the scripture, but much more 
looks like vanity, haughtiness and_ self-conceit 
(Deut. 17). So long as the church of God did as 
mentioned above, according to the example shown 
us in Israel, and according to the example of the 
apostolic church, integrity prevailed, and there was 
peace in large measure (Acts 15). But when one 
or several congregations presumed or undertook to 
manage some difficult cases, without the bishops, 
teachers, ministers and other congregations, all man- 
ner of offences and sorrow began and came there- 
from, even disturbance, division and destruction of 
the church of God; as must be seen today with 
weeping and sorrowful eyes, that so many have 
come short in this matter, that it should be high 


33 


514 Christian Matrimony. 


time just now to meditate, take an example, and 
reflect. 

Let us now return to the former article or 
proposition, namely the question raised by our op- 
ponents, which is this: If the unbeliever is stub- 
born, refractory and will not obey or live peaceably 
with the penitent conjugal partner, whether the 
penitent should then remain outside the church 
for all time? Whether his penitence should be 
subject to the unbeliever? etc. | 

Reply: There may be such true, enduring and 
consistent repentance found and felt in him who 
has thus gone astray, that his request to be received 
cannot be “consistently prevented or refused, yet 
always on this condition: that he leave the person 
whom he has taken contrary to God and his word, 
make himself a eunuch* for the kingdom of heaven’s 
sake (Matt. 19:12), have no liberty to take another, 
care for and support the one from whom he has 
departed, and faithfully and devoutly pray to God 
for her, that it might yet please God some time to 
open her eyes that she might rightly know the truth 
and be converted to the living God (2 Tim. 2). And 
if perchance some one might attack us at this point 
and assume that we herewith confess or acknowl- 
edge that this is matrimony which these two per- 
sons, that is, a person called a brother or sister, 
and an unbelieving person have entered into, we 
reply that this has been sufficiently answered and 
explained above, and that our own denomination 
and their opponents themselves confess that this is 
a wrong and unholy union. But if any one will 
be captious or sophistical, let him remember that 
all the wisdom and craftiness of men are foolish- 
ness and lack of judgment in the sight of God. Ii 
any one thinks that he knows something, let him 
remember the apostle’s words (1. Cor. 1:18-31: 
8:2), that he does not yet know what he ought to 
know. If any one desires to exalt himself, we desire 


* This expression and the passage to which it refers 
must be understood as Jesus meant, namely, that the per- 
son in question abstains from all carnal relation or con- 
jugal alliance, the same as the class of beings of which 
Jesus speaks, because incapable.—Tr. 


Christian Matrimony. 515 


to place ourselves on the plane of the humble and 
those of low estate, and say with Paul (Rom. 12) 
that we are determined to know nothing but Christ 
and him crucified, whose footsteps we desire to fol- 
low and according to the distinct rules of whose 
divine word we desire to walk (1 Cor. 1). To sum 
it up, if any man desire to be contentious (1 Cor. 
11:16), let him know that we have no such custom, 
neither the churches of God. 

Observe, these are the principal arguments and 
chief articles, so far as we have retained them, on 
which our denomination and its opponents, in the 
aforesaid matters, desire to maintain their ground, 
regarding permission or the prohibition of marriage 
out of the Lord and his church with an unbeliever. | 
But we hope that by the grace of the Lord we have 
so clearly elucidated and pointed out the matter 
and established and confirmed it by holy and divine 
scripture, and also so answered the arguments and 
propositions of our opponents, that every one who 
fears God can and will be satisfied therewith. But 
the reason why we have not been able to do this so 
fully and completely as we desired, is because of 
physical illness. God may, in his own good time, 
make these matters more clear, either through us, 
or through other persons; although we hope that 
we have satisfied all God-fearing lovers of the truth 
and fellow-members of our Christian faith. 

Finally, the sum total and conclusion of all that 
has been said is, that matrimony is a pure, good 
and holy ordinance of God, and cannot be otherwise 
entered upon, accepted and maintained than accord- 
ing to the express word of God (Gen. 2:5; Rom. 
7; Eph. 5, etc.), and according to the testimony 
of holy scripture, yea, according to the example 
presented by Christ, who accepts no bride but the 
believing one, flesh of his flesh and bone of his bone 
(1 Cor. 6), and who, spiritually, is of him. Thus 
also a brother may take to himself no other person 
than one who with him is a member of the body 
of Christ, and, as a sister, like him, according to 
the Spirit (Eph. 5), in faith of one mind with him 
in the truth, and as he by acceptance of the eternal 
Father has, in the knowledge and confession of his 


516. : Christian Matrimony. 


Son Jesus Christ, by grace become a son of God, 
so he must also in the fear of God take to himself 
a God-fearing sister for his wedded wife who is a 
daughter of the almighty heavenly Father. This, 
then, is what it means to be “married in the Lord,” 
and beside this there is no matrimony that is valid 
before God. Therefore the apostle Paul allows the 
union which he calls the marriage of this world 
(1 Cor. 7), namely, that of two unbelieving persons, 
who in their unbelief have come together, and 
allows it to remain a union; yet with this condition 
and provision, that the unbeliever is willing to live 
in peace with the believer, not to rule over his faith 
which God has wrought in him, but: leave him 
therein unenvied, unupbraided and _ unhindered. 
Thus there may be cohabitation, for then the un- 
believer is to the believer pure and holy, so far as 
conjugal fellowship and association or relation are 
concerned; and in such an unbeliever who conducts 
himself or herself with such propriety and becoming 
behavior there is still hope that by the grace of God 
he or she may become a believer. But we challenge 
any one to bring forward one single passage from 
the new testament by which this third matrimony 
(as our opponents would be pleased to have it 
called matrimony) is declared or established as free, 
pure and in such manner as is matrimony between 
a believer and an unbeliever who have come to- 
gether in unbelief and united in marriage. And to 
thus distort the words of Paul to the Corinthians 
(1 Cor. 7) is to openly do violence to the scriptures, 
and is no more authoritative than the claim which 
the Paedobaptists make and hold forth that because 
whole households were baptized by the apostles, 
they would gather evidence therefrom that there 
were infant children among the number and were 
baptized. But the evidence on which the false 
foundation or ground on which infant baptism is 
based as against the foundation of truth regarding 
true baptism of penitents and believers remains as 
powerless as is the effort to prove by the words of 
Paul to the Corinthians regarding matrimony 
between a believer and an unbeliever, that when a 
believing person takes an unbelieving person this 


Christian Matrimony. 517 


cohabiting togther and conjugal relation is pure. 
But if the backslider, who through his transgression 
is separated from God and his church, desires to 
repent and to give evidence of it, he must cease 
from everything in which he has sinned against 
God’s word and will, as has been explained above. 

In further explanation of all this, let every one 
remember that the whole matter regarding matri- 
mony outside of the church is in itself so wrong, 
so impure, and so ungodly, that it is punished with 
the ban by the church of the Lord. How then shall 
the transgressor be able to repent so long as he 
continues in sin and transgression? ‘Therefore if 
he on this account is justly punished with exclusion 
by God and by his church, has not true repentance 
these following characteristics, namely, a sincere 
sorrow and lamenting because of sins committed 
(Matt. 3; Acts 2), afterwards honest confession 
of sin, praying to God and making supplication at 
the throne of grace for forgiveness of sins (Psa. 
33), with firm trust in God’s mercy, and with 2 
settled purpose not to sin any more, but to cease 
from it? True repentance and worship, then, is to 
cease from sin and to cease from doing unrighteous- 
ness (Sir. 35). From this it follows incontrovertibly 
that if the transgression and iniquity of marrying 
outside of the church is so great in itself as to 
deserve the punishment of the ban, it must be neces- 
sary to first put away the accursed relation and life 
before there can be evidence of true repentance, and 
the backslider may again be received into the 
church, if he still continues to live in his defilement 
and sin. Beside this, let every one remember the 
words of Paul, that no one may marry but only in 
ies lords Corirsod ores and’5) and that 2 
Christian has not power of his own body, but the 
Lord. Let every one ponder these words well in 
his heart. 

And herewith we close our writing on this mat- 
ter and contents of the aforementioned subject, and 
admonish the God-fearing reader to read prayerfully 
all that we have under great difficulty and bodily 
illness written by the grace of God, take it to heart, 
weigh it upon the minute scales of the word of God 


518 Christian Matrimony. 


and thus prove and examine it, to see whether it 
accords with the simple truth and is the safest way 
upon which to walk in order to reach a blessed 
end; for there is a way . . . but the end thereof 
are the ways of death (Prov. 14). Again, there is 
a way that is level and open, and he that travels - 
thereon travels in safety. May the almighty God 
grant you and us all understanding and wisdom 
(Prov. 10), according to his holy and divine will 
to always do that which is right and pleasing in 
his eyes. 

Written and completed the 7th day of March, 
1568, by 1B ead se: 


THE 


Evangelical 


Ban and Shunning 
BY 


Ss. G. AND DIETRICH PHILIP. 


After a translation from the French by C. B. M. 
and from the Low Dutch into German 


by A. L. 


Teach them to observe all things whatsoever I 


have commanded you. Matt. 28:20. 


To this end also did I write, that I might know 
the proof of you, whether ye be obedient 


invallsthings: .2) Cor. 2 9. 


A PLAIN PRESENTATION OF THE EVAN- 
GELICAL BAN AND SHUNNING, 
BY DIETRICH PHILIP. 


It is fitting and proper that the Christian church 
give diligent heed to the word of God and to have 
it always in mind that in all things in which it 
passes judgment it may be directed thereby. ‘This 
must also be done in the matter of excommunica- 
tion, and wherever and upon whomsoever the 
punishment of excommunication. is imposed, there 
the sin must first be clearly proven and shown with 
the holy scripture. 

In the first place Christ says, Matt. 18:15: “Tf 
thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell 
him his fault between thee and him alone” (Lev. 
19:17; Luke 17:3). “If he shall hear thee, thou 
hast gained thy brother. But if he will not hear 
thee, then take with thee one or two more. 
that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every 
word may be established” (2 Cor. 18:1; Deut. 
17:6; 19:15; John 8:17). “And if he shall neglect 
to hear ‘Hen tell it unto the church: but if he neg- 
lect to hear the church, let him be unto thee as a 
heathen man and a publican” (1 Cor. 5:9). The 
apostle Paul likewise writes to the Romans after 
this manner: “Now I beseech you, brethten, mark 
them which cause divisions and offences contrary 
to the doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid 
them” (Rom. 16:17). The apostle Paul teaches 
Timothy and Titus the same thing (1 Tim. 6:3; 
2 Tim. 8:95; Tit. 3:10), and John in his epistle 
(2 John 10). And again the holy apostle Paul 
writes to the Corinthians, admonishes them and 
says: “If any man that is called a brother be a 
fornicator, or covetous, or an extortioner, or an 
idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard; with such an 
one no not to eat” (1 (ot, Didd)3 

Paul also says to the Thessalonians: “Now we 
command you, brethren, in the name of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw yourselves from 
every brother that walketh disorderly, and not after 


Evangelical Ban and Shunning. 521 


the tradition which he received of us” (2 Thess. 
3:6). “And if any man obey not our word by this 
epistle, note that man, and have no company with 
him, that he may be ashamed. Yet count him not 
as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother” (2 
Thess. 3:14, 15). This is a plain and universal rule 
of the holy scripture, by which Christians must 
govern and guide themselves, without opposing it, 
for it is of the Lord, and given .and commanded 
by his apostles. In it lies a great responsibility, 
and upon it much depends, as may be plainly noted 
in the foregoing passages, therefore it must be 
observed and accepted by all believing Christians. 
But there must be important reasons why this ex- 
clusion is instituted and must be observed among 
believers. 

1. That the church or the congregation of the 
Lord should not be defiled by the unrighteous or 
unjustified, for it is not the Lord’s will that the 
diseased, infected, scabbed sheep should remain in 
his fold and among his flock, that the whole flock 
be not infected and become scabbed. Of this we 
have a plain pattern and example in the Book of 
Joshua (Josh. 7) and in Numbers (Num. 16), and 
likewise in the epistle of Paul to the Corinthians 
(1 Cor. 5): “Know ye not that a little leaven 
leaveneth the whole lump?” And so also the apostle 
admonishes the believers and says: “If there come 
any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive 
him not into your house, neither bid him God speed: 
for he that biddeth him God speed is a partaker of 
his evil deeds” (2 John 10:11). 

2. That the sinner or the transgressor may be 
ashamed, humble himself, come to himself, and 
repent, as Paul teaches in his first epistle to the 
Corinthians (1 Cor. 5), and in the second epistle 
to the Thessalonians (2 Thess. 3). When this 
evangelical exclusion and ban are rightly exercised 
and observed they are very beneficial and necessary, 
and this for two reasons: (a) Because by this 
means the church of the Lord is kept pure, and 
(b) That the sinner who desires to repent, may 
thereby amend his ways. 

It is also a medicine or remedy that is very 


522 Evangelical Ban and Shunning. 


strong and penetrating in the healing of infected 
and foul, festering sores which cannot be healed 
with mild plasters and poultices; but because of 
its foulness the whole body might be destroyed. 
And though care were taken with the application 
of this strong remedy or medicine, yet it needs to 
be mixed with such sweetness and mixture as the 
holy scripture teaches us, otherwise it might do’ 
more harm than good. Therefore due heed should 
be given to the rule, which has been given us by 
the word of God. 

Jesus Christ instituted and commanded separa- 
tion, and wants those who have been separated to 
be looked upon as heathen and publicans. Now, 
the manner in which the Jews avoided these was 
not to eat and drink with them, they even did not 
go into their houses, as may be sufficiently seen 
in the holy scripture, for it holds them as heathen, 
‘as indeed they were so long as they continued in 
unbelief; for Christ said to the Canaanite woman 
(Matt. 15) that it was not meet to take the chil- 
dren’s bread and cast it to the dogs (V. 26), by 
which children the Lord would have us understand 
' that the Jews were meant, and the dogs, the heathen 
(Rev. 22). Likewise the Holy Spirit also calls those 
dogs who are outside of the Christian church. The 
woman of Samaria also said to Christ Jesus: “How 
is it that thou, being a Jew, askest drink of me, 
which am a woman of Samaria?” (John 4:9); for 
the Jews have no dealings with the Samaritans. 
Now the apostles sufficiently explain to us the 
aforementioned words of Jesus Christ regarding ex- 
clusion or excommunication, how they teach and 
expressly command us to withdraw ourselves from 
every brother or sister that deals and walks dis- 
orderly and unseemly, no not to eat with them, not 
to receive them into your houses nor have fellow- 
ship with them, nor to greet them or wish them God 
speed (2 Thess. 3; 1 Cor. 10; 2 John 10). By this 
injunction we must be governed and directed, with- 
out making the way longer or shorter or making 
the task heavier or lighter than as prescribed and 
taught. 

On this point some say that one may deal with 


Evangelical Ban and Shunning. 523 


an excommunicated and apostate member in friend- 
ship and love, converse with him and eat and drink 
with him, that he may come to repentance. 

To this we reply that we can readily concede and 
agree in the matter of speaking with a backslider, 
and to admonish him with the word of God; for the 
apostle, by God’s word and Spirit, teaches us to do 
this; but to eat and drink with an excommunicated 
member (2 Thess. 3), or to have dealings and fel- 
lowship with him, we do not allow, for the reason 
that there is not one word in the entire holy scrip- 
ture by which this can be proven consistent. When 
the apostle says that we are to have no fellowship 
with such an one, nor to eat and drink with him, 
the apostle says therewith that the kingdom of God 
consists not in eating and drinking, but in righteous- 
ness, peace and joy in the Holy Ghost (Rom. 14; 
1 John 8; 2.Cor. 7). “And Christian love does not 
consist in eating and drinking, but in deed and in 
truth. And the apostate and excommunicated per- 
son is not moved to repentance by eating and drink- 
ing, but by a sincere disapprobation of and sorrow 
for his sin. This withdrawing from them causes 
a true distress, sorrow and a preying on the con- 
science because of sin, which sin is disapproved and 
reproved by the word of God. Therefore the 
apostle says: “Let him not be to you as an enemy, 
but entreat him as a brother’; but he does not 
say: Eat and drink with him; for that is merely 
the human idea of propriety and reasoning; yea, 
such love must be considered false, for it does not 
accord with the truth and conflicts with evangelical 
excommunication. Whoever therefore desires to 
walk according to the love of God and his neighbor, 
let him observe God’s word, and seek his neighbor’s 
salvation; then he will at once see that it is a com- 
mand of God to put away from the church wicked 
men and those who do unrighteousness. For love 
to God consists in obedience to the commands of 
God, and true brotherly love really consists in 
promoting and seeking by every possible means the 
welfare and salvation of one’s brethren, Hence 
excommunication of sinners serves to make them 
ashamed, that they may realize what they are, and 


524 Evangelical Ban and Shunning. 


repent. And to this end also the instruction which 
God’s word enjoins regarding him, for the admoni- 
tion of his soul, which soul is not comforted with 
food and drink. 

Further, the question is asked whether help and 
support may not be rendered to an apostate and 
excommunicated brother who through misfortune 
becomes needy or infirm and suffers want. 

To this we answer according to the understand. 
ing given us of the Lord by his holy word, that the 
separation or exclusion is instituted and commanded 
by Jesus Christ, not for the purpose of destruction, 
but for repentance (1 Cor. 10; Matt. 12). Therefore 
Christians must not use the ban in the manner that 
the Jews of old exercised the law regarding the 
sabbath (Matt. 2), who would have allowed a man 
to perish rather than help him out of his need on 
this day; for we no longer serve according to the 
letter, although they of old broke the sabbath to 
prevent injury or harm to themselves. “And hence 
Christians do not break the law regarding the ban 
as instituted and commanded by Christ, if they 
render assistance to an excommunicated person in 
need and hunger; for to practice and show love 
and mercy, and to show kindness to the poor is not 
prohibited, but much more commanded, and, as 
many passages of scripture show, approved and 
enjoined. In short, if some one would help an 
excommunicated brother in the church in the time 
of his need, and would have fellowship with him 
as the Samaritan did with the man who fell among 
thieves (Luke 10), we believe that such an act must 
be pleasing to God; therefore we would rather 
show mercy to the poor as did the Samaritan, than 
pass by as did the priest and the Levite 
_ Furthermore we are also asked whether, in case 
two believers who are living together in matrimony 
and one of them departs from the faith and because 
of the transgression committed is excommunicated, 
the one remaining steadfast must withdraw from 
and shun the one who is excommunicated. 

To this we reply that excommunication is a 
universal rule in the church, which must be exer- 
cised rightly according to the scripture without 


Evangelical Ban and Shunning. 525 


respect of person, so that father, mother, son, 
daughter, husband and wife sanction and assist in 
pronouncing judgment; for a Christian and mem- 
ber of the church cannot look upon relationship or 
friendship; he can spare nobody in this matter. 

Should some one contradict this or even admit 
that the husband, on his part, passes judgment by 
the word of God against his guilty wife and aids 
in putting her without the pale of the Christian 
congregation, but would nevertheless want the 
church to grant the husband the libérty to maintain 
the same relation and companionship with his wife 
as before, when she was not excommunicated, we 
answer that the church separates and excommuni- 
cates the sister that has sinned or become apostate, 
by the power vested in or bestowed by Jesus Christ, 
and in such a manner indeed that there shall be no 
outward fellowship with her until the time when 
she, upon true sorrow, repentance and amendment 
is again received into the church. And the husband 
must, under the same conditions, be dealt with in 
the same way, for the reason that he is not his own, 
but the Lord’s and his church (1 Cor. 6 and 3), 
to whom he -must be obedient and devoted and 
render or show more love than he does to his 
own wife. 

If to this it be said that by marriage the hivebard 
is bound and united to his wife, because he is one 
body and one flesh with her, which he is not with 
the church, we reply that if the believing husband 
is united by marriage to his wife, so also is he 
spiritually united to Christ, the true Bridegroom 
of the church. And moreover, inasmuch as the 
believer is one body and one flesh with the church 
in Christ Jesus, therefore this spiritual bond and 
union with Christ is and must be firmer, stronget 
and more binding than natural or carnal matrimony 
(Eph. 5). 

Again, if it should be said that the husband may 
be united to Christ and yet remain with his wife, 
even though she has fallen away from the truth, 
the answer is that this cannot be, because it is 
against the teaching and command of the Lord and 
his apostles, because by so doing he does not observe 


526 © Evangelical Ban and Shunning. 


excommunication as instituted, for whence should 
such liberty come to him? Should it be simply 
because she is his wife? No, certainly not, for, as 
we have said above, carnal marriage and union can- 
not destroy, supercede and render invalid evan- 
gelical separation. 

But some one might ask and say that the law 
regarding separation is not broken in this that the 
husband treats his wife as his wife, and not as a 
sister in the church, even though he live with her 
and have fellowship with her. 

To this we reply and say that even though the 
separation of the persons were to be understood 
in a spiritual sense only; and outward fellowship 
were not forbidden, this might be admitted, but we 
have shown above that it is to the contrary. 

If some one says that separation according to the 
Spirit is sufficient, and that this does not demand 
nor permit outward withdrawal or separation, we 
answer that it is not permissable to break the evan- 
gelical separation by or because of carnal fellowship, 
as we have pointed out and shown above, for the 
command regarding separation is more than that 
regarding marriage. Note this, because one con- 
cerns man, and the other God; and herein is proved 
or tested what kind of faith and love we have 
toward God, when we for the sake of his word and 
commandments are to withdraw ourselves from our 
wives; for it is an express command of God that 
the church must put away, separate and exclude 
all apostates and transgressors of the truth (2 Cor. 
5; 1 John 1) without respect of person, before 
which the command regarding the marital relation 
and union must make way (Deut. 17 and 13). Of 
this we have the example and testimony of the holy 
scripture, inasmuch as God commanded the Israel- 
ites to stone their wives who invited or induced 
their husbands to go to strange gods and worship 
them; nor were they to be spared or excused by 
their own husbands, but they had to cast the first 
stone at her. From this we see that marriage and 
carnal union cannot stand against or in the face 
of figurative separation. The Israelites could not 
even spare their wives with or by the suspension 


Evangelical Ban and Shunning. 527 


of the marital relation when the wife had sinned, 
but had to enter complaint, bring information, ac- 
cuse, and pass judgment against them according to 
the law. deride also to observe evangelical sep- 
aration Christians must also temporarily shun their 
wives until they return again and come to true 
repentance and sorrow for the sins that have been 
committed. This punishment ts far easier to bear 
than the punishment which was imposed in the law 
of Moses. Beside this we must note that God had 
commanded that father and mother should be hon- 
ored (Ex. 20); yet this commandment also must 
make way before the other word and command 
which says that a man should forsake father and 
mother and cleave unto his wife, and that they twain 
shall be one flesh (Gen. 2; Matt. 19). Now, observe 
that this union was higher and stronger or more 
binding; yet so also must love for wife and marital 
union make way and give place to love of Christ 
and the gospel 

If any one disputes this and says that a man 
does not really and truly forsake his wife except 
only when he drives her away, persecutes or im- 
prisons her on account of the faith, and not when 
for the name of God, for the love of Christ and the 
gospel he simply withdraws himself from her on 
account of excommunication. 

Reply: Is it not the word and command of God 
that those who are separated and cut off from the 
church are to be to the members as the heathen 
and publicans, and that no dealings and fellowship - 
are to be maintained with them, no not even eating 
and drinking (1 Cor. 5)? Now, if for this reason 
a man withdraws himself from his wife, does he not 
do it for love to God and for the sake of the gospel, 
just the same as when he forsakes her because he 
does not want to fall into idolatry or transgress.a 
single commandment of God? 

Are the foregoing words of Jesus Christ and his 
apostles not also considered as the word of God 
and the holy scripture, or are they untrue? If to 
this the reply is made that Christ has forbidden the 
husband to leave or forsake his wife, except onlv 
because of fornication, let it be carefully heeded 


528 Evangelical Ban and Shunning. 


and observed that Christ’s purpose was to prohibit 
and prevent the separating from and putting away 
of wives as it was customary for the Jews to do 
with their wives, for every trivial reason as whim 
might dictate, or as they might desire, in order to 
marry another, which the Lord suffered them te 
do (Deut. 24) because of the hardness of their 
hearts. But such separation from the wife was not 
instituted nor allowed by God in the beginning 
(Gen. 2). Hence the Lord desired and commanded 
that men should do this no more, except in case of 
fornication, which is the only and true reason or 
cause for which a man may leave or put away his 
wife and take another (Matt. 19 and 5). Now there- 
fore believers do not act contrary to the command 
_ of Jesus Christ, when because of excommunication 
they withdraw themselves from their wives; for 
it is not for the purpose of taking another as was 
the case with the Jews on account of the hardness 
of their hearts, but the believing Christians wait 
with patience, with longsuffering, with prayer, fast- 
ing and supplication to God for grace to abstain 
until the time when the conjugal partner that is 
separated from the church comes again to true 
repentance, sorrow and amendment and is again 
received by the church, for thus she is then again 
received and accepted by her believing husband or 
wedded companion. And thus the matrimonial bond 
is neither broken nor dissolved, except only during 
the time of separation (as has been sufficiently 
stated above), for which the believers are not the 
cause or the transgressor, but those who have fel- 
lowship with sin and transgression, and because of 
which they were excommunicated for the preserva- 
tion of the church in her purity, that others might 
fear (Num. 12), and that after sufficient and satis- 
factory amendment they should again be received 
into the church of the Lord. 

The natural man receiveth not the things of the 
Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him: 
neither can he know them, because they are spirit- 
ually discerned. But he that is spiritual judgeth 
all things, yet he himself is judged of no man. 
LdCore 2 314; 15: 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Transiator sePeetace: as(4 ae Re etek ee, 3 
Preface to Book One ..... Wait casa’ . teem ‘hw. ie 


BOOK ONE. 
Confession of our faith concerning God the 
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost ...... maiteaut) 


Our Confession concerning the Creation, Re- 
demption and Salvation of Man ............ 


Of Christian Baptism ..1....0000 eer ee senee cee 
Infant Baptism, a shameful misuse ............ 


Views of many ancient and modern Teachers 
regarding mere opinions unsupported by 
Scripture... OVA, Bil PAPAL AO FIRB. 


Antagonistic views of Pasdbhdpiaten £8. SHO. VA 


False Arguments and Perverted aa at and 
Wisitines answered. SOG ts On PLt. APA? 


Concluding Words on Baptism .............. 
Our Confession concerning the Lord’s Supper. . 


BOOK TWO. 
The Incarnation of our Lord and Savior Jesus 
Chieti ne: saniwprlz. bi A ear eis 


Our Confession concerning Christ Jesus, that we 
maintain, believe and confess that he is the 


firstborn and only begotten Son of the al-. 


mighty Father and living God, and that Jesus 
Christ is our Redeemer, Savior and Mediator, 


14 
18 
32 


33 
30 


38 


65 


67 


95 


truly God and Man; eee and in what manner _ 


he is and became nips Tt SERPS a ek (Ree 


34 


530 Table of Contents. 


How the flesh of Christ is not of Mary, as the 
world maintains and imagines, but that he is 
the living Bread which came from Heaven, 
which Christ himself calls his Flesh........ 99 


That Man can not receive help in any manner 
or by any means but by Him who created 
DRO 5S anaties aes ene dina ablations See eee 101 


How God’s pales and first bepottel Son, yea God 
himself, became Man and yet remained God, 
portrayed and prefigured in Melchisedec... 102 


How, why and in what manner Christ is called 
the Seed of a Woman, as well as of Abraham, 


amor the loins.of Davide’, «wie « dev cuneate 104 
A Question answered regarding Christ’s suffer- 
ie aieay Mai core hit t rahe Sea eg htt 


Short Review of the foregoing Confession....114 


BOOK THREE. 


The ;frue, Knowledge of Jesus Christ... ..< 117 
The Reason for writing this Book ...... stolvea 119 
How one must truly know Christ, 
(a) In his eternal, Divinity ......:. PEER 120 
(b) in ‘his holy Humanity wesuicreensureeeee 130 
On the immovable, immutable doctrine of Salva- | 
tion by 1S Cvs ton: Perch. iy be Ces Gee ee eee 135 
BOOK FOUR. 


A Vindication against the grossly unjust accusa- 
tion of the world that we are Anabaptists and 
builders of Sects, and showing, on the other 
hand, that we are one with the true Church 
of God, which was from the beginning... ..145 


Difference between true and false worship. and 
why a pious Christian must flee from false 
worship’ hi.nciwee). arene A id iene el 158 


Examples, showing how earnestly a number of 
pious Israelites avoided idolatry ........... 159 


Table of Contents. 531 


Oy, 


Of the two fearful beasts mentioned in the Book 


Pry SESS ESS ied Sell setae AEB Faia ee ane ae 161 
Of the abomination of ie gem in the sak: 
City ee ett WO GA FARR EWE, 162 


An explanation of a liane of beautifully em- 
bellished false attitudes or positions, namely, 
whether one may consistently maintain fel- 
lowship outwardly with idolatry or sacrilege 
while at heart not adhering thereto; le 
witha treatiseton true@love®, 2607 6222 00UP Le. 163 


Concluding thoughts on the foregoing a es .170 
, 

BOOK FIVE 
Of the Sending of Preachers or Teachers, that 


is, who are true Teachers, sent of God, and 
properly chosen and called by the Christian 


AC, LIP. PIB a0 Oe b SHTE BRE. LOE. its 
How; false, Leachers are,recosnized «ow mi. 0%.- +s: 175 
How the true Teachers are called by God and 

iss Ghurche., ss, ./atiiee tweeter ete iy wzolink set. 177 
Of two kinds of fruit in true Teachers. .,. ... .184, 187 


Reply to several adroitly worded objections 
raised by false Teachers; beside a number of 
other refuations and replies De tee ae eer 
Oy oy ana See aii Ace ol, LOG; 198, 204, 208 


BOOK SIX. 


A Loving Admonition from the Word of God 
to the Church of God, showing how and in 
what manner the Church shall proceed with 
those who have entered the communion of . 
the saints and then are still found openly 
doing the works of the flesh and committing 
open abominations ........ $1 ee Peace Olea 228 


An offering of thanksgiving to almighty God 
because the writer had heard of the faith of 
the church, her love to God and his saints; 
also her patience and steadfastness in. all 


532 Table of Contents. 


manner of oppression and trouble, and an ad- 
monition to the same church with many com- 
forting words and scripture passages to re- 
main steadfast. to, the, end), ..caess4 2-4 wat 224 


The church is admonished to follow Christian 
peace and godly unity, and is warned to guard 
against all unnecessary strife, for he noticed 
that disturbers were among them, who ridi- 
culed the ministers of God’s word as foolish 
shepherds, who are not seeking that which is 
lost, nor binding up that which is wounded 
and broken, etc., and this for no other reason 
than this that they do not endorse the open 
works of iniquity, or suffer evil and carnal 
men to enter into the fellowship of the saints, 
but endeavor and desire with the word of 
God to keep them outside until they show 
true repentance. In the arguments given 
many beautiful lessons are drawn from both. 
old and new testament scriptures, in which it 
is abundantly shown that none of the sins 
mentioned are permissable or admissable in 
the fellowship of the saints .......... ja eek. 228 


Several false arguments (bolstered up and main- 
tained by perversion and misapplication of 
scripture to strengthen the evil and confirm 
them in their iniquity) are answered and 
HSRLCGS cer wai: Sales! toe ea re ition .. 296 


A loving admonition and brothers warning to 
guard against all sin and unrighteousness. ..239 


BOOK SEVEN. 


A beautifully worded admonition, in which is 
plainly shown in brief words the true knowl- 


edgéof:(s0dn 2.daslheoulk tos odo ot Bhat 243 
How that in the knowledge of God the Father 
three things must be observed ............. 246 


How in the knowledge of Jesus Christ “etd the 
knowledge of the Holy Ghost likewise three 
things need'to be observed V1. 225... 247, 248 


Table of Contents. 533 


BOOK EIGHT. 


A beautiful and true explanation and interpreta- 
tion of the Tabernacle of Moses, in which 
many beautiful and necessary figures of the 
Old Testament are discussed and harmonized 


with the spirit of the New Testament ......255 
How God commanded Moses to build a Taber- 
| "NACIOITEE, IE. LO TI - A ACO. DG. yee 258 
The explanation of the same ................. 259 


Of the utensils and furniture in the Tabernacle 
DUM ete SISMINICACION “cc ui, ake cn Sp mite «i hn oe 260 


A false explanation of the court of the Taber- 
nacle, by which it is sought to introduce and 
represent two kinds of Christians through the 
figures of Esau and seme refuted with the 
WORETOR NSO sie arth en ear ant BID o lek 274 


BOOK NINE. 


Of Regeneration, or the new creature, in which 
the true power, manner and nature of the 
new birth are very thoroughly explained, to- 
gether with many beautiful lessons and ad- 
monitions ...... AG Aa HOTTA Oa ary). Ss 293 


Causes which impelled the author to write this 
book J 0) 3 Dyed aera s 1, Ate 5 Toes Oe PE 295 


How man was created in the image of God, how 
he fell, and how he was again raised up by 
Nesta ee NEstG eS. OR ae Aces Bs is Dake 296 


That all such power of regeneration cannot be 
attributed to little children without speech or 
reason, but only to adults with understand- 
ing, and they must first hear, accept and be- 
lieve God’s word, and, on confession of their 
faith, be ‘baptized in the name of the Lord, 
even as exemplified by Christ himself...... 300 


Errors and mistakes of both those who believe 
in inward baptism alone and despise outward 
baptism, and those also who look upon the 


Do4 Table of Contents. 
outward sign alone and forget the true inner 
life indicated ‘thereby: ecg. ea peri - ae 304 


A solemn warning against false spirits who 
despise all Christian ordinances and look 


upon them as child’s play or mockery ..... 305 
Scriptural refutation of an argument presented 
Dy cettdin vain boasters. ... eo es ee oe 308 
How we are despised, derided and persecuted, 
BNCRWOV ES. Aik. wee ee > alten o vn web ae 310 
Wherein and through whom we seek our salva- 
tion, and what ‘we ‘claim {6)We Ovsae tess es 311 
Examples from the patriarchs ..,........ i atta 314 


Final presentation, declaring again how Christ, 
the Son of almighty God, is a true example 
and pattern, whom all Christian, regenerated 
believers must follow in all sincerity of heart.317 


BUCS ass. 


Spiritual Restitution, how all things that have 
occurred since the beginning are Spay 


| restored and: tue, he ed eae aan kaee 321 
Of the creation of heaven and earth .....5.... 326 
Of the creation of man ...j.. Piast asesondh cghteestant Maal 327 
OP MALCINONY Aeon cee ree. ek i eee .. .328 
Of Noah hats secarbosttic: hoiotso ape a 330 
Of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob .......... a Sisod 
Of the Paschal Lamb “ao. conus een 


Of the Manna, and the Rock, which gave Israel 
water. Likewise also of the angel of the 


Lord who went before Israel ...... Rasletse snes, 
Of the bitter waters that were made sweet ....340 
Oi. the)-worshippersvof: the; calf.iantaadier wie 341 


Of adultery with the daughters of Moab, of the 
Balaamites, also Dathan, Abiram and Korah. 342 

Of those who murmured, and of the twelve men 
who were sent to spy out the land ....... . 343 


Table of Contents. 535 


Of the figurative pulersiin of the Iudges, also 


EMTLSOTN.. SG tcleeeh Niqchtuc a toays Osteo revere tion eye 346 
Of the figurative kingdom of David SoA. 12. 048 
Of the figurative temple of Solomon .......... 349 
Of the Feasts of Pentecost and of Tabernacles. .350 
Of Solomon’s kingdom and glory ........ ashe dl 391 
The Song of Solomon and his ‘Bride ..........353 
Of the decline of Solomon’s kingdom .......... 354 
How Israel was twice carried into captivity and 

twice nade fre@ Po |. pPeaD, Me eee oe 356 


Of the building of. the temple in the city of the 
living God, in which work the enemies. of 
the truth desire to help, but which is not 
proper for them ...... Sra? AO. HOME yD Eee dS, 360 


BOOK ELEVEN. 


The Church of God, how it was in the beginning, 
how recognized and distinguished from all 


SbOtS Po. siaisteh) acts. et. 2s Manas. INVAPAID. £1 365 
How the Church had its origin with the angels, 
gud later -with+Adam-ard“Bve-iin. se ese 369 


The first apostasy among the angels, and the 
second with Adam and Eve, and its restora- 


AT ee Ee Pescara RAS et Pe ee 370 
How God gave Adam endl -Eve two sons, and 
what they represent ....,.. Waa obi A i a pale 371 


How God made his covenant with Noah and his 
three sons, also with Abraham, Isaac and 
Jacobs asaniay. 2 2 bywe. aearror | ES: hose. TEAS 372 


How regeneration takes ha ie namely by the 
word of God, and ‘how the word is twofold— 
laawwt-andnPosbelos brs. aoisiiogson. Dal ie: Oey 376 


That in regeneration the pure knowledge of the 
_ one, eternal and almighty God, who is Father, 
Son and. Holy Ghost, is essential ........... 380 


Ordination of ministers and signification of the 
Se Me alti. fake Tis Aaa ae enter 384 


536 Table of Contents. 


Ordinances of the church of God, whereby it is 
recognized and to a rarer from all 
Bects oe. eb eG Lae SOR iat ave tora $eb 385 

The First Ordinance (Ordination of Ministers) .385 


The Second Ordinance (Baptism and Lord’s 


PEC) cette * Sete a ae iors tebe Lik ace ae 386 
The Third Ordinance (Foctwishtiny Sg Re 388 
The Fourth Ordinance (The Ban) ........... 390 
Whe Pitths Ordinance: (lOve) a ..tng sinus “Renae 392 
The Sixth Ordinance (Keeping all the Com- 

TANS) ees Fe aa shh eg Le PUN are Rid es Nr. 3” 394 
The Seventh Ordinance (Suffering and Bee 

SHUT as wits «gis wate a pane eine o weelsck Pa ee 396 


That the church of God is readily known by the 
description of the same, namely that it is the 
holy city, the new Jerusalem, ee ashe eS 400 


Three Well Grounded Admonitions or Epistles sent | 
on different occasions to the Church of God. 


THE.FiIRST. EPISTLE, 
An explanation of the chief se pai for the first 


epistherts 6.0007: Seek EER, ILS IRE QOD 409 
Evangelical and aseeeolit greeting, eshbwea by 
thanksgiving to God, retc.i46'04), SMAR. LL 411 


How graciously God overlooked the time of our 
ignorance. For this reason the church is ad- 
monished to give thanks for this inexpressibly 
great grace and mercy, and to remember to 
what we have been called and why Jesus has 
called and accepted us to be his disciples... .412 


Many loving admonitions and comforting scrip- 
ture passages necessary for all anxious and 
fearful children of God, that they remember 
how faithfully God has at all times from the 
beginning stood by his chosen ones and 
strengthened and comforted them in all their 
trouples 4500s ee ears BA ak fier ay * artery 414 


Table of Contents. 537 


On the brevity of human life, together with an 
instructive example of the courage and piety 
of the aged Eleazar who would not play the 
hypocrite for a brief moment of his temporal 
life; also other beautiful lessons ......... PALLY 


A warning against false prophets, who preach 
to the people an easy way, pleasing to the 
flesh, whereby they mislead the people and 
teach a false liberty, together with a beautiful 
admonition, showing what true Christian lib- 
CHEVS 1S sete ccaests ES OS ee PSUS RRA Sa he 422 


How fearfully those err who imagine that they -— 
may go to the temples of idolatry and hear 
the false teachings taught there, just so one 
does not believe them at heart or adhere to 
THEM ce eee oie aie crete aie ee ee eee eee AZO 


A faithful warning against those who sow Strife 
and contention and cause offences, and do not 
avoid or shun apostates .......... fs fetes ais 426 


ti Bese LON DE Pit UE. 


A brief explanation of the contents of this letter.428 


After the greeting and thanksgiving the author 
describes his great joy and happiness which 
his. visit to the churches in the fatherland 


id Pasay tLe £29 ESE 4 Seah ae ar et i Pe 428 
An earnest, thoughtful prayer for the church that 
they remain steadfast in the truth........ 1, 429 


An earnest petition and humble request to walk 
faithfully in the truth, because Satan is now 
unbound to deceive the world and to war 
against the elect with many kinds of tyranny, 
and how to guard against the same ........4395 


A friendly request to stand fast in Christian 
Pieter LITER DY TSC G Ce cis as 6 a cin gheees 441 


A concluding explanation of how deep the love 
was that prompted the writing of this epistle .442 


538 Table of Contents. 


THE THIRD EPISTLE. 


An evangelical greeting, with thanksgiving to 
almighty God for the love manifested among 
them, together with a heartfelt wish that they 
might continue so to walk faithfully unto the 
end because of the grievous times and the 
many false prophets and antichrists, and 
boasters and vainglorious spirits who are 
present everywhere, who oppose the doctrine 
of Christ, and break and Seiya: his ordi- 


NANCES eee. eee ees bid 20S, sls eee 444 
Of the true foundation of Christian faith....... 445 
CFE ae OV CIID tba oth: sk. nice dias Seagate". (98. a eae eee 451 


How both baptism and the Lord’s Supper are 
instituted by-God to testify to this covenant. .452 


How baptism and the Lord’s Supper are to 
remind all Christians of God’s covenant and 


presloveuwe owe tonGods 2, csc: cease . 454 
A loving admonition to a Christian and godly 

Walk separa. A eas ey eee - EPS | os eed 455 
Many comforting sayings and passages regard- 

ing oppression and persecution ..... ea Sk 457 
Reply to and Refutation of two letters by Se- 

bastianedranckh:, we igel. thar cel penliaese 461 
Foreword to the Christian “Reader .v.,i....02% 462 
Reply to the preface by the printer on two letters 

by’ Sebastian Franckveus Jyicanod) ear .463 
Reply to two letters by Sebastian Franck rani ae ds: 
The real signification, of symbols on fee Ries Be 1. 474 


Reply to Franck’s false claim that outward sym- 
bols, such as baptism, are no longer neces- 
Cola ebayer ae Ue eee ee en a ae 479 


Reply to Franck’s claim that true worship can- 
‘not be restored without a special call from 
ROC esr ae epee ARE eR ah IS Se .. 481 


The substance of the reply to Franck .....:...485 


Table of Contents. 539 


- CHRISTIAN MATRIMONY 


As instituted and commanded by God and as it 
must be maintained and practiced according 


to the scripture by believers ........ an he ote 487 
Three points necessary to know in connection 
MEIER Ee OT UitianiCel. CN no. disvie es os ae 492 
God’s original plan and purpose regarding matri- 
BEE Ve cities ode. slowaigs 26 AE Se ee Cia, Sear 492 
Wee pecinmitie OfeMisuse. 204 5 oc et ets eae 493 
Foreign alliances wrong ........ ase her ese ie: 495 
Christ corrects wrong views and practices re- 
garding matrimony °. re. +. £4 Les... ae 497 
Atienatise OF inmnoly alliances 4.024)... 4)... ... 500 
How to deal with infractions of God’s law re- 
Se Me eMariinOny cei ian ee cs. os es 502 
Reply to opponents ...... ce an oe ee eee 503 
Meare ea CeS Ratt Uli ee Gael, tenes vs eae « 505 
The evangelical ban and shunning ............ p19 
The twofold purpose of the ban ...... Pe ene 521 


The extent to which the ban is to be exercised 
metwween NUShaAnd aNd WHIe . oe. <6. cnc wees 526 





? 














Le ae y ral) : F eee: WRG et a 
Distant) ? Bs hy) Wain) 


mary 


anys a 





‘ She aa. ta, ff 

, ee ao: a, be ££ BS Megs a os 
PK ee ATT gt rer s Bh ot wa 5 
AGiyee ye yA Ot F : 


F “2 ZO 
M 230.43 P53eEk 1910 c.l 
Philips, Dirk. 
Enchiridion, or, Hand 
book of the Christian 


HNN 
3 9310 02006194 9 


GAYLORD S$ 





og DAN ne Wy TE EN ORR OE Se ee eee en ne ehmale res =p Megs Hae? 
y ee Tk hae mm nanan Me mem eae POW ay PEMEON Tae. berger a ene PE. > RAY bi b Sgt pier Le ae aver He, ETI ONE BIOS Tore SUNS Fee te ee eee ee 

E . . - 3 ‘ ee Wt yy eh AT he eee ee lee Sik ati : ba . - ce: ins Se 
= ve ee sa dein en ete Mn cei PASAY AA NL AG AE aa aeRO mE 







Temi gee 





ae gt ete a ee eee Sgt a 7) ‘ ae fF 
ety Oe ee 






eae S 











at 





Yr ta I a eR nae nS NF “IE wen “owe ae “ — m “~ ~“ ee! R ei ahere ee: 
er ee hal aks tail etial ee ns ite tomy bs th ~ gee > “ oa = = 
Sica teh teal th noutetery pres) US gaet eo Hes seen Oy ee Ae een Mn HO ots oe 
cure a een tee ee 






dh iii Me 
eS Al a oe 


ber rns narrating inean Os oe EAE 
m = Pod " re rn a eke eae 











ase? a mm amon ie Pr in a 
peng gee antares ee ete tel le la 
nel? gress ena w See Panag a one ohare we Ne A OS Aga" 
Fes ahaa ee REEL ie hte ein ee yee 


a a ae allie all 
tae eet met a” em amene en Me Te ey 

ae hes 

tin nee Ta 


ie yg stn he tet eT 
er a ea ne 





we Hey tteg Mae 





















Heme eRe oan n aw etree Eran dam ene Te 
Septet ca tkre rer tbnmem wena he Same Sat hia a ese nee mW haha ERASE ED 
Sanity ta tee tna ete hen 


Rett as ae ee Ae elie es _ re ~~ heey ey ee 
Cena ee nae ew pie A SU Pe Un bs pth Bey Ph sad ta fone. aa i: pa a ree SM oe 
Otte gn OE to 3p aL RE etn Sep AEA Hh eR ar re SH + rao dle Tiara’ ew Ss Pi Scene - 
rad RE ERAT ahah eaten AH Se ae x aa 
eae aie ak ahah we hn Pa? + eae 
Pete Mette Fo Se MaMa hee Aare hn trie on tote 


ee ee i ta nb 
a a be bi en tic alta 
pee ee Rea SNA ah eee hE NE ratadnmetn tarde 
Fa sete Te SEO Ny Sameer oR Ey ME MN ON See 

so ne Peete te 0 ee Ne ee aah ee en 
IAT OR hte Gn aa Mon TH! 
een Mar Tm eget oe aH 
ee ee tala 
Sear ehe gs PT Te Ae eek NM GN mA eS 
ee ee de le he eo ie ke 
ig SOTERA R  ee ypne ee Mee es aE ate Ae ee 
ys 8 8 A CE See ae hats TATE Mh Re TS 
ree ne ie adil Fi aR ahh Soren tgg ye he hs et ME RT 
seg eae arta ik Pd Sime HA Mn ee ae na ge Ry TINE 


















dog? eet te Meath Sastre 9 
SA ee Pen ee =o 

pratt tuc! aay eee 

os 7 : 


“sens tm 


Ge UG KIARA EYER MMR Tah ha) MTU Se eee tae Sey 
prety aie uty ania OE LAR awe Senn Tenens! RTE ET He eT 
te iy tee hie Toe Ra EN oe FRE ae sat Oa Oe 

Ses os alain aaa 

oe thet ee ae 
poe tgs ash mm 
ats he ai ces ays gh OE 
meinen ma 









Lee ae 8 ae 





aye ‘7 ye 

AP apa yet a ai ile apr hell een Hae TOMI ENE SMTA MEMO ame AnH 

Sele nee en as ay a A ere Ber Ase nena ey AN ETA ee 
ee ae Be ae al eld (se ots nate ance She Careharatn Fate se 

Seite a eee eae tar wren hr RRR eer eo MEARS 















Ce eer ee ka be od ed a el 

ary eae! ee ad oe ae 

ont ah red Ek eal re any age ae AAS rire Pian ae! 
eh en Tee ED pee RYT Ee ste 









Geb Re ie dete Se 
pelea ni Tae ea ne es ante aed ns gh Mtoe May MH gg ame MWAH nde Nn" NE Be 
Sg ae AT ae em rage kd ee een tye a He aera Ma A Ss HRA en tt el bene oie 

yg nee ee TU rN ans ehe MRR erie Tare ee Mie AmB ae yy ee yy Tey eae Tas i aH Fl 
ona en tate TA eee mee , “y rent Ferien *Arnd eT ed eke me ST rah Mp cpa e-Se llen MallitBs WENN tn ay Sen ie Me an ee Oe SENN MRE I at 
; a geaheanterns none arte eae oa eee Yn Aa itn ME AE Me MAE MH se SARs aa SA TO ime eS Sms iy em Mn Hs are rR A Mey MF MY Em erm 
ee vem taitaeannnna Eas Tyee ree ERR Patni" = eee ™ Sg Hn Me Ns Mis attr Smee wT ae LN BANS ee HV AUN TH PME HEN SL IED ie PY Me 
SS AoR Unita tre Man ulate ie OFA He MeN E HH Ent Ai a Mae HIS PR ha ig, TE Os ee TY Sh A “SA LRN RN e SvN le Seen 8 Sua HS 
EEL Me Ct, ae SG eh May cage sy ean PE ag OI UY ey SHE yt eg yy RN A HH te te Rn He He at RT Ne Tae ee ne es My Oe, es 
Hoey SW eye haa ete MY 09 Mah erin arm enw vat Site mae ee Raley py Hd er ae ee Ue TY ee es See RD Fh het Oe Ee eee 
Dem ig ay ag ie ym iw gr in ig Ay Pal SA AD VE MM MELOY EAA ed 7 Me RM SHURE Y ema» 
Og eR ey Fea RE na SEH ME I inh ep RLS 











WoW ent etn ena hre aes ee 
pane art ae erst er a a aoa 
ha ee a Le al Sos od 
ante tie nte atten ea cnoerete=p "ween sa er kt ere Fine aan are eu eaten i745" 
= pment ate: MHS a ae eet a el ie e? 
otaawry en tary enka ener w HNN SE RMN ER HY epg MEMS MeSH aT 

ra arunetarweacn* rr son RnhsameeueN AMET A haa UTR UWE y Ae many Til DEC L Tirana nue Ae een ern hay “A oe ~bhe se Lr 
Serer i iiearesuresararacetare mrss ema wre een att Senay rata arn hava = Mine a antennas retina eae ta eh iiNn Mera maeTimas mu nam Sali mais Wp POA NE Me 
ta i tN oti At SMa a A See liab Lon edie pa ep ae an Ema NBN nA Ae A aT” 4 Aa Ry Tamer es oH mY E 
Sait Steen Seine Rtas pall ae UR So eee ates wretaen h tame™ ahqruch monet emanate yeu Nye aang Putra a aes Tow Sm “eosin ha” Bry tn SE SES yee 
ao caitn eying sahip eames ty WaHSe EAT Ne eR OH Seroeane tara aoe = tenn ene Ann eee Se ESE mAI UNDO Te HAT mH Sone ENN eh Ree ee re sta ee ee eR Oy eh ay ae TR AN To te LS HY NR a ern 
leet hid ded all ne een lel ee el a Se eee aan any Sy te Mes Ree NE ts TTA Re Te RE MH Sh ly Pay tos ge Pe a a ane A TE MAE ES Ht Hy rng eT Eh mh ay ee HNN te a 
aan NN ra ae age ee a Myre et gag Heys ite Ta home =e DOR MAEM Ae SA Snip maak ya eet 2g me Pe he HE PE em tl Ay Pe ane a HO et emi eS EES SH en TR Oe enn se Shanwe mE 
Spateageptatom mena eis yan ra=y ne“ NTR een man shah eas ee eee A muta c ume ma spre iene Ah epee ee etn Mn ae He eURA MWR asm B Nur e YRSB ERE srs Se dais teased nay eA WAN REMY eS FB wen A mts rete eam gOS Malo 
ee a ea toate ad ol aD pare mmen mm 20 AAte eA eh ea ar EO Mh ma HH Mec in Bolo ee eta olan ae he SC OR i ik let tk i Be 
aT Re Tie ae Se pics hea... bcd aie Mabel aaa Iak, ke Nits aaaanaah aed aaa aP 


el ea cee 
PE ORR WT YT aR EE 
Se are Sep net arte ey eeNs peng butane etn a" 
sin Od ye twenty atte eret era 

Fipean ets Hy ane emus ne 

SIDS TPT ea a tae ad tel a 





ax ay Stn eS P I Re Were hah oe ev nae “Sy 

‘. e av Tg Tn EE Re ey EH 
= RO Ee EE ee en Me fe Oe REE Hehe Oe an Ne a rar te le an gs hn yn an ee ny ek me ee He “ee 
Raha Heenan Sate tigg Ha 8h oa Ek So HU ee he NER he Aha eins MeO Bay mE VAR Ae Tere 
Sp =the Fen his a Re, wu HTS NTS ERE sar Ewy He es Ws 
Me yao Ws Say etter Re Ns SSN Ab MUS NR My Pen mA Maree me! MH NNN ne 
Sk ha Ng ag oar ey an kt Sy i hy MD 






















Le MAE EKA fom dee ae 








eh tates et ee Ret ee) 
ign bh eae WF A SNE Oy a ee STE 








een ae ae ae nip Ee” Ome erty rea 5 ~ 
tent pA we THA ANA R THTH aE eN yt ba cancel ecole ea nraeeere By Fe a Ie ee ee ae nr ane aoe p ‘ 

ee ee lal aol del ee ee ear Od. eas Oh ee ewe! ~- ee Bead ato Tal laa ee ed Deni ead he aed ma ST a ma~a Sry ne SS ee Se ae ae eel bellied eS eas Moana ¥ 

“ Sina uneasy ery Wee eri ere ty iT hes ey ENE eee hae aye le tie teen herien eh eR REG aan rm mam Can ST a ed pl ea en lap. ia 20h atta Rh-h.- bale aipslpalits Rielle apa aaa Pah =the 8t Cay mere tee yel 

2S Wah A is eels "SIS TOA O See Ek hea es MR) Pn he Se REE RS ey en ek ar AN ER SS eR mR Se en A 

catpn teen Pa eR ee Rhee ME Rg were SE hMn Me HN PATS He ND iat SA Ry Ma aw HE MAIER Te SeeT “En eT re Set Nate eh eter Maer 





ara tte ory eRe RAE eNTey" arn tOrN wen Speman MA ene PTR HRS HIME Sin ME PE 
See yee RRB Chr amerA HAL na ok ae hyena ee SHmlN HTH See he 
ota een ew AN ANT TL RH yt EMH A MIA Nm OTE a ena NN a ST EEE a et ME me NS nk nn ee he ht in ah et Eta a np an Pg 9 





eee ete et Atri ere rere a 
Anya spores te an a hn aan heme PHN ieee HN Se ng HN pt ys rah Ra ES wrote tenn 
CO re or it kee pelea Riad Fen ote ee hg ee Ene ee ie ce caor terns s=hod Mimew etme aHy eh emen ata vrata an Rent eisa Mesilla tame He th a ruse “ 
es: he i hte pit the at sinter te oan Dig ea ea yee Herne aA Aa I Saat pee Taw Hy an AE Tene Se mR aman Mae yh a es H ve Re ey HS Pay ER me Ms PE an gn ee egy MEY a Me Tepe ean wes Pr 
—S —e 4 Sig PHM ani ee MA PV ik yee ae Urn rh Me A NN HER i ee ie ee a nn RN An har es oes THN ten MN” 


i ee es AS Tm deh cs Dig Pai anne aa a 
ta? ab ewee este ie hee ERS a eee MEA SRN hE: 


— He ee Te salle hh on ieee eater Rai Re ae Te eee ie tae eh Ne ae Rial et ee a el 
aon cacietpemen nag abe e ned Heat iam Mena ie my Ms eT a8 Sa tee Say min tee nh Meaty SM Sem Seta NSN 


Slat tnntin  Yeonh Paani ioe tinePer te eT ESTE ad oad palette dose ra-ah ae a adld meh tHe ATH Sey yn MHA Ae AM Ab res Sune eTE TS REN 

pret etn eee ae get pase th MARY meng Hy yt ass ta Su ee NE sien See MAN ERM ON He esters Ses eg a remw Oi te eH einctp Men “mera ren se Seen nee te Th AH SE A Sm Say ate ODA He TH HAR ERTL EERE Heh HN 2481) ae eS 
rT bet ee lial Sgn AT Nae SUS ee ee el oe el ee nth We ere Hib Ny Wie an TAN ET nn omnia Ne TE ee OS 5 Ft i Eh regs Ml pes Se he Me Pe Mee es OR ery ME A MG HH ay RE TN ee SEES MS eA pe ee eA BRE i EDR MR Sore WT 
cen eon ay Senha EN ERAS MHASH SOU re Te Re rn eee Pantene Gry cy ATR en eet Meee te een ee ete EN A ad gt ep 
TR Nil Bi Ne Pa ae tenet Noh eee ic ARactin ah ah eke Sb Ah the bra 










I en ne oh ae ballet Be ck eee 
san ora en na awa OT Ahn Ett AHR MHS See a TT een peyenante“eeRre hon Tulse Ree rel me MyM <a har Ry te aed: “Ee mae NTH) 

year enn a ee ball i etn ea hs aN Tartine =3 “niga here ie FW MWA oy WO TaN My Rieiab ean Mey PWR ESOS 
eeetes ot he hd, i tel Leet Reel Sa tte et hea O Te Se Re TT See wren ” a ee ee eee le kee ey Ae TH RAE MM MO Rs PEE UH se Ng Ea HE ey her AE TY ay gene ete ery ST a AGL ee ts ge en en te 
= yee Aenean PREM ER ST ee? ta PE RT Spon eh een = na9 tl wrN ete p nan T eon ene Hh Mi ha MAS Maula ee Ws Sey eB S SOA eas Tate EE NW he EME “WS EES aM ey RN Naorey Meek Lev al vee at aN ip eS 
tee olf ah - al  pieaia Aae. etn aO h hdEoie See ee nvaaw ea etyeh Poke maceraeyarenerhvie #-u "ola npn am ene a SENAY ANG Sey Eee A Te AGS ee Sra ante avy =an hema SNS NESE R Bn te Ane tune eri ™Y TAT Em ern Serene ns ae 
Habre nny teeny ne Ae eRe Bn eR HN Sy ee eh Me Me Me er Mee AE eye a aa Me es a Se te ee ee Se eR ewe Fe ing a RN Ne ares Ue RS gl ae ag Oe iss Me BS NA, He ere 
So ee TER Mey eee ME Oe ets Eee ig Hp ho Pe mea EMG EUS teh Se RS ee ahs 


a rl A see eee noah. hide Fea tbale Baal uel eee a Sh sleet f 
Be cece eno eale perro sateen mah Rtas Hh sun wana haan hia Mason Ip My Ap zHF SMS neg se 

€ ee eeee cata ne neta -w n= wte=peatnentnen rane Mnitnmn Maine mater metume nena eH 3 

a ei eae Nene Re Ne eh aah aa pane A ae ae ape ae ROS het We be TOS lt Sy i BR Pp acsearle ha 
tat tel be ated shh aia aif a ae eae ia Mihi SI A ca abel —Rbaah ahaa tbith bain Rte aaa meee Me gion en ig ete Art OH EA HE NW wes OSH OG Fan Sep Sea Rey ABA mye hia NN AE Nt a a Le Ae 
Sia erecta tad ae AO) “seme thin m8 ye ena SE Se Re tO AY Us AEE RT MY) A “re ney ae Me Mt ate et nae 

fer eee ate ee Oe eee he een ter tether a ba Sane RSL ag THN ER RTE BEBE ON EH NATE ee ree eo ET EEN 


Dea ck ne hve eee =a ty ulin Mh OMEN cone ee hy 4 re Shay ma Nee ea ee Bee Ce a oe ie ed Oe Ly ON 
neni iggy A Marat wee Sp ee Hay iH eWeek HET eee es arm ear eny hap aay wan Meese, Seen tg ahem aren nes Se NN en tk : 
en waive ag yma ae NN Rete ee Nt Se ey Mer BY HOM Eee WIN A 


yah wah Hey A ae TY Re tN Phe eine yA WY anne te 


a hye eee Tae Na ee ae Sah eR pA rh ae a AR gh ee Shy is a eas Fe HN AY ee aye Sh SNE ee Pain ee ey 


FSH Rap ee Ma em TIAA PNY) ye aS Pm 


Sig Re yen tet ete AEE OT NAHE 
Fe) Dah y= eae a Rey SE NNN 





pene a te ne RAN Sy mee EN Rte hele SET RW MEAN AMS ehh MRT mB Th Sahu TD ROY I - 
ayn HAS eth Se ee Re ED ND peta ai Ah hE Sa ee eg yn net en Mp Pee ey 

Fay meh neh naa cakes Be My Hv HL Ee HC mG evn MAU mayan MN ae Mh egies ee May “eri BT 
gy uy a Hog tend Ah SS yA Pa an HE SR ty my wae ap ypmy nt RY 


~ ‘ uae i we aE mAt ERE E ener srr amm ma manny haters eryes 
Nee eg tn ohare WTO Nn enna NEM ESN SEN SSA hewsanR nH Tym RTA YR” Be etn 
Saree Te Re ST Ne a See Sy ee he genet MD at OY Tyratece pe new sna earn se turn aman mnaatten hy alyaellny hy ak a Rie en hoon in NE Re he Oe Synaral eS paar ME UH 
Se pew an esa TiN Te EE we Teen Ree ON Aenea ee tte he he el eee Rite Sayan AA Sys mmeerne anne thesia nn hen m ahah ee Aeon ene 
ety eam annak nme mea Mem HeN Pew AERD TPT TEI n Mae ame ete Le a ka nny a anh <A eA NE TT oy Me eee tee tes 
Speann@er eye ee sey g cata itn career eye eta ENN RSH ES UNE Me SAAT a9 wr hy eh EE Y STRETTON SE meant eee Ean ok RNA EN Ny ag et he NBM ny Me NN 88 
. Matha ee were REE MEHR NO EAI OR ou Sh My rmN Sery ey ay I rn hk Se ate ee a ee 





rahe A Ae SNR ye a 

se nine Bi irs Ba Wis ae Bh re a RANE si oer Tn ete wel thine Myra iy tA “leet et 
ey Snowrerate en eg yet eats AS Oe AA SR Teen weer lm Shs ee Fhe eS eB Ae ee 8a he tee AO He eM AN FAP e et 

seme heen re aang aa WRN LR ARI aH EN Miva meen MrT sons ae eh van Tm tes se yh Pay te A AI a YS Bb Sioa as hare we he Ghee Cheat cent ttt tea a ht pape Nh Sth tec ibe Ree tie ete a 

Vy ment weweerena et gobo plement JIE SS ein oe oesoh nok cir pe monn vie alee a ani uae a Se hoe de pu ohnbar eae aac eae ae cep RN EE OM HO ts ma ei ere ts Ry 7D Sa A Se PRS Alans a te ep est my Mn me OMS 

See WE ater R ms Hn a MEET ITH reer h eee ane sere Sein eee enti EtineNEEMONT! Paginas amK ane sie RTE ER Nn tm Am ee He acim OM Rag ATH TEMA Oia ie Meee ta Semaa he eK OWS Se yeaa Aw Nery ae mass Many ik WSUS mee brea Stent maar Aa ote Sei Ne esa tote 

. * <a Sa Se ea ry Bt Sets So aasetaaniy fPemaor caeanap el ekireetn a Aa areal eRe ASE IA ee ean Sorry arent nek heme st ep RET ie MN NEA WENN Saati ire tN hae MFM MY 

Creare ea hrru- k= ate as era ea mea Tae ENON SD Co“br mS Orwns we wre renee SS Moreen narartand A= omen aee nam Suen Ee a He Ne ha irra “ie ase se a A Kh POY Cb trem are one sp Simei on nthe EH 

Sree a al mR MENTE Bern a Fn he RMD A my aes emt We he ALE Tg yk Mh SL Wh te ata tN a) 

ape eh Ry a ik Et et Mas ORM ES pep NS 


ee ee el eee el a - 

PS ty iat eye ae Te ee Ne ae eet Re SE eee al ee ok teh ee el ak deh did < 
AN TET ATR ey nae Syn mye Sateen wie ees Re canine Ne ema mPa e Ren RN ines Mien y ty enrages Pinan Mr re Sr 

e I geet MS many AN PR mas nA PRM Ae eee RG eR a ae Pann 


> eine et Het weiga ra Eh eT ee es ~ 
st Caer ere nk aa bad Sie Piped per WON Teme tem iy mean MNT ty ee em Hrs fe Hs San EIN et OD baie 
‘ AA Ne Mey th ENR Hema SH EP mmc hE ea egte Ay a ea ee Cag ha eE een re re 
Sa We SURES aoe ek eo, ct ee ah a RN Tae iE yan aie ee armen He a Sai 


Pa Weyer nega gene OEE eH eIO 4 NUON GH ay ten 

reaanaeere - So eeneeaane=seerenweb meen —ruenahiertnnansaycomncnenn=iinranh Ta ertenin TY Molds taacaeh ane adeeeaeaeaeee . + 

<em N O ME erence pea i A Ont hit laaak itl aes eaerrnementhaatanies eneren sa "trees yeyansawren mM MA rer mens STH NY" SR BMT ay Se Sante TarG est New omen H =m eren=emipeg Sasa ail Medien et sain Fy eR U5 TAY ee 
ener ee ee a a oe a sansa ges peed yr ere p Morte THEN ee Newer The enna FY aH en a Ce naa! a ere e caren totararn ti prrsarnsamy neone teeth ee aThRAnIEny—Emana tind omATE RSE Mensa NACL Poise eh ares om ety A Fe i hha ha rien i ele aL AR al Cele ot dibasic Nb-oA sham aa abate a Ore 
a FP ET ad al Se Bh a id eeeeweguits Nen=eFae he Wen ATH TSN TS tS We wR SSW Ser el eet ne ce ed ee el a Heth hd So ee Ne IO mH Ee NEY TEES SR er eee ae gis teemcat a ere epee Ra a ah aah ab abaya reat eat 
iE een nee neg mini pa citeaitenaiettitad ener Seer an ark eew ey sacar nedatebnnrey "RANE hes Homan e HT nary 7a ema mu remion™ pris i =yrinh thre ytvesra chee gee a eS eB 8 TWN Te EM Nr hE Se Rate HN HORNY 
7 ek he ly pty ie wpe hm we Tes fei NAT EIR uM FAN ieee thee me ep atAepien ahe PathSt W Mh ~~ 
Lae a . Dana ha Sank AS ote a TAT NTN ek Hh meh ty Mey tei ta nS NE er 


. ; F eee nnacntet hasan Ternan win= AMARTH ete sR EMR Se ATH ir ey = he Scare ee eatma hin te Haye eben ape ymny ee Nees ry wnt wiper te nt Rae Re Og Ses THES me ey pe ene hla Os Ret nm eA ee 
aed se ft Nn ty tot Aree NES AAA SAS UN ca ek A fated a % ne the Ne Re RS ee pcb ie reat Ups omemecirs ARON Ae Nor Rika maine Rana Meroe ant me: chat <n Sebo he 
rea eatin ow pA Me My e™ Re AON ee ily eS Ann em Tee Mes EATS STE eae e—pPRTH HAT Ag OTe ree rem’ aOR ER esa hy hme rR AN aH Se et a oe een Meader he oh he eS MeN iam aon aimee wd Mati W TH! Hh mae Nm mv a8) atin Meet tnt 
tanehyensnenmuabouuasunrOn=iEaetimnn nthe atime <n~r*8 a S4an ra ee ew te—Dow urgent eat eat ten 2 jeapenrar Qeeeine rina seme 8 “in "evn SEITE ETRE TI Ea ea eet eae te a lt Re ee 

a " Peak MO) ee 





a eh ory Se le Mm he PHL RL hy ee Me He yer A 


hl i all et re ad at Sd aa lh Ate taeroRp Ie tH yO eM eer um peat e ieee EIEN Tow 

LAO ENS ee TENN ETRE RTE WORN a erat SS iar eene  Da ag eee le eal aca a” matty eh =O EAR Eyre gr ns ar one a Ne seem ay Maar MA TN ae HY 

5 ed ek tole tet ke eaeadedi dada erase treaty ene Geran ae eng ta eT ate ares He eh et a eee Te My =e IN te Mya el i bal ek ad Sram ane ean Hee enh Shoat How Tae MAEM eH DH AEEY rk SE MEU h mn Sabres TG oe =f eat en 
Len erg etary en ned Sah Rah estate Seno e Bae shrews neh ~ 2 als 3 “ ¥ 3 a oe eet ene ie en Nn Wt aly See moet Bema ae path abn ibaee abet eethaea rw wna 
Patensver gwenvr eo ae Same peeanane ts : < . S955 nae sven many aa Ame Teen oes mee Rene te eeh on SME mune Sane he agen cafe BOM atey RRMA H ATARI NY mare reve 
See pucy > achew ewe Hen” bkSe ewe neat lre Mey BST He PRINS OR OY eS - - Shere atc s ate ee ep eet tet ata ot at etree aetna tet 
Wie cokuai een seberasAuiy-waehatine heen TA~oryeM aban mweeweiraNaN SU eHTEN reenter ee ee te tat ata ett 
line Rint Ne ely 54 TEN NO reagent tate Nh Met aeh Mel Aor ren mae Pe yi sg Bon Seer Hea SAMI MN MEANT THD ae PR aye i Sirs rn ea aS oH eH A MYERS N toe 
a Delete eth 4 SNR a NS Sanaen tanya Aerie ADH Thos mT ea Se SH =p ~8 SPA “WH A BoE Sw we Rowan a eee alone ke: te tle a ele 
Sani pret a crea aratrmaeenurnteryy rornta n= s-HeeronN abe Se rarrasitanutusnt eras noeeneneaen tas Da TRON-PTE Scie ramieeekns marten sham Esta Nemim sh NE Ema Tere reer D eA ee A sete ay nan eae aon 
Pe a ee a aaa eet eA MeN ee NENA . "aw ina ae te v Mewy Bcneucycentataeee seaman syne RR lien mourn si Seri anh tin Seen ASY TSN On SYR B ON Seeman 2a) ere Ee 
mene Sete wn mined ae em Omen tie” heme eo eT Pe eed oa. eee Raaeeaieielod ; f Nt an eli Sat ahaa AEWA Shar as GSA ay MHA Sm mia! Sent Hn shmR1 2 Herons» MT mn ee 3 “ih Were mwa hmm rier Mae mf 
eae hc saan CO re aegritewratene nine ene in -: sy bs ‘ ete an Stes Pe gs My nah Sm gs hE Sai Feet es a aS Mes Ter ae ee mw SA) et att eae Sh Senin tian abs ai ac ctabs 8 ahah a el ae Frm 
Sona ae er astePmde nn nIan Were mer enamine eer A NT een gat pater amen Pee mT ae “Hae ME ETE te re tae eee niet a nie tt ear oe AE a en Gh Oe eS A PE Nm nn HR RN Nh SH yee Ye Yona aed 
Pat aenruter ye ter een tart ehh mea rh outa “iren EER NY nT NN ivy Hn OEE NSA HA HMPA . Sa eneka ta hekaey i eaome a nesion ta en te maenerTy ma era eee Maer AEG PURE AEN USN APAOOE TES TST a Oe aver Rae en Ht Si a 
aoe cy oe key =N ee NEW MORNE SANT Bene eh mare eae Ronis HET DS ORHAN AE HEE MEANT End wren <= sn irate as Hos NNT eH an Pa a WUe coe tem cabepewantih nears "Horie Uno) Sy Ree ayia w ey Irn ty may UM 
teh 8 KN ie Hh 4 Fr ALAS A A eck nic th Rtn eh Hee ye: lth hy Mb A Pete nT RN 
mension Nee eee eee ee er amie shai ieh oni kn) “ynmue yr parsa—y wim m8 ASU UCR EDA TH Wra-Be a he ees NR IAS ELE 
ea ag eA eg ME SE a me hd Sa a A A Weg ere pr ee HET Fhe My 


ether tye eee RRA E AM amet WeHTR eT Bw iw Ee eer eats " ss = a = 
Scie - on A APRA errant gy eH ad TT NTH AION 5 " 
- pecheheihaly cai cab seeatbete etre eR te athe Mbabane sbanbaae lene eae thal etna a> 
et er tee ee ea ca iain tacnmtben te tneenteater vente eet I CeO in bhmeonatih 





WAR Bala manent RANT 
ee re a pine abalone ae END ee ee oS or 
Whe ohopetaterny ety wn tHe ann Ah8 9 aT OTUs US emt ewe ba 
gee AYP NA Hy Tne at Rey Me AHN Hm me NN 
RR ee tnt ine ne RR tent aNrat Syne hy Ming teal Cre ta) eed aay sey emery a= Hah eer pra TA "ash TE reN ATH SBME PHn OHA RE S RURN E ee ee eeaauenarerencaraseew 
Sey oA in ig Ha MS RIV gS =A PA HN TDMA ON yn Nn ae See ny PR LE amen la ag 


21 tae aera SoU aR a~ es nmee wens” (dak ade hehehehe Mh dglashebpiotbe 
Cr tar ee ees eee eed el i ld oe 7 
Teh tate eh el ee oe Wen OBE OTE Mane tp Mase ete eet 2 
sa Area wh tA SA Se TE Ny eM wm FL I MG ing I) a POR MU TURES SB onl mA TAD Sat 
rare, “" 


eet 17 an od lll aealehateh ital se my eS et ie aaa okie eee tel rarer tee te ce ent tn ht te aah oe ane 
om RR eer nd wietnauiatn*eck~ shel" wee hee ws 1 Ga SAAS MH ie ata ” i: 
eee enc: a knees met pee We ee HAs ee ye vs le Me Sag hate Sree ai tay i mee 8 oie eden 4 aren tame eT hae “6 Lae 
ME Hve hin eR IEEE HRN Se lina yt tym ip Wap = SN Ea ~: ey en Oty ee" aye bd, Seti ans Md ging arvins a 
=— = >....f pe, ee ip tg Re. My Fy te a ee 


