Title: Confession of Faith and Minister's Manual: containing the
  Confession of Faith adopted at Dortrecht in 1632, the shorter
  catechism, forms for baptism, the Lord's Supper, marriage,
  ordination of bishops and ministers, funeral lessons, texts, etc.
Creator: Anonymous/collective (Mennonite Publishing House)
Publisher: Elkhart, IN: Mennonite Publishing House, 1890
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: Published 1890; public domain by date. Archive.org
  item metadata carries an explicit `NOT_IN_COPYRIGHT`
  possible-copyright-status, checked directly against the item's own
  metadata, 2026-09-25, this session.
Source: Internet Archive item theconfessionof00unknuoft
  (archive.org/details/theconfessionof00unknuoft), fetched directly
  (curl, raw bytes) from the item's own _djvu.txt full-text file,
  2026-09-25, this session.
Provenance note: Body text unaltered including its own OCR errors.
  A standalone English publication of the Dordrecht Confession
  (1632) together with the movement's own catechism and
  sacramental/ordination/funeral forms - distinct from, and
  independent of, the Confession's reproduction inside the
  already-vendored Martyrs Mirror (van-braght_martyrs-mirror_sohm1886.txt).
  Confirmed by direct read of the downloaded text before vendoring.

00 
O) 
CO 
O 

8 
S 

T~ 

(O 


CO 


BSSiON  OF  FAf 


AND 


MffllSMRS  H1IU. 


BX 

8124 

C65 

1890 

c.  1 

ROBA 


Presented  to  the 

LIBRARY  of  the 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO 

by 

MICHAH  RYNOR 


CONFESSION  OF  FAITH 


AND 

MINISTERS    MANUAL 

CONTAINING 

THE   CONFESSION   OF    FAITH    ADOPTED   AT 

DORTRECHT     IN     1632  —  THE     SHORTER 

CATECHISM— FORMS    FOR     BAPTISM, 

THE  LORD'S  SUPPER,  MARRIAGE, 

ORDINATION  OF  BISHOPS  AND 

MINISTERS    -        FUNERAL 

LESSONS,  TEXTS,    ETC. 


Christ  also  loved  the  Church,  and  gave  himself  for  it; 

That  he  might  sanctify  and  cleanse  it  with  the  wash 
ing  of  water  by  the  word, 

That  he  might  present  it  to  himself  a  glorious  Church, 
not  having  spot  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing;  but  that  it 
should  be  holy  and  without  blemish.  Eph.  5.25—27. 


EXKHART,   INDIANA. 
MENNONITE    PUBLISHING    COMPANY. 

leso. 


Entered  according  to  act  of  Congress  in  the  year  1890, 
By  MENNONITE  PUBLISHING  CO.,  ELKHART,  IND., 
In  the  Office  of  the  Librarian  of  Congress  at  Washington. 


PREFACE. 


Many  members,  and  especially  ministers  of 
the  Mennonite  Church  have  long  felt  the  need 
of  a  book,  in  the  English  language,  containing, 
in  compact  form,  our  confession  of  faith,  as 
well  as  the  forms  for  the  different  church 
services.  In  this  little  volume  it  is  our  purpose 
to  supply  this  want. 

The  Confession  of  Faith  is  the  same  that  has 
been  in  use  among  our  people  for  over  two 
hundred  and  fifty  years.  The  forms  for  the 
different  services  were  partly  translated'  from 
the  German  work  published  in  Canada,  by  Bish. 
Benjamin  Eby,  in -1840,  and  partly  arranged 
from  various  manuscripts  containing  forms,  now 
in  use  in  the  church,  in  different  parts  of  the 
country. 

Some  of  these  differed  widely  in  substance, 
form  ancl  language.  It  has  been  our  aim  to 
arrange  a  set  of  forms  well  adapted  to  the 
purpose  for  which  they  are  intended,  ex 
pressed  in  language  easily  understood,  and  in 
harmony  with  the  present  usages. 


We  believe  that  these  forms,  published  and 
placed  into  the  hands  of  the  church,  will  be  a 
great  help  to  the  minister  in  his  work,  and  to 
the  members  in  general.  We  feel  sure  that  this 
little  book  will  be  both  a  benefit  and  a  satisfac 
tion  to  young  people  and  others  who  contem 
plate  uniting  with  the  church.  It  will  also,  no 
doubt,  do  much  toward  bringing  about  a  closer 
union,  and  a  greater  uniformity  between  the 
churches  in  different  localities.  The  outlay  of 
money  to  obtain  it  will  be  so  small  that  every 
member  will  be  able  to  have  one;  and  the  book 
will  be  so  small  that  it  may  be  conveniently 
carried  in  the  pocket.  In  this  way  our  people 
may  become  better  acquainted  with  both  the 
forms  of  service,  and  the  doctrines  of  our  faith, 
which  are  matters  of  much  importance  in  es 
tablishing  and  confirming  the  people  in  the 
teachings  of  the  Bible  and  the  church. 

O 

May  God  bless  this  little  work  as  a  means  of 
.awakening  a  warmer  zeal  for  God  and  the 
church,  and  of  uniting  us  all  more  closely  in 
the  love  of  Jesus. 

THE  PUBLISHERS. 


Mennonite  Confession  of  Faith 

Written  and  adopted  at  a  Peace  Convention  held  at 
Dortrecht,  on  the  2ist  day  of  April,  1632, 

ENTITLED: 

A  DECLARATION  OF  THE  CHIEF  ARTICLES  OF 
OUR  GENERAL  CHRISTIAN  FAITH. 


ARTICLE  I. 

CONCERNING  GOD   AND  THE  CREATION   OF 
THINGS. 

Whereas  it  is  declared,  that  "without  faitfe 
it  is  impossible  to  please  God1'  (Heb.  Ilr6)r 
and  that  "he  that  cometh  to  God  must  heuY*  < 
that  he  is,  and  that  he  is  a  rcwarder  of  tlicmr 
that  diligently  seek  him,"  therefore  we  confess 
with  the  mouth,  and  believe  with  the  heart,, 
together  with  all  the  pious,  according  to  the 
Holy  Scriptures,  that  there  is  one  eternal,  al 
mighty,  and  incomprehensible  God,  Father,, 
Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  and  none  more  and  none 
other,  before  whom  no  God  existed,  neither  will 
exist  after  him.  For  from  him,  through  him, 
and  in  him  are  all  things.  To  him  be  blessing,, 
praise,  and  honor,  for  ever  and  ever.  Gen.  17:1:: 
Dent.  6:4;  Isaiah  46:9;  1  John  5:7. 


In  this  one  God,  who  "worketh  all  in  all," 
we  believe.  Him  we  confess  as  the  Creator  of 
all  things,  visible  and  invisible;  who  in  six  days 
created  and  prepared  "heaven  and  earth,  and 
the  sea,  and  all  things  that  are  therein."  And 
we  further  believe,  that  this  God  still  governs 
and  preserves  the  same,  together  with  all  his 
works,  through  his  wisdom,  his  might,  and  the 
"word  of  his  power".  Gen.  5:1,  2;  Acts.  14:15; 
1  Cor.  12:6;  Heb.  1:3. 

When  he  had  finished  his  works  and,  accord 
ing  to  his  good  pleasure,  had  ordained  and 
prepared  each  of  them,  so  that  they  were  right 
and  good  according  to  their  nature,  being  and 
quality,  he  created  the  first  man,  Adam,  the 
father  of  all  of  us,  gave  him  a  body  formed  "of 
the  dust  of  the  ground,  and  breathed  into  his 
nostrils  the  breath  of  life,"  so  that  he  "became 
a  living  soul,"  created  by  God  in  his  own  image 
and  likeness,"  in  "righteousness  and  true  holi 
ness"  unto  eternal  life.  He  also  gave  him  a 
place  above  all  other  creatures  and  endowed  him 
with  many  high  and  excellent  gifts,  put  him 
into  the  garden  of  Eden,  and  gave  him  a 
commandment  and  an  interdiction.  Thereupon 
he  took  a  rib  from  the  said  Adam,  made  a 


woman  out  of  it,  brought  her  to  him,  and  gave 
her  to  him  as  a  helpmate  and  housewife.  Con 
sequently  he  has  caused,  that  from  this  first 
man,  Adam,  all  men  who  "dwell  on  the  face 
of  the  earth,"  have  been  begotten  and  have 
descended.  Gen.  1:27;  2:7,15,17,22;  5:1; 
Acts  17: 26. 

ARTICLE  II. 

THE  FALL  OF  MAN. 

We  believe  and  confess,  that,  according  to 
the  purport  of  the  Holy  Scriptures,  our  first 
parents,  Adam  and  Eve,  did  not  long  remain  in 
the  happy  state  in  which  they  were  created; 
but  did,  after  being  seduced  by  the  deceit  and 
"subtility"  of  the  serpent,  and  envy  of  the 
devil,  violate  the  high  command  of  God,  and 
became  disobedient  to  their  Creator;  through 
which  disobedience  "sin  entered  into  the 
world,  and  death  by  sin;"  so  that  "death 
passed  upon  all  men,  for  that  all  have  sinned," 
and  thereby  incurred  the  wrath  of  God  and 
condemnation.  For  which  reason  our  first 
parents  were,  by  God,  driven  out  of  Paradise, 
to  cultivate  the  earth,  to  maintain  themselves 
thereon  in  sorrow,  and  to  ' '  eat  their  bread  in 
the  sweat  of  their  face,"  until  they  "returned 


to  the  ground,  from  which  they  were  taken." 
And  that  they  did,  therefore,  through  this  one 
sin,  so  far  apostatize,  depart,  and  estrange 
themselves  from  God,  that  they  could  neither 
help  themselves,  nor  be  helped  by  any  of  their 
descendants,  nor  by  angels,  nor  by  any  other 
creature  in  heaven  or  on  earth,  nor  be  redeemed 
or  reconciled  to  God;  but  would  have  had  to  be 
lost  forever,  had  not  God,  who  pitied  his  creat 
ures,  in  mercy,  interposed  in  their  behalf,  and 
made  provision  for  their  restoration.  Gen.  3:6, 
23;  Rom.  5:12—19;  Psalm  47 : 8,  9;  Rev.  5:3; 
John  3:16. 

AKTICLE  III. 

THE  RESTORATION  OF  MAN  THROUGH  THE 
PROMISE  OF  THE  COMING  OF  CHRIST. 

Regarding  the  restoration  of  our  first  parents 
and  their  descendants,  we  believe  and  confess: 
That  God,  notwithstanding  their  fall,  transgres 
sion  and  sin,  and  although  they  had  no  power 
to  help  themselves,  he  was  nevertheless  not 
willing  that  they  should  be  cast  off  entirely,  or 
be  eternally  lost;  but  again  called  them  unto 
him,  comforted  them,  and  showed  them  that 
there  were  yet  means  with  him  for  their  rec 
onciliation;  namely,  the  immaculate  Lamb,  the 


Son  of  God;  who  "was  fore-ordained"  to  this 
purpose  "before  the  foundation  of  the  world," 
and  who  was  promised  to  them  and  all  their 
descendants,  while  they  (our  first  parents)  were 
yet  in  paradise,  for  their  comfort,  redemption, 
and  salvation;  yea,  who  was  given  to  them 
thenceforward,  through  faith,  as  their  own; 
after  which  all  the  pious  patriarchs,  to  whom 
this  promise  was  often  renewed,  longed  and 
searched,  beholding  it  through  faith  at  a  dis 
tance,  and  expecting  its  fulfillment — expecting 
that  he  (the  Son  of  God),  would,  at  his  coming, 
again  redeem  and  deliver  the  fallen  race  of  man 
from  their  sins,  their  guilt,  and  unrighteousness. 
John  1:29;  11:27;  1  Pet,  1:19;  Gen.  3:15;  1 
John  2:1,  2;  3:8;  Gal.  4:4,  5. 

ARTICLE  IV. 

THE  ADVENT    OF   CHRIST   INTO  THIS    WORLD, 
AND  THE  REASON  OF  His  COMING. 

We  believe  and  confess  further:  That  "when 
the  fullness  of  the  time  was  come,"  after  which 
all  the  pious  patriarchs  so  ardently  longed, 
and  which  they  so  anxiously  awaited — the  pre 
viously  promised  Messiah,  Redeemer,  and 
Savior,  proceeded  from  God,  being  sent  by  him, 


—  10  — 

and,  according  to  the  prediction  of  the  proph 
ets  and  the  testimony  of  the  evangelists,  came 
into  the  world,  yea,  into  the  flesh,  so  that  the 
word  itself  thus  became  flesh  and  man;  and  that 
he  was  conceived  by  the  Virgin  Mary  (who  was 
espoused  to  a  man  named  Joseph,  of  the  house 
of  David),  and  that  she  bare  him  as  her  first 
born  son  at  Bethlehem,  "wrapped  him  in 
swaddling  clothes,  and  laid  him  in  a  manger." 
John  4:25;  16:28;  1  Tim.  3:16;  Matt.  1:21; 
John  1:14;  Luke  2:7. 

Further  we  believe  and  confess,  that  this  is 
the  same  One,  "whose  goings  forth  have  been 
from  of  old,  from  everlasting;"  who  has 
"neither  beginning  of  clays,  nor  end  of  life."  Of 
whom  it  is  testified,  that  he  is  "Alpha  and 
Omega,  the  beginning  and  the  end,  the  first  and 
the  last."  That  this  is  also  he — and  none  other— 
who  was  chosen,  promised,  and  sent;  who  came 
into  the  world;  and  who  is  God's  only,  first,  and 
proper  Son;  who  was  before  John  the  Baptist, 
before  Abraham,  before  the  world;  yea,  who 
was  David's  Lord,  and  who  is  God  of  the 
"whole  earth",  "the  first-born  of  every  creat 
ure  " ;  who  was  sent  into  the  world,  and  himself 
delivered  up  the  body  prepared  for  him,  as 


—  11  — 

"an  offering  and  a  sacrifice  to  God  for  a 
sweet  smelling  savor;"  yea,  for  the  comfort, 
redemption,  and  salvation  of  all — of  the  human 
race.  Micah  5:2;  Heb.  7:3;  Rev.  1:8;  John  3:16; 
Rom.  8:32;  Col.  1:15;  Heb.  10:5. 

But  how,  or  in  what  manner,  this  worthy 
body  was  prepared,  or  how  the  word  became 
flesh,  and  he  himself  man,  we  content  ourselves 
with  the  declaration  which  the  wrorthy  evange 
lists  have  given  and  left  in  their  description 
thereof;  according  to  which  we  confess  with  all 
the  saints,  that  he  is  the  Son  of  the  living 
God,  in  whom  exist  all  our  hope,  comfort, 
redemption,  and  salvation,  and  which  we  are  to 
seek  in  no  one  else.  Luke  1 : 31 — 35;  John 
20 : 31. 

Further,  we  believe  and  confess  by  authority 
of  scripture,  that  when  he  had  ended  his  course, 
and  "finished"  the  work  for  which  he  was  sent 
into  the  world,  he  was,  by  the  providence  of 
God,  delivered  into  the  hands  of  the  unright 
eous;  suffered  under  the  judge,  Pontius  Pilate, 
was  crucified,  died,  was  buried,  rose  again  from 
the  dead  on  the  third  day,  and  ascended  into 
heaven,  where  he  now  sits  at  the  right  hand  of 
the  Majesty  of  God  on  high;"  from  whence  he 


—  12  — 

will   come   again   to  judge   the   living  and  the 
dead.    Luke  23:1;  33:53;  24:5,  6,  51. 

Thus  we  believe  the  Son  of  God  died— 
"tasted  death  for  every  man,"  shed  his  precious 
blood,  and  thereby  bruised  the  head  of  the 
serpent,  destroyed  the  works  of  the  devil, 
"blotted  out  the  hand- writing,"  and  purchased 
redemption  for  the  whole  human  race;  and  thus 
he  became  the  source  of  eternal  salvation  to  all 
who  from  the  time  of  Adam  to  the  end  of 
the  world,  shall  have  believed  in  him,  and 
obeyed  him.  Gen.  3:15;  1  John  3:8;  Col.  2:14; 
Rom.  5:18. 

ARTICLE  V. 

THE   LAW   OF   CHRIST,    WHICH    is   THE   HOLY 
GOSPEL,  OR  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

We  also  believe  and  confess,  that  Christ 
before  his  ascension,  established  and  instituted 
his  New  Testament  and  left  it  to  his  followers, 
to  be  and  remain  an  everlasting  testament, 
which  he  confirmed  and  sealed  with  his  own 
precious  blood;  and  in  which  he  has  so  highly 
commended  to  them,  that  neither  men  nor 
angels  may  change  it,  neither  take  therefrom 
nor  add  thereto.  Jer.  31:31;  Heb.  9:15—17; 


—  13  — 

Matt.  26:28;  Gal.  1:8;  1  Tim.  6:3;  Rev.  22:18, 
19;  Matt,  5:18;  Luke  21:33. 

And  that  he  has  caused  this  testament  (in 
which  the  whole  counsel  and  will  of  his  heavenly 
Father,  so  far  as  these  are  necessary  to  the 
salvation  of  man,  are  comprehended),  to  be 
proclaimed,  in  his  name,  through  his  beloved 
apostles,  messengers,  and  servants  (whom  he 
chose  and  sent  into  all  the  world  for  this 
purpose) — to  all  nations,  people  and  tongues; 
these  apostles  preaching  repentance  and  remis 
sion  of  sins;  and  that  he,  in  said  testament, 
caused  it  to  be  declared,  that  all  men  without 
distinction,  if  they  are  obedient,  through  faith, 
follow,  fulfill  and  live  according  to  the  precepts 
of  the  same,  are  his  children  and  rightful  heirs; 
having  thus  excluded  none  from  the  precious 
inheritance  of  eternal  salvation,  except  the 
unbelieving  and  disobedient,  the  headstrong 
and  unconverted;  who  despise  such  salvation; 
and  thus  by  their  own  actions  incur  guilt  by 
refusing  the  same,  and  "judge  themselves 
unworthy  of  everlasting  life."  Mark  16:15; 
Luke  24:46,  47;  Rom.  8:17;  Acts  13:46. 


ARTICLE  vi. 

REPENTANCE  AND  AMENDMENT  OF  LIFE. 

We  believe  and  confess,  that,  as  the  "imagi 
nation  of  man's  heart  is  evil  from  his  youth," 
and  consequently  inclined  to  all  unrighteousness, 
sin  and  wickedness,  that,  therefore,  the  first 
doctrine  of  the  precious  New  Testament  of 
the  Son  of  God  is,  Repentance  and  amendment 
of  life.  Gen.  8:21;  Mark  1:15.  Therefore 
those  who  have  ears  to  hear,  and  hearts  to 
understand,  must  "bring  forth  fruits  meet  for 
repentance,"  amend  their  lives,  believe  the 
gospel,  "depart  from  evil  arid  do  good,"  desist 
from  wrong  and  cease  from  sinning,  "put  off 
the  old  man  with  his  deeds,  and  put  on  the 
new  man,"  which  after  God  is  created  in 
righteousness  and  true  holiness."  For  neither 
Baptism  Sacrament^  nor  church-fellowship, 
nor  any  other  external  ceremony,  can,  without 
faith,  the  new  birth,  and  a  change  or  renewal 
of  life,  help,  or  qualify  us,  that  we  may  please 
God,  or  receive  any  consolation  or  promise  of 
salvation  from  him.  Luke  3:8;  Eph.  4:22,  21; 
Col.  3:9,  10.  But  on  the  contrary,  we  must  go 
to  God  "with  a  sincere  heart  in  full  assurance 
of  faith,"  and  believe  in  Jesus  Christ,  as  the 


—  15  — 

scriptures  speak  and  testify  of  him.  Through 
Avhich  faith  we  obtain  the  pardon  of  our  sins, 
become  sanctified,  justified,  and  children  of 
God;  yea,  partakers  of  his  mind,  nature  and 
image,  as  we  are  born  again  of  God  through 
his  incorruptible  seed  from  above.  Heb.  10:21, 
22;  John  7: 38;  2  Pet.  1:1. 

ARTICLE  VII. — HOLY  BAPTISM. 
Regarding  baptism,  we  confess  that  all 
penitent  believers,  who  through  faith,  the  new 
birth  and  renewal  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  have 
become  united  with  God,  and  whose  names  are 
recorded  in  heaven,  must,  on  such  scriptural 
confession  of  their  faith,  and  renewal  of  life, 
according  to  the  command  and  doctrine  of 
Christ,  and  the  example  and  custom  of  the 
apostles,  be  baptized  with  water  in  the  ever 
adorable  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son, 
and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  the  burying  of  their 
sins,  and  thus  to  become  incorporated  into  the 
communion  of  the  saints;  whereupon  they  must 
learn  to  observe  all  things  whatever  the  Son 
of  God  taught,  left  on  record,  and  commanded 
his  followers  to  do.  Matt.  3:15;  28:19,  20; 
Mark  16:15,16;  Acts  2:38;  8:12,  38;  9:19; 
10  : 17;  16  :  33;  Rom.  6  :  3,  1;  Col.  2: 12. 


—  16  — 

ARTICLE  VIII. 
THE  CHURCH  or  CHRIST. 

We  believe  in  and  confess  a  visible  Church 
of  God,  consisting  of  those,  who,  as  before 
remarked,  have  truly  repented,  and  rightly 
believed;  who  are  rightly  baptized,  united  with 
God  in  heaven,  and  incorporated  into  the  com 
munion  of  the  saints  on  earth.  1  Cor.  12,  13: 
And  these,  we  confess,  are  a  "chosen  genera 
tion,  a  royal  priesthood,  an  holy  nation,"  who 
have  the  testimony,  that  they  are  the  ' '  bride " 
of  Christ;  yea,  that  they  are  children  and  heirs 
of  eternal  life — a  "habitation  of  God  through 
the  Spirit,"  built  on  the  foundation  of  the 
apostles  and  prophets,  of  which  4 '  Christ  himself 
is  the  chief  corner  stone" — the  foundation  on 
which  his  church  is  built.  John  3:29;  Matt. 
16:18;  Eph.  2:19—21;  Tit.  3:7;  1  Pet.  1:18,  19; 
2:9.  This  church  of  the  living  God,  which  he 
has  purchased  and  redeemed  through  his  own 
precious  blood,  and  with  which  he  will  be- 
according  to  his  own  promise — for  her  comfort 
and  protection,  ' '  always,  even  unto  the  end  of 
the  world;"  yea,  will  dwell  and  walk  with 
her  and  preserve  her,  that  no  "winds"  nor 
"floods,"  yea,  not  even  the  "gates  of  hell  shall 


prevail  against  her"— may  be  known  by  her 
evangelical  faith,  doctrine,  love,  and  godly  con 
versation;  also 'by  her  pure  walk  and  practice, 
and  her  observance  of  .thr  "true  ordinances  of 
Christ,  which  he.  fins  strictly  enjoined  on  his 
followers.  Matt.  7:^5;  lti:.l>:  i}6:-20; "  i>  Cor. 
6:16.  •'/''  X'v 

ARTICLE    IX. 

THE   OFFICE   OF   Tp;AgHEi$'  AND   MINISTERS — 
.-'MALE  AND  FE>T\LF-  IN  THE  CHURCH. 

Regarding  the  offices,  and  election  of  persons 
to  the  same1,  in  the  church,  we  believe  and 
confess:  That,  as  the  church  cannot  exist  and 
prosper,'  nor  continue  in  its  structure,  without 
offices  and  regulations,  that  therefore  the  Lord 
Jesujf  Mas  himself  (as  a  father  in  his  house), 
appointed  and  prescribed  his  offices  and  ordi 
nances,  and  has  given  commandments  concern 
ing  the  same,  as  to  how  each  one  should  walk 
therein,  give  heed  to  his  own  work  and 
calling,  and  do  it  as  it  becomes  him  to  do. 
Eph.  4:11,  12.  For  he  himself,  as  the  faithful 
and  great  Shepherd,  and  Bishop  of  our  souls, 
was  sent  into  the  world,  not  to  wound,  to  break, 
or  destroy  the  souls  of  men,  but  to  heal  them; 
to  seek  that  which  is  lost,  and  to  pull  down  the 


—  18  — 

hedges  and  partition  wall,  so  as  to  make  out  of 
many  one\  thus  collecting  out  of  Jews  and 
heathen,  yea,  out  of  all  nations,  a  church  in  his 
name;  for  which  (so  that  no  one  might  go 
astray  or  be  lost)  he  laid  down  his  own  life, 
and  thus  procured  for  them  salvation,  made 
them  free  and  redeemed  them,  to  which  bless 
ing  no  one  could  help  them,  or  be  of  service  in 
obtaining  it.  1  Pet.  2:25;  Matt.  18:11;  Eph. 
2:13,  14;  John  10:9,  11,  15. 

And  that  he,  besides  this,  left  his  church 
before  his  departure,  provided  with  faithful 
ministers,  apostles,  evangelists,  pastors,  and 
teachers,  whom  he  had  chosen  by  prayer  and 
supplication  through  the  Holy  Spirit,  so  that 
they  might  govern  the  church,  feed  his  flock, 
wTatch  over,  maintain,  and  care  for  the  same; 
yea,  do  in  all  things  as  he  left  them  an  example, 
taught  them,  and  commanded  them  to  do;  and 
likewise  to  teach  the  church  to  observe  all 
things  whatsoever  he  commanded  them.  Eph. 
4:11;  Luke  6:12,  13;  10:1;  Matt.  28:20. 

Also  that  the  apostles  were  afterwards,  as 
faithful  followers  of  Christ  and  leaders  of  the 
church,  diligent  in  these  matters,  namely,  in 
choosing  through  prayer  and  supplication  to 


—  19  — 

God,    brethren   who   were    to   provide   all   the 
churches  in  the  cities  and  circuits,  with  bishopsr 
pastors,    and   leaders,    and   to   ordain   to  these 
offices  such  men  as  took  "heed  unto  themselves^ 
and  unto  the  doctrine,"  and  also  unto  the  flock; 
who  were  sound  in  the  faith,  pious  in  their  life 
and  conversation,  and  who  had — as  well  within 
the  church  as  "without" — a  good  reputation  and 
a  good  report;  so  that  they  might  be  a  light  and 
example  in  all  godliness  and  good  works;  might 
Avorthily    administer    the   Lord's    ordinances- 
baptism   and    sacrament — and    that    they    (the 
brethren  sent  by  the  apostles)  might  also,  at  all 
places,    where   such   were   to   be   had,    appoint 
faithful  men  as  elders,  who  were  able  to  teach 
others,  confirm  them  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
"with  the  laying  on  of  hands,"  and  who   (the 
elders)  were  to  take  care  of  all  things  of  which 
the  church  stood  in  need;  so  that  they,  as  faith 
ful  servants,  might  well  "occupy"  their  Lord's 
money,  gain  thereby,  and  thus  "  save  themselves 
and  those  who  hear  them."    1  Tim.  3:1;  -1:14— 
16;  Acts  1:23,  24;  Tit,  1:5;  Luke  19:13. 

That  they  should  also  take  good  care  (par 
ticularly  each  one  of  the  charge  over  which  he 
had  the  oversight),  that  all  the  circuits  should 


—  20  — 

be  well  provided  with  almoners,  who  should 
have  the  care  and  oversight  of  the  poor,  and 
who  were  to  receive  gifts  and  alms,  and  again 
faithfully  to  distribute  them  amongst  the  poor 
saints  who  were  in  need,  and  this  in  all  honesty, 
as  is  becoming.  Acts  6:3 — 6. 

Also  that  honorable  old  widows  should  be 
chosen  as  servants,  who,  besides  the  almoners, 
are  to  visit,  comfort,  and  take  care  of  the  poor, 
the  weak,  the  afflicted,  and  the  needy,  as  also 
to  visit,  comfort,  and  take  care  of  widows  and 
orphans;  and  further  to  assist  in  taking  care  of 
any  matters  in  the  church  that  properly  come 
within  their  sphere,  according  to  their  best 
ability.  1  Tim.  5:9,  10;  Rom.  16:1,  2. 

And  as  it  further  regards  the  almoners,  that 
they  (particularly  if  they  are  fit  persons,  and 
chosen  and  ordained  thereto  by  the  church), 
may  also  in  aid  and  relief  of  the  bishops,  exhort 
the  church  (being,  as  already  remarked,  chosen 
thereto),  and  thus  assist  in  word  and  doctrine;' 
so  that  each  one  may  serve  the  other  from  love, 
with  the  gift  which  he  has  received  from  the 
Lord;  so  that  through  the  common  service  and 
assistance  of  each  member,  according  to  his 
ability,  the  body  of  Christ  may  be  edified,  and 


—  21  — 

the  Lord's  vineyard  and  church  be  preserved  in 
its  growth  and  structure.    2  Tim.  2:2. 

ARTICLE  X. 
THE  LORD'S   SUPPER. 

We  also  believe  in  and  observe  the  breaking 
of  bread,  or  the  Lord's  Supper,  as  the  Lord 
Jesus  instituted  the  same  (with  bread  and  wine) 
before  his  sufferings,  and  also  observed  and  ate 
it  with  the  apostles,  and  also  commanded  it  to  be 
observed  to  his  remembrance,  as  also  the  apos 
tles  subscqently  taught  and  observed  the  same 
in  the  church,  and  commanded  it  to  be  observed 
by  believers  in  commemoration  of  the  death  and 
sufferings  of  the  Lord — the  breaking  of  his 
worthy  body  and  the  shedding  of  his  precious 
blood— for  the  whole  human  race.  So  is  the 
observance  of  this  sacrament  also  to  remind  us 
of  the  benefit  of  the  said  death  and  sufferings  of 
Christ,  namely,  the  redemption  and  eternal 
salvation  which  he  purchased  thereby,  and  the 
great  love  thus  shown  to  sinful  man;  whereby 
we  arc  earnestly  exhorted  also  to  love  one 
another — to  love  our  neighbor — to  forgive  and 
absolve  him — even  as  Christ  has  done  unto  us — 
and  also  to  endeavor  to  maintain  and  keep 


—  22  — 

alive  the  union  and  communion  which  we  have 
with  God,  and  amongst  one  another;  which  is 
thus  shown  and  represented  to  us  by  the 
aforesaid  breaking  of  bread.  Matt.  26:26; 
Mark  14:22;  Luke  22:19;  Acts  2:42,  46;  1  Cor. 
10: 16;  11: 23— 26. 

ARTICLE  XI. 

THE  WASHING  or  THE  SAINT'S  FEET. 
We  also  confess  a  washing  of  the  feet,  of  the 
saints,  as  the  Lord  Jesus  did  not  only  institute 
and  command  the  same, » but  did  also  himself 
wash  the  feet  of  the  apostles,  although  he  was 
their  Lord  and  master;  thereby  giving  an  ex 
ample  that  they  also  should  wash  one  another's 
feet,  and  thus  do  to  one  another  as  he  did  to 
them;  which  they  also  afterwards  taught  be 
lievers  to  observe,  and  all  this  as  a  sign  of  true 
humiliation;  but  yet  more  particularly  as  a  sign 
to  remind  us  of  the  true  washing — the  washing 
and  purification  of  the  soul  in  the  blood  of 
Christ,  John  13:4—17;  1  Tim.  5:10. 

ARTICLE  XII. 
MATRIMONY. 

We   also  confess  that  there  is  in  the  church 
of  God   an    "honorable"    state   of    matrimony 


—  23  — 

between  two  believers  of  the  different  sexes, 
as  God  first  instituted  the  same  in  paradise 
between  Adam  and  Eve,  and  as  the  Lord  Jesus 
reformed  it  by  removing  all  abuses  which  had 
crept  into  it,  and  restoring  it  to  its  first  order. 
Gen.  1:27;  2: 18,  22,  2-k 

In  this  manner  the  apostle  Paul  also  taught 
and  permitted  matrimony  in  the  church,  leaving 
it  to  each  one's  own  choice  to  enter  into  matri 
mony  with  any  person  who  would  unite  with 
him  in  such  state,  provided  that  it  was  done 
"in  the  Lord,"  according  to  the  primitive 
order;  the  words  "in  the  Lord,"  to  be  under 
stood,  according  to  our  opinion,  that  just  as 
the  patriarchs  had  to  marry  amongst  their  own 
kindred  or  generation,  so  there  is  also  no  other 
liberty  allowed  to  believers  under  the  New  Tes 
tament  Dispensation,  than  to  marry  amongst  the 
"chosen  generation,"  or  the  spiritual  kindred 
of  Christ;  that  is,  to  such — and  none  others— 
as  are  already,  previous  to  their  marriage, 
united  to  the  church  in  heart  and  soul,  have 
received  the  same  baptism,  belong  to  the  same 
church,  are  of  the  same  faith  and  doctrine,  and 
lead  the  same  course  of  life,  with  themselves. 
1  Cor.  7;  9:5;  Gen.  24:4;  28:6;  Num.  36:6—9. 


—  24  — 

Such  arc  then,  as  already  remarked,  united  by 
God  and  the  church  according  to  the  primitive 
order,  and  this  is  then  called,  "Marrying  in 
the  Lord."  iCor.  7:39. 

ARTICLE  XIII. 
THE  OFFICE  OF  CIVIL  GOVERNMENT. 

We  also  believe  and  confess,  that  God  has 
instituted  civil  government,  for  the  punishment 
of  the  wicked  and  the  protection  of  the  pious; 
and  also  further,  for  the  purpose  of  governing 
the  world — governing  countries  and  cities;  and 
also  to  preserve  its  subjects  in  good  order  and 
under  good  regulations.  Wherefore  WTC  are  not 
permitted  to  despise,  blaspheme,  or  resist  the 
same;  but  are  to  acknowledge  it  as  a  minister 
of  God  and  be  subject  and  obedient  to  it,  in 
all  things  that  do  not  militate  against  the  law, 
will,  and  commandments  of  God;  yea,  "to  be 
ready  to  every  good  work;"  also  faithfully  to 
pay  it  custom,  tax,  and  tribute;  thus  giving  it 
what  is  its  due;  as  Jesus  Christ  taught,  did 
himself,  and  commanded  his  followers  to  do. 
That  we  are  also  to  pray  to  the  Lord  earnestly 
for  the  government  and  its  welfare,  and  in 
behalf  of  our  country,  so  that  we  may  live 


under  its  protection,  maintain  ourselves,  and 
"lead  a  quiet  and  peaceable  life  in  all  godliness 
and  honesty."  And  further,  that  the  Lord 
would  recompense  them  (our  rulers),  here  and 
in  eternity,  for  all  the  benefits,  liberties,  and 
favors  which  we  enjoy  under  their  laudable 
administration.  Rom.  13:1 — 7;  Tit.  3:1,  2;  1 
Pet.  2:17;  Matt.  17:27;  22:21;  1  Tim.  2:1,  2. 

AKTICLE  XIV. 
DEFENSE  BY  FORCE. 

Regarding  revenge,  whereby  we  resist  our 
enemies  with  the  sword,  we  believe  and  confess, 
that  the  Lord  Jesus  has  forbidden  his  disciples 
and  followers  all  revenge  and  resistance^  and 
has  thereby  commanded  them  not  to  "return 
evil  for  evil,  nor  railing  for  railing;"  but  to 
"put  up  the  sword  into  the  sheath,"  or,  as  the 
prophets  foretold,  "beat  them  into  plough 
shares."  Matt.  5:39,44;  Rom.  12:14;  1  Pet. 
3:9;  Isaiah  2:4;  Micah4:3. 

From  this  we  see,  that,  according  to  the  ex 
ample,  life,  and  doctrine  of  Christ,  we  are  not 
to  do  wrong,  or  cause  offense  or  vexation  to  any 
one;  but  to  seek  the  welfare  and  salvation  of  all 
men;  also,  if  necessity  should  require  it,  to  flee, 


—  26  — 

for  the  Lord's  sake,  from  one  city  or  country  to 
another,  and  suffer  the  "spoiling  of  our  goods," 
rather  than  give  occasion  of  offense  to  any  one; 
and  if  we  are  struck  on  our  "right  cheek,  rather 
to  turn  the  other  also,"  than  revenge  ourselves, 
or  return  the  blow.  Matt,  5:39;  10:23;  Rom. 
12:19. 

And  that  we  are,  besides  this,  also  to  pray  for 
our  enemies,  comfort  and  feed  them,  when  they 
are  hungry  or  thirsty,  and  thus  by  well-doing 
convince  them  and  overcome  the  evil  with  good. 
Rom.  12:20,  21. 

Finally,  that  we  are  to  do  good  in  all  re 
spects,  "commending  ourselves  to  every  man's 
conscience  in  the  sight  of  God,"  and  according 
to  the  law  of  Christ,  do  nothing  to  others  that 
we  would  not  wish  them  to  do  unto  us.  2  Cor. 
4:2;  Matt.  7:12;  Luke  6:31. 

ARTICLE  XV. 
THE  SWEARING  OF  OATHS. 

Regarding  the  swearing  of  oaths,  we  believe 
and  confess,  that  the  Lord  Jesus  has  dissuaded 
his  followers  from  and  forbidden  them  the  same ; 
that  is,  that  he  commanded  them  to  ' '  swear  not 
at  all;"  but  that  their  "Yea"  should  be  "yea," 


—  27  — 

and  their  "Nay,  nay."  From  which  we  under 
stand  that  all  oaths,  high  and  low,  are  forbidden; 
and  that  instead  of  them  we  are  to  confirm  all 
our  promises  and  covenants,  declarations  and 
testimonies  of  all  matters,  merely  with  "Yea 
that  is  yea,"  and  "Kay  that  is  nay;"  and  that  we 
are  to  perform  and  fulfill  at  all  times,  and  in  all 
things,  to  every  one,  every  promise  and  obliga 
tion  to  which  we  thus  affirm,  as  faithfully  as  if  we 
had  confirmed  it  by  the  most  solemn  oath.  And 
if  we  thus  do,  we  have  the  confidence  that  no  one 
— not  even  government  itself — will  have  just 
cause  to  require  more  of  us.  Matt.  5:34: — 37; 
James  5:12;  2  Cor.  1:17. 

ARTICLE  XVI. 

EXCOMMUNICATION    OR   EXPULSION    FROM    THE 
CHURCH. 

We  also  believe  in  and  acknowledge  the 
ban,  or  excommunication,  a  separation  or 
spiritual  punishment  by  the  church,  for  the 
amendment,  and  not  for  the  destruction,  of 
offenders;  so  that  what  is  pure  may  be  separated 
from  that  which  is  impure.  That  is,  if  a  person, 
after  having  been  enlightened,  and  received  the 
knowledge  of  the  truth,  and  has  been  received 


—  28  — 

into  the  communion  of  the  saints,  docs  willfully, 
or  out  of  presumption,  sin  against  God,  or 
commit  some  other  "sin  unto  death,"  thereby 
falling  into  such  unfruitful  works  of  darkness, 
that  he  becomes  separated  from  God,  and  is 
debarred  from  his  kingdom — that  such  an  one— 
when  his  works  are  become  manifest,  and  suf 
ficiently  known  to  the  church — cannot  remain  in 
the  "congregation  of  the  righteous;"  but  must, 
as  an  offensive  member  and  open  sinner,  be 
excluded  from  the  church,  "  rebuked  before  all," 
and  "purged  out  as  a  leaven,"  and  thus  remain 
until  his  amendment,  as  an  example  and  warning 
to  others,  and  also  that  the  church  may  be  kept 
pure  from  such  "spots"  and  "blemishes;"  so 
that  not  for  the  want  of  this,  the  name  of  the 
Lord  be  blasphemed,  the  church  dishonored, 
and  a  stumbling-block  thrown  in  the  way  of 
those  "without,"  and  finally,  that  the  offender 
may  not  be  condemned  with  the  world,  but  that 
he  may  again  be  convinced  of  the  error  of  his 
ways,  and  brought  to  repentance  and  amend 
ment  of  life.  Isaiah  59:2;  1  Cor.  5:5,6,  12; 
1  Tim.  5:20;  2  Cor.  13:10. 

Regarding  the  brotherly  admonition,  as  also 
the  instruction  of  the  erring,  we  are  to    "give 


all  diligence"  to  watch  over  them,  and  exhort 
them  in  all  meekness  to  the  amendment  of  their 
ways  (James  5:19,  20);  and  in  case  any  should 
remain  obstinate  and  unconverted,  to  reprove 
them  as  the  case  may  require.  In  short,  the 
church  must  "put  away  from  among  herself 
him  that  is  wicked,"  whether  it  be  in  doctrine 

or  life. 

ARTICLE  XVII. 

THE  SHUNNING  OF  THOSE  WHO  ARE 
EXPELLED. 

As  regards  the  withdrawing  from,  or  the 
shunning  of,  those  who  are  expelled,  we  believe 
and  confess,  that  if  any  one,  whether  it  be 
through  a  wicked  life  or  perverse  doctrine — is 
so  far  fallen  as  to  be  separated  from  God,  and 
consequently  rebuked  by,  and  expelled  from, 
the  church,  he  must  also,  according  to  the 
doctrine  of  Christ  and  his  apostles,  be  shunned 
and  avoided  by  all  the  members  of  the  church 
(particularly  by  those  to  whom  his  misdeeds  arc 
known),  whether  it  be  in  eating  or  drinking,  or 
other  such  like  social  matters.  In  short,  that 
we  are  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  him;  so  that 
we  may  not  become  defiled  by  intercourse  with 
him,  and  partakers  of  his  sins;  but  that  he  may 


—  30  — 

be  made  ashamed,  be  affected  in  his  mind,  con 
vinced  in  his  conscience,  and  thereby  induced 
to  amend  his  ways.  1  Cor.  5:9 — 11;  Rom. 
16:17;  2  Thcss.  3:14;  Tit.  3:10. 

That  nevertheless,  as  well  in  shunning  as  in 
reproving  such  offender,  such  moderation  and 
Christian  discretion  be  used,  that  such  shunning 
and  reproof  may  not  be  conducive  to  his  ruin, 
but  be  serviceable  to  his  amendment.  For 
should  he  be  in  need,  hungry,  thirsty,  naked, 
sick  or  visited  by  some  other  affliction,  we  are 
in  duty  bound,  according  to  the  doctrine  and 
practice  of  Christ  and  his  apostles,  to  render 
him  aid  and  assistance,  as  necessity  may  require; 
otherwise  the  shunning  of  him  might  be  rather 
conducive  to  his  ruin  than  to  his  amendment. 
1  Thess.  5:14. 

Therefore  we  must  not  treat  such  offenders 
as  enemies,  but  exhort  them  as  brethren,  in 
order  thereby  to  bring  them  to  a  knowledge  of 
their  sins  and  to  repentance;  so  that  they  may 
again  become  reconciled  to  God  and  the  church, 
and  be  received  and  admitted  into  the  same— 
thus  exercising  love  towards  them,  as  is  becom 
ing.  2  Thess.  3:15. 


—  31  — 

ARTICLE  XVIII. 

THE  RESURRECTION    OF  THE  DEAD    AND  THE 
LAST   JUDGMENT. 

Regarding  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  we 
confess  with  the  mouth,  and  believe  with  the 
heart,  that  according  to  the  scriptures — all  men 
who  shall  have  died  or  "fallen  asleep,"  will- 
through  the  incomprehensible  power  of  God— 
at  the  day  of  judgment,  be  " raised  up"  and 
made  alive;  and  that  these,  together  with  all 
those  who  then  remain  alive,  and  who  shall  be 
"changed  in  a  moment,  in  the  twinkling  of  an 
eye,  at  the  last  trump,"  shall  "appear  before 
the  judgment-seat  of  Christ,"  where  the  good 
shall  be  separated  from  the  evil,  and  where 
"every  one  shall  receive  the  things  done  in  his 
body,  according  to  that  he  hath  done,  whether 
it  be  good  or  bad;"  and  that  the  good  or  pious 
shall  then  further,  as  the  blessed  of  their 
Father,  be  received  by  Christ  into  eternal  life, 
where  they  shall  receive  that  joy  which  "eye 
hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  nor  hath  entered 
into  the  heart  of  man."  Yea,  where  they  shall 
reign  and  triumph  with  Christ  forever  and 
ever.  Matt.  22:30,  31;  25:31;  Dan.  12:2;  Job 
19:25,  26;  John  5:28,  29;  1  Cor.  15;  1  Thcss.  4:13. 


And  that,  on  the  contrary,  the  wicked  or 
impious,  shall,  as  the  accursed  of  God,  be  cast 
into  "outer  darkness;"  yea,  into  eternal,  hellish 
torments;  "  where  their  worm  dieth  not,  and 
the  fire  is  not  quenched;"  and  where— according 
to  Holy  Scripture — they  can  expect  no  comfort 
nor  redemption  throughout  eternity.  Isaiah 
66:24;  Matt.  25:46;  Mark  9:46;  Rev.  14:11. 

May  the  Lord  through  his  grace  make  us  all 
fit  and  worthy,  that  no  such  calamity  may  befall 
any  of  us;  but  that  we  may  be  diligent,  and  so 
take  heed  to  ourselves,  that  we  may  be  found  of 
him  in  peace,  without  spot,  and  blameless. 
Amen. 


Now  these  are,  as  before  mentioned,  the 
chief  articles  of  our  general  Christian  Faith, 
which  we  every  where  teach  in  our  congrega 
tions  and  families,  and  according  to  which  we 
profess  to  live;  and  which,  according  to  our 
convictions,  contain  the  only  true  Christian 
Faith,  which  the  apostles  in  their  time  believed 
and  taught;  yea,  which  they  testified  to  by  their 
lives  and  confirmed  by  their  deaths;  in  which  we 
will  also,  according  to  our  weakness,  gladly 
abide,  live,  and  die,  that  at  last,  together  with 
the  apostles  and  all  the  pious  we  may  obtain 
the  salvation  of  our  souls  through  the  grace  of 
God. 


—  33  — 


Thus  were  the  foregoing  articles  of  faith  adopted  and 
concluded  by  our  united  churches  in  the  city  of  Dort,  in 
Holland,  on  the  2ist  day  of  April,  in  the  year  of  our 
Lord  1632,  and  signed  by  the  following  ministers  and 

teachers. 

DORT.  SCHIEDAM. 

Isaac  Koenig,  Cornelis  Bom, 

Johann  Cobryssen,  Lambrecht  Paeldink. 

Jan  Jacobs,  LEYDEN. 

Jacuis  Terwen,  Christian  de  Kopink, 

Claes  Dirksen,  jan  Weyns. 

Mels  Gysbaerts, 
Adrian  Cornelis. 

FUSSINGEN. 

Dillaert  Willeborts, 
Jacob  Pennen, 
Ivieven  Marymehr. 

AMSTERDAM. 
Tobias  Goverts, 
Peter  Jansen  Mayer, 
Abram  Dirks, 
David  ter  Haer, 
Peter  Jan  von  Zingel. 

MlDDi,EBURG. 
Bastian  Willemsen, 
Jan  Winkelmans. 

HARLEM 
John  Doom, 
Peter  Gryspeer, 
Dirk  Wouters  Kolenkamp, 
Peter  Joosten. 

BOMMEI,. 

Wilhelm  Jan  von  Exselt, 
Gispert  Spiering. 


Claes  Claesson, 
Peter  Peterson. 

ZIRICZEE. 
Anton  Cornelis, 
Peter  Jan  Zimmerman. 

UTRECHT. 
Herman  Segers, 
Jan  Heinrich  Hochfeld, 
Daniel  Horens, 
Abraham  Spronk, 
Wilhelm  von    Brockhuysen. 

FROM  THE  UPPER  COUNTRY. 
Peter  von   Borsel, 
Anton  Hans. 

CREVEivDT. 

Herman  op  den  Graff, 
Wilhelm  Kreynen. 

ZEALAND. 
Cornelis  de  Moir, 
Isaac  Claes. 

GORCUM. 
Jacob  von  Sebrecht, 


ROTTERDAM. 

Balten  Centen  Schumacher,  Jan  J.  von  Kruysen. 
Michael  Michiels,  ARNHEIM. 

Israel  von  Halmael,  Cornelis  Jans, 

Heinrich  Dirkse  Apeldoren,  Dirk  Renderson. 
Andreas  Lucken. 


—  34  — 

Besides  this  coufession  being  adopted  by  so  many 
churches,  and  signed  by  their  ministers,  all  the  churches 
in  Alsace  and  Germany  afterwards  adopted  it  unani 
mously.  Wherefore  it  was  translated  from  the  Holland 
into  the  languages  of  these  countries — into  French  and 
German — for  the  use  of  the  churches  there,  and  for 
others.  Of  which  this  may  serve  as  a  notice. 

The  following  attestation  was  signed  by  the  brethren 
in  Alsace,  who  examined  this  confession  and  adopted  it 
as  their  own. 

We,  the  undersigned,  ministers  of  the  word 
of  God,  and  elders  of  the  church  in  Alsace, 
hereby  declare  and  make  known,  that  being 
assembled  this  4th  of  Feb.  in  the  year  of  our 
Lord  1660,  at  Onenheim,  on  account  of  the 
Confession  of  Faith,  which  was  adopted  at  the 
Peace  Convention  in  the  city  of  Dort,  on  the 
21st  day  of  April  in  the  year  1632;  and  having 
examined  the  same,  and  found  it,  according  to 
our  judgment,  in  agreement  with  the  word  of 
God,  we  have  entirely  adopted  it  as  our  own. 
Which  we,  in  testimony  of  the  truth,  and  a 
firm  faith,  have  signed  with  our  own  hands,  as 
follows: 

MINISTERS.  ELDERS. 

MAGENHEIM  MARKIRCH. 

John  Miller.  Jacob  Schmidt, 

HEIDEI,HEIM.  Bertram  Habich. 
John  Ringer.  OHNENHEIM. 

BALDENHEIM.  Ulrich  Husser. 

Jacob  Schebly.  Jacob  Gochnauer. 

ISENHEIM.  JEPSENHEIM. 

Henry  Schneider.  John  Rudolph  Bumen. 

KUNENHEIM.  DUERRSANZENHEIM. 

Rudolph  Bgli.  Jacob  Schneider. 

MARKIRCH.  KUNENHEIM. 

Adolph  Schmidt.  Henry  Frick. 


—  35  — 

POSTSCRIPT  TO  THE   FOREGOING  18  ARTICLES. 

From  an  authentic  circular  letter  of  the  year 
1557,  from  the  Highland  to  the  Nctherland 
churches,  it  appears  that  from  the  Eyfelt  to 
Moravia  there  were  50  churches,  of  which  some 
consisted  of  from  500  to  600  brethren.  And 
that  there  were  about  that  time,  at  a  conference 
at  Strasburg,  about  50  preachers  and  elders 
present,  who  discoursed  about  matters  concern 
ing  the  welfare  of  the  churches. 

These  leaders  of  the  non-resistant  Christians 
endeavored  earnestly  to  propagate  the  truth; 
so  that  like  a  "grain  of  mustard  seed,"  of  small 
beginning,  it  grew  against  all  bloody  persecu 
tion,  to  the  height  in  which  it  is  to  be  seen  in  so 
many  large  churches  in  Germany,  Prussia,  the 
Principality  of  Cleves,  &c. ,  and  particularly  in 
the  United  Netherlands. 

But  finally,  alas!  there  arose  disunion  amongst 
them  about  matters  of  faith,  which  so  deeply 
grieved  the  peaceably  disposed  amongst  them, 
that  they  not  only  thought  about  means  to  heal 
the  schism,  and  restore  union,  but  did  also  take 
the  matter  in  hand,  and  concluded  at  Cologne, 
in  the  year  1591,  a  laudable  peace  between  the 
Highland  and  Netheiiand  churches.  Still  th.> 


—  36  — 

schism  was  not  fully  healed.  Consequently  in 
the  years  1628  and  1630,  it  was  deemed  neces 
sary  at  a  certain  conference,  by  some  lovers  of 
peace  to  appoint  another  conference,  in  order 
to  see  whether  they  could  come  to  an  under 
standing,  and  the  schism  be  fully  healed.  Con 
sequently,  in  order  to  attain  this  object  in  the 
most  effectual  manner,  there  assembled  at  Dort, 
from  many  of  the  churches  in  Holland,  on  the 
21st  of  April,  1632,  fifty-one  ministers  of  the 
word  of  God,  appointed  for  said  purpose;  who 
deemed  it  advisable  that  a  scriptural  confession 
of  faith  should  be  drawn  up,  to  which  all  parties 
should  adhere,  and  on  which  this  peace  conven 
tion  and  the  intended  union  should  be  founded 
and  built.  Which  was  then  accordingly  drawn 
up,  publicly  adopted,  confirmed,  signed,  the  so 
much  wished  for  peace  obtained,  and  the  light 
again  put  on  the  candlestick,  to  the  honor  of 
the  non-resistant  Christianity. 


BRIEF  INSTRUCTION  FROM  HOLY  SCRIPTURE,  IN 
QUESTIONS  AND  ANSWERS,  FOR  THE  YOUNG. 


The  following  questions  and  answers,  contain 
in  brief,  the  principal  doctrines  of  our  faith, 
and  are  designed  for  the  instruction  of  those 
who  desire  to  unite  with  the  church. 

Ques.  1.  What  prompts  you  to  desire  to 
unite  with  the  communion  of  believers,  and  be 
baptized  ? 

Am.  I  am  impelled  by  faith,,  to  separate 
myself  from  the  world  and  its  sinful  lusts,  and 
to  submit  myself  in  obedience  to  my  Lord, 
Redeemer  and  Savior,  for  the  salvation  of  my 
soul.  Heb.  5:9. 

Ques.  What  has  induced  you  to  this  ? 

Am.  The  will  and  good  pleasure  of  God, 
which  were  proclaimed  and  demonstrated  to  me 
through  the  preaching  of  the  holy  gospel,  in 
which  were  also  revealed  unto  me  the  laws  and 
commandments  of  Christ',  which  I  am  bound 
to  receive  and  observe  in  true  faith?  Matt.  7: 
21;  19:17. 


—  38  — 

Ques.  3.  Do  you  then  expect  to  be  justified 
and  saved  through  your  good  works,  and  the 
keeping  of  the  commandments  of  Christ? 

Am.  No.  For  through  our  good  works  alone 
we  cannot  merit  heaven;  for  salvation  is  the 
unmerited  grace  of  God  purchased  for  us  by 
Jesus  Christ.  Eph.  2:8. 

Ques.  4.  For  what  purpose  are  then  good 
works  or  the  keeping  of  the  commandments  of 
Christ  necessary? 

Am.  They  are  evidence  of  true  faith  in 
Jesus  Christ;  for  obedience  from  love  to  God, 
is  the  light  and  life  of  faith,  without  which, 
" faith  is  dead."  James  2: 20. 

Qnes.  5.  Through  what  is  man  justified 
before  God? 

Am.  Through  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  alone; 
of  whose  righteousness  we  must  become  parta 
kers  through  "faith  which  worketh  by  love." 
Gal.  5:6. 

Ques.  6.  What  is  true  faith? 

Am.  It  is  a  certain  knowledge,  whereby  we 
hold  every  thing  as  true  that  is  revealed  to  us 
in  the  Holy  Scriptures;  and  whereby  we  cherish 
a  full  confidence,  that  the  pardon  of  our  sins, 
righteousness,  and  eternal  life,  are  granted  unto 


—  39  — 

us  by  God,  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
Eph.  2:5. 

Qu-es.  7.  What  do  you  believe  ? 

Ans.  I  believe  in  God,  Father,  Son,  and 
Holy  Ghost. 

Ques.  8.  How  do  you  believe  in  God  the 
Father? 

Ans.  I  believe  with  the  heart,  and  confess 
with  the  mouth,  that  He  is  one,  eternal,  almighty, 
and  just  God,  the  Creator  and  Preserver  of 
heaven  and  earth,  together  with  all  things 
visible  and  invisible.  Gen  14:17. 

Ques.  9.  How  do  you  believe  in  the  Son? 

Ans.  I  believe  that  he  is  Jesus  Christ,  the 
Son  of  the  living  God,  our  Savior  and  Re 
deemer,  who  has  been  with  the  Father  from 
eternity,  and  who,  in  the  "fullness  of  time,"  was 
sent  into  the  world;  that  he  was  conceived  by 
the  Holy  Ghost,  born  of  the  blessed  Virgin 
Mary,  suffered  for  us  under  Pontius  Pilate,  was 
crucified,  died,  and  was  buried;  rose  again  from 
the  dead  on  the  third  day,  ascended  into  heaven, 
and  sits  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  the  Almighty 
Father;  whence  he  will  again  come  to  judge  the 
living  and  the  dead.  Matt.  25:31;  John  17:5; 
Gal.  4:4. 


—  40  — 

Ques.  10.  How  do  you  believe  in  the  Holy 
Ghost? 

Ans.  I  believe  and  confess,  that  the  Holy 
Ghost  proceedeth  from  the  Father  and  the  Son, 
and  is  of  a  divine  nature;  therefore  I  also 
believe  in  God,  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost, 
as  being  one  true  God.  Besides  I  also  confess 
a  general  Holy  Christian  Church,  the  commun 
ion  of  Saints,  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  the  resur 
rection  of  the  flesh,  and  thereafter  eternal  life. 
1  John  5:20;  John  5:29. 

Ques.  11.  What  do  you  confess  of  the 
Christian  Church,  or  the  Congregation  of  the 
Lord? 

Ans.  I  confess  by  my  faith,  that  there  is  a 
Church  of  God,  which  the  Lord  Jesus  purchased 
with  his  own  blood,  and  which  he  "sanctified 
and  cleansed  with  the  washing  of  water  by  the 
word,  that  he  might  present  it  to  himself  a 
glorious  church."  Eph.  5:26,  2T. 

Ques.  12.  In  what  does  the  Church  of  God 
consist  ? 

Ans.  In  a  number  of  persons,  who,  through 
faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  have  withdrawn  from  the 
sinful  world,  and  submitted  in  obedience  to  the 
gospel,  not  to  live  any  more  to  themselves,  but 


—    41     — 

to  Christ  in  true  humility;  who  also  "give 
diligence"  to  exercise  Christian  virtues,  by 
observing  God's  holy  ordinances.  Such  are 
members  of  the  body  of  Christ,  and  heirs  of 
eternal  life.  2  Pet.  1:11. 

Ques.  13.  How,  and  through  what,  is  the 
Church  of  God  maintained? 

Am.  Through  the  preaching  of  the  holy 
gospel,  and  the  teaching  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
for  the  purpose  of  carrying  on  and  maintaining 
which,  teachers  and  ministers  are  elected  by  the 
church.  Eph.  4:11. 

Ques.  14.  Who  has  given  power  to  the 
church  to  choose  teachers  ? 

Ans.  I  confess  that  according  to  the  practice 
of  the  disciples,  so  has  God  also  given  authority 
to  his  church  to  do;  namely  to  elect  teachers 
and  ministers,  that  the  "body  of  Christ  may  be 
edified"  and  preserved.  Wherefore  the  election 
of  such  teachers  and  ministers  also  takes  place 
according  to  the  example  which  the  apostles 
were  accustomed  to  observe  in  such  matters. 
Eph.  4:12;  Acts  1:15— 26. 

Ques.  15.  Whence  comes  the  ordinance  of 
the  service  to  the  poor? 


—  42  — 

Ans.  Of  this  service  we  have  an  example  in 
the  Acts  of  the  Apostles;  who,  when  the  "num 
ber  of  the  disciples  was  multiplied,"  called 
together  the  multitude,  and  caused  to  be  "ap 
pointed  from  among  them,  seven  men,"  who 
took  charge  of  such  "business,"  which  example 
is  still  observed;  so  that  that  which  is  contributed 
by  Christian  hearts,  is  properly  applied  to  the 
relief  of  the  necessities  of  the  poor  members 
of  the  church.  Acts  6:1;  Eph.  4:28. 

Ques.  16.  How  and  through  what  means 
are  the  members  of  the  body  of  Christ  incor 
porated  into  the  church  ? 

Ans.  Through  the  ordinance  of  Christian 
baptism,  on  confession  of  their  faith,  and 
repentance  of  their  past  sins;  whereupon  they 
are  baptized  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  the 
Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost.  Matt.  28: 19. 

Qaes.  17.    What  is  baptism  properly? 

Ans.  I  confess  that  it  is  an  external  ordi 
nance  of  Christ,  a  sign  of  a  spiritual  birth  from 
God,  a  "putting  on  of  Christ,"  and  an  incorpo 
ration  into  his  church,  an  evidence  that  we  have 
established  a  covenant  with  Christ?  Rom.  6:4; 
Gal.  3: 27;  1  Pet,  3:21. 

Qtws.  18.  Of  what  use  is  baptism? 


_  43  — 

Ans.  It  represents  to  true  believers  the 
washing  away  of  the  impurity  of  their  souls, 
through  the  blood  of  Christ,  namely,  the  pardon 
of  their  sins;  whereupon  they  console  themselves 
with  the  hope  of  eternal  salvation,  through 
Jesus  Christ,  whom  they  have  "put  on"  in 
baptism.  Gal.  3:27. 

Quex.  19.  To  what  are  the  members  of  the 
church  of  Christ,  obligated  by  baptism? 

Ans.  To  the  act  of  burying  their  past  sins 
into  Christ's  death  and  of  binding  themselves  to 
Christ  in  a  new  life  and  conversation— a  life  of 
obedience— in  order  that  they  may  follow  his 
will,  and  do  what  he  has  commanded  them. 
Matt.  28:20.  ^ 

Qut>8.  20.  What  is  the  Lord's  Supper? 
Ans.  I  confess  that  it  is  an  external  ceremony 
and  institution  of  Christ,  administered  to  be 
lievers  in  the  form  of  bread  and  wine;  in  the 
partaking  of  which,  the  death  and  sufferings  of 
Christ  are  to  be  declared  and  observed  to  his 
memory.  1  Cor.  11:26. 

QMS.  21.    What  purpose  does  the  observance 
of  the  Lord's  Supper  subserve? 

An*.    It  is  thereby  represented  to  us,    how 
Christ's  holy  body  was  sacrificed  on  the  cross, 


and   his   precious  blood   shed   for   us — for  the 
pardon  of  our  sins.    1  John,  1 : 7. 

Q'ues.  22.  What  is  the  use  of  the  observance 
of  the  Lord's  Supper  ? 

Ans.  We  thereby  bear  witness  to  our  simple 
obedience  to  Christ,  our  Savior  and  Redeemer, 
which  has  the  promise  of  eternal  salvation. 
Further,  it  secures  unto  us,  through  faith,  the 
communion  of  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ, 
and  comforts  us  with  the  benefit  of  his  death; 
that  is,  the  assurance  of  the  pardon  of  our  sins. 
1  Cor.  10:16;  Heb.  5:9. 

Q'ues.  23.  Is  marriage  also  an  institution  of 
God? 

Ans.jfes.  For  it  is  instituted  by  God  him 
self,  and  confirmed  in  the  case  of  Adam  and 
Eve  in  the  Garden  of  Eden.  Gen.  1:27,  28. 

Ques.  24  For  what  purpose  is  marriage 
instituted  ? 

Ans.  For  the  purpose  of  preserving  the  hu 
man  race,  so  that  the  earth  may  thereby  be 
peopled  with  inhabitants,  and  that  fornication 
be  avoided.  Therefore  "every  man"  is  to  "have 
his  own  wife,"  and  "every  woman  her  own 
husband."  1  Cor.  7:2. 


—  45  — 

Ques.  25.  How  must  such  marriage  be  be 
gun,  so  that  it  does  not  conflict  with  the  insti 
tution  '( 

Am.  Persons  who  are  not  too  nearly  related 
by  consanguinity,  may,  after  diligent  prayer  to 
God,  enter  into  this  state,  and  endeavor  to  live 
therein,  in  a  Christian  manner  to  the  end  of 
their  days;  provided  that  they — as  members  of 
the  Christian  Church — enter  into  marriage  only 
with  members  of  the  church.  Lev.  18:6 — 17; 
1  Cor.  7:39;  9:5. 

Ques.  26.  Is  a  member  of  the  church  not  at 
all  allowed  to  enter  into  matrimony  with  a 
person  who  is  not  agreed  with  him  in  faith  and 
doctrine  ? 

Ans.  No.  For  this  is  contrary  to  the  mar 
riage  institution;  and  he  who  thus  enters  into 
matrimony,  acts  contrary  to  the  law  of  God, 
and  the  doctrine  of  the  apostles.  Deut.  7:3,  4; 
Judges  3:6,  7;  1  Cor.  1:10;  7:39;  Phil.  2:1,  2. 

Ques.  27.  Can  also  a  lawful  marriage,  for 
any  cause  be  divorced? 

Ans.  No.  For  the  persons  united  by  such 
marriage  are  so  closely  bound  to  each  other, 
that  they  can  in  no  wise  separate,  except  in  case 
of  " fornication."  Matt,  19:9. 


—  46  — 

Ques.  28.  What  do  you  confess  in  regard  to 
the  power  of  civil  government? 

Am.  I  confess,  from  the  testimony  of  Holy 
Scripture,  that  kings  and  governments  are  in 
stituted  by  God,  for  the  welfare  and  common 
interest  of  the  countries  over  which  they  rule; 
and  that  he  who  resists  such  authorities,  "resists 
the  ordinance  of  God."  Rom.  13:1.  Wherefore 
we  are  under  obligation  to  fear  and  honor  gov 
ernment,  and  obey  the  same  in  all  things  that 
do  not  militate  against  the  word  of  God.  So  we 
are  also  commanded  to  pray  for  the  same. 
1.  Tim.  1:2. 

Ques.  29.    Is  it  allowed  to  swear  an  oath? 

Ans.  No.  For  although  this  was  allowed  to 
the  fathers  of  the  Old  Testament,  yet  has  our 
Lord  and  institutor  of  the  New  Testament, 
Christ  Jesus,  expressly  forbidden  it  (Matt. 
5:33 — 37),  which  is  confirmed  by  the  apostle 
James,  when  he  says:  "Above  all  things,  my 
brethren,  swear  not;  but  let  your  Yea  be  yea; 
and  your  Nay,  nay;  lest  ye  fall  into  condemna 
tion."  James  5:12. 

Ques.  30.    Is  it  allowed  to  take  revenge  ? 
Ans.    No:  although  there  was  liberty  to  do 
so  under  the  Old  Testament  Dispensation.    But 


—  47  — 

now  that  it  is  totally  forbidden  by  Christ  and 
his  apostles,  we  must  not  lust  after  it,  but  in 
meekness  do  good  unto  our  neighbor;  yea,  alsoy 
to  our  enemies.  Matt.  5:38,  39;  Rom.  12:19-21. 

Ques.  31.  If  a  member  of  the  church  fall 
into  some  sin,  or  misdeed,  what  is  to  be  done  in 
such  case? 

Ans.  I  confess  by  virtue  of  the  doctrine  of 
Christ  and  his  apostles,  that  reproof  and  dis 
cipline  must  be  fostered  and  maintained  amongst 
believers;  so  that  the  headstrong,  as  well  as 
such  as  have  committed  gross  -sins  and  works  of 
the  flesh — whereby  they  have  separated  them 
selves  from  God — may  not  be  suffered  in  the 
communion  of  believers;  but  for  their  own 
amendment,  be  "rebuked  before  all,  that  others 
also  may  fear."  Matt,  18:15—18;  Isa.  59:2;. 
1  Tim.  5:20. 

Ques.  32.  How  must  we  conduct  ourselves 
towards  such  as  are  thus  separated  from  the 
church  ? 

Ann.  According  to  the  doctrine  of  the  apos 
tles,  the  true  members  of  the  church  of  Christ 
are  to  withdraw  from  such  reproved  and  impeni 
tent  offenders,  and  have  no  spiritual  communion 
with  them,  except  by  chance  or  occasion,  when 


—  48  — 

they  may  be  exhorted  in  love,  compassion,  and 
Christian  discretion,  again  to  rise  from  their 
fallen  state,  and  return  to  the  church.  Rom. 
16:17;  Tit,  3:10. 

Ques.  33.  How  long  is  the  avoiding  of  such 
offenders  to  be  observed? 

An-s.  Until  they  return,  give  evidence  of 
repentance  —  of  sorrow  for  their  sins  —  and 
earnestly  desire  again  to  be  admitted  into  the 
communion  of  the  church.  In  such  case  they 
are,  after  solemn  prayer  to  God,  again  received 
and  admitted  into  the  church.  2  Cor.  2:6,  7. 

Ques.  34.  What  do  you  believe  concerning 
the  second  coming  of  Christ,  and  the  resurrec 
tion  of  the  dead? 

Am.  I  believe  that  Christ,  our  Head,  Lord, 
and  Savior  will — just  as  he  visibly  ascended  to 
heaven — again  appear  from  thence  in  great 
power  and  glory,  "with  a  shout,  and  with  the 
trump  of  God."  1  Thess.  4:16.  "For  the  hour 
is  coming,  in  the  which  all  that  are  in  their 

O  / 

graves  shall  hear  his  voice,  and  shall  come  forth; 
they  that  have  done  good,  unto  the  resurrection 
of  life;  and  they  that  have  done  evil,  unto  the 
resurrection  of  damnation."  John  5:28,  29. 
"For  we  must  all  appear  before  the  judgment 


—  49  — 

seat  of  Christ;  that  every  one  may  receive  the 
things  done  in  his  body,  according  to  that  he 
hath  done,  whether  it  be  good  or  bad."  2  Cor. 
5:10. 

Ques.  35.  Now  as  this  confession  agrees  with 
the  doctrine  of  Christ  and  his  apostles:  Are  you 
inclined  with  all  your  heart,  to  submit  yourself 
to  the  will  of  your  Redeemer  and  Savior,  Jesus 
Christ — to  deny  yourself,  together  with  all  sinful 
lusts — and  to  strive  by  the  grace  of  God,  in  true 
faith  and  heart-felt  humility— to  lead  a  pious 
and  godly  life  and  holy  conversation,  according 
to  the  commandments  of  God  as  long  as  you 
live? 

An*.     I  am. 

The  minister  then  wishes  the  young  disciple 
the  rich  blessing  and  grace  of  God,  through 
the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  unto  salvation. 
To  him  be  honor  and  praise  for  ever  and 
ever.  Amen. 


MINISTERS   MANUAL, 


THE  ADMINISTRATION  OF  BAPTISM. 

When  any  person,  by  the  grace  of  God,  has 
come  to  a  saving  knowledge  of  the  truth,  and 
desires  to  enter  into  a  covenant  with  God  to  be 
baptized  and  received  into  church  membership, 
he  should  make  known  his  desire  to  the  bishop 
or  ministers,  or  to  any  member  of  the  church, 
who  may  inform  the  minister.  The  bishop  or 
minister  then  inquires  of  the  applicant  \vhether 
he  believes  that  his  desire  to  live  a  better  life 
is  a  call  from  God  to  the  saving  of  his  soul; 
whether  he  realizes  that  he  himself  is  not  able 
to  do  any  part  of  the  saving  work,  and  that  it 
is  impossible  for  him  of  his  own  will  to  continue 
faithful  in  the  good  work  begun  in  his  heart; 
whether  he  believes  that  God,  of  his  own  grace 
and  power,  will,  upon  true  repentance,  forgive 
him  his  sins,  give  him  a  new  heart,  adopt  him 
into  the  family  of  God,  and  receive  him  into  the 
fellowship  of  the  saints.  Also  whether  he  is 
willing  to  submit  himself  to  the  Gospel  of  Jesus 


—  54  — 

Christ  and  his  non-resistant  doctrine,  in  all 
things  to  be  advised  and  instructed  by  the  word 
of  God;  whether  he  is  at  peace  with  his 
neighbors  and  fellowmen  generally,  so  far  as 
it  is  possible,  and  whether  he  is  connected  with 
any  secret  society,  or  is  in  any  other  way 
living  contrary  to  the  teachings  of  the  Gospel 
as  we  interpret  it,  and  if  so,  whether  he  is 
willing  unconditionally  to  withdraw  from  any 
such  secret  organization,  and  in  every  respect 
to  renounce  all  the  errors  of  his  former  life. 
If  the  applicant  gives  satisfactory  evidence  that 
he  is  prompted  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  is 
willing  to  conform  to  the  requirements  of  the 
Gospel,  the  bishop  or  minister  publishes  the 
request  before  the  Congregation,  and  admon 
ishes  the  members  to  observe  the  walk  and 
conduct  of  the  applicant,  to  show  him  a  good 
example  in  a  pious  spiritual  life,  and  to  pray 
for  him. 

The  subject  or  subjects  (if  more  than  one) 
for  baptism  should  then  be  well  instructed  in 
the  doctrines  of  repentance,  forgiveness  of  sins, 
regeneration,  the  life  of  God  in  the  soul,  the 
ordinances  to  be  observed,  the  restrictions 
which  the  Gospel  places  upon  the  Christian, 


—  55  — 

and  the  rules  of  church  government.  The 
meetings  for  this  purpose  may  be  held  at  the 
meeting-house  or  at  some  other  convenient 
place,  on  the  afternoon  of  each  meeting  day, 
or  any  other  appropriate  time  and  place  may 
be  selected.  The  minister  should  give  such 
instructions  on  the  above  mentioned  subjects 
and  others,  as  he  may  consider  suitable  and 
necessary.  The  converts  should  be  instructed 
to  read  and  study  carefully  the  eighteen  articles 
of  our  confession  of  faith,  and  the  minister 
should  make  it  his  duty  to  see  that  they 
understand  them.  They  should  also  be  made 
acquainted  with  the  rules  and  requirements  of 
the  church,  as  well  as  the  duties  which  church- 
membership  imposes  upon  them,  and  the  privi 
leges  it  bestows. 

The  object  of  these  instructions  is  to  edify 
and  confirm  the  subjects  for  baptism  in  their 
faith,  and  encourage  them  to  persevere  in  the 
right  way.  All  applicants  for  baptism  and 
admission  into  the  church  should  be  able  to 
give  satisfactory  evidence  that  they  have  truly 
repented  of  their  sins,  and  have  found  peace  in 
their  souls  through  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  and 
that  they  have  passed  from  death  unto  life. 


—  56  — 
At  least   three   or  four  of  these  meetings 

to 

should  be  held  before  baptism.  In  some  places 
they  are  held  much  oftener.  These  should  be 
opened  and  closed  with  prayer,  and  if  practica 
ble,  with  the  singing  of  a  hymn.  In  many 
places  the  instruction  meetings  are  held  pub 
licly,  the  members  and  the  congregation  in 
general,  being  present,  which  is  appropriate 
and  profitable  for  both  the  members  and  the 
unconverted. 

In  some  localities,  before  baptism  is  admin 
istered,  a  counsel  of  the  church  is  held  for  the 
purpose  of  ascertaining  whether  there  is  any 
scriptural  reason  to  prevent  the  admission  of 
any  of  the  applicants  into  the  church.  If  no 
cause  is  found,  they  are  requested  to  meet  again 
on  the  day  preceding  baptism,  upon  which 
occasion  the  eighteen  articles  of  the  confession 
are  read  to  them  and  explained,  and  they  are 
asked  whether  they  believe  in  and  fully  agree 
with  these  doctrines.  If  they  answer  in  the 
affirmative,  they  are  exhorted  to  stand  firm, 
and  be  faithful  in  the  commandments  of  God, 
and  to  continue  in  good  works  unto  the  end. 

In  other  places  the  names  of  the  applicants 
are  simply  published  in  the  meeting,  and  if  no 


K7 
—   »j  i 

objection  is  presented,  and  the  candidates  have 
been  sufficiently  instructed,  either  publicly  or 
privately,  the  time  for  baptism  is  appointed, 
and  the  exercises  are  proceeded  with  as  follows: 

After  singing  a  hymn,  the  minister  or  deacon 
may  appropriately  read  John  1:1 — 36.  After 
the  usual  opening  services  and  prayer,  the 
bishop  or  another  minister  takes  an  appropriate 
text,  and  preaches  a  discourse  from  it  (observ 
ing  not  to  preach  too  long). 

He  then  descends  from  the  desk,  and  says  to 
the  congregation:  When  our  dear  Lord  and 
Savior  Jesus  Christ,  gave  his  last  commission  to 
his  disciples  he  said:  "All  power  is  given  unto 
me,  in  heaven  and  in  earth.  Go  ye  therefore 
and  teach  all  nations,  baptizing  them  in  the 
name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  teaching  them  to  observe  all  things 
whatsoever  I  have  commanded  you."  And 
again:  uGo  ye  into  all  the  world  and  preach 
the  gospel  to  every  creature;  he  that  belie veth 
and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved;  but  he  that  be 
lie  veth  not  shall  be  damned."  In  accordance 
with  these  declarations  of  the  word  of  God, 
these  dear  souls  have  presented  themselves 
before  us  for  the  purpose  of  being  baptized, 


—  58  — 

and  thus  making  a  covenant  with  God,  and 
being  received  into  the  communion  and  fellow 
ship  of  the  church. 

They  have  been  instructed  in  the  doctrines 
of  the  gospel  and  in  the  ordinances  and  require 
ments  of  the  church,  and  have  given  evidence 
that  they  are  prompted  in  their  purpose  by 
the  Spirit  of  God,  that  they  are  willing  to 
forsake  sin  and  the  world,  to  consecrate  them 
selves  to  the  service  of  God,  and  from  hence 
forth  to  be  the  disciples  and  followers  of  Christ. 
As  we  now  are  witnesses  of  these  solemn  exer 
cises,  let  each  one  of  us  remember  our  own 
covenant  and  pray  that  the  solemn  promises 
which  shall  be  made  here  to-day,  before  God 
and  this  congregation,  may  be  made  in  all 
sincerity,  and  that  God  may  bless  and  establish 
these  dear  souls  in  his  grace,  that  they  may  be 
strong  in  the  Lord,  zealous  in  good  works, 
ornaments  in  the  Christian  profession,  shining 
lights  in  the  world,  and  faithful  in  all  things 
unto  the  end.  And  as  there  is  joy  in  heaven 
over  one  sinner  that  repenteth,  so  let  our  hearts 
rejoice  that  God  has  led  these  precious  souls  to 
turn  from  their  former  ways  and  come  into  the 
fold  of  Christ.  As  we  thus  rejoice  let  us  like- 


—  59  — 

wise  pray  that  God  may  lead  yet  many  more  to 
follow  their  good  example.    Amen. 

Addressing  the  applicants,  the  minister  says : 
And  now  if  it  is  still  your  desire  to  be  baptized 
and  to  be  received  into  church  fellowship,  you 
will  arise. 

He  then  addresses  to  the  applicants  the 
following  questions : 

1.  Do  you  believe  in  one  true,  eternal,  and 
almighty  God,  who  is  the  Creator  and  Preserver 
of  all  visible  and  invisible  things  ( 

Answer:  I  do. 

2.  Do  you  believe  in  Jesus  Chiist:l\as  the 
only  begotten  Son  of  God,  -that  he  is  the  only 
Savior  of  mankind,  that  he  died  upon  the  cross, 
and  gave  himself  a  ransom  for  our   sins,    that 
through  him  we  might  have  eternal  life  ? 

Answer:    I  do. 

3.  Do  you  believe  in  the  Holy  Ghost  which 
proceedeth  from  the  Father  and  the  Son ;  that  he 
is  an  abiding  Comforter,  sanctifies  the  hearts  of 
men,  and  guides  them  into  all  truth? 

Answer:    I  do. 

(NOTE. — The  foregoing  questions  are,  by  some,  com 
bined  in  one ;  but  it  is  better  to  ask  them  separately,  in 
order  that  they  may  be  better  understood.) 


—  60  — 

4.  Are  you  truly  sorry  for  your  past  sins, 
and   are   you   willing  to   renounce   Satan,    the 
world,  and  all  works  of  darkness  and  your  own 
carnal  will  and  sinful  desires  ? 

Answer:    I  am. 

5.  Do  you  promise  by  the  grace  of  God, 
and  the  aid  of  his  Holy  Spirit,   to  submit  your 
self  to  Christ  and  his  word,   and  faithfully  to 
abide  in  the  same  until  death? 

Answer:   I  do. 

After  these  questions  have  been  asked  and 
answered  affirmatively,  the  minister  and  the 
subjects  for  baptism  kneel,  while  the  congrega 
tion  stands,  and  the  minister  prays  for  God's 
blessing  upon  them,  that  they  may  have  grace 
to  remain  steadfast  and  be  faithful  to  the  end  in 
the  promises  they  have  made. 

After  prayer,  the  minister  arises,  while  the 
subjects  for  baptism  remain  kneeling.  The 
deacon  or  some  other  brother  now  brings  a 
vessel  with  water,  and  the  minister  laying  his 
hands  upon  the  head  of  the  subject  for  baptism, 
says:  "Upon  the  confession  of  thy  faith,  which 
thou  hast  made  before  God  and  these  witnesses 
(He  now  with  both  hands  takes  a  quantity  of 
water  from  the  vessel,  and  pours  it  upon  the 


—  (51  — 

head  of  the  applicant),  I  baptize  thee  in  the 
name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the 
Holy  Ghost."* 

After  all  the  applicants  are  thus  baptized, 
the  minister  returns  to  the  one  first  baptized, 
and  taking  him  by  the  hand,  says: 

"In  the  name  of  Christ  and  his  church,  I 
give  you  my  hand:  Arise!  and  as  Christ  was 
raised  up  by  the  glory  of  the  Father,  even  so 
thou  also  shalt  walk  in  newness  of  life,  and  so 
long  as  thou  art  faithful  and  abidest  in  the  doc 
trine  of  his  word,  thou  art  his  disciple  indeed, 
and  shalt  be  acknowledged  as  a  member  of  the 
body  of  Christ,  and  a  brother  (or  sister)  in  the 
church."  He  then  gives  him  the  kiss  of  peace 
and  says:  "The  Lord  bless  thee  and  keep  thee. 
Amen." 

In  the  same  manner  he  also  raises  the  female 
converts,  and  the  wife  of  the  minister  or  deacon, 
or  any  sister  in  the  church,  gives  them  the  kiss 
of  peace,  and  thus  receives  them  into  the  fellow 
ship  of  the  church. 


*  Some,  instead  of,  "Which  thou  hast  made  before 
God  and  these  witnesses,"  say,  "repentance  and  sorrow 
for  thy  sins,"  etc. 


—  62  — 

The  minister  now  takes  his  place  again  at  the 
desk,  and  odves  such  further  instructions  as  he 

C5 

may  deem  necessary,  after  which  the  services 
are  closed  in  the  usual  manner. 

If  any  person  who  has  been  connected  with 
another  denomination,  and  having  been  bap 
tized  upon  the  confession  of  his  faith*,  wishes 
to  unite  with  the  church,  he  is  not  rebaptized, 
unless  he  earnestly  desires  it,  but  is  taught  the 
doctrines  of  the  Bible,  and  the  rules  of  order  as 
we  believe  and  practice  them.  If  he  agrees  with 
these,  and  the  church  has  no  cause  against  him, 
the  minister,  in  the  presence  of  the  whole 
congregation  asks  him  the  following  questions: 

"Do  you  confess  that  you  are  of  the  same 
mind  with  us  in  the  doctrines  and  rules  of  the 
church;  and  do  you  promise  to  remain  faithful 
and  obedient  in  the  same  until  death?"  If  he 
answers  this  affirmatively,  the  minister  takes 
him  by  the  hand,  saying:  "Upon  this  confession 
which  them  hast  made  before  God  and  these 
witnesses,  thou  shalt  be  acknowledged  as  a 
brother  (or  sister)  in  the  church;  and  so  long  as 
thou  art  faithful  and  abidest  in  the  doctrine  of 


*  Persons  who  were  baptized  in  their  infancy,  cannot 
be  received  into  the  church  without  being  rebaptized. 


—  63  — 

his  Word,  thou  art  his  disciple  indeed."  The 
kiss  of  peace  is  then  given,  and  he  says:  "The 
Lord  bless  thee  and  keep  thee.  Amen." 

Frequently  applicants  prefer  to  be  baptized 
in  the  water.  In  this  case  the  questions  are 
sometimes  asked,  and  the  prayer  offered  in  the 
house.  The  services  here  may  be  closed  by  the 
singing  of  a  hymn  before  proceeding  to  the 
water.  Here  the  minister,  standing  with  the 
converts  near  the  \vuter,  surrounded  by  the 
congregation,  reads  Acts  8:35 — 39,  or  some 
oth^r^fiort  and  appropriate  Scripture.  He  may 
also  add,  as  circumstances  may  suggest,  a  few 
•words  .of  comment,  or  admonition,  or  the  con 
gregation  may  sing  a  hymn.  The  minister  then 
leads  the  applicants,  one  or  two  at  a  time,  into 
the  water,  where  the  applicants  kneel  and  the 
minister  takes  up  water  with  both  hands,  pours 
it  on  their  heads,  and  proceeds  further  as  de 
scribed  abovx1. 


EXAMINATION  PRECEDING  THE  COM 
MUNION  OF  THE  LORD'S  SUPPER. 

Self-examination  is  a  duty  enjoined  upon  all 
Christian  believers.  We  read,  "Let  us  search 
and  try  our  ways,  and  turn  again  to  the  Lord." 
Lam.  3:40.  "  Let  a  man  examine  himself,  and 
so  let  him  cat  of  that  bread  and  drink  of  that 
cup,"  1  Cor.  11:28.  "  Examine  yourselves, 
whether  ye  be  in  the  faith;  prove  your  own 
selves."  2  Cor.  13:5.  "Purge  out  therefore 
the  old  leaven,  that  ye  may  be  a  new  lump,  as 
ye  are  unleavened."  1  Cor.  5:7.  "Put  away 
from  among  yourselves  that  wicked  person," 
etc.  1  Cor.  5:13. 

Hence  it  is  the  custom  of  the  church, 
several  weeks  before  the  communion  of  the 
Lord's  Supper  is  observed,  to  hold  a  church 
examination,  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  a 
knowledge  of  the  standing  and  condition  of 
each  member. 

When  the  day  for  the  examination  meeting 
is  made  known  to  the  church,  the  minister 
should  admonish  the  membership  to  improve 


—  65  — 

the  time  to  their  spiritual  benefit,  to  endeavor 
by  prayer,  meditation  and  the  reading  of  the 
Scriptures,  to  come  especially  near  to  God,  to 
purge  out  the  old  leaven  of  sin  and  impurity 
that  might  yet  beset  them,  that  they  may  gain 
new  strength  to  walk  in  love,  meekness,  hu 
mility,  and  self-denial,  according  to  the  example 
of  Jesus;  and  further,  if  any  one  has  aught 
against  his  neighbor  or  brother,  or  is  aware 
that  his  neighbor  or  brother  has  aught  against 
him,  that  he  go  to  him,  and  deal  with  him 
according  to  the  instructions  of  our  Savior 
given  in  Matt.  5:23,  24,  and  18:15,  35,  and 
thus  earnestly,  kindly  and  sincerely  seek  a 
reconciliation,  so  that  all  may  be  duly  prepared 
for  the  solemn  occasion. 

At  the  time  of  the  examination,  the  minister 
or  ministers  (if  more  than  one  is  present),  with 
the  deacons,  retire  to  the  counsel-room,  where 
the  members,  one  by  one,  present  themselves, 
and  in  some  churches  extend  to  the  minister 
the  right  hand  as  a  token  of  peace.  Then  the 
minister  asks:  "Do  you  acknowledge  peace  with 
God,  with  the  church,  and  with  all  men;  and 
is  it  your  desire  to  partake  of  the  communion 
of  the  Lord's  Supper?" 


—  66  — 

Should  any  one  offer  any  complaint  against 
any  brother  or  sister,  before  he  has  observed 
the  rule  given  in  Matt.  18:15—46,  his  complaint 
cannot  under  any  circumstances  be  received, 
unless  it  be  a  flagrant  transgression.  (The 
minister  who  receives  a  complaint  in  a  case 
where  the  complainant  has  not  observed  the 
above  rule,  makes  himself  liable  to  censure). 
But  when  this  rule  has  been  observed,  and  every 
effort  to  win  him  has  failed,  the  complaint  will 
be  received,  and  the  transgressor  will  be  further 
dealt  with  according  to  the  same  rule. 

After  all  the  brethren  and  sisters  have  thus 
presented  themselves,  the  ministers  return  to 
the  audience  room,  and  report  to  the  brother 
hood  the  result  of  the  examination,  and  usually 
announce  the  time  when  the  communion  of  the 
Lord's  Supper  will  be  observed. 

NOTE  1.  While  the  examination  is  progress 
ing,  the  congregation  may  very  appropriately 
spend  the  time  in  singing. 

NOTE  2.  In  case  that  any  of  the  brethren  or 
sisters  do  not  attend  the  examination  meeting, 
they  should  be  visited  by  the  minister  or  deacon 
before  communion.  If  any  dissatisfaction  exists, 
an  effort  should  be  made  to  bring  about  a  recon- 


dilation,  so  that  with  each  communion,  all 
difficulties  and  dissatisfactions  throughout  the 
district  may  be  adjusted,  and  thus  the  peace 
and  harmony,  as  well  as  the  purity  of  the  church 
preserved. 

NOTE  3.  The  examination  meeting  before 
communion  is  a  custom  in  our  church  which  is 
founded  upon  the  teachings  of  Christ  and  his 
apostles,  as  we  have  shown  above,  and  should 
never  be  omitted,  in  order  that  the  church  may 
be  preserved  pure,  and-  that  such  as  arc  Un 
worthy  and  walk  not  in  accordance1  with  the 
teachings  and  example  of  dnrist-  may  be  made 
manifest,  and  not  impose  themselves  upon  the 
church  and  partakg-of  the  communion,  and  thus 
bring  reproach  pjpon  the  people  of  God.  "  Know 
ye  not  that  a  little  leaven  leaveneth  the  whole 
lump."  1  Cor.  5:6. 


THE  COMMUNION  OF  THE  LORD'S 
SUPPER. 


The  Lord's  Supper  is  usually  observed  in 
the  Spring  and  fall  of  each  year.  The  meeting 
on  this  occasion  is  opened  by  singing  an  appro 
priate  hymn,  after  which  the  26th  chapter  of 
Matthew  or  the  22d  chapter  of  Luke  or  some 
other  appropriate  Scripture  is  read.  One  of  the 
ministers  then  delivers  a  short  address,  in  which 
he  points  out  the  importance  and  solemnity  of 
the  occasion,  and  then  offers  a  prayer. 

After  prayer,  a  suitable  text  is  read,  and  the 
bishop  or  another  minister  preaches  a  discourse 
appropriate  to  the  occasion.  The  object  of  the 
communion  is  generally  presented,  showing  that 
the  eating  and  drinking  together  of  the  members 
of  the  church,  at  the  Lord's  table,  is  expressive 
of  the  communion  and  unity  of  the  church  as 
"the  body  of  Christ."  Also  the  great  love  of 
Jesus,  which  he  manifested  toward  us  as  our 
Savior,  his  sufferings  and  death  upon  the  cross, 
the  great  salvation  which  he,  through  his  suffer- 


—  69  — 

ins:,  wrought  for  us  and  how  he  instituted  in 
commemoration  thereof,  his  Holy  Supper,  and 
commanded  all  his  true  followers  to  observe  and 
keep  the  same. 

When  the  discourse  is  concluded,  the  bishop 
usually  reads  1  Cor.  11:23—29,  and  again  ex 
horts  the  congregation  to  self-examination,  after 
which  the  bread  (the  bread  and  wine  should  be 
placed  on  the  table  at  the  opening  of  the 
meeting,  and  remain  covered  until  the  bishop 
is  ready  to  use  them)  is  placed  before  the 
bishop  by  the  deacon,  the  bread  being  cut  into 
long  'slices.  The  bishop  takes  the  bread  and 
gives  thanks,  the  congregation  the  while  stand 
ing.  After  the  congregation  is  again  seated,* 
the  minister  breaks  the  bread,  and  gives  to  each 
communicant  as  he  rises  to  his  feet  to  receive  it, 
a  piece,  until  all  are  served,  f 

During  the  distribution  of  the  bread,  the 
bishop  repeats  the  words  of  our  Savior  given 


*  In  some  congregations  the  members  remain  stand 
ing  until  they  are  served- 

t  It  has  been  the  custom  with  many  of  our  ministers 
to  partake  of  the  bread  and  wine  before  offering  it  to  any 
of  the  members,  but  in  later  years,  many  prefer  to  receive 
it  from  one  of  their  fellow  ministers  after  a  part  or  all  the 
others  have  been  served. 


in  Luke  22:19.  "This  is  my  body  which  is 
given  for  you;  this  do  in  remembrance  of 
me,"  or  1  Cor.  10:16,  "The  bread  which  we 
brake  is  it  not  the  communion  of  the  body  of 
Christ,"  or  1  Cor.  11:24,  "Take,  eat,  this  is  my 
body,"  etc.,  or  some  other  appropriate  text  or 
benediction. 

In  some  parts  of  the  country,  the  minister 
stands  by  the  table,  or  in  some  convenient  place, 
and  those  wishing  to  partake  of  the  Supper, 
rise  from  their  seats  and  £o  to  him  to  receive  the 

O 

bread,  and  afterwards  the  wine,  while  in  other 
localities,  the  minister  proceeds  through  the 
house  from  seat  to  seat,  while  the  communicant, 
as  stated  above,  simply  rises  to  his  feet  to 
receive  it. 

After  all  the  members  have  been  served  with 
bread,  the  deacon  pours  the  wine  into  the  cup. 
The  congregation  again  rise,  and  the  minister 
takes  the  cup  and  gives  thanks,  after  which  he 
hands  it  to  each  individual  communicant  after 
the  same  manner  in  which  he  distributed  the 
bread,  repeating  meanwhile  the  words,  "This 
cup  is  the  New  Testament  in  my  blood,  which 
is  shed  for  you,"  Luke  22:20;  or,  "The  cup  of 
blessing  which  we  bless,  is  it  not  the  commun- 


—  71  — 

ion  of  the  blood  of  Christ?11  1  Cor.  10:16; 
"This  cup  is  the  New  Testament  in  my  blood: 
this  do  ye,  as  oft  as  ye  drink  it,  in  remembrance 
of  me.  For  as-  often  as  ye  eat  this  bread,  and 
drink  this  cup,  ye  do  shew  the  Lord's  death  till 
he  come,"  1  Cor.  11:25,  26,  or  some  other  ap 
propriate  text. 

After  all  the  members  have  partaken  of  the 
cup,  the  minister  briefly  admonishes  the  con 
gregation  to  remain  faithful  in  the  service  of 
God,  walk  humbly,  and  exercise  meekness  and 
love  toward  all  men,  and  then  closes  the  meet 
ing  in  the  usual  manner,  by  offering  a  prayer, 
singing  a  hymn,  and  the  benediction. 


FEET-WASHING. 


With  the  benediction  the  congregation  in 
general  is  dismissed.*  But  those  who  have 
partaken  of  the  communion  of  the  Lord's 
Supper,  remain  to  take  part  in  the  exercise  of 
feet-washing,  which  is  performed  immediately 
after  the  communion.  Any,  however,  who  wish 
to  remain  to  witness  the  ceremony,  are  always 
welcome  to  do  so.  The  bishop  or  another 
minister  reads  from  John  13:1—17,  and  then 
makes  some  remarks  showing  that  this  act  of 
humility  was  instituted  by  our  Savior;  that  he 
commanded  his  disciples  to  do  one  to  another  as 
he  had  done  to  them ;  and  that  by  this  blessed 
example  we  should,  by  a  willing  obedience  to  this 
command,  be  prompted  to  declare  our  love  both 
towards  him  and  the  brethren.  Also  that  it 
shows  the  relation  which  the  members  of  the 
"body  of  Christ"  sustain  to  one  another,  Christ 
being  Lord  and  Master,  and  yet  doing  the  work 
of  a  servant,  thereby  showing  that  the  church 

*  In  some  places  the  congregation  is  not  dismissed 
until  feet-washing  is  concluded,  which  in  many  instances 
is  preferable. 


—  73  — 

is  a  brotherhood  in  which  each  member  stands 
upon  the  same  equality  with  the  others,  all 
being  brethren  in  Christ,  willing,  even  as  our 
Savior,  to  perform  to  the  glory  of  God,  the 
most  menial  and  common  service,  sincerely  con 
sidering  how  his  dear  Son  humbled  himself,  and 
with  his  own  precious  blood  washed  our  souls 
from  sin,  purified  our  hearts,  and  redeemed  us 
from  everlasting  death. 

The  deacons  now  bring  vessels  with  water, 
and  the  twro  sexes,  each  among  themselves, 
wash  one  another's  feet  and  wipe  them  with  a 
towel,  then  giving  each  other  the  right  hand, 
and  the  kiss  of  peace,  upon  which  one  of  them 
says:  "The  Lord  be  with  us,  preserve  us  in 
peace,  and  strengthen  us  in  love;"  or  some  other 
words  of  greeting:  The  other  responds:  "Amen." 
Then  two  other  brethren  proceed  in  the  same 
way,  and  so  on  until  all  have  passed  through 
this  ceremony.  The  sisters  proceed  in  the  same 
manner.  * 


*  In  some  localities  the  female  members  retire  to  the 
counsel  room,  with  which  almost  every  meeting-house 
is  provided,  and  there  wash  another's  feet,  in  the  apart 
ment  by  themselves.  This  is  said  by  old  ministers  to 
have  formerly  been  the  general  custom. 


CHOOSING  AND  ORDAINING  A 
MINISTER. 


When  a  church  is  not  fully  provided  with 
ministers,  a  brother  is  chosen  from  the  congre 
gation  and  ordained.  The  request  is  usually 
brought  before  conference,  that  the  ordination 
may  be  made  with  the  consent  of  conference 
and  the  approval  of  the  church.  As  soon  as 
convenient,  the  congregation  is  informed  of  the 
action  of  conference,  and  a  day  is  appointed 
for  the  purpose  of  choosing  a  brother  for  the 
ministry.  All  the  brethren  and  sisters  are 
requested  to  be  present.  They  are  admonished 
to  pray  earnestly  to  God  for  his  blessing  upon 
their  undertaking. 

On  the  appointed  day,  the  services  are  con 
ducted  as  usual.  The  minister  preaches  a  dis 
course  appropriate  to  the  occasion,  in  which  he 
endeavors  to  impress  the  minds  of  the  members 
with  the  importance  of  the  duty  before  them, 
and  shows  them  that,  in  the  fear  of  God, 
according  to  their  most  solemn  convictions, 
they  should  each  cast  their  vote  for  the  brother 


—  75  — 

who  they  believe  best  fills  the  requirements 
which  the  Scriptures  enjoin  for  this  important 
work  (1  Tim.  3:1 — 7)  and  whom  they  believe  to 
be  chosen  of  God. 

The  bishop  now,  with  one  or  two  fellow- 
ministers,  retires  to  the  counsel-room,  and  all 
the  members  who  feel  impressed  to  do  so,  one 
at  a  time,  go  in  and  mention  the  name  of  a 
brother  who  they  are  convinced  in  their  hearts, 
has,  according  to  the  Scriptures,  the  necessary 
qualifications.*  The  name  is  written  down. 
When  all  have  given  their  voices,  the  ministers 
return  to  the  audience  room,  and  announce  the 
name  or  names  for  which  the  votes  were  cast.  If 
only  one  brother  has  been  nominated,  which  is 
always  desirable,  the  church  has  a  united  voice 
according  to  the  instruction  given  in  the  Con 
fession  of  Faith;  and  the  brother  thus  chosen, 
after  due  examination,  is  ordained,  f 


*  This  is  a  work  of  solemn  importance,  that  those  who 
give  their  votes,  should  be  fully  convinced  that  the  Spirit 
has  revealed  to  them  what  they  should  do,  and  whom 
they  should  name.  No  one  should  venture  upon  this 
solemn  duty  thoughtlessly  or  carelessly. 

f  There  are  a  number  of  congregations,  especially 
among  the  Amish  and  Russian  Mennonites,  which 
choose  their  ministers  by  the  voice  of  the  members,  con- 


When  more  than  one  have  received  votes, 
the  congregation  is  earnestly  admonished  again 
to  commend  the  whole  matter  to  God,  and  im 
plore  His  help,  and  the  direction  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  that  the  choosing  of  one  from  this  num 
ber  may  tend  to  the  glory  of  God,  and  the  well- 
being  of  the  church. 

A  day  is  then  appointed  to  choose  by  lot  one 
from  among  those  nominated.  In  the  meantime 
the  brethren  named  are  examined  and  questioned 
regarding  their  faith,  and  are  admonished  to 
yield  themselves  in  willing  obedience  into  the 
hands  of  God.  The  meeting  is  opened  as  usual, 
and  Luke  10  : 1 — 22  or  some  other  appropriate 
Scripture  is  read.  After  prayer,  the  bishop  de 
livers  a  discourse  suitable  to  the  occasion,  and 
then  reads  Acts  1:23—26. 

After  the  discourse,  the  deacons  take  as 
many  books,  of  the  same  kind  (as  nearly  alike 
as  possible),  as  there  are  brethren  to  be  chosen 
from,  and  retire  to  the  counsel-room,  where  they 
place  into  one  of  the  books  the  lot  (a  slip  of  pa- 

sidering  the  one  chosen  who  receives  the  highest  num 
ber  of  votes.  When  two  brethren  receiving  the  highest 
number  of  votes,  have  received  an  equal  number  of 
votes,  the  lot  is  used  to  decide  between  them. 


<  i 


per  on  which  is  written,  "The  lot  is  east  into 
the  lap;  but  the  whole  disposing  thereof  is  of 
the  Lord."  Prov.  16:33,  or,  "Herewith  God 
hath  called  thee  to  the  ministry  of  the  Gospel)." 

The  books  are  then  taken  into  the  audience- 
room,  and  placed  on  the  desk  or  table.  The 
bishop,  with  the  whole  congregation  kneels  in 
prayer,  and  commends  the  whole  work  to  God, 
saying,  along  with  other  petitions:  "Thou, 
Lord,  which  knowest  the  hearts  of  all  men, 
show  which  of  these  thou  hast  chosen." 

Each  of  the  brethren  nominated  then  takes  a 
book,  and  the  bishop  proceeds  to  look  for  the 
lot.  The  one  in  whose  book  it  is  found  is  con 
sidered  chosen,  and  is  required  to  rise  (in  some 
congregations  they  kneel)  and  the  bishop  or 
dains  him. 

The  bishop  lays  his  hands  upon  his  head  and 
holds  them  there  while  he  says: 

"The  Lord  has  called  thee  to  preach  the 
Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ ;  to  make  known  his  holy 
word  and  the  counsels  of  his  will  regarding  our 
salvation.  Go,  preach  the  Gospel  in  its  purity; 
admonish  the  unconverted  to  repent;  instruct 
and  encourage  the  church.  Continue  earnestly 
to  read  the  word  of  God,  to  exhort  and  to  teach. 


—  78  — 

Pray  without  ceasing;  seek  to  be  a  faithful  and 
zealous  laborer  in  the  vineyard  of  the  Lord. 
Be  instant  in  season  and  out  of  season,  reprove, 
rebuke,  exhort  with  all  long-suffering  and  doc 
trine;  continue  in  them;  for  in  doing  this,  thou 
shalt  both  save  thyself  and  those  that  hear  thee. 
May  the  Lord  direct,  help,  and  bless  thee. 
Amen/' 

The  bishop  then  gives  him  his  right  hand 
and  the  kiss  of  peace.  The  other  ministers  also 
give  him  their  hand  and  the  kiss  of  peace,  and 
wish  God's  aid  and  blessing  upon  his  labors. 

The  bishop  now  admonishes  the  congrega 
tion  to  manifest  in  word  and  deed  true  Christian 
love  to  their  newly  ordained  minister;  to  pray 
for  him,  and  when  he  preaches  the  word,  to  be 
obedient  thereto.  The  services  are  closed  as 
usual. 


CHOOSING  AND  ORDAINING  A 
DEACON.* 


The  deacon  is  chosen  from  the  congregation 
in  the  same  manner  as  the  minister.  When  the 
deacon  is  to  be  chosen,  the  bishop  reads  Acts 
6:1 — 7,  and  shows  what  the  duties  of  the  deacon 
are.  If  more  than  one  brother  is  nominated, 
the  lot  is  cast  as  in  the  choosing  of  a  minister. 
The  brother  chosen  is  asked  to  arise  (or  kneel) , 
when  the  bishop  lays  his  hands  upon  his  head, 
and  gives  him  the  charge  to  his  office  as  follows: 

"  It  has  pleased  God  to  call  thee  to  the  office 
of  deacon.  It  will  now  be  your  duty  to  receive, 
and  take  care  of,  the  charities  of  the  church,  to 
distribute  them  to  the  needy  members,  accord 
ing  to  their  necessities;  to  visit  the  sick,  the 
widows  and  the  orphans,  and  comfort  them  and 
pray  with  them  in  their  afflictions;  also  to  assist 


*In  the  Confession  of  Faith,  according  to  the  teach 
ings  of  the  apostle,  there  is  provision  made,  also  for  the 
choosing  and  seivice  of  deaconesses,  or  female  deacons. 
See  art.  9,  Con.  of  Faith.  This  custom  however  has  long 
since  passed  into  disuse  and  there  are  now,  so  iar  as  we 
know,  no  deaconesses,  in  any  of  our  churches. 


—  80  — 

the  bishop  in  the  administration  of  baptism,  and 
the  Lord's  Supper;  to  bear  testimony  to  the 
truth  in  their  public  ministrations,  and,  when 
from  any  reason  no  minister  is  present  where 
the  people  meet  for  public  worship,  it  will  bo 
your  duty  to  conduct  the  services,  by  reading, 
exhortation  and  prayer.  Where  strife  or  diffi 
culties  arise  in  the  church,  or  between  brethren 
and  sisters,  it  will  be  your  duty  to  use  your  ut 
most  endeavors  to  bring  about  a  reconciliation, 
and  restore  unity  and  peace.  Be  faithful  to  the 
Lord,  and  he  will  endow  thee  with  wisdom  and 
understanding  from  on  high,  give  you  grace  to 
do  his  work,  and  bless  you  in  all  your  duties. 
The  grace  of  God  be  with  you.  Amen." 

The  bishop  then  gives  him  the  kiss  of  peace, 
and  if  any  deacon  is  present,  he  does  likewise, 
and  wishes  him  God's  grace  and  blessing. 

The  bishop  then  exhorts  the  church  to  re 
ceive  the  deacon  in  love,  and  to  pray  for  him, 
that  he  may  be  blessed  and  strengthened  in  his 
calling;  that  through  his  efforts  the  church  may 
be  preserved  in  love  and  peace,  and  her  rules 
and  ordinances  maintained  to  the  glory  of  God, 
and  the  salvation  of  souls.  The  meeting  is 
closed  in  the  usual  form. 


CHOOSING  AND  ORDAINING  A  BISHOP, 
OR  ELDER.* 


When  a  bishop  is  to  be  chosen,  the  congre 
gation  calls  a  bishop  from  some  neighboring 
congregation,  who  lays  the  matter  before  the 
members,  and  inquires  into  the  character  faith 
fulness,  and  abilities  of  their  ministers;  and  if 
any  are  found  possessing  the  necessary  qualifi 
cations,  according  to  the  instructions  of  Paul, 
2  Tim.  2:2;  3:2—8;  and  Tit,  1:6—9,  the  mem 
bers  are  asked  to  give  their  voice  for  one  among 
those  who  have  already,  for  some  time,  been 
in  the  ministry,  in  the  same  manner  as  above 
stated  in  choosing  a  minister.  Should  all  the 


*The  bishop  or  elder  in  the  Mennonite  church  is  sim 
ply  the  minister  who  has  been  ordained  to  the  special 
charge  of  caring  for,  and  officiating  in  the  church  of  a 
certain  prescribed  district.  This  district  may  contain  but 
one  place  of  worship,  or  a  number  of  places,  which  are  at 
considerable  distances  from  each  other.  He  may  have  a 
number  of  fellow-ministers  in  his  charge,  to  preach  at 
the  various  places,  and  aid  him  in  his  work  generally. 


—  82  — 

votes  fall  upon  one  person,  the  lot  is  not  used, 
but  when  two  or  more  are  nominated,  the  mat 
ter  is  proceeded  with  in  the  same  manner  as  in 
the  choosing  of  a  minister  or  deacon.  In  many 
places  it  is  customary  after  the  nominations  are 
made,  to  defer  the  choosing  and  the  ordination 
for  some  days,  perhaps  for  a  week  or  more;  but 
frequently  the  nominating  of  candidates,  the 
choosing  by  lot  and  ordination,  all  take  place  on 
the  same  day,  as  it  may  best  suit  the  circum 
stances  and  convenience  of  the  church. 

On  the  day  when  the  lot  is  to  be  cast,  and 
the  person  chosen  ordained,  the  officiating 
bishop  reads  1  Tim.  3:1—9,  and  1  Peter  5:1—4, 
or  other  appropriate  Scriptures,  and  from 
these  seek  to  set  forth  the  solemn  and  impor 
tant  duties  devolving  upon  a  bishop,  and  the 
qualifications  which  he  should  possess. 

After  the  bishop  has  been  chosen,  either  by 
the  united  voice  of  the  church  or  by  lot  the  or 
dination  takes  place  as  follows:  The  newly 
elected  bishop  is  requested  to  kneel,  and  the  of 
ficiating  bishop  lays  his  hands  upon  his  head 
(and  if  other  bishops  are  present,  they  also  at 
the  same  time  lay  their  hands  upon  his  head) 
and  addresses  him  as  follows: 


—  83  — 

"Dear  Brother,  you  are  chosen  to  the  office 
of  bishop  in  the  church  of  Christ.  It  will  he 
your  duty  to  preach  the  word  of  God,  to  pro 
mulgate  the  pure  doctrine  of  the  Gospel  of  our 
salvation;  to  baptize  and  receive  into  the  church 
those  who  believe,  upon  the  confession  of  their 
faith,  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the 
Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  to  teach  them 
to  observe  all  things  whatsoever  our  Savior  has 
commanded;  and  to  administer  the  Communion 
of  the  Lord's  Supper.  It  is  also  enjoined  upon 
you  to  ex-communicate  from  the  church,  ac 
cording  to  Matt.  18:17  and  1  Cor.  5,  those  who 
transgress  the  commands  of  Christ,  and  con 
tinue  in  their  disobedience,  and  when  they  re 
pent  and  return  to  obedience,  to  receive  them 
again.  It  will  also  be  your  duty  to  officiate  at 
the  marriage  of  members  of  the  church,  to  visit 
the  sick  and  the  afflicted,  to  comfort,  encourage 
and  strengthen  them  in  their  faith;  indeed  unto 
you  we  commit  all  the  duties  devolving  upon  a 
faithful  steward  in  the  house  of  the  Lord,  that 
in  all  things  you  may  walk  and  do  according  to 
the  Gospel.  Therefore  be  not  self-willed,  not 
soon  angry,  but  sober,  just,  holy,  temperate, 
holding  fast  the  faith  as  you  have  been  taught, 


—  84  — 

that  you  may  be  able  by  sound  doctrine  both  to 
exhort  and  convince  gainsayers.  Be  a  faithful 
shepherd  of  the  flock  of  God.  that  at  last  you 
may  also  be  received  by  the  Great  Shepherd  of 
souls  with:  'Well  done,  good  and  faithful  ser 
vant;  enter  thou  into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord.' 
May  God,  who  has  called  you  to  this  high  and 
holy  calling,  anoint  you  with  the  Holy  Ghost, 
give  you  grace  and  wisdom,  and  also  bless  you 
in  all  things,  through  His  Son  Jesus  Christ, 
Amen." 

The  officiating  bishop  now  takes  the  newly 
ordained  bishop  by  the  hand,  raises  him  to  his 
feet,  gives  him  the  brotherly  salutation,  and 
thus  welcomes  him  as  a  co-laborer  to  the  solemn 
duties  to  which  he  has  been  chosen. 

He  then  addresses  the  members  of  the 
church  as  follows: 

"Beloved  brethren  and  sisters,  Receive  your 
bishop  with  joy;  look  upon  him  as  chosen  of 
God,  and  appointed  over  you  to  this  important 
work.  Pray  for  him,  and  manifest  toward  him 
the  full  measure  of  that  great  love  which  the 
Gospel  requires.  When  he  declares  unto  you 
the  word  of  God,  receive  the  truth,  seek  to 


—  85  — 

obey,  and  submit  yourselves  unto  him,  for  he 
watcheth  over  your  souls  as  one  who  must  give 
account,  that  he  may  do  it  with  joy  and  not 
with  grief.  Heb.  13:17.  Acknowledge  him  as 
one  laboring  among  you,  who  is  over  you  in  the 
Lord,  and  admonishing  you  and  teaching  you 
the  way  of  life  everlasting;  esteem  him  very 
highly  for  his  work's  sake,  and  be  at  peace 
among  yourselves.  I  Thess.  5 : 12,  13.  May 
God  bless  you  and  keep  you  as  his  own  dear 
church,  and  finally  bring  you  all  to  his  eternal 
rest  through  Jesus  Christ,  our  Lord,  to  whom 
be  honor,  and  praise,  and  glory,  forever. 
Amen.*' 


A  bishop  then  must  be  blameless,  the  husband  of  one 
wife,  vigilant,  sober,  of  good  behavior  [or  modest],  given 
to  hospitality,  apt  to  teach ;  not  given  to  wine,  no 
striker,  not  greedy  of  filthy  lucre,  but  patient;  not  a 
brawler,  not  covetous  ;  one  that  ruleth  well  his  own 
house,  having  his  children  in  subjection  with  all  gravity; 
*  *  *  not  a  novice,  lest  being  lifted  up  with  pride,  he  fall 
into  the  condemnation  of  the  devil.  Moreover  he  must 
have  a  good  report  of  them  which  are  without,  lest  he 
fall  into  reproach  and  the  snare  of  the  devil,  i  Tim. 
3:2-4,6,  7. 


MARRIAGE  FORMULA. 


The  marriage  relation  is  the  most  important 
and  sacred  of  any  that  can  be  formed  in  this 
life.  It  is  of  Divine  origin,  and  was  instituted 
of  God  for  the  happiness,  preservation  and  wel 
fare  of  mankind.  It  imposes  upon  us  the  most 
solemn  obligations  and  duties,  and  from  it 
spring  the  most  momentous  consequences.  It  is 
a  union  which  surpasses  even  the  natural  ties  of 
relationship.  "For  this  cause  shall  a  man  leave 
his  father  and  mother,  and  shall  cleave  to  his 
wife,  and  they  twain  shall  be  one  flesh." 

Since  the  marriage  relation  then  is  one  of 
such  great  importance,  great  care  should  be  ex 
ercised  in  assuming  it,  and  hence  when  two  per 
sons,  who  are  members  of  the  church,  agree  to 
gether  to  enter  the  married  state,  their  names 
are  published  before  the  congregation,  at  the 
close  of  the  public  services,  on  at  least  two  suc 
cessive  Sundays.* 


*  Since  the  system  of  Legal  licenses  has  been  estab 
lished  in  most  of  the  states,  the  custom  of  publishing  in 
church  is  gradually  becoming  obsolete.  In  Canada  and 


—  ST  — 

After  they  have  boon  twice  published,  and 
no  cause  has  boon  presented  against  them,  the 
marriage  may  at  any  time  be  solemnized. 

The  marriage  ceremony,  according  to  our 
present  usage,  generally  takes  place  at  the 
home  of  the  bride.  There  is  apparently  no  rea 
son,  however,  why  it  should  not  be  performed 
in  the  meeting-house,  at  the  time  of  public  ser 
vices,  according  to  the  custom  of  our  brethren 
in  former  times,  and  as  is  still  the  custom  with 
some  Mennonite  churches. 

The  ceremony  is  conducted  as  follows:  After 
the  singing  of  a  hymn,  and  a  prayer  appropri 
ate  to  the  occasion,  the  minister  reads  Mark 
10: 2 — 12.  He  then  addresses  the  bridal  pair, 
and  explains  the  origin  and  institution  of  mar 
riage,  the  duties  and  obligations  it  imposes,  the 
sanctity  of  the  relation  into  which  they  are 
placed  by  taking  upon  themselves  the  bonds  of 
matrimony.  He  admonishes  them  to  serve  and 
fear  God,  lead  a  pious,  virtuous  life,  love  one 
another,  be  faithful,  kind  and  affectionate,  for 
bearing  and  patient,  and  to  endure  willingly  the 


some  other  places,  they  are  required  to  be  published 
three  successive  Sundays  before  the  marriage  ceremony 
is  performed. 


—  88  — 

sorrows  and  trials  which  may  be  associated  with 
their  joys  through  life. 

After  the  conclusion  of  the  discourse,  he  ad 
dresses  those  present,  saying: 

Beloved  friends:'  It  has  now  been  fully 
made  known  that  A.  B.  and  C.  D.  have  agreed 
to  enter  into  the  bonds  of  matrimony,  and  no 
reason  has  been  shown  to  prevent  them.  But  if 
any  one  present  should  know  of  any  just  cause 
why  these  persons  should  not  be  joined  in  holy' 
matrimony,  let  him  now  declare  it. 

If  none  is  presented,  the  bishop  or  minister 
again  addresses  the  bridegroom  and  bride  as 
follows: 

If  it  is  still  your  desire  to  enter  into  the 
bonds  of  matrimony,  you  will  arise. 

Upon  this  they  present  themselves  standing, 
before  the  minister,  the  bridegroom  on  the 
right  of  the  bride.  The  minister  then  asks  the 
following  questions: 

1.  To  both,  Do  you  believe  that  matrimony 
is  an  ordinance  instituted  of  God,  and  con 
firmed  and  sanctioned  by  Jesus  Christ,  and  that 
you  must  therefore  enter  upon  it  in  the  fear  of 
God? 

Each  answers:  I  do. 


—  80  — 

2.  He  then  asks  the  bridegroom:    Do  you 
confess  and  declare  that  you  are  unmarried,  and 
free  from  all  other  marriage  relations  and  en 
gagements  whatsoever  ? 

Answer:  I  am. 

3.  He  then  likewise  asks  the  bride: 

Do  you  confess  and  declare  that  you  are  un 
married,  and  free  from  all  other  marriage  rela 
tions  and  engagements  whatsoever? 

Answer:  I  am. 

4.  To  the  bridegroom,  A.  B. : 

Will  you,  in  the  presence  of  God,  and  these 
witnesses,  take  C.  D. ,  the  sister  by  your  side, 
to  be  your  wedded  wife;  will  you  love  and  cher 
ish  her,  provide  and  care  for  her  in  health  and 
sickness,  in  prosperity  and  adversity,  exercise 
patience,  kindness  and  forbearance  toward  her, 
live  with  her  in  peace  as  becometh  a  faithful, 
Christian  husband;  and,  forsaking  all  others, 
keep  yourself  only  unto  her  as  long  as  you  both 
shall  live  ? 

Answer:  I  will. 

5.  To  the  bride,    C.  D.: 

Will  you,  in  the  presence  of  God  and  these 
witnesses,  take  A.  B.,  the  brother  by  your  side, 
to  be  your  wedded  husband;  will  you  love  and 


—  90  — 

cherish  him  in  health  and  in  sickness,  in  pros 
perity  and  in  adversity,  share  with  him  the 
joys  and  sorrows  of  life,  exercise  patience, 
kindness  and  forbearance  toward  him  as  be- 
cometh  a  faithful  Christian  wife;  and,  forsakino- 

O 

all  others,  keep  yourself  only  unto  him  as  long 
as  you  both  shall  live  ? 

Answer:   I  will. 

The  minister  than  says: 

You  will  now  take  each  other  by  the  right 
hand. 

Upon  which  he  takes  their  joined  hands 
between  his  hands,  or  holds  them  in  his  right 
hand,  and  says: 

The  God  of  Abraham,  the  God  of  Isaac,  and 
the  Gocl  of  Jacob  be  with  you,  and  bless  you 
abundantly,  through  Jesus  Christ.  Go  forth  as 
husband  and  wife,  live  in  peace,  fear  God  and 
keep  his  commandments.  Amen. 

The  services  are  now  closed  with  prayer,  the 
singing  of  a  hymn,  and  the  benediction. 

NOTE:  —After  the  marriage  ceremony  is  performed, 
and  before  the  exercises  are  closed  it  is  a  custom  with 
some,  to  read  Eph  5:15 — 33;  Col.  3:18,  19;  i  Tim.  2:8 
— 14,  and  i  Peter  3:1 — 7,  and  give  an  exhortation  con 
cerning  the  duties  which,  as  husband  and  wife,  the  newly 
married  pair  owe  to  each  other.  This,  however,  may  very 
properly  be  left  to  the  option  of  the  officiating  minister. 


DEALING  WITH  TRANSGRESSORS. 

When  discord  or  difficulties  occur  between 
members  of  the  church,  the  rule  given  in  Matt, 
18:15,  16,  shall  be  strictly  observed.  If  after  a 
faithful  effort  the  difficulties  cannot  be  adjusted, 
and  the  parties  do  not  become  reconciled,  the 
deacon  shall  use  his  whole  influence  to  bring  the 
contending  parties  to  an  understanding,  and 
have  them  settle  the  matter  between  themselves. 
When  this  cannot  be  accomplished,  the  matter- 
is  laid  before  the. church,  so  that,  if  possible, 
through  the  prayers  and  efforts  of  the  whole 
brotherhood,  the  offending  and  erring  ones  may 
become  enlightened  and  reconciled.  If  this  can 
not  be  done,  a  counsel  is  taken.  If  either  of  .the 
parties  are  not  willing  to  submit  to  this  counsel 
of  the  church,  and  still  continue  in  their  diso 
bedience  and  iiisubmission,  they  will  be  allowed 
some  time  for  consideration,  in  which  time  the 
church  should  make  further  efforts  to  gain 
them;  and  if  they  do  not  then  submit,  acknowl 
edge  their  errors,  and  ask  forgiveness,  they 


—  92  — 

must  be  excluded  from  the  church,    according 
to  Matt.  18:16. 

When  it  appears  that  any  member  of  the 
church  walks  disorderly,  and  does  not  observe 
the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  rules  and 
ordinances  of  the  church,  he  shall  be  visited  by 
the  deacon,  who  shall  faithfully  endeavor  to 
bring  him  to  a  sense  of  his  duty,  to  show  him 
the  error  of  his  ways,  and  thus  bring  him  to 
confess  the  transgression,  to  repent  of  his  sins, 
and  ask  forgiveness  and  the  forbearance  of  the 
church.  But  if  by  repeated  efforts  this  cannot 
be  done,  the  matter  must  also  be  brought  be 
fore  the  church,  a  counsel  taken,  and  the  trans 
gressor  dealt  with  in  the  same  manner  as  above.* 

When,  however,  a  member  of  the  church 
becomes  a  gross  and  flagrant  transgressor  before 
the  world,  as  a  drunkard,  a  thief,  an  adulterer, 
etc.,  no  admonition  is  required.  Such  a  corrupt 
and  wicked  person  must  at  once,  but  upon 
positive  evidence  of  such  transgression,  be  ex 
cluded  from  the  church,  according  to  1  Cor.  5, 
and  2  Cor.  13. 


*  Every  accused  member,  however,  before  being  ex 
pelled,  should  be  visited  aud  heard  with  regard  to  the 
accusation. 


—  93  — 

On  these  points  Menno  Simon  says,  "Be 
hold,  in  this  sense  the  Holy  Scripture  remains 
salutary  unto  us,  and  proceeds  in  its  proper 
order,  when,  according  to  Matt.  18:15 — 18, 
one  brother  transgresses  against  another,  three 
admonitions  are  given  before  excommunication; 
to  a  heretic,  one  or  two  (Tit.  3:10),  and  to  an 
open  offensive,  sensual  sinner,  who  is  already 
condemned  by  the  word,  none  at  all."  1  Cor.  5; 
2  Cor.  13. 


Take  heed  to  yourselves:  If  thy  brother  trespass 
against  thee,  rebuke  him;  and  if  he  repent,  forgive  him: 
And  if  he  trespass  against  thee  seven  times  in  a  day,  and 
seven  times  in  a  day  turn  again  to  thee,  saying,  I  repent; 
thou  shalt  forgive  him.  Luke  17:  3,  4. 

Brethren,  if  a  man  be  overtaken  in  a  fault,  ye  which 
are  spiritual,  restore  such  a  one  in  the  spirit  of  meekness; 
considering  thyself,  lest  thou  also  be  tempted  Bear  ye 
one  another's  burdens  and  so  fulfill  the  law  of  Christ. 
Gal.  6:  i,  2, 

Brethren,  if  any  one  of  you  do  err  from  the  truth,  and 
one  convert  him,  let  him  know,  that  he  which  convert- 
eth  the  sinner  from  the  error  of  his  way  shall  save  a  soul 
from  death,  and  shall  hide  a  multitude  of  sins.  James 
5:19,20. 


EXCOMMUNICATION. 


When  from  any  cause  it  becomes  necessary  to 
excommunicate  a  member  of  the  church,  the 
bishop,  at  the  close  of  the  usual  public  services, 
in  the  presence  of  the  congregation  reads  Matt. 
18:15—18,  or  Tit.  3:10,  or  1  Cor.  5,  according 
to  the  nature  of  the  transgression  of  the  person 
to  be  excomunicated,  and  then  announces  to 
them  his  name  (and,  if  expedient  and  neces 
sary,  the  transgression  which  he  has  com 
mitted),  and  declares  him  no  longer  a  member 
of  the  church.  He  is,  however,  exhorted  to  re 
pentance  and  amendment  of  life  that  he  may 
be  reclaimed  to  the  favor  of  God  and  the  fel 
lowship  of  the  church.  The  members  are  also 
instructed  to  do  their  duty  in  trying  to  win 
him  by  admonishing  him  as  a  brother  (2  Thess. 
3:15)  that  the  soul  may  be  saved. 


RECEIVING    EXCOMMUNICATED    PER 
SONS  INTO  THE  CHURCH  AGAIN. 


When  excommunicated  persons  see  the  error 
of  their  ways,  sincerely  repent  of  their  sins, 
are  willing  to  acknowledge  and  confess  their 
transgressions,  and  ask  forgiveness  of  those 
whom  they  have  injured  or  offended,  they  shall 
again  be  received  into  the  communion  of  the 
church.  When  the  request  to  be  restored  is 
made  by  any  such  person,  the  matter  is  pre 
sented  before  the  church,  and  a  counsel  is 
taken;  and  if  the  members  are  satisfied  with  his 
confession  and  evidences  of  repentance,  he  is 
received  at  the  next,  or  a  subsequent  meeting. 

In  receiving  him,  the  bishop  asks: 

1.  Do    you    sincerely    desire    to    be    again 
received  into  the  communion  of  the  church  of 
Christ « 

2.  Are  you  truly  sorry  for  the   sins   which 
you   have    committed,    and    do    you   sincerely 
repent,  and  ask  God  and  the  church  to  forgive 
you;   and  do  you  promise  by  the  grace  and  help 


of  God,  and  the  aid  of  his  Holy  Spirit,  hence 
forth  to  walk  more  circumspectly',  and  to  sub 
mit  yourself  anew  to  Christ  and  his  word,  and 
faithfully  to  abide  in  the  same  until  death  ? 

If  these  questions  are  answered  affirmative Iv, 
the  bishop  takes  him  by  the  hand  and  says: 

Upon  this  confession  which  thou  hast  made 
before  God  and  these  witnesses,  thou  shalt  again 
be  acknowledged  as  a  member  of  the  body  of 
Christ,  and  a  brother  (or  sister)  in  the  church; 
and  so  long  as  thou  art  faithful  and  abiclest  in 
the  doctrine  of  his  Avord, .  thou  art  his  disciple 
indeed. 

He  then  gives  him  the  .brotherly  salutation, 
and  says: 

May  God  bless  and  strengthen  thee  and.  give 
thee  grace  to  remain  faithful  unto  the  end, 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  Amen. 


A  RULE  TO  BE  OBSERVED  WHEN  DIF 
FICULTIES  OCCUR  BETWEEN  MEM 
BERS  OF  THE  CHURCH. 


When  difficulties  occur  between  members  of 
the  church,  in  relation  to  secular  affairs,  the 
deacon,  in  the  first  place,  shall  make  an  effort 
to  bring  them  to  terms,  and  settle  the  matter 
between  themselves.  When  this  cannot  be  ac 
complished,  the  deacon  shall  advise  them  to 
choose  arbitrators  from  among  the  brethren  in 
the  church,  whose  duty  it  will  be  upon  the 
appointed  time,  to  examine  the  matter  in  dis 
pute,  receive  the  testimony  of  witnesses,  and 
impartially,  and  to  the  best  of  their  knowledge 
and  judgment,  decide  the  matter.  They  should 
especially  endeavor  so  to  decide,  that  both 
parties  may  be  satisfied.  Should  it,  however, 
be  discovered  that  transgressions  have  been 
committed  on  either  or  on  both  sides,  the  arbi 
trators  shall  advise  the  deacon,  who  shall  pre 
sent  the  matter  to  the  church.  A  counsel  shall 
then  be  taken,  and  the  case  determined  accord- 

7 


—  98  — 

ing  to  the  nature  and  the  circumstances  therein 
involved. 

But  if  one  of  the  contending  parties  should 
he  unwilling  to  submit  to  the  decision  of  the 
arbitrators,  and  the  counsel  of  the  church,  and 
continue  in  his  self-righteousness  and  insubmis- 
sion,  a  certain  time  for  consideration  of  the 
matter  should  be  given  him,  and  if  he  then  still 
refuses  to  submit  and  acknowledge  his  error, 
he  must,  according  to  Matt.  18:17,  be  excluded 
from  the  church,  until  he  repents,  becomes 
willing  to  acknowledge  his  error,  and  desires  to 
be  readmitted  into  the  fellowship  of  the  Church. 


SCRIPTURE    LESSONS    APPROPRIATE 
FOR    FUNERAL    OCCASIONS. 


1.  The  Burial  of  Sarah.— Gen.  23.    Verses  10 
to  17  may  be  omitted. 

2.  The  Burial  of  Jacob.—  Gen.  49:28—33;  50: 
1—13. 

3.  The  Death  of  Absalom.— Gen.  18:31—33. 

4.  The  Afflictions  of  Job.— Job  1. 

5.  Job's  Extreme  Anguish. — Job.  3:1 — 19. 

C5 

6.  Brevity  and  Uncertainty  of  Life. — Job  14. 

7.  The  Frailty  of  Man.— Psa.  90. 

8.  Remembrance    of    God   in   Youth. — Eccl. 
12:1—7. 

9.  Death  of  Lazarus.— John  11:1—27. 

10.  The    Resurrection   of   Lazarus. — John   11: 
32—45. 

11.  The  Resurrection  of  the  Dead.— 1  Cor.  15: 
12—58.    • 

12.  The  happy  State  of  the  Righteous  Dead.— 
2  Cor.  5:1—4;  1  Thess.  4:13—18. 


—  100  — 

The  following  lessons  are  also  appropriate  to 
be  read  when  visiting  believers  who  are  sick.  To 
these  might  be  added  %  Kings  20:1 — 11;  Isaiah 
43:1—7,'  44:1—8. 

13.  The  Blessedness  of  Affliction. -Heb.  12: 1-11. 

14.  The  Glory  of  those  who  are  Victorious  in 
Tribulations. — Rev.  7:9 — 17. 

15.  The  Glory  of  the  Heavenly  City.— Rev.  21. 

16.  The  Saints  by  the  River  of  Life.— Rev.  22: 
1—5. 


For  all  things  are  for  your  sakes,  that  the 
abundant  grace  might  through  the  thanksgiving 
of  many  redound  to  the  glory  of  God.  For 
which  cause  we  faint  not;  but  though  our  out 
ward  man  perish,  yet  the  inward  man  is  renewed 
day  by  day.  For  our  light  affliction,  which  is 
but  for  a  moment,  worketh  for  us  a  far  more 
exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory;  while 
we  look  not  at  the  things  which  are  seen,  but 
at  the  things  which  are  not  seen:  for  the  things 
which  are  seen  are  temporal;  but  the  things 
which  are  not  seen  are  eternal.  2  Cor.  4:15 — 18. 


FUNERAL  TEXTS. 


FOR  THE  FUNERAL  OF  A  CHILD. 

Although  affliction  cometh  not  forth  of  the 
dust,  neither  doth  trouble  spring  out  of  the 
ground:  yet  man  is  born  unto  trouble  as  the 
sparks  fly  upward.  Job  5:6,  7. 

Man  that  is  born  of  a  woman  /,«*  of  few  days 
and  full  of  trouble.  He  cometh  forth  like  a 
flower,  and  is  cut  down;  he  fleeth  also  as  a 
shadow,  and  continueth  not.  Job  14:1,  2. 

I  have  said  to  corruption,  Thou  art  my  fa 
ther:  to  the  worm,  TJion-  art  my  mother,  and 
my  sister.  Job  17: 14. 

As  for  man,  his  days  a/'c  as  grass:  as  a 
flower  of  the  field,  so  he  flourisheth.  For  the 
wind  passeth  over  it,  and  it  is  gone:  and  the 
place  thereof  shall  know  it  no  more.  Psalm 
103:15,  16. 

A  voice  was  heard  in  Ramah,  lamentation, 
and  bitter  weeping:  Rachel  weeping  for  her 
children,  refused  to  be  comforted  for  her  chil 
dren,  because  they  ^vw  not.  Jer.  31:15. 


—  102  — 

And  Jacob  rent  his  clothes,  and  put  sack 
cloth  upon  his  loins,  and  mourned  for  his  son 
many  days.  And  all  his  sons  and  all  his  daugh 
ters  rose  up  to  comfort  him;  but  he  refused  to 
be  comforted;  and  he  said,  For  I  will  go  down 
into  the  grave  unto  my  son  mourning.  Thus 
his  father  wept  for  him.  Gen.  37:34,  35. 

And  Nathan  departed  unto  his  house.  And 
the  Lord  struck  the  child  that  Uriah's  wife  bare 
unto  David  and  it  was  very  sick.  David  there 
fore  besought  God  for  the  child:  and  David 
fasted,  and  went  in,  and  lay  all  night  upon  the 
earth.  And  the  elders  of  his  house  arose,  and 
went  to  him,  to  raise  him  up  from  the  earth: 
but  he  would  not,  neither  did  he  eat  bread  with 
them.  And  it  came  to  pass  on  the  seventh  day, 
that  the  child  died.  And  the  servants  of  David 
feared  to  tell  him  that  the  child  was  dead:  for 
they  said,  Behold,  while  the  child  was  yet  alive, 
we  spake  unto  him,  and  he  would  not  hearken 
unto  our  voice:  how  will  he  then  vex  himself,  if 
we  toll  him  that  the  child  is  dead?  But  when 
David  saw  that  his  servants  whispered,  David 
perceived  that  the  child  was  dead:  therefore 
.David  said  unto  his  servants,  Is  the  child  dead? 
And  they  said,  He  is  dead.  Then  David  arose 


—  103  — 

from  the  earth,  and  washed,  and  anointed  him 
self,  and  came  into  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and 
worshiped:  then  he  came  to  his  own  house;  and 
when  he  required,  they  set  bread  before  him, 
and  he  did  eat.  Then  said  his  servants  unto 
him,  What  thing  is  this  that  thou  hast  done? 
Thou  didst  fast  and  weep  for  the  child,  while  ?  t 
was  alive;  but  when  the  child  was  dead,  thou 
didst  rise  and  eat  bread.  And  he  said,  While 
the  child  was  yet  alive,  I  fasted  and  wept;  for  I 
said,  Who  can  tell  whether  God  will  be  gracious 
to  me,  that  the  child  may  live  ?  But  now  he  is 
dead,  wherefore  should  I  fast?  Can  I  bring  him 
back  again?  I  shall  go  to  him,  but  he  shall  not 
return  to  me.  2  Samuel  12:16—23. 

And  when  the  child  was  grown,  it  fell  on  a 
day,  that  he  went  out  to  his  father  to  the  reap 
ers.  And  he  said  to  his  father,  My  head,  my 
head!  And  he  said  to  a  lad,  Carry  him  to  his 
mother.  And  when  he  had  taken  him,  and 
brought  him  to  his  mother,  he  sat  on  her  knees 
till  noon,  and  then  died.  And  she  went  up  and 
laid  him  on  the  bed  of  the  man  of  God,  and  shut 
tJie  door  upon  him,  and  went  out.  And  she 
called  to  her  husband,  and  said,  Send  me,  I 
pray  thee,  one  of  the  young  men,  and  one  of 


the  asses,  that  I  may  run  to  the  man  of  God, 
and  come  again.  And  he  said,  Wherefore  wilt 
thou  go  to  him  to-day?  it  is  neither  new  moon 
nor  Sabbath.  And  she  said,  It  shall  le  well. 
Then  she  saddled  an  ass,  and  said  to  her  ser 
vant,  Drive,  and  go  forward;  slack  not  thy  rid 
ing  for  me,  except  I  bid  thee.  So  she  went,  and 
came  unto  the  man  of  God  to  mount  Carmel. 
And  it  came  to  pass,  when  the  man  of  God  saw 
her  afar  off,  that  he  said  to  Gehazi  his  servant, 
Behold,  yonder  is  the  Shunammite:  run  now,  I 
pray  thee,  to  meet  her,  and  say  unto  her,  Is  it 
well  with  thee  ?  is  it  well  with  thy  husband  ?  is 
it  well  with  the  child  ?  And  she  answered,  It  /.s- 
wcll.  2  Kings  4: 18— 26. 

I  was  dumb,  I  opened  not  my  mouth;  be 
cause  thou  didst  it.  Psalm  39:9. 

The  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken 
away,  blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord.  Job. 
1:21. 

And  they  brought  young  children  to  him, 
that  he  should  touch  them;  and  ///*  disciples  re 
buked  those  that  brought  them.  But  when 
Jesus  saw  it,  he  was  much  displeased,  and  said 
unto  them,  Suffer  the  little  children  to  come 
unto  me,  and  forbid  them  not;  for  of  such  is 


—  105  — 

the  kingdom  of  God.  Verily,  I  say  unto  yon, 
Whosoever  shall  not  receive  the  kingdom  of 
God  as  a  little  child,  he  shall  not  enter  therein. 
And  he  took  them  up  in  his  arms,  put  his  hands 
upon  them,  and  blessed  them.  Mark  10: 13—16. 

Take  heed  that  ye  despise  not  one  of  these 
little  ones;  for  I  say  unto  you,  That  in  heaven 
their  angels  do  always  behold  the  face  of  my 
Father  which  is  in  heaven.  Even  so  it  is  not 
the  will  of  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven,  that 
one  of  these  little  ones  should  perish.  Matt. 
18:10—11. 

NOTE.     These  texts,  or  a  part  of  them , 
ly,  may  ~be  used  as  a  funeral  Icx 


FOK  A  YOUNG  PERSON,  on  A  SUDDEN  DEATH. 

Man  that  is  born  of  a  woman  is  of  few  days, 
and  full  of  trouble. 

He  cometh  forth  like  a  flower,  and  is  cut 
down:  He  fleeth  also  as  a  shadow,  and  contin- 
ueth  not.  Job  11:1,  2. 

As  for  man,  his  days  are  as  grass:  as  a 
flower  of  the  field,  so  he  flourisheth.  For  the 


—  106  — 

wind  passeth  over  it,  and  it  is  gone;  and  the 
place  thereof  shall  know  it  no  more.  Psa. 
103:15,  16. 

Thou  carriest  them  away  as  with  a  flood; 
they  are  as  a  sleep:  in  the  morning  they  are  like 
grass  which  groweth  up.  In  the  morning  it 
flourisheth,  and  groweth  up;  in  the  evening  it 
is  cut  down,  and  withereth.  Psa.  90:5. 

Behold,  thou  hast  made  my  days  as  a  hand- 
breadth;  and  mine  age  is  as  nothing  before  thee: 
verily  every  man  at  his  best  state  is  altogether 
vanity.  Psa.  39:5. 

For  we  are  strangers  before  thee,  and  so- 
journers,  as  were  all  our  fathers:  our  days  on 
the  earth  are  as  a  shadow,  and  there  is  none 
abiding.  1  Chron.  29:15. 

As  the  cloud  is  consumed  and  vanisheth 
away;  so  he  that  goeth  down  to  the  grave  shall 
come  up  no  more.  He  shall  return  no  more  to 
his  house,  neither  shall  his  place  know  him  any 
more.  Job  7:9,  10. 

Now  my  days  are  swifter  than  a  post:  they 
flee  away,  they  see  no  good.  They  are  passed 
away  as  the  swift  ships:  as  the  eagle  that  hast- 
eth  to  the  prey.  Job  9:25,  26. 


—  107  — 

My  days  are  swifter  than  a  weaver's  shuttle, 
and  are  spent  without  hope.  Job  7:6. 

Boast  not  thyself  of  to-morrow;  for  thou 
knowest  not  what  a  day  may  bring  forth.  Prov. 
27:1. 

Go  to  now,  ye  that  say,  To-day  or  to 
morrow  we  will  go  into  such  a  city,  and  con 
tinue  there  a  year,  and  buy  and  sell,  and  get 
gain.  Whereas  ye  know  not  what  shall  be  on 
the  morrow.  For  what  is  your  life  ?  It  is  even  a 
vapor,  that  appearcth  for  a  little  time,  and 
then  vanisheth  away.  James  1:13,  1-1. 

See  then  that  ye  walk  circumspectly,  not  as 
fools,  but  as  wise,  redeeming  the  time,  because 
the  days  are  evil.  Eph.  5:15,  16. 

For  man  knoweth  not  his  time:  as  the 
fishes  that  are  taken  in  an  evil  net;  and  as  the 
birds  that  are  caught  in  a  snare;  so  are  the  sons 
of  men  snared  in  an  evil  time,  when  it  falleth 
suddenly  upon  them.  Eccl.  9: 12. 

There  is  but  a  step  between  me  and  death. 
1.  Samuel,  20:3. 

Whatsoever  thy  hand  findeth  to  do,  do  it 
with  thy  might;  for  there  is  no  work,  nor  de 
vice,  nor  knowledge,  nor  wisdom,  in  the  grave, 
whither  thou  £oest.  Eccl.  9:10. 


—  108  — 

Lord,  make  me  to  know  mine  end,  and  the 
measure  of  my  days,  what  it  is;  that  I  may 
know  how  frail  I  am.  Psa.  39:  4. 

So  teach  us  to  number  our  days,  that  we 
may  apply  our  hearts  unto  wisdom.  Psa.  90: 12. 


FOR  A  MIDDLE-AGED  CHRISTIAN. 

For  what  is  your  life  ?  It  is  even  a  vapor, 
that  appearcth  for  a  little  time,  and  then  van- 
isheth  away.  James  4:14. 

I  have  said  to  corruption,  Thou  art  my  fa 
ther:  to  the  worm,  Thou  art  my  mother,  and 
my  sister.  Job  17: 14. 

But  I  would  not  have  you  to  be  ignorant, 
brethren,  concerning  them  which,  arc  asleep, 
that  ye  sorrow  not,  even  as  others  which  have 
no  hope.  For  if  we  believe  that  Jesus  died  and 
rose  again,  even  so  them  also  which  sloop  in 
Jesus  will  God  bring  with  him.  1.  Thess. 
4:13,  14. 

The  wicked  is  driven  away  in  his  wicked 
ness:  but  the  righteous  hath  hope  in  his  death. 
Prov.  14:32. 


—  109  — 

And  he  gave  them  their  request;  but  sent 
leanness  into  their  soul.  Psa.  106:15. 

For  we  know  that,  if  our  earthly  house  of 
this  tabernacle  were  dissolved,  we  have  a  build 
ing  of  God,  a  house  not  made  with  hands,  eter 
nal  in  the  heavens.  2.  Cor.  5:1. 

Therefore  we  are  always  confident,  knowing 
that,  whilst  we  are  at  home  in  the  body,  we  are 
absent  from  the  Lord.  2  Cor.  5:6. 

And  I  heard  a  voice  from  heaven  saying 
unto  me,  Write,  Blessed  are  the  dead  which  die 
in  the  Lord  from  henceforth:  Yea  saith  the 
Spirit,  that  they  may  rest  from  their  labors; 
and  their  works  do  follow  them.  Rev.  14: :  13. 

And  the  ransomed  of  the  Lord  shall  return, 
and  come  to  Zion  with  songs  and  everlasting 
joy  upon  their  heads:  they  shall  obtain  joy  and 
gladness,  and  sorrow  and  sighing  shall  flee 
away.  Isaiah  35: 10. 

And  God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from 
their  eyes;  and  there  shall  be  no  more  death, 
neither  sorrow,  nor  crying,  neither  shall  there 
be  any  more  pain:  for  the  former  things  are 
passed  away.  Rev.  21:4. 

These  are  they  which  came  out  of  great  trib 
ulation,  and  have  washed  their  robes,  and  made 


them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  lamb.  Therefore 
are  they  before  the  throne  of  God,  and  serve 
him  day  and  night  in  his  temple:  and  he  that 
sitteth  on  the  throne  shall  dwell  among  them. 

o 

They  shall  hunger  no  more,  neither  thirst  any 
more;  neither  shall  the  sun  light  on  them,  nor 
any  heat.  For  the  Lamb  which  is  in  the  midst 
of  the  throne  shall  feed  them,  and  shall  lead 
them  unto  living  fountains  of  waters:  and  God 
shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  their  eyes.  Rev. 
7:14—17. 


FOR  AN  AGED  CHRISTIAN. 

For  all  our  days  are  passed  away  in  thy 
wrath:  we  spend  our  years  as  a  tale  that  is  told. 
The  days  of  our  years  are  threescore  years  and 
ten;  and  if  by  reason  of  strength  the}^  be  four 
score  years,  yet  is  their  strength  labor  and  sor 
row;  for  it  is  soon  cut  off,  and  we  fly  away. 
Psa.  90:9,  10. 

As  the  cloud  is  consumed  and  vanisheth 
away;  so  he  that  goeth  down  to  the  grave  shall 
come  up  no  more.  He  shall  return  no  more  to 
his  house,  neither  shall  his  place  know  him  any 
more.  Job  7:9,  10. 


Your  fathers,  where  are  they?  and  the 
prophets,  do  they  live  forever?  Zech.  1:5. 

If  a  man  die,  shall  he  live  again?  All  the 
days  of  my  appointed  time  will  I  wait,  till  my 
change  come.  Thou  shalt  call,  and  I  will  answer 
thee:  thou  wilt  have  a  desire  to  the  work  of 
thine  hands.  Job  14:14,  15. 

For  I  know  that  my  Redeemer  liveth,  and 
that  he  shall  stand  at  the  latter  day  upon  the 
earth:  And  though  after  my  skin  worms  de 
stroy  this  body,  yet  in  my  flesh  shall  I  see  God: 
Whom  I  shall  see  for  myself,  and  mine  eyes 
shall  behold,  and  not  another;  though  my  reins 
be  consumed  within  me.  Job  19:25—27. 

For  this  corruptible  must  put  on  incorrup- 
tion,  and  this  mortal  must  put  on  immortality. 
1  Cor.  15:53. 

There  is  one  glory  of  the  sun,  and  another 
glory  of  the  moon,  and  another  glory  of  the 
stars;  for  one  star  differeth  from  another  star  in 
glory.  So  also  is  the  resurrection  of  the  dead. 
It  is  sown  in  corruption,  it  is  raised  in  incor- 
ruption;  it  is  sown  in  dishonor,  it  is  raised  in 
glory;  it  is  sown  in  weakness,  it  is  raised  in 
power;  it  is  sown  a  natural  body,  it  is  raised  a 


—  112  — 

spiritual  body.     There  is  a  natural  body,    and 
there  is  a  spiritual  body.    1  Cor.  15:41 — 44. 

Who  shall  change  our  vile  body,  that  it  may 
be  fashioned  like  unto  His  glorious  body,  ac 
cording  to  the  working  whereby  he  is  able  even 
to  subdue  all  things  unto  himself.  Phil.  3:21. 

Blessed  be  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  which  according  to  his  abundant 
mercy  hath  begotten  us  again  unto  a  lively  hope 
by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  from  the 
dead,  to  an  inheritance  incorruptible,  and  unde 
nted,  and  that  fadeth  not  away,  reserved  in 
heaven  for  you.  1  Peter  1:3,  4. 

So  when  this  corruptible  shall  have  put  on 
incorruption,  and  this  mortal  shall  have  put  on 
immortality,  then  shall  be  brought  to  pass  the 
saying  that  is  written,  Death  is  swallowed 
up  in  victory.  O  death,  where  is  thy  sting?  O 
grave,  where  is  thy  victory?  1  Cor.  15:54,55. 

Then  shall  the  righteous  shine  forth  as  the 
sun  in  the  kingdom  of  their  Father.  Who  hath 
ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear.  Matt.  13:43. 

Let  me  die  the  death  of  the  righteous,  and 
let  my  last  end  be  like  his.  Num.  23 : 10. 

Also  Ecclesiastes  12: 1 — 7. 


—  113  — 
FOR  AN  AGED  PERSON. 

There  is  no  man  that  hath  power  over  the 
spirit  to  retain  the  spirit;  neither  hath  he  power 
in  the  day  of  death;  and  there  is  no  discharge 
in  that  war;  neither  shall  wickedness  deliver 
those  that  are  given  to  it.  Eccl.  8:8. 

One  dieth  in  his  full  strength,  being  wholly 
at  ease  and  quiet.  His  breasts  are  full  of  milk, 
and  his  bones  are  moistened  with  marrow.  And 
another  dieth  in  the  bitterness  of  his  soul,  and 
never  eateth  with  pleasure.  They  shall  lie  down 
alike  in  the  dust,  and  the  worms  shall  cover 
them.  Job  21: 23— 26. 

What  man  is  he  that  liveth,  and  shall  not  see 
death?  shall  he  deliver  his  soul  from  the  hand 
of  the  grave?  Psa.  89:48. 

They  that  trust  in  their  Avealth,  and  boast 
themselves  in  the  multitude  of  their  riches; 
none  of  them  can  by  any  means  redeem  his 
brother,  nor  give  to  God  a  ransom  for  him: 
that  he  should  still  live  forever,  and  not  see 
corruption.  Psa.  49:6,  7,  9. 

Is  there  not  an  appointed  time  to  man  upon 
earth?  are  not  his  days  also  like  the  days  of  a 
hireling?  Job  7:1. 

8 


—  114  — 

Seeing  his  days  are  determined,  the  number 
of  his  months  are  with  thee,  thou  hast  ap 
pointed  his  bounds  that  he  cannot  pass.  Job 
14:5. 

Thou  destroyest  the  hope  of  man.  Thou 
prevailest  forever  against  him,  and  he  passeth; 
thou  ehangest  his  countenance,  and  sendest  him 
away.  Job  14: 19,  20. 


FOR  VARIOUS  OCCASIONS. 

There  is  no  man  that  hath  power  over  the 
spirit  to  retain  the  spirit;  neither  hath  he  pOAver 
in  the  day  of  death;  and  there  is  no  discharge 
in  that  war;  neither  shall  wickedness  deliver 
those  that  are  given  to  it.  Eccl.  8:8. 

For  I  know  that  thou  wilt  bring  me  to  death, 
and  to  the  house  appointed  for  all  living.  Job 
30:23. 

And  have  hope  toward  God,  which  they 
themselves  also  allow,  that  there  shall  be  a  res 
urrection  of  the  dead,  both  of  the  just  and  un 
just.  Acts  24: 15. 


1  1  K 
JL  -Lt/ 

For  since  by  man  came  death,  by  man  came 
also  the  resurrection  of  the  dead.  For  as  in 
Adam  all  die,  even  so  in  Christ  shall  all  be  made 
alive.  1  Cor.  15:21,  22. 

Marvel  not  at  this:  for  the  hour  is  coming, 
in  the  which  all  that  are  in  the  graves  shall  hear 
his  voice,  and  shall  come  forth;  they  that  have 
done  good,  unto  the  resurrection  of  life;  and 
they  that  have  done  evil,  unto  the  resurrection 
of  damnation.  John  5:28,  29. 

But  some  man  will  say,  How  are  the  dead 
raised  up  ?  and  with  what  body  do  they  come  ? 
1  Cor.  15:35. 

It  is  sown  in  corruption,  it  is  raised  in  incor- 
ruption:  it  is  sown  in  dishonor,  it  is  raised  in 
glory:  it  is  sown  in  weakness,  it  is  raised  in 
power:  it  is  sown  a  natural  body,  it  is  raised  a 
spiritual  body.  There  is  a  natural  body,  and 
there  is  a  spiritual  body.  1  Cor.  15:42 — 44. 

For  this  corruptible  must  put  on  incorrup- 
tion,  and  this  mortal  must  put  on  immortality. 
1  Cor.  15:53. 

And  as  it  is  appointed  unto  men  once  to  die, 
but  after  this  the  judgment.  Heb.  9:27. 


—  116  — 

For  wo  must  all  appear  before  the  judgment 
seat  of  Christ;  that  everyone  may  receive  the 
things  done  in  his  body,  according  to  that  he 
hath  done,  whether  it  be  good  or  bad.  2  Cor. 
5:10. 

So  then  every  one  of  us  shall  give  account  of 
himself  to  God.  Rom.  14:12. 

Because  he  hath  appointed  a  day,  in  the 
which  he  will  judge  the  world  in  righteousness 
by  that  man  whom  he  hath  ordained;  whereof 
he  hath  given  assurance  unto  all  men,  in  that 
he  hath  raised  him  from  the  dead.  Acts  17:31. 

Be  not  deceived:  God  is  not  mocked:  for 
whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also 
reap.  For  he  that  soweth  to  his  flesh  shall  of 
the  flesh  reap  corruption;  but  he  that  soweth  to 
the  Spirit  shall  of  the  Spirit  reap  life  everlast 
ing.  Gal.  6:7,  8. 

When  the  Son  of  man  shall  come  in  his 
glory,  and  all  the  holy  angels  with  him,  then 
shall  he  sit  upon  the  throne  of  his  glory:  and 
before  him  shall  be  gathered  all  nations:  and  he 
shall  separate  them  one  from  another,  as  a 
shepherd  divideth  his  sheep  from  the  goats:  and 


—  117  — 

he  shall  set  the  sheep  on  his  right  hand,  but 
the  goats  on  the  left.  Then  shall  the  King  say 
unto  them  on  his  right  hand,  Come,  ye  blessed 
of  my  Father,  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  for 
you  from  the  foundation  of  the  world.  Then 
shall  he  say  also  unto  them  on  the  left  hand, 
Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed,  into  everlasting 
fire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels.  And 
these  shall  go  away  into  everlasting  punish 
ment:  but  the  righteous  into  life  eternal.  Matt. 
25:31—34;  and  41,  46. 

If  the  clouds  be  full  of  rain,  they  empty 
themselves  upon  the  earth:  and  if  the  tree  fall 
toward  the  south,  or  toward  the  north,  in  the 
place  where  the  tree  falleth,  there  it  shall  be. 
Eccl.  11:3. 

And  have  hope  toward  God,  which  they 
themselves  also  allow,  that  there  shall  be  a  res 
urrection  of  the  dead,  both  of  the  just  and  un 
just.  Acts  24: 15. 

He  that  is  unjust,  let  him  be  unjust  still: 
and  he  which  is  filthy,  let  him  be  filthy  still: 
and  he  that  is  righteous,  let  him  be  righteous 
still:  and  he  that  is  holy,  let  him  be  holy  still. 
Rev.  22:11. 


—  118  — 

Jesus  said  unto  her,  I  am  the  resurrection 
and  the  life:  he  that  belie veth  in  me,  though  he 
were  dead,  yet  shall  he  live:  And  whosoever 
liveth  and  believeth  in  me  shall  never  die.  Be- 
lievest  thou  this?  John  11:25,  26. 

For  we  brought  nothing  into  this  world, 
and  it  is  certain  we  can  carry  nothing  out. 
ITim.  6:7. 

For  to  me  to  live  is  Christ,  and  to  die  is 
gain.  Phil.  1:21. 

For  which  cause  we  faint  not;  but  though 
our  outward  man  perish,  yet  the  inward  man  is 
renewed  day  by  day.  2  Cor,  4;  16, 

But  thanks  be  to  God,  which  gives  us  the 
victory  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  1 
Cor.  15:57. 

Now  this  I  say,  brethren,  that  flesh  and 
Mood  cannot  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God;  nei 
ther  doth  corruption  inherit  incorruption.  1 
Cor.  15:50. 

And  so  it  is  written,  The  first  man  Adam 
was  made  a  living  soul;  the  last  Adam  was 
made  a  quickening  spirit.  Howbeit  that  was 


—  119  — 

not  first  which  is  spiritual,  but  that  which  is 
natural;  and  afterward  that  which  is  spiritual. 
The  first  man  is  of  the  earth,  earthy:  the  second 
man  is  of  the  Lord  from  heaven.  1  Cor.  15: 
45—47. 

For  the  wages  of  sin  is  death;  but  the  gift 
of  God  is  eternal  life  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord.  Romans  6: 23. 

For  I  am  now  ready  to  be  offered,  and  the 
time  of  my  departure  is  at  hand.  I  have  fought 
a  good  fight,  I  have  finished  my  course,  I  have 
kept  the  faith:  Henceforth  there  is  laid  up  for 
me  a  crown  of  righteousness,  which  the  Lord, 
the  righteous  judge,  shall  give  me  at  that  day: 
and  not  to  me  only,  but  unto  all  them  also  that 
love  his  appearing.  2  Tim.  4:6 — 8. 


SERVICES  AT  THE  GRAVE. 


The  services  may  be  closed  immediately  after 
the  corpse  is  lowered  into  the  grave,  or  the 
grave  may  be  first  filled.  A  hymn  may  be  sung 
while  the  grave  is  being  filled. 

A.S  a  closing  service  the  minister  may  say: 
"Man  that  is  born  of  a  woman  is  of  few 
days  and  full  of  trouble;  he  cometh  forth  like 
a  flower  and  is  cut  down;  he  fleeth  also  as  a 
shadow  and  continueth  not."  Job  14:1,  2. 
' '  For  all  flesh  is  as  grass,  and  all  the  glory  of 
man  as  the  flower  of  grass.  The  grass  withereth 
and  the  flower  thereof  falleth  away;  but  the 
word  of  the  Lord  endureth  forever."  (1  Pet. 
1:24,  25),  in  which  word  we  have  the  promise 
of  eternal  life  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
Amen. 

"I  am  the  resurrection  and  the  life,"  saith 
the  Lord:  "he  that  belie veth  in  me,  though  he 
were  dead,  yet  shall  he  live;  and  whosoever 
liveth  and  believeth  in  me  shall  never  die." 
John  11:25,  26. 


—  121  — 

' '  I  know  that  my  Redeemer  liveth  and  that 
he  shall  stand  at  the  latter  day  upon  the  earth : 
and  though  after  my  skin  worms  destroy  this 
body,  yet  in  my  flesh  shall  I  see  God."  Job 
19:25,  26. 

"So  when  this  corruptible  shall  have  put  on 
incorruption,  and  this  mortal  shall  have  put  on 
immortality,  then  shall  be  brought  to  pass  the 
saying  that  is  written:  Death  is  swallowed  up 
in  victory.  Oh  death,  where  is  thy  sting?  O 
grave,  where  is  thy  victory?"  1  Cor.  15:54,  55. 

"In  my  Father's  house  are  many  mansions: 
If  it  were  not  so,  I  would  have  told  you.  I  go 
to  prepare  a  place  for  you.  And  if  I  go  and  pre 
pare  a  place  for  you,  I  will  come  again  and 
receive  you  unto  myself;  that  where  I  am,  there 
ye  may  be  also."  John  14:2,  3. 

"And  God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  their 
eyes;  and  there  shall  be  no  more  death,  neither 
sorrow,  nor  crying,  neither  shall  there  be  any 
more  pain;  for  the  former  things  are  passed 
away."  Rev.  21:4. 

"Then  shall  the  righteous  shine  forth  as  the 

O 

sun  in  the  Kingdom  of  their  Father."     Matt. 
13:43. 


—  122  — 

* '  Wherefore  comfort  one  another  with  these 
words."  1  Thess.  4:18. 

"And  I  heard  a  voice  from  heaven  saying 
unto  me,  Write,  Blessed  are  the  dead  which  die 
in  the  Lord  from  henceforth:  Yea,  saith  the 
Spirit,  that  they  may  rest  from  their  labors; 
and  their  works  do  follow  them."  Rev.  14:13. 

The  above  passage  (Rev.  H:13],  may  ~be  used 
alone  or  from  the  closing  sentence  of  any  part 
of  the  foregoing  passages,  or  any  other  appro 
priate  remarks  the  minister  may  choose  to  select 
for  the  occasion. 

Forasmuch  as  it  has  pleased  Almighty  God, 
in  his  wise  providence,  to  take  out  of  this 
world  the  soul  of  the  departed,*  we  commit  the 
body  to  the  ground;  earth  to  earth,  ashes  to 
ashes,  dust  to  dust,  and  commit  the  soul  to  God 
who  gave  it,  looking  for  the  general  resurrection 
in  the  last  day  and  the  life  of  the  world  to  come 
through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ;  at  whose  second 
coming,  in  glorious  majesty  to  judge  the  world, 
the  earth  and  sea  shall  give  up  their  dead;  and 


*  Or  of  our  deceased  brother  or  sister  as  the  case  may  be. 


—  123  — 

the  corruptible  bodies  of  those  who  sleep  in  him 
shall  be  changed,  and  made  like  unto  his  own 
glorious  body;  according  to  the  mighty  working 
whereby  he  is  able  to  subdue  all  things  unto 
himself. 

The  minister  may  then  offer  the  following 
prayer,  or  any  other  one  that  is  appropriate  to 
the  occasion. 

Almighty  God,  with  whom  do  live  the  spirits 
of  those  who  depart  hence  in  the  Lord,  and 
with  whom  the  souls  of  the  faithful,  after  they 
are  delivered  from  the  burden  of  the  flesh,  are 
in  joy  and  felicity;  we  give  thee  hearty  thanks 
for  the  good  examples  of  all  those  thy  servants, 
who,  having  finished  their  course  in  faith,  do 
now  rest  from  their  labors.  And  we  beseech 
thee,  that  we,  with  all  those  who  are  departed 
in  the  true  faith  of  thy  holy  name,  may  have 
our  perfect  consummation  and  bliss,  both  in 
body  and  soul,  in  thy  eternal  and  everlasting 
glory.  O  merciful  Father,  we  humbly  beseech 
thee  to  keep  us  from  the  death  of  sin,  and 
enable  us  to  walk  in  the  life  of  righteousness, 
that  when  we  depart  this  life,  we  may  rest  in 
Him  who  is  the  Resurrection  and  the  life,  and 


—  124  — 

be  found  acceptable  in  thy  sight,  and  receive 
that  blessing  which  thy  well-beloved  Son  shall 
then  pronounce  to  all  who  love  and  fear  thee, 
saying,  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father,  inherit 
the  Kingdom  prepared  for  you  from  the  foun 
dation  of  the  world.  Grant  this,  we  beseech 
thee,  through  Jesus  Christ,  our  Mediator  and 
Redeemer.  Amen. 

The  service  may  be  closed  by  the  benediction: 

The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the 

love  of  God  our  Father,  and  the  fellowship  of 

the  Holy  Spirit,  be  with  us  all  evermore.  Amen. 


It  will  be  observed  that  the  services  at  the 
grave  are  given  in  sub-divisions  as  follows: 

1.  Scripture  passages  setting  forth  the  frailty 
of  human  life. 

2.  Passages  referring  to  the  resurrection  of 
the  dead  and  the  life  beyond. 

3.  Passages  directing  the  mind  to  the  glory 
and  blessedness  of  heaven. 

4.  A  form  committing  the  body  to  the  earth, 
and  directing  the  mind  to  Christ,  who  is  Lord 
of  all. 

5.  A  prayer  appropriate  to  such  occasions. 

6.  The  Benediction. 


—  125  — 

When  the  burial  takes  place  before  the  sermon 
is  preached  in  the  church,  which  is  the  custom 
in  many  places,  the  benediction  is  not  spoken  at 
the  grave,  but  at  the  close  of  service  in  the  house. 
When  however  the  sermon  is  first  preached  and 
the  burial  takes  place  afterwards,  the  services 
should  always  be  closed  with  the  benediction  at 
the  grave. 

To  repeat  all  this  consecutively,  forms  an 
appropriate  service  at  the  grave  and  may,  very 
properly,  be  used  in  this  way,  but  in  many 
cases  it  may  be  too  long,  and  in  some  instances 
not  altogether  adapted  to  the  circumstances. 
It  will  be  well  therefore  for  the  minister  to 
select  from  these  such  parts,  as  in  his  judgment, 
are  most  appropriate  for  the  occasion.  In  some 
instances  it  is  best  to  make  the  services  very 
short,  while  in  others  a  longer  service  may 
profitably  be  used.  The  minister  should  always 
use  the  utmost  discretion  in  his  selections. 

The  object  of  these  lessons  is  not  to  estab 
lish  an  invariable  form,  but  simply  to  suggest 
and  direct  to  that  which  is  proper,  appropriate 
and  edifying;  and  hence  the  services  may  be 
varied  so  as  to  best  subserve  the  purpose  for 
which  they  are  designed. 


—  126  — 

APOSTOLIC  CONFESSION  OF  FAITH. 

I  believe  in  God,  the  Father,  Almighty 
Creator  of  heaven  and  earth:  And  in  Jesus 
Christ,  his  only  begotten  Son  our  Lord;  who 
was  conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  born  of  the 
Virgin  Mary,  suffered  under  Pontius  Pilate, 
was  crucified,  died,  and  was  buried.  He  rose 
again  from  the  dead.  On  the  third  day  He 
ascended  into  heaven,  where  he  sitteth  on  the 
right  hand  of  God  the  Father  Almighty,  from 
whence  he  shall  come  to  judge  the  living  and 
the  dead.  I  believe  in  the  Holy  Ghost;  the 
General  Christian  Church;  the  Communion  of 
Saints;  the  Forgiveness  of  sins;  the  Resurrection 
of  the  body,  and  the  Life  everlasting.  Amen. 


THE  LORD'S  PRAYER. 

Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven,  hallowed 
be  thy  name.  Thy  kingdom  come,  Thy  will  be 
done  on  earth,  as  it  is  in  heaven.  Give  us  this 
day  our  daily  bread.  And  forgive  us  our  debts, 
as  we  forgive  our  debtors.  And  lead  us  not  into 

o 

temptation;  but  deliver  us  from  evil:  For  thine 
is  the  kingdom,  and  the  power,  and  the  glory, 
forever.  Amen.  Matt.  6:9— 13. 


—  127  — 
PRAYER. 

God  be  merciful  to  us,  and  bless  us;  and 
cause  his  face  to  shine  upou  us;  that  thy  way 
may  be  known  upon  earth,  thy  saving  health 
among  all  nations.  Let  the  people  praise  thee. 
O  God:  let  all  the  people  praise  thee.  Oh 
let  the  nations  be  glad  and  sing  for  joy:  for 
thou  shalt  judge  the  people  righteously,  and 
govern  the  nations  upon  the  earth.  Let  the 
people  praise  thee,  O  God;  let  all  the  people 
praise  thee.  Then  shall  the  earth  yield  her  in 
crease;  and  God,  even  our  God,  shall  bless  us. 
God  shall  bless  us;  and  all  the  ends  of  the  earth 
shall  fear  him.  Psa.  67:1—7. 


BENEDICTIONS. 

The  Grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the 
love  of  God,  and  the  communion  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  be  with  you  all,  Amen.  2  Cor.  13:14. 

The  Lord  bless  thee,  and  keep  thee;  the 
Lord  make  his  face  shine  upon  thee,  and  be 
gracious  unto  thee:  the  Lord  lift  up  his  counte 
nance  upon  thee,  and  give  thee  peace.  Numbers 
6:24—26. 

The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with 
you  all.  Amen.  Rom.  16:24. 


CONTENTS. 


Administration  of  Baptism 53 

Advent  of  Christ  into  the  World,  £c 9 

Choosing  and  Ordaining  a  Bishop  or  Elder 81 

Choosing  and  Ordaining  a  Deacon 79 

Choosing  and  Ordaining  a  Minister 74 

Communion  of  the  Lord's  Supper 68 

Concerning  God  and  the  Creation  of  all  things 5 

Dealing  With  Transgressors 91 

Defense  by  Force 25 

Examination  Preceding  the  Communion 64 

Excommunication 94 

Excommunication,  or  Expulsion  from  the  Church....  27 

Fall  of  Man 7 

Feet  Washing 72 

Funeral  Lessons 99 

Funeral  Texts  for  a  Child 101 

"  for  an  aged  Christian no 

"  for  a  middle  aged  Christian 108 

"  for  a  young  person,  or  a  sudden  Death  105 

Holy  Baptism 15 

Marriage  Formula 86 

Matrimony 23 

Office  of  Civil  Government 24 

•Office  of  Teachers  and  Ministers, — male  and  female 

—in  the  Church 17 

Receiving  Excommunicated  Persons  into  the  Church  95 

Repentance  and  Amendment  of  Life 14 

.Resurrection  of  the  Dead,  and  the  last  Judgment 31 

Rule  to  be  observed  when  Difficulties  occur 97 

Shorter  Catechism 37 

Shunning  of  those  who  are  Expelled 29 

Swearing  of  Oaths 26 

The  Church  of  Christ 16 

The  Law  of  Christ,  which  is  the  Holy  Gospel,  or  the 

New  Testament 12 

The  Lord's  Supper 21 

The  Restoration  of  Man  Through  the  Promise  of  the 

Coming  of  Christ i. 8 

'Washing  of  the  Saints'  feet 22 


