Title: The Pilgrimage of Etheria (Peregrinatio Aetheriae, also called Itinerarium Egeriae)
Creator: Egeria (Etheria/Aetheria), late 4th century (translated by M. L. McClure and C. L. Feltoe)
Publisher: London: Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge; New York: Macmillan, 1919 -- Translations of Christian Literature, Series III: Liturgical Texts
Publication Date: 1919
Rights: Public Domain
Source: Internet Archive item pilgrimageofethe00mccliala, full-text OCR file pilgrimageofethe00mccliala_djvu.txt, fetched directly by the library/source-research thread, 2026-09-29. Item page marks possible-copyright-status NOT_IN_COPYRIGHT.
Provenance note: Header prepended by the library thread; the OCR text follows unchanged, apart from this header. Rights basis: 1919 publication date, more than 95 years before 2026, clears this registry's public-domain-by-date rule; the host's own NOT_IN_COPYRIGHT tag agrees. OCR artifacts left as found.
Content note: The volume opens with the editors' long introduction and notes; the translation of Egeria's own text begins after them. Egeria's own manuscript is incomplete (beginning and end lost), and her name and date are reconstructed from other sources; the editors' introduction states their own case for both.

---

Ti  M' 


TRANSLATIONS   OF  CHRISTIAN   LITERATURE 

SERIES  III 
LITURGICAL   TEXTS 


THE    PILGRIMAGE   OF   ETHERIA 


TOQtfLOTONtf  OF  CHRtfEKN 
LITERATURE.SERIESIII 

LITURGICAL  TEXTS 


THE 

PILGRIMAGE  OF 
ETHERIA 


Bu  M.LJH^CLURE 
andCL  PELTOE  ,DX). 


SOCIETY  FOR.  PROMOTING 
^CHRISTIAN  KNOWLEDGE. London 
TheMacmillan  Company 


i 


CONTENTS 

FAGB 

INTRODUCTION  .......  vii 

1.  THE   NARRATIVE   AND    ITS    AUTHORSHIP  .  vii 

2.  THE   PRESENT   EDITION    AND    ITS    EDITORS  .  XV 

3.  ETHERIA'S  ROUTE  TO  CONSTANTINOPLE  .  xvii 

4.  RESUME   OF   HER    JOURNEYINGS              .  .  Xvii 

5.  ECCLESIASTICAL   ORGANIZATION               .  .  XXvi 

6.  THE   MONKS    AND   NUNS    SHE    MET         .  .  XXVli 

7.  HER    USE   OF   THE    BIBLE                .             .  .  XXxi 

8.  LIST   OF   BIBLE    REFERENCES       .             .  .  XXXV 

9.  THE   LIVES    OF   THE    SAINTS         .             .  .  XXXvi 

10.  POINTS    OF   LITURGICAL    INTEREST         .  .   XXXvii 

11.  THE   CHURCHES    IN    JERUSALEM               .  .  xlv 

12.  LIST   OF   CHIEF   GREEK   WORDS   USED  .  .       xlvii 

TEXT  I 


INDEX    OF    PROPER   NAMES    AND   THINGS 


97 


ILLUSTRATIONS 


Facing  page 
I.      THE   BEGINNING   OF   VALERIUS'S   LETTER   TO    THE 

RELIGIOUS   BRETHREN        .  .  .  vii 

II.      RED    GRANITE   GROUP   OF   RAMESES   II.    AND    THE 

GOD    ATUM      .  .    ,          .  .  .  .16 

III.   THE  MOSAIC  IN  S.  PUDENZIANA  AT  ROME,  SAID 

TO  BE  IN  PART  OF  THE  FOURTH  CENTURY  .    45 


THE    BEGINNING    OK    VALERIUS'S    LETTKR 
TO     THE     RELIGIOUS     BRETHREN. 

[Facing  page  vii. 


The  Pilgrimage  oj  Etlu  r;n. 


INTRODUCTION 

i.  THE  NARRATIVE  AND  ITS  AUTHORSHIP 

THIS  book  was  discovered  by  Signer  Gamurrini  in 
a  MS.  of  the  eleventh  century  at  Arezzo,  and  he 
published  it  first  in  1887  and  again,  in  a  correcter 
edition,  in  1888.  Three  years  later  an  English  trans- 
lation with  text  and  notes,  by  Dr.  J.  H.  Bernard,  and 
an  appendix  on  the  topography  by  Sir  C.  W.  Wilson, 
appeared  under  the  auspices  of  the  Palestine  Pilgrims 
Text  Society.  In  1895  Dom  Cabrol  issued  a  treatise 
of  some  importance  entitled  Les  Eglises  de  Jerusalem. 
Then  came  M.  Paul  Geyer's  edition  in  1898  in  vol. 
xxxix.  of  the  Vienna  Corpus  Script.  Eccl  Lat.,  who 
still  further  emended  and  elucidated  the  text.  Up 
till  that  time  Signor  Gamurrini's  conjecture  that 
the  authoress  was  Silvia  of  Aquitaine,  sister  of  the 
Emperor  Theodosius's  minister  Rufinus  had  been 
considered  plausible,  but  had  not  been  either  cor- 
roborated or  disproved.1  But  in  1903  Dom  Ferotin 
(Revue  des  questions  historiques,  vol.  Ixxiv.)  sought  to 
identify  her  with  the  virgin  named  Etheria,  mentioned 

1  Another  conjecture  was  put  forward  by  Kohler  (Bibliothtque 
des  chartes,  xlv.  p.  141  ff.)  in  1884  that  she  was  Galla  Placidia, 
daughter  of  Theodosius,  who  is  said  to  have  visited  Jerusalem 
from  Constantinople  about  423  ;  but  this  pilgrimage  rests  on  an 
untrustworthy  tradition,  and  the  conjecture  has  never  met  with 
much  acceptance  from  others. 


viii  INTRODUCTION 

by  Valerius  in  a  letter  to  the  religious  brethren  of  the 
Vierzo  in  N.-W.  Spain,  and  his  arguments  have  met 
with  very  general  acceptance.  In  1909,  however,  a 
detailed  and  determined  attack  upon  his  views  was 
made  by  Karl  Meister  in  the  Rheinisches  Museum,  so 
far  as  the  date  and  nationality  of  the  pilgrim  are 
concerned  ;  but  his  arguments  were  in  Monseigneur 
Duchesne's  opinion1  successfully  met  and  answered 
by  the  Abbe  Deconinck  (Revue  Biblique,  1910)  and 
others.  No  one  probably  now  adheres  to  the  theory 
that  Silvia  was  the  pilgrim.  Meister  himself  agrees 
with  the  other  scholars  already  mentioned  who  have 
identified  her  with  the  abbess  named  Etheria,2  to 
whom  Valerius  refers  ;  he  only  disputes  her  date  and 
nationality. 

Dom  FeVotin's  theory,  amounting  almost  to  a 
certainty,  was  that  she  was  a  fellow-countrywoman 
of  Valerius,  who  had  visited  the  East  towards  the 
end  of  the  fourth  century,  i.  e.  in  the  reign  of 
Theodosius  (f395).  Valerius  himself  lived  in  the 
second  half  of  the  seventh  century,  and  is  chiefly 
known  as  the  biographer  of  his  contemporary  S. 
Fructuosus,  bishop  of  Braga.  He  was  abbat  of  the 
monasterium  Rufianense,  near  Astorga,  in  the  moun- 
tainous district  of  Gallaecia,'  now  called  the  Vierzo. 
In  the  letter  mentioned  above  he  speaks  of  Etheria 
as  extremo  occidui  marts  Oceani  littore  exorta  (sprung 
from  the  farthest  shore  of  the  western  sea,  the  Ocean), 
chap,  iv,  while  a  doubtful  phrase,  where  the  true 

1  See  his  Christian  Worship,  p.  541  :  S.P.C.K. 

8  It  may,  however,  be  mentioned  that  Eucheria  or  Egeria  has 
been  suggested  as  the  correct  form  of  the  name,  but  Duchesne 
still  (1918)  definitely  pronounces  in  favour  of  Etheria. 


INTRODUCTION  ix 

reading  is  uncertain,  in  chap,  i.,  seems,  nevertheless, 
almost  necessarily  to  connect  Etheria  with  the 
extremitas  hut  us  occiduae  plagae  (the  farthest  part  of 
this  western  coast).  If  huius  occurred  in  the  first 
of  these  two  expressions,  the  inference  that  she  was 
from  Gallaecia  would  be  certain  :  as  it  is,  the  phrases 
are  so  similar  that  very  little  doubt  can  be  entertained 
that  she  was.1 

Meister,  however,  maintains  that  they  do  not  of 
necessity  indicate  this  district,  and  that,  inter  alia,  as 
her  language  exhibits  no  trace  of  the  Spanish  dialect, 
but  distinct  traces  of  that  of  Gallia  Narbonensis,  and 
as  she  refers  to  the  river  Rhone  (on  p.  31)  as  if  it 
were  familiar  both  to  herself  and  her  readers,2  she 
came  from  S.-E.  Gaul,3  and  that  her  monastery  was 
perhaps  at  Marseilles  or  Aries,  where  there  were  well- 
known  religious  houses  in  the  sixth  century,  to  which 
he  assigns  her  pilgrimage,  viz.  in  the  first  half  of  the 
reign  of  Justinian  (f  565). 

A  considerable  portion  of  Meister's  argument  rests 
upon  the  language  used  by  Etheria.  He  goes  into 
minute  details  over  her  usages,  and  the  upshot  of  his 
examination  is  that  she  was  not  unlearned,  but  was 
familiar  with  the  Scriptures,  to  the  language  of  which 

1  We  may  compare  the  bishop  of  Edessa's  remark  (p.  42), 
that  she  had  taken  the  trouble  to  come  de  extremis  porro 
terris. 

*  This  is  practically  the  only  reference  to  European  topo- 
graphy in  the  extant  portions  of  the  narrative,  and  certainly 
implies  acquaintance  with  the  Rhone,  but  can  hardly  outweigh 
the  expressions  of  Valerius  quoted.  It  is  not  unlikely  that  she 
crossed  the  Rhone  at  some  point  in  her  journey  to  the  East. 

3  These  were  among  the  arguments  which  had  weighed  with 
the  earlier  editors,  who  sought  to  identify  the  pilgrim  with 
S.  Silvia  of  Aquitaine. 


x  INTRODUCTION 

her  own  is  similar,  her  phrases  being  often  suggested 
by,  or  formed  from,  the  same  :  this  seems  to  him  to 
point  to  a  later  date  and  a  different  nationality l  than 
the  one  we  have  accepted.  We,  too,  do  not  think  she 
was  for  her  time  and  country  badly  educated  and 
unlearned  nor  unfamiliar  with  the  Scriptures  :  no  one 
could  think  that.  But,  making  all  possible  allowances 
for  the  inaccuracies  of  the  scribe 2  to  whom  we  owe 
our  knowledge  of  her  narrative — and  they  are  prob- 
ably serious  and  frequent — yet  the  fact  remains  that 
she  wrote  a  very  slipshod  Latin  :  her  deficiencies  can- 
not all  be  due  to  the  carelessness  or  ignorance  of  the 
copyist.  And  this  is  the  more  surprising  because, 
though  she  does  not  appear  to  have  picked  up  any 
Syriac  or  other  native  tongue  in  her  journeys,  yet  she 
is  by  no  means  without  knowledge  of  Greek  :  for  she 
uses  quite  a  large  number  of  Greek  words  and  phrases3 
and  transliterates  them  as  a  rule  with  accuracy.  (See 
list  on  p.  xlviii  f.)  Besides  that  she  displays  great  intel- 
ligence and  exercises  great  powers  of  observation  and 
appreciation  of  what  she  sees  and  hears  wherever  she 
goes.  And  this  makes  her  narrative  always  lively 

1  Dom  Ferotin  has  also  gone  briefly  into  the  question  of 
language  in  footnote  2  on  pp.  26  f.,  and  comes  to  the  conclusion 
that  there  are  several  definite  traces  of  the  Spanish  dialect. 
This    serves    to    show    how    risky    such    investigations    and 
conclusions  usually  are ! 

2  Gamurrini  held  that  he  belonged  to  the  great  Benedictine 
house  of  Monte  Cassino  in  the  eleventh  century. 

3  Mrs.  McClure  has  given  two  examples  out  of  many  in  her 
note  on  p.  10,  where  Etheria's  titles  for  her  sisters  find  interest- 
ing parallels  in  the  Greek  and  Coptic  Ostraca  and  Letters,  as 
published  in  Crum's  Coptic  Ostraca  and  Hall's  Coptic  and  Greek 
Texts,  but  no  great  stress  can  be  laid  on  that  point,  as  similar 
forms   of  address    are    not    infrequent   in    Patristic    writings 
generally. 


INTRODUCTION  ri 

and  entertaining  in  spite  of  the  defects  in  her  style 
and  occasional  obscurity  of  meaning. 

Stress  has  been  laid,  and  not  without  reason,  on  the 
indications  of  Etheria's  social  importance  which  her 
story  affords.1  Wherever  she  went,  she  was  well 
received  and  entertained  by  bishops,  clergy  and 
monks,  who  spared  no  pains  in  acting  as  ciceroni  to 
her.  She  was  provided  with  escorts  of  Roman  soldiers 
when  passing  through  a  disturbed  and  dangerous 
district  between  Sinai  and  Egypt  (p.  14),  but  dis- 
pensed with  their  services  when  it  was  no  longer 
necessary  to  trouble  them  (p.  17).  Though  she  often 
uses  the  first  person  Singular  as  the  head  of  the  pil- 
grimage, yet  she  no  less  often  speaks  of  "  we "  and 
"us"  in  a  way  which  serves  to  show  that  she  travelled 
with  a  certain  retinue  of  her  own  ;  while,  in  the  jour- 
ney to  Mount  Sinai,  she  was  also  accompanied  by 
certain  holy  guides  (deductores],  and  again  when  she 
went  to  Mount  Nebo.  The  cost  of  this  expedition 
from  West  to  East  and  back  again,  which  occupied 
several  years,2  must  have  been  great,  however  abun- 
dant the  hospitality  was  which  she  met  with.  In  the 
return  from  Mount  Sinai  to  Clysma  (Suez)  she  men- 
tions the  "  animals  "  she  used  :  these  were  apparently 

1  Valerius  only  calls  her  beatissima  sanctimonialis  (nun),  but 
three  times  in  the  (thirteenth  century)  catalogues  of  S.  Martial 
of  Limoges  she  is  called  abbatissa  (Ferotin,  p.  33).  Fdrotin 
(p.  29)  also  draws  attention  to  the  coincidence,  if  it  be  nothing 
more,  that  the  Emperor  Theodosius  was  from  Gallaecia  and 
removed  his  family  to  Constantinople  about  the  time  of  Etheria's 
pilgrimage ;  this  may  have  considerably  helped  to  gain  her  a 
welcome  in  the  East,  if  she  was  in  any  way  connected  with  the 
Court. 

*  See  her  statements  on  pp.  30  and  43  f.  Cf.  Valerius,  chap.  i. 
per  multa  annorum  spatia . 


xii  INTRODUCTION 

not  camels,  for  she  immediately  speaks  of  them  by 
name  as  used  by  the  natives  of  Paran  ;  but  for  the 
first  part  of  the  ascent  of  Mount  Nebo  (east  of 
Jordan)  she  was  able  to  use  asellus  (an  ass  or  mule), 
whereas  she  had  to  walk  all  the  way  up  Mount  Sinai, 
not  even  a  sella  (litter)  being  possible  because  of  its 
great  steepness.  If  she  had  been  an  ordinary  pilgrim 
in  those  days  she  would  have  been  content  to  go  on 
foot  the  whole  way.1  Such  considerations  again  were 
amongst  those  which  led  earlier  editors  to  identify 
our  pilgrim,  as  has  been  said  above,  with  cither  Galla 
Placidia  or  with  Silvia  of  Aquitaine.  But  though 
there  is  a  certain  amount  in  Silvia's  case  that  fits  in 
with  what  is  here  contained,  yet  the  terms  in  which 
the  Lausiac  History  of  Palladius 2  speaks  of  her  in 
connexion  with  her  journey  from  Jerusalem  to  Egypt 
show  that  she  was  an  ascetic  of  the  most  severe  type 
in  her  practices,  and  that  our  pilgrim  never  shows 
herself  to  have  been,  however  much  she  respects  and 
admires  asceticism  in  those  she  meets  or  visits. 

Three  other  matters  remain  to  be  considered  which 
bear  upon  the  date  of  the  narrative  besides  being  of 
general  interest : — 

(a)  Etheria  speaks  of  the  three  bishops  whom  she 

1  Valerius,  chap.  i.  says  paulisper  duce  Domino  gradiendo 
pervenit  ad  sacralissima  /oca,  and  chap.  v.  in  hac  vita  pedibus 
Peregrinavit ,  but  these  may  be  only  conventional  phrases  of  his 
for  a  pilgrimage.     No  stress  can  be  laid  either  on  Etheria's 
occasional  use  of  ambulare  (walk)  to  describe  her  movements, 
because  it  means  any  kind  of  movement,  e.g.  ambulare  cum 
camelis  sui's,  p.  12,  etc. 

2  Chap.  lv.:    she  was  sixty  years  of  age,  never  used  water 
(except  for  the  tips  of  her  fingers  before  communicating),  never 
slept  on  a  bed  nor  travelled  in  a  litter.    This  is  her  own  account 
of  herself ! 


INTRODUCTION  xiii 

came  across  in  Mesopotamia  (at  Bathnae,  Edessa  and 
Haran)  as  conspicuous  for  their  holiness,  "being  both 
monk  and  confessor"  in  each  case.  She  does  not 
apply  this  word  "confessor"  to  any  other  of  the 
bishops,  although  she  has  several  times  noted  that 
they  were  or  had  been  monks  formerly,  while  the  still 
vigorous  old  priest  whom  she  saw  on  Mount  Sinai 
had  been  "  both  a  monk  from  an  early  age  and, 
as  they  say  here,  an  ascete."1  According  to  Mon- 
seigneur  Duchesne,  "we  know  that"  the  three  bishops 
who  are  called  confessors  "  were  victims  of  the  per- 
secution under  Valens  "  (A.D.  367-378),  (p.  547).  We 
can  hardly  be  said  to  "  know  "  this,  but  only  that  this 
is  more  likely  that  they  were,  other  things  being  con- 
sidered, than  that  they  were  those  whom  the  Emperor 
Anastasius,  favouring  the  Monophysites,  drove  out  in 
the  early  years  of  the  sixth  century  (as  Meister  main- 
tains). Is  it,  however,  altogether  certain  that  "con- 
fessor" in  these  three  cases  means  more  than  a  stricter 
ascete  than  an  ordinary  monachus  ?  Duchesne  him- 
self recognizes  that  this  is  a  frequent  meaning  of  the 
title  in  those  days  (see  Christian  Worship,  pp.  142, 
173,  284  and  420  ;  and  Batiffol,  Hist,  du  Brev.  Rom., 
p.  57).  Still  Eulogius,  bishop  of  Edessa  (j-  388),  seems 
to  have  suffered  persecution,  and  this  would  no  doubt 
fit  in  with  our  date  for  the  pilgrimage. 

(b]  Etheria  quotes  the  bishop  of  Haran's  statement 
to  her  that  at  that  time  the  Persians  held  the  district 
of  Nisibis  and  Ur,  and  the  Romans  had  no  place 

1  The  sanctus  monachus  vir  astitis  at  Carneas  was  appar- 
ently a  strict  hermit  living  alone  in  the  desert  ;  the  ascetics, 
whose  exploits  she  claims  to  have  described  on  p.  39,  are 
further  characterized  as  maiores, 


xiv  INTRODUCTION 

there  (p.  39).  As  the  Emperor  Jovian  had  yielded 
the  district  to  King  Sapor  in  363,  that  seems  to  be 
the  explanation  of  the  statement.1  On  the  other 
hand,  in  the  years  540-545  the  Romans  (under  Beli- 
sarius)  regained  their  supremacy  in  the  East,  so  that 
Meister  allows  that  the  pilgrimage  must  have  taken 
place  before  then.  For  that  reason,  among  others, 
he  assigns  it  to  534,  or  thereabouts. 

(c)  Dr.  Bernard  has  drawn  our  attention  to  another 
point  in  favour  of  the  earlier  date,  which  Meister 
seems  to  have  overlooked.  It  is  this.  When  we 
come  to  the  pilgrimages  which  are  admittedly  of  the 
sixth  century,  e.g.  the  so-called  Breviarium,  and  the 
pilgrimage  of  Theodosius  (both  of  which  may  be 
dated  about  530),  we  find  among  the  churches  in 
Jerusalem  visited  by  pilgrims  "  S.  Peter  in  the  house 
of  Caiaphas,"  and  "  S.  Sophia  in  the  Praetorium." 
Etheria  knows  nothing  of  these  ;  she  names  only  the 
Martyrium,  the  Anastasis,  and  the  Church  of  Sion, 
and  as  her  description  of  the  holy  city  is  rich  in 
detail,  it  may  be  reasonably  concluded  that  these  were 
the  only  churches  which  she  saw,  and  that  her  visit 
was  prior  to  the  erection  of  those  named  by  Theo- 
dosius. Meister  uses  a  similar  argument  to  prove 
that  the  pilgrimage  must  be  prior  to  the  building  by 
Justinian  of  the  Church  of  S.  Mary  Deipara  in  543 
(as  it  certainly  was)  ;  but  his  reasoning  is  equally 
conclusive  to  establish  its  priority  to  the  Breviarium 
and  the  Peregrinatio  Theodosii. 

1  It  may  be  further  noted  that   she   had   found   ( Roman  ^ 
"  soldiery  with  their  tribune"  stationed  at  Edessa  (p.  32). 


INTRODUCTION  xv 

2.  THE  PRESENT  EDITION  AND  ITS  EDITORS 

That  part  of  the  text,  which  relates  to  Jerusalem, 
had  been  translated  for  the  English  version  (2nd 
edition)  of  Duchesne's  Origines  du  culte  Chretien, 
which  Mrs.  McClure  published  in  1904.  For  it  she 
was  "  mainly  indebted,"  as  she  tells  us,  to  her 
"  brother  the  Rev.  George  Herbert,  who  had  the 
advantage  of  many  criticisms  and  suggestions  from 
so  eminent  a  scholar  as  the  late  Canon  Chas.  Evans, 
formerly  Headmaster  of  King  Edward's  School, 
Birmingham."  Mr.  Herbert  also  translated  the  rest 
of  the  text  which  now  appears  with  the  same  assist- 
ance. Moreover,  he  read  through  K.  Meister's  book 
on  the  subject  and  made  a  careful  resume  of  his 
conclusions  for  her,  of  which  use  has  been  freely 
made  in  this  Introduction.  Most  of  the  footnotes 
were  added  to  the  text  by  Mrs.  McClure  herself, 
a  few  by  the  present  writer.  But,  though  the  results 
of  their  joint  labours  had  been  set  up  in  print  for 
some  time  and  she  had  spent  a  good  deal  of  time 
in  further  research  and  thought  over  them  with  a 
view  to  writing  the  Introduction,  she  had  to  lay  the 
work  aside  while  she  was  completing  the  fifth  edition 
of  Christian  Worship  and  seeing  it  through  the  press. 
This  she  had  hardly  done,  when  she  was  called  away, 
just  as  she  was  intending  to  resume  her  work  on  the 
Pilgrimage  of  Etheria  last  summer  (1918).  There  are 
many  reasons  why  we  mourn  her  loss,  and  surely 
among  them  we  must  reckon  this,  that  we  are  not 
now  permitted  to  share  with  her  the  joy  of  seeing  the 
fruits  of  her  long  study  brought  to  completion.  She 
left  very  few  materials  for  the  Introduction  behind 


xvi  INTRODUCTION 

among  her  papers,  and  though  the  present  writer  has 
in  all  cases  done  his  best  to  utilize  what  there  was 
and  to  reproduce  what  he  thought  to  be  in  her  mind 
on  various  points,  yet  he  has  had  very  largely  to 
start  de  novo  in  drawing  up  the  introductory  sections, 
and  to  treat  the  text  more  or  less  independently. 
He  must  be  forgiven,  therefore,  if  he  has  failed  some- 
times to  do  justice  to  her  ideas  and  to  the  researches 
on  which  she  had  so  long  been  engaged,  and  if  there 
is  a  certain  amount  of  confusion  in  arrangement 
and  of  discrepancy  between  her  part  of  the  volume 
and  his. 

Mrs.  McClure  had  frequently  discussed  points  with 
friends  of  considerable  expert  knowledge  like  Arch- 
bishop Bernard,  Monseigneur  Duchesne,  Professor 
Flinders  Petrie,  and  others,  and  sometimes  mentions 
them  by  name  in  her  notes  as  having  told  her  this 
or  that.  The  first  named  of  these  had  written  a 
short  "Foreword"  to  the  volume  in  September  1916, 
but  he  has  requested  the  present  writer  to  withdraw 
it  as  being  no  longer  suitable  to  its  purpose,  and 
to  use  the  additional  facts  that  he  there  gave  in  his 
own  Introduction.  This  he  has  been  very  glad  to 
do,  and  begs  to  acknowledge  his  indebtedness  to  his 
Grace  for  them,  as  well  as  to  others  who  have  con- 
tributed to  the  production  of  the  book  in  its  present 
form,  and  in  particular  to  the  Rev.  A.  D.  Rigby,  who 
has  read  through  the  proofs  and  made  several 
valuable  suggestions,  which  he  has  been  able  to 
adopt, 


INTRODUCTION  xvii 

3.  ETHERIA'S  ROUTE  (TO  AND  FROM 

CONSTANTINOPLE) 

We  have,  of  course,  no  hint  of  the  route  taken  by 
Etheria  from  her  home  in  the  extreme  west  of 
Europe  as  far  as  Constantinople  and  back  again, 
unless  her  mention  of  the  river  Rhone  be  taken  as 
indicating  that  she  crossed  it  in  her  journey  (possibly 
at  Aries).1  But  it  is  interesting  to  note  that,  nearly 
fifty  years  before  her,  the  anonymous  "  Pilgrim  of 
Bordeaux"  gives  the  route  which  she  pursued,  and 
that  may  possibly  have  been  Etheria's  too.  She 
went  out  by  land,  she  tells  us,  across  the  north  of 
Italy,  through  Noricum,  Pannonia,  Moesia,  Dacia 
and  Thrace  ;  while  on  her  return  she  embarked  at 
Aulon  in  Epirus  and  crossed  the  South  Adriatic  to 
Hydruntum  (Otranto)  and  reached  home  by  Rome 
and  Milan. 

4.  A  RESUME  OF  THE  JOURNEYINGS 

The  narrative,  as  we  now  possess  it,  opens  in  the 
middle  of  a  sentence  at  the  point  where  the  pilgrim 
had  already  reached  the  megalithic  remains  at 
Kibroth  Hattaavah  in  sight  of  the  mountain  range 
of  Sinai.  It  may  reasonably  be  assumed  that  the 
missing  part  contained  the  account  of  her  journey 
from  her  Western  home  to  Constantinople,2  from 

1  Dom  Ferotin  (p.  31)  also  suggests  that  another  hint  is  the 
statement  of  Peter  the  Deacon  (twelfth  century),  who  made  large 
use  of  her  narrative  in  his  tract  De  Sanctis  Loci's,  that  she  knew 
the  flavour  of  the  fish  caught  in  the  Mediterranean,  but  surely 
this  is  a  little  far-fetched. 

*  For  this  see  §  3  above. 
t 


xviii  INTRODUCTION 

thence  through  what  is  now  Asia  Minor  to  Antioch  l 
and  on  to  Jerusalem,  the  events  of  her  stay  there 
(apart  from  the  description  of  the  services  which 
she  gives  later  on,  pp.  45  ff.)  and  her  journey  from 
thence  towards  Mount  Sinai  by  way  of  Clysma  (now 
Suez)  and  Faran  (or  Paran).  She  had  just  before 
probably  ascended  "the  mountain  of  Faran,"  where 
the  hands  of  Moses  were  uplifted  during  the  battle 
with  Amalek  (Exod.  xvii.  10  ff.),  and  came  down  again 
into  the  plain  (see  p.  xxii  below).  By  this  time  the 
mountains  lie  only  four  miles  distant,  and,  passing 
along  the  wide,  flat  valley  that  lies  between,  they 
soon  arrive  at  their  foot  on  the  western  side.  Sir 
C.  W.  Wilson  has  no  doubt  that  the  peak  which 
she  calls  the  Mount  of  God  and  made  a  point  of 
ascending  was  Jebel  Musa  (the  traditional  site, 
7363  ft.  high),  though  it  would  actually  be  impos- 
sible for  her  to  see  what  she  was  told  she  saw  from 
the  top  (p.  6) :  like  so  many  tourists  she  was  mis- 
informed. She  went  also  to  what  she  was  told  was 
Mount  Horeb,  where  Elijah's  cave  was,2  and  there 

1  See  p.  43.     It  is  not  easy  to  fit  in  her  visit  to  Alexandria 
and  the  Thebaid  :   perhaps   she  had   taken  ship  from  Tarsus 
or  Seleucia,  the  port  of  Antioch  for  Alexandria,  and  reached 
Palestine  from  there,  or  had  she  gone  straight  to  that  part  of 
Egypt,  when  she  left  Jerusalem  and  was  returning  from  it  for 
her  visit  to  Sinai  when  we  find   her  where  the  narrative  now 
begins  ?    The  latter  alternative  seems  on  the  whole  the  more 
likely,  though  either  of  them  will  account  for  the  expression 
used  on  p.  6  that  "  the  Parthenian  sea "  which  she  was  told 
she  saw  from  Mount  Sinai  "leads  to  Alexandria."     No  doubt 
she  called  to  mind  her  sea-trip  then,  and  was  not  too  critical 
of  her  guides'  assertions. 

2  No  doubt  the  site  which  is  now  shown  as  such.     In  the 
sixth  century  Jebel  el  Deir,  a  little  further  off,  was  identified 
with  Horeb. 


INTRODUCTION  xix 

she  specially  mentions  "  the  very  earnest  prayer " 1 
with  which  they  made  the  oblation.  Thence  they 
descended  on  the  eastern  side  to  the  place  of  the 
Burning  Bush  (where  the  present  convent  of  S. 
Catherine  is),  and  after  visiting  Taberah  and  several 
other  sites  she  returned  down  the  valley  again  to 
Faran,  and  so  back  after  two  days'  rest,  by  a  toilsome 
route  across  the  desert  to  Clysma,  where  she  was 
again  glad  to  rest  for  a  while. 

When  she  had  been  in  Egypt  before,  she  had  seen 
something  of  Goshen  as  well  as  of  the  Thebaid  and 
Alexandria,  but  she  was  now  desirous  to  explore  the 
route  of  the  Exodus  more  carefully.  She  found  it 
was  no  easy  journey  of  four  stations  across  the 
desert  to  what  she  calls  "  the  city  of  Arabia " 
(identified  by  experts  with  the  Thou  of  Roman 
official  documents,  or  possibly  Bubastir),  and  the 
district  was  apparently  at  the  time  unsettled  and  in 
military  occupation.  However,  she  was  allowed  an 
escort  of  soldiers,  and  set  out.  The  route  lay  past 
Epauleum  (Pi-hahiroth),  where  there  was  a  Roman 
garrison,  then  through  two  other  forts,  Migdol  and 
Baal-zephon,  and  onwards  by  way  of  Etham,  Succoth, 
Pithom  (another  fort)  to  Heroopolis  (then  only  a 
large  village),  on  a  branch  of  the  Nile  and  within  the 
borders  of  Egypt.  The  remainder  of  the  journey 
into  Goshen 2  was  then  accomplished.  It  took  her 
past  Rameses,  which  was  only  four  miles  from  her 

1  orationem  impensissimam,  a  phrase  which  reminds  us  of 
the  fKreviis  iKtffia  in  the  Liturgy  of  S.  Chrysostom  :  cf.  Valerius, 
chap,  ii,  cum  omni  exultatione  et  letitia  inter  crebra  orationum 
preconia  salutaris  Deo  obtulit  hostias. 

*  Only  sixteen  miles  according  to  Etheria ;  but  it  should  be 
twenty-six  according  to  Wilson. 


xx  INTRODUCTION 

goal,  "  the  city  of  Arabia,"  which  she  reached  on  the 
eve  of  the  Epiphany  in  time  for  the  services.  Here 
she  sent  back  her  military  guard,  as  she  was  now 
on  the  high  road  from  the  Thebaid  to  Pelusium,  and 
would  have  no  difficulty,  when  she  resumed  her 
journey  towards  Palestine.  At  Rameses  (Saft  el 
Henneh),  which  was  once  a  great  city,  she  found 
nothing  but  ruins  remaining  except  two  great  statues 
cut  out  of  "  one  great  Theban  stone  "  and  an  ancient 
sycomore  famous  for  its  healing  virtue,  which  they 
called  "  the  Tree  of  Truth  " l  according  to  the  "  bishop 
of  Arabia,"  who  had  come  out  to  meet  her  there. 
His  account  also  was  that  Pharaoh  had  burnt  the 
place  to  the  ground  in  anger  at  the  Israelites'  escape. 
Etheria's  route  lay  for  two  days  right  through  the 
land  of  Goshen  along  the  banks  of  the  Nile,  and  she 
was  greatly  struck  with  the  fertility  and  beauty  of 
this  district  (p.  I?).2  In  an  article  by  Miss  Amelia 
Betham  Edwards,  which  appeared  in  Harper's  Maga- 
zine, October  1886,  we  read  the  following  interesting 
comments  on  this  :  "  This  was  before  the  submerging 
of  the  '  field  of  Zoan  '  by  lake  Menzaleh.  Mas'oudy, 
the  Arab  traveller  and  historian  of  the  tenth  century, 
thus  describes  it :  '  The  place  occupied  by  the  lake 
was  formerly  a  district  which  had  not  its  equal  in 

1  "E.  Naville  in  Goshen,  pp.  12,  20,  quotes  inscriptions  on  the 
monuments  of  Saft,  in  which  the  sycomore  tree  is  mentioned. 
We  see  that  in  the  fourth  century  the  tradition  was  yet  surviv- 
ing, though  clothed  in  Christian  garb"  (Bernard,  p.  22  ».). 
Mrs.  McClure  has  left  a  note  among  her  papers  to  this  effect : 
"  Certain  sycomores  on  the  verge  of  the  desert  are  still  vener- 
ated. The  Fellahs  put  vases  of  water  under  them.  If  asked 
for  what  use,  the  answer  is  :  For  passers  by  and  pigeons." 

Cf.  Valerius,  chap,  i.:   singularum  provinciarum  magni- 
S)  uberrimas  fertilitates  atque  perspicuas  .  .  .  describens. 


INTRODUCTION  xxi 

Egypt  for  fine  air,  fertility  and  wealth.  Gardens, 
plantations  of  palms  and  other  trees,  vines  and  culti- 
vated fields  met  the  eye  in  every  direction.  In  short, 
there  was  not  a  province  in  Egypt  except  the 
Fayum,  to  be  compared  with  it  for  beauty.  This 
district  was  distant  about  one  day's  journey  from 
the  sea.  .  .  .  But  in  the  year  251  of  the  era  of  Dio- 
cletian (A.  D.  535)  the  waters  of  the  sea  flowed  in 
and  submerged  that  part  of  the  plain  which  now  is 
called  the  Lake  of  Tennis,  and  every  year  the 
inundation  increased,  so  that  at  last  it  covered  the 
whole  province.' "  We  know  that  the  late  Mrs. 
McClure  considered  this  an  additional  corroboration 
of  her  conviction  that  Meister's  date  for  the  pilgrim- 
age was  wrong :  and  it  is  certainly  a  remarkable 
sidelight  on  the  narrative,  if  the  date  and  the  other 
statements  are  to  be  relied  on. 

Between  "  the  city  of  Arabia  "  and  Pelusium  on 
the  sea  coast  she  mentions  only  one  place  that  she 
passed  through,  viz.  Tathnis,  which  is  taken  as  more 
likely  to  be  the  ancient  Tahpanhes  (or  Daphno)1 
than  Tanis  (Zoan),  but  the  two  places  were  not  far 
apart,  and  the  relevancy  of  the  extract  just  given  is 
not  affected. 

Without  further  description  of  her  journey  Etheria 
arrived  once  more  in  Jerusalem. 

She  now  proceeds  to  describe  another  expedition 
she  undertook  from  there,  viz.  to  make  the  ascent  of 
Mount  Nebo  in  the  land  of  Moab.  This  time  she 
was  accompanied  by  several  of  the  clergy  and  monks. 
They  crossed  the  Jordan  by  Jericho  and,  passing 
through  Livias,  came  to  the  mountain,  and  having 
1  See  note  on  p.  17. 


xxii  INTRODUCTION 

reached  the  top,  were  much  delighted  with  the  pano- 
rama spread  before  them,  particulars  of  which  she 
gives.  They  then  returned  to  the  Holy  City.  Her 
next  tour  was  through  Jericho  again  and  then  north- 
wards up  the  Jordan  valley  until  they  came  first  to 
Salem,  where  they  visited  Melchizedek's  church  and 
city;  then  to  Aenon,  Thisbe  (Elijah's  native  place) 
and  the  brook  Cherith,  and  so,  crossing  the  Jordan, 
into  the  Ausitis  (Uz),  when  they  made  the  burying- 
place  of  Job  at  Carneas  (or  Dennaba)  the  final  point 
in  their  journey.  The  church  had  been  "built  by 
some  tribune,"  but  left  unfinished.  Here  again 
Etheria  refers  to  the  thankfulness  and  joy  with  which 
she  and  her  companions  made  their  communion  at 
the  special  oblation,  which  the  bishop  offered  at  her 
request  before  they  returned  once  more  to  Jerusalem.1 
But  there  is  a  gap  in  the  MS.  in  the  middle  of  the 
account  of  this  tour.  After  leaving  the  brook  Cherith 
they  continued  up  the  valley  until  they  saw  on  the 
left  towards  Phoenicia  (on  the  N.  W.)  "a  great  and 
very  high  mountain  which  extended,"  and  there  the 
gap  begins,  and  when  the  story  is  taken  up  again 
we  are  at  Job's  burial-place.  Valerius  (chap,  ii.), 
mentions  several  mountains  as  visited  by  her,  which 
are  omitted  in  our  fragments :  Faran,  where  Moses 
prayed  with  hands  uplifted,  but  that  no  doubt  she 
described  before  our  fragments  begin  (p.  i);  Tabor, 
the  scene  of  our  Lord's  Transfiguration  ;  Hermon, 
where  the  Lord  was  wont  to  rest  Himself  with  His 
disciples,  and  the  mountain  where  our  Lord  taught 
His  disciples  the  beatitudes,  etc.  The  shape  of 

1  Cf.  Valerius,  chap.  ii.  :  cibo  Verbi  Dei  refecta,  infatigabiliter 
agens  gratias  Deo  carpebat  tier  intrepida. 


INTRODUCTION  xxiii 

Tabor,  which  is  conical  and  not  very  high,  does  not 
suit  Etheria's  description.  One  would  think,  there- 
fore, that  it  was  part  of  the  Hermon  range  that  she 
saw,  and  that  by  the  time  she  saw  it,  she  had  turned 
east  to  cross  the  Jordan. 

The  time  had  now  come  for  Etheria  to  return  to 
her  own  country,  but  still  full  of  energy  and  desire 
to  see  as  much  as  she  could,  she  determined  to  make 
a  big  detour  from  Antioch,  which  would  lie  in  her 
direct  course  by  land  to  Constantinople,  and  visit 
from  there  several  important  and  interesting  places 
in  N.-W.  Syria  and  Mesopotamia  before  turning  her 
face  westwards.  Accordingly,  when  she  left  Antioch 
she  went  first  to  Hierapolis,  and  from  there  reached 
the  great  river  Euphrates,  which  she  can  only  com- 
pare with  the  Rhone  for  its  width  and  strong  current. 
They  crossed  it  in  a  ship  and  came  to  Bathnae  (in 
Osrhoene),  and  from  thence  arrived  at  Edessa,  the 
chief  goal  of  her  desires,  where  she  stayed  three  days 
and  had  a  busy  and  very  interesting  time.  Matters 
of  interest  are  involved  in  this  portion  of  the 
narrative,  which  deserve  attention. 

Etheria  expressly  says  she  went  to  Edessa  to  pray 
at  the  martyrium  of  S.  Thomas  the  Apostle,  whose 
whole  body  is  there.  And  when  she  arrived  there, 
she  and  her  companions  went  at  once  to  the  church 
and  the  martyrium  of  S.  Thomas.  She  found  the 
great  and  beautiful  church  had  been  rebuilt  in  a  new 
form  (nova  compositione).  This  the  Emperor  Valens 
had  finished  in  372  (Socr.,  Hist.  Ecd.  iv.  18).  Her 
language  seems,  though  not  at  all  certainly,  to  imply 
that  the  martyrium  was  still  separate  from  the 
church.  The  Chronicle  of  Edessa  says  the  tomb  was 


xxiv  INTRODUCTION 

transferred  to  the  new  church  in  394,  when  Cyrus  was 
bishop,  who  had  succeeded  Eulogius  on  his  death  in 
388.  This  again  seems  to  corroborate  the  date  we 
have  accepted  for  her  pilgrimage. 

She  visited  many  other  martyria  in  the  town,  but 
makes  no  specific  allusion  to  the  famous  likeness  of 
our  Lord,  though  it  is  said  to  have  been  held  in 
veneration  at  least  as  early  as  the  middle  of  the 
fourth  century. 

She  does,  however,  describe  two  other  striking  like- 
nesses which  she  was  taken  to  see,  though  that  can 
hardly  be  more  than  a  coincidence — viz.  the  marble 
busts  or  images  (archiotepa)  of  King  Abgar  and  his 
son  Magnus1  in  the  royal  palace  (p.  33). 

Etheria  gives  us  likewise  an  account  that  will  be 
read  with  interest  of  what  she  was  told  about  the 
letters  of  Abgar  to  our  Lord  and  His  answer.  This 
account  differs  from  that  of  Eusebius  (Hist.  Eccl.  ii. 
13),  in  mentioning  the  promise  of  Christ  that  no 
enemy  should  ever  enter  the  city.  Eusebius  knows 
nothing  of  such  a  promise  of  immunity,  though  later 
historians  relate  it  (see  Bernard's  note,  p.  36),  and  it 
was  known  to  Ephraem  Syrus  (about  390).  She  also 
mentions  that  she  had  copies  of  these  letters  at  home. 
Meister  points  out  that  Rufinus's  translation  of  Eus. 
Hist.  Eccl.  into  Latin  was  not  complete  before  398  at 
the  earliest,  from  which  he  argues  that  copies  would 
not  be  known  in  the  West  so  soon  as  the  date  assigned 
by  Gamurrini  and  adopted  by  ourselves.  But  there 
may  have  been  other  sources  or  authorities,  Greek  as 
well  as  Latin,  besides  Eusebius  ;  nor  was  Etheria, 

1  According  to  Smith,  Diet,  of  Christian  Biog.,  s.v.  Abgar, 
several  Edessene  princes  bore  the  name  Ma'nO. 


INTRODUCTION  xxv 

perhaps,  quite  so  ignorant  of  Greek  as  is  usually 
thought,  and  her  copies  may  have  been  in  that 
language  after  all. 

From  Edessa  she  went  on  to  Haran  and  stayed  there 
two  days,  one  of  them  being  April  24,  the  festival  of 
S.  Helpidius  (see  note  on  p.  37) -1  She  would  very 
much  have  liked  to  penetrate  farther  east  to  Nisibis, 
and  then  on  to  Ur  of  the  Chaldees  ;  but  the  bishop 
dissuaded  her  on  the  ground  that  that  district  was 
now  in  the  hands  of  the  Persians,  no  longer  the 
Romans  (see  p.  39).  She  was  content,  therefore,  to 
go  only  six  miles  out  and  see  the  well  from  which 
Jacob  watered  Rachel's  flocks,  at  a  place  called 
Fadana  (the  Paddan-Aram  of  Gen.  xxviii.  2).  She 
then  returned  to  Antioch  and  pursued  her  westward 
journey,  through  Cilicia,  till  she  came  to  Tarsus. 
Here  she  made  another  detour  by  way  of  Pompeio- 
polis  (or  Soli)  and  Corycus  (both  on  the  sea  coast), 
in  order  to  pay  a  special  visit  to  the  tomb  of  S. 
Thecla  in  Isauria,  where  she  met  to  her  great  delight 
her  dear  friend  Marthana,  whom  she  had  known  in 
Jerusalem  (see  note  on  p.  xxix).  Coming  back  to 
Tarsus  she  made  her  way  without  further  delay  by 
Mopsocrene  (which  she  calls  Mansocrenae)  and  under 
Mount  Taurus  through  Cappadocia,  Galatia  and 
Bithynia,  until  she  arrived  at  Chalcedon,  and  stopped 
there  for  the  famous  shrine  of  S.  Euphemia,  and 
finally  arrived  at  Constantinople.2  There  she  visited 

1  The  ascete  of  this  name  described  by  Palladius  (Laus. 
Hist.  chap,  xlviii.)  is  apparently  a  different  person. 

1  She  had  taken  the  same  route  along  the  great  Roman  high 
road  on  her  way  out  from  Constantinople,  more  than  three  years 
before,  and  on  that  occasion  also  had  come  to  know  the  shrine 
of  S.  Euphemia  (p.  43), 


xxvi  INTRODUCTION 

the  Church  of  the  Apostles  (p.  44)  and  many  other 
of  the  martyria  with  which  the  city  abounded  :  and, 
still  indefatigable,  tells  her  beloved  sisters  that,  while 
she  is  preparing  this  narrative  for  them  there  and 
also,  it  seems,  drawing  up  her  account  of  the  services 
and  rites  which  she  had  witnessed  at  Jerusalem,  she 
will  not  actually  leave  for  home  till  she  has  crossed 
into  Asia  once  again  and  visited  the  martyrium  of 
S.  John  at  Ephesus.  If  anything  furtiier  remains  to 
tell  and  her  life  is  spared,  she  will  relate  it  in  person 
or  in  another  letter.  And  so  she  brings  her  story  to 
an  end,  which  investigation  proves  to  be  as  veracious 
as  it  is  undoubtedly  vivacious  throughout.1 

5.  THE  ECCLESIASTICAL  ORGANIZATION 

Etheria  practically  gives  no  description  and  makes 
no  comment  on  the  Church  organization  of  the  dis- 
tricts through  which  she  journeyed,  except  that  she 
mentions  (i)  the  bishops  and  other  clergy  whom  she 
met,  often  saying  that  they  had  been,  or  still  were, 
from  among  the  ranks  of  the  monastic  orders,  and  (2) 
the  churches  in  which  they  ministered.  At  the  end  of 
the  fourth  century  Egypt  was  an  independent  pro- 
vince under  the  Patriarch  of  Alexandria,  but  the  part 
of  Egypt  she  mostly  mentions  would  hardly  have 
been  organized  by  that  time  into  what  afterwards 
became  known  as  Augustanica  Prima,  with  fourteen 
bishops,  the  chief  of  whom  was  at  Pelusium.  The 

1  Valerius's  characteristic  summary,  for  all  its  loose  grammar 
and  rhetorical  exaggeration,  is  worth  quoting  :  totius  mundi 
itinera  non  quassabat,  maria  procellosa  ac  flumina  ingentia  non 
conclusit,  montium  immanitas  diraque  asperitas  non  imminuit, 
gentium  im-biarum  truculentissima  atrocitas  non  perterruit 
(chap.  Hi.). 


INTRODUCTION  xxvii 

bishop  of  Jerusalem  had  had  special  privileges 
granted  him  at  the  Council  of  Nicaea  (325),  but  he 
was  still  "  under  the  jurisdiction  of  his  provincial 
metropolitan,  the  Bishop  of  Caesarea"  (Duchesne, 
op.  ct't.,  p.  27)  :  and  therefore  probably  the  clergy 
west  of  the  Jordan  she  had  to  do  with  outside  the 
Holy  City  were  likewise  dependent  on  the  latter. 
To  the  east  and  north-east  of  the  Jordan  as  far  as 
Hierapolis  (p.  31)  the  places  she  visited  were  prob- 
ably all  in  the  domain  of  the  Patriarch  of  Antioch, 
while  those  in  Mesopotamia  would  be  under  the 
Catholicos  of  Armenia. 

6.  THE  MONKS  AND  NUNS  OF  THE  NARRATIVE 

It  is  a  matter  of  common  knowledge  that  monas- 
ticism  took  its  rise  in  Egypt  about  the  middle  of  the 
third  century,  perhaps  as  the  result  of  the  Decian 
persecution,  many  of  those  who  then  fled  to  the  desert 
never  returning,  and  that  from  the  beginning  of  the 
fourth  century  the  movement  developed  mainly  along 
two  lines  which  were  almost  contemporaneous1  :  (i) 
under  the  method  of  S.  Antony,  whose  monks  were 
mostly  solitary  hermits  in  the  strict  sense,  though  in 
some  places  they  lived  near  one  another  in  small 
companies  and  met  together  for  common  worship  on 
Saturdays  and  Sundays  :  (2)  under  the  rule  of  S. 
Pachomius,  who  founded  the  conventual  type  of  mon- 
asticism.  Here  the  brethren  lived  together  in  much 
larger  bands,  and  not  only  combined  for  common 

1  The  monks  of  Nitria  and  Scete,  to  the  south  of  Alexandria, 
would  more  or  less  represent  a  third  (see  Lowther  Clarke,  J>. 
Basil,  p.  33),  and  Etheria  may  have  come  across  them  when  she 
was  at  Alexandria  (p.  18). 


xxviii  INTRODUCTION 

worship  but  were  organized  for  regular  work  (on  the 
land,  etc.),  though  they  took  no  meals  together  and 
were  each  allowed  to  practise  that  amount  of  austerity 
which  his  strength  and  zeal  prompted  beyond  the 
fixed  minimum  which  was  obligatory  on  all.1  Thus 
the  spirit  of  individualism  was  a  strongly  marked 
feature  in  both  these  systems.  It  was  from  Egypt 
by  way  of  Rome  that  monasticism  was  quite  early 
brought  to  western  Europe,  and  there  for  some  time 
it  retained  many  of  its  more  especially  Eastern  char- 
acteristics. The  community  of  feeling  and  atmo- 
sphere, therefore,  between  the  monastic  institutions 
of  the  West  and  those  of  Egypt,  Syria  and  Palestine 
was  considerable,  and  will  account  for  the  readiness 
with  which  Etheria  was  received  everywhere  on  her 
journeys  and  for  the  highly  appreciative  way  in  which 
she  commends  the  saintliness  of  her  entertainers  and 
informants,  who  were  in  the  greater  number  of  in- 
stances closely  associated  with  the  monastic  and 
ascetic  life. 

The  rule  of  S.  Pachomius,  which  sprang  into  a  full 
organization  almost  at  once  (like  Minerva  from  the 
head  of  Jove),  spread  rapidly,  but  into  Palestine  the 
monastic  life  was  introduced  early  in  the  fourth  cen- 
tury, not  by  him,  but  by  a  disciple  of  S.  Antony, 
Hilarion.  There  "  the  original  impulse  to  the  erem- 
itic life  survived,  and  the  cenobitic  ideal  made  little 
headway  either  now  or  later.  In  Syria  and  Meso- 
potamia asceticism  was,  so  to  speak,  indigenous."2 

1  See  what  Etheria  herself  says  on  this  point  in  connexion 
with  the  Lenten  fast  (pp.  61  f.). 

*  Lowther  Clarke,  S.  £asi7,  p.  41.  I  am  indebted  for  my  infor- 
mation throughout  this  section  to  him  and  to  Mrs.  McClure's 


INTRODUCTION  xxix 

Consequently  most  if  not  all  the  monks  and  nuns 
that  Etheria  met  in  Palestine,  Syria  and  Mesopotamia 
were  probably  either  of  the  strictly  eremitic  or  semi- 
eremitic  kind  (see  e.g.  p.  37). 

The  names  she  uses  to  describe  these  monks  (and 
nuns)  are  various.  In  the  former  part  of  the  narra- 
tive her  regular  name  for  them  is  monachi.  We  have 
already  mentioned  (p.  xiii)  the  three  instances,  where 
she  also  brings  in  the  word  ascitis  (aoxr)Tr)<;)  and 
the  three  doubtful  instances  of  the  use  of  the  word 
"  confessor  "  in  connexion  with  monks.  The  ascitis 
whom  she  heard  of  or  met  at  Carneas  on  the  east  of 
Jordan  was  evidently  a  solitary,  and  so  probably  was 
the  priest  on  Mount  Sinai :  also  the  monachus  at 
Thisbe,  it  would  seem  (p.  28).  A  number  of  them 
came  into  Haran  from  the  Mesopotamia  desert  on 
the  Feast  of  S.  Helpidius  (April  24).  At  Seleucia  in 
Isauria  we  read  for  the  first  time  of  women  (vtrgines) 
as  well  as  men,  the  former  under  the  direction  of  a 
deaconess  named  Marthana 1  (see  p.  42)  whom  she 
had  previously  met  at  Jerusalem :  and  also  there  she 
first  uses  the  term  apotactitae  (anoraxTiTOi),  which  for 
her  includes  members  of  both  sexes.  This  term 
recurs  several  times  at  Jerusalem,  where  monazontes 
(/iovd£ovT£f)  and  parthenae  (naoQivoi)  are  likewise 


extracts  from  Gasquet,  English  Monastic  Life,  who  in  turn 
frequently  quotes  Dom  Butler's  masterly  introduction  to  the 
Lausiac  History  of  Palladius. 

1  She  is  mentioned  as  a  worthy  follower  of  S.  Thecla  by  the 
pseudo-Basil  of  Seleucia.  According  to  Theodoret,  Relig.  Hist, 
c.  29,  SS.  Marana  and  Cyra  visited  both  Jerusalem  and  S. 
Thecla's  tomb  early  in  the  fifth  century,  but,  if  the  date  we  have 
adopted  for  Etheria's  pilgrimage  is  correct,  the  close  similarity 
of  the  two  names  is  a  mere  coincidence. 


xxx  „      INTRODUCTION 

mentioned.1  Monazontes  should  strictly  denote  "  soli- 
taries," but  so  should  monachi:  probably  neither 
have  always  their  strict  significance  in  Etheria's 
vocabulary.  The  term  apotactitae  seems  to  have  been 
an  unusual  one  for  Christian  ascetics.  Palladius  in 
his  Lausiac  History  frequently  uses  the  verb  anord- 
£ao6cu  of  those  who  renounced  the  pleasures  and 
pursuits  of  the  world,  and  Cassian  gave  his  book  the 
title  of  de  institutis  renuntiantium,  where  renuntiantes 
bears  the  same  sense,  but  otherwise  apotactites  was 
one  of  the  names  assumed  by  such  ascetic  heretics 
as  the  Manichaean  Encratites,  etc.2  Evidently,  how- 
ever, in  Etheria's  usage  it  is  more  or  less  equivalent 
to  monachi  (monazontes]  and  parthenae  (virgines)  and 
has  not  the  least  sinister  association. 

One  other  word,  which  is  connected  with  this  sub- 
ject, needs  a  little  explanation.  Etheria  constantly 
speaks  of  the  monks'  monasteria.  It  follows  from 
what  has  been  said  that  with  her  in  the  singular 
monasterium  means  a  cell,  mostly  that  of  a  solitary, 
and  in  the  plural  monasteria  means  a  collection  of 
cells,  where  monks  were  living  under  semi-eremetic 
conditions,  more  probably  under  the  method  of  S. 
Anthony  than  under  the  rule  of  S.  Pachomius.  Thus 
the  aged  priest  on  Mount  Sinai  came  out  de  monasterio 
suo  (p.  4),  and  the  bishop  of  "  the  city  of  Arabia," 
whom  she  had  known  ever  since  she  was  in  the 
Thebaid,  had  been  brought  up  a  pisinno  (from  his 
boyhood)  in  monasterio.  [This  man,  in  passing,  is 

1  She  there  also  refers  to  laid  (p.  45)  and  saeculares  (p.  96) 
as  distinguished  from  clerid. 

:Cf.  Epiph.,  Haer.  Ixi.  506-513.  They  were  condemned 
by  edicts  of  Theodosius  in  381  and  383  (Bernard,  p.  43). 


INTRODUCTION  xxxi 

quite  worthy  of  further  notice,  because  Etheria  tells  us 
that  "  in  consequence  he  was  both  well  learned l  in  the 
scriptures  and  chastened  in  his  whole  life,"  besides 
being  "  courteous  and  most  kind  in  receiving  pilgrims" 
— truly  a  charming  picture  of  an  old-world  church 
dignitary.]  For  instances  of  monasteria  (collections 
of  cells)  we  may  refer  to  what  is  said  of  them  under 
Mount  Sinai  on  p.  5,  where  the  monks'  successful 
cultivation  of  the  lower  slopes  is  well  described,  and 
again  to  those  she  visited  round  Rachel's  well  near 
Haran,  and  the  monasteria  sine  numero  virorum  ac 
mulierum  which  she  found  surrounding  the  church 
at  Seleucia.2  These  last  were  all  enclosed  in  a  high 
wall  which  had  been  raised  to  protect  them  from  the 
inroads  of  the  brigands  who  infested  the  district 
(p.  42). 

7.  ETHERIA'S  USE  OF  THE  BIBLE 

Etheria's  usual  name  for  the  Bible  is  Scriptura 
(either  in  the  singular  or  the  plural,  and  with  or 
without  the  epithet  "  Holy ").  Twice  she  uses  the 
expression  "the  Scriptures  of  God"  (pp.  16  and  40). 
She  characterizes  the  Pentateuch,  from  which  she 
naturally  quotes  most  often,  as  "the  (holy)  books  of 
(holy)  Moses."  The  most  interesting  of  the  titles  she 
uses,  however,  is  (on  p.  38)  scriptura  canonis  ("the 
Scripture  of  the  Canon  "),  a  title  which  is  apparently 
almost  unknown  otherwise.  Westcott  {Canon  of 

1  She  says  the  same  thing  of  the  bishop  of  Haran  (p.  38). 

2  Valerius  (chap,  i.)  uses  two  different  words  in  describing 
Etheria's  visit  to  the  Thebaid,  viz.  visitans  monachorum  .  .  . 
congregationum  cenobia,  similiter  et  .  .  .  anachoretarum  ergas- 
tula,  but  has  no  special  reference  to  the  conditions  of  living  she 
found  among  the  monks  in  other  parts. 


xxxii  INTRODUCTION 

N.  T.  pp.  504  f.)  doubted  whether  Credner's  term 
ygcKpai  XO.VOVOQ  had  any  justification.  He  himself 
quoted  from  Amphilochius  (circ.  380)  the  following 
as  the  nearest  approach  to  it  :  — 


OVTO? 
xavcbv  &v  sir)  TWV  deoTtvevoratv 

But  now  Etheria  (ex  hypotkesi  this  writer's  contem- 
porary) has  given  us  an  even  more  exact  equivalent. 
As  Bishop  Westcott  says,  Canon  here  must  mean 
the  authoritative  rule  or  standard,  by  which  the 
books  have  been  ratified  and  approved  in  the 
Church. 

Her  quotations  and  references  to  the  books  of  the 
Old  Testament  usually  give  a  close  representation  of 
the  Greek  of  the  Septuagint,  although  we  may 
imagine  from  her  imperfect  knowledge  of  Greek  that 
they  are  based  on  a  pre-  Vulgate  Latin  version,  not 
on  the  Septuagint  itself.  The  proper  names  she 
quotes  are,  as  we  have  shown  in  the  text,  good 
instances  of  this,  and  to  these  we  may  add  one 
which  is  perhaps  the  clearest  of  all  :  on  p.  26  her 
Quodollagomor  (cf.  Gen.  xiv.)  represents  almost 
exactly  the  LXX  XodoMoyojuog,  while  our  Eng. 
Chedorlaomer  represents  the  Vulg.  Chodorlahomor. 
She  has,  however,  made  a  slip  in  calling  him  "  king 
of  Nations  "  instead  of  king  of  Elam  :  see  note 
in  loco.  There  are  a  few  variations  or  divergencies 
which  are  worthy  of  note,  though  it  is,  of  course, 
doubtful  how  far  they  are  due  to  carelessness  in  her 
own  or  her  copyist's  transcription.  The  principal  of 
these  are  as  follows  :  — 

(i)  pp.  8  f.    Exod.  iii.  $,corrigiam  calceamcnti  (the 


INTRODUCTION  xxxiii 

latchet  of  thy  shoe).  Here  the  LXX  only  gives 
vnodrjjua,  but  see  Gen.  xiv.  23,  and  S.  Mark  i.  7,  which 
probably  account  for  her  version.  The  same  reading 
is  found  in  Origen  (Lat.  works). 

(2)  p.  9.    Exod.  xxxii.  27,  de porta  in  porta.    Here 
we  should  no  doubt  read  in  flortam(LXX,  ini  nv).r]v), 
as  the  abl.  makes  no  sense. 

(3)  P-  I5-     Gen.  xlvii.  6.     Etheria's  rendering  here 
represents  exactly    neither  the    LXX  text   nor   the 
Vulg ,   which   are   different   from    one   another :  she 
gives  in  meliori  terra  Egypti,   where  the    LXX  has 
iv  -cfj  fiefaioTfl  yfi  (Vulg.  in  Optimo  loco),  and  she  adds 
in  terra  lessen,   in   terra  Arabiae,   which  the  LXX 
omits,  while  the  Vulg.  reads  et  trade  eis  terrain  Gessen. 
Probably    Etheria's   is    meant    to   be   only   a   loose 
paraphrase,  not  an  exact  transcription. 

(4)  and  (5),  pp.  1 8  and   19.     For  the  readings  and 
the   explanations  of  them    in    Deut.   xxxii.   49,   and 
xxxiv.  8,  see  notes  in  loco. 

(6)  p.  13.     In  quoting  apparently  Numb.  x.  12,  and 
xxxiii.  36,  she  gives   this   rendering  filii  Israel  .  .  . 
ambulaverunt  iter  suum   to    the    LXX   e^fjoav   and 
anfiQav  (Vulg.  profecti),  but  she  is  probably  thinking 
rather  of  such  phrases  as  nvQeveodai  or  noielodai  odov 
than  of  the  exact  original  :  e.g.  Prov.  ii.  20,  snoQevovro 
(Vulg.  ambulas]    TQfftov^    ayaOdi;,  iii.   23,  iva  noQevr/ 
(Vulg.   ambulabis]  .  .  .   id?   odovs   oov,    and   Judges 
xvii.  8,  TOV  noifjoai  odov. 

(7)  p.  6.     She  follows  the  LXX  version  of  I  Kings 
xix.  9,  tl  ov  evravda ;  (quid  tu  hie?},  a  reading  which 
is  found  in  Tert.  de  Jeiun.  6. 

(8)  p.  36.     In  Gen.  xxiv.  20,  F.theria  takes  it  for 
granted,  as  usual,  that  Abraham's  "eldest  servant" 


xxxiv  INTRODUCTION 

is  the  same  as  Eliezer  of  Damascus  (xv.  20),  though 
it  is  merely  an  assumption.  Again,  on  p.  25,  it 
appears  that  she  accepted  the  identification  of  the 
Salem  of  Melchizedek  (Gen.  xiv.  18)  with  the  place 
of  that  name  near  Sychar,  not  as  others  do  with 
Jerusalem  (cf.  Jerome  ad  Evang,  §  27,  and  Onom.}. 
Her  statement  on  p.  32  that  Batanis  (Batnae)  is 
mentioned  in  the  Bible  is,  so  far  as  we  know,  without 
foundation  : l  also  that  Moses  was  born  at  Taphnis 
or  Tatnis  (p.  17),  and  wrote  the  book  of  Deuteronomy 
in  the  plains  of  Moab  (p.  19). 

Her  actual  quotations  from  the  New  Testament  are 
not  very  numerous,  and  the  following  are  the  only 
ones  that  need  to  be  commented  on  : — 

(i)  In  S.  Mark  xiv.  38  (p.  72),  she  omits  "  and 
pray"  and  renders  iva  /urj  by  ne  (Vulg.  ut  non). 
(2)  In  S.  Luke  xxii.  41  (p.  71),  xat  avroq  ajieojidodr) 
.  .  .  (bael  UQov  fiotyv  .  .  .  xal  nQoor/v^ero,  she  has 
et  accessit  .  .  .  quantum  iactus  lapidis  et  oravit  (Vulg. 
et  ipse  avulsus  est  .  .  .  quantum  iactus  est  lapidis  .  .  . 
et  orabat).  Is  not  accessit  the  copyist's  mistake  for 
abscessitl  If  so,  it  is  probably  a  genuine  reading  of 
the  Latin  version  Etheria  used.  (3)  In  S.  John  xx. 
25  (p.  83),  she  has  non  credo,  nisi  videro,  but  the 
Greek  is  lav  /«y  Idco  .  .  .  ov  jur)  TUOTEVOO)  :  no  doubt 
it  is  a  brief  paraphrase,  not  a  quotation.  (4)  In  her 
reference  to  S.  John  xix.  30,  on  p.  77,  she  uses  the 
words  reddidit  spiritum  to  represent  naoedwxev  TO 
nvevfta,  a  much  more  expressive  phrase  than  the 
Vulg.  tradidit  spiritum.  Was  this  again  the  reading 
of  her  Latin  text? 

1  Mr.  Rigby  suggests  that  perhaps  she  has  confused  it  with 
Batanaea  =  Bashan  (mod.  Arab.  '  Bathaniyeh '),  which  is  not 
unlikely. 


INTRODUCTION 

8.  LIST  OF  BIBLICAL  QUOTATIONS  AND 
REFERENCES 


xxxv 


f  These  passages  have  been  commented  on  in  the  preceding 
pages. 

PAGE 

PACK 

Gen.  xi.  28    . 

•     39 

fNumb.  x.  12      . 

13 

xi.  31. 

•     38 

xi.  2  f. 

IO 

xii.  I  (||Acts  vii.  3) 

•     36 

xi.  25         ... 

10 

xii.  4  (LXX)      . 

.     36 

xi.  34  (LXX)     .         i, 

II 

xiv.  I  (LXX)      . 

.     26 

xiii.  22  (?)  . 

17 

fxiv.  2  (LXX)      . 

•    23 

XX.    II 

21 

xiv.  8,  1  8  . 

•     25 

xxi.  26  (LXX)  . 

23 

xv.  18 

•     31 

xxi.  33  (LXX)  . 

24 

xix.  23  ff.  . 

•     23 

xxiii.  14  (LXX) 

24 

xxiv.  10,  15 

•     38 

xxiii.  28  (LXX) 

24 

xxiv.  15 

•     36 

xxxii.  36   . 

19 

xxviii.  2 

•fxxxiii.  36  . 

13 

xxix.  i,  2,  4 

•     39 

Deut.  iii.  10  (LXX)      . 

24 

xxix.  IO     . 

.     40 

iv.  46  (LXX)      . 

23  f 

xxxi.  19 

.     41 

xxxi.  30  (LXX) 

20 

xxxiii.  II  . 

5». 

fxxxii.  49  f.  (LXX)      . 

18 

xxxvi.  32  . 

•     25 

xxxiii. 

20 

xlvi.  29  (LXX)  . 

•     15 

xxxiv.  3  (LXX) 

23 

xlvi.  34  (LXX)  . 

•     13 

xxxiv.  6  (LXX) 

22 

fxlvii.  6 

•     15 

fxxxiv.  8  f.  (LXX)       . 

19 

Exodus  i.  II. 

•     15 

Josh.  iii.  14  . 

19 

iii.  i  ff. 

2 

xiii.  27       ... 

19 

tiii.  5  . 

.      8f. 

xxii.  10  f.  . 

19 

xii.  43  ff.     . 

•     15 

Judges  viii.  20  (?)  . 

28 

xiii.  20  (LXX)    . 

14. 

xii.  7  (?)     •         •         • 

28 

xiv.  2  (LXX)      . 

*  " 

•      14 

i  Kings  xvii.  I  (LXX) 

28 

xiv.  10 

•     J4 

xvii.  3  (LXX)    . 

29 

xvi.  13  f.    . 

.       IO 

txix.  9  (LXX)     . 

6 

xvii.  5 

.      10 

i  Chron.  i.  43 

25 

xix.  1  8,  20 

3f. 

2  Chron.  vi.  vii.  8  ff. 

95 

xxiv.  gff.    . 

•       7 

Job  i.  i  (LXX)     . 

24 

xxiv.  18 

2 

Jerem.  xliii.  7ff.    . 

17/7 

xxxii. 

2 

Lam.  i.  12  (LXX) 

22 

fxxxii.  19,  27 

•       9 

xxxii.  20  (?) 

.      10 

S.  Matt.  xxi.  8  f.    .       52, 

66 

xxxiii.  22   . 

•       4 

xxiv.  3f.    . 

68 

xxxiv.  4 

•       5 

xxvi.  2ff.  . 

73 

xl.  17 

.     ii 

xxvi.  14  f.  . 

69 

Numb.  ix.  5  . 

.      IO 

fS.  Mark  xiv.  38  . 

72 

xxxvi  INTRODUCTION 

PAGE  PAGE 

St.  Mark  xv.  I  ff.  73         St.  John  xii.  I  ff.  64 


S.  Luke  ii.  22  ff. 
txxii.  41 

xxiii.  I  ff.  . 

xxiv.  50  ff. 
S.  John  iii.  23 

zi.  29  f. 


56  xviii.  28  ff. 

71  fxix.  30,  38  ff. 

73  fxx.  19,  25 

87  Acts  i.  9  ff.     . 
27  ii.  i  ff. 

64  vii.  3  ( ||  Gen.  xii. 


73 

77 
83 
87 
36 
36 


9.  THE  LIVES  OF  THE  SAINTS 

Besides  these  frequent  references  to  the  Bible 
lessons  which  describe  the  places  she  visited  and 
the  actions  of  holy  men  which  are  there  connected 
with  them,  Etheria  on  p.  43  mentions  in  set  terms 
the  Acts  of  S.  Thecla,  as  having  been  read  by  her  or 
to  her,  when  she  was  at  Seleucia.  Her  story,  which 
is  closely  connected  with  that  of  S.  Paul,  is  referred 
to  by  Tertullian,  de  Bapt.  c.  17,  about  A.D.  200,  as 
well  as  by  Hilary  of  Poictiers  and  Jerome  in  the 
fourth  century.  The  Acts  of  Paul  and  Thecla  were, 
at  one  time,  almost  looked  upon  as  included  in  the 
Canon.1  At  Edessa  also  she  read  besides  the  usual 
(Bible?)  lessons  "some  things  concerning  S.  Thomas 
himself"  (p.  32).  It  is  not  certain  what  the  reference 
here  is.  The  well-known  "  Acts  of  Thomas  "  were 
a  Gnostic  document,  not  specially  connected  with 
Edessa  nor  at  all  likely  to  be  used  by  the  orthodox 
Etheria.  The  earlier  legend  made  out  that  S. 
Thomas  the  Apostle  sent  Thaddeus  to  Edessa,  the 
later  version  identified  the  two.  Probably  what 
Etheria  read  was  either  the  Doctrina  Apostolorum  or 
the  Doctrina  Addaei  or  the  (Greek)  Acta  Thaddaei? 

So,  again,  in  connexion  with  what  the  bishop  had 

1  See  Smith,  Diet,  of  Christian  Biogr.  vol.  iv.  p.  884. 
1  Ibid.  vol.  i.  pp.  21,  31. 


INTRODUCTION  xxxvii 

quoted  for  her  benefit  at  Haran  (Charrae),  she  tells 
her  beloved  sisters  that  her  informants  were  always 
most  careful  to  quote  from  and  she  to  listen  to  only 
the  most  reliable  stories,  whether  from  the  scriptures 
themselves  or  from  the  gesta  mirabilia  of  holy  men 
(i.  e.  ascetae}?-  some  of  whom  were  dead  and  some 
still  alive  (p.  39). 

10.  POINTS  OF  LITURGICAL  INTEREST 

1.  Epiphany.     Etheria  leaves  practically  no  room 
for  doubt  that  both  in  Egypt  and  at  Jerusalem  the 
Feast  of  the  Nativity  was  kept  on  January  6,  not  on 
December  25,  and  this  is  in  accordance  with  what 
we  know  to  be  the  general  usage  of  those  churches 
otherwise.      Our    Christmas    Day   had    distinctly    a 
Western  origin,  not  having  been  introduced  into  the 
East  before  375,  and  that  was  at  Antioch.     Juvenal, 
bishop  of  Jerusalem  (f458),  is  said  to  have  accepted 
it,  but  Cosmas  Indicopleustes,  a  native  of  Egypt,  in 
the  first  half  of  the  sixth  century,  distinctly  witnesses 
against  its  observance  in  Jerusalem  then.     For  the 
vicissitudes  in    regard  to    Christmas   see   Duchesne, 
op.  cit.  pp.  259  ff.,  and  Conybeare,  Rituale  Armenorum, 
p.  512. 

2.  The  Purification  (Feb.  14).     Etheria's  name  for 
it  is  simply  quadragesimae  de  Epiphania  (the  fortieth 
day  from  E.),  the  common  name  for  it  being  Hypa- 
pante  (vnanavzij,  or  meeting,  i.e.  of  the  Holy  Family 
with  Simeon  and  Anna).     This  is  the  earliest  extant 

1  These  she  here  calls  monachi  maiores,  having  applied  the 
same  epithet  already  to  the  hermits,  who  came  down  from  the 
desert  hills  of  Mesopotamia  to  keep  the  feast  of  S.  Helpidius 
and  commemorate  holy  Abraham  at  Haran. 


xxxviii  INTRODUCTION 

notice  of  it.  Naturally  it  would  begin  as  a  favourite 
local  commemoration  in  the  Holy  City,  and  thence 
it  spread  towards  the  West  in  the  sixth  century. 

3.  Lent  at   Jerusalem    lasted    eight   weeks   when 
Etheria  was  there,  the  forty  days  (or  more  strictly 
forty-one  days)  being  made   up   by  omitting  all  the 
eight  Sundays  and  all  the  Saturdays  except  Easter 
Eve.     This  prolongation  of  the  season  is  not  men- 
tioned elsewhere.1     But   it  may  be   noted    that   the 
retention  of  the  Saturday  as  a  festival  (not  in  Lent 
only)  was  long  general  in  the  East,  if  not  to  some 
extent  in  the  West.     Etheria  says  that  in  Jerusalem 
they  call   Quadragesimal  Eortae  (i.e.  eoorat,  feasts), 
but  this  is  probably  a  mistake  on  her  part  due  to 
her  imperfect  knowledge  of  Greek,  eoQtr)  (sing.)  being 
commonly  used  for  the  great  yearly  festival  of  Easter. 

4.  The  observances  of  Holy  Week  are  all  of  great 
interest  in  view  of  the  early  date  of  the  record.    They 
included  the  following  : — 

(a)  The    children's   waving    of    olive    or    palm 

branches   on   the   Sunday.      This,    again, 
started  at  Jerusalem. 

(b]  The  celebration  of  the   Communion  in  the 

late  afternoon  of  Maundy  Thursday :   for 
this  practice  see  further  below  on  p.  xiii. 

(c]  The  adoration  of  the  Cross  and  the  observ- 

ance of  the  Three  Hours  on  Good  Friday. 

(d)  King  Solomon's  ring  and  the  ancient  anoint- 

ing horn  of  the  kings  were  also  exhibited 
and  venerated. 

5.  Ascension  Day  itself  was  kept,  but  without  much 
ceremonial,  and  at  Bethlehem,  not  in  the  Imbomon, 

1  See  Bernard,  p.  52,  and  Duchesne,  p.  243. 


INTRODUCTION  xxxix 

as  one  would  have  expected.  Curiously  enough, 
however,  on  the  afternoon  of  Pentecost  (p.  87)  meet- 
ings were  held  both  in  the  Eleona  and  in  the  Im- 
bomon  at  which  the  feast  of  the  Ascension  was 
again  commemorated.1 

6.  The  following  were  the  Daily  Offices : — 

(a)  Vigilide  nocturnae  before  dawn. 

(b)  Mattins  (at  dawn). 

(c)  Terce  (only  in  Lent). 

(d)  Sext. 

(e)  None. 

(f)  Lucernare  (Vespers). 

No  mention  is  made  of  Prime  or  Compline.  These 
services  were  open  to  all  who  wished  to  attend,  but 
naturally  the  chief  part  of  the  congregation  consisted 
of  ascetics  of  both  sexes  (monazontes  et  parthenae, 
p.  45).  Three  psalms  2  and  three  prayers  were  said 
at  each  office,  and  Etheria  was  agreeably  impressed 
with  the  (to  her  unfamiliar)  practice  of  adapting 
Psalms,  Prayers  and  Lessons  3  to  the  special  teaching 
of  the  season  or  place. 

She  also  speaks  of  "  hymns  "  and  "  antiphons  " 
being  used.  The  practice  of  "  singing  or  saying " 
hymns  other  than  the  Psalms  of  David  in  Divine 
service  was  of  very  early  origin,  certainly  in  the 
East,  and  almost  as  certainly  in  the  West ;  so  that 
in  any  case  Etheria  would  not  have  been  entirely 

1  Is  it  possible  that  this  portion  of  the  narrative  has  been 
dislocated,  or  that  Etheria  herself  has  blundered  here  ?  But 
see  Conybeare,  Rituale  Armenorum,  p.  509. 

1  Cf.  Cassian,  Inst.  3.  3. 

3  The  use  of  "  Proper''  Psalms,  etc.,  is  said  not  to  have  been 
introduced  into  the  Gallican  Church  before  the  middle  of  the 
fifth  century  (Bernard). 


xl  INTRODUCTION 

unaccustomed  to  it.  But  in  the  fourth  century — 
largely  in  consequence  of  the  efforts  of  the  orthodox 
or  catholics  to  counteract  the  spread  of  Arian  views  by 
this  means — -hymn-writing  and  singing  had  received 
a  very  great  impetus,  and  such  compositions,  whether 
metrical  (as  in  the  West)  or  merely  rhythmical  (as 
in  the  East),  had  become  a  regular  part  of  public 
worship  throughout  Christendom.  Thus,  at  Con- 
stantinople we  know  that  S.  Chrysostom  had  en- 
couraged their  use,  and  at  Milan  S.  Ambrose  had 
himself  written  hymns  for  the  purpose,1  while  at 
Edessa  the  famous  Syriac  hymns  of  Ephraem  belong 
to  about  the  same  period,  and  were  intended  as  a 
counterblast  to  the  unsound  teaching  conveyed  by 
the  older  songs  of  Bardesanes.  With  regard  to  the 
"antiphons"  which  Etheria  mentions,  it  is  difficult 
to  say  whether  she  means  compositions  strictly  so 
called,  because  they  were  sung  antiphonally,  or  in 
a  more  general  sense  "  anthems  "  as  we  call  them,  for 
both  kinds  were  already  probably  in  use.2 

It  is  not  necessary  to  repeat  here  what  Mrs. 
McClure  has  said  in  her  footnote  on  p.  46  by  way  of 
possible  explanation  of  the  obscure  expression  "  to 
approach  the  bishop's  hand,"  which  occurs  frequently 
in  Etheria's  account  of  the  services  at  Jerusalem. 

With  regard  to  Etheria's  use  of  the  word  missa  in 
her  narrative,  it  must  be  remembered  that  it  still  has 
for  her  its  original  meaning  of  "dismissal,"  and  is  so 

1  The  poems  of  Prudentius  (a  Spaniard)  were  not  used  as 
church  hymns  till  somewhat  later  (in  the  fifth  century). 

2  See  Diet,  of  Christian  Antiq.,  s,v.;  and  for  much  further 
information  on  this  subject  as  a  whole  the  article  on  "  Hymns 
in  the  same  Dictionary,  and  on  "  Verse-writers "  in  Diet,   of 
Christian  Biog.  may  be  consulted. 


INTRODUCTION  xli 

rendered  in  this  translation.  It  does  not  seem  to 
have  been  introduced  into  church  phraseology  much 
before  the  end  of  the  fourth  century,  and  she  herself 
does  not  employ  it  till  she  begins  to  describe  the 
services  at  Jerusalem  (pp.  46  ff.).  There  she  applies  it 
to  all  kinds  of  meetings  for  public  worship,  and  much 
more  often  to  the  daily  or  occasional  offices  than  to 
the  Liturgy  properly  so  called,  where,  however,  she 
is  careful  to  distinguish  between  the  missa  catechu- 
menorum  and  the  missa  fiddium.  Her  usual  terms 
for  the  Eucharist  are  oblatio  and  offerre,  and  the  con- 
gregation is  usually  said  procedere  for  its  celebration. 

One  quite  new  feature  of  this  edition,  on  which 
Mrs.  McClure  had  spent  much  care,  is  the  use  that 
she  has  made  in  her  notes  of  the  Old  Armenian 
Lectionary  for  the  purpose  of  identifying  the  psalms 
and  lections  sung  or  said  at  Jerusalem  during  her 
visit.  "  This  evidence,"  says  Archbishop  Bernard, 
"  supplies  an  interesting  confirmation  of  the  accuracy 
of  Etheria's  observations  as  to  the  nature  of  the 
services  at  which  she  was  present"  :  for  the  frequent 
references  in  its  rubrics  to  Jerusalem  sites  are  shown 
to  be  genuine  and  to  belong  to  an  early  period  by 
the  statements  of  more  than  one  Armenian  father  in 
the  first  half  of  the  eighth  century.1  The  information 
will  be  found  set  out  in  full  in  Mr.  Conybeare's  Ritualr. 
Armenorum,  pp.  5076*".:  it  is  based  upon  two  MSS., 
one  at  Paris  in  the  Bibliotheque  National  of  the 
eighth  century,  the  other,  at  Oxford  in  the  Bodleian, 
of  the  fourteenth  century,  and  upon  the  commentary 
of  Gregory  Asharuni  (early  eighth  century). 

7.  Fasting.     Various  details  are  given,  in  particular 
1  See  Conybeare,  Rituale  Armenorum,  pp.  181  and  508. 


xlii*  INTRODUCTION 

with  regard  to  Wednesdays  and  Fridays  in  Lent 
(p.  59)  and  the  extra  strict  fast  of  the  Apotactitae 
(pp.  61  f.) ;  but  the  rules  are  not  always  quite  clear, 
owing  to  Etheria's  use  of  Missa  (dismissal)  for  other 
services  than  the  Eucharist,  as  the  length  of  the  fast 
depends  on  the  hour  of  Communion.  She  speaks 
also  of  the  fast  after  Pentecost  (p.  89),  which  as 
late  as  the  tenth  century  was  still  in  theory  to  be 
observed  in  Western  Christendom  (see  Dowden,  Ch. 
Year  and  Kalendar,  pp.  85  f.).  We  find  references 
to  it  in  S.  Athanasius  (Apol.  de  fuga,  6)  and  in  the 
Apostolic  Constitutions  (v.  20).  It  is  perhaps  more 
than  a  coincidence  that  one  of  the  Ember  seasons 
in  the  West  was  fixed  by  the  date  of  Pentecost. 

No  relaxation  was  allowed  on  account  of  a  martyr's 
festival  falling  on  a  "  Station  "  day  in  Lent  at  Jeru- 
salem :  cf.  Council  of  Laodicea  in  Phrygia  (A.D.  361), 
c.  51. 

8.  The  Eucharist.  The  usual  liturgical  hour  on 
Saturdays  and  Sundays  was  the  third  (9  a.m.),  but 
on  "  Station "  days  throughout  the  year  the  ninth 
(3  p.m.).  Once  a  year,  on  Maundy  Thursday  (see 
above),  it  was  even  later,  i.e.  after  the  tenth  hour 
(4  'p.m.).  This  last  usage  is  stated  by  Archbishop 
Bernard  (pp.  cit.  p.  61)  to  have  been  after  a  meal, 
in  conformity  with  that  of  the  African  Church 
(Council  of  Carthage,  A.D.  397,  c.  29,  and  S.  Aug. 
Ep.  ad  Januar.  c.  7),  but  Etheria  seems  to  me  very 
distinctly  to  state  that  they  took  their  food  after,  not 
before  (p.  71).  Otherwise  during  Lent  the  Liturgy 
was  celebrated  only  on  Saturdays  and  Sundays,  and 
not  on  Wednesdays  and  Fridays.1 

*  Cf,  Council  of  Laod.  c.  49. 


INTRODUCTION  xliii 

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  language  em- 
ployed in  service  time  was  Greek,  not  Syriac,  though 
interpretations  of  lessons  and  instructions  were  given 
in  Syriac  for  the  benefit  of  those  who  did  not  know 
Greek  (p.  94). 

At  the  Sunday  Eucharist  as  many  of  the  priests 
who  were  present  preached  as  wished  to,  and  the 
bishop  preached  last  of  all.1  The  posture  of  the 
preacher  seems  to  have  been  that  of  sitting  (as  in 
the  Jewish  synagogue),  while  the  congregation  stood. 
Applause  as  well  as  other  signs  of  emotion  were 
often  called  forth  by  the  reader  or  speaker  (p.  94). 

9.  The  use  of  incense  is  mentioned  on  p.  49,  but 
apparently  for  fumigation  before  the  Liturgy  (or  at 
all  events  the  avayoQa  itself)  begins,  not  actually   as 
part  of  the  ceremonial. 

10.  Etheria  was  struck  by  the  use  of  the  Kyrie 
eleison  as  a  response  by  the   numerous   choir  boys 
standing  by  during  the  recitation  of  the  names  from 
the  diptychs  at  vespers  (p.  47). 2      The  evidence  goes 
to  show  that  this  formula  was  not  introduced  into 
the  West  of  Christendom  till  the  end  of  the  fifth 
century.     The  3rd  Canon  of  the  Council  of  Vaison 
(529)   speaks  of  it  as  having  reached  Provence  by 
way    of    Rome    and    Milan  :     probably    it    reached 
Spain  somewhat  later.     See  E.  Bishop,  Liturg.  Hist. 
pp.  ii6fT. 

11.  Holy  Baptism.     The  course  of  preparation  of 
th  >se  catechumens  who  became  competentes  during 

1  See  pp.  51,  56,  and  85.    Cf.  Apost.  Const,  ii.  57. 

2  It  is  possible  from  the  way  in  which  the  phrase  is  explained 
that  the  Latin  equivalent,  Domine,  miserere^  was  used  in  her 
own  country. 


xliv  INTRODUCTION 

Lent  and  the  Baptism  itself  on  Easter  Eve  is  fully 
described,  and  likewise  the  further  instructions  given 
to  the  newly  baptized  during  the  ensuing  Easter- 
tide. The  descriptions  tally  in  most  respects  with 
what  may  be  gathered  from  S.  Cyril  of  Jerusalem's 
eighteen  Catechetical  Lectures  delivered  to  the  com- 
petentes  and  the  five  on  the  Mysteries  delivered  to 
the  neophytes  in  386. 

12.  The  Dedication  Festival :  see  p.  xlvi  below. 

1 3.  Martyr  Memorials.  That  of  S.  Thomas  at  Edessa 
is  mentioned  on  p.  32  ;  that  of  S.  Elpidius  at  Haran 
on  p.  37  ;  of  S.  Thecla  at  Seleucia  in  Isauria  on  p.  42; 
of  S.  Euphemia  at  Chalcedon  on  p.  43,  and  of  S.  John 
at  Ephesus  on  p.  44.     Among  the  other  churches  and 
holy  sites  Etheria  visited  (besides  those  in  the  Sinai 
district)   mention   may  be  made   of  the   Church   of 
Melchizedek  (p.  28),  the  garden  of  S.  John  Baptist 
at  Aenon  (p.  27),  and  the  grave  of  Job  at  Carneas 
(p.  29).     She   gives   a   full   description  on  p.  20  of 
the  scheme  of  devotions  she  and  her  companions 
used  on  each  occasion,  the  order  followed  being  this  : 
prayer,  reading,  psalm,  prayer ;  for  less  full  accounts 
see  pp.  7  f.,  21  f.,  26  f.,  32,  35  f.,  40  and  43. 

14.  Officers  of  the  Church.     Except  Marthana,  the 
deaconess  (p.  42),  who  had  been  at  Jerusalem  and 
was  afterwards  in  charge  of  nuns  at  Seleucia,  the 
only  one  who  needs  to  be  specified  here  is  the  arch- 
deacon.    He  is  four  times  mentioned  at  Jerusalem  as 
"  lifting  his  voice  "  to  announce  the  place  of  the  next 
service   and   to    invite   the    congregation   to   attend 
(pp.  63,  65,  70  and  87).     The  same  official  is  men- 
tioned as  assisting  the  bishop  when  he  confers  minor 
orders  in  the  Statuta  ecclesiae  antiqua.     These  used 


INTRODUCTION  xlv 

to  be  considered  as  emanating  from  the  fourth 
Council  of  Carthage  (398),  but  they  are  now  usually 
assigned  to  the  end  of  the  fifth  century  and  held  to 
be  of  Galilean  origin  (Duchesne  op.  cit.  p.  132).  In 
any  case  this  is  probably  the  earliest  reference  to  the 
archdeacon  in  the  East.  He  takes  a  prominent  part 
in  the  services  of  the  Coptic  and  Syrian  Churches 
and  is  ordained  to  his  office  with  special  rites  (see 
Denzinger,  Ritus  Orientalium,  ii,  pp.  10,  70,  86,  and 
142). 

15.  Eulogiae.  At  various  places  Etheria  was  pre- 
sented with  these  after  service,  e.g.  at  Sinai,  p.  5, 
where  she  explains  them  to  be  "gifts  of  the  fruits 
grown  on  the  mountain,"  and  at  Nebo  on  p.  21,  and 
out  of  the  garden  or  orchard  of  S.  John  the  Baptist 
on  p.  28.  See  explanation  in  footnotes  in  loco  of 
this,  which  can  hardly  be  considered  a  liturgical 
matter  in  the  form  in  which  Etheria  mentions  it. 

ii.  THE  CHURCHES  IN  JERUSALEM  AND  THE 
NEIGHBOURHOOD 

In  the  Holy  City  itself  Etheria  mentions  or  refers 
to  these  Church  buildings  : — 

1.  The  old    Cathedral    Church   on    Mount    Sion, 
which  in  her  day  was  no  longer  regularly  used  for 
service.     The  congregation,  however,  went  there  (her 
expression  \sprocedituror  itur]  on  Wednesdays  and 
Fridays  in  Lent,  on  Easter  Day  and  its  Octave,  and 
on  Whitsunday. 

2.  The  Anas  fast's  (Resurrection),  on  the  traditional 
site  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre. 

3.  The  Sanctuary  of  the  Cross,  on  the  traditional 
site  of  Golgotha  (where  the  wood  of  the  true  Cross, 


xlvi  INTRODUCTION 

etc.,  were  kept).  This  consisted  of  two  parts: 
(a)  ante  Crucem,  an  open  court  (atrium,  locus  subdi- 
vanus)  with  cloisters,  and  (b)  post  Crucem,  a  smaller 
roofed-in  building. 

4.  The  Martyrium  (ecclesia  maior],  which  was  also 
post  Crucem^  but  exactly  where  in  relation  to  3  (b)  is 
not  quite  clear  (see  conjectural  plan  on  p.  137  of 
Bernard's  edition) ;  the  great  doors  (valvae  maiores) 
of  it  opened  on  to  the  market-place  (de  quintana 
parte)> 

These  last  three  buildings  were  set  up  by  the 
Emperor  Constantine  in  337,  the  same  year  in  which 
the  Church  of  the  Apostles  (mentioned  by  Etheria, 
p.  44)  had  been  completed  by  him  in  Constantinople. 
He  also  built  the  baptistery  near  the  Anastasis 
referred  to  on  p.  79. 

The  bishop's  house  (p.  50)  was  probably  close  by 
this  group  of  buildings,  no  longer  on  Mount  Sion. 

The  (eight-day)  Dedication  festival  of  the  Ana- 
stasis  and  the  Martyrium  was  held  in  September,  in 
close  connexion  with  the  Discovery  of  the  Cross  and 
its  Exaltation  at  the  same  time  of  the  year  and  on 
the  analogy  of  the  Dedication  of  Solomon's  Temple 
at  the  (autumn)  Feast  of  Tabernacles.2  A  very 
large  concourse  assembled  in  Jerusalem  on  this 
occasion,  not  only  of  monks  from  Mesopotamia, 
Syria,  and  Egypt  (especially  the  Thebaid),  but  also 
of  bishops  and  clergy  and  the  faithful  laity,  and  the 
churches  were  decked  out  as  at  Easter  and  Epiphany 
(see  pp.  95  f.). 

1  Eusebius  (Vit.  Const,  iii.  39)  gives  a  similar  description  of 
them. 

2  See  Eus.  Vit.  Const,  iv.  60,  and  Sozom.  H.E.  ii.  26. 


INTRODUCTION  xlvii 

In  the  environs  of  Jerusalem  she  mentions  : — 

1 .  The  Church  at  Bethlehem  built  and  adorned  by 
Constantine,  with  the  help  of  his  mother  Helena  l 
(p.  54).     This  was  the  appointed  place  for  the  night 
of  the  Epiphany  and  for  the  Ascension  festival. 

2.  The  Church  Eleona  (£Acuo>v)  on  the  Mount  of 
Olives,  where  was  the  cave  in  which  our  Lord  used  to 
teach  His  disciples. 

3.  The  hnbomon  (iv  pa)/u<jj)*  the  traditional  site  of 
the  Ascension,  which  was  higher  up  on  the  Mount. 
It  seems  to  have  been  rather  an  enclosed  site  with 
seats  than  a  regular  church  (see  p.  66). 

4.  The  "graceful"  Church  in   Gethsemane,  which 
was  no  doubt  lower  down  than  Eleona  (p.  71). 

5.  The   Church  on    the   road    to   Bethany  where 
Mary,  Lazarus's  sister,  met  our  Lord  (p.  63). 

6.  The  Lazarium  in  Bethany  itself. 

No  particulars  are  to  hand  of  these  buildings  that 
the  present  writer  is  aware  of. 

12.  THE  PRINCIPAL  GREEK  WORDS  AND 
PHRASES  USED 

apotactites,  see  pp.  xxix  f.  of  Introduction. 
archiotepa  (do^hvno;)  =  likeness  (i.e.  statue),  p.  33. 
ascetis,  see  p.  xxix  of  Introduction. 
campsemus  (?  xdpycojuev)  =  turn,  /'.  e.  "  go  out  of  the 
way,"  p.  20. 

1  See  Eus.  Vit.  Const,  iii.  43. 

*  Ba>fj.6s  here  seems  to  represent  the  Heb.  bamah  =  "high 
place  "  rather  than  to  retain  its  usual  sense  of  "  altar,"  but,  of 
course,  with  a  Christian  not  a  heathen  association.  Bamah  is 
translated  by  0u^6s  in  LXX,  Jer.  vii.  31,  32  (the  altar  of  Tophet 
in  the  valley  of  Benhimmon),  and  in  several  other  places  in  the 
prophets. 


xlviii  INTRODUCTION 

cata  (xcnd),  five  times  as  a  prepn.  with  accus.  = 
according  to. 

come  (x&jur))  =  village,  p.  15. 

cepos  tu  agiu  Johannu  (xrpiot;  tov  dyiov  '  Icodvvov), 
p.  27. 

dendros  alethias  (d^vdqov  cdrjOelas),  p.  16. 

Eleona  (=•  Qaidtv),  see  p.  xlvii  of  Introduction. 

eortae  (tograi),  see  p.  xxxviii  of  Introduction. 

encenia  (eyxaivia)  =  dedication,  p.  95. 

eulogiae  =  blessings,  see  p.  5  n. 

Imbomon  (=  ev  fiwjuq)),  see  p.  xlvii  of  Introduction. 

Kyrie  eleison  (XVQIE  eUrjoov),  see  p.  xliii  of  Intro- 
duction. 

licinicon  (A.v%vix6v),  p.  47. 

monazontes  (juovd£ovTe<;)  =  monachi  (fiova^oi],  p.  45. 

olosericus  (6^.oorjQMog)  =  all  of  silk,  p.  53. 

opu  (?  =  OQOC;  or  onov),  Melchizedek,  p.  28. 

parthenae  (noQQsvoi)  =virgines,  p.  45. 

petrinus  (neTQivoc;)  =  rocky,  p.  5. 

siriste  (OVQIOU)  =  in  the  Syriac  language,  p.  94. 

thimiateria  (dv/MctTTJQia)  =  censers,  p.  49). 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

(Much  is  -wanting.} 

THE  APPROACH  TO  SINAI 


were  pointed  out  according  to  the  Scriptures.  In 
the  meanwhile  we  came  on  foot  to  a  certain  place 
where  the  mountains,  through  which  we  were  journey- 
ing, opened  out  and  formed  an  infinitely  great  valley, 
quite  flat  and  extraordinarily  beautiful,  and  across 
the  valley  appeared  Sinai,  the  holy  mountain  of  God. 
And  this  place,  where  the  mountains  opened  out,  lies 
next  to  the  place  where  are  the  graves  of  lust.1 
Now  on  reaching  that  spot,  the  holy  guides  who  were 
with  us  told  us,  saying :  "  The  custom  is  that  prayer 
should  be  made  by  those  who  arrive  here,  when  from 
this  place  the  mount  of  God  is  first  seen."  And 
this  we  did.  The  whole  distance  from  that  place  to 
the  mount  of  God  was  about  four  miles  across  the 
aforesaid  great  valley. 

For  that  valley  is  indeed  very  great,  lying  under 
the  slope  of  the  mount  of  God,  and  measuring,  as 
far  as  we  could  judge  by  our  sight,  or  as  they  told  us, 
about  sixteen  miles  in  length,  but  they  called  its 

1  Eng.  Bible,  Kibroth-hattaavah,  Num.  xi.  34. 
B 


2  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

breadth  four  miles.  We  had,  therefore,  to  cross  that 
valley  in  order  to  reach  the  mountain.  Now  this  is 
the  great  and  flat  valley  wherein  the  children  of 
Israel  waited  during  those  days  when  holy  Moses 
went  up  into  the  mount  of  the  Lord  and  remained 
there  forty  days  and  forty  nijhts.1  This  moreover  is 
the  valley  in  which  the  calf  was  made,2  and  the  spot 
is  shown  to  this  day,  for  a  great  stone  stands  fixed 
there  on  the  very  site.  This  also  is  the  same  valley 
at  the  head  of  which  is  the  place  where,  while  holy 
Moses  was  feeding  his  father-in-law's  flocks,  God 
spake  to  him  twice  out  of  the  burning  bush.3  And 
as  our  route  was  first  to  ascend  the  mount  of  God, 
which  is  in  sight  here — [because]  the  ascent  was  easier 
by  the  way  we  were  coming — and  then  to  descend  to 
the  head  of  the  valley  where  the  bush  was,  that  being 
the  easier  descent,  so  we  determined,  having  first  seen 
all  that  we  desired,  to  descend  from  the  mount  of 
God  so  as  to  arrive  at  the  place  of  the  bush,  and 
thence  to  return  on  our  journey  throughout  the  whole 
length  of  the  valley,  together  with  the  men  of  God, 
who  there  showed  us  each  place  which  is  mentioned 
in  the  Scriptures.  And  so  it  was  done.  Thus,  going 
from  that  spot  where  we  had  prayed  when  we  arrived 
from  Faran,4  our  route  was  to  cross  the  middle  of  the 
head  of  that  valley,  and  so  turn  to  the  mount  of  God. 
Now  the  whole  mountain  group  looks  as  if  it  were 
a  single  peak,  but,  as  you  enter  the  group,  [you  see 
that]  there  are  more  than  one ;  the  whole  group 
however  is  called  the  mount  of  God.  But  that  special 
peak  which  is  crowned  by  the  place  where,  as  it  is 

1  Exod.  xxiv.  1 8.  2  Exod.  xxxii. 

'  Exod.  iii.  I  ff.  *  LXX,  *opo'c  :  Eng.  Bible,  Paran. 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  3 

written,  the  Glory  of  God  descended,  is  in  the  centre 
of  them  all.1  And  though  all  the  peaks  in  the  group 
attain  such  a  height  as  I  think  I  never  saw  before,  yet 
the  central  one,  on  which  the  Glory  of  God  came  down, 
is  so  much  higher  than  them  all,  that  when  we  had 
ascended  it,  all  those  mountains  which  we  had  thought 
to  be  high,  were  so  much  beneath  us  as  if  they  were 
quite  little  hills.  This  is  certainly  very  wonderful, 
and  not,  I  think,  without  the  favour  of  God,  that 
while  the  central  height,  which  is  specially  called  Sinai, 
on  which  the  Glory  of  the  Lord  descended,  is  higher 
than  all  the  rest,  yet  it  cannot  be  seen  until  you  reach 
its  very  foot,  though  before  you  go  up  it.  But  after 
that  you  have  fulfilled  your  desire  and  descend,  you 
can  see  it  from  the  other  side,  which  you  cannot  do 
before  you  begin  to  ascend.  This  I  had  learned  from 
information  given  by  the  brethren  before  we  had 
arrived  at  the  mount  of  God,  and  after  I  arrived  I 
saw  that  it  was  manifestly  so. 


THE  ASCENT  OF  SINAI 

We  reached  the  mountain  late  on  the  sabbath,  and 
arriving  at  a  certain  monastery,  the  monks  who 
dwelt  there  received  us  very  kindly,  showing  us  every 
kindness  ;  there  is  also  a  church  and  a  priest  there. 
We  stayed  there  that  night,  and  early  on  the  Lord's 
Day,  together  with  the  priest  and  the  monks  who 
dwelt  there,  we  began  the  ascent  of  the  mountains 
one  by  one.  These  mountains  are  ascended  with 
infinite  toil,  for  you  cannot  go  up  gently  by  a  spiral 

1  Exod.  xix.  1 8,  20. 


4  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

track,  as  we  say  snail-shell  wise,  but  you  climb 
straight  up  the  whole  way,  as  if  up  a  wall,  and  you 
must  come  straight  down  each  mountain  until  you 
reach  the  very  foot  of  the  middle  one,  which  is 
specially  called  Sinai.  By  this  way,  then,  at  the 
bidding  of  Christ  our  God,  and  helped  by  the  prayers 
of  the  holy  men  who  accompanied  us,  we  arrived,  at 
the  fourth  hour,  at  the  summit  of  Sinai,  the  holy  moun- 
tain of  God,  where  the  law  was  given,  that  is,  at  the 
place  where  the  Glory  of  the  Lord  descended  on  the 
day  when  the  mountain  smoked.1  Thus  the  toil  was 
great,  for  I  had  to  go  up  on  foot,  the  ascent  being 
impossible  in  the  saddle,  and  yet  I  did  not  feel  the 
toil,  on  the  side  of  the  ascent,  I  say,  I  did  not  feel 
the  toil,  because  I  realized  that  the  desire  which  I  had 
was  being  fulfilled  at  God's  bidding.  In  that  place 
there  is  now  a  church,  not  great  in  size,  for  the  place 
itself,  that  is  the  summit  of  the  mountain,  is  not 
very  great ;  nevertheless,  the  church  itself  is  great  in 
grace.  When,  therefore,  at  God's  bidding,  we  had 
arrived  at  the  summit,  and  had  reached  the  door  of 
the  church,  lo,  the  priest  who  was  appointed  to  the 
church  came  from  his  cell  and  met  us,  a  hale  old 
man,  a  monk  from  early  life,  and  an  ascetic,  as  they 
say  here,  in  short  one  worthy  to  be  in  that  place  ;  the 
other  priests  also  met  us,  together  with  all  the  monks 
who  dwelt  on  the  mountain,  that  is,  such  as  were 
not  hindered  by  age  or  infirmity.  No  one,  however, 
dwells  on  the  very  summit  of  the  central  mountain  ; 
there  is  nothing  there  excepting  only  the  church  and 
the  cave  where  holy  Moses  was.2  When  the  whole 

1  Exod.  xix.  18.  f  Exod.  xxxiii.  22. 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  5 

passage  from  the  book  of  Moses  had  been  read  in 
that  place,  and  when  the  oblation  had  been  duly 
made,  at  which  we  communicated,  and  as  we  were 
coming  out  of  the  church,  the  priests  of  the  place 
gave  us  eulogiae*  that  is,  of  fruits  which  grow  on 
the  mountain.  For  although  the  holy  mountain 
Sinai  is  rocky  throughout,  so  that  it  has  not  even  a 
shrub  on  it,  yet  down  below,  near  the  foot  of  the 
mountains,  around  either  the  central  height  or  those 
which  encircle  it,  there  is  a  little  plot  of  ground  where 
the  holy  monks  diligently  plant  little  trees  and 
orchards,  and  set  up  oratories  with  cells  near  to  them, 
so  that  they  may  gather  fruits  which  they  have  evi- 
dently cultivated  with  their  own  hands  from  the  soil 
of  the  very  mountain  itself.  So,  after  we  had  com- 
municated, and  the  holy  men  had  given  us  eulogiae, 
and  we  had  come  out  of  the  door  of  the  church,  I 
began  to  ask  them  to  show  us  the  several  sites. 
Thereupon  the  holy  men  immediately  deigned  to 
show  us  the  various  places.  They  showed  us  the 
cave  where  holy  Moses  was  when  he  had  gone  up 
again  into  the  mount  of  God,2  that  he  might  receive 
the  second  tables  after  he  had  broken  the  former 
ones  when  the  people  sinned  ;  they  also  deigned  to 
show  us  the  other  sites  which  we  desired  to  see,  and 
those  which  they  themselves  well  knew.  But  I  would 
have  you  to  know,  ladies,  reverend  sisters,  that  from 

1  This  word  is  still  used  in   the   Eastern  Church  for  food 
which  has  been  blessed  by  a  priest,  e.  g.  the  first  fruits  from  -an 
orchard  or  a  vineyard,  viands  on  a  table  after  "  grace  "  has  been 
pronounced   over  them,   etc.     Cf.    Gen.   xxxiii.    n,   etc.     See 
Brightman,  East.   Lit.   p.   597,   and  for  other   more   strictly 
liturgical  uses,  ibid.  p.  577. 

2  Exod.  xxxiv.  4. 


6  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

the  place  where  we  were  standing,  round  outside  the 
walls  of  the  church,  that  is  from  the  summit  of  the 
central  mountain,  those  mountains,  which  we  could 
scarcely  climb  at  first,  seemed  to  be  so  much  below 
us  when  compared  with  the  central  one  on  which  we 
were  standing,  that  they  appeared  to  be  little  hills, 
although  they  were  so  very  great  that  I  thought  that 
I  had  never  seen  higher,  except  that  this  central  one 
excelled  them  by  far. 

From  thence  we  saw  Egypt  and  Palestine,  and  the 
Red  Sea  and  the  Parthenian  Sea,1  which  leads  to 
Alexandria  and  the  boundless  territories  of  the 
Saracens,  all  so  much  below  us  as  to  be  scarcely 
credible,  but  the  holy  men  pointed  out  each  one  of 
them  to  us. 

HOREB 

Having  then  fulfilled  all  the  desire  with  which  we 
had  hastened  to  ascend,  we  began  our  descent  from 
the  summit  of  the  mount  of  God  which  we  had 
ascended  to  another  mountain  joined  to  it,  which  is 
called  Horeb,  where  there  is  a  church.  This  is  that 
Horeb  where  was  holy  Elijah  the  prophet,  when  he 
fled  from  the  face  of  Ahab  the  king,  and  where  God 
spake  to  him  and  said  :  What  doest  thou  here>  Elijah  ?  2 
as  it  is  written  in  the  books  of  the  Kings.  The  cave 
where  holy  Elijah  lay  hid  is  shown  to  this  day  before 
the  door  of  the  church  which  is  there.  A  stone  altar 
also  is  shown  which  holy  Elijah  raised  to  make  an 
offering  to  God  ;  thus  the  holy  men  deigned  to  show 

1  i.  e.  the  eastern  end  of  the  Mediterranean :  see  Introduction, 
p.  xviii.  n.  , 

*  I  Kings  xix.  9. 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  7 

us  each  place.  There,  too,  we  made  the  oblation, 
with  very  earnest  prayer,  and  also  read  the  passage 
from  the  book  of  the  Kings  ;  for  it  was  our  special 
custom  that,  when  we  had  arrived  at  those  places 
which  I  had  desired  to  visit,  the  appropriate  passage 
from  the  book  should  always  be  read.  The  oblation 
having  been  made  there,  we  came  to  another  place 
not  far  off,  which  the  priests  and  monks  pointed  out 
to  us,  where  holy  Aaron  had  stood  with  the  seventy 
elders,  when  holy  Moses  was  receiving  the  law  from 
the  Lord  for  the  children  of  Israel.1  In  that  place, 
although  it  is  not  covered  in,  there  is  a  great  rock 
which  has  a  flat  surface,  rounded  in  shape,  on  which 
those  holy  men  are  said  to  have  stood  ;  there  is  also 
in  the  midst  of  it  a  kind  of  altar  made  of  stones.  The 
passage  from  the  book  of  Moses  was  read  there,  and 
one  psalm,  suitable  to  the  place.  Then,  after  prayer 
had  been  made,  we  descended  thence. 


THE  BUSH 

And  now  it  began  to  be  about  the  eighth  hour,  and 
there  were  still  three  miles  left  before  we  could  get 
out  of  the  mountains  which  we  had  entered  late  on 
the  previous  day ;  we  had  not,  however,  to  go  out  on  the 
same  side  by  which  we  had  entered,  as  I  said  above, 
because  it  was  necessary  that  we  should  walk  past 
and  see  all  the  holy  places  and  the  cells  that  were 
there,  and  thus  come  out  at  the  head  of  the  valley,  as 
I  said  above,  that  is  of  the  valley  that  lies  under  the 
mount  of  God.  It  was  necessary  for  us  to  come  out 

1  Exod.  xxiv.  9-14. 


8  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

at  the  head  of  the  valley,  because  there  were  very 
many  cells  of  holy  men  there,  and  a  church  in  the 
place  where  the  bush  is,  which  same  bush  is  alive  to 
this  day  and  throws  out  shoots.  So  having  made  the 
whole  descent  of  the  mount  of  God  we  arrived  at  the 
bush  about  the  tenth  hour.  This  is  that  bush  which 
I  mentioned  above,  out  of  which  the  Lord  spake  in 
the  fire  to  Moses,  and  the  same  is  situated  at  that 
spot  at  the  head  of  the  valley  where  there  are  many 
cells  and  a  church.  There  is  a  very  pleasant  garden 
in  front  of  the  church,  containing  excellent  and 
abundant  water,  and  the  bush  itself  is  in  this  garden. 
The  spot  is  also  shown  hard  by  where  holy  Moses 
stood  when  God  said  to  him  :  Loose  the  latchet  of  thy 
shoe,  and  the  rest.1  Now  it  was  about  the  tenth  hour 
when  we  had  arrived  at  the  place,  and  so,  as  it  was 
late,  we  could  not  make  the  oblation,  but  prayer  was 
made  in  the  church  and  also  at  the  bush  in  the  garden, 
and  the  passage  from  the  book  of  Moses  was  read 
according  to  custom.  Then,  as  it  was  late,  we  took 
a  meal  with  the  holy  men  at  a  place  in  the  garden 
before  the  bush ;  we  stayed  there  also,  and  next  day, 
rising  very  early,  we  asked  the  priests  that  the 
oblation  should  be  made  there,  which  was  done. 


THE  SITES  IN  THE  VALLEY  AND  THE 
RETURN  TO  FARAN 

And  as  our  route  lay  through  the  middle  and  along 
the  length  of  the  valley — the  same  valley,  as  I  said 
above,  where  the  children  of  Israel  sojourned  while 

1  Exod.  iii.  5. 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  9 

Moses  ascended  into  the  mount  of  God  and  descended 
thence — so  the  holy  men  showed  us  each  place  that 
we  came  to  in  the  whole  valley.  At  the  top  of  the 
head  of  the  valley  where  we  had  stayed  and  had  seen 
the  bush  out  of  which  God  spake  in  the  fire  to  holy 
Moses,  we  had  seen  also  the  spot  on  which  holy 
Moses  had  stood  before  the  bush  when  God  said  to 
him  :  Loose  the  latchet  of  thy  shoe,  for  the  place  whereon 
thou  standest  is  holy  ground)-  In  like  manner  they 
began  to  show  us  the  other  sites  when  we  set  out 
from  the  bush.  They  showed  us  the  place  where  the 
camps  of  the  children  of  Israel  were  in  those  days 
when  Moses  was  in  the  mount.  They  also  showed  us 
the  place  where  the  calf  was  made,  for  a  great  stone 
is  there  to  this  day,  fixed  on  the  very  spot.  Then,  too, 
as  we  were  going  on  the  other  side  we  saw  the  top 
of  the  mountain  which  overlooks  the  whole  valley  ; 
from  which  place  holy  Moses  saw  the  children  of 
Israel  engaged  in  dancing  at  the  time  when  they  had 
made  the  calf.2  They  showed  us  a  great  rock  in  the 
place  where  holy  Moses,  as  he  was  descending  with 
Joshua  the  son  of  Nun,  in  his  anger  brake  the  tables 
that  he  was  carrying,  on  the  same  rock.  They  showed 
us  where  they  all  had  their  dwelling  places  in  the 
valley,  the  foundations  of  which  dwelling  places  appear 
to  this  day,  round  in  form  and  made  with  stone. 
They  showed  us  also  the  place  where  holy  Moses, 
when  he  returned  from  the  mount,  bade  the  children 
of  Israel  run  from  gate  to  gate?  They  showed  us  also 
the  place  where  the  calf  which  Aaron  had  made  for 
them  was  burnt  at  holy  Moses'  bidding.  They  showed 

1  Exod.  iii.  5.  2  Exod.  xxxii.  19. 

J  Exod.  xxxii.  27. 


io  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

us  also  the  stream   of  which  holy  Moses  made  the 
children  of  Israel  drink,  as  it  is  written  in  Exodus.1 
They  showed  us  also  the  place  where  the  seventy  men 
received  of  the  spirit  that  was  upon  Moses.2     They 
showed  us  also  the  place  where  the  children  of  Israel 
lusted   for   meat.     They   showed  us  also   the    place 
which  is  called  a  Burning,  because  part  of  the  camp 
was  consumed  what  time  holy  Moses  prayed,  and  the 
fire  ceased.3     They  showed  us  also  the  place  where  it 
rained    manna  and  quails   upon  them.4     Thus  were 
shown  to  us  (the  sites  of)  all  the  events  which  in  the 
sacred  books  of  Moses  are  recorded  to  have  occurred 
there,  viz.,  in  the  valley  which,  as  I  have  said,  lies 
under  the  mount  of  God,  holy  Sinai.     Now  it  would 
be  too  much  to  write  of  all  these  things  one  by  one, 
for  so  great  a  number  could  not  be  remembered,  but 
when  your  affection6  shall   read  the  holy  books  of 
Moses  it  will  more  quickly  recognize  the  things  that 
were  done  in  that  place.     Moreover  this  is  the  valley 
where  the  Passover  was  celebrated  when  one  year  had 
been  fulfilled  after  that  the  children  of  Israel  were 
come  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt.8     For  the  children  of 
Israel  abode  in  that  valley  for  some  time,  that  is,  while 
holy  Moses  ascended  into  and  descended  from  the 

1  Exod.  xvii.  5  ;  or  possibly  the  reference  is  to  xxxii.  20. 

2  Num.  xi.  25.  3  Eng.  Bible,  Taberah,  Num.  xi.  2,  3. 
4  Exod.  xvi.  13,  14. 

*  In  addressing  her  sisters  thus,  Etheria  is  following  the 
fashion  of  her  own  and  subsequent  centuries.  In  the  Coptic 
ostraca  found  in  Egypt  we  have  many  parallel  expressions  ; 
e.g.  on  an  ostracon  from  Thebes  we  read  :  "  I,  Andreas,  priest, 
salute  the  sweetness  of  thy  honoured  brothership"  (Hall's  Coptic 
and  Greek  Texts,  p.  71),  and  again  one  monk  writes  to  another  : 
41  My  insignificance  salutes  thy  brotherhood,"  ibid.  p.  34. 

8  Num,  ix.  5. 


THE   PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  n 

mount  of  God  the  first  and  the  second  time  ;  they 
tarried  there  also  while  the  tabernacle  was  being  made, 
together  with  all  things  that  were  shown  (to  Moses) 
in  the  mount  of  God.  The  place  also  was  shown  to 
us  where  the  tabernacle  was  set  up  by  Moses l  for  the 
first  time,  and  all  things  were  finished  which  God  had 
bidden  Moses  in  the  mount  that  they  should  be  made. 
At  the  very  end  of  the  valley  we  saw  the  graves  of 
lust,2  at  the  place  where  we  resumed  our  route,  that 
is  where,  leaving  the  great  valley,  we  re-entered  the 
way  by  which  we  had  come,  between  the  mountains 
of  which  I  spoke  above.  On  the  same  day  we  came 
up  with  the  other  very  holy  monks  who,  through  age 
or  infirmity,  were  unable  to  meet  us  in  the  mount  of 
God  for  the  making  of  the  oblation,  who  yet  deigned 
to  receive  us  very  kindly,  when  we  reached  their  cells. 
So  now  that,  together  with  the  holy  men  who  dwelt 
there,  we  had  seen  all  the  holy  places  we  desired,  as 
well  as  all  the  places  which  the  children  of  Israel  had 
touched  in  going  to  and  from  the  mount  of  God,  we 
returned  to  Faran  in  the  name  of  God.  And  although 
I  ought  always  to  give  thanks  to  God  in  all  things, 
not  to  speak  of  these  so  great  favours  which  He  has 
deigned  to  confer  on  me,  unworthy  as  I  am,  that  I 
should  journey  through  all  these  places,  although  I 
deserved  it  not,  yet  I  cannot  sufficiently  thank  even 
all  those  holy  men  who  deigned  with  willing  mind  to 
receive  my  littleness  in  their  cells  and  to  guide  me 
surely  through  all  the  places  which  I  was  always 
seeking,  according  to  the  holy  Scriptures.  Moreover, 
many  of  these  holy  men  who  dwelt  on  or  around  the 

1  Exod.  xl.  17.  *  Num.  xi.  34. 


12  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

mount  of  God  deigned  to  escort  us  back  to  Faran,  but 
these  were  of  greater  bodily  strength. 

FARAN  TO  CLYSMA 

Now  when  we  had  arrived  at  Faran,  which  is 
thirty-five  miles  distant  from  the  mount  of  God,  we 
were  obliged  to  stay  there  for  two  days  to  rest  our- 
selves. On  the  third  day,  hastening  thence,  we  came 
to  a  station  in  the  desert  of  Faran,  where  we  had 
stayed  on  our  outward  journey,  as  I  said  above.  On 
the  next  day  we  came  to  water,  and,  travelling  for  a 
little  while  among  the  mountains,  we  arrived  at  a 
station  which  was  on  the  sea,  at  the  place  where  the 
route  leaves  the  mountains,  and  begins  to  run  con- 
tinuously by  the  sea.1  It  runs  by  the  sea  in  such  a 
manner  that  at  one  time  the  waves  touch  the  feet  of 
the  animals,  while  at  another  the  course  is  through 
the  desert,  a  hundred,  two  hundred,  and  sometimes 
even  more  than  five  hundred  paces  from  the  sea,  for 
there  is  no  sort  of  a  road  there,  the  whole  being 
sandy  desert.  The  inhabitants  of  Faran,  who  are 
accustomed  to  travel  there  with  their  camels,  put 
signs  in  different  places,  and  make  for  these  signs 
when  they  travel  in  the  day  time,  but  the  camels 
mark  the  signs  at  night.  In  short,  the  inhabitants  of 
Faran  travel  more  quickly  and  safely  by  night  in 
that  place,  being  accustomed  thereto,  than  other  men 
can  travel  in  places  where  there  is  a  clear  road.  Thus 
on  our  return  journey  we  emerged  from  the  mountains 

1  Professor  Flinders  Petrie  in  commenting  on  this  passage, 
tells  me  :  "  The  route  along  the  west  coast  is  very  truly  de- 
scribed, and  is  striking  after  being  some  days  entirely  in  the 
desert." 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  13 

at  the  place  where  we  entered  them  on  our  journey 
out,  and  so  turned  towards  the  sea.  So  also  did  the 
children  of  Israel  return  from  Sinai,  the  mount  of 
God,  to  this  place  by  the  way  they  had  come,  that 
is,  to  the  place  where  we  left  the  mountains  and 
reached  the  Red  Sea.  But  while  we  turned  back 
from  this  spot  along  the  route  by  which  we  had  made 
our  journey  out,  the  children  of  Israel  marched  hence 
on  their  own  way,  as  it  is  written  in  the  books  of  holy 
Moses.1  So  we  returned  to  Clysma  by  the  same  route 
and  the  same  stations  by  which  we  had  come  out, 
and  when  we  had  arrived  at  Clysma  we  were  obliged 
to  stay  there  also  for  rest,  because  we  had  travelled 
hard  along  the  sandy  way  of  the  desert. 


CLYSMA  TO  THE  CITY  OF  ARABIA 

Now  although  I  had  been  acquainted  with  the  land 
of  Goshen  ever  since  I  was  in  Egypt  for  the  first 
time,  yet  [I  visited  it  again]  in  order  that  I  might  see 
all  the  places  which  the  children  of  Israel  touched  on 
their  journey  out  from  Rameses,  until  they  reached 
the  Red  Sea  at  the  place  which  is  now  called  Clysma 
from  the  fort  which  is  there.  I  desired  therefore  that 
we  should  go  from  Clysma  to  the  land  of  Goshen,2 
that  is,  to  the  city  called  Arabia,  which  city  is  in  the 
land  of  Goshen.  The  whole  territory  is  called  after  the 
city,  the  land  of  Arabia,  the  land  of  Goshen,  although 
it  is  part  of  Egypt.  It  is  much  better  land  than  all 
the  rest  of  Egypt.  From  Clysma,  that  is  from  the 

1  Num.  x.  12  and  xxxiii.  36. 

*  Gesse  in  the  text,  cf.  Gen.  xlvi.  34,  LXX,  tv  yrj  Ytyt 


14  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

Red  Sea,  there  are  four  desert  stations,  but  though 
in  the  desert,  yet  there  are  military  quarters  at  the 
stations  with  soldiers  and  officers  who  always  escorted 
us  from  fort  to  fort.  On  that  journey  the  holy  men 
who  were  with  us,  clergy  and  monks,  showed  us  all  the 
places  which  I  was  always  seeking  in  accordance  with 
the  Scriptures  ;  some  of  these  were  on  the  left,  some 
on  the  right  of  our  path,  some  were  far  distant  from, 
and  some  near  to  our  route.  For  I  hope  that  your 
affection  will  believe  me  [when  I  say  that],  as  far  as 
I  could  see,  the  children  of  Israel  marched  in  such 
wise  that  as  far  as  they  went  to  the  right,  so  far  did 
they  turn  back  to  the  left ;  as  far  as  they  went  for- 
ward, so  far  did  they  return  backward,  journeying 
thus  until  they  reached  the  Red  Sea.  Epaulcum  : 
was  shown  to  us  from  the  opposite  side,  when  we 
were  at  Migdol,2  where  there  is  now  a  fort  with  an 
officer  set  over  soldiers  to  maintain  Roman  discipline. 
These  escorted  us  thence,  according  to  custom,  to 
another  fort,  and  Baal-zephon 3  was  shown  to  us, 
when  we  were  at  that  place.4  It  is  a  plain  above 
the  Red  Sea,  along  the  side  of  the  mountain  which 
I  mentioned  above,  where  the  children  of  Israel  cried 
out  when  they  saw  the  Egyptians  coming  after  them. 
Etham  6  also  was  shown  to  us,  which  is  on  the  edge  of 
the  wilderness,  as  it  is  written,  also  Succoth,  which  is  a 
slight  elevation  in  the  middle  of  a  valley,  and  by  this 

1  Epauleum.     dWiwri  TTJS  &rowAeo>s,  Exod.  xiv.  2,  LXX,  i.e. 
opposite  the  military  quarters.      The   Eng.   Bible  has   before 
Pi-hahiroth. 

2  Magdalum  in  text.     MaySta\ov,  Exod.  xiv.  2,  LXX. 
8  Belsefon  in  text.     Bet\fffir<t>(by,  Exod.  xiv.  2,  LXX. 

4  Exod.  xiv.  10. 

6  Oton  in  text.     'Ofl^,  Exod.  xiii.  20,  LXX. 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  15 

little  hill  the  children  of  Israel  encamped.  This  is  the 
place  where  the  law  of  the  Passover  was  received.1 
The  city  of  Pithom,  which  the  children  of  Israel 
built,2  was  shown  to  us  on  the  same  journey  at  the 
place  where,  leaving  the  lands  of  the  Saracens,  we 
entered  the  territory  of  Egypt ;  the  same  Pithom  is 
now  a  fort.  The  city  of  Hero,3  which  existed  at  the 
time  when  Joseph  met  his  father  Jacob  as  he  came, 
as  it  is  written  in  the  book  of  Genesis,  is  now  a 
come*  though  a  large  one — a  village  as  we  say.  This 
village  has  a  church  and  martyr-memorials,  and  many 
cells  of  holy  monks,  so  that  we  had  to  alight  to 
see  each  of  them,  in  accordance  with  the  custom 
which  we  had.  The  village  is  now  called  Hero; 
it  is  situated  at  the  sixteenth  milestone  from  the 
land  of  Goshen,  and  it  is  within  the  boundaries  of 
Egypt ;  moreover,  it  is  a  very  pleasant  spot,  for  an 
arm  of  the  Nile  flows  there.  Then,  leaving  Hero, 
we  came  to  the  city  which  is  called  Arabia,  situated 
in  the  land  of  Goshen,  for  it  is  written  concerning  it 
that  Pharaoh  said  to  Joseph,  In  the  best  of  the  land  of 
Egypt  make  thy  father  and  brethren  to  dwell,  in  the 
land  of  Goshen,  in  the  land  of  A  rabia? 

RAMESES 

Rameses  is  four  miles  from  the  city  of  Arabia,  and 
in  order  to  arrive  at  the  station  of  Arabia,  we  passed 
through  the  midst  of  Rameses.  The  city  of  Rameses 
is  now  open  country,  without  a  single  habitation,  but 

1  Exod.  xii.  43  ff.  *  Exod.  i.  n 

3  Hero.     The   LXX   has   (Gen.   xlvi.   29)  'Hpwwt'  ir6\iv,   the 
Eng.  Bible,  Goshen.    For  the  "  city  of  Arabia  "  (PThou)  see  p.  xix. 

4  Greek  KU>^,  a  village.  *  Gen.  xlvii.  6. 


16  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

it  is  certainly  traceable,  since  it  was  great  in  circum- 
ference and  contained  many  buildings,  for  its  ruins 
appear  to  this  day  in  great  numbers,  just  as  they  fell. 
There  is  nothing  there  now  except  one  great  Theban 
stone,  on  which  are  carved  two  statues  of  great  size, 
which  they  say  are  those  of  the  holy  men,  Moses  and 
Aaron,  raised  in  their  honour  by  the  children  of  Israel. 
There  is  also  a  sycomore  tree,  which  is  said  to  have 
been  planted  by  the  patriarchs ;  it  is  certainly  very 
old,  and  therefore  very  small,  though  it  still  bears 
fruit.  And  all  who  have  any  indisposition  go  there 
and  pluck  off  twigs,  and  it  benefits  them.  This  we 
learned  from  information  given  by  the  holy  bishop 
of  Arabia,  who  himself  told  us  the  name  of  the  tree 
in  Greek — dendros  alethia,  or  as  we  say,  the  tree  of 
truth.  This  holy  bishop  deigned  to  meet  us  at 
Rameses ;  he  is  an  elderly  man,  truly  pious  from  the 
time  he  became  a  monk,  courteous,  most  kind  in 
receiving  pilgrims,  and  very  learned  in  the  Scriptures 
of  God.  He,  after  deigning  to  give  himself  the 
trouble  of  meeting  us,  showed  us  everything  there 
and  told  us  about  the  aforesaid  statues,  as  well  as 
about  the  sycomore  tree.  This  holy  bishop  also 
informed  us  how  Pharaoh,  when  he  saw  that  the 
children  of  Israel  had  escaped  him,  before  he  set  out 
after  them,  went  with  all  his  army  into  Rameses  and 
burnt  the  whole  city  which  was  very  great,  and  then 
set  out  thence  in  pursuit  of  the  children  of  Israel. 

EPIPHANY  AT  THE  CITY  OF  ARABIA 

RETURN  TO  JERUSALEM 

Now  it  fell  out  by  a  very  happy  chance  that  the 
day  on  which  we  came  to  the  station  of  Arabia  was 


<•,'•>  ar 
•;•'?•.•         .V  ^;'; 


RKI)     (1KANITE    CROUP    OF     R AMESES     II.    AND    THE    GOD    ATMU. 

FOUND     AT     RAAMSES,      NOW     TELL    RETABEH.      PROBABLY    THE 

FIGURES     LATER    CALLED     MOSES    AND    AARON. 

(  From  "  Hyksos  and  Israelite  Cities."     PI.  XXXII.) 

[Facing  page  16 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  17 

the  eve  of  the  most  blessed  day  of  the  Epiphany, 
and  the  vigils  were  to  be  kept  in  the  church  on  the 
same  day.  Wherefore  the  holy  bishop  detained  us 
there  for  some  two  days,  a  holy  man  and  truly  a  man 
of  God,  well  known  to  me  from  the  time  when  I  had 
been  in  the  Thebaid.  He  became  a  holy  bishop  after 
being  a  monk,  for  he  was  brought  up  from  a  child  in 
a  cell,  for  which  reason  he  is  so  learned  in  the 
Scriptures  and  chastened  in  his  whole  life,  as  I  said 
above.  From  this  place  we  sent  back  the  soldiers 
who  according  to  Roman  discipline  had  given  us  the 
help  of  their  escort  as  long  as  we  had  walked  through 
suspected  places.  Now,  however,  as  the  public  road 
— which  passed  by  the  city  of  Arabia  and  leads  from 
the  Thebaid  to  Pelusium — ran  through  Egypt,  there 
was  no  need  to  trouble  the  soldiers  further.  Setting 
out  thence  we  pursued  our  journey  continuously 
through  the  land  of  Goshen,  among  vines  that  yield 
wine  and  vines  that  yield  balsam,  among  orchards, 
highly  cultivated  fields  and  very  pleasant  gardens, 
our  whole  route  lying  along  the  bank  of  the  river 
Nile  among  oft-recurring  estates,  which  were  once  the 
homesteads  of  the  children  of  Israel.  And  why  should 
I  say  more  ?  for  I  think  that  I  have  never  seen  a  more 
beautiful  country  than  the  land  of  Goshen.  And 
travelling  thus  for  two  days  from  the  city  of  Arabia 
through  the  land  of  Goshen  continuously,  we  arrived 
at  Tatnis,1  the  city  where  holy  Moses  was  born.  This 
city  of  Tatnis  was  once  Pharaoh's  metropolis.  Now 

1  Tatnis,  i.e.  Zoan  (Numb.  xiii.  22),  but  Archbp.  Bernard 
conjectures  Taphnis,  in  which  case  the  place  would  be  the 
Tahpanh.es  of  Jer.  xliii.  7  ff.  (LXX  Tcupyds).  For  its  connexion 
with  "Pharaoh"  see  Hastings'  D.B.  vol.  iv.  p.  674.  The 
birth-place  of  Moses  is  not  mentioned  in  the  Bible. 
c 


1 8  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

although  I  had  already  known  these  places — as  I  said 
above — when  I  had  been  at  Alexandria  and  in  the  The- 
baid,  yet  I  wished  to  learn  thoroughly  all  the  places 
through  which  the  children  of  Israel  marched  on  their 
journey  from  Rameses  to  Sinai,  the  holy  mountain  of 
God  ;  this  made  it  necessary  to  return  to  the  land  of 
Goshen  and  thence  toTatnis.  We  set  out  from  Tatnis 
and,  walking  along  the  route  that  was  already  known 
to  me,  I  came  to  Pelusium.  Thence  I  set  out  again, 
and  journeying  through  all  those  stations  in  Egypt 
through  which  we  had  travelled  before,  I  arrived  at 
the  boundary  of  Palestine.  Thence  in  the  Name  of 
Christ  our  God  I  passed  through  several  stations  in 
Palestine  and  returned  to  Aelia,1  that  is  Jerusalem. 

VISIT  TO  THE  JORDAN  VALLEY 

Having  spent  some  time  there,  at  God's  bidding 
my  will  was  to  go  as  far  as  Arabia,  to  mount  Nebo, 
where  God  commanded  Moses  to  go  up,  saying  to 
him:  Get  thee  up  into  the  mountain  Arabot?  into 
Mount  Nebo,  which  is  in  the  land  of  Moab,  that  is  over 
against  Jericho,  and  behold  the  land  of  Canaan,  which 
I  give  unto  the  children  of  Israel  for  a  possession^  and 
die  in  the  Mount  whither  thou  goest  up.  So  Jesus  our 
God,  who  will  not  forsake  them  that  hope  in  Him, 
deigned  to  give  effect  to  this  my  wish.  Wherefore 

1  Helta  in  the  text.  Aelia  Capitolina  was  the  name  given  to 
the  colony,  which  the  Emperor  Hadrian  set  up  on  Mount  Sion 
A.D.  132.  The  retention  of  the  name  by  an  ecclesiastic  like 
Etheria  points  to  an  early  rather  than  a  late  date  for  her  visit : 
see  Heinichen  on  Eus.,  H.E.  iv.  6. 

•  The  LXX  here  (Deut.  xxxii.  49  f.)  has  'A/3a/wk  (Eng.  Bible, 
Abarini).  The  Pilgrim  has  apparently  put  Arabot  (LXX  'A/>a£&>0 
=  plains  in  Heb.)  by  mistake.  See  note  4  on  p.  19. 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  19 

setting  out  from  Jerusalem  and  journeying  with  holy 
men,  with  a  priest  and  deacons  from  Jerusalem  and 
with  certain  brothers,  that  is  monks,  we  came  to  that 
spot  on  the  Jordan  where  the  children  of  Israel  had 
crossed  when  holy  Joshua,  the  son  of  Nun,  had  led 
them  over  Jordan,  as  it  is  written  in  the  book  of 
Joshua,  the  son  of  Nun.1  The  place  where  the  children 
of  Reuben  and  of  Gad  and  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh 
had  made  an  altar  was  shown  us  a  little  higher  up  2  on 
that  side  of  the  river-bank  where  Jericho  is.  Crossing 
the  river  we  came  to  a  city  called  Livias,3  which  is  in 
the  plain  where  the  children  of  Israel  encamped  at 
that  time,  for  the  foundations  of  the  camp  of  the 
children  of  Israel  and  of  their  dwellings  where  they 
abode  appear  there  to  this  day.  The  plain  is  a  very 
great  one,  lying  under  the  mountains  of  Arabia  above 
the  Jordan  ;  it  is  the  place  of  which  it  is  written  : 4 
And  the  children  of  Israel  wept  for  Moses  in  the 
Arabot  Moab  on  the  Jordan  over  against  Jericho, 
forty  days.  This  is  the  place  where,  after  Moses' 
death,  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun  was  straightway  filled 
with  the  spirit  of  wisdom,  for  Moses  had  laid  his  hands 
upon  him,  as  it  is  written.5  This  is  the  place  where 
Moses  wrote  the  book  of  Deuteronomy,' and  where  he 
spake  in  the  ears  of  all  the  congregation  of  Israel  the 

1  Josh.  iii.  14;  xxii.  10,  ir. 

2  i  e.  on  the  west  side. 

*  This  is  the  Beth-haran  of  Numb,  xxxii.  36  and  Josh.  xiii.  27, 
which  was  rebuilt  and  called  Livias  by  Herod  the  Tetrarch  in 
honour  of  the  Empress  Livia. 

4  Deut.  xxxiv.  8.     The  LXX  has  :   *V  'Apa£a>0  M«a0  M  rov 

'lopSovou    Kara    'lepeixi    rpiaKovra  fi/j.(pas.      The    Eng.     Bible    puts 

"plains   of  Moab"   instead   of  "Arabot   M."     The   Pilgrim's 
"  forty  days  "  for  "  thirty  "  is  no  doubt  an  error. 
6  Deut.  xxxiv.  9. 


20  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

words  of  this  song  until  it  was  ended ;  it  is  written 
in  the  book  of  Deuteronomy.1  Here  holy  Moses,  the 
man  of  God,  blessed  the  children  z  of  Israel  one  by 
one,  in  order,  before  his  death.3  So  when  we  had 
arrived  at  this  plain,  we  went  to  the  very  spot,  and 
prayer  was  made  ;  here,  too,  a  certain  part  of  Deuter- 
onomy was  read,  as  well  as  his  song,  with  the 
blessings  which  he  pronounced  over  the  children  of 
Israel  ;  after  the  reading,  prayer  was  made  a  second 
time,  and  giving  thanks  to  God,  we  moved  on  thence. 
For  it  was  always  customary  with  us  that,  whenever 
we  succeeded  in  reaching  the  places  we  desired  to 
visit,  prayer  should  first  be  made  there,  then  the  lection 
should  be  read  from  the  book,  then  one  appropriate 
psalm  should  be  said,  then  prayer  should  be  made 
again.  At  God's  bidding  we  always  kept  to  this 
custom,  whenever  we  were  able  to  come  to  the 
places  we  desired.  After  this,  that  the  work  begun 
should  be  accomplished,  we  began  to  hasten  in 
order  to  reach  mount  Nebo.  As  we  went,  the 
priest  of  the  place,  i.  e.  Livias,  whom  we  had 
prayed  to  accompany  us  from  the  station,  because 
he  knew  the  places  well,  advised  us,  saying  :  "If  you 
wish  to  see  the  water  which  flows  from  the  rock, 
which  Moses  gave  to  the  children  of  Israel  when  they 
were  thirsty,  you  can  see  it  if  you  are  willing  to 
undertake  the  labour  of  going  about  six  miles  out  of 
the  way."  When  he  had  said  this,  we  very  eagerly 
wished  to  go,  and  turning  at  once  out  of  our  way,  we 
followed  the  priest  who  led  us.  In  that  place  there  is 
a  little  church  under  a  mountain,  not  Nebo,  but 

1  Deut.  xxxi.  30.          *  *.  e.  the  tribes.         3  Deut.  xxxiii. 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  21 

another  height  behind,  yet  not  far  from  Nebo.  Many 
truly  holy  monks  dwell  there,  whom  they  call  here 
ascetics. 

These  holy  monks  deigned  to  receive  us  very 
kindly,  and  permitted  us  to  go  in  to  greet  them. 
When  we  had  entered  and  prayer  had  been  made 
with  them,  they  deigned  to  give  us  eulogiae?-  which 
they  are  wont  to  give  to  those  whom  they  receive 
kindly.  There,  in  the  midst,  between  the  church  and 
the  cells,  there  flows  from  out  of  the  rock  a  great 
stream  of  water,  very  beautiful  and  limpid,  and 
excellent  to  the  taste.  Then  we  asked  those  holy 
monks  who  dwelt  there  what  was  this  water  of  so 
good  a  flavour,  and  they  said  :  "  This  is  the  water 
which  holy  Moses  gave  to  the  children  of  Israel  in 
this  desert." z  So  prayer  was  made  there  according 
to  custom,  the  lection  was  read  from  the  books  of 
Moses  and  one  psalm  said,  then — with  the  holy 
clergy  and  monks  who  had  come  with  us — we  went 
out  to  the  mountain.  Many  of  the  holy  monks  also 
who  dwelt  by  that  water,  and  who  could  undertake 
the  labour,  deigned  to  ascend  mount  Nebo  with  us. 
So  setting  out  thence,  we  arrived  at  the  foot  of 
mount  Nebo,  which  was  very  high ;  nevertheless  the 
greater  part  could  be  ascended  sitting  on  asses, 
though  a  little  bit  was  steeper  and  had  to  be  climbed 
laboriously  on  foot,  which  was  done. 

1  Archbp.  Bernard  translates  this  "gifts  of  blessing."  Small 
loaves,  called  "  blessings "  were  sent  by  ecclesiastics  to  one 
another.  See  supra,  p.  5.  Cf.  Bigg,  Wayside  Studies  in 
Eccles.  History,  p.  38. 

1  Cf.  Num.  xx.  ii. 


22  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

MOUNT  NEBO 

We  arrived,  then,  at  the  summit  of  the  mountain, 
where  there  is  now  a  church  of  no  great  size,  on  the 
very  top  of  mount  Nebo.  Inside  the  church,  in  the 
place  where  the  pulpit  is,  I  saw  a  place  a  little  raised, 
containing  about  as  much  space  as  tombs  usually 
contain.  I  asked  the  holy  men  what  this  was,  and 
they  answered:  "Here  was  holy  Moses  laid  by 
the  angels,  for,  as  it  is  written :  No  man  knoweth 
of  his  burial}  since  it  is  certain  that  he  was 
buried  by  the  angels.  His  tomb,  indeed,  where  he 
was  laid,  is  [not2]  shown  to  this  day;  for  as  it  was 
shown  to  us  by  our  ancestors  who  dwelt  here  where 
[he  was  laid],  so  do  we  show  it  to  you,  and  our 
ancestors  said  that  this  tradition  was  handed  down 
to  them  by  their  own  ancestors."  So  prayer  was 
made  anon,  and  all  things  that  we  were  accustomed 
to  do  in  their  order  in  every  place  were  done  here 
also,  and  we  began  to  go  out  of  the  church.  Then 
they  who  knew  the  place — the  priests  and  holy 
monks — said  to  us:  "If  you  wish  to  see  the  places 
that  are  mentioned  in  the  books  of  Moses,  come  out 
of  the  door  of  the  church,  and  from  the  very  summit, 
from  the  side  on  which  they  are  visible  from  here, 
look  and  see,3  and  we  will  tell  you  each  place  that  is 
visible  from  hence."  Then  we  rejoiced  greatly  and 
immediately  came  out.  From  the  door  of  the  church 

1  Deut.  xxxiv.  6.     Archbp.   Bernard  translates  sepulturam, 
how  he  was  buried,  and  his  note  in  loc.  is  :  "I  have  followed 
Geyer  in  supposing  that  the  monks   interpreted  sepultura  of 
the  act  rather  than  of  \hzplace  of  burial :  in  no  other  way  is  it 
possible  to  make  sense  of  the  passage." 

2  Geyer,  note  in  loc.,  thinks  that  the  non  should  be  deleted. 
8  Cf.  Lam.  i.  12. 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  23 

we  saw  the  place  where  the  Jordan  runs  into  the 
Dead  Sea,  which  place  appeared  below  us  as  we 
stood.  On  the  opposite  side  we  saw  not  only  Livias, 
which  was  on  the  near  side  of  Jordan,  but  also  Jericho, 
which  was  beyond  Jordan  ;  to  so  great  a  height  rose 
the  lofty  place  where  we  stood,  before  the  door  of  the 
church.  The  greatest  part  of  Palestine,  the  land  of 
promise,  was  in  sight,  together  with  the  whole  land 
of  Jordan,  as  far  as  it  could  be  seen  with  our  eyes. 
On  the  left  side  we  saw  all  the  lands  of  the  Sodomites 
and  Segor1  which  is  the  only  one  of  the  five  cities 
that  exists  to-day.  There  is  a  memorial  of  it,  but 
nothing  appears  of  those  other  cities  but  a  heap  of 
ruins,  just  as  they  were  turned  into  ashes.  The  place 
where  was  the  inscription  concerning  Lot's  wife  was 
shown  to  us,  which  place  is  read  of  in  the  Scriptures.2 
But  believe  me,  reverend  ladies,  the  pillar  itself  cannot 
be  seen,  only  the  place  is  shown,  the  pillar  is  said 
to  have  been  covered  by  the  Dead  Sea.  Certainly 
when  we  saw  the  place  we  saw  no  pillar,  I  cannot 
therefore  deceive  you  in  this.  The  bishop  of  the 
place,  that  is  of  Segor,  told  us  that  it  is  now  some 
years  since  the  pillar  could  be  seen.  The  spot  where 
the  pillar  stood  is  about  six  miles  from  Segor,  and 
the  water  now  covers  the  whole  of  this  space.  Then 
we  went  to  the  right  side  of  the  church,  out  of  doors 
and  opposite  to  us  two  cities  were  pointed  out,  the 
one  Esebon,3  now  called  Exebon,  which  belonged  to 
Seon,  king  of  the  Amorites,  and  the  other,  now  called 

1  LXX  2^-ya>/>,  Eng.  Bible,  Zoar.  Gen.  xiv.  2  ;  Deut.  xxxiv.  3. 

8  Gen.  xix.  23-26.  ?  titulus  (inscription)  =  <TTTJ\^  (tombstone 
here. 

3  LXX  'Effff8<i>v,  Eng.  Bible,  Heshbon.  Numb.  xxi.  26  ;  Deut 
iv.  46, 


24  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

Sasdra,1  the  city  of  Og  the  king  of  Basan.  Fogor,2 
which  was  a  city  of  the  kingdom  of  Edom,  was  also 
pointed  out  from  thence,  opposite  to  us.  All  these 
cities  which  we  saw  were  situated  on  mountains,  but 
a  little  below  them  the  ground  seemed  to  be  flatter. 
Then  we  were  told  that  in  the  days  when  holy  Moses 
and  the  children  of  Israel  bad  fought  against  those 
cities,  they  had  encamped  there,  and  indeed  the  signs 
of  a  camp  were  visible  there.  [From]  the  side  of  the 
mountain  which  I  have  called  the  left,  which  was 
over  the  Dead  Sea,  a  very  sharp-cut  mountain  was 
shown  to  us,  which  was  formerly  called  Agri  specula.3 
This  is  the  mountain  on  which  Balak  the  son  of  Beor 
placed  Balaam  the  sooth-sayer  to  curse  the  children 
of  Israel,  and  God  refused  to  permit  it,  as  it  is  written. 
Then,  having  seen  everything  that  we  desired,  we 
returned  in  the  Name  of  God  through  Jericho  back 
to  Jerusalem  along  the  whole  of  the  route  by  which 
we  had  come. 

VISIT  TO  AUSITIS 

Now  after  some  time  I  wished  to  go  to  the  region 
of  Ausitis*  to  visit  the  tomb  of  holy  Job,  for  the 
sake  of  prayer.  For  I  used  to  see  many  holy  monks 
coming  thence  to  Jerusalem  to  visit  the  holy  places  for 
the  sake  of  prayer,  who,  giving  information  of  every- 
thing concerning  those  places,  increased  my  desire  to 


1  LXX  'ESpdftfj.,  Eng.   Bible,  Edrci.   Numb.  xxi.  33  ;   Deut. 
iii.  10. 

2  LXX   *o7cip,  Eng.    Bible,   Peor.   Numb,  xxiii.   28  ;    Deut. 
iv.  46. 

s  i.  e.  the  aypov  ffKoicia.  (peak  of  the  field)  of  the  LXX.     Numb. 
xxiii.  14.     The  Eng.  Bible  has  "the  field  of  Zophim." 
*  LXX  Atorfn»,  Engr  Bibje  Uz,  Job  i.  i. 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  25 

undertake  the  toil  of  going  to  them  also,  if  indeed 
that  can  be  called  toil  by  which  a  man  sees  his  desire 
to  be  fulfilled.  So  I  set  out  from  Jerusalem  with  the 
holy  men  who  deigned  to  give  me  their  company 
on  my  journey — they  themselves  also  going  for  the 
sake  of  prayer — making  my  journey  from  Jerusalem 
through  eight  stations  to  Carneas.  The  city  of  Job 
is  now  called  Carneas,  but  it  was  formerly  called 
Dennaba,1  in  the  land  of  Ausitis,  on  the  confines  of 
Idumea  and  Arabia.  Travelling  on  this  journey  I 
saw  on  the  bank  of  the  river  Jordan  a  very  beautiful 
and  pleasant  valley  abounding  in  vines  and  trees,  for 
much  excellent  water  was  there,  and  in  that  valley 
there  was  a  large  village,  which  is  now  called  Sedima. 
The  village,  which  is  situated  in  the  middle  of  the 
level  ground,  has  in  its  midst  a  little  hill  of  no  great 
size,  shaped  as  large  tombs  are  wont  to  be.  There  is 
a  church  on  the  summit  and  down  below,  around  the 
little  hill  great  and  ancient  foundations  appear,  while 
in  the  village  itself  some  grave-mounds  still  remain. 
When  I  saw  this  pleasant  place  I  asked  what  it  was, 
and  it  was  told  me  : 2  "  This  is  the  city  of  king 
Melchizedek,  which  was  called  Salem,  but  now, 
through  the  corruption  of  the  language,  the  village 
is  called  Sedima.  On  the  top  of  the  little  hill,  which 
is  situated  in  the  midst  of  the  village,  the  building 
that  you  see  is  a  church,  which  is  now  called  in  the 
Greek  language  opu  Melchisedech.  For  this  is  the 

1  Eng.  Bible,  Dinhabah,  Gen.  xxxvi.  32  ;    i  Chron.  i.  43. 

2  See  Gen.  xiv.  8  and  18.     The   Pilgrim  seems  to  identify 
Salem    with    Salim  :    see    Hastings'  D.B.  under    both   names. 
Gamurrini   conjectures   that  opu   here   and    below  stands  for 
Spos  =  hill  :    but   ?  for    STOW  =  where    (Bernard).      She   never 
confuses  p  with  p  elsewhere. 


26  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

place  where  Melchizedek  offered  pure  sacrifices — 
that  is  bread  and  wine— to  God,  as  it  is  written  of 
him." 

THE  CITY  OF  MELCHIZEDEK 

Directly  I  heard  this,  we  alighted  from  our  beasts, 
and  lo !  the  holy  priest  of  the  place  and  the  clergy 
deigned  to  meet  us,  and  straightway  receiving  us  led 
us  up  to  the  church.  When  we  had  arrived  there, 
prayer  was  first  said  according  to  custom,  then  the 
passage  from  the  book  of  holy  Moses  was  read,  then 
one  psalm  suitable  to  the  place  was  said,  then,  after 
prayer  made,  we  came  down.  When  we  had  come 
down  the  holy  priest  addressed  us.  He  was  an  elderly 
man,  well  taught  in  the  Scriptures,  and  he  had  presided 
over  the  place  from  the  time  he  had  been  a  monk,  to 
whose  life  many  bishops — as  we  learned  afterwards — 
bore  great  testimony,  saying  that  he  was  worthy  to  pre- 
side over  the  place  where  holy  Melchizedek — when 
Abraham  was  coming  to  meet  him — was  the  first  to 
offer  pure  sacrifices  to  God.  When  we  had  come  down 
from  the  church,  as  I  said  above,  the  holy  priest  said 
to  us  :  "  Behold,  these  foundations  which  you  see 
around  the  little  hill  are  those  of  the  palace  of  king 
Melchizedek.  For  from  his  time  to  the  present  day  if 
any  one  wishes  to  build  himself  a  house  here,  and  so 
strikes  on  these  foundations,  he  sometimes  finds  little 
fragments  of  silver  and  bronze.  And  this  way  which 
you  see  passing  between  the  river  Jordan  and  this 
village  is  the  way  by  which  holy  Abraham  returned 
to  Sodom,  after  the  slaughter  of  Chedorlaomer l  king 

1  In  Gen.  xiv.  i  Chedorlaomer  is  called  king  of  Elam  and 
Tidal,  king  of  Goiim  (or  nations,  LXX 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  27 

of  nations,  and  where  holy  Melchizedek,  the  king  of 
Salem,  met  him." 


Then,  because  I  remembered  that  it  was  written  l 
that  S.  John  had  baptized  in  JEnon  near  to  Salim,  I 
asked  him  how  far  off  that  place  was.  The  holy 
priest  answered  :  "  It  is  near,  two  hundred  paces  off, 
and,  if  you  wish,  I  will  now  lead  you  there  on  foot. 
This  large  and  pure  stream  of  water,  which  you  see  in 
this  village,  comes  from  that  spring."  Then  I  began 
to  thank  him  and  to  ask  him  to  lead  us  to  the  place, 
which  was  done.  So  we  began  to  go  with  him  on 
foot  through  the  very  pleasant  valley,  until  we  reached 
a  most  pleasant  orchard,  in  the  midst  of  which  he 
showed  us  a  spring  of  excellent  and  pure  water,  which 
sent  out  continuously  a  good  stream.  The  spring 
had  in  front  of  it  a  sort  of  pool,  where  it  appears  that 
S.  John  the  Baptist  fulfilled  his  ministry.  Then  the 
holy  priest  said  to  us  :  "  This  garden  is  called  nothing 
else  to  this  day  than  2  cepos  tu  agiu  iohannu  in  the 
Greek  language,  or  as  you  say  in  Latin,  hortus  sancti 
Johannis.  Many  brethren,  holy  monks,  direct  their 
steps  hither  from  various  places  that  they  may  wash 
there."  So  at  the  spring,  as  in  every  place,  prayer 
was  made,  the  proper  lection  was  read  and  an  appro- 
priate psalm  was  said,  and  everything  that  it  was 
customary  for  us  to  do  whenever  we  came  to  the 
holy  places,  we  did  there  also.  The  holy  priest  also 
told  us  that  to  this  day,  at  Easter,  all  they  who  are 
to  be  baptized  in  the  village,  that  is  in  the  church 

1  S.  John  iii.  23. 

*  it?/™*  TOW  eryiow  'lufovov  (the  garden  of  Saint  John). 


28  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

which  is  called  opus  Melchisedech}-  are  always  baptized 
in  this  spring,  returning  early  to  vespers  with  the 
clergy  and  monks,  saying  psalms  and  antiphons,  so 
that  they  who  have  been  baptized  are  led  back  early 
from  the  fountain  to  the  church  of  holy  Melchizedek. 
Then,  receiving  eulogiae'1'  out  of  the  orchard  of  S.  John 
the  Baptist  from  the  priest,  as  well  as  from  the  holy 
monks  who  had  cells  in  the  same  orchard,  and  always 
giving  thanks  to  God,  we  set  out  on  the  way  we  were 
going. 

THE  CITY  OF  ELIJAH.    THE  BROOK  CHERITH 

Then  going  for  a  time  through  the  valley  of  the 
Jordan  on  the  bank  of  the  river,  because  our  route  lay 
that  way  for  a  while,  we  suddenly  saw  the  city  of  the 
holy  prophet  Elijah,  that  is  Thesbe,  whence  he  had 
the  name  of  Elijah  the  Tishbite.3  There,  to  this  day, 
is  the  cave  wherein  the  holy  man  sat ;  there  too  is  the 
tomb  of  holy  Getha,4  whose  name  we  read  in  the  books 
of  the  Judges.  There  too  we  gave  thanks  to  God 
according  to  custom  and  pursued  our  journey.  And 
as  we  journeyed  that  way  we  saw  a  very  pleasant 
valley  opening  towards  us  on  the  left ;  it  was  very 
large  and  discharged  a  very  great  torrent  into  the 
Jordan,  and  in  that  valley  we  saw  the  cell  of  one  who 
is  now  a  brother,  that  is  a  monk.  Then  I,  as  I  am 
very  inquisitive,  began  to  ask  what  was  this  valley 
where  the  holy  monk  had  now  made  himself  a  cell, 

1  See  p.  25,  note  2.  z  See  note  above,  p.  5. 

1  LXX  6  Geffptlrris  IK  Qfffftuv  TJJJ  ra\a,d$,  I  Kings  xvii.  I  ;  the 
A.V.  has  "the  inhabitants,"  the  R.V.  "the  sojourners  of  Gilead." 

4  *'.  e.  Jephthah,  Judg.  xii.  7  (Geyer)  or  perhaps  Jether,  Judg. 
viii.  20  (Bernard). 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  29 

for  I  did  not  think  it  was  without  reason.  Then  the 
holy  men  who  were  journeying  with  us,  and  who  knew 
the  place,  said,  "  This  is  the  valley  of  Corra,1  where  holy 
Elijah  the  Tishbite  dwelt  in  the  time  of  king  Ahab,2 
when  there  was  a  famine,  and  at  the  bidding  of  God 
the  raven  used  to  bring  him  food,  and  he  drank  water 
of  the  torrent.  For  this  brook  which  you  see  running 
through  this  valley  into  Jordan,  is  Corra."  Wherefore 
giving  thanks  to  God  Who  deigned  to  show  us  every- 
thing that  we  desired,  unworthy  as  we  were,  we  began 
to  make  our  journey  as  on  other  days.  And  as  we 
journeyed  day  by  day,  on  the  left  side,  whence  on  the 
opposite  side  we  saw  parts  of  Phoenicia,  there  suddenly 
appeared  a  great  and  high  mountain  which  extended 
in  length  .... 

[A  leaf  is  torn  out.'] 


BURIAL-PLACE  OF  JOB.    RETURN  TO  JERUSALEM 

.  .  .  which  holy  monk  and  ascetic,  after  so  many 
years  spent  in  the  desert,  found  it  necessary  to  move 
and  to  go  down  to  the  city  of  Carneas,  in  order  to 
advise  the  bishop  and  clergy  of  that  time,  according 
as  it  had  been  revealed  to  him,  that  they  should  dig 
in  that  place  which  had  been  shown  to  him  ;  which 
was  done.  And  they,  digging  in  that  place  which  had 
been  shown  to  him,  found  a  cave,  which  they  followed 
for  about  a  hundred  paces,  when  suddenly,  as  they 
dug,  a  stone  tomb  came  to  light,  and  when  they  had 
uncovered  it,  they  found  carved  on  its  lid  (the  name) 

1  LXX  Xoppde,  Eng.  Bible,  Cherith.     i  Kings   xvii.  3. 
J  I  Kings  xvii.  4,  etc. 


30  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

Job.  To  this  Job  the  church  which  you  see  was  then 
built  in  that  place,  in  such  a  manner  that  the  stone 
with  the  body  should  not  be  moved,  but  that  it  should 
be  placed,  where  the  body  had  been  found,  and  that 
the  body  should  He  under  the  altar.  That  church, 
which  was  built  by  some  tribune,  has  been  unfinished 
to  this  day.  Next  morning  we  asked  the  bishop  to 
make  the  oblation,  which  he  deigned  to  do,  and  the 
bishop  blessing  us,  we  set  out.  There  too  we  com- 
municated, and  always  giving  thanks  to  God  we 
returned  to  Jerusalem,  journeying  through  each  of 
the  stations  through  which  we  had  passed  three  years 
before. 

JOURNEY  INTO  MESOPOTAMIA 

Having  spent  some  time  there  in  the  Name  of  God, 
when  three  full  years  had  passed  since  I  came  to 
Jerusalem,  and  having  seen  all  the  holy  places  which 
I  had  visited  for  the  sake  of  prayer,  my  mind  was  to 
return  to  my  country.  I  wished,  however,  at  God's 
bidding,  to  go  to  Mesopotamia  in  Syria,  to  visit  the 
holy  monks  who  were  there  in  great  number,  and  who 
were  said  to  be  of  such  holy  life  as  could  hardly  be 
described,  and  also  for  the  sake  of  prayer  at  the 
memorial  of  S.  Thomas  the  Apostle,  where  his  body  is 
laid  entire.  This  is  at  Edessa.  For  Jesus  our  God 
by  a  letter  which  He  sent  to  Abgar  the  king  by  the 
hand  of  Ananias  the  courier,  promised  that  He  would 
send  S.  Thomas  thither,  after  that  He  Himself  had 
ascended  into  Heaven.1  The  letter  is  kept  with  great 
reverence  at  the  city  of  Edessa,  where  the  memorial 

1  See  Eus.,  Hist,  Eccl  i.  13. 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  31 

is.  Now  your  affection  may  believe  me  that  there  is 
no  Christian  who  having  arrived  at  the  holy  places 
that  are  at  Jerusalem,  does  not  go  on  thither  for 
the  sake  of  prayer;  it  is  at  the  twenty-fifth  station 
from  Jerusalem.  And  since  from  Antioch  it  is  nearer 
to  Mesopotamia,  it  was  very  convenient  for  me  at  God's 
bidding  that  as  I  was  returning  to  Constantinople,  and 
my  way  lying  through  Antioch,  I  should  go  thence  to 
Mesopotamia.  This  then,  at  God's  bidding,  I  did. 


ANTIOCH  TO  MESOPOTAMIA.    THE  CROSSING 
OF  THE  EUPHRATES 

Then,  setting  out  from  Antioch  to  Mesopotamia  in 
the  Name  of  Christ  our  God,  I  journeyed  through  cer- 
tain stations  and  cities  of  the  province  of  Ccele-Syria, 
which  is  Antioch,  and  entering  the  borders  of  the 
province  of  Augustofratensis,1  I  came  to  the  city  of 
Gerapolis2  which  is  the  metropolis  of  Augusto- 
fratensis. And  as  this  city  is  very  beautiful  and  rich 
and  abounds  in  everything,  it  was  necessary  for  me  to 
make  a  halt  there,  for  the  borders  of  Mesopotamia  were 
not  far  distant.  Then  starting  from  lerapolis,2  I  came, 
in  the  Name  of  God,  at  the  fifteenth  milestone  to  the 
river  Euphrates,  of  which  it  is  very  well  written  that  it 
is  the  great  river  Euphrates*;  it  is  huge  and,  as  it  were, 
terrible,  for  it  flows  down  with  a  current  like  the  river 
Rhone,  only  the  Euphrates  is  still  greater.  And  as 
we  had  to  cross  in  ships,  and  in  large  ships  only,  I 
waited  there  until  after  midday,  and  then  in  the  Name 

1  /.  e.  Augusta  Euphratensis. 

2  i.e.  Hierapolis.  3  Gen.  xv.  18. 


32  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

of  God  I  crossed  the  river  Euphrates  and  entered  the 
borders  of  Mesopotamia  in  Syria. 


EDESSA 

Then,  journeying  through  certain  stations,  I  came 
to  a  city  whose  name  we  read  recorded  in  the  Scrip- 
tures— Batanis,1  which  city  exists  to-day :  it  has  a 
church  with  a  truly  holy  bishop,  both  monk  and  con- 
fessor, and  certain  martyr-memorials.  The  city  has 
a  teeming  population,  and  the  soldiery  with  their 
tribune  are  stationed  there.  Departing  thence,  we 
arrived  at  Edessa  in  the  Name  of  Christ  our  God, 
and,  on  our  arrival,  we  straightway  repaired  to  the 
church  and  memorial  of  saint  Thomas.  There,  accord- 
ing to  custom,  prayers  were  made  and  the  other  things 
that  were  customary  in  the  holy  places  were  done  ; 
we  read  also  some  things  concerning  saint  Thomas 
himself.  The  church  there  is  very  great,  very  beauti- 
ful and  of  new  construction,  well  worthy  to  be  the 
house  of  God,  and  as  there  was  much  that  I  desired 
to  see,  it  was  necessary  for  me  to  make  a  three  days' 
stay  there.  Thus  I  saw  in  that  city  many  memorials, 
together  with  holy  monks,  some  dwelling  at  the 
memorials,  while  others  had  their  cells  in  more 
secluded  spots  farther  from  the  city.  Moreover,  the 
holy  bishop  of  the  city,  a  truly  devout  man,  both 
monk  and  confessor,  received  me  willingly  and  said  : 
"  As  I  see,  daughter,  that  for  the  sake  of  devotion  you 
have  undertaken  so  great  a  labour  in  coming  to  these 
places  from  far-distant  lands,  if  you  are  willing,  we 

1  Bathnse   in   Osrhoene  (Bernard).     There  seems  to  be  no 
reference  to  this  place  in  Holy  Scripture. 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  33 

will  show  you  all  the  places  that  are  pleasant  to  the 
sight  of  Christians."  Then,  first  thanking  God,  I 
besought  the  bishop  much  that  he  would  deign  to  do 
as  he  said.  He  thereupon  led  me  first  to  the  palace 
of  King  Abgar,  where  he  showed  me  a  great  marble 
statue  of  him — very  much  like  him,  as  they  said — 
having  a  sheen  as  if  made  of  pearl.  From  the  face 
of  Abgar  it  seemed  that  he  was  a  very  wise  and 
honourable  man.  Then  the  holy  bishop  said  to  me  : 
"  Behold  King  Abgar,  who  before  he  saw  the  Lord 
believed  in  Him  that  He  was  in  truth  the  Son  of 
God."  There  was  another  statue  near,  made  of  the 
same  marble,  which  he  said  was  that  of  his  son 
Magnus  ;  this  also  had  something  gracious  in  the 
face.  Then  we  entered  the  inner  part  of  the  palace, 
and  there  were  fountains  full  of  fish  such  as  I  never 
saw  before,  of  so  great  size,  so  bright  and  of  so  good 
a  flavour  were  they.  The  city  has  no  water  at  all 
other  than  that  which  comes  out  of  the  palace,  which 
is  like  a  great  silver  river. 

THE  STORY  OF  KING  ABGARUS 

Then  the  holy  bishop  told  me  about  the  water, 
saying  :  "  At  some  time,  after  that  King  Abgar  had 
written  to  the  Lord,  and  the  Lord  had  answered  King 
Abgar  by  Ananias  the  courier — as  it  is  written  in  the 
letter  itself — when  some  time  had  passed,  the  Persians 
came  against  the  city  and  surrounded  it.  And 
straightway  Abgar,  bearing  the  letter  of  the  Lord  to 
the  gate,  with  all  his  army,  prayed  publicly.  And  he 
said :  "  O  Lord  Jesus,  Thou  hadst  promised  us  that  none 
of  our  enemies  should  enter  this  city,  and  lo  !  the 
D 


34  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

Persians  now  attack  us."  And  when  the  king  had 
said  this,  holding  the  open  letter  in  his  uplifted  hands, 
suddenly  there  came  a  great  darkness  outside  the 
city  before  the  eyes  of  the  Persians,  as  they  were 
approaching  the  city  at  a  distance  of  about  three  miles, 
and  they  were  so  baffled  by  the  darkness  that  they 
could  hardly  form  their  camp  and  surround  the  whole 
city  about  three  miles  off.  So  baffled  were  the 
Persians  that  they  could  never  afterwards  see  the  way 
to  enter  the  city,  but  they  surrounded  it  and  shut  it 
in  with  their  hostile  forces,  at  a  distance  of  about  three 
miles,  for  several  months.  Then,  when  they  saw  that 
they  could  by  no  means  enter,  they  wished  to  slay 
those  within  the  city  by  thirst.  Now  that  little  hill 
which  you  see,  my  daughter,  over  against  the  city, 
supplied  it  with  water  at  that  time,  and  the  Persians, 
perceiving  this,  diverted  the  water  from  the  city  and 
made  it  to  run  near  that  place  where  they  had  made 
their  camp.  And  on  that  day  and  at  that  hour  when 
the  Persians  diverted  the  water,  the  fountains  which 
you  see  in  this  place  burst  forth  at  once  at  God's 
bidding,  and  by  the  favour  of  God  they  remain  here 
from  that  day  to  this.  But  the  water  which  the 
Persians  had  diverted  was  dried  up  at  that  hour,  so 
that  they  who  were  besieging  the  city  had  nothing  to 
drink  for  even  one  day ;  which  thing  is  plain  to  the 
present  time,  for  no  moisture  of  any  sort  has  ever  been 
seen  there  from  that  day  to  this.  So,  at  God's 
bidding,  Who  had  promised  that  this  should  come  to 
pass,  they  were  obliged  to  return  to  their  own  home 
in  Persia.  Moreover  afterwards,  as  often  as  enemies 
determined  to  come  and  take  the  city,  this  letter  was 
brought  out  and  read  in  the  gate,  and  straightway  all 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  35 

enemies  were  driven  back  by  the  will  of  God.  The 
holy  Bishop  also  told  me  that  the  place  where  these 
fountains  broke  forth  had  previously  been  open  ground 
within  the  city,  lying  under  the  palace  of  King  Abgar, 
which  same  palace  had  been  situated  on  somewhat 
higher  ground,  as  was  plainly  visible.  For  the  custom 
was  at  that  time  that,  whenever  palaces  were  built, 
they  should  always  stand  on  higher  ground.  But  after 
that  these  fountains  had  burst  forth  here,  then  Abgar 
built  this  palace  for  his  son  Magnus,  whose  statue  I 
saw  near  that  of  his  father,  so  that  the  fountains 
should  be  included  in  the  palace.  And  when  the 
holy  bishop  had  told  me  all  these  things,  he  said  to 
me  :  "  Let  us  now  go  to  the  gate  by  which  Ananias 
the  courier  entered  with  the  letter  of  which  I  spoke." 
So  when  we  had  come  to  the  gate,  the  bishop,  stand- 
ing, made  a  prayer  and  read  us  the  letters  ;  then,  after 
he  had  blessed  us,  another  prayer  was  made.  More- 
over the  holy  man  told  us  that  from  the  day  on  which 
Ananias  the  courier  entered  it  with  the  letter  of  the 
Lord,  the  gate  is  kept  to  this  day,  that  no  one  who  is 
unclean,  nor  any  mourner,  should  pass  through  nor 
should  any  dead  body  be  borne  out  through  it.  The 
holy  bishop  also  showed  us  the  memorial  of  Abgar 
and  of  his  whole  family,  very  beautiful,  but  made  in 
the  ancient  style.  He  took  us  also  to  the  palace 
which  King  Abgar  had  at  first,  on  the  higher  ground, 
and  if  there  were  any  other  places  he  showed  them  to 
us.  It  was  very  pleasant  to  me  to  receive  from  the  holy 
man  himself  the  letters  of  Abgar  to  the  Lord  and  of 
the  Lord  to  Abgar,  which  the  holy  bishop  had  read 
to  us  there.  For  although  I  have  copies  at  home,  yet 
it  seemed  to  me  more  pleasant  to  receive  them  from 


36  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

him,  lest  perhaps  something  less  might  have  reached 
us  at  home,  and  indeed  that  which  I  received  here  is 
fuller.  So  if  Jesus  our  God  bids  it,  and  I  come  home, 
you  too  shall  read  them,  ladies,  my  own  souls. 

GHARRI  (HARAN) 

Then,  after  three  days  spent  there,  it  was  necessary 
for  me  to  go  still  farther,  to  Charrae,  as  it  is  now 
called.  In  holy  Scripture  it  is  called  Charran,1  where 
holy  Abraham  dwelt,  as  it  is  written  in  Genesis  when 
the  Lord  said  unto  Abram :  Get  thee  out  of  thy  country, 
and  from  thy  father's  house,  and  go  to  Charran  and 
the  rest.2  And  when  I  arrived  at  Charrae  I  went 
straightway  to  the  church  which  is  within  the  city, 
and  soon  I  saw  the  bishop  of  the  place,  a  truly 
holy  man  of  God,  both  monk  and  confessor,  who 
deigned  to  show  us  all  the  places  there  that  we  desired. 
He  took  us  at  once  to  the  church,  which  is  without 
the  city  on  the  spot  where  stood  the  house  of  holy 
Abraham ;  it  stands  on  the  same  foundations,  and  it 
is  made  of  the  same  stone,  as  the  holy  bishop  said. 
When  we  had  come  to  the  church,  prayer  was  made, 
the  passage  from  Genesis  was  read,  one  psalm  was 
said,  and  after  a  second  prayer  the  bishop  blessed  us 
and  we  came  out.  Then  he  deigned  to  take  us  to  the 
well  whence  holy  Rebecca  used  to  fetch  water,3  and 
the  holy  bishop  said  to  us  :  "  Behold  the  well  whence 
holy  Rebecca  watered  the  camels  of  holy  Abraham's 
servant  Eleazar  " ;  thus  he  deigned  to  show  us  each 
thing.  Now  at  the  church,  which  is  outside  the  city, 

1  LXX  Xapodv,  Eng.  Bible  Haran.     Gen.   xii.  4. 
*  Gen.  xii.  i.  3  Gen.  xxiv.  15,  etc. 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  37 

as  I  said,  ladies,  reverend  sisters,  where  Abraham's 
house  was  originally,  there  is  now  the  martyr-memorial 
of  a  certain  holy  monk  named  Helpidius.  It  happened 
very  pleasantly  for  us  that  we  arrived  on  the  day 
before  the  martyr's  feast  of  saint  Helpidius,  which  is 
on  the  twenty-third  of  April.1  On  that  day  it  was 
of  obligation  that  all  the  monks  from  all  parts  and 
from  all  the  borders  of  Mesopotamia  should  come 
down  to  Charrae,  even  the  greater  ones  who  dwelt  in 
solitude,  whom  they  call  ascetics.  For  this  day  is 
observed  with  great  dignity  there  on  account  of  the 
memorial  of  holy  Abraham,  whose  house  stood  where 
the  church  now  is,  in  which  the  body  of  the  holy 
martyr  is  laid.  So  it  happened  to  us  very  pleasantly 
beyond  our  expectations  that  we  should  see  these 
holy  monks  of  Mesopotamia,  truly  men  of  God,  as 
well  as  those  whose  good  report  and  manner  of  life 
had  reached  men's  ears  far  and  wide,  whom  I  thought 
that  I  could  not  by  any  means  see,  not  because  it  was 
impossible  for  God  to  give  me  this,  Who  had  deigned 
to  give  me  all  things,  but  because  I  had  heard  that 
they  never  come  down  from  their  dwellings  except  on 
Easter  Day  and  on  this  day.  For  they  are  men  who 
do  many  wonders,  and,  moreover,  I  did  not  know  in 
what  month  was  the  day  of  the  martyr's  feast  which 
I  have  mentioned ;  but  at  God's  bidding  it  came 
about  that  I  arrived  on  the  day  that  I  had  not  hoped 
for.  We  stayed  there  two  days,  for  the  memorial 
day  and  for  the  sake  of  seeing  those  holy  men,  who 

1  The  ancient  Syriac  Martyrology  (A.D.  411/2),  as  printed 
by  Lietzmann  (Drei  Alt.  Mart.  p.  12),  gives  Helpidios  and 
Hermogenes  the  martyrs  in  Melitene  (Cappadocia)  on  May  3rd, 
not  April  23rd. 


38  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

deigned  to  receive  me  very  willingly  for  the  sake  of 
salutation,  and  to  speak  with  me,  of  which  I  was  not 
worthy.  Nor  were  they  seen  there  after  the  memorial 
day,  for  they  sought  the  desert  without  delay  in  the 
night,  each  one  returning  to  his  own  cell.  In  that 
city  I  found  scarcely  a  single  Christian  excepting  a 
few  clergy  and  holy  monks — if  any  such  dwell  in  the 
city ;  all  are  heathen.  And  in  like  manner,  as  we 
gazed  with  great  reverence  at  the  place  where  the 
house  of  holy  Abraham  was  at  first  for  the  sake  of 
his  memorial,  so  do  those  heathen  gaze  with  great 
reverence  at  a  place  about  a  mile  from  the  city,  where 
are  the  memorials  of  Nahor  and  Bethuel.  And  since 
the  bishop  of  that  city  is  very  learned  in  the  Scrip- 
tures, I  asked  him,  saying  :  "  I  beg  of  you,  my  lord, 
to  tell  me  that  which  I  desire  to  hear."  And  he  said  : 
"  Tell  me,  daughter,  what  you  wish,  and  I  will  tell  it 
you,  if  I  know  it."  Then  I  said  :  "  I  know  by  the 
Scriptures  x  that  holy  Abraham  came  to  this  place  with 
his  father  Terah  and  with  Sarah  his  wife,  and  with 
Lot  his  brother's  son,  but  I  have  not  read  when 
Nahor  and  Bethuel  came  here  ;  I  know  only  that 
afterwards  Abraham's  servant  came  to  Charrae  that  he 
might  seek  Rebecca,  the  daughter  of  Bethuel,  the  son 
of  Nahor,  for  Isaac  the  son  of  his  master  Abraham."  2 
Then  the  holy  bishop  said  to  me  :  "  Truly,  daughter, 
it  is  written  as  you  say,  in  Genesis,  that  holy  Abraham 
came  here  with  his  relatives,  but  canonical  Scripture 
docs  not  say  when  Nahor  and  his  relatives  and 
Bethuel  came  here,  but  it  is  plain  that  they  did  come 
here  afterwards,  since  their  memorials  are  here  at 
about  a  mile  from  the  city.  The  Scripture  does  indeed 
1  Gen.  xi.  31.  *  Gen.  xxiv.  10,  15. 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  39 

relate l  how  holy  Abraham's  servant  came  here  to  take 
holy  Rebecca,  and  how  holy  Jacob  came  here  when 
he  took  to  himself  the  daughters  of  Laban  the  Syrian." 
Then  I  asked  where  was  the  well  where  holy  Jacob 
watered  the  flocks  which  Rachel,  the  daughter  of 
Laban  the  Syrian,  was  feeding.  The  bishop  said  to 
me  :  "  The  place  is  six  miles  hence,  near  the  village 
which  then  was  the  farm  of  Laban  the  Syrian,  and  if 
you  wish  to  go  there,  we  will  go  with  you  and  show 
it  to  you  ;  there  are  also  many  very  holy  monks  and 
ascetics,  and  a  holy  church."  I  also  asked  the  holy 
bishop  where  was  that  place  of  the  Chaldees  where 
Terah  lived  at  first  with  his  family,2  and  the  holy 
bishop  said  to  me  :  "  The  place,  daughter,  of  which 
you  ask,  is  at  the  tenth  station  hence,  as  you  go  into 
Persia.  There  are  five  stations  from  here  to  Nisibis, 
and  five  stations  thence  to  Hur,3  which  was  a  city  of 
the  Chaldees,  but  there  is  now  no  access  for  Romans, 
for  the  Persians  hold  the  whole  country.4  This  district 
is  specially  called  the  Eastern  ;  it  is  on  the  borders 
of  the  Romans,  the  Persians  and  the  Chaldees."  And 
many  other  things  he  deigned  to  tell  me,  as  did  also 
the  other  holy  bishops  and  holy  monks,  but  all  they 
told  us  was  from  the  Scriptures  of  God  or  of  the  acts 
of  holy  men,  that  is  of  monks,  either  the  wonderful 
things  that  those  already  departed  had  done,  or  what 
those  who  are  still  in  the  body  do  daily,  at  any  rate 
those  who  are  ascetics.  For  I  would  not  that  your 
affection  should  think  that  the  monks  ever  told  me 

1  Gen.  xxix.  i,  2,  4.  2  Gen.  xi.  28. 

3  Ur  of  the  Chaldees.     Gen.  xi.  28. 

4  The  Emperor  Jovian  had  been  forced  to  sign  a  treaty  and 
surrender  Nisibis  and  the  district  to  Sapor  in  A.D.  363. 


40  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

any  other  stories  except  from  the  Scriptures  of  God 
or  else  those  of  the  acts  of  the  greater  monks. 


RACHEL'S  WELL.    THE  RETURN  TO  ANTIOCH 

Now  after  two  days  which  I  spent  there,  the 
bishop  took  us  to  the  well  where  holy  Jacob  had 
watered  holy  Rachel's  flocks ; l  the  well  is  six  miles 
from  Charrae,  and  in  its  honour  a  very  great  and 
beautiful  holy  church  has  been  built  hard  by.  When 
we  had  come  to  the  well,  prayer  was  made  by  the 
bishop,  the  passage  from  Genesis  was  read,  one 
psalm  suitable  to  the  place  was  said  and,  after  a 
second  prayer,  the  bishop  blessed  us.  We  saw  also, 
lying  on  a  spot  near  the  well,  that  very  great  stone 
which  holy  Jacob  had  moved  away  from  the  well, 
and  which  is  shown  to-day.  No  one  dwells  there 
around  the  well,  except  the  clergy  of  the  church 
which  is  there  and  the  monks  who  have  their 
cells  near  at  hand,  whose  truly  unheard-of  mode  of 
life  the  bishop  described  to  us.  Then,  after  prayer 
had  been  made  in  the  church,  I  visited,  in  company 
with  the  bishop,  the  holy  monks  in  their  cells,  giving 
thanks  both  to  God  and  to  them,  who  deigned  with 
willing  mind  to  receive  me  in  their  cells  wherever  I 
entered,  and  to  address  me  in  such  words  as  were 
fitting  to  proceed  out  of  their  mouth.  They  deigned 
also  to  give  me  and  all  who  were  with  me  eulogiae? 
such  as  is  the  custom  for  monks  to  give  those  whom 
they  receive  with  willing  mind  into  their  cells. 

1  Gen.  xxix.  10. 

2  See  note  above,  p.  5. 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  41 

And  the  place  being  in  a  large  plain,  a  great 
village  over  against  us  was  pointed  out  to  me  by 
the  holy  bishop,  about  five  hundred  paces  from  the 
well,  through  which  village  our  route  lay.  This  vil- 
lage, as  the  bishop  said,  was  once  the  farm  of  Laban 
the  Syrian,  and  is  called  Fadana ; 1  in  the  village 
the  memorial  of  Laban  the  Syrian,  Jacob's  father- 
in-law,  was  shown  to  me  ;  the  place  was  also  shown 
to  me  where  Rachel  stole  her  father's  images.2  So, 
having  seen  everything  in  the  Name  of  God,  and 
bidding  farewell  to  the  holy  bishop  and  the  holy 
monks  who  had  deigned  to  conduct  us  to  the  place, 
we  returned  by  the  route  and  by  the  stations  through 
which  we  had  come  from  Antioch. 


ANTIOCH  TO  TARSUS 

When  I  had  got  back  to  Antioch,  I  stayed  there 
for  a  week,  while  the  things  that  were  necessary  for 
our  journey  were  being  prepared.  Then,  starting 
from  Antioch  and  journeying  through  several  stations, 
I  came  to  the  province  called  Cilicia,  which  has 
Tarsus  for  its  metropolis.  I  had  already  been  at 
Tarsus  on  my  way  to  Jerusalem,  but  as  the  memorial 
of  saint  Thecla  is  at  the  third  station  from  Tarsus, 
in  Hisauria,  it  was  very  pleasant  for  me  to  go  there, 
especially  as  it  was  so  very  near  at  hand 

1  i.e.,  Paddan-Aratn  =  plain  of  Aram  (Syria),  LXX  Me<ro- 
Toro/i/a  2up/as.  Gen.  xxviii.  2.  See  Hastings'  D.B.  i.  p.  138, 
for  this  name  of  Mesopotamia. 

1  Gen.  xxxi.  19. 


42  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

VISIT  TO  S.  THECLA'S  CHURCH.     RETURN  TO 
CONSTANTINOPLE 

So,  setting  out  from  Tarsus,  I  came  to  a  certain 
city  on  the  sea,  still  in  Cilicia,  which  is  called 
Pompeiopolis.  Thence  I  entered  the  borders  of 
Hisauria  and  stayed  in  a  city  called  Coricus,  and 
on  the  third  day  I  arrived  at  a  city  which  is  called 
Seleucia  in  Hisauria  ; 1  on  my  arrival  I  went  to  the 
bishop,  a  truly  holy  man,  formerly  a  monk,  and  in 
that  city  I  saw  a  very  beautiful  church.  And  as  the 
distance  thence  to  saint  Thecla,  which  is  situated 
outside  the  city  on  a  low  eminence,  was  about  fifteen 
hundred  paces,  I  chose  rather  to  go  there  in  order 
to  make  the  stay  that  I  intended.  There  is  nothing 
at  the  holy  church  in  that  place  except  numberless 
cells  of  men  and  of  women.  I  found  there  a  very 
dear  friend  of  mine,  to  whose  manner  of  life  all  in 
the  East  bore  testimony,  a  holy  deaconess  named 
Marthana,  whom  I  had  known  at  Jerusalem,  whither 
she  had  come  for  the  sake  of  prayer ;  she  was  ruling 
over  the  cells  of  afotactitae*  and  virgins.  And  when 
she  had  seen  me,  how  can  I  describe  the  extent  of 
her  joy  or  of  mine?  But  to  return  to  the  matter  in 
hand  :  there  are  very  many  cells  on  the  hill  and  in 
the  midst  of  it  a  great  wall  which  encloses  the  church 
containing  the  very  beautiful  memorial.  The  wall 

1  Thecla  is  honoured  as  "  protomartyr "  in  the  East  as  well 
as  in  the  West  on  Sept.  23rd  or  24th.     Tradition  calls  her  a 
disciple  of  St.  Paul  at  Iconium,  but  places  her  grave  (as  here) 
at    Seleucia    in    Isauria.     Justinian    built    a    church    in    her 
memory  at  Constantinople.    The  Anc.  Syr.  Mart,  does  not 
mention  her. 

2  See  Introduction,  pp.  xxix  f. 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  43 

was  built  to  guard  the  church  because  of  the  Hisauri, 
who  are  very -malicious  and  who  frequently  commit 
acts  of  robbery,  to  prevent  them  from  making  an 
attempt  on  the  monastery  which  is  established 
there.  When  I  had  arrived  in  the  Name  of  God, 
prayer  was  made  at  the  memorial,  and  the  whole 
of  the  acts  of  saint  Thecla  having  been  read,  I 
gave  endless  thanks  to  Christ  our  God,  who  deigned 
to  fulfil  my  desires  in  all  things,  unworthy  and  unde- 
serving as  1  am.  Then,  after  a  stay  of  two  days, 
when  I  had  seen  the  holy  monks  and  apotactitae  who 
were  there,  both  men  and  women,  and  when  I  had 
prayed  and  made  my  communion,  I  returned  to 
Tarsus  and  to  my  journey.  From  Tarsus,  after  a 
halt  of  three  days,  I  set  out  on  my  journey  in  the 
Name  of  God,  and  arriving  on  the  same  day  at  a 
station  called  Mansocrenae,1  which  is  under  Mount 
Taurus,  I  stayed  there.  On  the  next  day,  going 
under  Mount  Taurus,  and  travelling  by  the  route  that 
was  already  known  to  me,  through  each  province  that 
I  had  traversed  on  my  way  out,  to  wit,  Cappadocia, 
Galatia,  and  Bithynia,  I  arrived  at  Chalcedon,  where 
I  stayed  for  the  sake  of  the  very  famous  martyr- 
memorial  of  saint  Euphemia,2  which  was  already 
known  to  me  from  a  former  time.  On  the  next  day, 
crossing  the  sea,  I  arrived  at  Constantinople,  giving 
thanks  to  Christ  our  God  who  deigned  to  give  me 
such  grace,  unworthy  and  undeserving  as  I  am,  for 
He  had  deigned  to  give  me  not  only  the  will  to  go, 
but  also  the  power  of  walking  through  the  places 

1  i.e.,  Mopsucrene  (Bernard). 

8  Commemorated  both  East  and  West  on   Sept.  i6th,  but 
not  given  in  Anc.  Syr.  Mart, 


44  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

that  I  desired,  and  of  returning  at  last  to  Con- 
stantinople. When  I  had  arrived  there,  I  went 
through  all  the  churches — that  of  the  Apostles  and 
all  the  martyr- memorials,  of  which  there  are  very 
many — and  I  ceased  not  to  give  thanks  to  Jesus  our 
God,  Who  had  thus  deigned  to  bestow  His  mercy  upon 
me.  From  which  place,  ladies,  light  of  my  eyes, 
while  I  send  these  (letters)  to  your  affection,  I  have 
already  purposed,  in  the  Name  of  Christ  our  God, 
to  go  to  Ephesus  in  Asia,  for  the  sake  of  prayer, 
because  of  the  memorial  of  the  holy  and  blessed 
Apostle  John.  And  if  after  this  I  am  yet  in  the 
body,  and  am  able  to  see  any  other  places,  I  will 
either  tell  it  to  your  affection  in  person,  if  God  deigns 
to  permit  me  this,  or  in  anywise,  if  I  have  another 
project  in  mind,  I  will  send  you  news  of  it  in  a  letter. 
But  do  you,  ladies,  light  of  my  eyes,  deign  to  re- 
member me,  whether  I  am  in  the  body  or  ou  of  the 
body. 


JERUSALEM 

I 

DAILY  OFFICES 
i.  Matins. 

Now  that  your  affection  may  know  what  is  the 
order  of  service  (operatic}  day  by  day  in  the  holy 
places,  I  must  inform  you,  for  I  know  that  you  would 
willingly  have  this  knowledge.  Every  day  before 
cockcrow  all  the  doors  of  the  Anastasis 1  are  opened, 
and  all  the  monks  and  virgins,  as  they  call  them  here, 
go  thither,  and  not  they  alone,  but  lay  people  also, 
both  men  and  women,  who  desire  to  begin  their 
vigil  early.  And  from  that  hour  to  daybreak  hymns 
are  said  2  and  psalms  are  sung  responsively  (respond- 
untur\  and  antiphons  in  like  manner ;  and  prayer  is 
made  after  each  of  the  hymns.  For  priests,  deacons, 
and  monks  in  twos  or  threes  take  it  in  turn  every 
day  to  say  prayers  after  each  of  the  hymns  or  anti- 
phons. But  when  day  breaks  they  begin  to  say  the 
Matin  hymns.  Thereupon  the  bishop  arrives  with 

1  See  Introduction,  p.  xlv. 

2  Etheria  constantly  uses  dicuntur,  dicitur  applied  to  hymns 
and  psalms — but  she  probably  means  "  sung."    See  Introduction, 
pp.  xxxix  f. 

45 


46  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

the  clergy,  and  immediately  enters  into  the  cave,1 
and  from  within  the  rails  (cancelli)  he  first  says  a 
prayer  for  all,  mentioning  the  names  of  those  whom 
he  wishes  to  commemorate  ;  he  then  blesses  the 
catechumens,  afterwards  he  says  a  prayer  and  blesses 
the  faithful.  And  when  the  bishop  comes  out  from 
within  the  rails,  every  one  approaches  his  hand,2  and 
he  blesses  them  one  by  one  as  he  goes  out,  and  the 
dismissal 8  takes  place,  by  daylight. 


2.  Sext  and  None. 

In  like  manner  at  the  sixth  hour  all  go  again  to 
the  Anastasis,  and  psalms  and  antiphons  are  said, 
while  the  bishop  is  being  summoned  ;  then  he  comes 

1  See  Introduction,  pp.  xlv  f. 

2  The  expression  "to  approach  the  bishop's  hand"  has  given 
rise  to  much  discussion.    Archbp.  Bernard  and  Professor  Sayce 
both  suggested  it  was  for  the  purpose  of  kissing  it.     But  an 
account  given  by  Mrs.  Gibson  and  Mrs.  Lewis  of  their  visit  to 
the  very  ancient  Coptic  Monastery  of  Deyr  Antonius  on  the 
Red  Sea,  seems  to  suggest  another  solution.     They  relate  that 
when  they  attended  Mass  in  the  Church  of  the  Monastery  .  .  . 
"  the  Service  lasted  two  hours,  and  towards  its  close  all  present, 
including  ourselves,  went  up  to  the  door  of  the  sanctuary  and 
received  a  blessing  from  the  chief  celebrant,  which  consisted 
mainly  in  his  laying  a  hand  on  our  cheeks."    I  submitted  this  as 
a  possible  explanation  of  Etheria's  expression  to  Mgr.  Duchesne 
and  to  Dom  Cabrol  and  they  both  agreed  it  appeared  to  solve 
the  difficulty.     Dom  Cabrol  further  suggested  that  this  manner 
of  conveying  a  blessing  might  be  the  origin  of  the  colaphus  or 
soufflet  given  in   Confirmation  in  the  Western   Church.     For 
further  details  of  this  Coptic  Mass  see  The  Century  Magazine^ 
Sept.  1904,  article  "Hidden  Egypt,"  by  Mrs.  Lewis. 

3  It  should  be  noted  that  the  word  missa  in  the  text  is  almost 
always    translated   "  dismissal,"   although    it    must    on    some 
occasions  have  meant  "  Mass."    This,  however,  Etheria  usually 
calls   oblatio   (offerre).     For    the    ambiguity  of   the  meaning 
attached  to  missa,  see  Introduction,  pp.  xl  f. 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  47 

as  before,  not  taking  his  seat,  but  he  enters  at  once 
within  the  rails  in  the  Anastasis,  that  is  in  the  cave, 
just  as  in  the  early  morning,  and  as  then,  he  again 
first  says  a  prayer,  then  he  blesses  the  faithful,  and  as 
he  comes  out  from  [within]  the  rails  every  one 
approaches  his  hand.  And  the  same  is  done  at  the 
ninth  hour  as  at  the  sixth. 


3.    Vespers. 

Now  at  the  tenth  hour,  which  they  call  here  licinicon^ 
or  as  we  say  lucernare,  all  the  people  assemble  at  the 
Anastasis  in  the  same  manner,  and  all  the  candles 
and  tapers  are  lit,  making  a  very  great  light.  Now 
the  light  is  not  introduced  from  without,  but  it  is 
brought  forth  from  within  the  cave,  that  is  from 
within  the  rails,  where  a  lamp  is  always  burning  day 
and  night,  and  the  vesper  psalms  and  antiphons  are 
said,  lasting  for  a  considerable  time.  Then  the  bishop 
is  summoned,  and  he  comes  and  takes  a  raised  seat, 
and  likewise  the  priests  sit  in  their  proper  places, 
and  hymns  and  antiphons  are  said.  And  when  all 
these  have  been  recited  according  to  custom,  the 
bishop  rises  and  stands  before  the  rails,  that  is, 
before  the  cave,  and  one  of  the  deacons  makes  the 
customary  commemoration  of  individuals  one  by  one. 
And  as  the  deacon  pronounces  each  name  the  many 
little  boys  who  are  always  standing  by,  answer  with 
countless  voices  :  Kyrie  eleyson,  or  as  we  say  Miserere 
Domine?  And  when  the  deacon  has  finished  all  that 
he  has  to  say,  first  the  bishop  says  a  prayer  and 

1  /.  e,  fb  \vxvin6v. 

*  For  this,  see  Introduction,  p.  xliii. 


48  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

prays  for  all,  then  they  all  pray,  both  the  faithful  and 
catechumens  together.  Again  the  deacon  raises  his 
voice,  bidding  each  catechumen  to  bow  his  head 
where  he  stands,  and  the  bishop  stands  and  says  the 
blessing  over  the  catechumens.  Again  prayer  is 
made,  and  again  the  deacon  raises  his  voice  and  bids 
the  faithful,  each  where  he  stands,  to  bow  the  head, 
and  the  bishop  likewise  blesses  the  faithful.  Thus 
the  dismissal  takes  place  at  the  Anastasis,  and  one 
by  one  all  draw  near  to  the  bishop's  hand.  After- 
wards the  bishop  is  conducted  from  the  Anastasis  to 
the  Cross  [with]  hymns,  all  the  people  accompanying 
him,  and  when  he  arrives  he  first  says  a  prayer,  then 
he  blesses  the  catechumens,  then  another  prayer  is 
said  and  he  blesses  the  faithful.  Thereupon  both  the 
bishop  and  the  whole  multitude  further  proceed 
behind  the  Cross,  where  all  that  was  done  before  the 
Cross  is  repeated,  and  they  approach  the  hand  of  the 
bishop  behind  the  Cross  as  they  did  at  the  Anastasis 
and  before  the  Cross.  Moreover,  there  are  hanging 
everywhere  a  vast  number  of  great  glass  chandeliers, 
and  there  are  also  a  vast  number  of  cereofalaf  before 
the  Anastasis,  before  the  Cross  and  behind  the  Cross, 
for  the  whole  does  not  end  until  darkness  has  set  in. 
This  is  the  order  of  daily  services  (operatic)  at  the 
Cross  and  at  the  Anastasis  throughout  the  six  days. 

1  /.  e.  candles  on  tall  candlesticks  (Ducange). 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  49 

II 

SUNDAY  OFFICES 
i.    Vigil. 

But  on  the  seventh  day,1  that  is  on  the  Lord's  Day, 
the  whole  multitude  assembles  before  cockcrow,  in  as 
great  numbers  as  the  place  can  hold,  as  at  Easter,  in 
the  basilica  which  is  near  the  Anastasis,  but  outside 
the  doors,  where  lights  are  hanging  for  the  purpose. 
And  for  fear  that  they  should  not  be  there  at  cock- 
crow they  come  beforehand  and  sit  down  there. 
Hymns  as  well  as  antiphons  are  said,  and  prayers  are 
made  between  the  several  hymns  and  antiphons,  for  at 
the  vigils  there  are  always  both  priests  and  deacons 
ready  there  for  the  assembling  of  the  multitude,  the 
custom  being  that  the  holy  places  are  not  opened 
before  cockcrow.  Now  as  soon  as  the  first  cock  has 
crowed,  the  bishop  arrives  and  enters  the  cave  at  the 
Anastasis  ;  all  the  doors  are  opened  and  the  whole 
multitude  enters  the  Anastasis,  where  countless  lights 
are  already  burning.  And  when  the  people  have 
entered,  one  of  the  priests  says  a  psalm  to  which  all 
respond,  and  afterwards  prayer  is  made  ;  then  one 
of  the  deacons  says  a  psalm  and  prayer  is  again 
made,  a  third  psalm  is  said  by  one  of  the  clergy, 
prayer  is  made  for  the  third  time  and  there  is  a 
commemoration  of  all.  After  these  three  psalms  and 
three  prayers  are  ended,  lo  !  censers  are  brought  into 
the  cave  of  the  Anastasis  so  that  the  whole  basilica 

1  Etheria  here  calls  the  Lord's  Day  the  seventh  day,  but 
only  because  she  has  just  before  spoken  of  the  six  days  that 
precede  it. 


50  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

of  the  Anastasis  is  filled  with  odours.1  And  then  the 
bishop,  standing  within  the  rails,  takes  the  book  of  the 
Gospel,  and  proceeding  to  the  door,  himself  reads  the 
(narrative  of  the)  Resurrection  of  the  Lord.  And 
when  the  reading  is  begun,  there  is  so  great  a  moaning 
and  groaning  among  all,  with  so  many  tears,  that 
the  hardest  of  heart  might  be  moved  to  tears  for  that 
the  Lord  had  borne  such  things  for  us.  After  the 
reading  of  the  Gospel  the  bishop  goes  out,  and  is 
accompanied  to  the  Cross  by  all  the  people  with 
hymns,  there  again  a  psalm  is  said  and  prayer  is  made, 
after  which  he  blesses  the  faithful  and  the  dismissal 
takes  place,  and  as  he  comes  out  all  approach  to  his 
hand.  And  forthwith  the  bishop  betakes  himself  to 
his  house,  and  from  that  hour  all  the  monks  return 
to  the  Anastasis,  where  psalms  and  antiphons,  with 
prayer  after  each  psalm  or  antiphon,  are  said  until 
daylight ;  the  priests  and  deacons  also  keep  watch 
in  turn  daily  at  the  Anastasis  with  the  people,  but 
of  the  lay  people,  whether  men  or  women,  those  who 
are  so  minded,  remain  in  the  place  until  daybreak, 
and  those  who  are  not,  return  to  their  houses  and 
betake  themselves  to  sleep. 

2.  Morning  Services. 

Now  at  daybreak  because  it  is  the  Lord's  Day 
every  one  proceeds  to  the  greater  church,  built  by 
Constantine,  which  is  situated  in  Golgotha  behind  the 
Cross,  where  all  things  are  done  which  are  customary 

1  Assuming  the  earlier  date  of  this  pilgrimage,  we  have 
probably  here  the  earliest  mention  extant  of  incense  being 
used  in  a  Christian  church  at  the  time  of  public  worship  :  see 
Dictionary  of  Prayer  Book,  p.  406,  s.v. 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  51 

everywhere l  on  the  Lord's  Day.  But  the  custom 
here  is  that  of  all  the  priests  who  take  their  seats, 
as  many  as  are  willing,  preach,  and  after  them  all  the 
bishop  preaches,  and  these  sermons  are  always  on  the 
Lord's  Day,  in  order  that  the  people  may  always  be 
instructed  in  the  Scriptures  and  in  the  love  of  God. 
The  delivery  of  these  sermons  greatly  delays  the 
dismissal  from  the  church,  so  that  the  dismissal  does 
[not]  take  place  before  the  fourth  or  perhaps  the 
fifth  hour.  But  when  the  dismissal  from  the  church 
is  made  in  the  manner  that  is  customary  everywhere, 
the  monks  accompany  the  bishop  with  hymns  from 
the  church  to  the  Anastasis,  and  as  he  approaches 
with  hymns  all  the  doors  of  the  basilica  of  the 
Anastasis  are  opened,  and  the  people,  that  is  the 
faithful,  enter,  but  not  the  catechumens.  And  after 
the  people  the  bishop  enters,  and  goes  at  once  within 
the  rails  of  the  cave  of  the  martyrium.  Thanks 
are  first  given  to  God,  then  prayer  is  made  for  all, 
after  which  the  deacon  bids  all  bow  their  heads, 
where  they  stand,  and  the  bishop  standing  within  the 
inner  rails  blesses  them  and  goes  out,  each  one 
drawing  near  to  his  hand  as  he  makes  his  exit. 
Thus  the  dismissal  is  delayed  until  nearly  the  fifth  or 
sixth  hour.  And  in  like  manner  it  is  done  at  lucer- 
nare,  according  to  daily  custom. 

This  then  is  the  custom  observed  every  day  through- 
out the  whole  year  except  on  solemn  days,  to  the 
keeping  of  which  we  will  refer  later  on.  But  among 
all  things  it  is  a  special  feature  that  they  arrange  that 
suitable  psalms  and  antiphons  are  said  on  every 
occasion,  both  those  said  by  night,  or  in  the  morning, 

1  This  of  course  includes  the  celebration  of  the  Eucharist. 


52  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

as  well  as  those  throughout  the  day,  at  the  sixth  hour, 
the  ninth  hour,  or  at  lucernare,  all  being  so  appro- 
priate and  so  reasonable  as  to  bear  on  the  matter  in 
hand.  And  they  proceed  to  the  greater  church,  which 
was  built  by  Constantine,  and  which  is  situated  in 
Golgotha,  that  is,  behind  the  Cross,  on  every  Lord's 
Day  throughout  the  year  except  on  the  one  Sunday  of 
Pentecost,  when  they  proceed  to  Sion,  as  you  will 
find  mentioned  below  ;  but  even  then  they  go  to  Sion 
before  the  third  hour,  the  dismissal  having  been  first 
made  in  the  greater  church. 

******* 

[A  leaf  is  wanting.'] 
Ill 

FESTIVALS  AT  EPIPHANY 

i.  Night  Station  at  Bethlehem}- 

******* 

Blessed  is  he  that  cometh  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord, 
and  the  rest  which  follows.2  And  since,  for  the  sake 

1  The  Old  Armenian  Lectionary  of  the  eighth  or  ninth 
century,  of  which  there  are  two  codices  with  certain  variations, 
one  in  the  Bodleian  at  Oxford  and  one  at  Paris,  has  preserved 
for  us  the  antiphons,  psalms  and  lections  in  use  at  Jerusalem. 
They  are  here  given,  as  far  as  they  bear  on  Etheria's  narrative. 
At  the  night  station  at  Bethlehem,  Gregory  Asharuni,  a  com- 
mentator about  690,  mentions  that  they  "assemble  in  the 
shepherd's  hut "  at  the  ninth  hour,  and  this  canon  is  performed  : 
Ps.  xxiii.1 — [the  small  1  here  indicates  that  ver.  i  is  sung  as  an 
antiphon  after  each  verse  of  Ps.  xxiii. :  and  so  elsewhere] ; 
Alleluiah;  Ps.  Ixxx.  ;  S.  Luke  ii.  8-20;  S.  Matt.  i.  18-25; 
Gen.  i.-iii.  20;  Isa.  vii.  10-18;  Exod.  xiv.  24~xv.  22;  Mic.  v. 
1-8  ;  Prov.  i.  1-9  ;  Isa.  ix.  5-7  ;  xi.  1-9  ;  xxxv.  4-8  ;  xlii.  1-7  ; 
Dan.  iii.  1-90;  Tit.  ii.  11-15;  Alleluiah;  Ps.  ex.;  S.  Matt. 
ii.  1-12. 

1  S.  Matt.  xxi.  9. 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  53 

of  the  monks  who  go  on  foot,  it  is  necessary  to  walk 
slowly,  the  arrival  in  Jerusalem  thus  takes  place  at 
the  hour  when  one  man  begins  to  be  able  to  recognize 
another,  that  is,  close  upon  but  a  little  before  day- 
break. And  on  arriving  there,  the  bishop  and  all 
with  him  immediately  enter  the  Anastasis,  where  an 
exceedingly  great  number  of  lights  are  already  burning. 
There  a  psalm  is  said,  prayer  is  made,  first  the  cate- 
chumens and  then  the  faithful  are  blessed  by  the 
bishop ;  then  the  bishop  retires,  and  every  one 
returns  to  his  lodging  to  take  rest,  but  the  monks 
remain  there  until  daybreak  and  recite  hymns. 

2.  Morning  Services  at  Jerusalem. 

But  after  the  people  have  taken  rest,  at  the  begin- 
ning of  the  second  hour  they  all  assemble  in  the 
greater  church,  which  is  in  Golgotha.1 

Now  it  would  be  superfluous  to  describe  the  adorn- 
ment either  of  the  church,  or  of  the  Anastasis,  or  of 
the  Cross,  or  in  Bethlehem  on  that  day  ;  you  see 
there  nothing  but  gold  and  gems  and  silk.  For  if 
you  look  at  the  veils,  they  are  made  wholly  of  silk 
striped  with  gold,  and  if  you  look  at  the  curtains, 
they  too  are  made  wholly  of  silk  striped  with  gold. 
The  church  vessels  too,  of  every  kind,  gold  and 
jewelled,  are  brought  out  on  that  day,  and  indeed,  who 
could  either  reckon  or  describe  the  number  and  weight 

1  The  Bodleian  Codex  of  the  Old  Arm.  Lect.  says  that  on  the 
second  day  they  assemble  in  the  shrine  of  S.  Stephen,  but  on 
the  third  day  they  go  to  the  holy  shrine  in  the  city  (/'.  e.  the 
martyrium,  or  as  Etheria  calls  it,  the  greater  church  in  Gol- 
gotha), and  this  canon  is  prescribed  :  Ps.  ex.3 ;  Heb.  i.  1-14 ; 
Ps.  ex.  ;  S.  Matt.  ii.  13-23,  but  Etheria  seems  to  have  confused 
the  order  of  the  fourth,  fifth  and  sixth  days. 


54  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

of  the  cereofala?-  or  of  the  cicindelae*  or  of  the  lucernae* 
or  of  the  various  vessels  ?  And  what  shall  I  say  of 
the  decoration  of  the  fabric  itself,  which  Constantine, 
at  his  mother's  instigation,  decorated  with  gold, 
mosaic,  and  costly  marbles,  as  far  as  the  resources  of 
his  kingdom  allowed  him,  that  is,  the  greater  church 
as  well  as  the  Anastasis,  at  the  Cross,  and  the  other 
holy  places  in  Jerusalem  ?  But  to  return  to  the 
matter  in  hand  :  the  dismissal  4  takes  place  on  the 
first  day  in  the  greater  church,  which  is  in  Golgotha, 
and  when  they  preach  or  read  the  several  lessons,  or 
recite  hymns,  all  are  appropriate  to  the  day.  And 
afterwards  when  the  dismissal  from  the  church  has 
been  made,  they  repair  to  the  Anastasis  with  hymns, 
according  to  custom,  so  that  the  dismissal  takes 
place  about  the  sixth  hour.  And  on  this  day  lucer- 
nare  also  takes  place  according  to  the  daily  use. 

3.  Octave  of  the  Festival. 

On  the  second  day  also  they  proceed  in  like 
manner  to  the  church  in  Golgotha,  and  also  on  the 
third  day ;  thus  the  feast  is  celebrated  with  all  this 

1  See  above,  p.  48. 

8  Lamps  for  burning  oil.  The  word  is  used  four  times  by 
S.  Gregory  of  Tours.  We  also  find  the  expression  "oleum 
cicindelis"  in  the  Life  of  S.  Nicettus,  Bishop  of  Lyons,  and  that 
glass  or  pottery  was  probably  the  material  is  shown  by  the 
following  : — "  Cicindela — de  manibus  super  lapides  lapsa  est, 
quas  nee  versa  est,  nee  fracta,  nee  extincta,"  which  occurs  in 
Messianus  Presbyter's  Life  of  S.  Casarius  of  Aries.  As  late 
as  the  twelfth  century  we  still  find  the  word  in  use.  Beroldus 
was  himself  a  cicendelarius  at  Milan,  and  fully  describes  the 
duty  of  that  functionary. 

3  Lanterns,  or  lamps. 

4  Here  again,  although  not  specified,  the  Eucharist  must  have 
been  celebrated. 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  55 

joyfulness  for  three  days  up  to  the  sixth  hour  in  the 
church  built  by  Constantine.  On  the  fourth1  day  it  is 
celebrated  in  like  manner  with  similar  festal  array  in 
Eleona,  the  very  beautiful  church  which  stands  on  the 
Mount  of  Olives  ;  on  the  fifth  day  in  the  Lazarium, 
which  is  distant  about  one  thousand  five  hundred 
paces  from  Jerusalem  ;  on  the  sixth2  day  in  Sion,  on 
the  seventh  3  day  in  the  Anastasis,  and  on  the  eighth 
day  at  the  Cross.  Thus,  then,  is  the  feast  celebrated 
with  all  this  joyfulness  and  festal  array  throughout 
the  eight  days  in  all  the  holy  places  which  I  have 
mentioned  above.  And  in  Bethlehem  also  throughout 
the  entire  eight  days  the  feast  is  celebrated  with 
similar  festal  array  and  joyfulness  daily  by  the  priests 
and  by  all  the  clergy  there,  and  by  the  monks  who 
are  appointed  in  that  place.  For  from  the  hour  when 
all  return  by  night  to  Jerusalem  with  the  bishop,  the 
monks  of  that  place 4  keep  vigil  in  the  church  in 
Bethlehem,  reciting  hymns  and  antiphons,  but  it  is 

1  On  the  fourth  day  the  Paris  Codex  of  the  Old  Arm.  Lect. 
makes  the  assembly  in  holy  Sion,  and  this  canon  is  performed  : 
Ps.  ex. ;  Gal.  iv.  1-7  ;  Ps.  cxxxii.  ;  S.  Luke  i.  26-38.     The  fifth 
day  is  on  the  Mount  of  Olives.     Canon  :  Ps.  xcix.  ;  Heb.  xii. 
18-27  ;  Ps.  xv.  ;  S.  Luke  i.  39-56. 

2  The   Paris  Codex  makes  the  assembly   in  the  shrine  of 
Lazarus,  and   they  celebrate  his   raising.     Canon  :   Ps.  xxx.  ; 
i  Thess.  iv.  12-14  ;  PS-  *L  i  S.  John  xi.  1-46. 

3  The  Paris  Codex  has  on  the  seventh  day  :  "  They  assemble 
in  holy  Golgotha  and  perform  the  canon :  Ps.  xcviii. ;  Col.  ii. 
1-15;  Alleluiah;  Ps.  Ixxxiv.  ;  S.  Luke  ii.  21."     Here  Etheria 
and  the  Lectionary  again  agree,  but  the   Lectionary  has  not 
prescribed   anything   for  the   eighth   day,   and    it  concludes  : 
•'  Here  ends   the   canon  of  the   Holy  Epiphany.    By  all  the 
martyrs   is   this   canon   performed."     The   later  Codex    has  : 
"  Here  ends  the  canon  of  the  assemblage  of  holy  Epiphany 
of  the  Lord.     In  all  commemorations  of  the  holy  martyrs  this 
canon  is  performed." 

4  i,e.  of  Bethlehem, 


56  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

necessary  that  the  bishop  should  always  keep  these 
days  in  Jerusalem.  And  immense  crowds,  not  of 
monks  only,  but  also  of  the  laity,  both  men  and 
women,  flock  together  to  Jerusalem  from  every 
quarter  for  the  solemn  and  joyous  observance  of  that 
day. 


4.   The  Presentation}    Mass. 

The  fortieth  day  after  the  Epiphany  is  undoubtedly 
celebrated  here  with  the  very  highest  honour,  for  on 
that  day  there  is  a  procession,  in  which  all  take  part, 
in  the  Anastasis,  and  all  things  are  done  in  their  order 
with  the  greatest  joy,  just  as  at  Easter.  All  the 
priests,  and  after  them  the  bishop,  preach,  always 
taking  for  their  subject  that  part  of  the  Gospel  where 
Joseph  and  Mary  brought  the  Lord  into  the  Temple 
on  the  fortieth  day,  and  Symeon  and  Anna  the  pro- 
phetess, the  daughter  of  Phanuel,  saw  Him, — treating 
of  the  words  which  they  spake  when  they  saw  the 
Lord,  and  of  that  offering  which  His  parents  made.2 
And  when  everything  that  is  customary  has  been 
done  in  order,  the  sacrament  is  celebrated,  and  the 
dismissal  takes  place.3 

1  The  Paris  Codex  gives  February  1533"  the  Quadragesima 
of  the  birth  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  They  assemble  in  the 
shrine  [t.  e.  martyrium]  of  the  city,  and  this  canon  is  per- 
formed :  Ps.  xcviii. ;  Ktzord  [i.e.  Antiphon],  All  the  ends  .  .  . ; 
Gal.  iii.  24-29  ;  Alleluiah  ;  Ps.  xcvi.  2  ;  S.  Luke  ii.  22-40." 
The  Bodleian  Codex  has  February  14  for  this  Festival. 

a  S.  Luke  ii.  22-39. 

8  Sacramento  aguntur  et  sic  Jit  missa. 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  57 

IV 
LENT 

And  when  the  Paschal  days  come  they  are  ob- 
served thus  : l  Just  as  with  us  forty  days  are  kept 
before  Easter,  so  here  eight  weeks  are  kept  before 
Easter.  And  eight  weeks  are  kept  because  there  is 
no  fasting  on  the  Lord's  Days,  nor  on  the  Sabbaths, 
except  on  the  one  Sabbath  on  which  the  Vigil  of 
Easter  falls,  in  which  case  the  fast  is  obligatory. 
With  the  exception  then  of  that  one  day,  there  is 
never  fasting  on  any  Sabbath  here  throughout  the 
year.  Thus,  deducting  the  eight  Lord's  Days  and 
the  seven  Sabbaths  (for  on  the  one  Sabbath,  as  I  said 
above,  the  fast  is  obligatory)  from  the  eight  weeks, 
there  remain  forty-one  fast  days,  which  they  call  here 
Eortae,  that  is  Quadragesimae? 

1  No  traces  of  the  Quadragesima  are  found  before  the  fourth 
century.  The  fifth  Canon  of  the  Council  of  Nicaea  (325)  contains 
the  earliest  mention  of  it.  Various  endeavours  were  made  in 
various  countries  to  combine  the  Quadragesima  with  Holy 
Week.  S.  Chrysostom  speaks  of  the  Quadragesima  being 
finished  and  the  "Great  week "  beginning.  At  Rome  and  at 
Alexandria  Holy  Week  was  included  in  the  Quadragesima  in 
such  a  manner  that  the  whole  fast  lasted  only  six  weeks,  but 
at  Constantinople  and  in  the  countries  observing  the  use  of 
Antioch  the  fast  was  observed  for  seven  weeks.  The  Sundays 
only  were  excepted  at  Rome,  but  at  Constantinople  both  the 
Sundays  and  Saturdays,  with  the  exception  of  Easter  Eve,  were 
exempt  from  fasting. — (Duchesne,  Christian  Worship,  4th  edit., 
pp.  242  f.) 

*  The  Old  Arm.  Lect.  has  :  "  For  the  Holy  Quadragesima : 
first  lection,  Isa.  i.  16-20 ;  second,  Ezek.  xviii.  20-23  »  third, 
Rom.  vi.  3-14  ;  fourth,  Col.  ii.  8  foil.  ;  fifth,  Heb.  xi.  1-31  ; 
sixth,  Isa.  xlv.  17-26 ;  seventh,  Eph.  iii.  I4~iv.  13 ;  eighth, 
Jer.  xxxii.  19-44 ;  ninth,  Job  xxxviii.  2-xxxix.  35  ;  tenth,  i  Cor. 
viii.  5~ix.  23  ;  eleventh,  Heb.  i.  1-12  ;  twelfth,  Isa.  vii.  n-vii  . 
10 ;  thirteenth,  Isa.  liii.  i-liv.  5  ;  fourteenth,  I  Cor.  xy.  l-?§ 


58  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

I.  Services  on  Sundays. 

Now  the  several  days  of  the  several  weeks  are  kept 
thus  : 

On  the  Lord's  Day  after  the  first  cockcrow  the 
bishop  reads  in  the  Anastasis  the  account  of  the 
Lord's  Resurrection  from  the  Gospel,  as  on  all  Lord's 
Days  throughout  the  whole  year,  and  everything  is 
done  at  the  Anastasis  and  at  the  Cross  as  on  all 
Lord's  Days  throughout  the  year,  up  to  daybreak. 
Afterwards,  in  the  morning,  they  proceed  to  the 
greater  church,  called  the  martyrium,  which  is  in 
Golgotha  behind  the  Cross,  and  all  things  that  are 
customary  on  the  Lord's  Days  are  done  there.  In 
like  manner  also  when  the  dismissal  from  the  church 
has  been  made,  they  go  with  hymns  to  the  Anastasis, 
as  they  always  do  on  the  Lord's  Days,  and  while 
these  things  are  being  done  the  fifth  hour  is  reached. 
Lucernare,  however,  takes  place  at  its  own  hour,  as 
usual,  at  the  Anastasis  and  at  the  Cross,  and  in  the 
various  holy  places  ;  on  the  Lord's  Day  the  ninth 
hour  is  *  kept. 


2.   Weekday  Services. 

On  the  second  weekday  they  go  at  the  first  cock- 
crow to  the  Anastasis,  as  they  do  throughout  the 
year,  and  everything  that  is  usual  is  done  until 
morning.  Then  at  the  third  hour  they  go  to  the 

fifteenth,  Dan.  vii.  13-27  ;   sixteenth,  I  Cor.  xii.  1-7  ;   seven- 
teenth,   i  Cor.    xii.    8-27  ;    eighteenth,    Ezek.    xxxvii.    1-14 ; 
nineteenth,  i  Tim.  iii.  14-16.     Here  ends  the  canon  of  them 
that  are  going  to  be  baptized." 
'  Mgr.  Duchesne  would  here  insert  "not." 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  59 

Anastasis,  and  the  things  are  done  that  are  custom- 
ary throughout  the  year  at  the  sixth  hour,  for  this 
going  at  the  third  hour  in  Quadragesima  is  additional. 
At  the  sixth  and  ninth  hours  also,  and  at  lucernare, 
everything  is  done  that  is  customary  throughout  the 
whole  year  at  the  holy  places.  And  on  the  third 
weekday  all  things  are  done  as  on  the  second  week- 
day. 

3.    Wednesday  and  Friday. 

Again,  on  the  fourth :  weekday  they  go  by  night  to 
the  Anastasis,  and  all  the  usual  things  are  done  until 
morning,  and  also  at  the  third  and  sixth  hours.  But 
at  the  ninth  hour  they  go  to  Sion,  as  is  customary  at 
that  hour  on  the  fourth  and  sixth  2  weekdays  through- 
out the  year,  for  the  reason  that  the  fast  is  always 
kept  here  on  the  fourth  and  sixth  weekdays  even  by 
the  catechumens,  except  a  martyrs'  day  should  occur. 
For  if  a  martyrs'  day  should  chance  to  occur  on  the 
fourth  or  on  the  sixth  weekday  in  Quadragesima, 
they  do  not  go  to  Sion  at  the  ninth  hour.  But  on 
the  days  of  Quadragesima,  as  I  said  above,  they  pro- 
ceed to  Sion  on  the  fourth  weekday  at  the  ninth 
hour,  according  to  the  custom  of  the  whole  year,  and 
all  things  that  are  customary  at  the  ninth  hour  are 
done,  except  the  oblation,  for,  in  order  that  the 

1  The   Old  Arm.  Lect.  has :   "  In   the  holy  Quadragesima, 
in  the  first  week  on  the  fourth  day  of  the  week,  they  assemble 
at  the  tenth  hour  in  holy  Sion,  and  this  canon  is  performed  : 
Exod.  i.  i-ii.  10 ;  Joel  i.  14-20;  Ps.  li.  sff."   (Gregory  Asharuni 
alone  gives  the  fifth  verse  as  the  antiphon.) 

2  The  Old  Arm.    Lect.  :   "  Friday,   at  the  tenth  hour  they 
assemble  in  holy  Sion,  and  this  canon  is  performed  :  Deut.  vi. 
4-vii.  10 ;  Job  vi.  2-vii.  13  ;  Isa.  xl.  1-8  ;  Ps.  xli.*" 


60  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

people  may  always  be  instructed  in  the  law,  both  the 
bishop  and  the  priest  preach  diligently.  But  when 
the  dismissal  has  been  made,  the  people  escort  the 
bishop  with  hymns  thence  to  the  Anastasis,  so  that  it 
is  already  the  hour  of  lucernare  when  he  enters  the 
Anastasis ;  then  hymns  and  antiphons  are  said,  prayers 
are  made,  and  the  service  (inissd)  of  lucernare  takes 
place  in  the  Anastasis  and  at  the  Cross.  And  the 
service  of  lucernare  is  always  later  on  those  days  in 
Quadragesima  than  on  other  days  throughout  the 
year.  On  the  fifth  weekday  everything  is  done  as 
on  the  second  and  third  weekday.  On  the  sixth 
weekday  everything  is  done  as  on  the  fourth,  in- 
cluding the  going  to  Sion  at  the  ninth  hour,  and  the 
escorting  of  the  bishop  thence  to  the  Anastasis  with 
hymns. 

4.  Saturday. 

But  on  the  sixth  weekday  the  vigils  are  observed  in 
the  Anastasis  from  the  hour  of  their  arrival  from 
Sion  with  hymns,  until  morning,  that  is,  from  the 
hour  of  lucernare^  when  they  entered,  to  the  morning 
of  the  next  day,  that  is,  the  Sabbath.  And  the 
oblation  is  made  in  the  Anastasis  the  earlier,  that 
the  dismissal  may  take  place  before  sunrise.  Through- 
out the  whole  night  psalms  are  said  responsively  in 
turn  with  antiphons  and  with  various  lections,  the 
whole  lasting  until  morning,  and  the  dismissal,  which 
takes  place  on  the  Sabbath  at  the  Anastasis,  is 
before  sunrise,  that  is,  the  oblation,  so  that  the  dis- 
missal may  take  place  in  the  Anastasis  at  the  hour 
when  the  sun  begins  to  rise.  Thus,  then,  is  each 
week  of  Quadragesima  kept,  the  dismissal  taking 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  61 

place  earlier  on  the  Sabbath,  i.e.  before  sunrise,  as  I 
said,  in  order  that  the  hebdomadarii,  as  they  are  called 
here,  may  finish  their  fast  earlier.  For  the  custom  of 
the  fast  in  Quadragesima  is  that  the  dismissal  on  the 
Lord's  Day  is  at  the  fifth  hour  in  order  that  they 
whom  they  call  hebdomadarii,  that  is,  they  who  keep 
the  weeks'  fast,  may  take  food.  And  when  these 
have  taken  breakfast  on  the  Lord's  Day,  they  do  not 
eat  until  the  Sabbath  morning  after  they  have  com- 
municated in  the  Anastasis.  It  is  for  their  sake,  then, 
that  they  may  finish  their  fast  the  sooner,  that  the 
dismissal  on  the  Sabbath  at  the  Anastasis  is  before 
sunrise.  For  their  sake  the  dismissal  is  in  the  morn- 
ing, as  I  said ;  not  that  they  alone  communicate, 
but  all  who  are  so  minded  communicate  on  that  day 
in  the  Anastasis. 

5.   The  Fast. 

This  is  the  custom  of  the  fast  in  Quadragesima : 
some,  when  they  have  eaten  after  the  dismissal  on 
the  Lord's  Day,  that  is,  about  the  fifth  or  sixth  hour, 
do  not  eat  throughout  the  whole  week  until  after  the 
dismissal  at  the  Anastasis  on  the  Sabbath  ;  these  are 
they  who  keep  the  weeks'  fast. 

Nor,  after  having  eaten  in  the  morning,  do  they  eat 
in  the  evening  of  the  Sabbath,  but  they  take  a  meal 
on  the  next  day,  that  is,  on  the  Lord's  Day,  after  the 
dismissal  from  the  church  at  the  fifth  hour  or  later, 
and  then  they  do  not  breakfast  until  the  Sabbath 
comes  round,  as  I  have  said  above.  For  the  custom 
here  is  that  all  who  are  apotactitae,  as  they  call  them 
here,  whether  men  or  women,  eat  only  once  a  day  on 


62  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

the  day  when  they  do  eat,  not  only  in  Quadragesima, 
but  throughout  the  whole  year.  But  if  any  of  the 
apotactitae  cannot  keep  the  entire  week  of  fasting  as 
described  above,  they  take  supper  in  the  middle  (of 
the  week),  on  the  fifth  day,  all  through  Quadragesima. 
And  if  any  one  cannot  do  even  this,  he  keeps  two 
days'  fast  (in  the  week)  all  through  Quadragesima, 
and  they  who  cannot  do  even  this,  take  a  meal  every 
evening.  For  no  one  exacts  from  any  how  much  he 
should  do,  but  each  does  what  he  can,  nor  is  he 
praised  who  has  done  much,  nor  is  he  blamed 
who  has  done  less ;  that  is  the  custom  here.  For 
their  food  during  the  days  of  Quadragesima  is  as 
follows : — they  taste  neither  bread  which  cannot  be 
weighed,1  nor  oil,  nor  anything  that  grows  on  trees, 
but  only  water  and  a  little  gruel  made  of  flour. 
Quadragesima  is  kept  thus,  as  we  have  said.  And  at 
the  end  of  the  weeks'  fast  the  vigil  is  kept  in  the 
Anastasis  from  the  hour  of  lucernare  on  the  sixth 
weekday,  when  the  people  come  with  psalms  from 
Sion,  to  the  morning  of  the  Sabbath,  when  the 
oblation  is  made  in  the  Anastasis.  And  the  second, 
third,  fourth,  fifth  and  sixth  weeks  in  Quadragesima 
are  kept  as  the  first.2 

1  Pattern,  quid  liberari  nonpotest,  but  Archbp.  Bernard  reads 
qui  deliquari  and  translates  :  "  bread  which  cannot  be  strained 
as  a  liquid."     I  have  adopted  Gamurrini's  conjecture  librari. 

2  In   the  Old  Arm.  Lect.  there  are  special  lections  for  all 
these  weeks.     They  will  be  found  in  the  Rituale  Armenorum, 
Appendix   II.,  pp.  5igf.     As   they  do  not   specially  figure   in 
Etheria's  narrative,  they  are  not  given  here.     The  places  of 
assembly  in  Jerusalem  are  specified  with  each  day's  lections. 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  63 


HOLY  WEEK  AND  THE  FESTIVALS  AT  EASTER 
I.  Saturday  before  Palm  Sunday. — Station  at  Bethany. 

Now  when  the  seventh  week  has  come,  that  is, 
when  two  weeks,  including  the  seventh,  are  left  before 
Easter,1  everything  is  done  on  each  day  as  in  the 
weeks  that  are  past,  except  that  the  vigils  of  the 
sixth  weekday,  which  were  kept  in  the  Anastasis 
during  the  first  six  weeks,  are,  in  the  seventh  week, 
kept  in  Sion,  and  with  the  same  customs  that 
obtained  during  the  six  weeks  in  the  Anastasis.  For 
throughout  the  whole  vigil  psalms  and  antiphons  are 
said  appropriate  both  to  the  place  and  to  the  day. 

And  when  the  morning  of  the  Sabbath2  begins  to 
dawn;  the  bishop  offers  the  oblation.  And  at  the 
dismissal  the  archdeacon  lifts  his  voice  and  says : 
"  Let  us  all  be  ready  to-day  at  the  seventh  hour  in  the 
Lazarium."  And  so,  as  the  seventh  hour  approaches, 
all  go  to  the  Lazarium,  that  is,  Bethany,  situated  at 
about  the  second  milestone  from  the  city.  And  as 
they  go  from  Jerusalem  to  the  Lazarium,  there  is, 
about  five  hundred  paces  from  the  latter  place,  a 
church  in  the  street  on  that  spot  where  Mary  the 

1  Mgr.  Duchesne  notes  there  were  variations  in  the  length  of 
the   Quadragesima  at  Jerusalem  (Christian  Worship,  p.  243, 
note  4,  4th  edit.).     The  Old  Arm.  Lect.  reckons  Holy  Week  as 
the  seventh,  and  Etheria  the  eighth  of  Quadragesima.     The 
meeting-places  also  do  not  quite  agree  in  the  two  MSS. 

2  For  the  Saturday  before  Palm  Sunday  the  Old  Arm.  Lect. 
gives  :   "  The  sixth   day  before  Zatik  (the  Passover),  on  the 
Sabbath  they  assemble   in  the   Lazarium,  and   this  canon   is 
performed  :   Ps.  xxx.3  ;   i  Thess.  iv.  12-17  ;     Alleluiah  ;  Ps.  xl.  ; 
S.  John  xi.  55-xii.  n." 


64  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

sister  of  Lazarus  met  with  the  Lord.1  Here,  when 
the  bishop  arrives,  all  the  monks  meet  him,  and  the 
people  enter  the  church,  and  one  hymn  and  one 
antiphon  are  said,  and  that  passage  is  read  in  the 
Gospel  where  the  sister  of  Lazarus  meets  the  Lord. 
Then,  after  prayer  has  been  made,  and  when  all 
have  been  blessed,  they  go  thence  with  hymns  to 
the  Lazarium.  And  on  arriving  at  the  Lazarium, 
so  great  a  multitude  assembles  that  not  only  the 
place  itself,  but  also  the  fields  around,  are  full  of 
people.  Hymns  and  antiphons  suitable  to  the  day 
and  to  the  place  are  said,  and  likewise  all  the  lessons 
are  read.  Then,  before  the  dismissal,  notice  is  given 
of  Easter,  that  is,  the  priest  ascends  to  a  higher  place 
and  reads  the  passage  that  is  written  in  the  Gospel : 
When  Jesus  six  days  before  the  Passover  had  come  to 
Bethany,  and  the  rest.2  So,  that  passage  having  been 
read  and  notice  given  of  Easter,  the  dismissal  is 
made.  This  is  done  on  that  day  because,  as  it  is 
written  in  the  Gospel,  these  events  took  place  in 
Bethany  six  days  before  the  Passover ;  there  being 
six  days  from  the  Sabbath  to  the  fifth  weekday  on 
which,  after  supper,  the  Lord  was  taken  by  night. 
Then  all  return  to  the  city  direct  to  the  Anastasis, 
and  lucernare  takes  place  according  to  custom. 

2.  Palm  Sunday. — (a)  Services  in  the  Churches. 
On  the  next  day,  that  is,  the  Lord's  Day,3  which 

1  S.  John  xi.  29,  30.  a  S.  John  xii.  I  ff. 

3  The  Old  Arm.  Lect.  has  :  "  On  the  Day  of  the  Palms  they 
assemble  in  the  holy  Shrine  of  the  city,  and  this  canon  is 
fulfilled  :  Ps.  xcviii.  8 ;  Eph.  i.  3-10 ;  Alleluiah ;  Ps.  xcix.  ; 
S.  Matt.  xxi.  i-ii." 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  65 

begins  the  Paschal  week,  and  which  they  call  here 
the  Great  Week,  when  all  the  customary  services 
from  cockcrow  until  morning  have  taken  place  in 
the  Anastasis  and  at  the  Cross,  they  proceed  on  the 
morning  of  the  Lord's  Day  according  to  custom  to 
the  greater  church,  which  is  called  the  martyrium. 
It  is  called  the  martyrium  because  it  is  in  Golgotha 
behind  the  Cross,  where  the  Lord  suffered.  When 
all  that  is  customary  has  been  observed  in  the  great 
church,  and  before  the  dismissal  is  made,  the  arch- 
deacon lifts  his  voice  and  says  first :  "  Throughout  the 
whole  week,  beginning  from  to-morrow,  let  us  all 
assemble  in  the  martyrium,  that  is,  in  the  great 
church,  at  the  ninth  hour."  Then  he  lifts  his  voice 
again,  saying  :  "  Let  us  all  be  ready  to-day  in  Eleona 
at  the  seventh  hour."  So  when  the  dismissal  has 
been  made  in  the  great  church,  that  is,  the  martyrium, 
the  bishop  is  escorted  with  hymns  to  the  Anastasis, 
and  after  all  things  that  are  customary  on  the  Lord's 
Day  have  been  done  there,  after  the  dismissal  from 
the  martyrium,  every  one  hastens  home  to  eat,  that 
all  may  be  ready  at  the  beginning  of  the  seventh 
hour  in  the  church  in  Eleona,  on  the  Mount  of  Olives, 
where  is  the  cave  in  which  the  Lord  was  wont  to 
teach. 

(b}  Procession  with  Palms  on  the  Mount  of  Olives. 
Accordingly  at  the  seventh  hour1  all  the  people 

1  The  Old  Arm.  Lect.  has  :  "  On  the  same  day,  at  the  ninth 
hour,  they  go  forth  to  the  Mount  of  Olives  with  palm  branches  ; 
and  there  they  pray  and  sing  psalms  until  the  tenth  hour. 
And  after  that  they  go  down  into  the  holy  Anastasis,  chanting 
Ps.  cxviii.28"  [N.B. — This  psalm  formed  part  of  the  Jewish 
F 


66  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

go  up  to  the  Mount  of  Olives,  that  is,  to  Eleona, 
and  the  bishop  with  them,  to  the  church,  where 
hymns  and  antiphons  suitable  to  the  day  and  to  the 
place  are  said,  and  lessons  in  like  manner.  And 
when  the  ninth  hour  approaches  they  go  up  with 
hymns  to  the  Imbomon,  that  is,  to  the  place  whence 
the  Lord  ascended  into  heaven,and  there  they  sit  down, 
for  all  the  people  are  always  bidden  to  sit  when  the 
bishop  is  present ;  the  deacons  alone  always  stand. 
Hymns  and  antiphons  suitable  to  the  day  and  to 
the  place  are  said,  interspersed  with  lections  and 
prayers.  And  as  the  eleventh  hour  approaches,  the 
passage  from  the  Gospel  is  read,  where  the  children, 
carrying  branches  and  palms,  met  the  Lord,  saying  ; 
Blessed  is  He  that  comet  It  in  the  name  of  the  Lord}- 
and  the  bishop  immediately  rises,  and  all  the  people 
with  him,  and  they  all  go  on  foot  from  the  top  of 
the  Mount  of  Olives,  all  the  people  going  before  him 
with  hymns  and  antiphons,  answering  one  to  another  : 
Blessed  is  He  that  cometh  in  the  Name  of  tlie  Lord. 
And  all  the  children  in  the  neighbourhood,  even  those 
who  are  too  young  to  walk,  are  carried  by  their 
parents  on  their  shoulders,  all  of  them  bearing 
branches,  some  of  palms  and  some  of  olives,2  and 
thus  the  bishop  is  escorted  in  the  same  manner  as 
the  Lord  was  of  old.  For  all,  even  those  of  rank, 
both  matrons  and  men,  accompany  the  bishop  all 
the  way  on  foot  in  this  manner,  making  these 

Hallel.  It  will  be  observed  that  Etheria's  ear  caught  the  ever- 
recurring  antiphon  :  "  Blessed  is  He  that  cometh  in  the  name 
of  the  Lord"  (v.  26),  but  she  does  not  seem  to  have  recognized 
the  psalm.  According  to  the  ancient  use,  the  antiphon  was 
sung  after  each  verse  as  a  refrain.] 

1  S.  Matt.  xxi.  9.  2  S.  Matt.  xxi.  8. 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  67 

responses,  from  the  top  of  the  mount  to  the  city, 
and  thence  through  the  whole  city  to  the  Anastasis, 
going  very  slowly  lest  the  people  should  be  wearied  ; 
and  thus  they  arrive  at  the  Anastasis  at  a  late  hour. 
And  on  arriving,  although  it  is  late,  lucernare  takes 
place,  with  prayer  at  the  Cross ;  after  which  the 
people  are  dismissed. 

3.  Monday  in  Holy  Week. 

On  the  next  day,  the  second  weekday,  everything 
that  is  customary  is  done  from  the  first  cockcrow 
until  morning  in  the  Anastasis ;  also  at  the  third 
and  sixth  hours  everything  is  done  that  is  customary 
throughout  the  whole  of  Quadragesima.  But  at  the 
ninth  hour  all  assemble  in  the  great  church,  that  is 
the  martyrium,1  where  hymns  and  antiphons  are  said 
continuously  until  the  first  hour  of  the  night  and 
lessons  suitable  to  the  day  and  the  place  are  read, 
interspersed  always  with  prayers.  Lucernare  takes 
place  when  its  hour  approaches,  that  is,  so  that  it  is 
already  night  when  the  dismissal  at  the  martyrium 
is  made.  When  the  dismissal  has  been  made,  the 
bishop  is  escorted  thence  with  hymns  to  the  Anas- 
tasis, where,  when  he  has  entered,  one  hymn  is  said, 
followed  by  a  prayer  ;  the  catechumens  and  then  the 
faithful  are  blessed,  and  the  dismissal  is  made. 

1  The  Old  Arm.  Lect.  has  :  "  The  second  day  of  the  week 
of  the  Fast  of  Zatik  (Pascha)  they  assemble  in  the  holy  Shrine 
of  the  city,  and  this  canon  is  fulfilled :  Gen.  i.  i-iii.  20 ; 
Prov.  i.  1-9  ;  Isa.  xl.  1-8  ;  Ps.  Ixv.6" 


68  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

4.   Tuesday  in  Holy  Week. 

On  the  third  weekday x  everything  is  done  as  on 
the  second,  with  this  one  thing  added — that  late  at 
night,  after  the  dismissal  of  the  martyrium,  and 
after  the  going  to  the  Anastasis  and  after  the  dis- 
missal there,  all  proceed  at  that  hour  by  night  to 
the  church,  which  is  on  the  mount  Eleona.  And 
when  they  have  arrived  at  that  church,  the  bishop 
enters  the  cave  where  the  Lord  was  wont  to  teach 
His  disciples,2  and  after  receiving  the  book  of  the 
Gospel,  he  stands  and  himself  reads  the  words  of  the 
Lord  which  are  written  in  the  Gospel  according  to 
Matthew,  where  He  says:  Take  heed  that  no  man 
deceive  you?  And  the  bishop  reads  through  the  whole 
of  that  discourse,  and  when  he  has  read  it,  prayer  is 
made,  the  catechumens  and  the  faithful  are  blessed, 
the  dismissal  is  made,  and  every  one  returns  from 
the  mount  to  his  house,  it  being  already  very  late 
at  night. 

5.    Wednesday  in  Holy  Week. 

On  the  fourth  weekday  everything  is  done  as  on 
the  second  and  third  weekdays  throughout  the  whole 
day  from  the  first  cockcrow  onwards,  but  after  the 
dismissal  has  taken  place  at  the  martyrium4  by  night, 

1  The  Old  Arm.  Lect.  has  :  "  On  the  third  day  of  the  week 
[the  later  Bodleian  Codex  has  :  '  they  assemble  on  the  Mount 
of  Olives,'  thus  agreeing  with  Etheria],  at  the  tenth  hour.  And 
this  canon  is  performed:  Gen.  vi.  9~ix.  17;  Prov.  ix.  i-ii; 
Isa.  xi.  9-17  ;  Ps.  xxv.1 ;  S.  Matt.  xxiv.  3-xxvi.  3." 

1  Cf.  S.  Matt.  xxiv.  3.  3  S.  Matt.  xxiv.  4. 

4  The  old  Arm.  Lect.  has  :  "  The  fourth  day  of  the  week  at 
the  tenth  hour  they  assemble  in  the  holy  Shrine  of  the  city, 
and  this  canon  is  performed:  Gen.  xviii.  i-xix.  30;  Prov.  i. 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  69 

and  the  bishop  has  been  escorted  with  hymns  to  the 
Anastasis,  he  at  once  enters  the  cave  which  is  in  the 
Anastasis,  and  stands  within  the  rails  ;  but  the  priest 
stands  before  the  rails  and  receives  the  Gospel,  and 
reads  the  passage  where  Judas  Iscariot  went  to  the 
Jews  and  stated  what  they  should  give  him  that 
he  should  betray  the  Lord.1  And  when  the  passage 
has  been  read,  there  is  such  a  moaning  and  groaning 
of  all  the  people  that  no  one  can  help  being  moved 
to  tears  at  that  hour.  Afterwards  prayer  follows, 
then  the  blessing,  first  of  the  catechumens,  and  then 
of  the  faithful,  and  the  dismissal  is  made. 

6.  Maundy  Thursday. — (a)  Mass  celebrated  twice. 

On  the  fifth  weekday  everything  that  is  customary 
is  done  from  the  first  cockcrow  until  morning  at  the 
Anastasis,  and  also  at  the  third  and  at  the  sixth 
hours.  But  at  the  eighth  hour  all  the  people  gather 
together  at  the  martyrium  2  according  to  custom,  only 

10-19;  Zech.  xi.  11-14;  PS-  xh-4  And  after  the  psalm  they 
go  down  into  the  holy  Anastasis,  and  a  lection  is  read, 
S.  Matt.  xxvi.  14-16." 

1  S.  Matt.  xxvi.  14,  15. 

2  The  Old  Arm.  Lect.  has  :  "  The  fifth  day  of  the  week  is  of 
the  old  Zatik,  as  touching  which  Jesus  said  to  His  disciples, 
'  With  desire  have  I  desired  to  eat  with  you  this  Zatik.'     They 
assemble  at  the  seventh  hour  in  the  holy  shrine  of  the  city,  and 
this  canon  is  performed  :  Gen.  xxii.  1-18  ;  Isa.  Ixi.  1-6  ;  Acts  i. 
15-26  ;   Ps.  lv.22      Their  words,  etc.     Then  the  catechumens 
are  dismissed.     Again  Is.  xxiii.5;  i  Cor.  xi.  23-33;  S.  Matt. 
xxvi.  20-39. 

And  then  the  sacrifice  is  offered  in  the  holy  shrine,  and 
before  the  holy  Cross.  And  in  the  same  hour  they  proceed  to 
holy  Sion.  The  canon  and  Apostle  are  the  same  :  For  I 
received  from  the  Lord  :  S.  Mark  xiv.  12-26. 

And  in  the  same  hour  they  go  forth  to  the  Mount  of  Olives, 
and  perform  the  evening  service  of  worship.  And  they  join 


70  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

earlier  than  on  other  days,  because  the  dismissal 
must  be  made  sooner.  Then,  when  the  people  are 
gathered  together,  all  that  should  be  done  is  done, 
and  the  oblation  is  made  on  that  day  at  the 
martyrium,  the  dismissal  taking  place  about  the 
tenth  hour.  But  before  the  dismissal  is  made  there, 
the  archdeacon  raises  his  voice  and  says :  "  Let  us 
all  assemble  at  the  first  hour  of  the  night  in  the 
church  which  is  in  Eleona,  for  great  toil  awaits  us 
to-day,  in  this  very  night."  Then,  after  the  dis- 
missal at  the  martyrium,  they  arrive  behind  the 
Cross,  where  only  one  hymn  is  said  and  prayer  is 
made,  and  the  bishop  offers  the  oblation  there,  and 
all  communicate.  Nor  is  the  oblation  ever  offered 
behind  the  Cross  on  any  day  throughout  the  year, 
except  on  this  one  day.  And  after  the  dismissal 

with  the  same  the  vigil,  and  with  three  gubalays  of  psalms. 
[Mr.  Conybeare  believes  gubalay  to  be  derived  from  Kt<pa\aiov  = 
chapter.  Each  canon  of  the  psalms  is  divided  for  liturgical 
purposes  into  seven  gubalays,  each  gubalay  comprising  two  or 
three  Psalms,  and  at  the  end  of  it  is  repeated  the  Gloria  Patril\ 
And  the  prayers  are  said  with  gonuklisia  [genuflections]. 

Of  the  first  gubalay,  Ps.  ii.2 

Of  the  second  gubalay,  Ps.  xli.5 

Of  the  third  gubalay,  Ps.  lix.1 

Of  the  fourth  gubalay,  Ps.  Ixxxviii.*,  Ktzord,  They  are  cut 
off  from  thy  hand. 

Of  the  fifth  gubalay,  Ps.  cix2.,  Ktzord,  They  spake  of  me 
and  with  deceitful  tongue. 

And  after  the  fifth  Psalm,  and  fifth  gubalay,  and  fifth  prayer, 
on  the  same  evening  they  read  the  Gospel  of  S.  John  xiii.  31- 
xviii.  i. 

On  the  same  evening  they  go  up  to  the  hillock  [on  the 
Mt.  of  Olives.  The  Bordeaux  pilgrim  calls  it  'the  little  hill.' 
Sir  C.  Wilson  thinks  it  may  be  the  slight  elevation  on  the  ridge 
of  Olivet,  known  afterwards  as  Galilee],  and  this  canon  is 
performed  :  Ps.  cix.4  ;  S.  Luke  xxii.  39-46. 

In  the  same  hour  of  night  they  assemble  in  the  room  of  the 
disciples,  and  read  the  lection,  S.  Mark  xiv.  33-42." 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  71 

there  they  go  to  the  Anastasis,  where  prayer  is  made, 
the  catechumens  and  the  faithful  are  blessed  according 
to  custom,  and  the  dismissal  is  made. 

(b)  Night  Station  on  the  Mount  of  Olives. 

And  so  every  one  hastens  back  to  his  house  to  eat, 
because  immediately  after  they  have  eaten,  all  go  to 
Eleona  to  the  church  wherein  is  the  cave  where  the 
Lord  was  with  His  Apostles  on  this  very  day.  There 
then,  until  about  the  fifth  hour  of  the  night,  hymns 
and  antiphons  suitable  to  the  day  and  to  the  place 
are  said,  lessons,  too,  are  read  in  like  manner,  with 
prayers  interspersed,  and  the  passages  from  the 
Gospel  are  read  where  the  Lord  addressed  His  dis- 
ciples on  that  same  day  as  He  sat  in  the  same  cave 
which  is  in  that  church.  And  they  go  thence  at 
about  the  sixth  hour  of  the  night  with  hymns  up  to 
the  Imbomon,  the  place  whence  the  Lord  ascended 
into  heaven,  where  again  lessons  are  read,  hymns  and 
antiphons  suitable  to  the  day  are  said,  and  all  the 
prayers  which  are  made  by  the  bishop  are  also 
suitable  both  to  the  day  and  to  the  place. 

(c)  Stations  at  Gethsemane. 

And  at  the  first  cockcrow  they  come  down  from  the 
Imbomon  with  hymns,  and  arrive  at  the  place  where 
the  Lord  prayed,  as  it  is  written  in  the  Gospel x  :  and 
He  was  withdrawn  2  (from  them]  about  a  stones  cast, 
and  prayed,  and  the  rest.  There  is  in  that  place  a 
graceful  church.  The  bishop  and  all  the  people 

1  S.  Luke  xxii.  41. 

1  Lat.  et  afcessit,  but  Vulg.  has  ipse  avulsus  est,  see  p.  xxxiv. 


72  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

enter,  a  prayer  suitable  to  the  place  and  to  the  day  is 
said,  with  one  suitable  hymn,  and  the  passage  from 
the  Gospel  is  read  where  He  said  to  His  disciples  : 
Watch,  that  ye  enter  not  into  temptation  l ;  the  whole 
passage  is  read  through  and  prayer  is  made.  And 
then  all,  even  to  the  smallest  child,  go  down  with  the 
Bishop,  on  foot,  with  hymns  to  Gethsemane  ;  where, 
on  account  of  the  great  number  of  people  in  the 
crowd,  who  are  wearied  owing  to  the  vigils  and  weak 
through  the  daily  fasts,  and  because  they  have  so 
great  a  hill  to  descend,  they  come  very  slowly  with 
hymns  to  Gethsemane.  And  over  two  hundred 
church  candles  are  made  ready  to  give  light  to  all 
the  people.  On  their  arrival  at  Gethsemane,2  first  a 
suitable  prayer  is  made,  then  a  hymn  is  said,  then 
the  passage  of  the  Gospel  is  read  where  the  Lord 
was  taken.  And  when  this  passage  has  been  read 
there  is  so  great  a  moaning  and  groaning  of  all  the 
people,  together  with  weeping,  that  their  lamentation 
may  be  heard  perhaps  as  far  as  the  city. 

(cT)  Return  to  Jerusalem. 

From  that  hour  they  go  with  hymns3  to  the  city  on 
foot,  reaching  the  gate  about  the  time  when  one  man 
begins  to  be  able  to  recognize  another,  and  thence 
right  on  through  the  midst  of  the  city  ;  all,  to  a  man, 
both  great  and  small,  rich  and  poor,  all  are  ready 

i  S.  Mark  xiv.  38. 

*  The  Old  Arm.  Lit.  has  :  "  In  the  same  hour  of  night,  in  the 
holy  Mount  of  Olives  in  Gethsemane.  And  they  read  S.  Matt. 
xxvi.  36-56." 

3  The  Old  Arm.  Lit.  has  :  "  In  the  same  hour  of  night  they 
come  singing  Ps.  cxviii.1,  and  they  recite  it  until  they  come 
before  Golgotha,  and  he  reads  S.  Matt.  xxvi.  5/-xxvii.  2," 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  73 

there,  for  on  that  special  day  not  a  soul  withdraws 
from  the  vigils  until  morning.  Thus  the  bishop  is 
escorted  from  Gethsemane  to  the  gate,  and  thence 
through  the  whole  of  the  city  to  the  Cross. 

7.   Good  Friday. — (a)  Service  at  Daybreak. 

And  when  they  arrive  before  the  Cross  the  daylight 
is  already  growing  bright.  There  the  passage  from 
the  Gospel  is  read  where  the  Lord  is  brought  before 
Pilate,  with  everything  that  is  written  concerning  that 
which  Pilate  spake  to  the  Lord  or  to  the  Jews ; l  the 
whole  is  read.  And  afterwards  the  bishop  addresses 
the  people,  comforting  them  for  that  they  have  toiled 
all  night  and  are  about  to  toil  during  that  same  day, 
(bidding)  them  not  be  weary,  but  to  have  hope  in 
God,  Who  will  for  that  toil  give  them  a  greater  reward. 
And  encouraging  them  as  he  is  able,  he  addresses 
them  thus  :  "  Go  now,  each  one  of  you,  to  your 
houses,  and  sit  down  awhile,  and  all  of  you  be  ready 
here  just  before  the  second  hour  of  the  day,  that  from 
that  hour  to  the  sixth  you  may  be  able  to  behold  the 
holy  wood  of  the  Cross,  each  one  of  us  believing  that 
it  will  be  profitable  to  his  salvation  ;  then  from  the 
sixth  hour  we  must  all  assemble  again  in  this  place, 
that  is,  before  the  Cross,  that  we  may  apply  ourselves 
to  lections  and  to  prayers  until  night." 

(b)  The  Column  of  the  Flagellation. 

After  this,  when  the  dismissal  at  the  Cross  has 
been  made,  that  is,  before  the  sun  rises,  they  all  go 

1  S.  Matt,  xxvii.  2,  etc.  ;  S.  Mark  xv.  I,  etc.  ;  S.  Luke  xxiii. 
I,  etc.  ;  S.  John  xviii.  28,  etc. 


74  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

at  once  with  fervour  to  Sion,  to  pray  at  the  column 
at  which  the  Lord  was  scourged.1  And  returning 
thence  they  sit  for  awhile  in  their  houses,  and  presently 
all  are  ready. 

(c}    Veneration  of  the  Cross. 

Then  a  chair  is  placed  for  the  bishop  in  Golgotha  2 
behind  the  Cross,  which  is  now  standing ; 3  the  bishop 
duly  takes  his  seat  in  the  chair,  and  a  table  covered 
with  a  linen  cloth  is  placed  before  him  ;  the  deacons 
stand  round  the  table,  and  a  silver-gilt  casket  is 

1  The  Old  Arm.  Lit.  has  :  "  In  the  same  hour  of  the  night 
they  go  to  the  palace  of  the  Judge,  and  he  [z.  e.  the  Lector] 
reads  S.  John  xviii.  28-xix.  16." 

a  The  Old  Arm.  Lit.  has  :  "At  dawn, on  the  Friday,  the  holy 
wood  of  the  cross  is  set  before  holy  Golgotha,  and  the  congrega- 
tion adore  until  the  ninth  hour.  The  adoration  is  completed, 
and  at  the  sixth  hour  they  assemble  in  holy  Golgotha,  and  repeat 
eight  psalms  and  five  Gospel  lections.  And  one  by  one  of  the 
psalms,  there  are  two  and  lections,  and  at  the  same  time 
prayers. 

Ps.  xxxv.  II.  [It  is  not  easy  to  understand  this,  but  Mr. 
Conybeare  th/nks  the  arrangement  was  thus  :  Ps.  standing  for 
Psalm,  and  L.  for  Lection  :  L.  Ps.  Ps.  L.  Ps.  Ps.  L.  Ps.  Ps. 
L.  Ps.  Ps.  L.,  making  five  Lections  and  eight  Psalms.] 

Lection  i. :  Zech.  xi.  11-14;  Gal.  vi.  14-18;  Ps.  xxxviii.17; 
Isa.  iii.  9-15  ;  Phil.  ii.  5-11. 

Prayer  with  gonuklisia  [genuflection]  Ps.  xli.8 ;  Isa.  1.  4-9; 
Rom.  v.  6-1 1  ;  Alleluiah;  Ps.  xxii.  18  ;  Amos  viii.  9-12  ;  I  Cor. 
i.  18-31. 

Prayer  with  gonuklisia  :  Ps.  xxxi.5 ;  Isa.  Iii.  I3~liii.12;  Heb. 
ii.  11-18;  S.  Matt,  xxvii.  3-53;  Heb.  ix.  11-28;  S.  Mark  (in 
MS.  Matt.)  xv.  16-41. 

Prayer  with  gonuklisia  :  Ps.  Ixxxviii.4  Lection  xiii  :  Jer.  (in 
MS.  Isa.)  xi.  18-21  ;  Heb.  x.  19-31  ;  S.  Luke  xxiii.  32-(49). 
[The  folio  being  torn,  the  part  within  brackets  (  )  is  added 
from  the  Bodleian  MS.  and  so  on  the  next  line.]. 

(Prayer  with  gonuklisia.  Ps.  cii.1 ;  Zech.  xiv.  6-)n  ;  Lec- 
tion xvi.  ;  i  Tim.  vi.  13-16  ;  S.  John  xix.  25-37." 

3  See  Introduction,  p.  xlv. 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  75 

brought  in  which  is  the  holy  wood  of  the  Cross.  The 
casket  is  opened  and  (the  wood)  is  taken  out,  and 
both  the  wood  of  the  Cross  and  the  title  1  are  placed 
upon  the  table.  Now,  when  it  has  been  put  upon  the 
table,  the  bishop,  as  he  sits,  holds  the  extremities  of 
the  sacred  wood  firmly  in  his  hands,  while  the  deacons 
who  stand  around  guard  it.  It  is  guarded  thus  be- 
cause the  custom  is  that  the  people,  both  faithful  and 
catechumens,  come  one  by  one  and,  bowing  down  at 
the  table,  kiss  the  sacred  wood  and  pass  through. 
And  because,  I  know  not  when,  some  one  is  said  to 
have  bitten  off  and  stolen  a  portion  of  the  sacred  wood, 
it  is  thus  guarded  by  the  deacons  who  stand  around, 
lest  any  one  approaching  should  venture  to  do  so 
again.  And  as  all  the  people  pass  by  one  by  one,  all 
bowing  themselves,  they  touch  the  Cross  and  the 
title,  first  with  their  foreheads  and  then  with  their 
eyes ;  then  they  kiss  the  Cross  and  pass  through,  but 
none  lays  his  hand  upon  it  to  touch  it.  When  they 
have  kissed  the  Cross  and  have  passed  through,  a 
deacon  stands  holding  the  ring  of  Solomon  and  the 
horn  from  which  the  kings  were  anointed  ;  they  kiss 
the  horn  also  and  gaze  at  ther  ring  2  ...  all  the 

1  Rufinus,  Hist.  Eccl.  i.  7,  8  (about  400),  is  responsible  for  the 
statement  that  part  of  the  wood  of  the  true  cross  was   sent 
to  Constantine  and   part   left  in  a   silver  casket  (as  here)  in 
Jerusalem.     According  to   S.  Ambrose  (395)  Pilate's   original 
superscription  (titulus)  was  found  by  Helena  still  attached  to 
the  Saviour's  cross,  which  enabled  her  to  distinguish  it  from 
the  two  others  ;  but  other  authorities,  including  Rufinus,  state 
that   it  was   found    in  a   separate  place  from   the  cross,  and 
that  the  recognition  of  the  true  cross  was  due  to  a  miracle. 
Evidently  at  the  time  of  Etheria's  visit  the  "  title  "  was  shown 
as  one  of  the  relics  at  Jerusalem. 

2  There  is  here  an  hiatus  in  the  MS.,  with  the  two  untranslat- 
able words  minus  secundu  in  the  middle. 


76  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

people  are  passing  through  up  to  the  sixth  hour, 
entering  by  one  door  and  going  out  by  another ;  for 
this  is  done  in  the  same  place  where,  on  the  preced- 
ing day,  that  is,  on  the  fifth  weekday,  the  oblation 
was  offered. 


(d)  Station  before  the  Cross.     The  Three  Hours. 

And  when  the  sixth  hour  has  come,  they  go  before 
the  Cross,  whether  it  be  in  rain  or  in  heat,  the  place 
being  open  to  the  air,  as  it  were,  a  court  of  great 
size  and  of  some  beauty  between  the  Cross  and  the 
Anastasis ;  here  all  the  people  assemble  in  such  great 
numbers  that  there  is  no  thoroughfare.  The  chair  is 
placed  for  the  bishop  before  the  Cross,  and  from  the 
sixth  to  the  ninth  hour  nothing  else  is  done,  but  the 
reading  of  lessons,  which  are  read  thus  :  first  from  the 
psalms  wherever  the  Passion  is  spoken  of,  then  from 
the  Apostle,  either  from  the  epistles  of  the  Apostles 
or  from  their  Acts,  wherever  they  have  spoken  of  the 
Lord's  Passion  ;  then  the  passages  from  the  Gospels, 
where  He  suffered,  are  read.  Then  the  readings  from 
the  prophets  where  they  foretold  that  the  Lord 
should  suffer,  then  from  the  Gospels  where  He  men- 
tions His  Passion.  Thus  from  the  sixth  to  the  ninth 
hours  the  lessons  are  so  read  and  the  hymns  said,  that 
it  may  be  shown  to  all  the  people  that  whatsoever  the 
prophets  foretold  of  the  Lord's  Passion  is  proved 
from  the  Gospels  and  from  the  writings  of  the  Apostles 
to  have  been  fulfilled.  And  so  through  all  those 
three  hours  the  people  are  taught  that  nothing  was 
done  which  had  not  been  foretold,  and  that  nothing 
was  foretold  which  was  not  wholly  fulfilled.  Prayers 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  77 

also  suitable  to  the  day  are  interspersed  throughout. 
The  emotion  shown  and  the  mourning  by  all  the 
people  at  every  lesson  and  prayer  is  wonderful ;  for 
there  is  none,  either  great  or  small,  who,  on  that  day 
during  those  three  hours,  does  not  lament  more  than 
can  be  conceived,  that  the  Lord  had  suffered  those 
things  for  us.1 

Afterwards,  at  the  beginning  of  the  ninth  hour, 
there  is  read  that  passage  from  the  Gospel  according 
to  John  where  He  gave  up  the  ghost.2  This  read, 
prayer  and  the  dismissal  follow. 

(e)  Evening  Offices. 

And  when  the  dismissal  before  the  Cross  has  been 
made,  all  things  are  done  in  the  greater  church,  at 
the  martyrium,  which  are  customary  during  this  week 
from  the  ninth  hour3 — when  the  assembly  takes  place 
in  the  martyrium — until  late.  And  after  the  dis- 
missal at  the  martyrium,  they  go  to  the  Anastasis, 
where,  when  they  arrive,  the  passage  from  the  Gospel 
is  read  where  Joseph  begged  the  Body  of  the  Lord 
from  Pilate  and  laid  it  in  a  new  sepulchre.4  And  this 
reading  ended,  a  prayer  is  said,  the  catechumens  are 
blessed,  and  the  dismissal  is  made. 

But  on  that  day  no  announcement  is  made  of  a 

1  This  is  probably  the  earliest  record  we  have  of  the  observ- 
ance of  the  "  Three  Hours." 

2  S.  John  xix.  30. 

*  The  Old  Arm.  Lect.  has  :  "Prayer  with  gonuklisia.  And 
then  they  go  up  into  the  church  at  the  tenth  hour.  [The  later 
Bodleian  MS.  in  the  place  of  "church"  says  "holy  shrine," 
which  agrees  with  Etheria's  "  martyrium  "].  And  this  canon  is 
performed:  Jer.  xi.  18-20.  Lection  xvii. ;  Isa.  liii.  1-12;  Ps. 
xxii.18  ;  S.  Matt,  xxvii.  57-61." 

4  S.  John  xix.  38-42. 


78  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

vigil  at  the  Anastasis,  because  it  is  known  that  the 
people  are  tired;  nevertheless,  it  is  the  custom  to 
watch  there.  So  all  of  the  people  who  are  willing, 
or  rather,  who  are  able,  keep  watch,  and  they  who 
are  unable  do  not  watch  there  until  the  morning. 
Those  of  the  clergy,  however,  who  are  strong  or 
young  keep  vigil  there,  and  hymns  and  antiphons  are 
said  throughout  the  whole  night  until  morning;  a 
very  great  crowd  also  keep  night-long  watch,  some 
from  the  late  hour  and  some  from  midnight,  as  they 
are  able. 

8.    Vigil  of  Easter. 
Now,  on  the  next  day,  the  Sabbath,1  everything  that 

1  The  Old  Arm.  Lect.  has  :  "On  the  Sabbath  day  at  dawn, 
in  the  holy  Anastasis  :  Ps.  Ixxxviii.  6  ;  S.  Matt,  xxvii.  62-66. 

At  eventide,  on  the  Sabbath  day,  they  light  a  torch  in  the 
holy  Anastasis. 

First  the  bishop  repeats  Ps.  cxiii.2  And  then  the  bishop 
lights  three  candles ;  and  after  him  the  deacons,  and  then  the 
whole  congregation.  And  then,  after  that,  they  go  up  into 
the  church  [the  martyrium]  and  begin  the  vigils  of  the  holy 
Zatik  [Paschal  vigils,  as  Etheria  calls  them],  and  read  twelve 
lections.  And  with  each  of  them  they  sing  psalms.  [Here 
is  evidently  the  primitive  form  of  the  ceremony  of  the  New  Fire 
in  the  ritual  of  the  Greek  Church  at  Jerusalem,  to  which  such 
importance  is  still  attached.  The  ceremony  does  not,  however, 
extend  beyond  the  Holy  City,  and  it  was  not  known  at  Rome. 
Etheria  seems  to  have  missed  this  service  of  the  lighting  of  the 
candles  :  her  narrative  is  concentrated  on  the  newly  baptized. 
There  is  no  mention  in  the  Old  Arm.  Lect.  or  in  Etheria's 
narrative  of  the  blessing  of  the  Paschal  candle,  which  was  an 
ancient  custom  in  N.  Italy,  Gaul  and  Spain,  and  perhaps 
Africa.  Cf.  Duchesne,  Christian  Worship,  pp.  25 if.]. 

Prayers  with  gonuklisia :  Ps.  cxviii.24 ;  Gen.  i.  i-iii.  24  :  Gen. 
xxii.  1-18  ;  Exod.  xii.  1-24;  Jonah  i.  i-iv.  n  ;  Exod.  xiv.  24- 
xv.  21  ;  Isa.  Ix.  1-13. 

[This  lection  is  farced  verse  by  verse  with  the  respond  : 
'  Behold,  there  is  come  the  King  of  Glory  of  light,  illumining 
all  creatures ']. 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  79 

is  customary  is  done  at  the  third  hour  and  also  at  the 
sixth  ;  the  service  at  the  ninth  hour,  however,  is  not 
held  on  the  Sabbath,  but  the  Paschal  vigils  are 
prepared  in  the  great  church,  the  martyrium.  The 
Paschal  vigils  are  kept  as  with  us,  with  this  one 
addition,  that  the  children  when  they  have  been 
baptised  and  clothed,  and  when  they  issue  from  the 
font,1  are  led  with  the  bishop  first  to  the  Anastasis ; 
the  bishop  enters  the  rails  of  the  Anastasis,  and  one 
hymn  is  said,  then  the  bishop  says  a  prayer  for  them, 
and  then  he  goes  with  them  to  the  greater  church, 

Prayers  with  gonuklisia :  Job  xxxviii.  1-28  ;  4  Kings  (2  Kings) 
ii.  1-22  ;  Jer.  xxxi.  31-34  ;  Josh.  i.  1-9  ;  Ezek.  xxxvii.  1-14  ; 
Dan.  iii.  1-90,  LXX.  [See  the  Song  of  the  Three  Holy 
Children  in  the  Apocrypha.] 

[This  is  farced  at  v.  33  after  the  words  :  '  Take  not  thy  mercy 
away  from  us,'  with  the  respond,  written  in  small  uncials  : 
'The  incorruptible  Holy  Trinity  has  beamed  forth  on  us  from 
incorruptible  light.  And  do  thou  work  propitiatory  mercy ; 
for  thee  alone  do  we  know  to  be  our  Saviour.'  Again,  at  v.  52, 
after  the  words:  'They  glorified  God  in  the  midst  of  the 
furnace,  and  said,'  comes  the  respond:  'The  ram  of  Isaac  hath 
been  exchanged.  Christ  is  become  unto  us  for  salvation.' 

In  the  rest  of  the  hymn  the  words  :  '  Praise  and  exalt  Him 
for  ever,'  are  repeated  thirty  times,  as  a  respond  after  each 
verse.] 

And  while  they  recite  the  hymn,  in  the  middle  of  the  night, 
there  enter  the  multitude  of  the  deacons  [the  Bodleian  MS. 
gives  'newly  sealed.'  N.B. — The  Old  Arm.  Lect.  seems  to 
give  two  processional  entries  to  the  martyrium  from  the 
Anastasis.  One,  when  they  begin  the  'vigils  of  the  holy 
Zatik,'  and  one  >yith  the  newly  baptized.  Etheria  seems  to 
give  merely  the  latter.  Section  8,  'Vigil  of  Easter']  together 
with  the  bishop,  and  this  canon  is  performed :  Ps.  Ixv.1 
Lection  :  i  Cor.  xv.  i-i  i ;  Alleluiah ;  Ps.  xxx.1 ;  S.  Matt, 
xxviii.  1-20." 

1  i.  e.  in  the  baptistery  which  Constantine  had  built  beside 
the  church  of  the  Anastasis.  The  rite  was  one  of  total  im- 
mersion, and  many  of  the  catechumens  were  adults  (Archbp. 
Bernard),  although  Etheria  uses  the  word  infantes  of  them 
here  :  see  Thompson  on  Baptismal  Offices,  p.  177. 


8o  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

where,  according  to  custom,  all  the  people  are  keeping 
watch.  Everything  is  done  there  that  is  customary 
with  us  also,  and  after  the  oblation l  has  been  made, 
the  dismissal  takes  place.  After  the  dismissal  of  the 
vigils  has  been  made  in  the  greater  church,  they  go  at 
once  with  hymns  to  the  Anastasis,  where  the  passage 
from  the  Gospel  about  the  Resurrection  is  read. 
Prayer  is  made,  and  the  bishop  again  makes  the 
oblation.  But  everything  is  done  quickly  on  account 
of  the  people,  that  they  should  not  be  delayed  any 
longer,  and  so  the  people  are  dismissed.  The  dis- 
missal of  the  vigils  takes  place  on  that  day  at  the 
same  hour  as  with  us. 


9.  Services  in  the  Easter  Octave. 

Moreover,  the  Paschal  days  are  kept  up  to  a  late 
hour  as  with  us,  and  the  dismissals  take  place  in  their 
order  throughout  the  eight  Paschal  days,  as  is  the 
custom  everywhere  at  Easter  throughout  the  Octave. 
But  the  adornment  (of  the  churches)  and  order  (of  the 
services)  here  are  the  same  throughout  the  Octave 
of  Easter  as  they  are  during  Epiphany,  in  the  greater 
church,  in  the  Anastasis,  at  the  Cross,  in  Eleona,  in 
Bethlehem,  as  well  as  in  the  Lazarium,  in  fact,  every- 
where, because  these  are  the  Paschal  days.  On  the 
first  Lord's  Day 2  they  proceed  to  the  great  church, 

1  The  Old  Arm.  Lect.  has  :  "  The  sacrifice  is  offered.  And 
after  the  dismissal  in  the  same  night  he  offers  in  the  holy 
Anastasis  before  holy  Golgotha,  and  instantly  reads  John  xx. 
1-18.' 

*  i.  e.  Easter  Day  itself. 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  81 

that  is,  the  martyrium,1  as  well  as  on  the  second  2  and 
third  weekdays,  but  always  so  that  after  the  dismissal 
has  been  made  at  the  martyrium,  they  go  to  the 
Anastasis  with  hymns.  On  the  fourth  weekday  they 
proceed  to  Eleona,  on  the  fifth  to  the  Anastasis,  on 
the  sixth  to  Sion,  on  the  Sabbath  3  before  the  Cross, 
but  on  the  Lord's  Day,4  that  is,  on  the  Octave,  (they 

1  The  Old  Arm.  Lect.  has  :  "  At  dawn,  of  the  congregation 
on  the  holy  Sunday  of  Zatik;  they  assemble  in  the  holy 
Shrine,  and  this  canon  is  performed:  Acts  i.  1-14;  Alleluiah  ; 
Ps.  cxlvii.  12  ;  S.  Mark  xvi.  2-8.  On  the  same  Sunday  of 
Zatik,  they  go  up  at  the  ninth  hour  to  the  holy  Mount  of 
Olives,  and  there  sing  a  Psalm  ;  and  go  down  with  Psalms  to 
the  holy  Anastasis.  And  thence  they  proceed  at  eventide  to 
holy  Sion,  and  this  canon  is  performed  :  Ps.  cxlix.1 ;  S.  John  xx. 
19-25." 

"  On  the  second  day  of  the  week  they  assemble  in  the  holy 
shrine,  and  this  canon  is  performed  :  Ps.  Ixv.  I  ;  Acts  ii.  22- 
41  ;  Alleluiah  ;  Ps.  cxlvii.  12  ;  S.  Luke  xiv.  1-12. 

Third  day  of  the  week,  they  assemble  in  the  holy  shrine  of 
the  proto-martyr  Stephen,  and  this  canon  is  performed  :  Ps.  v. 
12  ;  Acts  ii.  42-iii.  21  :  Ps.  xxi.  I  ;  S.  Luke  xxiv.  13-35. 

Fourth  day  of  the  week,  they  assemble  in  holy  Sion,  and  this 
canon  is  performed:  Ps.  cxlvii.  12;  Acts  iii.  22-iv.  12;  S.  Jas.  i. 
1-12  ;  Alleluiah  ;  Ps.  Ixv.  I  ;  S.  Luke  xxiv.  36-40. 

Fifth  day  of  the  week,  they  assemble  on  the  holy  Mount  of 
Olives,  and  this  canon  is  performed  :  Ps.  xcix.  5  ;  Acts  iv.  13- 
31  ;  S.  Jas.  i.  13-27  ;  Alleluiah  ;  Ps.  xv.  ;  S.  Matt.  v.  1-12. 

Friday  they  assemble  before  holy  Golgotha,  and  this  canon 
is  performed  :  Ps.  xcviii.  3  ;  Acts  iv.  32-v.  ii  ;  S.  Jas.  ii.  1-13  ; 
Alleluiah  ;  Ps.  xciii. ;  S.  John  xxi.  1-14." 

3  "  On  the  Sabbath  they  assemble  in  the  holy  Anastasis,  and 
this  canon  is  performed  :    Ps.  Ixvii.  I  ;   Acts  v.  12-33  ;   S.  Jas. 
ii.  14-26;   Alleluiah  ;   Ps.  Ixxxi.  ;    S.  John  i.  15-25." 

4  The  Old  Lect.  has:  "To-day  they  assemble  in  the  holy 
Shrine,  and  this  canon  is  performed  :  Ps.  Ixv. ;  Acts  v.  34-vi.  7  ; 
S.  Jas.  iii.  1-13  ;  Ps.  cxlvii.  12  ;  S.  John  i.  i-ll. 

On  the  same  Sunday  they  go  up  to  the  Mount  of  Olives 
at  the  ninth  hour,  and  there  sing  Psalms  for  a  space.  And 
thence  they  go  down  with  Psalms  to  the  holy  Anastasis,  and 
this  canon  is  performed  :  Ps.  cxlix.1;  S.  John  xx.  26-31." 

The  following  directions  in  the  Old  Arm.  Lect.  do  not  bear 
C 


82  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

proceed)  to  the  great  church  again,  that  is,  to  the 
martyrium. 

Moreover,  on  the  eight  Paschal  days  the  bishop 
goes  every  day  after  breakfast  up  to  Eleona  with  all 
the  clergy,  and  with  all  the  children  who  have  been 
baptised,  and  with  all  who  are  apotactitae,  both  men 
and  women,  and  likewise  with  all  the  people  who  are 
willing.  Hymns  are  said  and  prayers  are  made,  both 
in  the  church  which  is  on  Eleona,  wherein  is  the  cave 
where  Jesus  was  wont  to  teach  His  disciples,  and  also 
in  the  Imbomon,  that  is,  in  the  place  whence  the  Lord 
ascended  into  heaven.  And  when  the  psalms  have 
been  said  and  prayer  has  been  made,  they  come  down 
thence  with  hymns  to  the  Anastasis  at  the  hour  of 
lucernare.  This  is  done  throughout  all  the  eight  days. 

10.    Vesper  Station  at  Sion  on  Easter  Sunday} 

Now,  on  the  Lord's  Day  at  Easter,  after  the  dis- 
missal of  lucernare,  that  is,  at  the  Anastasis,  all  the 
people  escort  the  bishop  with  hymns  to  Sion.  And, 
on  arriving,  hymns  suitable  to  the  day  and  place  are 
said,  prayer  is  made,  and  the  passage  from  the  Gospel 

directly  on  any  part  of  Etheria's  narrative,  but  are  given  here 
because  they  bear  on  the  administration  of  the  Mysteries  : 

"  Lections  of  the  administration  of  the  Mystery  (=nv<TTay<ayla) 
after  the  dismissal  are  [read]  in  the  shrine  on  the  second  day 
in  the  same  week  :  i  Pet.  v.  8-14. 

Next  he  administers  the  Mystery  on  the  seventh  day  in  the 
same  week  :  i  Cor.  xi.  23-32. 

The  Sunday  at  the  close  of  Zatik.  He  reads  in  the  holy 
Anastasis  during  the  administration  of  the  Mystery  :  I  Pet.  ii. 

I-IO." 

[N.B.  The  lections  given  in  S.  Cyril's  Catech.  Orat.  seem  to 
tally  in  general  with  this  whole  series.] 
1  See  note  i  on  preceding  page. 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  83 

is  read  where  the  Lord,1  on  the  same  day,  and  in  the 
same  place  where  the  church  now  stands  in  Sion, 
came  in  to  His  disciples  when  the  doors  were  shut. 
That  is,  when  one  of  His  disciples,  Thomas,  was 
absent,  and  when  he  returned  and  the  other  Apostles 
told  him  that  they  had  seen  the  Lord,  he  said  : 
"  Except  I  shall  see,  I  will  not  believe"  2  When  this 
has  been  read,  prayer  is  again  made,  the  catechumens 
and  the  faithful  are  blessed,  and  every  one  returns  to 
his  house  late,  about  the  second  hour  of  the  night. 


1 1.  Sunday  after  Easter. 

Again,  on  the  Octave  of  Easter,3  that  is,  on  the 
Lord's  Day,  all  the  people  go  up  to  Eleona  with  the 
bishop  immediately  after  the  sixth  hour.  First  they 
sit  for  awhile  in  the  church  which  is  there,  and  hymns 
and  antiphons  suitable  to  the  day  and  to  the  place  are 
said ;  prayers  suitable  to  the  day  and  to  the  place  are 
likewise  made.  Then  they  go  up  to  the  Imbomon 
with  hymns,  and  the  same  things  are  done  there  as  in 
the  former  place.  And  when  the  time  comes,  all  the 
people  and  all  the  apotactitae  escort  the  bishop  with 
hymns  down  to  the  Anastasis,  arriving  there  at  the 
usual  hour  for  lucernare.  So  lucernare  takes  place 
at  the  Anastasis  and  at  the  Cross,  and  all  the  people 
to  a  man  escort  the  bishop  thence  with  hymns  to 
Sion.  And  when  they  have  arrived,  hymns  suitable 
to  the  day  and  to  the  place  are  said  there  also,  and 
lastly  that  passage  from  the  Gospel  is  read  where, 

1  S.  John  xx.  19.  2  S.  John  xx.  25. 

3  See  note  4  on  page  81.     "  On  the  same  Sunday,"  etc. 


84  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

on  the  Octave  of  Easter,1  the  Lord  came  in  where 
the  disciples  were,  and  reproved  Thomas  because  he 
had  been  unbelieving.  The  whole  of  that  lesson  is 
read,  with  prayer  afterwards ;  both  the  catechumens 
and  the  faithful  are  blessed,  and  every  one  returns  to 
his  house  as  usual,  just  as  on  the  Lord's  Day  of 
Easter,  at  the  second  hour  of  the  night. 

12.  Easter  to   Whitsuntide. 

Now,  from  Easter  to  the  fiftieth  day,  that  is,  to 
Pentecost,  no  one  fasts  here,  not  even  those  who  are 
apotactitae.  During  these  days,  as  throughout  the 
whole  year,  the  customary  things  are  done  at  the 
Anastasis  from  the  first  cockcrow  until  morning,  and 
at  the  sixth  hour  and  at  lucernare  likewise.  But  on 
the  Lord's  Days  the  procession  is  always  to  the 
martyrium,  that  is,  to  the  great  church,  according  to 
custom,  and  they  go  thence  with  hymns  to  the 
Anastasis.  On  the  fourth  and  sixth  weekdays,  as  no 
one  fasts  during  those  days,  the  procession  is  to 
Sion,  but  in  the  morning ;  the  dismissal  is  made 
in  its  due  order. 

13.   The  Ascension. — Festival  at  Bethlehem? 
On  the  fortieth  day  after  Easter,  that  is,  on  the  fifth 

1  S.  John  xx.  26-29. 

z  Between  Easter  and  Whitsunday  Etheria  describes  no 
festivals  with  the  exception  of  this  cursory  mention  of  the 
Ascension,  of  which  "  it  is  impossible  to  find  a  trace  before 
the  middle  of  the  fourth  century"  (Duchesne).  It  is  not 
given  in  the  Old  Arm.  Lect.,  but  on  May  7  we  find  the 
following — 

"They  assemble  before  holy  Golgotha,  on  the  day  of  the 
appearance  in  heaven  of  the  Sign  of  the  holy  Cross,  and-this 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  85 

weekday — (for  all  go  on  the  previous  day,  that  is,  on 
the  fourth  weekday,  after  the  sixth  hour  to  Bethlehem 
to  celebrate  the  vigils,  for  the  vigils  are  kept  in 
Bethlehem,  in  the  church  wherein  is  the  cave  x  where 
the  Lord  was  born) — On  this  fifth  weekday,  the 
fortieth  day  after  Easter,  the  dismissal  2  is  celebrated 
in  its  due  order,  so  that  the  priests  and  the  bishop 
preach,  treating  of  the  things  suitable  to  the  day 
and  the  place,  and  afterwards  every  one  returns  to 
Jerusalem  late. 


VI 

FESTIVALS  OF  WHITSUNTIDE 
I.    Whitsunday. — (a)  Morning  Station? 

But  on  the  fiftieth  day,  that  is,  the  Lord's  Day, 
when  the  people  have  a  very  great  deal  to  go  through, 
everything  that  is  customary  is  done  from  the  first 

canon  is  performed  :  Ps.  xcvii.6 ;  Epistle  of  Cyril,  bishop  of 
Jerusalem  to  Constantino ;  Gal.  vi.  14-18 ;  Alleluiah ;  Ps. 
xcviii.  ;  S.  Matt.  xxiv.  30-35." 

1  See  Introduction,  p.  xlvii. 

2  Lat.  missa  celebratur. 

3  In   the   Old  Arm.    Lect.   we  have   as  follows:   "On   the 
Sunday  of  Holy  Pentecost,  they  assemble  in  the  holy  Shrine. 
Canon  :  Ps.  cxliii.10;  Acts  ii.  1-21 ;  Alleluiah  ;  Ps.  How  lovely 
are  the  courts  ;  S.  John  xiv.  15-24. 

At  the  same  time,  after  the  dismissal  from  the  Shrine  at  the 
third  hour,  they  proceed  to  holy  Sion.  Canon  :  Ps.  the  same, 
and  same  lection  ;  S.  John  xiv.  25-29. 

On  the  same  Sunday,  at  the  tenth  hour,  they  assemble  on 
the  holy  Mount  of  Olives,  and  the  same  Psalm  and  the  same 
lection  are  used,  S.  John  xvi.  5-15.  And  there,  after  the  Gospel, 
takes  place  a  gonuklisia,  thrice.  And  in  all  places  in  the  same 
manner,  and  at  even  they  proceed  to  Holy  Sion.  Canon  ; 
Ps.  cxliii.  10  ;  S.  John  xiv.  15-24." 


86  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

cockcrow  onwards ;  vigil  is  kept  in  the  Anastasis, 
and  the  bishop  reads  the  passage  from  the  Gospel 
that  is  always  read  on  the  Lord's  Day,  namely, 
the  account  of  the  Lord's  Resurrection,  and  after- 
wards everything  customary  is  done  in  the  Anasta- 
sis, just  as  throughout  the  whole  year.  But 
when  morning  is  come,  all  the  people  proceed 
to  the  great  church,  that  is,  to  the  martyrium, 
and  all  things  usual  are  done  there ;  the  priests 
preach  and  then  the  bishop,  and  all  things  that 
are  prescribed  are  done,  the  oblation  being  made, 
as  is  customary  on  the  Lord's  Day,  only  the  same 
dismissal 1  in  the  martyrium  is  hastened,  in  order 
that  it  may  be  made  before  the  third  hour. 

(&)  Station  at  Sion. 

And  when  the  dismissal  has  been  made  at  the 
martyrium,  all  the  people,  to  a  man,  escort  the  bishop 
with  hymns  to  Sion,  [so  that]  they  are  in  Sion 
when  the  third  hour  is  fully  come.  And  on  their 
arrival  there  the  passage  from  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles 2  is  read  where  the  Spirit  came  down  so 
that  all  tongues  [were  heard  and  all  men]  under- 
stood the  things  that  were  being  spoken,  and 
the  dismissal  takes  place  afterwards  in  due  course. 
For  the  priests  read  there  from  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles  concerning  the  selfsame  thing,  because  that 
is  the  place  in  Sion — there  is  another  church  there 
now — where  once,  after  the  Lord's  Passion,  the 
multitude  was  gathered  together  with  the  Apostles, 

1  Lat.  eadem  adceleratur  mt'ssa- 
»  Acts  ii.  i  ff. 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  87 

and  where  this  was  done,  as  we  have  said  above. 
Afterwards  the  dismissal  takes  place  in  due  course, 
and  the  oblation  is  made  there.  Then,  that  the 
people  may  be  dismissed,  the  archdeacon  raises  his 
voice,  and  says :  "  Let  us  all  be  ready  to-day  in 
Eleona,  in  the  Imbomon,  directly  after  the  sixth 
hour." 

(c)  Station  at  the  Mount  of  Olives. 

So  all  the  people  return,  each  to  his  house,  to  rest 
themselves,  and  immediately  after  breakfast  they 
ascend  the  Mount  of  Olives,  that  is,  to  Eleona,  each 
as  he  can,  so  that  there  is  no  Christian  left  in  the  city 
who  does  not  go.  When,  therefore,  they  have  gone 
up  the  Mount  of  Olives,  that  is,  to  Eleona,  they 
first  enter  the  Imbomon,  that  is,  the  place  whence  the 
Lord  ascended  into  heaven,  and  the  bishops  and  the 
priests  take  their  seat  there,  and  likewise  all  the 
people.  Lessons  are  read  there  with  hymns  inter- 
spersed, antiphons  too  are  said  suitable  to  the  day 
and  the  place,  also  the  prayers  which  are  interspersed 
have  likewise  similar  references.  The  passage  from 
the  Gospel  is  also  read  where  it  speaks  of  the  Lord's 
Ascension,  also  that  from  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  J 
which  tells  of  the  Ascension  of  the  Lord  into  heaven 
after  His  Resurrection.  And  when  this  is  over,  the 
catechumens  and  then  the  faithful  are  blessed,  and 
they  come  down  thence,  it  being  already  the  ninth 
hour,  and  go  with  hymns  to  that  church  which  is  in 
Eleona,  wherein  is  the  cave  where  the  Lord  was  wont 
to  sit  and  teach  His  Apostles.  And  as  it  is  already 

»  §.  Luke  xxiv   50  ff. ;  Acts  i.  9  ff. 


88  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

past  the  tenth  hour  when  they  arrive,  lucernare  takes 
place  there  ;  prayer  is  made,  and  the  catechumens 
and  likewise  the  faithful  are  blessed. 


[d]   Night  Procession. 

And  then  all  the  people  to  a  man  descend  thence 
with  the  bishop,  saying  hymns  and  antiphons  suitable 
to  that  day,  and  so  come  very  slowly  to  the  mar- 
tyrium.  It  is  already  night  when  they  reach  the  gate 
of  the  city,  and  about  two  hundred  church  candles 
are  provided  for  the  use  of  the  people.  And  as  it  is 
a  good  distance  from  the  gate  to  the  great  church,  that 
is,  the  martyrium,  they  arrive  about  the  second  hour  of 
the  night,  for  they  go  the  whole  way  very  slowly  lest 
the  people  should  be  weary  from  being  afoot.  And 
when  the  great  gates  are  opened,  which  face  towards 
the  market-place,  all  the  people  enter  the  martyrium 
with  hymns  and  with  the  bishop.  And  when  they 
have  entered  the  church,  hymns  are  said,  prayer  is 
made,  the  catechumens  and  also  the  faithful  are 
blessed  ;  after  which  they  go  again  with  hymns  to 
the  Anastasis,  where  on  their  arrival  hymns  and 
antiphons  are  said,  prayer  is  made,  the  catechumens 
and  also  the  faithful  are  blessed  ;  this  is  likewise  done 
at  the  Cross.  Lastly,  all  the  Christian  people  to  a 
man  escort  the  bishop  with  hymns  to  Sion,  and 
when  they  are  come  there,  suitable  lessons  are  read, 
psalms  and  antiphons  are  said,  prayer  is  made,  the 
catechumens  and  the  faithful  are  blessed,  and  the 
dismissal  takes  place.  And  after  the  dismissal  all 
approach  the  bishop's  hand,  and  then  every  one 
returns  to  his  house  about  midnight. 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  89 

Thus  very  great  fatigue  is  endured  on  that  day,  for 
vigil  is  kept  at  the  Anastasis  from  the  first  cockcrow, 
and  there  is  no  pause  from  that  time  onward  through- 
out the  whole  day,  but  the  whole  celebration  (of  the 
Feast)  lasts  so  long  that  it  is  midnight  when  every 
one  returns  home  after  the  dismissal  has  taken  place 
at  Sion. 


2.  Resumption  of  the    Ordinary   Services. 

Now,  from  the  day  after  the  fiftieth  day  all  fast  as 
is  customary  throughout  the  whole  year,  each  one  as 
he  is  able,  except  on  the  Sabbath  and  on  the  Lord's 
Day,  which  are  never  kept  as  fasts  in  this  place.  On 
the  ensuing  days  everything  is  done  as  during  the 
whole  year,  that  is,  vigil  is  kept  in  the  Anastasis 
from  the  first  cockcrow.  And  if  it  be  the  Lord's 
Day,  at  the  earliest  cockcrow  the  bishop  first  reads 
in  the  Anastasis,  as  is  customary,  the  passage  from 
the  Gospel  concerning  the  Resurrection,  which  is 
always  read  on  the  Lord's  Day,  and  then  after- 
wards hymns  and  antiphons  are  said  in  the  Anasta- 
sis until  daylight.  But  if  it  be  not  the  Lord's 
Day,  only  hymns  and  antiphons  are  said  in  like 
manner  in  the  Anastasis  from  the  first  cockcrow 
until  daylight.  All  the  apotactitae,  and  of  the  people 
those  who  are  able,  attend  ;  the  clergy  go  by  turns, 
daily.  The  clergy  go  there  at  first  cockcrow,  but  the 
bishop  always  as  it  begins  to  dawn,  that  the  morning 
dismissal  maybe  made  with  all  the  clergy  present  ex- 
cept on  the  Lord's  Day,  when  (the  bishop)  has  to  go  at 
the  first  cockcrow,  that  he  may  read  the  Gospel  in  the 
Anastasis.  Afterwards  everything  is  done  as  usual 


90  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

in  the  Anastasis  until  the  sixth  hour,  and  at  the 
ninth,  as  well  as  at  lucernare,  according  to  the  custom 
of  the  whole  year.  But  on  the  fourth  and  sixth 
weekdays,  the  ninth  hour  is  kept  in  Sion  as  is 
customary. 

VII 

BAPTISM  * 
I.   The   Inscribing  of  the    Competents. 

Moreover,  I  must  write  how  they  are  taught  who 
are  baptised  at  Easter.  Now  he  who  gives  in  his 
name,  gives  it  in  on  the  day  before  Quadragesima, 
and  the  priest  writes  down  the  names  of  all  ;  this  is 
before  the  eight  weeks  which  I  have  said  are  kept 
here  at  Quadragesima.  And  when  the  priest  has 
written  down  the  names  of  all,  after  the  next  day  of 
Quadragesima,  that  is,  on  the  day  when  the  eight 
weeks  begin,  the  chair  is  set  for  the  bishop  in  the 
midst  of  the  great  church,  that  is,  at  the  martyrium, 
and  the  priests  sit  in  chairs  on  either  side  of  him, 
while  all  the  clergy  stand.  Then  one  by  one  the 
competents  are  brought  up,  coming,  if  they  are  males 
(vin)  with  their  fathers,  and  if  females  (femtnae)ywith 
their  mothers.  Then  the  bishop  asks  the  neighbours 
of  every  one  who  has  entered  concerning  each  indi- 
vidual, saying :  "  Does  this  person  lead  a  good  life, 
is  he  obedient  to  his  parents,  is  he  not  given  to  wine, 
nor  deceitful  ? "  making  also  inquiry  about  the  several 
vices  which  are  more  serious  in  man.2  And  if  he 

1  For  this  section  see  Thompson  on  Baptismal  Offices,  pp.  52  ff. 

8  Lat.  singula  viHa  quae  sunt  tamen  gra-viora  in  homine.     It 

js  difficult  to  decide  whether  this  means  "the  various  more 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  91 

has  proved  him  in  the  presence  of  witnesses  to  be 
blameless  in  all  these  matters  concerning  which  he 
has  made  inquiry,  he  writes  down  his  name  with  his 
own  hand.  But  if  he  is  accused  in  any  matter,  he 
orders  him  to  go  out,  saying :  "  Let  him  amend,  and 
when  he  has  amended  then  let  him  come  to  the 
font  (lavacrum}."  And  as  he  makes  inquiry  con- 
cerning the  men,  so  also  does  he  concerning  the 
women.  But  if  any  be  a  stranger,  he  comes  not  so 
easily  to  Baptism,  unless  he  has  testimonials  from 
those  who  know  him. 

2.  Preparation  for  Baptism. — Catechisings. 

This  also  I  must  write,  reverend  sisters,  lest  you 
should  think  that  these  things  are  done  without  good 
reason.  The  custom  here  is  that  they  who  come  to 
Baptism  through  those  forty  days,  which  are  kept  as 
fast  days,  are  first  exorcised  by  the  clergy  early  in  the 
day,  as  soon  as  the  morning  dismissal  has  been  made 
in  the  Anastasis.  Immediately  afterwards  the  chair  is 
placed  for  the  bishop  at  the  martyrium  in  the  great 
church,  and  all  who  are  to  be  baptised  sit  around,  near 
the  bishop,  both  men  and  women,  their  fathers  and 
mothers  standing  there  also.  Besides  these,  all  the 
people  who  wish  to  hear  come  in  and  sit  down — the 
faithful  however  only,  for  no  catechumen  enters  there 
when  the  bishop  teaches  the  others  the  Law.  Begin- 
ning from  Genesis  he  goes  through  all  the  Scriptures 

serious  human  vices"  (in  males  and  females),  in  which  case 
there  is  apparently  no  force  in  tamen,  or  "  the  various  vices, 
which  are  more  serious  in  a  male  (than  in  a  female)  all  the 
same,"  in  which  case  Etheria  uses  homo,  where  just  before  and 
after  she  uses  vir, 


92  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

during  those  forty  days,  explaining  them,  first  literally, 
and  then  unfolding  them  spiritually.  They  are  also 
taught  about  the  Resurrection,  and  likewise  all  things 
concerning  the  Faith  during  those  days.  And  this  is 
called  the  catechising. 

3.  "  Traditio  "  of  the  Creed. 

Then  when  five  weeks  are  completed  from  the  time 
when  their  teaching  began,  (the  Competents)  are  then 
taught  the  Creed.1  And  as  he  explained  the  meaning 
of  all  the  Scriptures,  so  does  he  explain  the  meaning 
of  the  Creed ;  each  article  first  literally  and  then 
spiritually.  By  this  means  all  the  faithful  in  these 
parts  follow  the  Scriptures  when  they  are  read  in 
church,  inasmuch  as  they  are  all  taught  during  those 
forty  days  from  the  first  to  the  third  hour,  for  the 
catechising  lasts  for  three  hours.  And  God  knows, 
reverend  sisters,  that  the  voices  of  the  faithful  who 
come  in  to  hear  the  catechising  are  louder  (in  ap- 
proval) of  the  things  spoken  and  explained  by  the 
^bishop  than  they  are  when  he  sits  and  preaches  in 
church.  Then,  after  the  dismissal  of  the  catechising 
is  made,  it  being  already  the  third  hour,  the  bishop  is 
at  once  escorted  with  hymns  to  the  Anastasis.  So 
the  dismissal  takes  place  at  the  third  hour.  Thus 
are  they  taught  for  three  hours  a  day  for  seven  weeks, 
but  in  the  eighth  week  of  Quadragesima,  which  is 
called  the  Great  Week,  there  is  no  time  for  them  to 
be  taught,  because  the  things  that  are  [described] 
above  must  be  carried  out.2 

1  Lat.  accipient  simbolum. 

*  i,  e.  the  Holy  Week  Services. 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  93 

4.  "  Redditio "  [Recitation]  of  the  Creed. 

And  when  the  seven  weeks  are  past,  [and]  the 
Paschal  week  is  left,  which  they  call  here  the 
Great  Week,  then  the  bishop  comes  in  the  morning 
into  the  great  church  at  the  martyrium,  and  the  chair 
is  placed  for  him  in  the  apse  behind  the  altar,  where 
they  come  one  by  one,  a  man  with  his  father  and  a 
woman  with  her  mother,  and  recite  the  Creed  to  the 
bishop.  And  when  they  have  recited  the  Creed  to 
the  bishop,  he  addresses  them  all,  and  says :  "  During 
these  seven  weeks  you  have  been  taught  all  the  law 
of  the  Scriptures,  you  have  also  heard  concerning  the 
Faith,  and  co-  cerning  the  resurrection  of  the  flesh, 
and  the  whole  meaning  of  the  Creed,  as  far  as  you 
were  able,  being  yet  catechumens.  But  the  teachings 
of  the  deeper  mystery,  that  is,  of  Baptism  itself,  you 
cannot  hear,  being  as  yet  catechumens.  But,  lest  you 
should  think  that  anything  is  done  without  good 
reason,  these,  when  you  have  been  baptised  in  the 
Name  of  God,  you  shall  hear  in  the  Anastasis,  during 
the  eight  Paschal  days,  after  the  dismissal  from  the 
church  has  been  made.  You,  being  as  yet  cate- 
chumens, cannot  be  told  the  more  secret  mysteries 
of  God." 

5.  Mystic  Catechisings. 

But  when  the  days  of  Easter  have  come,  during 
those  ekTht  days,  that  is,  from  Easter  to  the  Octave, 
when  the  dismissal  from  the  church  has  been  made, 
they  go  with  hymns  to  the  Anastasis.  Prayer  is  said 
anon,  the  faithful  are  blessed,  and  the  bishop  stands, 
leaning  against  the  inner  rails  which  are  in  the  cave 


94  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

of  the  Anastasis,  and  explains  all  things  that  a.'e  done 
in  Baptism.  In  that  hour  no  catechumen  approaches 
the  Anastasis,  but  only  the  neophytes  and  the  faithful, 
who  wish  to  hear  concerning  the  mysteries,  enter 
there,  and  the  doors  are  shut  lest  any  catechumen 
should  draw  near.  And  while  the  bishop  discusses 
and  sets  forth  each  point,  the  voices  of  those  who 
applaud  are  so  loud  that  they  can  be  heard  outside 
the  church.  And  truly  the  mysteries  are  so  unfolded 
that  there  is  no  one  unmoved  at  the  things  that  he 
hears  to  be  so  explained. 

Now,  forasmuch  as  in  that  province  some  of  the 
people  know  both  Greek  and  Syriac,  while  some  know 
Greek  alone  and  others  only  Syriac ;  and  because  the 
bishcp,  although  he  knows  Syriac,  yet  always  speaks 
Greek,  and  never  Syriac,  there  is  always  a  priest 
standing  by  who,  when  the  bishop  speaks  Greek, 
interprets  into  Syriac,  that  all  may  understand  what 
is  being  taught.  And  because  all  the  lessons  that  are 
read  in  the  church  must  be  read  in  Greek,  he  always 
stands  by  and  interprets  them  into  Syriac,  for  the 
people's  sake,  that  they  may  always  be  edified.  More- 
over, the  Latins  here,  who  understand  neither  Syriac 
nor  Greek,  in  order  that  they  be  not  disappointed, 
have  (all  things)  explained  to  them,  for  there  are 
other  brothers  and  sisters  knowing  both  Greek  and 
Latin,  who  translate  into  Latin  for  them.  But  what 
is  above  all  things  very  pleasant  and  admirable  here, 
is  that  the  hymns,  the  antiphons,  and  the  lessons,  as 
well  as  the  prayers  which  the  bishop  says,  always 
have  suitable  and  fitting  references,  both  to  the  day 
that  is  being  celebrated  and  also  to  the  place  where 
the  celebration  is  taking  place. 


THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA  95 


VIII 

DEDICATION  OF  CHURCHES  l 

Those  are  called  the  days  of  dedication  when  the 
holy  church  which  is  in  Golgotha,  and  which  they  call 
the  martyrium,  was  consecrated  to  God  ;  the  holy 
church  also  which  is  at  the  Anastasis,  that  is,  in  the 
place  where  the  Lord  rose  after  His  Passion,  was 
consecrated  to  God  on  that  day.  The  dedication  of 
these  holy  churches  is  therefore  celebrated  with  the 
highest  honour,  because  the  Cross  of  the  Lord  was 
found  on  this  same  day.  And  it  was  so  ordained 
that,  when  the  holy  churches  above  mentioned  were 
first  consecrated,  that  should  be  the  day  when  the 
Cross  of  the  Lord  had  been  found,  in  order  that 
the  whole  celebration  should  be  made  together,  with 
all  rejoicing,  on  the  self-same  day.  Moreover,  it 
appears  from  the  Holy  Scriptures 2  that  this  is  also 
the  day  of  dedication,  when  holy  Solomon,  having 
finished  the  House  of  God  which  he  had  built,  stood 
before  the  altar  of  God  and  prayed,  as  it  is  written  in 
the  books  of  the  Chronicles. 

So  when  these  days  of  dedication  are  come,  they 
are  kept  for  eight  days.  And  people  begin  to  assemble 
from  all  parts  many  days  before  ;  not  only  monks 

1  In  the  Old  Arm.  Lect.  we  have  :  "  September  23,  dedication 
of  the  holy  places.     On  the  first  day  in  the  holy  Anastasis, 
this  canon  is  performed  :  Ps.  Ixv.1;  Tim.  iii.  14-16 ;  Alleluiah  : 
Ps.  cxlvii.12;   S.  John  x.  22-42  .  .  ."    [Mr.  Conybeare  notes 
that  in  the  MS.  the  last  line  of  this  lection  is  torn  away  as  well 
as  the  beginning  of  the  rubric  which  follows,  and  which  related 
to  the  feast  of  the  Cross,  called  Warag,  on  the  following  day.] 

2  2  Chron.  vi.,  vii.  8-10. 


96  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  ETHERIA 

and  apotactitae  from  various  provinces,  from  Meso- 
potamia and  Syria,  from  Egypt  and  the  Thebaid 
(where  there  are  very  many  monks),  and  from  every 
different  place  and  province — for  there  is  none  who 
does  not  turn  his  steps  to  Jerusalem  on  that  day  for 
such  rejoicing  and  for  such  high  days — but  lay  people 
too  in  like  manner,  both  men  and  women,  with  faith- 
ful minds,  gather  together  in  Jerusalem  from  every 
province  on  those  days,  for  the  sake  of  the  holy  day. 
And  the  bishops,  even  when  they  have  been  few,  are 
present  to  the  number  of  forty  or  fifty  in  Jerusalem 
on  these  days,  and  with  them  come  many  of  their 
clergy.  But  why  should  I  say  more  ?  for  he  who  on 
these  days  has  not  been  present  at  so  solemn  a  feast 
thinks  that  he  has  committed  a  very  great  sin,  unless 
some  necessity,  which  keeps  a  man  back  from  carrying 
out  a  good  resolution,  has  hindered  him.  Now  on 
these  days  of  the  dedication  the  adornment  of  all  the 
churches  is  the  same  as  at  Easter  and  at  Epiphany, 
also  on  each  day  the  procession  is  made  to  the  several 
holy  places,  as  at  Easter  and  at  Epiphany.  For  on 
the  first  and  second  days  it  is  to  the  greater  church, 
which  is  called  the  martyrium.  On  the  third  day  it 
is  to  Eleona,  that  is,  the  church  which  is  on  that 
mount  whence  the  Lord  ascended  into  heaven  after 
His  Passion,  and  in  this  church  is  the  cave  wherein 
the  Lord  used  to  teach  His  Apostles  on  the  Mount 
of  Olives.  But  on  the  fourth  day  .  .  . 


INDEX   OF  PROPER   NAMES   AND   THINGS 


AARON,  7,  9,  16 
Abgar,  xxiv,  30  ff. 

—  his  likeness,  xxiv,  xlvii,  33 
Abraham  (Abram),  xxxiii,  xxxvii 

«.,  26,  36  f. 

his  house,  36 

Act  a  ThadJaei,  xxxvi 
Acts  of  Apostles.   See  Apostles 
Acts  of  S.  Thecla.    See  S.  Thecla 
Acts    of    S.    Thomas.      See    S. 

Thomas 
Adornment  of  Churches,  xlvi,  53, 

55,  80,  96 

Aelia  (Jerusalem),  18 
ALnon,  xxii,  xliv,  27  f. 
Agri  specula,  24 
Alexandria,  xviii «.,  xix,  xxvii  n., 

6,  18 

patriarch  of,  xxvi 

Amalek,  xviii 
Ambrose,  S.,  xl,  75  «. 
Amphilochius  quoted,  xxxii 
Ananias  the  courier,  30,  33,  35 
Anastasis,  Church  of,  xlv,  45  ff. 
Anastasius,  Emperor,  xiii 
Anna  the  prophetess,  xxxvii,  56 
Anthony,  rule  of  S.,  xxvii  f. 
Antioch,  xviii,  xxiii,  xxv,  xxxvii, 

31,  41 

patriarch  of,  xxvii 

Antiphons,  xxxixf.,  28,  45  ff. 
Apostles,  Church  of,  xlvi,  44 

Acts  of,  86,  87 

Epistles  of,  76 

Apostolic  Constitutions    quoted, 

xlii,   xliiitt. 
Apotactitat,  xxix,  xlii,  xlvii,    42, 

43,  62,  82,  83,  89,  96 

H  97 


Arabia,  25 

city  of,  xix,  xx,  13,   16 ;  its 

bishop,  xx,  xxx,  16,  17 

mountains  of,  19 

Archdeacon,  xlivf.,  63,65,  70,87 

Arianism,  xl 

Aries,  ix,  xvii 

Armenia,  Catholicos  of,  xxvii 

Armenian  Lectionary,  xli,  52  «. 

Ascension,    Feast    of,    xxxviiif., 

xlvii,  84,  87 
Ascetics,  xii,  xiii,  xxvii  ff.,  xxxvii, 

xxxix,  4,  21,  29,  37,  39 
Asia,  44 

Asses  used,  xii,  21 
Astorga,  viii 

Athanasius,  S.,  quoted,  xlii 
Augustine,  S.,  quoted,  xlii 
Augustofratensis,  province  of,  31 
Ausitis.     See  Uz 

Baalzephon,  xix,  14 

Balaam,  24 

Balak,  24 

Balsam,  17 

Baptism,  xliiif.,  90  ff. 

Baptisms  at  ^Enon,  27  f. 

Bardesanes,  xl 

Bashan,  xxxivn.,  24 

Batiffol,  Pierre,  xiii 

Bathnae,  xxiii,  xxiv,  32 

Bishop  of,  xiii,  32 

Belisarius,  xiv 

Bernard,    Archbishop,    vii,    xiv, 
xvi,    xx,    xxiv,    xxx,    xxxviii, 
xxxix;/.,     xli  f.,     xlvi,     17  n., 
21  «.,  22w.,  25«.,  28**.,  32;;. 
43  «.,  46  «.,  62 n. 


98      INDEX  OF  PROPER  NAMES  AND  THINGS 


Betham -Ed  wards,  Miss,   quoted, 

xx  f. 
Bethany,  63  ff. 

Church  of,  xlvii,  63  f. 

Beth-haran.     See  Livias 
Bethlehem,  xxxviii,  52  f. 

Church  of,  xlvii,  54 

Bethnel,  38 

Bigg,  Canon,  21  n. 

Bishop,  Edmund,  xliii 

Bishop's  hand,  to  approach  the, 

xl,  46  «. 

Bithynia,  xxv,  43 
Bordeaux,  Pilgrim  of,  xvii,  70  n. 
Braga,  Bishop  of,  viii 
Brightman,  Canon,  5  n. 
Buhastir,  xix 
Burning.     See  Taberah 

Bush,  xix,  2,  7  f. 

Butler,  Dom,  xxix  «. 

Cabrol,  Dom,  vii,  46  n. 
Csesarea,  Bishop  of,  xxvii 
Camels  used,  xii,  12 
Cancelli.     See  Rails 
Canon  of  Scripture,  meaning  of, 

xxxii 

Cappadocia,  xxv,  43 
Carneas,  xiii «.,  xxii,  xxix,  xliv, 

25,  29 

Bishop  of,  29  f. 

Carthage,  Councils  of,  xlii,  xliv 
Cassian  quoted,  xxx 
Catechizing,  91  ff 
Catechumens,  xli,  xliii,  48,  67  ff., 

90  ff. 

Catherine,  Convent  of  S.,  xix 
Cells  (monasteria],  xxx,  4,  5,  7, 

II,  21,  28,  29,  40,  42 
Cereofala,  48,  54 
Chalcedon,  xxv,  xliv,  43 
Chaldees,  39 
Charrae.     See  Haran 
Chedorlaomer    (Quodollagomor), 

xxxii,  26 

Cherith  (Corra),  xxii,  29 
Children.     See  Infantes 
Choir  boys,  xliii,  47 
"Christ  our  God,"  31,  32,  43,  44 
Christmas,  Feast  of,  xxxvii 


Chronicles,  Books  of,  95 
Chrysostom,  S.,  quoted,  xl 

Liturgy  of,  xix  «. 

Cicendelat,  54 

Cilicia,  xxv,  41,  42 

Clysma  (Suez).xi,  xviii,  xix,  12 f, 

Ccele-Syria,  31 

Competentes,  xliii  f.,  90  ff. 

Confessor,  xiii,  32,  36 

Constantino,  Emperor,  xlvif.,  50, 

52.54 

Constantinople,  viiw.,  xi«.,  xvii, 
xxiii,  xxv,  xlvi,  43,  44 

Churches  of,  xxvi,  42  ».,  44 

Conybeare,      F.      C.,      xxxvii, 

xxxix  «.,    xli,    39  n.,    62  «., 

7o«.,  95  ». 
Coptic  Church,  xlv 
Corra.     See  Cherith 
Corycus,  xxv,  42 
Cosmas     Indicopleustes    quoted, 

xxxvii 

Credner  on  the  Canon,  xxxii 
Creed,  "Traditio"  of,  92 

' '  Redditio  "  of,  93 

Cross,  Adoration  of,  xxxviii,  74  f. 

Discovery  of,  xlvi,  95 

Exaltation  of,  xlvi 

Title  of,  xlv,  75 

Cyril,    S.,    of  Jerusalem,    xliv, 

82».,  85  «. 
Cyrus,  Bishop  of  Edessa,  xxiv 

Daily  offices,  xxxix,  45  ff. 
Daphno.     See  Tahpanhes 
Deaconess,  xliv,  42 
Dead  Sea,  23,  24 
Decian  persecution,  xxvii 
Deconinck,  Abbe,  viii 
Dedication,  Feast  of,  xlvi,  95  f. 
Dennaba,  xxii,  25 
Denzinger,  H.,  xlv 
Deuteronomy,   Book   of,   xxxiii, 

18,  19,  20 
Dictionary  of  Bible,  Hastings's, 

17,  25,  41 

of     Christian     Biography, 

xxiv,  xxxvi,  xl 

of  Christian  Antiquities,  xl 

of  Prayer  Book,  50 


INDEX   OF   PROPER   NAMES  AND   THINGS      99 


Diptychs,  xliii,  47 

Dowden,  Bishop,  xlii 

Ducange  quoted,  48  n. 

Doctrina  Apostolorum,  xxxvi 

Addaci,  xxxvi 

Duchesne,  Monseigneur,  viii,  xiii, 
xv.xvi,  xxvii,  xxxvii,  xxxviii, 
xlv,  46«.,57«.,63«.,78«.,84«. 

Easter,  Feast  of,  xxxviii,   xliv, 

37,  49,  56>  80,  96 

Vigil  of,  78  f. 

Edessa,  xiv«.,  xxii,  xxxvi,  xliv 

Bishop  of,  ix«.,  xiii,  32 

new  church  of  S.  Thomas, 

xxiii,  32 

Chronicle  of,  xxiii 

Edom.     See  Idumaea 

Edrei  (Sasdra),  24 

Egeria,  viiiw. 

Egypt,   xi,  xii,  xix,  xxi,  xxvi, 

xxxvii,  6,  10,  13,  17,  96 

monks  of,  xxvii  ft. 

Eleona,  xxxix,  xlvii,  55  ff. 
Eliezer  of  Damascus,  xxxiv,  36 
Elijah,  xviii,  xxii,  6,  28 
Elpidius.     See  Helpidius,  S. 
Eortae,  name  for  Lent,  xxxviii, 

57 

Epauleum  (Pi-hahiroth),  xix,  14 

Ephesus,  xxvi,  xliv,  44 

Ephraem  Syrus,  xxiv,  xl 

Epiphany,  Feast  of,  xx,  xxxvii, 
xlvii,  16,  52  ff.,  96 

Epiphanius  quoted,  xxx  n. 

Esebon  (Exebon).     See  Heshbon 

Etham,  14 

Etheria,  her  date  and  country, 
viii  ff. ;  her  rank,  xi  ;  her  lan- 
guage, ix  f.  ;  her  knowledge  of 
Greek,  x,  xxv,  xlviif.  ;  her 
use  of  Scripture,  xxxiff  ;  her 
mode  of  travelling,  xii  ;  her 
route,  xvii  ff. ;  she  receives 
Communion,  5,  30,  43  ;  gives 
thanks,  28,  29,  30,  40,  43  ;  her 
sisters  in  religion,  5,  10,  23,  31, 
36,  37,  40,  44,  45,  91,92 

Eucharist,  xlii  f. 

Eacheria,  viii  «, 


Eulogiae,  xlv,  5,  21,  28,  40 
Eulogius,  Bishop  of  Edessa,  xiii, 

xxiv 
Euphemia,    S.,    tomb    of,    xxv, 

xliv,  43 

Euphrates,  xxiii,  31  f. 
Eusebius    the    historian    quoted, 

xxiv,  xlvif.,   i8w.,  30  n. 
Evans,  Canon  Charles,  xv 
Exodus,  route  of,  xix,  10 

Fadana  (Paddan-Aram),  xxv,  41 

Faran.     See  Paran 

Fasting,  rules  for,  xlif.,  57,  6 1  f. 

Ferotin,  Dom,  vii f.,  xi  «.,  xvii «. 

Fogor.     See  Peor 

Fructuosus,  S.,  of  Braga,  viii 

Gad,  19 

Galatia,  xxv,  43 

Galla  Placidia,  vii  «.,  xii 

Gallaecia,  viii,  ix,  xi«. 

Gallia  Narbonensis,  ix 

Gamurrini,  Signer,  vii,  x,  xxiv, 

25  «.,  62  n. 

Gasquet,  Abbe,  xxix  n. 
Genesis,  Book  of,  xxxiii,  15,  36, 40 
Gerapolis.     See  Hierapolis 
Getha,  Tomb  of,  28. 
Gethsemane,  xlvii,  71  f. 
Geyer,  M.  Paul,  vii 
Gibson,   Mrs.,   and  Mrs.  Lewis, 

quoted,  46  n. 
Glory  of  God,  and  Glory  of  the 

Lord,  3  f. 
Golgotha,  xlv,  53  ff. 
Good  Friday  observances,xxxviii, 

73  f- 
Graves    of    Lust.      See    Kibroth 

Hattaavah 
Greek,    use    of,   x,    xxiv,    xliii, 

xlvii  f. ,  94 

Gregory  Asharuni,  xii,  52  n. ,  59  «. 
Gregory,  S.,  of  Tours,  54  «.,  59  n. 
Goshen,  xix,  xx,  13,  15 
fertility  of,  xx  f.,  17 

Haran  (Charrae),  xxv,  xxix,  xxxi, 

xliv,  36 
Bishop  of,  xiii,  xxxvi,  36,  39 


ioo    INDEX  OF   PROPER    NAMES  AND  THINGS 


Heathen  mentioned,  38 
Helena,  Empress,  xlvii,  54 
Helpidius    (Elpidius),     S.,    xxv, 

xxix,  xliv,  37 
Herbert,  Rev.  George,  xv 
Hermon,  Mount,  xxii 
Heroopolis,  xix,  15 
Heshbon  (Esebon),  23 
Hierapolis      (Gerapolis),      xxiii, 

xxvii,  31 
Hilarion,  xxviii 
Hilary  of  Poictiers,  xxxvi 
Hisauria.     See  Isauria 
Holy  Week  observances,  xxxviii, 

63  ff. 

Horeb,  Mount,  xviii,  6 
Horn,  for  anointing  kings,  xxxviii, 

75 

Hur.     See  Ur 
Hymns,  xxxix  f. ,  45  ff. 

Idumaea  (Edom),  24,  25 
Imbomon,  xxxviii,  xlvii,  66  ff. 
Incense,  xliii,  49 
Infantes  (children  or  the  baptized), 
66,  79,  82.     See  also  Neophyti 
Isaac,  38 
Isauria,  xxv,  xxix,  xliv,  41,  42, 

43 
Israelites,  13,  16,  20,  24 

Jacob,  xxv,  15,  39,  41 
Jebel  el  Deir,  xviii n. 
Jebel  Musa,  xviii 
Jericho,  xxif.,  19,  23,  24 
Jerome,  S.,  quoted,  xxxiv,  xxxvi 
Jerusalem,   xii,   xviii,   xxii,   xxix, 

xxxvii,  xlf.,  xliv,  xlvi,  18,  19, 

24,  30,  31,  41 

churches  of,  xiv,  xlv 

Bishop  of,  xxvii,  45  ff.  ;  his 

house,  xlvi,  50 

services  in,  45  ff. 

"  Jesus  our  God,"  18,  30,  36 
Job,  xxii,  24  ff. 

grave  of,  xliv,  29 

John,  S.,  tomb  of,  xxvi,  xliv,  44 
John  the  Baptist,  S.,  xliv,  xlv,  27 f. 
Jordan,  xxif.,  xxvii,  xxix,  19,  28 
Joseph,  son  of  Jacob,  15 


Joseph  of  Arimathsea,  77 

of  Nazareth,  S.,  56 

Joshua,  9,  19 

book  of,  19 

Jovian,  Emperor,  xiv,  39 «. 
Judges,  Book  of,  28 
Justinian,  Emperor,  ix,  xiv,  42  «. 
Juvenal,     Bishop    of    Jerusalem, 


Kibroth  Ilattaavah     (Graves     of 

Lust),  xvii,  I,  n 
Kings,  Book  of,  7 

See  Horn 

Kohler,  vii  «. 

Kyrie  Eleison,  xliii,  47 

Laban,  39,  41 

Laodicea,  Council  of,  xlii 

Lay  people  (laid,  saculares),  xxx 

«-,  45.  56-  96 

Lazarium,  xlvii,  55,  63 f.,  80 
Lazarus,  sister  of,  xlvii,  64 
Lent,  observances  of,  57  ff. 

duration  of,  xxxviii 

fast  of,  xxviii  n. ,  xli  f. ,  59, 

61  f. 
Livias  (Beth-haran),  xxi,   19,  20, 

23 

Lord's  Day,  49  ff. ,  57  f. 
Lot's  wife,  23 
Lowther-Clarke,    Rev.     W.    K., 

xxvii «. ,  xxviii  n. 
Lucernaey  54 
Lucernare     (licinicon,     vespers), 

xxxix,  28,  47  ff. 

Magnus  (Ma'nu),  xxiv,  33 

Manasseh,  19 

Manichaeans,  xxx 

Mansocrenae.     See  Mopsocrene 

Ma'nu.     See  Magnus 

Marseilles,  ix 

Marthana  (the   deaconess),    xxv, 

xxix,  xliv,  42 
Martyrology,  Syriac,  37«.,  42«., 

43«- 
Martyrs'  memorials,  xliv 

days  in  Lent,  xlii,  59 

Mary  of  Bethany.     See  Lazarus 


INDEX   OF   PROPER   NAMES  AND  THINGS    101 


Mas'oudy,  the  traveller,  quoted,  xx 

Mattins,  xxxix,  45  f. 

Maundy    Thursday    observances, 

xxxviii,  xlii,  69  f. 
Mediterranean  Sea,  xviiw.,  6 
Meister,  Karl,  viii  ff.,  xiiiff. ,  xxi, 

xxiv 
Melchizedek,    xxii,    xxxiv,    xliv, 

xlviii,  25  ff. 
Mesopotamia,    xiii,    xxiii,    xxvii, 

xxxvii,  30,  32   37,  96 
Migdol,  xix,  14 
Milan,  xl,  xliii,  54  n. 
Missa,  meaning  of,  xl  f. 
Moab,  xxi,  xxxiv,  18  f. 
Monazontes,  xxix,  45 
Monks,  viii,  xxvii  ff. 

as  cultivators,  xxxi,  5,  28 

Mopsocrene  (Mansocrenae),  xxv, 

43 

Moses,    xviii,    xxii,    xxxi,    xxxiv, 
2,  4,  5.  7,  8,  9,  ii,  16,  20,  21, 

24 
books  of,  xxxi,  5,  7,  8,   16, 

19,  21,  22,  26 
Mules,  xii 
Mysteries,  instruction  about,  93  f. 

Nahor,  38 

Naville,  Ed. ,  xx  «. 

Nebo,  Mount,   xi,    xii,  xxi,   xlv, 

1 8,  20,  22 

Neophytes,  94.   See  also  Infantes 
Nicsea,  Council  of,  xxvii 
Nile,  xix,  15,  17 
Nisibis,  xiii,  xxv,  39 
Nitria,  xxvii  n. 
None,  xxxix,  46 
Nuns,  xi  «. ,  xxvii  ff. ,  42,  45  ff. 

Oblatio,  xix,  xxii,  xii,  5,  7,  II,  30, 

60,  70,  76,  80,  86 
Officers,  Roman,  14 
Og,  King  of  Bashan,  24 
Origen  quoted,  xxxiii 
Osrhoene,  xxiii,  32  n. 
Ostraca,  Coptic  and  Greek,  x  n., 

10  n, 

Pachomius,  S,,  Role  of,  xxvii  f. 


Paddan-Aram.     See  Fadana 
Palladius,  Lausiac  History  of,  xii, 

xxv  w. 
Palm         Sunday        observances, 

xxxviii,  64  ff. 
Palestine,  monks  of,  xxviii  f. 

seen  from  Mount  Sinai,  6 

Paran  (Faran),  xii,  xviii,  xxii,  2, 

I  Iff. 
Parthenae     (virgins),     xxix,    42, 

45  ff. 

Parthenian  Sea,  xviii  w.  6 
Passover,  10,  15 
Paschal  candle,  78  n. 
Paul,    S.,     connected     with    S. 

Thecla,  xxxvi 

Pelusium,  xx,  xxi,  xxvi,  17,  18 
Pentecost,  festival  of,  xxxix,  85  ff. 

fast  after,  xlii,  89 

Peor  (Fogor),  24 

Persians,  xxv,  33  f.,  39 

Peter  the  Deacon,  xvii  n. 

Petrie,  Prof.  Flinders,  xvi,  12 

Pharaoh,  16,  17 

Phoenicia,  xxii,  29 

Pilate,  77 

Pithom,  xix,  15 

Pompeiopolis  (Soli),  xxv,  42 

Prayers  offered,  4,  7. 

Provence,  xliii 

Prudentiu',  xl ». 

Psalter,  use  of,  xxxix,  45  ff. 

Pseudo- Basil  of  Seleucia,  xxix  «. 

Purification    (Hypopaute),    Feast 

of,  xxxvii,  56 

Quadragesimae,  xxxviii,  57 
Quodollagomor.     See  Chedorlao- 


Rachel's  well,  xxv,  xxxi,  39,  40, 

41 

Rails  (cancellt),  46  ff. 

Rameses,  xix,  xx,  13,  isf.,  18 

Rebecca,  36,  38 

Red  Sea,  6,  I3f. 

Reuben,  19 

Rhone,  ix,  xvii,  31 

Rigby,  Rev.  A.  D.,  xvi,  xxxiv  n. 


102     INDEX   OF  PROPER  NAMES  AND   THINGS 


Ring  of  King  Solomon,  xxxviii, 

75 

Rituale  Armenorum,  xxxvii,  62  n. 
Robbers,  xxxi,  43  ;  cf.  75 
Roman  Empire,  borders  of,  xxxv, 

39- 

Rufianense  monasterium,  viu 
Rufinus,  the  Imperial  minister,  vii 

,   the  writer,   quoted,   xxiv, 

75  «• 

Saft-el-Henneh,  xx 

Saints,  lives  of,  xxxvi  f. 

Salem     (Salim,     Sedima),    xxii, 

xxxiv,  25,  27 
Sapor,  King,  xiv,  39  n. 
Saracens,  6,  15 
Sarah,  38 
Sasdra.     See  Edrei 
Sayce,  Professor,  46  «. 
Scete,  xxvii  n. 
Scriptures,  I,  2,   II,   14,    16,  23, 

31,  38,  51,  91 

of  the  Canon,  38  ;  of  GOD, 

39,  46 

Sedima.     See  Salem 
Segor.     See  Zoar 
Seleucia,   xviii  «.,   xxix,  xxxi, 

xxxvi,  xliv,  42 
Seon.  See  Sihon 
Septuagint,  readings  of,  xxxii  ff, 

18,  19 

Sermons,  xliii,  51,  56,  85 
Sext,  xxxix,  46 

Sihon  (Seon),  KingofAmorir.es,  23 
Silvia,  S.,  of  Aquitaine,  vii,  viii, 

ix  «.,  xii 
Sinai,  xi,  xii,  xiii,  xvii,  xxix, 

xxx,  xliv,  xlv,  i,  3,  10,  1 8 
Sion,  xlv,  52  ff. 
Socrates,    the   historian,    quoted, 

xxiii 

Sodom,  23,  26 
Soldiers,   Roman,   xi,  xiv,  xix, 

xx,  14,  17,  31 

Soloman,      King.        See     Ring ; 

Temple 
Sozomen,   the  historian,  quoted, 

xlvi  «. 
Spain,  viii,  78  «, 


Spanish  dialect,  ix,  x  n. 
Statuta  ecclesiac  antiqua,  xliv 
Succoth,  xix,  14 
Suez.     See  Clysma 
Sychar,  xxxiv 
Sycomore  tree,  xx,  16 
Symeon  and  Anna,  xxxvii,  56 
Syria,  xxiii,  30,  96 

,  Church  of,  xxvii,  xlv 

,  monks  of,  xxviii  f. 

Syriac,  use  of,  x,  xl,  xliii 
,  interpreter  of,  xliii,  94 

Tabor,  xxii  f. 

Taberah  (Burning),  xix,  10 

Tabernacle,    1 1 

Tahpanhes    (Taphnis,    Daphno) 

xxi,  17  n. 

Taphnis.     See  Tahpanhes 
Tarsus,  xviii  «.,  xxv,  4iff. 
Tatnis.     See  Zoan 
Taurus,  Mount,  xxv,  43 
Temple,  Solomon,  xlvi,  95 
Terah,  38 
Terce,  xxxix,  58  f. 
Tertullian  quoted,  xxxiii,  xxxvi 
Thaddaeus,  xxxvi 
Thebaid,  xviii  n.,  xix,  xxxi,  17, 

1 8,  96 

Theban  stone,  xx,  16 
Thecla,    S.,    memorial    of,   xxv, 

xxix  «.,  xliv,  41  ff. 

,  Acts  of,  xxxvi,  43 

Theodoret  quoted,  xxix  «. 
Theodosius,   Emperor,   vii,   viii, 

xi  «.,  xxx  «.. 

,  the  pilgrim,  xiv 

Thesbe  (Thisbe),  xxii,  xxix,  28 
Thomas,      S.,      Apostle,      xxiii, 

xxxvi,  xliv,  30,  32,  85 

,  Acts  of,  xxxvi 

Thou,  xix 

Tribune  of  soldiers,  xiv  ».,  xxii, 

30,  32 

Three     Hours,     observance     of, 
xxxviii,  76 

Ur  of  the  Chaldees  (Hur),  xiii, 

xxv,  39 
Uz  (Ausitis),  xxii,  24 


INDEX  OF  PROPER 

Vaison,  Council  of,  xliii 
Valens,  Emperor,  xiii,  xxiii 
Valerius,    letter   of,   viii,   xi   «., 

xii  «.,  xix   «.,   xx   n.,   xxii, 

xxvi  n. 

Vespers.     See  Lucemarc 
Vierzo,  viii 

Vigiliae  nocturnae,  xxxix,  45,  49 
Virgin  Mary,  56 
Virgins.     See  Parthenae,  Nuns 


NAMES  AND  THINGS    103 
Vulgate,  readings  of,  xxxii  ff. 

Westcott,  Bishop,  xxxi  f. 
Whitsuntide      See  Pentecost 
Wilson,    Sir    Charles    W.,    vii, 
xviii,  xix  «  ,  70  n. 

Zoan  (Tatnis,  Tanis),  xxi,  xxxiv, 

17  f. 
Zoar  (Segor),  23 


PRINTED    IN    GREAT    BRITAIN    BY 
RICHARD  CLAY    &  Sous,  LIMITED, 

BRUNSWICK  ST.,  STAMFORD  ST.,  S.B.  I, 
AND    BUNGAY.    SUFFOLK. 


TRANSLATIONS    OF 
CHRISTIAN    LITERATURE 

A  NUMBER  of  translations  from  the  Fathers  have 
-*"*•  already  been  published  by  the  S.P.C.K.  under  the 
title  "  Early  Church  Classics."  It  is  now  proposed  to  en- 
large this  series  to  include  texts  which  are  neither  "  early  " 
nor  necessarily  "classics."  The  divisions  at  present  pro- 
posed are  given  below.  Volumes  belonging  to  the  original 
series  are  marked  with  an  asterisk. 

SERIES   I.— GREEK  TEXTS. 

*The  Epistle  of  St.  Clement,  Bishop  of  Rome.     By  the 

Rt.  Rev.  J.  A.  F.  Gregg,  D.D.     is.  tf. 
*Clement  of  Alexandria:  Who  is  the  Rich  Man  that  is 

being  saved?     By  P.  M.  Barnard,  B.D.     is.  $d. 
*St.  Chrysostom  :  On  the  Priesthood.    By  T.  A.  Moxon.  zs. 
*The  Doctrine  of  the  Twelve  Apostles.     By  C.  Bigg,  D.D. 

is.  $d. 
"The    Epistle    to    Diognetus.     By  the  Rt.   Rev.   L.  B. 

Radford,  D.D.     is.  6d. 

St.  Dionysius  of  Alexandria.    By  C.  L.  Feltoe,  D.D.    3*.  6d. 
Dionysius  the  Areopagite :   The  Mystical  Theology  and 

The  Divine  Names.     By  C.  E.  Rolt. 
*The  Epistle  of  the  Gallican  Churches:   Lugdunum  and 

Vienna.     With   an  Appendix  containing  Tertullian's 

Address  to  Martyrs  and  the  Passion  of  St.  Perpetua. 

By  T.  H.  Bindley,  D.D.     is.  $d. 
*St.  Gregory  of  Nyssa :  The  Catechetical  Oration.     By  the 

Ven.  J.  H.  Srawley,  D.D.     2s. 
*St.  Gregory   of   Nyssa :    The   Life  of  St.   Macrina.     By 

W.  K.  Lowther  Clarke,  B.D.     is.  $d. 
*Gregory  Thaumaturgus  (Origen  the  Teacher) :  the  Address 

of  Gregory  to  Origen,  with  Origen's  Letter  to  Gregory. 

By  W.  Metcalfe,  B.D.     is.  6d. 
*The  Shepherd  of  Hermas.     By  C.  Taylor,  D.D.     3  vols. 

zs.  each. 


SERIES    I.— GREEK   TEXTS  (continued] 

*The  Epistles  of  St.  Ignatius.  By  the  Ven.  J.  H.  Srawley, 
D.D.  2  vols.  is.  3</.  each. 

*St.  Irenaeus :  Against  the  Heresies.  By  F.  R.  M. 
Hitchcock,  D.D.  2  vols.  zs.  each. 

Macarius  Magnes :  The  Apocriticus.  By  T.  W.  Crafer,  D.D. 

Palladius :    The   Lausiac   History.     By  W.   K.   Lowther 

Clarke,  B.D.     55. 
*St.  Polycarp.     By  B.  Jackson,     is.  $d. 

SERIES   II.— LATIN   TEXTS. 

*St.  Augustine :  The  City  of  God.  By  F.  R.  M.  Hitchcock, 
D.D.  is.  6d. 

*St.  Cyprian  :  The  Lord's  Prayer.    By  T.  H.  Bindley,  D.D. 

is.  6d. 
Minucius  Felix :  The  Octavius.    By  J.  H.  Freese.    3*.  6d. 

*Tertullian :  On  the  Testimony  of  the  Soul  and  On  the 
Prescription  of  Heretics.    By  T.  H.  Bindley,  D.D.    25. 
On  Prayer,  and  On  Baptism.     By  A.  Souter,  D.Litt. 

*St.  Vincent 'of  Lerins:  The  Commonitory.  By  T.  H. 
Bindley,  D.D.  2s. 

SERIES  III.— LITURGICAL  TEXTS. 
EDITED  BY  C.  L.  FELTOE,  D.D. 

St.  Ambrose :  On  the  Mysteries  and  on  the  Sacraments. 

By  T.  Thompson,  B.D.     4*.  6d. 

*The  Apostolic  Constitution  and  Cognate  Documents,  with 
special  reference  to  their  Liturgical  elements.  By  De 
Lacy  O'Leary,  D.D.  is.  $d. 

*The  Liturgy  of  the  Eighth  Book  of  the  Apostolic  Con- 
stitution, commonly  called   the   Clementine   Liturgy. 
By  R.  H.  Cresswell.     if.  6d. 
The  Pilgrimage  of  Etheria.     By  M.  L.  McClure. 

*Bishop  Sarapion's  Prayer-Book.  By  the  Rt.  Rev.  J. 
Wordsworth,  D.D.  is.  6d. 

(Other  series  in  contemplation) 


University  of  California 

SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 

405  Hilgard  Avenue,  Los  Angeles,  CA  90024-1388 

Return  this  material  to  the  library 

from  which  it  was  borrowed. 


REC'DLD-URl 


JUN 


,99 


A     000  678  362     5 


