Title: The Acts and Monuments of John Foxe, Vol. III (a new and
  complete edition, with a preliminary dissertation by the Rev.
  George Townsend)
Creator: John Foxe (1516/17-1587) (Stephen Reed Cattley and George
  Townsend, Editors)
Publisher: London: R. B. Seeley & W. Burnside, 1837-41
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: Published 1837-41; public domain by date. Archive.org
  item metadata carries an explicit `NOT_IN_COPYRIGHT`
  possible-copyright-status, checked directly against the item's own
  metadata, 2026-09-25, this session.
Source: Internet Archive item actsmonumentsofj03foxe
  (archive.org/details/actsmonumentsofj03foxe), fetched directly
  (curl, raw bytes) from the item's own _djvu.txt full-text file,
  2026-09-25, this session.
Provenance note: Body text unaltered including its own OCR errors.
  Vol. III of this 8-volume edition, containing the Lollard-era
  martyrology this project vendored it for (William Thorpe's own
  1407 Examination, William Sautre's and John Badby's trials, Walter
  Brute's process, Sir John Oldcastle's history, Archbishop
  Chichele's proclamation against the Lollards) - confirmed by direct
  full-text search of this file before vendoring. Not independently
  spot-checked for OCR quality beyond the opening pages and the
  above-named sections this session.

5  UBRAWES  ^ 


DEDICATED,  BY  PERMISSION, 


HIS  MOST  GRACIOUS  MAJESTY. 


THE  ACTS  AND  MONUMENTS 
.    OF  JOHN  FOXE. 


VOL.  III. 


LONDOK : 
tKINTED    BY    R.  CLAY,    BREAD-STREET-HILL, 

doctors'  commons 


1  andMomiments 

of  ilitse  latter  an"a  ptrdlous  tJatics, 
■     touci)ing  matters  of  xl)t  €\)nxt\), 

•  wherein  are  comprehended  and  described 

the  great  persecutions  &  horrible  troubles 

that  haue  bene  wrousht  and  practised  b> 

the  Rcmishe  Prelates,  speciallye  in  this 

Realme  of  England  and  Scotlande, 

from  the  yeare  of  our  Lorde  a 

thousande,  unto  the  tyme 

nowe  present. 

Gathered  and  collected  according  to  the 

true  copies  and  w-rrtingres  certificatorie  as  wel 

of  the  parties  thetnselues  that  suffered, 

as  also  out  of  the  Bishops  Regpsters, 

which  wer  the  doers  therof, 

bv  John  Foxe. 


^■ 


thp:  acts  and  monuments 
of  john  foxe: 


A    NEW    AND    COMPLETE    EDITION 


WITH  A  PRELIMINARY  DISSERTATION, 
BY   THE 

KEV.  GEORGE  TOWNSEND,  M.A. 

OF   TRINITY   COLLEGE,    CAMBRIDGE. 

PREBENDARY  OF   DURHAM, 
AND    VICAR   OF    NORTHALLERTON,   YORKSHIRE. 


EDITED  BY  THE 

REV.  STEPHEN  REED  CATTLEY,  MA. 

OF    queen's  college,    CAMBRIDGE, 

RECTOR  OF  BAGTHORP,  NORFOLK, 
AND  CHAPLAIN  TO  THE  RIGHT  HONOURABLE  THE  EARL  OF  SCARBROUGH. 


VOL.  IIL 


PUBLISHED  BY  R.  B,  SEELEY  AND  W.  BURNSIDE ; 

AND  SOLD  BY  L.  &  G.  SEELEY, 

FLEET  STREET,  LONDON. 

MDCCCXXXVIL 


C4^- 


\ 


'  b 


(s 


"\    O 


CONTENTS. 

VOL.  III. 
CONTINUATION  OF  BOOK  V. 

CONTAINING    THE    LAST    THREE    HUNDRED    YEARS    FROM    THE    LOOSING    OUT 

OF    SATAN. 

A.D.  PAGE 

1377.  Richard  II 3 

Articles  collected  out  of  Wickliff's  Sermons 4 

1378.  Bull  of  Pope  Gregory   to  the  Chancellor  and  University  of 

Oxford 5 

Epistle  of  Pope  Gregory  to   Richard,   King  of   England,  to 

persecute  John  WicldifF 7 

The  Conclusions  of  John  WicklifF  exhibited  at  a  Convocation 

of  Bishops  at  Lambeth 10 

The  Protestation  of  John  WickliiF 12 

An  Exposition  upon  the  Conclusions  of  John  WicklifF  ...  13 
1382.  Mandate  of  Archbishop  Courtney  respecting  Heresy       ...     20 

Articles  of    John  Wickliff,    some   condemned    as    heretical, 

others  as   erroneous 21 

A   Letter  of  Archbishop  Courtney  to  the  Bishop  of  London 

against  John  WicldifF  and  his  adherents 22 

Determinations  upon  the  Articles  of  Wickliff  ....  24 
A  Letter  of  Archbishop  Courtney  to  the  Chancellor  of  Oxford 

against  Wickliff  and  his  adherents ibid. 

The  Monition    of  Archbishop  Courtney  to  the  Chancellor  of 

Oxford 26 

The  Examination  of  Nicholas  Herford,  Philip  Reppington,  and 

John  Ashton ibid. 

The  Protestation  of  Herford,  Reppington,  and  Ashton  ...  28 
Further  Examinations  and  Proceedings  against  Herford,  Rep- 
pington and  Ashton 29 

Process  of  Archbishop  Courtney  against  John  Ashton     ...     31 

The  Sentence  pronounced  on  John  Ashton 32 

The  Sentence  of  Excommunication  passed  upon  Herford  and 

Reppington,  with  the  Citation  against  them 34 

A  Private  Statute  made  by  the  Clergy  without  the  consent  of 

the  Commons ;  \vith  the  Examination  of  it  by  the  Author  .  36 
An  Extract  from  the  Petition  of  the  Commons  for  repealing  the 

aforesaid  Statute 37 

b 


11  CONTENTS. 

A.D.  .  .  ^-AGE 

1 382.  The  King's  Letters-patent  to  the  Archbishop  against  the  Fa- 

vourers of  WickhfF ibid. 

The    Kinsr's    Letter   to   the  Vice-chancellor  and  Proctors  of 

Oxford^ 38 

Matters  incident  to  Robert  Rigges,  Vice-chancellor  of  Oxford, 

Herford,  Reppington  and  others 40 

""  Another  Letter  of  the  King  to  the  Vice-chancellor  of  Oxford  .  43 
A  Letter  of  Robert  Rigges,  Vice-chancellor  of  Oxford,  to  the 

Archbishop 45 

Abjuration  of  Philip  Reppington 46 

A  cruel  Letter  of  the  Archbishop  against  Herford     ....  47 

An  Epistle  of  John  Wickliff  to  Pope  Urban  VI 49 

1383.  Pope  Urban 's  Bull  to  destroy  Clement  the  Antipope  .     ...  51 
Form  of  the  Pope's  Absolution  pronounced  by  the  Bishop  .     .  ibid. 

1384.  The  substance  of  John  Wickliff 's  Answer  to  the  King,  touch- 

ing the  right  and  title  of  the  King  and  the  Pope  ....  54 
The  Public  Testimony  given  by  the  University  of  Oxford,  for 

John  Wickliff 57 

The  Testimony  of  John  Huss  touching  John  Wickliff  ...     58 
The  Sentence  of  the  Council  of  Constance  in  condemnation  of 
the  Doctrine  and  Fortj'-five  Articles  of  Wickliff    ....     GO 

Certain  other  Articles  of  AVickliff 61 

Articles  against  Wickliff  attested  by  William  Woodford     .     .     63 
The  Public  Defence  of  certain  Articles  of  John  Wickliff,  be- 
fore the  whole  University  of  Prague.     On  the  Thirteenth 

and  Fifteenth  Articles ;  by  John  Huss 64 

The  Second  Disputation,  in  the  University  of  Prague,  upon  the 

Seventeenth  Article  of  John  Wickliff;  by  John  Huss  .  .  77 
Hildegard's  Prophecy  respecting  Friars  and  Monks  ....  87 
The    Third    Disputation,    upon    the    Eighteenth  Article    of 

Wickliff;  by  John  Huss 88 

The  Substance  of  the  Decree  of  the  Council  of  Constance  for 
the  taking  up  of  the  Bones  of  John  Wickliff    .     .     •     .     .     94 

1389.  The   Story  of  William  Swinderby        107 

The  Revocation  of  Swinderby 108 

1391.  The  Process  of  John  Tresnaut,   Bishop  of  Hereford,  against 

Swinderby,  in  the  cause  of  Heretical  Pravity 109 

Matters  articulated  against  Swinderby 110 

The   Protestation  of  Swinderby  to  the  Bishop  of  Hereford,  in 

the  same  old  English  wherein  he  wrote  it 112 

The  Citation  of  William  Swinderby 120 

The  Sentence  against  Swinderby 126 

His  Appeal  from  the  Sentence  of  the  Bishop  to  the  King  .  .  ibid. 
Swinderby's  fruitful  Letter  sent  to  the  Nobles  and  Bm-gesses 

of  the  Parliament 128 

The  Story  and  Process  against  Walter  Brute,  a  Briton  .  .  .  131 
Articles  and  Instruments  denounced  against  him  ....  132 
Certain  Exhibits  of  Walter  Bi-ute  in  writing  presented  to  the 

Bishop,  for  his  Defence 136 

A  more  ample  Tractation  of  the  same  matter 139 

The  Judgment  and  Belief  of  Walter  Brute,  touching  the  Lord's 

Supper,  the  Order  of  Priests,  &c 173 

Walter  Bra te,  on  the  Order  and  Office  of  Prayer 179 

Copy  of  a  Letter  from  a  Lollard  to  Master  Nicholas  Herford  .  188 
The  Device  of  a  Letter,  feigned  under  the  name  of  Lucifer, 

Prince  of  Darkness,  written  to  the  proud  and  persecuting 

Prelates  of  the  Popish  Clergy 190 

Bull  of  Pope  Boniface  to  the  I3ishop  of  Hereford  against  the 

Lollards 193 

The  Tenor  of  the  Pope's  Bull  to  King  Richard 194 

The  King's  Commission 195 

1392.  Letter  of  the  King  against  Walter  Brute 196 


CONTKNTS.  m 

A-D.  PAGE 

1394.  Letters  of  Archbishop  Courtney  respecting  the  An-est  of  eight 

Lollards,  and  the  Re-admission  of  Margaret  Caily,  a  nun,  into 

the  Monastery  of  St.  Kadegond 199 

Letter  of  the  Archbishop,  enjoining  Penance  of  certain  good 
Persons  of  Leicester 200 

1395.  The  Book  of  Conclusions  and  Reformations,  exhibited  in  the 

Parliament  holden  at  London,  and  set  up  at  Paul's  door  and 

other  places,  a.  d.  1395 203 

Letter  of  Richard  IL  to  Pope  Boniface  IX 207 

1398.  Notes  of  Parliaments,  holden  in  the  reign  of  King  Richard  IL, 

making  against  the  Pope 213 

1399.  Henry  IV 221 

1400.  Sir  William  Sautre,  otherwise  called  Chatris,  parish  priest,  a 

Martyr ibid. 

Sir  William's  First  and  Second  Examination 222 

Process  against  him ;  his  Recantation,  &c 225 

Sentence  of  Degi-adation  pronounced  upon  him 227 

The  cruel  Decree  against  William  Sautre 228 

1401.  Articles  against  King  Henry  IV.  set  upon  Church-doors     .     .  230 

1409.  John  Badby,  artificer,  a  Martyi- 235 

Sentence  of  the  Bishop  of  Worcester  against  him,  with  the 

attestation  of  the  Notaries 236 

The  cruel  Statute  '  Ex  Officio"       239 

The  cruel  Constitution  of  Archbishop  Arundel,   against  the 

Gospellers,  or  followers  of  God's  Tnith 242 

Articles  of  divers  who  were  constrained  to  abjure       ....  248 

William  Thorpe  :  that  constant  servant  of  God 249 

The  Preface  of  William  Thorpe  followed  by  his  Examination, 

penned  with  his  own  hand 250 

The  Testament  of  William  Thoi-pe 282 

The  Story  of  John  Purvey 285 

Articles  which  he  recanted,  with  other  Articles  drawn  out  of 

his  books  by  Richard  Lavingham 286 

A  Sermon  no  lesse  godly  than  learned,  preached  at  Paules 

Crosse  on  the   Sunday  of  Quinquagesima,   anno  1389,  by 

R.  Wimbeldon 292 

Letters  of  King  Henry  IV.  to  Pope  Gregory  XII 308 

Letter  of  King  Henry  IV.  to  the  Cardinals 309 

1410.  A  Mandate  of  Archbishop  Arundel  to  the  Bishop  of  London,  to 

warn  men  to  say  certain  Prayers  at  the  tolling  of  the  '  Aves' 

or  ringing  of  Curfew 311 

A  Commission  from  the  same,  to  suspend  ceitain  Churches  of 
London,  because  they  rung  not  their  bells  at  the  presence  of 
my  Lord  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  with  other  Letters  on 
the  same  subject 313 

An  Injunction  of  Penance,  fi-om  the  Register  of  William 
Comtney,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury 315 

Notes  of  Parliament  Matters  in  the  days  of  King  Henry  IV.  316 

1413.   Henry  V 319 

The  Trouble  and  Persecution  of  the  most  valiant  and  worthy 
Martyr  of  Christ,  Sir  John  Oldcastle,  knight.  Lord  Cobham.  320 

The  Christian  Belief  of  Lord  Cobham 324 

The  Examinations  of  Loixl  Cobham,  &c 326 

The  definitive  Sentence  of  his  Condemnation 336 

A  Testimonial  made  by  his  Friends 338 

An  Abjuration  counterfeited  by  the  Bishops 339 

Copy  of  an  Epistle  of  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  to  the 
Bishop  of  London,  whereon  dependeth  the  ground  and  cer- 
tainty of  the  aforesaid  history  of  the  Lord  Cobham     .     .     .  342 
The  Catholic  Faith  and  Confession  of  Lord  Cobham       .     .     .  344 
The  definitive  Sentence  of  Lord  Cobham's  Condemnation  .        347 


iv  CONTENTS. 

A.D.  PAGB 

1413.  A  Defence  of  Lord  Cobham  against  Nicliolas  Harpsfield,  set 

out  under  the  name  of  Alanus  Copus  Anglus 348 

The  Words  and  Contents  of  the  Statute  made  in  the  second 

year  of  Henry  V.,  chapter  seventh  ;    with   Notes  by  the 

Author 353 

The  Indictment  of  the  Lord  Cobham,  Sir  Roger  Acton,  and 

others,  with  Notes  following  upon  the  same 36S 

1414.  The  Entry  of  the  memorable  History  of  the  Bohemians,  con- 

taining the  History  of  Master  John  Huss,  no  less  famous 
than  lamentable  :  wherein  is  set  out  at  large  the  whole  order 
of  his  coming  unto  the  Council  of  Constance,  with  the  Acts 
and  Process  against  him  there ;  and,  finally,  his  most  cruel 
Death  and  Martyrdom,  for  the  testimony  of  the  ti-uth  of  our 

Lord  Jesus  Christ " 405 

Articles  drawn  out  by  John  Huss  and  his  adherents  .  .  .  409 
Objections  of  John  Huss  and  his  party  against  the  Decree  of 

the  Doctors .411 

Substance  of  the  Answer  of  the  Catholic  Doctors  to  the  fore- 
going objections 412 

Letter  of  Pope  John  to  King  Wenceslaus 415 

The  Council  of  Constance 416 

Recapitidation  of  matters  done  in  each  Session  of  the  Council.  418 
The  Safe-conduct  given  to  Master  John  Huss ;  and  his  Letters.  424 
The  Testimonial  of  the  good  Bishop  of  Nazareth  .....  427 
An  Instrument  of  Recognition  or  Protestation  of  the  Lord  In- 
quisitor of  Heresies ibid. 

An  Instrument  of  Testimonial,  how  Master  John  Huss  and  his 
Procm-er  were  denied  entrance  into  the  Public  Procuration, 
celebrated  and  holden  in  the  Archbishop's  Court  ....  430 
The  Copy  of  the  Letters  which  John  Huss  set  up  in  the  com- 
mon places  of  the  Cities  which  he  passed  through,  going  to 
the  Council 431 

1415.  Articles  presented  unto  Pope  John  XXIII.,  for  the  Condem- 

nation of  Master  John  Huss  after  he  was  newly  imprisoned.  436 
The  first  Schedule  or  Bill,  which  the  Nobles  of  Bohemia  de- 
livered up  to  the  Council  for  the  Deliverance  of  John  Huss, 

the  fourteenth  day  of  May,  A.  D.  1415 440 

Answer  of  the  Bishop  of  Luthonis,  to  the  last  part  of  the  Sup- 
plication which  the  Nobles  of  Bohemia  presented  unto  the 

Council 441 

Answer  of  the  Nobles  of  Bohemia 442 

Copy  of  a  Public  Testimonial  of  the  whole  University  of  Prague 

for  John  Huss,  offered  up  to  the  Council 444 

Another  Supplication  of  the  Nobles  of  Bohemia  for  John  Huss.  446 
The  Protestation  of  John  Huss,  and  the  Answer  of  the  Council.  447 
Supplication  of  the  Barons  to  the  Emperor  Sigismund  for  John 

Huss 449 

The  Answer  of  John  Huss  to  Twenty-six  Articles  concerning 

his  Book  of  the  Church 459 

The  Copy  and  Tenor  of  the  Appeal  of  John  Huss  ....  467 
Seven  Articles  said  to  be  di'awn  out  of  the  Treatise  which  John 

Huss  wrote  against  Stephen  Paletz 468 

Six  Articles  drawn  out  of  the  Treatise  of  John  Huss,  wiitten 

against  Stanislaus  de  Znoyma 471 

Other  Nineteen  Articles  objected  against  John  Huss,  he  being 

in  Prison • 473 

Second  Series  of  Nineteen  Articles  formally  contained  in  or 
picked,  by  the  Parisians,  out  of  the  Treatise  of  John  Huss  of 
Prague,  which  he  entitled  "  Of  the  Church,"  following  in 
this  part  or  behalf,  the  errors,  as  they  term  them,  of  John 

Wickliff 478 

Reasons  and  Determinations  of  the  Masters  of  Paris       .     .     .  479 


CONTENTS.  V 

A.D.  PAGE 

1416.  Oration  of  the  Emperor  Sigismund,  addressed  to  the  Council  .  484 
The  Sermon  of  the  Bishop  of  Londe,  befoi-e  the  Sentence  was 

given  upon  John  Huss 486 

The  Sentence  or  Judgment  of  the  Council  of  Constance  against 

John  Huss 489 

The  Letter  of  the  Emperor  Sigismund  to  the  Nobles  of  Bo- 
hemia    ■ 495 

A  Letter  of  John  Huss  to  his  Friends  in  Bohemia      ....  496 
A  Letter  of  the  Lord  John  de  Clum,  concerning  the  Safe-con- 
duct of  John  Huss ibid. 

Epistles  and  Letters  of  John  Huss 497 

A  Letter  of  a  Scholar  of  WicklLff  to  John  Huss  and  the  Bohe- 
mians :  dated  from  London 506 

Other  Letters  of  John  Huss 507 

The  Consolation  of  Master  Jerome  to  Master  Huss    ....  510 
The    tragical  and  lamentable  History  of  the  famous  learned 
man  and  godly  martp-  of  Christ,  Master  Jerome  of  Prague: 
bm-ned  at  Constance  for  like  cause  and  quarrel  as  was  Mas- 
ter John  Huss 511 

The  Intimation  of  Jerome  of  Prague,  set  up  in  divers  places  of 

the  town  of  Constance 513 

The  Citation  of  Jerome  to  the  Council  of  Constance  ....  ibid. 
The  forced  Abjuration  of  Master  Jerome  of  Prague  .     .     .     .517 

The  Sentence  read  against  Jerome 523 

The  Letter  of  the  Fifty-four  Nobles  of  Moravia,  written  unto 
the  Council  of  Constance  in  defence  of  Master  John  Huss 
and  Master  Jerome  of  Prague  :  with  their  names  annexed  .  526 
The  History  of  John  Claydon,  currier ;  and  of  Richard  Tunn- 
ing, baker 531 

Articles  contained  in  an  English  Book  called  "  The  Lanthorn 

of  Light  " 532 

Proclamation  of  Archbishop  Chichesley  against  the  Lollards    .  534 
The  Trouble  of  John  Barton  and  Robert  Chapel,  for  Religion  .  535 

Articles  obtruded  upon  Chapel  to  confess 536 

Recantation  of  Thomas  Granter 539 

1417.  The  Second  Apprehension  of  the  Lord  Cobham 541 

1418.  In  D.  Johan.  Cobhami  equitis  aurati  et  martyris  cineres,  car- 

men J.  F.  in  felicem  memoriam 544 

Continuation  of  the  memorable  History  of  the  Bohemians ; 
Avherein  is  plainly  and  truly  set  forth,  what  vexations  and 
conflicts  they  had  for  the  religion  of  John  Huss  and  Jerome 
of  Prague,  and  of  their  Victories  obtained  and  gotten,  both 
against  the  Papists,  and  also  against  the  Emperor  Sigis- 
mund: and,    finally,    the    Death  of   their  valiant  Captain 

Zisca 545 

Articles  decreed  in  the  Council  of  Constance,  against  the  Bo- 
hemians          ibid. 

1419.  The  Story  of  Zisca 548 

1422.  A  Notable  Oration  of  Zisca  to  his  Soldiers 555 

The  Epitaph  of  John  Zisca,  the  valiant  Captain  of  the  Bohe- 
mians     556 

The  Bull  of  Pope  Martin  directed  forth  against  the  Followers 
of  John  Wickliff  in  England,  of  John  Huss  of  Bohemia,  and 

of  Jerome  of  Prague 557 

The  Articles  of  John  Huss  to  be  inquired  upon 561 

A  fruitfid  and  christian  Exhortation  of  the  Bohemians,  to  Kmgs 
and  Princes,  to  stir  them  up  to  the  Zeal  of  the  Gospel    .     .  567 

The  Oration  of  Cardinal  Julian 577 

The  Table  of  the  Archbishops  of  Canterbury 579 


CONTENTS. 


BOOK    VI. 


PERTAINING    TO    THE    LAST    THREE    HUNDRED  YEARS    FROM   THE  LOOSING    OUT    OF 

SATAN. 

AD.  TASE 

1422.  A  Preface  to  the  Reader 580 

Henry  VI 581 

William  Tailor,  Priest ibid. 

1424.  John  Florence,  a  Turner 584 

Richard  Belward,  and  others 585 

1428.  Copy  of  the  King's  Letters  directed  to  John  Exeter  and  Jacolet 
Germain,  Keeper  of  the  Castle  of  Colchester,  for  the  appre- 
hending of  Sir  William  White,  Priest,  and  other  Lollards, 
as  they  called  them 586 

WiUiam  White,  Priest 591 

Copy  of  the  Letter  of  the  Bishop  of  Norwich  respecting  Thomas 
Pie  and  Thomas  Mendham 592 

John  Beverly,  alias  Battild,  a  Labourer ;  John  Skilley  of  Flinton, 
Miller,  and  others 593 

The  Story  of  Margery  Bagster  and  others 594 

1430.  Richard  Hoveden,  Martyi- 598 

1431.  Nicholas  Canon,  of  Eye 599 

Thomas  Bagley,  Priest ;  Paul  Craw,  a  Bohemian,  Martyr       .  600 
The  Story  of  Thomas  Rhedon,  a  Frenchman  and  Carmelite 

Friar,  burnt  in  Italy  for  the  Pi'ofession  of  Christ    .     .     .     .601 
1431  The  Order  and  Manner  of  the  Council  of  Basil :  with  a  brief 

to  Recapitulation  of  the  principal  Matters  decreed  and  con- 

1439.  eluded  therein 605 

The  Conclusions  of  the  Disputations,   and  the  Argument  of 

Panormitane  for  the  Pope 608 

The  Answer  of  John  Segovius 609 

The  Conclusions  of  the  Disputations,  summed  up  by  iEneas 

Sylvius 611 

The  Oration  of  Panormitane 627 

The  Oration  of  Ludovicus  the  Prothonotary 629 

The  Oration  of  Cardinal  Arelatensis,  or,  of  Aries       .     .     .     .631 

The  Oration  of  Amedeus,  Archbishop  of  Lyons 640 

The  Oration  of  Segovius       .     .     .     .     , 641 

The  Second  Book  of  the  Commentaries  of  .^neas  Sylvius,  upon 

the  Acts  of  the  Council  of  Basil 658 

The  Preface  of  John  Segovius  and  his  associates        ....  664 
The  Oration  in  favour  of  Amedeus  to  the  Popedom  ....  670 
A  further  Continuation  of  the  memorable  History  of  the  Bo- 
hemians ;  being  a  bi'ief  Epitome,   showing  how  they  were 
called  and  brought  unto  the  Council  of  Basil ;  briefly  col- 
lected and  gathered   out  of  the  Commentaries  of  iEneas 

Sylvius 675 

A  Declaration  of  the  Council  of  Basil  touching  the  three  last 

Articles  of  the  Bohemians  already  alleged 682 

A  Declaration  of  the  Council  touching  the  first  Article  of  the 

Communion 683 

Certain  Petitions  which  the  Bohemians  put  up,  last  of  all,  in 

the  sacred  Council  of  Basil 688 

An  Epistle  of  Martin  Meyre  to  iEueas  Sylvius 692 

The  Copy  of  an  Epistle  of  Julian,  Cardinal  of  St.  Angelo,  unto 
Pope  Eugene,  for  that  he  went  about  to  dissolve  the  Council 

of  Basil 693 

An  Epistle  of  jEneas  Sylvius  to  the  Rector  of  the  University 
of  Cologne,  in  defence  of  the  Coimcil 699 

1440.  Richard  Wiche,  Priest,  Martvr 702 


CONTKN'TS.  VU 

A.D.  PAGK 

1  HO.  The  King's  Writ   prohi])iting   Pilgrimages   to  the  Tomb   of 

Richard  Wiche 708 

A  brief  Answer  to  the  Cavillations  of  Alanus  Copus  concerning 

Lady  Eleanor  Cobham 704 

The  Contention  between  the  rich  Cardinal  of  Winchester,  and 
Humphrey,    the   good   Uuke  of  Gloucester,    with  certain 

Articles  objected  against  the  Cardinal 709 

1447.  The  Story  and  Death  of  Humphrey,  Duke  of  Gloucester    .     .711 

1450.  The  Invention  and  Benefit  of  Printing 718 

1453.  The  lamentable  Losing  of  Constantinople 722 

1457.  The  History  of  Reynold  Peacock,  Bishop  of  Chichester; 
afflicted  and  tormented  by  the  false  Bishops  for  his  Godli- 
ness, and  Profession  of  the  Gospel 724 

Copy  of  the  Citation  sent  by  Thomas  Bowcher,  alias  Burschere, 

Archbishop  of  Canterbmy 732 

The  Form  and  Manner  of  the  Retractation  of  Reynold  Peacock.  733 
Sentences  or  Proverbs  attributed  unto  Pope  Pius  IL,  &c.  .  .  736 
The  Title  of  the  House  of  York  to  the  Crown  of  England  .     .  740 

1461.  Edward  IV 742 

1473.  Albei-t  and  Frederic  III.,  Emperors  of  Germany 762 

The  Large  Dominions  of  Ladislaus 767 

1477.  John  the  Neatherd,  of  Franconia,  a  martyr;  and  Doctor  Jo- 
hannes de  Wesalia 775 

1483.    Edward  V 782 

Ricliard  II.,  the  Usurper 785 


ILLUSTRATIONS  IN  VOL.  III. 

Exhumation  of  Wickliff P^ge     9(> 

Burning  of  Badby 238 

Injunction  of  Penance ...  314 

Burning  of  Lord  Cobham 542 


ACTS  AND  MONUMENTS. 


VOL.  III. 


VOL.  III. 


ACTS   AND    MONUMENTS. 


CONTINUATION  OF  BOOK  V. 


CONTAINING 


THE  LAST  THREE  HUNDRED  YEARS  FROM  THE  LOOSING  OUT 

OF  SATAN.  1 


RICHARD  THE  SECOND. 


After  king  Edward  HI.,  succeeded  his  grandson,  Richard  II.  Richard 
being  yet  but  young,  of  the  age  of  eleven  years  :  who,  in  the  same  ^^' 
year  of  his  father's  decease,  with  great  pomp  and  solemnity  was  A.  D. 
crowned  at  Westminster,  a.u.  1377,  and  following  his  father's  steps,  1377. 
was  no  great  disfavourer  of  the  way  and  doctrine  of  WicklifF:  albeit, 
at  the  first  beginning,  partly  through  the  iniquity  of  the  times,  and 
partly  through  the  pope's  letters,  he  could  not  do  what  he  would. 
Notwithstanding,  something  he  did  in  that  behalf;  more  perhaps 
than  in  the  end  he  had  thanks  for  from  the  papists,  as  more,  by  the 
grace  of  Christ,  shall  appear.  But  as  times  do  change,  so  changeth 
commonly  the  cause  and  state  of  man.  The  bishops  now  seeing  the 
aged  king  to  be  taken  away,  during  the  time  of  whose  old  age  all  the 
government  of  the  realm  depended  upon  the  duke  of  Lancaster  ;  and 
now  the  said  bishops  again  seeing  the  said  duke,  with  the  lord  Percy, 
the  lord  marshal,  to  give  over  their  offices,  and  to  remain  in  their 
private  houses  without  intermeddling,  thought  now  the  time  to  serve 
them,  to  have  some  advantage,  against  John  WicklifF;  who  hitherto, 
under  the  protection  of  the  aforesaid  duke  and  lord  marshal,  had  some 
rest  and  quiet.  Concerning  the  story  of  this  WicklifF,  I  trust,  gentle 
reader,  it  is  not  out  of  thy  memory  what  went  before,  (vol.  ii.  p.  801), 
how  he  being  brought  before  the  bishops,  by  the  means  of  the  duke 
and  of  lord  Henry  Percy,  the  council  was  interrupted,  and  broke  up 
before  nine  of  the  clock,  by  reason  whereof  WicklifF  at  that  time 
escaped,  without  any  further  trouble ;  who,  notwithstanding  his  being 
by  the  bishops  forbidden  to  deal  in  that  doctrine  any  more,  continued 

(1)  Latin  Edition  1559,  p.  3.   Ed.  1563,  p.  83.  Ed.  r.570,  p.  ,529.  Ed.  1576,  p.  425.  Ed.  1583, 
p.  430.  Ed.  1596,  p.  396.  Ed.  1684,  vol.  1.  p.  490.— Eu. 


4  WirKI.Il'l'  S    AliTlCI.l'.S. TlIK    I'Ul'i;  b    bill    sent    to    OXFORL*. 

Richard  g^-]|  ^^.j^i^  j^jg  fpJiQ^yg  going  barefoot, ^nd  in  long  frieze  gowns,  preacli- 

ing  diligently  unto  the  people.    Out  of  his  seraions  these  articles  most 

^•i^    chiefly  at  that  time  were  collected. 

Articles  collected  out  of  WickliflTs  Sermons. 

That  the  holy  eucharist,  after  the  consecration,  is  not  the  very  body  of  Christ, 
but  figuratively. 

That  the  church  of  Rome  is  not  the  head  of  all  churches  more  than  any  other 
church  is ;  nor  hath  Peter  any  more  power  given  him  by  Christ  than  any  other 
apostle  hath. 

Item,  That  the  pope  of  Rome  hath  no  more  part  in  the  keys  of  the  ciunch, 
tlian  hath  any  other  within  the  order  of  priesthood. 

Item,  If  God  bo,  the  lords  temporal  may  lawfully  and  meritoriously  take 
away  their  temporalties  from  the  churchmen  offending  habitualiter. 

Item,  If  any  temporal  lord  do  know  the  church  so  oflendhig,  he  is  bound, 
under  pain  of  damnation,  to  take  the  temporalties  from  the  same. 

Item,  That  the  gospel  is  a  rule  sufficient  of  itself  to  rule  the  life  of  every 
christian  man  here,  without  any  otlier  rule. 

Item,  That  all  other  rules,  under  whose  observances  divers  religious  persons 
be  governed,  do  add  no  more  perfection  to  the  gospel,  than  doth  the  white 
coloiu'  to  the  wall. 

Item,  That  neither  the  pope,  nor  any  other  prelate  of  the  church,  ought  to 
have  prisons  wherein  to  punish  transgressors. 

His  con-  Besides  these  articles,  divers  other  conclusions  afterwards  were 
condemn-  gathered  out  of  his  writings  and  preachings  by  the  bishops  of  Eng- 
edbythe  Jand,  which  they  sent  diligently  to  pope  Gregory  XL,  at  Rome; 
at  Rome,  wlicrc  the  Said  articles  being  read  and  perused,  were  condemned 

for  jieretical  and  erroneous  by  three  and  twenty  cardinals. 
wickiiff        In  the  mean  time  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  sending  forth  his 
fnre'^the^  citations,  as  is  aforesaid,  called  before  him  the  said  John  WicklifF,  in 
?T''l'"    ,  the  presence  of  the  duke  of  Lancaster  and  lord  Percy ;  who,  upon 

bishop  of  1  .  ,  1   1  •  -1  p 

Canter-    the  declaration  oi  the  pope  s  letters  made,  bound  him  to  silence,  lor- 

^^^'       bidding  him  to  treat  any  more  of  those  matters.     But  then,  through 

the  disturbance  of  the  bishop  of  London,  and  the  duke,  and  lord 

Percy,  that  matter  was  soon  despatched,  as  hath  been  above  recorded. 

And  all  this  was  done  in  the  days  and  last  year  of  king  Edward  IIL, 

and  pope  Gregory  XL 

A.D.1378.      Li  the  year  following  (a.d.  1378),  being  the  first  year  of  king 

sttflbrd'^  Richard  iL,  the  said  pope  Gregory,  taking  his  time,  after  the  death 

brink's      of  king  Edward,  sendeth  his  bull'  by  the  hands  and  means,  peradven- 

buii.      '  ture,  of  one  master  Edmund  Stafford,  directed  unto  the  university  of 

Oxford,  rebuking  them  sharply,  imperiously,  and  like  a  pope,  for 

suffering  so  long  the  doctrine  of  John  WicklifF  to  take  root,  and  not 

plucking  it   up  with  the  crooked  sickle  of  their  catholic  doctrine. 

The  mas-  When  the  bull  came  to  be  delivered  into  their  hands,  by  the  pope's 

Oxford,     niessenger  aforesaid,  the  proctors  and  masters  of  the  university,  join- 

doubt      ijig  together  in  consultation,  stood  long  in  doubt,  deliberating  with 

wnether       i  ^  .  i  i       i      n         •   i       i 

to  receive  themsclvcs  whether  to  receive  the  pope  s  bull  with  honour,  or  to 
orreject    p^f^gg  ^^^  rcjcct  it  witli  sliamc. 

I  cannot  here  but  laugh  in  my  mind  to  behold  the  authors  of  this 

(i)  Our  author  has  fallen  into  an  error  respecting  the  date  of  this  bull  (seep.fi),  for  Gregory  XI.  died 
on  March  27,  a.  d.  1378,  more  than  two  months  anterior  to  it.  According  to  Wilkins's  Concilia,  all 
these  bulls  were  dated  June  11,  1377  ;  tbey  did  not  reach  England  till  the  November  following,  and 
in  the  mean  time,  on  June  21,  in  the  same  year,  king  Edward  III.  died.  Richard  assembled  his  first 
parliament  on  the  13th  of  October,  1378.  See  Lewis's  History,  p.  50  ;  Wilkins's  Concilia,  vol.  iii. 
p.  118 :  and  Wordsworth's  Ecclesiastical  Biography,  7ol.  i.  pp.  33  and  34,  in  the  note. — Ed. 


COl'V    OK    THK     I'Ol'l.  S    WILD     BULL.  ,-> 

story    whom    I   follow  ;     what  exclamations,    what   wouderings    and  •ff'c*o»'rf- 

marvels  they  make  at  these  Oxford  men,  for  so  doubting  at  a  nuitter 

so  plain,  so  manifest  of  itself,  as  they  say,  whether  the  pope's  bull    ^-  ^' 
sent  to  them  from  Home  was  to  be  received  or  not ;  which  thing  to 
our  monkish  ^vriters  seemed  then  such  a  prodigious  wonder,  that  they 
with  blushing  cheeks  arc  fain  to  cut  short  the  matter,  in  the  midst, 
with  silence. 

The  copy  of  this  wild  bull,  sent  to  them  from  the  pope,  was  this  : 

Gregory  the  Bishop,  the  Servant  of  (lod's  Servants,  to  his  well- 
beloved  Sons,  the  Chancellor  and  University  of  Oxford,  in  the 
Diocese  of  Lincoln,  Greeting  and  Apostolical  Benediction. 

We  are  compelled  not  only  to  marvel,  but  also  to  lament,  that  you,  consider-  The 
ing  the  apostolical  seat  hath  given  unto  your  university  of  Oxford  such  great  f'"''^  ^  ,, 
favour  and  privilege,  and  also  that  you  flow,  as  in  a  large  sea,  in  the  knowledge  sent  to 
of  the  holy  Scriptures,  and  ought  to  be  champions  and  defenders  of  the  ancient  Oxiord. 
and  catholic  faith  (without  which  there  is  no  salvation),  by  your  great  negligence 
and  sloth,  will  suffer  wild  cockle,  not  only  to  grow  up  among  the  pure  wheat  of 
the  flourishing  field  of  yoiu"  university,  but  also  to  wax  strong  and  choke  the 
com.     Neither  have  ye  any  care,  as  we  are  informed,  to  extirpate  and  pluck 
the  same  up  by  the  roots,  to  the  great  blemishing  of  your  renowned  name,  the 
peril  of  your  souls,  the  contempt  of  the  church  of  Rome,  and  to  the  great  decay 
of  the  ancient  faith.     And  further  (which  grieveth  us),  the   increase    of  that 
filthy  weed  was  more  sharply  rebuked  and  judged  of  in  Rome  than  in  England, 
where   it  sprang :   wherefore  let   there  be  means  sought,   by  the  help  of  the 
faithful,  to  root  out  the  same.     Grievously  it  is  come  to  our  ears,  that  one  John  The  pope 
Wickliff,  parson   of  Lutterworth,  in    Lincoln  diocese,   a  professor  of  divinity  '^°™- 
(would  God  he  were  not  rather  a  master  of  errors),  is  rim  into  a  kind  of  detest-  of^john 
able  wickedness,  not  only  and  openly  publishing,  but  also  vomiting  out  of  the  Wicklifl". 
liJthy  dungeon  of  his  breast,  divers  professions,  false  and  erroneous  conclusions, 
and  most  wicked  and  damnable  heresies,  whereby  he  might  defile  the  faithful 
sort,  and  bring  them  from  the  right  path  headlong  into  the  way  of  perdition, 
overthrow  the  state  of  the  clmrch,  and  utterly  subvert  the  secular  policy.     Of 
which  his  mischievous  heresies  some  seem  to  agree  (only  certain  names  and 
terms  changed)  with  the  perverse  opinions,  and  unlearned  doctrine,  of  Marsilius 
of  Padua,  and  of  John  of  Ganduno,  of  miworthy  memory ;  whose  books  were 
uttei'ly  abolished  in  the  realm  of  England,  by  om'  predecessor  of  happy  memorj^, 
John  XXIL,  which  kingdom  doth  not  only  flourish  in  power  and  abundance  of 
faculties,  but  is  much  more  glorious  and  shining  in  pureness  of  fuith  ;  accus- 
tomed always  to  bring  forth  men  excellently  learned  in  the  true  knowledge  of 
the  holy  Scriptures,  ripe  in  gravity  of  manners,  men  notable  in  devotion,  and 
defenders  of  the  catholic  faith. 

Wherefore  we  will  and  command  you,  by  our  writing  apostolical,  in  the  name 
of  your  obedience,  and  upon  pain  of  privation  of  our  favour,  indidgences,  and 
privileges  granted  unto  you  and  your  university  from  the  said  see  apostolical, 
tliat  hereafter  ye  sufter  not  those  pestilent  heresies,  and  those  subtle  and  false 
conclusions  and  propositions,  misconstriung  the  light  sense  of  faith  and  good 
works  (howsoever  they  term  it,  or  what  curious  implication  of  words  soever  they 
use)  any  longer  to  be  disputed  of,  or  brought  in  question ;  lest  if  it  be  not 
withstood  at  the  first,  and  plucked  up  by  the  roots,  it  might  perhaps  be  too  late, 
hereafter  to  prepare  medicines  when  a  greater  number  are  infected  with  the 
contagion.  And  fiulher,  that  ye  apprehend  immediately,  or  cause  to  be  appre-  Here  the 
hended  the  said  John  Wickliff,  and  deliver  him  to  be  detained  in  the  safe  ^^''.'i  i"^" 
ciLstody  of  our  well-beloved  brethren,  the  archbishop  of  Canterbiuy,  and  the  *"  "  ^"^ 
bishop  of  London,  or  either  of  them.  And  if  you  shiul  find  any  gainsayers  cor- 
rupted with  the  said  doctrine  (which  God  forbid)  in  your  said  university,  within 
your  jurisdiction,  who  shall  obstinately  stiuid  in  the  said  errors,  that  then,  in 
like  manner,  ye  apprehend  them,  and  commit  them  to  safe  custody,  and  other- 
wise to  do,  in  this  case,  as  it  shall  appertain  unto  you ;  so  that  by  yoiu"  carefid 
proceedings  herein,  your  past  negligence  concerning  the  premises  may  now 
fuUv  be  supplied  and  recon'''H!used  with  prc-x-iit  diligence.     Whereby  you  sliall 


Sudburv. 


6  THK    I'OPK  S    LETTKl^S    AGAINST    WICKLIFP\ 

Richard    not  only  purcliase  unto  you  the  favour  and  benevolence  of  the  seat  apostolical, 
^■f-       but  also  a  great  reward  and  merit  of  Almighty  God. 
J  Given  at  Rome,  at  St.  Mary's  the  Greater,  xi.  Kalends  of  June,  and  in  the 

1S7S      ^'^^  J^''^  "^  '^"'  consecration. 
Simon  Besides  this  bull  sent  to  the  university  of  Oxford,  the  said  pope 

Gregory  directed,  moreover,  his  letters  at  the  same  time  to  the  arch- 
bishop of  Canterbury,  Simon  Sudbury,  and  to  the  bishop  of  London, 
named  William  Courtney,  with  the  conclusions  of  John  Wickliff 
therein  enclosed,  commanding  them,  by  virtue  of  those  his  letters 
apostolical,  and  straitly  enjoining  them  to  cause  the  said  John 
WicklifF  to  be  apprehended,  and  cast  into  prison  ;  and  that  the  king 
and  the  nobles  of  England  shovdd  be  admonished  by  them,  not  to 
give  any  credit  to  the  said  John  WicklifF,  or  to  his  doctrine  in  any  M'ise. 
Besides  this  bill  or  bull  of  the  pope,  sent  unto  the  archbishop  of 
Canterbury  and  to  the  bishop  of  London,  bearing  date,  eleventh 
Kalend.  Jun.  and  the  seventh  year  of  the  reign  of  the  pope  ;  I  find, 
moreover,  in  the  said  story,  two  other  letters'  of  the  pope  concerning 

(1)  The  editor  subjoins  the  two  letters  to  which  our  author  alludes,  from  Wilkins's  Concilia 
Magnce  Britannise  et  Hiberniaa,  pp.  117,  118. 

AlicB  litem  afostoliccE  ad  citandum  cum  ad  comjmrcndum  coram  domino  papa.  Ex  Eeg. 
Sudbury,  fol.  45,  b. — "  Gregorius  episcopus,  servus  servorum  Dei,  venerabilibus  fratribus  archi- 
episcopo  Cantuariensi,  et  episcopo  Londonensi,  salutem,  et  apostolicam  benedictionem.  Xuper 
nos  non  sine  gravi  cordis  turbatione,  ex  plurium  fide  dignorum  significatione  pcrcepto,  quod 
Johannes  WycfifT,  rector  ecclesis  de  Lutterworth,  Lincoiniensis  dioecesis,  sacrae  paginss  professor, 
utinam  non  magister  errorum,  in  earn  dctestabileni  vesaniam  temere  proruperat,  quod  nonnullas 
propositiones  et  conclusiones  erroneas  ac  falsas,  et  male  in  fide  sonantes,  qua;  statum  totius  eccle- 
sias  subvertere  et  enervare  nituntur,  quarumquee  aliquae,  licet  quibusdam  mutatis  terminis,  imitari 
videbantur  perversas  opiniones,  et  doctrinam  indoctam  damnatse  memoriae  Marsilii  de  Padua,  et 
Johannis  de  Ganduna,  quorum  liber  per  felicis  recordationis  Johanncra  papam  XXII.  prasdcces- 
sorem  nostrum,  reprobatus  extitit  et  damnatus,  non  verebatur  in  regne  Anglias  asserere,  dogmati- 
zare,  et  publice  praedicare,  illis  nonnuUos  Christi  fideles  nialigne  inficiens,  ac  a  fide  catholica,  sine 
qua  non  est  salus,  faciens  deviare.  Nos  attendentes,  quod  tarn  perniciosum  malum,  quod  in 
plurimos  serpere  poterat,  corum  animas  lethali  contagione  necaudo,  non  debebamus,  prout  nee 
(lebemus,  sub  dissimulatione  transire;  vobis  per  alias  nostras  literas  commisim\is  et  mandavimus, 
ut  vos,  vel  alter  vestrum  de  dictarum  propositionum  et  conclusionum  assertione,  quaruni  copiani 
sub  bulla  nostra  misimus  interclusam,  vos  secrcto  informantes,  si  ita  esse  inveneritis  praedictum 
Johannem  auctoritate  nostra  capi,  et  carceribus  mancii)ari  faceretis,  eumque  sub  bona  custodia 
teneretis  in  vinculis,  donee  a  nobis  super  hoc  receperitis  aliud  in  mandatis,  prout  in  dictis  Uteris 
plenius  continetur.  Considerantes  itaque,  quod  praefatus  Johannes  hujusmodi  captionem  et  car- 
cerationem  forte  praisentiens,  posset  (quod  absit)  per  fugae,  latitationis  prsesidia  dictum  nostrum 
mandatum  in  gravissimum  fidei  detrimentum  eludere  ;  nos,  ne  tam  damnabilcs  propositiones  et 
conclusiones  indiscussas,  et  earum  tcmerarius  assertor  impunitus  remaneant,  in  detrimentum 
gravissimum  fidei  prtelibata?,  fraternitati  vestrce  per  apostolica  scrijjta  committimus  et  mandamus, 
quatenus  vos,  vel  alter  vestrum,  per  vos  vel  aliuni,  seu  alios,  praefatum  Johannem,  si  per  vos  capi 
et  carcerari  nonpossit,  per  edictum  publicum  proponendum  in  studio  Oxoniensi  dictae  dioecesis,  et 
aliis  locis  publicis,  de  quibus  sit  verisimilis  conjectura,  quod  ad  dicti  Johannis  uotitiam  perv-enire 
valeat,  et  de  quibus  vobis  expedire  videatur,  ex  parte  nostra  peremptorie  monere  et  citare  curetis, 
quod  infra  trium  mensium  spatium  a  die  citationis  hujusmodi  in  antea  computandum,  ubicunque 
tunc  nos  esse  contigerit,  compareat  personaliter  coram  nobis,  super  propositionibus  et  conclusi- 
onibus  hujusmodi  responsurus  ac  dicturus,  et  facturus  quicquid  super  eis  duxerimus  ordinandum, 
et  ordo  dictaverit  rationis  ;  praedicendo  in  hujusmodi  citationis  edicto,  quod,  sive  idem  Johannes 
in  hujusmodi  termino  comparuerit,  sive  non  comparuerit,  nos  super  prasmissis,  et  contra  eum, 
usque  ad  debitam  condemnationem  ipsius  inclusive  procedemus,  prout  ejus  deraerita  exigent,  ac 
nobis  secundum  Deum  et  conservationem  dictae  fidei  videbitur  expedire.  VoUimus  autcm,  et  prae- 
sentium  tenore  statuimus,  quod  prasdicta  citatio  sic  facta,  perinde  piaefatum  Johannem  arctet,  ac 
si  sibi  personaliter  insinuata  et  intimata  fuisset ;  constitutione  quacunque  contraria  non  obstante. 
Diem  vero citationis  et  formam,et  quicquid  feceritis  in  pr^dictis,  nobis  per  vestras  literas,  vestris 
sigillis  raunitas,  harum  serieni  continentes,  fideliter  et  quam  citius  poteritis,  intimare  curetis. 
Dat.  Romae  apud  Sanctam  Mariam  Majorem,  11  cal.  Junii,  pontlficatus  nostri  anno  septimo." 
[A.D.  1377,  the  51st  Ed.  III.] 

Alice  litereB  apostoliccE  pro  codcm.  Ex  Reg.  Sudbury,  fol.  46,  a. — "  Gregorius  episcopus  servus 
servorum  Dei,  venerabilibus  fratribus  Cantuariensi  archiepiscopo,  et  episcopo  Londonensi,  salutem, 
et  apostolicam  benedictionem.  Subsi  periculosis  admodum  erroribus  quarundam  detestabilium 
propositionum  et  conclusionum  ad  enervationem  totius  ecclesiastici  status  tendentium,  quas  scrip- 
tas  in  scliedula  inclusa  praesentibus,  Johannes  Wycliff,  rector  ecclesiae  de  Lutterworth,  Lincoinien- 
sis diccccsis,  dictus  theologiae  professor,  asseritur  tam  impie,  quam  temere  suscitasse  plenius  vobis 
scribimus  per  alias  nostras  patentes  literas,  quas  cum  prssentibus  destinamus.  Volumus  igitur, 
et  fraternitati  vestrae  mandamus,  quatenus  clarissimum  in  Christo  filium  nostrum  Edwardum, 
legem  Angliae  illustreni,  et  dilectos  tilios  nobiles  viros  et  natos  dicti  regis,  ao  delectam  in  Christo 
filiam  nobilem  mulierem  princepissam  Acquitaniae  et  WaUiae,  aliosque  magnates  de  Anglia,  et 
consiliarios  regis,  iper  vos  et  alios  magistros  et  peritos  in  sacra  pagina  non  maculatos  hujusmodi 
erroribus,  sed  in  fide  sinceros  et  fervidos  studeatis  facere  plenarie  informari,  ac  eis  ostendi,  quanta 
verecundia  devoto  regno  Angliae  oriatur  exinde ;  et  quod  non  solum  sunt  ipsK  conclusiones  erro- 
neae  in  fide,  sed,  si  bene  advertatur,  innuunt  omnem  distruere  politiam  ;  et  requi'ratis  eos  strictis- 
sime,  quod  ad  extirpationem  tantomm  errorum,  pro  reverentia  Dei  et  apostolicsc  sedis,  et  nostrn, 


THREE    LETTERS    OF    THE    POPE    ABOUT    ONE    MATTER.  7 

the  same  matter,  but  differing  in  form,  sent  unto  the  same  bishops,  Bichard 

and  all  bearing  the  same  date,  both  of  the  day,  year,  and  month  of '. 

the  reign  of  the  said  pope  Gregory  :   whereby  it  is  to  be  supposed    A.  D. 
that  the  said  pope  either  was  very  exquisite  and  solicitous  about  the    ^•^^^- 
matter,  to  have  WicklifF  to  be  apprehended,  who  wrote  three  divers  Three 
letters  to  one  person,  and  all  in  one  day,  about  one  business,  or  else  the  pope 
that  he  did  suspect  the  bearers  thereof;  the  solution  whereof  I  leave  p"°JJ,^, 
to  the  judgment  of  the  reader.  ^''""^  °"^ 

h  urthermore,  beside  these  letters  \vritten  to  the  university,  and  to 
the  bishops,  he  directeth  also  another  epistle,  bearing  the  same  date, 
unto  king  Edward,  as  one  of  my  stories  saith  ;  but  as  another  saith, 
to  king  Richard,  which  soundeth  more  near  the  truth ;  forasmuch  as 
in  the  seventh  year  of  pope  Gregory  XL,  which  was  a.d.  1378, 
king  Edward  was  not  alive.  The  copy  of  his  letter  to  the  king  here 
followeth : — 

The  Copy  of  the  Epistle  sent  by  the  Bishop  of  Rome  to  Richard, 

King  of  England,  to  persecute  John  WicklifF.  ' 

Unto  his  well-beloved  son  in  Christ,  Richard,  the  most  noble  king  of  Eng-  i 

land,  health,  &c.  1 

The  kingdom  of  England,  which  the  Most  Highest  hath  put  under  your  i 

power  and  governance,  being  so  famous  and  renowned  in  valiancy  and  strength, 
so  abundant  and  flowing  in  all  kind  of  wealth  and  riches,  but  much  more  glo- 
rious, resplendent,  and  shining,  through  the  brightness  and  clearness  of  all 
godliness  and  faith,  hath  been  accustomed  always  to  bring  forth  men  endued  i 

with  the  true  knowledge  and  understanding  of  the  holy  Scriptures,   grave  in  ; 

years,  fervent  in  devotion,  and  defenders  of  the  catholic  faith  :  tlie  which  have 
not  only  directed  and  instructed  their  own  peojile  through  their  wholesome  I 

doctrine  and  precepts  into  the  true  path  of  God's  commandments,  but  also  we 
have  heard  by  the  report  and  infoiTnation  of  many  credible  persons,  to  our  i| 

great  grief  and  heart  sorrow,  that  John  Wickliff,  parson  of  Lutterworth,  in  the  I 

diocese  of  Lincoln,  professor  of  divinity  (I  would  to  God  he  were  no  author  of  I 

heresy),  hath  fallen  into  such  a  detestable  and  abominable  madness,  that  he  'i 

hath  propounded  and  set  forth  diverse  and  sundry  conclusions,  full  of  errors,  and 
containing  most  manifest  heresy,  which  do  tend  utterly  to  subvert  and  over- 
throw the  state  of  the  whole  church ;  of  which,  some  (albeit  under  coloured 
phrase  and  speech)  seem  to  smell  and  savour  of  perverse  opinions,  the  foolish  i 

doctrine  of  condemned  memory  of  Marsiliiis  of  Padua,  and  John  of  Ganduno,  ' 

whose  books  were,  by  pope  John  XXIL,  our  px-edecessor,  a  man  of  a  most  happy  j 

memory,  reproved  and  condemned,  &c.  i 

Hitherto,  gentle  reader,  thou  hast  heard  how  WicklifF  was  accused 
by  the  bishop.  Now  you  shall  also  hear  the  pope's  mighty  reasons 
and  arguments,  by  which  he  did  confute  him,  to  the  king.     It  fol-  , 

loweth  : — 

Therefore,  forasmuch  as  our  reverend  brethren  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury  Here  is  ' 

and  the  bishop  of  London  have  received  a  special  commandment  from  us,  by  impdson- 
our  authority,  to  apprehend  and  commit  the  before-named  John  WicklifF  unto  JJJfteach. 
prison,  and  to  transport  his  confession  unto  us  :  if  they  shall  seem  in  the  pro-  ing. 
secution  of  this  their  business  to  lack  your  favour  or  help,  we  require,  and  most  ' 

earnestly  desire  your  majesty,  even  as  your  most  noble  predecessors  have  always  i 

been  most  earnest  lovers  of  the  catholic  faith  (whose  case  or  quarrel  in  this  matter  ■ 

is  chiefly  handled)  ;  that  you  would  vouchsafe,  even  for  the  reverence  of  God 
and  the  faith  aforesaid,  and  also  of  the  apostolic  seat  and  of  our  person,  with 
your  help  and  favour  to  assist  the  said  archbishop  and  all  others  that  shall  go 
about  to  execute  the  said  business :  whereby,  besides  the  praise  of  men,  you 

ipsonimque,  merito  apud  Deum,  et  honore  in  seculo,  tanquam  caUiolici  piincipes,  etpugiles  dict.-B 
fldei,  omni,  qua  pcterint,  efficacia  tribuant  auxilium  et  favorem.  Dat.  RomEe  apud  Sanctara 
MariaiD   Majorem,  11  cal.  Junii,  pontificatus  nostri  anno  septimo." 


8  THE  i'opk's  arguments  in  confuting  heresies. 

Richard    shall  obtain  an  heavenly  reward,  and  great  favour  and  good  will  at  our  hand, 
^^-       and  of  the  see  aforesaid. — Dated  at  Rome,  at  St.  Mary  the  Greater,  the  11th 
~7~Q~  Kal.  of  June,  in  the  7th  year  of  our  bishopric,  a.d.  1378. 

1378.  *' These  are  the  -whole  force  and  strength  of  the  arguments  with 
The  which  these  apostolic  bishops  do  defend  the  christian  faith,  and  by 
reas'ons  which  tliey  pcrsuadc  the  whole  world  to  the  burning  of  their  brethren, 
and  argu-  -^yhom  they,  by  a  slanderous  title  and  name,  do  call  heretics,  and  we, 
confuting  truly  contrariwisc,  most  blessed  martyrs.  We  will  require  and  com- 
mand you,  what  reason  is  brought  herein,  but  only  that  will  standeth 
for  reason  ?  Whatsoever  the  pope  doth  once  pronounce  or  speak, 
it  is  counted  of  such  force  and  effect,  that  there  is  no  man  so  hardy 
or  stout,  that  dare  once  murmur  against  it.  But  they  who  do  succeed 
in  the  apostles^  room  and  place,  ought  to  confer  with  their  brethren 
with  an  apostolic  spirit  and  meekness,  considering  with  themselves 
(according  to  the  counsel  of  the  gospel)  "  of  what  spirit,"  and  whose 
ministers  they  are ;  for  whatsoever  is  lawful  unto  an  extern  judge,  or 
in  a  profane  cause ;  or  in  time  past  hath  been  licensed  unto  tyrants 
among  the  heathen  ;  or  else,  whatsoever  was  permitted  unto  the 
bishops  of  the  old  law,  is  not,  by  and  by,  fit  and  decent  for  the  mi- 
nisters of  the  New  Testament,  who  have  received  a  far  diverse  and 
contrary  spirit,  even  the  spirit  of  him,  who  commanded  them  to  learn 
of  him  to  be  humble  and  meek  of  heart.  Wherefore  it  were  very 
decent  that  these  men  (brag  they  never  so  much  of  the  apostles'" 
succession),  do  remember  themselves,  not  only  that  they  are  ministers 
and  servants,  but  also  whose  ministers  they  are  ;  for,  as  Themistocles 
said,  that  he  would  not  count  him  a  cunning  musician  that  kept 
neither  number  nor  measure  in  his  song ;  so  likewise  must  these  men 
think  of  themselves  in  the  usage  of  their  function  and  ofSce,  that 
they  frame  themselves  no  other  way,  than  according  to  the  true 
harmony  of  the  rule  which  they  have  professed.  And  albeit  that 
Wickliff  had  been  a  most  great  and  rank  heretic,  yet  where  did  the 
pope  learn  to  bind  him  in  fetters,  to  lay  him  in  prison,^  and,  with 
force  and  fire,^  to  oppress  and  persecute  him,*  when  as  yet  he  had 
confuted  him  by  no  probable  argument,  whose  cause  also,  peradven- 
ture,  he  did  not  sufficiently  know  ?  And  seeing  that  John  Wickliff' 
had  written  so  many  books  in  Latin,  if  they  had  seemed  not  conso- 
nant to  the  truth,  how  worthy  a  thing  had  it  been  for  the  apostolic 
dignity,  first  to  have  communicated  the  matter  with  the  man  himself, 
or  else  to  have  debated  the  same  (as  far  as  had  been  lawful)  amongst 
learned  men.  Truly  it  had  been  their  office  and  duty,  stoutly  to 
subdue  and  overthrow  errors,  by  the  Scriptures,  and  not  by  force  : 
and,  verily,  to  accuse  him  so  rasldy,  to  so  noble  and  valiant  a  prince 
and  king,  not  having  any  cause,  which  either  they  could  not,  or  would 

(1)  These  passages  in  single  asterisks,  extending  to  page  10,  are  extracts  from  the  Edition  of 
1563,  pp.  89—91,  and  are  iii  the  Latin  Edition  of  1559,  pp.  6,  7.— Ed. 

(2)  If  it  should  be  objected  to  this  expression,  that  Wickliff  was  never  subjected  to  so  severe 
a  punishment,  the  reader  is  reminded  that  it  was  the  gracious  providence  of  God  which  preserved 
this  able  reformer  from  the  misery  of  fetters  and  prisonhouses,  and  not  from  any  leniency  on  the  part 
of  the  pope  of  Rome  ;  for  in  1377  the  pope  issued  bulls,  addressed  to  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury, 
to  the  bishop  of  London,  to  the  king,  and  to  the  heads  of  the  university  of  Oxford,  commanding 
that  Wickliff  should  be  seized  and  detained  in  prison  till  further  instructioas  arrived  from  Rome. 
See  the  document,  just  before  cited,  by  Foxe,  from  the  pope  to  king  Richard,  and  note  (1)  on 
p.  6.— Ed. 

(3)  Our  author  means  the  "  fire"  of  persecution,  as  he  not  only  describes  the  inability  of  the 
papists  to  silence  the  tongue  or  overthrow  the  doctrine  of  this  zealous  protestant,  but  notices  here- 
after his  peaceful  death  at  Lutterworth. — Ed. 

(4)  A  mandate  from  the  king  was  addressed  to  the  vice-chancellor,  dated  July  1382,  ordering 
that  Wicliliff  and  his  adherents  should  be  expelled  from  the  miiversity,  within  seven  days. — Ed. 


«Y    WHAT    ^lEAXS    BISHOPS    COKVINCK    HERETICS.  il 

not,  brine:  and  allcL![e  aonin.st  him,  it  sccnictli  to  be  a  kind  of  most  iiuitnrd 
strange  and  barbarous  cruelty  and  lightness,  for  men  ini])udently  to 


abuse  the  majesty  of  their  prince.  A.  D. 

And  yet  tliese  men  (whom  nothing  can  once  cause  to  blush  or  Ije  __li_ 
ashamed)  desire  to  be  accounted  the  successors  of  the  apostles  ;  from 
whose  manners  and  examples  they  do  so  much  vary,  and  are  as  distant, 
as  we  are  distant  from  India.  St.  Paul  willeth,  that  after  thou  hast 
admonished  or  warned  a  heretic  once  or  twice,  if  he  do  not  amend, 
then  to  fly  and  eschew  his  company.  [Tit.  iii.  10.]  Which  of  the 
apostles,  at  any  time,  did  cast  a  heretic  into  jirison,  were  he  ever  so 
obstinate,  either  bound  him  in  fetters,  or  consumed  him  to  ashes .''  as 
though  the  truth  itself,  and  Christ,  who  is  the  author  of  truth,  were  not 
strong  enough  of  tliemselves  to  reprove  heretics,  without  they  were 
holpen  with  bonds  and  torments.  8t.  Paul,  instructing  the  ecclesiasti- 
cal pastor  with  apostolic  precepts,  amongst  other  things,  writeth  thus 
to  Timothy,  [2  Epis.  ii.24,]  "  It  is  not  meet  for  the  servant  of  the 
Lord  to  fight  and  strive,  but  to  show  himself  mild  and  gentle  towards 
all  men,  ready  to  instruct,  suffering  evil,  and  with  meekness  teaching 
not  only  those  which  were  seduced  through  error  or  ignorance,  but 
also  such  as  do  resist,  that  God  in  time  may  give  them  repentance 
to  know  his  truth."  And  again,  writing  unto  Titus,  [i.  9,]  he  saith 
that  "  he  must  be  stout,  or  strong,  to  overcome  those  who  resist  and 
gainsay  him  :"  but  how  !  with  sword,  weapon,  or  torment  ?  No  !  I 
think  not ;  but  with  the  armour  and  power  of  the  Spirit,  and  vvith 
the  word  of  God.  For  it  is  far  different  to  fight  with  worldly  princes, 
as  touching  their  right,  and  to  dispute  in  causes  of  religion,  in  the 
chiu-ch  of  God.  I  confess,  that  according  to  St.  PauFs  word,  we  must 
eschew  and  fly  a  heretic  ;  but  it  is  one  thing  to  eschew  a  heretic,  and 
a  clean  contrary  one  to  kill  an  innocent,  instead  of  a  heretic.  He  that 
being  once  or  twice  admonished  or  warned,  and  continueth  still  in  his 
error,  is  worthy  not  only  to  be  eschewed  of  all  men,  but  also,  by 
strait  imprisonment,  to  be  secluded  from  all  good  and  honest  company. 
But  how  shall  I  know  that  it  is  an  error,  without  thou  do  allege  better .'' 

From  whence  then  is  this  example  of  barbarous  cruelty  sprung  up  By  what 
or  come  into  the  christian  hierarchy,  that  they  will  straight  condemn  "/,e^"^ 
to  death,  him,  whom  not  only  they  have  not  overcome  with  any  argu-  wsimps 
ments,  but  also  not  once  admonished,  for  no  other  cause  but  only  vince 
that  he   seemeth  unto  them  a  heretic  ?    wherefore,   he  that  can  so  '^®'^'^""- 
boldly  pronounce  or  determine  of  other  men''s  heresies,  had  need  to 
be  assuredly  grounded  as  to  what  is  the  true  sincerity  of  the  faith  ; 
otherwise,  if  tliat  was  sufficient  for  every  man,  which  his  own  will  and 
affection  lead  him  unto,  it  were  to  be  feared,  lest,  as  it  happened  unto 
the  Jews  in  time  past,  when  they  would  have  crucified  Christ,  as  a 
deceiver,  they  crucified  the  very  Son  of  God  ;  so  likewise  may  happen  Papists 
unto  them  in  persecuting  of  heretics,  that  they  themselves  become  the  sewl^sthe 
greatest  heretics  of  all  others.    But  now-a-days,  there  are  many,  whom  fl^^^<^^ll 
either  their  nature,  or  cruelty,  or  folly,  or  some  vain  superstition,  hath 
so  moved  or  stirred  up,  that  albeit  they  understand  and  see  no  more, 
in  these  matters,  than  a  poor  blind  man  doth,  in  colours ;  yet  is  it  a 
world  to  see  with  how  great  boldness  they  will  determine  and  pro- 
nounce against  heretics.     And  yet,  these  are  they  who  cannot  fad  to 
err,  or  be  deceived  ;  neither  is  it  lawful  for  any  man  to  examine  their 


"10  THK    CONCLUSIONS    OF    JOHN    WICKLIFK    KXHIBITED    IN 

liichuni  -wills,  by  the  censure  of  any  liunian  judg^iicnt.    O  most  miserable  state 
— — —  of  the  church !  seeing  that  the  whole  state  of  christian  people  dependeth 
^'  ^^-    on  the  will  (as  it  were  on  the  beck)  of  any  one  man,  that  whatsoever 
^''^^^-    doth  either  please  or  displease  his  blockish  brain,  must  be  received 
and  embraced  of  all  men  ;  and  according  thereunto,  the  whole  reli- 
gion to  be  applied  and  formed :  what  other  thing  is  this,  than  to 
refer  Christ^s  religion  unto  men''s  wills,  and  not  men  unto  religion  ? 

But  now  we  will  leave  off  to  speak  any  more  of  the  pope,  and 
return  to  Wickliff;  who,  albeit,  as  we  said  before,  he  was  forced  by 
the  bishops  and  prelates  to  keep  silence,  yet  could  not  be  so  sup- 
pressed ;  but  that  through  the  vehemencv  of  the  truth,  he  burst  out 
afterwards  much  more  fiercely.  For  Wickliff,  having  obtained  and 
gotten  the  good  will  and  favour  of  certain  noblemen,  attempted  again 
to  stir  up  his  doctrine  amongst  the  common  people.  Then  began 
the  Pharisees  again  to  swarm  and  gather  together,  with  marvellous 
tragedies,  striving  against  the  light  of  the  gospel,  which  began  to  shine 
abroad ;  neither  was  the  pope  himself  behind  with  his  part,  for  he 
never  ceased  with  his  bulls  and  letters,  to  stir  up  them,  who  other- 
wise, of  their  own  accord,  were  but  too  furious  and  mad.  Divers 
copies  of  his  letters  I  have  by  me,  in  which,  save  force  and  violence, 
threatenings  and  vain  words,  there  was  nothing  else  contained.* 

The  articles  included  in  the  pope's  letters,  which  he  sent  to  the 
bishops  and  to  the  king,  against  Wickliff,  were  these  which  in  order 
do  follow : — 

The  Conclusions  of  John  Wickliff,  exhibited  in  the  Convocation  of 
certain  Bishops  at  Lambeth. 

I.  All  the  whole  race  of  mankind  here  on  earth,  except  Christ,  have  no 
power  simply  to  ordahi,  that  Peter  and  all  his  offspring  should  politically  rule 
over  the  world  for  ever. 

II.  God  cannot  give  to  any  man,  for  him  and  his  heirs,  any  civil  dominion 
for  ever. 

III.  All  writings  invented  by  men,  as  touching  perpetual  heritage,  are  im- 
possible. 

IV.  Every  man,  being  in  grace  justifying,  hath  not  only  right  unto  the  thing, 
but  also  for  his  time  hath  right,  indeed,  over  all  the  good  things  of  God. 

V.  A  man  can  only  ministratoriously  give  any  temporal  gift,  or  perpetual  gift, 
whether  to  his  natural  son,  or  to  his  son  by  imitation. 

VI.  If  God  be,  the  temporal  lords  may  lawfully  and  meritoriously  take  away 
the  riches  from  the  church  when  delinquent.' 

VII.  We  know  that  Christ's  vicar  cannot,  neither  is  able  by  his  bulls,  neither 
by  his  own  will  and  consent,  neither  by  the  consent  of  his  college,  either  to 
enable  or  disable  any  man. 

VIII.  A  man  cannot  be  excommunicated  to  his  hurt  or  undoing,  except  he 
be  first  and  principally  excommunicate  by  himself. 

IX.  No  man  ought,  but  in  God's  cause  alone,  to  excommunicate,  suspei\d,  or 
forbid,  or  otherwise  to  proceed  to  revenge  by  any  ecclesiastical  censure.^ 

(1)  "  The  church  when  delinquent ;"  see  the  Latin  edition,  p.  9,  •'  Ecclesia  delinquente."  In  the 
English  editions,  see  "the  church  when  they  do  ofiend  habitualiter."  Between  the  sixth  and  the 
seventh  conclusion,  Wilkins.  in  his  Concilia,  vol.  iii.  p.  123,  gives  another  from  Sudbury's  Regis- 
ter— "Nunquid  ecclesia  est  in  tali  statu  vel  non,  non  est  meum  descutere,  sed  dominorum  tempo- 
ralium  examinare  ;  et  posito  casu  contidenter  agere,  et  in  poena  daninationis  a;ternae  ejus  temporalia 
auferre."  This  is  not  extant  in  the  Latin  nor  in  any  English  edition  of  Foxe  ;  Lewis,  p.  58,  gives 
it  thus:  "  Whether  the  church  he  in  such  a  state  or  not,  is  not  my  business  to  examine,  but  the 
business  of  temporal  lords  ;  who,  if  they  find  it  in  such  a  state,  are  to  act  boldly,  and  on  the  penalty 
of  damnation  to  take  away  its  teraporalties."  The  same  writer  adds  a  note,  intimating  that  this  ar- 
ticle was  inserted  in  the  pope's  schedule,  but  no  reason  is  alleged  for  its  omission  by  our  author. — Ed 

(2)  This  conclusion  is  otherwise  expressed  in  the  pope's  schedule.  The  same  observation  applies 
to  the  fifteenth  and  three  following.     See  Lewis's  History,  p.  58.— Ed. 


THE    CONVOCATION    OF    CERTAIN    BISHOPS    AT    LAMBETH.  11 

X.  A  cm-se  or  excommunication  doth  not  simply  bind,  but  in  case  it  be  pro-  Richard 
nounced  and  given  out  against  the  adversary  of  God's  law.  ^^■ 

XI.  Tliere  is  no  power  given  by  any  example  of  Christ  to  his  apostles,  to  .  ^ 
excommunicate  any  subject  specially  for  denying  of  any  temporalties,  but  rather  ,  'y' 
contrariwise.  1 

XII.  The  disciples  of  Christ  have  no  power  to  exact,  by  any  ci\'il  authority, 
temporalties  by  censures. 

XIII.  It  is  not  possible  by  the  absolute  power  of  God,  that  if  the  pope,  or 
any  other  Christian  do  pretend  by  any  means  to  bind  or  to  loose,  that  thereby 
he  doth  so  bind  and  loose. 

XIV.  We  ought  to  beUeve  that  the  vicar  of  Christ  doth  only  bind  and  loose 
when  he  worketh  conformably  to  the  law  and  ordinance  of  Christ. 

XV.  This  ought  universally  to  be  believed,  that  every  priest  rightly  and  duly 
ordered,  according  unto  the  law  of  grace,  hath  power  according  to  his  vocation, 
whereby  he  may  minister  the  sacraments,  and  consequently  absolve  any 
man  confessing  his  fault,  he  being  contrite  for  the  same. 

XVI.  It  is  lawful  for  kings,  in  causes  licensed  by  the  law,  to  take  away  the 
temporalties  from  the  spiritualty,  sinning  '  habitualiter,'  that  is,  who  continue 
in  the  custom  of  sin,  and  will  not  amend. 

XVII.  Whether  they  be  temporal  lords,  or  any  other  men,  whatsoever  they 
be,  who  have  endowed  any  church  with  temporalties,  it  is  lawfiil  for  them  to  take 
away  the  same  temporalties,  as  it  were  by  way  of  medicine,  to  avoid  sin, 
notwithstanding  any  excommunication  or  other  ecclesiastical  censure ;  foras- 
much as  they  are  not  given  but  under  a  condition. 

XVIII.  An  ecclesiastical  minister,  and  also  the  bishop  of  Rome,  may  lawfully 
be  rebuked  by  his  subjects,  and  for  the  profit  of  the  church  be  accused  either  by 
the  clergy  or  by  the  laity.* 

The  above  letters,  with  these  articles  enclosed,  being  received  from 
the  pope,  *the'^  bishop  of  Canterbury  and  the  other  bishops  took  them 
no  little  to  heart ;   for,  being  partly  encouraged  by  them,  and  partly 
moved  and  pricked  forward  by  their  own  fierceness  and  cruelty,  it  is 
to  be  marvelled  at,  with  what  boldness  and  stomach  they  did  openly 
profess,  before  their  provincial  council,*  that  all  regard  of  fear  or 
fevour  set  apart,  no  person,  neither  high  nor  low,  should  hinder  them, 
neither  would  they  be  *seduced^  by  the  entreaty  of  any  man,  neither 
by  any  manner  of  threatenings  or  rewards  :  but  that  in  this  cause,  they 
would  follow  straight  and  upright  justice  and  equity,  yea,  albeit  even 
if  danger  of  life  should  follow  thereupon :  surely  a  very  good  and 
noble  promise,  if  they  had  determined  this  justice,  within  its  right 
bounds.*     But  these  so  fierce  brags,  and  stout  promises,  with  the  stout 
subtle  practices  of  these  bishops,  who  thought  themselves  so  sure  J'^^"  *"  ' 
before,  the  Lord,  against  whom  no  determination  of  man's  counsel  l^^l\y^ 
can  prevail,  by  a  small  occasion  did  easily  confound  and  overthrow,  thrown. 
For  the  day  of  the  examination  being  come,  a  certain  personage  of  the  wicumr 
prince's  court,  and  yet  of  no  great  noble  birth,  named  Lewis  Clifford,  ^f^Jg^ 
entering  in  among  the  bishops,  commanded  them  that  they  should  if'ore 
not  proceed  with  any  definitive  sentence  against  John  Wickliff.     At 
these  words  they  all  were  so  amazed,  and  their  combs  so  cut,  that,  as 
in  the  story  is  mentioned,  they  became  mute  and  speechless,  as  men 
having  not  one  word  in  their  mouths  to  answer.     And  thus,  by  the  is  again 
wondrous  work   of  God's   providence,   John  Wickliflf  escaped  the  trom'^^'^'^ 
second  time  out  of  the  bishops'  hands,  and  was  by  them  clearly  "'^™- 
dismissed  upon  his  declaration  made  of  his  articles,  as  anon  shall 
follow. 

(1)  Lewis  observes,  p.  46,  "  This  conclusion  or  article  was  thus  represented  by  the  Council  of 
Constance :  '  People  may,  at  their  pleasure,  correct  their  princes,  when  they  do  amiss.'"  These 
conclusions  have  been  collated  \>'ith  the  Latin. — Ed. 

(2)  and  (3)  These  two  passages  are  from  Edition  15G3,  p.  90.— Ed. 


12  THi;    PROTESTATION    OF    JOHV    WICKLIFF. 

Richard       Moreover,  here  is  nut  to  be  passed  over,  how  at  the  same  time, 
'      and  in  the  said  chapel  of  the  archbishop  at  Lambeth,  where   the 
A.  D.    bishops  were  sitting  upon  John  Wickliif,  the  historian,  writing  of  the 
^^'^^-    doing  thereof,  addeth  these  words,  saying:'  "  I  say,  not  only  that  the 
citizens  of  London,  but  also  the  vile  abjects  of  the  city,  presumed  to 
be  so  bold  in  the  same  chapel  at  Lambeth,  where  the  bishops  were 
sitting  upon  John  WicklifF,  as  both  to  entreat  for  him,  and  also  to 
let  and  stop  the  same  matter ;  trusting,  as  I  suppose,  to  the  negli- 
gence Avhich  they  saw  before,  in  the  bishops,"  &c. 

Over  and  besides,  here  is  not  to  be  forgotten,  how  the  said  John 
WicklifF,  at  the  time  of  his  examination,  offered  and  exhibited  unto 
the  bishops,  in  writing,  a  protestation,  with  a  declaration  or  expo- 
sition of  iiis  own  mind,  upon  his  said  articles,  the  effect  whereof 
followeth. 

The  Protestation  of  John  WicklifF. 

First,  I  protest,  as  I  have  often  before  done,  that  I  do  mind  and  intend  with 
my  wliole  heart,  by  the  grace  of  God,  to  be  a  true  Cliristian ;  and,  as  long  as 
breath  shall  remain  in  me,  to  profess  and  defend  the  law  of  Christ.  And  if  it 
shall  happen  that  through  ignorance,  or  otherwise,  I  shall  fail  therein,  I  desire 
of  my  Lord  God  pardon  and  forgiveness.  And  now  again,  as  before  also,  I  do 
revoke  and  make  retractation ;  most  humbly  submitting  myself  under  the  cor- 
rection of  our  holy  mother,  the  church.  And  forasmuch  as  the  sentence  of  my 
faith,  which  I  have  holden  in  the  schools  and  elsewhere,  is  reported  even  by 
children,  and,  moreover,  is  carried  by  children  even  unto  Rome;  therefore, 
lest  my  dearly  beloved  brethren  should  take  any  offence  by  me,  I  will  set  forth 
in  writing  the  sentence  and  articles,  for  which  I  am  now  accused  and  impeached ; 
which  also  even  unto  the  death  I  will  defend,  as  I  believe  all  Christians  ought 
to  do,  and  specially  the  bishop  of  Rome,  and  all  other  priests  and  ministers  of 
the  church :  for  I  do  understand  the  conclusions  after  the  sense  and  manner  of 
speaking  of  the  Scriptures  and  holy  doctors,  which  I  am  ready  to  expound ; 
and  if  they  shall  be  found  contrary  to  the  faith,  I  am  ready  to  revoke,  and 
speedily  to  call  them  back  again. - 

(1)  "  Non  dico  cives  tantum  Londinenses,  sed  viles  ipsius  civitatis  se  impudenter  ingerere  pree- 
sumpserunt  in  eandem  capellam  et  verba  facere  pro  eodem,  et  istud  negotium  impedire,  confisi,  ut 
reor,  de  ipsorum  pra^missa  negligentia  pra^latorum,"  &c. 

(2)  When  Wickliff  had  been  dismissed  from  the  convocation  of  bishops  holden  at  Lambeth  m 
1377,  he  was  attacked  by  an  anonymous  writer,  whom  he  designated  a.'  motley  theologian.'  In 
Wickliff's  reply  to  this  zealous  defender  of  papacy,  he  concludes  his  treatise,  first,  by  a  "  further 
explanation"  of  his  Conclusions  (given  in  the  text  above) ;  and  secondly,  by  a  zealous  appeal  to 
the  influential  classes  of  society,  to  shake  off  the  temporal  and  spiritual  thraldom  of  the  church 
of  Rome.  The  following  Conclusions  and  Expositions  are  the  first  which  he  set  forth,  and  are 
inserted  from  the  first  edition  of  the  '  Acts  and  Monuments',  where  Foxe  observes,  "  it  were  too 
long  in  this  place  to  rehearse  all  the  conclusions  of  this  book^  but  for  the  rare  and  most  singular 
utility  and  profit  in  them,  gentle  reader!  I  thought  it  not  good  to  omit  them,  lest  I  should  be 
thought  more  desirous  of  brevity  than  of  profit." — Ed. 

The  First  Conclusions  of  John  Wickliff,  exhibited  in  the  Convocation  of  certain  Bishops,  at  Lambeth. 

I.  "All  the  whole  race  of  mankind,"  &c.  It  is  evident  by  the  Scriptures.  Forasmuch  as  in  the 
latter  judgment  all  civil  rule  shall  cease,  [1  Cor.  xv.] ;  where  the  apostle,  speaking  of  the  latter 
day,  writeth  thus;  "  Then  shall  the  end  come,  when  he  shall  deliver  up  his  kingdom  unto  God, 
his  Father,  when  he  shall  have  made  void  all  princely  rule,  power,  and  dominion."  Whosoever 
then  believeth  the  resurrection  of  the  body,  must  also  believe  this  article,  forasmuch  as  after  that, 
there  shall  be  no  more  exaction  or  secular  conversion.  No  man  then  hath  power,  in  this  behalf, 
to  ordain  any  thing  contrary  to  the  will  and  decree  of  the  Lord. 

II.  "  God  cannot  give  to  any  man,"  &c.  For  this  I  do  take  :  that  this  word  '  for  ever,'  is  taken 
properly  and  famously,  after  the  manner  of  the  church,  praying,  "  Glory  be  unto  the  Trinity,  both 
now  and  ever."  Secondly,  I  understand  that  civil  dominion  is  taken,  formally,  for  that,  whereby 
every  man  doth  civilly  rule  and  govern.  And,  thirdly,  that  this  speech  of  the  power  of  God,  is 
ordinate  or  revealed  in  the  holy  Scriptures ;  and  then  this  conclusion  followeth,  by  that  which  is 
aforesaid  ;  that  by  speaking  of  the  absolute  power  of  God,  it  seemcth  probable  unto  many,  that 
the  Lord  cannot  continue  eternally  the  success  of  his  spouse,  because  he  should  then  defraud  her 
of  her  reward,  and  unjustly  defer  to  take  vengeance  upon  the  body  of  the  devil,  which  he  hath 
deserved. 

III.  "All  writings  invented  by  men,"  &c.  This  was  spoken,  by  the  way,  to  a  certain  Doctor, 
who,  highly  commending  the  writings  of  men,  did  contemn  and  neglect  the  holy  Scriptures.  I  said 
it  was  best  to  attend  and  lean  unto  their  [the  ?]  position  and  defence  of  the  Scripture,  forasmuch  as 
many  of  these  writings  are  impossible.  I  grant  the  conclusion,  forasmuch  as  many  writings  affirm 
as  touching  those  who  are  disherited  and  dead  untested,  that  it  is  given  to  them  for  themselves 


AX    EXPOSITIOX    UPON    THE    COXCLUSIOXS    OF    WICKI.IFF.  13 

An  Exposition  upon  the  Conclusions  of  John  WicldifF,  exhibited  by  ^'"'j'^^'^ 

him  to  the  Bishops.  

^  A.D. 

1.  "  All  the  race  of  mankind  here  on  earth,  except  Christ,  hatli  no  power    1378. 
simply  to  ordain,  that  Peter,"  &c.  

This  conclusion  of  itself  is  evident,  forasmuch  as  it  is  not  in  man's  power  to 
stop  tlie  coming  of  Christ  to  his  final  judgment,  but  he  must  needs  come, 
according  to  the  article  of  our  creed,  to  judge  both  the  quick  and  the  dead. 

and  their  heirs  for  ever,  by  a  divine  writing;  which  thing,  forasmuch  as  it  is  against  the  divine 
ordinance,  they  ought  not  to  canonize  every  writing  contemning  the  Scriptures. 

IV.  "  Every  man  being  in  grace  justifying,"  &c.  Winch  appeareth  evidently  enough  by  the  holy 
Scripture,  [Matt,  xxiv.]  "  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  above  all,  the  goodness  of  God,"  &c. ;  and  the 
apostle  saith.  in  Romans  viii.,  "  God  spared  not  his  own  Son.  but  gave  him  for  us  all ;  how,  tlien. 
did  he  not  give  us  all  things  also  with  him?"  Wherefore  these  three  first  conclusions  do  even 
print  faith  in  the  hearts  of  these  worldlings,  that  they  should  not  be  drowned  in  the  waves  and 
cares  of  the  world,  which  passeth  away  with  its  concupiscence.  And  the  fourth  conclusion  allureth 
ns  unto  the  love  of  God,  who  hath  chosen  us  to  so  many  great  and  true  riches. 

V.  "  A  man  can  but  only  ministratoriously  give  any  temporal  dominion  or  gift,  as  well  to  his  natu- 
ral son,  as  to  bis  son  by  adoption."  Itappeareth  from  Luke  vi.,  "They  shall  give  you,  and  put  into 
your  bosoms  a  good  measure  filled,  heaped  up,  and  running  over."  And,  forasmuch  as  it  is  done 
only  by  ministration,  it  is  evident  that  it  is  not  lawful  to  give  any  thing  to  a  man  living  in  this 
world,  but  ac  it  were  by  the  ministry  of  God,  and  under  his  authority,  according  to  the  saying  of 
the  apostles  ;  "  I  say  that  Jesus  Christ  was  a  minister,"  &c.  Let  not  his  vicar  be  ashamed  to  use 
the  ministry  of  the  church  ;  forasmuch  as  he  is,  or  at  least  ought  to  be,  the  servant  of  the  servants 
of  God.  For  the  determination  going  from  the  manner  of  speaking  of  the  holy  Scripture,  and 
the  pride  of  secular  dominion,  with  the  flattering  and 'glossing  worldly  style,  doth  seem  to  tend 
unto  blasphemy,  and  to  the  advancement  of  Antichrist;  and.  especially,  wlien  the  verities  of  the 
Scriptures  are  reputed  as  cokle,  contrary  to  the  christian  faith;  yea,  by  the  head  captains  them- 
selves, who  do  presume  that  aU  controversies  of  the  Scriptures  should  stand  in  their  determination; 
albeit  they  be  ever  so  ignorant  of  the  Scriptures.  For  so  they  might  consent  and  come  together 
unto  the  court,  to  buy  out  a  condemnation  against  the  most  holy  and  sacred  Scriptures  as  heretical, 
and  also  adetennination  against  the  articles  of  our  christian  faith. 

VI.  "  If  God  be,  the  temporal  lords  may  lawfully,"  &e.  By  this  is  to  be  understood,  that  we 
do  speak  of  power,  according  as  the  authentic  Scripture  doth  speak,  [Matt,  iii.]  "God  is  able,  even 
of  these  stones,  to  raise  up  children  unto  Abraham."  Wherefore  I  do  grant  the  consequent  cor- 
respondent unto  the  iirst  .-irticle  of  our  faith :  for  if  God  be,  he  is  omnipotent ;  and  if  he  be  omni- 
potent, he  may  give  unto  the  secular  lords  such  powers;  and  so,  consequently,  the  secular  lords 
may  meritoriously  and  lawfully  use  the  same  power.  But,  lest  this  conclusion  should  not  seem  to 
depend  on  the  consequent,  1  have  declared,  how  that  the  temporal  lords  have  power  to  withdraw 
and  take  away  their  alms  and  charity  bestowed  upon  the  church,  if  they  abuse  the  same  ;  and  that 
such  taking  away,  in  some  case,  is  a  spiritual  work  of  mercy,  saving  and  preserving  the  soul  from 
eternal  fire,  and  obtaining  blessedness  and  grace ;  and  such  cluirity  aforesaid,  bestowed  upon  the 
church,  yea  although  against  the  religion  which  Christ  hath  ordained,  doth  relieve  the  body  from 
a  temporal  misery,  as  a  corporal  or  bodily  alms.  And  as  it  seemeth,  that  great  gifts  may  be  an 
occasion  of  blessedness  and  happiness,  so  more  like  is  the  taking  away  of  the  same.  Yet,  notwith- 
standing, 1  said  that  it  was  not  lawful  to  do  it,  but  by  the  authority  of  the  church,  and  for  lack  of 
some  spiritual  ruler  or  governor,  and  in  case  the  ecclesiastical  minister,  being  strayed  from  the 
catholic  faith,  is  to  be  corrected  and  punished, 

VII.  "  We  know  that  Christ's  vicar  cannot,"  &c.  It  appeareth  evidently  by  the  Scriptures  ;  for- 
asmuch as  the  church  doth  fully  believe,  that  the  abling  of  any  man  ought  first  to  proceed  and 
come  of  God  ;  wherefore  no  man,  being  Christ's  vicar,  hath  any  power  in  this  matter  ;  but  only,  as 
vicar,  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  to  notify  unto  the  church,  whom  God  hath  enabled.  Wherefore, 
if  any  man  do  any  thing,  not  as  vicar,  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  whom  he  ought  to  forethink  to  be 
his  author  and  head,  it  is  a  presumption  of  Lucifer ;  forasmuch  as  Christ  by  his  apostle  saith, 
[1  Cor.  iii.]  "  All  our  sufficiency  cometh  of  God." 

VIII.  "  A  man  cannot  be  excommunicated  to  his  hurt,"  S;c.  It  appeareth;  forasmuch  as  every 
such  excommunication  doth  tend  unto  the  impairing  of  him  who  is  excommunicated  ;  for  no  man, 
according  to  St.  Chrysostom's  mind,  and  by  the  holy  Scriptures,  can  be  endamaged  or  hurt,  except 
he  be  hurt  by  sin,  which  must  take  its  first  original  and  beginning  from  him  who  doth  commit  the 
offence  or  sin.  For  the  just  and  deserved  suspension  of  any  man,  from  the  sacraments,  and 
entrance  to  the  church,  is  no  excommunication  of  the  church,  but  by  name  only  :  and,  as  touching 
the  desert  itself,  it  proceedeth  first  from  him  who  is  excommunicated,  rather  than  from  the  vicar 
of  Christ,  who  doth  give  the  sentence  against  him;  for  no  man  is  excommunicated  to  his  own 
hurt,  but  only  through  sin,  which  taketh  away  God's  help  ;  and  as  it  appeareth  by  Isaiah  li.x. 
"  Your  sins  have  made  separation  between  your  God  and  you." 

IX.  "  No  man  ought,  but  on  God's  cause  alone,"  &c.  It  appeareth  by  this,  that  no  man  ought  to 
desire  vengeance,  but  in  a  just  cause  :  whereupon,  I  conclude,  that  forasmuch  as  all  such  punish- 
ment hath  its  original  of  sin,  and  that  all  sin  is  against  God,  as  saith  the  psalmist,  [Psalm  li.] 
"  Against  thee  only  have  I  sinned."  Whereby  it  is  evident  that  no  man  ought  to  proceed  to  any 
such  kind  of  punishment,  but  only  in  respect  to  take  vengeance  for  the  offence  done  against  God ; 
for,  according  unto  the  Scripture,  no  man  ought  to  take  vengeance  but  for  offence  committed 
against  his  God,  and  to  forgive  all  private  injuries,  as  it  is  plain  by  the  commandment  of  Christ 
[Matt,  xviii],  "  If  thy  brother  have  offended  thee,  forgive  him.  even  unto  seventy  times  seven." 

X.  Hereby  the  conclusion  is  evident,  that  "  a  curse  or  excommunication  doth  not  simply  bind, 
but  in  case  it  be  pronounced  and  given  out  against  ttie  adversary  of  God's  law  ;"  and  it  appeareth 
thus:  every  such  malediction  doth  not  bind,  as  touching  towards  God,  except  that  he  wlio  is  so 
bound  doth  offend  against  his  law;  but  it  doth  not  simply  bind, except  it  did  also  bind  as  touching 
God ;  ergo,  I  conclude,  "  if  God  do  justifj',  who  is  he  that  can  condemn  ?"  and  God  is  not  offended 
at  any  time,  but  for  resisting  against  his  law.  And  these  articles  of  faith  do  further  and  help, 
that  the  law  of  Christ  is  the  i)etter  embraced  and  loved,  which,  notwithstanding,  ought  to  be  the 
reason  and  rule  to  direct  and  lead  us  in  every  lawful  process,  and  that  the  Scripture,  written  in 
Rom.  xii.,  may  the  better  be  remembered,  where  it  is  said,  "  Dearly  beloved,  be  not  revengers  of 
your  own  selves,  but  give  place  unto  anger;  for  it  is  written,  Commit  vengeance  to  me,  saith  the 
Lord,  and  I  will  reward." 


14  AX    EXPOSITION    UPOX    THE    CONCLUSIONS    OV    WICKLIKF. 

nichnrd    And  tlien,  as  the  Scripture  teachetli,  shall  surcease  all  civil  and  politic  rule 
IJ        here :   I  understand  the  temporal  and  secular  dominion  pertaining  to  men  here 

] —  dwelling  in  this  mortal  lite,  for  so  do  the  philosophers  speak  of  civil  dominion. 

A.D.     j^^^^^  altliou'^h  the  thing  which  is  terminable,  and  hath  an  end,  is  called  some- 

^•^^^-    times  perpetual,  yet,  because  in  holy  Scripture,  and  in  use  of  the  church,  and 

in  the  books  of  philosophers,  most  commonly  that  is  taken  to  be  perpetual, 

wliich  hath  no  end  of  time  liereafter  to  come,  according  to  which  sense  the 

XI.  "  There  is  no  power  given  by  any  example,"  kc.  And  this  is  evident  by  this ;  that  Christ 
saith"  that  the  honour  of  God,  and  the  profit  of  the  diurch,  are  to  be  preferred  befofe  any  private 
comiiiodity,  or  denial  of  temporalties.  The  second  part  is  evident  by  Luke  ix.,  where  he  rebuked 
his  disciple's,  when  they  would  have  had  lire  to  come  down  from  heaven,  to  excommunicate  the 
infidels  and  misbelievers,  because  they  unjustly  detained  and  kept  back  their  goods  from  Christ 
and  his  disciples.  "  You  know  not,"  said  he,  "  whose  spirit  ye  are  of;  for  the  Son  of  Man  cometh 
to  save  the  souls  of  men,  and  not  to  destroy  them."  Whereupon  this  is  a  general  conclusion,  that 
it  is  not  lawful  for  him  who  is  Christ's  vicar,  to  excommunicate  his  neighbour,  but  only  for  love  ; 
wherewithal  he  must  be  more  affected,  than  with  the  love  of  any  temporal  goods  of  this  world. 
The  negative  conclusion  is  also  evident,  inducing  and  leading,  unto  the  impossibility,  which 
otherwise  should  be  in  Christ,  "  yea,  yea,  nay,  nay." 

XII.  "  The  disciples  of  Christ  have  no  power,"  S:c.  This  appeareth  by  the  apostles,  and  the 
other  of  Christ's  disciples,  until  the  time  that  tlie  church  was  endued  with  possessions ;  w  hich 
church,  in  how  great:  necessity  soever  the  faithful  were,  did  never  exercise  any  such  kind  of  power 
(ir  authority,  but  exhorted. all  men  according  to  the  law  of  God,  and  the  devout  ministering  of  such 
blessings,  which  ought  to  be  willing  alms.  But,  after  that  the  church  was  endued  and  enriched, 
then  were  these  cloaked  censures  and  secular  exactions  brought  in.  This  is  proved,  and  standeth 
manifest  in  Luke  xxii.,  that  all  civil  possessions  wore  forbidden  and  prohibited  unto  Christ's 
disciples. 

XIII.  "  It  is  not  possible  by  the  absolute  power,"  &c.  It  appeareth,  by  this  means,  that  every 
Christian  may  very  shamefully  err  on  this  point,  from  the  triumphant  church  :  then  could  he  not 
bind  or  loose,  as  he  doth  pretend  in  his  mind;  wherefore  it  cannot  be,  that  albeit  he  do  pretend  to 
liind  and  loose,  that  he  doth  so.  Whereupon  it  seemetli  unto  me,  that  he  who  doth  usurp  that 
power  unto  himself,  should  lie  the  same  man  of  sin,  of  whom  it  is  spoken  in  2  Thess.  ii.,  that 
"  he  sitteth  in  the  temple  of  God,  and  shovveth  himself,  as  though  he  were  a  God." 

XIV.  "  We  ought  to  believe  that  the  vicar  of  Christ,"  &c.  Hereby  it  appeareth  that  all  the 
power  and  authority  which  Christ's  vicar  hath,  is  then  only  lawful  in  effect,  so  long  as  it  is  niled 
by  the  good- will  and  pleasure  of  the  head  of  the  church. 

XV.  "  This  ought  universally  to  be  believed,  that  every  priest,  rightly  and  duly  ordered, 
according  to  the  law  of  grace,  hath  power  according  to  his  vocation,  whereby  he  may  minister  the 
sacraments,  and  consequently  absolve  any  man  confessing  his  fault,  being  contrite  and  penitent 
for  the  same,  whatsoever  it  be."  Whereby  all  men  may  perceive,  that  the  power  and  authority  of 
orders  in  all  christian  priests  is  alike;  as  Hugo,  in  his  second  book  of  Sacraments,  doth  declare. 
Notwithstanding,  some  authorities  of  the  inferior  sort  of  priests  are  now  so  reasonably  restrained 
in  substance,  and  otherwise  set  at  liberty  in  the  very  point  of  need  or  necessity. 

XVI.  "  It  is  lawful  for  kings,  in  causes  licensed  by  the  law,  to  take  away  the  temporalties  from 
the  spiritualty,  which  in  their  living  and  behaviour  abuse  the  same."  It  appeareth  by  the  reason 
set  before  in  the  fifth  conclusion :  for  unto  the  greatest  works  of  mercy,  most  easy  unto  the 
temporal  lords,  they  are  most  largely  bound  :  but,  peradventure,  it  would  be  a  greater  alms,  and 
easier  temporal  dominion,  to  take  away  their  alms,  that  it  do  not  build  unto  damnation  through 
the  abuse  thereof,  than  to  enlarge  the  said  alms  for  any  corporal  or  bodily  relief  or  help.  Where- 
fore I  do  conclude,  that,  according  unto  the  threefold  law,  this  sentence  is  specified.  The  first  is 
the  civil  law:  '  De  Collatione  Corrodii '  [Col.  10].  "  If  any  of  the  clergy,"  saith  the  law,  "  as  a 
bishop,  or  an  abbot,  have  a  benefice  given  him  by  the  king,  not  only  of  the  person,  but  of  the 
church,  and  that  through  his  own  fault  and  offence  he  do  lose  the  same,  he  being  yet  alive,  it 
pertaineth  unto  the  king.  But  after  the  death  of  the  spiritual  man,  it  shall  return  again  to  his 
successor."  The  second  is  the  canon  law  [Qusest.  16] ;  where  it  is  thus  decreed,  that  "  it  shall  be 
lawful  for  the  sons,  nephews,  and  the  most  honest  of  the  kindred  of  him,  who  either  builded,  or 
endowed  any  church,  to  have  this  foresight :  that  if  they  do  intend  to  defraud  any  priest  of  the 
dowry  bestowed  upon  him,  they  should  either  admonish  him  by  some  honest  communication  or 
talk,  or  else  complain  of  him  to  the  bishop  or  judge,  to  be  punished  :  and,  if  it  so  happen  that  the 
bishop  he  negligent  of  doing  of  bis  olUce,  let  it  be  told  unto  the  metropolitan  ;  and  if  he  also  seem 
to  slack  and  wink  at  the  matter,  let  it  then,  as  saith  the  canon,  be  remembered  in  the  ears  of  the 
king."  Neither  do  I  believe  this  to  be  a  feigned  matter ;  but  of  what,  I  pray  you,  should  they 
complain  unto  the  king,  but  only  that  he  should  see  correction  done  ?  Neither  is  there  any  doubt, 
but  that  correction  doth  more  aptly  appertain  unto  the  king ;  and  the  taking  away  of  the  goods 
reasonably  (according  unto  the  fault),  whereof  he  is  principal  and  chief  lord,  should  be  much 
better  and  more  commendable  in  this  behalf.  The  third  is  the  law  of  the  gospel  [2  Thess.  iii.], 
where  the  apostle  writeth  thus;  "  When  we  were  with  you,  we  declared  this  unto  you,  that  who- 
soever would  not  work,  should  not  eat."  The  law  of  nature,  also,  doth  license  all  such  as  have 
the  rule  and  governance  of  kingdoms,  to  correct  the  abuse  of  the  temporalties,  which  %vill  be  the 
chief  destructions  of  their  kingdoms. 

XVII.  "  Whether  they  be  temporal  lords,"  &c.  Hereby  it  appeareth,  that  the  condition  follow- 
ing upon  the  gift  of  any  such  goods  unto  the  church  is  such,  that  God  should  be  honoured  thereby, 
and  the  church  huilded;  which  condition,  if  it  be  left  undone  in  any  point,  the  title  of  the  gift  is 
lost,  and  so,  consequently,  the  lord  who  gave  the  gift  ought  to  correct  and  amend  the  fault,  and 
excommunication  ought  not  to  stop  or  let  the  execution  of  justice.  For  so  the  clergy,  by  their 
excommunications  provided  for  the  same,  might  get  into  their  hands  the  whole  world. 

XVIII.  "  An  ecclesiastical  minister,  and  also  the  bishop  of  Rome,"  &c.  The  first  part  is  evident ; 
forasmuch  as  every  ecclesiastical  brother,  being  in  danger  of  sin,  is  consequently  under  the  law  of 
brotherly  correction  [Matt,  xviii  ],  if  he  do  offend  against  any  man,  having  any  possible  oppor- 
tunity, he  ought  to  correct  him;  and  so,  likewise,  if  he  obstinately  continue  in  any  heretical 
opinion,  or  other  grievous  offence,  tending  to  any  spiritual  hurt,  or  damage  of  the  church;  that,  in 
such  case,  he  ought  to  be  complained  of  to  the  higher  powers,  to  the  intent  that  through  his 
correction,  the  danger  may  be  avoided :  For  so  was  Peter  rebuked  by  St.  Paul  [Gal.  ii.] ;  and  many 
unruly  persons  have  been  put  down  by  emperors,  as  Castrensis,  in  his  fifth  book  of  Polychionicon, 
doth  declare :  "  For  the  church  is  above  the  bishop."  Therefore,  to  say  that  he  ought  not  to  be 
rebuked,  or  punished  but  only  of  God,  what  offence  soever  he  hath  committed,  it  seemeth  to  me  to 


AN    EXPOSITION    UPON     THE    CONCLUSIONS    OF    WICKIJFK.  15 

churcli  singeth  "  Gloria  patri,"  &c.  "  Nunc  et  in  perpetuam;"  I  also,  after  Richard 
the  same  signification,  do  take  here  this  word  "  perpetually,"  and  so  is  this       "■ 
conclusion  consonant  to  the  principles  of  the  Scripture,  that  it  is  not  in  man's      .    „ 
power  to  ordain  the  course  and  voyage  of  the  church,  here  perpetually  to  last.      1070' 

2.  "  God  cannot  give  to  any  man,"  &'c.  L 

To  the  second  conclusion  I  answer,  understanding  civil  dominion,  as  in  the 

conclusion  before.  And  so  I  hold,  first,  that  God,  by  his  ordinate  power,  cannot 
give  to  any  person  civil  dominion  here  for  ever.  Secondly,  that  by  his  absolute 
power  it  is  not  probable  that  he  will  so  do,  forasmuch  as  he  cannot  ever  detain 
his  spouse  in  perpetual  prison  of  this  life,  nor  always  defer  the  final  beatitude 
of  his  church. 

3.  To  the  third  conclusion.  "  Many  writings  or  charts  invented  by  men,  as 
touching  perpetual  heritage  civil,  be  impossible." 

The  verity  of  this  conclusion  is  incident.  For  we  must  not  canonize  all 
manner  of  charts  whatsoever  as  catholic  or  universal ;  for  then  it  were  not 
lawful  by  any  means  to  take  away  or  sequester  things  given  by  chart  or  charter, 
when  any  doth  unjustly  occupy  the  same.  And  so  if  that  stand  confirmed  and 
ratified  by  the  faith  of  the  church,  great  occasion  thereby  should  be  ministered  to 
men  so  chartered,  to  ti-ust  to  their  temporal  charts ;  and  so  might  grow  thereby 
nmch  liberty  and  license  to  sin :  for,  like  as  by  what  supposition  every  truth 
is  necessary,  so  by  the  same  supposition  every  false  thing  is  possible ;  as  is  plain 
by  the  testimony  of  the  Scripture,  and  of  holy  doctors  speaking  of  necessity  of 
things  to  come. 

4.  "  Every  man  being  in  grace  justifying  fin.ally,'  hath  not  only  right  unto 
the  thing,  but  also  for  his  time  hath  right  indeed  over  all  the  good  things  of 
God." 

The  verity  hereof  is  evident,  by  holy  Sciipture  [Matt,  xxiv.],  where  Verity 
promiseth  to  every  man  entering  into  his  joy :   "  verily,"  saith  he,  "  I  tell  you, 
he  shall  set  and  place  him  over  all  the  goods  he  hath."     For  the  right  and  title  Here  he 
belonging  to  the  communion  of  saints  in  their  country  (he  meaneth  in  the  speaketu 
kingdom  of  heaven)  :  ^  "  hath  his  relation,  as  unto  his  object,  to  all  the  goods  the  right 
and  possession  of  God."  of  things 

5.  "  A  man  can  only  ministratoriously  give  any  temporal  dominion  or  gift  c"unt™ 
perpetual,  as  well  to  his  natural  son,  as  to  his  son  by  imitation."  to  come, 

1 1  is  evident.  For  every  man  ought  to  recognise  himself  in  all  his  works  and  ""' '"  *•*'* 
doings,  as  an  humble  servant  and  minister  of  God,  as  the  words  of  Scripture 
do  teach  us  :  "  Let  a  man  so  esteem  of  us  as  the  ministers  of  Christ."  Yea,  so 
Christ  himself  did  teach  his  chief  apostles  to  minister ;  but  in  their  country  the 
saints  shall  give  unto  their  fellow  brethren  the  dominion  of  their  goods,  '  Ut  patet 
de  suis  corporibus  et  bonis  eis  inferioribus  in  natura,'  according  to  the  words  of 
Luke  vi.  "  They  shall  give  you,  and  put  into  your  bosoms  a  good  measure  and 
perfect,  well  filled  and  heaped  up,  and  running  over." 

6.  "  If  God  be,  temporal  lords  may  lawfully  and  meritoriously  take  awa)^  the 
goods  of  fortime  from  the  chiu'ch  when  they  do  offend  habitualiter." 

This  conclusion  is  cori'elative  with  the  first  article  of  our  faith :  "  I  believe 
in  God,  the  Father  Almighty,"  &c.     Where  I  understand  this  word  "  may  "  in 

infer  that  he  should  be  above  the  church,  the  spouse  of  Christ.  And  Christ  himself,  albeit  that  he 
was  without  sin,  yet  wovdd  he  be  subject  unto  the  princes  and  rulers,  even  in  the  talcing  away  of 
his  temporalties,  as  it  appeareth  in  Matthew  xvii. 

These  conclusions  (as  I  have  said)  are  as  the  true  seed  of  faith,  separated  from  the  chaff,  whereby 
the  unthankful  cockle  is  enflamed  and  set  on  fire  ;  which,  after  it  hath  brought  out  the  fire  of  most 
vile  and  unsavourj'  shamefacedness  and  vengeance,  it  provideth  food  for  Antichrist,  contrary  and 
against  the  holy  Scriptures  ;  whereof  this  is  an  infallible  sign :  tliat  there  shall  reign  in  the  clergy, 
most  pernicious  and  luciferous  venom  and  pride,  consisting  in  the  greedy  desire  of  domination  and 
rule  ;  whose  companion  and  wife,  insatiable  covetousness  of  earthly  things,  utterly  extinguishing 
the  children  of  the  evangelical  poverty,  bringeth  forth  the  children  of  the  devil.  A  most  certain 
token  of  this  genealogy  appeareth  by  this  ;  that  many,  even  of  the  children  of  poverty,  degenerating 
and  going  out  of  kind,  do  maintain,  either  by  their  words,  or  at  least  by  their  silence,  the  part  of 
Lucifer  ;  not  being  able  or  willing,  or  at  least  not  daring  (for  the  seed  of  that  man  of  sin  which  is 
sown  in  their  hearts,  or  for  some  servile  or  bond  fear  for  the  loss  of  their  temporalties)  to  stand  to 
the  defence  of  the  poverty  of  the  gospel.     Thus  far  Wickliff.     Our  author  then  proceeds  :  — 

"  These  were  the  chief  conclusions  which  Wickliff,  at  that  present,  exhibited  unto  the  bishops, 
which  being  either  not  thoroughly  read,  or  at  least  not  well  understood  (I  cannot  tell  by  what 
means),  suddenly  they  waxed  very  meek  and  gentle,  and  gi-anted  him  free  liberty  to  depart." — See 
Latin  Edition,  Basle,  1559,  pp.  8 — 12.  Edition  I5(i3,  London,  pp.  91—95.  See  these  conclusions, 
also,  in  Vaughan's  Life  of  Wickliff  (Appendix  to  vol.  i.),  copied  from  MSS.  Seldeni  Archi.  B.  10. — 
Ed. 

(1)  "  In  gratia  gratificante  finaliter." — Ed. 

(2)  "  Fundatur  objective  supra  un  versitatem  bonorima  Dei." 


16  AN    EXPOSITION     LPON    THE    CONCl.IISION.S    OF    WICKLIFF. 

Richard   this  conclusion,  after  tlip    manner   of  autlientic    Scripture,   wliich   saith   and 
il-       granteth,  "  that  (iod  is  able  of  these  stones  to  raise  up  children  to  Abraham;" 
for  otherwise  all  christian  princes  were  heretics.     For  upon  this  conclusion  thus 
^''R'    standeth  the  reason  :  If  God  be,  he  is  omnipotent,  and  if  he  be  Almighty,  he 
'        is  able  to  command  the  lords  temporal  so  to  do:  and  if  he  may  so  command, 
then  may  they  lawfully  so  take  away  such  goods,  &c.     And  so  by  the  virtue  of 
the  same  principle,  christian  princes  have  practised  the  said  sentence  upon  the 
churchmen  heretofore,  as  did  William  Rufus,  &c.     But  God  forbid  that  any 
should  believe  hereby  my  intention  to  have  been,  that  secular  lords  may  law- 
fully take  away  what  goods  soever,  and  by  what  means  soever,  by  their  own 
naked  authority  at  their  pleasure  :  but  only  by  the  authority  of  the  church  they 
may  so  do,  in  cases  and  form  limited  by  the  law. 

7.  *'  We  know  that  it  is  not  possible  that  the  vicar  of  Christ  is  able  by  his 
pure  bulls,"  &c. 

This  is  manifest  by  the  catholic  faith ;  forasmucli  as  the  church  doth  fully 
believe  that  the  enabling  of  any  man  ought  first  to  proceed  and  come  of  God; 
wherefore  no  man  being  Christ's  vicar,  hath  any  power  in  this  matter,  but  only 
as  vicar  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  so  far  forth  as  he  is  enabled  of  the  Lord,  to 
notify  unto  the  church  whom  God  hath  enabled.  Wherefore  if  any  man  do 
any  thing,  not  as  vicar  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  whom  he  ought  to  forethink 
to  be  his  author  and  head,  it  is  a  presumption  of  Lucifer,  forasmuch  as  Christ 
by  his  apostle  saith  [1  Cor.  iii.],  "  all  our  ability  or  sufficiency  cometh  of  God." 
And  so  consequently,  it  cometh  not  purely  by  the  ministry  of  his  vicarship, 
that  he  is  enabled,  bvit  the  ableness  or  unableness  of  him,  being  the  vicar  of 
Christ,  cometh  to  him  another  way  from  above. 

8.  *'  A  man  cannot  be  excommunicated  to  his  hurt  or  undoing,  except  he 
be  excommunicated  first  and  principally  of  himself." 

It  is  evident,  forasmucli  as  all  such  excommunication  ought  to  proceed  and 
begin  originally  of  his  own  sin  which  is  damnified  :  whereupon  Augustine  saith, 
"  De  verbis  Domini,"  sermone  .51.  "  Do  not  thou  conculcate  thyself,  and  man 
overcometh  thee  not."  And  moreover  the  faith  of  the  church  doth  teach, 
"  Quod  nulla  ei  nocebit  adversitas,  si  nulla  dominetur  iniquitas  :"  that  is  to  say, 
"  No  adversity  shall  hurt,  if  no  iniquity  hath  the  upper  hand."  And  yet, 
notwithstanding,  every  excommunication  for  many  causes  is  also  to  be  feared, 
although  the  excommunication  of  the  church,  to  the  humble  man  being  excom- 
municated, be  not  damnable  but  wholesome. 

9.  "  No  man  ought  but  in  God"s  cause  alone  to  excommunicate,  suspend," 
&c. 

It  is  clear,  forasmuch  as  every  just  cause  is  the  cause  of  God,  whose  respect 
ought  chiefly  to  be  weighed  and  pondered.  Yea,  the  love  of  the  person  excom- 
municated, ought  to  surmount  the  zeal  of  revengement  and  the  desire  of  all 
temporal  goods  whatsoever ;  for,  otherwise,  he  that  doth  excommvmicate,  doth 
damnify  himself.  To  this  ninth  conclusion,  notwithstanding,  it  is  congiiient 
that  a  prelate  may  excommunicate  in  the  cause  also  of  man,  so  that  his  principal 
respect  in  so  doing  be  had  to  the  injiny  done  to  his  God,  as  appeareth  13, 
quffist.  4.     "  Inter  querelas." 

10.  "  No  curse  or  excommunication  can  bind  simply,  but  in  case  it  be  given 
out  against  the  adversary  of  Christ's  law." 

And  it  appeareth  thus,  because  that  God  doth  bind  simply  every  one  that  is 
bound,  who  cannot  excommunicate  but  only  for  transgression  of  his  law. 
Whereunto  it  is  consonant  notwithstanding,  that  the  censure  of  the  church  doth 
not  bind  simply,  but  secondaiily  in  that  case  and  respect,  as  it  is  denounced 
against  the  adversary  of  the  members  of  the  clmrch. 

11.  "  There  is  no  example  of  Christ,  which  giveth  power  to  his  disciples  to 
excommunicate  any  subject,  especially  for  denying  of  any  temporalties,  but 
contrary." 

Which  is  thus  declared  by  the  faith,  whereby  we  believe  that  God  is  to  be 
beloved  above  all  things,  and  our  neighbour  and  enemy  are  to  be  beloved  above 
all  temporal  goods  of  this  world  necessarily ;  for  the  law  of  God  cannot  be 
contrary  unto  itself. 

12.  "  The  disciples  of  Clnist  have  no  power,  by  any  civil  coaction,  to  exact 
temporal  things  by  their  censures." 

This  appeareth  by  the  faith  of  the  Scripture  [L\ike  xxiii.],  where  Christ  did 


AN    EXPOSITION    UPON    THK    CONCLUSIONS    OF    WICKMFK.  17 

forbid  his  apostles  ci\Tlly  to  reign  or  to  bear  any  lordsliip.     "  The  kings,"  saith   Richaiii 
he,  "of  the  Gentiles  bear  rule  over  them;  but  you  not  so."     And  after  this       ■^•^• 
sense  it  is  expounded  of  St.  Bernard,  of  St.  Chrysostom,  and  other  holy  men :  ~7~~r) 
which  conclusion   notwithstanding,   yet  may  they  exact  temporal   things   by     jo^o' 

ecclesiastical  censures  incidently,  if  case  be  that  it  appertain  to  the  revenge-  -. 1_ 

ment  of  their  God. 

13.  "  It  is  not  possible  by  the  absolute  power  of  God,  that  if  the  pope  or  any 
other  Christian  do  pretend  to  bind  or  loose  at  their  pleasure  by  what  means 
soever,  that  thereby  he  doth  so  bind  and  loose." 

The  contrary  of  this  conclusion  will  destroy  the  whole  catholic  faith,  importing 
no  less  than  that  he  is  a  blasphemer,  who  thus  usui-peth  such  absolute  power  of 
the  Lord.  And  yet,  by  this  conclusion,  I  intend  not  to  derogate  from  the 
power  of  the  pope,  or  of  any  other  prelate  of  the  church,  but  that  he  may,  by 
the  virtue  of  the  head,  so  bind  and  loose ;  but  do  understand  the  conditional  of 
this  negative  to  be  impossible,  after  this  sense,  that  it  cannot  be  that  the  pope 
or  any  other  prelate  of  the  church  can  pretend,  by  himself,  to  bind  or  loose 
(how  and  after  what  manner  he  list  himself),  except  in  such  sort,  that  he  do 
indeed  so  bind  and  loose  before  God,  as  he  doth  pretend  to  do. 

14.  "  We  ought  to  believe,  that  the  vicar  of  Christ  doth  at  such  times  only  power  of 
bind  and  loose,  when  he  worketh  conformably  by  the  law  and  ordinance  of  all  priests 
Christ"  &c.  -      _  _  [?,r'^ 

The  reason  thereof  is  this,  because  otherwise  it  is  unlawful  for  him  so  to  do,  equal, 
except  he  should  do  it  in  virtue  of  that  law ;  and  so,  consequently,  unless  it  be 
conformable  to  the  law  and  ordinance  of  Christ. 

15.  To  this  conclusion,  "  This  ought  universally  to  be  believed,  that  every 
priest  rightly  and  duly  ordered  hath  power  according  to  his  vocation,"  &c. 

The  reason  hereof  is  this,  because  the  order  of  priesthood,  in  his  own  nature 
and  substance,  receiveth  no  such  degrees,  either  of  more  or  less.  And  yet, 
notwithstanding,  the  power  of  inferior  priests  in  these  days,  is  upon  due  con- 
sideration restrained,  and  sometimes  again,  in  time  of  extreme  necessity, 
released.  And  thus,  according  to  the  doctors,  a  prelate  hath  a  double  power, 
to  wit,  the  power  of  order,  and  the  power  of  jurisdiction  or  regiment.  And 
according  to  this  second  power,  the  prelates  are  in  a  higher  majesty  and 
regiment. 

16.  "  It  is  lawfixl  for  princes  and  kings,  in  cases  by  the  law  limited,  to  with- 
draw temporal  commodities  from  churchmen,  abusing  the  same  '  habitualiter.' " 

The  reason  thereof  is  plain,  for  that  temporal  lords  ought  rather  to  lean  to 
spiritual  alms,  which  bringeth  with  it  great  fruit,  than  to  corporal  alms;  the 
case  so  standing,  that  sometimes  it  were  a  neeessan,'  work  of  spiritual  alms  to 
chastise  such  clerks,  by  taking  from  them  their  temporal  livings,  who  used  to 
abuse  the  same,  to  the  damnifj'ing  both  of  their  soul  and  body.  The  case 
which  the  law  doth  limit  in  this  matter,  were  the  defect  of  coiTecting  his 
spiritual  head,  or  else  for  lack  of  correcting  the  faith  of  the  clerk  who  so 
ofTendeth,  as  appeareth,  iQ.  q.  7.  "  Filiis,"  dist.  40.  cap.  "  Si  Papa." 

17.  "  Whether  they  be  temporal  lords,  or  any  other  men  whatsoever,  who 
have  endowed  any  church  with  temporalties,"  &c. 

The  truth  thereof  is  evidently  seen,  for  that  nothing  ought  to  stop  a  man 
from  the  principal  works  of  charity  necessarily,  because  in  every  action  and 
work  of  man  is  to  be  understood  a  pri\'y  condition  necessary  of  God,  his  good 
will  concuiTing  withal,  as  it  is  in  the  civil  law  de  c.  Conradi  cap.  o.  in  fine 
collat.  X.  And  yet,  God  forbid,  that  by  these  words  occasion  should  be  given 
to  the  lords  temporal  to  take  away  the  goods  of  fortune  from  the  church. 

1 8.  "  An  ecclesiastical  minister,  yea,  the  bishop  of  Rome,  may  lawfully  be 
rebuked  by  his  subjects,  and  for  the  profit  of  the  church  be  accused,  either  bv 
the  clergy,  or  by  the  laity." 

Tlie  proof  of  this  is  manifest  hereby,  because  the  said  bishop  of  Rome  is 
subject  to  fall  into  the  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  may  be  supposed,  saving 
the  sanctitude,  humility,  and  reverence  due  to  such  a  father.  J^or  so  long  as 
our  brother  is  subject  unto  the  infinnity  of  falling,  he  lieth  under  the  law  of 
brotherly  correction.  And  when  the  whole  college  of  cardinals  may  be  slothful 
in  ministering  due  correction  for  the  necessary  prosperity  of  the  church,  it  is 
apparent  that  the  residue  of  the  body  of  the  chm-ch,  which  possibly  may  stand 
most   of  laymen,  may  wholesomely  correct  the  same,  accuse,  and  bring  him  to 

vol..  III.  c 


18  TWO    POPKS    IX     ROJIE. 

Richnrd    a  better  way.     The   possibility  of  this  case  is  touched,  dist.  40.   "  Si  Papa." 

^'-       "  If  the  pope  do  en-  from  the  right  faith,"  &'c.     For  as  such  a  great  fall  ought 

~7~r\      not  to  be  supposed  in  the  lord  pope  without  manifest  evidence,  so  again,  such 

-,0-0     a»  obstinacy  ought  not  to  be  supposed  in  him,  possibly  being  fallen,  but  that 

1 !_  he  will  humbly  receive  the  wholesome  medicine  of  his  superior,  correcting  him 

in  the  Lord ;  the  practice  of  which  conclusion  also  is  testified  in  many  chro- 
nicles. Far  be  it  from  the  church  of  Christ,  that  verity  should  be  condemned 
which  soundeth  evil  to  transgi-essors  and  other  slothful  persons,  for  then  the 
.whole  faith  of  the  Scripture  were  in  a  damnable  case. 

Thus  Jolin  WicklifF,  in  giving  his  exposition  unto  his  aforesaid 
propositions  and  conclusions,  as  is  above  prefixed,  through  the  favour 
and  diligence  of  the  Londoners,  either  shifted  off  the  bishops,  or 
else  satisfied  them  so,  that  for  that  time  he  was  dismissed,  and 
escaped  clearly  away,  only  being  charged  and  commanded  by  them, 
that  he  should  not  teach  or  preach  any  such  doctrine  any  more,  for 
the  offence  of  the  lay  people. 

Thus  this  good  man,  being  escaped  fi-om  the  bishops  with  this 

charge,   yet,  notwithstanding,   ceased  not  to  proceed  in   his  godly 

purpose,  labouring  and  profiting  still  in  the  church  as  he  had  begun  ; 

AD.  1378.  to  whom  also,  as  it  happened  by  the  providence  of  God,  this  likewise 

was  a  great  help  and  stay,  that  in  the  same  year,  or  in  the  beginning 

Death  of  of  the  year  following,  the  aforesaid  pope  Gregory  XL,  who  was  the 

Ko?y  XL   stirrer  up  of  all  this  trouble  against  him,   turned  up  his  heels  and 

A  schism  died.      After  liira   ensued  such  a  schism  in  Rome,   between    tAvo 

ome.  pppgg^  ^^^^  others  succeeding  them,  one   striving  against  another, 

that  it  endured  the  space  of  thirty-nine  years,  until  the  time  of  the 

Council  of  Constance,    (a.d.  1414.) 

The  first  occasioner  of  that  schism,  was  pope  Urban  VL,  who  in 
the  beginning  of  his  popedom  was  so  proud  and  insolent  to  his 
cardinals,  and  others  (as  to  dukes,  princes,  and  queens),  and  so  set 
to  advance  his  nephews  and  kindred,  with  injuries  to  other  princes, 
that  the  greatest  nimnber  of  his  cardinals  and  courtiers,  by  little  and 
little,  shrunk  from  him,  and  set  up  another  French  pope  against  him, 
named  Clement,  who  reigned  eleven  years  ;  and  after  him  Bene- 
dict XIIL,  who  reigned  twenty-six  years.  Again,  on  the  contrary 
side,  after  Urban  VL  succeeded  Boniface  IX.,  Innocent  VIII. , 
Gregory  XIL,  Alexander  V.,  John  XXIIL     (a.d.  1410.)' 

As  touching  this  pestilent  and  most  miserable  schism,  it  would 
require  here  another  Iliad  to  comprehend  in  order  all  the  circum- 
stances and  tragical  parts  thereof,  what  trouble  in  the  whole  church, 
what  parts  taking  in  every  country,  what  apprehending  and  impri- 
soning of  priests  and  prelates  taken  by  land  and  sea,  what  shedding 
of  blood  did  follow  thereof.      How  Otho,  duke  of  Brunswick  and 
•vas  not   prince  of  Tarentvim,  was^  taken  and  murdered:  liow  Joan,  his  \vife, 
joTiy^      queen  of  Jerusalem  and  Sicily,  who  before  had  sent  to  pope  Urban, 
ment?      b^sidcs  Other  gifts  at  his  coronation,  forty  thousand  ducats  in  pure 
gold,  was,  afterwards,  by  the  said  Urban,  committed  to  prison,  and 
in  the  same   prison    strangled :    what  cardinals  were  racked,    and 


(1)  POPES. 

Urban  VI.  ruled 11  yrs.     8  mo. 

Boniface  IX 14  9 

Innocent  VIII 2  0 

Gregory  XII. 2  7 

Alexander  V 0  II 

JohnXXlIl 5  10 


ANTIPOPES, 

Clement  ruled       ........     1 1  yrs. 

Benedict  XIII 2* 


JACK  straw's  rebellion.  19 

miserably,  without  all  raercv,  tormented  on  (>^ibbets  to  death :  Vnat  Rtckard 
slaughter  of  men,  what  battles  were  fought  between  the  two  popes,         " 
wherein  five  thousand  men  on  one  side  were  slain,  beside  the  number    a.D. 
of  them  who  were  taken  prisoners  :  of  the  beheading  of  five  cardinals    1380. 
together  after  long  torments,  and  how  the  bishop  of  Aquilonensis, 
being  suspected  by  pope  Urban,  for  not  riding  faster  with  the  pope, 
his  horse  being  not  good,  was  there  slain  by  the  pope''s  command- 
ment, sending  his  soldiers  to  him  to  slay  him,  and  cut  him  in  pieces. 
All  these  things,  with  divers  other  acts  of  horrible  cruelty,  happening 
in  the  time  of  this  abominable  schism,  because  they  are  abundantly 
discoursed  at  full  by  Theodricus  Niemus,^  who  was  near  to  the  said 
pope  Urban,  and  present  at  all  his  doings ;    therefore,  as  a  thing 
needless,  I  here  omit ;  referring  those  who  covet  to  be  certified  more 
amply  herein,  unto  the  three  books  of  the  said  Thcodric,  above 
mentioned. 

About  the  same  time  also,  some  three  years  after,  there  arose  a  jack 
cruel  dissension  in  England,  between  the  common  people  and  the  febeiTion. 
nobility,  which  did  not  a  little  disturb  and  trouble  the  common- 
wealth.     In  this  tumult  Simon  of  Sudbury,  archbishop  of  Canter-  simon, 
bury,  was  taken  by  the  rustic  and  rude  people,  and  was  beheaded ;  b^s'iiop,'^ 
in  whose    place    succeeded    ^V'illiam  Courtney,    who    was    no    less  ^f^^^^' 
diligent  than  his  predecessor  had  been   before  him,   in  doing  his 
diligence  to  root  out  heretics.    Notwithstanding,  in  the  mean  season, 
Wickliflfs  sect  increased  privily,  and  daily  drew  to  greater  force, 
until  the   time   that  William  Barton,    vice-chancellor  of  Oxford, 
about  A.D.  1880,  had  the  whole  rule  of  that  university:  who  calling  a.d.isso, 
together  eight  monastical  doctors,  and  four  others,  with  the  consent 
of  the  rest  of  his  affinity,  putting  the  common  seal  of  the  university 
unto  certain  waitings,  set  forth  an  edict,  declaring  unto  every  man, 
and  threatening  them  under  a  grievous  penalty,  that  no  man  should  Edict 
be  so  hardy  hereafter,  to  associate  himself  with  any  of  WicklifF's  ^^ewick- 
abettors  or  favourers  :  and  unto  WicklifF  himself  he  threatened  the  liffites. 
greater  excommunication,  and  further  imprisonment,  and  to  all  his 
abettors,  unless  that  after  three  days  canonical  admonition  or  warning, 
or  as  they  call  it,  peremptory,  they  did  repent  and  amend.     When 
WicklifF  understood  this,  forsaking  the  pope  and  all  the  clergy,  he 
thought    to    appeal   unto    the    king's    majesty ;    but    the    duke    of 
Lancaster  coming  between,  forbade  him,  that  he  should  not  here- 
after attempt  or  begin  any  such  matters,  but  rather  submit  himself 
unto  the  censure  and  judgment  of  his  ordinary.     Whereby  Wickliff, 
being  beset  with  troubles  and  vexations,  as  it  were  in  the  midst  of 
the  waves,  was  forced  once  again  to  make  confession  of  his  doctrine  ; 
in  which  his  confession,  to  avoid  the  rigour  of  things,  he  answered  as 
is  aforesaid,  making  his  declaration,  and  qualifying  his  assertions  after 
such  a  sort,  that  he   did  mitigate  and  assuage  the  rigour  of  his 
enemies. 

The  year  after  (a.d.  1382),  by  the  commandment  of  William,  ad.  1332 
archbishop  of  Canterbury,  there  was  a  convocation  holden  at  London, 
where   John  WicklifF  was   also  commanded  to  be   present  ;    but 
whether  he  there  appeared  personally  or  not,  I  find  it  not  in  story 

(I)  Thcodoricus  Niemus,  "Do  Schismate." 

c  2 


20  Courtney's  manuatk   respecting  heresv, 

Richard  certainly   affirmed.      The    mandate    of    the   archbishop,    William 

^^'  Courtney,  sent  abroad  for  the  convcnting  together  of  his  council, 

A.  D.  here  followeth  underwritten,  truly  copied  out  of  his  own  registers. 
1382, 


Mandate  of  Archbishop  Courtney  respecting  Heresy. 

Memorandum. — Whereas  amongst  the  nobles  as  well  as  commons  of  this  realm 

of  England,  there  hath  a  certain  iiimonr  been  spread  of  divers  conclusions  both 

erroneous,  and  also  repugnant  to  the  detei-mination  of  the  church,  which  tend  to 

the  subvei-sion  of  the  whole  chm-ch,  and  to  our  province  of  Canterbury,  and  also 

to  the  subversion  of  the  whole  realm,  being  preached  in  divers  and  sundry  places 

of  our  said  province,  generally,  commonly,    and   publicly :    We  William,  by 

God's   permission    archbishop  of   Canterbury,    primate  of  all    England,    and 

legate  of  the  see  apostolical,  being  minded  to  execute   our  office  and  duty 

herein,  have  convocated  or  called  together  certain  of  our  fellow  brethren  and 

others  a  great  many,  as  well  doctors  and  bachelors  of  divinity,  as  doctors  of  the 

canon  and  civil  law,  and  those  whom  we  thought  to  be  the  most  famous  men, 

skilfullest  men,  and  men  of  soundest  judgment  in  religion,  that  were  in  all  the 

realm,  whose  names  hereunder  ensue.     And  the  same  being  (the  seventeenth 

day  of  the  month  of  May,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  1,382,)  in  a  certain  chamber 

within  the  territories  of  the  priory  of  the  friars  preachers  of  London,  before  us 

and  our  aforesaid  fellow  brethren  assembled,  then  and  there  personally  present : 

after  that  the  said  conclusions  (the  tenor  whereof  hereunder  ensueth)  were 

opelny  put  forth,  and  distinctly  and  plainly  read,  we  burdened  our  aforesaid 

fellow  brethren,  doctors  and  bachelors,  in  the  faith  wherein  they  stood  bound 

to  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  as  they  would  answer  before  the  High  Judge  in 

the  day  of  judgment,  that  they  should  speak  their  opinions  touching  the  said 

conclusions,  and  what  each  of  them  thinketh  therein. 

Certain  of      And  at  length,  after  good  deliberation  had  upon  the  premises,  the  aforesaid 

Wickliff's  oyj.  brethren  the  bishops,   doctors,    and  bachelors  reassembled  before  us  the 

sicms^ro-  twenty-first  day  of  the  same  month  in  the  aforesaid  chamber,  the  aforesaid 

iiounced    conclusions  being  again  and  again  repeated  and  plainly  read ;  by  us,  and  by 

to  be  he-   ^^  common  consent  of  us  all,  it  remaineth  published  and  declared,  that  some 

others'er-  of  the  said  conclusions  are  heretical,  and  others  erroneous  and  contrary  to  the 

roneous.    determination  of 'the  church,  as  hereafter  most  manifestly  shall  appear.     And, 

forasmuch  as  by  sufficient  information  we  find  and  perceive,   that  the  said 

conclusions  in  many  places  of  our  said  province  have  been,  as  is  said,  both 

taught  and  preached  ;  and  that  divers  other  persons  do  hold  and  maintain  the 

same,  and  be  of  heresy  vehemently  and  notoriously  suspected,  we  have  thought 

good,  as  well  generally  as  specially,  to  send  out  this  process  underwritten,  &c. 

Names  of  The  namcs  of  the  jurors  were  these  : — Eight  bishops  :  Canterbury, 
to  whom'  Winchester,  Durham,  Exeter,  Hereford,  Sarum,  Rochester,  and  friar 
they  were  Botlcsham,  bishop  :  Three  friars  preachers  :  Siward,  Paris,  Langley. 
Four  minorites  :  Folvile,  Carlel,  Frisley,  Bernwell.  Augustine  friars, 
four  :  Ashborne,  Bowkin,  Woldley,  Hornington.  Carmelites  four  : 
Glanvile,  Dis,  Loney,  Kiningham.  Monks  four :  Wells,  Ramsey, 
Bloxam,  Marton.  Doctors  of  the  canon  and  civil  law  fourteen  : 
Appelby,  Waltram,  Baketon,Chadesden,Tregision,  Stow,  Blanchard, 
Rocombey,  Lidford,  Welbourne,  Flainburgh,  Motrum,  Brandon, 
and  Prophet.  Bachelors  of  divinity  six:  Humbleton,  Pickwech, 
Lindlow,  Wich,  Chiselden,  Tomson. 

The  articles  of  John  WicklifF  here  above  specified,  whereof  there 
were  nine  which  were  by  these  friars  condemned  as  heretical,  the  rest 
as  erroneous,  here  in  order  follow,  are  are  these  :  although  it  may 
be  thought,  that  some  of  them  were  made  worse  by  their  sinister 
collecting  than  he  meant  thm  in  his  own  works  and  wTitings. 


ARTICLES    OF    WICKLIFF    CONDEMNED.  21 

Articles  of  John  Wickliff,  condemned  as  Heretical.  Richard 


1.  That  the  substance  of  material  bread  and  wine  doth  remain  in  the 
sacrament  of  the  altar  after  the  consecration. 

2.  That  the  accidents  do  not  remain  without  tbf  subject  in  the  same  sacra- 
ment, after  the  consecration. 

3.  That  Christ  is  not  in  the  sacrament  of  the  altar  truly  and  really,  in  his 
proper  and  cor|5oral  person. 

4.  That  if  a  bishop  or  a  priest  be  in  deadly  sin,  he  doth  not  order,  conse- 
crate, or  baptize. 1 

5.  That  if  a  man  be  duly  and  truly  contrite  and  penitent,  all  exterior  and 
outward  confession  is  but  superfuous  and  unprofitable  unto  him. 

6.  That  God  ought  to  obey  the  devil. ^ 

7.  That  it  is  not  found  or  established  by  the  gospel,  that  Christ  did  make  or 
ordain  mass. 

8.  That  if  the  pope  be  a  reprobate  and  evil  man,  and  consequently  a  member 
of  the  devil,  he  hath  no  power  by  any  manner  of  means  given  unto  him  over 
faithftd  Christians,  except  peradventure  it  be  given  him  by  the  emperor. 

9.  That  since  the  time  of  Urban  VI.  there  is  none  to  be  received  for  pope, 
but  every  man  is  to  live  after  the  manner  of  the  Greeks,  under  his  own  law. 

10.  That  it  is  against  the  sacred  Scripttu-e,  that  ecclesiastical  ministers  should 
have  any  temporal  possessions.* 

Other  Articles  of  John  Wickliff,  condemned  as  En-oneous. 

11.  That  no  prelate  ought  to  excommunicate  any  man  except  he  know  him 
first  to  be  excommunicate  of  God. 

12.  That  he  who  doth  so  excommunicate  any  man,  is  thereby  liimself  either 
a  heretic  or  excommunicated. 

13.  That  a  prelate  or  bishop  excommunicating  any  of  the  clergy,  who  hatli 
appealed  to  the  king  or  the  council,  is  thereby  himself  a  traitor  to  the  king  and 
realm. 

14.  That  all  who  do  leave  off  preaching  or  hearing  the  word  of  God,  or 
preaching  the  gospel,  for  fear  of  excommunication,  are  already  excommunicated, 
and  in  the  day  of  judgment  shall  be  counted  as  traitors  unto  God. 

15.  That  it  is  lawful  for  any  man,  either  deacon  or  priest,  to  preach  the  word 
of  God  without  authority  or  license  of  the  apostolic  see  or  any  other  of  its 
catholics.* 

16.  That  so  long  as  a  man  is  in  deadly  sin,  he  is  neither  bishop  nor  prelate 
in  the  church  of  God.* 

17.  Also  that  the  temporal  lords  may,  according  to  their  own  will  and 
discretion,  take  away  the  temporal  goods  from  the  churchmen  whensoever 
they  do  offend.* 

18.  That  tenths  are  pure  alms,  and  that  the  parishioners  may,  for  offence  of 
their  curates,  detain  and  keep  them  back,  and  bestow  them  upon  others,  at 
their  own  will  and  pleasure. 

19.  Also,  that  all  special  prayers  applied  to  any  private  or  particular  person, 
by  any  prelate  or  religious  man,  do  no  more  profit  the  same  person,  than 
general  or  universal  prayers  do  profit  others,  who  be  in  like  case  or  state  unto 
him. 

20.  That  he  that  giveth  alms  to  tlie  friars,  or  to  any  friar  that  preacheth,  is 
excommunicate,  both  he  that  giveth  and  he  that  taketh. 

21.  Moreover,  if  any  man  doth  enter  into  any  private  religion,  whatsoever  it 
be,  he  is  thereby  made  the  more  unapt  and  unable  to  observe  and  keep  the 
commandments  of  God. 

(1)  Id  est,  "  indigne  hsc  fecit,"  exposit  Joan.  Huss.    Lat.  Ed.  p.  26. — Ed. 

(2)  Jhis  article  is  either  slanderously  reported,  or  else  can  hardly  be  defended.  [This  sixth 
article  is  inserted  from  the  Latin  Edition,  p.  26.  "Deus  debet  obedire  diabolo,"  to  which  our  author 
attaches  a  side-note,  "  Caluinniam  sapit. '    It  is  also  referred  to  in  a  subsequent  page. — Ed.] 

(3)  He  meaneth  church  goods  not  to  be  so  peculiar  to  ministers,  but  that  tjiey  may  be  taken 
away  if  they  so  deserve. 

(iy  Hunc  articuium  explanat  et  emoUit  Joan.  Huss.     Lat.  Ed.  p.  26. — Ed. 

(5)  This  article,  peradventure,  was  not  so  straightly  meant  of  him  as  it  was  gathered  of  them, 
as  is  aforesaid. 

(6)  This  article  expoundeth  the  10th  article  above.  ["  Forte  aiiversarii  depravant  articulum." 
See  the  LaJin  Edition,  p.  26.— Ed.] 


A.D. 
1382. 


22  ARcniiisHop  Courtney's  letter  against   wickliff. 


A.D. 

1382. 


Richard        22.  Tliat  holy  men,  who  have  instituted  private  religions,  whatsoever  they 
l^-       be  (as  well  such  as  are  endowed  and  possessed,  as  also  the  order  of  begging 
friars  having  no  possessions),  in  sn  doing,  have  grievously  offended. 

23.  That   religious  men,    being   in  their  private  religions,   are  not  of  the 
Christian  religion. 

24.  That  friars  are  bound  to  get  their  living  be  the  labour  of  their  hands, 
and  not  by  begging. 

A  Letter  of  William  Courtney,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  directed 
to  the  Bis^jop  of  London,  against  John  Wickliff  and  his  Adherents. 

William,  by  God's  permission  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  metropolitan  of  all 
England,  and  of  the  apostolical  see,  legate ;  to  our  reverend  brother,  by  the 
grace  of  God,  bishop  of  London,  salutation.  The  prelates  of  the  church  ought 
to  be  so  much  the  more  vigilant  and  attentive  about  the  charge  of  the  Lord's 
flock  committed  to  them,  by  how  much  the  more  they  shall  understand  the 
wolves,  being  clothed  in  sheep's  apparel,  fraudulently  to  go  about  to  worry  and 
scatter  the  sheep.  Truly,  by  the  continual  cry  and  public  fame,  which  it 
grieveth  me  to  report,  it  is  come  to  our  knowledge,  that  although,  by  the  cano- 
nical sanctions,  no  man  being  forbidden  or  not  admitted,  should  either  publicly 
or  privately,  without  the  authority  of  the  apostolical  see,  or  bishop  of  that  place, 
usurp  or  take  upon  him  the  office  of  a  preacher  ;  some,  notwithstanding,  such 
as  are  the  children  of  damnation,  being  under  the  veil  of  bhnd  ignorance,  are 
brouglit  into  such  a  doating  mind,  that  they  take  upon  them  to  preach,  and  are 
not  afraid  to  affirm  and  teach  divers  and  sundry  propositions  and  conclusions, 
here-under  recited,  both  heretical,  erroneous,  and  false,  condemned  by  the 
church  of  God,  and  repugnant  to  the  decree  of  holy  church,  which  tend  to  the 
subverting  of  the  whole  state  of  the  same,  of  our  province  of  Canterburj-,  and 
to  the  destruction  and  weakening  of  the  tranquillity  of  the  same ;  and  that  as 
well  in  the  churches,  as  in  the  streets,  as  also  in  many  other  profane  places  of 
our  said  province,  generally,  commonly,  and  publicly,  they  do  preach  the  same, 
infecting  very  many  good  Christians,  causing  them  lamentably  to  wander  out 
of  the  way,  and  from  the  catholic  church,  without  which  there  is  no  salvation. 
We,  therefore,  considering  that  so  pernicious  a  mischief,  which  may  creep 
amongst  many,  we  ought  not  to  suffer,  and  by  dissimidation  to  pass  over,  which 
may  with  deadly  contagion  slay  the  souls  of  men,  lest  their  blood  be  required 
at  our  hands,  are  willing,  so  much  as  God  will  permit  us  to  do,  to  extirpate  the 
same.  Wherefore,  by  the  counsel  and  consent  of  many  of  our  brethren  and 
suffragans,  we  have  convented  divers  and  sundry  doctors  of  divinity,  as  also 
professoi-s  and  other  clerks  of  the  canon  and  civil  law,  the  most  learned  within 
the  realm,  and  of  the  soundest  opinion  and  judgment  in  the  catholic  faith,  to 
give  their  opinions  and  judgments  concerning  the  aforesaid  conclusions.  But, 
forasmuch  as  the  said  conclusions  and  assertions,  being  in  the  presence  of  us 
and  our  fellow-brethren  and  other  convocates  openly  expounded  and  diligently 
Had  ye  examined,  and  in  the  end,  found  by  the  common  council  and  consent  as  well 
tried  of  them  as  of  us,  and  so  declared  that  some  of  those  conclusions  were  heretical, 
tileTrufh  ^^^  some  of  them  erroneous,  and  repugnant  to  the  determination  of  the  church, 
you  as  here-under  are  described  :  we  will  and  command  your  brotherhood,  and,  by 

should      virtue  of  holy  obedience,  sti-aitly  enjoin  all    and  singular  our   brethren   and 
found        suffi-agans  of  our  body  and  church  of  Canterbury,  that  with  all  speedy  diligence 
them         you  possibly  can,  you  likewise  enjoin  them,  as  we  have  enjoined  you,  and  each 
wise!"       °^  them  ;  and  that  every  one  of  them,  in  their  churches  and  other  places  of 
their  city  and  diocese,  do  admonish  and  warn ;  and  that  you,  in  your  church 
and  other  churches  of  your  city  and  diocese,  do  admonish  and  warn,  as  we,  by 
the  tenor  of  these  presents,  do  admonish  and  warn  the  first  time,  the  second  time, 
and  the  third  time  ;  and  yet  more  straitly  do  warn,  assigning  for  the  first  admo- 
nition one  day,  for  the  second  admonition  another  day,  and  for  the  third  admo- 
nition, canonical  and  peremptory,  another  day  :  That  no  man  from  henceforth, 
of  what  estate  or  condition  soever,  do  hold,  preach,  or  defend  the  aforesaid  here- 
sies and  errors,  or  any  of  them ;  or  that  he  admit  to  preach  any  one  that  is 
prohibited  or  not  sent  to  preach,  or  that  he  hear  or  hearken  to  the  heresies  or 
eiTors  of  him  or  any  of  them,  or  that  he  favour  or  lean  unto  him,  either  publicly 
or  privately ;  but  that  immediately  he  shun  him,  as  he  would  avoid  a  serpent 


A\   KARTHUUAKE  WHEN   WlCKLll'K  WAS  EXAMINED  23 

putting  forth  most  pestiferous  poison,  under  pain  of  the  greater  curse,  which   Ruhcrd 
we  coinmand  to  be  thundered  against  all  and  every  one  who  shall  be  disobedient       ^'■ 
in  this  behalf,  and  not  regarding  these  our  monitions,  after  those  three  days  be  ~7~T7~ 
past  which  are  assigned  for  the  canonical  monition,  and  that  their  delay,  fault,     V^^i^' 
or  oifence  committed,  require  the  same  :  and  tlien,  according  to  the  tenor  of 
these  writings,  we  command,  both  by  every  one  of  our  fellow-brethren  and  our 
suffragans  in  their  cities  and  dioceses,  and  by  you  in  your  city  and  diocese  (as 
much  as  belongeth  both  toyou  and  them),  that  to  the  uttermost  both  ye  and  they 
cause  the  same  excommunications  to  be  pronounced. 

And,  furthermore,  we  will  and  command  our  aforesaid  fellow-brethren,  and  all  He  that 
and  singular  of  you  apart  by  ourselves,  to  be  admonished,  and  by  the  aspersion  '^'"'^''} 
of  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  we  likewise  admonish  you,  tliat,  according  to  the  thili'khe 
institution  of  the  sacred  canons,  every  one  of  them  in  his  cit}'  and  diocese,  be  ''"tli  God 
a  diligent  inquisitor  of  this  lieretical  pravity  ;  and  that  every  one  of  you  also  in  service 
your  city  and  diocese  be  the  like  inquisitor  of  the  aforesaid  lieretical  pravity. 
And  that  of  such  like  presumption  they  and  you  carefully  and  dihgently  inquire, 
and  that  both  they  and  you  (according  to  your  duties  and  office  in  this  behalf), 
with  effect  do  proceed  against  the  same,  to  the  honour  and  praise  of  His  name 
that  was  crucified,  and  for  the  preservation  of  the  christian  faith  and  religion.' 

Here  is  not  to  be  passed  over  the  great  miracle  of  God's  divine 
admonition  or  warning;  for  when  the  archbishop  and  suffragans,  with 
the  other  doctors  of  divinity  and  lawyers,  with  a  great  company  of 
babbling  friars  and  religious  persons,  were  gathered  together  to  con- 
sult as  touching  John  Wickliffs  books,  and  that  whole  sect;  when, 
as  I  say,  they  were  gathered  together  at  the  Grey-Friars  in  London, 
to  begin  their  business,  upon  St.  Dunstan's  day  after  dinner,  about 
two  of  the  clock,  the  very  hour  and  instant  that  they  should  go  for- 
ward  with  their  business,  a  wonderful  and  terrible  earthquake- fell  An  earth- 
throughout  all  England  :^  whereupon  divers  of  the  suffragans,  being  '^^^^' 
feared  by  the  strange  and  wonderful  demonstration,  doubting  what  wickiiff 
it  should  mean,  thought  it  good  to  leave  off  from  their  determinate  amined. 
purpose.     But  the  archbishop  (as  chief  captain  of  that  army,  more 
rash  and  bold  than  wise)  interpreting  the  chance  which  had  happened 
clean  contrary  to   another  meaning   or  purpose,   did   confirm   and 
strengthen   their  hearts  and  minds,  who  were  almost  daunted  with 
fear,  stoutly  to  proceed  and  go  forward  in  their  attempted  enterprise : 
who  then  discoursing  WicklifF's  articles,  not  according  to  the  sacred 
canons  of  the  holy  Scriptures,  but  to  their  own  private  affections  and 
traditions,  pronounced  and  gave  sentence,  that  some  of  them  were 
simply  and  plainly  heretical,   some  half  erroneous,  some  irreligious, 
others  seditious,  and  not  consonant  to  the  church  of  Rome.   *Besides,* 
the  earthquake  aforesaid,  there  happened  another  strange  and  won- 
derfiil  chance,  sent  by  God,  and  no  less  to  be  marked  than  the  other, 
if  it  be  true,  which  was  reported  by  John  Huss's  enemies.     These 
enemies  of  his,  amongst  other  principal  points  of  his  accusation,  ob- 
jected and  laid  this  to  his  charge  at  the  Council  of  Constance  ;  that 
he  had  said  openly  unto  the  people,  that  at  what  time,  as  a  great 
number  of  religious  men  and  doctors  were  gathered  together  in  a 
certain  church,  to  dispute  against  WicklifF,  suddenly,  the  door  of  the 
church  was  broken  open  with  lightning,  in  such  sort,  that  his  enemies 
hardly  escaped  without  hurt.     This  thing,  albeit  that  it  was  objected 

(1)  Yea,  rather,  for  the  hono\ir  of  your  pope,  and  the  destruction  of  christian  faith. 

(2)  The  Godstow  Chronicle  tells  us,  "  that  this  earthquake  was  on  the  Wednesday  before  \M\\i- 
Sunday,  or  Slay  30,  about  one  o'clock  in  the  afternoon."  See  Lewis'  Hist.  p.  332. — Ed. 

(3)  Ei  Chron.  mon.  Aiban. 

.;4)  For  this  passage,  see  edition  1563,  pp.  95,  96.  — En. 


524  DKTJiliMINATION    UPON    HIS    ARTICLES. 

Richard  against  Huss  by  his  adversaries  (neither  is  it  in  the  story  of  WicklifF, 
^  •  that  I  can  find  or  know),  yet,  forasmuch  as  he  did  not  deny  the  same, 
A.D.  neither,  if  lie  so  said,  doth  it  seem  that  he  would  speak  it  without 
^'^^^-  some  ground  or  reason,  I  have  not  thought  good  to  leave  it  clean  out 
of  memory.  Of  like  credit  is  this  also,'  which  is  reported  of  Wick- 
lifF (which  thing  I  here  write  but  only  of  report),  that  when  WicklifF 
was  lying  very  sick  at  London,  certain  friars  came  to  him  to  counsel 
him ;  and  when  they  had  babbled  much  unto  him,  as  touching  the 
catholic  church,  and  of  acknowledging  his  errors,  and  of  the  bishop 
of  Rome  ;  WicklifF,  being  moved  with  the  foolishness  and  absurdity 
of  their  talk,  with  a  stout  stomach,  setting  himself  upright  in  his 
bed,  repeated  this  saying  out  of  the  Psalms,  [cxviii.  17]  :  "  I  will 
not  die,  but  I  shall  live,  and  show  forth  and  declare  the  noble  works 
of  the  Lord  ;"  which  thing,  if  it  be  so  true,  as  it  is  reported  of 
some,  it  doth  declare  and  show  a  great  fervency  and  desire  of  the  spirit 
in  that  man,  passing  and  above  the  common  state  of  our  human 
nature  and  infirmity.^* 

DETERMIKATION   UPON  THE  ARTICLES  OF  WICKLIFF. 

On  the  twelfth  day  of  June,  a.  d.  1382,  in  the  chamber  of  the 
friars  preachers,  the  aforesaid  master  Robert  Rigges,  chancellor  of  the 
university  of  Oxford,  and  Thomas  Brightwell,  professors  of  divinity, 
being  appointed  the  same  day  and  place,  by  the  aforesaid  reverend 
father  in  God,  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  appeared  before  him  in 
the  presence  of  the  reverend  father  in  God,  lord  William,  by  the  grace 
of  God,  bishop  of  Winchester,  and  divers  other  doctors  and  bachelors  of 
divinity,  and  of  the  canon  and  civil  law,  whose  names  are  before  recited. 
And  first,  the  said  chancellor,  by  the  lord  archbishop  of  Canterbury, 
being  examined  what  his  opinion  was  touching  the  aforesaid  articles, 
publicly  affirmed  and  declared,  that  certain  of  those  conclusions  were 
heretical,  and  certain  erroneous,  as  the  other  doctors  and  clerks  before 
mentioned  had  declared.  And  then  immediately  next  after  him,  the 
aforesaid  Thomas  Brightwell  was  examined,  who,  upon  some  of  the 
conclusions  at  first  somewhat  staggered,  but,  in  the  end,  being  by  the 
said  archbishop  diligently  examined  upon  the  same,  did  affirm  and 
repute  the  same  to  be  heretical  and  erroneous,  as  the  aforesaid  chan- 
cellor had  done.  Another  bachelor  of  divinity,  also,  there  was,  named 
N.,  who  stammered  at  some  of  those  conclusions,  but  in  the  end  he 
affirmed  that  his  opinion  therein  was,  as  was  the  judgment  of  the 
aforesaid  chancellor  and  Thomas  Brightwell,  as  is  above  declared. 
Whereupon  the  said  lord  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  willing  to  let 
and  hinder  the  peril  of  such  heresies  and  errors,  delivered  unto  the 
aforesaid  chancellor,  there  being  publicly  read,  his  letters-patent  to  be 
executed,  the  tenor  whereof  in  these  words  doth  follow. 

A  Letter  of  William  Courtney,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  to  the 
Chancellor  of  Oxford,  against  WicklifF  and  his  Adherents. 

William,  by  the  gi-ace  of  God  archbishop  of  Canterbuiy,  primate  of  all 
England,  and  legate  of  the  apostolic  see,  to  our  well-beloved  son  in  Christ,  the 

(1)  Also  in  the  Latin  edition  of  1559,  p.  13.— Ed. 

(2)  In  Lewis's  History.p.  64,  another  version  of  this  account  Is  given,  which  has  been  repeated  by 
many  writers  on  the  reformers,  to   the  rejection  of  this  more  natural,  sober,  and  cliaracteristic 


A   LETTER   OK   WILLIAM   COURTNEY   AGAIN'ST   WICKLIFF.  25 

chancellor  of  the  university  of  Oxford,  within  the  diocese  of  Lincoln,  greeting,    Richard 
grace,  and  benediction.      The  prelates  of  the  chiircii,  about  the  Lord's  flock       ^^■ 
committed  to  tlieir  charge,  ought  to  be  so  nuieli  more  vigilant  as  that  they  see  _  " 

the  wolf,    clothed  in  sheep's  attire,  fraudulently  go  about  to  worry  and   scatter     /.jon' 

the  sheep.      Doubtless,  the  common  fame  ami  nunour  is  come  to  our  ears,  &c.  1 

(See  tlie  ])receding  mandate  of  the  archbislio]). )  We  will,  tlierefore,  and  com- 
mand, straitly  enjoining  you,  that  in  the  church  of  our  blessed  lady  in  Oxford, 
upon  those  days  in  which  accustomably  the  sermon  is  made,  as  also  in  the 
schools  of  the  said  university  u])on  those  days  the  lectures  be  read,  ye  publish, 
and  cause  by  others  to  be  published,  to  tlie  clergy  and  people,  as  well  in  their 
vulgar  tongue,  as  in  the  Latin  tongue,  manifestly  and  plainly,  without  any 
curious  implication,  the  same  heretical  and  erroneous  conclusions,  so  repugnant 
to  the  determination  of  holy  church,  as  is  aforesaid,  to  have  been  and  be  con- 
demned ;  which  conclusions  we  also  declare  by  these  our  letters  to  be  utterly 
condenmed.  And  furthermore  that  you  forbid,  and  canonically  admonish  and 
cause  to  be  admonislied,  as  we  by  the  tenor  of  these  ])resents  do  forbid  and 
admonish  you,  once,  twice,  and  thrice,  and  that  peremptorily,  that  none  here- 
after hold,  teach,  and  preach,  or  defend,  the  heresies  and  errors  above  said,  or 
any  of  them,  either  in  scliool  or  out  of  school,  by  any  sophistical  cavilling  or 
otherwise :  or  that  any  admit  to  preacli,  hear,  or  hearken  unto  John  Wicklifl", 
Nicholas  Herford,  Pliilip  Reppington  (canon  regular),  John  Ashton,  or  Law- 
rence Redman,  who  be  vehemently  and  notoriously  suspected  of  heresy,  or  else 
any  other  whatsoever,  so  suspected  or  defamed  ;  or  that  either  privately  or  pub- 
licly they  either  aid  or  favour  them  or  any  of  them,  but  that  innnediately  they 
shun  and  avoid  the  same  as  a-seqjent  which  putteth  forth  uu)st  pestiferous  poison. 
And,  furtlun-more,  we  suspend  the  said  suspected  persons  from  all  scholastical 
act,  till  such  time  as  they  shall  purge  themselves  before  us  in  that  behalf;  and 
we  enjoin  that  you  denounce  the  same  publicly  by  us  to  have  been  and  be  sus- 
pended ;  and  that  ye  diligently  and  faithfully  inquire  for  all  their  abettors  and 
favourers,  and  cause  to  be  iiupiired  throughout  all  the  halls  of  the  said  univer-  Make 
sity  ;  and  that  when  you  shall  have  intelligence  of  their  names  and  persons,  ye  sure 
compel  all  and  every  of  them  to  abjure  their  outrages  by  ecclesiastical  censures  ^'^''^'■ 
and  other  pains  canonical  whatsoever,  under  pain  of  the  greater  curse,  which, 
against  all  and  singular  the  rebellious  in  this  behalf,  and  disobeying  our  monitions, 
we  pronounce  :  so  that  their  fault,  deceit,  and  offence  in  this  behalf  deserve 
the  same  (the  said  monition  of  ours  being  first  sent),  which  in  this  behalf  we 
esteem  and  allow  canonical ;  that  then  and  again,  according  to  the  effect  of  these 
our  letters,  &c.,  the  absolution  of  all  and  singular  such,  who  shall  incur  the 
sentence  of  this  instrument  by  us  sent  forth  (which  God  forbid),  we  specially 
reserve  unto  ourselves ;  exhorting  you,  tlie  chancellor,  by  the  sprinkling  of  the 
blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  that  to  the  uttermost"  of  your  power  hereafter  you  do  your 
endeavour,  that  the  clergy  and  people  being  subject  unto  you,  if  there  be  any  who 
have  strayed  from  the  catholic  faith  by  such  errors,  they  may  be  brought  home 
again  to  the  laud  and  honour  of  His  name  that  was  crucified,  and  to  the  preserva- 
tion of  the  true  faith.  And  further  our  will  is,  that  whatsoever  you  shall  no  in  the 
premises,  in  manner  and  form  of  our  process  in  this  behalf  it  be  had  and  done; 
and  that  you,  for  your  part,  when  you  shall  be  required  theretmto,  plainly  and 
distinctly  do  certify  us  by  your  letters  patent,  having  the  tenor  hereof. 

The  conclusions  and  articles  here  mentioned  in  this  letter  are 
above  prefixed  ;  of  which  some  were  condemned  for  heretical,  some 
for  erroneous. 

After  this,  within  a  few  days,  the  aforesaid  archbishop  William 
Courtney  directed  down  his  letters  of  admonition  to  Robert  Rigges, 
commissary  of  Oxford,  for  the  repressing  of  this  doctrine ;  Avhich 
still  notwithstanding,  both  then,  and  yet  to  this  day  (God  be  praised) 
doth  remain  :  the  copy  of  his  monition  to  the  commissary  here,  out  of 
his  own  register,  followeth. 

story  from  Foxe's  own  pen.  The  point  of  difference  in  Lewis's  History,  quoted  from  Bale,  p.  469, 
is  this:  "  Dr.  Wickliff  immediately  recovering  strength,  called  his  servants  to  him,  and  ordered 
them  to  raise  him  a  little  on  his  pillows,  which,  when  they  had  done,  he  said  with  a  loud  voice,  '  I 
shall  not  die,  but  live,  and  declare  the  evil  deeds  of  the  friars  ;'  on  which  the  doctors,  &c.  de- 
parted ftom  him  i)i  confusion,  and  Doctor  Wickliff  recovered." — Ed. 


26  THE    MONITION    Ol-     WILLIAM    COURTXEV, 

it-      The  Monition  of  William  Courtney,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  unio 
^  £)  the  aforesaid  Chancellor  of  Oxford. 

In  the  name  of  God,  Amen.  Whereas  we  William,  by  the  permission  of 
God  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  lord  primate  of  England,  and  legate  of  the 
apostolical  see,  by  the  consent  of  our  sufl'ragans,  have  caused  to  be  assembled 
together  divers  clerks  both  secidar  and  regular  of  the  university  of  Oxford, 
within  our  province  of  Canterbury,  and  other  catholic  persons,  to  inform  us  of 
and  upon  certain  conclusions  heretical  and  erroneous,  generally  and  commonly 
preached  and  published  in  divers  places  of  the  said  province  of  Canterbury,  to 
the  subversion  of  the  whole  state  of  the  church  and  our  said  province :  and 
whereas  after  mature  deliberation  had  upon  the  same,  by  the  common  council 
of  the  said  our  suffragans  and  their  convocates,  it  was  declared,  that  certain  of 
the  said  conclusions  have  been  and  be  condemned,  some  for  heretical,  and  some 
for  erroneous,  and  notoriously  repugnant  to  the  determination  of  the  chui'ch, 
which  we  also  ourselves  have  declared  to  be  damnable :  and  whereas  we  have 
understood  by  credible  information,  and  partly  by  experience,  that  thou  Robert 
Rigges,  chancellor  of  the  university  aforesaid,  hast  and  dost  inchne  partly  to 
the  aforesaid  damnable  conclusions,  whom  also  we  in  this  part  have  partly  sus- 
pected, and  dost  intend  to  molest  these  pur  clerks  above  specified,  and  others 
adhering  unto  us  in  this  behalf  as  they  ought  to  do,  through  thy  subtle  and 
sophistical  imaginations,  sundry  and  manifold  ways ;  therefore,  we  admonish 
thee  master  Robert,  chancellor  aforesaid,  the  first,  second,  and  third  time,  and 
peremptorily,  that  thou  dost  not  grieve,  let,  or  molest,  judicially  or  extra-judi- 
cially,  apertly  or  privily,  or  cause  to  be  grieved,  let,  and  molested,  or  procure 
directly  or  indirectly  by  thyself  or  any  other,  as  much  as  in  thee  lieth  to  be 
grieved,  the  aforesaid  clerks  secular  or  regidar,  or  such  as  favour  them  in  the 
premises,  in  their  scholastical  acts,  or  in  any  other  condition  whatsoever ;  and 
that  thou  suffer  none  hereafter  to  teach,  maintain,  preach,  or  defend  any  sucli 
heresies  or  errors  in  the  said  universit)^,  either  within  or  without  the  schools ; 
neither  that  thou  do  admit  John  Wickliff,  Nicholas  Herford,  Philip  Reppington. 
John  Ashton,  or  Lawrence  Redman,  who  are  vehemently  and  notoriously  sus- 
pected of  heresy,  or  any  other  so  suspected  or  defamed,  unto  the  office  of 
preaching ;  but  that  thou  denoimce  the  said  persons  to  be  suspended,  whom  we 
have  suspended  from  all  scholastical  act,  until  they  clear  their  innocency  in  this 
part  before  us,  under  pain  of  the  greater  curse,  which  we  here  in  these 
writings  denounce  against  thy  person,  if  thou  shalt  not  obey  those  our  admoni- 
tions with  effect,  as  thy  crime,  subtlety  and  offence  in  this  behalf  shall  require 
according  to  this  our  admonition  premised ;  which  we  repute  in  this  part  for 
canonical,  as  well  then,  as  now,  and  now  as  well  as  then ;  reserving  the  abso- 
lution of  this  sentence  excommunicatory,  if  it  happen  to  light  upon  thee  (as 
God  forbid)  specially  imto  ourselves. — Testified  with  the  hands  of  the  jurors, 
before  specified,   (p.  20.) 


THE    EXAMINATION    OF    NICHOLAS    HERFORD,     PHILIP    REPPING- 
TON,   AND    JOHN    ASHTON. 

The  eighteenth  day  of  the  month  and  year  aforesaid  (a.d.  1382), 
in  the  chamber  of  the  preaching  friars  before-mentioned,  before  the 
aforesaid  archbishop,  in  the  presence  of  divers  doctors  and  bachelors 
of  divinity,  and  many  lawyers  both  canon  and  civil,  whose  names  are 
underwritten,  appeared  master  Nicholas  Herford,  Philip  Reppington, 
and  John  Ashton,  bachelors  of  divinity,  who,  after  a  corporal  oath 
taken  to  show  their  judgment  upon  the  conclusions  aforesaid,  were 
examined  severally,  each  one  by  himself,  before  the  archbishop  ;  who 
there  required  day  and  place  to  deliberate  upon  the  conclusions  afore- 
said, and  to  give  their  answer  unto  the  same  in  writing,  and  also  required 
to  have  a  copy  of  the  said  conclusions  to  be  delivered  unto  them,  which 
copy  being  openlyread  unto  them,  tlie  said  Nicholas  and  Philip  received. 


KKLATFNG    TO    WICKMFF    AND    OTHERS.  27 

The  aforesaid  master  JolmAsliton  likewise  was  examined,  and  judicially   Richard 

admonislied  by  the  said  archbishop,  by  virtue  of  his  oath,  that  he, '. 

setting  aside  all  sophistical  w\)rds  and  subtleties,  would  say  his  mind    A.  D. 
fully  and  plainly  upon  the  conclusions  aforesaid.     And  being  asked,   ^'^^— 
moreover,  by  the  said  archbishop,  w^hether  he  would  have  a  further  Joi>nAsh 
day  to  deliberate  upon    his   answers,  as  the  aforesaid  Nicholas  and  amined. 
Philip  had  before,  he  said  expressly  that  he  would  not,  but  would  an- 
swer then  to  those  co'nclusions  ;  and  so,  for  final  answer  said,  as  con-  Answer 
concerning  all  these  conclusions   (taking  them  all  together),  that  his  ^^shton! 
judgment  was  in    this  respect  to  hold  his  peace.     Wherefore    the 
aforesaid  archbishop,  reputing  the  said  John  herein  to  be  suspected, 
admonished  him  in   form   of  words  as  followcth  :   "  We  admonish 
thee,  John  Ashton,  whom  we  repute  to  be  defamed,  and  notoriously 
suspected  of  heresy,  the  first,  the  second,  and  third  time ;  that  in 
our  province  of  Canterbury  hereafter  thou  do  not  preach   publicly 
or  privately  without   our  special  license,  under  pain  of  the  greater 
curse,  which  we  denounce  here  by  these  presents  against  thy  person, 
if  thou  obey  not  our  monitions,  for  now  as  for  then."     And  conse- 
quently, forasmuch  as  the  said  John,  being  asked  of  the  archbishop, 
confessed  that  he  had  heard  before  of  the  publication  of  the  arch- 
bishop's mandate,  wherein  was  contained  that  no  person  prohibited  or 
not  sent  should  preach  hereafter,  the  aforesaid  archbishop  assigned  him  Ashton 
the  Friday  next  following,  which  was  the  twentieth  day  of  the  same  fsh^,""' 
month,  after  dinner,  to  appear  l)elore  him  either  at  Lambeth,  or  in  ^sain  to 
the  same  place,  to  say  for  himself  wherefore  he  might  not  be  pro- 
nounced for  a  heretic,  and  for  such  a  one  to  be  denounced  throughout 
his  whole  province.     Also  the  said  archbishop  assigned  to  the  afore- 
said Nicliolas  and  Philip,  the  said  day  and  place  to  answer  peremp- 
torily and  to  say  fully  and  plainly  to  the  conclusions  aforesaid,  all 
sophistication  of  words  and  disputation  set  apart. 

The  names  of  the  friars  that  sat  upon  them. — Friars  Preachers, 
seven :  Thomas  Barnewell,  William  Swinherd,  William  Piclovorth, 
Thomas  Whately,  Lawrence  Grenliam,  John  Leigh,  John  Haker, 
Canuelites  three :  Walter  Dish,  John  Kiningham,  John  Lovey. 
Augustine  friar :  Thomas  Ashbome,  doctor. 

At  the  time  and  place  above  prefixed,  before  the  aforesaid  arch- 
bishop, sitting  in  his  tribunal  seat,  in  the  presence  of  divers  doctors 
of  divmity,  and  lawyers  both  civil  and  canon,   personally  appeared 
master    Nicholas  Herford,    and    Philip  Reppington,    bachelors    ofiierford 
divinity,  and  John  Ashton,  master  of  arts.     The  aforesaid  Nicholas  ll%fj,f 
and  Philip,  being  required  by  the  archbishop  to  answer  there,  and  appear, 
say  fully  and  phiinly  their  judgment  upon  the  conclusions  prefixed 
(to  which  purpose  the  archbishop  had  assigned  to  the  said  Nicholas 
and  Philip   the  same  term),   did  exhibit  to  the  archbishop,  there 
judicially  sitting,   certain  answers  in  Avriting,  after  the   manner  of 
indenture.     The  tenor  of  this  indenture,  containing  the  aforesaid 
conclusions,  followeth  in  these  words  : 


28 


PROTKSTATION    AND    ANSWEU 


Richard 
II. 


A.D. 
1382. 


Articles, 
with  the 
answer. 


The  Protestation  of  Nicholas  Herford,  Philip  Reppington,  and  John 
Ashton,  with  their  Articles  and  Answers. 

We  protest  here  as  before,  publicly,  in  these  presents,  that  we  intend  to  be 
humble  and  faitlifid  tliildren  to  the  church  and  holy  Scripture,  and  to  obey  in  aJl 
thino-s  the  determinations  of  the  church.  And  if  it  shall  chance  to  us  at  any 
time,  whii'h  God  forbid,  to  swerve  from  this  our  intention,  we  submit  ourselves 
humbly  to  the  correction  of  our  reverend  father,  lord  archbishop  of  Canterbury, 
and  prinuite  of  all  England ;  and  of  all  others  who  have  interest  to  correct 
such  swervcrs.  This  protestation  premised,  thus  we  answer  to  the  conclusions 
aforesaid. 

"  That  the  substance  of  material  bread  and  wine  remaineth  in  the  sacrament 
of  the  altar  after  consecration." 

After  the  sense  contrary  to  the  decretal,  beginning  "  Firmiter  credimus :" — 
We  grant  that  it  is  heresy. 

"  That  the  accidents  do  not  remain  without  the  subject  after  consecration 
of  the  sacrament." 

After  the  sense  contrary  to  that  decretal,  "  Cum  Marthe :" — We  grant  that  it 
is  heresy. 

"  That  Christ  is  not  in  the  sacrament  of  the  altar  tndy  and  really  in  his  own 
corporal  presence." 

Although  this  conclusion,  as  the  words  stand,  sounds  to  be  probable  and  intel- 
ligible, yet  in  the  sense  contrary  to  the  decretal  in  Cle  :  "  Si  dudum,"  we 
grant  that  it  is  heresy.  And,  briefly,  concerning  this  whole  matter  of  the  sacra- 
ment of  the  altar,  as  touching  also  all  other  things,  we  profess  that  we  will, 
both  in  word  and  sense,  hold  with  the  holy  Scripture,  with  the  determination  of 
the  holy  church,  and  with  the  sayings  of  the  holy  doctors. 
,  "  Obstinately  to  affirm  that  it  hath  no  foundation  in  the  gospel,  that  Christ 
ordained  the  mass  :" — We  grant  that  it  is  heresy. 

"  That  God  ought  to  obey  the  devil." 

In  this  sense,  that  God  in  his  own  person  or  essence,  ought  to  obey  the  devil 
with  the  obedience  of  necessity  : — We  grant  that  it  is  heresy. 

"  If  a  man  be  duly  contrite,  that  all  external  confession  is  to  him  superfluous 
and  unprofitable  :" — We  grant  that  it  is  heresy. 

"  If  the  pope  be  a  reprobate,  and  an  evil  man,  and  consequently  a  member 
of  the  devil,  he  hath  no  powder  over  the  faithful  of  Christ  given  to  nim  by  any, 
unless  it  be  by  Ca?sar  :" — We  grant  that  it  is  heresy. 

"That  after  pope  Urban  Vl.  none  is  to  be  received  for  pope ;  but  that  we 
ought  to  live  after  the  manner  of  the  Grecians,  under  our  own  laws:" — We 
grant  that  it  is  heresy. 

"  That  it  is  against  the  holy  Scripture  for  ecclesiastical  persons  to  have 
temporal  possessions:" — If  obstinacy  be  joined  withal,  we  grant  that  it  is 
heresy. 

"  That  no  prelate  ought  to  excommunicate  any  man,  unless  he  know  him 
before  to  be  excommunicated  of  God  :" — We  grant  that  it  is  an  error ;  imder- 
standing  this  knowledge  to  signify  an  experimental  knowledge ;  so  that  here- 
with may  stand  the  decree  of  the  church,  11  q.  3,  "  Nemo  Episco." 

"  That  he  who  doth  so  excommunicate,  is  thereby  an  heretic,  or  excom- 
municate :" — After  the  sense,  agreeing  with  the  other  before,  we  grant  this  to 
be  an  error. 

"  That  a  prelate  excommunicating  a  clerk,  who  appealeth  to  the  king  or 
council  of  the  realm,  in  so  doing  is  a  traitor  to  God,  the  king,  and  the  realm:" — 
We  grant  it  is  an  error. 

"  That  they  who  leave  off  to  preach,  or  to  hear  the  word  of  God  and  the 
gospel  preached,  for  the  excommunication  of  men,  are  excommunicated,  and 
in  the  day  of  judgment  shall  be  counted  for  traitors  to  God:"  understanding 
this  conclusion  universally,  so  as  Scripture  and  laws  do  imderstand  such  inde- 
finite propositions  : — We  grant  it  is  an  error. 

"  Tnatit  is  lawful  for  any  deacon  or  priest  to  preach  the  word  of  God  with- 
out the  authority  of  the  see  apostolic,  or  catholic  bishop,  or  of  any  other  whose 
authoritj'  he  knoweth  sufficient :" — We  grant  it  is  an  error. 

"  That  there  is  no  civil  lord,  no  bishop  or  prelate,  while  he  is  in  mortal  sin  :" 
—We  grant  it  is  an  error. 


OF    HEKFORD,    KEPPIKGTOS,    AN'D    ASHTON.  ^9 

"  That  temporal  lords  may,   at  their  pleasure,  take  away  the  temporal  goods  Richard 
from  the  churches,  offending   '  habifualiter  :' " — We  grant  it  is   an  error,  after       ^^• 
this  sense,  that  they  may  so  take  away  temporal  goods  of  the  churches,  without  ~7~~rj 
the  cases  limited  in  the  laws  of  the  church  and  kingdoms.  ,  '„„' 

"  That  the  vulgar  people  may  correct  the  lords  offending,  at  their  pleasure :" —  __! L 

Understanding   hy  this  word  "  may,"  that  they  may  do  it  by  the  law,  we  grant 
it  is  an  error,  because  subjects  have  no  power  over  their  lords. 

"  That  tithes  be  pure  alms,  and  that  parishioners  may,  for  the  offences  of  their 
curates,  detain  the  same,  and  bestow  them  on  others  at  their  pleasure :" — 
Understanding  by  this  word  "  may,"  as  before,  to  be,  "  may  by  the  law,"  we 
grant  it  is  an  error. 

"  That  special  prayers  applied  to  any  one  person  by  prelates  or  religious 
men,  do  no  more  profit  than  the  general  prayers,  if  there  be  no  let  by  the  way 
to  make  them  unlike :" — Understanding  this  conclusion  universally  negative, 
and  understanding  by  special  prayers,  the  prayers  made  upon  special  devotion, 
and  general  prayers  of  general  devotion ;  then,  afler  this  sense,  that  no  such 
special  prayers,  applied  to  any  one  person,  by  special  orators,  do  profit  more 
specially  the  said  person,  than  general  prayers  do,  which  are  made  by  the  same, 
and  for  the  same  persons,  we  grant  it  is  an  error. 

"  That  he  that  giveth  alms  to  the  friars,  or  to  any  friar  that  preacheth,  is  ex- 
communicate, both  he  that  giveth,  and  he  that  taketh  :" — Understanding 
this  proposition  universally  or  conditionally,  as  is  aforesaid,  we  grant  it  to  be  an 
error.  "" 

"  That  who  so  entereth  into  any  private  religion  whatsoever  is  thereby 
made  more  unapt  and  unmeet  to  obey  the  commandments  of  God:" — We  grant 
it  is  an  error. 

"  That  such  holy  men  as  did  institute  any  private  religions  whatsoever,  as 
well  of  seculars  having  possessions,  as  of  friars  having  none,  in  so  instituting 
did  sin  :" — Understanding  this  redupHcafively  or  universally,  we  grant  it  an 
error,  after  this  sense,  that  what  saints  soever  did  institute  private  religion, 
instituting  the  said  religion  upon  that  consideration  as  they  did,  did  sin. 

"  That  religious  men,  hving  in  private  religions,  be  not  of  the  religion  of 
Christ :" — Understanding  the  proposition  universally,  as  is  aforesaid,  we  grant  it 
is  an  error. 

"  That  friars  are  bound  to  get  their  living  by  the  labour  of  their  hands,  and 
not  by  begging:" — Understanding  this  proposition  universally,  as  before,  we 
gi-ant  it  is  an  error. 

These  things  have  we  spoken,  reverend  father  and  lord,  in  all  humility,  under 
your  gracious  supportation  and  benign  correction,  according  to  our  abilities  and 
slender  capacities  for  this  present  (the  honour  of  God,  the  verity  of  our  belief, 
and  safe  conscience  in  all  points  reserved),  most  humbly  still  beseeching  you, 
that  if  any  other  thing  there  be,  that  seemeth  meet  unto  your  excellency  and 
discretion  to  be  more  or  otherwise  said  and  spoken,  that  your  gracious  father- 
hood would  vouchsafe  to  inform  us  as  children  by  the  sacred  Scriptures,  by  the 
determination  of  the  church,  or  authorities  of  the  holy  doctors  ;  and,  doubtless, 
with  ready  wills  and  obedient  minds  we  will  consent  and  agree  unto  your  whole- 
some doctrine.  May  it  therefore  please  your  fatherhood,  right  reverend  in 
God,  according  to  the  accustomed  manner  of  your  benignity,  favourably  to 
accept  these  oui"  words  and  sayings,  forasmuch  as  the  aforesaid  conclusions 
were  never  by  us  either  in  schools  affinned,  or  in  sermons  publicly  preached. 


FURTHER  EXAMIXATION    AXD    PROCEEDINGS  AGAINST    THE  AFORE- 
SAID   NICHOLAS     HERFORD,     PHILIP     REPPINGTON,    AND     JOHN 
ASHTON.      20tH    JUNE,  a.  D.  1382. 

When  all  these  answers  were  made  unto  the  said  lord  archbishop 
of  Canterbury,  the  said  Herford  and  Reppington,  because  they  an- 
swered not  unto  the  meaning  and  words  of  the  first  conclusion  ex- 
pressly, but  contrary  to  the  sense  of  the  decretal  "  Firmiter  credimus,*" 
were  there  judicially  examined  what  their  sense  and  meaning  was, 
but  they  would  not  express   the   same.     Then  was  it    demanded  of 


30  EXAMINATION    OF    HERFORD,    REPPINGTON,    AND    ASHTON. 

Richard  them,  according  to  the  sense  of  the  same  conclusion  declared  on 
^^'      behalf  of  the   said  lord    of  Canterbury,  whether  the   same  material 


A.  D.  bread  "  in  numero,"'  which  before  the  consecration  is  laid  upon  the 
^■^^^-  altar,  remains  in  proper  substance  and  nature,  after  the  consecration 
in  the  sacrament  of  the  altar ;  and  likewise  of  the  wine  ?  To  this 
the  said  Herford  and  Reppington  answered,  that  for  that  time  they 
could  say  no  more  therein,  than  what  they  already  answered,  as  is  be- 
fore alleged  in  writing.  And  because  unto  the  sense  and  words  of  the 
second  conclusion  they  answered  not  fully  and  expressly,  but  in  a  sense 
contrary  to  the  decretal  "Cum  Marthe;"  being  asked  what  was  their 
meaning,  they  would  not  express  the  same.  Therefore  it  was  demanded 
of  them,  according  to  the  sense  of  the  same  conclusion,  declared  in  the 
behalf  of  the  said  lord  of  Canterbury,  whether  those  corporal  accidents 
which  formally  were  in  the  bread  and  Avine  before  the  consecration  of 
them,  were  in  the  same  bread  and  wine  after  the  consecration,  or  else 
were  subjected  in  any  other  substance  ?  To  this  they  answered,  that 
to  answer  better,  than,  before  in  their  writings,  they  already  had,  for 
that  time  they  could  not.  To  the  meaning  also  and  words  of  the 
third  conclusion,  for  that  they  answered  not  plainly  and  expressly,  but 
in  sense  contrary  to  the  decretal  in  the  Clementines,  "  Si  dudum,"''' 
being  asked  what  was  that  sense  and  meaning,  they  would  not  declare 
the  same.  Wherefore  it  was  then  demanded  of  them,  according  to 
the  sense  of  the  same  conclusion,  declared  on  the  behalf  of  the  said 
lord  of  Canterbury,  whether  the  same  body  of  Christ,  which  was 
assumed  of  the  Virgin,  be  in  the  sacrament  of  the  altar,  "  Secundum 
seipsura,"  even  as  he  is  really  in  carnal  substance,  proper  essence, 
and  nature .''  To  this  they  answered,  that  for  that  time  they  could 
say  no  more  than  what  they  had  said,  as  before  is  specified  in 
writing. 

Furthermore,  to  the  sense  and  text  of  the  sixth  conclusion,  because 
they  answered  not  fully  and  expressly,  being  asked  whether  God  owed 
any  manner  of  obedience  to  the  devil  or  not :  they  said,  "  Yea,  as 
the  obedience  of  love,  because  he  loveth,  and  punished  him  as  he 
ought."  And  to  prove  that  God  ought  so  to  obey  the  devil,  they 
offered  themselves  to  the  fire. 

To  the  eleventh  conclusion,  because  they  answered  not  expressly, 
being  asked  whether  a  prelate  might  excommunicate  any  man  being 
in  a  state  of  grace  :  they  said,  "  Yea." 

To  the  twentieth  conclusion,  for  that  they  answered  not  fully, 
simply,  and  expressly ;  being  demanded  whether  special  or  general 
prayers  did  most  profit,  and  were  of  greater  force,  they  would  not  say 
but  tkat  special  did. 

To  the  last  conclusion,  for  that  they  answered  neither  simply,  nor 

expressly ;  and  being  demanded  particularly,  whether  any  friar  were 

bound  to  get  his  living  with  his  manual  labour,  so  that  it  might  not 

be  lawful  for  him  to  live  by  begging,  they  would  make  no  answer 

at  all. 

Judg-  After  that,  the  lord  archbishop  of  Canterbury  demanded  of  all  the 

Sle  doc"    doctors,  M'hat  their  judgment  was  touching  the  answers   that  were 

ihese^""  "^^^^  ^P^'^  ^^^  ^^^  singular  such  conclusions ;  all  and  every  one  of 

articles     Avhom  Severally  said,  that  all  the  answers  given  unto  the  first,  second, 

third,  and  sixth   conclusion  (as  is  before  recited)  were  insufficient, 


PROCESS    ISSUKl)    BY    rOUUJXEY    AGAINST    ASHTON.  31 

heretical  and  subtle ;  and  that  all  the  answers  made  specially  to  the  JUrhnrd 

ninth,  tenth,  and  last  conclusion,  as  is  above  mentioned,  were  insuffi- : — 

cient,   erroneous,   and   perverse.     Whereupon  the  lord  archbishop,     ■^•^■ 

considering;  tiie  said  answers  to  be  heretical,  subtle,  erroneous,  and II- 

perverse,  accordingly  as  the  said  doctors  (as  is  aforesaid)  had  weiglied 
and  considered,  admonished  the  said  Hertbrd  and  Keppington  suffi- 
ciently under  this  form  of  words. 

The  name  of  Christ  being  called  upon,  we,  William,  by  God's  permission,  Admoni 
archbishop  of  Canterbury,   metropolitan   of  all    England,   and  legate    of  the  tion  and 
apostolic  see,  and   through  all   our  province   of  Canterbury,  inquisitor  of  all  of  the 
heretical  pravity,  do  sufhciently  and  lawfully  admonish  and  cite  you  Nicholas  arch- 
Herford  and  Philip   Keppington,  professors  of  divinity,  having  this  day  and  bishop, 
place  assigned  you  by  your  own  consent  and  our  appointment,  peremptorily  to  the  ex- 
answer  and  to  say  fully  and  plainly  your  opinions  touching  these  conclusions,  aminants 
whereunto  we  do  refer  you  (all  subtle,  sophistical,  and  logical  words  set  apart), 
being  thereimto  sworn,   cited,  and  connuanded :  whicli  thing  to  do,  without 
cause  reasonable  or  any  license  given  thereunto,  you  neither  have  been  willing, 
nor  are  willing ;  nay  rather  ye  contemptuously  refused  to  answer  to  some  of 
those  conclusions  before  us  judicially,  according  to  the  effect  of  our  monition, 
citation,  and  commandment  aforesaid.     But  for  that  ye  have  answered  unto 
some  of  them  heretically,  and  to  others  erroneously,  although  not  fully ;  we 
admonish  and  cite  you  once,  twice,  and  thrice,  and   that  peremptorily,  that 
plainly  and  fully  (all  subtle,  sophistical,  and  logical  words  set  apart)  you  and 
every   of 'you  answer  unto  the   same   conclusions,   and    unto  that   sense   and 
meaning  by  us  limited,  imder  the  pain  which  otherwise  such   conclusions  by 
you  confessed  deserve,  and  which  for  the  same  conclusions  you  ought  to  have. 

This   admonition   being  made  and  done,    because  the  aforesaid 
Herford  and  Keppington  would  make  no  other  answer,  the  said  lord 
archbishop  of  Canterbury   concluded   that    business,   prefixing  and 
assigning  unto  the  aforesaid  Nicholas  and  Philip,  eight  days'"  space ; 
that  is  to  say,  until  the  twenty-seventh  day  of  the  same  month,  and  Anotiier 
that  then   they  should  appear  before  the   said  lord  archbishop  ofsig^',g^" 
Canterbury,  wheresoever  Avithin  the  same  his  province  of  Canterbury  ^'"^ them 
he  should  happen  to  be,  to  hear  his  decree  that  should  be  made  in 
that   behalf.     This  done,    the    aforesaid  archbishop   of  Canterbury 
admonished  and  cited  lawfully  and  sufficiently  John  Ashton,  under 
the  tenor  of  these  words  following. 

Process  issued  by  William  Courtney,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury, 
against  John  Ashton. 

In  the  name  of  God ;  we,  William,  by  God's  permission  archbishop  of 
Canterbury,  primate  of  all  England,  legate  of  the  see  apostolical,  and  through 
all  our  province  of  Canterbury,  of  all  heretical  pravity  chief  inquisitor,  do 
monish  and  cite  thee  John  Ashton,  master  of  arts,  and  student  in  divinity, 
appearing  before  us  judicially,  to  say  and  speak  the  plain  verity  touching  these 
conclusions,  to  the  which  we  do  refer  thee,  and  to  the  which  we  have  caused 
thee  to  swear,  laying  thy  hand  upon  a  book ;  as  being  also  otherwise  by  lis 
admonished  and  commanded  to  keep  this  day  and  place  by  us  appointed,  for 
the  third  time  peremptorily,  to  propone  such  reasonable  cause  (if  thou  hast 
any),  wherefore  thou  oughtest  not  to  be  pronounced  a  heretic.  And  suffi- 
ciently and  lawfully  we  monish  and  cite  thee,  the  first,  second,  and  third  time, 
and  that  peremptorily,  that  thou  fully  and  jilainly  (all  subtle,  sophistical,  and 
logical  words  set  apart)  do  answer  imto  the  same  conclusions  under  the  pain 
that  unto  such  conclusions  belong,  and  on  thy  part  confessed,  and  that  thou 
for  such  conclusions  oughtest  to  suffer. 

This  monition  being  thus  premised,  the  said  archbishop  read  the 


82  WHKTHEU    MATEUIAI.    UKEAD    KEMAIV    IN    THE    SACRAMENT. 

Rickard  first  conclusioii,  and  of  tlie  said  John  inquired  wliat  was  his  opinion 
^^'      and  meaning  therein  ?  and  hereupon  he  said  his  mind  concerning  the 
A.D.    aforesaid   monition.     Then   the  aforesaid  John  Asliton,  being  often 
1382.    required  by  the  archbishop,  that  he  would  answer  in  tlie  Latin  tongue 
^°^"       to  those  questions  which  were  demanded  of  him,  because  of  the  lay 
sepa-       people  that  stood  about  him ;  he,  crying  out  in  the  English  tongue, 
am!lfed!^  Uttered  frivolous  and  opprobrious  contumelies  to  move  and  excite  the 
The  arch-  people  against  the  said  archbishop;  as  it  should  seem.     Neither  did 
and  his     he  unto  the  first  conclusion,  nor  unto  any  of  these  other  conclusions, 
avoid  the  effectually  and  pertinently  seem  to  them  to  answer ;   but  rather  by 
English    subtleties  and   shifts,  saying  oftentimes,  and  as  expressly  as  Luke 
forfea^r     Said,  it  was  sufficient  for  him  to  believe  as  the  holy  church  believed. 
peopTe      Then  the  said  archbishop  examined  him  upon   the  first  conclusion 
Whether  touchiug  the  sacrauieut  of  the  altar ;  whether  that  after  the  words  of 
bl-eld"^'    consecration    there    remaineth    material   bread,   particular  bread,   or 
r'u  e"     universal  bread  ?     He  said  the  matter  passed  his  understanding,  and 
sacra-       therefore  said,  he  Avould  in  that  form  and  manner  answer,  and  other- 
wise not:  but  amongst  other  things,  he  spake  in  deriding-wise  unto 
the  said  archbishop  against  this  word  "  material,""  saying,  *•'  You  may 
put  that  in  your  purse,  if  you  have  any."     Whereupon  the   said 
archbishop,  calling  that  an  unwise  and  foolish  answer,  as  the  rest  of  the 
doctors  did  (of  whom  mention  was  made  before),  the  rather  for  that 
he  was  a  graduate  in  the  schools,  further  proceeded  against  the  said 
John  Ashton  in  this  wise. 

The  Sentence  pronounced  on  John  Ashton. 

And  thou  John  Ashton,  monished  and  commanded  by  us,  as  is  aforesaid, 
after  thine  oath  taken,  without  any  reasonable  cause  or  any  other  license, 
neither  wouldst  thou,  nor  yet  wilt,  but  rcfusedst,  and  yet  dost  contemptuously, 
to  answer  unto  such  conclusions  before  us ;  judicially,  according  to  our  monition 
and  commandment  aforesaid,  we  do  hold  all  such  conclusions  to  be  by  thee 
confessed,  and  thee  the  aforesaid  John,  with  all  thy  aforesaid  conclusions,  con- 
victed. And  therefore,  we  do  pronounce  and  declare  by  giving  sentence,  that 
thou  John  Ashton,  concerning  those  conclusions,  which  by  us  with  good  deli- 
beration of  divers  prelates  our  suiFragans,  and  also  divers  and  sundry  professors 
of  divinity,  and  other  wise  men  and  learned  in  the  law,  accordhig  to  the 
Ashton  canonical  sanctions,  being  condemned  and  declared  for  a  heretic,  and  heretical 
declared  jj^st  been,  and  still  art  a  heretic,  and  thy  conclusions  heretical.  And  as 
touching  thy  other  conclusions,  by  us  heretofore  counted  erroneous,  and  for 
erroneous  condemned,  we  do  pronounce  and  declare  sententially  by  these  our 
writings,  both  that  thou  hast  erred,  and  dost  err. 

Upon  the  same  twentieth  day  of  June,  in  the  year  and  place  above 

^e°ed  recited,  the  aforesaid  lord  of  Canterbury  being  desirous,  as  he  pre- 

"'^^^:       tended,  to  be  informed  by  Thomas  Hilman,  bachelor  of  divinity, 

Asutuii.    there  being  present,  and  somewhat  favouring  the  said  master  John 

Ashton,  what  his  judgment  and  opinion  was,  touching  the  aforesaid 

conclusions,  prefixed  and  assigned  unto  the  said  Thomas  (for  that 

Time       time  demanding  the  same  deliberation  and   day)  eight  days  after; 

HOrnan     that  is  to  Say,  the  twenty-eighth  of  the  said  month,  to  appear  before 

to  answer,  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  wheresoever  within  his  said  province 

of  Canterbury  he  should  then  happen  to  be,  to  declare  plainly  and 

fully  what  his  judgment   and  opinion  was  touching  the  aforesaid 

conclusions.' 

(n  Ex  Regist.  W.  Courtney. 


a  heretic. 


Hilman 

SUS|J 


THE    ANSWER    OF    IIILMAN.  83 

The   names  of  friars  and  doctors  assistant  at  the   examination  Richard. 

aforesaid. — Friars  observant :   Botlesham,  bishop  of  Navatoii,  friar ; 1_ 

John  Langlcy,   William  Suard. — Friars  of  Dominic''s  order:  John    A. D. 
Kinghimi,  John   Lovey,  Peter  Stokes,  AValtcr  Dish. — Friars  Car-    ^'^^-- 
meUte :  Thomas  Ashburn,  Baukine,  Robert  Walbey. — Doctors  and 
friars  Augustine :    Master  John  Barnct,   Master  Thomas   Backton, 
Master  John  Blanchard,  Master  John  ShilHngfbrd,  INIaster  Lidford, 
Master  Thomas  Southam. 

The  Friday  following,  that  is  to  say,  the  twenty-eighth  of  June,  Juiu-  28. 
A.D.  1382,  the  aforesaid  Nicholas  Herford,  Philip  Reppington,  and 
Thom.as  Hihnan,  appeared  before  the  arclibishoj)  and  lord  inquisitor 
of  Canterbury,  in  the  chapel  of  his  manor  of  Otford,  in  the  diocese 
of  Canterbury,  there  sitting  in  his  tribunal  seat ;  to  whom  the  bishop 
of  Canterbury  said,  that  because  at  that  time  he  had  not  the  presence 
and  assistance  of  the  doctors  in  divinity  and  of  the  canon  and  civil 
law,  he  continued  the  business  touching  the  said  Nicholas,  Philip, 
and  Thomas,  in  the  same  state  wherein  it  then  was,  till  the  Tuesday 
next  and  immediately  ensuing ;  that  is  to  say,  the  first  day  of  July, 
in  the  year  of  our  Lord  aforesaid ;  and  prefixed  unto  the  said  Nicholas, 
Philip,  and  Thomas,  the  same  day  to  appear  before  him,  wheresoever 
within  his  province  of  Canterbury  he  should  then  chance  to  be,  to  do 
that  which  upon  the  said  twenty-eighth  day,  they  were  purposed  to 
do  together  or  apai't. 

The  Tuesday  being  come,  the  aforesaid  archbishop,  in  the  chief 
house  of  his  church  at  Canterbury,  before  the  hour  of  nine,  with  the 
doctors  whose  names  are  under  contained,  and  other  clerks  a  great 
multitude,  expected  the  aforesaid  Nicholas,  Philip,  and  Thomas  a 
long  time,  the  beadle  calling  them  and  looking  after  them ;  who, 
nevertheless,  appeared  not  before  two  of  the  clock  after  dinner  the 
same  day,  continuing  the  aforesaid  business  in  the  pristine  state  till 
that  same  hour ;  at  •which  time  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  having 
for  assistants  the  doctors  and  clerks  under  recited,  examined  Master 
Thomas  llilman,  then  and  there  judicially  appearing,  what  his  opinion 
was  touching  the  aforesaid  conclusions  ;  who,  at  them  and  the  meaning 
of  them  somewhat  stammering,  at  last,  to  all  and  singular  the  same 
conclusions  then  to  liim  read  and  expounded,  thus  answered :   "  I  Answerof 
suppose  and  judge  all  and  singular  those  conclusions  lately  condemned  "'^™*°- 
by  my  lord  of  Canterbury  that  now  is,  together  with  the  counsel  and 
consent  of  his  clerks,  to  be  heretical  and  erroneous,  even  as  the  same 
my  lord  of  Canterbury  and  other  doctors  of  divinity,  of  the  canon  and 
civil  law,  by  common  consent  and  counsel,  have  supposed  and  thought. 
And  the  same,  being  for  lieresies  and  errors,  as  before  is  said,  con- 
demned, I  do,  as  much  as  in  me  is,  condemn ;  protesting  that  I  will 
hold  and  affirm  the  contrary  of  those  conclusions,  and  in  the  same 
faith  live  and  die.""     Then  the  said  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  then 
and  there  sitting  as  tribunal  or  judge,  pronounced  the  said  masters  Herford 
Nicholas  and  Philip,  long  in  court  called  before  and  tamed  for,  and  phigton 
yet  not  appearing,  guilty  of  contumacy  and  disobedience ;  excom-  ^,^n™" 
municating  them  for  the  penalty  of  this  their  contumacy,  in  tenor  of  f^^ted. 
these  words  following  : 


VOL.  rn. 


34  CITATfON    AGAIMST    HKUFOKl)    AND    REPPINGTON. 

Rief/ard     flic  Scntcncc  of  Excommunicatioii  passed  upon  Nicholas  Herford 
'■ —  and  Pliilip  Reppington. 

I'iH'y  ^^'  William,  by  the  grace  of  God  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  primate  of 
—  England,  legate  of  the  apostolical  see,  and  through  all  our  province  of  Canter- 
bury, of  all  heretical  pravity  chief  inquisitor,  do  pronounce  Master  Nicholas 
Herford  and  Master  Phihp  Reppington,  professors  of  divinity,  having  this  day 
and  place  by  our  prefixion  appointed  to  hear  and  decree  in  this  business  of 
heretical  pravity  (being  in  court  by  our  beadle  long  called  and  tarried  for,  and 
yet  not  ajjpearing),  to  be  stubborn  and  disobedient  persons ;  and,  for  the  penalty 
of  this  their  contumacy,  we  do  excommunicate  them,  and  either  of  them,  by 
these  })resents. 

The  denouncing  of  the  Excommunication  against  Nicholas  Herford 
and  Philip  Reppington. 

Julyl'tli,       William,  by  God's  permission  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  &c.    To  our  beloved 
A.D.1382!  son  in  Christ,  whosoever  he  be,  that  this  instant  Sunday  shall  preach  at  Paul's 
Kxcom-     Cross  in  London,  salutation,  gi'ace,  and  blessing.     Forasmuch  as  we  prefixed  a 
tion  to       certain  competent  day  and  place   to  Master  Nicholas  Herford,  and  Master 
be  de-        Philip  Reppmgton,  canon  regular  of  the  monastery  of  our  Lady  of  Leicester, 
aTpaul's    ''^^•"g  doctors  of  divinity,  and  of  heretical  pravity  vehemently  suspected  (afler 
Cross.        certain  answers  not  ftilly  made,  but  impertinent  and  nothing  to  the  purpose,  as 
also  heretical  and  erroneous),  in  divers  places  of  our  said  province  commonly, 
generally,  and  publicly  taught  and  preached;  and  that,  therefore,  they  should 
judicially  appear  before  us,  to  do  and  to  receive  peremptorily  in  that  behalf, 
what  thing  soever  the  quality  of  that  business  should  move  us  unto ;  and  that 
we  have,  for  their  contumacy  in  not  appearing  before  us  at  that  day  and  place, 
judicially  appointed,  as  right  therein  required :  we,  by  these  presents,  command 
and  commit  inito  you,  firmly  enjoining  you,  that  when  all  the  multitude  of 
people  shall  be  gadiered  together  to  hear  your  sermon,  in  the  day  and  place 
appointed,  you  publicly  and  solemnly  denounce  the   aforesaid  Nicholas  and 
Pliilip,  holding  up  a  cross,  and  lighting  up  a  candle,  and  then  throwing  down 
the  same  upon  the  ground,  to  have  been  so  and  in  such  manner  excommuni- 
cated, and  still  to  be. — Fare  ye  well. 

In  oiu"  manor  house  at  Lambeth,  the  tliirteenth  day  of  July,  in  the  year 
of  our  Lord  1382,  and  first  year  of  our  translation.' 

The  Citation  against  the  said  Nicholas  and  Philip. 

William,  by  the  grace  of  God,  &c.  To  our  well-beloved  son  Master  Robert 
Rigges,  chancellor  of  the  university  of  Oxford,  salutation,  &c.  Forasmuch  as 
we  have  prefixed  a  competent  day  and  place  to  Master  Nicholas  Herford,  and 
Master  Philip  Reppington,  &c.  We  straitly  charge  and  command  you,  that 
3'ou  publicly  and  solemnly  denounce  in  the  church  of  our  Lady,  and  in  the 
schools  of  the  university,  the  aforesaid  Nicholas  and  Philip  to  have  been  by  us 
excommunicated,  and  still  to  be.  And  that  you  further  cite,  or  cause  to  be 
cited,  peremptorily  the  aforesaid  Nicholas  and  Philip,  that  they  and  every  of 
them  appear  before  us  within  fifteen  days  after  the  date  of  this  citation,  where- 
soever it  shall  fortune  us,  within  our  said  province  of  Canterbuiy,  then j  to  be : 
to  hear  and  see  how  we  mean  to  proceed  against  them,  and  every  of  them, 
concerning  the  aforesaid  heretical  and  erroneous  conclusions,  according  to  the 
form  of  retroactions,  and  quality  of  the  business  in  this  behalf  had  and  used. 
And  that  both  of  the  day  of  the  receipt  of  this  present  citation,  of  the  manner 
and  form  thereof;  or  if  that  you  shall  apprehend  by  personal  citation  the  said 
Nicholas  and  Philip,  or  either  of  them,  or  whether  they  shall  be  absent  and 
hide  themselves,  as  of  every  thing  else,  which  in  this  behalf  you  shall  think  meet 
to  be  done ;  that  between  this  and  the  feast  of  St.  Laurence,  you  clearly  certify 
us  by  your  letters  patent,  containing  the  effect  of  these  things. — Fare  ye  well. 
At  our  manor  of  Lambeth,  the  thirteenth  day  of  July,  in  the  year  of  our 
Lord  1382,  and  first  year  of  our  translation. 

(I)  See  aJso  the  Harleian  MSS.  in  the  Brit.  Mus.  No.  420.  Art.  xi.  "  Excerpta  aliena  manu 
fiCnpta  ex  Registro  Willlelmi  Courtnej',  super  conclusionibus  hereticis  et  recantationibus  Nicliolai 
llerfordi,  Pliillippl  Reppyngdon.etJohannisAsscheton.Wiclevistarum.  a. d.  1382. "(Imperfect.)— Ed. 


NAMES    OF    THE    ASSISTANTS    AT    THE    SITTING.  35 

Tlic  names  of  the  doctors  niul  friars,  assistants  at  tliis  sittiniif,  were  Richard 
these. — Seculars  :    Master    William    Blankpaine,    Master    William      ^^' 
Barton. — Friars  Carmelite:   Robert  Every,  prior;  John  Rennini,''-    A. D. 
ham,   prior;   and  John  Lunne. — Friars  Minor;   William  Barnwell,  _m^.-_ 
John  Rydden,  and  AVilJiam  Brunscombe. — Friars  Augustine :  John 
Court,  Patrington,  Tomson,  and  Keepes. 

Against  this  blind  excommunication  of  tlie  said  archbishop  the 
parties  excommunicated  commenced  and  exhibited  their  appeal  unto 
the  bishop  of  Rome  ;  which  appeal  of  theirs,  as  insufficient,  or  rather 
to  him  impleasant,  the  said  archbishop  utterly  rejected  (as  mifht 
oftentimes  overcometh  right),  proceeding  in  his  preconceived  excom- 
munication against  them,  and  writing,  moreover,  his  letters  to  him 
that  should  preach  next  at  PauFs  Cross,  as  is  aforesaid,  to  denounce 
and  to  publish  openly  the  said  Nicholas  Herford  and  Philip  Rep- 
pington  to  be  excommunicate,  for  not  appearing  at  their  term  assigned, 
which  was  the  thirteenth  day  of  July. 

This  archbishop,  moreover,  the  said  year,  in  the  month  and  on  the  Another 
day  aforesaid,  sent  also  another  letter  to  Master  Rigges,  commissary  |he"rch- 
of  Oxford,  straitly  enjoining  and  charging  him,  not  only  to  denounce  ^'^^°p 
the  said  sentence  of  excommunication,  and  to  give  out  public  citation  ciian- 
against  them,  but  also  to  make  diligent  search  and  inquisition  throuo-h  Oxford.^ 
all  Oxford  for  them,  to  have  them  apprehended  and  sent  up  to  him, 
personally  before  him  to  appear  at  a  certain  day  prescribed  for  the 
same ;  whereby  may  appear  how  busy  this  bishop  was,  in  disquieting 
and  persecuting  these  poor  men,  whom  rather  he  should  have  nourished 
and   cherished  as  his  brethren.     But,  as  his  labour  is  past,  so  his 
reward  will  follow,  on  that  day  when  the  great  Archbishop  of  our 
souls  shall  judicially  appear  in  his  tribunal  seat,  to  judge  both  the 
quick  and  the  dead. 

The  archbishop,  not  yet  contented  with  this,  doth,  moreover,  by  Hitherto 
all  means  possible,  solicit  the  king  to  join  withal  the  power  of  his  "urn  any 
temporal  sword ;  for  that  he  well  perceived,  that  hitherto  the  popish  ^^^yPi°^ 
clergy  had   not  authority  sufficient,  by  any  public  law  or  statute  of 
this  land,  to  proceed  unto  death  against  any  person  whatsoever,  in 
case  of  religion,  but  only  by  the  usurped  tyranny  and  example  of  the 
court   of  Rome.     Here  note,  gentle  reader,  for  thy  better  under- 
standing, the  practice  of  the  Romish  prelates  in  seeking  the  king''s 
help  to  further  their  bloody  purpose  against  the  good  saints  of  God ; 
which  king  being  but  young,  and  under  years  of  ripe  judgment,  The  king 
partly  induced,  or  rather  seduced,  by  importunate  suit  of  the  aforesaid  vem™ 
archbishop,  partly,  also,  either  for  fear  of  the  bishops  (for  kings  cannot  ^y  ^^^ 
always  do  in  their  realms  what  they  will),  or  else,  perhaps,  enticed  by  bishop. 
some  hope  of  subsidy  to  be  gathered  by  the  clergy,  was  content  to 
adjoin  his  private  assent,  such  as  it  was,  to  the  setting  down  of  an 
ordinance,  which  was  indeed  the  very  first  Jaw  that  is  to  be  found  First  law 
made  against  religion  and  the  professors  thereof,  bearing  the  name  of  by^'hr'* 
an  act  made  in  the  parliament  holden  at  Westminster  in  the  fifth  buriffn.^"'^ 
year  of  Ricluird  II. ;  where,  among  sundry  other  statutes  then  pub-  professors 
lished,  and  yet  remaining  in  the   printed  books  of  statutes,   this  gio"!?.' 
supposed  statute  is  to  be  found  (cap.  5.  et  ultimo). 

d2 


36 


THK    SUPPOSED    STATUTE    EXAMINED. 


Ricliard 

n. 


A.D. 

1382. 


This 
statute 
was  re- 
pealed 
after- 
wards by 
the  com- 
mons. 


A  Private  Statute  made  by  the  Clergy,  without  Consent  or  Know- 
ledge of  the  Commons. 

Item,  Forasmuch  as  it  is  openly  known  that  there  be  divers  evil  persons 
within  the  realm,  going  from  county  to  county,  and  from  town  to  town,  in 
certain  habits,  under  dissimidation  of  great  holiness,  and  without  the  license  of 
the  ordinaries  of  the  places,  or  other  sufficient  authority,  preaching  daily,  not 
only  in  churches  and  churchyards,  but  also  in  markets,  fairs,  and  other  open 
places  where  a  great  congregation  of  people  is,  divers  sermons  containing 
heresies  and  notorious  errors,  to  the  great  emblemishing  of  christian  faith  and 
destruction  of  the  laws  and  of  the  estate  of  holy  church,  to  the  great  peril  of 
the  souls  of  the  people  and  of  all  the  realm  of  England,  as  more  plainly  is  found 
and  sufficiently  proved  before  the  reverend  father  in  God  the  archbishop  of 
Canterbury,  and  the  bishops  and  other  prelates,  masters  of  divinity,  and  doctors 
of  canon  and  of  civil  law,  and  a  great  part  of  the  clergy  of  the  said  realm, 
specially  assembled  for  this  great  cause ;  which  persons  do  also  preach  divers 
matters  of  slander,  to  engender  discord  and  dissension  betwixt  divers  estates  of 
the  said  realm,  as  well  spiritual  as  temporal,  in  exciting  of  the  people,  to  the 
great  peril  of  all  the  realm :  which  preachers,  being  cited  or  summoned  before 
the  ordinaries  of  the  places,  there  to  answer  to  that  whereof  they  be  impeached, 
will  not  obey  their  summons  and  commandments,  nor  care  for  their  monitions 
or  the  censures  of  the  holy  church,  but  expressly  despise  them ;  and  moreover, 
by  their  subtle  and  ingenious  words,  do  draw  the  people  to  hear  their  seraions, 
and  do  maintain  them  in  their  errors  by  strong  hand,  and  by  great  routs :  it  is 
ordained  and  assented  in  this  present  parliament,  that  the  king's  commissions 
be  made  and  directed  to  the  sheriffs,  and  other  ministers  of  our  sovereign  lord 
the  king,  or  other  sufficient  persons  learned,  and  according  to  the  certifications 
of  the  prelates  thereof,  to  be  made  in  the  Chancery  from  time  to  time,  to  arrest 
all  such  preachers,  and  also  their  favourers,  maintainers,  and  abettors,  and  to 
hold  them  in  arrest  and  strong  prison,  till  they  will  justify  themselves  accoi-ding 
to  the  law  and  reason  of  holy  church.  And  the  king  willeth  and  commandeth, 
that  the  chancellor  make  such  commissions  at  all  times,  that  he,  by  the  prelates, 
or  any  of  them,  shall  be  certified  and  thereof  required,  as  is  aforesaid. 


AN  EXAMINATION  OF  THE  AFORESAID    SUPPOSED    STATUTE,  AND 
OF    THE    INVALIDITY    THEREOF. 

This  supposed  statute,  forasmuch  as  it  was  the  principal  ground 
whereupon  proceeded  all  the  persecution  of  that  time,  it  is,  therefore, 
not  impertinent  to  examine  the  same  more  particularly  ;  whereby  it 
shall  appear,  that  as  the  same  was  fraudulently  and  unduly  devised 
by  the  prelates  only,  so  was  it  in  like  manner  most  injuriously  and 
unorderly  executed  by  them.  For,  immediately  upon  the  publishing 
of  this  law,  without  further  warrant  either  from  the  king  or  his 
council,  commissions  under  the  great  seal  of  England  were  made  in 
this  from  :  "  Richard,  by  the  oTace  of  God,"  &c.  (as  the  act  shows, 
p.  541)  ;  "  witness  myself,  at  Westminster,  the  twenty-sixth  day  of 
No  usual  June,  in  the  sixth  year  of  our  reign  ;'"  without  more  words  of  warrant 
under\vritten,  such  as  in  like  cases  are  both  usual  and  requisite ;  viz. 
"  per  ipsum  regem  ;"  "  per  regem  et  concilium  \''  "  per  breve  de 
privato  sigillo  C  all  or  any  of  which  words  being  utterly  wanting  in 
this  place,  as  may  be  seen  in  the  king's  records  of  that  time,  it  must, 
therefore,  be  done  either  by  wan-ant  of  this  aforesaid  statute,  or  else 
without  any  warrant  at  all.  Whereupon  it  is  to  be  noted,  that 
whereas  the  said  statute  appointed  the  commissions  to  be  directed  to 
the  sheriff,  or  other  ministers  of  the  king,  or  to  other  sufficient  per- 
sons learned  for  the  arresting  of  such  persons  ;  the  said  commissions  are 


words  of 
warrant 
affixed  to 
this  com- 
mission. 


A    PKTITION    TO    THE    KIXG    FROM    THE    COMMONS.  37 

directed  to  the  arclibisliop  and  his  suffragans,  being,  as  it  appeareth,  Richard 
parties  in  the  case,  autliorizing  theni,  further,  without  either  the  words, 


or  reasonable  meaning  of  the  said  statute,  to  imprison  them  in  their    A.  D. 
own  houses,  or  where  else  pleased  them.  \.iS2. 

Besides  also,  what  manner  of  law  this  was,  by  whom  devised,  and 
by  what  authority  the  same  was  first  made  and  established,  judge  by 
that  which  followeth,  viz. — 

In  the  Utas  of  St.  MichaeP  next  following,  at  a  parliament  sum- 
moned and  holden  at  Westminster,  the  sixth  year  of  the  said  king, 
among  sundry  petitions  made  to  the  king  by  his  commons,  whereunto 
he  assented,  there  is  one  in  this  form  : — 

An  Extract  fi-om  the  Petition  of  the  Commons  for  repealing  the 
aforesaid  Statute. 

Item,  the  commons  pray,  That  whereas  a  statute  was  made  the  last  parlia- 
ment, in  these  words,  "  It  is  ordained  in  this  present  parliament,  that  commis- 
sions from  the  king  be  directed  to  the  sheriiFs  and  other  ministers  of  the  king, 
or  to  other  sufficient  persons  skilful,  and  according  to  the  certificates  of  the 
prelates  thereof,  to  be  made  unto  the  Chancery  from  time  to  time,  to  arrest  all 
such  preachers,  and  their  favourers,  maintainers,  and  abettors,  and  them  to 
detain  in  strong  prison,  until  they  will  justify  themselves  according  to  reason, 
and  law  of  holy  church ;  and  the  king  willeth  and  commandeth,  that  the  chan-  The 
cellor  make  such  commissions,  at  all  times,  as  he  shall  be  by  the  prelates  or  statute 
any  of  them  certified,  and  thereof  required,  as  is  aforesaid."  The  which  was 
never  agreed  to  nor  granted  by  the  commons ;  but  whatsoever  was  moved 
therein  was  without  their  assent :  That  the  said  statute  be  therefore  disannulled. 
For  it  is  not  in  any  wise  their  meaning,  that  either  themselves,  or  such  as  shall 
succeed  them,  shall  be  further  justified  or  bound  by  the  prelates,  than  were 
their  ancestors  in  former  times:  whereunto  is  answered,  "  il  plaist  al  roy  ;"  that 
is,  "  the  king  is  pleased." 

Hereby,   notwithstanding  the  former  unjust  law  of  the  fifth  ofTheking 
Rich.  II.  was  repealed,  and  the  fraud  of  the  framcrs  thereof  suffi- [he"*" 
ciently  discovered,  yet  such  means  were  there  used  by  the  prelates,  that  '"''p^^'- 
this  act  of  repeal  was  never  published,  nor  ever  since  printed  with  the 
rest  of  the  statutes  of  that  parliament :  insomuch  that  the  said  repeal 
being  concealed,  like  commissions  and  other  process  were  made  fi-om 
time  to  time,  by  virtue  of  the  said  bastard  statute,  as  Avell  dm'ing  all 
the  reign  of  this  king,  as  ever  since,  against  the  professors  of  religion  ; 
as  shall  hereafter,  by  the  grace  of  God,  appear  in  the  second  year  of 
king  Henry  lY.,  where  the  clergy  pursued  the  like  practice. 

And  now  again  to  the  story  of  our  Oxford  divines,  and  of  the 
archbishop ;  to  whom  the  king  writeth  his  letters-patent,  first  to  the 
archbishop,  then  to  the  vice-chancellor  in  Oxford,  as  followeth  : — 

The  King's  Letters-patent  to  the  Archbishop,  against  the  Favourers 

of  Wickliflr. 

Richard,  by  the  grace  of  God,  king  of  England,  and  lord  of  Ireland,  to  all  A.D.13S2. 
those  to  whom  these  present  letters  shall  come,  greeting.     By  the  petition  of 
the  reverend  father  in  God,  William,   archbishop  of  Canterbuiy,  primate  of 
England,  exhibited  unto  us,  we  right  well  understand,  that  divers  and  sundry 
conclusions,  very  contrary  to  wholesome  doctrine,  and  redounding  both  to  the 

(1)  The  "  utas."  or  octaves.  This  was  the  eighth  day  succetdir,^  any  term,  or  feast.  To  be  within 
"  the  Utas  of  St.  Michael,"  implies  that  it  was  a  day  betweeu  St.  Michael's  day  and  the  eighth  day 
next  ensuing.  — Ed. 


38  THE    KING  S    LETTERS    AGAINST    WICKLIFF. 

Richard   subversion  of  the  catliolic  faith,  the  holy  church,  and  of  his  province  of  Canter- 

^^-       bury,  in  divers  and  sundry  places  of  tlie  same  his  province,  have  been  openly 

.    ^      and   publicly   preached,   although   damnably  preached  :  of  which  conclusions, 

,  „'o9'     some,  as  heresies,  others,  as  errors,  have  been  condemned,  but  not  before  good 

!_  and  mature  deliberation  first  therein  had  and  used ;  and  by  common  counsel  of 

the  said  archbishop,  his  siifliagans,  and  many  doctors  in  divinity,  and  other 
clerks  and  learned  men  in  the  holy  Scriptures,  were  they  sententially  and 
wholesomely  declared.  Whereupon  the  said  archbishop  hath  made  his  suppli- 
cation unto  us ;  that  both  for  the  coercion  and  due  castigation  of  such  as  snail, 
henceforth,  of  an  obstinate  mind,  preach  or  maintain  the  aforesaid  conclusions, 
we  would  vouchsafe  to  put  to  the  arm  and  helping  hand  of  our  kingly  power. 
We,  therefore,  moved  by  the  zeal  of  the  catholic  faith,  whereof  we  be  and  will 
be  defenders,  and  unwilling  that  any  such  heresies  or  errors  should  spring  up 
within  the  limits  of  our  dominion,  give  and  grant  special  license  and  authority, 
by  the  tenor  of  these  presents,  imto  the  aforesaid  archbishop,  and  to  his  sulftagans, 
to  arrest  and  imprison,  either  in  their  own  prisons  or  any  other,  all  and  every 
such  person  and  persons,  as  shall  either  privily  or  apertly  preach  and  maintain  the 
aforesaid  conclusions  so  condemned ;  and  the  same  persons,  so  imprisoned  there, 
at  their  pleasures  to  detain  till  such  time  as  they  shall  repent  them  and  amend 
them  of  such  heretical  pravities,  or  else  it  shall  be  of  such  arrests,  b}'  us  and 
our  council  otherwise  determined  and  provided:  further  chai'ging  and  com- 
manding all  and  singular  our  liege-men,  ministers,  and  subjects,  of  what  state 
and  condition  soever  they  be,  upon  their  fidelity  and  allegiance  wherein  they 
stand  bound  to  us,  that  by  no  means  they  either  favour,  counsel,  or  help  the 
preachers  or  maintainers  of  the  said  conclusions  so  condemned,  or  their  favour- 
ers, upon  pain  and  forfeiture  of  all  that  ever  they  have  ;  but  that  they  obey  and 
humbly  attend  upon  the  said  archbishop,  his  suffragans,  and  ministers,  in  the 
execution  of  these  presents ;  so  that  due  and  manifest  publication  against  the 
aforesaid  conclusions  and  their  maintainers,  without  any  perturbation,  may  be 
done  and  executed,  as  for  the  defence  of  our  realm  and  catholic  faith  shall  be 
thought  most  meet  and  requisite.  In  witness  whereof,  we  have  caused  these 
our  lettere-patent  to  be  made. 

Witness  our  self,  at  Westminster,  the  sixteenth  day  of  June,  and  sixth 
year  of  our  reign. 

The  King's  Letters-patent  to  the  Vice-chancellor  and  Proctors  of 

Oxford. 

The  king,  to  the  chancellor  and  the  procurators  of  the  university  of  Oxford  who 
now  be,  or  for  the  time  being  shall  be,  greeting.  Moved  by  the  zeal  of  christian 
faith,  whereof  we  be,  and  always  will  be,  defenders,  and  for  our  soul's  health 
induced  thereunto,  having  a  great  desire  to  repress,  and  by  condign  punishment 
to  restrain  the  impugners  of  the  aforesaid  faith,  who  newly  and  wickedly  go/ 
about  and  presume  to  sow  their  naughty  and  perverse  doctrine  within  our 
kingdom  of  England,  and  to  pi'each  and  hold  damnable  conclusions,  so  notori- 
ously repugnant  and  contrary  to  the  same  faith,  to  the  perverting  of  our  subjects 
and  people,  as  we  understand ;  before  they  any  further  proceed  in  their  malicious 
errors,  or  else  infect  others,  we  have  by  these  presents  appointed  you  to  be 
inquisitor-general,  all  the  chief  divines  of  the  said  university  being  your  assist- 
ants, and  the  same,  likewise,  to  be  done  of  all  and  singular  the  graduates, 
divines,  and  lawyers  of  the  same  university.  And  if  they  shall  know  any  who 
be  of  the  jurisdiction  of  the  said  university  of  Oxford,  who  be  probably  of  them 
suspected  to  be  in  the  favour,  belief,  or  defence  of  any  heresy  or  error,  and 
especially  of  any  of  the  conclusions  publicly  condemned  by  the  reverend  father, 
William,  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  by  the  counsel  of  his  clergy,  or  else  of  any 
other  conclusion  like  unto  any  of  them  in  meaning,  or  in  words ;  and  that  if 
henceforth  you  shall  find  any  that  shall  believe,  favour,  or  defend  any  of  the 
aforesaid  heresies  or  errors,  or  any  other  such,  or  who  shall  be  bold  to  receive 
into  their  houses  and  inns,  Master  John  WicklifF,  Master  Nicholas  Herford, 
Master  Philip  Reppington,  or  Master  John  Ashton,  or  any  other  noted  by  pro- 
bable suspicion  of  any  of  the  aforesaid  heresies  or  errors,  or  any  other  like 
unto  them  in  meaning  or  in  word ;  or  that  shall  presume  to  communicate  with 
any  of  them,  or  else  to  defend  or  favour  any  such  favourers,  receivers,  conimu- 


THE    KIKg's    letters    AGAINST    WKKMFF.  39 

nicants,  and  defenders,  within  seven  days  after  tlie  same  shall  appear  and  be    Richard 
manifest  unto  you,  that  you  banish  ami  expel  them  from  the  university  and       ^^■ 
town  of  Oxford,  till  auch  time  as  they  shall  declare  their  innocency  before  the      .    y^  " 
archbishop  of  Canterbury  fur  the  time  being,  by  manifest  purgation.     So,  not-     10139' 
withstanding,  that  such  as  be  compelled  to  purge  themselves,  you  certify  us  "" 

and  the  said  archbishop,  under  your  seals,  from  time  to  time  within  one  month, 
that  they  be  such  manner  of  men  :  commanding,  furthermore,  that  through  all 
the  halls  of  the  said  universitj'  ye  cause  diligently  to  be  searched  and  inquired 
out  of  hand,  if  any  man  have  any  book  or  tractation  of  the  edition,  or  com- 
piling of  the  aforesaid  Master  John  Wickliff;  or  Nicholas  Hcrford ;  and  that, 
when  and  where  soever  ye  shall  chance  to  find  any  such  book  or  tractation,  ye 
cause  the  same  to  be  arrested  and  taken,  and  unto  the  aforesaid  archbishop, 
within  one  month,  without  correction,  corruption,  or  mutation  whatsoever, 
word  for  word,  and  sentence  for  sentence,  to  be  brought  and  presented.  And, 
therefore,  we  straitly  enjoin  and  command  you,  upon  your  fidelity  and  alle- 
giance wherein  ye  stand  boiuid  unto  us,  and  upon  pain  of  forfeiture  of  all  and 
singular  your  liberties  and  the  pi-ivileges  of  your  said  universit}',  and  of  all  that 
ever  yoii  have  besides ;  that  you  give  your  diligent  attendance  upon  the  pre- 
mises, and  that  well  and  faithfidly  you  execute  the  same  in  manner  and  form 
aforesaid.  And  that  you  obe)'  the  aforesaid  archbishop,  and  his  lawful  and 
honest  mandates,  that  he  shall  think  good  to  direct  unto  you  in  this  behalf,  as 
it  is  meet  ye  should.  And  we  give  in  charge  unto  the  vice-chancellor  and 
mayor  of  Oxford  for  the  time  being,  and  to  all  and  singular  our  sheriffs  and 
under-sherifiTs,  bailiffs,  and  subjects,  by  these  presents ;  that  they  aid,  obey,  and 
be  attendant  upon  you,  in  the  execution  of  tlie  premises.  In  witness  whereof, 
&c.,  witness  the  king,  at  Westminster,  the  thirteenth  day  of  July,  the  sixth 
year  of  his  reign. 

Besides  these  letters-patent,  the  said  young  king,  moved  by  the  a.d.i3S2 
restless  importunity  of  the  archbishop,  sendeth,  moreover,  another  ''^^'  '^' 
special  letter  to  the  vice-chancellor  and  proctors  to  the  university  of 
Oxford,  wherein,  under  a  pretended  zeal  for  the  defence  of  the  chris- 
tian faith,  he  straitly  and  sharply  enjoineth  and  assigneth  them,  for  Theton- 
the  utter  abolishing  of  those  conclusions  and  opinions,  to  make  a  Iham'jet 
general  inquisition  through  the  whole  university,  as  well  for  the  parties  terotking 
aforesaid,  John  WicklifF,  Nicholas  Herford,  Philip  Reppington,  John  sent' to 
Ashton,  and  such  others ;  as  also  for  all  others  whom  they  Icnow  or  ^jfa^n"!' 
judge  to  be  suspected  of  that  doctrine,  or  to  be  maintainers,  receivers,  ^^j^^^^l^ 
and  defenders  of  the  aforesaid  parties  or  their  conclusions,  in  any  feiiows. 
manner  of  way  ;  to  the  intent  that  they  being  so  apprehended,  through 
their  diligent  search,  may  be,  within  seven  days  of  their  admonitions, 
expelled  the  university,  and  cited  up  to  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury, 
before  him  to  appear  and  to  stand  to  their  answers :  willing,  moreover, 
and  commanding  the  said  vice-chancellor  and  proctors,  with  other 
regents  their  assisters,  that  if  any  person  or  persons  in  any  house, 
hall,  or  college,  or  in  any  other  place,  shall  be  found  to  have  any  of 
their  books  or  treatises  compiled  by  the  said  John  Wickliff,  Nicholas 
Herford,  &c.,  they  will  cause  without  delay  the  said  person  or  persons,  Persons, 
with  their  books,  to  be  arrested  and  attached,  and  presented  within  booksfu.'^ 
one  month,  without  coiTCction,  corruption,  or  mutation,  to  the  afore-  ^^^'■" 
said  archbishop,  upon  their  faith  and  allegiance,  as  they  will  avoid  the 
forfeiture  of  all  and  singular  the  liberties  and  privileges  to  the  uni- 
versity appertaining ;  and  tlmt  they  will  be  obedient  to  the  arch- 
bishop aforesaid  in  the  ordering  hereof,  and  all  other  his  injunctions 
to  be  obeyed  in  all  things  lawful  and  honest.     Giving,  moreover,  in 
these  his  letters  charge  and  commandment  to  the  mnvor,  bailiffs, 
and  others,  the  inhabitants  of  Oxford,  to  be  assistant  and  attendant 


40  MATTERS    INCIDENT    TO    ROBERT    RIGGES. 

Hichard  unto  tlic  aforesaid  vice-chancellor  and  proctors,  touching  the  execution 

^^-      of  the  premises,  bearing  the  date  of  July  14,  a.d.  1382, 
A.D. 

^^^^-     MATTERS    INCIDENT    TO    ROBERT    RIGGES,   VICE-CHANCELLOR    OF 
OXFORD,     NICHOLAS    HERFORD,    AND     PHILIP 
REPPINGTON,    WITH    OTHERS. 

The  vice-chancellor  of  Oxford  at  that  time  was  Master  Robert 
Rio-cres ;  the  two  proctors  were  John  Huntman  and  Walter  Dish, 
■who  then,  as  flir  as  they  durst,  favoured  the  cause  of  John  Wickliff 
and  that  side ;    insomuch   that  the  same  time  and  year,  which  was 
A.D.  1382,  when  certain  public  sermons  should  be  appointed,  accord- 
ing to  custom,  at  the  feast  of  the  Ascension  and  of  Corpus  Christi,  to 
be  preached  in  the  cloister  of  St.  Frideswidc,  now  called  Chrisfs 
Church,  before  the  people,  by  the  vice-chancellor  aforesaid  and  the 
proctors,  the  doing  whereof  they  had  committed  to  Philip  Repping- 
ton  and  Nicholas  Herford,  so  that  Herford  should  preach  on  the 
Herford,   Asccusiou-day,  and  Reppington   on  Corpus  Christi-day  :    Herford, 
ontheAs-  ijeorinninar  first,  was  noted  to  defend  John  WicklifF  openly,  as  being 
•lay,        a  faithftd,  good,  and  innocent  man  ;  for  which  no  small  ado  with 
Wickiifi-.   outcries  was  amongst  the  friars.     This  Herford,  after  he  had  long 
favoured  and  maintained   Wickliffs   pai-t,    grew  first   in  suspicion 
amongst  the  enemies  of  the  truth  ;  for,  as  soon  as  he  began  somewhat 
liberally  and  freely  to  pronounce  and  utter  any  thing  which  tended  to 
the  defence  of  WicklitF,  by  and  by  the  Carmelites,  and  all  the  orders 
of  religion  were  on  his  top,  and  laid  not  a  few  heresies  unto  his  charge, 
which  they  had  strained  here  and  there  out  of  his  sennons,  and  had 
compiled  together  in  a  certain  form,  by  the  hands  of  certain  notaries, 
through  the  industry  and  diligence  of  one  Peter  Stokes,  a  Carmelite ; 
a  kind  of  people  prone  and  ready  to  all  kind  of  mischief,  uproar, 
debate,  and  dissension,  *'as  though  they  were  born  and  provided  only 
for  that  purpose,  utterly  unprofitable,  and  nothing  worth  for  any  thing 
else  ;  much  like  things  do  divers  wTiters  (such  as  treat  of  the  proper- 
ties of  beasts),  write,  of  the  nature  of  certain  spiders ;  that,  what- 
soever pleasant  juice  is  in  herbs,  they  suck  it  out,  and  convert  it  into 
poison.    But  these  cowled  merchants  (in  this  behalf)  do  pass  all  the 
spiders,  for  whatsoever  is  worst  and  most  pestilent  in  man,  that  do 
they  hunt   out  and  seek  for,  and  with  their  teeth   even,  as  it  were, 
gnaw  it  out  ;  and  of  the  opinions  which  be  good,  and  agi-eeable  with 
verity,  they  do  make  schisms  and  heresies.     Such  is  the  aptness  of 
art,  when  nature  helpeth  thereunto.*     After  this  the  feast  of  Corpus 
Christi  drew  near,  upon  which  day  it  was  looked  for  that  Reppington 
Ropping-  should  preach.     This  man  was  a  canon  of  Leicester,  and  had  before 
ofYeic^"-  taken  his  first  dcgi'ee  unto  doctorship,  who,  preaching  at  that  time  at 
ter,  after-  Broadgate,  for  the  same  sermon  first  became  suspected,  and  hated  by 
bishop  of  the  Pharisaical  brood  of  the  friars  ;  but,  through  the  great  and  notable 
nico  n.    (jgxterity  of  his  wit,  which  all  men  did  behold  and  see  in  him,  accom- 
panied with  like  modesty  and  honesty,  he  did  so  overcome,  or  at  least 
assuage  this  cruelty  and  persecution  w^hich  was  towards  him,  that. 
Com-       shortly  after,  by  the  consent  of  the  whole  fellowship,  he  was  admitted 
doctor,     doctor,  who,  as  soon  as  he  had  taken  it  upon  him,  by  and  by  he 

U)  See  EdiUon  1503    p    lOl.— En. 


NOTES  ON  THE  SERMON  OF   REPPINGTON.  41 

stepped  forth  in  the  scliools,  and  began  immediately  to  show  forth  and  Richard 

utter  that  which  he  had  hjnij-  hidden  and  dissembled,  protesting  openly '. — 

that  in  all  moral  matters  he  would  defend  WicklifF ;    but  that  as    A.D. 
touching  the  sacrament,  he  would  as  yet  hold  his  peace,  until  such    ^^^'^- 
time  as  the  Lord  should  otherwise  illuminate  the  hearts  and  minds  of 
the  clergy. 

Now  the  day  of  Corpus  Christi  aforesaid  approaching  near,  when 
the  friars  understood  that  this  man  should  preach,  these  Babylonians 
fearing  lest  he  would  scarce  civilly  or  gently  rub  the  galls  of  their 
religion,  convented  with  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  that  the  same 
day,  a  little  before  Philip  should  preach,  WicklifF's  conclusions, 
which  were  privately  condemned,  should  be  openly  defamed  in  the 
presence  of  the  Avhole  university  ;  the  doing  of  which  was  committed 
to  Peter  Stokes,  friar,  standard-bearer  and  chief  champion  of  that  Peter 
side  against  Wickliff.  ^ll&^d- 

There  were  also  letters  sent  unto  the  commissary,  that  he  should  \l^^^l 
help  and  aid  him  in  publishing  the  same  conclusions,  as  is  before  de-  Papists. 
clared. 

These  things  thus  done  and  finished,  Reppington,  at  the  hour 
appointed,  proceeded  to  his  sermon,  in  which,  among  many  other 
things,  he  was  reported  to  have  uttered  these  sapngs,  or  to  this 
effect : 

"  That  the  popes  or  bishops  ought  not  to  be  recommended  above  Notes  on 

.  1  1       1     ■>i  the  ser- 

temporal  lords.  monof 

Also,  "  That  in  moral  matters  he  would  defend  Master  WicklifF,  ^^pp'"°'' 
as  a  true  catholic  doctor."" 

Moreover,  "  That  the  duke  of  Lancaster  was  very  earnestly  affected 
and  minded  in  this  matter,  and  would,  that  all  such  should  be  re- 
ceived under  his  protection  ;""  besides  many  more  things,  which  touched 
the  praise  and  defence  of  Wickliff. 

And  finally,  in  concluding  his  sermon,  he  dismissed  the  people, 
repeating  this  sentence  ;  "  I  will,"  said  he,  "  in  the  speculative  doc- 
trine, as  appertaining  to  the  matter  of  the  sacrament  of  the  altar, 
keep  silence  and  hold  my  peace,  until  such  time  as  God  otherwise 
shall  instruct  and  illuminate  the  hearts  of  the  clergy.^ 

When  the  sermon  was  done,  Reppington  entered  into  St.  Frides- 
wide's  church,  accompanied  by  many  of  his  fi-iends,  who,  as  the 
enemies  surmised,  were  privily  weaponed  under  their  garments,  if 
need  had  been.  Friar  Stokes,  the  Carmelite  aforesaid,  suspecting  all 
this  to  be  against  him,  and  being  afraid  of  hurt,  kept  himself  within  the 
sanctuary  of  the  church,  not  daring  then  to  put  out  his  head.  The  vice- 
chancellor  and  Reppington,  friendly  saluting  one  another  in  the 
chuich-porch,  sent  away  the  people,  and  so  departed  every  man  home 
to  his  own  house.     There  was  not  a  little  joy  throughout  the  whole 

(1)  In  the  first  Edition  of  Foxe,  p.  97,  the  notes  on  Reppington's  sermon  slightly  vary  from 
later  editions.  They  are  as  follow  :  "  First,  Whoso  doth  recommend  the  pope  or  bishops  above  the 
temporal  lords,  doeth  contrary  and  against  the  holy  Scripture.  Secondly,  That  Master  Wickliif  is 
a  true  catholic  doctor.  Thirdly,  That  WicklifF  never  determined  or  talked  otherwise,  as  touching 
the  matter  of  the  sacrament  of  the  altar,  than  according  to  the  mind  and  intent  of  the  whole 
universal  church  of  God.  Fourthly,  That  his  opinion  concerning  the  sacrament  of  the  altar  is 
most  true."  The  person  mentioned  in  the  notes  above,  was  John  of  Gaunt,  duke  of  Lancaster,  who 
was  an  influential  person  at  court,  and  exerted  his  influence  wittf  the  crown  in  behalf  of  Wickliff, 
and  who,  there  is  every  reason  to  believe,  had  imbibed  some  of  the  sentiments  of  that  bold  and 
pious  reformer. — Ed. 


42  THE  VICE-CHANCELLOR  CUAVETH  PAKDON. 

Richard  university  on  account  of  that  sermon ;  but,  in  the  mean  time,  the  un- 

^''      quiet  and  busy  Carmelite  slipt  not  his  matter.      For  first,  by  his 

A.D.    letters,  he  declared  the  whole  order  of  the  matter  unto  the  arch- 

^'^^'^-    bishop,  exaggerating  the  perils  and  dangers  that  he  was  in,  requiring 

The  uni-  jmJ  dcsiring  his  help  and  aid,  pretermitting  nothing  whereby  to  move 

r^oVceth.  and  stir  up  the  archbishop's  mind,  who  of  his  own  nature  was  as  hot 

i     as  a  toast,  as  they  say,  and  ready  enough  to  prosecute  the  matter  of 

his  own  accord,  though  no  man  had  prickt  him  forward  thereunto, 

Douring  oil  into  the  bui-ning  flame. 

**The  archbishop  hearing  this,  was  moved  and  angered,  and  call- 
ing together  the  whole  convocation,  commanded  Rigges,  the  commis- 
sary, and  the  proctors  John  Huntman  and  Walter  Dish,  to  be  sent  for, 
with  one  Master  Brightwell,  against  whom  he  would  attempt,  and  lay 
certain  suspicions,   or  rather  evidences,  to    convict  them  for  taking 
Wickliif ''s  part.  They  at  first  denied,  and  by  excusing  themselves  with 
lair  woixis  and  doubtful  sentences,  went  about  to  slip  their  heads 
/     out  of  the  collar.*     But  besides  all  this,  three  days  after,  with  a  fierce 
and    bold  courage,   the  said    fiiar,  breathing  out    threatenings  and 
heresies  against  them,  took  the  way  unto  the  schools,  minding  there 
Whether  to  provc,  that  the  pope  and  the  bishops  ought  to  be  prayed  for  before 
were°to  ^  tlic  lords  temporal.  Whilst  this  friar  was  thus  occupied  in  the  schools, 
be  prayed  hc  was  mocked  and  derided  by  all  men,  and  shortly  after  he  Avas  sent 
the  ^  °     for  by  the  archbishop  to  London  ;  whom,  immediately  after,  the  vice- 
Thefrfar  chanccllor  and  Brightwell  followed  up,  to  purge  and  clear  themselves 
derided    and  tlicir  adherents,  from  the  accusations  of  this  friar  Peter.     At 
schools,    length,  they  being  examined  upon  Wickliif 's  Conclusions  that  were 
condemned,  they  did  all  consent  tliat  they  were  worthily  condemned. 
The  vice-chancellor  being  afterwards  accused  for  the  contempt  of  the 
archbisliop"'s  letters,  when  he  perceived  and  saw  that  no  excuse  would 
prevail  to  avoid  that  danger,  humbling  himself  upon  his  knees,  he 
desired  pardon  ;  which  when  he  had  now  again  (as  is  aforesaid)  albeit 
very  hardly  obtained,  by  the  help  of  the  bishop  of  Winchester  he  was 
sent  away  again  with  certain  commandments,  and  suspension  of  he- 
retics ;  *  ^  that  90  soon  as  he  was  returned  home,  making  inquisition 
throughout  the  university,  he  should  put  to  silence  all  such  as  he 
found  to  be  the  favourers  of  WicklifF,  Hcrford,  Reppington,  Asliton, 
and  Bedman ;  and  that  he  should  also  publish,  at  the  head  church 
of  the  university,  all  WicklifF's  Conclusions  to  be  condemned,  and 
that  all  others,  whosoever  he  took  or  found  to  be  an  adherent  unto 
Wickliffs  sect  or  faction,  that  he  should  either  put  them  to  their 
purgation,  or  cause  them  to  abjure ;  unto  whom,  when  the  commis- 
sary answered  again,  that  he  durst  not  do  it  for  fear  of  death,  "What!" 
said   the  archbishop,    "  is   Oxford  such  a  nestler   and  favourer  of 
heresies,  that  the  catholic  truth  cannot  be  published  T 

Hereby  it  appeareth  (to  note  here  by  the  way  concerning  this  uni- 
versity) that  Oxford,^  among  all  other  schools  and  universities  that  I 
hear  of,  Avas  the  first  and  most  forward  in  setting  forth  and  main- 
taining the  truth  of  all  this  christian  religion  and  doctrine,  which 

(1)  See  Edition  15C3,  p.  97. --Ed.  (2)  Ibid. 

(3)  Foxe  presented  to  Magdalen  College  a  copy  of  his  Acts  and  Monuments,  with  an  epistle 
dedicatory  in  his  own  hand  ;  a  fac  simile  of  which  interesting  document,  with  the  author's  auto- 
{jraph,  will  be  found  in  the  first  volume  of  this  Edition.— Ed. 


lp:tti:ii  of  the  kixg  to  thp:  vick-chancellok.  43 

now,  through   tlic  operation  of  Christ,   is   spread   so    far  and  wide  R;ciuir,i 
abroad.       Wherefore,   as   this   university  of   Oxford    may    worthily      ^^' 
challenge  the  first  praise  hereof,  under  the  Lord,  amongst  all   other    A.  D. 
christian    schools,  so  is  it  to  be  wished  of  the  Lord,  that  the  said    ^'^^-- 
university  now  will  show  herself  no  less  fervent  and  studious  in  re- 
taining  or  defending  the  same,  which  she  so  fervently  set  forth  in 
the  beginning.* 

Then   began  the  hatred  on  either  part  somewhat  to  appear  and 
show ;  and   especially  men  were  offended,  above  all,  with  the  friars  I'irst 
and  religious   men,   unto  whom  whatsoever  trouble  or  mischief  was  of^lli" 
raised  up,  they  did  impute  it,  as  to  the  authors  and  causers  of  the  trouble. 
same.     *  And,^  in  my  mind,  not  without  cause,  for  what  trouble  or 
business  hath  there  ever  been,  where  men  of  religion  have  not  been 
the  ringleaders,  both  in  city,   town,  and  country  :   in  all   ])laccs  they 
creep,  in  all  matters   they  meddle.     And]  as  in  Christ"'s  time,  none 
were  more  against    him  than   they  who  professed  most  sanctimony, 
so  now  amongst  all  sorts  of  men,  none  were  more  against  true  reli- 
gion than  they  who  most  professed  religion  ;*  amongst  ■whom  there 
was  one  Henry  Crompe,   a  monk   Cistercian,  a  well  learned  divine,  Henry 
who  afterwards  was  accused  by  the  bishops  of  heresy.     He  at  that  a,^,°ac^* 
time  was  o])enly  suspected  by  the  commissary,  because  in  his  lee-  y^^g'j."^ 
tures   he  called  the   heretics  Lollards,  or  rather  in  liis  acts,  as  they  a/;cuse(i 
term  them,   in  the   school.     Then  he,  coming  by  and  by  up  to  Lon-  Jfheresy. 
don,   made  his  complaint  unto  the  archbishop,  and  to    the  king's 
council ;  whereupon  he  obtained  the  letters  of  the  king,  and  of  his 
council,  by  virtue  whereof,  he    returning  again  to    the  university, 
was  released  and  restored  to  his  former  state  ;   the  Avords  of  which 
letter  here  follow : 

Another  Letter  of  the  King  to  the  Vice-chancellor  and  Proctors 

of  Oxford. 

The  king  to  the  vice-chancellor  and  procurators  of  the  university  of  Oxford, 
greeting.     Whereas  we,  of  late,  understanding  by  the  grievous  complaint  of 
Henry  Crompe,  monk,  and  regent  in  divinity  within  the  said  luiiversit}',  how 
that  lie,  being  assisted  by  the  reverend  father  in  God  the  archbishop  of  Cantor- 
bury,  and  by  other  clerks  and  divines  in  the  city  of  London,  to  proceed  in  the 
condemnation  of  certain  conclusions  erroneous  and  heretical,  hath  been,  there- 
fore, molested  by  you,  and  that  you,  through  sinister  suggestion  of  some  adver- 
saries, pretending  the  peace  of  the  said  university  to  have  been  broken  by  the 
said  Henry  in  his  last  lecture,  did,  therefore,  call  him  before  you  to  appear  and  Henry 
answer ;  and  for  his  not  appearing,  did,  therefore,  pronounce  liim  obstmate,  and  ^p°"Y1ii 
convicted  of  peace-breaking,  and  have  also  suspended  the  said  Hemy  from  his  eth  to  the 
lectures  and  all  scholastical  acts :  and  whereas  we,  by  our  writ,  did  call  you  up  kinp's 
for  the  same,  to  ap])ear  and  answer  before  our  council  unto  the  premises ;  and  0°"","' 
all  things  being  well  tried  and  examined  by  the  said  council,  it  was  found  and  seeular 
determined,  that  all  your  process  against  tlie  said  Henry  was  void  and  of  none  "1^.*''"^. 
effect ;  and  commandment  given,  that  the  said  Henry  should  be  restored  and 
admitted  again  to  his  former  lectures  and  scholastical  acts,  and  to  his  pristine 
state  as  you  know.     To  the  intent,  therefore,  that  this  decree  aforesaid  should 
be  more  duly  executed  on  your  part,  we  here,  by  these  presents,  straitly  charge 
and  command  you,  that  you,  speedily  revoking  all  your  jirocess  against  the  said 
Henry  in  the  university  aforesaid,  with  all  others  that  followed  thereof,   do 
admit  and  cause  to  be  restored  the  said  Henry  to  his  scholastical  acts,  his 
accustomed  lectures,  and  pristine  estate,  without  any  delay,  according  to  the 
(1)  Sec  Edition,  1563,  r- 37— Ed- 


44  HEllFORD  AND  REPPINGTON  FLY  TO  THE  DUKE  OF  LAKCASTER. 

Richard  form  of  the  decree  and  determination  aforesaid :  enjoining  you,  moreover,  aod 

I^-       your  commissaries  or  deputies,  and  your  successors,  and  all  other  masters,  regent 

A   TA     and  non-regent,  and  other  presidents,  officers,  ministers  and  scholars  of  the 

J 009'    university  aforesaid,  upon  your  faith  and  the  allegiance  you  owe  to  us,  that  you 

^  do  not  impeach,  molest  or  grieve,  or  cause  to  be  grieved,  in  any  manner  of  way, 

Crompe,    privily  or  apertly,  the  said  friar  Henry  for  the  causes  premised,  or  friar  Peter 

and  Pack-  Stokes,  Carmelite,  for  the  occasion  of  his  absence  from  the  university,  or  friar 

ington,      Stephen  Packington,  Carmelite,  or  any  other  religious  or  secular  person  favour- 

trtheif     ^"o   them,  upon   occasion  of  any  word  or  deed  whatsoever,   concerning   the 

scholasti-  doctrine  of  John  Wickliff,  Nicholas  Herford,  and  Philip  Reppington,  or  the 

cal  acts,     reproof  and  condemnation  of  their  heresies  and  errors,  or  the  correction  of  their 

favourers;  but  that  you  do  procure  peace,  unity  and  quiet  within  the  said 

university,  and  chiefly  between  the  rehgious  and  secular  persons ;  and  that  you, 

with  all  thligence,  nourish,  increase,  and  preserve  the  same  to  the  uttermost  of 

your  strength.     And  that  you  in  no  case  omit  to  do  it  accordingly,  upon  the 

forfeitures  of  all  and  singular  the  liberties  and  privileges  of  the  university 

aforesaid. 

Witness  myself  at  Westminster,  the  fourteenth  day  of  July. 

Mention  was  made,  as  you  heard  a  little  before,  how  Master  Rigges, 
vice-chancellor  of  Oxford,  coming  up  with  Master  Brightwell  to  the 
archbishop  of  Canterbury,  Avas  there  straitly  examined  upon  the  con- 
clusions of  WicklifF,  where  he,  notwithstanding,  through  the  help  of 
the  bishop  of  Winchester,  obtained  pardon,  and  was  sent  away  again 
with  commandments  and  charges  to  seek  out  all  the  favourers  of  John 
Herford    WicklifF.   This  Commandment  being  received,  Nicholas  Herford,  and 
pington'   Philip  Reppington,  being  privily  warned  by  the  vice-chancellor,  in  the 
duke  of''  '^^an  season  conveyed  themselves  out  of  sight,  and  fled  to  the  duke  of 
Lancas-    Lancaster  for  succour  and  help ;  *  but,^  the  bishop's  orders  were  at 
hand  (as  it  were  serpents  lying  in  wait),  to  bite  Christ  by  the  heel ; 
unto  whom  the  duke  showed  himself  first  somewhat  sharp,*  but  after- 
wards, whether  for  fear,  or  for  what  cause  else  I  cannot  say,  over- 
come by  the  bishop's  adherents,  in  the  end  he  forsook  his  poor  and 
miserable  clients. 

In  the  mean  time,  while   they  were  thus  fled  to  the  duke,  great 

search  and  inquisition  was  made  for  them,  to  cite  and  to  apprehend 

them  wheresoever  they  might  be  found ;  whereupon  the  archbishop  of 

The  arch-  Canterbury,  William  Courtney,  directed  his  letters  first  to  the  vice- 

lette'rs  to  chanccllor  of  Oxford,  then  to  the  bishop  of  London,  named  Robert 

chancel-    Braybrokc,    charging   them   not    only  to    excommunicate  the    said 

lor  and    Nicholas  and  Philip  within  their  jurisdiction,    and  the  said  excom- 

Bray-       muuicatiou  to  be  denounced,  likewise,  throughout  all  the  diocese  of 

hisho^pof  ^lis  suffi-agans,  but  also,   moreover,  that  diligent  search   and  watch 

London,   should  be  laid  for  them,  both  in  Oxford  and  in  London,  that  they 

might  be  apprehended  ;  requiring,  moreover,  by  them  to  be  certified 

again,  what  they  had  done  in  the  premises.     And  this  was  written  the 

fourteenth  day  of  July,  a.  d.  1382.^ 

Unto  these  letters  received  from  the  archbishop  diligent  certificate 
was  given  accordingly,  as  well  on  the  bishop  of  London's  part,  as 
also  on  the  vice-chancellor's,  the  tenor  whereof  was  this  : 

(1)  Collated  with  Edition  1563,  p.  102.— Ed.  (2)  Ex  Regist.  W.  Courtney, 


A    LKTTK.n   0|-    ItOHKIlT   RIOGKS.  45 


A.D. 

1382. 


A  Letter  of  Robert  Riggcs,  Vict--clifinccllor  of  Oxford,  to  t!  • 
Archbishop. 

To  the  reverend  father  in  C'lirist  lord  William,  archbishop  of  Canterbur}', 
primate  of  all  England,  and  legate  of  the  apostolic  see,  Robert  Iligges,  professor 
of  divinity,  and  vice-chancellor  of  the  university  of  Oxford,  greeting  with  due 
honoiir.  Your  letters  bearing  the  date  of  the  fourteenth  of  July  I  have  received ; 
by  the  authority  whereof  I  have  denovuuxd,  and  caused  to  be  denounced 
effectually,  the  aforesaid  Nicholas  and  Philip  to  have  been,  and  to  be  excom- 
municated publicly  and  solemnly  in  the  church  of  St.  Mary,  and  in  the  schools, 
and  to  be  cited  also  personally,  if  by  any  means  they  might  be  apprehended, 
according  as  you  commanded.  But  after  diligent  search  laid  for  them  on  my 
part,  to  have  them  personally  cited  and  apprehended,  I  could  find  neither  the 
said  Master  Nicholas,  nor  Master  Philip,  who  have  hid  or  conveyed  themselves 
awiiy,  unknown  to  nie,  as  here  is  well  known  ;  whereof  I  tliought  here  to  give 
signification  to  your  fatherhood. — Sealed  and  testified  with  the  seal  of  mine 
office,  from  Oxford,  the  twenty-fifth  of  JiUy,  a.d.  1382. 

In  the  mean  time  Nicholas  Herford  and   Rcppington  being  re-  Herford 
pulsed  by  the  duke,  and  destitute,  as  was  said,  of  his  .sujjport,  whether  pfn'^gt^n' 
they  were   sent,  or  of  their  own  accord  went,  to  the  archbishop,  is  b^ule**^ 
uncertain.     This   I  find  in  a  letter  of  the  aforesaid  archbishop,  con-  duke, 
tained  in  his  register,  tliat  Rcppington,  the  twenty-third  of  October,  Repping- 
the  same  year   (a,  d.  1382),  was  reconciled  again  to  the  archbishop,  1""^^^" 
and  also  by  his   general  letter  was  released,  and  admitted  to  his  scho-  Ashton 
lastical  acts  in  the  university  ;  and  so  was  also  John  Ashton,  of  whom  ctie^d,  by 
(Christ  willing)  more  shall  follow  hereafter.     Of  Nicholas  Herford,  "Jsifjp.''" 
all  this  while,  T  find  no  special  relation. 

In  the  mean  time,   about  the  twenty-third  of  September  in   the 
said  year,  the  king  sent  his  mandate  to  the  archbishop  for  the  col- 
lecting of  a  subsidy,  and  to  have  a  convocation  of  the  clergy  sunnnoned  a  convo- 
against  the  next  parliament,  which   should  begin  the   eighteenth   ofsummon- 
November.     The   archbishop  likewise,  on  the  fifteenth  of  October,  ^''• 
(a.d.  1382),  directed   his  letters  monitory,    as  the  manner  is,   to 
Robert  Braybroke,  bishop   of  London,  to  give  the  same  admonition 
to  all  his  suffragans,  and  to  others  of  the  clergy  within  his  province, 
for   the  assembling  of  the  convocation    aforesaid.     All  which  done 
and  executed,  the  parliament   began,  being   holden    at  Oxford  the 
eighteenth  of  November,  where  the  convocation  was  kept  in  the  mo- 
nastery of  Frideswide,  in  Oxford.     In  that  convocation  the  archl)ishop  convoca- 
with  other  bishops  there  sitting  in  their  pontificalibus,  declared  two  Pridos-'  ' 
causes  of  that  their  present  assembly :   the  one,  said  he,  to  repress  ^jfj^rd" 
heresies,   which  began  newly  in    the  realm  to    spring   up,  and    for 
correcting  other  excesses  in  the  church  :  the   other  cau.se,  said  he, 
was  to  aid  and   sup|)ort  the  king  with   some   necessary   subsidy  of 
money  to  be   gathered,  which  thus  declared,   the    convocation   was 
continued    till    the  day  following,    which   was    the   nineteenth  of 
November. 

At  the  said  day  and  place,  the  archbishop  with  the  other  prelates  Novianu 
a.ssembling  themselves  as  before,  the  archbishop,  after  the  usual  so- 
lemnity, willed  the  procurators  of  the  clergy,  appointed  for  every 
diocese,  to  considt  among  themselves  in  some  convenient  private 
place,  what  they  thought  for  iheir  parts  touching  the  redress  of  things, 
to  be  notified  and  declared  to  him  and  to  his  brethren. 


46 


KEl'PINGTON    AND    ASIITOK  S    ABJURATION. 


Richnid        Furthermore,  forasmuch,  saith  he,  as  it  is  so  noised  throuqh  all 

'. —  the  realm,  that  there  were  certain  in  the  university  of  Oxford,  who 

A.  D.    (lid  liold  and  maintain  conclusions  (as  he  calleth  them)  heretical  and 
erroneous,  condemned  by  him,  and  by  other  lawyers  and  doctors  of 
divinity ;  he  therefore  assigned  the  bishops  of  Sarum,  Hereford,  and 
Rochester,  with  William  Ru'jo'e,  then  vice-chancellor  of  the  univer- 
RigKes     sity  of  Oxford    (for  perhaps   Robert  Rigges  was  then    displaced), 
from^tifJ  as  also  William  Berton,  and  John  Middleton,  doctors  ;  giving  them 
ehlncei-    ^^^^  ^^^^^  authority,  with  cursing  and  banning,  to  compel  them  to  search, 
lorship.     and  to  inquire  with  all  diligence  and  in  all  ways  possible,  over  all  and 
tionmade  singular  whatsoever,  either  doctors,  bachelors,  or  scholars  of  the  said 
atoxtord.  university,  who  did  hold,  teach,  maintain,  and  defend,  in  schools  or 
out  of  schools,  the  said  conclusions  heretical   (as  he  called  them)  or 
erroneous,  and  afterwards  to  give  certificate  truly  and  plainly  touching 
the  premises.     And  thus,  for  that  day,  the  assembly  broke  up  to  the 
next,  and  so  to  the  next,  and  the  third,  being  Monday,  the  twenty- 
fourth  of  November.* 

On  that  day,  in  the  presence  of  the  prelates  and  the  clergy  in  the 
chapter-house  of  St.  Frideswide,  came  in  Philip  Reppington,  other- 
wise called  by  the  brethren,  afterwards,  Rampington,  who  there 
abjured  the  conclusions  and  assertions  aforesaid  in  this  form  of  words 
as  foUoweth. 

Abjuration  of  Philip  Reppington. 

In  the  name  of  God,  Amen.  I  Philip  Reppington,  canon  of  the  house  of 
Leicester,  acknowledging  one  catholic  and  apostolic  faith,  do  cm'se  and  also 
abjure  all  heresy ;  namely  these  heresies  and  errors  under-written,  condemned 
and  reproved  by  the  decrees  canonical,  and  by  you  most  reverend  father, 
touching  which  hitherto  I  have  been  defamed;  condemning,  moreover,  and 
reproving  both  them  and  the  authors  of  them,  and  do  confess  the  same  to  be 
catholically  condemned.  And  I  swear,  also,  by  these  holy  evangelists  which 
here  I  hold  in  my  hand,  and  do  pi-omise,  never  by  any  persuasions  of  men,  nor 
by  any  way  hereafter,  to  defend  or  hold  as  true,  any  of  the  said  conclusions 
under-written ;  but  do  and  will  stand  and  adhere  in  all  things,  to  the  determi- 
nation of  the  holy  catholic  church,  and  to  yours,  in  this  behalf.  Over  and 
besides,  all  such  as  stand  contrary  to  this  faith,  I  do  pronounce  them,  with  their 
doctrine  and  followers,  worthy  of  everlasting  curse.  And  if  I  myself  shall 
presume  at  any  time  to  hold  or  preach  any  thing  contrary  to  the  premises,  I 
shall  be  content  to  abide  the  severity  of  the  canons. — Subscribed  with  mine 
own  hand,  and  of  mine  own  accord. 

Philip  Reppington. 

Philip  And  thus  the  said  '  Rampington'  was  discharged,  who  afterwards 

t^n''be-°   ^^^^  made  bishop  of  Lincoln,  and  became  at  length  the  most  bitter 
comes  a    and  extreme  persecutor  of  this  side,  of  all  the  other  bishops  within 

terrible  -  '^  -  -  '■ 


perse-      the  realm,  as  in  process  hereafter  may  appear. 


cutor. 


After  the  abjuration  of  this  Reppington,  immediately  was  brought 
tion  of     in  John  Ashton,  student  of  divinity ;  who,  being  examined  upon 


J.Ashton. 


those  conclusions,  and  willed  to  say  his  mind,  answered,  That  he 
was  too  simple  and  ignorant,  and  therefore  would  not,  and  could  not, 
answer  any  thing  clearly  or  distinctly  to  those  conclusions.  Where- 
upon the  archbishop  assigned  to  him  doctor  William  Rugge,  the 
vice-chancellor,  and  other  divines,  such  as  he  required  himself,  to  be 


(1)  Ex  Regist.  W.  Courtney. 


A    CRITEI.    LETTER    OK     AKCHBISHOI'    COUKTKEY.  1-7 

instructed  in  the  nivsterv  of  those  conchisions  iifj-ainst  tlic  afternoon  ;'  nirharA 

who,   then  appeiuing  a^oiin  after  tlinm-r  htfore  the  archbishop  and -* — 

the   prelates,  did  in  like  sort   ami   form   of  words  abjure,   as    did    '^■^^' 
Reppincfton  before.  -.'''". 

Of  this  John  Ashton  we  read,  that  afterwards,  by  Thomas  Anindcl, 
archbisiiop  of  Canterbury,  he  wa,s  cited  and  condemned  ;  but  whether 
he  died  in  jirison,  or  was  burned,  we  have  vet  no  certainty  to  show. 
This  is  certain,  bv  the  plain  words  of  the  Chronicle  of  St.  Alban's, 
that  when  the  archbishop,  with  his  dcjctors  and  triars,  sat  in  examina-  The  i,nn- 
tion  upon  this  John  Ashton,  in  London,  the  Londoners  broke  open  fo°rcrihe 
the  door  of  the  conclave,  "and  did  hinder  the  archbishop  himself  ^!]^J^g 
sitting  in  the  city  of  London,  when  lie  would  have  made   process  'he  ^^<^^- 
against  John   Ashton.""^    (a.d.   1o82.)     And    thus   much  of  John  sitting  ' 
Ashton. 

As  touching  Nicholas  Herford,  during  the  time  of  this  convocation 
he  did  not  appear ;   and,  therefore,  had  the  sentence  of  excommuni- 
cation, against  which  he  put  in  his  appeal  from  the  archbishop  to  the  ncrford. 
king  and  his  council.     The  archbishop  would  not  admit  it,  but  find-  uomlhe 
ing  stays  and  stops,  caused  him  to  be  apprehended  and  enclosed  in  b[sh,m, 
prison.     Notwithstanding,  through  the  will  of  God,  and  good  means,  ''"•" 

1  1  I-         ■  '^  •  1  •      <-  •  \  "".to 

he  escaped  out  ot  prison,  retummg  agam  to  his  tormer  exercise,  and  prison, 
preaching  as  he  did  before,  albeit  in  as  covert  and  secret  a  manner  es"capeth. 
as  he  could  ;  whereupon  the  archbishop,  thundering  out  his  bolts  of 
excominunication  against  him,  sendeth  to  all  pastors  and  ministers, 
willing  them  in  all  chiirchcs  and  on  all  festival  days,  to  divulge  the 
said  excommunication  against  him  to  all  men :  he  writeth,  moreover, 
and  sendeth  special  charge  to  all  and  singular  of  the  laity,  to -beware 
that  their  simplicity  be  not  deceived  by  his  doctrine,  but  that  they, 
like  catholic  children,  will  avoid  him,  and  cause  him  bv  all  others  to 
be  avoided- 

Furthennore,  not  contented  with  this,  he  addresseth  his  letter  unto 
the  king,  requiring  also  the  aid  of  his  temporal  sword  to  chop  off  his 
neck,  whom  he  had  already  cast  down.  See  and  note,  reader  !  the 
seraphicnl  charity  of  these  priestly  prelates  towards  the  poor  redeemed 
flock  of  Christ.  And  yet  these  be  they,  who,  washing  their  hands 
with  Pilate,  say  and  pretend,  "  Nobis  non  licet  interficere  quen- 
quam  :""  "  it  is  not  our  parts  to  kill  any  man."  The  copy  of  the 
letter  written  to  the  king  is  this  : — 

A  cruel  Letter  of  the  Archbishop  to  the  King,  against  Nicholas 

Ilerford. 

To  the  most  exconent  prince  in  Christ,  &'c.;  William,  &'c.,  preetinp  in  Him  by 
whom  kintjs  do  reijrn  and  princes  bear  rule.  I'nto  your  kingly  cilsitiide  bv  the 
tenor  of  these  presents  we  intimate,  that  one  Master  Nicholas  Herford,  doctor 
of  divinity,  for  his  manifest  contumacy  and  offence  in  not  appearing  before  us, 
being  called,  at  the  day  and  place  a.ssigned,  is  therefore  enwrapped  in  the  sen- 
tence of  the  greater  curse,  publicly  by  our  ordinary  aiuhority ;  and  in  the  same 
sentence  hath  continued  now  forty  days,  and  yet  still  continueth  with  obdurate 
heart,  wickedly  contemning  the  keys  of  the, church,  both  to  the  great  peril 
of  his  soul,  and  to  the  pernicious  example  of  others.     Fora.smuch,  therefore, 

(1)  A  nhort  time,  my  lord,  for  a  miii  in  one  lore  noon  to  Icam  a  faith  ai^ainst  his  conscience ! 

(2)  "  Ipnumqne  archiepisroimm  in  civitafe  sedentem  imiediverunt,  cum  procecsum  fecitsot 
contra  Johaiuiem  Aihtnn."  &c.     Kx  Chron.  Mona^t    Albani. 


48  WHAT    THE    KING    MIGHT    HAVE    ANSWERED. 

Richard   as  tlic  holy  mother  the   church   hath   not  to  do,  or  to  proceed,  any  further 

M-       in  this  matter,  we   humbly  desire   your   kingly  majesty  to    direct  out   yom- 

~.    yi      letters   for   the   apprehending  of  the    said   excommunicate,  according  to  the 

jgoo'     custom  of  this  realm  of  England,  wholesomely  observed  and  kept  hitherto; 

'     to  the  intent  that  such,  whom  the  fear  of  God  doth  not  restrain  from  evil,  the 

discipline  of  the  secular  arm  may  bridle  and  pluck  back  from  ofFending,i    Your 

princely  celsitude  the  Lord  long  continue. — From  Lambeth,  the  fifteenth  of 

January. 

To  this  letter  of  the  archbishop,  inight  not  the  king,  gentle  reader, 
thus  answer  again,  and  answer  well. 

Prosopo-       "  Your  letters  with  your  complaint  and  requests  in  the  same  con- 
what  the  tained,  we  have  received  and  well  considered  :  for  the  accomplishing 
mriiit      whereof  ye  shall  understand,  that  as  wc  are  readily  bent  to  gratify 
have        and  satisfy  your  mind  in  this  behalf  on  the  one  hand,  so  we  must  be- 
again.      ware  agam  on  the  other,  that  our  authority  be  not  abused,  either  to 
oppress  before  we  know,  or  to  judge  before  we  have  tried.     Where- 
fore, forasmuch  as  you,  in  your  letters,  do  excite  and  sharpen  the 
severe  discipline  of  our  secular  sword  against  one  Nicholas  Herfbrd,  for 
his  not  appearing  before  you,  and  yet  showing,  in  the  said  your  letters, 
no  certain  cause  to  us  what  you  have  to  charge  him  withal ;  we, 
therefore,  following  the  example  of  Alexander  the  Great,  or  rather  the 
rule  of  equity,  in  opening  both  our  ears  indifferently,  to  hear  as  well 
the  one  pan  as  the  other,  do  assign  both  to  him,  when  he  may  be 
found,  and  to  you,  when   ye  shall  be  called,  a  term  to  appear  before 
us  :  to  the  intent  that  the  controversy  between  you  and  him,  standing 
upon  points  of  religion,  being  tried  by  the  true  touchstone  of  God's 
holy  word,  due  correction  indifferently  may  be  ministered  according 
as  the  offence  shall  be  found.    In  the  mean  time,  this  we  cannot  but 
something  marvel  at  in  your  said  letters.     First,  to  see  you,  men  of 
the  church  and  angels  of  peace,  to  be  so  desirous  of  blood.    Secondly, 
to  consider  you  again  so  fierce  in  prosecuting  the  breach  of  your  law, 
and  yet  so  cold  in  pursuing  the  breach  of  the  express  law  of  God  and 
his  commandments.     Thirdly,  to  behold  the  unstable  doubleness  in 
your  proceedings,  who,  pretending  in  your  public  sentence  to  become 
entreaters,  for  them  to  us,  in  the  bowels  of  Jesus  Christ,  that  we  will 
withdraw  from  them  the  rigour  of  our  severity,  yet,  in  your  letters, 
you  be  they  who  most  set  us  on.     If  not  appearing  before  you  be 
such  a  matter  of  contumacy  in  case  of  your  law,  that  it  is  in  no  case 
to  be  spared,  what  should  then  our  princely  discipline  have  done  to 
brshlJ^sof  ^^^^^^  ^^  y^^  calling  ?     Henry  Spencer,  bishop  of  Norwich,  being  at 
Canter-    Canterbmy,  was  sent  for  by  oiu:  special  commandment,  to  come  at 
appeared  our  Call,  who  dcuicd  to  comc,  and  yet  we  spared  him.     John  Strat- 
"hJir^^"'^^  ford,  archbishop,  your  predecessor,  being  required  of  our  progenitor 
''It  wfre*^  king  Edward  III.,  to  come  to  him  at  York,  Avould  not  appear ;  by 
they  not    rcason  whereof  Scotland  at  the  same  time  was  lost,  and  yet  was  he 
cuted.      endured.    The  like  might  be  said  of  Robert  Winchelsey,  in  the  days 
of  king  Edward  I.,  and  of  Edmund,  archbishop  of  Canterbmy,  in 
the  days  of  king  Henry  III.    Stephen  Langton  was  sent  for  by  king 
John  to  come  ;  he  came  not.     The  like  contumacy  was  in  Becket 

(1)  This  is  not  to  seek  that  Which  is  lost,  by  the  rule  of  Ezekiel  (chap,  xxxiv.  4,) ;  "  The  diseased 
have  ye  not  strengthened,  neither  have  ye  healed  that  which  was  sick,  neither  liave  ye  bound  up 
that  which  was  broken,  neither  have  ye  brought  again  that  which  was  driven  away,  neither  have 
ye  sought  that  which  was  lost ;  but  with  force  and  with  cruelty  liave  ye  ruled  them." 


l.ETTKR    ()!••    WW  KI.IKK    TO    POPL    TUHAN.  49 

toward  king  Henry  II.     Also   in  Anselni,  toward  king  Henry  I.  Richard 

All  these,  for  tlieir  not  appearing  before  their  prinecs,  ye  do  excuse,  \ — 

who,  notwithstanding,  might  have  appeared  without  danger  of  life:  A.  U. 
this  one  man,  for  not  appearing  before  you,  you  think  worthy  of  _lii!l. 
death,  whose  life  you  would  have  condemned  notwithstanding,  if  he 
had  aj)peared.  If  the  scpiirrel,  climbing  the  tree  from  the  lion's 
claws,  would  not  appear,  being  sent  for,  to  be  devoured — it  is  no 
reason  that  the  eagle  therefore  should  seize  upon  him  without  any 
just  cause  declared  against  the  party.  Wherefore,  according  to  this 
and  to  that  aforesaid,  when  he  shall  appear,  and  V(ju  be  called,  and 
the  cause  justly  weighed,  due  execution  shall  be  administered." 

And  thus  far  concerning  Xicli(»las  Herford,  and  the  other  aforesaid. 
But  in  all  this  interval,  what  became  of  John  Wicklift"  is  not  cer- 
tainly knowTi ;  albeit,  so  far  as  may  be  gathered  out  of  Walden,  it  ap- 
peareth  that  he  was  banished  and  driven  to  exile.  In  the  mean  time, 
it  is  not  to  be  doubted,  but  he  was  alive  during  all  this  while,  where- 
soever he  was,  as  by  his  letter  may  appear,  which  he,  about  this  time, 
wrote  to  pope  Urban  VI.  In  that  letter  he  doth  purge  himself,  that 
being  commanded  to  aj)pcar  before  the  pope  at  Rome,  he  came 
not ;  declaring  also  in  the  same  a  brief  confession  of  his  faith :  the 
copy  of  which  epistle  here  followeth. 

An  Epistle  of  John  Wickliff  to  Pope  Urban  VI.,  a.d.  1382. 

Verily  I  do  rejoice  to  open  and  declare  nnto  everj'  man  the  faith  which  I  do 
hold ;  and  especially  unto  the  bishop  of  Rome :  which,  forasmuch  as  I  do  sup- 
pose to  be  sound  and  true,  he  will  most  willingly  confirm  my  said  faith,  or,  if  it 
DC  erroneous,  amend  the  same. 

First,  I  suj)pose  that  the  gospel  of  Christ  is  the  whole  body  of  God's  law ;  and 
that  Christ,  who  did  give  that  same  law  himself,  I  believe  to  be  very  God  and 
verj'  man,'  and  in  that  j)oint,  to  exceed  the  law  of  the  gospel,  and  all  other 
parts  of  the  Scripture.  Again,  I  do  give  and  hold  the  bishop  of  Rome,  foras- 
much as  he  is  the  vicar  of  Christ  here  on  earth,  to  be  most  bound,  of  all  other 
men,  unto  that  law  of  the  gospel.  For  the  greatness  among  Christ's  disciples 
did  not  consist  in  worldly  dignity  or  honours,  but  in  the  near  and  exact  follow- 
ing of  Christ  in  his  life  and  manners  :  whereupon  I  do  gather  out  of  the  heart 
of  the  law  of  the  Lord,  that  Christ,  for  the  time  of  his  ])ilgrimage  here,  was  a 
most  poor  man,  abjecting  and  casting  off  all  worldly  rule  and  honour,  as 
appeareth  by  the  gospel  of  St.  Matthew,  chap,  viii.,  and  the  second  epistle  of 
the  Corinthians,  chap.  viii. 

Hereby  I   do  fully  gather,  that  no  faithful  man  ought  to  follow,  either  the  True  dis- 
pope  himself  or  any  of  the  holy  men,  but  in  such  points  as  be  hath  followed  the  "P'p*  °^ 
Lord  Jesus  Christ ;   for   Peter  and  the  sons  of  Zebedee,  by  desiring  worldly  geek  not 
honour,  contrarj*  to  the  following  of  Christ's  steps,  did  offend,  and  therefore  in  worldly 
those  errors  they  are  not  to  be  followed.  honour. 

Hereof  I  do  gather,  as  a  coimsel,  that  the  pope  ought  to  leave  unto  the 
secular  power  all  temporal  dominion  and  rule,  and  thereunto  effectu.illy  to  move 
and  exhort  his  whole  clergy ;  for  so  did  Christ,  and  especially  by  his  apostles. 
Wherefore,  if  I  have  erred  in  any  of  these  points,  I  will  most  humbly  submit 
myself  unto  correction,  even  by  death,  if  necessity  so  require;  and  if  I  could 
labour  according  to  my  will  or  desire  in  mine  own  person,  I  would  surely 
present  myself  before  the  bishop  of  Rome ;  but  the  Lord  hath  otherwise  visited 

(I)  "I  believe  to  be  verj-  God,"  tie.  The  English  editions  have,  "  I  believe  to  be  a  verj-  man." 
This  letter,  Riven  in  the  I.afin  edition,  p.  16,  and  bearing  date  "  Anno  \?,M,"  proceeds  thus  : — 
"  Christum  autem,  qui  evangelium  illud  immediate  dcdtrat,  rrerto  esse  venim  Deum,  et  vcrum 
homincm."  In  Lewis's  history-,  p.  284.  as  also  in  a  MS.  in  the  Uodlcian  Library,  it  is  also  cor 
rectly  (fiven :  "  I  believe  that  Jesu  Christ,  that  gaf  in  his  own  persoun  this  gospel,  is  very  God 
and  very  man,  and  te  this  it  passes  all  other  laws." — Ed. 

VOL.  III.  E 


oO  WAR    I5F.TWEKN    POPE    URBAN    AND    I'OPK    CLEMEKT, 

Richard   me  to  the  contraiy,  and  hath  taught  me  rather  to  obey  God  than  men.     Foras- 

^^-       much  tlien  as  God  hath  given  imto  om-  pope  just  and  true  evangelical  instincts, 

A.  D     ^^  ought  to  pray  that  those  instincts  be  not  extinguished  by  any  subtle  or  crafty 

13S2.    'If'^'ice,  and  that  the  pope  and  cai'dinals  be  not  moved  to  do  any  thing  contrary 

unto  the  law  of  the  Lord. 

Wherefore,  let  us  pray  unto  our  God,  that  he  vnW  so  stir  up  our  pope 
Urban  VI.,  as  he  began,  that  he  with  his  clergy  may  follow  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  in  life  and  manners ;  and  that  they  may  teach  the  people  effectually,  and 
that  they,  likewise,  may  faithfully  follow  them  in  the  same.  And  let  us  spe- 
cially pray,  that  our  pope  may  be  presei'ved  from  all  malign  and  evil  counsel, 
which  we  do  know  that  evil  and  envious  men  of  his  household  would  give  him. 
And  seeing  the  Lord  will  not  suffer  us  to  be  tempted  above  our  power,  much 
less  then  will  he  require  of  any  creature  to  do  that  thing  which  it  is  not  able ; 
forasmuch  as  that  is  the  plain  condition  and  manner  of  Antichrist. 

The  pope  Tlius  mucli  wrotc  John  WicklifF  to  pope  Urban,  Bnt  this  Ur- 
p'ieTin  banus,  otherwise  termed  '  Turbanns,'  was  so  hot  in  his  Avars  against 
sciiisma-  Clement  the  French  pope,  his  adversary,  that  he  had  no  leisure,  and 

tics'!  wsrs  1     i.     '  J  ■  ' 

that  he  '  less  list,  to  attend  to  Wichliff's  matters  ;  by  reason  of  which  schism, 
lefsure"    God  SO  provided  for  poor  WiclclifF,  that  he  was  in  some  more  rest 
inat°terr  ^"^^  quictncss.     Concerning  these  schismatical  wars  of  the  popes,  for- 
asmuch as  we  have  here  entered  upon  the  mention  thereof,  it  shall 
not  be  impertinent  from  the  order  of  our  story,  digressing  a  little 
from  the  matter  of  John  WicklifF,  to  say  something  of  the  tragical 
doings  of  these  two  holy  popes,  striving  for  the  triple  crown ;  to  the 
intent  that  the  christian  reader,  judging  by  their  fruits  and  proceed- 
Kiffer-      ings,  may  see  and  understand  what  difference  there  is  between  these 
tweentiie  popcs,  and  Clirist  and  his  apostles.     For  though  in  the  story  of  the 
amuhe    gospel  it  is  read,  that  certain  of  the  disciples  did  strive  which  should 
popes,  in  bc  the  greater  ;   yet  neither  do  we  read  that  one  of  them  ever  took 
for  pre^    wcapou  against  the  other ;  and  moreover,  in  the  said  story  of  the 
nence.      gospcl  it  doth  appear,  that  they,  for  so  striving  as  they  did,  were 
shai-ply  rebuked  by   our  Saviour  Christ,  and  were  taught  by  him 
another  lesson. 
A-d.-iss.      About  the  beginning  of  the  year  following,  which  was  a.d.  1383, 
JeTor^^'  P^P^  Urban  setting  all  his  study  how  to  repress  and  conquer  the 
war.        contrary  pope,  his  adversary,  being  then  at  Avignon,  seeing  all  his 
other  means  to  fail,  and  that  his  cross  keys  could  do  no  good,  took  to 
him  the  sword  of  Romulus,  and  set  upon  him  with  open  war.     And 
first  devising  with  himself  whom  he  might  best  choose  for  his  chief 
champion,  he  thought  none  meeter  for  such  affairs  than  Henry  Spencer, 
being  then  bishop  of  Norwich,  a  young  and  stout  prelate,  more  fitting 
for  the  camping  cm'e,  than  for  the  peaceable  church  of  Christ,  as 
partly  also  might  appear  before  by  his  acts  done  at  Lennam,  in 
striving  for  the  mayor"'s  mace,  mentioned  before.     Unto  this  bishop 
of  Norwich  the  pope  had  sent  his  bulls  about  this  time,  to  croisy 
whosoever  would  go  with  him  into  France,  to  destroy  the  antipope, 
who  named  himself  Clement,  and  to  make  war  against  all  those  that 
took  his  part.     These  bulls,  for  that  they  gave  to  him  such  gi-cat 
authority,  he  caused  to  be  published  in  the  parliament  house,  and 
caused  copies  of  the  same  to  be  sent  all  about,  and  to  be  set  up  and 
fastened  upon  all  the  church  doors  and  monastery  gates,  that  all  men 
might  read  them ;  in  which  bulls  these  privileges  were  granted,  the 
copy  whereof  here  followeth. 


THE    I'ltlVlLKGF.S    OF    THE    POPES    BULL.  51 

Pope  Urban's  Bull  to  destroy  Clement  the  Antipope.  //. 

Imprimis,  That  the  said  hishop  of  Norwich  may  use  his  sword  against  the  A.  D. 
antij)()pe,  and  ail  iiis  adherents,  favovirers,  and  counsellors,  and  with  violence  1383. 
put  tlieni  to  death.  ZT 

2.  Item,  That  ho  hatli  full  power  to  inquire  of  all  and  singular  such  schisma-  fruits  of 
tics,  and  to  put  them  in  prison,  and  to  confiscate  all  their  tfoods,  moveahlu  and  '^'"'" 
immoveahle.  '^""'*'- 

3.  Item,  That  he  hath  power  and  authority  to  deprive  all  laymen  that  are 
such  schismatics,  of  all  manner  of  secular  ottices  whatsoever,  and  to  give  their 
'jffices  to  other  lit  ;uul  convenient  persons. 

4.  Item,  That  he  may  deprive  all  such  clerks,  and  declare  them  to  be  schis- 
matics, and,  in  this  behalf,  to  give  and  bestow  their  benefices,  either  with  cure 
or  without  cure,  their  dignities,  parsonages,  or  offices,  to  other  persons  more 
meet  for  the  same 

5.  Item,  He  hath  power  and  authority  over  lay  persons  that  are  exempt, 
and  clerks  both  secular  and  rcgvilar,  yea  although  they  be  friars  mendicant,  or 
masters  and  professors  of  other  houses  or  hospitals  of  St.  John  of  Jerusalem,  or 
St.  Mary  of  Flanders,  or  ])rofessors  of  all  other  orders  whatsoever. 

6.  Item,  He  hath  power  to  dispense  with  wliat  secular  clerk  soever,  being 
beneficed  either  with  cure  or  without  cure,  and  also  with  such  as  have  dignities, 
parsonages,  or  offices,  being  regulars  either  exempt  or  not  exempt,  that  every 
one  of  them  may  be  absent  with  him  from  their  dignities  and  benefices,  &c. 
tmder  the  standard  of  the  cross,  without  license  of  any  of  their  prelates  being 
required,  and  yet  to  receive  and  take  the  entire  commodities  of  their  benefices, 
as  though  they  had  been  personally  resident  upon  the  same. 

7.  Item,  There  is  granted  to  all  that  pass  the  seas  in  this  quarrel,  either  at 
their  own  expense,  or  at  the  expense  of  any  others,  full  remission  of  their  sins; 
and  as  large  privileges  are  granted  to  all  those  that  go  over  the  sea  with  him, 
as  to  any  that  pay  their  money,  or  go  to  fight  for  the  Holy  Land. 

8.  Also  all  such  as,  with  their  proper  goods  and  substance,  shall  give  sufficient 
stipend  to  able  soldiers,  at  the  discretion  of  the  aforesaid  lord  bishop  mustered, 
or  by  any  other  his  deputy,  although  he  himself  be  not  personally  at  this  busi- 
ness aforesaid  ;  yet  shall  he  have  like  remission  and  indulgence,  as  they  who 
have  been  personally  with  him  in  this  expedition. 

9.  Item,  All  they  are  partakers  of  this  remission,  who  shall  give  any  part  of 
their  goods  to  the  said  bishop  to  fight  against  the  said  schismatics. 

10.  Item,  if  any  shall  chance  to  die  in  the  journey  who  are  soldiers  under 
the  said  standard  of  the  cross,  or  else  before  the  quan-el  by  some  means  be 
finished,  they  shall  fully  and  wholly  receive  the  said  grace,  and  shall  be  par- 
takers of  the  aforesaid  remission  and  indulgence. 

11.  Item,  He  hath  power  to  excommunicate,  suspend,  and  interdict,  what 
persons  soever  be  rebellious  or  disturbers  of  him  in  the  execution  of  his  power 
and  authority  committed  unto  him,  of  what  dignity,  state,  degree,  pre-eminence, 
order,  place,  or  condition  soever  they  shall  be :  whether  they  shall  be  either  of 
regal,  queenly,  or  imperial  dignity,  or  of  what  dignity  else  soever,  either  eccle- 
siastical or  nnmdane. 

12.  Item,  He  hath  power  and  authority  to  compel  and  enforce  all  religious 
persons  whatsoever,  and  to  appoint  them,  and  sencl  them  over  sea,  if  it  seem 
good  to  him ;  yea,  although  they  be  professors  of  the  friars  mendicant,  for  the 
execution  of  the  premises. 

Form  of  the  Pope"'s  Absolution  pronoiineed  by  the  Bishop. 

By  the  authority  apostolical  to  me  in  this  behalf  committed,  we  absolve  thee 
A.  B.  from  all  thy  sins  confessed  with  thy  mouth,  and  being  contiite  with  thy 
heart,  and  whereof  thou  wouldst  be  confessed  if  they  came  into  thy  memory; 
and  we  grant  unto  thee  plenary  remission  of  all  manner  of  sins,  and  we  promise 
unto  thee  thy  part  of  the  reward  of  all  just  men,  and  of  everlasting  salvation. 
And  as  many  privileges  as  are  granted  to  them  that  go  to  fight  for  the  Holy  Christ's 
Land,  we  grant  unto  thee ;  and  of  all  the  prayers  and  benefits  of  the  church,  ^^"f^?" 
the  universal  synod,  as  also  of  the  holy  catholic  churcli,  wc  make  thee  par-  ^^  pi^ce. 
takers. 

k2 


0%  TI£K    lilSHOl'    OF    XOKWICH,    TllK    HOPK  S    WARRIOR. 

Richard       Tliis  couragcous  ov  rather  outrageous  bishop,  armed  thus  with  the 

!__  pope"'s  authority,  and  prompt  with  his  privileges,  in  the  year  aforesaid 

A.  D.  (a.d.  1883),  about  the  time  of  Lent,  came  to  the  parliament,  where 
^^^^'  great  consultation  and  contention,  and  almost  no  less  schism,  was, 
about  the  voyage  of  this  popish  bishop  in  the  parliament,  than  was 
between  the  popes  themselves ;  in  which  parliament  many  there 
were,  who  thought  it  not  safe  to  commit  the  king's  people  and 
subjects  to  a  rude  and  unskilful  priest.  So  great  was  the  diversity  of 
judgments  in  that  behalf  that  the  bishop"'s  voyage  was  protracted  to 
the  Saturday  before  Passion  Sunday.  On  that  Sunday  was  sung  the 
solemn  anthem,  "  Ecce  crucem  Domini,  fugite  partes  adversse ;""  that 
is,  "  Behold  the  cross  of  the  Lord,  fly  away  all  you  adversaries." 
After  that  Sunday  the  parties  so  agreed  amongst  themselves  by 
common  decree,  that  the  bishop  should  set  forward  on  his  voyage, 
having  given  to  him  the  fifteenth,  which  was  gi-anted  to  the  king  in 
the  parliament  before.  These  things  thus  concluded,  this  warlike 
bishop  preparing  beforehand  all  things  in  readiness,  set  forward  on 
his  pope-holy  journey ;  who,  about  the  month  of  May,  came  to 
Canterbury,  and  there,  tarrying  for  a  wind  in  the  monastery  of 
St.  Augustine,  received  a  writ  from  the  king  that  he  should  return  to 
him,  to  know  further  of  his  pleasure.  The  bishop  fearing,  that  if  he 
turned  again  to  the  king,  his  journey  should  be  staid,  and  so  all  his 
labour  and  preparation  lost,  with  great  derision  and  shame  unto  him, 
thought  better  to  commit  himself  to  fortune  with  that  little  army  he 
had,  than,  by  tarrying,  to  be  made  a  laughing  stock  to  his  adversaries. 
Wherefore  he  sent  word  back  again  to  the  king,  that  he  was  now 
ready  prepared,  and  well  forward  on  his  journey ;  and  that  it  was  not 
expedient  now  to  protract  the  time  for  any  kind  of  talk,  which,  per- 
ad venture,  should  be  to  no  manner  of  purpose ;  and  that  it  was  more 
convenient  for  him  to  hasten  in  his  journey  to  God's  glory,  and  also 
to  the  honour  of  the  king.  And  thus  he,  calling  his  men  unto  him, 
entered  forthwith  upon  the  seas,  and  went  to  Calais,  where  he,  waiting 
a  few  days  for  the  rest  of  his  army,  on  its  arrival,  took  his  journey 
first  to  the  town  of  Gravelines,  which  he  besieged  so  desperately, 
without  any  preparing  of  engines  of  war,  or  counsel  of  politic  men 
skilful  in  such  affairs,  that  he  seemed  rather  to  fly  upon  them,  than 
to  invade  them.  At  length,  through  the  superstition  of  our  men 
trusting  to  the  pope's  absolution,  he  so  harshly  approached  the  walls 
and  invaded  the  enemies,  that  a  great  number  of  them  were  piteously 
slain  with  shot  and  wild-fire ;  till,  in  the  end,  the  inhabitants  being 
oppressed  and  vanquished,  our  men  entered  the  town  with  their 
ness°of*'  bishop,  whcrc  they,  at  his  commandment,  destroying  both  man, 
Anti-_  woman,  and  child,  left  not  one  alive  of  all  those  who  remained  in  the 
whole  town,  "  And  so  it  came  to  pass  by  the  virtue  of  the  cross, 
that  the  enemies  of  the  cross  were  so  utterly  destroyed,  that  not  one 
of  them  remained  alive."' 

From  Gravelines  this  warlike  bishop  set  forward  to  Dunkirk, 
where,  not  long  after,  the  Frenchmen  meeting  with  him,  joined  with 
him  in  battle ;  in  which  battle,  if  the  story  be  true,  twelve  thousand 
of  the  Frenchmen  were  slain  in  the  chase,  and  of  our  men  only  seven 

(1)  "  Sicque  crucis  beneficio  factum,  ut  crucis  hostes  ita  delerentur,  quod  unua  ex  eis  non 
reraanait."— Ex  Chron.  Mon.  D.  Albanl.  in  Vita  Ric.  II. 


Christ! 


WICKI.IU'S    DEATH HIS    BOOKS    BURNED.  5S 

■were  missing.     It  would  req"uire  a  long  narration  here  to  discourse  of  Richard 

all  things  done  in  these  popish  wars ;  also  it  would  be  no  less  ridicu- L_ 

lous  to  view  and  behold  the  glorious  temerity  of  this  new  upstart  A.U. 
captain.  But  certes,  lamentable  it  is  to  see  the  pitiful  slaughter  and  1^83 
murder  of  Clu-ist's  people  by  means  of  these  pitiless  popes,  during 
these  wars  in  France ;  as  when  the  bishop  coming  from  Dunkirk  to 
the  siege  of  Ypres,  a  great  number  of  Englishmen  there  were  lost, 
and  much  money  consumed,  and  yet  nothing  done  effectually,  to  the 
great  shame  and  ignominy  of  the  bishop.  Again,  after  the  siege  of 
Ypres,  thus  with  shame  broken  up,  the  same  bishop  proceeding  with 
a  small  power  to  fight  with  the  French  king's  camp,  contrary  to  the 
counsel  of  his  captains,  who  counted  him  rash  and  unskilful  in  his 
attempt,  was  fain  to  break  company  with  them ;  whereby  part  of  the 
army  went  unto  Burburgh,  and  the  bishop  with  the  other  part 
returned  to  Gravelines ;  both  wliich  towns  shortly  after  Avere  besieged 
by  the  French  army,  to  the  great  loss  both  of  the  English  and 
French.  In  fine,  when  the  bishop  could  keep  Gravelines  no  longer, 
the  said  bishop  with  his  croysies,  crossing  the  seas,  came  home  again 
as  wise  as  he  went.  And  thus,  making  an  end  of  this  pontifical  war, 
we  will  return  again  from  whence  we  digressed,  to  the  story  and 
matter  of  John  WicklifF. 

This  John  WicklifF  returning  again  within  short  space,  either  from  a.d.i384. 
his  banishment,  or  from  some  other  place  where  he  Avas  secretly  kept, 
repaired  to  his  parish   of  Lutterworth,  where  he  Avas  parson ;  and 
there,  quietly  departing  this  mortal  life,  slept  in  peace  in  the  Lord, 
in  the  beginning  of  the  year  1384,  upon  Silvester's  day.^ 

Here  is  to  be  noted  the  great  providence  of  the  Lord  in  this  man, 
as  in  divers  others,  Avhom  the  Lord  so  long  preserved  in  such  rages 
of  so  many  enemies  from  all  their  hands,  even  to  his  old  age.  For 
so  it  appeareth  by  Thomas  Walden,  Avriting  aminst  him  in  his  tomes 
entitled  "  De  Sacramcntis,  contra  Wiclevium, '  that  he  Avas  well  aged 
before  he  departed,  by  that  Avhich  the  aforesaid  Walden  Avriteth  of 
him  in  his  epilogue,  spealiing  of  WicklifF  in  these  Avords  ;  ^  "so  that 
the  same  thing  pleased  him  in  his  old  age,  Avhich  did  please  him 
being  young."  Whereby  it  seemeth  that  WicklifF  lived  till  he  Avas 
an  old  man  by  this  report.  Such  a  Lord  is  God,  that  whom  he  vdll 
have  kept,  nothing  can  hurt. 

This  WicklifF  had  Avritten  divers  and  sundry  works,  which  were 

(1)  There  is  a  small  tract  freely  circulated  amon^  the  papists  in  Ireland,  en  itled  "  A  sure  way 
to  find  out  the  true  religion."  Dublin,  sixth  edition,  1833.  The  writer,  following  the  steps  of 
Alanus  Copus,  and  others,  attacks  our  author  by  a  reference  to  his  calendar  of  martyrs.  Of  this 
calendar  Foxe  thus  speaks  in  the  fourth  edition,  page  583,  col.  1  :  "  In  my  book  of  Acts  and  Monu- 
ments entreating  of  matters  passed  in  the  church  these  latter  five  hundred  years,  I  did  regulate 
out  a  calendar;  not  for  any  canon  to  constitute  saints,  but  only  for  a  table  of  them,  who  within 
the  same  time  did  surter  for  the  testimony  of  the  word,  whom  I  did,  and  do,  take  to  be  good  and 
godly  men."  And  again,  in  the  same  page,  col.  2,  speaking  of  Sir  John  Oldcastle  and  others,  he 
says,  "  But  this  peradventure  inoveth  your  cholor,  that  in  the  calendar  I  named  them  lor  martjTs. 
And  why  may  not  I,  in  my  calendar,  call  them  by  the  name  of  martyrs,  who  were  faithful  witnesses 
of  Christ's  truth  and  testament,  for  which  they  were  also  chiefly  brought  unto  that  end.'"  The 
use  of  this  term  martyr,  in  cases  of  suffering  short  of  death,  is  allowable  by  the  authority  of 
Dr.  Johnson,  who  thus  quotes  from  South  :  "  To  be  a  martyr,  signifies  only  to  witness  the  truth  of 
Christ;  but  the  witnessing  of  the  truth  was  tlii-n  so  generally  attended  with  persecution,  that 
martyrdom  vow  signifies  not  only  to  '-vitness,  but  to  witness  by  death."  Notwithstanding  Foxe's 
explanation  of  his  meaning  of  this  word  martyr,  we  read  in  the  tract  above  referred  to,  at  page  CI, 
"  John  AA'ickliffe,  martyr;  this  is  another  of  Foxe's  lies,  for  AVickliffe  was  never  put  to  death,  nor 
yet  so  much  as  imprisoned  for  his  heresy,  but  died  in  his  bed  at  Lutterworth,  in  Leicestershire." 
Let  the  reader  compare  this  Jesuitical  insinuation  of  an  untruth  on  the  part  of  Foxe,  with  the  above 
detailed  account  of  Wickliff's  death,  "  quietly  departing,"  and  .sleeping  -'in  peace  in  the  Lord," 
and  a  more  deliberate  deception  on  the  part  of  his  adversary  can  hardly  be  conceived. — Ed. 

(2)  "  Ita  ut  cano  placeret,  quod  juveni  complacebat,"  &c. — Waldanus  2.  tomo  de  Sacramentis. 
contra  Wiclevium. 


54  WICKLIPf's    ANSWKR    unto    king    RICHARD, 

Richard  biirnt  lit  Oxford  a.d.  1410,  the  abbot  of  Shrewsbury  being  then 

"'      commissary,   and  sent  to  oversee  tliat  matter.^     And  not  only  in 

A.  D     England,  "but  in  Bohemia  likewise,  the  books  of  the  said  Wickliff 

^'^^'^-    were  set  on  fire  by  one  Subincus,  archbishop  of  Prague,  who  made 

The         diligent  inquisition  for  the  same,  and  burned  them.     The  volumes 

wkkiiirs  which  he  is  said  to  have  burned,  most  excellently  written,  and  richly 

^"''^^'      adorned  with  bosses  of  gold,  and  rich  coverings  (as  Eneas  Silvius 

writeth),  were  about  the  number  of  two  hundred. 

*I  would  to  God,  that  our  destinies  had  not  so  much  envied  us,  as 
to  have  deprived  us  of  the  felicity  and  commodity  of  so  great  a 
treasure.  Albeit,  in  this  behalf,  John  Bale  hath  deserved  not  a  little 
praise,  through  whose  exquisite  labour  and  diligence  it  is  brought  to 
pass,  that  not  only  certain  titles  and  arguments  of  his  books,  but  also 
certain  monuments,^  as  I  do  hear,  are  recovered  out  of  darkness ;  a 
man  who,  not  in  this  respect  alone,  hath  well  deserved,  of  good 
students.*^ 

Johannes  Cocleus,  in  his  book  '  De  historia  Hussitarmii,'  speaking 
of  the  books  of  Wickliff,  testifieth,  that  he  wrote  very  many  books, 
sermons,  and  tractations.  Moreover,  the  said  Cocleus,  speaking  of 
himself,  recordeth  also,  that  there  was  a  certain  bishop  in  England, 
who  wrote  to  him,  declaring,  that  he  had  yet  remaining  in  his  custody 
two  huge  and  mighty  volumes  of  John  Wickliffs  works,  which,  for 
the  quantity  thereof,  might  seem  to  be  equal  to  the  works  of  St. 
Augustine. 

Among  other  of  his  treatises,  I  myself  also  have  found  out  certain, 
as  '  De  sensa  et  veritate  Scripturse ;''  '  De  Ecclesia  f  '  De  Eucha- 
ristia  confessio  Wicklevi,'  which  I  intend  hereafter,  the  Lord  so 
granting,  to  publish  abroad. 

As  concerning  certain  answers  of  John  Wickliff  which  he  wrote  to 
king  Richard  II.,  touching  the  right  and  title  of  the  king  and  of  the 
pope,  because  they  are  but  short,  I  thought  here  to  annex  them. 
The  effect  whereof  here  followeth  : — 

The  Substance  of  John  Wickliff's  Answer  to  King  Richard  II., 
touching  the  Right  and  Title  of  the  King  and  the  Pope. 

It  was  demanded  "  whetlier  the  kingdom  of  England  may  lawfully  in  case  of 
necessity,  for  its  own  defence,  detain  and  keep  back  the  treasure  of  the  kingdom, 
that  it  be  not  carried  away  to  foreign  and  strange  nations,  tiie  pope  himself 
demanding  and  requiring  the  same,  under  pain  of  censure,  and  by  virtue  of 
obedience."  Wickliff,  setting  apart  the  minds  of  learned  men,  and  what  might 
be  said  in  the  matter,  either  by  the  canon  law,  or  by  the  law  of  England,  or  by 
the  civil  law,  saith  : 

"  It  resteth  now  only  to  persuade  and  prove  the  affirmative  part  of  this  doubt, 
by  the  principles  of  Christ's  law.  And  first,  I  prove  it  thus :  Every  natural 
body  hath  power  given  by  God  to  resist  against  its  contrary,  and  to  preserve 
itself  in  due  estate,  as  philosophers  know  very  well;  insomuch,  that  bodies 
without  life  are  endued  with  such  kind  of  power,  as  it  is  evident,  unto  whom 
hardness  is  given  to  resist  those  things  that  would  break  them,  and  coldness  to 
withstand  the  heat  that  dissolveth  them.  Forasmuch  then,  as  the  kingdom  of 
England,  after  tlie  manner  and  phrase  of  the  Scriptures,  ought  to  be  one  body, 

(1)  In  theHarleian  MSS.  in  the  British  Museum,  No.  419,  Art.  50,  is  an  old  document  containing, 
amongst  other  matters,  the  history  of  the  condemnation  and  search  after  Wickliff' s  books. — Ed. 

(2)  Wharton  observes,  "  We  have  as  many  of  the  works  of  Wickliff  yet  extant,  as,  if  printed 
together,  would  make  four  or  five  volumes  in  folio." — Ed. 

(3)  See  the  edition  1563,  p.  98. 


TOUCHING    THE    RIGHT    OF    THE    KING    AND    POPE.  55 

and  the  clergy,  wth  tlie  commonalty,  the  members  thereof,  it  seemeth  that  the  Richard 
same  kingdom   hath   such   i)o\ver  given  it  of  God;    and  so  much  the  more       ^^■ 
apparently,  by  how  much  the  same  body  is  more  precious  unto  God,  adorned      .    j^ 
with  virtue  and  knowledge.     Forasmuch  then  as  there  is  no  power  given  of    ,  .,'q  / 

God  unto  any  creature  for  any  end  or  pui'pose,  but  that  he  may  lawfally  use  1_ 

the  same  to  that  end  and  purpose,  it  followeth  that  our  kingdom  may  lawfully 
keep  back  and  detain  their  treasure  for  the  defence  of  itself,  in  what  case  soever 
necessity  doth  require  the  same. 

Secondly,  The  same  is  proved  by  the  law  of  the  gospel :  for  the  pope  cannot  The 
challenge  the  treasure  of  this  kingdom,  but  under  the  title  of  alms,  and  conse-  ^"V^y 
quently  under  the  pretence  of  works  of  mercy,  according  to  the  rule  of  charity,  the  alms 

But  in  the  case  aforesaid,  the  title  of  alms  ought  utterly  to  cease :   Ergo,  the  o*"  good 
right  and  title  of  challenging  the  treasure  of  our  realm,  shall  cease  also,  in  the  ™^"' 
presupposed  necessity.     Forasmuch  as  all  charity  hath  its  beginning  of  itself,  Necessity 
it  were  no  woi-k  of  charity,  but  of  mere  madness,  to  send  away  the  treasures  of  tal^eth 
the  realm  unto  foreign  nations,  whereby  the  realm  itself  may  fall  into  ruin,  pop^e^s  '"^ 
under  the  pretence  of  such  charity.  alms. 

It  appeareth  also  by  this,  that  Christ,  the  head  of  the  church,  whom  all 
christian  priests  ought  to  follow,  lived  by  the  alms  of  devout  women  [Luke  vii. 
and  viii.]  He  hungered  and  thirsted,  he  was  a  stranger,  and  many  other 
miseries  he  sustained,  not  only  in  his  members,  but  also  in  his  own  body,  as  the 
apostle  witnesseth  [2  Cor.  viii.]  "  He  was  made  poor  for  your  sakes,  that  through 
his  poverty'  you  might  be  rich :"  whereby,  in  the  first  endowing  of  the  church, 
whatsoever  he  were  of  the  clergy  that  had  any  temporal  possessions,  he  had 
the  same  by  form  of  a  perpetual  alms,  as  both  writings  and  chronicles  do 
witness. 

Hereupon  the  blessed  Bernard,  declaring  in  his  second  book  to  Eugenius, 
that  he  could  not  challenge  any  secular  dominion  by  right  of  succession,  as 
being  the  vicar  of  St.  Peter,  wi-iteth  thus;   "  If  St.  John  should  speak  unto  the  Notewell, 
pope  himself,  as  Bernard  doth  unto  Eugenius,  were  it  to  be  thought  that  he  j,,^  ^^' 
would  take  it  patiently?     But  let  it  be  so,  that  you  do  challenge  it  unto  you  by  Bernard. 
some  other  ways  or  means  ;  but  truly,  by  any  right  or  title  apostolical,  you  cannot 
so  do :  for  how  could  he  give  unto  you  that  wliicli  he  had  not  himself?     That 
which  he  had,  he  gave  you ;  that  is  to  say,  care  over  the  church ;  but  did  he 
give  you  any  lordship  or  rule?     Hark  what  he  saith,    '  Not  bearing  rule  as 
lords  over  the  clergy,  but  behaving  yourselves  as  examples  to  the  flock.'     And 
because  thou  shouldst  think  it  to  be  spoken  only  in  humility,  and  not  in  ^"^rity, 
mark  the  word  of  the  Lord  himself  in  the  gospel,  *  The  kings  of  the  people  do 
rule  over  them,  but  you  shall  not  do  so.'     Here  lordship  and  dominion  are 
plainly  forbidden  to  the  apostles,  and  darest  thou  then  usurp  the  same  I    If  thou 
wilt  be  a  lord,  thou  shalt  lose  thine  apostleship ;  or,  if  thou  wilt  be  an  apostle  The  pope 
thou  shalt  lose  thy  lordship :  for  truly  thou  shalt  depai-t  from  the  one  of  them.  ™^'^' 
If  thou  wilt  have  both,  thou  shalt  lose  both,  or  else  think  thj'Bclf  to  be  of  that  jordship, 
nimiber,  of  whom  God  doth  so  greatly  complain,  saying,  '  They  have  reigned,  or  else  his 
but  not  through  me ;  they  are  become  princes,  and  I  have  not  known  it.'  ^\^;  Tet 

^'  Now  if  it  do  suffice  thee  to  rule  without  dominion. ^  thou  hast  thy  glory,  but  him  ' 
not  with  God.  But  if  we  will  keep  that  which  is  forbidden  us,  let  us  hear  '^^^^°^^ 
what  is  said,  '  He  that  is  the  greatest  amongst  you,'  saith  Christ,  '  shall  be  made 
as  the  least,  and  he  which  is  the  highest  shall  be  as  the  minister;'  and,  for 
example,  he  set  a  child  in  the  midst  of  them.  So  this  then  is  the  true  form 
and  institution  of  the  apostles'  trade  ;  lordship  and  nile  is  forbidden,  ministra- 
tion and  service  commanded." 

By  these  words  of  this  blessed  man,  whom  the  whole  church  doth  The  pope 
reverence  and  worship,  it  doth  appear  that  the  pope  hath  not  power  power"" 
to  hold  in  possession  the  (i^oods  of  the  church,  as  lord  thereof,  but  as  "^'"^j^ 
minister  and  servant,  and  proctor  for  the  poor.     And  would  to  God,  goods. 
that  the  same  proud  and  greedy  desire  of  rule  and  lordship,  which  J^l^^^^^ 
this  seat  doth  challenge  unto  it,  were  not  a  preamble  to  prepare  a  |,'^^_'''^s- 
Avay  for  Antichrist ;  for  it   is  evident  by  the  gospel,  that  Christ,  Christ. 

(1)  "  Jam  si  sine  dominio,  regnare  juvat,"  &c  See  Latin  edition,  p.  17.  This  passage  is  thus 
given  in  the  English  editions  of  Foxe  :  "  If  it  do  suffice  thee  to  rule  with  the  Lord."— Ed. 


56  PENANCE    OF    THE    EARL    OF    SALISBURY. 

Richard  througli  his  povcrtv,  humility,  and  suffering  of  injury,  got  unto  him 

'      the  children  of  his  kingdom. 
A.  D.        And  moreover,  as  far  as   I  remember,   the  same   blessed  man 
'13^'i-    Bernard,   in   his  third  book,  writeth  also  thus  unto  Eugenius,   "  I 
fear  no  poison  so  great  to  happen  unto  thee,  as  greedy  desire  of 
dominion." 

This  WicklifF,  albeit  in  his  lifetime  he  had  many  grievous  enemies, 
vet  was  there  none  so  cruel  to  him,  as  the  clergy  itself.     Yet,  not- 
withstanding, he  had  many  good  friends,  men  not  only  of  the  meaner 
sort,  but  also  of  the  nobility,  amongst  whom  these  men  are  to  be 
numbered,  John  Clenbon,  Lewes  Clifford,  Richard  Stury,  Thomas 
Latimer,  William  Nevil,  and  John  Montague,  who  plucked  down 
Penance    all  the  images  in  his  church.     Besides  all  these,  there  was  the  earl  of 
ead'^of      Salisbury,  who,  for  contempt  in  him  noted  towards  the  sacrament,  in 
Salisbury,  carrying  it  home  to  his  house,  was  enjoined  by  Ralph  Ergoni,  bishop 
of  Salisbury,  to  make  in  Salisbury  a  cross  of  stone,  in  Avhich  all  the 
story  of  the  matter  should  be  written :  and  he,  every  Friday  during 
his  life,  to  come  to  the  cross  barefoot,  and  bareheaded  in  his  shirt, 
and  there  kneeling  upon  his  knees  to  do  penance  for  his  deed.^ 

The  Londoners  at  this  time,  somewhat  boldly  trusting  to  the 
mayor''s  authority,  who  for  that  year  was  John  of  Northampton,  took 
upon  them  the  office  of  the  bishops,  in  punishing  the  vices,  belonging 
to  civil  law,  of  such  persons  as  they  had  found  and  apprehended  in 
committing  both  fornication  and  adultery ;  for,  first,  they  put  the 
women  in  the  prison,  which,  amongst  them,  was  then  named  Dolium  ; 
and  lastly,  bringing  them  into  the  market-place,  where  every  man 
might  behold  them,  and  cutting  off  their  golden  locks  from  their 
heads,  they  caused  them  to  be  carried  about  the  streets,  with  bag- 
pipes and  trumpets  blown  before  them,  to  the  intent  they  should  be 
the  better  known,  and  their  companies  avoided ;  according  to  the 
manner  then  of  certain  thieves  that  were  named  "  Appellatores," 
accusers  or  impeachers  of  others  that  were  guiltless,  who  were  so 
served.  And  with  other  such  like  opprobrious  and  reproachful  con- 
tumelies did  they  serve  the  men  also  that  were  taken  with  them  in 
Fruits  of  committing  the  aforenamed  wickedness  and  vices.  Here  the  story 
uue  doc-  recordetli  how  the  said  Londoners  were  encouraged  hereunto  by  John 
Wickliff,  and  by  others  who  follo.wed  his  doctrine,  to  perpetrate  this 
act,  to  the  reproach  of  the  prelates  of  the  clergy ;  for  they  said,  that 
they  did  not  only  abhor  to  see  the  great  negligence  of  those,  to  whom 
that  charge  belonged,  but  also  their  filthy  avarice  they  did  as  much 
detest,  who,  for  greediness  of  money,  were  choaked  with  bribes,  and 
winking  at  the  penalties  due  to  such  persons  by  the  laws  appointed, 
suffered  such  fornicators  and  incestuous  persons  favourably  to  continue 
in  their  wickedness.  They  said,  furthermore,  that  they  greatly  feared, 
lest  for  such  wickedness  perpeti'ated  within  the  city,  and  so  apparently 
dissembled,  God  would  take  vengeance  upon  them,  and  destroy  their 
city.  Wherefore  they  said,  that  they  could  do  no  less  than  purge 
the  same ;  lest,  by  the  sufferance  thereof,  God  should  bring  a  plague 
upon  them,  or  destroy  them  with  the  sword,  or  cause  the  earth  to 
swallow  up  both  them  and  their  city.^ 

(1)  Ex  Chron.  Mon.  D.  Albani,  in  Vita  Ric.  II.  (2)  Ibid. 


true 
trine 


TESTIMONY   Ol«"   THE   UKIVEUSITY    OF   OXFORD    TO  WICKLIFF.  57 

This  story,  "-entle  reader,  althouu:h  tlie   author  thereof,  whom  I  ^''^j'^"'-'^ 
follow,  doth  give  it  out  in  reproachful   terms  to  the  great    discom- 
mendation  of  the    Londoners   for  so  doing,  yet  I  thought  not  to    ^^g^" 

omit,  but  to  commit  the   same   to  memory ;  which  seemeth  to  me '-- 

rather  to  tend  unto  tlie  worthy  commendation  both  of  the  Londoners 
and  the  aforesaid  John  of  Northampton,  the  mayor.  *iA  notable 
and  worthy  example,  doubtless,  of  a  true  magistrate ;  which  man,  if 
they  that  follow  him  now  in  like  office,  would  also  follow  him  in  like 
severity  and  diligence,  I  doubt  not  but  that  it  would  be  better  with 
the  city  of  Ijondon,  for  the  good  reformations  of  the  people :  so  that, 
we  had  not  either  fallen  into  this  tempest  of  great  misery,  wherewith 
all  the  realm  of  England  is  now  plagued,  or  else,  we  should  yet  the 
sooner  shake  off  the  j^lague,  and  put  it  away.  But  now,  while  the 
princes  do  attend  and  give  ear  to  blind  prophecies,  the  bishops  play 
the  t}Tants,^  the  divines  are  drowned  in  ambition,  the  prophets  slain,  the  . 
noblemen  fall  into  all  kinds  of  lascivious  wantonness,  the  magistrates 
wink  at  vice  unpunished,  the  common  people  run  into  all  kinds  of 
lasciviousness  ;  while  prostitution,  divorcements,  adultery,  avarice  and 
covetousness,  craft  and  deceit,  drunkenness,  contentions,  usury  and 
perjury,  with  all  other  kinds  of  vice  and  wickedness,  overflow  now 
the  realm,  what  marvel  is  it,  if  all  the  joints  and  fi-ames  of  the  com- 
monwealth being  loosed  asunder,  all  things  run  in  heaps,  to  ruin 
and  decay.' 

Hitherto  it  may  be  thought,  that  we  are  sufficiently  instructed  by 
the  great  scourges,  plagues,  and  miseries  which  have  happened  ;  and 
except  we  are  so,  nothing  Avill  teach  us  what  it  is  to  fall  into  the  hand 
of  the  Lord,  and  what  it  is  to  abuse  his  holy  gospel.  Time  it  is, 
yea,  and  high  time  doth  require  it,  that  we  now,  forsaking  and  wear- 
ing weary  of  our  old  corruptions  and  evils,  may  at  length  convert 
and  turn  the  wrath  and  displeasure  of  God,  into  his  mercy  and  favour ; 
which  thing  we  shall  soon  do,  if  we  first  of  all  ourselves,  do  correct 
and  amend  our  lives,  and  change  our  vice  into  virtue ;  but  of  this 
matter  (God  willing)  we  Avill  find  another  place  to  treat.  Now  Ave 
will  return  again  to  the  favourers  of  Wickliff,  amongst  whom  is  to 
be  counted  the  lord  Cobham,  who  is  reported  openly  to  have  con- 
fessed (as  Walden  writeth)  that  he  did  never  with  his  heart  hate 
sin,  before  he  was  instructed  and  taught  by  Wickliff.  All  these 
were  noble  men,  yet  was  there  no  want  amongst  the  meanest  sort  of 
such  as,  with  all  their  diligence,  did  defend  his  doctrine  ;  and  espe- 
cially among  the  Oxford  men,  of  whom  there  was  not  one  that  escaped 
free  without  some  kind  of  mark  ;  for  either  they  were  most  shame- 
fully forced  unto  recantation,  or  most  cruelly  judged  to  the  fire.* 
After  these  things  thus  declared,  let  us  now  add  the  testimonial  of 
the  university  of  Oxford  in  favour  of  John  Wickliff. 

The  Public  Testimony  given  by  the  University  of  Oxford,  touching 
the  great  Learning  and  crood  Life  of  John  Wickliff.* 
Unto  all  and  singular  the  children  of  our  holy  mother  the  church,  to  whom 

(1)  See  edition,  15G3,  p.  100.    Also  the  Lat.  edition,  p.  18.— Ed. 

(2)  "  Play  the  tyrai'ts."    "  Ejjiscopi  Ti'pan-ei'ovcri,  ambitione  insaniiuit  theologi."    Lat.  edition, 
1569,  p.  18.— Ed, 

(3)  '•  \Vhat  marvel,"  kc.    "  Quid  miruin,  si  luxatis  undique  reipublica?  compagibus,  ruinam 
demumac  7ravo\f#piai/ spectare  omnia  videantur."     Lat.  ed.  l.')59,  p.  18. — En. 

(■4)  The  enemies  of  Wicklift"  have  endeavoured  to   o\eithrow  the  auvlieiitiiity  of  this  valuable 


A.D. 
1384. 


58  TKSTIMOKV    OF    JOHN    HUSS    TO    WICKLIKF. 

Richard  this  present  letter  shall  come,  the  vice-chancellor  of  the  university  of  Oxford, 
^'-  with  the  whole  congregation  of  the  masters,  wish  perpetual  health  in  the  Lord. 
Forasmuch  as  it  is  not  commonly  seen,  that  the  acts  and  monuments  of  vahant 
men,  nor  the  praise  and  merits  of  good  men  should  be  passed  over  and 
hidden  with  pei-petual  silence,  but  that  true  report  and  fame  should  conti- 
nually spread  abroad  the  same  in  strange  and  far  distant  places,  both  for  the 
witness  of  the  same,  and  the  example  of  others ;  forasmuch  also  as  the  provi- 
dent discretion  of  man's  nature,  being  recompensed  with  cruelty,  hath  devised 
and  ordained  this  buckler  and  defence  against  such  as  do  blaspheme  and  slander 
other  men's  doings,  that  whensoever  witness,  by  word  of  mouth,  cannot  be  pre- 
sent, the  pen,  by  wn-iting,  may  supply  the  same : 

Hereupon  it   followeth,  that  the  special   good  will  and  care  which  we  bear 
unto    John  WicklifF,  sometime  child  of  this  our  university,   and  professor   of 
divinity,  moving  and  stirring  our  minds  (as  his  manners  and  conditions  required 
no  less),  with  one  mind,  voice,  and  testimony,  we  do  witness  all  lais  conditions 
and  doings,  throughout  his  whole  life    to  have  been   most-  sincere  and  corn- 
Great        mendable;  whose  honest  manners  and    conditions,  profoundness    of  learning, 
learning    gj^jj  niost  redolent  renown  and  fame,  we  desire  the  more  earnestly  to  be  notified 
with  good  and  known  unto  all  the  faithful,  for  that  we  understand  the  maturity  and  ripe- 
life  and     ness  of  his  conversation,  his  diligent  labours  and  travails,  to  tend  to  the  praise 
godliness.  ^^  q^^^  ^j^g  j^gjp  ^j^^  safeguard  of  others,  and  the  profit  of  the  church. 

Wherefore  we  signify  unto  you  by  these  presents,  that  his  conversation,  even 
from  his  youth  upward,  unto  the  time  of  his  death,  was  so  praiseworthy  and 
honest,  that  never  at  any  time  was  there  any  note  or  spot  of  suspicion  reported 
of  him.  But,  in  his  answering,  reading,  preaching,  and  determining,  he  be- 
haved himself  laudably,  and  as  a  stout  and  valiant  champion  of  the  faith ; 
vanquishing  by  the  force  of  the  Scriptures,  all  those,  who,  by  their  wilful  beg- 
gary, blasphemed  and  slandered  Christ's  religion.  Neither  was  this  doctor 
convicted  of  any  heresy,  nor  burned  of  our  prelates  after  his  burial.^  God  for- 
bid, that  our  prelates  should  have  condemned  a  man  of  such  honesty,  as  a 
heretic ;  who,  amongst  all  the  rest  of  the  university,  had  written  in  logic,  phi- 
losophy ,divinity,  moralit}',  and  the  speculative  arts,  without  his  peer.  The  know- 
ledge of  which  all  and  singular  things,  we  do  desire  to  testify  and  deliver  forth ; 
to  the  intent  that  the  fame  and  renown  of  this  said  doctor  may  be  the  more 
evident  and  had  in  reputation  amongst  them  unto  whose  hands  these  present 
letters  of  testimonial  shall  come.  In  witness  whereof,  we  have  caused  these 
our  letters  testimonial  to  be  sealed  with  our  common  seal. 

Dated  at  Oxford  in  our  congregation-house,  the  fifth  day  of  October,  in 
the  year  of  our  Lord,  1406.* 

The    Testimony  and  Judgment  of    Master   Jolm    Huss,  touching 
Master  John  Wickliff. 

Verily,   as  I  do  not  believe,  neither  grant,  that  Master  John  Wickliff"  is   a 
heretic,  so  do  I  not  deny,  but  firmly  hope  that  he  is  no  heretic  ;  forasmuch  as 
in  all  matters  of  doubt,   I  ought,  as  near   as  I  can,  to  choose  the  best  part. 
Wherefore  I  surely  trust,  that  Master  John  Wickliff  is  one  of  the  number  of 
them  who  are  saved.     The  words  of  Christ  move  me  thereunto,  saying  [Matt. 
vii.]  "  Do  ye  not  judge,  that  ye  be  not  judged,"  and  [Luke  vi.]  "  Do  not  con- 
demn, and  ye  shall  not  be  condemned ;"  and  the  words  of  the  apostle  [1  Cor.  iv.] 
Motives     "  Do  ye  not  judge  before   the  Lord  himself  do  come,  who  shall  open  those 
of  John     things  that  are  hid  in  darkness,  to  manifest  the  secrets  of  all  hearts." 
un'deV-''  Secondly,  The  love  and  charity  which   I  ought  to  bear  unto  my  neighbour, 

take      ^   loving  him  as  myself,  doth  move  me  thereunto.   [Luke  x.] 
dlfencf  ^      Thirdly,  His  good  fame  and  report  moveth  me,  which  he  bath  of  the  good 

document :  for  the  particulars  of  this  controversy  the  reader  is  referred  to  Lewis's  History, 
p.  183  to  192.  Dr.  Wordsworth  remarks  upon  this  subject  (Ecc.  Hist.  Vol.  I.  p.  94  in  the  note): 
"  As  to  the  practical  vahie  and  importance  of  this  testimonial,  we  have  ample  evidence  of  the 
popularity  at  Oxford  of  Wickliffe's  person  and  his  cause,  in  the  concessions  and  the  complaints  of 
his  adversaries."  Foxe  gives  the  v/ritings  of  John  Huss,  as  the  source  from  whence  he  derived 
this  document,  and  it  stands  at  p.  24,  in  the  Latin  edition  of  his  Acts  and  Monuments. — Ed. 

(1)  The  bones  of  Wicklitf  were  not  yet  commanded  by  the  council  of  Constance  to  be 
burned. 

'2)  Fx.  2.  tomo  operum  Jua.  Huss.  fol.  uU. 


WICKLIFF    PROVED     NO    HERETIC.  59 

priests  of  the  university  of  Oxford,  and  not  of  the  wicked,  and  commonly  of  Ricliard 
the  vulgar  sort;  although  not  of  the  covetous,  proud,  and  luxurious  priests  iind       ^^- 
prelates.*  ^  j^ 

Fourthly,  His  own  works  and  WTitings   do  stir  mo   tliereunto,  by  which  he     i-iaA 

gooth  about  with   his  whole  endeavour  to  reduce    all    men    unto  the  law  of '— 

Christ,    and    especially   the    clergy,   that  they  should   forsake  the  pomp   and 
dominion  of  this  world,  and,  with  the  apostles,  lead  the  life  of  Christ. 

Fifthly,  His  own  protestations,  which  he  doth  oftentimes  use  in  his  sentences, 
often  repeating  the  same,  do  not  a  little  move  me. 

Sixthly,  His  earnest  desire  and  affection  which  he  hath  unto  the  law  of 
Christ,  doth  not  a  little  allure  me  thereunto,  disputing  of  the  verity  thereof,  which 
cannot  fail  in  any  one  jot  or  tittle.  Whereupon  he  made  a  book  of  the  verity 
of  the  holy  Scripture,  approving,  even  unto  the  uttermost,  the  truth  of  God's 
law.' 

Therefore,  it  were  too  foolish  a  consequence  to  say,  that  because  the  multi- 
tude of  the  prelates  and  clergy  in  England,  France  and  Bohemia,  do  count 
John  Wickliff  a  heretic,   that  therefore  he  is  a  heretic,  &e.     Like  as  is  the  Bumiiifr 
reason  for  burning  the  books;  for  it  is  written  in  the  first  book  of  Maccabees,  '^^  books 
the  first  chapter,  that  "  They  did  burn  the  books  of  the  Lord,  tearing  them  in  of  his 
])ieces,  and  whosoever  was  found  to  have  kept  any  books  of  the  Testament  of  the  beinj,'  he- 
Lord,  or  which  observed  and  kept  the  law  of  the  Lord,  he  was,  by  the  king's  "^'^^"'^ " 
commandment,  put  to  death."     If  then  the  burning  of  the  books  by  wicked 
men,  did  argue  or  prove  the  evil  of  these  books,  then  was  the  law  of  God  evil 
and  naught. 

So  likewise  the  burning  of  St.  Gregorj''s  books,  and  those  of  divers  other 
saints  and  good  men,  should  argue  and  prove  that  they  were  evil  and  naughty 
men.     Whereupon  as  it  doth  not  follow,  that  because  the  bishops,  scribes,  and 
pharisees,  with  the  elders  of  the  people,  condemned  Christ  Jesus  as  a  heretic, 
that  therefore  he  is  a  heretic ;  so  likewise  doth  it  not  follow,  of  any  other  man,  p^j^^ 
that  because  the  bishops,  masters  of  divinity,  monks,  and  prelates,  condemned  conse- 
that  man  as  a  heretic,  ergo,  he  is  a  heretic.     For  this  consequent  is  reproved  qu«=>'ce 
by  the  blessed  John  Chrysostome,  who  was  twice  condenmed  as  a  heretic  by  by^ciiry- 
the  bishops  and  the  whole  of  he  clergy.     Likewise  St.  Gregory,  in  his  books,  was  sostome. 
condemned  by  the  cardinals. 

By  like  proof  also,  as   they  affirm   Master  John  Wickliff  to  be  a  heretic,  Duke  of 
John  duke  of  Lancaster,  a  man  of  worthy  memorj^  and  progenitor  of  Heniy,  Lancas- 
king  of  England,  should  he  a  heretic.     Because  the  said  duke  defended,  fa-  fende/of 
voured,  and  greatly  loved  Master  John  Wickliff:  ergo,  the  said  duke  is  or  was  Wickliff. 
a  heretic ;  the  consequent  is   good.      The  minor  is  well  known  to   English- 
men. The  major  appeareth  in  the  canon,  where  it  is  said,  "  He  who  defendeth 
a  heretic,"  &c. 

But,  these  things  set  apart,  I  demand  of  the  adversary,  whether  Master  John  Wickliff 
Wickliff  be  damned  for  ever  or  no?  If  he  say,  that  he  is  damned  because  Proved  no 
he  is  a  heretic,  I  propound  this  unto  him  :  whether  Master  John  Wickliff,  whilst 
he  lived,  held  any  false  doctrine  contrary  to  the  holy  Scriptiu^es?  If  he  do 
affirm  it,  let  him  then  show  what  doctrine  it  is,  and  ailerwards  declare  that  he 
held  it  obstinately.  But  he  shall  find  that  in  his  books,  he  always  wrote  most 
commendable  protestations  against  obstinacy  and  stiff-neckedness.  And,  by 
and  by,  afterwards.  Master  John  Stokes  in  his  "  Intimation"  saith,  that  Master 
John  Wickliff,  in  England,  is  counted  for  a  heretic. 

This  seemeth  also  false  by  the  letter  testimonial  of  the  university 
of  Oxford,  to  which  there  is  more  credit  to  be  given  than  unto 
liira.     And  this  shall  suffice  for  the  present. 

Now  as  we  have  declared  the  testimony  of  the  university  of 
Oxford,  and  of  John  Huss,  concerning  the  praise  of  John  Wickliif, 
it  followeth,  likewise,  that  we  set  forth  and  express  the  contrary 
censures  and  judgments  of  his  enemies,  blinded  with  malicious  hatred 
and  corrupt  affections  against   him,  especially  of  the  pope's  council 

(r,  "  Prelatis  et  sacerdotibus."  Lat.  edition,  p.  24. 
(2)  Lib.  de  sensu  et  veritate  Scripturae  per  J.  Wicklcv 


60 


WICKLIFF  S    ARTICLES    CONDEMNED 


Richard  gathered  at  Constance  ;  proceeding,  first,  in  condemning  his  books, 

^^-  then  his  articles,  afterwards  burning  liis  bones.     The  copy  of  the  sen- 

A.  D.  tence  sriven  asfainst  him  by  that  council  here  foUoweth. 
1384.  ^  " 

The  Sentence  given  by  the  Council  of  Constance,  in  condemna- 
tion of  the  Doctrine,  and  Five  and  Forty  Articles  of  John 
WicldifF.    A.D.  1415. 

The  most  holy  and  sacred  council  of  Constance,  making  and  representing 
the  catholic  church,  for  the  extirpation  of  this  present  schism,  and  of  all  other 
errors  and  heresies  springing  and  growing  under  the  shadow  and  pretence  of 
the  same,  and  for  the  reformation  and  amendment  of  the  church,  being  law- 
fully congregated  and  gathered  together  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  for  the  perpetual 
memory  of  the  time  to  come  : 

We  are  taught  by  the  acts  and  histories  of  the  holy  fathers,  that  the  catholic 
faith,  without  which,  as  the  holy  apostle  St.  Paul  saith,  it  is  impossible  to 
please  God,  hath  been  always  defended  by  the  faithful  and  spiritual  soldiers 
of  the  church,  by  the  shield  of  faith,  against  the  false  worshippers  of  the 
same  faith,  or  rather  perverse  impugners ;  who,  through  their  proud  curiosity, 
will  seem  to  know  more,  and  to  be  wiser  than  they  ought  to  be,  and  for 
the  desire  of  the  glory  of  the  world,  have  gone  about  oftentimes  to  overthrow 
the  same.  These  kinds  of  wars  and  battles  have  been  prefigured  to  us  before 
in  those  carnal  wars  of  the  Israelites  against  the  idolatrous  people.  For  in 
those  spiritual  wars  the  holy  catholic  church,  through  the  virtue  and  power 
of  faith,  being  illustrated  with  the  beams  of  the  heavenly  light  by  the  provi- 
dence of  God,  and  being  holpen  by  the  help  and  defence  of  the  saints 
and  holy  men,  hath  always  continued  immacidate,  and,  the  darkness  of 
errors,  as  her  most  cruel  enemies,  being  put  to  flight,  she  hath  most  gloriously 
triumphed  over  all.  But  in  these  our  days,  the  old  and  unclean  enemy  hath 
raised  up  new  contentions  and  strifes,  that  the  elect  of  this  world  might  be 
known,  whose  prince  and  captain  in  time  past  was  one  John  WicklifF,  a 
false  christian  ;  who,  during  his  lifetime,  taught  and  sowed  very  obstinately 
many  articles  contrary  to  and  against  the  christian  religion,  and  the  catholic 
faith.  And  the  same  John  Wickliff  wrote  certain  books  which  he  called  a 
Dialogue,  and  a  Trialogue,  besides  many  other  treatises  and  works,  which  he 
both  wrote  and  taught,  in  which  he  wrote  the  aforesaid,  and  many  other 
damnable  and  execrable  articles;  which  his  books  for  the  publication  and 
advancement  of  his  perverse  doctrine,  he  did  set  forth  openly  for  every  man 
to  read,  whereby,  besides  many  offences,  great  hurt  and  damage  of  soul  hath 
ensued  in  divers  regions  and  countries,  but,  especially  in  the  kingdoms  of 
England  and  Bohemia.  Against  whom  the  masters  and  doctors  of  the  univer- 
sities of  Oxford  and  Prague,  rising  up  in  the  truth  and  verity  of  God,  accord- 
ing to  the  order  of  the  schools,  within  a  while  after  did  reprove  and  condemn 
the  said  articles. 

Moreover,  the  most  reverend  fathers,  the  archbishops  and  bishops,  at  that 
time  present,  of  Canterbuiy,  York,  and  Prague,  legates  of  the  apostolic  see,  in 
the  kingdoms  of  England  and  Bohemia,  did  condemn  the  books  of  the  said  WicklifF 
to  be  burnt.  And  the  said  archbishop  of  Prague,  commissary  of  the  apostolic 
see,  did,  likewise,  in  this  behalf,  determine  and  judge.  And,  moreover,  he  did 
forbid  that  any  of  those  books,  which  did  remain  unburned,  should  be  hereafter 
any  more  read.  And  again,  those  things  being  brought  to  the  knowledge  and 
understanding  of  the  apostolic  see,  and  in  the  general  council,  the  bishop  of 
Rome,  in  his  last  council,  condemned  the  said  books,  treatises,  and  volumes, 
commanding  them  to  be  openly  burned :  most  straitly  forbidding  that  any  men 
who  should  bear  the  name  of  Christ  should  be  so  hardy  either  to  keep,  read,  or 
expound  any  of  the  said  books  or  treatises,  volumes,  or  works,  or  by  any  means 
to  use  or  occupy  them ;  or  else  to  allege  them  openly  or  privily  but  to  their 
reproof  and  infamy.  And,  to  the  intent  that  this  most  dangerous  and  filthy 
doctrine  should  be  utterly  wiped  away  out  of  the  church,  he  gave  command- 
ment throughout  all  places,  that  the  ordinaries  should  diligently  inquire  and 
seek  out,  by  the  apostolic  authority  and  ecclesiastical  censure,  for  all  such 
books,  treatises,  volumes,  and  works ;  and  the  same  so  being  found,  to  burn 
and  consume  them  with  fire ;  providing  withal,  that  if  there  be  any  such  found 


The 

spiritual 
■wars  of 
holy 
church 
pre- 
figured 
by  the 
carnal 
wars  of 
the  Is- 
raelites. 


Dialogue 
and  Tria- 
logue of 
Wickliff. 


His  books 
condemn- 
ed to  be 
ourned. 


Words  of 
authority 
without 
due  pro- 
bation. 


BY    THE    COUNCIL    OK    CONSTANCE.  61 

who  will  not  obey,  the  same  pi-ocess  to  be  made  against  them,  as  against  the  Richard 
favourers  and  maintainors  of  heresies.     And  this  most  holy  synod  hath  caused       ^^- 
the  said  forty-hvo  articles  to  be  exaniinid,  iuul  oftentimes  perused,  by  many    ^  jj 
most  reverend  fixthers  of  the  church  of  Uoine,  cardinals,  liishops,  abbots,  masters    j^'g^' 

of  divinity,  and  doctors  of  both  laws,  besides  a  great  number  of  other  learned  L 

men ;  which  articles  being  so  examined,  it  was  found  (as  in  truth  it  was  no  Ask  my 
less)  that  many,  yea  and  a  great  number  of  them  be  notoriously,  for  heretical,  be  a  thief, 
reproved  and  condemned  by  the  holy  fathers ;  others  not  to  be  catholic,  but  §(,  „.(. 
erroneous  ;  some  fidl  of  offence  and  blasphemy  ;  certain  of  them  ofiensive  unto  hear  you 
godly  ears,  and  many  of  them  to  be  rashful  and  seditious.     It  is  found,  also,  ^^^^ 
that  his  books  do  contain  many  articles  of  like  efi'ect  and  quality,  and  that  they 
do  induce  and  bring  into   the   church   unsound  and  unwholesome  doctrine,* 
contrary  unto  the  faith  and  ordinance  of  the  church.     Wherefore,  in  the  name  So 
of  our   Lord  Jesus  Christ,   this    sacred   synod,   ratifying   and    approving  the  {{|°"^|'' 
sentences  and  judgments  of  the  archbishops  and  council  of  Rome,  do,  by  this  jiers  per- 
their  decree  and  ordinance  perpetually,  for  evermore,  condemn  and  reprove  the  petually 
said  articles,  and  every  one  of  them,  his  books  which  he  entitled  his  "  Dialogue  "  |io„.^,'^'* 
and  "  Trialogue,'"^  and  all  other  books  of  the  same  author,  volumes,  treatises,  Christ 


and  works,  by  what  name  soever  they  be  entitled  or  called,  which  we  will  here  f™.'" 
to  be  sufficiently  expressed  and  named.     Also,  we  forbid  the  reading,^  learning,  o^mar- 
exposition,  or  alleging  of  any  of  the  said  books  unto  all  faithfid  Christians,  but  vellous 


so  far  forth  as  shall  tend  to  the  reproof  of  the  same ;  forbidding  all  and  singular  ^^"^"1 
catholic  persons,  under  the  pain  of  curse,  that  from  henceforth  they  he  not  so  xhough 
hardy  openly  to  preach,  teach,  or  hold,  or  by  any  means  to  allege  the  said  the  sepul- 
articles,  or  any  of  them,  except,  as  is  aforesaid,  that  it  do  tend  unto  the  reproof  chre  be 
of  them ;  connnanding  all  those  books,  treatises,  works,  and  volumes  aforesaid,  Christ    ' 
to  be  openly  burned,  as  it  was  decreed  in  the  synod  at  Rome,*  as  is  before  will  rise. 
expressed :  for  the  execution  whereof  duly  to  be  observed  and  done,  the  said 
sacred  synod  doth  straitly  charge  and  command  the  ordinaries  of  the  place 
diligently  to  attend  and  look  to  the  matter,  according  as  it  appertaineth  to  every 
man's  duty  by  the  canonical  laws  and  ordinances. 

What  these  articles  were,  here  condemned  by  the  council,  collected 
out  of  all  his  works,  and  exhibited  to  that  council,  to  the  number  of 
forty-five,  the  copy  of  them  here  following  declareth. 

Certain  other  Articles  gathered  out  of  Wickliflfs  Books  by  his 
Adversaries,  to  the  Number  of  Forty-five,  exhibited  to  the 
Council  of  Constance  after  his  Death,  and  in  the  same  Council 
condemned. 

Note. — Besides  the  twenty-four  articles  above  mentioned,  there  were  others 
also  gathered  out  of  his  books,  to  the  number  of  forty-five,  which  his  mahcious 
adversaries,  perversely  collecting,  and  maliciously  expounding,  did  exhibit 
to  the  council  of  Constance  ;  all  which  to  repeat,  though  it  be  not  here  needful, 
yet  to  recite  certain  of  them  as  they  stand  in  that  council,  it  shall  not  be 
superfluous. 

25.  All  such  as  be  hired  for  temporal  living  to  pray  for  others,  offend,  and 
sin  of  simony. 

26.  The  prayer  of  a  reprobate  prevaileth  for  no  man. 

27.  All  things  happen  from  absolute  necessity. s 

(1)  "  Unwholesome,"  because  they  teach  apainst  the  pomp  of  the  pope. 

(2)  Because  this  "  trialogue"  teareth  the  pope's  triple  crown.  [Tlie  ancient  crown  or  "  tiara" 
(mentioned  at  page  172  of  vol.  ii.)  was  a  round  high  cap.  Pope  John  XXIII.  first  encircled  it  with 
a  crown;  Boniface  added  to  it  a  second  crown,  and  Benedict  XII.  added  the  third.  This  covering 
for  the  head  of  the  pope,  which  has  increased  in  splendour,  as  his  church  has  increased  in  pride, 
is  the  badge  of  his  civil  right,  as  the  keys  are  of  his  spiritual  jurisdiction  ;  for  as  soon  as  the  pope 
is  dead,  his  arms  are  represented  with  the  tiara  alone,  without  the  keys. — Eb.] 

(.3)  Upon  this  injunction  against  Wickliff's  works,  Foxe  observes,  "  Rub  a  galled  horse  on  the 
hack,  and  he  will  wince."  By  which  he  means,  that  the  church  of  Rome,  having  been  once  made 
to  smart  under  the  attacks  of  WicklifT,  was  anxious  that  old  wounds  should  not  be  reopened,  and 
therefore  condemned  and  reprobated  his  writings. — Ed. 

(4)  "  At  Rome,"  nether  barrel,  better  herring. 

(5)  This  article,  omitted  in  all  the  English  editions  of  Foxe,  is  here  restored  to  its  place  from  the 
Latin  edition  of  1559,  p.  30.    "  Omnia  de  necessitate  absolute  eveniunt."    To  this  our  author 


62  CERTAIN    OTHER    ARTICLES    OF    WICKLIFF 

Rkiuird  28.  The  confirmation  of  young  persons,  the  ordination  of  the  clergy,  and 
II-  the  consecration  of  places,  be  reserved  to  the  pope  and  prelates,  from  a  desire 
.    „      of  temporal  lucre  and  honour.^ 

29.  Graduations  and  doctorships  in  universities  and  colleges  as  they  be  used, 
^'    conduce  nothing  to  the  church. 

30.  The  excommunication  of  the  pope  and  his  prelates  is  not  to  be  feared, 
because  it  is  the  censure  of  Antichrist. 

31.  Such  as  found  and  build  monasteries,  do  offend  and  sin,  and  all  such  as 
enter  into  the  same,  be  members  of  the  devil. 

32.  To  enrich  the  clergy  is  against  the  rule  of  Christ, 

33.  Silvester  the  pope,  and  Constantine  the  emperor,  erred  in  enriching  the 
church. 

34.  A  deacon  or  a  priest  may  preach  the  word  of  God  without  the  authority 
of  the  apostolic  see  or  that  of  a  bishop. - 

35.  Such  as  enter  into  orders,  or  religion  monastical,  are  thereby  luiable  to 
keep  God's  commandments,  and  also  to  attain  to  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  except 
they  return  from  the  same. 

3G.  The  pope  with  all  his  clergy,  having  those  great  possessions  which  they 
have,  be  heretics  in  so  having ;  and  the  secular  powers  in  so  suffering  them  do 
not  well. 

37.  The  church  of  Rome  is  the  synagogue  of  Satan  ;  nor  is  the  pope  imme- 
diately the  vicar  of  Christ  and  of  the  apostles. 

38.  The  letters  decretal  be  apocryphal,  and  seduce  from  the  faith  of  Christ ; 
and  the  clergy  that  study  them  be  fools. 

39.  The  emperor  and  secular  lords  be  seduced  by  the  devil,  when  they 
enrich  the  church  with  temporal  goods. 

0.  It  is  not  necessary  to  salvation  to  believe  the   church  of  Rome  to  be 
supreme  head  over  all  churches. 

41.  It  is  infatuation  to  believe  in  the  indulgences  of  the  pope. 

42.  All  oaths  which  be  made  for  any  contract  or  civil  bargain  betwixt  man 
and  man,  be  unlawful. 

43.  Augustine,  Benedict,  Bernard,  with  all  such  as  have  been  patrons  of 
private  religion,  except  they  have  repented,  with  such  'also  as  have  entered 
into  the  same,  be  in  a  damnable  state,  and  so  from  the  pope  to  the  lowest 
novices,  they  be  altogether  heretics. 

44.  All  private  religions  whatsoever,  indiscriminately  introduced,  are  not 
from  Christ." 

45.  That  all  in  the  order  of  mendicants  be  heretics,  and  all  who  give  them 
alms  are  excommunicate. 

Besides  these  articles,  to  the  number  of  forty-five,  condemned, 
as  is  said,  by  the  council  of  Constance,  other  articles  also  I  find 
diversely  collected,  or  rather  wrested  out  of  the  books  and  writings 

adjoins  a  side  note ;  "  Et  hie  forte  calumnia."  The  reader  will  indeed  find  the  above  article 
amongst  those  which  follow,  collected  by  William  Woodford,  but  unless  it  is  retained  here  with 
articles  44  and  45,  inserted  from  the  Latin  edition,  the  number  mentioned  in  the  heading  would 
be  contradicted  by  the  text,  and  the  frequent  and  important  references  to  the  articles  would  be 
incorrect.  The  variations  which  occur  in  these  copies  of  the  conclusions  of  Wiekliffare  accounted 
for  in  the  following  extract  from  the  first  edition  of  the  Acts  and  Monuments,  p.  107.  "  As  con- 
cerning John  Wickliff's  conclusions  which  were  condemned  in  the  council  of  the  earthquake,  we 
have  spoken  before.  Now,  forasmuch  as  the  slander  of  the  adversaries  doth  further  move  me, 
it  remaineth  that  we  gather  the  articles  exhibited  and  condemned  in  the  council  of  Constance ; 
albeit  that  I  do  not  tind  all  men  to  accord  and  agree,  neither  in  the  order,  neither  in  the  number 
of  them.  For  William  Widford  [Woodford]  in  his  Impugnation  which  he  dedicated  unto  Thomas, 
archbishop  of  Canterbury,  numbereth  them  after  one  sort,  and  John  Huss  after  another." 

"  And.  again,  the  copy  of  Cologne,  which  here  we  do  follow,  doth  dijfer  from  them  both,  as  the 
apology  of  John  Huss  doth  declare,  where  the  15,  IG,  17  articles  are  placed  after  another  order 
than  they  be  set  forth  in  other  books,  as  it  shall  appear  by  his  defence,  which  we  will  annex 
immediately  upon  the  articles,  forasmuch  as  it  is  most  evident  that  there  were  45  articles  put  up 
unto  the  council  of  Constance,  and  in  the  catalogue  of  Cologne  is  found  but  44  articles." — Ed. 

(1)  As  in  the  English  editions  of  Foxe  this  article  is  either  incorrectly  translated,  or  is  copied 
from  Huss,  Woodford,  or  others,  the  clause,  as  it  appears  in  the  Latin  edition,  p.  26,  is  subjoined, 
and  retained,  in  English,  in  the  text  above. — Ed. 

"  Confirraatio  juvenum,  clericorum  ordinatio,  locorum  consecratio,  reserventur  papas  et  epis- 
opis,  propter  cupiditatem  lucri  temporalis  et  honoris." — Ed. 

(2)  The  words  "  or  that  of  a  bishop"  have  been  added  from  the  Latin ;  where  is  a  note  also, 
"  De  pontifieiis  sentit  episcopis." — Ed. 

(3)  This  article  is  only  found  in  the  Latin  edition,  p.  27. — "  Omnes  religiones  privatae,  indifferen- 
ter  introductas,  non  sunt  h  Christo." — Ed. 

(4)  See  article  14,  in  Latin  edition,  p.  26. — Ed. 


CONDEMNED    HY    THE    COUNCIL    OF    CONSTANCE.  68 

of  Wickliff ;  some  by  William  Woodford,  and  some  by  Waldcn,  inchnrd 
friar  Tissington,  and  others,  whom  they,  in  their  books,  have  impugned      ^'' 

rather   than   confuted;    in  the    number  of  which   writers  William  A.D. 

Woodford  especially  findeth  out  these  articles,  and  writeth  against  ^^^'^- 
the  same,  to  the  number  of  eighteen,  as  hereunder  follow. 

Articles  against  Wickliff  collected  by  William  Woodford. 

1.  The  bread  remaineth  in  its  own  substance,  after  the  consecration  thereof 
upon  the  altar,  and  ceaseth  not  to  be  bread  still. 

2.  As  John  was  figuratively  Elias,  and  not  personally ;  so  the  bread  is 
figuratively  the  body  of  Christ,  and  not  natui-ally.  And,  without  all  doubt, 
this  is  a  figurative  speech,  to  say,  "  This  is  my  body ;"  as  to  say,  "  This  John 
is  Elias." 

3.  In  the  decree,  "  Ergo  Bercngarius,"  the  court  of  Rome  iiath  determined, 
that  the  sacrament  of  the  holy  Eucharist  is  naturally  true  bread. 

4.  They  who  do  affirm  that  the  infimts  of  the  faithful,  departing  without 
the  sacrament  of  baptism,  are  not  saved,  be  presumptuous  and  fools  in  so 
affirming. 

5.  The  administration  of  the  sacrament  of  confirmation  is  not  only  reserved 
to  the  bishops. 

6.  In  the  time  of  St.  Paul,  only  two  orders  of  clerks  did  suffice  in  the  church, 
priests  and  deacons.  Neither  was  there  in  the  time  of  the  apostles  any  distinction 
of  popes,  patriarchs,  archbishops,  and  bishops;  but  these  the  emperor's  pride 
did  find  out. 

7.  Such  as  in  times  past,  either  for  covetousness  of  temporal  lucre,  or  in 
hope  of  mutual  succour  by  kindred,  or  for  cause  to  excuse  their  lust  (although 
they  despaired  of  issue),  were  married,  were  coupled  together  not  by  tnie 
matrimony. 

8.  The  causes  of  divorcement,  either  for  spiritual  consanguinity,  or  for 
affinity^  be  not  founded  on  Scripture,  but  are  only  ordinances  of  men. 

9.  These  words,  "  I  will  take  thee  to  wife,"  are  rather  to  be  taken  in  contract 
of  matrimony,  than  these  words,  "  I  do  take  thee  to  wife."  And  the  contract 
with  any  party,  by  the  words  of  the  future  tense,  ought  not  to  be  frustrated 
for  the  contract  with  any  party  afterwards  made  by  the  words  of  the  present 
time. 

10.  There  be  twelve  disciples  of  Antichrist :  popes,  cardinals,  patriarchs, 
archbishops,  bishops,  archdeacons,  officials,  deans,  monks,  canons,  friars,  and 
pardoners. 

11.  In  the  Book  of  Numbers,  chap,  xviii.,  and  in  Ezekiel,  chap,  xliv.,  it  is 
commanded  simply,  that  neither  the  priests  of  Aaron,  nor  the  Levites  should 
have  any  part  of  inheritance  with  other  tribes,  but  should  live  merely  by  tithes 
and  oblations. 

12.  There  is  no  gi-eater  heretic  or  Antichrist  than  that  clerk  who  teacheth 
that  it  is  lawfid  for  priests  and  Levites,  by  the  law  of  grace,  to  be  endued  with 
temporal  possessions.  And  if  there  be  any  heretics,  apostates,  or  blasphemers, 
these  clerks  be  such. 

13.  It  is  not  only  la\\'fid  for  the  lords  temporal  to  take  away  goods  of  fortxme 
from  the  chmchmen,  sinning  usually,  but  also  they  are  bound  so  to  do,  under 
pain  of  eternal  damnation. 

14.  He  that  is  the  more  humble  and  more  serviceable  to  the  church,  and 
more  enamoured  with  the  love  of  Christ,  is^  in  the  church  militant,  the  greater, 
and,  then,  nearest  vicar  of  Christ. 

15.  If  corporal  unction  or  anoyling  were  a  sacrament,  as  now  it  is  feigned 
to  be,  Christ  and  his  apostles  would  not  have  left  the  ordinance  thereof 
untouched. 

16.  Unto  the  true  dominion  secular,  is  required  virtuous  life  of  him  that 
i-uleth. 

17.  All  things  that  happen  do  come  absolutely  of  necessity. 

18.  Whatsoever  the  pope  or  his  cardinals  can  deduce  clearly  out  of  the 
Scripture,  that  only  is  to  be  believed,  or  to  be  done  at  their  monition ;  and 
whatsoever  otherwise  they  do  command,  is  to  be  condemned  as  heretical. 


64  THK    DEFENCE    OF    WRKLIFF    BY    JOHX    HUSS. 

Richard        Bcsidcs  tliis   William   Woodford   aforementioned,'   divers   others 

"      there  were  who  wrote   against   these  articles  of  Wickliif  aforesaid, 

A.D.    maintaining   the   pope's   part,  as   seemeth,  for  flattery,   rather  than 

^^^^-    following  any  just  cause  so  to  do,  or  showing  forth  any  reason  or 

learning  in  disproving  the  same.     Notwithstanding,  on  the  contrary 

part,  some  there  were  again  both  learned  and  godly,  who,  taking  the 

part  of  WicklifF,  without  any  flattery,  defended  the  most  of  the  said 

articles  openly  in  schools  and  other  places. 

*^Thus  you  have  the  whole  sum  of  Wickliffs  articles,  containing 
nis  whole  doctrine,  described  and  set  forth ;  albeit  not  as  he  hath 
uttered  them,  but  as  his  froward  adversaries  have  compiled  and 
collected  them  out  of  his  writings.  Wherefore,  if  some  of  them 
seem  hard  or  strange,  I  think  it  rather  to  be  imputed  to  their  evil 
will,  than  to  his  good  meaning ;  as  it  might  soon  appear  if  his  books 
had  been  now  extant  to  testify  of  his  doctrine.  But  this  is  certain ; 
howsoever  his  articles  were  taken  of  the  wicked  and  evil  disposed, 
with  all  good  men  he  Avas  highly  favoured,  and  had  in  such  estima- 
tion for  his  profound  knowledge  and  great  learning,  that  also  foreign 
nations  were  moved  with  his  authority.  Amongst  all  others  the 
Bohemians  had  him  in  great  reverence  for  the  opinion  of  his  sin- 
gular learning,  that  John  Huss,  the  greatest  doer  in  the  university  of 
Prague,  not  only  took  profit  of  his  doctrine,  but  also  openly  de- 
fended his  articles.  Insomuch  that  in  his  public  disputation  and 
solemn  acts  after  the  manner  of  schools,  he  took  upon  him  the 
public  defence  of  divers  of  the  said  articles ;  namely,  upon  the  four- 
teenth, fifteenth,  and  seventeenth,  with  others  more ;  whose  dispu- 
tation upon  the  same  matter,  if  it  shall  not  seem  tedious  to  the 
reader  to  understand,  it  shall  not  seem  grievous  to  me  to  declare  ; 
not  only  for  the  antiquity  of  the  matter,  but  also  for  the  utility  of 
the  same.* 

THE    PUBLIC    DEFENCE    OF    CERTAIN    ARTICLES    OF    JOHN    WICK- 
LIFF,   IN    THE    FIRST   ACT    BEFORE    THE    WHOLE    UNIVERSITY 
OF    PRAGUE,    IN    CHARLEs's    COLLEGE. 

The  Determination  of  John  Huss  upon  the  Thirteenth  Article  of 
Wicklifi^,  touching  the  Preaching  and  Hearing  of  the  Word  of 
God,  made  in  the  Year  of  our  Lord  1412. 

Forasmuch  as  to  condemn  the  truth  wittingly,  or  without  reasonable  examina- 
tion, doth  tend  to  great  danger  of  salvation,  as  the  Lord  saith,  [Luke  vi.]  "  Do 

(1)  Tractat.  frat.  W.  Woodford  contra  Trialogum  Wicklevi. 

(2)  See  edition  15G3,  p.  lOS.  The  reader's  attention  is  particularly  directed  to  this  passage,  as 
it  accounts  for  the  "  hard  and  strange  things,"  which  are  set  forth  in  Wickliff's  articles.  They 
seem,  indeed,  in  some  cases,  to  be  isolated  passages,  extracted  from  his  writings,  or  casual  ex- 
pressions falsely  reported,  to  suit  the  malicious  intentions  of  his  enemies.  It  is  needless  to  add, 
that  the  Romish  church  has  never  ceased  to  adduce  these  adulterated  articles,  as  proofs  of  the 
dangerous  doctrines  of  the  reformer  ;  and  this,  too,  in  such  strong  terms  as  would  well  nigh  shake 
our  confidence  in  the  general  soundness  of  Wickliff's  views,  were  it  not  that  we  possess  abundance 
of  his  other  writings  to  refute  this  slander,  and  to  confirm  us  in  the  opinion  of  his  piety  and 
sincerity.  One  of  his  greatest  works  was  the  translation  of  the  New  Testament  into  the  vulgar 
tongue,  of  which  the  following  is  an  extract : — "  The  New  Testament,  with  the  Lessons  taken 
out  of  the  Old  Law,  read  in  churches  according  to  the  use  of  Sarum  ;  translated  into  English  from 
the  vulgar  Latin,  by  ,Iohn  Wicklif,  D.D.  rector  of  Lutterworth.  13S0.  Luke  ii.  — And  scheperdis 
weren  in  the  same  cuntre,  wakinge  and  kepinge  watchis  of  the  night  on  her  flok.  And  lo  the 
aungel  of  the  lord  stood  bisidis  hem,  and  the  clerenesse  of  God  schynede  aboute  hem  ;  and  thei 
dredden  vrith  grete  drede.  And  the  aungel  seyde  to  hem,  nyle  ye  drede,  for  lo  Y  preche  to  you  a 
grete  Joye  that  schal  be  to  alle  peeple.  For  a  savyour  is  borun  to  day  to  you,  that  is  Crist  the 
Lord  in  the  cytee  of  Davith.  And  this  is  a  tokene  to  you,  ye  shulen  fynde  a  younge  child  wlappid 
in  clothis,  and  leyd  in  a  cracche.  And  sodeinly  ther  was  maad  with  the  aungel  a  multitude  of 
hevenly  knyghthood,  heryinge  God  and  sciynge ;  Glorye  be  in  higheste  thingis  to  God,  and  in 
erthe  pees  be  to  men  of  good  wille." — Ed. 


DUTY    OF    iMlN'lSTF.KS    A\0    HEARKKS.  65- 

ye  not  condemn,  and  ye  shall  not  be  condcnnied  :"  therefore,  to  avoid  this  great  jiu/wrd 
danger,  the  nniversity  of  Prague,  and  the  whole  commonalty  thereof,  the  rector,       •'^• 
masters,  doctors,  bachelors,  and  students,  in  their  general  assembly,  not  agreeing     .    t\ 
to  the  condemnation  pronounced  by  the  doctors  in  their  council-house,  require     1004' 

of  the  said  doctors  a  reasonable  j)roof  of  their  condenmation,  and  that  they '_ 

should  by  Scripture,  authority,  or  infallible  reason,  prove  the  falsehood  of  every  The 
those  live  and  forty  articles ;  the  which  being  once  done,  the  said  university  will  unUer- 
Jigree  to  the  said  condenmation  as  just.     For  the  university  doth  well  know,  sity  of 
that,  as  Augustine  saith,  at  the  end  of  his  second  book  of  Christian  Doctrine,  ^'^i'?"^''* 
"  Whatsoever  a  man  doth  learn  besides  the  holy  Scriptures,  if  it  be  hurtful,  the  judg- 
there  it  is  condenmed;  if  it  be  profitable,  there  it  is  found.     And  when  a  man  ment  of 
hath   found  all  things  therein  which  he  hath  prolitably  learned  elsewhere,  he  Jl'^s'lvho 
shall  much  more  abundantly  lind  those  things  which  are  found  in  no  place  else,  cendemn- 

but  are  learned  in  the  marvellous  deptli  and  marvellous  profoundness  of  those  S''  "'" 

]  . .     ■    .  1     1)  '■  *^  forty-five 

most  sacred  Scriptures  only.  articles. 

Thus  writeth  Augustine.  And  Gregory,  in  his  twenty-third  book  of  Morals, 
saith  thus:  "  (rod,  in  the  holy  Scripture,  hath  comprehended  whatsoever  thing 
may  happen  unto  any  man,  and  in  the  same  hath,  by  the  examples  of  those 
who  are  gone  before,  taught  those  who  arc  to  come,  how  to  reform  their  lives." 
Whereby  it  appeareth  that  if  every  of  the  five  and  forty  articles  containeth  in 
it  wholly  the  thing  that  is  false  and  untrue,  the  same  is  either  plainly  or  darkly 
condemned  in  the  holy  Scrij)tures. 

Secondly,  it  followeth  by  the  sentence  and  mind  of  this  holy  man,  that  if  the 
condenmation  of  the  five  and  forty  articles  be  profitable,  the  same  is  found  in 
the  holy  Scriptures.  And  whereas  again  St.  Augustine  writeth  unto  St.  Jerome, 
in  his  eighth  epistle,  and  the  ninth  distinction,  "  I,"  saith  he,  "  have  learned 
to  attribute  this  honour  and  reverence  unto  those  writers  only  who  are  called 
canonical,  that  I  dare  atiirm  none  of  them  to  have  erred  in  their  works  or 
writings.  As  for  all  other  writers,  I  do  so  read  them,  that  although  they  abound 
with  never  so  much  holiness,  or  excel  in  doctrine,  I  do  not  by  and  by  think  it 
true  because  they  themselves  do  so  judge ;  but  if  they  can,  by  other  canonical 
authors  or  probable  reasons,  persuade  or  prove  that  they  do  not  digress  from 
the  truth." 

Also  the  said  Augustine,  in  his  book  '  De  Unico  Baptismo,'  lib.  ii.,  saith 
thus :  "  Who  doth  not  know  or  understand  the  holy  canonical  Scripture  to  be 
contained  in  his  own  bonds  and  limits,  and  the  same  to  be  preferred  before  all 
other  letters  and  decrees  of  bishops,"  &c.  And,  a  little  after,  he  hath  the  like 
saying,  as  for  the  letters  of  other  bishops  which  have  been  written,  or  be 
written  (after  the  canon,  being  confirmed),  they  may  lawfully  be  reprehended 
and  reproved,  both  by  the  word  of  them  that  be  more  skilful  in  that  matter, 
and  also  by  the  ancient  authority  of  other  bishops,  or  by  the  prudence  and 
wisdom  of  such  as  be  better  learned,  or  more  expert,  or  else  by  general  councils, 
if  it  so  chance  that  they  in  any  point  have  erred  and  gone  asti'ay  from  the 
sincere  truth. 

By  these  sayings  of  St.  Augustine  and  others,  &c.,  the  university  of  Prague 
hath  concluded  and  determined,  that  they  will  not  receive  the  condemnation  of 
the  five  and  forty  articles,  matle  by  the  doctors  in  their  council-house,  as  just 
and  true,  unless  they  who  condemned  them  W'ill  prove  their  condenmation  by 
the  holy  Scriptures  and  probable  reasons  upon  every  of  the  five  and  forty 
articles. 

Wherefore,  for  the  due  examination  of  the  aforesaid  condemnation,  whether 
it  be  effectual  or  no,  we  will  at  this  present  take  in  hand  the  fourteeidh  article 
of  the  number  of  the  five  and  forty  ;  which  article  is  this : — 

"  They  who  leave  off  preaching  and  hearing  of  the  word  of  God,  for  fear  of 
excomnmnication  of  men,  are  already  excommunicate,  and  in  the  day  of  judg- 
ment shall  be  coiuited  the  betrayers  of  Christ." 

This  article  contain etli :  First,  that  all  priests,  omitting  the  preaching  of  the 
word  of  God  for  feai*  of  excommunication  of  men,  are  already  excommuni- 
cated. 

Secondly,  It  containeth  that  all  such  as  do  omit  the  hearing  of  the  word  of 
God,  for  fear  of  excommunication,  are  already  excommunicated. 

Thiidly,  That  both  these  sorts  of  men  in  the  day  of  judgment,  shall  be 
counted  traitors  to  Christ 

VOL.  III.  F 


(i(y  THE    UKFKXCE    OF    WICKLIFF    BV    JOHN    HUSS. 

Rkhard        As  concerning  the  first  point,  it  is  pre-siipposed,  tliat  the  preaching  of  the 

^^-       word  of  God  is  commanded  unto  the  apostles  and  their  followers,  as  it  appeareth 

.    1^      in  Matt,  x.,  where  it  is  said,  "  Jesus  sent  his  twelve  disciph  s,  commanding 

T^oi"     tl^cm  and  saying,  Go  and  preach  that  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand."    Also 

L  in  the  last  of  Matthew,  and  the  tenth  of  Luke.     Whereupon  Peter,  the  apostle 

The  of  Christ,  acknowledging  this  precept  and  commandment  for  himself,  and  for 

orthc""")^  the  other  apostles  and  successors,  in  Acts  x.,   saith  thus  :  "  He  commanded  us 
spel  com-  to  preach  and  testify,  that  it  is  he  which  is  ordained  of  God,  the  judge  hoth  of 
inantled     jj^g   quick  and   the  dead."     This  commandment,  also,  the  other  apostles  did 
^     *"'  '     acknowledge,  and  especially  the  chosen  vessel,   pronouncing  under  a  great 
threatening,  [1  Cor.  ix.]  "  'Wo  be  unto  me  if  I  do  not  preach  the  gospel."    And 
pope   Nicholas,  considering  that  great  threatening  in   the  forty-third  distinc- 
tion, saith :  "  The  dispensation  and  distribution  of  the  heavenly  seed  is  com- 
manded and  enjoined  unto  us  ;  wo  be  unto  us  if  we  do  not  sow  it  abroad,  or  if 
we  hold  our  peace."    Which  thing  when  the  vessel  of  election  did  fear  and  cry 
out  upon,  how  much  more  ought  all  other  inferiors  to  fear  and  dread  the  same ! 
To  the  same  pui-pose  doth  St.  Gregory  WTite,  in  his  Pastoral,  in  the  distinction, 
"  Sit  rector."'     It  is  also  evident  by  many  other  doctors  and  holy  men,  as  by 
St.  Augustine,  Jerome,  Isidore,  Bernard,  whose  words  it  were  too  long  here 
to  rehearse. 
Tlie  hear-      As  touching  the  second  point,  That  the  hearing  of  the  word  and  law  of  God 
ing  of  the  jg  commanded  unto  the  people,  it  is  evident  both  by  the  old  and  new  law ;  for 
com-         it  is  said  in  Proverbs  [chap,  xxviii.],   "  He  that  tiu-netli  away  his  ear,  and 
manded     will  not  hear  the  law  of  God,  his  prayer  shall  be  cursed."     And  our  Saviour, 
by  God.     rebuking  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  concludeth  thus  in  John  viii.,  saying,  "  He 
that  is  of  God,  heareth  God's  word ;  but  forasmuch  as  you  are  not  of  God, 
therefore  you  hear  not  his  word." 
r.xcom-         Thirdly,  It  is  to  be  noted  that  excommunication  is  a  separation  from  the 
munica-    communion,  1 1  quest.  3  par.,  "  Nihil ;  "et  cap.  "  Canonica  ;"  and  27  quest.  1  par., 
"  Viduas;"  34  quest.  3  par.,  "  Cum  sacerdos."     And  this  excommunication  is 
Excom-     double,  that  is  to  say,  either  secret  or  manifest.     The  secret  excommunication 
Uon"'^^"    is,  whereby  a  man  is  separated  from  the  mystical  body  of  Christ,  and  so  from 
double.      God  through  sin,  according  unto  the  59th  of  Isaiah,  "  Your  iniquities  have 
made  separation  between  your  God  and  you."    And  with  this  excommunication 
doth  the  apostle  excommunicate  every  man  who  doth  not  love  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ ;  saying  in  the  firsth  epistle  to  the  Corinthians,  and  the  last  chapter,  "  If 
any  man  do  not  love  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  let  him  be  accursed."    The  manifest 
and  apert  excommunication  may  be  divided  into  a  manifest  excommunication  by 
God   which  is  spoken  of  in  Matt,  xxv.,  "  Go,  ye  cursed,"  &c.p  and  oftentimes 
else  in  the  law  of  God  :  also  into  a  manifest  excommunication  by  men,  whereby 
the  prelate  doth  either  justly  or  unjustly  cast  out  any  man  from  the  participation 
of  the  communion  of  tlie  church  ;  whereof  this  shall  suffice  at  this  present. 
The  Then,  as  touching  the  first  part  of  the  article,  it  is  thus  argued,  &:c. 

proofs  of        Whosoever  forsake  or  leave  the  commandments  of  God  undone,  they  are 
parttrfthe  excommunicate  of  God.     But  the  priests  who  leave  off  the  preaching  of  the 
article.      word  of  God,  for  fear  of  the  unjust  exconnnunication  of  men,  do  leave  the  com- 
mandment of  God  undone.     Ergo,  those  priests  who  do  leave  off  preaching  of 
the  word,  are  excommunicated  of  God. 

The  first  part  of  this  article  is  true :  the  major  appeareth  by  the  Psalm, 
"  Cursed  be  they  which  do  decline  and  swerve  from  thy  precepts."  The  minor 
IS  evident  by  the  first  proposition,  which  proveth  that  the  preaching  of  the  word 
of  God  is  the  commandment  of  God  enjoined  unto  those  priests  and  ministers. 
Whereupon  the  saying  of  our  Saviour  [Matt,  xv.]  is  spoken  unto  them :  "  Where- 
fore do  you  transgress  the  commandments  of  God  for  your  own  traditions?" 
leaving  off  the  preaching  of  the  word  of  God  for  fear  of  unjust  excommunica- 
tion ;  and  so  dishonouring  the  father  Christ,  and  the  mother  the  holy  church. 

It  is  thus  confirmed :  All  they  who  do  omit  or  let  slip  any  manner  of  work, 
principally  and  sti-aitly  enjoined  tliem  by  the  Lord  Jesu  Christ,  under  the  cloak 
and  colour  of  grace,  for  fear  of  any  excommunication  of  men,  are  already  excom- 
municate. But  priests,  and  especially  curates,  admonialied  by  the  Spirit  of  God, 
leaving  off  the  preaching  of  the  word  of  God  for  fear  of  the  excommunication  of 
men,  omit  and  leave  off,  for  fear  of  the  same  excommunication,  a  work  principally 
(1)  Greg.  dist.  44,  cap.  6,  "Rector." 


DUTY    OF    MIKISTKRS    AND    HKAKERS.  67 

and  straitly  enjoined  them  by  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  under  the  cloak  and  colour  Richard 

of  grace :  ergo,  priests,  and  especially  curates  and  such  as  be  admonished  and       ^^- 

warned  by  the  Spirit  of  Ciod,  omitting  the  preaching  of  tlie  word  of  God  for    ^  j)^ 

fear  of  excommunication,  are  excommunicate.    The  consequence  is  well  known.     133  [ 

The  major  appeareth  by  the  Psalm,  "  Cursed  be  tliey  which  do  decline  and  go 

away  from  thy  commandments."     The  minor  is  also  evident  again  by  the  first 

supposition. 

Item,  If  the  apostles  of  Christ  had  left  offtlie  preaching  of  the  word  of  God  The  apo- 

for  fear  of  the  excommunication  of  men,  whicli  tlie   Lord  did  foreshow  unto  ^"f*  '*''^ 
1  •      T   1  •  ■  ri>i  111  ■  /•   1     ■  1"'  obey 

them  ui  John  xvi.,  sayuig,  "  they  snail  excommunicate  you  out  01  their  syna-  any  wick- 

gogues;"  they  had  been  excommunicated  of  God  :  ergo,  by  like  evidence,  the  ert  inhi- 
priests  and  ministers  of  Christ,  being  insj)ired  with  the  same  spirit  to  preach  ^ '""' 
and  declare  the  word  of  God,  if  they  leave  it  undone  for  fear  of  the  excommu- 
nication of  men,  are  already  excommunicate.  The  consequence  dependeth 
upon  a  similitude,  and  the  antecedent  is  evident ;  for  if  the  apostles  had  left  off 
preaching  for  fear  of  excommunication,  they  had  broken  tlie  commandments  of 
God,  and  consequently  had  been  accursed.  Wherefore  they,  willing  to  observe 
and  keep  the  commandments  of  God,  and  to  put  off  the  excommunication  of 
men,  said  unto  the  higli  priests,  elders,  and  scribes  at  Jerusalem,  to  Annas, 
Caiphiis,  John,  and  Alexander,  and  all  others  of  the  kindred  of  the  priests  who 
were  gathered  together,  and  commanded  tliem  that  they  sliould  not  preach  or 
teach  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  "  If  it  be  just  in  the  sight  of  God,  that  we  should 
rather  obey  you  than  God,  that  judge  you."  [Acts  iv.]  And  in  tlie  fifth  of  the 
Acts  they  said  unto  them,  "  We  ought  rather  to  obey  God  tiian  man."  By 
tliis  saying  of  the  Holy  Ghost  it  is  concluded,  that  the  priests  and  ministers  01 
Christ,  inspired  by  the  Holy  Ghost  to  preach  the  word  of  God,  ought  rather  to 
obey  the  Holy  Ghost,  than  those  that  shall  prohibit  and  command  them  to  the 
contrarj',  and  to  sidier  the  excommunication  of  men  patiently.  Whereupon 
pope  Anacletus  spake  very  well  in  this,  as  it  is  written  [Dist.  43,]  :  "  We  know," 
saith  he,  "  that  many  do  go  about  to  molest  and  trouble  the  doctors  and 
teachers  to  this  end,  that  they  might  utterly  destroy  them,  and  fulfil  their  own 
proper  lusts  and  desires :  yet,  notwithstanding,  the  said  doctors,  as  much  as  in 
them  lieth,  ought  not  to  depart  or  go  back  from  their  good  doings  and  intent, 
knowing  assuredly  that  blessed  are  they  who  suffer  persecution  for  righteous- 
ness' sake."  Thus  much  writeth  he.  And,  upon  these  words,  "  Ye  shall 
find  an  ass  tied  up,  and  a  he-foal  \vith  her  ;  loose  her  and  bring  her  unto  me  ; 
and  if  any  man  say  any  thing  unto  you,  say  ye  that  the  Lord  hath  need  of 
them,"  the  reverend  Bede  writeth  thus  :  "  Here  it  is  mystically  commanded 
unto  the  doctors  and  teachers,  that  if  any  adversity  do  let  or  hinder,  or  any 
man  do  proliibit  or  stop,  that  sinners  cannot  be  loosed  from  their  bonds  or 
snares,  and  be  brought  unto  the  Lord  by  the  confession  of  their  faith,  that  they, 
notwithstanding,  should  not  leave  off  preaching,  but  constantly  and  boldly  afiirin 
and  say,  that  tlie  Lord  hath  need  of  such  to  edify  and  build  again  his  church. 
For  so  did  the  apostles  ;  so  likewise  ought  all  the  humble  and  meek  ministers  of 
Christ  to  do."  And  St.  Jerome,  writing  to  Rusticus,  the  bishop  of  Narbonne, 
saith  thus :  "  Let  no  bishop  fi-om  henceforth  be  puffed  up  or  inilamed  with  the 
en\y  of  devilish  temptation,  if  the  priests  now  and  then  do  exliort  and  teach 
the  people,  or  preach  openly  in  the  churches  ;  or,  as  it  is  said,  do  bless  the 
people ;  for  unto  him  who  should  deny  unto  me  the  doing  hereof,  I  would  say 
in  this  manner:  He  that  wills  not  that  priests  shoidd  do  those  things  which  they 
are  commanded  by  God,  let  him  say  that  he  is  greater  and  above  Christ;"  by 
which  words  St.  Jerome  doth  openly  declare,  that  priests  are  commanded  to 
exhort  and  teach  the  people,  and  to  preach  in  the  churches.  Secondly,  That  a 
bishop,  denying  or  forbidding  the  same  to  be  done,  specially  the  priests  or 
ministers  being  apt  men  thereunto,  is  extolled  above  Christ ;  and  therefore,  con- 
sequently, is  not  to  be  obeyed  nor  heard  in  his  doings. 

Item,  Admit  that  the  pope  be  a  heretic,  iuul  teach  doctrine  perverse  and  if  the 
contrary  to  the  holy  Scriptures,  and  that  the  bisliop  be  a  catholic  man,   unto  pope  he  a 
whom  the  pope  giveth  in  commandment  that  he  shall  suffer  no  man  to  preach  the  godly 
contrary  to  his  opinion,  as  it  happened  in  pope  Leo,  and  St.  Hilary  the  bishop  :  bishops 
adding  this  also,  that  the  bishop  do  execute  the  pope's  commandment,  under  "Jg^^j, 
pain  of  excommunication  ;  this  notwithstanding,  if  the  catholic  priests,  learned  against 
in  the  law  of  God,  do  leave  off  preaching  against  the  pope's  heresies,  for  fear  of  li>™- 

F  2' 


fiS 


THE    DEFEXCK    OF    WICKLTFF    BY    JOHN    IIUSS. 


lihhnrd 
II. 

A.D. 

'  1384. 


Tliough 
tlie  chief 
priests  be 
adulter- 
ers, j'et 
ought  the 
ministers 
to  preach 
against 
adultery. 


Example 
of  Christ. 


Obedi- 
ence of 
christian 
priests 
towards 
their 
prelates. 


excommunication  of  men,  they  are  already  excommunicate  ;  which  thing  is 
evident,  forasmuch  as  they  are  accursed  through  the  consent  of  their  silence, 
as  St.  Isidore  saith,  11  quest.  1  par.  :  "  He  that  doth  consent  unto  sinners,  or 
defendeth  a  sinner,  he  shall  be  cursed  both  before  God  and  man,  and  shall  be 
punislicd  with  a  most  severe  rebuke."  And  in  the  7th  question,  4  par.,  "  Om- 
nis,"  it  is  said :  "  He  that  doth  neglect  to  amend  that  which  he  may  correct,  com- 
mittetli  no  less  fault  than  he  who  had  before  offended ;  for  not  only  they  who 
do  commit  the  offence,  but  also  they  who  consent  thereunto,  are  judged  par- 
takers thereof."  In  like  case,  priests  who  do  not  preach  against  tlie  heresy 
wliich  the  pope  teacheth,  are  dumb  dogs,  not  able  to  open  their  mouths  or  bark 
against  the  wolf,  which  will  kill  the  sheep  of  Jesus  Christ :  ergo,  how  can  it  then 
be  otlierwise,  but  they  must  needs  be  betrayers  of  the  sheep  of  their  own  shepherd  ? 

Item,  Let  it  be  so,  that  the  bishop  with  the  chief  prelates  be  adulterers,  or 
otherwise  open  offenders,  and  that  he,  together  with  his  prelates,  do  command 
under  pain  of  excommunication,  that  none  be  so  hardy  as  to  preach  against 
adultery ;  in  such  a  case,  they  who  do  omit  their  duty  in  preaching  against 
adultery,  for  fear  of  excommunication  of  men,  are  already  excommunicated  of 
God  :  ergo,  the  first  pai-t  of  the  article  is  true.  The  antecedent  is  proved  :  for 
our  Saviour,  in  Mark  viii.,  saith  thus :  "  He  that  acknowledgeth  me  and  my 
words  in  this  wicked  and  adulterous  generation,  the  Son  of  Man  shall  also 
acknowledge  and  confess  him  when  he  shall  come  in  the  glory  of  his  Father 
with  his  angels."  Therefore  he  that  shall  confess  Christ,  and  these  words  of 
Christ,  [Matt,  v.]  "  You  have  heard  that  it  was  said  to  them  in  old  time,  Thou 
shalt  not  commit  adultery :  but  I  say  unto  you,  that  every  one  which  shall 
behold  a  woman  to  lust  after  her,  hath  already  committed  adultery  with  lier  in 
his  heart:"  he,  I  say,  that  shall  confess  these  tilings  before  an  adulterous 
bishop,  with  his  chief  prelates,  who,  perchance,  are  tlie  wicked  and  adulterous 
generation,  the  Son  of  Man  shall  also  acknowledge  him,  when  he  shall  come 
in  the  glory  of  his  Father,  and  so  consequently  is  he  blessed.  Contrariwise 
he  who,  for  the  fear  of  excommunication  of  men,  will  not  confess  Christ  and 
his  words  before  the  sinftil  and  adulterous  generation,  is  accursed.  The  conse- 
quence holdeth  by  the  words  of  Christ,  [Luke  ix.]  "  He  that  is  ashamed  of  me 
and  my  words,  him  shall  the  Son  of  Man  be  ashamed  of,  when  he  shall  come 
in  his  majesty,  and  in  the  glory  of  his  Father,  and  his  holy  angels :"  pronouncing 
that  which  is  spoken,  [Matt,  xxv.]  "  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  I  know  you  not ; 
go  you  cursed  into  evenasting  fire." 

Also  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  did  not  omit,  or  leave  off  the  preaching  of  the 
kingdom  of  God  for  any  pretended  excommunication  of  the  bishops.  Scribes, 
and  Pharisees ;  so  likewise  liis  true  and  humble  priests  ought  not  to  omit  their 
preaching  for  any  pretended  excommunication  of  men ;  the  consequence  holdetli 
by  the  saying  of  Christ,  [John  xv.]  "  Be  ye  mindfiil  of  the  words  which  I  have 
spoken  unto  you,  the  servant  is  not  greater  than  his  master  :  if  they  have  per- 
secuted me,  they  will  persecute  you  also."  The  antecedent  is  apparent  by  the 
saying  of  St.  John,  chap.  ix. :  "  Even  now  the  Jews  had  conspired,  that  whoso- 
ever did  confess  him  to  be  Christ,  should  be  excommunicate."  And  likewise, 
John  vii. :  "  Whether  did  any  of  the  princes  or  rulers,  or  any  of  the  Pharisees 
believe  in  him?  but  this  people  which  knoweth  not  the  law  are  accursed." 

Also  the  humble  and  just  ministers  of  God  ought  not,  under  pain  of  sin,  to 
cease  from  the  fruitful  preaching  of  the  law  of  God  for  any  unjust  excommu- 
nication, or  unlawful  commandment ;  and  it  is  proved  thus  :  the  humble  and 
just  ministers  of  Christ  ought  not  to  obey  their  prelates  in  such  things  as  are 
contrary  to  God ;  as  all  the  holy  doctors,  and  sucn  as  are  learned  in  the  law  of 
God,  do  wholly  with  one  consent  affirm.  And,  forasmuch  as  an  unjust  excom- 
munication and  imlawful  commandments  are  against  God,  therefore  the  just 
and  true  ministers  of  God  ought  not  to  obey  such  unlawful  excommunication 
and  commandments ;  and,  consequently,  ought  not  to  cease  for  them  from  the 
fruitful  preaching  of  the  gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  but  ought  boldly  and 
gladly  to  preach  the  same.  Forasmuch  as  the  Lord  doth  comfort  them  in 
Matt,  v.,  saying  thus  :  "  Blessed  and  happy  are  ye  when  men  do  curse  you  and 
persecute  you,  and  speak  all  kind  of  evil  against  you,  making  lies  and  slanders 
upon  you  for  my  sake  ;  rejoice  and  be  glad,  for  great  is  your  reward  in  heaven." 

Also  every  minister  having  power  given  him  from  above  to  preach  the  gospel, 
hath  the  same  given  unto  him  for  the  edifying  of  the  church,  and  not  for  the 


D(  TY     OF    MINISTEKS    AND    HEARERS.  6'J 

dcstniction  of  the  same  ;  as  the  apostle  saith,  [2  Cor.  x.,]  "  13ut  every  one  Richard 
leaving  off  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  for  fear  of  any  pretended  exconiinuni-       ^^• 
cation  of  men,  should  frustrate  the  power  given  him  for  the  edifying  of  the     a    |^ 
church."     And,  tliorefore,  in   so  doing,  lie  should  sin  against  God  and   his     -looj' 

cluirch,  and  consequonMy  ought  rather  to  choose  not  to  cease  from  preaching  '— 

for  fear  of  any  such  excommunication,  lest  that  he  be  excomnmnicated  of  our  .P''c<.ch- 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  pos-iei 

Item,  Set  a  case  that  the  pope  doth  command  that  there  shall  be  no  preach-  nu-ant  for 
ing  in  any  place;  then  the  ministers  of  Clirist,  leaving  off  their  preaching  for  ^'.''''"•■^- 
fear  of  the  po])e"s  curse,  are  already  exconnnunicated  of  God  :  it  is  evident,  iv.r  de- 
forasmiich  as  they  have  neglected  the  commandment  of  Ciod  for  the  command-  struction. 
nient  of  men.     And  this  case  is  possible ;  for  by  what  reason  may  the  ])ope  The 
command,  under  pain  of  excommunication,  that  there  shall  be  no  preaching  in  I'reacliing 
some  place,  and  namely  in  tiie  parisli  churches?  Ijy  the  same  reason  he  may  .'ospi-l  is 
connnand  that  no  man  should  preach  in  any  place.     The  first  part  is  evident  "ot  to  be 
by  the  prohibition  of  pope  Alexander,  who  in  his  bull  did  prohibit  to  preach  .''il',!',"^'"'^ 
the  word  of  God  unto  the  ])eople  in  chapels,  although   the  said  chapels  were  pope's 
confirmed  by  the  privilege  of  the  see  apostolic  ;  the  which  bull  the  lord  Subincon,  I'TOi'il^i- 
archbishop  of  Prague,  with  his  canons,  obtained.     By  these  aforesaid,  the  first   '"  "' 
part  of  the  article  is  evident,  which  is  this,  that  all  priests  omitting  the  preach- 
ing of  the  word  of  God,  for  fear  of  the  exconnnunication  of  men,  are  already 
excommunicate.     The  second  part  of  the  article  is  this :   that  all  they  who  do  Tlie 
omit  the  hearing  of  the  word  of  God,  for  fear  of  the  excommunication  of  men,  proofs  of 
are  alreadj-  excommunicate.     And  it  is  proved  thus :  all  such  as  neglect  the  cond  part 
commandments  of  (}od  are  excommunicate.     But  they  who  neglect  the  hear-  of  the 
ing  of  the  word  of  (Jod,  for  the  excommunication  of  men,  are  they  who  neglect  ^""^'^• 
the  commandments  of  God.     Therefore  they  who  omit  the  hearing  of  the  word 
of  God,  for  the  excommunication  of  men,  are  already  excommunicate.     The 
major  is  apparent  by  Psalm  cxviii.,  "  Cursed  be  they  which  decline  from  thy 
commandments;"  and  the  minor  is  evident  by  the  second  supposition,  which 
saith,  that  tlie  hearing  of  the  word  of  God  is  commanded  unto  the  people. 
This  is  confirmed :  all  such  as  omit  the  necessary  means  unto  salvation  are  Means 
excommunicate.     But,  such  as  omit  the  hearing  of  the  word  of  God,  for  the  necessary 
excommunication  by  men,  be  such  as  do  omit  the  necessary  means  unto  salva-  vationare 
tion  :  therefore,  in  so  doing,  they  are  excommunicate.     The  consequence  is  not  to  be 
plain  :  the  major  is  made  evident  by  this,  that  all  such  as  do  omit  the  neces-  °™'"«'*- 
sary  means  unto  salvation,  do  also  neglect  their  salvation,  and  so  are  out  of  the 
way  of  salvation,   and  be   excommunicated  of  God.      The   minor  appeareth 
hereby,  that  to  hear  the  Avord  of  God  is  the  means  most  necessary  unto  salva- 
tion, as  the  apostle  doth  prove  in  Romans  x. ;  "  How,"  saith  he,  "  shall  they 
believe  on  him,  whom  they  never  heard  of?    and  how  shall  they  hear  without 
a  preacher  ?"     And,  by  and  by  afterwards,  the  ajiostle  inferreth  to  the  same 
puq)ose,  "  That  faith  cometh  by  hearing,  and  hearing  by  the  word  of  God." 

Item,  Whatsoever  is  done  contrary  to  conscience,  doth  tend  to  eternal  dam-  A  man 
nation  ;   as  it  is   said,   touching    the   restitution   of  the   spoiled  goods,   chap,  "u^'l't  "> 
"  Literas  porro."     But  to  omit  tlie  hearing  of  the  word  of  God   for  fear  of  thing 
excommunication  of  men,  is  a  thing  which  is  done  against  conscience  :  there-  apinst 
fore,  to  omit  the  hearing  of  tlie  word  of  God  for  excomnumication,  doth  tend  g^'feJ^,""" 
to  eternal  damnation,  and  therefore  consequently  ought  not  to  be  done,  for 
fear  of  any  excommmiication.     Wherefore  a  woman  being  adjiulged  to  a  man, 
whom  she  knoweth  to  be  within  the  degrees  of  consanguinity  which  God's  law- 
hath  prohibited,  ought  not  to  obey  that  judgment,  lest  she  offend  against  God ; 
but  meekly  and  patiently  to  sustain  the  exconnnunication,  i\s  it  appeareth  in 
the  chapter  before  alleged.     So,  likewise,  all  true  Christians  ought,  rather  than 
offend  against  God,  meekly  to  suffer  the  excommunication  of  men,  and  not  to 
omit  the  hearing  of  the  word  of  God.     To  this  purpose  also  serveth  that  which 
is  spoken  in  the  1 1  quest.  3  par.,   "  He  that  feareth  the  omnipotent  God,  will 
not  presume  by  any  means  to  do  any  thing  contrary  unto  the  gospel  or  apostles, 
either  contrary  unto  the  prophets,  or  tlie  institutions  of  the  holy  fathers."     By 
these  premises,  the  second  part  of  this  ai'ticle  is  manifest,  that  all  such  as  do 
omit  the  hearing  of  die  word  of  God,  for  fear  of  excommunication  of  men,  are 
already  excommunicated. 

And  forasmuch  as  all  Christians,  being  of  lawful  age,  not  repenting  at  the 


70  THE    DEFENCE    OF    WICKLIFF    BY    JOHN    HUSS. 

Richard    end,  shall  be  counted  in  a  manaer  as  traitors  to  Christ  in  the  day  of  judg- 

^^-      ment,  because  they  were  unfaithful  servants  of  Christ,  —  therefore  they  who 

A   T)     through  fear  omit  the  preaching  and  hearing  of  the  word  of  God,  for  the 

1004'     excommunication  of  men,    shall  be  counted  as  traitors  to  Christ,   and  shall 

'—  render  account  thereof  imto  the   Lord.     Whereupon   Chrysostome  touching 

'^^®,    ,  both  those  sorts  in  his  41st  homily,  showing  how  the  Lord  would  have  some 
the°hird    to  be  teachers,  and  others  to  be  cUsciples,  saith  thus:  "For  unto  those  whom 
part  of      he  would  have  to  be  teachers,  he  speaketh  thus  by  his  prophet  Isaiah  :   '  Ye 
tM  ^'^"      priests  speak  to  the  hearts  of  the  people,  for  if  the  priests  do  not  manifest 
all  the  truth  unto  the  people,  they  shall  render  account  thereof  at  the  day  of 
judgment :  and,  likewise,  if  the  people  do  not  learn  the  truth,  they  shall  also 
give  an  account  at  the  day  of  judgment.' "     It  is  also  made  more  evident  by 
him  in  Matt,  x.,  "  '  Do  not  fear  those  Avhich  kill  the  body,'  lest  through  the 
fear  of  death,  you  do  not  freely  speak  that  which  you  have  heard,  neither 
boldly  preach  that  unto  all  men  which  you  alone  have  heard  in  your  ears.     So 
that  hereby  alone  it  is  evident  that  not  only  he  is  a  betrayer  of  the  truth,  who, 
transgressing  the  truth,  doth  openly  speak  lies  instead  of  the  truth ;  but  he 
also  who  doth  not  freely  pronounce,  or  doth  not  fi-eely  defend  the  tnith,  which 
he  ought  boldly  to  defend,  is  also  a  traitor  unto  the  tnith.     For  like  as  the 
priest  is  a  debtor  to  preach  the  truth  which  he  hath  heard  of  the  Lord,  even  so 
the  layman  is  bound  to  defend  the  truth,  which  he  hath  heard  of  the  minister, 
approved  by  the  Scriptures  :  which  if  he  do  not,  then  is  he  a  traitor  to  the 
truth ;  for  steadfast  belief  with  the  heart,  prevaileth  unto  righteousness  ;  the 
Chrysos-    confession  which  is  made  with  the  mouth,  helpeth  unto  salvation."    Thus  much 
'?™^'h^"  '^''^"iteth  Chrysostome,  who,  together  with  the  people  meekly  bearing  the  ex- 
he  ivas      communication  of  the  bishops,  freely  preached  the  truth,  and  the  people  heard 
excom-     him ;  and  so  by  his  word  and  his  works  he  freely  taught  the  truth,  lest  he 
cate"  vet    s^io^^l'l  ^^  a  traitor  to  the  truth,  and  consequently  be  counted  as  a  traitor  to  our 
he  did       Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  the  day  of  judgment.     And  thus  the  third  part  of  the 
preach.      article  aforesaid  is  manifest. 


The  Defence  of  the  Fifteenth  Article  of  John  Wickliff  by  John 

Huss. 

"  It  is  lawftil  for  any  deacon  or  priest  to  preach  the  word  of  God  without  the 
authority  of  the  apostolic  see,  or  of  his  catholics." 

First,  I  understand  here  by  the  authority  of  the  apostolic  see,  his  special 

consent  properly  authorizing.     And,  likewise,  I  understand  by  authority  of  the 

bishop,  a  special  consent  of  the  bishop  authorizing  the  said  deacon  or  priest 

to  preach. 

Confir-  Now  as  touching  the  truth  of  this  article,  I  thus  argue  :  like  as  after  matri- 

mation      mony  once   complete,  the  man  and  wife  may  lawfully,  without  any  special 

fifteenth    license  of  the  pope  or  bishop,  procreate  carnal  children,  so  likewise  deacons  or 

article.      priests,  by  the  motion  of  God  through  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  may  lawfully, 

Every       -without  any  special  license  either  of  pope  or  bishop,  generate  spiritual  children. 

jng  law-    Ergo,  this  article  is  true,  and  the  antecedent  is  thus  proved.     For  as  it  is  an 

fully         acceptable  work  unto  God  for  man  and  wife,  without  the  special  license  of  the 

by  the       pope  or  bishop,  to  generate  carnal  children ;  so  it  is  acceptable  imto  him,  that 

church,      deacons  or  priests,  by  the  motion  of  God  through  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ, 

ought  to    should  lawfully  generate  spiritual  children,  without  the  special  license  of  the 

the  word    pope  or  of  any  other  bishop  :  ergo,  the  assumption  is  true. 

of  God  But  if  any  man  will  deny  this  similitude,  let  him  show  the  diversity.     Yea, 

the  pope's  ^^  ^^  ^^  worse  not  to  receive  or  to  choke  the  seed  of  God's  word,  than  the  carnal 

license,      seed,  so  contrariwise,  it  is  better  to  receive  and  sow  abroad  that  seed  of  the 

word  of  God,  whereby  children  might  be  raised  up  unto  God,  than  to  receive 

or  give  seed  whereby  carnal  children  may  be  gotten.    Whereupon  our  Saviour, 

in  Matthew  x.,  saith  thus ;  "  Whosoever  doth  not  receive  you,  neither  heareth 

your  words,  wipe  off  the  dust  from  your  feet :  verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  in  the 

day  of  judgment  it  shall  be  better  unto  the  land  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  than 

to  that  city." 

Also  a  deacon  or  priest,  being  stirred  by  the  Spirit  of  Jesus  Christ,  may 
preach  the  word  of  God  without  the  special  license  of  the  pope  cr  bishop. 


DUTY    OF    PRIESTS    AND    DEACON'S.  71 

Ergo,  it  is  lawful  for  him  so  to  do.     The  consequence  is  thus  manifest ;  so  Richard 
much  as  the  Spirit  of  God,  moving  the  deacon  or  priest  unto  the  preaching  of      ^^- 
the  gospel,  is  of  greater  force  tlian  any  prohibition  of  pope  or  bishop  invented     a   tj 
by  man  :  ergo,  according  unto  the  rule  of  the  apostles,  they  ought  infallibly  to    233^" 

be  obedient  unto  the  Spirit  of  Clirist,  wliich  doth  so  move  tliem  thereunto,  and  1- 

rather  to  obey  God  than  man :  [Acts  v.]  Also,  by  like  reason,  as  Eldad  and 
Medad,  upon  whom  the  Spirit  of  God  did  rest,  did  lawfully  prophesy  without 
requiring  any  license  at  Moses'  hands,  as  it  is  written  Numb.  xi. ;  for  the  same 
reason  may  the  meek  minister  of  Christ,  upon  whom  the  Spirit  of  God  doth 
rest,  without  the  requiring  of  any  license  either  of  the  pope  or  bishop,  lawfully 
preacii  the  word  of  God  unto  the  people.  And  would  to  God  in  this  behalf  all 
prelates  had  the  spirit  of  Moses;  for  it  is  said.  Numb,  xi.,  that  when  Eldad 
and  Medad  were  prophesying  in  the  tents,  a  child  ran  unto  Moses,  and  told 
him,  sapng;  "  Eldad  and  Medad  do  prophesy  in  the  tents;"  and  by  and  by 
Joshua  the  son  of  Nun,  the  servant  of  Moses,  whom  he  had  chosen  out  amongst 
many,  said,  "  My  master  Moses,  forbid  them :"  and  he  said,  "  Why  enviest 
thou  for  my  sake  ?  Woidd  God  that  all  the  people  could  prophesy,  and  that  God 
the  Lord  would  give  them  his  Spirit!"  O  would  to  God  the  pope  and  bishops  ^[*"^g''^' 
had  the  affections  which  this  holy  man,  the  friend  of  God,  had !  Then  would  people 
he  not  prohibit  the  meek  deacons  and  ministers  of  Jesus  Christ  to  preach  the  may  pro- 
gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  like  affection  had  the  blessed  man  Gregory,  who,  gt"^G^fe. 
in  his  twenty-second  book  of  Morals,  writing  upon  these  words  of  Job,  "  And  gorj'. 
I  have  not  afflicted  the  soul  of  his  husbandmen,"  saith  thus:  "  The  husband- 
men of  this  earth  are  these,  who,  being  set  in  small  authority,  with  as  fervent 
desire  as  they  can,  and  with  as  great  labour  as  they  may,  do  work  by  the 
preaching  of  grace,  to  the  erudition  of  the  holy  church,  which  husbandmen  of 
this  world  not  to  afflict,  is  not  to  envy  their  labours  and  doings :  neither  ought 
the  ruler  of  the  church,  albeit  he  do  challenge  unto  himself  alone  the  title  of 
preaching,  through  envy  gainsay  others  who  do  preach  tnily  and  uprightly. 
For  the  godly  mind  of  the  pastor,  who  seeketh  not  his  own  glory  amongst  men, 
desireth  to  be  holpen ;  which  thing  also  the  faithfid  preacher  doth  wish,  if  it 
might  by  any  means  be  brought  to  pass,  that  the  truth,  which  he  alone  cannot 
sufficiently  express,  all  men's  mouths  might  declare.  Whei-efore,  when  Joshua 
would  have  resisted  the  two  who  were  prophesying  in  the  host,  '  why  dost  thou 
en\y,'  saith  he,  '  for  my  sake?'  for  he  did  not  envy  that  good  in  others  which 
he  himself  had."     Thus  waiteth  St.  Gregory. 

Also  the  meek  ministers  of  Christ  have,  by  a  special  gift  of  God,  knowledge  The 
and  mind  to  preach  the  gospel ;  but  it  is  lawful  neither  for  the  pope  nor  bishop,  J^^" "^  "j 
nor  any  other  man,  to  let  or  hinder  them,  lest  thereby  they  should  hinder  the  of  God 
word  of  God,  that  it  have  not  its  free  course.     Ergo,  this  article  is  true ;  for  the  ought  not 
king  doth  not  so  much  rule  over  the  goods  of  his  subjects,  no  not  of  his  own  stopped, 
sons,  but  that  they  may  give  alms  to  whom  they  will :  much  more  the  bishop 
hath  not  so  great  authority  over  the  knowledge  of  the  meek  minister,  with  his 
other  gifts  of  God,  but  that  he  may  now  freely,  under  the  title  of  spiritual  alms, 
freely  preach  the  gospel  unto  the  people.     Ergo,  forasmuch  as  it  shoidd  seem 
strange,  that  a  bishop  shoidd  forbid  any  man  to  give  any  corporal  alms  to  the 
poor  that  are  an-hungered ;  much  more  strange  and  marveUous  would  it  be,  if 
he  should  prohibit  the  spiritual  minister  of  Christ  to  give  spiritual  alms,  by  the 
preaching  of  the  gospel  of  the  word  of  God. 

Item,  No  catholic  man  ought  to  doubt,  but  that  a  man  able  for  the  piu^ose, 
is  more  bound  to  teach  those  who  are  ignorant,  to  counsel  and  comfort  the  weak 
in  spirit,  to  correct  such  as  are  unruly,  to  forgive  those  that  do  them  wTong, 
than  to  do  any  other  work  of  mercy  •  forasmuch  then  as  he  that  hath  sufficient 
is  bound,  under  pain  of  damnation,  to  give  corporal  alms,  as  it  appeareth  in 
Matthew  xxv.,  much  more  he  who  is  able,  is  bound  to  do  spiritual  alms.  And 
this  alms  St.  Bernard,  writing  unto  Eugenius  in  his  third  book,  perceived  to  be  st.  Ser- 
ver}' necessary  for  the  bishop  of  Rome,  where  he  saith  thus :  "  I  fear  no  "^r'l 
greater  poison,  nor  greater  sword  nor  mischief,  will  happen  unto  thee,  than  this 
insatiable  desire  of  dominion."  With  what  face,  then,  can  the  faithful  minister 
withdraw  or  keep  back  the  spiritual  alms  for  the  pope  and  any  other,  even 
without  the  special  license  of  the  pope  or  of  the  bishop ;  which  license,  through 
the  far  distance  from  the  pope,  the  ministers  cannot  so  easily  obtain  or  come 
by  ?     For  any  prolubition  of  any  prelate,  being  broken  through  necessity,  is 


THE    DEFENCE    OF    WICKI.IFF    BV    JOHN    IIL'SS. 


Richard 
11. 

A.D. 

1384. 


Objec- 
(ion. 


Answers 
to  tlie 
objection. 


Wliat  it 
is  falsely 
to  usurp 
the  office 
of  a 
preacher. 

Who  is  a 
true 

minister 
of  the 

church. 


Four 
kinds  of 
sendinf; 
or  calling 
according 
to  St.  Au- 
gustine. 

The  com- 
mon law. 


not  to  be  blamed.  11  quest.  3  par.  "  Intercessor,"  and  also  in  tlie  chapter 
following. 

Item,  All  authority  of  preaching  given  unto  deacons  and  priests  in  their 
consecration,  were  but  vain,  except  that  in  case  of  necessity,  without  any  special 
license,  they  might  preach  the  gospel.  For  it  is  evident,  inasmuch  as  it  is  not 
lawful  for  them  to  use  that  authority,  without  the  special  license  of  their  adver- 
sary :  ergo,  it  is  given  them  in  vain.  The  consequence  is  evident  by  the 
common  saying  of  the  philosopher,  that  "  power  is  but  vain,  whereof  proceedeth 
no  use  of  action."  But  forasmuch  as  this  article  doth,  as  it  were,  depend  upon 
the  pi-eceding  article,  therefore  this  shall  suffice  to  be  spoken  thereof  at  this 
present. 

But,  against  the  affirmations  of  both  these  articles,  this  is  objected  out  of  the 
16  quest.  1  par. :  "  All  faithful  people,  and  especially  all  priests,  deacons,  and 
all  others  of  the  clergy,  ought  to  take  heed  that  they  do  nothing  without  the 
license  of  their  bishop."  It  is  also  objected  out  of  the  fifth  book  of  Decretals, 
"  Tituli  de  haereticis ;"  cap.  "  Cum  ex  injuncto;"  where  it  is  said,  no  man  ought 
to  usurj)  to  himself  indifferently  the  office  of  preaching,  forasmuch  as  the  apostle 
saith,  "  How  shall  they  preach,  except  they  be  sent  ?"  Whereas,  also,  Innocent 
doth  declare,  that  it  is  not  sufficient  for  a  man  to  say,  that  he  is  sent  of  God  to 
preach  except  he  do  show  the  same.  As  touching  the  fir.st  point,  the  Gloss 
doth  sufficiently  answer  upon  this  word,  "  without  license;"  "  that  is  to  be 
expounded,"  saith  he,  "  without  general  license;  which  is  obtained  and  given, 
when  a  bishop  doth  appoint  any  priest  to  govern  the  people;"  "  for  thereby," 
saith  he,  "  it  seemeth  a  bishop  is  thought  to  give  him  general  power  to  minister 
imto  the  people,  and  to  rule  the  chiu'ch."  Thus  much  in  the  Gloss.  And  to 
the  same  end  and  purpose  it  is  said  in  the  7  quest.  1  chapter,  "  Episcopi :" 
"  Bishops  or  priests,  if  they  come  into  the  clnu'ch  of  another  bishop  to  visit  the 
same,  as  it  is  said  Gloss  1.  'in  honore  suo,'  let  them  be  received  in  their  degree, 
and  desired  as  well  to  preach  the  word,  as  to  do  any  other  consecration  or 
oblation." 

Secondly,  it  is  to  be  noted,  which  is  very  well  expressed  in  the  same  place ; 
"  No  man  ought  to  usurp  unto  himself  the  office  of  preaching,  as  a  thing  indif- 
ferent," for  to  usurp,  is  unlawfully  to  use  any  thing:  ergo,  the  same  deacon  or 
priest  doth  then  usurp  the  office  of  preaching  indifferently,  who,  living  viciously, 
contrary  unto  the  law  of  Christ,  or  being  ignorant  of  the  law  of  God,  doth 
preach  either  for  gain  or  covetousness  of  living,  either  for  his  belly  or  dainty 
life,  or  for  any  vain  glory ;  but  he  who  doth  live  according  unto  the  laws  of 
Christ,  and  being  moved  with  the  affection  of  sincere  charity,  intending  pui'ely 
the  honour  of  God  and  the  salvation  of  himself  and  his  neighbours,  doth  preach 
no  lies  or  vain  jests  or  other  things  not  authorized,  but  only  the  law  of  Christ 
and  the  minds  of  the  holy  doctors.  And  he  that  doth  so  preach,  necessity 
occasioning  or  moving  him  thereunto,  in  case  there  be  no  pope  or  bishop,  or  in 
case  possible,  to  withstand  the  preaching  of  heritics  or  false  preachers,  in  so 
doing  doth  not  usurp  the  office  of  preaching  ;  and  in  such  case  there  is  no  doubt 
but  he  is  sent  of  God.  And  this  doth  also  answer  unto  that  which  is  conse- 
quently said,  that  if  any  man  will  peradventure  craftily  answer,  that  such 
preachers  are  invisibly  sent  of  God,  although  not  visibly  of  men,  when  the 
invisible  sending  of  God  is  much  better  than  the  visible  sending  of  men ;  a  man 
may  reasonably  answer  tliereunto,  that  forasmuch  as  that  internal  sending  is 
secret,  it  is  not  sufficient  for  a  man  only  to  say  that  he  is  sent  of  God,  forasmuch 
as  every  heretic  may  so  say ;  but  he  ought  to  prove  the  same  his  invisible  calling 
by  the  working  of  some  miracle,  or  by  some  special  testimony  of  the  Scripture. 

Here  it  is  to  be  noted,  that  according  to  St.  Augustine,  in  his  65th  book  of 
Questions  to  Orosius,  there  are  four  kinds  of  sending.  The  first  is  from  God 
only,  whereof  we  read  in  Moses  and  others,  who  were  inspired  by  God.  And 
this  kind  of  sending  looseth  from  the  danger  of  the  statute ;  so  that  he  whom 
the  Spirit  of  God  hath  inspired,  this  prelate  (giving  thanks)  may  proceed 
unto  a  better  life.  Whereupon  pope  Urban  saith,  19th  quest.  2  par.,  "  There 
be,"  said  he,  "  two  laws,  the  one  public,  the  other  private.  The  jiublic  la\v 
is  that  which  is  confirmed  in  writing  by  the  holy  fathers,  such  as  is  the 
canon  law,  which  is  only  given  for  transgressions.  As  for  example,  it  is 
decreed  in  the  canons,  that  none  of  the  clergy  shall  go  from  one  bishopric  to 
another,  without  the  letters  commendatory  of  his  bishop  ;  which  was  ordained 


VVTY    OF    PRIESTS    A\D    DEACONS.  73 

only  for  offenders,  that  no  infamed  persons  should  be  received  by  any  bishop ;   indiard 
for  tliey  were  wont,  wlien  tluy  could  not  celebrate  or  do  their  office  under  their       ^' 
own  bishopric,  to  go  to  aiiotlier ;  wliicli  now  is  forbidden  by  tiie  laws  and  pre-     •    ,  j 
cepts.     The  ])rivate  law  is  that,  which,  by  the  instruction  of  the  Holy  Giiost,  is     ioqj' 

written  in  the  heart,  as  tlie  apostle  speaketh  of  many  who  have  the  law  of  God I_ 

'  written  in  their  hearts.'  "     And  in  another  place :  "  Fonisniuch  as  the  Gentiles  'i'''e  pri- 
have  not  the  law  of  (Jod,  but  naturally  do  those  things  which  are  of  the  law,  ^^'"^  '^"'^ 
they  are  laws  unto  themselves."     And  afterwards  he  saith,  "  the  private  law  is  Private 
much  more  worthy  than  the  public  law.     For  the  Spirit  of  God  is  a  law;  and  !^*>  'hat 
'  they  wlio  are  nun-ed  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  are  led  by  the  law  of  God.     And  ^^^^\  !f„j^" 
who  is  he,  that  can  worthily  resist  against  the  Holy  Ghost?'    Whosoever  there-  inward 
fore  is  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  albeit  his  bishop  do  say  him  nay,  let  him  go  ","[^'?,^ 
fi'eely  by  our  authority ;  for   'the  law  is  not  appointed  for  the  just  man,'  for  spirit  in 
'  where  tlie  Spirit  of  God  is,  there  is  liberty  :  and  if  ye  be  led  by  the  Spirit  of  "le  heart. 
God,  ye  are  not  under  the  law.'  " 

Behold,  here  it  is  atHrmed,  that  the  sending  by  God  through  inspiration,  is  not 
bound  under  the  bondage  of  the  law ;  for  that  law  is  more  worthy  than  the  pub- 
lic law.  Secondly,  that  the  law  is  made  for  transgressors  aiul  offenders,  and  not 
for  tlie  just.  Thirdly,  that  whosoever  is  led  by  tlie  Spirit  of  God,  although  his 
bishop  stand  against  him,  he  may  proceed  unto  a  better  life.  Whereby  it  is 
evident,  that  a  deacon  or  priest  disposed  to  preach,  and  being  led  by  the  Spirit 
of  God,  may  freely  preach  the  gospel  of  Christ,  without  the  spiritual  license  of 
his  bishop.  It  is  evident,  forasnuich  as  it  is  good,  that  a  deacon  or  priest  do 
live  well,  and  preach  fruitfully.  Ergo,  he  may  proceed  from  idleness  unto  the 
labour  and  office  of  preaching,  and  so  to  a  better  life. 

But  whereas  it  is  said  before,  that  forasmuch  as  the  inward  sending  or  calling  Ever> 
is  secret,  therefore  it  is  not  sufficient  for  a  man  barely  to  affirm  only  that  he  is  "^^"  ^^^ 
sent  of  God,  when  every  heretic  may  so  say  ;  but  it  is  necessary,  that  he  do  con-  to  be  seiit 
firm  and  prove  his  invisible  sending  by  the  working  of  some  miracle,  or  by  some  '/  Ctod 
special  testimony  of  the  Scripture :  here  is  to  be  noted,  that  there  are  two  kinds  Jj",^iy 
of  preachers ;  those  of  the  Saviour  Christ,  and  those  of  the  seducer  Antichrist.  Two 
The  first  sort,  following  their  Master,  Christ,  teach  the  people  in  truth.     The  '^""'s  of 
<Jther  sort,  being  of  a  corrupt  mind,  and  reprobate  touching  faith,  resist  against  ers. 
the  verity ;  and,  through  covetousness  by  their  feigned  words,  do  make  mer- 
chandize of  the  people.     And  these  men  do  give,  and  shall  give  miracles,  as  our 
Savioiu-  saith  [Matt,  xxiv.],  "  There  shall  arise  false  Christs  and  false  prophets 
which  shall  show  great  signs  and  wonders,   insomuch  that  even  the  elect  them- 
selves, if  it  were  by  any  means  possible,  should  be  brought  into  error."     And 
the  apostle   [2  Thes.  ii.],   as  touching  their  head.  Antichrist,  writeth  thus  : — 
"  Whose  coming  shall  be  according  to  the  operation  of  Satan,  with  all  power 
and  signs,  false  miracles,  seducing  unto  iniquity  those  which  do  perish,  because, 
they  have  not  received  the  charity  and  love  of  truth,  that  they  might  be  saved :' 
therefore  will  the  Lord  send  upon  them  the  operation  of  error,  that  they  shall  give 
credit  unto  lies ;  that  all  sucli  as  have  not  believed  the  truth,  but  consent  imto 
wickedness,  should  be  judged."     Behold  how  expressly  our  Saviour,  by  himself.  Of  the 
and  by  his  apostle,  doth  teach  us,  how  the  disciples  of  Antichrist,  with  their  jvoJJ^J'rs'* 
head,  should  shine  through  their  great  signs  and  wonders.     But  tlie  ti-ue  disci-  of  Anti 
pies  of  Clirist  shall  not  so  do  in   the  time  of  Antichrist.     For,  as  St.  Isidore  f'lr'st. 
saith,  in  his  first  book,  22  par.,  "  De  summo  bono  :"  "Before  Antichrist  shall 
appear,  all  virtues  and  signs  shall  cease  from  the  church,  tiiat  he  may  the  more 
boldly  persecute  the  same,  as  an  abject.     For  this  profit,  shall  all  miracles  and 
signs  cease  under  Antichrist,  that  thereby  the  patience  of  the  holy  men  might 
be  known,  and  the  lightness  of  the  reprobate?,  who  are  offended,  may  be  opened, 
and  also  that  the  cruelty  of  the  persecutors  should  be  made  more  fierce." 

Thus  writeth    St.   Isidore ;  and  St.  Gregory,  in  his  twenty-fourth    book  of  why  true 
Morals,  saith,  "  Fo"-  why  ?    By  a  terrible  examination  of  (iod's  secret  dispensa-  miracles 
tion  shall  all  signs  of  virtue  or  power  be  taken   away  from  the  holy  church,  be- 


cease  un- 


fore  that  the  Leviathan  appear  in  that  most  wicked  and  damniible  man,  whose  ler  Anti- 
shape  he  doth  take  upon  lum.     For  jirophccy  is  hidden,  the  gift  of  healing  is  '■■''^'^'• 
taken  away,  the  virtue  of  long  abstinence  is  diminished,  the  words  of  doctrine 
are  put  to  silence,  and  the  wonderful  works  of  miracles  are  extinguished  ;  which 
things  notliing  can  utterly  take  away,  but  only  the  dispensation  of  God.     But 
this  dispensation  is  not  so  openly  and  manifoldly  declared,  as  it  hath  been  in 


74  THE    DEFENCE    OF    WICKLIFF    BY    JOHN    HUSS. 

Richard   times  past ;  which  also  is  done  by  a  marvellous  dispensation,  that  through  one 

II- only  thing  both  God's  love  and  justice  should  be  fulfilled.     For  the  power  of 

A.  D.    miracles  being  for  a  while  taken  away,  the  holy  church  appeareth  the  more  ab- 
1384     j^ct  ^^^  forsaken,  and  the  reward  of  good  men  doth  cease,  who  reverenced  the 

— same  for  the  hope  of  heavenly  riches,  and  not  for  any  present  signs  ;  and  that 

the  minds  of  evil  men  against  the  same  might  the  sooner  be  known,  who  ne- 
glect to  follow  the  invisible  things  which  the  church  doth  promise,  while  they 
be  led  with  visible  signs." 

Forasmuch  then  as  the  humility  of  the  faithful  is,  as  it  were,  destitute  of  the 
multitude  and  appearing  of  signs  by  the  terrible  working  of  God's  secret  dis- 
pensation, whereby  mercy  is  given  unto  the  good  and  just,  wrath  heaped  upon 
the  evil ;  forasmuch  then,  as  it  is  ti-uly  said,  that  before  this  Leviathan  shall 
plainly  and  manifestly  come,  poverty  shall  go  before  his  face  (for,  before  that 
time,  the  riches  of  miracles  shall  be  taken  away  from  the  faithful),  then  shall 
that  ancient  enemy  show  himself  against  them  by  open  wonders ;  that,  as  he  is 
extolled  through  signs  and  wonders,   so  shall  he  the  more  manfully  be  van- 
quished of  the  faithful,  without  any  signs  or  miracles.     Also  in  his  sixteenth 
book  upon  these  words,  which  the  blessed  man  Job  [chap,  xxiv.]  said ;  "  Who 
shall  reprehend  his  way  before  him,  or  who  shall  cast  in  his  teeth  what  he  hath 
done  ?"     While  he  did  speak  of  the  body  of  all  evil,  he  suddenly  converted  his 
speech  imto  the  head  of  all  the  wicked ;  for  he  did  see  that,  towards  the  end  of 
The  de-     the  world,  Satan  should  enter  into  man,  whom  the  Scripture  calleth  Antichrist ; 
ofTntl"    ^"^  %\.\o\\  be  extolled  with  such  pride,  he  shall  rule  with  such  power,  he  shall  be 
ciirist  out  exalted  with  such  signs  and  wonders,  under  the  pretence  of  hohness,  that  his 
ofSt.Gre-  doing  cannot  be  controlled  of  men,  forasmuch  as  his  signs  and  tokens  are 
joined  with  power  and  terror,  and  with  a  certain  show  of  holiness.     Wherefore, 
he  saith,  "  Who  shall  control  his  ways  before  him  ?"  what  man  is  he  that  dare 
once  rebuke  or  check  him?  whose  look  or  countenance  is  he  afraid  of ?  But, 
notwithstanding,  not  only  Enoch  and  Elias,  who  are  brought  as  example  for  his 
probation,  but  also  the  elect,  do  argue  and  reprove  his  way,  while  they  do  con- 
temn, and  by  the  force  and  power  of  their  minds,  resist  his  malice.      But  foras- 
much as  this  thing  is  not  done  by  their  own  power  and  strength,  but  by  God's 
help  and  grace,  therefore  it  is  very  well  said  :  "  Who  shall  argue  or  reprove  his 
ways  before  him?"  who,  but  only  God,  by  whose  help,  the  elect  are  aided  and 
ade  able  to  resist. 
The  proof      And,  a  little  after,  upon  the  same  book  of  Job,  Gregory  saith,  "  Inasmuch  as 
ofholi-      j^Qiy  Ywew  do  withstand  his  iniquity,  it  is  not  they  themselves  who  do  so  rebuke 
his  ways,  but  it  is  He  through  whose  help  they  are  strengthened."     Also  in 
his  second  book  he  saith,  "  Now  the  holy  church  doth  not  regard,  but  despise 
the  signs  and  miracles  of  the  heretics,  if  they  do  any  ;  forasmuch  as  the  church 
doth  sufficiently  understand,  that  it  is  no  kind  of  holiness  :  for  why  ?  the  proof 
of  holiness  is  not  to  make  signs  or  wonders,  but  to  love  every  man  as  himself, 
to  think  truly  of  the  veiy  tiaie  God,  and  to  think  better  of  thy  neighbour  than 
of  thyself:  for  true  virtue  and  hohness  consisteth  in  love,  and  not  in  showing 
of  miracles.     This  the  Verity  declareth,  saying  ;   '  Hereby  shall  all  men  know 
that  ye  are  my  disciples,  if  ye  love  one  another :'  but  he  saith  not,  that '  hereby 
men  shall  know  that  ye  are  my  disciples,  because  ye  work  miracles;'  but  con- 
trariwise,   '  if  ye  love  one  another :'  declaring  plainly  thereby,  that  it  is  not 
miracles,  but  the  mere  charity  and  love  of  God  which  maketh  us   the   ser- 
vants of  God.     Wherefore  the  chief  testimony  of    being   God's  disciple  is   to 
have  the  gift  of  brotherly  love."     This  throughout  doth  St.  Gregory  write,  and 
oftentimes,  in  other  places,  he  speaketh  very  much  of  miracles,  how  they  shall 
cease  amongst  the  just,  and  aboi;nd  amongst  the  wicked. 
Signs  Also  Chrysostome,  in  his  fifty-fifth  homily,  saith  thus  :  "  It  is  a  common  and 

common  ^^  indifferent  work  between  the  ministers  of  God  and  the  ministers  of  the  devil, 
different  ^o  ^^^^t  out  devils ;  but  to  confess  the  truth,  and  to  work  righteousness,  is  the  only 
to  the  work  of  the  saints  and  holy  men:  therefore,  whomsoever  thou  dost  see  casting 
of  Chri"^  out  devils,  if  he  have  not  the  confession  of  the  ti-uth  in  his  mouth,  neither 
and  Anti-  righteousness  in  his  hands,  he  is  not  a  man  of  God:  but  if  thou  dost  see  a  man 
Christ.  openly  confessing  and  declaring  the  truth,  and  doing  justice,  although  he  do 
The  prin-  cast  out  no  devils,  yet  is  he  the  man  of  God."  And  it  followeth,  "Let  us 
cipal  know,  that  like  as  at  the  coming  of  Christ,  before  him  the  prophets,  and  with 
niiracles.  j^j^^  ^j^^  apostles,  wrought  miracles,  through  the  Holy  Ghost;  for  such  as  the 


DUTV    OF     PRIKSTS    AND    DEACONS.  75 

thing  is,  which  is  stirred,  such  scent  and  savour  will  proceed  from  the  same."  itich-ird 
He  writeth  also  upon  the  beginning  of  Mattliew,  "The  whole  world  did  marvel       ^^• 
and  wonder  at  three  things, — that  Christ  rose  again  after  his  death ;  tliat  Hesh  "7    7^ 
ascended  into  heiiven ;  and  that  he  did  convert  the  whole  world  by  his  eleven     loo/ 

apostles.     There  are  four  causes  which  wrought  the  same;  that  is  to  say,  the  — '- '— 

contempt  of  riches  or  monev  ;  the  despising  of  pomp  and  glory;  the  separation 
of  themselves  from  all  worldly  occupation  and  business,  and  the  patient  suffer- 
ing of  torments."     Thus  much  writeth  Chrysostome. 

Also  St.  Isidore,  in  his    first  book  and  twenty-fifth  chapter,  "  De  summo  Cause 
bono,"  writeth  thus:   "  Like  as  in  the  apostles,  tlie  marvellous  effect  and  power  ".''^  '''® 
of  works  was  much  more  commendable  than  the  virtue  of  their  signs ;  even  so  now 
now  in  the  church,  it  is  nuich  better  to  live  well,  than  to  work  any  signs  or  "orketli 
miracles.      .\nd  the  cause  why  the  church  of  God  doth  not  at  this  present  work  "["V""^^ 
miracles,  as  it  did  in  the  time   of  the  apostles,  is  this;  that  it  was  neccssarj'  at 
that  time  that  the  world  should  believe  miracles,  and  now,  at  this  present,  every 
faitliful  believer  ought  to  shine  with  good  works,  for  to  this  end  were  signs  and 
miracles  then  outwardly  wrought,  that  their  faith  thereby  might  be  inwardly 
strengthened  and  established:  for  whatsoever  faithful   man  he  be  that  seekcth 
to  work  miracles,   he  seeketh  vain-glory  to  be  praised  of  men;  for  it  is  written, 
'  iMirades  are  signs  and  tokens  unto  the  infidels  and  unbelievers,  and  not  unto 
the  faithful.'  "     Thus  much  writeth  Isidore. 

Item,  St.  Augustine,    in   his  book  of  confessions,   saith   thus:   " There  is  no  A  preat 
greater  miracle  amongst  men,  than  to  love  our  enemies."     By  these  words  of  "^'r*^'" 
these   holy  men  a  man  may  easily  gather,  that,  both    in  our  days,  and  in  the  man's 
time  to  come,   the  disciples  of  Antichrist  both  do  and  shall  flourish  and  show  enemy, 
themselves  more  by  strange  signs  and  miracles,  than  did  the  disciples  of  Christ, 
according  to  the  saying  of  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ;   "There  shall  rise  up 
amongst  you  false  prophets,  which  shall  work  strange  miracles."     Secondlj',  it 
is  proved  that  they  are  greater  and  stranger  miracles,  to  confess  the  truth,  and 
to  do  justice,  than  to  work  any  other  kind  of  miracle.      Thirdly,  it  is  gathered 
thereby,  that  whatsoever  minister  or  deacon  loveth   his  enemies,  contemneth 
riches,   despiseth  the  glory  of  the  world,  and  flieth  from  all  worldly  troubles, 
and  meekly  sustaineth  and  suff'ereth   most  terrible  and  ciiicl  threatenings  and 
strokes  for  the  gospel's  sake,  he  worketh  miracles,  having  thereby  a  testimony 
and    witness,   that   he    is    the    true  disciple   of  Jesus  Christ.     And  it  is    evi-  The  true 
dent  by    the    saying    of   our    Saviour    Jesus   Christ,    [Matt,  v.]    "  Let   your  miracles 
good  works    so   shine   before    men,  that  they  may  see  your  good  works,  and  Christ's 
glorify  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven."  And  likewise,  John  x.  38,    "  Believe  rninis- 
the  works."'     Whereupon  St.  Gregory,  in  his  first  book  of  Dialogues,  writeth  ^^'^' 
thus :  "  The  estimation  of  a  true  life  consisteth  in  the  virtue  of  its  works,  and 
not  in  the  showing  of  signs."     'Whereby  it  is  fourthly  concluded  by  what  is 
aforesaid,  that  it  is  a  more  effectual  testimony  and  witness  for  a  priest  or  deacon 
that  he  is  sent  of  God   to  confess  the  truth,  and  follow  Christ  in  the  aforesaid 
virtues,  than  to  cast  out  devils,  or  to  do  any  other  miracles,  as  it  is  evident  by 
the  saying  of  Chrysostome  before  alleged:  "  Whomsoever  thou  dost  see  to  cast 
out  devils,  if  the  confession  or  acknowledging  of  the  truth  be  not  in  his  mouth, 
neither  righteousness  nor  justice  in  his  hands,  he  is  not  a  man  of  God."     This 
is  also  confirmed  by  the  words  of  Christ  [Matt,  vii.],  "  Many  shall  say  unto 
me  in  that  day.  Lord,  Lord,  have  not  we  prophesied  in  thy  name ;  have  not 
we  cast  out   devils  in    thy  name ;  and  have  not  we  also  wrought   many  great 
wonders  and  miracles  in   thy  name  ?     Then  I  will  answer  and  say  unto  them  ; 
Forasmuch  as  I  have  not  known  you  at  any  time,  depart  from  me,  ye  workers  of 
iniquity."     And  as  touching  the  second  part,  Chrysostome  saith  ;   "  If  you  see 
a  man  confessing  and  preaching  the  truth,  and  working  righteousness,  although 
he  do  not  cast  out  devils,  he  is  a  man  of  God." 

Hereby  it  appeareth,  that  every  deacon,   priest,   or  minister,  confessing  the  The  tesii- 
tnith  and  working  justice,  hath  a  perfeA  and  sure  testimony  that  he  is  sent  of  "'°">'  °^ 
God ;  and  that  it  is  not  necessary  for  him  to  approve  tliis  his  sending  by  the  priest, 
working   of  any  miracle,  instead  of  working  righteousness ;  neither   by   any 
testimonial,  which  should  plainly  declare  him  by  name,  that  he  was  sent  of  the 
Lord  to  preach. 

1)  "Operibus  credile."    I.atir.  edition,  p.  37.     The  English  editions  erroneously  translate  thij, 
"  Trust  unto  your  good  works."— Ed. 


76  DEFENCE    OK    WICKLIFK    BY    JOHN    HUSS. 

nichnid       The  first  part  appearcth  manifest  by  that  which  is  already   spoken,  that  ail 
■'^-       miracles  in  the  time  of  Antichrist  shall  cease  in  the  elect. 

.    ..  The  second  part   is  also  evident:  forasmuch  as  none  of  the  present pi-eachers 

,00  ,'     can  show  by  the  Scripture  of  the  law  of  God,  that  he  is  specially  named  there- 

— '. _  unto. 

And  likewise,  I  do  also  affirm  and  say,  as  touching  all  preachers  who  shall 
come  liereaftei',  that  they  are  not  named  by  name ;  but  let  no  man  here  object 
Enoch  and  Elias,  who  were  ancient  preachers,  and  prophesied  by  the  Holy  Spirit 
of  God.  And  it  is  apparent,  that  like  as  it  is  not  a  cause  sufficient  to  prove, 
that  this  priest  or  deacon  is  sent  of  God  to  preach,  because  he  worketh  miracles ; 
so  is  it  not  a  cause  sufticient  to  prove  that  he  is  not  sent  of  God  to  preach,  because 
he  dotii  no  miracles ;  but  to  confess  the  truth,  to  work  righteousness,  to  contemn  the 
world  with  the  glory  thereof,  patiently  to  suffer  rebukes,  is  a  sufficient  testimony 
for  any  priest  or  deacon,  having  knowledge  of  the  law  of  God,  freely  to  preach 
the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  forasmuch  as,  in  such  case,  he  is  sent  of  God.  And 
this  is  the  sending  which  the  apostle  speaketh  of  in  Komans  xii.  "How 
shoidd  they  preach,  except  they  be  sent?"  Whereupon  the  Gloss  of  St.  Augus- 
tine writeth  thus ;  "  These  things  serve  to  set  forth  God's  gi'ace,  declaring  that 
all  our  goodness  is  prevented  *  by  grace."  "  For,"  he  saith,  "belief  cometh 
of  hearing,  hearing  cometh  of  preaching,  and  preaching  by  the  sending  of  God ; 
so  that  it  altogether  and  wholly  cometh  out  of  the  fountain  of  grace,  and 
preaching  truly  cometh  of  sending."  This  hath  the  Gloss : "  How  shall  they  then 
preach,  without  thej'  be  sent  of  God  1  And  this  is  evident,  that  the  great  and 
principal  sending  is  from  God  alone,  as  it  is  proved  by  Moses.' 

The  second  sending  is  both  from  God  and  man  ;  as  by  the  example  of  Joshua 
and  others,  who  were  sent  both  by  God  and  the  rulers  to  preach. 

The  third  sending  is  from  man  alone ;  which  is  not  founded  in  the  law  of 
God,  but  in  men's  traditions,  which  they  rather  esteem. 

The  fourth  sending,  which  hath  but  the  name  only,  is  proper  to  them,  who 
of  themselves  unworthily  usurp  the  office  of  preaching,  as  those  false  prophets 
of  whom  God  speaketh  in  Jeremy  xxiii.,  "  I  did  not  send  them,  and  they  ran; 
I  spake  not  unto  them,  and  they  prophesied :  if  they  had  continued  in  my 
counsels,  and  had  declared  my  words  vmto  my  people,  I  would  have  converted 
them  from  their  evil  ways,  and  wicked  imaginations."  And  our  Saviour 
speaketh  of  these  prophets  in  Matthew,  saying,  "  There  shall  arise  false  pro- 
phets." And  Peter,  his  true  vicar,  in  his  second  epistle  and  second  chapter, 
prophesying  unto  the  faithful  believers  in  Christ,  speaketh  thus  of  them : 
"  There  were  amongst  the  people  false  prophets,  as  there  shall  be  amongst  you 
also  masters  of  lies,  through  whom  the  truth  shall  be  blasphemed  and  slan- 
dered;" and  that  he  might  the  better  instruct  the  people  to  know  them,  he 
addeth,  "  They  shall  go  about  with  feigned  words,  for  coveteousness'  sake,  to 
make  merchandize  of  you." 
Differ-  Wherefore  every  faithful  man,  diligently  weighing  these  things  in  his  mind,  may 

encebe-    j^qw  easily  perceive  how  great  a  number  of  false  prophets  there  be,  through 

tween  the  •^■'..  .  x^i  ,..s 

ministers  whom  the  christian  truth  is  blasphemed,  and  all  covetous  dealing  is  exercised  ; 
ofClirist    and  these  are  they  who  freely  preach  lies.     But  the  humble  and  true  ministers 
c^r'  ^""'  ^^  Christ,  wheresoever  they  do  appear,  by  and  by  are  persecuted,  whereby 
the  prophecy  of  the  apostle  is  verified,  which  is  written  in  the  second  epistle  to 
Timothy,  chap.  iii.   "  All  men,"  saith   he,  "  which  desire  to  live  godly,  shall 
suffer  persecution  ;  but  the  evil  men  and  seducers  shall  prosper  in  their  wicked- 
Ministers  ness,  running  daily  more  and  more  into  all  kinds  of  errors."     The  wicked  have 
°h  ^t  d     '^^^  ^^  much  2)revailed,  that  they  do  preach  lies,  making  heretics  of  the  faith- 
cloak  the  ful  Christians ;  neither  is  there  any  man  that  dare  prohibit  them  their  lying, 
vices  of     so  that  they  do  not  preach  against  the  vices  of  the  prelates.     How  then  can 
Ltes^,  ^''^"  y^*^^  ^^3-''  t^^^*-  Antichrist  is  not  exalted  above  all  that  is  called  God,  suppressing 
the  members  of  Christ  in  his  office,  fortifying  and  fostering  his   members  in 
lying  ?     Therefore  the  true  and  faithful  disciples  of  Christ  ought  to  stand  ready 
girt  about  their  loins,  and  shoes  upon   their  feet,   in  defence  of  the  gospel, 
taking  the  sword  in  hand,  which  is  the  word  of  God  [Ephes.  vi.],  and  to  fight 
against  the  crafts  of  Antichrist,  who  goeth  about  utterly  to  extinguish  the  true 
preaching  of  the  gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ._ 

()>  Is  preceded  by,  oris  the  result  of. — Ed. 


ox    TE.MPOUAr.    .lijlUSUICTIOV    OVF.R    THK    SPI  lUTl' A  I.T  V.  7T 

The   Second   Disputation   in   the    University  of  Prague,  upon   the      //• 
Seventeenth  Article  of  John  Wicklitf,  most  fruitful  to  l)c  read ;  "aTdT 
proving,  by  four    and    twenty   reasons   out    of  the    Scriptures.    1384. 
that  Princes  and    Lords   Temporal   have    lawful  Authority  and 
Jurisdiction  over  the  Spiritualty  and  Cluirchmen,  both  in  taking 
from  them,  and  in  correcting  their  Abuses  according  to  their  doings 
and  deserts.     By  John  Huss. 

To  tlie    honour    of  Almighty    God,   and    our  Lord  Jesus    Clirist,    both    for  Condem- 
thc  trying  out  of  trutli,   and  tlic  profit  of  the   holy  niotiier    tlie    cliurch,  ac-  nation  of 
cording  to  the  congregation  of  our  university  of  Prague,  wliich,  avoiding  always  Jjve 'a'nr- 
to  do  that  which  shall  be  prejudicial  to  the  truth,  hatli  deferred  to  give  their  cles,  and 
consent  unto  the  condemnation  of  the  forty-five    articles,  wishing,  even  unto  J^^^.^: 
this  present  time,  sufficient  probation  to  be  given  of  the  condenuiation  of  the  m,7to  be 
said    articles,    and    particularly  of  every    one    of   them  :  wliereupon  the   said  allowed, 
university  doth    always    require  due  proof  of   the  same,    forasmuch    as  pope 
Damasus,  in  his  canon,  Distinction,  chapter  Ixviii.   "  Chorepiscopi,"  saith  thus; 
"  That  it  is  necessary  that  whatsoever  thing  standeth  not  by  due  reason  should 
be  rooted  out ;"  whereby  it  appeareth,   that  the  condemnation  of  the  five  and 
forty  articles,. if  it  stand  not  with  proof  and  sufficient  demonstration  for  every 
article,  is  necessarily  to  be  rooted  out. 

But,  if  any  man  will  object  and  say,  that  to  require  a  reason  for  every  thing, 
is  to  derogate   from  God's  divine  power :  unto    this  objection  Master  William 
doth  answer  himself  in  his  philosopli}-,  the  first  book,  almost  at  the  end,  where 
he,  treating  of  the  place  in  Genesis  ii.  "  Ciod  made  man  of  the   slime  of  the 
earth,"  Src,  hath   these  words;   "  For  in  what    point,"  saitli  he,  "  are  we  con-  AIlow- 
trary   to  the   holy    Scriptures,  if  we  seek  by  reason  to  declare  wherefore  any  ^bleto 
thing  is  done,  which  is  said  in  the  Scriptures  to  be  done  ?     For  if  a  wise  man  declare 
should  say  that  a  thing  is  done,  and  do  not  declare  how  it  is  done,  and  another  byreason, 
man  speaketh  the  very  self-same  thing,  and  declareth  how  it  is  done,  what  con-  J^j^inVg 
trariety  is  there  ?  But,  forasmuch  as  they  themselves  know  not  the  force  of  nature,  recorded 
to  the  intent  that  they  might  have  all  men  partakers  with  them   of  their  igno-  '"  Scrip- 
rance,  they  would  have   no  man  to  inquire  it   out ;  Init  they  would  have  us  done, 
believe  as  ignorant  people,  and  not  to  seek   any  reason  of  our  belief,  that  the 
prophecy  miglit  be  fulfilled,   "  Such  as  the  people  is,  such  shall  be  the  priest." 
But  we  truly  do  say,  that  in  all  things  a  reason  is  to  be  sought,  if  it  may  by 
any  means  be  found.     But  if  any  man  do  stay  at  any  thing  which  the  Scriptures 
do  affirm,  let  him  commit  the  same  unto  faith,  and  unto  the  Holy  Ghost.     For 
Moses  saith,   "  If  the  lamb  cannot  be  eaten,  let  it  not  be  by  and  by  consumed 
in  the  fi"e ;  but  let  him    first  call  his  neighbour  which   dwelleth  in  the  next 
house  unto  him  ;  and  if  they  also  be  not  sufficient  to  eat  the  lamb,  then  let  it 
be  burned  in  the  fire."     So  likewise,  when  w'e  go  about  to  seek  any  thing  as 
touching  the  godhead,  and  be  not  able  of  ourselves  to  comprehend  the  same, 
let  us  call  our  neighbour  who  dwelleth  in  the  next  house  unto  us ;  that  is  to 
say,  let  us  seek  out  such  a  one  as  dwelleth  in  the  same  catholic  faith  with  us;  and 
if  then  neither  we,  nor  yet  he,  be  able  to  comprehend  the  same,  let  it  then  be 
burned  with  the  fire  of  faith. 

But  these  men,  albeit  they  have  many  neighbours  dwelling  near  unto  them,  yet  An  alle- 
for  very  pride  they  will  not  call  any  man  unto  them  ;  choosing  rather  to  continue  ^'"'■y 
still  ignorant,  than  to  ask  any  question.    And  if  they  do  know  any  man  to  inquire  Paschar 
for  his  neighbour  in  such  case,  by  and  by,  they  cry  out  upon  him  as  a  heretic  ;  Lamb, 
presuming  more  upon  their  own  head,  th<in  having  confidence  in  their  wisdom. 
But  I  exhort  you  to  give  no  credit  unto  their  outward  appearance,  for  already 
it  is  verified  in  them  which  the  satirical  poet  saith :    "  No  credit  is  to  be  given 
unto  the  outward  show;  for  which  of  them  all  is  it  that  doth  not  abound  with 
most  shameful  and  detestable  vices  ?"     And  in  another  place  he  saith  :  "  They 
are  very  daintj'  of  their  speech,  and  have  great  desire  to  keep  silence."     And 
thus  much  hath  .Master  William.     Let  all  such   hear  whom  this  parable  doth 
touch ;  for   I,    with  the  rest  of  the  masters,    bachelors,   and    students  of  our 
university,  considering  how  hard  a  matter  the   condemnation  of  the  forty -five 
articles  of  WicklifF,  without  reason,  is,  and  how  grievous  a  thing  it  were  if  we 


78  THK    DEFENCE    OF    WICKLIFF    BY  JOHN    HUSS. 

liichard  should  thereunto  consent,  do  call  together  my  neighhoiu-s,   the  doctors  of  this 
^^-       university,  and   all  others  who  woidd  object  any  tiling  against  the   same,  that 
„      we  mio-ht  presently  find  out  the  reason  of  the  condemnation  of  this  article,  con- 
y.^^'    ceming  the  taking  away  the  temporalties  fi-om  the  clergy. 

•         Notwithstanding,   I   do  profess  that   it  is  not   my  intent,  like  as  it  is  not 
A  protes-  the   meaning  of    the  university,    to  persuade,    that  princes    or    secular  lords 
tation,       should    take   away  the    goods  from    the    clergy    when  they    would,   or    how 
h*'"'^''th  they  woidd,  and  convert  them    to  what  use  they   hst.     But  our   whole    in- 
light  unto  tent  is  diligently  to  search  out  whether  this  article,    as  touching  the  taking 
the  read-    away  of  temporalties  from  the  clergy,  may  have  in  it  any  true  sense,  whereby 
the  pro^     it  may  be  defended  without  reproof.     Wherefore  this  article,  being  the  seven- 
position     teenth  in  the  number  of  the  forty-five,  is  propounded  under  this  form  :    "  The 
■''T^vf''^  lords  temporal  may,  at  their  own  will   and  pleasure,   take  away  the  temporal 
under-      goods  from  the  clergy,   if  they  do  ofiend,  and  therein  continue."     It  is  thus 
stood,  and  proved :  the  kings  of   tlie  Old  Testament  took  away  the  temporal  goods  at 
fhat'^the     God's  commandment  from  the  clergy  ;  that  is  to  say,  from  the  priests  offending. 
goods  of    'J'herefore  the  kings  also  of  the  New  Testament,  at  God's  commandment,  may 
the  cler-    j^  ^j^^  jjjj^^  when  the  priests  of  the  new  law  do  offend.     The  consequence  de- 
not^utter-  pendeth  upon  a  similitude ;  and  the  antecedent  is  evident.     First,  it  is  proved 
ly  to  be     ]jy  Solomon,  1  Kings  ii.  27,  which  Solomon  deposed  Abiathar  the  high  priest, 
a\v'a'y!hut  because  he  had  taken  part  with  Adonijah,  the  brotlier  of  Solomon,  to  make  him 
in  case      king,  without  the  advice  either  of  David,  or  of  Solomon  himself,  who  ought 
tiie  clergy  ^^  reign,  and  set  up  Zadoc  the  priest  in  the  place   of  Abiathar,  because  he  had 
the^ame.  uot  consented  with  Abiathar  unto  Adonijah,  as  it  is  written,   1  Kings  i.  5 — 8 ; 
First  rea-  where   it  is  said;  "Adonijah,  the  son  of  Haggith,    exalted  himself,  saying,    I 
son.  So-    ^^]j  reign ;  and  made  luito  himself  chariots  and  horsemen,  and  forty  men  which 
should  run  before  him  ;  neither  did  his  father  rebuke  him  at  any  time,  saying. 
Wherefore  hast  thou  done  this  ?     For   he  was  very  comely,   being  second  son, 
next  to  Absalom,  and  his  talk  was  with  Joab  the  son  of  Zer>uah  and  Abiathar 
the  priest,  which  took  part  with  Adonijah.     But  Zadoc  the  priest,  and  Benaiah 
the  son  of  Jehoiada,  and  Nathan  the  prophet,   and  Shimei,  and  Serethei,  and 
Felethi,  and  all  the  power  of  David's  host,  were  not  on  Adonijah's  part." 

This  was  the  cause  of  the  deposing  of  Abiathar,  because  he  took  part  with 
Adonijah,  that  he  should  be  king  against  Solomon,  the  eldest  son  of  king  David  : 
wherefore  it  is  written,  1  Kings  ii.  26  ;  "  The  king  said  unto  Abiathar  the 
priest.  Go  your  ways  unto  Anathoth  thine  own  field,  for  thou  art  a  man  of 
death ;  but  this  day  I  will  not  slay  thee,  because  thou  hast  cai-ried  the  ark  of 
the  Lord  before  my  father  David,  and  didst  labour  in  all  things  wherein  iny 
father  laboured."  Then  did  Solomon  cast  out  Abiathar,  that  he  should  be  no 
more  the  priest  of  the  Lord ;  that  the  word  of  the  Lord  might  be  fulfilled, 
which  he  spake  concerning  the  house  of  Eli  in  Shiloh. 

I     Behold,  the  most  prudent  king  Solomon,  according  to  the  wisdom  which  was 

given  him  of  God,  did  exercise  his  power  upon  the  said  priest,  putting  him  out 

of  his  pi-iesthood,  and  setting  in  his  place  Zadoc  the  priest.    This  was  a  greater 

matter  than  to  take  away  the  temporalties.     If,  then,  in  the  law  of  Christ,  who 

now  i-eigneth  over  us,  a  bishop  should  likewise  rebel  against  the  true  heir  of 

the  kingdom,  willing  to  set  up  another  for  king,  why  shoidd  not  the  king  or 

his  heir  have  power,  in  like  case,  to  take  away  the  temporalties  from  liim  so 

offending  ? 

Second  It  is  also  evident  by  the  king  Nebuchadnezzar,  who  had  power  given  him  of 

reason.      Qq^  jq  jg^d  away  the  children  of  Israel,  with  their  priests  and  Levites,  into 

cli'a'dnez-  the  captivity  of  Babylon,  as  it  is  written  in  2  Kings  xxv. 

zar.  Item,  We  read  in  2  Kings  xii.,  how  that  Jehoash,  the  most  godly  king  of 

Third        Judah,  according  to  the  wisdom  which  God  had  granted  him,  "  took  away  all 
Jrtfoas'h.    the  consecrated  vessels  which  Jehoshaphat,  Jehoram,  and  Ahaziah,  his  fore- 
fathers, kings  of  Judah,  had  consecrated,  and  those  which  he  himself  had 
offered,  and  all  the  treasure  that  could  be  found  in  the  temple  of  the  Lord  and 
in  the  king's  palace,  and  sent  it  unto  Hazael,  king  of  Syria,  and  he  departed 
from  Jerusalem."     Mark  how  this  most  holy  king  exercised  his  power,  not 
only  in  taking  away  the  temporalties  of  the  priests,  but  also  those  things  which 
Fourth      were  consecrated  in  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  to  procure  unto  the  common- 
iieze"       wealth  the  benefit  of  peace, 
kiah!  Item,  In  2  Kings  xviii.,  it  is  written,  how  that  the  holy  king  Hezekiah  took 


0\    TKMPORAI.    JURISDICTION    OVKK    THE    SI'IKITUAI.TY.  79 

al!  tlie  treasure  that  was  found  in  the  liouso  of  the  Lord,  iiiid   in  tlie  king's  Richard 
treasury,  and  brake  down  the  ])inars  of  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  and  all  the       ^^• 
plates  of  gold  which  he  hiniselT  had  fastened  thereuj)on,  and  gave  them  unto     .    p. 
the  king  of  the  Assyrians;  yet  was  he  not  rebuked  of  the  Lord  for  it,  as  he     yluA 

was  for  his  other  sins,  as  it  aj)j)eareth  in  2  Chron.  xxxii.     Forasnnich,  then,  as  ' 

in  time  of  necessity  all  things  ought  to  be  in  common  unto  Christians,  it 
followeth  that  the  secular  lords,  in  case  of  necessity,  and  in  many  other  com- 
mon cases,  may  lawfully  take  away  the  moveable  gooda  from  the  clergy,  when 
they  do  ott'end. 

We  also  read  in  Matthew  xii.,  that  the  disciples  of  Jesus,  to  slake  their  FiftU 
hunger,  upon  the  Sabbath-day  pulled  the  ears  of  corn,  and  did  eat  them,  and  jia^u'ew 
the   Pharist'es  rebuked  tliem  for  it;  unto  whom  C'iirist  answered,  "  Have  ye 
not  read  what  David  did  when  he  was  liungry,  and  tliose  that  were  with  him ;  David, 
how  he  entered  into  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  did  eat  the  shewbread,  which 
it  was  not  lawful  for  him,  neither  for  them  that  were  with  him  to  eat,  but  only 
for  the  priests  ?"     This  story  is  written  in  1  Sam.  xxi.,  and  the  conunandment  Case  of 
in  Deuteronomy  xii.,'  whereby  it  appeareth,  that  it  is  lawful,  in  time  of  neces-  "^cessity. 
sity,  to  use  any  thing,  be  it  ever  so  much  consecrated.     Otherwise,  children 
by  giving  their  moveables  to  the  consecration  of  any  temple,  should  not  be 
bound  to  help  their  parents;  which  is  contrary  and  against  the  gospel  of  St. 
Matthew  [chap,  xvi.],  where  our  Saviour  sharply  rebuked  the  Pharisees,  that, 
for  their  own  traditions,  they  did  transgress  the  conunandment  of  (iod. 

Item,  Titus  and  Vespasian,  secular  princes,  had  power  given  them  by  God,  sixth 
twenty-four  years  after  the  Lord's  ascension,  to  take  away  the  temporalties  ffason- 
from  the  priests  who  had  offended  against  the  Lord's  Holy  One,  and  thereby,  vespa. 
also,  bereft  them  of  their  lives :  and  it  seemeth  luito  many,    they  <lid,  and  sian. 
might,    worthily  do  the   same    according    to  God's  good  will  tuid  ])leasure. 
Then,  forasnmch  as  our  priests,  in  these  days,  may  tran.sgress  and  offend  as 
much,  and  rather  more,  against  the  Lord's  anointed,  it  followeth,  that,  by  the 
pleasure  of  God,  the  secular  lords  may  likewise  punish  them  for  their  offence. 

Our  Saviour,  being  King  of  kings,  and  high  Bishop,  with  his  discijiles,  did  Seventh 
give  tribute  unto  Ca;sar,  as  it  appeareth  in  Matthew  xvii.,  and  commanded  the  ^^,^^°^- 
Scribes  and  Pharisees  to  give  the  like  unto  CiBsar  [Matt,  xxii.]  ;  whereby  he  ample  of 
gave  example  unto  all  priests  that  should  come  after  him  to  render  tribute  unto  Christ 
their  kings.     Hereupon  blessed  St.  Ambrose,  in  his  fourth   book,  upon  these  {r^bute 
words  in  Luke  v.  4.,  "  Cast  out  your  nets,"  writeth  tints;   "  There  is  another  st. Ara- 
kind  of  fishing  amongst  the  apostles,  after  which  manner  the  Lord  commanded  brose's 
Peter  only  to  fish,  saying,  '  Cast  out  thy  hook,  and  that  fish  which  cometli  first  ""'"'• 
up,  take  him.'"     And  then  unto  the  purpose  he  saith ;   "  It  is  truly  a  great 
and  spiritual  document,  whereby  all  christian  men  are  taught  that  they  ought 
to  be  subject  unto  the  higher  powers,  and  that  no  man  ought  to  think  that  the 
laws  of  a  king  here  on  earth  are  to  be  broken.     For  if  the  Son  of  God  did  paj' 
tribute,  art  thou  so  great  a  man,  that  thou  thinkest  thou  oughtest  not  to  pay 
tribute  .'      He  payed  tribute  who  had  no  possessions ;    and  thou  who   daily 
seekest  after  the  lucre  of  the  world,  why  dost  thou  not  acknowledge  the  obedi- 
ence and  duty  of  the  world  I     Why  dost  thou,  through  the  arrogancy  of  thy 
mind,  exalt  thyself  above  the  world,  whereas,  through   thine  own   miserable 
covetousness,   thou   art  subject  unto  the  world  ?"     Tlius  writeth  St.  Ambrose, 
and  it  is  put  in  the  1 1  quest.  1  par.,  "  Magnum  quidem."     He  also  writeth  Christ 
upon  these  words  in  Luke  xx.  24.,  "  Show  me  a  penny;  whose  image  hath  <^°'"-    , 
It?      "If  Chnst  had  not  the  image  oi  C.'csar,  why  did  he  pay  any  tribute?  ,rii,ute  to 
He  gave  it  not  of  his  own,  but  rendered  unto  the  world  that  which  was  the  be  paid 
world's ;  and  if  thou  wilt  not  be  in  danger  of  Caesar,  possess  not  those  things  "ni'^^r. 
which  are  the  worlds,  for  if  thou  hast  riches  thou  art  in  danger  of  Ciesar.  " 
Wherefore,  if  thou  wilt  owe  nothing  unto  any  earthly  king,  forsake  all  those 
things,  and  follow  Christ.     If,  then,  all  ecclesiastical  ministers  having  riches 
ought  to  be  under  the  subjection  of  kings,  and  give  unto  them  tribute ;  it  fol- 
loweth that  kings  may  lawfully,  by  the  authority  which  is  given  them,  take 
awa}'  their  temporalties  from  them. 

Hereupon  St.  Paul,  acknowledging  himself  to  be  under  jurisdiction  of  the 
emperor,  appealed   unto  Ca;sar,  as  it  appeareth,  Acts  xxv.  10. :  "  I  stand," 

(1)  Or  rather,  in  I.cv.  xxlv.  9.— En. 


80  THE    DEFEXCK    OF    WICKLIFF    BY    JOHX    HUSS. 

Kichnrd  siiith  he,  "  at  Cassai-'s  judgment  seat ;  there  I  ought  to  be  judged."     Where- 

'^l-       upon,  in  the  eighth  distinction,  cliapter  "  Quo  jure,"  St.  Amlirose  allegeth,  that 

~T~~pr~  all  things  are  lawful  unto  the  emperor,  and  all  things  under  his  power.    For  the 

Tj'q4"    confirmation  whereof  it  is  said,  [Daniel  ii.  137,  38,]    "  The  God  of  heaven  hath 

given  unto  thee  a  kingdom,  strength,  empire  and  glory,  and  all  places  wherein 


Eighth      the  children  of  men  do  dwell ;  and  hath  given  into  thy  power  the  beasts  of  the 

Paui"ap-    ^^'*^'  ^"'^  fowls  of  the  air,  and  set  all  things  imder  thy  subjection." 

peaieth  Also,  in  the  11  quest,  par.  1,  St.  Ambrose  saith,  "  If  the  emperor  require 

to  the        tribute,  we  do   not  deny  that   the   lands    of  the   church  shall   pay  tribute ; 

St.  a""-"^    if  the  emperor  have  need  of  our  lands,  he  hath  power  to  challenge  them,  let 

brose.        him  take  them,  if  he  will :  I  do  not  give  them  unto  the  emperor,  neither  do  I 

(Daniel     deny  them."     This  he  writeth,  expressly  declaring  that  the  sccidar  lord  hath 

"'.'  power  at  liis  pleasure  to  take  away  the  lands  of  the  church  ;  and  so,  conse- 

reason.      quently,   the  secular  lords  have  power  at   their  pleasures,   to  take  away  the 

St.  Am-     temporal  goods  from  the  ecclesiastical  ministers  when  they  do  offend. 

brose.  Also,  St.  Augustine  writeth,  "  If  thou  sayest,  '  What  have  we  to  do  with  the 

reason       emperor?'     But  now,  as  I  said,  we  speak  of  man's  law.     The  apostles  would 

St.  Au-      be  obedient  unto  kings,  and  honour  them,  saying,  '  Reverence  your  kings  ; 

gustine.     ^^id  Jq  not  say.  What  have  I  to  do  with  the  king?'     What  hast  thou  then  to 

do  with  possessions  ?     By  the  king's  law  thy  possessions  are  possessed.     Thou 

hast  said,  '  What  have  I  to  do  with  the  king  ? '  bvtt  do  not  say,  what  have  thy 

possessions  to  do  with  the  king  ?     For  then  hast  thou  renounced  the  laws  of 

men,  whereby  thou  didst  possess  thy  lands."     Thus  "smteth  St.  Augustine  in 

his  eighth  distinction,  by  whose  words  it  is  manifest,  that  the  king  hath  power 

over  the  church  goods,  and  consequently  may  take  them  away  from  the  clergy 

transgi-essing  or  ottending. 

Eleventh        Item,  in  his  thirty-third  epistle  to  Boniface,  he  saith,  "  What  sober  man 

rea.son.      will  say  uuto  our  kings,  '  Care  not  3'ou  in  your  kingdom,  by  whom  the  church 

trails*       of  the  Lord  is  maintained,  or  by  whom  it  is  oppressed ;  it  pertaineth  not  unto 

keepers     you,  wlio  will  be  either  a  religious  man,  or  who  will  be   a  church-robber  1 ' 

of  both      Unto  whom  it  may  be  thus  answered,   '  Doth  it  not  pertain  unto  us  in  our 

The  dutj  kingdom,  who  will  either  live  a  chaste  life,  or  who  will  be  an  unchaste  whore- 

of  kings     monger?'"    Behold,  this  holy  man  showeth  here  how  it  is  the  duty  of  kings  to 

the^"'  '*'*  punish  such  as  are  robbers  of  churches,  and  consequently  the  proud  clergy 

clergy.       wlieu  they  do  offend. 

Twelftii         Item,  he  writeth  in  the  33  quest.  7  par.,  "  Si  de  rebus,"    "  The  secular 
reason.      lords  may  lawfully  take  away  the  temporal  goods  from  heretics ;  and  foras- 
much as  it  is  a  case  greatly  possible  that  many  of  the  clergy  ai'e  users  of 
simony,  and  thereby  heretics,  therefore  the   secular  lords  may  very  lawfully 
take  away  their  temporalties  from  them."    "  For  what  an  unworthy  thing  is  it," 
continues  St.  Augustine,  "  if  the  catholics  do  possess,  according  unto  the  will 
of  the  Lord,  those  things  which  the  heretics  held?  forasmuch  as  this  is  the 
word  of  the  Lord  unto  all  wicked  men  [Matt,  xxi.],   '  The  kingdom  of  God 
shall  be  taken  away  from  you,  and  given  unto  a  nation,  which  shall  do  the 
righteousness  thereof.'     Is  it  in  vain  which  is  written  in  the  Book  of  Wisdom 
[chap,  xi.],  '  The  just  shall  eat  the  labours  of  the  wicked?'  " 
An  objec-      And  whereas  it  may  be  objected  as  touching  the  desire  of  other  men's  goods, 
tion  of       St.  Augustine  answereth,  "  That  by  that  evidence  the  seven  nations,  which  did 
of  other"^*^  abuse  the  Land  of  Promise,  and  were  driven  out  from  thence  by  the  power  of 
men's        God,  may  object  the  same  imto  the  people  of  God,  which  inhabit  the  same ;" 
goods.       jjj^j  j.]^g  Jews  themselves,  from  whom,  according  unto  the  word  of  the  Lord, 
"  The  kingdom  is  taken  away,  and  given  unto  a  people,  which  shall  do  the 
works  of  righteousness,"  may  object  the  same  unto  the  church  of  Christ,  as 
touching  the  desire  of  other  men's  goods :  but  St.  Augustine's  answer  is  this  ; 
"  We  do  not  desire  another  man's  goods,  forasmuch  as  they  are  ours  by  the 
commandment  of  Him  by  whom  all  things  were  made."     By  like  evidence  the 
clergy  having  offended,  their  temporal  goods  are  made  the  goods  of  others,  for 
the  profit  of  the  church.     To  this  purpose  also,  according  to  St.  Augustine, 
serveth  the  14  quest.  4  par.,  "Unto  an  unbeliever  it  is  not  a  halfpenny  matter ; 
but  unto  the  faithful  it  is  a  whole  world  of  riches."     Shall  we  not  then  convince 
all  such  that  they  possess  another  man's  goods,  who  seem  to  have  gathered 
great  riches  together,  and  know  not  how  to  use  them  ?  for  tliat  truly  is  not 
another's,  which  is  possessed  by  right ;  and  that  is  lawfully  possessed,  which  is 


ox    TEMPORAL    Jl'U  I DSICTIOX    OVER    TKF.    SPIRITUAI.T  V.  81 

justly  possessed ;  and  that  is  justly  possessed,  wliich  is  well  possessed.     Ergo,    itichara 
all  tlijit  wMch  is  ill  possessed,  is  another  mans,  and  he  doth  ill  possess  it,  who      ^^• 
doth  ill  use  it.  ~~\~n~ 

If  then  any  of  the  clcrpy  do  abuse  the  temporal  goods,  the  temporal  lords    loo/ 

may,  at  their  own  pleasure,  according  unto  the  rule  of  charitv,  take  away  the 1- 

said  temporal  goods  from  the  clerg}'  so  transgressing.  For  then,  according  to 
the  allegation  aforesaid,  the  clergy  do  not  justly  possess  those  temporal  goods, 
but  the  temj)oral  lords  proceeding  according  to  the  rule  of  charity,  do  justly 
possess  those  temporalties,  forasmuch  as  all  tilings  are  the  just  man's  [1  Cor.  iii. 
21 — 23].  "  All  things,"  saith  the  apostle,  "  are  yours;  whether  it  be  Paul,  or 
Apollo,  or  Cephas;  either  the  world,  or  life  or  death,  or  things  present,  or 
things  to  come :  for  all  things  be  yours,  you  be  Christ's,  and  Christ  is  God's." 
Also  in  the  23  quest.  7  par.,  "  Qiiicunque,"  it  is  written;  "  Jure  divino 
omnia  sunt  justonim."  "The  'words  of  St.  Augustine  in  that  place,  ''Ad 
Vincentium,  "  be  these:  "  Whosoever,"  saith  he,  "  upon  the  occasion  of  this 
law  or  ordinance  of  the  emperor,  doth  molest  or  persecute  you,  not  for  love  of 
any  charitable  correction,  but  only  for  hatred  and  malice  to  do  you  displeasure, 
I  hold  not  with  him  in  so  doing." 

And  although  there  is  nothing  here  in  this  earth,  that  any  man  may  possess  By  God's 
assuredly,  but  either  he  must  hold  it  by  God's  law,  by  which  "  cuncta  justorum  cJ'nj.jj, 
esse  dicuntur;"  that  is,  "  all  things  be  said  to  pertain  to  the  possession  of  the  justorum 
just:"  or  else  by  man's  law,  which  standctii  in  the  king's  power  to  set  and  to  "se  di- 
ordain ;  here,  by  the  words  of  St.  Augustine  alleged,  ye  see  all  things  belong  to  '^^"^ 
the  possession  of  the  just,  by  God's  law.* 

Item,  Forasmuch  as  the  clergy  by  means  of  their  possessions  are  in  danger  Thir- 
of  the  emperor  and  king,  it  foUoweth,  that  if  they  do  offend,  the  emperor  or  reason, 
king  may   lawfully  take  away  their  possessions  from  them.     The  consequent  The 
dependeth  on  this  point,  forasmuch  as,  otherwise,  they  were  not  in  subjection  "^'"^^f 
under  the  emperor  or  king:  and  the  antecedent  is  manifest  by  the  11  quest,  unto  tlie 
1  par.,  "  His  ita  respondetur,"  where  it  is  specified  in  Latin  thus:   "  Clerici  emperor 
ex  officio  cpiscopo  sunt  suppositi,  ex  possessionibus^  imperatori  sunt  obnoxii :  ab  ^".  meMM 
cpiscopo  unctioneni,  decimas,  et  primitias  accipiunt ;  ab  imperatore  vero  pos-  of  their 
sessiones  nanciscuntur  :  '  that  is  to  say,  "The  clergy,  by  means  of  their  office,  Pp^^^s- 
are  under  the  bishop;  but  by  reason  of  their  possessions  they  be  subject  unto 
the  emperor :  of  the  bishop  they  receive  unction,  tithes,  and  first-fruits ;  of 
the  emperor  they  receive  possessions."     Thus  then  it  is  decreed  by  the  impe- 
rial law,  that  livelihoods  should  be  possessed  ;  whereby  it  appeareth,  that  the 
clergy,  by  the  possession  of  their  livelihoods,  are  in  danger  of  the  emperor  for 
him  to  take  away  from  them,  or  to  correct  them  according  to  their  deservings, 
and  to  have  the  controlment  of  them,  as  it  shall  seem  good  unto  him. 

Item,  The  temporal  lords  may  take  away  the  temporalties  from  such  as  use  Four- 
simony,  because  they  are  heretics.     Ergo,  this  article  is  true.     The  antecedent  |g*jo|j 
is  manifest,  forasnmch  as  the  secular  lords  may  refuse  such  as  use  simony,  and  Users  of 
punish  them  except  they  do  repent.     For,  by  tiie  decree  of  pope  Paschasius,  s'^nony 
in  the  first  and  last  questions  it  appeareth,  that  all  such  as  used  simony  were  nished  by 
to  be  refiised  of  all  faithful  people,  as  chief  and  principal  heretics ;  and  if  they  the  civil 
do  not  repent  after  tliey  be  warned,  they  are  also  to  be  punished  by  the  extern  J^gfJ*" 
power.     For  all  other  faults  and  crimes,  in  comparison  of  simony,  be  counted 
but  light,  and  seem  small  offences.     Whereupon  the  Gloss,  expounding  the 
same  text,  saith,  that  by  this  word  'extern,'  is  understood  the  laity,  who  have 
power  over  the  clergy,  besides  the  church,  as  in   the  seventeenth  distinction, 
"  Non   licuit,"  and  23  quest,  i)  par.,    "  Principcs."     Whereby  it  is  evident, 
that  the  temporal  lords  may  take  away  the  temporal  goods  from   the  clergy 
when  they  do  offend. 

Item,  St.  Gregory,  in  the  register  upon  his  seventh  book  and  ninth  chapter,  Gregory 
writeth  thus  unto  the  French  queen  :  "  Forasmuch  as  it  is  written  that  '  right-  "/{{fj'' 
eousness  helpcth  the  people,  and  sin   maketh   them  miserable ;'  then   is  that  French 
kingdom  counted  stable,  when  the  offence  which  is  known,  is  soon  amended.  <l"cen. 
Therefore,  forasmuch  as  wicked  priests  are  the  cause  of  the  ruin  of  the  people  ^V'^ked 
(for  who  shall  take  upon  him,  to  be  intercessor  for  the  sins  of  the  people,  if  the  de- 
the  priest  who  ought  to  entreat  for  the  same,  have  committed  greater  ofiences),  structiou 
and    under   your   dominions    the    priests  do  live   wickedly   and   unchastely ;  ™pie 
(1)  Ttis  passage  is  not  in  the  Latin  edition.— Ed.  (2)  Sz-c  Latin  edition,  p.  43.— luD. 

VOL.   III.  G 


82  THE    DEFENCE    OF    WICKLIFF    BY    JOHN    HUSS. 

Bichard  therefore,  that  the  offence  of  a  few  might  not  turn  to  the  destruction  of  many 

^^-      we  ouglit  earnestly  to  seek  the  punishment  of  the  same.     And  it  followeth,  if 

A  T\      we  do  command  any  person,  we  do  send  him  forth,  with  the  consent  of  your 

1  „'o  /     authority,  who,  together  with  other  priests,  shall  diligently  seek  out,  and  accord- 

'_  ing  unto  God's  word,  correct  and  amend  the  same.     Neither  are  these  things 

to  be  dissembled,  which  we  have  spoken  of,  for  he  that  may  correct  any  thing, 
and  doth  neglect  the  same,  without  all  doubt  he  maketh  himself  partaker  of  the 
sin  or  offence.  Therefore,  foresee  unto  your  own  soul ;  provide  for  your  nephews, 
and  for  such  as  you  do  desire  to  reign  after  you  ;  provide  for  your  country,  and 
with  diligence  provide  for  the  correction  and  punishment  of  that  sin,  before  our 
Creator  do  stretch  out  his  hand  to  strike." 
Gregory  And  in  liis  next  chapter  he  writeth  unto  the  French  king  :  "  Whatsoever  you 
to  the  ^o  understand  to  pertain  either  unto  the  honour  and  glory  of  our  God,  to  the 
King!  reverence  of  the  church,  or  to  the  honour  of  the  priests,  that  do  you  dihgently 
cause  to  be  decreed,  and  in  all  points  to  be  observed.  Wherefore,  once  again 
we  do  move  you,  that  you  command  a  synod  to  be  congregated,  and  as  we  wrote 
lately  unto  you,  do  cause  all  the  carnal  ^'ices,  which  reign  amongst  your  priests, 
and  all  tlie  wickedness  and  simony  of  your  bishops,  which  is  most  hard,  to 
be  condemned  and  reproved,  utterly  to  be  banished  out  of  your  kingdom  ;  and 
that  you  will  not  suffer  them  to  possess  any  more  substance  under  yoiur  domi- 
nion, than  God's  commandment  doth  allow." 

Behold,  how  carefully  blessed  Gregoiy  doth  exhort  the  queen  and  the  king 
to  punish  the  vices  of  the  clergy,  lest,  through  their  negligence,  they  should  be 
partakers  of  the  same,  and  how  they  ought  to  coiTect  their  subjects.  For  as  it 
is  convenient  to  be  circumspect  and  careful  against  the  outward  enemies,  even 
so,  likewise,  ought  they  to  be  against  the  inward  enemies  of  the  soul.  And,  as 
in  just  war  against  the  outward  enemies  it  is  lawful  to  take  away  their  goods,  so 
long  as  they  continue  in  their  malice,  so  also  it  is  lawful  to  take  away  the  goods 
of  the  clergy,  being  the  inward  enemy.  The  consequent  is  proved  thus :  for 
so  much  as  the  domestical  enemies  are  most  hurtful. 
Sixteenth  Item,  It  is  thus  argued  ;  if  God  be,  the  temporal  lords  may  meritoriously  and 
reason.  lawfully  take  away  the  temporal  goods  from  the  clergy,  if  they  do  offend.  For 
this  point  let  us  suppose  that  we  speak  of  power  as  the  true  authentic  Scripture 
doth  speak  [Mat.  iii.  9],  "  God  is  able  even  of  these  stones  to  raise  up  chil- 
dren to  Abraham." 

Whereupon  it  is  thus  argued :  If  God  be,  he  is  omnipotent ;  and  if  he  so  be, 
he  may  give  like  power  unto  the  secular  lords ;  and  so  consequently  they  may 
meritoriously  and  lawfidly  use  the  same  power.  But,  lest  any  man  object,  that 
a  proof  made  by  a  strange  thing  is  not  sufficient,  it  is  therefore  declared  that 
the  temporal  lords  have  power  to  take  away  their  alms  bestowed  upon  the 
church,  the  church  abusing  the  same,  as  it  shall  be  proved  hereafter.  And  first 
thus :  it  is  lawful  for  kings,  in  cases  limited  by  the  law,  to  take  away  the  move- 
ables from  the  clergy  when  they  do  offend:  it  is  thus  proved;  for  the  temporal 
lords  are  most  bound  unto  the  works  of  greatest  mercy  most  easy  for  them  :  but, 
in  case  possible,  it  shoiUd  be  greater  alms  and  easier  temporal  dominion,  to  take 
away  their  alms  from  such  as  build  therewithal  unto  eternal  damnation,  through 
the  abuse  thereof,  than  to  give  the  said  alms  for  any  bodily  relief.  Ergo,  the 
assumption  is  true. 

Whereupon  first  this  sentence  of  the  law  of  Chiist  in  2  Thess.  iii.,  is  noted, 
where  the  apostle  writeth  thus :  "  When  we  were  amongst  you,  we  declared  this 
unto  you,  that  he  that  would  not  work,  should  not  eat."  Wherefore  the  law  of 
nature  doth  license  all  such  as  have  the  governance  of  kingdoms,  to  correct 
the  abuse  of  the  temporalties,  which  would  be  the  chief  cause  of  the  destruction 
of  their  kingdoms ;  whether  the  temporal  lords,  or  any  other,  had  endowed  the 
church  with  those  temporalties  or  not.  It  is  lawful  for  them  in  some  cases  to 
take  away  the  temporalties,  as  it  were  by  way  of  physic  to  withstand  sin,  not- 
withstanding any  excommunication,  or  other  ecclesiastical  censure ;  forasmuch 
as  they  are  not  endowed,  but  only  with  condition  thereunto  annexed, 
When  Hereby  it  appeareth,  that  the  condition  annexed  to  the  endowing  or  enriclu'ng 

and  how  of  any  church,  is,  that  God  should  be  honoured  :  which  condition  if  it  once  fail, 
of  any  ^  the  contrary  taking  place,  the  title  of  the  gift  is  lost,  and  consequently  the  lord 
gift  is  who  gave  the  alms  ought  to  correct  the  offence.  Excommunication  ought  not 
.ost.         (-Q  Ixinder  the  fulfilling  of  justice.     Secondly,  according  to  the  canon  law,  six- 


ox    TEMPORAL    .IL'RISDICTION    OVKIl    THK    SI'IlUTUAl/lV.  83 

teenth  question,   7  par.,   this  sentence  is   noted,  where    it  is  thus  spoken  as  RicUrd 
touching  the  children,    nephews,   and  tlie  wiost  honest  of  the   kindred  of  him       ^^• 

who  halh  builded  or  endowed  any  ciiurch  :  Tiiat  it  is  lawful  for  tiieni  to  be  tlius  .    p,  " 

circumspect,  that  if  they  perceive  the  priest  do  defraud  any  part  of  that  which  fV' ^" 

is  bestowed,  tliey  should  either  gently  admonish  or  warn  hiin,  or  else  complain  ^"^^^■ 


of  him  to  the  bishop,  that  he  may  be  corrected.  But  if  the  bishop  himself  at- 
tempt to  do  the  like,  let  them  complain  of  him  to  his  metropolitan ;  and  if  the 
metropolitan  do  the  like,  let  them  not  defer  tiie  time  to  report  it  in  the  ears  of 
the  king;  for  so  saith  the  canon,  "  Let  them  not  defer  to  report  it  in  the  ears  of 
the  kin^."  To  what  end,  I  pray  you,  but  that  he  should  do  correction  !  neither 
is  it  to  be  doubted,  but  tliat  correction  doth  more  apportiiin  unto  tlie  king  in 
tlus  point  for  their  goods,  whereof  he  is  chief  lord,  by  a  subtraction  proportional, 
according  to  the  fault  or  otFence. 

Item,  It  is  thus  proved:  it  is  lawful  for  the  secular  lords,  by  their  power,  to  Seven- 
do  coiTcction  upon  the  clergy  by  some  kind  of  fearful  discipline  appertaining  teenth 
to  tlieir  secular  power.    Ergo,  by  like  reason  it  is  lawful  for  them  by  their  powe°  Lawf°i 
to  do  such  con-ection  by  all  kind  of  fearftil  discipline  pertaining  unto  their  se-  fortheci- 
cular  power.      Forasmuch,   tlien,  as  the  taking  of  their  temporalties  is  a  kind  ^'' ''"'''" 
of  fearful  discipline  pertaining  unto  the  secular  power,  it  followeth  that  it  is  Ihe'^""''*' 
lawful  for  them  thereby  to  do  such  correction  :  and,  consequently,  it  followeth  cl'-Tgy. 
that  the  tmth  is  thus  to  be  proved.     The  consequent  is  evident ;  and  the  an- 
tecedent   is  proved    by  Isidore,   twentj'-third  question,   5  par.,  "Principes;" 
where  it  is  thus  written  :  "There  should  be  no  secular  powers  within  tlie  church, 
but  only  for  this  purpose,  that  whatsoever  thing  the  priests  or  ministers  caiuiot 
bring  to  pass  by  preaching  or  teaching,  the  secular  powers  may  command  the 
same  by  the  terror  and  fear  of  discipline.     For,  oftentimes,  the  heavenly  kino-- 
dom  is  profited  and  holpen  by  the  earthly  kingdom ;  that  they  who  are  in  the 
church,  and  do  any  thing  contrary  unto  faith  and  discipline,  by  the  rigour  of  the 
princes  mav  be  trodden  down,  and  that  the  power  of  the   rulers  may  lay  tliat 
discipline  upon  the  necks  of  the  proud  and  stiffiiecked,  which  the  utiHty  and 
profit  of  the  church  cannot  exercise  or  use. 

Item,  All  things  that  by  power  ought  to  work  or  bring  to  any  perfect  end  by  Ei'iit- 
the  reasonable  measuring  of  the  mean  thereto,  may  lawfully  use  by  power  the  eeiuh 
subtraction  or  taking  away  of  the  excess,  and  the  addition  of  tlie  want  of  tlieir  reason, 
means,  according  as  shall  be  convenient  or  meet  for  the  measure  to  be  made. 
Forasmuch,  then,  as  the  secular  lords  ou^ht  by  their  power,  to  provide  for  the 
necessary  sustentation  of  the  christian  clergy  by  the  reasonable  measuring  oi 
their  temporalties,  which  they  are  bound  to  bestow  upon  the  christian  clergy,  it 
followeth,  that  they  may  lawfully,  by  their  power,   use   tlie  taking  away,  or 
adding  unto,  those  temporalties,  according  as  shall  be  convenient  for  the  per- 
formance of  that  reasonable  matter. 

Item,  It  is  lawful  for  the  clergy,  by  their  power,  to  take  away  the  sacraments  Nj^e. 
of  the  church  from  the  Laity  customably  ottending,  forasmuch  as  it  doth  per-  teenth 
tain  to  the  office  of  the  christian  ministers,  by  tlieir  power,  to  minister  the  same  ^^^""• 
unto  the   lay-people.     Wherefore,  forasmuch  as   it  doth  pertain  unto  the  olfice 
of  the  laitj',  according  unto  their  power,  to  minister  and  give  temporalties  to  the 
clergy  of  Christ,  as  thi>  apostle  saith   [1  Cor.   ix.,],  itfollowetli,  that  it  is  also 
lawfiil  for  them  by  their  power  to  take  away  the  temporalties  from  the  clergy, 
when  they  do  habitually  sin  and  offend. 

Item,  By  like  power  may  he  who  giveth  a  stipend  or  exhibition,  withdraw  xwen- 
and  take  away  the  same  from  the  unworthy  labourers,  as  he  hath  power  to  give  tietu  rca- 
the  same  unto  the  worthy   labourers  :  forasmuch  then  as  temporalties  of  the  *""' 
clergj'  are  the  stipends  of  the  laity,  it  followeth  that  the  lay-people  may,  by  as 
good  authority,  take  away  again  the  same  from  the  clergj-  who  will  not  worthily 
labour,  cis  they  might,  by  their  power,  bestow  the  same  upon  those  who  would 
worthily  labour,  according  to  the   sajnng   of  the  gospel  [Matth.  xxi.],  "  The 
kingdom  shall  be  tikcn  away  from  you,  and  given  unto  a  people  which  shall 
bring  forth  the  fniits  thereof." 

Item,  It  is  also  lawful  for  the  secular  lords,  by  their  power,  to  chastise  and  Twenty- 
punish  the  lay-people  when  they  do  offend,  by  taking  away  their  temporalties  first  rea- 
according  to  the  exigent  of  their  offence,   forasmuch  as  the  lay-people  are  sub-  *°"' 
jected  to  their  dominion.     Wherefore  the  clergy  being  also  subject  to  the  domi- 
nion of  the  secular  lords,  as  appears  from  Rom.  xiii.,  and  many  other  places,  it 

G  2 


84 


THE    DEFENCE    OF    WICKLIFF    BY    JOHN    HUSS. 


Richard 
11. 

A.D. 
1384. 

Twenty- 
second 
re.-ison. 


Twenty- 
third  rea- 
son. 


Twenty 

fourth 

reason. 


Twenty- 
fifth  rea- 
son. 


is  evident  that  it  is  lawful  by  their  power  to  punish  the  clergy,  by  taking  awav 
their  temporaltie.s,  if  their  oifence  do  so  deserve. 

Item,  The  most  easy  reformation  of  the  clergy  to  the  life  of  Christ  and  the 
apostles,  and  the  most  profitable  to  the  laity,  (that  the  clergy  yiould  not 
live  contrary  unto  Christ),  seemeth  to  be  the  withdrawing  of  their  alms,  and 
the  taking  away  of  those  things  which  had  been  bestowed  upon  them.  And  it 
is  thus  proved  :  that  medicine  is  the  most  apt  to  be  laid  to  the  sore,  whereby  the 
infirmity  may  soonest  be  holpen,  and  which  is  most  agreeable  to  the  patients ; 
such  is  the  taking  away  of  the  temporalties.  Ergo,  this  article  is  true.  The 
minor  is  thus  proved  :  forasmuch  as  by  the  abundance  of  temporalties  the  worm 
or  serpent  of  pride  hath  sprung  up,  whereujxjn  insatiable  desire  and  lust  is  in- 
Hamed,  and  f\-om  which  proceed  all  kinds  of  gluttony  and  lechery.  It  is 
evident  in  this  point,  forasmuch  as  tlie  temporalties  being  once  taken  away, 
every  one  of  those  sins  is  either  utterly  taken  away,  or  at  least  diminished,  by 
the  contrary  virtue  induced  and  brought  in.  It  seemeth  also  most  pertinent 
unto  the  laity,  forasmuch  as  they  ought  not  to  lay  violent  hands  upon  their 
ministers,  nor  to  abject  the  priestly  dignit)',  neither  to  judge  any  of  the  clergy  in 
their  open  courts.  It  seemetli,  also,  by  the  law  of  conscience  to  pertain  unto 
the  lay-people,  forasmuch  as  every  man  who  worketh  any  work  of  mercy, 
ought  diligently  to  have  respect  unto  the  ability  of  them  that  he  bestoweth  his 
alms  upon  ;  lest  by  nourishing  or  helping  loiterers,  he  be  made  partaker  of  their 
offence.  Whereupon,  if  priests  do  not  minister  in  their  spiritual  things,  as  of 
their  tithes,  first-fruits  and  oblations,  as  Hostiensis  teacheth  in  his  third  book, 
the  people  ought  to  take  away  the  alms  of  their  tithes  from  them. 

Item,  It  is  confirmed  by  the  last  chapter  of  the  seventeenth  question,  out  of 
the  decree  of  Rents  appropriate  unto  the  church,  "  Quicunque,"  where  the  case 
is  put  thus  :  That  a  certain  man  having  no  children,  and  not  hoping  to  have  any, 
gave  all  his  goods  to  the  church,  reserving  to  himself  the  use  and  profits  thereof: 
it  happened  afterwards,  that  he  had  children,  and  the  bishop  restored  again  his 
goods  unto  him  not  hoping  for  it.  The  bishop  had  it  in  his  power,  whether  to 
render  again,  or  not,  those  things  which  were  given  him ;  but  that  was  by  the 
law  of  man,  and  not  by  the  law  of  conscience.  If  then,  by  the  decree  of  the 
holy  doctor  St.  Augustine,  in  his  sermon  on  the  life  of  the  clergy,  Aurelius, 
bishop  of  Carthage,  had  no  power  by  God's  law  to  withhold  that  which  is  be- 
stowed upon  the  church  for  the  necessity  of  children ;  by  which  law,  the  wanton, 
proud,  and  unstable  clergy,  being  more  than  sufiiciently  possessed  and  enriched, 
do  detain  and  keep  back  the  temporalties  to  the  detriment  and  hurt  of  their  own 
state,  and  of  the  whole  militant  church,  the  secular  patrons  being  thereby  so 
impoverished,  that  they  are  compelled  by  peimry  to  rob  and  steal,  to  oppress 
their  tenants,  to  spoil  and  undo  others,  and,  oftentimes,  by  very  necessity  are 
driven  to  beggary. 

Item,  Suppose  that  a  priest  and  minister,  how  grievously  soever  he  do  offend, 
by  what  kind  or  sign  of  offence  soever  it  be,  as  it  was  in  tlie  case  of  bishop 
Judas  Iscariot,  of  the  religious  monk  Sergius,  of  pope  Leo  the  heretic,  and  many 
other  priests,  of  whom  the  Scripture  and  Chronicles  make  mention,  and  daily  ex- 
perience doth  teach  us  the  same  :  it  is  evident,  that,  as  it  is  supposed,  the  priests 
in  the  kingdom  of  Bohemia  grievously  offending,  it  is  the  king's  part,  foras- 
much as  he  is  supreme  head  next  under  God,  and  lord  of  the  kingdom  of  Bo- 
hemia, to  correct  and  punish  those  priests.  And,  forasmuch  as  the  gentlest 
correction  and  punishment  of  such  as  be  obdurate  in  their  malice,  is,  the  casting 
away  of  their  temporal  goods,  it  followeth,  that  it  is  lawful  for  the  king  to  take 
away  temporalties.  Wlierefore  it  should  seem  very  maivellous  and  strange,  if 
priests,  riding  about,  should  spoil  virgins,  and  violently  corrupt  and  defile  honest 
matrons :  if,  in  such  case,  it  were  not  lawful  for  them  to  take  away  their  armour, 
weapons,  horses,  guns,  and  swords  from  them.  The  like  reason  were  it,  also, 
if  they  had  unlawfully  conspired  the  death  of  the  king,  or  that  they  would  be- 
tray the  king  unto  his  enemies. 

Item,  Whatsoever  any  of  the  clergy  doth  require  or  desire  of  the  secular  power, 
according  unto  the  law  and  ordinance  of  Christ,  the  secular  power  ought  to 
perform  and  grant  the  same.  But  the  clergy,  being  hindered  by  riches,  ought 
to  require  help  of  the  secular  power  for  the  dispensation  of  the  said  riches. 
Ergo,  the  secular  power  ought,  in  such  case,  by  the  law  of  Christ,  to  take  upon 
it  the  office  or  duty  of  getting,  keeping,  and  distributing,  all  such  mannei  of 


ON'    TKMPOUAl.    ..LKISUICTION    OVKIl     111  E    S IM  UITU  AL  TY.  8o 

riches.     The  minor  is  hereby  proved,  that  no  man  ouglit  to  liave  riches,  but  to   jtuhmu 
that  end,  that  tliey  be   helps,   preferring  and   lu'li)ing  imto  the  office  which  is       ^^• 
appointed  of  CJod.     Therefore,  in  case  secular  pctisession  do  hinder  the  clergy      .    pj 
from  their  duty,  the  secular  jjowcr  ought  to  take  it  away,  for  so  did  the  apostles,     100/ 

Acts  vi.,  saying,  "  It  is  not  lawful  for  us  to  lea\e  the  word  of  (Jod  unUiught,  and  — '■ 1- 

to  minister  unto  tables." 

And  thus,  liitlicrto,  Iiatli  Jolin  Huss  prosecuted  WicklifTs  articles 
with  long  argrnnents  and  reasons  ;  and  it  were  too  long  a   travail, 
neither  agreeable  lor  this  place,   to  allege  all  the   whole  order  of"  the 
reasons  and  proofs  which  he  used  in  that  disputation,  above  the  num- 
ber of  twenty  more,  besides  the  testimonies  of  all  the  writers   before 
recited,  which  he  allegeth  out  of  the  Scriptures,  the  decretals,  St.  Am-  Ambrose, 
brose  in  his  book  of  offices,  St.  Augustine  in  his  fiilh  book  and  fifth  i^,"^f7»i- 
qucstion,  and  also  unto  Macedo,  Isidore,  the  council  of  Nice,  Gregory  Jt^.  . 
in  his  eleventh  question,  Bernard  unto  Eugene  in  his  third  book,  Nice, 
and  out  of  Lincolniensis,  the  sixty-first  epistle,  besides  many  other  u'rfia^' 
more :  the  sum  of  all  which  testimonies  tends  to  this  end,  that  he  ^"^ 

otiicrs. 

might  utterly  take  away  all  earthly  rule  and  dominion  from  the  clergy, 
and  bring  them  under  the  subjection  and  censure  of  kings  and  em- 
perors, as  it  were  within  certain  bonds,  which  is  not  only  agreeable  to 
equity  and  God's  word,  but  also  profitable  for  the  clergy  then)sclves. 
He  teacheth  it  also  to  be  necessary,  that  they  should  rather  be  sub- 
jected under  the  secular  power,  than  be  above  it ;  because  that  else 
it  were  dangerous,  lest  they,  being  entangled  with  such  kind  of  busi- 
ness, should  be  an  easier  prey  to  Satan,  and  sooner  entrapped  in  his 
snares  ;  and,  thereby,  it  should  come  to  pass,  that  the  goveniance  and 
principality  of  all  things  being  at  length  brought  into  tlie  hands  of  the 
clergy,  the  lawful  authority  of  kings  and  princes  should  not  only  be 
given  over  unto  them,  but  in  a  manner,  as  it  were,  grow  out  of  use ; 
especially  forasmuch  as  already,  in  certain  kingdoms  and  common- 
wealths, the  ecclesiastical  power  is  groAvn  to  such  a  height,  that  not  only 
in  Bohemia,  but  also  almost  throughout  all  the  commonAvealths,  they 
do  occupy  the  third,  or  at  least  the  fourth  part  of  the  rents  and  reve- 
nues. And,  last  of  all, he  allegeth  thee.xamples  of  Gregory  and  of  Mauri- 
tius, and  afterwards  the  prophecy  of  Hildegard,  writing  in  this  manner. 

The  Second  Disputation  of  John  Huss,  continued. 

As  the  ecclesiastical  ministers  do  wiljingly  receive  reward  and  praise  of  kings 
and  i-ulers  for  their  good  deeds,  so  also  ought  they,  when  they  do  offend,  wil- 
lingly to  suffer  and  receive  punishment  at  their  hands  for  their  evil  doings.  The 
consequent  holdeth  thus,  forasmuch  as  the  punishment  meekly  and  humbly 
received  for  his  offence  doth  more  profit  a  man,  than  his  praise  received  for  any 
good  work :  whereupon  St.  Gregory  WTiteth  thus  imto  INIauritius,  the  emperor, 
when  he  did  persecute  him,  saying,  "  I  believe  that  you  do  please  Almighty 
God  so  nmch  the  better,  in  so  cruelly  afflicting  me,  who  have  been  so  e\-il  a 
servant  unto  him."  If  then  this  holy  pope  did  so  humbly  and  meekly,  without 
any  offence,  suffer  this  aflliction  of  the  emperor,  why  should  not  any  of  the 
clergy,  wlien  they  do  offend,  meekly  siLst.iin  punishment  at  the  king's  or  nder's 
hands,  under  whom  they  are  bound  to  be  subject,  when  the  true  vicar  of  Christ 
saith  [1  Pet.  ii.],  *'  Be  ye  subject  unto  every  creature  for  God's  cause,  whether 
it  be  unto  the  king,  as  most  excellent,  or  unto  the  ruicrs,  as  men  sent  of  God 
for  the  punishing  of  the  wicked,  and  to  the  jjraisc  of  the  good :  for  so  is  the 
good  will  of  God  i" 

Whereupon  pope  Leo,  leaning  to  tliis  rule,  submitted  himself  to  Louis,  the 


86  THE    DEFENCE    OF    WICKLIFF    BY    JOHN    HUSS. 

Richard   emperor,  as  it  is  written  in  the  second  question,  7  par.,  in  these  words,  "  If  we 
^^-        have  done  any  tiling  incompetently,  or  if  we  have  not  observed  the  upright  path 
.    „      and  way  of  equity  amongst  subjects,  we  will  amend  the  same,  either  by  your  own 
'     '    judgment,  or  else  by  the  advice  or  judgment  of  those  whom  you  shall  appoint  for 
'  that  purpose.     For  if  we,  who  ought  to  correct  and  punish  other  men's  faults,  do 

Pope  Leo  commit  more  grievous  ourselves,  we  are  not  then  the  disciples  of  the  truth,  but, 
t"ti"h'      ^^^'^  sorrow  we  speak  it,  we  shall  be  above  all  others  the  masters  of  error." 
self  unto        And,  in  the  tenth  distinction,  he  writeth  thus,  touching  the  obedience  unto 
the  em-     ^q  emperor :  "  As  concerning  the  precepts  and  commandments  of  our  emperors 
Lou'h        ^n^  °^^i'  predecessors  the  bishops  (whom   the  Gloss  calleth  emperors,  who  are 
anointed  after  the  manner  of  bishops)  to  be  observed  and  kept  unbroken,  we  do 
profess  ourselves  by  all  means  possible,  as  much  as  in  us  lieth,  or  that  we  may 
and  can,  we  will,  by  the  help  of  God,  preserve  and  keep  them  both  now  and 
ever.     And  if,  peradventure,  any  man  do  inform,  or  hereafter  shall  inform  you 
otherwise,  know  you  him  assiu-edly  to  be  a  liar  and  slanderer." 
Tyranny        Mark  how  this  devout  and  holy  pope,  calling  the  emperors  bishops,  submitted 
and  pride  himself,  according  to  the  rule  of  St.  Peter  the  apostle,  under  the  obedience,  and 
clergy        ^^^  punishment  of  the  emperor.    Wherefore,  then,  should  not  the  clergy  of  the 
kingdom  of  Bohemia  submit  themselves  under  the  obedience  of  their  king,  for 
God's  cause,  to  be  punished  if  they  do  offend ;  and  not  only  submit  themselves 
unto  the  king,  but  also  unto  the  rulers  ;  and  not  only  luito  the  rulers,  but  unto 
every  other  creature  ?     For  by  how  much  they  do  so  humble  and  abase  them- 
selves in  this  world  for  God's  sake,  so  much  the  more  shall  they  be  exalted  with 
him :  but  what  is  the  hindrance  thereof,  but  only  pride,  whereby  Antichrist 
doth  exalt  himself  above  the  most  humble  and  meek  Lord  Jesus  Christ? 
Prophecy       Also,  it  seemeth  to  appear  by  that  which  is  aforesaid  on  the  taking  away  of 
of  Hilde-   t}ig  temporalties,  in   the  prophecy  of  Hildegard,  the  virgin,  which  she  writeth 
^^^  '         in  her  books  under  Eugene  the  pope,  in  the  coimcil  of  Treves,  approved  and 
allowed  by  many  bishops  of  France,  Italy,  and  Almain,  who  were  there  present, 
where  also  St.  Bernard  himself  was  present.     The  virgin  prophesying,  spake  in 
this  manner:  "The  kings  and  other  rulers  of  the  world,  being  stirred  up  by  the 
just  judgment  of  God,  shall  set  themselves  against  them,  and  run  upon  them, 
saying,  '  We  will  not  have  these  men  to  reign  over  us  with  their  rich  houses  and 
great  possessions,  and  other  worldly  riches,  over  which  we  are  ordained  to  be 
lords  and  rulers  :  and  how  is  it  meet  or  comely  that  those  shavelings,  with  their 
stoles  and  chisils,  should  have  more  soldiers,  or  more  or  richer  armour  or  artillery 
than  we  ?     So  is  it  not  convenient  that  one  of  the  clergy  should  be  a  man  of 
war,  or  that  a  soldier  should  be  one  of  the  clergy.     Wherefore,  let  us  take 
away  fi-om  them  that,  which  they  do  not  justly,  but  wrongfully  possess.'" 

And,  immediately  after,  she  saith  thua :  "  The  Omnipotent  Father  equally  di- 
vided all  things ;  that  is  to  say,  the  heavens  he  gave  unto  the  heavenly  creatures. 
Just  di-     and  the  earth  unto  the  earthly.     And  by  this  means  was  there  a  just  division 
vision  in-  made  between  the  children  of  men,  that  the  spiritualty  should  have  such  things 
God  be-  ^  ^s  belong  unto  them,  and  the  secular  people,  such  things  as  are  meet  andne- 
tween  the  cessary  for  them,  so  that  neither  of  these  two  sorts  should  oppress  each  other  by 
"^'ri'^h'^'    violence ;  for  God  doth  not  command,  that  the  one  son  or  child  should  have 
secular      both  the  cloak  and  the  coat,  and  the  other  should  go  naked ;  but  he  willeth  that 
people,      the  one  shoidd  have  the  cloak,  and  the  other  the  coat.     Wherefore  the  secular 
sort  ought  to  have  the  cloak  for  the  greatness  of  their  worldly  cares,  and  for 
their  children,  which  daily  increase  and  multiply.    The  coat  he  giveth  unto  the 
spiritualty,  that  they  should  not  lack  clothing,  and  that  they  should  not  possess 
more  than  necessity  doth  require.    Wherefore  we  judge  and  think  it  good,  that 
all  these  aforesaid  be  divided  by  reason  and  equity ;  and  that  where  the  cloak 
and  the  coat  are  both  found,  the  cloak  should  be  taken  away,  and  given  unto 
the  needy,  that  they  do  not  perish  for  lack  or  want."     These  things  spake  the 
virgin  Hildegard,  plainly  foreshowing  the  taking  away  of  the  temporalties  from 
the  clergy  by  the  seailar  lords ;  and  showing  for  what  cause  they  shall  be  so 
taken  away,  and  what  manner  of  division  shall  be  made  of  those  things  that 
are  taken  away,  that  they  be  not  consumed,  and  spent  unprofitably. 

Forasmticli  as  mention  is  here  made  of  Hildegard,  it  shall  not  seem 
impertinent,  moved  'by  the  occasion  hereof,  to  give  forth  unto  the 
reader  such  things  as  we  have  found  in  certain  old  volmnes,  touching 


HILDKUAUd's    I'UOl'lIKOV     KKGAKUlKo     !•  IIIAKS    AND    MONKS.  87 

her  prophecy  of  the  coining  of  certain  false  prophets,  only  meaning,  nicimij 

as  it  soenieth,  the  begging-friars,   who  sprang  up  shortly  after  licr '. 

time.    The  tenor  whereof  is  this,  word  fur  word,  as  we  find  it  written.    A.D. 

1384. 


Hildegard's  Propliecy  respecting  Friars  and  Monks. 

In  those  days  there  shall  rise  up  a  people  without  understanding,  proud, 
covetous,  untrusty,  and  deceitful,  that  shall  eat  the  sins  of  the  people,  holding  a 
certain  order  of  foolish  devotion,  under  the  feigned  cloak  of  beggary  ;  preferring 
themselves  above  all  others,  by  their  feigned  devotion,  arrogant  understanding, 
and  pretended  hohness  ;  walking  without  shamefacedness,  or  the  fear  of  God ; 
inventing  many  new  mischiefs,  being  strong  aiid  stout :  but  this  order  shall  be 
accursed  of  all  wise  men  and  faitliful  Ciiristians ;  they  shall  cease  from  labour, 
and  give  themselves  over  unto  idleness  ;  choosing  rather  to  live  through  flattery, 
and  by  begging.  Moreover,  they  shall  together  study,  how  they  may  perversely 
resist  tlie  teacliers  of  the  truth,  and  slay  them  together  with  tlio  noble  men ; 
how  to  seduce  and  deceive  the  nobility,  for  the  necessity  of  their  living  and  the 
pleasures  of  this  world.  For  the  devil  will  graft  in  them  four  principal  vices ;  Four 
that  is  to  say,  flattery,  envy,  liy))ocrisy,  and  slander :  flattery,  that  they  may  Pfincipa] 
have  large  gifl^s  given  them  :  envy,  wlien  tliey  see  gifts  given  unto  others,  and  tiirfriars. 
not  unto  then\ :  nypocrisy,  that  by  false  dissimulation,  they  may  please  men  : 
detraction,  that  they  may  extol  and  commend  themselves,  and  backbite  others, 
for  the  praise  of  men,  and  the  seducing  of  the  shnple. 

Also,  they  shall  instantly  preach  without  devotion  or  example  of  the  martyrs, 
and  shall  traduce  the  secular  princes,  taking  away  the  sacraments  of  tlie  diurch 
from  the  true  pastors,  receiving  alms  of  the  poor,  diseased,  and  miserable,  and 
also  associating  themselves  with  the  common  people,  having  familiarity  with 
women,  instructing  them  how  they  shall  deceive  their  husbands  and  friends  by 
their  flattery  and  deceitful  words,  and  rob  their  husbands  to  give  it  unto  tliem  : 
for  they  will  take  all  these  stolen  and  evil-gotten  goods,  and  say,  "  Give  it  unto 
us,  and  we  will  pray  for  you;"  so  that  they,  being  curious  to  hide  other  men's 
faidts,  do  utterly  forget  their  own :  and  alas,  they  will  receive  all  tilings  of  rovers, 
pickers,  spoilers,  thieves,  and  robbers  ;  of  sacrilegious  persons,  usurers,  and 
adulterers;  of  heretics,  schismatics,  and  apostates;  of  noblemen,  peijurers,  mer- 
chants, false  judges,  soldiers,  tyrants,  princes ;  of  such  as  live  contrary  to  the  ' 
law,  and  of  many  perverse  and  wicked  men :  following  the  persuasion  of  the 
devil,  the  sweetness  of  sin,  a  delicate  and  transitory  life,  and  fulness  even  unto 
eternal  damnation. 

All  these  things  shall  manifestly  appear  in  them  unto  ail  people,  and  they, 
day  by  day,  shall  wax  more  wicked  and  hard-hearted ;  and  when  their  wicked- 
ness and  deceits  shaU  be  found  out,  then  shall  their  gifts  cease,  and  then  shall 
they  go  about  their  houses  hungry,  and  as  mad  dogs  lookhig  down  upon  the 
earth,  and  drawing  in  tlieir  necks  as  doves,  tliut  they  might  be  satisfied  with 
bread.  Then  shall  the  people  cry  out  upon  them,  "  Woe  be  unto  you,  ye  miser- 
able children  of  sorrow.  The  world  hatli  seduced  you,  the  devil  hath  bridled 
your  mouths  ;  your  flesh  is  frail,  and  your  hearts  without  savour ;  your  minds 
have  been  unsteadl'ast,  and  your  eyes  deUghted  in  much  vanity  and  folly  ;  your 
dainty  bellies  desire  delicate  meats;  your  feet  are  swift  to  run  imto  mischief." 
Remember  when  you  were  apparently  blessed  yet  envious,  poor  but  rich,  sim- 
ple, mighty  devout  flatterers,  unfaithful  betrayers,  perverse  detractors,  holy 
hypocrites,  subvertcrs  of  the  truth,  overmuch  upright,  proud,  unshamefaced, 
unsteadfast  teacher8,_delicate  martyrs,  confessors  for  gain,  meek  slanderers,  reli- 
gious, covetous,  humble,  proud,  pitiftd,  hard-hearted,  liars,  pleasant  flatterers, 
peace-breakers,  persecutors,  oppressors  of  the  poor,  bringing  in  new  sects  newly 
invented  of  yourselves,  merciless,  wicked,  lovers  of  the  world,  sellers  of  pardons, 
spoilers  of  benefices,  unprofitjible  orators,  seditious  conspirators,  drunkards,  de- 
sirers  of  honour,  maintainors  of  miscliief,  robbers  of  the  world,  insatiable, 
preachers,  men-pleasers,  seducers  of  women,  and  sowers  of  discord.  For  Moses, 
the  glorious  prophet,  spake  very  well  of  you  in  his  song :  "  A  people  without 
counsel  or  understanding ;  would  to  God  they  did  know,  understand,  and  foresee 
the  end." 

You  have  biiilded  up  on  high,  ana  when  you  could  ascend  no  higher,  then 


88  THE  DEFENCE    OF    WICKLIFF    BY   JOHN     HUSS. 

Richard   did  you  fall,  even  as  Simon  Magus  whom  God  overthrew,  and  did  strike  with  a 

^^-      cruel  plague ;  so  you,  likewise,  through  your  false  doctrine,  naughtiness,  lies, 

A    r\     detractions,  and  wickedness,  are  come  to  ruin.     And  the  people  shall  say  unto 

1  'iS4     y^*^'  "  ^° '  y^  teachers  of  wickedness,  subverters  of  the  truth,  brethren  of  the 

— '. '—  Shunamite,  fathers  of  heresies,   false  apostles,  who  have  feigned  yourselves  to 

follow  the  life  of  the  apostles,  and  yet  have  not  fulfilled  it  in  any  part:  sons  of 
iniquity !  we  will  not  follow  the  knowledge  of  your  ways,  for  pride  and  presump- 
tion have  deceived  you,  and  insatiable  concupiscence  hath  subverted  your  erro- 
neous hearts;  and  when  ye  would  yet  ascend  higher  than  was  meet  or  comely 
for  you,  by  the  just  judgment  of  God  you  are  fallen  back  into  perpetual  oppro- 
biy  and  shame." 

This  blessed  Hildegard,  whose  prophecy  this  is,  flourished  about 
the  year  of  our  Lord,  1146,  as  it  is  written  in  Martin's  Chronicles. 

Hugo,  also,  in  his  second  book  of  Sacraments,  part  ii.  chapter  3, 
saith,  "The  laity,  forasmuch  as  they  intermeddle  with  cartliiy  matters 
necessary  unto  an  earthly  life,  they  are  the  left  part  of  the  body  of 
Christ.  And  the  clergy,  forasmuch  as  they  do  dispose  those  things 
which  pertain  unto  a  spiritual  life,  are,  as  it  were,  the  right  side  of 
the  body  of  Christ.'''  And,  afterwards,  interpreting  both  these  parts 
himself,  he  saith,  "  A  spiritual  man  ought  to  have  nothing  but  such  as 
pertaineth  unto  God,  unto  whom  it  is  appointed  to  be  sustained  by 
the  tithes  and  oblations  which  are  oflTered  unto  God ;  but  unto  the 
christian  and  faithful  laity  the  possession  of  the  earth  is  granted ;  and 
unto  the  clergy  the  whole  charge  of  spiritual  matters  is  committed,  as 
it  was  in  the  Old  Testament.  And  in  his  seventh  chapter  he  de- 
clareth,  how  that  certain  things  are  given  unto  the  church  of  Christ 
by  the  devotion  of  the  faithful,  the  power  and  authority  of  the  secular 
power  reserved,  lest  there  might  happen  any  confusion ;  forasmuch 
as  God  himself  cannot  allow  any  disordered  thing.  Whereupon  of- 
tentimes the  worldly  princes  do  grant  the  bare  use  of  the  church,  and 
oftentimes  use  power  to  exercise  justice,  which  the  clergy  cannot 
exercise  by  any  ecclesiastical  minister,  or  any  other  person  of  the 
clergy.  Notwithstanding  they  may  have  certain  lay-persons  ministers 
unto  that  office ;  "  but  in  such  sort,"  saith  he,  "that  they  do  acknow- 
ledge the  power  which  they  have,  to  come  from  the  secular  prince  or 
ruler,  and  that  they  do  understand  their  possessions  can  never  be 
alienated  away  from  the  king's  power ;  but,  if  necessity  or  reason  do 
require,  the  same  possessions,  in  all  such  case  of  necessity,  do  owe  him. 
obeisance  and  service.  For,  like  as  the  king's  power  ought  not  to 
turn  away  the  defence  or  safeguard  which  he  oweth  unto  others,  so, 
likewise,  the  possessions  obtained  and  possessed  by  the  clergy,  ac- 
cording to  the  duty  and  homage  which  are  due  unto  the  patronage  of 
the  king's  power,  cannot  by  right  be  denied."  Thus  much  writeth 
Hugo. 

The  Third  Disputation  of  John  Huss,  upon  the  Eighteenth  Article 
of  Wickliff,  made  in  the  third  Act,  the  same  Year,  after  the  Feast 
of  St.Vitis,  touching  Tithes,  &c. 

"  Tithes  are  pure  Alms." 

Alms  Upon  this  article  it  is  to  be  noted,  that  forasmuch  as  alms  is  a  work  of  mercy, 

mercy.      ^s  St.  Augustine,  St.  Chrysostome,  and  others  do  jointly  affirm,  and  mercy,  ac- 
cording to  Lincolniensis'  mind,  for  the  present,  is  a  love  or  desire  to  help  the 


TITHKS    PUOVKD    TO    BK    PURE    ALMS.  89 

miserable  out  of  his  misery  :  and  forasmuch  as  the  misery  of  mankind  is  two-   nuhnrd 
fold;  that  is  to  say,  spiritual  and  bodily,  which  is  the  want  or  Uiking  away  of      ^i- 
the  goods ;   and  the  goods  of  man   are  eitlier  the  goods  of  the  soul   or  of  the 
body  :   and  the  goods  of  the  soul  are  twofold;   that  is  to  say,  the  enlightening  of    |t.*jH' 
the  mind,  and  the  uprightness  of  ailection  :   the  iiiisery  of  the  soul  is  also  two- 
fold ;  as  the  darkness  of  ignorance,  and  a  froward  and  wilful  swerving  from  the  T*o 
truth.     And  both  the  goods  of  the  soul  are  wont  to  be  comprehended  under  one  „,igery. 
title  or  name  ;  that  is  to  say,  *  wisdom  :'  and  both  the  miseries  of  the  soul,  under  Two 
the  name  of  folly.'     Whereupon  all  tlie  whole  goodness  of  the  soul  is  wisdom,  goodness 
and  all  the  whole  misery  thereof  is  ignorance.     The  miseries  of  the  body  are -j-j^^ij^j^^ 
lack  of  meat;  that  is  to  say,  hunger;  and  lack  of  drink,  called  thirst;  and,  ricaofthe 
briefly,  all  misery  is  the  want  of  some  thing  which  is  desired.     Also  these  arc  '"'"^  ^"'* 
bodily  miseries  :  nakedness,  lack  of  harbour,  sickness,  and  imprisonment.     All 
the  miseries  therefore  being  numbered  together,  arc  but  one  of  the  soul,  which 
is  folly  and  lack  of  wisdom,  and  six  of  the  body,  which  the  Lord,  in  Matthew 
XXV.,  doth  plainly  rehearse.     There  are  also  commonly  appointed  seven  bodily 
alms ;  that  is  to  say,  to  feed  the  hungry,  to  give  drink  unto  the  thirsty,  to  clothe 
the  naked,  to  harbour  the  stranger  or  harbourless,  to  visit  the  sick,  and  to  bury 
.  the  dead ;  which  all  together  are  contained  in  these  verses : 

"  Visito,  poto,  cibo,  redimo,  tego,  colligo,  condo." 

Which  verse  is  thus  Englished : 

Visit  the  sick,  the  hungry  feed, 
Give  drink  to  the  thirsty,  clothe  the  naked, 
Bury  the  dead,  the  captive  redeem, 
The  harbourless  receive  to  thy  lodging. 

There  be  also  seven  other  spiritual  alms  appointed,  which  are  these :  to  teach  What 
the  ignorant ;  to  counsel  him  that  is  in  doubt;  to  comfort  him  who  is  in  heavi-  ^'""^  '^ 
ncss  ;  to  correct  the  offender ;  to  forgive  him  who  hath  offended  against  thee ; 
to  bear  with  those  who  are  grievous ;  and  to  pray  for  all  men  :  which  are  also 
contained  in  these  verses  following  : 

"  Consule,  castiga,  solare,  remitte,  fer,  ora." 

Which  verse  is  thus  Englished : 

Instruct  the  ignorant,  the  weak  confirm, 
Comfort  the  heavy  heart,  and  correct  sin  : 
Forgive  the  offender,  bear  with  the  rude. 
Pray  for  all  men  both  evil  and  good. 

So  that,  notwithstanding,  under  the  same,  counsel  and  doctrine  be  compre- 
hended, as  writeth  Thomas  in  the  second  part  of  the  second  question,  art,  xxxii. 
par.  2. 

Secondly,  it  is  to  be  noted  that  in  this  present  article  our  intent  is  only  to  treat 
of  bodily  alms  ;  which,  as  Tliomas  writeth  in  his  second  part,  second  question 
(art.  xx.\ii.  par.  1),  according  to  some  men's  minds  is  thus  defined  :  "  Alms  is  a 
work  whereby  any  thing  is  given  unto  the  needy,  out  of  compassion,  for  God's 
sake."  And  forasmuch  as  this  definition  serveth  as  well  for  the  spiritual  as  for  the 
corporal  alms,  therefore,  to  the  purjiose :  alms  is  a  work,  whereby  any  thing  is 
given  unto  the  needy  in  body  for  compassion,  and  for  God's  sake ;  or  that  is 
given  of  compassion  or  pity  imto  the  bodily  needy  for  God's  sake.' 

Whereupon  it  is  manifest  that  alms,  as  St.  Augustine  and  other  holy  men  say, 
is  a  work  of  mercy,  as  also  to  give  alms,  as  it  appeareth  by  the  name ;  for  in 
the  (ireek  it  is  derived  from  this  word  '  elemonia,' which  is  '  mercy ;' for  as 
in  the  Latin  this  word  '  miseratio,"  which  significth  '  pity,'  is  derived  from  '  miseri- 
cordia,'  which  is  '  mercy ;'  so  this  word  '  elecmosyna,'  which  significth  '  alms,'  is 
derived  from  the  Greek  word  '  elemonia,'  which  is  to  say  '  mercy,'  and  from 

(I)  "  Elecmosyna  est  opus,  quo  datur  aliquid  indigent!  in  corpore,  ex  compassionc  propter 
Deum,  vel  quod  datur,  vel  datum  est  ex  compastionc,  indigeoticorporaliter  propter  Deum."— See 
the  Latin  edition,  1559,  p.  48— Eo 


90 


THE    DEl'ENCE    OF    WICKLIFF    BY    JOHN    HUS.^. 


Richard 
II. 


A.D. 

i;js4. 


Tithes. 


St.  Au- 
tjustiiie 
proveth 
titbe.s  to 
he  pure 
alms. 


the  word  '  sina,'  which  is  to  say  '  commandment,'  as  it  were  a  commandment 
of  mercy,  or  otherwise  from  this  word,  '  el«monia.'  By  this  letter  '  I,'  which 
is  to  say,  '  God,'  and  this  word  '  sina,'  which  is  '  commandment :'  it  is  as  if  it 
were  said,  '  the  commandment  of  God;'  as  Januensis,  in  his  book  entitled 
'  Catholicon,'  affirmeth.^ 

For  our  Saviour  doth  command,  in  Luke  xi.,  to  give  alms,  saying,  "  Give 
alms,  and  behold  all  things  are  clean  unto  you :"  lest  that  in  this  point  there 
may  be  any  equivocation,  it  is  supposed,  presently  that  the  alms  given  by  men 
is  a  corporal  alms,  given  simply  under  the  name  of  alms.  Secondly,  it  is  to  be 
noted,  that  tithes,  in  this  case,  are  the  tenth  part  of  goods  of  fortune,  given  by 
man  simply  under  the  name  of  alms  for  God's  sake. 

These  things  being  thus  noted  and  supposed,  the  article  is  thus  proved : 
Every  gift  of  fortune,  or  temporal  gift  simply  given  under  the  name  of  alms,  is 
alms.  But  some  tithes  are  the  gift  of  fortune,  or  a  temporal  gift  under  the 
name  of  alms ;  therefore  some  tithes  are  alms.  This  consequent  is  manifest 
of  itself.  The  major  appeareth  by  the  first  supposition ;  and  the  minor  by  the 
second. 

Item,  Every  gift  given  by  a  man,  even  of  love,  to  relieve  and  help  the  mise- 
rable out  of  his  misery,  is  an  alms.  The  tenth  part  of  the  goods  of  fortune 
given  by  a  man,  simply  under  the  name  of  alms  for  God's  sake,  is  given  by 
the  same  man  even  of  love,  to  help  the  miserable  out  of  his  misery ;  therefore, 
the  tenth  part  of  the  goods  of  fortune,  being  given  by  any  man  simply  under 
the  name  of  alms  for  God's  sake,  is  alms.  The  consequent  is  manifest.  The 
major  appeareth  by  this,  that  every  such  gift  is  either  a  spiritual  or  bodily  alms. 
The  minor  seemeth  hereby  true,  forasmuch  as  many  holy  men  have  given,  and 
do  give,  even  for  love,  to  relieve  the  miserable  out  of  his  misery ;  neither  is  it  to 
be  doubted  but  that  such  kind  of  tithes  are  alms.  For  St.  Augustine,  upon  these 
words  of  the  Lord  in  the  Gospel,  "  Woe  be  unto  you  Pharisees,  which  do  tithe 
the  mint  and  anise,"  writeth  thus :  "  If  they  cannot  be  cleansed  without  they 
believe  in  him  who  doth  cleanse  the  heart  by  faith,  to  what  pm-pose  is  it  that 
He  saith,  *  Give  alms,  and  behold,  all  things  are  clean  unto  you  ? '  Let  us  give 
ear,  and  peradventure  He  doth  expound  it  himself.  They  did  take  out  the 
tenth  part  of  all  their  fruits,  and  give  it  for  alms ;  which  any  christian  man  doth 
not  willingly.  Then  they  mocked  Him,  when  He  spake  these  words  to  them, 
as  unto  men  who  woidd  do  no  alms.  This  the  Lord  foreknowing  said,  '  Woe 
be  unto  you  Pharisees,  which  tithe  mint  and  rue,  and  all  kind  of  herbs,  and  pass 
over  the  judgment  and  charity  of  God  ;'  for  this  it  is  to  do  alms,  if  thou  dost 
understand  it,  begin  with  thyself;  for  how  canst  thou  be  merciful  unto  another, 
who  art  unmerciful  unto  thyself?"  This  writeth  St.  Augustine,  plainly  saying, 
that  "  tithes  are  alms." 

Also  in  his  Enchiridion,  chap.  Ixxvi.,  upon  these  words  of  St.  Luke,  chap,  xi., 
"  Notwithstanding  that  which  is  more  than  sufficient,  give  in  alms,  and  all 
things  shall  be  clean  unto  you,"  he  saith  thus:  "  When  he  had  rebuked  them, 
that  they  washed  themselves  outwardly,  and  inwardly  were  full  of  iniquity  and 
abomination,  admonishing  them  in  what,  and  how,  a  man  ought  first  to  bestow 
alms  upon  himself,  and  first  to  cleanse  himself  inwardly,  he  saith,  '  That  which 
doth  remain,  give  in  alms  ;  and  behold,  all  things  are  clean  unto  you.'  After- 
wards, that  he  might  the  better  declare  what  he  had  given  them  warning  of, 
and  what  they  had  neglected  to  do,  that  they  shoidd  not  judge  him  ignorant  of 
their  alms,  he  saith,  '  Woe  be  unto  you  Pharisees ;'  as  though  he  should  say, 
'  I  verily  gave  you  warning  that  you  should  give  such  alms,  whereby  all  things 
might  be  clean  unto  you ;  but  woe  be  unto  you  who  tithe  the  mint,  me,  and  all 
kind  of  herbs,  for  I  do  know  these  your  ahns,  that  you  should  not  tliink  with 
yourselves  that  you  had  given  me  warning  thereof,  and  neglect  and  pass  over 
the  judgment  and  charity  of  God,  by  which  alms  ye  might  be  cleansed  from  all 
yoiu-  inward  filthiness,  and  your  bodies  also,  which  you  do  wash,  should  be 
clean,  and  all  these  things,  both  inward  and  also  outward;'  as  it  is  said  in 
another  place,  '  Cleanse  that  which  is  within,  and  the  outward  tilings  shall  be 


(1)  An  extract  from  the  Latin  is  here  subjoined.  "  Et  hoc  apparet  ex  ipso  nomine.  Nam  in 
Grsco  ^misericordiaderivatur,  sicut  Latinfe  miseratio  a  misericordia :  sic  eleemosyna  ab  elemonia, 
quod  est  misericordia ;  et  sina,  quod  est  mandatum,  id  est,  mandatum  misericordiae,  vel  elimonia, 
per  '  r  melius.  Et  tunc  dicitur  ab  '  eli'  quod  est  '  Deus,'  et  '  sina,'  quod  est  '  mandatum,'  quasi 
Kiandatum  Dei,  ut  dicit  Januensis  in  suo  Catholicon."   Pp.  48,  49. — Ed. 


riTIlKS    I'KOVKU    TO    BE    P'JllE    ALMS. 


91 


also  clean  '     But  lest  he  should  seem  to  refuse  those  alms  which  are  given  of  Richard 
the  fruits  of  the  earth,  he  saith,  '  You  ought  to  have  done  these  things;'  that       ^^- 
is  to  say,  the  judgment  and  love  of  God ;  and  not  to  neglect  the  otlier,  that  is    ^  ^ 
to  say,  tlie  alms   of  the   fruit   of  the   earth."      This    writeth    St.  Augustine,    jgg^] 
expressly  calling  the  tithes,  '  alms.'  

Also  Chrysostome,  upon  the  same  words,  in  Luke  xi.,  "  That  which  remain-  Chrysos- 
eth  give  in  alms,"  saith  thus  :  "  Whereas  it  was  spoken  of  the  Jewish  kind  of  °"'^" 
cleansing,  it  is  wholly  passed ;  but  forasnuich  as  tithes  is  a  certain  alms,  and 
the  time  was  not  yet  expressly  come  to  kill  the  sacrifices  of  the  law,  for  this 
cause,"  he  saith,  "  Ye  ought  to  do  those  things,  and  not  omit  the  other."  St. 
Thomas  allegeth  the  same  in  his  gloss  upon  St.  Luke.  And  Chrysostome  him- 
self dotii  touch  two  points  :  first,  that  tithes  are  alms  ;  secondly,  tliat  tithes  are 
in  a  manner  lawfxil,  forasmuch  as  the  gift  thereof  unto  the  priests  did  not  cease 
in  the  time  of  Christ. 

Also  St.  Augustine,  in  a  certain  sermon  on  giving  alms,  saith  thus  :  "  What  is 
it  to  say,  '  Give  alms,  and  beliold,  all  things  arc  clean  unto  you  V  Let  us  give 
ear,  and  peradventure  he  doth  expound  it  himself.  When  he  had  spoken  these 
words,  witho\it  doubt  they  thought  within  themselves,  Who  do  give  alms,  and 
how  do  they  give  it  ?  They  tithed  all  that  they  had,  imd  took  out  the  tenth 
])art  of  all  their  fruits,  and  gave  it  for  alms :  which  no  Cln-istian  readily  doth. 
Mark  what  the  Jews  did  :  they  tithed,  not  only  their  wheat,  but  their  wine  and 
oil ;  and  not  that  only,  but  also  vile  things,  at  the  commandment  of  the  Lord, 
as  cummin,  rue,  and  anise  ;  of  which  they  took  the  tenth  part,  and  gave  it  for 
alms.  I  think,  therefore,  forasmuch  as  they  called  to  mind,  and  thought  within 
themselves,  that  our  Lord  Christ  spake  in  vain  unto  them  that  they  did  no 
alms,  when  they  knew  their  own  works,  that  they  tithed  the  smallest  and  worst 
of  all  their  fruits,  and  gave  alms  thereof,  they  mocked  him  amongst  themselves, 
because  he  did  speak  in  such  sort  vuito  them,  as  unto  men  that  did  no  alms. 
This  the  Lord  foreseeing,  by  and  by  added  notwithstanding,  '  Woe  be  unto 
you  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  hypocrites,  who  tithe  your  mint,  cummin,  and  rue, 
and  all  kind  of  herbs ;  for  be  assured  that  I  do  understand  your  alms.  TiiUy, 
these  are  your  tithes,  these  are  your  alms ;  you  tithe  out  the  least  and  worst  of 
fall  your  fruits,  and  have  left  the  weighty  matters  of  the  law  undone.'  "  Here 
St.  Augustine  often  expoundeth  that  tithes  are  alms  ;  also  he  writeth  the  like  in 
his  book  of  Homilies,  in  his  sixth  homily. 

Item,  For  the  proof  of  this  article.  That  tithes  are  pure  alms,  it  is  thus  argued. 
For  this  proposition,  Tithes  are  pure  alms,  is  infinite  ;  taking  the  truth  for  many 
of  its  particularities.  It  is  most  certain  that  it  is  not  damnable,  but  most 
catholic,  that  God  is  something  ;  which  being  false  in  all  particulars,  it  is  only 
true  for  that  alone  which  doth  surmount  all  kind.  Ergo,  by  like  reason,  this 
particidar'  is  true,  tenths  are  pure  alms :  for  it  is  thus  proved.  These  tenths 
of  a  good  layman  being  wholly  distributed  by  a  faithful  minister  unto  a  needy 
layman,  according  to  a  good  intent,  how  can  they  be  but  pure  alms,  yea,  and 
more  pure  than  any  alms  given  by  any  of  the  clergy  who  may  be  a  fornicator  ? 
The  whole  antecedent  I  suppose  as  possible,  and  doubtfid  unto  the  condemners, 
if  it  be  true. 

Item,  It  is  also  thus  proved ;  These  tithes,  and  all  other  goods  of  fortune, 
are  pure  alms  in  respect  of  God,  forasmuch  as  every  man,  emperor  and  king, 
is  a  beggar  of  God,  as  St.  Augustine  doth  oftentimes  affirm ;  and,  consequently, 
if  he  do  receive  fruitfully  any  such  goodness  at  the  hand  of  God,  the  same  is 
pure  alms  in  respect  of  God ;  neither  is  there  any  faithfnl  man  who  will  deny 
the  same,  but  that  it  simply  followeth  that  the  same  is  pure  alms  before  God  : 
ergo,  it  is  pure  alms. 

It  is  also  thus  argued ;  All  tithes  are  by  themselves,  and  every  part  of  them, 
alms ;  neither  is  there  any  reason  contrary  to  this,  that  they  are  alms  :  ergo,  they 
are  pure  alms  ;  for  they  are  by  no  other  means  or  reason  other  than  alms,  if  they 
be  altogether  themselves  alms ;  forasmuch  as  it  followeth,  if  they  be  by  any 
other  means  or  otherwise  than  alms,  then  they  are  otherwise  than  some  alms, 
and  forasnuich  as  they  themselves  are  some  alms,  it  followeth  that  they  are 
other^vise  tlian  they  are  indeed ;  which  is  false. 

But  now  to  pass  beyond  the  bounds  of  logic,  it  is  to  be  demanded,  whether 

(1)    '  Haec  indefinita."    See  the  Latin  edition,  p.  50.— Ed. 


92  THE    DKFEXCE    OF    WICKLIFF    BY    JOHN    HUSS, 

Richard   before  the  church  was  endowed,  or  sustenance  and  clothing  were  given  to  the 

^I-       apostles,  there  was  any  pure  alms,  or  whether  alms  were  given  by  any  other 

.    ^     means  by  bond  of  debt  amongst  men.     And,  forasmuch  as  the  reason  is  not  to 

■     •    be  feigned,  but  that  they  were  pure  alms,  so,  afterwards,  the  custom  of  the  same 

•    thino-  according  unto  like  reason  doth  not  alter  the  kind  of  the  reason  ;  for  so 

Suste-       might  beggars  challenge  by  custom,  beyond  the  purity  of  alms,  the  temporalties 

nance  and  ^yjiich  they  do  beg.    Neither  doth  debt  utterly  exclude  the  purity  of  alms  before 

given"to'    God  ;  for  every  man  duly  giving  alms,  doth  as  he  ought  to  do:  as  every  man 

the  apo-    duly  receiving  his  alms,  ought  so  to  receive  it  as  according  to  God's  will ;  and 

l\^Zl'  ^^^^  simply  to  establish  any  human  title  upon  the  continuance  of  any  such  alms,  it 

also  is  altogether  contrary  unto  the  reason  oi  alms.      Iheretore,  they  do  continuaJiy 

tithes.       observe  and  keep  the  reason  of  the  pm-ity  of  alms,  which  they  liad  from  the 

beginning,  when  the  bond  conditioned  doth  not  desti-oy  the  purity  thereof; 

wherefore,  there  is  no  cause  why  it  should  be  denied  that  tithes  are  pure  alms, 

except  that  the  proud  should  be  marvellously  extolled,  contrary  to  the  humility 

of  Christ ;  for  they  do  challenge,  by  the  title  of  their  lack  or  want,  so  to  be 

pleased  for  their  tithes  :  for  so  might  the  begging  friar,  by  the  continuance  of 

his  daily  begging,  challenge  according  to  the  like  quantity  or  circumstance. 

But  it  is  no  argument,  that  if  the  ciu'ate  do  perform  his  coi-poral  ministry,  that 

he  ought,  therefore,  to  challenge  tithes  by  any  civil  title ;  because  that  as  well 

on  the  behalf  of  him  who  giveth  the  tithe,  as  also  on  the  behalf  of  the  curate, 

every  such  ministry  ought  freely  to  be  given,  and  not  by  any  civil  exchange  ; 

forasmuch  as  it  is  not  required,  but  that  rather  the  comparison  of  such  exchanges 

is  repugnant ;    for  so  much  also  as  no  man  freely  giveth  any  alms,  except  he 

do  look  for  the  duty  of  recompense,  by  the  law  of  conscience. 

Item,  All  temporal  goods  bestowed  upon  the  clergy  by  the  lay-people  under 
condition,  as  the  goods  of  the  church,  are  the  alms  of  them  who  give  them:  it  is 
proved  thus,  forasmuch  as  all  those  goods  are  the  goods  of  the  poor;  as  it 
appeareth  by  many  sayings  of  holy  men  and  by  the  laws. 

But  they  were  not  the  goods  of  the  poor,  after  they  were  mere  secular  goods, 
but  only  by  means  of  the  work  of  mercy,  whereby  they  were  bestowed  upon 
the  poor :  ergo,  they  were  pure  alms.  The  consequent  dependeth  upon  the 
definition  of  pure  alms. 

Item,  All  things  changed  to  the  use  and  power  of  another,  either  by  civil 
exchange  or  evangelical,  are  changed ;  but  the  church  goods  are  so  changed  by 
one  of  these  ministries.  But  the  evangelical  exchange  is  not  to  be  feigned, 
because  it  is  not  done  either  by  buying  or  selling,  or  any  other  civil  exchange. 
Therefore  there  doth  only  remain  a  pure  gift,  for  hope  of  a  heavenly  re- 
The  ward,  which  is  mercy,  and  so  pure  alms.     And  it  seemeth  to  follow,  conse- 

clergy  quently,  that  all  the  clergy  receiving  such  alms  are  not  only  in  respect  of  God, 
eggars.  ^^  ^jj  other  men,  but  in  respect  of  men,  beggars.  For  they  would  not  so  in- 
stantly require  those  alms  except  they  had  need  of  them :  neither  ought  we 
to  be  ashamed  thereof,  or  to  be  proud  beggars ;  forasmuch  as  Christ,  touching 
his  humanity,  became  a  beggar  for  us,  because  he  declared  his  need  unto  his 
Father,  saying,  &c. 

Item,  When  any  king,  prince,  knight,  citizen,  or  any  other  man,  doth  give 

unto  the  clergy,  or  to  any  priest  for  his  stipend,  he  giveth  the  same  unto  the 

church  of  God,  and  to  the  private  party,  as  a  perpetual  alms,  that  he  should 

attend  to  his  vocation,  preaching,    pra)ang,  and  studying.     But  this  kind  of 

giving  doth  not  suffice  to  ground  any  secular  dominion  amongst  the  clergy :  it 

followeth  that  the  bare  use  remaineth  in  them,  or  the  secular  use  without  any 

secular  power. 

Tithes  The  major  appeareth  hereby,  forasmuch  as,  otherwise,  alms  should  not  be  a 

are  to  be    work  of  mercy.     Whereby  it  may  also  appear,  that  tenths  are  pure  alms  given 

fh^^"ii'th  ^^  ^^^  church,  to  the  use  of  the  poor.  And  hereupon  the  holy  men  do  say,  that 

part  of      tenths  are  the  tributes  of  the  needy  souls.     Whereupon  St.  Augustine,  in  a  ser- 

goods.       mon  made  upon  the  restoring  of  tithes,  saith,    "  The  giving  of  tithes,  most  dear 

brethren,    is  the  tribute  of  poor   souls  therefore  pay  your   tribute  unto    the 

poor."     And  by  and  by  afterwards  he  saith,  "  Therefore  whoso  desireth  either 

to  get  any  reward,  or  to  have  any  remission  of  sins  by  giving  his  tenths,  let 

him    study  to  give   alms  even  of  the  ninth  part :   so    that   whatsoever    shall 

remain    more  than  a  competent  living  and  decent  clothing,  it  be  not  reserved 

for  riot,  but  that  it  be  laid  up  in  the  heavenly  treasury,  by  giving  it  in  alms  to 


TITHES    IMIOVKU    TO    UK     I'l'KK    ALMS.  93 

the  poor.     For  wljatsoovcr  Ciod  cloth  give  tons  more  tlian  we  have  need  of,  he   Richard 
dotli  not  give  it  us  specially  for  ourselves ;  but  doth  send  it  us  to  be  bestowed  upon       ^^- 
others  by  our  hands:   if  we  do  not  give  it,  we  invade  another  man's  possessions."      .    .. 
Thus  much  writetli   St.  Augustine,  and  it  is  repeated  in    the   l(j  question,     10Q4 

I.  "  Decima*.  "  1. 

.Mso  St.  Jerome  in  an  epistle,  and  it  is  put  in  tlie  sixteenth  question,  chap, 
ii.  "  Quiquid."     "  Whatsoever  the  clergy  have,  it  is  the  goods  of  the  |)oor." 

Also  St.  Augustine  in  his  thirty-third  epistle  to  Boniface;  and  it  is  alleged  in 
the  first  question,  aiul  12. 

Also  in  tlie  twenty-third  question,  7.  "  If  we  do  possess  any  things  privately 
which  do  suffice  us,  they  are  not  ours,  but  the  goods  of  tlic  poor,  whose  stewards 
we  are,  except  we  do  challenge  to  ourselves  a  property  by  .some  damnable 
usvirpation."  Tlie  Gloss  upon  tliat  part  of  the  twenty-third  question,  7. 
saith,  "  The  prelates  are  only  the  stewards  of  the  church-goods,  and  not  lords 
thereof." 

St.  Ambrose,  also,  upon  this  saymgof  the  gospel  (Luke  xvi.),  '♦  Give  account 
of  your  bailiship  or  stewardship:"  "Hereby  ilien  do  we  learn,  that  they  are 
not  lords,  but  rather  stewards  and  baiiitis  of  other  men's  substiuice." 

And   St.  Jerome,   writing  to  Nepotianus,   saith,  "  How  can  they  be  of  tlie  The  cler- 
clergy,  who  are  commanded  to  contemn  and  desjiise  their  own  substance  '.     To  ^^.^^ ^ 
take  away  from  a  friend  is  theft;  to  deceive  the  ciuirch  is  sacrilege,  and  to  take  of  the 
away  that  which  sliould  be  given  unto  the  poor."  churcli- 

And  St.  Hernard,  in  his  sermon  upon  these  words,   "  Simon  Peter  said  unto  f,"a  not 
Jesus"  (Jolm  xix.),  said  "  Truly,  the  goods  of  the  churcli,  are  the  patrimonv  '"'■^* 
of  the  poor:  and  whatsoever   thing  the  ministers  and  stewards  of  the   same,  """^'^°'^- 
not  lorcLs  or  possessors,  do  take   unto  themselves  more   than    sulKcient  for  a 
competent   living,  the  same  is    taken  away  from  the   poor  by  a   sacrilegious 
cruelty." 

And  Eusebius,  in  his  treatise  upon  the  pilgrimage  of  St.  Jerome,  wiitetli 
thus:  "  If  thou  dost  possess  a  garment,  or  any  other  thing  more  tlian  extreme 
necessity  dotli  require,  and  dost  not  help  the  needy,  thou  art  a  thief  and  a  robber. 
Wherefore,  dearly  beloved  children,  let  us  be  stewards  of  our  teni])oralties,  and 
not  possessors." 

And  Isidore,  in  his  treatise,  "  De  summo  bono,"  chap,  xlii.,  saith,  "  Let  the 
bisliopknow  that  he  is  the  servant  of  the  people,  and  not  lord  over  them." 

.\Iso  in  the  fifth  book  of  Decretals,  "  Extra  de  donationibus,"  sub  auctoritate 
Alexandri  tertii,  episcopi  Parisiensis.'  He  saith,  "  We  believe  that  it  is  not 
unknown  unto  your  brotherhood,  tliat  a  bishop,  and  every  other  prelate,  is  but 
a  steward  of  the  church-goods,  and  not  lord  thereof."  By  these  sayings  of  these 
holy  men  it  is  evidently  declared,  that  not  only  tithes,  but  also  all  other  sub- 
stance which  the  clergy  have  by  gift  or  work  of  mercy,  are  pure  alms,  which, 
after  the  necessity  of  the  clergy  is  once  satisfied,  ought  to  be  transported  unto 
the  poor. 

Secondly,  it  is  declared  how  the  clergy  are  not  lords  and  possessors  of  those 
goods,  but  ministers  and  stewards  thereof. 

Thirdly,  it  is  showed,  that  if  the  clergy  do  abuse  the  same,  they  are  thieves, 
robbers,  and  sacrilegious  persons,  and,  except  they  do  repent,  by  the  just 
judgment  of  God  they  are  to  be  condemned. 


Antl  thus,  hitherto,  I  may  pcradventurc  seem  to  have  mailo  suffi- 
ciently Innij  recital  out  of  John  Huss,  but  so  notwithstanding-,  that  the 
commodity  of  those  tlunfifs  may  abundantly  recompense  the  proli.xitv 
thereof.  Wherefore,  if  I  shall  seem  unto  any  man,  in  the  rehearsal 
of  this  disputation,  to  have  passed  very  far  the  bounds  of  the  history, 
]et  him  think  thus  of  me,  that  at  what  time  I  took  in  hand  to  write 
of  these  ecclesiastical  matters,  I  could  not  omit  these  things  which 
vere  so  straitly  joined  witli  the  cause   of  the  church.     Not  tliat   I 


u 


ON  THE  DECP.KE  OF  THE  SYNOD  OF  CONSTANCE, 


rtic/wrd  make  more  account  of  the  history  which  I  had  taken  in  hand,  than 

'- —  of  the  common  utility  whereunto  I  had  chief  respect. 

A. D.        There  v.ere  besides  these,  certain  other  articles  whereupon  the  said 

:_  John  Huss  had  very  Avisely  and  learnedly  disputed  ;  but  these  shall 

suffice  us  for  the  present.  And  for  the  residue,  we  will  pass  them 
over  to  the  intent  we  may  the  more  speedily  return  to  where  our 
story  left  off,  declaring  what  cruelty  they  used  not  only  against  the 
books  and  articles  of  John  WicklifF,  but  also  in  burning  his  body  and 
bones,  commanding  them  to  be  taken  up  forty-one  years  after  he 
was  buried ;  as  appeareth  by  the  decree  of  the  said  synod,  the  fonn 
whereof  we  thought  hereunto  to  annex. 

SUBSTANCE  OF  THE  DECREE  OF  THE  SYNOD  OF  CONSTANCE, 
TOUCHING  THE  TAKING  UP  OF  THE  BODY  AND  BONES  OF  JOHN 
WICKLIFF,  TO  BE  BURNED  FORTY-ONE  Y'EARS  AFTER  HE  W'AS 
BURIED  IN  HIS  OWN  PARISH  AT  LUTTERWORTH. A.  D.  1425.' 

"  Forasmuch  as  by  the  authority  of  the  sentence  and  decree  of  the 
council  of  Rome,  and  by  the  commandment  of  the  church  and  the 
apostolic  see,  after  due  delays  being  given,  they  proceeded  unto  the 
condemnation  of  the  said  John  Wickliff  and  his  memory,  having  first 
made  proclamation,  and  given  commandment  to  call  forth  whosoever 
would  defend  the  said  WicklifF  or  his  memory,  if  there  were  any  such 
(but  there  did  none  appear,  who  would  either  defend  him  or  his  memory): 
and,  moreover,  witnesses  being  examined,  by  commissioners  appointed 
by  pope  John  and  his  council,  upon  the  impenitcncy  and  final  ob- 
stinacy and  stubbornness  of  the  said  John  WicklifF  (reserving  that 
which  is  to  be  reserved,  as  in  such  business  the  order  of  the  law 
requireth),  and  his  impenitcncy  and  obstinacy,  even  unto  his  end, 
being  sufficiently  proved  by  evident  signs  and  tokens,  and  also  by 
lawful  witnesses,  of  credit  lawfully  given  thereunto :  wherefore,  at 
the  instance  of  the  steward  of  the  treasury,  proclamation  being  made 
to  hear  and  understand  the  sentence  against  this  day,  the  sacred 
synod  declareth,  determineth,  and  giveth  sentence,  that  the  said  John 
WicklifF  Avas  a  notorious  obstinate  heretic,  and  that  he  died  in  his 
heresy  :  cursing  and  condemning  both  him  and  his  memory. 

"This  synod  also  decreeth  and  ordaineth,  that  the  body  and  bones 
of  the  said  John  WicklifF,  if  it  might  be  discerned  and  known  from 
the  bodies  of  other  faithful  people,  should  be  taken  out  of  the  ground, 
and  thrown  away  far  from  the  burial  of  any  church,  according  to  the 
canon  laws  and  decrees.  Which  determination  and  sentence  definitive 
being  read  and  pronounced,  and  it  being  demanded  and  asked  of  the 
lord  president,  and  the  aforesaid  presidents  of  the  four  nations, 
whether  it  did  please  them  or  no,  they  all  answered,  and  first, 
Hostiensis,  the  president,  and  after  him  the  other  presidents  of  the 
nations,  that  it  pleased  them  very  well :  and  so  they  allowed  and 
confirmed  all  the  premises.""  *  This"  wicked  and  malicious  sentence 
of  the  bishop,  would  require  here  a  diligent  apology,  but  that  it  is  so 
foolish  and  vain,  and  no  less  barbarous,  that  it  seemeth  more  worthy 
of  derision  and  disdain,  than  by  any  argument,  to  be  confuted.  For 
what  will  it  prevail  to  talk  with  reasons  and  arguments,  against  him 

(1)  Ex  actis  concilii  Constan. 
(2)  See  the  edition  of  1563,  p.  105,  and  the  Latin  edition  of  1559,  p.  23.— Ed. 


TOUCIIIN'G    THF,    TAKIN(;    VV    OF    THF,    lUlDY    OF    WICK  1,1  FF.  95 

wlio  followcth  neither  reason  nor  arj^nment  ?  except,  pcradvcnturc,  Ric'i'^.rd 

thou  wouklst  seem  to  phiy  Panncnio's  part  in  the  comedy,  that  is,  to '. — 

join  perfect  reason  and  mad  folly    toifcther.      First,  under   many    A.  D. 
glorious  and  bragging  words,  they  pretend  here  a  great  colour  of  the 
catholic  faith,  and  yet  bring  no   reason  at  all  to  declare  the  catholic 
faith.     If  the  catholic  faith  consist   in  men's  scats,  and  not  in  the 
men ;  in  words  and  not  in  deeds,  then  wouhl  I  grant  that  the  sec  of 
Koine  might  seem  catholic.     Next,  they  pretend  here,  the  authority 
of  the  holy  sjnod ;  and  that,  in  the  name  of  our  Lord,  when  they 
bring  forth  no   Scripture  of  our  Lord.    "  La^vfully""  say  they  "  con- 
gregated together :"  I  hear  it  very  well  !  and  to  the  intent  that  this 
authority  may  be  of  greater  force  and  effect,  the  consent  also  of  the 
synod  of  Rome  is  annexed  and  joined  unto  this  council ;  for  these 
be  their  words :   "  As  it  was   decreed,'"  say  they,  "  in  the  s}Tiod  of 
Rome,"  &c.     WTiicli  synod  of  Rome,  how  lawfully  it  was  gathered 
together,    the    owl    did   sufficiently   declare,   which    oftentimes   (as  The 
Clemagis  doth  witness),  flying  into  the  council  of  Rome  where  pope  of^iiome 
John  did  sit,  she  could  sooner  put  him  out  from  his   catholic  seat  1','Jf^"^^'' 
(and  so  did),   than  she   could  be  driven  away  from  him  with  any  sign  or 
kind  of  weapon.     Hereof,  Christ  so  willing,  more  shall  be  declared,  an  owi. 
when  we  come  to  the  place   severally  to  speak  of  the  council   of 
Constance.     In  this  synod,  being  thus  gathered  together,  the  works, 
and  forty-five  articles  of  WicklifF,  were  condemned,  and  he  himself, 
forty-one  years  after  his  death,  was  taken  out  of  his  grave  and  burned. 
And  what  was  the  cause  ?     Only  for  that  he,  with  most  firm  and  strong 
reasons,  enterprised  and  went  about    to  control  and   rebuke    their 
life,  errors,  filthiness,  and  pride,  which  was  now  grown  unto   that 
point,  that   it  was  not  any  longer  to   be  suffered.     But  how  much 
rather  ought  they   in   this    behalf   to    have   rendered  tLinks  unto 
WicklifF,  for  his  most  godly  and  wholesome  admonition,  unto  whose 
good  counsel,  if  they  Ixad  any  thing  framed  themselves,  much  more 
truly  had  that  seat  seemed  catholic.     Now,  if  it  shall  be  sufficient  to 
condemn  men  or  their  books,  whatsoever  the  pope's  treasurer,  or  the 
four  presidents  of  the  four  nations  shall  say,  or  pleasure  is,  and  so 
we,  standing  upon   the  same,  will  defend  the   liberty  of  sin,  that  avc 
will  neither  amend  ourselves,  nor  yet  will  suffer  ourselves  to  be  con- 
trolled  or  corrected  by  others,   to  what   end  then  faith,  godliness 
conscience,  learning,  or  the  knowledge  of  holy  Scripture  doth  serve, 
I   do   not  greatly  perceive.     Wlierefore,  seeing  the  decree  of  this 
council  hath  nothing  in  it  that  can  be  rcvinced  with  argument,  beside 
only  bare    names   and   authority  of  cardinals,  archbishops,   abbots, 
masters  of  divinity,  and  doctors  of  the  law,  we  have,  on  the  contrary 
part,   against  the  witness  of   these    seditious    persons,  alleged    the 
testimonies  of  certain  good  men  ;  first  of  all  the  testimonial  of  the 
whole  university  of  Oxford,  and  afterwards  the  testimony  of  John 
Huss,  which,  if  it  hath  been  read,  with  equal  and  indifferent  cars  ot 
the  readers,  I  doubt  not,  but  that  it  hath  made  as  much  for  the  de- 
fence of  WicklifF,  as  these  men's  witnesses  sliall  do  to  the  contrary.* 
What  Hcnu'litus  would  not  laugh,  or  what  Democritus  would  not 
weep,  to  see  these  so  sage  and  reverend  Catos  occupying  their  heads 
to  take  up  a  poor  man's  body,  so  long  dead  and  buried  before,  by  the 
space  of  forty-one  years  ;  and  yet,  peradvcnture,  they  were  not  able  to 


96  MAKTYRS    AND    EXILES    FOR    THE    TRUTH. 

Bickarri  find  his  right  bones,  but  took  up  some  otlier  body,  and  so    of  a 

catholic  made  a  heretic  !     Albeit  herein  Wickliif  had  some  cause 

A.D.  to  give  them  thanks,  that  they  Avould  at  least  spare  hirn  so  long 
^'^^'*-  till  he  was  dead,  and  also  give  him  so  long  respite  after  his  death, 
forty-one  years  to  rest  in  his  sepulchre  before  they  ungraved  him, 
and  turned  him  from  earth  to  ashes  ;  which  ashes  they  also  took  and 
threw  into  the  river.  And  so  was  he  resolved  into  three  elements, 
earth,  fire,  and  water,  thinking  thereby  utterly  to  extinguish  and 
abolish  both  the  name  and  doctrine  of  WicklifF  for  ever.'  Not 
much  unlike  the  example  of  the  old  Pharisees  and  sepulclirc-knights, 
who,  wlien  they  had  brought  the  Lord  unto  the  grave,  thought  to 
make  him  sure  never  to  rise  again.  But  these  and  all  others  must 
know,  that  as  there  is  no  counsel  against  the  Lord,  so  there  is  no 
keeping  down  of  verity,  but  it  will  spring  up  and  come  out  of  dust 
and  ashes,  as  appeared  right  well  in  this  man  ;  for  though  they  digged 
up  his  body,  burnt  his  bones,  and  drowned  his  ashes,  yet  the  M-ord  of 
God,  and  the  truth  of  his  doctrine,  with  the  fruit  and  success  thereof, 
they  could  not  burn,  which  yet  to  this  day,  for  the  most  part  of  his 
articles,  doth  remain  :  notwithstanding  the  transitory  body  and  bones 
of  the  man  were  thus  consumed  and  dispersed,  as  by  this  picture 
here  set  forth  to  thine  eyes  (gentle  reader),  may  appear. 

These  things  thus  finished  and  accomplished,  which  pertain  to  the 
story  and  time  of  WicklifF,  let  us  now,  by  the  supportation  of  the 
Lord,  proceed  to  treat  and  write  of  the  rest,  who  either  in  his  time 
or  after  his  time,  springing  out  of  the  same  university,  and  raised  up, 
as  ye  would  say,  out  of  his  ashes,  were  partakers  of  the  same  perse- 
cution ;  of  whom  speaketh  Thomas  Walden  in  his  book,  "  Do 
Sacramentis  et  Sacramentalibus,''''  cap.  liii.  where  he  saith,  that  after 
WicklifF  many  suffered  most  cruel  death,  and  many  more  did  forsake 
Martyrs  the  realm  ;  in  the  number  of  whom  were  William  Swinderby,  Walter 
Brute,  John  Purvey,  Richard  White,  William  Thorpe,  and  Reynold 
Peacock,  bishop  of  St.  Asaph,  and  afterwards  of  Chichester. 

To  this  catalogue  also  pertaineth  (mentioned  in  ancient  writers) 
Lawrence  Redman,  master  of  arts  ;  David  Sautre,  a  divine ;  John 
Ashwarby,  vicar,  as  they  call  him,  of  St.  Mary's  church  at  Oxford  ; 
William  James,  an  excellent  young  man,  well  learned ;  Thomas 
Brightwell,  and  William  Hawlam,  a  civilian  ;  Rafe  Greenhurst,  John 
Scut,  and  Philip  Norise ;  who,  being  excommunicated  by  pope 
Eugene  IV.,  a.  d.  1446,  appealed  unto  a  general  or  oecume- 
nical council.  *Many2  more  did  forsake  the  realm,  but  what  they  were, 
or  what  kind  of  punishment  they  suffered,  Walden  left  no  mention. 
But  we  will  not  suffer  their  names  to  be  blotted  out  with  silence, 
which  we  might  by  any  means  pick  out ;  but  sure  we  are  greatly 
sorry  that  there  came  nothing  else  into  our  hands  but  only  their  bare 
names.     Would  to  God  that  the  constant  diligence  of  our  prede- 

(!)  Upon  this  subject  a  modern  Romish  writer  observes,  "  A  spirit  of  candour,  would  have  led 
you  to  the  discovery  of  something  like  toleration,  in  the  conduct  of  your  illustrious  founder 
Wickeham,  and  his  brethren ;  who,  whilst  they  condemned  Wickiitf's  errors,  left  his  person 
unpunislied  and  unmolested  during  the  whole  of  his  life;  and  an  impartial  view  of  the  dreadful 
effects  of  his  doctrine,  in  this  and  other  countries,  v/ould  have  made  yon  see,  in  the  ordinance  of 
the  council  against  his  memory  and  remains,  not  an  act  of  vengeance,  but  a  wise  and  salutary 
instmction  to  mankind."— See  Letters  to  a  Prebendary;  p.  74;  by  the  Rt.  Rev.  J.  Milner,  D.  D. 
The  reader  may  judge  by  these  remarks,  how  far  tlie  church  of  Rome  that  now  is,  differ)  from 
the  church  of  Rome  in  1425.— Ed. 

(2)  See  edition  15fi3,  p.  137.— En. 


and 
exiles. 


JTOW     llIK    OOSPKI.    SI'KAN(.     fl'     IN"     UOIIKM I  A.  9T 

cessors  had  preserved  in  incinory  tor  us  tlie  whole  order  of  tlieir  Ufe,  n>c'"ird 

the  form  of  tla'ir  process  and  judpncnl,  and  wliat  was  to  be  observed '. 

in   their   adversaries,  or  to  be  eonmu'ntk'd   in  them.      Albeit  that    A.  I), 
matter  were  not  ^^reatlyfor  our  purpose,  forsomuch  as  all  those  tliinj^s    ^'^^*- 
eoulil   not  be  e(tntained  in   a  few  volumes ;   and  that  also,  l)y  those 
few,  it  were  easy  to  be  judyed  what  a  man  mav  think  as  touching  the 
cruelty  of  the  papists  iigainst  all  men.* 

Peter  Paine  also,  who  flying  Irom  O.xford  unto  Bohemia,  did 
stoutly  contend  against  the  sophisters,  as  touching  both  hinds  of  the 
sacrament  of  the  last  supper ;  who,  afterwards,  among  the  rest  of 
the  orators,  was  one  of  the  fourteen  that  were  sent  unto  the  eouncilof 
liasil ;  where,  by  the  space  of  three  days,  he  disputed  \ipon  the 
fourth  article,  which  was  touching  the  civil  dominion  of  the  clergy, 
A.  u.  1438.  Also  the  lord  Cobham,  with  divers  others  besides,  whose 
names  are  mentioned  in  the  king\s  writ,  sent  to  the  shcrilf  of  North- 
ampton, the  tenor  of  which  writ  of  the  king  here  followeth  : 

'riie  kinji  to  the  shurilFs  of  Novtliampton,  health.  Forasmuch  as  Jolni 
Attyato  of  Chopiiigwarclen,  John  ^Varn•nl■l■,  R.  Brewood,  &rc.  beinp  receivers 
and  favourers  of  heretics,  and  especially  of  one  John  Woodward,  priest,  publicly 
defamed  and  condemned  of  heresy,  will  not  be  justified  by  the  censiues  of  the 
cliurch,  as  the  reverend  fatlier  John,  bishop  of  Lincoln,  hath  certified  lis:  Wc, 
therefore,  willinjif  to  withstand  all  defenders  and  favourers  of  such  horcsies,  do 
will  and  command  as  well  the  beforenamcfl,  as  namely,  the  aforesaid  Jolin 
Woodward  to  be  appreliended,  straitly  cliarging  tlie  same  to  be  imprisoned  by 
their  bodies,  or  otherwise  punished  as  shall  seem  good  to  the  justices,  until  they 
and  ever}'  of  them  sludl  submit  themselves  to  tlie  obedience  of  the  aforesaid 
bishop  in  that  behalf  accordingly.  Whereof  fail  you  not,  under  pain  of  a 
hundred  pounds.  Witness  ourselves :  Given  at  our  manor  of  Langley,  the 
eighth  day  of  March,  the  twelfth  year  of  our  reign. 

To  these  above  rehearsed,  and  other  favourers  of  WicklifF,  within 
this  our  country  of  England,  we  may  add  also  the  Bohemians  ;  for- 
asnuich  as  the  propagation  of  the  said  doctrine  of  WicklifF  in  that 
country  also  took  root,  coming  from  England  to  Bohemia  bv  this 
occasion,  as  in  story  here  followeth. 

There  chanced  at  that  time  a  certain  student  of  the  country  of  Howtiit, 
Bohemia  to  be  at  Oxford,   one  of  a  wealthy  house,  and  also   of  a  omvicT 
n(jble  stock  ;  who  returning  h(mie  from   the  university  of  O.vford  to  |j,",^^{^^ 
the  university  of  Prague,  carried  with  him  certain  books  of  WicklifF,  nii.i. 
'  De   Kealibus   Universalibus,"'    '  De   Civili   Jure,  et   Divino,'    '  De 
Ecclesia,'  ■  De  Qu;estionibus  Variis  contra  Cleruni,''  &c.     It  chanced 
that  at  the  same  time  a  certain   nobleman  in  the  city  of  Prague  had 
founded  and  built  a  great   church   of  Matthias  and  Matthew,  which 
church  was  called  Bethlehem,  giving  to  it  great  lamb,  and  finding  in 
it  two  preachers  every  day,  to  preach  both  on  holy  days  and  working- 
days  to  the  people.     Of  the.se  two  preachers  this  John  IIuss  was  one;  Thcpreat 
a  man  of  great  knowledge,  of  a  pregnant  wit,  and  excellently  favoured  oj^john" 
for  his  worthy  life  amongst  them.    This  John  Huss  having  familiarity  J'""*" 
with  this  young  man  in  reading  and  perusing  these  books  of  WicklifF,  wickuir. 
took  such  pleasure  and  fruit  in  reading  thereof,  that  not  only  he  began  wick- 
to  defend   this  author  openly  in  the  schools,  but  also  in  his  sermons,  'i,"n"uV'' 
commending  him  for  a  good  man,  a  holy  man  and  a  heavenly  man,  »a">ctiu. 
wishing  himself,  when  he  should  die.  to  be  there  placed,  where  the  dignus. 

vol..  HI.  II 


98  ON  THE  CKUELTY  OF  THE  WORLD. 

Richard  soul  of  WickUff  sliould  be.    And  thus  for  the  spreading  of  Wickliff 's 

L doctrine  enough,  and  tlius  much  briefly  concerning  the  favourers  and 

A.D.  adherents  of  John  Wickliff  in  general.  *  Amongst'  whom,  I  have 
^•^^^-  onlv,  as  yet,  rehearsed  such,  unto  whom  the  profession  of  the  gospel 
was  perilous,  and  a  heavy  burden ;  whom,  notwithstanding,  I  thought 
not  worthy  to  be  defrauded  of  their  praise  :  but  now,  we  will  convert 
oiu'  style  unto  those,  who,  continuing  unto  the  end,  have  followed 
the  Lamb  whithersoever  he  went,  even  unto  the  loss  of  their  lives. 
And  here  I  am  minded  first  of  all,  if  the  brevity  of  the  matter 
would  suffer  it,  somewhat  to  expostulate  with  the  cruelty  of  the 
world. 

Forasmuch  as  all  mankind,  having  put  apart  all  use  of  humanity, 
have  so  far  degenerated  even  unto  the  iron  age,  or  rather  unto  a 
brutal  cruelty,  that  never,  as  I  think,  since  the  beginning  of  the  world 
was  Plautus''  proverb  more  verified,  "  one  man  is  a  wolf  unto  ano- 
ther ;"  but  amongst  all  the  wolves,  they  are  most  cruel  which  are 
clothed  in  lambs'"  skins,  Avhich  also  do  most  profess  peace. 

In  times  past  among  the  Israelites,  and  in  the  time  of  Christ  and 
his  apostles,  the  worshipping  and  religion  of  God  began  to  be  altered 
unto  Pharisaical  superstition ;  but  now,  the  same  pharisaical  super- 
stition, I  know  not  by  what  means,  amongst  Christians,  is  grown  into 
extreme  tyranny.  Albeit  that  a  small  portion  of  this  incommodity 
or  evil  doth  fall  upon  those,  who,  for  the  love  of  Christ,  do  suffer  vio- 
lence. For  whereas  all  others  are  dead,  they  only  do  verily  live  again 
who  die  in  Christ.  This  therefore  is  a  most  rare  dignity  which  hap- 
pen eth  but  unto  a  few,  insomuch  that  if  we  do  diligently  weigh  the 
matter,  this  only  happiness  hath  our  miserable  life,  if  that  it  may 
happen  to  any  man  to  suffer  for  Christ^s  sake.  Again  I  do  repeat 
the  same  :  nothing  truly  can  be  esteemed  in  this  world,  bvit  only  the 
name  of  Christ,  and  to  suffer  for  his  name. 

Wherefore  St.  Paul  doth  not  unworthily  command,  that  Ave  should 
not  only  have  steadfast  hope  through  him,  but  also  suffer  affliction 
for  his  sake.  For  howsoever  the  judgments  of  men  do  esteem  it, 
there  is  no  truer  life  than  that  which  is  laid  up  in  Christ  as  a  gage, 
none  more  absolute  renown  than  to  be  slain  for  the  Son  of  God.  But 
this  glory  doth  not  yet  appear  unto  our  human  senses,  which  are 
overwhelmed  with  the  filth  of  this  world.  But  at  the  length  it  shall 
appear,  and  peradventure  sooner  than  shall  be  expedient  for  some, 
except  with  speedy  repentance  they  do  wax  wise  and  amend,  which, 
that  it  may  the  better  be  brought  to  pass,  suffer  me  a  little  by  your 
license,  gentle  reader,  to  talk  with  these  cruel  blood-suckers ;  whereby 
they,  being  admonished,  may  repent ;  or  if  they  will  not,  that  they 
may  behold,  to  their  great  shame  and  rebuke,  whether  they  will 
or  no,  their  wicked  cruelty  and  great  slaughters,  laid  before  them,  as  it 
were  upon  a  stage.  Surely  it  was  a  Avorthy  saying  of  a  jester,  who 
was  but  a  profane  man,  "  that  it  is  as  unseemly  for  a  prince  to 
abound  in  tyranny,  as  for  a  physician  to  have  many  corpses."  What 
shall  we  then  say  unto  these  reverend  prelates  of  the  church  :  if  they 
be  princes,  why  do  they  bring  in  so  great  torments  into  the  poor 
cottages  of  Christ ;  if  they  be  physicians,  how  happeneth  so  great 

(1)  The  contents  of  the  next  few  pages  are  from  the  edition  1563,  pp.  130—136.  See  also  the 
Lstin  edition,  pp.  53,  58.— Ed. 


WHO    IIKST    IIUOUGIIT     I\     KAGGOTS    AM)    l-IRK.  99 

death   amongst  the  sheep?   liut  l)i.toro   1  will  take  this  quarrel   in    Hi.-hard 

hand,  I  do  once  ag-ain  admonish  thee,  gentle  reader,  of"  that  which   I  '—- 

must  otlcntimes  repeat  in  this  aruTiuient.  First  of  all,  that  you  do  ,  '  j 
not  interpret  any  thing  which  shall  he  here  spoken,  in  such  a  manner  — '■ — '■- 
as  though  I  would  maintain  any  unproved  doctrine  :  for,  as  I  do  not 
favour  heretics,  who  are  licrclics  indeed,  even  so  nmch  less  do  I 
favour  false  bishops.  And  ag-ain,  as  1  do  give  license  unto  neither 
of  these,  neither  to  the  one,  to  use  his  tyrannv,  nor  to  the  other,  to 
proceed  in  his  errors,  so  likewise  do  I  not  go  about  here,  to  take 
away  the  power  of  the  civil  sword,  because  it  is  not  borne  bv  the 
magistrate  in  vain.  For  they  have  their  laws,  their  judges,  and  their 
punishments,  necessary  in  a  commonwealth,  without  which  there 
should  be  no  society,  neither  any  discipline  amongst  men.  But  this 
my  complaint  doth  only  touch  them,  who  professing  a  perfectness  of 
spiritual  life  above  all  the  rest  of  the  common  sort  of  the  people,  and 
who  ought  to  be  the  masters  of  all  pity  and  godliness,  yet  shall  you 
scarcely  find  any  men  more  venomous  in  hatred,  anger,  malice,  aveng- 
ing, and  all  kind  of  t}Tanny.  Who  was  the  first  that  brought  in 
amongst  Christians  these  recantations,  faggots,  and  fire,  and  these 
lamentable  funerals  by  burning  of  the  live  bodies  of  men,  under  the 
name  of  heretics  ?  who,  but  only  this  flock  of  religious  men  and  the 
clergy,  whose  part  it  had  been  rather  to  help  those  that  had  erred, 
and  not  to  kill  them,  according  to  the  example  of  their  High  Master, 
who  came  not  to  destroy,  but  to  save  all  men.  For  it  is  never  so 
certain  amongst  men''s  opinions,  but  that  oftentimes  some  error  will 
intermeddle  itself:  the  first  purity  of  the  church  always  excepted. 
Neither  doth  every  error,  by  and  by,  make  a  man  a  heretic,  except 
it  have  joined  therewith  an  obstinate  and  froward  will;  neither  do  I 
know  whether,  in  this  point  also,  the  extremities  arc  to  be  attempted 
or  no ;  but  the  quality  of  the  heresy  is  to  be  marked,  and  the  rule 
of  the  gospel  is  to  be  considered,  what  it  doth  require,  and  what  is 
convenient  for  every  man's  profession  :  the  profession  of  a  secular 
judge  is  one,  the  condition  of  an  evangelical  minister  is  another.  As 
St.  Augustine  writeth  in  the  psalm,  "  Aliud  est  sella  terrena,  aliud 
tribunal  cceleste,"  &c. 

But  our  pseudo-evangelical  papists,  neither  marking  the  quality 
of  the  one,  nor  the  condition  of  the  other,  nor  their  own  ])rofession, 
neither  looking  upon  one  thing  nor  upon  another,  without  all  respect 
or  difference,  like  furious  Donatists,  or  homicides  rather,  under  the 
cloak  of  religion,  of  cverv  little  word  spoken  against  their  pomp  and 
ambitious  pre-eminence,  make  a  matter  of  heresy,  whereby  to  murder 
and  make  havoc  of  Christ''s  people.  What  did  the  heart  of  Bonner, 
and  of  such  of  his  affinity,  differ  from  the  heart  of  the  strongest 
pirate,  or  homicide,  murdering  by  the  highway  .''  yea  insomuch  that 
the  very  pirates  themselves  (if  it  be  true  that  is  reported  of  Bonner's 
receiving  into  prison),  be  ashamed  of  his  comparison,  and  to  be 
counted  of  his  society.  And  yet,  neither  pity  can  stay  him  from 
cruel  bloodshed,  nor  shame  can  drive  him  to  repent  such  horrible 
tyranny.  Wherein  tlie  cai?e  of  these  sicarcs  and  thieves  yet  may  seem 
better,  than  of  these  catholics.  For  they,  at  the  execution  of  God's 
judgment,  as  they  cannot  dissemlile  their  trespass,  so  are  they  sooner 
touched  with  repentance.   The  others,  either  with  ignorance  drowned, 

II  2 


100  THE    WORD    OF    GOD    AND    PRAYER    THE    TRUE    WEAPONS, 

Ricimrd  or  cliokcd  witli  malice,  as  they  have  spoiled  the  life  of  many  more 

^'      than  ever  did  any  thief;  so  much  more  be  they  further  of  repenting 

A.  D.    their  iniquity,  but  think  that,  good  service  done  to  God,  which  they  have 

1384.    done  to  the  devil,  "vvho  is  a  murderer  from  the  beginning :  and  think 

themselves  good  pastors,   when  they  devoured  the  poor  flock,  and 

played  the  wolves.     So  dangerous  a  thing  it  is,  to  have  an  ignorant 

zeal,   where  true  knowledge  is  wanting.     Of  these  did  Christ  pre- 

monish  us  before,  declaring  the  blind  ignorance  of  such,  who,  of 

their  preposterous  zeal,   should   turn  iniquity  and  cruelty  to  God's 

service ;  and  under  the  title  of  the  chmx-h,  should  impugn  the  church, 

and  of  sincere  verity,  should  make  heresy. 

But  such  as  these  never  reigned  more,  or  raged  fm-ther,  than  in 
these  latter  days  of  the  church,  as  the  monuments  of  this  history  will 
declare  :  as  who,  having  no  regard  of  man's  life,  make  every  matter 
spoken  against  their  private  commodity  to  be  '  heresy !  heresy  !'  In 
times  past  it  was  not  accounted  as  a  heresy,  except  it  did  contain 
blasphemy,  and  did  bring  in  some  great  peril  to  the  faith,  or  where  the 
majesty  of  Christ  was  hurt :  such  as  were  the  Donatists,  Manichees, 
A^ppolinatists,  and  Arians. 

And  notwithstanding  the  moderation  of  the  bishops  was  such  in 
those  days,  that  they  would  not  implore  the  emperor's  aid  in  this 
case,  except  the  wickedness  of  those  heretics,  who  filled  all  places 
full  of  slaughter  and  schism,  did  even  of  necessity  force  them  thereunto. 
As  it  doth  evidently  appear  by  St.  Augustine  and  divers  others,  who 
thought  the  requiring  of  the  profane  power  not  so  necessary  in  such 
business ;  insomuch  that  he  became  an  advocate  vmto  Dulcitius  the 
tribune,  that  he  should  put  none  of  them  to  death.  The  like  thing, 
as  I  suppose,  did  he  unto  Macedonius  the  president,  considering  witii 
himself  that  they  ought  to  use  no  other  kind  of  weapon,  in  this  kind 
of  contention,  than  only  the  word  of  God,  prayer,  and  doctrine ;  or 
if  the  evil  were  past  remedy,  then  they  used  to  exclude  them  out 
of  the  church.  And  if  the  said  Austin  afterward  altered  his  mind, 
being  led  thereunto,  rather  by  the  success  ensuing  than  by  his  own 
judgment :  that  helpeth  little  or  nothing  the  cruelty  of  our  men  now- 
a-days.  For  first  of  all,  with  what  success  the  Babylonical  fire- 
makers  have  exercised  their  tyranny  upon  the  members  of  Christ, 
the  matter  itself  doth  sufficiently  testify  :  then  let  us  behold  those 
against  whom  they  did  then  so  rage,  what  manner  of  Manichees  and 
Donatists  they  were  ;  of  whom  no  man  is  ignorant,  that  although 
they  were  called  heretics,  yet  they  were  indeed  furious  robbers,  and 
thieves,  so  that  the  matter  now  seemed  no  more  to  belong  unto  the 
office  of  the  church,  but  rather  to  appertain  to  the  tribunal  power, 
albeit  the  church  would  wink  thereat. 

Whereby  it  is  brought  to  pass,  that  through  the  perilous  wick- 
edness of  the  time,  the  bishops  are  driven  to  this  point ;  that  of  force 
the  emperor's  laws  are  to  be  received  for  help,  and  then  these  laws  did 
threaten  none  other  thing,  but  only  death  unto  the  captains  of  them, 
as  it  appeareth,  in  the  book  of  the  laws  upon  the  Manichees  and 
Samaritans.  The  disciples  were  punished  by  the  purse  ;  and  such  as, 
neglecting  the  laws  of  the  princes,  did  obstinately  persevere  in  their 
wickedness,  banishment  was  appointed  for  them  :  besides  that  at  that 
time,  there  were  no  university-schools    (as  we   call  them)  erected, 


men's    TRAUITIONS    AND    THK    DOCTUINKS    OF    CHRIST.  101 

to  resist  those  mischiefs,  whereas  contrariwise  now,  there  is  ahnost  ineimrd 
no  religion,  which  is  not  armed  and  adorned  with  universities,  whereby 


there  may  speedy  remedy  be  liad,  it'  wc  be  so  ^eatly  at'raitl  ot"  liere-  A.  1). 
tics ;  but  what  is  now-a-days  come  in  men's  minds,  that  setting  apart  ^'^^^^ 
the  universities  and  all  kind  of  arguments,  whereby  they  might 
the  more  better,  so  also  more  easily,  convince  all  eiTors,  and  finally 
forgetting  all  Icind  of  meekness,  wliieli  Christ  himself  and  his  aj)ostles 
do  so  greatly  commend  unto  us,  using  no  kind  of  reason,  do  think  that 
heretics  must  be  entreatetl  by  no  other  means,  than  with  torments, 
faggots,  and  fire.  What  profit  cometh  of  the  universities,  when  we 
do  think  that  the  truth  is  to  be  defended  by  no  other  means,  than 
with  bunds,  stripes,  chains,  and  torments,  &c.  ?  Thus  we  have  al- 
leged, as  touching  heretics,  as  though  they  were  the  very  same 
indeed,  which  they  are  now  falsely  accused  to  be. 

But  now  let  us  see  what  manner  of  things  they  are,  whereabout 
these  greed v  papists  make  so  nmch  ado,  with  so  many  tragedies  and 
fires.  Amongst  so  many,  who,  in  these  our  days,  have  been  burned, 
who  is  it  that  can  show  me  only  three,  who  either  have  wickedly  taught, 
or  openly  spoken  of  God  ;  who  have  detracted  or  taken  away  one  so 
small  a  part  of  the  divine  nature  of  Christ ;  who  have  taught  any 
blasphemy  against  the  Holv  Ghost,  or,  finally,  who  have  untruly  dis- 
sented in  any  article  of  the  faith  .''  but  all  this  filthy  sink  is  troubled 
about  certain  circumstances  of  places,  times,  and  persons,  and  of  men's 
traditions. 

What  doth  it  so  much  make  matter,  if  any  man  do  truly  worship 
Christ  in  heaven,  although  he  do  not  worship  him  in  the  sacrament  .'* 
Wiiat  great  importance  is  it,  if  with  Christ  and  Paul,  w^e  do  call  the 
bread  the  body  of  Christ,  if  we  do  not  conceive  with  the  school-men, 
the  accident  to  be  there  without  the  subject  ?  What  if  wc  do  not  dis- 
close unto  the  priest  the  number  of  our  sins,  if  that  wc,  confessing 
ourselves  truly  unto  Christ,  do  turn  untr)  repentance  .^  What  if  that 
we  do  forsake  the  trust  of  our  works  .''  What  if  that  wc  do  contemn  the 
pardon  of  bishops,  and  repose  our  whole  righteousness  and  redemp- 
tion in  Christ,  our  only  bishop .''  Is  our  faith  therefore  the  less  agree- 
able and  conformable  unto  the  articles  given  us  by  the  apostles  .'*  What 
if  that  we,  contemning  the  image  of  saints,  do  worship  one  only 
Christ  in  spirit  and  truth;  shall  we  be  any  deal  the  less  Christians 
therefore,  or  is  not  Clirist  alone  sufficient  for  us  all  .''  The  gospel 
teacheth  onlv  two  sacraments,  which  alone,  if  a  man  do  reverently 
embrace,  setting  apart  all  the  others,  which  are  sprung  up  by  men's 
institutions,  what  hurt  shall  Christianity  sustain  thereby  ^  So  like- 
wise the  Scripture  of  God  doth  not  permit  a  concubine ;  but  it  doth 
license  every  man  to  have  a  wife,  so  that  he  have  but  one — whether 
then  do  von  think  doth  bind  most  strictly,  the  will  of  God,  or  the  vow 
of  men  ?  Or  if  that  a  priest,  breaking  his  unlawful  vow,  had  nither 
call  her,  with  whom  he  hada  long  timeaccomjianied,  '  wife,'  than  'con- 
cubine ;'  what !  <loth  this  deserve  either  punishment  or  prisonment .'' 
Neither  do  I  think  that  thereby  the  regiment  of  the  church  or  the 
order  of  the  clergy,  should  come  to  ruin,  if  that  one  bishop  of  Italy 
setting  apart  his  primacy,  which  no  Scripture  doth  allow,  were  re- 
duced unto  the  order  of  other  bishops.  And  these  are  those  great 
offences  of  blasphemy,  for  the  which  one  Christian  is  so  exasperated 


J  02  JIOW    THE    CHRISTIAN    lilKKARCHY    SHOULD    GOVERN. 

Richard  against  another,  with  so  great  fury  and  cruelty.     Here  again  is  the 
^^"      admonition  to  be  renewed,  which  hath  been  so  often  before  repeated, 


^^-  D.  that  we  neither  speak  nor  think  any  thing  against  the  poUtic 
^^^"^^  but  only  against  such,  to  whom  it  were  convenient,  for  their  profession, 
to  be  most  meek  of  all  men,  and  yet  by  nature  they  are  most  fierce 
and  cruel.  Their  own  constitutions  declare  the  same  in  the  fifth  book 
of  their  Decretals,  where  it  is  commanded,  that  a  heretic,  convicted 
in  any  error  (but  how  convicted?  by  authority  rather  than  by  the 
Scriptures  !),  should  be  delivered  unto  the  secular  power  :  neither  is 
that  yet  sufficient  that  they  do  so  imbrue  the  secular  sword  with 
blood,  but  that  also,  with  their  malice,  they  do  sharpen  and  whet  the 
same,  which  of  itself  is  already  sharp  enough.  The  writers  of  the 
Gloss  do  also  add  this  unto  it,  "  to  be  burned."  And  these  are  they 
who  will  represent  Christ  unto  us  here  upon  earth,  crying  out  often- 
times that  all  Chrisfs  doings  are  for  our  instniction.  But  if  that  all 
our  life  be  to  be  directed  unto  Christ\s  institutions ;  what  thing  less 
do  his  examples  teach  us,  than  such  kind  of  cruelty,  and  especially  in 
ministers,  in  whom  he  doth,  with  so  great  zeal,  commend  humility 
and  meekness  with  mutual  love,  as  the  only  knot  of  his  gospel : 
wisely  forbidding  them,  that  in  pulling  up  of  the  cockle,  they  should 
not  be  too  rash,  fearing  lest  peradventure  that  might  come  to  pass, 
which  now  indeed  hath  happened  :  lest  together  with  the  cockle  they 
pull  up  the  good  wheat  also.  Then  what  is  there  to  be  said,  where, 
not  only  together  with  the  cockle,  but,  instead  of  the  cockle,  the  very 
wheat  itself  is  plucked  out  of  the  floor  of  the  Lord  ?  How  well  that 
is  correspondent  unto  Christ''s  doings  let  they  themselves  judge. 

I  sm'ely  am  greatly  afraid  that  they  will  deserve,  no  great  thanks 
at  the  hands  of  the  Lord  of  the  harvest,  when  he  shall  come  to  reward 
every  man  according  to  his  doings.  But  in  this  point  I  do  not  plead  as 
the  advocate  of  the  heretics,  if  there  be  any  who  are  heretics  indeed. 
Neither  do  I  go  about  here  to  discuss  how  far  the  power  of  the  civil 
sword  doth  extend,  or  what  is  lawful  to  be  done  by  the  civil  consti- 
tutions. But  truly,  whatsoever  the  necessary  severity  of  the  civil 
power  doth,  yet  the  priests  and  rulers  of  the  church  ought  always  to 
use  humility  and  gentleness,  according  to  the  example  of  Him,  who 
would  not  compel  any  man  to  his  religion.  What  saith  he  ?  "  He 
that  hath  ears  to  hear  let  him  hear,"  yet  doth  he  not  by  and  by 
threaten  death  unto  him  that  will  not  hear ;  neither  doth  he  grievously 
threaten  those  who  do  depart  away  from  him,  as  St.  Cyprian  wit- 
nesseth  ;  but  turning  unto  his  disciples  he  said,  will  you  also  depart 
from  me  ?  He  came  not  to  occupy  any  civil  authority,  and  as  he  did 
not  possess  any  civil  authority,  so  neither  did  he  deliver  any  man 
over  unto  the  civil  power.  Albeit  it  is  not  to  be  doubted  but  that  it 
may  happen  sometimes,  that  the  christian  hierarchy  shall  need  to  call 
for  the  help  of  the  magistrates  (like  as  against  the  Donatists  the 
help  of  the  laws  were  very  necessary),  especially  if  the  heresy  do 
once  grow  on  to  tumult,  schism,  sedition,  robbery,  or  to  the  ruin  of 
the  commonwealth  ;  in  such  case  I  suppose  the  foreign  magistrate 
ought  to  foresee  that  the  commonwealth  suffer  no  detriment.  Other- 
wise, if  the  heresy  be  such  that  it  do  contain  itself  within  some 
private  error,  without  passing  any  further,  that  same  doth  seem  to 
pertain  only  imto  the  bishops  and  universities,  neither  do  I  greatly  see 


HOW     UKST    TO    UI-ShlfATK    II  KUKsl  ts.  lOS 

what  tlie  fivil  power  should  meddle  herein  :  for  so  heresies  are  more   Jt''i«>rd 


easily  troii<len  down,  bcin^  convicted  rather  by  reason,  than  oppressed  - 
by  violence,     liut  now,  these  many  years,  they  have  rajred  against    -^•^• 
heretics  with  great  hatred  and  extreme  tonuents. 

But  that  they  have  profited  tiiereby,  every  man  dotii  perceive. 
How  much  more  circumspect  and  worthy  of  a  christian  man  were  it, 
if  that  tliey  would  walk  in  the  footstep;;,  and  follow  the  examples,  of 
our  forelathers,  for  our  fathers  in  Christ  desired  rather  to  excel  in 
learning,  in  tongues,  in  godliness,  in  the  power  of  the  word  and  Spirit, 
rather  than  in  any  worldly  authoritv.  So  did  l*aul,  Peter,  and 
the  apostles ;  so  did  the  martyrs  of  the  primitive  age ;  so  did  the 
learned  doctors  and  writers  after  them,  whose  learning  and  labour 
were  great  in  tlie  church,  although  their  authority  was  but  little,  after 
the  manner  of  this  world.  For  such  is  the  nature  of  the  church,  that 
as  it  is  a  spiritual  regiment,  so  by  spiritual  means  it  is  maintained. 
But  now-a-days  you  shall  see  many  who  think  there  is  no  other 
means  for  defending  the  church  against  heretics,  than  the  force  and 
majesty  of  the  bishojjs  only :  whereby  it  is  come  to  pass  that  the 
ecclesiastical  ministration  is  far  alienated  from  that,  which,  in  times 
past,  was  begun  in  the  world  by  Christ  and  his  apostles  ;  for  now  it 
is  grown,  as  it  were,  to  an  image  and  form  of  a  secular  empire, 
and  almost  unto  a  kingly  power  and  riches,  and,  in  a  manner,  unto 
most  extreme  tyranny.  But  if  our  desire  be  so  gieat  to  dissipate 
heresies,  I  see  no  speedier  way  or  remedy,  than  that  if  the  fathers  of 
the  church  would  diligently  take  heed  that  the  church  of  Christ  be 
not  overwhelmed  with  such  a  number  of  articles ;  so  should  it  soon  be 
brought  to  pass,  that  not  only  the  young  branches  of  heresy  should 
be  easily  cut  off,  wheresoever  they  begin  to  spring,  but  also,  that  in 
short  time,  there  should  no  more  spring  or  rise  up.  For,  if  wo 
should  say  the  truth,  whereupon  cometh  it  that  the  world  is  so  full 
of  dissension,  but  only  that  all  things  are  so  intricate,  with  so  many 
articles,  so  many  censures,  cautions,  and  school  pleas,  neither  is  there 
any  article  which  hath  not  its  heresy  annexed  unto  it,  as  the  shadow 
unto  a  body ;  insomuch  that  the  matter  is  now  come  unto  this  point, 
that  nothing  can  now  be  spoken  so  circumspectly,  but  that  it  shall 
tend  to  some  snare  of  heresy,  or,  at  the  least,  suspicion.  There  are 
so  many  snares  of  constitutions  and  decrees,  so  manv  titles  of  repre- 
hension and  caption,  specially  where  hitherto,  instead  of  love  and 
charitv,  which  now  is  banished,  I  know  not  into  what  stnmge  and 
far  distant  place,  the  fury  Erynnys  is  come  in  place,  the  depraver  of 
all  things,  filling  all  the  world  with  her  reproaches  and  slanders,  even 
for  a  small  occasion,  and  oftentimes  for  none  at  all.  Wherefore,  since 
all  things  are  at  this  point,  nothing  in  mine  opinion  is  to  be  preferred 
to  this,  that  we,  being  reconciled  together  with  a  mutual  conjunction 
of  our  minds,  do  take  away  all  occasion  (as  much  as  may  be)  of 
brotherly  offence.  Whereupon  especially  this  mischief  doth  grow  : 
if  we  do  commit  any  heresy,  whatsoever  doth  resist  against  men's  de- 
crees, it  were  better  that  there  were  fewer  articles  in  the  world,  .md 
then  the  heresies  would  cease  of  their  own  accord.  For  hereupctn 
began  the  first  spring  of  all  mischief,  and  at  this  point  again,  must 
the  method  of  remedy  be  sought  for.  What  if  that  the  pope's  de- 
crees did  extend  no  further  than  Italy?  What  if  there  were  nothing 


104  THE    BKLiTAL    WORDS    OF    BISHOP    STOCKSLEY. 

Richttrd  received  into  our  necessary  faith,  which  is  contained  in  very  few 
'  words,  but  only  the  articles  of  the  apostolical  symbols,  as  they  were  set 
A.D.  forth  by  the  most  approved  councils,  what  should  the  church,  the 
^^^'^'  spouse  of  Christ,  be  hindered  thereby?  Yet  notwithstanding,  for 
these  trifles,  we  do  see  in  every  place  old  men,  young  men,  and  also 
women  burnt,  neither  do  they  spare  kindred,  stock,  nor  age,  insomuch 
that  it  is  almost  less  danger  to  offend  against  the  majesty  even  of  the 
most  mighty  princes,  than  to  violate  the  sanctions  of  any  so  mean  a 
bishop.  Whereof  the  storm  and  tempest  of  persecution  bath  been  so 
vehement  in  these  our  days,  that  there  is  almost  no  part  of  Europe, 
which  is  not  imbrued  with  the  blood  of  the  martyrs  which  hath  been 
shed.  And,  albeit  that  their  decrees  do  most  consonantly  agree  unto  the 
Scriptures  (let  us  also  grant  them  that),  yet  were  it  the  part  of  divines 
to  teach,  and  of  tyrants  to  compel.  Now  what  is  this  by  violence  to 
be  carried  unto  the  fire,  for  certain  doubtful  articles  of  controversy, 
some  not  greatly  sound,  or  peradventure  disagreeing  unto  the  Scrip- 
tures, not  only  heretics,  but,  instead  of  heretics,  the  guiltless  and 
innocents.  Oh  what  marvellous  folly  is  this  of  men,  that  while  these 
tyrants  daily  do  exercise  this  tyranny  in  the  cottages  of  Christ,  en- 
glutting  themselves  with  men's  blood,  they  do  triumphantly  rejoice, 
as  though  they  had  done  a  high  service  unto  God,  and  wrought  a 
very  good  deed.  Even  in  like  sort,  as  in  foreign  wars  of  princes,  it 
is  counted  great  valiantness,  whosoever  can  kill  most  of  his  enemies  ; 
so  likewise  this  is  the  only  renown  and  praise  amongst  the  heads  of 
the  church,  which  of  them  hath  shed  most  heretics'  blood.  As  we  have 
heard  report  of  John  Stocksley,  sometime  bishop  of  London,  that  he 
did  boast  himself,  even  when  he  was  at  the  point  of  death,  giving 
thanks  unto  God  with  a  loud  voice,  that  he  had  sent  thirty-one  here- 
tics unto  the  infernal  fire  !  Verily  these  were  words  more  fitted  for  a 
beast  than  for  a  man. 

But  let  these  men  take  heed  that  while  they  go  about,  by  their  own 
fantasies  rather  than  by  any  just  judgment,  to  put  heretics  to  death, 
that  the  same  thing  do  not  happen  unto  them  which  in  times  past 
happened  unto  the  Jews,  who  when  they  would  have  entered  upon 
Christ  as  a  seditious  man,  they  stumbled  upon  the  Son  of  God. 

The  which  for  that  it  may  not  come  to  pass,  wisdom  and  learning 
chiefly  in  bishops,  diminution  of  articles,  judgment,  an  evangelical 
mind,  gentleness,  a  zeal  joined  with  knowledge,  a  care  to  save  rather 
than  to  destroy  men,  a  mind  which  attributeth  nothing  unto  affection, 
but  submitteth  itself  wholly  unto  the  rule  and  governance  of  equity 
and  the  Scriptures,  shall  principally  perform. 

But  heresy  is  altogether  to  be  suppressed  truly,  neither  shall  heresy 
find  any  maintenance  at  my  hands.  This  only  do  I  require  in  these 
catholics,  that  if  they  will  not  use  the  apostolic  moderation,  yet  they 
would  use  some  civil  modesty,  and  rather  choose  to  try  their  matters 
by  some  reasonable  means,  than  with  such  clamours  and  seditious 
rashness.  I  do  require  some  moderation  which  will  lawfully  convince 
those  whom  it  is  wished  to  oppress.  I  require  doctrine  which 
should  rather  bridle  the  heresies,  than  the  heretics.  Let  them  rage  so 
much  as  they  will  against  the  name  of  heretics,  truly  I  think  if  these 
days  which  do  seem  scarcely  christian,  had  six  Jeromes,  and  as  many 
Augustines,  although  it  had  no  other  help  besides,  I  think  the  church 


MA\'V    AN'I)    GKKAT     PKKSK  CL'TION'S    KOHKTOLU.  105 

should  want  no  sufficient  aid  to  put  to  flight  the  great  heaps  of  here-   Rteitard 

lies.      But  forasmuch  as  in  this  extreme  cruelty  of  the  world,   when  '■ — 

all  charity  is  waxed  so  cold,  I  am  not  i<,morant  how  small  credit  these    yiw7' 

thin;jp  sliail  find  at  many  men's  hands,  hke  as  also  other  counsels  of 1- 

inoderations  before  mine  have  been  ne^dected  :  wherefore  it  shouhl 
be  the  best  for  me  to  leave  these  kind  of  men  to  their  owTi  will, 
nitlier  than  to  sint^  unto  such  as  are  deaf,  and  so  to  lose  both  time 
and  labour. 

But  now  let  us  rt-tuni  unto  the  martyrs ;  but  before  we  do  enter 
into  that  lamentable  story,  we  do  think  it  worth  our  labour,  to  show 
first  certain  prophecies  of  sundry  n^en,  whereby  so  many  great  per- 
secutions of  the  world  were  prefigured.  And  first  to  begin  ^vith 
Joiachim  the  abbot,  wc  will  reliearse  what  was  found  of  him  in  an  old 
monument  of  Hovcden :  Thus  he  saith,  "  Richard,  the  king  of 
Kngland,  in  his  expedition  unto  Jerusalem,  hearing  tell  of  the  great 
fame  of  Joiachim  of  Calabria,  abbot  of  Curacon,  who,  by  the  spirit  of 
prophecy,  did  foreshow  things  to  come.  What  time  as  he  sojourned 
at  Sicily  he  caused  the  said  abbot  to  be  sent  for  to  him,  to  hear  of 
him,  amongst  other  things  more,  what  he  could  declare  as  touching 
Antichrist :  he  then,  expounding  the  mystery  of  the  seven  kings  in 
the  Revelation,  Avhereof  five  were  fallen,  &c.  said  "  The  seven  kings 
are  seven  persecutors,  Herod,  Nero,  Constantinus,  Mahomet,  Melse- 
mutus,  Saladinus,  and  Antichrist."  But  as  touching  Antichrist,  he 
said  thus,  That  even  at  that  present  he  should  be  bred  in  Rome,  and 
should  be  exalted  in  the  apostolic  see,  of  whom  the  apostle  speaketh, 
'  he  is  e.xalted  above  all  things  that  is  called  God.' " 

Thus  much  writeth  Hoveden  ;  and  this  abbot  was  in  the  year  of  our 
Lord  1290.  There  is  also  the  prophecy  of  Hildegard  (of  whom  we 
have  spoken  before),  in  the  29th  bookof  Vincentius.  "  In  the  year," 
says  she,  "  after  the  incarnation  of  Christ,  1 200,  the  doctrine  of  the 
apostles,  and  the  fervent  justice  which  God  had  appointed  amongst 
the  spiritual  Christians,  began  to  wax  slack  and  doubtful,  but  this 
womanly  time  shall  not  so  long  continue  as  it  hath  hitherto  continued." 
Thus  much  writeth  he  ;  neither  did  Fluentius,  the  bishop,  doubt 
openly  to  preach  that  Antichrist  was  bom  in  his  days,  as  it  appeareth 
by  Sabellicus.  Also  before  these  days,  a.  d.  1239,  Gerardus,  bishop 
of  Laodicca,  in  his  book  entitled  "  Of  the  Preservation  of  the 
Servants  of  God,"  doth  conjecture  Antichrist  to  be  even  at  hand,  by 
the  rarity  of  prophesying  and  the  gift  of  curing.  There  is  also  a  cer- 
tain prophecy  of  Jerome  Savonarola,  evident  (if  it  be  worthy  credit) 
69  years  before,  wherein  he  doth  affirm  in  this  manner,  "  that  Italy 
should  be  plagued  with  the  scourge  of  God,  for  the  manifold  sins 
thereof,  even  amongst  the  princes,  as  well  ecclesiastical  as  secular ; 
and  when  the  cities  of  Rome  and  Florence  arc  overthrown  then 
should  the  church  be  renewed,  the  which  should  happen  very 
shortly  ;  and  that  the  Turks,  and  Mauritanians,  in  these  our  days, 
should  be  converted  unto  the  true  knowledge  of  Christ."  He  fore- 
showed also,  that  "  there  should  one  pass  the  Alps,  like  unto 
Cyrus,"  who  should  subvert  all  Italy."  Thus  much  have  we  found 
in  the  book  of  Gaspar  Hedio,  entitled  the  "  Paralipomena." 

(I)  Like  ryriiii,  in  the  greatnc*!  of  his  achievementii,  but  like  Hnnnibal  rather,  in  bi.o  pas!>a;;r 
of  the  Alps.-  Kii. 


106  THE    TORMENTS    OF    THE    CHRISTIAN    MARTYRS. 

jtiihard       I  think  also  it  lacketh  not  liis  prophecy  which  happened  a.  d. 
^^'      3501,  that  throughout  all  Germany  there  was  seen  upon  men''s  gar- 


A.D.  ments,  crosses,  crowns  of  thorn,  the  similitude  of  nails  and  drops  of 
^'■^^^-  blood  fallen  from  heaven:  and  oftentimes  these  fell  within  the  houses, 
insomuch  that  many  women  wore  the  same  \o\\g  time  upon  their 
garments  :  if  that  be  true  which  Gaspar  doth  report.  Hereunto  also 
is  to  be  annexed  that  which  we  read  in  our  countryman  Froysard,  as 
touching  one  John  of  Rochetaylada,  a  Franciscan  friar ;  not  that  we 
have  any  certainty  thereof,  but  that  ^ve  do  only  show  what  is  there 
written.  He,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  1346,  is  said  to  have  foreshowed, 
that  the  ecclesiastical  order  should  suffer  much  through  the  ambitious 
.  avarice  and  pride  ;  whereupon,  he  was  by  pope  Clement  VI.  cast 
into  prison.  Neither  is  it  to  be  passed  over  with  silence,  that  which 
is  reported,  that  Manfridus,  a  Dominic  fi'iar  of  Vercellos,  is  said  to 
have  foreshowed  that  Antichrist  should  rise  up  in  his  time^  as  it  is 
written  by  Antoninus. 

And  Arnoldus  de  Villa  Nova,  Catalanus,  a  singular  mathematician 
and  physician,  did  affirm  out  of  Daniel  and  Sibil,  that  Antichrist, 
after  the  year  of  our  Lord  1300,  should  fully  rage  over  the  godly, 
and  that  there  should  be  persecution  in  the  church.  He  said  more- 
over, that  these  cloister  monks  did  falsify  the  doctrine  of  Christ.  That 
the  sacrifice  of  the  altar  was  not  profitable  to  the  quick  nor  to  the 
dead,  neither  that  there  was  any  knowledge  in  the  pope's  consolations, 
but  only  of  men's  works.  At  the  last  he  was  sent  by  Frederic,  king 
of  Sicily,  to  the  bishop  of  Rome,  where  by  the  Avay  upon  the  sea  he 
died,  and  was  buried  at  Genoa.  I  might  also  have  repeated  the  tes- 
timony of  Peter  John  Aquitane,  a  Franciscan  friar  in  Vasconia,  who, 
after  all  the  rest,  prophesied  that  in  the  latter  days  the  law  of  liberty 
should  appear ;  who  after  his  burial  was  by  pope  Clement  IV. 
declared  a  heretic,  and  his  dead  corpse  taken  up  and  burned,  if  that 
we  may  credit  Guido  of  Parpinian.  T'len  we  may  also  repeat  those 
things  which  so  many  years  before  v. re  pronounced  of  divers,  as 
touching  the  birth  of  Luther,  and  gathered  out  of  Melancthos"" 
commentaries  upon  Daniel.  These  things  thus  presupposed,  and 
those  also  remembered,  whom  this  miserable  storm  of  persecution 
hath  afflicted,  and  driven  unto  recantation  and  the  uttermost  terror  of 
death,  now  our  story  shall  return  to  them,  unto  whom  God  hath  given  a 
greater  constancy  of  heart,  and  steadfastness  of  faith,  to  persevere  even 
unto  the  death  ;  albeit  I  cannot  promise  the  whole  catalogue  of  them, 
forsomuch  as  there  were  so  many  christian  martyi's  in  all  parts  of  the 
world,  whereof  a  great  number  were  compassed  in  with  craft  and  de- 
ceit, some  were  poisoned,  others  were  tormented  with  open  torments, 
many  were  oppressed  with  private  and  unknown  murder  and ,  death, 
others  died  in  prison,  some  by  famine,  and  some,  by  other  means, 
Avcre  openly  and  privately  destroyed ;  that  it  is  scarcely  possible  to 
attain  to  the  knowledge  of  a  small  number  of  them,  or  if  that  it  hap- 
pen that  I  obtain  the  knowledge  of  the  names  of  them,  yet  can  I  not 
by  any  means  find  out  the  manner  of  their  execution,  and  the  causes 
of  all  them  who  have  suffered  in  so  many  and  far  distant  places; 
neither  do  I  think  that  one  man  is  able  to  do  it ;  albeit  this  one 
thing  is  most  certain  in  them  all,  and  may  be  as  perpetual :  that 
whatsoever  thing  hath  happened  unto  any  one  of  them,  by  the  example 


THE    STORY    OI-     WILLIAM    SWINDERBY.  107 

thereof,  you  may  easily  jud<je  what  hath  happened  unto  them  all :  for-  RuHnrd 

somucli  as  the  cruelty  of  all  the  bishops  towards  them  hath  been  in __. 

a  manner,  all  alike,  the  form  of  their  judijments  all  one,  the  reason  of   A.  D. 
their  condenmation  ajjreeing,  and  the  onler  and  kind  of  their  death    ''^^^' 
nothing  dirt'crent,  neither  were  their  eauses  groatlv  diverse,  when,  as  in 
a   manner  from   the  superstition    of  the  sacrament  only,  and  a  frw 
other  ceremonies,  and  the  ambition  of  the  clerLrv,  the  wjjole  principal 
cause  and  occasion  of  this  trouble,  did  spring  and  grow.* 

Now  particularly  and  in  order  let  us,  by  Christ's  grace,  prosecute 
the  stories  anil  persecutions  of  the  parties  aforenamed  as  the  course 
of  their  times  shall  require,  first  beginning  with  the  valiant  champions 
William  Swindcrbv  and  Walter  Hrute. 


Cfje  .^tocn  of  JDilUam  ^tomoerbp.' 

In  the  vear  of  our  Lord  1381),  William  Swindcrbv,  priest,  within  a.d.jsbp. 
the   diocese  of  Lincoln,   being  accused  and  detected  as  to  certain  w.  swui- 
opinions,  was  presented  before  John,  bishop  of  Lincoln,  and  examined  nmex- 
upon  certain  articles  in  the  churcK  of  Lincoln,  after  the '  form  and  *'"'"e<i- 
order  of  the  pope''s  law,  according  to  their  usual  rite  observed ;  his 
denouncers  were  these:  friar  Frisby<  an  obserrant ;  friar  Ilincelv,  an  Denoun- 
Augustine  ;  and  Thomas  Blaxtou,  a  Dominican.  The  articles  where-  w^swin- 
with  thev  charfjed  him,  although  in  form  of  words,  as  they  put  them  "^f^^y- 
up,  thev  might  seem  something  strange  here  to  be  recite^l ;  yet,  to  friars, 
the  intent  that  all  men  may  see  the  spiteful  malice  of  these  spider- 
friars,  in  sucking  all  things  to  poison,  and  in  forging  that  which  is 
not  true,  as  in  process  (Christ  willing)  hereafter  shall  better  appear 
by  his  answers,  I  thought  good  to  notify  the  same. 

That  men  may  ask  their  debts  by  charity,  but  in  no  manner  for  Articles 
debt  imprison  anv  man  ;  and  that  he  so  imprisoning  is  accursed.  coiimed 

That  if  parishioners  do  know  their  curate  to  be  a  lecher,  incon-  |^f.'"*' 
tinent,  and  an  evil  man,  they  ought  to  withdraw  from  him  their  tithes,  derby. 
or  else  they  be  fautors  of  his  sins. 

That  tithes  be  purely  alms,  and  that  in  case  curates  be  e\il  men, 
the  same  may  lawfully  be  conferred  on  other  men. 

That  for  an  evil  curate  to  cur.se  his  subject  for  withholding  tithes, 
is  nothing  else,  but  to  take  with  extortion  wickedly  antl  unduly  from 
him  his  money. 

That  no  prelate  may  curse  a  man,  except  he  know  beforehand  that 
he  is  cursed  of  God. 

That  every  priest  may  absolve  any  sinner  being  contrite  ;  and 
is  bound,  notwithstanding  the  inhibition  of  the  bishop,  topreacli  the 
Gospel  to  the  people. 

That  a  priest  taking  any  annual  pension  upon  covenant,  is,  in  so 
doing,  a  simoniac,  and  accursed. 

That  anv  priest  being  in  <leadly  sin,  if  he  give  himself  to  con- 
secrate the  body  of  the  Lord,  committeth  idolatry  rather  than  doth 
consecrate. 

That  no  priest  entercth  into  any  house,  but  to  evil  entreat  the 
wife,  the  daughter,  or  the  maid ;  and  therefore  he  admonished    the 

(1)  Ex  Recriitro  Episc.  Hereford 


108  THE    STORY    OF    WILLIAM    SWINDEKBY. 

Ri<^h"rd  good  man  of  the  house  to  take  heed  what  priest  he  doth  let  into  liis 
'      house. 


r" 


A.D.         Another  conclusion  falsely  to   him  objected ;   That   a  child  is  not 
^^^^-    truly  baptized,   if  the  priest  that  baptizeth,  or  the  godfather  or  god- 
mother, be  in  deadly  sin. 

Item,  That  no  man  living  against  the  law  of  God  is  a  priest,  how- 
ever he  were  ordained  priest  by  any  bishop. 

These  articles  or  conclusions  untruly  collected,  were  as   cruelly 
exhibited  against  him  by  the  friars  in  the  bishop  of  Lincoln^s  court, 
swin-       Although  he  had  never  preached,  taught,  or  at  any  time  defended 
50^       them,  as  appeareth  more  in  the  process  following,  yet  the  friars  with 
the  friar^  their  witnesscs    standing  forth  against  him,  declared  him  to  be  con- 
to  abjare  victed ;  bringing  also  dry  wood  with  them  to  the  town  to  bum  him, 
which  he  and  would  not  leave  him  before  they  had  made  him  promise  and  swear, 
taJght.     through  fear  of  death,  never  to  hold  them,  teach  them,  or  preach  them 
privily  or  openly,  under  pain  of  relapse  ;  and  that  he  should  go  to  cer- 
tain churches  to  revoke  the  aforesaid  conclusions,  which  be  never 
affirmed  :  as  first  in  the  church  of  Lincoln ;   then  in  St.  Margarefs 
church  in  Leicester ;   also  in  St.  Martin's  church  in  Leicester,  and  in 
our  Lady's  churches  at  Newark,  and  in  other  parish-churches  also, 
namely,  those  of  Melton- Mowbray,  Helhoughton,  Hareborough,  and 
Lentborough  :  which  penance  being  enjoined  liim,  he  did  obediently 
accomplish,with  this  form  of  revocation,  which  they  bound  him  to, 
in  these  words. 

,  The  Revocation  of  William  Swinderby,  whereunto  he  was  forced  by 

the  Friars. 

I,  William  Swinderby,  priest,  although  unworthy,  of  the  diocese  of  Lincoln, 
acknowledging  one  true  catholic  and  apostolic  faith  of  the  holy  church  of  Rome, 
do  abjure  all  heresy  and  error,  repugning  to  the  determination  of  the  holy  mo- 
ther church,  whereof  I  have  been  hitherto  defamed ;  namely,  the  conclusions 
and  articles  above  prefixed,  and  every  one  of  them,  to  me  judicially  objected 
by  the  commissary  of  the  reverend  father  in  Christ  and  Lord,  lord  John, 
by  the  grace  of  God,  bishop  of  Lincoln,  and  do  revoke  the  same,  and  every 
one  of  them,  some  as  heretical,  others  as  erroneous  and  false  ;  and  do  affirm 
and  believe  them  to  be  so,  and  hereafter  will  never  teach,  preach,  or  affirm  pub- 
licly or  privily  the  same.  Neither  will  I  make  any  sermon  within  the  diocese 
of  Lincoln,  but  asking  first  and  obtaining  the  license  of  the  aforesaid  reverend 
father  and  lord,  the  bishop  of  Lincoln.  Contrary  to  which,  if  I  shall  presume 
hereafter  to  say  or  do,  to  hold  or  preach,  I  shall  be  content  to  abide  the  severity 
of  the  canon,  as  I  have  judicially,  by  the  necessity  of  the  law,  sworn,  and  do 
swear,  &c. 

Thus  have  you  the  conclusions  and  articles  of  this  good  man, 
falsely  objected  to  him  by  the  malicious  and  lying  friars  ;  and  also  the 
retractation,  whereunto  they,  by  force,  compelled  him  ;  whereby  it  may 
likewise  be  conjectured,  what  credit  is  to  be  given  to  the  articles  and 
conclusions  Avhich  these  cavilling  friars,  wresting  all  things  to  the 
worst,  have  objected  and  imputed  both  to  WicklifF,  and  all  others  of 
that  sort,  whom  they  so  falsely  do  defame,  so  slanderously  do  belie, 
and  so  maliciously  do  persecute.  After  these  things  thus  done  and 
wrought  in  the  diocese  of  Lincoln,  it  so  befell  that  the  said  William 
Swinderby  removed  to  the  diocese  and  county  of  Hereford ;  where  he 
was  again  as  much   or  more  molested   by  the  friars,  and  by  John 


THK    I'KOCKSS    AGAIN'ST     lll.M.  109 

Tresnant,  bishop  of  Hereford,  as  by  the  process  and  story  here  ensuing,  Juchnrd 

set  out  at  large  out  of  their  u\vii  ref,nsters,  may  appear.  ' 

A.  D. 
The  Process  of  John  Tresnant,   Bisliup  of  Hrreford,  had  a','ainst  the     ^''^^^- 

aforesaid  WilUani  Swinderby  in  the  cause  of  Heretical  Pravity,  as 

the  Popish  Heretics  call  it. 

The  glorious  iiaiue  of  the  Prince  of  Pccicc,  and  his  counsel  (whose  counsellor  Flourinh- 
no  man  is,  and  whosu  providence  in  his  disposition  is  never  deceived)  being  in-  ing  invo- 
vocated,  To  all  and  singular  believers  of  Christ,  wlio  shall  see  or  hear  this  our  (fij^""  ° 
process  underwritten,   John,   by  the   suiierance    of  God    bishop    of   Hereford,  name, 
greeting,  and  peaceable  charity  in  the  Lord.     Forasmuch  as  Ciod,  the  creator  of 
all  things,  the  keeper  of  justice,  the  lover  of  right,  and  the  hater  of  malice,  be- 
holding from  the  nigh  throne  of  his  providence  the  sons  of  men,  now,  through 
the  fall  of  their  first  father,   prune  and  declining   to  dishonest,  and  lilthy,  and 
detestable  mischiefs,  and  to  keep  under  their  malice,  which  wicked  transgression 
did  first  gender,  hath  appointed  divers   presidents  of  the  world  established  in 
siuulry  degrees,  by  whom,  and  their  circumspect  providence,   mans  audacity 
should  be  restrained,   innocency   should  be  nourished   amongst  the  good,  and 
terror  should  be  stiicken  into  the  wicked  not  to  deceive  ;  also  that  their  power 
to  hurt,  and  their   insolency   should  be   bridled   in  all   places  :  and  whereas, 
amongst  many  kinds  of  cares  which  come  to  our  thoughts,  by  the  duty  of  the 
office  committed  unto  us,  we  are  specially  bovmd  to  extend  our  strength,  chieffy 
that  the  catholic  faith  may  prosper  in  our  times,  and  heretical  pravity  may  be 
rooted  from  out  of  the   borders  of  the  faithful.     We,  therefore,  being  excited 
through  the  information  of  many  credible  and  faithful  Christians  of  our  diocese, 
to  root   out  pestiferous  plants,  as  sheep  diseased  with  an  incurable  sickness, 
going  about  to  infect  the  whole  and  sound  flock,  are  by  tlie  care  of  the  shepherd 
to  be  removed  from  the  flock,  that  is  to  say,  preachers,  or  more  truly  execrable 
oHenders  of  the  new  sect,  vulgarly  called  Lollards;  who,  under  a  certain  doked  Lollard, 
show  of  holiness,  numing  abroad  tlirough  divers  places  of  our  diocese,  and  en-  pLe's  in- 
tleavouring  to  cut  asunder  the  Lord's  unsewed  coat,  that  is  to  say,  to  rend  the  terprcta- 
unity  of  the  holy  church,  and  of  the  catholic   faith,  and  also  to  tear  in  pieces  ^'""l'j  * 
with  their  tempestuous  blasts  the  power  of  St.  Peter,  that  is  to  say,  to  weaken  rived 
the  strength  of  the  ecclesiastical  states  and  degrees,  and  the  determination  of  ffo™  lo'- 
the  same  holy  church,  have  wickedly  presumed,  and  do  presume,  from  day  to   '"'"' 
day,  to  speak,    to  teach,   to  maintain,  and,   that  which   is  more  horrible  to  be 
uttered,   to   preach  openly  many  things  heretical,  blasphemies,  schisms,  and 
slanderous  defamings,  even  quite  contrarj'  to  the  sacred  canons  and  decrees  of 
the  holy  fathers,   so  that  they  know   not  to  direct  their  paths  in  the  ways  of 
righteousness  and  truth,  in  that  they  expound  to  the  people  the  holy  Scripture  as  They 
the  letter  soundeth,  after  a  judaical  sort,  otherwise  than  the  Holy  Ghost  will  needs  f°""|,^[,,e 
have  it,  where  the  words  wander  from  their  proper  significations,'  and  appear  prophets 
to  bring  in,  by  guessing,  new  meanings;  whereas  the  words  must  not  be  judged  wrd'.  a» 
by  the  sense  that  they  make,  but  by  the  sense  whereby  they  be  made;  where  inprinci-s 
the  construction  is  not  boimd  to  the  Donates'  rules,  where  faith  is  far  placed  apparel, 
from  the  capacity  of  reason;  but  they  labour,  by  their  pernicious  doctrines  and 
teachings,  public  and  privy,  to  boil  out  the  poison  of  schisms  between  the  clergy 
and  the  people.     We,  to  encounter  against  such  kind  of  preachers,  nay  rather 
deceivers,  and  horrible  seducers  amongst  tiie  peojile,  advancing  and  rousing  up 
ourselves  in  God's  behalf,  and  that  of  holy  mother  church,  with  the  spiritual 
sword,  which  may  strike  them  wisely,  and   wound  them  medicinally,'  for  their 
health  and  welfare ;  and  namely,  William  Swinderby,  priest  (so  pretending  him- 
self to  be),  a-s  a  teacher  of  such  kind   of  pernicious  doctrine,  and  a   horrible 
seducer  among  the  people  ;  to  whom  personally  ap])earing  before  us  on  the  Wed- 
nesday, to  wit,   the  fourteenth  of  the  month  of  j\me,  in  the  parish  church  of 
Kingston  of  our  diocese,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  13!»1,  he  being  vehemently  de-  a.D.issi. 
faUicd  to  us  of  heresy,  schism,  and  his  perverse  doctrines  both  manifest  and 
privy ;   we,  therefore,  have  caused    many    cases    and    articles  concerning  the 
catholic  faith  to  be  ministered  unto  him,  that  he  should  answer  to  the  same  at 

(1)  Who  expoundcth  the  Scripture  more  aAer  the  letter,  let  the  re«der  judge  by  "Hoc  est  corpus 
mcum." 
{2)  irsuih  luedicinei  *bould  be  ininittered  'oyoii,  ye  would  cod  /our  pbyskian  li'-tle  thank. 


110  AKTICLKS    AGAINST    WILLIAM     SWINDERBY. 

Richard  a  day  and  place  for  him  meet  and  convenient,  of  his  own  choice  and  free  will ; 
II-  that  is  to  say,  on  the  Friday,  being  the  last  of  the  same  month  of  June  next 
followinof,  assigned  to  him,  at  the  chm'ch  of  Bodenham  of  the  same  our  dio- 
cese  :  which  cases  and  articles  were  exhibited  to  us  by  many  of  Christ's  faithful 
people,!  zealous  followers  of  the  catholic  faith,  who  made  information  to  our  office; 
which  cases  and  articles  also  were  by  us  administered,  as  is  before  said,  to  the 
same  William  Swinderby ;  the  tenor  thereof  followeth,  and  is  thus  : 


1391. 


Matters  articulated  against  William  Swinderby. 

Revei-end  father  and  high  lord,  lord  John,  by  God's  sufferance  bishop  of 
Hereford :  it  is  lamentably  declared  imto  your  reverend  fatherhood  on  the  be- 
half of  Christ's  faithful  people,  your  devout  children  of  your  diocese  of  Hereford, 
'  Lord,'  that  notwithstanding  the  misbelief  of  very  many  Lollards,  who  have  too  long  a 
'  Lord,'  a  time  sprung  up  here  in  your  diocese,  there  is  newly  come  a  certain  child  of 
styVe"of  wickedness,  named  William  Swinderby  ;  who,  by  his  horrible  persuasions  and 
their  own  mischievous  endeavours,  and  also  by  his  open  preachings  and  private  teachings, 
making,  j^^h  pervert,  as  much  as  in  him  is,  the  whole  ecclesiastical  state,  and  stirreth 
atirao"  "P'  ^^^*^^  ^^^  ^^^  possible  power,  schism  between  the  clergy  and  the  people.  And 
the  pro-  that  your  reverend  fatherhood  may  be  the  more  fully  informed,  who  and  what 
motors,  to  manner  of  man  the  same  William  Swinderby  is,  there  be  proposed  and  exhibited 
o'rHMe-^'  hereafter  to  the  same  your  fatherhood,  on  the  l)ehalf  of  the  samefaithftd  people 
ford.  of  Christ,  against  the  same  William  Swinderby,  cases  and  articles ;  which  if  the 

same  William  shall  deny,  then  shall  the  same  cases  and  articles  most  evidently 
be  proved  against  him  by  credible  witness  worthy  of  belief,  and  by  other  lawful 
proof  and  evidences,  to  the  end  that  those  being  proved,  the  same  fatherhood 
of  yours  may  do  and  ordain  therein,  as  to  your  pastoral  office  belongeth. 

Imprimis,  the  same  William  Swinderby,  pretending  himself  priest,  was  openly 
and  publicly  convicted  of  certain  articles  and  conclusions  bemg  erroneous, 
schismatical,  and  heretical,  preached  by  him  at  divers  places  and  times,  before 
a  multitude  of  faithful  christian  people.  And  the  same  articles  and  conclusions 
did  he  by  force  of  law  revoke  and  abjure,  some  as  heretical,  and  some  as  eixo- 
neous  and  false;  avouching  and  believing  them  for  such,  as  that  from  thence- 
forth he  would  never  preach,  teach,  or  affirm,  openly  or  privily,  any  of  the  same 
conclusions :  and  if,  by  preaching  or  avouching,  he  should  presume  to  do  the 
contrary,  that  then  he  should  be  subject  to  the  severity  of  the  canons,  accord- 
ingly as  he  did  take  a  corporal  oath,  judicially,  upon  the  holy  gospels. 

II.  Also  the  conclusions,  M'hich  by  the  same  William  were  first  openly  taught 
and  preached,  and  afterwards  abjured  and  revoked,  as  is  aforesaid,  are  contained 
before  in  the  process  of  the  bishop  of  Lincoln,  even  as  they  be  there  written 
word  by  word.  And  for  the  cases  and  articles,  they  were  consequently  exhibited 
by  the  beforenamed  faithful  christian  people  against  the  said  William  Swinderby, 
together  with  the  conclusions  before  said,  and  hereafter  written  :  of  which  cases 
and  articles  the  tenor  here  ensueth. 

III.  Item,  The  said  William,  contrary  to  the  former  revocation  and  abjura- 
tion, not  converting  to  repentance,  but  perverted  from  ill  to  worse,  and  given 
up  to  a  reprobate  sense,  came  into  your  diocese;  where,  running  about  in  sundry 
places,  he  hath  presumed  to  preach,  or  rather  to  pervert  and  to  teach,  of  his  own 
rashness,  many  heretical,  erroneous,  blasphemous,  and  other  slanderous  things 
contrary  and  repvignant  to  the  sacred  canons,  and  the  determination  of  the  holy 
catholic  church.  What  those  things  were,  at  what  place  and  what  time,  shall 
hereafter  more  particularly  bo  declared. 

IV.  Item,  The  same  William,  notwithstanding  your  commandments  and  ad- 
monitions sealed  with  your  seal,  and  to  all  the  curates  of  your  diocese  directed, 
containing  amongst  other  things  that  no  person  of  what  state,  degree,  or  condi- 
tion soever  he  were,  should  presimie  to  preach  or  to  teach,  or  expound  the  holy 
Scripture  to  the  people,  either  in  hallowed  or  profane  places  within  your  diocese, 
without  sufficient  authority,  by  any  manner  or  pretence  that  could  be  sought, 
as  in  the  same  your  letters  monitory  and  of  inhibition,  the  tenor  whereof  here- 
after ensueth,  is  more  largely  contained ;  which  letters  the  same  William  did 
receive  into  his  hands,  and  did  read  them  word  by  word  in  the  town  of  Mon- 

(I)  Such  as  were  in  qiieen  Mary's  days  ;  as  John  Eeard,  J.  Avalec,  Robin  Papist,  and  other  like 
niurdercrs. 


AKTICl.ES     AGAINST     W I  I.  l.I  A  M     SWINUKUBV.  Ill 

mouth  of  your  diocese,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  l.jyo,  so  that  these  your  letters,    Hichani 
and  the  contents  thereof,  came  to  the  true  and  uiidouhted  knowledge  of  the  same       '' 
William ;  yet,    notwithstanding,   liath   tlie  same    William   presumed    in    divers  ~7~T) 
placeM  and  times  to  preach  within  the  same  your  diocese,  after  iuid   agauist     ijoi 
yoiu"  commandment  aforesaid.  '— 

The  tenor  of  the  same  Letters  before  iiiLMiliuiied  followctli,  and  is 
this  : 

John,  hy  the  sufferance  of  God  bishoj)  of  Hereford,  to  the  dean  and  chapter  The  letter 
of  our  church  of  Hereford,  and  to  all  and  singular  abbots,  priors,  provosts,  deans  ""(h'^*"^ 
rural,  parsons  and  vicars  of  monasteries,  priories,  churches,  colleges,  and  parishes,  bishop  of 
and  to  others  having  cure  of  souls  within  the  city  and  diocese  of  Heretord,  and  .''"'-■'T'^' 
to  all  and  every  other  being  within  the  same  city  and  diocese,  greeting,  grace,  {„  prea^"h 
and  blessing.     Forasmuch  as  the  golden  laurel  of  teaching  doctoral  is  not  from  without 
above  indifferently  every  man's  gift;  neither  is  the  oliice  of  preacliing  granted  J."pjJ.' 
save  to  such  as  arc  called,  and  esjjecially  by  the  church  admitted  thereunto : 
we  do  admonish  and  require  you,  ail  and  singular  clerks  afore.said,  and  do  straitly 
enjoin  you  all,  in  the  virtue  of  holy  obedience,  that  neither  you  nor  any  of  you 
do  admit  any  man  to  preach  or  to  teach  the  catholic   faith,  saving  such  as  the 
same  office  of  preaching  shall,  by  the  authority  apostolical,  or  else  your  bishop, 
be  specially  conunittedunto  ;  but  that  as  much  as  in  you  shall  lie,  you  do  by  word 
and  deed  labour  to  let  those  that  would  attempt  the  contrar}-.     And  you,  lords, 
ladies,  knights,  barons,  esquires,  and  all,  and  singular  persons,  of  what  estate, 
degree,  pre-eminence,  or  condition  soever  ye  be,  remaininj'  within  the  city  and 
diocese  of  Hereford,  we  do  beseech  and  exhort  iii  our  Lord,  that,  following  the 
words  of  our  Saviour,  you  beware  of  the  leaven  of  the  Pharisees. 

Item,  According  to  the  saying  of  the  apostle,  "  Be  not  ye  carried  away  with  Would 
divers  and  strange  doctrines;"  and  that  in  the  meanwhile,  as  saith  the  apostle,  [j°'*,'^'j 
you  be  not  removed  from  Llie  sense  of  the  holy  ancient  fathers,  lest  that  any  all  men 
man  by  any  means  should  seduce  you  ;  but  you,  agreeing  together  in  one  mind,  did  be- 
sce  that  you  honour  God  with  one  mouth.     But  if  any  men  to  whom  that  thing  Jh^t^iea- 
is  not  specially,  as   is  aforesaid,  conunitted,  shall  attempt  to  instruct,  or  in  this  ven. 
your  life  to  direct  you  into  the  catliolic  faith,  do  ye  deny  to  give  them  audience, 
and  refuse  you  to  be  present  at  their  assemblies,  and  shun  ye  their  teachings, 
because  they  be  wicked  and  perverse.     And  as  for  us,   we  will  not  omit  to 
proceed,  according  to  the  sacred  canons  and  precepts  of  the  holy  fathers,  against 
such  as  do  the  contrarj'. 

Dated  at  London,  in  tlie  house  of  our  habitation,  under  oxir  seal,  the  last 
day  save  one  of  December,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  1389,  and,  of  our  consecra- 
tion, the  first. 

V.  Item,  The  same  William,  in  his  preaching  to  the  people  on  Monday  the 
first  of  August,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  1390,  in  the  parish  of  Whitney  of  your 
diocese,  did  hold  and  affirm,  that  no  prelate  of  t!ie  world,  of  what  estate,  pre- 
eminence or  degree  soever  he  were,  having  cure  and  charge  of  souls,  he  being 
in  deadly  sin,  and  hearing  the  confession  of  any  under  his  hand,  in  giving  him 
absolution,  doth  nothing :  as  who  neither  doth  loose  him  from  his  sin,  nor  in  one  of 
correcting  or  exconnuunicating  liim  for  his  demerits,  doth  bind  him  by  his  sen-  Wickliff*! 
tencc,  except  the  prelate  shall  be  free  himself  from  deadly  sin,  as  St.  Peter  was,  '''''■ 

to  whom  our  Lord  gave  power  to  l)ind  and  loose. 

VI.  Item,  The  sjime  William  in  manv  places  said  and  affirmed,  in  the  pre- 
sence of  many  faithful  christian  people,  that  after  the  sacramental  words  uttered 
by  the  priest  having  the  puq)ose  to  consecrate,  there  is  not  made  the  very  body 
of  Christ  in  the  sacrament  of  the  altar. 

VII.  Item,  That  accidents  cannot  be  iu  the  sacrament  of  the  alt^ir  without  a  -Bread; 
subject ;  and  that  there  remaineth  material  bread  there  to  such  as  be  partakers  he  mean 
comnmnicant  with  the  body  of  Christ  in  the  same  sacrament.  j^^'. '" 

VIII.  Item,  That  a  priest  being  in  deadly  sin,  cannot  be  able  by  the  strength  stance. 
of  the  sacramental  words  to  make  the  body  of  Christ,  or  bring  to  perfection  any 
otler  sacrament  of  the  church,  neither  yet  to  minister  it  to  the  members  of  the 
churcli. 


112  ARTICLES    AGAINST    WILLIAM    SWINDERBY. 

Richard  IX.  Item,  That  all  priests  are  of  like  power  in  all  things,  notwithstanding 
^^-  that  some  of  them  in  this  world  are  of  higher  and  greater  honour,  degree,  or 
.    p.      pre-eminence. 

:fV ',  X.  Item,  That  only  contrition  putteth  away  sin,  if  so  be  that  a  man  shall  be 

duly  contrite ;  and  that  all  auricular  and  outward  confession  is  superfluous,  and 
not  requisite  of  necessity  to  salvation. 

XI.  Item,  Inferior  curates  have  not  their  power  of  binding  and  loosing  im- 
mediately from  the  pope  or  bishop,  but  immediately  from  Christ :  and  there- 
fore neither  the  pope  nor  bishop  can  revoke  to  themselves  such  kind  of  power, 
when  they  see  time  and  place  at  their  lust  and  pleasure. 

XII.  Item,  That  the  pope  cannot  grant  such  kind  of  annual  and  yearly  par- 
dons, because  there  shall  not  be  so  many  years  to  the  day  of  judgment,  as  are 
in  the  pope's  bulls  or  pardons  contained  :  whereby  it  followeth  that  the  pardons 
are  not  of  such  like  value  as  they  speak  of,  and  are  praised  to  be. 

XIII.  Item,  It  is  not  in  the  pope's  power  to  grant  to  any  person  penitent, 
forgiveness  of  the  punishment  or  of  the  fault. 

XIV.  Item,  That  person  that  giveth  his  alms  to  any,  who  in  his  judgment  is 
not  in  necessity,  doth  sin  in  so  giving  it. 

XV.  Item,  That  it  stands  not  in  the  power  of  any  prelate,  of  what  religion 
soever  he  be,  privately  to  give  letters  for  the  benefit  of  his  order,  neither  doth 
such  benefit  granted,  profit  them,  to  the  salvation  of  their  soul,  to  whom  they 
be  granted. 

XVI.  Item,  That  the  same  William,  unmindfid  of  his  own  salvation,  hath, 
many  and  oftentimes,  come  into  a  certain  desert  wood,  called  Dervallwood,  of 
your  diocese,  and  there,  in  a  certain  chapel  not  hallowed,  or  rather  in  a  pro- 
fane cottage,  hath,  in  contempt  of  the  keys,  presumed  of  his  own  rashness  to 
celebrate,  nay  rather  to  profanate. 

XVII.  Item,  the  same  William  hath  also  presumed  to  do  such  things  in  a 
certain  profane  chapel,  being  situate  in  the  park  of  Newton,  nigh  to  the  town 
of  Leintwarden,  of  the  same  your  diocese. 

Upon  Friday,  being  the  last  of  the  month  of  June,  in  the  year  above  said, 
about  six  of  the  clock,  in  the  said  parish  chiu"ch  of  Bodenham,  hath  the  said 
William  Swinderby  personally  appeared  before  us.  And  he,  willing  to  satisfy 
the  term  to  him  assigned,  as  before  specified,  hath  read  out  word  by  word  be- 
fore all  the  multitude  of  faithful  christian  people,  many  answers  made  and 
placed  by  the  same  William  (in  a  certain  paper-book  of  the  sheet  folded  into 
four  parts)  to  the  said  articles,  and  the  same  answers  for  sufficient  hath  he  to 
us  exhibited,  avouching  them  to  be  agreeable  to  the  law  of  Christ.  Which  thing 
being  done,  the  same  William  (without  any  more  with  him)  did  depart  from 
our  presence,  because  that  we,  at  the  instance  of  cei-tain  noble  personages,  had 
promised  to  the  same  William  free  access ;  that  is,  to  wit,  on  that  day  for  the 
exhibiting  of  those  answers,  and  also  free  departing  without  prefixing  of  any 
term,  or  without  citation,  or  else  any  other  offence  or  harm  in  body  or  in  goods. 

As  for  the  tenor  of  the  same  answers,  exhibited  unto  them  by  the 
same  William,  as  is  before  specified,  we  have  hereunder  annexed  it 
word  for  word,  and  in  the  same  old  language  used  at  that  time,  when 
it  was  exhibited.     And  it  followeth  in  these  words. 

The  Protestation  of  William  Swinderby,  with  his  Answers  to  the 
Articles  by  the  Promoters  laid  against  him,  to  the  Bishop  of  Here- 
ford, taken  out  of  the  Registers  in  the  same  old  English,  wherein 
he  wrote  it. 

In  the  name  of  God,  amen.  I  William  Swinderby,  priest,  vn worthy,  couent- 
ing  and  puqjosing,  whohe  with  all  my  hart,  to  be  a  true  christian  man,  with 
open  confession  knowledging  mine  owne  defaults  and  vnwise  deedes ;  making 
openHe  this  protestation,  cleping  God  to  record  here  before  our  worshipful  bishop 
John,  through  the  sufterance  of  God  bishop  of  Hereford,  with  witnesse  of  all  this 
people,  that  it  is  not  mine  intent  any  thing  to  say  or  affirme,  to  maintaine  or  to 
defend,  that  is  contrarie  to  holie  writte,  against  the  beliefe  of  holie  church,  cr 
that  shoulde  offend  the  hohe  determination  of  Christe's  church,  or  the  true  sen- 


AKTICl.lb    AGAINST    WILLIAM    sWlNUl.UnV.  118 

tences  of  holie  doctors.     And  if  J  haue  here  before,  through  mine  vnciinn  ng,   nichartt 
been   vnordercd,   or,  by  euill  counsailc,   Ikiu-  drceiiied,   or  imie  tiling  saide,       ''• 
preached,  holden,  niaintaint'd,  or  tauglit,  contrarie  to  the  lawe  of  (iod,  whrdlie  "T^TT 
and  fullie  for  tliat  time  for  now  and  eiar  with  full  will  I  reuoke  it  and  withdraw    jog/ 

it,  as  euerich  christen  man  should :  praying  and  beseeching  eclic  christen  man,  L 

to  whom  this  writing  shall  come,  that  gif  1  ought  erre  (as  (lod  forbid  that  I 
doe),  or  euer  erred  in  anie  point,  contrarie  to  holie  writ,  that  it  be  had  and  holden 
of  them,  as  for  thing  nought  said.  And  all  the  trothes  that  I  haue  said  accord- 
ing with  y"  law  of  God,  that  they  maintainc  them  and  stand  by  (hem,  for  life 
or  death,  to  Ciods  worshij),  as  a  true  cliristen  man  should,  submitting  nie  mceklie 
to  the  correction  of  our  bishop  that  here  is,  or  of  any  other  christen  man,  after 
Christcs  lawes  and  holie  writ ;  in  will  euer  readie  to  be  amended,  and,  with  this 

1)rotestation,  I  say  and  answere  to  these  conclusions  and  articles  that  here  fol- 
owen  after,  the  which  bene  put  to  me  to  aunswere  to. 

The  first  is  this:  That  I  William  of  Swinderby,  pretending  (he  saith)  my 
selfe  a  priest,  was  iudiciallie  coiuiented  of  certaine  articles,  and  conclusions  of 
error,  false,  schimaticke,  and  heresie,  by  me,  in  diuers  places  and  times,  preached 
(hee  saith)  before  multitudes  of  true  christen  men  :  and  the  same  articles  and 
conclusions,  by  need  of  law  reuoked  and  forsworn,  sonic  as  heresies,  and  some 
as  errours  and  tidse :  and  such  I  afKrnied  and  beleeued  them  to  be.  And  that 
none  of  them  from  that  titne  forth  I  should  jireach,  teach,  or  aflirme,  openly  or 
jiriuilie,  ue  that  I  should  make  no  sermon  to  the  peojile,  ne  jireach  but  by  law- 
full  leaue  asked  and  gotten.  And  if  I  woidd  presume  in  doing  or  affirming  the 
contrary,  then  to  the  seueritie  of  the  lawe  I  should  be  buxom,'  as  by  nede  of 
the  lawe  I  swore. 

To  this  I  say,  witnessing  CJod  that  is  in  hcaucn  to  my  wit  and  vndersUmding, 
that  I  neuer  preached,  held,  ne  taught,  tliese  conclusions  and  articles,  the  which 
falsly  of  friers  were  put  \  pon  me,  and  of  lecherous  priestes   to  the  bishop  of 
Lincolne.     For  I  was  ordamed  by  processe  yersaid,^of  their  law,  by  the  bishop 
and  his  commissaries,  so  as  I  graunted  them  to  bring  my  purgation  of  thirteen 
priestes  of  good  fame.     And  so  I  did,  with  a  letter,  and  twelve  scales  thereby,  Wit- 
from  the  mayor  of  Leycester,   and  from  true  burgesses,  and  thirty  men  to  wit-  "yj^r  ",1" 
nesse  with  me,  as  the  duke  of  Lancaster  knew  and  heard,  the  earle  of  Darby,  Swinder- 
and  other  many  great  men  that  were  tliat  time  in  tlie  lowne,  that  I  neuer  said  ^y- 
them,  tiuight  them,  ne  preached  them.    But  when  I  should  haue  made  my  ])ur- 
gation,  there  stooden  forth  fiue  friers  or  moe,  that  some  of  tliem  neuer  saw  me 
before,  ne  heard  me,  and  three  lecherous  priestes  openlie  knowen,  some  lieuiug  Thechas- 
in  their  lecherie  twenty  yeare  (men  sayden)  or  more,  as,  by  their  childer,  was  '•'y"''*''- 
openly  knowen.     Some  of  tliese  they  clepindeu  denounciations,  and  some  weren  be  noted, 
cleped  comprobations,  that  weren  there  falslie  forsworne,  the\'  suing  busilie  and 
crying,  with  manic  an  other  frier,  with  great  instance  to  giue  the  dome  vppon 
nu',  to  bunie  me,  and  boughten  drie  wood  before,  as  men  tolden  in  that  towne  . 
and  these  sleights,  and  swearing,  and  money  giuing,  as  men  saiden,  with  fauor 
of  the  bishop  (by  what  lawe  I  wot  not,  but  sothly  not  by  Gods  law),  they  saiden, 
they  held  me  as  conuicted,  and  juight  not  haue  forth  my  purgation.     So  as  I 
fullie  forsooke  them,  and  neuer  granted  that  1  said  them.     Ouer  this  they  made 
me  sweare  neuer  to  hold  them,  teach  them,  ne  jircach  them,  priuilie  ne  apertlie : 
and  that   I  would  go  to  certaine  churches  to  reuoke  the  conclusions  which  I 
neuer  said,  in  sclaunder  of  my  selfe,  by  great  instance  of  the  friers.     And  so  for 
dred  of  death  and  for  tleshlie  counsell  that  I  had,  I  assented,  and  so  I  ditl.     And 
also  they  maden   me  to  sweare,   that   I  should  not   preach   (by   instance  of  the 
friers)  within  that  diocesse,  withouten  licence  asked  and  granted,  and  neuer 
sithen  I  did.     .Vnd  now  the  same  conclusions  bene  rehearsed  to  me  againe  : 
vhether  by  friers  counsell  I  will  not  deme,  God  wot,  but  in  slaunder  of  me  it  is: 
and  therefore  I  will  answen  now  (with   God's  helpe)  to  the  conchisions,  of  the 
which  the  first  is  this:  That  men   mowen  asken  tliir  debts  by  charitie,  but  in 
no  maner  for  debt  to   imprison  any  man:  and  that  hee  so  emprisoning,  is  iConclu- 
accursed."  *'""• 

So  I  said  not ;  but  thus  I  haue  said,  and  yet  say  with  protestation  put  before :  n"w"dc{it 
I'hat  whoso  jjursxies  his  brother  with  malice,  prisoning  him  cruellie  for  debt  is  to  be 
without  mercie  that  faine  would  ])ay  it  if  he  might:  he  sinneth  against  Christe's  pursued, 
teaching, '  Estotc  misericordcs,  sicut  pater  vester  miscricors  est.' 

(1)  "  Buxom,"  submissive  —Ed.  (2)  "  Yersaid,"  that  \t,  bcforcsaid 

VOL.   III.  ! 


Ill 


PROTESTATION    AND    ANSWER    OF    Wll.LTAM    SWINDERBY 


Hidi/ird 
II. 

A.I). 
1391. 

2.  Conclu- 
sion. 
Answer. 


.■i.  Conclu- 
sion. 


4.'Conclu 
sion. 


5.  Conclu- 
sion. 


The  second  conclusion,  that  false  friers  and  lecherous  priests  putten  vpon 
me  was  this  :  That  if  the  parochiens  know  her  curate  to  hene  a  lechour,  inconti- 
nent, and  an  euill  man,  they  owen  to  withdraw  from  him  tithe ;  and  else  they 
hene  fautours  of  his  siniies. 

Thus  I  said  not,  but  on  this  wise,  and  yet  I  say  with  protestation  put  before : 
That  if  it  he  knowne  openUe  to  the  people,  that  parsons  or  curates  come  to  their 
benefice  by  simonie,  and  linen  in  notorie  fornication,  and  done  not  their  office 
and  her  duties  to  her  parochiens  by  good  ensample  of  holie  life,  in  true  preach- 
ing, lining  and  residence,  wending  awaie  from  his  cure,  occupied  in  secular 
office,  he  owes  nought  to  haue  of  the  parochiens,  tithes,  ne  offi-inges,  ne  hem 
owes  not  to  holde  him  for  their  curate,  ny  hem  owes  not  to  geuen  him  tithes, 
lest  they  bin  guiltie  to  God  of  consent  and  maintaining  of  her  open  sinne. 
'Nemo  militans  deo,  implicat  se  negotiis  secularibus.'  1.  quest.  1.  ca.  Quis- 
qiiis  per  pecuniam,'  and  dist.  8o.  cap.  '  Si  quis.' 

The  third  conclusion  was  this,  that  friers  and  priestes  putten  upon  me  :  That 
tithes  purely  bene  almesses  :  and  in  case  that  curates  bene  euill  men,  they 
mowen  leefidlie  be  giuen  to  other  men,  by  temporall  lords,  and  other  temporal- 
ties  been  done  away  from  men  of  the  church  actuallie  and  openhe  trespassing. 

This  I  said  not  in  these  termes,  but  thus  I  saie  with  protestation  made  before  : 
That  it  were  modefuU  and  leefull  to  secular  lords  by  waie  of  charitie,  and 
power  geuen  to  hem  of  God,  in  default  of  prelates  that  amend  not  by  Gods 
lawe,  cursed  curates  that  openhe  misusen  the  goods  of  holy  church,  that  ben 
poore  mens  goods  and  customablie  against  the  law  of  God :  the  which  poore 
men,  lordes  ben  holden  to  maintaine  and  defend,  to  take  away  and  withdrawe 
from  such  curates,  poore  mens  goods,  the  which  they  wrongfulhe  holden  in 
helpe  of  the  poore,  and  their  owne  wilful  ofteringes,  and  their  bodily  almes 
deeds,  and  geue  them  to  such  that  dulie  serue  God  in  y^  church,  and  beene 
needy  in  vpbearing  of  the  charge  that  prelats  shoulden  doe,  and  done  it  not. 
'  Alter  alterius  onera  portate,  et  sic  adimplebitis  legem  Christi.'  And  as 
anenste  taking  awaie  of  temporalities  I  say  thus  with  protestation  made  before  : 
That  it  is  leefull  to  kings,  princes,  dukes,  and  lordes  of  the  worlde,  to  take  awaie 
fro  popes,  cardinals,  fro  bishops  and  prelates,  possessions  in  the  church,  theii' 
temporalties,  and  their  almes  that  they  haue  giuen  them  ^q^on  condition  they 
shoulden  serue  God  the  better,  vhen  they  verelie  sene  that  their  giuing  and  their 
taking  bene  contrarie  to  the  lawe  of  God,  to  Christes  lining  and  his  apostles : 
and  namelie  in  that,  that  they  taken  vppon  them  (that  shoulden  be  next  fol- 
lowers of  Christ  and  his  apostles  in  poorenesse  and  meeknesse)  to  be  secular 
lords:  against  the  teaching  of  Christ  and  saint  Peter.  Luc.  xxii.  'Reges 
gentium.'  Et  1  Pet.  v.  '  Neque,  dominantes  in  clero.'  And  namelie  when 
such  temporalties  maken  them  the  more  proud,  both  in  heart  and  in  araie, 
then  they  shoulden  bene  else,  more  in  strife  and  debate  against  peace  and 
charitie,  and  in  euill  ensample  to  the  world  more  to  be  occupied  in  worldly  bu- 
sinesse  ;  '  Omnem  solicitudinem  proiicientes  in  eum  ;'  and  drawes  them  from 
the  seruice  of  God,  from  edifying  of  Christes  church,  in  empouei'ishing  and 
making  lesse  the  state  and  the  power  of  kinges,  princes,  dukes,  and  lords  that 
God  hath  set  them  in  ;  in  wrongfull  oppression  of  commons  for  vnmightfulnesse 
of  realmes.  For  Paul  saith  to  men  of  the  church  (vhose  lore,  prelates  shoulden 
soueraignlie  followen),  '  Habentes  victum  et  vestitum,  hiiS  contenti  simus.' 

The  fourth  conclusion  is  this,  that  friers  and  priests  putten  vpon  me  falselie  : 
That  an  euiU  curate  cursing  his  soget  for  withholding  of  tithes,  is  naught  else, 
but  to  take  with  extortion  wickedUe  and  vndulie  money  from  them.^ 

Thus  said  I  not,  but  thus  I  saide,  and  yet  doe  with  protestation  made  before  : 
That  an  euill  curate  cursing  his  parochiens,  vnmightie  to  pay  their  tithing,  with 
vengeance  without  pitie,  for  his  singular  worldlie  winning  against  charitie,  and 
not  for  heed  of  their  soules,  there  he  is  hold  by  his  power  reasonablie  to  helpe  his 
needy  parochiens,  and  dooth  nought  of  the  goods  of  the  church  :  wickedlie  and 
vnduUe  he  withholds  from  them,  that  vhich  is  due  to  them  by  the  law  of  God : 
♦  Dimittite  et  dimittetur  vobis  :  date,  et  dabitur  vobis  :  verum  mihi  vindictam, 
et  ego  retribuam  dicit  Uominus.' 

The  fift  conclusion  is  this,  that  friers  and  priests  falsly  putten  vpon  me  : 
That  no  man  may  curse  any  man,  but  if  he  wote  him  cursed  of  God,  ne  the 
commers  with  him  rennen  not  into  sentence  of  cursing  in  any  maner." 

(1.)  Here  may  you  see  the  falsehood  of  the  papists,  gathering  articles  against  good  men  which 
they  never  said  nor  miant. 


TO    CERTAIN    ARTUl.KS    KALSKLY    GATHKRKD    BY    Tllli    PAPISTS.  115 

Thus  said  I  not,  but  thus  I  said,  and  say  willi  protestation  iJUt  befori; :    fliat  Richard 
no  man  ouj^ht  to  curse  any  man,  but  for  ch;irity  and  witli  eliaritie.     '  Omnia       '^• 
vestra   cum  cbaritato  fiant.'     And  sikerly  I  say,  that  no  wrongful!  cursing  of     .    ,^ 
pope  or  any  prelate  in  earth,  bindes  anenst  Ciod,  but  wlien  they  wrongfully  and     to"n|' 
wittinglie  eursen  men,  for  that  men  will  not  do  their  sing\dar  will,  vnreasonahle      ' 
bidding,  with  higlmes  of  heart  and  cnieltie  (standing  patience  and  charity  in  Answer, 
them  that  they  eursen  wrongfully),  he  is  ble.ssrd  of  Almightie  God,  and  they  Against, 
themselte  bene  cursed.     Math.  5.     '  Beati  eritis  cun>  maledixerint  homines,' 
&'c.     Et  in  I'sahno  :      '  Malcdicent  illi,  et  tu  bcnediccs.'     Et  Augustinus,  xi. 
quest.  3.  chap.  '  Illud.' 

The  sixt  conclusion  is  this,  that  friers  and  priestcs  putten  x^pcn  me  falselic :  ti.  Conr!u- 
T hat  each  priest   may  assoile  him  that  sinnetn,  contrition  hau :  and  notwitli-  "'""• 
standing  forbiddings  of  ye  bishop,  is  hoIden<?  to  preach  to  the  people  the  gospell. 

Thus  I  saide  not,  but  thus  I  said,  and  yet  say  with  protestation  made  before :  Answer. 
That  each  tnie  priest  may  counsell  simiefull  men,  that  shewen  to  liim  her  siimes 
after  the  witte  and  cunning  that  God  had  giucn  him,  to  turne  fro  sinne  to  ver- 
tuous  life.  And  as  touching  preaching  of  the  gospel,  I  say  that  no  bishop  owes 
to  let  a  tnie  priest,  that  God  had  giuen  grace,  wit,  and  cunning  to  doe  that 
office :  for  both  priestes  and  deacons,  that  God  liad  ordained  deacons  and 
priestes,  ben  holden  by  power  giuen  hem  of  God  to  preacli  to  the  people  the 
gospel,  and  namelie  and  somelie,  popes,  bishops,  prelates,  and  curates :  for 
this  is  due  to  the  peo])le  and  parochiens,  for  to  haue  and  askc  of  hem,  and  they 
duely  and  freely  owen  to  done  it,  Matli.  5.  Luke  5.  *  Ite,  ecce  ego  mitto  vos.' 
Et  .Marc.  16.  '  Euntes  in  nundum  \-niuersum.'  Et  Math.  5.  '  Euntcs  autem 
pra'dicate.'  Et  dist.  21.  ca.  'In  nouo  testamento.'  Et  Ysidor.  '  De  summo 
bono.'  11.  Et  Chrysost.  distinct.  31.  ca.  '  Nolite.'  Et  .Vug.  distinct.  31.  ca. 
'  Quisquis.'  Et  Circg.  in  suo  pastorali,  ca.  38.  Et  in  Tollitano.  ca.  '  Ignorantia.' 
Et  lerom.  distinct.  95.  ca,  '  Ecce  Ego.' 

The  7.  conclusion  is  this,  that  friers  and  priestes  falsly  putten  vppon  me :  ?;  Conclu- 
That  a  priest  taking  anie  thing  for  annuell,   through  couenant :  in  that,  lie  is  "'""• 
schismaticke  and  cursed. 

This  said  I,  neuer  in  tliese  termes ;  but  thus  I  said,  and  yet  say  with  pro-  Answer, 
testation  put  before  :  That  no  priestes  owes  to  sell,  by  bargaining  and  couenant, 
lus  ghostUc  Irauaile,  ne  his  masses,  ne  liis  praiers,  ne  God's  worde,  ne  hallow- 
inges,  baptisme,  ne  confirming,  order  giuing,  for  weddinges,  for  shrifte,  for 
housell,  or  for  ennointing :  any  worldl}'  mens  reward  to  aske  or  take  for  these 
or  for  anie  of  these,  or  for  ianic  ghostlie  thing,  he  erres  and  doth  simonie :  ut 
patct  1.  quest.  2.  ca.  '  Nullus;'  et  ex  concilio  Tribureiiti.  capit.  '  Dictum  est;' 
et  Christus,  in  Euangelio:  A'endentes  et  ementes  eiecit  de  templo.   Matli.  22. 

The  viiL  conchison  is  this,  that  friers  and  priestcs  putten  vnto  me  falsly,  s.  Conclu- 
saying  tliat  I  bclceue  sadly  as  my  sell  sayes :  'i'hat  yche  priest  being  in  deadly  s'""- 
sinne,  yef  he  put  him   to  make   Christes  bodie,  rather  he  dos  idolatrie  then 
makes  it. 

Thus  saide  I  not,  but  thus  I  said,  and  yet  say  witli  a  protestation  put  before :  Answer. 
That  vhat  priest  y^  puts  himself  presumptuously  and  vnwortlielie  in  deadlie 
sinne,  wittingly  to  minister  and  to  recciue  that  holie  sacr.;ment,  and  so  recordes 
hit  cursedlie  and  damnably,  he  rcceiucs  his  dome :  '  Qui  manducat  et  bibit 
indigne,  indicium  sibi  manducat  et  bibit."   1.  Corin.  11, 

The  ix.  conclusion   is  thi.s,  that  friers  and  priestcs  falsly  putten  \-ppon  me:  9. Conciu- 
That  no  priestes  entres  into  anie  house  but  euill  for  to  treate  the  wife,  the  *'"'■ 
daughter,  or  the  wenche  :  and  therefore  they  sayden,  that  I  prayed  tlic  people 
that  their  husbands  should  beware,  that  they  siiffer  no  priest  to  enter  into  her 
house. 

And  if  I  had  said  thus,  then  I  liad  praied  against  my  sclfe,  for  I  come  oft  Answer. 
into  mens  houses :  but  thus  I  said,  and  yet  I  doe,  praying  christen  men  to  be- 
ware that  they  nourish  nor  mniutaine  no  lecherous  ])riestes  in  their  sinncs :  for 
there  be  vhere  (a.s  men  wel  knowen)  they  ben  maintained  in  manie  place?, 
continuing  homclie  with  her  women.  And  iclie  man  there  sayne  they  paine 
therefore  a  certaine  to  the  IJ.  almes.  Et  idco  ait  Ysido.  11.  quest.  4.  '  Qui  con- 
sentit  peccantihus  et  defendit  alium  delinquentem,  maledictus  erit  apud  Deum 
et  homines.'  lo.  Con- 

The  X.  conclusion  is  this,  that  friers  and  priestes  putten  uppon  me  falslie  •  elusion. 

(2.)  •<  Holdcn,"  that  is,  bound. 


11  C)  PROTKSTATIOX    AND    ANSWER    OF    WILLIAM    SWINDERBY 

Richard   That  a  childc  is  not  verelie  baptised,  if  the  priest  that  baptiseth,  the  godfather, 
^^-       or  the  godmother,  ben  in  deadlie  sinne. 

~T~T7~      God  wot  in  heauen  they  said  full  false  ;  but  thus  I  said,  and  yet  I  say  :  that 
,','    the  praiers  that  an  euill  priest  praies  (lining  in  lecherie  or  other  deadhe  sinne) 

I_  oner  the  child  when  it  shal  be  halowed,  ben  not  acceptable  to  God  as  ben  the 

Answer,  praiers  of  a  good  pi-iest.  And  the  better  and  clenner  the  priest  is,  the  god- 
father, and  the  godmother,  the  more  graciously  God  will  heare  him,  if  all  they 
ben  not  greatest  nor  most  rich  in  the  world.  Vnde  gg.  xiii.  q.  vii.  cap.  '  In 
grauibus.'  '  Cum  is  qui  displicet  ad  intercedendum  peccator  admittitur,  irati 
animus  procul  dubio  ad  deteriora  prouocatur. ' 

n.  Con-        The  xi.  conclusion  is  this,  that  friers  and  priestes  putten  vpon  me  falsly : 

elusion.  'YX^^i  no  man,  lining  against  the  lawe  of  God  is  a  priest,  how  euer  he  were 
ordained  priest  of  anie  bishop. 

Answer.  Certes  this  is  false,  for  I  said  neuer  thus  in  these  termes :  but  thus  I  said,  and 
thus  I  say  with  a  protestation  put  before :  That  what  euerie  pope,  or  cardinal, 
bishop  or  priest,  or  any  prelate  of  the  church,  comes  to  his  state  or  dignitie  by 
simonie,  and  in  simonie  occupies  that  office,  and  holy  churches  goodes :  I  say 
that  hee  is  a  theefe,  and  that  by  the  dome  of  God,  and  comes  but  to  steale  and 
kill.  loh.  10.  '  Fur  non  venit  nisi  vt  fnretur,  et  mactet,  et  perdat.'  And  further- 
more I  say,  that  what  pope,  cardinall,  bishop,  prelate,  or  priest,  in  manner  of 
lining,  or  teaching,  or  lawes  making,  conti-arie  to  Christes  lining  and  his  lawes, 
or  anie  other  ground,  put  in  ruhng  of  the  church  of  Christ,  but  by  Christ  and 

The  true    his    lawes    is  very  Antichrist,   aduersarie  to  Jesus   Christ   and  his  apostles. 

descnp-     <  j^li^d  fundamentum  nemo  potest  ponere,  praetcr  id  quod  positum  est,  quod 

isAnti-     est  Christus.'    Et  patet  1  quaest.  3  c.  'Si  quis.'    Et  1  quasst.  6  c.    '  Ego  autem.' 

Christ.       '  Qnicunq.' 

But  this  worshipfull  father  bishop  of  Hereford,  that  here  is,  sayes  thns  in  his 
writing :  That  I  William  of  Swinderby,  notwithstanding  the  foresaid  reuocation 
and  abiuration  (not  setting  at  heart,  but  from  euill  to  worse,  he  sales,  peruerted 
so  his  dioces)  he  sales  I  come  running  about  by  diners  places ;  and  by  mine 
owne  follie,  he  sales,  that  I  haue  presumet  to  preach  many  heresies,  errours, 
blasphemies,  schismes,  and  other  diffames,  and  to  holie  canons  and  determina- 
tion of  holy  church  contrarie  and  repugnant,  which  where  and  when,  within 
forth  more  speciallie  it  shall  be  shewed  forth,  that  ye  bee  falsely  enformed,  y'^  I 
haue  presumed  in  diuers  places  in  your  dioces  to  preach  heresies,  errors,  blasphe- 
mies, schismes  and  other  diffames.  And  sire,  all  the  coimtry  knowes  whether  this 
be  sooth  or  not :  for  sire,  I  presume  not,  sithen  it  is  the  office  of  a  priest,  by  the 
lawe  of  Christ,  to  preach  the  gospell ;  ne  nought  I  did  for  presumption  ;  but 
for  the  charge  that  I  haue  of  God  by  priesthood  (if  all  I  be  unworthie),  and 
to  the  worship  of  God,  and  helpe  of  christen  soules,  freely,  without  gathering  of 
her  goods,  for  my  preaching.  If  I  erred  in  this,  I  will  bee  amended.  And  sire, 
touching  your  mandement  that  ye  senden  to  me,  there  was  sent  none.  And  sire, 
I  made  neuer  yet  disobedience  vnto  you,  ne  to  your  ministers :  and  yef  all  I 
had,  me  owes  more  to  obeyche  to  God  then  to  you,  in  that  that  ye  bidden  con- 
trarie to  Christes  bidding.  And  sire,  as  ye  saine  that  I  had  no  mind  of  my  hele, 
it  is  to  lightlie  demet:  for  God  forbid,  but  yef  there  lie  hele  more  then  in  your 
bidding.  For  God  wot  for  hele  I  did  it,  of  mine  and  of  the  people,  and  that 
was  in  my  minde.  But  sire,  it  semes  me  that  ye  charge  not,  by  euidence  of  the 
punishing,  so  greatlie  the  breaking  of  Gods  bests,  as  ye  done  of  your  own.  And 
sire,  if  it  be  your  wil,  in  default  that  the  people  wanted  you  to  teach  hem  (and 
her  curates  did  not),  by  the  desire  of  the  people  that  weren  hungrie  and  thirsty 
after  Gods  word,  ichone  to  beare  vp  others  charge  as  Gods  law  bids,  I  preached : 
not  for  disobedience  to  you ;  but  sire,  in  fulfilling  of  the  obedience  that  Gods 
law  bids  me  doe.  In  excusing  of  my  selfe  to  you  of  that  ye  blame  me  of,  in  open 
shewing  to  holie  church,  with  the  protestation  that  I  first  made,  I  answere  thus 
to  the  articles  that  ye  have  put  to  me. 

L  Article.  The  first  is  this  :  That  I  AVilliam  of  Swinderby,  the  Monday  the  first  of  August, 
the  year  of  our  Lord  1390,  preaching  to  the  people  in  the  church  of  Witney 
of  your  dioces,  helde  and  affirmed  (as  ye  saine)  that  no  prelate  of  the  world, 
of  what  state  or  degree  that  he  be,  hauing  cure  of  soules,  being  in  deadlie  sinne, 
and  hearing  confession  of  his  suget,  does  nought  in  assoiling  him,  ne  he  assoiles 
him  not  of  his  sinne  :  and  also,  in  amending  his  suget  openlie  sinning,  and  him 
for  his  desertes  cursing,  his  sentence  bindes  not,  but  if  that  prelate  be  as  clean 


TO    1-ERTAlN    AKTICLIlS    KALSKl.Y    (.  A  11!  KKKl)    HY    THK    i'AlMSTS.  117 

out  of  dcndlic  sinne  as  was  saint  Pctvr,   to  whoinc  our  Lordo  pane  power  of  Hufmni 
binding  and  vnbindini;.'  '^■ 

I   neuer  tlmuj^ht  this  iie  spako  tliis,   no   heard   it  to  the  time  tliat  I  saw  it      .    .. 
written  in  our  hooke,  and  tliat  will  witnesse  the  lord  of  the  towne  that  has  the     \•l^^ 

same  sermon  written,  and  many  gentils  and  other  that  hcarden  me  that  dale  ;  '■ L 

but  thus  I  said,  and  tluis  I  sale  with  protestation   ])nt  before  :  That  there  is  no  Answer, 
man,   pope   ne  liishoppe,   prelate  ne    eurate,   that  bindes  soothlie,   verilie  and  p,,!,".', 
<;hostly,  hut  in  as  mucli  as  his  binding  or  vnbinding  aeeordes  with  the  keyes  of  liinding 
heauen  tliat  (lod  gaue  to  IVter ;  and,  as  S.  (Jregorie  saies,  '  That  j)ower  ban  they  '"'"  ^" '' 
onlie,  that  hold  together  the  ensample  of  the  apostles  with  becre  teaching.'  '  Illi  ttt,. 
soli  in  hac  came  ])ositi  ligandi  atcpie  soluendi  potestatem  liabent,  sicut  sancti 
apostoli  <pii  corum  exempla  simul  cum  doctrina  tenent.'* 

The  seeonde  article  that  is  put  vpon  nu-,  is   this:   'J'hat  I  should  haue  saide,  2.  Article. 

preached,    and  atlinned,  in    manic  places,  before  many  true  men  of  Christ:  :');'?'' V**'!' 
1  «•  1  11  1  •  1        <•    1  •  1        •         ■  •  II  he  had 

that  after  the  sacramentall  wordes  saide  oi  the  priest,  Iiaumg  uitention  ot  con-  said  it. 

secration,  that  in  the  sacrament  of  Ciods  bodie,  is  not  verie  CJods  bodie. 

This  saide  I  neuer,  CJod  wote,  and  true  men  that  haue  heard  nu'.  Annwer. 

The  third  article  is  this,  that  our  bislioj)  \nit  vpon  me  :    That  I  should  haue  3.  Article, 
said  in  many  places,  and  alKniu^d,  that  accidents  mow  not  be  in  the  sacrament 
of  the  auUar  without  subiect,  and  that  material!  bread  leucs  not  there  with 
Gods  bodie  in  the  same  sacrament. 

This  conclusion  I  haue  not  holden,  ne  taught,  ne  preached,  for  I  haue  not  Answer, 
inedled  me  of  that  matter ;  my  wit  sutKceth  not  thereto,     lint  here  I  tell  my 
beleefe  with  protestation  put  before :  that  the  sacrament  of  the  aidtar  made  by  Bread 
vertue  of  beauenly  words,   that   Christ   himselfe  said  in   the  Cene,   when   bee  ?,'."'•  .. 
made  this  sacrament,   that  it  is  bread  and  Christs  bodie,  so  iis  Christ  himselfe  body  in 
saies  in  the  gospell,  and  S.  Paule  saies,  and  as  doctors  in  the  conuuon  law  haue  'he  sacra- 
determined  to  tills  sentence.    Mat.  26.    Mar.  14.     Luc.  22.    Pa.  1.    Cor.  10.  et  '"'^"' 
11.  De  consecr.  distinct.  2. '  Panis :'  et  De  consecr.  dist.  2. '  Corpus.'  lo.  6. '  Vents 
pan  is.' 

The  fourth  article  is  this,  that  our  bishop  accuseth  mee  of:  That  I  should  4. Article, 
haue  preaclved  about  and  said  :  that  a  priest  being  in  deadlie  sinne,  may  not,  by 
the  strength  of  the  sacramentall  wordes,  make  Gods  bodie,  or  none  other  sacra- 
nu'ut  of  the   church,  either  performe   to  minister  them  to  members  of  the 
same. 

Thus  I  neuer  said,  thought  it,  preached  it,  ne  taught  it ;   for  well  I  wot,  the  Answer, 
wickednesse  of  a  priest  may  appaire  no  verie  sacrament :  but  the  wickednesse  JJ^esrof 
of  the  prieste  appaires  himselfen,  and  all   that  boldnesse  and  example   of  his  the  priest 
sinne  causen  the  people  to  liuen  the  worse  against  Gods  law.     Vnde  Greg,  'mpaireth 
'  Et  si  sacerdos  in  peccatis  fuerit,  totus  populus  ad  peccandum  conuertitur.'         ment. 

The  5.  article  is   this,  that  our  bishop  puts  unto  me  :  That  all  priests  ben  5.  Article. 
of  euen  power  in  al  things,   notwithstanding  that  some  of  this  world  bene  of 
higher  dignitie  or  more  passing  in  highnessc  of  degree. 

Certes  no  man  would  say  thus  as  I  suppose,  no  more  did  I,  ne  neuer  heard  it  Answer, 
that  I  wot  of:  but  this  I  say  with  protestation  made  before,  that  what  priest  ^f priest^. 
Hues  most  holilie,  ne.xt  following  the  law  of  God,  he  is  most  loner  of  God,  and 
most  profitable  to  the  church.  If  men  speaken  of  worldlic  power  and  lord- 
ships and  worships,  with  other  vices  that  raignen  therein,  what  priest  that  desires 
and  has  most  hereof  (in  what  degree  so  he  be),  he  is  most  Antichrist  of  all  the 
priests  that  ben  in  earth.  Vnde  Augustinus,  ad  V^alerium  scribens,  ait:  '  Nihil 
est  in  hac  vita,  et  maxlme  hoc  tempore  facilius  et  leuius,  et  hominibus  accepta- 
bilius,  episcopi,  presbiteri  aut  decani  oHiciis :  sed  si  perfunctori^  aut  adulatorie, 
nihil  apud  Deiim  miserabilius  aut  tristius  et  damnabilius.' 

The  sixt  article   is  this:  That  onlie  contrition  di)es  away  sin,  if  a  man  be  6. Aiiidc. 
duelie  contrite :  and  all  outward  confession  by  word  is  superfluous  and  not 
reqniret  of  need  of  health. 

This  conclusion  said  I  neuer  that  I  know  of.     But  tlius  I  say  with  protesta-  Answer, 
tion  put  before :  That  veray  contrition  of  heart,  that  is  neuer  without  charitie 
and  grace,  dos  away  all  sinnes  before  done  of  that  nian  that  is  verilie  contrite. 
And  all  true  confession  made  by  mouth  outward  to  a  wise  priest,  and  a  good,  Conre*- 
profiteth  much  to  man,  and  is  needfull  and  helping  that  men  shewe  their  life  *'°'^- 

(1)  Note  here  how  the  papists  use  falsely  to  wrestle  Rood  men's  sayings  and  articles. 

(2)  Orcg.  lib.  iv.  Scntcntiariun. 


118 


PROTESTATION    AND    ANSWER    OF    WILLIAM    SWINDERBY 


II. 

A.D. 
1391. 

God  for- 
giveth 
sin. 
Answer. 


Against 
pardon. 


The  pope 
proved  a 
blas- 
phemer. 


10.  Arti- 
cle. 


He  mean 
ethof 

heciging 
friars.  • 


to  such,  trusting  full  to  Gods  mercie,  and  that  he  forgiues  thy  sinne.  Vnde 
August,  de  conse.  distinct.  4.  '  Nemo  tollit  peccata  mundi  nisi  solus  Christus 
qui  est  agnus,  tollens  peccata  mundi.' 

Tlie  7.  article  is  this  :  That  I  should  say  that  lower  curates  haue  not  here 
power  of  binding  and  assoiling,  by  meane  of  pope  and  bishop,  but  of  Christ 
without  money ;  and  therefore  neither  pope  ne  bishop  may  reuoke  such  maner 
power  for  time  and  place  at  her  will. 

Thus  said  I  not,  but  not  for  thy  >  it  seemes  me  thus,  that  no  man  shoidd 
graunt  anie  thing  after  his  owne  will,  ghostlie,  ne  bodilie.  But  euerich  man 
should  be  well  aduiset,  that  hee  graunt  nothing  but  if  it  be  the  will  of  God  that 
he  so  graunt  it.  And  it  is  no  doubt  that  ne  God  grauntes  *  *  *  ^  by  meane 
persons,  as  does  Antichrist  to  torment  Christes  people.  Vnde  et  loh.  19.  'Ait 
Pilatus.  Nescis  qiua  potestatem  habeo  dimittere  te  ? '  Et  Christus.  '  Non 
haberes  potestatem  aduersum  me  vllam,  nisi  esset  tibi  datum  desuper.' 

The  8.  article,  that  our  bishop  puts  me  to,  is  this :  That  I  should  say  that 
the  pope  may  not  graunt  such  maner  indulgence  of  yeares ;  for  there  shall  not 
be  so  manie  yeares  unto  the  daie  of  doome,  as  bene  conteined  in  his  buls,  or  in 
the  popes  indulgences  :  whereof  it  f  illowes  that  indvilgences  bene  not  so  much 
worth  as  they  semen  and  bene  preached. 

This  article  I  saide  not  thus ;  but  I  say  that  the  pope  may  graunt  indulgences 
written  in  his  letter  of  yeares,  all  so  far  forth  that  he  may  graunt  him  in  Gods 
law :  so  far  to  graunt,  and  farther  not :  yeares  may  he  graunt  no  mo  then  God 
hath  set.  If  indulgence  ben  forgiuenesse  of  sinne,  I  wot  well  all  onely  God  for- 
giues sinne.  If  it  bee  releasing  of  paines  in  purgatorie  ordeinet  of  God,  if  God 
haue  bidden  him  release  so  many,  or  ordeined  that  hee  should  release  so  manie,. 
he  may  then  release  hem  :  yet  if  it  be  in  his  owne  disposing  to  release  whom 
him  likes,  and  howe  much,  then  he  may  destroy  purgatorie,  and  let  none  come 
there,  and  release  his  own  pain,  as  charitie  wots.  So  it  seemes  he  may  be  liker 
to  be  saued,  if  himselfe  list.  If  anie  go  to  purgatorie,  then  it  seemes  hee  full 
failes  charitie.  If  buls  ben  the  indulgence  that  men  bringen  from  the  court, 
then  ben  they  not  so  much  worth,  as  they  costen  there ;  for  lightlie  they  might 
bee  lost,  drenched,  or  brent,  or  a  rat  might  eaten  them  :  his  indulgence  then 
were  lost.  Therefore  sire,  haue  me  excuset,  I  know  not  these  termes :  teach  me 
these  termes  by  Gods  law,  and  truely  I  will  learne  hem. 

The  9.  article  is  this  that  I  should  haue  said :  That  it  is  not  in  the  popes 
power  to  graunt  to  any  man  (doing  penance)  remission  from  paine,  ne  from  blame. 

Leude  I  am,  but  this  article  said  I  not  thus  leudly  :  but  thus  I  say,  that  sithen  it 
is  onlie  due  to  God  to  giue  and  to  graunt  plenarie  remission  from  paines  and 
from  blame,  that  what  euer  he  be,  pope  or  other,  that  presumptuousHe  mis- 
takes vpon  him  that  power  that  is  onlie  due  to  God  ;  in  that  (in  as  much  as  in 
him  is)  he  makes  himselfe  Christ,  and  blasphemeth  in  God,  as  Lucifer  did, 
when  he  said  :  '  Ascendam  et  ero  similis  Altissimo.'  Farther  I  say,  if  the  pope 
holde  men  of  amies,  in  mainteining  his  temporalties  and  lordship  to  venge  him 
on  hem  that  gilten  and  ofFenden  him,  and  geues  remission  to  fight  and  to  slay 
hem  that  contrarien  hem,  as  men  sayden  he  did  by  the  bishop  of  Norwich,^ 
not  putting  his  swerd  into  his  sheath,  as  God  commanded  Peter.  'Mitte,'  &c.he 
is  Antichristus,  for  he  dos  contrarie  to  the  commandementes  of  Jesus,  y'^  bade 
Peter  forgiue  to  his  brother  seuentie  sithe  seuen  sithe.  '  Si  peccauerit  in  me 
frater  mens,  quotiens  dimittam  ei?  Septies?'&c.  *Et Christus:  Non  dico  tibi 
septies,  sed  septuagesies  septies.' 

Tlie  10.  article  is  this,  that  our  bishop  puts  to  me:  That  I  should  haue  said: 
that  a  man  geuing  his  almes  to  anie  man  after  his  dome  (not  hauing  need), 
sinnes,  in  so  giuing. 

This  article  soothlie  I  saide  not  in  these  termes ;  but  of  this  matter  I  haue 
spoken,  and  will,  with  protestation  made  before,  on  this  wise  :  that  it  is  medefuU 
to  giue  almes  to  ich  man  that  asketh  it  bodily  or  ghostlie,  but  not  to  giue  to  ich 
shamelesse  begger,  strong  and  mightie  of  bodie  to  get  his  lifeloode  leuefull 
and  Avill  not;  and  in  vhat  degixe  so  he  be,  men  owen  not  to  geue  it  to  such  a 
one,  that  hee  vnreasonablie  asketh,  for  if  he  giue  it  to  him  wittinglie,  he  sinnes 
as  fautor  of  his  idlenessie.  Vnde  Sap.  12.  'Si  bene  feceris,  scito  cui  bene  feceris, 
et  erit  gloria  in  bonis  tuis  multa.' 

(1)  "  Not  for  thy;"  that  is,  notwithstanding.  (2)  Something  here  lack  th  in  the  copy. 

(3)  Of  this  Henry  Spenser,  bisliop  ol  Norwich,  see  vol.  ii.  p.  SOS. 


TO    (i;illAlN     AlirULES    FAI.SKLY    GATllKUKD    IIV     IHK     I'Al'ISTS.  Ill) 

TIic  11.  article  is  this,  that  is  put  to  iiu-,  that  1  sliould  haue  said:    'I'liat  it  is    Uhhard 
not  in  the  power  of  anie  jjrelate  of  what  euer  priuate  religion,  to  {jraunt  letters       ^^ 
of  the  pood  decdes  of  their  order,  ne  snch  benefices  gruuntet  profits  not  to  hele     a    ii 
of  soules  to  hem  that  tiiey  ben  grauntel  to.  13yi 

I  said  nener  thus  in  these  ternies ;  but  thus  I  say  with  protestation  :   That  pre * 

lates  of  priuate  religion  niowen  graunt ;  letters  of  the  good  deedes  of  her  order  ;  Answer, 
but  the  gostly  niede  that  conies  of  good  deedes,  they  mow  not  graunt,  for  that  is 
oiulie  propriet  to  (lod.      And  if  they  blinde  the  people    in   misbeliefe   for  her 
worldlie  winning,  wittinglie  behetting  hem  of  her  owne  graunt  ghostly  medes  Good 
in  heauen  by  her  letters  and  her  scale  (vncertaine,  who  shall  be  danuned),  but  <ltfils  of 
nuike  the  people  bolder  to  siiuie  by  trust  of  her  praicrs  :  hit  is  none  heal  to  the  pru,i'n," 
soules,  but  harnies  to  that  one  and  to  that  other.   '  For  (Jod  shall  yeld  tocchone  thing, 
after  here  werks  :'     '  Ipse  reddet  vnicuicpie  secundum  opera  sua.' 

The  12.  article  is  this,  that  our  bishop  puts  to  me:   That  I  many  times  and  12.  Arii- 
ofl  haue  come  (he  saies)  to  a  desert  wood,  clejjed  Derwoldswode,  of  his  dioces :  '^'•-■• 
and  there,  in  a  cliappell  not  hallwood,  biit  accurset  shepheardeshulke,' by  mine 
owne  foUie,  haue  presumed  to  sing  (but  rather  to  curse)  in  contempt  of  the  keies. 

Hereto  1  say,  that  this  is  f;dsly  put  vj)on  me  of  hem  that  told  you  this,      l-'or  Answer 
it  is  a  cha]>pell  where  a  priest  sings  certaine  dales  in  the  yeare,  with  great  so- 
lenuiitie  :  and  certes  I  neuer  song  therein  seth  I  was  borne  into  this  world. 

The  13.  article  is  this:    That  1  should  also  presume  to  sing  in  an  unhallowet  n.  Ani- 
chai)pell,  that  stonds  in  the  parke  of  Newton,  besides  the  towne  of  Lcyntwardy,  cle. 
of  tins  same  dioces. 

Truely  I  wot  not  vhere  that  place  stonds. 

The  14.  article  is  this:  That  1  should  say  that  no  man  owes  to  sweare  for  anie  14.  Arti- 
thinp,  but  simply  withcuten  oth  toafKrme  or  to  denie ;  and  if  he  sweare  he  sinnes.  •^''^• 

Tliis  article  said  i   not,  that  I  haue  mind  of,  in  this  mancr :  but  oft  I  haue  Answer, 
said  and  yet  will,  that  men  should  not  sweare  by  anie  creature  by  the  law  of 
God,  and  that  no  man  should  sweare  in  idel,  as  welnigh  all  the  i)cople  vseth. 
And  therefore  me  thinkes  it  is  no  neede  to  comfort  the  people  in  swearing;  for  1,.° ^lu*^'^"^ 
froui  the  olde  vnto  the  yong,  and  namely  men  of  holie  church,  breken  his  heste,  creature, 
and  few  bishops  pursuen  hem  therefore. 

The  15.  article  is  this:  That  I  should  haue  taught  to  true  men  of  Christ,  that  iS-  Ani 
on  no  maner  they  should  worship  the  image  of  him  that  was  done  on  the 
crosse,  or  the  image  of  the  blessed  mayd  his  mother,  or  of  other  saints  into 
honour  and  worship  of  the  same  ordcinet  in  y^  mind  of  them.  And  oft  sithes,  y^ 
worshipper  of  such  image  he  has  reprouet,  saying,  andstronglie  affirming,  that 
churchmen  sinnen  and  done  idolatrie. 

Tliis  conclusion  liaue  I  not  said  in  these  tennes.     But  this  I  say  with  protes-  Answer, 
tation,  tliat  God  commaundes  in  his  lawc  in  divers  jjlaces.  (Exod.  20.  Leuit.  19. 
and  2<j.  Deut.  5.  and  7.  Tobiae  1.  Bamc.  6.  2.  ad.  C'orin.  10.  F^say  1').  lere  2.  G. 
8.  and  10.  22.  and  vltimo.  Sapient.  13.  ll.andlo.  Mac.  5.  and  Threnonmi  1.  and 
poBtremo),  that  men  should  not  worshippen  grauen  images  tliat  ben  werkes  of 
mens  hands :    and  also  he   bids  that  men  should  not   make   to  hem   graueji  Im.iRcs 
images  in  likenesse  of  the  things  that  ben  in  heauen,  to  that  end  to  worshippen  l^.'^'^^^^j'* 
hem  :  sethen  neither  God  ne  Christ  by  his  manhood  gaue  neuer  commande-  ped. 
ment  to  make  these  images,  ne  expresse  counsell,  ne  his  apostles  in  all  his  lawe, 
ne  to  worship  such  that  bene  made.     But  well  1  wote,  that  by  mens  owne  rela- 
tion that  haue  misbclieuet  in  hem,  that  many  men  sinnen  in  maiunefrie  wor- 
shipping   stich  dead  images :    notforthy,'     to  the  men   bene    images  good    to 
w  horn  they  haue  bene  but  kalendars,  and  through  the  sight  of  hem  they  knowen 
the  better  and   worship])en  oft  Ciod  and  his  saint.s.     And  to  such  men  they 
done  hanne  that  setten  her  hope  and  trust  in  hem  or  done  any  worsliip  to  hem 
against  Gods  law  and  his  heste.     Vnde  ait  Gregorius,  in  Rcgistro,  libro.  10.,  in 
epistnlaad  Serenum  Kpisconum.   '  Si  quis  imagines  facere  voiuerit,  minime  pro- 
hibe  :  adorare  onmino  prohibe.     Sed  hoc  solicite  fratemitas  tua  :idmoneat,  vt  e.\ 
visione  rei   gesta?,  ardorem  compunctionis  percipiant,   vt  in  adoratione  totius 
Trinitatis  posteniantur.' 

These  conclusions,  points,  and  articles  that  I  havi-,  vndcr  protestation,  in  th  s 
booke  affirmed,  I  will  stand  by  hem,  and  maintaine  hem  (with  the  grace  of 
Almightie  God)  to  the  time  that  the  contrarie  be  prouct  duclie  by  Gods  law  : 

(I)  Dr.  Shopnr  (2)  "  Notforthy,"  that  Is  nolwithst-inding. 


]20  CITATIONS    ACiAINST    WILl.IAM    SWJNDERBY. 

Richard   and  this  protestation    I  make  for  my  faith  and  my  beliefe  as  I  did  at  the  begin- 

^^-       ning  :  Tliat  wliensoeuer  this  worshipful!  or  any  other  christen  man  shewes  me 

veraily  by  Gods  hiwc  tlie  contrarie  of  this,  I  will  holy  forsake  hem,  and  take  me 

-  o  ^^  the  veray  tronth  and  better  understanding  ofwisermen,  readie  to  be  amended 

^•^"^  •    by  the  law  of  Jesu  Christ,  and  be  a  true  christen  man  and  faithfuU  sonne  of  holy 

church  :  and  of  these  I  beseech  you  all  beare  witnesse  Avhere  ye  commen. 

Subsequenter  vero,  quia  fide  dignoiami  relatione  recepimus,  quod  idem  Gu- 
lielmus  Swynderby  latitabit  quo  minus  posset  in  propria  persona  citari  ipsum 
Guliehnum  viis  et  modis  per  Edictum  publicum  ad  instar  albi  prsetoris  in  ecclesia 
nostra  Cathedrali  Herfordensi  ct  parochialibus  ecclesii  de  Kington  Croste,  et 
Witney  nostrse  diocesis ;  ubi  idem  Guilielmus  solebat  commotari  citari  fecirhus, 
prout  et  quemadmodum  in  modo  citatorio  continentur,  cujus  tenor  sequitur  in 
hsec  verba. 

William  Swinderby  keeping  from  the  Bishop  was  cited  as  followeth. 

The  tenor  John,  by  God's  permission  bishop  of  Hereford  :  to  his  dear  sons,  our  dean  of 
of  theri  Leamster,  to  the  parsons  of  Croft,  Almady,  and  Whitney,  and  also  to  the  vicars 
of  Kingston,  Ladersley,  Wiggemore,  and  Monmouth  Clifford,  and  of  St.  John's 
altar  in  our  cathedral  church  of  Hereford,  and  to  the  rest  of  the  deans,  parsons, 
vicars,  chaplains,  parish  priests,  and  to  others,  whosoever  in  any  place  are  ap- 
pointed through  our  city  and  diocese  of  Hereford,  sendeth  gi-eeting,  grace  and 
benediction. 

We  bid  and  command,  charging  you  straitly,  in  the  virtue  of  holy  obedience, 
that  you  cite  or  cause  to  be  cited  peremptorily,  and  imder  the  pain  of  excommu- 
nication, WiUiam  Swinderby,  pretending  himself  to  be  a  priest;  that'he  appear 
before  us,  or  our  commissaries,  the  twentieth  day  of  this  present  month  of  J  uly, 
at  North  Lodebury,  within  our  diocese,  with  the  continuance  of  the  days  follow- 
ing in  other  places  also  to  be  assigned  unto  him  if  it  be  expedient,  till  such 
things  as  have  been,  and  shall  be  laid  against  him,  be  fully  discussed:  to  answer 
more  at  large  to  certain  positions  and  articles,  touching  the  catholic  faith,  and 
the  holy  mother  church's  determination,  that  have  been  exhibited  and  ministered 
imto  the  said  William ;  and  to  see  and  heare  also  many  things  that  have  openly, 
in  judgment  before  us  and  a  great  number  of  faithful  Christians,  by  him  been 
even  in  writing  confessed,  to  be  condemned  as  heretical,  false,  schismatical,  and 
erroneous  ;  and  to  see  and  hear  positions  and  articles  denied  by  the  said  Wil- 
liam, to  be  proved  by  faithful  witnesses,  and  other  lawful  trials  against  the  said 
William  ;  and  to  receive  for  his  false,  heretical,  erroneous,  and  schismatical  doc- 
trine, what  justice  shall  appoint,  or  else  to  show  causes  why  the  premises  should 
not  be  done. 

And  if  the  said  William  lieth  privily,  or  else  cannot  be  so  cited  in  his  proper  per- 
son, we  will  that  in  your  churches,  when  most  people  shall  then  come  together 
to  divine  service,  you  openly,  with  a  loud  voice  and  that  may  be  understood, 
cause  the  said  William  peremptorily  to  be  cited  unto  the  premises,  certifying  the 
same  William,  that  whether  he  shall  appear  the  day  and  place  appointed  or  no, 
we,  notwithstanding,  will  proceed  imto  the  premises  against  the  said  William, 
according  to  the  canonical  decrees  by  form  of  law,  in  the  absence  or  contumacy 
of  the  said  William  notwithstanding.  We  will,  moreover,  if  the  said  AVilliam 
shall  appear  at  the  said  day  and  place  as  is  aforesaid,  before  us,  friendly  hear 
him,  and  honestly  and  favourably,  as  far  as  we  may  with  God's  leave,  deal  with 
him ;  granting  free  license  to  come  and  to  go  for  his  natural  liberty  without  any 
hurt  either  in  body  or  goods.  And  see  that  you  fully  certify  us  of  the  things 
that  you  or  any  of  you  shall  do  about  the  execution  of  this  our  commandment, 
and  that,  by  your  letters  patent,  signed  with  your  seal  authentical ;  giving  also 
faithfully  to  the  said  WilUam,  or  to  his  lawful  proctor,  if  he  require  it,  a  copy  of 
this  our  present  commandment. 

Given  at  our  house  of  Whitborne,  under  our  seal,  the  fifth  day  of  the 
month  of  July,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  1391. 

First  Sitting  against  WilUam  Swinderby. 

On  Thursday  the  twentieth  of  July,  in  the  year  of  the  Lord  aforesaid,  we,  in 
the  parish  church  of  North  Lodebury  aforesaid,  about  six  of  the  clock,  sitting  in 


CITATION'S    AGAINST     WILLIAM     SWINDERBY.  121 

judgment,  after  that  it  was  reported  unto  us,  how  ♦.lie  aforesaid  William  was   Richard 

personally  taken  and  lawfully  cited,  caused  the  same  William  then  and  there  : — 

openly  in  judi,Mnent  to  bi'  culled  out,  to  do,  hear,  and  receive  such  thin<;s,  A.  I). 
whereto  he  was  afore  cited,  and  to  do  otherwise  that  which  justice  should  per-  i;591. 
suadc.  And  the  said  William  appeared  neither  by  himsell",  nor  by  ])roctor;  but 
only  by  a  servant,  whose  name  we  know  not,  he  sent  unto  us  a  certiiin  schedule 
of  paper,  made  like  an  indenture,  to  excuse  him.  After  which  schedule,  seen, 
read,  and  with  ri','ht  deliberation  weighed,  and,  in  any  wise  notwithstanding,  we 
adjudged  the  said  William  (after  he  was  often  called,  and  long,  even  to  the  due 
hour  tarried  for,  and  by  no  means  appearing),  worthily,  for  his  obstinacy  and  for 
liis  stubbornness  we  assigned  unto  him  the  twenty-ninth  day  of  July,  in  the 
church  of  Ponsley,  to  appear  before  us  with  the  aforesaid  safeguard,  to  answer 
more  fully  to  such  articles,  and  otherwise  to  hear,  receive,  and  do,  as  before  is 
noted. 

Second  Sitting  against  William  Swinderby. 

On  Saturday  tlie  twenty-ninth  of  July,  and  in  the  year  of  the  Lord  aforesaid,  T''c  »e- 
wc,  John,  by  God's  permission  the  fore-remembered  bishop,  in  the  church  of  j._  ^, 
Pontesbury,  of  our  diocese,  at  six  of  the  clockor  thereabout,  sitting  in  judgment; 
made  the  said  William  of  Swinderby  to  be  openly  called,  that  (as  was  to  him  ap- 
pointed and  assigned)  he  should  appear  before  us,  to  answer  to  the  aforesaid 
articles  more  fully,  and  to  declare  the  said  articles,  as  the  darkness  of  his  answers 
did  worthily  reipiire.  And  because  the  said  William,  being  called,  and  long,  for 
a  due  time  looked  for,  did  make  no  means  to  appear,  we  pronoiuiced  him  to  be 
obstinate,  and  for  his  obstinateness  (to  overcome  his  malice,  and  of  our  exceed- 
ing favour)  thought  good  to  appoint,  and  did  appoint  the  eighth  of  August, 
then  next  followhig,  at  Cleobm-y  Mortemere  of  the  same  our  diocese,  unto  the 
said  William  for  tlie  same  thing. 

Third  Sitting  against  William  Swinderby. 

On  Tuesday  the  eighth  of  August,  the  year  aforesaid,  I,  John,  by  God's  The  third 
permission  bishop  of  Hereford  aforesaid,  in  the  church  of  Cleobur}'  Mortemere,  ^^^  ''*^'- 
about  six  of  the  clock,  sitting  in  judgment,  caused  the  aforesaid  William  Swin- 
derby to  be  called  many  times  openly,  to  do  and  receive  about  the  premises, 
according  to  the  appointment  of  the  same  day  what  justice  shoidd  advise ; 
which  William  did  not  appear  at  all.  Whereupon,  we,  after  that  the  said  Wil- 
liam was  called,  and  often  proclaimed,  and  long  looked  for,  but  not  appearing 
at  all,  did  judge  him  worthily  (as  of  right  appertained)  obstinate;  and,  for  his 
obsthiateness,  assigned  him  the  sixteenth  day  of  the  same  month  of  August  next 
folhjwing,  in  the  parish  church  of  Whitborne  of  the  same  our  diocese,  to  bring 
forth,  or  to  see  brought  forth,  all  laws,  muniments,  and  other  kinds  of  proofs; 
and  to  see  also  witnesses  brought  forth,  admitted,  and  sworn,  by  whom  and 
which  things  we  intend  to  prove  the  aforesaid  articles,  or  at  leastwise  some  of 
the  same. 

Fourth  Sitting  ajjainst  William  Swinderbv. 

On  Wednesday  the  sixteenth  day  of  the  month  of  August,  the  year  aforesaid.  The 
we  John,  the  bishop,  in  the  parish  church  of  Whitborne  aforesaid  of  our  diocese,  'j'".^'' 
sitting  in  judgment,  caused  the  said  William  Swinderby  oftentimes  to  be  called,    *^  *  "*"  • 
who,  ;i3  is  aforesaid,  ajjpeared  not  at  all ;   whom,  after  that  he  was  so  called,  pro- 
claimed, and  long  looked  for,  and  yet  by  no  means  appearing,  we  pronounced  to 
be  obstinate.  We  received  also,  by  certain  faithful  Christians  and  zeahms  men  for 
the  catholic  faith,  of  our  diocese,  a  certain  process  made  and  had  at  another 
time  against  the  same  William,  before   the  reverend  father  in  God  and  lord, 
lord  John,  by  the  grace  of  God  bishop  of  Lincoln,  confirmed  by  the  hanging  on 
of  the  seal  of  the  same  reverend  father,  the  lord  bi.shop  of  Lincoln.'     And  these 
faithful  Christians,  moreover,  against  the  obstinateness  of  the    said  William 

(i;  Of  this  proMM  mention  is  made  before,  p.  109. 


122 


ADDITIONAL    ARTICLES    AGAINST    WILLIAM    SWINDERUY 


Richard  Swinderby  brought  forth  discreet  men,  Master  William  Leviet,  parson  of  the 

•       parish  church  of  Kyversly,  and  also  Edmund  Waterdon,  parish  chaplain  of  the 

A.  D.     '^'^apel  of  N.,  and  Roger  Newton,  and  Hugh  Sheppert,  laymen  of  our  diocese  or 

1391      Lincoln,  asking  instantly  that  they  might  be  received  for  witnesses,  to  prove 

some  of  the  aforesaid  articles,  whom  against  the  obstinateness  of  the  said  Wil- 

ham  Swinderby,  we  thought  good  to  receive,  and  did  receive,  and  their  oaths 
to  the  holy  gospels  of  God,  being  laid  hands  on  corporally  in  our  hande,  and  did 
dihgently  examine  them  in  proper  person  severally  in  form  of  law,  whose  say- 
ing and  depositions  are  afterwards  brought  in ;  and,  at  the  instance  of  the  same 
faithful  Christians,  we  assigned  the  second  day  of  September  next  following,  to 
the  said  William  Swinderby,  to  say  and  allcdge  against  the  said  process,  v,'it- 
nesses,  and  their  sayings,  in  the  said  church  of  Whitbom ;  decreeing  that  a 
copy  should  be  made  for  him  of  those  things  that  were  brought  forth,  and  of  the 
depositions  of  the  witnesses,  *  •  •  [Here  we  fail  in  our  copy,  till  the  re- 
gister come  to  our  hands  again.] 

by  the  dore,  but  wendith  upon  an  other  halfe,  bee  is  a  night  theefe  and  a 
day  theefe.      And  there  he  telleth  how  he  that  flieth  from   their  flocke,   is 
not  the  sheapherd  but  an  hired  man,  and  it  pertaineth  not  to  him   of  the 
sheepe. 
sion '"^'"       To  the  second  conclusion :  That,  he  saien,  is  eiTour  or  heresie,  that  toucheth 
taking  away  of  the  temporalties  and  of  lordships  of  priests  that  bene  euill 
liuers, 
Declara-        I  sale,  me  seemeth  that  the  conclusion  is  tme,  and  is  this  :  That  it  were 
medefull  and  leeftdl  to  secular  lordes,  by  way  of  charitie,  and  by  power  giuen 
to  them  of  God,   m  default  of  prelates  that  amend  naught  by   Gods  lawe ; 
cursed  curates  that  openlie  misuse  the  goods  of  holy  church,  that  ben  poore 
mens  goods  :  and    customably  ayens  the  law  of  God  (the  which  poore  men, 
lordes  ben  holden  to    maintaine  and  defend),  to  take  awaie  and  to  draw  from 
such  curates,  poore  mens  goods  in  helpe  of  the  poore,  and  their  owne  wilfull 
ofieringes,  and  their  bodilie  almes  deedes  of  worldlie  goods,  and  giue  them  to 
such  as  duelie  semen  God  in  the  church,  and  ben  readie  in  vpbearing  of  the 
Sft"^v      ^^^^""g^  *^^at  prelates  shoulden  doe  and  done  it  not.  And  as  anentes  taking  away 
upon  con-  ^^  temporalties,  I  say  thus  :  That  it  is  leefull  to  kings,  to  princes,  to  dukes,  and 
dition  is    to  lords  of  the  world,  to  take  away  from  popes,  from  cardinals,  from  bishops, 
upoVthe  P'"'^^^tes,  and  possessioners  in  the  church,  their  temporalties,  and  their  almes 
breach  of  that  they  haue  giuen  them  vpon  condition  that  they  shoulden  serue  God  the 
eveiy        better :  when  they  are  verilie  scene  that  their  giuing  and  taking  bene  contrarie 
dition.      J-o  the  law  of  God,  conti-arie  to  Christes  lining  and  his  apostles ;  and  namelie 
in  that    they  taken  vppon  them,  they  that  shoulden   be    next    followers    of 
Christ  and  his  apostles  in    poorenesse   and   meekenesse,   to  be  secular  lords 
against  the  teaching  of  Christ  and  of   S.  Peter.     Tmelie  me  seemeth  that  all 
christen  men,  and  namelie  priestes  shoulden  take  keepe,  that  their  doing  were 
according  with    the  lawe  of  God,   either  the  old  law,  either  the  new.     The 
priestes  of  the  olde  lawe  weren   forbidden  to  haue  lordships   among  their  bre- 
thren :  for  God  said,  that  he  would  be  their  part  and  their  heritage.   And  Christ, 
that  was  the  highest  priest  of  the  Newe  Testament,  forsooke  worldlie  lordship, 
and  was  here  in  fourme  of  a  sei-uaunt,  and  forbad  his  priests  such  lordships,  and 
said,  '  Reges  gentium  dominantur  eorum,  &c.  vos  autem  non  sic'     That  is : 
'  The  kings  of  the  heathen,  beare  dominion  and  rule,  &c. ;  but  you  shall  not 
do  so.'    And  as  S.  Peter  saith,  '  Neque  dominantes  in  clero,'  &c.    'Not  bearing 
rule  and  dominion  of  the  clergie,' &c.     So  it  seemeth  me  :  that  it  is  against 
both  lawes  of  God,  that  they  haue  such  lordshippes,  and  that  their  title  to  such 
lordshippes  is  not  full  good.     And  so    it    seemeth  me,   that  zif  they    bene 
thereto  of  euill  lining,  it  is  no  great  perill  to  take  away  from   them  such  lord- 
ships, but  rather  meedftill,  if  the  taking  awaie  were  in  charitie,  and  not  for  sin- 
gular couetousnesse  ne  wrath.   And  I  suppose  that  if  friers,  that  bene  bounden 
to  their  founders  to  Hue  in  pouertie,>  woidde  breake  their  rule  and  take  world- 
lie  lordships,    might  not  men  lawfullie  take  from  them  such  lordships,   and 
make  them  to  line  in  pouertie  as  their  mle  would  1    And  forsooth  it  seemeth 
me,  that  priestes  oughten  also  well  to  keepe  Christes  nile,  as  friers  owen  to  keepe 

(1)  If  the  pope  may  take  from  the  friars,  to  cause  them  to  keep  St.  Francis  rule,  may  not  the 
emperor  take  from  the  pope,  to  cause  him  keep  Christ's  rule. 


FALSEI.V     UATHKllKl)     DY     THK     TAPISTS.  123 

the  nilc  of  their  founder.     Jeremie  witnessetli,  howo  God  commended  Rachabs   nichari 
chiklreii,  for  they  wuulde  not  breake  their  faders  bidding  in  drinking  of  wine.       ^'• 
And  vet  Jeremie   nrofered  them  wine  to  drinke.     And  so   I  trowe,  that  God     .    rj 
woulde  commend   his  nriestes,  if  they  wouldcn  forsake  worldUe   lord.shi])s,  and     ^^{n^ 

hoUlen  them  apayd  witli    Ufelot,  and  with  clotiiing;  and  basic  them  fa.st  about Ll 1- 

their  heritage  of  heauen.  And  God  saith,  Nuineri.  18.,  ('  In  terra  eorum  nihil 
possidebitis,  nee  tenebitis  partem  inter  eos :  Kgo  pars  et  ha?redita3  vestra  in  medio 
filiorum  Israel,  &c.  Et  Deut.  1 8.  '  Non  liabebitis  sacerdotes  et  Lcuitae  et  omnes  qui 
de  eadem  tribu  estis,  partem  et  hiereditatem  cum  reliquo  Israel,  quia  sacrificia 
Domini  et  oblationes  cius  comedent,  et  nihil  accipient  de  possessionc  fratrum 
suoruni.  Dominus enim  ipse  est  haeredita.s  ipsonim,  sunt  locutus est  illis.'  Kt  Luc.-c 
14.  '  Sic  ergo  onmis  ex  vobis,  qui  non  renunciauerit  omnibus  qu.e  possidet,  non 
potest  mens  esse  discipulus.'  Et  leronymus  in  Epistola.  34.  Et  Bernardus  libro 
20.  ad  Eugenium  Papa.  Et  Hugo  '  De  Sacramentis,'  parte.  2.  libri  Secundi  cap. 
7.  Et  12.  q.  pri.  cap.  'Duo  sunt:'  Et  cap.  'Ciericus.'  Et  Bernardus,  'in  Scrmonc 
de  Apostolis,  super  illud :  '  Ecce  nos  reliquimus  omnia.'  Et  Chrysost.  super 
Math.  Et  *  Vetus  Testamentum :  That  is,  you  shall  haue  no  inheritance  in  their 
land,  nor  haue  np  part  amongest  them  :  I  will  be  your  part  and  inheritance 
amongest  the  children  of  Israel,'  &c.  Deut.  18.  '  The  priests  and  Leuites,  and  all 
that  be  of  the  same  tribe  shall  haue  no  part  nor  inheritance  with  the  rest  of 
Israel:  because  tlay  shall  eat  the  sacrifices  of  the  Lord  and  his  oblations,  and 
they  shall  take  nothing  of  the  possession  of  their  bretliren.  The  Lord  himself 
is  tiieir  possession,  as  he  spake  unto  them.'  And  y«  14.  chapter  of  Luke  •  '  Euen 
so  euerie  one  of  you,  which  forsaketh  not  all  that  lie  possesseth,  cannot  be  mv  dis- 
ciple.' And  Jerome,  in  his  14.  Epistle,  hath  the  like  wordes.  And  Bernard  in 
his  20.  booke  to  Eugenius  the  ])ope.  And  also  Hugo  in  his  booke  '  De  Sacra- 
mentis,' the  second  part  of  his  second  booke,  the  7.  chapter.  And  also  in  the 
12.  q.  first  chap.  '  Duo  sunt,'  and  in  the  chap.  '  Ciericus.'  And  agaiiie,  Bernard 
in  his  booke  '  De  sermone  de  Apostolis,'  vpon  this  place  :  *  Ecce  nos  reliquimus 
onuiia.'  'Behold  we  leaueall,'  &c.  Chrysost.  v|)on  the  gospel  of  S.  Math.  &c. 

The  third  conclusion  toucheth  the  matter  of  preaching  of  priests,  withouten  3.  Concla- 
leaue   of  bishops,    and  is  this :     That   such  true  priestes    may  counsell  sinflill  sion. 
men,  that  shewen   to  them  their  sinnes,  after  the  wit  and  cimning  that  God 
hath  giuen,  to  turne  hem  from  sinne  to  vertuous  life,  and  as  touching  preach- 
ing of  the  gospel. 

I  say  that  no  bishop  oweth  to  let  a  true  priest,  that  God  hath  giffen  grace,  wit,  Declara- 
and  cunning  to  do  that  office :  for  both  priestes  and  deacons,  that  God  hath  or-  ''°"" 
dained  deacons  or  priestes,  bene  holden  by  power  geucn  to  them  of  God,  to 
preach  to  the  people  the  gospel :  and  namelie,  andsouerenlie,  popes,  bishops  prelates 
and  curats ;  for  this  is  due  to  the  people  and  the  parisheners,  to  haue  it  and  aske  it. 
And  hereto  seemeth  me,  that   Christ  said  generallie  to   his  disciples :     '  Ite  et 
praedicate  Euangelium  omni  creaturae,'  '  Goe  and  preach  the  gospel  to  all  crea- 
tures,' as  well  as  he  said,  '  Ite  et  baptizate  omnes  gentes,'  '  Goe  and  baptise  all 
nations,'  that  also  as  well  longeth  preaching  to  priests  without  leaue  of  a  bishop 
as  doth  baptising :  and  then  why  maie  he  not  preach  Gods  worde  withouten  a 
bisliops  leaue  ?  And  sithen  Clirist  bade  his  priests  preach,  who  should  forbidden 
them    preach?    The   apostles    were  forbidden  of  a    bishop    at   Jerusalem,  to  A  priest 
speake  more   of  the  name  of   Jesus,   but   Peter  said:    'Si  iustum  est  in  con- ^'J?''Y'^ 
spectu  Dei,  vos  potius  audire  quam  Dominum,  indicate.'     That  is,  '  Whether  it  preach, 
be    iust  in  the  sight  of  God  to  heare  and  obey  you    before  the   Lord :    be  though 
vour  selues  judges.'     A  bishop  may  not  let  a  priest  of  giuing  l)odilie  ;dmes  in  and'*""'^* 
liis  dioces  :  nuich  more  may  he  not  let  the  doing  of  s])irituall  almcs  in  his  dioces  bishop 
bv  Gods  lawe.     A  priest  may  saie  his  mattines  withouten  the  bishops  leaue :  '?''''^'  *"' 
for   the    pope    that  is  aboue    the    bishop,   hath    charged   priestes  therewith  :  preach 
and   me  thinketh  that  Christes  bidding   should  be   all  so  much  of  charge  as  the  word, 
the  popes.     Math.  10.     '  Eimtes  autem  pra>dicate.      Ite  ecce  ego  mitto  vos.' 
Et.  Mar.  IG.  '  Euntes  in  mundum  ^■niuersem,'  Src.  Luca*  10.    Et  Anachtus  pap. 
dis.  21.  can.  'In  nouo  Test^imento."     Et    lk?da  8uj)er  illud:  '  Messis    quideni 
mvlta.'     Kt  Isidorus  '  De  siunnto  bono.'  ca.  4-1.     Et  Gregorius  in  canone  dis. 
43.     '  Prirconis  quippe    oflicium    su.scipit,'  &c.     Et  Chrj-sostom.   distinct.  43. 
•  Nolite  timere.'      Et.    Aug.  dis.   34.   cap.   '  (Juisquis.'     Et   Gregorius    in  suo 
postorali.  c.  38.  '  Qui  enim  est.'     Chrysost.  hom.  31.  et  in  ToUitano  concilio  : 
'  Ignorantia.'    Et  Aug.  in   Prologo  sermonum   suorum ;  et  leronymus,  dis.   9. 


124 


ADDITIONAL    AUTICLES    AGAINST    WILLIAM    SWINDERBY 


Richard 
II. 

A.D. 
1391. 


■I.f'imclu 
sioii. 


S.Conclu 
sioii. 


Remis- 
sion dou- 
ble. 


6.  CouclU' 

SlOIl. 


'  Ecce  o<^().'  Et  Au$^.  super  id  :  '  Homo  quidain  pcrcgriiius?'  That  is,  'Go  you 
forth  and  ])reacli :' and  again,  'Bchokl  I  send  you,'  &c.  Mar.  IG.  '  Go  you  into  all 
the  world,'  &c.  and  Luk.  10.  cap.  '  In  Nouo  Testamento.'  And  Beda  vpj)on 
this  place.  '  Messis  quidcni  multa:' the  haniest  is  great.  Also  Isidorus,  '  De 
sununo  bono.' cap.  41.  AndGregorius  in  the  canon,  dist.  43.  '  Pragconis  cpiippe 
officiuni suscipit,  &c.  and  Chrysostome  in  his  34  distinction  :  '  Nolite  tiniere  :'  and 
Augustine  in  the  31  distinction,  cap.  '  Quisquis.'  And  Gregorius  in  his  Pastoral 
cap.  38.  '  Qui  enini  est.'  And  Chrysostome  in  his  31.  Homelie.  Et  in  Tolli- 
tano  conciho,  'Ignorantia.'  And  Augustine  in  the  prologue  of  his  Sermons. 
And  Hierome  in  the  95.  distinct.  '  Ecce  ego.'  And  Augustine  \'pon  this 
place  :  '  Homo  quidam  peregrinus.'     '  A  certaine  traueller.' 

The  fourth  conclusion  toucheth  the  sacrament  of  the  aultar,  and  is  this  : 
That  wholly  I  beleeue  that  the  sacrament  of  the  aultar,  made  by  vertue  of 
heauenlie  wordes,  is  bread  and  Christes  bodie,  so  as  Christ  himselfe  saith  in  the 
gospel,  and  as  S.  Paul  saith,  and  as  doctors  in  the  common  law  haue  deter- 
mined :  To  this  sentence  John  G.  '  Moses  hath  not  giuen  you  bread  from 
heauen,  but  my  father  will  giue  you  bread  from  hcauen."  He  is  the  true  bread 
that  came  downe  from  heauen  and  giueth  life  vnto  the  worlde.  My  father 
giueth  vnto  you  bread  in  deed :  the  verie  true  bread  of  God  is  that,  which 
came  downe  from  heauen  and  giueth  life  vnto  the  world.  I  am  the  bread  of  life  : 
The  bread  which  I  will  giue  is  my  flesh.'  And  in  the  canon  of  the  Masse, 
'  Panem  sanctum  vitae  ajternae,'  'The  holie  bread  of  life.'  And  Corinth,  the  10. 
chap,  and  iirst  epistle.  '  The  bread  which  wee  breake,  is  it  not  the  communi- 
cating of  the  bodie  of  the  Lord  ?  Let  a  man  proue  himself,  and  so  eatc  of  that 
bread,'  &c.  And  canon  '  Ue  consecratione'  distinction  2.  vnder  the  authoritie 
of  Hilarius  the  pope  : '  Corpus  Christi  quod  sumitur  de  altari,'  &c.  And  Augus- 
tine in  the  foresaid  distinction  :  '  That  which  is  scene,  is  bread,'  &c.  That  which 
,  faith  requireth,  is  bread,  and  is  the  body  of  Christ.  And  in  ye  foresaid  distinc- 
tion, cap.  '  Omnia  qiiaecunque,'  &c.  By  these  two  sentences  it  is  manifestlic  de- 
clared, that  that  bread  and  this,  be  not  two,  but  one  bread  and  one  flesh.  Note 
the  words  for  that  he  saith,  the  bread  and  flesh ;  and  the  author,  '  De  diuinls 
officiis  ;'  and  also  Augustine  in  his  booke,  '  De  remedijs  penitentia; :'  '  Why  pre- 
parest  thou  thy  teeth,'  &c.  And  Ambrose,  '  De  Sacramentis  :' '  De  consecratione :' 
distinct.  2.  '  Reuera  mirabile  est,'  iSrc.  '  This  meat  which  you  receiue,  and  this 
bread  of  one  which  descended  from  heauen,  doth  minister  the  substance  of 
eternall  life ;  and  whosoeuer  shall  eate  the  same,  shall  not  die  euerlastinglie,  and 
is  the  bodie  of  Clu-ist.'     Note  how  he  saith,  '  and  is  the  bodie  of  Christ.' 

The  5.  article  telleth  of  forgiuenesse  of  sinnes,  and  is  this  :  That  verie  contri- 
tion withouten  charitie  and  grace,  do  away  all  sinnes  before  done  of  that  man, 
that  is  verilie  contrite,  and  all  true  confession  made  by  mouth  outwardly  to  a 
wise  priest  and  a  good,  profiteth  much  to  a  man,  and  it  is  needtiill  and  helping, 
that'  men  shew  their  life  to  such,  trusting  fullie  to  Gods  mercie,  that  be  for- 
giueth  the  sinne. 

And  hereto  I  say,  that  there  bene  two  remissions  of  sinnes  :  one  that  belongetli 
onelie  to  God :  and  that  remission  is  the  clensing  of  tlie  soule  from  sinne :  and 
the  other  remission,  a  certifying  that  one  man  certifieth  anothei-,  that  his 
sinnes  be  forgiuen  of  God,  if  he  be  sory  with  all  his  heart  for  tliem,  and  is  in 
full  will  to  leaue  them  for  euer :  and  tliis  maner  of  forgiuenesse  longeth  to 
priests.  Of  the  first  maner  of  forgiuenesse,  Dauid  saith  :  '  And  I  said  I  will  con- 
fess my  vnrighteousnesse  vnto  the  Lord,  and  thou  forgauest  me  my  misdeede.'  And 
Zacharie  saith :  '  And  thou,  O  child,  shalt  be  called  the  prophet  of  the  highest, 
&c.  to  giue  knowledge  of  saluation  vnto  his  people  for  the  remission  of  their 
sinnes,  by  the  bowels  of  Gods  mercie.'  And  John  Baptist:  '  Behold  the  Lambe 
of  God  that  taketh  away  the  sinnes  of  the  world.'  And  S.  John  the  Euange- 
list  saith  in  his  epistle  :  '  If  we  confesse  our  sinnes,  he  is  faithfidl  and  iust  to 
forgiue  vs  our  sinnes,  and  cleanse  vs  from  all  our  iniquitie.'  And  it  followeth  : 
'  If  anie  man  sinne,  we  haue  an  aduocatewith  the  father,  euen  Jesus  Christ,  and 
liee  it  is  that  is  the  propitiation  for  our  sinnes.'  And  of  the  other  remission  of' 
sinnes  Christ  speaketh  in  the  gospel,  and  saith  :  '  Whose  sinnes  ye  forgiue,  they 
shal  be  forgiuen.'  And  mans  forgiuenes  auaileth  litle,  unless  God  forgiue  om- 
sinnes  through  his  grace. 

The  G.  conclusion  teacheth  indulgences  and  pardons,  that  the  pope  graunt- 
etliin  his  bulles,  and  men  callen  it  an  absolution,  '  A  poena  et  culpa.' 


KALSEI.Y     GATHKRKl)    n^     TMK    I'AriSTS.  1'25 

Of  this  manor  of  spcach  I  cannot  fiiidc  in  the  gospel,  no  in  no  place  of  holie   nuhnrd 
write,  ne  I  haiie  not  read   that  ('lirist  vscd  this  muiuT  of  remission,  ne  none  of      '' 
his  apostles.      Hut  as  me   seemeth,  if  the  j>ope   had   such  a  power,   sithen  the      .    .. 
piines  after  a  man's  deatli  bene   much  {greater  than   anie  bodily  pains  of  the     i»fii 
world :  me  thinketh  he  shoidd  of  eharitie  keep  men  out  of  such  paines,  and  ^J__L 
then  men  neede  not  totinde  so  manie  vicious  priests  after  their  life,  to  bring  their  Kither 
souies   out   of  puri,'atorie.      An   other  thing   me  thinketh,  that  sithe  the  popes  ""^■''^  '" 
power  ne  mtiy  not  keep  vs  in  this  world  fro  bodily  paines  as  from  cold,  from  {'ory'.or 
hunger,  tVom  dread,  from  sorrow,  and  other  such  ])aines,  how  should  his  power  else  tlie 
helpe  vs   from   spiritual!    paines,   when   we   bene   dead.'     But   for  that  no  man  J."^^!"* 
commeth  after  his  deatli  to  tell  vs  the  sooth  in  what  ])ain  they  bene,  men  mow  tell  Thc 
thcreof  wliat  hem  lust.     S.  John  saith  in  Ids  Apoealyps,  that  he  saw  vnder  the  vv^'* 
aultar,  the   souies  of  them  which  were  slayne  for  the  word  of  God,  and  for  the  p",,  J^^.^.., 
testimonie  which  they  had.     '  And  they   did  crie  with  a  loud  voice,  saying :  none 

'  Howe  lontr  Lord,  holie  and  true,  doest  not  thou  reuen<rc  our  bloud  of  them  wliich  ,'^"'"! 

o  '  '^  o  _  i)oQily 

dwell  on  the  earth ."     And  white   stoles  were  giuen  to  eucrie  of  them  to  rest  pain. 

a  while,   till   the  number    of   their  fellow  seniantes  and  brethren  should  be  l^rn". 

fidfilled,  which  also  remained  to  be  slaine  as  they  were,'&c.     Here  seemeth  it,  ^^umtal- 

that  these  soides  were  not  assoiled  '  a  pu?na,'  that  is,  from  paine  :  for  their  desire  ritual. 

is  not  fulfillcn.     And  thev  were  bidden  abide  a  while,  and  that  is  a  i)ain.     And  ""^ ''""' 

•i"    1  <•  •  •     •     1        1  !•  •  •         1        1       ""  power 

if  martyrs  were  not  assoiled  from  panic,  it  is  hard  tor  anie  man  to  saie,  that  he  grounded 

assoileth  other  men  '  a  poena.'     Also  good  mens  souies  haue  not  but  spirituall  ^yon 
blisse,  and  they  want  bodilie  blisse,  untill  their  resurrection  in  the  day  of  dome.  to'^bMng'" 
And  after  they  desiren  to   haue  that  blisse,  and  abiden  it,  and  tiiat  is  paine  to  from 
them.     And  I  cannot  see  that  the  pope  hath  power  to  bring  him  from  this  pain.  P»'n°^ 
But  if  anie  man  can  shew  me,  that  he  hath  such  a  power  graunted  in  the  troth  tory. 
of  Holy  Write,  I  will  gladlio  leefen  it. 

The  7.  point  speaketh  of  the  pope  and  is  this:  Sithe  it  is  onlie  due  to  God,  7.Conclu- 
as  I  haue  said  before,  to  gene  and  to  graunt  plener  remission,  from  paine,  and  i;""- 
from  blame,  that  whatsoeuer  he  be,  pope  or  oilier,  that  presumptuouslie  mistaketh  niakcth 
v])pon  him  the  power  that  onelie  is  due  to  God,   in  that,  in  as  much  as  in  liiiu  is,  himself 
he  maketh  himselfe  euen  with  Christ,  and  blasphemeth  God,  as  Lucifer  did,  chVi'sr" ' 
when  he  said,  '  Ascendam,  and  ero  similis  altissimo.'  That  is, '  1  will  ascend,  and 
be  like  the  highest,'  &c. 

For  that  I  say,  if  the  pope  holde  men  of  armes  in  maintaining  of  his  tempo- 
ral! lordship,  to  venge  him  on  them  that  gilten  and  offenden  him,  and  geueth 
remission  to  fight  and  to  slaie  them,  that  contraricn  him,  as  men  sayden  heedid 
by  the  bishop  of  Norwich,  not  putting  his  sworde  in  his  sheath,  as  God  com-  The 
niaunded  to  Peter,  he  is  Antichrist.     For  hee  doth  the  contrarie  of  the  com-  ^!'|!^P,J^ 
mandement  of  Jesus  Christ,  that  bade  Peter  forgiuen  to    his  brother  70.  sithe  Henry 
7.  sithe.     Well  I  find  in  the  gospel,    that  vhen  Christ  sent  his  disciples  to  Sa-  S'pcnser, 
marie,  the  Samaritanes  would  not  receiuen  them.      And  some  of  them  bidden  wamo/ 
Christ,  that  hec  should  make  a  fire  come  downe  from  heaucn,  to  destroy  the  set  up  of 
citie.     And  hee  blamed  them,  and  said  :  '  Nescitis  cuius  spiritus  estis  :  filius  ho-  IggiP"''" 
minis  non  venit  animas  perdere,  se'dsaluare.'     That  is,  '  Ye  know  not  of  what  i,is  ene- 
spirite  ye  are:  the  sonne  of  man  is  not  come  downe  to  destroy,  but  to  sauc  the  mics. 
hues  and  souies  of  men,'&c.     If  Christ  then  come  to  saue  men,  and  not  to  slea  conwwy*' 
them,  who  that  doth  the  rcuors  liereof,  is  against  Christ,  and  then  he  is  Anti-  to  Christ. 
Christ.     Christ  bad  Peter  put  his  sword  in  liis  sheath  and  said  :   '  Omncs  qui 
gladium  acceperint,  gladio  peribunt.'      That  is :   '  All  which  take  the  sword, 
shall  perish  with  the  sworde.'    And  I  cannot  finde  that   Peter  drewe  out  his  Proved 
sworde  after  that  time,  but  suffered  as  Christ  said :   '  Cum  senueris,  alius  cinget  An^t'j^ 
te,  et  ducet  quo  tu  non  vis.'     That  is,  'When  thou  shalt  waxe  old,  another  shall 
gird  thee  and  lead  thee  whether  thou  wilt  not."  And  tlierefore  said  Peter, '  Christ 
sufFered  for  vs,   leauing  vs  example  that  we  should  follow  his  steppes.      And 
Paule  saitli  :    '  Not  defending  your  selues,  but  geue  place  to  anger:  leaue  re- 
uenging  to  mee,  and  I  shall  reward  them,'  &c.     And  therefore  it  seenietli  to 
mee,  that  it  is  as  much  against  Christes  luue,  that  his  vicar  should  bee  a  fighter, 
sithen  that  hee  mote  be  a  shcpheard,  that  should  go  before  his  sheepe,  and  let 
them  come  after  him,  and  not  with  swordes  to  driue  them  away  from  him.    For 

(1)  If  the  mart>T«  bciivj  dead,  \yt  not  assuri<!  fioMi  ^rief  rf  tarrjlng,  much  less  can  they  3«*oil 
other*  from  paini  of  purBatory. 


126 


THE    SENTENCE    AGAINST    WILLIAM    SV  INDERBY. 


FJchard 
II. 

A.D. 

1391. 

Two 

swords 
never 
given  to 
the  pope. 


Two  sorts 
of  an- 
noin- 
tinges  in 
Scrip- 
ture. 


A  defec- 
tion in 
Anti- 
christ's 
time. 


as  Cmist  saith,  'A  good  shepheard  shall  put  his  life  fot  his  sheepe.'  Andzif  all 
that  Christ  had,  were  two  swordes,  when  hee  was  taken  of  the  J  ewes,  he  said 
himselfe,  it  was,  for  tliat  the  Scriptures  moten  zit  be  fulfilled  :  '  Quoniam  cimi 
iniquis  deputatus  est,'  that  is  :  '  Hee  was  reputed  among  the  wicked  :'  and  not  to 
figure  two  swordes,  that  men  sayen  the  pope  hath,  to  gouerne  witli  the  church. 
And  when  I  see  such  doings  of  the  pope,  and  manj'  other  that  accorden  not 
with  Christes  lore,  ne  his  lining :  and  when  I  reade  diuers  Scriptures  of  holie 
writte,  I  am  foide  astonied  whether  they  shoulden  be  understanded  of  him,  or 
of  anie  other.  And  I  pray  you  for  Gods  loue  tell  me  the  sooth.  Christ  saith : 
'  Many  shall  come  in  my  name,  saying,  I  am  Christ,  and  shall  seduce  manie,'  &c. 
Christ  (I  wot  well)  is  as  nmcli  to  say,  as  he  that  is  anointed;  and  two  anoint- 
ings there  weren  in  the  lawe,  one  of  kings,  another  of  priests.  And  Christ  was 
both  king  and  priest,  and  so  the  pope  saith  that  he  is.  And  if  all  that  haue 
bene  emperours  of  Rome,  and  other  heathen  kinges,  haue  bene  Antichristes, 
they  come  not  in  Christes  name.  But  who  so  commeth  in  Christe's  name,  and 
faineth  him  Christe's  frend,  and  he  be  priuilie  his  enemie,  he  may  lightlie  be- 
guile manie.  Saint  Paule  saith  :  '  Before  there  commeth  a  defection  first,  and 
the  Sonne  of  perdition  shall  be  reuealed,  which  is  the  aduersarie,  and  is  extolled 
aboue  all  that  is  named  God,  or  which  is  worshipped :  so  that  he  shall  sit  in 
the  temple  of  God,  shewing  him  selfe  as  God.'  And  it  foUoweth  in  the  same 
place :  '  And  now  ye  know  what  holdeth  till  he  be  reuealed  in  his  time,  for 
he  worketh  alreadie  the  mysterie  of  iniquitie.  Onhe  he  that  holdeth,  let 
him  holde  till  he  come  abroad,  and  then  that  wicked  one  shall  be  reuealed, 
whom  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  slay  with  the  spirite  of  his  mouth,' &:c.  And  Saint 
John  saith  in  the  Apocalyps :  '  I  sawe  another  beast  ascending  out  of  the 
earth,  and  two  homes  like  to  the  lambe.  He  spake  like  the  Dragon,  and  had 
the  power  of  the  first  beast.'  Manie  such  authorities  astonieth  me  oft  sithes, 
and  therefore  I  pray  you,  for  the  loue  of  God,  to  tel  me  that  they  meane. 


Sentence 
given 
against 
him. 


The  Sentence  against  William  Swinderby. 

Tlie  which  schedule'  aforementioned,  with  the  contents  thereof,  diligently 
of  us  perused,  Ave,  considering  that  diseases  which  be  not  easily  cured  with 
gentle  remedy  must  have  harder  plaisters ;  considering,  moreover,  these  his 
articles,  with  his  answers  to  the  same,  and  to  other  articles  also  lastly  against 
him  produced ;  first  mature  deliberation  had  before  upon  the  whole  matter  with  tlie 
aforesaid  masters  and  doctors,  as  well  secular  as  regular,  to  a  great  number, 
observing  in  the  same  all  things  to  be  observed  in  this  behalf,  have  given 
sentence  against  the  said  William  in  form  as  foUoweth. 

The  name  of  Christ  being  invocated,  we  John,  by  the  permission  of  God, 
bisliop  of  Hereford,  sitting  in  tribunal  seat,  having  God  before  our  eyes, 
weighing  and  considering  the  articles  by  the  aforesaid  faithful  Christians  put  up 
against  the  said  Swinderby,  pretending  himself  to  be  priest,  with  his  answers 
upon  the  same  '  Actis  et  Actitatis '  before  us,  in  the  cause  of  heretical 
perversity,  with  the  mature  deliberation  had  before,  in  this  behalf,  with  masters 
and  doctors  of  divinity,  and  also  of  other  faculties,  with  their  counsel  and 
consent,  do  pronounce,  decree,  and  declare  the  said  William  to  have  been, 
and  to  be,  a  heretic,  schismatic,  and  a  false  informer  of  the  people,  and  such 
as  is  to  be  avoided  of  faithful  Cliristians.  Wherefore  we  admonish,  under  the 
pain  of  the  law,  all  and  singular  Christains,  of  what  sex,  state,  condition,  or  pre- 
eminence soever,  that  neither  they,  nor  any  of  them,  within  our  diocese,  or  any 
other,  do  believe,  receive,  defend,  or  favour  the  said  WiUiam,  till  he  shall  de- 
serve fully  to  be  reconciled  to  the  bosom  again  of  holy  church. 


The  Appeal  of  William  Swinderby  from  this  Sentence  of  the 
Bishop  prefixed,  vnto  the  King  and  his  Council. 

'  In  nomine  patris,  et  filij,  et  spiritus  sancti,'  Amen.     I  William  Swinderby, 

priest,  knowledge  openlie  to  all  men,  that  I  was  before  the  bishop  of  Hereford 

the  third  day  of  October,  and  before  manie  other  good  clerks,to  answere  to 

certaine  conclusions  of  the  faith  that  I  was  accused  of.    And  mine  answer  was 

(1)  Mention  was  made  of  this  E.chcdule  before,  in  the  first  day's  act,  p.  120. 


Ills    APPEAL    FROM    TIIF.    BISHOP    TO    THE    KIN'G,  127 

tills :  That  if  the  bishop  or  any  man  couthe  shewe  me  by  Gods  law,  that  my  RUhari 
conclusions  or  mine  unswi-res  were  error  or  hercsie,  I  would  be  amended,  and       ^^ 
openlie  rcwoke  tliem  before  all  the  people.   •  •  •  '  knowes  in  any  of  my  con-      .    .. 
elusions,  but  sayden  singly  with  word,   that  there  were  errours  in  them,  and     logi 

bidden  me  subioct  me  to  tlie  bishop,  and  put  me  into  his  grace  and  reuoke  mine  !_ 

crrour,  and  shewed  me  nouglit  by  Gods  law  no  nxson,  ne  proued  which  they 
weren.  And  for  I  would  not  knowledge  me  guiltie,  so  as  I  kncwe  no  crrour  in 
them,  of  which  I  should  be  guiltie,  therefore  the  bishop  sate  in  dome  in  mine 
absence,  and  deemed  nie  an  hereticke,  a  schismaticke,  and  a  teacher  of  errours, 
and  denounced  me  accursed,  that  I  come  not  to  correction  of  the  church.  And 
therefore,  for  this  vnrightfull  iudgemcnt,  I  appeale  to  the  kings  justices  for 
manie  other  causes. 

One  cause  is,  for  the  kings  court,  in  such  matter,  is  aboue  the  bishops  court :  The 
for  after  that  the  bishop  has  accursed,  hce  may  ne  fcare  by  his  law,  but  then  •'■"R* 
mote  he  sech  succour  of  the  kings  law,  and  by  a  writ  of  '  significauit,'   put  a  above  the 
man  in  prison.  bishops 

The  second  cause  is,  for  in  cause  of  heresie  there  liggeth  iudgement  of  death,  '^°"'^- 
and  that  dome  may  not  be  giuen  without  the  kings  justices.  For  tlie  bishop 
will  say:  '  Nobis  non  licet  interficcre  quenquam,' that  is,  '  It  is  not  lawfuU  for 
vs  to  kill  any  man  :  as  they  sayden  to  Pilate,  vhcn  Christ  should  be  deemed. 
And  for  I  think  that  no  justice  will  giue  sodainly  and  vntnie  dome  as  the  bishop 
did,  and  therefore  openlie  I  appeale  to  hem  and  send  my  conclusions  to  the 
knightes  of  the  parliament,  to  be  shewed  to  the  lordes,  and  to  be  taken  to  the 
justices,  to  be  well  auiset  or  that  they  geuen  dome. 

The  third  cause  is,  for  it  was  a  false  dome :  for  no  man  is  an  hereticke,  but  WTiat  is 
he  that  maisterfuUie  defends  his  errour  or  heresie,  and  stiflie  maintaines  it.  ». '>'^'^«-- 
And  mine  answcre  has  ben  alwaie  conditionall,  as  the  people  openlie  knowes :  for 
euer  I  say,  and  yet  say,  and  alway  will ;  that  if  they  cannen  shew  me  by  Gods 
law  that  i  haue  crret,  I  will  gladlie  ben  amcndet,  and  reuoke  mine  errours ;  and 
so  I  am  no  hereticke,  ne  ncucr  more  in  Gods  grace  will  ben  in  no  wise. 

The  fourth  cause  is ;  for  the  bishops  lawe,  that  they  deme  men  by,  is  full  of  The 
errours  and  heresies,  contrarie  to  the  tnicth  of  Christes  law  of  the  gospell.  bishop's 

For  there  as  Christes  law  biddes  vs  loue  our  enemies,  the  popes  law  geues  vs  condem 
leaue  to  hate  them  and  to  sley  them,  and  grauntcs  men  pardon  to  werren  againe  nation 
heathen  men,  and  sley  hem.     And  there  as  Christes  law  teache  vs  to  be  mer-  [^"psfej 
cifull,  the  bishops  lawe  teaches  to  be  wTctchfull.     For  death  is  the  greatest  and 
wretch  that  men  mowen  done  on  him  that  guiltie  is.  errors. 

There  as  Christes  law  teaches  vs,  to  blcssen  him  that  diseazen  vs,  and  to  pray 
for  him,  the  popes  law  teacheth  vs  to  curse  them,  and  in  their  great  sentence 
that  they  vscn,  they  presume  to  damme  hem  to  hell  that  they  cursen.  And  this 
is  a  foule  heresie  of  blaspheme  :  there  as  Christes  lawe  bids  vs  be  patient,  the 
popes  law  iustifics  two  swords,  that  wherewith  he  smiteth  the  shecpe  of  the 
church.  And  he  has  made  lordes  and  kinges  to  sweare  to  defend  him  and  his 
church. 

There  as  Christe's  law  forbiddeth  vs  lecherie,  the  pope's  law  iustifies  the 
abhominable  whorcdome  of  common  women,  and  the  bishops,  in  some  place, 
haue  a  great  tribute  or  rent  of  whorcdome. 

There  as  Christe's  laws  bids  to  minister  spirituall  thinges  freelic  to  the  people,  Contra- 
the  pope  with  his  law  selles  for  money,  after  the  quantitie  of  the  gift,  as  par-  [J^g^^**^' 
dons,  orders,  blessing,  and  sacramentes,  and  praiers,  and  benefices,  and  preach-  the  pope 
ing  to  the  people  ;  as  it  is  knowen  amongest  them.  »"<!. 

There  as  Christes  lawe  teaches  peace,  the  pope,  with  his  law,  assoiles  men      ^'''' 
for  money  to  gader  the  people,  priests,  and  other,  to  fight  for  his  cause. 

There  as  Cnristes  law  forbias  swearing,  the  popes  law  iustifieth  swearing, 
and  compels  men  thereto. 

Whereas  Christe's  law  teacheth  his  pricstcs  to  be  poore,  the  pope,  with  his 
lawe,  iustifics  and  maintaines  pricstes  to  be  lordes. 

And  yet  the  fift  cause  is,  for  the  popes  lawe  that  bishops  demcn  men  by,  is 
the  same  vnrightfitll  lawe  that  Christ  was  demet  by  of  the  bishops,  with  the 
Scribes  and  with  the  Pharisies.  For  right  as  at  that  time  they  gaucn  more 
credcns  to  the  two  false  witnesses  that  witnessed  against  Christ,  then  they  deden 
to  al  the  people  that  witnesseden  to  his  true  preaching  and  his  miracles :  so  the 

(1)  Some  thing  there  lackcth  in  the  copy. 


128  THE    LETTER    OF    SWINDERBY     TO    THE    PARI.IAAIEKT. 

Richard    bishops  of  the  popes  law  geuen  more  leuen  by  their  lawe  to  two  hcretickes  and 

-''•       apostates,  or  two  comcn  wymen,  that  wouldcii  witnesseden  agaynes  a  man  in 

the  cause  of  heresie,  than   to  thousandcs  ot  peoj^le   that  were   true  and   good. 

T^'cn '    ^"'l  ^"^  ^^^^  1'°?*^  ^*  *^"^  Antichrist,  and  his  law  contrary  to  Christ  his  law,  fully 

I  forsake  this  law,  and  so  I  reed  all  christen  men.     For  thus,  by  an  other  point 

The  cause  of  this  lawe,  they  mighten  conquere  much  of  this  world:  for  whan  they  can 

SwL-       Kv  tl"s  ^'^^^^  present  a  man  an  hereticke,  his  goodes  shulen  be  forfet  from  him 

derby        and  from  his  heires,  and  so  might  they  lightlie  haue  two  or  three  false  witnesses 

forsook     ^Q  record  an  heresie  against  vhat  true  man,  so  hem  liked.    Herefore  me  thinkes, 

t  e  pope.  ^^^^^  whatsoeuer  that  I  am  a  christen  man  I  may  lawfull,  appeale  from  a  false 

dome  of  the  lawe,  to  he  righteously  demct  by  the  trouth  of  Gods  law.     And  if 

this  appeale  will  not  serue,  I  appeale  openlie  to  my  Lord  Jesu  Christ  that  shall 

deme  all  the  world,  for  hee  I  wot  well,  will  not  spare  for  no  man  to  deeme  a 

trouth.     And  therefore  I  pray  God  Almightie  with  Dauid  in  the  Sauter  Booke, 

'  Deus  iudicimn  tuum  regi  da,  et  iustitiam  tuam  filio  regis  :  ludicai-e  populum 

tuum  in  iustitia  etpauperes  tnos  in  iudicio  :'  that  is,  '  O  God  giue  thy  iudge- 

ment  to  the  king,  and  thy  iustice  to  the  kings  sonne ;  to  iudge  thy  people  in 

iustice,  and  thy  poore  ones  in  iudgement,'  &c. 

A  fi-uitful  Letter  sent  to  the  Nobles  and  Burgesses  of  the  Parliament, 
by  Master  William  Swinderby. 

lesu,  that  art  both  God  and  man,  helpe  thy  people  that  louen  thy  law,  and 
make  knowen  through  thy  grace  thy  teaching  to  all  christen  men  !  Deare  sirs,  so 
as  we  seen,  by  manie  tokens,  that  this  world  drawes  to  an  end,  and  all  that  euer 
haue  bene  forth-brought  of  Adam's  kind  into  this  world,  shulen  come  togeder  at 
domesday,  rich  and  poore,  ichone  to  gene  accompt  and  receiue  after  his  deeds 
ioy  or  paynen  for  euermore  :  therefore  make  we  our  werks  good,  ve  while  that 
God  of  mercy  abides,  and  be.  ye  stable  and  true  to  God,  and  ye  shulen  see  his 
helpe  about  you.  "  Constantes  estote  et  videbitis  auxilium  Domini  super  vos." 
This  land  is  full  of  ghostly  cowards,  in  ghostly  battaile  fewe  dare  stand.  liut 
Christ,  the  comforter  of  all  that  falleth  (to  that  his  heart  brast  for  our  lone), 
against  that  fiend,  the  doughtie  duke  comforteth  vs  thus :  "  Estote  fortes  in  bello, " 
&c.  "Be  ye  strong  in  battaile,"  he  sales,  "and  fight  ye  with  the  old  adder." 
"  State  in  fide,  viriliter  agite,"  &c.  "Wake  ye  and  pray  yee,  stond  ye  in  be- 
leeuBj.  do  ye  manly  and  be  ye  comfortet,  and  let  all  your  things  be  done  with 
charitie :"  For  Saint  Paul  bids  thus  in  his  Epistle,  that  saw  the  priuities  of  God 
in  heauen  :  "  Euigilate  iusti,"  &c.  "  Awake  ye  that  been  righteous  men,  be  ye 
stable  and  vnmoueable  :  Awake  ye  quickly  and  sleepe  nought,  and  stond  now 
strongly  for  God's  law."  For  Saint  lohn  in  the  Apocalips  sayes :  "  Blessed  be  he 
that  awakes  :  for  nought  to  sleepers  but  to  wakers  God  has  behite  the  crown  of 
life."  "  For  the  houre  is  now,"  as  Paul  saith  to  vs,  "  from  sleepe  for  to  arise, 
for  hee  that  earlie  awakes  to  me,  he  shall  finde  me,  saith  Christ  himseluen." 
This  waking  ghostly,  is  good  liuing  out  of  sinne :  this  sleep  betokens  that  which 
cowardeth  a  man's  heart  from  ghostly  comfort,  and  to  stand  in  the  same, 
thorough  a  deceaueable  sleepe  is  this  that  lets  a  man  of  the  blisse  of  heauen. 
The  fiend  makes  men  bold  in  sinne  and  ferd  to  doe  worship  to  God.  Death  is  a 
likening  to  a  theefe  that  priuily  steales  vpon  a  man  that  now  is  riche,  and  full 
of  wele  ;  anon  hee  makes  him  a  needle  wreche.  Therefore,  said  God,  by  Saint 
lohn,  in  the  Apocalips,  in  this  wise :  "  Be  thou  waking,  for  if  thou  wake  nought, 
I  shall  come  to  thee  as  a  theefe,  and  thou  shalt  not  wit  what  houre."  "And  if 
the  husbandman"  sales  Christ,  "  wist  what  houre  the  theefe  shoulde  come,  hee 
woulde  wake  andsnffer  him  not  to  vndermine  his  house."  Saint  Peter  therefore 
warneth  and  saith,  "  Wake  and  be  yee  ware,  suffer  yee  no  man,"  he  sayes, 
" as  a  theefe,  but  willinglie  for  Gods  loue;"  "for  it  is  time,"  as  Peter  sales, 
"  that  dome  begin  from  the  house  of  God."  "  Ye  bene  the  body  of  Chi-ist," 
sayes  Poule,  "  that  needs  must  suffer  with  the  head,  or  els  your  bodies  bene 
but  dead  and  departed  from  Christ  that  is  the  head."  "  And  therefore  curset 
be  he,"  sales  Poule,  "that  loues  not  lesu  Christ."  And  who  it  is  that  loues 
him,  Christ  himselfe  telles  in  the  gospel,  "  Hee  that  has  my  bests,  and  keeps 
them,  he  it  is  that  loues  me."  "Cursed  he  be  therefore,"  says  Poule,  "that 
doth    Christe's    workes   deceiueably."     "  Be    ye  not  therefore,  '    eays   Poule, 


THK    l.KTTEU    OV    SWINnKKHV     TO    IIIK    i'ARl.IAMKNT.  129 

"  ashnincd  of  the  true  witncsse  of  Icsu  Christ ;"  for  Christ  our  God  sayes  in  his  inrhnrd 
gospel,  "  Hi-e  that  sliaim-s  ino  and  my  wordts,  him  sliall  mans soniio  asliame  wlien       ^^ 
hi-  sliall  foiuL'  for  to  set  in  the  siegu  of  his  Maiestie.    And  eacli  man,"  he  sayes,      .    .^ 
"  tiiat  kiinwes  me  and  my  wordts  before  men,  in  tliis  sinefull  generation  and     i.j(.i 

whorish,  mans  sonne  shall  knowledge  )iim  before  my  father,"  saves  Christ  him- '— 

self,  "  when  he  shal  eome  with  hys  aimgels  in  the  glorie  of  his  father."  Sithe  ye 
therefore  bene  Christen  men,  tliat  is  to  say,  Christes  men,  shew  in  deede  that  ye 
bene  sneh  as  ye  (hireii  shew  yon  the  kings  men;  "for  hit  had  bene,"  as  Peter 
sayes,  "  i)etter  not  to  liane  knowen  the  way  of  tructh,  then  after  the  knowing 
thereof  to  bee  conuerted  backward  there  from."  We  knowen  Christ,  that  is 
trought,  we  sayn  all  througli  our  beliefe,  if  we  turne  from  him  for  drede,  truely 
we  denie  the  troth.  And  therefore  sith  our  time  is  short,  (how  short  no  man 
knowes  but  God,)  do  we  the  good  tliat  wee  may  to  (iods  worship,  "  when  we 
liaue  time."  "  lie  tnie"  (saiesGod)  "to  the  deatli,  and  you  shall  haue  the  crowne 
of  life."  And  thinke  on  ludius  Machabeus,  that  was  (jod's  true  knight,  that 
comforted  hartely  Ciods  true  people,  to  be  the  followers  of  iiis  law.  "  And 
geue  ye, "  hee  said,  "your  lines  for  the  Testament  of  your  fathers  And  ye 
shullen  winne,"  he  said,  "great  ioy,  and  a  name  for  euermore."  "Was  not 
Abraham,"  hee  said,  "in  lem])tati(m  founden  true,  and  was  'arectet  vnto  him 
euermore  to  rigliteousnesse  ;  Iosej)h  in  time  of  his  anguish  hee  kept  truely  Ciods 
best,  hee  was  made,  by  Gods  j)rouidence,  lord  of  Egypt,  for  his  troutli.  Phinees 
our  fadure  louing,"  hee  saith,  "the  zeale  of  God,  tooke  the  tcstiunent  of  euer- 
lasting  priesthoode.  losue  for  hee  fulfillet  the  wordeof  God  wa.s  domes  man  in 
Israel.  Cale})h  that  witnessed  in  the  church,  he  took  therefore  the  heritage," 
he  saith  :  "  I)auid,  in  his  mercie,  he  gat  the  siege  of  the  kingdom  in  worlds. 
Hely  for  that  he  loued  the  zeale  of  Gods  lawe,  was  taken  vppe  into  heauen. 
Ananie,  .\zan>e,  and  Misael,"  hee  saies,  "  weren  deliueret  thoore  through  true 
beliefe  out  of  the  hot  flame  of  fire.  True  Daniel  in  his  simj)lenes  was  deliueret  Daniel 
from  the  lyons  moutlie.  IJethinke  ye  therefore,"  he  saies,  "by  generation  and  ^'-  2-- 
generation,  and  thou  shalt  neucr  tinde  that  lie  fayled  that  man  that  truely 
trusted  in  him.  And  therefore  dread  you  nought,"  he  saies,  "of  the  words  of 
a  sinfull  man:  his  glory  is,"  he  saies,  "  but  wornics  and  tordcs  :  lice  is  to  day," 
he  saith,  "y  made  nie,  to  morow  he  saies  he  is  not  founden,  for  he  is  turned," 
he  saves,  "  into  his  earth  againe,  and  the  mind  of  him  is  pcrishet.  Sonnes 
therefore"  he  saies,  "be  ye  comfortet,  and  die  manly  in  the  law  :  for  when  ye 
ban  done  that  tliat  God  commaunds  you  to  doe,  ye  shulen  be  glorious  in  him." 
And  Dauid  the  king  saies  also  on  this  wise  in  the  Psalter  booke  :  "  blesset  be  Psalms 
they  (Lord)  that  keepen  thy  law,  in  worldcs  of  worldes  they  shall  praise  thee."  '^^^^-  '^^ 
And  in  Leuiticus  saves  God  thus :  "  gif  that  vee  wcnden  in  mine  hestes  and  Lfvit. 
keepen  my  commaundementes,  and  done  hem,  I  shal  bring  forth  their  fruit,  and  ' 
trees  shall  be  fulfilled  with  apples.  And  ye  shalleii  cate  your  bread  in  fulnesse, 
ye  shoulen  dwell  in  your  land  without  drede,  I  shall  giue  peace  in  your  costes, 
ye  shal  sleepe  and  no  man  sliall  feare  you.  Euill  beastcs  I  shal  done  away  from 
you,  and  sword  shal  not  passe  your  teniies,  ye  sliuln  pursue  your  enemies,  and 
they  shall  fall  before  you;  fiftie  of  yours  shulne  pursue  an  hundreth  ()f  heren, 
an  hundret  of  yours,  a  thousand  of  theirs:  your  enemies,"  he  saith,  "shulen 
fal  through  sword,  and  your  sute.  I  shall"  he  sayes,  "  behold  you  and  make 
you  to  waxe,  and  yce  shall  be  multipliet :  And  I  shall  strength  with  you  my 
couenant,  ye  shall  eat  the  aldcst,  and  the  new  shull  come  in  thereon.  And  yee 
shuln  cast  forth  the  olde,  I  shall  dwell  in  the  midst  of  you.  And  I  shal  wend 
amonges  you,  and  shal  he  your  God,  and  ye  shulne  be  my  people.  If  that  yce 
heare  me  not,  ne  done  nought  all  my  hestes,  but  dispisen  my  law,  and  my 
domes,  and  that  ye  done  not  the  things  that  of  me  bene  ordcnet,  and  breaken 
my  commaundement.s  and  my  couenant :  I  shall  doe  these  tilings  to  you.  I  shall 
visite  you  surelv  in  nede  and  brenning,  which  shal  dimme  your  eghenen,  and 
shal  wast  your  lines  about  nought :  Ye  shulne  sowe  your  sede,  for  hit  shal  be 
deuouret  of  enemies ;  I  shal  put  my  face  against  you,  and  ve  shall  fall  before 
your  enemies.  .\nd  ye  shulden  be  vnderlinges  to  them  that  han  hatet  you,  ye 
shall  flee,  no  man  pursuing.  And  if  ye  will  not  be  hu.xome  to  me,  I  shall  adde, 
therevnto,  thomes,  and  seuenfold  blame.  And  I  shall  all  to  brast  the  hardnes  of 
you,  I  shall  geue  the  heauen  aboneyou  as  yron,  and  the  earth  as  brassc.  -Vbout 
nought  shall  your  labour  be,  for  the  earth  shall  bring  you  forth  no  fruit,  ne  tree 

(I)  Reckoned. 
\  1)1..  U(.  K 


130  COX.TECTURES    ABOUT    SWIKDEllBY  S    DEATH. 

Pudinrd    shall  geue  none  apples  to  you.     If  that  ye  wenden  against  me,  and  will  not 

'•'•       heare  me,  I  shall  adde  hereto,  seuen  fold  woundes  for  your  sinnes.    I  shall  send 

.    ^      amoneest  you  heastes  of  the  field  that  shall  deuour  you  and  your  heastes,  I  shall 

I'iq-i'     bring  you  into  a  field,  and  wayes  shuln  be  desart.     And  if  that  ye  will  not  re- 

L  ceiue  lore,  but  wenden  againste  me,  I  will  also  wenden  againste  you,  and  I  shall 

smite  you  seuen  sithes  for  your  sinnes.  I  shall  leade  in  vpon  you,  sword,  ven- 
ger  of  my  couenant :  and  vpon  the  fleen  into  cities,  I  shal  send  pestilence  in 
the  middest  of  you.  So  that  ten  women  shall  bake  their  bread  in  one  furnace, 
and  yeld  them  again  by  waight,  and  ye  shall  eat,  and  not  be  fillet.  If  that  yee 
heare  me  not  by  these  tilings,  but  wenden  against  me,  I  shall  wend  in  against 
you  in  a  contrarie  woodnesse,  and  blame  yovi  with  seuen  plagues  for  your  sinnes ; 
so  that  they  soulen  eat  the  flesh  of  your  sonnes  and  of  your  daughters.  And 
insomuch  my  soule  shall  loth  you,  that  I  shall  bring  your  cities  into  wildernesse, 
and  your  sanctuaries  I  shall  make  desart,  ne  I  shall  not  ouer  that  receiue  sweet 
oder  of  your  mouth.  And  I  shall  chsperkle  your  land,  and  enemies  shulen 
maruel  thereon,  Avhen  they  shulen  inhabite  it;  I  shal  disperkel  you  among 
heathen,  and  draw  my  sworde  after  you."  These  vengeances  and  many  mo, 
God  said  should  fall  on  them  that  breake  his  bidding,  and  dispiseth  his  lawes, 
and  his  domes.  Than  sithe  Christ  become  man,  and  bought  vs  with  his  heart 
bloud,  and  has  shewed  vs  so  great  loue,  and  giuen  vs  an  easie  law,  of  the  best 
that  euer  might  be  made,  and  to  bring  vs  to  the  ioy  of  heauen,  and  we  dispise 
it  and  louen  it  nought ;  what  vengeance  will  be  taken  here  on,  so  long  as  he 
has  suffered  vs,  and  so  mercifully  abidden,  when  Hee  shall  come,  tliat  righteous 
iudge,  in  the  cloudes,  lo  deme  this  world?  Therefore  tume  we  vs  to  him,  and 
leaue  sinne  that  hee  hates,  and,  ouer  all  thinges,  maintaine  his  law  that  he 
confirmed  with  his  death.  For  other  lawes  that  men  had  made,  should  be 
demed,  at  that  day,  by  the  iust  law  of  Christ,  and  the  maker  that  them  made ; 
and  then  we  wonne  that  long  life  and  that  ioy  that  Poul  speaketh  of,  "  that  eye 
ne  see  not,  ne  eare  heard  not,  ne  into  mans  heart  ascended  not,"  the  bhsse  and 
ioy  that  God  hath  ordeined  to  them  that  louen  him  and  his  lawes. 
The  faith-  Deare  worshipfull  sirs,  in  this  world  I  beseech  you  for  Christes  loue,  as  ye  that 
'^"  ''''■  I  trow  louen  Gods  law  and  trouth,  (that,  in  these  daies,  is  greatly  borne  abacke) 
wniiam  that  they  woUen  vouchsafe  these  thinges,  that  I  send  you  written,  to  Gods  worship, 
Swinder-  to  let  them  be  shewed  in  the  parliament  as  your  wits  can  best  conceiue,  to  most 
^^'  worship  to  our  God,  and  to  shewing  of  the  trouth  and  amending  of  holy  church. 

My  conclusions  and  mine  appeale,  and  other  true  matters  of  Gods  law  (gif  any 
man  can  find  therin  eiTor,  falsenesse,  or  default,  prouet  by  the  law  of  Christ 
clearly  to  christen  mens  knowledge),  I  shall  reuoke  my  wrong  conceit,  and  by 
Gods  law  be  amendet :  euer  readie  to  holde  with  Gods  law,  openly  and  priuily, 
with  Gods  giace,  and  nothing  to  hold,  teach,  or  maintaine,  that  is  contrarie  to 
his  law. 

Of  tne  process,  answers,  and  condemnation,  of  this  worthy  priest, 
and  true  servant  of  Christ,  William  Swinderby,  you  have  heard. 
What  afterwards  became  of  him  I  have  not  certainly  to  say  or  afRrm  ; 
whether  he  in  prison  died,  or  whether  he  escaped  their  liands,  or  whe- 
ther he  was  burned,  there  is  no  certain  relation  made.  This  remaineth 
out  of  doubt,  that  during  the  life  of  king  Richard  II.,  no  great  hann 
was  done  unto  him,  which  was  to  the  year  1399,'  at  which  time,  king 
Richard  being  wrongfully  deposed,  Henry  IV.  invaded  the  kingdom 
of  England ;  about  the  beginning  of  whose  reign  we  read  of  a  certain 
parliament  holden  at  London,  mentioned  also  by  Thomas  Walden,  as 
is  above  specified,  in  which  parliament  it  was  decreed,  that  whosoever 
showed  themselves  to  be  favourers  of  WicklifF,  who  at  that  time  were 
called  Lollards,  they  should  be  apprehended ;  and  if  so  be  they  did 

(1)  The  date  which  our  Author  here  assigns  for  the  death  of  king  Richard  is  1401,  although  he 
gives  the  received  date  of  the  accession  of  Henry  IV.  on  a  subsequent  page.  The  Editor  has  cor- 
rected this  error ;  nor  would  he  have  noticed  it,  had  not  an  attack  upon  Foxe's  veracity,  in 
"  Baddeley's  Sure  Way,"  (p.  51)  been  founded  upon  it.  "  Fox,"  he  states,  "  writes  that  Swinder- 
by's  martyrdom  was  in  1400,  and  yet  he  says,"  alluding  to  this  erroneous  date,  "  'that  in  1401  no 
great  harm  was  done  him.'  "  The  impartial  reader  can  form  but  one  opinion,  as  to  the  projriety  of 
founding  a  charge  upon  that  which  is  obviously  an  error  of  the  press. — Ed. 


THK    STOKY     ANU    I'ROCKSS    AGAINST    WALTKR    BRCTE.  131 

obstinately  persevere  in  that  doctrine,  they  should  be  delivered  over  Richard 

unto  the  bishop  of  the  diocese,  and  from  him  sliould  be  committed  to  '. — 

the  correction  of  the  secular  ma<^istrate.     This  law,  (saith  the  story)    '\-  !->• 
brou<;I>t  a  certain  priest  to  punishment  the  same  year,  who  was  burned  • 

in  Smithfield  in  the  presence  of  a  <,Tcat  nund)er.  This  have  wc  drawn 
out  of  a  piece  of  an  ohl  story,  and  it  is  most  certain  that  such  a  priest 
was  l)urncd  there  for  the  aiHrmaticm  of  the  true  faith,  but  it  doth  not 
appear  by  the  story  what  the  priest's  name  was  :  notwithstandin;,',  by 
divers  conjectures,  it  appeareth  unto  me  that  his  name  was  Swindcrby, 
who  was  forced  to  recant,  before,  by  the  bishop  of  Lincoln.  Whereby 
what  is  to  be  conjectured  by  the  premises,  let  other  men  judge  what 
they  think,  1  have  nothinij  hereof  expressly  to  affirm.  This  is  plain 
for  all  men  to  judge,  who  have  here  seen  and  read  his  story,  that  if  he 
were  burned,  then  the  bishops,  friars,  and  priests,  who  were  the  causes 
thereof,  have  a  great  thing  to  answer  to  the  Lord,  when  he  shall  come 
to  judg«  the  quick  and  the  dead,  et  seculum  per  ignem 

5r^e  -^torp  ant)  ^lixttH  again.b't  ©alter  3cute,  a  2?riton.' 

After  the  story  of  William  Swinderbv,  I  thought  good  and  conve- 
nient next  to  adjoin  the  acts  and  doings  of  Walter  Brute,  his  joint 
fellow  and  companion,  being  a  lay-man  and  learned,  brought  up  as  it 
seemcth  in  the  university  of  Oxford,  being  there  also  graduate  ;  the 
tractation  of  whose  discourse,  as  it  is  something  long,  so  therein  may 
appear  divers  things  worthy  to  be  read  and  considered.  First,  the 
migluv  operation  of  God's  spirit  in  him.  his  ripe  knowledge,  his  modest 
simplicity,  his  valiant  constancy,  his  learned  tractations  and  manifold 
Conflicts  sustained  against  God's  enemies.  On  the  contrary  part,  in  his 
adversaries  may  appear,  might  against  right ;  man's  authority  against 
jdain  verity :  against  which,  they,  having  nothing  directly  to  answer, 
proceed  in  condemnation  of  him  against  whom  they  are  able  to  bring 
forth  no  confutation.^  The  chief  occasion  that  seemed  to  stir  up  the 
heart  and  zeal  of  this  ^Valte^  against  the  pope,  was  the  impudent 
pardons  and  indulgences  of  pope  Urban,  granted  to  Henry  Spencer, 
bishop  of  Norwich,  to  fight  against  pope  Clement,  mentioned  before, 
vol.  ii.  p.  80-5  :  secondly,  the  wrongful  condemnation  of  the  articles 
and  conclusions  of  William  Swindcrby ;  the  whole  order  whereof,  in 
the  process  here  following,  more  plainly  may  appear. 

The  Process  had  by  John,  Bishop  of  Hereford,  against  Walter  Brute, 
a  Lay-man  and  learned,  of  the  Diocese  of  Hereford,  touching  the 
cause  of  Heresy,  as  they  call  it ;  set  forward  by  the  way  of  the 
Bishop's  Office,  &c.,  at  the  Instruction  of  certain  Faithful  Chris- 
tians, as  he  termed  them,  but  in  deed,  cruel  and  false  Promoters. 

In  the  name  of  God,  Amen:  To  all  manner  of  faithful  christian  people,  that  Murder- 
sliall  see  and  hear  this  our  present  process,    John,  by  the   surterance  of  God,  '"K  hearts 
bishop  of  Hereford,  sendcth  precting  and  continual  charity  in  the  Lord.     Wc  ("[der^ 
would  that  you  all  should  know,  that  of  late,  by  many  faithful  christian  people,  lovins 
and  snccially  zealous  followers  of  the  catholic  faith,  it  was  lamentably  done  us  ^°'''''- 
to  uJiuerstand,  by  way  of  complaint,  that  a  certain  son  of  ours  going  out  of  kind, 

(1)  The  itory  of  Waiter  Unite  ii  r.ot  related  in  the  firitt  Edition.     Ed.  IS70,  p.  J6C.     Ed.  Io7C, 
ji.  4S7.     Ed    i'JM,  p  475.     E<1.  liM,  p.  4Sf)      E<t.  16S4,  vol.  i.  p   542. 

(2)  Ex  registro  Epis  Hereford. 


132 


MATTERS    AND    CONCLUSIONS 


II. 

A.D. 

1391. 


named  Walter  Brute,  a  lay  person,  learned,  of  our  diocese,  hath,  under  a  cloaked 
show  of  holiness,  damnably  seduced  the  people  ;  and,  setting  behind  him  the 
fear  of  God,  doth  seduce  them  as  much  as  he  can,  from  day  to  day ;  informing 
and  teaching  openly  and  privily  as  well  the  nobles  as  the  commons,  in  certain 
conclusions  heretical,  schismatical,  and  erroneous,  and  also  heretofore  con- 
demned :  and  they  have  also  probably  exhibited  against  the  same  Walter,  the 
articles  under-written,  in  manner  and  form  as  followeth. 


First 
Article. 


Seventh. 


Articles  exhibited  and  denounced   to  the  Bishop,    against  Waltci 
Brute,  by  certain  Priests  and  Friars. 

Reverend  father  and  lord !  we,  the  faithful  people  of  Christ,  and  zealous 
lovers  of  the  catliolic  faith,  and  also  your  humble  and  devout  children,  do 
minister  and  exhibit  to  yoiu"  reverend  fatherhood  the  articles  under-written, 
touching  the  catholic  faith,  contrary  and  against  malicious  persons,  and  detrac- 
tors of  the  same  faith,  and  the  determinations  of  holy  mother  church ;  and 
namely  against  the  child  of  Belial,  one  Walter  Bi-ute,  a  false  teacher  and 
seducer  amongst  the  people :  humbly  beseeching,  that  you  would  vouchsafe 
to  have  regard  to  the  connection  of  the  enormities  under-written,  according  vmto 
the  canonical  constitutions,  even  as  to  your  office  pastoral  doth  lie  and  belong. 

Imprimis,  We  do  give  and  exhibit,  and  intend  to  prove,  that  the  same  Walter 
Brute,  being  unmindful  of  his  salvation,  hath  been,  by  many  and  divers  faithful 
christian  people,  sundry  times  accused  of  the  cursedness  of  heresy,  as  by  the 
swift  report,  slander,  and  rumour  of  the  people,  proceeding  before  the  most 
reverend  father  and  lord,  lord  William  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  and  also  before 
the  reverend  father  and  lord,  lord  John,  late  bishop  of  Hereford,  your  predeces- 
sor, and  now  bishop  of  St.  Asaph,  hath  been  testified  ;  and  also  hath  been  many 
and  divers  times  cited  to  answer  unto  articles  by  him  against  the  catholic  faith 
avouched,  and  openly  and  publicly  taught.  But  he,  in  this  matter  of  heretical 
cursedness  (so  grievously  and  shamefully  spoken  of),  hath  never  regarded  to 
purge  his  innocency ;  but  lurkingly,  and  running  into  corners,  hath  many  and 
sundry  years  laboured  to  advance  things  erroneous  and  schismatical,  and  also 
heresies,  and  to  imprint  them  in  the  hearts  of  faithful  people. 

Item,  The  aforesaid  Walter  Brute  hath  openly,  publicly,  and  notoriously, 
avouched,  and  commonly  said  and  taught,  and  stubbornly  affirmed,  that  every 
christian  man,  yea,  and  woman,  being  without  sin,  may  make  the  body  of  Christ 
as  well  as  the  priest. 

Item,  The  same  Walter  hath  notoriously,  openly,  and  publicly,  avouched  and 
taught,  that  in  the  sacrament  of  the  altar  there  is  not  the  very  body,  but  a  sign 
and  a  memorial  only. 

Item,  The  aforesaid  Walter  hath  said  commonly,  and  avouched,  and  also 
hath  laboured  to  infonn  men  and  companies,  that  no  man  is  bound  to  give  tithes 
or  oblations ;  and  if  any  man  will  needs  give,  he  may  give  his  tithes  and  obla- 
tions to  whom  he  will,  excluding  thereby  their  curates. 

Item,  That  such  as  do  preach  and  prefer  croised  matters,  and  pardons  (granted 
by  the  high  bishop  to  them  that  helped  the  purpose  of  the  reverend  father  lord 
Henry,  by  the  grace  of  God,  bishop  of  Norwich,  when  he  took  his  journey  upon 
him  to  fight  for  the  holy  father  the  pope),  are  schismatics  and  heretics ;  and 
that  the  pope  cannot  grant  such  manner  of  pardons. 

Item,  The  said  Walter  hath  oftentimes  said,  and  commonly  avouched,  that 
the  pope  is  Antichrist,  and  a  seducer  of  the  people,  and  utterly  against  the  law 
and  life  of  Christ. 

Item,  Whereas,  of  late  your  reverence  did,  at  the  instance  of  faithful  christian 
people,  proceed  in  form  of  law  against  William  Swinderby ;  and  that  the  said 
William  Swinderby  had,  unto  the  said  articles  objected  against  him,  given  up 
his  answers  in  writing,  containing  in  them  errors,  schisms,  and  heresies,  even  as 
you,  with  the  mature  counsel  of  masters  and  doctors  in  divinity,  and  other 
faculties,  have  determined  and  given  sentence,  and  have  pronounced  the  same 
William  Swinderby  to  be  a  heretic  and  a  schismatic,  and  an  erroneous  teacher 
of  the  people  :  nevertheless  the  aforenamed  Walter  hath  openly,  publicly,  and 
notoriously,  said,  avouched,  and  stubbornly  affirmed,  that  the  said  William's 
answers  (whereof  notice  hath  been  given  before)  afe  good,  righteous,  and  not 


MINISTERKD    AGAINST    WAI.TKR    BKLTK.  133 

abk' to  be  convinci'il,  ill   tb.it  thoy   contain   no  error ;  and  that  your  sciiti'iite  Richard 

aforesaid,  given  against  the  same  William,  is  evil,  false,  and  iiniust ;  and  that  ^^• 

your  assistants  have  wickedly,  naughtily,  j)erversely,  and  unjustly,  condenuied  .    .y 

the  answers  aforesaid.  I'.i'Jl 
Now,  immediately  thereupon,  those  same   faithful  christian   people  have  in- 


stantly recjuired,  that  we  would  vouchsafe  tliat  other  articles  given  by  the  same  ''f't^r- 
faithful    cnristians    against    tlie   said    William   Swinderby,'   together   with    the  t,\,^fy 
writings  and  answers  of  the  same  William  thereunto,  should  be  admitted  against  promo- 
Walter  IJrute,  mentioned  of  in  this  matter  of  cursed  heresy ;  of  which  articlea  '*^"' 
and  answers,  the  tenor  doth  follow  in  these  words. 

Imprimis,  That  one  William  Swindcrbv,  pretending  himself  priest,  was  of 
certain  articles  and  conclusions  erroneous,  false,  schismatical,  and  heretical,  by 
him  preached,  at  divers  places  and  times,  before  a  great  uudtitude  of  i'aithful 
christians  juilicially  convinced ;  and  the  same  articles  and  conclusions  did  he, 
enforced  by  necessity  of  law,  revoke  and  abjure,  some  as  heretical,  and  others 
as  erroneous  and  false  ;  and  for  such  did  he  avouch  them  ever  afterwards,  pro- 
mising so  to  take  and  believe  them,  and  that  from  thenceforth  he  would  openly 
or  privily  preach,  teach,  or  attirm  none  of  them  ;  nor  that  he  should  make  ser- 
mon or  preach  within  your  diocese,  without  license  demanded  and  obtained. 
And  in  case  he  should  to  the  contrary  presume,  by  preaching  or  avouching, 
that  then  he  should  be  subject  to  the  severity  of  the  canons,  even  as  he  judicially 
sware,  accordingly  as  the  law  enforced.  Also  the  conclusions  abjured  by  the 
said  Williani  do  follow,  and  are  these. 

I.  Imprimis,  That  men,  by  the  rule  of  charity,  may  demand  debts,  but  by  no 
means  imprison  any  man  for  debts;  and  that  the  party  so  imprisoning  a  bodv, 
is  exconununicated. 

II.  Item,  That  if  the  parishioners  shall  know  their  curate  to  be  incontinent 
and  naughtv,  they  ought  to  withdraw  from  him  their  tithes,  &c. 

III.  Item,  That  tithes  are  mere  alms;  and  in  case  that  the  curates  shall  be 
ill,  they  may  be  lawfully  bestowed  upon  others  by  the  temporal  owners,  &c. 

IV.  Item,  That  an  evil  curate  to  excommunicate  any  under  his  jurisdiction 
for  withholding  of  tithes,  is  naught  else,  &c. 

V.  Item,  That  no  man  may  excommunicate  any  body,  exce])t  that  first 
he  know  him  excommunicate  of  God ;  neither  do  those  that  communicate 
with  such  a  one,  incur  the  sentence  of  excommunication  by  any  manner  of 
means. 

V'l.  Item,  That  every  priest  may  absolve  every  sinner  being  contrite,  and  is 
bound  to  preach  the  gospel  to  the  people,  notwithstanding  the  prohibition  of 
tlie  bishops. 

VII.  Item,  That  a  priest,  receiving  by  bargin  any  thing  of  yearly  annuity,  is, 
in  so  doing,  a  schismatic,  and  excommunicate. 

VIII.  Item,  He  doth  assuredly  believe,  as  he  avouchcth,  that  every  priest 
being  in  deadly  sin,  if  he  dispose  himself  to  make  the  body  of  Christ,  doth 
rather  commit  idolatry,  than  make  Christ's  body. 

IX.  Item,  That  no  priest  doth  enter  into  any  house,  but  to  h-Midle  ill  the 
wife,  the  daughter,  or  the  maid,  and  therefore,  &c. 

X.  Item,  That  the  child  is  not  rightly  baptized,  if  the  priest,  &c. 

XI.  Item,  That  no  manner  of  person  if  he  live  against  God's  law,  &c. 

XII.  Item,  The  same  William,  against  the  things  premised,  and  his  revoca- 
tion and  abjuration  (not  to  his  heart  converting,  but  from  evil  to  worse  per- 
verting), dul  turn  aside  into  our  diocese,  where,  ruiming  to  and  fro  in  divers 
places,  he  hath  of  his  own  rash  head  presumed  to  preach,  or  rather  to  per- 
vert, Src. 

XIII.  Item,  After  that  wo  liad  hoard  divers  rumours,  and  slanders  of  very 
many,  we  directed  divers  nmnitions  and  commandments  comminatory,  to  be 
sent  abroad  by  our  commissaries  to  sundry  places  of  our  diocese,  that  no  per- 
son, of  what  estate,  degree,  or  condition  soever  he  were,  should  presume  to 
preach  or  to  teach  the  sacred  Scripture  to  the  peopl?,  in  places  holy  or  profane, 
within  our  diocese,  &c. 

(1)  Thc^c  concluslont  and  articles  of  William  Swinderby  here  repeated,  and  objected  to  Walter 
Brute,  arc  to  bo  found  before,  p.  110. 


]84 


MATTERS    AND    CONCLUSIONS 


Richard 
II. 

A.D. 

1391. 

Infan- 
dum 
I'acinus 
scilicet. 


A  peril- 
ous door 
to  open. 


XIV.  Item,  That  the  same  sort  of  monitions,  inhibitions,  and  precepts  con- 
firmed by  our  seal,  came  to  the  true  and  undoubted  knowledge  of  the  said 
William. 

XV.  Item,  The  same  William,  unmindful  of  his  own  salvation,  hath  since, 
and  against  those  monitions,  inhibitions,  and  precepts,  and  (that  which  is  more 
abominable  to  be  spoken)  in  contempt  of  the  high  bishop's  dignity,  and  to  the 
slander  and  offence  of  many  people,  presumed,  in  divers  places  of  our  said  dio- 
cese, to  preach,  or  rather  to  pervert,  and  to  teach,  the  forementioned,  and 
other  heretical,  erroneous,  and  schismatical  devices. 

XVI.  Item,  The  same  William,  in  preaching  to  the  people  on  Monday,  to 
wit,  the  first  of  August,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  1390,  in  the  church  of  Whit- 
ney, in  our  diocese,  held  and  affirmed  :  that  no  prelate  of  the  world,  of  what 
state,  pre-eminence,  or  degree  soever  he  were,  having  cure  of  souls  and  being 
in  deadly  sin,  &c. 

XVII.  Item,  The  same  William  in  many  places  said  and  affirmed,  in  the 
presence  of  many  faithful  christian  people,  after  the  sacramental  words  uttered 
by  the  priest,  having  the  intent  to  consecrate,  there  is  not  made  the  very  body 
of  Christ  in  the  sacrament  of  the  Eucharist. 

XVIII.  Item,  That  accidents  cannot  be  in  the  sacrament  of  the  altar  with- 
out their  subject;  and  that  there  remaineth  material  bread  '  Concomitanter,' 
with  the  body  of  Christ  in  the  sacrament. 

XIX.  Item,  That  a  priest  being  in  deadly  sin,  cannot,  by  the  power  of  the 
sacramental  words,  make  the  body  of  Christ. 

XX.  Item,  That  all  priests  are  of  like  power  in  all  points,  notwithstanding 
that  some  of  them  are,  in  this  world,  of  higher  dignity,  degree,  or  pre-emi- 
nence. 

XXI.  Item,  That  contrition  only  putteth  away  sin,  if  a  man  shall  be  duly 
contrite ;  and  that  all  vocal  confession  and  exercise  is  superfluous,  and  not  re- 
quisite, of  necessity,  to  salvation. 

XXII.  Item,  That  inferior  curates  have  not  their  power  of  binding  and 
loosing  immediately  from  the  pope  or  bishop,  but  immediately  from  Christ, 
&c. 

XXIII.  Item,  That  the  pope  cannot  grant  such  kind  of  annual  pardons, 
because  there  shall  not  be  so  many  years  to  the  day  of  judgment,  as  are  con- 
tained in  the  pope's  bulls  or  pardons.  Whereby  it  followeth,  that  pardons  are 
not  so  much  worth  as  they  are  noised  and  praised  to  be. 

XXIV.  Item,  That  it  is  not  in  the  pope's  power  to  grant  to  any  penitent 
body,  forgiveness  of  the  pain,  or  of  the  trespass. 

XXV.  Item,  That  one  giving  his  alms  to  any  body,  who,  as  hejudgeth,  hath 
no  need  thereof,  doth  sin  in  so  giving,  &c. 

XXVI.  Item,  That  it  stands  not  in  the  power  of  any  prelate,  of  what  private 
religion  soever  he  be,  to  give,  by  letters,  benefits  of  their  order ;  neither  do  such 
kind  of  benefits  given,  profit  them  to  whom  they  be  given  for  the  salvation  of 
souls. 

XXVII.  Item,  That  the  same  WiUiam,  unmindful  of  his  own  salvation,  hath 
many  times  and  often  resorted  to  a  certain  desert  wood  called  Derwalswood,  of 
our  diocese,  and  there,  in  a  certain  unhallowed  chapel  (nay,  a  profane  cottage), 
hath  presumed  of  his  own  proper  rashness,  to  celebrate,  &c. 

XXVIII.  Item,  The  same  William  hath  also  presumed  to  do  the  like  things 
in  a  certain  profane  chapel,  situate  in  the  park  of  Newton,  nigh  to  the  town  of 
Leyntwardyn,  in  the  same  our  diocese. 

Walter  Which  things  being  done,  the  same  faithful  christian  people,  and  especially 

mote^r^^""  ^^^  Walter  Pride,  the  penitentiary  of  our  cathedral  church  of  Hereford,  per- 
rather  a  sonally  appearing  before  us,  sitting  in  our  judgment  seat  in  the  parish  church 
proud  of  Whiteborne  of  our  diocese,  brought  forth  and  exhibited  two  public  instru- 
promo  er.  ^igj^^g  against  the  same  Walter  Brute,  in  the  case  of  cursed  heresy  aforesaid,  of 
which  instruments  here  follow  the  tenor  and  the  articles. 


Afoul 
fault  for- 
sooth. 


The  first  Instrument  exhibited  by  certain  Canons  of  Hereford  against 
Walter  Brute. 
In  the  name  of  God,  Amen.     Be  it  evidently  known  to  all  persons,  by  this 
present  public  instrument,  that  in  the  j'ear  from  the  incarnation,  after  the  course 


MISISTKKKU    Al.AIN'ST     WAI.TKK     BRUTK.  185 

and  coinputatiun  of  the  churcli  of  England,  1391,  the  indiction  fifteen  of  the    hichard 
pontifical  orticc  of  our  most  lioly  father  and  lord  in  Ch.rist,  lord  Honifaco  IX.        ^^• 
hy  (iod's  wisdom   pope,  the  second   year,    the  fifteenth  day    of  the   month    of  ~T    ij 
()clol)er,  in    the    dwelling-house   of  tlie  worshipful   man.    Master  John   Gode-    i./qi 

nioston,  canon  of  tiie  cathedral  churcii  of  Hereford,  in  tlie  presence  of  me,  the  ■-- " 

puhlic   notary  underwritten,   and  of  witnesses   subscrihed,  Walter  Brute  a  lay-  Bishop  of 
man,   learned,   of  Hereford   diocese,  personally  appearing,  said,  avouched,  and  „,J^'yg°ly 
stifHy  maintained,  that  the  said  bishop  of  Hereford,  and  assistants  who  were  with  cou- 
him  the  third  day  of  the  aforesaid  month  of  Octob'.-r,  theyear  of  our  Lord  afore-  '^^^^^ 
said,  in    the   church  of  Hereford,  did   naughtily,  wickedly,  jjervcrBely,  and  un-  articles  of 
justly,  comlemn  the  answers  of  Sir  William  Swinderbv,  chaplain,  given  bv  the  ^winder 
same  Sir  William  to  the  sanu»   lord   bishop   in   writing,  and  also   the   articles  ^' 
ministered  by  the  same  Sir  William. 

And,   furthermore,  he  said,  held,  and  avouched,  that  the  same  conclusions 
given  by  the  same  Sir  William,  even  as  they  were  given,  are  true  and  catholic. 

Item,  As  touching  the  matters  ohject^'d  against  him  by  them  that  stood  by,  M.-itiem 
concerning  the  sacranuMit  of  the  altar;  he  said,  that  after  the  sacramental  words  ohjccted 
there  doth  remain  very  bread,  and  the  substance  thereof  after  the  consecration  \vaj{"r' 
of  the  body  of  Christ ;  and   that  there  do  not  remain  accidents  without  sub-  Urute. 
stance  or  subject  after  the  consecration  of  the  body  of  Christ.    And  as  touching 
this  matter,  the  doctors  hold  divers  opinions. 

Furthermore,  as  concerning  the  pope,  he  said,  held  and  avouched,  that  he  is  The  pope 
the  very  Antichrist ;  because  that  in  life  and   manners  he  is  contrary  to  the  ^"''" 
laws,  doctrines,  and  deeds,  of  Christ  our  Lord. 

All  and  ever}'  of  these  things  were  done,  even  as  they  be  above-written  and 
rehearsed  in  the  year  of  our  Lord,  pontifical  office,  month,  day,  and  place  afore- 
said, at  supper  time   of  the  day  aforeiumied ;   then  and  there  being  present  the  Wit- 
worshipful  and  discreet  men,  Sir  Walter  Ramsbury,  chief  chaunter  of  the  said  "«>«*-» 
cathedral  church  of  Hereford,  Roger  Hoore,  canon  of  the  same  church,  Walter  hf,'"."* 
Wall,  chaphun  of  the  said  church  of  Hereford  (being  a  vicar  of  the  choral),  and 
certain  other  worthy  witnesses  of  credit,  that  were  specially  called  and  desired 
to  the  premises.' 

And  I,  Richard  Lee,  wheeler,  clerk  of  Worcester,  being  a  public  notary  by  Richard 
the  authority  apostolic,  was  personally  present  at  all  and  singular  the  premises,  ^f^  ^^- 
whilst  that,  as  is  before   rehearsed,  they  were  done  and  a  doing  in  the  year  of  ^^Uo"" 
our  Lord,  l.'J'Jl  ;  j)ontifical  office,  month,  day,  place,   and  the  hour  aforesaid:  hereof, 
and  I  did  see,  write,  and  hear,  all  and  singular  those  things  thus  to  be  done, 
and  have  reduced  them   into  this  public  manner  and  form ;  and,  being  desired 
*rv\y  to  testify  the  premises,  have  sealed  the  said  instrument  made  hereupon, 
with  mine  accustomed  seal  and  name. 

Fonn  of  the  second  Instrument. 

In  the  name  of  God,  Amen.    Be  it  plainly  known  to  all  persons,  by  this  pre- 
sent public  instrument,  that  in  the  year  from  the  incarnation  of  the  I/ord,  aAer 
the  course  and  computation  of  the  church   of  England,    1391,   the  indiction 
fifteen,  in   the  third   year  of  the  pontifical   office  of  the  most  holy  father  in 
Christ  and  our  lord,  lord  Boniface,  pope,  by  the  jjrovidence  of  God,  the  ninth, 
and  in  the  nineteenth  day  of  the  month  of  January ;  Walter  Bnite,  layman,  of  Afattcrs 
Hereford  diocese,  personally  appearing  before  the   reverend  father  in  Christ  ""J. <"<">- 
and  lord,  lord  John,  by  God's  grace  bishop  of  Hereford,  in  the  presence  of  me,  Jn?n!s"* 
being  a  public  notary,  and  one  of  the  witnesses  mider-written,  did  say,  hold,  tired 
publish,  and  affirm,  the  conclusions  hereafter  written  :  that  is  to  say,  that  chris-  "^.*5"'" 
tian  people  are  not  bound  to  pay  tithes  either  by  the  law  of  Moses,  or  by  the  Brute, 
law  of  Clirist. 

Item,  That  it  is  not  lawful  for  Christians,  for  any  cause  in  any  case,  to  swear 
by  the  Creator,  neither  by  the  creature.* 

Item,  He  confesseth  openly  and  of  his  own  accord,'  that  within  the  s  unc 
month  of  Januarj*,  he  diid  eat,  drink,  and  communicate  with  William  Swin- 

(11  F.x  Rcp^t.  Hcrefbrd. 

(2)  This  concluiion  ncemeth  to  \te  falsely  collected,   a»  were  I'cfore  the  article!  of  Willjam 
£nindcrby.  (3)  This  conclusion  is  net  rightly  qaihered. 


186 


MATTERS    AND    CONCI.USIONs. 


Itivliard 
II. 

A.D. 

1391. 


Wit- 
nesses 
against 
Walter 
Brute. 


Benedict 
Come,  re- 
gister, 
witness 
and  writer 
of  this 
instru- 
ment. 


derby,  not  being  ignorant  of  tbe  sentence  of  tbe  said  reverend  fatber,  wbereby 
tbe  same  William  Swinderby  was  pronounced  a  beretic,  scbismatic,  and  a  false 
seducer  of  tbe  connnon  people ;  wbicb  conclusions  tbe  same  reverend  tatber 
caused  to  be  written,  and  in  writing  to  be  delivered  to  tbe  same  Walter,  wbicb 
wben  be  bad  seen  and  read,  be  said  also  tbat  be  did  maintain  and  justify  tbem 
according  to  tbe  laws  aforesaid.  Tbese  tilings  were  done  in  tbe  chamber  of  tbe 
said  bisbop  of  Hereford,  at  bis  manor  of  Wbiteborne  of  tbe  said  diocese  of 
Hereford :  tbere  being  tben  present  tbe  same  bisbop  abovesaid.  Master  Rey- 
nold, of  Wolston,  canon  of  Hereford ;  Sir  Philip  Dilesk,  parson  of  tbe  parish 
church  of  Blamurin  ;  Thomas  Guildefeld,  parson  of  tbe  church  of  Englishby- 
knore  ;  John  Cresset,  parson  of  tbe  church  of  Wbiteborne ;  and  Thomas  Walle- 
wayne,  household  servant ;  for  witnesses  especially  called  and  desried  to  the 
premises,  of  the  diocese  of  Hereford  and  St.  Asaph. 

And  I,  Benedict  Come,  clerk  of  the  diocese  of  St.  Asaph,  public  notary,  by  tlie 
apostolic  authority  of  the  diocese  of  St.  Asaph,  was  personally  present,  together 
with  tbe  witnesses  before  named,  at  all  and  singidar  tJiese  and  other  things  here 
premised,  whilst  they  were  so  done  and  a  doing ;  and  did  see,  bear,  and  write 
those  things  so  to  be  done,  as  is  before-mentioned ;  and  did  write  the  same,  and 
reduce  them  into  this  public  form ;  and  with  my  wonted  and  accustomed  seal  and 
name  have  sealed  it,  being  desired  and  required  tndy  to  testify  tbe  premises. 


At  last,  tbe  aforesaid  Walter  Biiite  did  present  and  cause  to  be  presented  to 
us  (at  divers  places  and  times,  assigned  by  us  to  the  same  Walter,  to  answer  to 
the  former  conclusions  and  articles)  divers  scrolls  of  paper,  written  witli  his  own 

fjroper  hand,  for  his  answers  to  tbe  same  articles  and  conclusions  above  written ; 
le,  partly  appearing  by  bis  own  self,  before  us  sitting  in  our  judgment  seat,  and 
partly  by  his  messengers,  specially  appointed  to  tbat  purpose ;  of  which  scrolls, 
the  tenors  do  follow  in  order  v/ord  by  word,  and  be  on  this  manner. 


Protesta- 
tion 
made 


No  writer 
or  doctor 
without 
his  error, 
tlie  Scrip- 
ture only 
excepted. 
Error  in 
the  doc- 
tors, and 
among 
the 
popish 
writers. 


Certain  Exhibits  of  Walter  Brute,  in  writing,  presented  to  the  Bishop 
for  his  Defence. 

In  the  name  of  the  Fatber,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  tbe  Holy  Ghost,  Amen. 
I  Walter  Brute,  sinner,  lay-man,  husbandman,  and  a  Christian  (having  my  off- 
spring of  tbe  Britons,  both  by  my  father's  and  mother's  side),  of  the  Britons 
have  been  accused  to  the  bisbop  of  Hereford,  tbat  I  did  err  in  many  matters 
concerning  tbe  catlrolic  christian  faith,  by  whom  I  am  required  tbat  I  shoidd 
write  an  answer  in  Latin  to  all  those  matters ;  whose  desire  I  will  satisfy  to  my 
power,  protesting  first  of  all,  before  God  and  before  all  the  world,  tbat  like  as 
it  is  not  my  mind,  through  God's  grace,  to  refuse  the  known  tnith,  for  any  re- 
ward, greater  or  smaller,  yea,  be  it  never  so  big,  nor  yet  for  the  fear  of  any  tem- 
poral punishment ;  even  so  it  is  not  my  mind  to  maintain  any  erroneous  doctrine 
for  any  commodity's  sake.  And,  if  any  man,  of  what  state,  sect,  or  condition 
soever  he  be,  will  show  me  tbat  I  err  in  my  writings  or  sayings,  by  tbe  authority 
of  the  sacred  Scripture,  or  by  probable  reason  grounded  on  the  sacred  Scrip- 
ture, I  will  humbly  and  gladly  receive  his  information.  But,  as  for  the  bare 
words  of  any  teacher,  Christ  only  excepted,  I  will  not  simply  believe,  except  he 
shall  be  able  to  establish  tbem  by  tbe  tnith  of  experience,  or  of  tbe  Scripture ; 
because  tbat  in  the  holy  apostles  elected  by  Christ,  there  bath  been  found  error 
by  tbe  testimony  of  the  holy  Scripture,  because  that  Paul  himself  doth  confess 
tbat  he  rebuked  Peter,  for  tbat  be  was  worthy  to  be  rebuked  [Gal.  ii.]  Tbere 
have  been  errors  foimd  in  tbe  holy  doctors,  tbat  have  been  before  us,  as  they 
themselves  confess  of  themselves.  And  oftentimes  it  falletb  out,  tbat  tbere  is 
error  found  in  the  teachers  in  our  age,  who  are  of  contrary  opinions  among 
themselves  ;  and  some  of  tbem  do  sometimes  deteiTnine  one  thing  for  truth, 
and  others  do  condemn  tbe  self-same  thing  to  be  heresy  and  error.  Which  pro- 
testation premised,  I  will  here  place  two  suppositions  or  cases  for  a  ground  and 
a  foundation  of  all  things  that  I  shall  say  ;  out  of  which  I  would  gather  two 
probable  conclusions  established  upon  tbe  same,  and  upon  tbe  sacred  Scripture. 
By  which  conclusions,  wben  they  shall  be  declared  after  my  manner  and  fashion, 
it  shall  plainly  appear  what  my  opinion  and  judgment  is  concerning  all  matters 
that  I  am  accused  of.    But  because  I  am  ignorant  and  unlearned,  I  will  get  me 


.M1NI3TERKU    AGAIN'ST    WAI.TIU     BRl' II"..  131 

under  the  mighty  defences  of  the  Lord  :   ()  Lord!   I  will  remember  tliiiic  only  Ruhard 
righteousness.  ^' 

God  tlie   Father  Almighty  uncreate,  the  maker  of  heaven  and  earth,  hath  ^  j^ 

sent  his  Son,  that  was  everlastingly  begotten,  into  this  world,  that  he  should  be  x-y\\ 
incarnated  for  the  salvation  and  redemption  of  mankind  ;  who  was  conceived  by 


the  Holy  ("ihost,  everlastingly  proceeding  from  the  Father  and  the  Son,  and  was  "'■"<»^ 
born  of  Mary  the  virgin,  to  the  end  that  we  might  be  born  anew.      He  suffered  "icuseth 
p.'ission  under  I'ontius  I'ilate  for  our  sins,  laying  down  his  life  for  us,  that  we  his  u-arn- 
ahould  lay  down  our  lite  for  our  brethren.     He  was  crucified,  that  we  should  be  '">'• 
crucified  to  the  world,  and  the  world  to  us.    He  was  dead,  that  he  might  redeem  or  suppo- 
us  from  death,  by  purchiising  for  us  forgiveness  of  sins.      He  was  buried,  that  s't'on- 
we,  being  buried  together  with  him  into  death  by  baptism,  and  that  we,  dead 
to  sins,  should  live  to  righteousiu'ss.    He  descended  iivto  hell,  thereby  delivering 
man  from   tliraklom  and  from  the  bondage  of  the  devil,  and  restoring  him  to 
his   inheritance  which   he  lost  by  sin.     'I'he  third  day  he  rose  from  the  dead, 
through  the  glory  of  the  Father,  that  we  also  should  walk  in  newness  of  life.    He 
asceiuled  up  to  the  heavens,  to  which  nobody  hath  ascended,  saving  he  that 
descended  from  heaven,  even  the  Son  of  Man  which  is  in  heaven.     He  sitteth 
at  the  right  haiul  of  God  the   Father  Almighty,  until  his  enemies  be  made  his 
footstool ;  he  being,  in  very  deed,  so  much  better  than  the  angels,  as  he  hath 
obtained  by  inheritance  a  more  excellent  name  than  they.     From  whence  he 
shall  come  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead,  according  to  their  works,  because 
tlie  Father  hath  given  all  judgment  to  the  Son.      In  whose  terrible  judgment 
we  shall  rise  again,  and  shall  all  of  us  stand  before  his  judgment  seat;  and 
receive  joy  as  well  bodily  as  spiritually,  for  ever  to  endure,  if  we  be  of  the  sheep 
placed  at  the  right  haiul;  or  else  punishment  both  of  body  and  soul,  if  we  shall 
be  foimd  amongst  goats,  placed  on  the  left  hand,  &c. 

Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  very  God  and  very  man,  a  king  for  ever,  by  Second 
establishing  an  everlasting  kingdom,  'breaking  to  powder  all  the  kingdoms  of  •^'|**°'' 
the  world'  [Daniel  ii.],  'a  priest  for  ever,  atler  the  order  of  Melchisedec,' 
whereby  also  he  is  able  evemiore  to  save  such  as  by  him  come  unto  (iod,  and 
always  liveth  to  entreat  for  us'  [Heb.  vii.]  :  he,  '  offering  one  sacrifice  for  our 
sins,  hath  made  perfect  for  ever  by  one  oblation  those  that  be  sanctified'  [Heb. 
X.]  Being  the  \visdom  that  cannot  be  deceived,  and  the  truth  that  cannot  be 
uttered,  he  hath  in  this  world  taught  the  will  of  the  Godhead  of  his  Father, 
which  will,  he  hath  in  work  fulfilled,  to  the  intent  that  he  might  faitht\illy 
instruct  us,  and  hath  given  the  law  of  charity,  to  be  of  his  faithful  peoi)le 
obser^•ed ;  which  he  hath  written  in  the  hearts  and  minds  of  the  faithful  with 
the  finger  of  God,  where  is  the  Spirit  of  God,  searching  the  inward  secrets  of 
the  (lodhead.  Wherefore  his  doctrine  must  be  observed  above  all  other  doc- 
trines, whether  they  be  of  angels  or  of  men,  because  that  he  could  not,  nor 
would  not  err  in  his  teaching.  But  in  men's  doctrine  there  chanceth  oftentimes 
to  be  error ;  and  therefore  we  must  forsake  their  doctrines,  if  cloakedly  or 
expressly  they  be  repugnant  to  the  doctrine  of  Christ.  Men's  doctriiu-s  being 
made  for  the  people's  profit,  must  be  allowed  and  observed,  so  that  they  be 
grounded  ujion  Christ's  doctrine,  or  at  least  be  not  repugnant  to  his  words. 

If  the  high  bishop  of  Rome,  calling  himself  the  servant  of  the  servants  of  First  con- 
God,  and  the  chief  vicar  of  Christ  in  this  world,  do  make  and  maintain  many  ^!"''°^'; 
laws  contrary  to  the  gospel  of  Jesu  Christ,  then  is  he  of  those  that  have  come  »„  idol  of 
in  Christ's  name,  saying,   I  am  Christ,  and  have  seduced  many  a  one,  by  the  Jesola- 
testimony  of  our  Saviour  in   Matt.  xxiv. ;  and  the  idol  of  desolation  sitting  in  J|°,g'in'' 
the  temple  of  (iod,  and  tiking  away  from  him  the  continual  sacrifice  for  a  time,  the  tein- 
times,  and  half  a  time,  which  idol  nuist  be  revealed  to  the  christian  people,  by  j'.''' "^ 
the  testimony  of  Daniel,   whereof  Christ  speaketh   in   the  gospel  ;   '  When  ye  i,-  1,1, 
shall  see  the  abomination  of  desolation  that  was  told  of  by  Daniel  the  prophet,  laws  be 
standing  in  the  holy  place,  let  him   that  rcadefh   understand;'  and  he  is  the  [oq™^ 
pestiferous  mountain  infecting  the  whole  universal  earth,  as  witnesseth  Jeremy,  he  is  the 
chapter  li.,  and  not  the  head  of  Christ's  body.    '  For  the  ancient  person  in  years,  i'*^"'' 
and  horw)urable  in  reverence,  he  is  the  head  :  and  the  prophet  teaching  lies  is  mountain 
the  tail,'  as  Isaiah  allcgeth,  chapter  ix. ;  and  he  is  that  wicked  and  sinful  cap-  infcctinK 
tain  of  Israel,  whose  foreanpointed  day  of  iniquity  is  conu>  in  time  of  iniquity,  '.^^t^ 
who  shall  take  away  Cidanm,  and  take  away  the  crown,  [Ezek.  xxi.]  to  whom  The  pope 
it  was  said,  '  Forasmuch  as  thy  heart  was  exalted,  and  thou  didst  say,   I  am  a  ihc  sinful 


138 


MATTERS    AND    CONCLUSIONS 


Richard 
II. 

A.D. 
1391. 

captain  of 
Israel, 
spoken  of 
by  Eze- 
kiel. 
Anti- 
christ de- 
scribed. 
The  pope 
an  idle 
shepherd. 
The  pope 
signifieth 
the  beast 
horned 
like  the 
lamb, 
ascending 
out  of  the 
earth. 


Terrible 
Scrip- 
tures 


the  pope. 


Rome, 
Babylon. 


Twelve 
hundred 
and  nine- 
ty days 
figured. 


Fall  of 
Babylon. 


God,  and  sittest  in  the  seat  of  God,  in  the  heart  of  the  sea,  seeing  thou  art  a 
man  and  not  God,  and  liast  given  thine  heart,  as  if  it  were  the  heart  of  God  ; 
therefore,  behold  I  will  bring  upon  thee  the  most  strong  and  mighty  strangers 
of  the  nations,  and  they  shall  draw  their  swords  upon  the  beauty  of  thy  wisdom, 
and  shall  defile  the  commandments,  and  kill  thee,  and  pidl  thee  out ;  and  thou 
shalt  die  in  the  destruction  of  the  slain.'  And  it  foUoweth,  '  In  the  multi- 
tude of  thine  iniquities,  and  of  the  iniquities  of  thy  merchandise,  thou  hast 
defiled  thy  sanctification.  I  will  therefore  bring  forth  a  fire  from  the  midst  of 
the  whole  earth,  and  will  make  thee  as  ashes  upon  earth.  Thou  art  become 
nothing,  and  never  shalt  thou  be  any  more,'  [Ezek.  xxviii.]  Furthermore,  he 
is  the  '  idle  shepherd,  forsaking  his  flock,  having  a  sword  on  his  arm,  and  another 
swoi-d  in  his  right  eye '  [Zech.  xi.],  and  who,  '  sitting  in  the  temple  of  God,  doth 
advance  himself  above  all  that  is  called  God,  or  whatsoever  is  worshipped,'  by 
the  testimony  of  Paul  to  the  Thessalonians,  second  epistle,  chap.  iii. :  '  And  in 
the  defection  or  falling  away  shall  the  man  of  sin  be  revealed,  whom  the  Lord 
Jesus  shall  slay  with  the  breath  of  his  mouth.'  '  For  every  kingdom  divided 
in  itself  shall  be  brought  to  desolation.'  He  is  also,  besides,  'the beast  ascend- 
ing up  out  of  the  earth,  having  two  horns  like  unto  a  lamb,  but  he  speaketh 
like  a  di'agon;'  and  as  '  the  cruel  beast  ascending  up  out  of  the  sea,  whose 
power  shall  continue  forty  and  two  months.'  He  worketh  the  things  that  he 
hath  given  to  the  image  of  the  beast.  '  And  he  compelled  small  and  great, 
rich  and  poor,  free-men  and  bond-slaves,  to  worship  the  beast,  and  to  take  his 
mark  in  their  forehead  or  their  hands,'  [Apoc.  xiii.]  And  thus,  by  the  testi- 
mony of  all  these  places,  is  he  the  chief  Antichrist  upon  the  earth,  and  must 
be  slain  with  the  sword  of  God's  word,  and  cast,  with  the  dragon,  the  cruel 
beast,  and  the  false  prophet  that  hath  seduced  the  earth,  into  the  lake  of  fire 
and  brimstone  to  be  tormented  world  without  end. 

If  the  city  of  Rome  do  allow  his  traditions,  and  do  disallow  Christ's  holy  com- 
mandments and  Christ's  doctrine,  that  it  may  confirm  his  traditions,  then  is  she 
'  Babylon  the  great,'  or  '  the  daughter  of  Babylon,'  and  '  the  great  whore  sitting 
upon  many  waters,'  with  whom  the  kings  of  the  earth  have  committed  fornication, 
and  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  are  become  drunken  with  the  wine  of  her  harlotry, 
lying  open  to  lewdness ;  with  whose  spiritual  whoredom,  enchantments,  witch- 
crafts, and  Simon  Magus  merchandises,  the  whole  round  world  is  infected  and 
seduced ;  saying  in  her  heart,  '  I  sit  as  a  queen,  and  widow  I  am  not,  neither  shall 
I  see  sorrow  and  mourning.'  Yet  is  she  ignorant  that  within  a  little  while  shall 
come  the  day  of  her  destruction  and  niin  by  the  testimony  of  the  Apocalypse, 
chap,  xvii.,  because  that  from  the  time  that  the  continual  sacrifice  was  taken  away, 
and  the  abomination  of  desolation  placed,  there  be  passed  twelve  hundred  and 
ninety  days,  by  the  testimony  of  Daniel  [chap,  xii.]  ;  and  the  chronicles  added 
do  agree  to  the  same.  And  the  holy  city  also  hath  been  trodden  under  foot  of 
the  heathen  for  forty-two  months,  and  the  woman  was  nourished  up  in  the 
wilderness  (unto  which  she  fled  for  fear  of  the  face  of  the  serpent)  during 
twelve  hundred  and  sixty  days,  or  else  for  a  time,  times,  and  half  a  time,  which 
is  all  one.  All  these  things  be  manifest  by  the  testimony  of  the  Apocalypse, 
and  the  chronicles  thereto  agreeing.  And,  as  concerning  the  fall  of  Babylon 
aforesaid,  it  is  manifest  in  the  Apocalypse  [chap,  xiv.],  where  it  is  said,  '  In  one 
day  shall  her  plagues  come,  death,  lamentation,  and  famine,  and  she  shall  be 
burned  with  fire.  For,  strong  is  the  Lord,  which  shall  judge  her.'  And  again, 
'  Babylon,  that  great  city,  is  fallen,  which  hath  made  all  nations  to  drink  of  the 
wine  of  her  whoredom.'  And  thirdly,  '  One  mighty  angel  took  up  a  mill-stone, 
that  was  a  very  great  one,  and  did  cast  it  into  the  sea,  saying.  With  such  a 
violence  as  this  is,  shall  that  great  city  Babylon  be  overthrown,  and  shall  no 
more  be  found.  For  her  merchants  were  the  princes  of  the  earth,  and  with  her 
witchcraft  all  nations  have  gone  astray,  and  in  her  is  there  found  the  blood  of 
the  saints  and  prophets.'  And  of  her  destruction  speaketh  Isaiah  [chap, 
xiii.]  :  '  And  Babylon,  that  glorious  city,  being  so  noble  amongst  kingdoms  in 
the  pride  of  the  Chaldeans,  it  shall  be  that,  like  as  the  Lord  did  overturn  Sodom 
and  Gomorrah  upside  down,  it  shall  never  more  be  inhabited,  nor  have  the 
foundation  laid  in  any  age,  from  generation  to  generation.'  Jeremy  [chap,  li.], 
saith,  *  Your  mother  that  hath  borne  you  is  brought  to  very  great  confusion, 
and  made  even  with  the  ground.'  And  again,  '  The  Lord  hath  devised  and 
done  as  he  hath  spoken  against  the  inhabiters  of  Babylon,  which  dwell  richly 


MINISTKRED    AGAINST    WAl.TKK     BRI  TK.  139 

in    their    treasures    upon    many   watiTs ;    thine    end    is  come."    And  thirdly,    Htchara 
'  DrouEjht  shall  fall  upon  her  waters,   and  they  shall   begin  to  be  dry  :  for  it  is       '' 
a  land  of  graven  images,    and  boasteth  in    her   prodigious  wonders:  it   shall     A.I) 
never   more   be   inhabited,   neither  be   builded   up   in   any   age  or  generation.      \:vj\ 

Verilv  even  Jis  (Jod  hath  subverted  Sodom  and  (iomorrah  with  their  calves.'       

I'ardon  me,  I  bcseeeh  you,  though  I  be  not  plentiful  in  pleasant  words  ; 
for  if  I  siiould  run  after  the  course  of  this  wicked  world,  and  should  please 
men,  I  should  nut  be  Christ's  ser^-ant.  And,  because  I  am  a  poor  man,  and 
neither  have,  nor  can  have,  notaries  hired  to  testify  of  these  my  writings,  I  call 
upon  Christ  to  be  my  witness,  who  knoweth  the  inward  secrets  of  my  heart, 
that  I  an»  ready  to  declare  the  things  that  I  have  written  after  my  fashion,  to 
the  i)rotit  of  all  christian  people,  and  to  the  hurt  of  no  man  living,  and  am 
ready  to  be  refonnod,  if  any  man  will  show  me  where  I  have  erred ;  being 
ready,  also  (miserable  sinner  though  I  be),  to  suffer  for  the  confession  of  the 
name  of  Christ  and  of  his  doctrine,  as  much  as  shall  ])Iease  him  by  his  grace 
and  love  to  assist  me,  a  miserable  sinner.  In  witness  of  all  these  things  I  have 
to  this  writing  set  the  seal  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  which  I 
beseech  him  to  imprint  u])on  my  forehead,  and  to  take  from  me  all  manner  of 
mark  of  Antichrist.     Amen. 

Those  two  suppositions  (as  tlicy  arc  termed  in  the  schools)  written 
by  Walter  Brute,  and  exhibited  unto  the  bishoj),  although  thev  con- 
tained matter  sutficient  cither  to  satisfy  the  bishoj),  if  he  hail  been 
disposed  to  learn,  or  else  to  have  provoked  him  to  reply  a^\'iin,  if  his 
knowledge  therein  had  been  better  than  his,  yet  could  they  neither 
of  them  work  efFcct  in  him.  But  he,  receiving  and  perusing  the 
same,  when  he  neither  could  contlite  that  which  was  said,  nor  would 
reply  nor  answer  by  learning  to  that  which  was  truth,  finding  other 
byc-cavillations,  said.  That  this  his  wiiting  was  too  short  and  obscure  ; 
and  therefore  reijuircd  him  to  write  upon  the  same  again  more  plainly 
and  more  at  large.  Whereupon  the  said  Master  Walter,  satisfying 
the  bishop's  request,  and  ready  to  give  to  every  one  an  account  of 
his  faith,  in  a  more  ample  tractation  reneweth  his  matter  again  before 
declared,  writing  to  the  bishop  in  words  and  form  as  followeth. 

Another  Declaration  of  the  same  Matter,  after  a  more  ample  Trac- 
tation, exhibited  by  Walter  Brute  to  the  Bishop 

Reverend  father,  forasmuch  as  it  seemeth  to  you  that  my  motion,  in  my  two 
suppositions  or  cases,  and    in  my  two   conclusions,  is  too  short  and  somewhat 
dark,  I  will  gladly  now  satisfy  your  desire,  according  to  my  small  learning,  by 
declaring  the  same  conclusions ;  in  opening  whereof,  it  shall  plainly  appear, 
what  I  do  judge  in  all  matters  that  I  am  accused  of  to  your  reverence,  desiring 
you,  first  of  all,  that  your  discretion  would  not  believe  that  I  do  enterprize  of 
any  presumption  to  handle  the  secrets  of  the  Scriptures,  which  the  ^olv,  and 
just,  and  wise  doctors,  have  left  unexpounded.     It  is  not  unknown  to  many, 
that  I  am  in  all  points  far  inferior  to  them,  whose  hoUncss  of  life  and  profound- 
ness in  knowledge  are  manifold  ways  allowed.     Hut  as  for  mine  ignorance  and  Thcythnt 
multitude  of  sins,  they  are  to  myself  and  others  sufficiently  known  ;  wherefore  sohumbly 
I  judge  not  myself  worthy  to  unloose  or  carrv  their  shoes  after  them.     Do  you  IsJem-"'^ 
therefore  no  otherwise  deem  of  me,  than   I  do  of  mine  own  self.     But  if  you  sWvcs, 
shall  find  any  goodness  in  my  writings,  ascribe  it  to  God  only,  who,  according  '"''  ^° 
to  the  multitude  of  his  mercy,  doth  sometimes  reveal  those  things  to  idiots  and  carelessly 
sinners,  which  are  hidden  from  the  holy  and  wise,  according  to  this  saving,  "  I  continue, 
will  praise  and  confess  thee,  O  Father !  for  that  thou  hast  hidden  these  thing?  qI^^ 
from  the  wise  and  prudent,  and  hast  disclosed  them  to  the  little  ones  ;  even  so, 
O  Father!  because  it  hath  thus  pleased  thee."     .\nd  in  another  place  :  "  I  am 
come  to  judgment  into  this  worUi,  that  they  which  see  not,  may  see;  and  that 
they  v.hich  see,  may  be  made  blind.  "    And  Paul  saith,  "That  God  hath  chosen 


140  THE    STORY    OF    WALTER    ERUTE. 

Richard   the  Weak  tilings  of  the  world,  to  confound  the  mighty ;  that  no  man  shall  boast 
^^-       in  himself,  but  that  all  men  should  give  the  honour  to  God." 

~  .    T^  It  was  commanded  to  Isaiah  [chap,  vi.],  bearing  the  type  of  Christ ;  "  Go, 

,oqi'    ^^^  say  to  this  people:  Hear  ye  with  your  hearing,  and  do  not  understand? 

1_  Behold  ye  the  vision,  and  yet  know  ye  not  the  thing  that  ye  see  ?     Make  blind 

the  heart  of  this  people,  and  make  dulhtheir  ears,  and  shut  their  eyes,  lest  that 
perchance  with  their  eyes  they  should  see,  and  with  their  ears  they  should  hear, 
and  with  their  hearts  they  should  understand,  and  be  converted,  and  I  should 
heal  them.  And  I  said,  How  long.  Lord  ?  And  he  said,  Until  that  the  cities 
be  made  desolate  without  inhabitants,  and  the  house  without  any  person  within 
it."  Also  in  Isaiah  [chap,  xix.],  thus  it  is  written  :  "  And  the  multitude  of  all 
nations  which  shall  fight  against  Ariel,  and  all  persons  that  have  warred,  and 
besieged,  and  prevailed  against  it,  shall  be  as  a  dream  that  appeareth  in  the 
night,  and  as  the  hungry  person  dreameth  that  he  eateth,  but  when  he  shall 
awake  out  of  sleep,  his  soul  is  empty.  And  like  as  the  hungry  person  dreameth 
that  he  eateth,  and  yet  after  that  he  shall  awake  he  is  still  weary  and  thirsty, 
and  his  soul  void  of  nourishment ;  even  so  shall  it  be  with  the  multitude  of  all 
nations  that  have  fought  against  the  mount  Sion.  Be  you  amazed,  and  have 
great  wonder ;  reel  ye  to  and  fro,  and  stagger  ye  ;  be  ye  dnmken,  and  not  with 
■wine ;  stagger,  but  not  through  dnmkennesss ;  for  the  Lord  hath  mingled  for 
you  the  spirit  of  drowsiness.  He  shall  shut  your  eyes,  he  shall  cover  your 
prophets  and  princes  that  see  visions.  And  a  vision  shall  be  to  you  altogether 
like  the  words  of  a  sealed  book,  which  when  he  shall  give  to  one  that  is  learned, 
he  shall  say,  Read  here,  and  he  shall  answer,  I  cannot,  for  it  is  sealed.  And 
the  book  shall  be  given  to  one  that  is  unlearned,  and  knoweth  not  his  letters, 
and  it  shall  be  said  unto  him,  Read ;  and  he  shall  answer,  I  know  not  the  letters, 
*  I  am  unlearned.     Wherefore  the  Lord  saith,  Forasmuch  as  this  people  draweth 

nigh  me  with  their  mouths,  and  glorifieth  me  with  their  lips,  but  their  hearts 
are  far  from  me,  and  they  have  rather  feared  the  commandments  of  men,  and 
have  cleaved  to  their  doctrines  :  behold,  therefore,  I  will  add  besides,  and  bring 
such  a  muse  and  marvel  upon  this  people  as  shall  make  men  amazed  with  mar- 
velling. For  wisdom  shall  perish  from  their  wise  men,  and  the  understanding 
of  the  prudent  persons  shall  be  hidden."  [Isaiah  xxix.]  And  soon  after  it 
foUoweth  in  the  same  place :  "  Yet  a  little  while  and  Libanus  shall  be  turned 
into  Carmel,  and  Carmel  counted  for  a  copse  or  grove ; '  and  in  the  same  day 
shall  the  deaf  folks  hear  the  word  of  this  book,  and  the  eyes  of  the  blind 
(changed  from  darkness  and  blindness)  shall  see." 

Nabuchadnezzar  inquiring  of  Daniel,  said,  "  Thinkest  thou  that  thou  canst 
truly  declare  me  the  dream  that  I  have  seen,  and  the  meaning  thereof?"  And 
Daniel  [chap,  ii.]  said,  "As  for  the  mystery  whereof  the  king  doth  ask,  neither 
the  wise  men,  magicians,  soothsayers,  nor  enchanters,  can  declare  to  the  king  : 
but  there  is  a  God  in  heaven,  that  discloseth  mysteries,  who  will  declare  to  thee, 
O  king  Nabuchadnezzar,  what  things  shall  come  to  pass  in  the  last  times  of  all." 
"  To  me  also  is  this  sacrament  or  mystery  disclosed,  not  for  any  wisdom  that  is  in 
me  more  than  in  all  men  living,  but  to  the  end  that  the  interpretation  might  be 
made  manifest  to  the  king,  and  that  thou  shouldst  know  the  cogitations  of  thy 
mind." 

It  was  also  said  to  Daniel  [chap,  xii.],  "  And  thou  Daniel,  shut  up  the  words, 
seal  up  the  book,  until  the  time  appointed.  Verily  many  people  shall  pass  over, 
and  manifold  knowledge  shall  there  be.  And  Daniel  said  to  the  man  that  was 
clothed  with  linen  garments,  who  stood  upon  the  waters  of  the  flood :  How  long 
will  it  be  before  the  end  shall  come  of  these  marvellous  things  ?  And  I  heard  the 
man  that  was  clothed  in  linen  apparel,  w'ho  stood  upon  the  waters  of  the  floods, 
when  he  had  lift  up  his  right  hand  and  his  left  hand  unto  heaven,  and 
had  sworn  by  him  that  liveth  for  evermore,  that  for  a  time,  times,  and  half 
a  time,  and  when  the  scattering  abroad  of  the  hand  of  the  holy  people  shall  be 
accomplished,  then  shall  all  these  things  be  finished.  And  I  heard  and  under- 
stood not,  and  I  said,  O  my  Lord!  what  shall  be  after  these  things?  And  he 
said,  Go  thy  ways,  Daniel,  for  this  talk  is  shut  and  sealed  up  until  the  time  that 
is  before  appointed." 

(1)  Libanus  and  Carmel,  two  hills ;  the  one  in  Phoenicia,  fruitful  and  pleasant,  the  othei  in  the 
borders  of  Jewry,  barren  and  unpleasant,  which  is  Carmel. 


rm:   rkvlalinc   ok   antk  iirist.  141 

All  these  thiiv^'s  Ii.ive   I   written  to  show  that  he  tliat  li;ith  the  key  of  David,    Hichar.i 
"  Who  openeth  and  no  man  shntteth,  and  shuttcth  and  no  man  ()j)eneth,"  doth        " 
(wlien  and  how  long  it  pleasetli  him)  liide  the  mysteries,  and  liide  secrets  of  the      .    .. 
Scriptures  from  the  wise,  pnidont,  and  righteous  ;   and  otherwliiles  at  his  plea-     .  .j,  . 

sure  revealeth   the  same  to  sinners,  and  hiy-persons,  and  simple  souls,  that  he  ! L 

may  have  the  honour  and  glory  in  all  things.  Wherefore,  as  I  have  hefore 
said,  if  you  shall  find  any  good  thing  in  my  writings,  ascrihe  the  same  to  Ciod 
alone;  if  you  shall  hnd  otherwise,  think  yc  the  same  to  he  written  of  ignorance, 
and  not  of  malice.  And  if  any  douht  of  error  he  showed  me  in  all  my  writings, 
I  will  humblv  allow  your  information  and  fatherly  correction. 

Hut  why  are  such  manner  of  matters  moved  touching  the  disclosing  of  Anti- 
christ in  this  kingdom,  more  than  in  other  kingdoms,  and  in  this  time  also  more 
th  HI  in  time  past?     The  answer  as  concerning  the  time  of  the  motion  is,  that 
it  is  the  last  conjunction  of  Saturn  and  Jupiter,  in  the  sign  of  the  Twins,'  which 
is  the  liouse  of  Mercun*',  being  the  signifier  of  the  christian  people:  wliich  con- 
junction seemeth  to  me  to  betoken  the  second  coming  of  Christ  to  reform  his 
church,  and  to  call  men  again,  l)y  the  disclosing  of  Antichrist,  to  the  perfection 
of  the  gos])el,  from  their  heathenish  rites,  and  ways  ol  the  (ientiles,  by  whom  the 
holy  city  was  trampled  under  foot  for  12  months,  even  as  the  conjunction  of  the 
said  two  planets  being  enclosed  in  the  side  of  the  Virgin,  which  is  also  the  house 
of  Mercurj',  did  betoken  the  first  coming  of  Christ,  for  the  salvation  of  all  peo- 
ple that  were  perished  of  the  house  of  Israel,  whereby  to  call  them,  through  the 
same  coming,  to  the  full  perfection  of  tlie  gospel.     As  touching  this  calling  o 
the  heathen,  speaketh  Christ  in  the  gospel,  "  I  have  also  other  shee|)  that  are 
not  of  this  fold,  and  those  must  I  bring,  and  they  shall  hear  my  voice,  and  there 
shall  be  one  sheepfold,  and  one  shepherd."     For  although  theCicntiles  be  con- 
verted from  the  infidelity  of  their  idolatry  to  the  faith  of  Christ,  yet  are  they 
not  converted   to  the  perfection   of  the  law  of  Christ.     And  therefore  did  the 
apostles  in  the  primitive  church,  lay  no  burden  upon  the  Gentiles,  hut  that  they  Bytliis 
should  abstain  tVom  heinous  things,  as  from  things  offered  to  idols,  and  from  pertecu- 
blood,  and  things  strangled,  and  fornication.     As  touching  this  second  coming  ''""^  ^^P' 
spcakotli  Isaiah,  [chap,  xi.],  "On  that  day  the  root  of  Jesse,  which  standeth  meaneth 
for  a  sign  or  mark  to  the  people,  to  him  shall  the  heathen  make  their  homage  '*''"  7^^°^' 
and  supplication,  and  his  .sepulchre  shall  be  glorious ;  and  in  that  day  shall  it  tiie 
come  to  pass,  that  the  Lord  shall  the  secoad  time  put  to  his  hand,  to  possess  the  church 
remnant  of  his  people,"  &c.     "  And  he  shall  lift  up  a  token  toward  the  nations,  of  uie""' 
and  he  shall  assemble  the  nmagate  people  of  Israel  that  were  fled,  and  those  way. 
that  were  dispersed  of  Judah  shall  he  gather  together  from  the  four  quarters 
of  the  earth.     And  the  zealous  emulation  of  Ephraim  shall  he  broken  to  pieces, 
and  the  enemies  of  Judah  shall  come  to  nought."     Paul  to  the  Thcssalonians 
saith,  "  We  beseech  you,  brethren,  by  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and 
our  gathering  together  before  him,  that  you  be  not  soon  removed  from  your  un- 
derstanding, neither  that  you  be  put  in  fear,  as  though  the  d.iy  of  the  Lord  were 
at  hand,  neither,  as  it  were,  by  letter  sent  by  us,  neither  by  s])irit,  nor  yet  by 
talk.     Let  not  any  body  by  any  means  bring  you  out  of  the  way,  or  seduce  you, 
for  except  there  shall  first  come  a  departing,  and  that  the  man  of  sin.  the  son  of 
perdition,  shall  be  disclosed,  which  maketh  resistance  and  is  advanced  above  all 
that   is  called  God,  or  that  is  worshipped,  so  that  he  doth  sit  in  the  temple  of  Tlic  rc- 
God,  showing  himself  as  if  he  were  God.     Do  you  not  remember,  that  whilst  I  ^^aj'"!? 
was  as  yet  with  you,  I  told  you  of  this  .'  And  now  ye  know  what  keepeth  him  christ. 
back,  that  he  may  be  uttered  in  his  due  time.     For  even  now  doth  he  work  the 
my.stery  of  iniquity  ;  only  that  he  which  holdeth,  may  hold  still  until  he  be 
come  to  light ;  and  then  shall   that  wicked  one  he  disclosed,  whom  the  Lord 
Jesus  shall  slay  with  the  breath  of  his  mouth,  and  shall  destroy  with  the  bright- 
ness of  his  coming ;  even   him,  whose  coming  is,  according  to  the   working  of 
Satan,  in  all  power,  with  signs  and  lying  wonch-rs,  and  in  all  deceitful  leading 
out  of  the  truth  towards  those  th.it  do  perish,  because  that  they  receive  not 
heartily  the  love  of  truth,  that  they  might  be  saved." 

(1)  In  sifrno  Gemini.  Mark  here,  (food  reader,  by  thi«  a.«tronoinical  conjunrtion  of  thcue  two 
planet*,  in  CHrrnini,  he  meaneth  rovcrtlythe  ichism  t>Ftwt'en  the  two  popes  which  Listed  thirty-nine 
years;  by  which  conjunction  hii  meaning  ia,  that  Gud  would  hare  Antichrist  to  be  disclosed,  and 
his  church  to  he  reformed. 


142 


THE    STORY    OF  WALTER    BRUTE. 


Richard 
II. 

A.D. 

1391. 

The 

abomina- 
tion of  de- 
solation. 


Destruc- 
tion 
of  the 
Jewish 
temple. 

One  thou- 
sand two 
hundred 
and  nine- 
ty days, 
expound- 
ed 


Why  at 
this  tim 
and 
in  this 
kingdom 
rather 
than  in 
another, 
Anti- 
christ is 
moved. 
The 
Britons 
first  re- 
ceiving 
the  faith, 
by  the 
special 
election 
of  God. 


Christ  being  demanded  of  tlie  apostles  what  should  be  the  token  of  his 
coming,  and  of  the  end  of  the  world,  said  unto  them,  "  There  shall  come 
many  in  my  name,  saying,  I  am  Christ,  and  they  shall  seduce  many  :"  also 
he  telleth  them  of  many  other  signs ;  of  battles,  famine,  pestilence,  and  earth- 
quakes. But  the  greatest  sign  of  all  he  teacheth  to  be  this,  "  When  you  shall  see," 
saith  he,  "  the  abomination  of  desolation  standing  in  the  holy  place,  he  that 
readeth  let  him  understand."  But  Luke  in  chap.  xxi.  of  his  gospel,  speaketh  more 
plainly  hereof;  "  When  you  therefore,  shall  see  Jenisalem  to  be  compassed 
about  with  an  army,  then  know  ye  that  the  desolation  thereof  shall  draw  nigh." 
And  afterwards  it  followeth,  "  And  they  shall  fall  by  the  face  of  the  sword, 
and  shall  be  led  away  captive  to  all  nations  ;  and  Jerusalem  shall  be  trod- 
den under  foot  of  the  heathen,  until  the  times  of  the  nations  be  fulfilled,'' 
Now  in  Daniel  thus  it  is  written  of  this  matter;  "And  after  seventy-two  weeks 
shall  Christ  be  slain,  neither  shall  that  be  his  people,  that  will  deny  him.  And 
as  for  the  city  and  sanctuary,  a  people  shall  (with  his  captain  that  will  come 
with  them)  destroy  the  said  city  and  sanctuary,  and  his  end  shall  be  to  be 
wasted  utterly,  till  it  be  brought  to  nought ;  and,  after  the  end  of  the  Avar, 
shall  come  the  desolation  appointed.  In  one  week  shall  he  confirm  the 
covenant  to  many,  and  within  half  a  week  shall  the  offering  and  sacrifice  cease 
And  in  the  temple  shall  there  be  the  abomination  of  desolation,  and  even  unto 
the  end  shall  the  desolation  continue."  And  elsewhere,  in  Daniel,  thus  it  is 
written,  "  From  the  time  that  the  continual  sacrifice  shall  be  offered,  and  that 
the  abomination  shall  be  placed  in  desolation,  there  shall  be  one  thousand  two 
hundred  and  ninety  days." 

Now  if  any  man  will  behold  the  Chronicles,  he  shall  find  that  after  the  destiiic- 
tion  of  Jerusalem  was  accomplished,  and  after  the  strong  hand  of  the  holy  peo- 
ple was  fully  dispersed,  and  after  the  placing  of  the  abomination  (that  is  to 
say,  the  idol  of  desolation  of  Jerusalem,  within  the  holy  place,  where  the  tem 
pie  of  God  was  before,)  there  had  passed  twelve  hundred  and  ninety  days, 
taking  a  day  for  a  year,  as  commonly  it  is  taken  in  the  prophets ;  and  the  times 
of  the  heathen  people  are  fulfilled,  after  whose  rites  and  customs  God  suffered 
the  holy  city  to  be  trampled  under  foot  for  forty  and  two  months.  For 
although  the  christian  church,  which  is  the  holy  city,  continued  in  the  faith 
from  the  ascension  of  Christ,  even  till  this  time,  yet  hath  it  not  observed  and 
kept  the  perfection  of  the  faith  all  this  whole  season ;  for  soon  after  the  de- 
parture of  the  apostles,  the  faith  was  kept  with  the  observation  of  the  rites  of 
the  Gentiles,  and  not  of  the  rites  of  Moses'  law,  nor  of  the  law  of  the  gospel 
of  Jesus  Christ.  Wherefore,  seeing  that  this  time  of  the  error  of  the  Gentiles 
is  fulfilled,  it  is  likely  that  Christ  shall  call  the  Gentiles  from  the  rites  of  their 
Gentility  to  the  perfection  of  the  gospel,  as  he  called  the  Jews  from  the  law  of 
Moses  to  the  same  perfection  in  his  first  coming ;  that  there  may  be  one  sheep- 
fold  of  the  Jews  and  Gentiles,  under  one  shepherd.  Seeing,  therefore,  that 
Antichrist  is  known,  who  hath  seduced  the  nations,  then  shall  the  elect,  after 
that  they  have  forsaken  the  errors  of  their  gentility,  come,  through  the  light 
of  God's  word,  to  the  perfection  of  the  gospel,  and  that  same  seducer  shall  be 
slain  with  the  sword  of  God's  word  :  so  that  by  these  things  it  doth  partly 
appear  unto  me,  why  that  at  this  time  rather  than  at  any  other  time,  this  matter 
of  Antichrist  is  moved. 

And  why  this  motion  is  come  to  pass  in  this  kingdom  rather  than  in 
other  kingdoms,  methinks  there  is  good  reason ;  because  no  nation  of  the  Gen- 
tiles was  so  soon  converted  unto  Christ  as  were  the  Britons,  the  inhabitants  of 
this  kingdom.  For  to  other  places  of  the  world  there  were  sent  preachers  of  the 
faith,  who,  by  the  working  of  miracles,  and  continual  preaching  of  the  word  of 
God,  and  by  grievous  passion  and  death  of  the  body,  did  convert  the  people  o' 
those  places ;  but,  in  this  kingdom,  in  the  time  of  Lucius,  king  of  the  Britons, 
and  of  Eleutherius,  bishop  of  the  Romans,  did  Lucius  hear  from  the  Romans 
that  were  infidels  (by  the  way  of  rumours  and  tales),  of  the  christian  faith 
which  was  preached  at  Rome.  Who  believed  straightways,  and  sent  to  Rome, 
to  Eleuthenus,  for  men  skilful  to  inform  him  more  fully  in  the  very  faith  itself; 
at  whose  coming  he  was  joyful,  and  was  baptized,  with  his  whole  kingdom. 
And,  after  the  receiving  of  the  faith,  they  never  forsook  it,  neither  for  any 
manner  of  false  preaching  of  others,  neither  for  any  manner  of  torments,  or 
yet  assaults  of  the  Painims,  as  in  other  kingdoms  it  hath  come  to  pass.     And 


KING    I.LCirS    ASl)    m^     HKiroNS     UKCKIVK    THE     KAITH.  1+3 

thus  it  secnu'tl)  to  iiu>  tlie  Hritons,  amongst  other  nations,  have  been,  as  it  were    liici.urd 
by  the  spei-i:!!  iliction  of  God,  called  and  converted  to  the  faith.  Of  tliem,  as       ''■ 
me  seemeth,  did   Isaiah  prophesy,  sayinj: ;   "  For  tiu-y  did  see,  to  whom  there     ;^  j^ 
was  nothinj;  told   of  him,  and   they  did  beliold,  that  had  not  heard  of  him."    jyyj 

And,  a<,'ain,  "  I5t  liold,  thou   slialt  call   a   nation  which  thou    knewest  not;  and  ^ 

nations  that  have  not  known  thee,  shall  run  unto  thee;  for  the  Lord  thy  God, 
and  the  holy  mw  of  Israel  shall  jjlorify  thee." 

Of  this  kinj,'d(Mn  did  St.  John,  in  the  Apocalypse,  prophesy,  as  mc  seemeth, 
where  he  said,   "  'I'he  draj;on    stood   before  the  woman,  which  was  about  to  be 
delivered  of  a  child,  to  the   intent  that  when  .she  had  brought  it  forth  info  the 
world,  he  might  devour  up  her  son  :  and  she  brought  forth  a  child,  winch  was 
a  man-child,  who  should  govern  all   nations  with  an  iron  rod.     And  the  same  The  call- 
Son  was  taken   up  to  tiod,  and  to  his  throne.     And  the  woman  fled  into  the  ll'**  "?^|''"' 
wilderness,   where   she   had  a  place    jjrepared  of   God,   that    they   may   feed  xtie  wo- 
her  one   thousand   two  hundred  and  sixty   days."     And  again,   in   the   sama  jnan  fed 
chapter,   "  .\fter  the  dragon  saw  that  he  was  cast  out  u]>on  the  earth,  he  did  "^rt  one* 
persecute  the  woman,  which  brought  forth  the  man-child.     And  there  were  thouiand 
jnven  to  the  woman  two  wine-s  of  a  irrcat  ea^le,  that  she  mit;ht  flee  into  the  ^wohun- 
wilderness  into  her  ])lace,  where  she  is  fostered   up  for  a   time,   times,   and  sj^ty 
half  a  time,  from  the  face  of  the  serpent.      And  the  serpent  did  cast,  as  it  were,  da.vs 
a  flood  of  water  after  the  woman,  to  the  intent  that  he  might  cause  her  to 
be  drowned  iiy  the  flood  ;   and   the  earth,  opening  her  mouth,  did  help   the 
woman,  and  did  swallow  up  the  flood  which  the  dragon  did  cast  out  of  his 
mouth."     Let  us  see  how  these  sayings  may  be  ajiplied  unto  this  kingdom 
rather  than  to  other  kingdoms.     It  is  well  known  that  this  kingdom  is  a  wil- 
derness or  a  desert  jilace,  because  the  ])hilosophers  and  wise  men  did  not  pass 
upon  it,  but  did  leave  it  for  a  wilderness  and  desert,  because  it  is  placed  without 
the  climates. 

Unto  this  place  fled  the  woman  ;  tint  is  to  say,  the  church,  which  by  faith  Tiiis 
did  si)iritually  bring  forth  Christ  into  the  world,  where  she  was  fed  with  the  hea-  \\^^^°. 
venly  bread,  the  flesh  and  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  for  one  thousand  two  hundred  sort,  in 
and  sixty  days,  seeing   that  for  so  many  days,  taking  a  day  for  a  year,  the  ''"^Scrip- 
Britons  continued   in  the  faith   of  Christ ;  which  thing  cannot  be  found  so  of  seemeth 
any  christian  kingdom,  but  of  this  desert.     And  well  it  is  said,  that  she  flew  to  here 
this  place.     For  from  the  East  came  the  faith  into  Britain,  not  by  walking  in  ^^^^„ 
journey,    nor  yet   by  sailing  ;  for  then  should  it  have  come  by  Rome,  Italy,  hanily 
Almaine,  or  France,  which  cannot  be  found  :  and  therefore  she  flew  over  those  expound 
places,  and  rested  not   in  them,  even  as  a  bird,  flying  over  a  place,  rcsteth  not  p„i,(, 
in  the  same,  but  resteth  in  this  wilderness  for  a  time,  times,  and  half  a  time  :  c.ime  in- 
that  is,  one   thousand  two  hundred   and  sixty  years,  from  the   first  coming  of  {"jp  f^ni 
the  faith  into  Britain  until  this  present.  the  Kast, 

In  saying  for  a  time,  times,  and  half  a  time,  there  is  agoing  forward  from  yt  from 
the  greater  to  the  less.    The  greatest  time  that  we  name,  is  one  thousand  years ;  Rome.*" 
there  is  a  time  ;  and  the  next  time,  that  is  less,  in  the  singular  number,  is  one 
hundred  years.      In  the  plural  nvunbcr,"  times"  signify  that  there  he  more  hun- 
dreds than  one,  at  least  two  hundred  vears.     Wherefore,  if  they  be  put  under  a 
certain  number,  it  must  needs  be  that  they  be  two  ;  but  the  same  two  cannot 
fitly  be  called  some  times,  excej)t  they  be  hundreds.      For  in  this,  that  there  is  a  .\  time, 
going  down  from  the  greater  to  the  Jess,  when  it  is  said  a  time,  times,  and  half  '^'^I'^^'^jf 
a  time,  and   that  the   number  of  one  thousand  is  likely  assigned  for  a  time,  a  time 
it  must  needs  follow,  that  times  nnist  be  taken  for  hundreds,  and  half  a  time  for  cxpound- 
sixtv,  because  it  is  the  greater  half  of  a  hundred  years  though  fifVy  be  Uie  even  " 
half. 

And  when  the  serpent  sent  the  water  of  the  persecution  after  the  woman  to 
cau.se  her  to  be  drowned  of  the  flood,  then  did  the   earth,  that  is  to  say,  the 
stableness  of  faith,   help  the  woman,  by  supping   up  the  water  of  tribulation. 
For  in  the  most   cruel  persecution  of  Diodesian  and-Maximian  against   the  Per»ecu- 
Christians,  when  Christianity  was  almost  every  where  rooted  out,  yet  did  they,  |'°"  j" 
in  this  kingdom,  stand  continually  in  the  faith  unmovable.     And  so,  consider-  sian'i 
ing  that  the  Britons  were  converted  to  the  faith  of  Christ,  as  you  would  say,  by  time 
an  election  and  picking  out  amongst  all    the   nations  of  the  heathen,  and  that  **^^.j  ^,„ 
after  they  had  received  the  fiiith,  they  did  never  start  back  from  the  faith  for 
any  manner  of  tribulation  ;  it  is  not  to  be  marvelled  at  if,  in  their  place,  the 


u-t 


THE    STORY     OF    WALTER    BRUTE. 


llichard 
II. 

A.D. 

1391. 


A  friend 
to  the 
Welch- 
men, 


The 
strong 
faith  of 
the  Bri- 
tons. 


Tales  of 

Anti- 

ehrist- 


A  false 
imagina- 
tion of 
Anti- 
christ. 


The 

Scripture 
and  pro- 
phetsnot 
rightly 
under- 
stood 
touching 
Anti- 
christ. 


calling  of  the  Gentiles  be  made  manifest,  to  the  profiting  of  the  gospel  of  Jesus 
Christ,  by  the  revealing  of  Anticlirist. 

But  besides  this,  me  seemeth  that  Ezekiel  doth  specially  speak  of  them, 
where  he  speakcth  of  the  fall  of  the  prince  of  Tyre,  saying :  "  Forasmuch  as 
thy  heart  is  lifted  up,  as  if  it  were  the  heart  of  God,  therefore,  behold,  I  will 
bring  upon  thee  some  of  the  strongest  of  the  heathen  ;  and  they  shall  draw 
their  naked  swords  upon  the  beauty  of  thy  wisdom,  and  they  shall  defile  thy 
comeliness,  and  they  shall  slay  thee,  and  pull  thee  out ;  and  thou  shalt  die  in 
the  slaughter  of  the  slain  persons,  in  the  heart  of  the  sea." 

This  prince,  who  saith  that  he  himself  is  God,  and  doth  sit  in  God's  chair  in 
the  heart  of  the  sea,  doth  signify,  as  most  likely  it  seemeth  to  me,  that  Anti- 
christ shall  be  destroyed  by  the  most  mighty  persons  of  the  Gentile  folk,  through 
the  sword  of  the  word  of  God ;  because  that  amongst  the  other  Gentiles  there 
have  been  none  more  strong  than  the  Britons,  either  in  their  body  or  their 
faith;  and,  in  their  bodily  wars,  there  have  been  none  more  mighty  than  they, 
for  never  in  wars  have  they  been  vanquished,  but  by  their  own  sedition  or 
treason.  But  how  many  kingdoms  have  they  conquered  !  Yea,  and  neither 
by  the  most  mighty  city  of  Rome  could  they  be  driven  out  of  their  kingdom, 
until  that  God  sent  upon  them  pestilence  and  famine  ;  whereby  they,  being 
wasted,  were  compelled  to  leave  their  country,  which  thing  I  have  not  heard 
of  any  other  people.  Now,  in  the  faith,  have  they  been  amongst  all  the  people 
the  strongest,  as  is  before  said,  because  that  by  no  tribulation  could  they  be 
compelled  to  forsake  the  faith. 

Wherefore  of  them  this  seemeth  to  me  to  be  understood :  "Then  will  I  bring 
upon  thee  some  of  the  strongest  people,  and  they  shall  draw  their  naked 
swords,"  &c.  By  these  things  it  may  plainly  appear,  why  at  this  time,  rather 
than  in  time  past,  this  matter  is  stirred  up  ;  and  why  in  this  kingdom,  rather 
than  in  other  kingdoms,  the  calling  of  the  Gentiles  is  treated  of,  to  the  verifj^- 
ing  of  the  gospel,  through  the  disclosing  of  Antichrist. 

But  forasmuch  as  many  tales  and  fables  are  told  of  Antichrist  and  his  coming, 
and  many  things,  which  do  rather  seduce  than  instruct  the  hearers,  are  applied 
to  him  out  of  the  Scriptures  of  the  prophets,  we  will  briefly  write  those  things 
which  are  spoken  of  him,  and  we  will  show  that  the  same  fable  sprang  from 
the  error  of  people  imagining,  and  from  no  truth  of  the  Scriptures  prophe- 
sying. Now  then  they  do  say,  that  Antichrist  shall  be  born  in  Babylon  of  the 
tribe  of  Dan,  and  conceived  of  the  mixture  of  man  and  woman  in  sin,  because 
that  Christ  was  born  of  a  virgin,  and  conceived  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  They  say, 
that  he  shall  be  an  ill  favoured  personage,  because  that  it  is  written  of  Christ, 
"  Comely  and  beautiful  is  he,  beyond  the  sons  of  men."  They  say,  that  he  shall 
preach  three  years  and  half  where  Christ  preached  ;  and  that  he  shall  circum- 
cise himself,  and  say  that  he  is  Christ,  and  the  Messias,  sent  for  the  salvation 
of  the  Jews.  And  they  say,  that  he  shall  three  manner  of  ways  seduce  the 
people ;  by  false  miracles,  gifts,  and  torments ;  so  that  whom  he  shall  not  be 
able  to  overcome  with  miracles  or  with  gifts,  those  shall  he  go  about  to  over- 
come with  divers  kinds  of  torments ;  and  those  that  he  shall  seduce,  will  he 
mark  with  his  tokens  in  their  forehead  or  hands.  He  shall  sit  in  the  temple 
of  God,  and  cause  himself  to  be  worshipped  as  God.  He  shall  fight,  as  they 
say,  with  the  two  witnesses  of  Christ,  Enoch  and  Elijah,  and  shall  kill  them; 
and  he  himself  shall  finally  be  slain  with  lightning.  To  this  imagined  man  of 
their  own  imagination,  but  by  none  of  the  prophets  foreshowed  (at  least  in  no 
such  wise  as  this  is),  do  they  apply  the  prophets,  as  this  of  Daniel :  "  When 
the  continual  sacrifice  shall  be  taken  away,  and  abomination  shall  be  placed  to 
desolation :"  that  is,  say  they,  when  the  worshipping  of  God  shall  be  taken 
away,  and  desolation  (to  wit,  Antichrist)  shall  abominably  show  forth  himself 
to  be  worshipped,  then  shall  there  be  twelve  hundred  and  ninety  days :  that  is 
to  say,  three  years  and  a  half:  and  this  time  do  they  say  is  the  time,  times, 
and  half  a  time.  And  when  it  is  said  in  Daniel,  "Blessed  is  he  that  looketh 
for,  and  cometh  to  one  thousand  three  hundred  and  thirty-five  days,"  this, 
do  they  say,  is  thus  to  be  understood :  forty-five  days  of  repentance  to 
such  as  have  worshipped  Antichrist ;  which  forty-five  days  added  to  the  one 
thousand  two  hundred  and  ninety,  make  one  thousand  three  hundred  and 
thirty-five  days ;  which  days,  they  that  shall  reach  unto,  shall  be  called  blessed. 

They  apply  also  to  this  Antichrist,  this  saying  of  the  Apocalypse,   "  I  saw  a 


SIc;\S    OK    THl.    COMINc;     Ol      AN  riCIIUIsT.  1  i.') 

beast  rising  up  mil  of  tlu-  sou,  luivin};  .seven    lieads  and  ten    horn.^,  wlio   had  Richard 

power  fjiven  liim  to  make  forty-two  inontlis  :"   wliicli   montlis,    as   they  say,  do  ^'■ 

make  three  yeur.s  and  a  lialf,  in  which  Antielirist  sliall  reifjn.    And  many  other  .    ij 

thing's  there  are  toM,  and  applied  unlitly  to  this   imaginca  Antichrist,  that  arc  1301 
not  truly  grounded  upon  the  Scriptures. 


Now  let  us  show  the  errors  of  this  fable  :  first  of  all,  if  there  Shall  come  such  Touching 
a  one  (.sayint;  exj)re.sslv  that  he  is  Christ),  what  Christian  would  he  seduced  by  l.''^'"'' 
him,  though  he  should  do  ever  so  many  miracles .'  Neither  sliall  he  come  after  months. 
the  manner  of  a  seducer,  who  shall  show  himself  an  express  adversary.   Neither  see  vol.  ii. 
is  it  likely  tf.at  the  Jews  can  be  seduced   by  such  a   one,  seeing  that  Christ  is  P''^'*'' 
not  promised  unto  them  of  the  stock  of  Dan  by  iuiy   of  the  prophets,  but  of  the  j^.^^na- 
stock  of  Judah  :  nor  yet  is  he  promised    to  them  to  be   a   kmg  warlike,  but  tion 
peaceable,  taking  war  away,  and  not  making  war.     For  of  Christ  saith    Isai.Ui  ''"'c'""? 
[chap,  ii.],  "  And  in  the  last  days,  shall  there  be  prepared  the  mountain  of  the  christ, 
house  of  the  Lord,  iu  the  top  of  the  mountains,  and  it  shall  be  e.valted  above  the  confuted. 
hills ;  and  to  it  shall  all  the  nations  have  great  recourse,  and  many  people  shall  Anti- 
go  and  say :  Come,  let  us  go  uj)  to  the  mountain  of  the  Lord,  and  to  the  house  comcth 
of  the  Ciod  of  Jacob,  and  he  shall  teach  us  his  ways,  and  we  shall  walk  in  his  not  so 
paths.     For  out  of  Sion  shall  there  go  a  law,  aiul  the   word  of  the  Lord  from  f^.";*'!*'*' 
Jerusalem,  and  he  shall  judge  the  nations,  and  reprove   nuicli   people.     And  pists  ima- 
thcy  shall  turn  their  swords  into  ploughshares,  and  their  spears  into  scythes.  E'ne. 
There  shall  not  a  nation  lift  u])  itself  against  another  nation,  nor  yet  shall  they 
be  any  more  exercised  to  war."    And  again  [Isaiah  ix.],  "  A  little  babe  is  born 
to  us,  and  a  son  is  given    to  us,  and  his  imperial   kingdom  u])on  his  shoulder ; 
and  his  name  sludl  he  called,  the  great  Counsellor,  the  mighty  God,  the  Father 
of  the  world  to  come,  the  Prince  of  Peace.    His  empire  shall  be  multiplied,  and 
there  shall  be  no  end  of  his  peace.     He  shall  sit  upon   the  seat  of  David,  and 
upon  his  kingdom ;  that  he  may  make  it  steadfast  and  strong  in  judgment  and 
in  justice,  from  henceforth  and  for  evermore."     Zachariah  [chap.  i.\.]  doth  say 
of  Christ :  "  Rejoice  thou  greatly,  O  thou  daughter  Sion !  be  thou  exceeding  merry, 
O  daughter  Jenisalem !     Behold,  thy  king  shall  come  a  righteous  person  and  a 
Saviour  unto  thee,  and  yet  he  a  poor  man,    and  getting  uj)  upon  an  ass,  even 
upon  a  yomig  colt  of  the  she-ass.     And  I   will  scatter  abroad  the  chariot  of 
Ephraim,  and  the  horse  of  Jerusalem  ;  and  the  bow  of  war  shall  be  dispersed, 
and  he  shall  speak  peace  to  the  nations,  and  his  power  shall  be  from  the  sea  to 
the  sea,  and  from  the  flood  unto  the  borders  of  the  earth." 

By  whicli  things  it  is  manifest,  that  the  wise  Jews  knew  well   enough,  Christ  Christ 
to  be  promised  to  them  of  the  stock  of  Judah,  and  not  of  the  stock  of  Dan  ;  and  come  of 
tliat  he  was  given   all  to  peace,  and  not  to  war :  therefore  it  is  not  likely  that  thf  trii>c 
they  can  be  seduced  by  such  a  one.     But  if  there  should  have  been,  in   time  to  "'^  ^^^' 
come,  some  such  singular  .\ntichrist,   then  would  Christ,  seeing  he  loved  his, 
have  said  somewhat  unto  them  of  him.     Now,  of  one  singularly,  doth  he  not 
speak,  but  of  many,   saying,   "  Many  shall  come  in   my  name,  and  say,   I  am 
Christ ;  and  they  shall  seduce  many  persons."     But  now   let  us  see,  how  the 
pronhecies  in  Daniel,  and  in  the  Apocalypse,  aforesaid,  be  fidsely   and  errone- 
ously applied  to  the  same  imagined  Antichrist.     For  in  Daniel  [chap,  i.x.],  thus 
it  is  written :  "  .\nd  after  seventy-two  weeks  shall  Christ  be  slain,  and  they  which 
will  deny  him  shall  not  be  his  people.     And  the  city  and  sanctuary   shall   a 
people,  with  their  captain  that  shall  come  with  them,  destroy ;  whose  end  shall 
be  utter  desolation,  and  after  the  end  of  the  war  a  detennined  destruction.     Now 
he  shall  in  one  week  confirm  his  covenant  towards  many  ;  and  in  the  half  week, 
shall  the  olFeriiig  and  sacrifice  cease ;  and  in  the  temple   .shall  there  be  an  abo-  The  abo- 
mination of  desolation  :  and  even  to  the  fulfilling  up  of  all,  and  to  the  end  shall  ™'P''ti<"i. 
the  desolation   continue.        It  is  plain   and  mannest  tliat  this  prophecy  is  now  dtsola- 
fulfilled.      For  the    peoide  of  Rome,  with  their  captain,  destroyed  Jerusalem  •'<'"• 
even  to  the  ground,  aiul  the  people  of  the  Jews  were  slain  and  scattered.     And  f,,'',"',,-"'^ 
the  abomination,  that  is,  the  idol   of  desolation,  was  placed  by  .Vdrian,   in  the  holy 
last  destruction,  in  Jeru.salem,   in  the  holy  place  ;  that  is  to  say,  in   a  ])lace  of  I''"'"'"- 
the  temple.     And  from  that  time  hitherto  have  passed  near  about  twelve  hun- 
dred and  ninety  days,   taking  a  day   for  a  year,  as  Daniel  takes  it  in  his  pro- 
phechies,  and  other  prophets  likewise.     For  Daniel,  speaking  of  the  sixty-two 
weeks,  doth  not  speak  of  the  weeks  of  days,  but  of  years.     So,  therefore,  when 
he  saith,  "  From  the  time  that  the  continual  sacrifice  was  taken  away,"  &c., 
VOL.    III.  1. 


14G  THE     STORY    OF    WALTER    RRUTE. 

nichnrd   twelve  hundred  and  ninety  days  must  be  taken  for  so  many  years,  from  the 
'^        time  of  the  desolation  of  Jerusalem,  even  unto  the  revealing  of  Antichrist ;  and 
.    Tj      not  for  three  years  and  a  half,  which,   they  say.  Antichrist  shall  reign.     And 
I'ioi'    ''g'^J'i;  whereas  Daniel  said,  "How  long  till  the   end  of  these  marvellous  mat- 
— L! — 1-  ters  ?"    it  was  answered  him,   "  For  a  time,  and  times,  and  half  a  time  :"  behold 
Anti-        also,  how  unfitly  they  did  assign  this  time,   by  three  years  and   a  half,  which 
rei"nVn!y  ^^'^X  ^^y  Antichrist  shall  reign.     For  whereas  it  is  said  "  a  time,  times,  and 
three         half  a  time;"  there  is  a  going  downward  from  the  greater  to  the  less,  from  the 
years         whole  to  the  part,  because  it  is  from  a  time  to  half  a  time.     If,  therefore,  there 
haifAs      ^^^  ^  goi"g  downward  from  the  whole  to  the  part,  by  the  midst  (which  is  greater 
falfe.         than  the  whole  itself),  the  going  downward  is  not  meet  or  agi-eeing.    And  this 
is  done  when  it  is  said,  that  a  time,  times,  and  half  a  time,  is  a  year,  two  years, 
and  half  a  year.     Wherefore,  more  fitly  it  is  said,  that  a  time,  times,  and  half  a 
time,  doth  signify  twelve  hundred  and  ninety  years,  as  is  before   said  in   the 
chapter  preceding.     Thus  therefore  is  the  prophecy  of  Daniel  falsely  applied  to 
that  imagined  Antichrist. 
Look  be-        Likewise  is  the  process  of  the  Apocalypse  applied  to  the  same  imagined  Anti- 
fureinthe  christ  too  en'oneously.     Because  that  the  same  cruel  beast  which  came  up  out 
the  ten      o^  '■he  sea,  having  seven  heads  and  ten  horns,  to  whom  there  was  power  given 
first  per-    over  every  tribe,  people,  and  tongue,  and  the  power  given  for  the  space  of  foity- 
vo^"i'°"^'  ''^^^  months :  this  beast  doth  note  the  Roman  emperors,  who  most  cruelly  did 
Apoc.xiii.  persecute  the  people  of  God,  as  well  Christians  as  Jews.  For  when  the  condem- 
nation of  the  great  whore,   sitting  upon  the  many  waters,  was  showed  to  John, 
he  saw  the  same  woman  sitting  upon  the  purple-coloured  beast,  fidl  of  the  names 
of  blasphemy,  having  seven   heads  and  ten  horns,  and  he  saw  a  woman  being 
drimken  with  the  blood  of  the  saints  and  martyrs  of  Jesu.     And  the  angel,  ex- 
pounding and  telling  him  the  mystery  of  the  woman  and  the  beast  that  carried 
her,  said,  "  The  seven  heads  are  seven  hills,   and  are  seven   kings :  five  are 
fallen,  one  is,  the  other  is  not  yet  come  :  and  when  he  shall  come,  he  must  reign 
a  short  time.     And  the  ten  horns  which  thou  sawest,  are  ten  kings,  who  have 
not  yet  taken  their  kingdom,  but  shall  receive  their  power  as  it  were  in  one  horn- 
under  the  beast."     And,  finally,  he  saith,   "The  woman  whom  thou  sawest  is 
The  pur-  the  great  city,  which  hath  the  kingdom  over  the  kings  of  the  earth."    And  it  is 
P'^ J'"^''^'   manifest  that  the  city  of  Rome,  at  the  time  of  this  pi-ophecy,  had  the  kingdom 
Apoca-      over  the  kings  of  the  earth.     And  this  city  was  borne  up  and  upholden  by  her 
lypse         cruel  and  beastly  emperors  ;  who,  by  their  cruelty  and  bea^liness,  did  subdue 
Romtf*^     unto  themselves,  in  a  manner,  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world,   of  zeal  to  have 
lordship  over  others,  and  not  virtuously  to  govern  the  people  that  were  their 
subjects,  seeing  that  they  themselves  did  lack  all  virtue,  and  di-ew  back  others 
from  the  faith,  and  from  virtue. 

Wherefore  that  cruel  beast  coming  up  out  of  the  sea,  doth  rightly  note  the 

Roman  emperors,  who  had  power  over  every  language,   people,  and  country. 

And  the  power  of  the  beast  was  for  forty-two  months,  because   that  from  the 

first  emperor  of  Rome,  that  is  to  say,  Julius  Ca?sar,  unto  the  end  of  Frederic, 

For  tlie     the  last  emperor  of  Rome,  there  were  forty-two  months,  taking  a  month  for 

forty-two   thirty  days,  as  the  months  of  the  Hebrews  and  Grecians  are,  and  taking  a  day 

m  on  tlm  '  ^    o  j 

look  be-  always  for  a  year,  as  it  is  commonly  taken  in  the  prophets.  By  which  things 
fore,  page  it  may  plainly  appear  how  unfitly  this  prophecy  is  applied  to  that  imagined 
1 24, vol.  11.  Antichrist,  and  the  forty-two  months  taken  for  three  years  and  a  half,  which, 
they  say,  he  shall  reign  in,  against  the  saying  of  the  prophets,  because  days  are 
taken  for  years.  As  in  the  second  chapter  of  the  Apocalypse,  "  They  shall  be 
troubled  ten  days ;"  which  do  note  the  most  cruel  persecution  of  Dioclesian 
against  the  Christians,  that  endured  ten  years.  And  in  another  place  of  the 
Apocal)rpse  it  is  written  of  "  the  smoke  coming  up  out  of  the  bottomless  pit :" 
out  of  which  pit  there  came  forth  grasshoppers  into  the  earth,  and  to  them  was 
power  given,  as  scorpions  have  power,  to  vex  and  trouble  men  five  months. 
Now,  it  is  manifest,  that  from  the  beginning  of  the  friars  minors  and  preachers,* 
to  the  time  that  Armachanus  began  to  disclose  and  uncover  their  hypocrisy, 
and  their  false  foundation  of  valiant  begging  under  the  poverty  of  Christ,  were 
five  months,  taking  a  month  for  thirty  days,  and  a  day  for  a  year :  and  to 
Ezekiel  were  days  given  for  years.     Wherefore  it  is  an  unfit  thing  to  assign  the 

(1)  The  beginning  and  end  of  the  valiant  beggarly  friars  spoken  of  in  the  Apocalypse,  expounded 
by  Armachanus,  see  vol.  ii.  p.  756. 


THi:    I.MAi.lN'Klt    TALKS    OI-     ANTICHKIST    rOVFL'Tl.D.  147 

forty-two  moiitlis,  being  appointed  to  the  power  of  the  beast,  unto  three  years  Richard 
and  a  half,  for  the  reifjn  of  that  fantastical  and  imagined  Antichrist  ;   especially      '' 
seeing  that  tluy  do  apj)ly  to  his   reign  the  twelve   hundred  and  ninety   days  in     ^  jj 
Daniel,  which  make  forty-two  months,  and  in  the  Apocalypse  they  assign  him     1,391 
forty-two  months.      It  is  plain  that   the  psaltery  and  llie  harp  agree  not.     And, 


therefore,  seeing  that  it  is  suliiciently  showed  tliat  the  same  fabling  tale  of  that  ^^  •":"'tT 
imagined  Antichrist  to  come,    is  a  fable  and   eiKmeous;  let   us  go   forward  to  ,iirist  lie 
declare  whether  Antichrist  be  already  couic,   and  yet  is  he  hid  from  many,  and  -ilriaily 
must  be  opened  and  disclosed  within  a  little  while  according  to  the  truth  of  the  '^*^""" 
holy  Scripture,  for  the  salvation  of  the  faithful. 

And  because  that  in  the  fn-st  conclusion  of  mine  answer  I  have   conditionallv 
put  it :  Who  is  the  .-Vntichrist  lying  privy  in  the  hid  Scriptures  of  the  prophets  I  I 
will  pass  on  to  the  declaration  of  that  conclusion,  bringing  to  light  tliose  things 
which  lay  hid  in  darkness,  because  nothing  is  hid  which  shall  not  be  disclosed,  and 
nothing  covered  which  shall  not  be  known.    And  therefore  the  thing  which  was 
said  in  the  darkness,  let  us  say  in  the  light ;  and  the  thing  that  we  have  heard 
in  the  ear,  let  us  preach  upon  the  house-tops.   I,  therefore,  as  I  have  before  said.  The  pope 
so  say,  that  if  the  high   bishop  of  Rome,  calling  himself  the  servant  of  (Jod  and  l'''"\'-''l 
the  chief  vicar  of  Christ  in  this  world,  do  make  and  justify  many  laws  contrary  curist. 
to  the  gospel  of  Jesu  Christ,  then  is  he  the  chief  of  many,  who,  coming  in  the 
name  of  Christ,  have  s.'iid  "I  am  Christ,"  who  have  seduced  many:  which  is 
the  (irst  part  of  the  first  conclusion,  and  is  manifest ;  for  Christ  is  called  by  the 
Hebrews  the  very  same  that  we  call  anointed ;  and  amongst   thenj  there  was  a  Anoint- 
double  sort  of  legal  anointing  by  the  law,   the  one  of  kings,  and  the   other  of  "Jk;'""- 
priests  ;  and  as  well  were   the  kings,  as  the  priests,  called  in   the  law,  Christs.  scrimurc 
The  kings,  as  in  the  Psalm,   "  The  kings  of  the  earth  stood  up  together,  and  the  Kin«s 
princes  assembled  themselves  in  one  against  the  Lord,  and  against  his  Christ  or  ""■''_ 
anointed."     And  in   the  Books  of  the  Kings   very  often  are  the  kings   called  anointed. 
Christs ;  and  our  Saviour  was  Christ,   or  anointed  king,   because  he  was  a  king 
for  evermore  upon  the  throne  of  David,  as  the   Scripture  doth  very  oftentimes 
witness.     The  priests  also  were  called  anointed,  as  where  it  is  written,   "  Do  not 
ye  touch  my  Christs ;"  that  is,  mine  anointed  ones,  "  and  be  not  ye  spiteful  against 
my  prophets."     And  so  was  our  Saviour  Christ  "a  priest  for  ever,  according  to 
the  order  of  Melchizedec." 

Seeing  then  that  the  bishops  of  Rowie  do  say  that  they  are  the  high  priests,  Popos 
they  say  also  therein  that  they  are  kings,  because  they  say  that  thoy  have  the  '"^'"" 
spiritual  sword  pertaining  to  their  priesthood,  and   the  corporal  sword   which  gJiTJs 
agrecth  for  a  king's  state.     So  is  it  plain,  that,   really  and  in  very  deed,  thev  I'riesu 
say  that  they  are  Christs,  albeit  that  expressly  they  be   not  called   Christs.  PI"* 
Now,  that  they  come  in  the  name  of  Christ  it  is  manifest,  because  they  say  that  The  pope 
they  are  his  principal  vicars  in  this  world,   ordained  of  Christ  specially  for  the  malieth 
government   of  the  christian  church.     Therefore,  seeing  they  say  that  really  cirri*^"^ 
and  in  very  deed  they  are  Christs,  and  the  chief  friends  of  Christ;  if  they  make  nnd 
and  justify  many  laws  contrary  to  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  then  is  it  jjlain  ''"""•'•'>  in 
that  they  themselves  in  earth  are  tlie  principal  Antichrists,  because  there  is  no  hV  proved 
worse  plagx'.e  and  pestilence  than  a  familiar  enemy.     And  if  in  secret  they  be  ■'^'">- 
against  Christ,  and  yet  in  open  appearance  they  say  that  they  arc  his  friends,  p„7ward 
they  are  so  much  the  nisre  meet  to  seduce   and  deceive  the  christian  people :  friend, 
because  a  manifest  enemy  shall  have  much  ado  to  deceive  a  man,  because  men  "'"'  1"^'''^ 
trust  him  not ;  but  a  privy  enemy,   pretending  outward   friendship,  may  easily  chrUt.  " 
seduce,  yea  those  that  be  wise. 

But  that  this  matter  may  the  more  fully  be  known,  let  us  see  wh.at  is  the  law 
and  doctrine  of  Christ,  that  ought  to  be  observed  by  all  faithful  people ;  which 
being  known,  it  shall  be  an  easy  thine  to  see,  if  the  bishop  of  Home  do  make 
or  maintain  any  laws  contrary  to  the  law  of  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ. 

I  say  then,  tiiat  the  law  of  Christ  is  charity,  which  is  the  perfect  love  of  God 
and  ol'  Christ.     This  thing  is  plain  and  manifest.     For  Christ  being  demanded 
of  a  certiiin  doctor  of  the  law,    "What  is  the  greatest  commandment  in  the 
law  V  answered  :  "  Thou  shaltlove  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart,  and  with  The  law 
all  thy  soul,  and  with  all    thy  mind:  this  is  the  principal  and  greatest  com-  °'^'"^'= 
mandment.     .\nd  as  for  the  second  it  is  like  unto  this :  Thou  shalt  love  thy  mended 
neighbour  as  thine  own  self.     On  these  two  commandments  the  whole  law  and  '"  ""^ 
prophets  depend."  And  in  another  place  [John  xiii.]  Christ  saith  :  "All  manner  ^°''"^* 


148  THE    STORY     OF    WALTER    BRUTE. 

Richard   of  things,  therefore,  that   you  would  that  men  should  do  to  you,  the  same 

^^-       also  do  you  unto  them,  for  this  is  the  law  and  the  prophets."     And  in  the 

.    p.      same  chapter  of  John,  Christ  saith,  "  And  now  do  I  say  unto  you,  I  give  you 

]„'q/    a  new  commandment,  that  you  should  love  each  other;  as  I  loved  you,  in  like 

. 1.  manner  that  you  also  should  love  one  another.     In  this  shall  all  men  know 

that  you  are  my  disciples,  if  you  shall  have  love  one  towards  another."  And 
John,  chapter  xv.  "  This  is  my  commandment,  that  you  love  together  as  I 
have  loved  you.  Greater  love  than  this  hath  nobody,  that  a  man  should  give 
his  life  for  his  friends."  The  apostle  Peter  saith,  in  his  first  epistle,  chapter  iv. 
"  Above  all  things  having  continually  charity  one  towards  another;  for  charity 
covereth  the  multitude  of  sins.  Be  ye  harbourers,  and  entertain  ye  one  another 
without  grudging  ;  every  one  as  he  hath  received  grace,  so  let  him  bestow  it 
upon  another  man,  as  the  good  stewards  of  the  manifold  grace  of  God.  If  any 
man  speak,  let  him  speak  as  the  word  of  God.  If  any  man  do  ought  for 
another,  let  it  be  done  with  singleness  and  unfeigned  verity,  ministered  of  God 
to  usward,  that  in  all  things  God  may  be  honoured  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord."  James,  in  his  epistle,  chapter  ii.  says,  "  If  ye  perform  the  royal  law 
accordingly  to  the  Scriptures,  '  thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour,'  ye  do  well :  but 
if  ye  be  partial  in  receiving  and  preferring  men's  personages,  ye  work  wicked- 
ness, being  blamed  of  the  law  as  transgressors."  And  again,  "So  speak  ye, 
and  so  do  ye,  as  ye  should  now  begin  to  be  judged  by  the  law  of  liberty.  What 
shall  it  avail,  my  brethren,  if  a  man  say  he  have  faith,  and  have  no  works  ? 
Never  shall  that  faith  be  able  to  save  him.  For  if  a  brother  or  sister  be  naked, 
and  have  need  of  daily  food,  and  some  of  you  say  to  them.  Go  ye  in  peace,  be 
ye  made  warm  and  satisfied ;  and  if  ye  shall  not  give  those  things  that  are 
necessary  for  the  body,  what  shall  it  avail  1  Even  so  faith,  if  it  have  not  works, 
is  dead  in  itself." 

John,  in  his  first  epistle,  chapter  iii.  "  This  is  the  tidings  which  you  have 
lieard  from  the  beginning,  that  you  should  love  one  another."  And  again,  "  We 
know  that  we  are  translated  from  death  to  life,  if  we  love  the  brethren :  he  that 
loveth  not,  abideth  in  death."  And  again,  "  Herein  do  we  know  the  love  of 
God,  because  that  he  hath  laid  down  his  life  for  us,  and  we  ought  to  lay  down 
our  lives  for  the  brethren.  He  that  shall  have  the  substance  of  this  world,  and 
shall  see  his  brother  have  need,  and  shall  shut  up  his  bowels  from  him,  how 
abideth  the  love  of  God  in  him  ?  My  little  children,  let  us  not  love  in  word  nor 
tongue,  but  in  deed  and  truth."  And  again,  chapter  iv.  "  Most  dearly  beloved, 
let  us  love  together  ;  for  love  is  of  God.  He  that  loveth  not,  knoweth  not  God ; 
for  God  is  love.  In  this  thing  hath  the  love  of  God  appeared  in  us,  that  God 
hath  sent  his  only  begotten  Son  into  the  world,  that  we  should  live  by  him. 
Herein  is  love ;  not  that  we  have  loved  God,  but  that  he  hath  first  loved  us, 
and  hath  sent  his  Son  an  atonement  for  oin-  sins.  Most  dearly  beloved,  if  God 
have  loved  us,  we  so  ought  to  love  together.  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any 
time;  if  we  love  together,  God  abideth  in  us,  and  his  love  is  perfect  in  us." 
And  again,  •'  Let  us  love  God,  for  he  hath  first  loved  us.  If  a  man  shall  say, 
I  love  God,  and  do  hate  his  brother,  he  is  a  liar :  for  he  that  loveth  not  his 
brother  whom  he  seeth,  how  can  he  love  God  whom  he  seeth  not?  And  this 
commandment  have  we  of  God,  that  who  so  loveth  God,  should  love  his  brother 
also."  Paul  the  apostle,  in  his  epistle  to  the  Romans,  chapter  xiii.  "Owe  ye 
nothing  to  nobody,  saving  that  you  should  love  together ;  for  he  that  loveth  his 
brother  hath  fulfilled  the  law.  For  thou  shalt  not  commit  adultery,  thou  shalt 
not  murder,  thou  shalt  not  steal,  thou  shalt  not  bear  false  witness,  thou  shalt 
not  covet  thy  neighbour's  goods  ;  and  if  there  be  any  other  commandment,  it  is 
plentifully  fulfilled  in  this  word :  '  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself.'  " 
Wherefore  the  fulfilling  of  the  law  is  love. 

Paul  to  the  Corinthians  [chapter  xiii.]  saith,  "  If  I  should  speak  with  the 
tongues  of  men  and  angels,  and  yet  have  not  charity,  I  am  become  as  it  were  a 
piece  of  sounding  metal  or  tinkling  cymbal.  And  if  I  have  all  prophecy,  and 
know  all  mysteries  and  all  knowledge,  and  shall  have  all  faith,  so  that  I  might 
remove  mountains,  and  yet  shall  not  have  charity,  I  am  nothing.  And  if  I  shall 
give  abroad  all  my  goods  to  feed  the  poor,  and  shall  give  up  my  body  to  be 
burned,  and  yet  have  not  charity,  it  profits  me  nothing."  To  the  Galatians 
[chapter  v.]  saith  Paul,  "  For  you  my  brethren  arc  called  unto  liberty  :  do  ye 
not  give  your  liberty  for  an  occasion  of  the  flesh,  but  by  charity  of  the  spirit 


i.()\  K    rnK   lai.m.i.iNc.  ok  tiii-:   iaw.  14«9 

serve  ye  one  another.     For  all  tho  law  is  fullilled  in  one  saying  :   "  Tiiou  slialt    it„-hatd 
love  thy  neighbour  as  thine  own  self."   To  tlie  Ephesians  [chapter  iv.]  he  saith,       " 


1  therefore  that  sutler  bonds  in  the  Lord  do  beseecli  you,  that  you  would  walk      ^   jj 
worthy  of  the  calling  wherewith  ye  are  called,  with  all  humbleness  and  mild-     i;j;)| 

ness,  with  patience,  forbearing  one  another  in    love,  being  careful   to   keep  the '- 

unity  of  the  spirit  in  the  bond  of  peace  :  that  you  he  one  body  and  one  spirit, 
even  as  you  be  called  in  one  hope  of  your  calling."  And  again,  chapter  v.  "  Re 
ye  followers  of  me  as  most  dear  children,  and  walk  ye  in  love,  as  Clirist  also 
hatli  loved  as,  and  hath  delivered  uj)  himself  for  us,  an  olfering  and  sacrifice  to 
(lod  of  a  sweet  savour."  To  tiie  Philippians,  tims  he  speaketh,  in  chapter  i. 
'•  t)nly  let  your  conversation  be  worthy  of  the  gospel  of  Christ,  that  either  wiien 
1  shall  come  and  see  you,  or  else  in  mine  absence  I  may  hear  of  you,  that  you 
stand  steadfast  in  one  spirit,  labouring  together  with  one  accord  for  the  faith  of 
the  gospel.  And  in  nothing  be  ye  afraid  of  the  adversaries,  which  is  to  them  a 
cause  of  damnation,  but  to  you  of  salvation,  and  that  of  (iod.  For  to  you  it  is 
given,  not  only  that  you  should  believe  in  him,  but  also  that  you  should  suffer 
with  him,  you  having  the  like  fight  and  battle  that  you  have  both  seen  in  me, 
and  also  now  do  hear  of  me.  If,  therefore,  there  be  any  consolation  in  Christ, 
if  any  comfort  of  charity,  if  any  fellowsiiip  of  the  spirit,  if  any  bowels  of  com- 
passion, fulfil  you  my  joy,  that  you  may  be  of  one  judgment,  having  one  and 
the  selfsame  cliarity,  being  of  one  accord,  of  one  manner  of  judgment,  doing 
nothing  of  contention  or  of  vain  glory,  but  in  humbleness  accounting  others 
amongst  you,  every  one,  better  than  yourselves;  not  every  body  looking  upon 
the  things  that  be  his  own,  but  on  those  that  belong  to  others."  And  to  the 
Colossians  [chapter  iii.]  thus  he  writeth,  "  You,  therefore,  as  the  elect  of  God, 
holy  and  beloved,  put  upon  you  the  bowels  of  mercy,  gentleness,  humbleness, 
lowliness,  modesty,  patience,  bearing  one  with  another,  and  giving  place  to  your- 
selves :  if  any  have  a  quarrel  against  any  body,  even  as  the  Lord  forgave  you, 
so  do  you  also.  Above  all  tilings  have  ye  charity,  which  is  the  bond  of  per- 
fection, and  let  the  peace  of  Christ  triumph  in  your  hearts,  in  which  peace  you 
also  are  called  in  one  body;  and  be  ye  kind  and  thankful."  And  to  the  Thes- 
salonians,  thus  Paul  writeth,  in  his  first  epistle,  chapter  iv.  "  As  concerning 
brotherly  charity  we  have  no  need  to  write  unto  you;  for  you  yourselves  have 
learned  of  God,  that  you  sliould  love  one  another.  And  the  same  tiling  ye  do 
towards  all  the  brethren  throughout  all  Macedonia." 

Out  of  all  these,  and  many  other  places  of  the  holy  Scripture,  it  sufficiently 
appeareth,  that  the  law  of  Christ  is  charity  ;  neither  is  there  any  virtue  com- 
manded by  Christ,  or  any  of  his  apostles,  to  be  observed  by  the  faithful  people, 
but  that  it  Cometh  out  of  charity,  or  else  doth  nourish  charity. 

The  law  is  given  by  Moses,  and  the  truth  by  Christ.     Christ  came  not  to  un- 
loose the  law  and  the  prophets,  but  to  fulfil  them.     But  yet  many  things  were  M.iiiy" 
lawful  and  might  have  been  observed  in  the  time  of  the  law,  which  in  the  time  }.',""fy]  ,^. 
of  grace  must  not  be  observed ;  and  many  things  were  unhuvful  to  them  that  the  old 
were  under  the  law,  which  in  the  time  of  grace  are  lawful  enough.   After  what  '-iw. 
sort,  then,  he  did  not  loose  the  law,  but  did  fulfil  it,  it  is  necessary  to  declare,  ^'^"^^  *" 
for  those  ttiings   which  hereafler  must  be  said.     For  amongst  Christians  many  now 
things  are  judged  to  be  lawful,  because  in  the  former  Testament  in  the  law  they 
were  lawful :  and  yet  they   be   expressly  contrary  to  Christ's  gospel.     But  the 
authors  of  such  things  do  argue  and  reason  thus  :  Christ  came  not  to  loose  the  How 

law  or  the  prophets.     Now  after  what  sort  he  did  not  unloose  them,  it  is  mani-  phristdid 
•       l  ,  ,  .  i«r  ■•  II       loose,  alio 

fest  by  the  holy  bcnpture ;  that  the  law  given  by  .Moses,  was  written  in  tables  not  loose 
of  stone,  to  declare  the  hardness  of  the  people's  heart  towards  the  love  of  God,  tlic  U^^. 
or  of  Christ.  But  Christ  hath  written  his  law  in  the  hearts  and  in  tlie  minds  of 
his ;  that  is  to  sny,  the  law  of  perfect  love  of  God  and  of  Christ :  which  law 
whosoever  observeth,  he  doth  observe  the  law  of  Moses,  and  doth  much  greater 
works  of  perfection,  than  were  the  works  of  the  law.  Thus,  therefore,  were  the 
morals  of  the  old  law  fulfilled  in  the  law  of  the  charity  of  Christ,  and  not  un- 
loosed ;  because  they  are  much  more  perfectly  observed,  than  by  the  Jews : 
thi.s  I  say,  if  the  Christians  do  observe  the  commandments  of  Christ  in  such 
sort,  as  he  commanded  the  same  to  be  observed.  Christ  hath  fulfilled  the  laws 
moral  of  the  Old  Testament,  because  that  the  morals  and  judicials  were  ordained, 
that  one  person  should  not  do  injury  to  another,  and  that  every  man  should 
have  paid  him  that  is  his.     Now  they  that  arc  in  charity,  will  do  no  injury  to 


150 


THK    STOKY    OF    WALTER    BRUTE, 


llichard 
II. 

A.D. 
1391. 


Free 

justifica- 
tion, b/ 
faith 
only. 


Christ 
enters 
not  into 
the  tem- 
ple mada 
l)y  man, 
hut  into 
the  verj' 
Heaven. 
His  sacri- 
fice not 
many 
times 
oifered, 
but  once 
for  all. 


others,  neither  do  they  take  other  men's  goods  away  from  them  ;  nay,  she  seeketh 
not  her  own  things,  for  charity  seeketh  not  the  things  that  be  her  own.  Where- 
fore much  less,  by  a  stronger  reason,  it  ought  not  to  seek  for  other  men's  goods. 
And  when  the  judicials  and  morals  were  ordained,  Christ  did  not,  by  the  works 
of  the  law,  justify  the  believers  in  him,  but  by  grace  justified  them  from  their 
sins.  And  so  did  Christ  fulfil  that  by  grace,  which  the  law  could  not  by 
justice. 

Paul  to  the  Romans,  declareth  in  a  godly  discourse,  and  to  the  Galatians 
likewise,  "  That  none  shall  be  justified  by  the  works  of  the  law,  but  by  grace ' 
in  the  faith  of  Jesus  Christ."  As  for  the  morals  and  ceremonies  of  the  law,  as 
circumcision,  sacrifices  for  offences  and  for  sins,  first-fruits,  tenths,  vows,  divers 
sorts  of  washings,  the  sprinkling  of  blood,  the  sprinkling  of  ashes,  abstaining 
from  unclean  meats,  which  are  ordained  for  the  sanctifying  and  cleansing  of 
the  people  from  sin,  no  nor  yet  the  prayers  of  the  priests,  neither  the  preachings 
of  the  prophets  could  cleanse  a  man  from  his  sin.  For  death  reigned  even  from 
Adam  to  Moses,  and  sin  from  Moses  to  Christ,  as  Paul  declareth  to  the  Romans, 
[chapter  v.]  But  Christ,  willing  to  have  mercy  and  not  sacrifice,  "  being  a 
priest  for  ever  after  the  order  of  Melchisedec,  and  a  high  priest  of  good  things 
to  come,  did  neither  by  the  blood  of  goats  nor  calves,  but  by  his  own  blood 
enter  in  once  into  the  holy  places,  when  everlasting  redemption  was  found  • 
neither  did  Jesus  enter  into  the  holy  places  that  were  made  with  hands,  which 
are  the  examples  of  true  things,  but  into  the  very  heaven,  that  now  he  may 
appear  before  the  coimtenance  of  God  for  us.  Nor  yet  he  did  so,  that  he  should 
offer  up  himself  oftentimes,  as  the  high  bishop  entered  into  the  holy  place  every 
year  with  strange  blood  (for  otherwise  he  must  needs  have  suffered  oftentimes 
since  the  beginning  of  the  world) ;  but  now,  in  the  latter  end  of  the  world,  hath 
he  once  appeared,  by  his  own  sacrifice,  for  the  destruction  of  sin.  And,  like  as 
it  is  decreed  for  men  once  to  die,  and  after  that  cometh  judgment,  even  so  ivas 
Christ  once  offered  up  to  consume  away  the  sins  of  many.  The  second  time 
shall  he  appear  without  sin  to  the  salvation  of  such  as  look  for  him."  [Heb.  ix. 
24 — 28.]  "For  the  law,  having  a  shadow  of  good  things  to  come,  and  not  the 
very  image  or  substance  itself  of  the  things,  can  never,  by  those  sacrifices  which 
they  offer,  of  one  self-same  sort  continually  year  by  year,  make  them  perfect 
that  come  unto  her:  otherwise  men  would  leave  off  offering,  because  that  those 
worshippers  being  once  cleansed  should  have  no  more  prick  of  conscience  for 
sin  afterwards.  But  in  them  is  there  remembrance  made  of  sins  every  year. 
For  it  is  impossible,  that  by  the  blood  of  goats  and  bulls  sins  should  be  taken 
away.  Whereas  he,  entering  into  the  world,  doth  say,  As  for  sacrifice  and 
offering  thou  woiddst  not  have,  but  a  body  hast  thou  framed  unto  me  :  and 
sacrifices  for  sin  have  not  pleased  thee.  Then,  said  I,  Behold,  I  come :  in  the 
head,  or  principal  part  of  the  book  it  is  written  of  me,  that  I  should  do  thy  will, 
O  God.  Wherefore  he  said  before,  that  sacrifices,  oblations,  and  burnt-offer- 
ings, and  that  for  sin,  thou  wouldst  not  have,  neither  were  those  things  pleasant 
to  thee  which  are  offered  according  to  the  law :  then  said  T,  Behold,  I  come, 
that  I  may  do  thy  will,  O  God.  He  taketh  away  the  first,  that  he  may  establish 
that  that  followed.  In  which  will  we  are  sanctified  and  made  holy,  by  the  offer- 
ing up  of  the  body  of  Jesus  Christ  once.  And  verily  every  priest  is  ready  every 
day  ministering,  and  oftentimes  offering  the  self-same  sacrifices,  which  never 
can  take  away  sins.  But  this  man,  offering  one  sacrifice  for  sins,  doth  for  ever 
and  ever  sit  at  God's  right  hand,  looking  for  the  rest  to  come,  till  that  his  ene- 
mies be  placed  to  be  his  footstool.  For  with  one  offering  hath  he  for  ever  made 
'  perfect  those  that  be  sanctified."  [Heb.  x.  1 — 14.]  By  which  things  it  plainly 
appeareth,  that  Christ,  by  one  offering,  hath  cleansed  his  from  their  sins,  who 
could  not  be  cleansed  from  the  same  by  all  the  ceremonies  of  the  law,  and  so 
did  fulfil  that,  which  the  priesthood  of  the  law  could  not.  Wherefore  only  the 
morals  and  judicials  he  fulfilled  by  the  law  of  charity,  and  by  grace  ;  and  the 
ceremonials,  by  one  ofiering-up  of  his  body  on  the  altar  of  the  cross.  And  so 
it  is  plain  that  Christ  fufiUed  the  whole  law. 

Wherefore,  since  the  holy  things  of  the  law  were  a  shadow  of  those  things  that 
were  to  come  in  the  time  of  grace,  it  were  meet  that  all  those  things  should 
utterly  cease  amongst  Christians,  wliich  should  either  be  against  charity  or  the 


(1)  Grace,  that  is,  the  free  favour,  mercy,  and  goodness  of  God. 


TITHKS     SOT    KXrHK:;Sl-Y    COMMASDKU    ANKW     BY     (IIRIST.  I . j  I 

pracc  of  Christ.     Although   in   the  time  of  the  law  they  wore  lawful,  and  not  Huh.ird 
utterly  contrary  to   it,  but  were  figures  of  perfections  in   Christ's  faith,  yet  it       ^^• 
were  meet  that  they  should  cease  at  the  coming  of  the  perfection  wliicli  they  ~a7Tk~ 
did   pretij^urate  ;  as  circumcision,  the  catin;^  of  the  paschal  lamb,  and  otlier    1,391. 

ceremonial  points  of  the  law.   Whereupon  also,  Paul  to  the  Hebrews,  [cliapter  vii. 

11  — 19,1    saith  thus  "  If,  therefore,  the  makinj^  up   of  the  perfection  of  all, 
was  by  tne  Levitical  priesthood  (for  the  people  received  the  law  under  him),  why 
was  it  necessary  '  l)esides,  that  another  priest  should  rise  up  after  the  order  of 
Melchisedec,  and  not  be  called  after  the  order  of  Aaron  !    For  when  the  priest-  whero 
hood  is  removed,  it  nuist   needs  be   that  tlie  law  also  be  removed.      For  he  of  the 
whom  these  thinj^s  are  spoken,  is  of  another  tribe,  of  which  none  stood  j)Vesent  jJ"o"'j^ 
at  the  altar;  because  it  is  manifest  that  our  Lord  had  his  offspring  of  Judah,  in  removed, 
whicli  tribe  Moses  spake  nothing  of  the  priests.   And  besides  this,  it  is  manifest,  "'^■'^'^. 
if  according  to  the  order  of  .Melchisedec  there  do  rise  up  another  priest,  which  ja^^i^  ' 
was  not  made  according  to  the  law  of  the  carnal  conmiandmeiit,  but  according  removed 
to  the  power  of  the  life  that  cannot  be  lost.     For   thus    lie  beareth   witness, 
That  thou  art  a  priest  for  ever  after  the  order  of  Melchisedec  :  so  that  the  com- 
maiulment  that  went  before,  is  disallowed  for  the  weakness  and  unprofitableness 
thereof,  for  the  law  hath  brought  nobody  to  perfection."     Hy   which  things  it  The 
appeareth  that  Christ,  making  an  end  of  the  priesthood  of  Aaron,  doth  also  ""*.'^ 
make  up  a  full  end  of  tlie  law  belonging  to  that  priesthood.'     Whereupon   I  the  effect 
marvel  that  your  learned  men  do  say,  that  christian  folks  are  bound  to  this  a''"^ 
small  ceremony  of  the  payment  of  tithes,  and  care  nothing  at  all  for  others,  as  ""*' 
well  the  great  as  the  small  ceremonies  of  the  law. 

It  is  plain,  that  the  tithes  were  given  to  the  sons  of  Levi,  for  their  serving  in 
the  tabernacle  and  in  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  as  the  first-fruits  were  given  to 
the  priests,  and  also  part  of  the  sacrifices ;  and  so  were  the  vows  of  their  ministry, 
as  it  appeareth  in  the  Hook  of  Numbers,  [chapter  xxii.]  But  forasmuch  as  the 
labour  of  those  sacriiices  did  cease  at  the  coming  of  Christ,  how  should  those 
things  be  demanded,  which  were  ordained  for  that  labour  ?  And,  seeing  that 
the  first  fniits  were  not  demanded  of  Christians,  which  first  fruits  were  then 
rather  and  sooner  demanded  than  the  tithes,  why  must  the  tithes  be  demanded, 
except  it  be  therefore,  peradventure,  because  the  tithes  be  more  worth  in  value 
than  be  the  first  fruits  ? 

Secondly,  Why  are  the  lay  people  bound  to  the  payment  of  tithes,  more  than 
the  Levites  and  the  priests  were  to  the  not  having  of  possessions  of  realties 
and  lordships  amongst  their  brethren,  seeing  that  the  selfsame  law,  in  the  self- 
same place,  where  he  saith,  that  the  tithes  ought  to  be  given  to  Levites, 
saith  also  to  the  liCvites,  "  You  shall  be  contented  with  the  offering  of  the  tithes, 
and  have  none  other  thing  amongs^t  your  brethren.  "*  Wherefore,  seeing  that 
the  priests  be  bound  to  the  not  having  of  temporal  lordships,  how  are  the  lay 
people  bound  by  that  law  (of  God,  he  meaneth,  and  not  of  man),  to  the  pay- 
ment of  tithes  ?* 

Thirdly,  as  touching  circumcision,  which  is  one  of  the  greater  ceremonies  of  Circum- 
the  law,  and  was  given  before  the  law,  and  was  an  universal  ceremony  concern-  "^"'"".v  . 
ing  the  covenant  between  God  and  his  people,  and  was  so  much  regarded  in  jrgo,  the 
the  law,  that  thereof  it  was  said,  "The  soul,  whose  flesh  shall  not  be  circum-  ccrcmo- 
cised  in  the  foreskin,  shall  perish  from  among   his  people :"  yet  did  this  cere-  "j^g/* 
mony  utterly  cease  at  the  coming  of  Christ,  although  certain  of  the  Jews  did 
say  in  the  primitive  church,  that  the  Christians  must  needs  keep  the  conmiand- 
mcnt  of  circumcision   with   the  faith  ;  whom    Paul  reproveth,  writing  thus  to 
the  Cialatians   [chapter  iv.],  where  he  speaketh  of  the  children   of  the   bond-       , 
woman  and  of  the  free-woman,  which  (io  signify   tiie  two  Testaments  :   "  But 
we,  O  brethren,  are  the  children  of  the  promise  after  Isaac  ;  but  like  as  at  that 
time  he  that  was  born  after  the  flesh,  did  persecute  him  which  was  after  the 
spirit,  even  so  it  is  now  also.      But  what  saith  the  Scripture  ?    Throw  out  the 

(I)  Bound,  ai  .1  matter  of  rclifrion.  or  »«  by  the  neceuity  uf  God's  Uw,  and  not  man's  :  bat  11  i.v 
tithes  atand  by  man'i  law,  and  not  by  the  old  law. 

(21  He  meaneth.  that  necessity  of  tithei  which  itarideth  by  the  necessity  of  the  old  law,  to  cense. 

1 3  \t  tilliet  be  claimed  by  force  uf  the  old  law,  by  the  lamr  law  priests  are  bound  to  have  iin 
tcmporaltie*. 

(41  lie  pr.iveth  not  contr.iry.  but  that  tithes  be  due  by  the  profitable  I,iw  ufinaui  although  nut 
bv  th"  ccnmonial  bw  of  Mov.s. 


152 


THE    STOHY    OK     WAITKK     llRUTi:. 


Richard 
II. 

A.D. 

1391. 

Christian 
liberty 
from  the 
bondage 
of  the 
law. 


Priests 
wrest  re- 
ligion to 
their  own 
profit. 

.  Tithes 
not  ex- 
pressly 
com- 
manded 
anew  by 
Christ 
in  the 
gospeL 


Tithes 
not  re- 
quired in 
the  primi- 
tive 
Church. 


Tithes 
due,  to  be 
paid  by 
the  law   • 
of  men. 


bondwoman  and  Iter  son.  The  son  of  the  bondwoman  shall  not  be  heir  with  the 
son  of  the  free-woman.  Wherefore  brethren,  we  are  not  tlie  sons  of  the  bond- 
woman, but  of  the  free.  Stand  ye  steadfast  in  the  liberty  wherewith  Christ  hath 
delivered  you,  and  be  not  ye  holden  again  under  the  yoke  of  slavery.  Behold, 
I  Paul  say  unto  you,  if  you  be  circumcised,  Christ  shall  nothing  profit  you.  For 
I  testify  again,  to  every  man  that  circumciseth  himself,  that  he  is  bound  to  keep 
all  the  whole  law.  Ye  are  utterly  void  of  Christ :  whosoever  will  be  justified 
in  the  law,  are  f^vllen  from  grace." 

In  like  manner  we  may  reason,  if  we  be  bound  to  tithing,  •  we  are  debtors  and 
bound  to  keep  all  the  whole  law.  For  to  say,  that  men  are  bound  to  one  cere- 
mony of  the  law,  and  not  to  the  others,  is  no  reasonable  saying.  Either  there- 
fore we  are  bound  to  them  all,  or  to  none.  Also,  that  by  the  same  old  law,  men 
are  not  bound  to  pay  tithes,''  it  may  be  showed  by  many  reasons,  which  we  need 
not  any  more  to  multiply  and  increase,  because  the  things  that  be  said  are  suf- 
ficient. Whereupon  some  do  say,  that  by  the  gospel  we  are  bound  to  pay 
tithes,  because  Christ  said  to  the  Pharisees,  [Matt,  xxiii.]  "  Wo  be  to  you 
Scribes  and  Pharisees,  which  pay  your  tithe  of  mint,  of  anise-seed,  and  of  cum- 
min, and  leave  judgment,  mercy,  and  truth  undone,  being  the  weightier  things 
of  the  law ;  both  should  ye  have  done  these  things,  and  also  not  have  left  the 
other  undone.  O  ye  blind  guides,  that  strain  out  a  gnat,  and  swallow  up  a 
camel."  This  word  soundeth  not  as  a  commandment,  or  manner  of  bidding, 
whereby  Christ  did  command  tithes  to  be  given  ;  but  it  is  a  word  of  disallowing 
the  hypocrisy  of  the  Pharisees,  who,  of  covetousness,  did  weigh  and  esteem 
tithes  because  of  their  own  singular  commodity,  rather  than  other  great  and 
weighty  commandments  of  the  law.  And  me  seemeth  that  our  men  are  in  the 
same  predicament  of  the  Pharisees,  who  do  leave  off  all  the  ceremonies  of  the 
old  law,  keeping  only  the  commandment  of  tithing. 

It  is  manifest  and  plain  enough,  by  the  premises  and  by  other  places  of  the 
Scripture,  that  Christ  was  a  priest  after  the  order  of  Melchisedec,  of  the  tribe  of 
Judah,  not  of  the  tribe  of  Levi,  who  gave  no  new  commandment  of  tithing  of 
any  thing  to  him  and  to  his  priests,  whom  he  would  place  after  him  :  but, 
when  his  apostles  said  to  him,  "  Behold  we  leave  all  things,  and  have  followed 
thee,  what  then  shall  we  have?"  he  did  not  answer  them  thus,  "Tithes  shall  be 
paid  you  ;"  neither  did  he  promise  them  a  temporal,  but  an  everlasting  reward 
in  heaven ;  for  he,  both  for  food,  and  also  apparel,  taught  his  disciples  not  to  be 
careful :  "  Be  ye  not  careful  for  your  life  what  ye  shall  eat,  or  for  your  body  what  ye 
shall  put  on.  Is  not  the  life  of  man  more  worth  than  the  meat,  and  the  body  more 
worth  than  apparel  ?  Behold  ye  the  birds  of  heaven,  which  do  not  sow,  nor  reap, 
neither  yet  lay  up  in  barns,  and  yet  your  heavenly  Father  feedeth  them.  And  as 
for  apparel,  why  should  you  be  careful  ?  Consider  the  lilies  of  the  field,  how  they 
grow;  they  labour  not,  neither  do  they  spin,"&c.  In  conclusion  he  saith,  "Be 
not  ye  careful,  saying,  What  shall  we  eat  ?  or,  What  shall  we  drink?  or.  Wherewithal 
shall  we  be  covered  ?  (for  all  these  things  do  the  Gentiles  seek  after ;)  for  your  Fa- 
ther knoweth  tliat  you  have  need  of  all  these  things.  First,  therefore,  seek  ye  for 
the  kingdom  of  God  and  the  righteousness  thereof,  and  all  these  things  shall  be 
cast  unto  you."  [Matt,  vi.]  And  Paul,  right  well  remembering  this  doctrine, 
instructeth  Timothy,  [1  Tim.  vi.]  and  saith  thus,  "  But  we  having  food,  and 
wherewithal  to  be  covered,  let  us  therewith  be  contented."  And,  as  the  Acts  of 
the  Apostles  do  declare  in  the  first  conversion  of  the  Jews  at  Jerusalem,  "  Tliey 
had  all  things  common,  and  to  every  one  was  division  made,  as  need  required." 
Neither  did  the  priests  make  the  tithes  their  own  proper  goods  ;  for  like  as  it 
was  not  meet  that  the  lay  people,  being  converted,  should  have  propriety  of 
goods,  even  so  neither  that  priests  should  have  propriety  of  tithes.  So  that  if 
the  priests  started  back  fi"om  fervent  charity,  in  challenging  to  themselves  the 
propriety  of  tithes,  it  is  no  marvel  of  departing  backward  (as  do  the  priests  from 
the  perfection  of  charity)  also  of  the  laity,  to  be  willing  to  appropriate  to  them- 
selves the  nine  parts  remaining  after  tithes.  Wherefore,  seeing  that  neither 
Christ,  nor  any  of  the  apostles,  commanded  to  pay  tithes,  it  is  manifest  and 
plain,  that  neither  by  the  law  of  Moses,  nor  by  Christ's  law,  christian  people 
are  bound  to  pay  tithes ;  but,  by  the  tradition  of  men,  they  are  bound. 

By  the  premises  now  it  is  plain,  that  Christ  did  not  undo  the  law,  but  by  grace 

(1)  "  Bound  in  one  thing ;"  he  meaneth,  bound  in  all :  either  bound  to  all,  or  to  none. 

(2)  Here  he  expresseth  his  meaning  plainly. 


THK    UOITUISF.    OK    CHUlsr    AM)    OK     1  11 K     I'Ol'K    COM  I'A  It  KD.  153 

did  fulfil  it.    NotwithsUmdiiig,  in  the  law  many  things  were  lawful,  whicli  in  the   Hichnnt 
tinu"  of  graco  are  tbrhiddeii ;  and  many  tilings  were  then  unlawful  wliicli  now       "■ 
are  lawful   enough.     For  notiiing   that  is  contrary   to  charity,   is  lawful  to  a  "T    Tj 
Christian.  l"')] 

Let  us  now  hear  what  manner  of  conmuindment.s  Christ  hath  given  us  in  the  ^___1 
gosnel,  without  tlie  ohservation  of  which  commandments,  charity  shall  not  per- 
fectly be  kept ;   by  whicli  commandments  Christ  did   not  undo  the  old  law,  but 
did  fulfil  it ;   by  the  obsej-vation   idso  of  which  commandmenta,   he  teacheth  us 
to  pass  and  go  beyond  the  righteousness  of  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  who 
thought  themselves   to  keep  the  law  most  perfectly.     This  absolute  and  perfect 
righteousness,  which  we  arc   boiuid  to   have  beyond  the  righteousness  of  the 
Pharisees  and  the  Scribes,  he  teacheth  in  the  liftli,  sixth  and  seventh  chapters  of 
Matthew,  which  being  heard  and  compared  with  the  traditions  made  and  com-  Docinnc 
manded  by  the   Roman  prelates,    it  shall   plainly  appear,  whether   they  be  con-  "f  l^'irist, 
trary  or  no.     Christ  therefore  saitli :   "  You  have  heard,  that  it  was  said  to  them  ■^^  \^  („„. 
of  the  old  time.  Thou  shall  not  kill ;   for  he  that  killeth  shall  be  guilty  of  judg-  trary  to 
iiient.     15ut  I  say  unto  you,  that  every  one  that  is  angry  with  his  brother  shall  {jj,^,,''^''' 
be  in  danger  of  judgment."   [Matt.  v.  21,  12U.]     In  this   he   doth  teach  that  wi-  tin.- pope 
ought  not  to  be  angry  with  our  brethren ;  not  that  he  would  undo  this  old  com-  "'  ""'• 
mandment,   "  Thou  shalt  not  kill,"  but  the  same  should  be  the  more  perfectly 
observed.     Again  he  saitli :  "  You  have  heard  that  it  was  said,  thou  shalt  love 
thy  friend,  and  hate  thine  enemy.     But  I  say  unto  you,  love  your  enemies,  do 
well  to  them  that  hate  you,  pray  for  them  that  persecute  and  slander  you,  that 
you  may  be  the  children  of  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven;  which  maketh  his 
sun  to  arise  upon  the  good  and  the  evil  people,  and  raineth  upon  the  just  and 
unjust.     For  if  you  love  them  which  love  you,  what  reward  shall  you  have  ?  do 
not  the  publicans  thus?  And  if  you  shall  salute  your  brethren  only,  what  great 
thing  do  ye .'  do  not  the  heathen  thus   also  ?     Be  you  therefore  perfect,  as  also 
your  heavenly  Father  is  perfect."  [Matt.  v.  43 — 48.] 

Again  Christ  saith :  "  You  have  heard  that  it  is  said,  an  eye  for  an  eye,  a 
tooth  for  a  tooth.  But  I  say  unto  you,  see  that  you  resist  not  evil ;  but  if  any 
man  shall  strike  you  upon  the  right  cheek,  give  him  the  other  too.  And  to  him 
that  will  strive  with  thee  for  thy  coat  in  judgment,  let  him  have  thy  cloak  also. 
And  whosoever  shall  constrain  thee  one  mile,  go  with  him  also  two  others.  He 
that  asketh  of  thee,  give  him  ;  and  he  that  will  borrow  of  thee,  turn  not  thyself 
from  him."  [Matt.  vi.  38 — 42.] 

By  these  things  it  may  plainly  appear  how  that  Christ,  the  king  of  peace,  the  Doctrine 
Saviour  of  mankind,  who  came  to  save,  and  not  to  destroy,  who  gave   a  law  of  °*^9''5''l,' 
chanty  to  be  observed  by  his  faitliiul  people,  natli  taught  us  not  to  be  angry,  popecom- 
not  to  hate  our  enemies,  nor  to  render  evil  for  evil,  nor  to  resist  evil :  for  all  these  pared, 
things  do  foster  and  nourish  peace  and  charity,  and  do  proceed  and  come  forth 
of  charity ;  and  when  tliey  be  not  kept,   charity  is  loosed,  and  peace  is  broken. 
But  the  bishop  of  Home  approveth  and  alloweth  wars,  and  slaughters  of  men  in 
war,  as  well  against  our  enemies,  that  is,  the  infidels,  as  also  against  the  Chris- 
tians, for  temporal  goods.     Now,  these  tilings  are  qiute   contrary   to  Christs 
doctrine,  and  to  charity,  and  to  peace. 

In  the  decree  23.  q.  1.  cap.  "  Paratus,"  it  is  taught,  that  the  precepts  of  pa-  Olosiof 
tience  must  always  be  retained  in  purpose  of  the  heart ;  so  that  patience,  with  "i^^^"* 
benevolence,  must  be  kept  in  the  mind  secret.     But  apparently  and  manifestly  cii. 
that  thing  shoidd  be  done  which  seemetli  to  do  good  to  those,  whom  we  ought 
to  wish  well  unto;  wherein  they  give  to  understand,  that  a  Christian  may  fn-ely 
defend  himself     And  for  confinnation   of  this  saying  they  do  say,  that  Christ, 
when  he  was  stricken  on  the  face  by  the  high  bishop's  servant,  did  not  f\dfil,  if 
we  look  uiK)n  the  words,  his  own  commandment;  becaiuse  he  gave  not  to  the 
smiter  the  other  part,  but   rather  did  forbid  him,  that  he  should  not  do  it,  to 
double  his  injury.     For  he  said,  "  If  I   have  spoken  evil,   bear  witness  of  the 
evil ;  but  if  well,  why  dost  thou  strike  me.'"'     I  do  marvel  of  this  saying,  for, 
first,  if  those  commandments  of  patience  must  be  kept  in  secret  in  the  mind, 
niid  seeing  the  body  doth  work  at  the  motion  of  the  mind,  and  is  and  ought  to 

(n  Chri.4t,  in  aniwering  to  his  striker,  did  not  break  his  rule  of  patience  outwardly.  The  precept 
of  Christ  to  turn  the  ulbcr  check,  hath  a  privy  comparison  ;  ns  if  Iw  wnuld  say,  rathir  U-  you  con- 
tent to  sufftr  rwo  Howt,  than  to  revenge  one. 


154. 


THE    STORY    OF    WALTEll    BKUTE. 


Richard  be  moved  and  ruled  by  the  same,  it  must  then  needs  be,  that  if  patience  be  in 
II-       the  mind,  it  must  appear  also  outwardly  in  the  body. 

Secondly,  I  marvel  that  it  is  said,  that  Christ  did  not  fulfil  his  own  precept  of 

-^'  ^-     patience  :  for  it  is  manifest,  that  albeit  he,  teaching  always  as  a  good  school-mas- 
ter  those  things  which  were  fit  for  the  salvation  of  souls,  speaking  the  wholesome 


trine  ol' 

the 

clerty. 


War  in 
case  al- 
lowed. 


This  arti-  word  of  instruction  to  the  higli  bishop's  servant  smiting  liim  unjustly,  did  neither 
^®  °^  by  word  forbid  another  stroke  to  be  given  on  the  other  cheek,  neither  did  he 
must  defend  himself  bodily  from  striking  on  the  same  cheek ;  but,  speaking  to  him, 
have  are-  jt  jg  likelv  that  he  gave  him  the  other  cheek;  he  meaneth,  that  he  turned  not 
the°doc°  the  other' cheek  away.  For  a  man  turneth  not  away  from  him  whom  he  speaketh 
to,  or  whom  he  infonneth ;  but  layeth  open  before  him  all  his  face :  even  so  do 
I  believe  that  Christ  did,  that  he  might  fulfil  in  very  deed  that  which  before  he 
had  taught  in  word.  Neither  yet  did  Christ,  by  his  word,  or  by  his  deed,  show 
any  thing  of  defence,  or  of  bodily  resistance. 

Thirdly,  I  marvel  why  wise  men,  leaving  the  plain  and  manifest  doctrine  of 
Christ,'  whereby  he  teacheth  patience,  do  seek  corners  of  their  own  imagining, 
to  the  intent  they  may  approve  fightings  and  wars.  Why  mark  they  not  after 
what  manner  Christ  spake  to  Peter,  striking  the  high  bishop's  servant,  saying, 
"  Put  up  thy  sword  into  the  sheath,  for  every  one  that  shall  take  the  sw'ord, 
shall  perish  wath  the  sword?"  But  in  another  case  we  must  make  resistance; 
which  case  may  be  so  righteous,  as  it  is  for  a  man's  lord  and  master  being  a  most 
righteous  man,  and  yet  suffering  injury  of  mischievous  persons. 

Fourthly,  I  marvel,  seeing  that  we  are  bound  of  charity,  and  by  the  law  of 
Christ,  to  give  our  lives  for  our  brethren,  how  they  can  allow  such  manner  of 
dissensions  and  resisting  ;2  for  when  thy  brother  shall  maliciously  strike  thee, 
Patience    thou  mayest  be  sure,  that  he  is  manifestly  fallen  from  charity,  into  the  snare  of 
com-         the  devil.     If  thou  shalt  keep  patience,  he  shall  be  ashamed  of  his  doing,  and 
inTrivate  tbou  mayest  bow  and  bend  him  to  repentance,  and  take  him  out  from  the 
causes       snare  of  the  devil,  and  call  him  back  again  to  charity.     If  thou  resist,  and  per- 
amongst    chg^ce  by  resistance  doth  strike  again,  his  iiiry  shall  be  the  more  kindled,  and 
tians.        he,  being  stirred  up  to  greater  wrath,  peradventiu-e  shall  either  slay  thee,  or 
thou  him.  Touching  thyself,  thou  art  uncertain,  if  thou  go  about  to  make  resist- 
ance, whether  thou  shalt  fall  from  charity,  and  then  shalt  thou  go  backward 
from  the  perfection  of  Christ's  commandment.    Neither  dost  thou  know  but  that 
it  may  happen  thee  so  greatly  to  be  moved,  as  that,  by  the  heat  and  violence  of 
wrath,  thou  shalt  slay  him.    Whereas,  if  thou  wouldst  dispose  thyself  to  patience, 
as  Christ  teacheth,  thou  shouldst  easily  avoid  all  these  mischiefs,  as  well  on  the 
behalf  of  thy  brother,   as  also  of  thine  own   part.    Wherefore  the  observing  of 
charity,  as  the  precept  of  patience,  is  to  be  observed. 

Fifthly,  I  do  marvel  why,  for  the  allowing  of  this  corporal  resistance,  he  doth 

say  in  the  same  chapter,  that  Paul  did  not  fulfil  the  precept  of  the  patience  of 

Christ,  when  he,  being  stricken  in  the  place  of  judgment  by  the  commandment 

break  the  of  the  high  priest,  did  say,  "  God  strike  thee,  O  thou  painted  wall :  dost  thou  sit 

^^^-  ?^ .,    to  iudge  me  according  to  the  law,  and  dost  thou  command  me  to  be  stricken 
christian         •'.     °    ,      ,        „,,    t     •  •<•         i        t>      i  i  •  •  i  ■  i  i 

patience,   agamst  the  law  ?     It  is  manliest  that  Paul  made  resistance   m  nothing,  though 

neither      }^g  spake  a  word  of  instruction  to  the  priest,  who  against  the  law  commanded 

bod'ifyTe^  him  to  be  stricken.  And  if  Paul  had  overpassed  the  bounds  of  patience,  through 

sistance.    the  grief  of  the  stroke,  what  of  that?    Miist  the  deed  of  Paul's  impatience  for 

this  cause  be  justified,  and  the  commandment  of  patience  taught  by  Christ  be 

left  undone  for  Paul's  deed,  and  coi-poral  resistance  be  allowed  1  God  forbid.  For 

both  Paul  and  Peter  might  err;  but  in  the  doctrine  of  Christ  there  may  be 

found  no  erroi'.     Wherefore  we  must  give  more  credence  and  belief  to  Christ's 

The  fact    sayings,  than  to  any  living  man's  doings.     Wherefore,  although  Paul  had  re- 

either  of    sisted,  which  I  do  not  perceive  in  that  Scripture,  it  followeth  not  thereof,  that 

any  otiier,  Corporal  resistance  must  be  approved,  which  is  of  Christ  expressly  forbidden.    I 

doth  not    much  marvel  that  always  they  seek  corners  and  shadows  to  justify  their  deeds. 

derogate    w}|y  (Jq  they  not  mark  what  great  things  Paul  reciteth  himself  to  have  suffered 

doctrine    for  Christ?  and  where,  I  pray  you,  have  they  found  that  he,  after  his  conversion, 

of  our        struck  any  man  that  did  hurt  him  ?  or  where  do  thej'  find  that  he  in  express 

Saviour.    ^Qj.^g  ^q^\^  teach  such  a  kind  of  corporal  resistance  ?  But,  as  touching  patience, 

he  saith  in  plain  words  to  the  Romans,  [chap.  xii.  16 — 21,]    "  Be  not  wise  in 

(1)  The  cause  here  again  of  Christ  was  private,  and  his  doctrine  is  to  be  understood  in  private 
cases.  (2)  He  meaneth  resistance  for  private  causes,  or  for  worldly  goods. 


Paul  he- 


stricken 
did  not 


Rfl.KS    OF    CUKISTI.W     I'AIIKN'CK.  155 

your  own  conceits  :  renrtir  ill  for  ill  to  nobody;  providing  good  things  not  only   luchani 
bcfort'  (lod,  but  also  bit'ori-  all  nu:i,  if  it  be  possible.    Be  at  peace  with  all  folks,       '^• 
as  much  as   in  you  lifth ;  not  defendiii};  yourselves,   my  most  dearly  beloved,  ~T    I" 
but  {,nve  you  place  unto  ani,'er:  for  it  is  written,  Ven>^eancc  is  mine  ;  and  I  will     ^j ', ' 
recompense  them,  saitli  the  I^ord.    Hut  if  thine  inemy  shall  bean  hungered,  give 
him  meat ;  if  he  be  athirst,  give  him  drink :  for  thus  doing,   thou  shall  heap 
coals  of  fire  upon  his  head.     Be  not  overcome  of  evil,  but  overcome  thou  evil 
with  good." 

To  the  Corinthians  [1  Cor.  vi.],  as  touching  judgment  and  contention,'  which 
arc  matters  of  less  weight  than  arc  fightings,  thus  be  writeth:  "  Now  verily  there 
is  great  fault  in  you,  that  you  be  at  law  amongst  yourselves :  why  rather  take 
ye  not  wrong  ?  why  rather  sufler  ye  not  deceit !"     And  generallv,  in  all   his 
epistles,  he  teacheth  that  patience  should  be  kept,  and  not  corporal  resistance  by 
fighting,  becatise  charity  is  patient,   it  is  courteous,  it  sutlereth  all  things.     I 
mar\'el  how  they  justify  and  make  good  the  wars  by  Christians,  saving  only  the 
wars  against  the  devil  and  sin  ;  for,  seeing  that  it  is  ])lain  that  tliose  things  which 
were  in  the  Old  Testament  were  figures  of  things  to  be  done  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment, therefore,  we  must  needs  say,  that  the  corporal  wars  being  then  done,  were  Corporal 
figures  of  the  christian  wars  against  sin  and  the  devil,  for  the  heavenly  country,  ^^*  '" 
which  is  our  inheritance.      It  is  plain  that  it  was  written  thus  by  Christ :  "The  xcsta- 
mighty  Lord,  and  of  great  power  in  battle,   hath  girded  himself  in   force  and  ment,  be 

manliness  to  the  war;  and  he  came  not  to  send  i)eace  into  the  earth,  but  war."  ^'^^"■'^.  ?'' 
T       1  •  1        1    •     •  I  I  II-  1-  ■  1.1    '■"-■  »P'n- 

In  this  war  ought  christian  peoj)le  to  be  soldiers,  aceordmg  to  that  manner  which  mai  wars 

Paul  teacheth  to  the  Kphcsians,  [chap.  vi.  1 1  — 17.]  "  Put  upon  you  the  armour  '»  "'« 

of  Cfod,  that  you  may  be  able  to  stand  against  the  deceits  of  the  devil.     For  we  tanrcnt'^^'' 

have  not  to  wrestle  against  flesh  and  blood,  but  against  princes  and  potestates,  against 

against  the  rulers  of  the  darkness  of  the  world,  against  spiritual  wickedness  in  "l"^'"*-! 

heavenly  things,  which  are  in  the  high  places.    Wherefore  take  ye  the  armour  of 

God,  that  ye  may  be  able  to  resist  in  the  evil  day,  and  to  stand  perfectly  in  all 

things.  Stand  you,  therefore,  girded  about  with  tnith  upon  your  loins,  having  put 

upon  you  the  breastplate  of  righteousness,  and  your  feet  shod  in  a  readiness  to 

the  gosjiel  of  peace;  in  all  things  taking  the  shield  of  faith,  wherewith  you  may 

quench  all  the  fiery  darts  of  that  wicked  one.    And  take  unto  you  the  helmet  of 

salvation,  and  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,  which  is  the  word  of  God." 

By  these  things  it  is  plain,  what  are  the  wars  of  Christians,  and  what  are  the  ^Vhat  be 

weapons  of  their  warfare.     And  because  it  is  manifest,  that  this  testament  is  of 'hi- wars 

■-.,,„  ,.    ,  f.      1        1  most  uro- 

greater  perfection   than  the  former,  we  mu.st  now  fignt  more  perfectly  tiian  at  per  to 

that  time  :  for  now  spiritually,  then  corporally  ;  now  for  an  heavenly  everlast- 9"^'*" 

ing  inheritance,  then  for  an  earthly  and  temporal ;  now  by  patience,  then  by    '*"'' 

resistance.     For   Christ  saith,   "  Blessed  are   they  that  suffer  persecution  for 

righteousness,   for  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  Heaven."  [Mat.  v.  10.]     He  saith 

not,  Blessed  are   they   that  fight  for  righteousness.'     How  can  a  man  say  that 

they  may  lawfully   make  war  and  kill  their  brethren  for  the  temporal  goods, 

which  peradventure  they  unjustly  occupy,  or  unjustly  intind  to  occupy  ?  for  he 

that  killeth  another  to  get  those  goods  which  another  body  unjustly  occupiefh, 

doth  love  more  the  verj'  goods  than  his  own  brother;  and  then  he,  falling  from 

charity,  doth  kill  himself  spiritually :  if  he  go  forward  without  charity  to   make  Note 

war,  then  doth  he  evil,  and  to  his  own  danniation.  Wherefore  he  doth  not  law-  Jj'ij*,*^^^' 

fully  nor  justly  in  proceeding  to  the  djunnation  of  his  own  self  and  his  brother,  charity. 

whom,  though  he  seem  unjiLstly  to  occupy  his  goods,  yet  he  doth  intend  to  kill. 

And  what  if  such   kind  of  wars^  were  lawful  to  tlie  Jews?  this  argneth  not, 

that  now  they  are  lawful  to  Christians :  because  their  deeds  were  in  a  shadow  of 

imperfection,  but  the  deeds  of  Christians  in  the  light  of  ])crfection.    It  was  not 

said  unto  them,    "  All  peo])le  that  shall  take  the  sword,  shall  perish  with  the 

sword.'     What   if  John  the  Baptist  disidlowed  coq»oral  fightings,  and  corporal  Howjuhn 

warfiire,  at  such  time  as  tlte  soldiers  asked  him,  saying,  "  .Vnd  what  sh.ul  we  B^p''*' 

do  ?"  who  saitJi  to  them,   "  See  that  you  strike  no  man,  neither  pick  ye  <piarrels  ,j^  "^ 

against  any,  and  be  ye  contented  with  your  wages."     This  saying  of  John 

(1)  He  raeancth  such  wars  of  Christians,  a»  the  Po]>e  allovrcth,  risinf;  rather  from  private  revenge 
or  princes,  foi  worldly  glory  or  alTcction,  than  for  any  public  necessity. 

(2)  All  this  taki-'th  not  away  the  lawfulness  of  wars  in  case  of  public  necessity,  but  only  ir.  pri- 
vate case  for  temporal  goods.  * 

(3)  "  Such  kind  of  wars."  that  is,  such  kind  as  be  for  private  revenge  of  temporal  good^. 


156 


THE    STORY    OF    WALTEIl    BRUTE. 


Richard 
II. 

A.D. 
1391. 


They 
that  be 
least  in 
the  king- 
dom of 
Heaven, 
greater 
than 
John 
Baptist, 
expound- 
ed. 


Objec- 
tion. 


alloweth  not  corporal  warfare  amongst  Christians ;  for  John  was  of  the  priests  of 
the  Old  Testament,  and  under  the  law ;  neither  to  him  it  appertaineth,  not  to 
follow  the  law,  but  to  warn  the  people  to  the  perfect  observation  of  the  law  :  for 
he,  being  likewise  demanded  by  the  pubhcans  what  they  should  do,  said  unto 
them,  "  Do  no  other  thing  than  is  appointed  unto  you."  But  Christ,  the  author 
of  the  New  Testament  and  of  greater  perfection  than  was  the  perfection  of  the 
old  law,  gave  new  things,  as  it  plainly  appeareth  by  the  gospel ;  so  that  Chris- 
tians ought  to  receive  information  fi-om  Christ,  not  from  John.  For  of  John 
also  doth  Christ  speak,  "  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  there  hath  not  risen  amongst 
the  children  of  women,  a  greater  than  John  Baptist ;  but  he  that  is  least  in  the 
kingdom  of  Heaven  is  greater  than  he  :"  in  which  saying,  Christ  showeth  that 
those  that  be  least  in  the  kingdom  of  Heaven  in  the  time  of  grace,  are  placed  iu 
greater  perfection  than  was  John,  who  was  one  of  them  that  were  the  elders ; 
and  he  lived  also  in  the  time  of  the  law  in  greater  perfection.  And  when  cer- 
tain of  John's  disciples  said  unto  him,  "  Master,  he  that  was  beyond  Jordan,  to 
whom  thou  gavest  witness,  behold,  he  baptizeth,  and  all  people  come  imto  him :" 
.  John  answered  and  said,  "  A  man  cannot  take  any  thing  upon  him,  unless  it 
shall  be  given  him  from  above.  You  yourselves  do  bear  me  record,  that  I  said, 
I  am  not  Christ,  but  that  I  was  sent  before  him.  He  that  hath  the  bride,  is  the 
bridegroom  ;  as  for  the  bridegroom's  friend,  who  standeth  and  heareth  him,  he 
rejoiceth  with  great  joy  to  hear  the  voice  of  the  bridegi-oom.  This  therefore  my 
joy  is  fulfilled ;  he  must  increase,  and  I  must  be  diminished.  He  that  cometh 
from  on  high,  is  above  all;  he  that  is  of  the  earth  is  earthly,  and  speaketh  of 
the  earth:  he  that  cometh  from  Heaven,  is  above  all  folks;  that  which  he 
hath  seen  and  heard,  the  same  doth  he  witness,  and  yet  his  witnessing  doth  no 
body  receive.  But  he  that  receiveth  his  witnessing,  hath  put  to  his  seal,  that 
God  is  true.     For  he  whom  God  hath  sent,  speaketh  the  words  of  God." 

By  which  things  it  plainly  appeareth,  that  credence  is  to  be  given  neither  to 
John,  nor  yet  to  an  angel,  if  he  teach  any  thing  that  is  not  agreeable  to  Christ's 
doctrine.  For  Christ  is  above  the  angels,  because  God  infinitely  passeth  them  in 
wisdom.  Now,  if  Moses  the  servant  of  God,  a  minister  of  the  Old  Testament, 
was  so  much  to  be  believed,  that  nothing  could  be  added  to,  nor  yet  any  thing 
diminished  from,  the  commandments  that  were  given  by  him  (for  so  Moses  had 
said,  "  The  thing  that  I  command  thee,  that  do  thou  only  to  the  Lord,  neither  add 
thou  any  thing,  nor  diminish,")  how  much  more  ought  we  not  to  add  nor  to 
take  away  from  the  commandments  given  by  God  himself,  and  also  the  Son  of 
God  ?  In  the  primitive  church,  because  the  Christians  had  ferveiit  love  and 
charity,  they  observed  these  precepts  as  they  were  given  ;  but  their  fervent  cha- 
rity afterwards  waxing  lukewarm,  they  invented  glosses,  by  drawing  the  com- 
mandments of  God  back  to  their  own  deeds,  which  they  purposed  to  justify  and 
maintain ;  that  is  to  say,  wars  against  the  infidels.*  But  that  they,  by  wars, 
should  be  converted  to  the  faith,  is  a  fact  faithless  enough  :  because  that  by  vio- 
lence, or  unwillingly,  nobody  can  believe  in  Christ,  nor  be  made  a  Christian, 
neither  did  he  come  to  destroy  them  by  battle  that  believed  not  in  him  ;  for  he 
said  to  his  disciples,  "  You  know  not  what  spirit  you  are  of.  The  Son  of  man 
came  not  to  destroy  men's  lives,  but  to  save  them."  Then,  to  grant  pardons 
and  forgiveness  of  sins  to  those  that  kill  the  infidels,  is  too  much  an  infidel's  fact, 
seducing  many  people  ;  for  what  greater  seducing  can  there  be,  than  to  promise 
to  a  man  forgiveness  of  sins,  and  afterwards  the  joy  of  Heaven,  for  setting  him- 
self against  Christ's  commandments  in  the  killing  of  the  infidels,  that  would  not 
be  converted  to  the  faith  1  whereas  Christ  doth  say,  "  Not  every  one  that  saith 
to  vce,  Lord,  Lord,  shall  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  Heaven,  but  he  that  doth  the 
will  of  my  Father  which  is  in  Heaven,  this  person  shall  enter  into  the  kingdom 
of  Heaven."  Now  the  will  of  the  Father  is,  that  we  should  believe  in  his  only 
Son  Jesus  Christ,  and  that  we  should  obey  him  by  observing  of  those  things 
which  he  himself  hath  commanded.  Wherefore  Christ's  precepts  of  patience 
must  be  fulfilled ;  wars,  fightings,  and  contentions  must  be  left,  because  they 
are  contrary  to  charity. 

But  peradventure  some  man  will  thus  reason  against  Christ :  "  The  saints,  by 
whom  God  hath  wrought  miracles,  do  allow  wars  as  well  against  the  faithfxd 

(1)  He  meaneth  those  wars  against  infidels,  stirred  up  and  procured  by  the  pope,  upon  blind  su- 
perstition, to  fight  for  the  Holy  Land,  and  not  taken  byprinces  in  the  necessary  defence  of  themselves 
and  of  their  country. 


WHAT     WAR     UK     MOST     IMlOI'Kll     Ttl    CH  B  IS  TI  AN'S.  157 

people,  as  also  against  the  infidelit ;  and  the  holy  kings  were  warriors,  for  whose   Richard 

sakes  nuracles  also  have  been  showed,  a-«  well  in  their  death,  iis  also  in  their  il:__ 

life,  yea  in  the  very  time  wlierein  they  were  at  warfare  :  wherefore  it  seenieth  A.  D. 
that  their  facts  were  good  and  lawful ;  for,  otherwise,  God  would  not  have  done  1391. 
miracles  for  them.  "  An^weT 

To  this  ajrain  I  say,  that  we  for  no  miracles  must  do  contrary  to  the  doctrines  Lepii,u8 
of  Christ,  for  in  it  can    there  be   no  error;   but   in   miracles  there  oftentimes  at;<.-ndum 
chanceth  error,'   as  it   is  plain  as  well  by  the  Old,  as  by  the  New  Testament.  "°"," 
God  forbid  tlien  tliat  a  Christian  should,  for  deceivable  miracles,  depart  from  the 
infallible  doctrine  of  Clirist.      In  E.\odus  [chapter  vii.]  it  is  manifest,  how  that 
the  wicked  wise  men  of  the  Egyptians,  throui,'h  the  enchantments  of  Egypt,  and 
certain  secret  workings,  threw  their  wands  upon  the  earth,  which  were  turned 
into  dragons  ;  even  as  Aaron,  before  time,  in  the  presence  of  I'haraoh,  threw 
his  wanu  upon  the  earth,  which,  by  the  power  of  God,  was  tunied  into  a  ser- 
pent.    In  the  first  book  of  Kings,   [chapter  xxii.]    Micaiah  did  see  the  Lord 
"sitting  upon  his  throne,  and  all  the  host  of  heaven  standing  about  him  on  thi' 
right  hand  and  on  the  left.      And  the  Lord  said,  Who  shall  deceive  Ahab  the 
king  of  Israel,  that  he  may  go  up  and  be  slain  in  liamoth-gilciul  (  .\nd  one  said 
this  way,  and  another  otherwise.     Now  there  went  forth  a  spirit,  and  stood  be-  Aliab  de- 
fore  the   Lord,  and  said,   I   will  deceive  him.     To  whom  the  Lord  spake  :    By  ^Jj/'lfJ'. 
what  means  ?  And  he  said,  I  will  go  forth,  and  be  a  lying  spirit  in  the  mouth  of  phets. 
all  his  prophets.     And  the  Lord  said.  Thou  shalt  deceive  him  and  prevail :  go 
thy  wavs  forth,  and  do  even  so."     Thus  also  it  is  written  in  Deuteronomy:   "  If 
there  shall  arise  a  prophet  amongst  you,  or  one  that  shall  say,  he  hath  seen  a 
dream,  and  shall  foretell  a  sign  and  a  wonder;  and  if  that  shall  come  to  pass 
that  he  hath  spoken,  and  he  shall  say  unto  thee.  Let  us  go  and  follow  strange 
gods  (whom  thou  knowest  not),  and  let  us  serve  them,  thou  shalt  not  hearken 
unto  the  words  of  that  prophet  or  dreamer;  for  the  Lord  your  God  temptcth 
you,  to  make  it  known  whether  ye  love  him  or  no,  with  all  your  heart,  and  with 
all  your  soul." 

In   JereniT,  [chap,  xxiii.],  "  Are  not  my  words  even   like  fire,  saith   the  Prophet* 
Lord  ?  and  like  a  hammer  that  breaketh  the  stone?"  " Therefore,  behold,  I  will  [^"'^'^y 
come  against  the  prophets  which  have  dreamed  a  lie,  saith  the  Lord,  which  doctrine, 
have  showed  those  things,  and  have  seduced  the  people  through  their  lies  and 
their  miracles,  when  I  sent  them  not,  neither  commanded  them ;  which  have 
brought  no  profit  unto  this  people,    saith  the  Lord."     In  Mark  [chapter  xiii.],  False 
saith  Christ,  "  For  there  shall  arise  false  Christs  and  false  prophets,  and  shall  prophet;^ 
show  great  signs  and  wonders,  to  deceive,  if  it  were  possible,  even  the  very 
elect."     Paul  [2  Cor.  xi.],     "Such  false  apostles  are  deceitful  workers,  trans- 
forming themselves  into  the  apostles  of  Christ."     And  no  marvel,  for  even  Satan 
transformeth  lumself  into  an    angel    of  light ;  therefore  it  is  no  great  thing 
though  his  ministers  transform  themselves,  as  though  they  were  the  ministers 
of  righteousness,  whose  end  shall  be  according  to  their  works. 

In  the  .\pocalypse  [chapter  xiii.],  John  saw  ''a  beast  ascending  up  out  ot 
the  earth,  and  it  had  two  horns  like  a  lamb,  but  he  spake  like  the  dragon,  and 
he  did  all  that  the  first  beast  could  do  before  him ;  and  he  caused  the  earth  and 
the  inhabitants  thereof  to  worship  the  first  beast,  wliose  deadly  wound  was 
healed,  and  did  great  wonders,  so  that  he  made  fire  come  down  Irom  heaven  on 
the  earth,  in  the  sight  of  men,  and  di>ceived  them  that  dwell  on  the  earth,  by 
means  of  the  signs  which  were  permitted  to  him  to  do  in  the  sight  of  the 

'^'^"•'''•"  Ml 

By  these  things  it  is  most  manifest  and  plain,  that  in  miracles  this  manifold  "^'"^^ 
error  oftentimes  happeneth,  through  the  working  of  the  devil,  to  deceive  the  tried. 
people  withal ;  wherefore  we  ought  not  for  the  working  of  miracles,  to  depart  from 
the  commandments  of  (Jod.  I  would  to  God  that  they  who  put  confidence  in 
miracles,  would  give  heed  unto  the  word  of  Christ,  in  thus  speaking  [Matthew, 
cha]).  vii.],  "  Many  shall  say  unto  me  in  that  day.  Lord,  Lord,  have  we  not  in 
thy  name  prophesied  ?  and  in  thv  name  cast  out  de\nls,  and  in  thy  name  done 
many  great  works .'"  &-c.  "  I  will  profess  unto  them,  I  never  knew  you,  depart 
from  me,  all  ye  which  work  iniquity  " 

By  this  saying  it  is  most  manifest  that  the  servants  of  Christ  are  not  discerned  by 

il)  True  miracle*  here  of  holy  men  not  disproved,  but  f peaking  universally,  the  stable  doctrine 
and  word  of  God  is  the  sure  rule  for  men  to  follow. 


158  THE    STORY    OF    WALTER    BRUTE, 

Richard    Working  of  miracles,  but  by  tlie  working  of  virtues,  departing  from  iniquity,  and 

^^-       obeying  the  commandments  of  God.     Wherefore  it  is  wonderful,  that  any  in 

^  Q     tliis  life  dare  presume  to  prevent  the  day  of  the  judgment  of  God,  to  judge  by 

139l'    ™6ans  of  miracles,  that  some  are  saints  ;  whom  men  ought  to  worship;  whom, 

peradventure,  God  will  in  the  last  judgment  condemn,  saying,   "  Depart  from 

-„_  _ii ...u;„i,  , .,„,.!,  ;.,;,., .;i..  '•      Ti' ^^  i _.^ ii_  i.   i    _  ^i 


saints. 


The  ser-  me  all  ye  which  work  iniquity."  If  any  man  could  here  on  earth  judge  sinners 
Christ"^  to  be  condemned ;  then,  if  this  judgment  were  certain,  Christ  should  not  judge 
discerned  the  second  time ;  and  whatsoever  such  judges  bind  in  earth,  the  same  ought  to 
i'n '^"it'^'f  ^^  l^ound  in  Heaven.  But  if  such  a  judgment  be  uncertain,  then  it  is  perilous 
mfrrcles)  ^"d  full  of  deceit,  when  by  it  men  on  earth  may,  instead  of  saints,  worship  such 
but  of  as  are  damned  with  the  fellowship  of  the  devils,  and  in  prayer  require  their  aid, 
virtues.  Tf/\^Q^  even  like  as  the  devils  their  companions,  are  more  ready,  and  more  of  might, 
women  *°  ^^^^  ^^]^^  *P  g°*"^'  "^o^^  ^o  hurt  than  to  profit.  I  wonder  they  mark  not 
are  not  what  Christ  said,  when  his  kinswoman  came  unto  him,  desiring  and  requiring 
"'*!''y*''  something  of  him,  and  saying,  "  Command  that  these  my  two  sons  may  sit  one 
''•'"'^''  upon  thy  right  hand,  and  the  other  upon  tliy  left  hand  in  thy  kingdom.  But 
Jesus  answering,  said.  Ye  know  not  what  ye  ask,  can  ye  di-ink  of  the  cup  which 
I  shall  drink  of?  They  said  unto  him,  We  can.  He  said  unto  them.  Of  my  cup 
indeed  ye  shall  drink,  but  to  sit  at  my  right  hand,  or  at  my  left,  it  is  not  mine 
to  give,  but  unto  whom  it  is  prepared  of  my  Father."  Christ,  being  equal 
unto  the  Father  according  to  his  Godhead,  and  exceeding  all  manner  of  men, 
according  to  his  manhood,  namely  in  goodness  and  wisdom ;  said,  "  To  sit  at 
my  right  hand,  or  at  my  left,  is  not  mine  to  give,  but  unto  whom  it  is  prepared 
of  my  Father."  If  it  were  none  of  his  to  give,  "to  sit  at  the  right  hand,  or  at 
the  left,"  &c.,  how  then  is  it  in  the  power  of  any  sinful  man  to  give  unto  any 
man  a  seat,  either  on  the  right  hand,  or  on  the  left,  in  the  kingdom  of  God,  which 
sinful  man  knoweth  not  whether  such  have  any  seat  prepai-ed  for  them  of  the 
Father  in  his  kingdom  ?  They  much  extol  themselves,  who  exercise  this  judi- 
cial power  in  giving  judgment  that  there  are  some  saints  who  ought  to  be 
honoured  by  men,  by  reason  of  the  evidences  of  dreams,  or  of  deceitful  miracles; 
of  which  men  they  are  ignorant,  whether  God  in  his  judgment  will  con- 
demn them  or  not,  together  with  the  devils  for  ever  to  be  tormented.  Let  them 
beware,  for  the  infallible  Truth  saith,  that  "  every  one  that  exalteth  himself 
shall  be  brought  low." 

By  these  things  is  gathered  that  the  wars  of  Christians  are  not  lawfid  ;i  for 
that  by  the  doctrine  and  life  of  Christ  they  are  prohibited,  by  reason  of  the  evi- 
dence of  the  deceitful  miracles  of  those  who  have  made  wars  amongst  the 
Christians,  as  well  against  the  Christians,  as  also  against  the  infidels :  because 
Christ  could  not  err  in  his  doctrine,  forasmuch  as  he  was  God;  and  forasmuch 
as  heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,  but  the  words  of  Christ  shall  not  pass  away. 
He,  therefore,  who  establisheth  his  laws,  allowing  wars  and  the  slaughter  of  men 
in  the  war,  as  well  of  Christians  as  of  infidels,  doth  he  not  justifythose  things 
which  are  contrary  to  the  gospel  and  law  of  Christ?  Tlierefore  in  this  he  is 
against  Christ,  and  therefore  Antichrist,  seducing  the  people,  and  maldng  men 
believe  that  to  be  lawful  and  meritorious  unto  them,  which  is  expressly  pro- 
hibited by  Christ. 

And  thus  much  concerning  the  first  part,  touching  peace  and  war, 
wherein  he  declareth  Christ  and  the  pope  to  be  contrary,  that  is,  tlic 
one  to  be  given  all  to  peace,  the  other  all  to  war,  and  so  to  prove,  in 
conclusion,  the  pope  to  be  Antichrist :  where,  in  the  mean  time,  thou 
must  understand,  gentle  reader,  his  meaning  rightly ;  not  that  he  so 
thinketh  no  kind  of  wars  among  Christians  in  any  case  to  be  law- 
ful, for  he  himself  before  hath  openly  protested  the  contrary ;  but 
that  his  purpose  is,  to  prove  the  pope  in  all  his  doings  and  teachings 
more  to  be  addicted  to  war  than  to  peace,  yea,  in  such  cases  where  is 

(1)  This  proposition  of  Walter  Brute,  concerning  the  wars  of  Christians  not  to  be  lawful,  is  not 
to  be  taken  universally,  but  in  particular  case,  as  he  meaneth,  which  is  this,  that  such  wars  al- 
lowed by  the  pope,  not  for  the  necessary  defence  of  public  peace,  liberty,  and  safeguard  of  our  coun- 
tries, or  against  public  injuries  offered ;  but  only  to  go  and  kill  the  infidels,  because  tliey  believi- 
not,  having  no  other  cause,  those  wars  of  the  pope  he  liketh  not. 


wnil     HIS    CODI.V     DlCIAHAl  ION'S.  159 


necessity  of  war ;  aim  tlifriin  j)rovetli  he  tlic  |)opc  t(»  be  contrary  H'chard 
Christ,  that  is,  to  be  Antieiirist.  '—  - 


no 
to 

Now  he  proceedetli  further  to  the  seeoiul  jjarl,  which  is  of  mercy ;    A.  D. 
in  which  part  he  showelh  how  Christ  teaeheth  us  to  be  merciful,  "  be- 
cause  mercy,"  as  he  saith,  "  proceedeth  from  charity,  and  nourisheth 
It. 

In  this  doctrine  of  mercy,  Christ  breakcth  not  the  law  of  righteousness,  for  he  Doctrine 
hiinst'lf,  by  mercy,  hath  cleansed  us  from  our  sins,  from  which  we  could  not  by  "'^ '"''"'' 
tlie  righteousness  of  the  law  be  cleansed.      But  whom  he  hath  made  clean  by  mercy  de- 
mercy,  und()iil)tedly  it  hehoveth  those  same  to  be  also  merciful;  for  in  Matthew  dared, 
[chap,  v.]  he  saith,  "  Blessed  are  the  merciful,  for  they  shall  obtain  mercy."  And 
again   in  Matthew  [chaj).  vi.],  he  saith,  "  If  ye  forgive  unto  men    tiieir  sins, 
your  Father  will  forgive  unto  you  your  sins."      And  again  in  Matthew  [chap. 
vii.J,  "Judge  not  and  ye  shall  not  be  judged;  condemn  not,  and  ye  shall  not  be 
condemned;  and  with  what  measure  ye  measure,  with  the  s;imc  shall  it  be  mea- 
sured unto  you  again."      In  Matthew  [chap,  xviii.],   Peter  asked  the  Lord, 
saying,  "  Lord,  how  often  shall  my  brother  sin  against  me,  and  shall  I  forgive 
him.'  seven  times?  Jesus  said  luito  him,  I  .say  not  unto  thee  seven  times,  but 
seventy  times  seven.     Therefore  is  the  kingdom  of  Heaven  likened  unto  a  cer- 
tain king,  which  wovdd  take  account  of  his  servants.     And  when  he  had  begun 
to  reckon,  one  was  brought  unto  liim  which  oweth  him  ten  thousand  talents; 
ami  because  he  had  nothing  wherewitlial  to  pay,  his  master  conunanded  him  to 
be  sold,  and  his  wife  ami  liis  children,  and  all  that  he  had,  and  the  debt  to  be 
paid.      The  servant    therefore    fell    down,  and  besought  him,    saying,    Have 
patience  with  me,  and  I  will  pay  thee  all.  And  the  lord  had  pity  on  that  servant, 
and  loosed  him,  and  forgave  him  the  debt.     But  when  the  servant  was  de- 
parted, he  foimd  one  of  his  fellow  servants,  which  owed  him  an  hundred  pence, 
and  he  laid  hands  on  him,  and  took  him  by   the  throat,  saying.   Pay  me  that 
thou  owest;   and   his   fellow    fell    down,    and    besought    him,    saying,    Have 
patience  with  me,  and  I  will  pay  thee  all.      But  he  would  not,  but  went  and  cast 
him  into  prison,  till  he  should  pay  the  debt.     And  when  his  other  fellows  saw 
the  things  that  were  done,  they  were  very  sorry,  and  came  and  declared  unto 
their  master  all  that  was  done.     Then  his  master  called  him,  and  said  unto  him, 
O  thou  ungracious  servant,  I  forgave  thee  all  that  debt  when  thou  desiredst  Mercy 
me  :  oughtest  thou  not  then  also  to  have  sucli  pity  on  thy  fellow,  even  as  I  had  "''"'*  P''^ 
pity  on  thee  ?     And  his  lord  was  wroth,  and  delivered  him  unto  the  gaolers,  mended, 
till  he  should  pay  all  that  was  due  unto  him.      So  likewise  shall  my  heavenly 
Father  do  unto  you,  except  ye  forgive  from  your  hearts  each  one  his  brother 
their  trespasses." 

By  this  doctrine  it  is  most  plain  and  manifest,  that  every  Christian  ought  to  Necess*- 
be  merciful  unto  his  brother,  how  often  soever  he  ofi'endcth  against  him  :  be-  J.^  *?  *"' 
cau.se  we,  so  often  as  we  oti'end,  do  ask  mercy  of  God.     Wherefore,  forasmuch  tians. 
as  our  offence  against  (iod  is  far  more  grievous  than  any  offence  of  our  brother 
against  us,  it  is  plain  that  it  behoveth  us  to  be  mercifid  unto  our  brethren,  if  we 
will  have  mercy  at  Ciod's  hand.     But,  contrary  to  this  doctrine  of  mercy,  the  The  pope 
Romish  bishop  maketh  and  confirmeth  many  laws,  which  punish  oti'eiulers,  even  5°*^!."!^. 
unto  the  death;  as  it  is  plain  by  the  process  of  the  decrees,  distin.  23,  quest.  5.  inshow- 
"  It  is  declared  and  determined,  that  to  kill  men  '  ex  officio,'  that  is,  having  au-  '"^  "*"" 
thorify  and  power  so  to  do,  is  not  sin;"  and  again,  "  The   soldier  who  is  obe-  '^^ 
dientunfo  the  higher  power,  and  so  killeth  a  man,  is  not  guilty  of  murder  ;  '  and 
again,  "  He  is  the  minister  of  the  Lord,  who  smiteth  the  evil  in  that  they  are 
evil,  and  killeth  them."     And  many  other  such  like  things  are,  throughout  the 
whole  process  of  that  question,  determined:  that  for  certain  kinds  of  sins  men 
ought,   by  the   rigour  of  the  law,  to  be  punished  even  unto  death.     But  tlu? 
foundation  of  their  saying  they  took  out  of  the  old  law,  in  which,  for  divers 
transgressions,    were    appointed   clivers  punishment.s.       It   is    very    wonderful 
unto  me,  why  that  wise  men,  being  the  authors  and  makers  of  laws,  do  always, 
for  the  foundation  of  their  sayings,  look  upon  the  shadow  of  the  law,  and  not 
the  light  of  the  gospel  of  Je.sus  Christ ;  for  they  give  not  heed  unto  the  fitnirc 
of  perfection,  nor  yet  unto  (he  perfection  figured.     Is  it  not  WTitten  in  John  iii., 


160  THE    STORV    OF    WALTEU    BRUTE. 

Richard    "  God  seiit  not  his  Son  into  the  world,  to  judge  the  world,  but  to  save  the  world 

-^-f-       by  him?"   In  John  viii.,  "The  Scribes  and  Pharisees  bring  in  a  woman  taken  in 

.    1^     adultery,    and  set  her  in  the  midst,  and  said  unto  Christ,   Master,  even  now 

l^'gi"    this  woman  was  taken  in  adultery.     But  in  the  law,  Moses  hath  commanded  us 

1_  to  stone  such  :  what  sayest  thou  therefore  ?  This  they  said  to  tempt  him,  that 

they  miglit  accuse  him.     But  Jesus  stooped  down,  and  with  his  finger  wrote  on 

the  ground.     And  while  they  continued  asking  him,  he  lift  himself  up,  and  said 

unto  them,  Let  him  that  is  among  you  without  sin,  cast  the  first  stone  at  her. 

And  again  he  stooped  and  wrote  on  the  ground.     And  when  they  heard  it,  they 

Themak-  went  out  one  by  one,  beginning  at  the  eldest :  so  Jesus  was  left  alone,  and  the 

^J^  °^     ,   woman  standing  in  the  midst.     When  Jesus  had  lift  up  himself  again,  he  said 

law  follow  unto  her.  Where  be  they  which  accused  thee  ?  hath  no  man  condemned  thee  ? 

not  the      She  said.  No  man,  Lord.     And  Jesus  said  unto  her,  Neither  do  I  condemn  thee, 

rule^'^'      go  thy  way,  and  sin  now  no  more." 

It  is  manifest  by  the  Scriptures,  that  Christ  was  promised  he  should  be  king 

of  the  Jews,  and  imto  the  kings  pertained  the  judgments  of  the  law :  but 

because  he  came  not  to  judge  sinners  according  to  the  rigour  of  the  law,  but 

came  according  to  grace,  to  save  that  which  was  lost,  in  calling  the  sinner  to 

repentance,  it  is  most  plain,  that  in  the  coming  of  the  law  of  gi-ace,  he  would 

have  the  judgment  of  the  law  of  righteousness  to  cease ;  for  otherwise  he  had 

dealt  unjustly  with  the  aforesaid  woman,  forasmuch  as  the  witnesses  of  her 

adultery  bare  witness  against  her.     Wherefore,  seeing  the  same  King  Christ 

was  a  judge,  if  it  had  been  his  will  that  the  righteousness  of  the  law  should  be 

observed,  he  ought  to  have  adjudged  the  woman  to  death,  according  as  the  law 

commanded;*  which  thing,  forasmuch  as  he  did  not,  it  is  most  evident  that  the 

judgments  of  the  righteousness  of  the  law  are  finished  in  the  coming  of  the 

King,  being  King  of  the  law  of  grace ;  even  as  the  sacrifices  of  the  priesthood 

of  Aaron  are  finished  in  the  coming  of  the  Priest,  according  to  the  order  of 

Melchisedec,  who  hath  oflTered  himself  up  for  our  sins ;  because,  as  it  is  before 

said,  neither  the  righteousness  of  the  law,  nor  sacrifices  for  sin,  brought  any 

man  to  perfection  :  wherefore  it  was  necessary  that  the  same,  by  reason  of 

Whether   their  imperfection,  should  cease.     And  seeing  among  all  the  laws  of  the  world, 

cialiaw'of  ^^^  ^^^^  °^  Moses  was  most  just,  forasmuch  as  the  author  thereof  was  God,  who 

Moses       is  the  most  just  judge  ;  and  by  that  law  always  look,  what  manner  of  injiuy  one 

fully  (now  }^^^  done  unto  another,  contrary  to  the  commandment  of  the  law,   the  like 

coming  of  injury  he  should  I'eceiye  for  his  transgression,  according  to  the  upright  judgment 

Christ)      of  the  law  ;  as  death  for  death,  a  blow  for  a  blow,  burning  for  burning,  wound 

in^force'    ^°^  wound,  eye  for  eye,  tooth  for  tooth,  and  most  just  punishments  were  ordained 

or  not.  '    according  to  the  quantity  of  the  sins  :  but  if  this  law  of  righteousness  be  clean 

The  law    taken  away  in  the  coming  of  the  law  of  grace,  how  then  shall  the  law  of  the 

ofaliliiws  Gentiles  remain  among  Christians,  which  was  never  so  just?     Is  not  this  true, 

mostjust.  that  in  them  who  are  converted  unto  the  faith,  there  is  no  distinction  between 

the  Jew  and  the  Grecian  ?  for  both  are  under  sin,  and  are  justified  by  grace  in 

the  faith  of  Christ,  being  called  unto  faith,  and  unto  .the  perfection  of  the  gospel. 

If  therefore  the  Gentiles  converted  are  not  bound  to  play  the  Jews,  to  follow 

the  law  of  the  Jews,  why  should  the  Jews  converted,  follow  the  laws  of  the 

Gentiles  which  are  not  so  good?     Wherefore  it  is  to  be  wondered  at,^  why 

thieves  are,  among  Christians,  for  theft  put  to  death,  when  after  the  law  of  Moses 

they  were  not  put  to  death.    Christians  suffer  adulterers  to  live,  Sodomites,  and 

they  who  curse  father  and  mother,  and  many  other  horrible  sinners ;  and  they 

who  according  to  the  most  just  law  of  God  were  condemned  to  death,  are  not 

put  to  death.     So  we  neither  keep  the  law  of  righteousness  given  by  God,  nor 

the  law  of  mercy  taught  by  Christ. 

Wherefore  the  law-makers  and  judges  do  not  give  heed  imto  the  aforesaid 
sentence  of  Christ  unto  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  who  said,  "  He  which 
amongst  you  is  without  sin,  let  him  cast  the  first  stone  at  her."^     What  is  he 

(1)  Here  is  meant,  and  to  be  understood,  not  what  public  magistrates  may  do,  in  cases  of  right- 
eousness, but  what  ecclesiastical  persons,  according  to  the  office  of  their  profession,  should  do,  in 
not  revenging  by  death,  as  they  do  by  offices. 

(2)  His  marvel  is  not  so  much,  why  thieves  are  put  to  death,  but  why  the  judicial  law  of  Moses 
in  this  point  is  broken,  and  in  other  points  is  straitly  kept.     Mark  his  meaning  ! 

(3)  Take  his  meaning  wisely,  gentle  reader.  Walter  Brute's  mind  is  not  so,  that  no  magistrate, 
being  not  without  sin,  may  punish  a  transgressor,  but  he  speaketh  against  such  churchmen,  who, 
professing  the  rule  of  mercy,  show  no  mercy  at  all,  but  all  rigour  by  their  law,  '  ex  officio.' 


MIS    (.ODI.V     DKOI.AHA  TION'S.  1  (i  1 

tliat  daretlj  be  so  bold  m  to  say,  he  is  without  sin,  ju-a,  and  without  a  prievous  Richard 
sin,  when  the  transgression  oi"  the  connnainhm  iit  of  God  is  a  j^rievous  sin  ?       ''■ 
and  who  can  say  that  lie  nevor  transgressed  this  eoniniandinent  of  (lod,  " 'I'liou      .    r)~ 
shall  love  tliy  neigliLoiir  as  thyself.'  '  or  the  otiier  eoniniandnient  which  is  of    log] 

greater  force,   "  Thou  shalt  love  the   Lord   tiiy  (Jod  with  id!   tliy   heart,"  &c.  1- 

Wherefore  tiiou,  wliatsoever  thou  art,  tliat  judgest  thy  brother  unto  death, 
thinkest  thou  that  tiiou  shalt  escape  the  judgment  of  (iod,  who  peradventure 
hast  oti'ended  more  grievously  llian  hath  he  whom  thou  judgest  i  How  scest 
thou  a  mote  in  tliy  brother's  eye,  and  seest  not  a  beam  in  thine  own  eye  ? 
Knowest  thou  not  that  with  wiiat  measure  tliou  measures!,  that  same  shall  be 
measured  to  you  again  .'  Uoth  not  the  Scripture  say,  "  Unto  me  belongeth 
vengeance,  and  I  will  render  again,  saith  the  Lord  .' "  How  can  any  man  say 
that  these  men  can  with  charity  keep  these  judgments  of  death?  Who  is  it 
that  oll'endeth  God,  and  desireth  of  God  just  judgment  for  his  oHetice  ?  He 
desireth  not  judgment,  but  mercy.  If  he  desire  mercy  for  himself,  why  de- 
sireth he  vengeance  for  his  brother  offending  ?  How  therefore  loveth  he  his 
brother  as  himsell'?  or  how  dost  thou  show  mercy  unto  thy  brotJier,  as  thou 
art  bouml  by  the  commandment  of  Christ,  who  seekest  the  greatest  vengeance 
upon  him  that  thou  canst  infer  unto  him  ?  for  death  is  llie  most  terrible  thing 
of  all,  and  a  more  grievous  vengeance  than  death,  can  no  man  infer.  Where- 
fore they  who  will  keep  charity,  ought  to  observe  the  commandments  of  Christ 
touching  mercy  ;  and  they  whu  live  in  the  law  of  charity,'  ought  to  leave  the 
law  of  vengeance'  and  judgments. 

Ought  we  to  believe  that  Christ  in  his  coming,  by  grace,  abrogated  the  most 
just  law  which  he  himself  gave  unto  the  children  of  Israel  by  Moses  his  servant, 
and  established  the  laws  of  the  Gentiles,  being  not  so  just,  to  be  observed  by 
his  taithful  ?     Doth  not  Daniel  [chap,  ii.]    expound  the  dream  of  Nebuchad- 
nezzar the  king,  concerning  the  image,  whose  head  was  of  gold,  the  breast  and 
arms  of  silver,  the  belly  and  thighs  of  brass,  the  legs  of  iron,  one  part  of  the 
feet  of  iron,  and  the  other  part  of  clay  ?     Nebuchadnezzar  saw  that  a  stone 
was  cut  out  of  a  mountain,  without  hands,  and  strake  the  image  in  his  feet  of 
iron  and  of  clay,  and  brake  them  to  pieces.     Then  were  the  iron,  the  clay,  the 
briiss,  the  silver,  and  gold,  broken  all  together,  and  became  like  the  chaff  of  the 
summer  floor,  which  is  carried  away  by  the  wind,  and  there  was  no  place  found 
for  them;  and  tlie  stone  that  smote   the  image  became  a  great  mountain,  and 
lilled  the  whole  earth.    He  applieth  therefore  four  kingdoms  unto  the  four  parts  The 
of  the  image  ;  namely,  the  kingdom  of  the  Babylonians,  unto  the  head  of  gold ;  ''5'^^"'  °^ 
the  kingdom  of  the  Niedes  and  Persians,  unto  the  breast  and  anns  of  silver;  ciiadncr- 
the  kingdom  of  the  Grecians,   unto  the  belly  and   thighs  of  brass  ;  but  the  zar  con- 
fourth  kingdom,  which  is  of  the  Romans,  he  applieth  unto  the  feet  and  legs  of  ^""'"c 
iron.     And  Daniel  addeth,   "  In  the  days  of  their  kingdoms  shall  God  raise  up  image, 
a  kingdom  which  shall  never  be  destroyed :  and  his  kingdom  shall  not  be  deli-  expound- 
vered  unto  another,  but  it  shall  break  and  destroy  those  kingdoms ;  and  it  shall  i)a„ici. 
stand  for  ever,  according  as   thou  sawest,   that  the  stone  was  cut  out  of  the 
mountain,  without  hands,  and  brake  in  pieces  the  clay  and  iron,  brass,  silver, 
and  gold."    Seeing  therefore  it  is  certain,  that  this  stone  signitieth  Christ,  whose 
kingdom  is  for  ever ;  it  is  also  a  thing  most  assured,  that  he  ought  to  reign 
every  where,  and  to  break  in  pieces  the  other  kingdoms  of  the  world.     Where- 
fore, if  terrcstriid  kings,  and  the  teiTestrial  kingdom  of  the  Jews,  and  their  laws 
and  judgments,  have  ceased'  by  Christ  the  King  calling  the  Jews  unto  the 
perfection  of  his  gospel,  namely,  mito  faith  and  charity;  it  is  not  to  be  doubted, 
but  that  the  kingdom  of  the  (Jentiles  (which  is  more  imperfect)  and  their  laws, 
ought  to  cease  among  the  (ientiles,  departing  from  their  Gentility  unto  the  per- 
fection of  the  gospel  of  Je.sus  Christ.      For  there  is  no  distinction  between  the 
Jews  and  Gentiles  being  converted   unto  the  faith  <jf  Christ ;   but  all  of  them, 
abiding  in  that  eternal  kingdom,  ought  to  be  under  one  law  of  charity  and  of 
virtue.     Therefore  they  ought  to  have  mercy,   and  to  leave  the  judgments  of 
death,  and  the  desire  of  vengeance.     Wherefore  they  who  do  make  laws,  mark 

(1)  He  nie.Micth,  of  the  pnpe  xnil  of  the  cleffry. 

(2)  H)!  siicikfth  against  the  dc«ire  of  revenge,  not  agaiait  the  execution  of  mccssory  l.-iw  done 
by  moKiiiratcs 

i3)  The  juiliriaJ  ncceiiity  jf  those  laws  he  moAnelh  to  cease,  nolwithiitandini;  rhristiiiii  princes 
may  borrow  txith  out  uf  thosu  lawi,  and  out  of  all  otbcrt,  what  they  think  good  and  expedient  for 
their  comtiiunwcal. 

vol,,  in.  M 


162  THE    STORY    OF    WALTKR    BH-UTE. 

Richard   iiot  the  parable  of  Christ,  saying,  "  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  unto  a  man 

II-       which  sowed  good  seed  in  his  field ;  but  when  men  were  on  sleep,  the  enemy 

A  D     came  and  sowed  tares  in  the  midst  of  the  wheat,  and  went  his  way.    But  when 

1391      the  herb  was  grown  and  brought  forth  fruit,  then  appeared  the  tares.    And  the 

servants  came  unto  the  good  man  of  the  house,  and  said  unto  him.  Lord !  didst 

not  thou  sow  good  seed  in  thy  field  ?  from  whence  then  come  these  tares?  And 
he  said  unto  them.  The  enemy  hath  done  this.  And  the  servants  said  unto 
him,  Wilt  thou  that  we  go  and  gather  them  up  ?  And  he  said,  No,  lest  perad- 
venture  gathering  up  the  tares,  ye  pluck  up  the  wheat  by  the  roots ;  suflPer  them 
both  to  grow  until  the  harvest,  and  in  the  time  of  the  harvest,  I  will  say  unto 
the  harvest-men,  gather  first  the  tares  and  bind  them  in  bundles,  that  they  may 
be  burnt,  but  gather  the  wheat  into  my  barn,"  Christ  himself  expoundeth 
this  parable  in  the  self-same  chapter,  saying,  "  He  which  soweth  the  good 
seed  is  the  Son  of  Man  ;  but  the  field  is  the  world ;  and  the  good  seed,  those  are 
the  children  of  the  kingdom.  But  the  tares  are  the  naughty  children ;  and  the 
enemy  which  soweth  them  is  the  devil.  And  the  harvest  is  the  end  of  the 
world;  and  the  harvest-men  are  the  angels.  Even  as,  therefore,  the  tares  are 
gathered  and  burnt  with  fire,  so  shall  it  be  in  the  end  of  the  world.  The  Son 
of  Man  shall  send  his  angels,  and  they  shall  gather  out  of  his  kingdom  all 
offenders,  and  those  which  commit  iniquity,  and  sliall  put  them  into  a  furnace 
of  fire  ;  there  shall  be  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth." 

By  which  plain  doctrine  it  is  manifest,  that  Christ  will  have  mercy  showed 
to  sinners,   even   unto   the  end  of  the  world,   and  will  have  them  to  remain 
mingled  with  the  good ;  lest  peradventure,  when  a  man  thinketh  he  doth  right 
well  to  take  away  the  tares,  he  taketh  away  the  wheat.'    For  how  great  a  sinner 
soever  a  man  be,  we  know  not  whether  his  end  shall  be  good,  and  whether  in 
the  end  he  shall  obtain  mercy  of  God ;   neither  are  we  certain  of  the  time, 
wherein  God  will,  by  grace,  judge  him  whom  we  abhor  as  a  sinner.  And,  per- 
adventure, such  a  one  shall  more  profit  after  his  conversion  in  the  church,  than 
he  whom  we  think  to  be  just,  as  it  came  to  pass  in  Paul.    And  if  God  justifieth 
a  man  by  grace,  although  at  his  end,  why  darest  thou  be  so  bold  to  be  his 
judge,  and  to  condemn  him?     Yea  rather,  although  a  man  seem  to  be  obstinate 
and  hardened  in  his  evil  (so  that  he  is  not  corrected  by  a  secret  coiTection), 
correct  him  before  one  alone ;  if  he  do  not  receive  open  correction,  being  done 
before  two  or  three  witnesses,  neither  do  pass  upon  a  manifest  correction  when 
his  sin  is  made  known  unto  the  church,  Christ  doth  not  teach  to  punish  such 
a  one  with  the  pxmishment  of  death.     Yea  rather,  he  saith,   "  If  he  hearken 
not  unto  the  church,  let  him  be  unto  thee  as  an  ethnick  and  a  publican."    And 
Paul,  following  this  doctrine,  in  1  Cor.  v.,  saith,  "  There  goeth  a  common  saying, 
that  there  is  fornication  among  you,  and  such  fornication  as  is  not  once  named 
among  the  Gentiles,  that  one  should  have  his  father's  wife.    And  ye  are  puffed 
up,  and  have  not  rather  sorrowed,  that  he  which  hath  done  this  deed  might  be 
put  fi-om  among  you.     For  I,  verily,  as  absent  in  body,  but  present  in  spirit, 
have  already  determined,  as  though  I  were  present,  that  he  which  hath  done 
this  thing,  when  ye  are  gathered  together,  and  my  spirit,  in  the  name  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  such  a  one,  by  the  power  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  be 
delivered  unto  Satan  for  the  destiniction  of  the  flesh,   that  the  spirit  may  be 
saved  in  the  day  of  the  Lord  Jesus."     Paul  teacheth  not  to  kill  this  man,  as 
some  gatlier  by  this  text,  but  to  separate  him  from  the  other  faithftd,  and  so 
from  Christ,  who  is  the  head  of  the  church  of  the  faithful ;  and  so  is  he  delivered 
unto  Satan,  who  is  separated  from  Christ,  that  the  flesh  may  be  killed,  that  is, 
that  the  carnal  concupiscence,  whereby  he  luxuriously  lusted  after  the  wife  of 
his  father,  may  be  destroyed  in  him  by  such  a  separation,  that  the  spirit  may  be 
saved  :  and  not  that  his  body  should  be  killed,  as  some  say ;  as  it  is  manifest  in 
the  self-same  chapter,  where  he  saith,  "  I  wrote  unto  you  an  epistle,  that  you 
should  not  keep  companj'  with  fornicators  ;  and   I  meant  not  of  all  the  forni- 
cators of  this  world,  either  of  the  covetous,   or  extortioners,  or   idolaters,   for 
then  must  ye  needs  have  gone  out  of  the  world.    But  now  I  have  written  unto 
you,  that  ye  keep  not  company  together ;  if  any  that  is  called  a  brother  be  a 
fornicator,  or  covetous  person,  or  a  worshipper  of  images,  either  a  cursed  speaker, 
or  drunkard,  or  an  extortioner :  with  him  that  is  such,  see  that  ye  eat  not." 

(!)  His  purpose  is  not  that  no  evil  doer  sliould  be  punished  in  a  commonwealth,  but  his  relation 
is  to  the  23.  quest.  5,  aforesaid,  notinj?  causes  of  religion,  whicli  the  pope  and  his  prelates  are  wont 
to  punish  with  death,  taking  many  times  for  tares  that  which  is  pure  wheat. 


HIS    UODI.V     DKCI.AUATIOXS.  163 

By  whicli  it  is  niaiiifest,  that  Paul  would  have  the  aforesaid  fornicator  sepa-  RicharU 
rated  fiuin  the  fellowship  of  tlie  faithful  ;   that  his  carnal  concupiscence  might       •''• 
be  mortified,  for  the  healtli  of  the  spirit,  and  not  that  the  body  should  he  killed  :      .    tx 
wherefore  they  do  ill  understand  Paul,  who  by  this  sayinj^  do  confirm  the  killing     im.i 

of  men.     And  forasmuch   as  lieresy  is  one  of  the  most  grievous   sins'   (for  a  - '— 

heretic  leadeth  nun  into  errors,  whereby  they  are  made  to  stray  from  faith, 
without  which  they  cannot  be  saved),  it  doth  most  great  hurt  in  the  church. 

Further,  as  concerning  such  a  wicked  man,  Paul  thus  speaketh,  "  flee  from 
the  man  that  is  a  heretic  after  the  first  and  second  correction,  kn(jwing  that 
such  a  one  is  subverted  and  sinneth,  forasmuch  as  he  is,  by  his  own  judgment, 
condemned.  Behold,  Paul  teacheth  not  to  kill  this  man,  but  with  Christ  to 
separate  him  from  the  fellowship  of  the  faithful.'  But  some  sav,  that  Peter,  in 
tiie  primitive  church,  slew  Ananias  and  Sapphira  for  their  sins,  wherefore,  they 
say,  it  is  lawful  for  them  to  condemn  wicked  men  to  death.  We  will  declare, 
by  showing  the  whole  process,  how  falsely  they  speak  in  alleging  of  Peter,  to 
justify  their  error. 

In  Acts  iv.  it  is  written,   "  As  many  as  were  possessors  of  lands  or  houses,  Tlie  cx- 
sold  them,  and  otlered  the  price  of  that  which  they  sold,  and  laid  it  before  the  ^{"pe^pr 
feet  of  the  apostles ;  and  it  was  divided  unto  every  one  ii^  he  had  need  thereof  slayinf? 
But  a  certain  man,  called  Ananias,  with  Sapphira  his  wife,  sold  a  piece  of  land,  Ananias 
and  kept  back  a  part  of  the  price  of  the  held,  his  wifr  being  privy  unto  it,  and  phjra^'' 
bringing  a  certain  part  thereof,  he  laid  it  at  the  feet  of  the  apostles.     But  Peter  falsely 
said  unto   Ananias,  Ananias  !  why  hath  Satan   tempted  thy  heart,   that  thou  J^yJhg'^pj. 
shouldst  lie  unto  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  keep  back  a  part  of  the  price  of  the  land  ?  pl^ts. 
Did  it  not,  whilst  it  remained,  remain  unto  thee ;  and  being  sold,  was  it  not  in 
thine  own  power .'  why  hast  thou  conceived  this  thing  in  thine  heart  ?     Thou 
hast  not  lied  unto  men,  but  unto  God.     And  when  Ananias  heard  these  words, 
he  fell  down  and  gave  up  the  ghost,  and  great  fear  came  on  all  them  that  heard 
these  things.     And  the  young  men  rose  up  and  took  him  up,  and  carried  him 
out,  and  buried  him.     And  it  came  to  pass,  about  the  space  of  three  hours  after, 
that  his  wife  came  in,  being  ignorant  of  that  which  was  done.     And  Peter  said 
unto  her.  Tell  me,  woman,  sold  ye  the  land  for  so  much  '     And  she  said,  Yea, 
for  so  much.     But  Peter  said  imder  her.  Why  have  ye  agreed  together  to  tempt 
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  ?  Behold  the  feet  of  them  which  buried  thy  husband  are 
at  the  door,  and   shall  carr}'  thee  out.     And  straightway  she  fell   down  before 
his  feet,  and  gave  up  the  ghost ;  and  the  young  men  entering  in,  found  her 
dead,  and  they  carried  her  out,  and  buried  her  by  her  husband.     And  great 
fear  came  on  all  the  church,  and  all  those  which  heard  these  things."     It  is  Peternot 
marvel  that  any  man  that  is  wise,  will  say   that  by  this  process   Peter  slew  ^f^,};*'"* 
Ananias  or  his  wit\'.     For  it  was  not  his  act,  but  the  act  of  God,  who  made  a  death  of 
wedding  to  his  Son,  and  sent  his  servants  to  call  them  that  were  bidden  imto  Ananias 
the  wedding,  and  they  would  not  come.  "  The  king  then  sent  forth  his  servants  to  phira. 
the  out-corners  of  the  high-ways,  to  gather  all  that  they  could  find,  both  good 
and  enl,  and  so  they  did  :  and  the  marriage  was  full  furnished  with  guest.s.  Then 
came  in  also  the  king  to  view  and  see  them  sitting;  among  whom  he  perceived 
there  one  sitting,  having  not  a  wedding  garment,  and  saith  unto  him,  Friend, 
how  earnest  thou  hither?  And  he,  being  dumb,  had  not  a  word  to  speak.  Then 
said  the  king  to  tlie  servitors,  Take  and  bind  him  hand  and  foot,  and  cust  him 
into  the  outward  darkness ;   there  shall  be  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth. 
Many  there  be  called,  but  few  chosen,"  &c. 

It  is  manifest,  that  this  wedding  garment  is  charity,  without  which  because  Thewed- 
Ananias  entered  into  the   marriage  of  Christ,  he  w.is  given  to  death,  that  by  jjj"^,*" 
one  many  might  be  infonrnd  to  learn  and  understand,  that  they  who  have  faith  Thcdeath 
and  not  charity,  although  they  appear  to  men  to  have,  yet  it  cannot  be  privy  to  of  Ana- 
the  Spirit  of  God,  that  they  do  feign.  Such  there  are  here  no  doubt,  but  they  shall  "|",^7fi- 
be  excluded  from  the  marriage  of  Christ,  as  we  see  this  exemplified  in  the  death  what  in- 
of  Ananias  and  his  wife  by  the  hand  of  God,  and  not  by  the  hand  of  Peter,  formaiior. 
And  how  should  Peter  there  have  judged  Ananias  (albeit  he  had  judged  him)  m'the 
worthy  of  death  by  the  rigour  of  the  old  law  ?  For  why  ?  by  the  law  he  had  not  been  church. 

(I)  Hersby  it  appearetb  that  aU  hit  reUtinn  in  this  matter,  touchei  only  the  cases  of  heresy 
«iid  opinloni  In  relifrlon, 

(21  By  this  it  appfareth  aeain,  that  hii  respect  U  only  to  the  pops  and  his  prelates  of  the 
Church,  and  not  to  civil  magistrates. 


IGI  THE    STOUY    OF    WALTER    BRUTE. 

Richard   guilty  of  death,  for  tliat  part  which  they  did  fraudulently  and   dissemblingly 

II-       reserve  to  themselves :  yea,  and  if  they  had    stolen  as   much  from  anotheV 

.    „      man,  which  was  greater,  neither  yet  for  his  lie  committed,  he  had  not  therefore, 

\{n{    V  that  law  of  justice,  been  found  guilty  of  death.     Wherefore,  if  he  did  not 

1_  condemn  him  by  the  law  of  justice,  it  appeareth  that  he  condemned  him  by 

the  law  of  grace  and  mercy,  which  he  learned  of  Christ :  and  so,  consequently, 
it  followeth  much  more  apparent,  that  Peter  could  not  put  him  to  death.  Fur- 
thermore, to  say  that  Peter  put  him  to  death  by  the  mere  motion  of  his  own 
will,  and  not  by  the  authority  of  the  old  law,  or  by  the  new,  it  were  deroga- 
tory and  slanderous  to  the  good  fame  and  name  of  Peter.  But  if  Peter  did 
kill  him,  why  then  doth  the  bishop  of  Rome,  who  pretendeth  to  be  successor  of 
Peter,  excuse  himself  and  his  priestsfromthe  judgment  of  death  against  heretics 
and  other  offenders,  although  they  themselves  be  consenting  to  such  judgments 
done  by  lay-men  ?  For  that  which  was  done  by  Peter  without  ofience,  ma}' 
reasonably  excuse  him  and  his  fellow  priests  from  the  spot  of  crime.  [Acts  v.] 

It  is  manifest  that  there  was  another  who  did  more  grievously  offend  than 
Ananias,  and  that  Peter  rebuked  him  with  more  sharp  words  ;  but  yet  he  com- 
manded him  not  so  to  be  put  to  death.  "  For  Simon  Magus  also  remaining  at 
Samaria,  after  that  he  believed  and  was  baptized,  he  joined  himself  with  Philip; 
and  when  he  saw  that  the  Holy  Spirit  was  given  by  the  apostles  (laying  their 
hands  upon  men),  he  offered  tliem  money,  saying,  Give  unto  me  this  power, 
that  upon  whomsoever  I  shall  lay  my  hand,  he  shall  receive  the  Holy  Ghost. 
To  whom  Peter  answered,  "  Desti'oyed  be  thou  and  thy  money  together ;  and 
for  that  thou  supposest  the  gift  of  God  to  be  bought  with  money,  thou  shalt 
have  neither  part  nor  fellowship  in  this  doctrine.  Thy  heart  is  not  pure  before 
God,  therefore  repent  thee  of  thy  wickedness,  and  pray  unto  God  that  this 
wicked  thought  of  thy  heart  may  be  forgiven  thee ;  for  I  perceive  thou  art  even 
in  the  bitter  gall  of  wickedness,  and  baiid  of  iniquity."  Behold  here  the 
grievous  offence  of  Simon  Peter's  hard  and  sharp  rebuking  of  him,  and  yet 
thereupon  he  was  not  put  to  death.  Whereby  it  appeareth  that  the  death  of 
Ananias  aforesaid,  proceeded  of  God  and  not  of  Peter.  Of  all  these  things  it 
is  to  be  gathered,  seeing  the  judgments  of  death  are  not  grounded  upon  the  ex- 
press and  plain  Scriptures,  but  only  under  the  shadow  of  the  old  law,  that  they 
are  not  to  be  observed  of  Christians  because  they  are  contrary  to  charity.  Ergo, 
the  bishop  of  Rome  approving  such  judgments,  alloweth  those  that  are  con- 
trary to  the  law  and  doctrine  of  Christ;  as  before  is  said  of  wars,  where  he 
approveth  and  justifieth  that  which  is  contrary  to  charity.  The  order  of  priest- 
hood, albeit  it  doth  justify  the  judgments  to  death  of  the  laity,  Avhereby  offenders 
are  condemned  to  die,  yet  are  they  themselves  forbidden  to  put  in  execution 
the  same  judgments.  The  priests  of  the  old  law  being  imperfect,  when  Pilate 
said  unto  them  concerning  Christ,  whom  they  had  accused  as  worthy  of  death, 
"  Take  him  unto  you,  and  according  to  your  law  judge  him,"  answered,  "  That 
it  was  not  lawful  for  them  to  put  to  death  any  man."    John  xviii. 

Whereby  it  appeareth,  that  our  priests,  being  much  more  perfect,  may  not 
lawfully  give  judgment  of  death  against  any  offenders  :  yet,  notwithstanding, 
they  claim  imto  them  the  power  judicial  upon  offenders ;  because,  say  they,  it 
belongeth  unto  them  to  know  the  offences  by  the  auricular  confession  of  the 
offenders,  and  to  judge  upon  the  same  being  known,  and  to  enjoin  divers 
penances  unto  the  parties  offending,  according  to  the  quantit}'  of  their  offences 
committed,  so  that  the  sinner  may  make  satisfaction,  say  they,  unto  God,  for  the 
offences  which  he  never  committed.  And  to  confirm  unto  them  this  judicial 
power,  they  allege  the  Scriptures  in  many  places,  wresting  them  to  serve  their 
purpose. 

First,  They  say  that  the  bishop  of  Rome  (who  is  the  chief  priest  and  judge 
among  them")  hath  full  power  and  authority  to  remit  sins.  Whereupon  they 
say,  that  he  is  able,  fully  and  wholly,  to  absolve  a  man  'a  poena  et  culpa  ;'  so 
that  if  a  man,  at  the  time  of  his  death,  had  this  remission,  he  should  straight- 
Like  a  ways  ily  unto  heaven  without  any  pain  of  purgatory.  The  other  bishops,  as 
pulled  they  say,  have  not  so  great  authority.  The  priests  constituted  under  every  bishop, 
have  power,  say  they,  to  absolve  the  sins  of  them  that  are  confessed,  but  not  all 
kind  of  sins  :  because  there  are  some  grievous  sins  reserved  to  the  absolutions 
of  the  bishops ;  and  some  again,  to  the  absolution  only  of  the  chief  and  high 
bishop.     They  say  also,  that  it  behoveth  the  offender,  for  the  necessity  of  his 


HIS    CODLV     DKC'LARATIONS.  ]{]r, 

soul's  licaltK,  to  call  to  remembrance  his  offences,  and  to  manifest  the  same,   Ri,/i„r,i 
with  all  the  circimistaiiccs  tluTi-of,  unto  the  priest  in  aurirular  confession,  siij>-       JJ- 
phinj,'  the  place  of  Coil,  after  the  manner  of  a  judpe ;  and  afterwards  hunildy  ~7^  ja 
to  fiilhl  tlie  penance   enjoined  unto  him    hy  the  priest   for   his  sins,  except  the     i.,',,/ 
said  penance    so    enjoined,    or  any  part   tliereof,   he   released   hy  the    superior       '  '    ' 
power.      All   these    thini,'s,   say  they,  are  manifestly  determined,  ju  well   in  the 
decrees    as    decretals.      And    although    these   thiufrs    have   not   expressly  their 
foundation  in  the  plain  and  manifest  doctrine  of  Christ  or  any  of  the  apostles, 
yet  the  authors  of  the  decrees  and  decretals   concerninfj    this   matter,    have 
grounded  the  same  upon  divers  places  of  the  Scriptures,  as  in  the  process  of 
Christ,   in  the    gospel   of  St.  Matthew,  chap.  x%i.     Whereupon    they  ground  Tht- 
the  pope's  power  judicial  to  surmount  the  powers  of  other  priests,  as  where  popi-'s 
Christ  said  unto  his  disciples,  "  Whom  do  men  say  tliat  I  an» !     And  they  an-  "'"'•'"'l 
swered,  Some  say  thou  art  John  Haptist,  some  Elias,  and  some  Jeremy,  or  one  falsely 
of  the  prophets.     To  whom  he  said,  But  who  say  you  that  I  am  ?    Simon  Peter,  ''""'"J'^d 
making  answer,  said.  Thou  art  Christ,  the  son  of  the  living  (Jod.     ,\nd  Jesus  srr'ipturi- 
answered  and  said  unto  him,  Blessed  art  thou  Simon,  the  son  of  Jonas  ;  for  flesh 
and  blood  have  not  opened  this  unto  thee;  but  my  Father  which  is  in  heaven. 
And  1  say  unto  thee,  that  thou  art  Peter,  and  upon   this  rock  will    I  build  my 
church,  and  hell-gates  shall  not  prevail  agjiinst  it.  And  I  will  give  thee  the  keys 
of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.     And  whatsoever  thou  shalt  biiul  upon  earth,  shall 
also  be  bound  in  heaven,  and  whatsoever  thou  shalt  loose  upon  earth,  shall  be 
loosed  also  in  heaven." 

Out  of  this  text  of  Christ,  divers  expositors  have  drawn  divers  errors.     For 
when  Christ  said,  "  And  I  say  unto  thee,  that  thou  art  Peter,  and  upon  this  rock 
will  I  build  my  church ;  "  some  thereupon   atnrm,  that  Clnist  meant  he  would 
build  his  church  upon   Peter  by  authority  of  that  text,  as  it  is  written  in  the 
first  part  of  the  decrees,  dist.  It),  cap.  "  Ita  Dominus  noster.  "     The  exj)osition 
hereof  is  ascribed  to  pope  Leo ;  the  error  whereof  is  manifestly  known.     For 
the  church  of  Christ  is  not  builded  upon  Peter,  but  uj)on  the  rock  of  Peter's 
confession,  for  that  he  said,  "  Thou  art  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  (iod."  And 
for  that  Christ  said  singularly  unto  Peter,     "  I  will  give  unto  thee  the  keys  of  The 
the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  whatsoever  thou  shalt  bind,"  &c.,  by  this  saying  ^'^^^i^^ 
they  athrm,  that  Christ  gave  unto  Peter  specially,  as  chief  of  the  rest  of  the  Riving 
apostles,  a  larger  power  to  bind  and  to  loose,  than  he  did  unto  the  rest  of  the  "'«  keys 
apostles  and  disciples.     And  because  Peter  answered  for  himself  and  all   the  M.a^  x['i. 
apostles,  not  only  confessing  the  faith  which  he  had  chiefly  above  the  rest,  but  a;itlyex- 
also  the  faith  which  the  rest  of  the  apostles  had  even  as  himself,  by  the  revela-  l'"""'''^'^ 
tion  of  the  heavenly  Father,  it  appcareth  that  as  the  faith  of  all  the  apostles 
was  declared   by  the  answer   of  one,  so,  by  this   that  Christ   said  unto  Peter, 
"  Whatsoever  thou  shalt  bind,"  &c.,  are  given  unto  the  rest  of  the  apostles  the 
same  power  and  equality  to  bind  and  to  loose,  as  unto  Peter ;  which  Christ  de- 
clareth   in   the  gospel  of  St.  Matthew,  chap,  xviii.,  in  these  words,  "  Verily  I 
say  unto  you,  what  things  soever  you  shall  bind  upon  earth,  shall  be  bound 
in  heaven  ;  and  whatsoever  you  shall  loose  upon  earth,  shall  be  also  loosed  in 
heaven.  "     And  further  he   added,  "  And  again  I  say  unto  you,  that  if  two  of 
you  shall  consent  upon  earth,  and  request,  whatsoever  it  be,  it  shall  be  granted 
unto  you  of  my  Father  which  is  in  heaven:  for  when  two    or  three  be  gathered 
togetlier  in  my  nanu",  1  am  there  in  the  midst  of  them.  "     And  in  John,  chap. 
XX.,  he  saith  generally  unto  them,  "  Receive  ye    my  Spirit.     Whose    sins  ye 
shall  remit,  shall  be  remitted  unto  them ;  and  whose  sins  you  shall  retain,  shidl 
be  retiiined." 

By  this  it  appeareth,  that  the  power  to  bind  and  to  loose  is   not    specially 
granted  to  Peter,  as  chief  and  head  of  the  rest,  and  that  by  him  the  rest  had 
their  power  to  hind  and  to  loose;  for  that  the  head  of  the  body  of  the  church  is  Christ 
one,  which  is  Christ,  and  the   head  of  Christ  is   CJod.     iVter  and  the  rest  of""')  •''»-' 
the  apostles  are  the  good  members  of  the  body  of  Christ,  receiving  power  and  ','|^^''  "^ 
virtue  of  Christ,  whereby  they  do  confirm  and  glue   together  the  other  mi>m-  church. 
bcrs  (as  well  the  strong  and   noble,  as  the  weak  and  unable)  to  a  perfect  com- 
position and  seemliness  of  the  body  of  Christ ;  that  all   honour,  from  all  parts 
and  members,  may  be  given  unto  Christ  as  heatl  .uul  chief,  by  whom,  as  head, 
all    the  members  are  governed.     And  therefore  Paul,  1  Cor.  iii.,  "  When  one 
man    saith,  I    hold  of  Paul,  and  another  saith,  I    hold  of  /\pollos,  are  ye  not 


16G 


THE    STORY    OF    WALTER    BRUTE. 


Richard 
II. 


A.D. 

1391. 


Tlie  third 
error. 


Other 
apostles 
had  like 
power  to 
bind  and 
to  loose 
as  Peter 
had. 


Peter 

ruled 
three 
churches. 


carnal  men  ?  for  what  is  Apollos?  what  is  Paul?  The  minister  of  him  in  whom 
ye  have  believed,  and  he,  as  God  giveth  unto  every  man.  I  have  planted. 
Apollos  hath  watered,  but  God  hath  given  the  increase.  Therefore,  neither  he 
that  planteth  is  any  tiling,  neither  he  that  wateretli,  but  God  that  giveth  the 
increase."  And  Paul  to  the  Galatians,  chap,  ii.,  "  God  hath  no  respect  of 
persons.  Those  that  seemed  to  be  great  and  do  much,  availed  or  profited  me 
nothing  at  all :  but  contrariwise,  when  they  saw  that  the  gospel  of  the  uncir- 
cumcision  was  comiuitted  unto  me,  as  the  circumcision  was  unto  Peter  (for  he  that 
wrought  with  Peter  in  the  apostleship  of  the  circumcision,  wrought  with  me 
also  among  the  Gentiles),  and  when  they  knew  the  grace  which  was  given  me, 
Peter,  James,  and  John,  straightway,  joined  themselves  with  me  and  Barnabas; 
that  w'e,  among  the  Gentiles,  and  they  in  circumcision  only,  might  be  mindful 
of  the  poor,  which  to  do,  I  was  very  careful."  Hereby  it  appeareth  that  Paul 
had  not  his  authoritj'  of  Peter  to  convert  the  Gentiles,  to  baptize  them,  and  to 
remit  their  sins,  but  of  him  who  said  unto  him,  "  Saul !  Saul !  why  perse- 
cutest  thou  me?  It  is  hard  for  thee  to  kick  against  the  pricks." [Acts  ix.]  Here 
is  Paul,  the  head  of  (he  church,  and  not  Peter  :  by  which  head  they  say,  that 
all  the  members  are  sustained  and  made  lively. 

The  third  error  which  the  authors  of  the  canons  conceive  in  the  said  text  of 
Christ,  which  was  said  to  Peter,  "  Unto  thee  will  I  give  the  keys,"  &c.,  is  this: 
They  say  that  in  this  sentence  which  was  said  to  Peter  of  the  authority  to  bind 
and  loose,  was  meant,  that  as  Christ  gave  unto  Peter,  above  all  the  rest  of  the 
apostles,  a  special,  and  as  it  were  an  excellent  power  above  all  the  apostles ; 
even  so,  say  they,  he  gave  power  unto  the  bishops  of  Rome  (whom  they  call 
Peter's  chief  successors),  the  same  special  power  and  authority,  exceeding  the 
power  of  all  other  bishops  of  the  woi'ld. 

Tlie  first  part  of  this  similitude  and  comparison,  doth  appear  manifestly  by 
the  premises  to  be  erroneous  ;  wherein  is  plainly  showed,  that  the  other  apo- 
stles had  equal  power  with  Peter  to  bind  and  loose.  Wherefore  consequently  it 
follov/eth  that  the  second  part  of  the  similitude,  grounded  upon  the  same  text, 
is  also  erroneous.  But  and  if  the  first  part  of  the  said  similitude  were  truth, 
as  it  is  not,  yet  the  second  part  must  needs  be  an  error,  wherein  is  said,  that 
the  bishops  of  Rome  are  Peter's  chief  successors.  For  although  there  be  but 
one  catholic  christian  church  of  all  the  faithful  sort  converted,  yet  the  first  part 
thereof,  and  first  converted,  was  of  the  Jews,  the  second  of  the  Greeks,  and  the 
tliird  part  was  of  the  Romans  or  Latins :  whereof  the  first  part  was  most  per- 
fectly converted  unto  the  faith,  for  that  they  faithfully  observed  the  perfection 
of  charity,  as  appeareth  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  by  the  multitude  of  the 
believers.  "  They  were  of  one  heart,  and  one  soul,  neither  called  they  any 
thing  that  they  possessed  their  own,  but  all  was  common  amongst  them." 
[Acts  ii.] 

Hereupon  Paul  to  the  Romans,  chap.  i. :  "  Salutation  to  every  believer;  first 
to  the  Jew,  and  to  the  Greeks  after  the  Jews."  The  Greeks  were  the  second, 
and  after  the  Jews  next  converted;  and  after  them  the  Romans,  taking  their 
information  from  the  Greeks,  as  appeareth  by  the  chronicles,  although  indeed 
some  Romans  were  converted  to  the  faith  by  Peter  and  Paul ;  and  as  Christ 
said  thrice  unto  Peter,  "  Feed  my  sheep,"  so  Peter  ruled  these  three  churches, 
as  witness  the  chronicles.  But  first  he  reformed  the  church  of  the  Jews  in 
Jerusalem  and  Judea,  as  appeareth  by  the  testimony  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles, 
chap.  i. ;  for  it  is  there  manifest  how  Peter,  standing  up  amongst  his  brethren, 
spake  unto  them  concerning  the  election  of  an  apostle  in  the  place  of  Judas  the 
traitor,  alleging  places  unto  them  out  of  the  Scripture,  that  another  should  take 
upon  him  his  apostleship  :  and  so  by  lot  was  Matthias  constituted  in  the  twelfth 
place  of  Judas  [x\cts  ii.]  "  After  that  the  Holy  Ghost  was  come  upon  the 
apostles,  and  that  they  spake  with  the  tongues  of  all  men,  the  hearers  were 
astonied  at  the  miracle ;  and  some  mocked  them,  saying.  These  men  are 
full  of  new  wine :  but  Peter  stood  up  and  spake  unto  them,  saying.  That 
it  was  fulfilled  in  them  which  was  prophesied  by  Joel  the  prophet.  And 
he  preached  unto  the  people  Christ,  whom  they  of  ignorance  had  put  to 
death ;  to  whom  was  a  Saviour  promised  by  the  testimony  of  the  prophets. 
And  when  they  heard  the  words  of  Peter,  they  were  pricked  at  the  heart,  say- 
ing unto  him  and  the  rest  of  the  apostles,  What  shall  we  then  do  ?  And  Peter 
said  unto  them,  Repent,  and  let  every  one  of  you  be  baptized  in  the  name  of 


HIS    i.OUl.V     1)KC1,AHATI()N».  1  G7 

Jesus  Christ,  for  the  remission  of  yoiirsins,  and  ye  shall  receive  the  Holy  Ghost.    Hirhani 
And  there  were  joined  nnlo  them  tlie  same  day  about  three  tliousand  souls."       ^' 
And  by  Aets  iii.  iv.  v.,  it  appeareth  that  I'etur,  above  the  rest,  did  those  thinps      ,  . 
whicli  belonged  to  the  ministry  of  the  apostleship,  as  well  in  ])reacliing  as  in     j..'fii 

answering.     Whereupon  some  chronielcs  say,  that   Peter  governed  the  church !lJ 1 

of  the  Jews  at  Jenisalem  four  years  before  he  governed  Antioch.     And  by  the  I'tter 
testimony  of  Paul  to  the  (ialatians,  as  before  is  said,  tiie  gospel  of  the  uncircum-  f,"J'^'^"'^'' 
eision  was  committed  to  Paul,  even  as  the  circumcision  to   Peter;  and  he  tliat  church  at 
wrought  with    Peter   in   tlie   apostleship  of  circumcision,  wrought  with   I'aul  J^rusa- 
amongst  the  Gentiles  [Gal.  iii.]  :  whereby  it  appeareth  that  the  church  of  the  y^^rs  be- 
Jcws  was  conunitted  to  the  government  of  Peter.     And  in  the  process  of  the  lore  he 
Acts  of  the  Apostles  it  appeareth,  that  Peter  believed  that  the  faith  of  Christ  '^"ntloch'' 
was  not  to  be  preached  unto  those  (Jentilcs,  who  always  lived  in  uncleanncssof 
idolatry.     "  But  when  Peter  was  at  Joppa,  Corneliu.s,  a  Gentile,  sent  unto  him 
that  he  would  come  and  show  him  the  way  of  life  :  but  i'eter,  a  little  before 
tiie  coming  of  the  messengers  of  Cornelius,  being  in  his  chamber,  after  he  had 
prayed,  fell  into  a  trance,  and  saw  heaven  open,  and  a  certain  vessel  descend- 
ing even  as  a  gi-eat  sheet,  letten  down  by  four  corners  from  heaven  to  earth  ;  in 
which  were  all  manner  of  four-footed  beasts,  serpents  of  the  earth,  and  i'owls  of 
the  air.     And  a  voice  spake  unto  him,  saying.  Arise  Peter,  kill  and  eat  :  and 
Peter  said,  Not  so,  Lord,  because  I  have  never  eaten  any  common  or  unclean 
thing.     This  was  done  thrice.     And   Peter  descended,  not  knowing  what  the 
vision  did  signify,  and  found  the  messengers  of  Cornelius." 

As  concerning  the  authority  judicial  of  the  clergy,  many  things  are  written 
thereof  in  the  canons  of  decrees  greatly  to  be  marvelled  at,  and  far  from  the 
mith  of  the  Scripture.     The  authors  of  the  canons  say,  that  Christ  gave  unto 
the  priests,  power  judicial  over  sinners  that  confessed  their  sins  imto  them. 
And  this  they  ground  upon  the  text  of  Christ :  "  I  will  give  unto  thee  the  keys  The  keys 
of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  whatsoever  thou  loosest,"  &c.     And  these  keys  "^^^JV"" 
of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  they  call  the  knowledge  to  discern,  and  the  power       " 
to  judge,  which  they  say  only  belongeth  to  the  priests,  except  in  case  of  neces- 
sitv  :  then  they  say,  a  lay-man  may  absolve  a  man  from  sin.     And  as  touching  Three 
absolution,  they  say,  there  are  three  things  to  be  required  on  the  sinner's  part :  'hings 
First,   hearty  contrition,  whereby  the  sinner  ought  to  bewail  his  offending  of  ,„  popish 
God   through   sins.     The  second  is,  auricular  confession,  whereby  the  sinner  absoiu- 
oupht  to  show  unto  the  priest  his  sins,  and  the  circumstances  of  them.     The  trition""' 
third  is,  satisfaction  through  penance  enjoined  unto  him  by  the  priest  for  his  confes 
sins  committed.     And  of  his  part  that  giveth  absolution  there  are  two  things,  "**f^t'"„ 
say  they,  to  be  required :  that  is  to  say,  knowledge  to   discern  one  sin  from  x^q 
another ;  whereby  he  ought  to  make  a  difference  of  sins,  and  appoint  a  con-  things 
venicnl  penance,  according  to  the  quantity  of  the  sins.     The  second  is,  autho-  o^,''J,'js*' 
rity  to  judge,  whereby  he  ought  to  enjoin  penance  to  the  offender.    And  further  part  that 
thev  say,  that  he  that  is  confessed  ought  with  all  humility  to  submit  himself  to  K'^*'^ 
this  authority,  and  wholly  and  voluntarily  to  do  those  penances  which  are  com-  ai.solu- 
manded  him  by  the  priest,  except  the  said  penance  be  released  by  a  superior  tion. 
j)ower  :  for  all  priests,  as  they  say,  have  not  equal  authority  to  absolve  sins. 
The  chief  priest,  whom  they  call  Peter's  successor,  hath  power  fully  and  wholly 
to  absolve.     But  the   inferior  priests  have  power,  some  more,  some  less.     The 
more,  as  they  are  near  him  in  dignity ;  the  less,  as  they  arc  further  from  the 
dignity  of  his  degree.     All  this  is  declared  by  process  in  the  decrees,  but  not 
by  the  express  doctrine  of  Christ,  or  any  of  his  apostles  ;  for  although  Christ 
absolved  men  from  their  sins,  I  do  not  find  that  he  did  it  after  the  manner  of  a 
judge,  but  of  a  Saviour.     For  Christ  saith   [John  iii.],   "  God  sent  not  his  Son 
into  the  world  to  judge  sinners,  but  that  the  world  should  be  saved  by  him  :" 
whereupon  he  spake  imto  him  whom  he  healed  of  the  palsy,  "  Behold  thou  art 
made  wholf,  go  thy  ways  and  sin  no  more;"  and  to  the  woman  taken  in  adul- 
tery, Christ  said,  "  Woman,  where  be  thy  accusers  ?  hath  no  man  condemned 
thee?"  who  said,  "  No  man,  Lord."     To  whom   then  Jesus   thus  said,  "  No 
more  will  I  condemn  thee  ;  go,  and  now  sin  no  more."     [John  v.] 

By  which  words  and  deeds  of  Christ,  and  many  other  places  of  the  Scripture, 
it  appeareth  he  was  not,  as  a  judge,  at  his  first  coming,  to  punish  sinners  ac- 
cording to  the  quantity  of  their  offences;  but  that  day  shall  come  hereafter, 
wherein  he  shall  judge  all  men,  according  to  their  work."!,  as  in  Mat.  xxv.,  where 


168 


THE  sTony  OF  Walter  buute. 


Richard 
II. 

A.D. 
1391. 

The 

saints 

shall 

judge 

with 

Christ. 


The  mi- 
nisterial 
power  to 
remit  sin, 
belongeth 
as  well  to 
one  priest 
as  to 
another. 


The  keys 

of  the 

kingdom 

of 

heaven, 

mistalien 

in  the 

pope's 

canons. 


Faith  and 
hope,  the 
keys  of 
heaven. 


he  saith,  "  When  tlie  Son  of  Man  shall  come  in  his  majesty,  and  all  his  angels 
with  him,  then  sliall  he  sit  upon  the  seat  of  his  majesty,  and  all  nations  shall 
be  gathered  together  before  him,  and  he  shall  separate  them  one  from  another, 
as  a  shepherd  sejjarateth  the  sheep  from  the  goats,"  &c.  Neither  sh,ill  he  judge 
alone,  but  his  saints  also  with  him :  for  he  saith.  "  You  that  have  followed  me 
in  this  generation,  when  the  Son  of  Man  shall  sit  in  the  seat  of  his  majesty,  shall 
sit  also  upon  twelve  seats,  and  judge  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel."  If  then  Christ 
came  not  as  a  judge,  why  do  the  priests  say,  that  they  supply  the  room  of  Christ 
on  earth,  to  judge  sinners  according  to  the  quantity  of  their  offences  ?  And  yet 
not  only  this,  but  it  is  more  to  be  marvelled  at,  how  the  bishop  of  liome  dareth 
to  take  upon  him  to  be  a  judge  before  the  day  of  judgment,  and  to  prevent  the 
time  ;  judging  some  to  be  saints  in  heaven,  and  to  be  honoured  of  men,  and  some 
again  to  be  [tormented  in  hell  eternally  with  the  devils  ?  Would  God  these 
men  would  weigh  the  saying  of  St.  Paul,  1  Cor.  iv.,  "  Judge  ye  not  before  the 
time  until  the  coming  of  the  Lord,  who  shall  make  light  the  dark  and  secret 
places,  and  disclose  the  secrets  of  hearts ;  and  then  every  one  shall  have  his 
praise."  Let  the  bishop  of  Rome  take  heed,  lest  that  in  Ezekiel  be  spoken  of 
him,  "  Because  thy  heart  is  elevate,  and  thou  saidst  unto  thyself,  I  am  God,  I 
have  sitten  in  the  seat  of  God,  and  in  the  heart  of  the  sea,  when  thou  art  but 
man,  and  not  God."  It  is  manifest  that  the  remission  of  sins  principally  be- 
longeth  to  God,  who,  through  grace,  washeth  away  our  sins.  For  it  is  said, 
"  The  Lamb  of  God  taketh  away  the  sins  of  the  world."  And  unto  Christians 
it  belongeth  as  the  ministers  of  God.  For  in  John  xx.  Christ  saith,  "  Receive 
unto  you  the  Holy  Ghost :  whose  sins  you  shall  remit,  they  are  remitted  unto 
them;  and  whose  sins  you  shall  retain,  they  are  retained." 

Seeing,  therefore,  that  all  Christians  that  are  baptized  in  the  name  of  the 
Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  receive  the  Holy  Ghost,  it  ap- 
peareth  that  they  have  power  given  to  them  of  Christ,  to  remit  sins  minis- 
terially. Hath  not  every  Cliristian  authority  to  baptize  ?  and  in  the  baptism  all 
the  sins  of  the  baptized  are  remitted.  Ergo,  they  that  do  baptize  do  remit  sins. 
And  thus  ministerially  all  sucli  have  power  to  remit  sins.  Therefore,  to  say 
that  one  man  hath  more  authority  to  remit  sins  than  all  other  Christians  have, 
is  too  much  to  extol  him,  and  to  place  him  even  in  God's  seat.  I  pray  you  how 
are  the  sins  remitted  him  that  is  baptized  by  the  priest  (yea  although  he  were 
by  the  pope  himself  baptized),  more  than  if  he  were  baptized  by  another  Chris- 
tian ?  Surely  I  think  no  more.  For  seeing  that  before  baptism  he  remaineth 
a  sinner,  and  of  the  kingdom  of  the  devil  by  sin,  after  baptism  he  entereth  into 
the  kingdom  of  heaven :  it  appeareth  that  he  that  doth  baptize,  openeth  the 
gate  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  him  that  is  baptized,  which  he  cannot  do  with- 
out the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Therefore  every  one  that  doth  baptize, 
hath  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ;  as  well  the  inferior  priest,  as  the  pope. 
But  these  keys  are  not  the  knowledge  to  discern,  and  power  to  judge,  because 
these  do  nothing  avail  in  baptism.  Ergo,  there  are  other  keys  of  the  kingdom 
of  heaven  than  these.  Wherefore  it  seemeth  that  the  authors  of  the  canons  erred 
in  mistaking  the  keys,  whereupon  they  ground  the  authority  judicial  of  the 
clergy. 

Now  a  little  error  in  the  beginning  granted,  groweth  to  great  inconvenience 
in  the  end.  Wherefore,  in  my  judgment,  it  seemeth  that  the  keys  of  the  king- 
dom of  heaven  are  faith  and  hope :  for  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  hope  in 
him  for  the  remission  of  sins,  we  enter  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  This  faith  is  a 
spiritual  water,  springing  from  Jesus  Christ  the  fountain  of  wisdom,  wherein 
the  soul  of  the  sinner  is  washed  from  sin.  With  this  water  were  the  faithful 
patriarchs  baptized  before  the  law ;  and  the  faithful  people  of  the  Hebrews,  and 
the  faithful  Christians,  after  the  law.  Wherefore  I  greatly  marvel  of  tJiat  say- 
ing in  the  decrees,  which  is  ascribed  unto  Augustine,  that  little  children  that 
are  not  baptized  shall  be  tormented  with  eternal  fire,  although  they  were  born 
of  faithful  parents,  that  wished  them  with  all  their  hearts  to  have  been  baptized: 
as  though  the  sacrament  of  baptism  in  water  were  simply  necessary  to  salva- 
tion, when  nevertheless  many  Christians  are  saved  without  this  kind  of  baptism, 
as  martyrs.  If  that  kind  of  sacrament  be  not  necessary  to  one  of  elder  years, 
how  then  is  it  necessary  to  an  infant  born  of  the  faithful  ?  Are  not  all  baptized 
with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  with  fire?  but  yet  not  with  material  fire;  no  more 
is  the  lotion  of  water  corporally  necessary  to  wash  away  sins,  but  only  spiritual 


JUS    (.(IDLY     DKfl.AKA  riON^^.  169 

water,  tiiat  is  to  say.  tin-  watt-r  of'failli.     Are  not  tho  <|uick  baptized  for  tlicin    /ii.hnrd 
that  are  ilead  .'  as  witiiesseth  I'aiil,  i  C"nr.  xv.,  "  If  the  dead  rise  not  at  all,  wliy        ^^• 
are  tlie  living'  tlien  baptized  for  them  !"     If  tbe  living  be  baptized  for  tiie  dead,  . 

wli\  then  is  not  tbe  infant  saved  by  tlie  ba])tisni  of  his  parents;  seeinj^  tlie  infant     ,,,',,|* 
itself  is  ini|)otent  at  the  time  of  death,  and  not  al)!e  to  recpiire  baptism  .'    Christ       ' 
saith,  "  lie  tliat  believeth   and   is   baptized  shall  be   saved."      He  saith  not,  be 
that  is  baptizeii  not,  i)nt  he  that  bilieveth  not,  shall  be  damned.      Wherefore  in 
Jolm,  eliapter  xii.,  Christ   saith,  "1  am   the  resnrreetion   and  life;  lie  that  be- 
lieveth in  nie,  yea,  although  he  were  dead,  sliall  live."     Tbe  foith,  therefore,  is 
neeessary   which   the  infant  hath    in   his  faithfid   ])arents,  although  be  be  not 
washed  with  corj)oral  water.      How  then   is  the   infant   damned  and  tonnented 
with  eternal  tire.'     Were  not  they  that  were  before  the  coming  of  Christ,  and 
dead  before  bis  death  by  a  thousand  years,  saveil  also  by  his  death  and  passion  ! 
All   that  believed  in  him  were  baptized  in  his  blood,  and  so   were  saved  and  re- 
deemed from  sin  and  the  bondage  of  the  devil,  and  made  partakers  of  the  king- 
d(;m  of  heaven.      How  then,  in  the  time  of  grace,  shall  the  infant   be  damned 
that   is  born   of  faitlifnl    parents,  that  do  not  despise,  but  rather  desire,  to  have 
their  children  baptized?   I  dare  not  consent  to  so  hard  a  sentence  of  the  decrees, 
l>ut  rather  believe  that  he  is  saved  by  virtue  of  the  passion  of  Christ,  in  faith  of 
bis  faithful  parents,  and  the  hoj)e  which  they  have  in  Clirist;  which  faith  and 
hope  are  tbe  keys  of  the  heaveidy  kingdom.      (lod  were  not  just  and  merciful, 
if  he  would  condemn  a  man  that  believeth  not  in  him,  except  be  showed  unto 
him  the  faith  which  he  ought  to  believe.    And  therefore  Christ  saitli,  "  If  I  had 
not  coi'ie  and  spoken  luito  them,  sin  could  not  have  been  laid  unto  their  charge; 
but  now  they  have  no  excuse  for  sin."     Therefore,  seeing  the  faith   of  Christ  is  Cliildren 
not  manifest  unto  the  infant  departing   before  baptism,  neither  hatli  he  denied  '''P''"'""ii 
it,  how  then  shall  he  be  damned  for  the  same?     But  if  CJod  speaketh  inwardly,  baptism 
by  way  of  illumination,  of  the   intelligence  of  the  infant,  as  be  speaketh  luito  ""t  con- 
angels,  who  then  knoweth,  save  (iod  alone,  whether  the  infant  rcceiveth,  or  not  """"''"  ■ 
receiveth,  the  faith   of  Christ!'     What  is  he,  therefore,  that  so  rashly  doth  take 
upon  him  to  judge  the  infants  begotten  of  faithful  parents  dying  without  bap- 
tism, to  be  tormented  with  eternal  tire ! 

Now  let  us  consider  the  three  things  wliicli  the  canons  of  decrees  affirm  to  be 
retpiisite  for  the  remission  of  the  sins  of  those  that  sin  after  baptism :  that  is  to 
say,  contrition  of  heart ;  auricular  confession ;  and  satisfaction  of  the  deed  Auricular 
through  penance  enjoined  by  the  priest  for  the  sins  conmiitted.  I  cannot  find  ';?'''^^'*" 
in  any  place  in  the  gospel,  where  Christ  commanded  that  tliis  kind  of  confession 
should  be  done  unto  the  priest;  nor  can  I  lind  that  Christ  assigned  any  penance 
inito  sinners  for  their  sins,  but  that  he  willed  them  to  sin  no  more.  If  a  sinner 
confess  that  lie  bath  ott'ended  God  through  sin,  and  sorrow  heartily  for  his 
ofl'ences,  minding  hereafter  no  more  to  sin,  then  is  he  tnily  repentant  for  bis 
sin,  and  tlien  he  is  converted  unto  the  Lord.  If  he  shall  then,  huml)ly  and  with 
good  hojie,  crave  mercy  at  God  and  remission  of  his  sins,  what  is  he  th.it  can 
hinder  Ciod  to  absolve  that  sinner  from  liis  sin  '.  And  as  God  ab>olveth  a  sinner 
fron»  bis  sin,  so  bath  Christ  absolved  many,  although  they  confessed  not  tlieir 
sins  unto  the  priests,  and  although  they  received  not  due  penance  for  their  sins. 
And  if  Christ  could,  after  that  manner,  once  absolve  sinners,  how  is  he  become 
now  not  able  to  absolve,  except  some  man  will  say  that  he  is  above  Christ,  and 
that  his  power  is  minished  by  the  ordinances  of  his  own  laws?  How  were  sin- 
ners absolved  by  (lod  in  the  time  of  the  apostles,  and  always  heretofore,  unto 
the  time  that  these  canons  were  made .'  I  speak  not  these  tilings  as  though  con- 
fession to  priests  were  wicked,  but  that  it  is  not  of  necessity  requisite  unto  sal- 
vation. I  believe  verily  that  tbe  confession  of  sins  unto  good  priests,  and  like- 
wise to  otlier  faithful  Christians,  is  good,  as  witiusseth  JSt.  James  the  apostle, 
"  Confess  ye  yourselves  one  to  another,  and  praj-  ye  one  for  another,  that  ye 
may  be  saved;  for  tbe  continual  prayer  of  the  just  availeth  much.  Klias  was  a 
man  that  sutfered  many  things  like  unto  you,  and  be  prayed  that  it  should  not 
rain  upon  the  earth,  and  it  rained  not  in  three  years  and  six  months.  And 
again  lie  prayed,  and  it  rained  from  heaven,  and  the  earth  yielded  forth  her 
fruit.  '  'Ibis  kind  of  confession  is  good,  profitalile,  and  expedient;  for  if  CJod, 
peradventure,  lieareth  not  a  mans  own  jirayer,  be  is  helped  with  the  interces- 
sion of  others.  Yet,  nevertheless,  tho  prayers  of  the  jiriests  seem  too  much  to  be 
extolled   in    the  decrees,   where  tliey  treat  of  penitence,  and  that  saying  is 


170  THE    STORY    OF    WALTER    RllUTE. 

Richard    ascribed  unto  pope  Leo,  dist.  i.  cap.    "  Multiplex  niisericordias  Dci,"&c.  And  it 

^l-       followetli,  "  So  is  it  ordained  by  the  providence  of  God's  divine  will,  that  the 

.    „      mercy  of  God  cannot  be  obtained  but  by  the  prayer  of  the  priests,"  &c.     The 

■     ■    prayer  of  a  good  priest  doth  much  avail  a  sinner,  confessing  his  faults  unto  him. 

'  '    *    The  counsel  of  a  discreet  priest  is  very  profitable  for  a  sinner,  to  give  the  sinner 

counsel  to  beware  hei'eafter  of  sin,  and  to  instruct  him  how  he  shall  punish  his 

body  by  fasting,  by  watching,  and  such  like  acts  of  repentance,  that  hereafter 

he  may  be  better  preserved  from  sin. 

After  this  manner  I  esteem  confession  to  priests  very  expedient  and  profit- 
able to  a  sinner.     But  to  confess  sins  unto  the  priest  as  unto  a  judge,  and  to 
receive  of  him  corporal  penance  for  a  satisfaction  unto  God  for  his  sins  com- 
mitted :  I  see  not  how  this  can  be  founded  upon  the  truth  of  the  Scripture.  For 
before  the  coming  of  Christ,  no  man  was  sufficient  or  able  to  make  satisfaction 
to  God  for  his  sins,  although  he  suffered  ever  so  much  penance  for  his  sins ;  and 
therefore  it  was  needful  that  he  that  was  without  sin,    should  be  punished  for 
sins,  as  witnesseth  Isaiah,  chapter  liii.,  where  he  saith,  "  He  took  our  griefs  upon 
him,  and  our  sorrows  he  bare;"  and  again,  "He  was  wounded  for  our  iniqui- 
ties, and  vexed  for  our  wickedness;"  and  again,  "The  Lord  put  upon  him  our 
iniquity;"  and  again,  "For  the  wickedness  of  my  people  have  I  stricken  him." 
If  therefore  Christ,  through  his  passion,  hath  made  satisfaction  for  our  sins, 
whereas  we  ourselves  were  unable  to  do  it,  then,  through  him,  have  we  grace 
and  remission  of  sins.  How  can  we  say  now  that  we  are  sufficient  to  make  satis- 
faction unto  God  by  any  penance  enjoined  mito  us  by  man's  authority,  seeing 
that  our  sins  are  more  grievous  after  baptism,  than  they  were  before  the  coming 
of  Chi-ist  ?     Therefore,  as  in  baptism  the  pain  of  Christ  in  his  passion  was  a  full 
satisfaction  for   our  sins;  even  so  after  baptism,  if  we  confess  that  we  have 
offended,  and  be  heartily  sorry  for  our  sins,  and  mind  not  to  sin  again  afterwards. 
Hereupon  John  writeth  in  his  first  epistle,  chapter  i.,  "  If  we  say  we  have  no 
sin,  we  deceive  ourselves,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  us.     If  we  confess  our  sins, 
God  is  faithful  and  just ;  lae  will  remit  them,  and  cleanse  us  from  all  our  iniqui- 
ties.   If  we  say  we  have  not  sinned,  we  make  him  a  liar,  and  his  word  is  not  in 
us.     My  well  beloved  childi'en,  thus  I  write  unto  you,   that  ye  sin  not ;  but  if 
any  man  sin,  we  have  an  advocate  with  the  Father,  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous, 
and  he  is  the  propitiation  for  our  sins ;  and  not  for  our  sins  only,  but  for  the 
Confes-     sins  of  the  whole  world."     Therefore  we  ought  to  confess  ourselves  chiefly  unto 
sion  unto  God,  even  from  the  heart,  for  that  he  chiefly  doth  remit  sins,  without  whose 
^°'^"         absolution  little  availeth  the  absolution  of  man.  This  kind  of  confession  is  profit- 
Auricular  able  and  good.     The  authors  of  the  canons  say,  that  although  auricular  confes- 
confes-      sion  made  unto  the  priest  be  not  ex|)ressly  taught  by  Christ,  yet,  say  they,  it  is 
tru^y""'     taught  in  that  saying  which  Christ  said  unto  the  diseased  of  the  leprosy,  whom 
grounded  he  commanded,  "  Go  your  ways  and  show  yourselves  unto  the  priest,"  [Luke 
upou  the   xvii.,]  because,  as  they  say,  the  law  of  cleansing  lepers,  which  was  given  by 
>crip  ure.  jyj^g^g^  signified  the  confession  of  sins  unto  the  priest.     And  whereas  Christ 
commanded  the  lepers  to  show  themselves  unto  the  priests,  they  say,  that  Christ 
meant  that  those  that  were  unclean  with  the  leprosy  of  sin,  should  show  their 
Authors    sins  unto  the  priests  by  auricular  confession.     I  marvel  much  at  the  authors  of 
°^^^^        the  canons;  for,  even  from  the  beginning  of  their  decrees  unto  the  end,  they 
reproved!^  ground  their  sayings  upon  the  old  law,  which  was  the  law  of  sin  and  death,  and 
not,  as  witnesseth   Paid,  upon   the  words  of  Christ,  which  are  spirit  and  life. 
Christ  saith,  "The  words  which   I  speak  unto  you,  are  the   spirit  and  life." 
They  ground  their  sayings  in  the  shadow  of  the  law,  and  not  in  the  light  of 
Christ:  "For  every  evil  doer  hateth  the  light,  and  cometh  not  unto  it,  that  his 
deeds  be  not  reproved  ;  but  he  that  doth  tlie  truth,  cometh  into  the  light,  that 
his  works  may  be  openly  seen,  because  they  are  done  in  God."  [John  iii.] 

Now  let  us  pass  to  the  words  that  Christ  spake  to  the  leper  :  "  Lord,  if  thou 
wilt,  thou  canst  make  me  clean.     And  Jesus  stretching  forth  his  hand  touched 
him,  saying,   I  will,    be  thou  clean :  and  straightways  he  was  cleansed  of  his 
leprosy.    And  Jesus  said  unto  him.  See  thou  tell  no  man,  but  go  and  show  thy- 
self to  the  priests,  and  offer  the  gifts  that  Moses  commanded  for  a  witness  of 
The  story  these  things."  [Luke  v.]     This  gospel  witnesseth  plainly,  that  the  diseased  of 
of  the        leprosy  were  cleansed  only  by  Christ,  and  not  by  the  priests  ;  neither  did  Christ 
pounded.'  command  the  leper  to  show  himself  unto  the  priests,  for  any  help  of  cleansing 
that  he  should  receive  of  the  priests,  but  to  fulfil  the  law  of  Moses,  in  offering 


AL'lUl  I'LAH    CONKKSSIOS     llliPROVED.  171 

a  sacrifice  for  liis  cleansing,  and  for  a  ti-stimony  unto  the  priests,  who  always  Richard 

of  envy  accused  Clirist  as  a  trans<;ressor  of  the  law.   For  if  Christ,  after  he  had  ^^- 

cleansed  the  leper,  had  licensed  him  to  connnuiiicate  with  others  tiiat  were  clean,     ^  jj 
hefore  he  had  showed  himself  cleansed  unto  tiu-  priests,  then  nuf^ht  the  priests     j.jyj 

havf  accused  Christ,  as  a  transjjressorof  the  law  ;  hecause  it  was  a  precept  of  the  • 

law,  that  the  leper,  after  he  was  cleansed,  slunild  show  himself  unto  tlie  priests.  Itmakeih 
And  tiiey  liad  sij^ns  in  the  hook  of  the  law,  wherel)y  they  mii,'ht  judge  whether  fj'/au"? 
he  were  truly  cleansed  or  not.   And  if  he  were  cleansed,  then  would  the  priests  cularcou 
otter  a  gift  ibr  liis  cleansing ;  and  if  he  were  not  cleansed,  then  would  they  '•^^""n- 
segregate  him  from  the  company  of  others  that  were  clean.  Seeing  every  figure  The 
ought  to  he  assimilated  imto  the  thing  that  is  figured,  I  ])ray  you  then  what  ,,f^o"y""^ 
agi'eement  is  there  hetween  the  cleansing  of  lepers  hy  the  law,  and  the  confes-  leprosy, 
sion  of  sins?    By  tliat  law  the  priest  knew  hetter  whether  he  were  leprous,  than  '""i 'he 
he  himself  that  had  the  lej)rosy.     In  confession  the  priest  knew  not  the  sins  of  nf\i,g    ^ 
him  that  was  confessed,  hut  hy  his  own  confession.     In  that  law  the  priest  did  prii-st  in 
not  cleanse  the  h'prous.      How  now,  therefore,  ougiit  the  priests  to  cleanse  sin-  ^"nfy"'^' 
ners  from  their  sin,  aiul  how  is  it,  that  without  them  tiiey  ciuniol  he  cleansed?  sion  agree 
In  tliis  law  the  priest  had  certain  signs,  hy  which  he  could  certaiidy  know  whe-  ""'• 
ther  a  man  were  cleansed  from   his  lepros\'  or  not.     In  confession  the  priest  is 
not  certain  of  the  cleansing  of  sins,  hecause  he  is  ignorant  of  his  contrition.  He 
knoweth  not,  also,  whether  he  will  not  sin  any  more ;  without  which  contrition 
and  granting  to  sin  no  more,  God  hath  not  ahsolved  any  sinner.     And  if  God 
hath  not  absolved  a  man,  without  doubt  then  is  he  not  made  clean.     And  how 
then  is  confession  figured  under   that  law  ?     Doubtless  so  it  seemeth   to   me 
(under  the  correction  of  them  that  can  judge  better  in  the  matter),  that  this  law 
heareth  rather  a  figure  of  excommunication,  and  reconciliation  of  him  that  hath 
been  obstinate  in  his  sin,  and  is  reconciled  again.     For  so  it  appeareth  by  the 
jirocess  of  the  gospel,  tluit  when  the  siinier  doth  not  amend  for  the  private  cor- 
rection of  his  brother,  nor  fjr  the  correction  of  two  or  three,  neither  yet  for  the 
public  correction  of  the  whole  church,  then  is  he  to  be  counted  as  an  ethiiick 
and  a  publican,  and  as  a  certain  leper  to  be  avoided  out  of  the  companj-  of  all 
men:  which  sinner,   notwithstanding,  if  he    shall   yet  repent,   is  then  to  be 
reconciled,  because  he  is  then  cleansed  from  his  obstinacy. 

But  he  who  pretendeth  himself  to  be  tlie  chief  vicar  of  Christ,  and  the  high  The 

priest,  saith,  that  he  hath  power  to  absolve  'a  pcena  et  culpa:'  which  I  do  not  P"?*^* . 
.  ,,  .*  .  .  •  power  111 

find  how    it  is  founded  in  the  Scri])ture,  but   that  of  his  own  authority  he  absolving 

enjoineth  to  sinners  penance  for  their  sins.     And  grant  that  from  their  sins  from  sins 

he  may  well  absolve  them,  yet,  from  the  pain  (which  they  call  'a  poena,')  he  "d  in"" 

doth  not  simply  absolve,  as  in  his  indidgences  he  promiseth.     But  if  he  were  in  Scripture. 

charity,  and  had  such  power  as  he  i)retendeth,  he  would  suffer  none  to  lie  in  '1*^  'l^" 
<••/>  1  1  -iii-  1111  •         i-i     al'solve 

purgatory  tor  sm :  lorasmucli  as  that  ])am  uotli  tar  exceed  all  other  pani  which  none  from 

here  we  sufiTer,  what  man   is  there  being  in  cliarity,  hut  if  he  see  his  brother  to  pmiish- 
be  tormented  in  this  norld,  if  he  may,  he  will  iielp  him  and  deliver  him?  Much  ""^"  ' 
more  ought  the  pope  then  to  deliver  out  of  jiaiiis  of  purgatory,  indifl'erently,  as 
well  rich  as  poor.     .\nd  if  he  sell  to  the  rich  his  indulgences,  doublewise,  yea  The  pope 
treblewise,  he  seduceth  them.     First,  in   promising  to  deliver  them  out  of  the  p"rdons 
pain  fi-oin  whence  he  doth  not,  neither  is  able  to  deliver  them  ;  and  so  maketh  Jeceivcth 
them  falsely  to  believe   that,  which  they  ought  not  to  believe.     Secondly,  he  ""^"  ""^"^^° 
dcceiveth  them  of  their  money,  which  he  taketh  for  his  indulgences.     Thirdly,  „i  „aj.s 
he  seduceth   them  in    this,  that  he,  promising  to  deliver  them  from  pain,  doth  pro- 
induce  them  into  grievous  punishment  indeed,  for  the  heresy  of  simony,  which  i"i»inK 
both  of  them  do  commit,  and,  therefore,  are  both  worthy  of  great  ])ain  to  fall  h"j,"j',f. 
upon  them  :  for  so  we  read  that  Jesus  cast  out  buyers  and  sellers  out  of  his  ntii  men 
temple.     Also  Peter  .said   unto   Simon,  the   first  author  of  this  heresy,  "  Thy  '?  *'"  '" 
money,"  said  he,  "  with  thee  he  destroyed,  for  that  thou  hast  thought  tlie  gift 
of  Goid  to  be  possessed  for  money.  "  .Moreover,  whereas  Christ  saith,  "  Freely 
you  have  received,  freely  give  ;  "  and  whereas,  contrary,  the  pope  doth  sell  that 
thing  which  he  hath  taken  ;  what  doid)t   is  there,  but  that  he  doth  grievously 
descr\e  to  be  punished,  both  he  that  selleth,  and  he  that  buyeth,  for  the  crime 
of  simony  which  they  commit?    Over  and  besides,  by  many  reasons  and  autho- 
rities of  the  Scripture  it  may  be  proved,  that  he  doth  not  absolve  a  man  contrite 
for  his  sins,  although  he  do  absolve  him  from  the  guilt. 

But  this  mar\'ellcth  me,  that  he,  in  hi?  indulgences,  promiseth  to  absolve  men 


172  THE    STORY    OF    WALTEll    KUUTE. 

Richard  from  all  manner  of  deadly  sins,  and  yet  cannot  absolve  a  man  from  debt ;  for- 

^^-      asmucli  as  the  debt  whicli  we  owe  to  God,  is  of  much  greater  importance  than 

~Z~r)      is  the  debt  of  our  brother.     Wherefore,  if  he  be  able  to  remit  the  debt  due  to 

,  OQ1      God,  much  more  it  should  seem  that  he  is  able  to  forgive  the  debt  of  our  brother. 

'_      Another  thing  there  is  that  I  marvel  at,  for  that  the  pope  showeth  himself 

The  pope  more  strait  in  absolving  a  priest  for  not  saying,  or  negligently  saying  his  matins, 
saith  he  jjjjj,^  fQj-  transgressing  the  commandment  of  God ;  considering  that  the  trans- 
the  debt  gression  of  the  commandment  of  God,  is  much  more  grievous  than  the  breach 
to  God,      of  man's  commandment. 

caiiiKJt'to  ^*""  these  and  many  other  errors  concurring,  and  in  this  matter  of  the  pope's 
man.  absolutions,  blessed  be  God,  and  honour  be  unto  Him  for  the  remission  of  our 
sins.  And  let  us  firmly  believe  and  know,  that  he  doth  and  will  absolve  us  from 
our  sins,  if  we  be  soiTy  from  the  bottom  of  our  hearts  that  we  have  offended 
him,  having  a  good  pui^pose  and  will  to  offend  him  no  mofe.  And  let  us  be 
bold  to  resort  unto  good  and  discreet  priests,  who,  with  wholesome  discretion 
and  sound  counsel,  can  instruct  us  how  to  avoid  the  corruption  of  sin  hereafter ; 
and  who,  because  they  are  better  than  we,  may  pray  to  G^d  for  us  :  whereby 
we  may  both  obtain  sooner  the  remission  of  our  sins  past,  and  also  may  learn 
better  how  to  avoid  the  danger  of  sin  to  come.i 

And  tlius  mucli  concerning  the  judgment  and  doctrine  of  this 
Walter  Brute,  for  christian  patience,  charity,  and  mercy  ;  which,  as 
they  be  true  and  infallible  notes  and  marks  of  true  Christianity,  so  the 
said  Walter,  making  comparison  herein  between  Christ  and  the  pope, 
goeth  about  purposely  to  declare  and  manifest ;  whereby  all  men  may 
see  what  contrariety  there  is  between  the  rule  of  Christ''s  teaching, 
and  the  proceedings  of  the  pope  ;  between  the  examples  and  life  of 
the  one,  and  the  examples  of  the  other:  of  whicli  two,  as  one  is  alto- 
gether given  to  peace ;  so  is  the  other,  on  the  contrary  side,  as  much 
disposed  to  wars,  murder,  and  bloodshed,  as  is  easy  to  be  seen.  Whoso 
looketh  not  upon  the  outward  shows  and  pretensed  words  of  these 
Romish  popes,  but  adviseth  and  considereth  the  inward  practices  and 
secret  works  of  them,  shall  easily  espy,  under  the  visor  of  peace,  Avhat 
discord  and  debate  they  work,  who,  bearing  outwardly  the  meek  horns 
of  the  lamb  mentioned  in  the  Apocalypse,  within  do  bear  the  bowels 
of  a  wolf,  full  of  cruelty,  murder,  and  bloodshed.  Which  if  any  do 
think  to  be  spoken  by  me  contumcliously ;  would  God  that  man 
could  prove  as  well  the  same  to  be  spoken  by  me  not  truly  !  But 
truth  it  is,  I  speak  it  sincerely,  without  affection  of  blind  partiality, 
according  to  the  truth  of  histories  both  old  and  new.  Thus,  under 
'  in  Dei  nomine.  Amen,"'  how  unmercifully  doth  the  pope  condemn 
his  brother  !  And  while  he  pretended  it  not  to  be  lawful  for  him  to 
kill  any  man,  what  thousands  hath  he  killed  of  men  .''  And  likewise 
in  this  sentence,  pretending  '  in  visceribus  Jesu  Christi,'  as  though  he 
would  be  a  mediator  to  the  magistrate  for  the  party  ;  yet,  indeed,  will 
he  be  sure  to  excommunicate  the  magistrate,  if  he  execute  not  the 
sentence  given.  Who  be  true  heretics,  the  Lord  when  he  cometh 
shall  judge ;  but  give  them  to  be  heretics  whom  the  pope  condemneth 
for  heretics,  yet  what  bowels  of  mercy  are  here,  where  is  nothing  but 
burning,  faggoting,  drowning,  prisoning,  chaining,  famishing,  racking, 
hanging,  tormenting,  threatening,  reviling,  cursing,  and  oppressing ;  and 
not  instructing,  nor  yet  indifferent  hearing  of  them,  what  they  can  say  .'* 
The  like  cruelty  also  may  in  their  wars  appear,  if  we  consider  how 
pope  Urban  V.,  besides  the  racking  and  murdering  of  seven  oi  eight 

(i;  Ex  Registro  Latino  Epise.  Hereford. 


MIS   np.i.iKi-   rorciiis'i.  tiik   i.oiui's  siiprKR.  Vt'i 


rardinnls,  sot  u])  Ili-nrvSpciurr,  bishop  of  Norwich,  to  fif,'ht  ajjiiinst  the  nichard 
I'Vt'Uch  i)c>j)c.     Itinoctiit  1\'.  w;i.s  in  war  hiiii.sclt' against  the  Aj)ulians. ! — 


rare  I 

I'Vt'Ucii  poj) 

Likewise   Alexander   I\^,  his  successor,   stirred    up  the  son  of  king    A.D. 

llenrv  III.  a<,Minst   the  son   of  Frederic  11.  the  enii)cr(jr,    t(»   fi;.;ht    ''^^'• 


for  Apulia,      lioniface  Vlli.  moved  Albortus,  who  stood   to  l)e  em-  ^^''"'' 

11111  11-  •    1  •  /  <  wars  have 

poror,  to  drive  IMuhp  the  r  rcncli  km,uf  out  ot  his  realm.  Gregory  hecn  siir- 
iX.  excited  Louis  the  French  king  three  sundry  times  to  mortal  war  [^'Ije"!" '* 
against  the  earl  Kainuind  and  city  of  Toulouse,  and  Avignon,  where 
Louis,  the  said  French  king,  died,  llonorius  III.,  by  strength  of 
war,  many  ways  resisted  Frederic  II.,  and  sent  out  thirtv-five  galleys 
against  the  coasts  of  the  emperor's  dominions.  The  same  pope  also 
besieged  Ferrara.  To  pass  over  the  war  at  Tieinum,'  with  many 
other  battles  and  conflicts  of  popes  against  the  Romans,  Venetians, 
and  divers  other  nations,  Innocent  IIL  set  up  Philij),  the  French 
king,  to  war  against  king  John.  What  stir  pope  Gregory  \\\., 
otherwise  named  Ilildebrand,  kept  up  against  the  emperor  Henry 
fV.,  is  not  unknown.  And  who  is  able  to  recite  all  the  wars,  battles, 
and  fields,  fought  by  the  stirring  up  of  the  j)o|)c  .''  These,  with  nviny 
('ther  like  examples  considered,  did  cause  this  Walter  Hrute  to  write 
in  this  matter  so  as  he  did,  making  yet  thereof  no  universal  propo- 
sition, but  that  christian  magistrates,  in  case  of  necessity,  might  make 
resistance  in  defence  of  public  right.  Now  he  proceedeth  further 
to  other  matter  of  the  sacrament. 

The  Judgment  and  Belief  of  Walter  Brute,  touching  the  Lord's 
Supper,  the  Order  of  Priests,  &c. 

Touching  tlie  matter,  saith  he,  of  the  sacrament  of  the  body  and  blood  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  divers  men  have  divers  oi)in:ons,  as  the  learned  do  know. 
.'\s  concerning;  my  judgment  upon  the  same,  I  firmly  believe  whatsoever  the 
Lord  Jesus  taught  implicitly  or  expressly  to  his  disciples  and  faithfid  people  to 
be  believed.  For  he  is,  as  I  believe  and  know,  the  true  bread  of  Gotl  which 
descended  from  heaven,  and  giveth  life  to  the  world  :  of  which  bread  whosoever 
eatcth,  shall  live  for  ever ;  as  it  is  in  John  vi.  declared.  Before  the  coming  of 
Christ  iji  the  liesh,  although  men  did  live  in  body,  yet  in  spirit  they  did  not  live, 
because  ;dl  men  were  then  under  sin,  whose  souls  thereby  were  dead ;  from  which 
death  no  man,  by  the  law,  nor  with  the  law,  was  justified  :  "  For  by  the  works  of  Justifira- 
the  law  shall  lu)  flesh  be  justified."  [Gal.  ii.]  And  again  in  the  same  epistle  [chap.  ['"".  ''"1^ 
iii.],  "  That  by  the  law  no  man  is  justified  before  fiod,  it  is  manifest ;  for  the  by  tiic 
just  man  shall  live  by  his  faith  :  the  law  is  not  of  faith  ;  but  whosoever  hath  the  '^*- 
works  thereof,  shall  live  in  them."  And  again,  "  If  the  law  had  been  given, 
whicli  might  have  justified,  then  our  righteousness  had  come  by  the  law.  But 
the  .Scripture  hath  concluded  all  under  sin,  that  the  promise  might  be  sure  by 
the  faith  of  Jesus  Christ  to  all  believers.  Moreover,  before  that  faith  came, 
they  were  kept  and  concluded  all  under  the  law,  imtil  the  coming  of  that  faith 
which  was  to  be  revealed.  For  the  law  was  our  schoolmaster  in  Christ  Jesus, 
lliat  we  should  be  justified  by  faith."  Also  the  said  Paul  [Romans  v.],  saith, 
"  That  the  law  entered  in  the  mean  time,  whereby  sin  might  more  abound. 
Where  then  sin  hath  more  nboimded,  there  also  hath  grace  super-abounded  ; 
that  like  a.s  sin  hath  reigned  unto  death,  so  grace  might  also  reign  by  righteous- 
ness unto  ctenial  life,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord."  Whereby  it  is  manifest, 
that  by  the  faith  which  we  have  in  Christ,  believing  him  to  be  the  true  Son  of 
God  who  came  down  from  heaven  to  redeem  us  from  sin,  we  are  justified  from 
sin  ;  and  so  do  livo  by  him  who  is  the  tnie  bread  and  meat  of  the  soul.  And 
the  bread  which  Christ  gave  is  his  flesh  given  for  the  life  of  the  world.  [John 
\n.]     For  he,  being  God,  came  down  from  heaven,  and  being  true  carnal  man, 

(I)  " Tieinum,"  Pavia,  a  city  in  Auttrian  Italy.— Eo. 


iTi  THE    STORY    OF    WALTEK     liUUTE. 

Richard   did  suffer  in  the  flesh  for  our  sins,  for  which  in  liis  divinity  he  could  not  sufier, 

^^-       Wherefore,  like  as  we  believe  by  our  faith  that  he  is  true  God,  so  must  we 

A    rx      also  believe  that  he  is  true  man,  and  then  do  we   eat  the  bread  of  heaven, 

joQi'     and  the  flesh  of  Christ.     x\nd  if  we  believe  that  he  did  voluntarily  shed  his 

!_  blood  for  our  redemption,  then  do  we  drink  his  blood. 

True  eat-  And  thus,  except  we  eat  the  flesh  of  the  Son  of  Man,  and  drink  his  blood,  we 
Clfrist  is  liave  not  eternal  life  in  us ;  because  the  flesh  of  Christ  verily  is  meat,  and  his 
true  be-  blood  is  drink  indeed  :  and  whosoever  eateth  the  flesh  of  Christ,  and  drinketh 
lieving  in  j^jg  ij]ood,  abideth  in  Christ,  and  Christ  in  him  [John  vi.]  :  and  as,  in  this  world, 
Eating  of  the  souls  of  the  faithful  live,  and  are  refreshed  spiritually  with  this  heavenly 
the  flesh  bread,  and  with  the  flesh  and  blood  of  Christ,  so,  in  the  world  to  come,  the  same 
what7t^*'  ^'^^^1 1^^^  eternally  in  heaven,  refreshed  with  the  deity  of  Jesus  Christ,  as  touch 
is.  ing  the  most  principal  part  thereof,  that  is,  to  wit,  '  intellectum  ;'  forasmuch  as 

this  bread  of  heaven,  in  that  it  is  God,  hath  in  itself  all  delectable  pleasantness. 
And  as  touching  the  intelligible  powers  of  the  same,  as  well  exterior  as  interior, 
they  are  refreshed  with  the  flesh ;  that  is  to  say,  with  the  humanity  of  Jesus 
Christ,  which  is  as  a  queen  standing  on  the  right  hand  of  God,  decked  with  a 
golden  robe  of  divers  colours :  for  this  queen  of  heaven  alone,  by  the  word  of 
God,  is  exalted  above  the  company  of  all  the  angels ;  that  by  her  all  our  corpo- 
ral power  intellective,  may  fully  be  refreshed,  as  is  our  spiritual  intelligence, 
with  the  beholding  of  the  deitj^  of  Jesus  Christ ;  and  even  as  the  angels  shall  we 
be  fidly  satisfied.  And  in  the  memory  of  this  double  refection,  present  in  this 
world,  and  in  the  world  to  come,  hath  Christ  given  unto  us,  for  eternal  blessed- 
ness, the  sacrament  of  his  body  and  blood  in  the  substance  of  bread  and  wine ; 
as  it  appeareth  in  Matthew  xxvi. :  "  As  the  disciples  sat  at  supper,  Jesus  took 
bread  and  blessed  it,  brake  it,  and  gave  it  unto  his  disciples,  and  said.  Take,  eat, 
this  is  my  body.  And  he  took  the  cup,  and  thanked,  and  gave  it  them,  saying, 
Drink  ye  all  of  this  ;  for  this  is  my  blood  of  the  New  Testament  which  shall  be 
shed  for  many,  for  the  remission  of  sins."  And  Luke,  in  his  gospel  [chap,  xxii.], 
of  this  matter  thus  writeth:  "  And  after  he  had  taken  the  bread,  he  gave  thanks. 
This  is  ^^  brake  it,  and  gave  it  unto  them,  saying.  This  is  my  body  which  shall  be 
my  body,  given  for  you  ;  do  you  this  in  my  remembrance.  In  like  manner  he  took  the 
expound-  gyp  jjftgj.  supper,  Saying,  This  is  the  cup  of  the  New  Testament  in  my  blood, 
which  shall  be  shed  for  you."  That  which  Christ  said,  "This  is  my  body," 
in  showing  to  them  the  bread,  I  firmly  believe,  and  know  that  it  is  true  :  that 
Christ,  forasmuch  as  he  is  God,  is  the  very  truth  itself,  and  by  consequence  all 
that  he  saith  is  true.  And  I  believe  that  the  very  same  was  his  body,  in  such 
Notewell,  wise  as  he  willed  it  to  be  his  body :  for  in  that  he  is  Almighty,  he  hath  done 
gentle  whatsoever  pleased  him.  And  as,  in  Cana  of  Galilee,  he  changed  the 
water  into  wine  really,  so  that  after  the  transubstantiation,  it  was  wine  and 
not  water:  so,  when  he  said,  "This  is  my  body,"  if  he  would  have  had  the 
bread  really  to  be  transubstantiated  into  his  very  body,  so  that  after  this  chang- 
ing it  should  have  been  his  natural  body,  and  not  bread  as  it  was  before,  I  know 
thnt  it  must  needs  have  been  so.  But  I  find  not  in  the  Scripture,  that  his  will 
was  to  have  any  such  real  transubstantiation  or  mutation. 

And  as  the  Lord  God  Omnipotent,  in  his  perfection  essential  being  the  Son 
of  God,  doth  exceed  the  purest  creature,  and  yet,  when  it  pleased  him,  he 
took  upon  him  our  nature,  remaining  really  God  as  he  was  before,  and  was 
really  made  man,  so  that  after  this  assuming  of  our  substance,  he  was  really  very 
God  and  veiy  man  :    even  so,  if  he  would,  when  he  said,  "  This  is  my  body," 
he  could  make  this  to  be  his  body  really,  the  bread  still  really  remaining  as  it 
was  before.     For  less  is  the  difference  of  the  essence  between  bread  and  the 
body  of  a  man,  than  between  the  Deity  and  humanity;  because  that  of  the  bread 
is  naturally  made  the  body  of  a  man.     Of  the  bread  is  made  blood ;  of  the  blood 
natural  seed ;  and  of  natural  seed  the  natural  substance  of  man  is  engendered. 
But  in  this  that  God  became  man,  this  is  an  action  supernatural.     Wherefore, 
he  that  could  make  one  man  to  be  very  God  and  very  man,  could,  if  he  would. 
Bread  by   make  one  thing  to  be  really  very  bread,  and  his  very  body.     But  I  do  not  find 
tude '"       ^*  fixpj'^ssly  "1  f^he  Scripture,  that  he  would  have  any  such  identity  or  conjunc- 
tion to  be  made.     And,  as  Christ  said,  "  I  am  veiy  bread,"  not  changing  his 
Bread        essence  or  being  into  the  essence  or  substance  of  bread,  but  was  the  said  Christ 
tiaU^v^"'    which  he  was  before  really,  and  yet  bread  by  a  similitude  or  figurative  speech ; 
so,  if  he  would,  it  might  be,  when  he  said,  "  This  is  my  body,"  that  this  should 


ms     UKI.IF.K    TOUCHING    THK     l,OKl)'b    S  U 1*  I' K  It .  !75 

really  liave  bt-i'ii  tlie  dread  as  it  was  before,  and  sacranientally  or  inemorially  to   RUhnni 
be  liis  body.     And  this  seeiiieth  unto  nie  most  nearly  to  agree  to  the  meaning        ^^- 
of  Christ,  forasnuich  as  bo  said,  "  Uo  this  in  remembrance  of  nie."     Tlien,  for-     .    i^ 
asinnch  <ls  in  the  sui)per  it  is  manifest  that  Christ  gave  unto  liis  disciples  the      1301 

bread  of  I\is  body,  which  he  brake,  to  tliat  intent  to  eat  with  ths-ir  montlis,  in  1 

wliich  bread  he  gave  liimsclf  also  unto  them,  as  one  in  whom  they  sliould  be-  »'"'  "he 
lieve  (lus  to  l)e  the  food  of  t!ie  soul) ;  and  by  that  faith  they  should  believe  him  cramc'n- 
to  be  their  Saviour  who  took  his  i)ody,  wherein  also  he  willed  it  to  be  manifest,  tally, 
that  he  would  udeem  tiiem  from  death;  so  was  the  bread  eaten  with  the  disci- 
ples' mouths,  tliat  he,  being  the  tnu-  bread   of  the  sold,  might  be  in  spirit  re- 
ceived and  eaten  s])irituallv  by  their  faith  who  l)elieved  in  him. 

The  bread  which  in  the  di.sciples'  mouths  was  chewed,  from  the  mouth  passed  Thchrcad 
to  the  stouuich.      Tor  as  Christ  saith,  "  Whatsoever  cometh  to  the  mouth,  goeth  Lo'rdeavr 
into  the  belly,  and  from  thence  into  the  draught  [Matt,  xv.]     But  that  tnu-  and  entcrcth 
very  bread  of  tiie  soul,  was  eaten  by  the  spirit  of  the  disciples,  and  by  faith  en-  ".""Jj!" 
tcied  their  minds,  and  abode  in  their  inward  parts,  through  love.     And  so  the  die,,  but 
hread  broken  seemeth  luito  me  to  i)e  really  the  meat  of  the  body,  and  the  bread  the  t>oay 
wiiich    it  was  before;  but,  sacramentdly,  to  be  the  body  of  Christ;  as  Paul  ^ave'j.nf 
[  1  'or.  x.],  "The  bread  which  we  break,  is  it  not  the  participation  of  the  body  terrth  in- 
of  the  Lord  ?"    So  the  bread  which  wo  break  is  the  partici])atioii  of  tho  Lord's  '".""e    ^ 
body  :  and  it  is  manifest  tliat  the  heavenly  bread  is  not  broken,  neither  yet  is  ,1,^  jig^., 
subject  to  such  breaking,  therefore  Paul  calleth  the  material  bread  which  is  pies 
broken,  the  body  of  Clirist  which   the  faithful  are  partakers  of     The  bread  J!f|ip,|, 
therefore  changeth  not  its  essence,  but  is  bread  really,  and  is  the  body  of  Christ  it  ma- 
sacramentally  :  even  as  Christ  is  the  very  vine,  abiding  really  and  figuratively  \''^]^\ 
the  vine,  so  the  temple  of  Jerusalem  was  really  the  material  temple;  and,  fi-  .\„tc,reM 
giirativcly,  it  was  the  body  of  Christ,  because  he  said,  "  Destroy  you  this  ten:-  dor! 
pie,  and  in  three  days  I  will  repair  the  same  again."     And  this  spake  he  of  the 
temple  of  his  body  ;   whereas  others  understood  it  to  be  the  material  temple,  as 
appeared  by  their  answer.     For,  said  they,   "  Forty  and  seven  years  hath  this 
temple  been  in  building,  and  wilt  thou  build  it  up  in  three  days .'" 

Even  so  may  the  consecrated  bread  be  really  bread,  as  it  was  before,  and  yet, 
figuratively,   the  body   of  Christ.     And  if,   therefore,  Christ  would  have  this 
bread  lo  be  only  sacranientally  his  body,  and  would  not  have  the  same  br^ad 
really  to  be  transubstantiated  into  his  body,  and  so  ordained  his  priests  to  make 
this  sacrament  as  a  memorial  of  his  passion,  then  do  the  priests  grievously  of-  The  vain 
fend,  who  beseech  Christ  in  their  holy  mass,  that  the  bread  wliich  lieth  upon  prayer  of 
the  altar  may  be  made  really  the  body  of  Christ,  if  he  would  only  liave  the  same  priests  at 
to  be  but  a  sacrament  of  his  body ;  and  then   be  they  both  greatlj-  deceived  their 
themselves,   and  also   do  greatly   deceive   others.     But  whether  the  bread  be  '"""■"• 
really  transubstantiated   into  the  body  of  Christ,  or  is  only  the  body  of  Christ 
sacranientally,  no  doubt  but  that  the  people  are  marvellously  deceived  ;  for  the  The  peo- 
people  believe  that  they  see  the  body  of  Christ,  nay  rather  Christ  himself,  be-  {1!'^^^^^"'.'. 
tween  the  hands  of  the  priests,  for  so  is  the  common  oath  they  swear,  "  By  him  edinthe 
whom  I  saw  this  day  between  the  priest's  hands."     And  the  people  believe  that  «acra- 
thcy  eat  not  the  body  of  Christ  but  at  Easter,  or  else  when  they  lie  upon  their  '"^""  ' 
death-bed,  and  receive  with  their  bodily  moutli  the  sacrament  of  the  body  of 
Christ.   Butthebodv  of  Christ  (admit  the  bread  be  transubstantiated  really  into 
the  body)  is  in  the  sacrament  'indivisibiliter.'  that  is,  not  able  to  be  divided ; 
and  so  '  imnunsurabiliter,'  that  is,  not  able  to  be  measured.     Ergo,  '  invisibili- 
ter,'  that  i.s,  not  able  to  be  seen.     To  believe   therefore  that  he  may  be  seen 
corporally  in  the  sacrament,  is  erroneous.   And  forasmtich  as  the  body  of  Christ 
b  the  soul's  food,  and  not  the  food  of  the  body  in  this  world,  (for  that  whoso- 
ever believcth,  doth  eat  spirit\ially  and  really,  at  any  time  when  he  sobclievetli)  ^^'^ 
it  is  manifest  that  they  do  greatly  err  who  believe  that  they  eat  not  the  body  of  seek  their 
Christ,  but  when  they  eat  with  their  teeth  the  sacrament  of  the  body  of  Christ,  own  ho- 

And  although  it  should  be  to  the  great  honour  of  priests,   that   the   bread  ","H'^ '" 
really    were   changed  bito  the  body  of  Christ,  by  virtue    of  the  sacramental  transub- 
words  pronounced,  yet,  if  Christ  would  not  have  it  to  be  so,  then  they,  desiring  s;-»>tii 
to  do  tnis  contrary  to  the  will  of  Christ,  and  informing  the  people  what  is  to  be         ■ 
done,  so  contrary  to  the  will  of  C^hrist,  arc  in  great  peril,  most  dangerously  se-  f, ere  ye 
ducing  both  themselves  and  the  people.     And  then,  although  thereby  tliev  get  good 
a  little  worldly  and  transitory  honour  for  a  short  time,  it  is  to  be  fearecl  lest  •""" "'" 


176  THE    STORY    OF     WALTKR    BRUTE. 

Richard   pei-petual  shame  finally  shall  follow  and  ensue  upon  the  same  ;  for  Christ  saith 

^^-       "  Eveiy  one  that  exalteth  himself  shall  he  brought  low."     Let  them  therefore 

~.    ,-.      take  heed,  lest  they,  extolling  themselves  for  this  sacrament  above  the  company 

\.{a{    of  angels  who  never  sinned,  for  the  error  which  they  be  in,  for  evermore  be 

•    placed  with  the  sinful  angels  under  the  earth. 

Let  every  man  therefore  think  lowly  of  himself,  in  what  state  or  degree  soever 

he  be:  neither  let  him  presume  to  do  that  which  he  is  not  able  to  do;  neither 

desire  to  have  that  thing  done,  which  God  woidd  not  have  done. 

Themak-       I  gi'eatly  marvel  at  those  who  were  the  makers  of  the  canons,  how  variably, 

ers  of  the        j  (.gntrarv  one  to  anothei',  they  write  of  this  sacrament  of  the  bodv  of  Christ, 
canon  law  .       ,       ,     ,  -^      ,      „  .,        -,  ■'  -i  ,,  .  ^^       •     ,        i     i  i      •        i 

contrary    In  the  last  part  01  the  decrees  where  this  matter  is  touched,  not  only  in  the 

to  them-    text,  but  also  in  the  process  of  the  matter,  divers  do  diversely  write,  and  one 
Contra-     contrary  to  another.     For  in  the  chapter  that  thus  beginneth,  "  Prima  inquit 
riety  in      hajresis,"  1  it  is  thus  written,  "  You  shall  not  eat  this  body  which  you  see,  nor 
the  pope  s  g]^all  drink  this  blood  which  they  shall  shed  who  shall  crucify  me  :  I  will  com- 
mend unto  you  a  certain  sacrament  spiritually  understood  that  quickeneth  you  ; 
for  the  flesh  profiteth  you  nothing  at  all."     And  in  the  end  of  the  same  chap- 
ter it  is  thus  written,  "  Till  the  world  shall  have  an  end,  the  Lord's  place  is  in 
heaven :  yet  notwithstanding  the  verity  of  the  Lord  is  here  abiding  with  us. 
For  the  body  wherewith  he  rose,  ought  to  be  in  one  place  ;  but  his  verity  is  in 
every  place  diffused  and  spread  abroad."     And  in  the  chapter  following,  which 
thus  beginneth,  "Omnia  quaecunque  voliut,"^&c.     It  is  written,  "Although 
the  figure  of  the  bread  and- wine  seem  to  be  nothing,  yet,  notwithstanding,  they 
must,  after  the  words  of  consecration,  be  believed  to  be  none  other  thing  than 
the  very  flesh  of  Christ,  and  his  blood.     Whereupon  the  Verity  himself  said 
unto  his  disciples,  'This  is,'  saith  he,  '  my  flesh,   which  is  given  for  the  life  of 
the  woHd,'  and  to  speak  yet  more  marvellously,  this  is  none  other  flesh  than 
that  which  was  born  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  and  suffered  upon  the  cross,  and  rose 
out  of  the  sepulchre." 
The  re-  See  how  far  this  chapter  differeth  from  the  first.     And  in  the  chapter  which 

cantation  beginneth,  "  Ergo  Berengarius,"  &c.,  this  is  the  confession  which  Berengarius 
garius  is    himself  confessed  touching  this  sacrament,  and  his  confession  is  of  the  church 
heretical,  allowed :  "  I  confess,"  saith  Berengarius,  "  that  the  bread  and  wine  which  is 
laid  upon  the  altar  after  the  consecration,  is  not  only  a  sacrament,  but  also  that 
it  is  the  very  body  and  blood  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ :  and  the  same  not  only 
sensually  to  be  a  sacrament,  but  also  verily  to  be  handled  with  the  priest's  hands, 
and  to  be  broken,  and  chewed  with  the  teeth  of  faithful  men."    This  confession 
doubtless  is  heretical :  for  why?     If  the  body  of  Christ  be  in  the  sacrament  (as 
of  the  church  it  is  so  determined),  it  is  there  then  'multiplicative,'  and  so  '  in- 
divisibiliter ;'  wherefore  not  '  sensualiter.'     And  if  it  be   there  '  indivisibiliter,' 
that  is,  in  such  sort  as  it  cannot  be  divided  or  separated,  then  can  it  not  be 
touched,  felt,  broken,  or  with  the  teeth  of  men  chewed. 
The  sa-         'fhe  writers  of  this  time  and  age  do  affirm,  that  if,  by  the  negligence  of  the 
left'by'the  pi'iest,  the  sacrament  be  so  negligently  left,  that  a  mouse,  or  any  other  beast  or 
priest's      vermin  eat  the  same ;  then  they  say,  that  the   sacrament  return  eth  again  into 
"•^^h-        t|,g  nature  and  substance  of  bread.     Whereby  they  must  needs  confess,  that  a 
be  eaten    miracle  is  as  well  wrought  by  the   negligence  of  the  priest,  as  first  there  was 
of  a  made  by  the  consecration  of  the  priest  in  making  the  sacrament.     For  either 

returneth  ^J  ^'^^  eating  of  the  mouse  the  body  of  Christ  is  transubstantiated  into  the 
again  nature  of  bread,  which  is  a  transubstantiation  supernatural,  or  else  of  nothing 
from  body  |jy  creation  is  this  bread  produced;  and  therefore  either  of  these  operations  is 
miraculous  and  to  be  marvelled  at.  Now,  considering  the  disagreeing  opinions 
of  the  doctors,  and  for  the  absurdities  which  follow,  I  believe  with  Paul,  that 
Wliether  j^g  ^j-gad  which  we  break,  is  the  participation  of  the  body  of  Christ ;  and,  as 
signs  in  a  Christ  saith,  that  the  bread  is  made  the  body  of  Christ  for  a  memorial  and  re- 
priest  be  meinbrance  of  him.  And  in  such  sort  as  Christ  willed  the  same  to  be  his  body, 
ofVnH-^  in  the  same  manner  and  sort  do  I  believe  it  to  be  his  body. 
Christ  or  But,  whether  women  may  make  the  body  of  Christ,  and  minister  it  unto  the 
^^^^  ,  .  people  ;  or  whether  priests  be  divided  from  the  lay  people  for  their  knowledge, 
upon"  ^  pre-eminence,  and  sanctity  of  life,  or  else  by  external  signs  only ;  also,  whether 
Christ.      the  sign  of  tonsure  and  other  external  signs  of  holiness  in  priests,  be  signs  of 

(1)  DeConBec.  dist.  2.  (2)  Ibid. 


Ills     (..ODI.Y     l)i;(  I.AIIATIONS.  177 

Antichrist  and  liis  characters;  or  else  intruduced  and  taught  hy  oiir  Lord  Jesus    Hichnrd 
Christ :   consequently  it  reniaineth   next  to  sjieaiv  unto  the  faithful  s(jrt,  accord-       H 
in^  to  the  process  of  the  holy  Scrinlure  ;   hrst,  of  the  three  kinds  of  the  priests.         " 
I  remember  that  I  liave  read,  the  hrst  of  them   to  he  Aaronical,  legal,  and  tem-     '..'     ' 
poral ;   the  second  to  be  eternal  aiul   regal,  according  to  the  order  of  Melchise-       ' 
dec ;  the  third  to  be  Christiaii.     The  first  of  these  ceased  at  the  coming  of  Three 
Christ  ;  for  as   St.  Paul  to   the    Hebrews  saith,  '  The  priesthood  of  Aaron  was  ^J^rxlW 
translated  to  the  priesthood  of  the   order  of  Melchisedec'      Tlie  legal  sort  of  priests, 
priests  of  .\aron  were  separated   from  tlie  rest  of  the  people  by  kindred,  oiiice,  Levi'ical 
and  inheritance  :  by  kindred,  for  that  the  children  of  Aaron  only  were  j)riests  :  jj^ldcd 
by  olhce,  for  tliat  it  only  pertained  to  them  to  offer  sacrifice  for  the  sins  of  the  from  the 
people,  and  to  instruct  the  people  in  the  precepts  and  ceremonies  of  the    law:  j^""?'';!'^ 
by  inheritance,  because  the  Lord  was  their  portion  of  inheritance;  neither  had  oiiicK.and 
tliey  any  other  inheritance  amongst  their  brethren,  but  those  things  which  were  '"''en- 
ottered  unto  the  Lord,  as  the  first  fruits,  parts  of  the  sacrifices,  and  vows ;  except  '""^'■' 
places  for  tlicir  mansion  houses,  for  them  and  theirs,  as  appeareth  by  the  pro- 
cess of  Moses'  law.     The  priesthood  of  Christ  did  much  diihr  from  this  priest- 
hood, as  I'aul  doth  witness  to  the  Hebrews,  in  chapters  vii.  viii.  i.\.  x. 

First,  in  kindred :  because  that  our   Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  came  of  How  the 
the  stock  and  tribe  of  Judah,  of  which  tribe  none  liad  to  do  with  the  altar,  and  h",^j'  f 
in  which  tribe  nothing  at  all  was  spoken  of  the  priests  of  Moses.  Christ 

Secondly,  for  that  others  were  made  jmests  without  their  oath  taken  ;  but  '!'"'"«"' 
he,  by  an  oath  by  him  who  s.iid,  '  The  Lord  swore  and  it  shall  not  repent  him,  Lcvitical 
thou  art  a  priest  t'or  ever  according  to  the  order  of  Melcliisedec'  priest- 

Thirdly,  by  durability  ;  for  that  many  of  them  were  made  priests  but  during  ''""''• 
the  term  of  their  lives ;  '  but  he,  for  that  he  remaineth  for  ever,  hath  an  eternal 
priesthood.  Wherefore  he  is  able  to  save  us  for  ever,  having  by  himself  access 
unto  God,  wliich  ever  livcth  to  make  intercession  for  us.'  Tlie  law  made  also 
such  men  priests  as  had  infirmities ;  but  '  Semio'  (that  is,  the  Word,  which,  aa- 
cording  to  tlie  law,  is  the  eternal  Son  and  perfect),  by  an  oath. 

The  priesthood  of  Christ  also  did  differ  from  the  priesthood  of  Aaron  and  the 
law  in  the  matter  of  the  sacrifice,  and  in  the  place  of  sacrificing  In  the  mat- 
ter of  their  sacrifice  :  because  they  did  use  in  the  sacrifices  strange  bodies  for 
the  matter  of  their  sacrifices,  and  did  shed  strange  blood  for  the  expiation  of 
sins  ;  but  he  offering  himself  unto  God  his  Father  for  us,  shed  his  own  blood  for 
the  remission  of  our  sins.  In  the  place  of  sacrificing  :  because  they  did  offer 
their  sacrifice  in  the  tabernacle  or  temple ;  but  Christ  suffering  death  without 
the  gates  of  the  city,  offered  himself  upon  the  altar  of  the  cross  to  God  his 
Father,  and  there  shed  his  precious  blood.  In  his  supping  cliamber,  also,  he 
blessed  the  bread,  and  consecrated  the  same  for  his  body,  and  the  wine  which 
was  in  the  cup  he  also  consecrated  for  his  blood;  delivering  the  same  to  his 
apostles  to  be  done  for  a  commemoration  and  remembrance  of  his  incarnation 
and  passion.  '  Neither  did  Jesus  enter  into  the  sanctuary  made  with  man's 
hands,  which  be  examples  and  figures  of  true  things,  but  he  entered  into  heaven 
itself,  that  he  might  appear  before  the  Majesty  of  (Jod  for  us.  Neither  doth  he 
offer  himself  oftentimes,  as  the  chief  priest  in  the  sanctuary  did  every  year  with 
strange  blood  (for  then  should  he  oftentimes  have  suffered  from  the  beginning); 
but  now  once  for  all,  in  the  latter  end  of  the  world,  to  destroy  sin  by  his  peace- 
offering  hath  he  entered.  And  even  as  it  is  decreed,  that  man  once  sliall  die,  and 
then  cometh  the  judgment,  so  Christ  Jiatli  been  once  offered,  to  take  away  the  sins 
of  many.  The  second  time  he  shall  appear  without  sin  to  them  that  look  for  him  ; 
to  their  salvation.  For  the  law  having  a  shadow  of  good  things  to  come,  can  The  Uw 
never,  by  the  image  itself  of  things  (which  every  year  without  ceasinp  they  ofl'er  »>rinKeth 
by  such  sacrifices),  make  those  perfect  that  come  thereunto;  for  otherwise  that  perft,-" 
offering  should  have  ceased,  because  that  such  worshippers,  being  once  cleansed  tion. 
from  their  sins,  should  haw  no  more  conscience  of  sin.  But  in  these,  comme- 
moration is  made  every  year  of  sin ;  for  it  is  impossible  that  by  the  blood  of 
goats  and  calves,  sins  should  be  purged  and  taken  away.  Therefore,  coining 
into  the  world  he  said,  sacrihce  and  olilation  thou  wouldst  not  have,  but  a  body 
hast  tliou  given  me ;  peace-offerings  for  sins  have  not  pleased  thee :  then  said  I, 
Behold  I  come  ;  in  the  volume  of  the  book  it  is  written  of  me,  that  I  should  do 
thy  will,  O  God  :  saying,  as  above,  Because  thou  wouldcst  have  no  sacrifice 
nor  bumt-ofFcrings  for  sin,  neither  dost  thou  take  pleasure  in  those  things  tliat 
vol..   II!.  N 


178 


THE    STORY    OF    WALTER    BRLTK. 


Richard 
II. 

A.D. 
1391. 


The 
priest- 
hood of 
Christ 
differetli 
fi-oni 
alljothers. 

The 
third 
priest- 
hood. 
The  name 
of  Sacer- 
dos  or 
Priest  not 
used  in 
the  New 
Testa- 
ment. 


The 

fourth 
priest- 
hood, 
wliich  is 
the 
Roman. 


The 
office  of 
priests 
after  the 
pope's 
order. 


The  body 
of  Christ 
not  left  to 
be  a  sacri- 
fice for 
sin,  but 
only  for  a 
sacra- 
ment. 


are  offered  according  to  the  law.  Then  said  I,  Behold  I  come,  that  I  may  do 
thy  will  O  God.  He  taketh  away  the  first  to  establish  that  which  followeth.  In 
which  will  we  are  sanctified,  by  the  oblation  of  the  body  of  Jesus  Christ  once 
for  all.  And  every  priest  is  ready  daily  ministering,  and  oftentimes  ofi^eving 
like  sacrifices,  which  can  never  take  away  sins.  But  this  Jesus,  offering  one 
sacrifice  for  sin^_  sitteth  for  evennore  on  the  right  hand  of  God,  expecting  the 
time  till  his  enemies  be  made  his  footstool.  For  by  his  one  only  oblation, 
hath  he  consummated  for  evermore  those  that  are  sanctified.' 

All  these  places  have  I  recited  which  Paul  writeth,  for  the  better  under- 
standing and  declaration  of  those  things  of  which  I  mean  to  speak ;  by  all  which 
it  appeareth  manifestly,  how  the  priesthood  of  Christ  diftereth  fi'om  the  legal 
priesthood  of  Aaron :  and  by  the  same  also  appeai'eth,  how  the  same  diflereth 
from  all  other  priesthood  Christian,  that  imitateth  Christ ;  for  the  properties  of 
the  priesthood  of  Christ,  above  recited,  are  found  in  no  other  priest,  but  in 
Christ  alone. 

Of  the  third  priesthood,  that  is,  the  '  Christian  priesthood, '  Christ,  by  express 
words,  speaketh  but  little  to  make  any  difference  between  the  priests  and  the 
rest  of  the  people  ;  neither  yet  doth  use  this  name  of  '  sacerdos,'  or  'presbyter,' 
in  the  gospel,  but  some  he  calleth  'disciples,'  some  'apostles,'  whom  he  sent  to 
baptize  and  to  preach,  and  in  his  name  to  do  miracles.  He  calleth  them  the 
'  salt  of  the  earth,'  in  which  name  wisdom  is  meant :  and  he  calleth  them  'the 
light  of  the  world,'  by  which  good  living  is  signified:  for  he  saith,  'Let  your 
light  so  shine  before  men,  that  they  may  see  your  good  works,  and  glorify  your 
Father  which  is  in  heaven.'  And  Paul,  speaking  of  the  priests  to  Timothy 
and  Titus,  seemeth  not  to  me  to  make  any  diversity  betwixt  the  priests  and  the 
other  people,  but  in  that  he  would  have  them  to  surmount  others  in  knowledge 
and  perfection  of  Hfe. 

But  the  fourth  priesthood  is  the  Roman  priesthood,  brought  in  by  the  church 
of  Rome,  which  church  maketh  a  distinction  between  the  clergy  and  the  lay 
people,  and,  after  that,  the  clergy  is  divided  into  sundry  degrees,  as  appeareth 
in  the  decretals.  This  distinction  of  the  clergy  from  the  laity,  witli  the  tonsure 
of  clerks,  began  in  the  time  of  Anacletus,  as  it  doth  appear  in  the  chronicles. 
The  degrees  of  the  clergy  were  afterwards  invented  and  distinguished  by  their 
offices,  and  there  was  no  ascension  to  the  degree  of  the  priesthood,  but  by  in- 
ferior orders  and  degrees.  But  in  the  primitive  church  it  was  not  so ;  for,  im- 
mediately after  the  conversion  of  some  of  them  to  faith  and  baptism  received, 
they  were  made  priests  and  bishops,  as  appeareth  by  Anianus,  whom  Maixus 
made  of  a  tailor  or  shoemaker  to  be  a  bishop ;  and  of  many  others  it  was  in  like 
case  done,  according  to  the  traditions  of  the  church  of  Rome.  Priests  are  or- 
dained to  offer  sacrifices,  to  make  supplication  and  pi-ayers,  and  to  bless  and 
sanctify.  The  oblation  of  the  priesthood  only  to  priests,  as  they  say,  is  con- 
gruent ;  whose  duties  are  upon  the  altar  to  offer  for  the  sins  of  the  people  the 
Lord's  body,  which  is  consecrated  of  bread.  Of  which  saying  I  have  great  mar- 
vel, considering  St.  Paul's  words  to  the  Hebrews  before  recited.  If  Christ,  offer- 
ing for  oiu' sins  one  oblation  for  evermore,  sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  and 
with  that  one  oblation  hath  consummated  for  evermore  those  that  are  sanctified  : 
if  Christ  evermore  sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  to  make  intercession  for  us, 
what  need  he  to  leave  here  any  sacrifice  for  our  sins  by  the  priests  to  be  daily 
offered  ?  I  do  not  find  in  the  Scriptures  of  God,  or  of  his  apostles,  that  the 
body  of  Christ  ought  to  be  made  a  sacrifice  for  sin ;  but  only  as  a  sacrament 
and  commemoration  of  the  sacrifice  passed,  which  Christ  offered  vipon  the  altar 
of  the  cross  for  our  sins.  For  it  is  an  absurdity  to  say  that  Christ  is  now  every 
day  really  offered  as  a  sacrifice  upon  the  altar  by  the  priests ;  for  then  the 
priests  should  really  crucify  him  upon  the  altar,  which  is  a  thing  of  no  Christian 
to  be  believed.  But,  even  as  in  his  supper  his  body  and  his  blood  be  delivered 
to  his  disciples,  in  memorial  of  his  body  that  should  be  crucified  on  the  morrow 
for  our  sins :  so  after  tiiis  ascension,  did  his  apostles  use  the  same  (when  they 
brake  bread  in  every  house)  for  a  sacrament,  and  not  for  a  sacrifice,  of  the  body 
and  blood  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  And  by  this  means  were  they  put  in  re- 
membrance of  the  great  love  of  Christ,  who  so  entirely  loved  us,  that  willingly 
he  suffered  the  death  for  us,  and  for  the  remission  of  our  sins.  And  thus  did 
they  offer  themselves  to  God  by  love,  being  ready  to  suffer  death  for  the  con- 
fession of  his  name,  and  for  the  saving  health  of  their  brethren,  fulfilling  the  new 


SOOTilSAVIN'c.    AND    W I  ICIICK  A I  T    Ol'    THK    KOMISII     I'lUKSTS.  ]"/.) 

conimandineiit  of  Christ,   which  said  unto  Oiem,   '  A  new  commandment  do    nichm,: 

I  ^ive  unto  you,  that  you  lovu  one  another,  as   I    liave  loved   you.'     Hut  when       '^- 

love  hegan  to  wax  cold,  or  lather  to  be  Iro/en  for  cold,  through  the  aiij,'uisli  and      4    i^ 

anxiety  of  persecutiin  for  tiie  name  of  Christ,  then  j)riests  did  use  tiie  Hesli  and     \-u\\ 

blood  of  Christ,  instead  of  a  siicritice.   And  because  many  of  them  feared  death,  — '■ 1- 

soiue  of  t^iem  lied  into  solitary  places,  not  daring  to  give  themselves  a  sacrifice  ""*  "}« 

oy  death  unco   (iod   througli  tlie  confession  of  his  name,  and    for  the  saving  ofthe'^ 

health   of  their  brethren  :  some  others  worsliijjjjed  idols,  fearing  death;  as  did  tacra- 

al.so  tlie  eliief  bislu)i>  of  Rome,  and  many  otliers  besides,  in  divers  places  of  tlie  ""^■"' 

11.11-  1  1  1-1  1    ■        1         1  1  fame  to 

world.    And  tluis  it  came  to  pass,  tliat  tliat  winch  was  ordained  and  constituted  the 

for  a  memorial  of  the  one  and  only  sacrilice,  was  altered,  for  want  of  love,  into  rt-aiity  of 

the  reality  of  the  sacritice  itself.  ^^  ^'^tK\t 

Attor  these  thin^fs  tlius  discussed,  he  int'erreth  eonscqucntly  upon 
the  same,  annther  briet'  traetation  of  women  and  hiy-men  :  whether,  in 
defect  of  the  other,  they  may  exercise  the  action  of  prayer,  and  admi- 
nistration of  sacraments  belonfjing  to  priests,  wherein  he  declareth  the 
use  received  in  the  pope's  church  for  women  to  baptize,  which,  saith 
he,  cannot  be  without  remission  of  sins  :  wherefore,  seeino^  that  women 
have  power  by  the  pope  to  remit  sin,  and  to  ])aptize,  why  may  not 
they  as  well  be  admitted  to  minister  the  Lord's  Supper,  in  like  case 
of  necessity  ?  Wherein  also  he  maketh  relation  ofp()j)e  Joan  VIII., 
a  woman  pope,  moving  certain  tjuestionsof  her.  All  which,  for  brevity, 
I  omit,  proceeding  unto  the  ministmtion  of  Prayer,  and  blessing  of 
Sanctification,  appropriate  to  the  office  of  priests,  as  followeth. 

Walter  Brute,  on  the  Order  and  Office  of  Prayer,  &c. 

Furthermore,  as  touching  the  function  and  office  of  praying  and  blessing,  xhe 
wliereunto  priests  seem  to  be  ordained   (to  omit  here  the  question  whether  I/ird's 
women  may  pray  in  churches,  in  lack  of  other  meet  persons),  it  remaineth  now     '^">''^- 
also  to  prosecute.     Christ,  heing  desired  of  his  disciples  to  teach  them  to  pray, 
gave  them  the  Common-Prayer  both  to  men  and  women,  to  which  prayer,  in  my 
estimation,  no  other  is  to  be  compared.   For  in  that,  first,  the  wliole  honour  due 
unto  the   Deity  is  comprehended.     Secondly,   whatsoever  is  necessary  for  us, 
both  for  the  time  present  or  past,  or  for  time  to  come,  is  there  desired  and  prayed, 
for.    He  informeth  us  besides  to  pray  secretly,  and  also  briefly  :  secretly  to  enter 
into  our  close  chamber,  and  there   in   secrecy   he  willetli  us  to  pray  unto  his 
Father :  and  saith,  moreover,  '  When  ye  pray,  use  not  much  babbling,  or  many 
words,  as  do  the  heathen.     For  they  think,  in  their  long  and  jjrolix  praying,  to 
be  heard.    Therefore  be  you  not  like  to  them.'  [Matt,  vi.]    By  which  doctrine  rhe  art« 
he  calietii  us  away  from  the  errors  of  the  heatlicn  (Jentilcs,  from  whom  proceed  of  mcro 
these  superstitious  manners  of  arts  (or  rather  of  ignorances),  as  necromancy,  the  "^"^^ 
art  of  di\nnation,  and  other  spices  of  conjuration,  not  unknown  to  them  that  be  inc,  and 
learned:  for  these  necromancers  believe  one  place  to  he  of  greater  virtue  tlian  "'''!'': 
another;  there  to  be  luard  sooner,  than  in  another.    Like  as  lialaam  heing  hired  _",j  f^°^ 
to  curse  the  people  of  (mxI  by  his  art  of  soothsaying  or  cliarming,  when  he  could  whom 
not  accompiisli  his  puri)ose  in  one  place,  he  removed  to  another;    but  he,  in  the  J^'^'"> 
end,  wii-s  deceived  of  his  desire  :  for  he,  intending   first  to  curse  them,  was  not 
able  to  accursc  them  whom   the  Lord  blessed,  so  that   his  curse  could  not  hurt 
gny  of  all  that  people,     .\fter  like  sort,  the  necromancers  turn  their  face  to  the 
East,  as  to  a  phicc  more  apt  for  their  pr.-iyers.     Also  the   necromancers  believe 
that  the  virtue  of  the   words   of  the  prayer,  and  the  curiosity  thereof,  cause 
them  to  bring  to  effect   that  which  they  seek  after ;  which  is  also  another  ])oint 
of  infidelity,  used  much  of  charmers,  sorcerers,  enchanters,  soothsayers,  and  such 
like.  Out  of  the  same  art,  I  fear,  proceedeth  the  practice  of  exorcising,  whereby  gj^p^ij. 
devils  and   sjiirits  be  conjured  to  do  that,  whereunto  they  are  enforced  by  the  ing. 
exorcist.     Also,  whereby  other  creatures  likewise  arc  exorcised  or  conjured,  so 
that,  by  the  virtue  of  their  exorcism,  they   may  have  their  power  and  strength 
exceeding  all  natural  operation. 

n2 


180  THE    STORY    OF    WALTER    BRUTE. 

Richird        In  the  churcli  of  Rome  many  such  exorcisms  and  conjurations  be  practised, 

11        and  are  called  by  them  benedictions,  or  hallowings.     But  here   I  ask  of  these 

.    ,-      exorcisers,  whether  they  believe  the  things  and  creatures  so  exorcised  and  hal- 

,  „■  ,"    lowed,  have  that  operation  and  efficacy  given  them  which  they  pretend?  If  they 

'__  so  believe,  every  child  may  see  that  they  are  far  beguiled.     For  holy  water, 

Conjur-  being  of  them  exorcised  or  conjured,  hath  no  such  power  in  it,  neither  can  have, 
hafiowi  which  they  in  their  exorcism  do  command.  For  there  they  enjoin  and  com- 
in  the  niand,  that  wheresoever  that  water  is  sprinkled,  all  vexation  or  infestation  of 
popish  the  unclean  spirit  should  void,  and  that  no  pestilent  spirit  there  should  abide, 
J.  "^"^  ■  &c.  But  most  plain  it  is,  that  no  water,  be  it  ever  so  holy,  can  have  any  such 
water  jiower  SO  to  do,  as  it  is  commanded ;  to  wit,  to  be  a  universal  remedy  to  expel 
conjured,  all  diseases. 

.  This,    I  would  ask,  of  these  exorcists :  whether  in  their  commanding,  they 

dity  and    do  conjure,  or  adjure,  the  things  conjured  to  be  of  a  higher  virtue  and  operation, 
abomina-  than  their  own  nature  doth  give  :  or  else,  whether  they,  in  their  prayers,  desire 
th"po-      o^  God,  that  he  will  infuse  into  them  that  virtue,  which  they  require  ?  If  they, 
pish  ex-    in  their  commanding,  do  so  believe,  then   do  they  believe  that  they  have  that 
orcisms     power  in  them,   to  which  the  inferior  power  of  the  thing  exorcised  must  obey, 
in  receiving  that  which  is  commanded.     And  so  doing,  they  are  much  more 
deceived,  forasmuch  as  they  see  themselves,  that  they  who  are  so  authorized  to 
the  office  of  exorcising,   say  to  the  devil  being  conjured,  'Go,'  and  he  goeth 
not;  and  to  another,  'Come,' and  he  cometh  not:  and  many  things  else  they 
command  the  inferior  spirit  their  subject  to  do,  and  he  doth  not.    So,  in  like  case, 
when  they  pray  to  God  to  make  the  water'  to  be  of  such  virtue,  that  it  may  be  to 
them  health  of  mind  and  body,  and  that  it  may  be  able  to  expulse  every  unclean 
spirit,  and  to  chase  away  all  manner  of  distemperature  and  pestilence  of  tlie  air 
(being  an  unreasonable  petition  asked,  and  sore  displeasing  to  God),  it  is  to  be 
feared  lest  their  benediction,  their  hallowing  and  blessing,  is  changed  into  curs- 
ing, according  to  that  saying  that  followeth  :  '  And  now,  O  you  priests,  I  have 
a  message  to  say  unto  you ;  if  you  will  not  hear  and  bear  well  away  in  your 
minds  to  give  the  glory  unto  my  name,   saith  the   Lord  God  of  hosts,  I  will 
send  scarcity  among  you,  and  I  will  curse  your  blessings.'     What  things,  and 
how  many  are  blessed,  or  hallowed  in  the  church,  that  in  hallowing  thereof 
displease  God,  and  are  accursed  ?  And  therefore,  according  to  the  saying  of  St. 
James  [chap,  iv.],  they  ask  and  are  not  heard,  because  they  ask  not  as  they 
Romish     should,  that  they  in  their  own  desires  may  perish.    Let  a  man  behold  the  bless- 
conju-       jjig  Qj.  liallowing  of  their  fire,  water,  incense,  wax,  bread,  wine,  the  church,  the 
altar,  the  churchyard,  ashes,  bells,  copes,  palms,  oil,  candles,  salt,  the  hallowing 
of  the  ring,  the  bed,  the  stafi",  and  of  many  such  like  things ;  and  I  believe  that 
a  man  shall  find  out  many  errors  of  the  heathen  magicians,  witches,  soothsayers 
and  charmers.     And  notwithstanding  the  ancient  and  old  magicians,  in  their 
books,  command  those  that  be  conjurei-s,   that  they  in  any  wise  live  devoutly 
(for  otherwise,  as  they  say,  the  spirits  will  not  obey  their  commandments,  and 
conjurations),  yet  the  Roman  conjurers  do  impute  it  to  the  virtue  of  the  holy 
words,  because  they  be  they  which  work,  and  not  the  holiness  of  the  conjurers. 
The  pood  How  cometh  it  to  pass  that,  they  say,  the  things  consecrated  by  a  cursed  and 
life  of  a     vicious  javeP  should  have  as  great  virtue  in  pronouncing  (as  they  say)  the  holy 
great '       and  mystical  words,  as  if  they  were  pronounced  by  a  priest  ever  so  holy  1     But 
matter      \  marvel  that  they  say  so,  reading  this  saying  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  :  be- 
God'^s'  '"  cause  the  charmers,  pronouncing  the  name  of  Jesus,  which  is  above  all  names, 
matters,    would  have  healed  those  that  were  possessed  with  devils,  and  said ;   '  In  the 
name  of  Jesus,  whom  Paul  preacheth,  go  ye  out  of  the  men  ;'  and  the  possessed 
with  devils  answered,  *  Jesus  we  know,  and  Paul  we  know,  but  what  are  ye  ? 
And  they  all  to  be  beat  the  conjurers.' 

And  now,  considering  this  and  many  such  like  things,  I  marvel  wherefore  the 
vicious  priests  do  sell  their  prayers  and  blessings  dearer  (as  also  their  masses  and 
trentals^  of  masses)  than  those  that  be  devout  lay-men,  and  holy  women,  who, 
with  all  their  heart,  desire  to  flee  from  vice,  and  take  hold  of  virtue :  forasmuch 
as  God,   in  divers  places  of  the  Scripture,   doth  promise   that  he  will  not  hear 

(1)  Where  was  the  pope's  holy  water  then,  in  the  great  pestilence  in  the  time  of  king  Edward  I H  ? 

(2)  "  Javel."     A  slanderer. — Ed. 

(3)  "  Trcntal."  An  office  for  the  dead,  which  lasts  for  thirty  days,  and  consists  of  thirty  masses 
—Ed. 


BUYIXr.    AN'D    SKM.ISG    OF    rUAVKIlS    AND    DIKGES.  181 

sinners  and  wicked  jutjoiis  ;  neither  should  he  seem  to  be  jiust,  if  he  should   Richard 
sooner  hear  the  prayers  of  his  enemies,  than  of  his  faithful  friend.   How,  I  pray       "■ 
you,  shall  a  sinful  priest  dehver  another  man  from  sin  by  his  prayers,  or  else     ^  ^^ 
from  the  punishment  of  sin,  when  he   is  not  able  to   deliver  himself,  by  his    j.j'yj" 

prayers,  from  sin  .'  What  then  doth  God  so  much  accept  in  the  mass  of  a  vicious  — ! !_ 

priest,  that  for  his  mass,  his  prayer  or  oblation,  he  n)in;nt  deliver  any  man  either  The  pray- 
t'rom  sin,  or  from  the  pain  due  for  sin  ?     No,  but  for  this,  that  Christ  hath  once  l"^-^^^ 
otlered  himself  for  our  sins,  and  now  sitteth  on  the  right  hand  of  God  the  Father,  priest 
always  showing  unto  him  what  and  how  great  things  he  hath  suffered  for  us.  j^'^.'^lj-jj.,,, 
And  every  priest  always  maketh  mention  in  his  mass  of  this  oblation  ;  neither  \^fota 
do  we  this  that  we  might  bring  the  same  oblation  into  the  remembrance  of  God,  fioil- 
because  that  he  always,  in  his  presence,  seeth  the  same  ;  but  that  we  should  have  Hemem- 
in  remembrance  this  so  great  love  of  God,  that  he  would  give  his  own  Son  to  ti,rist'» 
death  for  our  sins,  that  he  might  cleanse  and  purify  us  from  all  our  sins.     What  passion 
doth  it  please  God,  that  the  remembrance  of  so  great  love  is  made  by   a  priest,  {JJ^j'jg"' 
who  more  loveth  sin  than  God  ?    Or  how  can  any  prayer  of  such  a  priest  please  goJ,  but 
God,  in  what  holy  place  soever  he  be,  or  what  holy  vestments  soever  he  put  on,  to  man. 
or  what  holy  ))rayers  soever  he  maketh  I    And,  whereas  Christ  and  his  apostles  Pfiestn 
do  command  the  jireaching  of  the  word  of  God,  the  priest.n  now  be  more  bound  more 
to  celebrate   the  mass,   and  more  straitly  bound  to    say  the  cnnonical  hours ;  g"" "J^'J." 
whereat  I  cannot  hut  greatly  marvel.     For  why?    To  obey  tjie  precepts  of  men  corn- 
more  than  the  commandments  of  God,  is  in  etlect  to  hcmour  man  as  (Jod,  and  mandeil 
to  bestow  the  sacrifice  upon  man  which  is  due  unto  God,  and  this  is  also  spiritual  ,,,.j„  ,y' 
fornication.     How,  therefore,  are  ])riests  bound,  at  the  commandment  of  man,  preach- 
to  leave  the  preaching  of  the  word  of  God,  at  whose  commandment  they  are  not  UJ^';,,^"™' 
bound  to  leave  the  celebration  of  the  mass,  or  singing  of  matins  ?  Therefore,  as  it  of  (Jod. 
seemeth.  priests  ought  not,  at  the  commandment  of  any  man,  to  leave  the  preach-  Spiritual 
ing  of  the  word  of  God,  to  which  they  are  bound  both  by  divine  and  apostolical  ("uJJ"*^^' 
precepts.  With  which  agreeth  the  writing  of  Jerome  upon  the  decreUds,  saying 
in  this  wise  ;  '  Let  none  of  the  bishops  swell  with  tlie  iiivy  of  devilish  tempta- 
tion ;  let  none  be  angry,   if  the  priest  do  sometimes  exhort  the  people ;  if  they 
preach   in  the  church,  &c.     For  to  him   that  forbiddeth  me  these  tilings  I  will 
say,  that  he  is  unwilling  that  priests  should  do  those  things  which    be  com- 
manded of  God.    What  thing  is  there  above  Christ?  or  what  may  be  preferred 
before  his  body  and  his  blood  T  ii:c. 

Do  priests  therefore  sin  or  not,  who  bargain  for  money  to  pray  for  the  soul  of  wiieiher 
any  dead  man?     It  is  well   known  that  Jesus  did  whip  those  that  were   buyers  iTx-'st" 
and  sellers  out  of  the  temple,  saying,   '  My  house  shall  be  called  the  house  of  ^.^^n  ,^ 
prayer,  but  you  have  made  the  same  a  den  of  thieves  :'     Tridy  he  cast  not  out  sinR  for 
such  merchants  from  out  of  the  church,  but  because  of  their  sins.     Whereupon  p^^'ed'''^^ 
Jerome,  upon  this  text,  sailh  ;  '  Let  the  priests  be  diligent  and  take  good  heed  in  Jerome, 
this  church,  that  they  turn  not  the  house  of  God  into  a  den   of  thieves.     He 
doubtless  is  a  thief  who  seeketh  gain  by  religion,  and  by  a  show  of  holiness 
studieth  to  find  occasion  of  merchandise.'      Hereupon  the  holy  canons  do  make 
accursed  simoniacal  heresy,   and  do  command  that  those  should  be  deprived  of 
the  priesthood,  who,  for  the  suniassing  or   marvellous  spiritual  grace,  do  seek 
gain  or  money.     Peter  the  apostle  said  to  Simon  Magus,   '  Let  thy  money  and 
thou  go  both  to  the  devil,  which  thinkest   that  the  gifts  of  God  may  be  bought 
for  money.'     Therefore  the  sj)iritual  gifts  of  (Jod  ought  not  to  be  sold. 

Verily  prayer  is  the  spiritual  gift  of  God,  as  is  also  the  preaching  of  the  Word  ScUinc  of 
of  God,  or  the  laying  on  of  hands,  or  the  administration  of  other  the  sacraments,  j'™''*'.'' 
Christ,  sending  fortli  his  disciples  to  preach,  said  imto  them,  '  Heal  ye  the  sick,  |,ie. 
cast  out  devils,  raise  the  dead;  freely  ye  have  received,  freely  give  ye  again.'  If 
the  priest  have  power,  by  his  prayers,  to  deliver  souls  being  in  purgatory  from 

rievourt  pains,  without  doubt   he  hath   received  that  power  freely  from   God. 

low,  thert'fore,  can  he  sell  his  act,  unless  he  resist  the  commandments  of  God, 
of  whom  he  hath  received  that  authority  ?  This  tridy  cannot  be  done  without 
.sin,  which  is  against  the  conunandment  of  God.  How  plainly  spake  Christ  to 
the  Pharisees  and  priests,  saying;  'Woe  be  unto  you.  Scribes  and  Pharisees, 
hypocrites,'  because  ye  have  eaten  the  whole  houses  of  such  as  be  widows  by 
making  long  prayers,  and,  therefore,  have  you  received  greater  damnation.' 
Wherein,  I  nray  you,  do  our  pliajjsees  and  priests  differ  from  them  ?  Do  not 
our  priests  (levour  widows'  houses  and  possessions,  tliat  by  their  long  prayers 


I 


182  THE    STORY    OF  WALTER    BRUTE. 

Richard   they  might  deliver  the  souls  of  their  husbands  from  the  grievous  pains  of  purga- 

^^-        tory  ?    How  many  lordships,  I  pray  you,  have  been  bestowed  upon  the  religious 

~T~r\      men  and  women  to  pray  for  the  dead,  that  they,   by  their  prayer,  might  deliver 

^'^n^      those  dead  men  from  the  pain,  as  they  said,  tliat  they  suifer  in  purgatory,  griev- 

L  ously  tormented  and  vexed?     If  their  prayers  and  speaking  of  holy  words  shall 

Religious  not  be  able  to  deliver  themselves  from  pain,  unless  they  have  good  works,  how 
men  and  g^^ll  other  men  be  delivered  from  pain  by  their  prayers,  who,  whilst  they  lived 
devourers  here,  gave  themselves  over  to  sin  ?  Yea,  peradventure  those  lordships  or  lands, 
of  wi-  which  they  gave  unto  the  priests  to  pray  for  them,  they  themselves  have  gotten 
houses  by  might,  from  other  faithful  men,  unjustly,  and  violently  :  and  the  canons  do 
Praying  say,  that  siu  is  not  forgiven,  till  the  thing  taken  away  wrongfully  be  restored  : 
for  souls  jjQ^y  \]\er\  shall  they  be  able,  who  do  unjustly  possess  such  lordships  or  lands, 
fory.  to  deliver  them  by  their  prayers  from  pain,  who  have  given  to  them  these  lord- 
Evil  got-  ships  or  lands,  seeing  God,  from  the  beginning,  hath  hated  all  extortion  in  his 
ten  lands,  burnt  sacrifices  ?  '  Not  every  one  that  saith  unto  me.  Lord !  Lord !  shall  enter 
bestowed  mto  the  kingdom  of  heaven  :  but  he  which  doth  the  will  of  my  Father  which 
for  pray-  is  in  heaven.'  And  again,  '  Not  the  hearers  of  the  law,  but  the  doers  of  the 
soulfin     law  shall  be  justified.' 

purga.  If,  therefore,  the  words  of  him  that  prayeth,  do  not  deliver  himself  from  sin,  nor 

tory.         from  the  pain  of  sin,  how  do  they  deliver  other  men  from  sin  or  from  the  pain 
of  sin,  when  no  man  prayeth  more  earnestly  for  another  man,  than  for  himself? 
Buying     Therefore  many  are  deceived  in  buying  or  selling  of  prayers,  as  in  the  buying 
and  sell-    of  pardons,  that  they  might  be  delivered  from  pain  ;  when  commonly  they  pay 
ing  of        dearer  for  the  prayers  of  "the  proud  and  vicious  prelates,  than  for  the  prayers  of 
and  par-    devout  women  and  devout  men  of  the  lay-people.     But,  out  of  doubt,  God  doth 
dons  in  _    j^gt  regard  the  person  of  him  that  prayeth,  neither  the  place  in  which  he  prayeth, 
church.^  **  1^01^  his  apparel,  nor  the  curiousness  of  his  prayer,  but  the  humility  and  godly 
Person,     affection  of  him  that  prayeth.     Did  not  the  pharisee  and  the  publican  go  up 
place,  ap-  into  the  temple  to  pray?     The  publican's  prayer,  for  his  humility  and  godly 
Hoslt'y'o"    affection,  is  heard.     But  the  pharisee's  prayer,  for  his  pride  and  arrogancy,  is 
eloquence  contemned.     Consider  that  neither  the  person,  nor  the  place,  nor  the  state,  nor 
of  prayer,  ^jje  curiousness  of  his  prayer,  doth  help  the  pharisee  :  because  the  publican,  not 
garded  of  thinking  himself  worthy  to  lift  up  his  eyes  unto  heaven,  for  the  midtitude  of  his 
God.         sins,  saying,  '  O  God!  be  merciful  unto  me  a  sinner,'  is  justified  by  his  humi- 
lity, and  his   prayer  is  heard.     But  the  pharisee,  boasting  in  his  righteousness, 
is  despised ;  because   God  thrusteth  down  the  proud,  and  exalteth  the  humble 
and  those  that  be  meek.     The  rich  glutton  also,   that  was  clothed  with  purple 
and  silk,  and  fared  every  day  daintily,  prayed  unto  Abraham,  and  is  not  heard, 
but  is  buried  in  pains  and  torments  of  hell-fire.     But  Lazarus,  who  lay  begging 
That         'T't  his  gate,  being  full  of  sores,  is  placed  in  the  bosom  of  Abraham.     Behold  that 
prayer       neither  the  riches  of  his  apparel,  nor  the  deliciousness  of  his  banquets,   nor  the 
doth  more  gorgeousness  of  his  estate,  neither  the   abundance  of  his  riches,  doth  help  any 
ney,  than  thing  to  prefer  the  prayei's  or  petitions  of  the  rich  glutton,  nor  yet  diminish 
for  ehari-  lijg  torments,  because  that  mighty  men  in  their  mightiness,  shall  suffer  torments 
proved,     inightily.     How  dare  any  man,  by  composition,  demand  or  receive  any  thing  of 
another  man  for  his  prayers  ?     If  he  believe  that  he  can,  by  his  prayer,  deliver 
his  brother  from  grievous  pain,  he  is  bound  by  charity  to  relieve  his  brother 
with  his  prayers,   although  he  be  not  hired  thereunto:    but  and  if  he  will 
not  pray  unless  he  be  hired,  then  hath  he  no  love  at  all.     What  therefore 
helpeth  his  prayer  who  abideth  not  in  charity  ?      Therefore  let  him  first  take 
compassion  of  himself  by  prayer,  that  he  may  come  into  charity,  and  then  he 
shall  be  the  better  able  to  help  others.     If  he  believe  not,  or  if  he  stand  in  doubt 
whether  he  shall  be  able  to  deliver  his  brother  by  his  prayer,  wherefore  doth  he 
make  with  him  an  assured  bargain,  and  take  his  money,  and  yet  know  not  whe- 
ther he  shall  relieve  him  ever  a  whit  the  more  or  not,  from  his  pain  ?  I  fear  lest  the 
words  of  the  prophet  are  fulfilled,  saying,    '  From  the  least  to  the  most,  all  men 
apply  themselves  to  covetousness  ;  and  from  the  prophet  to  the  priest,  all  work 
deceitfully.'     For  the  poor  priests  excuse  themselves  of  such  bargaining  and 
selling  of  their  prayers,  saying,    '  The  young  cock  learneth  to  crow  of  the  old 
cock.'     'For,'  say  they,  '  thou  mayest  see  that  the  pope  himself,  in  stalling  of 
bishops  and  abbots,  taketh  the  first  fruits  :  in  the  placing  or  bestowing  of  bene- 
fices he  always  taketh  somewhat,  and  especially  if  the  benefices  be  great.    And 
he  selleth  pardons  or  bulls ;  and,  to  speak  more  plain,  he  taketh  money  for 


IHfc;    CITY     OF     llOMK,     BAUYI.ON.  183 

tliem.      Hisliops,  in  f^iving  orders,  in  lialluwin|(  churches  and  iliuirli-yjirds,  do   Jtuhnrd 
takf  nionoy  ;  in  ecclesiastical  correction  they  take  money  for  the  mitigation  of       ■'^• 
penance;   in  the  grievous  otiences  of  convict  persons,  money  is  required,  and      »    ,^~ 
caused  to  he  paid.      Ahhots,  monks,  and  <illiir  rchgious  men  that  have  posses-     i..qi 
sion,  will  receive  no  man  into  their  fratcrnitv,  or  make  tlu  in  partakers  of  their       ' 
spiritual   suffrages,  uidess    he   hestow   somewhat   upon   them,  or  ])romise  tluni   StIlinRof 
somewhat.     Curates  and  vicars,   having  sutiiciint  livings  by  the  fillies  of  their  0^,1^°"*' 
parishioners,  yet  in  dirges  and  years-minds,  in  hearing  confessions,  in  weddings  church 
and  burj'ings,  do  recpiire  and  have  money.     The  friars,  also,  of  the  four  orders  .''"J'"*.'., 
of  beggars,  who  think  themselves  to  be  the  most  perfect  men  of  the  church,   do  ciplinc, 
take  money  for  their  prayers,  confessions,  and  huryings  of  the  dead ;  and  when  fraicr- 
they  preach,    they    believe   that  they  shall   have  either  money,  or  some  other  Ji'^^^.^ 
thing  worth  money.      Wh'Tefore  then   be  the  poor  priests  blamed  .'  ought  not  year-  ' 
they  to  be  held  excused,  although  they  take  money  for  their  prayers  by  comj)o-  ""'"ds. 
sition  .'"  Truly,  uie  thinketh,  that  this  e.\cuse  by  other  men's  sins,  doth  not  excuse  gi„ns, 
them,  forasnuieh  as  to  heap  one  mischief  upon  another's  head,  is  no  sufficient  wt<l- 
disehart,'e.     I  would  to  God  that  all  the  buyers  and  sellers  of  si)iritual  sufirasres  !'"'-'!• 

~  ,  ,  •  I  r^        bur  yiiic8, 

would,  with  the  eyes  of  their  heart,   behold  the  ruin  of  the  great  city,  and  the  sennons, 
fall  of  Babylon,  and  that  which  they  shall  say  after  that  fall.     Doth  not  the  pro-  ^<=- 
phot  say,    '  .\nd  the  merchants  of  the  earth  shall    weep  and  mourn  for  her,  •'•Y^P''-' 
because  no  nuiii  shall  buy  any  more  their  merchandise ;  that  is,  their  merchan-  taken  by 
dise  of  gold  and  silver,  and  of  precious  stone,  and  of  pearl,   and  of  silk  and  the  fall  of 
purple  ?'      And  again,  he  saith,  'And  the  merchants  which  were  made  rich  by     *  * 
her,  shall  stand  aloof  for  fear  of  her  torments,  weeping,  mourning,  and  saying, 
Alas!   Alas  !  that  city  Babylon,  that  great  city,  which  was  wont  to  wear  purple, 
white  silk,  crimson,  gold,  pearl,  and  precious  stone,  because  that  in  one  hour  all 
those  riches  are  come  to  nought.'      .-^nd  again;    'And  they  cast  dust   upon 
their  heads,  and  cried  out,  weeping,  and  mourning,  and  saying,  Alas !  Alas  ! 
that  great  and  mighty  city  Babylon,  by  whom  all  such  as  had  ships  upon  the 
sea,  were  made  rich  by  rewards  ;  because  that  in  one  hour  she  is  become  deso- 
late.' 

This  Babylon,  this  great  city,  is  the  city  of  Rome,  as  it  appeareth  by  the  pro-  Tlu- ciiy 
cess  of  the  apostle,  because  the  angel  who  showed  unto  St.  John  the  destruction  ^  ,'\V""'" 
of  the  mighty  harlot  sitting  upon  many  waters,   with  whom  the  kings  of  the 
earth  have  connnitted  fornication,  and  all  they  who  dwell  upon  the  earth  are 
made  drunk  with  the  wine  of  her  whoredom,  said  unto  him,   '  And  the  woman 
which  thou  sawest,  is  the  great  city  which  hath  dominion  above   kings,'  &c. 
[Apoc.  18.]     And  indeed,  in  the  days  of  St.  John,  the  whole  world  was  sub- 
ject to  the  temporal  empire  of  the  city  of  Rome,  and  afterwards  it  was  subject 
to  the  spiritual  empire  or  dominion  of  the  same.     But,  touching  the  temporal  The  icm- 
govemment  of  the  city  of  Rome,  it  is  fallen  already ;  and  so  that  other  also,  for  I"'".'  ="'• 
the  multitude  of  her  spiritual  fornication,  shall  fall.     The  emperors  of  this  city  dominion 
gave  themselves  to  idolatry,  and  would  have  that  men  should  honour  them  as  of  tlu- 
gods,  and  put  all  those  to  death  that  refused  such  idolatry ;  and  by  the  cruelty  \l]^j^l'J 
of  their  torments  all  infidels  gat  the  upper  hand. 

Hereupon,  by  the  image  of  Nabuchadnczzar,  the  empire  of  the  Romans  is 
likened  to  iron,  which  beateth  together,  and  hath  the  mastery  of  all  metals.   And  The 
in  the  vision  of  Daniel,  wherein  he  saw  the  four  winds  of  heaven  to  fight  in  the  [)^"'*,^„ 
main  sea,  and  four  very  great  beasts  coming  out  of  the  sea,  the  kingdom  of  the  the  pro- 
Romans  is  likened  to  the  fourth  terrible  and  marvellous  beast,  which  had  great  p'lecy  of 
iron  teeth,  eating  and  destroying,  and  treading  the  rest  under  his  feet ;  and  this  gjpnifich 
beast  had  ten  horns,  and,  as  Daniel  saith,  he  shall   speak  words  against  the  Rome. 
Most  Highest,  and  shall  tear  with  his  teeth  the  saints  of  the  Most  Highest,  and  he 
shall  think  that  he  may  be  able  to  change  times  and  laws ;  and  they  shall  be 
delivered  into  his  power,  until  a  time,  times,  and  half  a  time.     In  the  Apo-  Thcbcait 
calypse,  St.  John  saw  a  best  coming  out  «)f  the  sea,  having  seven  heads  and  ten  with  sc- 
homs,  and  power  was  given  to  him  to  continue  for  forty-two  months.     So  long  jic"js  in 
time  endured  the  empire  of  the  Romans,  that  is  to  say,  from  the  beginning  of  the  Apoc. 
Julius  Caesar,  who  was  the  first  emperr»r  of  the  Romans,  unto  the  entl  of  Frede-  ?ip"'"^"i 
ric,  who  was  the  last  emperor  of  the  Romans.     Under  this  empire  Christ  suf- 
fered, and  other  martyrs  idso  sufl'ered  for  his  name's  sake.     And  here  is  fallen 
Rome  as  Babylon,  which  is  all  one,  according  to  the  manner  of  speaking  in  the 
Appcalj'pse,  as  touching  the  temporal  and  corporal  power  cf  governing.     And 


184  TIIK    STORY    OK    WALTER    BRUTE. 

liichard    thus  shall  she  fail,  also,  touching  the  spiritual  power  of  governing,   for   tlie 
II-      multitude  of  iniquities,  and  spiritual  fornication  and  merchandise  that  are  com- 
.    ^     mitted  by  her  in  the  church. 

A.  u.  rpj^g  ^ggj.  ^£  ^]jg  image  which  Nabuchadnezzar  saw,  did  betoken  the  empire  o 
____  Rome,  and  part  of  them  were  of  iron,  and  part  of  clay  and  earth.  The  part 
The  feet  (.jjjjj  ^^g  of  iron  fell,  and  the  power  thereof  vanished  away,  because  the 
Image  in  power  thereof  was  at  an  end  after  certain  months.  That  part  of  clay  and  earth 
tiie"  yet  endureth,  but  it  shall  vanish  away  by  the  testimony  of  the  prophets ;  where- 
Nabu-  "^  upon  St.  John  in  the  Apocalypse :  '  After  that,  he  saw  the  part  made  of  iron 
chadnez-  rising  out  of  the  sea,  to  which  each  people,  tribe,  and  tongue,  submitted  them- 
zarsigni-  selves.  And  he  saw  another  beast  coming  out  of  the  earth,  which  had  two 
Rome.      horns  like  to  the  horns  of  a  lamb,  and  he  spake  like  a  dragon,  and  he  vanquished 

the  first  beast  in  his  sight.' 
The  beast      This  beast,  as  seemeth  me,  doth  betoken  the  clay  and  earthen  part  of  the  feet 
with  two  of  ^jjg  image,  because  he  came  out  of  the  earth ;  for  that  by  terrene  help  he  is 
like  the     made  the  high  and  chief  priest  of  the  Romans  in  the  church  of  Christ,  and  so 
Iamb,        from  below  he  ascended  on  high.     But  Christ  ft-om  heaven  descended,  because 
the"sptri-  ^^^^  ^^^  '^^'^"  ^^^  God,  and  Author  of  every  creature,  became  man ;  and  he  that 
tual  do-     was  Lord  of  lords,  was  made  in  the  shape  of  a  servant.     And  although  in  the 
minion  of  heavens  the  company  of  angels  minister  unto  him,  he  himself  ministered  or 
served  on  earth,  that  he  might  teach  us  humility,  by  which  a  man  ascendeth 
into  heaven,  even  as  by  pride  a  man  goeth  down  into  the  bottomless  pit.     This 
beast  hath  two  horns  most  like  a  lamb,  because  he  challengeth  to  himself  both 
the  priestly  and  kingly  power  above  all  other  here  on  earth.     The  Lamb,  that 
is  Christ,  is  a  king  for  ever  upon  the  kingly  seat  of  David,  and  he  is  a  priest  for 
ever  after  the  order  of  Melchisedec,  but  his  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world,  but  the 
kingdom  of  this  beast  is  of  this  world,  because  those  that  be  under  him  fight  for 
Jesus  is     him.  And,  as  Jesus  is  Christ  two  manner  of  ways,  because  '  Christus'  is  as  much 
Christ       j^g  ^o  gjjy^  'Unctus,'  he  verily  was  anointed  king,  and  anointed  priest:  so  this 
ner  of       beast  saith,  that  he  is  chief  king  and  priest.     Wherefore  doth  he  call  himself 
ways,  as    Christ ;  because  Christ,  knowing  that  before,  said,  '  Many  shall  come  in  my 
Priest^"    name,  saying,  I  am  Christ,  and  shall  deceive  many.'      And  thus,  because  he  is 
both  king  and  priest,  he  challengeth  to    himself  the  double  sword ;    that  is, 
The  dou-  the  corporal  sword,  and  the  spiritual  sword.     The  corporal  sword    is  in  his 
bie  sword  right  hand,  and  the  spiritual  sword  is  in  his  right  eye,  by  the  testimony  of 
pope.**       Zachariah.     But  he  speaketh  subtilely,  like  a  dragon,    because,  by  the  testi- 
mony of  Christ,  he  shall  deceive  many,  as  the  Apocalypse  witnesseth.      He  did 
great  wonders,  that  also  he  might  make  more  fire  to  come  from  heaven  into  the 
earth  in  the  sight  of  men,  that  he  might  deceive  those  that  dwell  upon  the 
earth,  because  of  the  wonders  that  are  permitted  him  to  do  in  the  sight  of  the 
beast ;  and  he  overcame  the  first  beast  which  ascended  out  of  the  sea,  for  that 
beast  challenged  unto  himself  authority  of  government  over  the  whole  world. 
He  hath  put  to  death  and  tormented  those  that  resist  his  commandments,  and 
would  be  honoured  as  a  god  upon  the  earth.     The  bishop  of  Rome  saith,  that 
the  whole  world  ought  to  be  in  subjection  unto  him :  those  that  be  disobedient 
unto  his  commandments  he  putteth  in  prison,  and  to  death,  if  he  can.     If  he 
cannot,  he  excommunicateth  them,  and  commandeth  them  to  be  cast  into  the 
devil's  dungeon.     But  he  that  hath  no  power  over  the  body,  much  less  hath  he 
power  over  the  soul.     And  ti'uly  his  excommunication,  or  the  excommunication 
of  any  priest  under  him,  shall  at  that  time  little  hurt  him  that  is  excommuni- 
cated, so  that  the  person  of  him  that  is  excommunicated  be  not  first  excommu- 
nicated of  God,  through  sin. 

And  thus  it  seemeth  a  truth  unto  me,  that  God  thus  turns  their  blessings  into 
bishop  of  '^ui'sings,  because  they  give  not  due  glory  unto  his  name  :  so  when  they  unjustly 
Rome  excommunicate  and  curse,  he  turneth  their  cursings  into  blessings.  Also  the 
seeketh  bishop  of  Rome  doth  make  men  to  worship  him  as  God,  because  the  special 
shipped  sacrifice  that  God  doth  require  of  us,  is  to  be  obedient  unto  him  in  keeping 
as  God.  his  commandments.  But  now  the  pope's  commandments  be  commanded  to  be 
mand"  '^^P*'  ^"^  ''^  '^^P''  ^"  '^^'*y  ^^^^>  ^^^  ^^e  Commandments  of  Christ  are  contemned 
ments  and  rejected.  "Thus  sitteth  the  bishop  of  Rome  in  the  temple  of  God,  showing 
more  re-  himself  as  God,  and  extolling  himself  above  all  which  is  called  God,  or  wor- 
thln  shipped  as  God.  But  in  his  fall  he  shall  be  revealed,  because  every  kingdom 
ciuisfs     divided  in  itself  shall  be  made  desolate.     He,  teaching  a  truth,  is  the  head  of  the 


THK     Sr.MUKK    OK    TllK     BliAST.  185 

church;  but  the  prophet,  teaching  a  lie.  is  the  tail  of  the  dragon.     He,  seducing  Richard 

the  worhl,  shall  be  acknowledged  to  he  the  verity  of  the  doctrine  of  Christ ;  but       '^ 

after  he  is  known,   he  shall   be  n-jected  and  nougiit  esteemed.      He  givttli   to      .    .. 

small  and  great,  rich  and  poor,  free  and  bond,  marks  in  their  right  hands  and     i-jmi 

in  tlieir  foreheads,  that  no   man  should  buy  or  sell,  but  those  that  shall  have  the  — L! — !_ 

marks  of  the  name  of  the  beast,  or  that  look  to  have  of  him  some  recompense, 

small,  mean,  or  great,  or  else  the  number  of  his  name,  which  nund)er.is  three 

hundred.     The  pojie  saith,  that,  in  the  administration  of  every  sacrament,  he 

doth  imprint  certain  characters  or  marks,  into  the  soul  of  him  that  receivcth  it. 

In  baptism,  he  saith,  that  he  doth  imprint  into  the  soul  of  him  that  is  baptized, 

a  mark  that  cannot  be  wiped  out;  and  so  likewise  in  other  sacraments.     And  I  In  every 

know  that  in  a  sacrament  are  two  thiiitrs,  that  is,  the  sacramental  sign,  and  the  '*"'"'■''•' 

...  Ill  '^     .  ,  ,     .      ^.       .  mint  two 

spiritual -grace  represented  by  the  same  sign  :  the  sacramental  sign  is  given  to  things. 

man  by  man,  but  the  spiritual  grace  is  given  by  Christ. 

Wherefore,  although  a  vicious  or  naughty  ])riest  doth  i)aptize  any  man,  if  he  that 
is  ba])tized  or  his  parents  (if  he  be  a  child)  do  ask  with  faithful  meaning,  baptism, 
and  do  mean  fiitlifullv  hereafter  to  observe  the  words  of  baptism,  he  is  iis  well 
baptized,  as  if  lu-  were  baptized  of  ever  so  virtuous  a  priest.  So  also  the  sin- 
ner, who,  with  all  his  heart,  is  sorry  for  his  sins,  and  doth  ask  faithfully  mercy 
of  God,  is  as  well  absolved  by  a  vicious  j)riest,  as  by  a  virtuous  :  because  the 
Lambof(iod  which  taketh  away  the  sins  of  the  world,  wipeth  away  inwardly 
our  sins  by  his  grace,  because  he  is  the  bishop  and  pastor  of  our  souls.  All 
other  priests  do  outwardly  work  absolution,  who  know  not  for  a  certainty  whe- 
ther tliey  have  absolved  or  not :  so  also  is  it  in  the  others,  because  that  the 
grace  of  the  sacrament  is  given  by  God,  and  the  sacramental  sign  by  man.  In 
giving  of  orders  the  chief  bishop  doth  imprint  the  corporal  mark  ;  but  of  the 
spiritual  marks  I  know  none,  unless  a  man  will  say,  that  by  receiving  the  ordel 
he  hath  some  belief  that  he  may  work  some  things  pertaining  to  that  order 
which,  before  the  receiving  of  the  order,  he  could  not.  Hut  this  one  thing  is 
certain,  that  none  in  the  church  ought  to  sell  spiritual  merchandise  (of  which 
things  we  have  spoken  before),  unless  he  have  the  mark  of  the  beast.  My  cavcat 
counsel  is,  let  the  buyer  be  aware  of  those  marks ;  because  that  after  the  f;dl  of  emptor 
Babylon,  '  If  any  man  hath  worshipped  the  beast  and  her  image,  and  hath  re- 
ceived the  mark  upon  his  forehead,  ami  upon  his  hand,  he  shall  drink  of  the 
wine  of  (Jod's  wrath,  which  is  mixed  with  the  wine  in  the  cup  of  his  anger,  and 
he  shall  be  tormented  in  fire  and  brimstone  in  the  sight  of  the  holy  angels,  and 
in  the  sight  of  the  Lamb:  and  the  smoke  of  their  torments  shall  evermore  as- 
cend, although  he  look  for  a  recompense,  small,  mean,  or  great,  of  tlie  beast,  or 
else  the  number  of  his  name.'  The  beast,  doubtless,  doth  recompense  his  There- 
friends  with  his  small  reward :  that  is,  with  great  gifts  and  benefices  corporal  :  wards  o( 
with  a  mean  reward,  that  is,  with  great  spiritual  gifts,  in  authority  of  blessing,  '  *  ^**' 
loosing,  binding,  praying,  and  exercising  other  spiritual  works;  and  with  his 
greatest  reward,  which,  after  they  be  dead,  maketh  them  to  be  honoured  on 
earth  among  the  saints.     The  number  of  his  name,  according  to  the  opinion  of  Thenum- 

some  men,  is.  '  Dux  cleri'   the  '  captain  of  the  clergy,'  because  by  that  name  he  is  I';^'''  "^ 

1  .         1       •    .  .  1  11  ■      •     1         i"     1         1    •    •        •       'he  n.inie 

named,  and  maketh  his  name  known,  and  that  name  is  six  hundred  and  sixty-six.  of  the 

This  is  my  opinion  of  the  beast  ascending  out  of  the  earth,  and  shall  be,  beast, 
until  such  time  as  I  shall  be  of  the  same  beast  better  instructed.  And  although  ^'"^  *^'''' 
this  beast  doth  signify  the  Roman  bishops,  yet  the  other  cruel  beiust  ascending 
out  of  the  sea  doth  signify  the  Roman  emperors.     And  although  the  drjigon, 
being  a  cruel  bejist,  and  the  false  prophet  giving  the  mark,  must  be  thrown 
into  the  lake  of  fire  and  brimstone  to  be  tormented  for  ever,  I  would  have  no 
man   to  judge;  but   I    leavi- such  things  altogether  to  the   final  judgment   of 
Chri.Ht  to  be  deternui\ed.      Hut   Martin,   the  pope's  confessor,   who  maketh  the  More 
chronicle  of  the  emperors  and  popes,  reciteth  many  errors  of  the  popes,  more  w'^ked 
horrible  and  abominable  than  of  the  emperors  :   for  he  speaketh  of  the  idolatrous  ,|,nn  em- 
popes,  heretical,  simoniacal,  and  popes  that  were  murderers,  that  used  necro-  perors. 
mancy  and  witchcraft,  that  were  fornicators,  and  defiled  with  all  kind  of  vice. 
IJut  I  have  partly  declared  how  the  f)ope's  law  is  contrary  to  Christ's  law,  and 
how  he  saith.  that  he  is  the  chief  vicar  of  Christ  on  earth;  and  in  his  deeds  is 
contrary  to  Christ,  and  doth  forsake  both  his  doctrine  and  life.     I  cannot  see 
who  else  may  be  so  well  .Viitichrist,  and  a  seducer  of  tlie  people,  for  there  is 
not  a  greater  pestilence  than  a  familiar  enemy. 


186 


THE    STORY     OF    WALTER    BRUTE. 


Hichurd 
II. 

A.D. 

1391. 

Matters 
of  idola- 
try. 

Images. 

Oaths, 
how  far 
tolerable. 


Whether 
temporal 
goods  may 
be  taken 
away  from 
ecclesias- 
tical 
persons 
otFending. 


Popes 
take  from 
emperors, 
their  be- 
nefactors, 
temporal 
domi- 
nion, 

when  they 
offend:  er- 
go, much 
more  may 
emperors 
take  from 
popes 
temporal 
dominion 
when  they 
offend. 
A  pro- 
phecy of 
Walter 
Brute, 
that  tem- 
poral 
goods 
shall  be 
taken 
away 
from  the 
clergy  for 
the  multi- 
tude of 
their  biiis. 


As  concerning  idols  and  the  worshipping  of  them,  I  think  of  them  as  Moses, 
Solomon,  Isaiah,  Jeremy,  and  the  rest  of  the  prophets  did,  who  all  spake 
against  the  making  of  images,  as  also  the  worshipping  of  images.  And  faithful 
David,  full  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  saith,  '  Let  all  those  be  confounded  that  wor- 
ship images,  and  that  rejoice  in  idols.'  And  again  he  saith,  '  Let  them  be 
made  like  unto  them  tliat  make  them,  and  all  such  as  put  their  trust  in  them.' 
Wherefore  I  pray  God  that  this  evil  come  not  upon  me,  which  is  the  curse  of 
God  pronounced  by  David  the  prophet  :  nor  ^vill  I  be,  by  God's  grace,  either  a 
maker  or  else  a  worshipper  of  images. 

As  concerning  oaths,  I  believe  and  obey  the  doctrine  of  the  Almighty  God, 
and  my  master  Jesus  Christ,  who  teacheth,  that  christian  men,  in  affirmation 
of  a  trutli,  should  pass  the  righteousness  of  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  of  the  Old 
Testament,  or  else  he  excludeth  them  from  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  For  he 
saith,  '  Unless  your  righteousness  exceed  the  righteousness  of  the  Scribes  and 
Pharisees,  ye  cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven.'  And  concerning  oaths 
he  saith,  '  It  hath  been  said  to  them  of  old  time,  Thou  shalt  not  forswear  thy- 
self, but  shalt  perform  unto  the  Lord  those  things  which  tliou  knowest.  But 
I  say  unto  you,  Thou  sliaU  not  swear  at  aU,  neither  by  the  heaven,  nor  yet  by 
the  earth,  &c.  But  let  your  communication  be  yea,  yea,  nay,  nay  ;  for  what- 
soever shall  be  more  than  this,  proceedeth  of  evil.'  Therefore,  as  the  perfec- 
tion of  the  ancient  men  of  the  Old  Testament  was,  not  to  forswear  themselves, 
so  the  perfection  of  christian  men  is,  not  to  swear  at  all,  because  they  are  so 
commanded  of  Christ,  whose  commandment  must  in  no  case  be  broken,  although 
the  city  of  Rome  is  contrary  to  this  doctrine  of  Christ,  even  as  in  many  things 
she  is  found  contrary  to  herself. 

As  touching  the  taking  away  of  temporal  goods,  from  those  that  are  ecclesi- 
astical persons  offending  '  habitualiter,'  by  such  as  are  temporal  lords,  I  will 
not  affirm  any  thing  to  be  lawful  in  this  matter  (as  in  other  matters  before)  tliat 
is  not  agreeable  to  charity.  And  that,  because  it  is  a  hard  matter  for  a  man  to 
take  another  man's  goods  from  him  without  breaking  of  charity ;  because,  perad- 
venture,  he  that  taketh  away  is  the  more  moved  to  such  manner  of  taking 
away,  by  reason  of  the  desire  he  hath  to  those  goods,  which  he  endeavoureth  to 
take  away  ;  or  else,  because  of  some  displeasure  or  hatred  to  the  person  from 
whom  he  goeth  about  to  take  away  those  goods,  than  that  he,  from  whom  tliose 
goods  be  taken,  should  be  amended.  Therefore,  unless  he  that  taketh  away  be 
only  moved  of  charity  to  the  taking  away  of  such  goods,  I  dare  not  affirm  that 
such  taking  is  lawful.  And  if  such  taking  away  proceed  of  charity,  I  dare  not 
judge  it  unlawful;  because  the  bishop  of  Rome,  who  received  his  temporal 
dominion  of  the  emperor,  when  the  emperor  rebelled  and  was  not  obedient  unto 
him,  deprived  him  from  his  temporal  jurisdictions :  how  much  more  then  may 
temporal  lords  do  the  same,  who  have  bestowed  upon  them  many  temporal 
dominions  and  lordships,  only  to  the  intent  that  they  might  the  better  intend 
to  serve  God,  and  keep  his  commandments?  Now  if  they  perceive  that  they 
be  against  the  laAvs  of  God,  and  that  they  be  over-busily  occupied  about  worldly 
matters,  I  cannot  see  but  that  they  may  well  enough  take  from  them  tliose 
temporal  goods,  which  to  a  good  purpose  they  gave  them.  But  if,  in  time  to 
come  after  this,  those  that  be  temporal  lords  shall  take  from  ecclesiastical 
persons  such  temporalties,  let  him  that  desireth  to  understand  this,  read  the 
prophet  Ezekiel,  in  the  chapter  of  the  shepherds  of  Israel  who  fed  themselves 
instead  of  their  flock,  and  also  let  him  read,  in  the  Apocalypse,  of  the  fall  of  Ba- 
bylon :  let  him  also  read  the  pope's  decretals  against  heretics ;  and  in  those  he 
shall  find,  that  the  taking  away  of  the  temporalties  from  the  clergy,  shall  come 
to  pass  for  the  multitude  of  their  sins. 

Thus,  reverend  father,  have  I  made  mine  answer  to  the  matter  whereof  I  am 
accused :  beseeching  )'ou  that  as  I  have  been  obedient  to  your  desire,  and  that 
even  as  a  son,  declaring  unto  you  the  secrets  of  my  heart  in  plain  words, 
although  rudely,  so  I  desire  to  know  your  opinion,  and  crave  your  fatherly 
benevolence,  that  now  your  labour  may  be  for  my  instruction  and  amendment, 
and  not  to  accusation  and  condemnation.  For  like  as  in  the  beginning,  I  have 
promised  you,  if  any  man,  of  what  state,  sect,  or  condition  soever  he  be,  can 
show  me  any  error,  in  any  of  my  writings,  by  the  authority  of  holy  Scripture, 
or  by  any  probable  reason  grounded  on  the  Scriptures,  I  will  receive  his 
information  willingly  and  humbly. 


Ills     KK-APri:.\KAN('K    ANU    SUBMISSION'.  187 

After   all   the  aforesaid  tliin<,'s   were  exhibited  and  given  by   the  ituhard 


II. 


aforesaid  Walter  Brute,  untu  the  said  hislioj)  of  Merefunl,  he  further 
appointed  to  the  same  Walter,  the  third  ihiy  of  the  month  of  Oeto-    A.  J>. 
ber,  at  tiereford,  with  the  eontinuanee  oftlie  days  following,  to  hear 
his  opinion  :  whieh  third  day  now  at  hand,  being  Friday,  a.u.  130.'i,  )Jj^'" 
the  said  Walter  Brute  apjjeared  before  him,  sitting  in  commission  in  aKaiu 
the  eathedral  ehureh  of  Hereford,  at  six  o'cloek,  or  tiiereabout,  having  manded 
for  his  assistixnts  in  the  same  place,  divers  prelates  and  abbots,  and  a  com-^' 
twenty  baeiielors  of  divinity,  whereof  twelve  were  monks,  and  two  mission 
doctors  of  the  law.     Amongst  these  wa.^  Nicliohis  Hereford,  aecom-  uponWai- 
panied  with  many  other  prelates  and  worshipful  men,  anil  wise  gra-  n'ci'^m 
duates  in  sunilry  faculties.     Now  was  the  aforesaid  Walter  apposed  ]l">=^°\^ 

PI-  •   •  f  ■  1  11  1-  T-<  there  also 

or  his  writings  aforesaid,  and  the  contents  therein.     Lamest  were  prtsent. 
they  in  picking  out  of  those  writings,  his  heresies,  and  in  sliowing  his 
schisms,  sundry  errors,  and  divers  other  things.    Now,  after  they  had  writinRs 
continued  all   that  day  and  the  two  days  following   (that  is,  Friday,  uruu-  e" 
Saturday,  and  Sunday),  in  their  informations  and  examinations  against  ^""n*^''- 
the  same  Walter  Brute,  the  same  Walter  Brute  submitted  himself  to 
the  determination  of  the  church,  and  to  the  coneetion  of  tiie  said 
John,  the  bishoj),  as  it  appeareth,  wcjrd  for  word,  in  a  scroll  written  in 
the  English  tongue  :  the  tenor  of  which  scroll  is  as  followeth  :  — 

I,  Walter  Brute,  submit  myself  principally  to  the  evangcly  of  Jesus  Christ,  The  tenor 
and  to  tlie  determination  of  holy  kirk,  and  to  the  general  councils  of  holy  kirk,  ofhissub- 
And  to  the  sentence  and  detemiination  of  the  four  doctors  of  holy  writ ;  that  is,  ''"*'"°"- 
Augustine,  Ambrose,  Jerome,  and  Gregory.    And  I  meekly  submit  me  to  your 
correction,  as  a  subject  ought  to  his  bishop. 

This  scroll,  as  before  is  recited,  in  the  English  tongue,  the  afore-  Thesuu- 
said  Walter  Bnite  read,  with  a  loud  and  intelligible  voice,  at  the  Openly" 
cross  in  the  churchyard,  on  Monday ;  tliat  is  to  say,  the  sixth  of  the  „''.'',?'  ^ 
said  month  of  October,  before  the  sermon  made  unto  tlie  people,  in 
presence  of  the  said  bishop  of  Hereford  and  others  above  written,  as 
also  other  barons,  knights,  and  noblemen,  and  clergy,  and  also  a  great 
multitude  of  people.     After  whieh  reading  of  the  scroll,  the  aforesaid 
Thomas  Crawlay,    bachelor  of  divinity,   made  a  sermon   unto  the 
people,   and  took  for  his  theme   the   words  of  the  apostle   to   the 
Romans,  chapter  xi.,  that  is  as  followeth  :  "  Be  not  over-wise  in  your 
own  conceits,  but  stand  in  fear,"  &c. 

Out  of  these  declarations  and  writings  of  Walter  Brute,  the  bishop, 
with  the  monks  and  doctors  above  rehearsed,  did  gather  and  tb^w  out 
certain  articles,  to  the  number  of  thirty-seven,  which  they  sent  to  the 
tmivcrsity  of  Cambridge  to  be  confuted,  unto  two  learned  men. 
Master  Colwill  and  Master  Newton,  bachelors  of  divinity:  which 
Masters  Colwill  and  Newton  did  both  labour  in  the  matter,  to  the 
uttennost  of  their  cunning,  in  replying  and  answering  to  the  said 
thirty-seven  articles. 

Besides  them  also,  William  Woodford,  a  friar,  who  wrote  likewise 
against  the  articles  of  Wieklitf,  labouring  in  the  same  cause,  made  a 
solemn  and  a  long  tractation  ;  compiling  the  articles  of  the  said  Brute, 
to  the  number  of  nine  and  twenty  :  all  which  treatises  as  I  wish  to 
come  to  the  reader's  hand,  that  the  slendemess  of  them  might  be 
known  ;  so  it  may  happen  perca.«ie,  that  the  same  being  in  my  hands 


188  LETTER  OF  A  CERTAIN  LOLLARD 

uichard  may  hereafter  be  further  publislietl,  with  other  like  tractations  more, 
^^'      as  convenient  time,  for  the  prolixity  thereof,  may  hereafter  better  serve 

A.  D.    than  now. 

^'"^91.  What,  after  this,  became  of  this  Walter  Brute,  or  what  end  he 
had,  I  find  it  not  registered;  but  like  it  is,  that  he  for  this  time 
escaped.  Certain  other  wTitings  I  find,  moreover,  which,  albeit  they 
bear  no  name  of  this  Walter,  nor  of  any  certain  author,  yet,  because 
they  are  in  the  same  register  adjoined  to  the  history  of  him,  I  thought, 
therefore,  most  fit  here  to  be  inserted :  of  which  one  was  a  letter  sent 
to  Nicholas  Hereford,  a  little  above  specified,  who  being,  at  the  first, 
a  great  follower  of  John  WicklifF,  as  appeareth  before,  was  now  in 
the  number  of  them  who  sat  upon  this  Walter,  as  is  above  recorded. 
The  copy  of  this  letter,  bearing  no  name  of  any  special  author,  but 
only  as  sent  by  a  certain  Lollard,  as  the  register  doth  term  him,  is 
written  in  manner  and  form  as  followeth. 

The  Copy  of  a  Letter  sent  to  Master  Nicholas  Hereford,  by  a 
Lollard,  as  in  the  Register  it  is  said. 
Forasmuch  as  no  man  that  putteth  his  hand  to  the  plough  and  looketh  back, 
is  meet  for  the  kingdom  of  God,  as  our  Saviour  Christ  saith,  what  marvel  is  it, 
although  Master  Nicholas  Hereford,  who  at  the  first  (by  the  visitation  of  the 
Spirit  of  God,  peradventure)  put  his  hand ;  that  is,  gave  his  diligence  unto  the 
plough ;  that  is,  to  the  sowing  of  tlie  word  of  God  and  holy  Scripture,  as  well 
in  preaching  as  in  doing  good  works,  is  now  so  blind  and  unskilful  to  expound 
the  Scripture,  that  he  knoweth  not  what  is  understood  by  the  kingdom  of 

Nicoiai-     heaven  ?     Truly,  it  is  no  marvel,  O  thou  that  art  master  of  the  Nicolaitans  ! 

tans.  who,  like  Nicholas,  the  most  false  deacon,  hast  left  or  forsaken  the  infallible 
knowledge  of  the  holy  Scripture :  for  the  true  knowledge  of  the  theological 
verity  is  shut  up  as  well  from  thee,  as  from  all  the  other  Nicolaitans  following 
thy  conditions  ;  forasmuch  as  thou  goest  not  in  by  the  door  to  expound  the  same 
evangelical  verity. 

Therefore,  when  thou  didst  recite  the  other  day,  first,  the  pharisaical  and 
hj^oci-itical  woe  (nothing  at  all  to  any  purpose),  thou  shouldst  have  said  justly 
in  this  sort,  both  of  thyself,  and  other  thy  followers  and  religious  Antichrists : 
'  Woe  be  unto  tis  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  which  shut  up  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ;' 
that  is  to  say,  the  true  knowledge  of  the  holy  Scriptures  before  men,  by  our 
false  glosses  and  crooked  similitudes :  and  neither  we  ourselves  enter  into  the 
same  kingdom  or  knowledge,  nor  suffer  others  to  enter  into  it.  Wherefore,  it 
seemeth  unto  the  faithful  sort,  that  wrongfully,  falsely,  and  without  any  reve- 
rence, ye  have  expounded  that  text  of  Gregory  [1  qusest.  1],  that  is  to  say, 
'  Quicunque  studet,'  &:c.  For  this  is  the  true  understanding  of  the  same  : 
knowing,  first,  that  there  be  some  priests  after  the  thing  and  name  only  ;  and  it 
doth  show  that  this  is  true,  that  whosoever  studieth  to  receive  the  holy  order 
by  giving  of  money,  he  is  not  a  priest,  '  Secundum  rem  et  nomen  ;'  but,  to 
say  the  tnith,  he  desireth  to  be  called  a  priest ;  that  is,  to  be  a  priest  '  Secun- 
dum nomen  tantum.'  And  such  a  priest,  who  is  a  priest  in  name  only,  is  no 
priest ;  no  more  than  St.  Maiy  painted  is  St.  Mary ;  or  a  false  doctor  a  doctor, 
but  no  doctor ;  and  a  man  painted  is  not  a  man,  but  no  man.  And  thus  such  a 
priest  in  name  only,  is  not  a  priest ;  because  all  faithful  men  do  firmly  beheve 
with  St.  Gregory,  that  no  man  buying  the  holy  orders,  may  then  be  called  a 
priest;  as  he  saith  [1  quasst.  1],  'They  that  buy  or  sell  holy  orders  can  be 
no  priest.'  Whereupon  is  written,  'anathema  dandi,'  and  'anathema  acci- 
piendi;'  that  is,  'simoniacal  heresy.'  Audit  followeth,  '  How,  therefore,  if 
they  be  accursed  and  not  blessed,  can  they  make  others  blessed  ?  And  when 
they  be  not  in  the  body  of  Christ,  how  can  they  either  receive  or  dehver  the 
body  of  Christ?  He  that  is  accursed,  how  can  he  bless?'  as  though  he  would 
say.  It  is  impossible.  As  pope  Urban  saith  [1  queest.  1],  'Si  quis  a  simonia- 
cis,'  &c.,  '  They  that  wilUngly  know  and  suffer  themselves  to  be  consecrated, 
nay  rather  execrated,  of  those  that  are  infected  with  simony,  we  judge  that 


ro    MASTKK     M(  MOi.AS    IIKRKKOUI).  189 

tlieir  consecration  is  altogether  void."      Also  pope   Leo  [2  qu.i'st.  1  J,   saitJi  in    nicharit 
this  wise :   '  Grate,  if  it  he  not  freely  given  and  received,  is  not  grace.     Spiri-       f^ 
tiial  nsnrers  do  not  receive  freely  :  therefore,  they  receive   not  the  sj)iritual      ,^  y 
grace,  which  specially  worketh  in  the  ecclesiastical  orders.     If  they  receive  it    1391 

not,  they  iiave   it  not  :   if  they  have   it   not  freely,  liiey  canhot  give  it  freely.  

And  by  tJiis  it  is  more  clear  tlum  the  light,  tliat  they  who  know  so  much,  and 
receive  orders  by  spiritual  usury  or  simony,  arc  neither  ])riests  nor  deacons, 
neither  afler  the  manner  nor  character.  For  if  such  character  or  mark  were 
otherwise  given  in  giving  orders,  it  were  recpiisite  always  that  there  should  he 
a  certain  grace  imprinti-d  in  the  man ;  hut  tlure  is  no  such  grace  given  or  im- 
])rinted,  as  afore  is  manifest.  Therefore  tliere  is  no  sucli  ciiaracter  to  he  feigned. 
Therefore  such  character  or  mark  abideth  not  in  him,  forasmuch  as  he  never 
had,  nor  hath,  the  same.'  And  yet  furtliermore,  in  the  same  place,  '  What 
then  do  the  simoniacal  prelates  give .''  And  lie  maketh  answer,  '  Truly  even 
that  which  they  have,  as  the  spirit  of  lying,  llow  prove  we  this?  Because 
that  if  it  be  the  spirit  of  verity,  as  the  same  verity  doth  testify  from  whom  it 
Cometh,  it  is  freely  received.'  And  it  foUoweth  for  tlie  whole  purpose  no  doubt, 
'  it  is  convicted  to  be  the  spirit  of  lying,  which  is  not  freely  received.' 

By  this  it  appcareth  luaiiifestly  to  the  faithful  sort,  that  those  who  wittingly 
and  simoniacally  are  made  priests,  forasmuch  as  they  receive  not  the  character 
of  the  Lord,  but  oidy  the  spirit  of  lying,  and  the  mark  of  Simon  Magus  and  of 
Judiis  the  traitor,  they  be  not  priests,  either  according  to  the  mark  or  manner : 
and  such  do  no  more  make  the  sacraments  of  church,  than  other  laymen  may 
in  the  time  of  necessity  ;  nor  yet  so  truly,  during  their  heretical  naughtiness. 
And  yet  indeed,  brother  mine,  '  uni  voce  natura,'  but  yet  '  a'qui  voce  in  mori-  Urothcr 
bus;'  I  do  not  wTite  thus  sharply  unto  you,  through  anger,  or  any  imperfect  i""a'"ro-. 
hate,  but  through  the  perfect  hate  of  your  horrible  heresy,  and  denjnng  the  ^ers  no 
faith  of  Christ,  that  I  may  say  with  David  in  the  Psalm,  '  Perfecto  odio  oderam,'  brother. 
&c.    .Vnd  I  am  very  sorry  for  you,  that  you,  who,  in  times  past  have  excellently 
well  and  fruitfidly  preached  the  gospel  in  the  pulpit,  do  now  as  well  fail  in  the 
congniity  of  the  Latin  tongue,  as  in  the  other  science  natural.     For,  as  it  was 
heard,  thrice  in  one  lecture  you  said  '  appetitis;'  that  is  to  say,  pronouncing 
the  middle  sj'Ilable  long,  which  thing  not  only  the  masters,  but  also  the  young 
scholars  understood.     And  many  other  faults  there  were  in  grammar,  which  for 
shame  I  dare  not  recite.     I  send  unto  you  these  five  conclusions. 

1.  It  is  an  infallible  verity  that  the  words  of  the  four  chief  doctors,  e.xpound-  Kve  «oti- 
ing  the  holy  Scripture  according  to  the  verity  which  the  words  do  pretend,  are  '^'"*''"'*- 
to  be  holden  and  kept. 

2.  He  who  importeth  any  equivocation  out  of  any  of  the  doctors  expounding, 
for  the  colouring  of  his  text,  his  equivocation  is  always  to  be  left. 

3.  No  perversion  of  any  reprobate  is  able  to  turn  the  congregation  of  the 
elect  from  the  faith,  because  all  things  that  sliall  come  to  pass,  are  eternally  in 
God,  devised  and  ordained  for  the  best  unto  the  elect  Cliristians. 

4.  Like  as  the  mystical  body  of  Christ  is  the  congregation  of  all  the  elect,  so 
Antichrist,  mystically,  is  the  church  of  the  wicked  and  of  all  the  rejirobates. 

5.  The  conclusions  of  Swinderby  be  agreeable  to  the  faith  in  every  ])art. 

This  letter  was  thus  subscribed  :  '  By  the  Spirit  of  God,  sometime 
visiting  you.' 

Besides  this  epistle  above  prefixed,  there  is  also  found  annexed  to 
the  same,  a  deviec  of  another  cerUiin  letter  counterfeited  under  the 
name  of  Lucifer,  Prince  of  Darkness,  writini,'  to  the  pope  ami  all 
popish  prelates,  persecuting;  the  true  and  ri,i,dit  church  with  all  mi^ht 
and  main,  to  maintain  their  pride  and  domination  in  this  earth,  under 
a  colourable  pretence  and  visor  of  the  catholic  church  and  succession 
apostolical :  which  letter,  althoui^h  it  seemeth  in  some  authors  to  be 
ascribed  to  Ocham,  above  mentioned  ;  yet,  because  I  find  it  in  the 
same  register  of  the  church  of  Hereford  contained,  and  inserted 
among  the  tractations  of  Walter  Brute,  and  devised,  as  the  register 


190 


A    LETTER    OF    LUCIFER 


Richard  saitli,'  by  tlie   Lollards,  I    tliought  no   nieeter  place   than    here  -to 
^^'      annex  the  same  ;  the  tenor  whereof  thus  proceedeth  in  the  following 
words. 


A.D. 
1391. 


The  dif- 
ference 
between 
the 

bishops 
of  the 
primi- 
tive, and 
of  the 
later 
church. 
Humility 
edifieth. 
Pride  de- 
stroy eth. 


Placing  of 
proud 
prelates 
the  cause 
of  all  mis- 
chief. 


The 
church 
never 
well  go- 
verned, 
since  the 
devil's  of- 
fers 
were 
taken  by 
the 

church- 
men. 

Pride  in 
prelates 

noted. 


The  Device  or  Counterfeit  of  a  certain  Letter,  feigned  under  the 
name  of  Lucifer,  Prince  of  Darkness,  written  to  the  proud  and 
persecuting  Prelates  of  the  Popish  Clergy. 

I,  Lucifer,  prince  of  darkness  and  profound  heaviness,  emperor  of  the 
mysteries  of  the  king  of  Acheron,  captain  of  the  dungeon,  Erebus  king  of  hell, 
and  controller  of  the  infernal  fire  :  To  all  our  children  of  pride,  and  companions 
of  our  kingdom ;  and  especially  to  our  princes  of  the  church  of  this  latter  age 
and  time  (of  which  our  adversary  Jesus  Christ,  according  to  the  prophet,  saith, 
'  I  hate  the  church  or  congregation  of  the  wicked)'  send  greeting ;  and  wish 
prosperity  to  all  that  obey  our  commandments,  as  also  to  those  that  be  obedient 
to  the  ^laws  of  Satan  already  enacted,  and  that  are  diligent  observers  of  our 
behests,  and  the  precepts  of  our  decree. 

Know  ye  that  in  times  past  certain  vicars  or  vicegerents  of  Christ,  following 
his  steps  in  miracles  and  virtues,  living  and  continuing  in  a  beggarly  life,  con- 
verted, in  a  manner,  the  whole  world  from  the  yoke  of  our  tyranny  unto  their 
doctrine  and  manner  of  life,  to  the  great  derision  and  contempt  of  our  prison- 
house  and  kingdom,  and  also  to  the  no  little  prejudice  and  hurt  of  our  juris- 
diction and  authority ;  not  fearing  to  hurt  our  fortified  power,  and  to  offend 
the  majesty  of  our  estate.  For  then  received  we  no  tribute  of  the  world,  nei- 
ther did  the  miserable  sort  of  common  people  rush  at  the  gates  of  our  deep  dun- 
geon as  they  were  wont  to  do,  with  continual  pealing  and  rapping ;  but  then  the 
easy,  pleasant,  and  broad  way,  which  leadeth  to  death,  lay  still  without  great 
noise  of  trampling  travellers,  neither  yet  was  trod  with  the  feet  of  miserable 
men.  And  when  all  our  courts  were  without  suitors,  hell  then  began  to  howl ; 
and  thus,  continuing  In  great  heaviness  and  anguish,  was  robbed  and  spoiled : 
which  thing  considered,  the  impatient  rage  of  our  stomach  could  no  longer 
suffer,  neither  the  ugly  reckless  negligence'  of  our  great  captain-general  could 
any  longer  endure ;  but  we,  seeking  remedy  for  the  time  that  should  come 
after,  have  provided  us  of  a  very  trim  shift.  For,  instead  of  these  apostles  and 
other  their  adherents  who  draw  by  the  same  line  of  theirs,  as  well  in  manners 
as  doctrine,  and  are  odious  enemies  unto  us,  we  have  caused  you  to  be  their  suc- 
cessors, and  put  you  in  their  place,  who  be  prelates  of  the  church  in  these  latter 
times,  by  our  great  might  and  subtlety,  as  Christ  hath  said  of  you  :  '  They 
have  reigned,  but  not  by  me.'  Once  we  promised  unto  him  all  the  kingdoms 
of  the  world,  if  he  would  fall  down  and  worship  us ;  but  he  would  not,  saying, 
'My  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world,'  and  went  his  way  when  the  multitude 
would  have  made  him  a  temporal  king.  But  to  you,  truly,  who  are  fallen  from 
the  state  of  grace,  and  that  serve  us  in  the  earth,  is  that  my  promise  fulfilled ; 
and  by  our  means  all  terrene  things  which  we  have  bestowed  upon  you,  are 
under  your  government :  for  he  hath  said  of  us,  as  ye  know,  '  The  prince  of 
this  world  cometh,'  &c.  and  hath  made  us  to  reign  over  all  children  of  imbe- 
lief.  Therefore  our  adversaries  before  recited  did  patiently  submit  themselves 
unto  the  princes  of  the  world,  and  did  teach  that  men  should  do  so,  saying, 
'  Be  ye  subject  to  every  creature  for  God's  cause,  whether  it  be  to  the  king,  as 
most  chief :'  and  again,  '  Obey  ye  them  that  are  made  rulers  over  you,'  &c. 
For  so  their  master  commanded  them,  saying,  '  The  kings  of  the  heathen 
have  dominion  over  them,'  &c.  But  I  think  it  long  till  we  have  pom-ed  our 
poison  upon  the  earth,  and  therefore  fill  yourselves  full. 

And  now,  be  ye  not  only  unlike  those  fathers,  but  also  contrary  unto  them  in 
your  life  and  conditions ;  and  extol  yourselves  above  all  other  men.  Neither 
give  ye  to  God  that  which  belongeth  to  him,  nor  yet  to  Caesar  that  which  is 
his:  but  exercise  you  the  power  of  both  the  swords,^  according  to  our  decrees, 
making  yourselves  doers  in  worldly  matters,  fighting  in  our  quarrel,  entangled 


(1)  Second  edition,  "  Ougle  rechelous  negligence." — Ed. 

(2)  The  double  jurisdiction  of  the  pope's  two  swords  cometh  of  Lucifer. 


TO    THE    POPK    AND    HIS    PRELATES.  1<)1 

with  secular  labours  and  business.     And  climb  yc,  by  little  and  little,  from  the   jnchard 
miserable  state  of  poverty,  unto  the  highest  seats  of  all  honours,  and  the  most       H- 
princely  places  of  dignity  by  your  devised  practices,  and  false  and  deceitful      .    . 
wiles  and  subtlety:  that  is,  by  hypocrisy,  flatteiy,  lying,  perjury,  treasons,  de-     inq-i 
ceits,  simony,  and  other  greater  wickedness  than  which  our  infernal  furies  may       ' 
devise.     For  after  ye  have  by  us  been  advanced  thither  where  ye  would  be,  yet  Popish 
that  doth  not  suffice  you,  but,  as  greedy  shavelings,  more  hungry  than  ye  were  pitlates 
before,  ye  suppress  the  poor,  scratch  and  rake  together  all  that  comes  to  hand,  {o  Go" 
perverting  and  tui'ning  everj'  thing  topsyturv)';  so  swollen,  that  ready  ye  are  to  norC^sar 
burst  for  pride,  living   like  lechers  in   all   coi-porai  delicateness,  and  by  fraud  ^^^J"  "^^* 
directing  all  your  doings.      You  challenge  to    yourselves  names    of  honour  belongeth 
in  the  earth,  calling  yourselves  lords,  holy,  yea  and  most  holy  persons.  to  God 

Thus,  either  by  violence  ye  raven,  or  else  by  ambition  subtilelyje  pilfer  away,  ^^sar 
and  wrongfully  wrest,  and  by  false  title  possess,  those  goods,  which,  for  the  sus-  Donjinos 
tentation  of  the  poor  members   of  Christ  (whom  from  our  first  fall  we  have  Sanctos. 
hated;,  were  bestowed  and  given,  consuming  them  as  ye  yourselves  list,  and  there-  Sanctis- 
with  ye  cherish  and  maintain  an  innumerable  sort  of  lechers  and  strumpets, 
with  whom  ye  ride  pompously,  like  mighty  princes,  far  otherv\nse  going  tlian 
those  poor  beggarly  priests  of  the  primitive  church.    For  I  would  ye  should  build 
yourselves   rich  and  gorgeous  palaces :  yea,   and  fare  like  princes,  eating  and 
diinking    the    daintiest  meats    and   pleasantest    wines    that   may  be    gotten : 
hoard  and  heap   together  an    infinite  deal   of   treasure,  not  like  to  him  that 
said,   'Gold  and  silver  have  I  none  :'  serve  and  fight  iOr  us  according  to  your 
wages!     O  most  acceptable    society  or  fellowship,  promised  to  us  by  the  pro- 
phet, and  of  those  fathers  long  ago  reproved :  whust  that  Christ  called  thee 
'  the    synagogue  of  Satan,'  ana  likened  thee  to   the  mighty  whore  which  com- 
mitted fornication  with  the  kings  of  the  earth,  the  adulterous  spouse  of  Christ, 
and  of  a  chaste  person  made  a  strumpet.     Thou  hast  left  thy  first  love  and  hast 
cleaved  unto  us,  O  our  beloved  Babylon  !    O  our  citizens,  who  from  the  trans- 
migration of  Jerusalem  come  hither!  we  love  you  for  yoiir  deserts;  we  rejoice 
over  you,  who  contemn   the  laws  of  Simon  Peter,  and   embrace  the  laws  of 
Simon  Magus  our  friend,  and  have  them  at  your  fingers'   ends;  and  exercise  The  pope, 
the  same  publiclj',  buying  and  selling  spiritual  things  in    the  church  of  God,  successor 
and  against   the   commandment  of  God.     Ye  give  benefices  and  honours  by  gf^"^ 
petition,  or  else  for  money ;  for  favour,  or  else  for  filthy  ser\'ice  :  and  refusing  Peter, 
to  admit  those  that  be  worthy,  to   ecclesiastical  dignities,  and  preferring  those  ^^  "^ 
that  are  unworthy,  you  call  unto  the  inheritance  of  God's  sanctuary,  bawds,  Magus, 
liars,  flatterers,  your  nephews,   and  your  own  children ;   and  to  a  childish  boy 
ye  give  manj'  prebends,  the  least  whereof  ye  deny  to  bestow  upon  a  poor  good 
man  :  ye  esteem  the  person  of  a  man,  and  receive  gifts ;  ye  regard  money  and 
have  no  regard  of  souls.     Ye  have  made  the  house  of  God,  a  den  of  thieves. 

All  abuse,  all  extortion  is  more  exercised  a  hundred-fold  in  your  judgment-  Extor- 
seats,  than  by  any  secular  tyrant.     Ye  make  laws  and  keep  not  the  same ;  and  tion. 
ye  dispense  with  your  dispensations  as  it  pleaseth  you;  you  justify  the  wicked  ^f^f"^ 
for  rewards,  and  you  take  away  the  just  man's  desert  from  him.     And,  briefly,  justice. 
ye  perpetrate  or  commit  all  kind  of  mischief,  even  as  it  is  our  will  j-e  should.      Accep- 
And  ye  take  much  pain  for  lucre's  sake,  in  our   service,  and,  especially,  to  pe''r"ons 
destroy  the  christian  faith ;  for  now  the  lay-people  are  almost  in  doubt  what  Briberj-. 
they  may  believe  ;  because,   if  ye   preach  any  thing  to    them    (as   sometimes,  ^°^'^  "^ 
although  it  be  but  seldom  seen,  and  that  negligently  enough,  even  as  we  would  Destruc- 
have  it),  yet   notwithstanding  they  believe  you  not,  because  they  see  mani-  t'on  if 
festly  that  ye  do  clean  contrary  to  that  ye  say.  Whereupon  the  common  people,  J-™,^ 
doing  as  ye  do  who  have  the  government  of  them,  and  should  be  an  example 
to  them  of  well-doing,  now,  many  of  them,  leaning  to  your  rules,  do  run  head- 
long into  a  whole  sea  of  vices,  and  so,  continually,  a  very  great  multitude  flocketh 
at  the  strong  and  well  fenced  gates  of  our  dungeon.     And  doubtless  ye  send  us 
so  many  day  by  day,  of  every  sort  and  kind  of  people,  that  we  should  not  be 
able  to  entertain  tliem,  but  that  our  insatiable  chaos,  with  her  thousand  ravening 
jaws,  is  sufficient  to  devour  an  infinite  number  of  souls  :  and  thus  the  sovereignty  T^e  popa 
of  our  empire  by  you  hath  been  reformed,  and  our  intolerable  loss  restored,  ^"h'^hgi^i" 
Wherefore,  most  specially  we  commend  you,  and  give  you  most  hearty  thanks ; 
exhorting  you  all,  that  in  any  wise  ye  persevere  and  continue,  as  hitherto  ye 
have  done;  neither  that  you  slack  henceforth  your  enterprize.     For  why?  by 


192 


A    LETTER    OF    LUCIFER. 


A.D. 

1391. 


of  peace 
between 


man  em- 
pire craf- 
tily sub- 
verted by 
him. 


Simony, 


Richard  your  helps,  we  purpose  to  bring  the  whole  world  again  under  our  power  and  do- 
^^-       minion. 

Over  and  besides  this,  we  commit  unto  you  no  small  authority,  to  supply  our 
places  in  the  betraying  of  your  brethren ;  and  we  make  and  ordain  you  our 
vicars,  and  the  ministers  or  Antichrist  our  son,  now  hard  at  hand,  for  whom  ye 
have  made  a  very  ti-im  way  and  passage. 

Furthermore,  we  counsel  you  who  occupy  the  highest  rooms  of  all  others, 
A  feigned  that  you  work  subtilel}^,  and  that  ye  feignedly  procure  peace  between  the  princes 
procurer  of  the  world,  and  that  ye  cherish  and  procure  secret  causes  of  discord.  And, 
like  as  craftily  ye  have  destroyed  and  subverted  the  Roman  empire,  so  suffer  ye 
no  kingdom  to  be  overmuch  enlarged  or  enriched  by  tranquillity  and  peace ; 
lest  perhaps,  in  so  great  tranquillity  (all  desire  of  peace  set  aside),  they  dispose 
themselves  to  view  and  consider  your  most  wicked  works,  suppressing  on 
every  side  your  estate  ;  and  from  your  treasures  take  away  such  substance 
as  we  have  caused  to  be  reserved  and  kept  in  your  hands,  until  the  coming  of 
our  well-beloved  son  Antichrist. 

We  would  ye  should  do  our  commendations  to  our  entirely  beloved  daugh- 
ters, Pride,  Deceit,  Wrath,  Avarice,  Belly-cheer,  and  Lechery,  and  to  all  other 
the  pope's  Qy^  daughters ;  and  specially  to  Simonj%  who  hath  made  you  men,  and  enriched 
you  ;  and  hath  given  you  suck  with  her  own  breasts,  and  weaned  you,  and 
therefore  see  that  you  in  no  wise  call  her  Sin.  And  be  ye  lofty  and  proud,  be- 
cause that  the  most  high  dignity  of  your  estate  doth  require  such  magnificence : 
and  also  be  ye  covetous,  for  whatsoever  ye  get  and  gather  into  your  fardel,  it 
is  for  St.  Peter,  for  the  peace  of  the  church,  and  for  the  defence  of  your  patri- 
mony and  the  crucifix ;  and  therefore  ye  may  lawfully  do  it. 

Ye  may  promote  your  cardinals  to  the  highest  seat  of  dignities  without  any 
let  in  all  the  world,  in  stopping  the  mouth  of  our  adversary  Jesus  Christ, 
and  alleging  again,  that  he  preferred  his  kinsfolks  (being  but  of  poor  and 
base  degree)  unto  the  apostleship  :  but  do  not  you  so,  but  rather  call,  as  ye 
do,  those  that  live  in  arrogancy,  in  haughtiness  of  mind,  and  in  filthy  le- 
chery, unto  the  state  of  wealthy  riches  and  pride ;  and  those  rewards  and  pro- 
motions, which  the  followers  of  Christ  forsook,  do  you  disti-ibute  unto  your 
friends. 

Therefore,  as  ye  shall  have  better  understanding,  prepare  ye  vices  cloaked 
under  the  similitude  of  virtues.  Allege  for  yourselves  the  glosses  of  the  holy 
Scripture,  and  wrest  them  dii'ectly  to  serve  your  purpose :  and  if  any  man 
preach  or  teach  otherwise  than  ye  will,  oppress  ye  him  violently  with  the  sen- 
tence of  excommunication ;  and,  by  your  censures  heaped  one  upon  another, 
by  the  consent  of  your  brethren,  let  him  be  condemned  as  a  heretic,  and  let 
him  be  kept  in  most  strait  prison,  and  there  tormented  till  he  die,  for  a  terrible 
example  to  all  such  as  confess  Christ.  And,  setting  all  favour  apart,  cast  him 
out  of  your  temple  ;  lest,  peradventure,  the  ingrafted  word  may  save  your  souls, 
which  word  I  do  abhor,  as  I  do  the  souls  of  other  faithful  men.  And  do  your 
endeavour,  that  ye  may  deserve  to  have  the  place  which  we  have  prepared  for 
you,  under  the  most  wicked  foundation  of  our  dwelling-place. 

Fare  ye  well,  with  such  felicity  as  we  desire  and  intend,  finally,  to  reward  and 
recompense  you  with. 

Given  at  the  centre  of  the  earth,  in  that  our  dark  place,  where  all  the 
rabblement  of  devils  were  present,  specially  for  this  purpose  called 
unto  our  most  dolorous  consistory ;  under  the  character  of  our  terrible 
seal,  for  the  confirmation  of  the  premises.' 


Promot- 
ing of 
proud 
and 

rich  car- 
dinals. 
Cloaked 
holiness 


Wrest- 
ing of 
Scripture. 


Tyranny 
and  cruel- 
ty of  the 
pope. 


The 

author 

thereof 


Who  was  the  true  author  of  this  poesy  or  epistle  above  written, 
it  is  not  evidently  known  ;  neither  doth  it  greatly  skill.  The  matter 
being  well  considered  on  their  part  who  here  be  noted,  may  minister 
unto  them  sufficient  occasion  of  wholesome  admonition,  either  to 
remember  themselves  what  is  amiss,  or  to  bethink  Avith  themselves 
what  is  to  be  amended.  Divers  other  writings  of  like  argument, 
both  before  and  since,  have  been  devised  ;  as  one,  bearing  the  title 

(1)  Ex  Registro  Herefordensi,  ad  verbum. 


BITI.I,    Ol'    VOVK    BONIFACE    AGAINST    THE    LOLLARDS.  193 

*  Lucifeii  ad  males  Principes  Ecclesiasticos,''  imprinted  first  at  Paris  nuhard 
in  Latin  ;  and  under  the  writing  thereof,  bearing  this  date,  '  Anno  a        " 
Palatii   nostri    fractione,    consortiumquc    nostrorum    substractione,    A.D. 
1351  ;'  "which,  if  ye  count  from   the  passion  of  the  Lord,  reacheth    ^^^^- 
well  to  the  time  of  Wickliff,  a.  d.  1385.  which  was  above  six  years  other 
before  the  examination  of  this  Walter  Brute.  Lucifer. 

There  is  also  another  epistle  of  Lucifer,  Prince  of  Darkness,  '  ad 
Proelatos,''  mentioned  in  the  epistle  of  the  scliool  of  Prague,  to  the 
university  of  Oxford,  set  forth  by  Hulderic  Hutten,  about  a.  d.  (as 
it  is  there  dated)  1370;  which  seemcth  to  be  written  before  this 
epistle. 

Also  Vincentius'  infen-eth  like  mention  of  a  letter  of  the  fiends 
infernal  to  the  clergjTnen,  as  in  a  vision  represented,  four  hundred 
years  before ;  in  which  the  devils  give  thanks  to  the  spiritual  men, 
for  that  by  their  silence,  and  not  preaching  the  gospel,  they  sent  in- 
finite souls  to  hell,  &c. 

Divers  other  letters  also  of  like  device  have  been  written,  and  also 
recorded  in  authors  :  whereunto  may  he  added,  that  one  Jacobus  Car- 
thusiensis,  writing  to  the  bishop  of  Wonns,  alleged  out  of  the  pro- 
phesy of  Hildegard,  in  these  words  :^  "  Therefore,  the  devil  may 
say  of  you  priests  in  himself,  '  The  meats  of  banqueting  dishes, 
and  feasts  of  all  kind  of  pleasure,  I  find  in  these  men ;  yea  also 
mine  eyes,  mine  ears,  my  belly,  and  all  my  veins  be  full  of  their 
frothing,  and  my  breasts  be  full  stuffed  with  their  riches,'' "  &c.  "  Fiu:- 
thermore,"  saith  he,  "  they  labour  every  day  to  rise  up  higher  with 
Lucifer,  but  every  day  they  fall  with  him  more  deeply." 

Hereunto  also  pertaineth  a  story  written,  and  commonly  found  in  xue  devii 
many  old  written  books.     In  the  year  of  our  Lord,  1228,  at  Paris,  in  a  ^1",^^^  ^g 
s}Tiod  of  the  clergy,  there  was  one  appointed  to  make  a  sermon,  who  ciergy- 
being  very  careful  in  his  mind,  and  solicitous  what  to  sav,  the  devil 
came  to  him,  asking  him.  Why  he  was  so  careful  for  his  matter  that 
he  should  preach  to  the  clergy.    Say  thus,  quoth  he,  "  The  princes  The  si- 
of  hell  salute  you,  O  you  princes  of  the   church  !  and  gladly  give  p^dests 
you  thanks,  because  through  your  default  and  negligence  it  cometh  pjeachin" 
to  pass,  that  all  souls  go  down  to  hell."     Adding,  moreover,  that  the gos- " 
he  was  also  enforced  by  the  commandment  of  God  to  declare  the  daineth 
same  ;  yea,  and  that  a  certain  token,   moreover,  was  given  to  the  ™^"^  ^ 
said  clerk  for  a  sign,  whereby  the  synod  might  evidently  see  that  he 
did  not  lie.^ 

The  Bull  of  Pope  Boniface  to  the  Bishop  of  Hereford,  against  the 

Lollards. 

Boniface,  bishop,  servant  of  the  servants  of  God,  to  the  reverend  brother, 
John,  bishop  of  Hereford,  sendeth  greeting  and  apostolical  benediction.  We 
mean  to  wnte  unto  our  well-beloved  son  in  Christ,  Richard,  the  renowned  king 
of  England,  in  form  enclosed  within  these  presents.  Therefore  we  will  and 
command  your  brotherhood,  that,  as  much  as  ye  may,  ye  study  and  endeavour 
yourself  to  exhort  and  induce  the  same  king  to  do  those  things  which  we  have 

(1)  In  Speculo  Hist.  lib.  25.  cap.  89. 

(2)  '  Ideo  et  diabolus  in  scmetipso  de  vobis  sacerdotibus,  ait ;  Escas  epulantium,  convivia  et 
omnes  volupiates  in  istic  invenio ;  sed  et  oculi,  et  aures,  et  venter  meus,  et  venae  mca,  de  syumis 
Ulorum  plenae  sunt,  ^et  ubera  mea  plena  sunt  divitiis  illorum,'  &c. 

(3)  Ex  Catal.  Illj-r.  fol.  546. 

VOL.   III.  O 


194. 


BULL    OF    POPE    BONIFACE    AGAINST    KIXG    RICHAKl)    II. 


Richard 
II. 

A.D. 

1391. 


written  unto  liim,  as  it  is  said  before.  And,  notwithstanding  that  now,  many  a 
day,  you  ougiit  to  have  done  it  of  yourself,  and  not  to  look  that  we  should  per- 
suade you  to  that  eiiect  by  us  written,  you  may  proceed  as  well  by  our  authority, 
as  by  your  own,  forasmuch  as  it  was  given  you  before  :  that  hereafter  we  may 
know  effectually  by  your  diligence,  what  zeal  your  devotion  bcareth  unto  the 
catliolic  faith,  and  to  the  conserving  of  the  ecclesiastical  honour,  and  also  to  the 
execution  of  yoin*  pastoral  office. 

Given  at  Rome  at  St,  Peter's,  the  1 5th  of  the  Kalends  of  October,  the 
sixth  year  of  our  bishop-like  dignity. 


The 
pope's 
wild  bull 
let  loose 
against 
the  ser- 
vants of 
Christ. 
Alack, 
good 
heart, 
what  sor- 
row the 
pope 
taketh. 


Tlie  dra- 
gon here 
spouteth 
out  his 
floods  of 
water  to 
drown  the 
Chris- 
tians. 


Behold 
the  spirit 
of  the 
pope's 
meek 
holiness. 


The  tenor  of  the  Bull,  to  the  renowned  Prince,  Richard,  by  the  grace 
of  God,  King  of  England  and  of  France,  whereof  mention  is  made 
above,  as  followeth,  and  is  thus  much  in  effect. 

To  our  well-beloved  son  in  Christ,  Richard,  the  noble  king  of  England,  we 
send  greeting,  &c.  It  grieveth  us  from  the  bottom  of  our  hearts,  and  our  holy 
mother  the  church  in  all  places  through  Christendom  lamenteth.  We  under- 
stand that  there  be  certain  heresies  sprung  up,  and  do,  without  any  condign  re- 
straint, range  at  their  own  liberty,  to  the  seducing  of  the  faithful  people,  and 
do  every  day,  with  overmuch  liberty,  enlarge  their  indiscreet  bounds.  But  how 
much  the  more  carefully  we  labour  for  the  preservation  both  of  you  and  your 
famous  kingdom,  and  also  for  the  sincerity  of  the  faith,  and  do  with  much  more 
ardent  desire  covet  that  the  prosperous  state  of  the  same  should  be  preserved 
and  enlarged,  the  sting  of  greater  soitow  doth  so  mucli  the  more  penetrate  and 
molest  us,  forasmuch  as  we  see  (alas  the  while  !)  in  out  time,  and  under  the 
regal  presidence  of  your  most  Christian  government,  a  certain  crafty  and  hair- 
brained  sect  of  false  Christians  in  the  same  your  kingdom  to  grow  and  increase  ; 
who  call  themselves,  '  The  poor  men  of  the  treasury  of  Christ  and  his  disciples,' 
and  whom  the  common  people  by  a  more  sound  name  call  '  Lollards'  (as  a  man 
would  say,  '  withered  darnel'),  according  as  their  sins  require  ;  and  perceive  that 
they  may  wax  strong,  and  as  it  were  prevail  against  the  diocesans  of  some  places, 
and  other  governors,  as  they  meet  together,  not  courageously  addressing  them- 
selves against  them  as  they  ought  to  do  (whereof  chiefly,  and  not  undeservedly, 
I  give  them  admonition),  for  that  they  take,  thereby,  the  more  bold  presumption 
and  stomach  among  the  unlearned  people.'  And  forasmuch  as  those  whom  we 
cannot  call  men,  but  the  damnable  shadows  or  ghosts  of  men,  do  rise  up  against 
the  sound  faith,  and  the  holy  universal  church  of  Rome  ;  and  that  very  many  of 
them  being  indifferently  learned,  which  (to  the  confusion  and  eternal  damna- 
tion of  some  of  them)  they  got  sitting  upon  their  mother's  lap,  the  said  church 
of  Rome,  do  rise  up  or  inveigh  against  the  determination  of  the  holy  fathers, 
with  too  much  presiunptuous  boldness,  to  the  subversion  of  the  whole  ecclesi- 
astical order  and  estate ;  and  have  not  been  afraid,  nor  are  yet  afraid,  publicly 
to  preach  very  many  erroneous,  detestable,  and  heretical  articles,  for  that  they 
are  not  put  to  silence,  I'eproved,  driven  out,  rooted  out,  or  otherwise  punished, 
by  any  that  hath  authority  and  the  fear  and  love  of  God.  And  also  they  are 
not  afraid  openly  to  write  the  same  articles,  and  so  being  written,  to  deli\-er  them 
to  your  kingly  parliament,  and  obstinately  to  affirm  the  same :  the  venomous 
and  disdainful  recital  of  which  articles,  upon  good  advisement,  at  this  present 
Ave  pass  over,  lest  the  sufferance  of  such  sensuality  might  fortune  to  renew  the 
wound  that  reason  may  heal.  Yet  notwithstanding,  lest  so  great  and  contagious 
an  evil  should  escape  unpunished,  and  that  without  deserved  vexation ;  and, 
also,  that  it  might  not  get  more  heart,  and  wax  more  strong,  we,  therefore,  (ac- 
cording to  what  our  office  and  duty  is,  where  is  such  negligence  and  sluggish- 
ness of  our  prelates,  being  present  where  this  thing  is),  do  commit  and  give  in 
commandment  to  our  reverend  brethren,  the  archbishops  of  Canterbury  and 
York,  by  other  our  letters,  that  they  stand  up  in  the  power  of  God  against  this 
pestilent  and  contagious  sect,  and  that  they  lively  persecute  the  same  in  form  of 
law  ;  root  out  and  destroy  those,  that  advisedly  and  obstinately  refuse  to  withdraw 
their  foot  from  the  same  stumbling-block,  any  restraint  to  the  contrary  notwith- 
standing.    But,  because  the  assistance,  counsel,  favour,  and  aid  of  your  kingly 


(1)  As  though  no  learning  were  but  in  the  church  of  Rome. 


THE    king's    commission    AGAINfST    THE    FRIARS.  195 

estate  and  highness  are  requisite  to  the  execution  of  the  premises,  we  require,  Richard 
exhort,   and  beseech  the  same  your  princely   higliness,  by  the  bowels  of  the       ^^- 
mercy  of  Jesus  Christ,  by  his  holy  faith,  by  your  own  salvation,  by  the  benefit     a   r\ 
that  to  all  men  is  common,  and  by  the  prosperity  assured  to  evei-y  man  and     loni" 
woman,  that  not  only  your  kingly  severity  may  readily  show,  and  cause  to  be 


showed  unto  our  archbishops  and  their  commissaries  (in  this  behalf  requiring  the  -The 
aforesaid  due  execution)  convenient  aid  and  favour,  as  otherwise  also  to  cause  jesus 
them  to  be  assisted  ;    but  that  also  you  will  enjoin  your  magistrates  and  justices  Christ  be 
of  assize  and  peace  more  straitly,  that  of  their  own  good  wills  they  execute  the  J^^'g  p' 
authoritj-,  committed  unto  men,  with  all  severity,  against  such  damned  men,  ac-  the 
cording  as  they  are  bound  by  the  ofiice  which  they  are  put  in  trust  with  :  against  ''"wels  of 
those,  I  mean,  who  have  determined  obstinately  to  dolilo  themselves  in  their  fufi  of'^'^ 
malice  and  sins,  those  to  expel,  banish,  and  imprison,  iind  there  so  long  to  keep  tyranny, 
them,  till  condign  sentence  shall  pronounce  them  worthy  to  sutler  punishment. 
For  your  kingly  wisdom  seeth  that  such  as  they  be,  do  not  only  deceive  poor 
simple  souls,  or  at  least  do  what  they  can  to  deceive  them,  but  also  bring  their 
bodies  to  destruction,  and,  further,  prepare  confusion  and  ruinous  fall  unto  their 
temporal  lords.     Go  to,    therefore,  my  sweet  son,  and  endeavour  yourself  to  Help  the 
work  so  in  this  matter  as  luidoubtedly  we  trust  you  will :  that,  as  this  firebrand  P?pe  ata 
(burning  and  flaming  oversore)  began  imder  your  presidence  or  government :  else  he  is 
so,  under  your  severe  judgment  and  virtuous  diligence,  might,  favour,  and  aid,  like  to 
there  may  not  one  spark  remain  hid  under  the  ashes,  but  that  it  be  utterly  ex-  ^^jj^  ^ 
tingiiished,  and  speedily  put  out. 

Given  at  om-  palace  of  St.  Peter  at  Rome,  the  15th  of  the  Kalends  of 
October,  in  the  sixth  year  of  our  pontificality. 

The  King's  Commission. 

Richard,  by  the  grace  of  God  king  of  England  and  of  France,  and  lord  of 
Ireland,  to  all   those  unto  whom  these  present  letters  shall   come,  greeting. 
Know  ye,  that  whereas  lately,  at  the  instance  of  the  reverend  father  William, 
archbishop  of  Canterbury,  metropolitan  of  all  England,  and  legate  of  the  apo- 
stolical see,  we,  for  the  redress  and  amendment  of  all  those  who  would  obsti- 
nately preach   or  maintain,   publicly  or  privily,   any  conclusions  of  the  holy 
Scripture  repugnant  to  the  determination  of  our  holy  mother  the  church,  and 
notoriously  redounding  to  the  subversion  of  the  catholic  faith,  or  containing  any 
heresy  or  error,  within  the  province  or  bishopric   of  Canterbury,  have,  by  our 
special  letters  patent,  in    the  zeal  of  the    faith,  given  authority  and  license 
unto  the  aforesaid  .archbishop,  and  to  all  and  singular  his  suftragans,  to  arrest 
all  and  every  of  them  that  will  preach  or  maintain   any  such  conclusions, 
wheresoever   they  may  be  found  ;  and  to  commit  them  either  to  their  own 
prisons,  or  any  other  at  their  own  pleasure,  and  to  keep  them  in  the  same, 
until  they  repent  them  of  the  errors  and  pravities  of  those  heresies ;  or  till  that 
of  such  manner  of  arrests,  by  us  or  by  our  council  it  should  be  otherwise  deter- 
mined ;  that  is  to  say,  to  every  one  of  them  and  their  ministers  throughout  their 
cities  and  dioceses.     And  now  the  reverend  father  in    God,  John,  bishop  of  xhe  hot 
Hereford,  hath  for  a  certainty  informed  us,  that  although  the  same  bishop  hath,  com- 
according  to  justice,  convinced  a  certain  fellow  named  AVilliam  Swinderb}-,  pre-  cj,a"itv"of 
tending  himself  to  be  a  chaplain,  and  one  Stephen  Bell,  a  learned  man,  and  hath  the 
pronounced  them  heretics,  and  excommunicate,  and  false  informei's  among  the  ^f^^, 
common  people,  and  hath  declared  the  same  by  the  definitive  sentence  of  the  foj-^ 
aforesaid  bishop,  for  that  they  have  presumed  to  affirm  and  preach  openly, 
in  divers  places  within  the  diocese  of  Hereford,  many  conclusions  or  naught}' 
opinions  notoriously  redounding  to  the  subversion  of  the  catholic  sound  faith, 
and  tranquillity  of  our  kingdom :  the  same  bishop  notwithstanding,  neither  by 
the  ecclesiastical  censures,  neither  by  the  force  and  strength  of  our  commission, 
was  able  to  revoke  the  aforesaid  William  and  Stephen,  nor  yet  to  bridle  the 
malice  and  obdurate   contumacy  of  them  :  for  that  they,  after  they  were  upon 
such  heretical  pravity  convicted  by  the  same  bishop  (to  the  intent  they  might  Furiso 
delude   his  judgment  and  justice),  conveyed  themselves,  by  and  by,  unto  the  ne  com- 
borders  of  Wales,  with   such  as  were  their  factors  and  accomplices,   keeping  I'lajf^,,, 
themselves  close,  unto  whom  the  force  of  our  said  letters  doth  in  no  wise  ex- 
tend.   Whereupon  the  said  bishop  hath  made  supplication  unto  us,  that  we  will 

o  2 


196  LETTER    Ol'    KIMG    RICHARD    AGAINST    WAI,TER    BRUTE. 

Richard  vouchsafe  to  provide  a  sufficient  remedy  in  that  behalf.  We  therefore,  wlio 
^^-  always,  by  the  help  of  Almighty  God,  are  defenders  of  the  faith,  willing  to 
withstand  such  presumptuous  and  perverse  enterprises  by  the  most  safe  way 
'  ■  ^'  and  means  we  may,  give  and  commit  full  power  and  authority  to  the  aforesaid 
bishop  and  to  his  ministers,  by  the  tenor  of  these  presents,  to  arrest  or  take,  or 
cause  to  be  arrested  or  taken  the  aforesaid  William  and  Stephen,  in  any  place 
within  the  city  and  diocese  of  Hereford  and  our  dominion  of  Wales,  with  all 
the  speed  that  may  be ;  and  to  commit  them  either  to  our  prison,  or  else  to  the 
prison  of  the  same  bishop,  or  any  other  prison  at  their  pleasure,  if  such  need  be, 
and  there  to  keep  them  safe.  And  afterwards,  unless  they  will  obey  the  com- 
mandments of  the  church,  with  diligence  to  bring  them  before  us  and  our  coun- 
cil, or  else  cause  them  to  be  brought ;  that  we  may  detennine  for  their  further 
punishment,  as  we  shall  think  it  requisite  and  convenient  to  be  done  by  the  ad- 
Pseudo-  vice  of  our  council,  for  the  defence  and  preservation  of  the  catholic  faith.  And 
catholica  that  the  aforesaid  William  and  Stephen,  being  succoured  by  the  aid  of  their 
"^^^  fautors  or  favourers,  should  not  be  able  to  fly  or  escape  to  their  accustomed  start- 
ing holes,  and  that  the  sharpness  of  their  pains,  so  aggravated,  may  give  them 
sufficient  cause  to  return  to  the  lap  again  of  their  holy  mother  the  church ;  we 
straitly  charge  and  command  all  and  singular  our  sheriffs,  bailiffs,  barons,  and 
all  other  our  officers  in  the  city  and  diocese  of  Hereford,  and  in  many  other 
places  being  within  our  dominion  of  Wales,  by  the  tenor  of  these  presents,  that, 
from  time  to  time,  where  they  think  it  most  meet,  they  cause  it  openly  to  be 
proclaimed  in  our  name,  that  none,  of  what  state,  degree,  pre-eminence,  kind  or 
other  condition  he  shall  be,  do  cherish,  openly  or  secretly,  the  aforesaid  William 
and  Stephen,  vmtil  the  time  that  they  repent  them  of  their  heresies  and  errors, 
and  shall  be  reconciled  unto  the  holy  church  of  God :  neither  that  any  person 
or  persons  be  believers,  favourers  or  receivers,  defenders,  or  in  any  case  wit- 
tingly instructors  of  the  said  William  or  Stephen,  or  any  other  of  the  residue  of 
the  heretics  that  are  to  be  convinced,  upon  the  forfeiture  of  all  that  ever  they 
have.  And  that  also  they,  giving  their  attendance,  be  obedient  and  answerable 
to  the  aforesaid  bishop  and  his  deputies  in  this  behalf  for  the  execution  of  the 
premises :  and  that  they  certify  us  and  our  council  distinctly  and  plainly,  from 
time  to  time,  of  the  names  of  all  and  singular  persons,  who  shall  fortune  to  be 
found  culpable  in  this  behalf,  under  their  seals.  In  witness  whereof,  we  have 
caused  these  our  lettei's  patent  to  be  made. 

Witness  ourself  at  Westminster,  the  ninth  day  of  March,  in  the  fifteenth 
year  of  our  reign. 

Farrington. 

Another  Letter  of  King  Richard,  against  Walter  Brute  and 

others. 

Richard,  by  the  grace  of  God,  king  of  England  and  of  France,  and  lord  of 
Ireland,  to  his  beloved  and  faithful  John  Chaundos,  knight;  John  Eynford, 
knight ;  Renold  de  la  Bere,  knight ;  Walter  Deveros,  knight ;  Thomas  de  la 
Bare,  knight;  William  Lucy,  knight;  Leonard  Hakeluke,  knight;  and  to  the 
mayor  of  the  city  of  Hereford,  to  Thomas  Oldcastle,  Richard  Nash,  Roger 
Wygmore,  Thomas  Waylwayne,  John  Skydmore,  John  Up-Harry,  Henry  Mor- 
ton, and  to  the  sheriff  of  Hereford,  sendeth  salutations. 

Forasmuch  as  it  is  advertised  us,  that  one  Walter  Brute,  and  other  such  chil- 
dren of  iniquity,  have  damnably  holden,  affirmed,  and  preached,  certain  articles 
and  conclusions,  being  notoriously  repugnant  against  the  holy  Scripture,  of 
which  some  of  them  as  heresies,  and  the  rest  as  errors,  are  finally  by  the  church 
condemned,  and  that,  in  divers  places  within  the  diocese  of  Hereford  and  parts 
near  adjoining,  both  privily,  openly,  and  obstinately,  which  thing  we  perceive 
not  only  to  redound  to  the  subversion,  in  a  manner,  of  the  catholic  faith,  which, 
as  well  we,  as  other  catholic  princes,  ought  of  duty  to  maintain,  but  also  to  fore- 
warn us  of  the  subversion  of  our  faithful  diocesans  :  and  that  the  said  bishop, 
upon  the  good  dehberation  and  advisement  of  a  great  number  of  doctors  in 
divinity,  and  other  learned  and  skilful  men  in  the  Scriptiu-es,  of  special  devotion, 
according  to  his  bounden  duty,  purposed  to  begin  and  make  divers  and  sundry 
processes  by  law  to  be  sent  unto  the  aforesaid  Walter  and  his  accomplices  to 
appear  personally  before  him  and  other  the  doctors  aforesaid  in  the  cathedral 
church  of  Hereford,  the  morrow  after  the   translation  of  St:  Thomas  of  Here- 


KING    RICHAKU    SET    AGAINST    THE    GOSPELLEKS. 


]97 


ford  next  ensuing,  and  to  proceed  in  tlie  same  place  against  the  same  Walter,    Richard 

in  the  foresaid  articles  and  conclusions,  for  the  amendment  of  his  soul:  and : — 

that  they  now  afresh  (because  the  said  Walter  and  others  of  their  retinue,  cleav-     A.  D. 

ing  and  confederating  with  him,  might  not  sutler  condign  pains  according  to     1394. 

their  demerits)  endeavour  themselves  to  make  void  and  frustrate  the  said  godly  ^^T~ 

purpose  of  the  same  bishop,  in  such  correction  and  execution  as  should  have  ^^g  ^oc- 

been  done,  and  with  force  do  resist  and  let  the   same  with  all  the  power  they  trine  of 

may,  to  the  great  contempt  of  us  and  of  our  crown,  and  to  the  breaking  and  ^af^ver 

hurting  of  our  peace,  and  pernicious  example  of  others :  we  do  appoint  you,  against 

and  every  of  vou,  immediately  as  soon  as  this  our  commission  shall  be  delivered  resi'^t- 
•  1     1     1/.  1  1  1  i-        •      ^1        I-  ance, 

unto  you,   m  our  benalt   and  name,  to  make  open  proclamation  m  the  uiocese  i,^^,,  j^ 

and  parts  aforesaid,  where  ye  shall  think  it  most  meet  and  convenient :  that  no  this  nice 
man  be  so  hardy  henceforth,  of  what  state  or  condition  soever  he  shall  be,  within  J^J', 
the  diocese  and  parts  aforesaid,  upon  pain  of  forfeiture  of  all  that  ever  he  hath, 
to  make  or  levy  any  conventicles,  assemblies,  or  confederacies,  by  any  colour ; 
or  that  they  presume  to  attempt  to  procure  any  other  thing,  whereby  our  peace 
may  be  hurt  or  broken,  or  that  the  same  bishops  and  doctors  aforesaid  may  be 
by  any  means  molested,  or  let,  in  the  execution  of  such  correction  as  is  to  be 
done,  according  to  the  canonical  sanctions ;  and  to  arrest  all  those  whom  ye 
shall  find,  or  take  offending  in  this  behalf,  or  that  keep  themselves  in  any  such 
conventicles ;  and  that  they,  being  committed  to  prison,  be  there  kept,  till  you 
shall  have  other  commandment  from  us  and  from  our  council  for  their  deliver- 
ance ;  and  that  ye  distinctly  and  plainly  certify  us,  and  our  said  council,  of  all 
your  doing  in  this  behalf  under  your  seals,  or  else  the  seals  of  some  of  you.  And 
therefore,  we  straitly  charge  and  command  you  and  every  of  you,  that  ye 
diligently  attend  upon  the  premises,  and  that  in  your  deeds  ye  execute  the  same 
with  all  diligence  and  careful  endeavour  in  the  form  and  manner  aforesaid. 
And  further  we  give  strait  charge  and  commandment  to  all  and  singular  sheriffs, 
mayors,  bailifis,  constables,  and  other  our  faithful  subjects,  by  the  tenor  of  these 
presents ;  that  they  be  attending  upon  you,  counselling  and  aiding  you  and 
every  ot  you,  as  is  meet  and  convenient,  in  the  doing  and  execution  of  the  pre- 
mises. In  witness  whereof,  we  have  caused  these  our  letters  patent  to  be  made. 
Witness  myself  at  Westminster  the  22d  day  of  September,  in  the  seven- 
teenth year  of  our  reign. 

By  the  same  king  and  council. 

Thus  king  Richard,  by  the  setting  on  of  William  Courtney,  arch-  King 
bishop  of  Canterbury  and  his  fello\vs,  taking  part  with  the  pope  and  set'^  ^" 
Romish  prelates,  Avaxed  somewhat  strait  and  hard  to  the  poor  Chris-  \f^'^^^_ 
tians  of  the  contrary  side  of  WicklifF,  as  by  these  letters  above  prefixed  \:^^^l^^ 
may  appear ;  albeit,  during  all  the  life  of  the  said  king  I  find  of  none  wshop 
expressly  by  name  that  suffered  burning.     Notwithstanding  some  p^iat*)! 
there  were,  who,  by  the  aforesaid  archbishop  William  Courtney,  and 
other  bishops,  had  been  condemned,  and  divers  also  abjured,  and  did 
penance  as  well  in  other  places,  as  chiefly  about  the  town  of  Leicester, 
as  followeth  here  to  be  declared  out  of  the  archbishop's  register  and 
records.^ 

At  what  time  the  said  archbishop,  William  Courtney,  was  in  his 
visitation  at  the  town  of  Leicester,  certain  there  were,  accused  and  de- 
tected to  him,  by  the  monies  and  other  priests  in  the  said  town :  the 
names  of  which  persons  there  detected  were,  one  Roger  Dexter, 
Nicholas  Taylor,  Richard  WagstafF,  Michael  Scrivener,  William 
Smith,  John  Henry,  William  Parchmeanar,  and  Roger  Goldsmith, 
inhabitants  of  the  same  town  of  Leicester.  These,  with  others  besides, 
were  denounced  to  the  archbishop  for  holding  the  opinion  of  the  sa- 
crament of  the  altar,  f)f  auricular  confession,  and  other  sacraments, 
contrary  to  that  which  the  church  of  Rome  doth  preach  and  observe : 

(I)  Ex  Rcgist.  \V.  Courtney,  Arcn. Cant. 


198  CEKTAIN    GODLY     PERSONS    OF    LEICESTER 

Richard  all  which  parties  above-named,  and  many  others,  whose  names  are  not 

'. known,  did  hold  these  heresies  and  errors  here  under-written,  and  which 

A.  D.    are  of  the  Romish  church  condemned. 
i;}94. 


I.  That  in  the  sacrament  of  the  altar,  after  the  words  of  consecration,  there 
remaineth  the  body  of  Christ  with  the  material  bread. 

II.  That  images  ought  not  to  be  worshipped  in  any  case,  and  that  no  man 
ought  to  set  any  candle  before  them. 

III.  That  no  cross  ought  to  be  worsliipped. 

IV.  The  masses  and  matins  ought  not,  with  a  high  and  loud  voice,  to  be  said  in 
the  church. 

V.  Tiiat  no  curate  or  priest,  taken  in  any  crime,  can  consecrate,  hear  confes- 
sions, or  minister  any  of  the  sacraments  of  the  church. 

VI.  That  tlie  pope  and  all  prelates  of  the  church  cannot  bind  any  man  with 
the  sentence  of  excommunication,  unless  they  know  him  to  hz  iirst  excommu- 
nicated of  God. 

VII.  That  no  prelate  of  the  church  can  grant  any  pardons. 

VIII.  That  every  lay-man  may,  in  every  place,  preach  and  teach  the  gospel. 

IX.  That  it  is  sin  to  give  any  alms  or  charity  to  the  friars  preacliers,  mino- 
rites,  Augustines,  or  Carmelites. 

X.  That  no  oblation  ought  to  be  used  at  the  funerals  of  the  dead. 

XI.  That  it  is  not  necessary  to  make  confession  of  our  sins  to  the  priest. 

XII.  That  every  good  man,  although  he  be  unlearned,  is  a  priest. 

These  articles  they  taught,  preached,  and  affirmed  manifestly,  in  the 
town  of  Leicester,  and  other  places  adjoining ;  whereupon  the  said 
archbishop  admonished  the  said  Roger  and  Nicholas,  with  the  rest,  on 
the  next  day  to  make  answer  unto  him  in  the  said  monastery  to  the 
aforesaid  articles  :  but  the  aforesaid  Roger  and  Nicholas,  with  the  rest, 
hid  themselves  out  of  the  way,  and  appeared  not.     Whereupon  the 
archbishop,  upon  Allhallows-day,  being  the  first  day  of  November, 
celebrating  the  high  mass  at  the  high  altar  in  the  said  monastery, 
being  attired  in  his  pontificalibus,  denounced  the  said  parties,  with 
all  their  adherents,  fautors,  favourers,  and  counsellors,  to  be  excom- 
Roger,     municated  and  accursed,  who  either  held,  taught,  or  maintained  the 
res'!  ac-    aforcsaid  conclusions  heretical  and   eiToneous ;  and  that,  in  solemn 
with  "^      wise,  by  ringing  the  bells,  lighting  the  candles,  and  putting  out  the 
book, bell,  same  again,  and  throwing  them  down  to  the  ground,  with   other  cir- 
candie.     cumstauces  thereunto  belonging.    Upon  the  morrow  after,  being  AU- 
Souls-day,  he  sent  for  all  the  curates  and  others,  lay-men,  of  the  town 
of  Leicester,  to  inquire  more  diligently  of  the  verity  of  such  matter  as 
they  knew  and  were  able  to  say,  against  any  persons  whatsoever,  con- 
cerning the  aforesaid  articles,  as  also  against  the  parties  before  named 
and  specified  upon  their  oaths ;  denouncing  every  one  of  them  seve- 
rally by  their  names  to  be  excommunicated  and  accursed,  and  causing 
them  also,  in  divers  parish  churches  in  Leicester,  to  be  excommunicated. 
The         And,  further,  the  said  archbishop  interdicted  the  whole  town  of  Lei- 
Leicester  cester,  and  all  the  churches  in  the  same,  so  long  as  any  of  the  afore- 
interdict-  g^^-^j  excommuuicated  persons  should  remain  or  be  Avithin  the  same, 
and  till  all  the  lollards  of  the  town  should  retm'n  and  amend  from  such 
heresies  and  errors,  obtaining  at  the  said  archbishop''s  hands  the  bene- 
fit of  absolution. 
Matilda,        At  length  it  was  declared  and  showed  to  the  said  archbishop,  that 
rrsf.dted  ^^''^^  ^^^  ^  certain  anchoress,  whose  name  was   Matilda,  enclosed 
toappear.  witliiu  the  churchvard    of  St.  Peter's  Church  in  the  said  town  of 


IN    TROUBLE    FOR    THE    TRUTH. THEIR    ABJURATION. 


199 


Leicester,  infected,  as  they  said,  with  the  pestiferous  contagion  of  the  mchard 

aforesaid  heretics  and  loliards :  whereupon,  after  the  said  archbishop '. — 

liad  examined  the  aforesaid  Matilda,  touching  the  aforesaid  conclusions,  A.  D. 
heresies,  and  errors,  and  found  her  not  to  answer  plainly  and  directly  _1_^ 
to  the  same,  but  sophistically  and  subtilely;  he  gave  and  assigned  unto 
her  a  day,  peremptory,  personally  to  appear  before  him  in  the  monas- 
tery of  St.  James,  at  Northampton,  more  fully  to  answer  to  the  said 
articles,  heresies,  and  en-ors,  which  was  the  sixth  day  of  the  said  month 
of  November ;  commanding  the  abbot  of  the  monastery  of  Pratis 
aforesaid,  that  the  door  of  the  recluse,  in  which  the  said  Matilda  was, 
should  be  opened,  and  that  till  his  return  he  should  cause  her  to  be 
put  in  safe  custody.  That  done,  he  sent  forth  his  mandate  against 
the  loliards,  under  this  form. 

The  King's  Process  sent  by  the  Archbishop  Courtney  to  arrest  the 
eight  aforenamed  Lollards. 

William,  by  the  permission  of  God,  &c.  To  his  well-beloved  sons,  the  mayor 
and  bailiffs  of  the  town  of  Leicester  diocese,  greeting.  We  have  lately  received 
the  king's  letters,  gi'aciously  granted  us  for  the  defence  of  the  catholic  faith,  in 
these  words  following,  '  Richard,  by  the  grace  of  God  king  of  England  and  of 
France,'  &c.  We,  on  the  behalf  of  our  holy  mother  the  church,  by  the  king's 
authority  aforesaid,  do  require  you,  that  you  cause  the  same  Richard,  William, 
Roger,  and  the  rest,  to  be  arrested,  and  sent  unto  us;  that  they  with  their 
pernicious  doctrine  do  not  infect  the  people  of  God,  &c. 
Given  under  our  seal,  &c. 

By  another  instrument  also  in  the  same  register  mention  is  made  Maigaret 
of  one  Margaret  Caily,  a  nun,  who,  forsaking  her  order,  was  by  the  nu/'  ^ 
said  archbishop  constrained,  against  her  will,  again  to  enter  the  same, 
as  by  this  instrument  hereunder  ensuing  may  appear. 

Copy  of  a  Letter  of  the  same  Archbishop  respecting  the  re-admission 
of  Margaret  Caily,  a  Nun,  into  the  Monastery  of  St.  Radegond. 

William,  by  the  grace  of  God,  &c.  To  our  reverend  brother  in  God,  John, 
by  the  grace  of  God  bishop  of  Ely,  greeting,  &c.  In  the  visitation  of  our  diocese 
of  Lincoln,  according  to  our  office,  amongst  other  enormities  worthy  reforma- 
tion, we  found  one  sheep  out  of  oiu-  fold  strayed,  and  amongst  the  briers  entangled ; 
to  wit,  Margaret  Caily,  nun  professed,  in  the  monastery  of  St.  Radegond  within 
your  diocese  ;  who,  casting  off  the  habit  of  her  religion,  was  found  in  secular 
attire,  many  years  being  an  apostata,  and  leading  a  dissolute  life.  And  lest 
her  blood  should  be  required  at  our  hands,  we  have  caused  her  to  be  taken  and 
brought  unto  you,  being  her  pastor  :  and  straitly  enjoining  you,  by  these  pre- 
sents we  do  command,  that  you  admit  the  same  Margaret  again  into  her  afore- 
said monastery,  although  returned  against  her  will,  or  else  into  some  other  place, 
where,  for  her  soul's  health,  you  shall  think  most  convenient;  and  that  from 
henceforth  she  be  safely  kept,  as  in  the  strait  examination  of  the  same  you  will 
yield  an  account. 

Given  under  our  seal,  &c. 

By  sundry  other  instnunents  also  in  the  same  register  recorded  I  Matilda 
find,  that  the  aforesaid  Matilda,  the  anchoress,  upon  the  strait  exami-  eth!'"'^'* 
nation  and  handling  of  the  aforesaid  archbishop,  before  whom  peremp- 
torily she  was  enjoined  to  appear,  and  till  that  day  of  appearance  taken 
out  of  the  recluse,  and   committed  to  safe  custody,  as  vou  heard. 


200 


TENANCE    ENJOINED    THEM. 


Richard 
II. 

A.D. 
1394. 


William 

Smith, 

Roger 

Dexter, 

and  Alice, 

his  wife, 

abjure. 


retracted  and  recanted  her  aforesaid  articles  and  opinions :  for  which 
she,  being  enjoined  forty  days'"  penance,  vas  again  admitted  into  her 
aforesaid  recluse  in  Leicester.' 

Also,  by  another  letter  of  the  aforesaid  archbishop  to  the  dean  of 
the  cathedral  church  of  our  Lady  of  Leicester  being  registered,  I  find 
that  of  the  number  of  those  eight  persons  before  recited,  whom  the 
archbishop  himself,  at  high  mass,  did  in  his  pontificalibus  so  solemnly 
curse  with  book,  bell,  and  candle  ;  after  certain  process  being  sent  out 
against  them,  or  else  in  the  mean  time  they  being  apprehended  and 
taken,  two  of  them  recanted  their  opinions  ;  to  wit,  William  Smith, 
and  Roger  Dexter.  But,  in  the  mean  time,  Alice,  the  wife  of  the 
said  Roger  Dexter,  taking  hold  of  the  aforesaid  articles  with  her  hus- 
band also,  together  with  the  said  William  Smith,  abjured  the  same.^ 
NotAvithstanding,  whether  they  presented  themselves  willingly,  or  else 
were  brought  against  their  wills,  as  most  like  it  was,  hard  penance 
was  enjoined  them  before  they  were  absolved.  These  be  the  words 
of  the  instrument,^ 


The  man 
ner  of 
thei- 
penance 
enjoined. 


Three 
kisses  of 
the  cross. 


The  col- 
lect of 
Katha- 
rine, Pa- 
ternoster, 
and  Ave 
Maria. 


A  Letter  of  Archbishop  Courtney,  enjoining  Penance  of  certain  good 
Persons  of  Leicester. 

Seeing  our  holy  mother  the  church  denieth  not  her  lap  to  any  penitent 
child  returning  to  the  unity  of  her,  but  rather  profFereth  to  them  the  same  ;  we 
therefore  do  receive  again  the  said  WilHam,  Roger,  and  Alice,  to  grace :  and 
further  have  caused  them  to  abjure  all  and  singular  the  aforesaid  articles  and 
opinions,  before  they  received  of  us  the  benefit  of  absolution,  and  were  loosed 
from  the  sentence  of  excommunication,  wherein  they  were  snarled,  enjoining 
unto  them  penance,  according  to  the  quantity  of  the  crime,  in  form  as  fol- 
loweth :  that  is  to  say,  that  the  Sunday  next  after  their  returning  to  their 
proper  goods,  they,  the  said  William,  Roger,  and  Alice,  holdfng  every  of  them 
an  image  of  the  crucifix  in  their  hands,  and  in  their  left  hands  every  one  of  them  a 
taper  of  wax,  weighing  half  a  pound  weight,  in  their  shirts,  having  no  other 
apparel  upon  them,  do  go  before  the  cross  three  times  during  the  procession  of  the 
cathedral  church  of  our  Lady  of  Leicester ;  that  is  to  say,  in  the  beginning  of 
the  procession,  in  the  middle  of  the  procession,  and  in  the  latter  end  of  the  pro- 
cession; to  the  honour  of  Him  that  was  crucified,  in  memorial  of  his  passion, 
and  to  the  honour  of  the  Virgin  his  mother ;  who  also,  devoutly  bowing  their 
knees  and  kneeling,  shall  kiss  the  same  crucifix,  so  held  in  their  hands  :  and  so, 
with  the  same  procession,  they,  entering  again  into  the  church,  shall  stand,  during 
all  the  time  of  the  holy  mass,  before  the  image  of  the  cross,  with  their  tapers  and 
crosses  in  their  hands ;  and  when  the  mass  is  ended,  the  said  William,  Roger, 
and  Alice,  shall  offer  to  him  that  celebrated  that  day  the  mass. 

Then,  upon  the  Saturday  next  ensuing,  the  said  William,  Roger,  and  Alice, 
shall,  in  the  full  and  public  market,  within  the  town  of  Leicester,  stand  in  like 
manner  in  their  shirts,  without  any  more  clothes  upon  their  bodies,  holding  the 
aforesaid  crosses  in  their  right  hands;  which  crosses  three  times  they  shall, 
during  the  market,  devoutly  kiss,  reverently  kneeling  upon  their  knees  ;  that  is, 
in  the  beginning  of  the  market,  in  the  middle  of  the  market,  and  in  the  end  of 
the  market.  And  the  said  William,  for  that  he  somewhat  understandeth  the 
Latin  tongue,  shall  say  this  anthem  with  the  collect,  '  Sancta  Katharina,'  and 
the  aforesaid  Roger  and  Alice,  being  imlearned,  shall  say  devoutly  a  '  Pater 
Noster,'  and  an  '  Ave  Maria.'  And  thirdly,  the  Sunday  next  immediately  after 
the  same,  the  said  William,  Roger,  and  Alice,  in  their  parish  church  of  the  said 
town  of  Leicester,  shall  stand  and  do,  as,  upon  the  Sunday  before,  they  stood 


(1)  The  bishop's  letter  to  the  magistrates  of  the  town  thus  beginneth :  '  Willielmus  permissioue 
divina,'  &c.  '  dilectis  filiis,'  Sic. 

(2)  These  be  the  words  of  the  instrument :  '  Subsequenter  vero  praefati  Willielmus,  Rogerus.   et 
Alicia  reatus  suos  respicientes.  se  nostro  conspectu  praesentarunt,'  &c. 

(3)  '  Sancta  mater  ecclesia,'  &c. 


PETER    PATESHUL    AGAINST     THE    FRIARS.  SOI 

and  did,  in  the  cathedral  church  of  our  Lady  aforesaid  in  all  things :  wliich  Richard 
done,  the  aforesaid  William,   Roger,  and  Alice,  after  mass,  shall  oifer  to  the       ^^■ 
priest  or  chaplain  that  celehrated  the  same,  with  all  humility  and  reverence,  the     .    ,v 
wax  tapers,  which  they  shall  carry  in  their  hands.     And  because  of  the  cold    ,  „'„ .' 

weather  that  now  is,  lest  the  aforesaid  penitents  might  peradventure  take  some  !__L 

bodily  hurt,  standing  so  long  naked  (being  mindful  to  moderate  partly  the  said 
our  rigour),  we  give  leave,  that  after  their  entrance  into  the  churches  abovesaid, 
while  they  shall  be  hearing  the  aforesaid  masses,  they  may  put  on  necessary  cold 
gai-ments  to  keep  them  from  cold,  so  that  their  heads  and  feet  notwithstanding  weather 
be  bare  and  inicovered.     We,  therefore,  will  and  command  you,  together  and  ^I'^^f^lf,^ 
apart,  that  3'ou  denounce  the  said  William,  Roger,  and  Alice,  to  be  absolved  and  cd ! 
restored  again  to  the  unity  of  our  holy  mother  the  cluirch,  and  that  you  call 
them  forth  to  do  their  penance  in  manner  and  form  aforesaid. 

Given  at  Dorchester,  the  seventeenth  day  of  November,  in  the  year  of 
our  Lord  God  13S9,  and  the  ninth  year  of  our  translation. 

Unto  the  narration  of  these  above-named;  we  will  adjoin  the  story  of  Peter 
one  Peter  Pateshul,  an  Austin  friar,  who,  obtaining  by  the  pope"'s  agahist" 
privilege,  through  the  means  of  Walter  Dis,  confessor  to  the  duke  ^^^  '^"^"• 
of  Lancaster,  liberty  to  change  his  coat  and  religion,  and  hearing  the 
doctrine   of  John  WicklifF  and  others   of  the  same  sort,  began  at 
length  to  preach  openly,  and  to  detect  the  vices  of  his  order,  in  such 
sort  as  all  men  wondered  to  hear  the  horrible  reciting  thereof.     This 
being  brought  to  the  ears  of  his  order,  they,  to  the  number  of  twelve, 
coming  out  of  their  houses  to  the  place  where  he  was  preaching, 
thought  to  have  withstood  him,  by  force  :  among  whom  one  espe- 
cially, for  the  zeal  of  his  religion,  stood  up  openly  in  his  preaching, 
and  contraried  that  which  he  said  ;  Avho  then  was  preaching  in  the 
church  of  St.  Christopher  in  London.     This  when  the  faithful  Lon-  London- 
doners  did  see,  taking  grief  hereat,  they  were  moved  with  great  ire  against 
against  the  said  friar,  thrusting  him  with  his  other  bretliren  out  of  the  '^^  ^"ari 
church,  whom  they  not  only  had  beaten  and  sore  wounded,  but  also 
followed  them  home  to  their  house,  minding  to  have  destroyed  their 
mansion  with  fire  also ;  and  so  would  have  done,  had  not  one  of  the 
sheriffs  of  London,  with  two  of  the  friars  of  the  said  house,  well  known 
and  reported  amongst  the  Londoners,  with  gentle  words  mitigated 
their  rage  and  violence.     After  this,  Peter  Pateshul  thus  disturbed, 
as  is  aforesaid,  was  desired  by  the  Londoners,  forasmuch  as  he  could 
not  well  preach  amongst  them,  to  put  in  writing  that  which  he  had 
said  before,  and  other  things  more  that  he  knew  of  the  friars ;  who 
then,  at  their  request,  writing  the  same,  accused  the  friars  of  murder  The  friars 
committed  against  divers  of  their  brethren.     And  to  make  the  mat-  horrfbit"^ 
ter  more  apparent  and  credible,  he  declared  the  names  of  them  that  "imes. 
were  murdered,  with  the  names  also  of  their  tormentors  ;  and  named, 
moreover,  time  and  place,  where  and  when  they  were  murdered,  and 
where  they  were  buried.  He  affirmed,  further,  that  they  were  Sodomites, 
and  traitors  both  to  the  king  and  the  realm  ;  with  many  other  crimes, 
which  mine  author  for  tediousness  leaveth  off  to  recite.     And  for 
the  more  confutation  of  the  said  friars,  the  Londoners  caused  the  said 
bill  to  be  openly  set  up  at  St.  PauFs  church-door  in  London,  which 
was  there  read  and  copied  out  by  very  many.     This  was  done  in  the 
year  of  our  Lord  1387,  and  in  the  tenth  year  of  king  Richard  IL* 

Thus  it  may  appear,  by  this  and  other  things  above  recited,  how  the 

(I)  Ex  Chrou.  Monachi  Albanensis :  cujus  est  exordium  '  Anno  gratiae  niillesimo,'  Src 


202  COMMENDATION    OF    QUEEN    ANNE. 

Rtchard  gospel  of  Clirist,  preached  by  John  WicklifF  and  others,  began  to 
'      spread  and  fructify  abroad  in  London,  and  in  other  places  of  the 
A-  D-    realm  ;  and  more  it  would  have  done  no  doubt,  had  not  William 
J^94^  Courtney,  the  archbishop,  and  other  prelates,  with  the  king,  set  them 
so  forcibly,  with  might  and  main,  to  gainstand  the  course  thereof : 
Few  or     albeit  as  is  said  before,  I  find  none  who  yet  were  put  to  death  on  that 
burned  in  accouut  during  the  reign  of  this  king  Richard  11. ;  whereby  it  is  to 
ukLrd's  ^6  thought  of  this  king,  that  although  he  cannot  utterly  be  excused 
time.       for  molesting  the  godly  and  innocent  preachers  of  that  time  (as  by 
his  briefs  and  letters  aforementioned  may  appear),  yet  neither  was 
he  so  cruel  against  them,  as  others  that  came  after  him ;  and  that 
which  he  did,  seemed  to  proceed  by  the  instigation  of  the  pope  and 
other  bishops,  rather  than  either  by  the  consent  of  his  parliament,  or 
advice  of  his  council  about  him,  or  by  his  own  nature.     For,  as  tlie 
decrees  of  the  parliament  in  all  his  time  were  constant  in  stopping  out 
the  pope's  provisions,  and  in  bridling  his  authority,  as  we  shall  see, 
Christ  willing,  anon  :  so  the  nature  of  the  king  was  not  altogether  so 
fiercely  set,  if  that  he,  following  the  guiding  thereof,  had  not  stood  so 
Kings      much  in  fear  of  the  bishop  of  Rome  and  his  prelates,  by  whose  im- 
t/mes      portunate  letters  and  calling  on,  he  was  continually  urged  to  do  con- 
brought    trary  to  that  which  both  right  required,  and  will,  perhaps,  in  him 
much      desired.     But  howsoever  the  doings  of  this  king  are  to  be  excused, 
tht'pope.  or  not,  undoubted  it  is,  that  queen  Anne,  his  wife,  most  rightly  de- 
serveth  singular  commendation  ;  who  at  the  same  time,  living  with 
the  king,  had  the  gospels  of  Christ  in  English,  with  four  doctors  upon 
How  the  the  same.     This  Anne  was  a  Bohemian  born,  and  sister  to  Wencis- 
of  w?ck-  ^^^^s  king  of  Bohemia  before  :  who  was  married  to   king  Richard 
i'^bT^  about  the  fifth,  some  say  the  sixth,  year  of  his  reign,  and  continued 
mia.       with  him  the  space  of  eleven  years  :  by  the  occasion  whereof  it  may 
seem  not  improbable,  that  the  Bohemians  coming  in  with  her,  or  re- 
sorting into  this  realm  after  her,  perused  and  received  here  the  books 
of  John  Wickliff,  which  afterwards  they  conveyed   into  Bohemia, 
whereof  partly  mention  is  made  before. 
The  The  said  virtuous  queen  Anne,  after  she  had  lived  with  king 

queen"  Richard  about  eleven  years,  in  the  seventeenth  year  of  his  reign 
-*^""s-  changed  this  mortal  life,  and  was  buried  at  Westminster  ;'  at  whose 
funeral  Thomas  Arundel,  then  archbishop  of  York,  and  lord  chancel- 
lor, made  the  sermon  ;  in  Avhich  sermon,  as  remaineth  in  the  library 
of  Worcester  recorded,  he,  treating  of  the  commendation  of  her,  said 
these  words,  That  it  was  more  joy  of  her  than  of  any  woman  that 
ever  he  knew ;  for,  notwithstanding  that  she  was  an  alien  born,  she 
Queen     had  iu  Euglisli  all  the  four  gospels,  with   the  doctors  upon  them ; 

Anne  had  .  P    . 

the  four    affirming,  moreover,  and  testifying,  that  she  had  sent  the  same  unto 
witrih'e  ^i'^^  to  examine  ;  and  he  said,  they  were  good  and  true.     And,  fur- 
doctors,    ther,  with  many  words  of  praise  he  did  greatly  commend  her,  in  that 
lish.        she,  being  so  great  a  lady,  and  also  an  alien,  would  study  so  lowly 
such  virtuous  books ;  and  he  blamed  in  that  sermon  sharply  the  negli- 
gence of  the  prelates  and  other  men  :  insomuch  that  some  said,  he 
would  on  the  morrow  leave  the  office  of  chancellor,  and  forsake  the 
world,  and  give,  him  to  fulfil  his  pastoral  office,  for  what  he  had  seen 

(U  Ex  fragmento  libri  cujusdam  Wisornensis  Bibliothccn;.    Ex  accomodato  D.   Mat.  Arch. 
Cant. 


CONCLUSIONS    EXHIBITED    TO    THE     PAULlAiMENT. 


203 


and  read  in  those  books ;  and  then  it  had  been  the  best  sermon  that  J^'^-J'^rd 
ever  they  heard. ^ 

In  this  sermon  of  Thomas  Arundel,  tliree  points  are  to  be  con-    A^j^- 

sidered :  first,  the  laudable  use  of  those  old  times  received,  to  have - 

the  Scripture  and  doctors  in  our  vulgar  English  tongue.     Secondly, 
the  virtuous  exercise  and  also  example  of  this  godly  lady,  who  had 
these  books  not  for  a  show  hanging  at  her  girdle  ;  but  also  seemed, 
by  this  sermon,  to  be  a  studious  occupier  of  the  same.     The  third 
thing  to  be  noted  is,  what  fruit  the   said  Thomas,  archbishop,  de- 
clared also  himself  to  receive  at  the  hearing  and  reading  of  the  same 
books  of  hers  in  the  English  tongue.     Notwithstanding,  the  same  Arch- 
Thomas  Arundel,  after  this  sermon  and  promise  made,  became  the  Amndei 
most  cruel  enemy  that  might  be  against  English  books  and  the  authors  ^^^^^^l^!" 
thereof;    as  folloAveth  after  in  his  story  to  be  seen.     For  shortly  mse.^^ 
after  the  death   of    queen  Anne,  the  same   year,   the   king  being  the 
then  in   Ireland,   this   Thomas  Arundel,  archbishop  of  York,  and  ^1^12°^ 
Kobert  Braybrocke,  bishop  of  London  (whether  sent  by  the  arch-  f°^^°^l'^- 
bishop  of  Canterbury  and  the  clergy,  or  whether  going  of  their  own  the  king, 
accord),  crossed  the  seas  to  Ireland,  to  desire  the  king  in  all  speedy  pialnTf 
wise  to  return  and  help  the  faith  and  church  of  Christ,  against  such  tj^^^^^^^ 
as,  holding  WicklifF's  teaching,  went  about,  as  they  said,  to  subvert  of  God's 
all  their  proceedings,  and  to  destroy  the  canonical  sanctions  of  their 
holy  mother  church.     At  his  complaint  the  king  hearing  the  one 
part  speak,  and  not  advising  the  other,  was  in  such  sort  incensed,  that 
incontinently  lea\dng  all  his  affairs  incomplete,  he  sped  his  return 
towards  England  ;-  "having  kept  his  Christmas  at  Dublin.     In  the 
mean  time,  in  the  beginning  of  the  year  following,  which  was  a.  d. 
1395,  a  parliament  was  called  at  Westminster  by  the  commandment  a.d.isqs. 
of  the  king.     In  that  parliament  certain  articles  or  conclusions  were 
put  up  by  them  on  the  gospel's  side,  to  the  number  of  twelve  ;  which 
conclusions,  moreover,  were  fastened  up  upon  the  church-door  of  St. 
PauFs  in  London,  and  also  at  Westminster  :  the  copy  of  which  con- 
clusions, with  the  words  and  contents  thereof,  hereunder  ensue. 

The  Book  of  Conclusions  or  Reformations,  exhibited  to  the  Par- 
liament holden  at  London,  and  set  up  at  PauFs^  door,  and 
other  places,  in  the  eighteenth  year  of  the  reign  of  King  Richard 
IT.,  and  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  1395. 

The  first  conclusion  : — When  the  church  of  England  began  first  to  dote  in 
temporalties  after  her  stepmother  the  great  church  of  Rome,  and  the  churches 
were  authorised  by  appropriations ;  faith,  hope,  and  charity  began  in  divers  places 
to  vanish  and  fly  away  from  our  church,  forasmuch  as  pride,  with  her  most 
lamentable  and  dolorous  genealogy  of  mortal  and  deadly  sins,  did  challenge 
that  place  by  title  of  heritage.  And  this  conclusion  is  general,  and  approved 
by  experience,  custom,  and  manner,  as  ye  shall  after  hear. 

The  second  conclusion  : — That  our  usual  priesthood,  which  took  its  original  Papisti- 
at  Rome,  and  is  feigned  to  be  a  power  higher  than  angels,  is  not  that  priest-  ^"o^"*^^'" 
hood  which  Christ  ordained  to  his  disciples.  This  conclusion  is  thus  proved, 
forasmuch  as  the  Romish  priesthood  is  done  with  signs,  and  pontifical  rites, 
and  ceremonies,  and  benedictions,  of  no  force  and  effect,  neither  having  any 
ground  in  Scripture,  forasmuch  as  the  bishops  ordinal,  and  the  New  Testament, 
do  nothing  at  all  agree ;  neither  do  we  see  that  the  Holy  Ghost  doth  give  any 

(I)  Hac  ex  libro  Wit'onieiisis.  (2)  Ex  Hist.  D.  Albani. 


204  CONCLUSIONS    EXHIBITED    TO    THE    I'ARLIAMEMT, 

Richard  good  gift  through  any  such  signs  or  ceremonies,  because  He,  together  with  all 
^^-       noble  and  good  gifts,  cannot  consist  and  be  in  any  person  with  deadly  sin.     Tlie 
~~r~Tr~  corollary  or   effect  of  this  conclusion   is,  that  it  is  a  lamentable  and  dolorous 
y^^^r      mockery  unto  wise  men,  to  see  the  bishops  mock  and  play  with  the  Holy  Ghost 
in  the  giving  of  their  orders ;  because  they  give   crowns  for  their  characters 
and  marks,  instead  of  white  hearts ;  and  this  character  is  the  mark  of  Anti- 
christ, brought  into  the  holy  church  to  cloak  and  colour  their  idleness. 
Single  The  third  conclusion  : — That  the  law  of  chastity  enjoined  unto  priesthood, 

life  of       which  was  first  ordained  to  the  prejudice  of  women,  induceth  infamy  into  the 
prieb  s.     j.]jm.(,]^  J  jjyj-  ^g  (Jq  excuse  us  by  the  Bible,  because  the  suspect  decree  doth  say, 
that  we  should  not  name  it.    Both  reason  and  experience  prove  this  conclusion. 
Reason  thus,  forasmuch  as  the  delicate  feeding  and  fare  of  the  clergy  will  have 
either  a  natiu'al  purgation,  or  something  worse.'     Experience  thus,  forasmuch 
as  the  secret  trial  and  proof  of  such  men  is,  that  they  do  delight  in  women ; 
and,  whensoever  thou  dost  prove   or  see  such  a  man,  mark  him  well,  for  he  is 
He  pro-     one  of  that  number.     The  corollary  of  this  conclusion  is,  that  these  private  re- 
phesieth    ligions,  with  the  beginners  thereof,  ought  most  chiefly  to  be  disannulled,  as  the 
monkery  original  of  that  sin  and  offence  :  but  God  of  his  might  doth,  for  privy  sins,  send 

open  vengeance. 
The  The  fourth  conclusion,  that  most  harmeth   the  innocent  people,  is  this  : — 

feigned     That  the  feigned  miracle  of  the  sacrament  of  bread  induceth  all  men,  except  it 
of  tran-     be  a  very  few,  unto  idolatry  ;  forasmuch  as  they  think  that  the  body  which  shall 
substan-    never  be  out  of  heaven,  is,  by  virtue  of  the  priests'  words,  essentially  included 
tiation.     jj^  jj^g  ]j(.j^|g  )jyead,  which  they  do  show  unto  the  people.     But  would  to  God 
they  would  believe  that  which  the  evangelical  doctor  2  teacheth  us  in  his  tria- 
logue,  '  Quod  panis  altaris  est  accidentaliter  corpus  Christi :'  that  is.  That  the 
bread  of  the  altar  is  the  body  of  Christ  accidentally  :  forasmuch  as  we  suppose 
that  by  that  means  every  faithfid  man  and  woman  in  the  law  of  God  may  make 
the  sacrament  of  that  bread  without  any  such  miracle.     The  corollary  of  this 
conclusion  is,  That  albeit  the  body  of  Christ  be  endowed  with  the  eternal  joy, 
Feast  of    the  service   of  Corpus  Christi,  made  by  friar  Thomas,  is  not  true,  but  painted 
Corpus      full  of  false  miracles ;  neither  is  it  any  marvel,  forasmuch  as  friar  Thomas,  at 
invented  t^^*  time  taking  part  with  the  pope,  would  have  made  a  miracle  of  a  hen's  egg  ; 
by  The-    and  we  know  it  very  well,  that  every  lie  openly  preached  and  taught,  doth  turn 
Aquinas    ^^  ^^^^  rebuke  and  opprobrium  of  Him,  who  is  always  true  without  any  lack. 
Exor-  'T'^e  fifth  conclusion  is  this  : — That  the  exorcisms  and  hallowings,  consecrations 

cismsand  and  blessings,  over  the  wine,  bread,  wax,  water,  oil,  salt,  incense,  the  altar- 
blessings  stone,  and  about  the  church-walls,  over  the  vestment,  chalice,  mitre,  cross,  and 
pries  s.  piigj.jj-,-j_g(-jjypg^  f^j.g  the  very  practices  of  necromancy,   rather  than   of  sacred 
divinity.     This  conclusion  is  thus  proved :    because   that  by  such  exorcisms 
the  creatures  are  honoured  to  be  of  more  force  and  power  than  by  their  own 
proper  nature  ;  for  we  do  not  see  any  alteration  or  change  in  any  creature  so 
exorcised,  except  it  be   by  false  faith,  which  is  the  principal  point  of  devilish 
art.     The  corollary  of  this  is,  That  if  the  book  of  exorcisation  or  conjuring  of 
holy  water,  which  is  sprinkled  in  the  church,  were  altogether  faithful  and  true ; 
we  think  certaiidy  that  holy  water  used  in  the  church,  were  the  best  medicine 
for  all  kinds  of  sickness  and  sores:  '  Cujus  contrarium  experimur  :'  that  is, 
The  contrary  whereof  daily  experience  doth  teach  us.' 
Differ-  The  sixth  conlusion,  which  maintaineth  much  pride,  is,  that  a  king  and  bishop 

rence        both  in  one  person,  a  prelate  and  justice  in  temporal  causes,  a  curate  and  officer 
between    jj^  wordly  office,  doth  make  every  kingdom  out  of  good  order.    This  conclusion 
sia'st^car   is  manifest,  because  the  temporalty  and  the  spiritualty  are  two  parts  of  the  holy 
and  .        universal  church ;  and,  therefore,  he  who  addicteth  himself  to  the  one  part,  let 
es°tate!       ^ini  not  intermeddle  with  the  other,  '  Quia  nemo  potest  duobus   Dominis  ser- 
vire;'  wherefore  to  be  called  'amphroditse,'  which  are  men  of  both  kinds,  or 
'  ambodoxtri,'  which  is  such  as  can  play  with  both  hands,  were  good  names  for 
such  men  of  double  estates.    The  corollary  of  this  conclusion  is,  that  thereupon 
we,  the  procurators  of  God,  in  this  case  do  sue  unto  the  parliament,  that  it  may  be 
enacted,  that  all  such  as  be  of  the  clergy  (as  well  of  the  highest  degree  as  of 
the  lowest),  should  be  fully  excused,  and  occupy  themselves  with  their  own 
cure  and  charge,  aiul  not  with  others. 

(1)  He  doth  very  excellently  paint  out  th;  lecherous  clergy. 

(2)  He  meaneth  here  Wicklifl'. 


riLGRIMAGKS    AND    OBLATIONS. AURICULAR    CONITSSION.  205 

The  seventh  eonchision   that  we  mightily  affirm   is,  that  spiritual  prayers  Richard 
made  in  the  church  for  tlie  souls  of  the  dead,  ])referring  any  one  man  by  name       ^^- 
more  than  another,  is  a  false  foundation  of  alms,  whereupon  all  the  liouses  of     »   j) 
alms  in  England  are  falsely  founded.  This  conclusion  is  proved  by  two  reasons:     1305' 

the  one  is,  that  a  meritorious  prayer  (of  any  force  or  effect)  ought  to  be  a  work  1- 

proceeding  from  mere  charity,  and  perfect  charity  exceptctli  no  j)erson,  because  The 
thoushalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself;  wherel)y  it  appeareth  that  the  benefit  j"^,  ^f 
of  any  temporal  gitY,  bestowed  and  given  unto  priests  and  houses  of  alms,  is  masses 
the  principal  cause  of  any  special  prayers,    which  is  not  far  different  from  'J"'  '.'"^ 
simony.     The  otlier  reason   is,  that  every  special  prayer,  made   for  men  con- 
demned to  eternal  punishment,  is  verj'  displeasant  before  (Jod ;  and  albeit  it  be 
doubttld,  yet  it  is  very  likely  unto  the  faithful  christian  people,  that  the  found- 
ers of  every  such  house  of  alms,  for  their  wicked  endowing  of  the  same,  are 
for  the  most  part,  passed  by  the  broad  way.  The  corollary  is,  that  every  prayer 
of  force  and  effect,  proceeding  of  perfect  charity,  woidd  comprehend  generally 
all  such  whom  God  would  have  saved,  and  to  live.    The  merchandise  of  special  A  luin- 

F avers  now  used  for  the  dead,  maketh  mendicant  possessioners  and  other  hire-  J^"^^'' 
-.     -         .  ,  ,  .        '  S  ,  ,  houses 

Img  priests ;  who,  otherwise,   were  strong  enough   to  work  and  to  serve  the  of  alms 
whole  realm  ;  and  maintainetli  the  same  in  idleness,  to  the  great  charge  of  the  sufficient 
realm,  because  it  was  proved  in  a  certain  book  wliicli  the  king  hath,  that  a  hun-  England, 
dred  houses  of  alms  are  sufficient  for  the  whole  realm  ;  and  thereby,  peradven- 
ture,  greater  increase  and  profit  might  come  unto  the  temporalty. 

The  eighth  conclusion,  needful  to  tell  to  the  people  beguiled  is,  that  pilgrim-  Pili?ri- 
ages,   prayers,    and  oblations  made   unto  blind  crosses  or    roods,  or  to  deaf  and'ob- 
images   made  either  of  wood  or  stone,  are  very   near  of  kin   unto  idolatry,  lations. 
and  far  different  from  alms :  and,  albeit  these  which  are  forbidden  and  im- 
agined are  the  book    of  error  unto   the  common  people,  notwithstanding  the  The 
usual  and  common  image  of  the  Trinity  is  most  especially  abominable.  This  image  of 
conclusion  God  himself  doth  openly  manifest,  commanding  alms  to  be  given  to  Trinity 
the  poor  and  needy  man,  for  he  is  the  image  of  God,  in  a  more  perfect  simili-  an  abo- 
tude  and  likeness,  than  any  block  or  stone.   For  God  did  not  say.  Let  us  make  a  J"'."^**'^ 
block  or  stone  unto  our  likeness  and  image,  but.  Let  us  make  man ;  forasmuch  ^    °"j. 
as  the  supreme  and  highest  honour,  which  the  clergy  call  'Latria,'  pertaineth  man  a 
only  to  the  Godhead,  and  the  inferior  honour,  which  the  clergy  call  'Dulia,'  more  per- 
pertaineth  unto  men  and  angels,  and  to  none   other  inferior  creature.     The  image  of 
corollary  is,  that  the  service  of  the  cross,  celebrated  twice  every  year  in  our  God. 
church,  is  full  of  idolatry  :  for  if  rood,  tree,  nails,  and  spear,  ought  so  profoundly 
to  be  honoured  and  worshipped,  then  were  Judas'  lips,  if  any  man  could  get  Judah's 
them,  a  marvellous  goodly  relic.  But  thou,  pilgrim,  we  pray  thee  tell  us,  when  /^^' 
thou  dost  offer  to  the  bones  of  the  saints  and  holy  men  which  are  Laid  up  in  any  deaUiof 
place,  whether  dost  thou  relieve  thereby  the  holy  man  who  is  already  in  joy,  or  Becket 
that  alms-house  which  is  so  well  endowed,  where  they  are  canonized,  the  Lord  "°' '°  ^ 
knoweth  how  ?  and  to  speak  more  plainly,  every  faithful   Christian  may  well  for  mar- 
judge  and  suppose  that  the  strokes  of  that  same  man,  whom    they    call  St.  tyrdoni. 
Thomas,  were  no  cause  of  martyrdom,  nor  yet  be. 

Tlie  ninth  conclusion,  that  keepeth  the  people  low  is,  that  auricular  confes-  Auricular 

sion,  which  is  said  to  be  so  necessary  for  salvation,  and  the  feigned  power  of  gj'o'jf^t^i^e 

absolution,  exalt  and  set  up  the  pride  of  priests,  and  give  them  opportunity  of  minister 

other  secret  talks,  which  we  will  not  at  this  time  talk  of;  forasmuch  as  both  oX\n%i. 

lords  and  ladies  do  witness,  that  for  fear  of  their  confessors  they  dare  not  speak 

the  truth :  and  in  time  of  confession  is  good  opportunity  ministered  of  wooing, 

or  to  play  the  bawd,  or  to  make  other  secret  conventions  to  deadly  sin.     They 

affirm  and  say,  tliat  they  are  commissaries  sent  of  God  to  judge  and  discern  of 

all  manner  of  sin,  to  pardon  and  cleanse  whatsoever  please  them.     They  say  Impu- 

also,  that  they  have  the  keys  of  heaven  and  hell,  and  that  they  can  excommu-  !l^"'^?'^'' 

Ill  1-1  11  1     •  -11         11  •  "ess  or 

nicate,  curse  and  bless,  bind  and  loose,  at  tlieir  own  will  and  pleasure  :  inso-  priests. 

much  that  for  a  small  reward,  or  for  twelve  pence,  they  will  sell  the  blessing  of 

heaven  by  charter  and  clause  of  warranty,  sealed  by  their  common  seal.     This  The  pope, 

conclusion  is  so  commonly  in  use,  that  it  needeth  not  any  probation.     The  treasurer 

corollary  hereof  is,  that  the  pope  of  Rome  who  feigned  himself  to  be  the  pro-  church, 

found  treasurer  of  the  whole  church,  having  that  same  worthy  jewel,  which  is  instead  of 

the  treasure  of  the  passion  of  Christ,  in  his  own  keeping  and  custody,  together  ^■^l^f^^l^ 

with  the  merits  of  all  the  saints  in  heaven,  wlicreby  he  giveth  feigned  indul-  up  coais. 


206 


VKRSKS    ANNEXED    TO    THE    CONCLUSIONS. 


Richard   gences  and  pardons  'a  poena  et  culpa,'  is  a  treasurer  almost  banished  out  of 
^^-       charity,  whereby  he  may  deliver  all  cajitives  being  in  pvu'gatory  at  his  pleasure, 
and  make  them  not  to  come  there.     But  here  every  faithful  Christian  may 
■^•^"    easily  perceive  that  there  is  much  falsehood  hid  in  our  church. 
^^^^-        The  tenth,  that  manslaughter,  either  by  war  or  by  any  pretended  law  of  jus- 
How  war  tice,  for  any  temporal  cause  or  spiritual  revelation,  is  expressly  contrary  unto 
is  lawful,   the  New  Testament,   which  is  the  law  of  grace,  full  of  mercy.     This  con- 
hyex°°    chision  is  evidently  proved  by  the  examples  of  the  preaching  of  Christ  here  on 
perience    earth,  who  chiefly  teacheth  every  man  to  love  his  enemies,  and  to  have  com- 
passion upon  them,  and  not  to  kill  and  murder  them.     The  reason  is  this,  that 
for  the  most  part  when  men  do  fight,  after  the  first  stroke,  charity  is  broken  ; 
and  whosoever  dieth  without  charity,  goeth  the  right  way  to  hell.    And  besides 
that,  we  do  well  imderstand  and  know,  that  none  of  the  clergy,  by  any  lawful 
reason,  can  deliver  any  from  the  punishment  of  death  for  one  deadly  sin,  and 
not  for  another  :  but  the  law  of  mercy,  which  is  the  New  Testament,  forhiddeth 
all  manner  of  murder.  For  in  the  gospel  it  is  spoken  unto  our  forefathers, '  Thou 
shalt  not  kill.'     The  corollary  is,  it  is  a  very  robbing  of  the  people,  when  lords 
purchase  indulgences  and  pardons  '  a  poena  et  culpa,'  imto  such  as  do  help 
theii-  armies  to  kill  and  murder  the  christian  people  in  foreign  countries,  for 
temporal  gain  ;  as  we  do  see  certain  soldiers  who  do  run  among  the  heathen 
people,  to  get  themselves  fame  and  renown  by  the  murder  and  slaughter  of 
men.     Much  more  do  they  deserve  evil  thanks  at  the  hands  of  the   King  of 
Peace,  forasmuch  as  by  humility  and  peace  our  faith  is  multiplied  and  increased ; 
for   murderers  and  man-quellers   Chiist  doth  hate  and  menaceth,  '  He  that 
striketh  with  the  sword,  shall  perish  with  the  sword." 
Nuns  and      The  eleventh  conclusion  is,  which  is  shame  to  tell,  that  the  vow  of  chastity, 
who°  vow  "^^de  in  our  church  by  women  that  are  frail  and  imperfect  in  nature,  is  the 
single        cause  of  bringing  in  many  great  and  horrible  offences  and  vices,  incident  to  the 
'''^^-  nature  of  man  :  for,  albeit  the  murder  of  their  children  born  before  their  time, 

,  and  before  they  are  christened,  and  the  destruction  of  their  nature  by  medicine, 
are  filthy  and  foul  sins ;  yet  they,  accompanying  among  themselves,  do  pass  to 
such  an  unseemliness,  that  they  ought  to  be  punished  by  infernal  torments. 
The  corollary  is,  that  widows,  and  such  as  take  the  mantle  and  the  ring,  deli- 
ciously  fed,  we  would  that  they  were  married,  because  we  cannot  excuse  them 
from  private  offence  of  sin. 

The  twelfth,  that  the  multitude  of  arts  not  necessary,  used  in  this  our  church, 
causeth  much  sin  and  offence  in  waste,  curiosity,  and  disguising  in  curious  ap- 
parel :  experience  and  reason  partly  do  show  the  same,  forasmuch  as  natin-e, 
with  a  few  arts,  is  sufficient  for  man's  use  and  necessity. 

This  is  the  whole  tenor  of  our  ambassage,  which  Christ  hath  commanded  us 
to  prosecute  at  this  time,  most  fit  and  convenient  for  many  causes.  And,  albeit 
these  matters  be  here  briefly  noted  and  touched,  yet,  notwithstanding,  they  are 
more  at  large  declared  in  another  book,  with  many  other  more  in  our  own  pro- 
per tongue,  which  we  would,  shoidd  be  common  to  all  Christian  people.  Where- 
fore, we  earnestly  desire  and  beseech  God,  for  his  great  goodness'  sake,  that 
he  will  wholly  reform  our  church,  now  altogether  out  of  frame,  unto  the  per- 
fection of  her  first  beginning  and  original.^ 

Certain  Verses-  were  annexed  unto  the  Conclusions,  whicli  are  tlms 

Englished. 

t  The  English  nation  doth  lament,  of  these  vile  men  theu-  sin, 

Which  Paul  doth  plainly  signify,  by  idols  to  begin. 
But  Giersites,  full  ingrate,  from  sinful  Simon  sprung, 
This  to  defend,  though  priests  in  name,  make  bulwai'ks  great  and  strong. 
Ye  princes,  therefore,  M'hom  to  rule  the  people,  God  hath  placed, 
With  justice'  sword,  why  see  ye  not,  this  evil  great  defaced  ? 

(1)  Ex  Archivis  Regiis. 

(2)  "  Plangunt  Anglorum  gentes  crimen  Sodomorum,! 

Paulus  fert,  liorum  sunt  idola  causa  malorum : 
Surgunt  ingrati  Gierzitse  Simone  nati, 
Nomine  prselati,  hoe  defensare  parati. 
Qui  Reges  est's,  populis  quicunque  prseestis, 
Qualiter,  his  gestis,  glaOios  proliibere  potefitis?" 


A    I  ETTEU    OF    KING    RICHARD    II.    TO    POPE    BONIFACE    IX.  207 

After  these  conclusions  were  thus  proposed  in  the  parliament,  the  Richard 
king  not  long  after  returned  home  from  Dublin  into  England,  towards         " 
the  latter  end  of  the  parliament.  At  his  return  he  called  certain  of  his    A.  D. 
nobles  unto  him,  Richard  Stury,  Lewis  Clifford,  Thomas  Latimer,    ^^^^- 
John  Mountacute,  &c.,  whom  he  did  sharply  rebuke,  and  did  tei-ribly  ^^-  stury, 
threaten,  for  that  he  heard  them  to  be  favourers  of  that  side  ;  charging  cuffora, 
them  straightly  never  to  hold,  maintain,  or  favour  any  more  those  i'l^e^^joim 
opinions  and  conclusions  :  and  namely  of  Richard  Stury  he  took  an  Mounta- 
oath,  that  he  should  never,  from  that  day,  favour  or  defend  any  such  good' fa- 
opinions  ;  which  oath  being  taken,  the  king  then  answered,  '  And  I  ^°"'''"''" 
swear,'  saith  he, '  again  to  thee,  that  if  thou  dost  ever  break  thine  oath, 
thou  shalt  die  for  it  a  shameful  death,' '  &c. 

All  this  while  William  Courtney,   archbishop  of  Canterbury,  was  pope  ur- 
yet  alive,  who  was  a  great  stirrer  in  these  matters;  but  yet  pope  Urban,  ^^ad'^" 
the  great  master  of  the  catholic  sect,  was  dead  and  buried  six  years 
before,  after  whom  succeeded  in  the  schismatical  see  of  Rome  pope 
Boniface  IX.,  who,  nothing  inferior  to  his  predecessor  in  all  kind  of  p„pc  Bo- 
cruelties,  left   no  diligence  unattempted  to  set  forward  that  which  "^^"^^ 
Urban  had  begun,  in  suppressing  them  that  were  the  setters-forth  of 
the  light  of  the  gospel ;  and   who  had  written  sundry  times  to  king  Letters  of 
Richard,  as  well  for  the  repealing  of  the  acts  of  parliament  against  his  ^^f^^ 


Bo- 
face  to 


provisions,  '  Quare  impedit,'  and  '  praemunire  facies ;'  as  also  that  he  kips 
should  assist  the  prelates  of  England  in  the  cause  of  God,  as  he  pre- 
tended, against  such,  whom  he  falsely  suggested  to  be  Lollards,  and 
traitors  to  the  church,  to  the  king,   and  the  realm,  &c.     Thus  the 
courteous  pope,  those  whom  he  could  not  reach  with  his  sword,  at 
least,  with  cruel  slander  of  his  malicious  tongue,  would  he  work  his 
poison  against;  which  letter  he  wrote  to  the  king  a.  d.  1396,  which  a.d.issg. 
was  th.e  year  before  the  death  of  William  Courtney,  archbishop   of  Death  of 
Canterbury ;  after  whom  succeeded  in  that  see  Thomas  Arundel,  bro-  counney, 
ther  to  the  earl  of  Arundel,  being  first  bishop  of  Ely,  afterwards  arch-  ^^'^hop  of 
bishop  of  York,  and  lord  chancellor  of  England,  and  at  last  made  banter- 
archbishop  of  Canterbury  about  a.  d.  1397.     The  year  following, 
which  was  1398,  and  the  ninth  year  of  the  pope,  I  find,  in  certain  a.d.isos. 
records  of  the  bishop  of  Durham,  a  certain  letter  of  king  Richard  IL, 
written  to  the  said  pope  Boniface,  which,  because  I  judged  it  not  un- 
worthy to  be  seen,  I  thought  here  to  annex  the  same,  proceeding  in 
form  as  folio  we  th. 

A  Letter  of  King  Richard  II.  to  Pope  Boniface  IX. 

To  the  most  holy  father  in  Christ,  and  lord,  lord  Boniface  IX.,  by  the  grace 
of  God  high  pope  of  the  most  holy  Romish  and  universal  church,  his  humble 
and  devout  son  Richard,  by  the  grace  of  God,  king  of  England  and  France,  lord 
of  Ireland,  greeting,  and  desiring  to  help  the  miseries  of  the  afflicted  church, 
and  kissing  of  those  his  blessed  feet : 

Who  will  give  my  head  water,  and  mine  eyes  streaming  tears,  that  I  may 
bewail  the  decay,  and  manifold  troubles  of  our  mother,  which  have  chanced  to 
her  by  her  own  children  in  the  distress  of  this  present  schism  and  division  ?  For 
the  sheep  have  forgotten  the  proper  voice  of  their  shepherds,  and  hirelings  have 
thrust  in  themselves  to  feed  the  Lord's  flock,  who  are  clothed  with  the  apparel  of 
the  true  shepherd,  challenging  the  name  of  honour  and  dignity ;  resembling  so 
the  true  shepherd,  that  the  poor  sheep  can  scarce  know  whom  they  ought  to 

(1)  Ex  Cbron.  Monachi  Albaneiisis. 


208  A    LETTER    OF    KING    RICHARD    II.    TO    POPE    BONIFACE    IX. 

Richard   follow,  or  what  pastor,  as  a  stranger,  they  ought  to  flee,  and  whom  they  should 

l^-       shun  as  a  hireling.    Wherefore,  we  are  afraid  lest  the  holy  standard  of  the  Lord 

~T~pj      he  forsaken  by  his  host,  and  so  that  city,  being  full  of  riches,  become  solitary 

,  oqo'     and  desolate,  and  lest  the  land  or  people  which  was  wont  to  say,  flourishing  in 

!_  her  prosperities,  '  I  sat  as  a  queen,  and  am  not  a  widow,'  be   destitute  of  the 

presence  of  her  husband,  and,  as  it  were,  so  bewitched,  that  she  shall  not  be  able 
to  discern  his  face,  and  so  wrapped  in  mazes,  that  she  shall  not  know  where  to 
turn  her,  that  she  might  more  easily  find  him,  and  that  she  shall,  with  weeping, 
speak  that  saying  of  the  spouse,  '  I  sought  him  whom  my  soul  loveth ;  I  sought 
him  and  found  him  not.'  For  now  we  are  compelled  so  to  wander,  that  if  any 
man  say,  Behold  here  is  Christ,  or  there,  we  may  not  believe  him  so  saying ; 
and  so  many  shepherds  have  destroyed  the  Lord's  vineyard,  and  made  his  amia- 
ble portion  a  waste  wilderness. 

This   multitude  of  shepherds  is  become  very  burdenous  to  the  Lord's  flock  : 
for  when  two  strive  to  be  chief,  the  state  of  both  their  dignities  stands  in  doubt, 
and,  in  so  doing,  they  give  occasion  to  all  the  faithful  of  Christ  for  a  schism  and 
division  of  the  church.     And  although  both  parties  go  about  to  subdue  unto 
their  power  the  whole  church  militant,   yet,  contrary  to  both  their  purpose,  by 
working  this  way,  there  beginneth  to  rise  now  a  division  in  the  body  of  the 
church,  like  as  when  the  division  of  the  quick  innocent  body  was  asked,  when  the 
two  harlots  did  strive  before  Solomon  ;  like  as  the  ten  tribes  of  Israel  followed 
Jeroboam  the  intruder,  and  were  withdrawn  from  the  kingdom,  for  Solomon's 
Desire  to  sin :  even  so,  of  old  time,  the  desire  of  ruling  hath  drawn  the  great  power  of  the 
rule  in      world  from  the  unity  of  the  church.  Let  yourselves  remember,  we  beseech  you, 
church,     liow  that  all  Greece  did  Ml  from  the  obedience  of  the  Romish  church,  in  the 
Greece      time  of  the  faction  of  the  primarch  of  Constantinople  ;  and  how  Mahomet,  with 
renounc-  lijg  fellows,   by  occasion  of  the  supremacy  in  ecclesiastical  dignity,  deceived  a 
Romish     gi'eat  part  of  the  Christians,  and  withdrew  them  from  the  empire  and  ruling  of 
church.     Christ ;  and  how,   in  these  days,  where  the  same  supremacy  hath  withdrav/n 
itself  from  the  obedience  of  it,  insomuch  that  now,  in  very  few  realms,  the  candle 
that  burns  before  the  Lord  remaineth,  and  that  for  David,  his  servant's  sake. 
And,  although  now  remain  few  countries  professing  the  obedience  of  Christ's 
true  vicar,   yet,  peradventure,  if  every  man  were  left  to  his  own  liberty,  he 
would  doubt  of  the  preferring  of  your  dignity,  or,  what  is  worse,  would  utterly 
refuse  it  by  such  doubtful  evidence  alleged  on  both  sides :  and  this  is  the  subtle 
craft  of  the  crooked  serpent,  that  is  to  say,   under  the  pretence  of  unity  to  pro- 
cure schisms,  as  the  spider  from  a  wholesome  flower  gathers  poison,  and  Judas 
learned  of  peace  to  make  war. 

Wherefore  it  is  lively  believed  of  wise  men,  that  except  this  pestilent  schism 
be  withstood,  by  and  by  the  keys  of  the  church  will  be  despised,  and  they  shall 
bind  the  consciences  but  of  a  few  :  and  when  either  none  dare  be  bold  to  cor- 
rect this  fault,  or  to  reform  things  contrary  to  God's  law,  so,  by  this  means,  at 
The  liing  length,  temporal  lords  will  take  away  the  liberties  of  the  church,  and  peradventure, 
seemeth  t]jg  Romans  will  come  and  take  away  their  place,  people,  and  lands :  they  will 
prophesy,  spoil  their  possessions,  and  bring  the  men  of  the  chiu-ch  into  bondage,  and  they 
shall  be  contemned,  reviled,  and  despised,  because  the  obedience  of  the  people, 
and  devotions  towards  them  will  be  almost  taken  away,  when  the  greater  part 
of  the  church,  left  to  their  own  liberty,  shall  wax  prouder  than  they  be  wont, 
leaving  a  wicked  example  to  them  that  do  see  it.  For  when  they  see  the 
prelates  study  more  for  covetousness  than  they  were  wont,  to  purse  up  money, 
to  oppress  the  subjects,  in  their  punishings  to  seek  for  gain,  to  confound  laws,  to 
stir  up  strife,  to  suppress  truth,  to  vex  poor  subjects  with  wrong  corrections,  in 
meat  and  drink  intemperate,  in  feastings  past  shame  :  what  marvel  is  it  if  the 
people  despise  them  as  the  foulest  forsakers  of  God's  law  ?  But  all  these  things 
do  follow  if  the  church  shoidd  be  left  long  in  this  doubtfulness  of  a  schism,  and 
then  should  that  old  saying  be  verified ;  '  In  those  days  there  was  no  king  in 
Israel,  but  every  one  did  that,  that  seemed  right  and  straight  to  himself.' 
Micaiah  did  see  the  people  of  the  Lord  scattered  on  the  mountains,  as  they 
had  been  sheep  without  a  shepherd :  for  when  the  shepherd  is  smitten,  the 
sheep  of  the  flock  shall  be  scattered  :  the  great  stroke  of  the  shepherd  is  the 
minishing  of  his  jui-isdiction,  by  which  the  subjects  are  drawn  from  his  obedi- 
ence. When  Jason  had  the  oflice  of  the  highest  priest,  he  changed  the  ordi- 
nance of  God,  and  brought  in  the  customs  of  the  heathen  ;  the  priests  leaving 


A    LKTTICII    OK    KINt;    RICHARD    II.    TO    I'OPK    ROXIFACK    IX.  2()f) 

the  service  of  the  holy  altar,  and  applying  themselves  to  wrestling,  and  other  Richard 
exercises  of  the  Grecians,  and  despising  those  things  that  belonged  to  the  ])riests,       ^'■ 
did  labour  with  all  their  niiglit  to  learn  such  things  of  the  Grecians;  and  by  that     »    .^ 
means  the   place,  people,  and  holy  anointing  of  priests,  which,  in  times  past,     ,  ^'qu' 

were  had  in  great  reverence  by  kings,  were  trodden  under  foot  of  all  men,  and  — ^ '— 

robbed  by  the  king's  power,  and  were  ])rofaned  by  thrusting  in  for  money. 
Therefore  let  the  highest  vicar  of  Christ  look  unto  this  with  a  diligent  eye,  and 
let  him  be  the  follower  of  Him  by  whom  he  hath  gotten  authority  above  others. 

If  you  mark  well,  most  holy  father !    you  shall  tind  that  Christ  rebuked  Bislmps 
sharply  two  brethren,  coveting  the  seat  of  honour  :  he  taught  them  not  to  ])lay  'j*'":'"  '*>' 
the  lords  over  the  people,  but  the  more  grace  they  were  prevented  with,  to  be  to  play 
so  much  more  humble  than  others,  and  more  lowly  to  serve  their  l)rethren ;  to  Hie  lords, 
him  that  asked  his  coat,  to  give  the  cloak ;  to  him  that  smote  him  on  tlie  one 
cheek,  to  turn  the  other  to  him.    For  the  sheep  that  are  given  to  his  keeping  he 
must  forsake  all  earthly  things,  and  to  shed  his  own  blood,  yea,  and  if  need 
required,  to  die.     These  things,  I  say,  be  those  that  adorn  the  highest  bishop.  The  right 
if  they  be  in  him ;  not  his  purple,  nht  his  wliite  horse,  not  his  imperial  crown,  "'■"^' 
because  he,  among  all  men,  is  most  boimd  to  all  the  sheep  of  Clirist.     For  the  a  tme 
fear  of  God,  therefore,  and  for  tiie  love  of  the  flock  which  ye  guide,  consider  bishop, 
these  things  diligently,  and  do  them  wisely,  and  suffer  us  no  longer  to  waver 
betwixt  two  :  although  not  for  your  own  cause,  to  whom  peradventtire  the  ful- 
ness of  your  own  power  is  known,  yet  in  jjitying  our  weakness,  if  thou  be  he, 
tell  us  openly,  and  show  thyself  to  the  world,  that  all  we  may  follow  one.     Be 
not  to  us  a  bloody  bishop,  lest,  by  your  occasion,  man's  blood  be  shed ;  lest  hell 
swallow  such  a  number  of  souls,  and  lest  the  name  of  Christ  be  evil  spoken  of 
by  infidels,  through  such  a  worthy  personage.     But,  peradventure  ye  will  say,  a  bald 
for  our  righteousness  it  is  manifest  enough,  and  we  will  not  put  it  to  other  men's  ""swer. 
disputations.     If  this  bald  answer  should  be  admitted,  the  schism  should  con- 
tinue still ;  seeing  that  neither  part  is  willing  to  agree  to  the  other,  and  that 
where  the  world  is,  as  it  were,  equally  divided  betwixt  them,  neither  part  can 
be  compelled  to  give  place  to  the  other  without  much  bloodshed.     The  incar- 
nation of  Christ  and  his  resurrection  were  well  enough  known  to  himself  and 
his  disciples ;   yet  he  asked  of  his  Father  to  be  made  known  to  the  world. 
He  made  also  the  gospel  to  be  written,  and  the  doctrine  of  the  apostles,  and 
sent  his  apostles  into   all  the  world,  to  do  the  ofiice  of   preaching,  that  the 
same  thing  might  he  known  to  all  men.     The  afoi'esaid  reason  is  the  sub- 
tlety of  Mahomet,  who,  knowing  himself  guilty  of   his   sect,  utterly   forbad 
disputations.     If  ye  have  so  full  trust  of  your  righteousness,  put  it  to  the  exa- 
mination of  worthy  persons  in  a  general  council,  to  which  it  belongeth  by  right 
to  define  such  doubts,  or  else  commit  it  unto  able  persons,  and  give  them  full 
power  to  determine  all  things  concerning  that  matter;  or,  at  least,  by  forsaking 
the  office  on  both  parties,  leave  the  church  of  God  free,  speedily  to  provide 
for  a  new  shepherd. 

We  find  kings  have  forsaken  their  temporal  kingdoms,  only  upon  respect  of  Public 
devotion,   and  have  taken  tlie   apparel  of  monks'  profession.      Tlierefore  let  respect  to 
Christ's  vicar,  being  a  professor  of  most  high  holiness,  be  ashamed  to  continue  red  before 
in  his  seat  of  honour  to  the  offence  of  all  people,   and  the  prejudice  and  hurt  private. 
of  the  Romish  church,  and  the  devotion  of  it,  and  cutting  away  kingdoms 
from  it. 

But  if  you  say,  It  is  not  requisite  that  the  cause  of  God's  church  should  be 
called  in  controversy,  and,  therefore,  we  cannot  so  easily  go  from  it,  seeing  our 
conscience  gainsayeth  it:  to  this  we  answer.  If  it  be  the  cause  of  God  and  the  Answer 
church,  let  the  general   council  judge  of  it ;  but  if  it  be  a  personal  cause,  as  '"  ^. 
almost  all  the  world  probably  thinkelh,  if  ye  were  the  followers  of  Christ,  ye  ohleetion. 
would  rather  choose  a  temporal  death,  than  suffer  such  a  wavering,  I  say  not,  Hard 
to  the  hurt  of  so  many,  but  to  the  endless  destruction  of  souls,  to  the  offence  of  roursil 
the  whole  world,  and  to  an  everlasting  shame  of  the  apostolical  dignit}-.     Did  ^°^  ""^ 
not  Clement,  named,  or,  that  I  may  more  truly  speak,  ordained,  of  St.  Peter  to 
the  apostolic  dignity,  and  to  be  bishop,  resign  his  right,  that  his  deed  might  be 
taken  by  his  successors  for  an  example  ?    Also  pope  Siricius  gave  over  his  pope- 
dom to  be  a  comfort  of  the  eleven  thousand  virgins  ;>  therefore  much  more 

(1)  The  legend  of  the  eleven  thousand  vir<;ins,  is  one  of  the  fahlescoev.il  with  the  close  of  the  third, 
W  the  opening  of  the  fourth,  centur>'.    The  story  is  as  follows  :— Flavius  '."Icmtns  Maximus,  the 

VOL,  III.  1' 


pope. 


210  A    LETTER    OF    KING    KTCHAKD    II.    TO    POI'E    BOKIEACE    IX. 

Richard  ouglit  you,  if  need  require,  give  over  your  popedom,  that  you  might  '  gather 
•'■f-       together  the  children  of  God  which  be  scattered  abroad.'    For,  as  it  is  thought  a 
—  glorious  thing  to  defend  the  common  right,  even  to  bloodshed,  so  is  it  sometimes 
o   o     necessary  for  a  man  to  wink  at  his  own  cause,  and  to  forsake  it  for  a  greater 
^'^^°'    profit,  and  by  that  means  better  to  procure  peace.     Should  not  he  be  thought  a 
Unity        devil,  and  Christ's  enemy  by  all  men,  who  woidd  agree  to  an  election  made  of 
of  the       ]-|j,^-j  ^-Qj.  (-j^g  apostolical  dignity  and  popedom,  if  it  should  be  to  the  destruction 
bJ  prefer-  of  Christians,  the  division  of  the  church,  the   offence  and  loss  of  all  faithful 
red  before  people?     If  such  mischiefs  should  be  known  to  all  the  world  by  God's  revela- 
ri^rftv      '^°"  *"  come  to  pass,  by  such  receiving  of  the  popedom  and  apostolical  dignity  : 
then,  by  the  like  reason,  why  should  he  not  be  judged  of  all  men  an  apostate 
and  forsaker  of  his  faith,  who  chooseth  dignit}',  or  worldly  honour,  rather  than 
the  unity  of  the  church  ?    Christ  died  that  he  might  gather  together  the  children 
of  God,  who  are  scattered  abroad  :  but  such  an  enemjf  of  God  and  the  church 
wisheth  his  subjects  bodily  to  die  in  battle,  and  the  more  part  of  the  world  to 
perish  in  soul,  rather  than,  forsaking  to  be  pope,  to  live  in  a  lower  state,  although 
The  pope  it  were  honourable.     If  the  fear  of  God,  the  desire  of  the  heavenly  kingdom, 
\i\\[  not     jjj^(i  tijg  earnest  love  of  the  unity  of  the  church  do  move  your  heart,  show  indeed 
(iTgnity,     that  your  works  may  bear  record  to  the  truth.    Clement  and  Siricius,  most  holy 
for  any      popes,  not  only  are  not  reproved,  but  rather  are  reverenced  by  all  men,  becavse 
public       j.jjpy  gave  over  their  right  for  profitable  causes,  and  for  the  same  cause  all  the 
lity.  church  of  holy  men  show  forth  their  praise.     Likewise  your  name  should  live 

Wicked  for  ever  and  ever,  if  ye  would  do  the  like  for  a  necessary  cause,  that  is  to  say, 
flatterers  f^j.  t]jg  unity  of  God's  church.  Give  no  heed  to  the  unmeasurable  cryings  of 
pope!  *^*^  them  that  say,  that  the  right  choosing  of  popes  is  lost,  except  ye  defend  your 
part  manfully  :  but  be  afraid,  lest  such  stirrers  up  of  mischief  look  for  their  own 
commodity  or  honour,  that  is  to  say,  that  under  your  wing  they  might  be  pro- 
moted to  riches  and  honour.  After  this  sort  Ahithophel  was  joined  with  Absa- 
lom in  persecuting  his  own  father,  and  falsely  usurping  his  kingdom. 

Furthermore,  there  should  be  no  jeopardy  to  that  election,  because  both 

parties  stick  stiffly  to  the  old  fashion  of  election,  and  either  of  them  covet  the 

pre-eminence  of  the  Romish  church,  counselling  all  Christians  to  obey  them. 

Better       And  although,  through  their  giving  over,  the  fashion  of  choosing  the  pope  shoidd 

that  the    be  changed  for  a  time,  it  were  to  be  borne,  rather  than  to  suffer  any  longer  this 

th''^'o°ies'  tlivision  in  God's  church.     For  that  fashion  in  choosing  is  not  so  necessarily 

election     required  to  the  state  of  a  pope,  but  the  successor  of  the  apostle,  as  necessary 

should       cause  required,  might  come  in  at  the  door  by  another  fashion  of  choosing,  and 

thar'the    that  canonical  enough.     And  this  we  are  taught  manifestly  by  examples  of  the 

church      fathers ;  for  Peter  the  apostle  appointed  after  him  Clement,  and  that  not  by 

should      falsely  usurping  of  power,  as  we  suppose  ;  and  it  was  thought  that  that  fashion 

division,    of  appointing  popes  was  lawful  unto  the  time  of  pope  Hilary,  who  decreed  that 

no  pope  should  appoint  his  successor. 

Afterwards,  the  election  of  the  pope  went  by  the  clergy  and  people  of  Rome, 
and  the  emperor's  council  agreeing  thereto,  as  it  appeareth  in  the  election  of 
the  blessed  Gregory ;  but  pope  Martin,  with  the  consent  of  the  holy  synod, 
granted  Charles  the  power  to  choose  the  pope:  but,  of  late,  Nicholas  II.  was 
the  first  whom  Martinus  makes  mention  of  in  his  councils  as  chosen  by  the 
cardinals.     But  all  the  bishops  of  Lombardy,  for  the  most  part,  withstood  this 

captain  of  the  armv  of  the  emperor  Gratian,  had  acquired  such  influence  over  the  soldier)',  that 
they  proclaimed  hiin  emperor  in  the  lifetime  of  Gratian,  his  master.  Arriving  in  Gaul,  and  benig 
■well  received  by  the  forces  of  Gratian,  which  happened  to  be  quartered  there,  Maximus,  with 
their  aid,  made  a  descent  upon  some  of  the  most  fertile  districts  of  that  country,  and  visited  the 
inhabitants  either  with  death,  or  banishment.  Their  land  he  divided  among  the  bravest  of  his 
British  followers  ;  and,  the  more  speedily  to  people  the  newly-formed  colony,  he  despatched  mes- 
sengers to  Britain,  to  procure  wives  for  the  settlers.  According  to  the  story,  eleven  thousand 
virgins,  with  one  named  Ursula  at  their  head,  embarked  from  Britain  ;  but,  being  driven  by  a  storm 
upon  the  coast  of  Germany,  where  an  army  of  Gratian,  in  pursuit  of  Maximus,  was  unfortunately 
encamped,  these  fair  adventurers  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  merciless  soldiery.  At  Ursula's  solici- 
tation, they  immediately  determined  rather  to  die,  than  submit  to  the  insults  and  shame  that 
thus  awaited  them ;  in  consequence  of  which,  it  is  affirmed  that  they  were  all  put  to  death.  How- 
ever, among  the  students  of  the  divinity  schools  at  Geneva  it  is  maintained,  that  the  above  story 
was  invented  upon  the  discovery  of  an  ancient  inscription,  beginning,  '  undecimil.  virg.,'  and  that 
instead  of  recording  the  death  of  eleven  thousand  virgins,  it  was  intended  to  commemorate  the 
death  of  one  only,  whose  name  was  Undecimilla.  The  Editor  gives  this  solution  as  he- received 
it,  without  attempting,  in  this  instance,  to  decide  between  Geneva  and  Rome.  Pope  Syricius  was 
a  zealous  maintainer  of  the  celibacy  of  the  clergy,  but  that  he  gave  over  his  papacy  for  the  sake  of 
the  above  eleven  thousand  virgins,  does  not  so  readily  appear ;  for,  in  the  same  See  which  he  held 
for  fourteen  years,  he  died,  a.d.  .198 ;  the  year  in  which  the  famous  John  Chrysostome,  presbyter 
of  the  church  of  Antioch,  was  preferred  to  the  See  of  Constantinoijle.— Ed. 


A    LKTTEK    OK    KING     RICHAUD    II.    TO    POPE    BONIKACK    IX.  211 

election,  and  chose  Cadulus  to  be  pope,  saying,  that  the  pope  ought  not  to  be    Richard 
chosen  but  of  the  precinct  of  Italy.     Wherefore  we  think  it  not  a  safe  way  so  _JJ___ 
earnestly  to  stick  to  the  traditions  of  men,  in  the  fashion  of  choosing  the  pope,     ^_  j)_ 
and  so  oft  to  change,  lest  we  be  thought  to  break  God's  traditions  concerning     1393. 

the  unity  of  the  church  :  yea,  rather,  it  were  better  yet  to  ordain  a  new  fashion  

of  his  election,  and  meeter  for  him  than  as  it  hath  been  before.  But  all  things 
concerning  the  same  election  might  be  kept  safe,  if  God's  honour  were  looked  Good 
for  before  your  own,  and  the  peace  of  tlie  church  were  uprightly  sought ;  for  [^g""^'^' 
such  a  dishonouring  should  be  most  honour  unto  you,  and  that  giving  place 
should  be  the  getting  of  a  greater  dignity,  and.  the  willing  deposing  of  your 
honour  should  obtain  you  the  entry  of  everlasting  honour,  and  should  procure 
the  love  of  the  whole  world  towards  you,  and  you  should  deserve  to  be  exalted 
continually,  as  David  was,  in  humbling  himself. 

O  how  monstrous  a  sight,  and  how  foul  a  monster,  is  a  man's  body  disfigm'ed 
with  two  heads !      So,  if  it    were  possible,   the  spouse   of   Christ   should   be 
made  as  monstrous,  if  she  were  ruled  with  two  such  heads ;  but  that  is  not 
possible  :  she  is  ever  altogether  fair,    in   whom  no  spot  is  found ;  therefore 
we  must  cast  away  that  rotten  member,  and  thruster-in  of  his  second  head. 
We  cannot  sutFer  any  longer  so  great  a  wickedness  in  God's  house,  that  we 
should  suffer   God's  coat  that  wants  a  seam,   by  any  means  to  be   torn   by  Christ's 
the    hands  of  two,  that  violently  draw  it   asunder;    for  if  these  two  should  seamless 
be  suftered  to  reign  together,  they  would  so,  betwixt  them,  tear    in  pieces  ^°^'  ^'°" 
that  little   coat  of  the  Lord,   that  scarce  one  piece  would  hang  to  another. 
They  pass  the  wickedness  of  the  soldiers,  that  cursed  Christ ;  for  they,  willing  popes, 
to  have  the  coat  whole,  said,  '  Let  us  not  cut  it,  but  let  us  cast  lots  for  it,  compared 
whose  it  shall  be :'  but  these  two  popes,  suffering  their  right  and  title  to  be  soijiej-g 
tried  by  no  lot  or  way,  although  not  in  words  yet  in  deeds,  they  pronounce  this  that 
sentence,  '  It  shall  neither  be  thine  nor  mine,  but  let  it  be  divided;'  for  they  ^!^"'.'^^ 
choose  rather,  as  it  appcareth,  to  be  lords,  though  it  be  but  in  a  little  part,  and 
that  to  the  confusion  of  the  imity  of  the  church,  than,  in  leaving  that  lording, 
to  seek  for  the  peace  of  the  church.  We  do  not  affirm  this,  but  we  show  almost 
the  whole  judgment  of  the  world  of  them  ;  being  moved  so  to  think  by  likely 
conjectures.     We  looked  for  amendment  of  this  intolerable  confusion,  by  the 
space  that  these  two  inventors  of  this  mischief  lived.    But  we  looked  for  peace, 
and  behold  trouble ;  for,  neither  in  their  lives  nor  in  their  deaths,  they  procured 
any  comfort,  but  rather,  dying  as  it  were  in  a  doubt  betwixt  two  ways,  left  to 
their  successors  matter  of  contention  continual.  But  now,  for  the  space  of  seven 
years  of  their  successors,  that  which  we  desired  and  looked  for  before  (that  is, 
that  they  shoiUd  bear  good  gi-apes,  and  they  bring  forth  wild  grapes),  in  this 
matter  we  fall  into  a  deep  despair.  But,  inasmuch  as  we  hear  the  comfort  of  the 
Lord,  who  promised  that  miserably  he  would  destroy  those  wicked  men,  and  let 
his  vineyard  to  other  husbandmen  who  will  bring  him  fruit  at  their  times  ap- 
pointed, and  hath  promised  faithfully  that  he  will  help  his  spouse  in  her  need 
to  the  end  of  the  world  :  we,   leaning  on  the  sure  hope  of  this  promise,  and  in 
hope  contrary  to  hope  believing,  by  God's  grace  will  put  our  helping  hands  to 
the  easing  of  this  misery,  when  a  convenient  time  shall  serve,  as  much  as  our  A  godly 
kingly  power  is  able  ;  and  although  our  wit  doth  not  perceive  how  these  things  P"."P''^^' 
before  rehearsed  may  be  amended,  yet  we,  being  encouraged  to  this  by  the  hope  teen  put 
of  God's  promise,  will  do  our  endeavour ;  like  as  Abraham  believed,  his  son  ii>  cxocu- 
being  slain  by  sacrifice,  that  the  multitude  of  his  seed  should  increase  to  the  *'°"' 
number  of  the  stars,  according  to  God's  promise. 

Now,  therefore,  the  time  draws  near  to  make  an  end  of  this  schism,  lest  a 
third  election  of  a  schismatic  against  the  apostles'  successor  make  a  custom  of 
the  doing,  and  so  the  pope  of  Avignon  shall  be  double  Romish  pope,  and  he  shall 
say  with  his  partakers,  as  the  patriarch  of  Constantinople  said  imto  Christ's 
vicar  when  he  forsook  him :  'The  Lord  be  with  thee,  for  the  Lord  is  with  us;' 
which  is  much  to  be  feared  of  all  christian  men,  for  that  pharisee  begins  now  to 
be  called  the  pope  of  Avignon  among  the  people. 

But  peradventure  it  would  be  thought  by  some  men,  that  it  belongeth  not  to  Secular 
secular  princes  to  bridle  outrages  of  the  pope.  To  whom  we  answer,  that  natu-  FV"^^'^' 
rally  the  members  put  themselves  in  jeopardy  to  save  the  head,  and  the  parts  tii?  out- 
labour  to  save  the  whole.  Christ  so  decked  his  spouse,  that  her  sides  should  rages  of 
cleave  together,  and  should  uphold  themselves,  and  by  course  of  time  and  occa-  '"  ^  '"''*' 

I' 2 


212  A    LETTER    OF    KING    RICHARD    II.    TO    POPE    BONIFACE    IX. 

Richard    sioii  of  things  they  should  correct  one  another,  and  cleave  together  tuneably. 

•'^-        Did  not  Moses  put  down  Aaron,  because  he  was  unfaithful  ?  Solomon  put  down 

~7~Tr~  Abiathar,  who  came  by  lineal  descent  from  Anathoth,  and  removed  his  priest- 

jq'qo'    hood  from  his  kindred  to  the  stock  of  Eleazar  in  the  person  of  Zadok,  who  had 

! L  his  beginning  from  Eli  the  priest?     [1  Kings  ii.]     Otho  the  emperor  deposed 

Popes  pu:  pope  John  XII.,  because  lie  was  lecherous.  Henry  the  emperor  put  down  Gra- 
princes*^  tian,  because  he  used  simony  in  buying  and  selling  spiritual  livings ;  and  Otho 
-deposed  pope  Benedict  I.,  because  he  thrust  in  liimself.  Therefore,  by  like 
reason,  why  may  not  kings  and  princes  bridle  the  Romish  pope  in  default  o?  the 
church,  if  the  quality  of  his  faidt  require  it,  or  the  necessity  of  the  church,  by  this 
means,  compel  to  help  the  church  ojjpressed  by  tyranny?  In  old  times  schisms, 
which  rose  about  making  the  pope,  were  determined  by  the  power  of  secular 
princes ;  as  the  schism  betwixt  Symmachus  and  Laurence  was  ended  in  a  council 
before  Theodoric,  king  of  Italy.  Henry  the  emperor,  when  two  did  strive  to 
be  pope,  deposed  them  both,  and  received  the  third,  being  chosen  at  Rome,  to 
be  pope,  that  is  to  say,  Clement  II.,  who  crowned  him  with  the  imperial  crown  ; 
and  the  Romans  promised  him  that  from  thenceforth  they  would  promote  none 
to  be  pope  without  his  consent.  Alexander  also  overcame  four  popes,  schis- 
matics, all  whom  Frederic  the  emperor  corrected. 

Thus,  look  on  the   register  of  popes  and  their  deeds,  and  ye  shall  find  that 
schisms  most  commonly  have  been  decided  by  the  power  of  secular  princes,  the 
schismatics  cast  out,  and  sometimes  new  popes  made ;  and  sometimes  the  old 
Lawful      ones  cast  out  of  their  dignities,  and  restored  to  their  old  dignities  again.     If  it 
that  were  not  lawful  for  secular  princes  to  bridle  the  outrages  of  such  a  pope  lawfully 

f'""S^^      made,  and  afterwards  becoming  a  tyrant :  in  such  a  case  he  might  oppress  over- 
with-        much  the  church,   he  might  change  Christendom  into  heathens,  and  make  the 
stand  the  labour  of  Christ  crucified  to  be  in  vain :  or  else  truly  God  should  not  have  pro- 
of'th'e"^     vided  for  his  spouse  on  earth,  by  all  means,  as  much  as  is  possible,  by  service 
pope.        of  men  to  withstand   dangers.     Therefore  we  counsel  you,  with  such  a  loving 
aiFection  as  becomes  children,  that  ye  consider  in  your  heart  well,  lest,  in  work- 
ing by  this  means,  ye  prepare  a  way  to  Antichrist  through  your  desire  to  bear 
rule,  and  so,  by  this  means,  as  we  fear  the  one  of  these  two  shall  chance,  either 
ye  shall  cause  all  the  princes  of  the  world  to  rise  against  you  to  bring  in  a  true 
follower  of  Christ  to  have  the  state  of  the  apostolical  dignity,  or  what  is  worse, 
the  whole  world,  despising  the  ruling  of  one  shepherd,  shall  leave  the  Romish 
church  desolate.     But  God  keep  this  from  the  world,  that  the  desire  of  honour 
The  king  of  two  men  should  bring  such  a  desolation  into  the   church  of  (Jod  :  for  then, 
seemeth    that  departing  away  which  the  apostle  prophesied,  should  come  before  the  coming 
prophesy  ^^  Antichrist   were  at  hand,  which  should  be  the  last  disposition  of  the  world, 
ofthede-  peaceably  to  receive  Antichrist  with  honour.     Consider,  therefore,  the  state  of 
of  thTlio-  yo'^^'  most  excellent  holiness,  how  ye  received  the  power  from  God  to  the  build- 
manpope.  ing  of  the  church,  and  not  to  the  destruction  of  it ;  that  Christ  hath  given  you 
wine  and  oil  to  heal  the  wounded,   and  hath  appointed  you  his  vicar  in  these 
things  which  pertain  to  gentleness,  and  hath  given  us  those  tilings  which  serve 
to  rigour.     For  we  bear  not  the  sword  without  a  cause  to  the  punishment  of 
evil  doers,  which  power,  ordained  of  God,  we  have  received,  ourselves  being  wit- 
ness ;  beseeching  you  to  receive  our  counsel  efFectuallj'^,  that  in  doing  thus,  the 
waters  may  return  to  the  places  from  whence  they  came,  and  so  the  waters  may 
begin  to  be  made  sweet  with  salt ;  lest  the  ax  swim  on  the  water,  and  the  wood 
The  pope  sink,  and  lest  the  fruitful  olive  degenerate  into  a  wild  olive,  and  the  leprosy  of 
and  the     Naaman,  that  nobleman,  cleave  continually  to  the  house  of  Gehazi,  and  lest  the 
sees  new  pope  and  the  Pharisees  crucify  Christ  again.    Christ,  the  spouse  of  the  church, 
crucifiers  who  was  wont  to  bring  the  chief  bishop  into  the  holiest  place,  increase  your 
°       "*■  holiu£ss,  or  rather  restore  it.  being  lost.     Written,  &c.' 

Tliis  epistle  of  king  Richard  11.  written  to  pope  Boniface  IX.,  in 
the  time  of  tlie  schism,  about  the  year,  as  appeared,  1398,  as  it  con- 
tained much  good  matter  of  wholesome  counsel  to  be  followed,  so 
how  little  it  wrought  with  the  pope  the  sequel  afterwards  declared  ; 
for  the  schism,  notwithstanding,  continued  long  after,  in  which  neither 

fl)  Ex  fragmento  libri  cujusdam  Dunelm. 


NOTES    OUT    OK    THK    PARLIAMENT    ROLLS.  213 

of  the  popes  would  n^ivc  over  his  liolil,  or  yield  any  tiling  to  good  BicUard 

counsel  given  him,  for  any  respect  of  public  wealth.     Sucli  a  stroke '. — 

bearcth  ambition  in  this  apostolical  sec,  which  we  are  wont  so  greatly  to    ^-  ^■ 

magnify  :  but  of  this  enough,  which  I  leave  and  refer  to  the  consider- ' 

ation  of  the  Lord,  seeing  men  will  not  look  upon  it. 

Drawing  now  towards  the  latter  end  of  king  Ricliard's  reign,  it 
remaineth  that,  as  wc  did  before  in  the  time  of  king  Edward  III.,  so 
here  also,  wc  show  forth  a  summary  recapitulation  of  such  parliamen- 
tary notes  and  proceedings,  as  then  were  practised  by  public  parlia- 
ment in  this  king''s  time,  against  the  jurisdiction  of  tlie  bishop  of  The  _ 
Home,  to  the  intent  that  such,  if  any  such  be,  as  think,  or  have  thought  usurped 
the  receiving  of  the  pope''s  double  authority  to  be  such  an  ancient  thing  {''J','^j|j,'i" 
within  this  reahii,  may  diminish  their  o])inion  ;  as  evidently  may  ap-  v< .  ..- 
pear  by  divers  arguments  heretofore  touched,  concerning  the  election  KD^iand 
and  investing  of  bishops  by  the  king ;  as  where  king  Oswin  com-  f^t'e'^ 
manded  Cedde  to  be  ordained  archbishop  of  York  ;  also  where  king  y-'^"* 
Egfride  caused  Cuthbert  to  be  brought  to  king  Canute,  and  at  his 
commandment  he  was  instituted  bishop  of  the  same  see.'  And  likewise 
IMatthew  Paris  testifieth,  that  king  Henry  III.  gave  the  archbishopric 
of  Canterbury  to  Radulph,  then  bishop  of  London,  and  invested  him 
■with  staff  and  ring:  and  the  same  king  gave  the  bishopric  of  Win- 
chester to  William  GifFord ;  and  moreover,  following  the  steps  both 
of  his  father  and  brother  before  him,  endowed  him  with  the  posses- 
sions pertaining  to  the  said  bishopric  (the  contrary  statute  of  pope 
Urban,  forbidding  that  clerks  should  receive  any  ecclesiastical  dignity 
at  the  hands  of  princes,  or  of  any  lay  person,  to  the  contrary  notwith- 
standing.)    That  innumerable  examples  of  the  like  sort  are   to  be 
seen  in  ancient  histories  of  this  our  realm,  as  also  out  of  the  parlia- 
ment rolls  in  the  time  of  king   EdAvard  III.,  hath  sufficiently  been 
noticed  a  little  before  :  whereunto  also  may  be  added  the  notes  of 
such  parliaments  as  have  been  holden  in  the  reign  of  this  present 
king  Richard  II.,  the  collection  whereof  in  part  here  folloAveth. 

Notes  of  certain  Parliaments,  holden  in  the  reign  of  King  Richard  II., 
making  against  the  Pope. 

In  the  first  year  of  king  Richard  II.,  in  the  parliament  holden  at  Westminster, 
it  was  recjuested  and  granted,  that  the  pope's  collector  he  willed  no  longer  to  , 
gather  the  first  iruits  of  benefices  within  this  realm,  being  a  very  novelty,  and 
tiiat  no  person  do  any  longer  pay  thcni.^ 

Item,  That  no  man  do  procure  any  benefice  by  provision  from  Rome,  on 
pain  to  be  out  of  the  king's  protectioi).' 

Item,  That  no  Englishman  do  take  to  farm  of  any  alien  any  ecclesiastical  bene- 
fice or  prebend,  on  the  like  pain.  In  this  bill  was  rehearsed,  that  the  French^ 
men  had  six  thousand  pounds  yearly  of  such  livings  in  England.* 

Item,  That  remedy  migiit  be  had  against  the  pope's  reservations  to  dignities 
elective,  the  same  being  done  against  the  treaty  of  the  pope,  madte  with  king* 
Edward  III.* 

In  the  second  year  of  the  said  king  Richard  II.  it  was  by  petition  requested, 
that  some  order  miglit  be  taken,  touching  aliens  having  the  greatest  part  of  the 
church  dignities  in  their  hands :  whereunto  the  king  answered,  That  by  ad- 
vice of  the  lords  he  would  provide  therefore.^ 

(1)  Ex  lib.  Guli.  Malmesb.  de  gestis  Pontif.  Anglonan.  Ex  Mat.  Paris,  lib.  de  vita  Hen. 

(2)  Ex  Archivis  Parliament,  an.  1.  reg.  Rich.  IL  tit.  66. 

(3)  Tit.  CI.  (4)  Ibid.  68.  (5)  Ibid.  77.  (6)  Ex  anno  2.  tit.  70, 


214  MOTES    OUT    OF    THE    PARLIAMENT    ROLLS, 

Richard  Item,  It  Was  enacted,  that  all  the  benefices  of  cardinals,  and  other  rebels  to 
^^-       pope  Urban  tliat  now  is,  shall  be  seized  into  the  king's  liands.' 

An  act  that  pope  Urban  was  true  and  lawful  pope,  and  that  the  livings  of  all 

t\'oq     cardinals,  and  other  rebels  to  the  said  pope,  should  be  seized  into  the  king's 

hands,  and  the  king  be  answei'ed  of  the  profits  thereof:  and  that  whosoever 

within  this  realm  shall  procure  or  obtain  any  provision  or  other  instrument  from 

any  other  pope  than  the  same  Urban,  shall  be  out  of  the  king's  protection.^ 

Moreover,  in  the  third  year  of  king  Richard  II.,  the  prelates  and  clergy  made 
their  protestation,  in  this  parliament,  expressly  against  a  certain  new  grant,  to 
Here  note  wit,  their  extortions:  That  the  same  never  should  pass  with  their  assent  and 
strange  g^od  will,  to  the  blemishing  of  the  liberties  of  the  church,  if,  by  that  word  ex- 
proceed-  tortion,  they  meant  any  thuig  largely  to  proceed  against  ordinaries  and  others 
'"o-  of  the  church  ;  but  if  they  meant  none  otherwise  to  deal  hereafter  therein,  than 

before  that  time  had  been  done,  then  would  they  consent.  Whereunto  it  was 
But  mark  replied  for  the  king.  That  neither  for  the  same  their  said  protestation,  or  other 
tiie  ^  words  in  that  behalf,  the  king  would  stay  to  grant  to  his  justices  in  that  case, 
eveiit^  'I'^d  ill  'ill  other  cases,  as  was  iLsed  to  be  done  in  times  past,  and  as  he  was 
bound  to  do  by  virtue  of  his  oath  taken  at  his  coronation.^ 

Furthermore,  in  the  fourth  year  of  the  said  king  Richard  II.,  it  was  re- 
quested. That  provision  might  be  had  against  the  pope's  collectors,  for  levying 
of  the  first  fruits  of  ecclesiastical  dignities  within  the  realm.* 

Item,  That  all  priors,  aliens,  might  be  removed  out  of  their  houses,  and 
licensed  to  depart,  and  never  to  revert;  and  that  Englishmen  may  be  placed  in 
their  livings,  answering  the  king  as  they  did.^ 

And  in  the  ninth  year  of  the  aforesaid  king,  touching  the  matter  of  the 
staple,  the  speaker  of  the  parliament  pronounced,^  that  he  thought  best  the  same 
were  planted  within  the  realm,  considering  that  Calais,  Bruges,  and  other  towns 
beyond  the  seas  grew  very  rich  thereby,  and  good  towns  here  very  much  de- 
cayed :  and  so  much  for  the  common  profit.  Touching  the  king,  he  affirmed 
that  the  subsidy  and  custom  of  wool  yielded  more  to  the  king  when  the  staple 
was  kept  in  England,  by  one  thousand  marks  yearly,  than  it  did  now,  being 
holden  beyond  the  seas. 

Item,  That  inquisition  and  redress  might  be  had  against  such  religious  per- 
sons, as  under  the  license  to  purchase  10/.  yearly,  do  purchase  80/.  or  100/.^ 

Item,  That  all  clerks,  advanced  to  any  ecclesiastical  dignity  or  living  by  the 
king,  will  grant  to  the  king  the  first  ftuits  of  their  livings,  none  otherwise  than 
they  would  have  done  to  the  pope,  being  advanced  by  him.* 

In  the  eleventh  year  of  king  Richard  II.,  it  was  put  up  by  the  petitions  of 
the  commons,  that  such  impositions  as  are  gathered  by  the  pope's  bulls  of '  Vo- 
lumus'  and  '  Imponimus'  of  the  translations  of  B.  B.  and  such  like,  might  be 
employed  on  the  king's  wars  against  the  schismatics  of  Scotland ;  and  that  such 
as  bring  into  the  realm  the  like  bulls  and  novelties  may  be  reputed  for  traitors.^ 

In  the  thirteenth  year  of  his  reign  followed  another  parliament,  in  which,  al- 
though the  archbishops  of  Canterbury  and  York,  for  them  and  the  whole  clergy 
of  their  provinces,  made  their  solemn  protestations  in  open  parliament,  that 
they  in  no  wise  meant,  or  would  assent  to  any  statute  or  law  made  in  restraint 
of  the  pope's  authority,  but  utterly  Avithstood  the  same;  willing  this pi-otestation 
of  theirs  to  be  enrolled ;  yet  the  said  protestation  of  theirs  at  that  time  took  no 
great  eflJect.i" 

Item,  In  the  same  parliament  it  was  put  iip  by  public  petition,  that  '  the 
pope's  collector  should  be  commanded  to  void  the  realm  within  forty  days,  or 
else  to  be  taken  as  the  king's  enemy  ;  and  that  every  such  collector,  from 
henceforth,  may  be  an  EngUsliman,  and  sworn  to  execute  the  statutes  made  in 
this  parliament." 

Moreover,  in  the  same  parliament,  the  year  above-said  of  the  king,  the 
twenty-sixth  of  January,  Master  John  Mandoure,  clerk,  was  charged  openly  in 
parliament,  that  he  should  not  pass  or  send  over  to  Rome,  or  attempt  or  do 
any  thing  there  touching  the  archdeaconry  of  Durham,  in  prejudice  of  the  king, 
or  of  his  laws,  or  of  the  party  presented  thereto  by  the  king,  on  peril  that 
might  ensue. '2 

(1)  Tit.  71.  (2)  Ibid.  78.  (3)  Ex  anno  3.  reg.  Rich.  II.  (4)  Tit.  44. 

(5)  Tit.  46.  ((i)  Ex  anno  9.  ejusdem  regis,  tit.  4.  (7)  Tit.  36.  (8)  Ibid.  44. 

(a)Tit.  2ti.  (10  An.  13.  regis  Rich.  II.,  tit.  24.  (11)  Tit.  34.         (12)Ibul.  B. 


MAKING    AGAIXisT    THE    POPE.  215 

1'he  year  following,  which  was  the  thirteenth  of  this  king's  reign,  it  was    Richard 
enacted  first  toiicliing  the  staplers,  that,  after  the  feast  of  Epipliany  next  ensu-       ^^ 
ing,  the  staple  should  be  removed  from  Calais  into  England,  in  such  places  as     .    p. 
are  ccntained  in  the  statute  made  in  the  twenty-seventli  of  Edward  III.,  which     ioqo' 

statute  should  be  fully  executed:  and  further,  that  every  alien  that  bringeth ' 

merchandise  into  the  realm,  should  find  sufficient  surety  to  buy  and  carry  away  Apainst 
commodities  of  the  realm,  to  half  the  value  of  tlie  said  merchandise.'  usury. 

Item,  In  the  .same  parliament  petition  was  made.  That  against  the  horrible 
vice  of  usury,  then  termed  shifts,  practised  as  well  by  the  clergy  as  laity,  the 
order  made  by  John  Notte,  late  mayor  of  London,  might  be  executed  through- 
out the  realm. - 

Moreover,  in  the  fifteenth  year  of  the  reign  of  the  aforesaid  king,  it  was  ac- 
corded :  for  that  Sir  William  Brian,  knight,  had  purchased  from  Rome  a  bull 
directed  from  the  archbishops  of  Canterbury  and  York,  to  excommunicate  such 
as  had  broken  up  his  house,  and  had  taken  away  divers  letters,  privileges,  and 
charters  ;  the  same  bull,  being  read  in  the  parliament  house,  was  adjudged  pre- 
judicial to  the  king's  crown,  and  in  derogation  of  the  laws :  for  which  he  was, 
by  the  king,  and  assent  of  the  lords,  committed  to  the  Tower,  there  to  remain  at 
the  king's  will  and  pleasure.^ 

In  the  said  parliament  also,  William,  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  maketh  his 
protestation  in  the  open  parliament,  saying,  that  the  pope  ought  not  to  ex- 
communicate any  bishop,  or  to  intermeddle,  for  or  touching  any  presentment 
to  an)'  ecclesiastical  dignity  recorded  in  any  of  the  king's  courts.  He  ftu-ther 
protested,  that  the  pope  ought  to  make  no  translation  to  any  bishopric  within  the 
realm  against  the  king's  will ;  for  that  the  same  was  to  the  destniction  of  the 
realm  and  crown  of  England,  which  hath  always  been  so  free,  as  the  same  hath 
had  no  earthly  sovereign,  but  hath  been  subject  to  God  only,  in  all  things  touching 
regalities,  and  to  none  other  :  which  protestation  he  prayed  might  be  entered.* 
In  the  seventeenth  year  of  the  reign  of  the  king  aforesaid,  it  was  desired 
tl'.at  remedy  might  be  had  against  such  religious  persons  as  caused  their  vil- 
lains or  underlings  to  marry  free  women  inheritable,  whereby  the  lands  came 
to  those  religious  men's  hands  by  collusion.* 

Item,  That  suflicient  persons  might  be  presented  to  benefices,  who  may  do 
well  on  the  same,  so  that  their  stock,  for  want  thereof,  do  not  perish.* 

Item,  That  remedy  might  be  had  against  the  abbots  of  Colchester  and  Abing- 
don, who,  in  the  towns  of  Colchester  and  Colnham,  claim  to  have  sanctuary.' 

To  come  to  the  parliament  holden  in  the  twentieth  year  of  this  king's  reign.  Here  the 
we  find,  moreover,  in  the  said  rolls,  how  that  the  archbishops  of  Canterbiuy  ^'^.'^^- 
and  York,  for  themselves  and  the  clergy  of  their  provinces,  declared  to  the  king  ca,i'ter-° 
in  open  parliament,  that,  forasmuch  as  they  were  sworn  to  the  pope  and  see  of  bury  go- 
Rome,  if  any  thing  were  in  the  parliament  attempted  in  restraint  of  the  same,  t'^py","' 
they  would  in  no  wise  assent  thereto,  but  verily  withstand  the  same  :  which  himself. 
their  protestation  they  require  to  be  enrolled.' 

Upon  the  petition  of  the  begging  friars,  there  at  large  it  was  enacted,  that 
none  of  that  order  should  pass  over  the  seas  without  license  of  his  sovereign,  nor 
that  he  should  take  upon  him  any  order  of  master  of  divinity,  unless  he  were 
first  apposed  in  his  chapter  provincial ;  on  pain  to  be  put  out  of  the  king's 
protection.' 

Item,  That  the  king's  officers,  for  making  arrests  or  attachments  in  church- 
yards, are  therefore  excommunicated  ;  whereof  remedy  was  recpiired.'" 

In  the  twenty-first  year  of  the  same  king's  reign  the  parliament  being  holden 
at  Westminster,  we  find  how  the  commons,  in  full  parliament,  accused  Thomas 
Arundel,  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  for  that  he  as  chancellor  procured,  and  as 
chief  doer  executed,  tlie  same  commission,  made  traitorously  in  the  tenth  year 
of  the  king  :  and  also,  that  he,  the  said  archbishop,  procured  the  duke  of  Glou- 
cester, and  the  earls  of  Arundel  and  Warwick,  to  encroach  to  themselves  royal 
power,  and  to  judge  to  death  Simon  de  Burley  and  Sir  John  Berners,  without 
the  king's  assent :  whereupon  the  commons  required  that  the  same  archbishop 
might  rest  under  safe  keeping :  whereunto,  for  that  the  same  impeachments 
touched  so  gi-eat  a  person,  they  would  be  advised.'* 

(1)  Exan.  14.  rcR.  Ric.  II.,  tit.  6.  (2)  Tit.  24.  (3)  Ibid.  29. 

(4)  Vide  articulum,  tit.  29.  (5)  Ex  an.  17.reg.  Ric.  II.,  tit.  33.  (fi)  Tit.  43. 

(7)  Tit.  16.  (8)  Ex  an.  20.  reg.  Ric.  II.,  tit.  22.  (9)  Tit.  32. 

OO)  Tit.  3fi.  (11)  Ex  21.  an.  reg.  Ric.  II.,  tit.  15. 


<216  ICING    KlCHAllD    II.    I)]:POSED. 

Hichard       Item,  The  tweiity-fiftli  day  of  September,  tlie  commons  prayed  the  king  lo 

//.       give  judf^ment  against  the  said  archbislioj),  according  to  his  deserts.     The  king 

answered,  that  privately  the  said   archbishop  had  confessed  to  him,  how  he 

.    q'    mistook  himself  in  the  said  commission,  and  therefore  submitted  himself  to  the 

kino-'s  mercy ;  wherefore  the  king,  lords,  and  sir  Thomas  Percy,  proctor  for 

TlieArcii-  the  clero'y,  adjudged  the  fact  of  the  said  archbishop  to  be  treason,  and  himself 

bisliop       .^   ti-aityj-^  and  therefore  it    was    ordered,  that  the  said   archbishop  should  be 

n'aitor.  ^   banished,  his  temporalities  seized,  his  lands  and  goods  forfeited,  as  well  in  use 

as  in  possession.' 

^J'he  king  further  prescribed,  that  the  said  archbishop  should  take  his  passinsr 
on  Friday,  within  six  weeks  of  Michaelmas,  at  Dover,  towards  the  parts  of 
France.^ 

Thus  having  hitherto  sufficiently  touched  and  comprehended  such 

things  as  have  happened  in  the  reign  of  this  king,  necessary  fur  the 

church  to  know,  by  course  of  story  we  come  noAv  to  the  twenty- 

A.D.1399.  second  year  of  king  Richard's  reign,  which  Is  a.  d.  1399.     In  that 

Tiiede-     y.^.^^^  happened  the  stranoje  and  also  the  lamentable  deposing^  of  this 

kint;'      kmg  Kichard  11.  aioresaid,  irom  his  kmgly  sceptre  :   strange,  tor  tluat 

lychaid    j^j^^  jj|.^  example  hath  not  often  been  seen  in  seats  royal :  lamentable, 

for  that  it  cannot  but  be  grievous  to  any  good  man"'s  heart,  to  see  han 

either  so  to  deserve,  if  he  were  justly  deposed,  or  if  he  were  unjustly 

deprived,  to  see  the  kingly  title  there  not  able  to  hold  its  right,  where, 

by  force,  it  is  compelled  to  give  place  to  might. 

As  concerning  the  order  and  process  of  king  Richard's  deposing, 
for  that  it  is  not  greatly  pertinent  to  my  argument,  and  also  that  it  is 
sufficiently  contained  in  Robert  Fabian,  and  in  the  king's  records,  in 
the  chronicle  of  St.  Alban's,  and  in  other  histories  at  large,  it  were 
here  tedious  and  superfluous  to  intermeddle  with  repeating  thereof. 
Vices  and  Wbat  Were  the  conditions  and  properties  of  this  king,  partly  before 
ni[xe/in  hath  been  touched ;  in  whom,  as  some  good  virtues  may  be  noted, 
ttTchard.  SO  also  somc  viccs  may  seem  to  be  mixed  withal,  but  especially  this, 
that  he,  starting  out  of  the  steps  of  his  progenitors,  ceased  to  take 
part  with  them  who  took  part  with  the  gospel.   Whereupon  it  so  fell, 
not  by  the  blind  wheel  of  fortune,  but  by  the  secret  hand  of  Him  who 
wiiatitis  directeth  all  estates,  that,  as  he  first  began  to  forsake  the  maintaining 
thenTain-  of  thc  gospcl  of  God,  SO  the  Lord  began  to  forsake  him  :  and  where 
ofthr^    the  protection  of  God  beginneth  to  fail  him,  whom  God  once  giveth 
gospel,     over  to  man's  punislmient,  there   can  lack  no  causes  to  be  charged 
withal.     So  that  to  me,  considering  the  whole  life  and  trade  of  this 
prince,  among  all  other  causes  alleged  in   stories  against  him,  none 
seemeth  to  be  of  more  weight  to  us,  or  more  hurtful  to  him,  than  this 
forsaking  of  the  Lord  and  his  word :  although,  to  such  as  list  more 
to  be  certified  in   other  causes  concurring  withal,  many  and-  sundry 
Thirty-     defects  in  that  king  may  appear  in  stories,  to  the  number  of  thirty- 
tides  ?Ii'd  three  articles  alleged,  or  forced  rather  against  him  :  in  which  as  I  can- 
aarainst     ^^ot  dcny,  but  that  he  was  worthy  of  much  blame,  so  to  be  displaced 
r.iciiard.   there-for  from  his  regal  seat,  and  rightful  state  of  the  crown,  it  may  be 
thought  perhaps  the  causes  not  to  l)e  so  rare,  or  so  material  in  a  prince, 
who  either  could,  or  else  would,  have  served,  had  not  he  given  over 
before  to  serve  the  Lord  and   his  word,  choosing  rather  to  serve  the 
humour  of  thc  pope  and  bloody  prelates,  than  to  further  the  Lord's 
proceedings  in  preaching  of  his  word.     And  then,  as  I  said,  how  can 

(1)  Tit.  16.  (2)  Ibid.  17. 


DISPLEASURE    AGAIXST    THE    LOXDONERS.  217 

enemies  lack,  wliereGoil  standotli  not  to  befriend?  or  what  cause  can  r^ichard 


II. 


be  so  little,  which  is  not  able  enough  to  cast  down,  where  the  Lord's 

arm  is  shortened  to  sustain?     Wherefore,  it  is  a  point  of  principal    A.  D. 

wisdom  in  a  prince,  not  to  forget,  that  as  he  standeth  always  in  need    ^'^'^^■ 


of  God's  helping  hand,  so  always  he  have  the  discipline  and  fear  of  II  im  ^"^'^ 
l)etore  his  eyes,  accordmg  to  tlie  counsel  oi  the  godly  kmg  David,  neces- 
Psalm  ii.  ^"--y- 

And  thus  much  touching  the  time  and  race  of  this  king  Richard, 
with  the  tragical  story  of  his  deposing;  the  order  and  manner  whereof 
purposely  I  omit,  only  contented  briefly  to  lay  together  a  few  special 
things  done  before  his  fall,  such  as  may  be  sufficient,  in  a  brief  sum, 
both  to  satisfy  the  reader  inquisitive  of  such  stories,  and  also  to  fore- 
warn other  princes  to  beware  of  the  like  dangers.     In  such  as  write  The  wng 
the  life  and  acts  of  this  prince,  thus  I  read  of  him  reported,  that  he  lew/'*^ 
was  niTich  inclined  to  the  favouring  and  advancing  of  certain  persons  counsel, 
about  him,  and  ruled  all  by  their  counsel,  who  were  then  greatly  ab- 
horred and  hated  in  the  realm,  the  names  of  whom  were  Robert  Vere, 
earl  of  Oxford,  whom  the  king  made  duke  of  Ireland ;  Alexander 
Nevile,  archbishop  of  York ;   Michael  de  la  Pole,  earl  of  Suffolk  ; 
Robert  Trisilian,  lord  chief  justice  ;   Nicholas  Brembre,  with  others. 

These  men,  being  hated  and  disdained  by  divers  of  the  nobles  and 
of  the  commons,  the  king  also,  by  favouring  them,  was  less  favoured  ■ 
himself;  insomuch,  that  the  duke  of  Gloucester,  named  Thomas 
Woodstock,  the  king"'s  uncle,  with  the  earl  of  Warwick,  and  the  earl 
of  Derby,  stood  up  in  arms  against  those  counsellors  and  abusers  (as 
they  named  them)  of  the  king.  Insomuch  that  the  king  for  fear  was 
constrained,  against  his  mind,  to  remove  out  of  his  court,  Alexander 
Nevile,  archbishop  of  York ;  John  Ford,  bishop  of  Durham  ;  friar 
Thomas  Rushoke,  bishop  of  Chichester,  the  king's  confessor;  with 
the  lord  Harringworth,  lord  Burnell  and  Beamond,  lord  Vere,  and 
divers  others. 

And  furthermore,  in  the  parliament,  the  year  following,  Robert  The  no- 
Trisilian,  the  justice,  was  hanged  and  drawn  :  also  Nicholas  Brembre,  3^^^"^' "' 
knight,  James  Salisbury  also,  and  James  Barnese,  both  knights  ;  John  against 
J^eauchamp,  the  king's  steward,  and  John  Blake,  esquire,  in  like  man-  hiscoun- 
ner.  All  these,  by  the  counsel  of  the  lords  being  cast  in  the  parliament,  *^'"°"' 
against  the  king's  mind  did  suffer;  which  was  in  the  eleventh  of  his 
reign,  he  being  yet  under  governors:  but  consequently,  after  the  same, 
the  king,  claiming  his  own  liberty,  being  come  to  the  age  of  twenty, 
began  to  take  more  upon  him.     And  this  was  one  thing  that  stirred 
up  the  king's  stomach  against  the  nobles.' 

Secondly  :  Another  thing  that  stirred  him  up  so  much  acrainst  the  Prepara- 

"^  .  r  o  tives  to 

Londoners,  was  this,  for  that  he  would  have  borrowed  of  them  a  thou-  theicing's 
sand  i)ounds,  and  they  denied  him,  to  their  double  and  triple  disad-  '''^^"""^ 
vantage,  as  after  ensued  upon  it.^  Another  occasion  besides  this, 
between  the  king  and  the  Londoners,  happened  thus,  by  reason  of  one 
of  the  bishop  of  Salisbury's  servants,  named  Roman,  and  a  baker's 
man,  who  then  carrying  a  basket  of  horse-bread  in  Fleet-street,  the 
aforesaid  Roman  took  a  horse-loaf  out  of  the  basket.  The  baker  asking 
liim  why  he  did  so,  the  bishop's  lusty  yeoman  tumed  back  again  and 
brake  his  head  :  whereupon  the  neighbours  came  out,  and  would  have 

(1)  Ex  Chron.  Albanensis.  (2)  Ibid. 


218  PREPARATIVKS    TO    THE    DEPOSIXG    OF    THE    KING. 

Richard  aiTcsted  this  Roman,  but  he  escaped  away  unto  the  bishop's  house. 
^^'      Then  the  constable  would  have  had  him  out ;  but  the  bishop's  men 
A-  D.    shut  fast  the  gates,  that  they  should  not  approach.    Thus  much  people 
^^^^-   gathered  together,  threatening  to  burst  open  the  gates,  and  fire  the 
liouse,  imless  they  had  the  aforesaid  party  to  them  brought  out : 
whereby  much  ado  there  was,  till  at  length  the  mayor  and  sheriffs 
came  and  quieted  the  rage  of  the  commons,  and  sent  every  man  home 
to  his  house,  charging  them  to  keep  peace.    Here  as  yet  was  no  great 
harm  done;  and  if  the  bishop,  for  his  part,  had  been  quiet,  and  had  not 
stirred  the  coals  of  debate,  which  were  well  slaked  already,  all  had  been 
ended  without  further  perturbation.     But  the  stomach  of  the  bishop 
Waitam    (whosc  name  was  John  Waltam,  being  then  treasurer  of  England,, 
saus"-''  "^  ^'^^  having  digested  the  wrong,  although  his  OAvn  man  had  done  it, 
bury,  a    jiaving  uo  great  cause  so  to  do,  the  aforesaid  bishop  went  to  Thomas 
bate.       Arundel,  at  that  time  archbishop  of  York,  and  lord  chancellor  of 
England,  to  complain  of  the  Londoners.     Where  is  to  be  noted,  or 
rather  revealed,  by  the  way,  a  privy  mystery,  which  although  it  be  not 
in  this  story  touched    by  the  "writers,  yet  it  touched  the  hearts  of 
London-   the  bishops  not  a  little.     For  the  Londoners  at  that  time  were  noto- 
vourersof  riously  kuown  to  be  favourers  of  Wickliff"s  side,  as  partly  before  this 
doctrine.^  is  to  be  scen,  and  in  the  story  of  St.  Alban's  more  plainly  doth  appear, 
where  the  author  of  the  said  history,  writing  upon  the  fifteenth  year  of 
king  Richard's  reign,  reporteth  in  these  words  of  the  Londoners,  that 
they  were,^  "not  right  believers  in  God,  nor  in  the  traditions  of  their 
forefathers ;  sustainers  of  the  Lollards,  depravers  of  religious  men, 
withholders  of  tithes,  and  impoverishers  of  the  common  people,"  &c.^ 
Thus  the  Londoners,   being  noted  and  suspected  of  the  bishops, 
were  the  more  maliced,  no  doubt,  of  the  said  bishops,  who  were  the 
more  ready  to  find  and  take  all  occasions  to  work  against  them,  as  by 
Ms"«)m-  ^^^^^  doing  herein  may  well  appear :  for  the  bishop  of  Salisbury,  and 
plained  of  the  archbishop  of  York,  having  no  greater  matter  against  them  than 
king  by    was  declared,  with  a  grievous  complaint  went  to  the  king,  complaining 
fehops.    ^f  t^6  mayor  and  sheriflTs  of  London.     What  trespass  the  mayor  and 
Beati  ^    sheriffs  had  done,  as  ye  have  heard  before,  so  may  you  judge.     Now 
what  followed  after  let  us  hear.     The  king,  incensed  not  a  little  with 
the  complaint  of  the  bishops,  conceived  eftsoons,  against  the  mayor 
and  sheriffs,  and  against  the  whole  city  of  London,  a  great  stomach ; 
insomuch,  that  the  mayor  and  both  the  sheriffs  were  sent  for,  and  re- 
moved from  their  office.     Sir  Edward  Darlington  was  then  made 
warden  and  governor  of  the  city ;  who  also,  for  his  gentleness  showed 
to  the  citizens,  was  deposed,  and  another,  named  Sir  Baldwin  Ra- 
dington,  placed  in  that  room.     Moreover,  so  much  grew  the  king's 
The  court  displcasurc  against  the  city,  that  he  also  removed  from  London  the 
fr^^IlV  courts  and  terms,   to  be  kept   at  York,   that  is  to  say,  the  chancery, 
don  to      the  exchequer,  the  king's  bench,  the  hanaper,  and  the  common  pleas ; 
where  the  same  continued  from  Midsummer  till  Christmas,  to  the  great 
decay  of  the  city  of  London  ;  which  was  a.  d.  1398. 

Thirdly  :  Another  great  cause  which  purchased  the  king  much  evil 
will  amongst  his  subjects,  was  the  secret  murdering  of  his  own  uncle, 

(1)  '  Male  creduli  in  Ileum  et  traditiones  avitas,  Lollardorum  sustentatores,  religiosoium  rie- 
tiactatores,  deci:narum  deteiitores,  et  communis  vulgi  ciepaupcratores,'  &c. 

(2)  E^  biBtor.  D.  Aibani,  cujus  sic  habet  inilium,  anno,  gvatite,  Sic. 


HE    I'LTTTETH    HIS    UKCI.E    TO    DEATH.  219 

named  Thomas  Woodstock,  duke  of  Gloucester,  of  whom  mention  Richard 
was  made  before ;  where  was  declared,  how  tlie  said  duke,  with  the      ^^' 
earl  of  Arundel,  the  earl  of  Warwick,  and  the   earl  of  Derby,  with    A.  D. 
others,  were  up  in  armoui-  against  certain  wicked  counsellors  about  the    ^'^^^- 
king.     Whereupon  the  king,  watching  afterwards  his  time,  came  to 
Chelmsford,  and  so  to  the  place  near  by,  where  the  duke  lay  ;  where,  The  king 
with  his  own  hands,  he  arrested  the  said  duke  his  uncle,  and  sent  him  h"^o"n*'' 
down  by  water  immediately  to  Calais ;  and  there,  through  the  king's  ""'^'e' 
commandment,  by  secret  means  he  was  put  to  death,  being  strangled  htm^to  be 
under  a  feather  bed,  the  earl  marshal  being  then  the  keeper  of  Calais,  J^rong- 
Avhereby  great  indignation  rose  in  many  men's  hearts  against  the  king.  ^J'\^° 

With  the  same  duke  of  Gloucester,  also,  about  the  same  time,  were 
arrested  and  imprisoned  the  earl  of  Warwick  and  the  earl  of  Arundel, 
who,  being  condemned  by  parliament,  were  then  executed  ;  whereby 
great  grudge  and  great  indignation  rose  in  the  hearts  of  many  against 
the  king.    A.  D.  1397. 

Fourthly,  to  omit  here  the  blank  charts  sent  over  all  the  land  by 
the  king,  and  how  the  king  was  said  to  let  out  his  realm  to  farm  : 
over  and  beside  all  these  above  premised,  befell  another  matter,  which 
was  the  principal  occasion  of  this  mischief;  the  banishment,  I  mean, 
of  Henry,  earl  of  Derby,  made  duke  of  Hereford  a  little  before  (being 
son  of  John  of  Gaunt,  duke  of  Lancaster,  who  died  shortly  after  the 
banishment  of  his  son,  and  lieth  buried  in  the  clim-ch  of  St.  Paul,  in 
London),  and  the  duke  of  Norfolk,  who  was  before  earl  of  Notting-  Eari  of 
ham,  and  afterwards,  by  this  king,   made  duke  of  Norfolk  the  year  ha°m'"*'" 
before.     At  that  time  the  king  made  five  dukes,  a  marquis,  and  four  made 
earls  ;  to  wit,  the  duke  of  Hereford,  who  was  before  earl  of  Derby  ;  Norfolk 
the  duke  of  Avnnerle,  who  was  before  earl  of  Rutland ;  the  duke  of 
Southrey,  who  was  before  carl  of  Kent ;  the  duke  of  Exeter,  who  was 
before  earl  of  Huntingdon  ;  and  this  duke  of  Norfolk,  being  before 
earl  of  Nottingham,  as  is  aforesaid,  &c.     The  occasion  of  banishing 
the  first-named  dukes  was  this  : 

About  this  present  time  the  duke  of  Hereford  did  impeach  the 
duke  of  Norfolk  upon  certain  words  spoken  against  the  king  :  where- 
upon, casting  their  gloves  one  against  the  other,  they  agreed  to  fight 
out  the  quarrel,  a  day  being  appointed  fcr  the  same  at  Coventry.  But  He  ana 
the  king  took  up  the  matter  into  his  own  hands,  banishing  the  duke  of l/ere-^ 
of  Norfolk  for  ever  (who  afterwards  died  at  Venice)  ;  and  the  other  ^^J^  ''^■ 
duke,  who  was  the  duke  of  Hereford,  for  ten  years.     Beside  these, 
also  was  exiled  into  France,  Thomas  Anmdel,  archbishop  of  Canter-  AmndeV 
bury,  by  act  of  parliament  in  the  same  year,  for  points  of  treason,  as  as  a'uai^ 
ye  have  heard  before  expressed,  p.  21 6 ;  all  which  turned  to  the  great  '<""  ^y 
inconvenience  of  this  king,  as  in  the  event  following  may  appear.        mint. 

These  causes  and  preparatives  thus  premised,  it  followed  the  year 
after,  which  was  a.  d.  1399,  and  the  last  year  of  this  king,  that  the 
king,  upon  certain  affairs  to  be  done,  took  his  voyage  into  L-e- 
land.  In  the  mean  time  Henry  of  Bolingbroke,  and  with  him  the 
earl  of  Derby,  the  duke  of  Hereford,  and  the  aforesaid  archbishop, 
Thomas  Anmdel  (who  before  were  both  exiled),  returning  out  of 
France  to  Calais,  came  into  England,  challenging  for  the  aforesaid 
Henry  the  dukedom  of  Lancaster,  after  the  death  of  his  father. 
With  them  also  came  the  son  and  heii-  of  the  earl  of  Arundel,  beinsr 


220  KING    RICHARD    RESIGNETH    HIS    CROWX. 

Richard  ypj.  |j^|.  young.     Tliosc  together  setting  out  from  Calais,  arrived  at 

— Kavenspur  in  the  north  ;  at  the  knowledge  whereof  much  people 

v?9g'    gathered  unto  them. 

'-      In  the  mean  time,  as  the  duke  was  hovering  on  the  sea  to  enter 

tlic  land,  lord  Edmund,  duke  of  York,  the  king's  uncle,  to  whom 
the  king  conmiittcd  the   custody  of  his  realm,  having  intelligence 
thereof,  called  to  him  the  bishop  of  Chichester  named  Edmund  Staf- 
ford, chancellor  of  the  realm  ;  and  William  Scropc,  earl  of  Wiltshire, 
lord  treasurer;  also  John  Bushey,   William  Bagot,  Henry  Grene, 
and  John  Ruschell,  with  divers  others,  consulting  with  them  what  was 
best  in  that  case  to  be  done ;  avIio  then  gave  their  advice  (whether 
wilful   or  unskilful,  it  is  not  known,  but  very  unfruitful),  that  he 
should  leave   London,   and  go  to  St.  Alban's,  there  to  wait  for  more 
strength,  able  to  encounter  with  the  duke.     But,  as  the  people  out 
of  divers  quarters  resorted  thither,  many  of  them  protested  that  they 
Avould  do  nothing  to  the  harm  and  prejudice  of  the  duke  of  Lancas- 
ter, who,  they  said,  was  unjustly  expulsed.     The  rest  of  the  council, 
John  Bushey,  William  Bagot,  Henry  Grene,  "William  Scrope,  trea- 
surer, hearing  and  understanding  how  the  commons  were  minded  to 
join  with  the  duke  of  Hereford,  left  the  duke  of  York  and  the  lord 
chancellor,  and  fled  to  the  castle  of  Bristol.     Here  it  is  to  be  under- 
stood, that  these  four  were  they,  to  whom,  as  the  common  fame  ran, 
What       the  king  had  let  out  his  realm  to  farm ;  and  were  so  hated  by  the 
l)m!>Mioth  people,  that  it  is  to  be  thought,  that  for  the  hatred   of  them  more 
about  a     thau  of  the  king,  this  commotion  was  among  the  people. 
Richard        -^^  tliis  broil  was  in  England,  the  noise  thereof  sounding  to   the 
ftomT"'  king''s  ears,  being  then  in  Ireland,  for  hasty  speed  of  returning  into 
land.       England,  he  left  in  Ireland  both  his  business,  and  most  of  his  ord- 
nance also  behind  him ;  and  so,  passing  the  seas,  landed  at  Milford 
Haven,  not  daring,  as  it  seemed,  to  come  to  London. 

On  the  contrary  side,  unto  Henry,  duke  of  Hereford  (being 
landed,  as  is  said,  in  the  north),  came  the  earl  of  Northumberland, 
lord  Henry  Percy,  and  Henry  his  son,  the  earl  of  Westmorland,  lord 
Radulph  Nevile,  and  other  lords  besides  to  a  great  nvmiber,  so  that 
the  multitude  rose  to  sixty  thousand  able  soldiers ;  who,  first  making 
toward  the  castle  of  Bristol,  took  the  aforesaid  Bushey,  Grene. 
Scrope,  and  Bagot,  of  whom  three  were  immediately  beheaded ;  Bagot 
escaped  away,  and  fled  to  Ireland. 
Forsaken       The  king,  in  the  mean  Avhile,  lying  about  Wales,  destitute  and 

of  his  •  '     ^       o  ^  ' 

subjects,   desolate,  without  comfort  or  counsel ;   who  neither  durst  come  to 
i's.fora    London,  neither  would  any  man  come  to  him  ;  and  perceiving,  more- 
prince  to  ovcr,  that  tlic  commons,  that  were  up  in  such  a  great  power  against 
cdofhis  him,  would  rather  die  than  give  over  that  they  had  begun,  for  fear  of 
su  jects.  themselves  ;  seeing  therefore  no  other  remedy,  called  to  him  Lord  T. 
Percy,  earl  of  Worcester,  and  steward  of  his  household,  willing  him, 
with  others  of  his  family,  to  provide  for  themselves  in  time ;  who 
then  openly  in  the  hall  brake  his  white  rod  before  them  all,  com- 
manding every  man  to  shift  for  himself.     Fabian,  however,  and  some 
others  say,  that  he  did  this  of  his  own  accord,  contrary  to  his  alle- 
Richard    giancc.     The  king,   compassed  on  every  side  with  miseries,  shifted 
?«igTihi3  ^o™  P^*^^^  ^^  place,  the  duke  still  following  him;  till  at  length,  being 
crown      at   the  castle    of  Conwav,  the  kinff  desired  to   talk  with  I'liomas 


KIXG    HEXRY    THE    FOURTH    F,  NTH  HONED.  221 

Anindel.  archbishop,  andwith  tlic  carl  of  NorthumbcHand;  towhom  he  nuhard 

declared,  that  he  would  resign  his  crown,  on  condition  that  an  honour- '. — 

able  living  might  be  for  him  provided,  and  life  promised  to  eight   A.  I). 

persons,  such  as  he  would  name.     This  being  granted  and  ratified, i^l 

but  not  performed,  he  came  to  the  castle  of  Flint,  whence,  after  talk 
had  with  the  duke  of  Lancaster,  he  was  brought  the  same  night,  by 
the  duke  and  his  army,  to  Chester,  and  from  thence  was  conveyed 
secretly  into  the  Tower,  there  to  be  kept  till  the  next  parliament.  By  The  king 
the  way,  as  he  came  near  to  London,  divers  evil-disposed  men  of  the  ^™,gj  ^^ 
citv  beins:  warned  thereof,  gathered  themselves,   thinking  to  have  »Jie 

^  '    o  7  o  ^  Tower. 

slain  him,  for  the  great  cruelty  he  had  used  before  toward  the  city ; 
but,  by  the  policy  of  the  mayor  and  rulers  of  the  city,  the  madness  of 
the  people  was  stayed.  Not  long  after  followed  the  duke,  and  also 
began  the  parliament:  in^vhich  parliament  the  earl  of  Northumberland, 
with  many  other  earls  and  lords  were  sent  to  the  king  in  the  Tower,  to 
take  of  him  a  full  resignation,  according  to  his  former  promise  ;  and 
so  they  did.  This  done,  divers  accusations  and  articles  were  laid  and 
engrossed  against  the  said  king,  to  the  number  of  thirty-three,  some 
say  thirty-eight,  which,  the  matter  in  them  contained  not  being 
greatly  material,  I  overpass :  and  the  next  year  after,  he  was  had  to 
Pomfret  Castle,  and  there  famished  to  death. 


HENRY  THE  FOURTH.^ 

And  thus  king  Richard  bv  common  assent  being  deposed  from  his    A.D. 
rightful  crown,  the  duke  of  Lancaster  was  led  by  Thomas  Arundel,    1399. 
the  archbishop,    to   the   seat  royal ;    who   there   standing  up,    and 
crossing  himself  on  the  forehead  and  the  breast,  spake  in  words  as 
followeth : 

In  the  name  of  God,    Amen.     I   Henrj'  of  Lancaster  claim  the  realm  of  The 
England  and  the  crown,  with  all  the  appurtenances,  as  I  that  am  descended  by  ^o^^^  of 
right  hne  of  the  blood,  coming  from   that  good  lord  king  Henry  III.,  and,  cilumng 
through  the  right  that  God  of  his  grace  hath  sent  to  me,  with  the  help  of  my  Uie 
kin  and  of  my  friends  to  recover  the  same,  which  was  in  point  to  be  undone  for  "own. 
default  of  good  governance,  and  due  justice,  &:c. 

After  these  words  the  archbishop,  asking  the  assent  of  the  people,  Kinp 
being  joyful  of  their  new  king,  took  the  duke  by  the  hand,  and  "fo.rfm- 
placed  him  in  the  kingly  throne,  which  was  a.  u.  1399,  and,  shortly  ^^^^^^^^ 
after,  bv  the  aforesaid  archbishop,  he  was  crowned  also  king  of  Eng- 
land.2  ' 

&\t  IDiUiam  ^autre,  otl)ectoi.^e  calleD  CfjatrfjS,  ^aciisf)  ^xitiU 
a  JJJactpc. 

The  next  year  after,  followed  a  parliament  holden  at  Westminster;  a.d.hoo 
in  which  parliament  one  William  Sautre,  a  good  man  and  a  faithful 

(1)  Edition  1563.  p.  HI.  Ed.  1570,  p.  614.  EU.  1576,  p.  133.  Ed.  1583,  p.  514.  Ed.  1596,  p.  474.  Ed. 
IfiSt,  Vol.  i.  p.  586.— Ed. 

(2)  Ex  Chron.  D.  Albanensis. 


THE    STOllY    OF    SIR.    WILLIAM    SAUTRE. 

Henry    pricst,  inflamed  with  zeal  for  true  religion,  required  that  he  might  be 

^^"      heard  for  the  commodity  of  the  whole  realm.     But  the  matter  being 

A.  D.    smelt  before  by  the  bishop,  they  obtained  that  the  matter  should  be 

11^^  referred  to  the  convocation,  where  the  said  William  Sautre  being 

brought  before  the   bishops  and  notaries  thereunto  appointed,  the 

convocation  was  deferred  to  the  Saturday  next  ensuing. 

Sir  William's  First  and  Second  Examinations, 

When  Saturday  was  come,  that  is  to  say,  the  12th  day  of  February,  Thomas 
Arundel,  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  in  the  presence  of  his  council  provincial 
being  assembled  in  the  said  chapter-house,  against  one  sir  William  Sautre,  other- 
wise called  Chatris,  chaplain,  personally  then  and  there  appearing  by  the 
commandment  of  the  aforesaid  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  objected,  that  the 
said  sir  William,  before  the  bishop  of  Norwich,  had  once  renounced  and  ab- 
jured divers  and  sundry  conclusions  heretical  and  erroneous ;  and  that  after 
such  abjuration  made,  he  publicly  and  privily  held,  taught,  and  preached  the 
same  conclusions,  or  else  such  like,  disagreeing  to  the  catholic  faith,  and  to  the 
great  peril,  and  pernicious  example  of  others.  And  after  this  he  caused  such 
like  conclusions,  holden  and  preached,  as  is  said,  by  the  said  sir  William  with- 
out renunciation,  then  and  there  to  be  read  unto  the  said  archbishop,  by  Master 
Robert  Hall,  chancellor  unto  the  said  bishop,  in  a  certain  scroll  written,  in 
tenor  of  wordj  as  followeth  : 

Sir  William  Chatris,  otherwise  called  Sautre,  parish  priest  of  the  cluuxh 
St.  Scithe  the  virgin,  in  London,  publicly  and  privily  doth  hold  these  conclu- 
sions underwritten : 

The  artt-       Imprimis,  He  saith.  That  he  will  not  worship  the  cross  on  which  Christ  suf- 

•^^^*.  fered,  but  only  Christ  that  suffered  upon  the  cross. 

William        1 1.  Item,  That  he  would  sooner  worship  a  temporal  king,  than  the  aforesaid 

Sautre.     wooden  cross. 

III.  Item,  That  he  would  rather  worship  the  bodies  of  the  saints,  than  the 
very  cross  of  Christ  on  which  he  hung,  if  it  were  before  him. 

IV.  Item,  That  he  would  rather  worship  a  man  truly  contrite,  than  the  cross 
of  Christ. 

V.  Item,  That  he  is  bound  rather  to  worship  a  man  that  is  predestinate,  than 
an  angel  of  God 

VI.  Item,  That  if  any  man  would  visit  the  monvunents  of  Peter  and  Paul, 
or  go  on  pilgrimage  to  the  tomb  of  St.  Thomas,  or  any  whither  else,  for  the 
obtaining  of  any  temporal  benefit ;  he  is  not  bound  to  keep  his  vow,  but  he  may 
distribute  the  expenses  of  his  vow  upon  the  alms  of  the  poor. 

VII.  Item,  That  every  priest  and  deacon  is  more  bound  to  preach  the  word 
of  God,  than  to  say  the  canonical  hours. 

VIII.  Item,  That  after  the  pronouncing  of  the  sacramental  words  of  the 
body  of  Christ,  the  bread  remaineth  of  the  same  nature  that  it  v/as  before,  nei- 
ther doth  it  cease  to  be  bread. 

To  these  conclusions  or  articles,  being  thus  read,  the  archbishop  of  Canter- 
bury required  the  same  sir  William  to  answer :  and  then  the  said  William  asked  a 
copy  of  such  articles  or  conclusions,  and  a  competent  space  to  answer  unto  the 
same :  whereupon  the  said  archbishop  commanded  a  copy  of  such  articles  or 
conclusions  to  be  delivered  then  and  there  unto  the  said  sir  William,  assigning 
the  Thursday  then  next  ensuing  for  him  to  deliberate  and  make  answer  in.  When 
Thursday,  the  said  day  of  appearance  was  come,  Master  Nicholas  Rishton, 
auditor  of  the  causes  and  business  belonging  to  the  said  archbishop  (he  being  then 
in  the  parliament-house  at  Westminster,  otherwise  hindered),  continued  the  said 
convocation  with  all  matters  arising,  depending,  and  appertinent  thereunto,  by 
commandment  of  the  said  bishop  until  the  next  morrow  at  eight  of  the  clock. 
When  the  morrow  came,  being  Friday,  the  aforesaid  sir  William  Sautre,  in  the 
chapter-house,  before  the  said  bishop  and  his  council  provincial  then  and  there 
assembled,  making  his  personal  appearance,  exhibited  a  certain  scroll,  con- 


HIS    FIKST    AND    SECOND    EXAMINATION.  223 

taining  the  Answers  unto  certain  articles  or  conclusions  given  unto  him,  as   is     Henri/ 
aforesiiid,  by  the  said  bishop  ;  and  said,  that  unto  tlie  aforesaid  archbishop  he      •'^• 
dehvered  the  same  as  his  answer  in  that  beluilf,  under  the  tenor  of  such  words     ,    .^ 
as  follow.  j^qq' 

I  William  Sautre,  priest  unworthy,  say  and  answer,  that  I  will  not  nor  intend  '— 

to  worship  the  cross  whereon  Christ  was  cruciiied,  but  only  Christ  that  suffered  The  an- 
upon  the  cross ;  so  understanding  me,   that  I  will   not  worship  the  material  ^viiTiam 
cross,  or  the  gross  corporal  matter :  yet,  notwithstanding,    1  will  worship  the  Sautre 
same  as   a  sign,  token,  and  memorial  of  the  passion  of  Christ,  '  adoratione  Ki^^n  up 
vicaria.'     And  that  1  will  rather  worship  a  tcui])oral  king,  than  the   aforesaid  ;„;,. 
wooden  cross,  and  the  material  substance  of  the  same.     And  that  I  will  rather  The  cross, 
worship  the  bodies  of  saints,  than  the  very  cross  of  Christ  whereon  he  hung  ;  '^l^^' 
with  this  addition,  even  if  the  very  same  cross  were  before  me,  as  touching  the  not  to  be 
material  substance.     And  also  that  I  will  rather  worship  a  man  truly  con-  "orship- 
fessed  and  penitent,  than  the  cross  on  which  Christ  hung,  as  touching  the  ma- 
terial substance. 

And  that  also  I  am  bound,  and  will  rather  worship  him  whom  I  know  to  be  A  man 
predestinate,  truly  confessed,  and  contrite,  than  an  angel  of  God :  for  that  the  predesti- 
one  is  a  man  of  the  same  nature  with  the  humanity  of  Christ,  and  so  is  not  a  thertobe- 
blessed  angel.     Notwithstanding  I  will  worship  both  of  them,  according  as  the  wor- 
will  of  God  is  I  should.  _  ^^^ll 

Also,  That  if  any  man  hath  made  a  vow  to  \nsit  the  shrines  of  the  apostles  an^'ei: 
Peter  and  Paul,  or  to  go  on  pilgrimage  unto  St.  Thomas's  tomb,  or  any  whither  "'^*  '^  ."> 
else,  to  obtain  any  temporal  benefit  or  commodity,  lie  is  not  bound  simply  to  tjiel-  can 
keep   his  vow  upon  the  necessity    of   salvation ;    but    he  may   give  the  ex-  be  wor- 
penses  of  his  vow  in  alms  amongst  the  poor,  by  the  prudent  counsel  of  his  su-  ^!'i',hou'[ 
perior,  as  I  suppose.  idolatry. 

And  also  I  say,  that  every  deacon  and  priest  is  more  bound  to  preach  the 
word  of  God,  than  to  say  the  canonical  hours,  according  to  the  primitive  order 
of  the  church. 

Also,  touching  the   inteiTogation  of  the  sacrament  of  the  altar,  I  say,  that  How 
after  the  pronouncing  of  the  sacramental  words  of  the  body  of  Christ,  there  ^p"^j„, 
ceaseth  not  to  be  very  bread  simply,  but  remains  bread,  holy,  true,  and  the  bread  eth  in  the 
of  life ;  and  I  believe  the  said  sacrament  to  be  the  very  body  of  Christ,  after  the  sacra- 
pronouncing  of  the  sacramental  words. 

"When  all  these  answers  were  thoroughly,  by  Master  Robert  Hall,  directly 
and  publicly  there  read,  the  aforesaid  archbishop  of  Canterbury  inquired  of  the 
said  sir  William,  whether  he  had  abjured  the  aforesaid  heresies  and  errors  ob- 
jected against  him,  as  before  is  said,  before  the  bishop  of  Norwich,  or  not;  or 
else  had  revoked  and  renounced  the  said  or  such  like  conclusions  or  articles,  or 
not  ?  To  which  he  answered  and  affinned  that  he  had  not.  And  then  conse- 
quently (all  other  articles,  conclusions,  and  answers  above  written  immediately 
omitted),  the  said  archbishop  examined  the  same  sir  William  Sautre,  especially 
upon  the  sacrament  of  the  altar. 

First,  Whether  in  the  sacrament  of  the  altar,  after  the  pronouncing  of  the 
sacramental  words,  remaineth  very  material  bread  or  not?  Unto  which  inter- 
rogation, the  same  sir  William  somewhat  waveringly  said  and  answered,  that  he 
knew  not  that.  Notwithstanding  he  said,  that  there  was  very  bread,  because  it 
was  the  bread  of  life  which  came  down  from  heaven. 

After  that  the  said  archbishop  demanded  of  him,  whether,  in  the  sacrament, 
after  the  sacramental  words  rightly  pronounced  of  the  priest,  the  same  bread 
remaineth,  which  did,  before  the  words  were  pronounced,  or  not.  And  to  this 
question  the  aforesaid  WilUam  answered  in  hke  manner  as  before,  saying,  that 
there  was  bread,  holy,  true,  and  the  bread  of  life,  &c. 

After  that,  the  aforesaid  archbishop  asked  him,  whether  the  same  material 
bread  before  consecration,  by  the  sacramental  w^ords  of  the  priest  rightly  pro- 
nounced, be  transubstantiated  from  the  nature  of  bread  into  tlie  very  body  of 
Christ,  or  not  ?  Whereunto  sir  William  said,  that  he  knew  not  what  that  matter 
meant. 

And  then  the  said  archbishop  assigned  unto  the  said  sir  William  time  to  de-  The  con- 
liberate,  and  more  fully  to  make  his  answer  till  the  next  day  ;  and  continued  '''"nation 
•  111  -111  i-i_  •       \      rtsumea. 

yus  convocation  then  and  tlicre  till  the  moiTow :  which  morrow,  to  wit,  the 


■S24  SENTEXCE    AND    PROCESS    AGAINST     WILLIAM    SATTTIIE. 

Henry    nineteenth  day  of  February,  being  come,  the  aforesaid  archbishop  of  Canter- 
^*'-      bury,   in    the   said  chapter-house  of   St.  Paul  in  London,  before  liis  council 
.    „      provincial  then   and  there  assembled,  especially  asked  and  examined  the  same 
^jVi^'     sir  William  Sautre,  there  personally  present,  upon  the  sacrament  of  the  altar, 
as  before :  and  the  same   sir  William,  again,  in  like  manner  as  before,  an- 
swered. 

After  this,  amongst  other  things,  the  said  bishop  demanded  of  the  same 
William,  if  the  same  material  bread  being  upon  the  altar,  after  the  sacramental 
words  being  by  the  jiriest  rightly  pronounced,  is  transubstantiated  into  the  very 
body  of  Christ  or  not  ?  And  the  said  sir  William  said,  he  understood  not  what 
he  meant. 

Then  the  said  archbishop  demanded,  whether  that  material  bread  being  round 
and  wliite,  prepared  and  disposed  for  the  sacrament  of  the  body  of  Christ  upon 
the  altar,  wanting  nothing  that  is  meet  and  I'equisite  thereunto,  by  virtue  of  the 
sacramental  words  being  by  the  priest  rightly  pronounced,  be  altered  and 
changed  into  the  very  body  of  Christ,  and  ceaseth  any  more  to  be  material  and 
very  bread  or  not?  Then  the  said  sir  William,  deridingly  answering,  said,  he 
coidd  not  tell. 

Then  consequently,  the  said  archbishop  demanded,  whether  he  would  stand 
to  the  determination  of  the  holy  church  or  not,  which  affirmeth,  that  in  the 
sacrament  of  the  altar,  after  the  words  of  consecration  being  rightly  pronouned 
by  the  priest,  the  same  bread,  which  before  in  nature  was  bread,  ceaseth  any 
more  to  be  bread  ?  To  this  interrogation  the  said  sir  William  said,  that  he 
Determi-  would  stand  to  the  determination  of  the  church,  where  such  determination  was 
nation  of  not  contrary  to  the  will  of  God. 

^^    ,  This  done  he  demanded  of  him  again,  what  his  judgment  was  concerning 

to  be  fol-  the    sacrament  of  the  altar :  who  said  and  affirmed,  that  after  the   words  of 

lowed  as    consecration,    by    the    priest    duly  pronounced,    remained    very    bread,    and 

eVto  the"  the    same  bread  which  was  before  the  words  spoken.     And  this  examination 

will  of      about  the  sacrament,  lasted  from  eight  o'clock  until  eleven  o'clock,  or  there- 

^"'^         abouts,  of  the    same  day :    insomuch  that  during  all  this  time  the  aforesaid 

William  would  no  otherwise  answer,  neither  yet,  touching  the  same  sacrament, 

receive  catholic  information,  according  to  the  institution  of  the  pope's  church, 

and  his  christian  faith.     Wherefore   the   said  Canterbury,  by  the  counsel  and 

assent  of  his  whole  covcnt  then  and  there  present,  did  pronndgate   and  give 

sentence,  by  the  mouth  of  Robert  Hall,  against  the   same  sir  William  Sautre 

(being  personally  present,  and  refusing  to  revoke  his  heresies,  that  is  to  say,  his 

true  doctrine,  but  constantly  defending  the   same),  under  the  tenor  of  words  as 

foUoweth : 

Tlie  Sentence  against  William  Sautre. 

In  the  name  of  God,  Amen.  We,  Thomas,  by  the  grace  of  God  archbishop 
of  Canterbury,  primate  of  England,  and  legate  of  the  see  apostolical,  by  the 
authority  of  God  Almighty,  and  blessed  St.  Peter  and  Paul,  and  of  holy  church, 
and  by  our  own  authority,  sitting  for  tribunal  or  chief  judge,  having  God  alone 
before  our  eyes,  by  the  counsel  and  consent  of  the  whole  clergy,  our  fellow  bre- 
thren and  suffragans,  assistants  unto  us  in  this  present  council  provincial,  by  this 
our  sentence  definitive,  do  pronounce,  decree,  and  declare,  by  these  presents, 
thee  WilKam  Sautre,  otherwise  called  Chatris,  parish  priest  pretensed,  per- 
sonally appearing  before  us,  in  and  upon  the  crime  of  heresy,  judicially  and 
lawfully  convicted  as  a  heretic,  and  as  a  heretic  to  be  punished. 

This  sentence  definitive  being  thus  read,  the  aforesaid  archbishop  of  Canter- 
bury continued  in  the  same  provincial  council  till  Wednesday  next,  and  imme- 
diately ensuing,  to  wit,  the  twentj'-fourth  day  of  the  same  month  of  February, 
■which  being  expired,  the  bishop  of  Norwich,  according  to  the  commandment 
of  the  said  archbishop  of  Canterbmy,  presented  unto  the  aforesaid  William 
Sautre,  by  a  certain  friend  of  his,  being  present  at  the  same  council,  a  certain 
process  enclosed  and  sealed  with  his  seal,  giving  the  names  of  credible  witnesses 
sealed  with  their  seals,  the  tenor  whereof  followeth  in  this  wise  ; 


HIS    KECANTATION.  225 

A  certain  Process  against  William  Sautre,  presented  by  the  Bishop  of   "/k!^ 

Norwich.  

A.D. 

Memorandum,  That  upon   the  last  day  of  April,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord     1100. 
139!),  in  the  seventh  iiidiction,  and  tenth  year  of  the  papacy  of  pope  Boniface  ' 

IX.,  in  a  certain  chamber  within  the  manor-house  of  the  said  bishop  of  Norwich, 
at  South  Helingham  (where  the  register  of  the  said  bishop  is  kept),  before  the 
ninth  hour,  in  a  certain  chapel  within  the  said  manor  situate,  and  the  first  day 
of  May  then  next  and  immediately  ensuing,  in  the  aforesaid  chamber  sir 
William  Chatris,  parish  priest  of  the  church  of  St.  Margaret  in  the  town  of 
Lynn,  appeared  before  the  bishop  of  Norwich,  in  the  presence  of  John  de 
Derlington,  archdeacon  of  Norwich,  doctor  of  the  decrees,  friar  AValter  Dish, 
and  John  Rikinghal,  professors  in  divinity;  William  Carlton,  doctor  of  both 
laws,  and  William  Friseby,  with  Hugh  Bridham,  public  notaries,  and  there 
publicly  affirmed  and  held  the  conclusions,  as  before  is  specified. 

All  and  singular  the  premises  the  aforesaid  William  affirmeth  upon  mature 
deliberation.  And  afterwards,  to  wit,  the  nineteenth  day  of  May  in  the  year, 
indiction,  and  papacy  aforesaid,  in  the  chapel  within  the  manor-house  of  the 
said  Henry  bishop  of  Norwich,  situate  at  South  Helingham,  the  aforesaid  sir 
William  revoked  and  renounced  all  and  singular  the  aforesaid  his  conclusions; 
abjuring  and  correcting  all  such  heresies  and  errors,  taking  his  oath  upon  a 
book  before  the  aforesaid  Henry  the  bishop  of  Norwich,  that  from  that  time 
forward  he  would  never  preach,  affirm,  nor  hold,  privily  or  apertly,  the  afore- 
said conclusions ;  and  that  he  would  pronounce,  according  to  the  appointment 
of  the  said  bishop,  the  aforesaid  conclusions  to  be  erroneous  and  heresies  in  the 
parish  churches  of  Lynn  and  Tilney,  and  in  other  places,  at  the  assignment  of 
the  said  bishop ;  and  further  swore,  that  he  would  stand  to  the  ordinance  of  the 
said  bishop  touching  the  premises,  in  the  presence  of  the  discreet  and  worshipful 
men  before  recited,  with  divers  other  more. 

As  concerning  the  first  conclusion,  that  he  said  he  would  not  worship  the 
cross,  &c.,  he  confessed  himself  to  have  en-ed,  and  that  the  article  was  eri'o- 
neous,  and  submitted  himself.  And  as  touching  the  second  article,  that  he 
said  he  would  rather  worship  a  king,  &c.,  he  confessed  himself  to  have  erred, 
and  the  article  to  be  erroneous,  and  submitted  himself;  and  so  forth  of  all 
fhe  rest. 

Then  next  after  this,  upon  the  twenty-fifth  day  of  May,  in  the  year  of  our 
Lord  aforesaid,  in  the  churchyard  of  the  chapel  of  St.  James  within  the  town 
of  Lynn,  the  aforesaid  William,  in  presence  of  the  aforesaid  bishop  and  clergy, 
and  the  people  of  the  said  town  of  Lynn  standing  round  about,  publicly  de- 
clared in  the  English  tongue,  the  aforesaid  conclusions  to  be  erroneous  and 
heresies,  that  were  contained  in  a  certain  scroll.  And  after  this,  the  twenty- 
sixth  day  of  May,  in  the  year  abovesaid,  in  the  church  of  the  hospital  of  St. 
John's  in  the  town  of  Lynn,  the  said  sir  William,  before  the  said  bishop  sitting 
as  judge,  swore  and  took  his  oath  upon  the  holy  evangelists,  that  he  woidd 
never  after  that  time  preach  openly  and  publicly  the  aforesaid  conclusions,  nor 
would  hear  the  confessions  of  any  of  the  subjects  of  his  diocese  of  Norwich, 
without  the  special  licence  of  the  said  bishop,  &c.  In  the  presence  of  friar 
John  Smermen,  Master  John  Rikinghal,  doctor  of  divinity,  William  Carlton, 
doctor  of  both  laws,  and  Thomas  Bulton,  officer  of  the  liberty  of  Lynn  afore- 
said, with  divers  others. 

The  tenor  of  the  Scroll  and  Recantation  of  William  Sautre. 

Imprimis,  Touching  the  first  and  second,  where  I  said,  that  I  woidd  adore  The  first 
rather  a  temporal  prince,  ami   the   lively  bodies  of  the  saints,  than  the  wooden  ^"^se- 
cross  whereupon  the  Lord  did  hang  :  I  do  revoke  and  recant  the  same,  as  being  tides. 
therein  deceived. 

To  this  1  say,  that  the  article  is  false  and  erroneous,  and  by  false  informa-  The  third 
tion  I  held  it ;  which  I   renounce  and  ask  forgiveness  thereof,  and  say,  that  it  article 
is  a  precious  relic,  and  that  I  shall  hold  it  while  I  live  ;  and  that  I  swear 
here. 

I  know  well  that  1  erred  wrongftdly  by  false  information  ;  for  I  wot  well,  Fourth. 

VOL.  TIT.  a 


226 


THE    STORY    OF    SIR    WILLIAM    SAUTRE. 


Henry 

ir. 

A.D. 

1400. 

Sixth. 
Seveiitli. 


Ninth. 
Tentli. 


Process 
against 
Sautre. 


tliat  a  deacon  or  a  priest  is  more  bound  to  say  his  matins  and  hours,  than   to 
preach  ;  for  thereto  he  is  bounden  by  right :  wherefore  I  submit  me,  &c. 

Touching  that  article,*  I  know  right  well  that  I  erred  by  false  information 
wherefore  I  ask  forgiveness. 

As  concerning  vows,  I  say  that  opinion  is  false  and  erroneous,  and  by  false 
information  I  held  it ;  for  a  man  is  bounden  to  hold  his  vow,  &c. 

To  the  seventh  article  I  say,  that  I  did  it  by  authority  of  priesthood,  through 
which  deed  I  acknowledge  well  that  I  have  guilt  and  trespassed :  wherefore  I 
submit  me  to  God  and  to  holy  church,  and  to  you  father,  swearing  that  I  shall 
never  hold  it  more. 

To  the  eighth  I  say,  that  I  held  it  by  false  and  wrong  information  :  but  now 
I  know  well  that  it  is  heresy,  and  that  bread,  anon  as  the  word  of  the  sacra- 
ment is  said,  is  no  longer  bread  material,  but  that  it  is  turned  into  Christ's  very 
body  ;  and  that  I  swear  here. 

I  say,  that  this  is  false  and  erroneous,  &c. 

I  say  as  I  said,  &c. 

This  being  done,  the  22d  of  February  aforesaid,  a.  d,  1400,  in  the  Chapter 
house  of  St.  Paul,  in  London  aforesaid,  the  aforesaid  archbishop  of  Canterbury, 
in  the  convocation  of  his  prelates  and  clergy,  and  such  like  men  there  being 
present,  caused  the  afore  recited  jjrocess  of  the  bishop  of  Norwich  to  be  read 
openly  and  publicly  to  sir  William  Sautre,  otherwise  called  Chatris.  And 
afterwards  he  asked  Ihe  said  sir  William,  whether  he  plainly  understood  and 
knew  such  process,  and  the  contents  within  the  same;  and  he  said,  'Yea.'  And 
further  he  demanded  of  him,  if  he  would  or  could  say  or  object  any  thing 
against  the  process,  and  he  said.  '  No.'  And  after  that  incontinent,  the  afore- 
said archbishop  of  Canterbury  demanded  and  objected  against  the  said  sir 
William,  as  divers  others  more  did  ;  that  after  he  had,  before  the  bishop  of 
Norwich,  revoked  and  abjured,  judicially,  divers  errors  and  heresies,  among 
other  errors  and  heresies  by  him  taught,  holden,  and  preached,  he  affirmed, 
that  in  the  same  sacrament  of  the  altar,  after  the  consecration  made  by  the 
priest,  as  he  taught,  there  remained  material  bread;  which  heresy,  amongst 
others,  as  errors  also  he  abjured  before  the  aforesaid  bishop  of  Norwich.^  Here- 
unto the  aforesaid  William  answered  smiling,  or  in  mocking  wise,  saying  and 
denying  that  he  knew  of  the  premises.  Notwithstanding,  he  publicly  affirmed, 
that  he  held  and  taught  the  aforesaid  things  after  the  date  of  the  said  process 
made  by  the  said  bishop  of  Norwich,  and  that  in  the  same  council  also  he  held 
the  same.  Then  finally  it  was  demanded  of  the  said  sir  William,  why  he  ought 
not  to  be  pronounced  as  a  man  fallen  into  heresy,  and  why  they  should  not  tin-- 
ther  proceed  unto  his  degradation  according  to  the  canonical  sanctions  :  where- 
unto  he  answered  nothing,  neither  could  he  allege  any  cause  to  the  contrarj'. 

Whereupon  the  aforesaid  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  by  the  counsel  and  assent 
of  the  whole  council,  and  especially  by  the  counsel  and  assent  of  the  reverend 
fathers  and  bishops,  as  also  priors,  deans,  archdeacons,  and  other  worshipful 
doctors  and  clerks  then  and  there  present  in  the  council,  fully  determined  to 
proceed  to  the  degradation  and  actual  deposing  of  the  said  William  Sautre,  as 
re-fallen  into  heresy,  and  as  incorrigible,  according  to  the  sentence  definitive 
put  in  writing,  the  tenor  whereof  is  in  words  as  foUoweth  : 


Sentence  of  Relapse. 

In  the  name  of  God,  amen.  We,  Thomas,  by  the  grace  of  God  archbishop 
of  Canterbury,  legate  of  the  see  apostolical,  and  metropolitan  of  all  England, 
do  find  and  declare,  that  thou  William  Sautre,  otherwise  called  Chatris,  priest 
by  us,  with  the  counsel  and  assent  of  all  and  singular  our  fellow  brethren  and 
whole  clergy,  by  this  our  sentence  definitive  declared  in  writing,  hast  been  for 
heresy  convicted  and  condemned,  and  art  (being  again  fallen  into  heresy)  to  be 
deposed  and  degraded  by  these  presents. 

And  from  that  day,  being  Wednesday,  there  was  in  the  said  council  provin 
cial  nothing  further  prosecuted,  but  was  continued  with  all  dependents  till 


(I)  Meaning  the  Fifth. 


(2)  Ex  Regiit.  Cantuai 


THF.    POPISH    DEGRADATION    OF    WILLIAM    SAITTnK.  22  i 

the  Friday   next  ensuing,  which  Friday  approaching,  Master  Nicholas  Risli-     Uennj 
ton  (by  the  commandment  of  the  said  arclibishop  of  Canterl)iiry,  being  then       ^^• 
busied,  as  he  said,  in  the  parliament  house)  continued  this  council  and  convo-     .    |~. 
cation  with  all    incidents,   dependents,  and    occasions  growing   and  annexed    -lAQri 

thereunto,  the  next  day,  to  wit,  Saturday  next  and  innnediately  after  ensuing.  L 

Upon  Saturday,  being  the  2Gtli  of  the  said  month  of  February,  the  aforesaid 
archbishop  of  Canterbury  sat  in  the  bishop's  scat  of  the  aforesaid  church  of  St. 
Paul  in  London,  and  solemnly  apparelled  in  his  pontifical  attire,  sitting  with 
him  as  his  assistants  these  reverend  fathers  and  bishops,  of  London,  Lincoln, 
Hereford,  Exeter,  Menevensis,  and  Rossensis,  above-mentioned,  commanded 
and  caused  the  said  sir  William  Sautre,  apparelled  in  priestly  vestments,  to  be 
brought  and  appear  before  him.  That  done,  he  declared  and  expounded  in 
English  to  all  the  clergy  and  people  there  in  great  multitude  assembled ;  that 
all  process  was  finished  and  ended  against  the  said  sir  William  Sautre.  This 
thing  finished,  before  the  pronouncing  of  the  said  sentence  of  relapse  against 
the  said  sir  William,  as  is  premised,  he  often  then  and  there  recited  and  read. 
And  for  that  he  saw  the  said  William  in  that  behalf  nothing  abashed,  he  pro- 
ceeded to  his  degradation  and  actual  deposition,  in  form  as  followeth  : 

Sentence  of  Degradation  pronounced  on  Sir  William  Sautre. 

In  nomine  Patris,  et  Filii,  et  Spiritus  Sancti.   We,  Thomas,  by  God's  permis- 
sion archbishop  of  Canterbury,  primate  of  all  England,  and  legate  of  the  apos- 
tolic see,  do  denounce  thee  William  Sautre,  otherwise  called  Chatris,  chaplain 
feigned,  in  the  habit  and  apparel  of  a  priest,  as  a  heretic,  and  one  re-fallen  into 
heresy,  by  this  our  sentence  definitive,  by  counsel,  assent,  and  authority,  to  be 
condemned ;  and  by  conclusion  of  all  our  fellow  brethren,  fellow  bishops,  pre- 
lates, council  provincial,  and  of  the  whole  clergy,  do  degrade  and  deprive  thee 
of  thy  priestly  order.     And  in  sign  of  degradation  and  actual  deposition  from  The 
thy  priestlv  dignity,  for  thine  incoiTigibility  and  want  of  amendment,  we  take  Patent 
from  thee  the  patent  and  chalice,  and  do  deprive  thee  of  all  power  and  autho-  chalice 
rity  of  celebrating  the  mass,  and  also  we  pull  from  thy  back  the  casule,  and  take  taken 
from  thee  the  vestment,  and  deprive  thee  of  all  manner  of  priestly  honour.  ,,^j^ 

Also,  We  Thomas,  the  aforesaid  aixhbishop,  by  authority,  counsel,   and  as-  The  book 
sent,  which  upon  the  aforesaid  William  we  have,  being  deacon  pretensed,  in  the  of  the 
habit  and  apparel  of  a  deacon,  having  the  New  Testament  in  thy  hands,  being  ^n^pj/^' 
a  heretic,  and  twice  fallen,  condemned  by  sentence  as  is  afoi'esaid,  do  degrade  taken 
and  put  thee  from  the  order  of  a  deacon.     And  in  token  of  this  thy  degrada-  frp"" 
tion  and  actual  deposition,  we  take  from  thee  the  book  of  the  New  Testament, 
and  the  stole,  and  do  deprive  thee  of  all  authority  in  reading  of  the  gospel,  and 
of  all  and  all  manner  of  dignity  of  a  deacon. 

Item,  We  Thomas,  archbishop  aforesaid,  by  authority,  counsel,  and  assent.  The  albe 
which  over  thee  tlie  aforesaid  William,  we  have,  being  a  sub-deacon  pretensed,  J.^'^^" 
in  the  habit  and  vestment  of  a  sub-deacon,  a  heretic,  and  twice  fallen,  condemned  him. 
by  sentence,  as  is  aforesaid,  do  degrade  and  put  thee  from  the  order  of  a  sub- 
deacon  ;  and  in   token  of  this  thy  degradation  and  actual  deposition,  we  take 
from  thee  the  albe »   and  maniple,''  and  do  deprive  thee  of  all  manner  of  sub- 
diaconical  dignity. 

Also,  We  Thomas,  archbishop  aforesaid,   by  counsel,  assent,  and  authority  The 
which  we  have  over  thee  the  foresaid  WiUiam,  an  acolyte  ^  pretensed,  wearing  ^^/p^'^'j^j 
the  habit  of  an  acolyte,  and  heretic,  twice  fallen,  by  our  sentence  as  is  aforesaid  taper 
condemned,  do  degrade  and  put  from  thee  all  order  of  an  acolyte  ;  and  in  sign  taken 
and  token  of  this  thy  degradation,  and  actual  deposition,  we  take  from  thee  the    °™  ""'" 
candlestick  and  taper,  and  also  urceolum,*  and  do  deprive  thee  of  all  and  all 
manner  of  dignity  of  an  acolyte. 

Also,  We  Thomas,  archbishop  aforesaid,  by  assent,  counsel,  and  authority, 
which  upon  thee  the  aforesaid  Willam  we  have,  an  exorcist  pretensed,  in  the 
habit  of  an  exorcist  or  holy  water  clerk,  being  a  hei'etic,  twice  fallen,  and  by 

(1)  '  Albe,'  the  surplice.— Ed. 

(2)  '  Maniple,'  a  kind  of  scarf  worn  about  the  wrists. — Ed. 

(3)  An  inferior  servant,  who  waited  on  the  priest,  carried  the  bread  and  wine,  or  lighted  the 
candles:  an  under-deacon. — Ed. 

<4)  A  vessel  used  in  the  celebration  of  the  popish  services. — Ed. 

Q.    2 


228  THE    STORY    OF    SIR    WILLIAM    SAUTRE. 

Henry    our  Sentence  as  is  aforesaid,  condemned,  do  degrade  and  depose  thee  fi-om  the 
J^-      order  of  an  exorcist ;  and  in  token  of  this  thy  degradation  and  actual  deposition, 
we  take  from  thee  the  book  of  conjm-ations,  and  do  deprive  thee  of  all  and 
singular  dignity  of  an  exorcist. 


A.D. 

1400. 


Also,  We  Thomas,  archbishop  aforesaid,  by  assent,  counsel,  and  authoritj',  as 
The  holy  is  above  said,  do  degi-ade  and  depose  thee  the  aforesaid  William,  reader  pre- 
water  tensed,  clothed  in  the  habit  of  a  reader,  a  heretic,  twice  fallen,  and  by  our  sen- 
jured  "  tence,  as  is  aforesaid,  condemned  from  the  order  of  a  reader ;  and  in  token  of 
from  him.  this  thy  degradation  and  actual  deposition,  we  take  from  thee  the  book  of  the 
legend  divine  lections  (that  is,  the  book  of  the  church  legend),  and  do  deprive  thee  of 
book.        all  and  singular  manner  of  dignity  of  such  a  reader. 

Item,  We  Thomas,  archbishop  of  Canterbury  aforesaid,  by  authority,  coun- 
sel, and  assent,  which  we  have,  as  is  aforesaid,  do  degrade  and  put  thee,  the 
aforesaid  William  Sautre,  sexton  pretensed,  in  the  habit  of  a  sexton,  and  wear- 
plice  and  i^g  '1  sui-plice,  being  a  heretic,  twice  fallen,  by  our  sentence  definitive  condemned, 
fhurch  as  aforesaid,  from  the  order  of  a  sexton  ;  and  in  token  of  this  thy  degradation 
takeii  ^^  and  actual  deposition,  for  the  causes  aforesaid,  we  take  from  thee  the  keys  of 
from  the  chinch  door,  and  thy  surplice,  and  do  deprive  thee  of  all  and  singular  man- 
him.         jigj.  of  commodities  of  a  door-keeper. 

And  also,  by  the  authority  of  omnipotent  God,  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the 

Holy  Ghost,   and  by  the  authority,  counsel,  and  assent  of  our  whole  council 

Privilege  provincial  above  written,  we  do  degrade  thee,  and  depose  thee,  being  here  per- 

of  clergy    sonally  present  before  us,  from  orders,  benefices,   privileges  and  habit  in  the 

from  him.  church;  and,  for  thy  pertinency  incorrigible,  we   do  degrade  thee  before  the 

secular  court  of  the  high  constable  and  marshal  of  England,  being  personallj' 

present ;  and  do  depose  thee  from  all  and  singular  clerkly  honours  and  digni- 

The  ties  whatsoever,  by  these  writings.   Also,  in  token  of  thy  degradation  and  depo- 

pnest's      sition,  here  actually  we  have  caused  thy  crown  and  ecclesiastical  tonsure,  in  our 

from  his    presence,  to  be  rased  away,  and  utterly  to  be  abolished,  like  unto  the  form  of  a 

head,        secular  lay  man ;  and  here  we  do  put  upon  the  head  of  thee,  the  aforesaid 

uifafl  ill    William,  the  cap  of  a  lay  secular  person ;  beseeching  the  court  aforesaid,  that 

all.  they  will  receive  favourably  the  said  William  unto  them  thus  recommitted. 

Thus  William  Sautre,  the  servant  of  Clirist,  being  utterly  thrust 
out  of  the  pope''s  kingdom,  and  metamorphosed  from  a  clerk  to  a 
secular  lay-man,  was  committed,  as  ye  have  heard,  unto  the  secular 
power :  which  so  done,  the  bishops,  yet  not  herewith  contented,  cease 
not  to  call  upon  the  king,  to  cause  him  to  be  brought  forth  to  speedy 
execution.  Whereupon  the  king,  ready  enough  and  too  much  to 
gratify  the  clergy,  and  to  retain  their  favours,  directeth  out  a  terrible 
decree  against  the  said  William  Sautre,  and  sent  it  to  the  mayor  and 
sheriffs  of  London  to  be  put  in  execution  ;  the  tenor  whereof  here- 
under ensueth. 

The  cruel  Decree  of  the  King  against  William  Sautre.^ 

The  decree  of  our  sovereign  lord  the  king  and  his  council  in  the  parliament, 
against  a  certain  newly-spnmg-up  heretic,  to  the  mayor  and  sheriffs  of  London, 
&c.  Whereas  the  reverend  father  Thomas,  archbishop  of  Canterburj',  primate 
of  all  England,  and  legate  of  the  apostolic  see,  by  the  assent,  consent,  and  coun- 
sel of  other  bishops,  and  his  brethren  suffragans,  and  also  of  all  the  whole  clergy 
within  his  province  or  diocese,  gathered  together  in  his  provincial  council,  the 
due  order  of  the  law  being  observed  in  all  points  in  this  behalf,  hath  pronounced 
and  declared,  by  his  definitive  sentence,  William  Sautre,  sometime  chaplain, 
fallen  again  into  his  most  damnable  heresy,  which  before  time  the  said  William 
had  abjured,  thereupon  to  be  a  most  manifest  heretic,  and  therefore  hath  de- 
creed that  he  should  be  degraded,  and  hath  for  the  same  cause  really  degraded 
him  from  all  prerogative  and  pri\'ilege  of  the  clergy,  decreeing  to  leave  him 
unto  the  secular  power ;  and  hath  really  so  left  him,  according  to  the  laws  and 

(1)  For  the  Latin  copy  of  tliis  decree,  see  edition  1563,  p.  142.— Ed. 


HIS    CI'UEL    BURNING. 


229 


canonical  sanctions  set  forth  in  this  behalf,  and  also  that  ova-  lioly  mother  the     iienry 
church  liath  no  further  to  do  in  the  premises ;  we  therefore  being  zealous  in      ^^■ 


religion,  and  reverend  lovers  of  the  catholic  faith,  Avilling  and  minding  to  main-    A.D. 
tain  and  defend  the  holy  church  and  the  laws  and  the  liberties  of  the  same,  to    HJiO 
root  all  such  eiTors  and  heresies  out  of  our  kingdom  of  England,  and  with  con-  ~ 
dign  punishment  to  correct  and  punish  all  heretics  or  such  as  be  convict ;  pro-  teams' 
vided  always  that  both  according  to  the  law  of  God  and  man,  and  the  canonical  zealwith- 
institutions  in  this  behalf  accustomed,  such  heretics  convict  and  condemned  in  "gj'J^"""" 
form  aforesaid,  ought  to  be  burned  with  fire :  we  command  you,  as  straitly  as 
we  may,  or  can,  firmly  enjoining  you  that  you  do  cause  the  said  William,  being 
in  your  custody,,  in  some  public  or  open  place  within  the  liberties  of  your  city 
aforesaid  (the  cause  aforesaid  being  published  imto  the  people),  to  be  put  into 
the  fire,  and  there  in  the  same  fire  really  to  be  burned,  to  the  great  horror  of 
his  offence,  and  the  manifest  example  of  other  Christians.     Fail  not  in  the  exe- 
cution thereof,  upon  the  peril  that  will  fall  thereupon. 

Teste  Rege,  apud  Westm.  26th  Feb.  An.  regni  sui. 

Thus  it  may  appear  how  kinsfs  and  princes  have  been  blinded  and  Aimo- 

^11  o  I  ^  nitioQ  to 

abused  by  the  false  prelates  of  the  church,  insomuch  that  they  have  princes. 
been  their  slaves  and  butchers,  to  slay  Christ's  poor  innocent  mem- 
bers. See,  therefore,  what  danger  it  is  for  princes  not  to  have  know- 
ledge and  understanding  themselves,  but  to  be  led  by  other  men"'s 
eyes,  and  especially  trusting  to  such  guides,  who,  through  hypocrisy, 
both  deceive  them,  and,  through  cruelty,  devour  the  people. 

As  king  Henry  IV.,  who  was  the  deposer  of  king  Richard,  was  Henryiv. 
the  first  of  all  English  kings  that  began  the  unmerciful  burning  of  Engu^h 
Christ''s  saints  for  standing  against  the  pope  ;  so  was  this  William  f]j"f  to^. 
Sautre,  the  true  and  faithful  martyr  of  Christ,  the  first  of  all  them  mented 
in   WicklifTs  time,   that  I  find  to  be  bm-ned  in  the  reign  of  the  ^' 
aforesaid  king,  which  was  in  the  year  of  om*  Lord,  1400. 

After  the  martyrdom  of  this  godly  man,  the  rest  of  the  same  com- 
pany began  to  keep  themselves  more  closely  for  fear  of  the  king,  who 
was  altogether  bent  to  hold  with  the  pope"'s  prelacy.     Such  was  the 
reign  of  this  prince,  that  to  the  godly  he  was  ever  terrible,  in  his 
actions  immeasurable,  of  few  men  heartily  beloved ;  but  princes  never 
lack  flatterers  about  them.     Neither  was  the  time  of  his  reign  very 
quiet,  but  full  of  trouble,  of  blood  and  misery.    Such  was  their  desire 
of  king  Richard  again,  in  the  reign  of  this  king,  that  many  years  aftei 
he  was  rumoured  to  be  alive  (of  them  which  desired  belike  that  to 
be  true,  which  they  knew  to  be  false),  for  which  divers  were  executed. 
For  the  space  of  six  or  seven  years  together  almost  no  year  passed 
without  some  conspiracy  against  the  king.     Long  it  were  here  to  re-  mucn 
cite  the  blood  of  all  such  nobles  and  others,  which  was  spilled  in  the  ^^^'^_ 
reign  of  this  king,  as  the  earl  of  Kent,'  the  earl  of  Salisbury,  the  heading 
earl  of  Huntingdon,  named  John  Holland,  &:c.,  as  writeth  the  story  umJ*^ 
of  St.  Alban's.     But  the  English  writers  differ  something  in  then-  Henr"j^v 
names,  and  make  mention  of  four  carls,  of  Surrey,  of  Exeter,  of 
Salisbury,  and  lord  Spencer,  carl  of  Gloucester.^ 

And  the  next  year  following  sir  John  Clarendon,  knight,  \\\i\\ 
two  of  his  servants,  and  the  prior  of  Laund,  with  eight  friars,  were 
hanged  and  quartered.  And  after  these  Henry  Percy  the  younger ; 
the  earl  of  Worcester,  named  Thomas  Percy,  his  uncle  ;  the  lord  of 
Kinderton,  and  lord  Richard  de  Vcruova.   The  earl  of  Northumber- 

(1)  It  is  to  be  doubted.  (2)  Ex  lib.  cui  tit.  Calcndariuni  Bruti. 


230  REBELLION    AGAINST    KING    HENRY    IV. 

Henry    land  scarcc  escaped  with  his  pardon,  a.d.  1403:  in  which  year  the 
^^'      prison  in  Cornhill,  called  the  Tun,  was  turned  into  the  Conduit  there 


A.D.  now  standing. 
^"^QO-  To  let  pass  others  hanged  and  quartered  the  same  time,  as  Blunt, 
knight,  and  Benet  Kely,  knight,  and  Thomas  Wintersel,  esq. ;  also 
the  same  year  were  taken  and  executed  sir  Bernard  Brookes,  knight, 
sir  John  Shilley,  knight,  sir  John  Mandelin  and  William  Frierby. 
After  all  these,  lord  Henry,  earl  of  Northumberland,  and  lord  Bar- 
dolf,  conspiring  the  king's  death,  were  taken  in  the  north  and  be- 
headed, Avhich  was  in  the  eighth  year  of  this  king  Henry. 
Arch-  This  civil  rebellion  of   so  many  nobles  and  others  against  the 

York^and  hi^g,  declared  what  grudging  hearts  the  people  then  bore  toward  this 
Mowb-a    ^^"o  Henry  ;  among  whom  I  cannot  omit  here  also  the  archbishop  of 
against     York,  named  Richard  Scrope,  who,  with  the  Lord  Mowbray,  marshal  of 
Heniyiv.  England,  gathered  a  great  company  in  the  north  country  against  the 
Lord  Bar-  aforcsaid  king,  to  whom  also  was  joined  the  help  of  lord  Bardolf,  and 
doi^^and   Henry  Percy,  earl  of  Northumberland  :  '  and  to  stir  up  the  people  the 
Percy.eari  more  willingly  to  take  their  parts,  they  collected  certain  articles  against 
thumber-  the  Said  king,  to  the  number  often,  and  fastened  them  upon  the  doors 
iga^nst     ^f  ^^^*^  churches  and  monasteries,  to  be  read  by  all  men  in  English  ;^ 
the  king,  wliich  articles  if  any  be  disposed  to  understand,  forasmuch  as  the  same 
also  contain  a  great  part  of  the  doings  between  king  Henry  and  king 
Richard  aforesaid,   I  thought,   for  the  better  opening  of  the  matter, 
hereunder  to  insert  the  same,  in  such  form  as  I  found  them  in  the 
story  of  '  Scala  mundi"'  expressed. 

Articles  against  King  Henry  IV.,  set  upon  Church  Doors. 

AD.HOl.  In  the  name  of  God,  amen.  Before  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  judge  of  the  quick 
and  dead,  &c.  We,  A.  B.  C.  D.  &c.,  not  long  since,  became  bound  by  oath, 
upon  the  sacred  evangehcal  book,  unto  our  sovereign  lord  Richard,  late  king  of 
England  and  France,  in  the  presence  of  many  prelates,  potentates,  and  nobility 
of  the  realm,  that  we,  so  long  as  we  lived,  should  bear  tnae  allegiance  and  fide- 
lity toward  him  and  his  heirs  succeeding  him  in  the  kingdom  by  just  title,  right, 
and  line,  according  to  the  statutes  and  custom  of  this  realm  of  England ;  by 
virtue  whereof  we  are  bound  to  foresee  that  no  vices  or  heinous  offences  arising 
in  the  common-weal,  do  take  effect  or  wished  end,  and  we  ought  to  give  our- 
selves and  our  goods  to  withstand  the  same,  without  fear  of  the  sword  or  death 
whatsoever,  upon  pain  of  perjury,  which  pain  is  everlasting  damnation.  Where- 
fore we,  seeing  and  perceiving  divers  horrible  crimes  and  great  enormities 
daily,  without  ceasing,  to  be  committed  by  the  children  of  the  devil  and  Satan's 
soldiers,  against  the  supremacy  of  the  Church  of  Rome,  the  liberty  of  the  church 
of  England,  and  the  laws  of  the  realm ;  against  the  person  of  king  Richard  and 
his  heirs ;  against  the  prelates,  noblemen,  religion,  and  commonalty ;  and  finally 
against  the  whole  weal  public  of  the  realm  of  England,  to  the  great  offence  of  the 
majesty  of  Almighty  God,  and  to  the  provocation  of  his  just  wrath  and  ven- 
geance toward  the  realm  and  people  of  the  same  :  and  fearing  also  the  destruc- 
tion both  of  the  church  of  Rome  and  England,  and  the  ruin  of  our  country  to  be 
at  hand,  having  before  our  eyes  the  justice  and  the  kingdom  of  God,  calUng 
always  on  the  name  of  Jesus,  having  an  assured  confidence  in  his  clemency, 
mercy,  and  power,  have  here  taken  unto  us  certain  articles,  subscribed  in  form 
following,  to  be  propounded,  tried,  and  heard  before  the  just  judge,  Jesus  Christ, 
and  the  whole  world,  to  his  honour,  the  delivery  of  the  church,  the  clergy  and 
commonalty,  and  to  the  utility  and  profit  of  the  weal  public.  But  if  (which 
God  forbid)  by  force,  fear,  or  violence  of  wicked  persons  we  shall  be  cast  into 
prison,  or  by  violent  death  prevented,  so  as  in  this  world  we  shall  not  be  able  to 
prove  the  said  articles  as  we  would  wish,  then  do  we  appeal  to  the  high  celestial 
(I)  Ex  Chron.  D.  Albani.  (2)  Ex  Hist.  Scala  Mundi. 


ARTICLES    AGAINST    HIM.  231 

Judge,  that  he  may  judge  and  discern  the  same,  in  the  day  of  his  supreme  judg-   Henry 
nient,  ^^■ 

First :  We  depose,  say,  except,  and  intend  to  prove,  against  the  lord  Henry  ~A~~jT~ 
Darby,  son  of  the  lord  John  of  Gaunt,  late  duke  of  Lancaster,  and  commonly     1401' 

called  king  of  England  (himself  pretending  the  same,  although  without  all  right L 

and  title  thereunto),  and  against  his  adherents,  fautors,  and  accomplices,  that 
ever  they  have  been,  are,  and  will  be,  traitors,  invaders,  and  destroyers  of  God's 
church,  in  Rome,  England,  Wales,  and  Ireland,  and  of  our  sovereign  lord 
Richard,  late  king  of  England,  his  heirs,  his  kingdom,  and  common-wealth,  as 
shall  hereafter  manifestly  appear. 

Second :  We  depose,  &c.,  against  the  said  lord  Henry,  for  that  he  had  con- 
ceived, de\'ised,  and  conspired,  certain  heinous  crimes  and  traitorous  offences 
against  his  said  sovereign  lord  Richard,  his  state  and  dignity,  as  manifestly  did 
appeal'  in  the  contention  between  the  said  lord  Henry,  and  the  lord  Thomas, 
duke  of  Norfolk,  begun  at  Coventry,  but  not  finished  thoroughly.  Aftenvards 
he  was  sent  into  exile  by  sentence  of  tlie  said  king  Richard,  by  the  agreement 
of  his  father,  the  lord  John,  duke  of  Lancastci-,  by  the  voice  of  divers  of  the  lords 
temporal,  and  nobility  of  the  realm,  and  also  by  his  own  consent,  there  to  re- 
main for  a  certain  time  appointed  unto  him  by  the  said  lords ;  and  withal  he 
was  bound,  by  oath,  not  to  return  into  England  before  he  had  obtained  favoui 
and  grace  of  the  king.  Not  long  after,  when  the  king  was  departed  into  Ireland, 
for  reformation  of  that  countiy,  appertaining  to  the  crown  of  England,  but  as 
then  rebelling  against  the  same,  the  said  lord  Henry  in  the  mean  time,  con- 
trary to  his  oath  and  fidelity,  and  long  before  the  time  limited  unto  him  was 
expired,  with  all  his  fautors  and  invaders  secretly  entered  into  the  realm,  swear- 
ing and  protesting  before  the  face  of  the  people,  that  his  coming  into  the  realm 
in  the  absence  of  the  king  was  for  no  other  cause,  but  that  he  might,  in  humble 
sort,  with  the  love  and  favour  of  the  king,  and  all  the  lords  spiritual  and  tem- 
poral, have  and  enjoy  his  lawfiil  inheritance  descending  imto  him  of  right  after 
the  death  of 'his  father :  which  thing  as  it  pleased  all  men,  so  cried  thej', 
'Blessed  is  he  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord.'  But  how  this  blessing 
afterwards  turned  into  cursing,  shall  appear  in  that  which  followeth  :  and  also 
ye  shall  understand  his  horrible  and  wicked  conspiracy  against  his  sovereign 
lord  king  Richard,  and  divers  other  lords  as  well  spiritual  as  temporal ;  besides 
that  his  manifest  perjurj'  shall  well  be  known,  and  that  he  remaineth  not  only 
forsworn  and  perjured,  but  also  excommunicate,  for  that  he  conspired  against  King 
his  sovereign  lord  om-king:  wherefore  we  pronounce  him,  by  these  presents,  as  pg^^Jred. 
well  peijured,  as  excommunicate. 

Thirdly  :  We  depose,  &c.,  against  the  lord  Henry,  that  he  the  said  lord  Henry,  Charged 
immediately  after  his  entry  into  England,  by  crafty  and  subtle  policy  caused  to  "'"> 
be  proclaimed  openly  throughout  the  realm,  that  no  tenths  of  the  clergy,  fif- 
teenths of  the  people,  sealing  up  the  cloth,  diminution  of  wool,  impost  of  wine, 
or  other  extortions  or  exactions  whatsoever,  should  hereafter  be  required  or 
exacted ;  hoping  by  this  means  to  purchase  unto  him  the  voice  and  favour  of 
the  prelates  spiritual,  the  lords  temporal,  the  merchants,  and  the  commonalty  of 
the  whole  realm.  After  this  he  took  by  force  the  king's  castles  and  fortresses, 
spoiled  and  devoured  his  goods  wheresoever  he  found  them,  crying,  '  havock,' 
'  havock.'  The  king's  majesty's  subjects,  as  well  spiritual  as  temporal,  he  spoiled 
and  robbed ;  some  he  took  captive  and  imprisoned  them ;  and  some  he  slew 
and  put  to  miserable  death  ;  whereof  many  were  bishops,  prelates,  priests,  and 
religious  men :  whereby  it  is  manifest,  that  the  said  lord  Henry  is  not  only 
perjured,  in  promising  and  swearing  that  there  should  be  hereafter  no  more 
exactions,  payments,  or  extortions  within  the  realm,  but  also  excommunicate, 
for  the  violence  and  injury  done  to  prelates  and  priests :  wherefore,  by  these 
presents  we  pronounce  him,  as  before,  as  well  perjured,  as  excommunicate. 

Foiu-thly :  We  depose,  &c.,  against  the  said  lord  Henry,  that  he,  hearing  of  charged 
the  king's  return  from  Ireland  into  Wales,  rose  up  against   his  sovereign  lord  with  trea 
the  king  with  many  thousands  of  armed  men,  marchmg  forward  with  all  his  a°"inst 
power  towards  the  castle  of  Flint,  in  Wales,  where  he  took  the  king  and  held  hTs  sove- 
him  prisoner,  and  so  led  him  captive  as  a  traitor  imto  Leicester ;  from  whence  reigo. 
he  took  his  journey  towards  London,  misusing  the  king  by  the  way    both  he 
and  his,  with   many  injuries  and  opprobrious  contumelies  and  scoffs  :  and  in 
tha  end  committed  him  to  the  Tower  of  London,  and  held  a  parliament,  the  king 


232  KEBEI.LION    AGAINST    KING    HENUY. 

beino- absent  and  in  prison;  wberein,  for  fear  of  death,  he  compelled  the  king  to 
yield  and  resign  unto  him  all  his  right  and  title  to  the  kingdom  and  crown  of 
Eno-land.  After  which  resignation  being  made,  the  said  lord  Hcmy,  standing 
up  in  the  parliament  house,  stoutly  and  proudly  before  them  all,  said  and 
affirmed,  that  the  kingdom  of  England  and  crown  of  the  same,  with  all  there- 
unto belonging,  did  pertain  unto  him  at  that  present,  as  of  very  right,  and  to 
no  other ;  for  that  the  said  king  Richard,  by  liis  own  deed,  was  deprived  for 
ever  of  all  the  right,  title,  and  interest  that  ever  he  had,  hath,  or  may  have  in 
the  same.  And  thus  at  length,  by  right  and  wrong,  he  exalted  himself  unto  the 
throne  of  the  kingdom  ;  since  which  time,  our  common-weal  never  flourished 
nor  prospered,  but  altogether  hath  been  void  of  virtue,  for  that  the  spiritualty 
was  so  oppressed,  exercise  and  warlike  practices  have  not  been  maintained, 
charity  is  waxed  cold,  and  covetousness  and  misery  have  taken  place,  and  finally 
mercy  is  taken  away,  and  vengeance  supplieth  the  room  :  whereby  it  doth  ap- 
pear, as  before  is  said,  that  the  «aid  lord  Henry  is  not  only  perjured  and  false  by 
usurping  the  kingdom  and  dominion  belonging  to  another,  but  also  excommu- 
nicate for  the  apprehending,  unjust  imprisoning,  and  depriving  his  sovereign 
lord  the  king  of  his  royal  crown  and  dignity :  wherefore,  as  in  the  articles  before, 
we  pronounce  the  said  lord  Henry  to  be  excommunicate. 

Fifthly  :  We  depose,  &c.,  against  the  said  lord  Henry,  that  he  the  same  lord 
Henry  with  the  rest  of  his  favourers  and  complices,  heaping  mischief  upon  mischief, 
have  committed  and  brought  to  pass  a  most  wicked  and  mischievous  fact,  yea, 
such  as  hath  not  been  heard  of  at  any  time  before :  for,  after  that  they  had 
taken  and  imprisoned  the  king,  and  deposed  him  by  open  injury  against  all 
humane  nature,  yet,  not  content  with  this,  they  brought  him  to  Pomfret  castle, 
and  there  imprisoned  him,  where  fifteen  days  and  nights  they  vexed  liim  with 
continual  hunger,  thirst,  and  cold,  and  finally  bereft  him  of  life,  with  such  a 
kind  of  death  as  never  before  that  time  was  known  in  England,  but  by  God's 
providence  it  is  come  to  light.  Who  ever  heard  of  such  a  deed,  or  who  ever 
saw  the  like  of  it?  Wherefore,  O  England  !  arise,  stand  up,  avenge  the  cause,  the 
death  and  injury,  of  thy  king  and  prince  :  which  if  thou  do  not,  take  this  for 
certain,  that  the  righteous  God  will  destroy  thee  by  strange  invasions  and  foreign 
power,  and  avenge  himself  on  thee  for  this  so  horrible  an  act :  whereby  doth 
appear  not  only  his  perjury,  but  also  his  excommunication  most  execrable,  so 
that,  as  before,  we  pronounce  the  said  Henry  not  only  perjured,  but  also  excom- 
municate. 
Charged  Sixthly  :  We  depose,  &c.,  against  the  said  lord  Henry,  that  after  he  had 
with  vio-  attained  to  the  crown  and  sceptre  of  the  kingdom,  he  caused  forthwith  to  be 
ordefs  of^  apprehended  divers  lords  spiritual,  bishops,  abbots,  priors,  and  religious  men  of 
h.oiy  all  orders,  whom  he  arrested,  imprisoned,  and  bound,  and  against  all  order 

church,  tji-ought  them  before  the  secular  judges  to  be  examined  ;  not  sparing  the  bishops 
whose  bodies  were  anointed  with  sacred  oil,  nor  priests,  nor  religious  men,  but 
commanding  them  to  be  condemned,  hanged,  and  beheaded  by  the  temporal 
law  and  judgment,  notwithstanding  the  privilege  of  the  church  and  holy  orders, 
which  he  ought  to  have  reverenced  and  worshipped,  if  he  had  been  a  true  and 
lawful  king ;  for  the  first  and  chiefest  oath  in  the  coronation  of  a  lawful  king  is, 
to  defend  and  keep  inviolate  the  liberties  and  rights  of  the  church,  and  not  to 
deliver  any  priest  or  religious  man  into  the  hands  of  the  secular  power,  except 
for  heresy  only,  and  that,  after  his  degradation,  according  to  the  order  of  the 
church.  Contrary  unto  all  this  hath  he  done ;  so  that  it  is  manifest  by  this 
article,  as  before  in  the  rest,  that  he  is  both  perjured,  and  excommunicate. 
Charged  Seventhly :  We  depose,  &c.,  against  the  said  lord  Henry,  that  not  only  he 
■with  caused  to  be  put  to  death  the  lords  spiritual  and  other  religious  men,  but  also 
tyranny.  ^;ygj.g  Qf  ^^q  ]ords  temporal  and  nobiUty  of  the  realm,  and  chiefly  those  that 
studied  for  the  preservation  of  the  common-weal,  not  ceasing  as  yet  to  continue 
his  mischievous  enterprise,  if  by  God's  providence  it  be  not  prevented,  and  that 
with  speed.  Amongst  all  others  of  the  nobility,  these  first  he  put  to  death ;  the 
earl  of  Salisbury,  the  earl  of  Huntingdon,  the  earl  of  Gloucester,  the  lord  Roger 
Clarendon,  the  king's  brother,  with  divers  other  knights  and  esquires  ;  and  after- 
wards, the  lord  Thomas  Percy,  earl  of  Worcester,  and  the  lord  Henry  Percy, 
son  and  heir  to  the  earl  of  Northumberland  ;  which  lord  Henry  he  not  only 
slew,  but  to  the  uttermost  of  his  power  again  and  again  he  caused  him  to  be 
slain.     For  after  that  he  was  once  put  to  death,  and  delivei-ed  to  the  lord  of 


King' 
Henry 
charged 
with 
murder- 
ing his 
prince. 


ARTICLES     AGAIXST     III.M.  'ZdO 

Furnile  to  be  buried,  who  committed  his  body  to  holy  sepulture,  with  as  much     //enri/ 
honour  as  might  be,  commending  his  soul  to  Almighty  God  with  the  sufirages      ^''• 
of  the  blessed  mass  and  other  prayers,  the  said  lord  Henry,  most  like  a  cruel  ~T    71 
beast  still  thirsting  for  his  blood,  caused  his  body  to  be  exhumed  and  brought    14/^1 

forth  again,  and  to  be  reposed  between  two  mill-stones  in  the  town  of  Shrews-  L. 

bury,  there  to  be  kept  with  armed  men ;  and  afterwards  to  be  beheaded  and 
quartered,  commanding  his  head  and  quarters  to  be  carried  into  divers  cities  of 
the  kingdom :  wherefore,  for  so  detestable  a  fact,  never  heard  of  in  any  age 
before,  we  pronounce  him,  as  in  the  former  articles,  excommunicate. 

Eighthly :  We  depose,  &c.,  against  the  said  lord  Henry,  for  that  after  his  Charged 
attaining  to  the  crown  he  willingly  ratified,  allowed,  and  approved,  a  most  wicked  f ''  ®^'' 
statute  set  forth  and  renewed  in  the  parliament  holden  at  Winchester;  which  ment. 
statute  is  directly  against  the  church  of  Rome,  and  the  power  and  principality 
thereof  given  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  unto  blessed  St.Peter  and  his  successors, 
bishops  of  Home  ;  unto  whom  belongeth,  by  full  authorit}',  the  free  disposing  of 
all  spiritual  promotions,  as  well  superior  as  inferior;  which  wicked  statute  is 
the  cause  of  many  mischiefs,  viz.,  of  simony,  peijury,  adidtery,  incest,  misorder, 
and  disobedience  ;  for  that  many  bishops,  abbots,  priors,  and  prelates  (we  will 
not  say  by  virtue,  but  rather  by  error  of  this  statute),  have  bestowed  the  benefices 
vacant  upon  young  men,  rude  and  unworthy  persons,  who  have  compacted  with 
them  for  the  same,  so  that  scarce  one  prelate  is  found  that  hath  not  covenanted 
with  the  party  promoted,  for  the  half  yearly,  or,  at  the  least,  the  third  part  of  the 
said  benefice  so  bestowed.  And  by  this  means  tlie  said  statute  is  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  right  of  St.  Peter,  the  church  of  Rome  and  Engliuid,  the  clergy  and 
universities,  the  whole  common-weal,  and  maintenance  of  wars,  &c. 

Ninthly  :  We  say  and  depose,  &e.,  against  the  said  lord  Henry,  that  after  he  Charged 
had  tyi-annously  taken  upon  him  the  government  of  the  realm,  England  never  "''*^  ?P' 
flourished  since,  nor  prospered,  by  reason  of  his  continual  exactions  of  money,  and  per^ 
and  o])pressions  yearly  of  the  clergy  and  commonalty ;  neither  is  it  known  how  jury. 
this  money  so  extorted  is  bestowed,  when  neither  his  soldiers  nor  his  gentle 
men  are  payed  as  yet  their  wages  and  fees  for  their  charges  and   wonderful 
toil  and  labour,  neither  yet  the  poor  country  people  are  satisfied  for  the  victuals 
taken  of  them  ;  and,  nevertheless,  the  miserable  clergy,  and  more  miserable  com- 
monalty, are  forced  still  to  pay  by  menaces  and  sharp  threatenings  :  notwith- 
standing he  swore,  when  he  first  usui-]^)ed  the  crown,  that  hereafter  there  should 
be  no  such  exactions  or  vexations,  neither  of  the  clergy  nor  laity :  wherefore, 
as  before,  we  pronounce  him  perjiured,  &c. 

In  the  tenth  and  last  article  we  depose,  say,  and  openly  protest  by  these  pre- 
sents, for  ourselves,  and  all  our  assistants  in  the  cause  of  the  church  of  Rome 
and  England,  and  in  the  cause  of  king  Richard,  his  heirs,  and  the  clergy  and 
commonalty  of  the  whole  realm,  that  neither  our  intention  is,  was,  nor  shall  be, 
in  word  or  deed  to  offend  any  state  either  of  the  prelates  spiritual,  lords  tem- 
poral, or  commons  of  the  realm ;  but  rather,  foreseeing  the  perdition  and  de- 
struction of  this  realm  to  approach,  we  have  here  brought  before  you  certain 
articles  concerning  tJie  destruction  of  the  same,  to  be  circumspectly  considered 
by  the  whole  assembly,  as  wdl  by  the  lords  spiritual  as  temporal,  and  the  faith- 
fid  commons  of  England :  beseeching  you  all,  in  the  bowels  of  Jesus  Christ, 
the  righteous  judge,  and  for  the  merits  of  our  blessed  lady,  the  mother  of  God, 
and  of  St.  George  our  defender,  imder  whose  displayed  banner  we  wish  to  live 
and  die,  and  under  pain  of  damnation,  that  ye  will  be  favourable  to  us,  and  to 
our  causes  which  are  three  in  number ;  whereof  the  first  is,  that  we  exalt  unto  T^ree 
the  kingdom  the  true  and  lawful  heir,  and  him  to  crown  in  kingly  throne  with  causes  de- 
the  diadem  of  England.  And  secondly,  that  we  revoke  the  Welshmen,  the  blared. 
Irishmen,  and  all  others  our  enemies  imto  perpetual  peace  and  amity.  Thirdly 
and  finally,  that  we  deliver  and  make  free  our  native  country  from  all  exactions, 
extortions,  and  unjust  payment;  beseeching  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  grant  his 
blessing,  the  remission  of  their  sins,  and  life  everlasting  to  all  tliat  assist  us  to 
their  power  in  this  godly  and  meritorious  work :  and  unto  all  those  that  are 
against  us  we  threaten  the  curse  of  Almighty  God,  by  the  authority  committed 
unto  us  by  Christ  and  his  holy  church,  and  by  these  presents  we  pronounce 
them  excommunicate. 

These  articles  being  seen  and  read,  much  concourse  of  people  daily 


234  THE    ARCHBISHOP    OF    YORK,    V/ITH    OTHERS*,    EXECUTED. 

Henry    icsorted  iBore  and  more  to  the  archbishop.     The  earl  of  Westmore- 
'^'     land  (being  then  not  far  off,  with  John,  the  king's  son)  hearing  of 


A.  D.    this,  mustered  his  soldiers  with  all  the  power  he  was  able  to  make, 
I'^Ql-    and  bent  towards  the  archbishop  ;  but  seeing  his  part  too  weak  to 
Earl  of     encounter  with  him,  he  useth  practice  of  policy,  where  strength  would 
moreiand  not  scrvc.     And  first,  coming  to  him  under  colour  of  friendship  dis- 
the'areh-  scmblcd,  lie  labourcd  to  seek  out  the  causes  of  that  gi'eat  stir :   to 
bishop,     whom  the  archbishop  again  answered,   that  no  hurt  was  intended 
thereby,  but  profit  rather  to  the  king  and  commonwealth,  and  main- 
tenance of  public  peace  ;  but,  forasmuch  as  he  stood  in  gi'eat  fear  and 
danger  of  the  king,  he  was  therefore  compelled  so  to  do.    And  withal 
False-      he  showed  unto  him  the  contents  of  the  articles  aforesaid  ;  which 
fjibw"    when  the  earl  had  read,  setting  a  fair  face  upon  it,  he  seemed  highly 
^'^'P-        to  commend  the  purpose  and  doings  of  the  bishop,  promising,  more- 
over, that  he  would  help  also  forward  in  that  quarrel  to  the  uttermost 
of  his  power,  and  he  required  upon  the  same  a  day  to  be  set,  when 
they,  with  equal  number  of  men,  might  meet  together,  in  some  place 
appointed,   to  have  further  talk  of   the  matter.     The  archbishop, 
easily  persuaded,  was  content,  although  much  against  the  counsel  of 
the  earl  marshal,  and  came  ;  where  the  articles  being  openly  published 
and  read,  the  earl  of  Westmoreland  with  his  company  pretended  well 
to  like  the  same,  and  to  join  their  assents  together.     This  done,  he 
exhorted  the  archbishop,  that  forasmuch  as  his  garrison  had  been  now 
long  in  armour  and  from  home,  he  would  therefore  discharge  the 
needless  multitude  of  his  soldiers,  and  dismiss  them  home  to  their 
works  and  business,  and  they  would  together  drink  and  join  hands 
The  arch-  in  the  sight  of  the  whole  company.      Thus  they,   shaking  hands 
York^°^  together,  the  archbishop  sendeth  away  his  soldiers   in   pe;icc,  not 
craftily     kuowing  himsclf  to  be   circumvented,  before  he  was  immediately 
ven"e'd.'    arrcstcd  by  the  hands  of  the  earl  of  Westmoreland :  and,  shortly 
The  arch-  after,  the  king  coming  with  his  power  to  York,  he  was  there  beheaded 
bishop  of  ^Q  Monday  in  Whitsun-week,  and  with   him  also  lord  Thomas 

\ork,lord  *^ii-it  ^  p    ^  •  p  ^t      ^ 

Mow-  Mowbray,  marshal,  with  divers  others,  moreover,  ot  the  city  ot  Y  ork, 
anYmany  who  had  taken  their  parts  ;  after  whose  slaughter  the  king  proceedeth 
s^'ireraen  fui'thcr  to  pcrsccute  the  earl  of  Northumberland,  and  lord  Thomas 
executed.  Bardolph,  who  then  did  fly  to  Berwick.  From  thence  they  removed 
to  Wales.  At  length,  within  two  years  after,  fighting  against  the 
king's  part,  they  were  slain  in  the  field,  a.d.  1408 :  in  which  year 
A  D.1408.  divers  others  in  the  north  parts,  for  favouring  the  aforesaid  lords,  were 
\\Ael  "^  likewise  condemned  by  the  king,  and  put  to  death ;  among  whom  the 
hanged-    abbot  of  Halcs,  for  the  like  treason,  was  hanged. 

The  king,  after  the  shedding  of  so  much  blood,  seeing  himself  so 
hardly  beloved  of  his  subjects,  thought  to  keep  in  yet  with  the  clergy, 
and  with  the  bishop  of  Rome,  seeking  always  his  chiefest  stay  at  their 
hands ;  and  therefore  he  was  compelled  in  all  things  to  serve  their 
humour,  as  did  appear  as  Avell  in  condemning  William  Sautre  before, 
as  also  in  others,  which  consequently  we  have  now  to  treat  of ;  in  the 
number  of  whom  cometh  now,  by  the  course  of  time,  to  write  of  one 
John  Badby,  a  tailor  and  a  layman,  who,  by  the  cruelty  of  Thomas 
Arundel,  archbishop,  and  other  prelates,  was  brought  to  his  condemna- 
A.ivHoo.  tion  in  this  king's  reign,  a.d.  1409,  as  by  their  own  registers  appeareth, 
and  foUoweth  by  his  narration  to  be  seen. 


JOHN    BADBY,    AND    THk    ARTICLES    AGAINST    HIM.  235 

gio^n  25aDbii,  mtificet,  a  jaartor/  ''1^ 

In  the  year  of  our  Lord  1409,  on  Sunday,  being  the  first  day  of  -'^^^^ 
March,  in  the  afternoon,  the  examination  following,  of  one  John 
Badby,  tailor,  being  a  layman,  was  made  in  a  certain  house  or  hall 
within  the  precinct  of  the  preaching  friars  of  London,  in  an  outer 
cloister,  on  the  crime  of  heresy,  and  other  articles  repugnant  to  the 
determination  of  the  erroneous  church  of  Rome,  before  Thomas 
Anmdel,  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  and  other  his  assistants,  as  the 
archbishop  of  York,  and  the  bishops  of  London,  Winchester,  Oxford, 
Norwich,  Salisbury,  Bath,  Bangor ;  the  bishop  Menevensis,  and  also 
Ednmnd,  duke  of  York,  Thomas  Beaufort,  chancellor  of  England, 
lord  de  Roos,  clerk  of  the  rolls,  and  a  gi'cat  number  of  other  lords, 
both  spiritual  and  temporal,  being  then  at  the  self-same  time  present : 
Master  Morgan  read  the  articles  of  his  opinions  to  the  hearers, 
according  as  it  is  contained  in  the  instrument  read  by  the  aforesaid 
Master  Morgan,  the  tenor  whereof  folio weth,  and  in  effect  is  such. 

The  Articles  against  John  Badby,  and  his  Examination  and  Monition 

thereon. 

In  the  name  of  God,  Amen.  Be  it  manifest  to  all  men  by  this  present  public 
insti'ument,  that  in  the  year  after  the  incarnation  of  our  Lord,  according  to  the 
course  and  computation  of  the  church  of  England,  otherwise  in  the  year  1409, 
in  the  second  indiction,  in  the  third  year  of  the  popedom  of  the  most  holy  father 
in  Christ  and  Lord,  lord  Gregory  XL,  by  the  divine  permission  pope,  the 
second  day  of  January,  in  the  chapel  Carvariae,  of  St.  Thomas  the  Martyr,  nigh 
unto  the  cathedral  church  of  Worcester,  being  situate  in  the  said  diocese,  in  the 
presence  of  me  the  public  notary,  and  of  the  witnesses  under  written,  the  afore- 
said John  Badby,  a  layman,  of  the  said  diocese  of  Worcester,  appearing  per- 
sonally before  the  reverend  father  in  Christ  and  Lord,  lord  Thomas,  by  the 
grace  of  God  bishop  of  Worcester,  sitting  in  the  said  chapel  for  chief  judge, 
was  detected  of  and  upon  the  crime  of  heresy  being  heretically  taught  and 
openly  maintained  by  the  aforesaid  John  Badby :  that  is,  that  the  sacrament  of  The  sa- 
the  body  of  Christ,  consecrated  by  the  priest  upon  the  altar,  is  not  the  true  body  '^fp'?^"f 
of  Christ  by  virtue  of  the  words  of  the  sacrament ;  but  that  after  the  sacra-  body, 
mental  words  spoken  by  the  priests  to  make  the  body  of  Christ,  the  material 
bread  doth  remain  upon  the  altar  as  in  the  beginning,  neither  is  it  turned  into 
the  very  body  of  Christ  after  the  sacramental  words  spoken  by  the  priests. 

Which  John  Badby  being  examined,  and  diligently  demanded  by  the  afore- 
said reverend  father  concerning  the  premises,  in  the  end  did  answer,  That  it 
was  impossible  that  any  priest  should  make  the  body  of  Christ,  and  that  he 
believed  firmly  that  no  priest  could  make  the  body  of  Christ  by  such  words 
sacramentally  spoken  in  such  sort.  And  also  he  said  expressl)^.  That  he  would 
never,  while  he  lived,  believe  that  any  priest  could  make  the  body  of  Christ 
sacramentally,  unless  that  first  he  saw  manifestly  the  like  body  of  Christ  to  be 
handled  in  the  hands  of  the  priest  upon  the  altar,  in  his  corporal  form.  And 
furthermore  he  said,  That  John  Rakier,  of  Bristol,  had  as  much  power  and 
authority  to  make  the  like  body  of  Christ,  as  any  piiest  had.  Moreover  he  said, 
that  when  Christ  sat  at  supper  with  his  disciples,  he  had  not  his  body  in  his 
hand,  to  the  intent  to  distribute  it  to  his  disciples ;  and  he  said  expressly,  that 
he  did  not  this  thing.  And  also  he  spake  many  other  words,  teaching  and 
fortifying  the  heresy  in  the  same  place,  both  grievous,  and  also  out  of  order, 
and  horrible  to  the  ears  of  the  hearers,  sounding  against  the  catholic  faith. 

Upon  which  occasion  the  same  reverend  father  admonished  and  requested 
the  said  John  Badby  oftentimes,  and  very  instantly  to  charity ;  forasmuch  as  he 
woidd  willingly  that  he  should  have  forsaken  such  heresy  and  opinions  holden, 
taught,  and  maintained  by  him  in  such  sort  against  the  sacrament ;  to  renounce, 

(1)  Ex  Regist.  T.  Arundel. 


236 


THE    EXAMINATION    OF    JOHN    BADBY. 


Henry 
IF. 

A.D. 

1409. 

I  cannot 
blame  ye 
that  ye 
are  so 
ant,'ry,  for 
it  was  not 
for  your 
prolit. 


and  utterly  abjure  them,  and  to  believe  other  things  which  the  holy  mother  the 
church  doth  believe  :  and  he  informed  the  said  John  on  that  behalf  both  gently, 
and  yet  laudably.  Yet  the  said  John  Badby,  although  he  were  admonished 
and  requested  both  often  and  instantly  by  the  said  reverend  father,  said  and 
answered  expressly,  That  he  woidd  never  believe  otherwise  than  before  he  had 
said,  taught,  and  answered.  Whereupon,  the  aforesaid  reverend  father,  bishop 
of  Worcester,  seeing,  understanding,  and  perceiving  the  aforesaid  John  Badby 
to  maintain  and  fortify  the  same  heresy,  being  stubborn,  and  proceeding  in  the 
same  stubbornness,  pronounced  the  said  John  to  be  before  this  time  convicted 
of  such  a  heresy,  and  that  he  hath  been  and  is  a  heretic  ;  and  in  the  end 
declared  it  in  these  words. 


The  Sentence  of  the  Bishop  of  Worcester  against  John  Badby,  with 
the  Attestation  of  the  Notai-ies. 

*  In  the  name  of  God,  Amen.  We,  Thomas,  bishop  of  Worcester,  do  accuse 
thee  John  Badby,  being  a  layman  of  our  diocese,  of  and  upon  the  crime  of 
heresy,  before  us  sitting  for  chief  jvulge,  being  oftentimes  confessed  and  con- 
victed of  and  upon  that  which  thou  hast  taught,  and  openly  affirmed,  as  hitherto 
thou  dost  teach,  boldly  affirm,  and  defend :  that  the  sacrament  of  the  body  of 
Christ,  consecrated  upon  the  altar  by  the  priest,  is  not  the  true  body  of  Christ ; 
but  after  the  sacramental  words,  to  make  the  body  of  Christ,  by  virtue  of  the 
said  sacramental  words  pronounced,  to  have  been  in  the  crime  of  heresy ;  and 
we  do  pronounce  thee  both  to  have  been,  and  to  be,  a  heretic,  and  do  declare 
it,  finally,  by  these  writings.' 


A  rabble 
of  monks 
and  friars 
about  the 
condem- 
nation of 
John 
Badby. 
Quare 
iremue- 
runt 
gentes  ? 
Psal.  ii. 


Scribes 
with  Pha- 
risees. 


The  an 
swer  of 
John 
Badby 
to  the 
articles. 


These  things  were  done  accordingly,  as  is  above  written  and  recited,  in 
the.  year,  indiction,  popedom,  month,  day,  and  place  aforesaid  ;  there  being 
present  at  the  same  time  John  Malune,  prior  of  the  cathedral  church  of  Wor- 
cester ;  John  Dudle,  monk ;  and  John  Haule,  sub-prior  of  the  said  church  : 
Thomas  Penings,  of  the  order  of  the  Carmelites ;  Thomas  Fekenham,  of  the 
order  of  the  preaching  friars ;  William  Pomfi-et,  of  the  order  of  the  Minorites, 
being  professors  and  masters  in  divinity :  William  Hailes,  Gualter  of  London, 
John  Swippedew,  being  public  notaries ;  and  William  Beauchamp  and  Thomas 
Gerbis,  being  knights  ;  Richard  Wish,  of  Tredington  ;  Thomas  Wilby,  of  Hem- 
bury  ;  John  Weston,  of  Yewley,  being  parsons  of  churches ;  and  Thomas  Ba- 
leinges,  master  of  St.  Wolston,  in  Worcester ;  and  also  Henry  Haggely,  John 
Penerel,  Thomas  Trogmorton,  and  William  Wasleborn,  esquires,  of  the  dioceses 
of  Worcester  and  Norwich,  and  many  other  worshipful  and  honest  men  being 
witnesses,  and  called  specially  to  the  things  aforesaid. 

And  I  John  Chew,  clerk  of  the  diocese  of  Bath  and  Wells,  and,  by  the 
authority  apostolical,  public  notary  of  the  said  bishop,  have,  in  testimony  of  the 
premises,  put  my  hand  and  seal  to  the  examination,  interrogation,  monition, 
and  answer  of  the  same  John  Badby,  and  to  his  obstinacy,  and  also  to  the  pro- 
ceedings of  all  and  singular  other  doings  as  is  aforesaid,  which  against  him, 
before  the  said  bishop,  were  handled  and  done,  in  the  year,  indiction,  popedom, 
month,  day,  and  place  aforesaid,  who,  with  the  before-named  witnesses,  was 
personally  present ;  and  the  same,  even  as  I  heard  them  and  saw  them  to  be 
done  (being  occupied  with  other  matters),  I  caused  to  be  written  and  published, 
and  into  this  public  form  have  compiled  the  same.  I,  the  aforesaid  notary,  am 
also  privy  unto  the  words  and  examinations  interlined  between  seven  or  eight 
lines  of  the  beginning  of  this  instrument ;  which  lines  I  also,  the  aforesaid 
notary,  do  approve  and  make  good. 

And  I  Walter  London,  clerk  of  the  diocese  of  Worcester,  and,  by  the  authority 
apostolical,  public  notary,  to  all  and  singujar  the  aforesaid  things  as  before  by 
the  aforesaid  notary  are  recited,  and  in  the  year,  indiction,  popedom,  month, 
day,  and  place  aforesaid  were  handled  and  done,  being  with  other  the  before- 
recited  witnesses  personally  present,  and  to  all  and  every  of  the  same  (as  I 
saw  and  heard  them  to  be  done,  being  thereunto  faithfully  desired  and  required), 
in  testimony  of  the  premises,  have  signed  and  subscribed  according  to  the 
accustomed  manner.' 


(1)  H:cc  f.x  Keg.  Cr.iit. 


THE    CONDKMNATION    OV    JOHN    BADBY.  237 

And  when  the  articles,  in  the  aforesaid  instrument  contained,  were,  by  the    iienry 
archbisliop  of  Canterbury,  publicly  and  v\dgarly  read  and  approved ;  he  publicly       ^''• 
confessed  and  afFimied,  that  he  had  both  said  and  maintained  the  same.     And  ~A~Tj 
then  the  archbishop,  to  convince  the  constant  purpose  of  the  said  John  Hadby,     \.ir.q' 

commanded  the  saTue  articles  again  to  be  read,  often  instructing  him  both  by  IL 

words  and  examples,  informing  and  exhorting  him  that  thereby  he  might  be 
brought  the  sooner  to  the  religion  that  he  was  of.     And,  furthermore,  the  said 
archbishop  said  and  afilnned  there  openly  to  the  same  John,  that  he  would,  if 
he  would  live  according  to  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  gage  his  soul  for  him  at  the 
judgment  day.     And   after  that  again   he  caused  those  articles,  in  the  said 
instnmient  expressed,  to  be  read  by  the  aforesaid  Philip   Morgan,  and  the  said 
archbishop  himself  expounded  the  same  in  English  as  before;  whereunto  John  stance  of 
Badby  answered :  as  touching  the  iirst  article,  concerning  the  body  of  Christ,  bit-ad  not 
he  expressly  said.   That  after  the  consecration  at  the  altar,  there  remaiueth  [n'^he'sa- 
material  bread,  and  the  same  bread  which  was  before :  notwithstanding,  said  he,  crament. 
it  is  a  sign  or  sacrament  of  the  living  God. 

Also,  when  the  second  article  was  expounded  unto  him,  '  That  it  is  impossi- 
ble for  any  priest,'  &c.  To  this  article  he  answered  and  said,  That  it  could  not 
sink  into  his  mind,  that  the  words  are  to  be  taken  as  they  literally  lie,  unless  he 
siiould  deny  the  incarnation  of  Christ. 

Also  being  examined  on  the  third  article  concerning  '  Jack  Rakier,'  he  said. 
That  if  Jack  Rakier  were  a  man  of  good  living,  and  did  love  and  fear  God,  he 
hath  as  much  power  so  to  do,  as  hath  the  priest ;  and  said  further,  that  he  hath 
heard  it  spoken  by  some  doctors  of  divinity,  that  if  he  should  receive  any  such 
consecrated  bread,  he  were  worthy  to  be  damned,  and  were  damned  in  so 
doing. 

Furthermore  he  said,  That  he  would  believe  the  Omnipotent  God  in  Trinity ; 
and  said  moreover,  that  if  every  host  being  consecrated  at  the  altar  were  the 
Lord's  body,  that  then  there  be  twenty  thousand  gods  in  England.  But  he 
believed,  he  said,  in  one  God  Omnipotent;  which  thing  the  aforesaid  arch- 
bishop of  Canterbury  denied  not. 

And  when  the  other  conclusion  was  expounded,  '  That  Christ  sitting  with  his 
disciples  at  supper,'  &c.  To  this  he  answered  and  said.  That  he  woidd  greatly 
mar\'el,  that  if  any  man  had  a  loaf  of  bread,  and  should  break  the  same,  and 
give  to  every  man  a  mouthful,  the  same  loaf  should  afterwards  be  whole. 

When  all  these  things  were  thus  finished,  and  all  the  said  conclusions  were 
oft^en  read  in  the  vidgar  tongiie,  the  aforesaid  archbishop  demanded   of  him, 
whether  he  would  renounce  and  forsake  his  opinions  and  such  like  conclusions 
or  not,  and  adhere  to  the  docti-ine  of  Christ  and  catholic  faith  ?     He  answered, 
That,  according  to  that  he  had  said  before,   he   would  adhere  and  stand  to  ^o"^'^"- 
thosc  words  which  before  he  had  made  answer  unto.      Then  the  archbishop  John 
oftentimes  required  the  said  John,  in  the  bowels  of  Jesus  Christ,  that  he  would  Badby 
forsake  those  opinions  and  conclusions,  and  that  henceforth  he  would  cleave  to  ^^^11'^" 
the  christian  faith ;  which  thing  to  do,  in  the  audience  of  all   the  lords  and  bishop, 
others  that  were  present,  he  expressly  denied  and  refused. 

After  all  this,  when  the  aforesaid  archbishop  of  Canterbury  and  the  bishop  of  The 
London  had  consulted  together,  to  what  safe  keeping  the  said  John  Badby,  l"shops 
until    the  Wednesday  next,   might  be  committed,   it  was  concluded,  that  he  sure 
should  be  put  into  a  certain  chamber  or  safe  house  within  the  mansion  of  the  work, 
friars  preachers,  and  so  he  was ;  and  then  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury  said,  bishon'^ ' 
that  he  himself  would  keep  the  key  thereof  in  the  mean  time.     And  when  the  both 
aforesaid  Wednesday  was  expired,  being  the  fifteentli  day  of  March,  and  that  J^'^Kc  and 
the  aforesaid  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  with  his  fellow  brethren  and  siiffi-agans,  ^^' "'' 
were  assembled  in  the  church  of  St.  Paul  in  London,  the  archbishop  of  Canter- 
bury, taking  the  ejjiscopal  seat,  called  unto  him  the  archbishop  of  York,  Richard 
London,  Henry  Winchester,  Robert  Chichester,  Alexander  Norwich,  and  the  .    . 
noble  prince  Edmund  the  duke  of  York;  Ralph  earl  of  Westmoreland;  Thomas  runt  re- 
Beaufort,  knight,  lord  chancellor  of  England;'  and  the  lord  Beamond,  with  K^'s'*^."'''^. 
other  noble  men,  as  well  s])iritual  as  temporal,  that  stood,  and  sat  by,  whom  to  cLes  con- 
name  it  would  be  1-ong;  before  whom  the  said  John  Badby  was  called  per-  venerunt 
sonally  to  answer  unto  the  articles  premised  in  the  aforesaid  instrument:  who  '"  ""^™ 
when  he  came  personally  before  them,  the  articles  were  read  by  the  official  of  4c  Ps.  ii.' 
the   court   of   Canterbury ;  and   by   the   archbishop,    in    the    vulgar   tongue 


238  THE    BURNING    OF    JOHN    BADBY. 


Henry     expounded  publicly  and  expressly  :  and  the  same  articles  as  he  had  before  spoken 

^^-      and  deposed,  he  still  held  and  defended,  and  said,  that  whilst  he  lived,  he 

'  .    „      would  never  i-etract  the  same.   And,  furthermore,  he  said  specially,  to  be  noted, 

?'!--     that  the  lord  duke  of  York,  personally  there  present,  as  is  aforesaid,  and  every 

^'    man  else  for  the  time  being,  is  of  more    estimation   and  reputation,  than  the 

sacrament  of  the  altar,  by  the  priest  in  due  form  consecrated. 


And  whilst  they  were  thus  in  his  examination,  the  archbishop  con- 
sidering and  weighing  that  he  would  in  no  wise  be  altered,  and  seeing, 
moreover,  his  countenance  stout,   and  heart  confirmed,  so  that  he 
began  to  persuade  others  as  it  appeared,  in  the  same  :  these  things 
considered,  the  arch-prelate,  when  he  saw  that  by  his  allurements  it 
was  not  in  his  power,  either  by  exhortations,  reasons,  or  arguments,  to 
bring  the  said  John  Badby  from  his  constant  truth  to  his  catholic 
faith  (executing  and  doing  the  office  of  his  great  Master),  proceeded 
to  confinn  and  ratify  the  former  sentence  given  before  the  bishop  of 
Worcester  against  the  said  John  Badby,  pronouncing  him  for  an 
Note       open  and  public  heretic.     And  thus,  shifting  their  hands  of  him  they 
murder-   delivered  him  to  the  secular  powers,  and  desired  the  said  temporal 
Jng         lords  then  and  there  present,  very  instantly,  that  they  would  not  put 
in  sheep's  the  sauic  Joliu  Badby  to  death  for  that  his  offence,  nor  deliver  him 
clothing.  ^^  ^^  punished  or  put  to  death,  in  the  presence  of  all  the  lords  above- 
recited. 

These  things  thus  done  and  concluded  by  the  bishops  in  the  fore- 
noon, in  the  afternoon  the  king's  ^vrit  was  not  far  behind,  by  the 
force  whereof  John  Badby,  still  persevering  in  his  constancy  unto  the 
death,  was  brought  into  Smithfield,  and  there,  being  put  in  an  empty 
barrel,  was  bound  with  iron  chains  fastened  to  a  stake,  having  dry 
wood  put  about  him.     And  as  he  was  thus  standing  in  the  pipe  or 
tun,  for  as  yet  Perillus's  bull  was  not  in  use  among  the  bishops,  it 
happened  that  the  prince,  the  king''s  eldest  son,  was  there  present, 
who,  showing  some  part  of  the  good  Samaritan,  began  to  endeavour 
and  essay  how  to  save  the  life  of  him,  whom  the  hypocritical  Levites 
The         and  Pharisees  sought  to  put  to  death.  He  admonished  and  counselled 
faboureth  ^*"^'  ^^^'^■,  haviug  Tcspcct  unto  himsclf,  he  should  speedily  withdraw 
to  tuni     himself  out  of  these  dangerous  labyrinths  of  opinions,  adding  often- 
^'     times  threatenings,  which  might  have  daunted  any  man"'s  stomach. 
Also  Courtney,  at  that  time  chancellor  of  Oxford,  preached  unto 
him,  and  informed  him  of  the  faith  of  holy  church. 
Thesa-         In  the  mean  season  the  prior  of  St.  Bartholomew"'s  in  Smithfield 
sotanniy  brought,  with  all  solemnity,  the  sacrament  of  God's  body,  with  twelve 
aTthe*^'    torches  borne  before,  and  so  showed  the  sacrament  to  the  poor  man 
""f^fi'db    ^^^^S  ^^  ^^  stake.     And  then  they  demanding  of  him  how  he 
believed   in   it,  he   answered,   That  he  knew  well  it  was  hallowed 
bread,  and  not  God's  body.     And  then  was  the  tun  put  over  him, 
and  fire  put  unto  him.     And  when  the  innocent  soul  felt  the  fire,  he 
cried  "  Mercy  !"  calling  belike  upon  the  Lord ;  with  which  horrible  cry 
the  prince  being  moved,  commanded  them  to  take  away  the  tun,  and 
quench  the  fire.     This  commandment  being  done,  he  asked  him  if 
he  would  forsake  heresy,  to  take  him  to  the  faith  of  holy  church  ? 
which  thing,  if  he  would  do,  he  should  have  goods  enough ;  promising 
also  unto  him  a  yearly  stipend  out  of  the  king's  treasury,  so  much  as 
should  suffice  for  his  contentation. 


HIS  CONSTAKCV  AT  HIS  DEATH.  239 

But  this  valiant  champion  of  Christ,  neglecting  the  prince's  fair    Henry 
words,  as  also  contemning  all  men's  devices,  being  fully  determined 


rather  to  suffer  any  kind  of  torment,  were  it  never  so  grievous,  than    A.D. 
so  great  idolatry  and  wickedness,  refused  the  offer  of  worldly  promises. 


being  no  doubt  more  vehemently  inflamed  with  the  Spirit  of  God,  John 
than  with  any  earthly  desire.     Whe-reforc,  when  as  yet  he  continued  constant 
unmovcable  in  his  former  mind,  the  prince  commanded  him  straight  ^^^^^ 
to  be  put  again  into  the  pipe  or  tun,  and  that  he  should  not  after- 
wards look  for  any  grace  or  favour.     But  as  he  could  be  allured  by 
no  rewards,  even  so  was  he  nothing  at  all  abashed  at  their  torments, 
but,  as  a  valiant  champion  of  Christ,  he  persevered  invincibly  to  the 
end,   not  without  a  great  and  most  cruel  battle,  but  with  much 
greater  triumph  of  victory ;  the  Spirit  of  Christ  having  always  the 
upper  hand  in  his  members,  maugrc  the  fury,  rage,  and  power  of  the 
whole  world.     For  the  manifestation  of  which  torment,  we  have  here 
set  forth  the  picture  of  his  burning,  in  such  manner  as  it  was  done. 

This  godly  martyr,  John  Badby,  having  thus  consummated  his  ah  the 
testimony  and  martyrdom  in  fire,  the  persecuting  bishops  yet  not  jjj°an'^se't'^ 
hercAvith  contented,  and  thinking  themselves  as  yet  either  not  strong  against 
enough,  or  else  not  sharp  enough,  against  the  poor  innocent  flock  of  pel. 
Christ,  to  make  all  things  sure  and  substantial  on  their  side,  in  such 
sort  as  this  doctrine  of  the  gospel  now  springing  should  be  suppressed 
for  ever,  laid  their  conspiring  heads  together ;  and  having  now  a  king 
for  their  own  purpose,  ready  to  serve  their  turn  in  all  points  (during 
the  time  of  the  same  parliament  above-recited  yet  continuing),  the 
aforesaid  bishops  and  clergy  of  the  realm  exhibited  a  bill  unto  the 
king's  majesty,  subtilcly  declaring,  what  quietness  had  been  main- 
tained within  this  realm  by  his  most  noble  progenitors,  who  always 
defended  the  ancient  rites  and  customs  of  the  church,  and  enriched  the 
same  with  large  gifts,  to  the  honour  of  God  and  the  realm  :  and,  con- 
trariwise, what  trouble  and  disquietness  had  now  risen  by  divers,  as 
they  teniied  them,  wicked  and  perverse  men,  teaching  and  preaching 
openly  and  pri\aly  a  certain  new,  wicked,  and  heretical  kind  of  doc-  The  gos- 
trine,  contrary  to  the  catholic  faith  and  determination  of  holy  church,  ^^rist 
Whereupon  the  king,  always  oppressed  with  blind  ignorance,  by  the  ^""^,"4^^^^ 
crafty  means  and  subtle  pretences  of  the  clergy,  granted  in  the  said  and  here- 
parliament,  by  consent  of  the  nobility  assembled,  a  statute  to  be 
observed,  called  '  Ex  Officio,'  as  foUoweth  : 

The  cruel  Statute  '  Ex  Officio.'' 

That  is  to  say,  that  no  man  within  this  realm,  or  other  the  kings  majesty's 
dominions,  presmne  to  take  upon  him  to  preach  pri\aly  or  apertly,  without 
special  license  first  obtained  of  the  ordinary  of  the  same  place  (curates  in  tlieir 
own  parish  churches,  and  persons  heretofore  privileged,  and  others  admitted 
by  the  canon  law,  only  excepted) :  nor  that  any  hereafter  do  preach,  maintain, 
teach,  inform  openly  or  in  secret,  or  make  or  write  any  book  contrary  to  the 
catliolic  faith  and  determination  of  the  holy  church :  nor  that  any  hereafter 
make  any  conventicles  or  assemblies,  or  keep  and  exercise  any  manner  of 
schools  touching  this  sect,  wicked  doctrine,  and  opinion.  And  ftirther,  that 
no  man  hereafter  shall,  by  any  means,  favour  any  such  preacher,  any  such 
maker  of  unlawful  assemblies  or  any  such  book-maker  or  writer ;  and,  finally, 

(1)  See  the  Harleian  MSS.  in  the  Brit.  Mus.  No.  420.  Art.  12.  "  Excerpta  ex  Registro  Tnoms 
Arundeli :  de  LoUardis.  67.  (i.  e.  Statutnni  Hcgium  in  I'arliamento  editum  contra  Hereticos,  vulgo 
ilictum  '  Ex  Officio')"— Et). 


?40  THE    (KUEL    STATUTE,    EX    OFFICIO. 

Henry    any  such  teacher,  infomier,  or  stirrer  up  of  the  people :  and  that  all  and  singular 

^^-       persons  having  any  of  the  said  books,  writings,  schedules,  containing  the  said 

.    p.      wicked  doctrines  and  opinions,  shall,  within  forty  days  after  this  present  pro-- 

1 400     clamation  and  statute,  really  and  effectuallj'  deliver,  or  cause  to  be  delivered,  all 

L  and  singular  the  said  books  and  writings  unto  the  ordinary  of  the  same  place. 

And  if  it  shall  happen  that  any  person  or  persons,  of  what  kind,  state,  or  con- 
dition soever  he  or  they  be,  do  or  attempt  any  manner  of  thing  contrary  to  this 
present  proclamation  and  statute,  or  do  not  deliver  the  same  books  in  form 
aforesaid :  that  then  the  ordinary  of  the  same  place,  in  his  own  diocese,  by 
authority  of  the  said  proclamation  and  statute,  shall  cause  to  be  arrested  and 
detained  under  safe  custody  the  said  person  or  persons  in  this  case  defamed  and 
evidently  suspected,  or  any  of  them,  until  he  or  they  so  offending  have,  by  order 
of  law,  purged  him  or  themselves  as  touching  the  articles  laid  to  his  or  their 
charge  in  this  behalf ;  or  until  he  or  they  have  denied  and  recanted,  according 
to  the  laws  ecclesiastical,  the  said  wicked  sect,  preachings,  teachings,  and  here- 
A  bloody  tical  and  erroneous  opinions.  And  that  the  said  ordinary,  by  himself  or  his 
lawjjf  commissaries,  proceed  openly  and  judicially  to  all  the  effect  of  law,  against  the 
HenrylV.  Said  persons  so  arrested  and  remaining  under  safe  custody;  and  that  he  end 
and  determine  the  matter  within  three  months  after  the  said  arrest  (all  delays 
and  excuses  set  apart),  according  to  the  order  and  custom  of  the  canon  law. 
And  if  any  person,  in  any  cause  above-mentioned,  shall  be  lawfully  convicted 
before  the  ordinary  of  the  diocese  or  his  commissaries,  that  then  the  said  ordi- 
nary may  lawfully  cause  the  said  person  so  convicted  (according  to  the  manner 
and  quality  of  his  fact)  to  be  laid  in  any  of  his  own  prisons,  and  there  to  be 
kept  so  long  as  his  discretion  shall  be  thought  expedient. 

And  further,  the  said  ordinary  (except  in  cases  by  which,  according  to  the 
canon  law,  the  party  offending  ought  to  be  delivered  unto  the  secular  power) 
shall  charge  the  said  person  with  such  a  fine  of  money,  to  be  paid  unto  the 
king's  majesty,  as  he  shall  think  competent  for  the  manner  and  quality  of  his 
offence.  And  the  said  diocesan  shall  be  bound  to  give  notice  of  the  said  fine 
into  the  king's  majesty's  exchequer,  by  his  letters  patent  xmder  his  seal ;  to  the 
intent  that  the  said  fine  may  be  levied  to  the  king's  majesty's  use,  of  the  goods 
of  the  person  so  convicted. 

And  further,  if  any  person  within  this  realm  and  other  the  king's  majesty's 
dominions  shall  be  convicted  before  the  ordinary  of  the  place,  or  his  commis- 
saries, of  the  said  wicked  preachings,  doctrines,  opinions,  schools,  and  heretical 
and  erroneous  informations,  or  any  of  them ;  and  will  refuse  to  abjure  and  recant 
the  said  wicked  sect,  preachings,  teachings,  opinions,  schools  and  informations ; 
or  if,  after  his  abjuration  once  made,  the  relapse  be  pronounced  against  him  by 
the  diocesan  of  the  place,  or  his  commissaries  (for  so,  by  the  canon  law,  he 
ought  to  be  left,  to  the  secular  power,  upon  credit  given  to  the  ordinary  or  his 
commissaries),  that  then  the  sheriff  of  the  same  county,  the  mayor,  sheriffs  or 
sheriff,  or  the  mayor  or  bailiffs  of  the  same  city,  village,  or  borough  of  the  same 
county,  and  nearest  inhabiting  to  the  said  ordinary,  or  his  said  commissaries, 
shall  personally  be  present,  as  oft  as  they  shall  be  required,  to  confer  with  the 
said  ordinary  or  his  commissaries,  in  giving  sentence  against  the  said  persons 
A  bloody  offending,  or  any  of  them :  and,  after  the  said  sentence  so  pronounced,  shall 
siatute.  take  imto  them  the  said  persons  so  offending,  and  any  of  them,  and  cause  them 
openly  to  be  burned  in  the  sight  of  all  the  people ;  to  the  intent  that  this  kind 
of  punishment  may  be  a  terror  unto  others,  that  the  like  wicked  doctrines  and 
heretical  opinions,  or  authors  and  favourers  thereof,  be  no  more  maintained 
within  this  realm  and  dominions,  to  the  great  hurt  (which  God  forbid)  of 
christian  religion,  and  decrees  of  holy  church.  In  all  which  and  singular  the 
premises,  concerning  the  statute  aforesaid,  let  the  sheriff,  mayors,  and  bailiffs  of 
the  said  counties,  cities,  villages,  and  boroughs,  be  attendant ;  aiding  and 
favouring  the  said  ordinaries  and  their  commissaries. 

By  this  bloody  statute,  so  severely  and  sharply  enacted  against 
these  simple  men,  here  liast  thou,  gentle  reader  !  a  little  to  stay  with 
thyself,  and  to  consider  the  nature  and  condition  of  this  present 
world,  how  it  hath  been  set  and  bent  ever  from  the  beginning,  by  all 
might,  counsel,  and  ways  possible,  to  strive  against  the  ways  of  God, 


COMPARED    TO    THE    LAW    OF    MAXIMIXUS.  241 

and  to  overthrow  that,  which  he  will  have  set  up.    And  although  the    H:nry 
world  may  see,  by  infinite  stories  and  examples,  that  it  is  but  in 


vain  to  strive  against  him,  yet  such  is  the  nature  of  this  world  (all    -'^-  ^• 
set  in  malignity),  that  it  will  not  cease  still  to  be  like  itself. 


The  like  law  and  statute  in  the  time  of  Uioclesian  and  Maximinus  The  law 
was  attempted,  as  before  appeareth  ;  and  for  the  more  strength  was  Linus 
written  also  in  tables  of  brass,  to  the  intent  that  the  name  of  Christ  ^"^^^^ 
should  utterly  be  extinguished  for  ever  :  and  yet  the  name  of  Christ  'exoui- 
remaineth ;  whereas  that  brazen  law  remained  not  three  years.    That  pared. 
bw  written  then  in  brass,  although  it  differ  in  manner  and  form 
from  this  our  statute  '  Ex  officio,'  yet  to  the  same  end  and  cruelty, 
to  spill  the  blood  of  saints,  there  is  no  difference  between  the  one 
and  the  other ;    neither  is  there  any  diversity  touching  the  first 
original  doer  and  worker  of  them  both  :  for  the  same  Satan  which 
then  wrought  his  uttemiost  against  Christ,  before  he  was  bound  up, 
the  same  also  now,  after  his  loosing  out,  doth  what  he  can,  though 
not  after  the  same  way,  yet  to  the  same  intent ;  for  then,  with  out- 
ward violence,  as  an  open  enemy,  he  did  what  he  could ;  noAv,  by  a 
more  covert  way,  under  the  tiile  of  the  church,  he  impugneth  the 
church  of  Christ,  using  a  more  subtle  way  to  deceive,  under  gay 
pretensed  titles,  but  no  less  pernicious  in  the  end  whereto  he  shooteth; 
as  well  appeareth  by  this  bloody  statute   '  Ex  officio,'  the  sequel 
where(if  cost  afterwards  many  a  christian  man's  life,  as,  in  process  of 
story,  remaineth  more  hereafter,  Christ  willing,  to  be  declared. 

Furthermore,  for  the  more  fortification  of  this  statute  of  the  king 
aforesaid,  concurreth  also  another  constitution  made  much  about  the 
same  time  by  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  Thomas  Arundel :  so 
that  no  industry  nor  policy  of  man  here  did  lack  to  set  the  matter 
forward,  but  specially  on  the  bishops'  parts,  who  left  no  means  unat- 
tempted,  how  to  subvert  the  right  ways  of  the  Lord, 

First,  In  most  diligent  and  exquisite  execution  of  the  king's 
statute  set  forth,  the  execution  whereof  they  did  so  exactly  apply  ; 
that  marvel  it  is  to  consider,  all  other  laws  of  kings  commonly,  be 
they  never  so  good,  to  be  so  coldly  kept,  and  this  only,  among  all 
the  rest,  so  nearly  followed.  But  herein  is  to  be  seen  the  diligence 
of  the  Romish  prelates,  who  never  let  any  thing  fall,  that  maketh  for 
the  dignity  of  their  estate. 

Secondly,  Beside  their  vigilant  care  in  seeing  the  king's  statute 
to  be  executed,  no  less  industrious  also  were  they  in  adding  there- 
unto more  constitutions  of  their  own,  as  from  time  to  time  appeareth 
as  well  by  other  archbishops  hereafter,  and  by  pope  Martin,  as  also 
by  this  constitution  here  present  made  by  Thomas  Arundel,  the 
archbishop. 

But  before  we  enter  on  the  relation  of  these  aforesaid  constitu- 
tions of  the  clergymen,  here  cometh  in  more  to  be  said  and  noted 
touching  the  aforesaid  statute  '  Ex  officio,'  to  prove  the  same  not 
only  to  be  cruel  and  impious,  but  also  to  be  of  itself  of  no  force  and 
validitv  for  the  burning  of  any  person  for  the  cause  of  religion  ;  for 
the  disproof  of  which  statute  we  have  sufficient  authority  remaining 
as  yet  in  the  Parliament  Rolls  to  be  seen  in  her  majesty's  Court  of 
Records  :  which  here  were  to  be  debated  at  large,  but  that  upon 
special  occasion  we  have  deferred  the  ample  discoiu-se  thereof  to  the 

VOT..  III.  R 


242  THE    CRUEL    CONSTITUTIONS    OF    ARUNDEL 

iTenry    crucl  pcrsccutiou  of  tlic  lord  Cobham  liereafter  ensuing  ;    as  may 
^'-      appear  in  the  defence  of  tlie  said  lord  Cobham   against   Nicholas 
A.D.    Harpsfield,  under  the  title  and  name  of  'Alanus    Copus."'      And 
1409.    ^|^^g  i-eferring  them  for  the  examination  of  this  statute  to  the  place 
aforesaid,  let  us  now  return  to  Thomas  Arundel,  and  his  bloody 
constitutions  above-mentioned :  the  style  and  tenor  whereof,  to  the 
intent  the  rigour  of  the  same  may  appear  to  all  men,  I  thought  here- 
under to  adjoin,  in  words  as  followeth  : 

The  cruel  Constitution  of  Thomas  Arundel,  Archbishop,  against  the 
Gospellers,  or  followers  of  God's  Truth. 

Thirteen  Thomas,  by  the  permission  of  God,  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  primate  of  all 
articles.  Ei^gland,  and  legate  of  the  see  apostolic  :  to  all  and  singular  our  reverend 
brethren,  fellow  bishops,  and  our  suffragans ;  and  to  abbots,  priors,  deans  of 
cathedral  churches,  archdeacons,  provosts  and  canons  ;  also  to  all  parsons, 
vicars,  chaplains,  and  clerks  in  parish  churches,  and  to  all  laymen,  whom  and 
wheresoever  dwelling  within  our  province  of  Canterbury,  greeting,  and  grace  to 
stand  firmly  in  the  doctrine  of  the  holy  mother  church. 

It  is  a  manifest  and  plain  case,  that  he  doth  wrong  and  injury  to  the  most 
reverend  council,  who  so  revolteth  from  the  things  being  in  the  said  council 
once  discussed  and  decided ;  and  whosoever  dareth  presume  to  dispute  of  the 
supreme  or  principal  judgment  here  in  earth,  in  so  doing  incurreth  the  pain  of 
sacrilege,  according  to  the  authority  of  civil  wisdom  and  manifold  tradition  of 
human  law.     Much  more  then,  they,  who,  trusting  to  their  own  wits  are  so 
bold  to  violate,  and  with  contrary  doctrine  to  resist,  and  in  word  and  deed  to 
contemn,  the  precepts  of  laws  and  canons  rightly  made  and  proceeding  from 
niasphe-   the  key-bearer  and  porter  of  eternal  life  and  death,  bearing  the  room  and  person 
my  not  of  j^q^  ^f  p^^j-g  man,  but  of  true  God  here  in  earth ;  which  also  have  been  observed 
man   but  hitherto  by  the  holy  fathers,  our  predecessors,  vmto  the  glorious  effiision  of  their 
of  true      blood,  and  voluntary  sprinkling  out  of  their  brains,'  are  worthy  of  greater 
^°^'         ptmishment,  deserving  quickly  to  be  cut  off,  as  rotten  members,  from  the  body 
Scripture  of  the  churcli  militant.    For  such  ought  to  consider  what  is  in  the  Old  Testament 
clerUy      written, '  Moses  and  Aaron  among  his  priests,'  that  is,  were  chief  heads  amongst 
applied,     ^]^^>y^^ .  j^j^d  j^  the  New  Testament,  among  the  apostles  there  was  a  certain 
difference :  and  though  they  were  all  apostles,  yet  was  it  granted  of  tlie  Lord 
to  Peter,  that  he  should  bear  pre-eminence  above  the  other  apostles ; '  and  also 
the  apostles  themselves  would  the  same,  that  he  should  be  the  chieftain  over  all 
Kt^ar       the  rest ;  and  being  called  Cephas,  that  is.  Head,  shoidd  be  as  a  prince  over 
aVo  Thj-    the  apostles,  unto  whom  it  was  said,  '  Thou  being  once  converted,  confirm  thy 
Mark^"^    brethren.'     As  though  he  would  say.  If  there  happen  any  doubt  among  them,  or 
this,  you    if  any  of  them  chance  to  err  and  stray  out  of  the  way  of  faitli,  of  just  living, 
gramma-  ^j,  yjg,i  j.  conversation,   do  thou  confirm  and  reduce  him  into  the  right  way 
Mark        agaiu,^  which  thing,  no  doubt,  the  Lord  would  never  have  said  unto  him,  if  he 
well  the    had  not  so  minded,  that  the  rest  shoidd  be  obedient  unto  him.    And  yet,  all  this 
v^nftv  '''  notwithstanding,  we  know  and  daily  prove  what  we  are  sorry  to  speak,  how 
the  old  sophister,  the  enemy  of  mankind  (foreseeing  and  fearing  lest  the  sound 
doctrine  of  the  church,  determined  from  ancient  times  by  the  holy  forefathers, 
shoidd  withstand  his  malice,  if  it  might  keep  the  people  of  God  in  unity  of 
faith  under  one  head  of  the  church),  doth  therefore   endeavour,  by  all  means 
jjo^y         possible,  to  extirpate  the  said  doctrine,  feigning  vices  to  be  virtues.      And  so, 
aptly  he    under  false  pretences  of  verity  dissimuled,  he  soweth  discord  among  catholic 
painteth    people,  to  the  intent  that  some  going  one  way,  some  another,  he,  in  the  mean 
ceedings    time,  may  gather  to  himself  a  church  of  the  maUgnant,  differing  wickedly  from 
ofhisown  the  universal  mother,  holy  church  :  in  which,  Satan,  transforming  himself  into 
church.     ^"  angel  of  light,  bearing  a  lying  and  deceitful  balance  in  his  hand,  pretendeth 
great  righteousness,  in  contrarying  the  ancient  doctrine  of  the  holy  mother 

(1)  He  meaneth  here  of  Becket  his  predecessor,  who  had  his  brains  beat  out  in  the  time  of 
king  Henry  II.   [See  vol.  ii,  p.  246. — En.] 

(2)  This  gear  hangeth  together  like  Germans'  lips. 

(I!)  An  argument  far  let,  that  true  doctrine  consisteth  in  making  one  head  of  the  church. 


AGAINST    THE    TKUE    PROFKSSOUS    OF    'CUE    GOSPKI,.  248 

church,  and  refusing  the  traditions  of  tlie  same,  determined  and  appointed  by    iicnry 
lioly  fatlu-rs ;  persuading  men,  by  feigned  forgeries,  the  same  to  be  nought,       ^^■ 
and  so  inducing  other  new  kinds  of  doctrine,  leading  to  more  goodness,  as  he      .    ix 
by  liis  lying  persuasions  pretendeth,  although  he  in  very  truth  neither  willeth    iYqc. 

nor  mindeth  any  goodness,  but  ratlier  that  he  may  sow  schisms,  whereby  divers  '  '-. 

opinions,  and  contrary  to  themselves,  being  raised  m  the  church,  faith  thereby 
may  be  diminished,  and  also  the  reverend  holy  mysteries,  through  the  same 
contention  of  words,  may  be  profaned  by  Pagans,  Jews,  and  other  infidels,  and 
wicked  miscreants.  And  so  that  figure  in  the  Apocalypse,  chaj).  vi.  is  well  verified, 
speaking  of  him  that  sat  on  the  black  horse,  bearing  a  pair  of  balances  in  his 
hand ;  by  which  heretics  are  understood,  who,  at  the  first  appearance,  like  to 
weights  or  a  balance,  make  as  though  they  would  set  forth  right  and  just  things, 
to  alliu'e  the  hearts  of  the  hearers ;  but  afterwards  appeareth  the  bhick  horse, 
that  is  to  say,   their  intention,   full  of  cursed  speaking.     For  they,  under  a  Tlie 
diverse  show  and  colour  of  a  just  balance,  with  the  tail  of  a  black   horse  figure  of 
sprinkling  abroad  heresies  and  errors,  do  strike  ;  and,  being  poisoned  them-  j,g*gg ']); 
selves,  under  coloiu:  of  good,  raise  up  infinite  slanders,  and,  by  certain  persons  the  Apo- 
fit  to  do  mischief,  do  publish  abroad,  as  it  were,  the  sugared  taste  of  honey  ^^'^P'*? . 
mixed  with  poistm,  thereby  the   sooner  to  be  taken  :    working  and  causing,  expound- 
through  their  sleight  and  subtleties,  that  error  should  be  taken  for  verity,  wick-  eil. 
edness  for  holiness  and  for  the  true  will  of  Christ.     Yea,  and  moreover,  the 
aforesaid  persons  thus  picked  out,  do  preach  before  they  be  sent,  and  presume 
to  sow  the  seed,  before  the  seed  discreetly  be  separate  from  the  chaff;  who,  not 
pondering  the  constitutions  and  decrees  of  the  canons  provided  for  the  same 
purpose  against  such  pestilent  sowers,  do  prefer  sacrifice  diabolical  (so  to  term 
it),  before  obedience  to  be  given  to  the  holy  church  militant. 

We,   therefore,   considering  and  weighing  that  error  which  is  not  resisted  Behold 

seemeth  to  be  allowed,  and  tliat  he  openeth  his  bosom  too  wide,  who  resisteth  ^^^  ^■■"^. 
,  .    ■  .  ■  1  1  1       -ii-  image  of 

not  the  viper,  thinking  there  to  thrust  out  her  venom  ;  and  willing,  moreover,  wolves 

to  shake  off  the  dust  from  our  feet,  and  to  see  to  the  honour  of  our  holy  mother  under 
church,  whereby  one  uniform  holy  doctrine  may  be  sown  and  planted  in  the  ciift^in^-. 
church  of  God,  namely,  in  this  our  province  of  Canterbury,  so  much  as  in  us  doth 
lie,  to  the  increase  of  faith  and  service  of  God,  first  rooting  out  the  evil  weeds 
and  offendicles  which,  by  the  means  of  perverse  preaching  and  doctrine,  have 
sprung  up  hitherto,  and  are  likely  more  hereafter  to  grow  ;  purposing  by  some 
convenient  way,  with  all  diligence  possible,  to  withstand  them  in  time,  and  to 
provide  for  the  peril  of  souls  which  we  see  to  rise  under  pretence  of  the  pre- 
mises ;  also,  to  remove  all  such  obstacles,  by  which  the  said  our  purpose  may 
be  stopped,  by  the  advice  and  assent  of  all  our  suffragans  and  other  prelates, 
being  present  in  this  our  convocation  of  the  clergy,  as  also  of  the  procurators  of 
them  that  be  absent,  and  at  the  instant  petition  of  the  procurators  of  the  whole 
clergy  within  this  our  province  of  Canterbury,  for  the  more  fortification  of  the 
common  law  in  this  part ;  adding  thereunto  punishment  and  penalties  condign, 
as  be  hereunder  written. 

We  will  and  command,  ordain  and  decree  :  That  no  manner  of  person,  seen-  The  first 
lar  or  regular,  being  authorized  to  preach  by  the  laws  now  prescribed,  or  licensed  t?',"^*""" 
by  special  privilege,  shall  take  upon  him  the  office  of  preaching  the  word  of 
God,  or  by  any  means  preach  unto  the  clergy  or  laity,  whether  within  the  church 
or  without,  in  English,  except  he  first  present  himself,  and  be  examined  by 
the  ordinary  of  the  place,  where  he  preacheth  :  and  so  being  found  a  fit  person, 
ivs  well  in  manners  as  knowledge,  he  shall  be  sent  by  the  said  ordinary  to  some 
one  church  or  more,  as  shall  be  thought  expedient  by  the  said  ordinary,  accord- 
ing to  the  quahty  of  the  person.     Nor  any  person  aforesaid  shall  presume  to 
preach,  except  first  he  give  faithfid  signification,  in  due  form,  of  his  sending  and 
authority  ;  that  is,  that  he  that  is  authorized,  do  come  in  form  appointed  him  in 
that  behalf,  and  that  those  that  aflirm  they  come  by  special  privilege,  do  show  . 
their  privilege  unto  the  parson  or  vicar  of  the  place  where  they  pi-each.     And 
those  that  pretend  themselves  to  be  sent  by  the  ordinary  of  the  place,  shall  likewise 
show  the  ordinary's  letters  made  unto  him  for  that  purpose,  under  his  great  seal,  ^^ests  to 
Let  us  always  understand,  the  curate  (having  the  perpetuity)  to  be  sent  of  right  preach, 
unto  the  people  of  his  own  cure :  but  if  any  person  aforesaid  shall  be  forbidden  ['j"Jj['J_ 
by  the  ordinary  of  the  place,  or  any  other  superior,  to  preach,  by  reason  of  his  ,io„ofihc 
errors  or  heresies  which  before,  peradventure,  he  hath  preached  and  taught ;  prelates. 


244  THE   CllTTEL    CONSTITUTIONS    OF    ARUNDEL 

Henrij    that  then,  and  from  thenceforth,  he  abstain  from  preaching  within  om-  province, 

^^-      imtil  he  have  purged  himself,  and  be  lawfully  admitted  again  to  preach  by  the 

just  arbitrement  of  him  that  suspended  and  forbade  him ;  and  shall  always, 

-  V^lfT^    after  that,  carry  with  him,  to  all  places  wheresoever  he  shall  preach,  the  letters 

testimonial  of  him  that  restored  him. 

Moreover  the  parish  priests  or  vicars  temporal,  not  having  perpetuities,  nor 
being  sent  in  form  aforesaid,  shall  simply  preach  in  the  chiuxhes  where  they 
have  cliarge,  only  those  things  which  are  expressly  contained  in  the  provincial 
constitution  set  forth  by  John,  our  predecessor,  of  good  memor)',  to  help  the 
A  jolly      ignorance  of  the  priests,  which  beginneth,  '  Ignorantia  Sacerdotum  ;'  which  book 
mean  to    of  constitutions  we  would  should  be  had  in  every  parish  church    in  our  province 
w"rld  *  ^^  '^^  Canterbury,  within  three  months  next  after  the  publication  of  these  presents, 
into  such  and  (as  therein  is  required)  that  it  be  effectually  declared  by  the  priests  them- 
(larkness.  gpiyes  yearly,  and  at  the  times  appointed.    And,  lest  this  wholesome   statute 
might  be  thought  hurtful  to  some,  by  reason  of  payment  of  money,  or  some 
other  difficulty,  we  therefore  will  and  ordain,  that  the  examinations  of  the  persons 
aforesaid,  and  the  making  of  their  letters  by  the  ordinary,  be  done  gratis  and 
freely,  without  any  exaction  of  money  at  all  by  those  to  whom  it  shall  apper- 
tain.    And  if  any  man  shall  willingly  presume   to  violate    this    our  statute 
grounded  upon  the  old  law,  after  the  publication  of  the  same,  he  shall  incur  the 
sentence  of  greater  excommunication,  'ipso  facto:'  whose  absolution  we  spe- 
cially i-eserve,  by  tenor  of  these  presents,  to  us  and  our  successors.     But,  if  any 
such  preacher,  despising  this  wholesome  statute,  and  not  weighing  the  sentence 
of  greater  excommunication,  do,  the  second  time,  take  upon  him  to  preach,  say- 
ing and  alleging,  and  stoutly  affirming,  that  the  sentence  of  greater  excommu- 
nication aforesaid  cannot  be  appointed  by  the  church  in  the  persons  of  the 
])relates  of  the  same,  that  then  the  superiors  of  the  place  do  worthily  rebuke 
him,  and  foi-bid  liim  from  the  communion  of  all  faithftil  Christians. 

And  that  the  said  person  hereupon  lawfully  convicted  (except  he  recant  and 
abjure  after  the  manner  of  the  church)  be  pronounced  a  heretic  by  the  ordinary 
of  the  place.     And  that  from  thenceforth  he  be  reputed  and  taken  for  a  heretic 
and  schismatic,  and  that  he  incur  'ipso  facto'  the  penalties  of  heresy  and  schis- 
macy,  expressed  in  the  law  ;  and,  chiefly,  that  his  goods  be  adjudged  confiscate 
by  the  law,  and  apprehended,  and  kept  by  them  to  whom  it  shall  appertain. 
And  that  his  fautors,  receivers,  and  defenders,  being  convicted,  in  all  cases  be 
likewise  punished,  if  they   cease   not  off  within    one  month,    being   lawfully 
warned  thereof  by  their  superiors. 
The  se-         Furthermore,  no  clergyman,  or  parochians '  of  any  parish  or  place  within  our 
oond  con-  province  of  Canterbury,  shall  admit  any  man  to  preach  within  their  churches, 
stitution.  church-yards,  or  other  places  whatsoever,  except  first  there  be  manifest  know- 
ledge had  of  his  authority,  privilege,  or  sending  thither,  according  to  the  order 
aforesaid :  otherwise  the  church,  church-yard,  or  what  place  soever,  in  which 
it  was  so  preached,  shall  '  ipso  facto'  receive  the  ecclesiastical  interdict,  and 
so  shall  remain  interdicted,  until  they  that  so  admitted  and  suffered  him  to 
preach,  have  reformed  themselves,  and  obtained  the  place  so  interdicted  to  be 
released  in  due  form  of  law,  either  from  the  ordinary  of  the  place,  or  else  his 
superior. 
The  third       Moreover,  like  as  a  good  householder  casteth  wheat  into  the  ground,  wel 
constitu-   ordered  for  that  purpose,  thereby  to  get  the  more  increase,  even  so  we  will  and 
'"*"■         command,  that  the  preacher  of  God's  word,  coming  in  form  aforesaid,  preach- 
ranny  ll'  i"g  either  unto  the  clergy  or  laity,  according  to  his  matter  proponed,  shall  be  of 
this,  to      good  behaviour,  sowing  such  seed  as  shall  be  convenient  for  his  auditory  :  and 
^reacher's  ^^'^i^^y   preaching   to   the  clergy,  he  shall   touch  the  vices,    commonly  used 
mouth       amongst  them ;  and  to  the  laity,  he  shall  declare   the  vices  coinmonly  used 
what  to     amongst  them  ;  and  not  otherwise.  But  if  he  preach  contrary  to  this  order,  then 
^^^'  shall  he  be  shar]>ly  punished  by  the  ordinary  of  that  place,  according  to  the 

quality  of  that  offence. 
The  Item,  Forasnuich  as  the  part  is  vile,  that  agreeth  not  with  the  whole,  we  do 

fourth       decree  and  ordain,  tliat  no  preacher  aforesaid,  or  any  other  person  whatsoever, 
tion.         shall  otherwise  teach  or  preach  concerning  the  sacrament  of  the  altar,  matri- 
mony, confession  of  sins,  or  any  other  sacrament  of  the  church,  or  article  of  the 

(1)  '  Parochian,'  a  person  lying  within  the  diocese  of  a  bishop. — Ea. 


AGAINST    rilJi    TRUE    niOFESSORS    OF    THE    GOSPKL  24.' 

faith,  than  what  already  is  discussed  by  the  holy  mother  church  ;  nor  shall  bring  Henry 

any  thing  in  donbt  that  is  determint'd  by  the  church,  nor  sliall,  to  his  know-  ^^■ 

ledge,  })rivily  or  apertly  pronounce  blasphemous  words  concerning  the  same ;  a    t» 

nor  sliall  teach,  preach,  or  observe  any  sect,  or  kind  of  heresy  whatsoever,  con-  i  Vaq 
trary  to  the  wholesome  doctrine  of  the  churcli.    He  that  shall  wittingly  and 


obstinately  attempt  the  contrary  after  the  j)ublication  of  these  presents,  shall  A  bar  for 
incur  the  sentence  of  excomnuuiication  'ipso  facto:'  from  wliich,  except  in  "'^ 
point  of  death,  he  shall  not  be  absolved,  until  he  have  refonned  himself  by  ah-  ers. 
juration  of  his  heresy,  at  the  discretion  of  the  ordinary  in  whose  territory  he  so 
offended,  and  have  received  wholesome  penitence  for  his  offences.  But  if  the 
second  time  he  shall  so  offend,  being  lawfully  convicted,  he  shall  be  pronoimced 
a  heretic,  and  his  goods  shall  be  confiscated,  and  aj)prehended,  and  kept  by 
ihem  to  whom  it  shall  appertain.  The  penance  before-mentioned,  shall  be  after 
this  manner :  if  any  man,  contrary  to  the  determination  of  the  church,  that  is, 
in  tlie  decrees,  decretals,  or  our  constitutions  provincial,  do  openly  or  privily 
teach  or  preach  any  kind  of  heresy  or  sect,  he  shall,  in  the  parish  church  of  the 
sanie  place  where  he  so  preached,  upon  one  Sunday  or  other  solemn  day,  or 
more,  at  the  discretion  of  the  ordinary,  and  as  his  offence  is  more  or  less,  ex- 
pressly revoke  what  he  so  preached,  taught,  or  affirmed,  even  at  the  time  of  the 
solenuiity  of  the  mass,  when  the  people  are  most  assembled  ;  and  there  shall  he 
effectually,  and  without  fraud,  preach  and  teach  the  very  truth  determined  by 
the  church;  and,  further,  shall  be  punished  after  the  quality  of  his  offence,  as 
shall  be  thought  expedient,  at  the  discretion  of  the  ordinary. 

Item,  Forasmuch  as  a  new  vessel,  being  long  used,  savoureth  after  the  head.  The  fifth 
we  decree   and  ordain,  that  no  schoolmasters  and  teachers  whatsoever,  that  cpnstitu- 
instruct  children  in  grammar,  or  others  whosoever,  in  primitive  sciences,  shall,  '""'' 
in  teaching  them,  intermingle  any  thing  concerning  the  catholic  faith,   the  for'^^^'^''' 
sacrament  of  the  altar,   or  other  sacraments  of   the  church,  contrary  to  the  school- 
determination  of  the  church ;  nor  shall  suffer  their    scholars  to  expound  the  ™^*'"*- 
holy  Scriptures  (except  the  text,  as  hath  been  used  in  ancient  time) ;  nor  shall 
permit  them  to  dispute  openly  or  privily  concerning  the  catholic  faith,  or  sacra- 
ments of  the  church.      Contrariwise,  the  offender  herein  shall  be  grievously 
punished  by  the  ordinary  of  the  place,  as  a  favourer  of  errors  and  schisms. 

Item,  For  that  a  new  way  doth  more  frequently  lead  astray,  than  an  old  way,  xhe  sixth 
we  will  and  command,  that  no  book  or  treatise  made  by  John  Wickliff,  or  constitu- 
others  whomsoever,  about  that  time,  or  since,  or  hereafter  to  be  made,  be  from  3*"^    ^ 
henceforth  read  in  schools,  halls,  hospitals,  or  other  places  whatsoever,  within  John 
our  province  of  Canterbury  aforesaid,  except  the  same  be  first  examined  by  J^'i<"k'iff 
the  university  of  Oxford  or  Cambridge ;  or,  at  least,  by  twelve  persons,  whom  deu" 
the  said  universities,  or  one  of  them,  shall  appoint  to  be  chosen  at  our  discretion, 
or  the  laudable  discretion  of  our  predecessors ;  and  the  same  being  examined 
as  aforesaid,  to  be  expressly  approved  and  allowed  by  us  or  our  successors,  and 
in  the  name  and  authority  of  the  university,  to  be  delivered  unto  the  stationers 
to  be  copied  out,  and  the  same  to  be  sold  at  a  reasonable  price,  the  original 
thereof  always  after  to  remain  in  some  chest  of  the  university.    But  if  any  man 
shall  read  any  such  kind  of  book  in  schools  or  otherwise,  as  aforesaid,  he  shall    • 
be  punished  as  a  sower  of  schism,  and  a  favourer  of  heresy,  as  the  quality  of 
the  fault  shall  require. 

Item,  It  is  a  dangerous  thing,  as  witnesselh  blessed  St.  Jerome,  to  translate  The 
the  text  of  the  holy  Scripture  out  of  the  tongue  into  another ;  for  in  the  trans-  seventh 
lation  the  same  sense  is  not  always  easily  kept,  as  the  same  St.  Jerome  con-  tion. 
fesseth,  that  although  he  were  inspired,  yet  oftentimes  in  tliis  he  erred :  we  He  con- 
therefore  decree  and  ordain,  that  no  man,  hereafter,  by  his  own  authority  trans-  [^,a7st 
late  any  text  of  the  Scripture  into  E^nglish  or  any  other  tongue,  by  way  of  a  Jerome 
book,  libel,  or  treatise  ;  and  that  no  man  read  any  such  book,  libel  or  treatise,  ^V^^^  '" 
now  lately  set  forth  in  the  time  of  John  Wickliff,  or  since,  or  hereafter  to  be  set  laUon. 
forth,  in  part  or  in  whole,  privily  or  apertly,  upon  pain  of  greater  excommu-  And  jet 
nication,  until  the  said  translation  be  allowed  by  the  ordinary  of  the  place,  or,  ^ch^"' 
if  the  case  so  require,  by  the  council  provincial.     He  that  shall  do  contrary  to  bishop 
this,  shall  likewise  be  punished  as  a  favourer  of  error  and  heresy.  commen- 

Item,   For  that  Almighty  God  cannot  be  expressed  by  any  philosophical  queen 
terms,  or  otherwise  invented  of  man :  and  St.  Augustine  saith,  that  he  hath  Ann,  for 
oftentimes  revoked  such  conclusions  as  have  been  most  true,  because  they  have  ''^^'"S 


246 


THE    CIIUEL    CONSTITUTIONS    OF    ARUNDEL 


Jle.nry 
IV. 

A.D. 

1409. 

the  Scrip- 
ture in 
English. 
The 
eighth 
constitu- 
tion. 
Terms 
and  pro- 
positiong 
in  dis- 
puting 
to  be 
observed. 
Tlie  ninth 
constitu- 
tion. 


Authority 
of  the 
pope's 
decretals 
not  to  be 
doubted 
under 
pain  of 
heresy. 
Adora- 
tion of 
the  cross. 


The 

tenth 
constitu- 
tion. 

No  priest 
to  cele- 
brate 
without 
his  letters 
of  orders. 

The 

eleventh 
constitu- 
tion. 


Oxford 

famous 

for 

sincere 

religion. 


been  oftensive  to  the  ears  of  the  religious ;  we  do  ordain  and  specially  forbid, 
that  any  manner  of  person,  of  what  state,  degree,  or  condition  soever  he  be,  do 
allege  or  propone  any  conchisions  or  propositions  in  tlie  catholic  faith,  or  re- 
pugnant to  good  manners  (except  necessary  doctrine  pertaining  to  their  faculty 
of  teaching  or  disputing  in  their  schools  or  otherwise),  although  they  defend 
the  same  with  ever  such  curious  terms  and  words.  For,  as  saith  blessed  St. 
Hugh  of  the  sacraments,  '  That  which  oftentimes  is  well  spoken,  is  not  well  un- 
derstood.' If  any  man,  therefore,  after  the  publication  of  these  presents,  shall 
be  convicted  wittingly  to  have  proponed  such  conclusions  or  propositions,  ex- 
cept (being  monished)  he  reform  himself  in  one  month,  by  virtue  of  this  present 
constitution,  he  shall  inciu"  the  sentence  of  greater  excommunication  '  ipso  facto,' 
and  shall  be  openly  pronounced  an  excommunicate,  until  he  hath  confessed  his 
fault  openly  in  the  same  place  where  he  offended,  and  hath  preached  the  true 
meaning  of  the  said  conclusion  or  proposition  in  one  church  or  more,  as  shall 
be  thought  expedient  to  the  ordinary. 

Item,  No  manner  of  person  shall  presume  to  dispute  upon  the  articles 
determined  by  the  church,  that  are  contained  in  the  decrees,  decretals,  or 
constitutionsprovincial,  or  in  the  general  councils;  but  only  to  seek  out  the  true 
meaning  thereof,  and  that  expressly,  whether  it  be  openly  or  in  secret ;  and 
none  shall  call  in  doubt  the  authority  of  the  said  decretals  or  constitutions,  or 
the  authority  of  him  that  made  them ;  or  teach  any  thing  contrary  to  the  deter- 
mination thereof:  and,  chiefly,  concerning  the  adoration  of  the  holy  cross,  the 
M'orshipping  of  images,  of  saints,  going  on  prilgrimage  to  certain  places,  or  to 
the  relics  of  saints,  or  against  the  oaths,  in  cases  accustomed  to  be  given  in 
both  common  places,  that  is  to  say,  spiritual  and  temporal.  But  by  all  it  shall 
be  commonly  taught  and  preached,  that  the  cross  and  image  of  the  cnicifix,  and 
other  images  of  saints,  in  honour  of  them  whom  they  represent,  are  to  be  wor- 
shipped with  procession,  bowing  of  knees,  oifering  of  frankincense,  kissings, 
oblations,  lighting  of  candles,  and  pilgrimages, '  and  with  all  other  kind  of 
ceremonies  and  manners  that  have  been  used  in  the  time  of  our  predecessors ; 
and  that  giving  of  oaths  in  cases  expressed  in  the  law,  and  used  of  all  men  to 
whom  it  belongeth,  in  both  common  places,  ought  to  be  done  upon  the  book  of 
the  gospel  of  Christ.  Contrary  unto  this  whosoever  doth  preach,  teach,  or 
obstinately  affirm,  except  he  recant  in  manner  and  form  aforesaid,  shall  forth- 
with incur  the  penalty  of  heresy,  and  shall  be  pronounced  a  heretic,  in  all  effect 
of  law. 

Item,  We  do  decree  and  ordain,  that  no  chaplain  be  admitted  to  celebrate  in 
any  diocese  within  our  province  of  Canterbiuy,  where  he  was  not  born,  or  re- 
ceived not  orders ;  except  he  bring  with  him  his  letters  of  orders,  and  letters 
commendatory  from  his  ordinary,  and  also  from  other  bishops  in  whose  diocese 
of  a  long  time  he  hath  been  conversant,  whereby  his  conversation  and  manners 
may  appear;  so  that  it  may  be  known,  whether  he  hath  been  defamed  with 
any  new  opinions  touching  the  catholic  faith,  or  whether  he  be  free  fi'om  the 
same :  otherwise,  as  well  he  that  celebrateth,  as  he  that  suffereth  him  to  cele- 
brate, shall  be  sharply  punished  at  the  discretion  of  the  ordinary. 

Finally,  Because  those  things  which  newly  and  unaccustomably  creep  up, 
stand  in  need  of  new  and  speedy  help,  and  where  more  danger  is,  there  ought 
to  be  more  wary  circumspection  and  stronger  resistance ;  and  not  without  good 
cause,  the  less  noble  ought  discreetly  to  be  cut  away,  that  the  more  noble  may 
the  more  perfectlj'^  be  nourished :  considering,  therefore,  and  in  lamentable  wise 
showing  unto  you,  how  the  ancient  university  of  Oxford,  v/hich  as  a  fruitful 
vine  was  wont  to  extend  forth  her  fruitful  branches  to  the  honour  of  God,  the 
great  perfection  and  defence  of  the  church;  now  partly  being  become  wild, 
bringeth  forth  bitter  grapes,  which  being  indiscreetly  eaten  of  ancient  fathers, 
that  thought  themselves  skilfiil  in  the  law  of  God,  hath  set  on  edge  the  teeth  of 
their  children :  and  our  province  being  infected  with  divers  and  imfruitful  doc- 
trines, and  defiled  with  a  new  and  damnable  name  of  Lollardy,  to  the  great 
reproof  and  offence  of  the  said  university,  being  known  in  foreign  countries, 
and  to  the  great  irksomeness  of  the  students  there,  and  to  the  great  damage  and 
loss  of  the  church  of  England,  which  in  times  past  by  her  virtue,  as  with  a 
strong  wall,  was  wont  to  be  defended,  and  now  is  like  to  run  into  ruin  not  to 
be  recovered :  at  the  supplication,  therefore,  of  the  whole  clergy  of  our  pro- 
(1)  With  all  abomination. 


ACJAIKST    THE    TIIUK    I'UOl'KSSOUS    OF    THE    GO.Sl'EI,.  .^i' 

vince  of  Canterbury,  and  by  the  consent  and  assent  of  all  our  bretliren  and  suf-  iioiry 
fragans,  and  otlier  the  prelates  in  this  convocation  assembled,  and  the  proctors       ^^ 

of  them  that  are  absent,  lest  the  river  being  cleansed,  tlie  fountain  sliould  re-  .  ,^ 

main  corrupt,  and  so  the  water  coming  fnjm  thence  shoidd  not  be  pure,  intend-  ^a,u\ 
ing  njost  wholesomely  to  provide  for  the  honour  and  utihty  of  our  lioly  mother 


the  churcli  and  the  university  aforesaid :  we  (h)  ordain  and  decree,  that  every  Inqui- 
warden,  provost,  or  master  of  every  college,  or  principal  of  every  liall  within  ^i''""  '<> 
the  university  aforesaid,  shall,  once  every  month  at  the  least,  diligently  inquire  throuVh 
in  tlie  said  college,  hall,  or  other  place  where  he  hath  authority,  whether  any  coUctjes 
scholar  or  inhabitant    of  such  college  or  liall,  etc.  liave  holden,  alleged,    or  QfOxfon/ 
defended,  or  by  any  means  proponed,  any  conclusion,  proposition,  or  opinion, 
concerning  the  catholic  faitli,  or  sounding  contrary  to  good  manners,  or  con- 
trary to  the  determination  of  the  cluuxh,  otherwise  than  appertaineth  to  neces- 
sary doctrine ;  and  if  lie  shall  find  any  suspected  or  defamed  herein,  he  shall, 
according  to  his  oificc,  admonish  him  to  desist.     And  if,  after  such  monition 
given,  the  said  party  offend  again  in  the  same  or  such  like,  he  shall  incur  '  ipso 
facto'  (besides  the  penalties  aforesaid)  the  sentence  of  greater  excommuni- 
cation.    And  nevertheless,  if  it  be  a  scholar  that  so  offendeth  the  second  time, 
whatsoever  he  shall  afterwards  do  in  the  said  imiversity  shall  not  stand  in  effect. 
And  if  he  be  a  doctor,  a  master,  or  bachelor,  he  shall  forthwith  be  suspended  I  would 
from  every  scholar's  act,  and  in  both  cases  shall  lose  the  light  that  he  hath  in  *'^*  "''^.^ 
the  said  college  or  hall,  whereof  he  is,  'ipso  facto;'  and  by  the  warden,  provost,  „o\v  for 
master,  principal,  or  other  to  whom  it  appertaineth,  he  shall  be  expelled,  and  "'e 
a  catholic,  by  lawful  means,  forthwith  placed  in  his  place.     And  if  the  said  ''^'^f'^' 
wardens,  provosts,  or  masters  of  colleges,  or  principals  of  halls,  shall  be  negli-  papistry. 
gent  concerning  the  inquisition  and  execution  of  such  persons  suspected  and 
defamed,  by  the  space  of  ten  days  from  the  time  of  tlie  true  or  supposed  know- 
ledge of  the  publication  of  these  presents,  that  then  they  shall  incur  the  sentence 
of  greater  excommmiication,  and  nevertheless  shall  be  deprived  '  ipso  facto'  of 
all  the  right  which  they  pretend  to  have  in  the  colleges,  halls,  etc.,  and  the  said 
colleges  and  halls,  to  be  eff'ectually  vacant :  and  after  lawfid  declaration  hereof 
made  by  them  to  wliom  it  shall  appertain,  new  wardens,  provosts,  masters,  or 
principals,  shall  be  placed  in  their  places,  as  hath  been  accustomed  in  colleges 
and  halls  being  vacant  in  the  said  university.     But  if  tlie  wardens  themselves, 
provosts,  masters,  or  principals  aforesaid,  be  suspected  and  defamed  of  and  con- 
cerning the  said  conclusions  or  propositions,  or  be  favourers  and  defenders  of 
such  as  do  therein  offend,  and  do  not  cease,  being  thereof  warned  by  us,  or  by 
our  authority,  or  by  the  ordinary  of  the  place:  that  then  bylaw  they  be  deprived, 
as  well  of  all  privilege  scholastical,  within  the  university  aforesaid,  as  also  of 
their  right  and  authority  in  such  college,  hall,  etc.,  besides  other  penalties  before- 
mentioned,  and  that  they  incur  the  said  sentence  of  greater  excommunication. 

But  if  any  man,  in  any  case  of  this  present  constitution,  or  any  above  expressed.  The 
do  rashly  and  wilfully  presume  to  violate  there  our.  statutes  in  any  part  thereof,  t^^'«Jf|^ 
although  there  be  another  penalty  expressly  there  limited,  yet  shall  he  be  made  tion. 
altogether  unable  and  unworthy  by  the  space  of  three  years  after,  without  hope 
of  pardon,  to  obtain  any  ecclesiastical  benefice  within  our  province  of  Canter- 
bury :  and  nevertheless,  according  to  all  his  demerits  and  the  quality  of  his 
excess,  at  the  discretion  of  his  superior,  he  shall  be  lawfidly  punished. 

And  further,  that  the  manner  of  proceeding  herein  be  not  thought  uncertain.  The 
considering  with  ourselves,  that  although  there  be  a  kind  of  equality  in  the  '''ir- 
crimes  of  heresy  and  ott'ending  the  prince,  as  is  avouched  in  divers  laws,  yet  the  constUu- 
fault  is  much  imlike,  and  that  to  offend  the  divine  Majesty  reqiureth  greater  tion. 
punishment  than  to  offend  tlie  prince's  majesty  :  and  where  it  is  suificient,  for  ^Jf' j  '° 
fear  of  danger  tliat  might  ensue  by  delays,  to  convince  by  judgment  the  offender  against 
of  the  pi-ince's  majesty,  proceeding  against  himftdly  and  wholly,  with  a  citation  t'le 
sent  by  messenger,  by  letters,  or  edict  not  admitting  proof  by  witnesses,  and  fa"" ^i,an 
sentence  definitive  to  be :  we  do  ordain,  will,  and  declare,  for  the  easier  punisli-  ajjainst 
ment  of  the  offenders  in  the  premises,  and  for  the  better  reformation  of  the  ?'.";     , 
church  divided  and  hurt,  that  all  such  as  are  defamed,  openly  known,  or  volu- 
mently  suspected,  in   any  of  the  cases  aforesaid,  or,  in  article  of  the  cath,>lic 
faith,  sounding  contrary  to  good  manners,  by  the  authority  of  the  ordinary  of 
the  place  or  other  superior,  be  cited  personally  to  appear,  either  by  letters,  pub- 
lic messenger  being  sworn,  or  by  edict  openly  set  ai  that  place  where  the  said 


248  GODLY    ARTICLES    ABJURED. 

Hevry    offender  commonly  remaineth,  or  in  his  parish  church,  if  he  have  any  certain 

J^^-      dwelHng  house ;  otherwise,  in  the  cathedral  church  of  the  place  where  he  was 

.   -p.     born,  and  in  the  parish  church  of  the  same  place  where  he  so  preached  and 

1 4nq'    taught :  and  afterwards,  certificate  being  given  that  the  citation  was  formerly 

. 1_  executed  against  the  party  cited  being  absent  and  neglecting  his  appeai'ance,  it 

shall  be  proceeded  against  him  fully  and  plainly,  without  sound  or  show  of 
judgment,  and  without  admitting  proof  by  witnesses  and  other  canonical  pro- 
bations. And  also,  after  lawful  information  had,  the  said  ordinary  (all  delays 
set  apart)  shall  signify,  declare,  and  pimish  the  said  offender,  according  to  the 
quality  of  his  offence,  and  in  fonn  aforesaid ;  and  further,  shall  do  according  to 
justice,  the  absence  of  the  offender  notwithstanding. 

Given  at  Oxford. 

Who  would  have  thought,  by  these  laws  and  constitutions,  so  sub- 
stantially founded,  so  circumspectly  provided,  so  diligently  executed, 
but  that  the  name  and  memory  of  this  persecuted  sort  should  utterly 
have  been  rooted  up,  and  never  could  have  stood  ?  And  yet,  such  be 
the  works  of  the  Lord,  passing  all  men's  admiration  all  this  notwith- 
standing, so  far  was  it  off  that  the  nmnber  and  courage  of  these  good 
men  were  vanquished,  that  rather  they  multiplied  daily  and  increased. 
For  so  I  find  in  registers  recorded,  that  these  aforesaid  persons,  whom 
the  king  and  the  catholic  fathers  did  so  greatly  detest  for  heretics, 
were,  in  divers  countries  of  this  realm,  dispersed  and  increased ; 
especially  at  London,  in  Lincolnshire,  in  Norfolk,  in  Herefordshire, 
in  Shrewsbury,  in  Calice,  and  divers  other  quarters  besides,  with 
whom  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  Thomas  Arundel,  the  same  time 
had  much  ado,  as  by  his  own  registers  doth  appear.  Albeit  some 
there  were  that  did  shrink  ;  many  did  revolt  and  renounce,  for  dan- 
ger of  the  lav/,  among  whom  was  John  Purvey,  who  recanted  at 
Paul's  cross,  of  whom  more  followeth,  the  Ijord  willing,  to  be  said  in 
the  year  142L  Also  John  Edward,  priest  of  the  diocese  of  Lincoln, 
who  revoked  in  the  Green-yard  at  Norwich ;  Richard  Herbert  and 
Emmot  Willy  of  London  ;  also  John  Becket,  who  recanted  at  Lon- 
don ;  Item,  John  Seynons  of  Lincolnshire,  who  was  caused  to  revoke 
at  Canterbury.  The  articles,  which  commonly  they  did  hold,  and 
which  they  were  constrained  to  abjure,  most  especially  were  these 
which  follow : 

The  Articles  of  divers  who  were  constrained  to  abjure. 

First,  That  the  office  of  the  holy  cross  (ordained  by  the  whole  church)  cele- 
brated, doth  contain  idolatry. 

Item,  They  said  and  affirmed,  that  all  they  who  do  reverence  and  worship 
the  sign  of  the  cross,  do  commit  idolatry,  and  are  reputed  as  idolaters. 

Item,  They  said  and  affirmed,  that  the  true  flesh  and  blood  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  is  not  in  the  sacrament  of  the  altar,  after  the  words  spoken  by  the  priest 
truly  pronounced. 

Item,  They  said  and  affirmed  the  sacramimt  of  the  altar  to  be  sacramental 
bread,  not  having  life,  but  only  instituted  for  a  memorial  of  Christ's  passion. 

Item,  They  said  and  affirmed,  that  the  body  of  Christ,  which  is  taken  on  the 
altai',  is  a  figure  of  the  body  of  Christ  as  long  as  we  see  the  bread  and  wine. 

Item,  They  said  and  aflirmed,  that  the  decree  of  the  prelates  and  clergy  in 
the  province  of  Cantei'bury,  in  their  last  convocation,  with  the  consent  of  the 
king  and  the  nobles  in  the  last  parliament,  against  him  that  was  bui-nt  lately  in 
the  city  of  London,  was  not  sufficient  to  change  the  purpose  of  the  said  John, 
when  the  substance  of  material  bread  is  even  as  it  was  before  in  the  sacrament 
of  the  altar,  no  change  beins;  made  in  the  nature  of  bread. 


THE    HISTORY    OF    WILLIAM    THORI'K.  249 

'Item,  That  any  lay-man  may  preach  the  gospel  in  every] place,  and  may     Htnnj 
teach  it  by  his  own  authority,  without  the  license  of  his  ordinary.  ^^  ■ 

Item,  That  it  is  sin  to  give  any  thing  to  the  preaching  friars,  to  the  Muio-    ^  j-j 
rites,  to  the  Augustines,  to  the  Caniielites.  1409 

Item,  Tliat  we  ought  not  to  offer  at  the  flinerals  of  the  dead.  

Item,  That  the  confession  of  sins  to  the  priest^  is  unneedful. 

Item,  That  every  good  man,  though  he  be  unlearned,  is  a  priest. 

Item,  That  the  infant,  though  he  die  luibaptized,  shall  be  saved. 

Item,  That  neither  the  i)ope,  nor  the  prelate,  neither  any  ordinary,  can  com- 
pel any  man  to  swear  by  any  creature  of  God,  or  by  the  Bible  book. 

Item,  That  as  well  the  bishop  and  the  simple  man,  the  priest  and  the  lay- 
man, be  of  like  authority,  as  long  as  they  live  well. 

Item,  That  no  man  is  bound  to  give  bodily  reverence  to  any  prelate. 


i©iUiam  Cfjocpe :  t^at  constant  ^erbant  of  <0oli. 

Thus  much  briefly  being  signified  by  the  way,  touching  these  who 
have  been  forced  in  time  of  this  king  to  open  abjuration,  next  cometh 
to  our  hands  the  worthy  history  of  Master  William  Thorpe,  a  warrior 
valiant  under  the  triumphant  banner  of  Christ,  with  the  process  of  his 
examinations  before  the  aforesaid  Thomas  Arundel,  archbishop  of 
Canterbury,  written  by  the  said  Thorpe,  and  storied  by  his  own  pen, 
at  the  request  of  his  friends,  as  by  his  own  words,  in  the  process  hereof, 
may  appear;  in  whose  examination,  which  seemeth  first  to  begin, 
A.  D.  1407,  thou  shalt  have,  good  reader,  both  to  learn  and  to  marvel : 
to  learn,  in  that  thou  shalt  hear  truth  discoursed  and  discussed,  with 
the  contrary  reasons  of  the  adversary  dissolved  ;  to  marvel,  for  thou 
shalt  behold  here  in  this  man,  the  marvellous  force  and  strength  of  the 
Lord's  might,  spirit,  and  grace,  working  and  fighting  in  his  soldiers, 
and  also  speaking  in  their  mouths,  according  to  the  word  of  his  pro- 
mise, Luke  xxi.  To  the  text  of  the  story  we  have  neither  added  nor  This  his- 
diminished,  but,  as  we  have  received  it  copied  out,  and  con-ected  by  get^nh 
Master  William  Tindal  (who  had  his  own  hand  wi-itinij),  so  we  have  and  eor- 

V  o/^  ^  reeled  by 

here  sent  it,  and  set  it  out  abroad.  Although  for  the  more  credit  of  Master 
the  matter,  1  rather  wished  it  in  his  own  natural  speech,  wherein  it  Tind'ai? 
was  first  written,  notwithstanding,  to  put  away  all  doubt  and  scruple 
herein,  this  1  thought  before  to  pre-monish  and  testify  to  the  reader, 
touching  the  certainty  hereof,  that  they  be  yet  alive  who  have  seen 
the  self-same  copy  in  its  own  old  English,  resembling  the  true  anti- 
quity both  01  the  speech  and  of  the  time,  the  name  of  whom,  as  for 
record  ofthesameto  avouch,  is  Master  Whitehead;  who,  as  he  hath 
seen  the  true  ancient  copy  in  the  hands  of  George  Constantine,  so 
he  given  credible  relation  of  the  same,  both  to  the  printer  and  to  me. 
Furthermore,  the  said  Master  Tindal  (albeit  he  did  somewhat  alter 
and  amend  the  English  thereof,  and  frame  it  after  our  manner),  yet 
not  fully  in  all  words  but  that  something  doth  remain,  savouring  of 
the  old  speech  of  that  time.  What  the  causes  were,  why  this  good 
man  and  servant  of  Christ,  William  Thorpe,  did  write  it,  and  pen  it 
out  himself,  it  is  sufficiently  declared  in  his  own  prcfiice,  set  before  his 
book,  which  is  here  prefixed  in  manner  as  followeth : 

(1)  Their  article  commonly  was  thus :  that  who  so  takcth  upon  him  the  office  of  a  priest,  though 
ho  have  no  cure  of  souls,  nor  license  of  his  ordinary,  is  bound  to  preach  the  gospel. 

(2)  'To  the  people,'  in  the  editions  previous  to  1569. — Ec. 


250 


THE    HISTORY    OF    WILLIAM    1 HORPK. 


Four, 
causes. 

The  first 
cause. 


The  se- 
cond 
rause 


Henry 
IV. 

The  Preface  of  William  Thorpe. 

1409.         The  Lorde  God  that  knoweth  all  thinges,  woteth  well  that  I  am  right  sorrow- 

~  full  for  to  wryte  or  to  make  knowen  this  sentence  beneath  written,  whereby,  of 

mine  euen  christen  set,  in  hie  state  and  dignitie,  so  great  blyndnesse  and  malice 
ma\'  be  knowen,  that  they  which  doe  presume  of  them  selfe   to  distroie  vices, 
and  to  plant  in  men,  vertues,  neither  drede  to  ofFende  God,  nor  luste  to  please 
God's        him,  as  their  workes  showe.   For  certes  the  bidding  of  God  and  his  lawe,  which, 
lawsmust  j^  the  praysing  of  his  most  holie  name,  hee  commaundeth  to  be  knowen   and 
and^fol^"  kept  of  all  men  and  women,  yonge  and  olde,  after  the  conning  and  power  that 
lowed.       hee  hath  giuen  to  them ;  the  prelates  of  this  lande  and  their  ministers,  with  the 
couent  of  priests  chiefly  consenting  to  them,  enforce  them  moste  buselie  to  with- 
stande  and  destroie  the  holie  ordinance  of  God.     And  there  thorowe,  God  is 
greatlie  wroth  and  moued  to  take  harde  vengeaunce,  not  onlie  vpon  them  that 
doe  the  euill,  but  also  on  them  that  consent  to  these  Antichristes  limmes;  which 
knowe  or  might  knowe,  their  malice  and  falshod,  and  dresse  them  not  to  with- 
stand their  malice  and  their  great  pryde.     Neuerthelesse,  foure  things  moueth 
me  to  wryte  this  sentence  beneth. 

The  first  thing  that  moueth  me  hereto  is  this  :  that  where  as  it  was  knowen 
to  certaine  frendes,  y'  I  came  from  ye  prison  of  Shrewesburie,  and  as  it  befell 
in  dede  that  I  should  to  the  prison  of  Caunturbury,  then  diners  friendes,  in 
diners  places,  spake  to  me  full  hartely  and  full  tenderly :  and  commanded  me 
then,  if  it  so  were  that  I  shoidd  be  examined  before  the  archbishop  of  Cauntur- 
burie,  that  if  I  myght  in  anie  wyse,  I  should  write  n ane  apposing,  and  mine 
answering.  And  I  promised  to  my  speciall  frendes,  that  if  I  might,  I  would 
gladlie  doe  their  biddings  as  I  might. 

The  second  thing  that  moueth  me  to  write  this  sentence  is  this :  diuers  frendes 
which  haue  heard  that  I  haue  bene  examined  before  the  archebishop,  haue  come 
to  me  in  pryson,  and  counselled  me  beselie,  and  coueted  greatlie  that  I  shoulde 
doe  the  same  thyng.  And  other  brethren  haue  sent  to  me,  and  required  on 
Gods  behalfe,  that  I  shoidde  wryte  out  and  make  knowen,  both  mine  apposing 
and  mine  answering,  for  the  profite  that  (as  they  say)  vpon  my  knowledging 
may  come  thereof.  But  this  they  bad  me,  that  I  should  be  besie  in  all  my  wittes, 
to  goe  as  nere  the  sentence  and  the  wordes  as  I  could,  both  that  were  spoken  to 
me,  and  that  I  spake  :  Upauenture  this  writing  may  come  another  time,  before 
the  archbishop  and  his  counsell.  And  of  this  counselling  I  was  right  glad,  for 
in  my  conscience  I  was  moued  to  doe  this  thing,  and  to  aske  hitherto  the  speciall 
helpe  of  God.  And  so  then  I  considering  the  great  desire  of  diuers  frendes  of 
sondrie  places,  according  all  in  one,  I  occupied  all  my  minde  and  my  wits  so 
besilie,  that  throwe  God's  grace  I  perceiued,  by  their  meaning  and  their  chari- 
table desire,  some  profite  might  come  there  throwe.  For  sothfastenesse  and 
truth  hath  these  conditions  :  where  euer  it  is  impugned,  it  hath  a  sweet  smell, 
and  thereof  comes  a  swete  sauor;  and  the  more  \iolentlie  the  enemies  dresse 
smell  te-  themselfs  to  oppresse  and  to  withstand  the  truth,  the  greater  and  the  sweter 
hind  it.  smell  cometh  thereof.  And  therefore,  this  heauenly  smell  of  God's  worde,  will 
not  as  a  smoke  passe  awaie  with  the  wind ;  but  it  will  descend  and  rest  in  some 
clene  soule,  that  thursteth  there  after.  And  thus  some  dele  by  this  writing  may 
be  perceiued,  through  Gods  grace,  how  that  the  enemies  of  the  truth  (standing 
boldely  in  their  malice),  enforce  them  to  withstande  the  fredom  of  Christe's 
gospel,  for  which  fredom  Christ  became  man,  and  shed  his  harte  blond.  And 
therefore  it  is  great  pitie  and  sorrowe,  that  manie  men  and  women  doo  their 
owne  weyward  will,  nor  besie  them  not  to  knowe  nor  to  doo  the  pleasant  will  of 
God. 

The  men  and  women  that  heare  the  truth  and  sothfastnesse,  and  heare  or 
knowe  of  this  (perceiuing  what  is  nowe  in  the  church),  ought  here  through,  to 
be  the  more  moued  in  all   their  wits,  to  able  them  to  grace,  and  to  set  lesser 
pryce  by  themselfe,  that  they,   without  tarying,  forsake  wilfullie  and  bodelie 
all  the  wretchednesse  of  thys  lyfe,  since  they  knowe  not  howe  sone,  nor  v/hen, 
nor  where,  nor  by  whom,  God  will  teache  them  and  assay  their  patience.    For 
lowem       ^°  doubt,  who  that  euer  wil  line  piteously,  that  is  charitablie  in  Christ  Jesu, 
the  true     shall  suffer  nowe  here  in  this  life  persecution,  in  one  wyse  or  another.    That  is, 
church,      if  ^ve  shal  be  sane,  it  behoueth   vs  to  imagin  ftdl  besilie,  the  vilitie  and  foiUe- 


Truth 
leaveth 
always  a 
sweet 


Godly 
counsel 
{;iven,  if  it 
may  he 
followed. 


Persecu- 
tion fol- 
loweth 


HIS    REASON    FOR     \VR]TIN-G    IT.  251 

nesse  of  sinne,  and  howe  the  Lord  God  is  displeased  therefore  :  and  so  of  this     Henry 
vilitie,  of  hideousnesse  of  sin,   it  bchouetli  vs  to  besie  vs  in  all  our  wittes,  for  to      ^^■ 
abhorre  and  hold  in  our  mind  a  great  shame  of  sinne  euer,  and  so  than  we  owe     .    .j 
to  sorrow   hartaly  therefore,   and  euer  flying  all  occasion  thereof.     And  then     ^A(\^) 

behoueth  vs  to  take  vpon  vs  sharpe  penavmce,  continuing  therein,  for  to  obteine  '— 

of  the  Lorde  forgiuenesse  of  our  foredone  sinnes,  and  grace  to  abstayne  vs  here- 
after from  sinne.     And  but  if  we  inforce  vs  to  do  this  wilfullic,  and  in  conue- 
uient  tyme,  the  Lorde  (if  he  will  not  vtterlic  destroye  and  cast  vs  awaie)  will 
in  diuers  maners  moue   tyrantes  against  vs,  for  to   constraine  vs  violentlie  to 
doo  penaunce,  whiche  we  would  not  doo  wilfully.     And  truste  that  this  doyng  xhe  cause 
is  a  speciall  grace  of  the  Lorde,  and  a  gi'eat  token  of  lyfe  and  mercie.     And  no  wiiy  pei- 
doubt,  who  euerwil  not  apphe  himself  (as  is  said  before)  to  punish  himselfe  wil~  is  suffered 
fuUie,  neither  will  suffer  paciently,  mekelie,  and  gladlie,  tlie  rodde  of  the  Lorde,  to  come, 
how  so  euer  that  lie  will  punishe  him :  theyr  wayward  willes  and  their  inipa- 
cience,  are  vnto  them  earnest  of  euerlasting  damnacyon.    But  because  there  are 
but  fewe  in  numbre  that  do  able  them  thus  faithfullie  to  grace,  for  to  Hue  here 
simplie  and  purelie,  and  without  gall  of  malice  and  of  grudginge :  herefore  the 
loners  ol  this  worlde  hate  and  pursue  them  that  they  know  pacient,  meke,  chaste, 
and  wilfuUie  poore,   hating  and  flying  all  worldlye  vanities  and  fleshlie  lustes. 
For  surelie,   their  vertuous  condicions  are  euen  contrarie  to  the  maners  of  this 
world. 

The  third  thing  that  moueth  me  to  wryte  this  sentence  is  this,  I  thought  I  The  third 
shall  busie  me  in  my  selfe  to  doo  faithfullie,  that  all  men  and  women  (occupy-  cause, 
ing  all  their  businesse  in  knowing  and  in  kepinge  of  Gods  commaundementes) 
able  them  so  to  grace,  that  they  might  vnderstand  truelie  the  truth,  and  haue 
and  vse  vertue  and  prudence,  and  so  desei-ue   to  be  lightned  from  aboue  with 
heauenlie  wisdome ;  so  that  all  their  words  and  their  works  may  be  hereby 
made  pleasaimt  sacrifice  vnto  the  Lorde  God :  and  not  onely  for  healpe  of  their 
owne  soules,  but  also  for  edification  of  holie  church.     For  I  dout  not,  but  all  Edifica- 
they  that  wil  applie  them  to  haue  this  foresaid  businesse,  shall  profiet  full  mekill  '"?"  "^ 
both  to  frendes  and  foes.     For  some  enemies  of  the  truth,  throwe  the  grace  of  necessary 
God,  shall,  throwe  charitable  folkes,  be  made  astonied  in  their  conscience,  and  to  be  con- 
peraduenture   conuerted  from  vices  to  vertues  :  and  also,  they  that  labour  to  ^'''^'■^"• 
know  and  to  kepe  faithfullie  the  biddinges  of  God,  and  to  suiter  pacientlie  all 
aduersities,  shall  hereby  comfort  manie  friends. 

And  the  foiuth  thinge  that  moueth  me  to  wryte  thys  sentence  is  this  :  I  knowe  The 
by  my  soden  and  unwarned  apposing  and  answering,  that  al  they  that  wil,  of  fourth 
good  hart  without  faining,  able  them  self  wilfldlie   and  gladlie,  after  their  con- 
ning and  their  power,  to  follow  Christ  paciently,  traueling  biisilie,  priuilie,  and 
apertlie  in  worke  and  in  word,  to  withdrawe  whosoeuer  that  they  may  from 
vyces,  planting  in   them  (if  they  may)  vertues,  comforting  them  and  furthering 
them  that  standeth  in  grace ;  so  that  therewith  they  be  not  home  vp  in  vaine 
glorie,  throwe  presumption  of  their  wisdome,  nor  inflamed  with  anie  worldlie 
prosperitie,  but  euer  meke  and  pacient ;  purposing  to  abide   stedfastlie  in  the  The  as- 
wil  of  God;  suffering  wilfuUie  and  gladly  without  anie  grutchin^  what  soeuer  g/g'^''" 
rodde  the  Lord  will  chastise  them  with :  then,  this  good  Lord  will  not  forget  to  „ever 
comfort  all  such  men  and  women  in  all  theyr  tribulacions,  and  at  euerie  poynt  f''led 
of  temtacion   that  anie  ennemie   purposeth  for  to  do  against  them.     To  such  afe'pcrle- 
faithfidl  louers  speciallie,  and  pacient  followers  of  Christ,  the  Lord  sendeth  his  cuted. 
wisedome  from  aboue,  to  them  which  the  aduersaries  of  the  truth  may  not  knowe 
nor  vnderstand.     But  through  their  olde  and  newe  vnshamefast  sinnes,  those 
tyrantes  and  enemies  of  southfastnesse,  shal  be  so  blinded  and  obstinate  in  euill, 
that  they  shal  wene  tiiem  self  to  doo  pleasaunt  sacrifices  vnto  the  Lorde  God  in 
their  malicious  and  wrongfid  persewing  and  destroying  of  innocent  mens  and 
womens  bodies  :  whiche  men  and  women,  for  their  vertuous  lining,  and  for  their 
true  knowledging  of  the  tioithe,  and  their  pacient,  wilfiill,  and  glad  suffering  of 
persecution  for  righteousnesse,  deserue,  thorow  the  grace  of  God,  to  be  heyres  of 
the  endles  blisse  of  heauen.     And  for  the  feruent  desire  and  great  loue  that 
those  men  haue,  as  to  stand  in  sothfastncsse  and  witnesse  of  it,  though  they  be 
sodeinlie  and  vnwarnedly  brought  forth  to  be  apposed  of  their  aduersaries,  the 
Holie  Ghost  yet  that  moueth  and  rideth  them  through  his  charitie,  will,  in  that 
houre  of  their  answering,  speake  in  them  and  shewe  his  wisdome,  that  all  their 
enemies  shall  not  again  say,  nor  again  stand,  lawfullie. 


252  THE    EXAMINATION    OF    WILLIAM    THORPE. 

tievru         And  therefore,  al  they  that  are  stedfast  in  the  faith  of  God,  yea  whiche  thorow 
^^-      diligent  keping  of  his  commaundements  and  for  their  pacient  suffi-ing  of  what- 
~T~7r~  soeuer  aduersitie  tliat  commeth  to  them,  hope  surehe  in  his  mercie,  piu-posing 
*     ■     to  stand  continualhe  in  perfict  charitiej  for  those  men  and  women,  drede  not 
•     so  the  aduersities  of  this  hfe,  that  they  wil  feare  (after  their  conning  and  their 
power)  to  knowledge  prudentlie  the  truth  of  Gods  words,  when,  where,  and  to 
whom,  they  thinke  their  knowledging  may  profite.    Yea  and  though,  therefore, 
persecution  come  to  them  in  one  wise  or  an  other,  certes  they  pacientlie  take 
it ;  knowing  their  conuersation  to  be  in  heauen.     It  is  an  hei  rewarde  and  a 
special  grace  of  God,  for  to  haue  and  inioy  the  euerlasting  inheritance  of  hea- 
uen, for  the  suffering  of  one  persecution,  in  so  short  time  as  is  the  terme  of  this 
life.    For  lo,  this  heauenlie  heritage  and  endles  reward,  is  the  Lorde  God  him 
self,  which  is  the  best  thing  that  may  be.     This  sentence  witnesseth  the  Lord 
God  him  self  whereas  he  said  to  Abraham,  '  I  am  thy  mede  :'  And  as  the  Lord 
said :  he  was  and  is  the  mede  of  Abraham  :  so  he  is  of  all  other  his  saintes. 
This  moste  blessed  and  best  mede,  he  graunte  to  vs  all  for  his  holie  name,  that 
made  vs  of  naught,  and  sent  his  only  most  deare  worthie  sonne,  our  Lorde  Jesu 
Christe,  for  to  redeme  vs  with  his  moste  precious  hart  bloud.     Amen. 

The  Examination  of  William  Thorpe,  penned  with  his  own  Hand. 

Exami-         Knowen  be  it  to  al  men  that  read  or  heare  this  wryting  benethe,  that  on  the 

nation  of  gondaye  next  after  the  feast  of  Saint  Peter,  that  we  cal  Lammasse,  in  the 

before  '     yeare  of  our  Lorde  a  thousand  four  hundred  and  seven,  I  William  Thorpe,  being 

Thomas    in  prison  in  y"  castel  of  Saltwode,  was  brought  before  Thomas  Arundel,  arcli- 

Mchb'''^''   byshop  of  Canterbury,  and  chancelor  then  of  England.  And  when  that  I  came 

to  him,  he  stoode  in  a  great  chamber  and  much  people  about  him  :  and  when 

that  bee  sawe  me,  he  went  faste  into  a  closet,  bidding  all  seculer  men  that 

folowed  him  to  goe  forth  from  him  soone,  so  that  no  man  was  left  than  in  that 

closet  but  the  archebishop  himselfe,  and  a  phisitian  that  was  called  Malueren, 

parsone  of  Saint  Dustanes  in  London,  and  two  other  persons  vnknowen  to  me 

Loitering  which  were  ministers  of  the  lawe.     And  I,  standing  before  them,  by  and  by 

c'^nnT'    *'^^  archbishop  said  to  me :  William,  I  knowe  wel  that  thou  hast  this  twentie 

abide  tra-  winter  and  more,  traueiled  about  besilie  in  the  north  countrey  and  in  other 

veiling      diuerse  countries  of  England,  sowing  about  false  doctrine,  hauing  great  busi- 

ers.^ '      nesse,  if  thou  might,  with  thine  vntrue  teaching  and  shrewdc  will,  for  to  infecte 

The  srace  ^"^1  poyson  all  this  land.   But,  through  the  grace  of  God,  thou  art  nowe  with- 

of  God,      standid  and  brought  into  my  ward,  so  that  I  shall  nowe  sequester  thee  from 

lord'of'"^  thine  euill  pui-])ose,  and  let  thee  to  enuenime  the  shepe  of  my  prouince.    Neuer- 

Canter-     theles  Saint  Paul  saith :  If  it  may  be,  as  muche  as  in  vs  is,  wee  are  to  haue 

bury,  be    peace  with  al  men.     Therfore,  William,  if  thou  wilt  now  mekely  and  of  good 

tilings,      hart,  without  any  feining,  knele  downe  and  lay  thy  hand  vpon  a  booke,  and 

kisse  it,  promising  faithfidly,  as  I  shal  here  chai-ge  thee,  that  thou  wilt  submit 

thee  to  my  correction,  and  stande  to  mine  ordinaunce,'  and  fulfil  it  duely  by  al 

thy  conning  and  power,  thou  shalt  yet  find  mee  graciouse  vnto  thee. 

Than  said  I  to  the  archbishop  :  Sir,  sinse  ye  deme  me  an  heretike  and  out 
of  beleue,  will  ye  geue  me  here  audience  to  tell  my  beleue.  And  he  said  :  Yea 
tell  on.  And  I  said  :  I  beleeue  that  there  is  not  but  one  God  Almightie,  and 
in  this  godhead,  and  of  this  godhead,  are  three  persones,  that  is,  the  Father, 
the  Sonne,  and  the  soothfast  Holie  Ghost.  And  I  beleeue  that  all  these  three 
persones  are  euer  in  power,  and  in  conning,  and  in  might,  full  of  grace  and  of 
all  goodnesse.  For  whatsoeuer  that  the  Father  doth  or  can  or  will,  that  thing 
also  the  Sonne  doth  and  can  and  will :  and  in  all  their  power,  conning,  and 
will,  the  Holie  Ghost  is  equall  to  the  Father  and  to  the  Sonne. 

Ouer  this,  I  beleeue  that  through  counsell  of  this  most  blessed  Trinitie,  in 
most  conuenient  time  before  ordeined  for  the  saluation  of  mankinde,  the  seconde 
persone  of  this  Trinitie,  was  ordeined  to  take  the  fourme  of  man,  that  is,  the 
kinde  of  man.  And  I  beleeue  that  this  second  persone  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ, 
was  conceiued  through  the  Holie  Ghost,  into  the  wombe  of  the  most  blessed 
Virgin  Marie,  without  mans  seede.  And  I  beleeue,  that  after  nine  monethes, 
Christ  was  borne  of  this  most  blessed  Virgine,  without  any  paine  or  breaking  of 
the  closter  of  her  wombe,  and  without  filth  of  her  virginitie. 

(I)  Your  ordinance  '  and  why  not  God's  ordinance,  if  it  please  your  grace? 


THE    EXAMINATION    OF    WILLIAM    TIIOUI'K.  253 

Vncl  1   htleeue  that  Christe  our  Saiiiour  was  circumcised  in  the  eight  daye    Henry 

IV. 


after  his  byrth,  in  fulfilling  of  the  hiwe,  and  Iiis  name  was  called  Jesus,  which  

was  so  called  of  the  angel,  before  that  bee  was  conceiued  in  the  wombe  of    ^  j)_ 
Marie,  his  mother.  1409 

And  1  beleeue  that  Christ,  as  he  was  about  thirty  yeare  olde,  was  baptised  in  

the  floud  of  Jordane,  of  John  Baptist :  and  in  the  likenesse  of  a  done  the  Holy 
Ghost  descended  there  vpon  him,  and  a  voice  was  harde  from  heauen,  saying, 
Thou  art  my  wel  beloued  Sonne,  in  thee  I  am  full  pleased. 

And  I  beleeue  that  Christ  was  moued  tlien  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  for  to  go  into 
ys  desert,  and  there  he  fasted  forty  dales  and  forty  nights  without  bodilie  meat 
and  drinke.  And  I  beleeue  that  by  and  by,  after  his  fasting,  when  the  manhod 
of  Christ  lumgred,  the  feend  came  to  him,  and  tempted  him  in  glutony,  in  vaine 
glorie,  and  in  couetise  :  but  in  all  those  temptations,  Christ  concluded  the 
feend,  and  withstode  him.  And  then,  without  tarjang,  Jesu  began  to  preache 
and  to  say  vnto  the  people,  Do  ye  penance,  for  the  realme  of  heauen  is  now 
at  hand. 

I  beleeue  that  Christ,  in  al  his  time  here,  liued  moste  liolilie,  and  taught  the 
will  of  his  Father  most  truelie  :  and  I  beleeue  that  he  sufired  therefore,  moste 
wrongfuUie,  greatest  reprieues  and  despisinges. 

And,  after  this,  whan  Christ  wold  make  an  end  here  of  tliis  temporal  lyfe,  I  That  is. 

beleue  that  in  the  dale  next  before  that  bee  would  suffer  passion  in  the  morne,  ""'^f  "'*' 
1         1      (•  1  1    •       1    1  i>  1  •     n     1  11-     creatures 

ui  lorme  oi  bread  and  ot  wyne,  lie  ordemed  the  sacrament  ot  his  liesn  and  Ins  of  bread 

hloud,  that  is,  his  owne  precious  bocUe,  and  gaue  it  to  his  apostles  for  to  eate ;  and  wine. 

connnaimding  them,  and  by  them  all  their  after-commers,  that  they  should  doe 

it  in  tliis  forme  that  bee  shewed  to  them  :  vsc  them  self,  and  teach  and  comone 

forth  to  other  men  and  women,  this  most  worshipfidl  and  holiest  sacrament,  in 

minde  fulnesse  of  his  holiest  liuing,  and  of  his  moste  true  teaching,  and  of  his 

wilfull  and  pacicnt  sidfring  of  the  moste  painefuU  passion. 

And  1  beleue  that  this  Christ  our  Sauiour,  after  that  hee  had  ordeined  this 
moste  worthy  sacrament  of  his  owne  pretious  bodie,  he  went  forth  wilfullie 
against  his  ennemies,  and  he  suffered  them  most  pacientlie  to  lay  their  handes 
most  violentlie  v'pou  him,  and  to  bjaid  him,  and  to  leade  him  forth  as  a  tlieefe, 
and  to  skorne  him  and  buffet  him,  and  al  to  blow  or  file  him  with  their  spit- 
tinges.  Oner  this,  I  beleeue  that  Christ  suffred  moste  mekelie  and  pacientlie 
his  ennemies,  for  to  dinge  out  with  sharpe  scourges  the  hloud  that  was  betweene 
his  skinne  and  his  fleshe  :  yea,  Avithout  grudging,  Christ  suffered  the  cruell 
Jewes  to  crowne  hym  with  most  sharpe  thornes,  and  to  strike  him  with  a  rede. 
And  after,  Christ  suffered  wicked  Jewes  to  ch'aw  him  out  vpon  the  crosse,  and 
for  to  nayle  hym  there  vpon  foote  and  hande.  And  so,  through  his  pitifidl 
nayling,  Christ  shed  out  wilfidlie,  for  man's  life,  the  bloud  that  was  in  his  vaines. 
And  then  Christ  gaue  wilfullie  his  spirite  into  the  handes  or  power  of  his 
Father,  and  so,  as  he  would,  and  when  hee  woulde,  Christ  died  wilfullie,  for 
man's  sake,  vpon  the  crosse.  And  notwithstanding  that  Christ  was  wilfidlie, 
j)ainfidly,  and  moste  shamefully,  put  to  death,  as  to  the  world,  there  was  left 
bloud  and  water  in  his  hart,  as  before  ordeined,  that  he  woulde  shede  out  this 
bloude  and  this  water  for  man's  saluation.  And  therefore  he  suffered  the  Jewes 
to  make  a  blinde  knight  to  thruste  him  into  the  hart  with  a  speare,  and  this  the 
bloud  and  water  that  was  in  his  hart  Christ  woidde  shed  out  for  man's  loue, 
and  after  this,  I  beleeue  that  Chiist  was  taken  downe  from  the  crosse  and  buried. 
And  I  beleeue  that  on  the  third  dale,  by  y^  power  of  his  godhead,  Christe  rose 
againe  from  death  to  life.  And  the  fortie  day  thereafter,  I  beleeue  that  Christ 
ascended  up  into  heauen,  and  that  he  there  sitteth  on  the  right  hande  of  the 
Father  Almightie  :  and  the  fiftie '  dale  after  this  vp  goyng,  he  sent  to  his 
apostles  the  Holie  Ghost,  that  he  had  promised  them  before  :  and  I  beleeue 
that  Christ  shall  come  and  iudge  al  mankind,  some  to  euerlasting  peace,  and 
some  to  euerlasting  paines. 

And  as  I  beleue  in  the  Father  and  in  the  Sonne,  that  they  are  one  God 
Almightie,  so  I  beleeue  in  the  Holie  Ghoste,  that  he  is  also  with  them  the  same 
God  Almightie. 

And  I  beleeue  an  holie  church ;  that  js,  al  they  that  haue  bene,  and  that  ^^at  is 
now  are,  and  alwaies  to  the  ende  of  the  worlde  shall  be,  a  people  the  which  church?^ 

(I)  Edition  1563,  p.  147,  "the  tenth  daie :"— Ed.  1570.  p.  C3I,  "the  fifteth  daie."  The  "  up- 
poyng,"  in  the  text,  signifies  the  up-going  from  the  grave,  not  the  ascension. — Ed. 


254  THE    EXAMINATIOK    OF    WILLIAM    THORPE. 

Hetiry    shall  endeuoi-  them  to  know  and  to  kepe  the  connnaundenientes  of  God,  dredingt- 
!'■      ouer  all  thing  to  ott'end  God,  and  louing  and  seeking  most  to  please  him  :  and 
I  heleue  that  all  they  that  haue  had  and  yet  haue,  and  all  they  that  yet  shall 
haue,  the  foresayde  vcrtues,  surelie  standing  in  the  beleefe  of  God,  hopyng 
"^^'    stedfastlie  in  his  mercifuU  doinges,  continuing  to  their  ende  in  perfecte  charitie, 
wilfuUie,  patientlie,  and  gladly,  suffering  persecutions,  by  the  example  of  Christ 
chiefiie  and  his  apostles,  all  these  haue  their  names  written  in  the  boke  of  life. 
The  true        Therefore  I  beleeue  that  the  gadering  togither    of  this  people,  lining  now 
notes  of    }jgj.g  in  this  life,  is  the  holie  church  of  God,  fighting  here  on  earth  against  the 
church,     feende,  the  prosperitie  of  the  world,  and  their  fleshlie  lustes.    Wherefore,  seeing 
that  all  the  gathering  together  of  this  church  before  sayd,  and  euery  parte 
thereof,  neither  coueteth,  nor  willeth,  nor  loueth,  nor  seeketh  any  thing  but  to 
eschew  the  offence  of  God,  and  to  doe  his  pleasing  wil ;    mekelie,  gladlie,  and 
wilfidlie,  with  all  mine  heart,  I  submitte  my  selfe  vnto  this  holie  church  of 
Christ,  to  bee  euer  buxome  and  obedient  to  the  ordinance  of  it,  and  of  euery 
member  thereof,  after  my  knowledge  and  power  by  the  helpe  of  God.     There- 
fore 1  knowledge  nowe,  and.euermore  shall,  if  God  wyll,  that  with  all  my  hart 
and  with  all  my  might,  I  will  submit  me  onlie  to  the  rule  and  gouernaunce  of 
them,  whome,  after  my  knowledge,  I  may  perceiue,  by  the  hauing  and  vsing 
of  the  beforesayd  vertues,  to  be  members  of  the  holie  church.   Wherefore  these 
What  he-  articles  of  belefe,  and  al  other  (both  of  the  olde  law  and  of  the  newe,  which 
resy  in      after  the  commaundemente  of  God  any  man  ought  to  beleue),  I  beleue  verilie 
this  be-     in  jny  sovde,  as  a  sinfull  deadlie  wretche  of  my  cunnyng  and  power  ought  to 
pray  you   beleue  :  praying  the  Lorde  God,  for  his  holie  name,  for  to  increase  my  belefe, 
my  lord?  and  to  helpe  my  vnbelefe. 

And  for  because,  to  the  praysing  of  God's  name,  I  desire,  aboue  all  thinges, 

to  bee  a  faithfull  member  of  holie  church,  I  make  this  protestation  before  you 

all  foure  that  are  now  here  present,  coueting  that  all  men  and  women  that  now 

be  absent  knewe  the  same  :  that  what  thing  soeuer  before  this  time  I  haue 

saide  or  done,  or  what  thing  here  I  shall  do  or  say,  at  any  time  hereafter,  I 

The  Old    beleeue,  that  all  the  olde  lawe  and  newe  lawe  giuen  and  ordened  by  coimsell  of 

^^^T    d  ^^^  three  persones  of  the  Trinitie,  were  geuen  and  written  to  the  saluation  of 

New.        mankind.     And  I  beleeue,  that  these  lawes  are  sufficient  for  man's  saluation. 

And  I  beleue  euery  article  of  these  lawes,  to  the  intent,  that  these  articles, 

ordeined  and  commanded  of  these  three  persons  of  the  most  blessed  Trinitie, 

are  to  be  beleeued. 

And  therefore,  to  the  rule  and  the  ordinaunce  of  these,  Gods  lawes,  meekely, 

gladlie,  and  wilfuUie,  I  submit  me  with  all  mine  hart :  that  whosoeuer  can  or 

will,  by  authoritie  of  Gods  lawe,  or  by  open  reason,  tell  me  that  I  haue  erred 

or  now  eri-e,  or  any  tyme  hereafter  shall  erre  in  any  article  of  belefe  (from 

which  inconuenience   God  kepe  me  for  his  goodnesse),  I  submitte  me  to  be 

reconciled  and  to  be  buxum  and  obedient  imto  these  lawes  of  God,  and  to  euerie 

article  of  them.     For,  by  authoritie  specially  of  these  lawes,  I  will,  through  the 

grace  of  God,  be  vnited  charitablie  vnto  these  lawes.      Yea  Sir,  and  ouer  this, 

I  beleeue  and  admitte  all  the  sentences,  authorities,  and  reasons,  of  the  saintes 

and  doctoiu-3,  according  vnto  holy  scripture,  and  declaryng  it  trulie. 

Doctors         I  submit  me  wilfuUie  and  meeklie,  to  be  euer  obedient  after  my  conning  and 

so  to  be     power,  to  all  these  saintes  and  doctours,  as  they  are  obedient  in  work  and  in 

a"s"thT'''   ■^'"'■fl'^  to  God  and  to  his  law  ;  and  further  not  (to  my  knowledge),  not  for  any 

foiiow^he  earthlie  power,  dignitie,  or  state,  thorough  the  helpe  of  God.     But  Sir,  I  praie 

word.        you  tell  me,  if,  after  your  bidding,  I  shall  lay  my  hande  vpon  the  boke,  to  what 

"J^"    _        entent  to  sweare  thereby?     And  the  archbishop  said  to  me:  Yea,  wherefore 

a^oo'k/    else?     And  I  said  to  him  :  Sir,  a  booke  is  nothing  else  but  a  thinge  coupled 

whether    together  of  diners  creatures,  and  to  sweare  by  any  creature,  bothe  Gods  lawe 

ful  ^  ^"^   ^"'^  nians  lawe  is  against  it. 

But  Syr,  this  thyng  I  saye  here  to  you  before  these  your  clerkes,  with  my 
foresayd  protestation,  that  howe,  where,  when,  and  to  whom,  men  are  bound  to 
sweare  or  to  obey,  in  any  wise,  after  Gods  lawe,  and  saints  and  tnie  doctours 
according  vnto  God's  lawe,  I  will,  through  Gods  grace,  bee  euer  readie  thereto, 
with  all  my  cunning  and  power.  But  I  pray  you  Sir,  for  the  charitie  of  God, 
that  ye  will,  before  that  I  sweare  (as  I  haue  here  rehearsed  to  you),  tell  me 
howe  or  whereto  that  I  shall  submit  me  :  and  shewe  me  whereof  that  yee  will 
coi-rect  mee,  and  what  is  the  ordinance  that  yee  will  thus  oblige  mee  to  fulfill. 


WHAT    HK    WAS    TO    SWEAR    TO.  255 

And  the  archbishop  said  vnto  me  :  I  will  shortlie  that  nowe  thou  sweare  here     Henry 
to  nie,  that  thou  sluilt  forsake  all  tlie  opinions  which  the  sect  of"  LoUardes  holde,       ^^^ 
and  is  slaundered  with :   so  that  after  tliis  time,  neither  priuilie  nor  apertlie,     *    t\ 
thou  liolde  any  opinion  which  I  shall  (after  thou  hast  sworne)  rehearse  to  thee     1400* 

here.     Nor  thou  shall  fauour  no  man  nor  woman,  yong  nor  olde,  that  holdeth  '— 

any  of  these  foresaide  opinions ;  but  after  thy  knowledge  and  power,  thou  shalte 
force  thee  to  withstande  all  such  distroublers  of  holie  church  in  eueine  diocesse 
that  thou  commest  in ;  and  them  that  will  not  leaue  their  false  and  damnable  How, 
opinions,  thou  shalt  put  them  vj),  publisliing  them  and  their  names,  and  make  )'^'\"'': 
them  knowne  to  the  bishop  of  the  dioces  that  they  are  in,  or  to  the  bishop's  j";,  swear. 
ministers.     And,  ouer  this,  1  will  that  thou  preach  no  more  \iito  the  tyme  that 
I  knowe,  by  good  witnesse  and  true,  that  thy  conuersation  be  such,  that  th}- 
hart  and  thy  mouth  accord  truelie  in  one,  contrarying  all  the  lewd  learning  that 
thou  hast  taught  here  before. 

And  I,  hearing  these  wordes,  thought  in  my  heart,  that  this  was  an  vnlefull 
askyng,  and  deemed  my  selfe  cursed  of  God,  if  I  consented  hereto;   and  I 
thought  howe  Susan  saide.  Anguish  is  to  niee  on  euerie  side.     And  in  that 
I  stoode  still  and  spake  not,  the  archbishoppe  saide  to  me :  Answere  one  wise 
or  other.     And  I  said.  Sir,  if  I  consented  to  you  thus  as  yee  haue  herebefore  Behold 
rehearsed  to  me,   I  should  become  an   appealer,  or  euerie  bislioppe's  espie,  ^^^  v°- 
somoner  of  all  Englande.     For  and  I  should  thus  put  vp,  and  publishe,  the  ceedings' 
names  of  men  and  women,  I  should  herein  deceiue  full  many  persons  :  Yea  Sir,  whereto 
as  it  is  likelie,  by  the  dome  of  my  conscience,  I  shaidd  herein  be  cause  of  the  they  tend, 
death  both  of  men  and  women,  yea  both  bodilie  and  ghostlie.     For  many  men 
and  women  that  stand  nowe  in  the  waie  of  saluation,  if  I  should,  for  the  learn- 
ing and  reading  of  their  beleeue,  publish  them  therefoi-e,  up  to  the  bishops  or 
to  their  vnpitious  ministers,  I  knowe  some  deale  by  experience,  that  they  shoidd 
be  so  distroubled  and  diseased  with  persecution  or  otherwise,  that  many  of  them 
(I  thinke)  woulde  rather  chuse  to  forsake  the  waie  of  tnith  then  to  be  ti-auailed, 
skorned,  slaundered,  or  punished,  as  bishops  and  their  ministers  nowe  vse,  for  to 
constraine  men  and  women  to  consent  to  them. 

But  I  finde  in  no  place  in  holie  Scripture,  that  this  office  that  ye  would  nowe 
enfeaffe  me  with,  accordeth  to  any  priest  of  Christe's  sect,  nor  to  any  other 
christian  man :  and,  therefore,  to  doe  this,  were,  to  me,  a  full  noious  bond  to 
be  bounden  with,  and  ouer  grieuous  charge.     For  I  suppose  that  if  I  thus  did,  no  mar- 
many  men  and  women  woulde,  yea  Sir,  might  iustlie  to  my  confusion,  say  to  velwhy; 
me,  that  I  were  a  traytor  to  God  and  to  them,  since  (as  I  thinke  in  mine  hart)  an'd*^"t'"j! 
many  men  and  women  tnist  so  mikle  in  this  case,  that  I  woidd  not,  for  sailing  christ, 
of  my  life,  doe  thus  to  them.     For  if  I  thus  should  doe,  fidl  many  menne  and  ^°'^''  *^*" 
women  would  (as  they  might  full  truelie)  saie  that  I  had  falselie  and  cowardlie  agree? 
forsaken  the  truth,  and  slaundered  shamefullie  the  word  of  God.    For,  if  I  con- 
sented to  you  to  do  here  after  your  will,  for  bonchefe  or  mischiefe  that  may 
befall  vnto  me  in  this  life,  I  deme  in  my  conscience,  that  I  were  worthy,  heerefore, 
to  be  cursed  of  God,  and  also  of  all  his  saintes :  from  which  inconuenience,  keep 
me  and  all  christian  people,  Almightie  God !  nowe  and  cuer  for  his  holie  name. 

And  then  the  archbishop  saide  vnito  me  :     Oh,  thine  heart  is  fidl  harde  in-  It  is 
durate  as  was  the  heart  of  Pharao,  and  the  diuell  hath  ouercomen  thee  and  ',!J^"* 
peruerted  thee,  and  he  hath  so  blinded  thee  in  al  thy  wits,  that  thou  hast  no  Pharaoh 
grace  to  knowe  the  truth,  nor  the  measure  of  mercie  that  I  haue  profered  to  judgeiu 
thee.     Therfore,  as  I  perceiue  nowe  by  thy  foolish  answere,  thou  hast  no  will  'hard- 
to  leaue  thine  old  errours.     But  I  say  to  thee,  leud  losell,'  other  quicklie  con-  hearted, 
sent  thou  to  mine  ordinance,  and  submit  thee  to  stand  to  mv  decrees ;  or,  bv  "^^i^^e 
saint  Thomas,  thou  shalt  be  degraded,  and  followe  thy  fellow  2  into  Smithfield.  you,  my 
And  at  this  saying,  I  stood  still  and  spake  not ;  but  I  thought  in  mine  hart  that  icd,  to 
God  chd  to  me  great  grace,  if  he  woidd,  of  his  great  mercie,  bring  me  to  such  brother'' 
an  ende.     And,  in  mine  heart,  I  was  nothing  afraide  with  this  manasing  of  the  Kaca? 
archbishop.     And  I  considered  there,  twoe  thinges  in  him.     One,  that  he  was 
not  yet  sorrowfull  for  that  hee  hadde  made  William  Sawtre  wrongfullie  to  bee 
burnt;    and,  as  I   considered   that  the  archbisho])pc  thirsted    yet  after  more 
shedding  out  of  innocent  blond.     And  fast,  therefore,  I  was  moued  in  all  my 
wittes,  for  to  holde  the  archbishop  nother  for  prelate  nor  for  priest  of  God. 
And,  for  that  mine  inwarde  man  v/as  thus  altogether  departed  from  the  arch- 

(1)  "  Losell,"  a  lost  person. — Ed.  (2)  He  meaneth  God's  martyr,  William  Sautre. 


256  EXAMINATION    OF    WILLIAM    THORPE. 

Henry  bisliop,  iiie  tlioiiglit  I  slioulcle  not  haue  any  dread  of  him ;  but  I  was  riglit 
^^-  lieauie  and  sorrowfull,  for  that  tliere  was  no  audience  of  secular  men  by :  but 
ill  my  heart  I  praied  the  Lord  God,  for  to  comfort  me  and  strength  mee  against 
1 4no"  them  that  tliere  were  against  the  soothfastnesse,  and  I  pm-posed  to  speake  no 
more  to  the  archbishop  and  his  clerkes  then  me  need  behoued.  And  all  thus 
I  praide  God  for  his  goodnesse  to  geue  mee,  then  and  alwaie,  grace  to  speake, 
with  a  nieeke  and  an  easie  spirit ;  and  whatsoeuer  thing  that  I  should  speake, 
that  I  might  thereto  haue  true  authorities  of  Scriptures,  or  open  reason.  And, 
for  that  I  stood  thus  still  and  nothing  spake,  one  of  the  archbishop's  clerkea 
saide  vnto  me :  What  thing  musest  thou  ?  Do  thou  as  my  lord  hath  nowe 
commanded  to  thee  heere. 
The  order  And  yet  I  stood  still,  and  answered  him  not.  And  then,  soon  after,  the  arcli- 
and  mail-  bishop  saide  to  me  :  Art  thou  not  yet  bethought,  whether  thou  wilt  do  as  I  haue 
brUigiii'^^  said  to  thee  ?  And  I  said  then  to  him :  Sir,  my  father  and  my  mother,  on 
lip.  °  whose  soides  God  haue  mercie  (if  it  bee  his  will),  spent  milde  money,  in  diners 
places,  about  my  learning,  for  the  intent  to  haue  made  mee  a  priest  to  God. 
But  when  I  came  to  yeares  of  discretion,  I  had  no  will  to  be  priest,  and  there- 
fore my  friendes  were  right  heauie  to  me,  and  then  methought  their  grudging 
against  me  was  so  painefull  to  me,  that  I  purposed  therefore,  to  haue  left  their 
companie.  And  when  they  perceiued  this  in  me,  they  spake  sometime  full 
faire  and  pleasant  words  to  me ;  but,  for  that  they  might  not  make  me  to  con- 
sent, of  good  heart,  to  be  a  priest,  they  spake  to  me  fiU  oftentimes  verie  greeuous 
words,  and  manased  me  in  diners  manners,  shewing  to  me  fidl  heauie  cheere. 
And  thus  one  whije  in  faire  manner,  another  while  in  greeuous,  they  were  long 
time  (as  me  thought)  full  busie  about  me,  or  I  coiisented  to  them  to  bo  a  priest. 
But  at  the  last,  when,  in  this  matter,  they  would  no  longer  suffer  myne 
excusations,  but  either  I  shoidd  consent  to  them,  or  I  should  euer  beare  their 
indignation,  yea  their  curse  (as  they  saide),  then  I,  seeing  this,  praied  them 
that  they  would  giue  me  licence  for  to  goe  to  them  that  were  named  wise 
j)riestes,  and  of  vertuous  conuersation,  to  haue  their  counsell,  and  to  knowe  of 
them  the  office  and  the  charge  of  priesthoode.  And  hereto  my  father  and  my 
mother  consented  ftdl  gladlie,  and  gauc  me  their  blessing  and  good  leaue  to 
goe,  and  also  money  to  spend  in  this  iourney.  And  so  that  I  went  to  those 
priestes  whom  I  heard  to  be  of  best  name,  and  of  most  holie  liuing,  and  best 
learned,  and  most  wise  of  heauenlie  wisedome ;  and  so  I  communed  with  them 
vnto  the  time  that  I  perceiued,  by  their  vertuous  and  continual  occupations, 
that  their  honest  and  charitable  workes  passed  their  fame  which  I  had  liearde 
before  of  them. 

Wherefore  Sir,  by  the  example  of  the  doctrine  of  them,  and  speciallie  for  the 
godlie  and  innocent  workes  which  I  perceiued  then  of  them,  and  in  them,  after 
my  cunning  and  power  I  haue  exercised  me  then  and  in  this  time,  to  know 
perfectlie  God's  lawe,  hauing  a  will  and  desire  to  Hue  thereafter,  which  willeth 
that  all  men  and  women  shoulde  exercise  themselues  faithfullie  thereabout.  If 
than  Syr,  either  for  pleasure  of  tliem  that  are  neither  so  wise,  nor  of  so  vertuous 
conuersation  to  my  knowledge,  nor  by  common  fame  to  any  other  men's  know- 
ledge in  this  lande,  as  these  men  were,  of  whome  I  tooke  my  coimsell  and  in- 
formation, I  should  now  forsake  thus  suddenlie,  and  shortlie,  and  vnwarned,  all 
the  learning  that  I  haue  exercised  my  selfe  in  these  thirtie  winters  and  more, 
my  conscience  should  euer  be  herewith  out  of  measure  vnquieted ;  and  as  Syr, 
I  knowe  well,  that  manie  men  and  women  should  be  there-through  greatlie 
troubled  and  slaimdered ;  and  as  I  said  Syr,  to  you  before,  for  mine  vntruth  and 
false  cowardnesse,  manie  a  one  shoulde  bee  put  into  full  great  reproofe :  yea 
(Sir,  I  dread  that  manie  one  as  they  might  then  iustlie)  would  curse  me  full 
bitterhe ;  and  Syr,  I  feare  not  but  the  curse  of  God,  which  I  shoidd  deserue 
herein,  woidd  bring  me  to  a  full  euill  ende,  if  I  continued  thus.  And  if, 
thorough  remorse  of  conscience,  I  repented  me  any  time,  returning  into  the 
waie  wliich  you  doe  your  diligence  to  constraine  me  nowe  to  forsake,  yea  Sir, 
all  the  bishoppes  of  this  lande,  with  ftdl  manie  other  priestes,  woidd  defame  me, 
and  pursue  me  as  a  relapse ;  and  they  that  nowe  haue  (though  I  be  vnworthie) 
some  confidence  in  mee,  hereafter  woidd  neuer  trust  to  me,  though  I  coidde 
teach  and  line  neuer  so  vertuouslie,  more  then  I  can  or  may.  For  if,  after  yom- 
counsell,  I  left  vtterlie  all  my  learning,  I  should  heereby  first  wound  and  defile 
mine  owne  soule,  and  also  I  shoulde,  here-through,  giue  occasion  to  many  men 


REPIN'GTON    A    CRUEL    PERSECUTOR.  257 

and  women  of  full  sore  hurting :  yea  Syr,  as  it  is  likelie  to  mee,  if  I  consented    Henry 
to  your  will,  I  shoukle  herein,  by  mine  euill  example  in  it,  as  farre  as  in  mee       ^^- 
were,  slea  nianie  folke  ghostlie,  tliat  I  slumkle  neuer  deserue  for  to  hane  grace  "aTdT 
of  God,  to  the  editying  of  his  church,  neitlier  of  my  selfc,  nor  of  none  other    1409. 
man's  life,  and  vndone  both  before  God  and  man. 


But  Syr,  by  example  chicflie  of  some  whose  names  I  wil  not  nowe  rehearse,  PuiUp 
of  H.,  of  I.  P.,  and  B.,  and  also  by  the  present  doing  of  Philip  Rampington,  that  j^^l'j.],'f^g 
now  is  become  B.  of  Lincolne,  I  am  now  learned  (as  many  moe  hereafter,  bisim'p, 
through  God's  grace  sliall  be  learned)  to  hate  and  to  flee  all  such  slaunder  that  and  a  per 
these  foresaid  men  chieflie  haue  defiled  principally  themselues  with.    And  in  it  s'^'^"""'- 
that  in  them  is,  they  haue  enuenomed  al  the  church  of  God,  for  the  slanderous 
reuoking  at  the  crosse  of  Paules,  of  H.  P.,  and  of  B.,  and  how  now  Philip 
llampington  pursueth  Christes  people.     And  the  faining  that  these  men  dis- 
semble by  woi'ldlie  prudence,  keeping  them  cowardlie  in  their  preaching  and 
communing,  within  the  bondes  and  tearmes,  which,  without  blame,   may  be 
spoken  and  shewed  out  to  the  most  worldlie  huers,  will  not  be  vnpunished  of 
God :  for  to  the  point  of  truth  that  these  men  shewed  out  sometime,  they  will 
not  now  stretch  forth  their  Hues.     But  by  example,  cache  one  of  them,  as  their 
words  and  their  works  she  we,  busie  them  through  their  faining,  for  to  slander 
and  to  pursue  Ciuist  in  his  members,  rather  then  they  will  be  pursued. 

And  the  archbishop  said  to  me  :  These  men  the  which  thou  speakest  of  nowe, 
were  fooles  and  heretikes,  when  they  were  coimted  wise  men  of  thee  and  other 
such  losels.  But  now  they  are  wise  men,  though  thou  and  such  other  deeme  them 
vnwise :  neuertheles  I  wist  neuer  none  that  right  said,  that  any  whils  were  en- 
uenomed with  your  contagiousnesse,  that  is,  contaminated  and  spotted  doctrine. 

And  I  saide  to  the  archbishoppe  :  Sir,  I  thinke  well  that  these  men  and  such 
other  are  nowe  wise  as  to  this  world  ;  but  as  their  wordes  sounded  sometime, 
and  their  workes  shewed   outwardlie,   it  was  Uke  to  moue  me   that  they  had 
earnest  of  the  wisedome  of  God,   and  that  they  should  haue  deserued  mikle  Happy  be 
grace   of  God,  to  haue  saued  their   owne   soules   and  manie   other   mens,  if  they  that 
they  had  continued  faithfullie  in  wilfiUl  pouertie,  and  in  other  simple  vertuous  to  the 
lining  ;  and  speciallie  if  they  had,  with  these  foresaid  vertues,  continued  in  their  end. 
busie  fruitfull  sowing  of  God's  word ;  as,  to  many  mennes  knowledge,   they 
occupied  them  a  season  in  al  their  wits,  fid  busily  to  know  y^  pleasant  will  of 
God,  trauelling  al  their  members  ful  busily  for  to  do  therafter,  purelie  and  Woe 
chieflie  to  the  praising  of  the  most  holie  name  of  God,  and  for  grace  of  edifi-  7i"^^^ ^_ 
cation  and  saluation  of  christen  people.     But  woe  worth  false  couetise,  and  euill  vetous- 
coimsell,  and  tyrannic,   by  which  they,  and  manie  men  and  women,  are  led  ness. 
blindlie  into  an  euill  end. 

Then  the  archbishop  said  to  me :  Thou  and  such  other  losels  of  thy  sect,  J'  '^  pity 
would  shaue  your  beards  full  neare  for  to  haue  a  benefice.     For,  by  Jesu,  I  latifs^^an- 
know  none  more  couetous  shrewes  then  ye  are,  when  that  ye  haue  a  benefice,  not 
For  loe,  I  gaue  to  John  Purueie  a  benefice  but  a  mile  out  of  this  castle,  and  I  swear, 
heard  more  complaints  about  his  couetousnesse  for  tithes  and  other  misdoinges,  Q°sness 
then  I  did  of  all  men  that  were  aduanced  within  my  dioces.  joined 

And  I  saide  to  the  archbishop  :  Sir,  Purueie  is  neither  with  you  now  for  the  ^j'^'j^'j^P^g 
benefice  that  you  gaue  him,  nor  hee  holdeth  faithfidlie  with  the  learning  that  ^'^  ^"'^^''^' 
he  taught  and  writ  before  time :  and  thus  he  sheweth  himselfe  neither  to  be  hot 
nor  colde,  and  therefore  he  and  his  fellowes,  maie  sore  dread  that  if  they  turn 
not  hastilie  to  the  waie  that  they  haue  forsaken,  peraduenture  they  be  put  out 
of  the  number  of  Christs  chosen  people. 

And  the  archbishop  said :  Though  Purueie  be  nowe  a  false  harlot,  I  quite  me 
nowe  to  him :  but  come  he  more  for  such  cause  before  me,  or  we  depart,  I 
shall  know  with  whom  hee  holdeth.  But  I  sale  to  thee  :  Which  are  these  holie 
men  and  wise,  of  whom  thou  hast  taken  thine  information  ? 

And  1  said  :  Sir,  Maister  John  Wickliffe  was  holden  of  fidl  mainie  men,  the  A  worthy 
greatest  clearke  that  they  kjiewe  then  lining  ;  and  therewith  hee  was  named  a  ^°™n'^"f 
passing  ndie  man  and  an  innocent  in  his  lining  :  and,  hereforc,  great  men  com-  Master 
mmied  oft  with  liim,  and  they  loued  so  his  learning,  that  they  writ  it,  and  ^"^"  .„ 
busilie  inforced  them  to  rule  thcmsehies  therafter.     Therefore  Sir,  this  foresaid     "^   ' 
learning  of  M.  John  Wickliffe,  is  yet  holden  of  fidl  manie  men   and  women, 
the  most  agreeable  learning  vnto  the  lining  and  teaching  of  Christ  and  of  his 
apostles,  and  most  openlie  shewing  and  declaring  how  the  church   of  Christ 

vor,.  III.  S 


958  THE    KXAJIIX'ATION    OF    WILLIAM    THORPE. 

iliDry    hatli  beeiie,  and  yet  shoiilde  bee,  ruled  and  gouerned.     Therefore,  so  many  men 
^^'-      and  women  couet  this  learning,  and  purpose,  through  God's  grace,  to  conforme 
~  their  lining  like  to  this  learning  of  Wickliff.      M.   John  Aston  taught  and 

^'  ^'    writte  accordinglie  and  full  busilie,  where  and  when,  and  to  whom   that  lie 
mif^ht,  and  he  vsed  it  himselfe  right  perfectlie  vnto  his  lines   end.     And  also 
l^hilip  of  Rampington,  while  hee  was  a  canon   of  Leicester.     Nicholas   Here- 
ford, Dauie  Cotraie  of  Pakring,  monke  of  Byland  and  a  maister  of  divinitie, 
and  John  Puruaie,  and  many  other  which  were  liolden  right  wise  men  and  pru- 
dent, tauglit  and  writ  busilie  this  foresaide  learning,  and  conformed  them  thereto. 
And  witli  all  these  men  I  was  right   homelie  and  communed  with  them  long- 
time and  oft :  and  so,  before  all  other  men,  I  chose  willinglie  to  be  informed  of 
them  and  by  them,  and  speciallie  of  WickliiFe  himselfe,  as  of  the  most  vertuoui? 
and  godlie  wise  man  that  I  heard  of  or  knew.     And  therefore  of  him  speciallie, 
and  of  these  men,  I  tooke  the  learning  that  I  haue  taught,  and  purpose  to  liue 
thereafter  (if  God  will)  to  my  lines  end.     For  though  some  of  those  men  be 
contrarie  to  the  learning  that  they  taught  before,  I  wote  wel  y'  their  learning 
was  true  which   they  taught ;  and  therefore,  with  the  helpe  of  God  I  purpose 
to  hold  and  to  vse  the  lerning  which  I  heard  of  them,  while  they  sate  on  Moises 
chaire,  and  speciallie  while  thej'  sate  on  the   chaire  of  Christ.     But  after  the 
workes  that  they  now  do,  I  will  not  do,  with  God's  helpe.     For  they  feine,  and 
hide,  and  contrarie  the  truth,  which  before  they  taught  out  plainlie  and  trulie. 
For,  as  I  knowe  well,  when  some  of  those  men   haue  bene  blamed  for  their 
slanderous  dooing,  they  grant  not  that  they  haue  taught  a  misse   or  erred 
before   time,   but  that  they  were  constrained,  by  paine,   to  leaiie   to  tell  out 
the  sooth,  and  thus  they  chuse  now  rather  to  blaspheme  God,  then   to  suffer  a 
while  here  persecution  bodilie,  for  soothfastnesse  that  Christ  shed  out  his  hart 
The  testi-  blond  for.    And  the  archbishop  saide  :  That  learning  that  thou  callest  truth  and 
vr^kiff"^  soothfastnesse,  is  open  slaunder  to  holie  church,  as  it  is  proued  of  holie  chin-ch. 
out  of  the  For,  albeit  that  Wicklifte,  your  author,  was  a  great  clearke,  and  though  that 
mouth  of  many  men  held  him  a  perfect  liner,  yet  his  doctrine  is  not  approued  of  holie 
advert"    church,  hut  manie  sentences  of  his  learning  are   damned,  as  they  well  worthie 
sary.         are.     But  as  toijching  Philip  of  Rampington,  that  was  first,  canon,  and  after- 
Many        ward,  abbot  of  Leicester,  which  is  nowe  bishoppe  of  Lincolne,    I   tell  thee, 
vigils        that  the  dale   is  common,  for  which  he  fasted  the  eeuen.      For  neither  hee 
have  our  holdeth  nowe,  nor  will  holde,  the  learning  that  he  taught,  when  hee  was  a  canon 
calen-       ^^  Leicester ;  for  no  ^bishoppe  of  this  lande  pursueth  now  more  sharplie  them 
dars.         that  holde  thy  waie,  then  he  doth.^ 

And  I  saide  :  Sir,  full  manie  men  and  women  wondereth  vpon  him,  and 
speaketh  him  mikle  shame,  and  holdeth  him  for  a  cursed  enemie  of  the  truth. 

And  the  archbishop  said  to  me :  Wherfore  tariest  thou  me  thus  here  with 
such  fables  ?  wilt  thou  shortlie  (as  I  haue  said  to  thee)  submit  thee  to  me  or  no  ? 

And  I  said :  Sir,  I  tell  you  at  one  word,  I  dare  not,  for  the  dread  of  God, 

submit  me  to  you,  after  the  tenor  and  sentence  that  ye  haue  aboue  rehearsed  to 

me.     And  thus,   as  if  he  had  beene  wroth,  he  saide  to  one  of  his  clerkes  : 

Fetch  hither  quicklie,  the  certification  that  came  to  me   from  Shrewesburie 

vnder  the  bailiffes  scale,  witnessing  the  errors  and  heresies,  which  this  losel 

hath  venimouslie  sowne  there.     Then  hastilie  the  clerke  tooke  out  and  laide 

forth  on  a  cupbord,  diners  roUes  and  writinges,  among  which  there  v/as  a  little 

one,  which  the  clearke  deliuered  to  the  archbishop.     And  by  and  by  the  ai'ch- 

rhe  sa-     bishoppe  read  this  roll   conteining  this  sentence :    "  The  thirde   Sundaie  after 

crament    Easter,    A.  D.   1407.,  William  Thorpe  came  vnto  the  towne   of  Shrewesburie, 

setration,  •'^"^  through  leaue  granted  vnto  him  to  preach,  he  saide  openlie,  in  S.  Chads 

material    church,  in  his  sermon,  that  the  sacrament  of  the  aultar,  after  the  consecration, 

"^^^  ■       was  material  bread.     And  that  images  should  in  no  wise  be  worshipped ;  and 

that    men  should  not  goe  on  pilgrimages ;  and  that  priests  haue  no  title  to 

tithes;  and  that  it  is  not  lawfuU  for  to  sweare  in  any  wise." 

And  when  the  archbishop  had  red  thus  this  roll,  he  rolled  it  vp  againe,  and 
said  to  me :  Is  this  wholesome  learning^  to  be  among  the  people. 

And  I  said  to  him  :  Sir,  I  am  both  ashamed  on  their  behalfe,  and  right  sor- 
rowfull  for  them  that  haue  certified  you  these  things  thus  vntrulie ;  for  I 
preached  neuer,  nor  taught  thus,  priuilie  nor  apertlie. 

(1)  Repington  became  a  persecutor,  after  he  was  made  bishop. 

'2)  AVholesome  enough  for  man's  soul,  though  not  for  your  kitchen. 


OF    THE    PREACHIKG    OF    THE    TIUITH.  )^59 

And  the  archbishop  said  to  me  :  I  will  giue  credence  to  these  worshipfull  men     Henry 
which  haue  written  to  me,  and  witnessed  vnder  their  scales  there  among  them.      ^^- 
Though  nowe  thou  dcniest  tliis,  weenest  thou  that  I  will  giue  credence  to  thee  ?     ^  j^ 
Thou  losell !    hast  troubled  the  worsliipfuU  coinmunaltie  of  Shrewsbune,  so  that    j^^j^^" 

the  bailiffes  and  comnnmaltie  of  that  town  haue  written  to  me,  prajang  me  that _LL 

am  archbishop  of  Canterbtiiy,  primate  and  chancellor  of  Englande,  that  I  will  °^^.''f"'^' 
vouchsafe  to  graunt  them,  that  if  thou  shalt  be  made  (as  thou  art  worthie)  to  „"J^  \^^^^ 
suffer  open  iouresse  for  thine  heresies,  that  thou  may  haue  thy  iouresse  openlie  a  cause  to 
there  among  them  :»  so  that  all  they  whom  thou  and  such  other  losels  haue  [J;P^'"i,j 
there  peruerted,  may,  through  feare  of  thy  deed,  be  reconciled  againe  to  that 'thou 
the  vnitie  of  holie  church  ;  and  also  they  that  stand  in  true  faith  of  holie  "'''^^^^^^^ 
chm-ch,  may,  thorough  thy  deed,  be  more  established  therein.  And,  as  if  this  "ejve'^the 
asking  wellpleased  tlie  archbishop,  hee  saide  :  By  my  thrift,  this  hartie  praier,  truth 
and  feruent  request,  shall  be  thought  on.  was'of-' 

But  certainlie,    nother  the  praier   of   the   men   of   Shrewcsburie,    nor   the  fered 
manasing  of  the  archbishop  made  me  any  thinge  afraide ;  but  in  rehearsing  of  thee, 
this  malice,  and  in  the  hearing  of  it,   my  heart  greatly  reioced,  and  yet  doth. 
I  thanke  God  for  the  grace  that  I  then  thought,  and  yet  thinke,  shall  come  to 
all  the  church  of  God  here-thorow,  by  the  speciall  mercifull  doing  of  the  Lord. 
And,  as  hauing  no  dread  of  the  malice  of  tyrants,  by  trusting  stedfastlie  in  the 
helpe  of  the  Lord,  with  full  purpose  for  to  knowledge  the  soothfastnesse,  and 
to  stand  thereby  after  my  cunning  and  power,  I  said  to  the  archbishop  :  Sir, 
if  the  truth  of  Gods  word  might  now  be  accepted  as  it  should  be,  T  doubt  not 
to  proue  by  likelie  euidence,  that  they  that  are  famed  to  be  out  of  the  laith  of 
holie  chiu-ch  in  Shrewsburie,  and  in  other  places  also,  are  in  the  true  faith  of 
holie    church.'     For,  as   their  wordes  sound,  and  their  workes  shew  to  mans 
iudgement  (dreading  and  loiung  faithfullie  God),  their  Avill,  their  desire,  their 
loue,  and  their  busines,  are  most  set  to  dread  to  offend  God,  and  to  loue  for  to  a  sure 
please  him  in  true  and  faithful  keeping  of  his  commandements.  And  agjiin,  they  *J^^^?^'" 
that  are  said  to  be  in  the  faith  of  holie  church  in  Shrewcsburie  and  in  other  truth  con- 
places,  by  open  euidence  of  their  proud,  enuious,  malicious,  couetous,  lecherous,  foundeili 
and  other  foule  wordes  and  workes,  neither  know,  nor  haue  will  to  know,  nor  J.'j.^  ™j?- 
to  occupie  their  wits  truely  and  effectuoushe  in  the  right  faith  of  holie  church,  tyrants. 
Wherefore  all  these,  nor  none  that  foUowe  their  maners,  shall  any  time  come 
verihe  in  the  faith  of  holie  church,  except  they  inforce  them  more  truely  to 
come  in  the  waie  which  now  they  despise.    For  these  men  and  women  that  are 
nowe  called  faithfull,  and  holden  iust,  nother  knowe,  nor  will  exercise  themselfe 
to  know  (of  faithfulnesse),  one  commandment  of  God.     And  thus  full  many  men 
and  women  nowe,  and  speciallie  men  that  are  named  to  be  principall  lims  of  lioly 
church,  stir  God  to  great  wrath,  and  deserue  his  curse  for  that  they  call  or  hold  them 
iust  men,  which  are  fid  vniust ;  as  their  vicious  words,  their  great  customable  swear- 
ing, and  their  slanderous  and  shamful  workes,  shewe  openlie  andwitnesse.    And  Shrews- 
therefore  such  vicious  men  and  vniust,  in  their  owne  confusion,  call  them  vniust  ^^J>;^^ 
men  and  women,  which,  after  their  power  and  cunning,  busie  themsclues  to  thou 
Hue  iustlie  after  the  commandment  of  God.     And  where  Sir  ye  sale,   that  I  [{jrnfrom 
haue  distroublcd  the  communaltie  of  Shrewcsburie,  and  many  other  men  and  ^d  ways, 
women    with  my  teaching  :  if  this  be,  it  is  not  to  be  wondred  of  wise  men,  thou 
since  all  the  connnunaltie  of  the  cittie  of  Jerusalem  was  distroubled  of  Christes  J'^^gYve"* 
owne  person,  tht't  was  verie  God  and  man,  and  ye  most  prudent  preacher  that  tj^e  truth. 
euer  was  or  shall  be.     And  also  all  the  synagogue  of  Nazareth   was  moued  jerusa- 
against  Christ,  and  so  fulfilled  with  ire  towards  him  for  his  preaching,  that  the  {^^™  [™"- 
men   of  the  synagogue  rose  vp  and  cast  Christ  out  of  their  citie,  and  led  him  jjig 
vp  to  the  top  of  a  mountain  for  to  cast  him  downe  there  headlong :  also  ac-  preaching 
cordinglie  hereto,  the  Lord  witnesscth  by  Moises,  that  he  shall  put  dissention  °^  '^l^'"'*^- 
betwixt  his  people,  and  the  people  that  contrarieth  and  pursueth  his  people. 
Who,  Sir,  is  he  that  shall  preach  the  truth  of  Gods  worde  to  the  vnfaithfull 
people,  and  shall  let  the  soothfastnesse  of  the  gospell,  and  the  prophecie  of  God 
Almightie,  to  be  fidfilled. 

And  the  archbishop  saide  to  me :    It  foUoweth  of  these  thy  words,  that  thou 
and  such  other  thinkest,  that  yee  do  right  well  for  to  preach  and  teach  as  ye 

(1)  The  Romish  church  must  he  established,  by  persecuting  of  true  preachers. 

(2)  If  the  touch-stoue  might  try,  truth  should  he  known. 


2G0  THE    EXAMINATION    OF    WILLIAM    TIIOHI'E. 

Henry     doc,  without  authoritic  of  any  bishop.     For  you  presume,  that  the  Lord  hatli 
^^-      cliosen  you  only  for  to  preach,  as  faithfull  disciples  and  speciall  followers  of 
A    lA      Christ. 

1 400'         ^^^^  ^  ^^^^ '  ^"'  ^y  authoritie  of  Gods  law,  and  also  of  saints  and  doctors,  I  am 
learned  to  deeine,  that  it  is  euerie  priests  office  and  duty  for  to  preach  husilie, 


The  word  freely,  and  truelie  the  worde  of  God.    For  no  doubt  euerie  priest  shoidd  pui-jjose 
of  God      f}j.gt  ill  ]iis  soule,  and  couet,  to  take  the  order  of  priesthoode  cheefly  for  to  make 
truly  to  be  knowne  to  the  people  the  worde  of  God,  after  his  cunning  and  power;  approu- 
preached.  ing  his  words  euer  to  be  true  by  his  vertuous  workes,  and  for  this  intent  we 
suppose  that  bishops  and  other  prelates  of  liolie  church  should  chieflie  take  iuid 
vse  their  prelacie,  and  for  the  same  cause  bishoppes  shoidd  giue  to  priests  their 
If  this       orders.     For  bishoppes  shoidd  accept  no  man  to  priesthood,  except  that  he  had 
h^^dteen  g^ood will  and  full  purpose,  and  were  well  disposed,  and  well  learned  to  preach. 
well  fol-     Wherefore  Sir,  by  the  bidding  of  Christ,  and  by  the  example  of  his  most  holy 
worm'iiad  ''"i"^'  ^"^^  ^'^^  '•'y  the  witnessing  of  his  holie  apostles  and  prophets,  wee  are 
not  been    bouud,  vnder  full  great  paine,  to  exercise  vs,  after  our  cunning  and  power  (as 
brout'ht     euerie  priest  is  likewise  charged  of  God),  to  fulfill  duelie  the  office  of  preesthood. 
darkness   ^^  presume  not  here  of  our  seines  for  to  be  esteemed  (neither  in  our  owne 
by  blind    reputation  nor  in  none  other  mans)  faithfull  dysciples,  and  speciall  followers  of 
Dr^fts™*^  Christ.    But  Sir,  as  I  said  to  you  before,  we  deeme  this,  by  authoritie  chiefly  of 
Gods  word,  that  it  is  the  chiefe  dutie  of  euerie  priest,  to  busie  tliem  faithfullie 
to  make  the  law  of  God  knowne  to  his  people,  and  so  to  commune  the  com- 
mandment of  God  charitablie,  how  that  we  may  best,  where,  when,  and  to  whom 
that  euer  we  may,  is  our  verie  dutie.    And,  for  the  will  and  businesse  that  we 
tuous  ^"^    ^^^  °^  *1"^  ''^^t  ^^  ^°^  iustlie  our  office  thorough  the  stirring  and  speciall  helpe 
prayer,      (as  we  trust)  of  God,  hoping  stedfastlie  in  his  mercie,  we  desire  to  be  the  faith- 
trant  in  disciples  of  Christ :  and  we  pray  this  gratious  Lord,  for  his  liolie  name,  that 

all  minis-  he  make  vs  able  to  please  him  with    deuoiit  prayers,  and  charitable  priestlie 
ters.  works,  that  we  may  obtain  of  him  to  follow  him  thankefully. 

And  the  archbishop  said  to  me :  Lewd  losel !  whereto  makest  thou  such  vaine 

reasons  to  me  ?     Asketh  not  Saint  Paule,  How  should  priestes  preach,  except 

they  be  sent  ?     But  I  sent  thee  neuer  to  preach ;  for  thy  venemous  doctrine  is 

so  knowne  throughout  England,  that  no  bishop  will  admit  thee  to  preach  by 

preached   witnessing  of  their  letters.    Why  then,  lewd  idiot !  wilt  thou  presume  to  preach, 

without     since  thou  art  not  sent,  nor  licensed  of  thy  soueraign  to  preach !    Saith  not 

*'}6     ,      Saint  Paide,  that  subiects  ought  to  obey  their  souereignes,  and  not  onelie  good 

licens^.^     and  vertuous,  but  also  tyrants  that  are  vicious  ? 

He  an-  And  I  said  to  the  archbishop :  Sir,  as  touching  your  letter  of  licence  or  other 

to  the"^     bishops,  which  ye  say  we  shoidde  haue  to  witnesse  that  we  were  able  to  be  sent 

question    for  to  preach,  wee  knowe  well  that  neither  you  Sir,  nor  any  other  bishop  of  this 

concern-    land,  will  grant  to  vs  any  such  letters  of  licence,  but  if  we  should  oblige  vs  to 

letter  of    y^"'  '^^^  ^^  other  bishops,  by  vnlefull  oathes,  for  to  passe  not  the  bounds  and 

license,     termes  which  ye  Sir,  or  other  bishops,  will  limit  to  vs.    And  since  in  this  matter 

conveni-    y^^^'^'  termes  be  some  too  large,  and  some  too  strait,  we  dare  not  oblige  vs  thus 

ences  of    to  bee  bounden  to  you  for  to  keepe  the  termes,  which  you  wil  limit  to  vs,  as 

seeking     you  doe  to  friers  and  such  other  preachers  ;  and  therefore,  though  we  haue  not 

bishop's     your  letter  Sir,  nor  letters  of  anie  other  bishops  written  with  inke  vpon  parch- 

letter  or    ment,  we  dare  not  therefore  leaue  the  office  of  preaching  (to  which  preaching, 

license.     g^||  priests,  after  their  cunning  and  power,  are  bounden  by  diners  testimonies  of 

Gods  lawe,  and  great  doctors)  without  anie  mention  making  of  bishoppes  letters. 

For,  as  mikle  as  we  haue  taken  vpon  vs  the  office  of  priesthood  (though  we  are 

vnworthie  thereto),  we  come  and  purpose  to  fulfill  it  with  the  help  of  God,  by 

authoritie  of  his  owne  lawe,   and   by  witnesse  of  great   doctors  and  saints, 

accordinglie  hereto  trusting  stedfastlie  in  the  mercie  of  God.  For  that  he  com- 

mandeth  vs  to  doe  the  office  of  priesthood,  he  will  be  our  sufficient  letters  and 

witnesse,  if  we,  by  example  of  his  holie  lining  and  teaching,  sjieciallie  occupie 

The  wit-    vs  faithfullie  to  do  our  office  iustlie :  yea  the  people  to  whom  we  preach  (be 

the^  "^      *^^^y  faithfull  or  vnfaithfull)  shall  be  our  letters,  that  is,  our  witnes  bearers ;  for 

preachers  the  truth  where  it  is  sowne,  may  not  be  vnwitnessed.     For  all  y'  are  conuerted 

is  the        and  saued  by  learning  of  Gods  word,  and  by  working  thereafter,  are  witnesse 

orthe'ibl-  bearers,  that  the  truth  and  soothfastnesse  which  they  heard  and  did  after,  is 

lowers       cause  of  their  saluation.     And  again,  all  vnfaithfull  men  and  women  which 

heard  the  truth  told  out  to  them,   and  would  not  do  thereafter :  also  all  they 


TWO    KINU.S    OF    OUEVING.  '^Ql 

that  niii^ht  haue  lieard  tlie  truth  and  would  not  hearc  it,  because  tliat  they  would    ifmr;/ 
not  do  thereafter.     All   these  shall  beai'e  witnes  agahist  theinselucs,  and  the      ^''• 
truth  which  they  would  not  lieare,  or  else  heard  it  and  dc.sj)iscd  to  doe  there-     .    ,^ 
after,  through  tlicir  vnfaithfulnesse,  is  and  shal  he  cause  of  their  damnation.    ,.'^q* 
Therefore  Sir,  since  this  aforesaid  witnessing  of  (iod,  and  of  diners  saintes  and L_ 


doctflrs,  and  of  all  the  people,   good  and  euili,  sutKceth  to  all  true  preachers, 
we  thinke  that  we  doe  not  the  oitice  of  priesthood,  if  that  we  leaue  our  preach- 
ing ;  because  tliat  we  haue  not,  or  may  not  haue,  dulie  bishoppcs  letters,  to 
witnesse  that  we  arc  sent  of  them   to  preach.     This  sentence  approuctli  Saint 
l*aule,  where  he  speaketh  of  himselfe,  and  of  faitlifull  apostles  and  disciples, 
saieing  thus  :  We  need  no  letters  of  commendations,  as  some  preachers  do, 
which  j)reach  for  couetousnesse  of  temporall   goods,  and  for  mens  praising,  xwo 
And  where  ye  saie  Sir,  that  Paide  biddeth  subiects  obeic  their  soueraignes,  that  kinds  of 
is  sooth,  and  may  not  be  denied.     But  there  is  two  maner  of  soueraignes,  ver-  HJl^g 
tuous  soueraignes  and  vicious  tyrantcs.     Therefore,   to  these  last  soueraignes,  lie  mean 
neither  men  nor  women  that  be  subiect,  owe  to  obey  in  two  manors.     To  ver-  j^"^  f'j" 
tuous  soueraigns  and  charitable,  subiects  owe  to  obeie  wilfullie  and  gladlie,  in  t,e  unvir- 
liearing  of  their  good  counsell,  in  consenting  to  their  charitable  biddinges,  and  tuous. 
in  working  after  their  fruitfull  workes. 

This  sentence  Paide  approueth  where  he  saith  to  subiects  :  Be  ye  mindfull  of 
your  soueraignes,  that  speake  to  you  the  word  of  God;  and  followe  you  the  faith 
of  them,  whose  conuersation  you  knowe  to  be  vertuous.     For,  as  Paule  saith 
after,   these  soueraignes,  to  whom  subiects  owe  to  obey  in  following  of  their 
maners,  work  busilie,  in  holie  studieng,  how  they  may  withstand  and  destroie 
vices,  iirst  in  themselues,  and  after  in  all  their  subiects,  and  howe  they  male 
best  plant  in  them  vertues.     Also  these  soueraignes,  make  deuout  and  feruent  Two 
praiers  for  to  piuxhase  grace  of  God,  that  they  and  their  subiects  male,  ouer  all  manner  of 
thing,  dread  to  offend  him,  and  to  loue  for  to  please  him.     Also  these  soue-  ]  7n'foi- 
raignes  to  whom  Paule  biddeth  vs  obeie,  as  it  is  saide  before,  line  so  vertuouslie,  lowing 
that  all  they  that  will  line  well,  male  take  of  them  good  example,  to  know  and  \^f}^ ''"' 
to  keej)  the  connnandements  of  God.    But,  in  this  foresaid  wise,  subiectes  ought  exam- 
not  to  obeie,  nor  to  be  obedient  to  tyrants,  while  they  are  vicious  tyrants,  since  pies. 
their  will,  their  counsell,  their  biddings,  and  their  workes  are  so  vicious,  that  they  suirJrinK 
ought  to  be  hated  and  left.    And  though  such  tyrants  be  maisterfuU  and  cruell  in  tlieir 
boasting  and  menacing,  in  oppressions  and  diners  punishings,  S.  Peter  biddeth  the  w'^",'?*^^' 
seruants  of  such  tyrants,  to  obeie  meeklie  such  tyrants,  suffering  patientlie  their  soned.my 
malicious  cruelnesse.    But  Peter  counselleth  not  anie  seruant  or  subiect,  to  obeie  iprd,  and 
to  anie  lord,  or  prince,  or  soueraign,  in  anie  thing  that  is  not  pleasing  to  God.    gje^jf 

And  the  archbishop  saide  vnto  me  :  If  a  soueraigne  bid  his  subiect  do  that  thing 
that  is  vicious,  this  soueraigne  herein  is  to  blame ;  but  the  subiect,  for  his  obedience, 
deseruetli  meede  of  God  :  for  obedience  pleaseth  more  to  God  than  anie  sacrifice. 

And  I  said:  Samuel  the  prophet  said  to  Saule,  the  wicked  king,  that  God 
was  more  jjleased  with   the  obedience  of  his  commandement,  then  with  anie 
sacrifice  of  beasts.    But  Dauid  saith,  and  S.  Paule,  and  S.  Gregorie  accorilinglie  ^'^'^^'''jy* 
together,  that  not  onlie  they  that  do  euill,  are  worthie  of  death  and  damnation  ;  to  be 
but  also  they  that  consent  to  euill  doers.     And  Sir,  tlie  law  of  holie  church  given,  ex- 
teacheth  in  the  decrees,  that  no  seruant  to  his  lord,  nor  childe  to  the  father  or  jJifn^"' 
mother,  nor  wife  to  her  husband,  nor  monke  to  his  abbot,  ought  to  obeie,  except  lawful, 
in  lefull  things,  and  lawfnll. 

And  the  archbishop  saide  to  me:  All  these  alledginges  that  thou  bringest  All  is  pre- 
forth  are  not  else  but  proud  ])resuinj)tuousnesse ;  for  hereby  thou  inforcest  thee  smnp''"" 
to  prone,  that  thou  and  such  other  are  so  inst,  that  ye  ought  not  to  obeie  to  standcth 
prelates.  And  thus,  against  the  learning  of  Saint  Paule  that  tcacheth  you  not  against 
to  preach  but  if  ye  were  sent,  of  your  owne  authoritie  ye  will  go  forth  and  J""i^J^^'^''' 
preach,  and  doe  what  ye  list.  ambition. 

And  I  said  :  Sir,  presenteth  not  cuerie  priest  the  office  of  the  apostles,  or  the 
office  of  the  disciples  of  Christ?  And  tlie  archbishop  said,  Yea.  And  I  said  : 
Sir,  as  the  tenth  chapter  of  Mattlicw,  and  the  last  chapter  of  Mark  witnesseth, 
Christ  sent  his  apostles  for  to  preach.  And  tlij  tenth  chapter  of  Luke  witnesseth, 
that  Christ  sent  his  two  and  seuentie  disciples  for  to  preach,  in  euerie  place  that 
Christ  was  to  come  to  :  and  S.  Gregorie,  in  the  common  lawe,  saith,  that  euerie 
man  that  goeth  to  priesthoode,  taketh  ^'pon  him  the  office  of  preaching :  for,  as 
he  saith,  that  priest  stirreth  God  to  great  wrath,  of  whose  mouth  is  not  heard 


THE    KXAMINATION    OF    WILLIAM    THOKPK. 


Henni 
If.' 

A.D. 

1409. 

Priests 

that 

preach 

not,  1)6 

slayers 

of  the 

l)eoyle, 


Priests 
not  only 
sent, 
but  com- 
manded 
to  preach. 
Whatso- 
ever a 
man 
doth, 
leavinji 
that  un- 
done 
whiclihe 
is  chiefly 
bound  to 
do,  is  sin. 
Yet  this 
bishop 
plucketh 
him  not 
by  the 
beard, 
nor  bum 
eth  otfliii 
hand,  as 
Bouner 
did. 


Two 

parts  of 

holy 

church. 


the  voice  of  preacliing ;  and,  as  other  more  gloscs  vpon  Ezechiel  witnesse, 
that  tlie  priest  that  preacheth  not  husilie  to  the  people,  sliall  be  partaker  of  their 
damnation  that  perish  through  his  default.  And,  though  the  people  be  saued 
by  other  speciall  grace  of  God  then  by  the  priestes  preaching,  yet  the  priests, 
in  that  they  are  ordeincd  to  preach,  and  preach  not,  as  before  God,  they  are 
mansleyers.  For,  as  farre  as  in  them  is,  such  priestes  as  preach  not  busilie  and 
truelie,  sleieth  all  the  people  ghostlie,  in  that  they  withholde  from  them  the 
word  of  God,  that  is  y''  life  and  sustenance  of  mens  soules.  And  S.  Isidore 
said,  priestes  shall  be  damned  for  wickednesse  of  the  people,  if  they  teach  not 
them  that  are  ignorant,  or  blame  not  them  that  are  sinners.  For  all  the  worke 
or  businesse  of  priestes  standeth  in  preaching  and  teaching ;  that  they  edifie  all 
men,  as  well  by  cunning  of  faith,  as  by  discipline  of  workes,  that  is,  vertuous 
teaching ;  and,  as  y'  gospell  witnesseth,  Christ  sayd  in  his  teaching :  I  am  borne 
and  comen  into  this  worlde,  to  beare  witnesse  to  the  truth  ;  and  he  that  is  of  the 
truth,  heareth  my  voice. 

'i'hen  Sir,  since  by  the  word  of  Christ  speciallie,  that  is  his  voice,  priests  are 
commanded  to  preach,  and  whatsoeuer  priest  that  it  be,  that  hath  not  good  will 
and  full  pm-pose  to  doe  thus,  and  ableth  not  himselfe,  after  his  cunning  and 
power,  to  doe  his  office  by  the  example  of  Christ  and  of  his  apostles,  whatsoeuer 
other  thing  that  he  doth,  displeaseth  God.  For  lo,  S.  Gregorie  saith.  That 
thing  left,  that  a  man  is  bound  chieflie  to  doe,  whatsoeuer  other  thing  that  a 
man  dooth,  it  is  unthankfidl  to  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  therefore,  saith  Lincolne, 
the  priest  that  preacheth  not  the  word  of  God,  though  he  be  seen  to  haue  none 
other  default,  he  is  Antichrist  and  Sathanas,  a  night  theefe  and  a  daie  theefe, 
a  sleyer  of  soules,  and  an  angell  of  light  turned  into  darkenesse.  Wherefore 
Sir,  these  authorities  and  other  well  considered,  I  deeme  my  selfe  damnable,  if 
I,  either  for  pl,easure  or  displeasure  of  any  creature,  applie  mee  not  diligentlie 
to  preach  the  word  of  God.  And  in  the  same  damnation  I  deeme  all  those 
priestes,  which,  of  good  piu-pose  and  will,  enforce  them  not  busilie  to  do  thus, 
and  also  all  them  that  haue  purpose  or  will  to  let  any  pi'iest  of  this  businesse. 

And  the  archbishop  said  to  those  three  clearks  that  stoode  before  him :  Loe 
Sirs,  this  is  the  maner  and  businesse  of  this  losell  and  such  other,  to  picke  out 
such  sharpe  sentences  of  holy  Scripture  and  doctors,  to  maintaine  their  sect  and 
lore  against  the  ordinance  of  holy  church.  And  therefore,  losell !  it  is  thou 
that  couetest  to  haue  again  the  Psalter  that  I  made  to  bee  taken  from  thee  at 
Canturburie,  to  record  shaqje  verses  against  vs.  But  thou  shalt  neuer  haue 
that  Psalter,  nor  none  other  booke,  till  that  I  know  that  thy  hart  and  thy  mouth 
accord  fuUie,  to  be  gouerned  by  holy  chiu'ch. 

And  I  said.  Sir,  all  my  will  and  power  is,  and  euer  shall  be  (I  trust  to  God), 
to  be  gouerned  by  holie  church. 

And  the  archbishop  asked  me  what  was  holie  church. 

And  I  said :  Sir,  1  told  you  before,  what  was  holy  churche  :  but  since  ye  aske 
me  this  demand,  I  cal  Christ  and  his  saints,  holie  church. 

And  the  archbishop  said  unto  me  :  I  wote  well  that  Christ  and  his  saints  are 
holie  church  in  heauen ;  but  what  is  holie  church  in  earth  1 

And  I  said,  Sir :  though  holie  church  be  euery  one  in  charitie,  yet  it  hath 
two  parts.  The  first  and  principall  part  hath  ouercomen  perfectlie  all  the 
wretchednesse  of  this  life,  and  raigneth  ioyfiillie  in  heauen  with  Christ.  And 
the  other  parte  is  here  yet  in  earth,  busilie  and  continuallie  fighting',  day  and 
night,  against  temptations  of  the  fiend,  forsaking  and  hating  the  prosperity  of 
this  world,  despising  and  withstanding  their  fleshlie  lustes ;  which  onelie  are  the 
pilgrimes  of  Christ,  wandering  toward  heauen  by  stedfast  faith  and  grounded 
hope,  and  by  perfect  charitie.  For  these  heauenlie  pilgrimes  may  not,  nor  wil 
not,  be  letted  of  their  good  purpose,  by  the  reason  of  any  doctors  discording 
from  holie  Scripture,  nor  by  the  floudes  of  any  tribulation  temporall,  nor  by 
the  winde  of  any  pride,  of  boast,  or  of  manasing  of  any  creature  ;  for  they  are 
all  fast  grounded  vppon  the  sure  stone,  Christ,  hearing  his  worde  and  louing  it, 
exercising  them  faithfullie  and  continuallie  in  all  their  wits  to  doe  thereafter. 

And  the  archbishop  said  to  his  clerkes  :  See  ye  not  how  his  hart  is  indurate, 
and  how  he  is  trauelled  with  the  deuill,  occupying  him  thus  busilie  to  alledge 
such  sentences  to  maintaine  his  errors  and  heresies  ?  Certaine,  thus  he  would 
occupie  vs  here  all  day,  if  we  would  suffer  him ! 

One  of  the  clerkes  answered :  Sir,  he  saide  right-nowe,  that  this  certification 


HIS     UELIEF    IN    THE    1-ORu's    SUPPEll.  f263 

that  came  to  you  from  Shrewesburie,  is  vntrulie  forged  against  him.  Therefine,  H.-nnj 
Sir,  appose  you  him  now  here  in  all  the  points  which  are  certified  against  him,      '^'■ 

and  bo  we  shall  lu-arc  of  his  owne  mouth  his  answcres,  and  witnesse  them.  .    .^ 

And  the  archbishop  took  the  certification  in  his  hande,  and  looked- thereon  -lA^n 
awhile,  and  then  he  said  to  me:   Loe  here  it  is  certified  against  thee,  by  worthy 


men  and  faithliill   of  Shrewesburie,    that  thou  preachest  there  openlie,  in  S.  Well 
Chads  church,  that  the  sacrament  of  the  aultar  was  material  bread  after  the  fonvard 
consecration  :  what  saiest  tliou  ?  was  this  truelie  preached  ?  master 

And  1  said  :  Sir,  I  tell  you  trulie  that  I  touched  nothing  tliere  of  the  sacra-  '^'®''''- 
ment  of  the  aulter,  but  in  this  wise,  as  I  will,  with  God's  grace,  tell  you  here.  As 
I  stood  there  in  the  ])ulpit,  busying  me  to  teach  the  commandment  of  God,  there  The  vir- 
knilled  a  sacring  bell,  and  therefore  mickle  people  turned  away  hastilie,  and  ^Y-^  "•" 
with  noise  ran  fro  towards  me.     And  I,  seeing  this,  said  to  them  thus :  Good  meiu^"'* 
men !  ye  were  better  to  stand  here  still  and  to  heare  God's  word  ;  for  certes  the  standeth 
vertue  and  the  meede  of  the  most  holie  sacrament  of  the  aulter  standeth  mickle  j",J'!,^ 
more  in  the  beleefe  thereof  that  ye  ought  to  haue  in  your  soule,  then  it  doth  in  more' 
the  outward  sight  thereof.    And  therefore,  ye  were  better  to  stand  still,  quietlie  th;'"  i" 
to  heare  God's  worde,  because  that  thi-ough  the  hearing  thereof,  men  come  to  outward 
very  true  beleefe.     And  otherwise,  Sir,  I  am  certain  I  spake  not  there  of  the  sign, 
worthie  sacrament  of  the  aulter. 

And  the  archbishop  saide  to  me  :  I  beleue  thee  not,  whatsoeuer  thou  saist, 
since  so  wor.shipfuU  men  haue  witnessed  thus  against  thee.  But,  since  thou  de- 
niest  that  thou  sayedst  thus  there,  what  saist  thou  now  ?  resteth  there,  after 
the  consecration  in  the  hoast,  materiall  bread  or  no  ? 

And  I   said:  Sir,    I  know  in  no  place  in  holie  Scripture  where  this  termc  Material 
materiall  bread  is  written  ;  and  therefore,  Sir,  when  I  speak  of  this  matter,   I  ^''^'•^'■^■ 
vse  not  to  speake  of  material  bread. 

Then  the  archbishop  said  to  me  :  How  teachest  thou  men  to  beleeue  in  this 
sacrament  ? 

And  I  said :  Sir,  as  I  beleeue  my  selfe,  so  I  teach  other  men. 

He  said :  Tell  out  plainlie  thy  beleefe  thereof. 

And  I  saide,  with  my  protestation  :  Sir,  I  beleue  that  the  night  before  that 
Christ  Jesu  woulde  suffer  (wilfuUie)  passion  for  mankinde  on  the  morne  after, 
he  tooke  bread  in  his  holie  and  most  worshipfiill  hands,  lifting  vppe  his  eies, 
and  giuing  thankes  to  God  his  Father,  blessed  this  bread  and  brake  it,  and  gaue 
it  to  his  disciples,  saying  to  them  :  Take  eate  of  this  all  you,  this  is  my  bodie. 
And  that  this  is  and  ought  to  be  all  mens  beleefe,  Matthew,  Marke,  Luke,  and 
Paule,  witnesseth.  Other  beleefe  Sir,  I  haue  none,  nor  will  haue,  nor  teach ; 
for  I  beleeue,  that  this  sulRceth  in  this  matter.  For  in  this  beleefe,  with  God's 
grace,  I  purpose  to  Hue  and  die,  knowledging  as  I  beleeue  and  teach  other  men 
to  beleeue,  that  the  worshipfuU  sacrament  of  the  aultar,  is  the  sacrament  oi 
Christ's  flesli  and  his  bloud  in  forme  of  bread  and  wine. 

And  the  archbishop  saide  to  me  :  It  is  sooth  that  this  sacrament  is  very 
Christes  bodie  in  forme  of  bread ;  but  thou  and  thy  sect  teachest  it  to  be  sub- 
stance of  bread.     Thinke  you  this  true  teaching  ? 

And  I  said  :  Neither  I,  nor  any  other  of  the  sect  that  yee  damne,  teach  any 
otherwise  then  I  haue  tolde  you,  nor  beleeue  otherwise,  to  my  knowing.  Neuer- 
thelesse  Sir,  I  aske  of  you  for  charitie,  that  ye  will  tell  me  here  plainely,  howe 
yee  shall  vndei'stand  the  text  of  Saint  Paule,  where  he  saitli  thus  :  This  thing  ,^^^ 
feele  you  in  yourself,  that  is  in  Christ  Jesu,  while  he  was  in  the  forme  of  God.  papists 
Sir,  calleth  not  Paule  here  the  forme  of  God,  the  substance  or  kind  of  God  ?  also  ''^^'^  "" 
Sir,  saieth  not  the  church,  in  the  houres  of  the  moste  blessed  virgine  accordinglie  defence 
hereto,  where  it  is  wTitten  thus :  Thou  author  of  health  !  remember,  that  some-  for  them 
time  thou  tooke  of  the  vndeftled  virgin,  the  forme  of  our  bodie  I     Tell  me  for  J'^g  ""^* 
charitie,  therefore,  whether  the  fornie  of  our  bodie  be  called  here  the  kind  of  church, 
our  bodie  or  no  / 

And  the  archbishop  said  to  me :  Wouldest  thou  make  mee  to  declare  this 
text  after  thy  purpose,  since  the  church  now  hath  determined,  that  there 
abideth  no  substance  of  bread  after  the  consecration,  in  the  sacrament  of  the 
aulter?  Beleeuest  thou  not  this  ordinance  of  the  church  ? 

And  I  said :  Sir,  whatsoeuer  prelates  haue  ordained  in  the  churche,  our 
beleefe  standeth  euer  whole.  I  haue  not  heard,  that  the  ordinance  of  men 
vnder  beleefe,  shoidd  bee  put  into  beleefe. 


264  THE    EXAMINATION    OF    WILLIAM    THOllI'E. 

Henry  And  the  archbishop  said  to  me  :  If  thou  hast  not  learned  this  before,  learne 
-'^'-  now  to  knowe  that  thou  art  out  of  beleefe,  if  in  this  matter  and  other,  thou 
.  ^  beleeuest  not  as  the  hohe  church  beleeuest.  What  say  doctors  treating  of  this 
sacrament  ? 

And  I  said :  Sir,  Saint  Paule,  that  was  a  great  doctor  of  hohe  church,  speak- 


1409. 


Every  ing  to  the  people,  and  teaching  them  in  the  right  beleefe  of  this  most  holie 
ordinance  sacrament,  calleth  it  bread,  that  we  breake  :  and  also  in  the  canon  of  the  masse 
church-  after  the  consecration,  this  moste  worthy  sacrament  is  called  holie  bread ;  and 
men  euerie  priest  in  this  land,  after  that  he  hath  receiued  this  sacrament,  saith  in  this 

not  our  '^^^6  ■  That  thing  that  we  haue  taken  with  our  mouth,  we  pray  God  that  wee 
faith.  may  take  it  with  a  pure  and  cleane  minde.  That  is,  as  I  vnderstand,  we  praie 
^''^t  GoA  that  we  may  receiue,  through  verie  beleefe,  this  holie  sacrament  worthily, 
doctors  And  Sir,  Saint  Augustine  saith :  That  thing  that  is  seene,  is  bread  ;  but  that 
of  the  mens  faith  asketh  to  be  informed  of,  is  very  Christs  body.  And  also,  Fulgeuce, 
apostles.  ''^  cntentife  doctor  saith  :  As  it  were  an  error  to  say  that  Christ  was  but  a  sub- 
St.  Paul,  stance,  that  is  verie  man,  and  not  verie  God,  or  to  say  that  Christ  was  verie 
the  canon  God,  and  not  very  man ;  so  is  it  (this  doctor  saith)  an  errour  to  saie,  that  the 
mass\nd  sacrament  of  the  aultar  is  but  a  substance.  Also  Sir,  accordingly  hereto,  in  the 
St.  Aus-  Secret  of  the  mid  masse  on  Christmase  dales,  it  is  written  thus  :  '  Idem  refulsit 
tin,  call-  Deus,  sic  terrena  substantia  nobis  conferat  quod  diuinum  est;'  which  sentence, 
bread.  Sir,  with  the  secret  of  the  fourth  ferie,  '  quatuor  temporum  Sejitembris  :'  I  pray 
My  lord    you,  sir,  declare  here  openlie  in  English. 

can  revile  And  the  archbishop  said  to  jne :  I  perceiue  well  enough  where  about  thou 
can  de-  ^  '•^^t,  and  howe  the  deuill  blindeth  thee,  that  thou  may  not  vnderstand  the  ordi- 
clare  but  nance  of  holie  church,  nor  consent  thereto.  But  I  command  thee  now,  answere 
a  little,  j^g  shortlie :  Beleuest  thou  that  after  the  consecration  of  this  foresaid  sacra- 
hi'm'^up     iiient,  there  abideth  substance  of  bread,  or  not  ? 

my  lord.  And  I  saide :  Sir,  as  I  vnderstande,  it  is  all  one  to  grant  or  beleeue,  that  there 
dwelleth  substance  of  bread,  and  to  grant  and  to  beleeue,  that  this  most  worthie  sa- 
crament of  Christs  owne  bodie  is  accident  without  subiect.i  But  Sir,  for  as  niickle 
as  your  asking  passeth  my  vnderstanding,  I  dare  neither  denie  it  nor  grant  it, 
for  it  is  schoole  matter,  about  which  I  busied  me  neuer  for  to  know ;  and  there- 
fore I  commit  this  terme  '  accidens  sine  subiecto,'  to  those  clerkes  which  delight 
them  so  in  curious  and  subtle  sophistry,because  they  determine  oft  so  diiKcult  and 
strange  matters,  and  wade  and  wander  so  in  them,  from  argument  to  argument, 
with  'pro'  and  '  contra,'  till  that  they  wot  not  where  they  are,  and  vnderstand  not 
themselues.  But  the  shame  that  these  proud  sophisters  haue  to  yeeld  them  to 
men,  and  before  men,  maketh  them  oft  fooles,  and  to  bee  concluded  shamefuUie 
before  God. 
Tem-  And  the  archbishop  said  to  me :  I  purpose  not  to  oblige  thee  to  the  subtle 

1''"'".  .  arguments  of  clerkes,  since  thou  art  vnable  thereto ;  but  I  purpose  to  make  thee 
Tem-        obey  to  the  determination  of  holie  church. 

plum  And  I  said  :    Sir,  by  open  euidence  and  great  witnesse,  a  thousand  yeare 

omini.    ^ffgj.  j.]^g  incarnation  of  Christ,  the  determination  which  I  haue  here  before  you 

church      rehearsed,  was  accept  of  holy  church,  as  sufficient  to  the  saluation  of  all  them 

stood        that  would  beleeue  it  faithfullie,  and  worke  thereafter  charitablie.     But  Sir,  the 

tUMhe      determination  of  this  matter,  which  was  brought  in  since  the  feend  was  loosed 

fiend        by  friar  Thomas  againe,  specialUe  calling  the  most  worshipfuU  sacrament  of 

broke        Christes  owne  bodie  an  accident  without  subiect :  which  terme,  since  I  know  not 

that  Gods  law  approueth  it  in  this  matter,  I  dare  not  grant ;  but  vtterlie  I  denie  to 

make  this  friars  sentence,  or  any  such  other,  my  beleefe,  doe  with  me  God !  what 

thou  wilt. 

It  is  And  the  archbishop  said  to  me  :  Well,  well,  thou  shalt  say  otherwise  or  that 

dfd  ?iot'^   I  leaue  thee.     But  what  saiest  thou  to  this  second  point  that  is  recorded  against 

fly  in  his  thee  by  worthie  men  of  Shrewe.sburie,  saying  that  thou  preachedst  there,  that 

fece,  as     images  ought  not  to  be  worshipped  in  any  wise  ? 

<ji^_  And  I  said  :  Sir,  1  preached  neuer  thus,  nor,  through  Gods  grace,  I  Avill  not 

at  any  time  consent  to  think  nor  to  saie  thus,  neither  priuilie  nor  apertlie.  Yor 
loe,  the  Lorde  witnesseth  by  Moses,  that  the  thinges  which  he  made  were  right 
good,  and  so  then  they  were,  and  yet  they  are  and  shall  be,  good  and  worship- 

(1)  To  grant   real  being  of  the  body  without  bread,  is  as  much  as  to  grant  the  accident  to  be 
without  the  subject. 


THE    SECOND    POINT,    TOUCHING    IMAGES.  265 

full  ill  tluir  kind.     And  therefore,  to  the  end  that  God  made  tlicm,  they  are     ugn^y 
all  praisable  and  worshipfull,  and  spcciallio  man,  that  was  made  after  the  image       I^- 
and  likenosse  of  God,  is  full  worshipfull  in  his  kind,  yea  this  holie  image  that 
is  man,  (Jod  worshippeth.     And  herefore  euerie  man  shoulde  worshippe  otlier,    ,  '     ', 
in  kinde,  and  also  for  heaucnlie  vertues  that  men  vse  charitablie.     And  also  I  ___J_^ 
say,  wood,  tin,  gokle,  siluer,  or  any  other  matter  that  images  are  made  of:  all  Man  a 
these  creatures  arc  worshipfull   in   their  kind,  and  to  the  end  that  God  made  "'"rsh'P- 
them  for.     lint  the  carumg,  eastmg,  and  pamtmg  ot  an  nnagery,  made  witnm  of  guj, 
mans  hand,  albeit  that  this  doing  be  accept  of  man  of  highest  state  and  dignitie, 
and  ordained  of  them  to  be  a  calender  to  lewd  men,  that  neither  can,  nor  wil 
be  learned  to  know  God  in  his  word,  nt^ither  by  his  creatures,  nor  by  his  won- 
derfull  and  diners  workings,   yet  tliis  imagerie  ought  not  to  bee  worshipped  in 
forme,  nor  in  the  likenesse  of  mans  craft.'     Neuerthelesse,  that  euerie  matter 
the  paintei"s  paint  with,   since  it  is  Gods  creature,  ought  to  be  worshipped  in 
the  kinde,  and  to  the  end,  that  God  made  and  ordained  it  to  serne  man. 

Then  the  archbishop  said  to  me  :  I  grant  well  that  no  bodie  ought  to  doe  wor- 
ship to  any  such  images  for  themselues.    But  a  crucifix  ought  to  be  worshipped 
for  the  passion  of  Christ  that  is  painted  therein,  and  so  brought  therethrough  to 
mans  mind :   and  thus  the  images  of  the  blessed  Trinitie,  and  of  the  Virgin  The 
Marie,  Christs  mother,  and  other  images  of  saints,  ought  to  be  worshipped.    For  ■"'•'j-'® 
loe,  earthlie  kings  and  lords,  which  vse  to  send  their  letters  ensealed  witli  their  Trinity, 
armes,  or  with  their  priuie  signet  to  them  that  are  with  them,  are  worship))ed 
of  these  men.'-     For  when  these  men  receiue  their  lords  letters,  in  which  tliey 
see  and  knowe  the  wils  and  biddings  of  the  lords,  in  worship  of  their  lords 
they  do  off  their  caps  to  these  letters.     Wh)'  not  then,  since  in  images  made 
witli  mans  hande  we  may  read  and  know  many  diners  thinges  of  God,  and  of 
his  saintes,  shall  we  not  worship  their  images  ? 

And  I  saide  :  Within  my  foresaid  protestation  I  sale,  that  these  worldlie 
vsages  of  tempoi'all  lawes  that  ye  speake  now  of,  may  be  done  in  case  without 
sinne.  But  this  is  no  similitude  to  worship  images  made  by  mans  hand,  since 
that  Moyses,  Dauid,  Salomon,  Baruch,  and  other  saintes  in  the  Bible,  forbid  so 
plainelie  the  worshipping  of  such  unages.  •* 

Then  the  archbishop  said  to  mee  :  Lewd  losell !  in  the  olde  law,  before  that 
Christ  tooke  mankind,  was  no  likenesse  of  any  person  of  the  Trinitie,  neither 
shewed  to  man  nor  knowne  of  man ;  but  nowe,  since  Christ  became  man,  it  is 
lefull  to  haue  images  to  shew  his  manhood.*  Yea,  thogh  many  men  which  are 
right  great  clerks  and  other  also,  held  it  an  error  to  paint  y"  Trinitie,  I  saie  it 
is  well  don  to  make  and  to  paint  the  Trinitie  in  images  ;^  for  it  is  great  mouing 
of  deuotion  to  men,  to  haue  and  to  behold  the  Trinity,  and  other  images  of  saints, 
earned,  cast,  and  painted.  For  beyond  the  sea,  are  the  best  painters  that  euer 
I  saw.  And  Sirs,  I  tell  you,  this  is  their  maner,  and  it  is  a  good  maner  :^  when 
that  an  image  maker  shall  carue,  cast  in  mold,  or  paint  any  images,  he  shall 
goe  to  a  priest,  and  shriue  him  as  cleane,  as  if  he  should  then  die  ;  and  take 
penance,  and  make  some  certaine  vow  of  fasting,  or  of  praying,  or,pilgrimage3 
doing,  praying  the  priest  speciallie  to  pray  for  him,  that  he  may  haue  grace  to 
make  a  faire  and  deuout  image. 

And  I  said :  Sir,  I  doubt  not,  if  these  painters  that  ye  speak  of,  or  any  other 
painters,  vnderstood  truely  the  text  of  Moyses,  of  Dauid,  of  the  wise  man,  of 
Baruch,  and  of  other  saints  and  doctors,  these  painters  shoulde  bee  moued  to 
shriue  them  to  God  with  full  inward  son-owe  of  heart,  taking  vpon  them  to  doe 
right  sharpe  penance  for  the  sinnefull  and  vaine  craft  of  painting,  earning,  or 
casting  they  had  vsed ;  2'romising  God  faithfullie,  ncuer  to  doe  so  after ;  know- 
ledging  openlie,  before  all  men,  their  reproucable  learning.  And  also  Sir,  these 
priests,  that  shriue  (as  you  doe  saie)  painters,  and  enioyne  them  to  doe  penance, 
and  pray  for  their  speed,  promising  to  them  helpe  of  their  praiers  for  to  be 
curious  in  their  sinnefull  craftes,  sin  herein  more  greeuouslie  then  y"  painters. 
For  these  priests  do  comfort  and  giue  them  counsell  to  doe  that  thing,  which, 

( 1 )  Though  man  accept  the  painting  or  carving  of  images,  yet  is  it  not  the  right  way  to  learn  to 
serve  God. 

(2)  A  similitude  of  the  king's  seal  or  letters,  to  prove  the  worship  of  images. 

(3)  No  similitude  to  be  made  between  earthly  things  and  spiritual,  namely,  when  God's  word 
doth  express  to  the  contrary. 

(4)  So  you  say,  my  lord,  but  God  saith  contrary,  in  his  commandments, 

(5)  Painters'  devotion  and  the  pope's  divinity  do  well  agree. 

(())  Prepnration  of  the  painters  to  make  a  fair  and  a  devout  image. 


266  THE    EXAMINATION    OF     WILLIAM    THORl'K. 

Henry    of  great  paiiie,  yea  vnder  the  paine  of  Gods  cursse,  they  should  vtterlie  forbid 
l^-      them.     For  certes  Sir,  if  the  wonderfiUl  working  of  God,  and  the  hohe  liuing 
and  teaching  of  Christ,  and  of  his  apostles  and  prophetes,  were  made  knowne 
to  the  people  by  holie  liuing  and  true,  and  busie  teaching  of  priests,  these 
things,  Sir,  were  sulficient  bookes  and  kalenders  to  knowe  God  by,  and  his 


A.D. 

1409. 


The  true  saints,  without  any  images  made  with  mans  hande.  But  certes,  the  vicious 
books  and  jjujjjg  Qf  priestes,  and  their  couetousnesse,  are  chief  cause  of  this  error,  and  all 
to  know    other  viciousnesse  that  raigneth  among  the  people. 

God.  Then  the  archbishoppe  said  imto  me  :  I  holde  thee  a  vicious  priest  and  acurst, 

and  all  them  that  are  of  thy  sect,  for  al  priests  of  holie  churche,  and  all  images  that 
mooue  menne  to  deuotion,  thou  and  such  other  goe  about  to  destroy.  Losell ! 
were  it  a  faire  tliinge  to  come  into  the  churche  and  see  therein  none  image  ?* 

And  I  saide  :  Sir,  they  that  come  to  the  church  for  to  pray  deuoutlie  to  the 
Lord  God,  may  in  their  inward  wittes  be  the  more  feruent,  that  all  their  out- 
ward wits  bee  closed  from  all  outward  seeing  and  hearing,  and  from  all  distm-b- 
The  right  ance  and  lettings.     And,   since  Christ  blessed  them  that  saw  him  not  bodilie, 
rciiris-"^  and  haue  beleeued  faithfixllie  in  him,  it  sufficeth  then  to  all  men  (through 
tian.         hearing  and  knowing  of  Gods  woi'd,  and  to  do  thereafter)  for  to  beleeue  in  God, 
though  they  neuer  see  images  made  with  mans  hande  after  any  person  of  the 
Trinitie,  or  of  any  other  saint. 

And  the  archbishop  said  to  me,  with  a  feruent  spirite  :  I  saie  to  thee,  losell ! 
that  it  is  right  well  done  to  make  a«d  to  haue  an  image  of  the  Trinitie ;  yea,^ 
what  saist  thou  ?  is  it  not  a  stirring  thing  to  behold  such  an  image  ? 

And  I  said :  Sir,  ye  saide  right,  now,  that  in  the  olde  lawe,  or  Christ  tooke 
mankind,  no  likenesse  of  any  person  of  the  Trinitie  was  shewed  to  men; 
wherefore  Sir,  yee  saide,  it  was  not  then  lefull  to  haue  images  :  but  now  ye  say, 
since  Christ  is  becomen  man,  it  is  lefull  to  make  and  to  haue  an  image  of  the 
Trinitie,  and  also  of  other  saints.  But  Sir,  this  thing  woulde  I  learn  of  you  • 
since  the  Father  of  heauen,  yea  and  euery  Person  of  the  Trinitie  was,  without 
beginning,  God  Almightie,  and  many  holie  prophets  that  were  deadlie  men  were 
martyred  violentlie  in  the  old  law,  and  also  many  men  and  women  then  died 
confessors  :  why  was  it  not  then  as  lefull  and  necessarie  as  now,  to  haue  made 
an  image  of  the  Father  of  heauen,  and  to  haue  made  and  had  other  images  of 
martyrs,  prophetes,  and  holy  confessors,  to  haue  bene  kalenders  to  aduise  men 
and  moue  them  to  deuotion,  as  ye  saie  that  images  now  doe  P 
Thesyna-  And  the  archbishop  said:  The  sinagogue  of  the  Jewes  had  not  authoritie  to 
gogue  of    approue  those  thinges  as  the  church  of  Christ  hath  now. 

Christ  will      And  I  saide  :  Sir,  Saint  Gregorie  was  a  great  man  in  the  newe  lawe,  and  of 
have  au-    great  dignitie,  and,  as  the  common  lawe  witnesseth,  he  commended  greatlie  a 
tiiorhy      bishop,  in  that  he  forbad  vtterlie  the  images  made  with  mans  hande  should  be 
worshipped. 

And  the  archbishop  said  :  Ungratious  losell !  thou  sauourest  no  more  truth 
then  an  hound.  Since  at  the  rood  at  the  Northdore  at  London,  at  our  Ladie  at 
Walsingham,  and  manie  other  diuers  places  in  England,  are  many  great  and 
praisable  miracles  done,  should  not  the  images  of  such  holie  saints  and  places, 
at  the  reverence  of  God,  and  our  Ladie,  and  other  saints,  be  more  worshipped 
then  other  places  and  images,  where  no  miracles  are  done  ? 

And  I  said :  Sir,  there  is  no  such  vertue  in  any  imagerie,  that  any  images 

should  herefore  be  worshipped ;  wherefore  I  am  certain  that  there  is  no  miracle 

done  of  God,  in  any  place  in  earth,  because  that  any  images  made  with  maimes 

hande   should  be  worshipped.^      And   herfore  Sir,  as  I  preached  openlie  at 

Shrewesburie  and  other  places,  I  saie  now  here,  before  you :   That  no  bodie 

tian  man  shoulde  trust  that  there  were  any  vertue  in  imagery  made  with  mans  hand,  and 

ought  not  therefore  no  bodie  should  vowe  to  them,  nor  seeke  them,  nor  kneele  to  them 

seek°^'or  ""'^  bowe  to  them,  nor  praie  to  them,  nor  offer  any  thing  to  them,  nor  kisse 

bow,'  nor    them,  nor  ensence  them.     For  loe  the  most  worthy  of  such  images,  the  brasen 

pray,  nor  serpent  (by  Moyses  made,  at  Gods  bidding),  the  good  king  Ezechias  destroied 

kisTan      worthilie  and  thankfidly,  and  all  because  it  was  ensenced.     Therefore  Sir,  if 

image.      men  take  good  heede  to  the  writing  and  to  the  learning  of  S.  Augustine,  of 

(1)  A  better  sight,  my  lord,  than  to  see  blind  stocks  there  to  be  worshipped. 

(2)  My  lord,  your  yea  will  not  answer  God's  nay. 

(3)  Note  this,  ye  worshippers  and  maintainers  of  images. 

(4)  Miracles  importing  worship  to  be  done  to  images  may  well  be  suspected  not  to  come  of  God. 


THE    THIRD    POINT,    TOUCHING    PILGRIM AGKS.  267 

S.  Gregovie,  and  of  Saint  John  Chrysostome,  and  of  other  saints  and  doctors,    n^nry 
how  tliey  spake  and  wrote  of  miracles  that  shall  be  done  now  in  the  hist  end  of      ^^- 
the  world,  it  is  to  dreyd,  tliat  for  the  vnfaithfulnes  of  men  and  women,  the  fiend    ^  j^ 
hath  great  power  for  to  worke   many  of  the  miracles  that  nowe  are  done  in     \^qq 

such  places.     For  both  men  and  women  delight  nowe  more  to  heare  and  know  "- 

miracles,  then  they  do  to  know  Gods  word,  or  to  heare  it  effectuously.      Wher-  ^^^^^^^ 
fore,  to  the  great  confusion  of  al  them  that  thus  do,  Christ  saith:  The  genera-  fui„css  of 
tion  of  adulterers  requireth  tokens,  miracles,  and  wonders.     Neuerthelesse,  as  men,  the 
diners  saintes  say,  nowe,  when  the  faith  of  God  is  published  in  Christendome,  ^^^^^  '^^^ 
the  word  of  God  sufficeth  to  mans  sahiation,  without  such  miracles  :  and  thus  rades. 
also  the  word  of  God  sufficeth  to  all  faithful  men  and  women,  without  any  such  ^j-''^';  J^,'"''^ 
images.     But  good  sir,  since  the  Father  of  heauen,  that  is  (Jod  in  his  godhead,  suiticetu 
is  the  most  vnknowne  thing  that  may  be,  and  the  most  wonderftdl  spirit,  hauing  us  to  sal- 
in  it  no  shape  or  likenesse,  and  members  of  any  deadly  creature,  in  what  like-  \^^^out 
nes,  or  what  image,  may  God  the  Father  be  shewed  or  painted  ?  miracles. 

And  the  archbishop  said  :  As  holy  church  »  hath  suffered  the  images  of  the 
Trinitie,  and  al  other  images  to  be  painted  and  shewed,  it  sufficeth  to  them  that 
are  members  of  holie  church.  But  since  thou  arte  a  rotten  member,  cut  away 
from  holie  church,  thou  fauorest  not  the  ordinance  thereof.  But  since  the  dale 
passeth,  leaue  we  tliis  matter. 

And  then  he  said  to  me  :  What  saiest  thou  to  the  third  point  that  is  certified  The  third 
against  thee,  preaching  openly  in  Shreusburie,  that  pilgrimage  is  not  lefuU ;  and  ^}^ff- 
ouer  this,  thou  saidest  that  those  men  and  women  that  go  on  pilgrimages  to  na4e.' 
Canturburie,  to  Beuerley,   to   KarHngton,   to  Walsingam,    and    to    any   such 
other  places,  are  accursed  and  made  foolish,  spending  their  goods  in  wast. 

And   I  said:  Sir,  by  this  certification  I  am   accused  to  you   that  I  shoidd  Two 
teach,  that  no  pilgrimage  is  lefull.     But  I  saide  neuer  thus.     For  I  know  that  pj'fgl-."^ 
there  be  true  pilgrimages  and  lefidl,  and  fidl  pleasant  to  God ;  and  therefore,  mage- 
sir,  howsoeuer  mine  enemies  haue  certified  you  of  me,  I  told  at  Serewsbm'ie  of 
two  maner  of  pilgrimages. 

And  the  archbishop  saide  to  me :  Whome  callest  thou  ti-ue  pilgrimes? 

And  I  said :  Sir,  with  my  protestation,  I  call  them  true  pilgrimes  trauelling  The  true 
towarde   the  blisse  of  heauen,  which,  in  the  state,  degree,  or  order  that  God  {JJ^"„"'iy 
calleth  them  to,  doe  busie  them  faithfullie  for  to  occupie  all  their  wits  bodelie  to  travail 
and  ghostlie,  to  knowe  truely,  and  to  keepe  faithfullie  the  biddings  of  God,  i"  ''ea- 
hating  and  fleeing  all  the  seauen  deadlie  sins,  and  euerie  branch  of  them :  Jhiugs. 
nding  them  vertuouslie  (as  it  is  said  before)  with  al  their  wits ;  doing  discreetlie, 
\vilfullie,  and  gladly,  all  the  works  of  mercie,  bodely  and  ghostly :  after  their 
cunning  and  power,  abling  them  to  the  gifts  of  the  Holie  Ghost;  disposing  them 
to  receiue  them  in  their  soides,  and  to  hold  therein,  the  right  blessinges  of 
Christ :  busieng  them  to  knowe  and  to  keepe  the  seauen  principall  vertues,  and 
so  then  they  shall  obteine  heere,  through  grace,  for  to  vse  thankefullie  to  God, 
all  the  conditions   of  charitie.     And  then,  they  shall  be  moued  with  the  good 
Spirit  of  God,  for  to  examine  oft  and  diligentlie  their  conscience,  that  neither  Avil- 
fullie  nor  wittinglie  they  erre  in  any  article  of  belecfe  ;  hauing  continuallie  (as 
frailtie  will  sufier)  all  their  businesse  to  dread  and  to  flee  the  ofience  of  God, 
and  to  loue,  ouer  all,  and  to  seeke  euer  to  doc,  his  pleasant  will.     Of  these  pil-  Everj' 
grimes  I  said,  whatsoeuer  good  thought  that  they  any  time  thinke,  what  ver-  good 
tuous  worde  that  they  speake,  and  what  fruitfidl  worke  that  they  worke  :  euerie  Jgood  ^ 
such  thought,  worde,  and  worke,  is  a  step,  numbred  of  God,  towarde  him  into  step  to 
heauen.     These  foresjiide  pilgrimes  of  God,  delight  sore  when  they  heare  of  ^^^  ^"^ 
saintes  or  of  vertuous  men  and  women,  how  they  forsooke  wilfuUie  the  pro-  ncr  and 
speritie  of  this  life,  howe  they  withstoode  the  suggestion  of  the  fiendc,  how  they  exainpk^ 
restrained  their  fleshly  lustcs,  howe  discreet  they  were  in  their  penance  doing,  °  ^^""s. 
howe  patient  they  were  in  all  their  aduersities,  howe  prudent  they  were  in  coun- 
selling of  men  and  women,  moouing  them  to  hate  all  sinne,  and  to  flie  them, 
and  to  shame  euer  greatlie  thereof,  and  loue  all  vertues,  and  to  drawe  to  them, 
imagining  howe  Christ,  and  his  followers,  by  example  of  him,  suflered  scornes 
and  sclaimder,  and  howe  patientlie  they  abode  and  tooke  the  wrongful  manasing 
of  tyrantes  :  howe  homelie  thev  were  and  seruisable  topoore  men,  to  relieue  and 

(1)  '  Holy  church'  of  year  own  building. 


«68 


THE    KXAMINA  llOX     Ol'     WILLIAM     TUOUri.. 


ir'. 

A.D. 

HOD. 


comfort  tlioni  Innlolio  ami  glmstlio,  nftor  tlieir  powov  aiul  ciinnin>; ;  and  howc 
douout  tliov  wi'Vi'  ill  piaiovs,  howe  fonuMit  thov  woio  in  hoauoiilio  dosii-i's,  and 
howo  thov  absontoil  tlu-in  from  tipi-ctai-li's  of  vaino  sayiiij^os  and  lu'arin^s  ;  nnd 
how  stable  tliov  woro  to  lot  and  dostroio  all  vicos,  and  howo  laborious  and  ioy- 
fiiU  thov  woro,  to  sowo  and  to  planto  vortnos.  Tiioso  hoauonlio  conditions  and 
such  other,  banc  piliirimos,  or  ondcuour  them  for  to  bane ;  whose  pilgrimage 
Cod  acceptetb. 

Ami  againo,  I  saide,  as  tlieir  workes  shewe,  the  most  parte  of  men  and 
women  tliat  goe  now  on  pilgrin\ages,  bane  not  these  foresaide  conditions,  nor 
loiu'tb  to  bnsie  them  faithfullie  for  to  haue.  For,  as  I  well  know,  since  I  hauo 
full  oft  assaid,  examine,  whosoeuer  will,  twenty  of  these  jnlgrimes,  and  bee 
sliall  not  tiiid  three  men  or  women  that  know  surely  a  commandement  of  Cod, 
nor  can  say  their  Pater  Noster  ami  Aue  Maria,  m>r  their  Creed  readily  in  any 
maner  of  language.  And,  as  1  bane  learned,  and  also  know  somewhat  by  ex- 
perience, of  tliese  same  pilgrimes,  telling  the  cause,  whie  that  many  men  and 
women  go  hither  and  thither  now  on  pilgrimage:  It  is  more  for  the  health  of 
their  bodies,  then  of  their  soules ;  more  for  to  haue  riches  and  prosperitie  of 
this  worlde,  then  for  to  be  enriched  with  vcrtues  in  their  soules;  more  to  liaue 
here  worlilly  and  tleshlie  friendship,  then  for  to  haue  friendshi])  of  Cod,  and  of 
his  saints  in  lieauen :  for  whatsoeuer  thing  man  or  woman  doth,  the  friendship 
of  Cod,  nor  of  any  other  saint,  cannot  be  had,  without  keeping  of  Cods  com- 
mandements.  Further,  with  my  protestation,  1  sale  now  as  I  said  in  Shrews- 
bury, though  they  that  haue  tleslily  wils,  trauell  far  their  bodies  and  spend  mikle 
mony,  to  seeke  and  to  visite  the  bones  or  images  (as  they  sale  they  do")  of  this 
Pilsri-  saint  or  of  that,  such  pilgrimage-going  is  neither  praiseable  nor  thankfiill  to 
luagedis-  Cod,  uor  to  any  saint  of  Cod,  since,  in  otiect,  all  such  pilgrimes  despise  (lod 
pleasant  jy^jj  ^\\  \^[^  commandements  and  saints.  For  the  commandemeiits  of  Ciod  they 
will  notlier  know  nor  keepe,  nor  conforme  them  to  Hue  vertuonsly  by  cxamjtle 
of  Christ  and  of  his  salutes,  ^^'herefore  sir,  I  bane  preached  and  taught  openlie, 
and  so  I  pm-pose  all  my  life  time  to  doe  with  Cods  helpe,  saying,  that  sucli  fond 
people  waste  blamefullie  Cods  goods  in  their  vaine  pilgrimages,  spending  their 
gxiods  \iH)n  vitious  hostelars,  which  are  oft  vndeane  women  of  their  bodies ;  and 
at  tlie  least,  those  goods,  with  the  which  they  should  doe  workes  of  mercie,  after 
Gods  bidding,  to  poore  necdie  men  and  women. 

These  poore  mens  goods  and  their  liuelode,  these  runncrs-about  oiler  to  rich 
priests,  which  haue  mikle  more  liuelode  then  they  neede  :  and  thus  those  goods 
they  wast  wilfiiUie.  and  spend  them  vniuslie,  against  (lods  bidding,  vpon 
strangers,  with  which  they  should  helpo  and  relieue,  after  Cods  wil,  their  poore 
needie  neighboni-s  at  home.  Yea  and  oner  this  follie,  oft  times  diuers  men  and 
women  of  these  runners  thus  madlie  hither  and  thither  into  pilgrimage,  borrow 
hereto  other  mens  goods ;  yea  and  sometime  they  steale  mens  goodes  hereto, 
and  they  paie  them  neuer  againe.  Also  Sir,  I  knowe  well  that  when  diuers  men 
and  women  will  goe  thus  after  their  own  willes,  and  finding  out  one  pilgrimage, 
they  willordaine  with  them  before,  to  liaue  with  them  both  men  and  women  that 
can  well  sing  wanton  songes,  and  some  other  pilgrimes  will  haue  with  them 
bagge  pipes;  so  that  enerie  towne  that  they  come  through,  what  with  the  noise 
of  their  singing,  and  with  the  sound  of  their  piping,  and  with  the  iangling  of 
their  Canturburie  bels,  and  with  the  barking  out  of  dogges  after  them,  that  they 
make  more  noice,  then  if  the  king  came  there  away,  witli  all  his  clarions,  and 
many  other  minstrels.  And  if  these  men  and  women  be  a  monetli  out  in  their 
pilgrimage,  many  of  them  shall  be  an  halfe  yeare  after,  great  ianglers,  talc- 
tellers,  and  Hers. 

And  the  archbishop  said  to  me  :  Lend  losell !  thou  seest  not  far  inougli  in 
this  matter,  for  thou  considerest  not  the  great  trauaile  of  pilgrimes,  therefore 
thou  blamest  tliat  thing  tliat  is  praisable.  I  say  to  thee,  that  it  is  right  wel 
done,  that  pilgrims  liane  with  them  both  singers  and  also  pipers;'  that  when  one 
of  them  that  goeth  barefoot,  striketh  his  toe  upon  a  stone,  and  hm-teth  him  sore, 
and  maketh  him  to  bleede,  it  is  well  done  that  he  or  his  fellow  begin  then  a 
song,  or  else  take  out  of  his  bosom  a  bagpipe,  for  to  driue  awaie  with  such  mirth, 
the  hurt  of  bis  fcHow  :  for  with  such  solace,  the  trauaile  and  wearinesse  of  pil- 
grimes, is  lightly  and  merely  borne  ont.- 

(1)  Well  spoken,  my  lord,  for  Lincolnshire  bag-pipes. 

i2)  And  wliy  then  bkmied  Bonner  Philpot,  for  singing  in  the  stocks? 


Goods 
evil  be- 
stowed in 
pilgri- 
mage. 

The  in- 
conveni- 
ence that 
Cometh 
by  pil- 
grimage. 


THK    KOrUTH    POINT,    TOU(iri\<;     I'UIKSTb'    TITHKS.  269 

And  I  said  :  Sir,  S.  Paide  teachcth  men  to  weepe  with  them  that  weepe.  ifmry 

And  tlic  archliishop  saidc  :  Whatjanglest  thou  af,'ainst  mens  douotion?  Wliat-  ^''• 
socur  thou  or  sucli  other  saie,  I  saie  tliat  tlie  pilgrimage  that  now  is  vsed,  is  to  .  .. 
them  that  do  it,   a  praiseable   and  a  good  meane   to  come  the  rather  to  grace.     i4/,(/ 

But  I    }iold  tliee  vnable  to  know  this  grace,  for  tliou  cnforcest  thee  to  let  the L 

deuotion  of  the  people ;  since  by  authoritie  of  holie  scripture,  men  may  lefuUie  A  new 
haue  and  vse  such  solace  as  thou  reprouest.  For  Dauid,  in  his  last  Psalme,  (I-",? ','„ 
teacheth  men  to  haue  diners  instruments  of  musicke,  for  to  praise  therewith  God.  grace,  of 

And  I  said :  Sir,  by  the  sentence  of  diuers  doctors  e.x])ounding  the  Psalmes  f'."^     , 
of  David,  that  nuisicke  aiul  minstrelsie  that  Dauid  and  other  saints  of  the  olde  makmg. 
lawe  spake  of,  ought  nowe  nother  to  be  taken  nor  vsed  by  the  letter ;  but  these  instru- 
instnunents,  with  their  musicke,  ought  to  be  interpreted  ghostly :  For  all  those  ni*-'nts 
figures  are  called  vertues  and  grace,  with  which  vertues  men  should  please  God,  ^u-  ofthe 
and  praise  his  name  ;  for  S.  Paule  saith,  all  such  things  befell  to  them  in  figure.  Old  Tes- 
Therefore,  Sir,  I  vnderstand,  tliat  the  letter  of  this  j)salme  of  Dauid  and  of  such  }^'".'^"J' 
other  Psalmes  and  sentences,  doth  slaie  them  that  take  them   now  litterallie.  are  to  be 
This  sentence,  as  1  vnderstand  sir,  Christ  approueth  himselfe,  putting  out  the  applied 
minstrels,  or  that  hee  would  quicken  the  dead  damsell.  fnUie^'^ 

And  the  archbishop  saide  to  me :   Leud  losel !  is  it  not  lefull  to  vs  to  haue  New  Tes 
organes  in  the  church,  for  to  worship  there-withall  God.'    And  I  said:  Ye  sir,  '^n^^"'- 
by  mans  ordinance;  but  by  the  ordinance  of  God,  a  good  sermon  to  the  jieoples  P""!^"!* 
vnderstanding  were  mikle  more  pleasant  to  God.'  church. 

And  the  archbishop  said,  that  organes  and  good  delectable  songs,  quickned 
and  sharpned  more  mens  wits  then  should  any  sermon. 

But  I  said  :  Sir,  lustie  men  and  worldly  louers,  delite  and  couet  and  trauail 
to  haue  all  their  wits  quickned  and  shai-pened  with  diners  sensible  solace :  but 
all  the  faitlifidl  louers  and  followers  of  Christ,  haue  al  their  dehte  to  heare  Gods 
word,  and  to  vnderstand  it  truely,  and  to  worke  thereafter  faithfully  and  continu- 
allie.  For  no  doubt,  to  dread  to  offend  God,  and  to  loue  to  please  him  in  all 
thinges,  quickneth  and  sharpeneth  all  the  wits  of  Christs  chosen  people,  and 
ahleth  them  so  to  grace,  that  they  ioy  greatlie  to  withdrawe  their  eares  and  all 
their  wits  and  members,  from  al  worldly  delite  and  from  all  fleshlie  solace.  For 
S.  Jerome  (as  I  thinke)  saith.  No  bodie  male  ioy  with  this  world  and  raigne 
with  Christ. 

And  the  archbishop  (as  if  he  had  beene  displeased  with  mine  answere)  said  Yon 
to  his  clerks:  What  gesse  ye  that  this  idiot  wil  speake  there,  where  he  hath  no  swear, my 
dread  ;  since  hee  speaketh  thus  now  here  in  my  presence  :  Well,  well,  by  God, 
thou  shalt  be  ordained  for.     And  then  he  spake  to  me  all  angerlie  : 

What  saiest  tliou  to  this  fourth  point,  that  is  certified  against  thee,  preaching  The 
openly  and  boldly  in  Shrewsburie,  that  priests  haue  no  title  to  tithes.  fourth  ar- 

And  I  said :  Sir,  I  named  there  no  word  of  tithes  in  my  preaching.     But  clTnhig' 
more  then  a  month  after  that  I  was  arested  there  in  prison,  a  man  came  to  me  priests 
into  the  prison,  asking  me  what  I  said  of  tithes.  And  I  saide  to  him  :  Sir,  in  tliis  t'"ies. 
towiie  are  many  clcrkes  and  priestes,  of  which  some  are  called  religious  men, 
though  many  of  them  be  seculars ;  therefore  aske  ye  of  them  this  question.  And 
this  man  said  to  me :  Sir,  our  prelates  say,  that  we  also  are  obliged  to  ])aie  our 
tithes  of  all  things  that  renue  to  vs  ;  and  that  they  are  accursed,  that  withdi-aw 
any  part  wittinglie  fro  them  of  their  tithes.  And  I  said.  Sir,  to  that  man,  as  with  A  para- 
my  protestation  I  saie  nowe  before  j-ou,  that  I  wonder  that  anj'  priest  dare  saie  ''"f  J  j'' 
men  to  be  accursed,  without  the  ground  of  Gods  worde.     And  the  man  said  :  word 
Sir,  our  priests  say,  that  they  ciu-se  men  thus  by  authoritie  of  Gods  lawe.    And 
I  said  :  Sir,  I  know  not  where  this  sentence  of  cursing  is  authorised  now  in  the 
Bible.     And  therefore  Sir,  I  praie  you  that  yee  will  aske  the  most  cunning 
clerke  of  this  towne,  that  ye  may  know  where  this  sentence  of  cui'sing  them  that 
tithe  not,  is  now  written  in  Gods  law  ;  for  if  it  were  written  there,  I  would  right 
gladly  be  learned  where.  But  shortly  this  man  would  not  go  fro  me,  to  aske 
this  question,  of  an  other  body,  but  required  mc  there,  as  I  would  answere 
before  God,  if  in  this  case,  that  cursing  of  priests  wore  lawiull  and  approued  of 
God  ?     And  shortlie  herwith  came  to  ni}'  mind  the  learning  of  S.  Peter,  teach- 
ing priests  spcciallie  to  hallow  the  Lord  Christ  in  their  harts  ;  being  euennore 
redie  (as  far  as  in  them  is)  to  answere  through  faitli  and  hope  to  them  that  aske 

(1)  A  fit  comparison,  my  lord,  and  like  yourself. 


270  THE    EXAMINATION    OF    WIL1,IAIM    THOUPE. 

H<-nry    of  them  a  reason.     And  this  lesson  Peter  teaclieth  men  to  vse  with  a  meeke 

^^-       spirit  and  with  dread  of  tlie  Lord.     Wherefore  Sir,  I  said  to  this  man  in  this 

A    r\      wise  :     In  the  old  law,  which  ended  not  fully  till  the  time  that  Christ  rose  vp 

140q'     ^gaine  from  death  to  life,  God  commanded  tithes  to  be  giuen  to  the  Leuits,  for 

'—  the  great  husines  and  dailie  trauaile  that  pertained  to  their  office.    But  priests, 

A  differ-  because  their  trauaile  was  mikle  more  ea«ie  and  light,  then  was  the  office  of  the 
putVe"  ^  Leuites,  God  ordained  the  priests  should  take  for  their  liuelode,  to  do  their  office, 
tween  the  the  tenth  part  of  those  tithes  that  were  giuen  to  the  Leuites.  But  now  (I  said), 
old  law  j,-|  j.]jg  j^g^y  lawe,  neither  Christ  nor  any  of  his  apostles  tooke  tithes  of  the  people, 
aud  the  i    i  .1  1  .      •'.  ,  f  ,  .  r     r    » 

new.         uor  commaunded  the  people  to  paie  tithes,  neither  to  priestes  nor  to  deacons. 

Christ       But  Christ  taught  the  people  to  doe  almes,  that  is,  works  of  mercy  to  poore 
'^""d    ,     needy  men,  of  surplus  (that  is,  superfluous  of  their  temporall  goods)  which  they 
alms,  not  ^^^^y  more  then  them  needed  reasonably  to  their  necessary  liuelode.     And  thus 
tithes,  ex-  (I  said)  uot  of  tithes,  but  of  pure  almes  of  the  people,  Christ  liuetli  and  his 
twies  be    ^postles,  when  they  were  so  busie  in  preaching  of  the  worde  of  God  to  the  people, 
alms.         that  they  might  not  trauel  otherwise  for  to  get  their  liuelood.  But,  after  Christs 
ascension,  and  when  the  apostles  had  receiued  the  Holie  Ghost,  they  trauailed 
with  their  hands,  for  to  get  their  liueloode,  when  that  they  might  thus  do  for 
busie  preaching.     Therefore,  by  example  of  himselfe,  S.  Paide  teacheth  all  the 
priestes  of  Christ  for  to  trauaile  with  their  hand,  when  for  busie  teaching  of  the 
people  they  might  thus  do.     And  thus,  all  these  priestes  whose  priesthood  God 
accepteth  nowe,  or  will  accej^t,  or  did  in  the  apostles  time,  and  after  their  decease, 
Tithes,  by  will  do  to  the  worldes  end.    But  (as  Cisterciensis  telleth)  in  the  thousand  yeare 
whomand  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  211.  yeare,  one  Pope  Gregorie  the  X.  ordained  new 
nieywere  '^i^'hes  first  to  be  giuen  to  priestes  now  in  the  new  lawe.  But  Saint  Paule,  in  his 
first  com-  time,  whose  trace  or  example  all  priestes  of  God  enforce  them  to  followe,  seeing 
manded     fjjg  couetousnesse  that  was  among  the  people,  desiring  to  destroie  the  foule  sinne, 
new  law.    throvigh  the  grace  of  God  and  true  vertuous  lining  and  example  of  himselfe, 
wrought  and  taught  all  priests  for  to  follow  him  as  he  followed  Christ,  patiently, 
willinglie,  and  gladly  in  high  pouertie.     Wherefore,  Paule  saith  thus  :     The 
Paul,         Lord  hath  ordained  that  they  that  preach  the  gospell,  shall  line  of  the  gospell. 
power^to    •^'^*'  ^^'^  (saith  Paule)  that  couet  and  busie  vs  to  be  faithfull  followers  of  Christ, 
take,  yet    vse  not  tbis  power.     For  lo  (as  Paule  witnesseth  afterward),  when  he  was  ful 
used  it      poore  and  needle,  preaching  among  the  people,  he  was  not  chargeous  vnto  them, 
but  with  his  hands  he  trauailed  not  onely  to  get  his  own  lining,  but  also  the 
If  priests  lining  of  other  poore  and  needie  creatures.     And  since  the  people  was  neuer  so 
■were  CO-    couetous,  nor  so  auarous  (I  gesse)  as  they  are  nowe,  it  were  good  counsell  that 
then,         all  priests  tooke  good  heede  to  this  heauenly  learning  of  Paule,  following  him 
what  be     here  in  wilfull  pouertie,  nothing  charging  the  people  for  their  bodily  liuelode.' 
t  eynow.  g^^.^  because  that  many  priests  do  contrarie  to  Paule  in  this  foresaid  doctrine, 
Paule  biddeth  the  people  take  heede  to  those  priests,  that  follow  him  as  he  had 
giuen  them  example.     As  if  Paule  would  say  thus  to   the  people :  Accept  ye 
none  other  priests  then  they,  that  hue  after  the  forme  that  I  hauc  taught  you. 
For  certain,  in  whatsoeuer  dignitie  or  order  that  any  priest  is  in,  if  he  conforme 
him  not  to  follow  Christ  and  his  apostles  in  wilful  pouerty,  and  in  other  hea- 
uenly vertues,  and  speciallie  in  true  preaching  of  Gods  word,  though  such  a  one 
be  named  a  priest,  yet  hee  is  no  more  but  a  priest  in  name  ;  for  the  worke  of  a 
verie  priest,  in  such  a  one  wanteth.     This  sentence  approueth  Augustine,  Gre- 
gory, Chrysostom,  and  Lincolne  plainly. 

And  the  archbishop  said  to  me :  Thinkest  thou  this  wholesom  learning-  for 
to  sow  openly,  or  yet  priuilie  among  the  people  ?  Certain,  this  doctrine  con- 
trarieth  plainly  the  ordinance  of  holy  fathers^  which  haue  ordained,  granted, 
and  licenced  priests  to  be  in  diuers  degrees,  and  to  Hue  by  tithes  and  ofiriugs  of 
the  people,  and  by  other  dueties. 

And  I  said :  Sir,  if  priestes  were  now  in  measurable  measure  and  number, 
and  liued  vertuousHc,  and  taught  busilie  and  truly  the  word  of  God  by  example 
of  Christ  and  of  his  apostles,  without  tithes,  oft'erings,  and  other  duties  that 
priests  now  chalenge  and  take,  the  people  would  giue  them  freely  sufficient 
liuelode.* 

(1)  This  rule,  with  the  rule  of  begging  friars,  can  not  stand  together. 

(2)  Wholesome  enough,  my  lord,  if  your  taste  were  to  savour  it. 

(3)  But  it  contrarieth  not  the  ordinance  neither  of  God  nor  of  his  word. 

(4)  If  priests  would  not  slack  in  their  duty,  they  should  not  lack  in  having  suflficient. 


TOUCHING  priests'  titiiks.  271 

And  a  clerke  said  to  me:   How  wilt  thou  make  this  good,  that  the  people     ncnnj 
will  giiie  freely  to  priestes  their  liuelode ;  since  that  now,  by  the  law,  euery      ^''• 
priest  can  scarsely  constrain  the  people  to  giue  them  their  liuelode  ?  ^ 

And  I  saide :  Sir,  it  is  nowe  no  wonder  though  the  people  grudge  to  giue    r.\7' 

priests  the  Huelode  that  they  aske.     Mekil  people  know  now,  how  that  priests    ^"^  '•^' 

shoidd  hue,  and  how  that  they  Hue  contrary  to  Christ  and  to  his  apostles.     And  Why  the 

therefore,  the  people  is  ful  heauy  to  pay  (as  they  do)  their  temporall  goods  to  ^'|';"V'':  ^'^ 

parsons,  and  to  other  vicars  and  priestes,  which  should  be  faithfuU  dispensatours  their 

of  the  parishes  goods;  taking  to  themselues  no  more,  but  a  scarse  lining  ol'titlies. 

tithes  nor  of  offrings,  by  the  ordinance  of  the  common  law.     For  whatsoeuer  Priests 

priests  tiike  of  the  people  (be  it  tithe  or  offering,  or  any  other  duety  or  seruice),  'i^''^  ^ 

the  priests  ought  not  to  hauc  therof  no  more,  but  a  bare  lining :  and  to  depart  ciency 

the  residue  to  the  poore  men  and  women  specially  of  the  parish  of  whom  they  ought  tn 

tiike  this  tem])orall  lining.     But  the  most  deale  of  priests  now  wasteth  their  ''^'^■S    \„ 

1  1  111  1     •  •!       /•  1  1  1     •        1     •     residue  to 

parislies  goods,  and  spendeth  them  at  their  own  wu,  after  the  world,  m  their  tlie  poor. 

vaine   lusts;  so  that  in  fewe  places  poore  men   haue  duely  (as  they  should 

haue)  their  owne  sustenance,  nother  of  tithes   nor  of  offrings,  nor  of  other 

large  wages  and  foundations  that  priests  take  of  the  people  in  diners  maners, 

aboue  that  they  neede  for  needefull  sustenance  of  meat  and  clothing.     But 

the  poore  needy  people  are  forsaken  and  left  of  priestes  to  be  sustained  ol 

the  parishners,^  as  if  the  priests  tooke  nothing  gf  the  parishners  for  to  help  the 

people  with. 

And  thus  sir,  into  ouer  great  charges  of  the  parishners  they  pay  their  temporall  Whether 
goods  twice,  where  once  might  suffice,  if  priests  were  true  dispensatours.  Also  '"''^^^  are 
Sir,  the  parishners  that  paie  their  temporal  goods  (be  they  tithes  or  offerings)  to  to  prie-ts 
priests  that  do  not  their  office  among  them  iustly,  are  parteners  of  euery  sinne  <ioin;;  not 
of  those  priestes ;  because  that  they  sustaine  those  priests  folly  in  their  sinne,  \^^^, 
with  their  temporall  goods.  If  these  things  be  well  considered,  what  wonder 
is  it  then  sir,  if  the  parishners  grudge  against  these  dispensators  ? 

Then  the  archbishop  said  to  me :  Thou  that  shouldest  be  iudged  and  ruled 
by  holy  church,  presumptuously  thou  deemest  holie  church  to  haue  en-ed  in  the 
ordinance  of  tithes  and  other  dueties  to  be  paied  to  priests.  It  shall  be  long 
or  thou  thriue,  losel,  that  thou  despisest  thy  ghostly  mother.^  How  darest  thou 
speake  this  (losel)  among  the  people?  Are  not  tithes  giuen  to  priests  for  to 
Hue  b\' .' 

And  I  said :  Sir,  S.  Paule  saith,  that  tithes  were  giuen  in  tlie  old  law  to 
Leuites  and  to  priests,  that  came  of  the  linage  of  Leuy.  But  our  priestes,  he 
saith,  came  not  of  the  linage  of  Leuy,  but  of  the  linage  of  Juda,  to  which  Juda 
no  tithes  were  promised  to  be  giuen.  And  therfore  Paule  saith  :  Since  the 
priesthoode  is  changed  from  the  generation  of  Leuy  to  the  generation  of  Juda,* 
it  is  necessarie  that  changing  also  be  made  of  the  law.  So  that  priests  liue 
now,  without  tithes  and  other  dutj'  that  they  claime,  following  Christ  and  his 
apostles  in  wilfidl  pouerty,  as  they  haue  giuen  them  example.  For  since  Chiist 
lined,  all  the  time  of  his  preaching,  by  pure  almes  of  the  people,  and  by  ex- 
ample of  him,  his  apostles  liued  in  the  same  wise,  or  else  by  the  trauaile  of  their 
hands,  as  is  said  aboue  ;  euery  priest,  whose  priesthood  Christ  approueth, 
knoweth  well,  and  confesseth  in  word  and  in  worke,  that  a  disciple  ought  not 
to  be  aboue  his  maister ;  but  it  sufficeth  to  a  disciple  to  bee  as  his  maister, 
simple  and  pure,  meeke  and  patient :  and  by  example  specially  of  his  maister 
Christ,  euerie  priest  should  rule  him  in  all  his  lining ;  and  so,  after  his  cunning 
and  power,  a  priest  should  busie  him  to  enforme  and  to  nde  whom  soeuer  he 
might  charitablie. 

And  the  archbishop  said  to  me,  with  a  great  spirit :  Gods  curse  *  haue  thou, 
and  mine,  for  this  teaching !  for  thou  wouldest  herby,  make  the  olde  lawe  more 
free  and  perfect  then  the  uewe  lawe.  For  thou  saiest  that  it  is  leful  to  Leuites 
and  to  priests  to  take  tithes  in  the  old  lawe,  and  so  to  eiiioie  their  priuiledges  : 
but  to  vs  priests  in  the  new  law,  thou  saist,  it  is  not  lawful  to  take  tithes.    And 

(1)  Fallax  ardumentum  secundum  non  causara  ut  causam. 

(2)  Priests  did  so  then,  but  our  priests  do  not  so  now. 

(3)  Ghostly  mother!  nay,  an  unghostly  stepdame,  to  all  God's  children! 

(1)  By  the  law,  none  could  challenj^e  tithes,  but  the  seed  of  Levi.  Our  priests  be  not  of  the  seed 
of  Levi :  ergo,  by  the  law,  our  priests  cannot  challenge  tithes.  As  the  priesthood  is  changed,  so  is 
the  law  changed. 

\5)  Bless,  but  curse  not,  saith  St.  Paul! 


272  THE    EXAMINATION    OF    WILLIAM    THORPE. 

Henrg    thus  thou  giucst  to  Leuits  of  tlie  old  law,  more  frcedomc  than  to  priests  of  the 

^^-      new  law.i 
A.  D.         -^"'^  I  saide  :  Sir,  I  maruell  that  ye  vnderstand  this  plaine  text  of  Paule 
1409!    thus.     Ye  wot  well,  that  the  Leuites  and  priests  in  the  old  law  that  tooke 

tithes,  were  not  so  free  nor  so  perfect,  as  Christ  and  his  apostles  that  tooke  no 

ferenc'e  f  ti'^hes.  And  Sir,  there  is  a  doctor  (I  thinke  that  it  is  Saint  Jerome)  that  saith 
the  free-  thus :  The  priests  that  chalenge  now  in  the  new  law,  tithes,  say  in  effect,  thai 
doms  be-  Christ  is  not  become  man,  nor  that  he  liath  yet  suffered  death  for  mans  loue. 
okf  and  ^  Wherefore  this  doctor  saith  this  sentence  :  Since  tithes  were  the  hires  and 
new  laws,  wages  limited  to  Leuites  and  to  priests  of  the  old  law,  for  bearing  about  of  the 
For  what  tal)ernacle,  and  for  slaying  and  fleing  of  beastes,  and  for  burning  of  sacrifice, 
tUhes  ^"*^  ^^^^  keeping  of  the  temple,  and  for  tromping  of  battell  before  the  hoste  of 
were  Israeli,  and  other  diuers  obseruances  that  pertained  to  their  office  :  those  priestes 
Si^en  in  tl^f^t  will  chalenge  or  take  tithes,  denie  that  Christ  is  come  in  the  flesh,  and  do 
l~^^  the  priests  office  of  the  old  lawe,  for  whome  tithes  were  granted:  for  else  (as 

this  doctor  saith)  priests  take  nowe  tithes  wrongfuUie. 
If  you  And  the  archbishop  said  to  his  clerks  :  Heard  you  euer  losel  speake  thus  ? 

takeaway  Certaiue  this  is  the  learning  of  them  all,  that  wheresoeuer  they  come,  and 
you  undo  they  may  be  suffered,  they  enforce  them  to  expugne  the  freedome  of  holie 
the  church. 

ciurc  And  I  saide  :  Sir,  why  call  you  of  taking  the  tithes,  and  of  such  other  duties 

that  priestes  chalenge  now  (wrongfullie),  the  fi-eedom  of  holie  church ;  since  neither 
Cin-ist  nor  his  apostles,  chalenge  nor  tooke  such  dueties?  Therefore  these 
takinges  of  priests  now,  are  not  called  iustly  the  freedome  of  holie  church ;  but 
all  such  giuing  and  taking  ought  to  be  called,  and  holden,  the  slanderous  coue- 
tousnes  of  men  of  the  holie  church. 

And  the  archbishop  saide  to  me  :  Why,  losell !  wilt  not  thou  and  other  that 
are  confedered  with  thee,  seeke  out  of  holie  Scripture  and  of  the  sence  of  doc- 
tours,  all  sharpe  authorities  against  lords,  knights,  and  squicrs,  and  against 
other  secular  men,  as  thou  doest  against  priests  ? 

And  I  saide  :  Sii",  whatsoeuer  men  or  women,  lords  or  ladies,  or  any  other 

that  are  present  in  our  preaching  speciallie,  or  in  our  conmioning,  after  our 

cunning,  we  tell  out  to  them  their  office  and  tlieir  charges :  but  sir,  since  Cliry- 

sostome  saith  that  priests  are  the  stomack  of  the  people,  it  is  needfull  in  preaching, 

The  vi-     and  also  in  commoning,  to  be  most  busie  about  this  pi'iesthood.-     Since,  by  the 

ciousnes  yitiousuesse  of  priests,  both  lords  and  commons  are  most  sinfullie  infected  and 
and  pride  ■,■,.■,  ^  »ii  ^  ^  o       ■  t        •  ^ 

of  priests  led  into  the  worst.     And  because  that  the  couetousnesse  of  priests  and  pride, 

iiifecteth  and  the  boast  that  they  liaue  and  make  of  their  dignitie  and  power,  destroieth 

world^       not  onely  the  vertues  of  priesthoode  in  priests  themselues,  but  also,  ouer  this, 

it  stirreth  God  to  take  great  vengeance  both  vpon  the  lordes,  and  vpon  the 

commons,  which  sufi'er  their  priests  charitablie. 

A  spiteful      And  the  archbishop  saide  to  me  :  Thou  iudgest  euerie  priest  proud,  tliat  will 

meek-       j^qj  gQ  araied  as  thou  doest.     By  God,  I  deme  him  to  be  more  meeke  that 

is.  in        goeth  euery  day  in  a  scarlet  gown,  than  thou  in  thy  threed-bare  blewe  gowne, 

scarlet       Whereby  knowest  thou  a  proud  man  ? 

gowns.  ^j^^  J  gj^j^i .  gjj.^  ^  proud  priest  may  be  known,  when  he  denieth  to  follow 

and  ^'^"^  Christ  and  his  apostles  in  wilful  pouertie  and  other  vertues,  and  coueteth  worldly 

marks  of  worship,  and  taketh  it  gladlie,  and  gathereth  together  with  pleading,  manasing, 

proud        Qj.  ^yjjij  flattering,  or  with  simony,  and  worldly  goods  :  and  most,  if  a  priest 

busie  him  not  chefly  in  himselfe,  and  after,  in  all  other  men  and  women  after 

his  cunning  and  power,  to  withstand  sin. 

And  the  archbishop  said  to  me  :  Though  thou  knewest  a  priest  to  haue  all 

I        these  vices,  and  though  thou  sawest  a  priest  a  fornicator,  wouldst  thou  therefore 

deme  this  priest  damnable  ?     I  sale  to  thee  that  in  the  turning  about  of  thy 

hand,  such  a  sinner  may  be  verilie  repented. 

And  I  said  :  Sir,  I  will  not  damne  any  man  for  any  sinne  that  I  know  done 

or  may  be  done,  so  that  the  sinner  leaueth  his  sinne.     But,  by  authoritie  of 

holie  Scripture,  he  that  sinncth  thus  openly  as  ye  shew  here,  is  damnable  for 

doing  of  such  a  sin  ;  and  most  speciallie,  a  priest  that  sliould  be  an  example  to 

all  other  for  to  hate  and  flie  sinne.     And  in  how  short  time  that  euer  ye  say 

that  such  a  sinner  may  be  repented,  he  ought  not,  of  him  that  knoweth  his 

(1)  He  goeth  near  you,  my  lord,  when  he  toucheth  your  tithes. 

(2)  Thorpe !  preach  against  whom  thou  wilt,  so  thou  touch  not  this  scab. 


THE    riUDE    OF    PRIESTS.  973 

sinning,  to  be  iuclged  verelie  repentant,  without  opeji  cuidence  of  great  shame    //,«;,/ 
and  harty  sorrow  for  sinne.     For  whosoeuer  (and  specially  a  priest)  that  vsetli       ^^■ 
pride,  enuy,  couetousnesse,  lechery,  simony,  or  any  other  vices,  slieweth  not  ~T    77~ 
as  open  euidence  of  repentance,  as  he  hath  giuen  euill  example  and  occasion  of    , '  :, 
sinning,  if  he  continue  in  any  such  sinne  as  long  as  he  may,  it  is  likclie  tliat  ' 

sinne  leaueth  him,  and  lie  not  sinne.     And  as  I  vndcrstand,  such  a  one  sinneth 
vnto  death,  for  whom  no  bodie  oweth  to  praie,  as  S.  John  saith. 

And  a  clerke  saide  then  to  the  archbishop  :  Sir,  the  lenger  that  ye  appose  Clerkly 
him,  the  worse  he  is  ;  and  the  more  ye  busie  you  to  amend  him,  the  waywarder  ^^'"^y'l' 
he  is.     For  he  is  of  so  shrewd  a  kind,  that  he  shameth  not  only  to  be  himselfe  Parasitt.* 
a  foule  nest,  but  without  shame  he  busieth  him  to  make  his  nest  fouler. 

And  then  the  archbishop  said  to  his  clerke  :  Suller  a  while,  for  I  am  at  an  Forset 
end  with  him,  for  there  is  an  other  point  certified  against  him,  and  I  will  heare  ""thing, 
what  he  saith  thereto.  ^  P'^'^y 

And  sp  than  he  said  to  me  :  Loe  it  is  here  certified  against  thee,  that  tliou  lord'.  ™^ 
preachedst  openly  at  Shrewsburie,  that  it  is  not  lawfiill  to  sweare  in  any  case. 

And  I  saide  :  Sir,  I  preached  neuer  so  openly,  nor  I  haue  taught  in  this 
wise  in  any  place.  But  Sir,  as  I  preached  in  Shrewsburie,  with  my  protes- 
tation I  say  to  you  now  here,  that  by  the  authoritie  of  the  (jospell  of  S.  James, 
and  by  witnes  of  diners  saints  and  doctors,  I  haue  preached  openly  in  one 
place  or  other,  that  it  is  not  lefull  in  any  case  to  sweare  by  any  creature.  And 
ouer  this  Sir,  I  banc  also  preached  and  taught,  by  the  foresaid  authorities,  that 
no  bodie  should  sweare  in  any  case,  if  that  without  othc,  in  any  wise,  hee  that 
is  charged  to  sweare,  might  excuse  him  to  them  that  haue  power  to  compell 
him  to  sweare,  in  lefull  thing  and  lawfull.  But  if  a  man  may  not  excuse  him 
without  oth,  to  them  that  haue  power  to  compell  him  to  sweare,  than  he  ought 
to  sweare  onely  by  God,  taking  him  only  that  is  soothfastnesse,  for  to  witnes 
the  soothfastnes. 

And  then  a  clerke  asked  me,  if  it  were  not  leful  to  a  subiect,  at  the  bidding 
of  his  prelate,  for  to  kneele  down  and  touch  the  holy  gospel  booke,  and  kisse 
it,  saj-ing  :  So  helpe  me  God,  and  this  holy  dame ;  for  he  should,  after  his 
cunning  and  power,  doe  all  things  that  his  prelate  commandeth  him.' 

And  I  said  to  them  :  Sirs,  ye  speake  here  ftill  generallic  or  largely.  What 
if  a  prelate  commanded  his  subiect  to  doe  an  vnlawful  thing,  should  he  obey 
thereto  ? 

And  the  archbishop  saide  to  me :  A  subiect  ought  not  to  suppose,  that  his 
prelate  will  bid  him  do  an  vnlawful  thing.^  For  a  subiect  ought  to  thinke  that 
his  prelate  will  bid  him  doe  nothing  but  that  hee  will  aunsweare  for  before 
God,  that  it  is  lefull :  and  then,  though  the  bidding  of  the  prelate  bee  vnlefull, 
the  subiect  hath  no  perill  to  fulfill  it,  since  that  he  thinketh  and  iudgeth, 
that  whatsoeuer  thing  his  prelate  biddeth  liim  do,  that  it  is  leful  to  him  for 
to  do  it. 

And  I  said  :  Sir  I  trust  not  thereto.     But  to  oin-  purpose.     Sir,  I  tell  you,  A  com- 
that  I  v/as  once  in  a  gentlemans  house,  and  there  were  then  two  clerkes  there,  "'>""'■■■«- 
a  maister  of  diuinitie,  and  a  man  of  law,  which  man  of  law  was  also  communing  t'wixt'a 
in  diuinitie.     And  among  other  thinges,  these  men  spake  of  othes,  and  the  man  lawyer 
of  law  said  :  At  the  bidding  of  his  soueraigne,  which  had  power  to  charge  him  ""''  ^  **'" 
to  sweare,  he  woidd  lay  his  hand  vpon  a  booke,  and  heare  his  charge  ;  and  if 
his  charge  to  his  vnderstanding  were  vnlefull,  he  would  hastely  withdraw  his 
hand  vpon  the  booke,  taking  there  onely  God  to  witncsse,  that  he  woidd  fulfill 
that  lefull  charge,  after  his  power.     And  the  maister  of  diuinitie  saide  then  to 
him  thus  :  Certaine,  he  that  laieth  his  hand  vpon  a  booke  in  this  wise,  and 
maketh  there  a  promise  to  do  tliat  thing  that  he  is  comnlanded,  is   obliged 
thereby,  by  booke-otlie,  then   to  fulfill  his  charge.       For  no   doubt  he   that 
chargeth  him  to  laie  his  hand   thus  A'pon  a  booke  (touching  the  booke,  and 
swearing  by  it,  and  kissing  it,  promising  in  this  forme  to  do  this  thing  or  that), 
will  saie  and  witnesse,  that  hee  that  toucheth  thus  a  booke,  and  kisseth  it,  hath 
sworne  vppon  that  booke.     And  all  other  men  that  see  that  man  thus  doe,  and 
also  all  those  that  heare  hereof,  in  the  same  wise  will  saie  and«  witnesse,  that 
this  man  hath  sworne  vpon  a  booke.    Wherefore,  the  maister  of  diiunitie  saide, 
it  was  not  lel'uU  neither  to  giue  nor  to  ttvke  any  such  charge  vpon  a  booke ;  for 

(1)  Well  said,  Sir  John,  of  you  ;  your  holy  mother  stroke  your  head. 

(2)  These  prelates  would  be  thought  to  be  good,  be  they  never  so  bad. 

VOL.  111.  T 


274 


THE    EXAMINATION    OK    WILLIAM     THOUPE. 


Henry 
IV. 

A.  D. 

MOO. 

To  swear 
Dy  a  book 
is  to 

swear  by 
creatures. 


Christ 
promis- 
eth  and 
giveth 
mouth 
and  utter- 
ance. 


What  it 
is,  to 
swear 
well. 


euery  booke  is  nothing  else,  but  diuers  creatures  wliich  it  is  made  of.  Tliere- 
forc,  to  sweare  vpon  a  booke,  is  to  sweare  by  creatures  :  and  this  swearing  is 
euei-  vnleful.  This  sentence  witnesseth  Chrysostonie  plainely,  blaming  them 
greately  that  bring  forth  a  booke  for  to  sweare  vpon  ;  charging  clerks  that  in 
no  wise  they  constraine  any  bodie  to  sweare,  whether  they  thinke  a  man  to 
sweare  true  or  false. 

And  the  archbishop  and  his  clerkes  scorned  me,  and  blamed  me  greatlie  for 
this  saying.  >.  And  the  archbishop  manased  me  with  great  punishment  and 
sharpe,  except  I  left  this  opinion  of  swearing.  • 

And  I  said  :  Sir,  this  is  not  mine  opinion,  but  it  is  the  opinion  of  Christ 
our  Sauiour,  and  of  S.  James,  and  of  Clnysostome,  and  of  other  diuers  saints 
and  doctors. 

Tiian  the  archbishop  bad  a  clerk  read  this  homily  of  Chrysostome,  which 
iiomily  this  clerke  held  in  his  hand,  written  in  a  i-oule ;  which  roule  the  arch- 
bishop caused  to  be  taken  from  my  fellow  at  Canturburie.  And  so  then  this 
clerke  read  this  role,  till  he  came  to  a  clause  where  Chrysostome  saith,  That  it 
is  sin  to  sweare  well. 

And  then  a  clerke  (Malueren  as  I  gesse)  ^  saide  to  the  archbishop :  Sir,  I 
praie  you  wcte  of  him,  how  he  vnderstandeth  Chrysostome  here,  saying  it  to 
be  sinne  to  sweare  well. 

And  so  the  archbishop  asked  me,  how  I  vndersood  here  Chrysostome. 

And  certaine,  I  was  somwhat  afraid  to  answere  hereto ;  for  I  had  busied  me 
to  studie  about  the  sense  thereof;  but,  lifting  vp  my  mind  to  God,  I  praied 
him  of  grace,  and  as  fast  as  I  thought  howe  Christ  saide  to  his  apostles : 
When  for  my  name  ye  shall  be  brought  before  judges,  I  shall  giue  into  your 
mouth,  wisedome  that  your  aduersaries  shall  not  against  sale.  And  trusting 
faithfullie  in  the  word  of  God,  I  said :  Sir,  I  know  well  that  many  men  and 
women,  haue  nowe  swearing  so  in  custome,  y*  they  know  not,  nor  will  not 
knowe,  that  they  do  euil  for  to  sweare  as  they  do  ;  but  they  thinke  and  saie, 
that  they  do  well  for  to  sweare  as  they  doe,  though  they  know  well  that  they 
sweare  vntrulie.  For  the  say,  they  may,  by  their  swearing  (though  it  be 
false),  voide  blame  or  temporal  harme,  which  they  should  haue,  if  they  sweare 
not  thus.  And  Sir,  many  men  and  women  maintaine  stronglie  that  they 
sweare  well,  when  that  thing  is  sooth  that  they  sweare  for.  Also,  full  many 
men  and  women  say  nowe,  that  it  is  well  done  to  sweare  by  creatures,  when 
they  may  not  (as  they  saie)  otherwise  be  beleeued.  And  also,  full  manie  men 
and  women  nowe  saie,  that  it  is  well  done  to  sweare  by  God,  and  by  our  ladie, 
and  by  other  saints,  for  to  haue  them  in  minde.  But,  since  all  these  sayings 
are  but  excusations  and  sinne,  me  thinketh  Sir,  that  this  sense  of  Chrysostome 
may  be  alleaged  wel  against  all  such  swearers,  witnessing  that  all  these  sin 
greeuouslie,  though  they  thinke  themselues  for  to  sweare,  in  this  foresaid  wise, 
wel :  for  it  is  euill  done  and  great  sinne,  for  to  sweare  truth,  when  in  any  maner, 
a  man  may  excuse  himselfe  without  othe. 

And  the  archbishop  saide,  that  Chrysostome  might  bee  thus  vnderstand. 

And  then  a  clerke  said  to  me  :  Wilt  thou  tarrie,  my  lord,  no  lenger,  but 
submit  thee  here  meekelie  to  the  ordinance  of  holie  church,^  and  laie  thy  hand 
vpon  a  book,  touching  the  holie  gospel  of  God,  promising  not  onlie  with  thy 
mouth,  but  also  with  thine  hart,  to  stand  to  my  lords  ordinance  1 

And  I  said  :  Sir,  haue  I  not  told  you  here,  how  that  1  heard  a  maister  of 
diuinitie  saie,  that  in  such  case  it  is  al  one  to  touch  a  booke,  and  to  sweare  by 
a  booke  ? 

And  the  archbishop  said  :  There  is  no  maister  of  diuinitie  in  England  so 
great,  that  if  he  hold  this  opinion  before  me,  but  I  shall  pimish  him  as  1  shall 
doe  thee,  except  thou  sweare  as  I  shall  charge  thee.* 

And  I  said  :  Sir,  is  not  Chrysostome  an  ententife  doctor  ? 

And  the  archbishop  said,  Yea. 

And  1  saide  :  If  Chrysostome  proueth  him  worthie  greate  blame,  that  bringeth 
forth  a  booke  to  sweare  vppon,  it  must  needes  follow,  that  he  is  more  to  blame 
that  sweareth  on  that  booke. 


(1)  Here  now  lacked  Bonner,  to  scratch  him  by  the  face. 

(2)  Either  Malveren,  or  else  Sir  Brian  Blowcole.  (3)  Pope-holy  church. 

(4)  It  is  happy  that  he  called  not  for  a  candle,  and  made  a  Scoevola  of  him,  as  Bonner  did  of 
Tomkins. 


And  the  archbishop  said :  If  Chrysostome  meiit  accordinglic  to  the  ordinance    iiennj 
of  hoh"c  church,  we  will  accept  liim.'  ^^  • 

And  then  said  a  clerke  to  me :   Is  not  the  worde  of  God  and  God  himselfe    ^  j) 
equipollent,  that  is,  of  one  authoritie  ?  1  lO'J 

And  I  said,  Yea.  — 

Then  he  said  to  me :  Whie  wilt  thou  not  sweare  then  by  the  gospel  of  God, 
that  is  God's  word;-  since  it  is  all  one  to  sweare  by  the  word  of  God,  and  by 
God  himselfe  ? 

And  I  saide :  Sir,  since  I  may  not  now  otherwise  be  beleeued,  but  by  swear-  Thorpe 
ing,  I  perceiue  (as  Austen  saith)  that  it  is  not  spcedeful  that  ye  that  shoidd  be  '''^'("j'q"' 
my  brethren,  should  not  belceue  me :  therefore  I  am  redie,  by  the  word  of  God  swear, 
(as  the  Lord  commanded  me  by  his  word)  to  sweare. 

Then  the  clerke  saide  to  me :  Laie  then  thine  hand  vpon  the  booke,  touching 
the  holie  gospell  of  God,  and  t;iJce  thy  charge. 

And  I  said  :  Sir,  I  vnderstand  that  the  holie  gospel  of  God  may  not  be  touched 
with  mans  hand. 

And  the  clearke  said,  1  fonded,  and  that  I  said  not  truth. 

And  I  asked  this  clerke,  whether  it  were  more  to  reade  the  gospell,  then  to 
touch  the  gospell  i 

And  he  said,  it  was  more  to  read  the  gospell. 

Then  I  said :  Sir,  by  authoritie  of  S.  Hierome,  the  gospell  is  not  the  gospell  WTiethcr 
for  reading  of  the  letter,  but  for  the  beliefe  that  men  haue  in  the  word  of  God.  ^^^^lH"^ 
That  it  is  the  gospell  that  we  bcleeue,  and  not  the  letter  that  we  read ;  for  because  gospel, 
the  letter  that  is  touched  with  mans  hand,  is  not  the  gospel,  but  the  sentence 
that  is  verilie  beleeued  in  mans  heart,  is  the  gospel.     For  so  Hierome  saith  : 
The  gospel,  that  is  the  vertue  of  Gods  word,  is  not  in  the  leaues  of  the  booke, 
but  it  is  in  the  roote  of  reason.    Neither  the  gospel  (he  saith)  is  in  the  writing 
aboue  of  the   letters,  but  the  gospell  is  in  the  marking  of  the  sentence  ol 
Scriptures.      This  sentence  approueth  S.  Paule,  saying  thus  :    The  kingdome 
of  God  is  not  in  worde,  but  in  vertue.     And  Dauid  saith :    The  voice  of  the 
Lord  that  is  his  word,  is  in  vertue.      And  after,  Dauid  saith  :    Through  the 
worde  of  God  the  heauens  were  formed,  and  in  the  spirit  of  his  mouth  is  all 
the  vertue  of  them.     And   I   praie  you  Sir,  vnderstand  ye  wcl  how  Dauid 
saith,  then,  in  the  spirit  of  the  mouth  of  the  Lorde,  is  all  the  vertue  of  angels 
and  of  men. 

And  the  clerke  said  to  me  :  Tliou  wouldest  make  vs  to  fond  with  thee.  Say 
we  not  that  the  gospels  are  written  in  the  masse  booke  2^ 

And  I  said  :   Sir,  though  men  use  to  saie  thus,  yet  it  is  an  vnperfect  speech ; 
for  the  principall  part  of  a  thing  is  properlie  the  whole  thing.     For  loe,  mans 
soule  that  may  not  nowe  be  scene  here,  nor  touched  with  any  sensible  thing,  is 
properlie  man.     And  all  the  vertue  of  a  tree  is  in  the  root  therof,  that  may  not 
be  scene ;  for  do  away  the  roote,  and  the  tree  is  destroied.    And  Sir,  as  ye  said 
to  me  right  now,  God  and  his  word  are  of  one  authoritie.    And  Sir,  S.  Hierome  The  gos- 
witnesseth,  that  Christ  (verie  God  and  verie  man)  is  hid  in  the  letter  of  the  J',^^]^  ™' 
law  :  thus  also  Sir,  the  gospell  is  hid  in  the  letter.     For  Sir,  as  it  is  ful  likely  but  hid  in 
many  diuers  men  and  women  here  in  the  earth,  touched  Christ,  and  saw  him,  the  letter. 
and  knew  his  bodelie  person,  which  neither  touched,  nor  saw,  nor  knew  ghostly 
his  godhead,  right  thus  Sir,  many  men  now  touch,   and  see,  and  write,  and 
read  the  Scriptures  of  God's  law,  which  neither  see,  touch,  nor  read  efi'ectuallie, 
the  gospell.     For,  as  the  godhead  of  Christ  (that  is,  the  vertue  of  God)  is 
knowne  by  the  vertue  of  beliefe,  so  is  the  gospell,  that  is,  Christ's  word. 

And  a  clerke  said  to  me:  These  be  full  mistie  matters*  and  vnsauerie,  that 
thou  shewest  here  to  us. 

And  I  said :  Sir,  if  ye,  that  are  raaisters,  know  not  plainelie  this  sentence,  ye 
may  sore  dread  that  the  kingdome  of  heauen  be  taken  from  you,  as  it  was  from 
the  princes  of  pricstes  and  from  the  elders  of  the  Jewes. 

And  then  a  clerke  (as  I  gesse  Malueren),  said  to  me :  Thou  knowest  not 
thine  equiuocations ;  for  the  kingdome  of  lieauen  hath  diuers  vndcrstandings. 
What  callest  thou  the  kingdome  of  heauen  in  this  sentence,  that  thou  shewest 
here? 

(1)  It  is  happy  that  Chrj-sostome  was  not  here,  or  else  he  would  have  had  him  by  the  back. 

(2)  But  that  word  cannot  be  touched. 

;3)  This  clerk  was  well  seen  in  the  mass  book. 
4)  Misty  matters,  for  your  blind  eyes. 

T  2 


27G 


THE    EXAMINATION    OF    WILLIAM    THORPE. 


Henry 
IV. 

A.D. 

HOf). 

The  king- 
dom of 
God 
taken 
for  tlie 
under- 
standing 
of  God's 
word. 
Help 
down 
with  him, 
Sir  John. 


A  false 
brother. 


Auricular 
confes- 
sion. 


A  crafty 
train  of 
a  popish 
dissem- 
bler. 


And  I  said :  Sir,  by  good  reason  and  sentence  of  doctors,  the  realm  of  heauen 
is  called  here,  the  viiderstanding  cf  God's  word. 

And  a  clerke  said  to  me :  From  whom  thinkest  thou  that  this  vnderstanding 
is  taken  away  ? 

And  I  saide  :  Sir,  by  authoritie  of  Christ  himselfe,  the  efFectuall  vnderstand- 
ing of  Christ's  word  is  taken  awaie  from  all  them  chieflie,  which  are  great 
lettered  men,  and  presume  to  vnderstand  high  things,  and  will  be  holden  wise 
men,  and  desire  maistership  and  high  state  and  dignitie ; '  but  they  wil  not 
conforme  tliem  to  the  lining  and  teaching  of  Christ  and  of  his  apostles. 

Then  the  archbishop  said :  Well,  well,  thou  wilt  iudge  thy  soueraignes.  By 
God,  the  king  doth  not  liis  dutie,  but  he  suffer  thee  to  be  condemned. 

And  then  an  other  clerke  said  to  me :  Why,  on  Fridaie  that  last  was,  coun- 
sailedst  thou  a  man  of  my  lords,  that  he  shouid  not  shrine  him  to  no  man  but 
only  to  God? 

And  with  this  asking  I  was  abashed;  and  then,  by  and  by,  I  knew  that 
I  was  subtillie  betraied  of  a  man  that  came  to  me  in  prison  on  the  Fridaie 
before,  communing  with  me  in  this  matter  of  confession.'^  And  certaine, 
by  his  wordes  I  thought,  tliat  this  man  came  then  to  me  of  ful  feruent  and 
charitable  will ;  but  now  I  know  he  came  to  tempt  me  and  to  accuse  me, 
God  forgiue  him,  if  it  be  his  will !  And  with  all  my  heart,  when  I  had  thought 
thus,  I  saide  to  this  clerke :  Sir,  I  praie  you  that  yee  would  fetch  this  man 
hither,  and  all  the  wordes,  as  neere  as  I  can  repete  them,  which  that  I  spake 
to  him  on  Fridaie  in  the  prison,  I  wil  rehearse  now  beer  before  you  all,  and 
before  him. 

And  (as  I  gesse)  the  archbishop  saide  then  to  me :  They  that  are  nowe  here, 
suffice  to  repeate  them.     How  saidst  thou  to  him  ? 

And  I  saide :  Sir,  that  man  came  and  asked  me  in  diuers  things,  and,  after 
his  asking,  I  answered  him  (as  I  vnderstood)  that  good  was.  And,  as  he 
shewed  to  me  by  his  words,  he  was  sorie  of  his  lining  in  court,  and  right  heauie 
for  his  owne  vicious  liuing,  and  also  for  the  viciousnes  of  other  men,  and 
speciallie  of  priests  euill  liuing :  and  herefore  he  said  to  me,  with  a  sorrowfull 
heart  (as  I  gessed),  that  bee  purposed  fullie  within  short  time  for  to  leaue  the 
court,  and  to  busie  him  to  know  God's  lawe,  and  to  conforme  aU  his  life  there- 
after. And  when  he  had  said  to  me  these  words,  and  moe  other  which  I  would 
rehearse  and  he  were  present,  he  praied  me  to  heare  his  confession.  And 
I  saide  to  him :  Sir,  wherefore  come  ye  to  me,  to  bee  confessed  of  me  ?  ye  wote 
wel  that  the  archbishop  putteth  and  holdeth  me  here,  as  one  vnworthy  either  to 
giue  or  to  take  any  sacrament  of  holie  cluu-ch. 

And  he  said  to  me  :  Brother,  I  wote  well,  and  so  wote  many  other  moe,  that 
you  and  such  other  are  wrongfuUie  vexed,  and  therfore  I  common  with  you  the 
more  gladly.  And  1  said  to  him :  Certain  I  wote  well  that  any  men  of  this 
court,  and  specially  the  priests  of  this  houshold,  would  be  ful  euil  apayd  both 
with  you  and  me,  if  they  wist  that  yee  were  confessed  of  mee.  And  he  said, 
that  he  cared  not  therefore,  for  he  had  full  little  affection  in  them  :  and,  as  me 
thought,  he  spake  these  words  and  many  other,  of  so  good  wiU  and  of  so  high 
desire,  for  to  bane  knowne  and  done  the  pleasant  wil  of  God.  And  I  said  to 
him,  as  with  my  foresaid  protestation  I  say  to  you  nowe  here :  Sir,  I  counsaile 
you,  for  to  absent  you  from  all  euill  company,  and  to  draw  you  to  them  that 
loue  and  busie  them  to  know  and  to  keepe  the  precepts  of  God ;  and  then  the 
good  spirit  of  God  will  mooue  you  for  to  occupy  busilie  all  yom-  wits  in  gather- 
ing together  of  all  your  sins,  as  far  as  ye  can  bethinke  you,  shaming  greatlie  of 
them  and  sorrowing  hartelie  for  them.  Yea  Sir,  the  Holy  Ghost  will  then  put 
in  your  hart  a  good  will  and  a  feruent  desire  for  to  take  and  to  hold  a  good 
piu^ose,  to  hate  euer  and  to  file  (after  yoiu:  cunning  and  power)  all  occasion  of 
sinne :  and  so  then,  wisedome  shall  come  to  you  from  aboue,  lightening,  with 
diuers  beames  of  grace  and  of  heauenly  desire,  all  your  wits,  enforming  you 
how  ye  shal  trust  stedfastly  in  the  mercy  of  the  Lord,  knowledging  to  him  onely 
all  your  vicious  liuing,  praying  to  him  euer  deuoutlie  of  charitable  counsell  and 
continuance ;  hoping  without  doubt,  that  if  ye  continue  thus,  busying  you  faith- 
fullie  to  know  and  to  keepe  his  biddings,  that  he  will  (for  he  onely,  may)  forgiue 
you  all  your  sinnes.    And  this  man  said  to  me  :  Though  God  forgiue  men  their 

(1)  This  salt  was  somewhat  too  sharp  for  their  rotten  flesh  to  abide. 

(2)  Note  here  the  crafty  practice  of  this  holy  church. 


HIS    LEARNED    ANSWEUS    AND    WITTY    QUESTIONS.  277 

sinnes,  yet  it  behoueth  men  to  be  assoiled  of  priests,  and  to  do  the  penance  that    Hennj 
they  enioine  thcni.  ^^'■ 

And  I  saide  to  him  :  Sir,  it  is  all  one  to  assoile  men  of  their  sinnes,  and  to  ~T~Tj 
forgiue  men  their  sinnes.  Wherfore,  since  it  pertaineth  onely  to  God  to  for^jiue  ^AnQ 
sinne,  it  sufficeth,  in  this  case,  to  counsell  men  and  women  for  to  leane  their 


sinne,  and  to  comfort  them  that  busie  them  thus  to  do,  for  to  hope  stedfastly  in  God  only 
the  mercie  of  God.    And  againeward,  priests  ought  to  tel  shaqily  to  customable  Jin^'man 
sinners,  that  if  they  will  not  make  an  ende  of  their  sinne,  but  continue  in  diners  only  can 
sins  while  that  they  may  sinne,  all  such  desenie  paine  without  any  end.     And  '^''""s'-"' 
herefore,  priests  should  euer  busie  them  to  Hue  well  and  holilie,  and  to  teach  sin. 
the  people  busilie  and  truly  the  word  of  God,  shewing  to  all  folke,  in  open 
preaching  and  in  priuie  counselhng,  that  the  Lord  God  only  forgiueth  sinne. 
And  therfore,  those  priests  that  take  vpon  them  to  assoile  men  of  their  sinnes, 
blaspheme  God ;  since  that  it  pertaineth  onely  to  the  Lord,  to  assoile  men  of 
all  their  sinnes.     For  no  doubt  a  thousand  yeare  after  that  Christ  was  man,  no 
priest  of  Christ  durst  take  vpon  him  to  teach  the  people,  neither  priuily  nor 
apertly,  that  they  behoued  needes  to  come  to  be  assoiled  of  them,  as  priests 
now  do.    But,  by  authoritie  of  Christ's  word,  priests  bound  indurate  customable 
sinners,  to  euerlasting  paines,  which  in  no  time  of  their  lining  would  busie 
them  faithfuUie  to  knowe  the  biddings  of  God,  nor  to  keepe  them.  And  againe, 
all  they  that  would  occupy  al  their  wits  to  hate  and  to  flie  all  occasion  of  sinne, 
dreading  ouer  all  things  to  offend  God,  and  louing  for  to  please  him  con- 
tiniiallie  :  to  tliese  men  and  women  priestes  shewed,  how  the  Lord  assoileth 
them  of  all  their  sinnes.     And  thus  Christ  promised  to  confirme  in  heauen,  all 
the  binding  and  loosing  that  priests,  by  authoritie  of  his  word,  bind  men  in 
sinne,  that  are  indurate  therein,  or  loose  them  out  of  sinne  here  vpon  earth, 
that  are  verely  repentant.     And  this  man,  hearing  these  words,  said,  that  he 
might  well,  in  conscience,  consent  to  this  sentence.      But  he  said :    Is  it  not  Shrift 
needefull  to  the  lay  people  that  cannot  thus  doe,  to  go  shrive  them  to  priests  ?  ^"'^.'^'"V' 
And  I  said :   If  a  man  feele  himselfe  so  distroubled  with  any  sinne,  that  he  priests, 
cannot,  by  his  own  wit,  auoid  this  sin  without  counsell  of  them  that  are  herein 
wiser  than  he :  in  such  a  case,  the  counsell  of  a  good  priest  is  Ml  necessarie.  A  good 
And  if  a  good  priest  faile,  as  they  do  now  commonlie,  in  such  a  case  S.  Angus-  s^'''''^"' 
tine  saith,  that  a  man  may  lawfullie  commune  and  take  coimseU  of  a  vertuous  be  coun- 
secular  man.     But  certaine,  that  man  or  woman  is  ouerladen  and  too  beastlie,  sellor, 
which  cannot  bring  their  own  sinnes  into  their  mind,  busying  them  night  and  ^  m\ts.t 
daie  for  to  hate  and  to  forsake  all  their  sins,  doing  a  sigh  for  them  after  their  faileth. 
cunning  and  power.     And  Sir,  ful  accordingUe  to  this  sentence,  vpon  Middlent 
Sundaie   (two  yeare   as  I  gesse  now  agone),  I  heard  a  monke   of  Feuesam,  Morden, 
that  men   called  Morden,  preach  at  Canturburie  at  the  crosse  within  Christ-  f,^!;^^^" 
Church  Abbey,  saying  thus  of  confession :  That  as,  through  the  suggestion  of  confes- 
the  feend  without  counsell  of  any  other  bodie,  of  themselues  many  men  and  sion. 
women  can  imagine   and  find  meanes  and  waies  inough  to  come  to  pride,  to 
theft,  to  lecherie,  and  other  diners  \aces ;  in  contrariwise  this  monke  saide  : 
Since  the  Lorde  God  is  more  readie  to  forgiue  sinne  than  the  feend  is,  or  may  Hearty 
be,  of  power  to  moue  any  bodie  to  sin,  than  whosoeuer  wil  shame  and  sorrow  [,^,'p^"'' 
hartelie  for  their  sinnes,  knowledging  them  faithfullie  to  God,  amending  them  cod 
after  their  power  and  cunning,  without  counsell  of  any  other  bodie  than  of  God  "eedi-tu 
and  of  himselfe  (through  the  grace  of  God),  al  such  men  and  women  may  find  fe^sio"  to 
sufficient  meanes  to  come  to  God's  mercy,  and  so  to  be  cleane  assoiled  of  all  a  priest, 
their  sinnes.     This  sentence  I  said  Sir,  to  this  man  of  yours,  and  the  selfe 
wordes,  as  neere  as  I  can  gesse. 

And  the  archbishop  said :   HoUe  church  approueth  not  this  learning.* 
And  I  .said :  Sir,  holy  church  of  which  Christ  is  head  in  heauen  and  in  earth, 
must  needes  approue  this  sentence.     For  loe,  hereby  all  men  and  women  may, 
if  they  will,  be  suflicientlie  taught  to  know  and  keepe  the  commandements  of 
God,  and  to  hate  and  to  flie  continuallie  all  occasion  of  sin,  and  to  loue  and  to 
seeke  vertues  busilie,  and  to  beleeue  in  God  stablie,  and  to  trust  in  his  mercie  p.  . 
stedfastlie,  and  so,  to  come  to  perfect  charity,  continue  therin  perseuerantlie :  piveth 
and  more  the  Lord  asketh  not  of  any  man  here  nowe  in  this  life.     And  cer-  freedom, 
taine,  since  Jesu  Christ  died  \'pon  the  crosse  wilfully  to  make  men  free,  men  g,veth''" 
of  the  church  are  too  bold  and  too  busie  to  make  men  thral,  binding  them  thraldom. 
(1)  No,  nor  any  thing  else,  that  is  good. 


278 

Henry 
IV. 

A.D. 

1409. 


True 
freedom 
<if  holy 
cliurch 
iKit  de- 
stroyed, 
but  in- 
creased, 
by  true 
preach- 
ers. 


Take  my 
lord's 
blessing, 
and  stand 
up. 


My  lord 
hath 

haste,  for 
being  be- 
liirlited. 


THE    EXAMINATION    OF    WILLIAM    THOKPE. 

viidcr  the  paine  of  endles  curse  (as  they  saie)  to  do  many  obseruances,  and 
ordinances,  which  neither  the  lining  nor  teaching  of  Christ,  nor  of  his  apostles, 
approueth. 

And  a  clerke  said  then  to  me :  Thou  shewest  plainlie  here  thy  deceit,  which 
thou  hast  learned  of  them  that  trauell  to  sow  the  popple  among  the  wheat. 
But  I  coimsell  thee  to  goe  awaie  cleane  from  this  learning,  and  submit  thee 
lowly  to  my  lord,  and  thou  shalt  find  him  yet  to  be  gratious  to  thee. 

And  as  fast  then,  an  other  clerke  saide  to  me :  How  wast  thou  so  bold  at 
Failles  Crosse  in  London,  to  stand  there  hard,  with  thy  tippet  bounden  about 
thine  head,  and  to  reproue  in  his  sermon  the  worthie  clerke  Alkerton,  drawing 
awaie  all  that  thou  mightest?  yea,  and  the  same  dale  at  afternoone,  thou, 
meeting  the  worthie  doctor  in  Watling  streete,  calledst  him  false  flatterer  and 
hypocrite. 

And  I  said :  Sir,  I  thinke  certainely  that  there  was  no  man  nor  woman  that 
hated  verilie  sinne,  and  loued  vertues  (hearing  the  sermon  of  the  clerke  at 
Oxford,  and  also  Alkertons  sermon),  but  they  said,  or  might  iustly  saie,  that 
Alkerton  reproued  that  clerke  vntniely,  and  slandered  him  wrongfullie  and 
vncharitablie.  For,  no  doubt,  if  the  liuing  and  teaching  of  Christ  chieflie,  and 
of  his  apostles,  be  true,  no  bodie  that  loueth  God  and  his  law  wil  blame  any 
sentence  that  the  clerke  then  preached  there ;  since,  by  authoritie  of  Gods 
word,  and  by  approved  saints  and  doctors,  and  by  open  reason,  this  clerke 
approued  all  things  clearlie  that  he  preached  there. 

And  a  clerke  of  the  archbishops  said  to  me :  His  sermon  was  false,  and  that, 
he  sheweth  openlie ;  since  he  dare  not  stand  forth  and  defend  his  preaching 
that  he  then  preached  there. 

And  I  said :  Sir,  1  thinke  that  he  purposeth  to  stand  stedfastly  therby,  or 
else  he  sdaundereth  fouly  himselfe,  and  also  many  other  that  haue  great  trust 
that  hee  will  stand  by  the  truth  of  the  gospell.  For  I  wote  wel,  this  sermon  is 
written  both  in  Latin  and  English,  and  many  men  haue  it,  and  they  set  great 
price  thereby.  And  Sir,  if  ye  were  present  with  the  archbishop  at  Lambeth, 
when  this  clerke  appeared  and  was  at  his  answere  before  the  archbishop,  ye 
wote  well  that  this  clerke  denied  not  there  his  sermon,  but  two  days  he  main- 
tained it  before  the  archbishop  and  his  clerkes. 

And  then  the  archbishop,  or  one  of  his  clerkes,  saide  (I  wote  not  which  of 
them)  :  That  harlot  shall  be  met  with,  for  that  sermon ;  for  no  man  but  he  and 
thou,  and  such  other  false  harlots,  praiseth  any  such  preaching. 

And  then  the  archbishop  said :  Your  cursed  sect  is  busie,  and  it  ioieth,  right 
greatly,  to  contrary  and  to  destroie  the  priuilege  and  fredome  of  hohe  church. 

And  I  said :  Sir,  I  know  no  men  that  trauell  so  busily  as  this  sect  dooth, 
which  you  reproue,  to  make  rest  and  peace  in  holie  church.  For  pride, 
couetousnesse,  and  simonie,  which  distrouble  most  holy  church,  this  sect  hateth 
and  fleeth;  and  trauaileth  busilie  to  moue  al  other  men,  in  like  maner,  vnto 
meeknesse,  and  wilfidl  pouertie,  and  charitie,  and  fi'ee  ministring  of  the  sacra- 
ments :  this  sect  lovetli  and  vseth,  and  is  full  busie  to  moue  all  other  folkes 
thus  to  do.  For  these  vertues,  owe  all  members  of  holy  church,  to  their  head 
Christ. 

Then  a  clerke  said  to  the  archbishop :  Sir,  it  is  faiTe  daies,  and  ye  haue  farre 
to  ride  to  night ;  therefore  make  an  end  with  him,  for  hee  will  none  make. 
But  the  more  Sir,  that  ye  busie  you  for  to  draw  him  toward  you,  the  more 
contumare  he  is  made,  and  the  further  fro  you. 

And  then  Malueren  said  to  me :  William,  kneele  down,  and  praie  my  lorde 
of  gi-ace,  and  leaue  all  thy  phantasies,  and  become  a  child  of  holie  church. 

And  I  saide :  Sir,  I  haue  praied  the  archbishop  oft,  and  yet  I  praie  him  for 
the  loue  of  Christ,  that  hee  will  leaue  his  indignation  that  he  hath  against  me ; 
and  that  he  will  suffer  me,  after  my  cunning  and  power,  for  to  doe  mine  office 
of  priesthood,  as  I  am  charged  of  God  to  do  it.  For  I  couet  nought  else  but 
to  serue  my  God  to  his  pleasing,  in  the  state  that  I  stand  in,  and  haue  taken 
me  to. 

And  the  archbishop  said  to  me :  If  of  good  hart  thou  wilt  submit  thee  now 
here  meeklie,  to  be  ruled  from  this  time  forth  by  my  counsel,  obeying  meeklie 
and  wilfullie  to  mine  ordinance,  thou  shalt  find  it  most  profitable  and  best  to 
thee  for  to  do  thus.  Therefore  tarrie  thou  me  no  lenger;  grant  to  do  this  that 
I  haue  said  to  thee  now  here  shortlie,  or  denie  it  vtterlie. 


HIS    LEARNED    ANSWERS    AND    WITTY    UUESTIONS.  270 

And  I  said  to  the  archbishop :  Sir,  owe  we  to  beleeue  tluit  Jesu  Christ  was    Henry 
and  is,  vcrie  God  and  verie  man  ?  ^^• 


And  tlie  archbishop  said.  Yea.  *    j) 

And  I  said:  Sir,  owe  we  to  beleeue  that  all  Christes  lining  and  his  teaching    j^qo 

is  true  in  eucrie  point  ?  1- 

And  he  said,  Yea. 

And  I  said :  Sir,  owe  we  to  beleeue,  that  the  living  of  the  apostles,  and  the 
teaching  of  Clirist,  and  all  the  prophets,  are  true,  which  are  written  in  the 
Bible,  for  the  health  and  saluation  of  good  people  ? 

And  he  said.  Yea. 

And  I  said :  Sir,  owe  all  christen  men  and  women,  after  their  cunning  and 
power,  for  to  confonne  all  their  lining  to  tlie  teaching  speciallie  of  Christ,  and 
also  to  the  teaching  and  lining  of  his  apostles  and  of  prophetes,  in  things  tha 
are  pleasant  to  God,  and  edification  of  his  church  ? 

And  he  said.  Yea. 

And  1  said :  Sir,  ought  the  doctrine,  the  bidding,  or  the  counsell  of  any  bodie, 
to  bee  accepted  or  obeied  vnto,  except  this  doctiin,  these  biddings,  or  this 
counsel,  may  be  granted  and  affirmed  by  Christ's  lining  and  his  teaching  spe- 
ciallie, or  by  the  liuing  and  teaching  of  his  apostles  and  prophets  ? 

And  the  archbishop  said  to  me :    Other  doctrine  ought  not  to  bee  accepted.  And  wiiy 
nor  we  owe  not  to  obeie  to  any  man's  bidding  or  counsel,  except  we  can  per-  '°™''5! , 
ceine  that  his  bidding  or  counsel  accordeth  with  the  life  and  teaching  of  Christ,  man  to 
and  of  his  apostles  and  prophets.  'h^  ^^on- 

And  I  said :  Sir,  is  not  all  the  learning,  and  biddings  and  counsels  of  holie  xhorpe 
church,   meanes  and  healefull  remedies,  to  know  and  to  withstand  the  priuy  content  to 
suggestions,  and  the  aperte  temptations  of  the  fiende?    and  also  waies  and  u"'"°'f{- 
healefull  remedies  to  slea  pride  and  all  other  deadly  sinnes,  and  the  braunches  to  the 
of  them,  and  soueraigne  meanes  to  purchase  grace,  for  to  withstand  and  ouer-  ordinance 
come  all  the  fleshlie  lusts  and  mouings  ?  cils."*^"* 

And  the  archbishop  said.  Yea. 

And  I  said :  Sir,  whatsoeuer  thing  ye  or  any  other  body  bid  or  counsell  me 
to  do,  accordingly  to  this  foresaid  learning,  after  my  cunning  and  power, 
through  the  helpe  of  God,  I  will  meekely,  with  all  my  heart,  obey  thereto. 

And  the  archbishop  said  to  me :  Submit  thee  than  now  here  meekly  and 
wilfully,  to  the  ordinance  of  holie  chiu-ch,  which  I  shall  shew  to  thee. 

And  I  said :  Sir,  accordingly  as  I  haue  here  now  before  you  rehearsed,  I  will 
now  be  readie  to  obeie  full  gladlie  to  Christ,  the  head  of  the  holie  church,  and 
to  the  learning,  and  biddings,  and  counsels,  of  euerie  pleasing  member  of  him. 

Then  the  archbishop,  striking  with  his  hand  fiercely  \^on  a  cupbord,*  spake 
to  me  with  a  great  spirit,  sayhig :  By  Jesu,  but  if  thou  leaue  not  such  additions, 
obliging  thee  now  here,  without  any  exception,  to  mine  ordinance,  or  that  I  go 
out  of  tliis  place,  I  shall  make  thee  as  sure,  as  any  theefe  that  is  in  the  prison 
of  Lanterne :  aduise  thee  now  what  thou  wilt  do.  And  then,  as  if  he  had 
beene  angred,  he  went  fro  the  cupbord  where  he  stood,  to  a  window. 

And  then  Malueren  and  an  other  clerke  came  nearer  me,  and  they  spake  to 
me  many  words  full  pleasantly ;  and  an  other  while  they  manassed  me,  and 
counselled  fidl  busily  to  submitte  me,   or  else,  they  said,  I  should  not  escape 
punishing  ouer  measure :    for  the  said,    I   should  be  degi'aded,  cursed,   and 
burned,  and  so  then  damned.     But  now  they  said,  Thou  maist  eschew  al  these 
mischiefes,  if  thou  wilt  submit  thee  wilfidly  and  meekly  to  this  worthie  prelate, 
that  hath  cure  of  thy  soul.     And  for  the  pittie  of  Christ  (said  they)  bethinke 
thee,  bow  great  clerks  the  bishop  of  Lincoln,  Herford,  and  Puruey  were,  and 
yet  are,  and  also  B.,  that  is  a  well  vndcrstanding  man,  which  also  haue  for-  jj,e  mul 
saken  and  reuoked,  all  the  learning  and  opinions,  that  thou  and  such  other  titude  is 
hold.2    Wherefore,  since  each  of  them  is  mikle  wiser  then  thou  art,  we  counsell  "JJio'^elT 
thee  for  the  best,  that  by  the  example  of  these  foure  clerkcs,  thou  follow  them,  in  evil. 
submitting  thee  as  they  did. 

And  one  of  the  bishops  clerkes  said  then  there,  that  hce  heard  Nicoll  Herford 
say,  that  since  he  forsooke  and  reuoked  all  the  learning  and  Lollards  opinions, 
he  hath  had  mikle  greater  fauour  and  more  dclite  to  hold  agiiinst  them,  then 
euer  he  had  to  hold  with  them,  while  he  held  with  them. 

(1)  If  Bonner  had  been  here,  he  would  not  have  stroken  the  cuubo^d. 

(2)  See  what  man  is,  God  giving  him  up  to  himself. 


^80  THE    EXAMINATION    OF    WILLIAM    THORPE. 

jfenry        And  therefore  Maluereu  said  to  me :  I  \Tiderstand,  and  thou  wilt  take  thee 
ly-      to  a  priest,  and  sln-iue  thee  cleane,i  forsake  all  such  opinions,  and  take  the 
^  J)      penance  of  my  lord  heere,  for  the  holding  and  teacliing  of  them,  within  short 
1409*     time,  thou  slialt  he  greatly  comforted  in  this  doing. 

'—      And  I  said  to  the  clerkes,  that  thus  busilie    counselled  me  to  follow  these 

foresaid  men  :  Sirs,  if  these  men,  of  whome  yc  counsel  me  to  take  example,  had 
forsaken  benefices  of  temporall  profite,  and  of  worldly  worship,  so  that  they  had 
absented  them,  and  eschewed  from  all  occasions  of  couetousness  and  of  fleshly 
lusts,  and  had  taken  vpon  them  simple  lining,  and  wilfidl  pouertie,  they  had 
herein  giuen  good  example  to  me  and  to  many  other,  to  haue  followed  them. 
But  now,  since  all  these  foure  men,  haue  slanderously  and  shamefully  done  the 
conh-arie,  consenting  to  receiue,  and  to  haue  and  to  hold  temporall  benefices, 
lining  now  more  worldly  and  more  fleshlie  then  they  did  before,  conforming 
them  to  the  maners  of  this  world,  I  forsake  them  herein,  and  in  all  their  fore- 
said slanderous  doing.     For  I  purpose,  with  the  helpe  of  God  (into  remission  of 
other        j^^y  sinnes,  and  of  my  foule  cursed  lining),  to  hate  and  to  flee  priuily  and  apertly, 
amples      to  follow  these  men,  teaching  and  counselling,  whom  so  euer  that  I  may,  for  to 
are  so  to    flee  and  eschew  the  way  that  they  haue  chosen  to  go  in,  which  wil  lead  them 
ed  as°^  *-°  *'^^  worst  end  (if  in  conuenient  time  they  repent  them  not),  verely  forsaking 
they  be     and  reuoking  openly  the  slander  that  they  haue  put,  and  euery  day  yet  put,  to 
f*^,^  ^       Christs  church.     For  certaine,  so  open  blasphemy  and  slander  as  they  haue 
of  Christ,  spoken  and   done,  in  their  reuoking  and  forsaking  of  the  truth,  ought  not, 
nor  may  not,  priuilie  be  amended  duly.     Wherefore  Sirs,  I  pray  you  that  you 
busie  not  for  to  moue  me  to  follow  these  men,  in  reuoking  and  forsaking  the 
truth,  and  sothfastnes  as  they  have  done,  and  yet  doe :  wherein,  by  open  eiu- 
dence,  they  stin-e  God  to  great  wroth,  and  not  only  against  themselues,  but  also 
against  all  them  that  fauor  them,  or  consent  to  them  herein,  or  that  com- 
muneth  with  them,  except  it  be  for  their  amendment ;  for  whereas  these  men  first 
were  pursued  of  enemies,  nowe  they  haue  obliged  them,  by  oth,  for  to  slander 
and  pursue  Christ  in  his  members.  Wherefore  (as  I  trust  stedfastly  in  the  good- 
nesse  of  God)   the  worldly  couetousnes,  and  the  lustie  lining,  and  the  sliding 
from  the  truth,  of  those  runnagates,  shall  be  to  me,  and  to  many  other  men  and 
woiuen,  an  example  and  an  euidence,  to  stand  more  stifly  by  the  truth  of  Christ. 
Promo-  For  certaine,  right  many  men  and  women,  doe  marke  and  abhorre  the  foul- 

tions  and  nesse  and  cowardnes  of  these  foresaid  vntrue  men,  how  that  they  are  ouercome 
Hv^ings  "^^^  stopped  with  benefices,  and  withdrawn  fi'om  the  truth  of  Gods  word,  for- 
choke  saking  vtterly  to  suffer  therfore  bodily  persecution.  For  by  this  unfaithfull 
truth.  doing  and  apostasie  of  them  (specialle  that  are  great  lettered  men,  and  haue 
knowledged  openly  the  ti-uth,  and  now,  either  for  pleasure  or  displeasure  of 
tyrantes,  haue  taken  hire  and  temporall  wages  to  forsake  the  truth,  and  to  hold 
Men  against  it,  slandering  and  pursuing  them  that  couet  to  follow  Christ  in  the  way 
following  of  righteousnes),  many  men  and  women  therefore  are  now  moued.  But  many 
of^  wajs  j^^^  thorow  the  grace  of  God,  shall  be  moued  hereby  for  to  learne  the  truth  of 
BaJaam.    God,  and  to  do  therafter,  and  to  stand  boldly  thereby. 

Then  the  archbishop  said  to  his  clerks :  Busie  you  no  longer  about  him,  for 

he  and  other  such  as  he  is,  are  confedered  together  that  they  will  not  sweare  to 

Thorpe's    be  obedient,  and  to  submit  them  to  prelates  of  holy  church.      For  nowe  since  I 

ftiseth  to"  stood  here,  his  fellow  also  sent  me  word,  that  he  will  not  sweare,  and  that  this 

swear  to    fellow  counselled  liim,  that  hee  should  not  sweare  to  me.     And,  losell !  in  that 

the  pre-     tl^jng  that  in  thee  is,  thou  hast  busied  thee  to  loose  this  young  man  ;  but,  blessed 

be  God,  thou  shalt  not  haue  thy  purpose  of  him.     For  he  hath  forsaken  all  thy 

learning,  submitting  him,  to  be  buxum  and  obedient  to  the  ordinance  of  holy 

church,  and  weepeth  full  bitterhe,  and  curseth  thee  fidl  heartily,  for  the  vene- 

mous  teaching  which  thou  hast  shewed  to  him,  counselling  him  to  do  thereafter. 

And  for  thy  false  counselling  of  many  other  and  him,  thou  hast  great  cause 

to  be  right  sory,  for  long  time  thou  hast  busied  thee  to  peruert  whomsoeuer 

thou  mightcst.     Therefore,  as  many  deathes  thou  art  worthie  of,  as  thou  hast 

giuen  cuill   counsels.     And  therefore,  by  Jesu,  thou  shalt  go  thether,  where 

Nicoll  Harford  and  Thomas  Puruey  were  harbored.     And  I  undertake,  or  this 

day  eight-daies,  thou  shalt  be  right  glad  for  to  do  what  thing  that  euer  I  bid 

thee  to  do.  And,  losell !  I  shall  assay,  if  I  can  make  thee  there  as  son-owfull  as, 

(1)  As  clean  froia  thrift  as  ftam  sin. 


HIS    I.F.ARXEl)    ANSWERS    AXI)    WITTV    QITESTIOXS.  281 

it  was  told  mo,  thou  wast  glad  of  my  last  going  out  of  England.   By  St.  Thomas,  ife,ir,j 

I  shall  turne  thy  ioy  into  sorrow.  ^^" 

And  I  said:  Sir,  there  can  no  bodie  prone  lawfidly,  that  I  ioied  euer,  of  the  ,^  ^ 

manor  of  your  going  out  of  this  land.  j  jQy_ 

But  Sir,  to  say  the  soth,  I  was  ioyfnll  when  ye  were  gone;  for  the  bishop  of 


London,  in  whose  prison  ye  left  me,  found  in  me  no  cause  for  to  hold  mc  lenger  Arundtll 
in  his  prison,  but,  at  the  request  of  my  frends,  he  deliuered  me  to  them,  asking  ^7 'icng""' 
of  me  no  maner  of  submitting.  land. 

'J'hen  the  archbisliop  said  to  me:  Wherefore  that  I  yede  out  of  England,  is  j^,'^,'^"J^"^^ 
vnknowne  to  thee ;  but  bee  this  thing  well  knowne  to  thee,  that  God  (as  I  wote  f,,g 
well)  hath  called  me  againe,  and  brought  mc  into  this  land,  for  to  destroie  thee  bishop  of 
and  the  false  sect  that  thou  art  of;  as)  by  God,  I  shall  pursue  you  so  narrowly,  ^o'"!""- 
that  I  shall  iu)t  leaue  a  slip  of  you  in  this  land.^ 

And  I  said  to  the  archbisliop :  Sir,  the  holy  prophet  Jeremy  said  to  the  false  A  notable 
prophet  Anany  :  When  the  word  that  is  the  prophecie  of  a  prophet,  is  knowne  '^",p^g  "^ 
or  fulfilled,  then  it  sliall  be  knowne,  that  the  Lord  sent  the  prophet  in  truth.        tbe 

And  the  archbishop,  as  if  he  had  not  beene  pleased  with  my  saying,  turned  bishop, 
him  awayward  hether  and  thether,  and  said :  By  God,  I  shall  set  vpon  thy 
shinnes  apaire  of  pearles,^  that  thou  shalt  be  glad  to  change  thy  voice. 

These,  and  many  moe  wonderous  and  conuicious  wordes  were  spoken  to  me, 
manassing  mc  and  all  other  of  the  same  sect,  for  to  be  punished  and  destroyed 
vnto  the  vttermost. 

And  the  archbishop  called  then  to  him  a  clcrke,  and  rowned  with  him  :  and 
thatclerke  went  forth,  and  soone  he  brought  in  the  constable  of  Saltwood  Castle, 
and  the  archbishop  rowned  a  good  while  with  him :  and  then  the  constable  went 
forth,  and  then  came  in  diners  seculars,  and  they  scorned  me  on  eucrie  side, 
and  manassed  me  greatly.*  And  some  counselled  the  archbishop  to  burne  me 
by  and  by,  and  some  other  counselled  him  to  drowne  me  in  the  sea,  for  it  is 
neare  hand  there. 

And  a  clerke,  standing  beside  me  there,  kneeled  downe  to  the  archbishop, 
praying  him  that  he  would  deliuer  me  to  him  for  to  say  mattins  with  him  ;  and 
he  would  vndertake,  that  within  three  daies,  I  should  not  resist  any  thing  that 
were  commanded  me  to  do  of  my  prelate. 

And  the  archl)ishop  said,  that  he  would  ordaine  for  me  himselfe. 

And  then  after,  came  againe  the  constable,  and  spake  priuilie  to  the  arch- 
bishop. And  the  archbishop  commanded  the  constable  to  lead  me  forth  thence 
with  him,  and  so  he  did.  And  when  we  were  gone  forth  thence,  we  were  sent 
after  againe.  And  when  I  came  in  againe  before  the  archbishop,  a  clerke  bad 
me  kneele  downe,  and  aske  grace,  and  submit  me  lowlie,  and  I  should  find  it 
for  the  best. 

And  I  said  then  to  the  archbishop :  Sir,  as  I  haue  said  to  you  diners  times  to  Obe- 
daie,  I  will  wilfuUie  and  lowlie  obey  and  submit  me  to  be  ordeined  euer,  aller  g^^' g*;,!," 
my  cunning  and  power,  to  God  and  to  his  law,  and  to  euery  member  of  holy  to  his  law 
church,  as  "far  forth  as  I  can  perceiue  that  members  accord  with  their  head  would  not 
Christ,  and  will  teach  me,  rule  me,  or  chastise  me  by  authoritie,  speciallie  of  ^'^'^^'^• 
Gods  law. 

And  the  archbishop  said :  I  wist  well  he  would  not,  without  such  additions, 
sv)bbmit  him. 

And  then  I  was  rebuked,  scorned,  and  manassed  on  euerie  side:  and  yet 
after  this,  diners  persons  cried  vpon  me  to  kneele  downe  and  submit  me,  but  I 
stoodc  still,  and  spake  no  word.  And  then  there  was  spoken  of  me  and  to  mc 
many  great  words,  and  I  stoode  and  heard  them  manasse,  cursse  and  scorne  me  : 
but  I  said  nothing.  ^  j„ 

Then  a  while  after,  the  archbishop  said  to  me :  Wilt  thou  not  submit  thee  to  patience 
the  ordinance  of  holy  church  ?  a"<l 

And  I  said :  Sir,  I  will  full  gladhc  submitte  me,  as  I  haue  shewed  you  before.  p„ss"ess 

And  then  the  archbishop  bad  the  constable  to  haue  me  forth  thence  in  haste,  your 

And  so  then  I  was  led  forth,  and  brought  intoafoule  vnhonest  prison,  where  ^"^^l^- 
I  came  ncuer  before.   But,  thanked  be  God,  when  all  men  were  gone  forth  then  ^ast  in 
from  me,  and  had  sparred  fast  the  prison  doore  after  them,  by  and  by  after,  I,  prison. 

(1)  So  promised  Winchester  in  queen  Mar)-'s  time,  but  that  passed  his  power  to  perform. 

(2)  Such  pearls  would  better  beseem,  my  lord,  your  golden  shoes. 

(3)  '  At  illi  clamabans  dicentes,  Tollc,  toUe,  crucifige  eum.* 


!^82  THE    TESTAMENT    OF    WILLIAM    THORPE. 

Henry   therein  by  my  selfe,  busied  me  to  thinke  on  God,  and  to  thanke  him  for  his 

^^-      goodnesse.     And  I  was  then  greatly  comforted  in  all  my  wits,  not  onely  for 

.    T-v     that  I  was  then  deliuered  for  a  time  from  the  sight,  from  the  hearing,  from  the 

140Q*    l""esence,  from  the  scorning,  and  from  the  manassing  of  mine  enemies;  but 

much  more  I  reioysed  in  the  Lord,  because  that  through  his  grace  he  kept  me 


Comfort-  so,  both  among  the  flattering  speciallie,  and  among  the  manassing  of  mine 
strength-  aduersaries,  that,  without  heauinesse  and  angiush  of  my  conscience,  I  passed 
ened  of  awaie  from  them.  For,  as  a  tree  layd  vpon  an  other  tree,  ouerthwart  or  crosse 
'ft^  ^]-^'  wise,  so  was  the  archbishop  and  his  three  clerkes  alwaies  contrairie  co  me,  and 
conHict      I  to  them. 

with  the  Now,  good  God !  for  thine  holie  name,  and  to  the  praising  of  thy  most  blessed 
bishop,  jiame,  make  vs  one  together,  if  it  be  thy  will  (by  authority  of  thy  word,  that  is 
true  perfite  charitie),  and  els  not.  And  that  it  may  thus  be,  all  that  this  writing 
reade  or  heare,  praie  hartelie  to  the  Lord  God,  that  he,  for  his  great  goodnesse 
that  can  not  be  with  toong  expressed,  graunt  to  us  and  to  all  other,  which,  in 
the  same  wise,  and  for  the  same  cause  speciallie,  or  for  anie  other  cause,  be  at 
distance,  to  be  knit  and  made  one  in  true  faith,  in  stedfast  hope,  and  in  perfite 
charitie.  Amen. 

Besides  this  examination  here  above  described,  came  another  trea- 
tise also  to  our  hands  of  the  same  William  Thorpe,  under  the  name 
and  title  of  his  testament ;  which  rather  by  the  matter  and  handling 
thereof  might  seem  to  be  counted  a  complaint  of  vicious  priests ; 
which  treatise  or  testament,  in  this  place  we  thought  not  meet  to  be 
left  out. 

The  Testament  of  William  Thorpe. 

Matthew,  an  apostle  of  Christ,  and  his  gospeller,  witnesseth  truly  in  the  holy 

gospel,  the  most  holy  living,  and  the  most  wholesome  teaching  of  Christ.     He 

rehearseth  how  that  Christ  likeneth  them  that  hear  his  words,  and  keep  them, 

to  a  wise  man  that  buildeth  his  house  upon  a  stone,  that  is,  a  stable  and  a  sure 

Christ       ground.     This  house  is  man's  soul,  in  which  Christ  delighteth  to  dwell,  if  it  be 

dwelleth    grounded,  that  is,  established  faithfully,  in  his  living  and  in  his  true  teacliing, 

inataith-  adorned  or  made  fair  with  divers  virtues,  which  Christ  used  and  taught  without 

any  meddling  of  any  error,  as  are  chiefly  the  conditions  of  charity. 
He  is  the       This  aforesaid  stone  is  Christ,  upon  which  every  faithful  soul  must  be  builded  ; 
stone        since,  upon  none  other  ground  than  upon  Christ's  living  and  his  teaching,  any  body 
we  must   ™^y  make  any  building  or  housing  wherein  Christ  will  come  and  dwell.     This 
build.       sentence  witnesseth  St.  Paul  to  the  Corinthians,  showing  to  them  that  no  body 
may  set  any  other  groimd  than  is  set,  that  is  Christ's  living  and  teaching.  And 
because  that  all  men  and  women  should  give  all  their  business  here  in  this  life, 
to  build  them  virtuously  upon  this  sure  fomidation,  St.  Paul,  acknowledging  the 
fervent  desire,  and  the  good  will  of  the  people  of  Ephesus,  wrote  to  them  coni- 
How  we    fortably,  saying,  '  Now  ye  are  not  strangers,  guests,  nor  yet  comelings,  but  ye 
are  made  jjj.j>  ^^^  citizens,  and  of  the  household  of  God,  builded  above  upon  the  founda- 
ple  of       dament  of' the  apostles  and  prophets.     In  which  foundament,  eveiy  building 
tiuJ-         that  is  builded  or  made  through  the  grace  of  God,  it  increaseth  or  groweth  into 
an  holy  temple  ;'  that  is,  every  body  that  is  grounded  or  builded  faithfully  in 
the  teaching  and  living  of  Christ,  is  there  through  made  the  holy  temple  of  God. 
This  is  the  stable  ground  and  steadfast  stone  Christ,  which  is  the  sui'e  corner- 
Mark        stone,  fast  joining,  and  holding  mightily  together,  two  walls.  For  through  Christ 
wiiat  we    Jesus,  the  mean  or  middle  person  of  the  Trinity,  the  Father  of  Heaven,  is  piti- 
christ.      ously  or  mercifully  joined  and  made  one  together  to  mankind ;  and  through 
dread  to  offend  God,  and  fervent  love  to  please  him,  men  be  inseparably  made 
one  to  God,  and  defended  surely  under  his  protection.  Also  this  aforesaid  stone 
Christ,  was  figured  by  the  square  stones  of  which  the  temple  of  God  was  made ; 
The  pro-   for  as  a  square  stone,  wheresoever  it  is  cast  or  laid,  abideth  and  lieth  stably  ;  so 
sqiwre^  ^  Chiist  and  every  faithful  member  of  his  church,  by  example  of  him,  abideth  and 
Btoiie.       dwelleth  stably  in  tme  faith,  and  in  all  other  heavenly  virtues  in  all  adversities 
that  they  suffer  in  this  valley  of  tears. 


THE    TESTAMENT    OF    WILLIAM    THORPE.  f283 

For  lo !  when  these  aforesaid  square  stones  were  hewen  and  wrought  for  to    Henry 
be  laid  in  tlie  walls  or  pillars  of  God's  temple,  no  noise  or  stroke  of  the  work-       ^^■ 
man  was  heard.     Certain,  this  silence  in  working  of  this  stone  figureth  Christ  ~T~n~" 
chiefly,  and  his  faithful  members,  who,  by  example  of  him,  have  been,  and  yet    i4qq' 

are,  and  ever  to  the  world's  end  shall  be,  so  meek  and  patient  in  every  adver-  '— 

sity,  that  no  sound,  nor  yet  any  grudging,  shall  at  any  time  be  perceived  in  them. 

Nevertheless,  this  chief  and  most  worshipfid  corner-stone,  which  only  is  the 
ground  of  all  virtues,  proud  beggars  reproved  ;  but  this  despite  and  reproof  Christ  Christ  an 
suffered  most  meekly  in  his  own  person,  to  give  example  of  all  meekness  and  ^j^^^n^P'^ 
patience  to  all  his  faithful  followers.     Certain,  this  world  is  now  so  full  of  proud  feet 
beggars,  who  are  named  priests ;  but  the  very  office  of  working  of  priesthood,  nieek- 
which  Christ  approveth  true,  and  accepteth,  is  far  from  the  multitude  of  priests  "^^'' 
that  now  reign  in  this  world. 

For,  from  the  highest  priest  to  the  lowest,  all,  as  they  say,  study,  that  is,  they  Priests 
imagine  and  travail  busily,  how  they  may  please  this  world  and  their  flesh,  ^'z^^  "'^ 
This  sentence  with  many  such  others  dependeth  upon  them,  if  it  be  well  consi-  o/tlfis"* 
dered:  either  God,  the  Father  of  heaven,  hath  deceived  all   mankind  by  the  world, 
living  and  teaching   of  Jesus  Christ,  and  by  the  living   and  teaching  of  his 
apostles  and  prophets ;  or  else  all  the  popes  that  have  been  since  I  had  any  The  lives 
knowledge  or  discretion,   with    all  the   college  of  cardinals,  archbishops  and"*^"'^ 
bishops,  monks,  canons,  and  friars,  with  all  the  contagious  flock  of  the  com-  and   ' 
monalty  of  priesthood,  who  have,  all  my  life  time,  and  mickle  longer,  reigned  Christ 
and  yet  reign,   and  increase  damnably  from  sin  to  sin,   have  been,  and  yet  apostles 
be,  proud,  obstinate  heretics,  covetous  sinners,  and  defouled  adulterers  in  the 
ministering  of  the  sacraments,  and  specially  in  the  ministering  of  the  sacrament 
of  the  altar.    For,  as  their  works  show,  whereto  Christ  biddeth  us  take  heed,  the 
highest  priests  and  prelates  of  this  priesthood,   challenge  and  occupy  unlawful 
temporal  lordships ;  and,  for  temporal  favour  and  meed,  they  sell  and  give  bene- 
fices to  unworthy  and  unable  persons  ;^  yea,  these  simoners  sell  sin,  suflering  men 
and  women,  in  every  degi-ee  and  estate,  to  lie  and  continue  from  year  to  year  in 
divers  vices  slanderously.     And  thus,  by  e\dl  example  of  high  priests  in  the 
church,  lower  priests  under  them  are  not  only  suffered,  but  they  are  maintained, 
to  sell  full  dear  to  the  people,  for  temporal  meed,  all  the  sacraments. 

And  thus  all  this  aforesaid  priesthood  is  blown  so  high,  and  borne  up  in  pride  Fleshly 
and  vain  glory  of  their  estate  and  dignity,  and  so  blinded  with  worldly  covet-  P"ests. 
ousness,  that  they  disdain  to  follow  Christ  in  very  meekness  and  wilful  poverty, 
living  holily,  and  preaching  God's  word  truly,  freely,  and  continually,  taking 
their  livelihood  at  the  free  will  of  the  people,  of  their  pure  alms,  where  and  when 
they  suffice  not,  for  their  true  and  busy  preaching,  to  get  their  sustenance  with 
their  hands.  To  this  true  sentence,  grounded  on  Christ's  own  living,  and  the 
teaching  of  his  apostles,  these  aforesaid  worldly  and  fleshly  priests  will  not  con- 
sent effectually ;  but,  as  their  works  and  also  their  words  show,  boldly  and  un-  They 

shamefacedly  these  beforenamed  priests  and  prelates  covet  and  enforce  them  !\"."'^^f'7 

•    1    •!  1  1       •!        1  11  1     1  •  1111  1    '"IS,  with 

mightily  and  busily,  that  all  holy  scriptures  were  expounded  and  drawn  accord-  tooth  and 

ingly  to  their  manners,  and  to  their  ungrounded  usages  and  findings ;  for  they  nail. 

will  not  (since  they  hold  it  but  folly  and  madness)  confomi  their  manners  to  the 

fiure  and  simple  liN-ing  of  Christ  and  his  apostles,  nor  will  they  follow  freely  their 
earning.    Wherefore  all  the  emperors  and  kings,  and  all  other  lords  and  ladies.  An  ex- 
and  all  the  common  people  in  every  degree  and  state,  who  have  before  time  hortatiou 
known,  or  might  have  known,   and  also  all  they  that  now  yet  know,  or  might  J^je^st- 
know,  this  aforesaid  witness  of  priesthood,  and  would  not ;  nor  yet  will  enforce  hood 
them,  after  their  cunning  and  power,  to  withstand  charitably  the  aforesaid  ene-  amended, 
mies  and  traitors  of  Christ,  and  of  his  church  :  all  these  strive  with  Antichrist 
against  Jesus,  and  they  shall  hear  the  indignation  of  God  Almighty  without  end, 
if  in  convenient  time  they  amend  them  not  and  repent  them  veiily,  doing  there- 
for due  mourning  and  sorrow,  after  their  cunning  and  power.     For,  through  Prelates 
presumptuousness  and  negligence  of  priests  and  prelates  (not  of  the  church  of  ='".'' 
Christ,  but  occupying  their  prelacy  unduly  in  the  church),  and  also  through  {Jegu^rent 
flattering  and  false  covetousncss  of  other  divers  named  priests,  lousengers  and  in  their 
lounderers  are  wrongfully  made  and  named  hermits,  and  have  leave  to  defraud  '^"'^" 
poor  and  needy  creatures  of  their  livelihood,  and  to  live,  by  their  false  winning 

(11  When  priests  forget  God's  truth,  ye  see  whither  they  run  headlong.    The  great  infect  the 
small. 


S84  TlIE    TESTAMENT    OF    WILLIAM    THORPE. 

Henry    and  begging,  in  sloth  and  in  other  divers  vices.     And  also  by  these  prelates, 

^^-      these  cokei'-noses  are  suffered  to  live  in  pride  and  hypocrisy,  and  to  defoul  them- 

.    x^     selves  both  bodily  and  ghostly.     Also  by  the   suffering  and  counsel  of  these 

1  ir>q'    ^foi'esaid  prelates  and  other  priests,  are  made  both  vain  brotherhoods  and  sister- 

hoods,  full  of  pride  and  envy,  which  are  full  contrary  to  the  brotherhood  of 

Christ,  since  they  are  cause  of  mickle  dissension,  and  they  multiply  and  sustain 
it  uncharitably :  for,  in  lusty  eating  and  drinking,  unmeasurably  and  out  of 
time,  they  exercise  themselves.  Also  this  vain  confederacy  of  brotherhood  is 
permitted  to  be  of  one  clothing,  and  to  hold  together. 

And  in  all  these  migrounded  and  unlawful  doings,  priests  are  partners,  and  -- «^ 
great  meddlers  and  counsellors ;  and  over  this  viciousness,  hermits  and  pardoners,         \^ 
anchorites  and  strange  beggars,  are  licensed  and  admitted  by  prelates  and  priests, 
to  beguile  the  people  with  flatterings  and  leasings  slanderously  against  all  good 
reason  and  true  belief;  and  so  to  increase  divers  vices  in  themselves,  and  also 
among  all  them  that  accept  them,  or  consent  to  them. 

And  thus  the  viciousness  of  these  aforenamed  priests  and  prelates  hath  been 
long  time,  and  yet  is,  and  shall  be  cause  of  wars,  both  within  the  realm  and  with- 
out. And  in  the  same  wise  these  unable  priests  have  been,  and  yet  are,  and 
shall  be,  the  chief  cause  of  pestilence  of  men,  and  miurain  of  beasts,  and  of  bar- 
renness of  the  earth,  and  of  all  other  mischiefs,  to  the  time  that  the  lords  and 
commons  able  them,  through  grace,  to  know  and  to  keep  the  commandments 
of  God,  enforcing  them  then,  faithfully  and  charitably,  by  one  assent,  to  redress 
and  make  one  this  aforesaid  priesthood,  to  the  wilful,  poor,  meek  and  innocent 
living  and  teaching,  specially  of  Christ  and  his  apostles. 

Therefore  all  they  that  know,  or  might  know  the  \aciousness  that  reigneth 
now  cursedly  in  these  priests,  and  in  their  learning,  if  they  suffice  not  to  under- 
stand this  contagious  viciousness,  let  them  pray  to  the  Lord  heartily  for  the  health 
of  his  church,  abstaining  them  prudently  from  the  obdurate  enemies  of  Christ 
and  of  his  people,  and  from  all  their  sacraments,  since  to  all  them  that  know 
them,  or  may  know  them,  they  are  but  fleshly  deeds  and  false ;  as  St.  Cyprian 
witnesseth  in  the  first  question  of  decrees,  and  in  the  first  cause.  Cap.  '  Siquis 
inquit:'  for,  as  this  saint  and  great  doctor  witnesseth  there,  not  only  vicious 
priests,  but  also  all  they  that  favour  them,  or  consent  to  them  in  their  vicious- 
ness, shall  together  perish  with  them,  if  they  amend  them  not  duly ;  as  all  they 
perished,  that  consented  to  Dathan  and  Abiram.  For  nothing  were  more  con- 
fusion to  these  aforesaid  vicious  priests,  than  to  eschew  them  prudently  in  all 
their  unlawful  sacraments,  while  they  continue  in  their  sinfid  living  slander- 
ously, as  they  have  long  time  done,  and  yet  do.  And  no  body  needs  to  be 
afraid,  though  death  did  follow  by  one  way  or  other,  to  die  out  of  this  world, 
without  taking  of  any  sacrament  of  these  aforesaid  Christ's  enemies,  since  Christ 
will  not  fail  to  minister,  himself,  all  lawful  and  healful  sacraments,  and  necessary 
at  all  time,  and  especially  at  the  end,  to  all  them  that  are  in  true  faith,  in  stead- 
fast hope,  and  in  perfect  charity. 

But  yet  some  mad  fools  say,  to  eschew  slander,  they  will  be  shriven  once  in 
the  year,  and  communed  of  their  proper  priests,  though  they  know  them  defouled 
with  slanderous  vices.  No  doubt  but  all  they  that  thus  do  or  consent,  privily 
or  apertly,  to  such  doing,  are  cidpable  of  great  sin  ;  since  St.  Paul  witnesseth, 
that  not  only  they  that  do  evil  are  worthy  of  death  and  damnation,  but  also  they 
that  consent  to  evil  doers.  Also,  as  their  slanderous  works  witness,  these  afore- 
said vicious  priests  despise  and  cast  from  them  heavenly  cunning  that  is  given 
of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Wherefore  the  Lord  throweth  all  such  despisers  from  him, 
that  they  neither  use,  nor  do,  any  priesthood  to  him. 

No  doubt,  then,  all  they  that  wittingly  or  wilfully  take,  or  consent  that  any 
other  body  should  take,  any  sacrament  of  any  such  named  priest,  sin  openly  and 
damnably  against  all  the  Trinity,  and  are  unable  to  any  sacrament  of  health. 

And  that  this  aforesaid  sentence  is  altogether  true,  '  Unto  remission  of  all  my 
sinful  living,  trusting  steadfastly  in  the  mercy  of  God,  I  offer  to  him  my  soul. ' 

And  to  prove  also  the  aforesaid  sentence  tnie,  with  the  help  of  God,  I  pur- 
pose fidly,  to  suffer  meekly  and  gladly  my  most  wretched  body  to  be  tormented 
where  God  will,  of  wliom  he  will,  and  when  he  will,  and  as  long  as  he  will,  and 
what  temporal  pain  and  death  he  will ;  to  the  praising  of  his  name,  and  to  the 
edification  of  his  chm-ch. 

And  I  that  am  a  most  imworthy  and  wretched  caitiff,  shall  now,  through  the 


HIS    END    UNCERTAIK.       THE    STORY    OF    JOHN    PURVEY.  285 

special  grace  of  God,  make  to  him  pleasant  sacrifice  with  my  most  sinfiJ  and    jjennj 
unworthy  body  :  beseeching  heartily  all  folk,  that  read  or  hear  this  end  of  my       ^^- 
purposed  testament,  that,  through  the  grace  of  God,  they  dispose  verily  and  vir-    ^  -^ 
tuously  all  their  wits,  and  able  in  like  manner  all  their  members,  to  understand     j^jgy 

truly,  and  to  keep  faithfully,  charitably,  and  continually,  all  the  commandments  L 

of  God,  and  so  then  to  pray  devoutly  to  all  the  blessed  Trinity,  that  I  may  have 
grace,  with  wisdom  and  prudence  from  above,  to  end  my  life  here  in  this  afore- 
said tnith,  and  for  this  cause;  in  true  faith,  and  steadfast  hope,  and  perfect  cha- 
lity.     Amen. 

AVlmt  Avas  the  end  of  this  good  man,  and  blessed  servant  of  God,  The  end 
William  Thorpe,  I  find  as  yet  in  no  story  specified,     liy  all  conjee-  nam ' " 
tures  it  is  to  be  thought  that  the  archbishop  Thomas  Arundel,  being  j^,',pjjf 
so  hard  an  adversary  against  those  men,  would  not  let  him  go  ;  much  tain. 
less  it  is  to  be  supposed,  that  he  would  ever  retract  his  sentence  and 
opinion,  which  he  so  valiantly  maintained  before  the  bishop ;  neither 
doth  it  seem  that  he  had  any  such  recanting  spirit.     Again,  neither 
is  it  found  that  he  was  burned  ;  wherefore  it  remaineth  most  likely 
to  be  true,  that  he,  being  committed  to  some  straight  prison,  accord- 
ing as  the  archbishop,  in  his  examination   before,  did  threaten   him 
there  (as  Thorpe  confesseth  himself),  was   so   straightly  kept,   that 
either  he  was  secretly  made  away  with,  or  else  he  died  there   by 
sickness. 

The  like  end  also  I  find  to  happen  to  John  Ashton,  another  good 
follower  of  Wickliff,  who,  for  the  same  doctrine  of  the  sacrament, 
was  condemned  by  the  bishops  ;  and,  because  he  would  not  recant, 
he  was  committed  to  perpetual  prison,  wherein  the  good  man  con- 
tinued till  his  death :  a.  d.  1382. 


€:^fc  ^torp  of  Slofjn  jpuvbep. 

Furthermore,  in  the  said  examination  of  William  Thorpe,  mention 
is  made,  as  ye  heard,  of  John  Purvey,  of  whom  also  something  we 
touched  before ;  promising  of  the  said  John  Purvey  more  parti- 
cularly to  treat,  in  order  and  process  of  time.  Of  this  Purvey, 
Thomas  Walden  writeth  thus  in  his  second  tome  :  "  John  Purvey," 
saith  he,  "  was  the  liberator  of  Lollards,  and  a  glosser  upon  Wick- 
liff. He  said  that  the  worshipping  of  Abraham  was  a  salutation." 
And  in  his  third  tome  he  saith,  "  This  John  Purvey,  with  Herford,  john 
a  doctor  of  divinity,  were  grievously  tormented  and  punished  in  the  prisoned 
prison  of  Saltwood,  and  at  length  recanted  at  Paul's  Cross  at  London,  f^^^^^^^ 
Thomas  Arundel  being  then  archbishop  of  Canterbury.  Afterwards  tion. 
again,  he  was  imprisoned  under  Henry  Chicheslcy,  archbishop  of 
Canterbury,  a.  d.  142L"  Thus  much  writeth  Walden.  The  Avorks 
of  this  man  which  he  wrote,  were  gathered  by  Richard  Lavingham, 
his  adversary,  which  I  think  worthy  to  be  remembered.  First,  as 
touching  the  sacrament  of  the  last  supper,  the  sacrament  of  penance, 
the  sacrament  of  orders,  the  power  of  the  keys,  the  preaching  of  the 
gospel,  of  marriages,  of  vows,  of  possessions,  of  the  punishing  and 
correcting  of  the  clergy,  of  the  laws  and  decrees  of  the  church,  of 
the  state  and  condition  of  the  pope  and  the  clergy :  of  all  these 
generally,  he  left  divers  monuments  gravely  and  exactly  written,  part 


286  JOHN    PURVEY    RECANTETH    AT    PAUl/s    CROSS, 

Henry    whcreof  licrc,  in  tlic  end  of  his  story,  we  thought  to  exhibit,  being 
^^'     translated  out  of  Latin  into  English. 


A.  D.        The  articles  which  he  taught,  and  afterwards  was  forced  to  recant 
l^Q^-    at  PauFs  Cross,  were  these  hereafter  following  : 

Articles  of  John  Purvey,  which  he  afterwards  recanted. 

1.  That  in  the  sacrament  of  the  altar,  after  the  consecration,  there  is  not, 
neither  can  be,  any  accident  without  the  subject ;  but  there  verily  remaineth 
the  same  substance,  and  the  very  visible  and  corruptible  bread,  and  likewise  the 
very  same  wine,  which,  before  the  consecration,  were  set  upon  the  altar  to  be 
consecrate  by  the  priest;  like  as  when  a  pagan  or  infidel  is  baptized,  he  is  spi- 
ritually converted  into  a  member  of  Christ  through  grace,  and  yet  remaineth 
the  very  same  man  which  he  before  was,  in  his  proper  nature  and  substance. 

2.  That  auricular  confession,  or  private  penance,  is  a  certain  whispering, 
destroying  the  liberty  of  the  gospel,  and  newly  brought  in  by  the  pope  and  the 
clergy,  to  entangle  the  consciences  of  men  in  sin,  and  to  draw  their  souls  into 
hell. 

3.  That  every  layman  being  holy  and  predestinated  unto  everlasting  life,  * 
albeit  he  be  a  layman,  yet  is  he  a  tnie  priest  before  God.' 

4.  That  divers  prelates  and  others  of  the  clergy  do  live  wickedly,  contrary 
to  the  doctrine  and  example  of  Christ  and  his  apostles :  therefore  they  who  so 
live,  have  not  the  keys  either  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  or  yet  of  hell ;  neither 
ought  any  Christian  to  esteem  their  censure  any  more  than  as  a  thing  of  Jio 
force.  Yea,  albeit  the  pope  should,  peradventure,  interdict  the  realm,  yet  could 
he  not  hurt,  but  rather  profit  us,  forasmuch  as  thereby  we  should  be  dismissed 
from  the  observation  of  his  laws,  and  from  saying  of  service  according  to  the 
custom  of  the  church. 

5.  That  if  any  man  do  make  an  oath  or  vow,  to  keep  perpetual  chastity,  or 
do  any  thing  else  whereunto  God  hath  not  appointed  him  (giving  him  grace  to 
perform  his  purpose),  the  same  vow  or  oath  is  unreasonable  and  indiscreet, 
neither  can  any  prelate  compel  him  to  keep  the  same,  except  he  will  do  con- 
trary unto  God's  ordinance.  But  he  ought  to  commit  him  unto  the  governance 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  of  his  own  conscience ;  forasmuch  as  every  man,  who  will 
not  fulfil  his  vow  or  oath,  cannot  do  it  for  that  cause. 

The  6.  That  whosoever  taketh  upon  him  the  oflfice  of  priesthood,  although  he 

charge  of  have  not  the  charge  of  souls  committed  unto  him  according  to  the  custom  of 
pries  B      jjjg  c]jurch,  not  only  may,  but  ought,  to  preach  the    gospel  freely  unto  the 
people ;  otherwise  he  is  a  thief,  excommunicated   by  God,  and  by  the  holy 
church. 
Against        7.  That  pope  Innocent  III.,  and  six    hundred    bishops,  and   a    thousand 
stantia-'    ^^l^^^  prelates,  with  all  the  rest  of  the  clergy,  who  together  with  the  same  pope 
tion.         agreed  and  determined,  that  in  the  sacrament  of  the  altar,  after  the  conversion 
of  the  bread  and  wine  into  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ,  the  accidents  of  the 
said  bread  and  wine  do  remain  there  without  any  proper  subject  of  the  same; 
who  also  ordained,  that  all  Christians  ought  to  confess  their  sins  once  a  year 
unto  a  proper  priest,  and  to  receive  the  reverend  sacrament  at  Easter,  and  made 
certain  other  laws  at  the  same  time  :  All  they,  saith  he,  in  so  doing,  were  fools 
and  blockheads,  heretics,  blasphemers,  and  seducers  of  christian  people.  Where- 
fore we  ought  not  to  believe  the  determinations  of  them,  or  of  their  successors ; 
neither  ought  we  to  obey  their   laws  or  ordinances,   except  they  be  plainly 
grounded  upon  the  holy  Scriptvure,  or  upon  some  reason  which  cannot  be  im  • 
pugned. 

Other  Articles  drawn  out  of  Purvey's  Books  more  at  large,  by 
Richard  Lavingham. 

As  touching  the  sacrament  of  thanksgiving.  Purvey  saith,  That  that  chapter 
of  repentance  and  remission,  "  Omnis  utriusque  sexus,"  wherein  it  is  ordained, 
that   ev«ry  faithful   man  ought  once  every  year  at  least,  that    is  to  say,  at 

(1)  He  speaketh  of  priests  here,  and  not  of  public  ministers,  appointed  in  the  church. 


ARTICLES    WHICH    HE    TAUGHT.  287 

Easter,  to  receive  the  sacrament  of  the  eucharist,  is  a  beastly  thing,  heretical    Henry 
and  blasphemous.  ^^- 

Item,  That  pope  Innocent  III.  was  the  liead  of  Antichrist,  who,  after  the  letting     ^  jj 
loose  of  Satan,  invented  a  new  article  of  our  faith,  and  a  certain  feigned  verity    i  Van 

touching  the  sacrament  of  the  altar ;   that  is  to  say,  that  the  sacrament  of  the  altar '-L- 

is  an  accident  without  a  substance,  or  else  a  heap  of  accidents  without  a  substance :  The  sa- 
but  Christ  and  his  apostles  do  teach  manifestly,  that  the  sacrament  of  tlie  altar  is  ofthepo- 
bread  and  the  body  of  Christ  together,  after  the  manner  that  he  spake.    And  in  pish  altar, 
that  he  calletli  it  bread,  he  would  have  the  people  to  understand,  as  they  ought 
with  reason,  that  it  is  very  and  substantial  bread,  and  no  false  nor  feigned  bread. 

And  although   Innocent,  that  Anticlirist,  doth  allege,  that  in   the  council  of  Pope  In- 
Lyons,  where  this  matter  was  decided,  were  six  hundred  bishops  with  him,  and  "i"e™ead 
one  thousand  prelates,  who  were  in  one  opinion  of  this  detennination,  all  those  of  Anti- 
notwithstanding,  he  calleth  fools,  accoi-ding  to  that  saying  of  Eccles.  i.  '  Of  fools  christ. 
there  are  an  infinite  number.'  And  so  in  like  manner  he  calleth  them  false  Christs 
and  false  prophets,  of  whom  Christ  speaketh  in  Matthew  xxiv. '  Many  false  Christs 
and  false  prophets  shall  arise,  and  deceive  many.'     And,  therefore,  every  chris-  The  sa- 
tian  man  ought  to  believe  firmly,  that  the  sacrament  of  the  altar  is  very  bread  pament 
indeed,  and  no  false  nor  feigned  bread.     And  although  it  be  very  bread  indeed,  stance, 
•yet  notwithstanding,  it  is  the  very  body  of  Christ  in  that  sort  he  spake,  and  bread ;  in 
called  it  his  body ;  and  so  it  is  very  bread,  and  the  very  body  of  Christ.     And  tion'^he' 
as  Christ,  concerning  his  humanity,  was  both  visible  and  passible,  and  by  his  body  of 
divinity  was  invisible  and  impassible  ;  so  likewise  this  sacrament,  in  that  it  is  Christ. 
very  bread,  may  be  seen  with  the  corporal  eye,  and  may  also  abide  coiTuption. 
But  although  a  man  may  see  that  sacrament,  yet  notwithstanding  cannot  the 
body  of  Christ  in  that  sacrament  be  seen  with  the  coi-poral  eye,  although  it  be 
the  body  of  Christ  in  that  manner  he  spake  it ;  for,  that  notwithstanding,  the 
body  of  Christ  is  now  incorruptible  in  heaven.     So  the  sacrament  of  the  cup  is  stantia- ' 
very  wine,  and  the  very  blood  of  Christ,  according  as  his  manner  of  speaking  tion  not 
was.     Also  Innocent  III.,  with  a  great  multitude  of  his  secular  priests,  made  a  ?P®"1^ 
certain  new  determination,   '  That  the  sacrament  of  the  altar  is  an  accident  one  thou- 
without  a  substance,'  whereas  neither  Jesus  Christ,   nor  any  of  his  apostles  sand 
taught  this  faith,  but  openly  and  manifestly  to  the  contrary ;  neither  yet  the  ^^^^^ 
holy  doctors,  for  the  space  of  a  thousand  years  and  more,  taught  this  faith  Christ. 
openly. 

Therefore  when  Antichrist,  or  any  of  his  shavelings,  doth  ask  of  thee  that  art 
a  simple  Christian,  whether  this  sacrament  be  the  very  body  of  Christ  or  not  ? 
affirm  thou  it  manifestly  so  to  be.    And  if  he  ask  of  thee  whether  it  be  material 
bread,  or  what  other  bread  else  ?  say  thou.  That  it  is  such  bread  as  Christ  under- 
stood and  meant  by  his  proper  word ;  and  such  bread  as  the  Holy  Ghost  meant 
in  St.  Paul,  when  he  called  that  to  be  very  bread  which  he  brake  :  and  wade 
thou  no  further  therein.     If  he  ask  thee  how  this  bread  is  the  body  of  Christ  ? 
say  thou,  As  Christ  understood  the  same  to  be  his  body,  who  is  both  omnipo-  The  sa- 
tent  and  true,  and  in  whom  is  no  untruth  ;  say  thou  also  as  the  holy  doctors  do  u'^tlT^"^' 
say,  That  the  terrestrial  matter  or  substance  may  be  converted  into  Christ,  as  bread  and 
the  pagan  or  infidel  may  be  baptized,  and  hereby  spiritually  be  converted,  and  the  body, 
be  a  member  of  Christ,  and  so,  after  a  certain  manner,  become  Christ,  and  yet  respects! 
the  same  man  remain  still  in  his  proper  nature.     For  so  doth  St.  Augustine 
grant  that  a  sinner,  forsaking  his  sin,  and  being  made  one  spirit  with  God  by 
faith,  grace,  and  charity,  may  be  converted  into  God,  and  be,  after  a  manner, 
God  (as  both  David  and  St.  John  do  testify),  and  yet  be  the  same  person  in 
substance  and  nature,  and  in  soul  and  virtue  be  altered  and  changed.     But  yet 
men  of  more  knowledge  and  reason  may  more  plainly  convance  the  falsity  of 
Antichrist  both  in  this  matter  and  in  others,  by  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
working  in  them.     Notwithstanding,  if  those  that  be  simple  men  will  humbly 
hold  and  keep  the  manifest  and  apparent  words  of  the  holy  Scripture,  and  the 
plain  sense  and  meaning  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  proceed  no  further,  but  humbly 
commit  that  unto  the  Spirit  of  God,  which  passeth  their  understanding ;  then 
may  they  SEifely  offer  themselves  to  death,  as  true  martyrs  of  Jesus  Christ. 

As  touching  the  sacrament  of  penance,  that  chapter  '  Omnis  utriusque  sexus,'  Auricular 
by  which  a  certain  new-found  auricular  confession  was  ordained,  is  full,  he  confes- 
saith,    of  hj'pocrisy,    heresy,    covetousness,    pride,    and   blasphemy ;    and    he  pe''Mnce. 
reproveth  the  same  chapter  verbatim,  and  that  by  the  sentences  of  the  same 


288  ARTICLES    WHICH    HE    TAUGHT. 

nmry    pvoccss :  also,  that  the  penance  and  pains  limited  by  the  canons  he  nnreason- 
if^-      able  and  unjust,  for  the  austerity  and  rigorousness  which  they  contain,  more 
-  than  are  taxed  by  God's  law.     He  also  doth  exemplify  of  the  solemn  and  pub- 
,  lie  denial  of  penitents  to  be  received  into  orders,  according  to  the  decree  of  the 

'^^^'    general  council,  Distinctione  50.  cap.  '  Ex  pcenitentibus:'  also  of  the  seven-fold 
penitence  of  a  priest  committing  fornication,  according  to  the  chapter,  '  Pres- 
byter,' Dist.  82.     And  further  he  showeth  another  example  of  the  penitence  of 
priests,  according  to  that  chapter,  '  Qui  presbyterium,'  &c.,  where  the  decretal 
of  the  general  council  saith,  '  That  such  a  one  ought  to  remain  continuing  his 
life  in  the  wars,  and  not  to  marry ;'  and  how  Innocent  III.  brought  in  a  new- 
found confession,  whereby  the  priests  do  oppress  the  simple  laymen,   and  that 
many  other  things  they  do,  compelling  them  to  confess  themselves  to  blind  and 
ignorant  priests,  in  whom  is  nothing  else  but  pride   and  covetousness,  having 
such  in  contempt  as  ai'e  learned  and  wise.     Also  that  the  decretal  of  Innocent 
III.,  touching  the  aforesaid  auricular  or  vocal  confession,  was  brought  in  and 
invented  to  intricate  and  entangle  men's  consciences  with  sin,  and  to  draw  them 
down  to  hell ;  and  furthermore,  that  such  manner  of  confession  destroyeth  the 
evangelical  liberty,  and  doth  hinder  men  from  inquiring  after  and  retaining  the 
wise  counsel  and  doctrine  of  such  as  be  good  priests,  who  know  faithfully  how 
to  observe  God's  precepts  and  commandments,  and  who  would  willingly  teach 
the  people  the  I'ight  way  to  heaven  :  for  which  abuse  all  christian  men,  and 
especially  all  Englishmen,  ought  to  exclaim  against  such  wicked  laws. 
The  order      As  touching  the  sacrament  of  order.  Purvey  saith,  That  all  good  Christians 
hood'^^*"  are  predestinate,  and  be  ordained  of  God,  and  made  true  priests  to  offer  Christ 
in  themselves,  and  to  Christ,  themselves ;  as  also  to  teach  and  preach  the  gospel 
to  their  neighbours,'  as  well  in  word,  as  in  example  of  living.    But  the  worldly 
shavelings  do  more  magnify  the  naked  and  bare  signs  of  priesthood  (invented 
by  sinful  men)  than  tlie  ti-ue  and  perfect  priesthood  of  God,  grounded  by  a  true 
and  lively  faith,  annexed  with  good  works.     Also,  if  it  were  needful  to  have 
such  shavelings,^  God  knoweth  how,   and  can  make,  when  it  pleaseth  him, 
priests  (without  man's  working  and  sinful  signs ;  that  is  to  say,  without  either 
sacraments  or  characters)  to  be  known  and  discerned  of  the  people  by  their 
virtuous  life  and  example,  and  by  then-  true  preaching  of  the  law  of  God ;  for 
Priests      so  made  he  the  first-made  priests  and  elders  before  the  law  of  Moses  ;  and  so 
here  have  ^naAe  he  Moses  a  priest  before  Aaron,  and  before  the  ceremonies  of  the  law, 
not  a  pub-  without  man's  operation  at  all;  and  even  so  hath  God  made  all  such  as  are 
lie  under-  predestinate,  to  be  his  priests.     But  such  as  be  true  Christians  receive  none 
Stan  ing.  ^^^^  ^^  priests,  unless  they  follow  Christ  and  his  apostles;  neither  do  they 
believe  that  they  make  the  sacrament  of  the  altar  (which  they  affirm  to  be 
God's  body)  when  it  pleaseth  them,  lest  haply  God  be  not  with  them,  foras- 
much as  they  do  this  thing  for  covetousness'  sake,  or  else  to  brag  of  their  own 
power.     And  therefore  such  as  be  simple  men,  will  worship  that  sacrament  in 
this  doubtfulness,   with  a  silent  condition  ;  that  is,    if  it  be  made  by  God's 
authority,  and  have  their  devotion  to  the  body  of  Christ  in  heaven.     Also,  that 
such  as  be  elders,  if  (hey  be  God's  priests,  be  bishops,  prelates,  and  curates  of 
their  christian  brethren,  whom  they  may  lead  to  heaven  by  the  example  of  their 
holy  conversation,  and  by  pi'eaching  the  gospel,  although  they  make  no  sacrifice 
to  that  Antichrist  of  Rome  for  their  confirmation,  neither  be  they  dedicated  to 
the  world  by  secular  divine  things,   and  by  consuming  the  livings  of  the  poor, 
What  if     as  be  those  secular  bishops,  prelates,  and  curates.     Also,  that  although  there 
were         ^^'"^  "°  pope,  according  as  the  custom  of  the  church  is,  yet  Christ,  who  is  the 
pope         head  of  his  church,  doth  ordain  such  a  pope  as  pleaseth  him  ;  and  that  is, 
known?     whosoever  is  most  humble  and  lowly,  and  best  doth  the  office  of  a  true  priest, 
church      although  he  be  unknown  to  the  world  ;  and  although  there  were  no  such  proud 
could        bishop  above  all  the  rest  as  the  church  doth  use,  yet  all  the  priests  might  well 
stand.       govern  the  church  by  common  assent,  as  once  they  did,  before  such  worldly 
Tonsure    pride  crept  in  amongst  the  bishops,  &c.    And,  admit  that  no  such  priests  were, 
makes       according  to  the  accustomed  use  now,  of  receiving  of  order  and  tonsure  by  such 
priest.       ^  mitred  bishop  and  his  tonsure,  yet  Christ  knoweth  both  how  to  make  and 
choose  such  as  shall  well  please  him  both  in  conversation  of  life,  and  sincere 
preaching  of  the  gospel,  in  ministering  to  his  people  all  necessary  sacraments. 

(1)  He  meaneth  of  private  preaching  to  their  neighbours. 

(2)  True  ministers  may  be  made  without  shaving. 


ARTICLES    DRAWN    OUT    OF    JOHN    I'URVEY's    HOOKS.  2Si) 

And  every  holy  man  who  is  a  minister  of  Christ,  although  he  be  not  shaven,  is     iicnnj 
■A  true  priest  ordained  of  (lod,  although  no  mitred  bishop  ever  laid  his  character      ^^■ 
upon  him  :  so  that  the  pope  and  prelates  do  make  more  estimation  of  their     a    i\ 
characters   (as  tonsures  and  crowns  by  them  invented),  than  of  the  true  and    Vinf. 

perfect  priesthood  ordained  of  God ;  whereas  all  those  that  are  predestinate,  are ^ 

true  priests  made  of  him. 

As  touching  the  authority  of  the  keys  and  censures,  no  christian  man  ought  The 
to  esteem  Satan  (whom  men  call  the  pope),  and  his  unjust  censures,  more  than  l'"''f  ■" 
the  hissing  of  a  serpent,  or  the  blast  of  Lucifer.     Also,  that  no  man  ought  to  like  tin 
trust  or  put  confidence  in  the-  false  indulgences  of  covetous  priests,  which  indul-  ijlast  of 
gences  do  draw  away  the  hope,  which  men  ought  to  repose  in  God,  to  a  sort  of    "'^'  '"'^' 
sinful  men,  and  do  rob  the  poor  of  such  alms  as  are  given  to  them.     Such 
priests  be  manifest  betrayers  of  Christ  and  of  the  whole  church,  and  be  Satan's 
own  stewards,  to  beguile  christian  souls  by  their  hypocrisy  and  feigned  pardons. 
Also,  forasmuch  as  those  prelates  and  clergymen  live  so  execrable  a  life,  con- 
trary to  the  gospel  of  Christ  and  examples  of  his  apostles,  and  teach  not  truly 
the  gospel,  but  only  lies  and  the  traditions  of  sinful  wicked  men,  it  appeareth 
most  manifestly,  that  they  have  not  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  but  Popish 
rather  the  keys  of  hell ;  and  they  may  be  right  well  assured,  that  God  never  gave  Pi^'^sts 
unto  them  authority  to  make  and  establish  so  many  ceremonies  and  traditions  the  keys 
which  be  contrary  to  the  liberty  of  the  gospel,  and  are  blocks  in  christian  men's  ofheaven 
ways,  that  they  can  neither  know  nor  observe  the  same  his  gospel  in  liberty  of  ^f  i,g^i  "''^ 
conscience,  and  so  attain  a  ready  way  to  heaven. 

Also,  that  all  manner  of  religious  men,  notwithstanding  the  chapter  '  Religi- 
osi,'  touching  the  privileges  in   the  '  Clementines,"  may  lawfully  minister  all 
sacraments  to  them  that  are  worthy  the  same  ;  forasmuch  as  the  same  is  a  work 
of  charity,  which  it  is  only  the  will  and  ordinance  of  the  pope  and  his  fautors,  in 
this  case,  to  hinder  and  let.     Item,   If  the  pope  shall  interdict  this  our  realm.  The 
that  cannot  hurt  us,  but  much  profit  us,  because  that  thereby  he  should  separate  pope's 
us  from  all  his  wicked  laws,  and  from  the  charges  of  sustaining  so  many  thou-  hurteth 
sand  shavelings,  who,  with  small  devotion,  or  none  at  all,  patter  and  chatter  a  not,  but 
new-found  song,  '  Secundum  usum  Sarum  :'  so  that  not  whatsoever  the  pope  in  P™'""^'"'- 
his  general  council  bindeth  on  earth,  is  bound  of  God  in  heaven,  either  for  that 
he  Ijindeth  unreasonably,  and  contradictorily  doth  against  himself,  or  else,  for 
that  he  hath  forsaken  the  judgment  of  God. 

As  touching  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  whosoever  receiveth  or  taketh  upon 
him  the  office  of  a  priest,  or  of  a  bishop,  and  dischargeth  not  the  same  by  the 
example  of  his  good  conversation  and  faithful  preaching  of  the  gospel,  is  a 
thief,  excommunicated  of  God  and  of  holy  church.  And  further,  if  the 
curates  preach  not  the  word  of  God,  they  shall  be  damned,  and  if  they  know 
not  how  to  pi'each,  they  ought  to  resign  their  benefices  :  so  that  those  prelates 
who  preach  not  the  gospel  of  Christ,  although  they  could  excuse  themselves 
from  the  doing  of  any  other  e\'il,  are  dead  in  themselves,  are  Antichrists,  and 
Satans  transfigured  into  angels  of  light,  night-thieves,  man-quellers  by  daylight, 
and  betrayers  of  Christ's  people. 

Concerning  the  sacrament  of  matrimony  :  notwithstanding  any  spiritual  kin-  Gossopn- 
dred  or  gossopiy,  a  man  and  woman  may  lawfully  marry  together  by  the  law  of  "."t  suffi- 
God,  witliout  any  dispensation  papistical.   And  in  the  same  place  he  saith,  that  cause  to 
if  our  realm  do  admit  one  not  born  in  matrimony,  or  illegitimate,  to  the  impe-  restrain 
rial  crown,  so  that  he  doth  well  discharge  the  office  of  a  king,  God  maketh  him  ™p|"' 
a  king,  and  by  consequence  doth  reject  another  king  or  heir  of  the  kingdom, 
being  born  in  matrimony  and  legitimate :  so  for  such  spiritual  kindred  there 
ought  no  divorce  to  be  made.     Also  notwithstanding  the  chapter  '  Si  inter  de 
sponsalibus:'    if  any  man  shall  make  any  contract  with  any  woman  by  the 
words  of  the  future  tense,  by  an  oath  taken,  and  afterwards  shall,  with  another 
woman,  m.ike  the  like  contract  by  the  words  of  the  present  tense,  that  then  the 
second  contract  standeth.     Also  if  a  man  make  any  contract  with  a  woman  by  The  first 
the  words  of  the  future  tense,  upon  his  oath  taken,  and  maketh  afterwards  the  '"arriage, 
like  contract  with  another,  not  altering  the  words,  and  hath  carnal  connexion  i,''j,foro  ^ 
upon  the  same,  the  first  contract  maketh  the  matrimony  good,  and  not  the  witness 
second.     Also  if  a  man,  before  witness,  assure  himself  to  a  woman  by  a  con-  '^■^'*'!',,, 
tract  made  in  the  present  tense,  and  hath  children  by  the  same  woman,  and 
afterwards  the  sante  man  marrieth  another  woman,  with  the  like  words  in  tlie 

VOL.    III.  L' 


2.90 


ARTICLES    DRAWN    OUT    OF    JOHN    PUKVEY  S    BOOKS. 


Henry 
IV. 

A.D. 

1409. 


Keeping 
and 

making 
vows. 


Posses- 
sions of 
the 
cliurcli. 


Belly- 
cheer  of 
ill-dis- 
posed 
prelates 
and  of 
monas- 
teries, 
not  to  be 
nourished 
Mith  tem- 
poralties 
and  ap- 
propria- 
tions. 


present  tense  before  witness,  although  the  first  witnesses  be  dead,  or  else  by 
_  bribes  coiTupt,  and  the  second  bring  liis  witnesses  before  the  judge  to  prove  the 
second  contract,  the  first  contract  yet  standeth  in  force,  although  the  pope,  allow- 
ing the  second  contract,  doth  compel  them  to  live  in  adultery,  against  the  coni- 
-  mandment  of  God.  Also  he  condemneth  the  decretal  of  the  restitution  of  things 
stolen,  cap.  '  Literas  tuas,'  whicli  willeth  that  a  man  and  woman  having  carnal 
connexion  in  the  degree  of  consanguinity  forbidden,  and  no  witness  thereof,  if 
the  woman  will  depart  from  the  man,  she  shall  be  compelled  by  the  censures 
to  remain  with  him,  and  to  yield  her  debt.  Also,  in  case  wliere  a  man  liath 
made  contract  with  two  women,  with  one  secretly,  having  no  witness,  and  with 
the  other  openly,  having  witness,  then  were  it  better  to  acknowledge  the  insuf- 
ficiency of  the  law,  and  to  suffer  men  to  he  ruled  by  their  own  consciences,  than 
by  the  censures  to  compel  them  to  commit,  and  live  in  adulteiy. 

As  touching  the  keeping  and  making  of  vows  :  that  vow  or  oath  is  beastly, 
and  is  without  all  discretion  made,  which  to  perform  and  keep,  a  man  hath  no 
power,  but  by  grace  given  him  of  God  ;  because  that  some  such  there  be,  wliom 
God  doth  not  accept  to  persevei-e  in  the  state  of  chastity  and  perpetual  virginity ; 
and  such  a  one  cannot  keep  his  vow,  although  he  make  the  same.  Also  that 
every  one  making  a  vow  of  continency  or  chastity,  when,  making  the  same,  he 
shall  not  be  accepted  of  God,  doth  very  indisci-eetly,  and  as  one  witliout  al! 
reason  maketh  the  same,  when  he  is  not  able  of  himself,  without  the  gift  of 
God,  to  fulfil  his  promise,  according  to  that  saying  of  the  wise  man,  chapter 
viii.  '  No  man  hath  the  gift  of  continency,  unless  that  God  give  it  unto  him  :' 
for  otherwise,  if  God  help  not  such  a  one  to  perform  the  vow  or  oath  which  he 
hath  made  and  taken,  no  prelate  can  compel  liim,  unless  he  do  contrary  to 
God's  ordinance ;  but  he  ought  to  commit  himself  to  the  government  of  God's 
Holy  Spirit,  and  his  own  conscience. 

As  to  the  possessions  of  the  church,  in  another  treatise  it  is  declai-ed,  how  the 
king,  the  lords,  and  commons,  may,  without  any  charge  at  all,  keep  fifteen  garri- 
sons, and  find  fifteen  thousand  soldiers  (having  suificient  lands  and  revenues 
to  live  upon)  out  of  the  temporalties  gotten  into  the  hands  of  the  clergy,  and 
feigned  religious  men,  who  never  do  that  which  pertaineth  to  the  office  of 
curates  to  do,  nor  yet  to  secular  lords.  And,  moreover,  the  king  may  have, 
every  year,  twenty  thousand  pounds  to  come  freely  into  his  coffers,  and  above. 
Also  he  may  find  or  sustain  fifteen  colleges  more,  and  fifteen  thousand  priests 
and  clerks  witli  sufficient  living,  and  a  hundred  hospitals  for  the  sick,  and  every 
house  to  have  one  hundred  marks  in  lands.  And  all  this  may  they  take  of  the 
aforesaid  temporalties,  without  any  charge  to  the  realm ;  whereunto  the  king, 
the  lords,  and  the  commons  are  to  be  invited  :  for  otherwise,  there  seemeth  to 
hang  over  our  heads  a  great  and  marvellous  alteration  of  this  realm,  unless  the 
same  be  put  in  execution.  Also,  if  the  secular  priests  and  feigned  religious, 
who  be  simoniacs  and  heretics,  who  feign  themselves  to  say  mass,  and  yet  say 
none  at  all,  according  to  the  canons,  which  to  their  purpose  they  bring  and 
allege,  1  qusest.  3.  '  Audivimus,'  et  cap.  '  Pudenda,'  et  cap.  '  Schisma;'  by  which 
chapter  such  priests  and  religious  do  not  make  tlie  sacrament  of  the  altar :  that 
then  all  Christians,  especially  all  the  founders  of  such  abbeys,  and  endowers  of 
bishoprics,  priories,  and  chanteries,  ought  to  amend  this  faidt  and  treason  com- 
mitted against  their  predecessors,  by  taking  from  them  such  secular  dominions 
as  are  the  maintenance  of  all  their  sins  :  and  also  that  christian  lords  and  princes 
are  bound  to  take  away  from  the  clergy  such  secular  dominion  as  nousleth 
and  nourisheth  them  in  heresies,  and  ought  to  reduce  them  unto  the  simple  and 
poor  life  of  Christ  Jesus  and  his  apostles. 

And  further,  that  all  christian  princes,  if  they  will  amend  the  malediction 
and  blasphemy  of  the  name  of  God,  ought  to  take  away  their  temporalties  from 
that  shaven  generation,  which  most  of  all  doth  nourish  them  in  such  maledic- 
tion. And  so  in  like  wise  the  fat  tithes  from  churches  appropriate  to  rich  monks, 
and  other  religious,  feigned  by  manifest  lying,  and  other  unlawful  means ;  like- 
wise ouglit  they  to  debar  their  gold  to  the  proud  priest  of  Rome,  wlio  doth 
poison  all  Christendom  with  simony  and  heresy.  Furthei-,  that  it  is  a  great 
abomination  that  bishops,  monks,  and  other  prelates,  be  so  great  lords  in  this 
world ;  whereas  Christ,  with  his  apostles  and  disciples,  never  took  upon  thens 
secular  dominion,  neither  did  they  appropriate  unto  them  churches,  as  these  nu-a 
do,  but  led  a  poor  life,  and  gave  a  good  testimony  of  their  priesthood.     And 


AIlTICl-ES    DRAWN    OUT    OF    JOHN    PURVEYS    BOOKS.  291 

therefore,  all  Christians  ought,  to  the  uttermost  of  their  power  and  strength,  to     Uenrj 
swear  that  they  will  reduce  such  shavelings  to  the  humility  and  poverty  of  Christ      ^^■ 
and  his  apostles ;  and  whosoever  doth  not  thus,  consenteth  to  their  heresy.  Also     .    ,, 
that  these  two  chapters  of  the  immunity  of  churches  are  to  be  condemned,  that     i^o,,' 

is,  cap.  '  Nun  minus,'  and  cap.  'Adversus;'  because  they  do  decree,  that  tern- L 

poral  lords  may  neither  require  tallages  nor  tenths  of  any  ecclesiastical  persons. 

Now  to  the  correction  of  the  clergy.     By  the  law  of  God,  and  by  reason,  the  Correc- 
king  and  all  other  Christians  may  take  revenge  of  Italy,  and  of  all  the  false  ''""  "'' 
priests  and  clerks  within  the  same,  and  reduce  them  unto  the  humble  orchnance  der^y. 
of  Jesus  Christ.     Also  that  the  law  of  Silvester  the  pope,  which  is  declared  in  2 
q.  5.  cap.  '  Praisul,'  and  cap.  '  Nullam,'  is  contrary  to  the  law  of  Christ,  and 
either  Testament :  and  that  the  proud  and  ambitious  Silvester,  by  his  law,  so 
defended  two  cardinals  who  were  not  to  be  defended  by  the  law  of  Christ,  that 
by  no  means  they  might  be  convinced,  although  they  were  both  vicious  and 
evil :    and  that  although  Christ  sustained  and  suffered  the  judgment  of  unjust 
temporal  judges,  our  mitred  prelates  in  these  days  so  magnify  themselves  beyond 
Christ  and  his  apostles,  that  they  refuse  and  will  none  of  such  judgments :  also 
that,  those  decretals  of  accusations,  cap.  'Quando,'  et  '  Qualiter,'  whicli  do  ])«>- 
hibit  that  any  clerks  should  be  brought  before  a  secular  judge  to  receive  judg- 
ment, do  contain  both  heresy,  blas2)hemy,  and  error,  and  bring  great  gain  and 
commodity  to  Anticln-ist's  cotiers. 

Futhermore,  that  all  christian  Icings  and  lords  ought  to  exclaim  against  the  Punish- 
pope  and  those  that  be  his  fan  tors,  and  banish  them  out  of  their  lands,  till  such  "'j*^,°^ 
time  as  they  will  obey  God  and  his  gospel,  kings,  and  other  ministers  of  God's  beioiiKcih 
justice.     Also  that  bishojjs  and  their  favourers,  that  say  it  appertaineth  not  to  to  secular 
kings  and  secular  lords,  but  unto  them  and  their  officials,  to  punish  adultery  and  "i-at^^'g 
fornication,  do  fall  into  manifest  treason  against  the  king,  and  heresj'  against  rather 
the  Scripture.     Also  that  it  appertaineth  to  the  king  to  have  the  order  both  of ''^^"  '" 
priests  and  bishops,  as  these  kings  Solomon  and  Jehoshaphat  had. 

Furthermore,  that  chapter  '  Nullus  judicium  de  foro  competenti,' by  which 
seeidar  judges  are  forbidden,  without  the  bishop's  commandment,  to  condemn 
any  clerk  to  death,  is  manifestly  against  the  holy  Scripture,  declaring  that 
kings  have  power  over  clerks  and  priests,  to  punish  them  for  their  deserved 
crimes.     Also  that  the  decree  of  Boniface,  'De  poenis,'  in  6.  cap.  '  Felicis,' 
made  against  the  prosecutors,  strikers,   and  imprisoners  of  cardinals,  is  con- 
trary both  to  the  holy  Scripture,  and  to  all  reason.     Also  that  by  the  law   of 
God  and  reason,  a  secular  lord   may  lawfully  take  a  cardinal  and  put  him  in 
prison  for  committing  the  crime  of  open  simony,  adultery,  and  manifest  blas- 
phemy.     Also  that  the  chapter  '  Si  Papa,'  dist.  40,  which  saith  that  the  pope 
ought  to  be  judged  of  none,  unless  he  be  '  devius  a  fide,'  is  contrary  to  the  gos- 
pel, which  saith,  '  If  thy  brother  sin  against  thee,  correct  him.'      Also  whereas 
St.  Gregory  and  St.  Augustine  called  themselves  the  servants  of  God's  servants, 
this  proud  bishop  of  Rome,  who  will  not  be  judged  by  his  subjects  (who  be  in 
very  deed  his  lords,  if  they  be  just  and  good  men),  doth  destroy  the  order  of 
God's  law,  and  all  humility,  and  doth  extol  himself  above  God  and  his  apostles. 
Also  that  christian  kings  ought  not  only  to  judge  this  proud  bishop  of  Rome,  Good 
but  also  to  depose  him,  by  the  example  that  Cestrensis,  lib.  G.  cap.  8.  dcclareth  '^")?^ 
of  Otlio  tlie  emperor,  who  deposed  John  XII.,  and  did  institute  Leo  in  his  depose 
place.     And  furthei",  he  maketh  an  exhortation  to  the  princes  to  judge  the  wicked 
church  of  Rome,  which  he  calleth  the  great  and  cursed  strumpet,  of  whom  St.  l'"!""^- 
John  writeth  in  the  Apocalypse,  chap.  xvii. 

Lastly,  touching  the  laws  and  determinations  of  the  churcli,  Christians  have 
reasonable  excuses  and  causes  to  rejiel  the  statutes  of  the  pope  and  of  his  shave- 
lings, which  be  not  expressly  grounded  on  the  holy  Scriptures,  or  else  upon  reason 
inevitable.  Also  he  saith,  that  the  law  of  consecration,  which  is  set  forth,  distinc- 
tione  2.  cap.  '  Seculares,'  and  cap.  '  Omnis  homo,'  and  cap.  '  Et  si  non  fi-equentius,' 
and  cap.  '  In  ca'na  Domini :'  that  such  secular  men  as  do  not  receive  the  sacra- 
ment of  the  altar  at  Christmas,  Easter,  and  Whitsuntide,  are  not  to  be  counted 
amongst  the  number  of  Christians,  nor  to  be  esteemed  as  Christians :  whereby  it 
followeth  that  all  clerks  and  laymen  that  observe  not  the  same,  it  seemeth  they  go 
straight  to  hell.  But  if  this  law  be  of  no  force,  for  that  the  custom  and  use  in  re- 
ceiving is  contrary  to  the  same,  then  may  we  bless  such  rebellion  and  disobedience 
to  the  pope,  and  his  law ;  for  otherwise  we  should  flee  to  hell  without  any  stay  or 


292  A    SERMON,    NO    LESS    GODLY    THAN    LEARNED, 

Henry    let.     Hereby  we  may  conclude,  that  all   Christians  ought  well  to  practise  tliis 

^^-       school  of  disobedience  against  the  pope  and  all  his  laws  (not  founded  upon  the 

.    j^      Scripture),  which  do  let  men  to  climb  to  heaven  by  the  keeping  of  charity,  and 

1400'    '^^  liberty  of  the  gospel.     Also  that  christian  men  have  great  cause  to  refuse 

1-  the  laws  and  statutes  of  these   worldly  clerks,  which  the  people  call  the  papal 

laws,  and  bishoplike  statutes,  for  the  covetousness  and  voluptuousness  of  them  ; 
without  which  the  church  and  congregation  of  God  might  safely  run  towards 
heaven  by  the  sweet  yoke  of  the  Lord,  as  it  did  a  thousand  years  before  the  said 
laws  were  prescribed  and  sent  to  the  universities,  and  withdrew  men  from  study- 
ing of  the  holy  Scripture,  for  the  desire  of  benefices  and  worldly  goods.  Also, 
that  simple  men  do  reverently  receive  the  sentences  of  the  doctors  and  other 
laws,  so  far  forth  as  they  be  expressly  grounded  upon  the  holy  Scripture  or  good 
The  reason.    Also  that  whereas  the  pope's  laws,  and  laws  of  his  ministers  and  clerks 

pope's       be  both  contrary  to  themselves,  and  have  not  their  foundation  either  in  the 
tfJi-y  t°  '  Scripture,  or  yet  in  reason,  simple  men  ought  to  bid  them  farewell.      Also  that 
them-       when  all  the  apostles'  faith  failed  them  in  the  time  of  the  Lord's  passion,  faith 
selves.       jiig,^  resting  in  the  blessed  virgin,  much  more  might  that  proud  priest  of  Rome, 
with  all  his  rabble,  easily  cit  in  the  faith ;  and  yet  is  the  christian  faith  pre- 
He  and      served  whole  and  safe  in  the  faithful  members  of  Christ,  who  are  his  true  church  , 
iiis  eardi-  but  the  pope  and  all  his  rabblement  cannot  prove  that  they  be  any  part  of  his 
part  of      church.     Also  that  the  pope  with  all  his  fautors  may  as  well  be  deceived  by  a 
the  true     lying  spirit,  as  were  Ahab  and  all  his  prophets ;  and  that  one  true  phophet,  as 
church,     ^j^g  Micaiah,  may  have  the  verity  showed  unto  him,  '  contra  Concilium.'    Also 
that  all  good  Christians  ought  to  cast  from  them  the  pope's  laws,  saying,  '  Let 
us  break  their  bands  in  sunder,  and  let  us  cast  from  our  necks  those  heavy  yokes 
The  of  theirs.'    Also  that  where  these  prelates  do  burn  one  good  book  for  one  error, 

fuil^oV^^  perhaps,  contained  in  the  same,  they  ought  to  burn  all  the  books  of  the  canon- 
here.sy.      law,  for  the  manifold  heresies  contained  in  them. 

And  thus  much  out  of  a  certain  old  written  book  in  parchment, 
boiTowcd  once  of  J.  B.,  which  book,  containing  divers  ancient  records 
of  the  university,  seemeth  to  belong  sometime  to  the  library  of  the 
university,  bearing  the  year  of  the  compiling  thereof,  1396,  which 
computation  if  it  be  true,  then  was  it  written  by  Pm-vey,  ere  that  he  re- 
canted before  Thomas  Arundel,  archbishop,  at  Saltwood,  where  he  was 
imprisoned.  Hereunto  I  have  thought  good  to  annex  a  certain  godly 
and  most  fruitful  sermon  of  like  antiquity,  preached  at  PauFs  Cross 
'.much  about  the  same  time,  which  was  a.  d.  1388,  by  a  certain  learned 
clerk,  as  I  find  in  an  old  monument,  named  R.  Wimbeldon.  Albeit 
among  the  ancient  registers  and  records  belonging  to  the  archbishop 
of  Canterbury,  I  have  an  old  worn  copy  of  the  said  sermon,  written 
in  very  old  English,  and  almost  half  consumed  with  age,  purporting 
the  said  author  hereof,  bearing  also  the  aforesaid  name  ;  the  true  copy 
of  which  sermon,  in  his  own  speech  wherein  it  was  first  spoken  and 
preached  at  the  Cross,  on  the  Sunday  of  Quinquagesima,  and  after- 
wards exhibited  to  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  being  then,  as  it 
seemeth,  William  Courtney,  here  followcth. 

A  Scnnon  no  lesse  godly  than  learned,  preached  at  Panics  Crosse  on 
the  Sunday  of  Quinquagesima,  anno  1389,  by  R.  Wimbeldon.^ 

'  Redde  rationem  villicationis  tuae.' — Lucse  xvi.  2. 

My  dere  frends,  ye  shuUen  vnderstond,  that  Christ,  autor  and  doctour  of 

trueth,  in  his  books  of  the  gospell  (likening  the  kingdome  of  heauen  to  an 

housholder")  saith  on  this  manner:  '  Like  is  the  kingdome  of  heauen  to  an  hous- 

holding  man,  that  went  out  first  on  the  morow  to  hire  workemen  into  his  vine ; 

(1)  This  sermon  appears  to  have  produced  considerable  excitement,  hoth  at  the  period  of  its  deli- 
very, and  also  at  its  publication.  It  is  commonly  called  "  a  godlie  and  famous  sermon,  preached  in 
the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1388,  at  Paule's  Crosse,  on  the  Sunday  of  Quinquagesima,  by  R.  Wimbeldon  j 
and  found  hyd  in  a  wall."  The  te.\t  :  Luke  xvi  -'Redde  rationem  villicationis  tiise,"  ".Come, 
give  a  reconing  of  thy  Baylywicke."    Casley,  in  his  Catalogue  of  MSS.  in  the  Royal  Library,  p.  273, 


rilEACHED    AT     I'Al-l/s    CROSS,    HY    II.   WIMBLKUON.  293 

also,  about  y^  third,  sixt,  nieutli,  and  eleuent  houres,  he  went  out,  and  found  men  ijennj 
Btonding  idel,  and  said  to  them,  *  Why'  stande  ye  here  vnoccupied?*     Go  ye       •''^• 

into  mine  vineyerde,  and  tliat  right  is  1  vville  geue  you.  When  the  day  was  agoo,  .    . 

he  ck'pid  his  stuward  and  high  to  geue  eche  man  a  peny.'  *  '     " 
The  spirituali  vnderstonding  of  this  householder,  is  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ, 


tJiat  is  head  of  the  houshold  of  holy  church,  and  thus  clepith  men  in  diuerce  Tlie  call 
houres  of  the  day,  that  is,  in  diuerce  agees  of  tlie  werld ;  as  in  time  of  law  of  ^^^^^ 
kind,"  lie  cleped,  by  ensj)iring  Abel,  Ennok,  Noe,  and  Abraham  ;  in  time  of  the  old  diverse. 
law,  Moses,  Dauid,  Isay,  and  Jeremy,  *  with  tlie  prophets ;  *  and  in  time  of  grace, 
apostles,  martyrs,  and  confessours  and  virgines.  Also  he  cleped  men  in  diners 
agees,  some  on  childhode,  as  lohn  Baptist;  some  on  state  of  wexnig,  as  lohn  the 
Euangelist ;  some  in  state  of  manhood,  as  Peter  and  Andrew ;  and  some  in  old 
agee,  as  Gamaliel,  and  loseph  of  Arimathie ;  and  all  these  he  clepeth  to  trauaile  in 
his  vine,  that  is,  the  church,  and  that  on  chuers  manner.  For,  right  as  ye  see,  that 
in  tilling  of  the  materiall  vine  there  ben  diners  labours,  for  some  kutten  awey  the 
void  branches,  some  maken  forkis  and  railes  to  heren  vp  the  vine,  and  some  dig- 
gen  away  the  old  earth  fro  the  rote,  and  leyn  there  fatter ;  and  all  this  offices  ben 
so  necessary  to  the  vine,  that  if  any  of  them  faile,  it  shal  harme  greatly,  other* 
destroy  the  vine ;  for  but  if*  the  vine  be  kutte,  she  shall  waxe  wilde,  but  if  she 
be  rayled,  she  shall  be  ourgo  with  netles  *  and  wedis ;  and  but  if  the  rote  be 
fatted  with  dong,  she  for  feblenes  shuld  wax  baraine.  Right  so  in  the  church, 
beth  nedefull  these  three  offices,  priesthood,  knythode,  and  laborers.  To  priest- 
hood it  falleth  to  kut  away  the  void  braunches  of  sinnes  with  the  swerd  of  her 
tong.  To  knighthode  it  falleth  to  letten  wrongs  and  theffles^  to  ben  done,  and 
to  maintaine  Goddis  law,  and  them  that  ben  teachers  thereof,  and  also  to  kepe 
the  londe  from  enemies  of  other  londes.  And  to  labourers  it  falleth  to  trauail 
hodelich,  and  witli  their  sore  swete,  geten  out  of  the  earth  bodilech  lifelode  for 
hem  and  other  partes.  And  these  states  beth  also  nedefull  to  the  church,  that 
none  may  well  ben  without  other :  for  if  priesthod  lacked,  the  people,  for  de- 
fault of  knowing  of  Goddis  law,  should  waxe  wilde  in  vices,  and  deyen  gostely : 
and  if  the  knithod  laked,  and  men  to  ruhn  the  puple  by  law  and  hardinesse, 
theeues  and  enemies  shulden  so  encres,  that  no  man  shuld  Hue  in  peace  :  and  if 
the  laborers  were  nought,  both  knightes  and  priestes  must  become  acre  men  and 
herdis  ;  and  els,  they  shuld,  for  defaut  of  bodily  sustenance,  deye.  And,  there- 
fore, saitli  clerke  Auicenne,  that  euery  vnreasonable  best,  if  he  haue  that,  that 
kiiid^  hath  ordeined  for  him,  as  kind  hath  ordeined  it,  he  has  suffisance  to  Hue  by 
himselfe  without  any  help  of  other  of  the  same  kind.  And  if  there  were  but  one 
horse,  other  one  shepe  in  the  world ;  yet,  if  he  had  grasse  and  corne,  as  kind 
hath  ordeined  for  such  beasts,  he  shuld  Hue  well  enow.  But,  if  there  ne  were  but 
o^  man  in  the  world,  though  he  had  all  that  good  that  is  therein,  yet,  for  defaut, 
lie  shuld  deie,  or  his  life  shuld  be  wors  than  if  he  were  naught :  and  the  cause  is 
this,  for  that  thing  that  kind  ordeineth  for  a  mans  sustenance,  without  other 
arraieng  than  it  hath  of  kind,  accordeth  nought  to  him.  As  though  a  man  haue 
corne  as  it  commeth  ft-om  the  earth,  yet  it  is  no  meate  according  to  him,  vnto  it 
be,  by  mans  craft,  chaunged  into  bread ;  and  though  he  haue  Hesh  other  fish, 
yet,  while  it  is  rawe  as  kind  ordeined  it,  till  it  be  by  mans  trauaile  sodden,  rosted, 
or  bakcn,  it  corded  not  to  mans  lifelode.  And  right  so  woUe,  that  the  slieepe 
beareth,  mot,  bymannis  diners  craftis  and  trauailes,  be  chaunged  or^  it  be  able 
to  cloth  any  man ;  and  certis,  o  man,  by  himselfe,  shuld  neuer  doo  all  these 

mentions,  "Tho.  Wimbleton's  two  sermons  at  Paul's  Cross,  on  Luke  xvi.  2,  preached  a.  d.  1388." 
In  the  Catalogue  of  MSS.  at  Sidney  College.  Cambridge,  is  "  A  Sermon  preached  at  Paul's  Cross, 
an.  138!),  on  Uuinquagisiraa  Sunday,  by  Tho.  Wimbledon."  In  the  Catalofjue  of  Caius  College, 
Cambridge,  is  '  R.Wimbledon  Concio:  extat  quoq :  Anglice  1593,  Svo."  In  the  Bodleian  Library, 
is  the  same  document,  "by  R.  Wimbleton,  an.  1388."  This  sermon  was  first  printed  by  Jolin 
Kyngc,  without  date,  between  1550  and  15G1.  See  Herbert's  edition  of  Ames's  Tj-pographical  Anti- 
quities, vol.  2,  p.  lOyS.  In  the  first  edition  of  the  Acts  and  Monuments,  the  title  of  the  sermon  is 
as  follows :  '•  A  Sermon  no  lesse  frutefuU  then  famous.  Made  in  the  yeare  of  our  Lord  God 
McccLxxxviii.  In  these  our  later  dayes  moste  necessary  to  be  knowen.  Neyther  addinge  to,  nor 
diminishing  from.  Saue  the  olde  and  rude  English  thereof  mended  here  and  there."  The  phrase- 
ology and  orthography  which  Foxe  adopted  in  the  first,  do  not  occur  in  the  subsequent  copies  of  this 
senuon.  In  that  edition,  p.  175,  he  says,  "  neither  is  there  any  name  expressed  thereon,"  and,  "it 
seemeth  to  be  of  Wickliffe's  doing ;"  in  the  second  and  following  edition  he  acknowledges  it  as 
R.  Wimbledon's  Sermon. — Ed. 

'!)  The  sentences  in  asterisks  are  from  the  Edition  of  15fi3. — Ed. 

J2V  Law  of  kind,"  nature.— Ed.  (3)  "  Other,"  or.— Ed.  (4)  "But  if,"  unless.— Ed. 

(5)  Ed.  1570,  Thistles.— Ed.  (6)"Thefftes,"  hestes.  Ed.  15C3.— Ed. 

(7)  "Kind," nature. —En.  S)  "O,"  one. -En.  (9)  "  Or,"  ere  before.  — Ed. 


294 

A.D. 
1409. 


Job  X. 

2Cor.Tcvii- 
1  Pet.  ii. 
1  Thes.iv, 


Prov.  viii, 
2  Tim.  iv 


Three 
ques- 


A  SERMON,  NO  LESS  GODLY  THAN  LEAKNED, 

labours.  And  therefore,  saith  this  clerke,  it  is  neede  that  some  be  acre  men, 
some  bakers,  some  makers  of  cloth ;'  and  some  marchaunts,  to  fetch  that,  that  one 
londe  fettetli  from  an  other,  as  there  it  is  plentie. 

And  certis,  this  slinld  be  a  cause,  why  euery  state  should  loue  other;  and 
men  of  o  craft,  shuld  not  despise  ne  hate  men  of  none  other  craft,  sith  they  be  so 
nedefull  euerich  to  other ;  and  oft  thelke  crafts  that  ben  most  vnhonest,  might 
worst  ben  forbore.  And  o  thing  I  dare  well  say,  that  he  that  is  neither 
trauailing  in  this  woi'ld  on  studieng,  on  praiers,  on  preaching  for  helpe  of  the 
people  (as  it  falleth  to  priests),  neither  ruling  the  people,  mainteining  ne  de- 
fending fro  enemies  (as  it  falleth  to  knights,)  neither  traueling  on  earth,  in 
diuerse  craftes  (as  it  falleth  to  labourers),  whan  the  day  of  reckening  commeth, 
that  is,  the  end  of  this  life,  right  as  he  lined  here  withouten  trauaile,  so  he  shall 
there  lack  the  reward  of  the  'penie,'  that  is,  the  endles  ioie  of  heauen  ;  and, 
as  he  was  here  lining  after  none  state  ne  order,  so  he  shall  be  put  than  in  that 
place  that  no  order  is  in,  but  euerlasting  horror  and  sorrow,  that  is,  in  hell. 
Herfore,  euerich  man  see  to  what  state  God  hath  cleped  him,  and  dwell  he 
therein  by  trauile,  according  to  his  degree.  Thou  that  art  a  laborer  or  a  crafty 
man,  do  this  truelly.  If  thou  art  a  seruant  or  a  bondman,  be  suget  and  lowe, 
in  drede  of  displeasing  of  thy  Lord.  If  thou  art  a  mai'chaunt,  disceiue  nought 
thy  brother  in  chaffering.  If  thou  art  a  knight  or  a  lord,  defend  the  poore 
man  and  needy  fro  hands  that  will  harme  them.  If  thou  art  a  iustice  or  a 
iudge,  go  not  on  the  right  hand  by  fauour,  neither  on  the  left  hand,  to  punish 
any  man  for  hate.  If  thou  art  a  priest,  vndernime,^  pvaye,  and  reproue,  in  all 
maner  patience  and  doctrine.  Vndernime  thilke  that  ben  negligent,  pray^  for 
thilke  that  bene  obedient,  reproue  tho  that  ben  vnobedient  to  God,  so  euery 
man  trauaile  in  his  degree :  for,  whan  the  euenhis  come,  that  is,  the  end  of 
this  worlde,  than  euerye  man  shall  take  reward,  good  or  euill,  after  that  he 
hath  trauailed  here. 

The  words  that  I  haue  taken  to  make  of  my  sermon,  be  thus  much  to  say, 
'  Yeld  reconing  of  thy  bayly.*  Christ,  autour  of  pity,  the  louer  of  the  saluation 
of  his  people,  in  the  process  of  this  gospell  enfourmeth  euery  man  what  is  his 
bayly,  by  maner  of  a  parable  of  a  bayly  that  he  speaketh  of,  to  aray  him  to 
answer  of  the  goods  that  God  hath  taken  him,  when  the  day  of  straight  reconing 
shall  be  come,  that  is,  the  day  of  dome.  And  so  I,  at  this  time,  thorowe  the 
helpe  of  God,  following  Him  that  is  so  great  amaister  of  authori tie,  because  that 
I  know  nothing  that  should  more  draw  away  mans  vnreasonable  loue  fro  the 
passing  ioy  of  this  world,  then  the  minde  of  the  dreadfull  reconing.  As  much 
as  suffice,  I  shall  shew  you  how  ye  shall  dispose  you  to  auoide  the  vengeaunce  of 
God,  when  there  shal  be  time  of  so  straight  doome,  that  we  shall  geue  reconing 
of  euery  idle  word  that  we  haue  ispoken.  For  than  it  shall  be  said  to  vs,  and 
we  shall  not  flee  it :  '  Yelde  reconing  of  thy  bayly.' 

But,  for  forther  process  of  this  first  party  of  this  sermon,  yee  shall  wete  that 
there  shall  be  three  baylifes  that  shall  be  cleped  to  this  straight  reconing  :  twaine, 
to  answer  for  themselfe  and  for  other.  That  bene,  priests,  that  haue  cure  of  mens 
soules,  and  temporall  men,  that  hauegouernayle  of  people.  And  the  third  baylyf 
shall  acount  onely  for  himselfe,  and  that  is,  euerye  christen  man,  of  that  he  hath 
receiued  of  God.  And  euery  of  these  shull  aunswer  to  three  questions :  to  the 
first  question,  How  hast  thou  entred?  the  second.  How  hast  thow  ruled?  and 
to  the  third,  How  hast  thou  lined  ?  And  if  thou  canst  well  assoile  these  three 
questions,  was  there  neuer  none  earthly  lord  that  euer  so  well  rewarded  his 
sei-uant  without  comparison,  as  thy  lord  God  shal  reward  thee :  that  is,  with 
bUsse,  and  ioy,  and  life  that  euer  shall  last.  But,  on  that  other  side,  and  thou 
wilt  now  be  recheles  of  thine  owne  welfare,  and  take  none  heede  of  this  recon- 
ing :  if  that  day  take  thee  sodainly,  so  that  thou  passe  hence  in  deadly  sinne  (as 
thou  wotst  neuer  what  shall  fall  thee),  all  the  toungs  that  euer  were,  or  euer 
shall  be,  mow  not  tell  the  sorrow  and  wo,  that  thou  shalt  euer  be  in,  and  suffer. 
Therfore  the  desire  of  so  great  ioy,  and  the  dread  of  so  great  paine,  though  loue 
ne  dread  of  God  were  not  in  thine  hart,  yet  should  thou  make  thee  afeard  to  sinne, 
for  to  thinke  that  thou  shalt  giue  reckoning  of  thy  bayly. 

Therfore,  as  I  say  to  thee,  the  first  question  that  shall  be  proposed  to  the  first 

(1)  "Makers  of  cloth,"  "  men  of  occupations."  Ed.  1563. — Ed. 

(2)  "Vndernime,"  &c.,  "instruct,  praise,  and  reprove."  Ed.  1563. — Ed. 

(3)"  Pray  for,"  "praise."  Ed.l5C3.— Ed.     (4)  "Bayly,"  villicatio;  bailiwick,  or  stewardship.— Eu. 


PKEACIIKD    AT    TAUl's    CROSS    BY    11.    WIMBLEDON.  $95 

bayly  (that  is  a  prelate,  other  a  curat  of  mens  soules)  is  this  :   How  hast  thou     ii,-nnj 
entred  I  [Matt,  xxii.]  '  friend,  hr)w  entredst  thou  hether?'  who  brought  thee  into       ^'■ 
this  ottice .'  truth  or  syniony  ?  (Jod  or  the  deuill?  grace  or  mony?   the  flesh  or     .    .^ 
the  spirit?  Give  tiiou  tliy  reconing  if  thou  canst.     If  thou  canst  not,  I  redei     i.inq* 

that  thou  tary  for  to  learnc;  for,  vp  hap  ere  night  thou  slialt  be  cleped.      And  1_ 

if  thou  stande  donibe  forvnkunning,  or  els  for  confusion  of  thy  conscience,  thou  Against 
fall  into  the  sentence  that  anon  followeth  :  '  Binde  his  hands  and  his  feete,  ami  ^""""5- 
cast  liini  into  the  vttcrward  of  darkness;  there  shall  be  weeping  and  grenning^ 
of  teeth.'  'I'lierfore  I  rede  thee,  thou  aduise  tliee  how  thou  shalt  answer  to  the 
(juestion  :  How  hast  thou  entred  ?  whether  by  cleping,''  or  by  thine  owne  pro- 
curing :  for  that  thou  wouldest  trauaile  in  (lods  gospell,  other  for  thou  wouldest 
be  richly  arayed  t  Answere  now  to  thy  owne  conscience,  as  thou  slialt  answer 
to  God,  thou  that  liast  take  now  the  order  of  prieste  (whether  thou  be  curate 
or  none).  Who  stirred  thee  to  take  vpon  thee  so  high  an  estate  .'  whether  for 
thou  wouldest  Hue  as  a  priest  ought  to  do,  studying  of  Gods  law  to  preach, 
and  most  hartely  to  pray  for  the  people ;  or  for  to  Hue  a  delicious  life  vpon 
other  mens  ti-auale,  and  thy  selfe  trauale  nought. 

Why,  also,  setten  men  their  sonnes  either  their  cousins  to  schole  ?  whereto  ? 
but  for  to  get  thoni  great  aduancements,  or  to  make  them  the  better  to  know 
how  they  shoulden  serue  God.  This,  men  may  see  oj)enly,  by  the  sciences 
that  they  set  them  to.  Why,  I  pray  you,  put  men  their  sonnes  to  the  law  ciuill, 
or  to  the  kings  court  to  write  letter  and  writs,  rather  than  to  philosophy  or 
diuinity,  but  for  the  hope  that  these  occupations  should  be  euer  means  to  make 
them  great  in  the  world.  I  hope  that  there  will  no  man  say,  that  they  ne 
should  better  Icarne  the  rule  of  good  lining  in  the  booke  of  God's  law,  than  in 
any  bookes  of  man's  worldly  wisedome  ?  But,  certes,  now  it  is  sothe  that  John 
Chrysostom  saith  :  '  Mothers  be  louing  to  the  bodies  of  their  children,  but  the 
soule  they  despise ;  they  desire  them  to  wel  fare  in  this  world,  but  they  take 
none  hede*  what  they  shall  suffer  in  the  tother.  Some  ordeineu  fees  for  their 
children,  but  none  ordeine  them  to  godward.  The  lust*  of  their  bodies  they 
wol  decre  by,  but  the  health  of  their  soule  they  reke  nought  of.  If  they  see 
them  poore  or  sicke,  they  sorrow  and  sigheth;  but  though  they  see  them  sin, 
they  sorrow  not.  And  in  this  they  shew  that  they  brought  forth  the  bodies, 
but  not  the  soules.'^ 

And,  if  we  take  heede  truly  what  abhominations  be  scattered  and  spread 
abrode  in  holy  church  now  adayes  among  priests,  we  shul  wel  wit  that  they 
come  not  all  to  the  folde  of  Christ,  by  Christes  cleping,  for  to  profit,  but  by 
other  wayes,  to  get  them  worldly  welth  :  and  this  is  the  cause  of  lesing  of  soules 
that  Christ  bought  so  deare,  and  of  many  errours  among  the  peojile.  And, 
therefore,  it  is  iwrit  in  the  booke  of  Mourning,  where  the  prophet  speaketh 
thus  to  God  [Lam.  i.  10.]  :  '  The  enemy  hath  put  his  hand  to  all  things  de-  Tlie  rash 
sirable  to  him ;  for  he  hath  let  lawles  folke  enter  into  the  sanctuary,  of  the  '"^'^'."? 
which  thou  hadst  commanded,  that  they  should  not  enter  into  the  church.'  ters. 
This  enemy  is  Sathanas,  as  his  name  sowneth,  that  hath  put  his  hand  to  all 
that  him  liketh.  What  sinne,  I  pray  you,  will  the  fiend  haue  sow  on  men, 
that  nis  now  yvsed  ?  In  what  plenty  is  now  pride,  enuy,  wrath,  and  couetise  ? 
Whan  were  they  so  great  as  they  be  now  ?  and  so  of  all  other  sinnes.  And 
why,  trowest  thou  ?  But  for  there  be  a  lawles  people  enti-ed  into  thy  sanctuarie, 
that  neither  keepe  in  themselfe  the  law  of  God,  ne  konne  teachen  other.  And 
to  euery  such,  saith  God  by  the  prophet  [Ose  iv.],  '  For  that  thou  hast  put 
away  cunning,'  I  shall  put  thee  away,  that  thou  shall  vse  no  priesthoode  to  me.' 
Lo  that  God  expresly  heere  in  holy  writ  forbiddeth  men  to  take  the  state  of 
pristhoode  on  them,  but  they  haue  cunning  that  needeth  them.  Thou,  than, 
that  canst  neither  rule  thy  selfe  ne  other  after  the  law  of  God,  beware  how 
thou  wilt  answer  to  God,  at  his  dreadful!  dome,  when  he  shall  say  to  thee, 
that  which  I  tooke  to  my  theame  :  '  Yeld  the  reckening  of  thy  bayly,  how  thou 
hast  entred.' 

The  second  question,   that  euery  curate  and  prelate  of  holy  chircli  shall 

(1)  "  Rede,"  counsel. — Ed. 

(2) "  Grenninjr,"  grinding,  or,  as  in  Ed.  1563,  "  greeting,"  grating. — Ed. 

(3)  "Cleping,"  calling— Kd. 

(4)  "  Take  none  heed  ;"  pass  not.  Ed.  15G3.— Ed. 

(5^  "  The  lust,"  &c. ;  the  losse  of  their  bodies  they  will  sore  bewail.  Ed.  1563.— Ed. 

(I)  Julaiines  Chrysostomus,  Homiliu.  xxvii.  (7)  "  Cunning;"  knowledge. — Ed. 


A.  D. 

1409. 


$l()G  A    SERMON,  NO  LESS  GODLY  THAN  LEARNED, 

Henry  atiswcr  to,  is  this :  How  hast  thou'  niled '?  that  is  to  say,  the  soules  of  thy 
If"-  suo-o-ets,  and  the  goods  of  poore  men  :  geue  now  thine  account.  First,  how 
thou  hast  gouerned  God's  folke  that  were  take  thee  to  keepe?  Whether  art 
thou  an  lierd,  or  an  hired  man,  that  doost  all  for  loue  of  bodelich  hire ;  as  a 
father,  or  as  a  wolfe  that  eaten  his  sheepe  and  keepeth  them  nought  ?  Say, 
whom  hast  thou  turned  from  his  cursed  lining,  by  thy  deuout  preaching?  whom 
hast  thou  taught  the  law  of  God,  that  was  earst  vncunning  ?  There  shall  ben 
heard  a  grieuous  accusing  of  fatherles  children,  and  a  hard  alledgingi  that 
priests  haue  liueden  by  their  wages,  and  not  done  away  their  sins.  Yelde  also 
rekoning  how  thou  hast  ruled,  and  spended  the  goods  of  poore  men.     Harke 

Bernard,  what  S.  Bernard  saith :  '  Dread  clarks,  dread  the  ministers  of  the  church,  the 
which  ben  in  the  place  of  saints,  that  they  do  so  wickedly,  nought  holding 
them  apayd  with  such  wages  that  were  sufficient  to  them.'  That  oueq^lus  that 
needy  men  should  be  sustained  by,  they  be  not  ashamed  to  wast  in  the  house 
of  their  pride  and  leachery,  and  withholden  to  themselfe  wickedly  and  cursedly 
that  which  should  be  the  lifeloode  of  poore  men.  With  double  wickednes  truly 
they  sinne :  first,  for  they  receuen  other  mens  goods,  and  saith,  they  misuse 
holy  things  in  their  vanities  and  in  their  filthes.  Euery  such  bayly  therefore 
beware,  for  anone,  to  the  last  farthing  he  shall  recken  with  Christ.  Trowest 
thou  not  then,  that  thou  ne  shalt  be  disalowed  of  God,  of  that  thou  hast 
mispended^  in  feeding  of  fat  palfreys,  of  hounds,  of  haukes,  and  if  it  so  be,  that 
is  worst  of  all,  on  lecherous  women  ?  Heare  what  is  said  of  such :  '  They 
had  led  their  dayes  in  wealths;  and,  in  a  poynt,  they  bene  gone  downe 
into  hell.'  Thinke,  therefore,  I  rede  thee,  that  thou  shalt  yelde  reckening  of 
thy  bayly. 

The  third  question  that  this  bayly  shall  annswere  to,  is  this :  How  hast  thou 
lined  ?  what  light  of  holynes  hast  thou  shewed,  in  thy  lining,  to  the  people,  or 
what  mirrour  hast  thou  Isen  of  holynes  to  them  ?  geue  now  thy  reconing,  how 
thou  hast  liued,  as  a  priest  or  as  a  leude^  man,  as  a  man  or  as  a  beast  That 
is  to  wonder  timely,  how  the  life  of  priestes  is  chaunged !  They  be  clothen  as 
knights ;  they  speaken  as  vnhonestly  as  carels,  other  of  winning  as  marchaunts; 
they  riden  as  princes :  and  all  that  is  thus  spended,  is  of  the  goods  of  poore 
men,  and  of  Christ's  heretage.  Therefore,  saith  an  holy  doctor,  '  The  clay  of 
Egypt  was  tough  and  stinking,*  and  medled  with  blond.  The  slates  were  hard 
to  be  vndoe,  for  they  were  baked  with  tire  of  couetise,  and  with  the  light*  of 
lust.  In  this  trauaileth  rich  men,  in  this  they  wake,  awaiting  poore  men.  In 
these  trauaileth  prelates,  that  ben  too  much  blent''  witli  too  much  shining  of 
riches,  that  make  them  houses  like  chuixhes  in  greatnes,  that  with  diuers 
paintries  coloren  their  chambers,  that  with  diuers  clothings  of  colours  make 
images  gay :  but  the  poore  man,  for  default  of  clothes,  beggeth,  and,  with  an 
empty  wombe,  ciyeth  at  the  doore.  And  if  I  shall  the  sooth  say,'  saith  this 
doctor,  '  oft  time  poore  men  be  robbed  for  to  clothe  the  trees  and  stones.'  Of 
such  speaketh  the  prophet,  '  How  art  thou  heere,  or  as  who  art  thou  ?''  Here 
thou  art  occupying  the  place  of  Peter  and  of  Poule,  or  of  Thomas  or  of  Martine. 
But  how  ?  As  ludas  among  the  apostles,  as  Symon  Magus  among  the  disciples ; 
as  a  candle  new  queint,*  that  stincheth  al  the  house  in  steed  of  a  light  lanteme; 
as  a  smoke  that  blindeth  mens  eien,  in  place  of  clean  fire.  If  thou  contrarie 
thus  the  forme  of  lining  that  Christ  and  his  disciples  left  to  priests,   Lo,  what 

Jer.  xxxi.  saith  the  prophet  leremy  :  '  They  haue  entred,  and  they  haue  had,  and  nought 
ben  obedient.'     They  hauen,  with  false  title  or  with  their  false  and  connipt  in- 

Sap.  vi.  tention,  had  poore  mens  goods  to  their  misusing;  and  they  haue  not  be  obe- 
dient to  the  law  of  God  in  their  owne  liuing.  Therfore  it  is  writ,  that  the 
hai'dest  dome  shal  fall  on  such.  An  hard  dome,  for  they  haue  mis-entred ;  an 
harder  dome,  for  they  haue  misruled ;  and  tlie  hardest  dome,  for  they  haue  so 
ciu"sedlie  liued.  Thinke,  therefore,  I  rede,  how  thou  wilt  giue  reckning  of  thy 
baily ! 

(1)  "AUedging;"  "  a  strait  alledging  of  al  the  floke  that  thou  hast  take  of  them  thy  liuing, 
through  tlieir  labour  and  sweat,  and  do  nothing  therfor ;  but  let  them  goo  astray,  wandring  for 
pasture  and  water,  and  none  geuen  them  by  tliee."  Ed.  15G3,  p.  177.— Ed. 

(2)  "  Mispended  ;"  and  in  bringing  vp  of  yonge  idle  fellowes  nourished  or  taught,  as  it  were,  in 
a  schole,  to  blaspheme  God  in  al  manner  of  poyntes  of  euil ;  liuynge  in  feeding,  &c.  Ed.  1563 
p.  177.— Ed. 

(3)  "  Leudeman;"  a  layman,  unlearned.— Ed.      (4)  "Stinking;"  stycknge.  Ed.  1563.— Ed. 
(5)  "  Light,"  &c.  ;  layer  or  earths  of  lustes.  lb.— Ed.  (6)  "  Blent; '  blinded.— Ed. 

(7)  Esa.  xxii.  Quis  tu  hie  aut  quasi  quid  hie.         (8)  "  Queint;"  quenched.— Ed. 


I'UEACIIED    AT    PAUL's    CROSS    BY     U.   WIMBLKDOV.  f^UT 

The  second  bayliff  that  accounteth  at  this  dome  for  himselfe,  and  also  for  iiennj 

other,   is  hee  that  keeping  liath  of  any  conmiunite,  as  kings,  princes,  niaiers,  ^^■ 

and  shireues,   and  instices :    and  these  shall  also   answer  to  the  same  three  *   y. 

questions.      The  first  (picstion :    How  hast  thou  hentred  (that  is  to  say,  into  •■  /^f/ 
thine  otfice)  ?  other  for  helpe  of  the  people,  to  destroy  falshed  and  fortheren 


truth,  other  for  desire  of  winning,  or  worldly  worship .'     If  thou  take  such  an  Kings, 
office  more  for  thine  owne  worldlie  profit  than  for  the  helpe  of  the  comunite,  ^ndina- 
thou  art  a  tyrant,  as  the  philosopher  seith.     For  it  is  to  feare  least  there  bene  gistrates 
too  many  tliat  dcsiren  such  states,  that  they  may  the  rather  oppresse  tl.ilk  that  ^^™°- 
thcy  hatcth,  and  take  gifts  to  spare  to  punish  thilke  that  hauen  trespassed ;  How  iiait 
and  so  maketh  them  partcncrs  of  tlieir  sinnes ;  and  for  bribes  they  work  all  thou  en- 
things.     And  many  such,  when  they  ben  so  high,  they  reck  nought  that  they  ''^'''^"• 
beth  poore  mens  brethren  ;    but  they  weene  to  passe  them  in  kind,  as  they 
passeth  in  worldlie  worshippe,  that  is  but  wiude  *and'  vanity:*  of  which  God 
saith  by  the  prophet,  'They  hauen  raigned,  but  nought  of  me;  they  haue  bene  Ose.  viii 
princes,  but  I  know  nought.'     So  we  read  of  Roboam,   that  was  the  son  of 
king  Salomon  :  what  time  he  was  first  king  *  avanced  in  his  heart,*  the  people 
of  Israeli  comen  to  him  and  said,  '  Thy  father,  in  his  last  dales,  put  on  vs  great  ii.Oiron. 
charge.     Wee  pray  thee  some  deale  make  it  lighter,  and  we  willen  serue  thee.  ^• 
And  the  king  took  counsaile  of  the  old  wise  men,  and  they  counsailden  to 
answer  them  faire,  and  that  should  bee  for  the  best.    But  he  left  these  old  wise 
mennis  counsaile,  and  did  after  the  counsaile  of  children  that  were  his  play- 
feren,  and  saide  to  the  people  when  they  came  againe.  My  left  finger  is  greater 
than  my  father's  riegge.-     My  father  grieued  you  somewhat,  but  I  wil  echen 
more  thereto.'     And  the  people  heard  this,  and  rebeleden  to  hij7i,  and  tooke 
them  another  king;  and  sith,  the  kingdome  came  neuer  whole  again.     And 
therefore   it   is   good  that  euerie  ruler  of  cominalties,  that  they  be  not  lad 
by  follies,  ne  by  hone  other  eare-rowner,^  that  he  ne  haue  an  eygh  of  loue  to 
the  comontie  that  he  hath  to  nde.     For  wete  ye  wel,   bee  he  neuer  so  high, 
that  he  shal  come  afore  his  higher,  to  yeeld  reconing  of  his  bayly. 

The  second  question  is.   How  hast  thou  niled  the  people  and  the  office  that  How  hast 
thou  haddest  to  gouerne  ?  thou  that  hast  bene  a  fudge  in  causes  of  poore  men,  "^P". 
how  hast  thou  kept  this  best  of  God?    '  Thou  shalt  not  take  heed  to  the  person  Deut.  ix. 
of  a  poore  man,   to  be  to  him  the  harder  for  his  pouertie,  ne  thou  shalt  not 
behold  a  rich  mans  semblance,   to  spare  or  to  fauour  him  in  his  wrong  for  his 
riches  V    O  Lord !  what  abusion  is  there  amdng  officers  of  both  lawes  now  a 
daies.      If  a  great  man  pleadeth  with  a  poore  man,  to  haue  ought  that  he 
holdeth,  euerie  officer  shall  be  readie  to  hie  al  that  he  may,  that  the  rich  man 
might  haue  such  an  end  as  he  desired.     But  if  a  poore  man  plead  with  a  rich 
man,  than  thei-e  shal  be  so  many  delaies,  that  though  the  poor  man's  right  be 
open  to  all  the  countrey,  for  pure  faut  of  spending,  he   shal  be  glad  to  cease. 
Shriues  and  bailiffes  willen  retourne  poore  men's  writs,  with  '  tarde  venit,'  but  gif 
they  feelen  meed  in  their  hands :  and  yet  1  heare  say  (men  that  hauen  seyen 
both  lawes),  that  ilke  court  that  is  cleped  Chinst's  court,  is  much  more  cursed. 
Therfore  it  is  writ, '  Giftes  they  taken  out  of  mens  bosoms,  to  ouei-turne  the  right  Prov.xiii 
way  of  dome ;'  but  it  is  to  dread  the  word  of  Christ :   '  In  what  dome  ye  deeme,  ^t^"-  vii. 
ye  should  be  denied,  when  ye  comen  to  yelde  a  reconing  of  your  bayly.' 

The  third  question  is.  How  hast  thou  lined,  that  thou  deemest  and  punishest  How  J»st 
other  men  for  their  trespas  ?    A  great  doctor  saith  :  '  Tliee  behoueth  to  flee  the  *!'"" 
wickednesse  of  other  men,  that  thou  chastisest  them  for  their  trespas.     For  if 
thy  selfe  do  vnlawfullich,  in  deming  other  men,  thou  damnest  thy  selfe,  syth 
thou  doest  that  thou  damnest'     And  Poul  saith,  '  Why  teachest  thou  nought  Rom.  ii. 
thy  .selfe,   that  thou  teachest  other?  why  stealest  thou,  that  teachest  nought 
other  men  to  steale  ?'     Saint  Gregory  saith  :  '  He  shal  not  take  gouernaile  of 
other,  that  can  not  goe  before  them  in  good  Uuing.     And  when  any  man  stand 
before  him  in  dome,  he  must  take  heed  to  fore  what  Judge  he  shal  stand  him 
selfe,  to  take  his  dome  after  his  deedes.'     But  it  is  to  dread,  that  many  fareth 
as  twe  false  priestes,  that  woulden  haue  damned  to  death  holie  Susan,  for  she  Susan, 
would  not  assent  to  their  leacherie  ;  of  the  which  it  is  writ,  '  They  turned  away 
their  cyen,  for  they  would  not  sec  heauen,  ne  haue  minde  of  rightful  domes.' 
So  it  bappeth  oft,  tbey  that  were  more  worthy  to  bee  hanged,  damneth  them 

(1)  The  asterisks  denote,  that  words  are  introduced  from  the  Edition  of  13G3. — Ed. 
"">  "Riegge;"  back-bone. — Ed.  (3)  "  Eare-rowner  ;"  whisperer. — Ed. 


298  A  sEUMoy,  no  less  godly  than  learned, 

Hi'nrtj    that  be  lesse  worthy ;  as  a  clerke  tellelh  of  Socrates  the  philosopher.    Saith  he, 
J^-      '  Upon  a  day  a  man  asked  of  him,  why  he  laughed.     And  he  saide,  For  I  see 
great  theeues  leaden  a  little  theefe  to  hanging.'     I  pray  thee,  whether  is  he  a 
^  <n-eater  theefe  that  benimeth '  a  man  his  house  and  his  lande  from  him  and 

•    from  his  heires  for  euermore,  other  he  that,  for  making  of  great  need,  stealeth 
Socrates,    a  sheepe  or  a  calfe  ?'  ^    Whether  trowe  wee  nought,  that  it  happeth  such  extor- 
tioners to  bee  othcrwhile  iudges,  and  demeth  men  thus :  but  I  rede  thee,  that 
thus  deemest  other,  thinke  on  that  dome  thou  shalt  come  to,  to  yelde  the 
rekening  of  thine  bayly. 
Tlie  third      The  third  baylife  that  shal  be  cleped  to  this  dredfiill  acount  shal  bee  euery 
bailey.       christian  man,  that  shall  geue  rekening  to  his  Lord  God,  for  goods  that  he  hath 
aciraon^'^  had  of  hys.     And  heere  I  will  speake  but  of  the  first  question,  that  is  this  : 
tion  in      How  entrest  thou  ?     And  heere,  by  the  waie,  ye  that  haue  gotten  any  worldly 
general  to  good,  other  take  by  extortion,  by  rauine,  by  vsurie,  other  by  deceit,  '  Wo  shall 
christian   be  to  him  at  this  dreadful  day,'  as  Sainct  Austen  sayth.     If  he  be  cast  into  the 
man.         flj-e,  that  hath  nought  giuen  of  his  owne  good,  where,  trowest  thou,  shal  he  be 
castin,  that  hath  reued  other  mens  from  them  ?     And  if  he  shulle  brenne  with 
the  fend  that  hath  nought  clothed  the  naked,  where  trowest  shal  he  brenne 
that  hath  made  him  naked  that  was  earst  clothed  1     But,  as  Sainct  Gregorie 
saith,  '  Two  things  maketh  men  to  liue  thus  by  rauaine  of  other  neighbors ; 
that  they  desire  heynes,  and  dread  pouerty.'* 

And  what  vengeance  falleth  of  this  sinne  of  couetise,  I  may  see  by  figure  in 
Zach.  V.  holy  writ,  when  the  angel  sayd  to  prophet  Zacharie,  '  Rere  vp  thine  eien,  and 
see  what  is,  that  goeth  out.  And  the  prophet  said.  What  is  it  1  Then  the 
angell  saide.  This  is  the  potte  going  out ;  this  is  the  eizc  *  of  hem  on  all  the 
earth.  And  there  was  a  weight  of  lead  I  bore,  and  there  was  a  woman  sitting 
in  the  middle  of  this  pot :  and  the  angell  saide.  This  is  impietie.  And  he 
tooke  her,  and  cast  her  into  the  middle  of  this  pot ;  and  he  tooke  the  gobbette 
of  lead,  and  cast  it  into  the  pots  mouth.  And  the  prophet  lift  vp  his  eie,  and 
he  saw  two  women  comming  out,  and  spirits  in  her  wingis,  like  two  kytes  other 
gledes  ;5  and  they  carerid  vp  this  potbetweene  heauen  and  the  earth.  And  than 
the  prophet  spake  to  the  angell,  Whider  wol  these  beare  this  pot  1  And  he 
Expo-  saide.  Into  the  lond  of  Sennaar.'  This  pot  is  couetise  ;  for  right  as  a  pot  hath 
*'*"'■  a  wide  open  mouth,  so  couetise  gapeth  after  worldlie  good.  And  right  as  the 
licour  in  the  pot  profiteth  nought  to  the  pot,  but  to  men  that  draweth  and 
drinketh  therof ;  so  worldly  good,  oft,  profiteth  not  to  churles,  but  to  other  that 
Eccles.  V.  commeth  after ;  as  it  is  written,  '  He  that  hath  money,  shall  haue  no  fruite  of 
it.'  And  this  couetise  is  the  eie  of  couetous  men,  for  they  ben  blinde  to  see 
how  they  should  see  to  goe  to  heauen,  but  to  winning  of  worldly  thinges  they 
see  many  waies,  like  to  owles  and  nightcrowes,  that  seene  better  by  night  than 
by  day.  The  gobbet  of  lead,  is  the  sinne  of  obstination.  The  woman  that  sat 
in  tlie  pot,  is  vnpittie,  as  the  angell  saide,  that  foUoweth  vnrighteousnesse  and 
auarice.  For,  through  auarice,  a  man  leeseth  the  pity  that  he  should  haue  of 
the  mischiefe  of  his  soule.  For,  oft  time,  men  leese  the  life  of  their  soule,  by 
deadlie  sin  that  they  doo  to  haue  worldlie  winning ;  and  also  they  leese  the 
pitie  that  they  shoulde  haue  of  their  body,  putting  themselves  to  many  great 
bodelie  trauayls  and  perils  both  by  sea  and  land;  and  all  maketh  couetise. 
This  pot  is  stopped  with  the  gobbet  of  lead,  when  vnpitie  is  thus,  by  sinne  of 
obstination,  closed  in  couetise,  that  he  may  not  goe  out  of  the  chinches^  harte  by 
Jobxxii.   penance.     For,  as  lob  saith,  '  When  he  is  fulfilled,  he  shal  be  stopped.' 

The  twoe  women  that  bare  vp  this  pot,  are  pride,  and  lust  of  flesh,  that  be 
cleped,  in  holie  writ,  '  the  twey  daughtren  of  the  water-leche,  crying,  bring, 
bring.'  And  they  had  wings:  the  first  wing  is  grace  spirituall,  as  cunning, 
wisdome,  and  counsell,  with  such  other  m.any  ;  for  which  gifts  many  men  wexe 
proud.  The  second  wing  is  bodily  grace,  as  strength,  fairehood,  gentrie,  and 
many  other  such,  whereof  men  wexe  proud.  The  winges  of  the  second  woman, 
that  is,  fleshlie  desire,  beth  gluttonie  and  sloth.  Of  gluttony  speaketh  Saint 
Gregory  :  '  When  the  wombe  is  fulfilled,  the  prickes  of  lecherie  beth  meued.' 
And  of  slouth  Saint  Austine  saith :  '  Lot,  the  while  he  dwelled  in  businesse 
among  shrewes   in  Sodome,  hee  was  a  good  man :  but,  when  he  was  in  the 

(1)  "Binimeth,"  depriveth.— Ed.        (2)  Valerius  Maximus,  lib.  vii.        (3)  Morali.  Greg.  viii. 
(4)  "  Kize,"  resemblance. — Ed.  (5)  "  Gledes,"  hawks. — Ed. 

(C)  " The  chiiiche,"  the  keeper.  Ed.  1563.— Ed. 


riiKACHKU    AT    ST.    I'AUl/s    CROSS    BY    11.  WIMBLEDOX.  299 

hil,  slowe,!  fur  sykkei-ncs,"  he,  in  his  dninkennes,  lay  hy  liis  clauglitren.'^     And     iienry 
these  women  Imd  winges  like  kytes,  that,  with  a  crying  voice,   seeeheth  their       ^'- 
nieate,  as  Bartholonieus  saith.*     And  tlnis  tareth  couetise  of  men,  witnessing    ^  jj 
Saint  Anstine,  what  is  the  greedines  of  Heshlie  desire  :  '  In  asmuch  as  the     j4()<i 

ranenous  fyshes  liane  sometime  measure,  yet  when  they  hunger  they  rapin,  '— 

and  when   they  fulfil   they  spare  ;    but  only  couetise  of  men  may   not   bee  Against 
fulfilled.     For  euer  he  taketh,  and  neuer  iiath  inough  :  neither  hee  dreadeth  „esg. 
God,  neither  shame  of  men  :  he  ne  spareth  his  father,  ne  knoweth  his  mother, 
ne  accordeth   with  his  brethren,  neyther  keepeth  truth  with  his  friend  :    he 
ouerpresseth  widowes  and  fatherlesse  children.      Freemen   he  maketh  bond, 
and  bringeth  forth  false  witnes,  and  occupieth  dead  mens  things,  as  he  shulden 
neuer  die.'    '  What  manhood*  is  tliis,'  saith  this  doctour,  'thus  to  leese  life  and  Ps.  liv. 
grace,  and  get  death  of  soule  ?  win  gold,  and  leese  heauen  V     And  herefore 
saith  the  prophet:   '  Haue  trauaile  in  the  midst,  and  leaue  vnrighteousnesse.' 
Also  Innocent,  speaking  of  the  harmes  that  come  of  couetoise,  saith  thus;   '  O 
howe  manie  men  hath  couetise  deceiued  and  spilt?     When  couetise  Balaam  Numb, 
would,  for  giftes  that  the  king  profered  him,  haue  cursed  (iods  people,  his  owne  j''"'   ^.. 
asse  reproued  him,  and  hurt  his  foote  against  a  wall :  and  yet  was  ouercome  2  Kings 
and  led  away  with  couetousnesse,  which  enforced  him  what  he  might.''     Achor  ^■ 
was  stoned  to  death,  for  couetise  made  him  steal  gold  and  clothes,  against  the 
commandcment  of  God.     Giesy  was  smit  with  niesilrie,  for  he  sold  Naamans 
heal,  tliat  came  of  Gods  grace.     ludas,  for  couetise,  sold  Christ,  and  afterward 
hoong  himselfe.     Anany,  and  Zaphira,  his  wife,  were  dead  sodainlie,  for  they  Acts  v. 
forsoken  to  giue  Peter  their  money  that  they  had. 

And  couetise  maketh,  also,  that  rich  men  eat  the  poore,  as  beastes  done  their 
losous '  holding  them  lowe.  This  may  we  see  all  day  in  deed,  I  dread :  for  if 
a  ritch  man  haue  a  field,  and  a  poore  man  haue  in  the  middest,  or  in  the  side 
thereof,  one  acre  ;  and  a  inch  man  haue  all  a  streete,  saueth  o  house  that  some 
poore  brother  of  his  oweth ;  he  ceaseth  neuer  till  hee  get  it  out  of  the  poore 
mans  hand,  either  by  praier,  or  by  bying,  or  by  pursuing  of  disceit.  Thus  fared 
it  by  king  Achab,  that,  through  his  false  queenes  ginne,*  slow  the  poor  man 
Nahoth,  for  that  he  woulde  not  sell  him  his  vineyarde  that  was  nye  to  the 
kinges  palace.  Vppon  which  proces,  thus  saith  Saint  Ambrose  :  ^  '  How  fan-e 
will  ye  ritch  men  stretch  your  couetise?  will  ye  dwell  alone  vpon  the  earth, 
and  haue  no  poore  man  with  you  V  Why  put  ye  out  your  fellowe  by  kind, 
and  challenge  to  your  selfe  the  possession  comen  by  kinde  ?  In  commune  to 
all,  rich  and  poore,  the  earth  was  made.  Why  will  ye  ritch,  chalenge  proper 
I'ight  herein  ?  Kinde  knoweth  no  riches,  that  bringeth  forth  al  men  poore  :  for 
we  be  not  got  with  rich  clothes,  ne  borne  with  gold  ne  with  siluer.  Naked 
hee  bringeth  them  to  this  world,  needie  of  meat,  and  of  drink,  and  clothing. 
Naked  the  earth  taketh  vs,  as  she,  naked,  brought  vs  hither.  Shee  cannot 
close  with  vs  our  possession  in  the  sepulchre  ;  for  kind  maketh  no  difference 
betweene  poore  and  rich,  in  comming  hither,  ne  in  going  hence.  All  in  o 
maner  he  bringeth  foorth  ;  all  in  o  nianer  he  closeth  in  graue.  Who  so  will 
make  difference  of  poore  and  ritch,  abyde  till  they  haue  a  little  while  leyne  in 
the  graue.  Than  open,  and  looke  among  dead  bones,  who  was  ritch,  and  who 
was  poore  ;  but  if  it  be  thus  :  that  mo  clothes  rottetli  with  the  ritch  then  with  the 
poore,  and  that  barmeth  to  them  that  beth  on  line,  and  profitte  not  to  them 
that  beene  dead.  Thus  saith  the  doctour,  of  such  extortion,  as  it  is  writ: 
'  Other  mens  fields  they  repeth,  and  fro  the  vine  of  him  that  the  harme  op-  jou  x.xiv. 
pressed,  they  plucke  away  the  grapes.'  They  leueth  men  naked,  and  taketh 
away  her  clothis  that  hath  nought  wherewith  to  belle  them  in  cold,  and  liften 
vp  this  pot  bytwene  heauen  and  earth.  For  couetous  men  nother  haueth 
charitie  to  their  brethren  vpon  earth,  neyther  to  God  in  heauen ;  and  they  bare 
this  pot  into  the  lond  of  Sennaar,  that  is  to  say,  into  the  lond  of  Stenche,  that 
is  hell :  '  for  there  shall  be  stench,  in  steed  of  sweet  smeUing,'  as  Isay  sayth. 

Beware,  1  rede,  that  ye  nought  haue  to  doe  with  this  pot,  ne  with  the  woman 
therein  ;  and,  on  all  maner,  that  ye  be  nought  weddid  to  hir,  for  than  ye  must 

(I)  "Slowe,"  idle— Kd.  (2)  " Sykkernes,"  security.— Ed. 

(3)  August,  'de  conflictu  virtutis  et  viciorum.'      (4)  Bartholomeus  'de  proprietatibus  rerum. 

(5)  "  Manhood,"  madness.    Ed.  1563.— Ed.  (6)  Edition  1563.— Ed. 

(7)  "  Lesous."  &'c,  even  as  beastes  eate  grasse,  keping  it  under.    Ed.  1563. — Eb. 

(8)  "  Ginne,"  suarc— Ed.  (9)  Ambrosius  '  de  suo  libeUo  dc  Naboth.' 


300  A    SERMON,    NO    LESS    GODLY    THAN    LEARNED, 

llfiirii     DC  both  one.    This  is  thilke  foule  lecherous  woman  the  kinges  and  marchauntis 

^'  ■       of  the  earth  liaue  clone  leacherie  with,  and  of  her  vertue  they  haueth  be  made 

4    ,j      rich;  whose  damnation  is  written  in  the  booke  of  Priuities'  in  these  words: 

'l40o'     '  ^"  '^  ^^y  shall  come  all  this  vengeances  of  lier  death  ;  weping,  and  hunger; 

1    and  fire  shal  brenne  her ;  for  strong  is  God  that  shall  venge  him  on  her.  And  than 

shulleth  weepe  and  howle  vppe  on  her  the  kinges  of  the  earth,  that  haueth  done 
lechery  with  her,  and  haueth  lined  in  delices,  when  they  shidle  see  the  smoke 
of  her  brenning,  stonding  aferre,  weping  and  Aveyling,  and  saying :  '  Alas ! 
alas  !  thilke  great  city  that  was  clothed  with  bis,^  and  purpre,  and  brasile,*  and 
ouergilte  witli  gold,  and  pretious  stones,  and  pearle ;  for  in  one  houre  all  these 
great  riches  shal  be  destroyed.'  Then  shall  they  sey,  that  shal  be  damned  with 
her :  '  We  haue  erred  fro  the  waie  of  trouth  apd  rightwisnes,  light  liaue  not 
shined  to  vs,  and  the  sonne  of  vnderstonding  haue  not  I'esen  to  vs  :  we  haue  be 
made  weery  in  euerich  way  of  wickednes  and  of  lust,  and  haue  gone  hard 
waies ;  but  the  waies  of  God  we  knew  nought.  What  hath  pride  profited  to  vs, 
or  the  boast  of  riches  what  hath  it  brought  to  vs  ?  All  this  is  a  shadow  of 
death,  and  we  mow  now  shew  no  token  of  holinesse ;  in  our  wickednes  we  be 
wasted  awaie.'  Tliinke  therefore,  I  rede,  that  thou  shalt  yelde  rekening  of 
thy  bayly. 

Here  endeth  the  first  part  of  this  sermon,  and  beginneth  the  second  part. 

The  Second  Part  of  this  Sermon. 

*  Here  *  should  be  asked, '  How  haste  thou  gouerned  thy  wife,  thy  children,  and 
seruants?  haste  thou  brought  them  vp  after  the  laues  of  God,  and  continued  them 
there  in,  as  much  as  lyeth  in  thy  pouer  ?  But  if  thou  haste  brought  them  vp 
after  an  other  waye,  or  suflTered  them  to  goo  at  there  owne  will,  thynke  not  but 
thou  muste  geue  accomptes  therefore,  when  shal  be  said,  '  Redde  rationem  villi- 
cationis  tiise.'  But  and  if  thou  wilt  auoyd  al  the  straight  and  harde  accomptes, 
I  councell  thee,  whatsoeuer  thou  be,  to  fal  and  cleaue  vnto  the  mercy  and  good- 
nesse  of  God  through  Christs  merits,  with  a  liuelye  faith,  and  repentyng  hart  of 
thine  iniquities.  And  now,  therefore,  be  ware  of  thy  life  in  time  past,  and 
amend.  And  if  thou  doo  not,  and  that  in  time,  who  shal  graunt  thee  pardon 
and  release  of  this  thy  accompte.'  * 

In  which  second  part,  with  the  helpe  of  God,  I  wih  shew  first,  who  shall  clepe 

vs  to  this  reckening :  afterward,  to  fore  what  iudge  we  shall  reckyn  :  and  last, 

what  punishing  shall  be  do,  to  them  that  ben  found  false  seruantes  and  wicked, 

and  what  reward  shall  be  giue,  to  them  that  be  found  good  and  true. 

Matt.  For  the  first,  ye  shall  wetoen  that  tliere  shall  bee  twey  domes.     The  first 

xxvii.       doome  anone  after  the  departing  of  body  and  of  soule,  an  this  shall  bee  speciall : 

and  of  this  reckening  or  doome  speaketh  the  gospell  of  Lvike.     The  second 

reckening  or  doome  shal  be  anone  after  the  generall  resurrection,  and  shal  bee 

vniuersal :  and  of  this  is  to  speken  in  the  gospell.     To  the  firste  euery  man 

shal  be  cleped  after  other,  as  the  worlde  passeth.     To  the  secunde  shall  come 

o  togedre,  in  the  stroke  of  an  eye,  al  mankinde.     To  the  first,  men  shall  be 

Tiiree        cleped  with  three  sumners  other  sergeauntes :  the  first  is  sicknesse,  the  second 

summers  is  age,*  and  the  third  is  death :  the  first  warneth,  the  second  threateneth,  and 

Sickness,  ^^^  ^j^j^.^  taketh.     This  is  a  kindlie  order,  but  otherwise  it  faileth ;  for  smne  we 

death.       seeth  dyeth,  that  neuer  wist  what  was  sicknesse  ne  age,  as  children  that  ben 

suddenhe  slaine ;  and  sume,  ye  the  most  part  that  deyeth  now  a  dales,  deyeth 

byfore  her  kind  agee  of  deeth.     Therefore  I  say,  that  the  first  that  clepeth  to 

this  speciall  reckning  is  sicknesse  that  foloweth  all  mankind,  so  that  euery  man 

hath  it ;  and  sum  is  sicknesse  that  sume  men  haueth,  but  nought  all.     Yet  the 

first  sicknesse  is  double,  for  sume  is  withinne,  in  the  mightes  of  the  soule,  and 

sume  is  without,  in  feblenesse  of  the  body  that  needis  mo  bee  stroyed,  whan 

time  by  hem  selfe  is  cause  of  corruption,  as  philosophic  saith,  that,  thereby, 

feeblenesse  and  sicknes.     And  so  may  we  see  hereby,  though  that  a  man  shut 

out  of  the  house  of  his  hart  all  manner  of  worldlie  and  fleshlie  thoughts,  yet 

(1)  "  Priuities,"  the  Apocalypse.  — Ed.  (2)  "  Bis,"  fine  linen.— Ed. 

(3)  "Brasile,"  red  colour.— Ed. 

(4)  This  addition  to  the  sermon  of  R.  Wimbledon  is  found  only  in  the  first  edition  of  the  Acts 
and  Monuments,  p.  179. — Ed. 

(5)  "  Age;"  '  Elde,'  is  used  for  age  in  edition  1570.— Ed, 


PRKACHRD  AT  I'AUl.  !S  CROSS  HV  R.  WIMRLKDOX.  301 

vnnetli  shall  a  man,  for  ought  that  lie  can  doo,  thinke  on  (iod  onlio,  the  space     Jiennj 
of  o  I'ater  nostor,  hut  that  some  other  thing  that  is  passing,  entreth  into  tlie       l^'- 
soiile,  and  draweth  her  from  contemplation.    But  O  Lorde  God !  what  seekenes     ^  j^ 
is  this,  an  heauic  burden  on  the  sonnes  of  Adam,  that  on  foule  nioock  and  fen     linn" 

of  tlie  world,  we  may  thinke  long  ynow :  but  on  that  the  soule  shoulde  most 1- 

delectation  haue,  by  kinde,  mow  wee  nought  thinke  so  little  a  space,  but  if  the 
cokle  enter  among  the  whete.  Of  this  seekenes  speaketh  Poule,  where  he  saith : 
'  I  see  a  law  in  my  limmes  fighting  agenes  the  law  of  my  s])rite,  and  taking 
me  into  the  law  of  sinne.'  So  that  it  fares  by  vs,  as  by  a  man  that  would  looke 
ageyns  the  sunne,  and  may  nought  do  it  long  for  nothing.  And  forsooth  that 
is  for  no  default  that  is  in  the  sunne,  for  she  is  most  cleere  in  her  sclfe,  and  so, 
by  reason,  best  should  bee  seyn ;  but  it  is  for  feeblenes  of  mans  eye.  Ryght  so, 
syth  Adam  our  first  fader  was  put  out  of  paradise,  all  his  offspring  haue  ben 
thus  sickc,  as  the  prophet  seytli :  '  Our  faders  haue  eate  a  bytter  grape,  and  the 
teeth  of  the  children  be  wexe  an  edge.' 

The  second  sicknesse,  that  is  commune  to  all  mankind,  commith  of  feeblenes  of 
the  body,  as  hunger  andthorst,  colde  and  heate,  sorrowe  and  werines,  and  many 
other,  as  lob  saith :  '  A  man  that  is  ybore  of  a  woman,  lyuing  a  little  while,  job  xiv, 
is  fulfilled  with  many  miseases.'  Yet  there  is  other  sicknesse  that  conmieth  to 
some  men,  but  not  to  all,  as  lepyr,  palsey,  feuer,  dropsie,  blindnesse,  and  many 
other,  as  it  was  seyxlen  to  the  people  of  Israeli,  in  liolie  writ :  '  But  thou  keepe  Deut.  vii. 
the  commaundements  that  be  writ  in  this  booke,  God  shal  echen  the  sicknesse 
of  thee  and  of  thy  seedc,  great  sicknesse,  and  long  abiding.'  Yet  ye  shall 
vnderstond,  that  God  sendetli  otherwhile  such  sicknesse  to  good  menne, 
and  other  while  to  shrewes.  To  good  men  God  doth  it  for  two  causes,  and 
tliat  is  sooth. 

Of  sicknesse  I  wol  to  be  vnderstond  also  of  al  maner  of  tribulations.  The 
first  cause,  for  they  shoulde  alway  euer  know,  that  they  haue  none  perfection 
of  themselfe,  but  of  God  onely,  and  to  echen  their  meeknes.  And  thus  saieth 
Poule ;  '  Least  the  greatnesse  of  reuelations  rere  me  vppe  into  pride,  is  giuen  a 
pricke  of  my  fleshe,  the  .angell  of  Sathanas  to  smite  me  on  the  necke.  Where- 
fore I  haue  thrise  prayed  God,  that  he  should  go  from  me.  And  he  answered 
me  :  My  grace  is  suffisant  to  thee,  for  vertue  is  fulfilled  in  sicknes.'  Where  on  Cor.  xii. 
thus  sayn  the  glose  :  The  fend,  axing  lob  to  be  tempted,  was  heard  of  God,  and 
nought  the  apostle,  axing  his  temptation  to  bee  remoued.  God  heard  him,  that 
should  be  damned,  and  he  heard  nought  him,  that  he  should  saue.  For  oft  the 
sicke  manne  axit  many  thinges  of  the  leche,i  that  he  wol  not  geue  him  ;  and 
that  is  for  to  make  him  whole  of  sicknes. 

Also  God  sendeth  saincts,  oft,  sicknesse  and  persecution,  to  giue  vs  sinneful 
wretches  example  of  patience :  for  if  he  suffer  his  saincts,  to  haue  such  tribula- 
tion in  this  world,  and  they  thankin  him  thereof,  much  more  wretchis,  that 
God  sendeth  not  the  hundred  aparty  of  their  sorrowe,  shulden  beare  it  meekelie, 
sith  we  haue  descrued  a  thousand  so  much  as  they  haueth.  Whereof  Tobie,  Tobitii. 
that  one  day  when  he  was  wery  of  burying  of  poore  men  the  which  shulden 
haue  ley  vnburied,  and  haue  be  etene  of  houndis  and  foules,  as  caraynes^  of 
other  vnreasonable  bestes,  when,  for  werinesse,  he  had  leyde  him  to  rest,  through 
Goddis  sufferance  the  swallowes  that  bredden  aboue  on  his  hous,  maden  ordure 
into  his  eyen,  and  he  wexet  blind.  Thus  it  is  writ  of  this  temptation  for  soth  : 
'  Therefore  Ciod  suffered  to  come  to  him,  that  to  them  that  comen  afler  should 
be  giuen  ensample  of  patyence,  as  by  the  temptation  of  holy  lob.  For  sith, 
from  his  childhod,  euennore  hee  drede  God,  and  euer  kept  his  hestes,  hee  was 
not  agreeued  ayenst  God  that  the  mischiefe  of  blindnesse  fell  to  him,  but 
vnmoueable  dwelled  in  the  dread  of  God,  thanking  him  all  the  daies  of  his 
life.'  Lo  that  Holy  Writ  sayth  expresselie,  that  God  suffered  this  holie  man 
to  haue  that  sicknesse,  to  giue  them  that  shoulde  come  after  him  ensample 
of  patience. 

Also  otherwhile,  God  sendeth  sicknesse  and  tribulation  to  wicked  men,  and 
for  two  causes :  first,  for  that  they  shoulde  the  rather  dread  God,  and  leaue 
their  sinne ;  as  it  is  \mt :  '  Their  sicknesse  hath  bene  multiplied,  and  after,  they 
haue  hyed  to  (lodward.'  For  we  see,  oft,  men  in  sicknes  know  theyr  God,  that 
neuer  would  haue  turned  to  hin?  while  they  hadde  becne  whole.  Also  God 
sendeth  tliem  sicknes  oft  to  agast  other  men,  least  they  foUowe  their  sinne;  as 
(1)  "  Leche,*  physician. — Ed.  (2)  "  Carayties,"  carrion. — F.p. 


302 


A    SERMON,    NO    LESS    GODLY    THAN    I,EARNED, 


Henri) 
IV.' 

A.  D. 

1409. 

Anti- 
oclius. 


The 

second 
soraner. 
Proper- 
ties of 
death. 


The  third 
somner, 
'  Distinc- 
tlo  mor- 
tis.' 

Augus- 
tinus. 


The  day 
of  judg- 
ment. 


the  sicknesse  of  king  Antioche,>  wliom  God  smote  with  such  a  sicknes  that 
wormes  fel  out  of  hys  body  while  he  liued,  in  so  far  forth  that  he  stanke  so 
fowle,  that  his  friendes  were  so  weary  of  it,  that  they  might  not  suffer  it.  And 
at  the  hist,  when  he  himselfe  might  not  suffer  liis  owne  stinch,  then  he  began 
to  know  himselfe,  and  said :  '  It  is  rightfuU  to  be  subiect  to  God,  and  a  deadly 
manne  not  to  hold  himselfe  only  euen  with  God.'  And  the  story  saith,  hee 
asked  mercie  of  God,  and  made  a  vow  to  God,  that  he  woulde  make  the  citie 
of  Jerusalem  free,  and  the  lewes  to  make  them  as  free  as  the  men  of  Athens ; 
and  that  he  would  honour  God's  temple  with  *pretious  stones,"  and  also*  ary 
and  multiply  the  holy  vesselles,  and  finde  of  his  owne  rent  and  spenses  perteyn- 
ing  to  the  sacrifice ;  and  he  would  become  a  lewe,  and  goe  ouer  all  the  londc 
to  preach  Goddes  might :  and  yet  God  gafe  him  not  such  merce  as  lie  desired. 
And  I  trow  certein  that  it  was  for  good,  in  as  much  as  God  knew  he  would  not 
afterward  hold  his  couenant,  or  els  for  he  axket  it  too  late.  What  mede  was  it 
for  him  to  forsake  his  wickednes,  when  he  was  vnmightie  to  do  good  or  euill  ? 
*Neuerthelesse,*  I  trow  he  was  not  damned,  in  as  much  as  he  had  such  repent- 
ance ;  for  repentance,  in  this  life,  come  neuer  too  late  if  it  be  true :  *  but,  by 
this  vengeance  that  God  tooke  on  this  king,  should  men  see,  what  it  is  to  be 
vnobedient  to  God.  And  also  it  is  to  take  heed,  that  when  euer  sicknesse 
commeth,  euer  it  sheweth  that  he  that  suffereth  this  deadlie,  shall  nedes  die  : 
for  though  he  may  skape  of  his  sicknes,  yet  he  may  not  skape  death.  And  so 
thou  must  needes  come  giue  rekening  of  thy  bayly. 

The  second  somnour  that  shal  clepe  thee  to  this  particular  dome,  is  elde  or 
age.  And  the  condition  of  him  is  this ;  thogh  that  he  tarie  with  thee,  he  wil 
not  leue  thee,  till  he  bring  thee  to  the  third,  that  is  death.  But  there  be  many 
that  though  they  haue  this  somnor  with  them,  they  take  none  hede,  though 
they  see  ther  heare  hore,  ther  backe  crooke,  ther  breth  stynke,  ther  teeth  failo, 
ther  yen  derk,  ther  visage  riuely,  ther  erene  wexit  heuy  to  her.  What  meaneth 
all  this,  but  that  age  sumneth  to  the  dome  ? 

But  what  more  madhead  may  be  than  a  man  to  bee  clepcd,  and  drawe  to  so 
dreadfull  a  reckening  there,  where,  but  he  answere  well,  he  forfeteth  both  body 
and  soule  to  damnation  for  euer.  If,  seing  a  litle  worldly  mirth  on  the  way,  he 
tliinketh  so  mekill  thereupon,  that  he  forgetteth  who  draweth  him,*  or  whether 
he  draweth ;  so  doth  he  that  is  smitten  with  age  ahketh  so  on  the  false  worldis 
wealth,  that  he  forgetteth  whether  hee  is  away.  Herefore,  saith  an  holy 
doctour,  that,  among  all  abusions  of  the  world,  most  is  of  an  old  man  that  is 
obstinate :  for  he  thinketh  not  on  his  out  going  of  this  woi'ld,  ne  of  passing  into 
the  lyfe  that  is  to  come ;  he  heareth  messengers  of  death,  and  he  leueth  hem 
not ;  and  the  cause  is  this :  for  the  threefolde  cord  that  such  an  old  man  is 
bounden  with,  is  hard  to  breke.  This  cord  is  custome  ;  that  is  of  three  plightes, 
that  is,  of  ydle  thought,  vnhonest  speach,  and  wicked  deed ;  the  which  if  they 
groweth  in  a  man  from  the  childhoode  into  mans  age,  they  maketh  a  treble 
cord  to  binde  the  old  man  on  custome  of  sin.'  Herefore  sayth  Esay,  '  Breake  the 
bondes  of  sin.'  Thinke  herfore,  whosoeuer  that  thou  be  that  art  thus  sumned, 
that  thou  might  not  scape,  that  thou  ne  shalt  yeld  the  rekening  of  thy  baily. 

The  third  somner  to  this  reckening,  is  death.  And  the  condition  of  him  is, 
that  whan  euer  he  come,  first,  other  the  second,  other  the  last  houre,  he  ne 
spareth  neyther  power  ne  yough,*ne  he  dreadeth  no  thretning;  ne  he  ne  taketh 
Iiede  of  no  prayer,  ne  of  no  gift ;  ne  he  graunteth  no  respit ;  but  withouten 
delay  he  bringeth  forth  to  the  dome.  Herefore  seyth  Sainct  Austen :  '  Well 
ought  euery  man  drede  the  day  of  his  'death  :  for  in  what  state  a  mans  last 
day  findeth  him,  when  he  dyeth  out  of  this  wold,  in  the  same  state  lie  bringeth 
him  to  his  dome.'  Herefore  seyth  the  Wiseman  :  '  Sonne  !  thinke  on  thy  last 
daye  and  thou  shalt  neuer  sinne.'  Therefore  I  rede,  that  thou  thinke  that  thou 
shalt  geue  reconing  of  thy  bayly. 

I  said  also,  that  there  shal  be  another  doome,  to  the  which  all  men  shal  come 
together  *  in  ^  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  *  and  this  shall  be  vniuersall.    A  ud  right  as 

U)  Antlochus  Epiphanes.     See  Josephus  in  the  Lives  of  the  Herods,  p.  883.— Ed. 

(2)  Ed.  LOGS    p.  180.— Ed. 

(3)  These  words  between  asterisks,  which  seem  inconsistent  with  the  sentiment  expre.-ssert  in 
the  preceding  sentence,  are  not  inserted  in  the  edition  of  1563,  but  they  appear  in  tlie  subsequent 
editions.— Ed.  <  j    rt 

(4)  "  Draweth  him,"  hath  him  by  the  sleeve.    Ed.  1.^63.— Ed. 

(5J  "  Neytlier  poure  nor  rych,  aged  nor  yonge."  Ed.  1563.— Ed.        (G)  Ed.  i:63.— E.-j. 


PREACHED    AT    PAUl/s    CROSS    BY    R.  WIMBLEDON'.  S03 

to  the  other  dome,  eviery  man  shall  bee  cleped  with  these  three  sumnours ;  so    iienry 
to  this  dome,  all  this  world  shall  be  cleped  with  three  general  clepcrs.     And       ^^- 
right  as  the  other  three  messengers   tell  a  mans  ende,  so  these  tell  the  end  of    ^_jj,_ 
the  world.    The  first  cleper  is  tlie  workllie  sicknesse  ;  the  second  clcper  is  *  age     14*09] 

and*  feeblenesse  ;  and  the  thirde  is  the  end.     The  sicknesse  of  the  world  thou ' 

shalt  know  by  charity  a  cooling:  his  elde  and  feblcnes  thou  shall  knowe  by  ^,°g''"°™ 
tokens  fulfilling  :  and  his  end  thou  shalt  know  by  Antichristes  pursuing.    First,  world's 
I  said,  thou  shalt  know  the  worldes  sicknes  by  charitie  a  cooling.    Clerkes,  that  sickness. 
treate  of  kinde,'  sayne,  that  abodie  is  sickc,  when  his  bodihe  heate  is  to  lite,  or 
when  his  vnkindelie  heate  is  too  much.     Sythe  then  all  mankind  is  one  bodie, 
whose  kindly  heate  is  charity    (that  is  lone  to   God  and  to  our  neighbors), 
vnkindly  heate  is  lustfull  lone  to  other  creatures.     When  therefore  thou  seest 
that  tlie  lone  of  men,  to  Godwarde  and  to  their  neighl)our,  is  Uttle  and  faint, 
and  the  louo  of  worldlie  things  and  lustes  of  the  fiesh  is  great  and  feruent,  then 
wit  thou  well,  that  vnkindly  heate  is  too  great,  and  kindly  heate  is  too  little. 

That  this  be  acknowlich  of  this  sicknesse,  I  may  prooue  by  autoritie  of  Christ ;  Mat.  xvi. 
for  he  himselfe  gaue  them,  as  a  signe  of  the  drawing  to  the  ende  of  the  worlde. 
For  that  wickednesse  shall  be  in  plente,  charitie  shall  acoole.  Therefore,  when 
thou  seest  charitie  thus  little  in  the  worlde,  and  wickednes  encrease,  know  well, 
that  this  worlde  passeth  and  his  wealth,  and  that  this  siunner  is  come.  And 
thus  seyth  Seynt  Poule  ;  '  Wit  ye  wel,  that  in  the  last  dales  shall  come  peril-  Tim.  iii. 
lous  times.  And  there  shal  be  men  louing  them  selfe,  that  is  to  say,  their 
bodies,  *  and  ^  all  things  belonging  thereto,*  couetous  by  pride,  \niobedient  to 
father  and  mother,  vnkynde  fellowcs,  withouten  affection,  withouten  peace, 
blamers,  incontinent,  vnmilde,  withouten  benignitie,  traytors,  rebels,  swelhng, 
loners  of  lustes  more  than  of  God,  hauing  a  likenesse  of  pietie,  and  denying 
the  vertue  thereof.  And  these  flee  thou.  If  thou  seest  the  people  busied  with 
such  conditions,  wit  thou  wel  that  the  first  sumnour  wameth  al  the  world,  that 
the  day  of  reconing  draweth  toward. 

The  second  sumnour  that  wameth  all  the  world,  is  elde  or  age  of  the  world 
and  his  feblenesse,   and  sheweth  tokens  fulfilling.     But  I  know  wel,  that  we 
be  nought  suftisaunt  to  know  the  times  other  the  whiles  that  the  Fader  in  Trinitie 
hath  put  on  his  owne  power,  to  shew  certeinlie  the  day,  yeare,  other  hom-e,  of 
this  dome,  sith  this  knowleche  was  hid  fro  the  priuy  apostles  of  Christ,  and 
from  Christes  manhoode,  as  to  shewe  it  to  vs.    Nathlesse,  we  inough,  by  authoritie  Luke  xii. 
of  holy  writ,  with  reasons  and  expositions   of  saintes,  well  and  openly  shewe, 
that  this  day  of  wrath  is  nigh.     But  yet,  least  any  man  sey  in  his  hart,  as  it  is 
written'  of   folic  baylies,  that  they  shall  seien,  '  My  lord  that  is,    taiTyeth  to 
come  to  the  dome ;  and,  vpon  hope  heereof,  bee  taketh  to  smite  seruauntes  and 
hynen  of  God,  eate  and  drinke,  and  make  him  dronke  ;'  I  shall  shewe  that  this 
day  is  at  the  honde,   howe  ny,  neuerthelesse,  can  I  not  seie  ne  Avole.     For,  if 
Poule  sayde  nowe  for  a  thousande  and  three  hundred  yeere  and  passed  moe, 
'  Wee  ben  thilke,  into  whome  the  endis   of  the  worlde  bencome,'  much  rather  1  Cor.  .\. 
may  wee  seie  the  same,  that  been  so  much  necre  the  ende  than  he  was.     Also 
Sainct  Chrysostom  sayth  :  '  Tliou  seest  ouer  al  darknes,  and  thou  doubtest  that  Chrysns- 
the  day  is  go  ;  first  on  the  valeys  is  darknes,  whan  the  day  draweth  downward.  *°""'" 
Whan,  therefore,  thou  seest  the  valeies  yderked,  why  doubtest  thou  whether  it 
be  nigh  euen,*  but  if  thou  see  the  sun  so  low  that  derkncs  is  A-pon  the  hils,  thou 
wolt  seie,  doubtles,  that  it  is  night.' 

'  Right  so,  if  thou  see  first  in  the  seculers  and  the  lewd  christen  men  begin- 
neth  derknesses  of  sinnes,  and  to  bane  the  maistrie,  it  is  token  that  this  worlde 
endeth.     But  when    thou   seest  priestes,   that  ben  put  on   the  high  toppe  of  A  proper 
spirituall  dignities,  that  shudden  be  as  hilles  abouen   the  commune  people  in  s'""!'- 
perfect  lining,  that  derfcnesse  of  sinnes  hath  taken  them,  who  douteth  that  the 
world  nis  at  the  end?'     And  also  abbot   loachim,  in   exposition  of  leremye,  Joachim. 
seyeth  :   '  Fro  the  yeare  of  our  Lord  1200,  all  times  beth  suspect  to  me  ;  and  MaidHil- 
wee  ben  passed  on  this  suspect  time  nigh  200  yeare.'     Also  niayden  Plyldegarc  ilesard. 

(1)  "  Treate  of  kinde,"  wrj'ie  on  natural  thynRs.     Ed.  1562.— En. 

(2)  Words  inclosed  with  asterisks  are  from  the  Edition  ir>i)3.—  Ei>. 

(3)  The  following  parable  from  Luke  xii.  16,  is  retained  in  the  Edition  1.563,  p.  131,  instead  of 
the  above.  "  As  it  is  written,"  &c.  "  of  a  sick  man,  a  fowl  belly-scuer,  that  said,  I  will  {gather  al 
my  frutes  and  my  Roods;  and  I  will  say  to  my  soul.  Soul,  thou  hast  much  goods  laid  up  in  store 
for  many  yere»  ;  take  thine  ease  ;  eat  and  drink  and  be  merry." — Ed. 

(4)"  Nigh  euen  ;"  nere  night  orno.     Ed.  1563.— Ed. 


301 


Henri/ 
IV. 


A.D. 
1409. 


Anpus- 
tine. 


Mat. 
xxiv. 


Apoc.  0. 


A     SEKMON,  NO  LESS  GODLY  THAN  LEARNED, 

in  tlie  booke  of  her  Prophesic,  *if^  it  be  leful  to  give  them  credyt,*  the  thirde 
partie,  the  xi.  vision,  the  seuenth  chapter,  meueth  this  reason :  '  Riglit  as  on 
seauen  daies  God  made  the  world,  so,  in  7000  yeare,  the  worlde  shall  passe. 
And  right  as  in  the  sixt  day  man  was  made  and  fourmed  ;  so  in  6000  yeares 
he  was  brought  againe  and  refourmed.  And  as  in  the  seuenth  daye  the  worlde 
was  full  made,  and  God  lefte  off  his  working ;  right  so  in  the  7000  yeare,  the 
number  of  them  that  shullen  be  saued  shall  be  fulfilled,  and  rest  shall  bee  to 
seyntes  full  in  bodie  and  soiile.'  If  that  it  be  so  as  it  seenieth  to  followe  of 
this  maydens  wordes,  that  7000  in  passing  of  the  world,  accordeth  to  seauen 
daies  in  his  making  it,  see  what  lacketh  that  these  7000  yeares  ne  beth  fulfilled. 
For,  if  wee  reken  the  number  of  yeares  fro  the  natiuitie  of  Christ,  to  the  yeares 
fro  the  beginning  of  the  world  to  Christ,  and  thou  wolt  folowe  Austine,  Bede, 
and  Orosie,  and  most  probable  doctors,  treating  of  this  matter :  are  passed  now 
almost  sixe  thousande  and  sixe  hundred,  as  it  is  open  in  a  booke  that  is  cleped 
'  Speculum  ludiciale.'  So  it  suweth  that  this  laste  day  is  more  than  ahalfeago, 
if  we  shulden  giue  credence  to  this  maydens  reasun.  But  if  we  shull  lene  to 
the  gospel,  than  wee  shall  finde,  in  the  Gospell  of  Matthew,  that  the  disciples 
axiden  of  Christ  three  questions :  first,  what  time  the  citie  of  Jerusalem  shoidd 
be  destroyed :  the  second,  what  token  of  his  comming  to  the  dome  :  and  the 
third,  what  signe  of  the  ending  of  the  worlde.  And  Christ  gaue  them  no  cer- 
taine  time  of  these  thinges  when  they  shoulden  fall;  but  bee  gaue  them  tokens, 
by  which  they  might  know  when  they  drew  nighe  ;  and,  so,  as  to  the  first 
question  of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  he  saide,  '  When  the  Romaines  come 
to  besiege  that  citie,  then,  soone  after,  shee  shall  be  destroied.' 

And  as  to  the  second  and  the  third,  he  gaue  manie  tokens,  that  is  to  say,  that 
realme  shall  rise  against  realme,  and  people  against  people,  and  pestilences,  and 
earthquakinges ;  the  which  we  haue  scene  in  our  daies.  But  the  last  token 
that  he  gaue,  was  this ;  '  When  ye  scene  the  abhomination  of  elengenesse,^  sayd 
of  Danyel  the  prophet,  standing  on  the  sanctuarie,  then  who  so  readeth,  vnder- 
stond.'  Vppon  which  text,  thus  argueth  a  doctour,  in  a  booke  that  bee  maketh 
of  the  End  of  the  World :  '  If  the  wordes  of  Danyel  hauen  authoritie  (as  God 
sayth  that  they  hauen),  it  sufficeth  of  the  number  of  the  yeares  of  the  ende  of 
the  worlde,  that  Daniell  hath  written.  Now  Danyell,  in  the  twelfth  chapter, 
speaking  of  this  abhomination,  putteth  betweene  the  ceasing  of  the  busie  sacri- 
fice of  the  lewes,  the  which  fell,  when,  by  Titus  and  Vespasianus,  lerusalem 
was  destroyed,  and  the  people  of  lewes  were  disparkled  into  all  the  world.' 
And  this  abhomination,  that  doctour  sayne,  shall  be  in  the  great  Antichristes 
daies,  1290.  Nowe  prooueth  this  doctour,  that  a  day  must  be  taken  for  a  yeare, 
both  by  autoritie  of  holy  writ  in  the  same  place  and  in  other,  and  also  by  reason. 
So  it  seemeth  to  this  clerke,  that  the  great  Antichrist  shoidd  come  in  the  1400  yeare 
ii-o  the  birth  of  Christ,  *  then  any  time  els  before  *  the  which  number  of  yeares  is 
nowe  fulfilled,  not  fidly  twelue  yeares  and  a  halfe  lacking.*  And  this  reason  put  not 
I  as  to  shew  any  certaine  time  of  his  coming,  sitli  I  haue  not  that  knowledge ; 
but  to  shew  that  he  is  nye,  but  how  nye  I  wot  neuer.  But  take  wee  heede  to 
the  fourth  part  of  the  second  vision  of  Saint  lohn,  put  in  the  booke  of  Keue- 
lations  ;  in  the  which,  vnder  the  opening  of  the  seauen  seales,  is  declared  the 
state  of  the  church  from  the  time  of  Christ,  into  the  ende  of  the  worlde.  The 
opening  of  the  foure  first  seales,  sliewe  the  state  of  the  church,  fro  the  time  of 
Christ,  to  the  time  of  Antichrist  and  his  foregoers,  the  which  is  shewed  in  the 
opening  of  the  other  three  seales. 

The  opening  of  the  first  seale,  telleth  tlie  state  of  the  church  in  the  time  of 
the  preaching  of  Christ  and  of  his  apostles  :  for  the  first  beast,  that  is,  the  lyon, 
gaue  his  voice,  that  betokeneth  the  preachers  of  Christes  resurrection  and  his 
ascension.  For  then  yede  out  a  white  horse,  and  he  that  sate  vpon  him  had  a 
bowe  in  his  hande ;  and  bee  yede  out  ouercoming  to  ouercome.  By  this  white 
horse,  we  vnderstande  the  cleane  life  and  conuersation  that  these  preachers 
haden ;  and  by  the  bowe,  their  true  teaching,  pricking  sorrowe  in  mennes 
hearts  for  their  sinnes,  withouten  flattering.  And  they  wenten  out  of  lewry, 
that  they  comen  of  *  winninge,  and  *  ouercomming  some  of  the   lewes,   and 

(1)  For  these,  with  other  words  similaily  distinguished,  see  Edition  1563. — Ed. 

(2)  "  Elcngenesse,"  from  Elenges,  strange,  foreigne  ;  alluding  to  the  Roman  Eagle.  In  the 
Edition  1563,  the  phrase  "  Abhomination  of  lioliness"  is  used. — Kd. 

(3)  Antichrist  to  come  an.  1400.     This  sermon  ergo  was  made  an.  1389. 

(4)  In  edition  1563,  the  words  "  and  a  halfe,"  arc  omitted.— Ed. 


PREACIir.n    AT     TAUl/s    CROSS,    EY    R.    WIM  l!I,Kl)OX.  305 

maken  hem  to  leauc  the  trust  that  they  hadden  in  the  olde  lawc,  and  to  bclecuo     rrenry 
in  lesus  Christ,  and  shewi-n  his  teachinc;.  And  they  wcnten  out  to  oucrcome  the       ^'' 
Payncmes,  shewing  to  tlieni  that  Uieir  images  were  no  gods,  l)ut  niens  workcs,     ^\ d 
vnniightie  to  sane  themselfe  or  any  otlier;  di-awing  them  to  the  beliefe  of  lesus     \^qq\ 
Christ,  Ciod  and  man.  

In  the  opening  of  the  second  scale,  there  cried  the  second  beast,  that  is,  a 
calfe  :  that  was  a  beast  wonted  to  be  slaine,  and  offered  to  Ood  in  the  okle  lawe. 
This  sheweth  tlie  state  of  the  church  in  the  time  of  martyrs   that,  for   their 
stedfast  preaching  of  Gods  true  lawe,  slied  their  blond,  that  is  signified  by  the 
redde  hors  that  went  out  at  this  scale  opening ;  and  this  estate  began  at  Nero,  Kxposi- 
the  cursed  emperour,  and  diu-ed  vnto  the  time  of  Constanline  the  Great,  that  ti"- 
endowed  the  church ;  for  in  this  time  many  of  Christes  seruantes,  and  namely  (j„„^taa- 
the  leaders  of  Gods   flockc,  were  slaine.     For,  of  two  and  twenty  bishops   of  tine  the 
Rome  that  were  betweene   Peter  and  Siluester  the  First,  I  read  but  of  t'oure,  g^ygg'tg^. 
but  that  they  weren   martyrs  for  the  lawe  of  Chi-ist.     And  also  in  the  time  of 
Dioclesian   the  emperour,  tlic  ])crsecution  of  the  christen  men  was  so  great, 
that  in  thirtie  daies  weren   slaine  t.wentyc  two  thousande  men  and  women   in' 
diners  countreyes,  for  the  lawe  of  God. 

The  opening  of  the   third  scale,  telleth  the  state  of  the  churcli  in  time  of  The  third 
heretikes  ;  that  beth  figured  by  the  blacke  hors,  for  false  vnderstonding  of  holy  seal, 
write  ;  for  than  cryed  the  thirde  beast,  that  is  a  man.     For  at  that  time  was  it 
need  to  preache  the  mysterie  of  Christes  incarnation  and  his  passion,  ayenst 
these  erretikis  that  feliden  mis  of  these  pointis :  howe  Christ  tooke  verreyly  Exposi- 
mans  kinde  of  our  lady,  him    being  God  as  hee  was  bifore,  and  his  moder  *'"■ 
beeing  mayden  byfore  and  after. 

The  opening  of  the  fourtli  scale,  telleth  the  state  of  the  church  in  the  time  The 
of  ypocritis :  that  beth  signified  by  the  pale  hors,  that  beth  signes  of  pcnaunce  ^^^^^ 
with  outfoorth'  to  blinde   the  people.     And  he  that  sate  vpon   this  horse,  his  Exposi- 
nanie  was  Death  ;  for  they  shuUe  slee  gostly  them  that  they  leden'^  and  teaclieth  tio. 
to  trust  \'pon  otlier  thing  than   God :  and  belle  foUoweth  him ;  for  belle  re- 
ceiueth  thilke  that  these  disteineth.     At  that  time  shall  it  need,  that  the  fourth 
beast,  that  is,  the  egle,  make  his  cry,  that  flyeth  highest  of  foules,  to  reare  vp 
Gods  gospell,  and  to  preise  that  lawe  aboue  other  ;  least  mens  witte,  and  their 
traditions,  ouergone  and  treden  downe  the  lawe  of  God,  by  enforming  of  these 
ypocritis  :  and  this  is  the  last  state   that  is,  other  shal  be  in  the  church,  before 
the  comming  *and'  clear  appearing*  of  the  great  *member  of*  Antichrist. 

The  opening  of  the  lift  scale,  telleth   the  state  of  the  church  that  than  sliall  The  fifth 
folio  ive,  and  the  desire  that  loners  of  Goddis  law  shulleth  bane,  after  the  ende  ^'^*'- 
of  this  worlde,  to  be  deliuered  of  this  woe. 

The  opening  of  the  sixt  seale  telleth  the  state  of  the  church  in  time  of  Anti-  The  sixth 
christis  times,"the  which  state  yee  may  know  to  be  in  the  church,  whan  ye  seth  *^^'- 
fulfilled  that  Saint  lohn  prophesieth  to  fall  on  the  opening  of  tliis,  where  he 
saith  thus  :  '  After  this  I  sawe  four  angelles  stonding  vpon  four  corners  of  the 
earth,  holding  the  foure  windes  of  the  earth,  that  theyblowen  nought  vpon  the 
earth,  ne  vpon  the  sea,  ne  vpon  eny  tree.'  Tliese  four  angels  beth  the  number 
of  all  the  deuils  ministers,  that  on  that  time  shulleth,  in  the  pleasaunce  of  their 
lorde  Antichrist,  stoppe  the  foure  windis,  that  beth  the  foure  gospelles  to  bee 
preached,  and  so  let*  the  breath  of  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Gliost  to  fall  upon 
men  morning  for  sinne,  and  calling  them  to  amendment ;  and  to  other  that 
wolden  encrease  in  vertues ;  other  vpon  perfit  men. 

What  is  there  after  this  to  fall,  but  that  the  mysterie  of  the  seauenth  seale  The 
bee  shewed,  that  he  come  in  his  owne  person  :  that  lesu  Christ  shall  slee  with  ^^^^ 
the  spirite  of  his  mouthe,  when   the  fiend  shall  shew  the  vtmost  persecution 
that  he  and  his  seruauntis  may  doo  to  Christis  limmes.     And  that  shall  be  the 
third  warning  that  the  world  shal  bane  to  come  to  this  dreadfull  dome. 

In  all  tliis  matter  haue  I  nought  seid  of  my  selfe,  but  of  other  doctors  that 
beth  prooued.  I  seyd  also,  in  my  second  principal!  part,  that  it  were  to  wete, 
tofore  what  ludge  wee  sliull  reken.  Wherefore  we  shulleth  wite,  that  God  him- 
selfe  shall  hcere  this  rekening  ;  he,  that  seetb  all  our  dedis,  and  fill  our  thoughtes, 
fro  the  bcggining  of  our  life  to  the  ende  ;  and  he  shall  sliewe  there  the  hid  thingis 

(1)  "  With  outfoorth,"  outwardly.— Ed. 

(2)  "Leden,"&c. ;  "  Icden  and  teach  to  God  by  other  wayes  than  by  Christe."  Edition  15G3. 
So  we  read  in  John  xiv.  6.     "  No  man  cotneth  unto  the  Fatlicr  but  by  inc."— lio. 

{^)  For  the  words  in  asterisks,  sec  Ed.  1:G3.— Ed.  (1)  "  Let,'  >i:ndcr.-Eu. 

VOL.  III.  X 


306  A  SERMOX,  NO  LESS  GODLY  THAN  LEARNED, 

Henry    of  our  hert,  opening  to  al  the  world  the  rightfuhies  of  liis  dome  :  so  that,  with 

I^-       the  might  of  God,  euery  mans  dedis  to  all  the  world  shall  be  shewed.     And  so 

it  seenieth  by  the  wordes  of  Seint  lohn,  in  the  boke  of  Preuities,  there  he  seith 

thus :  '  I  sawe  dede  men,  litel  and  great,   stonding  in  the  sight  of  the  throne, 

'^^^^-    and  bookes  weren  opened  ;  and  an  other  booke  was  opened  that  was  of  life,  and 

Apocal.     dede  men  weren  iudged  after  the  thinges  that  weren  written  in  the  bokes,  after 

their  worchings.' 

These  bokes  beth  mens  consciences,  that  now  beth  closed  :  but  than,  they 
shulletli  bee  opened  to  all  the  world,  to  reden  therein  both  dedis  and  thoughtes. 
But  the  booke  of  life,  is  Christs  lining  and  doctrine,  that  is  nowe  hid  to  men 
that  shulleth  be  damned  through  their  owne  malice,  that  demeth  men  to  seioie 
the  world,  rather  than  God.  In  the  first  booke  shall  be  writ  all  tliat  we  haueth 
doe  ;  in  that  other  booke,  shall  bee  write  that  wee  shulden  haue  doo :  and,  than, 
shulle  dede  men  bee  demyd  of  thilke  thingis  that  ben  written  in  the  bokis.  For 
if  the  dedis  that  wee  hauen  doe,  the  which  ben  written  in  the  bookis  of  our 
conscience,  bee  according  to  the  booke  of  Christcs  teaching  and  his  lining,  the 
which  is  the  booke  of  life,  we  shulle  be  saued  :  and,  else,  wee  shulle  bee  damned : 
for  the  dome  shall  be  giuen  after  om*  worlds.  Looke,  therefore,  now  what  thing 
is  written  in  the  booke  of  thy  conscience,  while  thou  art  here ;  and  if  thou 
fiudest  ought  contrarie  to  Christis  life,  other  to  his  teaching,  with  the  knife  ot 
penaunce  and  repentance  scrape  it  away,  and  write  it  better ;  euermore  hertly 
thinking  that  thou  shalt  yelde  rekening  of  thy  bayly. 

Also  I  saide  principallie  that  it  were  to  witen,  what  reward  shall  be  geue  on 
that  doome,  to  wise  seruantes  and  good,  and  what  to  false  seruaimtes  and 
wicked.  For  the  which  it  is  to  wite,  that  our  Lorde  lesu  Christ  shall  come  to 
the  dome  here  into  this  world,  in  the  same  body  that  hee  tooke  of  ovn*  ladye, 
hauing  thereon  the  woundis  that  he  sufired  for  our  againe  bieng.  And  all  that 
euer  shullen  bee  saued,  taking  againe  their  bodies  clyuing  to  their  head  Christ, 
'  shull  be  rauished,  metyng  him  in  the  ayre,'  as  Paule  saith :  they  that  'shall  be 
damned,  lyen  vpon  the  earth  :  as,  in  a  tonne  of  wine,  the  dreggis  dwellen  bynetli, 
and  the  cliere  wine  houeth  aboue.  Than  shall  Christ  axe  rekening  of  the  deedes 
of  mercy,  reprouing  false  christen  men  for  the  leuyng  of  them,  rehearsing  the 
deedes  of  the  same,  and  other  tiiithis,  by  the  which  his  true  seruauntes  than 
folowed  hym.  Than  shulle  thilke  false  seruauntes  goe  with  the  deuill,  whom 
they  haue  serued  in  the  earth,  them  swallowing  into  the  endlesse  fire :  and  right- 
full  men  shullen  goe  into  euerlasting  life.  Then  shall  be  fulfilled  that  is  written 
in  the  booke  of  Priuities  :  'Woe!  woe!  woe!  tohem  that  dwellen  in  the  earth.' 
Woe  to  the  paynym,  that  gafe  that  worship  to  dead  images  wroglit  of  mans 
handes,  and  to  other  creatures,  that  hee  shoulde  haue  gone  to  God  that  liini 
wrought !  Woe  to  the  lewe  that  trusteth  so  muchil  in  the  oidde  lawe  :  than 
shall  he  see  Maries  son  deeming  the  world,  whom  he  despised  and  set  on  the 
crosse.  W^oe  to  the  false  christen  man  that  knew  the  will  of  his  Lorde,  and 
fulfilled  it  nought. 

Also  woe  for  sinne  of  thinking  to  thee,  that  thou  hast  shutte  out  the  meine^  of 
God ;  that  is,  minde  of  his  passion,  holy  contemplation  of  his  goodnesse,  and 
memorie  of  his  benefites,*  and^  thanks  therefore ;  and  hast  also  excluded  mekenes, 
petye,  gentelnes,  &c.,*  fro  the  chaumber  of  thine  hert,  and  hast  made  it  an  house 
of  swyn,  and  a  denne  of  theeues,  by  vncleane  thoughtes  and  delightes  ;  as  thou 
here  hast  sperd  God  out  of  thine  hert,  so  he  shal  spere  thee  out  of  heauen. 
Thou  hast  herberwid'  the  meine  of  the  fiend,  and  with  them  in  hell  thou 
shalt  euer  abide.  Woe  also  for  sinne  of  speacli,  for  thou  might  nought  open  thy 
foule  and  stinking  mouth,  with  the  which  thou  hast  spoken  vnhonestly,  cursing, 
fraud,  deceit,  leasinges,  forswearing,  scorning,  and  backbiting,  to  praise  God  in 
the  fellowship  of  saints  :  for  louing*  is  nought  comynlych  in  mouthes  of  sinners. 
For,  in  the  which,  gif  thou  haddest  kept  thy  mouth  cleane,  thou  shouldest  haue 
songen,  in  fellowship  of  angelles,  this  blessed  song :  '  Sanctus,  sanctus,  sanctus, 
Dominus  Deus  Omnipotens!'  'Holie,  holy,  holy,  Lorde  God  Almigh tie  !'  Then 
yelling  and  weeping  thou  shalt  cry  in  company  of  deuils ;  '  Ve,  ve,  ve,  quante 
sunt  tenebre !'  '  Woe,  woe,  woe,  how  great  beth  these  darknes !' 

Woe  also  forsinne  of  deede.     Thou  hast  bene  proud :  '  thy  pride  shall  be 

(1)  "  Meine,"  company,  or  a  famUy.— Ed.  (2)  See  Edition  1563.— Ed. 

(3)  "  Herberwid,"  harboured.— Ed.  (4)  "  Louing,"  praising.     Ed,  1563.— Ed. 


PllEACHKD    AT    I'An.'s    (ROSS,    BV    1!.    WlMHl.KDOX.  307 

drawne  to  hell,'  as  Esay  sayth,  or  tliou  hast  hene  hrent  witli  enuie  of  tlic  deuill.     iicnnj 
'  Enuy  entree!  into  the  world,  and  tliey  shouldcn  folowen  him  tliat  ben  <m  his      ^^■ 
side,'  as  Salomon  sayth.    Or  thou  hast  he  stirred  with  wrath  :  and  euerich  man      .    .  ~ 
that  beareth  wrath  to  his  brethren,  is  gilty  in  dome,  as  Christ,  in  the  Gospell  of    \\,y' 
Matthew,  saith.     Or  thou  hast  be  slow  to  good  deedes:    '  myssawe  shall  come  _____ 
to  thee  as  a  wayfaring  man,  and  thy  pouerti  as  a  man  armed ;'  as  the  booke  of 
Prouerbes  sayth.     Or  thou  hast  liaunted  lecherie,  glotonie,  or  couctise:  that, 
forsooth,  wete  ye,  that  '  euerych  auoutercr,  or  vncleane  man,  that  is  a  glutton 
other  chynch,'  shall  ncuer  haue  heritage  in  the  re.'dme  of  Christ  and  of  (jod,' 
as  Poule  saith;  but  'fire,  brimstone,  and  the  spirit  of  tempestcs;'  that  is,  the 
fiende  of  hell,  '  shulen  bee  a  partie  of  their  paine,'  as  it  is  written  in  the  Psauler. 
When  these  damned  men  bee  in  this  woe,  they  shuUen  sing  this  reuful  song,  Note. 
that  is  ywritten  in  the  booke  of  Mourning.^ 

The  ioy  of  our  hart  is  a  go, 

Our  quiet  is  turned  into  woe. 

The  crowne  of  our  heade  is  fallen  vs  fro ! 

Alas  for  sinne  that  we  haue  doc  ! 

But  ioye,  and  ioye,  and  ioye,  to  them  that  be  saued.  Ioy  in  God,  ioy  in  them 
selfe,  ioy  in  other  that  ben  saued.  Also  ioy,  for  theyr  trauaile  is  brought  to  so 
gracious  an  end.  Ioy,  for  they  scaped  the  paiue  of  liell ;  ioy  for  their  blisse 
that  they  han  in  the  sight  of  God.  Cut  sit  honor  et  gloria,  in  secula  seculorum. 
Amen. 

And  thus  much  concerning  this  worthy  and  fruitful  sermon,  which 
as  by  the  ancicntness  of  the  phrase  it  seemeth  to  be  preached  much 
about  the  time  of  John  WicklifF,  so  I  thought  here,  by  occasion  of 
William  Thoipe's  examination,  best  to  place  the  same,  for  the  apt 
coherence  both  of  the  spirit,  and  of  the  matter.  Especially  having 
before  our  eyes  the  public  utility  of  the  reader,  to  whom,  by  the  stu- 
dious reading  thereof,  might  rise  plentiful  matter  of  true  christian 
information,  both  of  the  wholesome  fearing  of  God,  and  of  the  right 
guiding  of  every  christian  man's  life. 

This  I  thought  good  to  annex  further  in  our  story,  after  the  exa- 
mination of  William  Thorpe,  and  the  martyi'dom  of  William  Sawtre, 
and  of  John  Badby  thus  described,  as  yc  have  heard ;  which  was  about 
the  year  ]409.  By  the  way,  here  is  to  be  considered,  at  least  to  be 
admonished,  that  all  this  while  the  schism  in  the  church  of  Rome  did 
yet  continue,  and  so  endured  till  the  council  of  Constance,  which  Avas, 
in  the  whole,  for  the  space  of  twenty-nine  years ;  the  origin  whereof, 
as  was  said  before,  first  began  at  Urban  V.,  which  Urban  being  dead, 
A.  D.  1389,  next  followed  pope  Boniface  IX.,  who  sat  fourteen  years. 
He,  in  selling  his  pardons,  was  so  impudent  and  so  past  shame,  that 
he  brought  the  keys  of  Peter,  as  saith  Platina,  into  contempt.  After 
him  succeeded  Innocent  VII.,  and  sat  two  years;  who  being  dead,  mecar- 
tiie  cardinals  consulted  together,  and  seeing  the  foul  enormity  and  d'vke  to 
inconvenience  growing  upon  this  contentious  schism  in  their  church  cease  the 
of  Rome  (minding  to  provide  some  remedy  for  the  same,  after  the  *" 
best  device  they  could),  in  their  conclave  where  they  were  assembled 
for  a  new  election  of  the  pope,  took  this  order,  promising  among 
themselves,  with  solemn  vow  made  to  God,  to  Mary  the  blessed  virgin, 
to  Peter  and  Paul,  and  to  all  the  blessed  company  of  saints  :  That 
if  any  of  them,  within  the  college  or  without  the  college,  should  be 
called  to  the  high  place  of  apostolical  pre-eminence,  he  should  efFec- 

(1)  "Chynch,"  a  covetous  person.— Ed.  (2)  Lament,  v.  16.— Ed. 

x2 


308  .LETTER    OF    KIX(;    HENRY    IV.    TO    THE    POPE. 

Henry    tuously  renouiicc  the  jurisdiction  and  title  of  his  popedom,  if  or  -when- 
^^'      soever  the  contrary  pope,  for  the  time  being,  would  in  like  manner 
A.  D.    renounce  his  place  and  title,  and  his  cardinals  in  like  manner  conde- 
^^Q^-   scend  to  the  other  cardinals  o-  Rome ;  so  that  both  these  two  colleges 
of  cardinals  agreeing  together,  one  chief  bishop  might  be  chosen  and 
taken  out  of  them  both,  to  be  made  the  true  pope :  provided,  more- 
over, that  none  should  seek  any  releasement  or  absolution  from  the 
said  promise,  vow,  and  bond,  once  passed  among  them.     Unto  all 
which  things  furthermore,  every  one  subscribed  with  his  hand.  These 
things  thus  prefixed  and  ratified  upon  the  same,  they  proceeded  to  the 
election,  in  which  was  chosen  Gregory  XII.,  who,  the  same  day  of  his 
election,  in  the  presence  of  all  the  cardinals,  confirmed  the  vow,  sacra- 
ment, and  promise  made,  subscribing  the  same  with  his  hand  in  form 
Oath  and  as  followcth  :  "And  I,  Gregory,  this  day,  being  the  last  of  November, 
po^e  Gre-  ^^  the  year  of  our  Lord  1407,  chosen  and  elected  for  bishop  of  Rome, 
gory  XII.  (Jq  swear,  vow,  and  promise,  and  confirm,  all  the  premises  above  con- 
tained.*'"' This  being  done,  shortly  after,  he  was  crowned,  being  of  the 
age  of  eighty  years.     As  the  time  thus  passed,  the  people  and  cardi- 
nals were  in  great  expectation,  waiting  when  the  pope,  according  to 
his  oath,  would  give  over,  with  the  other  pope  also.     And  not  long 
after,  the  matter  began  indeed  between  the  two  popes  to  be  attempted 
by  letters  from  one  to  another,  assigning  both  day  and  place,  where 
and  when  they  should  meet  together;  but  yet  no  effect  did  follow.' 
The  pope      This  SO  passiug  on,  great  murmuring  was  among  the  cardinals,  to 
^ei^iued.  see  their  holy  peijured  father  so  to  neglect  his  oath  and  vow  afore- 
cardinais  named ;  insomuch  that  at  length,  divers  of  them  did  forsake  the  pope, 
perjured,   as  being  perjured,  as  no  less  he  was,  sending,  moreover,  to  kings  and 
^°^^'       princes  of  other  lands,  for  their  counsel  and  assistance  therein,  to 
appease  the  schism.     Amongst  the  rest,  cardinal  Bituriensis  was  sent 
to  the  king  of  England  ;  who,  publishing  divers  propositions  and  con- 
clusions (remaining  in  the  registers  of  Thomas  Arundel),  disputeth, 
that  the  pope  ought  to  be  subject  to  laws  and  councils.     Then  king 
Henry,  moved  to  write  to  Gregory  the  pope,  directeth  his  letter  here- 
under ensuing,  which  was  the  year  of  our  Lord  1409.     The  contents 
of  the  letter  be  these. 

The  Letter  of  King  Henry  IV.  to  Pope  Gregory  XII, 

Most  blessed  father  !  if  the  discreet  providence  of  the  apostolical  see  would 

call  to  mind  with  what  great  perils  the  universal  world  hath  been  damnified, 

hitherto,  under  pretence  of  this  present  schism ;  and  especially  would  consider, 

Two  liun-  what  slaughter  of  christian  people,  to  th€  number  of  two  hundred  thousand,  as 

'•"■"'I  they  say,  hath  been,  through  the  occasion  of  war  raised  up  in  divers  quarters 

slain  by     of  the  world  ;  and  now  of  late,  to  the  number  of  thirty  thousand  soldiers,  who 

schism  of  have  been  slain  through  the  dissension  moved  about  the  bishopric  of  Leodium* 

Thirty      between  two  set  up,  one  by  the  authority  of  one  pope,  the  other  by  the  autho- 

thousand,  rity  of  the  other  pope,  fighting  in  camp  for  the  title  of  that  bishopric  :  certes,  ye 

slain  in     woidd  lament  in  spirit  and  be  sore  grieved  in  mind  for  the  same,  so  that  with 

fighting     good  conscience  ye  would  relinquish  rather  the  honour  of  the  see  apostolic,  than 

for  the       suifer  such  horrible  bloodshed  hereafter  to  ensue,  under  the  cloak  of  dissimula- 

orlliegT  ^-^^^ '  following  herein  the  example  of  the  true  mother  in  the  book  of  Kings, 

who,  pleading  before  Solomon  for  the  right  of  her  child,  rather  would  depart 

from  the  child,  than  the  child  should  be  parted  by  the  sword.    And  although  it 

may  be  vehemently  suspected,  by  the  new  creation  of  nine  cardinals,  by  you  last 

(1)  Ex  Chron.  D.  Alliani.  [2)  "Leodium,"  Liege.— Ed. 


THE    GOSPEL    TAKKTII    HOOT    IN    liOllEMIA.  309 

made,  contrary  to  your  oatli,  as  oilier  men   do  saj,   that  you  de  but  little  heed  Henn 
or  care  for  ceasing  the  schism,  yet  far  be  it  from  the  hearing  and  noting  of  the      ^'  ■ 

world,  that  your  circumspect  seat  should  ever  be  noted  and  distained  with  such  »    ,j 

an  inconstancy  of  mind,  whereby  the  last  error  may  be  worse  than  the  first.'  1400 

King  Henry  IV.  to  the  Cardinals. 

And  to  the  cardinals  likewise,  the  said  king  directcth  anotlier  letter  with  these 
contents  here  following  :  '  We  desiring  to  show  what  zeal  we  have  had  and  have, 
to  the  reformation  of  peace  of  the  church,  bj'  the  consent  of  the  states  of  the 
realm,  have  directed  to  the  bishop  of  Rome  our  letters  after  the  tenor  of  the 
copy  herewith  in  these  presents  enclosed,  to  be  executed  effectually :  wherefore 
we  seriously  beseech  your  reverend  college,  that  if  it  cliance  the  said  Gregory 
tti  be  present  at  the  council  of  Pisa,  and  to  render  up  his  popedom,  according  to 
your  desire,  and  his  own  oath,  you  then  so  ordain  for  his  state  totally,  that 
chiefly  God  may  be  pleased  thereby,  and  that  both  the  said  Gregory,  and  also 
we,  who  entirely  love  his  honoiu:  and  commodity,  may  have  cause  to  give  you 
worthily  condign  thanks  for  the  same.'- 

This  being  done  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  1409,  afterwards  in  the 
year  following,*  the  cardinals  of  both  the  popes,  to  wit,  of  Gregory  a.d.14io 
and  Benedict,  by  common  advice  assembled  together  at  the  city  of 
Pisa,  for  the  reformation  of  unity  and  peace  in  the  church.     To  that  council 
assembly  a  great  multitude  of  prelates  and  bishops  being  con  vented,  "^^^''^■ 
a  new  pope  was  chosen,  named  Alexander  V. ;  but  to  this  election, 
neither  Gregory  nor  Benedict  did  fully  agree,  whereby  there  were 
three  popes  together  in  the  Roman  church  ;  that  is  to  understand,  not  Three 
three  crowns  upon  one  pope''s  head,  but  three  heads  in  one  popish  gether.*^ 
church  together.     This  Alexander,  being  newly  made  pope,  scarcely 
had  well  warmed  his  triple-crown,  but  straight  he  giveth  out  full 
remission,  not  of  a  few,  but  of  all  manner  of  sins  whatsoever,  to  all  vain 
them  that  conferred  any  thing  on  the  monastery  of  St.  Bartholomew,  by'tife'"" 
by  Smithfield,  resorting  to  the  said  church  any  of  these  days  follow-  ^Xeue" 
ing :   to  wit,  on  Maundy-Thursday,  Good-Friday,  Easter-even,  the 
feast  of  the  Annunciation  ;  from  the  first  even-song  to  the  latter. 
But  this  pope,  who  was  so  liberal  in  giving  remission  of  many  years 
to  others,  was  not  able  to  give  one  year  of  life  to  himself,  for  within 
the  same  year  he  died :  in  whose  stead  stept  up  pope  John  XXIII. 

In  the  time  of  this  Alexander  great  stir  began  in  the  country  of  The  gos- 
Bohemia,  by  the  occasion  of  the  books  of  John  WicklifF,  which,  then  Hin^r^o'"" 
coming  to  the  hands  of  John  Huss,  and  of  others,  both  men  and  [n'^,^J,°°.' 
women,*  especially  of  the  lay  sort,  and  artificers,  began  there  to  do  mia. 
much  good;  insomuch  that  divers  of  them,  not  only  men,  but  women 
also,  partly  by  the  reading  of  their  books  translated  into  their  tongue, 
partly  by  the  setting  forward  of  John  Huss,  a  notable  learned  man, 
and  a  singular  preacher  at  that  time  in  the  university  of  Prague,  were 
in  short  time  so  ripe  in  judgment,  and  prompt  in  the  Scriptures,  that 
they  began  to  move  questions,  yea  and  to  reason  with  the  priests, 
touching  matters  of  the  holy  Scriptures. 

By  reason  whereof  complaint  was  brought  to  the  said  pope  Alex- 
ander v.,  Avho  caused  eftsoons  the  afore-named  John  Huss  to  be  cited 
up  to  Rome :  but  when  he  came  not  at  the  pope"'s  citation,  then  the 

(1)  Ex  Chron.  D.  Albani,  part  ii.  (2)  Ibid. 

'  (3)  Ibid.  (4)  Cholceo,  de  Histuria  Ilussitarum,  lib.  i. 


SVQ  NOTABLE    JUDGMENT    OF    GOD. 

Jio?!!/    tsaid  pope  Alexander  addressed  his  letters  to  tlie  arclibisliop  of  Swmco, 
^'^'__  wherein  he  straitly  charged  him  to  prohibit  and  forbid,  by  the  autho- 


A.  D.    rity  apostolical,  all  manner  of  preachings  or  sermons  to  be  made  to 

_1410^  the  people,  except  only  in  cathedral  churches,  or  colleges,  or  parish 

Letter  of  cluirchcs,  or  in  monasteries,  or  else  in  their  churchyards;  and  that 

Aiexan-    thc  articlcs  of  WicldiiF  should  in  no  case,  by  any  person,  of  what 

the  arch"  statc.  Condition,  or  degree  soever,  be  suffered  to  be  holden,  taught, 

bishop      Qj,  defended,  either  privily  or  apertly ;   commanding,  moreover,  and 

uoUeraia.  charging  the  said  archbishop,  that  he,  with  four  bachelors  of  divinity, 

and  two  doctors  of  the  canon  laAV  joined  unto  him,  Avould  proceed 

upon  thc  same,  and  so  provide,  that  no  person  in  churches,  schools,  or 

any  other  place,  should  teach,  defend,  or  approve  any  of  the  aforesaid 

articles,  so  that  whosoever  should  attempt  the  contrary,  should  be 

accounted  a  heretic,  and,  unless  he  shall  revoke  solemnly  and  publicly 

the  said  articles,  and  shall  for  ever  abjure  the  books  wherein  the 

aforesaid  articles  be  contained  (so  that  they  may  be  utterly  abolished 

The        out  from  the  eyes  of  the  faithful),  the  same  should  be  apprehended 

cmei^imii  Mid  im])risoned,  all  appellation  set  apart,  the  help  also  of  the  secular 

johir'    arm  being  called  thereunto,  if  need  shall  requu-e. — These  were  the 

Huss.      contents  of  this  mighty  and  fierce  bull  of  pope  Alexander. 

John  Against  this  bull,  on  the  other  side,  John  Huss,  justly  complain- 

ibjecteth  ing,  excepteth  again  and  objecteth  many  things,  as  appeareth  in  his 

against  it.  ^ook,  cntitulcd  '  Dc  Ecclcsia,''   cap.  18  ;    where  he  declareth  this 

mandate  of  the  pope  to  stand  directly  against  the  doings  and  sayings 

The .       both  of  Christ  and  of  his  apostles  ;   considering  how  Christ  himself 

b'uiTcon-  preached  to  the  people,  both  in  the  sea,  in  the  desert,  in  fields,  in 

rhnst"    houses,  in  synagogues,  in  villages  ;  and  the  apostles  also,  in  all  places, 

did  the  same,  the  Lord  mightily  working  with  them.     He  declared, 

moreover,  the  said  mandate  or  bull  of  the  pope  to  redound  unto  the 

great  detriment  of  the  chm'ch,  in  binding  the  word  of  God,  that  it 

might  not  have  its  free  passage  ;  also,  the  same  to  be  prejudicial 

Notable    unto  cliapels  newly  erected  for  the  word  to  be  preached  in  them  : 

or  Go^i^hi  "  Wherefore,"  said  he,   "  from  this  commandment  or  mandate  of 

theadvM-  P^P^  Alexander,  I  did  appeal  unto  the  said  Alexander  being  better 

saries  of  informed  and  advised  ;  and,  as  I  was  prosecuting  my  appeal,  the  lord 

pel.         pope,"  saith  John  Huss,  "  immediately  died." 

Then  the  archbishop  of  Swinco  aforesaid,  to  whom  this  present 

bull  was  directed,  when  he  saw  the  process,  bulls,  and  mandates  of 

the  bishop  of  Rome  to  be  thus  contemned  of  John  Huss  and  his 

fellows,  neither  having  any  hope  of  redress  in  Winceslaus  the  king, 

who  seemed  to  neglect  the  matter,  went  out  of  his  country  into 

Hungary,  to  complain  unto  Sigismund,  king  of  Hungary,  and  brother 

to  the  said  Winceslaus.     But  this  quarrelling  archbishop,  whether 

before,  as  the  Bohemians  say,  or  after,  "as  Silvius  saith,  that  he  had 

spoken  with  Sigismund,  immediately  there,  by  the  just  judgment  of 

God,  died  in  Hungary,  as  the  story  saith,  for  sorrow ;  whereby  a  little 

more  liberty  and  quiet  was  given  by  the  Lord  unto  his  gospel,  newly 

Thegos-  beginning  to  take  root  among  the  Bohemians.     Albeit,  this  tran- 

donHong  quillity,  there,  did  not  long  continue  without  trouble  and  persecution, 

quiet.      neither  could  it  in  those  furious  days  and  reign  of  Antichrist ;  for 

I'cpe       after  this  Alexander  succeeded  pope  John  XXIH.,  who,  likewise 

xxuT.    playing  his  part  in  this  tragedy   bent  all  his  might  and  mam  to  dis- 


MANDATE    OF    AUUNPKL    TO    TlIIl,    BISHOP    OV    LONDON.  Sll 

tui'b  the  Bohemians,  as  more  hereafter,  Christ  willing,  shall  be  declared    ficnty 


IV. 


in  further  process  of  our  history,  coming  to  the  year  of  our  Lord, 
1413.  A.D. 

1410. 


Thus  the  poor  Christians,  as  ye  see,  like  to  the  silly  Israelites  under 
the  tyranny  of  Pharaoh,  were  infested  and  oppressed  in  every  place, 
but  especially  here  in  England ;  and  that,  so  much  the  more  here, 
because  tlie  king,  not  like  to  Winceslaus,  went  full  and  whole  with 
the  pope  and  his  prelates  against  the  gospellers;  by  reason  whereof 
the  kingdom  of  the  pope  and  his  members  here  in  this  realm  began 
to  be  so  strong,  that  none  durst  stir,  or  once  mute'  against  them. 
The  bishops,  having  the  king  so  full  on  their  side,  armed,  moreover,  pndeand 
with  laws,   statutes,   punishments,  imprisonments,  sword,   fire,   and  [l"P\^\ 
faggot,  reigned  and  ruled  as  they  listed,  as  kings  and  princes  within  oi  Eng-" 
themselves.     So  strong  were  they  of  power,  that  no  human  force  was  those" 
able  to  stand  against  them  ;  so  exalted  in  pride,  and  puffed  up  in  '^^^'^■ 
glory,  that  they  thought  all  things  to  be  subject  to  their  reverend 
majesties.     Whatsoever  they  set  forth  or  decreed,  it  must  of  all  men 
be  received  and  obeyed.     And  such  was  their  superstitious  blindness 
and  curious  vanity,  that  whatsoever  toy  came  once  in  their  fantasy,  it 
was  straightways  determined  and  established  for  a  law  by  all  men  to 
be  observed,  were  it  ever  so  frivolous  or  superstitious ;  as  well  appear- 
cth  by  Thomas  Arundel,  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  and  others,  who, 
having  now  a  little  leisure  from  slaying  and  killing  the  innocent 
people,  martyrs,  and  confessors  of  the  Lord,  and  having  now  brought 
their  enemies,  as  they  thought,  under  their  feet,  began  to  set  up 
themselves,  and  to  invent  new  customs,  as  the  guises  of  the  pope's 
church  is,  ever  to  intrude  into  the  church  of  God  some  ceremony  or 
custom  of  their  own  making,  whereby  the  chm'cli  of  Christ  hath  been 
hitherto  exceedingly  pestered.     So  likewise  this  Thomas  Arundel,  Forty 
thinking  the  church  yet  not  sufficiently  stuffed  with  ceremonies  and  vain  parjo'n 
traditions  of  men,  bringeth  in  a  new-found  gaud,^  commonly  called  ^'J^'^^i^f 
'  The  tolling  of  Aves,"'  in  honour  of  our  Lady,  with  certain  '  Aves'  to 
be  said,  and  days  of  pardon  to  be  given,  for  the  same  ;  for  the  ratifica- 
tion whereof,  under  the  pretence  of  the  king's  request,  he  directed  his 
mandate  to  the  bishop  of  London,  well  stuffed  with  words  of  idolatry, 
as  by  the  reading  thereof  may  appear,  in  form  of  terms  as  foUoweth. 

A  Mandate  of  Thomas  Arundel,  directed  to  the  Bishop  of  London, 
to  warn  Men  to  say  certain  Prayers  at  the  tolling  of  the  '  Aves,' 
or  ringing  of  Curfew. 

Thomas,  &c.  To  the  right  reverend  brother,  the  lord  Robert,  by  the  grace  of 
God,  bisliop  of  London,  greeting,  &c.  While  we  lift  our  eyes  round  about  us,  Rin^'ing 
and  behold  attentively,  with  circumspect  consideration,  how  the  most  high  ofcmfew 
Word  that  was  in  the  beginning  with  God,  chose  to  him  a  holy  and  immacu- 
late virgin  of  the  kingly  stock,  in  whose  womb  he  took  tioie  flesh  by  inspiral 
inspiration,  that  the  merciful  goodness  of  the  Son  of  God,  that  was  uncreate, 
might  abolish  the  sentence  of  condemnation,  which  all  the  posterity  of  mankind, 
that  was  created,  had  by  sin  incurred  :  amongst  other  labours  in  the  vine  of  the 
Lord  of  Sabbaoth,  we  sung  to  God  our  Saviour  with  great  joy  in  him,  carefully 
thinking,  that  though  all  the  people  of  the  christian  religion  did  extol  with 
voices  of  praises  so  worthy  a  virgin,  by  whom  wc  received  the  beginnings  of 

(I)  "  Mute,"  mutter.— Ed.  (2)  "  Gaud,"  a  bauble.— Ed. 


sv, 


HEAriXG    UP    CEREMONIES    IN    THE    CHURCH. 


Henry 
IF. 

A.D. 
1410. 


These 

lllC'll 

make  a 
Bellona 
of  our 
Lady. 

False 
help 

sought 
and  set 
up  (if 
idolaters. 


Papists' 
blasphe- 
my, light- 
ing 

against 
the  grace 
of  Chri&t. 
Ringing 
of  curfew. 


Forty 
days'  par- 
don for 
fiveAves. 


our  redemption,  by  whom  the  holy  day  first  sliined  to  us,  which  gave  us  hope 
of  salvation  ;  and  although  all  the  same  people  were  drawn  to  reverence  her, 
who  being  a  haj)py  virgin,  conceived  the  Son  of  God,  the  King  of  heaven,  the 
Redeemer  and  Saviour  of  all  nations,  ministering  light  to  the  people  that  were 
miserably  drowned  in  the  darkness  of  death :  we  tridy,'  as  the  servants  of  her 
own  inheritance,  and  as  such  as  are  written  of,  to  be  of  her  peculiar  dower,  as 
we  are,  by  every  man's  confession,  acknowledged  to  be,  we,  I  say,  ought  more 
watchfully  tlian  others  to  show  the  endeavours  of  our  devotion  in  praising  her, 
who  being  hitherto  merciful  to  us,  yea,  being  even  cowards,  would  that  our 
power,  being,  as  it  were,  spread  abroad  every  where  through  all  the  coasts  of 
the  world,  should,  with  a  victorious  arm,  fear 2  all  foreign  nations;  that  our 
power,  being  on  all  sides  so  defended  with  the  buckler  of  her  protection,  did 
subdue  unto  our  victorious  standards,  and  made  subject  unto  us,  nations  both 
near  at  hand  and  far  off. 

Likewise  our  happy  estate,  all  the  time  that  we  have  passed  since  the 
beginning  of  our  lives,  may  be  well  attributed  only  to  the  help  of  her  medicine  ; 
to  whom  also  we  may  worthily  ascribe  now  of  late  in  these  our  times,  under 
the  mighty  government  of  our  most  christian  king,  our  deliverance  from  the 
ravening  wolves,  and  the  mouths  of  cruel  beasts,  which  had  prepared  against 
our  banquets  a  mess  of  meat  mingled  full  of  gall,  and  hated  us  unjustly,  secretly 
lying  in  wait  for  us,  in  recompense  of  the  good  will  that  we  showed  to  them. 
Wherefore,  that  she  being  on  high,  sitting  before  the  throne  of  the  heavenly 
Majesty,  the  defendress  and  patroness  of  us  all,  being  magnified  with  all  men's 
praises,  may  more  plentifiilly  exliibit  to  us,  the  sous  of  adoption,  tlie  teats^ofher 
grace,  in  all  those  things  that  we  shall  have  to  do ;  at  the  request  of  the  special 
devotion  of  our  lord  the  king  himself,  we  command  yoiu-  brotherhood,  straitly 
enjoining  you,  that  you  command  the  subjects  of  your  city  and  diocese,  and  of 
all  other  sufiragans,  to  worship  our  Lady  Mary,  the  mother  of  God,  and  our 
patroness  and  protecti-ess*  evermore  in  all  adversity,  with  such  like  kind  of 
prayer  and  accustomed  manner  of  ringing,  as  the  devotion  of  Christ's  faithful 
people  is  wont  to  worship  her  with,  at  the  ringing  of  '  cor  le  feu.'  And  when 
before  day  in  the  morning  ye  shall  cause  them  to  ring,  that  with  like  manner  of 
prayer  and  ringing  she  be  every  where  honoured  devoutly  by  the  aforesaid  our 
and  your  suffi'agans  and  their  subjects  as  well  religious  as  secular,  in  your  and 
their  monasteries  and  collegiate  cliurches  :  that  we  so  humbly  calling  upon  the 
mercy  of  the  heavenly  Father,  the  right  hand  of  the  heavenly  Piety  may  merci- 
fully come  to  the  help,  the  protection,  and  the  defence  of  the  same  our  lord 
the  king,  who,  for  the  happy  remedy  of  quietness,  and  for  our  succour  fi-om  tem- 
pestuous floods,  is  ready  to  apply  his  hands  to  work,  and  his  eyes,  with  all  his 
wliole  desire,  to  watching.  We,  therefore,  coveting  more  earnestly  to  stir  up  the 
minds  of  all  faithful  people  to  so  devout  an  exercise  of  God,  &c.,  we  gi'ant  by 
these  presents,  to  all  and  every  man,  &c.  that  shall  say  the  Lord's  Prayer  and 
the  Salutation  of  the  Angel  five  times  at  the  morning  peal  with  a  devout  mind, 
'  toties  quoties'  (how  oft  soever)  forty  days'  pardon  by  these  presents. 

Given  under  our  seal,  in  our  manor  of  Lambeth,    tlie    tenth    day    of 
February,  anno  nostree  translat.  9,  a.d.  1405. ^ 


Heaping 
lip  cere- 
monies 
in  the 
church. 


By  this  frivolous  and  barbarous  constitution,  with  many  others  of 
like  sort  heaped  into  the  church  by  the  papists,  appear  the  proper 
nature  and  condition  of  this  catholic  generation  ;  who,  being  them- 
selves not  greatly  exercised  nor  experienced  in  any  serious  cogitation 
of  spiritual  matter,  as  it  seemeth,  take  upon  them  to  govern  the  spi- 
ritual church  of  Christ,  whereof  indeed  they  have  no  skill  or  very 
little :  and,  therefore,  according  to  their  unskilful  handling,  they  lead 
and  rule  the  church  after  such  outward  sights  and  ceremonies,  seemly 
perhaps  to  their  o%vn  gross  affection,  but  not  agreeing,  nay  rather 
clean  contrary,  to  the  right  nature  and  condition  of  the  spii-itual  house 
and  kingdom  of  the  Lord  :  and  like  as  in  their  inventions  they  swerve 

(1)  If  this  be  not  blasphemous  and  derogatory  to  Christ,  let  the  reader  judgn. 

(2)  "  Intimidate."— Ed.  (3)  The  papists  would  suck  our  Lady's  paps. 

( i)  Will  ye  stand  to  this  doctrine,  ye  catholics  ?  (S)  Ex  Begist.  Thorn.  Arundel. 


rOMP    OF    THE    POPISH    CHURCH    NOTED.  313 

utterly  from  the  right  liandling  of  all  spiritual  government,  so,  in  their    Henry 


JV. 


manners  and  form  of  life  likewise,  they  do  resemble  little  or  no  part 
almost  of  such  as  are,  and  ought  to  be,  true  pastors  and  ministers  of   A.D. 
the  mystical  body  of  Christ.  Jli£.-_ 

Examples  hereof  are  plenty  and  plain  in  these  Roman  prelates  to  Pomp  of 

,  /        ,  11  •  1       ■  11  11  111  •    -L  the  pope s 

1)0  noted,  whoso,  well  c(msmermg  tiie  humble  state  and  lowly  s])irit  church 
which  ought  to  be  in  pastoral  leaders  of  the  church,  will  compare  the  ^°^'^'^' 
same  with  the  usual  pomp  of  these  glorious  potestatcs. 

As  for  example  :  \yhat  can  be  more  convenient  for  a  true  pastor 
ecclesiastical,  than  humility  of  heart  and  spirit,  according  to  the  ex- 
ample of  the  head  Bishop  himself. '*  so  what  greater  show  ofan'ogancy 
and  pride  could  there  be,  than  in  this,  whom  I  have  oft  named  before, 
Thomas  Arundel,  archbishop  of  Canterbury  ?  who,  passing  by  the 
hioh  street  of  London,  did  not  only  look  and  wait  for  the  rinmnij  of  the 
bells,  for  a  triumph  of  his  coming,  but  took  gi-eat  snufF,  and  did  sus- 
pend all  such  churches  in  London  (not  only  with  the  steeple  and  bells, 
but  also  with  the  organs),  so  many  as  did  not  receive  his  coming  with 
the  noise  of  bells,  according  as  out  of  his  own  registers  may  appear, 
the  words  whereof  written  to  his  own  somner,^  I  have  hereto  annexed 
in  his  own  form,  as  followeth. 

A  Commission  directed  to  the  Somncr,  to  suspend  certain  Churches 
of  London,  because  they  rung  not  their  Bells  at  the  presence  of  my 
Lord  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbm-y. 

Thomas,  by  the  permission  of  God,  &c.  To  our  well-beloved  Thomas  Wilton,  Churches 
our  somner  sworn,  health,  grace,  and  blessing.     The   comeliness   of  our  holy  "f  London 
church  of  Canterbury,  over  which  we  bear  rule,  deserveth  and  requireth,  that  edjomot 
while  we  pass  through  the  province  of  the  same  our  church,  having  our  cross  ringing  at 
carried  before  us,  every  parish  church  in  their  turns  ought,  and  are  bounden,  j^^^  ofTlie 
in  token  of  special  reverence  that  they  bear  to  us,  to  ring  their  bells :  which  arch- 
notwithstanding,  yea  on  Tuesday  last  past,  when  we,  betwixt  eight  and  nine  bishop, 
of  the  clock  before  dinner,  passed  openly  on  foot  as  it  were,  through  the  midst 
of  the  city  of  London,  with  our  cross  carried  before  vis,  divers  churches,  whose 
names  are  here  beneath  noted,  showed  towards  us  willingly,  though  they  cer- 
tainly knew  of  our  coming,  unreverence  rather  than  reverence,  and  the  duty 
that  they  owe  to  our  church  of  Canterbury,  ringing  not  at  all  at  om*  coming. 
Wherefore  we,  being  willing  to  revenge  this  injury,  for  the  honour  of  our  spouse,^ 
as  we   are  bounden,  command  you,  that  by  our  authority  you  put  all  those 
churches  under  our  indictment,  suspending  God's  holy  organs  and  instnunents 
in  the  same  :  which  we  also  suspend  by  the  tenor  of  these  presents,  till  the 
ministers  of  the  aforesaid  churches  be  able  hereafter  to  attain  of  us  the  benefit 
of  more  plentiful  grace. — Given,  &c. 

What  great  reason  was  in  this,  why  this  archbishop  either 
should  thus  look  for  the  ringing  of  the  bells,  or  why  he  should 
be  so  displeased  with  not  ringing,  I  do  not  see.  Belike,  his  mind, 
in  the  mean  time,  was  greatly  occupied  with  some  great  muse,  as 
feeling  of  God's  fear,  with  repentance  and  remembrance  of  his  sins, 
with  zealous  care  and  solicitude  for  his  flock,  with  the  earnest  medi- 
tation of  the  passion  and  life  of  our  Saviour,  who  in  this  world  was  so 
des])ised  ;  or  else  was  set  upon  some  gi'ave  study,  while  he  so  Avaited 
for  the  ringing  of  the  bells,  which  were  wont  to  be  so  noisome  to  all 
stiulents.  And  why  were  not  the  trumpeters  also  sheut  as  well,  because 

(1)  "  Somncr,"  suniner,  or  summoner ;  a  petty  officer  who  calls  a  man  to  a  court  of  justice  ;  an 
apparitor. — Ei>.  ^2)  Oh  injiirious  enemies  to  Christ's  humility  1 


314  OllGANS    SUSPENDED,    BECAUSE    THE    BELLS    DID    NOT    RING. 

jienry    tlicy  iiot  did  sound  before  liis  person  ?     But  and  though  the  bells  did 
^^  ■      not  clatter  in  the  steeples  (and  therefore  his  thunderbolt  should  have 


^-  ^-    fallen  upon  the  steeples  which  had  deserved),  why  should  the  body  of 
^^^^-    the  chiu-ch  therefore  be  suspended  ?     At  least,  the  poor  organs,  me 
oisans     thinketh,  had  some  part  of  wrong  to  be  put  to  silence  in  the  quire, 
ed'm  the  becausc  the  bells  rang  not  in  the  tower. 

because        Of  t^ic  like  matter,  also,  we  read  in  the  said  registers,  falling  between 

did  not '   ^^^^  bishop  of  Worcester  and  the  priory  of  the  «ame  town,  for  not 

ring.       ringing  at  the  bishop''s  coming  into  the  church  :  whereupon  much  suit 

and  contention  was  between  them,   till  at  length  the  archbishop  of 

Canterbury  took  up  tlie  matter,  moderating  it,  as  in  the  said  registers, 

fol.  441,  appeareth  to  be  seen  as  followeth  } 

Variance  between  the  Bishop  and  Prior  of  Worcester,  for  not  ringing 
at  the  Bishop"'s  coming. 

Universis,  &c.  Thomas,  &c.  Whereas  there  happened  variance  lately  between 
our  reverend  brother  the  lord  bishop  of  Worcester  on  the  one  part,  and  the  re- 
ligious and  discreet  men  the  prior  and  covent  of  the  same  church  on  the  other  part, 
for  not  ringing  of  bells  at  the  coming  of  our  said  brother  to  his  aforesaid  church,  at 
length  the  parties,  considering  the  great  inconvenience  that  might  come  thereof, 
at  our  instance  and  request  did  agree  on  this  manner ;  that  as  often  as  it  shall 
happen  our  reverend  brother  to  go  to  his  aforesaid  church,  either  to  celebrate 
orders,  or  to  visit  his  church  in  the  head  or  in  the  inferiors,  or  to  make  cream 
and  oil  in  the  same  church,  also  in  the  feast  of  the  Assumption  of  the  blessed 
Virgin  Mary,  which  is  the  chiefest  feast  in  the  abbey  aforesaid ;  then  the  prior 
and  the  covent,  and  their  successors  for  the  time  being,  shall  ring  solemnly 
against  his  coming,  or  shall  cause  to  be  rung  solemnly,  without  aU  contradic- 
tion, or  any  reclaiming  hereafter  to  be  made  against  the  same :  which  agreement 
that  it  may  be  more  firmly  kept,  we  let  you  all  understand  by  these  presents, 
sealed  with  our  seal. 

Given  at  our  palace  of  Canterbury,  July  12,  the  tenth  year  of  our 
government. 

The  like  stir  for  bell-ringing  and  for  processions  had  almost 
happened  between  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  successor  to  this 
Thomas  Arundel,  named  Henry  Chichesley,  on  the  one  part,  and  the 
abbey  of  St.  Alban's  on  the  other  part,  had  not  the  abbot,  in  time 
submitting  himself  to  the  archbishop,  so  provided,  that  the  ringing 
of  their  bells  at  his  coming  might  not  redound  to  any  derogation  of 
their  liberties.  Whereunto  the  archbishop  granted  by  these  his 
letters  as  followeth. 

Letter  of  Henry  Chichesley,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  to  the  Abbot 
of  St.  Alban's,  respecting  the  ringing  of  Bells  and  Processions. 

Kiiisring-       Henry,  &c.,  to  the  religious  men,  the  abbot  and  covent  of  the  monastery  of 

in  the       g(.  Alban's,  in  the  diocese  of  Lincoln,  health,  &c.     When  as  of  late  there  hap- 

bishop,      pened  a  matter  of  variance  between  us,  and  you  tlie  abbot  and  covent,  by  reason 

at  St.       of  not  giving  reverence  to  us,  being  due  to  our  province  of  Canterbury  f  that 

Albau's.,    j^^  ^yj,  ^^^  ringing  the  bells,  and  meeting  us  with  processions  when  we  passed 

by  divers  places  of  our  province,  as  well  due  of  common  custom,  as  of  old  use, 

and  for  the  prerogative  of  the  church  of  Canterbury,  as  also  being  due  of  every 

one  being  within  the  compass  of  this  our  said  province,  when  and  as  often  as 

we  shall  pass  by  their  places  ;  at  length  your  lord  abbot,  coming  personally  to 

us,  did  grant  both  for  you  and  the  covent  aforesaid,  to  do  and  to  give  of  your 

(1)  Ex  Registro  Tho.  Arundeli.  (2)  Ex  Regist.  Hen.  Chichesley,  fol.  365. 


"--—^-fi^  ov<-  x>fexi  X'-z^Xi  ati^o    /  Uff^^^^-^i 


>«ic-o  . 


INJUNCTION   OP  PENANCE. 


JCx  Itrgiilru.    tV.  Co.irln"/ :  ful :  :' i 


BIDICULOUS    PENANCE    OF    POOR    MEN.  315 

gentleness  all  reverence  and  honour,  with  such  reverence  both  to  us  and  onr     Henry 
church  of  Canterbury,  as  often  as  we  pass  by  your  monastery  or  the  places  nigh       ^^- 
or  adjoining  thereto,  or  shall  hereafter  go  by;  so  that  it  might  not  be  preju-     ^  jj 
dicial  to  your  exemption,  and  nothing  be  attempted  to  the  violating  of  your    j.jjq' 

privilege ;  and  that  it  might  not  be  challenged  for  duty  hereafter.     Wherefore  '-~ 

we,  desiring  to  keep  you  from  damage,  let  you  understand  by  these  presents, 
that  it  is  not  our  intent  to  derogate  your  exemptions  or  privilege  whatsoever 
herein ;  nor  by  any  means  to  be  prejudicial  to  you  by  these  your  reverences 
or  other  duties,  whatsoever  you  have  or  shall  grant  to  us,  of  your  devotion 
and  liberality,  both  by  you,  and  in  places  under  your  dominion.  In  witness 
whereof,  &c. 

Dated  the  28th  day  of  January,  1425,  at  St.  Alban's,  the  twelfth  year  of 
our  government. 

To  express,  moreover,  and  describe,  the  glorious  pomp  of  tliese 
prince-like  prelates,  in  these  blind  days  of  popish  religion  reigning 
then  in  the  church,  I  thought  to  adjoin  hereunto  another  example  not 
much  unlike,  neither  diifering  much  in  time,  concerning  certain  poor 
men  cited  up,  and  enjoined  strait  penance  by  William  Courtney,  pre-  wiiiam 
decessor  of  the  said  Thomas  Arundel,  for  bringing  litter  to  his  horse,  ar^cT"^^ 
not  in  wains,  as  they  should  do,  but  in  privv  sacks,  in  a  secret  manner  ^j-^^gP. 
luider  their  cloaks  or  coats  :  for  which  so  heinous  and  horrible  tres-  terbury. 
pass,  the  said  archbishop,  sitting  in  his  tribunal  seat,  did  call  and  cite 
before  him  the  said  persons  (pro  litera,  i.  e.  for  litter,  after  his  own 
Latin),  and,  after  their  submission,  enjoined  them  penance ;  which 
penance  what  it  was,  and  what  were  the  names  of  the  aforesaid  par- 
ties, here  followeth  out  of  the  said  archbishop's  registers,^  both  by  his 
own  words,  and  by  picture  of  the  persons  in  the  same  registers  an- 
nexed and  painted,  in  all  resemblance,  as  there  standeth,  and  here  is 
also  to  be  seen. 

An  Injunction  of  Penance,  from  the  Register  of  William  Courtney, 
Archbishop  of  Canterbury. 

Ignorance,  the  mother  of  error,  so  much  hath  blinded  and  deceived  certain  Penauce 
persons,    to   wit,  Hugh  Pennie,  John  Forstall,  John  Boy,    John  Wanderton,  f"J  ^'"ing- 
William  Hayward,  and  John  White,   tenants  of  the  lord  of  Wengham,  that  i„g  stra\« 
against  the  coming  of  the  aforesaid  archbishop  to  his  palace  of  Canterbury  on  t"  "jy 
Palm-Sunday-even,  the  year  of  our  Lord,  1390,  where  they,  being  warned  by  ^l^^^^ 
the  bayhti'  to  convey  and  carry  hay,  sti-aw,  and  other  litter,  to  the  aforesaid 
palace,  as  they  were  bound  by  the  tenor  of  their  lands,  which  they  hold  of  the 
see  of  Canterbury ;  refusing  and  disdaining  to  do  their  due  service,  as  they  were 
accustomed,  brought  their  straw  and  other  litter,  not  in  carts  and  wains  openly 
and  sufficiently,  but  by  piece-meal,  and  closely  in  bags  or  sacks,  in  contempt  of 
their  lord,  and  derogation  of  the  right  and  title  of  the  see  of  Canterbury.  Where- 
upon they  being  cited  and  presented  befoi-e  the  archbishop,  sitting  in  judgment 
at  his  manor  of  Statewood,  yielded  and  submitted  themselves  to  his  lordship's 

(1)  The  registers  of  the  archbishops  of  Canterbury,  of  which  Foxe  so  wisely  availed  himself  in 
compiling  his  Acts  and  Monuments  of  the  Church,  remain  to  this  day  indisputable  proofs  of  his 
own  veracity,  and  most  instructive  memorials  of  the  pride  and  oppression  of  the  church  of  Rome. 
The  illustration  on  the  opposite  jui^'e  dilfers  slightly  from  that  which  is  given  by  our  author;  it  is, 
nevertheless,  an  exact  copy  from  archhishop  Courtney's  Register,  which,  by  the  obliging  permission 
of  his  grace  the  .-uchbisho])  of  Canterbuf)-,  the  editor  was  enabled  to  take,  from  the  original  docu- 
ment at  Laml)eth.  Foxe  adjoins  to  his  illustration,  the  following  verses,  which  must  not  be  under- 
stood as  forming  an  extract  from  the  Register,  but  were  probably  the  production  oOiis  oVillJJenj — 

"  This  hag  full  of  straw,  I  bear  on  my  back, 
Because  my  lord's  horse  his  litter  did  lack ; 
If  ye  be  not  good  to  my  lord  grace's  horse, 
Ye  are  like  to  go  bare-foot  before  the  cross." 

The  superscription  in  the  arcnbishop's  register  is  as  follows:  "InjunctiopoeniteDtiiE  tenentibus 
domini,  in  nun  portaudo  sullicieutem  quantitatem  funi  et  stiaminis." — Ed. 


816 


NOTES    OUT    OF    Tlili    PARLIAMENTARY     ROLLS. 


Henry 
IF. 

A.D. 
1410. 

Excom- 
munica- 
tion and 
absolu- 
tion 
abused. 


1399 

to 
1413. 


pleasure,  humbly  craving  pardon  of  tlieir  trespass.  Then  the  aforesaid  ardi- 
bishop  absolved  the  above-named  Hugh  Pennie,  &c.,  they  swearing  to  obey  the 
'  laws  and  ordinances  of  holy  church,  and  to  do  the  punishment  that  should  be 
appointed  them  for  their  deserts  :  that  is,  that  they  going  leisurely  before  the 
procession,  every  one  of  them  should  carry  openly  on  his  shoulder  his  bag 
stufied  with  hay  and  straw,  so  that  the  said  hay  and  straw  should  appear  hang- 
ing out,  the  mouths  of  the  sacks  being  open.* 

MOTES    OF    CERTAIN    PARLIAMENT    MATTERS    PASSED    IN    THE 
DAYS    OF    KING    HENRY    IV. 

To  proceed  now  further  in  the  reign  of  this  king,  and  to  treat  also 
something  of  his  parliaments  as  we  have  done  of  others  before  :  first, 
we  will  begin  with  the  parliament  holden  in  the  first  year  of  his 
coming  in. 

Moreover,  forasmuch  as  our  catholic  papists  will  not  beheve,  yet 
the  contrary,  but  that  the  jurisdiction  of  their  father  the  pope  hath 
ever  extended  throughout  all  the  world,  as  well  here  in  England,  as 
in  other  places,  here,  therefore,  speaking  of  the  parliaments  holden 
in  this  king's  days  concerning  this  matter,  I  refer  them  to  the  par- 
liament of  the  said  king  Henry,  in  his  first  year  holden,  and  to  the 
twenty-seventh  article  of  the  same,  where  they  may  read,  in  the  tenth 
objection  laid  against  king  Richard,  in  plain  words  : 


The 

pope's 
jurisdic- 
tion ex- 
cluded 
out  of 
this 
realm. 


Forasmuch  as  the  crown  of  this  realm  of  England,  and  the  jurisdiction  belong- 
ing to  the  same,  as  also  the  whole  realm  itself,  at  all  times  lately  past,  hath  been 
at  such  liberty,  and  enjoyed  such  prerogative,  neither  the  pope,  nor  any  other 
out  of  the  same  kingdom,  ought  to  intrude  himself  or  intermeddle  therein  :  it 
was,  therefore,  objected  unto  the  afore-named  king,  Richard  II.,  for  procuring 
the  letters  apostolical  from  the  pope,  to  the  confirming  and  corroborating  of 
certain  statutes  of  his,  and  that  his  censures  might  be  prosecuted  against  the 
breakers  thereof,  which  seemed  then  to  the  parliament  to  tend  against  the 
crown  and  regal  dignity,  as  also  against  the  statutes  and  liberties  of  this  the 
said  our  realm  of  England.^ 

Furthermore,  in  the  second  year  of  the  said  king,  this  was  in  the  parliament 
required,  that  all  such  persons  as  shall  be  arrested  by  force  of  the  statute  made 
against  the  Lollards,  in  the  second  year  of  Henry  IV.,  may  be  bailed,  and  freely 
make  their  purgation ;  that  they  be  arrested  by  none  other  than  by  the  sheriffs, 
or  such  Uke  officers,  neither  that  any  havoc  be  made  of  their  goods.  The  king 
granted  to  their  advice  therein.^ 

In  the  eighth  year,  moreover,  of  this  king's  reign,  it  was  likewise  propounded 
in  the  parliament,  that  all  such  persons  as  shall  procure,  or  sue  in  the  court  of 


(1)  Erroris  mater  ignorantia,  quosdam  Hugonem  Pennie,  Johannem  Forstall,  Johannem  Boy,  Jo- 
hannem  Wanderton,  Guliemum  Hayward,  et  Johannem  White,  tenentes  domini  de  Wengham 
taliter  obccecavit,  quod  ante  adventum  dicti 'domini  archiepiscopi  ad  palatium  suum  Cantuariae  in 
vigilia  dominica  in  ramis  palmarum,  Anno  Dom.  1390,  de  ceriendo  et  ducendo  ad  dictum  palatium, 
fanuni,  straraen,  sive  literam,  ('  mark  ye  grammarians,  literse  for  litter,')  prout  ex  tenura  terra- 
rum,  et  tenura  suorum,  quas  et  quae  tenent  de  domino  et  ecclesia  sua  Cantuarise  astringuntur, 
per  ballivum  domini  ibidem  jussi  et  legitime  prjemoniti  debita  servitia  more  solito  impendere 
dedignantes,  stramen  hujusmodi  non  in  carrucis  et  vehiculis  publice  in  sufficienti  quantitate,  sed 
modice  in  saccis  sub  latibulo,  pontificis  ad  palatium  praedictum  perduxerunt ;  in  vilipendium 
domini,  ac  subtractionem,  jurium  ecclesise  suEe  Cantuar.  Unde  super  hoc  evocati  coram  domino, 
die  Jovis  in  hebdomada  Paschae  in  castro  suo  de  Statewode  pro  tribunali  sedente  personaliter 
comparentes,  ipsius  judicio  in  hac  parte  se  humiliter  submiserunt,  veniam  et  misericordiam  pro 
commissis  devote  petendo.  Et  deinde  dominus  praefatus,  Hugonem  Pennie,  Johannem  For- 
stall, Johannem  Boy,  Johannem  Wanderton,  Gulielmum  Hayward,  et  Johannem  White,  de  stando 
mandatis  ecclesise,  et  fideliter  peragendo  pccnam  eis  pro  eorum  demeritis  injungendam,  juratos 
absolvit  in  forma  juris,  nunciata  eis  et  eorum  cuilibet,  pro  modo  culpae,  piena  salutari ;  videlicet, 
quod  die  dominica  tunc  proxime  sequente,  praedicti  poenitentes  nudi  capita  et  pedes,  processionem 
apud  ecclesiam  coUegiatam  de  Wengham  faciendarn  cum  sijjgulis  saccis  super  humeris  suis 
palam  portantes  (plenis  videlicet  foeno  et  stramine)  ita  quod  stramen  et  fccnum  hujusmodi  ad  ora 
saccorum  patentium  intuentibus  prominerent,  lentis  incessibus  procederent  humiliter  et  devote. — 
Ex  regist.  W.  Courtney. 

(2)  Act.  Pari.  An.  1.  reg.  Hen.  IV.  act.  27.  (3)  Annoreg.  Hen.  IV.  act.  2a 


NOTES    OUT    OF    THE    PARI.IAMEXTAKY    UOI.LS.  317 

Rome  anv  process  touching  any  benefice,  collation,  or  presentation  of  the  same,     iioiri/ 

shall  incur  the  pain  of  tiie  statute  of  promisors,  made  in  the  thirteenth  year  of ^j 

Richard  II. :  whcr&unto  the  king  granted  that  the  statutes  heretofore  provided      ^  ^ 
should  be  observed.'  lo9<J 

Item,  In  the  said  parliament  there,  it  was  put  up  by  petition,  that  the  king        J^ 
might   enjoy  half  the  profits  of  every  parson's  benefice  who  is  not  resident     j.^jg 

thereon.     Thereunto  the  king  answered,   that  the  ordinaries  should   do  their  1- 

duties  therein,  or  else  he  would  provide  further  remedy  to  stay  their  pluralities.- 

Item,  In  the  said  parliament  it  was  retpiired,  that  none  do  sue  to  the  court 
of  Rome  for  anj'  benetice,  but  only  in  the  king's  courts.^ 

In  tiie  next  year  following,  which  was  the  ninth  of  this  hing, 
another  petition  of  the  commons  was  put  up  in  parliament  against  the 
court  of  Rome,  which  I  thought  good  here  to  express,  as  followeth : 

Petition  to  Parliament  for  Protection  against  the  Court  of  Rome. 

The  commons  do  beseech,  that  forasmuch  as  divers  pirovisors  of  the  benefices  The 
of  holy  church,  dwelling  in  the  court  of  Rome,  through  their  singular  covetous-  wicked 
ness,  now  newly  imagined  to  destroy  those  that  have  been  long  time  incum-  pope's 
bents  in  divers  their  benefices  of  holy  church  peaceably,  some  of  them  by  the  provisnrs 
title  of  the  king,  some  by  title  ordinary,  and  by  the  title  of  other  true  patrons  Ijnd'^e- 
thereof,  by  colour  of  provisions,  relations,''  and  other  grants  made  to  the  said  priving 
provisors  by  the  apostoil,  of  the  said  benefices,  do  pursue  processes  in  the  said  I'ei'eiiced 
court  by  citation  made  beyond  the  sea,  without  any  citations  made  within  the  England 
realm,  in  deed,  against  the  same  incumbents,  whereby  many  of  the  said  incum-  their 
bents,  through  such  privy  and  crafty  processes  and  sentences  of  privation  and  i,e[5,^'°"ot 
inabilitation,  have  lost  their  benefices,  and  others  have  been  put  in  the  places  known  in 
of  the  said  incumbents,  before  the  publication  of  the  same  sentences,  they  not  **>c 
knowing  any  thing  ;  and  many  are   in   great  hazard  to  lose    their  benefices 
through  such  processes,  to  their  perpetual  destruction  and  mischief:  and  foras- 
much as  this  mischief  cannot  be  holpen  without  an  especial  remedy  be  had  by 
parliament:  pleaseth  it  the  king  to  consider  the  great  mischief  and  danger  that 
may  so  come  unto  divers  his  subjects  without  their  knowledge,  through  such 
citations  out  of  the  realm,  and  thereupon  to  ordain,  by  the  advice  of  the  lords  of 
this  present  parliament,  that  none  presented  be  received  by  any  ordinary  unto 
any  benefice  of  any  such  incumbent  for  any  cause  of  privation  or  inabilitation, 
whereof  the  process  is  not  founded  upon  citation  made  within  the  realm,  and 
also  that  such  incumbents  may  remain  in  all  their  benefices,  until  it  be  proved, 
by  due  inquest  in  the  court  of  the  king,  that  the  citations,  whereupon  such  pri- 
vations and  inabilitations  are  granted,  were  made  within  the  realm ;  and  that 
if  such  ordinaries,  or  such  presented,  or  others,  do  pursue  the   contrary,  that 
then  they,  and  their  procurators,  fautors,   and  counsellors,  do  incur  the  pains 
contained  in  the  statute  made  against  provisors  in  the  thirteenth  year  of  the 
reign  of  the  late  Richard  II.,  king  of  England,  by  processes  to  be  made,  as  is 
declared  in  the  statute  made  against  such  provisors  in  the  twenty-seventh  year 
of  the  reigii  of  king  Edward,  predecessor  to  our  lord  the  king  that  now  is,  any 
royal  licenses  or  grants  in  any  manner  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding ;  and 
that  all  other  statutes  made  against  provisors,  and  not  repealed  before  this  pre- 
sent parliament,  be  in  their  full  force,  and  be  firmly  kept  in  all  points. 

That  the  king's  council  have  power  by  authority  of  parliament,  in  case  that 
any  man  find  himself  grieved  in  particular,  that  he  may  pursue;  and  that  the 
said  council,  by  the  advice  of  the  justices,  do  right  unto  the  parties.  This  to 
endure  until  the  next  parliament,  reserving  always  unto  the  king,  his  preroga- 
tive and  liberty. 

Item,  That  no  pope's  collector  thenceforth  should  levy  any  money  within  the 
realm  for  first-fruits  of  anj  ecclesiastical  dignity,  under  pain  of  incurring  the 
statute  of  provisions,  a.d.  1408.* 

(1)  An.  8.  reg.  Hen.  IV.  act.  116.  (2)  Ibid.  act.  114.  (3)  Ibid.  act.  37. 

(4)  "  Relation, '  an  obtaining  again  of  something  previously  forfeited,  or  resigned. — Ed. 

(5)  Ex  Eotulo  Parliamenti,  an  9  Hen.  IV.  act.  43. 


318  NOTES    OUT    OF    THE    PARLIAMENTARY    ROLLS. 

Henry        Besiclcs,  in  tlic  Said  parliament  holclen  the  eleventh  year  of  this 
king,  is  to  be  noted,'  how  the  commons  of  the  land  put  up  a  bill 


A.  D.    unto  the  king,  to  take  the  temporal  lands  out  from  spiritual  men's 
^^^    hands  or  possession  ;  the  effect  of  which  bill  was  this  : 

1413. 
That  the  temporalties  disordinately  wasted  by  men  of  the  church,  might  suf- 
fice to  find  to  the  king  fifteen  earls,  one  thousand  five  hundred  knights,  six 
Relief  of   thousand  two  hundred  esquires,  and  a  hundred  houses  of  almose,  to  the  relief 
the  poor,    of  poor  people,  more  than  in  those  days  within  England.     And  over  all  these 
aforesaid  charges,  the  king  might  put  yearly  in  his  coffers  twenty  thousand 
pounds. 

Provided,  that  every  earl  should  have  of  yearly  rent  three  thousand  marks ; 
and  every  knight  a  hundred  marks,  and  four  plough  lands ;  every  esquire  forty 
marks  by  the  year,  with  two  plough  lands ;  and  every  house  of  almose  a  hun- 
dred marks,  with  oversight  of  two  tm-e  seculars  unto  every  house  ;  and  also 
with  provision,  that  every  township  should  keep  all  poor  people  of  their  own 
dwellers,  which  might  not  labour  for  their  living :  witn  condition,  that  if  more 
fell  in  a  town  than  the  town  might  maintain,  then  the  said  alms-houses  to  re- 
lieve such  townships. 
A  com-  And  to  bear  these  charges,  they  alleged  by  their  said  hill,  that  the  tempo- 

of'church  I'^^^'i'^s,  being  in  possession  of  spiritual  men,  amounted  to  three  hundred  and 
goods,  to  twenty-two  thousand  marks  a-year ,  whereof  they  aftinned  to  be  in  the  see  of 
what  they  Canterbury,  with  the  abbeys  of  Christ's-church,  of  St.  Augustine's,  Shrewsburj-, 
Coggeshal,  and  St.  Osus,  twenty  thousand  marks  a-year ;  in  the  see  of  York, 
and  abbeys  there,  twenty  thousand  marks;  in  the  see  of  Winchester  and  abbeys 
there,  twenty  thousand  marks ;  in  the  see  of  London,  with  abbeys  and  other 
houses  there,  twenty  thousand  marks ;  in  the  see  of  Lincoln,  with  the  abbeys 
of  Peterborough,  Ramsey,  and  others,  twenty  thousand  marks ;  in  the  see  of 
Norwnch,  with  the  abbeys  of  Bury,  and  others,  twenty  thousand  marks ;  in  the 
see  of  Ely,  Spalding,  and  others,  twenty  thousand  marks ;  in  the  see  of  Bath, 
with  the  abbey  of  Okinborne,  and  others,  twenty  thousand  marks ;  in  the  see  of 
Worcester,  with  the  abbeys  of  Evesham,  Abingdon,  and  others,  twenty  thou- 
sand marks ;  in  the  see  of  Chester,  with  the  precinct  of  the  same,  with  the  sees 
of  St.  David,  Salisbury,  and  Exeter,  with  their  precincts,  twenty  thousand 
marks ;  the  abbeys  of  Ravens  or  Revens,  of  Fountains,  of  Gernons,  and  divers 
others,  to  the  number  of  five  more,  twenty  thousand  marks ;  the  abbeys  of 
Leicester,  Walthun,  Gosborne,  Merton,  Ticeter,  Osney,  and  others,  unto  the 
number  of  six  more,  twenty  thousand  marks ;  the  abbeys  of  Dover,  Battle, 
Lewes,  Coventry,  Daventry,  and  Tourney,  twenty  thousand  marks  ;  the  abbeys 
of  Northampton,  Thornton,  Bristol,  Killingworth,  Winchcomb,  Hailes,  Parchis- 
sor,  Frideswide,  Notly,  and  Grimsby,  twenty  thousand  marks. 

The  aforesaid  sums  amount  to  the  full  of  three  hundred  thousand  marks. 
And  for  the  odd  twenty-two  thousand  marks,  they  appointed  Hardford,  Roches- 
ter, Huntingdon,  Swinshed,  Crowland,  Malmesbury,  Burton,  Tewkesburj',  Dun- 
stable, Sherborne,  Taunton,  and  Biland. 

And  besides  this,  they  allege,  by  the  said  bill,  that  over  and  above  the  said 
sum  of  three  hundred  and  twenty-two  thousand  marks,  divers  houses  of  religion 
in  England  possessed  as  many  temporalties  as  might  suffice  to  find  yearly  fif- 
teen thousand  priests  and  clerks,  every  priest  to  be  allowed  for  his  stipend  seven 
marks  by  the  year. 

To  this  bill  no  answer  was  made,  but  that  the  king  of  this  matter  would  take 
deliberation  and  ad\'isement,  and  with  that  answer  ended,  so  that  no  fiuther 
labour  was  made. 


A.U.1413.  These  things  thus  hitherto  discoursed,  touching  such  acts  and  mat- 
ters as  have  been  incident  in  the  lifetime  of  this  king,  followeth  next 
the  thirteenth  year  of  his  reign.  In  that  year  the  said  king  Henry 
IV.  (after  he  had  sent  a  little  before  a  certain  company  of  captains 

(1)  Ex  Chron.  D.  Alban.  Fabiano,  et  aliis. 


DEATH  OF  HENRY  IV. — CORONATION  OF  HENRY  V.         31.0 

and  soldiers  to  aid  the  duke  of  Burgundy  in  France,  among  whom  was    nenry 

the  lord  Cobham)   keeping  his  Christmas  at  Eltham,  fell  grievously L_ 

sick.     From  thence  he  was  conveyed  to  London,  where  he  began  to    A.  D. 
call  a  parliament,  but  tarried  not  the  end.     In  the  mean  time,  the   ^^^^'^- 
infirmity  of  the  king  more  and  more  increasing,  he  Avas  taken  and 
brought  into  a  bed  in  a  fair  chamber  at  Westminster ;  and  as  he  lay 
in  his  bed,  he  asked  how  they  called  the   same  chamber;  and  they 
answered  and  said,  Jerusalem.    And  then  he  said  it  was  his  prophesy,  xiieking 
That  he  should  make  his  end  in  Jerusalem.    And  so,  disposing  him-  prophecy 
self  towards  his  end  in  the  aforesaid  chamber,  he  died ;  upon  what  tt'^t  he 
sickness,  whether  of  leprosy,  or  of  some  other  sharp  disease,  I  have  not  aiTin  jc- 
to  affirm.^    The  like  prophecy  we  read  of  pope  Silvester  II. ;  to  whom  ;^"^^''=™- 
being  inquisitive  for  the  time  and  place  where  he  should  die,  it  was  phecy  of 
answered,  That  he  should  die  in  Jerusalem.^     Who  tlicn  saying  mass  vx-^tcr  n. 
in  a  chapel,  called  likewise  Jerusalem,  perceived  his  end  there  to  be 
near,  and  died.     And  thus  king  Henry  lY.,  successor  to  the  lawful 
king  Richard  II.,  finished  his  life  at  Westminster,  and  was  buried  at 
Canterbury  by  the  tomb  of  Thomas  Becket,  a.  d.  1413. 


HENRY  THE  FIFTH.' 

After  this  Henry  lY.  reigned  Henry  Y.,  his  son,  who  was  bom  at  A.D. 
Monmouth  in  Wales,  of  whose  other  virtues,  and  great  victories  gotten  ^^13. 
in  France,  I  have  not  greatly  to  intenneddle ;  especially  seeing  the 
memory  of  his  worthy  prowess,  being  sufficiently  described  in  other 
Avriters  in  this  our  time,  may  both  content  the  reader,  and  unburden 
my  labour  herein  ;  especially  seeing  these  latter  troubles  and  pertur- 
bations of  the  church  offer  me  so  much,  that  scarcely  any  vacant  leisure 
shall  be  left  to  intermeddle  with  matters  profane. 

After  the  coronation  then  of  this  new  king,  which  was  the  ninth  Great 
day  of  April,  called  then  Passion  Sunday,  wliich  was  an  exceeding  atThe'co- 
stormy  day,  and  so  tempestuous,  that  many  did  wonder  at  the  portent  ronation. 
thereof,  not  long  after  the  same,  a  parliament  began  to  be  called,  and 
to  be  holden  after  the  feast  of  Easter,  at  Westminster,  a.  d.  1413. 
At  that  time  Thomas  Arundel,  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  collected  a  synod 
in  Paul's  church  at  London  a  universal  synod  of  all  the  bishops  and  London' 
clergy  of  England.     In  that  s}Tiod,  among  other  weighty  matters  and 
ponderous,  it  was  determined,  that  the  day  of  St.  George,  and  also  of 
St.  Dunstan,  should  be  a  double  feast,  called  Duplex  Festum,  in 
holy  church  :  in  holy  kitchen,  I  would  say. 

And  because  the  order  and  manner  of  those  pope-holy  feasts  either 
yet  is  not  sufficiently  known  to  some  rude  and  gross  capacities,  or  may, 
peradventnre,  grow  out  of  use,  and  be  strange  and  unknown  to  our  The  feasts 
posterity  hereafter,  therefore,  to  give  a  little  memorandum  thereof  by  popes 
the  way,  for  erudition  of  times  hereafter  to  come,  touching  this  mys-  ^'^^J^ibed 
tical  science  of  the  pope's  deep  and  secret  divinity,  here  is  to  be  noted,  and 
that  the  feasts  of  the  holy  mother,  catholic  church,  be  divided  into 

(1)  Ex  vetust.  Chron.  Anglico,  cujus  initium  est:  "That  all  men  called.  ' 

(2)  See  vol.  ii.  p.  25. — Ed. 

(3)  Edition  15ti3,  p.  173.    Ert.  1570,  p  6G3     Ed.  1576,  p.  .''.35.    Ed.  1563.  p.  557.    Ed.  1696,  p.  513, 
Ed   16SI,  vol.  i.  p.  635.— Ed. 


320  FEASTS    OF    Till::    POIMSH    CIirECH    DI.STlXGUISHf.D 

Henry  suTiclry  mcmbcTS.  Like  as  a  plentiful  root  m  a  fruitful  field  risctli  up 
"  and  burgencth  into  manifold  arms,  and  the  arms  again  do  multiply  into 
A.L.  divers  and  sundry  branches,  out  of  which,  moreover,  although  no  fruit 
^'^^'^-  do  come,  yet  both  leaves  and  flowers  do  bud  and  blossom  in  most 
copious  wise,  right  beautiful  to  behold :  even  so  this  '  festum,'  con- 
taining a  large  matter  of  great  variety  of  days  and  feasts,  groweth  in 
itsel  and  multiplieth,  being  thus  divided;  first,  into  'festum  duplex,' 
and  into  'festum  simplex;'  that  is,  into  '  feast-double,''  and  into  '  feast- 
simple.''  Again,  this  '  festum  duplex''  brancheth  four-fold-wise,  to  Avit, 
into  'festum  principale  duplex,'  into  'majus  duplex,''  into  'minus 
duplex,''  and  '  inferius  duplex  \  that  is,  into  '  principal  double,'  into 
'  greater  double,'  into  '  lesser  double,'  and  into  '  inferior'  or  '  lower 
double.'  Unto  these  several  sorts  of  feasts,  what  days  were  peculiarly 
assigned,  it  were  too  long  to  recite.  For  this  present  purpose  it  shall 
suffice  to  understand,  that  as  unto  the  principal  double  feast  only  be- 
longeth  eight  days  in  the  year,  so  the  '  majus  duplex  festum'  had  given 
unto  it  by  this  convocation  the  day  of  St.  George  and  of  St.  Dunstan, 
constitu-  as  is  afore  remembered :  albeit  by  constitution  it  was  so  decreed,  yet 
against  by  custoui  it  was  not  so  used.^  Item,  it  is  to  be  noted,  that  these  two 
custom,  fgasts,  to  wit,  '  principale  duplex,'  and  '  majus  duplex,'  did  differ  and 
were  known  from  all  others  by  four  notes  :  by  servdce  in  the  kitchen, 
and  by  service  in  the  church,  which  were  both  double ;  by  ringing  in 
the  steeple,  which  was  with  a  double  peal ;  by  copes  in  the  quire,  and  by 
thurifying  or  censing  the  altars  :  for  in  these  two  principal  and  greater 
double  feasts,  the  seventh,  eighth,  and  ninth  lesson  must  be  read  with 
silken  copes.  Also  at  the  said  feasts,  in  the  time  of  the  lessons,  the 
altars  in  the  chm-ch  must  be  thurified ;  that  is,  smoked  with  incense, 
&c.  And  likewise  the  '  minus  duplex,'  and  '  inferius  duplex'  had  also 
their  peculiar  service  to  them  belonging.  Secondly,  the  'simplex 
festum,'  which  is  the  second  arm  springing  of  this  division,  is  thus 
divided :  either  having  a  triple  invitory,  or  a  double,  or  else  a  single 
invitory ;  of  which,  moreover,  some  have  three  lessons,  some  have 
nine,  &c. 

And  thus  much,  by  occasion,  for  popish  feasts ;  not  that  I  do  so 
much  deride  them,  as  I  lament,  that  so  much  and  manifest  idolatry  in 
them  is  committed,  to  the  great  dishonour  of  our  Lord  God,  who  only 
is  to  be  honoured. 

Cfje  2:roubIe  anD  ^ct«iccutian  of  t^e  moiSt  baltant  anD  tuoctfj?  jaactpc 
of  Cfjci^t,  h\i  5|o[jn  <©IDcajStIc,  ^Ctnigljt,  EorD  aro&{)am. 

*After^  that  the  true  servant  of  Jesus  Christ,  John  Wickliff,  a 
man  of  very  excellent  life  and  learning,  had,  for  the  space  of  more 
than  twenty-six  years,  most  valiantly  battled  with  the  great  Anti- 
christ of  Europe,  or  pope  of  Rome,  and  his  diversely  disguised  host 
of  anointed  hypocrites,  to  restore  the  church  again  to  the  pure  estate 
that  Christ  left  her  in  at  his  ascension,  he  departed  hence  most 
christianly  in  the  hands  of  God,  the  year  of  our  Lord  1387,  as  is 
aforesaid,  and  was  buried  in  his  own  parish  church  at  Lutterworth, 
in  Leicestershire.*     No  small  number  of  godly  disciples  left  that 

(1)  Ex  tab.  Festorem. 

(2)  See  the  Latin  Edition  1559,  p.  98 ;   Ed.  1563,  p.  261 ;    from  which   latter  the  passage   in 
asterisks  is  an  extrart.— EiO.  (3)  Ex  operihus  et  scriptis  Thom<e  Waldeni. 


no  pro- 


TROUBLE    AND    TEKSECUTION    OF    THE    LORD    COBIIAM.  321 

ffood  man  bcliind  him,  to  defend  the  lowliness  of  the  gospel  against    Jienry 

the  exceeding  pride,  ambition,  simony,  avarice,  hypocrisy,  whoredom, '. 

sacrilege,  tyranny,  idolatrous  worship])ings,  and  other  filthy  fruits,  A.  D. 
of  those  stitf-necked  pharisecs  ;  against  whom  Thomas  Arundel,  ^'*^'^' 
tlie  archbishop  of  Canterbury  (as  fierce  as  ever  was  Pharaoh,  Anti-  ^''""^j*^. 
ochus,  Herod,  or  Caiaphas)  collected,  in  Paul's  church  at  London,  a  'in  mag- 
universal  synod  of  all  the  papistical  clergy  of  England,  in  the  year  "f^ 
of  our  Lord  1413  ;  as  he  had  done  divers  others  before,  to  withstand 
their  most  godly  enterprise.  And  this  was  the  first  year  of  king 
Henry  V.,  whom  they  had  then  made  fit  for  their  hand.* 

The  chief  and  principal  cause  of  this  assembling,  as  recordeth  the 
Chronicle  of  St.  Alban's,  was  to  repress  the  growing  and  spreading 
of  the  gospel,  and  especially  to  withstand  the  noble  and  worthy  lord 
Cobham,  who  was  then  noted  to  be  a  principal  favourer,  receiver, 
and  mq-intainer  of  those  whom  the  bishop  misnamed  to  be  Lollards ; 
especially  in  the  dioceses  of  London,  Rochester,  and  Hereford,  setting 
them  up  to  preach  whom  the  bishops  had  not  licensed,  and  sending 
them  about  to  preach,  which  was  against  the  constitution  provincial, 
before  remembered  :  holding  also  and  teaching  opinions  of  the  sacra- 
ments, of  images,  of  pilgrimage,  of  the  keys  and  church  of  Rome, 
contrary  and  repugnant  to  the  received  determination  of  the  Romisli 
church,  &c. 

In  the  mean  time,  as  these  *high'  prelates,  with  their  pharisees  and 
scribes,  were  thus  gathered  in  the  pestilent  council  against  the  Lord 
and  his  word,  and*  were  in  talk  amongst  themselves  concerning  the 
good  lord  Cobham,  there  resorted  unto  them  the  twelve  inquisitors 
of  heresies  ;  whom  they  had  appointed  at  Oxford  the  year  before,  to 
search  out  heretics,  with  all  Wickliif 's  books  ;  who  brought  two  hun- 
dred and  forty-six  conclusions,  which  they  had  collected  as  heresies 
out  of  the  said  books.^    The  name  of  the  said  inquisitors  were  these : 

John  Whitnam,  a  master  in  the  New  College ;  John  Langedon, 
monk  of  Christ's  Church  in  Canterbmy  ;  William  Ufford,  regent  of 
the  Carmelites  ;  Thomas  Claxton,  regent  of  the  Dominies  ;  Robert 
Gilbert,  Richard  Earthisdale,  John  Luckc,  Richard  Snedisham, 
Richard  Flemming,  Thomas  Rotbomc,  Robert  Ronbery,  Richard 
Grafdale. 

*In^  the  mean  season,  caused  they  their  hired  servants  to  blow  it 
forth  abroad  over  all  the  whole  realm,  that  they  were  there  congre- 
gated for  a  wholesome  unity  and  reformation  of  the  church  of  Eng- 
land, to  stop,  so,  the  mouths  of  the  common  people.  Such  is  always 
the  common  practice  of  these  subtle  sorcerers,  whilst  they  are  in 
doing  mischief,  to  blear  the  eyes  of  the  unlearned  multitude,  with 
one  false  craft  or  other.* 

These  things  thus  done,  and  the  articles  being  brought  in,  further 
they  proceeded  in  their  communication,  concluding  among  them- 
selves, that  it  was  not  possible  for  them  to  make  whole  Christ's  coat 
without  seam  (meaning  thereby  their  patched  popish  synagogue), 
unless  certain  great  men  were  brought  out  of  the  way,  who  seemed 
to  be  the  chief  maintaincrs  of  the  said  disciples  of  Wickliff.  Among 
them  this  noble  knight,  sir  .lohn  Oldcastle,  the  lord  Cobham,  was 

(1)  Edition  IjC3,  p.  2GS.— Ed.  (2)  Walden,  in  fasriculo  zizaiiioruni  Wicklovi. 

(S;  See  Edition  15fi3,  p  261.— Ed. 

vol..  III.  V 


S22  TEOUliLE    AND    PERSECUTION    OF    THE    LORD    COBHAM. 

Henry    complainecl  of  by  the  general   proctors  to   be  the  chief  principal. 

^-       Him  they  accused,  first,  as  a  mighty  maintaiaer  of  suspected  preachers 

A.D.    in  the  dioceses  of  London,  Rochester,  and  Hereford,  contrary  to  the 

1413.    niinds  of  the  ordinaries.     Not  only  they  affirmed  him  to  have  sent 

Lord  Cob-  thither  the  said  preachers,  but  also  to  have  assisted  them  there  by 

<u™dTfor  force  of  arms,  notwithstanding  their  synodal  constitution  made  before 

int'uie'"  to  the  contrary.    Last  of  all,  they  accused  him  that  he  was  far  othcr- 

Kodhead    ^yjgg  jn  bclicf  of  the  sacrament  of  the  altar,  of  penance,  of  pilgrimage, 

Accused    of  image- Worshipping,  and  of  the  ecclesiastical  power,  than  the  holy 

^°}  y^^.      church  of  Rome  had  taught  many  years  before, 

belief.  In  the  end  it  was  concluded  among  them,   that,   without  any 

T-ainst     further  delay,  process  should  be  awarded  out  against  him,  as  against 

him.        a  most  pernicious  heretic. 

A  spiri-        Some  of  that  fellowship  who  were  of  more  crafty  experience  than 
tuaiprac-  ^j^^  othcrs,  thought  it  not  best  to  have  the  matter  so  rashly  handled, 
but  by  some  preparation  made  thereunto  beforehand :    considering 
the  said  lord  Cobham  was  a  man  of  great  birth,  and  in  favour  at  that 
time  with  the  king,  their  counsel  was  to  know  first  the  king''s  mind, 
to  save  all  things  upright.      This  counsel  was  well  accepted,  and 
thereupon  the  archbishop  Thomas  Arundel,  with  his  other  bishops, 
and  a  great  part  of  the  clergy,  went  straitways  unto  the  king  then 
remaining  at  Kennington,  and  there  laid  forth  most  grievous  com- 
plaints against  the  said  lord  Cobham,  to  his  great  infamy  and  blemish  : 
The  king  being  a  man  right  godly.     The  king  gently  heard  those  blood-thirsty 
fJTh'im!*  prelates,  and  for  otherwise  than  became  his  princely  dignity :    not- 
withstanding requiring,  and  instantly  desiring  them,  that  in  respect 
of  his  noble  stock  and  knighthood,  they  should  yet  favourably  deal 
with  him  ;    and  that  they  would,  if  it  Avere  possible,   without  all 
rigour  or  extreme  handling,  reduce  him  again  to  the  church's  unity. 
His  gen-   He  promised  them  also,  that  in  case  they  were  contented  to  take 
iifise!"     some  deliberation,  he  himself  would  seriously  commune  the  matter 

with  him. 

The  Anon  after,  the  king  sent  for  the  said  lord  Cobham,  and  as  soon 

nionish-'^  as  he  was  come,  he  called  him  secretly,  admonishing  him  betwixt  him 

iTd"c*b    ^^^  ^"^'  ^^  submit  himself  to  his  mother  the  holy  church,  and,  as  an 

ham.        obedient  child,  to  acknowledge  himself  culpable.     Unto  whom  the 

His  an-    christian  knight  made  this  answer  :    "  You,  most  worthy  prince," 

the^king.  saith  he,  "  I  am  always  prompt  and  willing  to  obey,  forasmuch  as  I 

know  you  a  christian  king,  and  the  appointed  minister  of  God,  bearing 

the  sword  to  the  punishment  of  evil  doers,  and  for  safeguard  of  them 

that  be  virtuous.     Unto  you,  next  my  eternal  God,  owe  I  my  whole 

obedience,  and  submit  thereunto,  as  I  have  done  ever,  all  that  I  have, 

either  of  fortune  or  nature,  ready  at  all  times  to  fulfil  whatsoever  ye 

shall  in  the  Lord  command  me.     But,  as  touching  the  pope  and  his 

spiritualty,  I  owe  them  neither  suit  nor  service,  forasmuch  as  I  know 

him,  by  the  Scriptures,  to  be  the  great  Antichrist,  the  son  of  per- 

diton,  the  open  adversary  of  God,  and  the  abomination  standing  in 

Lord  Cob-  the  holy  place."     When  the  king  had  heard  this,  with  such  like 

.sakeii  by  Sentences  mere,  he  would  talk  no  longer  with  him,  but  left  him  so 

the  king,  utterly. 

And  as  the  archbishop  resorted  again  unto  him  for  an  answer,  he 
gave  him  his  full  authority  to  cite  him,  examine  him,  and  punish 


TnOUBT.F.    AXI)    rF.RSEClTTION'    OF    THE    LORD    COBIIAJI.  323 

him,  according  to  their  devilish  decree,  which  they  called  '  The  Laws    Jiennj 

of  holy  Church.**     Then  the  said  archbishop,  by  the  counsel  of  his " 

other  bishops  and  clergy,   ap])ointed  to  call  before  him   sir  John    A.  D. 
Oldcastlc,  tlie  lord  Cobhara,  and  to  cause  liim  personally  to  appear,  _iil^_ 
to  answer  to  such  suspect  articles,  as  they  should  lay  against  him  :  summon- 
80  he  sent  forth  his  chief  summoner,  with  a  very  sharp  citation  unto  arcii- 
the  castle  of  Cowling,  where  he  at  that  time  dwelt  for  his  solace  ;  '"'*'^°p- 
and  as  the  said  summoner  was  come  thither,  he  durst  in  no  case  enter 
the  gates  of  so  noble  a  man  without  his  license,  and  therefore  he 
returned  home  again,  his  message  not  done. 

Then  called  the  archbishop  one  John  Butler  unto  him,  who  was  J"''" 
then  the  doorkeeper  of  the  king''s  privy  chamber,  and  with  him  he  j)iayetii 
covenanted,  through  promises  and  rewards,  to  have  this  matter  craftily  p"^'',^' 
brought  to  pass  under  the  king's  name.     Whereupon  the  said  John 
Butler  took  the  archbishop's  summoner  with  him,  and  went  unto  the 
said  lord  Cob-ham,  showing  him,  that  it  was  the  king's  pleasure,  that 
he  should  obey  that  citation  ;  and  so  cited  him  fradulently.     Then 
said  he  to  them  in  few  words,  that  he  in  no  case  would  consent  to 
those  most  devilish  practices  of  the  priests.     As  they  had  informed 
the  archbishop  of  that  answer,  and  that  it  was  for  no  man  privately  to 
cite  him  after  that,  without  peril  of  life,  he  decreed  by  and  by  to 
have  him  cited  by  public  process  or  open  commandment ;  and,  in  all 
the  haste  possible,  upon  the  Wednesday  before  the  nativity  of  our 
Lady,  in  September,  he  commanded  letters  citatory  to  be  set  upon  citations 
the  great  gates  of  the  cathedral-church  of  Rochester,  which  was  but  ^^^^f^^t 
three  English  miles  from  thence,  charging  him  to  appear  personally  ^^l^J'^ 
before  him  at  Ledis,  the  eleventh  day  of  the  same  month  and  year, 
all  excuses  to  the  contrary  set  apart.     Those  letters  were  taken  down  The  cita- 
anon  after,  by  such  as  bore  favour  unto  the  lord  Cobham,  and  so  takln 
conveyed  aside.     After  that  the  archbishop  caused  new  letters  to  be  ^°'^'"' 
set  up  on  the  nativity-day  of  our  Lady,  which  also  were  rent  down, 
and  utterly  consumed. 

Then,  forasmuch  as  he  did  not  appear  at  the  day  appointed  at 
Ledis  (where  he  sat  in  consistory,  as  cruel  as  ever  Avas  Caiaphas,  witli 
his  court  of  hypocrites  about  him),  he  judged  him,  denounced  him, 
and  condemned  him,  of  most  deep  contumacy.     After  that,  when  he  FaUe  ac- 
had  been  felsely  informed   by  his   hired  spies,   and  other  glozing  acfunT* 
glaverers,  that  the  said  lord  Cobham  had  laughed  him  to  scorn,  dis-  '"'"■ 
dained  all  his  doings,  maintained  his  old  opinions,  contemned  the 
church's  power,  the  dignity  of  a  bishop,  and  the  order  of  priesthood 
(for  of  all  these  was  he  then  accused),  in  his  moody  madness,  without 
just  proof,  did  he  openly  excommunicate  him.    Yet  was  not  with  all  E-vcom- 
this  his  fierce  tyranny  satisfied,  but  he  commanded  him  to  be  cited  ™d'Tmi 
afresh,  to  appear  before  him  on  the  Saturday   after    the  feast  of  St.  "F^'" 
Matthew  the  apostle,  with  these  cmel  threatenmgs  added  thereunto, 
that  if  he  did  not  obey  at  the  day,  he  would  more  extremely  handle 
him.     And  to  make  liimself  more  strong  towards  the  performance 
thereof,  he  compelled  the  lay-power,  by  most  terrible  menacings  of 
curses  and  interdictions,  to  assist  him  against  that  seditious  apostate, 
schismatic,  and  heretic,  the  troubler  of  the  public  peace,  that  enemy 
of  the  realm,  and  great  adversary  of  all  holy  church  ;   for  all  these 
hateful  names  did  he  give  hin;. 

y  2 


324 


TnOUHLE    A\n    i-EFSECUTlON    OF    THE    LORD    COBHAM. 


This  most  constant  servant  of  the  Lord,  and  worthy  knight,  sir 
John  Oldcastle,  the  lord  Cobhani,  beholding  the  unpeaceable  fury  of 
Antichrist  thus  kindled  against  him,  perceiving  himself  also  compassed 
on  every  side  with  deadly  dangers,  he  took  paper  and  pen  in  hand, 
and  so  wrote  a  christian  confession  or  reckoning  of  his  faith  (which 
followeth  hereafter),  both  signing  and  sealing  it  with  his  own  hand ; 
wherein  he  also  answered  to  the  four  chief  articles  that  the  arch- 
bishop laid  against  him.  That  done,  he  took  the  copy  with  him,  and. 
went  therewith  to  the  king,  trusting  to  find  mercy  and  favour  at  his 
hand.  None  other  was  that  confession  of  his,  than  the  common 
Theapo-  belief  or  sum  of  the  church's  faith,  called  '  The  Apostles"  Creed,"" 
flith.  by  all  christian  men  then  used,  with  a  brief  declaration  upon  the 
same,  as  hereimder  cnsueth. 


V. 

A.D. 
1413 

Confess- 
eth  his 
taith  in 
God  be- 
fore men. 


The 

common 
Creed  of 
Chris- 
tians. 


Peclara- 
tionof  his 
belief. 


Christ, 

the  only 

heart 

of  his 

church. 

The 

church 

divided 

into  three 

parts. 


The 

church 

militant 

divided 

into  three 

estates. 

What 

priests 

should 

do. 


Wliat 

kniffht- 

hood 

should 

»io. 


The  Christian  Belief  of  the  Lord  Cobham. 

I  believe  in  God  the  Father  Ahnighty,  maker  of  heaven  and  earth :  And  in 
Jesu  Christ  his  only  Son  our  Lord,  which  was  conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghost, 
born  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  suffered  under  Pontius  Pilate,  crucified,  dead,  and 
buried,  went  down  to  hell,  the  third  day  rose  again  from  death,  ascended 
up  to  heaven,  sitteth  on  the  right  hand  of  God  the  Father  Almighty ;  and  from 
thence  shall  come  again  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead.  I  believe  in  the 
Holy  Ghost,  the  universal  holy  church,  the  communion  of  saints,  the  forgive- 
ness of  sins,  the  uprising  of  the  flesh,  and  everlasting  life.     Amen. 

And  for  a  more  large  declaration  (saith  he)  of  this  my  faith  in  the  catholic 
church,  I  steadfastly  believe,  That  there  is  but  one  God  Almighty,  in  and  of 
whose  godhead  are  these  three  persons,  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and  that  tliose  three  persons  are  the  selfsame  God  Almighty.  I  believe 
also.  That  the  second  person  in  this  most  blessed  Trinity,  in  most  convenient 
time  appointed  thereunto  before,  took  flesh  and  blood  of  the  most  blessed 
Virgin  Mary,  for  the  safeguard  and  redemption  of  the  universal  kind  of  man, 
which  was  before  lost  in  Adam's  offence.' 

Moreover  I  believe,  That  the  same  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  thus  being  both 
God  and  man,  is  the  only  head  of  the  whole  christian  church,  and  that  all 
tliose  that  have  been,  or  shall  be,  saved,  be  members  of  this  most  holy  chtu-ch. 
And  this  holy  church  I  think  to  be  divided  into  three  sorts  or  companies. 
Whereof  the  first  sort  be  now  in  heaven,  and  they  are  the  saints  from  hence 
departed.  These,  as  they  were  here  conversant,  conformed  always  their  lives 
to  the  most  holy  laws  and  pure  examples  of  Christ,  renouncing  Satan,  the 
world,  and  the  flesh,  with  all  their  concupiscences  and  evils.  The  second  sort 
are  in  purgatory  (if  any  such  place  be  in  the  Scriptures),  abiding  the  mercy  of 
God,  and  a  full  deliverance  from  pain.^  The  third  sort  are  here  upon  the  earth, 
and  be  called  the  church  militant :  for  day  and  night  they  contend  against  the 
crafty  assaidts  of  the  devil,  the  flattering  prosperities  of  this  world,  and  the 
rebellious  filthiness  of  the  flesh. 

Thi$  latter  congregation,  by  the  just  ordinance  of  God,  is  also  severed  into 
three  divers  estates,  that  is  to  say,  into  priesthood,  knighthood,  and  the  commons ; 
among  whom  the  will  of  God  is,  that  the  one  should  aid  the  other,  but  not 
destroy  the  other  The  priests,  first  of  all,  secluded  from  all  worldliness,  should 
conform  their  lives  utterly  to  the  examples  of  Christ  and  his  apostles.  Ever- 
more should  they  be  occupied  in  preaching  and  teaching  the  Scriptures  purely, 
and  in  giving  wholesome  examples  of  good  living  to  the  other  two  degrees  of 
men.  More  modest  also,  more  loving,  gentle,  and  lowly  in  spirit,  should  they  be, 
than  any  other  sort  of  people. 

In  the  knighthood  are  all  they  who  bear  sword  by  law  of  office  :  these  should 
defend  God's  laws,  and  see  that  the  gospel  were  pm"ely  taught,  conforming 
their  lives  to  the  same,  and  secluding  all  false  preachers ;  yea  these  ought  rather 
to  hazard  their  lives,  than  to  suffer  such  wicked  decrees  as  either  blemish  the 


(1)  1  John  V.     Gal.  iv.     John  i.     Luke  ii. 

(2)  Contrary  wrDte  he,  '  ad  I'arliameutum.' 


Ex  Waldeno. 


ins    CHRISTIAS    BELIEF.  325 

eternal  testament  of  God,  or  yet  let  the  free  passage  thereof,  wliercby  heresies    nennj 
and  scliisms  miglit  spring  up  in  the  church.     I''or  of  none  other  arise  they,  as        ^• 
I  suppose,  than  of  erroneous  constitutions,  craftily  first  creeping  in  under  hypo-    ^  ^ 
critical  lies,  for  advantage.     They  ouglit  also  to  preserve  God's  people  from     j^jg 

oppressors,  tyrants  and  thieves,  and  to  see  the  clergy  supported  so  long  as  they  L 

teach  purely,  pray  rightly,  and  minister  the  sacraments  freely.     And  if  they  Ma^k 
see  them  do  otherwise,  they  are  bound,  by  the  law  or  office,  to  compel  them  to  ^ost'' 
change  their  doings ;  and  to  see  all  things  performed  according  to  God's  pre-  ciiristian 
script  ordinance.  iieart. 

The  latter  fellowship  of  this  church,  are  the  common  people ;  whose  duty  is  What  the 
to   bear    their  good  minds  and  true  obedience    to  the  aforesaid  ministers  of  commi)n 
God,  their  kings,  civil  governors,  and  priests.  The  right  office  of  these,  is  justly  ought  to 
to  occupy  every  man  his  faculty,  be  it  merchandise,  liandicraft,  or  the  tithe  of  do. 
the  ground.  And  so  one  of  them  to  be  as  an  helper  to  another,  following  always, 
in  their  sorts,  the  just  commandments  of  the  Lord  God. 

Over  and  besides  all  this,  I  most  faithfully  believe,  That  the  sacraments  of  Relief  of 
Christ's  church  are  necessary  to  all  christian  believers ;  this  always  seen  to,  tliat  l^,^^^^^ 
they  be  truly  ministered  according  to  Christ's  first  institution  and  ordinance.  in„'  the 
And,  forasmuch  as  1  am  maliciously  and  most  falsely  accused  of  a  mis-behef  in  sacra- 
the  sacrament  of  the  altar,  to  the  hurtful  slander  of  many,  I  signify  here  unto 
all  men,  that  this  is  my  faith  concerning  that:  I  believe  in  that  sacrament  to  be  Of  the 
contained  Christ's  very  body  and  blood  under  the  similitude  of  bread  and  wine,  ^''^• 
yea  the  same  body  that  was  conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  bom  of  the  Virgin 
Mary,  done  on  the  cross,  died  and  was  buried,  arose  the  third  day  from  the 
death  ;   and  is  now  glorified  in  heaven.    I  also  believe  the  universal  law  of  God 
to  he  most  true  and  perfect,  and  they  who  do  not  so  follow  it  in  their  faith  and 
works  (at  one  time  or  another)  can  never  be  saved :  whereas  he  that  seeketh  it 
in  faith,  accepteth  it,  learneth  it,  delighteth  therein,  and  performeth  it  in  love, 
shall  taste  for  it  the  felicity  of  everlasting  innocency. 

Finally,  this  is  my  faith  also.  That  God  will  ask  no  more  of  a  Christian  believer  God's  law 
in  this  Hfe,  but  only  to  obey  the  precepts  of  that  most  blessed  law.     If  any  f^rred^'^'^' 
prelate  of  the  church  require  more,  or  else  any  other  kind  of  obedience,  than  before 
this  to  be  used,  he  contemneth  Christ,  exalting  himself  above  God,  and  so  man's. 
becometh  an  open  antichrist.     All  the  promises  1  believe  particularly,  and, 
generally,  all  that  God  hath  left  in  his  holy  Scripture,  that  1  should  believe ; 
instantly  desiring  you,  my  liege  lord  and  most  worthy  king,  that  this  confession  A  chris- 
of  mine  may  be  justly  examined  by  the  most  godly-wise,  and  learned  men  of  ^'j'™^*;?' 
your  realm;'  and,  if  it  be  found  in  all  points  agreeing  to  the  verity,  then  let  it  the  lord 
be  so  allowed,  and  I,  thereupon,  holden  for  none  other  than  a  true  Christian.  Cobham. 
If  it  be  pi-oved  otherv/ise,  then  let  it  be  utterly  condemned :  provided  always, 
that  I  be  taught  a  better  belief  by  the  word  of  God;  and  I  shall  most  reverently 
at  all  times  obey  thereunto. 

This  brief  confession  of  his  faith  the  lord  Cobham  wrote,  as  is 
mentioned  before,  and  so  took  it  with  him  to  the  court,  offering  it 
with  all  meekness  unto  the  king,  to  read  it  over.    The  king  would  in 
no  case  receive  it,  but  commanded  it  to  be  delivered  unto  them  that 
should  be  his  judges.     Then  desired  he,  in  the  king''s  presence,  that 
a  hundred  knights  and  esquires  might  be  suffered  to  come  in  upon 
his  purgation,  who  he  knew  would  clear  him  of  all  heresies.  Moreover 
he  offered  himself,  after  the  law  of  arms,  to  fight  for  life  or  death  with 
any  man  living,  christian  or  heathen,  in  the  quarrel  of  his  faith ;  the 
king  and  the  lords  of  his  council  excepted.     Finally,  vnih  all  gentle-  nischris- 
ness,  he  protested  before  all  that  were  present,  that  he  would  refuse  nfach  ami 
no  manner  of  correction   that  should,   after  the  laws  of  God,   be  manhood. 
ministered  unto  him  ;  but  that  he  would  at  all  times,  with  all  meek-  ^°'?->' 

....  sonable 

ness,  obey  it.     Notwithstanding  all  this  the  king  suffered  him  to  be  offer 
summoned  personally  in  his  own  privy  chamber.     Then  said  the  sei 


vould 
serve. 


(1)  This  request  was  lawful. 


326  THE    FIRST    EXAMINATION    OF    THE    LORD    COBHAM. 

Henry    lord  Cobliaiii  to  the  king,  that  he  had  appealed  from  the  archbishop 

^-      to  the  pope  of  Rome,  and  therefore  he  ought,  he  said,  in  no  case  to 

A.  D.    be  his  judfe.     And  having  his  appeal  there  at  hand  ready  written, 

1^13.    }jg  sliowed  it  with  all  reverence  to  the  king ;  wherewith  the  king  was 

cobham    then  much  more  displeased  than  afore,  and  said  angrily  to  him,  that 

fo?he''^'   he  should  not  pursue  his  appeal ;  but  rather  he  should  taiTy  in  hold, 

pope.       ^-ij  g^^^jj  ^jj^g  ^g  jj^  ^ffQXQ  of  the  pope  allowed.     And  then,  would  he 

cobham    or  nild  he,  the  archbishop  should  be  his  judge.     Thus  was  there 

oiwy'the*  nothing  allowed  that  the  good  lord  Cobham  had  lawfully  afore  re- 

beast.      quired :  but,  forasmuch  as  he  would  not  be  sworn  in  all  things  to 

submit  himself  to  the  church,  and  so  take  what  penance  the  archbishop 

would  enjoin  him,  he  was  arrested  again  at  the  king''s  commandment, 

and  so  led  forth  to  the  Tower  of  London,  to  keep  his  day  (so  was  it 

then  spoken),  that  the  archbishop  had  appointed  him  afore  in  the 

king''s  chamber. 

The  con-       Then  caused  he  the  aforesaid  confession  of  his  faith  to  be  copied 

andean-    again,  and  the  answer,  also,  which  he  had  made  to  the  four  articles 

newly      propounded  against  him,  to  be  written  in  the  manner  of  an  indenture, 

copied,     on  two  sheets  of  paper ;  that  when  he  should  come-to  his  answer,  he 

might  give  the  one  copy  unto  the  archbishop,  and  reserve  the  other 

to  himself 

THE    FIRST    EXAMINATION    OF    THE    LORD    COBHAM. 

As  the  day  of  examination  was  come,  which  was  the  23rd  day  of 

September,  the  Saturday  after    the  feast  of  St.  Matthew,  Thomas 

caiaphas  Aruudcl,  the  arclibisliop,  sitting  in  Caiaphas'  room,  in  the  chapter- 

consL-'"  house  of  PauFs,  with  Richard  Clifford,  bishop  of  London,  and  Henry 

lory.        Bolingbrook,  bishop  of  Winchester ;  Sir  Robert  Morley,  knight,  and 

lieutenant  of  the  Tower,  brought  personally  before  him  the  said  lord 

Cobham,  and  there  left  him  for  the  time ;  unto  whom  the  archbishop 

Anti-       said  these  words  :    "  Sir  John,  in  the  last  general  convocation  of  the 

here,       clergy  of  this  our  province,  ye  were  detected  of  certain  heresies,  and, 

Iwer      ^y  sufficient  witnesses,  found  culpable  :  whereupon  ye  were,  by  form 

of  spiritual  law,  cited,  and  would  in  no  case  appear.     In  conclusion, 

upon  your  rebellious  contumacy,  ye  were  both  privately  and  openly 

excommunicated.     Notwithstanding  we  neither  yet  showed  ourselves 

unready  to  have  given  you  absolution  (nor  yet  do  to  this  hour), 

would  ye  have  meekly  asked  it." — Unto  this  the  lord  Cobham  showed 

as  though  he  had  given  no  ear,  having  his  mind  otherwise  occupied, 

A  sipi  of  and  so  desired  no  absolution  ;  but  said,  he  would  gladly,  before  him 

tiueser-  and  his  brethren,  make  rehearsal  of  that  faith  which  he  held  and 

intended  always  to  stand  to,  if  it  would  please  them  to  license  him 

thereunto.     And  then  he  took  out  of  his  bosom  a  certain  writing, 

indented,   concerning  the  articles  whereof  he  was  accused,  and  so 

openly  read  it  before  them,  giving  it  unto  the  archbishop,  as  he  had 

made  thereof  an  end  ;  whereof  this  is  the  copy. 

Lord  Cobham's  further  Confession  of  his  Belief. 

ment  of  ^'  ^^^"^  Oldcastle,  knight,  lord  of  Cobham,  will  that  all  christian  men  know 
t;!"!-  l,ord's  and  understand,  that  I  call  Almighty  God  to  witness,  that  it  hath  been,  now  is, 
body.        and  ever,  with  the  help  of  God,  shall  be,  mine  intent  and  my  ^^•ill,  to  believe, 


v.^Mt 


THE    FIRST    EXAMINATION    OF    THE    LORD    COBIIAM,  827 

faitlifully  and  fully,  all  the  sacraments  that  ever  God  ordained  to  be  done  in     Henry 
liolv  ciuircli ;  and  niureover  do  declare  me  in  these  four  points :   I  believe  that        ^■ 
the  most  worshijiful  sacrament  of  the  altar  is  Christ's  body  in  form  of  bread,  ~~.    . 
the  same  body  that  was  born  of  the  blessed  virgin  our  lady  Saint  Mary,  done        '    ," 
on  the  cross,  dead  and  buried,  the  third  day  rose  fiom  death  to  life,  the  which  "' 

body  is  now  glorified  in  heaven. 

Also,  as  for  the  sacrament  of  penance,  I  believe,  That  it  is  needful  to  every  Penance 
man  that  shall  be  saved,  to  forsake  sin,  and  to  do  due  penance  for  sin  before 
done,  with  true  confession,  very  contrition,  and  due  satisfaction  as  God's  lav/ 
limiteth  and  teacheth,  and  else  may  he  not  be  saved ;  which  penance  I  desire 
all  men  to  do. 

And  as  for  images,  I  understand  that  they  be  not  of  belief,  but  that  they  were  Images, 
ordained  since  the  belief  of  Christ  was  given  by  sufferance  of  the  church,  to  be 
calendars  to  lewd  men,  to  represent  and  bring  to  mind  tiie  passion  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  and  martyrdom  and  good  living  of  other  saints  :  and  tliat  whoso 
it  be,  that  doth  the  worship  to  dead  images  that  is  due  to  God,  or  putteth  such 
hope  or  ti-ust  hi  help  of  them,  as  he  should  do  to  God,  or  hath  affection  in  one 
more  than  in  another,  he  doth  in  that,  tlie  greatest  sin  of  Mammetry.' 

Also  I  suppose  this  fully,  That  every  man  in  this  earth  is  a  pilgrim  toward  Pilgrim- 
bliss,  or  toward  pain ;  and  that  he  that  knoweth  not,  ne  will  not  know,  ne  keep  '"'S''- 
the  holy  commandments  of  God  in  his  living  here  (albeit  that  he  go  on 
pilgrimages  to  all  the  world,  and  he  die  so),  he  shall  be  damned :  he  that 
knoweth  the  holy  connnandments  of  God,  and  kecpeth  them  to  his  end,  he 
shall  be  saved,  though  he  never  in  his  life  go  on  pilgrimage,  as  men  now  use,  to 
Canterbury,  or  to  Rome,  or  to  any  other  place. 

This  answer  to  his  articles  thus  ended  and  read,  he  delivered  it  to  The  an- 
the  bishops  as  is  said  before.     Tlien  counselled  the  archbishop  -with  Tniined.'^' 
the  other  two  bishops  and  with  divers  of  the  doctors,  what  was  to  be 
done  in  this  matter ;  commanding  him,  for  the  time,  to  stand  aside. 
In  conclusion,  by  their  assent  and  information,  he  said  thus  unto  Qi.arreis 
him  :    "  Come  hither,  sir  John  :  in  this  your  Avriting  are  many  good  ^^'^^ 
things  contained,  and  right  catholic  also,  we  deny  it  not ;   but  ye  no"^  was 
must  consider  that  this  day  ■^vas  appointed  you  to  answer  to  other 
points  concerning  those  articles,  whereof,  as  yet,  no  mention  is  made 
in  this  your  bill :   and,  therefore,  ye  must  yet  declare  us  your  mind 
more  plainly.^     And  thus,  whether  ye  hold,  affirm,  and  believe,  that 
in  the  sacrament  of  the  altar,  after  the  consecration  rightly  done  by 
a  priest,  remaineth  material  bread,  or  not  .'*     Moreover,  whether  ye 
do  hold,  affirm,   and  believe,  that,  as  concerning  the  sacrament  of 
penance  (where  a  competent  number  of  priests  are),  every  christian 
man  is  necessarily  bound  to  be  confessed  of  his  sins  to  a  priest  or- 
dained by  the  church,  or  not .''" 

After  certain  other  commtmication,  this  was  the  answer  of  the  The 
good  lord  Cobham  :  That  none  otherwise  would  he  declare  his  mind,  answefof 
nor  vet  answer  unto  his  articles,  than  was  expressly  in  his  writing  1,^^  '"f' 

1  •        ^  mi  •  T      1         *       1  1  •   1  •  1  •  c^-     Cobham. 

there  contamed.  1  hen  said  the  Archbishop  again  unto  him  :  "  bir 
John,  beware  what  ye  do ;  for  if  ye  answer  not  clearly  to  those 
things  that  are  here  objected  against  you,  especially  at  the  only  time 
appointed  yon  for  that  ])urpose,  the  law  of  the  holy  church''  is,  That, 
compelled  once  by  a  judge,  we  may  openly  proclaim  you  a  heretic.'' 
Unto  whom  he  gave  this  answer:  "  Do  as  ye  shall  think  best,  for  I 
am  at  a  point."  Whatsoever  he  or  the  other  bishops  did  ask  him 
after  that,  he  bade  them  resort  to  his  bill ;  for  thereby  would  he 

(1)  "  Mammetry,"  Puppet,  or  idol-worship. — Ed. 

(;;)  The  wolf  was  liun;j;ry,  he  must  needs  be  fed  with  blood. 

(.'!)  A  tyrannous  whure  is  that  mother. 


C>28  DETEUMIXATION    OF    THE    POPISH    CLERuY. 

Henry    staiid  to  the  vcry  death.     Other  answer  would  he  not  give  that  day ; 
^"      wherewith  the  bishops  and  prelates  were  in  a  manner  amazed  and 
A.  D.    wonderfully  disquieted. 

l^^*^-  At  last  the  archbishop  counselled  again  with  his  other  bishops  and 
His  an-  doctors,  and  in  the  end  thereof  declared  unto  him,  what  the  holy 
tcTthe'ir  church  of  Rouic,  following  the  saying  of  St.  Augustine,  St.  Jerome, 
Antf-^'  ^t-  Ambrose,  and  of  the  holy  doctors,  had  determined  in  these 
Christ  set-  mattcrs  :  no  manner  of  mention  once  made  of  Christ !  *■'  which  deter- 
above  miuation,"  saith  he,  "  ought  all  christian  men  both  to  believe  and  to 
^'°'^-        follow." 

The  lord       Tlicu  Said  the  lord  Cobham   unto  him,   that  he   would   gladly 
Je^sorTeTh  ^^^^^  belicvc  and  observe  whatsoever  holy  church  of  Christ's  insti- 
to  Christ,  tution  had  determined,  or  yet  whatsoever  God  had  willed  him  either 
to  believe  or  to  do :  but  that  the  pope  of  Rome,  with  his  cardinals, 
archbishops,  bishops,  and  other  prelates  of  that  church,  had  lawful 
power    to    determine    such   matter   as    stood   not   with   His   word 
thoroughly ;  that,  would  he  not  (he  said)  at  that  time  aifirm.^    With 
this    the   archbishop   bade   him  to   take  good  advisement  till  the 
Monday  next  following    (which  was  the  twenty-fifth  day  of  Sep- 
tember),   and   then  justly   to   answer,    specially  unto    this   point : 
Whether  there  remained  material  bread  in  the  sacrament  of  the  altar, 
after  the  words  of  consecration  or  not  ?     He  promised  him  also,  to 
send  unto  him  in  writing  those  matters  clearly  determined,  that  he 
A  doc-     might  then  be  the  more  perfect  in  his  answer-making.     And  all  this 
devTis^to   '^^^  nought  else,  but  to  blind  the  multitude  with  somewhat.     The 
^'m)ie'''^  next  day,  according  to  his  promise,  the  archbishop  sent  unto  him, 
into  the  Tower,  this  foolish  and  blasphemous  writing,  made  by  him 
and  by  his  unlearned  clergy. 

The  Determination  of  the  Archbishop  and  Clergy.^ 

j-jyst  The  faith  and  determination  of  the  holy  church  touching  the  blissful  sacra- 

Article,  ment  of  the  altar,  is  this :  That  after  the  sacramental  words  be  once  spoken  by 
a  priest  in  his  mass,  the  material  bread,  that  was  before  bread,  is  tiunied  into 
Christ's  very  body ;  and  the  material  wine,  that  was  before  wine,  is  turned  into 
Christ's  very  blood :  and  so  there  remaineth  in  the  sacrament  of  the  altar,  from 
thenceforth,  no  material  bread,  nor  material  wine,  which  were  there  before  the 
sacramental  words  were  spoken  : — How  believe  ye  this  article? 
Second  Holy  church  hath  determined  that  every  christian  man,  living  here  bodily 

Article,     upon  the  earth,   ought  to  be  shriven  to  a  priest  ordained  by  the  church,  if  he 

may  come  to  him. — How  feel  ye  this  article  ? 

Third  Christ  ordained  St.  Peter  the  apostle  to  be  his  vicar  here  in  earth,  whose  see 

"^  "^  ^'     is  the  holy  church  of  Rome ;  and  he  granted,  that  the  same  power  which  he 

gave  unto  Peter  should  succeed  to  all  Peter's  successors,  whom  we  now  call 

popes  of  Rome ;  by  whose  power,  in  churches  particular,  be  ordained  prelates. 

The  seed   as  archbishops,   bishops,   parsons,   curates,   and  other  degrees   besides ;    unto 

pent!^  ^^"^   whom  christian  men  ought  to  obey  after  the  laws  of  the  church  of  Rome.    This 

is  the  detennination  of  holy  church. — How  feel  ye  this  article  ? 
Fourth  Holy  chiuch  hath  determined,  that  it  is  meritorious  to  a  christian  man,  to  go 

Article,  on  pilgrimage  to  holy  places,  and  there  specially  to  worship  holy  relics  and 
images  of. saints,  apostles,  and  martyrs,  confessors,  and  all  other  saints  besides, 
approved  by  the  church  of  Rome. — How  feel  ye  this  article  ? 

He.seeth       And  as  the    Lord  Cobham  had  read  over  this   most  wretched 
norance.    Writing,  he  marvelled  greatly  of  their  mad  ignorance ;  but  that  he 

(1)  Wliat  could  be  more  reasonably  said,  if  they  had  reason  to  receive  it  ? 

(2)  Ex  niagiio  i)rocessu  Thoma;;  Arundel. 


A>JOTIIER    EXAMINATION    OF    THE    LORD    COBIIAM. 


329 


considered  again,  that  God  had  given  them  over,  for  tlicir  unbeliefs 
sake,  into  most  deep  errors  and  blindness  of  soul.  Again,  he  per- 
ceived hereby,  that  their  uttermost  malice  was  purposed  against  him, 
howsoever  he  should  answer;  and  therefore  he  put  his  life  into  the 
hands  of  God,  desiring  his  only  S|)irit  to  assist  him  in  his  next 
answer.  When  the  said  twenty-fifth  day  of  September  was  come 
(which  Avas  also  the  Monday  before  Michaelmas),  in  the  said  year 
of  our  Lord  1413,  Thomas  Arundel,  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury, 
commanded  his  judicial  seat  to  be  removed  from  the  chapter-house 
of  Paul's,  to  the  Dominic  friars  within  Ludgate  at  London.  And 
as  he  was  there  set,  with  Richard  the  bishop  of  London,  Henry  the 
bishop  of  Winchester,  and  Bennet  the  bishop  of  Bangor,  he  called 
in  unto  him  his  council  and  his  officers,  with  divers  other  doctors 
and  friars,  of  whom  these  are  the  names  here  following :  Master 
Henry  Ware,  the  official  of  Canterbury ;  Philip  Morgan,  doctor 
of  both  laws ;  Howel  Kiffin,  doctor  of  the  canon  law ;  John  Kempe, 
doctor  of  the  canon  law;  William  Carleton,  doctor  of  the  canon  law  ; 
John  Whitnam,  of  the  New  College  in  Oxford ;  John  Whitehead, 
doctor  in  Oxford  also ;  Robert  Wombewcl,  vicar  of  St.  Lawrence 
in  the  JewTy ;  Thomas  Palmer,  the  warden  of  Minors  ;  Robert 
Chamberlain,  prior  of  the  Dominies ;  Richard  Dodington,  prior 
of  the  Augustines ;  Thomas  Walden,  prior  of  the  Carmelites : 
all  doctors  of  divinity.  John  Stephens  also,  and  James  Cole,  both 
notaries,  were  appointed  there  purposely  to  write  all  that  should  be 
cither  said  or  done.  All  these,  with  a  great  sort  more  of  priests, 
monks,  canons,  friars,  parish-clerks,  bell-ringers,  pardoners,  disdained 
him  with  innumerable  mocks  and  scorns,  reckoning  him  to  be  a 
horrible  heretic,  and  a  man  accursed  afore  God. 

Anon  the  archbishop  called  for  a  mass-book,  and  caused  all  these 
prelates  and  doctors  to  swear  thereupon,  that  every  man  should  faith- 
fully do  his  office  and  duty  that  day ;  and  that  neither  for  favour  nor 
fear,  love  nor  hate  of  the  one  party  or  the  other,  any  thing  should 
there  be  witnessed,  spoken,  or  done,  but  according  to  the  truth,  as 
they  would  answer  before  God  and  all  the  world,  at  the  day  of  doom. 
Then  were  the  two  aforesaid  notaries  sworn  also  to  write  and  to  wit- 
ness the  process  that  there  should  be  uttered  on  both  parties,  and  to 
say  their  minds,  if  they  otherwise  knew,  before  they  should  register 
it.  And  all  this  dissimulation  was  but  to  colour  their  mischiefs  before 
the  ignorant  multitude. 

Consider  herein,  gentle  reader,  Avhat  this  wicked  generation  is,  and 
how  far  wide  from  the  just  fear  of  God  ;  for  as  they  were  then,  so  arc 
they  yet  to  this  day. 

After  that,  came  forth  before  them  sir  Robert  Morley,  knight, 
and  lieutenant  of  the  Tower ;  and  he  brought  with  him  the  good  lord 
Cobham,  there  leaving  him  among  them  as  a  lamb  among  wolves,  to 
his  examination  and  answer. 


Ilcnnj 
V. 


The 

Council  of 
Caiaphas. 


Tlic  Plia- 
risecs  and 
Scribes. 


A  ralibk 
of  Anti- 
christs. 


Concili- 
um ma- 
lignan- 
tium. 


For  a 
false 
Colour 
swear 
they. 
All  done 
to  deceive 
the  igno- 
rant. 


Another  Examination  of  the  Lord  Cobham.' 

Then  said  the  archbishop  unto  liim  :  '  Lord  Cobham,  ye  be  advised,  1  am  sure, 
of  the  words  and  process  which  we  had  unto  you  upon  Saturday  last  past,  in 

(I)  Ex  vctusto  cxcmplati  Lundinensium. 


330  EXAMINATION    OF    THE    LORD    COEHAM, 

Henry    the  cliapter-houso  of  Paul's,  which  process  is  too  long  to  be  rehearsed  again 
^-        now.     I  said  unto  you  then,  that  you  were  accursed  for  your  contumacy  and 
.    p,      disobedience  to  the  holy  church,  thinking  that  ye  should  with  meekness  have 
j^jo'     desired  your  absolution.' 

Then  spake  the  lord  Cobham  with  a  cheerful  countenance,  and  said :  '  God 


The  curse  said  by  his  holy  prophet  Malachai  [chap,  ii.],  Maledicam  benedictionibus  ves 
chd-t'*'     *'"^'  which  is  as  much  as  to  say,  I  shall  curse  where  you  bless.' 

The  archbishop  made  then  as  though  he  had  continued  forth  his  tale  and  not 

A  wolfish  heard  him,  saying :  '  Sir,  at  that  time  I  gently  proiFered  to  have  assoiled  you, 

oiFer  of     jf  ygy  would  have  asked  it;  and  yet  I  do  tlie  same,  if  ye  will  humbly  desire  it, 

ness.         in  <^^ii6  form  and  manner,  as  holy  church  hath  ordained.'     Then  said  the  lord 

Cobham :  *  Nay  forsooth  will  I  not,  for  I  never  yet  trespassed  against  you,  and, 

therefore,  I  will  not  do  it' 

Lord  Cob-      And  with  that  he  kneeled  down  on  the  pavement,  holding  up  his  hands 

ham  con-  towards  heaven,  and  said :  '  I  shrive  me  here  unto  thee,  my  eternal  living  God, 

)iimself     th''^''  i"  i^y  fr^i^  youth  I  offended  thee,  O  Lord !  most  grievously  in  pride,  wrath, 

unto  God.  and  gluttony,  in  covetousness,  and  in  lechery.     Many  men  have  I  hurt  in  mine 

anger,  and  done  many  other  horrible  sins  ;  good  Lord,  I  ask  thee  mercy.'    And 

therewith  weepingly  he  stood  up  again,  and  said  with  a  mighty  voice  :  *  Lo, 

Man's       good  people  !  lo ;  for  the  breaking  of  God's  law  and  his  great  commandments, 

fo"  God'  ''-^^y  iipver  yet  cursed  me,  but,  for  their  own  laws  and  traditions,  most  cruelly  do 

law  pre-    they  handle  both  me  and  other  men  ;   and  therefore,  both  they  and  their  laws, 

ferred.       by  the  promise  of  God,  shall  be  utterly  destroyed.'    [Jer.  Ii.] 

At  this  the  archbishop  and  his  company  were  not  a  little  blemished.  Not- 
withstanding, he  took  stomach  unto  him  again  after  certain  words  had,  in 
excuse  of  their  tyranny,  and  examined  the  lord  Cobham  of  his  christian 
The  true  belief. — Whereunto  the  lord  Cobham  made  this  godly  answer:  'I  believe,' 
belief  of"  saith  he,  '  fully  and  faithfiilly  in  the  universal  laws  of  God ;  I  believe  that  all  is 
lord  Coji)-  true  which  is  contained  in  the  holy  sacred  scriptures  of  the  Bible ;  finally,  I 
ham.         believe  all  that  my  Lord  God  would  I  should  believe.' 

Then  demanded  the  archbishop  an  answer  of  that  bill  which  he  and  the  clergy 
had  sent  him  into  the  Tower  the  day  before,  in  manner  of  a  determination  of 
the  church  concerning  the  four  articles  whereof  he  was  accused ;  especially  for 
the  sacrament  of  the  altar,  how  he  believed  therein.  Whereunto  the  lord 
Cobham  said  :  That  with  that  bill  he  had  nothing  to  do ;  but  this  was  his  belief, 
he  said,  concerning  the  sacrament :  that  his  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ, 
sitting  at  his  last  supper,  with  his  most  dear  disciples,  the  night  before  he  should 
suffer,  took  bread  in  his  hand ;  and  giving  thanks  to  his  eternal  Father,  blessed 
it,  brake  it,  and  so  gave  it  unto  them,  saying,  '  Take  it  unto  you,  and  eat  thereof 
all :  this  is  my  body  which  shall  be  betrayed  for  you :  do  this  hereafter  in  my 
remembrance.'  '  "This  do  I  thoroughly  believe,'  saith  he,  '  for  this  faith  am  I 
taught  in  the  Gospel  of  Matthew,  xxvi.,  in  Mark  xiv.,  and  in  Luke  xxii. ;  and 
also  in  the  first  epistle  of  St.  Paul  to  the  Corinthians,  chap,  xi.i 

Then  asked  the  archbishop.  If  he  believed  that  it  were  bread  after  the  conse- 
cration or  sacramental  words  spoken  over  it  1  The  lord  Cobham  said  :  '  I  believe 
that  in  the  sacrament  of  the  altar  is  Christ's  very  body  in  form  of  bread,  the 
same  that  was  bom  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  done  on  the  cross,  dead,  and  buried, 
and  that  the  third  day  arose  from  death  to  life,  which  now  is  glorified  in  heaven.' 
Sacra-  Then  said  one  of  the  doctors  of  the  law  :  '  After  the  sacramental  words  be 

ment  of  uttered,  there  remaineth  no  bread,  but  only  the  body  of  Christ.' 
John  ^^^'  ^^^^  ^^^^  Cobham  said  then  to  one  Master  John  Whitehead  :  '  You  said  once 
"White-  unto  me,  in  the  castle  of  Cowling,  that  the  sacred  Host  was  not  Christ's  body  ; 
head  gone  b^j  J  jjgij  tjjg^  against  you,  and  proved  that  therein  was  his  body,  though  tie 
opinions :  Seculars  and  friars  could  not  therein  agree,  but  held,  each  one  against  the  other, 
all  this  that  opinion.  These  were  my  words  then,  if  ye  remember  it.'  Then  shouted 
help.  ^°^  ^  ^^^'^  °^  them  together,  and  cried  with  great  noise :  '  We  say  all,  that  it  is 
A  bias-     God's  body.' 

phemous       And  divers  of  them  asked  him  in  great  anger,  Whether  it  were  material  bread 
brood.        „rv      ii  ^.  ,  n  ^  ° 

Quarrel-    ^''^^r  the  consecration,  or  not  ? 

pickers.         Then  looked  the  lord  Cobham  earnestly  upon  the  archbishop,  and  said :  '  I 

believe  surely  that  it  is  Christ's  body,  in  fonn  of  bread.     Sir,  believe  not  you 

thus?'     And  the  archbishop  said  :  '  Yes,  marry,  do  L' 

(1)  Aiitichrist  alloweth  not  this  faith. 


WITH    HIS    GODLY    ANSWERS.  331 

Tlien  asked  him  the  doctoi*s,  whether  it  were  only  Christ's  body,  after  the  Henry 

consecration  of  a  priest,  and  no  bread,  or  not  ? — And  he  said  unto  them  :  *  It  ^' 

is  both  Christ's  body  and  bread ;   I  shall  prove  it  thus :  for  like  as  Christ's  ^  yy 

dwelling  here  upon  the  earth  had  in  him  both  Godhead  and  manhood,  and  had  1413, 
the  invisil)le  Godhead  covered  under  that  manhood,  which  was  only  visible  and 


seen  in  him;  so,  in  the  sacrament  of  the  altar,  is  Christ's  very  body  and  bread  ^'"^  ^*" 
,,,.,,  1  •      1        1  •  1  •  ,  111         ,  crainent 

also :  as  I  believe  tlie  bread  is  the  thing  that  we  see  with  our  eyes,  the  body  01  of  Christ's 

Christ,  which  is  his  flesh  and  his  blood,  is  thereunder  hid,  and  not  seen  but  in  boiiy,  is 

/.  ..,    ,  '  botii  tlif 

laith.l  _     _  b<Klyand 

'  And  moreover,  to  prove,  that  it  is  both  Christ's  body  and  also  bread  after  bre.ui. 
the  consecration,  it  is  by  plain  words  expressed  by  Gelasius,  one  of  your  own 
doctors,  writing  against  Eutyches,  who  saith :  Like  as  the  selfsame  sacraments  The 
do  pass  by  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost  into  a  divine  nature,  and  yet,  not-  P"i";'s  di- 
withstanding,  keep  the  property  still  of  their  former  nature,  so  that  principal  ^"' 
mystery  declareth  to  remain  one  true  and  perfect  Christ,'  &c. 

Then  smiled  they  each  one  upon  one  another,  that  the  people  ^lould  judge 
him  taken  in  a  gi-eat  heresy  :  and,  with  a  great  brag,  divers  of  them  said  :  '  It 
is  a  foul  heresy.' 

Then  asked  the  archbishop  what  bread  it  was  ?  And  the  doctors  also  inquired  Material 
of  him  whether  it  were  material  or  not  ? — The  lord  Cobham  said  unto  them  :  •'■'ead. 
'  The  Scriptures  make  no  mention  of  this  word  material  and  therefore  my  faith 
hath  nothing  to  do  therewith :  but  this  I  say  and  believe,  that  it  is  Christ's  body 
and  bread;  for  Christ  said  in  the  sixth  of  John's  gospel :  Ego  sum  panis  vivus, 
qui  de  coelo  descendi :  I  which  came  down  from  heaven  am  the  living  and 
not  the  dead  bread.  Therefore  I  say  now  again,  as  I  said  before,  as  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  is  very  God  and  very  man,  so  in  the  most  blessed  sacrament  of  the 
altar  is  Christ's  very  body  and  bread.' 

Then  said  they  all  with  one  voice  :  '  It  is  a  heresy  ! '  » 

One  of  the  bishops  stood  up,  by  and  by,  and  said,  '  What?  it  is  a  heresy  ma- 
nifest, to  say  that  it  is  bread  after  the  sacramental  words  be  once  spoken,  but 
Christ's  body  only.' — The  lord  Cobham  said :  '  St.  Paul  the  apostle  was,  I  am 
sure,  as  vnsc  as  you  be  now,  and  more  godly  learned,  and  he  called  it  bread,  Tlie  sa- 
writing  to  the  Corintliians :   The  bread  that  we. break,  saith  he,  is  it  not  the  F^"ip"J 
partaking  of  the  body  of  Christ?  [1  Cor.  x.]     Lo !  he  called  it  bread  !  and  not  bread. 
Christ's  body,  but  a  mean  whereby  we  receive  Christ's  body.' 

Then  s<iid  they  again  :  '  Paul  must  be  otherwise  understood ;  for  it  is  surely 
a  heresy  to  say  that  it  is  bread  after  the  consecration,  but  only  Christ's  body,' 

The  lord  Cobham  asked  :  How  they  could  make  good  that  sentence  of  theirs  ? 
— They  answered  him  thus :  '  For  it  is  against  the  determination  of  holy  church.' 

Then  said  the  archbishop  unto  him :  Sir  John,  we  sent  you  a  writing  con- 
cerning the  faith  of  this  blessed  sacrament,  clearly  determined  by  the  church  of 
Rome"  our  mother,  and  by  the  holy  doctors.' — Then  he  said  again  unto  him  :  '  I  A  most 
know  none  holier  than  is  Christ  and  his  apostles.  And  as  for  that  determina-  ^'1'"^ 'r" 
tion,  I  wot  it  is  none  of  theirs;  for  it  standeth  not  with  the  Scriptures,  but 
manifestly  against  them.  If  it  be  the  church's  as  ye  say  it  is,  it  hath  been  hers 
only  since  she  received  the  great  poison  of  worldly  possessions,  and  not  before.' 

Then  asked  they  him  to  stop  his  mouth   therewith,  if  he  believed  not  in  the 
determination  of  the  church  ? — And  he  said  unto  them  :  '  No  forsooth,  for  it  is  The  doc- 
no  God.     In  all  our  creed,  this  word  in  is  but  thrice  mentioned  concerning  [-"unrted 
belief:  In  God  the  Father,  in  (rod  the  Son,  in  God  the  Holy  Ghost,  three  per-  in  their 
sons  and  one  God.    The  birth,  the  deatli,  the  burial,  the  resurrection  and  ascen-  """  . 
sion  of  Christ,  hath  no  in  for  belief,  but  in  him  ;  neither  yet  hath  the  church,  '^"'^^ '""' 
the  sacraments,  the  forgiveness  of  sin,  the  latter  resurrection,   nor  yet  the  life 
everlasting,  nor  any  other  in  than  in  the  Holy  Ghost' 

Then  said  one  of  the  lawyers  :  '  Tush,   that  was  but  a  word  of  office  :  but 
what   is  your  belief  concerning  holy  church  ?' — The  lord  Cobham  answered  :  Ti.e  lord 
'  My  belief  is,  as  I  said  before,  that  all  the  Scriptures  of  the  sacred  Bible  are  (-'"bham 
true.     All  that  is  grounded  upon  them  I  believe  thoroughly,  for  I  know  it  is  not'in'tiie 
God's  pleasure  that  I  should  so  do ;  but  in  your  lordly  laws  and  idle  determi-  pope. 
nations  have  I  no  belief.     For  ye  be  no  part  of  Christ's  holy  church,  as  your 

(1)  Neither  will  Scripture  nor  reason  serve.    This  opinion  hath  St.  Aujuatii.e. 
.(2)  A  heresy  after  the  papists'  making. 
(3)  The  determination  of  the  church  must  stand,  whatsoever  Paul  saith. 


S32  EXAMINATION    OF    THE    LORD    COBHAM, 

Henry    Open  deeds  do  show ;  but  ye  are  very  Antichrists,  obstinately  set  against  his 
^-        holy  law  and  will.     The  laws  that  ye  have  made  are  nothing  to  his  glory,  but 
'  only  for  your  vain  glory  and  abominable  covetousness.' 

tV  This,  they  said,  was  an  exceeding  heresy^  (and  that  in  a  great  fume),  not  to 

believe  the  determination  of  holy  church. 
Holy  Then  the  archbishop  asked  him,  What  he  thought  of  holy  church  ? — He  said 

church      unto  him  :  '  My  belief  is,  that  the  holy  church  is  the  number  of  them  who  shall 
defined,     j^g  gavcd,  of  whom  Christ  is  the  head.     Of  this  church  one  part  is  in  heaven 
with  Christ,  another  in  purgatory  you  say,^  and  the  third  is  here  in  earth.    This 
latter  part  standeth  in  three  degrees,  in  knighthood,  priesthood,  and  the  com- 
monalty, as  I  said  before  plainly  in  the  confession  of  my  belief.' 

Then  said  the  archbishop  unto  him :  '  Can  you  tell  me  who  is  of  this  church  V 
— The  lord  Cobham  answered  :   '  Yea,  truly  can  I.' 

Then  said  doctor  Walden,^  the  prior  of  the  Carmelites  :  '  It  is  no  doubt  unto 
you,  who  i-s  thereof.  For  Christ  saith  in  Matthew  vii. :  Nolite  judicare.  Pre- 
sume to  judge  no  man.  If  ye  be  here  forbidden  the  judgment  of  yoiu:  neigh- 
bour or  brother,  much  more  the  judgment  of  your  superior.'  * 

The  lord  Cobham  made  him  this  answer,  '  Christ  saith  also  in  the  selfsame 
chapter  of  Matthew,  That  like  as  the  evil  tree  is  known  by  his  fruit,  so  is  a 
false  prophet  by  his  works,  appear  they  ever  so  glorious.    But  that,  ye  left  behind 
ye.      And  in  John  i. :  he  hath  this  text :  Operibus  credite  ;    Believe  ye   the 
outward  doings.     And  in  another  place  of  John  vii.:  Justum  judicium  judi- 
cate ;  When  we  know  the  thing  to  be  true,  we  may  so  judge  it,  and  not  offend. 
For  David  said  also,  Psalm  Ivi. :   Recte  judicate  filii  hf)minum  ;  Judge  rightly 
always,  ye  children  of  men.    And  as  for  your  superiority,  were  ye  of  Christ,  ye 
should  be  meek  ministers,  and  no  proud  superiors.' 
Diversity      Then  said  doctor  Walden  unto  him  :  *  Ye  make  here  no  difference  of  judg- 
ofjudg-     nients;  ye  put   no  diversity  between  the  evil  iudgments  which  Christ  hath 
forbidden,   and  the  good  judgments,  which  he  hath  commanded  us  to  have. 
Rash  judgment  and  right  judgment,  all  is  one  with  you.    So  swift  judges  always 
A  perfect  are  the  learned  scholars  of  Wickliff.' — Unto  him  the  lord  Cobham  thus  answered: 
answer.     <  jt  jg  ^-g]]  sophistered  of  you  forsooth.     Preposterous  are  your  judgments  ever- 
more.   For  as  the  prophet  Isaiah  [ch.  v.]  saith :  Ye  judge  evil  good  and  good 
evil :  and  therefore  the  same  prophet  Isaiah,  [ch.  v.]  concludeth,  chap.  Iv.,  that 
your  ways  are  not  God's  ways,  nor  God's  ways  your  ways.     And  as  for  that 
virtuous  man  Wickliff,  whose  judgments  ye   so  highly  disdain,  I  shall  say  here, 
of  my  part,  both  before  God  and  man,  that  before  I  knew  that  despised  doctrine 
of  his,  I  never  abstained  from  sin.*  But  since  I  learned  therein  to  fear  my  Lord 
God,  it  hath,  I  tiaist,  been  otherwise  with  me  :  so  much  grace  could  I  never  find 
in  all  your  glorious  instructions.' 
A  great         Then  said  doctor  Walden  yet  again  unto  him  :  '  It  were  not  well  with  me 
adver-       ^g^  many  virtuous  men  living,  and  so  many  learned  men  teaching  the  Scripture, 
being  also  so  open,  and  the  examples  of  fathers  so  plenteous),  if  I  then  had  no 
grace  to  amend  my  life,  till  I  heard  the  devil  preach.      St.  Jerome  saith:  That 
he  who  seeketh  such  suspected  masters  shall  not  find  the  mid-day  light,  but  the 
mid-day  devil.'  ^ 
Doctors         The  lord  Cobham  said  :  '  Your  fathers,  the  old  Pharisees,   ascribed  Christ's 
wiien  tlie  niii'acles  to  Beelzebub,  and  his  doctrine  to  the  devil ;  and  you,  as  their  natural 
tures  fail,  children,  have  still  the  selfsame  judgment  concerning  his  faithful  followers.^ 
they  be-    They  that  rebuke  your  vicious  living  must  needs  be  heretics,  and  that  must  your 
faU.  °        doctors  prove,  when  you  have  no  Scripture  to  do  it.'  Then  said  he  to  them  all. 
'  To  judge  you  as  you  be,  we  need  go  no  further  than  to  yoiu"  own  proper  acts. 
gy  to  sit    Where  do  you  find  in  all  God's  law,  that  ye  should  thus  sit  in  judgment  on  any 
on  life  or  christian  man,  or  yet  give  sentence  upon  any  other  man  unto  death,  as  ye  do 
hath  no    ^^^^  daily  ?     No  ground  have  ye  in  all  the  Scripture  so  lordly  to  take  it  upon 
ground  in  you,  but  in  Annas  and  Caiaphas,  who  sat  thus  upon  Christ,  and  upon  his  apostles 
Scripture,  j^j-jgj.  j-^jg  ascension.     Of  them  only  have  ye  taken  it  to  judge  Christ's  members 
of"caiv'^  as  ye  do ;  and  neither  of  Peter  nor  John. 
phas.  Then  said  some  of  the  lawyers  :  '  Yes,  forsooth.  Sir,  for  Christ  judged  Judas.' 

(1)  A  heresy  after  the  papists.  '(2)  Consider  him  to  be  then  in  shrewd  handling. 

(3)  Walden,  contra  Wiclevistas,  li.  ar.  2.  cap.  67. 

(4)  How  we  may  judge,  or  not,  judge  by  the  Scriptures. 

(5)  Walden,  in  prsefatione  doctrina;.  vii.  (6)  Hierom.  in  breviar.  in  minori. 
(7)  Luke  xi.  John  x. 


WITH    HIS    GODLY    ANSWEES.  333 

— The  lord  Cobham  said,  'No  !  Christ  judged  him  not,  but  ho  judged  liimself,     Henry 
and  thereupon  went  fbrth  and  so  did  liaiig  himself:  but  indeed  Christ  said:        ^• 
Wo  unto  hini,  for  that  covetous  act  of  his,  as  he  doth  yet  still  unto  many  of     .    t^ 
you.     For  since  the  venom  of  him  was  shed  into  the  church,  ye  never  followed    1410 
Christ,  neither  yet  have  j'e  stood  in  the  perfection  of  God's  law.  Ll- 

Thcn  the  archbishop  asked  him,  What  he  meant  by  that  venom ? — The  lord  ~^ 
Cobham  said  :  '  Your  possessions  and  lordships.    For  then  cried  an  angel  in  the  six  bi- 
air,  as  your  own  chronicles  mention.  Wo,  wo,  wo,  this  day  is  venom  shed  into  shops  of 
the  church  of  God.      Before  that  time  all  the  bishops  of  Rome  were  martyrs,  together 
in  a  manner :  and  since  that  time  we  read  of  very  few.     But  indeed  since  that  martyrs, 
same  time,  one  hath  put  down  another,  one  hath  poisoned  another,  one  hath  V^'^^  ""'^ 
cursed  another,  and  one  hath  slain  another,  and  done  much  more  mischief  Compari- 
besides,  as  all  the  chronicles  tell.     And  let  all  men  consider  well  tliis,  that  «""  i^'^- 
Christ  was  meek  and  merciful ;  the  pope  is  proud  and  a  tyrant :  Christ  was  maTtyrs'"^ 
jjoor  and  forgave;  the  pope  is  rich  and  a  mahcious  manslayer,  as  his  daily  and  the 
acts  do  prove  him :  Rome  is  the  very  nest  of  Antichrist ;  and  out  of  that  nest  P°l'<^s' 
come  all  the  disciples  of  him ;  of  whom  prelates,  priests,  and  monks,  are  the  Also  be- 
body,  these  pilled  friars  are  the  tail  behind.'  tween 

Then  said  the  prior  of  the  friars  Augustine:  'Alack,  Sir,  why  do  you  say  so?  an"  the 
that  is  uncharitably  spoken.' — And  the  lord  Cobham  said  :  '  Not  only  is  it  m)-  pope, 
saying,  but  also  the  prophet  Isaiah,   [chap,  ix.]  long  before  my  time.      The        t 
prophet,  saith  he,  which  preacheth  lies,  is  the  tail-behind.     For  as  you  friars  Rome  ia 
and  monks,  be,  like  Pharisees,  divided  in  your  outward  apparel  and  visages,  so  ^^s't's 
make  ye  division  among  the  people.     And  thus  you,  with  such  others,  are  the  nest. 
very  natural  members  of  Antichrist. 

Then  said  he  unto  them  all :  '  Christ  saith  in  his  gospel,  Matt,  xxiii.  Wo  unto 
you  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  hypocrites ;  for  ye  close  up  the  kingdom  of  heaven  Friars 
before  men,  neither  enter  ye  in  yourselves,  nor  yet  suffer  any  others  that  would  pr^yj^l 
enter  into  it,  but  ye  stop  up  the  ways  thereunto  with  your  own  traditions,  and  and  yet  ' 
therefore  are  ye  the  household  of  Antichrist:  ye  will  not  permit  God's  verity  to  found  no 
have  passage,  nor  yet  to  be  taiight  by  his  true  ministers,  fearing  to  have  your  ^ he*^"^^ 
wickedness  reproved.     But  by  such  flatterers  as  uphold  you  in  your  mischiefs,  religion 
ye  suffer  the  common  people  most  miserably  to  be  seduced.'  ^* 

Then  said  the  archbishop :  '  By  our  lady,  Sir,  there  shall  none  such  preach  '^  °^^* 
within  my  diocese,  and  God  will,  nor  yet  in  my  jurisdiction,  if  I  may  know  it, 
as  either  make  division,^  or  yet  dissension  among  the  poor  commons.' — The 
lord  Cobham  said :  '  Both  Christ  and  his  apostles  were  accused  of  sedition- 
making,  yet  were  they  most  peaceable  men  ;*  both  Daniel  and  Christ  pro- 
phesied, that  such  a  troublous  time  should  come,  as  hath  not  been  yet  since  the 
world's  beginning.  And  this  prophecy  is  partly  fulfilled  in  your  days  and 
doings  ;  for  many  have  ye  slain  already,  and  more  will  ye  slay  hereafter,  if  God 
fulfil  not  his  promise.  Christ  saith  also  [Matt,  xxiv.]  :  If  those  days  of  yours  were 
not  shortened,  scarcely  should  any  flesh  be  saved ;  therefore  look  for  it  justly, 
for  God  will  sborten  yoiur  days.  Moreover,  though  priests  and  deacons,  for 
preaching  of  God's  word,  and  for  ministering  the  sacraments,  with  provision 
for  the  poor,  be  grounded  on  God's  law,  yet  have  these  other  sects  no  manner 
of  ground  hereof,  so  far  as  I  have  read.' 

Then  a  doctor  of  law,  called  Master  John  Kemp,  plucked  out  of  his  bosom  a  Mark  this 
copy  of  the  bill  which  they  had  before  sent  him  into  the  Tower  by  the  arch-  ^?g!'J^'|j' 
bishop's  council,  thinking  thereby  to  make  shorter  work  with  him ;  for  they 
were  so  amazed  with  his  answers  (not  all  unlike  to  them  who  disputed  with 
Stephen),  that  they  knew  not  well  how  to  occupy  the  time ;  their  wits  and 
sophistry,  as  God  woidd,  so  failed  them  that  day. 

'My  lord  Cobham,'  saith  this  doctor,  'we  must  briefly  know  your  mind  con-  First 
cerning  these  four  points  here  following.    The  first  of  them  is  this :' — and  then  Article. 
he  read  upon  the  bill ;  '  The  faith  and  determination  of  holy  church  touching 
the  blessed  sacrament  of  the  altar  is  this  ;  That  after  the  sacramental  words  be  substan- 
once  spoken  by  a  priest  in  his  mass,  the  material  bread,  that  was  before  bread,  tiation  of 
is  tiu-ned  into  Christ's  very  body,  and  the  material  wine,  is  turned  into  Christ's  in^o^he 
blood.     And  so  there  remaineth,  in  the  sacrament  of  the  altar,  from  thence-  body.. 

(1)  Note,  I  pray  you,  how  those  are  counted  traitors  and  seditious,  who  teach,  or  cause  God's 
truth  to  be  taught.  (2)  Luke  xxiii.  .John  xix. 


EXAMINATION    OF    THE    LORD    COBHAM, 


Henry 
V. 

A.D. 
1413. 

Lord 
Cobhara'i 
belief  in 
tlie  sacra- 
ment. 
Second 
Article. 


Confes- 
sion of 
sins  to 
(Jod  only. 


Tlurd 
Article. 


Who  is 
next  to 
Peter. 
Succes- 
sion not 
cl'  place 
but  of 
condi- 
tion, 
inaketh 
Peter's 
heir. 
Anti- 
christ's 
head, 
body,  and 
tail. 


Fourth 
Article. 
Pilgri- 
majre. 


WHiat  is 
to  be 
done 
with 
images. 

Saints 
are  be- 
come 
covetous 
beggars. 


A  whelp 
of  the 
same 
hare. 


forth  no  material  bread,  nor  material  wine,  which  v/ere  there  before  the  sacra- 
mental words  were  spoken  :  Sir,  believe  you  not  this  V — The  lord  Cobham  said  : 
'This  is  not  my  belief;  but  my  faith  is,  as  I  said  to  you  before,  that  in  the 
worshipful  sacrament  of  the  altar  is  Christ's  very  body  in  form  of  bread.' 

Then  said  the  archbishop:  '  Sir  John  !  ye  must  say  otherwise.' — The  lord 
Cobham  said ;   '  Nay,  that  I  will  not,  if  God  be  upon  my  side,  as  I  trust  he  is ; 
'  but  that  there  is  Christ's  body  in  form  of  bread,  as  the  common  belief  is.' 

Then  read  the  doctor  again  : — '  The  second  point  is  this  :  Holy  church  hath 
determined,  that  every  christian  man,  living  here  bodily  upon  earth,  ought  to 
be  shriven  of  a  priest  ordained  by  the  church,  if  he  may  come  to  him.  Sir, 
what  say  you  to  this  V 

The  lord  Cobham  answered  and  said :  '  A  diseased  or  sore  wounded  man  hath 
need  to  have  a  sure  wise  chirurgeon  and  a  true,  knowing  both  the  ground  and 
the  danger  of  the  same.  Most  necessary  were  it,  therefore,  to  be  first  shriven 
unto  God,  who  only  knoweth  our  diseases,  and  can  help  us.  [Mai.  ii.]  I  deny 
not  in  this  the  going  to  a  priest,  if  he  be  a  man  of  good  life  and  learning ;  for 
the  laws  of  God  are  to  be  required  of  the  priest,  who  is  godly  learned.  But  if 
he  be  an  idiot,  or  a  man  of  vicious  living  that  is  my  curate,  I  ought  rather  to 
flee  from  him  than  to  seek  unto  him ;  for  sooner  mighL  I  catch  evil  of  him  that 
is  naught,  than  any  goodness  towards  my  soul's  health.' 

Then  read  the  doctor  again  : — 'The  third  point  is  this:  Christ  ordained  St. 
Peter  the  apostle  to  be  his  vicar  here  in  earth,  whose  see  is  the  church  of  Rome, 
and  he  granted  that  the  same  power  which  he  gave  unto  Peter  should  succeed 
unto  all  Peter's  successors,  whom  we  now  call  popes  of  Rome :  by  whose  special 
2>ower,  in  churches  particular,  be  ordained  prelates  and  archbishops,  parsons, 
curates,  and  other  degrees  besides,  to  whom  christian  men  ought  to  obey  after 
the  laws  of  the  church  of  Rome.  This  is  the  determination  of  holy  church.  Sir, 
believe  ye  not  this  ?' 

To  this  he  answered  and  said :  *  He  that  followeth  Peter  most  nigh  in  pure 
living,  is  next  unto  him  in  succession ;  but  your  lordly  order  esteemcth  not 
greatly  the  lowly  behaviour  of  poor  Peter,  whatsoever  ye  prate  of  him,  neither 
care  ye  greatly  for  the  humble  manners  of  them  that  succeeded  him  till  the 
time  of  Silvester,  who,  for  the  more  part,  were  martyrs,  as  I  told  you  before.  Ye 
can  let  all  their  good  conditions  go  by  you,  and  not  hurt  yourselves  with  them 
at  all.  All  the  world  knoweth  this  well  enough  by  you,  and  yet  ye  can  make 
boast  of  Peter.' 

With  that,  one  of  the  other  doctors  asked  him  :  '  Then  what  do  ye  say  of  the 
pope  ?' — The  lord  Cobham  answered :  '  As  I  said  before,  he  and  you  together 
make  whole  the  great  Antichrist,  of  whom  he  is  the  great  head  ;  you  bishops, 
priests,  prelates,  and  monks,  are  the  body ;  and  the  begging  friars  are  the  tail, 
for  they  cover  the  filthiness  of  you  both,  with  their  subtle  sophistry  ;  neither 
will  I  in  conscience  obey  any  of  you  all,  till  I  see  you,  with  Peter,  follow  Christ 
in  conversation.' 

Then  read  the  doctor  again  : — '  The  fourth  point  is  this  :  Holy  church  hath 
determined,  that  it  is  meritorious  to  a  christian  man,  to  go  on  pilgrimage  to 
holy  places,  and  there  specially  to  worship  the  holy  relics  and  images  of  saints, 
apostles,  martyrs,  confessors,  and  all  other  saints  besides,  approved  by  the 
church  of  Rome.     Sir,  what  say  you  to  this  V 

Whereunto  he  answered  :  '  I  owe  them  no  service  by  any  commandment  of 
God,  and  therefore  I  mind  not  to  seek  them  for  your  covetousness.  It  were 
best  ye  swept  them  fair  from  cobwebs  and  dust,  and  so  laid  them  up  for  catch- 
ing of  scathe,  or  else  to  bury  them  fair  in  the  ground,  as  ye  do  other  aged 
people,  who  are  God's  images.  It  is  a  wonderful  thing,  that  saints  now  being 
dead  should  become  so  covetous  and  needy,  and  thereupon  so  bitterly  beg,  who 
all  their  life  time  hated  all  covetousness  and  begging.  But  this  I  say  unto  you, 
and  1  would  all  the  world  should  mark  it,  that  with  your  shrines  and  idols,  your 
feigned  absolutions  and  pardons,  ye  draw  unto  you  the  substance,  wealth,  and 
chief  pleasures  of  all  christian  realms.' 

'  Why  Sir,'  said  one  of  the  clerks,  '  will  ye  not  worship  good  images?' — 
'  What  worship  should  I  give  unto  them  ?'  said  the  lord  Cobham. 

Then  said  friar  Palmer  unto  him  :  '  Sir,  will  ye  worship  the  cross  of  Christ, 
that  he  died  upon  V — '  Where  is  it  ?'  said  the  lord  Cobham. 

The  friar  said  :  '  I  put  you  the  case,  Sir,  that  it  were  here,  even  now  before 


WITH    HIS    GODLY    ANSWERS.  38.] 

ycu.' — The  lord   Cobham  answered  ;  *  This  is  a  great  wise  man,  to  put  me  an     iienry 
earnest  question  of"  a  thing,  and  yet  he  himself  knoweth  not  where  the  thing        ^'■ 
itself  is.     Yet  once  again  I  ask  jou,  What  worship  1  should  do  unto  it  V  ~\~~n~ 

A  clerk  said  unto  him  :  '  Such  worship  as  Paul  speaketh  of,  and  that  is  this;     ,  jj„' 
God  forbid  that  I  should  joy,  but  only  in  the  cross  of  Jesus  Christ.' — Then  said 


the  lord  Cobham,  and  spread  his  arms  abroad  :  '  This  is  the  very  cross,  yea,  and  The  cross, 
so  much  better  than  your  cross  of  wood,  in  that  it  was  created  of  God,  yet  will  j[  is  to"e 
not  I  seek  to  have  it  worshipped.'  worship- 

Then  said  the  bishop  of  London :  '  Sir,  ye  wot  well  that  he  died  on  a  mate-  P'^'^- 
rial  cross.'' — The  lord  Cobham  said:   '  Yea,  and  I  wot  also,  that  our  salvation  wiiatitis 
came  not  in,  by  that  material  cross,  but  alone  by  him  who  died  thereupon.  And  to  rejoice 
well  I  wot,  that  holy  St.  Paul  rejoiced  in  none  other  cross,  but  in  Christ's  pas-  '"  ""^  , 
sion  and  death  only,  and  in   his  own   sufferings  of  like  persecution  with  him,  Christ. 
for  the  selfsame  verity  that  he  hath  suffered  for  before'. 

Another  clerk  yet  asked  him,  '  Will  ye  then  do  no  honour  to  the  holy  cross?' 
— He  answered  him  :  '  Yes,  if  he  were  mine  own,  I  would  lay  him  up  honestly, 
and  see  unto  him  that  he  should  take  no  more  scathe  abroad,  nor  be  robbed  of 
his  goods,  as  he  is  now  adays.' 

Then  said  the  archbishop  unto  him :  '  Sir  John,  ye  have  spoken  here  many  slandered 
wonderfid  words  to  the  slanderous  rebuke  of  the  whole  spiritualty,  giving  a  great  ^^'^'^  ^^*^ 
evil  example  imto  the  common  sort  here,-  to  have  us  in  the  more  disdain.  Much 
time  have  we  spent  here  about  you,  and  all  in  vain,  so  far  as  I  can  see.  Well, 
we  must  now  be  at  this  short  point  with  you,  for  the  day  ])asseth  away  :  ye  must 
either  submit  yourself  to  the  ordinance  of  holy  church,  or  else  throw  yourself 
(no  remedy)  into  most  deep  danger.  See  to  it  in  time,  for  else  anon  it  will  be 
too  late.' 

The  lord  Cobham  said :  '  I  know  not  to  what  purpose  I  should  otherwise 
submit  me.  Much  more  have  you  offended  me,  than  ever  I  offended  you,  in 
thus  troubling  me  before  this  miiltitude.' 

Then  said  the  archbishop  again  unto  him  :  '  We  once   again   require  you  a  wolfish 
to    remember  yourself  well,  and  to    have  no    other    manner  of   opinion  in  °'^'^^  of 
these  matters,  than  the  universal  faith  and  belief  of  the  holy  church  of  Rome  „g"j  °" 
is.     And  so,  like  an  obedient  child,  return  again  to  the  unity  of  your  mother. 
See  to  it  I  say  in  time,  for  yet  ye  may  have  remedy,  whereas,  anon,  it  will  be 
too  late.' 

The  lord  Cobham  said  expressly  before  them  all :  'I  will  no  otherwise  be- 
lieve in  these  points  than  what  I  have  told  you  here  before.  Do  with  me  what 
you  will.' 

Finally,  then  the  archbishop   said :  '  Well,  then  I  see  none  other  but  that  Bloody 
we  must  needs  do  the  law ;  we  must  proceed  forth  to  the  sentence  definitive,  muider- 
and  both  judge  you  and  condemn  you  for  a  heretic'  *"' 

And  with  that  the  archbishop  stood  up  and  read  there  a  bill  of 
his  condemnation,  all  the  clergy  and  laity  veiling  their  bonnets.  And 
this  was  the  tenor  thereof. 

A  Bill  of  the  Lord  Cobham's  Condemnation. 

In  the  name  of  God ;  so  be  it.     We  Thomas,  by  the   sufferance  of  God,  suffered 
archbishop  of  Canterbury,  metropohtan  and  primate  of  all  England,  and  legate  of  God  as 
from  the  apostolic  see  of  Rome,  will  this  be  known  unto  all  men.     In  a  certain  A'hefettc 
cause  of  heresy,  and  upon  divers  articles,  whereupon  sir  John  Oldcastle,  knight,  for  con- 
and  lord  Cobham,  after  a  diligent  inquisition  made  for  the  same,  was  detected,  Jj^^l^s  of 
accused,  and  presented  before  us,  in  our  last  convocation  of  all   our  province 
of  Canterbury,  holden  in   the  cathedral  church  of  Paul's  at  London,  at  the 
lawful  denouncement  and  request  of  our  universal  clergy  in  the  said  convoca- 
tion, we  proceeded  against  him  according  to  the  law  (God  to  witness)  with  all 
the  favour  possible :    and,  following  Christ's  example  in  all  that  we  might, 

(1)  The  material  cross  is  not  '  material'  to  our  faith. 

(2)  These  men  seem  to  stand  only  upon  their  estimation  amongst  the  people. 


336  DKFINITIVE    SENTENCE    OF    I.OllD    COBIIAm''s    CONDEMNATION. 

Henry    Who  willeth  not  the  death  of  a  sinner,  but  rather  that  he  he  converted  f\nd 

^-       live  ;  ■  we  took  upon  us  to  con-ect  liim,  and  sought  all  other  ways   possible   to 

A  T)      bring  him  again  to  the  church's  unity,  declaring  unto  him  what  the  holy  and 

1413'     universal  church  of  Rome  hath  said,  holden,  determined,  and  taught,  in  that 

-7-  behalf.     And  tiiough  we  found  him  in  the  catholic  faith  far  wide^  and  so  stilf- 

wouidap-  nocked,  that  he  would  not  confess  his  error,  nor  purge  himself,  nor  yet  repent 
pear  cha-  him  thereof,  we  yet,  pitying  him  of  fatherly  compassion,  and  entirely  desiring 
ritable.  ^j^g  health  of  his  soul,  appointed  him  a  competent  time  of  deliberation,  to  see 
they  show  if  he  would  repent  and  seek  to  be  reformed  ;  bu^  since  that  time  we  have  found 
n.itthem-  him  worse  and  worse.  Considering,  therefore,  that  he  is  not  corrigible,  we 
^'^  ^^^'  are  driven  to  the  very  extremity  of  the  law,  and  with  great  heaviness  of  heart 
we  now  proceed  to  the  publication  of  the  sentence  definitive  against  him. 

Then  brought  he  forth  another  bill,^  containing  the  said  sentence, 
and  that  he  read  also,  in  his  beggarly  Latin.  "  Christi  nomine  in- 
vocato,  ipsumque  solum  prae  oculis  habentes.  Quia  per  acta 
inactitata,"  and  so  forth.  Which  I  have  also  translated  into  English, 
that  men  may  understand  it. 

The  definitive  Sentence  of  Lord  Cobham''s  Condemnation. 

Christ  we  take  unto  witness,  that  nothing  else  we  seek  in  this  our  whole  en- 
terprise, but  his  own  glory.     Forasmuch  as  we  have  found,  by  divers  acts  done, 
brought  forth,  and  exhibited,  by  sundry  evidences,  signs,  and  tokens,  and  also 
by  many  most  manifest  proofs,  the  said  sir  Jolin   Oldcastle,  knight,  and  lord 
Cobham,  not  only  to  be  an  evident  heretic  in  his  own  person,  but  also  a  mighty 
maintainer  of  other  heretics  against  the  faith  and  religion  of  tlie  holy  and  uni- 
versal church  of  Rome ;  namely  about  the  two  sacraments  (of  the  altar  and 
of  penance),   besides  the  pope's  power  and  pilgrimages;  and  that  he,  as  the 
A  colour    child  of  iniquity  and  darkness,  hath  so  hardened  his  heart,  that  he  will  in  no 
of  deceit,   case  attend  unto  the  voice  of  his  pastor  f  neither  will  he  be  allured  by  straight 
admonishments,  nor  yet  be  brought  in  by  favourable  words  :  the  worthiness  of 
the  cause  first  weighed  on  the  one  side,  and  his  unworthiness  again  considered 
on  the  other  side,  his  faults  also  aggravated  or  made  double  through  his  damn- 
able obstinacy  (we  being  loth  that  he  who  is  naught  should  be  worse,  and  so 
with  his  contagiousness  infect  the  multitude),  by  the  sage  counsel  and  assent  of 
the  very  discreet   fathers,    our  honourable  brethren,  and    lords  bishops  here 
present,  Richard  of  London,  Henry  of  Winchester,  and  Bennet  of  Bangor,  and 
of  other  great,  learned,  and  wise  men  here,  both  doctors  of  divinity,  and  of  the 
laws  canon  and  civil,  seculars  and  religious,  with  divers  other  expert  men 
assisting  us :  we  sententially  and  definitively,  by  this  present  writing,  judge, 
Christ  is    declare,  and  condemn*  the  said  sir  John  Oldcastle,  knight,  and  lord  Cobham, 
condemn-  fQj.  q  most  pernicious,  detestable  heretic,  convicted  upon  the  same,  and  refusing 
faithful     utterly  to  obey  the  church  again,  committing  him  here  from  henceforth  as  a 
members,  condemned  heretic,  to  the  secular  jurisdiction,  power,  and  judgment,  to  do 
him  thereupon    to  death.^     Furthermore,  we  excommunicate  and  denounce 

(1)  Ezek.  xviii.  and  xxxv.  (2)  Ex  magna  processu  Thomae  Arundeli. 

(3)  A  true  sheep  heareth  the  voice  of  a  true  pastor.  (4)   As  Caiaphas  did  Christ. 

(5)  "  Do  him  thereupon  to  death."  This  was  at  his  first  trial,  and  before  his  escape  from  the 
Tower.  This,  then,  is  all  we  require  to  refute  the  calumnies  which  have  been  heaped  upon  the  lord 
Cobham  by  Romish  writers,  and  to  prove  that  tlie  relif^ious  tyranny  of  the  papists,  and  not  his  own 
misconduct,  was  the  origin  of  those  proceedings  which  were  instituted  against  him.  Mr.  Charles 
Butler,  in  his  book  of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church,  confidently  inquires,  (Letter  xi.  p.  145),  "  Had 
not  his  practices  with  the  Lollards,  in  their  most  revolutionary  designs,  and  his  encouragement 
of  them  been  discovered?"  It  might  be  asked,  however,  If  "  rel)ellion,"  and  "  revolutionary 
designs,"  were  the  causes  which  made  lord  Cobham  odious  to  ("he  king  and  the  ecclesiastics, 
why  were  not  these  charges  brought  forward  at  his  first  trial :  and  why  tiid  the  whole  of  the  above 
e\amination  turn  upon  the  vain  doctrine  of  transubstantiation?  He  was  not  condemned  on 
this  occasion  for  conspiring  against  king  Henry,  but,  as  the  records  of  the  notaries,  and 
his  sentence  definitive  expressly  state,  "  for  refusing  to  obey  the  church ;"  the  question  of  his 
imputed  rebellion  is  not  even  agitated,  and  yet  he  is  condemned  to  death,  and  all  his  favourers 
formally  accursed.  Let  the  lord  Cobham  have  been,  subsequently,  one  of  the  most  revolutionary 
spirits  of  his  age,  let  him  eventually  liave  taken  arms  against  his  king,  still  the  truth  cannot  be 
evaded,  that,  primarily,  he  was  coiulemued  to  death  for  refusing  to  submit  to  the  church  of  Rome. 


THE    LOKI)    CORIIAm's    OONTSTANCY    IN    THE    TRUTH.  337 

accursed,  not  only  this  heretic  here  present,  hut  so  many  else  besides  as  shall    ifenry 
hereafter,  in   favour  of  his  error,  either   receive   him  or  defend  him,  counsel        ''• 
him,  or  help  him,  or  any  other  way  maintain  him,  as  very  fautors,  receivers,     .    i) 
defenders,  counsellors,  aiders,  and  niaiiitainers  of  condemned  heretics.  1413 

And  that  these  premises  may  be  the  better  known  by  all  faithful   christian  — 

men,'  we  commit  it  here  unto  your  charges,  and  give  you  straight  conunand- 
ment  thereupon  by  this  writing  also,   that  ye  cause  this  condemnation  and 
definitive  sentence  of  excommmiication  concerning  both  ibis  heretic  and  his 
fautors,  to  be  published  throughout  all  dioceses,  in  citie;-,  towns,  and  villages, 
by  your  curates  and  parish  priests,  at  such  times  as  tlicy  shall  have  most  re- 
course of  people.     And  see  that  it  be  done    after  this  sort:    As   the  people 
are  thus  gathered  devoutly  together,  let  the  curate  every  where  go  into  the 
pulpit,  and  there  open,  declare,  and  expound  this  excess,  in  the  mother-tongue, 
in  an  audible  and  intelligible  voice,  that  it  may  be  perceived  of  all  men :  and 
that  upon  the  fear  of  this  declaration  also  the  people  may  fall  from  their  evil 
o])inions  conceived  now,  of  late,  by  seditious  preachers.    Moreover  we  will,  that  Keep  tho 
after  we  have  delivered  unto  each  one  of  you  bishops,  who  are  here  present,  a  sepulchre 
copy  hereof,  that  ye  cause  the  same  to  be  written  out  again  into  divers  copies,  much,  yet 
and  to  be  sent  unto  the  other  bishops  and  prelates  of  our  whole  province,  that  Christ 
they  may  also  seethe  contents  thereof  solenmly  published  within  their  dioceses  )^-',J,',"*'^' 
and  cures.     Finally,  we  will  that  both   you  and  they  signify  again  unto  us,  omcc  left 
seriously  and  distinctly,  by  your  writings,  as   the  matter  is,  without  feigned  ""'li'tie 
colour,  in  every  point  performed,  the  day  whereon  ye  received  this  process,  the  1',^^  j'o'^' 
time  when  it  was  of  us  executed,  and  after  what  sort  it  was  done  in  every  con-  Anti- 
dition,  according  to  the  tenor  hereof,  that  we  may  know  it  to  be  justly  the  ^^i"'***- 
same.* 

A  copy  of  this  writing  Thomas  Arundel  the  archbishop  of  Canter- 
bury sent  afterwards  from  Maidstone,  the  tenth  day  of  October, 
witliin  tlic  same  year  of  our  Lord,  1413,  unto  Richard  Clifford  the 
bishop  of  London,  which  thus  beginneth :  '  Thomas,  permissione 
divina,"  &c.^ 

The  said   Richard  Clifford  sent  another   copy  thereof  enclosed  Richani 
within  his  own  letters,  unto  Robert  Maschal,  a  Carmelite  friar,  who 
was  then  bishop  of  Hereford  in  Wales,  -wTitten  from  Haddam,  the 
twenty-third  of  October  in  the  same  year,  the  beginning  whereof  is 
this :  "  Reverende  in  Christo  Pater,""  &c. 

This  Robert  Maschal  directed  another  co])y  thereof  from  London  uohert 
the  twenty-seventh  day  of  November  in  the  same  year,  enclosed  in 
his  own  commission  also,  unto  his  archdeacon  and  deans  in  Hereford 
and  Shrewsbury ;  and  this  is  thereof  the  beginning,  "  Venerabilibus  ex  utro- 
et  discretis  vu-is,"  &c.     In  like  manner  did  the  other  bishops  Avithin  emi)iaVi. 
their  dioceses. 

After  the  archbishop  had  thus  read  the  bill  of  his  condemnation, 
with  most  extremity,  before  the  whole  multitude,  the  lord  Cobham 
said  with  a  most  cheerful  countenance  :  "  Though  ye  judge  my  body, 
which  is  but  a  wretched  thing,  yet  am  I  certain  and  sure,  that  ye  can 
do  no  harm  to  my  soul,  no  more  than  could  Satan  unto  the  soul  of 
Job.  He  that  created  that,  will  of  his  infinite  mercy  and  promise 
save  it.  I  have,  therein,  no  manner  of  doubt.  And  as  concerning 
these  articles  before-rehearsed  I  will  stand  to  them  even  to  the  very 
death,  by  the  grace  of  my  eternal  God." 

And  therewith  he  turned  liim  unto  the  people,  casting  his  bands 

This  point  beini^  established,  the  cause  of  the  lord  Cobh.im  may  be  left  with  perfect  confidoneo  in 
the  hands  of  our  author. — Ed. 

(1)  How  spiritual  these  fathers  are. 

(2)  Wliat  care  is  here  to  hold  up  their  popery. 

(3)  Tho.  Waldeu.  in  fascicule  Zizaniorum  Wiclcvi. 

VOL,   III.  Z 


388  IHS    ADMONITION    TO    THE    I'EOPLE. 

Hf^'ry    abroad,  and  saying  with  a  very  loud  voice :  "  Good  christian  people, 

__il_  fur  God''s  love  be  v.ell  ware  of  these  men,  for  they  ■will  else  beguile 

A.D.    vou,  and  lead  you  blindling  into  hell  with  themselves.     For  Christ 

2j-l3^  saith  plainly  unto  you,  [Matt,  x.]  '  If  one  blind  man  leadeth  another, 

thev  are  like  both  to  fall  into  the  ditch.'' " 
He  pray-       Aftcr  tliis,  lic  fell  dowu  tlicrc  upon  his  knees,  and  thus  before  them 
ethforhis    jj  p^.^ycd  for  liis  cnemics,  holding  up  both  his  hands  and  his  eves 

enemies.    "        v      J  .'  /->i-r>  iiti  ^       ^  i> 

towards  heaven,  and  saymg,  "  Lord  God  Eternal !  1  beseech  thee,  oi 
thy  great  mercy  sake,  to  forgive  my  pursuers,  if  it  be  thy  blessed 
will."  And  then  he  was  delivered  to  sir  Robert  Morley,  and  so  led 
forth  again  to  the  Tower  of  London  ;  and  thus  there  was  an  end  of 
that  day's  work. 

While  the  lord  Cobham  was  thus  in  the  Tower,  he  sent  out  privily 
unto  his  friends ;  and  they,  at  his  request,  wrote  this  little  bill  here 
following,  causing  it  to  be  set  up  in  divers  quarters  of  London,  that 
the  people  should  not  believe  the  slanders  and  lies  that  his  enemies, 
the  bishop's  servants  and  priests,  had  made  on  him  abroad.  And 
thus  was  the  letter :' 

A  Testimonial  made  by  the  Lord  Cobham's  Friends. 

Forasmuch  as  sir  John  Oldcastle,  knight,  and  lord  Cobham,  is  untruly  con- 
victed and  imprisoned,   falsely  reported  and  slandered  among  the   common 
people  by  his  adversaries,  that  he  should  otherwise  both  think  and  speak  of  the 
sacraments  of  the  chmxh,  and  especially  of  the  blessed  sacrament  of  the  altar, 
than  was  written  in  the  confession  of  his  belief;  which  was  indented  and  taken 
to  the  clergj',  and  so  set  up  in  divers  open  places  of  the  city  of  London  :  known 
be  it  here  to  all  the  world,  that  he  never  since  varied  in  any  point  therefrom, 
To  stop     but  this  is  plainly  his  belief:  That  all  the  sacraments  of  the  church  be  profitable 
lying  lips,  and  expedient  also  to  all  them  that  shall  be  saved,  taking  them  after  the  intent 
saro/his   ^^^^^  Christ  and  his  true  church  have  ordained.     Furthermore  he  believeth, 
i)elief.       That  the  blessed  sacrament  of  the  altar  is  verily  and  truly  Christ's  body  in  form 
of  bread.^ 

The  After  this,  the  bishops  and  priests  were  in  great  discredit  both  with 

hatld       *'^6  nobility  and  commons  ;  partly,  for  that  they  had  so  cruelly  handled 

oft'ie      the  good  lord  Cobham,  and  partly  again,  because  his  opinion  (as  they 

peope.     ^jjQ^^gjj|.  g^^  ^Ijjji  time)  was  perfect  concerning  the  sacrament.     The 

prelates  feared  this  to  grow  to  further  inconvenience  towards  them  both 

ways,  wherefore  they  drew  their  heads  together,  and  at  last  consented  to 

use  another  practice  somewhat  contrary  to  that  they  had  done  before. 

A  prac-    They  caused  it  by  and  by  to  be  blown  abroad  by  their  feed  servan.ts, 

feise°^      friends,  and  babbling  sir  Johns,='  that  the  said  lord  Cobham  was  become 

priests,     a  good  man,  and  had  lowly  submitted  himself  in  all  things  unto  holy 

church,  utterly  changing  his  opinion  concerning  the  sacrament.    And 

thereupon,  they  counterfeited  an  abjuration  in  his  name,  that  the 

people  should  take  no  hold  of  his  opinion  by  any  thing  they  had 

These  are  heard  of  him  before,  and  so  to  stand  the  more  in  awe  of  them,  con- 

fe«™°"   sidering  him  so  great  a  man,  and  by  them  subdued. 

This  is  the  abjuration,  say  they,  of  sir  John  Oldcastle,  knight, 
sometime  the  lord  Cobham. 

(1)  Ex  vetusto  exemplari  Londiiiensium. 

(2)  In  form  of  bread,  but  not  without  bread  he  meaneth. 

(3)  A  name  of  derision  for  the  lower  orders  of  the  popish  clergy. — Ed. 


A    COUNTEUFETT    ADJUTl  ATTON    OF    LOUD    C'OB'ir.\:^I .  330 

An  Abjuration  counterfeited  by  the  Bishops.^  ^- 

A.  I). 

In  Dei  nomine,  Amen.    I  John  Oldcastle  denounced,  detected  and  convicted     i4];j. 

of,  and  npon,  divers  articles  savouring  both   of  licresy  and  error,  before  the  

reverend  fatlu'r  in  Christ  and  my  good  lord,  'i'lionias,  by  tlio  permission  of  God, 

lord  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  and  my  lawfid  and  rightful  judge  in  that  behalf, 

expressly  grant  and  confess :  That  as  concerning  thf  estate  and  power  of  the  most 

holy  father  the  pope  of  Rome,  of  his  archbishops,  his  bishops,  and  his  other  Mark 

prelates,  the  degrees  of  the  church,  and  the  holy  sacraments  of  the  same,  espe-  '^^"'f 

cially  of  the  sacraments  of  the  altar,  of  penance,  and  other  observances  besides  this  grace 

of  our  mother,  holy  churcli,  as  pilgrimages  and  pardons ;  I  affirm,  I  say,  before  cometh. 

the  said  reverend  fatlier  archbishop,  and  elsewhere,  that  I,  being  evil-seduced  Kne 

by  divers  seditious  preachers,  liave  grievously  erred,  and  heretically  persisted,  "'',""^"1  • ,  1 

blasphemously  answered,  and  obstinately  rebelled ;  and  therefore  I  am,  by  the  rtroV.'''  ' 

said  reverend  father,  before  the  reverend  fathers  in  Christ  also,  the  bishops  of 

London,  Winchester,  and  Bangor,  lawfidly  condenmed  for  a  heretic. 

Yet  nevertheless,  I  now,  remembering  myself,  and  coveting  by  this  mean  to  Alas ! 
avoid  that  temncn-al   T)ain  which  1  am  worthy  to  sufier  as  a  lieretic,  at  the  ^"'"^ 
assignation  of  my  most  excellent  christian  prince  and  liege  lord,  king  Henry  V.,  tiiou'art 
now,  by  the  grace  of  God,  most  worthy  king  both  of  England  and  of  France ;  slander- 
minding  also  to  prefer  the  wholesome  determination,  sentence,  and  doctrine  of  *"  ' 
the  holy  universal  church  of  Rome,  before  the  unwholesome  opinions  of  myself,  i 

my  teachers,  and  my  followers,  I  freely,  willingly,  delibei'ately,  and  thoroughly 
confess,  grant,  and  affirm,  that  the  most  holy  fathers  in  Christ,  St.  Peter  the  \ 

apostle,  and  his  snccessors,  bishops  of  Rome,  especially  now  at  this  time  my 
most  blessed  lord,  pope  John,  by  the  permission  of  God,  the  three  and  twentieth 
pope  of  that  name,  who  now  holdeth  Peter's  seat  (and  each  of  them  in  their 
succession),  hath  full  strength  and  power  to  be  Christ's  near  on  earth,  and  the 
head  of  tlie  church  militant :  and  that  by  the  strength  of  his  office  (what, 
though  he  be  a  great  sinner,  and  afore-known  of  God  to  be  damned  ?)  he  hath 
full  authority  and  jjower  to  ride  and  govern,  bind  and  loose,  save  and  destroy, 
accurse  and  assoil,  all  other  christian  men. 

And  agreeably  still  unto  this  I  confess,  grant,  and  affirm,  all  other  archbishops, 
bishops,  and  prelates  in  their  provinces,  dioceses,  and  parishes,  appointed  by 
the  said  pope  of  Rome  to  assist  him  in  his  doings  or  business,  by  his  decrees, 
canons,  or  virtue  of  his  office,  to  have  had  in  times  past,  to  have  now  at  this 
time,  and  that  they  ought  to  have  in  time  to  come,  authority  and  power  to  rule  ' 

and  govern,  bind  and  loose,  accurse  and  assoil,  the  subjects  or  people  of  their  j 

aforesaid  provinces,  dioceses,  and  parishes,  and  that  their  said  subjects  or  people 
ought,  of  right,  in  all  things  to  obey  them.      Furthermore,  I  confess,  grant,  Hoiv  j 

ami  affirm,  that  the  said  spiritual  fathers,  as  our  most  holy  father  the  pope,  f,J°J'L^*' 
archbishops,  bishops,  and  prelates,  have  had,  have  now,  and  ought  to  have  the  Scrip-  ^ 

hereafter,  authority  and  power  for  the  estate,  order,  and  governance  of  their  tures?  i 

subjects  or  people,  to  make  laws,  decrees,  statutes,  and  constitutions,  yea,  and  | 

to  publish,  command,  and  compel  their  said  subjects  and  people  to  the  observa- 
tion of  them. 

Moreover,  1  confess,  grant,  and  affinn,  that  all  these  aforesaid  laws,  decrees,  No  Scrip- 
statutes,  and  constitutions,  made,  published,  and  commanded,  according  to  the  ti'^e  have 
form  of  spiritual  law,  all  christian  people,  and  every  man  in  himself  is  straightly  ^hX." 
bound  to  observe,  and  meekly  to  obej',  according  to  the  diversity  of  the  afore- 
said powers,  as  the  laws,  statutes,  canons,  and  constitutions  of  our  most  holy 
father  the  pope,  incoi-porated  in  his  decrees,  decretals,  Clementines,  codes,  charts, 
rescripts,  sextiles,  and  extravagants  over  all  the  world;  and  as  the  provincial  1 

statutes  of  archbishops  in  their  provinces,  the  synodal  acts  of  bishops  in  their 
dioceses,  and  the  commendable  rides  and  customs  of  prelates  in  their  colleges, 
and  curates  in  their  parishes,  all  christian  people  are  both  bound  to  observe, 
and  also  most  meekly  to  obey.     Over  and  besides  all  this,  I,  John  Oldcastle,  intole- 
utterly  forsaking  and  renouncing  all  the   aforesaid   en-oi-s  and  heresies,  and  "''•'-'  i 

all  other  en-ors  and  heresies  like  unto  them,  lay  my  hand  here  upon  this  book  J|,'j.y"    ^  I 

or  holy  evangely  of  God,  and  swear,  that  I  shall  never  more  from  henceforth  j 

held  these  aforesaid  heresies  ror  yet  any  other  like  unto  thein  wittingly.  Neither 

(1)  WaUlen.  in  fasciculo  Zizaiiiorum  Wiclevi. 


340  THE    CLAMOUR    AN!)    PRACTU'ES    OF    THE    PAPISTS. 

irfTiry    shall  I  give  counsel,  aid,  help,  or  favour  at  any  time,  to  them  that  shall  hold, 
^'-       teach,  affivni,  or  maintain  the  same,  as  God  shall  help  me,i  and  these  holy 
,    j^      evangelists. 

'^',}.'        And  I  shall  from  henceforth  faithfully  obey,  and  inviolably  observe,^  all  the 
^^'    holy  laws,  statutes,  canons,  and  constitutions,  of  all  the  popes  of  Rome,  arch- 
The  bisliops,  bishops,  and  prelates,  which  are  contained  and  determined  in  their 

r"iT  '^"f  ^  lioly  decrees,  decretals,  Clementines,   codes,   charts,   rescripts,  sextilcs,   sums- 
papists,     papal  extravagants,  statutes  provdncial,  acts  synodal,  and  other  ordinary  regulcs 
Warkthis  and  customs  constituted  by  them,  or  that  shall  chance  hereafter  directly  to  be 
liandUng.  (j^^fp^mined  or  made.    To  these  and  all  such  other  will  I  myself,  with  all  power 
This         possible  apply.     Besides  all  this,  the  penance  which  it  shall  please  my  said 
charge      reverend  father  the  lord  archbishop  of  Canterbury  hereafter  to  enjoin  me  for 
mm-'  '^^  "ly  s'"Sj  I  ^^^^^  meekly  obey  and  faithfully  fulfil.     Finally,  all  my  seducers  and 
iiionly.      false  teachers,  and  all  others  besides,  whom  I  shall  hereafter  know  suspected 
of  heresy  or  errors,  I  shall  effectually  present,  or  cause  to  be  presented,  unto 
my  said  reverend  father  lord  archbishop,  or  to  them  who  have  his  authority,  so 
soon  as  I  can  conveniently  do  it,  and  see  that  they  be  corrected  to  my  utter- 
most power. 

This  abjuration  never  came  to  the  hands  of  the  lord  Cobham, 
neither  was  it  compiled  by  them  for  that  purpose,  but  only  therewith 
to  l>lear  the  eyes  of  the  unlearned  multitude  for  a  time  ;  after  which 
like  fetch  and  subtle  practice  was  also  devised  the  recantation  of  the 
archbishop  Thomas  Cranmer,  to  stop  for  a  time  the  people^s  mouths  : 
which  subtlety  in  like  manner  was  also  practised  with  the  false 
recantation  of  the  bishop  Hooper,  and  divers  other,  as  in  their  places 
hereafter,  Christ  granting-,  shall  be  showed. 

*  And'  when  the  clergy  perceived  that  policy  would  not  help, 
but  made  more  and  more  against  them,  then  sought  they  out  another 
false  practice  :  they  went  unto  the  king  with  a  most  grievous  com- 
plaint, like  as  they  did  afore,  in  his  father's  time,  that*  in  every 
quarter  of  tl*  realm,  by  reason  of  Wickliffs  opinions,  and  the  said 
lord  Cobham,  were  wonderful  contentions,  rumours,  tumults,  uproars, 
confederations,  dissensions,    divisions,   differences,   discords,  harms, 
slanders,    schisms,    sects,   seditions,    perturbations,  perils,    imkwtid 
assemblies,  variances,  strifes,  fightings,  rebellious  rufflings,  and.  daily 
Thecia-   iusurrectious.     The  church,  they  said,  was  hated.     The  diocesans 
"he^pa"     were  not  obeyed.     The  ordinaries  were  not  regarded.     The  spiritual 
pists.       officers,  as   suffragans,    archdeacons,    chancellors,   doctors,    commis- 
saries,  officials,   deans,  lawyers,   scribes,  and  somners,   were   every 
where  despised.    The  laws  and  liberties  of  holy  church  were  trodden 
under  foot.     The  christian  faith  was  ruinously  decayed.     God's  ser- 
vice was  laughed  to  scorn.      The  spiritual  jurisdiction,  authority, 
honour,  power,  policy,  laws,  rites,  ceremonies,  curses,  keys,  censures, 
and  canonical  sanctions  of  the  church,  were  had  in  utter  contempt, 
so  that  all,  in  a  manner,  was  come  to  naught, 
always         ^^^  ^^  causc  of  this  was,  that  the  heretics  and  lollards  of  Wick- 
eth'*'''"'  ^'^'^  opinion,  were  suffered  to  preach  abroad  so  boldly,  to  gather 
them.      conventicles  unto  them,  to  keep  schools  in  men's  houses,  to  make 

(1)  Never  made  he  such  an  oath.  (2)  And  this  maintain  they  still. 

(3)  The  next  few  paragraphs  are  from  the  Edition  1563,  p.274.  Why  Foxe  should  have  omitted  them 
in  succeeding  editions  does  not  readily  appear.  Br.  Wordsworth,  in  his  Ecclesiastical  Biograpliy, 
vol.  i.  p.  269,  quotes  them  from  "Bales  Brefe  Chronycle,"  observing  that  "the  history  is  not 
equally  full  or  well  told  in  Fox."  This  observation  arises  from  that  learned  writer  not  having  con- 
sulted the  first  edition  of  the  Acts  ami  Monuments,  as  is  evident  by  the  numerous  omissions  which 
occur  in  his  Life  of  Jolin  Wicklifl'e.  Compare  Ecc.  Biog.  vol.  i.  p.  15,  with  this  edition  of  the  Acts 
and  Monuments,  vol.  ii.  p.  795 — 797,  and  elsewhere. — Ed. 

(4)  Ex  Staluo  Parli:iuicuti  Regis  Henrici  V. 


A    CRUEL     ACT    OF    TIIK     KIMG.  341 

books,   compile   treatises,  aiul  write  l)alla(ls,   to   tcacli  privately  in    Jienry 
angles  and  corners,  as  in  woods,  fields,  meadows,  pastures,  groves, 


and  in  caves  of  the  gi-ound.  A.  D. 

This  would  be,  said  they,  a  destruction  to  the  commonwealth,  a    ^'^^'^' 
subversion  to  the  land,  and  an  utter  decay  of  the  king\s  estate  royal,  An  ow 

•  p  1  ■  1  i    •         •  »      1      1  •  1     •  1  •  practice 

IT  remedy  Avere  not  sought  m  tune.  And  tins  was  then-  policy,  to  of  theirs 
cou])le  the  king's  authority  with  what  they  had  done  in  their  former  ^^' "^''"''" 
council,  of  cratt,  and  so  to  make  it,  thereby,  the  stronger.  For  they 
perceived  themselves  very  far  too  weak  else,  to  follow  against  their 
enemies,  what  they  had  so  largely  enterprizcd.  Upon  this  complaint, 
the  king  immediately  called  a  parliament  at  Leicester.  It  might 
not,  in  those  days,  be  holdcn  at  Westminster,  for  the  great  fiivour 
that  the  lord  Cobham  had,  both  in  L(mdon  and  about  the  city. 
Yet  were  they  deceived  ;  what  they  doubted  most,  lighted  the 
soonest  upon  them. 

A  bill  was  put  in  there  again  by  the  commons,  against  their  con- 
tinual wasting  of  the  teniporalties,'  like  as  it  had  been  twice  before, 
by  procurement  of  the  said  lord  Cobham,  both  in  the  days  of  king 
Richard  II.,  a.  d.  13()5,"^  and  also  of  king  Henry  IV.,  a.  d.  1410. 
Whereupon  was  gi-OAvn  all  this  malice  afore  specified ;  but  this  Avas 
then  Avorkmanly  defeated  by  another  proper  practice  of  theirs  :  they 
put   the  king  in  remembrance  to   claim  his  right  in  France,  and 
granted  him  thereunto  a  disme,'  Avith  other  great  subsidy  of  money. 
Thus  Avere  Christ's  people  betrayed  every  Avay,  and  their  lives  bought 
and  sold  by  these  most  cruel  thieves.     For,  in  the  said  parliament,  a  cmei 
the  king  made  this  most  blasphemous  and  cruel  act,  to  be  as  a  law  ^-i,"' 
for  ever :  That  Avhatsoever  they  Avere  that  should  read  the  Scriptures  ^^'"'y  ^■ 
in  the  mother  tongue  (Avhich  Avas  then  called  Wickliff's  learning),  gion. 
they  should  forfeit  land,  cattle,  body,  life,  and  goods,  from  their  heirs 
for  ever,  and  so  be  condemned  for  heretics  to  God,  enemies  to  the 
croAvu,  and  most  arrant  traitors  to  the  land."* 

Besides  this,  it  Avas  enacted,  That  never  a  sanctuary,  nor  privileged  ciuist 
ground  Avithin  the  realm,   should  hold  them,  though  they  Avere  still  favour'^^^ 
permitted  both  to  thieves  and  murderers.     And  if,  in  any  case  thev  '!'f" 

*■  '  J  tj    tiiiev'cs* 

Avould  not  give  over,  or  Avere,  after  their  pardon,  relapsed,  they  should 
suffer  death  in  tAvo  manner  of  kinds  :  that  is  ;  they  should  first  be 
hanged  for  treason  against  the  king,  and  then  be  bm-ned  for  heresy  Never 
against  God  :  and  yet  neither  of  them  committed.     The  beginning  J,^""' 
of  that  act  is  this  :  "  Pro  eo  quod  magni  rumores,"  &c.     Anon  after,  cr"^^^'- 
Avas  it  proclaimed  throughout  the  realm,  and  then  had  the  bishops, 
j)riests,  monks,  and  friars,  a  Avorld  somcAvhat  to  their  minds. 

For  then  Avcre  many  taken  in  divers  cpiartcrs,  and  suffered  most 
cruel  death.  And  many  fled  out  of  the  land  into  Germany,  Bohemia, 
France,  Spain,  Portugal,  and  into  the  Avelds'  of  Scotland,  Wales,  and 
Ireland  ;  Avorking  there  many  marvels  against  their  false  kingdom  a 
too  long  to  Avrite.*  In  the  Christmas  folloAving  were  sir  Roger  {)"; 
Acton,  knight,  niaster  .lohn  BroAvn.  esquire,  sir  John  Beverly,  a  j!^"*-''''"'' 
learned  preacher,  and  divers  others,  attached,  for  quarrelling  Avith  tjion. 

(1)  Robertus  Fabiaiius,  in  Chronitis.     AValdcnus  in  fasciculo. 

(2)  Fabianus  in  Clironieis.  (;i)  "  Disme,"  a  tenth. — Ed. 

(4)  AValdenus  ad  Martmiini  papam,  cap.  '16,  et  in  Synod.  Polydorus. 

(5)  "  Weld,"  or  "  would,"  (Saxon)  a  forest. — Kd. 
m)  AValdcnus  ad  Martiuuui  pa^jam.  cap.  20.     De  sacramcutalibus,  ca^i  53. 


sore 
iTsecu 
i)n  in 


342  A    SORE    I'ERSECUTION    IN    EKGLAND    EOll    RELIGION. 

Hniry   ccitain  pricsts,  and  eo  imprisoned ;  for  all  men  at  tliaf  time  could 

: not  patiently  suffer  their  blasphemous  brags.^ 

A.  D.  The  complaint  was  made  unto  the  king  of  them,  that  they  had 
^'^^•^^  made  a  great  assembly  in  St.  Giles's  field  at  London,  pur^Dosing  the 
destruction  of  the  land,  and  the  subversion  of  the  common-wealth. 
As  the  king  was  thus  informed,  he  erected  a  banner,  saith  Walden,^ 
with  a  cross  thereupon  ;  as  the  pope  doth  commonly  by  his  legates, 
when  he  pretcndeth  to  war  against  the  Turks,  and,  with  a  great 
number  of  men,  entered  the  same  field,  where  he  found  no  such  com- 
pany. Yet  was  the  complaint  judged  true,  because  the  bishops  had 
spoken  it  at  the  information  of  their  priests.  All  this  hath  Thomas 
Walden  in  divers  of  his  works,  who  ^vas,  at  the  same  time,  a  white, 
or  Carmelite  fi'iar,  and  the  king's  confessor ;  and  partly  it  is  touched, 
both  by  Robert  Fabian,  and  by  Polidorc  Virgil,  in  their  English 
Chronicles,  but  not  in  all  points  rightly,  as  is  to  be  seen  in  our 
stories  afore  touched.* 

For  con-       And  thus  much  hitherto  concerning  the  first  trouble  of  sir  John 
of  this      Oldcastle,  lord  Cobham,  with  all  the  circumstances  of  the  true  time, 
iiibtoiy.    p]jj(_.g^  occasion,  causes,  and  order  belonging  to  the  same,  wherein  I 
trust  I  have  sufficiently  satisfied  all  the  parts,  requisite  to  a  faithful 
history,  without  corruption.     For  the  confirmation  whereof,  to  the 
intent  the  mind  also  of  the  wrangling  caviller  may  be  satisfied,  and 
to  stop  the  mouth  of  the  adversary,  which  I  see  in  all  places  to  be 
ready  to  bark,  I  have,  therefore,   of  purpose  annexed  withal,  my 
ground  and  foundation,  taken  out  of  the  archives  and  registers  of  the 
archbishop  of  Canterbury  :^  whereby  may  appear  the  manifest  error 
Hall  de-    both  of  Polydore,  and  of  Edward  Hall,  who,  being  deceived  in  the 
ceived.     riglit  distinction  of  the  times,  assign  this  citation  and  examination  of 
the  lord  Cobham  to  be  after  the  council  of  Constance,   whereas 
Thomas  Arundel,  archbishop  of  Canterbmy,  at  the  council  of  Con- 
stance was  not  alive.     The  copy  and  testimony  of  his  own  letter 
shall  declare  the  same,  being  written  and   sent  to  the  bishop  of 
London  in  form  as  followeth . 

Copy  of  the  Epistle  of  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  written  to 
the  Bishop  of  London,  whereon  depcndeth  the  ground  and  cer- 
tainty of  this  aforesaid  History  of  the  Lord  Cobham  above 
premised. 

To  the  reverend  father  in'  Christ,  and  lord,  the  lord  Robert,  by  the  grace  of 
God,  bishop  of  Hereford,  Richard,  by  the  permission  of  God,  bishop  of  London, 
health  and  continual  increase  of  sincere  love :  We  have  of  late  received  the 
letters  of  the  reverend  father  in  Christ,  and  lord,  the  lord  Thomas,  by  the  grace 
of  God  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  primate  of  all  England,  and  legate  of  the 
fipostohc  see.  To  our  reverend  brother  the  lord  Richard  bishop  of  London, 
health  and  brotherly  love  in  the  Lord.  It  was  lately  concluded  before  us,  in 
the  convocation  of  prelates  and  clergy  of  our  province  of  Canterbury  last  cele- 
brated in  our  church  of  St.  Paul,  intreating  amongst  otlier  things  with  the  said 
prelates  and  clergy  upon  the  union  and  reformation  of  the  chmxh  of  England, 
by  us  and  the  said  prelates  and  clergy ;  that  it  was  almost  impossible  to  amend 
the  whole  of  our  Lord's  coat  which  was  without  seam,  vinless,  first  of  all, 

(1)  Walden,  Fabian,  John  Major,  Polidore. 

(2)  Waldenus  ad  Martiiuini  et  in  prolcgo  de  saeramentis. 

(3)  Ex  F-rislola  Thoni.  Aiund.  ad  Rich.  Lend. 


THE    TUOUBLES    A\D    PERSECUTION    OF    I.OIIU    COBHAM 


343 


certain  nobles  of  the  realm,  who  are  authors,  favourers,  protectors,  clefondors,     n,my 
and  receivers  of  these  heretics  called  LoUurds,  were  sharply  rebuked,  and,  if        '  • 


need  were,  by  the  censiu-es  of  the  church  and  the  help  of  tlie  secular  power,  f^  ^ 
they  be  revoked  from  their  errors.  And  afterwards,  having  made  diligent  j^j.,_ 
inquisition  in  the  convocation  amongst  the  proctors  of  the  clergy  and  others 


who  were  there  in  great  number  out  of  every  diocese  of  our  province,  it  was  j^j^'Jj^'j'^'j 
found  out  amongst  others,  that  sir  John  Oldcastle,  knight,  was,  and  is,  the  prin-  rifrht  ne- 
oipal  receiver,  fovourer,  protector,  and  defender  of  them ;  and  that,  especially  =^**"y 
in  the   dioceses  of  London,  Rochester,  and  Hereford,  he  had  sent  the  said  j^^j  fl^^_ 
Lollards  to  preach,  not  being  licensed  by  the  ordinaries  and  bishops  of  the  ham 
dioceses  or  places,  contrary  to  the  provincial  constitutions  in  th.-it  behalf  made,  ^!,'°^^'^^yf 
and  hath  been  present  at  their  wicked  sermons,   grievously  punishing  with  ofthu 
threatenings,  terrors,  and  the  power  of  the  secular  sword,  such  as  did  withstand  way,  or 
him :  alleging  and  ailirming  amongst  others,  that  we  and  our  fellow-brethren,  poJsj'|,'i'e 
suUragans  of  our  provinces,  had  not,  neither  have,  any  power  to  make  any  such  for  papis- 
constitutions  :  also  he  hath  holden  and  doth  hold  opinion,  and  teach,  as  touching^  iLrtsii 
the  sacraments  of  the  altar,  of  penance,  of  pilgi-image,  of  the  worshipping  of 
saints,  and  of  the  keys,  contrary  to  that  which  the  universal  church  of  Rome 
doth  teach  and  affirm. 

Wherefore,  on  the  behalf  of  the  said  prelates  and  clergy,  we  were  then  re- 
quired that  we  would  vouchsafe  to  proceed  figainst  the  said  sir  John  Oldcastle 
upon  the  premises.  Notwithstanding  for  the  reverence  of  our  lord  the  king,  in  ^'.^'^,"|'" 
whose  favour  the  said  sir  John  at  that  present  was,  and  no  less  also  for  honour  j,,  f^vaur 
of  his  knighthood,  we,  with  our  fellow-brethren,  and  suffragans  then  present,  witii  the 
with  a  great  part  of  the  clergy  of  our  pi-ovince,  coming  personally  before  the  ^'"S- 
presence  of  our  lord  the  king,  being  then  at  his  manor  of  Kennington,  put  up 
against  the  said  sir  John  a  complaint,  and  partly  reciting  the  defaults  of  the  said 
sir  John  ;  but  at  the  request  of  our  lord  the  king,  we,  desiring  to  reduce  the  said 
sir  John  to  the  unity  of  the  church  without  any  reproach,  deferred  all  the  execu- 
tion of  the  premises  for  a  great  time.  But  at  last,  forasmuch  as  our  said  lord  the 
king,  after  his  great  travails  taken  about  the  conversion  of  him,  did  nothing  at 
all  profit,  as  our  said  lord  the  king  vouchsafed  to  certify  us  both  by  word  and 
writing,  we  immediately  decreed  to  call  forth  the  said  sir  John  personally  to 
answer  before  us  at  a  certain  time  already  passed,  in  and  upon  the  premises,  and 
sent  our  messengers  ivith  these  our  letters  of  citation  to  the  said  sn-  John,  then 
being  at  his  castle  at  Cowling  :  unto  the  which  messenger  we  gave  command- 
ment, that  he  should  in  no  case  go  into  the  castle,  except  he  were  licensed  ;  but 
by  the  mean  of  one  John  Butler,  porter  of  the  king's  chamber,  he  should  require 
the  said  sir  John,  that  he  would  either  license  the  said  messenger  to  come  into 
the  castle,  or  that  he  would  cite  him,  or  at  least,  that  he  would  suffer  himself  to 
be  cited  Avithout  his  castle.  The  which  sir  John  openly  answered  unto  tiie  said 
John  Butler,  declaring  the  premises  unto  him  on  the  behalf  of  our  lord  the  king ; 
that  he  would  by  no  means  be  cited,  neither  in  any  case  suffer  his  citation.  Then 
we,  being  certified  of  the  premises,  hiwfully  proceeded  further. 

First,  having  faithful  report  made  unto  us,  that  he  could  not  be  apprehended 
by  personal  citation,  we  decreed  to  cite  him  by  an  edict,  to  be  openly  set  up  in 
the  porches  of  the  cathedral  church  of  Rochester  next  unto  him,  little  more  than 
three  Englisli  nriles  distant  from  the  said  castle  of  Cowling.     As  we  had  thus 
caused  him  to  be  cited,  and  our  edict  aforesaid  to  be  publicly  and  openly  set 
iqjon  the  porclies  of  the  said  church,  that  he  should  personally  appear  before  us 
the  eleventh  day  of  September  last  past,  to  answer  unto  the  premises,  and  cer- 
tain other  tilings  concerning  heresy  :  which  day  being  come,  we,  sitting  in  the 
tribunal  seat  in  our  great  chapel  within  the  castle  of  Leedes  of  our  diocese,  which 
we  then  inhabited,  and  where  we  then  kept  residence  with  our  court,  and  hav- 
ing taken  an  oath,  which  is  requisite  in  the  premises,  and  the  information  by  us 
heard  and  received,  as  the  connnon  report  goeth,  in  the  parts  where  tlie  said  sir 
Jolm  dwelleth  (fortifying  himself  in  his  said  castle),  defending  his  opinions  mani- 
foldly, contenming  the  keys  of  the   el\ureh  and  the  archbishop's  power ;  we  T'le  keys 
therefore  caused  tlie  said  sir  Jolin  Oldcastle,  cited  as  is  aforesaid,  to  be  openly,  '^^.x^l^^\^ 
with  a  loud  voice,  called  by  the  crier ;  and  so  being  called,  long  looked  for,  and  fajsi-iy 
by  no  means  appearing,  we  judged  him,  as  he  was  no  less  worthy,  obstinate,  wrested. 
and  for  punishment  of  his  said  obstinacy  we  did  then  and  there  excommunicate 
him.  And,  forasmuch  as  by  the  order  of  the  premises,  and  other  evident  tokens 


su 


THE    TROURLES    AXU    rEUSECUTIOX    OF    LORD    COBIIAM. 


Henry 
V. 

A.D. 
1413. 

j'he  lord 

t'obham 

excoiii- 

muni- 

caled. 


Lord  Cob- 
liam  cast 
Into  the 
Tower. 
The  tears 
of  the 
crocodile! 


Popish 
absolu- 
tion neg- 
lected. 


of  his  (loiiig.s,  we  understand  tliat  the  said  sir  John,  for  the  defence  of  his  error, 
dotii  fortify  himself,  as  is  aforesaid,  against  the  keys  of  the  church,  by  pretence 
■  wliereof  a  vehement  suspicion  of  heresy  and  schism  riseth  against  him ;  we 
liave  decreed,  if  lie  may  be  apprehended,  again  personally  to  cite  him,  or  else, 
as  before,  by  an  edict,  that  he  shovdd  appear  before  us  the  Saturday  next  after 
the  feast  of  St.  Matthew  the  apostle  and  evangelist  next  coming,  to  show  some 
reasonable  cause,  if  he  can,  why  we  shoidd  not  proceed  against  him,  to  more 
grievous  punishment,  as  an  open  heretic,  scliismatic,  and  open  enemy  of  the 
universal  church,  and  personally  to  declare  why  he  should  not  be  pronounced 
such  a  one,  or  that  the  aid  of  the  secular  power  should  not  be  solemnly  required 
against  him ;  and  further  to  answer,  do,  and  receive  as  touching  the  premises, 
whatsoever  justice  shall  require.  Which  time  being  come,  that  is  to  say,  the 
Saturday  next  after  the  feast  of  St.  Matthev/,  being  the  twenty-fourth  day  of 
September,  sir  Robert  Morley,  knight,  lieutenant  of  the  Tower  of  London,  ap- 
peared personally  before  us,  sitting  in  the  chapter-house  of  the  church  of  St. 
Paul  at  London,  with  our  reverend  fellow-brethren  and  lords,  Richard  by  the 
grace  of  God  bishop  of  London,  and  Henry  bishop  of  Winchester,  and  brought 
with  him  sir  John  Oldcastle,  knight,  and  set  him  before  us ;  for  a  little  before, 
he  was  taken  by  the  king's  servants,  and  cast  into  the  Tower  :  unto  which  sir 
John  Oldcastle,  so  personally  present,  we  rehearsed  all  the  order  of  the  process, 
as  it  is  contained  in  the  acts  of  the  day  before  passed,  with  good  and  modest 
words  and  gentle  means ;  that  is  to  say,  how  he,  the  said  sir  John,  was  detected 
and  accused  in  the  convocation  of  the  prelates  and  clergy  of  oui-  said  province, 
as  is  aforesaid,  upon  the  articles  before  rehearsed,  and  how  he  was  cited,  and, 
for  his  contumacy,  excommunicated :  and  when  we  were  come  to  that  point, 
we  offered  ourselves  ready  to  absolve  him.  Notvvithstanding,  the  said  sir  John, 
not  regarding  our  offer,  said,  that  he  would  willuigly  rehearse  before  us,  and 
my  said  fellow-brethren,  the  faith  which  he  held  and  affirmed.  So  he,  having 
his  desire,  and  obtaining  license,  took  out  of  his  bosom  a  certain  schedule  in- 
dented, and  there  openly  read  the  contents  of  the  same,  and  delivered  the  same 
schedide  unto  us,  and  the  schedule  of  the  articles  whereupon  he  was  examined, 
which  was  in  form  following : — 


The  sa- 
crament 

of  the 
altar. 


Of  pen- 


Of 

iniatrcs. 


The  Catholic  Faith  and  Confession  of  the  Lord  Cobham,  a  Copy  of 
which  accompanied  the  preceding  Letter  to  the  Bishop  of  London. 

I,  John  Oldcastle,  knight,  lord  of  Cobham,  desire  to  make  manifest  unto  all 
Christians,  and  God  to  be  taken  to  witness,  that  I  never  thought  otherwise,  or 
woidd  think  otherwise,  by  Gof"'-:  help,  than  with  a  steadfast  and  undoubted  faith 
to  embrace  all  those  his  saci  iLiCnts  which  he  had  instituted  for  the  use  of  his 
church. 

Furthermore,  that  I  may  the  more  plainly  declare  my  mind  in  these  four 
points  of  my  faith:  first  of  all,  I  believe  the  sacrament  of  the  altar  to  be  the 
body  of  Christ  under  the  form  of  bread.  The  very  same  body  which  was  born 
of  his  mother  Mary,  crucified  for  us,  dead,  and  buried,  rose  again  the  third  day, 
sittetli  on  the  right  hand  of  his  immortal  P'ather,  now  being  a  triumphant  par- 
taker with  Him  of  his  eternal  glory. 

Then  as  touching  the  sacrament  of  penance,  this  is  my  belief:  That  I  do  think 
the  correction  of  a  sinful  life  to  be  most  necessary  for  all  such  as  desire  to  be 
saved,  and  that  they  ought  to  take  upon  them  such  repentance  of  their  former 
life,  by  true  confession,  unfeigned  contrition,  and  lawfid  satisfaction,  as  the  word 
of  God  doth  prescribe  unto  us;  otherwise  there  will  be  no  hope  of  salvation. 

Thirdly,  as  touching  images,  this  is  my  opinion  :  That  I  do  judge  them  no 
point  of  faith,  but  brought  into  the  world,  after  the  faith  of  Christ,  by  the  suffer- 
ance of  the  church,  and  so  grown  in  use,  that  they  might  serve  for  a  calendar 
for  the  lay-people  and  ignorant ;  by  the  beholding  whereof  they  might  the  better 
call  to  remembrance  the  godly  examples  and  martyrdom  of  Christ  and  other 
holy  men  :  but  if  any  man  do  otherwise  abuse  this  representation,  and  give  the 
reverence  unto  those  ir.iages  v/hich  is  due  unto  the  holy  men  whom  they  repre- 
sent, or  rather  imto  Hiuto  v.liom  the  holy  men  themselves  owe  all  their  honour, 
setting  all  their  trust  ar.tl  hope  in  them,  which  ought  to  be  referred  unto  God;  or 
if  they  be  so  affected  to  ./ard  the  dumb  images,  that  they  be  in  any  behalf  addicted 


A    GODLY'    CONFESSION    OF    HIS    FAITH.  34v5 

unto  them,  L'ilhcr  be  more  addicted  unto  one  saint  than  another,  in  my  mind    iicnr^ 
they  do  little  difler  from  idolatry,  grievously  ofiending  against  God,  tlie  author        ^  ■ 
ot"  all  honour.  a    i\ 

Last  of  all,  I  am  thus  persuaded  :  That  there  be  no  inhabitants  here  in  earth,     iii-j 

but  that  we  shall  pass  straight  cither  to  life  or  punishment ;  for  whosoever  doth  

so  order  his  life  that  he  stumbleth  at  the  connnandments  of  God,  which  either 

he  knoweth  not,  or  he  will  not  be  taught  them,  it  is  but  in  vain  for  him  to  look 

for  salvation,  although  he  run  over  all  the  corners  of  the  world.     Contrariwise,  ofpiJ- 

he  who  observeth  his  commandments  cannot  perish,  although  in  all  his  lifetime  grimagcs. 

he  walked  no  pilgrimage,  neither  to  Rome,  Canterbury,  nor  Compostella,  nor  to 

any  other  place,  whither  the  common  people  are  accustomed  to  walk. 

This  schedule,  with  the  articles  therein  contained,  being  read,  as  is  aforesaid, 
by  the  said  sir  John,  we  with  our  fellow-brethren  afoi-esaid,  and  many  other 
doctors  and  learned  men,  had  conference  upon  the  same ;  and  at  last,  by  the 
counsel  and  consent  of  them,  we  spake  these  words  following,  unto  the  said 
sir  John  there  present :  '  Behold,  sir  John  !  there  are  many  good  and  catholic 
things  contained  in  this  schedule,  but  you  have  at  this  time  to  answer  unto 
other  matters  which  savour  of  errors  and  heresies,  whereunto,  by  the  contents  gee  whe- 
of  this  schedule,  it  is  not  fully  answered ;    and,  therefore,  you  nuist  answer  ther  these 
thereunto,  and  more  plainly  express  and   declare  your  faith  and  opinions  as  °^';"  JJ^'' 
touching  those  points  in  the  same  bill ;  that  is  to  say.  Whether  you  hold,  be-  where 
lieve,  and  aiKrm,  that  in  the  sacrament  of  the   altar,  after  the  consecration  t'leynced. 
rightly  done,  there  remaineth  material  bread  or  not  V 

'  Item,  Whether  you  hold,  believe,  and  attirm,  that  it  is  necessary,  in  the 
sacrament  of  penance,  for  a  man  to  confess  his  sins  unto  a  priest  appointed  by 
the  church  V 

The  above  articles  in  this  manner  delivered  unto  him,  amongst  many  other 
things  he  answered  plainly.  That  he  would  make  no  other  declaration  or 
answer  thereunto  than  was  contained  in  the  said  schedule.  Whereupon  we, 
fav(Airing  the  said  sir  John,  with  benign  and  gentle  means  spake  unto  him  in 
this  manner :  '  Sir  John !  take  heed,  for,  if  you  do  not  plahily  answer  to  these 
things  which  are  objected  against  you,  within  a  lawful  time  now  granted  you 
by  the  judges,  we  may  declare  you  to  be  a  heretic:'  but  the  said  sir  John 
persevered  as  before,  and  would  make  no  other  answer.  Consequently  not- 
withstanding, we,  together  with  our  said  fellow-brethren,  and  others  of  our 
counsel,  took  advice,  and  by  their  counsel  declared  unto  the  said  sir  John  Old- 
castle,  what  the  holy  church  of  Rome  in  this  matter,  following  the  saying  of 
blessed  St.  Augustine,  Jerome,  Ambrose,  and  other  holy  men,  hath  determined ; 
which  determinations  every  catholic  ought  to  observe. *  Whereupon  the  said 
sir  John  answered.  That  he  would  believe  and  observe  whatsoever  the  holy 
cluuch  determined,  and  whatsoever  God  would  he  should  observe  and  believe. 
But  that  he  would  in  no  case  affirm,  that  our  lord  the  pope,  the  cardinals,  arch- 
bishops, and  bishops,  or  other  prelates  of  the  church,  have  any  power  to  deter- 
mine any  such  matters.  Whereunto,  we,  yet  favom'ing  him,"  mider  hope  of 
better  advisement,  promised  the  said  sir  John,  that  we  would  give  him  in 
writing  certain  determinations  upon  the  matter  aforesaid,  wheremito  he  shoidd 
more  plainl)'  answer,  written  in  Latin,  and,  for  his  better  understanding,  trans- 
lated into  English :  whereupon  we  conunanded  and  heartily  desired  him,  that 
against  Monday  next  following  he  should  give  a  plain  and  fidl  answer ;  which 
determinations  we  caused  to  be  translated  the  same  day,  and  to  be  delivered 
unto  him  the  Simday  next  following.  The  tenor  of  which  determinations  here 
follow  in  this  manner : 

'  The  faith  and  detennination  of  the  holy  church  upon  the  holy  sacrament  ^, 
£»   ,        1         •      t  •       '111  /'I  'I'l  11  ^  '^    sum 

ol  tlie  altar  is  tins:    Ihat  alter  the  consecration  done  m  the  mass  by  the  priest,  of  tlie 

the  material  bread  shall  be  changed  into  the  material  body  of  Christ,  and  the  !'"pi^l' 
material  wine  into  the  material  blood  of  Christ ;   therefore,   after  the  consecra- 
tion, there  remaineth,  no  more,  any  substance  of  bread  and  wine,  which  was 
there  before  : — what  do  you  answer  to  this  article  ? 

'  Also  the  holy  church  hath  determined,  that  every  Christian,  dwelHng  upon  „ 

siou. 
(1)  Here  ia  no  mention  maJe  of  the  word  of  God.  (2)  Vv'olves  clothed  in  slieei)'s  ikiiis. 


A.I). 
1413. 


346  THE    TROUBLE    AND    PERSECUTION    OF    LORD    COBHAM. 

Henry    earth,  ought  to  confess  his  sins  unto  a  priest  ordained  by  the  church,  if  lie  may 
^-       come  unto  him : — how  think  you  by  this  article  ? 

'  Christ  ordained  St.  Peter  his  vicar  on  earth,  whose  seat  is  in  the  church  of 
Rome,  giving  and  granting  the  same  authority,  which  he  gave  unto  Peter,  also 
to  his  successors,  who  are  now  called  popes  of  Rome  ;  in  whose  power  it  is  to 
The  ordain  and  institute  prelates  in  particular  churches,   as  archbishops,  bishops, 

pope's  su-  curates,  and  other  ecclesiastical  orders,   unto  whom  the  christian  people  owe 
prtmacy.   j,|jgjj;p,^(.p^  according  to  the  tradition  of  the  chin-ch  of  Rome.     This  is  the  de- 
termination of  the  holy  church  :■ — what  think  you  by  this  article  1 
Pilgrim-        '  Besides  this  the  holy  church  hath  determined,  That  it  is  necessary  for  every 
^S^-  christian  to  go  on  pilgrimage  to  holy  places,  and  there  specially  to  worship  the 

holy  relics  of  the  apostles,  martyrs,  confessors,  and  all  saints  whomsoever  the 
church  of  Rome  hath  allowed : — what  think  you  of  this  article  V 

Convene-  Upon  which  Monday,  being  the  five  and  twentieth  day  of  the  said  month  of 
runt  in  September,  before  us  and  our  fellow-brethren  aforesaid,  having  also  taken  unto 
adversus  ^^s  our  reverend  brother  Benedict,  by  the  grace  of  God,  bishop  of  Bangor,  and, 
Domi-  by  our  commandment,  our  counsellors  and  ministers.  Master  Henry  Ware, 
Christum  official  of  our  court  of  Canterbury ;  Philip  Morgan,  doctor  of  both  laws ;  Howel 
ejus.  Kiffin,  doctor  of  the  decretals ;  John  Kempe  and  William  Carlton,  doctors  of 

Psal.  ii.     \Q^^y  ■    John  Witnam,  Thomas   Palmer,  Robert  Wombewell,   John  Withe,  and 
Robert  Chamberlain,  Richard  Dotington,   and  Thomas  Walden,  professors  of 
divinity  ;    also  James  Cole  and  John  Stevens,  our  notaries  appointed  on  this 
behalf:    they,  all  and  every  one,  being  sworn  upon  the  holy  gospel  of  God, 
laying  their  hands  upon  the  book,  that  they  should  give  their  faithful  counsel 
in  and  upon  the  matter  aforesaid,   and  in  every  such  cause,  and  to  the  whole 
■world :  by  and  by  appeared  sir  Robert  Morley,  knight,  lieutenant  of  the  Towei 
of  London,  and  brought  with  him  the  aforesaid  sir  John  Oldcastle,  setting  him 
before  us ;  unto  whom  we  gently  and  familiarly  rehearsed  the  acts  of  the  day 
before  passed,  and,  as  before,  we  told  him  that  he  both  is  and  was  excommuni- 
cate, requiring  and  entreating  him  that  he  would  desire  and  receive  in  due  form 
the  absolution  of  the  church.     Unto  whom  the  said  sir  John  then  and  there 
plainly  answered  :  That  in  this  behalf  he  would  require  no  absolution  at  oiu- 
hands,   but  only  of  God.      Then,   afterwai-ds,  by  gentle  and  soft  means  we 
desired  and  required  him  to  make  plain  answer  unto  the  articles  which  were 
laid  against  him  ;  and  first  of  all,  as  touching  the  sacrament  of  the  altar.     To 
which  article,  besides  other  things,  he  answered  and  said  thus :  That  as  Christ, 
being  here  on  earth,  had  in  him  both  Godhead  and  manhood,  notwithstanding, 
the  Godhead  was  covered  and  invisible  under  the  humanity,  which  was  manifest 
The  sa-     ^^^  visible  in  him  :  so  likewise,  in  the  sacrament  of  the  altar,  there  is  the  very 
crament,   body  and  very  bread ;  bread  which  we  do  see,  the  body  of  Christ  hidden  under 
and^  ^""^^  ^^^^  same,  which  we  do  not  see.      And  plainly  he  denied,  that  the  faith,  as 
bread,  in    touching  the  said  sacrament,  determined  by  the  Romish  church  and  holy  doc- 
divers  re-  tors,  and  sent  unto  him  by  us  in  the  said  schedule,  was  the  determination  of 
^^'^  "■       the  holy  church.  But  if  it  be  the  determination  of  the  church,  he  said  that  it  was 
\     Y-  done  contrary  unto  the  Scriptures ;  after  the  church  was  endowed,  and  after  that 

V^  '  How  con-  poison  was  poured  into  the  church,  and  not  before.  Also,  as  touching  the  sacra- 

fession  is   ment  of  penance  and  confession,  he  plainly  said  and  affirmed  then  and  there  : 
lowed^       That  if  any  man  were  in  any  gi-ievous  sin,  out  of  which  he  knew  not  how  to  rise, 
it  were  expedient  and  good  for  him  to  go  unto  some  holy  and  discreet  priest  to 
take  counsel  of  him ;  but,  that  he  should  confess  his  sin  to  any  proper  priest  or 
to  any  other,  although  he  might  have  the  use  of  him,  it  is  not  necessary  to  salva- 
tion ;  forasmuch  as  only  by  contrition  such  sin  can  be  wiped  away,  and  the  sinner 
himself  purged.  As  concerning  the  woi'shipping  of  the  cross,  he  said  and  affirmed. 
That  only  the  body  of  Christ  which  did  hang  upon  the  cross,  is  to  be  worshipped ; 
forasmuch  as  that  body  alone  was  and  is  the  cross,  which  is  to  be  worshipped. 
What  ho-      And  being  demanded  what  honour  he  wovdd  do  unto  the  image  of  the  cross, 
iiourtobe  he  answered  by  express  words  :  That  he  would  only  do  it  that  honour,  that  he 
thecross.   would  make  it  clean  and  lay  it  up  safe.     As  touching  the  power  and  authority 
of  the  keys,  the  archbishops,  bishops,  and  other  prelates,  he  said.   That  tlie 
The  pope  pope  is  very  Antichritit,  that  is,  the  head ;  that  the  archbishops,  bishops,  and 
*1  ^^^\    other  prelates,  be  his  members,  and  that  the  friars  be  his  tail :  which  pope, 
^  '       archbishops,  and  bishops,  a  man  ought  not  to  obey,  but  so  far  forth  as  they  be 


THE    TROUBLE    AND    PERSECUTION    OF    LORD    COHHAM.  317 

followers  of  Christ  and  of  Peter,    in  their  life,   manners,  and  conversation,  iiennj 

and  that  he    is   the  successor  of  Peter  who  is  hcst  and  purest  in  life   and  ^■ 

manners.     Furthermore,  the  said  sir  John,  spreading  his  hands,  with  a  loud  •    ,j 

voice  said  thus  to  those  who  stood  about  him:   '  Tliese  men,  who  judge  and  iVio' 
would  condemn  me,  will  seduce  you  all  and  themselves,  and  will  lead  you 


unto  hell;  therefore  take  heed  of  them.'  VV'hen  lie  had  spoken  those  words,  bishoi)s 
we  again,  as  oftentimes  before,  with  lamentable  countenance,  spake  unto  the  members 
said  sir  John,  exhorting  him,  with  as  gentle  words  as  we  might,  that  he  would  and  tlie 
return  to  the  unity  of  the  church,  to  believe  and  hold  that  which  the  church  of  [''V."'*  '"^ 
llome  doth  believe  and  hold :  who  expressly  answered.  That  he  would  not  be-  n„i'ii  talk 
lieve  or  hold  otherwise  than  he  had  before  declared.  Wherefore,  perceiving,  "t'lord 
as  it  appeared  by  him,  that  we  could  not  prevail,  at  last,  with  bitterness  of  °  *""* 
heart  we  proceeded  to  the  pronouncing  of  a  definitive  sentence  in  this  manner : 

The  definitive  Sentence  of  Lord  Cobham's  Condemnation,  a  Copy  of 
which  accompanied  the  preceding  Letter  to  the  Bishop  of  London. 

In  the  name  of  God,  Amen.  We,  Thomas,  by  the  permission  of  God,  arch- 
bishop and  humble '  minister  of  the  holy  church  of  Canterbury,  primate  of  all 
England,  and  legate  of  the  apostolic  sec,  in  a  certain  cause  or  matter  of  heresy 
upon  certain  articles,  whereupon  sir  John  Oldcastle,  knight,  lord  Cobham, 
before  us,  in  the  last  convocation  of  our  clergy  of  our  province  of  Canterbury, 
holden  in  the  church  of  St.  Paul  in  London,  after  diligent  inquisition  thereupon 
made,  was  detected  and  accused,  and  by  our  said  province  notoriously  and 
openly  defamed.  At  the  request  of  the  whole  clergy  aforesaid  thereupon  made 
to  us  in  the  said  convocation,  with  all  favour  possible  that  we  might  (God  we 
take  to  witness),  lawfully  proceeding  against  him,  following  the  footsteps  and 
example  of  Christ,-  who  would  not  the  death  of  a  sinner,  but  rather  that  he 
should  be  converted  and  live,  we  have  endeavoured,  by  all  ways  and  means  we 
might  or  could,  to  reform  him,  and  rather  reduce  him  to  the  unity  of  the  church, 
declaring  unto  him  what  the  holy  universal  church*  of  Rome  doth  teach,  hold, 
and  determine,  in  this  behalf.  And  albeit  that  we  found  him  wandering  astray 
fi-om  the  catholic  faith,  and  so  stubborn  and  stiff-necked,  that  he  would  not 
confess  nis  error,  or  clear  himself  thereof,  to  detest  the  same  ;  notwithstand- 
ing we,  favouring  him  with  a  fatherly  affection,  and  heartily  wishing  and  desir- 
ing his  preservation,  prefixed  him  a  certain  competent  time  to  deliberate  with 
himself,  and,  if  he  would,  to  repent  and  reform  himself  And  last  of  all,  foras- 
much as  we  perceived  him  to  be  unreasonable,  observing  chiefly  those  things 
which  by  the  law  are  required  in  this  behalf,  with  great  sorrow  and  bitterness 
of  heart  we  proceeded  to  the  pronouncing  of  the  definitive  sentence  in  this 
wise : — • 

The  name  of  Christ  being  called  upon,  setting  him  only  before  our  eyes  : 
Forasmuch  as  by  act  enacted,  signs  exhibited,  evidences,  and  divers  tokens, 
besides  sundiy  kind  of  proofs,  we  find  the  said  sir  John  to  be,  and  to  have  been, 
a  lieretic,  and  a  follower  of  heretics  in  the  faith  and  observation  of  the  sacred 
univereal  church  of  Rome,   and  specially  as  touching  the  sacraments  of  the 
eucharist  and  of  penance;  and  that  as  the  son  of  iniquity  and  darkness  he  hath  They  call 
so  hardened  his  heart,  that  he  will  not  understand  the  voice  of  the  Shepherd,  lifiht 
neither  will  be  allured  with  his  monitions,  or  converted  with  any  fair  speech :  a,"  dark- 
having  first  of  all   searched  and  sought  out,  and  diligently  considering  the  ness 
merits  of  the  cause  aforesaid,  and  of  the  said  sir  John,  his  deserts  and  faults  ''S^t. 
aggravated  through  his  damnable  obstinacy,  not  willing  that  he  that  is  wicked 
should  become  more  wicked,  and  infect  others  with  his  contagion  ;  by  the 
counsel  and  consent  of  the  reverend  men  of  profound  wisdom  and  discretion, 
our  brethren,  the  lords  Richard,  bishop  of  London,  Henry,  bishop  of  Winches-  Like,  will 
ter,  and  Benedict,  bishop  of  Bangor,  and  also  of  many  other  doctors  of  divinity-,  to  like, 
the  decretals  and  civil  law,  and  of  many  other  religious  and  learned  persons  our 
assistants,  we  have  judged  and  declared  sententially,  and  definitely  condemned 
tlie  said  sir  John  Oldcastle,  knight,  lord  Cobham,  being  convicted  in  and  upon 
that  most  detestable  guilt,  not  willing  penitently  to  return  unto  the  unity  of  the 

(1)  They  call  themselves  humble,  who  rule  over  kings,  and  exercise  the  tjTanny  of  the  world. 

(2)  Following  Christ's  footsteps  !  clean  contrary  ! 

(3)  The  universal  church,  meaneth,  by  a  figure,  the  part  for  the  whole. 


348 


A    DEFEKCE    OF  TlUi    LORD    COBHAM, 


Henry    cliurch,  and  in  those  things  wliich  the  sacred  universal  church  of  Rome  doth 

V-       hold,  teach,  determine,  and  show  forth.     And  especially  as  one  emng  hi  the 

\  D     articles  ahove- writ  ten,  leaving  him  from  henceforth  as  a  heretic,  unto  the  secu- 

1413.    ^^i'  judgment. 

Moreover,  we  have  excommunicated,   and  by  these  writings  do  pronounce 


So  (lid  tlie  ^^^  exconnnunicate  him,  as  a  heretic,  and  all  others  who  from  henceforth,  in 
(leHvcf/'^^  favour  of  his  error,  shall  receive,  defend,  or  give  him  counsel  or  favour,  or  help 
Christ  to  him  in  this  behalf,  as  favourers,  defenders,  and  receivers  of  heretics.  And,  to 
^  ■  the  intent  tliat  these  premises  may  be  known  unto  all  faithful  Christians,  we 
charge  and  command  you,  that,  by  your  sentence  definitive,  you  do  cause  the 
curates  who  are  under  you,  with  a  loud  and  audible  voice  in  their  churches, 
when  most  people  are  present,  in  their  mother-tongue,  through  all  your  cities 
and  dioceses,  to  publish  and  declare  the  said  sir  John  Oldcastle,  as  is  before 
said,  to  be  by  us  condemned  as  a  heretic,  a  schismatic,  and  one  erring  in  the 
articles  above-said ;  and  all  others  who  from  henceforth  in  fivour  of  his  errors 
shall  receive  or  defend  him,  giving  him  any  counsel,  comfort,  or  favour  in  this 
behalf,  to  be  excommunicated  as  receivers,  favourers,  and  defenders  of  heretics  : 
as  is  more  effectually  contained  in  the  process.  That  by  such  means  the  eiTo- 
neous  opinions  of  the  people  (who,  peradventure,  have  otherwise  conceived  the 
matter),  by  those  declarations  of  the  truth,  how  the  matter  is,  may  be  cut  off: 
which  thing  also  we  will  and  command  to  be  written  and  signified  by  you,  word 
for  word,  unto  all  our  fellow-brethren,  that  they  all  may  manifest,  publish,  and 
declare,  throughout  all  their  cities  and  dioceses,  the  manner  and  form  of  this 
our  process,  and  also  the  sentence  by  us  given,  and  all  other  singular  the  con- 
tents in  the  same  ;  and  likewise  cause  it  to  be  published  by  their  curates  who 
are  under  them,  as  touching  the  day  of  receipt  of  these  presents,  and  what  you 
have  done  in  the  premises,  how  you  and  they  have  executed  this  our  command- 
ment. We  will  that  you  and  they  duly  and  distinctly  certify  us,  the  business 
being  done,  by  your  and  their  letters-patent,  according  to  this  tenor. 

Dated  in  our  manor  of  Maidstone,  the  tenth  of  October,  An.  1413,   and 
in  the  eighteenth  year  of  our  translation. 


Lord 
Cobham 
returned 
to  the 
Tower. 


Thus  have  you  here  the  judicial  process  of  the  bishops  against  this 
most  noble  christian  knight,  described  by  their  own  letters  and  style. 
After  all  this,  the  sentence  of  death  being  given,  the  lord  Cf)liham 
was  sent  away,  sir  Robert  Morley  can-ying  him  again  unto  the  Tower, 
where,  after  he  had  remained  a  certain  space,  in  the  night  season  (it 
is  not  known  by  what  means),  he  escaped  out,  and  fled  into  Wales, 
where  he  continued  by  the  space  of  four  years.  *Some'  writers  have 
thought  this  escape  to  come  by  the  aforesaid  sir  Roger  Acton,  and 
other  gentlemen  in  displeasure  of  the  priests  ;  and  that  to  be  the 
chief  occasion  of  their  deaths  ;  which  might  well  be :  but  Walden 
doth  not  so  utter  it,  who  reigned  at  the  same  time.* 


Alan  us 
Copus 

Anglus 
witli  liis 
six  dia- 
loKues. 


A    DEFENCE    OF    THE    LORD    COBHAM,    AGAINST    NICHOLAS 

HARPSFIELD,    SET    OUT    UNDER    THE    NAME    OF 

ALANUS    COPUS    ANGLUS. 

As  I  was  entering  into  this  story  of  the  lord  Cobham,  after  the 
tractation  of  all  the  former  histories  hitherto  passed,  having  next  to 
set  upon  this  present  matter,  luckily,  and  as  God  would,  in  such 
opportunity  of  season  as  God  may  seem  to  work  himself  for  the 
defence  of  his  saints,  cometh  to  my  hands  a  certain  book  of  new-found 
dialogues,  compiled  in  Latin,  by  Nicholas  Harpsfield,  set  out  by 
Alanus  Copus,  an  Englishman,  a  person  to  me  unknown,  and  obscure, 
hitherto,  unto  the  world,  but  who  now,  to  pmxhase  himself  a  name 


(l;  See  Edilion  luC3.  p.  375.— Ed. 


AGAINST    XiniOLAS    HARPSFIELD.  34-f> 

with  Erostratus,'  or  Avith  tlic  sous  of  Anakim,  cometl)  out,  not  wilh    Uenry 

liis  five  co-iis,  but  Avitli  his  six  railinir  (liah)i^-uos  ;  in  wliich  (liah)i;ues '. — 

tlic  said  Ahinus  Copus  Angkis  (whether  he,   under  the  armour  of   A.  I), 
another,  or  another  under  title  of  his  name,  I  know  not,  nor  pass  not), 
uncourteously  bcliavinij  himself,  intemperatel y  abusing  his  time,  study,  -"i>"s  •"- 
and  pen,  forgetting  himself,  neglecting  all  respect  of  honesty,  and  ratciy 
mild  modesty,  neither  dreading  the  stroke  of  God,  nor  caring  for  iIis",K.„! 
shame,  neither  favouring  the  living,  nor  sparing  the  dead,  who,  when 
alive  as  they  never  offended  him,  so  now  cannot  answer  for  themselves, 
being  gone ;   thus,  provoking  both  God  and  man  against  him,  after 
an  unseemly  sort,  and  with  a  foul  mouth,  and  a  stinking  breath, 
rageth  and  fareth  against  dead  men's  ashes,  taking  now  the  spoil  of  Copus 
their  good  name,  after  their  bodies  lie  slain  in  the  field ;  his  gall  and  ajialn'^sr 
choler  being  so  bitter  against  them,  that  he  cannot  abide  any  memory  ''^^'^ 
after  them  to  remain  upon  earth  ;  insomuch  that  for  the  hatred  of 
them  he  spurneth  also  against  me,  and  flieth  in  my  face,  for  that  in 
my  Acts  and  Monuments,  describing  the  history  of  the  church,   I 
woidd  say  any  thing  in  favour  of  them,  whom  the  Romish  catholics 
have  so  unmercifully  put  to  death.     The  answer  to  whose  book.  Answer 
although  it  would  require  a  several  tractation  by  itself  (as,  if  Christ  *"  ^°^"''' 
grant  space  and  leisure,  hereafter  it  shall  not  be  forgotten),  yet, 
because  such  opportunity  of  the  book  is  offered  to  me  at  this  present, 
coming  now  to  the  matter  of  the  lord  Cobham,  sir  Roger  Acton,  and 
others,  with  whom  he  beginneth  first  to  quarrel,  it  shall  be  requisite 
a  little  by  the  Avay  to  cope  with  this  Cope,  whatsoever  he  be,  so  much 
as  truth  shall  give  me  for  their  defence  to  say  something.    And  here, 
to  cut  off  all  the  offals  of  his  railing  tallc  and  unhonest  rebukes, 
which  I  leave  to  scolds  and  men  of  his  profession  against  they  list  to 
brawl,  let  us  briefly  and  quietly  consider  the  matter  for  discussing  of 
the  truth  ;  wherein  first  I  shall  desire  the  reader,  with  equality  and 
indifferency,  to  hear  both  the  parties  speak,  as  well  what  the  martyrs,  in<iiirer- 
hence  gone  and  slain,  could  say  for  themselves  if  they  were  present,  tuereaaer 
as  also  what  this  man  here  doth  object  against  them  now  being  gone,  craved. 
And  so,  according  to  the  same,  to  judge  both  upon  them,  as  they 
deserve,  and  of  me,  as  they  shall  please. 

Now  to  the  scope  of  Master  Cope's  matter,  Avhich  is  this  :  Avhethcr  AVhcther 
this  aforesaid  sir  John  Oldcastle,  lord  Cobham  (first  to  begin  with  h°am  be  to 
him)  is  rather  to  be  commended  for  a  mart}T,  or  to  be  reproved  for  a  ^Vrailor'^ 
traitor  ?  and  whether  that  I,  in  writing  of  him,  and  of  sir  Roger  Acton,  ornmar- 
with  others  besides,  in  my  former  edition,  have  dealt  fraudulently  and 
corruptlv,  in  commending  them  in  these  Acts  and  Monuments,  or 
no  .'*     Touching  the  discussion  hereof,  first,  I  trust  the  gentle  Master 
Cope,  mv  friend,  neither  will,  nor  well  can,  deny  any  part  of  all  that 
hitherto,  touching  the  story  of  the  lord  Cobham,  hath  been  premised  ; 
M'ho  yet  all  this  while  was  neither  traitor  to  his  country,  nor  rebel  to 
his  prince,  as  by  the  course  of  his  history  hitherto  the  reader  may 
well  understand.     First,  in  the  time  of  king  Henry  IV.,  he  was  sent  LnrdCob- 
over  to  France  to  the  duke  of  Orleans  :  he  did  obey.     Afterwards,  am!  obe- 
king  Henry  V.  coming  to  the  crown,  he  was  of  him  likewise  mcU  J|-^^"\,*°i. 
liked  and  favoured,  until  the  time  that  Thomas  Arundel,  with  his  ry  iv. 

(1)  "  Erostratus,"  or  Eratostratus,  an  Ephesian,  who,  to  immortalize  his  own  name,  burned  the 
famous  temple  of  Diana,  (he  night  in  which  Alexander  the  Great  was  bom. — £d. 


350  A  DEFENCE  OF  THE  LOUD  COBHAM, 

Henry   clcrgy,  complaining  to  the  king,  made  bate  between  them.    Then  tlie 
^'      lord  Cobham,  being  cited  by  the  archbishop,  at  his  citation  would  not 


A. D.  appear:  but,  sent  for  by  the  king,  he  obeyed  and  came.  Being 
^'^^^-  come,  what  lowly  subjection  he  showed  there  to  the  king,  the  story 
In  the  declareth.  Afterwards  he  yielded  an  obedient  confession  of  his  faith : 
favoured^  it  would  not  bc  rcceivcd.  Then  did  he  appeal  to  the  bishop  of  Rome, 
Hen"if  V  for  which  the  king  took  great  displeasure  with  him,  and  so  was  he 
'F^^ ,  repealed  by  the  king  to  the  archbishop,  and  committed  to  the  Tower : 
dispiea-  which  also  he  did  obey.  From  thence  he  was  brought  to  his  exa- 
cured''™  mination  once  or  twice  :  there,  like  a  constant  martyr,  and  witness  of 
thebrd  ^^^"^  truth,  he  stood  to  his  confession,  and  that  vmto  the  very  sentence 
cobiiam  of  death  defined  against  him.  If  this  be  not  the  effect  of  a  true 
prefaTs!'  martyr,  let  Alanus  Copus  say  what  he  will,  or  what  he  can.  This  I 
Cobham  Say,  at  least  I  doubt,  whether  the  said  Alanus  Copus  Anglus,  put  to 
Fn"hts'*"'  the  like  trial  himself,  w^ould  venture  so  nan-ow  a  point  of  martyrdom 
the  da"  of  ^^^  ^^^^  religion,  as  this  christian  knight  did  for  his  :  certes,  it  hath  not 
iiis  death,  jet  appeared. 

To  proceed  ;  after  this  deadly  sentence  was  thus  awarded  against 
him,  the  said  lord  Cobham  was  then  returned  again  unto  the  Tower, 
which  he,  with  patience  and  meekness,  did  also  obey ;  from  which 
Tower  i .  he  afterwards  by  the  Lord''s  providence  did  escape,  whether 
hath  Alanus  Copus  herein  more  to  praise  God  for  offering  to  him 
the  benefit,  or  to  blame  the  man  for  taking  that  which  was  offered  ? 
What  catholic  in  all  Louvain,  having  his  house  over  his  head  on  fire, 
•will  not  be  glad  to  have,  if  he  might,  the  door  set  open  to  fly  the 
peril  ?  or  else  why  did  Alanus  Copus  fly  his  county,  having  so  little 
need,  if  this  man,  bleeding  almost  under  the  butcher''s  axe,  might 
not  enjoy  so  great  an  offer  of  so  lucky  deliverance  ? 

Thus  hitherto,  I  trust,  the  cause  of  the  lord  Cobham  standeth  firm 
and  strong  against  all  danger  of  just  reprehension  ;  who  being,  as  ye 
have  heard,  so  faithful  and  obedient  to  God,  so  submiss  to  his  king, 
Xord  so  sound  in  his  doctrine,  so  constant  in  his  cause,  so  afflicted  for  the 
wonh™  truth,  so  ready  and  prepared  to  death,  as  Ave  have  sufficiently  declared, 
the  name  not  out  of  Uncertain  and  doubtful  chronicles,  but  out  of  the  true 
martyr:  origiuals  and  instruments  remaining  in  ancient  records  :  what  lacketh 
of  a  "'^"^  now,  or  what  should  let  to  the  contrary,  but  that  he,  declaring  him- 
vhatii  ^^^^  ^^^^^  ^  martyr,  that  is,  a  witness  to  the  verity,  for  which  also  at 
si?:ni-      last  he  Suffered  the  fire,  may,  therefore,  worthily  be  adorned  with  the 

title  of  martyr,  which  is  in  Greek  as  much  as  a  witness-bearer  .'' 

caiura-         But  here  now  steppeth  in  dame  17  SmjSoXfj,  with  her  cousin-scold 

Alecto,  &c.,  who  neither  learning  to  hold  her  tongue,  nor  yet  to  speak 

well,  must  needs  find  here  a  knot  in  a  rush,  and  beginning  now  to 

quarrel,  inferreth  thus  :  "  But  after,"  saith  he,  "  that  the  lord  Cobham 

was  escaped  out  of  the  Tower,  his  fellows  and  confederates  convented 

themselves  together  seditiously  against  the  king,  and  against  their 

country.""     A  great  crime  no  doubt,  Master  Cope,  if  it  be  true  :  so, 

if  it  be  not  true,  the  greater  blame  returneth  unto  yourself,  so  to 

enter  this  action  of  such  slander,  unless  the  ground  whereupon  ye 

Ac't^n"^"  stand  be  sure.     First,  what  fellows  of  the  lord  Cobham  were  these 

John"'      you  mean  ?    "  Sir  Roger  Acton,"  ye  say,  "  Master  Brown,  and  John 

.?,™n"'     Beverly,  with  thirty-six  others,  hanged  and  burned  in  the  said  field 

Beverly.-  of  St.  Giles's."     A  marvellous  matter,  that  such  a  great  multitude  of 


AGAINST    NICHOLAS    HAUPSKIELI).  351 

twenty  tliousand,  specified  in  story,  slionld  rise  against  the  k'mff,  and    nenry, 
yet  but  only  three  persons  be  known  and  named.     And  tlien  to  pro-        ' 
ceed  I'urtlicr,  I  would  aslc  of  Master  Cope,  what  was  the  end  of  this    A.  D. 
conspiracy  :   to   rebel   against  tlic   king  ?   to  destroy  their  country  ?    ^'^^^- 
and  to  subvert  the  cliristian  faith  ?   for  so  purporteth  the  story.     As 
like  true  the  one  as  the  other :  for  even  as  it  is  like  that  they,  being 
Turks,  went  about  to  destroy  the  faith  Oi   Christ  wherein  they  died, 
and  to  subvert  their  country  wherein  they  were  bred ;  even  so  like  it 
is,  that  they  went  about  to  destroy  the  king,  whom  God  and  tlicir 
conscience  taught  to  obey. 

Yet  further  proceedeth  this  fiimish  promoter  in  his  accusation,  and 
saith  moreover:  That  these  aforesaid  fellows  and  adherents  of  the  lord 
Cobham  were  in  the  field  assembled,  and  there  encamped  in  a  great 
number  against   the  king.     And  how  is  this  proved  ?     By  Robert 
Fabian  :  which  appcareth  to  be  as  true  as  that  which  in  the  said  Fabian 
Robert  Fabian  foUoweth  in  the  same  place,  where  he  affirmetli,  that  [[.^t",',^^ 
John  Claydon  and  Richard  Turming  were  burnt  in  the  same  year,  ""tnitii. 
being  1413,  when  indeed  by  the  true  registers  they  were  not  burnt 
before  the  year  of  our  Lord  1415.     But  what  will  Master  Cope  say,  An  un- 
if  the  original  copy  of  the  indictment  of  these  pretensed  conspirators  coplls'" 
doth  testify  that  they  were  not  there  assembled  or  present  in  the  field, 
as  your  accusation  pretendeth  ?  "  But  they  purposed,""  will  you  say  ? 
"  and  intended,  to  come."     Tlie  purpose  and  intent  of  a  man*'s  mind 
is  hard  for  you  and  me  to  judge,  where  no  fact  appeareth.     But 
grant  their  intent  was  so  to  come,  yet  might  they  not  come  to  those 
thickets  near  to  the  field  of  St.  Giles,  having  Beverly  their  preacher 
with  them  (as  ye  say  yourself,)  as  well  to  pray  and  to  preach  in  that 
Avoody  place,  as  to  fight  .'*     Is  this  such  a  strange  thing  in  the  church  piaying 
of  Christ,  in  time  of  persecution,  for  Christians  to  resort  to  desolate  ^^^^^h- 
woods  and  secret  thickets,  from  the  sight  of  enemies,  when  they  >"? 
would  assemble  in  praying  and  hearing  the  word  of  rod  ?    In  queen  a^ 
Mary"'s  time  was  not  the  same  colour  of  treason  objected  against  "/,"";;  in 
George  Eafjle,  and  others  besides,  for  frenuentino-  and  usincf  into  back  *'""'  "^ 

o  o      '  '  X  C7  o  pcrstcu* 

sides  and  fields,  who  suffered  for  that  whereof  he  was  innocent  and  tion. 
guiltless?     Did  not  Adam  Damlip  die  in  like  case  of  treason,  for 
having  a  French  crown  given  him  at  his  departure  out  of  Rome  by 
cardinal  Pool  ?     What  cannot  cankered  Calumnia  invent,  when  she  ni-wiii 
is  disposed  to  cavil  ?     It  was  not  the  cardinaFs  crown  that  made  him  luiugl  To 
a  traitor,  but  it  was  the  hatred  of  his  preaching  that  stirred  ui)  the  ^"""^^ 

'  1  o  i  meaning. 

accuser. 

In  France  what  assemblies  have  there  been  in  late  years,  of  good 
and  innocent  Christians  congi-egating  together  in  back  fields  and 
coverts,  in  great  routs,  to  hear  the  preaching  of  God's  holy  word,  and 
to  pray ;  yea,  and  not  without  their  weapon  also,  for  their  oa\ti  safe- 
guard ;  and  yet  who  never  intended  nor  minded  any  rebellion  against 
their  king.  Wherefore,  in  cases  of  religion  it  may  and  doth  happen 
many  times  that  such  congregations  may  meet  without  intent  of  any 
treason  meant.  But,  howsoever  the  intent  and  purpose  was  of  these  Anotiicr 
aforesaid  confederates  of  the  lord  Cobham,  whither  to  come,  or  what  "„  copus. 
to  do  (seeing  this  is  plain  by  records,  as  is  aforesaid,  that  they  were 
not  yet  come  unto  the  place),  how  will  Master  Cope  now  justify  his 
words,    so   confidently   affirming,  that  they   were   there  assembled 


corntTS 
.  com- 


352  A    DEFENCE    OF    THE    LORD    COBIIAM, 

iienrg    seditiously  too'ctlitT  ill  tlic  field  of  St.  Giles  against  the  kiiif?  ?     And 
mark  here,  I  beseech  thee,  gentle  reader  !  how  unlikely  and  untidely 


^■^/    the   points   of  this  tail  are  tied  and  hanged  together  (I  will  not  say 
-— __  without  all  substance   of  truth,  but  without  all  fashion  of  a  cleanlv 
lie)  ;  wherein  these  accusers  in  this  matter  seem  to  me  to  lack  some 
part  of  Simon''s  art,  in  conveying  their  narration   so   unartificially. 
All  1111-     First,  say  they,  the  king  was  come  first,  with  his  gan-ison,  unto  the 
tale/      field  of  St.  Giles  ;  and  then,  after  the  king  was  there  encamped,  con- 
sequently, the  fellows  of  the  lord  Cobham  (the  captain  being  away) 
came,  and  were  assembled,  in  the  said  field  where  the  king  was, 
against  the  king,  and  yet  not  knowing  of  the  king,  to  the  number  of 
twenty  thousand,  and  yet  never  a  stroke  in  that  field  given  !     And 
furthermore,  of  all  this  twenty  thousand  aforesaid,  never  a   man's 
name  known  but  only  three  :    to  wit,  sir  Roger  Acton,   sir  John 
Brown,  and  John  Beverly,  a  preacher.     How  this  gear  is  clampered 
together  let  the  reader  judge,  and  believe,  as  he  seeth  cause. 

But  give  all  this  to  be  true,  although  by  no  demonstration  it  can 
be  proved,  yet  by  the  pope^s  dispensation,  which  in  this  earth  is 
almost  omnipotent,  be  it  granted ;  that  after  the  king  had  taken  the 
field  of  St.  Giles  before,  the  companions  of  the  lord  Cobham  after- 
wards coming  and  assembling  in  the  thickets  near  the  said  field,  to 
fight  seditiously  against  the  king,  their  country,  and  against  the  faith 
of  Christ,  to  the  number  of  twenty  thousand,  where  no  stroke  being- 
given,  so  many  were  taken,  that  all  the  prisons  of  London  were  full, 
and  yet  never  a  man''s  name  known  of  all  this  multitude,  but  only 
three :  all  this  I  say,  being  imagined  to  be  true,  then  followeth  to  be 
<'obham  demanded  of  Master  Cope,  whether  the  lord  Cobham,  was  here  pre- 
notraitor.  ^^^^^  ^^^^^|^  j^^^  company  in  the  field,  or  not .''  "  Not  in  person,"  saith 
Cope,'  "but  with  his  mind  and  with  his  counsel  he  was  present:"  and 
he  addetli  this  reason,  saying,  "  And  therefore  he,  being  brought 
again  after  his  escape,  was  convicted  both  of  treason  and  heresy,  and 
therefore,  sustaining  a  double  punishment,  was  both  hanged  and 
burnt  for  the  same,"  &c.  And  how  is  all  this  proved .^^  "By  Robert 
Fabian,"  he  saith.  Whereunto  briefly  I  answer,  that  Robert  Fabian 
in  that  place  maketh  no  such  mention  of  the  lord  Cobham  assisting 
or  consenting  to  them  either  in  mind  or  in  counsel.  His  words  be 
these,  "  That  certain  adherents  of  sir  John  Oldcastle  assembled  in 
the  field  near  to  St.  Giles,  in  great  number,  of  whom  was  sir  Roger 
Acton,  sir  John  Brown,  and  John  Beverly:  who,  with  thirty-six  more 
in  number,  Avere  afterwards  convicted  of  heresy  and  treason,  and  for 
the  same  were  hanged  and  burned  within  the  said  field  of  St.  Giles," 
&c.  Thus  much  in  Fabian  touching  the  commotion  and  condem- 
nation of  these  men  ;  but  that  the  lord  Cobham  Avas  there  present 
with  them  in  any  part,  either  of  consent  or  counsel,  as  Alanus  Copus 
f-opus  Anglus  pretendeth,  that  is  not  found  in  Fabian,  but  is  added  of  his 
with"  liberal  '  cornucopise,''  whereof  he  is  so  copious  and  plentiful,  that  he 
another  may  keep  an  open  shop  of  such  unwritten  untruths,  which  he 
may  afford  very  good  and  cheap  I  think,  being  such  a  plentiful 
artificer. 

But  here  will  be  objected  against  me  the  words  of  the  statute  made 
the  second  year  of  king  Henry  V.,^  whereupon  this  adversary,  triumph- 

<1)  Al.  Cop.  p.  833,  line  11.  ,2)  Ex.  stat.  reg.  Hen.  V.  an.  2.  cap.  7. 


AGAIKST    NICHOLAS    IIAUPSFIET.I).  3o3 

ing  with  no  little  glory,  wanap  tic;  oXvfXTTiuca  aviXofxevoQ,  tliinkctli    iii^nry 

himself  to  have  double  vantage  against  me  :  first,  in  proving  these '- 

aforesaid  accomplices  and  adherents  of  the  lord  Cobham  to  have  made  A.I), 
insurrection  against  the  king,  and  so  to  be  traitors  :  secondly,  in  con-  ^^  • 
victing  that  to  be  uniruc,  where,  in  my  I'ormer  book  of  Acts  and  Mo- 
numents,' I  do  report,  how  that  after  the  death  of  sir  Roger  Acton, 
Brown,  and  Beverly,  a  parliament  was  holden  at  Leicester,  where  a 
statute  was  made  to  this  effect :  "  That  all  and  singular  such  as  were 
of  Wickliff 's  learning,  if  they  would  not  give  over  (as  in  case  of  felony 
and  other  trespasses,  losing  all  their  goods  to  the  king),  should  suffer 
death  in  two  manner  of  kinds :  that  is,  they  should  first  be  hanged 
for  treason  against  the  king,  and  then  be  burned  for  heresy  against 
God." 

Whereupon  it  remaincth  now  in  examining  this  objection,  and  an- 
swering the  same,  that  I  both  purge  them,  of  treason,  and  myself,  of 
untruth,  so  far  as  truth  and  fidelity  in  God's  cause  shall  assist  me  herein. 
Albeit  in  beginning  first  my  history  of  ecclesiastical  matters,  wherein 
I  have  nothing  to  do  with  debatcment  of  causes  judicial,  but  only 
following  the  simple  narration  of  things  done  and  executed,  I  never 
suspected  that  ever  any  would  be  so  captious  with  me,  or  so  nice- 
nosed,  as  to  press  me  with  such  narrow  points  of  the  law,  in  trying  and 
discussing  every  cause  and  matter  so  exactly,  and  straining,  as  ye  would 
say,  the  bowels  of  the  statute  law  so  rigorously  against  me  ;  yet,  for- 
asmuch as  I  am  thereunto  constrained  now  by  this  adversary,  I  will 
first  lay  open  all  the  w^hole  statute  made  the  second  year  of  this  afore- 
said Henry  V.,  after  the  death  of  the  aforesaid  sir  Roger  Acton  and 
his  fellows,  at  the  parliament  holden  at  Leicester,  a.  d.  1415.  That 
done,  I  will  note  upon  the  words  thereof,  so  as  by  the  circumstances 
of  the  same  may  appear  what  is  to  be  concluded,  either  for  the  defence 
of  their  innocency,  or  for  the  accusation  of  this  adversary.  The  tenor 
and  purport  of  the  statute  hereunder  ensueth. 

The  Words  and  Contents  of  the  Statute  made  in  the  second  year  of 
Henry  V.,  chapter  seventh. 

Forasmuch  as  great  rumours,  congregations  and  insurrections(  a )  lierc  in      (n) 
England,  by  divers  of  the  king's  majesty's  Ucge  people,  have  been  made  liere  Tiic  i)ic- 
of  late,  as  well  by  those  which  were  of  the  sect  of  heresy  called  Lollardy,  as  by  ^^'^'^ "', , 
other  of  their  confederations,  excitations  and  abatements,  to  the  intent  to  annul  of  the 
and  subvert  the  christian  faith  and  the  law  of  God(  h  )  within  the  same  realm,  stat\ite. 
as  also  to  destroy  our  sovereign  lord  the  king  liimself(  c  ),  and  all  manner  of      (*  ) 
estates  of  the  same  his  realm,  as  well  spiritual   as  temporal(  fZ),  and  also  all      (f/j 
manner  of  policy  and  the  laws  of  the  land(  e ) ;  finally,  the  same  our  lord  the  .   •(  e  ) 
king,  to  the  honour  of  God,  in  conservation  and  fortification  of  the  christian 
faith,  and  also  in  salvation  of  his  royal  estate,  and  of  the  estate  of  all  his  realm, 
willing  to  provide  a  more  open  and  more  due  punishment  against  the  malice  of 
such  heretics  and  Lollards,  than  hath  been  had  or  used  in  that  case  heretofore, 
so  that  for  the  fear  of  the  same  laws  and  punishments,  such  heresies  and  lol- 
lardies  may  the  rather  cease  in  time  to  come : 

By  the  advice  and  assent  aforesaid,  and  at  the  prayer  of  the  said  commons,  iiere  it 
hath  ordained  and  established,  that  especially  the  chancellor,  the  treasurer,  the  ^ppcarcth 
justice  of  the  one  bench  and  of  the  other,  justices  of  assize,  justices  of  peace,  j,,;,  _.i„,J' 
sheriffs,  mayors,  and  bailiffs  of  cities  and  towns,  and  all  other  officers,   having  s.-.piilica-.- 
the  government  of  people  cither  now  present,  or  which  for  the  time  shall  be,  '(""j,','"" 
do  make  an  oatii  in  taking  of  their  charge  and  ofncrs,  to  extend  their  whole  pain  -.vus  set 
(I)  The  first  edition  of  the  Acts  and  Monuments.    London,  IS63,  p.  173,  col.  2.— Ed. 
VOL.   III.  A    A 


354  A    DEFENCE    OF    THE    LORD    COBIIAM, 

Henry    and  (HHgcnce  to  put  out,  to  do  to  put  out,  cease,   and  destroy,  all  manner  of 

'•       heresies  and  errors,  commonly  called   lollardies,  within  the  places  in  which  they 

.    |,      exercise  tlieir  charges  and  offices  fi-om  time  to  time,  with  all  their  power ;  and 

-iA\{    that  they  assist,  favour  and  maintain  the  ordinaries  and  their  commissaries,  so 

often  as  they  or  any  of  them  shall  be  thereunto  required  by  the  said  ordinaries 


forward     or  their  commissaries ;  so  that  the  said  officers  and  ministers  when  they  travel 

the'  ^°       '^^  ""^^  *^  arrest  any  Lollard,  or  to  make  any  assistance  at  the  instance  and 

cause.       request  of  the  ordinaries  or  their  commissaries(/),  by  virtue  of  this  statute, 

Astite-      that  the  same  ordinaries  and  commissaries  do  pay  for  their  costs(^)  reasonably, 

runtreges  ^j^j  ^^^^  j]jg  services  of  the  king,  unto  whom  the  officers  be  first  sworn,  be 

sa;i.  preferred  before  all  other  statutes  for  the  liberty  of  holy  church  and  the  ministers 

(/)      of  the  same,  and  especially  for  the  correction  and  punishment  of  heretics  and 

( a )      Lollards,  made  before  these  days,  and  not  repealed,  but  being  in  their  force ; 

and  also  that  all  persons  convicted  of  heresy,  of  whatsoever  estate,  condition,  or 

degi-ee  they  be,  by  the  said  ordinaries  or  their  commissaries  left  unto  the  secular 

power,  according  to  the  laws  of  holy  church,  shall  Icese  and  forfeit  all  their  lands 

and  tenements  which  they  have  in  fee  simple,  in  manner  and  form  as  followeth ; 

that  is  to  say,  that  the  king  shall  have  all  the  lands  and  tenements  which  the 

said  convicts  have  in  fee  simple,  and  which  be  immediately  holden  of  him,  as 

forfeited ;  and  that  the  other  lords,  of  whom  the  lands  and  tenements  of  such 

convicts  be  holden,  immediately  after  that  the  king  is  thereof  seised  and  answered 

( ft )      of  the  year,  day  and  wast(  h  ),  shall  have  livery  thereof  out  of  the  hands  of  the 

king,  of  the  lands  and  tenements  aforesaid,  so  of  them  holden,  as  hath  been  used 

in  case  of  attainder  of  felonies,  except  the  lands  and  tenements  which  be  holden 

of  the  ordinaries  or  their  commissaries,   before  whom  any  such  impeached  of 

heresy  be  convict,  which  lands  and  tenements  shall  wholly  remain  to  the  king 

( i  )      as  forfeit(  i ).    And  moreover,  that  all  the  goods  and  chattels  of  such  convicted 

be  forfeit  to  our  right  sovereign  lord  the  king,  so  that  no  person  convict  of 

heresy,  and  left  unto  the  secular  power  (according  to  the  laws  of  holy  church), 

do  forfeit  his  lands  before  that  he  be  dead.  And  if  any  such  person  so  convicted 

be  enfeoffed,  whether  it  be  by  fine  or  by  deed,  or  without  deed,  in  lands  and 

tenements,  rents  or  services,  in  fee  or  otherwise,  in  whatsoever  manner,  or  have 

any  other  possessions  or  chattels  by  gift  or  grant  of  any  person  or  persons,  to 

the  use  of  any  other  than  only  to  the  use  of  such  convicts ;  that  the  same  lands, 

tenements,  rents  or  services,  or  other  such  possessions,  or  chattels,  shall  not  be 

forfeit  unto  our  sovereign  lord  the  king  in  any  manner  wise. 

And  moreover,  that  the  justices  of  the  king's  bench,  the  justices  of  peace,  and 
justices  of  assize,  have  full  power  to  inquire  of  all  such  which  hold  any  errors 
or  heresies,  as  Lollards,  and  who  be  their  maintainers,  receivers,  fautors,  and 
sustainers,  common  writers  of  such  books,  as  well  of  their  sermons,  as  schools, 
conventicles,  congregations,  and  confederacies,  and  that  this  clause  be  put  in 
the  commissions  of  the  justices  of  peace.  And  if  any  persons  be  indicted  of  any 
of  the  points  above  said,  that  the  said  justices  have  power  to  award  against  them 
a  'capias,'  and  that  the  sheriff  be  bound  to  arrest  the  person  or  persons  so  in- 
dicted, as  soon  as  he  can  find  them,  either  by  himself  or  by  his  officers.  And 
for  as  much  as  the  cognisance  of  heresies,  errors,  or  lollardies,  appertaineth  to 
the  judges  of  holy  church,  and  not  unto  the  secular  judges,  that  such  persons 
X  A  )  indicted  be  delivered  unto  the  ordinaries  of  the  places(  k  ),  or  to  their  commis- 
saries, by  indentures  between  them  to  be  made,  within  ten  days  after  their 
arrest,  or  sooner,  if  it  may  be  done,  to  be  thereof  acquitted,  or  convict  by  the 
laws  of  holy  church,  in  case  such  persons  be  not  indicted  of  any  other  thing, 
the  cognisance  whereof  appertaineth  to  the  judges  and  secular  officers ;  in  which 
case,  after  they  shall  be  acquitted,  or  delivered  before  the  secular  judges  of  such 
things  as  appertain  to  the  secular  judges,  they  shall  be  sent  in  safe  custody  unto 
the  said  ordinaries  or  their  commissaries,  and  to  them  to  be  delivered  by  inden- 
tures, as  is  aforesaid,  to  be  acquitted  or  convicted  of  the  same  heresies,  errors, 
and  lollardies,  as  is  aforesaid,  according  to  the  laws  of  holy  church,  and  that 
within  the  term  abovesaid  ;  provided,  that  the  said  indictments  be  not  taken  in 
( I  )  evidence,  but  only  for  information  before  the  judges  spiritual(  I ),  against  such 
persons  indicted :  but  that  the  ordinaries  begin  their  pi-ocess  against  such  persons 
indicted,  in  the  same  manner  as  though  no  such  judgment  were,  having  no 
regard  to  such  indictment.  And  if  any  be  indicted  of  heresy,  error  or  loUardy, 
and  taken  by  the  sheriff,  or  any  other  officer  of  the  king,  he  may  be  let  to  main- 


AGAINST    XICTIOLAS    IIARPSKIEIJ).  355 

prise,  within  the  said  ten  days,  by  good  suret\',   for  whom  the  said  sheriffs  or     n.-vnj 
other  orticers  will  answer,  so  that  the  person  so  indicted  be  ready  to  be  delivered        ^• 
unto  tlie  said  ordinaries,  or  to  their  commissaries,  before  the  end  of  the  tentli      .    . 
day  above  recited,  if  he  may  by  any  means  for  sickness.'     And  that  every  ordi-    ^^|..' 

nary  have  sutHcient  commissaries  or  commissary  abiding  in  every  county,  in ' 

place  notable,  so  that  if  any  such  person  indicted  be  taken,  the  said  commissaries 
or  commissary  may  be  warned  in  the  notable  place  of  his  abiding,  by  the  sheriff 
or  any  of  his  othcers,  to  come  unto  the  king's  gaol  within  the  said  county,  there 
to  receive  the  same  person  so  indicted,  by  indenture,  as  is  aforesaid ;  and  that 
in  the  inquests  in  this  case  taken,  the  sherifis  and  other  officers  unto  whom  it 
appertaineth,  do  impanel  good  and  sufficient  persons,  not  suspected,  nor  pro- 
cured, that  is  to  say,  such  as  have  at  the  least,  every  one  of  them  that  shall  be  so 
impanelled  in  such  inquests,  within  the  realm,  a  hundi-ed  sliillings  by  the  year, 
in  lands,  tenements,  or  rent,  upon  pain  to  leese  to  the  king's  use  twenty  pounds. 
And  that  those  which  shall  be  impanelled  upon  such  incjucsts  at  sessions  and 
gaols,  have,  every  one  of  them,  to  the  value  of  forty  shillings  by  the  year.  And 
if  any  such  person  arrested,  whether  it  be  by  the  ordinaries,  or  the  officers  of  the 
king,  either  escape  or  break  prison (/«  )  before  he  be  thereof  acquit  before  the  (.m) 
ordinary,  that  then  all  his  goods  and  chattels,  which  he  had  at  the  day  of  such 
arrest,  shall  be  forfeit  to  the  king :  and  his  lands  and  tenements  which  he  had 
the  same  day  be  seised  also  into  the  king's  hands,  and  that  the  king  have  the 
profits  thereof  from  the  same  day  until  he  render  himself  imto  the  said  prison 
fi'om  whence  he  escaped.  And  that  the  aforesaid  justices  have  full  power  to 
inquire  of  all  such  escapes  and  breakings  of  prisons,  and  also  of  the  lands,  tene- 
ments, goods  and  chattels  of  such  persons  i.idicted.  Provided,  that  if  any  such 
person  indicted  do  not  return  unto  the  said  pinson,  and  dieth,  not  being  convict, 
that  then  it  shall  be  lawful  for  his  heirs  to  enter  into  the  lands  and  tenements  of 
his  or  their  ancestor,  without  any  other  suit  made  unto  the  king  for  this  cause. 
And  that  all  those  who  have  liberties  or  franchises  royal  in  England,  as  the 
county  of  Chester,  the  county  and  liberty  of  Durham,  and  other  like  ;  and  also 
all  the  lords  which  have  jurisdictions  and  franchises  royal  in  Wales,  where  the 
king's  writs  do  not  run,  have  like  power  to  execute  and  put  in  execution  in  all 
points  these  articles,  by  them  or  by  their  officers,  in  like  manner  as  do  the 
justices  and  other  the  king's  officers  above  declared. 


NOTES  TOUCHIXG  THE  AFORESAID  STATUTE. 

Thus  having  recited  the  words  of  the  statute,  now  let  us  consider 
the  reasons  and  objections  of  this  adversary,  who,  grounding  pcrad- 
ventiu'e  upon  the  preface  or  preamble  of  this  aforesaid  statute,  will 
prove  thereby  the  lord  Cobham  and  sir  Roger  Acton,  with  the  rest  of 
their  abettors,  to  have  been  traitors  to  their  Icing  and  their  country. 
AVhereunto  I  answer,  first,  in  general,  that  although  the  face  or  pre-  preface 
face  prefixed  before  the  statute,  may  show  and  declare  the  original  ^^'^^^^ 
cause  and  occasion  why  the  statute  was  made,  yet  the  making  of  tlie  not  to  be 
statute  importcth  no  necessary  probation  of  the  preface  always  to  be  in^'tdaf  of 
true  that  goeth  before ;   which  being  but  a   colour  to  induce  the  ''^""'* 
making  thereof,  givcth  no  force  material  thereunto,  nor  is  any  neces- 
sary part  of  the  body  of  the  said  statute,  but  only  adhered  as  a  decla- 
ration of  the  circmnstance  thereof,  and  sometimes  is  clean  omitted, 
and  differeth  much  from  the  substance  of  the  same.  For,  as  statutes 
in  civil   policy  most  commonly  do  tend  to  a  public  end,   and  arc 
general,  so  prefaces  before  statutes,  which  nu)st  commonly  declare  the 
cause  or  beginning  thereof,  arc  private,  and  do  stand  but  only  upon 
particidar   facts,    which  either  of  ill   will    and  displeasure  may   be 
suggested,  or  by  colour  may  be  exaggerated,  or  for  fear  may  be  be- 
lieved— at   least  suspected — as  many  suspicions  do  ofltimes  rise  in 

(!)  "  If  he  may,"  &.C.    Unless  hindered  by  sickness.    Ed. 

A  a2 


356  A    DEFENCE    OF    THE    LOKO    f'OBHAM, 

Ucnry   princcs  licatls  through  false  surmises,  and  malicious  complaints  of 
^'      certain    evil  disposed  about  them,  whereby  many  cruel  laws,  rising 


A.  D.    upon  a  talse  ground,  arc  promulgated,  to  the  ruin  of  much  innocent 
^^^'^-    blood.     Example  whereof,  we  have  not  only  in  this  present  statute, 
made  in  the  second  year  of  king  Henry  V.  cap.  7;  but  also  in  the  like 
statute,  commonly  called  the  statute  '  Ex  officio,  vel  de  comburendo,"* 
made  by  this   king''s   father   and  predecessor,  the    second  year  of 
Henry  IV.  cap.  15,  in  the  preface  of  which  bloody  statute  is  con- 
tained another  like  complaint  of  the  prelates  and  clergy,  not  less  hei- 
nous,  as  also   most  shamefully  ildse  and  imtrue,  against  the  poor 
lollards,  as  by  the  words  of  the  complaint  may  appear,    beginning, 
The  pre-   "  Excellcutissimo  et  gratiosissimo  principi,"  &c.;  wherein  most  falsely 
face  be-     they  slaudcr  and  misreport  the  true  servants  of  Christ  to  be  Lollards, 
statute     heretics,   subverters  of  the  commonw^ealth,  destroyers  of  the  chris- 
burenda.  tiau  faith,  cncmics  to  all  good  laws,  and  to  the  church  of  Christ. 
The  words   of  which  statute,  proceeding  much  after  the  like  coiu-se 
as  doth  this  present  statute,  may  easily  bewray  the  untruth  and  false 
surmise  thereof,  if  thou  please,  gentle  reader,  to  mark  and  confer  the 
Avords  according  as  they  are  there  to  be  read  and  seen,  as  followeth : — 
"  Conventiculas  et  confederationes  faciunt,  scholas  tenent  et  exercent, 
libros  conficiunt  atque  scribunt,  popidum  nequiter  instruunt  et  in- 
formant,   et    ad  seditionem  sen  insurrectionem  excitant,  quantum 
possu.nt,  et  magnas  dissensiones  in  populo  faciunt,   et  alia  diversa 
enormia  auditui  horrenda  in  dies  perpetrant,  in  fidei  catholicse,  et 
ecclesise  subversionem,  divinique  cultus  diminutionem,  ac  etiam  de- 
structionem  status,  jm-ium,  et  liberatum  dictffi  ecclesiee  Anglicanse.""* 
And  afterwards  a  few  words,  '"  Ad  omnem  juris  et  rationis  ordinem  at- 
Faise  ac-  que  rcgimcu,  penitus  destruendum,''''  &c.     He  that  is,  or  shall  be,  ac- 
no^^ews'  quainted  with  old  histories,  and  with  the  usual  practices  of  Satan,  the 
i^n  .  ,     old    enemy  of  Christ,   from  the  first   beginning   of  the   primitive 
church,    church  urito  this  present  time,  shall  see  this  to   be  no  news,  but  a 
common,  and  as  one  would  say,  a  quotidian,  fever  among  Christ''s 
children,  to  be  vexed  with  false  accusations  and  cruel  slanders. 
of^Ne-^  ^       Nemesion,  the  Egyptian  and  true  martyr  of  Christ,  was  he  not 
a"m-ut'    ^^'^^  accused  to  be  a  felon  ?     And  when  that  could  not  be  proved, 
he  was  condemned  at  the  same  judgment  for  a  Christian ;  and  there- 
fore being  cast  into  bands,  was  scourged,  by  the  commandment  of 
the  president,  double  to  the  other  felons,  and  at  length  was  burned 
with  the  thieves,  although  he  never  was  found  thief  or  felon. 
Example       Agaiust  Cyprian,  in  like  sort,  it  was    slanderously  objected    by 
prian!      Galcnus   Maximus,   proconsul,  that  he  had  long  continued  with  a 
mind  full  of  sacrilege,  and  that  he  had  gathered  unto  him  men  of 
wicked  conspiracy.^ 
Justin  gQ  Justin  Martvr,  what  false  and  criminous  accusations  suffered  he 

ami  Cor-  by  Crcsccns  .'*  Cornelius,  bishop  of  Rome  and  martyr,  Avas  accused 
bishop  of  ty  Decius,  That  he  wrote  letters  unto  Cyprian  against  the  com- 
Kome.      monwealth.'' 

To  consider  the  laws  and  statutes  made  by  tyrants  and  emperor.^ 
in  the  first  persecution  of  the  primitive  church,  against  the  innocent 
servants  of  Christ,  and  to  compare  the  same  with  the  laws  and  statutes 

(1)  Ex  vetustis  instrumentls. 

C^)  •  Quod  diu  sacvilegia  mente  vixerit,  et  nefaris  sibi  conspirationis  homines  adjunxerit. 

1.31  Quod  ad  Cypviniuiiu  litteras  daret  contra  rempublic. 


AGAINST    NICHOLAS    HARPSFIELD.  85? 

in  this  latter  persecution  under  Antichrist,  a  man  shall  find,  that  as    ■'/<'n>» 
they  all  agree  in  like  cruelty,  so  was  there  no  great  difference  in  false       *"' 


nmitive 
latter 


forging  of  pretensed   causes  and  crimes  devised.     For  as  then  the    A.  D. 
Christians  were  wrongfully  accused  of  the  Gentiles  for  insurrections    ^'^^'^' 
and  rebellions  against  the  emperors  and  empire,  for  being  enemies  to  Laws  and 
all    mankind,   for  murdering  of  infants,    for  worshipping   the  sun  grou^nded 
(because  they  prayed  toward   the    East),  for  worshipping  also  the  }^^i,""» 
liead  of  an  ass,*  &c.,  upon  the  rumours  whereof  divers  and  sundry  causes 
laws  and  statutes  were  enacted,  some  engraven  in  brass,  some  other-  the  cTiris- 
wise  written  against  them  ;  so  in   this  aforesaid  statute,  made  in  the  p^."^^. 
second  year  of  Henry  V.,  chap.  7,  also  in  that  made  in  the  second  <^"t'ns 
year  of  Henry  IV.,  chap.  15,  and  in  such  other  statutes  or  indictments  \n\hr 
made  and  conceived  against  the  Lollards,  the  case  is  not  so  strange,  I 
but  it  may  credibly  be  supposed,  that  the  making  thereof  did  rise  '■'';']'"'^ 
rather  upon  malice  and  hatred  against  their  religion  conceived,  than  paied. 
upon  any  just  cause  ministered  on  their  parts,  whom  they  did  WTong-  fnd  fear, 
fully  charge  and  accuse.     Like  as  in  the  time  of  Domitian,  for  fear  of  "^^"^'^^^"^ 
David's  stock,  all  the  nephews  of  Judc,  the  Lord's  brother  in  the  cution. 
flesh,  were  accused   to   the  emperor.     And  also  the  like  fear  and 
hatred  stin-ed  up  other  emperors  and  the  senate  of  Rome,  to  proceed 
with  persecuting  laws  against  the  christian  flock  of  Christ  ;^  where- 
upon rose  up  those  malicious  slanders,  false  surmises,  imfamous  lies, 
and  ^\Tongful  accusations  against  the  Christians ;  so  that  what  crime 
soever  either  malice  could  invent,  or  rash  suspicion  could  minister, 
that  was  imputed  against  them. 

Not  unlike  also  it  may  seem,  that  the  pope  with  his  prelates,  fearing 
and  misdoubting  lest  the  proceeding  of  the  gospel  preached  by  these 
persons  should  overthrow  the  state  of  their  majesty,  did  therefore, 
by  sinister  accusations,  inflame  the  hearts  of  princes  against  them, 
and  under  some  coloured  covert,  to  shadow  their  cloaked  hatred,  de- 
mised these  and  other  like  crimes  which  were  not  true,  but  which  might 
cleanly  serve  their  purpose. 

This  hitherto  have  I  said  as  in  a  general  sum,  answering  to  the  The  mat- 
preamble  of  the  aforesaid  statute,  for  the  defence  of  sir  John  Old-  iiaaxUiy 
castle,  and  sir  Roger  Acton,  and  others  ;  not  as  defining  precisely  what  ^^!^^|![fj^; 
was,  or  was  not  (for  here  I  may  say  with  Hall,  that  as  I  was  not  pre-  lord  cob- 
sent  at  the  deed-doing,  so  with  him,  I  may  also  leave  the  same  at  sir  iiLger 

Acton 

(1)  Revolting  as  this  statement  may  appear  to  tlte  christian  reader,  it  is  nevertheless  a  well  were 
authenticated  fact,  that  some  of  the  blind  votaries  of  the  Romish  church  have  actually  introduced,  traitors, 
among  the  solemnities  of  her  worship,  this  animal,   the  head  of  which  the  primitive  Christians 

were  falsely  charged  with  worshipping. — Edgar,  in  his  "  Variations  of  Popery,"  p.  45,  speaks  of  the 
'  Feast  of  the  ass,'  celebrated,  for  some  time  in  the  Galilean  church,  especially  at  liovais  and  Burgundy. 
His  words  are  these  :  "  The  friends  of  this  ceremony  had  discovered,  by  their  superior  discernment, 
that  an  ass  was  the  conveyance  of  Joseph  and  Mary,  when  they  fled,  for  an  asylum,  from  Herod, 
into  Egypt.  An  institution  therefore  was  appointed  for  the  commemoration  of  the  flight  and 
deliverance  ;  and  the  solemnity  was  a  pattern  of  taste,  rationality,  and  devotion.  A  handsome  girl 
richly  attired,  represented  Mary,  who,  from  some  flattering  portraits  of  her  ladyship,  was  accounted 
a  Jewish  beauty.  The  girl,  bedizened  with  finery,  was  placed  on  an  ass,  covered  with  a  rich  cloth  of 
gold  and  richly  caparisoned.  The  ass,  accompanied  with  a  vast  concourse  of  clergy  and  laitj',  was 
led  to  the  cathedral  of  the  parish.  The  girl,  who  represented  the  mother  of  God,  seated  on  an  ass, 
was  conducted  unto  the  sanctuary  itself,  and  placed,  with  the  gospels,  near  the  altar.  High  mass 
began  ;  the  ass,  who  was  a  devout  worshipper  on  the  occasion,  was  taught  to  kneel,  as  in  duty  bound, 
at  certain  intervals,  while  a  hymn,  no  less  rational  than  pious,  was  sung  in  his  praise."  The  fol- 
lowing is  an  extract  from  the  hymn,  which  is  given  at  length  by  Uu  Cange: — 
"  Hey,  Sire  Asncs,  car  chantez, 

Belle  Iwuche  rechignez 

Vous  aurez  de  foin  assez 

Et  de  I'avoine  a  phantez." 
See  Du  Cange  in  his  Glossaxium,  vol.  iii.  p.  42G.,   Paris  1733.   Also  Velley's  Histoire  da  France, 
vol.  iii,  p.  537.  Paris,  17(il.— Ed. 

(2)  Euseb.  lib.  v.  cap.  21. 


A    DEFENCE    OF    THE    LORD    COBHAM, 


Henry    lavge)  ;  but  as  one,  by  tracing  the  footsteps  of  the  truth,  as  by  all 


pat  ions 
insurrec- 
tions. 


conjectures  hunting  out  in  this  matter,  what  is  most  like,  Avould  but 

A.  D.    only  say  my  mind  "  sine  strepitu,"  as  laAvyers  say,   "  et  sine  figura  a 
1413.  judicii." 

Now  consequently  it  followeth  that  we  descend  to  the  special  points 
and  particulars  of  the  aforesaid  preamble ;  to  consider  what  thereof 
may  be  collected,  or  necessarily  is  to  be  judged,  either  for  proof  or 
disproof  of  this  aforesaid  sir  John  Oldcastle  and  his  fellows. 

And  first  where  the  proem  of  this  statute  bcginneth  with  "  rumours, 
congregations  and  insurrections,"  &:c.  As  it  is  not  like,  that  if 
these  men  had  intended  any  forcible  entries  or  rebellion  against  the 
king,  they  wouldhave  made  any  rumours  thereof  before  the  deed  done  ; 
so  is  it  more  credibly  to  be  supposed,  all  these  flourishes  of  words  to 
be  but  words  of  course,  or  of  office,  and  to  savour  rather  of  the 
rankness  of  the  inditer's  pen,  who  disposed  either  "  per  amplifica- 
tionem  rhetoricam"  to  show  his  copy,  or  else  "  per  maliciam  papis- 
ticam,"  to  aggravate  the  crime  ;  and,  to  make  mountains  of  mole- 
I'u-  hills,  first  of  rumours  maketh  congregations,  and  from  congrega- 
eonsre-  tious,  riseth  up  to  insurrections;  whereas  in  all  these  rumours, 
congregations  and  insm-rections,  (a)  yet  never  a  blow  was  given, 
never  a  stroke  was  stricken,  no  blood  spilled,  no  furniture  nor  in- 
struments of  war,  no  sign  of  battle,  yea  no  express  significa- 
tion either  of  any  rebellious  word,  or  malicious  flict,  described  either 
in  records,  or  yet  in  any  chronicle.  Again,  if  these  rumours  were 
words  spoken  against  the  king,  as  calling  him  a  tyrant,  an  "  Usurper 
of  the  crown,"  the  "  Prince  of  Priests,"  &c.,  why  then  be  ftone  of 
these  words  expressed  in  their  indictments,  or  left  in  records  ?  Doth 
Master  Cope  tliink  for  a  man  to  be  called  a  traitor,  to  be  enough  to 
make  him  a  traitor,  unless  some  plain  and  evident  proof  be  brought 
for  him  to  be  so  indeed,  as  he  is  called  ?  "■  Rumours,"  saith  he, 
"  congregations,  and  insurrections  were  made."  Rumours  are  uncer- 
tain, congregations  have  been,  and  may  be,  among  christian  men  in 
dangerous  times  for  good  purposes,  and  no  treason  against  their 
princes  meant.  The  term  of  insurrections  may  be  added  £k  tov 
TTfpto-crouby  practice,  or  surmise  of  the  prelates  and  pen-men,  who, 
to  bring  them  the  more  in  hatred  of  the  king,  might  add  this  rather 
of  their  own  gentleness,  than  of  the  others'  deserving.  Certain  it  is, 
and  undoubted,  that  the  prelates  in  those  days,  being  so  mightily 
inflamed  against  these  Lollards,  were  not  altogether  behind  for  their 
parts,  nor  utterly  idle  in  this  matter,  but  practised  against  them 
what  they  could,  first  to  bring  them  into  hatred,  and  then  to 
death. 

Examples  of  this  kind  of  practice  among  the  popish  clergy  have 
not  lacked  either  before  or  since.  Moreover,  if  these  men  had 
made  such  a  rebellious  insurrection  against  the  king,  as  is  pretended 
in  the  preamble  before  this  statute,  which  were  a  matter  of  high 
treason,  how  chanceth  then,  that  the  Avhole  body  of  the  statute,  fol- 
lowing after  the  said  preface  or  preamble,  runneth,  in  all  the  parts 
or  branches  thereof,  both  in  matter  of  arrest,  of  indictment,  infor- 
mation, request,  allowance  of  officers,  cognisance  of  ordinaries,  of 
the  forefact,  &c.,  upon  cases  of  heresy,  and  not  of  treason,  as  by 
particular  tractation  shall  be,  Christ  willing,  declared. 


AGAINST    NICHOLAS    IIAUPSFIELD.  359 

And  forasmuch  as  these  men  be  so  grievously  accused  by  Alanus    iienry 
Copus,  for  conopre<i^ting  and  rising  against  their  king,  and  the  whole 


rcahii,  if  I  had  so  much  leisure  to  defend,  as  he  hath  pleasure  to    A.  D. 
defame,  here  might  be  demanded  of   him,  to    keep  him  in  some    ^^^■^- 
further  play,  touching  this  miglity  insurrection,  Where  they  came  in  i"-^v''- 
number  of  twenty  thousand  against  the  king?  in  what  order  of  battle-  oithe 
array  they  marched  ?  what  captains,  under-captains,  and  petty  cap-  apii[,st 
tains  they  had,  to  guide  the  wings,  and  to  lead  the  army  ?  whether  ^'"^  "^'"k. 
they  were  horsemen  or  footmen  ?     If  they  were  horsemen,  as  is  pre-  iiktiy. 
tensed,  what  meant  they  then  to  resort  to  the  thickets  near  to  St. 
Giles''s  field,  which  Avas  no  meet  place  for  horses  to  stir  ?     If  they 
were  footmen,  how  standeth  that  M'ith  the  author,  who  reporteth  them 
to  be  horsemen  ?     Moreover,  it  is  to  be  demanded,  what  ensigns  or 
flags,   what  shot,  what  powder,   what  armour,  weapons,  and    other 
furniture  of  war  ?  also  what  treasure  of  money  to  wage  so  many,  to 
the  number  of  twenty  thousand  ?  what  trmnpets,  drums,  and  other 
noise  necessary  for  the  purpose  they  had  ?     All  these  preparations 
for  such  an  enterprise,  are  requisite  and  necessary  to  be  had.     And 
peradventure,  if  truth  were  well  sought,  it  Avould  be  found  at  length, 
that  instead  of  annies  and  weapons,  they  Averc  coming  only  with  their 
books,  and  Avith  Beverly  their  preacher,  into  those  thickets.     But 
as  I  Avas  not  there  present  at  the  fact,  as  is  before  said,  so  have  I 
neither  certainty  to  define  upon  their  case,  nor  yet,  Master  Cope,  to 
exclaim  against  them  ;  unless  peradventure,  that  he,  taking  an  occasion 
of  the  time,  Avill  thus  argue  against  them,  that  because  it  was  the 
hot  month  of  January,  the  second  day  after  the  Epiphany,  therefore 
it  is  likely  that  sir  John  Oldcastle,  Avith  twenty  mousand  Lollards, 
encamped  together  in  the  fields  in  all  the  heat  of  the  Aveathcr,  to 
destroy  the  king,  and  all  the  nobles,  and  to  make  himself  regent  of 
England  :  and  Avhy  not  as  Avell  the  king,  as  regent  of  England,  see- 
ing all  the  nobles  should  have  been  destroyed,  and  he  only  left  alone 
to  reign  by  himself? 

It  folloAveth  moreover  in  the  preamble  of  the  aforesaid  statute,  "to 
annul,  destroy  and  subvert,  the  christian  faith,  and  the  law  of  God, 
and  holy  church,"  &c.  (h)     He   that   Avas  the  forger  and  inventor  a  sian- 
of  this  report,  as  it  appeareth  to  proceed  from  the  prelates,  seemeth  ^^^,,^11^ 
no  cunning  Doedalus,  nor  half  his  craftmaster  in  lying  for  the  whet-  Jj°^',''^™' 
stone.     Better  he  might  have  learned  of  Sinon  in  Virgil,  more  arti-  intended 
ficially  to  have  framed  and  conveyed  his  narration  ;  Avhich  although  cudsf '"'' 
it  could  in  no  case  sound  like  any  truth,  yet  some  colour  of  proba-  *^="''^ 
bility  should  have  been  set  upon  it,  to  give  it  some  countenance  of 
a  like  tale  :  as  if  he  had  first  declared  the  lord  Cobham  to  have  been 
before  in  secret  confederacy  Avith  the  great  Turk  ;  or  if  he  had  made 
him  some  Termagant  or  Mahound  out  of  Babylonia,  or  some  Herod 
of  Judea,  or  sone  Aniichrist  out  of  Rome,  or  some  grand-paunched 
epicure  of  this  Avorld,  and  had  showed,  that  he  had  received  letters 
from   the   great    Soldan,  to  fight   against   the  fiiith  of  Christ,   and 
law  of  God ;  then  had  it  appeared  somcAvhat  more  credible,  that  the 
said  sir  John  Oldcastle,  with  his  sect  of  heresy,  Avent  about  to  "  annul, 
destroA',  and  subvert,  the  christian  faith  and  laAV  of  God,  Avithhi  the 
realm  of  England, ''  &c. 

But  now,  where  will  cither  he  or  Master  Cope  find  men  so  mad 


laii 


3G0  A    DEFEKCE    OF    THJ:    LORD    COBHAM, 

Henry  to  bclicve,  01  SO  ingciiious,  that  can  imagine  this  to  be  true,  that 
.  ^'  the  lord  Cobham,  being  a  Cliristian,  and  so  faithful  a  Christian, 
A.D.  would,  or  did,  ever  cogitate  in  his  mind  to  destroy  and  annul  the 
^•^^S.  fi^j^jj  Qf  Christ  in  the  realm  of  England  ?  Whatsoever  the  report  of 
this  pursuant  or  preface  saith,  I  report  me  unto  the  indifferent  reader, 
how  standeth  this  with  any  face  of  truth?  that  he  -who  before,  through 
the  reading  of  Wickliffs  works,  had  been  so  earnestly  converted  to 
the  laAv  of  God,  who  had  also  approved  himself  such  a  faithful  servant 
of  Clu-ist,  that  for  the  faith  of  Christ,  he,  being  examined  and  tried 
before  the  prelates,  not  only  ventured  his  life,  but  stood  constant 
unto  the  sentence  of  death  defined  against  him,  being  a  condemned 
and  a  dead  man  by  law,'  who  had,  as  much  as  to  devotion  and  fear 
appertained,  "  suffered  already  what  he  might  or  could  suffer,''"'  as 
Cyprian  said  by  Cornelius  :  that  he,  I  say,  who  a  little  before,  in  the 
month  of  September,  stood  so  constant  in  defence  of  Christ's  faith, 
would  now,  in  the  month  of  January,  rise  to  destroy,  annul,  and  sub- 
vert Christ's  faith,  and  the  law  of  God,  and  holy  church  within  the 
realm  of  England  ? 

How  can  it  be,  not  likely  only,  but  possible  to  be  true,  that  he 
who  never  denied  the  faith ;  who  ever  confessed  the  faith  so  con- 
stantly ;  who  was  for  the  same  faith  condemned  ;  yea,  and  at  last 
also  burned  for  the  faith,  would  ever  fight  against  the  faith  and  law 
of  God,  to  annul  and  subvert  it  ?  Let  us  proceed  yet  further,  and 
see  when  he  should  have  so  destroyed  and  annulled  the  christian 
faith  and  law  of  God  in  England,  what  faith  or  law  then  could  he 
or  did  he  intend  to  bring  into  the  realm  of  England  ?  the  Tvu-k's 
faith  ?  or  the  Jew's  faith  ?  or  the  pope's  faith  ?  or  what  faith  else  I 
pray  you  ?  for  he  that  will  be  an  enemy  to  the  faith  of  Christ,  and 
will  show  himself  a  friend  to  no  other  faith  besides,  I  account  him 
not  out  of  his  right  fiiith,  but  out  of  his  right  wits. 

And  therefore,  even  as  it  is  true,  that  sir  John  Oldcastle  with  his 

confederates  and  abettors,  were  up  in  amis  to  subvert  and  extinguish 

the  faith  of  Christ  and  law  of  God  in  the  realm  of  England,  so,  by 

the  like  truth,  it  may  be  esteemed,  that  the  same  persons  rose  also 

Lord       "  to  destroy  their  sovereign  lord  the  king,  and  his  brethren." (c)  First, 

Sseiy"    thanks  be  to  God,  that  neither  the  king  nor  any  of  his  brethren  had 

slandered  fii-,y  ]^y^J.l  }yj  \{iii]^     But  his  intent,  saith  the  preface,  was  to  destroy 

tending    his  sovereign  lord  the  king.     Whercunto  I  answer  with  this  interro- 

stroy  the  g^itory.  Whether  Avas  his  intent  to  have  destroyed  him  privily,  or  by 

kiiig(c).    open  force  of  arms  ?  If  privily,  what  needeth  then  such  a  great  army 

of  twenty  thousand  men,  to  achieve  that  secret  feat  ?  rather  I  would 

think  that  he  needed  more  the  help  of  such  as  were  near  about  the 

king ;  as  some  of  the  king's  privy  chamber,  or  some  of  his  secret 

council ;   whereof  neither  chronicle  nor  record  doth  insinuate  any 

How        mention.     If  his  intent  was  openly  to  invade  the  king ;  you  must 

unlikely,  understand  Master  Cope,  that  to  withstand  a  king  in  his  own  realm, 

niany  things  are  required;  long  time,  great  preparation,  many  fi'iends, 

great  assistance  and  aid  of  kindred,  money,  horse,  men,  armour,  and 

all  otlier  things  appertaining  for  the  same. 

Earl  Godwin   of  Westsax,  who  had  manied  Canute's  daughter, 

(1)  "  Et  qui  quantum  ad  ejus  devotionem  pertmet  et  timorem,  passus  sit  quicquid  pati  potuit," 
C;  pr.  L  iv,  Epist,  2. 


AGAINST    XIOIOI.AS    HARrsl'IliLP.  3Gt 

being  a  niaii  botli  ambitious,  and  as  false  a  traitor,  for  all  his  six  sons    iimnj 
and  great  alliance,  yet  durst  not  set  upon  king  Edward  to  invade       ^' 


liini  within  his  realm  ;  although  he  sought  many  occasions  so  to  do,    A.  I), 
yet  never  durst  he  enterprise  openly  that  which  liis  ambition  so    '^j}^ 
greatly  presumed  unto.  what  a 

In  the  time  of  king  Henry  III.,  Simon  Montfort  carl  of  Glouccs-  t«itT" 
ter,  Gilbert  Clare  carl  of  Leicester,  Humfrey  Rone  carl  of  Ferrence,  %^^^^t 
with  a  great  number  of  lords  and  barons,  thought  themselves  to  have  ^^^  "^'"s- 
great  right  on  their  sides ;  yet  durst  they  not,  for  all  their  power, 
openly  assail  the  king  in  his  realm,  before  great   debatement  and 
talk  first  had  between. 

Likewise  what  murmuring  and  grudging  was  there  in  the  realm  Against 
against  king  Edward  IL,  among  the  peers  and  nobles,  and  also  pre-  Edlard 
lates,  Walter  bishop  of  Coventry,  only  excepted ;  first  for  Gaveston,  "■ 
then  for  the  Spencers,  at  what  time  Thomas  earl  of  Lancaster,  Guido 
earl  of  AVarwick,  with  the  most  part  of  all   the  other  earls  and 
barons,  concordly  consenting  together  to  the  displacing  first  of  Gaves- 
ton, then  of  the  Spencers,  yet  neither  raslily,  nor  without  great  fear, 
durst  stir  up  war  in  the  land,  or  disquiet  or  vex  the  king ;  but  first, 
by  all   means  of  moderate  counsel   and   humble  petition,  thought 
rather  to  persuade,  than  to  invade  the  king. 

In  like  manner,  and  with  like  grudging  minds,  in  the  reign  of  Against 
king  Richard  1 1.,   Thomas   Woodstock,    duke   of  Gloucester,   the  Richard 
king's  uncle,  with  the  earls  of  Arundel,  Warwick,  and  Derby,  with  '^' 
the  power  almost  of  the  whole  commons,  stood  up  in  arms  against 
the  king;  and  yet,  notwithstanding  all  their  power  joined  together 
being  so  great,  and  their  cause  seeming  to  them  so  reasonable,  yet 
were  they  not  so  hardy  as  straightways  to  fly  upon  the  king,  but  by 
way  of  parliament  thought  to  accomplish  that  which  their  pm-pose 
had  conceived  ;  and  so  did,   without  any  war  striking  against  the 
king. 

After  king  Richard  II.  was   deposed,    and   was   in   prison  yet  Against 
living,  divers  noblemen  were  greatly  inflamed  against  king  Henry  Henry 
IV.,  as  sir  John  Holland,  earl  of  Huntingdon  ;  Thomas  Spencer,  '^• 
earl  of  Gloucester ;  the  earls  likewise  of  Kent  and  Salisbury,  with 
sir  John  Cheiney,  and  others,  whereof  divers  had  been  dukes  before, 
and  were  now  deposed  by  king  Henry  IV.,  although  they  had  con- 
ceived in  their  hearts  great  grudge  and  malice  against  the  said  king 
Henry,  yet  had  they  neither  heart  nor  power  openly,  with  man's 
force,  to  assail  the  king,  but  secretly  were  compelled  to  achieve  their 
conceived  intent,  which  notwithstanding  they  could  not  accomplish.* 

Thus  you  may  see,   Master  Cope,  or  else  Master  Harpsfield,  or  The  in- 
whatsoever  ye  be,  to  gainstand  a  king,  and  with  open  force  to  en-  j,"'i[„"f 
counter  with  him  in  his  own  land,  and  in  his  own  chamber  of  Lon-  iTd 
don,  where  he  is  so  sure  and  strong,  a  matter,  of  how  great  achievance  jud'},'e<i" 
it  is,  wherein  so  many  and  so  great  difficulitics  do  lie,  the  attempt  so  ^J^^"' 
dangerous,  the  chances  so  uncertain,  the  fiii-niture  of  so  many  things  stance, 
required,  that  scarce  in  any  king's  days  heretofore  any  peers  or  nobles 
of  the  realm,  were  they  ever  so  strongly  assisted  with  power,  wit,  or 
counsel,  yet  either  were  able,  or  else  well  durst  ever  to  enterprise 
upon  the  case  so  dangerous,  notwithstanding  they  were  of  themselves 

(1)  Ex.  Hist.  D.  Alban. 


362  A  DEFENCE  OF  THE  LOUD  COBHAM, 

Henry    evcr  SO  far  from  all  fear  of  God,  and  true  obedience.     And  shall  we 

— '- —  then  think,  or  can  we  imagine,  Master  Cope,  that  sir  John  Oldcastle, 

^-  ^*    a  man  so  well  instructed  in  the  knowledge  of  God''s  word,  being  but 

]zL.  a  poor  knight  by  his  degree,  having  none  of  all  the  peers  and  nobles 

in  all  the  world  to  join  with  him,  being  prisoner  in  the  Tower  of 
London  a   little  before  in  the  month  of  December,  could  now,  in 
the  month  of  January,  so  suddenly,  in  such  a  hot  season  of  the  year, 
start  up  an  anny  of  twenty  thousand  fighting  men  to  invade  the 
king,  to  kill  two  dukes,  his  brethren,  to  annul  christian  faith,   to 
destroy  God''s  law,  and  to  subvert  holy  church  ?     And  why  doth  not 
he  add,  moveover,  to  set  also  all  London  on  fire,  and  to  turn  all 
England  into  a  fish-pool  ?     Belike  these  men,  who  give  out  these 
figments  of  sir  John  Oldcastle,  did  think  him  to  be  one  of  Deuca- 
lion's stock,  who  by  casting  stones  over  his  shoulder,  could,  by  and 
by,  make  men  at  his  pleasure,  or  else  that  he  had  Cadmus"'  teeth  to 
sow,  to  make  so  many  harvest  men  to  start  up  at  once. 
Twenty        But  let  US  cousidcr  yet  further  of  these  twenty  thousand  soldiers, 
men^and  ^^  Suddenly,  without  wages,  without  victual  or  other  provision,  con- 
yet  not     gregated  together,  what  they  were,  from  whence,  out  of  what  quarter, 
trom "     county,  or  counties  they  came.    In  another  king's  days,  whensoever 
^^gy"*^*^    any  rebellion  against  the  king  was  moved  by  the  commons,  as  when 
came,  it    Jack  Straw,  and  Wat  Tyler  of  Kent,  and   Essex,  also,  rose  in  the 
likely,      time  of  king  Richard  IL;   when  William  Mandevil  of  Abingdon, 
Jack  Cade  of  Kent,  in  the  time  of  king  Henry  VL ;  in  the  time  of 
king  Henry  VHL,  when  the  commotion  of  rebels  was  in  Lincoln- 
shire, then  in  Yorkshire  ;   when  in  king  Edward  the  Vlth's  time, 
Humphery  Arundel  in  Devonshire,  and  captain  Kyte  in  Norfolk, 
made  stir  against  the  king,  the  Country  and  parts  from  whence  these 
No  rebel-  rcbcls  did  spring,  were  both  noted  and  also  defamed.     In  this  so 
EngiMd;  traitorous  commotion,  therefore,  let  us  now  learn  what  these  men 
^ec\a?     ^^'cre,  and  from  what  county  or  counties  in  all  England  they  came. 
country,    If  they  Came  out  of  any,  let  the  chronicles  declare  Avhat  counties  they 
whence    Were.     If  they  came  out  of  none,  as  none  are  named,  then  let  them 
P3^fg       come  out  of  Eutopia,  where,  belike,  this  figment  was  first  forged 
^as         and  invented.  Wherefore   seeing  neither  the  counties  from  Avhence 
they  came,  nor  yet  the  names  of  any  of  all  these  twenty  thousand 
do  appear,   what  they  were,  either  in   chronicle  or  in  record,   but 
remain  altogether  unknown,  I  leave  it,  gentle  reader,  to  thy  judg- 
ment, to  think  thereupon,  as  thy  wisdom  shall  lead  thee. 

It  followeth  more  in  the  aforesaid  preface ;  "  And  to  destroy  all 
other  manner  of  estates  of  the  same  realm  of  England,  as  well  spiritual 
cd)      as  temporal,"  &c.  (c?)     By  the  course  of  this  preamble  it  appeareth, 
foi's°e  re-    ^^^  the  Said  sir  John  Oldcastle  was  a  wonderfully  cruel  tyrant  and 
Old  '  *^^*  murderer,  who,  being  not  yet  satisfied  with  the  blood  of  the  king,  nor 
intended  of  the  two  dukes  his  brethren,  would  also  make  havoc  and  sweep- 
manner'^  stake  of  all  manner  of  estates  in  the  realm  of  England.    What !  and 
inthe^'^^  leave  no  manner  of  estate  alive? — No!   neither  lord  spiritual  nor 
realm,      temporal,  but  all  together  shall  be  destroyed.     And  what  had  all 
these  estates  done,  thus  so  miserably  to  be  destroyed  ?     Although, 
percase,  the  mood  of  this  man  might  have  been  incensed  and  kindled 
against  the  king  and  the  lords  spiritual,  by  whom  he  had  been  con- 
demned, as  is  aforesaid ;  yet  why  should  all  other  manner  of  other 


AGAINST    NICHOLAS    HABPSFIELD.  368 

estates  both  spiritual  and  temporal  be  killed  ?     If  none  of  all  the    Henry 


estates  in  England,  neither  duke,  earl,  baron,  lord,  knight,  or  other 
gentleman  had  been  his  friend,  but  all  his  enemies,  how  then  is  it    ^-J^' 

likely  that  he,  having  all  the  estates,  peers,  nobles  and  gentlemen  of 1- 

the  realm  against  him,  and  none  to  stand  with  him,  either  could  or 
durst  attempt  any  commotion  against  the  whole  power  of  the  land, 
he  being  but  one  gentleman  only,  with  sir  Roger  Acton,  and  Master 
Brown  left  alone  ?  At  least,  good  reason  yet  would,  that  those 
hundreil  knights  should  have  been  spared  out  of  this  bloody  slaughter, 
whom  he  offered  to  produce  unto  the  king  before,  for  his  purgation. 
And  finally,  if  this  was  his  purpose,  that  all  these  estates  both  spiritual 
and  temporal  should  have  been  cut  down,  what  needed  then  that  he 
should  have  made  himself  a  regent,  when  he  might  as  well  have  made 
himself  a  king,  or  what  else  he  would,  being  left  then  prince  alone  ? 

The  preamble,  as  it  began  with  untruth,  and  continued  in  the  same  a  hard 
figure,  heaping  one  untruth  upon  another,  so  now  endeth  with  another  "e^troy'" 
misreport  as  imtrue  as  the  rest,  showing  and  declaring  that  the  intent  aii  policy 
of  sir  John  Oldcastle  was  also,  "  To  destroy  all  manner  of  policy,""  of  a  land. 
and  finally,  "  the  laws  of  the  land,""  hc.{e)  We  read  of  William  ^^^ 
the  Conqueror,  otherwise  named  William  the  Bastard,  who  being  a 
puissant  duke  in  his  country,  when  the  crown  of  England  was  allotted 
to  him,  and  he  coming  over  with  all  his  peers,  nobles  and  barons  of 
his  whole  land,  into  this  realm,  and  had  with  great  difficulty  obtained 
victory  against  king  Harold,  yet  to  alter  and  destroy  the  policy  and 
the  laws  of  the  land,  it  passed  his  power ;  insomuch  that  it  had  not 
been  pennitted  unto  him  to  have  proceeded  so  far  as  he  did,  unless 
he  had  first  sworn  to  the  nobles  of  this  land,  to  retain  still  the  laws 
of  king  Edward,  as  he  found  them.  And  albeit  he  afterwards  forswore 
himself,  breaking  his  oath  in  altering  and  changing  many  of  the  afore- 
said laws,  yet  wild  he,  nild  he,  he  could  not  so  destroy  them  all  (for 
which  much  war  and  great  commotions  endured  long  after  in  the 
realm),  but  that  he  was  constrained,  and  also  contented,  to  allow  and 
admit  a-  great  part  of  the  said  laws  of  king  Edward.  And  if  he, 
being  king  and  conqueror,  with  all  his  strength  of  Normans  and 
Englishmen  about  him,  was  too  weak  and  insufficient  to  destroy  all 
manner  of  policy  and  laws  of  this  land  which  he  had  conquered,  Iioav 
much  less,  then,  is  it  to  be  supposed  that  sir  John  Oldcastle,  being 
but  a  private  subject,  and  a  poor  knight,  and  a  condemned  prisoner, 
destitute  and  forsaken  of  all  lords,  earls  and  barons,  who,  to  save  his 
own  life  had  more  to  do  than  he  could  well  compass,  would  either 
take  in  hand,  or  conceive  in  his  head,  any  such  exploit,  after  the  sub- 
version of  christian  faith  and  law  of  God ;  after  the  slaughter  of  the 
king  and  all  manner  of  estates,  as  well  spiritual  as  temporal,  in  the 
realm  of  England  ;  after  the  desolation  of  holy  church  ;  to  destroy 
also  all  manner  of  policy ;  and,  finally,  the  laws  of  the  land  ?  Which 
monstrous  and  incredible  figment,  how  tnie  it  may  seem  to  Master 
Cope,  or  to  some  other  late  chroniclers  of  the  like  credulity,  I  cannot 
tell :  certainly,  to  me,  and  as  I  think,  to  all  indifferent  readers,  it 
appeareth  as  true  as  is  the  verse  of  the  satire,  wherewith  it  may  well 
be  compared  ; 

"  Nfl  intra  est  oleam,  nil  extra  est  in  nuce  duri." 

But  here  will  it  be  said  again  perhaps,  that  the  matter  of  such 


364  A    DEFENCE    OF    THE    LOED    COBHAM, 

Henry    preambles  and  prefaces  being  but  pursuants  of  statutes,  and  contain- 
ing but  Avords  of  coiu-se,  to  aggravate  and  to  give  a  show  of  a  thing 


A.  D.    wliich  they  would  have  to  seem  more  odious  to  the  people,  is  not  so 
1413.   precisely  to  be  scanned,  or  exquisitely  to  be  stood  upon,  as  for  the 


J^bjec-      ground  of  a  necessary  case  of  truth. 
Answer.:       Tlus  is  it,  Master  Cope,  that  I  said  before,  and  now  do  well  grant 
and  admit  the  same,  that  such  preambles  or  forcfaccs  lined  with  a 
'  non  sequitur,'  containing  in  them  matter  but  of  surmise,  and  words 
of  course,  and  rather  monsters  out  of  course,  and  many  times  rising 
upon  false  infonnation,  are  not  always  in  themselves  material  or  neces- 
sary probations  in  all  points  to  be  followed ;   as  appeareth,  both  by 
this  statute,  and  also  by  the  statute  of  this  king's  father,  made  in  the 
second  year  of  Henry  IV.,  c.  15,  beginning  "  Excellentissimo,''''  &c. 
And  yet,  notwithstanding,  out  of  these  same  preambles  and  forefronts 
of  statutes,  and  other  indictments,  which,  commonly  rising  upon  matter 
of  information,  run  only  upon  words  of  course  of  office,  and  not  upon 
The  rea-  simple  truth,  a  great  part  of  our  chroniclers  do  often  take  their  matter, 
cause"     which  they  insert  into  their  stories,  having  no  respect  or  examination  of 
nide'is™  cipcumstances  to  be  compared,  but  only  following  bare  rumours,  or  else 
ofttimes   such  woids  as  they  see  in  such  fabling  prefaces  or  indictments  ex- 
ceived.     picsscd  ;  whereby  it  cometh  so  to  pass,  that  the  younger  chronicler 
following  the  elder,  as  the  blind  leading  the  blind,  both  together  fall 
Cope  (le-  into  the  pit  of  error.  And  you  also.  Master  Cope,  folloAving  the  steps 
by  Ms      of  the  same,  do  seem  likewise  to  err  together  with  them  for  good  fellow- 
dera'"'     ^^^^P-   ^^^  ^^^^^  concerning  the  face  of  this  statute  hitherto  sufficiently. 
Now  let  us  consider  and  discuss  in  like  manner  first  the  coherence, 
then  the  particular  contents  of  the  said  statute ;   as  touching  which 
coherence,  if  it  be  well  examined,  a  man  shall  find  almost  a  chimera 
of  it,  in  which  neither  the  head  accordeth  with  the  body,  nor  yet  the 
branches  of  the  statute  well  agree  with  themselves,  wherein  he  that 
was  the  drawer,  or  first  informer  thereof,  seemeth  to  have  forgot  his 
verse  and  art  poetical. 

"  Atque  ita  mentitiir,  sic  veris  falsa  remiscet. 
Primum  ne  medio,  medium  ne  discrepet  imo."i 

The  body  For  Avhercas  the  preface  of  the  statute  standeth  only  upon  matter 
stamte,  of  treason,  conceived  by  false  suggestion  and  wrong  information,  the 
^gjj  ■  yS- .body  of  the  said  statute,  which  should  follow  upon  the  same,  runneth 
cap.  7.  only  upon  matter  of  heresy  pertaining  to  the  ordinaries,  as  by  every 
ned.        branch  thereof  may  appear. 

For  first,  Where  he  saith,  "  At  the  instance  and  request  of  the 
(/)  ordinaries  or  their  commissaries,"  hc.{f)  '■  hereby  it  appeareth,  this 
to  be  no  cause  of  treason  or  felopy ;  for  every  man,  of  duty,  is 
bound  to,  and  by  the  laws  of  the  realm  may,  arrest  and  apprehend  a 
traitor  or  a  felon,  if  he  can ;  where  otherwise  by  this  statute,  an 
officer  is  not  bound  to  arrest  him  who  ofFendeth  in  case  of  this 
statute,  without  request  made  by  the  ordinaries  or  their  commis- 
saries ;  and  therefore  this  offence  seemeth  neither  to  be  treason  nor 
felony. 

Secondly,  Where  it  foUoweth,  that  "  the  same  ordinaries  and  com- 
(^'     missaries  do  pay  for  their  costs"  &c.(^)  :    this  allowance  of  the 

'il)  Horace,  '  De  Arte  Poetica,'  1.  15i ;  or,  '  Primo  ne  medium,  medio  ne  discrepet  imum.'— Ed. 


AGAINST    NICHOLAS    IIARPSFIELD.  365 

officers''  charffcs  in  this  sort  proveth  tliis  oftencc  neither  treason  nor    m-nry 
lelony. 


Thirdly,  Where  the  statute  willeth  the  king  to  be  "answered  of  A.l). 
the  year,  day  and  wast,"  8ec.( k)  :  by  this  also  is  ])roved  the  offence    ^^^'^- 
not  to  be  treason  ;  for  else  in  cases  of  treason,  the  whole  inheritance,      C'  ) 
I  trow,  Master  Cope  (speaking  as  no  great  skilful  lawyer),  is  forfeit 
to  the  prince. 

The  fourth  argument  T  take  out  of  these  words  of  the  statute, 
"  Whereas  such  lands  and  tenements  which  are  holden  of  the  ordi- 
naries, arc  willed  wholly  to  remain  to  the  king  as  forfeit,"  hc.(i)  :  u) 
whereby  it  is  manifest,  that  the  prelates,  for  their  matter  of  lollardy 
only,  were  the  occasioners  and  procurers  of  this  statute  ;  and  there- 
fore were  ban-ed  of  the  benefit  of  any  forfeit  arising  thereby,  as  good 
reason  was  they  should.  And  thus  it  is  notorious,  that  the  preface 
running  specially  and  principally  upon  treason,  and  the  statute 
nmning  altogether  upon  points  of  heresy,  do  not  well  cohere  nor  join 
together. 

Fifthly,  In  that  "  such  persons  indicted  shall  be  delivered  unto 
the  ordinaries  of  the  places,"  &c.(^)  :  it  cannot  be  denied,  but  that      (*) 
this  offence  conccrneth  no  manner  of  treason,  forasmuch  as  ordinaries 
cannot  be  judges  in  cases  of  treason  or  felony,  by  the  laws  of  our 
realm.* 

Sixthly,  By  the  indictments  provided  "  not  to  be  taken  in  evidence, 
but  only  for  information,  before  the  judges  spiritual,"   &c.(Z)  :    it     (O 
is  likewise  to  be  noted,  to  Avhat  end  these  indictments  were  taken  ; 
to  wit,  only  to  inform  the  ordinaries,  Avhich  cannot  be  in  cases  of 
treason. 

Lastly,  Where  it  followeth,  toward  the  end  of  the  statute,  touching 
escape  or  breaking  of  prison,   &c.(m):  by  this  it  may  lightly  be     („ 
smelt,  whereto  all  the  purpose  of  this  statute  driveth  ;  that  is,  to  the 
special  escape  of  the  U>rd  Cobham  out  of  the  Tower,  to  this  end,  to 
have  his  lands  and  possessions  forfeit  unto  the  king.     And  yet  the  John 
same  escape  of  the  lord  Cobham,  in  this  statute  considered,  is  taken  oflL"'^  ' 
by  Mr.  Justice  Stanford,  in  the  first  book  of  the  Pleas  of  the  Crown,  JjJ^^^  °^ 
chap.  33,  to  be  an  escape  of  one  aixested  for  heresy,  where  he  down, 
speaketh  of  the  case  of  the  lord  Cobham. 

Moreover,  as  touching  the  parts  of  this  aforesaid  statute,  how  will 
you  join  these  two  branches  together,  Avhercas  in  the  former  part  it 
is  said,  "  That  the  lands  of  such  persons  convicted  shall  be  forfeit  to 
the  king,  not  before  they  be  dead  ;"  and  afterwards  it  followeth, 
"  That  their  goods  and  possessions  shall  be  forfeit  at  the  day  of 
their  arrest  to  the  king  .P"     But  herein  standcth  no  such  great  doubt, 
nor  matter  to  be  weighed.      This  is  without   all  doubt,  and  noto- 
riously, evidently,  and  most  manifestly,  may  appear,  by  all  the  argu- 
ments and  the  whole  purport  of  the  statute  ;  that  as  well  the  preamble 
and  preface  thereof,  as  the  whole  body  of  the  said  statute  were  made, 
framed  and  procured  only  by  and  through  the  instigation,  information, 
and  excitation,  of  the  prelates  and  the  popish  clergy ;  not  so  much  for  First 
any  treason  committee!  against  the  king,  but  only  for  fear  and  hatred  of'iii'^ir" 
of  lollardy,  tending  against  their  law,  which  they  more  dreaded  and  statute. 
abhorred  than  ever  any  treason  against  the  prince.    And  then,  to  set 

(1)  Bracton,  in  fine  prim,  libri. 


IG6  A    Dr.FENC'E    OF   THE    LORD    COBHAM. 

Hevry    tlic  king  and  all  the  states  against  tliem,  whereby  the  more  readily  to 
^'      work  their  dispatch,  they  thought  it  best,  and  no  policy  so  compen- 


A.  I),    dious,  as  prettily  to  join  treason  together  with  their  lollardy  ;  wherein 
_llif^  the  poor  men  once  entangled,  could  no  ways  escape  destruction.^ 
Practice        This,  Mastcr  Cope,  have  I  said,  and  say  again,  not  as  one  abso- 
I'ati^'^to     lutely  determining  upon  the  matter.     At  the  doing  whereof,  as  I 
treason     ^^^  "*^^  prcscut  uiyself,  so  with  your  own  Hall,  I  may  and  do  leave 
with        it  at  large,  but  as  one  leading  the  readers  by  all  conjectures  and  argu- 
eresy.     j^^^j^^g  q|  probability  and  of  due  circumstances,  to  consider  with  them- 
selves what  is  further  to  be  thought  in  these  old  accustomed  practices 
and  proceedings  of  these  prelates.  Protesting,  moreover,  Master  Cope, 
in  this  matter  to  you,  that  those  chroniclers  which  you  so  much  gi-ound 
upon,  I  take  them  in  this  matter  neither  to  be  as  witnesses  sufficient, 
nor  as  judges  competent ;  who,  as  they  were  not  themselves  present 
at  the  deed  done,  no  more  than  I,  but  only  following  uncertain  rumours 
and  words  of  course  and  office,  bringing  with  them  no  certain  trial  of 
that  which  they  do  affirm,  may  therein  both  be  deceived  themselves, 
and  also  deceive  you  and  others  who  depend  upon  them. 

And  hitherto  concerning  this  statute  enough  :  out  of  which  statute 
you  see.  Master  Cope,  that  neither  your  chroniclers,  nor  you,  can  take 
any  great  advantage,  to  prove  any  treason  in  the  lord  Cobham,  or  in 
his  fellows,  as  hath  been  hitherto  abundantly  declared  in  the  premises. 
It  remaineth  further,  that  forasmuch  as  you  in  your  sixth  dialogue,^ 
Avith  your  author  Edward  Hall,  do  allege  the  records,  "  et  publica 
judicii  acta,""  to  defame  these  men  for  traitors,  although  what  records 
they  be  you  bring  forth  never  a  word,  I,  therefore,  in  their  defence  do 
answer  for  them,  who  cannot  now  answer  for  themselves.  And  because 
you,  to  accuse  them,  do  mention  a  certain  record,  and  yet  do  not  show 
us  what  record  it  is,  and  perad venture  cannot,  if  ye  would,  I  have 
taken  the  pains  therefore,  for  the  love  of  them  whom  you  so  hate,  to 
search  out  such  records,  whereby  any  occasion  can  be  raised  against 
them.  And  fhrst  I  will  declare  the  commission  granted,  then  the  in- 
dictment commenced  against  them:  which  commission  and  indictment, 
albeit  in  countenance  of  words  it  will  seem  to  minister  much  suspicion 
against  them,  to  the  simple  reader,  before  he  be  better  acquainted 
with  these  subtle  dealings  and  practices  of  prelates ;  yet,  trusting  to 
the  goodness  of  the  cause  which  I  see  here  so  falsely  and  slightly  to 
be  handled,  I  nothing  fear,  nor  doubt,  to  produce  the  same  out  of  the 
records  in  Latin  as  they  stand  ;  to  the  intent  that  Avhen  the  crafty 
handling  of  the  adversaries  shall  be  disclosed,  the  true  simplicity  of  the 
innocent,  to  the  true  hearted  reader,  may  the  better  appear.  The  words 
first  of  the  commission  here  follow  under  written,  which  when  thou 
shalt  hear,  let  them  not  trouble  thy  mind,  gentle  reader  !  I  beseech 
thee,  before  thou  understand  further,  what  packing  and  subtle  convey- 
ance lie  covered  and  hid  under  the  same. 


The  Words  of  the  Commission  against  Lord  Cobham. 

Rex  dilectis  et  fidelibus  suis  Willielmo  Roos  de  Hamlack,  Henrico  le  Scrop. 

Willielmo  Croiomere  Majori  civitatis  suas  London.    Hugoni  Huls,  Joanni  Pres- 

( a  )      ton,  et  Joanni  Mertin  salutem.    Sciatis  quod  cum  nos  plenius(  a  )  infonnemur, 

(.1)  Papse  consilium  callidum.  (2)  Alanus  Copus,  paje  833,  line  i. 


A    COMMISSIOX    AGAINST    TIIK    LORD    COBIIAM,  367 

ac  notorie  et  inanifestc  dignoscatur,  (jiiod  qnam  plurcs  sulxliti  nostri  Lollardi    Henry 
vulgarie  imncupati,  ac  alii  inortLMii  iiostrani  contra  ligcancia;  siise  dcbitiiiii  pro-        '^• 
ditorie  iinagiuaveriint,  ac  quain  plura  alia,  taiu  in   fidei  cathoiica?,  qnam  status      .    p. 
doininornni  et  niagnatuni  regni  nostri  Angl,  tani  spiritualium  (juam  teniporalium    ,l}w 

destrnctioncni  i)r(Ji)osuerunt,   ac   divcrsas  congrcgationes,  ct  alia  conventicnla 1_ 

illicita  pro  nefando  proposito  sue  in  hue  parte  periniplcnd.  fecenmt  in  nostri 
exlierodationem  ac  rcgni  nostri  destructioneni  nianifestam :  nos  husjumodi 
LoUardos  ac  alios  pra^dictos  juxta  corum  denierita  in  hac  parte  castigari  ct  pnniri 
volentes,  ac  dc  tidelitate  et  circumspectione  vestris  plcnius  confidentes,  assigna- 
vinuis  vos  quinque,  quatuor,  et  ires  vestnun,  (pioruni  vos  pra'fati  Major  et  Hugo, 
duos  esse  volumus  justic.  nostros  ad  inciuirend.  per  sacram.  proborum  et  legal, 
honiinuni  de  civitate  pracdicta  et  suburbiis  ejusdeni,  ac  de  comitatu  Middle- 
sexisE,  tam  infra  libertates,  quam  extra,  per  quos  rei  Veritas  melius  sciri  poterit 
de  omnibus  et  singulis  proditionibus  et  insurrectionibus  per  bujusmodi  Lol- 
lardos  in  civitate,  suburbiis,  et  comitat.  pra^dictis,  factis  et  peri)etratis  necnon 
de  omniniodo  proditionibus  et  insurrectionibus,  rebellionibus  et  feloniis  in  civi- 
tate, suburbiis,  et  com.  pra;dictis,  per  quoscunque  et  qualitercunque  factis  sive 
perpetratis,  et  ad  easd.  prodition.  insurrect.  rebell.  et  felonias  and.  ct  termin. 
secund.  legem  et  consuetudinem  regni  nostri  Angl.  Et  ideo  vobis  mandamus, 
quod  ad  certos,  etc.  quos,  etc.  quorum,  etc.  ad  lioc  provideritis  diligentes  super 
premissis  fac.  inquisitiones,  et  preemissa  omnia  et  singula  audiatis  ct  temiinetis 
in  forma  praedicta  facturi,  etc.  Salvis,  etc.  jNIandavimus  enim  vicccomitibus 
nostris  Lond.  et  Midd.  quod  ad  certos,  etc.  quos,  etc.  quorum,  etc.  ejus  scire 
fac.  venire  facientes  coram  vobis,  etc.  quorum,  etc.  tot.  etc.  de  Balliva  sua,  tam 
infra  libertates,  quam  extra,  per  quos,  etc.  et  inquiri.  In  cujus,  etc.  T.  R. 
apud  Westm.  (b)  x.  die  Jan,  Per  ipsuni  llegem. — In  Rotulo  patent,  de  anno  (6) 
primo  Henrici  quinti. 

By  these  high  and  tragical  words  in  this  commission  sent  down 
against  the  lord  Cobham,  sir  Roger  Acton,  and  their  fellows,  it  may 
peradvcnture  seem  to  the  ignorant  and  simple  reader,  some  heinous 
crime  of  treason  to  rest  in  them,  for  conspiring  against  God,  the 
church,  the  king  and  their  country.  But  what  cannot  the  fetching 
practice  of  the  Romish  prelates  bring  about,  where  they  have  once 
conceived  a  malice  ?  Wherefore  marvel  not,  good  reader,  at  this, 
nor  judge  thou  according  to  the  words  which  thou  hearest,  but 
suspend  thy  judgment  awhile  till  the  matter  be  more  opened  unto 
thee.  Examples  of  like  handling  be  not  so  rare,  but  thou  mayest  Exam- 
soon  judge  by  other  times  the  like  also  of  these.  George  Egle,  of  ^[frsfJise- 
whom  mention  was  made  before,  did  but  preach  in  time  of  queen  ly accused 
Mary,  and  yet  commission  was  directed  against  him,  as  in  case  of  son. 
raising  up  a  commotion  against  the  queen,  Adam  Damlip,  in 
Calais,  did  but  preach,  and  the  receiving  of  one  poor  crown  two  years 
before  at  Rome,  was  enough  to  make  him  a  traitor.  In  time  of  king 
Henry  VIII, ,  one  Singleton,  chaplain  to  queen  Anne,  the  queen's 
majesty's  mother,  that  now  is,  did  but  preach  the  gospel,  moved  by 
zeal  (as  I  have  credible  witness  of  his  own  scholar  that  heard  him 
speak  it,  being  with  him),  and  yet,  by  virtue  of  a  commission,  it  was 
objected  to  him  for  raising  up  commotion  against  the  king,  yea,  and 
also  for  killing  of  Pakington,  and  he  suffered  for  the  same  as  a 
traitor.  So  here,  what  matter  or  marvel  is  it,  if  the  king  incensed,  or 
rather  circumvented  by  the  wrong  information  of  the  prelates,  whom 
he  believed,  gave  out  his  commission,  against  things  never  wrought 
nor  thought  .'* 

Wherefore  I  exhort  thee,  christian  reader !  as  I  said  before,  judge 
not  by  and  by  the  truth  by  the  words  of  the  commission,  but  judge 
rather  the  words  of  the  commission  by  the  truth ;  neither  measure 


3G8  ,  A    DEFENCE    OF    THE     LORD    COBHAM. 

Henry    tliou  the  line  by  the  stone,  but  tlie  stone  ratlier  by  tlie  line.     At 
^"      least,  yet  defer  thy  sentence  till  both  the  commission  and  the  indict- 


A.  D.    ment   being  laid  together,  thou  mayest  aftei-wards  see  and  perceive 
^^^^-    more,  what  is  to  be  judged  in  the  case. 

In  the  mean  season  mark  -well  these  words  of  the  king  in  this 
( a )     commission,  {a)   "  Cum  nos  plenius  informemur,"   &c. ;    by  which 
words  it  is  easy  to  be  understood,  that  the  king  himself  had  no 
certain  knowledge  thereof,  but  only  by  information   of  otho's  (of 
bishops  no  doubt  and  prelates),  and  thereupon  gave  forth  his  com- 
Engiish    mission  aforesaid.     And  then,  how  will  this  stand  with  our  chro- 
ciere"exa-  niclers,  and  other  epitomes  and  summaries,  which  Master  Cope  doth 
thc"wonfs  allege?  for,  if  that  be  certain  which  Robert  Fabian  saith,  that  "the 
of  the      king  himself  being  in  the  field  took  certain  of  them,  as  sir  Roger 
sion!  '     Acton,  Master  Brown,  and  John  Beverly ;"  and  your  own  Edward 
Hall  also,  and  your  epitome  agreeth  to  the  same ;  and  saith,  more- 
over, that  "  they  were  brought  before  the  king''s  jDresence  :"  Thomas 
Cooper  also,  whom  you  allege,  addeth  further,  and  saith,  that  "  the 
king  there  by  strength  did  take  them  :"'"' — I  pray  you,'  Master  Cope, 
what  needed  the  king  to  "write  this  by  information,  when  he  himself 
was  both  present  at  the  fact,  was  the  taker  of  them,  and  a  witness  of 
the  deed  ?  which,  if  it  be  true,  that  the  king  heard  this  but  by  way 
of  information,  how  Avill  you  then  defend  your  '  Chronicos'  and  your 
'  Bpitomas  ?'     But  herein  I  Avill  neither  greatly  stick  with  you,  nor 
contend  with  them  ;  desiring  the  reader  only  to  bear  in  mind  the 
{h)     date   of    this   present   commission   when  it   was   given,  (h)    which 
soundeth  to  be  the  tenth  day  of  January ;  and  afterwards  to  compare 
the  same  with  the  date  of  the  indictment  hereunder  following,  which 
vrill,  the  Lord  mlling,  also  hereunto  annex,  leaving  nothing  out ; 
yea  rather,  ministering  to  the  adversary  all  manner  of  helps,  whatso- 
ever they  can  seek  or  require,  for  their  utmost  advantage  in  this 
matter,  to  be  desired :   so  sure  and  confident  I  am  in  the  innocent 
cause  of  these  good  men,  not  fearing  whatsoever  blind  malice  can 
cavil  against  them. 

The  parliament  of  the  Lord  Cobham,  Sir  Roger  Acton,  and  others, 
with  Notes  following  upon  the  same. 

Parliameiita  coronse  coram  domino  rege  apud  Westm.  de  termino  sancti 
llilarii,  anno  regni  regis  Henrici,  quinti,  post  conquestum  primo,  Rot.  7.  inter 
parliamenta  regis.  Alias  coram  Gulielmo  Roos  de  Hamlak,  Henrico  le  Scrope, 
Gulielmo  Crowmere  Majore  civitatis  London.  Hugone  Hiils  et  sociis  Justic. 
domini  Regis,  ad  inquirend.  per  sacram.  proborum  et  legal,  hominum  de  civi- 
tate  domini  regis  London,  et  suburbiis  ejusdem,  ac  de  com.  Middl.  tam  infra 
libertates,  quam  extra,  de  omnibus  et  singulis  proditionibus  et  insurrectionibus, 
per  quamplures  subditos  domini  regis  lollardos  vulgarit.  nuncupatos,  et  alios 
in  civitate,  suburbiis,  et  com.  prsedictis,  factis  et  perpeti'atis,  necnon  de  omnibus 
proditionibus,  insurrectionibus,  rebellionibus,  et  feloniis  in  civitate,  suburbiis  et 
com.  przed.  per  quoscunque  et  qualitercunque  factis  sive  perjietratis,  et  ad 
easdem  proditiones,  insurrectiones,  rebelliones,  et  felonias  audiend.  et  termi- 
nand.  secundum  legem  et  consuetudinem  regni  domini  regis  Angliae,  per  literas 

{a)  ipsius  domini  regis  patentes,  assign,  apud  Westm. (a)  die  Mercurii  proximo 
post  festum  Epiphanise  Domini,  anno  regni  regis  Henrici  quinti  post  conquestum 

( b )  primo,  (b)  per  sacram.  xii.  Juratorum  extitit,  presentatum  ;  quod  Jo.  Oldcastle 
de  Couling.  in  Com.  Kane.  chr.  et  alii  lollardi  vulgar,  nuncupat.  qui  contra 
fidem  catholicam  diversas  opiniones  baereticas,  et  ,ilios  errores  manifestos  legi 
catluilicffi  repugnantes  a  diu  temeraiie  tenuerunt,  opiniones  et  errores  prffidictos 


TUF.    IXniCTMENT    OF    LORD    COBHAJI    AND    OTIIF.RS.  SC)9 

mamitencrc,  ac  in  facto  minime  pcriniplcrc  valcntcs,  qiiamdiu  rogia  potestas  ct    Hmri/ 
tarn  status  regal.    Domini  nostri  regis,  quani  status  et  oiHcium  prelatiae  dig-        ^■ 
nitatis  infra   regnum  Angl.   in  prosperitate  perse verarent,   falso  et  proditorie  ~T~T) 
macliinando,  tani  statum  rcgni,  quain  statum  et  otHcium  pradatorum,  necnon     iii-. 

ordincs  reiigiosorum  infra  dictum  regnum  Angl.  jienitus  adnuUare ;    ac  Domi-  ll- 

num  nostrum  rcgem,  fratres  sues,  pntlatos,  et  alios  magnates  ejusdem  regni 
interficere,  nee  non  viros  religiosos,  relict,  cult,  divinis  et  rcligiosis  observantiis 
ad  occupationes  mundanas  provocare,  ct  tarn  ecclesias  cathedrales,  quam  alias 
ecclcsias  et  domos  religiosas  de  reliquis  et  aliis  bonis  ecclesiasticis  totaliter 
spoliare  ac  funditiis  ad  terram  prostcrncrc, (c)  et  dictum  Johanncm  Oldcastle  (c) 
regentem  ejusdem  regni  constituere,  et  quamplura  regimina  secundum  eorum 
voluntatem  infra  regnum  prredictum  (</)  quasi  gens  sine  capitc,  in  finalem  (<') 
destructionem  tam  Hdei  catholics  et  cleri,  quam  sUitus  et  majestatis  dignitatis 
regal,  infra  idem  regnum  ordinare,  falso  et  proditorie  ordinaverunt  et  propo- 
sucrunt,  quod  ipso  insinnil  (f)  cum  quanq)luril)us  rebellibus  domini  regis  (.e) 
ignotis  ad  nuincrum  viginti  millium  hominum  de  diversis  partibus  regn.  Angl. 
mode  gueiTino  arrivat.  (/)  privatim  insurgent,  et  ((/)  die  Mereurii  proximo  |-^,' 
post  festum  Epiphania^  Domini,  anno  regni  regis  pra;dicti  pra,'dicto  apud 
villam  et  parocbiam  Sanctii  Egedii  extra  Barram  veteris  Tcmpli  London,  in 
quodam  magno  campo  ibidem  unanimit.  convenirent  et  insimul  obviarent  pro 
nefando  proposito  suo  in  praemissis  pcrimplend.  quo  quidem  die  Mereurii  apud 
villam  et  parocbiam  priedictas  prredicti  Jobanncs  Oldcastle  et  alii  in  bujus- 
modi  proposito  proditorio"  perseverantes,  (/i)  praedictum  domimnu  nostrum  {ii  i 
regem,  fratres  sues,  viz.  Tbo.  ducem  Clarentia',  Joan,  de  Lane,  et  Ilumfred.  de 
Lancast.  necnon  prelates  et  magnates  pncdictos  interficere,  necnon  ipsum 
dominum  nostrum  regem,  et  beredes  suos  de  regno  suo  praedicto  c.\bered;u"e, 
et  prajmissa  omnia  et  singula,  necnon  quamplura  alia  mala  et  intolerabilia 
facere  ct  perimplere  falso  et  proditorie  proposuerunt  et  imaginaverunt(?)  et  (') 
ibidem  versus  campimi  pra'dictum,  modo  guen-ino  arrivati  proditorie  niodo 
insurrectionis  contra  ligeancias  suas  equitaverunt  ad  debellandum  dictum 
dominum  nostnim  regem,  nisi  per  ipsum  nianu  forti  gratiose  impediti  fuissent. 
Quod  quidem  inditamentum  dominus  rex  nunc,  certis  de  causis,  coram  eo 
venire  fecit  terminandum.  Per  quod  preceptum  fuit  vie.  quod  non  omitteret, 
etc.  quin  caperet  prasfatum  Jobannem  Oldcastle,  si,  etc.  et  salvo,  etc.  Ita 
quod  baberet  corpus  ejus  coram  domino  rege  apud  Westmonasteriura  ad  bunc 
diem;  scilicet  die  Mereurii  proximo  post  octavas  Sancti  Hilarii  isto  eodem 
termino  ad  respondendum  domino  regi  de  priemissis,  etc.  Ad  quos  diem  et 
locum,  coram  domino  rege  vie.  return,  quod  prcedictus  Jolian.  Oldcastle  non 
fuit  inventus  in  balliva  sua,  etc.  Per  quod  preceptum  fuit  vie.  quod  exigi 
faceret  eum  de  com.  in  com.  quousque  utlagetur  si  non,  etc.  Et  si,  etc.  tunc 
eum  caperet,  et  salvo,  etc.  Ita  quod  baberent  corpus  ejus  coram  domino  rege 
in  octavas  Sancti  Joannis  Baptistae  ex  tunc  proximum  scquen.  ubicunque,  etc. 
ad  respondendum  domino  regi  de  proditionibus  et  feloniis  superius  sibi  im- 
positis.  Ad  quas  octavas  Sancti  Joannis  Baptistoe,  anno  regni  regis  llenrici 
quinti  post  Conquestum  secundo,  Joannes  Sutton,  et  Joannes  Micbel,  Vic. 
Midd.  coram  domino  rege  returnavenuit  quod  ad  Com.  Midd.  centum  apud 
BrajTiford  die  Jovis  proximo  ante  festum  Sanct.  Barnaba?  Apostob,  anno 
regni  regis  Henrici  quinti  post  Conquestum  secimdo.  Et  ad  quatuor  com.  ex 
tunc  ex  proximo  precedentes  pradictus  Jobanncs  Oldcastle  exactus  fuit,  et  non 
comparuit.  Et  quia  ad  nullum  eonmdem  com.  prcedict.  utiagatus  fuit,  per 
quod  inquiratur  de  terra  et  catallis  suis. 

NOTES    AND    CONSIDERATIONS    UPON    THE    INDICTMENT    AND 
COMMISSION    ABOVE    PREFIXED 

(a)  "  Die  Mereurii  proximo  post  festum  Epiplianiic,"  &c.  <(4 

First,  here  is  to  be  noted  and  considered,  good  reader,  the  day  notai 
and  date  of  giving  out  the  commission,  and  then  of  the  verdict  pre- 
sented by  the  jurors,  which  were  both  in  one  day,  that  is,  on  tlie 
Wednesday  next  after  the  Epipliany,  in  the  first  year  of  the  reign  of 
king  Henry  V.,   which  was  the  tenth  day  of  the  month  of  January 

VOL.   III.  B    B 


370  A  DEFENCE  OF  LORD  COBHAM, 

Xenry   (as  the  date  of  the  commission  saith),  anno  1413,  after  the  use  of 
England,  or  after  the  Romish  use,  anno  1414  ;  so  that  after  what 


A-D.    use  soever  we  count,  whether  it  be  anno  1413,  or  else  anno  1414, 

^'^^•^-   the  dominical  letter  beginning  at  the  first  day  of  January  to  change, 

must  needs  be  G  for  the  year,  and  so  necessarily  make  Wednesday 

next  after  the  Epiphany  to  be  the  tenth  day  of  the  said  month  of 

January.     Thus  then  this  present  Wednesday,  which  was  the  tenth 

day  of  the  month,  being  well  noted  and  borne  in  mind,  on  which  day 

both  the  commission  was  directed,  and  also  the  verdict  presented, 

let  us  now  proceed  further  in  the  aforesaid  indictment.    It  followeth  • 

(J)  (b)  "  Per  sacramentum  xii.  juratorum  extitit  prsesentatum,'''  &c. 

^ote"of        ^^  there  had  been  true  dealing  in  this,  the  jurors  should  have  been 

the  names  uamcd.     But  it  is  not  likely  that  there  was  ever  any  such  indictment 

Tarore      fouud  by  auy  jurors,  and  therefore  they  did  best  not  to  name  the 

left  out.    jm-ors,  lest  they  would  have  denied  this  indictment  to  be  their  act. 

It  followeth  more  in  process  of  the  indictment : 

(c)'  (c)  "  Et  dictum  Johan.  Oldcastle,  regentem  ejusdem  regni  consti- 

Third,  by  tuere,"  &c. 

making  a  ' 

resent,  If  there  were  no  other  argument,  this  were  sufficient  to  prove  the 
iieing'iiot  manifest  untruth  of  this  surmised  indictment :  when  the  king  was  not 
ovLr"^  yet  gone  to  France,  nor  determined  to  go,  how  could  they  conspire 
then  to  make  a  regent  ?  for  the  king  went  in  July  following,  viz.,  the 
second  year  of  his  reign,  leaving  behind  him  the  queen,  his  mother- 
in-law,  for  regent,  whereby  it  may  be  gathered,  that  this  matter  was 
untruly  entered  and  stolen  into  the  records  with  an  antedate,  or  else 
at  the  least  there  appeareth  manifest  untruth,  that  they  should  con- 
spire to  make  a  regent,  when  a  regent  was  not  thought  upon,  unless 
it  were  already  run  into  the  heads  of  the  clergy,  who  shortly  after, 
"  fearing  their  temporalties,""  as  Caxton  saith,  persuaded  the  king  to 
make  wars  in  France.  This  word  '  regent""  therefore  proceedeth  of 
the  secret  spirit  of  the  clergy,  and  maketh  the  whole  matter  very 
suspicious,  to  be  grounded  altogether  upon  the  malice  of  the  clergy, 
and  their  untrue  surmises.  It  followeth  moreover  : 
(rf)  (d)  "  Quasi  gens  sine  capite,  in  finalem  destruction  em,"  &c. 

hy'coJirra-      How  dotli  this  staud  with  that  which  goeth  before,  that  they  con- 
riety.       spircd  to  make  a  regent,  except  you  will  say,  that  to  make  a  regent 
is  to  be  a  people  without  a  head  ?    It  followeth : 
(e)  (e)  "  Cum  quampluribus  rebellibus  domini  regis  ignotis  ad  nume- 

th,  by  rum  viginti  millium  hominum,"  &c. 
sims'un-       ^  strange  matter,  that  they  should  know  of  the  conspiracy  of 
known,     twenty  thousand,  and  yet  know  of  no  more  names  of  the  rebels  but 
the  lord  Cobham  only,  or  one  or  two  more,  and  all  the  rest  were 
'  ignoti.' 
</^  (/)  "  Privatim  insurgentes,"  &c. 

seventh,  This  smcllcth  of  the  clergy's  own  penning,  without  any  great  advice 
unskfifui  ^^  learned  counsel ;  for  otherwise  such  as  had  been  herein  skilful 
penning,  would  never  have  put  in  '  privatim  insurgentes.' 

(9)  (p)  "  I^ie  Mercurii  proximo  post  festum  Epiphanise  Domini  anno 

e^ightb.by  '■<^g^i  i'^gi«  prsedicti,"  &c. 

andltme       "^^^^^  Wednesday  next  after  the  Epiphany  was  the  tenth  day  of 

■  the  month  of  January,  and  the  same  day  when  both  the  conspiracy 

was  put  in  execution,  and  the  same  day  when  the  commission  was 


The 
six 


AGAINST    NTCTIOLAS    ITARPSFIELD.  .^71 

given  out  to  inquire  ;  also  when  tlie  f:ict  was  by  inquiry  prcsenteil.    ift-nry 
Wliercby  it  may  seem  a  strange  thing  that  so  great  a  conspiraey        ' 
known  beforehand,  was  not  suppressed  nor  inquired  of  by  any  com-    A.  D. 
mission,  but  only  by  a  commission  bearing  date  the  same  day  upon    ^'^^•^- 
wliich,  by  the  pur])ort  of  the  indictment,  the  conspiracy  should  have 
been  put  in  execution  by  open  rebellion,  as  it  is  aforesaid. 

(//)  "  Pra^dictum  dominum  nostrum  rcgem,  fratressuos,  viz.Tho.du-      w 
cem  Clarcntia?,  Johanncm  dcLancastre,ctHunilrcd  deLancastre,"&c.  n^lh,  by 

If  the  king's  learned  counsel  had  dealt  in  this  indictment  as  in  '"■™''  ^"'' 

o  1  1111  wnjiip 

case  of  treason  they  should  have  done,  if  it  had  been  a  matter  of  naming 
tmth  they  would  never  have  handled  it  so  slenderly  and  wrongly,  as  dukes. 
to  name  the  dukes  of  Bedford  and  Gloucester,  John  of  Lancaster, 
and  Humfrey  of  Lancaster,  who  were  made  dukes  in  the  thirteenth 
year  of  the  reign  of  king  Henry  IV,,  their  father,  as  appcareth  by 
Caxton''s  chronicle. 

(0  "  Et  ibidem  versus  campum  prcedictum,  modo  guerrino  ani-      (') 
vati  proditorie,  modo  insun-ectionis,  contra  ligeantias  suas  equitaverunt  tenth,  by 
ad  dcbcllandum  dictum  dominum  nostrum  regcm,"  &c.  sonw'^of 

This  is  falsified  by  plain  evidence  of  histories,  and  Cope  himself  ""-*  i'*"y 
confesscth  no  less  ;  for  so  he  saith  and  confesseth,  page  833,  line  12, 
that  sir  John  Oldcastle  was  not  there  in  person,  but  only  that  his 
consent  and  good  will  were  there. 

Again,  seeing  this  equitation  or  riding  toward  St.  Giles's  field  was  me 
upon  the  Wednesday  next  after  the  feast  of  Epiphany,  (as  in  this  *'^''"■'"'^'- 
indictmcnt  and  process  of  outlawry  is  above  testified),  which  was  the 
tenth  day  of  January,  and  commission  also  the  same  day  was  charged, 
and  the  jury  moreover  impanelled  the, same  day,  and  yet  no  juror 
named ;  item,  the  verdict  the  same  day  presented :  how  all  these  can 
concur  together,  and  all  in  one  day,  let  the  reader,  after  he  have  well 
considered  the  matter,  use  his  judgment  therein,  not  only  whether  it 
be  likely,  but  also  whether  it  be  possible. 

Over  and  beside  all  this  it  is  to  be  noted,  that  if  this  matter  had  The 
been  truly  and  duly  handled,  as  touching  the  treason,  then  had  it  not  r^onfcob- 
been  needful  to  have  brought  sir  John  Oldcastle  into  the  parliament-  '''™'  =*"^ 
house,  before  the  lords  to  have  had  his  judgment;  for  by  his  outlawry,  proved  no 
if  it  had  been  true,  he  was  attainted,  and  without  any  more  ado  '■^'""'"• 
should  have  had  judgment  in  the  King's  Bench  as  a  traitor.    But  the 
chief  justice,  knowing  the  handling  of  the  matter,  durst  not,  belike, 
cnterjirise  so  far  :  wherefore  it  was  devised  that  he  should  certify  tiic 
record  unto  the  parliament,  which  he  did,  together  with  the  bishop's 
sentence  filed  to  the  record ;  which  was  very  strange. 

And  thereupon  the  lords  gave  such  a  judgment  as  was  not  due  for 
a  traitor  :  for  that  they  gave  no  judgment,  that  he  should  be  dra\m, 
hanged,  and  let  down  alive,  and  then  bowelled  and  quartered,  which 
is  the  judgment  of  a  traitor.  And  albeit  the  parliament  might  have 
attainted  him  without  any  more  ado,  and  by  the  same  act  of  attainder 
have  ordained  a  special  judgment,  as  they  should  think  good,  yet 
when  he  was  before  attainted  by  the  outlawry,  they  could  not  lawfully 
vary  from  the  common  judgment  of  treason.  At  least  how  could, 
or  should,  the  judgment  of  sir  Roger  Acton,  Master  Brown,  and 
John  Beverly,  who  were  judged  in  the  Guildhall  before,  and  without 
the  parliament,  vary  from  the  said  common  jud^nicnt  of  traitors, 

B  B  2 


372  A  DEFEXCE  OF  LORD  COBHAM, 

iieriry    if  tlicy  liad  truly  committed   and    been    convicted   of   sucli   high 
! —  treason  ? 


^-  D.        Add  this,  moreover,  to  the  aforesaid  notes  :   that  if  sir  John  Old- 
^'^^'^-   castle,  after  his  escape  out  of  prison,  had  been  culpable,   and  so 
Thethir-  attainted  of  that  high  treason,  whereby  his  lands  had  been  imme- 
note  or     diatcly  forfeited  imto  the  king  by  the  process  of  his  outlawry ;   what 
mfi^t.       needed  the  king  then  in  the  second  year  of  his  reign,  in  the  parlia- 
ment after  holden  at  Leicester,  have  made  that  proviso  to  have  his 
lands  forfeited  to  him  by  virtue  of  parliament,  upon  his  escape  on  the 
day  of  his  arrest,  when  the  lands  and  cattle  of  his,  had  been  forfeited 
before,  by  the  process  of  the  outlawry,  as  is  before  specified  ? 

Thus  you  see,  Master  Cope,  how  little  advantage  you  can  wTest 
out  of  this  commission  and  indictment  against  the  lord  Cobham  and 
his  fellows,  to  prove  them  traitors  :  and  admit  the  said  lord  Cobham 
was  attainted  of  treason  by  the  act,  and  that  the  king,  the  lords,  and 
the  commons,  assented  to  the  act ;  yet  it  bindeth  not  in  such  sort,  as 
if  indeed  he  were  no  traitor,  that  any  man  may  not,  by  search  of  the 
truth,  utter  and  set  forth  sincerely  and  justly,  the  very  true  cause 
whereby  his  death  happened  and  followed. 
Answer         Tlius  then,  haviug  sufficiently  cleared  the  lord  Cobham  and  his 
to  the      partners,  from  all  that  you  .can  object  unto  them  out  of  records  and 
lions  of    statutes,  let  us  now  come  to  your  English  chroniclers  wherewith  you 
Poi.'vi'r-  seem  to  press  me,  and  oppress  them,  whom  ye  name  to  be  Robert 
Haif&c    Fabian,  Edward  Hall,  Polydore  Virgil,  Thomas  Cooper,  Richard 
Grafton,  with  other  brief  epitomes  and  summaries,  &c. ;  concerning 
which  authors,  as  I  have  nothing  to  say,  but  to  their  commendations, 
in  this  place  :  so,  if  you  had  avouched  the  same  to  the  commendation 
rather  than  to  the  reproof  of  others,  I  would  better  have  commended 
your  nature,  and  believed  your  cause.  But  now,  like  a  spider-catcher, 
sucking  out  of  every  one  what  is  the  worst,  to  make  up  your  laystall, 
you  heap  up  a  dung-hill  of  dirty  dialogues,  containing  nothing  in  them 
but  malicious  railing,  virulent  slanders,  manifest  untruths,  opprobrious 
contmuelies,  and  stinking  blasphemies,  able  almost  to  coiTupt  and 
infect  the  air.    Such  is  the  malady  and  '  cacoethes*'  of  your  pen,  that 
it  bcginneth  to  bark,  before  it  hath  learned  well  to  write ;  which  pen  of 
yours,  notwithstanding,  I  do  not  here  reproach  or  contemn,  as  neither 
do  I  greatly  fear  the  same.  God,  of  his  mercy,  keep  the  sword  out  of 
the  papists'  hand  :  it  is  not  the  pen  of  the  papists  I  greatly  pass  upon, 
though  twenty  Copes  and  so  many  surplices  were  set  against  the 
'  Book  of  Monuments,'  were  I  so  disposed.  Master  Cope,  to  dally,  or, 
as  the  Greeks  do  say,  '  avriTrai^a,'  and  to  repay  again  as  I  am  pro- 
voked.    But,  in  despiteful  railing,  and  in  this  satirical  sort  of  barking, 
I  give  you  over,  and  suffer  you  therein  to  pass  not  only  yourself,  but 
Modesty  also  Cerberus  liimself,  if  ye  will,  the  great  bandog  of  Pluto.  Mildness 
m^ded    ^"^^  humanity  rather  beseemeth,  and  is  the  grace  of  the  Latin  phrase, 
irs""*     ■^^  y^  could  hit  upon  the  vein  thereof,  it  would  win  you  much  more 
honesty  with  all  honest  men  :  but  the  Lord  hereafter  may  call  you, 
which  I  beseech  him  to  do,  and  to  forgive  you  that  you  have  done. 

In  the  mean  time,  seeing  this  your  prattling  pen  must  needs  be 
walking,  yet  this  you  might  have  learned  of  these  your  own  authors 
whom  you  allege,  more  civilly  to  have  tempered  your  fume  in  exclaim- 
ing against  them  whose  cause  is  to  you  not  perfectly  known.  And  now 


AGAINST    XICIIOLAS    HARPSFIELD. 


briefly  to  answer  to  these  your  aforesaid  writers,  as  witnesses  produced    iicry 
against  these  men  :  there   be  two  things  (as  I  take    it)  in  chronicle 


■writers  to  be  considered;  first,  the  grounds  whicli  tliey  follow;  secondly,    A.D. 

in  what  place  they  serve.  ^'^^'^- 

As  touching  the  order  and  ground  of  \vritinff  amonff  these  chroniclers.  Two 

.  ~  ^  o  o  '  thintjs  to 

ye  must  consider,  and  cannot  be  ignorant,  that  as  none  of  all  these  by  be  ob- 
you  forenanied  was  present  at  the  deed,  nor  witness  of  the  fact,  so  have  gtory'^  '° 
they  nothing  of  themselves  herein  certainly  to  affirm,  but  either  must  writers, 
follow  public  rumour  and  hearsay  for  their  author,  or  else  one  of  them  Jriund  of 
must  borrow  of  another :  Avhereof  neither  secmeth  to  me  sufficient ;  {>''>'""'-■« 

p  IT  ■  .  ,  '  to  be  con- 

for,  as  public  i-umour  is  never  certain,  so  one  author  may  soon  deceive  sidered. 
another ;  by  reason  whereof  it  cometh  oft  to  pass,  that  as  these  story- 
wTiters  hit  many  times  the  tnith,  so  again  all  is  not  gospel  that  they  N'<>t  aii 
do  Avrite  :  wherefore  great  respect  is  here  to  be  had,  either  not  to  credit  uue'that 
rashly  every  one  that  writeth  stories,  or  else  to  see  what  snrounds  thev  ^'^  '^"""'^ 

,•'-•',  '  o  J  la  stones. 

have  whom  we  do  follow. 

Now  to  demand.  Master  Cope,  of  you,  what  authority  or  founda- 
tion hath  your  Robert  Fabian,  have  Polydore  Virgil,  Edward  Hall, 
and  other  of  your  authors,  to  prove  these  men  to  be  traitors  .'*  what 
authority  do  they  avouch  ?  what  acts,  what  registers,  what  records,  or 
out  of  what  court  do  they  show,  or  what  demonstration  do  they  make? 
And  do  you  think  it  sufficient,  because   these  men  do  only  affirm  it, 
without  further  probation,  with  your  '  avroq  s'^tj,''  therefore  we  arc 
bound  to  believe  it  ?     Take  me  not  so.  Master  Cope,  that  I  do  here 
diminish  any  thing,  or  derogate  from  the  credit  of  those  writers  you 
allege,  whose  labours  have  deserved  well,  and  serve  to  great  utility : 
but  coming  now  to  trial  of  a  matter  lying  in  controversy  between  us, 
we  are  now  forced  to  seek  out  the  fountain  and  bottom  of  the  truth, 
where  it  is  not  enough  to  say,  '  so  it  is,'  but  the  cause  is  to  be  showed 
why  it  is  so  affinned.     And  what  though  Robert  Fabian,  Polydore 
Virgil,  and  Edward  Hall  should  altogether  (as  they  do  not)  agree  in 
the  treason  of  sir  John  Oldcastle,  and  of  the  rest?  yet  neither  is  this 
any  sufficient  surety  to  prove  them  traitors ;  considering  that  wTiters 
of  stories  for  the  most  part  following  either  blind  report,  or  else  one 
taking  of  another,  use  commonly  all  to  sound  together  after  one  tune, 
"  tanquam  Dodonsei  lebetes,"  so  that  as  one  saith,  all  say ;  and  if  one  Words 
err,  all  do  err.    Wherefore  you  see,  Master  Cope,  how  it  is  not  suffi-  pr'oba" 
cient,  nor  sure,  to  stick  only  to  the  names  and  authorities  of  chrono-  ^""^uut 
graphers,  unless  the  ground  be  found  substantial  whereupon  they  stand  cient  in 
themselves,  which  yet  in  none  of  these  whom  you  have  produced  doth  luatters. 
appear. 

Secondlv,  In  alleging  and  writing  of  chronicles,  it  is  to  be  consi-  How  far, 

*  «  ^l(i  to 

dered  to  what  place  and  effect  they  serve.     If  ye  would  show  out  of  what 
them  the  order  and  course  of  times,  what  years  were  of  dearth  and  of  *^"„i. 
plenty,  where  kings  kept  their  Christmas,  what  conduits  were  made,  "^''^^ 
what  mayors  and  sheriffs  were  in  London,  what  battles  were  fought, 
what  triumphs  and  great  feasts  were  holden,  when  kings  began   their 
reign,  and  when  they  ended,  &c. :  in   such  vulgar  and  popular  aflhirs 
the  narration  of  the  chronicler  serveth  to  good  purpose,  and  may  have 
his  credit,  wherein  the  matter  forceth  not  much  whether  it  be  true  or 
false,  or  whether  any  listeth  to  believe  them.     But  where  a  thing  is 
denied,  and  in  cases  of  judgment  and  in  controversies  doubtful,  which 


f'/74..  A    DEFENCE    OF    LORD    COBIIAM. 

Henry   ai'C  to  bc  clccided  and  bolted  out  by  evidence  of  just  demonstration ; 
^-      I  take  them   neither  for  judges  of  the  bench,  nor  for  arbiters  of  the 
A.  D.    cause    nor  as  witnesses  of  themselves   sufficient  necessarily  to  be 
1413.    sticked  unto  :  albeit  I  deny  not  but  histories  are  taken  many  times, 
and  so  termed  for  witnesses  of  times,  and  glasses  of  antiquity,  &c.,  yet 
not  such  witnesses  as  whose  testimony  beareth  always  a  necessary 
truth,  and  bindeth  belief. 
Histories      Tlic  two  wituesscs  who  camc  against  Susanna  being  senators,  both 
to  be^be-^  of  aucicut  ycars,  bare  a  great  countenance  of  a  most  evident  testimony, 
iJLved.     ivhcreby  they  almost  both  deceived  the  people,  and  oppressed  the 
innocent,  had  not  young  Daniel,  by  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  taken  them 
aside,  and  severally  examining  them  one  from  the  other,  found  them 
to  be  false  liars  both ;  leaving  to  us  thereby  a  lesson  of  wholesome 
circumspection,  not  rashly  to  believe  every  one  that  cometh,  and  also 
teaching  us  how  to  try  them  out.     Wherefore,  Master  Cope,  follow- 
ing here  the  like  example  of  Daniel  in  trying  these  your  records  which 
ye  infer  against  these  men,  we  will,   in  like  manner,  examine  them 
severally  one  from  another,  and  see  how  their  testimony  agreeth :  first 
beginning  with  your  Robert  Fabian ;  which  Robert  Fabian  being 
neither  in  the  same  age,  nor  at  the  deed-doing,  can  of  himself  give  no 
credit  herein,  without  due  proof  and  evidence  convenient. 
Testimo-       How  then  doth  Robert  Fabian  prove  this  matter  of  treason  true  ? 
11^^^^"  what  probation  doth  he  bring  ?  what  authority  doth  he  allege  ?    And 
against    doth  Robcrt  Fabian  think,  if  he  Avere  not  disposed  to  conceive  of  the 
cobham   lord  Cobliam  and  those  men,  a  better  opinion  but  to  be  traitors,  that 
examin-  ^^^  ^^^  bound  to  believc  him  only  at  his  word,  without  any  groimd 
or  cause  declared,  why  they  should  so  do,  but  only  because  he  so  saith, 
and  it  pleased  him  so  to  write  ?     And  if  ye  think,  Master  Cope,  the 
word  only  of  this  witness  sufficient  to  make  authority,  speaking  against 
the  lord  Cobham,  and  proving  nothing  Avhich  followed  so  many  years 
after  him  ;  why  may  not  I,  as  well  and  much  rather,  take  the  word 
Testimo-  and  testimony  of  Richard  Belward,  a  Norfolk  man  of  the  town  of 
Richard    Crisam,  who,  living  both  in  his  tune,  and  possibly  knowing  the  party, 
ntiward.  and  punished  also  for  the  like  truth,  is  not  reported,  but  recorded  also 
in  the  registers  of  the  church  of  Norwich,  to  give  this  testimony, 
among  his  other  articles,  for  the  aforesaid  lord  Cobham ;  that  is,  that 
sir  John  Oldcastle  was  a  true  catholic  man,  and  falsely  condemned, 
and  put  to  death  without  a  reasonable  cause,  &c.' 

Against  this  man  if  you  take  exception,  and  say,  that  one  heretic 
will  hold  with  another ;  why  may  not  I,  with  the  like  exception,  reply 
to  you  again,  and  say  as  well,  one  papist  will  hold  with  another,  and 
both  conjure  together,  to  make  and  say  the  worst  against  a  true  pro- 
testant  ? 

Fm-ther,  yet  to  examine  this  aforesaid  Fabian  (witness  against  sir 
John  Oldcastle),  as  Daniel  examined  the  witnesses  against  Susanna : 
^.,^  I  Avill  not  here  ask  under  what  tree  these  adherents  of  sir  John  Old- 
iicsses  castle  conspired  against  the  king,  and  subversion  of  the  land,  but  in 
the  lord  what  tiuic,  in  what  year  and  month,  this  conspiracy  was  wrought  ? 
agree"not  Fabiau  witucsseth,  that  it  was  in  the  month  of  January.  ContrariAvise, 
together.  Edward  Hall,  and  others,  our  abridgm enters,  following  him,  do  affirm 

(1)  Ex  Regist.  Epise.  Norvic. 


THE    TESTIMOXY    OF    THE    CHRONICLERS    EXAMINED.  375 

that  they  were  condemned  in  the  Guildhall  the  12th  of  December,    Henry 

and  that  their  execution  upon  the  same  was  in  January  following-,  so L. 

that  by  their  sentence  the  fact  was  done  either  in  the  month  of  De-    A.  D. 
cember,  or  else  before,  and  so  '  Fabianus  mentitus  est  in  caput  suum, 
ut  cum  Daniele  dicam,''  or,  if  it  were  in  the  month  of  January,  as  Fabian 
saitli,  then  are  Hall  and  his  followers  deceived,  testifying  the  fact  to 
be  done  in  the  month  of  December. 

And  yet  to  object,  moreover,  against  tlie  said  Fabian,  forasmuch  FaWan 
as  he  is  such  a  rash  witness  against  these  burned  persons,  whom  ofamanf- 
he  calleth   traitors, •  it  would  be  demanded  further   of  him,  or  in  f*^^'  "■?- 
his  absence  of  Master  Cope,  in  what  year  this   treason  was  con-  lus  story 
spired  ?     If  it  were  in  the  same  year,  as  he  confesscth  himself,  in  ",1^^^ 
which  year  John  Claydon,  the  skinner,  and  Richard  Turming,  baker,  ''''•'am. 
were  burned,  then  was  it  neither  in  the  month  of  January,  nor  in 
the  first  year  of  king  Henry  V,,  for  in  the  register  of  Canterbury  it 
appeareth  plainly,  that  John  Cleidon  was  condemned  neither  in  the 
time  of  Thomas  Arundel,  archbishop,  nor  yet  in  the  first  or  second 
year  of  king  Henry  V,,  but  was  condemned  in  the  second  year  of 
the  translation  of  Henry  Chichesly,  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  the 
seventeenth  day  of  August,  which  was  the  year  of  our  Lord  1415  : 
so  that  if  this  conspiracy  was  in  the  same  year,  after  the  witness  of 
Fabian,  in  which  year  John  Cleidon  was  burned,  then  doth  the  testi- 
mony of  Fabian  neither  accord  with  other  witnesses,  nor  with  him- 
self, nor  yet  with  truth.     And  thus  much  concerning  the  witness  of 
Robert  Fabian. 

Let  us  next  proceed  to  Polydore  Virgil,  whose  partial  and  untrue  The  tes- 
handling  of*  our  history,  in  other  places  of  his  books,  doth  offer  to  Pofydore' 
us  sufficient  exception  not  to  admit  his  credit  in  this  :  and  yet  '^^-. 
because  we  will  rather  examine  him,  than  exclude  him,  let  us  hear  a 
little  what  he  saith,  and  how  he  faileth,  and  in  how  many  points, 
numbering  the  same  upon  my  five  fingers. 

First,  ending  with   the  life   of  king  Henry  IV.,   he  saith  that  FWeun- 
he  reigned  fourteen  years,  six  months,  and  two  days,  '  Angliae  His-  ^jJ^/yjore. 
toria,'  lib.  21,  Avhich  is  an  untruth  worthy  to  be  punished  with  a  ^'"' 
whole  year's  banishment  (to  speak  after  the  manner  of  Apuleius,*) 
when,  as   truth  is,  he  reigned,  by  the  testimony  of  the   story  of 
St.  Alban's,  of  Fabian,  of  Hall,  of  our  old  English  chronicle,  and 
of  '  Scala  Mundi,'  but  thirteen  years  and  six  months,  lacking,  as  some 
say,  five  days ;   Hall  saith,  he  reigned  but  tAvelve  years. 

The  second  untruth  of  Polydore  is  this,  whereas  he,  speaking  second 
of  this  sedition  of  sir  John  Oldcastle  and  his  adherents,  affirmcth  untruth, 
the  same  to  be  done  after  the  burning  of  John  Huss,  and  Jerome 
of  Prague,  which  was,  saith  he,  in  the  year  1415,  in  which  year, 
saith  he,  Thomas  Arundel  died.  His  words  be  these,  "  In  eodem 
concilio  damnata  est  Johan.  WiclifF.  hceresis ;  ac  Johan.  Hus,  et 
Hieronimus  Pragensis,  in  ca  urbc  combusti  sunt.  Quod  ubi  re- 
liquis  consociis,  qui  etiam  tunc  in  Anglia  erant,  patcfit,  tanquam 
furiis  agitati  primum  conjurationes  in  omnes  sacerdotcs,  deinde  in 
regem,""  &c. ;  in  which  words  he  not  only  erreth,  falsely  assigning 

(1)  Fab.  part  vii.  in  vita  Hen.  p.  390. 

(2)  "  Apuleius,"  Apuleia  Lex,  was  enacted  by  Apuleius  tlic  tribune,  a.u.c.  G52,  against  sedition* 
aud  tumults.— £d. 


S7G  A  DEFENCE  OF  LOUD  COBHAM, 

Hrnry    tlic    cause    aiid    occasion    of    this    sedition  to  the  death    of  Jolin 
'      Huss,  and  of  Jerome,  but  also  misseth  as  much  in  the  order  and 
•A- 1>.    computation  of  the  years.     For  neither  was  sir  Roger  Acton  with 
^^^'^-    his  aforesaid  fellows  alive  at  the  time  of  the  council ;  neither  doth 
he  agree  therein  with  any  of  our  English  writers,  except  only  with 
Hall,  who  also  erreth  therein  as  wide  as  he. 
Third  and      For  tlic  third  and  fourth  untruth  I  note  this,  where  he  addcth 
imtruths.  ^"^  saitli,  that  after  this  rebellion  raised  against  the  king,,  the  said 
sir  John  Oldcastle,  being  there  present  himself,  Avas  taken  and  im- 
prisoned  in  the  ToAver,   and    afterward    escaped   out    of  the    said 
Tower  by  night:  wherein  is  contained  a  double  untruth  ;  for  neither 
Avas  sir  John  Oldcastle  there  present  himself,  if  wc  believe  Fabian 
and  Copc,^  neither  yet  did  he  ever  escape  out  of  the  Tower  after 
that  conspiracy,  if  ever  any  such  conspiracy  was. 
Fifth  His  fifth,  but  not  the  last  untruth  in  Polydore,  is  this,  that  he 

untruth  »-»-.  j  *  * 

states  Thomas    Arundel  to  have   died    in    the  same  year,  noting 
the  year  to  be  1415,  whereas  by  the  true  registers  he  died  in  the 
year  1413. 
Auotiier        To  this  uutruth  another  also  may  be  joined,  where  he,   erring 
in"poiy^    in  the  computation  of  the  years  of  the  said  Thomas  Arundel,  arch- 
^°^^        bishop  of  Canterbury,  reporteth  him  to  sit  twenty-two  years  ;^  Avho 
was  there  archbishop  but  only  eighteen  years,  as  is  to  be  seen  in 
the  records  of  Canterbury.  The  Avords  of  Polydore  be  these  ;  "  Tho- 
mas Arundellius  Cantuariensis  antistes  annum  jam  tunc  sedens  ter- 
tium  et  trigesimum  e  vita  excessit.""*     Albeit  in  this  I  do  not  greatly 
contend  with  Polydore,  and  peradventure  the  adversary  will  find 
some  easy  shift  for  this  matter. 

But  let  us  noAv  pass  from  Polydore,  not,  as  they  say,  out  of  the 

hall  into   the   kitchen,  but  out  of  the  kitchen  into  the  '  hall,'' ex- 

Thetesti-  amiuiug  and  perpending  Avhat  saith  *  EdAvard  Hall,'  another  witness, 

Sau'^  "^   in  this  matter ;  upon  Avhom  Master  Cope  bindeth  so  fast,  that  he 

\hf\mi    supposeth  liis  knot  is  never  able  to  be  loosed.     And,  moreover,  he  so 

cobham    trcadeth  me  doAvn  under  his  feet  in  the  dirt  (as  a  man  Avould  think 

amined.    IiiHi  some  dirt-daubc/s  son)  "  that  the  spots  thereof,'''  he  saith,  "  will 

ncA'er  be  gotten   out  while  the  world  standeth,  and  a  day  longer."" 

Notwithstanding  I  trust.  Master  Cope,  that  your  dirty  pen,  Avith 

your  cockish  brags,  hath  not  so  bedaubed  and  bespotted  me,  nor 

-yet  convicted  me  to  be  such  a  depraver  of  histories,  but  I  hope  to 

sponge  it  out.     At  least  wise,  Avith  a  little  'asperges'  of  the  pope's 

holy  water,  I  trust  to  come  to  a  '  dealbabor''*  Avell  enough. 

But,  certes,  Master  Cope,  your  mastership  must  first  understand, 
that  if  ye  think  so  to  depress  me,  and  disprove  me  of  untruth  in  my 
history,  you  must  go  more  groundly  to  Avork,  and  bring  against  me 
other  authors  than  EdAvard  Hall.  You  must  consider.  Master  Cope, 
if  you  Avill  be  a  controller  in  story-matters,  it  is  not  enough  for 
you  to  bring  a  railing  spirit,  or  a  mind  disposed  to  carp  and  cavil 
where  any  matter  may  be  picked  :  diligence  is  required,  and  great 
searching  out  of  books  and  authors,  not  only  of  our  time,  but  of  all 

(11  ■Dial   vii.  p.  833,  line  II. 

(2)  In  Edition  ITiSH,  tlie  words  "thirty-three  years"  are  given,  and  in  the  Edition  1569  the 
•words  "  twenty-two"  are  inserted  in  the  text,  while  the  quotation  from  Polydore  remains  un- 
altcrrd.— Ed. 

{.•!'  Lib.  xxij  Aug   IIi.st.  (1)  "  Dcalbahor,"  a  iiurgrr,  or  whitcncr.  -  Ed. 


THE     rnsTIMONV    01-    TIIF.    CIIRONICLKRS    EXAIMIN'KI).  3  ( 

ages.     Aiul  especially  where   matters  of  religion  are  touched  per-    Henry 


V. 


taining  to  the  church,  it  is  not  sufficient  to  sec  what  'Fabian'  or 
what  '  Hair  saith  ;  but  the  records  must  be  sought,  the  registers  A.  1). 
must  be  turned  over,  letters  also  and  ancient  instruments  ought  to  ^^^'^- 
be  j)crused,  and  authors  with  the  same  coin])ared  :  finally,  the  writers 
amongst  themselves  one  to  be  conferred  with  another ;  and  so  with 
judgment  nutters  are  to  be  weighed  ;  with  diligence  to  be  laboured; 
and  with  simplicity,  pure  from  all  addition  and  partiality,  to  be 
uttered. 

Thus  did  Aventine,  thus  did  Sleidan,    write.     These  helps  also 
the  eldest  and  best  historicians  seemed  to  have,  both  Livy,  Sallust, 
Quintus  Curtius,  and  such  like  ;  as   by  tlieir  letters  and   records 
inserted  may  well  appear.     The  same  helps  likewise,  both  in  your  Cope,  a 
Fabian,  and  in  your  Edward  Hall,  were  to  be  required,  but  especially  of'stories 
in  you.   Master  Cope,  yourself,  who  take    upon  you  so  cockishly,  J|'j|'"|i",* 
rather  than  wisely,  to  be  a  controller  and  master-m()derator  of  other  no  skui. 
men's  matters:  in  which  matters,  to  say  the  truth,  you  have  no 
great  skill,  and  less  experience ;  neither  have  you  such  plenty  of 
authors  meet  for  that  purpose,  nor  yet  ever  travelled  to  search  out 
the  origins  and  grounds  of  that  whereof  ye  write  ;   but  contented 
with  such  only  as  cometh  next  to  hand,  or  peradventure,  receiving 
such  alms  as  some  of  your  poor  friends  bestow  upon  you,  you  think 
it  sufficient  if  you  can  allege  Fabian  and  Hall  for  your  purpose. 

Now  what  purpose  and  affection  herein  doth  lead  you,  or  rather 
doth  drive  you,  to  the  carping  and  barking  against  the  history  of 
these  good  men  that  be  hence  gone,   and  had   their   punishment, 
all  men  may  see  it  to  be  no  simple  sincerity  of  a  mind  indifferent, 
but  the  zeal  only  of  your  sect  of  popery,  or  rather  of  fury,  which 
setteth  your  railing  spirit  on  fire.  But  now,  out  of  the  fiery  kitchen 
to  come  to  the  'halT  again,   let  us  see  what   matter  licth  in  the 
testimony  of  Edward  Hall,  to  prove  these  men  to  be  traitors.     And 
here  forasmuch.  Master  Cope,  as   you  seem  neither  sufficiently  ac- 
quainted with  this  your  own  master  and  author,  Master  Hall,  nor  Answer 
yet  well  experienced  in  the  searching  out  of  histories,  I  will  take  a  i",i„.ard 
little  pains  for  you,  in  this  behalf,  to  certify  you,  concerning  the  n^'- 
story  of  this  author,  whereof  percase  you  yourself  are  ignorant. 

The  truth  hereof  is  this,  that  as  the  said  Edward  Hall,  your  great 
master  and  testis,  was  about  the  compiling  of  his  story,  certain  there 
were  who  resorted  to  him,  of  whom  some  were  drawers  of  his  pedi- 
gi'ee  and  vincat,  some  were  gravers,  the  names  of  whom  were  John 
Betts,  and  Tyrral,  who  be  now  both  dead.  And  others  there  were 
of  the  same  sodality,  who  be  yet  alive,  and  were  then  in  the  house 
of  Richard  Grafton,  he  being  both  the  printer  of  the  said  book,  and 
also,  as  is  thought,  a  great  helper  of  the  penning  of  the  same.  It 
so  befell,  that  as  Hall  was  entering  into  the  story  of  sir  John  Old- 
castle,  and  of  sir  Roger  Acton  and  their  fellows,  the  book  of  John 
Bale,  touching  the  story  of  the  lord  Cobham,  was  at  the  same  time 
newly  come  over :  which  book  was  privily  conveyed,  by  one  of  his 
servants,  into  the  study  of  Hall,  so  that  in  turning  over  liis  books  it 
must  needs  come  to  his  hands.  At  the  sight  whereof,  when  he  saw 
the  gi-ound  and  reasons  in  that  book  contained,  he  turned  to  the 
authors  in  the  aforesaid  book  alleged  ;  whereupon,  within  two  nights 


378  A  DEFENCE  OF  LORD  COBHAM. 

Henry    aftcr,  movccl  by  what  cause,  I  know  not,  but  so  it  was,  that  lie,  taking 
'       his  pen,  rased  and  cancelled   all  that  he  had  written  before  against 
A.D.    sir  John  Oldcastle  and  his  fellows,  and  which  was  now  ready  to  go 
^'^^'^-    to  print,  containing  near  to  the  quantity  of  three  pages.     And  lest 
rlseth      Master  Cope,  you,  or  any  other  should  think  me  to  speak  beside  my 
out  his     book,  be  it  therefore  known  both  to  you,  and  to  all  others,  by  these 
written"^^  presents,  that  the  very  selfsame  first  copy  of  Hall,  rased  and  crossed 
S"'"*     ^^^'^  ^^^^  ^^^  P^"'  remaineth  in  my  hands  to  be  shown  and  seen,  as 
cobham.   need  shall  require.    The  matter  which  he  cancelled  out,  came  to  this 
effect.      Wherein  he,  following  the  narration  of  Polydorc,  began 
with  like  words  to  declare  how  the  sacramentaries  *  here  in  England, 
after  the  death  of  John  Huss,  and  Jerome  of  Prague,  being  pricked, 
as  he  saith,  with  a  demoniacal  sting,   first  conspired  against  the 
priests,  and  afterwards  against  the  king,  having  for  their  captains  sir 
John  Oldcastle  the   lord  Cobham,  and  sir  Roger  Acton,  knight ; 
with  many  more  words  to  the  like  purpose  and  eflPect,  as  Polydore, 
and  other  such  like  chroniclers  do  write  against  him.      All  which 
matter  notwithstanding,  the  said  Hall,  with  his  pen,  at  the  sight  of 
John  Bale's  book,  did  utterly  extinguish  and  abolish ;  adding  in 
the  place  thereof  the  words  of  Master  Bale's  book,  touching  the 
accusation  and  condemnation  of  the  said  lord  Cobham  before  Tho- 
mas Arundel,   archbishop  of  Canterbiiry,  taken  out  of  the  letter  of 
the  said  archbishop,  as  is  in  his  own  story  to  be  seen.^ 
Hall,  in        And  thus  Edward  Hall,  your  author,  revoking  and  calling  back  all 
agreeth^  that  hc  had  devised  before  against  the  lord  Cobham  (whereof  1  have 
otileTs!^  his  own  hand  to  show,  and  witness  substantial  upon  the  same),  in  his 
Untruth    printed  book  recordeth  of  him  no  more,  but  only  showeth  the  process 
noted.      between  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury  and  him,  for  matters  of  religion. 
And  so,  ending  with  sir  John  Oldcastle,  he  proceedeth  further  to  the 
assembly  of  sir  Roger  Acton  (whom  he  falsely  calleth  Robert  Acton), 
John  Brown,  and  Beverly,  the  narration  whereof  he  handleth  in  such 
sort,  that  he  neither  agreeth  with  the  record  of  other  writers,  nor  yet 
with  the  truth  itself.     For  where  he  excludeth  the  lord  Cobham  out 
of  that  assembly,  he  discordeth  therein  from  Polydore  and  others  ; 
and  where  he  affirmeth  the  fact  of  that  conspiracy  to  be  wrought 
before,  or  at  the  twelfth  day  of  December,  that  is  manifestly  false,  if 
Hall        the  records  before  alleged  be  true.     And  where  he  reporteth  this 
fn'thf"^  assembly  to  be  after  the  burning  of  John  Huss,  and  of  Jerome  of 
sir  Robert  ^^'"^g^c,  therein  he  accordeth  with  Polydore,  but  not  with  the  truth. 
Acton.      Moreover  so  doubtful  he  is  and  ambiguous,  in  declaration  of  this 
story,  that  no  great  certainty  can  be  gathered  of  him. 

First,  as  touching  the  confession  of  them,  he  confesseth  himself 
that  he  saw  it  not,  and  therefore  leaveth  it  at  large  :  and  as  concern- 
ing the  causes  of  their  death,  he  leaveth  the  matter  in  doubt,  not 
daring  (as  doth  Master  Cope)  to  define  or  pronounce  any  thing 
thereof,  but  only  to  recite  the  surmises  and  minds  of  divers  men 
diversely,  some  thinking  it  was  for  conveying  the  lord  Cobham  out  of 
the  Tower,  some  that  it  was  for  treason  and  heresy.  And  here  cometh 
in  the  mention  only  of  a  record,  but  what  record  it  is,  neither  doth  he 

(1)  "  Sacramentaries,"  aterm  of  reproach  Riven  by  the  papists  to  the  protestants,  for  their  alleged 
errors  respecting  the  catholic  sacraments.— Eu. 

(2)  Hal.  ill  vita  Ueii.  V.  p.  2,  line  30. 


THE    TESTIMONY    OK    THE    CHRONICLERS    EXAMINED.  379 

utter  it,  nor  doth  lie  examine  it ;    otherwise  agnin  afErming,  as  he    Henr-j 
saith,  that  it  was  for  feigned  causes  surmised  by  the  spiritualty,  more 


of  displeasure  than  truth.  And  thus  your  author  Hall,  having  recited    A.  I), 
the  variety  of  men's  opinions,  detcnnincth  himself  no  certain  thing    i*''- 


thereof;  but,  as  one  indifferent,  neither  bound  to  the  conjectures  of '''""« 
all  men,  nor  to  the  writings  of  all  men,  referreth  the  whole  judgment  in  sir 
of  the  matter  free  unto  the  reader.    And  so  concluding  his  narration,  AcuTn's 
forasnuLch  as  he  was  neither  a  witness  of  the  fact,  nor  present  at  the  '^^^'-■• 
deed,  he  overpasscth  the  story  thereof. 

And  what  witness  then  will  you,  or  can  you,  Master  Cope,  take  of 
Edward  Hall,  who  denieth  himself  to  be  a  witness  ?  will  you  compel 
him  to  say  what  he  saw  not,  and  to  witness  what  he  cannot  ?  Where-  Repug- 
fore,  like  as  Susanna  in  the  story  of  Daniel,  was  quit  by  right  judg-  "jJJ'Jj  j„ 
ment  in  the  case  of  adultery,  because  her  accusers  and  '  testes,'  being  ''"^  "^i' 
examined  asunder  were  found  to  vary  and  halt  in  their  talc,  and  not  against 
to  agree  in  the  tsvo  trees ;  so  why  may  not,  in  like  case  of  treason,  coMiam, 
sir  Roger  Acton,  sir  John  Oldcastle,  Brown,  and  the  rest,  claim  the  ^"ctj'u'^ ''^^ 
same  privilege  ?  seeing  among  the  '  testes'  and  witnesses  produced 
against  them  such  discord  is  found,  and  such  halting  among  them, 
that  neither  do  they  agree  in  place,  person,  year,  day,  nor  month. 

For  first :  Where  Fabian  and  his  fellows  say,  that  they  were  assem-  i.Rcpus 
bled  together  in  a  great  company  in  the  field  near  to  St.  Giles,  the  tuepUce. 
forged  indictment  above  alleged,  saith,  they  were  but  riding  toward 
the  field. 

Secondly:  Where  the  aforesaid  indictment,  andPolydore,  give  the  2.  in  the 
lord  Cobham  to  be  present  personally  in  that  assembly,  Hall,  and  p*^'"*"'- 
Alanus  Copus  Anglus,'  do  exclude  his  personal  presence  from  thence ; 
and  so  doth  Fabian  also  seem  to  agree,  speaking  only  of  the  adhe- 
rents of  sir  John  Oldcastle. 

Thirdly  :  Where  Hall  and  Polydore  report  this  assembly  to  be  3.  in  tua 
after  the  burning  of  John  Huss  and  of  Jerome,  at  the  council  of  y*^^"^- 
Constance,  which  was  in  the  year  1415,  that  cannot  be  ;  but  if  there 
were  any  such  conspiracy  in  the  first  year  of  Henry  V.  it  must  needs 
be  in  1413.  And  here  by  the  way,  why  do  certain  of  your  epi- 
tome-writers, speaking  of  the  lord  Cobham,  committed  first  to  the 
Tower  for  heresy,  refer  this  said  imprisonment  to  the  year  1412, 
whereas  by  their  o^vn  count,  reckoning  the  year  from  the  Annuncia- 
tion, it  must  needs  be  in  the  year  1413,  being  done  in  harvest  time. 

Fourthly  :   Where  Hall  Avith  his  followers  atfirm  that  sir  Roger  4.  in  tiio 
Acton,  Bro\vn  and  Beverly  were  condemned  the  twelfth  day  of™"""' 
December,  the  record  is  evidently  against  it,  which  holdeth  the  fact 
to  be  in  working,  the  tenth  day  of  January. 

Fifthly  :  Whereas  the  aforesaid  record  of  the  indictment  givcth  r.  in  the 
the  Wednesday  next  after  the  Epiphany,  which  was  the  tenth  day  '  ^^' 
of  January  that  present  year,  both  the  flict  to  be  committed  the 
same  day,  the  commission  also  to  be  granted  and  delivered  to  the 
commissioners  the  same  day,  the  said  commissioners  to  sit  in  com- 
mission the  same  day,  the  sheriflTs  of  Middlesex  to  return  a  jury  out 
of  the  body  of  Middlesex  the  same  day,  and  the  jurors  to  find  the 
indictment  on  the  same  day  ;  and  yet  no  juror  in  the  indictment 
named  the  same  ^ay. 

(I)  ^Uanus  Copus,  p.  833,  line  12. 


880  A  DEFENCE  OF  LORD  COBHAM. 

Henry        Item,  thc  lord  Cobliam  the  same  day  to  be  found  conspiring  to 
'■      make  himself  regent,  when  the  king,  tliat  day  and  year,  was  not  yet 


A.  D.  passed  into  France — how  all  these  can  concur  and  hang  together,  and 
1413.  q\\  jj^  Qjie  day —  I  suppose  it  will  cost  you  two  days  before  you, 
with  all  your  learned  council,  will  study  it  out.  And  when  you,  in 
your  unlawful  assemblies,  have  conspired  and  conferred  together  all 
ye  can,  yet  will  ye  make  it,  as  I  think,  tliree  days,  before  you  honestly 
dispatch  your  hands  of  the  matter. 

And  wdiere  ye  think  that  ye  have  impressed  in  me  such  a  foul 
note  of  lying,  never  to  be  clawed  off  while  the  world  standeth,  yet 
shall  the  posterity  to  come  judge  between  you  and  me,  whether  shall 
appear  more  honest  and  true :  my  defence  for  that  worthy  lord,  or 
your  micourteous  and  viperous  wrangling  against  him,  moved  Avith 
no  other  cause  but  only  with  the  peevish  spirit  of  popery,  which  can 
abide  nothing  but  what  savom'eth  of  your  own  sect.^  For  else,  hoAv 
many  loud  lying  legends,  yea  what  legions  of  lies,  are  daily  used  and 
received  in  the  popish  church  ?  What  doltish  dreams  .'*  what  feigned 
mii'acles  ?  what  blasphemous  tales  and  friarly  fables,  and  idle  inven- 
tions, fighting  against  the  sincere  religion,  doctrine,  and  cross,  of 
Christ !  And  could  you  hold  your  pen  from  all  these  and  find  nothing 
else  to  set  your  idleness  at  work,  but  only  to  write  against  the  lord 
Cobham,  sir  Roger  Acton,  Brown,  Onley,  Cowbridge,  with  a  few 
others,  whom,  with  much  ado,  at  length  you  have  sought  out,  not  so 
much  for  any  true  zeal  to  rebuke  iniquity,  as  craftily  seeking  matter 
by  these  to  deface  and  blemish  the  book  of  Acts  and  Monuments  ? 
which  seemeth  belike  to  make  you  scratch  there,  where  it  itcheth  not. 
And  if  I  should,  after  the  like  dealing,  take  in  hand  your  popish 
portues,^  and  with  the  like  diligence  accuse  every  popish  martyr  and 
saint  there  canonized ;  think  you.  Master  Cope,  I  could  not  make 
you  out  half  a  dozen  as  rank  traitors  and  rebels  to  their  kings  and 
Popes,  princes,  as  ever  were  any  of  these  of  your  picking  out  ?  What  pope 
their^em"  ^li^^ost  hatli  thcrc  bccu  thcsc  last  five  hundred  years,  who  hath  not 
perors  bccu  a  traitor  to  his  emperor  and  prince,  and  to  his  country  ?  either 
princes,  opculy  rebelling  against  them,  or  privily  conspiring  their  destruction, 
or  proudly  setting  his  feet  upon  their  necks,  or  spurning  their  crowns 
off  from  their  heads,  or  making  the  son  to  fight  against  the  father  ? 
How  many  have  they  deposed,  and  set  up  others  in  their  seats .'' 
How  many  emperors  and  kings  have  they  wrongfully  cursed  ?  What 
consuls  of  Rome  have  they  resisted,  deposed,  and  put  to  death .'' 
What  wars  have  they  raised  up  against  their  own  country  of  Rome  .'' 
Yea,  the  continual  holding  of  the  city  of  Rome  from  its  lawful 
emperor,  what  is  it  but  a  continual  point  of  treason  "? 

What  will  you  answer  me,  Master  Cope,  to  the  pope,  who  con- 
spired to  let  fall  down  a  stone  upon  the  emperor's  head,  kneeling  at 
his  prayers  ? 
ofihe  ^^^^  though  this  treachery,  being  as  big  as  a  millstone,  seemed 

pope's  but  a  small  mote  in  your  eye,  that  it  could  not  be  espied,  yet  what 
and  con-  will  ye  Say  of  the  monk  of  Swinstead,  that  poisoned  king  John,  who 
were"^^  was  both  absolved  by  his  abbot  before  his  treason  committed,  and,  after 
traitors.    Ijig  trcasou,  had  a  perpetual  mass  sung  for  him,  to  help  him  out  of 

(1)  Papists  cannot  see  great  beams  in  their  own  eyes,  viho  spy  small  motes  in  others. 

(2)  "  Porlues,"  Porthose,  or  Mass  Booli. — Kb 


THE    TESTIMONY    OF    HIE    CHRONICLERS    EXAMINED.  381 

purgatory  ?     And  what  think  yc  in  your  conscience  is  to  be  said  of   Uennj 
Thomas  Bccket,  who  did  enough,  and  uiurc  tiian  became  ium,  to  set 


the  French  king  and  the  king  of  England  together  by  the  ears?  of  A.I). 
Ausehn  Hkewise,  and  of  Stephen  Langton,  who  departed  botli  out  of  ^^^'^' 
the  reahn  to  complain  of  their  princes  and  sovereigns  .''  the  like  may 
be  said  also  of  John  Peckham.  John  Stratford,  archbishop  of  the 
same  see  of  Canterbury,  notoriously  resisted  the  king's  command- 
ment, being  sent  for  by  king  Edward  III.,  to  come  to  the  parliament 
at  York  ;  through  the  default  of  whose  coming,  the  present  oppor- 
tunity of  getting  Scotland  was  the  same  time  lost. 

Richard  Scropc,  archbishop  of  York,  was  openly  in  arms  to  rebel  Scrope, 
and  fight  against  king  Henry  IV.,  for  which  he  was  condemned  and  ^[siiopof 
put  to  death :  and  yet,  notwithstandin''',  commission  was  sent  down  .^'"f*^- 

PI  lie  •  1  1  •  traitor; 

irom  the  pope  shortly  atter,  to  excommunicate  them  who  ])ut  Ium  to  and  >x-t 
death,  his  treason  notwithstanding.    Read  the  story  sincerely  of  pope  ho\yiimn. 
Benedict  XII.  and  of  pope  Clement  VI.,  and  see  how  the  traitorous  ^"in^^,,,,. 
rebellion  of  these  two  popes  against  Louis,  their  rightful  emperor,  'y  tf^i- 
can  be  defended ;  which  emperor  at  Last  was  also  poisoned,  and  not 
without  the  practice  of  pope  Clement,  as  Hieronimus  Marius  doth 
credibly  witness. 

In  the  reign  of  king  Edward  II.,  mention  was  made  before  of  Lancaster 
Thomas,  earl  of  Lancaster,  who,  with  a  great  number  of  other  nobles  ana  y'Jt ' 
and  barons  of  the  realm,  rose  in  armour  against  their  prince,  and,  ^'^^^^^  ^ 
therefore,  at  length  were  put  to  death  as  traitors.     And  yet  notwith- 
standing this  treason  committed.  Master  Cope,  if  you  be  so  ignorant 
in  our  stories  tliat  you  know  it  not,  set  your  setters  on  to  search,  and 
you  shall  find  it  true,  that  certain  noblemen  Avent  up  to  Rome,  for 
the  canonizing  of  the  said  Thomas  of  Lancaster,  to  be  made  a  saint, 
and  obtained  the  same  ;  insomuch  that  in  a  certain  old  calendar,  the 
name  of  the  said  St.  Thomas  of  Lancaster  is  yet  extant  to  be  seen. 

In  the  fourth  book  of  the  Acts  and  Monuments,  mention  was 
made  of  Edmund  Abbingdon,  archbishop   of  Canterbury,*  whom  Abbinp- 
although  I  do  not  disprove,  but  rather  commend  in  my  history,  for  his  bi's'impof" 
bold  and  sage  counsel  given  unto  king  Henry  III.,  and  also  for  offer-  ^';'J"'"" 
ing  the  censure  of  excommunication  against  the  king  in  so  necessary  rebelled 
a  cause,  yet  notwithstanding,  the  same  Edmund  afterwards,  about  his  uTs 
latter  end,  went  up  with  a  rebelling  mind  to  complain  of  his  king  ^'"u  yet 
unto  the  pope,  and  in  his  journey  died,  before  his  return  ;  who,  after-  ^^^^  > 
wards,  for  the  same,  was  canonized  by  the  pope,  and  now  shinetU 
among  the  saints  in  the  pope's  calendar. 

Let  us  come  more  near  to  these  days  and  times,  and  consider  the  Amndei 
doings  of  Thomas  Arundel,  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  who  being  first  uait"'^ 
deposed  and  exiled  for  his  contemptuous  deserts  against  the  king,  and  f,f;"^'j*'„^ 
afterwards  coming  in  with  Henry  Bolingbroke,  duke  of  Hereford,  in  and  yet" 
open  arms,  and  with  main  force,  rose  against  his  natural  and  lawful  ed  a  ^reat 
king.    Think  you.  Master  Cope,  this  is  not  as  great  a  point  of  treason,  }',',|! "ope-. 
as  that  which  was  done  in  Thickets'  fields  ?  and  though  he  be  not  cuurcu. 
placed  among  the  portuous  saints,  yet  I  think  nothing  contrary,  but 
in  your  heart  you  -will  not  greatly  stick  to  say,  "  Sancte  Tlioma  !  ora 
pro  nobis." 

All  these  things  well  considered,  tell  me,  Master  Cope,  I  pray  you, 

(1)  See  vol.  U.  p.  427.— Ed. 


382  A   DEFENCE    OF    LOUD    COBHAM. 

.  Henry    is  trcason  such  a  stranjje  and  uncouth  thinc^  in  your  pope-catholic 

'■ —  church,   that  your  burning  zeal  of  obedience  to  kings  and  princes 

^■^-    cannot  read  the  story  of  the  lord  Cobham  and  sir  Roger  Acton,  but 
your  pen  must  needs  be  inflamed  to  WTite  against  them,  and  yet  so  many 


traitors  in  your  own  calendars  neither  seen  nor  once  spoken  of?  And 
if  the  traitorous  conspiracy  and  rebellion  of  so  many  your  calendar 
saints,  committed  against  emperors,  kings,  and  princes,  cannot  stir 
your  zeal,  nor  move  your  pen ;  and  if  the  treason  of  pope  Gregory 
IX.,  raising  war  against  his  own  city  of  Rome,  and  causing  thirty 
thousand  citizens  in  one  battle  to  be  slain,  deserveth  not  to  be  espied 
and  accused,  as  much  as  this  treason  of  the  lord  Cobham  ;  yet  what 
A^ill  you,  or  can  you  answer  to  me.  Master  Cope,  as  touching  the 
horrible  treason  of  pope  Gregory  VII.,  committed  not  against  em- 
peror or  king,  or  any  mortal  man,  but  against  the  Lord  himself,  even 
against  your  God  of  your  own  making,  being  therein,  as  you  say,  no 
substance  of  bread,  but  the  very  personal  body,  flesh,  blood,  and 
bone,  of  Christ  himself;  which  body,  notwithstanding,  the  aforesaid 
PopeGre-  pope  Grcgory  VII.  took  and  cast  with  his  own  hands  into  the  burn- 
a"traitor '  i^g  fire,  bccausc  it  would  not  answer  him  to  a  certain  doubt  or  de- 
fhe  LOTd's  i^^'^d  ?  ^  Soothly,  if  sir  John  Oldcastle  had  taken  the  body  of  king 
own  body.  Henry  V.,  and  thrown  it  into  the  fire,  the  fact  being  so  notoriously 
certain  as  this  is,  I  would  never  have  bestowed  any  word  in  his  defence. 
And  could  this,  and  so  many  other  heinous  treasons  pass  through 
yoiu-  fingers.  Master  Cope,  and  no  other  to  stick  in  your  pen  but  the 
lord  Cobham  ? 

Finally  and  simply  to  conclude  with  you,  Master  Cope,  and  not  to 
flatter  you  :  what  is  the  whole  working,  the  proceedings,  actions, 
and  practices  of  your  religion,  or  have  thus  been  almost  these  five 
hundred  years,  but  a  certain  perpetual  kind  of  treason,  to  thrust 
doAvn  your  princes  and  magistrates,  to  derogate  from  their  right  and 
jurisdiction,  and  to  advance  your  own  majesties  and  dominations,  as 
hath  been  sufficiently  above  proved,  and  laid  before  your  faces  in  a 
parliament  holden  in  France,  by  the  lord  Peter  de  Cugneriis  ? 
Wherefore,  if  the  assembly  of  these  before-named  persons,  either 
within  or  without  St.  Giles's-field,  be  such  a  great  mote  of  treason  in 
your  eyes,  first  look  upon  the  great  blocks  and  millstones  of  your 
own  traitors  at  home,  and  when  you  have  well  discussed  the  same, 
then  afterwards  pour  out  your  wallet  of  trifling  dialogues,  or  trialogues, 
if  ye  list,  against  us,  and  spare  us  not.  Not  that  I  so  think  this  to  be 
a  sufficient  excuse  to  purge  the  treason  of  these  men,  if  your  popish 
calendars  and  legends  be  found  full  of  traitors.  "  Multitudo  enim 
peccatorum  non  parit  errori  patrocinium  :""  but  this,  I  think,  that  the 
Religion  same  cause  which  made  them  to  suffer  as  traitors,  hath  made  you  also 
lymaketh  to  rail  against  them  for  traitors,  that  is,  mere  hatred  only  against  their 
amon'g  religion,  rather  than  any  true  affection  you  have  to  yoiu*  princes  and 
prists  governors  ;  who,  if  they  had  been  as  fervent  in  your  popery,  and  had 
sufl^ered  so  much  for  the  holy  father  of  Rome,  or  for  the  liberties  of 
the  holy  mother-church  of  Rome,  I  doubt  not  but  they,  as  holy 
children  of  Rome,  had  been  rung  into  your  Romish  calendar  with  a 
'  Festum  duplex,"  or  at  least  with  '  Festum  simplex,'  of  nine  lessons ; 
also  with  a  vigil,  peradventure,  before  them. 

(1)  Benno.  Card. 


THE    TESTIMONY    OF    THE    CHRONICLERS    EXAMINED.  383 

Now,  because  they  were  of  the  contrary  profession,  and  enemies    iJ<^nrtj 
to   your  '  magna  Diana  Eplicsiorimi,''   you  play  with  tlicm  as  the      ^' 
Ephesian  carvers  did  with  St.  Paul,  and  worse.     Ye  thrust  them  out    A.D. 
as  seditious  rebels,  not  only  out  of  life  and  body,  but  also  cannot    ^'^^•^- 
abide  them  to  have  any  poor  harbour  in  their  own  friends^  houses, 
among  our  Acts  and  ^lonuments  to  be  remembered.     In  the  which 
Acts  and  Monuments,  if,  gentle  '  Master  Irencus,'  with  his  felloAV 
'  Critobulus,'  in  your  clerkly  dialogues,  will  not  suffer  them  to  be 
numbered  for  martjTS  ;  yet  speak  a  good  word  for  them.  Master  Co])e, 
they  may  stand  for   '  testes'  or  witness-bearers  of  the  truth.     Ancl 
thus  nuich  for  defence  of  them. 

Now  to  the  other  part  of  his  accusation  ;  wherein  this  Alanus  Copus  Answer 
Anglus,  in  his  f^oTrXa,  or  six-fold  dialogues,  contendcth  and  chafeth  leeoJTd 
against  my  fonner  edition,  to  prove  me  in  my  history  to  be  a  liar,  a  ^^J^^^, 
forger,  an  impudent,  a  misreporter  of  truth,  a  depraver  of  stories,  a  cusation 
seducer  of  the  world,  and  what  else  not  ?  whose  virulent  words,  and  ing  hT" 
contumelious  terms,  how  well  they  become  his  popish  person,  I  know  "i"a™^^„a. 
not.    Certcs,  for  my  part,  I  never  deserved  this  at  his  hands  wittingly,  j'f  jt'^'  " 
that  I  do  know.     Master  Cope  is  a  man  whom  I  never  yet  saw,  and  Acts  and 
less  offended,  nor  ever  heard  of  him  before.     And  if  he  had  not,  in  menu' 
tlie  front  of  his  book,  entitled  himself  to  be  '  an  Englishman,''  by  his 
writing  I  would  have  judged  him  rather  some  Avild  Irishman,  lately 
crept  out  of  St.  Patrick's  purgatory,  so  wildly  he  writeth,  so  ftimishly 
he  ftireth. 

But  I  cease  here,  and  temper  myself,  considering  not  what  Master 
Cope  deserveth  to  be  said  auto,  nor  how  far  the  pen  here  could  nui, 
if  it  had  its  scope ;  but  considering  what  the  tractation  rather  of  such 
a  serious  cause  rcquireth ;  and  therefore  seriously  to  say  unto  you. 
Master  Cope,  in  this  matter :  where  you  charge  my  history  of  Acts 
and  Monuments  so  cruelly,  to  be  full  of  untruths,  false  lies,  impudent 
forgeries,   depravations,  fraudulent  corruptions,  and  feigned  fables  ; 
briefly,  and  in  one  word,  to  answer  you,  not  as  the  Lacones  answered 
to  the  letters  of  their  adversary,  -with  '  si,'  but  with  '  osi :'  would  God, 
Master  Cope,  that  in  all  the  whole  book  of  Acts  and  Monuments,  riiebook 
from  the  beginning  to  the  latter  end  of  the  same,  were  never  a  true  and^Mo- 
story,  but  that  all  were  false,  all  were  lies,  and  all  were  fiibles  ! —  numents 
would  God  the  cruelty  of  your  catholics  had  suffered  all  them  to  live,  if  it  had' 
of  whose  death  ye  say  now,  that  I  do  lie  !     Although  I  deny  not  ood^'^'' 
but  in  that  book  of  Acts  and  Monuments,  containing  such  diversity  '".'"^'■- 
of  matter,  something  might  overscape  me,  yet  I  have  bestowed  my 
poor  diligence.     My  intent  was  to  profit  all  men,  to  hurt  none. 

If  you,  Master  Cope,  or  any  other,  can  better  my  rude  doings, 
and  find  things  out  more  finely  and  truly,  with  all  my  heart  I  shall 
rejoice  ^vith  you  and  the  common  wealth,  taking  profit  by  you.  In 
perfection  of  writing,  of  wit,  cunning,  dexterity,  fineness,  or  other 
endowments  required  in  a  perfect  writer,  I  contend  neither  with  you 
nor  any  other.  I  grant  that  in  a  laboured  story,  such  as  you  seem  to 
require,  containing  such  infinite  variety  of  matter,  as  this  doth,  much 
more  time  would  be  required  :  but  such  time  as  I  had,  that  I  did 
bestow  ;  if  not  so  laboriously  as  others  could,  yet  as  diligently  as  I 
might. 

But  here  partly  I  hear  what  you  will  say — I  should  have  taken 


384  A    DEFENCE    OF    LORD    COBITAM, 

Henry    morc  leisure  and  done  it  better.    I  gi-ant  and  confess  my  fault ;  sucli 

^  _  is  my  vice,  I  cannot  sit  all  the  day,  Master  Cope,  fining  and  mincing 

A.  D.  my  letters,  and  combing  my  head,  and  smoothing  myself  all  the  day 
^  j^l3^  jj^^  ^jjg  gjj^g  (jf  (Jiccro ;  yet,  notwithstanding,  doing  what  I  can,  and 
doinf  my  good  will,  me  thinks  I  should  not  be  reprehended,  at 
least  not  so  much  be  railed  on  at  Master  Cope's  hand  ;  who  if  he  be 
so  pregnant  in  finding  fault  with  other  men''s  labours,  which  is  an 
easy  thing  to  do,  it  were  to  be  wished,  that  he  had  enterprised  him- 
self upon  the  matter  ;  and  so  should  he  have  proved  what  faults  might 
have  been  found  in  him.  Not  that  I  herein  do  utterly  excuse  myself, 
yea  rather  am  ready  to  accuse  myself,  but  yet,  notwithstanding,  think 
myself  ungently  dealt  withal  at  Master  Cope''s  hand,  who,  being  mine 
own  countryman,  an  Englishman,  as  he  saith,  also  of  the  same  uni- 
versity, yea,  college  and  school  that  I  was  of;  knowing  that  the 
first  edition  of  these  Acts  and  Monuments  was  begun  in  the  far  parts 
of  Germany,  where  few  friends,  no  conference,  small  infonnation 
could  be  had ;  and  that  the  same  edition  was  afterwards  translated 
out  of  Latin  into  English  by  others,  Avhile  I,  in  the  mean  time,  was 
occupied  about  other  registers  ;  and  now  the  said  Cope,  hearing 
moreover  and  knowing  that  I  was  about  a  new  edition  of  the  same 
Acts  and  Monuments,  at  this  present  time  to  be  set  forth,  for  the 
amending  of  divers  things  therein  to  be  reformed,  if  he  had  known 
any  fault  needful  to  be  corrected,  he  might  gently,  by  letters,  have 
admonished  me  thereof:  gentleness  would  so  have  required  it.  time 
would  well  have  suffered  it.  Neither  was  he  so  far  off,  but  he  might 
sooner  have  wiitten  a  letter  to  me,  than  a  book  against  me  ;  neither 
was  I  so  ungrateful  and  inhuman,  but  I  would  have  thanked  him  for 
his  monition ;  neither  yet  so  obstinate,  but  being  admonished,  I 
would  have  corrected  willingly,  where  any  fault  had  been  committed, 
ungen-  But  herein  your  nature.  Master  Cope,  doth  right  well  appear. 
notofk  First,  in  the  said  book  of  Acts  and  Monuments,  where  many  other 
Cope.  good  things  be  contained,  not  unfruitful  nor  unprofitable  peradven-, 
ture  for  the  instruction  of  your  conscience,  and  wherein  my  labours 
perhaps  might  have  deserved  your  thanks,  all  that,  you  dissemble  and 
pass  over,  only  excerping  those  matters  which  make  for  cavillation. 
The  Thus  the  black  spider  out  of  pleasant  flowers  sucketh  its  poison, 
the'^pi-'  And  what  book  is  so  pleasant  and  fruitful,  though  it  were  the  pope''s 
der.  own  portues,  yea,  his  own  decretals,  yea,  his  own  very  mass-book,  to 
the  reading  whereof  if  I  brought  the  like  mind  so  disposed  to  cavil, 
as  you  bring  to  the  reading  of  my  history,  but  I  could  find  out 
twice  as  many  '  mendacia,"*  '  maculas,'  '  impudentias,"'  '  dolos  malos,"" 
'  fabulas,'  '  fucos,'  as  you  have  done  in  these  '  Acts  and  Monuments  T 
and  yet  you  have  done  pretty  well. 

Besides  all  this,  yet  better  to  mark  the  goodness  of  your  gentle 
nature  :  be  it  so  that  I  have  been  in  some  piece  of  my  story  deceived, 
as  I  do  not  justify  myself  in  all  points  therein  ;  yet  you,  under- 
standing that  I  was  about  the  correction  of  my  book  again,  might 
either  have  taken  the  best,  and  left  the  worst,  or  else  have  gently 
taken  the  pains  to  have  advertised  me  of  such  notes  as  you  had, 
without  further  exclamation  ;  or  at  least  might  have  deferred  yoiu: 
Dialogues  for  a  time,  till  the  coming  out  of  my  book,  to  see 
first  what  would  in  the  latter  edition  be  altered.     But  belike  youx 


AGAIXST    XICIIOI.AS    HARPSFIKI.I).  385 

wall  was  full ;   vour  haste  could  not  tarrv  ;   vour  venom  must  needs    I'cnry 

burst  out.  — '. — 

"  Et  si  non  aliqua  nocuisses,  mortuus  esses."  141  ■^' 


Seeing  therefore  the  order  of  your  doings  to  be  such,  and  the 
disposition  of  your  nature,  so  far  from  all  humanity,  dealing  with  me 
so  extremely,  if  I,  thus  provoked  with  your  extremity  again,  should 
now,  after  this  your  currish  nature,  shape  you  a  name  accordingly, 
and  instead  of  '  Cope,'  godfather  you  to  be  a  perpetual  sycophant,  copns 
could  you  much  blame  me  ?  and  doth  not  your  sycophantical  book  ^Z^imxa.. 
well  deserve  it  ?  or  think  you  1  could  not  repay  you  again  with  like 
extremity  as  you  bring,  and  cb-css  your  drowsy,  or  rather  lousy, 
Dialogues  in  their  right  colours,  if  I  were  so  disposed  ?  But  my 
pm-pose  is  with  patience  to  spare  you,  and  rather  to  pray  for  you  : 
God  make  you  a  good  man  !  Peradventure  he  may  hereafter  call 
you  ;  and  rather  had  I  to  win  you,  than  to  sting  you.  Leaving, 
therefore,  the  consideration  of  your  ungi-ateful  doings,  I  will  now 
consider  onlv  the  points  wherein  you  charge  me  in  your  book, 
answering  briefly  unto  the  same  :  briefly,  I  say,  because  the  great- 
ness of  this  volume,  and  abundance  of  other  more  fruitful  matter, 
give  me  little  leisure  at  this  present  to  stand  about  brawling  words. 

First,  he  seemeth  to  be  highly  grieved  Avith  me  for  my  Calendar  The  ca- 
prefixcd  before  the  Book  of  Monuments  ;  wherein  he  hath  no  cause  Ihe'^Actf 
either  to  be  offended  with  me,  or  to  chafe  with  himself.   As  touching  ^"^  ^'^°' 
that  calendar  I  have  sufficiently  and  expressly  declared  before  so  dcfended. 
much  as  might   quickly  satisfy  this  scruple  of  Master  Cope,  if  he 
cither  would  have  taken  the  pains,  or  else  had  the  leisure  to  read  the 
words  contained  in  the  Latin  preface  before  the  book  prefixed,  which 
are  thus  :    "  Quanquam  a  me  quidem  non  aliter  Calendarium  hoc 
institutum  est,  nisi  ut  pro  indice  duntaxat  suum  cujusque  Mart}Tis 
mensem  et  annum  designante,  ad  privatum  lectoris  serviret  usum,"' 
he. :  in  which  words  preventing  beforehand  the  cavilling  objection  of 
the  adversary,  I  forewarned  the  reader  touching  the  calendar,  where- 
fore it  was  ordained  and  prefixed  ;  for  no  other  purpose,  but  only  to 
serve  the  use  of  the  reader,  instead  of  a  table,  showing  the  year  and 
month  of  every  martyr,  what  time  he  suffered,  &c.     What  hurt,  I 
pray  you,   is  in  this  calendar  prefixed  before  the  Book  of  Monu- 
ments, more  than  in  the  table  of  Master  Cope''s  book,  set  after  his 
Dialogues  ?     But  Master  Cope  had  no  leisure  to  pursue  this  place  ; 
it  made  not  for  his  humour. 

But  this  grieveth  him  in  the  calendar,  and  that  very  sorely  :  for  objection 
that  1  place  in  this  calendar,  sir  John  Oldcastle,  sir  Koger  Acton,  [jrs"i'n'^ 
Brown,  l^everlv,  and  others,  for  martvrs  ;  and  displace  for  them  other  the  ca- 

11  •  '  1  •  ■'     *  1      1  •  c>      1  T\  1  lendar. 

holy  ancient  martyrs  and  saints,  as  Anatholms,  botiier,  Dorothea, 
Clarus,  Lucianus,  Severinus,  &c. — Answer:  If  Master  Cope  cannot  Answer. 
abide  the  lord  Cobham,  sir  Roger  Acton,  Brown,  and  Beverly,  who 
were  hanged  (as  he  saith,  for  treason),  to  have  the  name  of  martyrs, 
then  let  them  bear  the  nmie  of  witness-bearers,  or  '  testes '  of  the 
truth,  because  they  were  also  burned  for  the  testimony  of  their  fiiith  : 
seeing  there  is  no  difference  in  the  said  names,  all  is  one  to  me,  by 
which  they  are  called. 

(1)  Ex  prosemio  ad  leotorc-m.     [Sec  vol.  j. — Ed.] 
VOL.   III.  C   C 


386  A  DEFENCK  OF  LORD  COBHAM, 

^enrg        And  whcrc  he  cliargeth  me  for  thrusting  and  shouldering  out  the 
^'      old  and  ancient  holy  saints  aforenamed  out  of  this  calendar,  and 


A.  D.  placing  other  new-come  saints  in  their  rooms  ;  this  is  not  the  first 
i'i^^-  untruth  that  Master  Cope  hath  made  in  his  Dialogues,  nor  yet  the 
Untruth  legist :  uuto  wliom  I  might,  therefore,  fitly  answer  again  with  his  own 
Cope.  familiar  phrase,  or  rather  the  phrase  of  Cicero,  which  he  doth  so  much 
affect :  "  Quod  nimirum  hie  ipse  Alanus  Copus  Anghis  unde  me 
mendacii  coarguit,  inde  sibi  ipsi  sempiternam  ac  indelebilem.  turpis- 
simi  mendacii  ac  singularis  impudentise  notam  inurat;"'  for  why 
have  not  I  as  just  cause  to  say  this  to  him,  as  he  to  me  ?  forasmuch 
as  in  the  first  beginning  and  preface  of  the  said  book  of  Acts  and 
Monuments,  I  so  diligently  and  expressly  do  warn  all  men  before- 
hand, first,  that  I  make  here  no  calendar  purposely  of  any  saints,  but 
a  table  of  good  and  godly  men  that  suffered  for  the  truth,  to  show 
the  day  and  month  of  their  suffering.  My  words  be  extant  and  evi- 
dent, which  are  these :  "  Neque  vero  ideo  inter  divos  a  me  referuntur 
isti,  quod  inseruntur  in  calendarium,"  &c. ;  and  declaring  afterwards 
how  the  said  calendar  doth  stand  but  instead  of  a  table,  my  words  do 
follow  thus :  "  Hand  aliter  calendarium  hoc  institutum  est,  nisi  iit 
pro  indice  duntaxat  suum  cujusque  martyris  mensem  et  annum  desig- 
nante,  lectori  ad  usum  atque  ad  manum  serviat,''"'  &c.^ 

Again,  neither  did  I  receive  these  men  into  that  calendar,  that 
holy  Anatholius,  Sother,  Dorothea,  with  other  ancient  holy  saints 
should  be  removed  out,  as  you  do  falsely  and  untruly  affii-m ;  but, 
because  the  course  of  that  story,  reaching  but  five  hundred  years,  did 
not  comprehend  those  former  times  of  such  ancient  martyrs,  but  only 
of  such  as  suffered  in  these  latter  days :  therefore,  requisite  it  was, 
that  in  the  table  such  should  be  placed  chiefly,  of  whom  the  whole 
book  did  then  principally  and  only  treat ;  to  demonstrate  thereby 
the  time  and  day  of  their  martyrdom.  Neither  yet  were  the  others 
excluded  out  of  this  new  calendar,  who  were  never  inserted  in  the 
same  before,  but  only  because  both  together  could  not  there  have 
standing ;  necessity  so  required  these  in  no  case  to  be  omitted  ; 
and  yet  no  injury  meant  to  the  others  to  be  excluded  out  of  their 
own  calendars,  whereto  properly  they  did  pertain.  As  for  this 
calendar,  or  this  table,  because  they  were  not  pertinent  unto  it,  they 
could  not  therein,  neither  was  it  necessary  they  should,  be  included : 
and  yet  neither  did  I,  Master  Cope,  without  due  and  solemn  pro- 
testation omit  the  same  in  my  aforesaid  catalogue,  to  prevent  and 
stop  all  cavilling  mouths ;  as  by  special  words  in  the  said  proem  of 
my  book  unto  the  reader  doth  appear,  following  in  this  wise :  "  In- 
terim nullius  ego  boni  sanctique  viri  (modo  qui  vere  sanctus  sit) 
causam  Isedo,  nee  memoriam  extinguo,  nee  gloriam  minuo.  Et  si 
cui  hoc  displiceat  calendarium,  mimineret,  non  in  templis  a  me  coUo- 
cari,  sed  domesticse  tantum  lectioni  preeparari,"  &c.  And  where  is 
now,  Master  Cope,  this  your  rejecting,  expelling,  removing,  expulsing, 
exempting,  deturbating  and  thrusting  out,  of  Anatholius,  Sother, 
Dorothea,  and  other  holy  saints,  out  of  catalogues,  fasts,  and  calen- 
dars .''  or  what  man  is  that,  or  where  dwelleth  he,  "  qui  veros  christi 
martyres  e  coelo    ad  tartara  deturbat  P"^    that  is,    "who   tumbleth 

(1)  Copus,  p.  130,  line  18. 

(2)  In  prsefat.  ad  doct.  lector,  li.     Acts  and  Monuments.     [See  \ol.  i.  Ed.] 

(3)  Copus,  p.  161,  line  penultiraa. 


AGAINST    NICHOLAS    HAKI'SFIKLl).  387 

down  true  martyrs  from  lieavcn  into  hell  P^'  which  if  ye  mean  by  me,    uenry 
in  one  word  I  answer,  yc  falsely  belie  me,   Master  Copus ;    I  had      ^" 
almost  called  you  Master  Capus,  so  like  a  capon  you  speak.    Neither    A.D. 
have  you,  nor  any  other,  ever  heard  nic  so  say.     Neither  have  1  ever    ^'^^3. 
heard  of  any  so  mad,  to  play  so  the  ijiants  with  their  mountains  to  copusai- 
climb  the  heavens,  to  tumble  down  (lod's  true  and  holy  martyrs  out  "acapus" 
of  heaven  into  hell,  unless  it  were  yourself  (as  vet  ye  are,  vc  may  be  The  pa- 
better),  and  such  other  of  your  uilded  and  ])oi)ish  fraternity,  who  would 
make  of  God's  true  saints  stinking  dunghills  (for  so  ye  term  them  in  ^'J^^n 
your  books),  and  not  only  thrust  into  heaven  your  '  pseudosanctos,'  codstrue 
saints  of  your  OAvn  making,  whom  God  by  his  word  doth  not  allow;  of  heaven 
but  also   depulse  down   from  heaven,  and  make  dunghills  of  God''s  *''''^"' 
well-beloved  servants,  his  laithful  people  and  blessed  martvrs,  who 
have  died  for  the  word  of  God.     And  what  marvel  then,   if  in  vour 
blasphemous  books  ye  cast  down  from  heaven  to  hell  the  poor  saints 
of  Christ,  when  in  effect  you  deject  also  the  blood  and  cross  of  tlu^ 
Son  of  God,  Christ  Jesus  himself,  setting  up  in  his  office  and  place : 

Tu  per  Thomre  sanguinem,  quern  pro  te  impendit, 
Fac  nos  Christe  scandere,  quo  Thomas  ascendit. 

Say,  Master  Cope  I    your  conscience  indifferently ;    set  all  popish  Reckefs 
partiality  apart :  whereas  the  Scripture  teacheth  us  simply,   "  Quod  li'r^'ih'e 
citra  sansfuinem  nulla  fit  remissio,*'''  i.  e.  "  Without  blood  there  is  no  i!lJ".''>,"*" 

o  '  Clirist  s 

remission  ;"  whether  ye  think,  by  this  blood  of  the  New  Testament  wood, 
is  meant  the  blood  of  Christ  alone,  or  the  blood  of  other  more  be- 
sides .''  If  the  blood  of  one  must  stand  alone,  why  do  ye  then  with 
the  giants  build  up  your  mountains,  and  make  a  ladder  of  Beckefs 
popish  blood,  for  men  to  scale  the  heavens  ?  or  in  so  doing,  how  can 
you,  but  either  with  the  protestants  wipe  out  of  your  calendar 
'  ThomsD  sanguinem,"'  or  else  demolish  from  heaven  '  sanguinem 
Christi,'  with  the  papists  ? 

And  here,  by  the  way,  I  cannot  but  muse,  why  you  are  so  devout  Papists 
in    setting  up   the  cross  of  Christ  in  your  church,  who   are   such  vout  to 
enemies  to  the  true  cross  of  Christ  to  stand  in  heaven.     Look  upon  cMirS's 
this.  Master  Cope  !    and  tell  me,  "  Utra  pars  verius  veros  Christi  '^'■"ss  on 
martyres  e  ccelo  in  tartara  detnidat  ?"  and  therefore,  as  you  falsely  enemies 
belie  me  in  this,  for  detruding  and  tumbling  out  of  heaven  Anatho-  l°oIl^ui^ 
bus,  Julian,  Clams,  Lucian,  Agatha,  Dorothea,  and  others  afrainst  ^'^V'^^}: 
whom  I  never  yet  spake  any  reproachful  word,  but  rather  in  this  my  untrutii 
volume  have  set  forth  their  commendation  :  so  it  is  untiiie  likewise,  '"  ^°''"^' 
where  you  affirm,  that  in  this  my  calendar  I  make  an  '  arroOtwaiv,^ 
or  canonization  of  false  martyrs.     I  told  you  before,  when  ye  Avere 
in  England,  in  words  as  plain  as  I  could;  I  tell  you  again,  being  now 
in   your  transmigration :     "  Hanc  ego  Apotheosin   mihi    nunquam 
sumpsi,  quam  sibi  tam  confidenter  sumjjsit  Gregorius  nonus.'"*   Were 
not  these  words  of  my  protestation  manifest  enough  ?  were  they  not 
sufficient  to  satisfy  a  reasonable  Momus  ?    And,  to  make  the  matter 
more  plain,  did  1  not  add,  moreover,  as  followeth  ?  "  Porro  neque 
eo  spectat   hoc  calendarium,    ut  novam  aliquam  festorum  dierum 
legem  prseseribam  Ecclesiee,"  &c.      And,  not  contented  with  this, 
foreseeing  before  such  wrangling  spirits  to  come,  as  now  I  see  in  you, 
I  showed  also  the  cause  why  I  needed  not  so  to  do.     Mv  words 


388  A  DEFENCE  OF  LORD  COBHAM, 

Henry    wQXG  thcsG :   "  Festonim  dierum  jam  plus  satis  erat  in  niuiido,"  &c. 
^'      And  yet  further,  because  no  caviller  should  here  take  hold  of  any 


A.  U.  injury  done  to  the  holy  saints,  either  old  or  new  in  the  church, 
ltl3.  therefore,  in  express  words,  I  removed  away  all  suspicion  of  any 
injury,  preventing  the  objection  of  the  adversary  in  these  words: 
"  Habeat  et  Ecclesia  suos  sanctos,  turn  recentes,  turn  veteranos,  modo 
probatos,  modo  interim  iidem  ne  adorentur,  modo  quam  sint  vetusti, 
tam  etiam  vere  sancti  sint,""  &c.* 

These  places  of  my  book,  if  ye  did  see,  why  do  you  dissemble 
them  ?  If  ye  had  not  so  much  leisure  to  read  them,  how  had  you 
so  much  leisure  to  write  against  any  man's  book,  not  kno^nng  what 
Untruth  is  in  the  book  contained  ?  And  how  stands  it  then  with  truth,  that 
in  Cope.  gQ  ]ii^g  j^  Momus  yc  cry  out  so  in  your  book  against  these  new-made 
mart}TS,  "  Qui  non  possunt  nisi  per  aliorum  injuriam  crescere,''  &c.^ 
And  again,  where  you  exclaim  against  me,  and  say,  that  I  thrust  out 
the  ancient  martyrs  from  their  seat  and  possession,  and  place  new  in 
their  rooms,  &c.  Also  where  you,  continuing  yet  still  in  your 
common  place  of  lying,  out  of  which  you  cannot  digi-ess,  do  charge 
me  further,  tliat  I  do  point  out  holy  days  and  working  days  by 
colours  of  red  and  black,  in  my  aforesaid  calendar  to  be  observed ; 
these  lewd  notes  of  yours,  if  they  had  been  picked  out  of  the 
calendar  by  you,  without  mine  own  special  declaration  before  made 
to  the  contrary,  they  might  seem  to  have  some  blush  of  credit. 

Now  what  will  the  reader  say,  or  what  may  he  judge,  considering 
and  conferring  this  your  cavilling  with  the  matter  of  my  premonition 
made  before,  but  that  you  are  altogether  set  to  play  the  perpetual 
syc — :  I  had  almost  called  you  by  your  right  name,  Master  Cope. 
But  God  make  you,  as  I  said,  a  good  man  ! — Reading  further  in 
your  book,  I  could  not  but  smile  and  laugh  at  this  your  ridiculous  and 
most  loud-lying  hyperbolismum  ;  where  you,  comparing  my  making 
of  saints  with  the  pope's  making,  can  find,  as  ye  say,  in  the  pope,  no 
such  impudent  arrogancy  in  presuming,  as  ye  find  in  me.^  If  the 
pope  had  not  abused  his  arrogant  jurisdiction  in  canonizing  and 
deifying  his  saints,  more  than  I  have  done,  the  year  should  not  be 
cumbered  with  so  many  idle  holy  days,  nor  the  calendars  with  so 
many  rascal  saints  ;  some  of  them  as  good,  as  ever  were  they  that  put 
Christ  to  death. 

But  Avhere  will  you  find.  Master  Cope,  any  man  to  believe  this 

your  hyperbolical  comparison  to  be  true,  who  seetli  and  knoweth  the 

infinite  and  unmeasurable  excess  of  the  pope's  arrogancy,  not  only  in 

shrining  such  a  rabble  of  blind  saints  of  his  own  creating,  but  also  in 

prescribing  the  same  to  be  received  universally  in  the  whole  world ; 

Double     and  uot  to  be  received  only,  but  also  to  be  invocated  for  gifts  and 

tioTir!"'  graces ;  also  to  be  worshipped  for  advocates  and  mediators  ?  wherein 

cafendar^  Hscth  a  doublc  abomiuatiou  of  the  pope,  the  one  for  his  idolatrous 

making  and  worshipping  of  saints ;    the  other  for  his  blasphemous 

injury  and  derogation  to  Christ  in  repulsing  him  out  of  his  office  of 

mediation,  and  placing  other  mediators  of  his  own  making. 

The  great      And  now,  to  consider  what  saints  these  were,  or  what  were  the 

maker  of  causcs   of  their  sancting :    what  saint  almost  among  all  the  pope's 

(1)  Copus  Momus.     Copus,  p.  820.  (2)  Copus,  p.  820,  line  25. 

(3)  Copus  p.  SIO,  line  7. 


AGAINST    NICHOLAS    HAKPSFIELD.  389 

saints  shall  you  find,  Master  Cope,  made  within  these  five  hundred    nennj 
years,  but  commonly  he  was  either  some  pope,  or  some  rich  bishop 


and  prelate,  or  some  fat  abbot,  or  some  blind  friar,  some  monk,  or    A.  D. 
nun,  some  superstitious  regular,  or  some  builder  of  monasteries,  or    ^^^•^- 
some   giver   and    benefactor   to  the  popish  clergy,   or    maintaincr,  ^"""e- 
agonizing  for  the  dignities  and  liberties  of  the  popish  church  ?   What  be  hu '" 
poor  lay-man  or  lay-woman,  were  their  lives  ever  so  christian,  their  **""^' 
faith  and  confession  ever  so  pure,  their  death  ever  so  agonising  for 
the  witness  of  Christ,  and  truth  of  his  word,  shall  find  any  place  of 
favour  in  all  the  pope''s  '  TrovijpoTroXic/  that  is,  in  the  pope's  calen- 
dar, cither  in  red  colour,  or  else  in  black  ? 

But  here.  Master  Cope,  if  ye  had  the  wit  so  much  to  defend,  as  The  great 
ye  have  to  overthwart,  you  might  take  me  with  the  manner,  and  reply  maker  of 
again  for  the  defence  of  yom-  great  saint-maker,  or  rather  god-maker,  ^""^^• 
of  Rome,  that  he  maketh  more  martyrs  and  saints  of  these  aforesaid 
poor  lay-men,  and  lay-women,  than  ever  he  did  of  any  other :  for  he 
burnetii  them,  he  hangcth  them,  he  drowncth  them,  he  imprisoneth 
and  famisheth  them,  and  so  maketh  truer  martyrs  of  Christ,  than  any 
other  of  his  new  shrined  saints,  whom  he  hath  so  dignified  in  his  calen- 
dar ;  for  the  one  he  doth  rubricate  only  with  his  red  letters,  the  other 
doth  he  rubricate  with  tlieu-  own  blood.     And,   therefore,  to  answer 
you.  Master  Cope,  to  your  comparison  made  between  the  pope  and  me, 
for  making  of  holy  martyrs  and  saints :  briefly  I  say,  and  report  me 
to  all  the  world,  that  herein  is  no  comparison  ;  for  if  ye  speak  of  true 
martyrs,  who  doth  make  them,  but  the  pope  ?  if  ye  speak  of  false 
martyrs,  who  doth  make  them,  but  the  pope  ?     And,  furthermore,  to 
compare  together  the  causes  of  these  mart}Ted  saints  in  my  calendar 
with  them  who  shine  shrined  in  the  pope''s  calendar  (taking  the  same 
proportion  of  time  as  I  do,  within  these  last  five  hundred  years),  why 
may  not  I  have  as  good  cause  to  celebrate  these  in  my  calendar,  who 
lost  their  lives  and  were  slain  principally  for  the  cause  of  Clirist  and 
of  his  word,  as  the  pope  hath  to  celebrate  his  double  and  simple  feasted 
saints  in  his  calendar ;  who  in  their  doings,  doctrine,  and  life,  as  they 
seemed  rather  to  serve  the  pope,  than  Christ  the  Lord ;  so  in  their  No  cause 
death  appeared  no  such  cause,  why  they  should  be  sanctified   in  popl's  ^ 
the    church   beyond   all   others  ?      Let  not    the  church  of  Christ,  "^j^'^j,, 
Master  Cope,  be  deluded  with  hypocritical  names,  or  feigned  appa-  shouui  be 
ritions  and  fabulous  miracles,  neither  be  you  deceived  yourself,  but  calendar. 
let  us  resort  sincerely  to  the  word  of  God. 

What  was  in  St.  Francis  (look  upon  his  superstitious  life,  and  pre- 
sumptuous testament,  wrought  no  doubt  by  Satan  to  diminish  and 
obscure  the  Testament  of  Jesus  Christ),  why  he  should  be  made  a 
saint,  and  not  an  enemy,  rather,  of  Clirist .''  What  was,  likewise,  in  friar 
Dominic,  who,  before  Francis,  ten  years  together,  persecuted  the  poor 
Waldenses  to  death  and  destruction .''  why  should  he  stand  a  saint 
and  a  pillar  of  the  church  ?  I  pray  you  what  see  you  in  Thomas  Becket, 
but  that  he  died  for  the  ambitious  liberties  of  the  popish  church  "^  What 
in  Aldelm  and  in  Anselm,  but  only  that  they  chased  away  married 
priests  from  the  churches,  and  planted  in  idle  monks  in  their  stead  ? 
The  like  also  did  Dunstan,  who  was  rubricated  with  a  '  duplex  festum.' 
EKzabeth,  who  was  the  wife  of  the  marquis  of  Thuringia,  when  she 
had,  with  much  persuasion,  got  out  her  husband  to  fight  against  the 


390 


A    DEFENCE    OF    LOED    COBHAM, 


Henrij 
V. 

A.D. 
1413. 

Canoni- 
zation of 
St.  Gil- 
bert of 
Sem- 
pring- 
uam. 


Is  tliis 
good  doc- 
trine, 
Master 
Cope,  in 
tlie  pope's 
canoniza- 
tion? 


The  blas- 
phemous 
collect  of 
the  pope's 
making 
for  St. 
Gilbert. 


Talks,  and  he  was  there  slain,  she  afterwards  encloistered  herself,  and 
was  made  a  nun.  And  do  you  think  these  causes  to  be  sufficient  why 
they  should  be  made  saints,  worshipped  in  churches,  and  set  in  calen- 
dars ?  Long  it  were  to  make  rehearsal  of  all  this  riffraff,  and  almost 
infinite.  One  example  may  suffice  for  many.  St.  Gilbert  of  Sem- 
pringham  was  the  son  of  Jocelin,  a  knight,  Avho,  for  the  deformity  of 
his  body,  was  set  to  learning,  and  afterwards  made  canon,  and  was 
author  of  the  Gilbertines  in  the  time  of  king  John. 

This  Gilbert,  after  he  had  erected  thirteen  monasteries  of  his  order 
of  Sempringham,  was  afterwards  laboured  for  unto  the  pope  to  be 
made  a  saint,  who,  hearing  of  his  miracles,  wrote  his  letters  to  Hubert, 
archbishop  of  Canterbury,  in  behalf  of  the  aforesaid  Gilbert,  willing 
and  commanding  "  per  apostolica  scripta,''  that  the  feast  of  the  said 
Gilbert  should  be  solemnized  through  all  the  province  of  Canterbury  ; 
"  Ut  meritis  nimirum  ejus  et  precibus  apud  misericordissimum  judi- 
cem  miscricordiam  consequamur,"  &c. ;  whereupon  Hubert,  the 
archbishop,  directeth  down  his  writings  to  all  the  bishops  within  his 
province,  the  contents  of  Avhich  writings  the  reader  may  see  below  J 

The  sum  of  which  -writing  of  the  archbishop  tendcth  to  this  effect . 
That  forasmuch  as  the  pope,  hearing  of  the  life  and  miracles  of  Gilbert, 
master  of  the  order  of  Sempringham,  by  sufficient  witness  and  testi- 
monies, hath  in  his  letters  commanded  him,  by  the  advice  of  his  car- 
dinals, that  the  said  Gilbert  should  be  canonized  and  ascribed  in  the 
catalogue  of  saints,  and  that  his  solemnity  should  be  celebrated  solemnly 
throughout  all  the  province  of  Canterbury ;  and  also  his  body  to  be 
taken  up  and  shrined  to  the  honour  and  glory  of  God :  he,  there- 
fore, at  the  pope's  commandment  writing  unto  them,  willeth  all  the 
suffragans,  within  his  province  of  Canterbury,  yearly  to  solemnize, 
and  cause  to  be  solemnized,  reverently,  the  deposition  of  the  said  St. 
Gilbert,  confessor ;  to  the  intent  that  their  devotion  may  be  com- 
mended by  the  Lord,  and  by  him.  And  also  that  the  humble  inter- 
cession of  the  said  saint,  may  profit  them  to  their  salvation. 

Fm-thermore,  for  the  more  full  canonizing  (canvising,  I  had  almost 
said)  of  this  new  made  saint,  the  said  pope  Innocent,  writing  to 
Hubert  aforesaid,  adjoineth  withal  a  collect  of  his  oAvn  making,  which 
is  this.2  "  Work  in  us,  0  eternal  Saviour,  full  remedy  of  thy  virtue, 
that  we  who  worship  the  worthy  merits  of  blessed  Gilbert,  thy  confessor, 
being  succoured  by  his  suffrages,  may  be  delivered  from  all  languors 
and  diseases  of  our  souls  ;  who  livest  and  reignest,"  &c."'' 

The  consecration  of  this  one  saint,  who  perhaps  Avas  not  the  worst, 
I  thought  here  to  commemorate,  to  the  intent  that  the  reader,  mea- 
suring, by  this  one,  the  canonization  of  all  the  rest,  may  judge  the 

(1)  The  Pope's  Letter,  and  the  Archbishop's,  for  the  Canonizing  of  St.  Gilbert. — Hubertiis  Dei 
gratia  Canterb.  archiepiscop.  totius  Anglia  primas,  dilectis  in  Christo  frat.  episcop.  per  pro- 
vinciam  Canterb.  sal.  grat.  et  benedictionem.  d.  papa,  sicut  ex  litoris  ipsius  manifeste  perpenditur, 
de  conversatione,  meritis,  et  moribus  beati  Gilberti  magistri  ordinis  de  Sempringham,  et  niiraculis 
a  Ueo  per  eum  factis  per  testes  et  testimonia  sutficientfr  instructus,  de  concilio  fratrum  cardin. 
ipsura  mag.  catalogo  sanctorum  decrevit  ascribi,  solemnitatem  ejus  constituit  et  mandavit  per 
Canterb.  provinciam  solemniter  celebrari.  Insuper  et  corpus  ejus  cum  requisiti  fuerimus  prjEcepit 
ad  honorem  Dei  et  gloriam  elevari.  Vestra  igitur  Universitas  huic  mandato  cum  devotione  con- 
gaudeat,  et  secundum  formam  in  ipso  mandato  prsescriptam,  prsedicti  confessoris  domini  deposi- 
tionem  annuam  faciatis  cum  reverentia  et  solemniter  observari ;  ut  apud  dominum  et  ab  illo  vestra 
debeat  et  possit  devotio  commendari,  necnon  et  ipsius  sancti  supple.x  intercessio  vobis  proficiat  ad 
salutem.  Valete.— JSj  Lib.  de  Vila  Gilberti  Confessoris. 

(2)  "  Plenam  in  nobis  aeterne  Salvator  tuae  virtutis  operare  medelam,  ut  qui  praeclara  beati  Gil- 
berti confessoris  tui  merita  veneramur,  ipsius  adjuti  sufiragiis  a  cuntis  animarum  nostrartim 
languoribus  liberemur  :  qui  vivis  et  regnas,"  &c. 

(3)  Copus,  p.  119.  line  7. 


AGAINST     NICHOLAS    HAKPSFIEKD.  391 

better  upon  this  comparison  of  Master  Cope,  wlietlier  of  us,  doth    iienry 
vindicate  more  impudent  autliority,  the  pope  in  his  calendar,  or  I  " 


mine  .  or,  to  make  the  comparison  more  fit,  wliether  is  more  impudent    A.  D. 
the  pope  in  his  calendar,  or  Master  Co])e,  in  his  dialogues,  more 
doltish. 

But,  briefly  to  make  an  end  of  this  matter  -with  you :  to  canonize 
or  to  authorize  any  saints,  for  man  it  is  presumptuous  ;  to  prescribe 
any  thing  here  to  be  -worshipped,  beside  God  alone,  it  is  idolatrous; 
to  set  up  any  mediators  but  Christ  only,  it  is  blasphemous.  And  what- 
soever the  pope  doth,  or  hath  done,  in  his  calendar,  my  pui-jjose  in 
my  calendar,  was  neither  to  deface  any  old  saint,  or  to  solemnize  any 
new.  In  my  book  of  Acts  and  Monuments  treating  of  matters  passed 
in  the  church,  these  latter  five  hundred  years,  I  did  regidate  out  a 
calendar,  not  for  any  canon  to  constitute  saints,  but  only  for  a  table 
of  them,  who,  within  the  same  time  did  suffer  for  the  testimony  of  the 
word,  whom  I  did,  and  do,  take  to  be  good  and  godly  men.  If  any 
have  other  judgment  of  them,  I  bind  no  man  to  my  opinion,  as  the 
pope  doth  to  his.  The  day  will  come  which  shall  judge  both  them 
and  you.  In  the  mean  season  it  shall  be  best  for  you.  Master  Cope,  cope 
in  my  judgment  to  keep  a  good  tongue  in  your  head,  and  to  quiet  [°j""o^'' 
vour  railing  mood.     A  hard  thine:  it  is  to  iudge  before  the  Lord,  cease 

*■  o  ^  ^        Kj  ^  if        c>^  ^      1.  j    rail- 

Man"'s  judgment  may  fail  and  is  uncertain,  the  judgment  of  God  is  mg. 
always  sure.  Best  it  is,  therefore,  either  to  be  siu:e  by  the  word  and 
judgment  of  God  before  hand,  what  you  do  say,  or  else  to  say  the 
best.  Of  such  slanderous  and  intemperate  railing  can  come  no  good  ;  no  pood 
neither  to  them  whom  ye  rail  upon,  nor  to  yourself  who  rail,  nor  to  rauing.  "^ 
the  church  of  God  that  heareth  you  rail.  For  them  you  cannot  hurt ; 
they  are  gone :  to  yom-self,  though  your  matters  be  true,  yet  little 
honesty  it  will  bring  to  be  counted  a  railer ;  and  if  it  be  uncertain, 
your  state  is  dangerous,  and  if  it  be  false,  most  miserable :  and  as  to 
the  church,  what  great  edification  can  proceed  of  such  contentious 
brawling  and  barking  one  against  another,  I  do  not  greatly  see.  And 
if  the  zeal  of  the  bishop  of  Rome''s  church  have  so  much  swallowed 
you  up,  that  you  cannot  but  stamp  and  stare  at  traitors  when  ye  see 
them  put  in  calendars,  first,  IMaster  Cope,  be  ye  sure  that  they  be 
traitors  (wisdom  would),  whom  you  call  traitors.  And  if  ye  can  so 
prove  them  (as  ye  have  not  yet),  then  let  your  Irenseus,  or  Critobulus, 
tell  me,  why  doth  not  this  flagrant  zeal  of  yours,  as  hot  as  purgatory, 
bum  out,  and  flame  as  well  against  your  own  traitors,  hanng  so  many 
in  your  own  calendar  and  church  at  home  ? 

And  if  there  be  such  a  catholic  zeal  in  you,  that  hath  set  your  The  zeai 
gentle  breast  on  such  a  pelting  chafe,  why  then  is  not  this  your  catholic  cop'ex" 
zeal  equallv  indifferent .''  why  take  ye  on  so  fell  on  the  one  side  against  P<-'ndfi. 
sir  John  Oldcastle,  sir  Roger  Acton,  Master  Brown,  &c..''  A  man  would 
think  you  played  "  Hercules  furens  in  orchestra.'"'     On  the  one  side 
again,  ye  are  "  oleo  tranquillior."     What  indifference,  Master  Cope, 
call  you  this  ?    or  what  zeal  make  you  this  to  be .''    albeit,  your  zeal  I 
judge  not,  as  I  know  it  not.     Swift  judgment  shall  not  become  me, 
■who  go  about  to  correct  the  same  in  you ;  but  this  I  exhort  you  to 
beware.  Master  Cope,  that  by  your  own  fruits  and  doings  evident,  ye 
do  not  bewray  this  zeal  in  you  to  be  "  non  secundum  scicritiam,"" 
nor  such  a  zeal  as  fighteth  "pro  dome  Dei,  sed  pro  domo  Pontificis."" 


392  A  DEFENCE  OF  LORD  COBHAM, 

iicnnj  As  I  said,  I  judge  you  not.     You  have  your  Judge  to  wliom  ye 

^''      stand  or  fall.     My  counsel  is,  that  you  do  not  so  zeal  the  bishop  of 

A.  D.    Rome,  that  for  his  sake  ye  lose  your  own  soul.     Ye  remember  the 

1^13.    q](|  vulgar  voice,  it  is  not  good  "  Ludere  cum  Sanctis ;'"  worse  it  is 

"■  Illudere ;""  worst  of  all  it  is   "  Debacchari  in  immerentes  ;"  because 

that  "  Deus  ipse  ultionum  Dominus"  many  times  taheth  their  cause 

in  hand,  according  as  it  is  written,  "  Opprobria  opprobriantium  tibi 

ceciderunt  in  me  ;"  i.  e.  "  The  rebukes  of  thy  rebuker  fell  upon  me." 

And  seldom  have  I  seen  any  such  blasphemous  railers  against  the  end 

or  punishment  of  God's  saints  and  servants,  without  great  repentance, 

to  come  to  any  good  end  themselves. 

And  admit  this,  as  granted  unto  you.  Master  Cope,  that  these 
men  had  been  traitors,  which  ye  are  not  able  to  prove  :     Well !  they 
had  their  punishment  therefore ;  the  world  can  go  no  further,  and 
what  would  you  have  more  ?  who,  and  if  they  repented,  why  may  they 
not  have  as  good  part  in  Christ's  kingdom  as  yourself !     Now,  foras- 
much as  the  said  persons  also  suffering  a  double  punishment  Avere  so 
constant  in  the  way  of  truth,  and  most  principally  for  the  same  were 
persecuted,  and  chiefly  therefore  brought  to  their  death  :  that  part  of 
example,  because  I  saw  it  pertain  to  the  profit  of  the  church,  why 
might  I  not  insert  it  with  other  church  stories  in  my  book  ?     Let 
the   church   take    that  which    belongeth  to  the  church.      Let  the 
world  take  that  which  to  the  world  pertaineth,  and  go  no  further. 
And  if  ye  think  it  much,  that  I  would  exemplify  these  whom  ye 
call  traitors  in  the  Book  of  Martyrs ;  first,  ye  must  understand,  that 
I  wrote  no  such  book  bearing  the  title  of  the  "  Book  of  Martyrs ;" 
I  wrote  a  book  called  the  "  Acts  and  Monuments  of  things  passed  in 
the  Church,"  he.  wherein  many  other  matters  be  contained  beside  the 
The        martyrs  of  Christ.     But  this,  peradventure,  moveth  your  choler,  that 
inanjTs"^  in  the  calendar  I  name  them  for  martyrs.    And  why  may  I  not,  in  my 
in  the  ca-  calendar,  call  them  by  the  name  of  martyrs,  who  were  faithful  witnesses  of 
deftnded.  Clirist's  trutli  and  testament,  for  which  they  were  also  chiefly  brought 
manyn  ^  to  that  cud  ?  OX  why  may  I  not  call  them  holy  saints,  whom  Christ 
fahfts  of  ^^^^^  sanctified  with  his  blessed  blood  ?     And  what  if  I  should  also 
Christ,     call  the  thief  and  murderer,  hanging  on  the  right  side  of  the  Lord, 
by  the  name  of  a  holy  saint  and  confessor,  for  liis  witnessing  of  the 
Lord  ^  what  can  Master  Cope  say  against  it  ? 
Martyrs,       And  as  for  colouring  the  names  of  certain   martyrs  in  the  said 
red"""^^     calendar  in  red  or  scarlet  letters  (although  that  pertaineth  nothing  to 
me,  Avhich  was  as  pleased  the  painter  or  printer),  yet,  if  that  be  it, 
that, so  much  breaketh  patience,  why  rather  doth  he  not  expostulate 
The        in  this  behalf  with  the  great  saint-maker  of  Rome,  Avho  hath  redded 
Colour-     them  much  more  than  ever  did  I .''  for  he  did  red  and  dye  them  with 
red'  t^e*^  their  own  blood,  whereas  I  did  but  only  colour  them  with  red  letters, 
pope  with  And  thus  for  matter  of  my  calendar  enough.' 

blood.  •'  ° 

Ihor^^'        Proceeding  now  out  of  the  calendar  unto  the  book,  wherein   he 

cieareth  chargcth  me  with  so  many  lies,  impudencies,  vanities,  depravations, 

ofues  and  untruths,  it  remaineth  likewise  that  I  clear  myself,  ansAvering  first 

t^'ths""  to  t^o^^  ^^^^  ^"^  untruths,  Avhich  to  the  story  of  sir  Roger  Acton 

laid 

hfm"  '''  ■^'^'^  calendar,  copied  from  the  first  edition  of  the  Acts  and  Monuments,  in  red  and  bkck 

iettei",  will  be  found  in  the  first  volume  of  this  edition. — En. 


AGAINST    NICHOLAS    HAUPSFIELD.  393 

and  sir  Jolin  Oldcastle  do  appertain  ;  and  afterwards  to  other  parti-    i'<'»'-y 

culars,  as  in  the  order  of  my  book   do  follow.     And  first,  where  he  ^ 

layeth  against  mc  whole  heaps  and  cart-loads,  I  cannot  tell  how  many,  A.  D. 
of  lies  and  falsities :  I  here  briefly  answer  Master  Cope  again,  or  ^^^■^- 
what  English  Harpsfield  else  soever  lieth  covexed  under  this  English 
'  Cope,^  that  if  a  lie  be,  after  the  definition  of  St.  Augustine,  what- 
soever thing  is  pronounced  with  the  intent  to  deceive  another ; 
then,  I  protest  to  you,  Master  Cope  !  and  to  all  the  world,  there  is 
never  a  lie  in  all  my  book.  What  the  intent  and  custom  is  of  the 
papists  to  do,  I  cannot  tell :  for  mine  own  part  I  will  say,  although 
many  other  vices  I  have,  yet  this  one  I  have  always  of  nature  ab- 
hon-ed,  wittingly  to  deceive  any  man  or  child,  so  near  as  I  could, 
much  less  the  church  of  God,  Avhich  I  with  all  my  heart  do  reverence, 
and  with  fear  obcv.  And  therefore,  among  divers  causes  that  have 
withdra^^Ti  my  mind  from  the  papists'"  faction,  almost  tliere  is  none 
greater  than  this ;  because  I  see  them  so  little  given  to  truth,  so  far 
from  all  serious  feeling  and  care  of  sincere  religion,  so  full  of  false 
pretensed  hypocrisy  and  dissimulation  ;  so  little  regarding  the  church 
of  Christ  in  their  inward  hearts,  which  they  so  much  have  in  their 
mouths,  so  as  under  the  title  thereof  they  may  hold  up  their  own 
estate.  Otherwise,  so  little  reverence  they  yield  to  the  true  and 
honourable  church  of  Jesus  the  Son  of  God,  that  what  unworthy 
and  rascal  ministers  they  take  into  it  they  pass  not ;  what  fictions, 
what  lies  and  fables,  what  false  miracles  and  absurd  forgeries,  they  in- 
vent to  delude  it,  they  care  not.     I  speak  not  of  all. 

Some  there  be  of  that  sect  unfeigned  in  conscience,  and  more  re- 
ligious, and  better  disposed  natures,  only  of  simple  ignorance  deceived: 
but  such  commonly  have  been,  and  be,  the  chief  guides  and  leaders 
of  the  papists'  church,  that  little  true   care  and  small  zeal  hath  ap- 
peared in  them  towards  the  church   of  Christ,  not  much  regarding 
what  corruption  increased  therein,  so  that  their  commodity  might  not 
decrease.    Thus  out  of  this  fountain  have  gushed  out  so  many  prodi-  Lies  and 
gious  lies  in  church  legends,  in  saints'  lives,  in  monkish  fictions,  in  inVume- 
fabulous  miracles,  in  false  and  forged  relics ;  as  in  pieces  of  the  holy  [hepVp"'s 
cross,  in  the  blood  of  hales,  in  our  lady's  milk,  in  the  nails  of  Christ,  •■huich. 
which  they  make  to  a  great  number.    Likewise  in  their  false  and  blind 
errors,  corrupt  doctrines,  absurd  inventions,  repugnant  to  the  truth 
of  the  Word.     Item,  in  their  bastard  books,  forged  epistles,  their 
'  Apocrvpha,'  and  '  Pseudopigrapha.'      Here  come  in   their  forged 
canons,  their  foisting  and  cogging  in  ancient  councils  and  decrees,  as  in 
wq  airb  tfiov  irtrpov,  in  '  Canons  of  the  Apostles'  (if  those  canons  were 
the  apostles) ;   '  Excepta  Romana  sede,'  foisted  into  the  decrees  by 
Gratian,  also  the  coffginff  in  a  false  canon  to  the  council  of  Nice  for 
the  maintenance  of  the  see  of  Rome,  as  appeareth  m  the  sixth  s}iiod 
of  Carthage. 

Here  come  in  also  the  epistles  of  Clement,  and  other  sundry  epi-  rntruth 
sties  decretal,  which  as  they  are  no  doubt  falsely  inserted  by  others,  so  p"pish 
are  they  the  well-head  of  many  superstitious  traditions,  oppressing  ^Pj.^jgf^ 
this  day  the  church  of  Christ.     To  speak,  moreover,  of  the  liturgies  And  in 
of  St.  James,  of  Chrysostome  and  others,  of  the  first  mass  said  by  nturgics 
St.  Peter  at  Rome,  and  that  St.  Peter  sat  twenty-five  years  bishop  ot 
Rome.     To  speak  also  of  the  works  of  Augustine,  Ambrose,  Jerome, 


394 


Henry 

r 

A.D. 

1413. 

Untruth 
in  coun- 
terfeited 
books. 
Gregory's 
Dia- 


Untruth 
in  the 
pope' 
doctrine. 


In  the 
pope's  le- 
gend and 
mass 
books. 
In  his 
miracles 
and  relics 
and  in.  his 
sacra- 
ments. 


A  master- 
lie. 


A    DEFENCK    OF    LORD    COBIIAM, 

and  Gregory,  what  doctor  or  famous  writer  hath  there  been  in  the 
church,  under  whose  name  some  counterfeited  books  have  not  falsely 
been  fathered,  and  yet  stand  still  authorised  under  their  patronage,  to 
the  great  detriment  of  the  church  ?  What  should  I  speak  of  Abdias, 
Amphilochius,  Dionysius  Areopagita  ;  the  '  Dialogues  of  Gregory,' 
which  falsely  to  this  day  have  been  ascribed  to  Gregory  J.,  whereas 
indeed  they  were  first  written  in  Greek  by  Gregory  III.,  and  after- 
wards translated  out  of  Greek  into  Latin  by  pope  Zachary ;  vide 
supra.  Likewise  that  worthy  and  imperial  sermon  entitulcd, '  Eusebii 
Pamphili  Sermo  ad  Conventum  Sanctorum,''  hath  to  this  day  wrong- 
fully borne  the  name  of  Eusebius  ;^  whereas,  in  very  truth,  it  was 
made  by  the  good  emperor  Constantine  himself,  in  his  own  heroical 
style  in  Latin,  and  afterwards  translated  out  of  Latin  into  Greek  by 
Eusebius,  as  he  himself  confesseth  in  his  work, '  De  Vita  Constant." 
lib.  4.  But  as  touching  this  sermon,  although  the  name  be  changed, 
so  godly  and  fruitful  it  is,  that  it  mattereth  not  much  under  whose 
name  it  be  read,  yet  worthy  to  be  read  under  the  name  of  none  so 
much,  as  of  the  emperor  Constantine  himself,  who  was  the  true  author 
and  owner  thereof. 

Briefly,  except  it  be  only  the  books  of  the  New  Testament,  and 
of  the  Old,  what  is  there  almost  in  the  pope's  church,  but  either  it  is 
mingled,  or  depraved,  or  altered,  or  coiTupted,  either  by  some  addi- 
tions interlaced,  or  by  some  diminution  mangled  and  mutilated,  or 
by  some  gloss  adulterate,  or  with  manifest  lies  contaminate  ?  so  that 
in  their  doctrines  standeth  little  truth  ;  in  their  legends,  portues,  and 
mass-book,  less  truth ;  in  their  miracles  and  relics  least  truth  of  all. 
Neither  yet  do  their  sacraments  remain  clear,  and  void  of  manifest 
lies  and  corruption.  And  especially  here  cometh  in  the  master-bee, 
which  bringeth  in  much  sweet  honey  into  the  pope's  hives ;  the  mas- 
ter lie,  I  mean,  of  all  lies,  where  the  pope  leaving  not  one  crumb  of 
bread,  nor  drop  of  wine  in  the  reverend  communion,  untruly  and 
idolatrously  taketh  away  all  substance  of  bread  from  it,  turning  the 
whole  substance  of  bread  into  the  substance  of  Christ's  own  body ; 
which  substance  of  bread  if  the  pope  take  from  the  sacrament,  then 
must  he  also  take  the  breaking  from  it ;  for  breaking,  and  the  body 
of  Christ,  can  in  no  wise  stand  literally  together  by  the  Scripture. 
Thus,  then,  as  this  is  proved  by  the  word  of  God  to  be  a  manifest 
lie,  so  think  not  much,  good  reader,  hereat,  as  though  I  passed  the 
bounds  of  modesty  in  calling  it  the  arch-lie,  or  master-lie  of  all  lies : 
because  upon  this  one,  an  infinite  number  of  other  lies  and  errors  in 
the  pope's  church,  as  handmaids,  do  wait  and  depend. 

But,  forasmuch  as  I  stand  here  not  to  charge  other  men  so  much, 
as  to  defend  myself,  ceasing  therefore,  or  rather  deferring  for  a  time 
to  stir  this  stinking  puddle  of  these  wilful  and  intended  lies  and 
untruths,  which,  in  the  pope's  religion,  and  in  papists'  books,  be  in- 
numerable, I  will  now  return  to  those  untruths  and  impudent  lies, 
which  Master  Cope  hath  hunted  out  in  my  History  of  Acts  and 
Monuments,  first  beginning  with  those  untruths  which  he  carpeth  at 
in  the  story  of  the  aforesaid  sir  John  Oldcastle,  and  sir  Roger  Acton, 
Brown  and  the  rest. 

And  first,  where  he  layeth  to  my  charge,  that  I  call  them  martyrs, 

(1)  Sermo  ad  conventum  sanctorum,  in  fine  Eusebii,  made  by  Constantine  the  emperor. 


AGAIXST    NICHOLAS    HAHPSFIELD.  395 

who  wore  traitors  and  seditious  rebels  against  the  king,  and  their    ifoiry 
country ;  to  this  I  have  answered  sufficiently  before. 


Now  here  then  must  the  reader  needs  stay  a  little,  at  Master    ^-f^- 
Cope's  request,  to  see  my  yanity  and  impudence  yet  more  fully  and - 


amply  repressed  in  refuting  a  certain  place  in  my  Latin  story,  con- 
cerning the  king's  statute  made  at  Leicester,  which  place  and  words 
by  him  alleged,  be  these,  page  107.  '"'  Quocirca  rex  indicto  Leicestrite 
concilio  (quod  fortassis  Londini  ob  Cobhami  fautores  non  erat  tutum) 
proposito  edicto,  immanem  denunciat  panam  his,  quicunque  deinceps 
hoc  doctriuffi  genus  sectarentur;  usque  adeo  in  eos  seyerus,  ut  non 
modo  hsereticos,  sed  perduellioncs  etiam  haberi,  ac  proinde  gemino 
eos  supplicio,  suspendio  simul  et  incendio  afficiendos  statuerit,  &c. ; 
et  mox:  Adeo  ille  vires,  rationesque  intendebat  omnes,  ad  versus  Wick- 
levianos.  Wicklcviani  id  temporis  dicebantur,  quicunque  Scripturas 
Dei  sua  lingua  Icctitarent,''"'  &c. 

U])on  these  words  out  of  my  aforesaid  Latin  book  alleged.  Master  Three 
Cope  persuadeth  himself  to  have  great  advantage  against  me,  to  prove  p"'"'''" 
me  a  notorious  liar,  in  three  sundry  points.     First :  in  that  whereas  pirst  ob- 
I  say,  that  the  king  did  hold  his  parliament  at  Leicester,  adding  this  i^cUon. 
by  the  way  of  parenthesis,   "  quod  fortassis   Londini  ob  Cobhami 
fautores  non  erat  tutum,"  &c. :  here  he  concludeth  thereby,  '  simpli- 
citer  and  precisely,  that  the  lord  Cobham  and  sir  Roger  Acton  with 
his  fellows,  were  traitors,  &c. ;  whereby  a  man  may  soon  shape  a 
caviller,  by  the  shadow  of  Master  Cope.     For  whereas  my  '  Dialysis'  cope 
out  of  the  text  speaketh  doubtfully  and  uncertainly,  by  this  word  without' 
'  fortassis,'  meaning  indeed  the  king  to  be  in  tear  of  the  gospellers,  '=^'^^- 
that   he  durst  not  hold  his   parliament  at  London,   but  went  to 
Leicester :  he  argueth  precisely,  therefore,  that  the  lord  Cobham,  sir 
Roger  Acton,  and  his  fellows,  went  about  to  kill  the  king. 

Secondly :  whereas  I  affirm  that  the  king  in  that  parliament  made  secoim 
a  grievous  law^  against  all  such  as  did  hold  the  doctrine  of  Wickliff,  °  J*"^'""'- 
that  they  shoidd  be  taken  hereafter,  not  for  heretics,  but  also  for 
felons,  or  rebels,  or  traitors,  and  therefore  should  sustain  a  double 
punishment,  both  to  be  hanged,  and  also  to  be  burned,  &c. :   here 
cometh  in  Master  Momus,^  with  his  '  Cope'  on  his  back,  and  proving 
me  to  be  a  liar,  dcnieth  plainly  that  the  king  made  any  such  statute ; 
see  page  853,  line  6,  where  his  words  be  these  :  "  Atqui  quod  haeretici  jhirti  ob- 
pro  perduellionibus,  et  deinceps  geminatas  poenas  suspendii  et  incendii  Jection. 
luerant,  ut  nugatur  Foxus,  nullo  modo  illic  traditur,"  &c. 

Here,   first,   would  be  asked  of  Master  Cope,  what  he  callcth  The  sect 
'  Patriae  hostes,  et  proditores .?'     If  he  call  these  '  traitors,'  then  let  Jf^ made 
us  see  whether  they  that  followed  the  sect  of  Wickliff  were  made  i"^','^-^ 
traitors  and  heretics  by  the  kmgs  law,  or  not.    And  hrst,  let  us  hear  son  by  the 
what  saith  Polydore  Virgil,"'  his  own  witness  in  this  behalf,  whose    "^" 
words,   in  his  twenty-second  book,  page  44 1 ,  be  these  :   "  Quare 
jiublice  edLxit,  ut  si  uspiam  deinceps  reperientur  qui  eam  sequerentur 
sectam,  patrice  hostes  habercntur,  quo  sine  omni  lenitate  severius  ac 
ocius  de  illis  supplicium  sumeretur,"  &c.    That  is,  "  Wherefore  it  was 
by  public  statute  decreed,  that  whosoever  were  found  hereafter  to  follow 
the  sect  of  Wickliff,  should  be  accounted  for  traitors  ;  whereby,  without 
all  lenity,  they  should  be  punished  more  severely  and  quickly,"  &:c. 

'I)  Stat.  an.  2.  Hen.  V.  cap.  7.  (2)  Copus,  p.  853,  lin.  6.  (3)  Lib.  22. 


396  A  DEFENCE  OF  LORD  COBHAM, 

Henry        Thus  liave  you,  Master  Cope,  the  plain  testimony  of  Polydore 
^-      witli  me.     And  because  ye  shall  further  see  yourself  more  impudent 
A.  D.    in  carping,  than  I  am  in  depraving  of  histories,  you  shall  understand, 
1413.    moreover,  and  hear,  what  Thomas  Walden,'  one  of  your  own  catholic 
brotherhood,  and  who  was  also  himself  alive,  and  a  doer  in  the  same 
parliament,  being  tlie  provincial  of  the  Carmelites,  saith  in  this  matter, 
writing,  to  pope  Martin,  whose  very  words  in  Latin  here  follow,  wTitten 
in  his  prologue  to  the  said  Martin,  in  this  wise,  "  Nee  mora  longa 
processit,  quin  statutum  publicum  per  onme  regni  concilium  in  pub- 
lico emanavit  edicto,  quod  omnes  Wiclevistse,  sicut  Dei  proditores 
assent,  sic  proditores  regis,  proscriptis  bonis,  censerentur  et  regni, 
duplici   poense    dandi,   incendio   propter  Deum,   suspendio   propter 
regem,"  &c.    That  is,  "  And  it  was  not  long  after,  but  a  public  law 
and  statute  came  out,  by  the  common  assent  of  the  general  parlia- 
ment of  the  whole  realm  :  that  all  Wicklevists,  as  they  are  traitors 
to  God,  so  also  should  they  be  counted  traitors  to  the  king  and  to  the 
realm,  having  their  goods  lost  and  confiscate  to  the  king ;  and,  there- 
fore, should  suffer  double  punishment,  as  to  be  burnt  for  God,  and 
to  be  hanged  for  the  king,"  &c.     And  thus  have  you.  Master  Cope, 
not  only  my  sentence,  but  also  the  very  words  of  my  story  confirmed 
by  this  author ;  because  ye  shall  not  think  me  to  speak  so  lightly  or 
impudently  without  my  book.     And,  moreover,  to  confirm  the  said 
sentence  of  Thomas  Walden,  it  followeth  also  in  another  place  of  the 
aforesaid  author,  tom.  i.  lib.  2,  '  De  Doctrinali  fidei  Ecclesiee  Cathol.,"' 
cap.  46,  where  he  writeth  in  these  words,  "  Et  tamen  jam  cum  regnare 
ccepisset  illustris  rex  Henricus  V.,  qui  adhuc  agit  in  sceptris,  et  de 
eorum  perfidia  per  catholicos  bene  doctos  legem  statui  fecit,  ut  ubique 
per  regnum  Wicklevista  probatus,  ut  reus  puniretur  de  crimine  laesae 
majestatis,*"  &c.    That  is,  "  And  yet  when  the  noble  king  Henry  V., 
who  as  yet  doth  live  and  reign,  began  first  to  reign,  he  began  to  set 
forth  a  law,  by  his  learned  catholics  who  were  about  him,  against  the 
falseness  of  these  men  ;   so  that  whosoever  was  proved  to  be  a  Wick- 
levist,  through  the  whole  realm,  should  be  punished  for  a  traitor,"  &c. 
What  words  can  you  have.  Master  Cope  !  more  plain  than  these  ?  or 
what  authority  can  you  require  of  more  credit,  who  lived  in  the  same 
time,  and  both  did  see  and  hear  of  the  same  things  done 't  who, 
also,  writing  to  pope  Martin,  was  by  the  said  pope  Martin  allowed, 
approved,   and  solemnly  commended ;   as  appeareth  by  the  pope's 
epistle  to  him,  wherein  the  pope  declareth,  how  he  caused  his  books, 
"•  per   solemnes  viros  videri,  et  examinari ;"  that  is,  "  by  solemn 
Either      persous  to  be  seen  and   examined,"  &c.     So  that  you  must  needs 
wdteth    grant  either  this  to  be  true  that  Walden  writeth,  or  else  that  the 
true,  or    pope  '  tanquam  papa'  in  allowing  his  writings,  may  err  and  be  de- 
erreth.     ccived.    Choosc  ye.  Master  Cope  !   of  these  two  options  whether  you 
will  take. 

And  if  ye  think  this  my  assertion  yet  not  sufficiently  rescued  with 
these  authorities  aforesaid,  I  will  also  hereunto  adjoin  the  testimony 
of  another  Avriter  named  Roger  Wall,  who  writing  '  De  Gestis 
Henrici  V.,'  p.  10 ;  and  speaking  of  the  said  statute  of  this  parlia- 
ment something  more  plainly  than  the  rest,  hath  these  words  :  "  In 
hoc  etiam  parliamento  nobilitas  regia  hostes  Christi  sibi  reputans  pro- 

(1)  T.  Walden.  in  tomo  primo,  Doctrinali  ad  Man.  papam  in  prologo. 


AGAINST     NICHOLAS    HARI'SKIKI-D.  397 

ditores,  volens  dare  intelligerc  universis,  quod  ipse  absque  cujuscunque    f^firy 
fluctuationis  dubio,  quamdiu  auras  haurirct  vitales,  verus  et  perfcctus 


Christian.^  fidci  icmulator  cxistcrct ;  statuit  ct  dccrevit,  ut  quotquot    A.  D. 

ipsius  sccttc,  (\nsi  dicitur  Ijollardorum,  invcnircntur  rcmuli  ct  fautorcp,  ^ 

eo  facto  rci  proditorii  criminis  in  niajostatcm  rciriam  habcrentur,''''  &;c. 
In  English :  "  Also  in  this  parliament  the  noble  king,  reputing  Christ's 
enemies  to  be  traitors  to  himself,  to  the  intent  that  all  men  should 
know,  w-ithout  all  doubt,  that  so  long  as  he  lived,  he  would  be  a  true 
and  perfect  follower  of  christian  faith,  did  enact  and  decree,  that 
whosoever  should  be  found  followers  and  maintaincrs  of  this  sect, 
which  is  called  '  The  Lollard's  Sect,'  '  ipso  fixcto/  should  be  counted 
and  reputed  guilty  of  treason  against  the  king's  majesty,"  &c. 

By  these  hitherto  alleged,  if  Master  Cope  will  not  be  satisfied,  yet 
let  the  reader  indifferently  judge  ;  "  Utrum  in  hac  re  magis  nugatur 
Foxus,  an  Copus  calumniatur.""  And  yet,  moreover,  to  make  the 
matter  more  certain,  mark  the  exclamation  of  the  said  Roger  Wall 
added  to  the  end  of  those  words  above  recited,  whereby  we  have  to 
understand  more  clearly  both  what  were  the  proceedings  of  the  king 
in  the  said  parliament,  and  also  what  was  the  blind  affection  of  monks 
and  priests  at  that  time  towards  their  king  and  prince,  who  was  then  kihr 
called  '  Princeps  Sacerdotum,"'  in  condemning  and  destroying  the  "princess 
poor  Lollards.  The  words  of  the  monk  be  these  :  "  O  verus  amicus  !  sacerdo- 
(pii  amico  illatam  injuriam  sibi  inferri  consimiliter  arbitratur,  pra?ju- 
dicium  illi  intentum  reputat  esse  suum,  ct  ad  ejus  onera  conferenda, 
auxiliationis  humeros  supponere  non  vcretur,"  &c.  That  is,  "  O  true 
friend  !  who  taketh  and  reckoneth  that  injury  no  less  done  to  himself, 
which  is  done  to  his  friend ;  and  that  prejudice  which  is  intended 
against  him,  reputcth  to  be  as  his  own  ;  and,  to  bear  together  the 
burdens  of  his  friend,  sticketh  not  to  lay  to  his  ovm  shoulders,  for  the 
easing  and  helping  of  him,"  &c. 

How  can  it  now  be  denied.  Master  Cope !  in  reading  these 
authors,  and  seeing  their  testimonies,  but  that  Lollardy  in  the  par- 
liament was  made  both  treason  and  heresy,  and  had,  therefore,  a 
double  judgment  of  punishment  annexed,  to  be  hanged  for  the  one, 
and  to  be  burned  for  the  other ;  according  as  in  my  former  Latin 
story'  I  recorded,  and  yet  I  trust,  I  trifled  not? 

But  you  will  say  again,  as  ye  do,  that  there  is  no  mention  made 
for  heresy  to  be  made  treason,  nor  of  any  double  punishment  to  be 
inflicted  for  the  same.^  In  the  body  of  the  statute,  I  grant,  there  Ansxver. 
is  no  express  mention  in  words,  of  heresy  to  be  made  treason,  ex- 
pressly signified  in  rigour  of  words  ;  but  that  inclusively  it  is  so 
inferred,  it  cannot  be  denied.  For  first,  where  lands,  goods  and 
cattle  of  the  said  Lollards,  were  lost  and  forfeit  to  the  king,  what 
doth  this  import  else,  but  treason  or  felony  ?  * 

And  where  the  lord  Cobham,  for  whose  cause  specially  this  statute 
seemed  to  be  made,  did  afterwards  sustain  both  hanging  and  burn- 
ing by  the  vigour  of  the  same  statute,  what  is  here  contained,  but  a 
double  penalty  ?  Again,  where  in  the  beginning  of  the  statute 
mention  is  made  of  "  rumours""  and  "  congregations,"  and  afterwards, 
upon  the  same  followeth  "  the  services  of  the  king,  unto  whom  the 

(1)  Rerum  in  Ecclesia  Gestanim,  &c.  Basil,  1559.  (2)  Copus,  p.  835,  line  8.  Objection. 

(.•?)  Stat   an.  2,  Hen.  V.  cap.  vii. 


898  A    DEl'KNCK    OF    LORD    C'OEIIAM, 

Henry    officcrs  be   first  sworn,  should  be  first  preferred  for   the  liberty  of 
holy  church,  &c.,  and  punishment  of  heretics,  Sjc,  made  before  these 


A.  D.  days  and  not  repealed,'"  ut  supra :  what  meaneth  this,  but  to  make 
^"^l'^'  these  congregations  of  the  Lollards  to  be  forcible  entries,  riots, 
great  ridings,  unlawful  assemblies,  affrayers  of  the  people,  armour, 
routs,  and  insm-rections,  and  so  to  send  them  to  the  former  statutes 
riot  repealed  ;  that  is,  to  the  statute.  Anno  13.  Hen.  IV.,  cap.  vii. 
where  the  punishment  is  left  to  the  discretion  of  the  king ;  or  else 
the  statute.  Anno  15.  Rich.  XL,  cap.  ii.,  where  the  penalty  is  made 
fine  and  ransom ;  or  else  to  the  statute,  Anno  5.  Rich.  II.,  cap.  vi., 
where  such  assemblies  be  made  plain  treason,  'in  fine  statuti.' 

And  as  here  is  matter  of  treason  sufficiently  contained,   so  for 
heresy,  likewise,  the  same  statute  referreth  them  to  the  ordinaries, 
and  to  the  laws  properly  to  heresy  appertaining,  and  to  the  statute 
Anno  2.  Hen.  IV.,  cap.  xv.,  where  the  penalty  is  burning :  also  to 
the  statute.  Anno  5.  Rich.  II.,  cap.  v.  So  that  in  this  present  statute 
here,  mention  is  contained,  as  ye  see,  although  not  in  express  words, 
yet  inclusively  (by  referring  to  other  statutes  not  repealed),  both 
Lollardy,  which  is  punished  with  burning,  and  forcible  entries,  which 
are  punished  at  the  king''s  pleasure.     And  thus  much  concerning  the 
second  untruth,  which  Master  Cope  untruly  noted  in  me. 
Third  ob-      The  third  untruth  which  he  noteth  in  me  concerning  this  matter 
jection.     jg  j.}^jg^  wherein  he  reporteth  me,  that  I  say,  there  was  no  other  cause 
of  devising  this  sharp  law  and  punishment  against  these  men,  but 
only  for  having  the  Scripture  books  ;  and,  therefore,  here  is  to  be 
noted  in  the  margin  "  Foxi  dolus  malus ;""  but  let  Master  Cope  take 
Answer,    hccd  he  dcccive  not  himself  and  others.     For  my  part  I  remember 
no  such  place  in  this  my  Latin  story  where  I  so  say.     My  words  be 
only  these,  added  in  the  latter  end  of  the  place  above  recited :  "  Wicle- 
viani  vero  dicebantiu",  quicunque  id  temporis  scripturas  Dei  sua  lingua 
Reading  lectitarcut,"  &c.  That  is,  "  They  were  called  Wicklevists,  whosoever 
ture"^     at  that  time  read  the  Scriptures  in  English,  or  vulgar  tongue,""  &c.^ 
contrary   ^  ^^J  ^°^'  ^^^^^  ^^^  *^^  Scripturcs  being  read  in  the  English  tongue, 
to  the      therefore  the  law  was  enacted ;  but  so  is  Master  Cope  disposed  to 
faith,       construe  it.     What  law  and  statutes  were  made  against  writing  or 
hl%sy.     reading  of  any  book  in  English,  or  any  other  tongue,  contrary  to 
Jf^lilr'  ^^^  catholic,  that  is,  the  Romish  faith,  or  to  the  determination   of 
Scripture  the  holy  church,  that  is,  of  Rome,  read,  I  beseech  thee,  the  bloody 
t"rans'iate^d  statutc  made  Anuo  2.  Hen.  IV.,  cap.  xv.,  above  specified.  Also  read 
vulgar^    the  constitution   provincial  of  Thomas  Arundel   above-mentioned, 
tongue     where  it  was  decreed,  that  the  text  of  holy  Scripture  should  not  be 
pain  of     had,  or  read  in  the  vulgar  tongue,  from  the  time  of  Master  John 
heresy.     WicklifF  for  cvcr  after,  unless  the  said  translation  be  approved  first 
by  the  ordinary,  or  by  provincial  council,  under  pain  and  punishment 
of  heresy.     Now  let  the  reader  judge  whether  the  reading  of  scrip- 
ture books  in  the  English  tongue,  by  the  making  or  translating  of 
WicklifF,  or  from  the  tune  of  Wickliff  downward,  be  counted  heresy 
or  not.     As  for  the  approving  of  the  ordinary,  or  of  the  provincial 
council  added  in  the  end  of  the  said  constitution,  it  maketh  more  for 
a  show  or  pretence,  than  for  any  just  exception,  or  any  true  inten- 
tion :  for  what  man,  having  those  Scriptures  translated  into  English, 

(1)  Stat.  an.  1.  Hen.  IV.  cap.  xiv.  vid.  sup. 


VllAINST    MCHOI.AS    H  ARI'SKIKl.D.  399 

would  cither  present  them  to  their  ordinaries  being  so  set  against  the    ff<''>ry 

reading  of  such  books  ?  or  what  ordinary  would,  or  ever  yet  did, '. 

since  AriindePs  time,  approve  any  such  translation  presented  unto    A.  D. 
them  ?  Or  else  why  did  the  good  martyrs  of  Amersham  suffer  death,    ^'*^'^' 
in    the  beginning    of   king  Henry   VIII.,  for  having  and  reading 
certain  books  of  Scripture,  which  were,  as  is  said,  only  four  epistles 
of  St.  Paul,  with  certain    other  prayers  .-^    and  the  others  who  but 
only  heard  them  read,  did  bear  faggots ;  and  at  the  same  time,  the 
children  were  compelled  to  set  faggots  unto  their  fathers,  at  which  children 
time  Longland,  being  then  bishop  of  Lincoln,  and  preaching  to  them  sh;m""^ 
at  the  stake,  said ;  that  whatsoever  they  were  that  did  but  move  H^f^  '" 
their  lips  m  reading  those  chapters,  were  damned  for  ever  : — as  Avhen  b"*?  '<> 
we  come  to  that  time,  by  the  grace  of  Christ,  shall  hereafter  more  fathers. 
amply  and  notoriously  appear.     And  where  then  is  this  '  Dolus  ma- 
ins Foxi,''  margined  against  me,  for  crafty  dealing  in  my  story  .'* 

Moreover,  where  Master  Cope,  proceeding  further  in  this  matter, 
asketh  me  :  "  How  was  the  lord  Cobham  obedient  to  the  king,  when 
for  the  fear  of  him  the  king  durst  not  then  keep  his  parliament  at 
London  ?"""■'  To  whom  I  answer  again,  asking  likewise  of  Master 
Cope :  "  How  was  the  king  then  afraid  to  hold  his  parliament  at 
London  for  the  lord  Cobham,  when  the  lord  Cobham  at  that  time 
was  in  Wales.''''  And  here  Master  Cope  thinking  to  have  me  at  a 
narrow  strait,  and,  to  hold  me  fast,  biddeth  me  tell  him  how  it 
could  be  otherwise,  but  the  lord  Cobham  must  needs  have  fautors .'' 
"  and  who  should  these  fautors  be,"  saith  he,  "  but  sir  Roger  Acton, 
Brown,  and  their  fellows  .f*"  To  which  mighty  question  of  Master 
Cope,  I  answer  again  :  "  How  could  sir  Roger  Acton,  BroAvn,  and 
their  fellows  be  then  fautors  of  the  lord  Cobham,  for  whom  the  king 
durst  not  hold  the  parliament  at  London,  when  the  said  Roger 
Acton,  Brown,  and  the  rest,  were  put  to  death  a  whole  year  almost 
before  the  parliament  at  Leicester  began  T'' 

And  now,  as  I  have  hitherto  briefly  and  truly  answered  your  ask- 
ings, Master  Cope  !  let  me  be  so  bold  with  you  again,  to  propound 
to  you  likewise  another  question,  forasmuch  as  you  have  put  me  to 
the  searching  of  the  statutes  in  this  matter,  wherewith  before  I  was 
not  much  acquainted.  Now,  out  of  the  same  statutes  riseth  a  doubt- 
ful scruple  or  question,  worthy  to  be  solved.  The  case  is  this,  that 
forasmuch  as  so  many  good  martps  and  saints  of  God  hitherto,  in 
this  realm  of  England,  haxing  been  burned  from  the  time  of  king 
Henry  IV.,  Henry  V.,  Henry  VI.,  Henry  VIII.,  to  the  tune,  and 
in  the  time  of  queen  Mary,  my  question  is ;  that  you,  with  all  yom* 
learned  council  about  you,  will  tell  me,  by  what  law  or  statute  of 
the  realm  were  these  men  bunit  ?  I  know  the  ancient  custom  hath 
been,  that  heretics  convicted  by  a  provincial  council  were  wont  to  be 
I'^ft  to  the  secular  power.  But  how  will  ye  prove  me,  that  these 
heretics  were  either  convicted  by  such  provincial  council,  or  that 
these  secular  men  ought  to  be  your  butchers  in  burning  them  whom 
ye  have  committed  to  them .''  If  ye  allege  the  six  articles  made  in 
the  reign  of  king  Henry  VIII.,  those  articles  neither  did  serve 
before  the  time  of  king  Henry  VIII.,  nor  yet  were  they  revived 
after  his  time.     If  ye  allege  the  statute  made  Anno  5.,  Rich.  II., 

!1)  Copus,  p.  833,  line  20.  (2)  Ibid.  p.  836,  line  13. 


400  A  DEFENCE  OF  LORD  COBHAM, 

Henry    cap.  V.,  in  tliat  statutc,  I  answer,  is  contained  no  matter  of  burning, 
^'      but  only  of  anest  to  be  done  at  the  certifications  of  the  prelates, 
A.  D.    without  any  further  punishment  there  mentioned.     To  conclude,  if 
^^^^-    ye  allege  the  statute  made  Anno  2.  Hen.  IV.,  cap.  xv.,  and  revived 
Sundry    in  the  reign  of  queen  Mary,  mentioned  before ;  to  that  statute  I 
pro'iTer    answer,  that  although  the  pretensed  statute  appeareth,  in  form  of 
c^nt"^    Avords  in  the  printed  book,  to  give  unto  the  temporal  officers  autho- 
burnany  rity  to  bring  them  to  the  stake,  and  to  burn  them  whom  the  bishop 
"''"        deiivereth,  yet  is  it  not  to  be  proved,  either  by  you  or  any  other, 
that  statute  to  be  law,  or  warrant  sufficient  to  burn  any  person  or 
persons  committed  to  the  secular  power  by  the  clergy.     And  that  I 
prove  thus :  for  although  the  same  statute  of  king  Henry  IV.,  in 
the  books  printed,  appear  to  have  law  and  authority  sufficient,  by  the 
flill  assent  both  of  the  king,  of  the  lords,  and  of  the  commons ;  yet, 
being  occasioned  by  Master  Cope  to  search  further  into  the  statutes, 
I  have  found,  that  in  the  rolls  and  first  originals  of  that  parliament, 
there  is  no  such  mention  either  of  any  petition,  or  else  of  any  assent 
of  the  commons  annexed,  or  contained  in  that  statute,  according  as 
in  the  printed  books,  usual  in  the  lawyers'  hands,  too  craftily  and 
falsely  is  foisted  in ;    as  by  the  plain  words  thereof  may  well  appear. 
For  the  said  statute,  Anno  2.  Hen.  IV.,  cap.  xv.,  being  thus  entitled 
in  the  roll,  '  Petitio  Cleri  contra  hsereticos,*'  and  assented  unto  in 
this  form,  hath  these  words  : 
The  "  Quas  quidem  petitiones  prselatorum  et  cleri  superius  expressatas 

statute     <^lo.  noster  rex,  de  consensu  magnatum  et  aliormn  procerum  regni  sui, 
Hen°iv   ''^  prsesenti  parliamento  existentium  concessit,  et  in  omnibus  et  sin- 
c.  15.       gulis  juxta  formam  et  effectum  eorundem  ordinavit  et  statuit  de 
co^upt-    cetero  firmiter  observari,"  and  so  forth,  according  to  the  petition  : 
'^^-         and  more  words  are    there  not   in   the  statute  roll.     Wherefore, 
whereas  the  Statate-Book  printed  hath  thus  :   "  Super  quibus  quidem 
novitatibus  et  excessibus  superius  recitatis,"  (videlicet,  in  the  petition 
of  the  prelates  and  clergy,)  "  preelati  et  clerus  supradicti  ac  etiam 
communitates  dicti  regni  in  eodem  parliamento  existen.  dicto  domino 
regi  supplicarunt,   &c.    qui  quidem  dominus  rex,    &c.    ex  assensu 
magnatum  et  aliorum  procerum  ejusdem  regni,  &c,  concessit,  ordina- 
vit," &c. ;    these  words,   "  etiam   communitates  dicti   regni,""""  &c., 
are  put  in  further  than  the  roll  doth  warrant,  and  it  seemeth  to  be 
.  the  practice  of  the  clergy  to  make  that  as  an  act  of  parliament, 
and  to  seem  to  have  the  force  of  a  law,  which  was  never  assented 
unto  by  the  comm^ons. 

And  thus  you  see  how  this  aforesaid  statute,  printed  both  in 
English  and  in  Latin  among  the  provincial  councils  of  Oxford,^  by 
virtue  whereof  so  many  good  men  have  been  burned  so  long  in  Eng- 
land, doth  utterly  overthrow  itself,  for  that  it  swerveth  from  the 
record  both  in  form  and  in  matter,  and  lacketh  the  assent  of  the 
commons  :  which  doubt  I  thought  at  this  present  to  propound  unto 
you.  Master  Cope,  for  that  you  have  so  urged  me  to  the  searching 
out  of  the  statutes,  by  your  declaiming  against  the  lord  Cobham. 

Moreover  unto  this  statute  aforesaid,  join  also  withal  another  me- 
morandum of  like  practice,  done  Anno  5.  Rich.  11.,  in  which  year, 

(!)  Ex  constitutionibus  provincialibus  Oxonis  celebratis.  Johan.  Antbo. 


AGAIXST     NICHOLAS    IIAIlP.SFir.I.n.  401 

wlicrcas  a  statute  was  concluded  in  tlic  parliament,  Anno  o.  Rich.  II.,    iffnry 

cap.  v.,  against  certain  preachers  specified  in  the  same  statute,  who,  _. 

going  about  in  certain  habits  from  place  to  place,  did  draw  the  people  ^.1). 
to  sermons  ;  and  commissions  were  made  and  directed  in  the  said  ^'^^'^- 
parliament  to  the  sheriffs,  to  arrest  all  such  preachers,  and  to  imprison 
the  same,  at  the  certifications  of  the  prelates :  here  is  then  to  be 
noted,  that  the  same  statute.  Anno  -').  Rich.  II.,  cap.  v.,  was  revoked 
by  the  king  in  the  parliament.  Anno  G.  Rich.  II.,  upon  the  words  of 
the  commons,  being  these,  viz.,  ''Forasmuch  as  the  same  statute  was 
never  assented,  ne  granted  by  the  commons,  but  that  which  therein 
was  done,  was  done  without  their  assent,  and  now  ought  to  be  undone, 
for  that  it  was  never  their  meaning  to  be  justified,  and  to  bind  them- 
selves and  their  successors  to  the  prelates,  no  more  than  their  ances- 
tors had  done  before  them.'''  And  yet  this  aforesaid  revocation 
notwithstanding,  in  queen  Mary's  time,  they  inquired  upon  that 
statute. 

In  searching  of  these  statutes,  'as  you  have  occasioned  me  to  find 
out  these  scruples,  so  being  found  out,  I  thought  lierc  not  to  dis- 
semble them,  forasmuch  as  I  sec  and  hear  many  now-a-days  so  boldly 
to  bear  themselves  upon  this  statute ;  and  thinking  so  to  excuse 
themselves,  do  say,  that  they  have  done  nothing  but  the  law,  the 
law  !  to  the  intent  that  these  men,  seeing  now  how  inexcusable  tliey  The  per- 
be,  both  before  God  and  man,  having  no  law  to  bear  them  out,  may  ^rburn* 
the  sooner  repent  their  bloody  and  unlawful  tyranny,  exercised  so  '"^^g''* 
long  against  God's  true  servants,  yet,  in  time,  before  the  just  law  of  iiavedone 
God  shall  find  out  their  unjust  dealings ;  which  partly  he  beginneth  thTiaw. 
already  to  do,  and  more,  no  doubt,  will  do  hereafter. 

In  the  mean  time,  this  my  petition  I  ])ut  up  to  the  commons,  and  to 
all  othere  who  shall  hereafter  put  up  any  petition  to  the  parliament ; 
that  they,   being  admonished  by  this  abuse,  will  show  themselves  a  neces 
hereafter  more  wise  and  circumspect,  both  what  they  agree  unto  in  monufon 
parliaments,  and  also  v.hat  cometh  out  in  their  Jiame.    And,  as  these  *"  "^<= 

1  •         1  •         •  n  1  •         TT  1-i-r  11  commons 

good  commons,  m  tins  time  ot  kmg  Henry  iV  .,  wouul  not  consent  of  Enj^- 
nor  agree  to  this  bloody  statute,  nor  to  any  other  like  it ;  for  so  wc 
read  that  the  commons  in  that  bloody  time  of  king  Henry  IV., 
when  another  like  cruel  bill  was  put  up  by  the  prelates  in  Anno  8. 
Henry  IV.,  against  the  Lollards,  they  neither  consented  to  this,  and 
also  overthrew  the  other  :  so  in  like  manner  it  is  to  be  wished,  that 
the  commons,  in  this  our  time,  or  such  others  that  shall  have  to  do  in 
parliaments  hereafter,  following  the  steps  of  these  former  times,  Avill 
take  vigilant  heed  to  such  cruel  bills  of  the  pope's  prelacy  being  put 
up,  that  neither  their  consent  do  pass  rashly,  nor  that  their  names  in 
any  condition  be  so  abused;  considering  with  themselves  that  a  thing 
once  being  passed  in  the  parliament,  cannot  afterwards  be  called 
back  ;  and  a  little  incf)nvenicnce  once  admitted,  may  grow  aftei'- 
wards  to  mischiefs  that  cannot  be  stopped.  And  sometimes  it  may 
so  happen,  that  through  rash  consent  of  voices,  the  end  of  things 
being  not  well  advised,  such  a  thing  may  be  gianted  in  one  day,  that 
afterwards  may  cause  the  whole  realm  many  days  to  rue.  But  I  trust 
men  arc  bitten  enough  with  such  black  parliaments,  to  beware  of 
after-claps.     The  Lord  Jesus,  the  only  protector  of  his  church,  stop 

(I)  Ex  Rotul.  Pari, 
vol  .  III.  D    D 


402  SIR    ROGER    ACTON    AGAINST    THE    BISIIGP    OF    ROME. 

Uniry    all  crafty  devices  of  subtle  enemies,  and  with  Uis  wisdom  direct  our 

_Jj parliaments,  as  may  be  most  to  the  advantage  of  his  word,  and  com- 

A.  I),    fort  of  his  people  !     Amen,  Amen. 
1113. 

And  having  said  thus  much  for  the 'defence  of  the  lord  Cobham, 

of  sir  Roger  Acton,  knight,  of  Master  John  Brown,  esquire,  of  John 

Beverly,  preacher,  and  of  others  their  fellows,  against  Alanus  Co])us 

Anglus,  here  I  make  an  end  with  this  present  interim,  till  further 

leisure  serve  me  hereafter,  Christ  willing,  to  pay  him  the  whole  interest 

which  I  owe  unto  him  :  adding  this,  in  the  mean  time,  and  by  the 

way ;  that  if  Master  Cope  had  been  a  Momus  any  thing  reasonable, 

he  had  no  great  cause  so  to  wrangle  with  me  in  this  matter,  who  as  I 

did  commend  the  lord  Cobham,  and  that  worthily,  for  his  valiant 

standing  by  the  truth  of  his  doctrine  before  Thomas  Arundel  the 

archbishop  ;  so,  touching  the  matter  of  this  conspiracy,  I  did  not  affirm 

or  define  any  thing  thereof  in  my  former  history  so  precisely  that  he 

could  well  take  any  vantage  thereof  against  me,  who,  in  writing  of  this 

conspiracy  laid  against  sir  Roger  Acton,  and  sir  John  Oldcastle,  do 

Proposi.   but  disjunctively  or  doubtfully  speak  thereof,  not  concluding  cer- 

junctive.  taiuly  this  conspiracy  either  to  be  true,  or  not  true,  but  only  proving 

the  same  not  to  be  true  at  that  time,  as  Polydore  Virgil,  and  Edward 

Hall,  in  their  histories  do  affirm  ;  who  say,  that  this  conspiracy  began 

after  the  burning  of  John  Huss  and  Jerome  of  Prague ;  which  could 

not  be.     And  thereto  tendeth  my  assertion.     My  words  are  plain, 

and  are  these :   "  Wherefore  it  is  evident  that  there  was  either  no 

conspiracy  at  all  against  the  king,  or  else  that  it  was  at  some  other 

time,  or  done  by  some  other  captains,"  &c.^     These  be  my  words, 

with  others  besides  ;   in  which  proposition  disjunctive,  if  either  part 

be  true,  it  is  enough  for  me.    His  part  it  was  to  refel  both,  which  he 

hath  not  done  ;  but  only  standing  fast  upon  the  one  part,  dissimiUeth 

the  other.     And  this  is  Alanus  Copus  Anglus,  who,  by  the  time  he 

shall  come  from  Rome  (whither  he  is  now  gone,  as  I  hear  say),  1 

trust,  will  return  a  better  logician  home  again,  '  in  suam  Angliam."' 

Sir  Roger      But  to  the  truth  of  our  matter :  as  I  said  before,  so  I  say  again  ; 

^ntl-ary   wliatsocvcr  tliis  Worthy,  noble,  virtuous  knight,  sir  Roger  Acton  was 

WshcT  of  otherwise,  this  is  certain,  that  he  was  always  of  contrary  mind  and 

Rome,      opinion  to  the  bishop  of  Rome,  and  to  that  kind  of  people  ;  for  which 

Causes     cause  lie  had  great  envy  and  hatred  at  their  hands,  and  could  as  little 

tumi  why  l^^^J"  it :  neither  do  I  greatly  dissent  from  them,  who  do  suspect  or 

Actou^^"^  judge  that  the  lord  Cobham,  by  his  friendly  help,  escaped  out  of  the 

with  the   Tower;  and  that,  perad venture,  was  the  cause  why  he  was  apprehended 

imt'to"^  and  brought  to  trouble,  and,  in  the  end,  came  to  his  death.  *Albeit^ 

traitors'"^  that  during  that  severity  and  cruelty,  it  was  no  hard  matter  to  find 

andLoJ-  out  occasiou  of  death,  if  the  divines  or  bishops  did  hate  any  man,  or 

went  about  to  seek  his  destruction.    For  where  it  is  so  proved  by  the 

laws,  that  the  sincere  worshipping  of  Christ  is  counted  for  heresy,  and 

a  heretic  counted  a  traitor,  what  citizen  can,  in  that  commonwealth, 

live  in  safety,  without  sin  and  wickedness,  or  be  godly,  without  peril 

and  danger?*  Other  causes  also  there  might  be,  that  these  good  men 

percase  did  frequent  among  themselves  some  conventicles  (which 

(1)  First  edition  of  the  Acts  and  Monuments,  p.  174,  col.  2. — Ed. 

(2)  See  edition  1563,  p,  174.— En. 


THE    HANGING    AND    BURNING    OF    CERTAIN    LOLLARDS.  403 

convcntides  were  made  treason  by  tlic  statute  aforesaid),  cither  in    irenri, 
those  thickets,  or  in  some  place  else,  for  the  hearing  of  God's  word, 


and  for  public  prayer;  and  therefore  had  they  this  Beverly,  their    A.D. 
preacher,  with  them.  l-W^. 

But  to  conclude  :  whatsoever  this  sir  Roger  Acton  was,  this  is  the 
truth,  which  I  may  boldly  record,  as  one  writing  the  acts  and  things 
done  in  the  church,  that  he  was  at  length  apprehended,  condemned, 
and  put  to  death  or  martyrdom,  three  years  and  more  before  the  lord 
Cobham  died.  Likewise  Master  John  Brown,  and  John  Beverly, 
the  preacher,  suffered  with  him  the  same  kind  of  death,  as  some  say, 
in  the  field  of  St.  Giles,  with  others  more,  to  the  nnmljcr  of  thirty- 
sLx,  if  the  story  be  true  ;  which  was  in  the  month  of  January,  Anno 
1413,  after  the  computation  of  our  English  stories,  counting  the  year 
from  the  Annunciation  ;  but  after  the  Latin  writers,  counting  from 
Christ's  nativity.  Anno  1414. 

These  men,  as  is  said,  suffered  before  the  lord  Cobham  about  three  Diversity 
years,  of  whose  death  divers  do  write  diversely.    Some  say  they  were  "hours' 
hanged  and  burnt  in  St.  GilcsVfield  ;  of  whom  is  Fabian,  with  such  a.d.i4i4. 
as  follow  him.  Other  there  be  who  say,  that  some  of  them  were  hanged 
and  burned.  Polydore,  speaking  only  of  their  burning, maketh  no  men- 
tion of  hanging.  A  certain  other  English  chronicle^  I  have  in  my  hands, 
borrowed  of  one  Master  Bowyer,  which,  somewhat  differing  from  the 
rest,  recordeth  thus  of  sir  Roger  Acton,  that  his  judgment  before  the 
justice  was  this  ;  to  be  drawn  through  London  to  Tyburn,  and  there 
to  be  hanged  :  and  so  he  was,  naked,  save  certain  parts  of  him  covered 
with  a  cloth,  &c.     "And  when  certain  days  were  past,"  saith  the 
author,  "  a  tnmipcter  of  the  king's,  called  Thomas  Cliff,  got  grant  of 
the  king  to  take  him  down,  and  bury  him  ;  and  so  he  did,"  &c.    And 
thus  have  you  the  story  of  sir  Roger  Acton,  and  his  fellow  brethren. 
As  touching  their  cause,  whether  it  were  true,  or  else  by  error  mistaken 
of  the  king,  or  by  the  fetch  of  the  bishops  surmised,  I  refer  it  to  the 
judgment  of  Him  who  shall  judge  botli  the  quick  and  the  dead,  '  et 
seculum  per  ignem :'  to  whom,  also,  I   commit  you.  Master  Cope :  faster 
God  speed  your  journey  well  to  Rome,  whither  I  hear  say  you  are  to  Kome. 
going,  and  make  you  a  good  man  ! 

After  the  decease  or  martyrdom  of  these  above  mentioned,  who  were  Death  of 
executed  in   the  month  of  January,  a.  d.  1414,  on  the  twentieth  Aru^TdTi, 
day  of  the  February  following,  God  took  away  the  great  enemy  of  ^f''" 
his  word,  and  rebel  to  his  king, '^  Thomas  Arundel,  archbishop  of  Can-  canter- 
terbury ;  whose  death  following  after  the  execution  of  these  good  men   ^^' 
above  recited,  by  the  marvellous  stroke  of  God,'  so  suddenly,  may 
seem  somewhat  to  declare  their  inaocency,  and  that  he  was  also  some 
great  procurer  of  their  death,  in  that  God  would  not  suffer  him  longer 
to  live,  striking  him  with  death  immediately  upon  the  same :  but,  as  Arundci 
I  did  the  other  before,  so  this  also  I  do  refer  to  the  secret  judgment  Sentence 
of  the  Lord,  who  once  shall  judge  all  secrets  openly.  ?^^i"c'b 

In  the  mean  time  this  may  seem  strange,  that  the  same  Thomas  ham,  and 
Arundel,  who,  a  little  before,  sat  in  judgment  against  the  lord  Cobham,  gi°eth 
and  pronounced  sentence  of  death  upon  him,  did  himself  feel  the  stroke  g^^insT 
of  death,  and  the  sentence  of  God  executed  upon  him  before  the  otlier.  Arundd. 

(1)  This  English  story  beginneth  thus  :  "  A  Table  of  all  the  King's." 

(2)  Ex.  Hist.  S.  Albao.  (3)  God's  works  and  punishments  arc  to  be  noted. 

DD  2 


'K)4  SUPERSTITION    INCREASED. 

Henry    Wlio  woulcl  liavG  tliought  but  that  tlic  lord  Cobham,  being  so  cast^ 
^'       and  condemned  definitively,  by  the  archbisliop's  sentence,  should  have 


A.  D.    (lied  long  l)cfore  the  archbishop  ?     But,  such  be  the  works  of  God's 
^*1'^-    almighty  hand,  who  so  turned  the  wheel,  that  this  condemned  lord 
survived  his  condemner  three  or  four  years. 

In  the  death  of  this  archbishop,  first  Polydore  Virgil  is  deceived, 
who  affirmed  his  death  to  be  a.  d,  1415,  in  the  second  year  of  king 
Henry  V.,  also  after  the  beginning  of  the  council  of  Constance ; '  who, 
indeed,  never  reached  the  beginning  thereof,  nor  ever  saw  the  second 
year  of  that  king,  unless  ye  count  the  first  day  for  a  year ;  but  died 
before,  a.  d.  1414,  February  20.^  Furthermore,  concerning  the  death 
of  this  Arundel,  and  the  manner  thereof,  who  had  been  so  heavy  a 
troubler  of  Christ''s  saints  in  his  time,  because  the  thing  seemeth  worthy 
of  noting,  to  behold  the  punishment  of  God  upon  his  enemies,  this  is 
the  report,  as  I  have  found  it  alleged  out  of  Thomas  Gascoin,  in 
'  Dictionario  Theologico,"' whose  plain  words  be  these:  "A.  D.  1414, 
An  exam-  Thomas  Arundcl,  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  was  so  stricken  in  his 
God-'s       tongue,  that  he  could  neither  swallow  nor  speak  for  a  certain  space 
hand       before  his  death,  much  like  the  example  of  the  rich  glutton  ;  and  so 
asainst     died  upou  the  same.     And  this  was  thought  of  many  to  come  upon 
mfes  of    him,  for  that  he  so  bound  the  word  of  the  Lord,  that  it  should  not  be 
his  word,  preached  in  his  days.""*  Which  if  this  be  true,  as  it  doth  well  here  appear, 
vai'nto     thcsc  and  such  other  horrible  examples  of  God's  wrath  may  be  terrible 
o'od'f*"'^  spectacles  for  such  as  occupy  their  tongues  and  brains  so  busily  to  stop 
word.       the  course  of  God's  word,  striving  but  against  the  stream ;  against  the 
force  whereof  neither  are  they  able  to  resist,  and  many  times  in  resist- 
ing are  overturned  themselves  and  drowned  therein.  And  thus  much 
for  the  death  of  Thomas  Arundel,  who  continued  archbishop  in  the 
see  of  Canterbury  the  space  of  eighteen  years. 
Henry  After  this  Aruudcl,  succeeded  next  in  the  said  see  of  Canterbury 

i^'.'arch-'  Henry  Chichesly,  made  archbishop  a.  d.  1 414,  and  sat  five  and  twenty 
bishop  of  years.  This  Henry,  following  likewise  the  steps  of  his  predecessor, 
bury.  showed  himsclf  no  small  adversary  against  the  favourers  of  the  truth. 
In  his  time  was  much  trouble  and  great  affliction  in  the  church ;  for, 
as  the  preaching  and  teaching  of  the  word  did  multiply  and  spread 
abroad  daily  more  and  more,  so,  on  the  contrary  side,  more  vigilant 
care  and  strait  inquisition  followed  and  increased  against  the  people 
of  God,  by  reason  whereof  divers  did  suffer,  and  were  burned  ;  some 
for  fear  fled  the  country ;  and  many  were  brought  to  examination,  and 
by  infirmity  constrained  to  abjure,  of  whom  hereafter,  Christ  willing, 
particularly,  in  the  order  of  their  times,  we  will  treat. 

As  true  piety  and  sincere  preaching  of  Christ's  word  began  at  this 
time  to  decay,  so  idle  monkery  and  vain  superstition  in  place  thereof 
began  to  increase.  For  about  the  same  year  the  king  began  the  founda- 
tion of  two  monasteries,  one  on  the  one  side  of  the  Thames,  of  friars 
Sheen  obscrvaut,  the  other  on  the  other  side  of  the  Thames,  called  Sheen 
bufid^d"*  and  Zion,  dedicated  to  charter-house-monks,  with  certain  Bridget-nuns 
or  recluses,  to  the  number  of  sixty,  dwelling  within  the  same  precinct ; 
so  that  the  whole  number  of  these,  with  priests,  monks,  deacons,  and 

(I)  Polydore  Virgil  crreth.  See  his  twenty-second  book,  p.  441.     (2)  Ex  Hist.  S.  Albani,  et  multis. 

(?,)  "  Tlio.  Arundel.  Cant,  archiepiscop.  sic  lingua  percussus  erat,  ut  nee  deglutire,  nee  loqui  per 
aliquot  dies  ante  mmlein  suam  potuerit,  divitis  ejiuloni-s  exemplo ;  et  sic  tandem  obiit.  Atque 
mulli  tunc  (icri  piUabanl,  quia  verbum  aliigasset,  ne  suo  tempore  praedicaretur." 


HISTORY    OF    THE    BOHEMIANS.  405 

nuns,  should  equal  the  number  of  the  twelve  apostles  and  seventy-two    Uenry 
disciples.     The  order  of  these  was,  according  to  the  description  of  St 


Paul  the  apostle  [Col.  i.],  "  Eat  not,  taste  not,  touch  not,"  he. ;  to    A.  D. 
cat  no  flesh,  to  wear  no  linen,  to  touch  no  money,  etc. 

About  Michaelmas,  the  same  year,  the  king  began  his  parliament  at 
Leicester,  above  mentioned.  In  which  parliament  the  commons  put  up 
their  bill  again,  which  they  had  put  up  before,  in  the  eleventh  year  of 
Henry  IV.;  that  temporalties,  disorderly  wasted  by  men  of  the  church, 
might  be  converted  and  employed  to  the  use  of  the  king,  of  his  earls 
and  knights,  and  to  the  relief  of  the  poor  people,  as  is  before  recited ; 
in  fear  of  which  bill,  lest  the  king  would  give  thereunto  any  comforta- 
ble audience,  as  testify  Robert  Fabian  and  other  writers,  certain  of  crafty 
the  prelates  and  other  head  men  of  the  church,  ])ut  the  king  in  mind  oJ^thr*^ 
to  claim  his  right  in  France  :  whereupon  Henry  Chichesly,  archbishop  ^5^''^j[?^;, 
of  Canterbury,  made  a  long  and  solemn  oration  before  the  king  to  per-  stirred  up 
suade  him  to  the  same,  offering  the  king,  in  behalf  of  the  clergy,  great  by  the" 
and  notable  sums  :  by  reason  whereof,  saith  Fabian,  the  bill  was  again  ^'s'lops. 
put  off,  and  the  king  set  his  mind  for  the  recovery  of  the  same :  so 
that  soon  after  he  sent  his  letters  and  messengers  to  the  French  king 
concerning  that  matter,  and  received  from  him  again  answer  of  deri- 
sion, with  a  pipe  of  tennis-balls,  as  some  record,  sent  from  the 
Dauphin,  for  him  to  play  with  at  home.  Whereby  the  king's  mind 
was  incensed  the  more  toward  that  voyage ;  who,  when  furnishing 
himself  with  strength  and  armour,  with  powder  and  shot,  and  gun- 
stones,  to  play  with  in  France,  and  with  other  artillery  for  that  pur- 
pose convenient,  so  set  over  into  France,  where  he  got  Harfleur,  with 
divers  other  towns  and  castles  in  Normandy  and  Picardy,  and,  at 
Agincourt,  had  a  great  victory  over  the  French  army,  they  being 
counted  but  seven  thousand,  by  pricking  sharp  stakes  before  them,  &c. 
After  that  he  won  Caen,  Touques Rouen,  Avith  other  towns  besides,  as 
Meldune,  or  Melione,  and  married  with  Katharine,  the  French  king's 
daughter.  And  yet,  notwithstanding,  he  made  his  vopge  again  the 
third  time  into  France,  where  at  length,  at  Blois,  he  fell  sick  and  died : 
concerning  all  which  voyages,  because  they  are  sufficiently  discoursed 
in  Fabian,  Hall,  and  other  chronogTaphers,  referring  therefore  the 
reader  unto  them,  I  will  turn  ray  story  to  other  matters  of  the  church 
more  effectual. 


THE    ENTRY    OF    THE    MEMORABLE  HISTORY    OF    THE    BOHEMIANS. 

I^cce  follotoctlj  tf)e  i^l^tory  of  ISa^tfc  9Io!)n  ^u>'J»% 

NO  LESS  FAMOUS  THAN  LAMENTABLE:  WHEREIN  IS  SET  OUT  AT 
LARGE,  THE  WHOLE  ORDER  OF  HIS  COMING  UNTO  THE  COUNCIL 
OF  CONSTANCE,  WITH  THE  ACTS  AND  PROCESS  AGAINST  HIM 
THERE;  AND,  FINALLY,  HIS  MOST  CRUEL  DEATH  AND  MAR- 
TYRDOM, FOR  THE  TESTIMONY  OF  THE  TRUTH  OF  OUR  LORD 
JESUS    CHRIST.' 

I  declared  a  little  before,  how,  by  the  occasion  of  queen  Anne,  who  The  no- 
was  a  iSohemian,  and  married  to  king  Richard  H,,  the  Bohemians  reccivi'i'is 
coming  thereby  to  the  knowledge  of  Wickliff's  books  here  in  England,  j,^^  gos- 

(Ij  Th'-'  Title  is  from  the  First  Edition. 


406  iiisroiiY  OF  THE  bohp:mians. 

jhunj    })cgan  first  to  taste  and  favour  Christ''s  gospel,  till  at  length,  by  the 
•      preaching  of  John  Huss,  they  increased  more  and  more  in  knowledge, 
A.  D.    insomuch  that  pope  Alexander  V.  hearing  thereof,  began  at  last  to  stir 
^^^'^-    coals,  and  directeth  his  bull  to  the  archbishop  of  Swinco,  requiring  him 
The  pope  to  loolc  to  the  matter,  and  to  provide  that  no  person  in  churches, 
them.''      schools,  or  other  places,  should  maintain  that  doctrine;  citing  also  John 
joim       Huss  to  appear  before  him.  To  whom  the  said  John  answering  again, 
cited  bv    declared  that  mandate  or  bull  of  the  pope  utterly  to  repugn  against 
the  pope,  the  manifest  examples  and  doings  both  of  Christ  and  of  his  apostles, 
John       and  to  be  prejudicial  to  the  liberty  of  the  gospel,  in  binding  the  word 
.^ppeaiefh  <^f  Grod  not  to  liavc  free  course ;  and,  therefore,  from  this  mandate  of 
^Jo'eto*^  the  pope  he  appealed  to  the  same  pope  better  advised.     But,  while 
tiiepope.  he  was  prosecuting  his  appeal,  pope  Alexander  died,  as  is  aforesaid.' 
After  Alexander  succeeded  pope  John  XXIIL,  who  also,  playing 
his  part  here  in  this  matter  like  a  pope,  sought  by  all  means  possible 
how  to  repress  and  keep  under  the  Bohemians,  first  beginning  to  work 
John       his  malice  upon  the  aforesaid  John  Huss,  their  preacher,  who  at  the 
fused  to'  same  time  preaching  at  Prague  in  the  temple  of  Bethlehem,  because 
John.       ^^^  seemed  rather  willing  to  teach  the  gospel  of  Clu-ist,  than  the  tradi- 
tions of  bishops,  was  therefore  accused  of  certain,  to  the  beforenamed 
pope  John  XXHL,  for  a  heretic.    The  bishop  committed  the  whole 
matter  to  cardinal  de  Columna  ;  who,  when  he  had  heard  the  accusa- 
tion, appointed  a  day  to  John  Huss,  that  he  should  appear  in  the  court 
of  Rome  :  which  thing  once  done,  Wenceslaus,  king  of  the  Romans, 
and  of  Bohemia,  at  the  request  specially  of  his  wife  Sophia,  and  of  the 
whole  nobility  of  Bohemia,  as  also  at  the  earnest  suit  and  desire  of  the 
town  and  university  of  Prague,  sent  his  ambassadors  to  Rome,  to  desire 
the  bishop  to  quit  and  clearly  deliver  John  Huss  from  that  sentence 
and  judgment ;  and  that  if  the  bishop  did  suspect  the  kingdom  of 
Bohemia  to  be  infected  with  any  heretical  or  false  doctrine,  he  should 
send  his  ambassadors,  who  might  correct  and  amend  the  same,  if  there 
be  any  error  or  faidt  in  them  ;  and  that  all  this  should  be  done  at  the 
sole  cost  and  charges  of  the  king  of  Bohemia :  and  to  promise  in  his 
name,  that  he  would  aid  and  assist  the  bishop"'s  legates  with  all  his 
power  and  authority,  to  punish  all  such  as  should  be  taken  or  found  in 
any  erroneous  doctrine.    In  the  mean  season,  also,  John  Huss,  before 
his  day  appointed,  sent  his  lawful  and  meek  procurators  unto  the  court 
of  Rome,  and  with  most  firm  and  strong  reasons  did  j^rove  his  inno- 
cency ;  whereupon'  he  so  trusted,  that  he  thought  he  should  have  easily 
obtained,  that  he  should  not  have  been  compelled,  by  reason   of  the 
great  danger,  to  appear  the  day  appointed.  But,  when  the  cardinal  de 
Columna,  unto  whose  will  and  judgment  the  whole  matter  was  com- 
mitted, would  not  admit  any  defence  or  excuse,  John  Huss*'s  procu- 
Huss  ex-  rators  appealed  unto  the  high  bishop :  yet,  notwithstanding,  this  last 
ihca'red     Tcfuge  did  uot  SO  mucli  prevail  with  cardinal  de  Columna,  but  that  he 
by  cardi-  would  opeulv  cxcommunicate  John  Huss  as  an  obstinate  heretic,  be- 

nal  de  i  i  •       i  •  i  -r» 

Columna.  cause  lie  came  not  at  his  day  appointed  to  Rome. 

Notwithstanding,  forasmuch  as  his  procm-ators  had  appealed  unto 
the  high  bishop,  they  had  other  judges  appointed  unto  them,  as  cardi- 
nal Aquileianus  and  cardinal  Venetus,  with  certain  others  ;  which 
judges,  after  they  had  prolonged  and  deferred  the  matter  for  the  space 

(1)  Ex  CochiKO  in  Ilibt.  Uussit. 


THE    DOUBTS     Ol-     JOHN    HUSS    PROPOUNDED.  407 

of  a  year  and  a  half,  at  last  retumcd  to  the  sentence  and  judfjmcnt  of   Henry 
cardinal   de  Columna,   and,  confirming  the  same,  commanded  John      ^' 
Huss's  procurators,  that  they  should  leave  off  to  defend  him  any  more,    A.  D. 
for  they  would  suffer  it  no  longer :  whereupon,  when  his  procurators    ^^^'^- 
•uould  not  cease  their  instant  suit,  certain  of  them  were  cast  into  prison, 
and  grievously  punished ;  the  others,  leaving  their  business  undone, 
returned  into  Bohemia. 

The  Bohemians,  notwithstanding,  little  cared  for  all  this;  but,  con-  The  bo- 
tinuing  still,  as  they  grew  more  in  knowledge,  so  the  less  they  regarded  ''^'"?''"'s 
tlie  pope,  complaining  daily  against  him  and  the  archbishop  for  stop  'iie  pope 
ping  the  word  of  God,  and  the  gospel  of  Christ  to  be  preached,  saying,  Tot^^l 
that  by  their  indulgences,  and  other  practices  of  the  court  of  Rome, 
and  of  the  bishop's  consistory,  they  sought  their  own  profit,  and  not 
that  of  Jesus  Christ;  that  they  plucked  from  the  sheep  of  Christ  the 
wool  and  milk,  and  did  not  feed  them,  either  with  the  word  of  God,  or 
with  good  examples.     Teaching,  moreover,  and  afhrming,  that  the 
commandments  of  the  pope  and  prelates  are  not  to  be  obeyed,  but 
so  far  as  they  follow  the  doctrine  and  life  of  Christ  and  of  his  apostles  ; 
and  that  lay-men  ought  to  judge  the  works  of  prelates,  as  Paul  judged 
the  works  of  Peter  in  correcting  him  [Gal.  ii.].     Furthennore,  they 
had  amongst  them  certain  notes  and  observations,  whereby  they  might 
discern  how  for,  and  wherein,  they  might  obey  their  prelates ;  they 
derided  also  and  scorned  the  pope"'s  jurisdiction,  because  of  the  schism 
that  was  then  in  the  church,  when  there  were  three  popes  together, 
one  striving  against  another  for  the  papacy.' 

Over  and  besides  this,  at  the  same  time  John  Huss  did  propound 
publicly,  and  by  the  notaries  caused  to  be  written,  tlu-ee   doubtful  Three 
questions,   the  tenor  whereof  followeth  here  word  for  word,  and  is  john'''  °^ 
this  ;   "  Forasmuch,"  saith  he,  "  as  it  is  good  for  men  being  in  doubt  "">*s  p"?- 

,  111  11      II-'  11  1  pounded 

to  ask  counsel,  whereby  all  dubitation  removed,  they  may  be  able 
more  firmly  to  adhere  to  the  truth ;  three  doubts  arise  here  to  be 
solved:  The  first  doubt  is,  Whether  we  ought  to  believe  in  the  pope  ? 
The  second.  Whether  it  be  possible  for  any  man  to  be  saved,  who 
confesseth  not  with  his  mouth  unto  a  mortal  priest .''  The  third  doubt 
is,  Whether  any  of  the  doctors  do  hold  or  say,  that  some  of  Pharaoh's 
host  being  drowned  in  the  Red  Sea,  and  of  the  Sodomites  being  sub- 
verted, be  saved .'' 

As  concerning  the  first,  he  did  hold  negatively,  alleging  the  saying 
of  Bede  upon  this  place  of  the  apostle,   ''  To  him  that  believeth 
upon    him    which  justifieth    the   wicked,    his   fiiith   is  imputed  to 
righteousness"  [Rom.  iv.].     Upon  this  place  saith  Bede,  "  Aliud  est  Credcre 
credere  in  Deum,    aliud  credere  Deo,  aliud  credere  Deum,"    &c.  credere"' 
"  The  second  doubt"  saith  he,  "  the  master  of  the  sentences'*  doth  ^'^i^^ 
answer,  lib.  iv.  dist.  17.  cap.  11,  in  these  words,    '  What  is  then  to  Deum. 
be  holden  or  said  herein  ?    Certes,  that  without  the  confession  of  the  Against 
mouth,  and  assoiling  of  the  outward  pain,  sins  be  forgiven  through  conas" 
contrition  and  humility  of  the  heart,'"  &c.     For  the  third  doubt  he  """■ 
brought  in  the   words    of    St.  Jerome  upon  the  prophet   Nahum, 
speaking  of  the  Egyptians  destroyed  in  the  sea,  and  of  the  Sodomites 
destroyed  with  fire,  and  of  the   Israehtes  destroyed  in  the  desert. 
"  Know  you,"  saith  Jerome,  ''  that  God,  therefore,  punished  thern 

(1)  Ex  Cochlseo  in  Hist.  Hu.ssit.  iib.  I.  (?)  Pet.  Lumb. 


408 


HISTOKY    or    TUli     liOHEMIAXS. 


A.D 

1414 


Henry  for  tliclr  siiis  licrc  temporally,  because  they  sliouJil  not  be  punished 
L_  hereafter  perpetually  ;  and  therefore,  because  they  were  here  pu- 
nished, they  shall  not  be  punished  hereafter,  for  else  the  Scripture 
should  lie,  which  is  not  to  be  granted."  These  three  questions 
belike  John  Huss  did  bring  in,  to  declare  how  the  doctors  do  not 
agree  in  all  things,  neither  with  the  church  of  Rome,  nor  are  to  be 
followed  in  all  points  by  all  men. 

It  followeth,  moreover,  after  the  death  of  the  archbishop  Swinco 
above  mentioned,  that  one  named  Conrad  was  placed  by  the  pope 
there  to  be  chief  general,  which  Conrad,  conferring  with  the  divines 
and  doctors  of  the  university  of  Prague,  required  their  advices  and 
counsels,  what  way  they  might  best  take  to  assuage  the  dissensions 
and  discords  between  the  clergy  and  the  people :  whereupon  a 
certain  council  was  devised  to  be  liolden  after  this  sort  and  manner, 
as  followeth : 

Council  of  the  Prelates  of  Prague  against  the  Gospellers. 

T.  Tliat  all  doctors  and  masters  of  the  university  of  Prague  should  be  as- 
sembled in  the  court  of  the  archbishop,  and  that,  in  his  presence,  every  doctor 
and  master  should  swear,  not  to  hold  or  maintain  any  of  the  forty-five  articles 
of  John  Wicliff  before  condemned. 

II.  Item,  Concerning  the  seven  sacraments  of  the  church,  the  keys  and  cen- 
sures of  the  church,  the  manners,  rites,  ceremonies,  customs,  and  liberties  of 
the  church,  concerning  also  the  worshipping  of  relics  and  indulgences,  the 
orders  and  religions  of  the  church,  that  every  one  shall  swear  that  he  doth 
hold,  believe,  and  maintain,  and  will  maintain,  as  doth  the  church  of  Rome, 
and  no  otherwise,  of  which  church  of  Rome  the  pope  is  the  head,  and  the 
college  of  cardinals  is  the  body,  who  are  the  true  and  manifest  successors  of 
blessed  St.  Peter,  prince  of  the  apostles,  and  of  the  college  of  the  other  apostles 
of  Christ. 

III.  Item,  That  every  one  shall  swear,  that  in  every  catholic  matter  be- 
longing to  the  church,  he  will  stand  to  the  determination  of  the  apostolical  see, 
and  that  he  will  obey  the  prelates  in  all  manner  of  things,  wheresoever  the 
tiling,  which  is  pure  good,  is  not  forbidden,  or  that  which  is  mere  ill,  is  not 
commanded ;  but  is  mean  and  indifferent  between  both :  which  mean  or  in- 
different thing,  yet,  notwithstanding,  by  circumstances  of  time,  place  or  person, 
may  be  either  good  or  evil. 

IV.  Item,  That  every  one  shall  swear  and  confess  by  his  oath,  that  the 
opinions  of  Wickliff  and  others,  touching  the  seven  sacraments  of  the  church, 
and  other  things  above  notified,  being  contrary  to  the  said  church  of  Rome,  be 
false. 

V.  Item,  That  an  oath  be  required  of  them  all,  that  none  of  them  shall  hold, 
defend  or  maintain  any  of  the  forty-five  articles  of  John  WicklifF  aforesaid,  or 
in  any  other  matter  catholic,  and  especially  of  the  seven  sacraments  and  other 
articles  above  specified,  but  only  as  doth  the  church  of  Rome,  and  no  otherwise. 

VI.  Item,  That  every  ordinary  in  his  diocese  shall  cause  the  said  premises, 
contained  in  the  first,  second,  third,  and  fourth  articles  aforesaid,  to  be  pub- 
lished in  his  synods,  and  by  his  preachers  to  be  declared  to  the  people  in  the 
kingdom  of  Bohemia. 

VII.  Item,  If  any  clerk,  student,  or  lay-man  shall  withstand  any  of  the  pre- 
niises,  that  the  ordinary  have  authority,  if  he  be  convicted  thereof,  to  correct 
him  according  to  the  old  laws  and  canons,  and  that  no  man  shall  defend  such 
an  one  by  any  means  ;  for  none  but  the  ordinary  hath  power  to  correct  such  a 
man,  because  the  archbishop  is  chancellor  both  of  the  kingdom  and  university 
of  Prague. 

VIII.  Item,  That  the  songs  lately  forbidden,  being  odious,  slanderous,  and 
offensive  to  others'  fame,  be  not  sung  either  in  streets,  taverns,  or  any  other  place. 

IX.  Item,  That  Master  John  Huss  shall  not  preach  so  long  as  he  shall  have 
no  absolution  of  the  court,  neither  shall  hinder  the  preaching  in  Prague  by  hi3 
presence ;  that  by  this,  his  obedience  to  the  apostolical  see  may  be  known. 


Purum 
bonun; : 
purum 
malum  : 
medium, 


ARTICLES    CONCERNING    JOHN    UUSS,    WITH    IHS    REPLV.  409 

X.  Item,  That  this  council  doth  appear  to  be  good  and  reasonable  for  the    iicnry 
putting  away  of  ill  report  and  dissension  tliat  is  in  the  kingdom  of  Bohemia.  ^■ 

XI.  Item,    If  Master  John   Huss   with  his   accomplices   will   perform  this,      •    .. 
which  is  contained  in  the  four  former  articles,  then  we  will  be  ready  to  say  as     1414" 

they  would  wish  us  and  have  us,  whensoever  need  shall  require,  that  we  do 1_ 

agree  with  them  in  matter  of  faith :  otherwise,  if  they  will  not  so  do,  we,  in 
giving  this  testimony,  should  lie  greatly  imto  our  lord  the  king  and  the  whole 
world.  And  moreover,  we  will  be  content  to  write  for  them  to  the  court  of 
Rome,  and  do  the  best  we  can  for  them,  our  honours  saved. 

This  counsel  and  device  being  considered  amongst  the  lieads  of 
the  university  of  Prague,  the  aforesaid  administrator,  named  Conrad, 
presented  it  to  the  king  and  to  the  barons  of  tlie  realm,  and  also  to 
the  senate  of  Prague  ;  whereof,  as  soon  as  word  came  to  John  Huss 
and  his  adherents,  they  likewise  drew  out  other  articles  in  manner 
and- form  of  a  council,  as  foUoweth  : 

Articles  drawn  out  by  John  Huss  and  his  Adherents. 

For  the  honour  of  God  and  the  true  preaching  of  his  gospel,  for  the  lieallli 
of  the  people,  and  to  avoid  the  sinister  and  false  infamy  of  the  kingdom  of  lio- 
hemia,  and  of  the  marquiship  of  Moravia,  and  of  the  city  and  university  of 
Prague,  and  for  the  reforming  of  peace  and  unity  between  the  clergy  and  the 
scholars  of  the  universit3^ 

I.  Let  the  right  and  just  decreement  of  the  princes,  and  of  the  king's  council, 
be  holden  and  stand  in  force,  which,  between  the  lord  archbishop  Swinco,  on 
the  one  party,  and  between  the  rector  and  Master  John  Huss,  on  the  other 
party,  was  made,  proclaimed,  sealed,  and  solemnly  on  both  parts  received  and 
allowed,  in  the  court  of  our  sovereign  lord  the  king. 

II.  Item,  That  the  kingdom  of  IJohemia  remain  in  its  former  rites,  liberties, 
and  common  customs,  such  as  other  kingdoms  and  lands  do  enjoy ;  that  is,  in 
all  approbations,  condemnations,  and  other  acts  concerning  the  holy  mother 
universal  church. 

III.  Item,  That  Master  John  Huss  (against  whom  the  aforesaid  lord  Swinco 
could  object  no  crime  before  the  council)  may  be  present  in  the  congregation 
of  the  clergy,  and  there,  whosoever  will  object  to  him  either  heresy  or  error,  let 
him  object ;  binding  himself  to  suffer  the  like  pain,  if  he  do  not  prove  it. 

IV.  Item,  If  no  man  will  set  himself  on  the  contrary  part  against  him,  then 
let  the  commandment  be  made  by  our  sovereign  lord  the  king  through  all  his 
cities;  and,  likewise,  let  it  be  ordained  and  proclaimed  through  all  villages 
and  towns,  that  Master  John  Huss  is  ready  to  render  account  of  his  faith ; 
and  therefore  if  any  will  object  unto  him  any  heresy  or  error,  let  him  write 
his  name  in  the  chancery  of  the  lord  archbishop,  and  bring  forth  his  probations 
openly  before  both  the  parties. 

V.  Item,  If  no  such  shall  oe  found  to  object,  or  who  will  write  his  name, 
then  let  them  be  called  for,  who  caused  to  be  noised  and  rumoured  in  the  pope's 
court,  that  in  the  kingdom  of  Bohemia,  in  the  city  of  Prague,  and  in  the  mar- 
quisdom  of  Moravia,  many  there  be  whose  hearts  be  infected  with  heresy  and 
error,  that  they  may  prove  who  they  be;  and  if  they  be  not  able  to  prove  it, 
let  them  be  punished. 

VI.  Item,  That  commandment  be  directed  to  doctors  of  divinity  and  of  the 
canon-law,  and  to  the  chapter  of  cathedral  churches,  and  that  it  be  required 
of  them  all  and  of  every  one  particularly,  that  they  will  bring  forth  his  name, 
if  they  know  any  such  to  be  a  heretic  or  erroneous,  and  if  they  deny  to  know 
any  such,  then  let  them  make  recognition  thereof,  before  the  public  notary, 
confirming  the  same  with  their. seals. 

VII.  Item,  These  things  thus  done  and  premised,  then  that  our  sovereign 
lord  the  king,  and  also  that  the  archbishop  will  give  commandment  under  pain, 
that  no  man  shall  call  one  another  heretic  or  erroneous,  mdcss  he  will  st<md  to 
the  prol)alion  of  that  heresy  or  error,  as  it  becometh  him. 

VIII.  Item,  After  these' things  obtained,  that  our  sovereigi  lord  the  king, 
with  the  consent  of  hia  barons,  will  then  levy  a  subsidy,  or  collect  of  the  clergy. 


410  HISTORY    OF    THK    BOHEMIANS. 

Iicnrij    and  direct  an  honest  ambassy  to  the  pope's  court,  with  which  ambassadors  let 
''■       them  also  go  upon  their  own  proper  charges  or  expenses  for  then-  purgation, 
.  y^      who  have  caused  this  kingdom  falsely  and  grievously  to  be  defamed  in  the 
1  n  1     apostolical  court. 

L_       IX.   Item,  In  the  mean  season,  for  the  presence  of  Master  John    Huss,  no 

interdict  ought  to  be  made,  as  it  was  made  of  late,  contrary  to  the  order  and  de- 
termination of  our  holy  mother  church,  &c. 

As  this  matter  was  thus  in  altercation  between  the  two  parties, 
tlic  one  objecting,  the  other  answering  in  articles  as  is  aforesaid,  in  the 
mean  time  it  happened  by  the  occasion  of  Ladislaus,  king  of  Naples, 
who  had  besieged  the  pope's  towns  and  territories,  that  pope  John, 
The  pope  raisiiig  up  war  against  the  said  Ladislaus,  gave  full  remission  of  sins 
^^^'^^^  to  all  those  who  would  war  on  his  side  to  defend  the  church.  When 
this  bull  of  the  pope's  indulgence  was  come  to  Prague,  and  there  pub- 
lished, the  king  Wenceslaus,  who  then  favoured  that  pope,  gave  com- 
mandment that  no  man  should  attempt  any  thing  against  the  said 
pope's  indulgences.  But  Huss,  with  his  followers,  not  able  to  abide 
the  impiety  of  those  pardons,  began  manifestly  to  speak  against  them, 
of  which  company  were  three  certain  artificers,  who,  hearing  the  priest 
preaching  of  these  indulgences,  did  openly  speak  against  them,  and 
called  the  pope  Antichrist,  who  would  set  up  the  cross  to  fight  against 
his  even-christened.  Wherefore  they  were  brought  before  the  senate, 
and  committed  to  ward :  but  the  people,  joining  themselves  together 
in  arms,  came  to  the  magistrates,  requiring  them  to  be  let  loose.  The 
magistrates,  with  gentle  words  and  fair  promises,  satisfied  the  people, 
so  that  every  man  returning  home  to  his  own  house,  the  tumult  was 
assuaged :  but  the  captains,  being  in  prison,  were  notwithstanding 
John,  there  beheaded,  whose  names  were  John,  Martin,  and  Stascon.  The 
ilcath  and  martyrdom  of  these  tliree  being  known  to  the  people,  they 


and  Stas- 


con, mar-  took  the  bodies  of  them  that  were  slain,  and  with  great  solemnity 
brought  them  unto  the  church  of  Bethlem :  at  whose  funeral  divers 
priests  favouring  that  side,  did  sing  on  this  wise ;  "  These  be  the 
saints,  who,  for  the  testament  of  God,  gave  their  bodies,"  &c.  And 
so  their  bodies  were  sumptuously  interred  in  the  church  of  Bethlem, 
John  Huss  preaching  at  the  same  funeral,  much  commending  them  for 
their  constancy,  and  blessing  God,  the  feather  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  who  had  hid  the  way  of  his  verity  so  from  the  prudent  of  this 
world,  and  had  revealed  it  to  the  simple  lay-people  and  inferior  priests, 
who  chose  rather  to  please  God  than  men. 

Thus  this  city  of  Prague  was  divided.     The  prelates,  with  the 
greatest  part  of  the  clergy  and  most  of  the  barons  who  had  any  thing 
Stephen    to  losc,  did  liold  witli  the  pope,  especially  Stephen  Paletz,  being  the 
gr^e'at  ene-  chicfcst  docr  ou  that  sidc.    On  the  contrary  part,  the  commons,  with 
my 'o      part  of  the  clergy  and  students  of  the  imiversity,  went  with  John 
Huss.       Huss.     Wenceslaus  the  king,  fearing  lest  this  would  grow  to  a  tumult, 
being  moved  by  the  doctors  and  prelates  and  council  of  his  barons, 
John       thought  best  to  remove  John  Huss  out  of  the  city,  who  had  been 
banished  cxcommunicatcd  before  by  the  pope.     And  further  to  cease  this 
Pragul.    dissension  risen  in  the  church,  he  committed  the  matter  to  the  dispo- 
sition of  the  doctors  and  the    clergy.      They,  consulting  together 
among  themselves,  did  set  forth  a  decree,  ratified  and  confirmed  by  the 
sentence  of  the  king,  containing  the  sum  of  eighteen  articles  for  the 


OBJECTIONS    OF    IIUSS    AGAINST    THE    DOCTOr''s    DECREE.  411 

maintenance  of"  the  pope  and  of  tlie  see  of  Rome,  against  the  doctrine    iienri) 

of  Wickliff  and  John  Huss.     Tlie  names  of  the  doctors  of  divinity '- — 

were  these  :  Stephen  Paletz,  Stanislaus  dc  Znoyma,  Petrus  de  Ikoyma,    ■?' M* 

Johannes  Hclia?,  Andrreas  de  Broda,  Johannes  Hildesen,   Mattheus '- 

Monachus,  Hermanns  Heremita,  Georgius  liota,  Simon  Wcnda,  &c. 
John  Huss,  thus  departing  out  of  Prague,  went  to  his  country, 
where  he,  being  protected  by  the  lord  of  the  soil,  continued  there 
preaching,  to  whom  resorted  a  great  concourse  of  people  ;  neither 
yet  was  he  so  expelled  out  of  Prague,  but  that  sometimes  he 
resorted  to  his  church  at  Bethlem,  and  there  also  preached  unto  the 
people. 

Moreover,  against  the  said  decree  of  the  doctors,  John  Huss,  with 
his  company,  replied  again,  and  answered  to  their  articles,  with  con- 
trary articles  again  as  followeth. 

The  Objections  of  John  Huss,  and  of  his  Party,  against  the  Decree 
of  the  Doctors. 

I.  The  foundation  of  the  doctors,  whereupon  they  found  all  their  writings 
and  councils,  is  false,  which  foundation  is  this :  whereas  they  say  that  part  of 
the  clergy  in  the  kingdom  of  Bohemia  is  pestilent  and  erroneous,  and  holdeth 
falsely  of  the  sacraments. 

II.  The  doctors  herehy  do  defame  the  kingdom  of  Bohemia,  and  do  raise 
up  new  discords. 

in.  Let  them  show,  therefore,  those  persons  of  the  clergj',  whom  they  call 
pestilent,  and  so  let  them  verify  their  report,  binding  themselves  to  suffer  the 
like  pain,  if  they  be  not  able  to  prove  it. 

IV.  False  it  is  that  they  say  the  pope  and  his  cardinals  to  be  the  tnae  and 
manifest  successors  of  Peter  and  of  the  apostles,  and  that  no  other  successors  of 
Peter  and  of  the  apostles  can  be  found  upon  the  earth  besides  them  :  whereas 
no  man  knoweth  whether  he  be  worthy  of  hatred  or  of  favour ;  and  all  bishops 
and  priests  be  successors  of  Peter  and  of  the  apostles. 

V.  Not  the  pope,  but  Christ  only  is  the  head;  and  not  the  cardinals,  but  all 
Christ's  faithful  people  be  the  body  of  the  catholic  church ;  as  all  holy  Scrip- 
ture and  decrees  of  the  holy  fathers  do  testify  and  affirm. 

VI.  And  as  touching  the  pope,  if  he  be  a  reprobate,  it  is  plain  that  he  is  no 
head,  no  nor  member  also  of  the  holy  church  of  God,  but  of  the  devil  and  of 
his  synagogue. 

VII.  The  clergy  of  the  gospellers,  agreeing  with  the  saying  of  St.  Austin 
which  they  allege,  and  according  to  the  sanctions  of  the  fathers,  and  determi- 
nations of  the  holy  mother  church,  do  say  and  affirm  laudably  :  that  the  con- 
demnation and  prohibition  of  the  forty-five  articles  is  unlawfid,  and  unjust, 
and  rashly  done  ;  and  that  not  only  because  the  doctors,  but  also  all  bishops  and 
archbishops,  in  such  great  causes,  namely,  touching  faith  (as  these  articies  do), 
have  no  authority  at  all,  as  appeareth,  '  De  baptismo  et  ejus  effectu.'  Cap. 
*  Majores.'     Et  in  Can.  17.  dist.  cap.  '  Hinc  sedi,'  &c. 

VIII.  The  second  cause  of  the  discord  which  they  allege  also  is  most  false; 
seeing  the  faith  of  whole  Christendom,  concerning  the  church  of  Rome,  is 
divided  in  three  parts  by  reason  of  three  popes,  who  now  together  do  reign ; 
and  the  fourth  part  is  neutral.  Neither  is  it  true,  that  we  ought  to  stand  in  all 
things  to  the  determination  of  the  pope  and  of  the  cardinals,  but  so  far  forth 
as  they  do  agree  with  the  holy  Scripture  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament,  from 
whence  the  sanctions  of  the  fathers  did  first  spring,  as  is  evident, '  De  accusa- 
tionibus,'  cap.  'Qualiter,'  &c. 

IX.  In  the  fourth  article  they  burst  out  into  a  certain  dotage,  and  are  con- 
trary to  themselves ;  by  reason  that  they  doltishly  have  reprehended  the 
gospellers,  who  in  all  their  doings  receive  the  holy  Scriptiu-e,  which  is  the  law 
of  God,  the  way  of  truth  and  life,  for  their  judge  and  measure :  and  afterwards 
they  themselves  do  allege  the  Scriptiure  [Deut.  xvii.],  where  all  judges,  both 
popes  and  cardinals,  are  taught  to  judge  and  discern  between  leper  and  leper,  and 


412  HISTORY    OF    THE    KOHKIMIAKS, 

Hcnrrj     ii)  cvcvy  ecclesiastical  ctmse,  only  after  the  rule  of  God's  law.     And  so  arc  tfioy 
'^-       contrary  unto  their  second  article,    wherein  they  say,  that  in  every  catholic 
V   T)     matter  we  must  run  to  the  pope  ;  which  is  contrary  to  the  foolish  condemnation 
•J  .'l  /    of  the  articles  aforesaid. 

. ~      X.  Consequently,  like  idiots  they  do  most  falsely  allege  for  their  purpose  the 

canon,  under  the  name  and  authority  of  Jerome,  written  in  the  24.  q.  1.  '  Hjec 
est  fides  papa,'  &c.,  where  they  do  apply  most  impertinently  to  the  pope  of 
Rome,  the  words  which   Jerome  writeth  to  St.  Austin,  calling  him  a  most 
called"      blessed  pope.  _ 

pope.  XI.  By  which  place  of  Jerome  it  is  manifest  that  the  first  article  of  those 

doctors  is  false :  forasmuch  as  by  these  words  appeareth  that  others  besides  the 
bishop  of  Rome  and  his  cardinals  are  called  blessed  popes,  holding  the  faith 
and  seat  of  Peter,  and  are  successors  of  the  apostles ;  as  was  Austin  and  other 
holy  bishops  more. 

XII.  Whereof  it  followeth  moreover,  that  the  church  of  Rome  is  not  that 
place,  where  the  Lord  did  appoint  the  principal  see  of  his  whole  church  :  for 
Christ,  who  was  the  head  priest  of  all,  did  first  sit  in  Jerusalem,  and  Peter  did 
sit  first  in  Antioch,  and  afterwards  in  Rome.  Also  other  popes  did  sit  some  in 
Bononia,  some  at  Perugia,  some  at  Avignon. 

XIII.  Item,  The  aforesaid  prelates  are  falsifiers  of  the  holy  Scriptures  and 
canons,  and  therefore  are  worthy  to  be  punished  ;  who  affirm  and  say,  that  we 
must  obey  the  pope  in  all  things.  For  why?  it  is  known  that  many  popes  have 
erred,  and  one  pope  was  also  a  woman ;  to  whom  not  only  it  was  not  lawful  to 

Tnpe         give  obedience,  but  also  unlawful  to  communicate  with  then),  as  all  rubrics,  and 
.loan  a      infinite  canons  do  declare. 

XIV.  Item,  Their  sixth,  seventh,  eighth,  ninth,  tenth,  and  eleventh  articles 
do  stand  and  are  grounded  upon  untrue  and  false  persuasions,  and  therefore  are 
to  be  rejected  and  detested  like  the  other  before ;  seeing  they  do  induce  not  to 
peace  and  verity,  but  to  dissension  and  falsity. 

XV.  It  is  manifest  also  to  the  laity,  that  this  dissension  among  the  clergy 
riseth  for  no  other  cause,  but  only  for  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  which  repre- 
hendeth  such  simoniacs,  and  such  heretics  in  the  church  of  God,  as  namely 
haunt  the  court  of  Rome,  spreading  out  their  branches  abroad  into  all  the 
world,  who  deserve  to  be  removed  and  extirpated,  not  only  by  the  clergy-gos- 
pellers, but  also  by  the  secular  power.       And  so  these    three  vices,  to  wit, 

Three       symony,  luxury,  and  avarice  (which  is  idol-worship),  be  the  causes  of  all  this 

causes  of  dissension  among  the  clergy  in  the  kingdom  of  Bohemia,  and  not  the  other, 

dissen-      -which  they  falsely  ascribe  to  the  gospellers  of  Prague.    These  three  vices  being 

the  removed,  peace  and  unity  would  soon  be  restored  in  the  clergy. 

clergy.  XVI.  Moreover,  their  last  article  is  too  gross,  and  not  only  is  without  all  law, 

but  also  without  all  colour  of  law  :  whereas  they  fondly  and  childishly  do  argue 

thus :  that  the  processes  made  against  Master  John  Huss  ought  to  be  obeyed, 

because,  forsooth,  the  common  sort  of  the  clergy  of  Prague   have  received 

them.     By  the  same  reason  they  may  argue  also,  that  we  must  obey  the  devil, 

because  our  first  parents,  Adam  and  Eve,  obeyed  him.     Also  our  ancestors 

before  us  were  pagans ;  wherefore  we  must  obey  them,  and  also  be  pagans. 

XVII.  But  let  this  frivolous  opinion  go,  this  is  certain  truth,  that  the  said 
processes,  made  against  Master  John  Huss,  by  law,  are  none,  forasmuch  as  they 
were  obtained,  drawn,  wrought,  and  executed,  contrary  to  the  commission  of 
the  pope,  against  the  determination  of  the  holy  mother  church,  as  appeareth 
Cap. '  Sacro  de  Sententia  excom.,'  and  a  thousand  other  laws  besides. 

XVIII.  Finally,  whosoever  wittingly  and  obstinately  doth  defend  and  exe- 
cute (the  said  process  made),  or  consent  unto  them,  are  all  to  be  counted  as 
blasphemers,  excommunicate,  and  heretics,  as  hath  been  before  written  and 
exhibited  to  the  lord  general  bishop  Olomucense ; '  and  more  shall  be  declared 
and  proved,  if  audience  may  be  given  openly  before  all  the  doctors.' 

Substance  of  the  Answer  of  the  Catholic  Doctors  to  the  foregoing 

Objections. 

Unto  these  objections  of  John  Huss  and  his  party,  the  catholic  doctors  again 
did  answer  in  a  long  tedious  process,  the  scope  whereof  principally  tended  to 

(1)  "  Olomucense."  Olmutz  in  the  Austrian  States.— Ed.        (2)  Ex  jEnsea  Sylvi.  ct  Cochlaeo. 


THE    PROMISE    OF    CHRIST    DOCTOULY    APPLIED.  413 

defend  the  principality  of  tlie  pope,  and  to  maintain  his  obedience  above  all  Henry 
other  potentates  in  the  world ;  affirming  and  contending,  that  altliongh  Christ        ^■ 

is  the  head  alone  of  the  whole  mioltitude  of  them  that  are  sleeping  in  purgatory,  ^  j^ 

and  who  are  labouring  in  the  church  militant,  and  who  are  resting  in  heaven,  jaVi' 
yet  this  letteth  not,  but  the  pope  is  head  of  the  church  here  militant,  that  is,  yf 


all  the  faithful,  who  here  in  this  world  live  under  his  office.     Like  as  Christ  As 
is  King  of  all  kings,  and  yet  Charles  may  be  king  of  France ;  so  say  they,  ,^3^  \^^ 
Christ  may  be  the  universal  head,  and  yet  the  pope  may  be  head  under  him  of  kin^  of 
the  whole  church.'     And  thus  concluded  they  that  the  pope  is  the  head,  and  Jj^^'J^,^"' 
that  the  college  of  cardinals  is  the  body  of  the  Romish  church,  which  church  of  we  srant, 
Rome  is  placed  in  the  ecclesiastical  office  here  over  the  earth,  to  know  and  the  pnpe 
define  upon  every  ecclesiastical  and  catholic  matter;  to  correct  errors  and  to  fJi^jl^ojfof 
purge  them,  and  to  have  care  upon  all  such  universal  matters,  and  care  upon  Italy; 
all  universal  churches,  and  upon    the  universal  flock  of  faithful   Christians  :  F^^  ^^^J' 
forasmuch  as  in  the  regiment  of  the  chinch  through  the  universal  world,  there  conse- 
must  needs  remain  in  such  office  always  some  such  manifest  and  true  successors  quence. 
of  Peter,  prince  of  the  apostles,  and  of  the  college  of  the  other  apostles  of  Christ; 
neither  can  there  be  found  or  given  upon  earth  any  other  successors,  but  only 
the  pope  who  is  the  head,  and  the  college  of  cardinals,  which  is  the  body  of  the 
aforesaid  church  of  Rome.    And  although  the  whole  universal  multitude  of  the 
faithful  do  make  the  body  of  Christ,  yet  the  same  body  of  Christ  is  not  placed 
here  in  office  to  exercise  such  authority  upon  earth ;  because  that  universal 
multitude  was  never  yet,  nor  ever  can  be,  congregate  together.^ 

And  therefore  necessary  it  is,  that  some  such  true  and  manifest  successors 
and  judges  be  appointed,  to  whom  recourse  must  be  had  in  all  such  catholic  catliolic, 
and  ecclesiastical  matters  determinable.   For  like  as  in  earthly  regiments^  every  that  is, 
case  of  discord  is  brought  before  its  jndge,   and  hath  its  place  assigned  where  ^al!^" 
to  be  decided ;  so,  like  reason  would  require,  that  in  principal  matters  and  con- 
troversies of  faith,  some  such  presidents  and  places  be  limited  for  the  pui-pose 
to  have  such  doubts  resolved.     And  this  being  granted,  then  the  doctors  pro- 
ceed: "And  hei-e  must  needs  conclude,"  say  they,  "that  there  cannot  be  given 
in   all   the  world  any  other  place,   but  only  the  church  of  Rome;  the  head 
whereof  is  the  pope,  and  the  body  is  the  college  of  cardinals.     For,  like  as 
Clirist,  departing  out  of  this  world  in  his  corporal  presence,  left  his  body  here 
with  us  under  the  sacrament  in  another  form,  whereby  he  remaineth  with  us 
(according  to  his  promise  in  the  last  chapter  of  Matthew)  unto  the  consumma-  The  pro- 
tion  of  the  world,  even  so  while  Christ  walked  here  on  earth  in  his  bodily  ™^^?gj^ 
presence,  he  was  pope  himself  and  chief  bishop,  and  so  head  of  the  church  doctorly 
here  militant  on  earth,  coi-porally  conjoined  with  the  same,  as  the  head  is  to  its  applied. 
body.     But  after  he  departed  out  of  the  world,  because  his  body,  which  is  the  q  deep 
church  militant  upon  the  earth,  should  not  be  headless,  therefore  he  left  Peter  pj.\',"g'^^ 
and  his  successors  to  his  church,  for  a  head  in  his  place,  unto  the  consummation  doctors  i 
of  the  world,  saying  to  him,   '  Thou  art  Peter,  and  upon  tliis  rock  I  will  build 
my  church,'  &c.  Matt.  xvi. ;  and  again,  in  the  last  chapter  of  John,  he  saith, 
'  Feed  my  sheep ; '  that  is  to  say,  Be  thou,  Peter,  the  head  over  thy  brethren. 

Tedious  it  were  to  recite  all  the  bibble-babble  of  these  doctors  in 
this  their  long  responsal.  Whoso  listcth  to  see  the  bottom  of  their 
profound  writing  and  knowledge,  may  resort  either  to  the  history  of 
yEneas  Silvius,  or  else  to  Master  Cochleus,  in  his  fii'st  book,  '  De 
Hist.  Hussit."" 

Thus  then  Master  Jtohn  Huss,  being  driven  out  of  Prague  (as  is 
befoie  touched)  by  the  motion  of  these  doctors,  and,  moreover,  being 
so  excommunicated,  that  no  mass  nor  other  must  be  said  there  where 
he  was  present,  the  people  began  mightily  to  grudge  and  to  cry  out 
against  the  prelates  and  other  popish  priests,  who  were  the  workers 
thereof,  accusing  them  as  being  simoniacs,  covetous,  Avhoremastcrs, 

(1)  He  might  so  be,  if  God  had  so  appointed  him  ;  but  where  doth  he  so  appoint? 

(2)  Ex  CotliUeo  in  Hist.  Hussit. 

(.'!)  If  ye  t,'o  to  human  policy,  \f\\n  ever  saw  any  private  case  of  England,  brought  to  tlie  emperors 
ccurt  to  be  decided  >.    If  ye  gu  to  God's  policy,  th.-n  show  God's  word  for  it. 


414  HISTOKY    OF    THE    BOHEMIANS. 

Henry    aclultcrcrs,  proucl ;  sparing  not  to  lay  open  their  vices,  to  their  great 
ignominy  and  shame,  and  much  craving  reformation  to  be  had  of  the 


A.  D.    clergy. 

^'^1'^-        The  king,  seeing  the  inclination  of  the  people,  being  also  not 
ignorant  of  the  wickedness  of  the  clergy,   under   pretence  of  re- 
forming the  church,  began  to  require  gi-eater  exactions  upon  such 
priests  and  men  of  the  clergy,  as  were  known  and  accused  to  be 
wicked  livers.     Whereupon  they,  on  the  other  part,  that  favoured 
John  Huss,  taking  that  occasion  present,  complained  of  all,  accused 
many,  and  spared  none,  -whomsoever  they  knew  to  be  of  the  catholic 
faction,  or  enemies  to  John  Huss ;  by  reason  whereof  the  priests  of 
the  popish  clergy  were  brought,  such  as  were  faulty,  into  great  dis- 
tress, and  such  as  were  not  faulty,  into  great  fear,  insomuch  that  they 
were  glad  to  fall  in,  at  least  not  to  fall  out,  with  the  protestants, 
^j^g        being  afraid  to  displease  them.     By  this  means  Master  Huss  began 
priests  of  to  take  somc  more  liberty  unto  him,  and  to  preach  in  his  church  at 
displayed,  Bethlcm,  and  none  to  control  him  :  by  the  same  means  the  people 
foAhdr'^  also  received  some  comfort,  and  the  king  much  gain  and  money  by 
ill  life,      that  reason. 

And  thus  the  popish  clergy,  while  they  went  about  to  persecute 
John   Huss,  were   enwrapped  themselves  in  great  tribulation,  and 
afflicted  on  every  side,  as  Avell  by  lay-men,  as  by  learned  men  of  the 
clergy,  insomuch  that  women  also  and  children  were  against  them ; 
and  by  the  same  reason  wherewith  they  thought  to  entangle  him, 
they  were  overthrown  themselves.     For  the  doctors  who  before  con- 
demned this  doctrine  in  John  Huss  for  intolerable  heresy,  and  cried 
out  so  much  against  him,  for  teaching  that  temporal  lords  might  take 
away  temporal  livings  from  the  clergy  sinning  '  habitualiter,"'  that  is, 
living  and  continuing  still  in  the  custom  of  iniquity ;  now,  when  the 
king  and  the  lords  temporal  began  to  amerce  them,  and  bereave  them 
of  their  temporalties  for  their  transgressions,  the  said  doctors  did  keep 
pop^ish     silence  and  durst  speak  never  a  word.     Again,  whereas  the  aforesaid 
doctors     doctors  before  could  not  abide  in  John  Huss,  that  tithes  were  to  be 
priests      counted  for  pure  alms,  now,  coming  to  the  Guildhall,  they  were  fain 
thrown     to  entreat  for  their  temporal  goods  not  to  be  taken  from  them ; 
in  their    pleading  the  same  temporalties  to  be  mere  alms  and  devotion  of  good 
son.        men,  given  unto  the  church.' 

And  thus  now  did  they  themselves  grant  the  thing,  which  before 

they  did  condemn.     The  more  the  pope's  clergy  were  pinched,  the 

more  grudge  and  hatred  redounded  to  John  Huss,  although  he  was 

no  cause  thereof,  but  only  their  own  Avicked  deservings,  for  which  cause 

Stephen  Paletz,  and  Andrseas  de  Broda,  being  the  chief  champions  of 

that  faction,  though  they  could  not  remedy  the  cause,  yet  to  ease 

Wniers    their  minds,  wrote  sharp  and  cruel  letters  to  Master  Huss.     And,  to 

a|!aiust     help  the  matter  forward,  the  pope  also  here  must  help  at  a  pinch,  who 

Huss.      likewise  writeth  his  letters  to  Wenceslaus,  king  of  Bohemia,  who  was 

brother  to  Sigismund,  the  emperor,  for  the  suppressing  of  John  Huss 

and  of  his  doctrine,  which  was  in  the  fifth  and  last  year  of  his  popedom, 

A.D.  1414!:   the  tenor  of  whose  letters  to  king  Wenceslaus  in  this 

wise  procecdeth. 

(1)  ExCochUvo. 


THE    MERRY    STORY    OF    THE    OWL.  415 

ficvry 

Tlie  Letter  of  Pope  John  to  King  Wenceslaus.  '. — 

John,  bishop,  servant  of  God's  servants,  to  his  well-beloved  son  in  Christ,  1114. 
Wenceslaus,  king  of  Romans  and  of  Bolicmia,  greeting  and  apostolical  bene-  ~ 
diction.  Among  other  desires  and  delights  of  our  heart,  who,  although,  un- 
worthy, represent  the  room  of  Christ  here  in  earth,  this  doth  chiefly  redoimd 
to  our  singular  comfort,  so  often  as  we  do  hear  of  the  brotherly  entreaty  of 
peace  and  concord  (by  which  concord  kingdoms  do  increase,  as,  contrary^  by 
discord  they  are  diminished)  which  is  between  your  honour  and  our  well- 
.  beloved  in  the  Lord,  Sigismund,  your  brother  German  and  cousin,  for  the  noble 
king  of  the  Romans,  &c. 

And,  furthermore,  it  followeth  in  these  words : 

And  as  we  have  cause  to  joy  at  the  premises,  so  likewise  again  the  heavy 
rumours  which  are  here,  do  trouble  and  damp  our  minds.  For  we  hear  that  m 
divers  places  under  your  dominion,  there  be  certain  who  do  follow  and  lean  to  the 
errors  of  that  arch-heretic  Wicklift',  whose  books  have  been  long  since  con- 
demned in  the  general  Roman  council,  to  be  erroneovis,  heretical,  and  swerving 
from  the  catholic  faith.  And  furthermore,  which  is  worst  of  all,  the  said  persons 
cleaving  to  the  opinions  of  the  heretics  (lest  they  should  be  corrected  by  tlieir 
superior  powers  for  their  excess,  to  cover  their  naughtiness  and  stubbornness  in 
despising  the  commandments  of  the  apostolical  seat),  do  openly  teach  disobedi- 
ence and  contempt  of  the  keys  and  ecclesiastical  censure,  to  the  subversion  of 
the  apostolical  dignity,  setting  at  nought  the  decrees  of  the  holy  Withers  and 
canons.  Wherefore  we  do  exhort  your  worship,  for  the  mercy  of  our  God,  as 
heartily  as  we  may  or  can,  that  it  would  please  you,  as  we  desii-e  and  hope  you 
will,  so  effectually  to  show  forth  your  regal  power,  both  for  the  glory  of  God, 
and  defence  of  the  catholic  faith,  which  you  go  about  to  defend,  and  for  the 
conservation  of  your  kingly  name,  state,  and  honour,  and  for  the  prosperous  and 
safe  government  of  yom-  kingdom  and  dominions,  as  it  becometh  a  catholic 
prince ;  whereby  this  blot  of  heresy,  which  doth  so  lamentably  and  miserably 
spring  up  and  creep  in  those  parts,  and  doth  so  infect  the  minds  of  mortal  men, 
to  the  destruction  of  their  souls,  and  doth  sequester  them  from  the  congregation 
of  the  pure  and  catholic  faith  and  truth,  may  be  rooted  out,  &c. 

Given  at  Bononia,  in  the  ides  of  June,  in  the  fifth  year  of  our  pope- 
dom, &c. 

In  this  epistle  of  pope  John  above  prefixed,  forasmuch  as  mention 
is  made  of  a  certain  council  before  holden  at  Rome  (whicli  was  four 
years  before)  against  the  articles  and  books  of  John  WicklifF,  it  shall 
not  be  impertinent,  nor  out  of  purpose,  to  repeat  a  certain  meiTy 
history,  and  worthy  otherwise  to  be  noted,  written  by  Nicholas  Cle- 
mangis,  of  a  certain  spirit  which  ruled  the  popish  councils :  his  words 
are  these : 

"  The  same  pope  called  a  council  at  Rome  about  four  years  before,  at  the  An  owl 
earnest  suit  of  divers  men ;  and  a  mass  of  the  Holy  Ghost  being  said  at  the  ^["^^g"^* 
entrance  into  the  said  council  according  to  the  accustomed  manner,  the  council  council 
being  set,  and  the  said  John  sitting  highest  in  a  chair  prepared  for  him  for  that  of  pope 
puqiose :  behold,  an  ugly  and  dreadful  owl,  or,  as  the  common  proverb  is,  the 
evil  sign  of  some  mischance  of  death  to  follow,  coming  out  of  the  back  half  of 
him,  flew  to  and  fro  with  her  evil-favoured  voice,  and  standing  upon  the  middle 
beam  of  the  church,  cast  her  staring  eyes  upon  the  pope  sitting.     The  whole 
company  began  to  marvel  to  see  die  night-crow,  which  is  wont  to  abide  no 
light,  how  she  should,  in  the  mid-day,  come  in  the  face  of  such  a  multitude ;  and 
judged,  not  without  cause,  that  it  was  an  ill-favoured  token.     '  For  behold,' 
said  they  (whispering  one  in  another's  ear),  '  the  spirit  appeareth  in  the  shape 
of  an  owl.'     And  as  they  stood  beholding  one  another,  and  advising  the  pope. 


^16  HISTOHV    OF    THE    EOHEMTAKS. 

Henry     scavcely  could  they  keep  their  countenance  from  laughter.    John  himself,  upon 

^-       whom  the  owl  steadfastly  looked,  blushing  at  the  matter,  began  to  sweat,  and  to 

A.  D.    frs*^  ^nd  f^'T'e  with  himself,  and  not  finding  by  what  other  means  he  might 

]414'     salve  the  matter,  being  so  confused,  dissolving  the  council,  rose  up  and  departed. 

—  After  that  there  followed  another  session :  in  which  the  owl  again,  after  the 

manner  aforesaid,  although,  as  I  believe,  not  called,  was  present,  looking 
steadfastly  upon  the  bishop ;  whom  he  beholding  to  be  come  again,  was  more 
ashamed  than  he  was  before,  and  justlj' ;  saying,  he  could  no  longer  abide  the 
sight  of  her,  and  commanded  that  she  should  be  driven  away  with  bats  and 
shoutings.  But  she,  being  afraid  neither  with  their  noise  nor  with  any  thing  else, 
would  not  away,  until,  with  the  strokes  of  the  sticks  which  Avere  thrown  at  her, 
she  fell  down  dead  before  them  all.  This  I  learned  of  a  faithful  friend,  who  at 
the  same  time  came  to  Rome  :  which  thing  I  scarcely  crediting  for  the  rareness 
of  the  matter,  he  affirmed  by  his  oath,  that  it  was  most  certain  and  true  :  adding, 
moreover,  that  all  there  present  were  much  offended,  and  did  greatly  deride 
that  council  called  for  such  a  purpose ;  and  by  little  and  little  the  council  was 
dissolved,  nothing  done  there,  as  he  saith." 

Although  it  hath  not  been  always  seen  that  such  spiritual  doves 
have  been  present  with  popes  and  their  councils,  and  governed  them, 
yet  their  evil  doctrine  declareth  no  less.  Read,  gentle  reader  !  the 
book  of  Clemangis,  and  thou  shalt  not  think  thy  labour  ill  bestowed ; 
for  he  hath  both  learnedly,  truly,  freely,  and  godly,  bewailed  the 
filthiness  of  Antichrist  and  his  ministers,  their  wickedness,  impiety, 
and  cruelty,  and  the  miserable  state  and  face  of  the  chm'ch.  And 
thus  much  for  pope  John. 

THE    COUNCIL    OF    CONSTANCE. 

Here,  by  the  way,  is  to  be  noted  and  understood,  that  during  all 
this  time  of  pope  John,  there  were  three  popes  reigning  together, 
neither  was  yet  the  schism  ceased,  which  so  long  time  had  continued, 
the  space,  as  I  said,  of  twenty-nine  years ;  by  reason  whereof  a  general 
council  was  ordained  and  holden  at  Constance  in  the  same  year,  a.d. 
1414,  being  called  by  Sigismund  the  emperor,  and  pope  John  XXIIL, 
Three  for  the  pacifying  of  the  aforesaid  schism,  which  was  then  between  three 
together,  popes  Striving  for  the  popedom ;  the  first  whereof  was  John,  whom 
the  Italians  set  up ;  the  second  was  Gregory,  whom  the  Frenchmen 
set  up  ;  the  third  was  Benedict,  whom  the  Spaniards  placed.  In  this 
schismatical  ambitious  conflict,  every  one  defended  his  pope,  to  the 
great  disturbance  of  christian  nations.  This  council  endured  four 
years,  wherein  all  their  matters  mostly  were  decided  by  four  nations, 
namely,  the  English,  German,  French,  and  the  Italian  ;  out  of  which 
four  nations  w^re  appointed  and  chosen  four  presidents,  to  judge  and 
determine  the  matters  of  the  council.  The  names  of  the  presidents 
were  these :  John,  the  patriarch  of  Antioch,  for  France ;  Anthony, 
archbishop  of  Riegen,  for  Italy;  Nicholas,  archbishop  of  Genesuensis, 
for  Germany;  and  Nicholas,  bishop  of  Bath,  for  England ;  ^  by  whom 
many  great  and  profitable  things  to  the  glory  of  God,  and  public 
profit,  might  have  been  concluded,  if  the  rotten  flesh  of  the  church- 
men could  have  abiden  the  salt  of  the  gospel,  and  if  they  had  loved 
the  truth.  But,  as  Gregory  of  Nazianzen  writeth,  "  There  lightly 
come  few  general  councils,  but  they  end  more  with  disturbance  than 

(U,  The  prelates  aseemMed  in  this  rouncil  were  numbered  together  with  tlieir  deputies,  tbiQ. 
fbilip  and  Cheney,  &c.    Grcgorius  in  Epistola  quartam. 


POPE    JOHN    CAST    INTO    PRISON,  417 

tranquillity," SO  it  happened  in  this  council.  For  whereas  JohnXXlII.,    Henry 
in  the  first  session,  exliorteth  them  by  these  words  taken  out  of  the 


eio-hth  chapter  of  Zechariah,  "  Veritatem  diligite,"  that  is  to  say,  A.  D. 
"  Love  the  truth,"  further  admonishing  them,  and  especially  the  ^^^^- 
divines,  every  man  to  do  his  endeavour  for  the  unity  of  the  chm-ch, 
and  to  speak  their  mind  freely ;  how  soon  this  his  exliortation  was 
forgotten,  it  appeared  shortly  after  by  the  despising  of  the  prophets, 
and  persecuting  of  Christ  in  his  members,  as  by  the  grace  of  Christ 
shall  appear  hereafter  in  the  process  of  this  story. 

First,  this  John  did  resign  his  papacy :  the  emperor,  giving  him 
thanks,  kissed  his  feet.     Afterwards,  the  said  John,  repenting  him 
that  he  had  so  done,  sought  means  to  flee,  whereunto  Frederic,  duke 
of  Austria,  did  assist  him ;  for  he,  changing  his  garments,  fled  by 
night  with  a  small  company.     And  when  he  was  now  come  unto  Frederic 
Schaffhausen  to  go  into  Italy,  the  emperor  pursuing,  took  him,  and  \l^^^l'^_ 
proclaimed  Frederic  traitor,  and  for  that  cause  took  away  certain  claimed 
cities  from  him.     At  last  the  matter  was  appeased  on  this  condition, 
that  Frederic  should  require  grace  of  the  emperor,  and  resign  all  his 
possessions  unto  him :  whereupon  the  emperor  received  him  again 
into  favour,  and  restored  him  to  his  dukedom.     This  pope,  being  pope 
thus  deposed,  was  committed  unto  the  county  Palatine,  and  by  him  l^o^ri-^ 
carried  to  the  castle  of  Manheim,  where  he  was  kept  prisoner  for  the  ^'^'^• 
space  of  three  years.     Afterwards  he  was  again,  by  pope  Martin, 
admitted  to  the  number  of  cardinals. 

This  pope  John  was  deposed  by  the  decree  of  the  council,  more  Mark  the 
than  three  and  forty  most  giievous  and  heinous  crimes  being  objected  Htl'e'lof'' 
and  proved  against  him  :  as  that  he  had  hired  Marcilus  Parmensis,  a  p°p^ 
physician,  to  poison  Alexander,  his  predecessor ;  further,  that  he  was 
a  heretic,  a  simoniac,  a  liar,  a  hypocrite,  a  murderer,  an  enchanter,  a      f 
dice-player,  and  an  adulterer ;  and,  finally,  what  crmie  is  it  that  he 
was  not  infected  withal  ? 

And  now,  to  return  to  the  council :  first,  we  will  declare  the  order 
of  their  sessions,  with  things  therein  concluded,  in  general ;  then  we 
will,  Clu*ist  willing,  adjoin  the  special  tractation  of  such  matters  as 
pertain  to  the  story  of  the  Bohemians,  and  John  Huss  and  Jerome 
of  Prague,  who,  in  the  same  ungodly  council,  were  condemned  and 
burned. 

This  council,  therefore,  of  Constance,  which  was  smnmoned  by  the 
emperor  Sigismimd  and  pope  John  XXIIL,  about  the  nativity  of 
our  Lord  Jesus,  Anno  1414,  began  the  same  year  to  be  assembled, 
about  the  latter  end  of  the  year  ;  which  first  beginning,  as  the  man- 
ner is,  with  a  mass  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  they  were  singing,  accord- 
to  their  custom,  their  hymn,  "  Veni  Sancte  Spiritus,"  there  was,  at  a  writing 
the  same   time,  a  certain  bill  set  up  in  the  chm-ch  by  some  well-  howThe 
disposed  man,   as  it  seemed,  wherein  were  contained  these  words  ^^^^^ 
followinsf :  "  Aliis  rebus  occupati  nimc,  adesse  vobis  non  possumus  ;""  J^ad  no 

-         .f  ,,   itT  ^  •  -liii-i.'  1  leisure  to 

that  is  to  say,    'We  are  otherwise  occupied  at  this  time;  we  cannot  come  to 
attend  to  come  to  you."     Here  is  also  to  be  remembered  the  worthy  ^^l  '^°"" 
saying  of  the  emperor  Sigismund,  when  talk  was  ministered  as  touch- 
ing the  reformation  of  the  spiritualty,  and  some  said,  "  Quod  oporteat  worthy 
incipere  a  Minoritis  ;"  that  is,  "  The  reformation  ought  first  to  begin  ^he "em"^ 
at  the  Minorites ;"  the  emperor  answering  again,  "  Non  a  Minoritis,  p"'*''- 

VOL.  III.  E  E 


118  HISTORY    OF    THE    BOHEMIANS. 

n-jry   sed  a  Majoritis  ;"  that  is,  "  Not  with  the  Minorites,  but  with  the  Ma- 
_!1_  jorites  :"  meaning  the  reformation  ought  first  to  begin  with  the  pope, 
A.  D.    cardinals,  and  bishops,  and  other  superior  states  of  the  chm-ch ;  and  so 
1414.    to  descend  after  to  the  inferiors.    Thus  much  by  the  way,  and  now  to 
the  purpose  and  order  of  the  sessions  as  we  promised.     This  council 
continued,  as  is  aforesaid,  for  the  space  of  four  years,  and  had  in  it  five 
and  forty  sessions,  wherein  many  things  were  concluded,  which  alto- 
gether were  too  long  to  be  recited  in  this  place  ;  as  the  deposition  of 
three  several  popes,  who  were  before  spoken  of,  and  the  hearing  of 
certain  legates.     Yet  I  mind  to  make  some  brief  recapitulation  of 
the  most  principal  matters  there  done  in  the  sessions  orderly  ensuing. 

A  Recapitulation  of  Matters  done  in  each  Session  in  the  Council  of 

Constance. 

In  the  first  session  chiefly  was  concluded,  First,  that  this  council  was  lawfully 
congregated. 
The  au-  In  tlie  second  session,  Item,  that  the  going  away  of  the  pope  should  be  no 
tliorityof  jgj.  ^j.  g^j^y^  jjy^  jj^g  council  might  proceed. — Wherein  note,  gentle  reader,  that 
preferred  the  authority  of  the  general  council  is  above  the  pope,  contrary  to  their  own 
before       doctrine. 

the  pope.       jj^  (.jjg  ^.j^jj.^  session,  Item,  this  council  should  not  be  dissolved  before  the 
church  were  reformed,  as  well  in  the  superiors  as  inferiors. 

In  the  fourth  session  [a.d.  1415],  amongst  other  things  this  was  first  con- 
cluded, That  a  synod  congregated  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  making  a  general  council, 
representing  the  whole  catholic  church  here  militant,  hath  power  of  Christ  im- 
mediately, to  which  power  every  person,  of  what  state  or  dignity  soever  he  be, 
yea,  being  the  pope  himself,  ought  to  be  obedient  in  all  such  things  as  concern 
the  general  reformation  of  tlie  church,  as  well  in  the  heads  as  in  the  subjects. 
Item,  the  said  pope  should  not  translate  the  com-t  of  Rome,  and  the  officers  of 
the  same,  from  the  city  of  Constance ;  and  that  all  his  censures,  doings,  and 
woi'kings,  after  the  time  of  his  departure,  whatsoever  he  should  enterprise  to  do 
to  the  prejudice  of  this  council,  should  be  of  no  effect. 

In  the  fifth  session,  the  same  articles  were  repeated  and  concluded  again. 
In  the  sixth  session,  procuration  and  citation  were  sent  out  against  the  pope. 
Cotnmis-  Item,  commissioners  were  appointed  out  of  the  four  nations  for  the  hearing  of 
doners  to  JqI^^  Huss,  who  shall  be  hereafter  mentioned  in  his  story  following.  Item,  the 
Huss!°^°  memory  of  John  Wicklifi"  was  condemned,  and  the  sentence,  given  in  the 
council  holden  at  Rome  upon  the  condemnation  and  burning  of  Wickliff"s  books, 
Citation  was  there  confirmed.  Item,  in  the  same  session,  citation  was  sent  out  against 
against  Jerome  of  Prague,  the  tenor  whereof  followeth  after  in  the  story  of  the  said 
Prague.     Jerome.     Item,  in  this  session  was  decreed  against  libels  of  infamy. 

In  the  seventh  session,  nothing  was  handled  but  that  the  tenor  of  the  citation 
against  pope  John  was  recited. 
Sentence  In  th&  eighth  session,  the  sentence  and  condemnation  of  John  Wickliff"  and 
thrbum-  ^"^  forty-five  articles  was  recited,  and  sentence  given  against  his  memory,  and 
ingof  bones  to  be  burned,  the  tenor  whereof  is  rehearsed  in  the  history  of  John 
w^"^^  Wickliff"  before  passed. 

In  the  ninth  session,  the  matter  and  cause  of  pope  John  were  again  treated 
of,  and  commissioners  were  appointed  to  inquire  upon  his  cause,  and  judges 
for  the  same. 

In  the  tenth  session,  suspension  was  given  out  and  read  against  the  said 

people  of  pope.  ,  .  1    ,  ^    .  . 

Christ  ex-  In  the  eleventh  and  twelfth  sessions,  notanes  were  assigned,  and  definitive 
commu-  sentence  was  given  against  the  said  pope  ;  where  also  it  was  decreed  that  none 
from  the  of  those  who  intended  before  for  the  papacy,  shoidd  be  chosen  pope. 
commu-  In  the  thirteenth  session  was  decreed,  that  no  priest,  under  pain  of  excom- 
tiie"hoh  munication,  shall  communicate  unto  the  people  under  both  kinds  of  bread  and 
cup.         wine.'^ 

(1)  "  Quod  nuUus  presbyter,  sub  poena  excommunicationis,  communicet  populo  sub  utruque 
specie  panis  et  vini." 


MATTERS    DONE    IN    THE    COUNCIL    OF    CONSTANCE.  419 

In  the  fourteenth  session,  came  hi  the  resignation  of  pope  Gregory  XII.,  nenn/ 
who  was  one  of  the  three  before  mentioned  striving  for  the  papacy,  with  certain        ^^■ 

other  articles  concerning  the  election  of  the  bishop  of  Rome,  and  the  ratification  ,    ,. 

of  their  resigning  who  gave  over  the  papacy.  1 1  u 

Then  ensueth  the  fifteenth  session,  in  which  silence  was  commanded  on  all 


parts,  under  pain  of  excommunication  and  the  great  curse  ;  that  no  person  or  Solemn 
persons,  high  or  low,  of  what  estate  or  degree  soever  he  were,  emperor,  king,  !"'j'''5^,' 
cardinal,  or  other,  should  disturb  the  said  session  with  any  manner  of  noise,  sentence 
either  by  hand,  foot,  or  voice.     This  being  done,  the  sentence  and  condemna-  of  cmi- 
tion  against  John  Huss  was  read  and  published,  which  afterwards,  in  the  story  tion"''^' 
of  John  Huss,  followeth  to  be  seen  more  at  large.  against 

In  the  sixteenth  session,  ambassadors  Avere  assigned  by  the  council  to  go  to  ^^°  . 
AiTagon,  to  Benedict  XIII.,  to  treat  with  him  for  the  resignation  of  his  papacy, 
as  the  other  two  had  done  before.  Item,  power  was  given  to  judges  to  cite, 
under  pain  of  deprivation,  all  such  as  privily  departed  away  from  the  council ; 
in  which  session  also  the  sentence  agamst  John  Huss  was  confirmed  and 
ratified. 

In  the  seventeenth  session,  the  emperor  took  upon  him  a  journey  to  the  king  The 
of  Arragon,  to  treat  with  pope  Benedict.     Item,   an  excommunication  was  emperor's 
denounced  against  all  such  as  shoiddgo  about  to  impeach  the  emperor's  journey  jnto 
about  that  matter,  &c.     Item,  prayers  and  processions  were  determined  to  be  Arragon. 
made  by  the  council  every  Sunday  for  the  same  cause,  with  a  hundred  days  of 
pardon  given  to  them  that  would  be  present  thereat :  and  that  all  prelates  shoidd 
be  present  at  every  of  these  said  masses  and  processions,  in  their  pontificaUbus.  Pardons 
Granting  besides  to  e%'ery  priest  that  said  one  mass,  for  the  same  a  hundred  J^'^^e 
days  of  pardon  :  and  to  all  others  that  once  a  day  should  say  one  '  Pater  noster,'  cheap.  "^ 
and  one  '  Ave,'  for  the  safety  of  the  emperor,  forty  days  of  pardon. 

In  the  eighteenth  session,  certain  judges  were  assigned  for  the  hearing  of 
matters  which  the  council  had  no  leisure  to  hear.  Item,  it  was  there  decreed, 
that  such  letters  and  bulls  as  were  written  in  the  name  of  that  councU,  should 
be  received  with  no  less  credit  and  authority  than  the  bulls  proceeding  from  the 
see  apostolical,  and  that  the  falsifiers  of  the  same  shoidd  incur  no  less  penalty 
than  the  falsifiers  of  the  other.  Legates,  also,  and  ambassadors,  were  sent 
into  Italy. 

In  the  nineteenth  session,  which  was  the  same  yeai*,  .in  the  month  of  Sep- 
tember, Jerome  of  Prague,  who  was  cited,  as  is  before  said,  was  accused  of 
heresy,  and  cast  into  prison,  by  the  said  council,  and  constrained  to  abjm-e  ;  the 
which  abjuration  of  his  hereafter  followeth  to  be  seen  in  his  history.  Item, 
it  was  decreed,  that,  notwithstanding  the  safe  conduct  given  by  the  emperor  ConsiU- 
and  kings,  &c.,  inquiry  may  be  made  against  any  man  for  heresy,  by  a  suflicient  J?."^^^'" 
judge,  and  process  to  be  made  according  to  the  law.^  Item,  the  causes  of 
heresies  were  committed  to  certain  judges  and  deputies.  Item,  the  chart  called 
Carohna,  and  divers  other  charts  and  constitutions  concerning  the  hberties  of 
the  church  of  Rome,  being  brought  forth,  were  approved  and  confirmed.- 

In  the  twentieth  session,   letters  and  instruments  were  made  and  set  upon 
church  doors,  to  require  and  admonish  duke  Frederic  to  restore  again  unto 
George,  bishop  of  Austria,  such  lands,  rents,  and  revenues  as  he  detained  and  Provide 
withheld,    under   pain   of  interditement,    suspending,    and    excommunication,  ^^f^  ^^^^ 
During  the  time  of  this  session,  the  ambassadors  returned  o\it  of  Arragon  from  nothing. 
pope  Benedict,  and  were  heard  with  great  audience ;  where  certain  articles  and 
conditions  between  the  pope  and  the  council  were  brought  forth  and  agreed 
upon,  to  the  number  of  twelve. 

In  the  year  of  our  Lord  1416,  was  the  twenty-first  session,  beginning,  after 
their  manner,  with  a  mass  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  with  procession  and  such  other 
rites ;   in  the  time  of  which  mass,  James,  bishop  of  Londe,  made  a  sermon,  j^^.^^^ 
taking  for  his  theme  these  words  :  "  Exprobravit  Deus  incredulitatem  eorum  et  replied 
duritiam  ;"  that  is,   "  The  Lord  rebuked  their  misbelief  and  hardness."     This  against 
sermon  being  ended,  Jerome  of  Prague,  who  had  abjured,  as  is  said,  the  year  J^^^^^f" 
before,  being  present  thereat,  stood  up  vipon  a  certain  bench  or  form,  replying  thehishop 
against  the  aforesaid  James  and  his  sermon,  alleging  and  preaching  divers  and  of  Londe. 

(1)  "  Quod  non  obstantibus  salvis  conductibus  imperatoris,  reguni,  &c.  possit  per  judieem 
competeniem  de  haeretica  pravitate  inquiri."  ....  .•       i  o 

(21  And  how  chanceth  it  that  the  chart  of  Constantine's  donation  is  not  Iierc  mentionea .' 

E  E    2 


420  HISTORY    OF    THE    BOHEMIANS. 

Henry    sundry  things  ;  whereupon  the  patriarch  of  Constantinople,  one  of  the  commis- 

^'       sioncrs,  proceeded  against  him,  pronouncing  the  sentence  definitive,  wliich  he 

had  in  writing,  against  the  said  Jerome,  which  sentence  being  read  and  approved 

V^lTV    by  the  council  (the  tenor  whereof  ensuetli  in  his  history),  the  said  Jerome  was 

^'    delivered  unto  the  secidar  power,  and  burned. 

The  twenty-second  and  twenty-third  sessions  contain  no  worthy  matter,  but 
only  the  placing  of  the  ambassadors  of  Alphonsus,  king  of  Arragon,  and  grant- 
ing them  voices  in  the  council. 

In  the  twenty-fourth  session,  citation  was  given  out  against  Benedict,  keep- 
ing with  Alphonsus,  king  of  Arragon. 

The  twenty-fifth  session  containeth  nothing  but  a  certain  '  Commendam' 
given  to  the  chm'cli  of  Olmutz. 

In  the  twenty-sixth  session  there  was  nothing  else  handled,  but  the  uniting 
incorporating  of  the  ambassadors  of  the  king  of  Navarre  into  the  council,  and 
also  concerning  the  derogation  of  the  priority  of  voices. 

After  this  followed  the  twenty-seventh  and  twenty-eighth  sessions,  which 
were  in  the  year  1417;  wherein  were  treated  the  relation  and  declaration  con- 
cerning the  cause  betwixt  duke  Frederic  and  the  bishop  of  Trent,  and  process 
given  out  against  the  said  duke,  accusing  him  of  sacrilege ;  and  also  excommu- 
nicating him  for  not  obeying  the  admonition  of  the  council,  concerning  the  usm*- 
pation  and  detaining  of  the  city  of  Trent  and  other  possessions  from  bishop 
George,  as  is  before  specified. 

In  the  twenty-ninth  and  thirtieth  sessions,  proctors  and  notaries  were  given 
out  in  the  cause  against  pope  Benedict,  and  order  decreed  upon  his  obstinacy ; 
wherein  also  the  withdrawing  of  the  king  of  Arragon  from  the  same  pope  was 
recited,  and  approved  by  the  council. 

In  the  thirty-first  session,  certain  instniments  and  special  letters  monitory 
were  directed  from  the  council  to  a  certain  earl  of  Italy,  named  Comes  Virtu- 
tum,  for  laying  violent  hands  upon  Albert,  bishop  of  Asce,  and  for  bringing 
him  to  prison  ;  requiring  the  said  earl,  under  pain  of  interdiction  and  excom- 
munication, to  set  the  said  bishop  at  liberty.  Also  another  decree  was  set  forth 
for  restoring  again  the  liberties  of  the  church  of  Beron. 
Pope  In  the  thirty-second  and  thirty-third  sessions,  the  accusation  of  pope  Benedict 

accused     ^^^  renewed,  and  his  obtinacy  accused,  and  witness  brought  in ;  at  doing  which 
the  emperor  Sigismund  was  present. 

In  the  thirty-fourth  session,  the  cause  of  the  aforsaid  pope  was  heard,  and 
process  given  out  against  him. 

In  the  thirty-fifth   session,  the  ambassadors  of  the   king  of  Castile    were 

brought  in,  and  united  to  the  council,  and  instruments  thereof  made  and  read. 

Also,  that  notwithstanding  the  oaths  made  to  the  aforesaid  pope,  men  might 

lawfully  forsake  his  obedience. 

The  pope      In  the  thirty-sixth  session,  a  certain  citation  was  made  and  read  against  the 

the^^*       pope,  containing  his  deprivation  and  tlie  sentence  against  him,  and  instruments 

council,     made  upon  the  same.     And  whereas  this  pope  had  thundered  out  his  curses, 

deprivations,  and  excommunications  against  them,  the  said  synod  did  annihilate 

all  his  doings. 

The  thirty-seventh  session  did  renew  again  the  accusation  of  the  aforesaid 
pope,  and  the  sentence  definitive  against  him  was  published. 

In  the  thirty-eighth  session,  certain  decrees  were  made  touching  the  annihi- 
lating of  the  penalties  of  the  ambassadors  of  king  Henry,  son  of  Alphonsus, 
king  of  An-agon.  Also,  another  decree  was  made  touching  the  revocation  of 
the  voices  granted  to  the  ambassadors  of  the  king  of  Arragon. 

Thus  pope  Benedict  being  deposed  and  excommunicated,  as  is  aforesaid,  in 

the  next  sessions  following  they  addressed  themselves  to  the  election  of  a  new 

pope,  beginning  first  in  the  thirty-ninth  session,  to  give  out  decrees  concerning 

general  councils,  and  provision  for  the  avoiding  of  such  like  schisms  hereafter  ; 

Decrees     decreeing  every  tenth  year  to  have  a  general  council,  after  the  two  councils 

^°^  that  should  follow  immediately  after  this,  of  which  the  one  should  be  kept 

councils,   within  five  years  then  next  following,  and  the  second  within  seven  years  after 

that.     Item,   In  the  same  session  was  drawn  out  a  form  touching  such  things 

as  the  pope  shoidd  profess  and  bind  himself  to  observe  at  the  time  of  his 

election,  of  which  form  the  order  and  tenor  is  this  : 

"  I,  N.,  elected  for  pope,  profess  with  heart  and  mouth  unto  Almighty  God, 


MATTKRS    DONE    IN    THE    COUNCIL    OE    CONSTANCE.  421 

■whose  chiu-ch  I  take  upon  me  to  govern  by  his  help,  and  to  blessed  St.  Peter,  Heiiry 

the  prince  of  the  apostles,  so  long  as  I  shall  endure  in  this  frail  and  brittle  hfe,  ^- 

firmly  to  believe   and  hold  the  holy  catholic  faith,  after  the  traditions  of  the  ^  -q 

apostles,  of  general  councils,  and  of  other  holy  fathers,  and  namely,  of  the  \^\a 
eight  general  councils :  Nice  the  first,  Constantinople  the  second,  Ephesus  the 


third,  Chalcedon  the  fourth,  the  fifth  and  sixth  of  them  in  Constantinople,  the  The  pro- 
seventh  of  Nice,  the  eighth  of  Constantinople.     And  also  of  the  gensiral  coim-  which  the 
oils  of  Lateran,  Lyons,  and  Vienna,  willing  to  observe  the  same  faith  'inviolate  pope  is 
even  to  the  uttermost,  and  to  preach  and  defend  the  same,  even  to  the  spending  ^"""^ 
of  my  life  and  blood ;  and  also,  by  all  means  possible,  to  prosecute  and  observe 
the  rite  of  the  sacraments  canonically  delivered  to  the  catholic  church.     And 
tliis  mj'  profession  and  confession,  by  my  commandment  being  written  out  by 
the  notary  of  the  arches  of  the  holy  church  of  Rome,  I  have  subscribed  with 
mine  own  hand,  and  sincerely,   with  a  pure  mind  and  devout  conscience,  I 
offer  it  unto  the  Almighty  God  upon  such  an  altar,  &c.     In   the  presence  of 
such  witness,  &c.     Given,"  &c. 

It  was  also  decided  in  this  session,  that  no  prelates  should  be  translated 
against  their  wills. 

The  third  of  the  same  month  and  the  same  year,  followed  the  fortieth  session, 
wherein  certain  decrees  were  constituted  and  read,  as  touching  reformations  to 
be  made  through  the  whole  church  by  the  pope  that  next  should  be,  with  the 
council,  before  this  synod  should  break  up.  Item,  That  they  should  so  proceed 
to  the  election  of  the  bishop  of  Rome,  notwithstanchng  the  absence  of  those 
cardinals  who  were  with  pope  Benedict  in  Spain.  This  done,  the  order  and 
manner  was  decreed  for  the  election  of  the  pope. 

After  these  things  thus  decreed,  in  the  next  session,  which  was  the  forty-  The 
first,  the  constitution  of  Clement  VI.  was  read,  concerning  the  order  and  diet  ">''''''"  and 
of  the  cardinals  being  in   the  conclave  about  the  choosing  of  the  pope ;  and  ^f  the 
upon  the  same,  oaths  were   ministered  unto  the  cardinals  and  other  electors,  conclave 
binding  them  to  observe  and  keep  all  such  things  as  they  should  be  bound  to,  j" '^t^e'*" 
during  the  time  of  the  election.  pope. 

I.  That  they  should  enter  into  the  conclave  within  ten  days  after  the  fortieth 
session,  which  was  this  present  day,  after  sunset. 

II.  That  every  cardinal  should  have  but  two  servitors  attending  upon  him  at 
the  most,  either  of  the  laity  or  clergy,  as  they  woidd  themselves. 

III.  That  they  should  remain  together  in  the  said  conclave,  without  any 
wall  betwixt  them,  or  any  other  cover,  save  only  bare  curtains,  if  any  were 
disposed  to  sleep. 

IV.  That  the  conclave  should  so  be  shut  up,  and  the  entry  to  the  privy- 
chamber  be  kept  so  straightly,  that  none  of  them  should  come  in  or  out,  nor 
any  have  recourse  unto  them  to  talk  with  them  privily  or  apertly,  nor  they  to 
admit  any  man  to  come  to  them,  except  that  by  the  consent  of  them  all,  cer- 
tain should  be  called  about  matters  concerning  the  election. 

V.  That  no  man  should  send  to  them  either  messenger  or  writings. 

VI.  That  a  competent  window  should  be  assigned  unto  them  to  receive  in 
their  victuals,  but  that  no  person  might  come  in  thereat. 

VII.  That  no  day  after  their  first  ingress  into  the  conclave,  beside  bread, 
wine,  and  water,  they  should  have  any  more  dishes  but  one  of  one  only  kind, 
either  of  flesh  or  fish,  eggs,  pottage  made  of  fish  or  flesh,  not  after  the  daintiest 
sort;  besides  salads,  cheese,  fruit,  and  conserves,  whereof  there  shall  be  no 
principal  mess  made,  but  for  sauce  and  taste. 

VIII.  That  not  one  should  be  compelled  to  go  into  the  conclave ;  but  if 
they  did  all  refuse  to  go  in,  then  they  should  he  compelled  thereunto. 

IX.  That  such  as  would  go  out,  might :  but  if  they  woidd  aU  go  out  before 
the  pope  were  elect,  they  shoidd  be  compelled  to  go  in  again,  except  such  whom 
infirmitj'^  did  excuse ;  but  without  the  excuse  of  infirmity,  if  any  went  out,  he 
shoiUd  no  more  be  admitted,  except  they  went  all  out  together. 

X.  That  such  as  went  out,  by  reason  of  infirmity,  to  be  absent  and  return 
before  the  election  be  determined,  may  be  admitted  again  into  the  conclave  in 
the  same  state  wherein  they  shall  find  the  election  to  stand. 

Further  and  besides,  the  keepers  of  the  conclave  should  also  be  sworn  to  see 
all  these  premises  observed  and  kept  without  fraud  or  guile,  and  that  they  should 
not  straiten  the  cardinals  and  other  electors  above  the  order  here  taken.     And 


42!2  ■  HISTORY    OF    THE    BOHEMIANS. 

Henry    if  the  king  be  there  himself,  sitting  in  his  throne  of  estate,  he  should  receive  the 
^-       same  oath  of  the  cardinals.     Upon  this,  such  as  should  be  electors,  besides  the 


A  r)  cardinals,  were  chosen. 
1414.  Furtliermore,  forasmuch  as  tlie  goods  and  substance  of  sucli  as 
were  elect,'  were  accustomed  to  be  given  and  granted  unto  sucli  as 
could  catch  them  (whereupon,  under  the  pretence  of  the  same,  many 
did  invade  the  goods  of  the  cardinals,  and  others  who  were  in  the  con- 
clave, falsely  feigning  those  to  be  elected  who  were  not  to  be  elected,) 
to  stop  the  greedy  ravening  of  such,  a  decree  also  was  published  in  the 
same  session. 

These   things   thus  prepared  and  set  in  order,  the  patriarch  of 
Constantinople,  with  the  cardinals  and  other  archbishops,  bishops, 
abbots,  priors,  deans,  archdeacons,  doctors,  with  other  electors,  enter- 
rope       ing  into  the  conclave  on  Monday,  on  Thursday  after  they  had  hatched 
hatched    ^^^*'  ^  pop^'  being  St.  Martin's  even,  Avhereupon  they  named  him 
Martin.    This  Martin  thus  being  elected,  was  straightforth  brought  in 
by  the  emperor  and  the  council  into  the  church  of  Constance,  and 
there  enthronized  for  pope,  not  without  great  solemnity  and  triumph. 
The         The  twenty-first  day  of  the  said  month,  this  aforesaid  Martin,  accord- 
^Sdeth"^    ing  to  their   accustomed  pomp,  was  honourably  brought  in  to  be 
hOTs''e°on^  crowned  with  sumptuous  procession  from  the  high  church  of  Constance, 
the  right  unto  the  monastery  of  St.  Austin;  the  emperor  on  foot  leading  his 
prrnce''^  horse  by  the  bridle  on  the  right  hand,  and  the  marquis  of  Branden- 
olrthe'     burgh,  prince  elector,  likewise  leading  his  horse  on  the  left  hand  ;  the 
left  hand  pope  himself  riding  in  the  midst  upon  his  palfrey. 

And  thus  being  brought  into  the  monastery  aforesaid,  and  so  re- 
duced round  about  again  from  thence  to  the  high  church  of  Constance, 
he  was  there  crowned  with  all  magnificence. 

Notwithstanding  all  this,  yet  all  the  trifling  and  fond  vanity  of  this 
council,  more  great  than  wise,  did  not  end  thus. 

In  the  next  session,  which  was  the  forty-second,  came  out  a  decree  in  the 
name  of  the  pope  and  the  council,  discharging  the  bond  of  the  emperor  and  the 
county  palatine,  touching  the  safe  custody  of  pope  John,  who  was,  by  bond, 
committed  unto  them  to  be  kept  in  safety. 

In  the  forty-third  session,  certain  other  decrees  and  statutes  were  made  by 
pope  Martin  in  the  said  synod,  annullating  and  reproving  all  the  acts  and  pro- 
ceedings of  the  other  popes  before,  during  the  time  of  the  schism  from  the  time 
of  Gregory  XI. ;  as  in  matters  concerning  exemptions,  unions,  fmits,  and 
profits  of  the  church,  benefices,  simony,  dispensations,  tithes  and  other  bm-dens 
ofThf^  of  the  church.  Also  concerning  the  apparel  of  the  clergy,  and  such  other 
clergy.       things. 

In  the  forty-fourth  session,  the  sage  fathers  of  this  council  were  occupied 
about  the  determining  what  place  the  next  council  should  be  kept  in.  The 
forty-fifth  session  brake  up  and  dissolved  this  synod. 

Now,  to  finish  our  tedious  rehearsal  of  this  synod,  the  cardinal 
Umbald,  by  the  commandment  of  the  pope  and  the  council,  with  a 
high  and  loud  voice  pronounced  these  words :  "  Domini !  ite  in 
pace;"  which  is,  "  Lords  !  depart  in  peace;"  whereunto  the  stand- 
ers-by  answered,  "  Amen." 

Thus  the  council  being  dissolved,  friar  John,  bishop  of  Catania, 
by  the  consent  and  commandment  of  the  pope  and  the  council,  went 
up  into  the  pulpit  to  make  a  sermon,  taking  for  his  theme,  "  Vos 

,(1)  These  -were  wise  cardinals,  they  would  not  go  into  the  conclave,  but  they  would  be  sure  to 
have  their  goods  safe  and  unspoiled. 


COUNCIL    OF    CONSTAXCE.  •  423 

autem  tristitiam  liabetis  ;  iterum  autem  videbo  vos,  et  gauclebit  cor   Hwy 

vestrum ;""  "  You  are  now  in  sadness,  I  will  see  you  again,  and  then 

your  hearts  will  rejoice."  Which  collation  being  ended,  another  A.  D. 
cardinal,  named  Anthony,  was  sent  up  by  the  pope  and  the  council  ^"^^  ' 
with  this  proclamation ;  first,  to  dismiss  the  synod,  and  to  give  every 
man  leave  to  depart  home.  Also  to  declare  the  pope's  indulgence 
unto  them,  who,  by  the  authority  of  God  Almighty,  had  granted  to 
them  all  and  every  one  present  at  that  council,  full  absolution  once 
in  their  life ;  so  that  every  one,  within  two  months  after  the  hearing 
of  this  indulgence,  should  procure  the  same  in  form  of  writing.^ 
Also,  another  indulgence  was  granted  in  like  manner  of  plenary  re- 
mission at  the  hour  of  death,  and  that  was  understood  as  well  of  the 
household  as  of  the  masters  themselves  ;  but  under  this  condition,  that 
from  the  time  of  notification  of  the  same,  they  should  fast  by  the 
space  of  one  whole  year  every  Friday,  for  the  absolution  in  their  life- 
time ;  and  for  the  absolution  at  the  hour  of  death,  to  fast  the  same 
Friday  another  year,  except  they  had  some  lavrful  impediment  to  the 
contrary,  so  that  after  the  second  year,  they  should  fast  unto  their 
lives'"  end,  or  else  do  some  other  good  work ;  which  being  in  this 
manner  proclaimed,  the  synod  brake  up,  and  every  man  departed 
home.^ 

The   number  of  the  foreigners   resorting  to   this  council,    both 
spiritual  and  temporal,  was  sixty  thousand  five  hundred  :  whereof 
the  number  of  archbishops  and  bishops  was  three  hundred  and  forty-  The 
six ;  abbots  and  doctors,  five  hundred  and  sixty-four ;  secular  men,  „" "^ 
princes,   dukes,  earls,  knights,  esquires,   sixteen  thousand;  besides  i^'^'^s^^^^^^ 
common  women  belonging  to  the  same  council,  four  hundi-ed  and  cu  of 
fifty ;   barbers,  six  hundred ;  minstrels,   cooks,    and  jesters,    three  stance. 
hundred  and  twenty.  So  that  the  whole  multitude  which  were  viewed  ^f"^^! 
to  be  in  the  town  of  Constance,  between  Easter  and  Whitsuntide,  gers  at 
were  numbered  to   be  sixty  thousand  five   hundred  strangers  and  council, 
foreigners  at  that  council. 

Here  is  to  be  noted  that  in  this  council  of  Constance  nothing  was 
decreed  or  enacted  worthy  of  memory,  but  this  only,  that  the  pope's 
authority  is  under  the  council,  and  that  the  council  ought  to  judge  ^^^^^^ 
the  pope.     And,  as  touching  the  communion  in  both  kinds,  although  nZT' 
the  council  did  not  deny,  but  that  it  was  used  by  Christ  and  his  ^oth^ 
apostles,  yet  notwithstanding,  by  the  same  council,  it  was  decreed  to  denied. 
the  contrary. 

Hitherto  we  have  comprehended  the  order  and  discourse  of  this 
council,  with  the  acts  and  sessions  concerning  the  same  ;  which  coun- 
cil, although  it  was  principally  thought  to  be  assembled  for  quieting 
of  the  schism  between  the  three  popes;  yet,  notwithstanding,  a 
great  part  thereof  was  for  the  cause  of  the  Bohemians,  and  especially 
for  John  Huss,  as  appeared  by  their  preparation  before  the  council. 
For  before  the  council  began,  the  emperor  Sigismund  aforesaid  sent 
certain  gentlemen,  Bohemians,  who  were  of  his  own  household,  giving 
them  in  charge  to  bring  John  Huss,  bachelor  of  divinity,  unto  the 
said  council,  and  that  under  his  safe  conduct.  The  meaning  and 
intent  thereof  was,  that  John  Huss  should  purge  and  clear  him- 

(1)  Smell  here,  reader;  this  made  well  for  the  pope's  purse. 

(2)  Ex  paraliporaino  Abtatis  Ursp. 


number 
pre- 


424  HISTORY  OF    THE    BOHEMIANS. 

Henry    self  of  tlic  blanic  wliicli  they  had  laid  against  him  :  and,  for  the  better 

^'      assurance,  the  emperor  did  not  only  promise  him  safe  conduct,  that 

A.D.    he  might  come  freely  unto  Constance,  but  also  that  he  should  return 

^^14.    ao-ain  into  Bohemia,  without  fraud  or  interruption  ;  he  promised  also 

to  receive   bun   under  his  protection,  and  under  safeguard  of  the 

whole   empire.     For  the  same   only  cause  the   emperor  sent  him 

afterwards  the  said  safe  conducts  double  written,  both  in  Latin  and 

Almain  ;  the  form  whereof  doth  hereafter  ensue. 

The  Safe-conduct  given  to  Master  John  Huss. 

Sigismimd  by  the  grace  of  God  king  of  the  Romans,  of  Hungary  and  Den- 
mark, Croatia,  &c.     To  all  princes,  as  well  ecclesiastical  as  secular,  dukes,  mar- 
quisses    and  earls,  barons,  captains,  borough-masters,  judges  and  governors, 
officers  of  towns,  burgages,  and  villages,  and  unto  all  rulers  of  the  commonalty ; 
and  generally,  to  all  the  subjects  of  our  empire,  to  whom  these  letters  shall 
come,  grace  and  all  goodness. 
The  safe        ^^  charge  and  command  you  all,  that  you  have  respect  unto  John  Huss, 
conduct     who  is  departed  out  of  Bohemia,  to  come  unto  the  general  council,  which  shall 
siven  to    |jg  celebrated  and  holden  very  shortly  at  the  town  of  Constance.     The  wliich 
John         John  Huss  we  have  received  under  our  protection,  and  safeguard  of  the  whole 
Huss.        empire,  desiring  you  that  you  will   cheerfully  receive  him  when  he  shall  come 
towards  you,  and  that  you  entreat  and  handle  him  gently,  showing  him  favoiu* 
and  good  will,  and  show  him  pleasure  in  all  things,  as  touching  the  forwardness, 
ease,  and  assurance  of  his  journey,  as  well  by  land  as  by  water. 

Moreover,  we  will,  that  he  and  all  bis  company,  with  his  carriage  and  neces- 
saries, shall  pass  throughout  all  places,  passages,  ports,  bridges,  lands,  govern- 
ances, lordships,  liberties,  cities,  towns,  burgages,  castles  and  villages,  and  all 
other  your  dominions,  without  paying  of  any  manner  of  imposition  or  Dane- 
money,  peagc,  tribute,  or  any  other  manner  of  toll,  whatsoever  it  be.  We  will 
also,  that  you  suffer  him  to  pass,  rest,  tarry,  and  to  sojourn  at  liberty,  without 
doing  unto  him  any  manner  of  impeachment,  or  vexation,  or  trouble  ;  and  that 
if  need  shall  so  require,  you  do  provide  a  faithful  company  to  conduct  him  withal, 
for  the  honour  and  reverence  which  you  owe  unto  our  imperial  majesty.  Given 
at  Spires,  the  eighteenth  of  October,,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  God,  1414. 

By  this  it  may  appear,  that  this  safe  conduct  was  granted  not  in 
the  time  of  the  council,  by  the  bishops,  but  before  the  council,  by  the 
emperor,  who  was  or  ought  to  be  the  principal  ordainer  and  director 
of  the  council  under  God.  Now,  whether  the  bishops  did  well  in 
breaking  and  annulling  this  promise  of  the  emperor,  against  the  em 
peror"'s  mind,  because  the  discussion  thereof  belongeth  '  ad  materiam 
juris,  non  facti,"'  being  a  matter  rather  of  law  than  of  story,  I  will  defer 
to  reason  this  case  with  Master  Cope,  to  such  time  as  may  be  more 
convenient  to  the  full  tractation  thereof. 

Notwithstanding,  briefly  to  touch  and  pass,  let  us  consider  part  of 
the  reasons  of  th^  said  Cope,*  how  frivolous  and  false  they  be,  and 
Answer  casy  to  be  refelled.  "  What,"  saith  he,  "  if  he  preached  by  the  way 
to  copus.  coming  up  ?"  First,  that  it  is  false,  see  hereafter.  "  What,"  saith 
he,  "  if  he  stood  obstinate  in  his  heresy?"  "  what  if  he  sought  to  escape 
away  after  his  coming  up  ?"  To  this  the  lords  of  Bohemia  do  answer : 
That  this  safe  conduct  was  broken,  and  he  imprisoned  not  only  before 
he  attempted  to  escape,  or  before  he  was  condemned  for  a  heretic,  but 
also  before  he  was  heard  of  the  council  what  he  was.^  Vide  infra. 

(1)  Alamis  Copus,  p.  929. 

(2)  Dr.  Milner,  in  his  "  Letters  to  a  Prebendary,"  p.  80,  remarks  :  "  The  safe-conduct  of  John 
Huss  was  nothing  more  than  a  common  travelling  passport,  to  protect  him  frcm  seizwe  or  violence, 


THE    LETTERS    OF    JOHN    HUSS    SET    UP    IN    TRAGUE,  425 

Further,  wliere  Gope  saith,  that  the  general  council  was  above  the    ^™'-i/ 
emperor,  and  hath  power  in  case  of  heresy  to  break  public  leagues  and 


gi-a'nts :  to  that  I  say,  that  this  safe  conduct  stood  not  only  upon  the    ^^^• 
emperor,  but  also  upon  the  consent  of  the  pope  himself.  Vide  infra.  L 

And  admit  that  to  be  true,  that  the  council  had  power  to  make  this 
decree,  to  break  promise  with  heretics  ;  yet  this  cannot  be  denied,  but 
that  John  Huss  was  condemned  and  judged  before  that  decree  in  the 
nineteenth  session  was  made.  Finally,  when  Cope  hath  proved  by 
what  Scripture  the  councils  have  power  to  defeat  the  authority  of  their 
emperors  in  such  secular  causes  touching  safe  conducts  and  outward 
safety,  then  ^vill  I  answer  him  more  fully  herein.  But  to  the  purpose 
again  of  the  story. 

John  Huss  seeintj  so  many  fair  promises,  and  the  assurance  which  John- 

1  11        Huss 

the  emperor  had  given  to  him,  sent  answer  unto  the  emperor,  that  he  taketn 
wovdd  come  unto  the  council.     But  before  he  departed  out  of  the  pg^/^J^" 
realm  of  Bohemia,  and  especially  out  of  the  town  of  Prague,  he  did  ^^f^.'^""- 
write  certain  bills  long  enough  before,  as  well  in  Latin  as  in  the  Bo- 
hemian  language  and  Almain,  and  caused  them  to  be  set  and  fastened 
upon  the  gates  of  the  cathedral  churches  and  parish  churches,  cloisters 
and  abbeys,  signifying  unto  them  all,  that  lie  would  go  to  the  general 
council  at  Constance  ;  whereof,  if  any  man  have  any  suspicion  of  his 
doctrine,  that  he  should  declare  it  before  the  lord  Conrad,  archbishop 
of  Prague ;  or,  if  he  had  rather,  at  the  general  council,  for  there  he 
would  render  and  give  up  unto  every  one,  and  before  them  all,  an 
account  and  reason  of  his  faith.     The  example  of  his  letters  and  inti- 
mations set  up,  were  these,  the  copy  whereof  here  followeth : 

The  Letters  of  John  Huss  set  up  in  common  places  of  the  City  of 

Prague. 

Master  John  Huss,  bachelor  of  divinity,  will  appear  before  the  most  reverend 
father  the  lord  Conrad,  archbishop  of  Prague,  and  legate  of  the  apostolic  seat, 
in  their  next  convocation  of  all  the  prelates  and  clergy  of  the  kingdom  of  Bo- 
hemia ;  being  ready  always  to  satisfy  all  men  who  shall  require  him  to  give  a 
reason  of  his  faith  and  hope  that  he  holdeth,  and  to  hear  and  see  all  such  as  will 
lay  unto  his  charge  either  any  stubbornness  of  error  or  heresy,  that  they  should 
write  in  their  names  there,  as  is  i-equired  both  by  God's  law  and  man's.  And 
if  so  be  that  they  could  not  lawfully  prove  any  stubbornness  of  error  or  heresy 
against  liim,  that  then  they  should  suffer  the  like  punishments  that  he  should 
have  had ;  unto  whom  all  together  he  will  answer  at  the  next  general  council  at 
Constance,  before  the  archbishop  and  the  prelates,  and,  according  to  the  decrees 
and  canons  of  the  holy  fathers,  show  forth  his  innocency  in  the  name  of  Christ. 
— Dated  the  Sunday  next  after  the  feast  of  St.  Bartholomew. 

Another  Intimation  of  John  Huss,  for  his  going  to  Constance,  drawn 
out  of  the  Bohemian  Tongue. 

I,  Master  John  Husnetz,  do  signify  unto  all  men,  that  I  am  ready  to  come 
and  stand  before  the  face  of  my  lord  the  archbishop,  and  to  answer  to  all  things 

on  his  journey  to  and  from  the  council."  To  this  it  may  be  answered,  that  "  common  travelling 
passports"  were  not  in  general  use  for  more  than  three  hundred  years  after  this  event :  that  it  was 
not  essential  for  John  Huss  to  provide  himself  with  one:  and  that,  when  granted,  they  were 
peculiar  and  special  privileges,  and,  in  every  sense  of  the  word,  "  safe-conducts,"  extended  to 
travellers,  when  their  rank,  the  importance  of  their  embassage,  or  the  peculiar  nature  of  the  times, 
demanded  for  them  a  special  pledge  of  protection.  Besides,  if  it  be  admitted,  by  the  above  Roman 
catholic  writer,  that  the  safe-conduct  secured  to  John  Huss  protection  on  his  journey  from  the 
council  (of  which,  though  evident  in  itself,  the  safe-conduct  makes  no  mention),  it  must  also  be 
ijjferred  that  it  remained  in  force  during  his  stay  at  Constance,  nor  can  it  be  denied  but  that  the 
violation  of  it,  in  his  condemnation  and  martyrdom,  was  an  act  of  the  grossest  treachery.— Ed. 


426  HISTORY    07    THE    BOHEMIANS. 

Henry    wlicreof  I  am  falsely  accused,  in  the  next  convocation  of  bachelors ;  and  chiefly 
V-      to  this  point,  that  in  many  places  they  do  report  me  to  be  a  heretic,  not  having 
respect  unto  justice  or  law,  neither  yet  to  my  merits  or  deserts.  Therefore  since 
y^lv    you,  who  do  never  cease  to  slander  and  backbite  me  with  yom*  words,  do  under- 
stand  and  know  these  things,  come  forth  openly  before  the  face  and  presence  of 
The  offer   the  lord  archbishop,  and  with  an  open  mouth  declare  and  show  forth  what  false 
of  John      doctrine  or  other  things  you  have  heard  me  teach,  contrary  to  catholic  faith ;  and 
his  ene-     if  I  shall  be  found  faulty  in  ever  so  small  a  matter,  contrary  or  against  the  faith  of 
mies.        Christ,  or  in  any  false  doctrine,  and  that  I  do  choose  that,  or  other  things,  con- 
traiy  to  the  faith  of  Christ,  then  I  will  hold  my  peace  and  suffer  punishment  as 
a  heretic.     And  if  there  be  no  man  that  will  resist  against  me,  or  accuse  me  in 
this  point,  once  again  I  say  unto  you,  that  I  am  ready  to  appear  at  Constance 
in  the  famous  congregation,  to  the  end  that  I  may  stand  in  the  company  of  the 
divines,  even  before  the  face  of  the  pope.     Therefore,  whosoever  knoweth  any 
false  doctrine  contrary  to  the  faith  of  Christ  in  me,  let  him  come  thither  and 
show  it  forth  boldly,  if  he  have  any  thing  to  lay  against  me ;  and  for  my  part  I 
will  not  be  slack,  if  I  may  understand  or  know  it,  to  answer  as  well  to  small  as 
great,  as  touching  the  truth  which  I  have  received  of  God,  and  desire  to  be  de- 
fended.    All  you  good  men,  therefore,  who  love  the  truth,  say  now  whether, 
by  these  my  words,  I  do  think  or  go  about  any  thing,  either  contrary  to  the  law 
of  God  or  man.  If  I  be  not  admitted  then  to  be  heard,  be  it  known  and  manifest 
imto  all  men,  that  it  happeneth  not  through  my  fault. — The  same  day. 

This  Epistle  of  John  Huss  which  followeth,  was  set  upon  the  Gates 
of  the  King's  Palace,  translated  into  Latin,  out  of  the  Bohemian 
Tongue. 

Unto  the  king's  majesty,  the  queen,  and  to  all  such  as  are  of  his  council,  and 
to  all  other  rulers  and  magisti-ates,  who  now  are  in  the  king's  court :  I,  John 
Huss,  do  signify  and  publish,  that  I  have  imderstood,  not  by  any  vain  rumour 
or  tale,  that  there  be  letters  brought  from  the  pope  to  the  king's  majesty ;  the 
contents  whereof  are  these :  That  the  king's  majesty  should  bring  to  pass,  that 
the  heretics  who  were  now  lately  sprung  up  in  his  kingdom  and  dominions, 
should  not  take  any  firm  or  strong  root.  Forasmuch  as  without  any  desert,  as 
I  ti-ust  by  God's  grace,  the"  fame  or  noise  is  sprung  and  blown  abroad,  it  shall 
be  our  part  to  foresee  and  take  heed,  that  neither  the  king's  majesty,  nor  the 
noble  kingdom  of  Bohemia,  should  be  driven  to  bear  or  suffer  any  reproach  or 
slander  for  me.  Wherefore  now  of  late  I  have  sent  my  lettei's  to  and  fro,  which 
I  have  with  great  labour  and  diligence  caused  to  be  openly  set  up,  to  this  in- 
tent ;  that  I  might  thereby  cause  the  archbishop  to  be  careful  and  diligent 
about  the  matter ;  signifying  openly,  that  if  there  were  any  man  in  all  Bohemia, 
who  did  know  me  to  be  a  follower  of  any  false  or  corrupt  doctrine,  he  should 
profess  his  name  in  the  archbishop's  court,  and  there  show  forth  and  declare 
what  he  thought.  And,  forasmuch  as  there  would  none  be  foimd  or  come 
forth,  who  would  accuse  me,  the  archbishop  commanded  me  and  my  procurers 
to  depart  in  peace.  Wherefore  I  require  and  desire  the  king's  majesty,  who  is 
the  defender  of  the  tmth,  also  the  queen  and  their  councillors,  and  all  other 
rulers  and  magistrates,  that  they  would  give  me  a  faithful  testimonial  of  this 
matter ;  forasmuch  as  I  have  oftentimes  willed  and  attempted  this,  and  no  man 
hath  either  accused  me  or  troubled  me.  I  do  it,  moreover,  to  be  known  unto 
all  Bohemia,  and  to  all  nations,  that  1  will  be  present  even  at  the  first  time 
before  the  council  of  Constance,  in  the  most  famous  place,  in  the  presence  of 
the  pope,  the  pope  being  president ;  and  finally,  in  the  presence  of  all  others 
who  will  come  to  that  most  famous  place ;  and  that  whosoever  hath  any  suspi- 
cion of  me,  that  I  have  either  taught  or  defended  any  thing  contrary  unto  the 
faith  of  Christ,  let  him  come  thither  also ;  let  him  declare  there,  before  or  in 
the  presence  of  the  pope  and  all  the  doctors  of  divinity,  what  erroneous  or  false 
doctrine  I  have  at  any  time  followed  or  holden.  Moreover,  if  he  shall  convince 
me  of  any  eiTor,  or  prove  that  I  have  taught  any  thing  contrary  unto  the 
christian  faith,  I  will  not  refuse  to  suffer  whatsoever  punishment  shall  be  due 
for  a  heretic.  But  I  hope  and  trust,  even  from  the  bottom  of  my  heart,  that 
God  will  not  give  the  victory  to  unfaithful  and  unbelieving  men,  who  do 
willingly  kick  and  spm-n  against  the  truth. 


THE    BISHOP    OF    NAZARETH    IN    FAVOUR    OF    JOHN    HUSS.  427 

The  same  time  John  Huss  sent  his  procurers  to  the  lord  bishop    iienry 

of  Nazareth,  ordained,  by  the  apostolic  see,  inquisitor  of  heresy  of  the  L_ 

city  and  diocese  of  Prague,  requiring  him  that  if  he  had  found  any  A.  D. 
error  in  him,  he  would  declare  it  openly.  But  the  said  bishop,  iiHi. 
before  the  said  procurer  and  the  public  notary,  with  many  other 
credible  witnesses,  answered,  that  he  had  often  talked  with  John 
Huss,  and  that  he  never  knew  any  thing  in  him,  but  as  becometh  a 
godly  and  faithful  man  ;  and  this  his  testimony  of  John  Huss,  he 
approved  by  his  letters,  the  copy  whereof  is  here  under  written. 

The  Testimonial  of  the  good  Bishop  of  Nazareth. 

We,  Nicholas,  by  the  grace  of  God  bishop  of  Nazareth,  and  inquisitor,  spe- 
cially deputed  by  the  apostolic  seat,  for  heresies  both  of  the  city  and  diocese  of 
Prague,  by  these  presents  do  it  to  be  known  unto  all  men,  that  we  in  times 
past  have  often  communed  and  talked  with  that  honourable  man,  Master  John 
Huss,  bachelor  of  divinity,  of  the  famous  university  of  Prague,  and  have  had 
divers  and  sundry  conferences  with  him,  both  of  the  Scriptures  and  divers 
other  matters ;  and  in  all  his  sayings,  doings,  and  behaviour,  we  have  proved 
and  found  him  to  be  a  faithful  and  a  catholic  man,  finding  no  manner  of  evil, 
or  sinister,  or,  by  any  means,  eiToneous  doings  in  him  unto  this  present.  We  do 
witness  and  protest  moreover,  how  the  said  John  Huss,  of  late,  in  the  cathedral  He  wit- 
church  of  Prague,  and  in  other  both  collegiate  and  parish  churches,  and  in  the  ^'j^^'^j^jj^ 
colleges  of  the  university  of  Prague,  and  in  the  gates  and  porches  of  the  most  huss. 
noble  prince  and  lord,  the  lord  Wenceslaus,  king  of  Romans  and  of  Bohemia ; 
also  in  the  gates  of  the  reverend  father  the  lord  Conrad,  archbishop  of  Prague, 
legate  of  the  apostolic  see,  and  chancellor  of  the  university  of  Prague,  and  of 
other  princes  and  barons,  then  being  in  the  city  of  Prague,  hath  set  up  his 
letters  written  both  in  Latin,  and  in  the  Bohemian  tongue,  containing  senten- 
tially  in  effect,  how  the  aforesaid  Master  John  Huss  would  appear  before  the 
reverend  father,  the  lord  Conrad,  the  aforesaid  archbishop  of  Prague,  and  all 
the  prelates  and  clergy  of  the  kingdom  of  Bohemia,  that  shall  be  congregated 
and  called  together  by  the  said  archbishop,  at  the  day  appointed  in  the  said  city 
of  Prague  ;  ready  always  to  satisfy  every  man  that  shall  desire  and  require  him 
to  show  a  reason  of  his  faith  and  hope  that  he  holdeth,  and  to  see  and  hear  all 
and  every  one  who  could  prove  any  obstinacy  of  error  or  heresy  lawfully  against 
him,  under  the  pain  to  receive  the  like  punishment :  unto  whom  all  together  he 
would,  by  God's  help,  answer  in  the  council  of  Constance,  which  was  now  at 
hand,  before  the  said  lord  archbishop  and  us,  with  all  other  prelates ;  and  there, 
in  Christ's  name,  according  to  the  decrees  and  canons  of  the  holy  fathers,  to 
declare  and  show  forth  his  innocency.  After  which  letters  as  is  aforesaid,  by 
the  said  Master  John  Huss  openly  set  up,  there  did  no  man  appear  before  us, 
who  would  accuse  the  said  Master  John  Huss  of  any  error,  or  of  any  heresy. 
For  the  evident  witness  of  all  which  things  we  have  commanded  these  present 
letters  to  be  made,  and  confirmed  the  same  with  the  setting  to  of  our  seal. — 
Dated  in  Prague  the  thirtieth  of  August,  1414. 

Upon  which  matter  also,  a  public  instrument  was  drawn,  testified 
with  the  hand  and  seal  of  the  public  notary,  named  Michael  Prutha- 
tietz  ;  the  copy  of  which  instrument  here  under  followeth : 

An  Instrument  of  Recognition,   or  Protestation  of  the  Lord  Inqui- 
sitor of  Heresies. 

In  the  name  of  God,  Amen.  In  the  year  of  his  nativity,  one  thousand  four 
hundred  and  fourteen,  the  thirtieth  of  August,  in  the  fifth  year  of  the  bishopric 
of  the  most  holy  father  in  Christ,  John  by  the  grace  of  God  pope,  the  three 
and  twentieth  of  that  name,  in  the  uppermost  parlour  of  the  house  of  the  famous 
man  the  lord  Peter  of  Zwogsta,  called  Zuirglits,  master  of  the  mint  of  the  most 
famous  prince  and  lord,  tlie  lord  Wenceslaus,  king  of  Romans  and  of  Bohemia, 


428  HISTORY    OF    THE    BOHEMIANS. 

Henry    in  the  greater  city  of  Prague,  about  the  abbey  of  St.  James  the  apostle,  in  the 
^-       presence  of  me  the  puWic  notary  here  under  written,  and  certain  witnesses 
.    j^     here  within  written,  specially  called  for  that  purpose. 
■     ■         There  was  personally  present  Master  John  Jessenitz,  master  of  arts,  procurer 

1_  in  the  name  of  the  honourable  man.  Master  John  Huss,  bachelor,  fonned  in 

divinity  of  the  university  of  Prague.  He  most  humbly  and  earnestly  required 
of  the  reverend  father  in  Christ  and  lord,  Nicholas,  bishop  of  Nazareth,  inijui- 
sitor  of  heresies  for  the  city  and  diocese  of  Prague,  specially  appointed  by  the 
apostolic  see,  being  there  also  present,  sajing,  '  Reverend  father,  do  you  know 
any  heresy  or  error  in  Master  John  Husnetz,  otherwise  called  Huss  ? '  Which 
said  lord  Nicholas,  not  compelled  or  constrained,  but  of  his  own  will  and  accord, 
freely  and  openly,  did  there  recognise,  saying  these  or  the  like  words,  in  the 
Bohemian  tongue. 

'  I  have  often  and  many  times  been  conversant  with  Master  John  Huss,  and 
have  eaten  and  drunk  with  him ;  also  I  have  been  often  present  at  his  sermons, 
and  divers  of  his  collations  which  he  hath  made  upon  divers  places  of  the 
Scripture,  and  I  never  found  or  perceived  in  him  any  error  or  heresy,  but  in 
all  his  words  and  deeds  I  have  found  him  always  a  true  and  a  catholic  man, 
neither  have  I  found  any  thing  that  doth  savour  of  any  eiTor  or  heresy.' 

Again,  the  said  Master  John's  procurer  in  the  behalf  as  above,  required  and 
asked  the  said  lord  Nicholas,  bishop  and  inquisitor,  whether  any  man  have  ac- 
cused the  said  Master  John  Huss  of  any  heresy  before  him,  being  inquisitor 
for  heresy,  and  have  convicted  him  of  heresy  ?  He  answered,  that  since  the 
time  he  knew  John  Hnss,  and  that  he  was  made  inquisitor  for  heresy  in  the 
city  and  diocese  of  Prague  (as  is  aforesaid),  never  any  man  accused,  or  con- 
vinced the  said  Master  John  Huss  of  any  heresy  before  him  unto  this  present 
time.  Adding,  moreover,  that  he,  the  said  Master  John  Huss,  did  openly  set 
up  his  letters  patent  this  present  year  aforesaid,  in  the  said  month  of  August, 
upon  the  porches  of  the  cathedral  church  of  Prague,  and  other  collegiate  and 
parish  churches  of  the  city  of  Prague,  and  upon  the  gates  of  our  said  lord,  our 
lord  the  king,  and  the  archbishop  of  Prague,  containing  in  them  this  effect :  how 
tliat  he  woidd  appear  before  Conrad  archbishop  of  Prague,  and  all  the  prelates 
and  clergy  of  the  kingdom  of  Bohemia,  who  shoidd  be  congregated  and  called 
together  at  a  certain  day  of  the  month  aforesaid,  ready  always  to  satisfy  all 
men  as  touching  the  faith  and  hope  which  he  held,  and  to  see  and  hear  all 
and  singidar  that  would  lay  any  obstinacy  of  error  or  heresy  unto  him ;  that  they 
should  determine  themselves  there  to  suffer  the  like  punishment,  according 
to  the  extremity  both  of  God's  law  and  man's  law ;  unto  whom  altogether 
he  woidd  answer  in  his  own  right  before  the  said  archbishop  of  Prague,  and 
the  said  lord  Nicholas,  bishop  and  inqmsitor  aforesaid,  and  the  prelates  even  in 
the  next  general  council  of  Constance  ;  and  there,  according  unto  the  canons 
and  decrees  of  the  holy  fathers,  declare  and  show  forth  his  uprightness  and 
innocency:  upon  all  and  singular  of  which  proceedings.  Master  John  de 
Jessenitz,  procurer,  and  in  the  procurer's  name  or  behalf  as  before,  required  and 
desired  that  he  might  have  one  or  many  public  instruments  made  unto  him  by 
me  the  public  notary  here  imderwritten.  These  things  were  done  the  year, 
indiction,  month,  day,  hour,  place,  and  bishopric,  as  is  aforesaid,  in  the  pre- 
sence of  these  noble  and  famous  men,  the  lord  William  de  Zwingelitz,  baron 
of  the  kingdom  of  Bohemia  ;  Peter  his  son ;  the  lord  Hlawaczion  de  Re- 
now,  likewise  baron  Wenceslaus  de  Lunarx,  Vassone  de  Miekonitz,  burgrave 
of  the  castle  of  Lichetenburg,  Czitborius  de  Bodanetz,  esqmre,  and  William 
de  Dupoer,  knight  of  the  said  diocese  of  Prague,  with  many  other  worthy  and 
credible  witnesses  who  were  specially  desired  and  required  unto  the  premises. 
And  I  Michael,  sometime  the  son  of  Nicholas  de  Pracliatitz  of  the  diocese 
of  Prague,  and  by  the  imperial  authority,  pubhc  notary,  was  present  ■with 
the  witnesses  afore-named,  at  the  affairs  aforesaid,  at  the  request,  demand, 
answer,  and  petition,  and  all  and  singular  the  doings  within  written,  and 
did  see  and  hear  all  these  things  to  be  done  in  the  aforesaid  manner  and 
form.  But  being  busied  with  other  matters,  I  have  caused  this  to  be  faith- 
fiiUy  drawn  and  written,  and  subscribing  the  same  Avith  mine  own  hand,  have 
published  and  reduced  it  into  this  form,  and  have  signed  it  with  my  seal 
and  name  accustomed,  being  called  and  required  to  bear  witness  of  all  and 
singular  the  premises. 


CONRAD,    THE    ARCHBISHOP,    CLEAHETH    JOHN    HUSS.  429 

After  this,  as  all  the  barons  of  Bohemia  were  assembled  in  the    Henry 
abbey  of  St.  James,  about  the  affairs  of  the  realm,  where  the  arch- 


bishop of  Prague  was  also  present,  there  the  said  John   Huss  pre-    ^-  ^• 

sented  supplications,  bv  which  he  most  humbly  desired  the  barons, :_ 

that  they  would  show  him  this  favour  towards  the  said  archbishop: 
that  if  the  said  archbishop  did  suspect  him  of  any  error  or  heresy, 
he  would  declare  it  openly,  and  that  he  was  ready  to  endure  and 
suffer  correction  for  the  same  at  his  hands.     And  if  that  he  had  found 
or  perceived  no  such  thing  in  him,  that  he  would  then  give  him  a 
testimonial  thereof,  through  which  he,  being  as  it  were  armed,  might 
the  more  freely  go  unto  Constance.     The  said  archbishop  confessed  conrad 
openly,  before  all  the  assembly  of  barons,  that  he  knew  not  that  John  b^'hop,  ' 
Huss  was  culpable  or  faulty  in  any  crime  or  offence,  and  this  was  jg^n"'^ 
his  only  counsel :  that  the  said  John  Huss  should  purge  himself  of  huss. 
the  excommunication  he  had  incurred.     This  report  which  the  arch- 
bishop had  given  of  John  Huss,  doth  appear  by  the  letters  which 
the  barons  of  Bohemia  sent  unto  the   emperor  Sigismund  by  the 
said   Huss,  in  the  to^\^l  of  Constance. 

Finally,  all  the  prelates  and  clergy  assembled  together  in  the  town 
of  Prague,  in  the  archbishop's  court,  where  appeared  personally  the 
worshipful  Master  John  Jessenitz,  doctor  of  decretals  and  procurer, 
in  the  name  and  behalf  of  the  honourable  man.  Master  John  Huss, 
requiring  that  either  the  said  Master  John  Huss,  or  that  he,  in  the 
name  and  behalf  of  him,  might  be  suffered  to  come  into  the  arch- 
bishop''s  court,  to  the  presence  of  the  archbishop  and  the  prelates 
who  were  there  congregated  together,  forasmuch  as  Master  John  John 
Huss  is  ready  to  satisfy  all  men  who  shall  require  him  to  show  any  ^qu^ireth 
reason  of  his  faith  or  hope  which  he  holdeth,  and  to  see  and  hear  all  *ogpe 
and  singular  who  were  there  gathered  together ;  that  is  to  say,  the  mony  of 
lord  archbishop  and  prelates,  or  any  of  them  who  would  lay  any  and  could 
manner  of  obstinacy,  or  error,  or  heresy  unto  him  :  that  they  should  ad^ued. 
there  write  in  their  names,  and  according  both  unto  God's  law  and 
man's,  and  the  canon  law,  prepare  themselves  to  suffer  like  punish- 
ment, if  they  could  not  lawfully  prove  any  obstinacy  of  error  or 
heresy  against  him  :  unto  whom  altogether  he  would,  by  God's  help, 
answer  before  the  said  archbishop  and  the  prelates  in  the  next  general 
council  holden  at  Constance,  and  stand  unto  the  law ;  and,  according 
to  the  canons  and  decretals  of  the  holy  fathers,  show  forth  and  de- 
clare his  innocency  in  the  name  of  Christ.  Unto  which  Master  John 
of  Jessenitz,  doctor,  one  called  Ulricus  Swabe,  of  Swabenitz,  marshal 
of  the  said  archbishop,  coming  forth  of  the  said  court,  did  utterly 
deny  unto  the  said  master  doctor  and  his  party,  all  manner  of  ingress 
and  entrance  into  the  court,  and  to  the  presence  of  the  archbishop 
aforesaid,  and  of  the  prelates  there  gathered  together;  pretending 
that  the  archbishop,  with  the  prelates  aforesaid,  were  occupied  about 
the  king's  affairs :  requiring  the  said  master  doctor,  that  he  would 
tarry  in  some  place  without  the  said  court,  that  when  the  archbishop 
and  the  prelates  had  finished  the  king's  affairs,  he  might  then  return, 
and  have  liberty  to  come  into  the  court  there.  The  said  Master 
John  Huss,  and  the  doctor  of  law  tarried  awhile,  entreating  to  be 
admitted  into  the  archbishop's  court ;  but  seeing  he  could  prevail 
nothing,  he  made  there  a  solemn  protestation  of  his  request,  that  both 


430  insTOKY  OF  THE  Bohemians. 


Henry   he,  aiiJ  also  Mastcr  Jolm  Huss  and  his  party,  could  not  be  suffered 
to  come  into  the  archbishop's  court,  to  the  presence  of  the  archbishop 


A-  D-  and  the  prelates ;  requiring  of  the  aforesaid  notary,  public  instru- 
^'^^^-    ments  to  be  made  of  the  same,  which  also  was  done. 

*An  Instrument  of  Testimonial,^  how  Mastcr  Huss  and  his  Procurer 
were  denied  entrance  into  the  public  Procuration,  celebrated  and 
holden  in  the  Archbishop's  Court. 

In  the  name  of  God,  Amen.  In  the  year  of  His  nativity,  1414 ;  the  seventh 
indiction,  on  Monday,  the  27th  day  of  the  month  of  August,  at  three  of 
the  clock,  or  thereabouts ;  in  the  fifth  year  of  the  bishopric  of  our  most  holy 
father  and  lord,  the  lord  John,  by  the  grace  and  providence  of  God,  pope,  the 
twenty-tliird  of  that  name,  in  the  lesser  city  of  Prague,  before  the  archbishop 
of  Prague's  court. 

The  most  reverend  father  in  Christ,  the  lord  Conrad,  by  the  grace  of  God 
archbishop  of  Prague,  and  legate  of  the  apostolic  see,  and  all  other  lords, 
abbots,  priors,  presidents,  deans,  archdeacons,  scholars,  canons,  prebendaries, 
and  all  other  prelates  of  the  city  and  diocese  of  Prague,  celebrating  and  hold- 
ing a  solemn  congregation,  for  divers  causes,  in  his  court  aforesaid :  There 
appeared  personally  the  worshipful  Master  John  Jessenitz,  doctor  of  the  decretals, 
and  procurer,  in  the  name  and  behalf  of  that  honourable  man.  Master  John 
Huss,  formed  bachelor  of  divinity  ;  by  the  commission  of  whose  procuration,  it 
is  evident  enough,  unto  me,  the  public  notary  within  written,  that  he,  knocking 
at  the  porch  or  gate  of  the  archbishop's  comt  aforesaid,  reqiured  that  either  the 
said  Master  John  Huss,  or  that  he,  in  the  name  and  behalf  of  Master  John 
Huss  his  master,  might  be  suffered  to  come  into  the  said  archbishop's  court,  to 
the  presence  of  the  said  lord  archbishop  and  the  prelates  who  were  there  con- 
gregated together,  for  so  much  as  Master  John  Huss  is  ready  to  satisfy  all  men, 
who  shall  require  him  to  show  any  reason  of  his  faith  and  hope  which  he 
holdeth,  and  to  see  and  hear  all  and  singular,  who  were  there  gathered  together : 
that  is  to  say  the  lord  archbishop  and  prelates,  or  any  of  them  who  would  lay 
any  manner  of  obstinacy,  of  error,  or  heresy  unto  him,  that  they  shoidd  there 
write  in  their  names,  and  according  both  unto  God's  law  and  man's,  and  the 
canon  law,  prepare  themselves  to  suffer  like  punishment  if  they  could  not 
lawfidly  prove  any  obstinacy  of  error  or  heresy  against  him  :  unto  whom  alto- 
gether he  woidd,  by  God's  help,  answer  before  the  said  lord  archbishop  and 
the  prelates,  in  the  next  general  council  holden  at  Constance,  and  stand  unto 
the  law ;  and  according  to  the  canons,  and  decretals  of  holy  fathers,  show  forth 
and  declare  his  innocency  in  the  name  of  Christ.  Unto  whom  Master  John  de 
Jessenitz,  doctor,  a  certain  famous  man  called  Ulricus  Swabe,  of  Swabenitz, 
marshal  of  the  said  lord  archbishop,  coming  forth  fi'om  the  said  court,  did 
utterly  deny,  imto  the  said  Master  Doctor  and  his  party,  all  manner  of  ingress 
and  entrance  into  the  same  court,  and  to  the  presence  of  the  archbishop  afore- 
said, and  of  the  prelates  there  gathered  together :  paying  and  affirming  that 
the  lord  archbishop,  with  the  prelates  aforesaid,  were  occupied  about  the  king's 
affairs,  or  business ;  requiring,  notwithstanding,  that  the  said  Master  Doctor 
would  tan-y  in  some  place  without  the  said  court ;  also,  that  when  the  arch- 
bishop and  the  prelates  had  finished  the  king's  affairs,  he  might  then  return, 
and  have  liberty  to  come  into  the  court  there.  The  said  Master  John  Huss 
and  the  doctor  of  law  tarried  awhile,  intreating  to  be  admitted  into  the  said 
archbishop's  court;  but  seeing  himself  to  prevail  nothing,  he  made,  there,  a 
solemn  protestation  of  his  request,  that  both  he,  and  also  Master  John  Huss 
and  his  party,  could  not  be  suffered  to  come  into  the  archbishop's  court,  to  the 
presence  of  the  archbishop  and  the  prelates,  but  that  they  were  utterly  denied 
thereof;  desiring  me,  the  pubhc  notary  here  vmder  written,  upon  the  premises, 
to  make  him  one  or  many  pubUc  instruments.  These  things  were  done  the 
year,  indiction,  day,  month,  hoiur,  bishopric,  and  place  above  written,  these 

(1)  This  instrument  of  testimonial  is  introduced  from  the  Edition  of  1563,  p.  196. -El). 


LETTERS    OF    HUSS,    ON   HIS   WAY    TO    CONSTANCE.  431 

honourable  and  wise  men  being  there  present :  Simon  Tysnove,   bachelor  of   nennj 

divinity ;  Simon  de  Rochezana,  proctor  of  Pilsna ;  Nicholas  de  Stogitzin  and  ^'  _ 

John   de   Partizibram,  masters   of    arts;    also   Fi'ana   Etzotronis  and  Jerome    ^   j)_ 
Dzrolonis  of  Prague,  John  de  Nichintz  and  Jerome  de  Ugezd,  students  of  the    1414, 

dioceses  of  Prague  and  Litomistens,'  as  witnesses  of   the  premises.     And  I,  

James  Voles,  sometime  son  of  Ambrose  of  Prague,  by  the  imperial  authority 
also  of  aU  the  masters,  doctors,  and  scholars  of  the  famous  university  and  study 
of  Prague,  being  sworn  public  notary,  was  present  at  all  the  affairs  aforesaid, 
and  did  see  and  hear  them  all  to  be  done  in  form  abovesaid ;  but,  being  occu- 
pied about  other  weighty  business,  I  have  caused  this  same  to  be  faithfully 
written  by  another  notary,  and  have  subscribed  and  published  it  with  mine  own 
hand,  and  have  reduced  it  into  this  public  form,  and  confirmed  it  with  my  ac- 
customed mark  and  name,  being  desired  and  required  to  bear  witness  of  all 
and  singular  the  premises.* 

And  these  were  the  things  which  were  done  before  John  Huss 
took  his  journey  to  the  general  council  of  Constance,  the  which  I 
minded  briefly  to  rehearse-;  whereunto  I  will  also  annex  somewhat  as- 
touching  his  journey  thitherwards. 

About  the  ides  of  October,  1414,  John  Huss  being  accompanied  John 
with  two  noble  gentlemen,  that  is  to  wit,  Wencclate  of  Duba,  and  taketii 
John  of  Clum,  he  departed  from  Prague,  and  took  his  jom-ney  towards  Jjey^"" "^^ 
Constance.  And  in  every  place  as  he  passed,  he  notified  his  presence  con- 
by  his  letters  which  he  sent  abroad,  and  especially  in  every  good 
town,  or  city  of  name  ;  the  tenor  whereof  ensueth  : 

The  Copy  of  the  Letters  which  John  Huss  set  up  in  the  common 
places  of  the  Cities  which  he  passed  through,  going  to  the 
Council. 

Master  John  Huss  goeth  now  luito  Constance,  there  to  declare  his  faith  which 
he  hath  hitherto  holden,  and  even  at  this  present  doth  hold,  and  by  God's  help 
wiU  defend  and  keep  even  unto  death.  Therefore,  even  as  he  hath  manifested 
throughout  all  the  kingdom  of  Bohemia  by  his  letters  and  intimations,  willing 
before  his  departure  to  have  satisfied  and  given  an  account  of  his  faith  unto 
every  man,  who  shoidd  object  or  lay  any  thing  against  him  in  the  general  con- 
vocation holden  in  the  archbishop  of  Prague's  court :  so  likewise  he  doth  mani- 
fest and  signify,  that  if  there  be  any  man  in  this  noble  and  imperial  city,  who 
will  impute  or  lay  any  eiTor  or  heresy  unto  him,  that  he  should  prepare  himself 
to  come  unto  the  council,  forasmuch  as  the  said  Master  John  Huss  is  ready  to 
satisfy  every  man  at  the  said  council,  who  shall  lay  any  thing  unto  his  charge 
as  touching  his  faith. 


John 
uss  ■was 


In  all  cities  as  he  passed  by,  and  principally  when  he  was  departed  How 
out  of  Bohemia  and  entered  into  Almain,  a  great  number  of  people  h  " 
did  come  unto  him,  and  he  was  very  gently  received  and  entertained  "^^^f^^^ 
by  his  hosts  through  all  the  towns  of  Germany,  and  especially  by  the  yay.  go- 
citizens  and  bm'gesses,  and  oftentimes  by  the  cm'ates  ;  insomuch  that  to'thJ' 
the  said  Huss  did  confess,  in  a  certain  epistle,  that  he  found  in  no  "^oi^n"^-' 
place  so  great  enemies  as  in  Bohemia.  And  if  it  happened  that  there 
were  any  bruit  or  noise   before    of  his  coming,  the    streets   were 
always  full  of  people  who  were  desirous  to  see  John  Huss,  and 
gratify^  him ;    and,  amongst  all  others,  especially  at  Nuremberg, 
where  certain  merchants  who  went  before,  and  certified  the  citizens  of 

(1)  "Litomistens."    LeutomiscU,  or  Litomysl.    A  manufacturing  town  in  Bohemia,  formerly  a 
bishop's  see. — Ed. 

(2)  "  Gratify  him,"  do  him  a  good  turn.    Bailey's  Etym.  Diet.— Ed. 


4-32  HISTOllY    OF    THE    BOHEMIANS. 

Henry   his  coming.    In  the  same  city  there  were  many  curates  who  came  unto 
^'      him,  desiring  him  that  they  might  talk  with  him  secretly  apart,  unto 


A.  D.    whom  he  answered :   That  he  loved  much  rather  to  pronounce  and 

l'^14.   gi^Q^y  forth  his  mind  and  opinion  openly  before  all  men,  than  in 

hugger-mugger,  for  he  would  keep  nothing  close  or  hidden.  So,  after 

dinner,  until  it  was  night,  he  spake  before  the  priests,  senators,  and 

A  char-    divcrs  othcr  citizens,  insomuch  that  they  all  had  him  in  great  estima- 

moilk"^^  tion  and  reverence,  one  only  doctor  excepted,  who  was  a  charter- 

against     housc  mouk,  and  the  curate  of  St.  Sebauld,  who  did  improve '  all  that 

Huss.      he  had  said. 

jo,,„  The  twentieth  day  after  that  he  departed  out  of  the  town  of  Prague, 

Hiss's  -^vliich  was  the  third  day  of  November,  he  came  unto  Constance,  and 
named'  lodged  at  an  honest  matron''s  house,  being  a  widow  named  Faith,  in 
^''"'-      St.  GalleVstreet. 

The  morrow  after,  the  gentleman,  Master  John  de  Clum,  and 

Master  Henry  Latzemboge,  went  to  speak  with  the  pope,  and  certified 

him  that  John  Huss  was  come,  whom  they  had  brought  to  Constance 

to  the  general  council,  under  the  emperor's  safe  conduct ;   desiring 

him  also  that  he,  on  his  part,  would  grant  the  said  John  Huss  liberty 

The  pope  to  remain  in  Constance,  without  any  trouble,  vexation,  or  interruption. 

ethTo"the  Unto  whom  the  pope  answered.  That  albeit  John  Huss  had  killed 

durt  of"    l^^s  brother,  yet  would  he  go  about,  as  much  as  in  him  lay,  that  no 

Joi'"       outrage  or  hm-t  should  be  done  unto  him  during  his  abode  in  the 

town  of  Constance. 
Huss's  In  the  meantime,   the  greatest  advereary  that  John  Huss  had, 

gofng^  named  Master  Steven  Paletz,  who  was  also  a  Bohemian  born,  was 
to  Con-  come  unto  Constance.  But  his  companion,  Master  Stanislaus  Znoyma, 
dieth  by  was  uot  yet  passed  the  borders  of  Bohemia  when  he  was  stricken  with 
s'^ir*  ^^  imposthume,^  whereof  he  died.  As  soon  as  the  said  Paletz  was 
Paletz  come  to  Constance,  he  did  associate  unto  him  one  Michael  de  Causis, 
Mkhaei  "who  had  before  falsely  accused  and  blamed  the  said  John  Huss.  And 
chi^f  enel  ^^"^  "^^J  ^^^  ^^  forgottcu,  that  the  said  Paletz,  had  been  familiarly 
mies  to  conversant  and  acquainted  with  the  said  John  Huss  from  his  youth 
upward ;  but  after  that  there  was  a  bull  brought  unto  Prague,  from 
pope  John  XXIIL,  against  the  king  of  Apulia,  named  Ladislaus, 
the  said  John  Huss  withstood  it  openly,  forasmuch  as  he  saw  that  it 
was  wicked  and  nought. 

And  as  touching  the  said  Paletz,  albeit  he  had  confessed  at  a 
certain  banquet,  in  the  presence  of  the  said  John  Huss,  that  the  said 
bull  was  contrary  to  all  equity  and  right,  yet  notwithstanding,  foras- 
much as  he  was  obliged  and  bound  unto  the  pope  by  means  of 
certain  benefices  received  at  his  hand,  he  maintained  and  defended 
the  said  bull  against  John  Huss :  and  this  was  the  cause  of  the  discord 
and  falling  out  between  them.  As  for  Michael  de  Causis,  the  com- 
panion of  Master  Paletz,  he  was  sometime  the  curate  of  New  Prague  ; 
but  he,  not  being  content  therewith,  but  seeking  after  a  further  prey, 
dreamed  and  imagined  out  a  new  device  how  to  attain  unto  it,  for  he 
made  a  semblance  that  he  had  found  out  a  new  invention  or  mean, 
whereby  the  mines  of  gold  in  Gilory,  which  were  perished  and  lost, 
might  be  renewed  and  set  to  work  again.     By  this  means  he  did  so 

(1)  "  Improve,"  speak  against. — Ed. 

{2)  "  Imposthume,"  a  gathering  of  liumours  and  swellings  upon  the  body.— Ed, 


Huss. 


THE    ENEMIES    OF    JOHN    HUSS.  433 

mucli  with  the  king  Winceslaus,  that  he  did  put  a  great  sum  of  money    Henry 
into  his  hands,  to  do  that  withal  which  he  had  promised. 


This  honest  man,  after  he  had  laboured  and  travailed  certain  days   -A^-  ^• 

about  it,  and  perceiving  that  he  brought  nothing  to  pass,  and  that  by • 

that  means  he  was  utterly  in  despair  of  his  purpose,  conveyed  himseli  ^^^'^^^ 
privily  out  of  the  realm  of  Bohemia  with  the  rest  of  the  money,  and  descri- 
withclrew  himself,  as  a  worthy  bird  for  such  a  nest,  to  the  court  ot 
Rome.     Such  a  man,  of  such  conditions,  was  easily  corrupted  wath 
money,  and  that,  by  the  adversaries  of  the  said  Huss,  and  promised 
them  to  do  what  he  could  for  them,  which  he  did  shortly  after. 
These  ivfo  jolly  roistei-s,  Steven  Paletz,  and  Michael  de  Causis,  drew 
out  certain   articles    against  the  said  Huss,  saying,  that   they  had  The  ene- 
gathered  them  out  of  his  own  WTitings,  and  especially  out  of  his  5u"  °' 
treatise  which  he  had  written  of  the  church.     Thev  trotted  up  and  P'^a^9tise 
down,  hither  and  thither,  taking  great  pains  to  show  the  said  articles  wm. 
unto  the  cardinals,  bishops,  and  monks,  and  such  others  of  that  sort, 
doing  them  also  to  understand,  that  there  were  other  matters  of 
greater  importance,  which  the  said  John  Huss  had  committed  and  done 
against  the  holy  constitutions,  and  other  ordinances  of  the  pope  and  the 
church  ;  which,  if  need  were,  they  said  they  would  propound  before  the 
council.     Through  the  kindling  of  this  their  fire,  they  did  so  incense 
the  cardinals  and  all  the  priests,  that  all  they,  with  one  mind  and  consent, 
thought  to  cause  the  good  man  to  be  taken  and  laid  hands  on. 

The  twenty-sixth  day  after  the  said  Huss  was  come  to  Constance, 
(during  all  which  time  he  was  occupied  in  reading,  writing,  and 
familiar  talk  with  his  friends),  the  cardinals,  through  the  instigation 
and  motion  of  Paletz,  and  Michael  de  Causis,  sent  two  bishops,  to 
wit,  the  bishop  of  Augusta,  and  of  Trent,  and  with  them  the 
borough-master  of  the  town  of  Constance,  and  a  certain  knight,  to 
the  place  where  John  Huss  lodged,  about  dinner-time ;  who  should 
make  report  unto  him  that  they  were  sent  by  the  pope  and  his 
cardinals,  to  advertise  him  that  he  should  come  to  render  some  know- 
ledge or  witness  of  his  doctrine  before  them,  as  he  had  oftentunes 
desired,  and  that  they  were  ready  to  hear  him. 

Unto  whom  J  ohn  Huss  answered,  "  I  am  not  come  for  any  such  john 
intent,  as  to  defend  my  cause  particularly  before  the  pope  and  his  ^^^^^  ^^ 
cardinals,  protesting  that  I  never  desired  any  such  thing,  but  that  I  p^^^^^^i^* 
would  willingly  appear  before  the  whole  assembly  of  the  council,  and  fore  the 
there  answer  for  my  defence  openly,  without  any  fear  or  doubt,  unto  ^ouncn. 
all  such  things  as  shall  be  demanded  or  required  of  me.     Notwith- 
standing, said  he,  forasmuch  as  you  require  me  so  to  do,  I  will  not 
refuse  to  go  with  you  before  the  cardinals  ;  and  if  it  happen  that  they 
evil  entreat  or  handle  me,  yet,  nevertheless,  I  trust  in  my  Lord  Jesus, 
that  he  will  so  comfort  and  strengthen  me,  that  I  shall  desire  much 
rather  to  die  for  his  glory's  sake,  than  to  deny  the  verity  and  truth 
which  I  have  learned  by  his  holy  Scriptures."     Wherefore  it  came  to 
pass,  that  the  bishops  being  instant  upon  him,  and  not  showing  any 
outward  semblance  that  they  bare  any  malice  or  hatred  against  him 
in  their  hearts  (albeit  they  had  privily  laid  garrisons  both  in  the  house 
where  they  were  assembled,  and  also  in  other  houses),  John  Huss 
took  his  horse  which  he  had  at  his  lodging,  and  went  unto  the  court 
of  the  pope  and  the  cardinals. 

VOL.  III.  F  F 


434  HISTORY    OV    THE    BOHEMIAN'S. 

n,'>,r,j        When  lie  was  come  thither,  and  had  sahited  the  cardinals,  they 
bccran  to  speak  to  liim  in  this  sort :  "  We  have  heard  many  reports 


A.  D.    of  you,  which,  if  they  be  true,  are  in  no  case  to  be  suifered  ;  for 
1415.    j^^eii  say,  that  you  have  taught  great  and  manifest  errors,  and  con- 
He  comes  trarv  and  against  the  doctrine  of  the  true  church  ;  and  that  you  have 
popTand^  sowed  youi'  errors  abroad  through  all  the  realm  of  Bohemia,  by  a 
the  car-    i^^^.  gp^ce  or  time  ;  wherefore  we  have  caused  you  to  be  called  hither 
before  us,  that  we  might  understand  and  know  how   the  matter 
standcth." 
Answer        Uuto  whoui  John   Huss  auswcrcd  in  few  words  :    "  Reverend 
Hus'f  t"o    fathers  !  you  shall  understand  that  I  am  thus  minded  and  affectioned, 
the  pope  that  I  should  rather  choose  to  die,  than  I  should  be  found  culpable 
cardinals,  of  oue  ouly  ciTor,  iBuch  less  of  many  and  great  en-ors.     For  this 
cause  I  am  the  more  willingly  come  unto  the  general  council  which 
is  here  appointed,  to  show  myself  ready,  even  with  all  my  heart,  to 
receive  correction,  if  any  man  can  prove  any  errors  in  me.''     The 
cardinals  answered  him  again,  that  his  sayings  pleased  them  very  well ; 
and  upon  that  they  went  away,  leaving  the  said  John  Huss  with 
Master  John  de  Chun,  under  the  guard  and  keeping  of  the  armed 
men. 
Dolus  In  the  mean  season,  they  did  suborn  and  furnish  out  a  certain 

S?dina-    divine,  a  friar  Franciscan,  a  subtle  and  crafty  man,  and  a  malicious 
Hum.       hypocrite,  to  question  with  the  said  John  Huss,  who  was  compassed 
round  about  with  armed  men.    This  man  drawing  near  in  his  monkish 
A  friar     gesture,  said,   "Reverend  master!    I,  a  simple  and  rude  idiot,  am 
"Jtteth    (^ovat  unto  you  to  learn  ;  for  I  have  heard  many  strange  and  contrary 
twoques-  thiugs  against  the  catholic  faith  to  be  ascribed  unto  you,  which  do 
John       diversely  move  my  mind,  being  wholly  inclined  to  the  truth.  Where- 
Huss.      |.^^^^  J  ^^  desire  you,  even  for  the  love  which  you  bear  unto  the  truth, 
and  to  all  good  and  godly  men,  that  you  would  teach  me,  most 
simple  and  miserable  man,  some  certainty  and  truth.     And  first, 
men  say,  that  you  hold  opinion  that,  after  the  consecration  and  pro- 
nunciation of  the  words  in  the  sacrament  of  the  altar,  there  remaineth 
only  material  bread."     John  Huss  answered,  that  it  was  falsely  attri- 
buted and  imputed  unto  him.     Then  said  he,  "  I  pray  you,  is  not 
this  your  opinion  T""     "  No  verily,"  said  John  Huss,  "  I  do  not  so 
think  of  it."     When  the  monk  asked  this  question  the  third  time. 
Master     Mastcr  Johu  de  Clum  being  moved  somewhat  with  him,  said,  "  Why 
ci'um  ^    art  thou  so  importunate  upon  him  ?    Verily,  if  any  man  had  affirmed 
foi^j^hn  or  denied  any  thing  unto  me  but  once,  I  would  have  believed  him. 
Huss.      ^jj(j  t]^Q^^  albeit  he  hath  showed  thee  his  mind  so  often,  yet  ceasest 
not  to  trouble  him."    Then  said  the  monk,  "  Gentle  master  !  I  pray 
A  fiiariy  you  pardou  me  a  poor  idiot  and  simple  friar ;  surely  I  did  it  of  a 
"'"''^*"      good  mind  and  intent,  being  willing  and  desirous  to  learn."     This 
friar  put  forth  another  question  unto  him,  protesting  his  simplicity 
and  ignorance :  "  What  manner  of  unity  of  the  godhead  and  man- 
hood was  in  the  person  of  Christ  .^"     When  John  Huss  had  heard 
this  question,  he,  turning  himself  unto  Master  John  de  Clum,  in  the 
A  wolf  in  Bohemian  language  said :  "  Truly  this  friar  is  not  simple,  as  he  doth 
skiT''*   pretend,  for  he  hath  propounded  unto  me  a  very  hard  question." 
And  afterwards,  turning  himself  to  the  friar,  he  said  unto  him, 
"  Brother  !  you  say  that  you  are  simple,  but  as  I  have  heard  of  you, 


THE    POPE    BKEAKETH    HIS    PROMISE.  435 

I  perceive  very  well  that  you  are  double  and  crafty,  and  not  simple."    Henry 
"  It  is  not  so,  verily,"  said  the  friar.     "  Well,"  said  John  Huss,  "  I 


will  cause  you  well  to  understand  that  it  is  so.     For  as  touching  the    A.  D. 
simplicity  of  a  man,  it  is  required  in  things  that  concern  civility  and    ^^^^- 
manners,  that  the  spirit,  the  understanding,  the  heart,  the  words,  and 
the  mouth,  should  agree  together  :  and  I  do  not  perceive  that  this  is 
in  you.     There  is  in  your  mouth  a  certain  semblance  of  simplicity, 
which  would  very  well  declare  you  to  be  an  idiot  and  simple,  but 
your  deeds  show  plainly  and  evidently  a  great  subtlety  and  craft  in 
you,  with  a  great  quickness  and  liveliness  of  wit,  in  that  you  have 
proponed  unto  me  so  hard  and  difficult  a  question.  Notwithstanding, 
I  \n\\  not  fear  to  show  you  my  mind  in  this  question."     And  when 
he  had  made  an  end,  the  monk  gave  him  great  thanks  for  his  gentle- 
ness, and  so  departed.     After  that,  the  pope's  garrison  which  was 
about  the  said  John  Huss,  told  him,  that  this  friar  was  called  Master  Didace,  .1 
Didace,  who  was  esteemed  and  counted  the  greatest  and  most  subtle  mar. 
divine  in  all  Lonibardy.     "  Oh  !"  said  John  Huss,  "  that  I  had  ^^^'^^, 
known  that  before  ;  I  would  have  handled  him  after  another  sort  and  f^^^^^^ 
fashion  :  but  I  would  to  God  they  were  all  such ;  then,  through  the  cioak  of 
help  and  aid  of  the  holy  Scriptures,  I  would  fear  none  of  them."         ^^^ '" 

In  this  manner  the  said  Huss  and  Master  John  de  Clum  were  left 
under  the  keeping  of  these  men  of  arms,  until  four  of  the  clock  in 
the  afternoon.     After  that  time  the  cardinals  assembled  again  in  the 
pope''s  court,  to  devise  and  take  counsel  what  they  should  do  with 
John  Huss.      Then  Stephen  Paletz  and  Michael  de  Causis,  with 
divers  others  of  their  adherents,  made  earnest  suit  that  he  should  not 
be  let  go  at  liberty  again,  and  having  the  favour  of  the  judges  on  xheac- 
their  part,  they  bragged  up  and  down  in  a  manner  as  they  had  been  joim 
mad  men,  and  mocked  the  said  John  Huss,  saying,  "  Now  we  will  JJiumph 
hold  thee  well  enough  ;  thou  art  under  our  power  and  jurisdiction,  °^^l^^^ 
and  shalt  not  depart  until  such  time  as  thou  has  paid  the  uttermost  is  taken, 
farthing." 

A  little  before  night,  they  sent  the  provost  of  the  Roman  court 
unto  Master  John  de  Clum,'to  show  him  that  he  might  return  to  his 
lodging ;  but  as  for  John  Huss,  they  had  otherwise  provided  for  him. 
When  Master  John  de  Clum  heard  this  news,  he  was  wonderfully 
displeased,  forasmuch  as  through  their  crafts,  subtleties,  and  glosing 
words,  they  had  so  trained  this  good  man  into  their  snares  ;  where- 
upon he  went  unto  the  pope,  declaring  unto  him  all  that  was  done  ; 
most  humbly  beseeching  him,  that  he  would  call  to  remembrance  the 
promise  which  he  had  made  unto  him  and  Master  Henry  Latzemboge, 
and  that  he  would  not  so  lightly  falsify  and  break  his  faith  and 
promise.  The  pope  answered,  that  all  these  things  were  done  without  The  pope 
his  consent  or  commandment ;  and  said  further  to  Master  Clum  promise.' 
apart,  "  What  reason  is  it  that  you  should  impute  this  deed  unto  me, 
seeing  that  you  know  well  enough  that  I  myself  am  in  the  hands  of 
these  cardinals  and  bishops.''" 

In  mine  opinion,  forasmuch  as  pope  John  feared  that  which  indeed  Tiiepope, 
did  after  follow,  that  he  shoul(i  be  deprived  of  his  dignity,  he  thought  iL^'cmm. 
to  win  the  favour  of  these  Herodian  cardinals  and  bishops,  by  be-  ^g^'j^gt 
travinof  this  ffood  man  unto  them.    So  the  said  Master  Clum  returned  Joh" 
very  pensiveful  and  sorry  ;   he  complained  very  sore,  both  privily  and 

F   F   2 


43G  HISTORY    OF    THK    liOHEMIANS. 

Henry    opciily,  ot  tlic  iujuiy  and  outrage  that  the  pope  had  done ;  but  all 
'  ■      profited  nothing.     After  this,  the  said  John  liuss  was  led  by  the 


A.  I),    officers  to  the  chapter-house  of  the  great  church  of  Constance,  where 

_iii^  he  was  kept  prisoner  for  the  space  of  eight  days  ;    from  thence 

he  was  carried  unto  the  Jacobines,  hard  by  the  river  Rhine,  and 

was  shut  up  in  the  prison  of  the  abbey,  which  was  hard  by  the 

Bogardes. 

inipri  After  he  had  been  enclosed  there  a  certain  time,  he  fell  sore  sick 

and  sick--  of  an  ague,  by  means  of  the  stench  of  the  place,  and  became  so  weak, 

John"'     that  they  despaired  of  his  life.     And  for  fear  lest  this  good  man 

iiuss.      should  die  in  prison,  as  others  are  wont  to  do,  the  pope  sent  unto 

him  certain  of  his  physicians  to  cure  and  help  him.     In  the  midst  of 

his  sickness  his  accusers  made  importunate  suit  to  the  principals  of  the 

council,  that  the  said  John  Huss  might  be  condemned,  and  presented 

unto  the  pope  these  articles  here  under-written  : 

Articles  presented  unto  Pope  John  XXIIL,  for  the  Condemnation 
of  Master  John  Huss,  after  he  was  newly  imprisoned.' 

The  sup-        ^-  ^^  ^1°^!^  ^""  'il^out  the  sacraments  of  tlie  cliurch,  and  especially  about  the 
per  of  the  sacrament  of  the  body  of  Christ,  forasmuch  as  he  hath  openly  preached,  that  it 
Lord.        ought  to  be  ministered  openly  unto  the  people  under  both  kinds,  that  is  to  say, 
the  body  and  blood.     This  article  is  evident,  forasmuch  as  his  disciples  at  this 
instant  in  Prague  do  minister  the  same  in  both  kinds.     Moreover,  it  is  affirmed 
by  divers,  that  he  hath  taught  both  in  the  schools  and  in  the  church,  or  at  the 
least  that  he  doth  hold  this  opinion,  that  after  the  words  of  consecration  pro- 
nounced upon  the  altai",  there  remaineth  still  material  bread  in  the  sacrament. 
This  article  shall  be  known  by  his  examination. 
Of  the  II.  He  doth  err  as  touching  the  ministers  of  the  chiu'ch,  forasmuch  as  he 

adminis-  gajth^  that  they  cannot  consecrate  or  minister  the  sacraments  when  they  are  in 
the  sacra-  mortal  sin.  This  article  shall  likewise  be  known  by  his  examination  :  notwith- 
iiients.  standing,  all  that  which  is  here  contained  may  be  gathered  by  his  writings 
'  De  Ecclesia;'  the  which  if  he  deny,  let  there  then  be  some  divines  and  others 
appointed,  to  peruse  and  look  over  his  said  writings  of  the  chiu-ch.  Moreover 
he  saith,  that  other  men  beside  priests  may  minister  the  sacrament.  This 
article  is  evident,  forasmuch  as  his  disciples  do  the  same  at  Prague,  who  of 
themselves  do  violently  take  the  sacrament  out  of  the  treasury,  and  communi- 
cate among  themselves,  when  the  holy  communion  is  denied  imto  them.  By 
this  and  other  things  also  it  is  sufficiently  evident,  that  he  hath  taught  that 
every  man,  being  without  mortal  sin,  hath  the  power  of  orders  or  priesthood, 
forasmuch  as  such  only  as  have  taken  orders  ought  to  minister  the  sacrament 
luito  themselves.  And  because  he  proceedeth  from  small  matters  imto  great 
and  weightier,  it  doth  consequently  appear  and  follow,  that  those  who  be  in  the 
state  of  grace  can  bind  and  loose. 
Of  the  III.  He  doth  en-  as  touching  the  church,  and  specially  for  that  he  doth  not 

''  '"'^'" ''  allow  and  admit  that  the  church  signifieth  the  pope,  cardinals,  archbishops,  and 
the  clergy  underneath  them  ;  but  saith,  that  this  signification  was  drawn  out 
from  the  school-men,  and  is  in  no  case  to  be  holden  or  allowed.  This  article  is 
manifest  by  his  said  treatise  upon  the  church. 
Ecclesi-  Moreover,  he  doth  err  concerning  the  church,  in  that  he  saith,  that  the 
astical  church  ought  not  to  have  any  temporal  possessions.  And  that  the  temporal 
lords  may  take  then-.  &way  from  the  church  and  the  clergy  without  any  offence. 
This  error  is  evident,  forasmuch  as  through  his  doctrine  and  enticements  many 
churches  in  the  kingdom  of  Bohemia,  and  in  the  city  of  Prague,  are  already 
spoiled  and  robbed  of  a  great  part  of  their  temporalties  and  goods.  He  saith 
also,  that  Constantine  and  other  secular  princes  erred  by  enriching  and  en- 
dowing churches  and  monasteries.  This  article  is  manifest  by  that  which  goeth 
next  before. 

(1)  In  the  first  Edition,  it  is  stated  Itiat  these  articles  were  presented  hy  Michael  de  Causis. — Ed. 


revenues 


ARTICI.Ef.    AGAIXST    JOHN    HUSS.  43T 

IV.  He  erretli  as  touching  the  church,  in  that  he  saith,  that  all  priests  are 
of  like  power,  and  therefore  affirmeth,  that  the  reservations  of  the  pope's  casu- 
alties, the  ordering  of  bishops,  and  the  consecration  of  the  priests,  were  invented 
only  for  covetousness.  This  article  doth  somewhat  appear  by  those  aforegoing, 
but  by  his  examination  shall  be  more  evident. 

V.  He  erreth  concerning  the  church,  in  that  he  saith,  that  the  church,  being  The 

in  sin,  hath  no  power  of  the  keys,  when  the  pope,  cardinals,  and  all  other  of  pjf,!^"''^' 
the  priests  and  clergy  are  in  deadly  sin  ;  which  he  saitli  is  possible  enough.  The 
This  also  doth  appear  in  his  treatise  upon  the  church,  in  his  first  error  as  touch-  P"«er 
ing  the  ministers  of  the  church.  keys  of 

VT.  He  erreth  touching  the  church,  forasmuch  as  through  contempt  he  doth  the 
not  fear  excommunication.     This   doth  notoriously  appear  bv  his  own  doin£rs,  £^"'^'^'>- 
m  that  he  aid  contemn  and  despise  the  apostohc  and  ordinary  censure  ;  and  in  munica- 
all  the  apostolic  excommunications  and  injunctions  he  hath  borne  himself  upon  ti°"- 
the  divine  commandments  ;  and  in  contempt  of  the  keys,  to  the  setting  out  of 
his  hypocrisy,  he  hath  said  mass  all  the  ways  between  this  and  the  city  of 
Prague,  and  thereby  hath  profaned  the  process  and  authority  of  the  church. 

VII.  He  erreth  again  as  touching  the  church,  because  he  keepetli  not  the  Investi- 
institutions  and  investitures  thereof,  but  holdeth  opinion  that  every  man  hath  '"'^^^ 
authoritj'  to  invest  and  appoint  any  man  to  the  cure  of  souls.     This  is  evident 

by  his  own  doings,  forasmuch  as  many  in  the  kingdom  of  Bohemia  by  their 
defenders  and  favourers,  or  rather  by  himself,  were  appointed  and  put  into 
parish  churches,  which  they  have  long  ruled  and  kept,  not  being  appointed  by 
the  apostolic  see,  neither  yet  by  the  ordinary  of  the  city  of  Prague. 

VIII.  He  erreth  as  touching  the  church,  in  that  he  holdeth  opinion,  that  a  The 
man,  being  once  ordained  a  priest  or  deacon,  cannot  be  forbidden  or  kept  back  °^'^^  "^ 
from  the  office  of  preaching.    This  is  likewise  manifest  by  his  own  doings,  for-  jng^*^ 
asmuch  as  he  himself  could  never  be  letted  from  preaching,   neither  by  the 
apostolic  see,  nor  yet  by  the  archbishop  of  Prague. 

And  to  the  intent  that  the  said  John  Huss,  who  is  clothed  in  sheep's  clothing.  Lupus 
and  inwardly  a  ravening  wolf,  may  be  the  better  known  by  his  fruits,  for  the  ^^num 
better  information  of  you,  most  reverend  fathers,  I  say,  that  from  the  first  time  quod    ' 
that  he  took  in  hand,  or  went  about  to  sow  such  errors  and  heresies,  which  turbarit 
afterwards  he  did  in  deed,  he,  understanding  and  perceiving  himself  to  be  with-  a  h'eTpin" 
standed  and  gainsayed  by  the  Germans,  who  were  in  the  university  of  Prague,  together  ° 
forasmuch  as  he  could  conclude  nothing,  because  they  had  three  voices,  and  he  of  many 
on  his  part  had  but  one  voice  only :  he  went  about  and  brought  to  pass,  and  crimes, 
that  by  the  secular  power,  that  the  GeiTnans  should  have  but  one  voice,  and  he 
and  his  parts  three  voices ;  which  thing  when  the  Germans  once  perceived, 
rather  than  they  would  lose  or  forsake  any  part  of  their  right  which  they  had  The 
in  voices,  or  be  in  danger  in  their  persons,  which  would  then  have  ensued  upon  "^P^r'ure 
it,  to  save  themselves,  they  wholly,  with  one  consent,  agreed  together  to  depart  Germans 
out  of  Prague ;  and  by  this  means  this  solemn  and  famous  university  of  Prague  f^om  the 
was  made  desolate,  that  had  brought  forth  so  many  notable  men  in  divers  sky^of 
sciences.    Behold  this  his  first  fruits,  who  divided  that  so  famous  university,  for-  Prague, 
asmuch  as  grapes  are  not  gathered  of  thorns,  neither  figs  of  brambles. 

Moreover,   when  there  were  questions  moved  amongst  the  di\ines  of  the  Thefortj'- 
university  of  Prague  upon  the  forty-five  articles  of  John  WicklifF,  and  they  had  ^^. 
called  a  convocation,  and  all  the  divines  of  Bohemia  (for  the  Germans  were  AViekliff. 
already  departed),  they  concluded  that  every  one  of  those  articles  was  either 
heretical,  seditious,  or  erroneous.     He  alone  held  the  contrary  opinion,  that 
none  of  those  articles  were  either  heretical,  seditious,  or  en-oneous,  as  after- 
wards  he  did  dispute,  hold,  and  teach,   in  the  common   schools  of  Prague ; 
whereby  it  is  evidently  enough  foreseen,  that  he  doth  affirm  those  articles  of 
Wickhff,  which  are  not  only  condemned  in   England,  but  also  by  the  whole 
church,  because  they  were  first  invented  and  set  forth  by  the  members  of  Anti- 
christ. 

Moreover,  he  being  complained  of  to  the  archbishop  of  Prague,  that  he 
preached  and  set  forth  certain  articles  which  were  heretical,  false,  and  seditious, 
he  was  forbidden  by  the  said  archbishop  to  preach  any  more,  who  proceeded 
against  him,  according  to  the  canonical  sanctions ;  which  process  is  confirmed 
by  the  apostolic  see,  and  published  as  well  in  the  court  of  Rome,  as  without ; 
which  John  Huss  and  his  adherents  have  divers  and  manifold  ways  violated 


438 


HISTORY    OF    THE    BOHEMIANS. 


Henry 
V. 

A.D. 

1415. 

The 

office  of 
preaching 
forbidden 
by  the 
arch- 
bishop. 
Insurrec- 
tions 
against 
the 
clergy 
feared  in 
Bohemia. 


Caiaphas 
prophe- 
sied. 


Master 
Paletz 
lieth,  for 
the  Holy 
Ghost 
had  no 
leisure  to 
come  to 
that 
council. 


and  profaned.  And  whosoever  did  speak  against  him,  they  were  deprived  of 
their  benefices,  and  others  placed  in,  who  have  ruled  and  yet  do  rule  the  said 
churches,  and  the  flocks  pertaining  to  the  same,  not  having  any  cure  or  charge 
of  the  souls  committed  unto  them,  neither  by  the  apostolic  see,  nor  yet  by  the 
ordinary  of  the  place. 

Also  as  many,  as  well  priests  as  lay-men,  in  the  city  of  Prague  and  kingdom 
of  Bohemia,  who  have  spoken  against  the  doctrine  of  Huss,  and  the  protana- 
tion  of  the  process  aforesaid,  or  at  the  least  not  allowing  the  same,  have  suffered 
most  mortal  hatred  and  persecutions,  and  yet  to  this  day  do  suffer,  but  that  at 
this  present  it  is  dissimuled  until  the  end  of  the  process  against  John  Huss. 
Wherefore,  if  he  be  now  let  go  again,  without  doubt  they  shall  suffer  great  per- 
secution both  in  body  and  goods,  and  throughout  all  the  realm  of  Bohemia, 
"house  shall  be  against  house;"  and  this  mischief  will  creep,  yea  suddenly 
spring  up  throughout  all  Germany,  and  innumerable  souls  shall  be  infected,  so 
that  there  shall  be  such  persecution  of  the  clergy  and  faithful,  as  hath  not  been 
since  the  time  of  the  emperor  Constantine  to  this  present  day ;  for  he  ceaseth 
not  to  move  and  stir  up  the  laity  against  the  clergy  and  faithful  Christians.  And, 
when  any  of  the  clergy  would  draw  him  away,  or  call  him  from  his  heresy,  and 
for  that  cause  forbid  him  to  preach,  that  he  do  not  teach  any  heresies;  then 
saith  he,  and  teacheth,  that  the  clergy  do  that  of  envy  and  malice,  because  he 
rebuketh  their  vices  and  faults ;  that  is  to  say,  their  simony,  pride,  and  covet- 
ousness. 

Moreover,  he  stirreth  up  the  secular  princes  against  the  prelates  of  churches, 
monasteries,  and  universities,  and  generally  against  the  whole  clergy.  Going 
about  by  this  means,  he  preacheth  and  teacheth  that  prelates  and  other  men  of 
the  church  ought  not  to  have  any  temporal  goods  or  possessions,  but  only  to 
live  upon  alms.  And  by  this  means  he  hath  done  already  very  much  hurt,  and 
annoyed  divers  and  many  prelates,  clerks,  and  churches  in  the  kingdom  of 
Bohemia  and  the  city  of  Prague,  forasmuch  as  thereby  they  are  already  spoiled 
and  robbed  of  their  possessions.  Yea,  he  teacheth  also  that  it  is  lawful  for  the 
lay  people,  without  sin,  to  withhold  and  keep  back  the  tithes  and  oblations,  or  to 
give  the  church-goods  to  any  other  minister  ;  all  the  secular  princes  are  greatly 
inclined  hereunto,  but  especially  the  laity,  who  follow  every  man  his  own  will. 

He  hath  generally  to  lay  for  himself  all  those  heretics  who  do  but  very  smally 
regard  the  ecclesiastical  censures,  and  do  hate  the  authority  of  the  Roman 
church,  yea,  and  do  utterly  detest  and  abhor  the  same  ;  which  thing  will  more 
and  more  increase,  except  it  be  effectually  and  manfully  withstood:  and  if  he 
do  by  any  means  escape  from  the  council,  he  and  his  favourers  will  say  that 
his  doctrine  is  just  and  true,  and  that  it  is  allowed  by  the  the  authority  of  uni- 
versal sacred  council,  and  that  all  his  adversaries  are  wicked  and  naughty  men  ; 
so  that  he  would  do  more  mischief,  than  ever  any  heretic  did  since  the  time  of 
Constantine  the  Great. 

Wherefore,  most  holy  fathers !  provide  and  take  heed  to  yourselves,  and  to 
the  whole  flock  amongst  whom  the  Holy  Ghost  hath  placed  you,  to  ride  the 
church  of  Christ,  which  he  hath  purchased  with  his  own  blood ;  and,  whilst  the 
disease  is  new  and  fresh,  help  and  remedy  it,  as  well  touching  him  who  doth 
so  infect  and  trouble  the  church  of  God,  as  also  concerning  the  occasions 
through  which  he  hath  presumed,  and  might  do  the  same ;  because  the  prelates 
do  abuse  the  ecclesiastical  censures,  and  as  well  the  prelates  as  those  that  are 
under  them,  do  not  keep  and  observe  the  order  of  the  church  which  is  appointed 
them  by  God ;  whereby  it  cometh  to  pass,  that  whilst  they  themselves  do  walk 
the  broken  and  unknown  paths,  their  flock  falleth  headlong  into  the  ditch. 

Wherefore  let  our  sovereign  lord  the  pope,  and  this  most  sacred  council  ordain 
and  depute  commissioners,  who  may  examine  the  said  John  Huss  upon  all  afore- 
written,  and  other  things  in  the  presence  of  them  who  know  the  matter.  Let 
there  be  also  certain  doctors  and  masters  appointed  to  read  over  and  peruse  his 
books  which  he  hath  written,  whereof  some  are  here  present ;  that  the  church 
may  be  speedily  purged  and  cleansed  from  these  errors. 


Upon  this  his  accusation,  they  ordained  and  appointed  three  com- 
missioners or  judges;  that  is  to  say,  the  patriarch  of  Constantinople, 
and  the  bishop  of  Castile,  and  the  bishop  of  Lybusse  ;  which  prelates 


.JOHN    HUSS    SICK    IN    PHISOX.  439 

being  thus  deputed,  heard  the  accusation  and  the  witness  which  was    Heyy 

brought  in  by  certain  babbhng  priests  of  Prague,  confirmed  by  their '. 

oaths,  and  afterwards  recited  the  said  accusation  unto  the  said  Huss  in  A.D. 
the  prison,  at  such  time  as  his  ague  was  fervent  and  extremely  upon  ^^^^- 
him.  Joi"! 

Upon  this,  John  Huss  required  to  have  an  advocate  to  answer  for  of  an 
him  ;  which  was  plainly  and  utterly  denied  him.  And  the  reason  that  pfj^on" 
the  masters  commissioners  brought  against  it  was  this :  that  the  plain  oebaneci 
canon  doth  forbid  that  any  man  should  be  a  defender  of  any  cause  of  "livocate. 
him,  who  is  suspected  of  any  kind  of  heresy.    The  vanity  and  folly  of 
the  witnesses  was  such,  that  if  in  case  they  had  not  been  both  the 
accusers  and  judges  themselves,  there  should  have  needed  no  distinct 
confutation.     I  would  have  rehearsed  the  testimonies  in  this  place, 
but  that  I  knew  them  to  be  such,  as  the  prudent  and  wise  reader  could 
not  have  read  without  great  tediousness.  Howbeit,  some  of  them  shall 
be  declared,  when  we  come  to  the  process  of  his  judgment. 

Afterwards,  when  John  Huss  had  recovered  a  little  strength  or 
health,  by  the  commandment  of  the  tliree  commissioners  there  Vere 
presented  unto  him  certain  articles,  many  in  number,  which,  they  said, 
they  had  gathered  out  of  his  book  which  he  made  of  the  church ;  of 
which  articles  some  were  forged  and  invented  by  Master  Paletz,  and 
others  were  gathered  only  by  halves,  as  shall  be  more  plainly  declared 
hereafter,  when  we  come  to  speak  of  the  judgment  pronounced  and 
given  against  the  said  Huss. 

Thus  John  Huss  remained  in  the  prison  of  the  covent  of  the  Fran-  Books 
ciscans,  until  the  Wednesday  before  Palm  Sunday,  and  certain  ap-  joim 
pointed  to  keep  him  ;  and  in  the  mean  season,  to  employ  and  spend  his  ^"^^g  j„ 
time  withal,  he  wrote  certain  books,  that  is  to  say,  of  the  ten  com-  prison, 
mandments,  of  the  love  and  knowledge  of  God,  of  matrimony,  of 
penance,  of  the  three  enemies  of  mankind,  of  the  prayer  of  our  Lord, 
and  of  the  supper  of  our  Lord. 

The  same  day  pope  John  XXHL  changed  his  apparel,  and  con-  Pope 
veyed  himself  secretly  out  of  Constance,  fearing  the  judgirjent  by  which  out  of  *^ 
afterwards  he  was  deprived  of  his  papal  dignity,  by  means  of  most  ^,a"ce. 
execrable  and  abominable  forleits  and  doings.  This  was  the  cause  that 
John  Huss  was  transported  and  carried  unto  another  prison  ;  for  the 
pope's  servants,  who  had  the  charge  and  keeping  of  John  Huss,  under- 
standing that  their  master  was  fled  and  gone,  delivered  up  the  keys  of 
the  prison  unto  the  emperor  Sigismund,  and  to  the  cardinals,  and 
followed  their  master  the  pope.     Then,  by  the  whole  consent  of  the 
council,  the  said  John  Huss  Avas  put  into  the  hands  of  the  bishop  of 
Constance,  who  sent  him  to  a  castle  on  the  other  side  of  the  river 
Rhine,  not  very  far  from  Constance,  where  he  was  shut  up  in  a  tower 
with  fetters  on  his  legs,  that  he  could  scarce  walk  in  the  day-time, 
and  at  night  he  was  fastened  up  to  a  rack  against  the  wall  hard  by  his 
bed. 

In  the  mean  season,  certain  noblemen  and  gentlemen  of  Poland  and  NoWe- 
Bohemia  did  all  their  endeavour  to  purchase  his  deliverance,  having  Bohemia 
respect  to  the  good  renown  of  all  the  realm,  which  was  wonderfully  '^f^{^^^  ^""^ 
defamed  and  slandered  by  certain  naughty  persons.    The  matter  Avas  Huss. 
grown  unto  this  point,  that  all  they  who  were  in  the  town  of  Constance, 
who  seemed  to  bear  any  favour  unto  John  Huss,  wcie  made  as  mocking 


440  HISTORY    OF    THE    BOHEMIANS, 

Henry    stocks,  aiid  derided  of  all  men,  yea,  even  of  the  slaves  and  base 

'      people.      Wherefore  they  took  counsel  and   concluded  together  to 

A.  D.    present  their  request  in  writing  unto  the  whole  council,   or  at  least 

\^\o-    unto  the  four  nations  of  Almain,  Italy,  France  and  England :  this 

request  was  presented  the  fourteenth  day  of  May,  a.  d.  1415  ;   the 

tenor  here  ensueth. 

The  first  Schedule  or  Bill,  which  the  Nobles  of  Bohemia  delivered  up 
to  the  Council  for  the  Deliverance  of  John  Huss,  the  fourteenth 
day  of  May,  a.  d.  1415. 

Most  reverend  fathers  and  lords  !  the  nobles  and  lords  of  Bohemia  and  Poland 
here  present,  by  these  their  present  writings  do  show  and  declare  imto  your 
fatherly  reverences,  how  that  the  most  noble  king  and  lord,  the  lord  Sigismund, 
king  of  Romans,  always  Augustus,  king  of  Hungary,   Croatia,  Dalniatia,  &c., 
hearing  of  the  great  dissension  that  was  in  the  kingdom  of  Bohemia,  as  heir, 
king,  and  lord  successor,  willing  to  foresee  and  provide  for  his  own  honour,  sent 
these  noblemen,  Master  Wenceslate  de  Duba,  and  John  de  Clum  here  present. 
The  safe    that  they  would  bring  and  assure  Master  John  Huss,  under  the  king's  name  and 
conduct     safe  conduct ;  so  that  he  would  come  to  the  sacred  genei'al  council  of  Constance, 
peror  ^      under  the  safe  conduct  of  the  said  king,  and  the  protection  of  the  sacred  empire, 
challeng-  openly  given  and  granted  unto  the  said  Master  John  Huss,  that  he  might  purge 
^'^'  himself  and  the   kingdom  of  Bohemia  from  the   slander  that  was  raised  upon 

them,  and  there  to  make  an  open  declaration  of  his  faith  to  every  man  that  would 
lay  any  thing  to  his  charge  :  which  the  said  nobles,  with  the  beforenamed 
Master  John  Huss,  have  performed  and  done,  according  to  the  king's  command- 
ment. 

When  the  said  Master  John  Huss  was  freely  of  his  own  accord  come  unto 
Constance,  imder  tlie  said  safe-conduct,  he  was  grievously  imprisoned  before  he 
was  heard,  and  at  this  present  is  toi'mented  both  with  fetters,   and  also  with 
hunger  and  thirst.     Albeit  that  in  times  past,  at  the  council  holden  at  Pisa,  in  the 
year  of  our  Lord  1410,  tlie  heretics  who  were  condemned,  were  suiFered  to  re- 
main there  at  liberty,  and  to  depart  home  freely ;  notwithstanding  this.  Master 
John  Huss,  neither  being  convicted  nor  condemned,  no  not  so  much  as  once 
heard,  is  taken  and  imprisoned,  when  neither  king  nor  any  prince  elector,  nor 
any  ambassador  of  any  imiversitj',  was  yet  come  or  present.  And  albeit  the  loi'd 
the  king,  together  with  the  nobles  and  lords  here  present,  most  instantly  required 
and  desired,  that  as  touching  his  safe-conduct  they  would  foresee  and  have 
respect  unto  his  honour,  and  that  the  said  Master  John  Huss  might  be  openly 
heard,  forasmuch  as  he  would  render  and  show  a  reason  of  his  faith ;  and  if  lie 
were  found  or  convicted  obstinately  to  affirm  or  maintain  any  thing  against  the 
truth  or  holy  Scripture,  that  then   he  ought  to  correct  and  amend  the  same, 
The  ex-     ficcording  to  the  instruction  and  determination  of  the  council ;  yet  could  he 
tremities  never  obtain  this.     But  the  said  Master  John  Huss,  notwithstanding  all  this,  is 
John         most  grievously  oppressed  with  fetters  and  irons,  and  so  weakened  with  thin  and 
fered  hT    slender  diet,  that  it  is  to  be  feared,  lest  that,  his  power  and  strength  being  hereby 
prison.      consumed  and  wasted,  he  should  be  put  in  danger  of  his  wit  or  reason. 

And  although  the  lords  of  Bohemia  here  present  are  greatly  slandered,  because 
they,  seeing  the  said  Master  John  Huss  so  to  be  tormented  and  troubled,  con- 
trary to  the  king's  safe-conduct,  have  not  by  their  letters  put  the  king  in  mind 
of  his  said  safe-conduct,  that  the  said  lord  and  king  should  not  any  more  suffer 
any  such  matters,  forasmuch  as  they  tend  to  the  contempt  and  disregard  of  the 
kingdom  of  Bohemia,  which  from  the  first  original  and  beginning,  since  it  re- 
ceived the  catholic  faith,  never  departed  or  went  away  from  the  obedience  of 
the  holy  church  of  Rome  ;  yet,  notwithstanding,  they  have  suffered  and  borne  all 
these  things  patiently  hitherto,  lest  by  any  means,  occasion  of  trouble  or  vexa- 
tion of  this  sacred  council  might  arise  or  spring  thereof. 

Wherefore,  most  reverend  fathers  and  lords !  the  nobles  and  lords,  before 
named,  do  wholly  and  most  earnestly  desire  and  require  your  reverences  here 
present,  that  both  for  the  honour  of  the  safe-conduct  of  our  said  lord  the  king, 
and  also  for  the  preservation  and  increase  of  the  worthy  fiune  and  renown,  both 


THE   NOBLES  OF  BOHEMIA  SEEK  THE   DELIVERANCE  OF  HUSS.  4'4'1 

of  the  aforesaid  kingdom  of  Bohemia,  and  your  own  also,  you  will  make  a  short    Hennj 
end  about  the  affairs  of  Master  John  Huss ;  forasmuch  as  by  the  means  of  his        ^  ■ 
strait  handling  he  is  in  great  danger  by  any  longer  delay ;  even  as  they  do  most     .    .^ 
specially  trust  upon  the  most  upright  consciences  and  judgments  of  your  fatherly    t  I-.  .' 

reverences.    But,  forasnmch  as,  most  reverend  fathers  and  lords !  it  is  now  come  L!_ 

to  the  knowledge  and  understanding  of  the  nobles  and  lords  of  Bohemia  here 
present,  how  that  certain  backbiters  and  slanderers  of  the  most  famous  kingdom 
of  Bohemia  aforesaid  have  declared  and  told  unto  your  reverences,  how  that  the 
sacrament  of  the  most  precious  blood  of  our  Lord  is  carried  up  and  down  through 
Bohemia  in  vessels  not  consecrated  nor  hallowed,  and  that  cobblers  do  now  hear 
confessions,  and  minister  the  most  blessed  body  of  our  lord  unto  others :  the  The  con- 
nobles,  therefore,  of  Bohemia  here  present,  require  and  desire  you,  that  you  will  ^^^'cpjfaj,, 
give  no  credit  unto  false  promoters  and  tale-tellers,  for  that,  as  most  wicked  and  slanders. 
naughty  slanderers  and  backbiters  of  that  kingdom  aforesaid,  they  do  report  and 
tell  untruths ;  requiring  also  your  reverences,  that  such  slanderous  persons  of 
the  kingdom  aforesaid  may  be  named  and  known.    And  the  lord  the  king,  toge- 
ther with  your  reverences,  shall  well  perceive  and  see  that  the  lords  of  Bohemia 
will  go  about  in  such  manner  as  to  refel  and  put  away  the  false  and  frivolous 
slanders  of  these  naughty  persons,  that  they  shall  be  ashamed  to  appear  here- 
after before  the  lord  the  king  and  your  reverences. 

As  soon  as  this  their  supplication  was  read,  the  bishop  of  Luthonis, 
rising  up,  said,  "  Most  reverend  fathers,  I  well  perceive  and  under- 
stand, that  the  last  part  of  this  writing  doth  touch  me,  my  familiars, 
and  friends,  as  though  the  kingdom  of  Bohemia  were  slandered  by 
us.  Wherefore  I  desire  to  have  time  and  space  of  deliberation,  that 
I  may  purge  myself  from  this  crime  that  is  laid  against  me."  The 
principal  of  the  council  appointed  him  the  seventeenth  day  of  May, 
at  which  day  the  lords  of  Bohemia  should  be  present  again,  to  hear 
both  the  answer  of  the  council,  and  also  the  excuse  of  the  bishop  of 
Luthonis  ;  which  thing  indeed  was  afterward  performed,  for,  the 
seventeenth  day  of  May,  which  was  the  fourth  day  before  Whitsun- 
tide, they  met  there  again  ;  where,  first  of  all,  a  certain  bishop,  in 
the  name  of  the  whole  council,  answered  by  word  to  the  nobles  of 
Bohemia ;  the  contents  of  whose  answer  may  easily  be  known  by  the 
second  supplication  which  the  Bohemians  put  up  to  the  council.  But 
first,  I  shall  here,  in  these  few  words  following,  show  how  the  bishop 
of  Luthonis  defended  himself  against  that  which  is  before  written. 

Answer  of  the  Bishop  of  Lu^thonis,  to  the  last  Part  of  the  Supplica- 
tion which  the  Nobles  of  Bohemia  presented  unto  the  Council. 

Most  reverend  fathers  and  noble  lords  !  as  Peter  de  Mladoneywitz,  bachelor  Answer 
of  arts,  in  the  name  of  certain  of  the  nobles  of  the  kingdom  of  Bohemia,  in  his  ^"'^  ^'^'^f" 
writings,  amongst  other  things  did  propound  how  that  certain  slanderers  and  tiie bishop 
backbiters  of  the  said  kingdom,  have  brought  to  the  ears  of  your  reverences,  of  Lutho- 
that  the  most  pi-ecious  blood  of  Christ  is  caixied  up  and  down  in  Bohemia  in  a<Tainst 
bottles,  and  that  cobblers  do  hear  confessions,  and  minister  the  body  of  Christ  John 
unto  others  ;  whereupon,  most  reverend  fathers  and  lords,  albeit  that  I,  together  Huss. 
with  the  other  prelates,  doctors,  masters^  and  other  innumerable  catholics  of  the 
said  kingdom,  who  do  desire,  as  much  as  in  them  lieth,  to  defend  the  faith  of 
Christ,  have  laboiu-ed  for  the  extirpation  and  rooting  out  of  that  most  wicked 
and  detestable  sect  of  WicklifF's,  which  now   (alas !  for  sorrow)  beginneth  to 
spring  and  rise  in  the  said  kingdom,  as  it  is  well  known  :  notwithstanding,  here, 
in  this  my  oration,  not  for  any  shame  or  reproof,  but  for  the  honour  of  the 
kingdom  aforesaid,  I  have  propounded  and  declared  a  certain  new  sect,  which 
is  now  lately  spnmg  up  in  the  said  kingdom,  the  followers  whereof  do  minister 
and  communicate  the  sacraments  in  many  cities,  towns,  and  places  of  the  said 
kingdom,  under  both  kinds,  both  of  bread  and  wine,  and  do  constantly  teach 


4i';2 


HISTOKV    OF    THE    BOHEMIANS. 


Henry 
V. 

A.D. 
1415. 


the  common  people,  both  men  and  women,  that  it  is  so  to  be  communicated, 
obstinately  affirming  the  same,  and  that  the  clergy  who  do  repugn  or  say  nay 
\mto  it,  are  to  be  counted  church-robbers;  as  by  the  writings  of  "their  assertions, 
being  directed  and  presented  hither,  shall  openly  appear. 

Moreover,  by  the  report  and  fame  which  goeth  here  abroad,  and  by  the 
writings  which  were  sent  over  unto  me,  I  have  propounded  that  it  came  to  my 
knowledge,  that  the  blood  of  Christ  is  carried  about  in  vessels  not  consecrated, 
approving  the  aforesaid  eiToneous  assertion  of  the  Wicklevists,  who  affirm  it 
necessary  for  salvation,  that  the  people  should  communicate  under  both  kinds 
of  bread  and  wine  ;  and  that  it  is  necessary,  as  the  body  of  Christ  is  canied  in 
the  pix  or  box,  so  the  blood  of  Christ  should  be  carried  in  bottles,  or  other 
necessary  vessels,  from  place  to  place,  and  especially  about  the  ministration  of 
the  sick.  Also  I  declared  not  of  myself,  but  I  heard  it  to  be  declared  by  others, 
both  great  and  credible  persons,  that  there  was  a  certain  woman,  a  follower  of 
that  sect,  who,  taking  by  violence  the  body  of  Christ  out  of  a  priest's  hands, 
did  communicate  unto  herself,  and  affirmed  that  all  men  ought  to  do  so,  if  the 
priests  should  deny  them  the  communion.  And  the  same  woman,  amongst 
many  other  errors  of  the  which  she  was  convicted,  did  affirm  that  a  good  lay- 
woman  might  better  consecrate  and  give  absolution,  than  an  evil  priest ;  affirming 
that  an  evil  priest  can  neither  consecrate  nor  absolve.  But  I  kn(jw  that  neither 
I,  nor  any  of  my  assistants  in  this  matter,  have  brought  this  at  any  time  unto 
your  ears,  that  cobblers  in  the  said  kingdom  do  hear  confession,  or  minister  the 
sacrament  of  the  body  of  Christ,  as  is  alleged  by  the  said  Peter,  in  behalf  of  the 
said  supplicants.  Notwithstanding  that,  we  did  fear,  if  means  were  not  found 
to  recounter  or  stop  the  offences  before  named,  that  this  would  immediately 
follow  upon  it.  Wherefore,  most  reverend  fathers !  lest  that  the  kingdom  might 
be  defamed  any  more  by  such  pestiferous  sects,  and  that  the  christian  faith 
might  happen  to  be  endangered,  with  all  reverence  and  charity,  I  do  desire 
you,  even  by  the  bowels  of  mercy  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  this  most 
sacred  council  would  provide  some  speedy  remedy  for  this  kingdom,  as  touching 
the  premises. 

Moreover,  whether  be  they  backbiters  and  slanderers,  or  wicked  and  false 
enviers  of  the  kingdom  of  Bohemia,  who  do  let  the  errors  aforesaid,  and  many 
others  more,  which  are  sown  by  the  Wicklevists  in  the  said  kingdom,  and  also 
elsewhere  1  who  also  both  do  labour,  and  have  laboured,  for  the  extirpation  and 
rooting  of  those  eiTors  out  of  the  kingdom  aforesaid,  and  as  catliolic  men  for 
the  zeal  of  their  faith  have  manifestly  put  forth  themselves  against  the  main- 
tainers  of  the  said  errors,  or  such  as  do  maintain  and  defend  the  teachers  of  those 
errors  ?  this  answer  I  have  here  presented  before  your  reverences,  always  wholly 
submitting  myself  and  assistance  unto  your  judgment,  and  to  the  definition  ot 
this  most  sacred  council  of  Constance. 


Answer  The  day  before  Whitsuntide,  the  nobles  of  Bohemia  did  confute 
"f"^^  this  answer,  made  two  days  before  in  the  council  to  their  fonner 
confuted.  Writing,  as  here  followeth. 

Answer  of  the  Nobles  of  Bohemia. 

Most  reverend  fathers  and  lords !  forasmuch  as  upon  Thursday  it  was 
answered  in  the  behalf  of  your  reverences,  to  the  requests  of  the  nobles  and 
lords  of  Bohemia,  that  the  said  lords  were  misinformed  of  divers  points  con- 
tained in  the  declaration  of  their  said  bill ;  therefore  the  aforesaid  lords  have 
now  determined  and  deci'eed  to  declare  their  former  propounded  requests  more 
at  large  unto  your  reverences,  not  minding  hereby  to  argue  or  reprove  your 
fatherly  wisdoms  and  circumspections  ;  but  that  yoiu"  reverences  (their  desires 
being  partly  on  this  behalf  fulfilled)  might  the  more  effectuously  and  distinctly 
discern  and  judge  as  touching  this  matter. 
The  And  first  of  all,  whereas  the  lords  alleged  and  said,  how  that  Master  John 

bishops  Huss  was  come  hither  unto  Constance  freely  of  his  own  good  will,  under  the 
aboufthe  safe-conduct  of  the  lord  the  king,  and  the  protection  of  the  sacred  empire ;  it 
safe  con-  is  answered  on  the  behalf  of  your  reverences,  how  that  the  said  lords  are 
jpjj'^"  misinformed  as  touching  the  safe-conduct,  and  that  you  have  understood 
Huss.       by  such    as  are  worthy  credit,   that   the    friends   and  favourers  of  the  said 


THE    RESPONSE    OF    THE    NOBLES.  44«S 

John  Huss,  did  first  procure  and  get  his  safe  conduct,  fifteen  days  after  his    u-„ry 
imprisonment.  '^ " 


The  lords  of  Bohemia,  and  especially  the  lord  John  de  Clum  here  present,  A.  D. 
whom  this  matter  doth  chiefly  touch,  'doth  answer,  that  not  only  the  fifteenth  1415. 
day  after,  but  even  the  very  same  day  that  John  Huss  was  apprehended  and  -pj^g  ^^^^ 
taken,  when  our  reverend  father  the  pope,  in  the  presence  of  all  his  cardinals,  conduct 
demanded  of  Master  John  de  Clum,  whether  Master  John  Huss  had  any  safe  of  John 
conduct  from  the  king  his  son,  he  answered,  '  Most  holy  father  and  cardinals  !  ob'^aLed 
know  ye  that  he  hath  a  safe-conduct;'  and  when  he  was  asked  the  question  and 
again  the  second  time,  he  answered  in  like  manner.  beforeliis 

Yet,  notwithstanding,  none  of  them  required  to  have  the  safe-conduct  showed  imprison- 
unto  them  :  and  again,  the  third  day  following,  the  lord  John  de  Clum  complained  ment. 
unto  our  lord  the  pope,  how,  notwithstanding  the  safe-conduct  of  our  sovereign 
lord  the  king,  he  detained  and  kept  Master  John  Huss  as  prisoner,  showing  the 
safe-conduct  unto  many.  And  for  the  further  truth  herein,  he  referreth  himself 
unto  the  testimonies  and  witnesses  of  divers  earls,  bishops,  knights,  genllemen, 
and  famous  citizens  of  the  city  of  Constance,  who,  all  together  at  this  present, 
did  see  the  said  safe-conduct,  and  heard  it  read ;  whereupon  the  said  John  de 
Clum  is  ready  to  bind  himself  under  what  penalty  shall  be  required,  evidently 
to  prove  and  confirm  that  which  he  hath  promised,  whosoever  say  to  the 
contrary. 

Moreover,  the  lords  of  Bohemia  refer  themselves  unto  the  knowledge  of  cer- 
tain princes  electors,  and  other  princes,  bishops,  and  many  other  noblemen,  who 
were  present  before  the  king's  majesty,  where  and  when  the  said  safe-conduct  was 
granted  and  given  out  by  the  special  commandment  of  our  said  lord  the  king. 

Hereby  your  fatherly  reverences  may  understand  and  perceive  that  the  said  The 
lords  of  Bohemia  are  not  evil-informed  as  touching  the  said  safe-conduct ;  but  ^^^-^^^ 
rather  they,  who  by  such  reports  have  falsely  and  untruly  informed  your  re-  council 
verences.     And  first  of  all,  they  have  offended  against  the  lord  om-  king  and  his  falsely 
chancellors.     Secondly,  against  the  lords  and  nobles  of  Bohemia,  as  though  we  J"u°^}J^ng 
had  privily  and  by  stealth,  piu-chased  the  said  safe-conduct.    Wherefore  the  lords  the  safe° 
aforesaid  most  humbly  require  and  desire  your  reverences,  that  you  will  not  so  ^^^f^^ 
lightly  believe  such  as  be  not  worthy  of  credit ;  but  rather,  hearing  the  contrary  huss. 
part,  to  labour  and  discuss,  that  the  truth  may  the  more  evidently  appear. 

Secondly,  Whereas  the  lords  aforesaid,  alleging  how  Master   John   Huss,  John 
coming  unto  Constance  of  his  own  free  will,  being  neither  condemned  nor  heard,  j^^p^^jjo^. 
was  imprisoned,  your  reverences  have  made  answers  thereunto,  that  he,  the  ed  before 
said  Master  John  Huss,  in  the  time  of  Alexander  V.,  was  infamedand  slandered  he  was 
upon  certain  heresies,  and  thereupon  cited  personally  to  appear  in  the  court  of  condemn- 
Rome,  and  there  was  heard  by  his  procurers.  eti  or 

And  forasmuch  as  he  refused  obstinately  to  appear,  he  was  excommunicated  ;  *>^^'''^- 
in  which  excommunication  he  continued,  as  you  affirm,  by  the  space  of  five 
years  :  for  which  he  was  judged,  and  counted  not  only  a  simple  and  plain  here- 
tic, but  a  hercsiarch,  that  is  to  say,  an  inventor  and  sower  of  new  and  strange 
heresies ;  and  that  he,  coming  towards  Constance,  did  preach  by   the   way 
openly.     To  this  the  lords  aforesaid  do  answer,  that,  as  touching  his  slander  The 
and  citation,  they  can  aflSnn  nothing  but  by  report.     But,  as  touching  that  he  ^  "^^j^Yng 
did  not  personally  appear,  they  say  they  have  heard  both  himself  and  divers  the  cita° 
other  credible  persons  say,  yea  even  the  most  famous  prince  Wenceslaus,  king  ^^°^^^^^ 
of  Bohemia,  and  almost  all  the  whole  nobility  are  witness,  that  he  would  wil-  ^^gg  ^^ 
lingly  have   appeared  at  Rome,  or  elsewhere,  if  he  might  safely  have  come  the  court 
thither,  and  deadly  enmity  had  not  letted  :  and,  morover,  his  procurers  which  of  Rome. 
he  sent  unto  the  court  of  Rome,  alleging  reasonable  causes  for  his  non-appear-  His  pro 
ance,  some  of  them  were  cast  into  prison,  and  others  were  evil  entreated.  evUeu- 

As  for  the  excommunication  which  he  hath  so  long  sustained,  they  have  treated 
heard  him  often  say,  that  he  hath  not  resisted  against  the  same  by  contumacy,  »'  ^°^^ 
or  stubbornness,  but  imder  evident  appellation,  and  thereupon  referreth  himself 
unto  the  acts  of  his  causes  which  were  pleaded  in  the  court  of  Rome,  wherein 
all  this  is  more  largely  contained ;  which  your  reverences  may  evidently  per- 
ceive and  see  in  this  our  present  public  -transumpt,  which  we  have  offered  unto 
vou  upon  certain  points  aforesaid. 

As  concerning  his  preaching,  wherewithal  his  enemies  do  report  and  charge, 
that  Master  John  Huss  did  preach  openly  in  the  city  of  Constance  ;  the  lords 


44^4  HISTORY    OF    THE    BOHEMIANS. 

Henry    aforesaid,  and  especially  the  lord  John  de  Clum  here  present,  do  answer,  that 

^-       he  hath  continually  lodged  with  the  said  Master  John  Huss,  here  in  Constance, 

~T~~pr~  and  that  whosoever  they  be,  that  have  been  so  bold,  or  dare  be  so  bold,  to  say 

1 41  K      and  affirm  that  Master  John  Huss  had  preached,  as  is  premised,  or,  which  is  less, 

L_  that  since  the  time  of  his  coming  unto  this  city,  even  unto  the  very  day  and  time 

John  of  his  captivity  and  imprisonment,  he  went  but  one  step  out  of  the  house  of  his 
?."^j  lodging,  that  the  said  lord  John  de  Clum  will  and  is  content  to  bind  himself 
reported  with  any  such  as  shall  affirm  the  same,  under  what  penalty  soever  it  be,  of 
to  preach  ^igney  or  otherwise,  that  that  which  they  have  falsely  reported  unto  your  reve- 
open  y  a  ^.g^j^gg^  jj^gy  shall  never  be  able  justly  and  truly  to  affirm  and  prove. 
stance.  Thirdly,  Whereas  your  reverences  do  say,  that  you  do  not  understand  or 

John         know,  what  the  lords  do  mean,  by  the  heretics  condemned  at  the  council  holden 
falsdy       ^t  Visa.,  whether  the  mocking  or  deriding  of  the  pope,  whose  ambassadors  came 
charged     thither  for  unity  or  concord,  who  were  suffered,  and  gently  treated,  as  their 
to  preach  jgj.jg  were  most  inclined  unto  unity  and  peace ;  or  else  that  they  did  understand 
to  the       or  mean  the  particular  heretics,  who  were  there  condemned ;  adjoining  there- 
council,     unto,  that  the  heretics  also  coming  unto  the  council  under  the  pretence  of  that 
unity,  should  be  gently  handled  and  entreated,  &c.     Reverend  fathers  and 
lords !  whether  they  be  counted  the  first,  or  that  they  be  thought  the  second  or 
last,  the  lords  aforesaid  require  none  other  thing,  but  that  the  said  Master  John 
Huss  may  use  such  liberty  as  they  used,  forasmuch  as  he  came  willingly  unto 
this  most  sacred  council,  not  for  any  other  purpose,  but  only  publicly  to  recog- 
nise his  faith.     And  that  in  what  point  soever  he  shall  seem  to  vary  from  the 
word  of  God,  and  the  union  of  the  holy  mother  the  church,  in  that  point  he  will 
willingly  be  united  and  reconciled  again  thereunto  ;  and  not  only  himself,  but 
also  his  favourers  and  adherents  he  would  move  and  provoke  thereunto,  of  whom 
Hasmany  the  greater  number  are  in  the  kingdom  of  Bohemia.     Also  he  is  come  hither, 
Trs  in'^  ^   *'^^*'  ^^  might  purge  and  clear  the  noble  kingdom  of  Bohemia  from  the  sinister 
Bohemia,  and  evil  slander  which  was  raised  upon  it. 

Last  of  all,  most  reverend  fathers  and  lords !  forasmuch  as  your  reverences 
have  most  favourably  answered  unto  the  principal  request  made  by  the  lords 
aforesaid,  that  the  process  of  Master  John  Huss,  through  God's  help,  should  be 
determined  and  ended  with  all  expedition  and  gentleness ;  the  lords  aforesaid 
do  render  most  hearty  thanks  unto  your  reverences,  and  whensoever  their 
desire,  by  God's  help,  shall  come  to  the  end  or  effect  long  wished  or  looked  for, 
they  will  not  only  here,  but  also  before  the  whole  kingdom  of  Bohemia,  and  in  all 
other  places  wheresoever  they  come,  render  most  immortal  thanks  unto  your 
reverences  for  ever. 

This  declaration  of  the  nobles  of  Bohemia  above  prefixed,  may  serve 
not  only  to  the  confutation  of  the  bishop  Luthonis,  that  Bohemian, 
but  also  against  the  cavillations  of  Alanus  Copus  Anglus,'  touching  the 
safe-conduct  of  John  Huss,  whereof  sufficiently  before  hath  been  said. 

The  Copy  of  a  public  Testimonial  of  the  whole  University  of  Prague 
for  John  Huss,  offered  up  to  the  Council.^ 

*In  the  name  of  God,  Amen.  The  year  of  our  Lord  1411,  the  tenth  day  of 
September,  in  the  second  year  of  the  bishopric  of  our  most  holy  father  in  Christ 
and  Lord,  the  lord  John,  by  the  providence  of  God,  pope,  the  twenty-third  of 
that  name ;  in  the  greater  city  of  Prague,  in  the  college  of  Charles,  where  the 
weighty  affairs  of  the  university  of  Prague  are  accustomed  to  be  treated  and 
talked  of.  The  honourable  and  devout  man,  Master  John  de  Hussenetz,  master 
of  arts,  and  bachelor  of  divinity,  and  preacher  of  the  word  of  God  in  the  chapel 
called  Bethlehem,  did  put  up  a  certain  writing  in  manner  of  an  epistle,  written 
with  his  own  hand  before  the  reverend  man  sir  Simon  de  Thysnow,  master  of 
arts,  and  bachelor  of  divinity,  rector  of  the  university  and  the  whole  college  of 
doctors  and  masters,  in  the  presence  also  of  the  public  notaries,  which  he  would 
send  unto  our  most  holy  father,  the  tenor  whereof  followeth,  word  for  word. 

'  According  to  my  due  reverence  which  I  owe  unto  Jesu  Christ,  the  high 
bishop,  I  am  ready  to  satisfy  every  man,  who  shall  require  me  to  render  my 
(1)  Dial  6,  p.  929.        (2)  This  document ««  introduced  from  the  edition  of  1563,  p.  205.— Ed. 


SUPPI.ICATIOX  OF    THE   UNIVEKSITV   OF    PRAGUE   FOR    JOHN   HUSS.         445 

account  or  reason,  of  the  faith  which  I  do  hold.     And,  first,  I  do  confess,  with    Henry 
my  whole  heart,  Jesus  Christ  to  be  the  only  Lord,  very  God  and  very  man,  and        ^• 
all  his  laws  and  commandments  to  he  of  such  firm  and  steadfast  truth,  that  no     .    j^ 
iota  or  tittle  thereof  can  fail.     Moreover,  I  do  confess  his  most  holy  church  to     141/ 

be  so  surely  founded  and  set  upon  the  most  strong  and  steadfast  rock,  against L 

which  the  gates  of  hell  can,  by  no  means,  prevail ;  and,  in  the  hope  of  this  head, 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  I  am  ready  to  sustain  the  punishment  of  most  cruel 
death,  rather  than,  under  the  hope  of  election,  to  say  or  do  any  thing  which 
should  be  contrary  to  the  will  of  Christ  and  his  church.  Whereupon,  boldly 
and  truly  I  do  affirm,  that,  wrongfully,  I  am  accused  unto  the  apostolic  see  by 
such  as  are  enemies  unto  the  truth,  for  which,  falsely,  they  have  accused  me ; 
affirming,  that  I  should  teach  the  people,  that  in  the  sacrament  of  the  altar 
remaineth  only  the  substance  of  material  bread  ,•  with  like  unti-uth :  also,  that 
when  the  host  is  lifted  up,  then  it  is  the  body  of  Christ,  and  when  it  is  laid 
down,  it  is  not. 

'  Falsely,  likewise,  do  they  affirm,  that  a  priest  being  in  deadly  sin,  cannot 
consecrate  :  untruly,  also,  do  they  say  of  me,  that  I  should  teach  that  the  lords 
may  take  away  the  temporalties  from  the  clergy,  and  not  pay  the  tithes  : 
falsely,  that  pardons  are  nothing  worth  :  unjustly  have  they  said,  that  I  have 
persuaded  to  punish  the  clergy  by  the  sword :  untruly  have  they  reported  that 
I  have  preached,  taught,  or  holden,  any  manner  of  error  or  errors,  or  any  kind 
of  heresy,  or  that  I  have  seduced  the  people  from  the  way  of  truth  by  any 
manner  of  mine.  Unjustly  have  they  accused  me,  that  I  shoidd  be  the  cause 
that  certain  masters  of  the  Gennans  were  expulsed  out  of  Prague,  when  they 
themselves  refused  to  hold  and  keep  the  privilege  of  the  foundation  of  the 
famous  university  of  Prague ;  neither  would  they  obey  the  lawful  commandments 
of  the  most  noble  Wenceslaus  king  of  the  Romans  and  of  Bohemia ;  thinking, 
that,  without  their  presence,  the  university  of  Prague  could  not  continue  or  stand  : 
whereupon,  without  any  compulsion,  they  departed  and  went  their  ways. 

'  Truly  I  do  grant,  that  I  do  appeal  from  the  sentence  of  the  most  reverend 
father  in  Christ,  the  lord  Swincow,  archbishop  of  Prague,  unto  the  apostolic 
see ;  and,  again,  that  I  did  appeal  from  the  processes  which  came  forth  from 
the  holy  apostolic  see,  through  sinister  and  false  accusation  and  information. 
For  the  enemies  of  the  truth,  not  having  any  respect  or  regard  unto  their  own 
honour  or  salvation,  have  falsely  made  suggestion  unto  the  apostolic  see,  that,  in 
the  kingdom  of  Bohemia,  and  under  the  marquis  of  Moravia,  manifold  errors 
are  sprung  up,  which  have  infected  the  hearts  of  many  ;  so  that,  for  the  number 
and  multitude  of  those  who  are  infected  with  such  errors,  it  is  necessar}'^  that 
speedy  remedy  and  correction  be  had.  Finally,  they  have  falsely  made  sug- 
gestion, that  the  chapel  of  Bethlehem  should  be  the  private  place  for  the  pur- 
pose ;  forasmuch  as  that  place  is  appointed  and  confirmed  by  the  ordinary 
bishop,  for  an  ecclesiastical  benefice,  the  destruction  whereof  woidd,  not  a  little, 
diminish  and  take  away  the  honour  of  God  from  amongst  the  people,  hinder  the 
profit  and  furtherance  of  souls,  give  great  offence,  and  provoke  and  stir  up  the 
jieople,  not  a  little,  against  those  who  should  be  the  destroyers  thereof. 

'  Further,   I   being  cited  personally  to  appear  at  Rome,  with  all  humihty  why 
wished  and  desired  so  to  do.     But,  forasmuch  as  both  within  the  kingdom,  'ohn 
and  also  without,  there  were  snares  laid  for  my  life  by  the  Germans,  therefore,  ^"'^ 
being  advertized  by  the  counsel  of  many,  I  thought  it  should  have  been  but  to  to  Rome, 
tempt  God  to  put  my  life  in  danger,  not  profiting  the  church  any  tiling  at  all. 
Whereupon   I  have  not  personally  appeared,  but,  willing  to  show  myself  obe- 
dient unto  the  most  holy  apostolic  see,  I  appointed  my  advocates  and  procurers. 
I  therefore  most  humbly  do  implore  and  desire  your  clemency  and  holiness  to 
be  a  mean  unto  the  high  vicar  of  Christ,  that  he  will  vouchsafe,  even  for  the 
tender  mercy  of  the  most  Almighty  God,  freely  to  absolve  me,  though  I  did 
not  personally  appear ;  and  other  things  which  followed  thereupon.    Forasmuch 
as  by  the  most  famous  prince  Wenceslaus,  king  of  the  Romans  and  of  Bohemia, 
and,  also,  by  the  reverend  fathers  and  most  noble  pi-inces,  the  lord  Wencelaus 
patriarch  of  Antioch,  the  lord  Conrad  bishop  of  Olmulz,   and  also  the  most 
famous  prince,  the  lord  Rodolph,  duke  of  Saxony,  elector  of  the  most  sacred 
empire,  and,   also,   by  means  of  other  princes,  barons,  and  lords,  as  the  most 
noble  lord  Stiborius,  ambassador  of  the  most  famous  prince,  lord  Sigismund, 
king  of  Hungary :  I  am  fully  and  wholjy  agreed  and  accorded  with  the  afore- 


446  HISTORY    OF    THr<:    BOHEMIANS. 

ll,.nrij    said  most  reverend  father  in  Christ,  the  lord  Swinco ;  for  I  did  offer  myself  to 

''•       answer  to  all  and  singular  such  things  as  should  he  ohjccted  against  me,  re- 

.    „      ferring  myself  to  the  whole  audience ;  and  if  any  thing  should  be  found  in  me 

Vi  r '     contrary  to  truth  and  equity  (except  that  I  would  give  place  and  be  ready  to 

___Ll.  amend  the  same),  I  am  contented,  even  with  my  whole  heart,  to  be  punished 

with  fire,  and  am  even  presently  ready,  before  the  whole  university  of  Prague 

and  all  the  clergy  thereof,  if  any  man  shall  stand  up  against  me,  to  give  a 

reason  of  all  such  things  as  shall  be  objected.     But,  unto  this  day,  there  would 

no  man  stand  up  against  me,  who,  according  to  the  canonical  laws,  would  bind 

himself  unto  the  like  punishment  or  forfeit.' 

'  Written  at  Prague  with  mine  own  hand,  upon  Saint  Giles'  day.' 
Which  brief  or  epistle  being  thus  put  up  and  read,  the  said  Master  John 
Huss  required,  that,  for  the  more  evidence  and  gi-eater  evidence  to  be  had,  the 
said  writing  should  be  written  over  again  by  us  the  notaries  hereunder  written, 
and  should  be  reduced  to  a  common  form  and  order,  and  afterwards,  by  the 
rector,  doctors,  and  masters,  of  the  universities  aforesaid,  to  be  sealed  with  their 
common  seal.  The  which  lord,  the  rector,  after  he  had  taken  counsel  and  advice 
with  the  whole  college,  with  one  consent  and  mind  granting  to  the  request  of 
the  said  John  Huss,  commanded  that  the  brief  aforesaid,  should  be  newly 
written  and  reduced  unto  a  public  form  by  us  the  notaries  hereunder  written ; 
and,  for  the  greater  credit  to  be  given  thereunto,  he  commanded  also  the  seal 
of  the  university  to  be  put  unto  it.  Upon  all  which  and  singidar  the  premises, 
the  aforesaid  Master  John  Huss  required  that  we,  the  said  notaries,  should 
make  unto  him,  one  or  more  public  testimonials.  These  things  were  done  in 
the  presence  of  the  most  honourable  and  discreet  men  and  lords,  Vitus,  provost 
of  Myzzin  in  the  diocese  of  Olmutz  ;  James  de  Tachonia,  and  John  de  Tepla, 
priests ;  Matthew  de  Chlumptzan,  clerk ;  and,  by  the  imperial  authority,  public 
notary  ;  John  Xapasnick  esquire,  of  Prague  ;  Anthony  de  Rezce,  and  Michael 
de  Drenow,  clerks ;  and  many  other  witnesses  about  the  premises. 

Michael  de  Pracatitz,  by  the  imperial  authority,  public  notary  of  the 
diocese  of  Prague,  and  also  of  the  lords,  doctors,  masters,  and  scholars 
of  the  university  and  study  of  Prague  ;  and  Nicholas  de  Brewma,  by 
the  apostolic  and  imperial  authority,  public  notary  of  the  diocese 
of  Olmutz.* 

When  the  noble  men  of  Bohemia  by  long  tune  could  receive  no 
answer  of  those  supplications  which  they  had  already  put  up,  they 
determined,  the  last  day  of  May  following,  by  another  supplication 
being  put  up  unto  the  principals  of  the  council,  to  entreat  that  John 
Huss  might  be  delivered  out  of  prison,  and  defend  his  own  cause 
openly :  they  also  put  up  the  testimonial  of  the  bishop  of  Nazareth, 
as  touching  John  Huss ;  the  copy  whereof  is  expressed  in  the  be- 
ginning of  this  history,  word  by  word. 

Another  Supplication  of  the  Nobles  of  Bohemia  for  John  Huss. 

Another        Most  reverend  fathers  and  lords  in  Christ !  of  late  there  was  a  supplication 
supplica-  put  up  unto  your  reverences  on  the  behalf  of  the  lords  and  nobles  of  Bohemia, 
the\3ohe-  ^"^  ^^  nation  of  the  Poles,  wherein  they  most  humbly  desired  your  reverences 
mians  for  to  consider  how  the  informations  which  were  put  up  unto  your  reverences 
John         by  the  enemies  of  Master  John  Huss,  were  insufficient,  and,  with  reverence  be 
it  spoken,  in  many  points  untrue ;  as  in  the  safe-conduct  granted  by  the  king's 
majesty,  and  also  in  other  articles,  as  more  plainly  appeareth  in  the  schedule, 
The  lords  which  was  then  offered  unto  you  ;  upon  which  said  schedide  and  other  things 
hav^e  no    ^^   *''^^^   present,    being   put  up,  they  could  not  as  yet  receive  any    answer, 
answer  to  Wherefore  the  lords  aforesaid,  most  humbly  require  your  fatherly  reverences, 
their  sup-  that  it  would  please  you  to  consider  the  said  supplication,  and  to  give  some  an- 
p  loa  ion.  aj^s^-gj.  ^q  jj^g  lords  aforesaid  thereupon,  and  specially  having  respect  unto  tlio 
great  mjuries  and  griefs  which  are  done  unto  the  said  Master  John  Huss,  which 
may  be  understood  and  known  by  the  schedule  aforesaid,  that  you  will  merci- 
fully consider  and  foresee,  that  all  those  gi-iefs  and  evils,  so  far  different  from 


A.D. 

1415. 


THE    PROTESTATION    OF    JOHN    HUSS.  447 

all  brotherly  love  and  charity,  are  done  unto  him  by  his  enemies  even  for  very     u^tnii 
malice  and  hatred.  ^• 

To  the  intent,  therefore,  that  the  rancour  and  malice  may  be  confounded 
and  overthrown,  and  the  plain  and  evident  truth  appear,  it  may  please  your 
fatherly  reverences  to  understand  that  it  is  notified  and  known  unto  the  barons, 
nobles,  and  citizens,  the  clergy  and  laity  of  the  kingdom  of  Bohemia,  that 
Master  John  Huss,  in  all  his  acts  and  doings,  as  well  scholastical  as  ecclesias- 
tical, and  especially  in  all  his  public  and  open  sermons,  hath  made,  and  hath 
accustomed  to  make,  these  manner  of  protestations ;  and  which,  without  any 
thing  to  the  contrary,  he  hath  always  endeavoured  to  have  them  strong  and 
firm,  as  by  this  his  protestation  here  following  (which  he  made  about  the  determi- 
nation of  a  certain  question),  it  may  most  evidently  and  plainly  appear  unto  every 
man  who  would  behold  and  look  upon  the  same  :  the  form  and  tenor  whereof 
here  followeth,  and  is  this. 

'  The  Protestation  of  Jolm  Huss. 

'  Forasmuch  as  above  aU  things  1  do  desire  the  honour  of  God,  the  profit  of 
the  holy  church,  and  that  I  myself  may  be  a  faithftd  member  of  our  Lord  Jesu 
Christ,  who  is  the  head  and  husband  of  the  holy  chm-ch  which  he  hath  re- 
deemed ;  therefore,  as  heretofore  oftentimes  I  have  done,  even  so  now  again,  I 
make  this  protestation :  That  I  never  obstinately  said,  or  hereafter  will  say,  any 
thing  that  shall  be  contrary  unto  the  truth  and  verity ;  and,  moreover,  that  I 
have  always  holden,  do  hold,  and  firmly  desire  to  hold,  the  very  time  and  in- 
falUble  tiiith  and  verity ;  so  that  before  I  would  defend  and  maintain  any  error 
contrary  thereunto,  I  would  rather  choose,  by  the  hope  and  help  of  the  Lord, 
to  suffer  extreme  punishment,  even  unto  death  :  yea,  and  through  the  help  of 
God,  I  am  ready  even  to  offer  this  my  miserable  life  unto  death  for  the  law  of 
Christ,  which  I  do  believe,  every  part  and  parcel  thereof,  to  be  given  and  pro- 
mulgated for  the  salvation  of  mankind,  by  the  counsel  and  determination  of  the 
most  holy  Trinity  and  the  saints  of  God. 

*  '  Moreover,*  I  do  believe  all  and  singular  the  articles  of  that  law,  according 
to  the  sense  and  understanding  in  which  the  most  blessed  Trinity  hath  com- 
manded them  to  be  believed.  Wherefore,  like  as  in  my  answers  and  acts  scho- 
lastical, and  also  in  my  public  sermons,  I  have,  oftentimes,  submitted  myself, 
even  so  now,  again,  I  do  submit  myself,  and  hereafter  will  most  humbly  submit 
myself  under  the  obedience,  reconciliation,  and  ordinance,  of  this  most  sacred 
and  holy  law ;  being  ready  to  revoke  and  retract  whatsoever  I  have  hereto- 
fore spoken  or  said ;  being  truly  informed  and  taught,  that  it  were  contrary 
unto  the  truth.'* 

By  the  which  his  protestation,  and  also  other  protestations  by  the  said  Master 
John  Huss,  being  well  observed  and  noted,  it  may  be  easily  gathered  and 
known,  that  his  whole  intent  and  purpose  was  and  is,  that  he  neither  would 
nor  will  have  spoken  or  written  any  thing  in  his  books,  treatises,  doctrines,  or 
public  sermons ;  or  else  to  have  affirmed  any  articles,  which  willingly  and  wit- 
tingly he  did  understand  or  know  to  be  erroneous,  offensive,  seditious,  heretical, 
or  offending  the  godly  ear  :  albeit  that  these  and  such  like  things  are  falsely 
imputed  unto  him  by  his  enemies.  But  it  hath  always  been  his  chief  intent  and 
purpose,  and  so  is,  that  every  point,  conclusion,  or  article,  contained  in  his 
books  or  ai'ticles,  to  have  put  and  aflSrmed  them  to  this  end,  according  to  the 
truth  of  the  gospel,  the  holy  doctors,  and  writers  upon  the  holy  Scriptures ;  and 
to  that  end  and  purpose,  as  is  before  expressed  in  his  protestations :  and  if  in 
any  point  he  should  be  found  to  vary  or  go  astray,  or  that  he  were  not  well 
understood  of  others,  by  like  information  to  be  informed,  understood,  cor- 
rected, and  amended ;  and  that  he  will  by  no  means  sustain  or  defend  any 
manner  of  article  against  the  holy  chm-ch  of  Rome,  or  the  catholic  faith. 

Wherefore,  most  reverend  fathers !  the  premises  notwithstanding,  his  enemies, 
through  the  extreme  hatred  which  they  bear  unto  him,  have  picked  and  taken 
out  by  piecemeal,  certain  articles  out  of  the  books  of  Master  John  Huss,  and, 
rejecting  and  not  looking  upon  the  allegations  and  reasons,  neither  having  any 
relation  unto  the  distinction  of  their  equivocations,  have  compounded  and  made 

(U  This  paragraph  is  supplied  to  complete  the  document,  from  the  edition  of  156.'!,  p.  207. — Ed. 


A.  D. 

1415. 


44.8  HISTORY    Ol--    THE    BOHEMIANS. 

Henry    thereof  Certain   false  and  feigned  articles   against  hini  to  this  end,  that,  all 
^-        chanty  and  love  being  set  apart,  they  might  the   better  overthrow  him,  and 
bring  him  unto  death,  contrary  unto  the  safe-conduct  upon  good  and  just  occa- 
sion openly  assigned  and  given  unto  the  said  Master  John  Huss,  by  the  most 
.  noble  prince  the  lord  Sigismund,  king  of  the  Romans  and  of  Hungary,  for  his 
just  defence  against  all  the  frivolous  accusations  and  assaults  of  the  enemies, 
not  only  of  the  said  Master  John   Huss,   but  also  of  the  famous   kingdom  of 
Bohemia,  and  for  the  quiet  appeasing  of  all  such   tumults  and  rumours  rising 
and  springing  up  in  the  said  kingdom  of  Bohemia,  or  elsewhere  ;  the  avoiding 
of  which  most  perilous  uproars,  the   said  king  of  Romans  doth  greatly  desire 
and  wish,  as  the  right  heir  and  successor  of  the  said  kingdom. 
Articles         Whereupon  the  barons  and  nobles  aforesaid,  most  humbly  desire  and  require, 
foisted      the  premises  being  considered,  and  respect  had  unto  the  great  infamy  and  slan- 
Huss  s      ^^^  which  may  happen  by  the  premises  unto  the  said  kingdom  and  inhabitants 
books  by   thereof,  that  you  will  put  to  your  hands  and  take  some  order  and  means,  that 
his  ene-    Master    John   Huss  may  be  distinctly   heard  by  some  famous   men,   divines 
already  deputed,  or  otherwise  to  be  appointed,  upon  all  and  singular  such  arti- 
cles as  shall  be   laid  unto  him ;  to  declare  his  own  mind  and  intent,  and  also 
the  mind  of  the  doctors  alleged  for  this  purpose,  with  the  manifold  distinctions 
and   equivocations,  in  which   the  drawers-out  of  the  most  part  of  his  articles 
have  also  made  equivocations,  that  so,  according  to  the  disposition  of  the  wit- 
nesses, of  which  a  great  number  of  them  are  and  have  a  long  time  been  his  mortal 
enemies,  that  at  the  frivolous  instigation  of  his  enemies,  when  he  was  miserably 
detained  prisoner,  he  should  not  be   condemned  unheard.     Forasmuch   as  by 
the  said  declarations  your  fatherly  reverences  might  be  the  more  better  informed 
of  the  ti-uth,  he  himself  is  ready  always  to  submit  himself  under  the  determi- 
The  nation  of  this  most  sacred  council.     For  your  reverences,  by  the  crafty  and 

council     feigned  persuasions  of  his  enemies,  are  thus  informed,  that  Master  John  Huss 
formed     hath  been  incurably  obstinate  for  a  long  time,  in  most  perilous  articles,  which 
against     your  reverences  may  now  plainly  perceive  to  be  imtrue  :  and  for  the  more  evi- 
j^'^g"         dence  herein  to  be  showed,  there  is  presented  unto  your  reverences  an  instiai- 
ment  of  public  recognition    of   the   most  reverend  father  in  Christ  the  lord 
Nicholas,  bishop  of  Nazareth,  an  inquisitor  of  heresies,   especially  appointed 
by  the  apostolic  see  in   the   diocese  of  Prague,  which   by  your   reverences  is 
more  diligently  to  be  hearkened  unto. 
The  no-         Wherefore  it  may  please  your  fatherly  reverences    to   command  the   said 
bles  re-     Master  John  Huss,  neither  convicted  nor  condemned,  to  be  taken  and  brought 
?hat  John  out  of  his  bonds   and  chains,  in  which  he  is  now  most  grievously  detained  and 
Huss  not  kept,  and  to  put  him  into  the  hands  of  some  reverend  lords,  bishops  or  commis- 
cormcted  sioners  appointed,  or  to  be  appointed,  by  this  present  council ;  that  the  said  Master 
nor  con-    John  Huss  may  somewhat  be  relieved,  and  recover  again  his  health,  and  be  the 
<l^™°6d    lyiore  diligently  and  commodiously  examinedby  the  commissioners.    And  for  the 
be  de-       more  assurance,  the  barons  and  nobles  aforesaid  of  the  kingdom  of  Bohemia,  will 
livered      provide  most  sure  and  good  sureties,  who  will  not  break  their  fidelity  and  faith 
prison       ^"°^"  ^"y  thing  in  the  world ;  who  also  shall  promise  in  this  behalf,  that  he  shall 
not  flee  nor  depart  out  of  their  hands,  until  such  time  as  the   matter  be  fully 
determined  by  the  said  commissioners.     In   the  execution  of  which  promises, 
we  have  determined  to  provide  and  foresee,  unto  the  fame  and  honour  of  the 
said  kingdom  of  Bohemia,  and  also  to  the  safe-conduct  of  the  m.ost  worthy 
prince,  the  king  of  Romans  ;  lest  that  the  enemies  and  detractors  of  the  honour 
and  fame  of  the  kingdom  aforesaid,  might  not  a  little  slander  and  reprove  the 
said  lords ;  pretending  and  showing  forth  hereafter,  that  they  had  made  unrea- 
sonable or  unlawful  requests :  for  the  withstanding  of  which   mischief,   we   re- 
quire your  fatherly  reverences,  that  you  will  decree,  and  most  graciously  consent, 
that  this  our  petition  and  supplication  may  be  drawn  out  again  by  your  notary, 
and  reduced  into  a  public  form  and  order. 

After  this  supplication  was  read  before  the  deputies  of  the  four 
nations,  the  patriarch  of  Antioch  answered  in  the  name  of  them  all, 
unto  every  article  of  the  said  supplication ;  but  it  was  done  in  few 
words. 


so    CRKUri'    TO    BK    KEPT    WITH     A    HERETIC.  449 

Henry 

Substance  of  the  Answer  of  the  Council  to  the  Supplication.  " 

A.D. 
First,  as  touching  the  protestation  of  John  Huss,  whether  it  be  true  or  false,     141.5. 

it  shall  be  made  evident  in  the  process  of  his  cause.     Moreover,  whereas  they — 

say  that  the  adversaries  of  John  Huss  have  perversely  drawn  certain  things  out 
of  his  books :  that,  also,  the  matter  itself  shall   declare  in   the  end ;  where, 
if  it  shall   be  found   and  decreed  that  John  Huss  is  unjustly  and  imtruly  j  . 
accused,  it  shall  then  come  to  pass  that  his  adversaries  shall  incur  perpetual  Huss  in 
ignominy  and  slander.  But  as  touching  sureties,  albeit  there  might  be  a  thousand  ""  ^^**«^ 
put  in  or  bound,  yet  can  it  not  by  any  means  be,  that  the  deputies  of  the  council  baUeV!"^ 
with  a  safe  conscience  may  receive  or  take  them  in  this  man's  cause,  unto  whom  ^^     ,  ,■ 
there  is  no  faith  nor  credit  to  be  given.  Howbeit  thus  much  they  will  do,  upon  tolekLpt 
the  fifth  day  of  June  next,  John  Huss  shall  be  brought  again  unto  Constance,  ^^i"'? 
and  there  have  free  liberty  to  speak  his  mind  before  the  council,  and  that  they  '"^^'^''° 
would  lovingly  and  gently  hear  him. 

But  the  matter  in  the  end  fell  out  far  contrary  to  this  promise. — 
The  same  day  the  said  barons  and  lords  presented  a  supplication  of 
this  tenor  unto  the  emperor  : 

Supphcation  of  the  Barons  to  the  Emperor  Sigismund  for  John  Huss. 

Unto  the  most  high  and  mighty  prince,  the  lord  Sigismund,  king  of  the 
Romans,  always  Augustus,  king  of  Hungaiy,  Croatia  and  Dalmatia,  oui-  most 
gracious  lord,  faithful  and  true  service  in  all  things,  and  at  all  times.  Most 
noble  prince,  and  gi'acious  lord,  we  signify  unto  your  worthiness,  that  we  all 
together,  with  one  mind,  consent,  and  accord,  have  delivered  up  unto  the 
reverend  fathers  and  lords,  the  deputies  of  the  four  nations,  and  to  the  whole 
sacred  council  of  Constance,  this  our  supplication  hereunder  written,  as  reason- 
able, just,  and  worthy  of  consideration ;  the  tenor  whereof  here  followeth  word 
by  woi'd,  and  is  this.' 

'  Wherefore  we  most  humbly  require  and  desire  your  princely  majesty,  that 
both  for  the  love  of  justice,  and  also  of  the  fame  and  renown  of  that  most 
famous  kingdom  of  Bohemia,  whereof  we  acknowledge  you  undoubtedly  the 
true  lord,  heir,  and  successor ;  and  also  foreseeing  unto  the  liberty  of  your  safe- 
conduct,  that  you  will,  with  your  favourable  countenance,  beholding  these  most 
reasonable  and  just  supplications  which  we  have  put  up  to  the  lords  aforesaid,  put 
to  your  helping  hand  toward  the  said  most  reverend  fathers  and  lords,  that  they 
will  effectually  hear  us  in  this  our  most  just  petition,  which  we  have  offered  up 
to  them,  as  is  aforesaid ;  lest  the  enemies  of  the  renown  and  honour  of  the 
famous  kingdom  of  Bohemia  (and  such  be  our  slanderers  also)  hereafter  may 
detract  and  slander  us,  that  we  should  make  unreasonable  and  unlawful  requests 
unto  the  said  reverend  fathers  and  lords ;  and  therefore,  we  required  and  desired 
of  them,  that  it  would  please  them  to  decree,  by  setting  to  their  public  hand 
and  seal,  to  authorise  our  said  supplication.  Likewise,  we  do  most  heartily 
require  your  highness,  that  you  would  vouchsafe  in  like  manner  to  give  us 
your  testimony  of  the  premises.' 

But  what  answer  the  emperor  made  hereunto,  we  could  never  -j^^  ].;„_ 
understand  or  know ;  but  by  the  process  of  the  matter  a  man  may  '''orced  by 
easily  judge,  that  this  good  emperor  was  brought  and  led  even  unto  portJmity 
this  point,  through  the  obstinate  mischief  of  the  cardinals  and  bishops,  cardinals 
to  break  and  falsify  his  promise  and  faith  which  he  had  made  and  '°  ^^^-^^ 
promised  :  and  tins  was  then-  reason  whereby  he  was  diiven  thereunto, 
that  no  defence  could  or  might  be  given  either  by  safe-conduct,  or 
by  any  other  means  unto  him,  who  was  suspected  or  judged  to  be  a 

(1)  The  copy  of  the  supplication  before  written,  wliich  was  presented  unto  the  deputies  of  tlie 
council,  was  here  inserted,  whereunto  that  which  followeth  vas  annexed.     See  page  444. 

VOL.    III.  G    G 


promise. 


450  HISTORY    OF    TIIK    BOHEMIANS. 

Henry   herctic.     Biit  bv  the  epistles  and  letters  of  John  Huss,  a  man  may 
-  easily  judge  what  the  king's  mind  was.     Now  Ave  will  proceed  in  the 

A.  D.    history. 

^^^^-        The  fifth  day  of  June,  the  cardinals,  bishops,  and  the  rest  of  the 
Mischiev-  priests,  almost  all  that  were  in  Constance,  assembled  to  a  great  num- 
counsei     ber,  at  the  covent  of  the  Franciscans  in  Constance  ;  and  there  it  was 
popilh      commanded,  that  before  John  Huss  should  be  brought  forth,  in  his 
i'^"''-       absence  they  should  rehearse  the  witnesses  and  articles  which  they 
had  slanderously  gathered  out  of  his  books ;  which  articles,  with 
John  Huss's  answer,  we  will  hereafter  repeat.     By  chance  there  was 
then  present  a  certain  notary,  named  Peter  Mladoniewitz,  who  bare 
great  love  and  amity  unto  the  said  Huss ;  who,  as  soon  as  he  per- 
ceived that  the  bishops  and  cardinals  were  already  determined  and 
appointed  to  condemn  the  said  articles  in  the  absence  of  John  Huss, 
went  with  all  speed  unto  Master  Wencelate  de  Duba,  and  John  of 
Clum,  and  told  them  all  the  matter,  who  incontinent  made  report 
The         thereof  to  the  emperor,  who,  understanding  their  intent,  sent  Louis, 
counsel    the  couuty  Palatine  of  Heidelburgh,  and  the  lord  Frederic,  Burgrave 
pipi's^ts     ^f  Nuremberg,   to  signify  unto  them  who  ruled  the   council,  that 
stopped    nothing  should  be  resolved  or  done  in  the  case  of  John  Huss  before 

bv  the         . 

emperor,  it  Were  first  heard  with  equity,  and  that  they  should  send  him  all  such 
articles  as  were  laid  against  the  said  Huss,  which  were  either  false  or 
heretical ;  and  he  would  do  so  much,  that  the  said  articles  should  be 
examined  by  good  and  learned  men.  Then,  according  to  the  emperor's 
will,  the  judgment  of  the  principals  of  the  coimcil  was  suspended, 
until  such  time  as  John  Huss  were  present. 

In  the  mean  season,  these  gentlemen,  Master  Wencelate  of  Duba, 
and  John  of  Clum,  did  give  unto  the  two  princes,  whom  the  emperor 
had  sent,  certain  small  treatises  which  the  said  John  Huss  had  made, 
out  of  which  they  had  drawn  certain  articles  to  present  unto  them 
who  iTiled  the  council ;  under  this  condition,  that  they  would  render 
them  again,  when  they  should  demand  them.  The  intent  and  mean- 
ing of  these  barons  was,  that  by  this  means  the  adversaries  of  John 
Huss  might  the  more  easil)  be  reproved,  who,  of  a  naughty  and 
corrupt  conscience,  had  picked  corrupt  sentences  out  of  the  said  books 
of  John  Huss.  The  books  were  delivered  unto  the  cardinals  and 
bishops ;  and,  that  done,  John  Huss  was  brought  forth,  and  the 
princes  who  were  sent  by  the  emperor,  departed  back  again.  After- 
wards, they  showed  the  books  to  John  Huss,  and  he  confessed  openly, 
before  the  whole  assembly,  that  he  had  made  them ;  and  that  he  was 
ready,  if  there  were  any  fault  in  them,  to  amend  the  same. 

Now  hearken  a  little  to  the  holy  proceedings  of  these  reverend 

John       fathers ;  for  here  happened  a  strange  and  shameful  matter.     With 

Huss  . 

forced  much  ado  they  had  scarcely  read  one  article,  and  brought  forth  a  few 
liienceby  "^^'itncsscs  upou  the  Same  against  him,  but,  as  he  was  about  to  open 
outrage    his  mouth  to  auswcr,  all  this  mad  herd  or  flock  began  so  to  cry  out 

of  the  .  ^  *'      * 

bishops  upon  him,  that  he  had  not  leisure  to  speak  one  only  Avord.  The  noise 
and  trouble  was  so  great  and  so  vehement,  that  a  man  might  well 
have  called  it  a  bruit  or  noise  of  Avild  beasts,  and  not  of  men ;  much 
less  was  it  to  be  judged  a  congregation  of  men  gathered  together,  to 
judge  and  determme  so  grave  and  weighty  matters.  And  if  it  hap- 
pened that  the  noise  and  cry  did  ever  so  little  cease,  that  he  might 


and 
Driests 


FALSE    WITNESS    AGAINST    JOHM    HUSS.  451 

answer  any  thing  at  all  out  of  the  holy  Scriptures  or  ecclesiastical    Hennj 
doctors,   by  and  by  he  should  hear  this  goodly  reply  upon  him : 


"  That  maketh  nothing  to  the  purpose.'" '  -^-  ^• 

Besides  all  this,  some  did  outrao;e  in  words  asrainst  him,  and  others    ^'*^^- 


spitefully  mocked  him  ;  so  that  he,  seein<?  himself  overwhelmed  with  •'^"  °^^- 
these  rude  and  barbarous  noises  and  cries,  and  that  it  profited  nothing  councu. 
to  speak,  determined  finally  with  himself  to  hold  his  peace  and  keep 
silence.  From  that  time  forward,  all  the  whole  rout  of  his  adver- 
saries thought  that  they  had  won  the  battle  of  hun,  and  cried  out  all 
together ;  "  Now  he  is  dumb,  now  he  is  dumb  :  this  is  a  certain  sign 
and  token,  that  he  doth  consent  and  agree  unto  these  his  errors." 
Finally,  the  matter  came  to  this  point,  that  certain  of  the  most 
moderate  and  honest  among  them,  seeing  this  disorder,  determined 
to  proceed  no  further,  but  that  all  should  be  deferred  and  put  off 
until  another  time.  Through  their  advice,  the  prelates  and  others 
departed  from  the  council  for  that  present,  and  appointed  to  meet 
there  again  on  the  morrow  after,  to  proceed  in  judgment. 

The  n-ext  day,  which  was  the  seventh  of  June,  on  which  day  the  a  great 
sun  was  almost  wholly  eclipsed,  somewhat  after  about  seven  of  the  tueTun" 
clock,  this  same  flock  assembled  again  in  the  cloister  of  the  friars 
minor,  and  by  their  appointment  John  Huss  was  brought  before  them, 
accompanied  with  a  great  number  of  armed  men.     Thither  went  also  <  They 
the  emperor,  whom  the  gentlemen.  Master  Wencelate,  of  Duba,  and  ^^"^ 
John  of  Clum,  and  the  notary  named  Peter,  who  were  great  friends  ^'^^th 
of  the  said  Huss,  did  follow,  to  see  what  the  end  would  be.     When  and 
they  were  come  thither,  they  heard  that  in  the  accusation  of  Michael  tslihAd. 
de  Causis,  they  read  these  words  following :   "  John  Huss  hath  taught  ^|™  ^° 
the  people  divers  and  many  errors  both  in  the  chapel  of  Bethlem,  and  thief. 
also  in  many  other  places  of  the  city  of  Prague,  of  which  errors  some  jq,'" fo"** 
of  them  he  hath  drawn  out  of  WicklifF's  books,  and  the  rest  he  hath  lowcimst 
forged  and  invented  of  his  own  head,  and  doth  maintain  the  same  bishop's 
very  obstinately  and  stiffly.     First,  that  after  the  consecration  and  ^^°^^^^^ 
pronunciation  of  the   words  in  the  Supper  of  the  Lord,  there  re-  made 
maineth  material  bread.''     And  this  is  proved  by  the  witness  of  John  j=^°" 
Protyway,  parish  priest  of  St.  Clement's  in  Prague  ;  John  Pecklow,^  huss. 
preacher'at  St.  Giles  in  Prague  ;  Benise,  preacher  in  the  castle  of  ,4tness 
Prague ;  Andrew  Brode,  canon  of  Prague  ;  and  clivers  other  priests,  f^^^'" 
Unto  this  John  Huss,  taking  a  solemn  oath,  answered  that  he  never  Huss. 
spake  any  such  word  ;    but  thus  much  he  did  grant,  that  at  what  His^^^^ 
time  the  archbishop  of  Prague  forbade  him  to  use  any  more  that 
terra  or  word  '  bread,'  he  could  not  allow  the  bishop's  commandment ; 
forasmuch  as  Christ,  in  the  sixth  chapter  of  John,  doth  oftentimes 
name  himself  the  bread  of  angels,  which  came  down  from  heaven,  to 
give  life  unto  the  whole  world.     But  as  touching  material  bread,  he  Naming 
never  spake  any  thing  at  all.     Then  the  cardinal  of  Cambray,  taking  forbidden 
a  certain  bill  in  his  hand,  which  he  said  he  received  the  day  before,  ^y^^'^e 
said  unto  John  Huss:  "Wdl  you  put  any  universalities  'a  parte  rei,'  bishops. 
i.  e.  'as  touching  the  thing  .^'"  When  John  Huss  answered,  that  he 
would,  because  St.  Anselm  and  divers  others  had  so  done,  the  cardinal 
did  proceed  to  gather  his  argument  in  this  manner  :    "  It  foUoweth 

u)  Tlie  like  practice,  in  these  later  days,  was  «-:.'d  at  O.xford  against  the  ?odly  fathers 

G  a2 


452  HISTORY    OF    THK    BOHtMlAXS. 

Henry    thcii,''  Said  lic,  "  that  after  the  consecration  is  made,  there  remaineth 
^'      the  substance  of  material  bread  ;  and  that  I  do  thus  prove  :  that  the 


man. 


A.  D.    consecration  being  done,  while  the  bread  is  changed  and  transubstan- 
1-^15-    tiated  into  the  body  of  Christ,  as  you  say,  either  there  doth  remain 
The         the  common  substance  of  material  bread,  or  contrariwise.     If  thesub- 
sophistf-   stance  do  remain,  then  is  our  purpose  at  an  end.     If  contrariwise, 
^th  John  then  doth  it  follow,  that  by  the  decision  of  the  singularity,  the  uni- 
Huss.       versal  ccaseth  anv  more  to  be.'' — John  Huss  answered,   "  Truly  it 
ceaseth  to  be,  in  this  singidar  material,  bread,  by  means  of  this  tran- 
substantiation,  when  it  is  changed  and  transubstantiated  into  the  body 
of  Christ ;  but  notwithstanding  in  other   singularities   it   is  made 
subject." 
The  dis-        Then  a  certain  Englishman  by  that  argument  would  prove  out  of 
ofthe°"  the  first  position,  that  there  remained  material  bread.  Then  said  John 
English-  Huss,  "  That  is  a  childish  argument,  which  every  boy  in  the  schools 
knoweth  :"  and  thereupon  gave  a  solution.     Then  another  English- 
man would  prove,  that  there  remained  material  bread  in  the  sacra- 
ment, because  the  bread  after  the  consecration  was  not  annihilated. 
Unto  whom  John  Huss  answered,  "  Although,"'  said  he,  '"  the  bread 
be  not  annihilated  or  consumed,  yet  singidarly  it  ceaseth  there  to  be, 
by  means  of  the  alteration  of  its  substance  into  the  body  of  Christ." 
Another    Here  another  Englishman  stepping  forth,  said  :  "  John  Huss  seemeth 
English-  ^^^^  ^^^^  ^^  ^^gg  ^1^^  g^^^^p  Vm^  of  crafty  speech  which  WicklifF  used, 

for  he  firranted  all  these  things  which  this  man  hath  done,  and  yet  in 
very  deed  was  fullv  persuaded  that  material  bread  remained  in  the 
sacrament  after  the  consecration."     Which  when  John  Huss  had  de- 
nied, saving,  that  he  spake  nothing  but  only  sincerely  and  uprightly, 
according  to  his  conscience  ;  the  Englishman  proceeded  to  demand 
of  him  again,  whether  the  body  of  Christ  be  totally  and  really  in  the 
John       sacrament  of  the  altar.     Whereunto  John  Huss  answered  :  ''  Verily, 
^reeth    I  do  think  that  the  body  of  Christ  is  really  and  totally  in  the  sacra- 
with  that  nient  of  the  altar,  which  was  born  of  the  Virijiu  Marv,  suffered,  died, 

blind  "  ~  ».  ^  '  ^ 

time  in    aud  rosc  again,  and  sitteth  on  the  right  hand  of  God  the  Father 
^le^sacra-  ^^jj-fiiprl^ty"     Whcu  they  had  disputed  a  good  while  to  and  fro,  as 
touching  universalities,  the  Englishman,  who  before  would  prove  that 
material  bread  remained  in  the  sacrament,  because  the  bread  was  not 
annihilate,  interrupting  and  breaking  their  talk,  said  :  "  To  what  pur- 
pose is  this  disputation  upon  universalities,  which  maketh  nothing  to 
the  purpose,  as  touching  feith  '^     For  as  far  as  I  can  perceive  or  hear, 
this  man  holdeth  a  good  opinion  as  touching  the  sacrament  of  the 
stokes,    altar."  Then  another  Englishman,  named  Stokes,  said  :   '"  I  have  seen 
Jishraan.   at  Prague  a  certain  treatise,  which  was  ascribed  unto  this  man  John 
Huss,  wherein  it  was  plainly  set  forth,   that  after  the  consecration 
there  remained  material  bread  in  the  sacrament."     "  Verily,"  said 
John  Huss,  "  saving  vour  reverence,  that  is  not  true." 
Baise  Then  they  returned  again  unto  the  witnesses  of  them  who  were 

spoken  of  a  little  before,  who,  every  man  for  himself,  affirmed,  with  an 
John       oath,  that  which  he  had  said ;  amonsf  whom  John  Protvwav,  parish 

Muss  •  ^  O  .  .         1  ^ 

falsely ac-  pricst  of  St.  Clcmeut's  iu  Prague,  when  he  should  come  to  confirm  his 
caulng^""^  testimony,  added  more,  that  John  Huss  should  say,  that  St.  Gregory 
St.  Gre-  was  but  a  rhymer,  when  he  did  allege  his  authority  against  him.  Unto 
rhymer.    v>hom  John  Huss  answered,  that  in  this  point  they  did  him  great 


ANOTHER   ACCUSATION   FOR   DEFENDING  WICKLIFk's  ARTU'LKS.  45!^ 

injury,  forasmuch  as  he  always  esteemed  and  reputed  St.  Gregory  for    ir.-nnj 
a  most  holy  doctor  of  the  church.  ^' 

These  contentions  and  disputations  being  somewhat  appeased,  the    A.  D. 
cardinal  of  Florence  turned  himself  towards  John  Huss  and  said  :  _lli^. 
''  Master,  you  know  well  enough  that  it  is  written,  that  in  the  mouth  T'le  car- 
of  two  or  three  witnesses,  all  witness  is  firm  and  stable ;  and  here  Florence. 
you  see  now  almost  twenty  witnesses  against  you,  men  of  authority  ^^nesses 
and  worthy  of  credit,  amongst  whom  some  have  heard  you  teach  these  prevailed 
things  themselves,  the  others  by  report  and  common  bruit  or  voice  do  John 
testify  of  your  doctrine ;  and  all  together,  generally,  bring  firm  rea-  "e^tes'ti-' 
sons  and  proofs  of  their  witness,  \mto  the  which  we  are  forced  and  con-  """J  "^ 

1    i  •  ^■l  II'  T  1  ^"   Bohe- 

stramed  to  give  credit;   and,   tor  my  part,  i    see  not  how  you  can  mia could 
maintain  and  defend  your  cause  against  so  many  notable  and  well  "n  hu"''" 
learned  men."     Unto  whom  John  Huss  answered  in  this  manner  :  ^^"• 
"  I  take  God  and  my  conscience  to  witness,  that  I  never  taught  any 
thing,  neither  was  it  ever  in  my  mind  or  fantasy  to  teach  in  such  sort 
or  manner,  as  these  men  here  have  not  feared  to  witness  against  me 
that  which  they  never  heard.     And  albeit,  they  were  as  many  more 
in  number  as  they  are,  for  all  that,  I  do  much  more  esteem,  yea,  and 
without  comparison,  regard  the  witness  of  my  Lord  God,  before  the 
witness  and  judgment  of  all  mine  adversaries,  upon  whom  I  do  in  no 
])oint  stay  myself.''" 

Then  said  the  cardinal  again  unto  him:   "It  is  not  lawful  for  us  The  car - 
to  judge  according  to  your  conscience ;  for  we  cannot  choose,  but  cambray. 
that  W'C  must  needs  stay  ourselves  upon  the  firm  and  evident  witness 
of  these  men  here.     For  it  is  not  for  any  displeasure  or  hatred,  that 
these  men  do  witness  this  against  you  (as  you  do  allege),  for  they 
allege  and  bring  forth  such  reasons  of  their  Avitness,  that  there  is  no 
man  that  can  perceive  any  hatred  in  them,  or  that  we  can,  in  any 
case,  be  in  doubt  thereof.     And  as  touching  Master  Stephen  Paletz, 
whereas  you  say,  you  do  suspect  him  that  he  hath  craftily  and  deceit- 
fully drawn  certain  points  or  articles  out  of  your  books  to  betray 
them  afterwards  ;  it  seemeth  that  in  this  point  you  do  him  great 
wi-ong,  for  in  mine  advice  he  hath  used  and  showed  a  great  fidelity 
and  amity  toward  you,  in  that  he  hath  alleviated   and   moderated 
manv  of  your  articles  much  more  than  they  are  in  your  own  books. 
I  understand,  also,  that  you  have  like  opinion  of  divers  other  notable 
men,  and  especially  you  have  said,  that  you  do  suspect  Master  Chan-  He 
cellor  of  Paris,  than  whom  there  is  no  more  excellent  and  christian  "^l^^^^^^ 
man  in  all  the  whole  world." 

Then  was  there  read  a  certain  article  of  accusation,  in  which  it  Avas  Another 
alleged,  that  John  Huss  had  taught,  and  obstinately  defended,  certain  \\oTl^T 
erroneous  articles  of  WicklifF's  in  Bohemia.    Wliereunto  Huss  an-  ^vkkf/ff,^ 
swered,  that  he  never  taught  any  errors  of  John  Wickliffs,  or  of  any  ankles. 
other  man's.     "  Wherefore,  if  it  be  so  that  Wickliff  hath  sowed  any 
errors  in  England,  let  the  Englishmen  look  to  that  themselves."  But  to 
confinn  their  article,  there  Avas  alleged,  that  John  Huss  did  withstand 
the  condemnation  of  Wickliffs  articles,  Avhich  were  first  condemned  at 
Rome.  And  afterAvards  also,  Avhen  the  archbishop  of  Swinco,  Avith  other 
learned  men,  held  a  convocation  at  Prague  for  the  same  matter,  Avhen 
they  would  have  there  been  condemned  for  this  cause,  that  none  of 
them  Averc  agreeing  to  the  catholic  faitli  or  doctrine,  but  were  either 


454  HISTORY    Ol'    THE    LOHEMIANS. 

Henry   heretical,  erroneous  or  offensive ;  he  answered,  that  he  durst  not 
^'      aoree  thereunto,  for  offending  his  conscience,  and  especially  for  these 


A.  D.    articles  :  that  Silvester  the  pope,  and  Constantine,  did  err  in  bestowing 

l'^15-    those  oreat  gifts  and  rewards  upon  the  church.     Also,  that  the  pope 

Certain     or  pricst,  being  in  mortal  sin,  cannot  consecrate  or  baptize.     "  This 

wickuff"  article,"  said  he,  "  I  have  thus  determined,  as  if  I  should  say,  that  he 

HuL"'"''"  doth  unworthily  consecrate  or  baptize,  when  he  is  in  deadly  sin,  and 

stood  to.   that  he  is  an  unworthy  minister  of  the  sacraments  of  God."    Here  his 

accusers,   with   their  witnesses,  were  earnest   and   instant  that  the 

article  of  Wicldiff  was  written  in  the  very  same  words  of  the  treatise 

which  John  Huss  made  against  Stephen  Paletz.  "  Verily,"  said  John 

Huss,  "  I  fear  not  to  submit  myself,  even  under  the  danger  of  death, 

if  you  shall  not  find  it  so  as  I  have  said."  When  the  book  was  brought 

forth,  they  found  it  written  as  John  Huss  had  said.     He  added  also, 

moreover,  that  he  dvirst  not  agree  unto  them  who  had  condemned 

WicklifTs  articles,  for  this  article,  "  The  tenths  are  pure  alms." 

Whether       Here  the  cardinal  of  Florence  objected  unto  him  this  argument,  as 

'  ure^^  ^^  touching  the  alms  :   "  It  is  required  that  it  should  be  given  freely  with- 

aims.       out  bond  or  duty.     But  tenths  are  not  given  freely  without  bond  or 

duty;  therefore  are  they  no  alms."  John  Huss,  denying  the  major  of 

this  syllogism,  brought  this  reason  against  him  :  "  Forasmuch  as  ricli 

men  are  bound,  under  the  pain  of  eternal  damnation,  unto  the  fulfilling 

of  the  six  works  of  mercy,  which  Christ  repeateth  in  Matthew  xxv., 

Alms       and  these  works  are  piu-e  alms ;  ergo,  alms  are  also  given  by  bond  and 

duty"!  "^    duty."     Then  an  archbishop  of  England,  stepping  up,  said  :  "  If  we 

all  be  bound  unto  those  six  works  of  mercy,  it  doth  follow  that  poor 

men,  who  have  nothing  at  all  to  give,  should  be  damned."  "I  answer," 

said  Huss,  "unto  your  antecedent,  that  I  spake  distinctly  of  rich  men, 

and  of  those  who  had  wherewithal  to  do  those  works.     They,  I  say, 

are  bound  to  give  alms  under  pain  of  damnation." 

He  answered  moreover,  unto  the  minor  of  the  first  argument,  that 

tenths  were  at  first  given  freely,  and  afterward  made  a  bond  and  duty ; 

and  when  he  would  have  declared  it  more  at  large,  he  could  not  be 

suffered.    He  declared  also  divers  other  causes  why  he  could  not,  with 

The  mind  Safe  conscieucc,  consent  unto  the  condemnation  of  Wickliff 's  articles. 

Hy"g^"    But  howsoever  the  matter  went,  he  did  affirm   and  say,  that  he  did 

touching  never  obstinately  confirm  any  articles  of  Wickliffs,  but  only  that  he 

demna-    did  not  allow  and  consent  that  Wickliffs  articles  should  be  condemned, 

w^kHff's  before  sufficient  reasons  were  alleged  out  of  the  holy  Scripture  for  their 

articles,    condemnation. 

'  And  of  the  same  mind, '  saith  John  Huss,  '  are  a  great  many  other  doctors 
and  masters  of  the  university  of  Prague ;  for  when  Swinco  the  archbishop  com- 
manded all  WickHff's  books  to  be  gathered  together  in  the  whole  city  of  Prague, 
and  to  be  brought  unto  him,  I  myself  brought  also  certain  books  of  WicklifF's, 
which  I  gave  unto  the  archbishop,  desiring  him,  that  if  he  found  any  error  or 
heresy  in  them,  he  would  note  and  mark  them,  and  I  myself  would  publish  them 
WickliiT's  openly.     But  the  archbishop,  albeit  that  he  showed  me  no  error  nor  heresy  in 
books        them,  bm-ned  my  books,  together  with  those  that  were  brought  unto  him,  not- 
Prague'    withstanding  he  had  no  such  commandment  from  pope  Alexander  V.     But, 
by  the       notwithstanding,  by  a  certain  policy,  he  obtained  a  bull  from  the  said  pope  by 
hishon       "leans  of  Jaroslaus,  bishop  of  Sarepta,  of  the  order  of  Franciscans,  that  all  Wick- 
Swinco.     liff 's  books,  for  the  manifold  errors  contained  in  them  (whereof  there  were  none 
named),  should  be  taken  out  of  all  men's  liands.     The  archbishop,  using  the 


JOhlN    HUSS    I'ALSELY    ACCUSED.  455 

authority  of  this  bull,  thouglit  he  sliould  bring  to  pass,  that  the  king  of  Bohemia  Henry 
and  the  nobles  should  consent  to  the  condemnation  of  WicklifFs  books ;  but        ^• 

therein  he  was  deceived.     Yet  nevertheless,  calling  together  certain  divines,  he  *    .. 

gave  them  in  commission  to  sit  upon  WicklifFs  books,  and  to  proceed  against  i  A  i  - 
them  by  a  definitive  sentence  in  the  canon  law.     These  men,  by  a  general  sen- 


tence, judged  all  those  books  worthy  to  be  burned;  which  when  the  doctors,  The  uni- 
masters  and  scholars  of  the  university  heard  report  of,  tliey,  all  together,  with  one  Pra^Jue  " 
consent  and  accord  (none  excepted  but  only  they,  who  before  were  chosen  by  the  maketh 
archbishop  to  sit  in  judgment),  determined  to  make  supplication  unto  the  king  to  ^."PPj'ca- 
stay  the  matter.     The  king,  granting  their  request,  sent  by  and  by  certain  unto  the  king 
the  archbishop  to  examine  the  matter.     There  he  denied  that  he  would  decree  for  saving 
any  thing,  as  touclving  WicklilF's  books,  contrary  unto  the  king's  will  and  plea-  "ijf  g"^  ' 
sure.     Whereupon,   albeit  that  he  had  determined  to  burn  them  the  next  day  books, 
after,  yet  for  fear  of  the  king,  the  matter  was  passed  over.     In  the  mean  time  Wicklifif's 
pope  Alexander  V.  being  dead,  the  archbishop,   fearing  lest  the  bull  which  he  {j^n^(j  • 
had  received  of  the  pope,  would  be  no  longer  of  any  force  or  effect,  privily  calling  Prague 
unto  him  his  adherents,  and  shutting  the  gates  of  his  court  round  about  him,  against  ^ 
being  guarded  with  a  number  of  armed  soldiei-s,  consumed  and  burned  all  Wick-  ^^^\_  '"^* 
liff's  books.     Besides  this  great  injury,  the  archbishop  by  means  of  his  bidl 
aforesaid,  committed  another  no  less  intolerable  ;  for  he  gave  out  commandment, 
that  no  man  after  that  time,  under  pain  of  excommunication,  should  teach  any  that^M^ 
more  in  chapels.    Whereupon  I  did  appeal  unto  the  pope ;  who  being  dead,  and  man 
the  cause  of  my  matter  remaining  undetermined,   I  appealed  likewise  unto  his  ^^^°^^'^ 
successor  John  XXIII. :  before  whom  when,  by  the  space  of  two  years,  I  could  more  in 
not  be  admitted  by  my  advocates  to  defend  my  cause,  I  appealed  vmto  the  high  chapels. 
judge  Christ.' 

When  John  Huss  had  spoken  these  words,  it  was  demanded  of  him,  joUn 
whether  he  had  received  absoUition  of  the  pope  or  no .''  He  answered,  ^eaieth^to 
"  no."     Then  again,  whether  it  were  lawful  for  him  to  appeal  unto  f^e  pope, 

.  and  froni 

Clirist  or  no  ?  Whereunto  John  Huss  answered  :   "  Verily  I  do  affirm  the  pope 
here  before  you  all,  that  there  is  no  more  just  or  effectual  appeal,  than  '"  ^ii"^*- 
that  appeal  which  is  made  unto  Christ,  forasmuch  as  the  law  doth  de-  whether 
termine,  that  to  appeal,  is  no  other  thing  than  in  a  cause  of  grief  or  fu^o'^^' 
wrong  done  by  an  inferior  judge,  to  implore  and  require  aid  and  remedy  '^pp?^^  *<» 
at  a  higher  judge"'s  hand.    Who  is  then  a  higher  judge  than  Cluist  ?  no. 
Who,  I  say,  can  know  or  judge  the  matter  more  justly,  or  with  more 
equity  .'*  when  in  him  there  is  found  no  deceit,  neither  can  he  be  de- 
ceived ;  or,  who  can  better  help  the  miserable  and  oppressed  than  he  .''*'''  T^^^^^^ 
While  John  Huss,  with  a  devout  and  sober  countenance,  was  speak-  church 
ing  and  pronouncing  those  words,  he  was  derided  and  mocked  by  all  Christ. 
the  whole  council. 

Then  was  there  rehearsed  another  article  of  his  accusation  in  this 
manner ;  that  John  Huss,  to  confirm  the  heresy  which  he  had  taught 
the  common  and  simple  people  out  of  Wickliffs  books,  said  openly 
these  words  :   "  That  at  what  time  a  great  number  of  monks  and  triars, 
and  other  learned  men  were  srathered  together  in  Ensfland,  in  a  certain 
church,   to  dispute  against  John  Wickliff,  and  could  by  no  means 
vanquish  him,  or  give  him  the  foil,  suddenly  the  church-door  was 
broken  open  with  lightning,  so  that  with  much  ado  WicklifF's  enemies 
hardly  escaped  without  hurt."     He  added  moreover,  that  he  wished  huss  ac- 
his  soul  to  be  in  the  same  place  where  John  WicklifTs  soul  was.  tmstlng'^ 
Whereunto  John  Huss  answered,  that  a  dozen  years  before  any  books  \y^Viiff. 
of  divinity  of  John  WicklifTs  Avere  in  Bohemia,  he  did  see  certain  soui  is 
works  of  philosophy  of  his,  which,  he  said,  did  marvellously  delight  "^^  " 
and  please  Imn.    And  when  he  understood  the  good  and  godJy  life  of 
the  said  Wickliff.  he  spake  these  words :  "  I  trust,"  said  he,  "  that 


456  HISTORV    OF    THE    BOHEMIAXS. 

Henrij  Wicklift  is  savcd ;  and  albeit  that  I  doubt  whether  he  be  damned  or 

^-  no,  yet  ■witli  a  ,!^ood  hope  I  wish,  that  my  soul  were  in  the  same  place 

A.D.  where  John  WicklifTs  is.""     Then  again  did  all  the  company  jest  and 

1^^^-  laugh  at  him. 

„  ,. .  It  is  also  in  his  accusation,  that  John  Huss  did  council  the  people. 

Sedition  lo-i/r  ■  •  ^      ^  i-ii 

laid  to  his  accordiug  to  the  example  ot  Moses,  to  resist  with  the  sword  against  all 
c large.     ^^^^^^  ^^  ^^^  gainsav  his  doctrine.     And  the  next  day  after  he  had 
preached  the  same,  there  were  found  openly,  in  divers  places,  certain 
intimations,  that  every  man,  being  armed  with  his  sword  about  him, 
should  stoutly  proceed ;  and  that  brother  should  not  spare  brother,  nei- 
ther one  neighbour  another.  Jolm  Huss  answered,  that  all  these  things 
were  falsely  laid  to  his  charge  by  his  adversaries ;  for  he  at  all  times, 
when  he  preached,  did  diligently  admonish  and  warn  the  people,  that 
thev  should  all  arm  themselves  to  defend  the  truth  of  the  gospel,  ac- 
cording to  the  saying  of  the  apostle,  "  with  the  helmet  and  sword  of 
salvation  ;'"'  and  that  he  never  spake  of  any  material  sword,  but  of  that 
which  is  the  word  of  God.     And  as  touching  intimations,  or  Moses' 
sword,  he  never  had  any  thing  to  do  withal. 
Huss  ac-       It  is  moreover  affirmed  in  his  accusation  and  witness,  that  many 
moving"^  ofFenccs  are  sprung  up  by  the  doctrine  of  Huss.     For  first  of  all,  he 
tumults    sowed    discord    between  the    ecclesiastical   and   the   politic   state : 
against     wlicreupon  followed  the  persecution,  spoiling  and  robbery  of  the 
.5y,  and     clcrgy  and  bishops  ;   and  moreover,  that  he,  through  his  dissension, 
m^he*"    dissolved  the  university  of  Prague.     Hereunto  John  Huss  briefly 
"."'^'""     answered,   that  these   things  had  not  happened  by  his  means  or 
Prague,    default ;    for  the  first  dissension  that  was  between  the   ecclesiastical 
^wel^  °^  ^^*-^    politic  state,  sprang  up  and  gi'ew  upon  this  cause,  that  pope 
Gregory  XH.  promised  at  his  election,   that  at  all  times,  at  the 
will  and  pleasure  of  the  cardinals,  he  Avoukl  depart  from,  and  give 
over  his  seat  again  :  for  under  that  condition  he  was  elect  and  chosen. 
This  man,  contrary  and  against  Winceslaus  king  of  Bohemia,  who 
was   then   king   of  the    Romans,   made    Louis,    duke    of  Bavaria, 
emperor. 

A  few  years  after,  it  happened,  when  pope  Gregory  would  not 
refuse  and  give  over  his  seat  and  office  at  the  request  of  the  cardinals, 
that  the  whole  college  of  cardinals  sent  letters  to  the  king  of  Bohe- 
mia, requiring  him,  that,  together  with  them,  he  would  renounce  and 
forsake  his  obedience  unto  pope  Gregory  ;  and  so  it  should  come  to 
pass,  that  by  the  authority  of  a  new  bishop  he  should  recover  again 
his  imperial  dignity.     For  this  cause  the  king  consented  to  the  will 
of  the  cardinals  as  touching  a  neutrality ;    that  is  to  say,  that  he 
would  neither  take  part  with  pope  Gregory,  neither  yet  with  Bene- 
dict XH.,  bishop  of  Avignon,  who  was  then  named  pope,  as  it  doth 
Why       appear  by  chronicles.     In  this  cause  then,  forasmuch  as  the  arch- 
anTother  ^ishop  Swinco  with  the  clergy  were  against  the  king,  and  abstaining 
of  the      from  the  divine  service,  many  of  them  departed  out  of  the  city,  and 
fly  out  of  the  archbishop  himself,  breaking  down  the  tomb  of  the  lord  Win- 
Prague.    (.gj^te,  contrary  and  against  the  king"'s  will,  did  also  take  WicklifF's 
books  and  burn  them.    Thereupon  the  king,  without  any  gainsaying, 
suffered  that  certain  goods  of  theirs,  who  of  their  own  wills  were  fled 
away,  should  be  spoiled ;  because  they  should  not  consent  or  accord 
with  the  bishop.    Whereupon  it  is  easy  to  be  understood  and  known 


ON    THE    GERMANS    DEPARTING    FROM    PRAGUE.  457 

that  John  Huss  was  falsely  accused  for  that  matter.      Howbeit  a    Hfnry 

certain  man,  one  Naso,*  rising  up,  said  :  "  The  clergy  do  not  abstain '. 

from  the  divine  service,  because  they  will  not  swear  to  consent  unto  A.  D. 
the  king,  but  because  that  they  are  spoiled  and  robbed  of  their  goods  ^'^^^- 
and  substance."  And  the  cardinal  of  Cambray,  who  was  one  of  the 
judges  said  :  "  Here  I  may  say  somewhat  which  is  come  into  my 
mind.  When  I  came  from  Rome,  the  same  year  that  these  things 
were  done,  by  chance  I  met  on  the  way  certain  prelates  of  Bohemia ; 
of  whom,  when  I  demanded  what  news  they  had  brought  out  of 
Bohemia,  they  answered,  that  there  was  happened  a  wonderful  cruel 
and  heinous  fact ;  for  all  the  clergy  were  spoiled  of  their  substance, 
and  very  ill  entreated  and  handled.'" 

Then  John  Huss,  alleoinsr  the  same  cause  which  he  did  before, 
went  forward  unto  the  second  part  of  the  article  which  was  objected 
against  him,  denying  also  that  it  happened  through  his  fault,  that  the 
Germans  departed  from  the  university  of  Prague.     "  But  Avhen  the 
king  of  Bohemia,  according  to  the  foundation  of  Charles  IV.,  his 
fother,  granted  three  voices  unto  the  Bohemians,  and  the  fourth  unto  a  decia- 
the  Germans ;  whereat  the  Germans  grudging  that  they  should  be  how  the 
exempted  from  their  voices,  of  their  own  accord  departed  and  went  ^ll^^^^l 
their  ways  ;  binding  themselves  with  a  great  oath,  and  under  a  great  f™m  the 
penalty,^  both  of  their  fame,  and  also  money,  that  none  of  them  sity  of 
should  return  again   unto    Prague.       Notwithstanding,    I   am   not  ^"^^^"^ 
ashamed  to  confess,  that  I  did  approve  and  allow  the  doings  of  the 
king,  unto  whom  of  duty  I  owe  obedience  for  the  commodity  and 
profit  of  my  country.     And  because  you  shall  not  think  that  I  have 
spoken  any  untruth,  here  is  present  Albert  Wan-en  Trapius,  who 
was  deacon  of  the  faculties,  who  had  sworn  to  depart  with  the  rest  of 
the  Germans  ;  he,  if  he  will  say  the  truth,  shall  easily  clear  me  of  this 
suspicion." 

But  when  Albert  would  have  spoken,  he  could  not  be  heard.  The  sian- 
But  this  Naso,  of  whom  before  is  made  mention,  after  he  had  unshlnlT- 
asked  leave  to  speak,  said :  ''  This  matter  do  I  understand  well  ^^11^"° 
enough,  for  I  was  in  the  king's  court  when  these  things  were  done 
in  Bohemia,  when  I  saw  the  masters  of  the  three  nations  of  the  Ger- 
mans, the  Bavarians,  Saxons,  and  Silesians,  amongst  whom  the  Polo- 
nians  were  also  numbered,  most  humbly  come  unto  the  king,  requiring 
that  he  would  not  suffer  the  right  of  their  voices  to  be  taken  from 
them;  then  the  king  promise'd  them  that  he  would  foresee  and 
provide  for  their  requests  :  but  John  Huss  and  Jerome  of  Prague, 
with  divers  others,  persuaded  the  king  that  he  should  not  so  do. 
Whereat  the  king  at  first  being  not  a  little  moved,  gave  him  a  sore 
check,  that  he  and  Jerome  of  Prague  did  so  much  intermeddle  them- 
selves, and  moved  such  open  controversies,  insomuch  that  he  threat- 
ened them,  that  except  they  would  foresee  and  take  heed,  he  would 
bring  it  to  pass  that  the  matter  should  be  determined  and  decreed 
by  fire.  Wherefore,  most  reverend  fathers  !  you  shall  understand 
that  the  king  of  Bohemia  did  never  favour  with  his  heart  these  men, 
whose  unshamefastness  is  such,  that  they  feared  not  even  of  late  to 
treat  me  evil,  being  so  much  in  the  king's  favour  and  credit."    After 

(1)  This  doctor  Naso  was  counsellor  to  king  Winceslaus. 

(2)  The  penalty  of  money  was  a  hundred  silver  shock. 


458  HISTORY    OF    THE    BOHEMIANS. 

ne>iry    him  stcppcd  forth  Paletz,  saying,  "  Verily  most  reverend  fathers, 
^'      not  only  the  learned  men  of  other  nations,  but  also  of  Bohemia 


A.  D.    itself,  are,  through  the  counsel  of  John  Huss  and  his  adherents, 

^^^^-    banished  out  of  Bohemia,  of  which  number  some  remain  yet  in  exile 

Paletz      in  Moravia."     Hereunto  John  Huss  ansv/ered  :  "  How  can  this  be 

against     truc,"  Said  he,  "  since  I  was  not  at  Prague  at  that  time,  when  these 

'huss.      ™en  you  speak  of  departed  and  went  away  from  thence .'''"     These 

things  were  thus  debated  the  day  aforesaid  as  touching  John  Huss. 
Huss  This  done,  the  said  John  Huss  was  committed  to  the  custody  of 

te™to""  ^^^^  bishop  of  Reggio,  under  whctni  Jerome  of  Prague  was  also  pri- 
custody.  soner.  But  before  he  was  led  away,  the  cardinal  of  Cambray,  calling 
him  back  again  in  the  presence  of  the  emperor,  said,  "John  Huss,  I 
have  heard  you  say,  that  if  you  had  not  been  willing  of  your  own 
mind  to  come  unto  Constance,  neither  the  emperor  himself,  nor  the 
king  of  Bohemia,  could  have  compelled  you  to  do  it."  Unto  whom 
John  Huss  answered  :  "  Under  your  license,  most  reverend  father  ! 
I  never  used  any  such  kind  of  talk  or  words.  But  this  I  did  say, 
that  there  were  in  Bohemia  a  great  number  of  gentlemen  and  noble- 
men, who  did  favour  and  love  me,  who  also  might  easily  have  kept 
me  in  some  sure  and  secret  place,  that  I  should  not  have  been  con- 
strained to  come  unto  this  town  of  Constance,  neither  at  the  will  of 
The  car-  the  cuiperor,  neither  of  the  king  of  Bohemia,"  With  that  the  cardi- 
cambray.  nal  of  Cambray,  even  for  very  anger  began  to  change  his  colour,  and 
despitefully  said  :  '"'■  Do  you  not  see  the  unshamefastness  of  the  man 
here  ?''''  And  as  they  were  murmuring  and  whispering  on  all  parts, 
John  (le  the  lord  John  de  Clum,  ratifying  and  confirming  that  which  John 
"™'  Huss  had  spoken,  said,  that  John  Huss  had  spoken  very  well ;  "  for 
on  my  part,"  said  he,  "  who,  in  comparison  of  a  great  many  others, 
am  but  of  small  force  in  the  realm  of  Bohemia,  yet  always,  if  I  would 
have  taken  it  in  hand,  I  could  have  defended  him  easily  by  the  space 
of  one  year,  even  against  all  the  force  and  power  of  both  these  great 
and  mighty  kings.  How  much  better  might  they  have  done  it  who 
are  of  more  force  or  puissance  than  I  am,  and  have  stronger  castles 
and  places  than  I  have  .^"  After  the  lord  de  Clum  had  spoken,  the 
cardinal  of  Cambray  said,  "  Let  us  leave  this  talk ;  and  I  tell  you, 
John  Huss  !  and  counsel  you,  that  you  submit  yourself  unto  the 
sentence  and  mind  of  the  council,  as  you  did  promise  in  the  prison  ; 
and  if  you  will  do  so,  it  shall  be  greatly  both  for  your  profit  and 
honour." 

And  the  emperor  himself  began  to  tell  him  the  same  tale,  saying : 


ihe  era-        Albeit  that  there  be  some  who  say,  that  the  fifteenth  day  after  you  were 
peror's      committed  to  prison,  you  obtained  of  us  our  letters  of  safe-conduct ;  notwith- 
John         standing,  I  can  well  prove,  by  the  witness  of  many  princes  and  noblemen,  that 
Buss.        the  said  safe-conduct  was  obtained  and  gotten  of  us  by  my  lord  de  Duba  and 
de  Clum,  before  you  were  parted  out  of  Prague,  under  whose  guard  we  have 
sent  for  you,  to  the  end  that  none  should  do  you  any  outrage  or  hurt,  but  that 
you  should  have  full  liberty  to  speak  freely  before  all  the  council,  and  to  answer 
as  touching  your  faith  and  doctrine ;   and,  as  you  see,  my  lords  the  cardinals 
and  bishops  have  so  dealt  with  you,  that  we  do  very  well  perceive  their  good 
will  towards  you ;  for  which  we  have  great  cause  to  thank  them.     And  foras- 
much as  divers  have  told  vis,  that  we  may  not,  or  ought  not,  of  right  to  defend 
any  man  who  is  a  heretic,  or  suspected  of  heresy  ;  therefore,  now  we  give  you 
even  the  same  counsel  which  the  cardinal  of  Cambray  hath  given  you  already. 


uss 

ito  f 

emperor. 


THIRTY-\INE    ARTICLES    LAID    TO    .TOHX    HUSS.  4-59 

tliat  you  be  not  obstinate  to  maintain  any  opinion,  but  that  you  do  submit  your-    Henry 
self  under  such  obedience  as  you  owe  unto  the  authority  of  the  holy  council,  in        ^■ 
all  things  that  shall  be  laid  against  you,  and  confirmed  by  credible  witnesses :      .    q 
which  thing  if  you  do  according  to  our  coimsel,  we  will  give  order  that  for  the    '1415 

love  of  us,  of  our  brother,  and  the  whole  realm  of  Bohemia,  the  council  shall  - 

suffer  you  to  depart  in  peace,  with  an  easy  and  tolerable  penance  and  satis- 
faction. Which  thing  if  you,  con  ti'ari wise,  refuse  to  do,  the  presidents  of  the 
council  shall  have  sufficient  wherewithal  to  proceed  against  you.  And,  for  our 
part,  be  ye  well  assured,  that  we  will  sooner  prepare  and  make  the  fire  with  our 
own  hands,  to  burn  you  withal,  than  we  will  endure  or  suffer  any  longer  that 
you  shall  maintain  or  use  this  stiffness  of  opinions,  which  you  have  hitherto 
maintained  and  used.  Wherefore  our  advice  and  counsel  is,  that  you  submit 
yourself  wholly  unto  the  judgment  of  the  council. 

Unto  whom  John  Huss  answered  in  tliis  sort ;  "  O  most  noble  Answer 
emperor !  I  render  unto  your  highness  most  immortal  thanks,  for  Hust  " 
your  letters  of  safe  conduct.''  Upon  tliis  lord  John  de  Clum  cli(l  ""»» t^e 
break  him  of  his  purpose,  and  admonished  him  that  he  did,  in  no 
point,  excuse  himself  of  the  blame  of  obstinacy.  Then  said  John 
Huss  :  "O  most  gentle  lord  !  I  do  take  God  to  my  witness,  that  I 
was  never  minded  to  maintain  any  opinion  ever  obstinately  ;  and 
that  for  this  same  intent  and  purpose  I  did  come  hither  of  mine  own 
good  will,  that  if  any  man  could  lay  before  me  any  better  or  more 
holy  doctrine  than  mine,  I  would  then  change  mine  opinion  without 
any  further  doubt."  After  he  had  spoken  and  said  these  things,  he 
was  sent  away  with  Serjeants. 

The  moiTow  after,  which  was  the  eighth  day  of  June,  the  very 
same  company  which  was  assembled  the  day  before,  assembled  now 
again  at  the  covent  of  the  Franciscans,     And  in  this  assembly  were 
also  John  Huss's  friends,  lord  de  Duba,  and  lord  de  Clum,  and  Peter 
the  notary.     Thither  was  John  Huss  also  brought ;  and  in  his  pre-  Thirty- 
scnce  there   were  read  about  thirty-nine  articles,  which,  they  said,  articles 
were   drawn  out  of  his  books,     Huss  acknowledged  all  those  that  jo'hJ" 
were  faithfully  and  truly  collected  and  gathered,  to  be  his  ;  of  which  ^^"^*- 
sort  there  were  but  very  few.     The  residue  were  counterfeited  and 
forged  by  his  adversaries,  and  specially  by  Stephen  Paletz,  the  prin- 
cipal author  of  this  mischief:  for  they  could  find  no  such  thing  in 
the  books,  out  of  which  they  said  they  had  drawn  and  gathered 
them  ;  or  at  least,  if  they  were,  they  were  coiTupted  by  slanders,  as 
a  man  may  easily  perceive  by  the  number  of  articles. 

These  be  the  same  articles  in  a  manner  which  were  showed  before 
in  the  prison  to  John  Huss,  and  are  rehearsed  here  in  another  order. 
Howbeit  there  Avere  more  articles  added  unto  them,  and  some  others 
con-ected  and  enlarged.  But  now  we  will  show  them  one  with 
another,  and  declare  what  the  said  Huss  did  answer  both  openly 
before  them  all,  as  also  in  the  prison,  for  he  left  his  answers  in  the 
prison  briefly  written  with  his  own  hand  in  these  words. 

The  Answer  of  John  Huss  to  twenty-six  Articles  concerning  his 
Book  of  the  Church. 

I,  John  Huss,  unworthy  minister  of  Jesus  Christ,  raaster  of  arts,  and  bachelor 
cf  divinity,  do  confess  that  I  have  written  a  certain  small  treatise,  entituled, 
'  Of  the  Chmxh  ;'  the  copy  whereof  was  showed  mo  by  the  notaries  of  the  three 


460 


Henry 

y. 

A.D. 

1415. 

First 
article. 


Second. 
St.  Paul 
never 
member 
of  the 
devil. 


Two 

mHiiner 
rif  separa- 
tions 
from  the 
church. 


rhird. 
Th5 

members 
of  the 
church 
never  fall 
finally 
away. 


Fourth. 
The  pre- 
destinate 
is  always 
a  mem- 
ber of 
the  uni- 
versal 
church. 


Fifth. 
To  be  in 
the 

church, 
and  a 
member 
of  the 
church. 
Predesti- 
nation. 


Sixth. 
Both 
good  ai'd 
bad  in  the 
church. 


The 

seventh 

article. 


HISTORY    OF    THK    BOHEMIANS. 

presidents  of  tlie  council ;  that  is  to  say,  the  patriarch  of  Constantinople,  the 
bishop  of  Castile,  and  the  bishop  of  Libusse :  which  deputies  or'presidents,  in 
reproof  of  the  said  treatise,  delivered  unto  nie  certain  articles,  saying,  that 
they  were  drawn  out  of  the  said  treatise,  and  were  wTitten  in  the  same. 

The  first  article :  '  There  is  but  one  holy  universal  or  catholic  church,  which 
is  the  universal  company  of  all  the  predestinate.'  I  do  confess  that  this  pro 
position  is  mine,  and  it  is  confirmed  by  the  saying  of  St.  Augustine  upon 
St.  John. 

The  second  article  :  '  St.  Paul  was  never  any  member  of  the  devil,  albeit 
that  he  committed  and  did  certain  acts  like  unto  the  acts  of  the  malignant 
church.  And  likewise  St.  Peter,  who  fell  into  a  horrible  sin  of  peijury  and 
denial  of  his  Master,  it  Avas  by  the  permission  of  God,  that  he  might  the  more 
firmly  and  steadfastly  rise  again  and  be  confirmed.'  I  answer  according  to  St. 
Augustine,  that  it  is  expedient  that  the  elect  and  predestinate  should  sin  and 
offend.  Hereby  it  appeareth  that  there  are  two  manner  of  separations  from 
the  holy  church.  The  first  is,  not  to  perdition,  as  all  the  elect  are  divided  from 
the  church.  The  second  is  to  perdition,  by  which  certain  heretics  are,  through 
their  deadly  sin,  divided  from  the  church.  Yet  notwithstanding,  by  the  grace  of 
God,  they  may  return  again  unto  the  flock,  and  be  of  the  fold  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  of  whom  he  speaketh  himself,  saying,  '  I  have  other  sheep  which 
are  not  of  this  fold,'  John  xx. 

The  third  article  :  '  No  part  or  member  of  the  church  doth  depart  or  fall  away 
at  any  time  from  the  body,  forasmuch  as  the  charity  of  predestination,  which 
is  the  bond  and  chain  of  the  same,  doth  never  fall.'  This  proposition  is  thus 
placed  in  my  book :  '  The  reprobate  of  the  church  proceed  out  of  the  same, 
and  yet  are  not  as  parts  or  members  of  the  same,  forasmuch  as  no  part  or 
member  of  the  same  doth  finally  fall  away ;  because  that  the  charity  of  pre- 
destination, which  is  the  bond  and  chain  of  the  same,  doth  never  fall  away.' 
This  is  proved  by  1  Cor.  xiii.,  and  Romans  viii.  :  '  All  things  turn  to  good  to 
them  which  love  God.'  Also,  '  I  am  certain  that  neither  death  nor  life  can 
separate  us  from  the  charity  and  love  of  God:'  as  it  is  more  at  large  in  the 
book. 

The  fourth  article  :  '  The  predestinate,  although  he  be  not  in  the  state  of 
grace  according  to  present  justice,  yet  is  he  always  a  member  of  the  universal 
church.'  This  is  an  error,  if  it  be  understood  of  all  such  as  be  predestinate: 
for  thus  it  is  in  the  book,  about  the  beginning  of  the  fifth  chapter,  where  it  is 
declared,  that  there  be  divers  manners  and  sorts  of  being  in  the  church  :  for 
there  are  some  in  the  church,  according  to  a  misshapen  faith ;  and  others  accord- 
ing to  predestination,  as  Christians  predestinate,  now  in  sin,  but  who  shall 
return  again  unto  grace. 

The  fifth  article  :  '  There  is  no  degree  of  honour  or  dignity,  neither  any 
human  election,  or  any  sensible  sign,  that  can  make  any  man  a  member  of 
the  universal  church.'  I  answer,  this  article  is  after  this  manner  in  my  book. 
*  And  such  subtleties  are  understood  and  known  by  considering  what  it  is  to 
be  in  the  church,  and  what  it  is  to  be  a  part  or  member  of  the  church ;  and 
that  predestination  doth  make  a  man  a  member  of  the  universal  church,  which 
is  a  preparation  of  grace  for  the  present,  and  of  glory  to  come  ;  and  not  any 
degree  of  dignity,  neither  election  of  man,  neither  any  sensible  sign.  For  the 
traitor  Judas  Iscariot,  notwithstanding  Christ's  election,  and  the  temporal 
graces  which  were  given  him  for  his  office  of  apostleship,  and  that  he  was  re- 
puted and  coimted  of  men  a  true  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ,  yet  was  he  no  true 
disciple,  but  a  wolf  covered  in  a  sheep's  skin,  as  St.  Augustine  saith.' 

The  sixth  article  :  '  A  reprobate  man  is  never  a  member  of  the  holy  church.' 
I  answer,  it  is  in  my  book  with  sufficient  long  probation  out  of  Psalm  xxvi., 
and  out  of  the  Ephesians  v.,  and  also  by  St.  Bernard's  saying :  '  The  church  of 
Jesus  Christ  is  more  plainly  and  evidently  his  body,  than  the  body  which  he 
delivered  for  us  to  death.'  1  have  also  written  in  the  fifth  chapter  of  my  book, 
that  the  holy  church  is  the  barn  of  the  Lord,  in  which  are  both  good  and  evil, 
predestinate  and  reprobate,  the  good  being  as  the  good  corn  or  grain,  and  the 
evil  as  the  chaff;  and  thereunto  is  added  the  exposition  of  St.  Augustine. 

The  seventh  article :  '  Judas  was  never  a  true  disciple  of  Jesus  Christ.'  I 
answer,  and  I  do  confess  the  same.  This  appeareth  by  the  fifth  article,  which 
];>  passed  before,  and  by  St.  Augustine  in  his  Book  of  Penance,  where  he  doth 


ARTICLF.S    LAID    TO    JOIIX    HUSS,    AXD    HIS    ANSWERS.  4G1 

expound  the  meaning  of  St.  John,  in  tlie  first  epistle,  chap,  ii.,  where  he  saith,     iiemy 
'  Tiiey  came  ont  from  amongst  us,  hut  they  were  none  of  us.     He  knew  from        ''  • 
the  beginning  all  them  that  should  believe,  and  him  also  that  should  betray  ~~a~tT~ 
him,  and  said:  And  therefore,  I  say  unto  you,  that  none  cometh  unto  me  ex-     ^A^r 

cept  it  be  given  him  of  my  Father.     From  that  time   many  of  the  disciples L 

parted  from  him  :  and  were  not  those  also  called  disciples,  according  to  the  words 
of  the  gospel  I  And  yet,  notwithstanding  they  were  no  true  disciples,  because 
they  did  not  remain  and  continue  in  the  word  of  the  Son  of  God,  according  as 
it  is  said :  If  you  remain  in  my  word,  you  be  my  disciples ;  forasmuch,  then, 
as  they  did  not  continue  with  Christ  as  his  true  disciples,  so  likewise  are  they 
not  the  true  sons  of  God:  although  they  seem  so,  unto  him  they  are  not  so; 
unto  whom  it  is  known  what  they  shall  be,  that  is  to  say,  of  good,  evil.'  Thus 
much  writeth  St.  Augustine.  It  is  also  evident  that  Judas  cotdd  not  be  the 
true  disciple  of  Christ,  by  means  of  his  covetousness :  for  Christ  himself  said 
in  the  presence  of  Judas,  as  I  suppose,  '  Except  a  man  forsake  all  that  he  hath, 
lie  cannot  be  my  disciple.'  Forasmuch  then  as  Judas  did  not  forsake  all  things, 
according  to  the  Lord's  will,  and  follow  him,  he  was  a  thief,  as  it  is  said  in  John 
xii. ;  and  a  devil,  John  \\.  ;  whereby  it  is  evident  by  the  word  of  the  Lord, 
that  Judas  was  not  his  true,  but  feigned  disciple.  Whereupon  St.  Augustine 
writing  upon  John,  declaring  how  the  sheep  hear  the  voice  of  Chi'ist,  saith, 
'  What  manner  of  hearers,  think  ye,  his  sheep  were  ?  Truly  Judas  heard  him 
and  was  a  wolf,  yet  followed  he  the  shepherd ;  but  being  clothed  in  a  sheep's 
skin,  he  lay  in  wait  for  the  shepherd.' 

The  eighth  article :  '  The  congregation  of  the  predestinate,  whether  they  be  Eighth 
bi  the  state  of  grace  or  no,  according  unto  present  justice,  is  the  holy  universal  article, 
church  ;  and  therefore  it  is  an  article  of  faith,  and  it  is  the  same  church  which 
hath  neither  wrinkle,  nor  spot  in  it,  but  is  holy  and  undefiled,  which  the  Son 
of  God  doth  call  his  own.'     Answer:  The  words  of  the  book  out  of  the  which 
this  article  was  drawn  are  these :       '  Thirdly,  the  church  is  understood  and  The 
taken  for  the  congregation  and  assembly  of  the  faithful,  whether  they  be  in  the  church  is 
state  of  grace,  according  to  present  justice,  or  not.     And  in  this  sort  it  is  an  sometime 
article  of  our  faith,  of  which  St.  Paul  maketh  mention  in  Ephesians  v.  :  '  Christ  for  the 
«>o  loved  his  church,  that  he  delivered  and  offered  himself  for  the  same,'   &c.  ^P"?"^^?!"" 
I  pray  you  then,  is  there  any  faithftd  man  who  doth  doubt  that  the  church  doth  elect  and 
not  signify  all  the  elect  and  predestinate,  which  we  ought  to  believe  to  be  the  faithful, 
universal  church,  the  glorious  spouse  of  Jesus  Christ,  holy  and  without  spot?  fi"^artide 
Wherefore  this  article  is  an  article  of  faith,  which  we  ought  firmly  to  believe  taken  in 
according  to  our  creed  ;    '  I  believe  the  holy  catholic  church  :'    and  of  this  ''^^  creed, 
church  do  St.  Augustine,   St.  Gi-egory,    St.  Jerome,    and  divers  others  make 
mention. 

The  ninth  article :  '  Peter  never  was,  neither  is  the  head  of  the  holy  uni-  Nintli 
versal  church.'      Answer:    This  article  was    drawn    out   of   these  words  of  article, 
my  book.      '  All  men  do  agree  in  this  point,  that  Peter  had  received  of  the  „everwas 
Rock  of  the  church  (which  is  Christ),  humility,  povertj',  steadfastness  of  faith,  head  of 
and  consequently  blessedness.     Not  as  though  the  meaning  of  our  Lord  Jesus  "'^  "hole 
Christ  was,  when  he  said.  Upon  this   Rock  I  will  build  my  church,  that  he  church. 
would  biuld  every  militant  church  upon  the  person  of  Peter,  for  Christ  should 
build  his  cluu-ch  upon  the  Rock  which  is  Christ  himself,   from  whence  Peter 
received  his  steadfastness  of  faith,  forasmuch  as  Jesus  Christ  is  the  only  head 
and  foundation  of  every  church,  and  not  Peter.' 

The  tenth  article  :  '  If  he  that  is  called  the  vicar  of  Jesus  Christ,  do  follow  Tenth 
Christ  in  his  life,  then  he  is  his  true  vicar.  But,  if  so  be  he  do  walk  in  contrary  ~^"^'^* 
paths  and  ways,   then  is  he  the  messenger  of  Antichrist,  and  tlie  enemy  and  of  Chrisi, 
adversary  of  St.  Peter,  and  of  our  Lord  Jesiis  Christ,  and  also  the  vicar  of  Judas  ''o^  he  is 
Iscariot.'      I  answer,  the  words  of  my  book  are  these:   'If  he  who  is  called  j",!'^^^ 
the  vicar  of  St.  Peter,  walk  in   the  ways  of  christian  virtues  aforesaid,  we  do 
believe  verily  that  he  is  the  true  vicar,  and  true  bishop  of  the  church  which  he 
mleth ;  but  if  he  v/alk  in  contrary  paths  and  ways,  then  is  he  the  messenger  of 
Antichrist,  contrary  both  to  St.  Peter,  and  to  our   Lord  Jesus  Christ.      And 
therefore  St.  Bernard,  in   his  fourth  book,   did  write  in  this  sort  unto  pope 
Eugene :    Thou  delightest  and  walkest  in  great  pride  and  arrogancy,  being 
gorgeously  and  sumptuously  an-ayed  ;  what  friut  or  profit  do  tliy  flock  or  sheep 
receive  by  thee  ?     If  I  durst  say  it,  these  be  rather  the  pastures  and  feedings 


462 


HISTORY    OF    THE    BOHEMIANS, 


Henvij 
V. 


A.D. 
1415. 


Eleventh 
article. 


Prelates 
making 
merchan- 
dise of 
holy  or- 
ders. 


Twelfth 
article. 
The  pope 
taketh  his 
original 
from  the 
emperors. 


Thir- 
teenth 
article. 
The  pope 
is  not  the 
head  of 
any  parti- 
cular 
church. 


Four- 
teenth 
article. 


Fif- 
teenth. 
The 
pope's 
power 
vain. 


of  devils  than  of  sheep.  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul  did  not  so ;  wherefore  thou 
seemest  by  these  thy  doings  to  succeed  Constantine,  and  not  St.  Peter.'  These 
be  the  very  words  of  St.  Bernard.^  It  foUoweth  after,  in  my  book,  '  That  if 
the  manner  and  fashion  of  his  life  and  living  be  contrary  to  that  which  St.  Peter 
used  or  tliat  he  be  given  to  avarice  and  covetousness,  then  is  he  the  vicar  of 
Judas  Iscariot,  who  loved  and  chose  the  reward  of  iniquity,  and  did  set  out  to 
sale  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.'  As  soon  as  they  had  read  the  same,  those  who 
ruled  and  governed  the  council,  beheld  one  another,  and  making  mocks  and 
mouths,  they  nodded  their  heads  at  him. 

The  eleventh  article  :  '  All  such  as  do  use  simony,  and  priests  living  disso- 
lutelv  and  wantonly,  do  hold  an  untrue  opinion  of  the  seven  sacraments,  as 
unbelieving  bastards,  and  not  as  children,  not  knowing  what  is  the  office  and 
duty  of  the  keys  or  censures,  rites  and  ceremonies ;  neither  of  the  divine 
service  of  the  church,  nor  of  veneration  or  worshipping  of  relics ;  neither  of  the 
orders  constituted  and  ordained  in  the  clnu-ch ;  neither  yet  of  indulgences  or 
pardons.'  I  answer,  that  it  is  placed  in  this  manner  in  my  book.  '  This 
abuse  of  authority  or  power  is  committed  by  such  as  do  sell  and  make  mer- 
chandise of  holy  orders,  and  get  and  gather  together  riches  by  simony,  making 
fairs  and  markets  of  the  holy  sacraments,  and  living  in  all  kinds  of  voluptuous- 
ness and  dissolute  manners,  or  in  any  other  filthy  or  villanous  kind  of  living : 
they  do  pollute  and  defile  the  holy  ecclesiastical  state.  And  albeit  that  they 
profess  in  words  that  they  do  know  God,  yet  do  they  deny  it  again  by  their 
deeds,  and  consequently  believe  not  in  God ;  but,  as  unbelieving  bastards,  they 
hold  a  contrary  and  untrue  opinion  of  the  seven  sacraments  of  the  church. 
And  this  appeareth  most  evidently,  forasmuch  as  all  such  do  utterly  contemn 
and  de.spise  the  name  of  God,  according  to  the  saying  of  Malachi :  Unto  you, 
O  priests!  be  it  spoken,  which  do  despise  and  contemn  my  name.'     Chap. i. 

The  twelfth  article :  '  The  papal  dignity  hath  his  original  from  the  emperors 
of  Rome.'  I  answer,  and  mark  well  what  my  words  are  :  'The  pre-eminence 
and  institution  of  the  pope  is  spiimg  and  come  of  the  emperor's  power  and 
authority.  And  this  is  proved  by  the  ninety-sixth  distinction  ;  for  Constantine 
granted  this  privilege  unto  the  bishop  of  Rome,  and  others  after  him  confimied 
the  same :  That  like  as  Augustus,  for  the  outward  and  temporal  goods  be- 
stowed upon  the  church,  is  counted  always  the  most  high  king  above  all  others ; 
so  the  bishop  of  Rome  should  be  called  the  principal  father  above  all  other 
bishops.  This  notwithstanding,  the  papal  dignity  hath  its  original  immediately 
from  Christ,  as  touching  his  spiritual  administration  and  ofiice  to  rvde  the 
church.'  Then  the  cardinal  of  Cambray  said :  '  In  the  time  of  Constantine, 
there  was  a  general  council  holden  at  Nice,  in  which,  albeit  the  highest  room 
and  place  in  the  church  was  given  to  the  bishop  of  Rome ;  for  honour's  cause, 
it  is  ascribed  unto  the  emperor.  Wherefore  then  do  ye  not  as  well  affirm  and 
say :  That  the  papal  dignity  took  its  original  rather  from  that  council,  than  by 
the  emperor's  authority  and  power  ?' 

The  thirteenth  article  :  '  No  man  would  reasonably  affirm  (without  revela- 
tion) either  of  himself  or  of  any  other,  that  he  is  the  head  of  any  particular 
church.'  I  answer,  I  confess  it  to  be  written  in  my  book,  and  it  folio weth 
straight  after :  '  Albeit  that  through  his  good  living  he  ought  to  hope  and  trust 
that  he  is  a  member  of  the  holy  universal  church,  the  spouse  of  Jesus  Christ, 
according  to  the  saying  of  the  Preacher :  No  man  knoweth  whether  he  be 
worthy  and  have  deserved  grace  and  favour,  or  hatred.  And  Luke  xvii.  : 
When  ye  have  done  all  that  ye  can,  say  that  you  are  unprofitable  servants.' 

The  fourteenth  article :  '  It  ought  not  to  be  believed  that  the  pope,  whatso- 
ever he  be,  may  be  the  head  of  any  particular  church,  unless  he  be  predestinate 
or  ordained  of  God.'  I  answer,  that  I  do  acknowledge  this  proposition  to  be 
mine;  and  this  is  easy  to  prove,  forasmuch  as  it  is  necessary  that  the  christian 
faith  should  be  depraved,  forasmuch  as  the  church  was  deceived  by  N.,  as  it 
appeareth  by  St.  Augustine. 

The  fifteenth  article :  '  The  pope's  power  as  vicar,  is  but  vain  and  nothing 
worth,  if  he  do  not  confirin  and  address  his  life  according  to  Jesus  Christ,  and 
follow  the  manners  of  St.  Peter.'  I  answer,  that  it  is  thus  in  my  book ;  '  That 
it  is  meet  and  expedient  that  he  who  is  ordained  vicar,   should  address  and 


(1)  Bern,  ad  Eugeu.  lib.  4. 


ARTICLES    LAID    TO    JOHN    HUSS,    AXD    HIS    ANSWERS.  463 

frame  himself,  in  manners  and  conditions,  to  the  authority  of  him  who  did  put    uenry 
him  in  place.'      And  John  Huss  said,  moreover,  before  the  whole  council:  '  I       ''■ 
understand  that  the  power  and  authority  in  such  a  pope  as  doth  not  represent  ~~Z~t)~ 
the  manners  of  Christ,  is  frustrate  and  void,  as  touching  the  merit  and  reward    niic' 

wlrich  he  should  obtain  and  get  thereby,  and  doth  not  get  the  same :  but  not  .'- 

as  concerning  his  office.'      Then  certain  others  standing  by,  asked  of  him,  Distinc- 
saying,   'Where  is    that  gloss  in  your  book?'     John  Huss  answered,    '  You  j^^JJij^^^j 
shall  find  it  in  my  treatise  against  Master  Paletz :'  whereat  all  the  assistants,  of  office. 
looking  one  upon  another,  began  to  smile  and  laugh. 

The  sixteenth  article  :  '  The  pope  is  most  holy,  not  because  he  doth  supply  Sixteenth 
and  hold  the  room  and  place  of  St.  Peter,  but  because  he  hath  great  revenues.'  fj''^'^- 
I  answer,  that  my  words  are  mutilated,  for  thus  it  is  written  :  '  He  is  not  most  cometii 
holy,  because  he  is  called  the  vicar  of  St.  Peter,  or  because  he  hath  great  and  not  by 
large  possessions  ;  but  if  he  be  the  follower  of  Jesus  Christ  in  humility,  gentle-  bu/by 
ness,  patience,  labour  and  travail,  and  in  perfect  love  and  charity.'  following. 

The  seventeenth  article :  '  The  cardinals^  are  not  the  manifest  and  true  sue-  Seven- 
cessors  of  the  other  apostles  of  Jesus  Christ,  if  they  Uve  not  according  to  the  '^^p'^ 
fashion  of  the  apostles,  keeping  the  commandments  and  ordinances  of  the  Lord 
Jesus.'      I  answer,  that  it  is  thus  written  in  my  book,  and  it  proveth  itself  suffi- 
ciently ;  '  For  if  they  enter  in  by  another  way  than  by  the  door,  which  is  the  Lord 
Jesus,  they  be  murderers  and  thieves.' 

Then  said  the  cardinal  of  Cambray,  '  Behold  both  this  and  all  other  articles 
before  i-ehearsed,  he  hath  written  much  more  detestable  things  in  his  book  than 
are  presented  in  his  ai-ticles.  Truly,  John  Huss,  thou  hast  kept  no  order  in  thy 
sermons  and  writings.  Had  it  not  been  your  part  to  have  applied  your  sermons 
according  to  your  audience  ?  for  to  what  purpose  was  it,  or  what  did  it  profit 
you  before  the  people  to  preach  against  the  cardinals,  when  none  of  them  were 
present?  It  had  been  meeter  for  you  to  have  told  them  their  faults  before  them 
all,  than  before  the  laity.'  Then  answered  John  Huss  :  '  Reverend  father  ! 
forasmuch  as  I  did  see  many  priests  and  other  learned  men  present  at  my 
sermons,  for  their  sakes  I  spake  those  words.'  Then  said  the  cardinal,  '  Thou 
hast  done  very  ill,  for  by  such  kind  of  talk  thou  hast  disturbed  and  troubled  th.e 
whole  state  of  the  church.' 

The  eighteenth  article  :  '  A  heretic  ought  not  to  be  committed  to  the  secular  Eigh- 
powers  to  be  put  to  death,  for  it  is  sufficient  only  that  he  abide  and  suffer  the  *'^enth 
ecclesiastical  censure.'     These  are  my  words,  '  That  they  might  be  ashamed  of  j^^^ 
their  cruel  sentence  and  judgment,  especially  forasmuch  as  Jesus  Christ,  Bishop  Husscon 
both  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament,  would  not  judge  such  as  were  disobedient  flemneth 
by  civil  judgment,  neither  condemn  them  to  bodily  death.'     As  touching  the  tyofthe 
first  point,  it  may  evidently  be  seen  in  Luke  xii.  And  for  the  second,  it  appeareth  prelates 
also  by  the  woman  who  was  taken  in  adultery,  of  whom  it  is  spoken  in  John  viii. ;  |"  ^^^g" 
and  it  is  said  in  Matthew  xviii.,  '  If  thy  brother  have  off'ended  thee,'  &-c.  Mark,  death  of 
therefore,  what  I  do  say,  that  a  heretic,  whatsoever  he  be,  ought  first  to  be  in-  lieretics 
structed  and  taught  with  christian  love  and  gentleness  by  the  holy  Scriptures, 
and  by  the  reasons  drawn  and  taken  out  of  the  same ;  as  St.  Augustine  and 
others  have  done,  disputing  against  the  heretics.     But  if  there  were  any,  who, 
after  all  these  gentle  and  loving  admonitions  and  instructions,  woidd  not  cease 
from,  or  leave  off,  their  stiffness  of  opinions,  but  obstinately  resist  against  the 
truth,  such,  I  say,  ought  to  suffer  corporal  or  bodily  punishment. 

As  soon  as  John  Huss  had  spoken  those  things,  the  judges  read  in  his  book 
a  certain  clause,  wherein  he  seemed  grievously  to  inveigh  against  them  who 
delivered  a  heretic  unto  the  secular  power,  not  being  confuted  or  convicted  of 
heresy ;  and  compared  them  unto  the  high  priests.  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  who 
said  unto  Pilate,  '  It  is  not  lawfid  for  us  to  put  any  man  to  death,'  and  delivered  The  be- 
Christ  imto  him  :  and  yet  notwithstanding,  according  unto  Christ's  own  witness,  'raying 
they  were  greater  murderers  than  Pilate.     '  For  he,'  said  Christ,  '  who  hath  demning 
delivered  me  unto  thee,  hath  committed  the  gi'eatest  offence.'  Then  the  cardinals  of  inno- 
and  bishops  made  a  great  noise,  and  demanded  of  John  Huss,  saying :   '  Who  '^^"  ^' 
are  they  that  thou  dost  compare  or  assimule  unto  the  Pharisees  ? '  Then  he  said, 
'  All  those  who  deliver  up  any  innocent  unto  the  civil  sword,  as  the  Scribes  and 
Pharisees  delivered  Jesus  Christ  unto  Pilate.'     '  No,  no,'  said  they  again ;  '  for 

(1)  The  cardinals  do  count  it  heresy,  that  they  should  be  compelled  to  be  followers  of  thfi 
apostles. 


464 


niSTOUY    OF    THE    BOHEMIANS. 


Henry 

v. 

A.D. 
1415. 

Nine- 

leeiitli 

article. 

The 

church 

militant 

standeth 

in  three 

(larts. 


Twenti- 
eth arti- 
cle. 

Three 
kinds  of 
obedi- 
ence. 


True 
obedience 
ruled  by 
God's 
com- 
mand- 
ment. 

Twenty- 
first  arti- 
cle. 


Appeal- 
ing unto 
Christ: 


forbidden 
by  the 
cardinal 
of  Cam- 
bray. 


Twenty- 
second 
article. 
A  knot 
found  In 
a  rush. 


all  that,  you  spake  here  of  doctors.'  And  the  cardinal  of  Camhray,  according 
to  his  accustomed  manner,  said :  '  Truly  they  who  have  made  and  gathered  these 
articles,  have  used  great  lenity  and  gentleness,  for  his  writings  are  much  more 
detestahle  and  horrible.'' 

The  nineteenth  article :  '  The  nobles  of  the  world  ought  to  constrain  and 
compel  the  ministers  of  the  church  to  observe  and  keep  the  law  of  Jesus  Christ.' 
I  answer,  that  it  standeth  thus,  word  for  word,  in  my  book.  '  Those  who  be  on 
our  part  do  preach  and  affirm  that  the  church  militant,  according  to  the  parts 
which  the  Lord  hath  ordained,  is  divided,  and  consisteth  in  three  parts :  that  is 
to  say,  ministei's  of  the  clmrch,  who  should  keep  pin-ely  and  sincerely  the  ordi- 
nances and  commandments  of  the  Son  of  God ;  and  the  nobles  of  the  world,  who 
should  com.pel  and  drive  them  to  keep  the  commandments  of  Jesus  Christ ;  and 
of  the  common  people,  serving  to  both  these  parts  and  ends,  according  to  the 
institution  and  ordinance  of  Jesus  Christ.' 

The  twentieth  article :  '  The  ecclesiastical  obedience  is  a  kind  of  obedience 
which  the  priests  and  monks  have  invented  without  any  express  authority  of 
the  holy  Scriptiu'es.'  I  answer  and  confess,  that  those  words  are  thus  written  in 
my  book.  I  say  that  there  be  three  kinds  of  obedience,  spiritual,  secular,  and 
ecclesiastical.  The  spiritual  obedience  is  that  which  is  only  due  according  to 
the  law  and  ordinance  of  God,  under  which  the  apostles  of  Jesus  Christ  did 
live,  and  all  Christians  ought  to  live.  The  secular  obedience  is  that  which  is 
due  according  to  the  civil  laws  and  ordinances.  The  ecclesiastical  obedience  is 
such  as  the  priests  have  invented,  without  any  express  authority  of  Scriptm-e. 
The  first  kind  of  obedience  doth  utterly  exclude  from  it  all  evil,  as  well  on  his 
part  who  giveth  the  commandment,  as  on  his,  also,  who  doth  obey  the  same. 
And  of  this  obedience  it  is  spoken  in  Deut.  xxiv.  '  Thou  shalt  do  all  that  which 
the  priests  of  the  kindred  of  Levi  shall  teach  and  instruct  thee,  according  as  I 
have  commanded  them.' 

The  twenty-first  article  :  '  He  that  is  excommunicated  by  the  pope,  if  he  refuse 
and  forsake  the  judgment  of  the  pope  and  the  general  council,  and  appealeth 
unto  Jesus  Christ,  after  he  hath  made  his  appellation,  all  the  excommunica- 
tions and  curses  of  the  pope  cannot  annoy  or  hurt  him.  I  answer,  that  I  do 
not  acknowledge  this  proposition  ;  but  indeed  I  did  make  my  complaint  in  my 
book,  that  they  had  both  done  me,  and  such  as  favoured  me,  great  wrong ;  and 
that  they  refuse  to  hear  me  in  the  pope's  court.  For  after  the  death  of  one 
pope,  I  did  appeal  to  his  successor,  and  all  that  did  profit  me  nothing.  And  to 
appeal  from  the  pope  to  the  council  it  were  too  long ;  and  that  were  even  as 
much  as  if  a  man  in  trouble  should  seek  an  uncertain  remedy.  And,  therefore, 
last  of  all,  I  have  appealed  to  the  Head  of  the  church,  my  Lord  Jesus  Christ; 
for  he  is  much  more  excellent  and  better  than  any  pope,  to  discuss  and  deter- 
mine matters  and  causes,  forasmuch  as  he  cannot  err,  neither  yet  deny  justice 
to  him  that  doth  ask  or  require  it  in  a  just  cause ;  neither  can  he  condemn  the 
innocent.  Then  spake  the  cardinal  of  Cambray  unto  him,  and  said :  '  Wilt 
thou  presume  above  St.  Paul,  who  appealed  unto  the  emperor,  and  not  imto 
Jesus  Christ  V  John  Huss  answered  :  '  Forasmuch  then  as  I  am  the  first  that 
do  it,  am  I,  therefore,  to  be  reputed  and  counted  a  heretic  ?  And  yet  notwith- 
standing St.  Paul  did  not  appeal  unto  the  emperor  of  his  own  motion  or  will, 
but  by  the  will  of  Christ,  who  spake  unto  him  by  revelation,  and  said  :  Be  firm 
and  constant,  for  thou  must  go  unto  Rome.  And  as  he  was  about  to  rehearse 
his  appeal 2  again,  they  mocked  him. 

The  twenty-second  article  :  '  A  vicious  and  naughty  man  liveth  viciously  and 
naughtily ;  but  a  virtuous  and  godly  man  liveth  virtuously  and  godly.'  I  answer, 
my  words  ai-e  these ;  '  That  the  division  of  all  human  works  is  into  two  parts ; 
that  is,  that  they  be  either  virtuous  or  vicious ;  forasmuch  as  it  doth  appear,  that 
if  any  man  be  virtuous  and  godly,  and  that  he  do  any  thing,  he  doth  it  then 
virtuously  and  godly.  And,  contrariwise,  if  a  man  be  vicious  and  naughty,  that 
which  he  doth  is  vicious  and  naughty.'  For  as  vice,  which  is  called  crime  or 
offence  (and  thereby  understand  deadly  sin),  doth  universally  infect  or  deprave 
all  the  acts  and  doings  of  the  subject  (that  is,  of  the  man  who  doth  them),  so 
likewise  virtue  and  godliness  do  quicken  all  the  acts  and  doings  of  the  virtuous 

(1 )  And  how  could  this  bishop  of  Cambray  understand  the  books  of  John  Huss  being  written  in 
Bohemian  speech,  which  he  understood  not? 

(2)  For  this  appeal  of  John  Huss,  see  page  467. — Ed. 


ARTICLES    AGAINST    IIUSS,    WRESTED    BY    THE    PAPISTS.  4G5 

and  godly  man ;  insomnch  that  he,  being  in  the  state  of  grace,  is  said  to  pray 
and  do  good  works  even  sleeping,  as  it  were  by  a  certain  means  working ;  as 
St.  Augustine,  St.  Gregory,  and  divers  others  affirm.  And  it  appeareth  in 
Luke  vi.,  '  If  thine  eye  (that  is  to  say,  the  mind  or  intention)  be  simple  (not 
depraved  with  the  perverseness  of  any  sin  or  oiFence),  all  the  whole  body  (that 


is  to  say,  all  the  acts  and  doings)  shall  be  clear  and  shining,  (that  is,  acceptable  The  tree 
and  grateful  unto  God).  But  if  thine  eye  be  evil,  the  whole  body  is  darkened.'  jrood,'^ 
And  in  2  Cor.  x. ;  '  All  things  that  you  do,  do  them  to  the  glory  of  God.'  And  bringeth 
likewise  in  1  Coi-.  xvi.  it  is  said,  '  Let  all  your  doings  be  done  with  charity.'  ff""'.|>  good 
Wherefore  all  kind  of  life  and  living  according  unto  charity  is  virtuous  and 
godly ;  and  if  it  be  without  charity,  it  is  vicious  and  evil.  This  saying  may 
well  be  proved  out  of  Deut.  xxiii.,  where  God  speaketh  to  the  people,  that  he 
that  keepeth  his  commandments  is  blessed  in  the  house  and  in  the  field,  out- 
going and  in-coming,  sleeping  and  waking ;  but  he  tliat  doth  not  keep  his  com- 
mandments, is  accursed  in  the  house  and  in  the  fields,  in  going  out  and  in 
coming  in,  sleeping  and  waking,  &c.  The  same  also  is  evident  by  St.  Augustine, 
upon  the  psalm,  where  he  writeth,  that  a  good  man  in  all  his  doings  doth  praise 
the  Lord.  And  Gregory  saith,  that  the  sleep  of  saints  and  holy  men  doth  not 
lack  their  merit.  How  much  more  then  his  doings  which  proceed  of  good  zeal, 
be  not  without  reward,  and  consequently  be  virtuous  and  good  ?  And  contrari- 
wise it  is  understood  of  him  who  is  in  deadly  sin,  of  whom  it  is  spoken  in  the 
law,  that  whatsoever  the  unclean  man  doth  touch,  is  made  unclean.  To  this 
end  doth  that  also  appertain,  which  is  before  repeated  out  of  Mai.  i.  And 
Gregory,  in  the  first  book  and  first  question,  saith,  '  We  do  defile  the  bread,  which 
is  the  body  of  Christ,  when  we  come  unworthily  to  the  table,  and  when  we, 
being  defiled,  do  drink  his  blood.'  And  St.  Augustine,  on  Psalm  cxlvi.  saith, 
If  thou  dost  exceed  the  due  measure  of  nature,  and  dost  not  abstain  from 
gluttony,  but  gorge  thyself  up  with  drunkenness,  whatsoever  laud  and  praise 
thy  tongue  doth  speak  of  the  grace  and  favour  of  God,  thy  life  doth  blaspheme 
the  same.' 

When  he  had  made  an  end  of  this  article,  the  cardinal  of  Cambray  said :  Cardinal 
'  The  Scripture  saith  that  we  be  all  sinners.     And  again,  If  we  say  we  have  no  of  tan. - 
sin,  we  deceive  ourselves,  and  so  we  should  always  live  in  deadly  sin.'     John  jecteth. 
Huss  answered,   '  The  Scripture  speaketh  in  that  place  of  venial  sins,  which  do 
not  utterly  expel  or  put  away  the  habit  of  virtue  from  a  man,  but  do  associate 
themselves    together.'      And   a   certain    Englishman,    whose    name    was    W., 
said:  '  But  those  sins  do  not  associate  themselves  with  any  act  morally  good.' 
John  Huss    alleged    again    St.  Augustine's  place  upon    Psalm  cxlvi.,   Avhich 
when  he  rehearsed,  they  all  with  one  mouth  said,   '  What  makes  this  to  the 
purpose  ? ' 

The  twenty-third  article  :  '  The  minister  of  Christ,  living  according  to  his  law,  Twenty 
and  having  the  knowledge  and  understanding  of  the  Scriptures,  and  an  earnest  ^^^^^ 
desire  to  edify  the  people,  ought  to  preach ;   notwithstanding  the  pretended  poibid- 
excommunication  of  the  pope.     And  moreover,  if  the  pope,  or  any  other  ruler,  ding  to 
do  forbid  any  priest  or  minister,  so  disposed,  to  preach,  that  he  ought  not  to  obey  ^^l^gjj'gj. 
him.'     I  answer,  that  these  are  my  words :   '  That  albeit  the  excommunication  it  ought 
were  either  threatened  or  come  out  against  him,  in  such  sort  that  a  Christian  to  be 
ought  not  to  do  the  commandments  of  Christ,  it  appeareth  by  the  words  of  °  ^^^ 
St.  Peter,  and  the  other  apostles,  That  we  ought  rather  to  obey  God  than  man.'  Preach- 
Whereupon  it  foUoweth,  that  the  minister  of  Christ,  living  according  unto  this  ^'ims"'^ 
law,  &c.,  ought  to  preach,  notwithstanding  any  pretended  excommunication;  for  giving  be 
it  is  evident,  that  it  is  commanded  unto  the  ministers  of  the  church  to  preach  "ot  works 
the  word  of  God  [Acts  v.],  God  hath  commanded  us  to  preach  and  testify  unto  ent,  but 
the  people ;   as  by  divers  other  places  of  the  Scripture  and  the  holy  fathers,  duties 
rehearsed  in  my  treatise,  it  doth  appear  more  at  large.    The  second  part  of  this  n^^'iid"™ 
article  followeth  in  my  treatise  in  this  manner  :   '  By  this  it  appeareth,  that  for  ments. 
a  minister  to  preach,  and  a  rich  man  to  give  alms,  are  not  indifi'erent  works,  but  "^o  forbid 
duties  and  commandments.     Whereby  it  is  further  evident,  that  if  the  pope,  or  (er  to 
any  other  ruler  of  the  church,   do  command  any  minister  disposed  to  preach,  preacii, 
not  to  pi'each,  or  a  rich  man  disposed  to  give  alms,  nqt  to  give,  that  they  ought  ^"(faridi' 
not  to  obey  him.'  And  Huss  added  moreover;  '  To  the  intent  that  you  may  under-  man  to 
stand  me  the  better,  I  call  that  a  pretended  excommunication,  which  is  unjustly  S'^'*^    . 
disordered   and   given    forth,    contrary  to   the    order  of  tho   law   and   God's  both  one. 

VOL.  III.  H  H 


466  HISTORY    OF    THK    BOHEMIANS, 

Henry    Commandments ;  for  which,  the  meet  minister  appointed  thereunto,  ought  not 
^-       to  cease  from  preacliing,  neither  yet  to  fear  damnation.' 

Then  they  ohjected  unto  him,  that  ])e  had  said,  that  such  kind  of  excom- 
munications were  rather  blessings.     '  Verily,'  said  John  Huss,   '  even  so  I  do 
now  say  again,  that  every  excommimication,  by  which  a  man  is  unjustly  ex- 
communicated, is  unto  him  a  blessing  before  God ;  according  to  that  saying  of 
the  prophet,  I  will  curse  where  you  bless  :  and  contrariwise,  They  shall  curse, 
arc     "      but  thou,  O  Lord!    shalt  bless.'  Then  the  cardinal  of  Florence,  who  had  always 
blessings,  a  notary  ready  at  his  hand  to  write  such  things  as  he  commanded  him,  said : 
'  The  law  is,  that  every  excommunication,  be  it  ever  so  unjust,  ought  to  be 
feared.'     '  It  is  true,'  said  John  Huss,   '  for  I  do  remember  eight  causes,  for 
which  excommunication  ought  to  be  feared.'     Then  said  the  cardinal :  '  Are 
there  no  more  but  eight?'    '  It  maybe,'  said  John  Huss,  '  that  there  be  more.' 
Twenty-        The  twenty-fourth  article  :  '  Every  man  who  is  admitted  unto  the  ministry  of 
an'kle       ^^^^  church,  receiveth  also  by  special  connnandment  the  office  of  a  preacher, 
and  ought  to  execute  and  fulfil  that  commandment,  notwithstanding  any  excom- 
A  minis-   nmnication  pretended  to  the  contrary.'     Answer:  my  words  are  these:  '  Foi-- 
ter  once     asmucli  as  it  doth  appear  by  that  which  is  aforesaid,  that  whosoever  cometh,  or 
is  more^  '  is  admitted  unto  the  ministry,  receiveth  also  by  especial  commandment  the  office 
bound  to    of  preaching,  he  oiight  to  fulfil  that  commandment,  any  excommunication  to 
t*P  ^'^'^'(j    *^®  contrary  pretended  notwithstanding.    Also  no  Christian  ought  to  doubt,  but 
any  other  '■'^^^  ^  '^^^'^  sufficiently  instructed  in  learning,  is  more  bovtnd  to  counsel  and 
work  of     instruct  the  ignorant,  to  teach  those  who  are  in  doubt,  to  chastise  those  who  are 
th^pope's  ^ii^''^ly>  ^i^d  to  remit  and  forgive  those  that  do  him  injury,  than  to  do  any  other 
prohi-       works  of  mercy.'     Forasmuch  then  as  he  that  is  rich  and  hath  sufficient,  is 
^"t^^h     bound,  under  pain  of  damnation,  to  minister  and  give  coqioral  and  bodily  alms, 
standing.  '^^  appearetli  Matt,  xxv.,  how  much  more  is  he  bound  to  do  spiritual  alms! 
Twenty-       The  twenty-fifth  article  :  '  The  ecclesiastical  censures  are  antichristian,  such 
fifth  as  the  clergy  have  invented  for  their  own  preferment,  and  for  the  bondage  and 

ar  ic  e.      servitude  of  the  common  people  ;  whereby  if  the  laity  be  not  obedient  unto  the 
clergy  at  their  will  and  pleasure,  it  doth  multiply  their  covetousness,  defend 
Censures   their  malice,  and  prepare  a  way  for  Antichrist.     Whereby  it  is  an  evident  sign 
of  the       and  token,  that  such  censures  proceed  from  Antichrist ;  which  censures  in  their 
church      processes  they  do  call  fulminations  or  lightnings,  whereby  the  clergy  do  chiefly 
multiply    proceed  against  such  as  do  manifest  and  open  the  wickedness  of  Antichrist,  who 
coveto'us-^  thrust  themselves  into  the  office  of  the  clergy.'     These  things  are  contained  in 
ness.         the  last  chapter  of  his  treatise  of  the  church. — I  answer,  and  I  deny  that  it  is 
in  that  form :  but  the  matter  thereof  is  largely  handled  in  the  twenty-third 
chapter.     And  in  the  examination  of  the  audience,  they  have  gathered  certain 
clauses  most  contrary  thereunto ;  which  when  they  had  read,  the  cardinal  of 
Cambray  renewed  his  old  song,  saying  :  '  Truly,  these  are  much  more  grievous 
and  offensive,  than  the  articles  which  are  gathered.' 
Twenty-        The   twenty-sixth  article  :   '  There  ought  no  interdict  to  be  appointed  unto 
sixth         the  people,   forasmuch  as  Christ  the  high  bishop,  neither  for  John  Baptist, 
neither  for  any  injury  that  was  done  imto  him,  did  make  any  interdict.'     My 
words  are  these :  '  When  I  complained,  that  for  one  minister's  sake,  an  interdict 
was  given  out,  and  thereby  all  good  men  ceased  from  the  laud  and  praise  of 
Christ  in-  God.    And  Christ,  the  high  bishop,  notwithstanding  that  the  prophet  was  taken 
terdicted   and  kept  in  prison,  than  whom  there  was  no  greater  amongst  the  children  of 
prayed      inen,  did  not  give  out  any  curse  or  interdict,  no  not  when  Herod  beheaded 
for  all.       him ;   neither  when  he  himself  was  spoiled,   beaten,  and  blasphemed  of  the 
soldiers,  Scribes,  and  Pharisees,  did  he  then  curse  them,  but  prayed  for  them, 
and  taught  his  disciples  to  do  the  same,  as  it  appeareth  in  Matt.  v.    And  Christ's 
first  vicar,  following  the  same  doctrine  and  learning,  saith  [1  Pet.  ii.].  Hereunto 
are  ye  called  :  for  Christ  hath  suff'ered  for  us,  leaving  us  an  example,  that  we 
should  follow  his  footsteps,  who,  when  he  was  cursed  and  evil  spoken  of,  did  not 
curse  again.     And  St.  Paul,  following  the  same  order  and  way,  in  Rom.  xii., 
saith.  Bless  them  that  persecute  you.'     Thei'e  were  besides  these,  many  other 
places  of  Scripture  recited  in  that  book ;  but  they  being  omitted,  these  only  were 
rehearsed,  which  did  help  or  prevail  to  stir  up  or  move  the  judges'  minds. 

And  these  are  the  articles  which  are  alleged  out  of  John  Huss's 
book,  entituled,  '  Of  the  Church.'' 


JOHN    HUSS'S    APPEAL    FROM    THE    COUXCIl,    TO    CHRIST.  ^GT 

Forasmuch  as  mention  Avas  made,  page  46-i,  of  tlic  appeal  of  the    iier.ri/ 

said  Huss,  it  seemeth  good  to  show  the  manner  and  form  thcrc(;f.        __J 

A.  D. 
1415. 
The  Copy  and  Tenor  of  the  Appeal  of  John  Huss. 

Forasmuch  as  the  most  mighty  Lord,  one  in  essence,  thi'ee  in  person,  is  both  He 
the  chief  and  first,  and  also  the  last  and  uttermost  refuge  of  all  those  who  are  ajjpenls 
oppressed,  and  that  he  is  the  God  who  defendeth  verity  and  truth  throughout  ^'""^ 
all  generations,  doing  justice  to  such  as  be  wronged,  being  ready  and  at  hand  joim 
to  all  those  who  call  upon  him  in  verity  and  truth,  unbinding  those  that  are  >^>^III. 
bound,  and  fulfilling  the  desires  of  all  those  who  lionour  and  fear  him  ;  defend-  ^cWnt. 
ing  and  keeping  all  those  that  love  him,  and  utterly  destroying  and  bringing  to 
ruin  the  stiff-necked  and  impenitent  sinner ;  and  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
very   God  and  man,  being  in  great  anguish,  compassed  in  with  the  priests. 
Scribes,  and  Pharisees,  wicked  judges  and  witnesses,  willing,  by  the  most  bitter 
and   ignominious  death,  to  redeem  the  children  of  God,  chosen  before   the 
foundation  of  the  world,   from  everlasting  damnation  ;  hath  left  behind  him 
this  godly  example  for  a  memory  unto  them  who  should  come  after  him,  to 
the  intent  they  should  commit  all  their  causes  into  the  hands  of  God,  who  can  do 
all  things,  and  knoweth  and  seeth  all  things,  saying  in  this  manner :  O  Lord !  Tlie 
behold  my  affliction,  for  my  enemy  hath  prepared  himself  against  me,  and  thou  ^^'"'^'^"'^ 
art  my  protector  and  defender.  O  Lord!  thou  hast  given  me  understanding,  and  plaint 
I  have  acknowledged  thee ;  thou  hast  opened  imto  me  all  their  entei-prises ;  and  ^i"' 
for  mine  own  part,    I  have  been  as  a  meek  lamb  which  is  led  unto  sacrifice,  chn"  ° 
and  have  not  resisted  against  them.    They  have  wrought  their  enterprises  upon  against 
me,  saving ;  Let  us  put  wood  in  his  bread,  and  let  us  banish  liim  out  of  the  y^'i^^d 
land  of  the  living,  that  his  name  be  no  more  spoken  of,  nor  had  in  memory. 
But  thou,  O  Lord  of  hosts !    which  judgest  justly,  and  seest  the  devices  and 
imaginations  of  their  hearts,  hasten  thee  to  take  vengeance  upon  them,  for  I 
have  manifested  my  cause  unto  thee,  forasmuch  as  the  number  of  those  which 
trouble  me  is  great,  and  have  counselled  together,   saying.  The  Lord  hath  for- 
saken him,  pursue  him  and  catch  him.      O  Loi-d  my  God !  behold  their  doings, 
for  thou  art  my  patience;  deliver  me  from  mine  enemies,  for  thou  art  my  God ; 
do  not  separate  thyself  far  from  me,  forasmuch  as  tribulation  is  at  hand,  and 
thei"e  is  no  man  who  will  succour  me.     My  God !  My  God !  look  down  upon  After  tiie 
me ;  wherefore  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?     So  many  dogs  have  compassed  me  in,  '^j?j'™'!',^ 
and  the  company  of  the  wicked  have  besieged  me  round  about ;  for  they  have  ),e 
spoken  against  me  with  deceitful  tongiies,  and  have  compassed  me  in   with  maketh 
words^  full  of  despite,  and  have  enforced  me  without  cause.     Instead  of  love  ','3^^^  to 
towards  me,  they  have  slandered  me,  and  have  recompensed  me  with  evil  for  God. 
good  ;  and  in  place  of  charity,  they  have  conceived  hatred  against  me.' 

Whei-efore  behold  I,  staying  myself  upon  this  most  holy  and  fruitful  example  a  godly 
of  my  Saviour  and  Redeemer,  do  appeal  before  God  for  this  my  grief  and  hard  piayer  of 
oppression,  from  this  most  wicked  sentence  and  judgment,  and  the  excommu-  huss.  He 
nication  determined  by  the  bishops.  Scribes,   Pharisees,  and  judges,  who  sit  in  appealeth 
Moses'  seat,  and  resign  my  cause  wholly  unto  him  ;  so  as  the  holy  patriarch  ["^"jst" 
of  Constantinople,  John  Chiysostome,  appealed  twice  from  the  council  of  the 
bishops  and  clergy ;  and  Andrew,  bishop  of  Prague,   and  Robert,  bishop  of 
Lincoln,  appealed  unto  the  sovereign  and  most  just  Judge,  who  is  not  defiled 
with  cruelty,  neither  can  he  be  corrupted  with  gifts  and  rewards,  neither  j'et 
be  deceived  by  false  witness.  Also  I  desire  greatly  that  all  the  faithful  servants 
of  Jesus  Christ,  and  especially  the  princes,  barons,  knights,  esquires,  and  all 
others  who  inhabit  our  country  of  Bohemia,  should  understand  and  know  these 
things,  and  have  compassion  upon  me,  who  am  so  grievously  oppressed  by  the 
excommunication  which  is  out  against  me,  which  was  obtained  and  gotten  by 
the  instigation  and  procurement  of  Michael  de  Causis,  my  great  enemy,  and  by  ^^^^ 
the  consent  and  furtherance  of  the  canons  of  the  cathedral  church  of  Prague,  huss 
and  given  and  granted  out  by  Peter  of  St.  Angles,  dean  of  the  church  of  Rome,  com- 
and  cardinal,and  also  ordained  judge  by  pope  John  XXIIL  who  hath  continued  ofTn*^ 
almost  these   two   years,  and  would  give  no  audience  imto  my  advocates  and  cliael  de 
procurators  :  which  they  ought  not  to  deny  (no  not  to  a  Jew  or  pagan,  or  to  j^f^^'^^gt 
any  heretic  whatsoever  he  were),  neither  yet  would  he  receive  any  reasonable  enemy 

H  H    2 


468  HISTORY    OF    THE    BOHEMIAXS. 

Henry    excuse,  for  that  I  did  not  appear  personally  ;  neither  would  he  accept  the  testi- 

''•       monials  of  the  whole  university  of  Prague  with  the  seal  hanging  at  it,  or  the 

witness  of  tlie  sworn  notaries,  and  such  as  were  called  to  witness.     By  this  all 

•^*  ^'    men  may  evidently  perceive  that  I  have  not  incurred  any  fault  or  crime  of  con- 

.  ^^^^-    tumacy  or  disobedience,   forasmuch  as  it  was  not  for  any  contempt,  but  for 

reasonable  causes,  that  I  did  not  appear  in  the  coin-t  of  Rome.' 

And  moreover,  forasmuch  as  they  had  laid  ambushments  for  me  on  every 
side  by  ways  where  I  should  pass,  and  also  because  the  perils  and  dangers  of 
others  have  made  me  the  more  circumspect  and  advised :  and  forasmuch  as  my 
procurers  were  willing  and  contented  to  bind  themselves  even  to  abide  the 
punishment  of  the  fii'e,  to  answer  to  all  such  as  would  oppose  or  lay  any  thing 
The  against  me  in  the  court  of  Rome  ;  as  also  because  they  did  imprison  my  lawful 

vrocu-  pi-ocurator  in  the  said  court,  without  any  cause,  demerit,  or  fault,  as  I  suppose. 
.Vohn  "  Forasmuch  then  as  the  order  and  disposition  of  all  ancient  laws,  as  well  divine 
Huts,  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament,  as  also  of  the  canon  laws,  is  this ;  that  the 
in"\-ison  J'^'^S^^  should  resort  unto  the  place  where  the  crime  or  fault  is  committed  or 
at  Home,  done,  and  there  to  inquire  of  all  such  crimes  as  shall  be  objected  and  laid  against 
ilie  pope  }jijj^  ^yjjQ  js  accused  or  slandered ;  and  that  by  such  men  as  by  conversation 
!'o™do^  have  some  knowledge  or  understanding  of  the  party  so  accused  (who  may  not 
<igainst  be  the  evil  willers  or  enemies  of  him  who  is  so  accused  or  slandered,  but  must 
lus  own  j^g  j^gj^  p^  ^j^  honest  conversation,  no  common  quarrel-pickers  or  accusers,  but 
law,  fervent  lovers  of  the  law  of  God) :  and  finally,  that  there  should  be  a  fit  and 

meet  place  appointed,  whither  the  accused  party  might,  without  danger  or 
peril,  resort  or  come,  and  that  the  judge  and  witnesses  should  not  be  enemies 
unto  him  that  is  accused.  And  also,  forasmuch  as  it  is  manifest,  that  all  these 
conditions  were  wanting  and  lacking,  as  touching  my  appearance  for  the  safe- 
guard of  my  life,  I  am  excused  before  God  from  the  frivolous  pretended  obsti- 
nacy and  excommunication.  Whereupon  I,  John  Huss,  do  present  and  offer 
this  my  appeal  unto  my  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  my  just  judge,  who  knoweth,  and 
defendeth,  and  justly  judgeth,  every  man's  just  and  tme  cause. 

Otlier  articles  moreover  out  of  his  other  books  were  collected,  and 
forced  against  him  :  first,  out  of  his  treatise  written  against  Stephen 
Paletz,  to  the  number  of  seven  articles ;  also  six  other  articles 
strained  out  of  his  treatise  against  Stanislaus  Znoyma :  whereunto 
his  answers  likewise  be  adjoined,  not  unfruitful  to  be  read. 

Here  follow  seven  Articles,  said  to  be  drawn  out  of  the  Treatise 
which  John  Huss  wrote  against  Stephen  Paletz. 

First  1'he  first  article :  '  If  the  pope,  bishop,  or  prelate,  be  in  deadly  sin,  he  is  then 

ajticle.      no  pope,  bishop,   nor  prelate.'     Answer  :  I  grant  thereunto,  and  I  send  you 

unto  St.  Augustine,  Jerome,  Chrysostome,   Gregoiy,   Cyprian,  and  Bernard; 

who  do  say  moreover,  that  whosoever  is  in  deadly  sin,  is  no  true  Christian;  how 

much  less  then  is  he  pope  or  bishop  ?     Of  whom  it  is  spoken  by  the  prophet 

Ainos,   '  They  have  reigned  and  ruled,  and  not  through  me  ;  they  became 

princes,  and  I  knew  them  not,'  &c.     But  afterwards  I  do  grant,  that  a  wicked 

pope,  bishop,  or  priest,  is  an  unworthy  minister  of  the  sacrament,  by  whom 

God  doth  baptize,  consecrate,  or  otherwise  work,  to  the  profit  of  his  church :  and 

this  is  largely  handled  in  the  text  of  the  book  by  the  authorities  of  the  holy 

doctors ;  for  even  he  who  is  in  deadly  sin,  is  not  worthily  a  king  before  God, 

as  appeareth  in  1  Kings  xv. ;  where  God  saith  to  Saul  by  the  prophet  Samuel, 

'  forasmuch  as  thou  hast  refused  and  cast  off  my  word,  I  will  also  refuse  and 

cast  thee  off,  that  thou  shalt  be  no  more  king.' 

Tlie  While  these  things  were  thus  entreating,  the  emperor,  looking  out  of  a  cer- 

eniperoi-'s  j-^ij^  window  of  the  cloister,  accompanied  with  the  county  Palatine,  and  the 

^"'/u"m'*   burgrave  of  Nuremberg,  conferring  and  talking  much  of  John  Huss  :  at  length 

IU16S.        he  said,  that  there  was  never  a  worse  or  more  pernicious  heretic  than  he.  In  the 

mean  while,  when  John  Huss  had  spoken  these  words  as  touching  the  unworthy 

king,  by  and  by  the  emperor  was  called,  and  he  was  commanded  to  repeat  those 

words  again ;  which  after  that  he  had  done,  his  duty  therein  being  considered, 


ARTICLES    AGAIXST    HUSS,    WRESTED    BY    THE    PAPISTS.  469 

the  emperor  answered  :    '  No  man  doth  live  without  fault.'     Then  the  cardinal     Henry 
of  Cambray,  being  in  a  great  fury,  said  :  '  Is  it  not  enough  for  thee  that  thou        ^ 
dost   contemn    and   despise    the    ecclesiastical   state,  and   goest  about,  by  thy     »   y. 
writings  and  doctrine,  to  perturb  and  trouble  the  same,  but  that  now  also  thou.    iVi  -' 

wilt  attempt  to  throw  kings  out   of  their  state  and  dignity  V      Then  Paletz 1-1~ 

began  to  allege  the  laws,  whereby  he  would  prove  that  Saul  was  king  even  ^j^*^  '^^^- 
when  those  words  were  spoken  by  Samuel;  and  therefore  that  David  did  forbid  cambray 
that  Saul  should  be  slain,  not  for  the  holiness  of  his  life,  of  which  there  was 
none  in  him  ;  but  for  the  holiness  of  his  anointing.  And  when  John  Huss  re- 
peated out  of  St.  Cj'prian,  that  he  did  take  upon  him  the  name  of  Christian  it  v 
in  vain,  who  did  not  follow  Christ  in  his  living  :  Paletz  answered,  '  Behold  and 
see  what  a  folly  is  in  this  man,  who  allegeth  those  things  which  make  nothing 
for  the  purpose ;  for  albeit  any  man  be  not  a  true  Christian,  is  he  not,  there- 
fore, true  pope,  bishop,  or  king  ?  when  these  are  names  of  office,  and  to  be  a 
Christian,  is  a  name  of  merit  and  desert :  and  so  may  any  man  be  a  true  pope, 
bishop,  or  king,  although  he  be  no  true  Christian.'  Then  said  John  Huss:  '  If 
pope  John  XXIII.  were  a  true  pope,  whei-efore  have  ye  deprived  him  of  his 
office  V  The  emperor  answered :  '  The  lords  of  the  council  have  now  lately 
agreed  thereupon,  that  he  was  true  pope ;  but  for  his  notorious  and  manifest 
evil  doings,  wherewithal  he  did  offend  and  trouble  the  church  of  God,  and  did 
spoil  and  bring  to  ruin  the  power  thereof,  he  is  rejected  and  cast  out  of  his 
office.' 

The  second  article  :  '  The  grace  of  predestination  is  the  bond  whereby  the*"seconfl 
body  of  the  church,  and  every  part  and  member  thereof,  is  firmly  knit  and  joined  a"'<=le. 
unto  the  head.'  Answer :  I  acknowledge  this  article  to  be  mine,  and  it  is  proved 
in  the  text  out  of  Romans  viii.,  '  Who  shall  separate  us  from  the  charity  and 
love  of  Christ,'  &c.  ?  and  John  x.  'My  sheep  bear  my  voice;  and  I  know  them, 
and  they  follow  me ;  and  I  give  them  eternal  life,  neither  shall  they  perish 
eternally,  neither  is  there  any  man  which  shall  take  them  out  of  my  hands.' 
This  is  the  knot  of  the  body  of  the  church,  and  of  our  spiritual  head  Christ, 
understanding  the  church  to  be  the  congregation  of  the  predestinate. 

The  third  article :  '  If  the  pope  be  a  wicked  man,  and  especially  a  reprobate,  Thiid 
then,  even  as  Judas  the  apostle,  he  is  a  devil,  a  thief,  and  the  son  of  perdition,  artica-. 
and  not  the  head  of  the  holy  mihtant  church,  forasmuch  as  he  is  no  part  or 
member  thereof.'  Answer  :  My  words  are  thus :  '  If  the  pope  be  an  evil  or 
wicked  man,  and  especially  if  he  be  a  reprobate,  then  even  as  Judas,  so  is  he 
a  devil,  a  thief,  and  the  son  of  perdition.  How  then  is  he  the  head  of  the 
holy  militant  church  ?  whereas  he  is  not  truly  any  member,  or  part  thereof:  for, 
if  he  were  a  member  of  the  holy  church,  then  should  he  be  also  a  member  of 
Christ ;  and  if  he  were  a  member  of  Christ,  then  should  he  cleave  and  stick 
unto  Christ  by  the  grace  of  predestination  and  present  justice ;  and  should  be 
one  Spirit  with  God,  as  the  apostle  saith  in  1  Cor.  vi.,  *  Know  ye  not  that  your 
bodies  are  the  members  of  Christ?' 

The  fourth  article  :  *  An  evil  pope  or  prelate,  or  reprobate,  is  no  true  pastor.  Fourth 
but  a  thief  and  a  robber.'  Answer.  The  text  of  my  book  is  thus :  '  If  he  be  article. 
evil  or  wicked,  then  is  he  a  hireling,  of  whom  Christ  speaketh.  He  is  no  shep- 
herd, neither  are  the  sheep  his  own:  therefore,  when  he  seeth  the  wolf  coming, 
he  runneth  away  and  forsaketh  the  sheep.  And  so,  finally,  doth  every  wicked 
and  reprobate  man.'  Therefore,  every  such  reprobate,  or  wicked  pope  or  pre- 
late, is  no  true  pastor ;  but  a  very  thief  and  a  robber,  as  is  more  at  large  proved, 
in  my  book.  Then  said  John  Huss,  '  I  do  limit  all  things,  that  such  persons 
as  touching  their  desert,  are  not  truly  and  worthily  popes  and  shepherds  before 
God ;  but,  as  touching  their  office  and  reputation  of  men,  they  are  popes,  pastors, 
and  priests.' 

Then  a  certain  man  rising  up  behind  John  Huss,  clothed  aU  in  silk,  said : 
'  My  lords  !  take  heed  lest  John  Huss  deceive  both  you  and  himself  with  these 
his  glosses,  and  look  whether  these  things  be  in  his  book  or  not ;  for  of  late,  I 
had  disputation  with  him  upon  the  searticles,  in  which  I  said,  that  a  wicked  pope, 
&c.,  was  no  pope,  as  touching  merit  and  desert ;  but,  as  touching  his  office,  he 
was  truly  pope.  Whereupon  he  used  these  glosses  which  he  had  heard  of  me, 
and  did  not  take  them  out  of  his  book.'  Then  John  Huss,  turning  himself 
unto  him,  said,  '  Did  you  not  hear  that  it  was  so  read  out  of  my  book  ?  and 
tliis  did  easily  appear  in  John  xxiii.,   whether  he  were  true  pope,  or  a  very 


470  HISTORY    OV    THE    BOHEMIANS, 

ffeiirij    tiiiof  and  robber.'     Then  the  bishops  and  cardinals,  looking  one  upon  another. 
f^-       said,  that  he  was  a  tnie  pope,  and  laughed  John  Huss  to  sconi. 
■       ,y         The  fifth  article  :  '  The  pope  is  not,  neither  ought  to  be  called,  according  unto 
ii^-'    l.is  office.   Most  holy;  for  then  the  king  ought  also  to  be  called  Most  holy, 

'?Ji_  according  to  his  office.     Also  the  toi-mentors,  lictors,  and  devils,  ought  also  to 

Vifth  be  called  Holy.'  Answer.  My  words  are  otherwise  placed,  in  this  manner : 
article.  ,  g^  ought  a  feigner  to  say,  that  if  any  man  be  a  most  holy  father,  then  he  doth 
most  holily  observe  and  keep  his  fatherliness :  and  if  he  be  a  naughty  and 
wicked  father,  then  doth  he  most  wickedly  keep  the  same.  Likewise,  if  the 
bishop  be  most  holy,  then  is  he  also  most  good ;  and  when  he  saith  ttiat  he  is 
pope,  it  is  the  name  of  his  office.'  Whereupon  it  followeth,  that  '  the  man  who 
is  pope,  being  an  evil  and  reprobate  man,  is  a  most  holy  man  ;  and  consequently 
by  that  his  office  he  is  most  good.'  And  forasmuch  as  no  man  can  be  good  by 
his  office,  except  he  do  exercise  and  use  the  same  his  office  very  well ;  it  follow- 
eth, that  '  if  the  pope  be  an  evil  and  reprobatL'  man,  he  cannot  exercise  or  use 
his  office  well  :  forasmuch  as  he  cannot  use  the  office  well,  except  he  be 
morally  good  [Matt,  xii.].  How  can  you  speak  good  things,  when  you  your- 
selves are  evil .' '  And  immediately  after  it  followeth,  '  If  the  pope,  by  reason 
of  his  office,  be  called  Most  holy,  wherefore  should  not  the  king  of  Romans  be 
called  Most  holy,  by  reason  of  his  office  and  dignity  ?  when  the  king,  accord 
ing  to  St.  Augustine's  mind,  representeth  the  Deity  and  Godhead  of  Christ,  and 
the  priest  representeth  only  his  humanity.  Wherefore,  also,  should  not  judges, 
yea,  even  tormentors,  be  called  Holy,  forasmuch  as  they  have  their  office  by 
ministering  unto  the  church  of  Christ  ? '  '  These  things  are  more  at  large  dis- 
coursed in  my  book  ;  but  I  cannot  find  or  know,'  saith  John  Huss,  '  any  foun- 
dation whereby  I  should  call  the  pope  Most  holy,  when  this  is  only  spoken  of 
Christ :  Thou  only  art  most  holy  :  thou  only  art  the  Lord,  &c.  Should  I  then 
truly  call  the  pope  Most  holy  ? ' 
Sixth  The  sixth  article  :   '  If  the  pope  Uve  contrary  unto  Christ,  albeit  he  be  law- 

artic  e.  fully  and  canonically  elected  and  chosen,  according  to  hmnan  election,  yet  doth 
he  ascend  and  come  in  another  way  than  by  Christ.'  Answer.  The  text  is 
thus  :  '  If  the  pope  live  contrary  to  Christ,  in  pride  and  avarice,  how  then  doth 
he  not  ascend  and  come  in  another  way  into  the  sheepfold,  than  by  the  lowly 
and  meek  door,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ?'  But  admit,  as  you  say,  that  he  did 
ascend  by  lawful  election  (which  I  call  an  election  pi-incipally  made  of  God,  and 
not  according  to  the  common  and  vulgar  constitution  and  ordinance  of  men), 
yet  for  all  that,  it  is  affirmed  and  proved,  that  he  should  ascend  and  come  in 
another  way  :  for  Judas  Iscariot  was  truly  and  lawfully  chosen  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  unto  his  bishopric,  as  Christ  saith  in  John  vi..  And  yet  he  came 
in  another  way  into  the  sheepfold,  and  was  a  thief,  and  a  devil,  and  the  son  of 
perdition.  Did  he  not  come  in  another  way  when  our  Saviour  spake  thus  of 
him.  He  that  eateth  bread  with  me,  shall  lift  up  his  heel  against  me  ?  The 
same  also  is  proved  by  St.  Bernard  unto  pope  Eugenius.  Then  said  Paletz  : 
'  Behold  the  fury  and  madness  of  this  man  ;  for  what  more  furious  or  mad  thing 
can  there  be,  than  to  say,  Judas  is  chosen  by  Christ,  and  notwithstanding  he 
did  ascend  another  way,  and  not  by  Christ  ? '  John  Huss  answered  :  '  Verily 
both  parts  are  true,  that  he  was  elected  and  chosen  by  Christ,  and  also  that  he 
did  ascend,  and  came  in  another  way ;  for  he  was  a  thief,  a  devil,  and  the  son 
of  perdition.'  Tlien  said  Paletz  :  '  Cannot  a  man  be  truly  and  lawfidly  chosen 
pope,  or  bishop,  and  afterwards  Uve  contrary  to  Christ?  And  that,  notwith- 
standing, he  doth  not  ascend  by  any  other  ways.'  '  But  I,'  said  John  Huss, 
'  do  say,  that  whosoever  doth  enter  into  any  bishopric,  or  hke  office,  by  simony, 
not  to  the  intent  to  labour  and  travail  in  the  church  of  God,  but  rather  to  live 
delicately,  voluptuously,  and  unrighteously,  and  to  the  intent  to  advance  him- 
self with  all  kind  of  pride,  every  such  man  ascendeth  and  cometh  up  by  another 
way,  and,  according  unto  the  gospel,  he  is  a  thief  and  a  robber.' 

The  seventh  article :  '  The  condemnation  of  the  fort3'-five  articles  of  John 
Wickliff  made  by  the  doctors,  is  unreasonable  and  wicked,  and  the  cause  by 
them  alleged  is  feigned  and  untrue ;  that  is  to  say,  that  none  of  those  articles 
are  catholic,  but  that  every  of  them  be  either  heretical,  erroneous  or  offensive.' 
Answer :  '  I  have  written  it  thus  in  my  treatise  :  The  forty-five  articles  are 
condemned  for  this  cause,  that  none  of  those  forty-five  is  a  catholic  article,  but 
each  of  them  is  either  heretical,  erroneous  or  offensive.     O  Master  Doctor ! 


ARTICLES    AGAINST    HUSS,    WRESTED    BY    THE    PAPISTS.  4T1 

where  is  your  proof?  you  feign  a  cause  which  you  do  not  prove,  Src.  as  it  ap-    hetinj 
peareth  more  at  large  in  my  treatise.'    Then  said  the  cardinal  of  Cambray :        ''''■ 
•  John  Huss,   thou  didst  say  that  thou  wouldst  not  defend  any  error  of  John     *    ry 
Wickliff's  ;  and  now  it  appeareth  in  your  books,  that  you  have  openly  defended    i  iig 

his  articles.'      John  Huss  answered:  '  Reverend  father!  even  as  I  said  before,  L 

so  I  now  say  again,  that  I  will  not  defend  any  errors  of  John  Wickliff's,  neither  J.^^,*^*^' 
of  any  other  man's  :  but,  forasmuch  as  it  seemed'to  me  to  be  against  conscience,  cambray 
simply  to  consent  to  the  condemnation  of  them,  no  Scripture  being  alleged  or 
brought  contrary'  and  against  them,  thereupon  I  would  not  consent  or  agree  to 
the  condemnation  of  them;  and  forasmuch  as  the  reason  which  is  copulative 
cannot  be  verified  in  every  point,  according  to  every  part  thereof.' 

Now  there  remain  six  articles  of  thirty-nine.  These  are  said  to 
be  drawn  out  of  another  treatise  which  he  Avrote  against  Stanislaus  de 
Zno^nna. 

Six  Articles  drawn  out  of  the  Treatise  of  John  Huss,  written  against 
Stanislaus  de  Znoyma. 

The  first  article  :  *  No  man  is  lawfully  elected  or  chosen,  in  that  the  electors,  pj^t 
or  the  greater  part  of  them,  have  consented  with  a  lively  voice,  according  to  article, 
the  custom  of  men,  to  elect  and  choose  any  person,  or  that  he  is  thereby  the 
manifest  and  true  successor  of  Christ,  or  \ncar  of  Peter  in  the  ecclesiastical 
office ;  but  in  this,  that  any  man  doth  most  abundantly  work  meritoriously  to 
the  profit  of  the  church,  he  hath  thereby  more  abundant  power  given  him  of 
God  thereunto.'  Answer :  These  things  which  follow  are  also  written  in 
my  book.  '  It  standeth  in  the  power  and  hands  of  wicked  electors,  to  choose  a 
woman  into  the  ecclesiastical  office,  as  it  appearetli  by  the  election  of  Agnes, 
who  was  called  John,  who  held  and  occupied  the  pope's  place  and  dignity,  by 
the  space  of  two  years  and  more.'  It  may  also  be,  that  they  do  choose  a  thief, 
a  murderer  or  a  devil,  and,  consequently,  they  may  also  elect  and  choose  Anti- 
christ. It  may  also  be,  that  for  love,  covetousness,  or  hatred,  they  do  choose 
some  person  whom  God  doth  not  allow.  And  it  appeareth  that  that  person  is 
not  lawfully  elected  and  chosen ;  insomuch  as  the  electors,  or  the  greater  part 
of  them,  have  consented  and  agreed  together  according  to  the  custom  of  men, 
upon  any  person,  or  that  he  is  thereby  the  manifest  successor  or  vicar  of  Peter 
the  apostle,  or  any  other  in  the  ecclesiastical  office.  Therefore  they  who,  most 
accordingly  unto  the  Scripture,  do  elect  and  choose,  revelation  being  set  apart, 
do  only  pronounce  and  determine  by  some  probable  reason  upon  him  whom 
they  do  elect  and  choose  :  whereupon,  whether  the  electors  do  so  choose  good 
or  evil,  we  ought  to  give  credit  unto  the  works  of  him  that  is  chosen ;  for  in 
that  point,  that  any  man  doth  most  abundantly  work  meritoriously  to  the  profit 
of  the  church,  he  hath  thereby  more  abundant  power  given  him  of  God  there- 
unto.    And  hereupon  saith  Christ,  in  John  x..   Give  credit  unto  works.' 

The  second  article  :  *  The  pope  being  a  reprobate,  is  not  the  head  of  tlie  second 
holy  church  of  God.'  Answer.  I  wrote  it  thus  in  my  treatise  :  '  That  I  would  article, 
willingly  receive  a  probable  and  effectual  reason  of  the  doctor,  how  this 
question  is  contrary  to  the  faith,  to  say.  That  if  the  pope  be  a  reprobate,  how 
is  he  the  head  of  the  holy  church?  Behold,  the  truth  cannot  decay  or  fail  in 
disputation,  for  did  Christ  dispute  against  the  faith,  when  he  demanded  of  the 
Scribes  and  "Pharisees  [Matt,  xii.],  Ye  stock  and  offspring  of  vipers !  how 
can  ye  speak  good  things,  when  you  yourselves  are  wicked  and  evil?  And 
behold,  I  demand  of  the  scribes,  if  the  pope  be  a  reprobate,  and  the  stock  of 
vipers,  how  is  he  the  head  of  the  holy  church  of  God,  that  the  Scribes  and 
Pharisees,  who  were  in  the  council-house  of  Prague,  may  make  answer  here- 
unto ?  For  it  is  more  possible  that  a  reprobate  man  should  speak  good  things, 
forasmuch  as  he  may  be  in  state  of  grace  according  to  present  justice,  than  to 
be  the  head  of  the  holy  church  of  God.  Also  in  John  v.,  our  Saviour  com 
plaineth  of  the  Jews,  saying :  How  can  you  believe,  which  do  seek  for  glory 
amongst  yourselves,  and  do  not  seek  for  the  glorj'  that  cometh  only  of  God  ? 
and  I,  likewise,  do  complain,  how  that  if  the  pope  be  a  reprobate,  can  he  he 


472  }lISTORY    OF    THK    BOHEMIANS, 

Henry    tlie  lieacl  of  tlie   cliurch  of  God,  who  receivefh  his  glory  of  the   world,  and 
'  •       seeketh  not  for  the  glory  of  God?     For  it  is  more  possible,  that  the  pope  being 
.       a  reprobate  should  believe,  tlian  that  he  should  be  the  head  of  the  church  of 
'.  I'l  -■     God;  forasmuch  as  he  taketh  his  glory  of  the  world.' 

''•  The  third  article  ;  '  There  is  no  spark  of  appearance,  that  there  ought  to  be 
'iiiird  one  head  in  the  spiritualty,  to  ride  the  church,  which  should  be  always  con- 
Z"''*'''^-  versant  with  the  militant  church.'  Answer:  I  do  grant  it.  For  what  conse- 
quent is  tliis  ?  The  king  of  Bohemia  is  head  of  the  kingdom  of  Bohemia  :  Ergo, 
the  ])ope  is  head  of  the  whole  militant  church  ?  Christ  is  the  head  of  the 
spiritualty,  ruling  and  governing  the  militant  chinxh  by  much  more  and  greater 
necessity  than  Caesar  ought  to  rule  the  teniporalty;  forasmuch  as  Christ,  who 
sittelh  on  the  right  hand  of  God  the  Father,  doth  necessarily  rule  the  militant 
church|as  head.  And  there  is  no  sj^ark  of  appearance  that  there  should  be 
one  head  in  the  spiritualty  ruling  the  church,  that  should  always  be  conversant 
with  the  militant  chinxh,  except  some  infidel  would  heretically  affirm,  that  the 
militant  church  should  have  here  a  permanent  and  continual  city  or  dwelling- 
place,  and  not  inquire  and  seek  after  that  which  is  to  come.  It  is  a'so  further 
evident  in  my  book,  how  imconsequent  the  proportion  of  the  similitude  is,  for 
a  reprobate  pope  to  be  the  head  of  the  militant  church,  and  a  reprobate  king 
to  be  the  head  of  the  kingdom  of  Bohemia. 
I'i'urtii  The  fourth  article :  '  Christ  would  better  rule  his  church  by  his  true  apostles, 

article.  dispersed  throughout  the  whole  world,  without  such  monstrous  heads.'  I 
answer,' that  it  is  in  my  book  as  here  followeth  :  '  Albeit  that  the  doctor  doth 
say,  that  the  body  of  the  militant  church  is  oftentimes  without  a  head,  yet, 
notwithstanding,  we  do  verily  believe  that  Christ  Jesus  is  the  head  over  every 
church,  ruling  the  same  without  lack  or  default,  pouring  upon  the  same  a  con- 
tinual motion  and  sense,  even  unto  the  latter  day ;  neither  can  the  doctor  give 
a  reason  why  the  church,  in  the  time  of  Agnes,  by  the  space  of  two  years  and 
'  five  months,  lived,  according  to  many  members  of  Christ,  in  grace  and  favour, 

but  that,  by  the  same  reason,  the  .church  might  be  without  a  head,  by  the 
space  of  many  years ;  forasmuch  as  Christ  should  better  rule  his  church  by  his 
true  disciples  dispersed  throughout  the  whole  world,  without  such  monstrous 
heads.'  Then  said  they  altogether:  'Behold,  now  he  prophesieth.'  And 
John  Huss,  prosecuting  his  former  talk,  said,  '  But  I  say  that  the  church,  in 
tlie  time  of  the  apostles,  was  far  better  ruled  and  governed  than  now  it  is.  And 
what  doth  let  and  hinder,  that  Christ  should  not  now  also  rule  the  same,  better 
by  liis  true  disciples,  without  such  monstrous  heads  as  have  been  now  of  late  ? 
For  behold,  even  at  this  present  we  have  no  such  head,  and  yet  Christ  ceaseth 
not  to  rule  his  church.'  When  he  had  spoken  these  words,  he  was  derided 
and  mocked, 
fifth  The  fifth  article:  '  Peter  was  no  universal  pastor  or  shepherd  of  the  sheep 

ar.icle.  of  Christ,  much  less  is  the  bishop  of  Rome.'  Answer  :  Those  words  are  not  in 
my  book,  but  these  which  do  follow.  Secondly,  it  appeareth  by  the  words  of 
Christ,  that  he  did  not  limit  unto  Peter  for  his  jurisdiction  the  whole  world,  no 
not  one  only  province ;  so  likewise,  neither  unto  any  other  of  the  apostles. 
Notwithstanding,  certain  of  them  walked  through  many  regions,  and  others 
fewer,  preaching  and  teaching  the  kingdom  of  God ;  as  Paul,  who  laboured  and 
travailed  more  than  all  the  rest,  did  corporally  visit  and  convert  most  provinces ; 
whereby  it  is  lawful  for  any  apostle  or  his  vicar  to  convert  and  confirm  as  much 
people,  or  as  many  provinces  in  the  faith  of  Christ,  as  he  is  able,  neither  is 
there  any  restraint  of  his  liberty  or  jurisdiction,  but  only  by  disability  or  in- 
sufliciency. 
Sixth  The  sixth  article:  'The  apostles,  and  other  faithful  priests  of  the  Lord,  have 

hriicie.  stoutly  ruled  the  church  in  all  things  necessary  to  salvation,  before  the  office  of 
the  pope  was  brought  into  the  church,  and  so  would  they  very  possibly  do  still, 
if  there  were  no  pope,  even  unto  the  latter  day.'  Then  they  all  cried  out  again 
and  said,  'Behold  the  prophet.'  But  John  Huss  said:  'Verily  it  is  true  that 
the  apostles  did  nile  the  church  stoutly  before  the  office  of  the  pope  was  brought 
into  the  church ;  and  certainly  a  great  deal  better  than  it  is  now  niled.  And 
likewise  many  other  faithfiil  men,  who  do  follow  their  steps,  do  the  same;  for 
now  we  have  no  pope,  and  so,  peradventure,  it  may  continue  and  endure  a 
year  or  more. 


ARTICLES    AGAIXST    IIUSS,    ^VRESTED    BY    THE    PAPISTS.  4(U 

Besides  these,  were  brought  against  him  other  nineteen  articles,    He^ry 

objected  unto  him  being  in  prison,  which  with  his  answers  to  the : — 

same  here  likewise  follow:  of  which  articles  the  first  is  this.  A.D. 

1415. 


Other  Nineteen  Articles  objected  against  John  Huss,  being  in  Prison. 

The  first  article :  '  Paul,  according  unto  present  justice,  was  a  blasphemer  and  First 
none  of  the  chui'ch,  and  therewithal  was  in  grace,  according  unto  predestination  p ''";'?■ 
of  hfe   everlasting.'     Answer :  This  proposition   is  not  in   the  hook,  but  this  he  was 
which  foUoweth.    '  Whereby  it  doth  seem  probable,  that  as  Paid  was  both  a  both  a 
blasphemer,  according  to  present  justice,  and  therewithal,  also,  was  a  faithful  child  p^^emer, 
of  our  holy  mother  the  chiu-ch,  and  in  grace  according  to  predestination  of  life  and  also  a 
everlasting  :  so  Iscariot  was  both  in  grace,  according  unto  present  justice,  and  "i^J?''", 
was  never  of  our  holy  mother  the  church,  according  to  the  predestination  of  life 
everlasting,  forasmuch  as  he  lacked  that  predestination.  And  so  Iscariot,  albeit 
he  was  an  apostle,  and  a  bishop  of  Christ,  which  is  the  name  of  his  office,  yet 
was  he  never  any  part  of  the  imiversal  church.' 

The  second  article  :   '  Christ  doth  more  love  a  predestinate  man  being  sinful,  Second 
than  any  reprobate  in  what  grace  possible  soever  he  be.'     Answer  :    My  words  p^gJie^stj. 
are  in  the  fourth  chapter  of  my  book  entituled,  '  Of  the  Church  :'     '  And  it  is  nation, 
evident  that  God  doth  more  love  any  predestinate  being  sinful,  than  any  repro- 
bate in  what  grace  soever  he  be  for  the  time ;  forasmuch  as  he  willeth  that  the 
predestinate  shall  have  perpetual  blessedness,  and  the  reprobate  shall  have  eternal 
fire.'     Wherefore  God  partly  infinitely  loving  them  both  as  his  creatures,  yet  he 
doth  more  love  the  predestinate,  because  he  giveth  him  greater  grace,   or  a 
greater  gift,  that  is  to  say,  life  everlasting,  which  is  greater  and  more  excellent  than 
grace  only,  according  to  present  justice.     And  the  third  article  of  those  articles 
before,*  soundeth  very  near  unto  this :  that  the  predestinate  cannot  fall  from 
grace.     For  they  have  a  certain  radical  gi-ace  rooted  in  them,  although  they  be 
deprived  of  the  abundant  grace  for  a  time.     These  things  are  true  in  the  com- 
pound sense. 

The  third  article  :  'All  the  sinful,  according  to  present  justice,  are  not  faith-  Third  , 
ful,  but  do  swerve  from  the  true  catholic  faith,  forasmuch  as  it  is  impossible  that  ^^^^^^ 
any  man  can  commit  any  deadly  sin  but  in  that  point,  that  he  doth  swerve  from  commit- 
the  faith.'     Answer:   I  acknowledge  that  sentence  to  be  inine,  and  it  appeareth,  teth 
that  if  they  did  think  upon  the  punishment  which  is  to  be  laid  upon  sinners,  g^f"^'^ 
and  did  fully  believe,  and  had  the  faith  of  the  divine  knowledge  and  under-  swervetu 
standing,   &c.    then,  imdoubtedly,    they   would  not  so  offend  and    sin.     This  f^o™  ^^^ 
proposition  is    verified  by  the  saying  of  the  prophet  Isaiah,  'Thy  rulers  are 
unfaithfid,  misbelievers,  fellows  and  companions  of  thieves  ;  they  all  love  bribes 
and  follow  after  rewards.'     Behold,  the  prophet  calleth  the  rulers  of  the  church 
'infidels,'  for  their  offences;  for  all  such  as  do  not  keep  their  faith  inviolate  imto 
their  principal  Lord,  are  unfaithful  servants,  and  they  also  are  unfaithful  chil- 
dren who  keep  not  their    obedience,  fear,  and  love  unto  God,  their  Father. 
Item,  This  proposition  is  verified  by  the  saying  of  the  apostle,  Titus  i.  '  They  do 
confess  that  they  know  God,  but  by  their  works  they  do  deny  him.'     And  for- 
asmuch as  they  who  are  sinful,  do  swerve  away  from  the  meritorious  work  of 
blessedness,  therefore  they  do  swerve  from  the  true  faith  grounded  upon  cha- 
rity, forasmuch  as  faith  without  works  is  dead.     To  this  end  doth  also  appertain 
that  which    the   Lord  speaketh   [Matt,  xxiii.]  of  the  faithfrd  and  unfaithful 
servant. 

The  fourth  article  :  '  These  words  of  John  xxii. :  Receive  the  Holy  Ghost;  and,  Fourth. 
Whatsoever  you  shall  bind  upon  earth,  &c.  and  Matthew  [xvi.  and  xviii.].  For  g'nd-^' 
lack  of  understanding  shall  terrify  many  Christians,  and  they  shall  be  wonder-  ing  and 
fully  afraid,  and  others  shall  be  deceived  by  them,  presuming  upon  the  fulness  loosing, 
of  their  power  and  authority.'     Answer:  This  sentence  I  do  approve  and  allow,  J^^eybe 
and  therefore  I  say  in  the  same  place,  that  it  is  first  of  all  to  be  supposed,  that  well  un- 
the  saying  of  our  Saviomr  is  necessary,  as  toucliing  the  virtue  of  the  word,  for-  ^"n'°te^' 
asmuch  as  it  is  not  possible  for  a  priest  to  bind  and  loose,  except  that  binding  too  much 
and  loosing  be  in  heaven.     But,  for  the  lack  of  the  tnie  understanding  of  those  fear  or 
words,  many  simple  Christians  shall  be  made  afraid,  thinking  with  themselves,  {j^o'n."™^' 
(1)  The  reference  is  to  the  first  series,  consisting  of  twenty-six.    See  page  459.— Ed. 


47 i  rnsToiiY  of  thk  hoheimians. 

jiriiry    lliat  wlu'tlior  llioy  be  just  or  unjust,  the  priests  may,  at  their  pleasures,  whenso- 
^-       ever  tlioy  will,  bind  tiuMii.     And  the  ifj;norant  priests  do  also  presume  and  take 
.   --      U])()n  tbeni  to  li.ive  ])()wer  to  bind  and  loose  wliensoever  tliey  will.      For  many 
1  11^'     f""!'-"*''  •'^'"'  ii^norant  ])riesta  do  say,  that  they  have  power  aud  authority  to  ab- 
___!_Lsolve  overv  nian  eonfessing  himself,  of  what  sin  or  otl'euee  soever  it  be,  not 
knowiui,'  that  in  many  sins  it  is  forbidden  them,  and  that  it  may  hap])en  that  a 
hypoerite  do  eonfess  himself,  or  sueh  a  one  as  is  not  eontrite  for  his  sin  ;  wlu'reof 
])roof  liath  oftentimes  been  found,  and  it  is  evident,  forasmueh  as  the  letter  doth 
kill,  but  the  Spirit  doth  tpiicken. 
Fifth  'I'lie  fifth  artiele  :  '  The  bincUu};  and  h)osint!;  of  Cod,  Is  simply  and  plainly  the 

"'.'''"'.''•  chief  and  |)rineii)al.'  Answer:  This  is  evident,  forasniueh  as  it  were  blasphe- 
iind  loos-  nious  presiun])ti()n  to  ailirm,  that  a  man  may  remit  and  forgive  an  evil  fact  or 
"•K  oilenee  done  a<;ainst  such  a  Lord,  the  Lord   himself  not  ajjproving  or  allowing 

andlrrin-  *^''^'  sanu'.      For  by  the  universal  i)ower  of  the  Lord,  it  is  necessary  tluit  he  do 
cipally       first  absolve  and  forgive,  before  his  vicar  do  the  same  ;   neither  is  there  one  arti- 
belongto    .j,.  „f  „,„•  fjiitJi    w'hich  oufrht  to  be  more  connnon  or  known  unto  us,  thai\   that 
it  should  be  imjtossible  for  any  man  of  the  militant  clnu'ch  to  absolve  or  bmd, 
except  in  such  case  as  it  be  conibrniable  to  the  head  of  the  church,  Jesu  Christ. 
Wherefore  every  faithful  Clu-istian  ought  to  take  heed  of  that  saying :  'If  the 
])o])e,  or  any  otiier,  pretend  by  any  maimer  of  sign  to  bind  or  loose,  that  he  is 
thereby  bound  or  loosed,  for  he  that  doth  grant  or  confess  that,  must  also,  con- 
setpu'utly,  grant  and  confess  that  the  ))o)>e  is  without  sin,  and  so  that  he  is  a 
god ;  for  otherwise  he  must  needs  err  and  do  contrary  unto  the  keys  of  Christ.' 
'J'his  saying  ))roveth  the  fact  of  the  ])o])e,  who  always  in  his  absolution  presu])- 
j)oseth  contrition  and  confession.      Yvn,  moreover,  if  any  letter  of  absolution  be 
given   unto  any   otlender,   which   doth   not   declare   the  eircmnstances    of   the 
otlence  which  ought  to  be  declared,   it  is  said  that  thereby  the  letter  of  absolu- 
tion is  of  no  force  and  ellecl.      Jt  is  also  hereby  evident,  that  many  priests  do 
not  absolve  those  who  are  confessed,  because  that  either  through  shamefastness 
they  do  cloak  or  hide  greater  oifenci-s,  or  else  that  they  have  not  due  contrition 
To  tnii'     or  repentance  :  for  unto  true  absolution  there  is  first  required  Contrition.      Se- 
timi'fimr    ^"'""''.V'  ^  l>ur])ose  and  intent  to  sin  no  more.     Thirdly,  True  confession.    And 
ttiiiiffsarc  fourthly,   Steadfast  ho])e  of  forgiveness.     The  first^appeareth  by  Ezekiel.      '  If 
required,   (be  wicked  do  repent  him,'  &c.     Tiie  second,  in  John  v.,  '  Do  thou  not  sin  any 
more.'     The   (bird  part,  by   this   place   of  Luke:   'Show  yourselves  unto  the 
priests.'     And  the  fourth  is   confirmed  by  the  saying  of  Christ:   'My  son,  be- 
lieve, and  thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee.'      I  also  added  many  other  probations  in 
my  treatise  out  of  the  holy  fathers,  Augustine,  Jerome,  and  the  Master  of  the 
Sentences. 
Sixth  'Vhc  sixth  article  :   '  The  priests  do  gather  and  heap  up  out  of  the  Scrij)tures 

article.  (1,„>^,.  things  which  serve  for  the  belly ;  but  such  as  appertain  to  the  true  imita- 
tion and  following  of  Christ,  those  they  reject,  and  refuse  as  impertinent  unto 
salvation.'  Answer:  This,  St.  (iregory  doth  sufliciently  prove  in  his  seven- 
teenth Homily,  alleging  the  saying  of  Christ,  '  The  harvest  is  great,  the  work- 
men are  few  ;'  speaking  also  that  which  we  cannot  say  without  grief  or  sorrow, 
Priests      that  '  albeit  there  l)e  a  great  mimber  who  willingly  hear  good  things,  yet  there 

"1"''°  .  ,  lack  such  as  should  declare  the  same  luito  them  ;  for  behold,  the  world  is  full 
piveii  to'       ,        .  .  .  .  ,,  ,  •      .1      1  .      .• 

their  own  ot  priests,  but  notwiliistaudmg  tlu-re  is  a  scarcity  of  workmen  in  tlie  harvest  ot 

lucre  and  the  Lord.     We  take  upon  us  willingly  priesthood,  but  we  do  not  fullil  and  do 

than'to      t^'''  works  and  ofiice  of  priesthood.'     And  inunediately  after  he  saith,  '  We  are 

the  ser-     fallen  uiito  outward  allairs  and  business,  for  we  take  upon  us  one  office  for 

Ch'^'^t   *  ''*'"""*■  s  sake,  and  we  do  exhibit  and  give  another  to  case  ourselves  of  labour. 

We  leave  preaching,  and  as  far  as  1  can  perceive  we  are  called  bishops  to  our 

pain,  who  do  retain  the  nanu^  of  honour,  but  not  the  verity.'    And  immediately 

after  be  saith,  '  We  take  no  care  for  our  flock ;  we  daily  call  upon  them  for  our 

stipend  and  wages  ;  we  covet  and  desire   earthly  things  with  a  greedy  mind  ; 

we  gape  after  worldly  glory  ;  we  leave  the  cause  of  (iod  undone,  and  make 

liaste  about  our  worldly  affairs  and  business;  we  take  upon  us  the  ])lace  of 

sanctity  and  holiness,  and  wo  are  wholly  wrap])ed  in  worldly  cares  and  troubles,' 

il'c.    'I  nis  writetli  St.  (iregoiy,  with  many  other  things  more  in  the  same  place. 

Also  in  his  Pastoral,  in  his  Morals,  and  in  his  llegister.     Also  St.  IJernard,  as 

in  many  other  places,  so  likewise  in  hia  33d  Senuon  upon  the  Canonicals,  ho 


AllTICl.r.S     AGAIKiil'     miss,    WUKSTIU)     l!Y     llll',     I'A  I'l  SI'S.  -Im.") 

saith,  'All  fVii'iuls  and  all  (Mu-inics,  all  kinsfolks  and  advi-rsarios,  all  of  one     Henry 
honsoliold,  and  no  poaco-niakers ;   tlioy  aio  the   niinistiTS  of  Christ,  and  serve        '• 
Anticln-ist  ;   tlioy  f,'o  honourably  honoured  with  the  s^^oods  of  the  Lord,  and  yet      \    iT^ 
thoy  do  honour,"  lirc.  ^  '  ^ ' 

'i'ho  seventh  article:   '  The  powi-r  of  tjie  ])()]>e  who  doth  not  follow  Chrisl,  is 
not  to  be  feared.'  .\nswer:    It  is  not  so  in  my  tn-alise,  but,  contrariwise,  thai  the  i^'vcniii 
subjects  are  bound  willingly  and  gladly  to  obi'y  the  virtuous  and  pxid  rulers;  '"'"'''• 
and  also  those  who  are  wicked  and  evil.      I»ut,  notwilhstandinj;,  if  the  poijc  do  ,„,'.',. 
abuse  his  power,  it  is  not  then  to  be  feared  as  by  hondat^e.      And  so  the  lords  iimn-  im- 
the  cardinals,  as  I  suppose,  did  not  fear  the  i)ower  of  (iregory  ,\ll.,  before  his  '^'""J'  ^ 
deposition,  when  they  resisted  him,  sayinj;,  that  he  did  abuse  his  power,  eon-  fcami. 
travy  luito  his  own  oath. 

The  eighth  article:   '  An  evil  and  wicked  pope  is  not  the  s\iccessor  of  I'cter,  i',i,;iiih 
but  of  Judas.'     Answer:    1  wrote  thus  in  my  treatise;   '  If  the  pope  be  humble  i'U>''' 
and  meek,  neglecting  and  despising  the  honours  and  lucre  of  the  world  ;   if  ho 
be  a  shepherd,  taking  his  name  by  the  feeding  of  the  llock  of  (io<I  (of  which 
feeding  the    Lord   s|)eaketli,   saying.    Feed  my   sheep);   if  he  feed  the  sheep 
with  tin?  word,  and  wilii  virtuous  example,  and  beeonu"  even  like  his  lloek  with 
bis  whole  heart  and  mind  ;   if  he  do  diligently  and  carefully  labour  and  travail 
for  the  church,  then  is  iu-,  without  doubt,  tlu"  true  vicar  of  C'hrist.      Ihit  if  he  'rii- ponu 
walk  contrary  unio  thesi-  virtues,    Ibrasmuch   as  thert-  is  no  society   between  <l>>i'iK 
Christ  and   Belial,  and  Christ  himself  saith,    lie  that  is  not  willi  me,  is  against  [""•'I'l'j'^j 
nio  :    how  is  he  then  the  true  vicar  of  Christ  or  IVter,  and  not  rather  the  vicar  is  imt  tii'r 
of  Antichrist?      Christ  called   I'eter  himself,    Satanas,  when  be  did  contrary  ^,'''1'"' 
him  but  only  in  one  word,  and  that  with  a  good  aliection  ;  even  him  whom  he  ijn'tAnti- 
had  chosen   his  vicar,   and  sjjecially   a])]>oiute(l  uyr  his   church.     Why  then  I'luisi. 
should  not  any  other,  being  mori'  contrary  to  Chrisl,  be  truly  called  Satanas,  and 
conseijuently  Antichrist,   or  at  least  the  chief  and  principal  minister  or  vicar  of 
Antichrist.'  Tiiere  bt'  inliuite  testimonies  of  this  matter  in  St.  Augustine,  .leronie, 
Cyprian,  Chrvsoslome,  Mernard,  (Iregory,  Kemigius,  and  Aud)rose,'  &c. 

The  ninth  arliide:  '  The  j)()])e  is  the  same  beast  of  whom  it  is  spoken  in  the  Ninth 
Apocaly])se,  '  I'ower  is  given  unto  him  to  make  war  u])on  tiu"  saints.'  Answer:  "ni"!''- 
I  deny  this  article  to  be  in  my  book.' 

The  tenth  article  :   '  It  is  lawl'ul  to  ])reach  notwithstanding  the  pope's  iidiibi-  Tinth 
tion.'     Answer:  The  article  is  evident,  ibrasnuich  as  the  apostles  did  ])reach  i'Hi'l''- 
contrary  to  the  coinmaiulment  t)f  the   bishops  of  .lerusali'm.      Aiul  St.  Hilary  ,,L,,,'i'|,Vi'  ' 
did  the  like,  contrary  to  the  conunandment  of  the  po])e,  who  was  an  Arian.     It  iluiiopr'a 
is  also  manifest  bv  the  example  of  cardinals,  who,  contrary  to  the  conunand-  ''"'"- 

.'  1  '  '  .'  IllJlIUl-> 

nient  of  ])ojie  (iregor)'  XII.,  sent  throughout  all  realms  such  as  shoidd  preach  lueiit. 
against  him.     It  is  also  lawful  to  preach  under  a])peal,  contrary  unto  the  pope'H 
connnaiuhnent.      And   finally,  he  may  ))rcach  who  hath  the  conunandment  of 
(lod,  whereunto  he  ought  chielly  to  obey. 

'i'he  eleventh  article  :   '  If  the  po|)e's  conuiiandment  be  not.  concordant  and  Kluvcnih 
agreeable  with  the  doclrine  of  the  gospel  or  tlu-  a])ostles,  it  is  not  to  i)e  obeyed.'  '"■"'•■'^'• 
Answer:    I   have  thus  written   in   my   book;   ' 'I  lie  failid'id   disciple  of  Christ 
ought  to  weigh  and  considt'r,  whether  the  pope's  conunandment  1)C  expressly 
and  plainly  the  conunandnu'ut  of  Christ  or  any  of  his  apostles,  or  whether  it 
have  any  foundation  or  gromul  in  their  doctrine  or  no ;  and  that  being  once 
known  or  understood,  he  ought  reverently  and  lumdjly  to  obey  the  same.      Hut  H'>»  '"•ir 
if  he  do  certainly  know  that  the  pope's  conunandmi'ut  is  contrary  and  against  !,r,', ','„'|''u 
the  holy  Scripture,  and  hurtful  unto  the  church,  then  he  ought  boldly  to  resist  dhcyiil. 
against  it,  tliat  he  be  not  partaker  of  the  crime  and  oU'ence  by  consenting  there- 
inito.'     This  I  have  han(lled  at  large!  in  my  treatise,  and  have  conlirmed  it  by 
the    authorities  of   Augustine,   .leronu-,   (iregory,   ('brysostonu-,    Hernard    and 
Bede,  and  with  the  holy  Scripture  and  canons,  which  for  brevity's  cause  I  do 
here  pass  over.      I  will   only  rehearse   the  saying  of  St.  Isodore,  who  writeth 
thus:    '  He  who  doth  rule,  and  doth  say  or  conunand  any  thing  contrary  and 
beside  the  will  of  Clod,  or  that  which  is  evidi'utly  conunanded  in  the  Scriptures, 
he  is  honoured  as  a  false  witness  of  (Jod,  ami  a  chin-cb-robber.'     Whereupon 
we  are  bound  to  obey  no  ])relate,  but  in  such  case  as  he  do  comnunul  or  take 
counsel  of  the  coimsels  aiul  conunandments  of  (lirist.     Likewise  St.  Augustine 
upon  this  saying,  upon  the  chair  of  Moses,  &c.  saith  :    Secondly,  they  teach 

i(I)  John  IIuss  need  not  prove  tills  article,  the  pope  willpiove  it  bimscir. 


476  HISTORY    OF     THE    BOHEMIANS. 

Uevry    ill  the  chair  of  Moses  the  law  of  God  :  ergo,  God  teacheth  by  them.     But  if 

^-       they  will  teach  you  any  of  their  own  inventions,  do  not  give  ear  unto  them, 

•    j^     neither  do  as  they  command  you  '     Also,  in  the  saying  of  Christ,  '  He  that 

-lA-ts"    heareth  you,  heareth  me,'  all  lawful  and  honest  things  be  comprehended,  in 

. !_  which  we  ought  to  be  obedient,  according  to  Christ's  saying,  '  It  is  not  you 

which  do  speak,  but  the  Spirit  of  my  Father  which  speaketh  in  you.'     Let 
therefore  my  adversaries  and  slanderers  learn,  that  there  be  not  only  twelve 
counsels  in  the  gospel,  in  which  subjects  ought  to  obey  Christ  and  his  appointed 
ministers,  but  that  there  are  as  many  counsels  and  determinations  of  God,  as 
there  be  lawfid  and  honest  things  joined  with  precepts  and  commandments  of 
God,  binding  us  thereunto  under  the  pain  of  deadly  sin  ;  for  every  such  thing 
dotli  the  Loi-d  command  us  to  ftilfil  in  time  and  place,  with  other  circumstances, 
at  the  will  and  pleasure  of  their  minister. 
Tweiitli         The  twelfth  article  :   '  It  is  lawful  for  the  clergy  and  laity,  by  their  power 
article.      ^^^  jurisdiction,  to  judge  and  determine  of  all  things  pertaining  to  salvation, 
and  also  of  the  works  of  prelates.'     Answer :  I  have  thus  written  in  my  book  ; 
The  tier-  '  That  it  is  lawful  for  the  clergy  and  laity  to  judge  and  detennine  of  the  works 
Kt^"rnav  ^^  their  heads  and  rulers  ;'  it  appeareth  by  this  :  that  the  judgment  of  the  secret 
iud};e  of    counsels  of  God  in  the  court  of  conscience  is  one  thing,  and  the  judgment  of 
the  works  the  authority  and  power  of  the  church  is  another.     Wherefore  subjects  first 
prelates,    ought  principally  to  judge  and  examine  themselves  [1  Cor.  xi.]       Secondly, 
they  ought  to  examine  all  things  which  pertain  unto  their  salvation,  for  a  spiri- 
tual man  judgeth  and  examineth  all  things.     And  this  is  alleged  as  touching 
the  first  judgment,  and  not  the  second ;  as  the  enemy  doth  impute  it  unto  me. 
Whereupon  in  the  same  place  I  do  say  that  the  layman  ought  to  judge  and 
examine  the  works  of  his  prelate,  like  as  Paul  doth  judge  the  doings  of  Peter 
in  blaming  him.     Secondly,  to  avoid  them,  according  to  this  saying,  '  Beware 
Secretin  of  false  prophets,'  &c.      Thirdly,   to  rule  over  the  ministry:  for  the  subject 
^'rcm""^'  ought  by  reason  to  judge  and  examine  the  works  of  the  prelates.     And  if  they 
science,     be  good,  to  praise  God  therefore  and  rejoice  :  but  if  they  be  evil,  they  ought 
Open  in     vvith  patience  to  suffer  them,  and  to  be  sorry  for  them,  but  not  to  do  the  like, 
of  autho-  ^^^^  t^i^y  ^®  damned  with  them,  according  to  tliis  saying :   '  If  the  blind  lead 
rity.  the  blind,  both  fall  into  the  ditch.' 

Thir-  The  thirteenth  article  :  '  God  dotli  suspend,  of  himself,  every  wicked  prelate 

artide       ft"""^  his  ministry,  while  he  is  actually  in  sin ;  for  by  that  means  that  he  is  in 
'Jo  god-     deadly  sin,  he  doth  offend  and  sin  whatsoever  he  do,  and  consequently  is  for- 
ward all    bidden  so  to  do;  therefore  also^is  he  suspended  from  his  ministry.'     Answer: 
mVsf  rs  '^^'^  i^  proved  as  touching  suspension  from  dignity,  by  Hosea  iv.,  and  Isaiah, 
be  sus-      and  Malachi  i.     And  Paid,  in  1  Cor.  xi.,  suspendeth  all  such  as  be  sinfid,  or  in 
pended..    any  grievous  crime  or  offence,  from  the  eating  of  the  body  of  the  Lord,  and  the 
drinking  of  his  blood ;  and  consequently  suspendeth  all  sinful  prelates  from  the 
ministration  of  the  reverend  sacrament.     And  God  doth  suspend  the  wicked 
and  sinful  from  the  declaration  of  his  righteousness  [Psalm  xlix.]     Forasmuch 
then  as  to  suspend,  in  effect,  is  to  prohibit  the  ministry,  or  any  other  good  thing 
for  the  offence'  sake ;  or,  as  the  new  laws  do  determine  or  call  it,  to  interdict  or 
forbid,  it  is  manifest  by  the  Scriptures  before  rehearsed,  that  God  doth  prohibit 
the  sinful,  being  in  sin,  to  exercise  or  use  their  ministry  or  office,  which,  by 
God's  commandment,  ought  to  be  exercised  without  offence.     Whereupon  he 
saith  by  Isaiah  the  prophet,  '  Ye  that  caiTy  the  vessels  of  the  Lord,  be  ye  cleansed 
and  made  clean  ;'  and  to  the  Corinthians  it  is  said,  '  Let  all  things  be  done  with 
love  and  charity,'  &c.    The  same  thing  also  is  commanded  by  divers  and  sundry 
canons,  which  I  have  alleged  in  my  treatise. 
Four-  The  fourteenth  article.  (The  answer  which  he  made  to  the  twenty-fifth  article, 

teenth  in  prison,sufficeth  for  this ;  that  is  to  say,  that  the  clergy,  for  their  own  preferment 
ai  tide.  ^jj^  exaltation,  do  supplant  and  undermine  the  lay-people,  do  increase  and  multi- 
people^"  ply  their  covetousness,  cloke  and  defend  their  malice  and  wickedness,  and  prepare 
sup-  a  way  for  Antichrist.    The  first  part  he  proveth  by  experience,  by  the  example 

bl^'t'he'^  of  Peter  de  Luna,  who  named  himself  '  Benedict,'  by  the  example  of  Angelus 
clergy.  Coriarius,  who  named  himself  '  Gregory  XII. ;'  and  also  by  the  example  ol 
John  XXIII. ;  likewise  by  Ezekiel  xiii.  and  xxiv.,  and  out  of  Gregory,  who 
saith,  '  Wliat  shall  become  of  the  flock,  when  the  shepherds  themselves  are 
become  wolves,'  &c. ;  also  out  of  Hosea,  Micah,  and  other  of  the  prophets,  and 
many  places  of  St.  Bernard.-.  "The  second  part  is  proved  by  Jeremiah  viii.,  Gregory, 


NINETEEN    ARTICLES    OBJECTED    AGAINST    IIIJSS.  477 

In  his  seventeenth  Homily,  and  St.  Beniard,  upon  the  Canonicals.     The  third    Henry 
part  of  tliis  article  is  also  proved  by  experience  ;  for  who  defendeth  the  wicked-        ^■ 
ness  of  any  schism  but  only  the  clergy,  alleging  Scriptures,  and  bringing  reasons  ~J~r)~ 
there-for?     Who  excuseth  simony,  but  only  the  clergy?  likewise  covetousness     ^\^r 

(in  heaping  together  many  benefices),  luxuriousness,  and  fornication  ?  For  how L 

many  of  the  clergy  are  there  now-a-days  who  do  say,  it  is  no  deadly 'sin  ; 
alleging  (albeit  disorderly)  the  saying  of  Genesis,  '  Increase  and  multiply?' 
Hereby  also  is  the  fourth  part  of  the  article  easily  verified.  For  the  way  of 
Antichrist  is  wickedness  and  sin,  of  which  the  apostle  speaketh  to  the  Thessa- 
ionians;  Gregory  in  his  Register,  Pastoral,  and  Morals  :  also  St.  Bernard,  upon 
the  Canonicals,  plainly  saith ;  '  Wicked  and  evil  priests  prepare  the  way  .for 
Antichrist.' 

The  fifteenth  article :  '  John  Huss  doth  openly  teach  and  aflSrm,  that  these  Fifteenth 
conclusions  aforesaid  are  true.'     The  answer  is  manifest  by  that  which  I  have  article. 
before  written.     For  some  of  these  propositions  I  did  write  and  publish ;  others  J^*^  ''^*" 
mine  enemy  did  feign ;  now  adding,  then  diminishing  and  taking  away ;  now  of  "uciraa 
falsely  ascribing  and  imputing  the  whole  proposition  unto  me  :  which  thing  the  gathered 
commissioners  themselves  did  confess  before  me ;  whom  I  desired,  for  the  false  a'^am^t 
invention  and  feigning  of  those  articles,  that  they  would  punish  those  whom  they  Huss. 
themselves  knew  and  confessed  to  be  mine  enemies. 

The  sixteenth  article.   Hereby  also  it  appeareth,  that  it  is  not  true  which  they  sixteenth 
have  affirmed  in  the  article  following ;  that  is  to  say,  that  all  the  aforesaid  con-  article, 
elusions  be  false,  erroneous,  seditious,  and  such  as  do  weaken  and  make  feeble 
the  power  and  strength  of  the  church,  invented  contrary  to  the  holy  Scriptures 
and  the  church.     But  if  there  be  any  such,  I  am  ready  most  humbly  to  revoke 
and  recant  the  same. 

The  seventeenth  article.     There  was  also  an  objection  made  against  me  as  Seven- 
touching  the  treatises  which  I  wrote  against  Paletz  and  Stanislaus  de  Znoyma ;  teenth 
which  I  desired,  for  God's  sake,  they  might  be  openly  read  in  the  audience  of  ^'''"^'® 
the  whole  council ;   and  said  that  I,  notwithstanding  my  former  protestation, 
would  willingly  submit  myself  to  the  jiidgment  of  the  whole  council. 

The  eighteenth  article.  There  was  also  another  article  objected  against  me  in  Eigh- 
this  form : '  Item,  John  Huss  said  and  preached,  that  he  shoidd  go  to  Constance,  and  ^eenth 
if  so  be  that  for  any  manner  of  cause  he  should  be  forced  to  recant  what  he  had  ^^  "^  ^' 
before  taught,  yet,  notwithstanding,  he  never  puqDosed  to  do  it  with  his  mind ; 
forasmuch  as  whatsoever  he  had  before  taught,  was  pure  and  true,  and  the  sound 
doctrine  of  Christ.'  Answer:  This  article  is  full  of  lies,  to  the  inventor  whereof 
I  suppose  the  Lord  saith  thus ;  '  All  the  day  long  thou  hast  imagined  mischief 
and  wickedness,  and  with  thy  tongue,  as  with  a  shaqi  razor,  thou  hast  wrought 
deceit :  thou  hast  delighted  and  loved  rather  to  talk  of  wickedness  and  mischief, 
than  of  equity  and  justice.'  Verily  I  do  grant,  that  I  left  behind  me  a  certain 
epistle  to  be  read  to  the  people,  which  did  contain,  that  all  such  as  did  weigh 
and  consider  my  careful  labours  and  travails,  should  pray  for  me,  and  steadfastly 
preserve  and  continue  in  the  doctrine  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  knowing  for  a 
certainty,  that  I  never  taught  them  any  such  errors,  as  mine  enemies  do  impute 
or  ascribe  unto  me ;  and  if  it  should  happen  that  I  were  overcome  by  false 
witness,  they  should  not  be  vexed  or  troubled  in  their  minds,  but  steadfastly 
continue  in  the  truth. 

The  nineteenth  article.     Last  it  was  objected  against  me,  that  after  I  was  Nine- 
come  into  Constance,  I  did  write  unto  the  kingdom  of  Bohemia,  that  the  pope  teentii 
and  the  emperor  received  me  honoiuably,  and  sent  unto  me  two  bishops  to  make  ^"^'"^  ^' 
agreement  between  me  and  them ;  and  that  this  seemeth  to  be  written  by  me 
to  this  end  and  purpose,  that  they  should  confirm  and  establish  me  and  my 
hearers  in  the  errors  which  I  had  preached  and  taught  in  Bohemia.  This  article 
is  falsely  alleged,  even  from  the  beginning ;  for  how  manifestly  false  should  I 
have  written,  that  the  pope  and  the  emperor  did  honour  me,  when  I  had  other- 
wise written  before,  that  as  yet  we  knew  not  where  the  emperor  was?     And 
before  the  emperor  himself  came  to  Constance,  I  was,  by  the  space  of  three 
weeks,  in  prison.     And  to  write  that  I  was  honoured  by  my  imprisonment,  the 
people  of  the  kingdom  of  Bohemia  would  repute  the  honour  as  no  great  renown 
and  glory  unto  me.     Howbeit,  mine  enemies  anay  in  derision  say  unto  me,  that 
according  to  their  wills  and  pleasures  I  am  exalted  and  honoui'ed.     Wherefore 
this  article  is  wholly,  throughout,  false  and  untrue. 


478 


HISTOUY    OF    THE    BOHEMIANS. 

Unto  these  articles  above  prefixed,  were  other  articles  also  to  be 
annexed,  which  the  Parisians  had  drawn  out  against  Master  John 
Huss,  to  the  number  of  nineteen.  The  chief  author  whereof,  was 
John  Gerson,  chancellor  of  the  university  of  Paris,  a  great  setter-on 
of  the  pope  against  good  men.  Of  these  articles  John  Huss  doth 
often  complain  in  his  epistles,  that  he  had  no  time  nor  space  to  make 
answer  unto  them  ;  which  articles  being  falsely  collected  and  ^vrong- 
fully  depraved,  although  John  Huss  had  no  time  to  answer  unto 
them,  yet  I  thought  it  not  unfit  here  to  set  them  down  for  the  reader 
to  see  and  judge. 


First 
article. 


Second  Series  of  Nineteen  Articles  formerly  contained  in  or  picked, 
by  the  Parisians,  out  of  the  Treatise  of  John  Huss  of  Prague, 
which  he  entitled  "  Of  the  Church,""  following  in  this  part  or  be'half 
the  errors,  as  they  term  them,  of  John  Wickliff. 

The  first  article  :  '  No  reprobate  is  true  pope,  lord,  or  prelate.'  The  eu  ar  is 
in  the  faith,  and  behaviour,  and  manners,  being  both  of  late  and  many  times 
before  condemned,  as  well  against  the  poor  men  of  Lyons,  as  also  against  the 
Waldenses  and  Picards.  The  affirmation  of  which  error  is  temerarious,  sedi- 
tious, offensive  and  pernicious,  and  tending  to  the  subversion  of  all  human 
policy  and  governance ;  forasmuch  as  no  man  knoweth  whether  he  be  worthy 
of  love  or  hatred,  for  that  all  men  do  offend  in  many  points ;  and  thereby  should 
all  rule  and  dominion  be  made  uncertain  and  unstable,  if  it  should  be  founded 
upon  predestination  and  charity:  neither  should  the  commandment  of  Peter 
have  been  good,  who  willeth  all  servants  to  be  obedient  unto  their  masters  and 
lords,  although  they  be  wicked. 

Second.  The  second  article :  '  That  no  man  being  in  deadly  sin,  whereby  he  Is  no 
mem.ber  of  Christ,  but  of  the  devil,  is  true  pope,  prelate,  or  lord.'  The  error  of 
this  is  like  unto  the  first. 

Third.  The  third  article  :  '  No  reprobate  or  otherwise  being  in  deadly  sin,  sitteth  in 

the  apostolic  seat  of  Peter,  neither  hath  any  apostolical  power  over  the  chris- 
tian people.'     This  error  is  also  like  unto  the  first. 

Fourth.  The  fourth  article  :  '  No  reprobates  are  of  the  church,  neither,  likewise  any 

who  do  not  follow  the  life  of  Christ.'  This  error  is  against  the  common  under- 
standing of  the  doctors  concerning  the  church. 

Fifth.  The    fifth  article :    '  They  only  are  of  the    church,  and  sit  in  Peter's  seat, 

and  have  apostolic  power,  who  follow  Christ  and  his  apostles  in  their  lite  and 
living.'  The  error  hereof  is  in  faith  and  manners,  as  in  the  first  article,  but  con- 
taining more  arrogancy  and  rashness. 

Sixth.  The  sixth  article  :  '  That  every  man  who  liveth  uprightly,  according  to  the 

rule  of  Christ,  may  and  ought  openly  to  preach  and  teach,  although  he  be  not 
sent ;  yea,  although  he  be  forbidden  or  excommunicated  by  any  prelate  or  bishop, 
even  as  he  might  and  ought  to  give  alms  :  for  his  good  life  in  living,  together 
with  his  learning,  doth  sufficiently  send  him.'  This  is  a  rash  and  temerarious 
error,  offensive,  and  tending  to  the  confusion  of  the  whole  ecclesiastical  hier- 
archy. 

Seventh.  The  seventh  article  :  '  That  the  pope  of  Rome  being  contrary  unto  Christ,  is 
not  the  universal  bishop,  neither  hath  the  church  of  Rome  any  supremacy  over 
other  churches,  except  peradventure  it  be  given  to  him  of  Casar,  and  not  of 
Christ.'  An  error  lately  and  plainly  reproved. 

Eighth.  The  eighth  article  :  '  That  the  pope  ought  not  to  be  called  most  holy,  and  that 

his  feet  are  neither  holy  nor  blessed,  nor  ought  they  to  be  kissed.'  This  eri'or  is 
temerariously,  unreverently,  and  offensively  published. 

Ninth.  The  ninth  article  :  '  That  according  to  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  heretics,  be 

they  ever  so  obstinate  or  stubborn,  ought  not  to  be  put  to  death,  neither  to  be 
accursed  nor  excommunicated.'  This  is  the  error  of  the  Donatists,  temerari- 
ously, and  not  without  great  offence,  affirmed  against  the  laws  of  the  ecclesias- 
tical discipline ;  as  St.  Augustine  doth  prove. 


THE    DETERMINATION    OF    THE    MASTERS    OF    PARIS.  479 

Tlie  tenth  article :  '  That  subjects,  and  the  common  people,  may  and  ought  Henry 
publicly  and  openly  to  detect   and   reprove  the   vices  of  their  superiors  and        ^■ 

rulers,  as  having  power  given  them  of  Clirist,  and  the  example  of  St.  Paul  so  »   j^ 

to  do.'  This  error  is  pernicious,  full  of  offence,  inducing  all  rebellion,  disobe-  -liiK' 
dience,  and  sedition,  and  the  curse  and  malediction  of  Ham. 


The  eleventh  article :   '  That  Christ  only  is  head  of  the  church,  and  not  the  Eleventh. 
pops.'     It  is  an  error  according  unto  the  common  understanding  of  the  doctors, 
if  all  the  reason  of  the  supremacy,  and  of  being  head,  be  secluded  and  taken 
away  from  the  pope. 

The  twelfth  article :  '  That  the  only  church,  which  comprehendeth  the  pre-  Twelfth, 
destinate  and  good  livers,  is  the  universal  church,  whereunto  subjects  do  owe 
obedience.'     And  this  is  consequent  unto  the  former  article  :   the  error  is  con- 
tained as  in  the  former  articles. 

The  thirteenth  article  :  '  That  tithes  and  oblations  given  to  the  church  are  Thir- 
public  and  common  alms.'     This  error  is  offensive,  and  contrary  to  the  deter-  ^^^"t^- 
mination  of  the  apostle  [1  Cor.  ix.] 

The  fourteenth  article :  '  That  the  clergy  living  wickedly,   ought  to  be  re-  Four- 
proved  and  corrected  by  the  lay-people,  by  the  taking  away  of  their  tithes  and  tcenth. 
other  temporal  profits.'     A  most  pernicious  error  and  offensive,   inducing  the 
secular  people  to  perpetrate  sacrilege ;  subverting  the  ecclesiastical  liberty. 

The  fifteenth  article :  '  That  the  blessings   of  such  as  are  reprobate  or  evil  Fif- 
livers  of  the  clergy,  are  maledictions  and  cursings  before  God,  according  to  the  ^^enth. 
saying,   I  will  curse  your  blessings.'     This  error  was  lately  reproved  by  St. 
Augustine,  against  St.  Cyprian  and  his  followers,  neither  is  the  Master  of  the 
Sentences  allowed  by  the  masters  in  that  point  that  he  seemeth  to  favour  this 
article. 

The  sixteenth  article  :  '  That  in  these  days,  and  for  a  long  time  before,  there  six- 
hath  been  no  true  pope,  no  true  church,    nor  faith,  which  is  called  the  Romish  '*^^"''^ 
church,  whereunto  a  man  ought  to  obey ;  but  that  it  both  was,  and  is,  the  syna- 
gogue of  Antichrist  and  Satan.'  The  error,  in  this  article,  is  in  this  point,  That 
it  is  derived  from,  and  taketh  its  foundation  upon,  the  former  articles. 

The  seventeenth  article  :   '  That  all  gift  of  money  given  unto  the  ministers  Sevon- 
of  the  church,  for  the  ministration  of  any  spiritual  matter,  doth  make  such  ^'^'^^""> 
ministers,  in  that  case,  users   of  simony.'     This  error  is  seditious  and  temera- 
rious, forasmuch  as  something  may  be  given  luito  the  clergy,  under  the  title  of 
sustentation  or  maintaining  the  minister,  without  the  selling  or  buying  of  any 
spiritual  thing. 

The  eighteenth  article  :  *  That  whosoever  is  excommunicated  by  the  pope,  if  F-ig'i- 
he  appeal  to  Christ,  he  is  preserved  that  he  need  not  fear  the  excommunication,  ^"^^"^  '• 
but  may  utterly  contemn  and  despise  the  same.'     This  error  is  temerarious  and 
of  arrogancy. 

The  nineteenth  article  :  '  That  every  deed  done  without  charity,  is  sin.'  This  Ni"«- 
error  was  reproved  and  revoked  before  this  time  at  Paris,  especially  if  it  be  un- 
derstood of  deadly  sin  ;  for  it  is  not  necessary  that  he  who  lacketh  grace,  shoidd 
continually  sin  and  offend  anew,  albeit  he  be  continually  in  sin. 

This  declaration  following,  the  masters  of  Paris,  by  their  whole 
voice  and  consent,  did  add  and  adjoin  unto  these  nineteen  articles, 
for  their  reason  and  determination. 

Reasons  and  Determinations  of  the  Masters  of  Paris. 

We  affirm.  That  these  articles  aforesaid  are  notoriously  heretical,  and  that 
they  are  judicially  to  be  condemned  for  such,  and  diligently  to  be  rooted  out 
with  their  most  seditious  doctrines,  lest  they  do  infect  others.  For  albeit  they 
seem  to  have  a  zeal  against  the  vices  of  the  prelates  and  the  clergy,  which  (the 
more  is  the  pity  and  grief)  do  but  too  much  abound,  yet  is  it  not  according 
unto  learning :  for  one  of  a  sober  and  discreet  zeal,  suffereth  and  lamenteth 
those  sins  and  offences,  which  he  seeth  in  the  house  of  God,  that  he  cannot 
amend  or  take  away  ;  for  vices  cannot  be  rooted  out  and  taken  away  by  other 
vices  and  errors,  forasmuch  as  devils  are  not  cast  out  through  Beelzebub,  but 
by  the  power  of  God,  which  is  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  willeth,  that  in  correction 


4S0 


lilsrOKY    OF    THE     HOTTEMIANS. 


Henry 

r. 

A.D. 
1415. 


the  measure  and  mean  of  prudence  be  always  kept,  according  to  tlie  saying, 
'  Mark  who,  what,  where,  and  why,'  by  what  means  and  when,  prelates  and 
bishops  are  bound,  under  grievous  and  express  penalties  of  the  law,  diligently 
and  vigilantly  to  bear  themselves  against  the  aforesaid  errors,  and  such  others, 
and  the  maintainers  of  them  :  for  let  it  always  be  understood  and  noted,  that 
the  error  which  is  not  resisted  is  allowed ;  neither  is  there  any  doubt  of  privy 
affinity  or  society  of  him,  who  slacketh  to  withstand  a  manifest  mischief. 

These  things  are  intermeddled  by  the  way  under  correction,  as  by  way  of 
doctrine. 

John  Gerson,  Chancellor  of  Paris,  iniworthy. 


The 

words  of 
the  cardi- 
nal of 
Cambray 
unto 
John 
Huss 
after  his 
accusa- 
tion. 

A  double 
incon- 
venience 
for  John 
Huss  to 
fall  into. 


These  things  thus  declared,  a  man  may  easily  understand,  that 
John  Huss  was  not  accused  for  holding  any  opinion  contrary  to  the 
articles  of  our  faith,  but  because  he  did  stoutly  preach  and  teach 
against  the  kingdom  of  Antichrist,  for  the  glory  of  Christ  and  the 
restoring  of  the  church. 

Now  to  return  to  the  story :  when  the  first  thirty-nine  articles, 
which  I  have  before  rehearsed,  were  all  read  over,  together  with 
their  testimonies,  the  cardinal  of  Cambray  calling  unto  John  Huss, 
said  : — 

'  Thou  hast  heard  what  grievous  and  horrible  crimes  are  laid  against  thee,  and 
what  a  number  of  them  there  are  ;  and  now  it  is  thy  part  to  devise  with  thy- 
self what  thou  wilt  do.  Two  ways  are  proponed  and  set  before  thee  by  the 
council,  whereof  the  one  of  them  thou  must,  of  force  and  necessity,  enter  into. 
First,  That  thou  do  humbly  and  meekly  submit  thyself  unto  the  judgment  and 
sentence  of  the  council,  that  whatsoever  shall  be  there  determined,  by  their 
common  voice  and  judgment,  thou  wilt  patiently  bear,  and  suffer  the  same. 
Which  thing  if  thou  wilt  do,  we,  of  our  part,  botli  for  the  honour  of  the  most 
gentle  emperor  here  present,  and  also  for  the  honour  of  his  brother,  the  king  of 
Bohemia,  and  for  thy  own  safeguard  and  preservation,  will  treat  and  handle 
thee  with  as  great  humanity,  love,  and  gentleness,  as  we  may.  But  if  as  yet 
thou  art  determined  to  defend  any  of  those  articles  which  we  have  propounded 
unto  thee,  and  dost  desire  or  require  to  be  further  heard  thereupon,  we  will  not 
deny  thee  power  and  license  thereunto  :  but  this  thou  shalt  well  understand, 
that  here  are  such  manner  of  men,  so  clear  in  imderstanding  and  knowledge, 
and  having  such  firm  and  strong  reasons  and  arguments  against  thy  articles, 
that  I  fear  it  will  be  to  thy  great  hurt,  detriment  and  peril,  if  thou  shouldest 
any  longer  will  or  desire  to  defend  the  same.  This  do  I  speak  and  say  imto 
thee,  to  counsel  and  admonish  thee,  and  not  as  in  manner  of  a  judge.' 

This  oration  of  the  cardinal  many  others  prosecuting,  every  man 
for  himself  did  exhort  and  persuade  John  Huss  to  the  like;  unto  whom, 
with  a  lowly  countenance,  he  answered  : 

'  Most  reverend  fathers  !  I  have  often  said,  that  I  came  hither  of  mine  own 
free  will,  not  to  the  intent  obstinately  to  defend  any  thing,  but  that  if  in  any 
thing  I  should  seem  to  have  conceived  a  perverse  or  evil  opinion,  I  would  meekly 
and  patiently  be  content  to  be  reformed  and  taught.  Whereupon  I  desire  that 
I  may  have  yet  further  liberty  to  declare  my  mind ;  whereof,  except  I  shall 
allege  most  firm  and  strong  reasons,  I  will  willingly  submit  myself,  as  you 
require,  unto  your  information.' 


Then  there  started  up  one,  who,  with  a  loud  voice  said,  "  Behold, 
how  craftily  this  man  speaketh  :  He  termeth  it  information,  and  not 
correction  or  determination.""  "  Verily,"  said  John  Huss,  "  even  as 
you  will  term  it,  information,  con-ection  or  determination  :  for  I  take 


THK    EMPEROR    EXHORTETH    HLTSS    TO    RECANT.  •^'^l 

God  to  mv  witness,  that  I  speak  nothino-  but  with  mv  heart  and    ncnnj. 
mind."       "  ^  ■  ''■ 

Tlien  said  tlie  cardinal  of  Canibrav  :   "  Forasmuch,  tlien,  as  thou   A.  D. 
dost  submit  thyself  unto  the  information  and  grace  of  this  council,  this    ^^^^- . 
is  decreed  by  almost  threescore  doctors,  whereof  some  of  them  are  now  jj^'j^^i^gf 
departed  hence,  in  whose  room  and  place  the  Parisians  have  succeeded  ;  cambra> 
and  also  it  is  approved  by  the  whole  council,  not  one  man  speaking  etil' John 
the  contrary  thereunto :  First  of  all,  that  thou  shalt  humbly  and  meekly  ""j^^j^ 
confess  thyself  to  have  erred  in    these  articles  which  are  alleged  and  ^?"'''- 
brought  against  thee.    Moreover,  that  thou  shalt  promise  by  an  oath,  whereby 
that  from  henceforth  thou  shalt  not  teach,  hold,  or  maintain,  any  of  beS 
these  articles.    And,  last  of  all,  that  thou  shalt  openly  recant  all  these  ^^'■'^'*- 
articles. 

Upon  which  sentence,  when  many  others  had  spoken  their  minds, 
at  length  John  Huss  said  : 

'  I  once  again  do  say,  that  I  am  ready  to  submit  myself  to  tlie  information 
of  tlie  council ;  but  this  I  most  himibly  require  and  desire  you  all,  even  for  His 
sake,  who  is  the  God  of  us  all,  that  I  be  not  compelled  or  forced  to  do  the  thing 
which  my  conscience  doth  repugn  or  strive  against,  or  which  I  cannot  do  with- 
out danger  of  eternal  damnation :  that  is,  that  I  should  make  revocation,  by 
oath,  to  all  the  articles  which  are  alleged  against  me.  For  I  remember,  that  I 
have  read  in  the  Book  of  Universalities,  that  to  abjure,  is  to  renounce  an  error 
which  a  man  hath  before  holden.  And  forasmuch  as  many  of  these  articles  are 
said  to  be  mine,  which  were  never  in  my  mind  or  thought  to  hold  or  teach,  how 
should  I  then  renounce  them  by  an  oath  1  But  as  touching  those  articles  which 
are  mine  indeed,  if  there  be  any  man  who  can  teach  me  contrariwise  unto  them, 
I  will  willingly  perform  that  which  you  desire.' 

Then  said  the  emperor :   "  Why  mayest  not  thou  without  danger  The  em- 
also  renounce  all  those  articles  which  thou  sayest  are  falsely  alleged  hoiteth''" 
against  thee  by  the  witnesses  .''     For  I  verily  would  nothing  at  all  ^°^^"^  ^^ 
doubt  to  abjure  all  errors,  neither  doth  it  follow  that  therefore,  by  and  recant. 
by,  I  have  professed  any  error."     To  whom  John  Huss  answered : 
"  Most  noble  emperor  !  this  word  to  abjure,  doth  signify  much  other- 
wise than  your  majesty  doth  here  use  it."     Then  said  the  cardinal  of 
Florence,  "  John  Huss,  you  shall  have  a  form  of  abjuration,  which 
shall  be  gentle,  and  tolerable  enough,  written  and  delivered  unto  you, 
and  then  you  will  easily  and  soon  determine  with  yourself,  whether 
you  will  do  it  or  no."     Then  the  emperor,  repeating  again  the  words  The  em- 
of  the  cardinal  of  Cambray,  said ;  "  Thou  hast  heard  that  there  are  l^Zllxh 
two  ways  laid  before  thee  :  First,  that  thou  shouldest  openly  renounce  ^^^^j'''''^ 
those  tiiy  errors  which  are  now  condemned,  and  subscribe  unto  the  cam- 
judgment  of  the  council,  whereby  thou  shouldest  try  and  find  their  Jords. 
grace  and  favour.     But  if  thou  proceed  to  defend  thy  opinions,   the 
council  shall  have  sufficient,  whereby,  according  to  their  laws  and  ordi- 
nances, they  may  decree  and  determine  upon  thee."     To  whom  John 
Huss  answered ;   "  I  refuse  nothing,  most  noble  emperor  !  whatsoever 
the  council  shall  decree  or  determine  upon  me.     Only  this  one  thing 
I  except,  that  I  do  not  offend  God  and  my  conscience,  or  say  that  I 
professed  those  errors  which  it  was  never  in  my  mind  or  thought   to 
profess.  But  I  desire  you  all,  if  it  may  be  possible,  that  you  will  grant 
me  further  liberty  to  declare  my  mind  and  opinion,  that  I  may  answer 
as  much  as  shall  "suffice,  as  touching  those  things  which  are  objected 

vol'.  III.  I  I 


482  HISTORY    OF    THE    liOUKMIANS. 

Henry    against  1110,  aiul  specially  concerning  ecclesiastical  offices,  and  the  state 

; of  the  ministry." 

A.  D.         But  when  other  men  began  to  speak,  the  emperor  himself  began  to 
^^^^-    sing  the  same  song  which  he  had  sung  before.     "  Thou  art  of  lawful 
The  force  age,"  Said  the  emperor ;   "  thou  mightest  easily  have  understood  what 
witness.    I  said  unto  thee  yesterday,  and  this  day ;  for  we  are  forced  to  give 
peior^to    credit  unto  these  witnesses  who  are  worthy  of  credit,  forasmuch  as  the 
^°''"       Scripture  saith,  that  in  the  mouth  of  two  or  three  witnesses  all  truth 
is  tried :  how  much  more  then,  by  so  many  witnesses  of  such  worthy 
men  ?     Wherefore,  if  thou  be  wise,  receive  penance  at  the  hands  of 
the  council  with  a  contrite  heart,  and  renounce  thy  manifest  eiTors,  and 
promise  by  an  oath,  that  from  henceforth  thou  wilt  never  more  teach 
or  preach  them  ;  which  if  thou  refuse  to  do,  there  are  laws  and  ordi- 
nances whereby  thou  shalt  be  judged  of  the  council."'"' 
An  old  Here  a  certain  very  old  bishop  of  Poland  put  to  his  verdict.     He 

Poiami"*^  said  :  "  The  laws  are  evident  as  touching  heretics,  Avith  what  punish- 
ment they  ought  to  be  punished.""     But  John  Huss  constantly  an- 
swered as  before, insomuch  that  they  said  he  was  obstinate  and  stubborn. 
Objection  Thcu  a  ccrtaiu  well-fed  priest,  and  gaily  apparelled,  cried  out  unto  the 
bettered  presidents  of  the  council,  saying :   "  He  ought  by  no  means  to  be 
tau\t     ^clmitted  to  recantation,  for  he  hath  wi-itten  unto  his  friends,  that 
although  he  do  swear  vn\X\  his  tongue,  yet  he  will  keep  his  mind  un- 
sworn, without  oath  ;  wherefore  he  is  not  to  be  trusted."     Unto  this 
slander  John  Huss  answered  as  is  said  in  the  last  article  ;  affirming  that 
he  was  not  guilty  of  any  error. 
Paietz  Then  said  Paletz  :  "  To  what  end  is  this  protestation,  forasmuch  as 

John        thou  sayest  that  thou  wilt  defend  no  error,  neither  yet  Wickliff,  and 
""^^'       yet   dost  defend  hmi .''"     When   he  had  spoken   these  words,  he 
brought  forth  for  witness  nine  articles  of  John  Wickliff"'s,  and  read 
them  openly,  and  afterwards  he  said,  "  When  I  and  Master  Stanislaus, 
in  the  presence  of  Ernest  of  Austria,  duke  of  Prague,  preached  against 
them,  he  obstinately  defended  the  same,  not  only  by  his  sermons,  but 
A  new      also  by  his  books  which  he  set  forth ;  which,  except  you  do  here 
Glanders,   exhibit,  wc  will  cause  them  to  be  exhibited."     So  said  the  emperor 
also.    Unto  whom  John  Huss  answered  :   "  I  am  very  well  contented 
that  not  only  those,  but  also  all  other  my  books,  be  brought  forth  and 
showed." 

In  the  mean  time  there  was  exhibited  unto  the  council  a  certain 
article,  wherein  John  Huss  was  accused,  that  he  had  slanderously  in- 
terpreted a  certain  sentence  of  the  pope"'s,  which  he  denied  that  he  did, 
saying,  that  he  never  saw  it  but  in  prison,  when  the  article  was  showed 
him  by  the  commissioners.  And  when  he  was  demanded  who  was  the 
author  thereof;  he  answered,  that  he  knew  not,  but  that  he  heard  say 
that  Master  Jessenitz  Avas  the  author  thereof. 

"  What  then,"  said  they,  "  do  you  think  or  judge  of  the  intei-pre- 

tation  thereof?"     Then  answered  John  Huss,  "  What  should  I  say 

thereunto,  when  I  said  I  never  saw  it,  but  as  I  have  heard  it  of  you." 

John       Thus  they  were  all  so  grievous  and  troublesome  unto  him  that  he 

waxeth    waxcd  faint  and  weary,  for  he  had  passed  all  the  night  before  without 

sleep,  through  the  pain  of  his  teeth. 

Then  was  there  another  article  read,  in  which  was  contained,  that 
three  men  were  beheaded  at   Prague,  because,   through  Wickliff"'s 


faint  and 
wearj' 


QUARRELS    PICKED    AGAINST    HUSS    BY    HIS    ENEMIES.  483 

doctrine  and  teaching,  they  were  contumelious  and  slanderous  against  the    Henry 
pope's  letters ;  and  that  they  were,  by  the  same  Huss,  with  the  v/hole 


pomp  of  the  scholars,  and  with  a  public  convocation  or  congregation,  A.D. 
carried  out  to  be  buried,  and  by  a  public  sermon  placed  among  the  ^'^^^^ 
number  of  saints.  And  the  same  Dr.  Naso,  of  whom  you  have  heard  Another 
certain  testimonies  already  recited,  affirmed  the  same  to  be  true,  and  against 
that  he  himself  was  present,  when  the  king  of  Bohemia  commanded  ^Ij^g 
those  blasphemers  so  to  be  punished.  J^"';^"'^ 

Then  said  John  Huss :  "  Both  those  parts  are  false,  that  the  king  three 
did  command  any  such  punishment  to  be  done,  and  that  the  corpses  headed  at 
were  by  me  conveyed  with  any  such  pomp  unto  their  sepulture  or  ^'r^gue. 
burial :  wherefore  you  do  injury  both  unto  me  and  the  king.     Then  John 
Paletz  confirmed  the  affirmation  of  Dr.  Naso,  his  fellow,  with  this  ued^^  ^^' 
argument  (for  they  both  laboured  to  one  end  and  purpose)  :  That  it 
was  provided  by  the  king's  commandment,  that  no  man  should  once 
speak  against  the  pope's  bulls  ;  and  these  three  spake  against  the 
pope's  bidls :  ergo,  by  virtue  of  the  king's  commandment,  they  were 
beheaded.'  And  what  John  Huss's  opinion  and  mind  was,  as  touching 
these  men,  it  is  evident  enough  by  his  book  entitled,  '  Of  the  Church,*" 
wherein  he  Avriteth  thus :  '-*  I  believe  they  have  read  Daniel  the  pro- 
phet, where  it  is  said,  '  And  they  shall  perish  with  sword  and  fire,  and 
with  captivity,  and  many  shall  fraudulently  and  craftily  associate  them- 
selves unto  them.' "  And  afterwards  he  saith  ;  "  How  is  this  fulfilled 
in  these  two  lav-men,  who  not  consenting,  but  speaking  against  the 
feigned  lies  of  Antichrist,  have  offered  theii-  lives  there-for,  and  many 
others  were  ready  to  do  the  same,  and  many  were  fraudulently  asso- 
ciated unto  them,  who,  being  feared  by  the  threatenings  of  Antichrist, 
are  fled,  and  have  turned  theh  backs,"  &c. 

When  these  things  were  read,  one  looking  upon  another,  as  though 
they  had  been  all  in  a  marvellous  strange  study,  they  held  their  peace 
for  a  certain  space ;  for  this  Paletz,   and  the  aforesaid  Dr.  Naso 
had  also  added,  that  John  Huss,  in  an  open  sermon,  had  inflamed 
and  stirred  up  the  people  against  the  magistrates,  insomuch  that  a 
great  number  of  the  citizens  did  openly  set  themselves  against  the 
magistrates  ;  and  by  that  means  was  it,  he  said,  that  those  three  were 
ready  to  suffer  death  for  the  truth.     And  this  sedition  was  hardly 
appeased  by  any  benefit  or  help  that  the  king  could  do.     Then  the  Another 
Englishmen  exhibited  the  copy  of  a  certain  epistle,  which  they  said  '^^^H  ^y 
was  falsely  conveyed  unto  Prague,  under  the  title  of  the  University  ^"^f '^■ 
of  Oxford,  and  that  John  Huss  did  read  the  same  out  of  the  pulpit  asainst 
unto  the  people,  that  he  might  commend  and  praise  John  Wickliff  hus". 
to  the  citizens  of  Prague.     When  they  had  read  the  same  before  the  The  testi- 
council,  the  Englishmen  demanded  of  John  Huss,  whether  he  had  gX^^ "' 
read  the  same  openly  or  no.    Which  when  he  had  confessed,  because  f^  wick 
it  was  brought  thither  by  two  scholars  under  the  seal  of  the  univer-  brought 
sity,   they  also   inquired  of  him,  what  scholars  they  were.      He  p'rague. 
answered ;  "  This  my  friend  (meaning  Stephen  Paletz)  knoweth  one 
of  them  as  well  as  I ;  the  other,  I  know  not  what  he  was." 

Then  they  first  inquired  of  John  Huss,  as  touching  the  last  man, 
where  he  was.     John  Huss  answered :  "  I  heard  say,  that  on  his  ^ 

return  into  England  he  died  by  the  way."     As  touching  the  first, 

t\)  Ex  puris  affirmativis  non  consisfit  argum.  in  2  figura. 

I  i2 


484  HISTORY    OF    THE     BOHEMIANS. 

Hnny    Palctz  Said,  that  he  was  a  Bohemian  and  no  Englishman,  and  that  he 
^'      broui^ht  out  of  England  a  certain  small  piece  of  the  stone  of  Wick- 


A.D.    liff's  sepulchre,  Avhich  they  that  are  the  followers  of  his  doctrine  at 
^'^^^^    this  present,  do  reverence  and  worship  as  a  thing  most  holy.    Hereby 

A  piece  of  it  appcarcth  for  what  intent  all  these  things  were  done,  and  that  John 

of  Wick-   Huss  was  the  author  of  them  all. 

pl^chre         Then  the  Englishmen  exhibited  another  epistle,  contrary  to  the 

brought    g,.gf  under  the  seal  of  the  university,  the  effect  and  argument  whereof 

lor  a.  relic  •'  '  *^ 

toPrague.  was  this  :   "  The  senate  of  the  university,  not  without  great  sorrow 
and  gi'ief,  have  experimented  and  found,  that  the  errors  of  WicklifF 
are  scattered  and  spread  out  of  that  university  throughout  all  Eng- 
land.    And  to  the  intent,  that  through  their  help  and  labour,  means 
may  be  found  to  remedy  this  mischief,  they  have  appointed  for  that 
purpose  twelve  doctors,  men  of  singular  learning,  and  other  masters, 
who  should  sit  in  judgment  upon  the  books  of  Wickliff.    These  men 
have  noted  out  above  the  number  of  two  hundred  articles,  which  the 
whole  university  have  judged  worthy  to  be  burnt ;  but,  for  reverence 
of  the  said  sacred  council,  the  said  university  have  sent  them  unto 
Constance,  referring  and  remitting  the  whole  authority  of  the  judg- 
ment unto  this  council." 
Tiie  oath       Here  was  great  silence  kept  for  awhile.     Then  Paletz  rising  up, 
of  Paletz.  j^g  though  he  had  now  finished  his  accusation,  said  :  "  I  take  God  to 
my  witness  before  the  emperor's  majesty  here  present,  and  the  most 
reverend  fathers,  cardinals  and  bishops,  that  in  this  accusation  of 
John  Huss,  I  have  not  used  any  hatred  or  evil  will ;  but  that  I  might 
satisfy  the  oath  which  I  took  when  I  was  made  doctor,  that  I  would 
be  a  most  cruel  and  sharp  enemy  of  all  manner  of  errors,  for  the 
The  oath  profit  and  commodity  of  the  holy  catholic  church."     Michael  de 
chaei  de    C!ausis  did  also  the  like.     "  And  I,"  said  John  Huss,  "  do  commit 
causis.     all  these  things  unto  the  heavenly  Judge,  who  shall  justly  judge  the 
Huss       cause  or  quarrel  of  both  parties."     Then  said  the  cardinal  of  Cam- 
eVh"thl^     bray  :   "  1  cannot  a  little  commend  and  praise  the  humanity  and 
Lord.       gentleness  of  Master  Paletz,  which  he  hath  used  in  drawing  out  the 
articles  against  Master  John  Huss  ;  for,  as  we  have  heard,  there  are 
many  things  contained  in  his  book  much  worse  and  detestable." 

When  he  had  spoken  these  words,  the  bishop  of  Reggio,  unto 
whom  John  Huss  was  committed,  commanded,  that  the  said  John 
John  de    Huss  should  be  carried  again  safely  to  prison.     Then  John  de  Clum 
doth°com-  following  him,  did  not  a  little  encourage  and  comfort  him.     No 
Huss"''"  tongue  can  express  what  courage  and  stomach  he  received  by  the 
short  talk  which  he  had  with  him,  when,  in  so  great  a  broil  and  griev- 
ous hatred,  he  saw  himself  in  a  manner  forsaken  of  all  men.     After 
that  John  Huss  was  carried  away,  the  emperor  began  to  exhort  the 
presidents  oi  the  council  in  this  manner  following  : 

Oration  of  the  Emperor  Sigismund,  addressed  to  the  Council. 

'  You  have  heard  the  manifold  and  grievous  crimes  which  are  laid  against 
John  Huss,  which  are  not  only  proved  by  manifest  and  strong  witnesses,  but 
also  confessed  by  him ;  of  which,  ever}'  one  of  them,  by  my  judgment  and 
advice,  hath  deserved  and  is  worthy  of  death.  Therefoi-e,  except  he  do  recant 
them  all,  I  judge  and  think  meet  that  he  be  punished  with  fire.  And  albeit  he 
do  that  which  he  is  willed  and   commanded  to  do ;    notwithstanding,    I    do 


THE    EMPERORS    ORATION".  485 

counsel  you,  that  he  be  forbici  the  office  of  preaching  and  teaching,  and  also     Hennj 
that  he  retimi  no  more  into  the  kingdom  of  Bohemia :  foi-  if  he  be  admitted        '• 
again  to  teach  and  preach,  and  especially  in  the  kingdom  of  Bohemia,  he  will  "  .    |^» 
not  observe  and  keep  that  which  he  is  commanded;    but,  hoping  upon  the     141^" 

favour  and  good  will  of  such  as  be  his  adherents  and  fautors  there,  he  will  L 

return  again  unto  his  former  purpose  and  intent ;  and  then,  besides  these  errors, 
he  will  also  sow  new  errors  amongst  the  people  ;  so  the  last  eiTor  shall  be  worse 
than  the  first. 

'  Moreover,  I  judge  and  think  it  good,  that  his  articles  which  are  condemned, 
should  be  sent  unto  my  brother,   the  king  of  Bohemia,  and  afterward  into 
Poland,  and  other  provinces ;  where  men's  minds  are  replenished  with  his  doc-  That 
trine ;  with  this  commandment :  That  whosoever  do  proceed  to  hold  or  keep  the  which 
same,  they  should,  by  the  common  aid  both  of  the  ecclesiastical  and  civil  power,  pianteth 
be  punished.  So  at  length  shall  remedy  be  found  for  this  mischief,  if  the  boughs,  man  shall 
together  with  the  root,  be  utterly  rooted  and  pulled  up  :  and  if  the  bishops  and  "^"^ 
other  prelates,  who  here  in  this  place  have  laboured  and  travailed  for  tlie  ex- 
tirpating of  this  heresy,  be  commended  by  the  whole  voices  of  the  council  unto  jerome  of 
the  king  and  princes,  imder  whose  dominion  they  are.     Last  of  all,  if  there  be  Prague 
any  found  here  at  Constance,  who  are  familiars  unto  John  Huss,  they  also  ought  "d'^by  "{Je 
to  be  punished  with  such  severity  and  punishment  as  is  due  imto  them,  and  emperor, 
especially  his  scholar,  Jerome  of  Prague.' 

Then  said  the  rest :   "  WTien  the  master  is  once  punished,  we 
hope  we  shall  find  the  scholar  much  more  tractable  and  gentle/' 

After  they  had  spoken  these  words,  they  departed  out  of  the 
cloister,  where  they  were  assembled  and  gathered  together.     The 
day  before  his  condemnation,  which  was  the  sixth  of  July,  the  em- 
peror Sigismund  sent  unto  him  four  bishops,  accompanied  with  Master  Four 
Wencelate  de  Duba,  and  John  de  Clum,  that  they  should  learn  and  sen't°to* 
understand  of  him  what  he  did  intend  to  do.    When  he  was  brought  John 

Huss 

out  of  prison  unto  them,  John  de  Clum  began  first  to  speak  unto 
him,  saying :  "  Master  John  Huss,  I  am  a  man  unlearned,  neither  The  piti- 
am  I  able  to  counsel  or  advertise  you,  being  a  man  of  learning  and  x^l^"^^ 
understanding :  notwithstanding  I  do  require  you,  if  you  know  yom-  oration  of 
self  guilty  of  any  of  those  errors  which  are  objected  and  laid  against  cium 
you  before  the  council,  that  you  mil  not  be  ashamed  to  alter  and  huss^"^" 
change  your  mind  to  the  will  and  pleasure  of  the  council :    if  con- 
trariwise, I  will  be  no  author  unto  you,  that  you  should  do  any  thing 
contrary,  or  against  your  conscience,  but  rather  to  suffer  and  endure 
any  kind  of  punishment,  than  to  deny  that  which  you  have  knowTi  to 
be  the  truth."    Unto  whom  John  Huss,  turning  himself,  with  lamen- 
table tears  said :    "  Verily,  as  before  I  have  oftentimes  done,  I  do  The  mar- 
take  the  most  high  God  for  my  witness,  that  I  am  ready  with  my  consTancy 
heart  and  mind,  if  the  council  can  instruct  or  teach  me  any  better  by  "^^^l"" 
the  holy  Scripture,  and  I  will  be  ready  with  all  my  whole  heart  to  alter 
and  change  my  purpose."     Then  one  of  the  bishops  who  sat  by,  said 
unto  him,  that  he  w-ould  never  be  so  arrogant  or  proud,  that  he  would 
prefer  his  own  mind  or  opinion  before  the  judgment  of  the  whole 
council.     To  whom  John  Huss  answered :   "  Neither  do  1  otherwise  That  is 
mind  or  intend.     For  if  he  who  is  the  meanest  or  least  in  all  this  "^J^^l^ 
council  can  cou\'ict  me  of  error,  I  will,  with  an  humble  heart  and  J'j^^™^[^ 
mind,  perform  and  do  whatsoever  the  council  shall  require  of  me."  to  obey 
"  Mark,"  said  the  bishops,  "  how  obstinately  he  doth  persevere  in  "anlfcA" 
his  eiTors."     And  Avhen  they  had  thus  talked,  they  commanded  the  verity. 
keepers  to  carry  him  again  to  prison  ;  and  so  they  returned  again  unto 
the  emperor  with  their  commission. 


486  HISTORY    OF    THE    BOHEMIANS. 

jietiry        The  ncxt  day  after,  which  was  Saturday,  and  the  sixth  day  of  July, 

^-      there  was  a  general  session  holden  of  the  princes  and  lords,  both  of 

A.  D.    the  ecclesiastical  and  temporal  estates,  in  the  head  church  of  the  city 

1^16.    of  Constance,  the  emperor  Sigismund  being  president  in  his  imperial 

robes  and  habit ;  in  the  midst  whereof  there  was  made  a  certain  high 

place,  being  square  about  like  a  table,  and  hard  by  it  there  was  a 

desk  of  wood,  on  which  the  garments  and  vestments  pertaining  unto 

priesthood  were  laid  for  this  cause,  that  before  John  Huss  should  be 

delivered  over  unto  the  civil  power,  he  should  be  openly  deprived 

and  spoiled  of  his  priestly  ornaments.    When  John  Huss  was  brought 

thither,  he  fell  down  upon  his  knees  before  the  same  high  place,  and 

prayed  a  long  time.     In  the  mean  while  the  bishop  of  Londe  went 

up  into  the  pulpit,  and  made  this  sermon  following. 

The  Sermon  of  the  Bishop  of  Londe,  before  the  Sentence  was  given 
upon  John  Huss, 

In  the, name  of  the  Father,  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Trusting  by 
humble  invocation  upon  the  Divine  help  and  aid,  most  noble  prince,  and  most 
christian  emperor,  and  you  most  excellent  fathers,  and  reverend  lords,  bishops 
and  prelates,  also  most  excellent  doctors  and  masters,  most  famous  and  noble 
dukes,  and  high  counts,  honourable  nobles  and  barons,  and  all  other  men  worthy 
of  remembrance;  that  the  intent  and  purpose  of  my  mind  may  the  more  plainly 
and  evidently  appear  unto  this  most  sacred  congregation,  I  am  first  of  aD 
determined  to  treat  or  speak  of  that  which  is  read  in  the  epistle  on  the  next 
-pjjg  Sunday,  in  the  sixth  chapter  to  the  Romans ;  that  is  to  say,  '  Let  the  body  of 

theme,      sin  be  destroyed,'  etc. 

His  It  appeareth  by  the  authority  of  Aristotle,  in  his  book  entituled  *  De  Coelo  et 

theme  Mundo,'  how  wicked,  dangerous,  and  foolish  a  matter  it  seemeth  to  be,  not  to 
confirmed  ^yithstand  perverse  and  wicked  beginnings.  For  he  saith,  that  a  small  error  in 
stotle.  the  beginning,  is  very  great  in  the  end.  It  is  very  damnable  and  dangerous  to 
have  erred,  but  more  hard  to  be  corrected  or  amended.  Whereupon  that  worthy 
doctor,  St.  Jerome,  in  his  book  '  On  the  Exposition  of  the  Catholic  Faith,' 
teacheth  how  necessary  a  thing  it  is,  that  heretics  and  heresies  slioidd  be  sup- 
pressed, even  at  the  first  beginning  of  them,  saying  thus  :  '  The  rotten  and 
dead  flesh  is  to  be  cut  off  from  the  body,  lest  the  whole  body  do  perish  and 
putrefy.  For  a  scabbed  sheep  is  to  be  put  out  of  the  fold,  lest  that  the  whole 
flock  be  infected ;  and  a  little  fire  is  to  be  quenched,  lest  the  whole  house  be 
consumed  and  burned.'  Arius  was  first  a  spark  in  Alexandria,  who,  because  he 
was  not  at  the  first  quenched,  presumed,  and  went  about  with  his  wicked  and 
perverse  imaginations,  and  fantastical  inventions,  to  spot  and  defile  the  catholic 
faith,  which  is  founded  and  established  by  Christ,  defended  with  the  victorious 
triumphs  of  so  many  martyrs,  and  illuminated  and  set  forth  with  the  excellent 
doctrines  and  writings  of  so  many  men.  Such  therefore  must  be  resisted ; 
such  heretics,  of  necessity,  must  be  suppressed  and  condemned. 

Wherefore  I  have  truly  propounded,  as  touching  the  punishment  of  every 
such  obstinate  heretic,  that  the  body  of  sin  is  to  be  destroyed.  Whereupon  it  is 
to  be  considered,  according  to  the  holy  traditions  of  the  fathers,  that  some  sins 
are  adverse  and  contrary  to  others.  Others  are  annexed  or  conjoined  together; 
others  are,  as  it  were,  branches  and  members  of  others ,  and  some  are,  as  it 
were,  the  roots  and  heads  of  others.  Amongst  all  which,  those  are  to  be  counted 
the  most  detestable,  out  of  which  the  most  and  worst  have  their  original  and 
beginning.  Wherefore,  albeit  that  all  sins  and  offences  are  to  be  abhorred  of 
us,  yet  those  are  especially  to  be  eschewed,  which  are  the  head  and  root  of  the 
rest.  For  by  how  much  the  perverseness  of  them  is  of  more  force  and  power 
to  hurt,  with  so  much  the  more  speed  and  circumspection  ought  they  to  be 
rooted  out  and  extinguished,  with  apt  preservatives  and  remedies.  Forasmuch 
then  as  amongst  all  sins,  none  doth  more  appear  to  be  inveterate  than  the 
mischief  of  this  most  execrable  schism,  therefore  have  I  right  well  propounded. 


A    BUTClfKRLY    SERMON    AGAINST    JOHN     HUSS.  48T 

that  the  body  of  sin  should  be  destroyed.     For  by  the  long  contmuance  oi  this     Henry 
schism,  great  and  most  cruel  destruction  is  sprung  up  amongst  the  faithful,  and       ^■ 
hath  long  continued;  abominable  divisions  of  heresies  have  grown  up;  threaten-  " 

ings  are  increased  and  multiplied;  the  confusion  of  the  whole  clergy  is  grown     ,^,,." 
thereupon,  and  the  opprobries  and  slanders  of  the  christian  people  are  abun-  '_ 


dantly  sprung  up  and  increased.     And  truly  it  is  no  marvel,  forasmuch  as  that 
most  detestable  and  execrable  schism  is,  as  it  were,  a  body  and  heap  of  disso- 
lution of  the  true  faith  of  God ;  for  what  can  be  good  or  holy  in  that  place, 
where  such  a  pestiferous  schism  hath  reigned  so  long  a  time  ?     For,  as  St.  Ber- 
nard saith,   '  Like  as  in  the  imity  and  concord  of  the  faithful,  there  is  the 
habitation  and  dwelling  of  the  Lord ;  so  likewise  in  the  schism  and  dissipation 
of  the  Christians,  there  is  made  the  habitation  and  dwelling  of  the  devil.'     Is 
not  schsm   and  division  the  original  of  all  subversion,  the  den  of  heresies,  and 
the  nourisher  of  all  oftences?    for  the  knot  of  unity   and  peace  being  once 
troubled  and  broken,  there  is  free  passage  made  for  all  strife  and  debate.     Co- 
vetousness  is  uttered  in  others  for  lucre's  sake ;  lust  and  will  is  set  at  liberty,  and 
all  means  opened  unto  slaughter.    All  right  and  equity  is  banished,  the  ecclesi-  Theycan- 
astical  power  is  injured,  and  the  calamity  of  this  schism  bringeth  in  all  kind  of  ""' ^'^.''''* 
bondage;   swords  and  violence  do  rule,  the  laity  have  the  dominion,  concord  tJ^ruk in 
and  unity  are  banished,  and  all  prescript  rules  of  religion  uttei"ly  contemned  any  case, 
and  set  at  nought. 

Consider,  most  gentle  lords  !  dunng  this  most  pestiferous  schism,  how  many  All  the 
heresies  have   appeared   and   showed   themselves?    how  many  heretics  have  ren',fo,j 
escaped  unpunished  ?  how  many  churches  have  been  spoiled  and  pulled  down  ?  lietii  in 
how  many  cities  have  been  oppressed,  and  regions  brought  to  ruin  ?  what  con-  j^"!^^' . 
fiision  hath  there  happened  in  the  clergy?  what  and  how  great  destruction  hath  a'nd  Hve-' 
been  amongst  the  christian  people  ?     I  pray  you  mark  how  the  church  of  God,  ries. 
the  spouse  of  Christ,  and  the  mother  of  all  faithful,  is  contemned  and  despised ; 
for  who  doth  reverence  the  keys  of  the  church  ?  who  feareth  the  censures  or 
laws,  or  who  is  it  that  doth  defend  the  liberties  thereof?     But  rather  who  is  it  Note  here 
that  doth  not  offend  the  same,  or  who  doth  not  invade  it,  or  else  what  is  he  that  divinity, 
dare  not  violently  lay  hands  upon  the  patrimony  or  heritage  of  .Jesus  Christ?  how  the 
the  goods  of  the  clergy  and  of  the  poor,  and  the  relief  of  pilgrims  and  strangers,  Christ" 
gotten  together  by  the  blood  of  our  Saviour  and  of  many  martyrs,  are  spoiled  serveth 
and  taken  away :  behold,  the  abomination  of  desolation  brought  upon  the  church  '°  ?"■■■ 
of  God,  the  destruction  of  the  faith,  and  the  confusion  of  the  christian  people,  their  pa- 
to  the  ruin  of  the  Lord's  flock  or  fold,  and  all  the  whole  company  of  our  most  trimony. 
holy  Saviour  and  Redeemer. 

This  loss  is  more  great  and  grievous  than  any  wliich  could  happen  unto  the 
martyrs  of  Christ,  and  this  persecution  much  more  cruel  than  the  persecution 
of  any  tyrants ;  for  they  did  but  only  punish  the  bodies,  but  in  the  schism  and 
division  the  souls  are  tormented.  There,  the  blood  of  men  v/as  only  shed  ;  but, 
in  this  case,  the  true  faith  is  subverted  and  overthrown.  That  persecution  was 
salvation  unto  many  ;  but  this  schism  is  destruction  unto  all  men.  When  the 
tyrants  raged,  then  the  faith  did  increase  ;  but  by  this  division  it  is  utterly 
decayed.  During  their  cruelty  and  madness,  the  primitive  church  increased ; 
but  through  this  schism  it  is  confounded  and  overthrown.  Tyrants  did  igno- 
rantly  oifend ;  but  in  this  schism  many  do  wittingly  and  willingly,  even  of  obsti- 
nacy, offend.  There  came  in  heretics,  users  of  simony,  and  hypocrites,  to  the 
great  detriment  and  deceit  of  the  church;  under  those  tyrants,  the  merits  of  the 
just  were  increased.  But  during  this  schism,  mischief  and  wickedness  are 
augmented :  for  in  this  most  cursed  and  execrable  division,  truth  is  made  an 
enemy  to  all  Christians,  faith  is  not  regarded,  love  and  charity  hated,  hope  is 
lost,  justice  overthrown,  no  kind  of  courage  or  valiantness,  but  only  imto  mis- 
chief; modesty  and  temperance  cloaked,  wisdom  turned  into  deceit,  humility 
feigned,  equity  and  truth  falsified,  patience  utterly  fled,  conscience  small,  all 
wickedness  intended,  devotion  comited  folly,  gentleness  abject  and  cast  away, 
religion  despised,  obedience  not  regarded,  and  all  manner  of  life  reproachful 
and  abominable. 

With  how  great  and  grievous  sorrows  is  the  church  of  God  replenished  and 
filled,  whilst  that  tyrants  do  oppress  it,  heretics  invade  it,  users  of  simony  do 
spoil  and  rob  it,  and  schismatics  go  about  utterly  to  subvert  it  ?  O  most  mise- 
rable and  wretched  christian  people  !  whom  now,  by  the  space  of  forty  years. 


488  HISTORY    OF    THE    BOHEMIANS, 

nenry    with  sucli  iiiduvale  and  continual  schism,  they  have  tormented,  and  ahnost 
^'-        brouf^ht  to  niin  !    O  the  little  bark  and  ship  of  Christ!  which  hath  so  long  time 
wandered  and  strayed  now  in  the  midst  of  the  whirlpools,  and  by  and  by  stick- 
^        ■     eth  fast  in  the  I'ocks,  tossed  to  and  fro  with  most  grievous  and  tempestuous 
^"'    storms  !     O  miserable  and  wretched  boat  of  Peter !   if  the  most  holy  Father 
Tliis         would  suffer  thee  to  sink  or  drown,  into  what  dangers  and  perils  have  the  wicked 
schism      pirates  brought  thee !  amongst  what  rocks  have  they  placed  thee !     O  most 
ed  loi-ty"  -godly  and  loving  Christians  !  what  faithful  devout  man  is  there,  who  beholding 
years.       and  seeing  the  great  ruin  and  decay  of  the  church,  would  not  be  provoked  unto 
tears  ?     AVhat  good  conscience  is  there  that  can  refrain  weeping,  because  that 
contention  and  strife  are  poured  upon  the  ecclesiastical  rulers,  who  have  made  us 
to  eiT  in  the  way,  because  they  have  not  fomid,  or  rather  would  not  find,  the 
way  of  unity  and  concord  1  whereupon  so  many  heresies  and  so  great  confusion 
are  sprung  up,  and  grown  in  the  flock  of  Peter,  and  the  fold  of  the  Lord  ! 
He  stir-         Many  princes,  kings  and  prelates,   have  greatly  laboured  and  travailed  for 
mh  up     (-]^g  rooting  out  hereof;  but  yet  could  they  never  bring  to  pass,  or  finish  that 
ror  Sigis-  most  wholesome  and  necessary  work.     Wherefore,  most  christian  king !    this 
mund.      most  glorious  and  triumphant  victory  hath  tarried  only  for  thee,  the  crown  and 
glory  thei'eof  shall  be  thine  for  ever ;  and  this  most  happy  victory  shall  be  con- 
tinually celebrated  to  thy  great  honour  and  praise,  that  thou  hast  restored  again 
the  church  which  was  so  spoiled,  thou  hast  removed  and  put  away  all  invete- 
rate  and  overgrown  schisms  and  divisions,  thou  hast  trodden  down  users  of 
simony,  and  rooted  out  all  heretics.     Dost  thou  not  behold  and  see  how  great, 
perpetual,  and  famous  renown  and  glory  it  will  be  unto  thee  ?  for  what  can  be 
more  just,  what  more  holy,  what  better,  what  more  to  be  desired;  or,  finall)^ 
what  can  be  more  acce])table,  than  to  root  out  this  wicked  and  abominable 
schism,  to  restore  the  church  again  unto  her  ancient  liberty,  to  extinguish  and 
put  away  all  simony,  and  to  condemn  and  destroy  all  errors  and  heresies  from 
amongst  the  flock  of  the  faithful  ?     Nothing  truly  can  be  better,  nothing  more 
holy,  nothing  more  profitable  for  the  whole  world ;  and  finally,  nothing  more 
acceptable  unto  God.      For  the  performance  of  which  most  holy  and  godly 
work,  thou  wast  elected  and  chosen  of  God ;  thou  wast  first  deputed  and  chosen 
in  heaven,  before  thou  wast  elected  and  chosen  upon  earth.     Thou  wast  first 
appointed   by  the  celestial  and  heavenly  prince,    before    the  electors  of  the 
empire  did  elect  or  choose  thee ;  and  especially,  that  by  the  imperial  force  and 
power,  thou  shouldest  condemn  and  destroy  those  errors  and  heresies  which  we 
have  presently  in  hand  to  be  condemned  and  subverted.     To  the  performance 
of  this  most  holy  work,  God  hath  given  unto  thee  the  knowledge  and  under- 
standing of  his  divine  truth  and  verity,  power  of  princely  majesty,  and  the  just 
judgment  of  equity  and  righteousness,  as  the  Highest  himself  doth  say  :  '  I  have 
Loripi-      given  thee  imderstanding  and  wisdom,  to  speak  and  utter  my  words,  and  have 
dem  rec-    ggt  thee  to  rule  over  nations  and  kingdoms,  that  thou  shouldest  help  the  people, 
deat^^  '"    pluck  down  and  destroy  iniquity.    And  by  exercising  of  justice  thou  shouldest, 
tBthiopeni  I  say,  destroy  all  errors  and  heresies,   and  specially  this  obstinate  heretic  here 
albus.        present,  through  whose  wickedness  and  mischief,  many  places  of  the  world  are 
vifVat-    ^"f^'^ts'i  \\'\i\\  most  pestilent  and  heretical  poison,  and,  by  his  means  and  occa- 
tery  of      sion,  almost  utterly  subverted  and  destroyed.  This  most  holy  and  godly  labour, 
tluse  pa-  o  most  noble  prince  !  was  reserved  only  for  thee  ;  upon  thee  it  doth  only  lie, 
when        ^ii^to  whom  the  whole  rule  and  ministration  of  justice  is  given.  Wherefore  thou 
they  hast  established  thy  praise  and  renown,  even  by  the  mouths  of  infants  and 

would  sucking  babes  ;  for  thy  praises  shall  be  celebrate  for  evermore,  that  thou  hast 
thing  of  destroyed  and  overthrown  such  and  so  great  enemies  of  the  faith.  The  which 
the  em-  that  thou  mayest  prosperously  and  happily  perform  and  bring  to  pass,  our  Lord 
ih^r  pur-  Jesus  vouchsafe  to  grant  thee  his  grace  and  help,  who  is  blessed  for  ever  and 
pose.         ever.     Amen ! 

Tiicproc-  When  this  sermon  was  thus  ended,  the  procurer  of  the  council 
counco'^  .rising  up,  named  Henricus  de  Piro,  required  that  the  process  of  the 
caiieth      cause  against  .Tolni  Huss  mioht  be  continued,  and  that  they  might 

lor  ine  o  o  ^  •        i  •   i  i 

sentence,  proceed  imto  the  definitive  sentence.     Then  a  certain  bishop,  who 
was  appointed  one  of  the  judges,  declared  the  process  of  the  cause, 


THE    SENTENCE    AGAINST    JOHN    HUSS.  489 

which  was  pleaded  long  since  in  the  court  of  Rome,  and  elsewhere,    Henry 

between  John  Huss  and  the  prelates  of  Prague.  J 

At  last  he  repeated  those  articles  which  Ave  have  before  remem-    A.  D. 
bered  ;  amongst  which  he  rehearsed  also  one  article,  That  John  Huss    ^^^^- 
should  teach  the  two  natures  of  the  Godhead  and  manhood  to  be 
one  Clu'ist.     John  Huss  went  about  briefly,  with  a  word  or  two,  to 
answer  unto  every  one  of  them  ;  but  as  often  as  he  was  about  to  speak, 
the  cardinal  of  Cambrav  commanded  him  to  hold  his  peace,  saying,  The  car- 
"  Hereafter  you  shall  answer  all   together,  if  you  will."     Then  saM  camlray 
John  Huss :   "  How  can  I  at  once  answer  all  these  things  which  are  ''°'"- 
alleged  against  me,  when  I  cannot  remember  them  all  T''     Then  said  huss  to 
the  cardinal  of  Florence  :  "  We  have  heard  thee  sufRciently.'"'     But  I'encef' 
Avhen  John  Huss,  for  all  that,  Avould  not  hold  his  peace,  they  sent 
the  officers  wdio  should  force  him  thereunto.     Then  began  he  to  en-  Huss 
treat,  pray,  and  beseech  them,  that  they  would  hear  him,  that  such  be"heam 
as  were  present  mio-ht  not  credit  or  believe  those  thintrs  to  be  true  '"  "^^., 

1  o  o  council. 

which  were  reported  of  him.     But  when  all  this  would  nothing  pre-  commit- 
vail,  he,  kneelincr  down  upon  his  knees,  committed  the  M'hole  matter  '^"^  ^f 

'        '  o  A  .  '  cause  to 

unto  God,  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  for  at  their  hands  he  believed  the  Lord, 
easily  to  obtain  that  which  he  desired. 

When  the  articles  abovesaid  were  ended,  last  of  all  there  was 
added  a  notable  blasphemy,  which  they  all  imputed  to  John  Huss ; 
that  is,  That  he  said  there  should  be  a  fourth  person  in  divinity,  and  Mark  the 
that  a  certain  doctor  did  hear  him  speak  of  the  same.     When  John  flicednTJs 
Huss  desired  that  the  doctor  might  be  named,  the  bishop  that  alleged  °l  f^^'j^^' 
the  article,  said.  That  it  was  not  needful  to  name  hmi.     Then  said  what  "they 
John  Huss :   "  O  miserable  and  wretched  man  that  I  am,  which  am 
forced  and  compelled  to  bear  such  a  blasphemy  and  slander !" 

Afterwards  the  twenty-first  article  was  repeated,  how  he  appealed  The 
unto  Christ ;  and  that,  by  name,  was  called  heretical.     Whereunto  doth  caii 
John  Huss  answered  :  "  O  Lord  Jesu  Christ !  whose  word  is  openly  "aft^rp- 
condemned  here  in  this  council,  unto  thee  again  I  do  appeal,  who  ^^^° 
when  thou  wast  evil  entreated  of  thine  enemies,  didst  appeal  imto 
God  thy  Father,  committing  thy  cause  unto  a  most  just  Judge ;  that 
by  thy  example,  we  also,  being  oppressed  with  manifest  wTongs  and 
injuries,  should  flee  unto  thee."'  Last  of  all,  the  article  was  rehearsed.  Contempt 
as  touching  the  contempt  of  the  excommunication  by  John  Huss.  pope't  ex- 
Whereunto  he  answered  as  before,  that  he  was  excused  by  his  advo-  nj^tTn 
cates  in  the  court  of  Rome,  wherefore  he  did  not  appear  when  he  lajd^to 
was  cited ;  and  also  that  it  may  be  proved  by  the  acts,  that  the  ex-  huss. 
communication  was  not  ratified  ;  and  finally,  to  the  intent  he  might 
clear  himself  of  obstinacy,  he  was  for  that  cause  come  unto  Constance, 
under  the    emperor's  safe-conduct.       When  he  had  spoken  these 
words,  one  of  them,  who  was  appointed  judge,  read  the  definitive 
sentence  against  him,  which  followeth  ^hus  word  for  word. 

The  Sentence  or  Judgment  of  the  Council  of  Constance  against 
John  Huss. 

The  most  holy  and  sacred  general  council  of  Constance,  being  congregated 
and  gathered  together,  representing  the  catholic  church,  for  a  perpetual  me- 
mory of  the  thing,  as  the  Verity  and  1  nith  did  witness,  '  An  evil  tree  bringeth 


490  HISTORY    OF    THE    BOHEMIANS. 

Henry    forth  evil  fruit;'  Iiereupon  it  cometli,  that  the  man  of  most  damnable  memory 
^-       John  Wickliftj   through  his  pestiferous  doctrine,  not  through  Jesus  Christ  by 

'T~Tr     the  gospel,  as  the  holy  fathers  in  times  past  have  begotten  faithful  children  ; 
^A-tr     ^^i*-;  contrary  luito  the  wholesome  faith  of  Jesus  Christ,  as  a  most  venomous 

. L  root,   liath  begotten   many  pestilent  and  wicked  children,  whom  he  hath  left 

behind  him,  successors  and  followers  of  his  perverse  and  wicked  doctrine : 
against  whom  this  sacred  synod  of  Constance  is  forced  to  rise  up,  as  against 
bastards  and  unlawful  children,  and,  with  diligent  care,  with  the  sharp  knife 
of  the  ecclesiastical  authority,  to  cut  up  their  errors  out  of  the  Lord's  field,  as 
most  hurtful  brambles  and  briers,  lest  they  should  grow  to  the  hurt  and  detri- 
ment of  others. 

Forasmuch  then  as  in  the  holy  general  council,  lately  celebrated  and  holden 
at  Rome,  it  was  decreed.  That  the  doctrine  of  John  WicklifF,  of  most  damnable 
memory,  should  be  condemned,  and  that  his  books  which  contained  the  same 
docti-ine,  shoidd  be  burned  as  heretical,  and  this  decree  was  approved  and  con- 
firmed by  the  sacred  authority  of  the  whole  council :  nevertheless,  one  John 
Huss,  here  personally  present  in  this  sacred  council,  not  the  disciple  of  Christ, 
but  of  John  Wickliff,  an  arch-heretic  (after,  and  contrary  to  or  against,  the 
condemnation  and  decree),  hath  taught,  preached,  and  affirmed  the  articles  of 
Wickliff,  which  were  condemned  by  the  church  of  God,  and  in  times  past  by 
certain  most  reverend  fathers  in  Christ,  lords,  archbishops,  and  bishops,  of 
divers  kingdoms  and  realms,  masters  of  divinity  of  divers  universities ;  espe- 
cially resisting  in  his  open  sermons,  and  also  with  his  adherents  <ind  accom- 
plices in  the  schools,  the  condemnation  of  the  said  articles  of  WicklifF,  often- 
times pul)lished  in  the  said  university  of  Prague,  and  hath  declared  him,  the 
said  WicklifF,  for  the  favour  and  commendation  of  his  doctrine,  before  the  whole 
multitude  of  the  clergy  and  people,  to  be  a  catholic  man,  and  a  true  evangelical 
doctor.  He  hath  also  published  and  affirmed  certain  and  many  of  liis  articles, 
worthily  condemned,  to  be  catholic,  which  are  notoriously  contained  in  the 
books  of  the  said  John  Huss. 

Wherefore,  after  diligent  deliberation  and  full  information  first  had  upon  the 
premises  by  the  reverend  fathers  and  lords  in  Christ  of  the  holy  church  of  Rome, 
cardinals,  patriarchs,  archbishops,  bishops,  and  other  prelates,  doctors  of  divinity 
and  of  both  laws,  in  great  number  assembled  and  gathered  together,^  this  most 
sacred  and  holy  council  of  Constance,  declareth  and  determineth  the  articles 
abovesaid  (which  after  due  conference  had,  are  found  in  his  books  written  with 
his  own  hand,  which  also  the  said  John  Huss  in  open  audience,  before  this  holy 
council,  hath  confessed  to  be  in  his  books)  not  to  be  catholic,  neither  worthy  to 
be  taught;  but  that  many  of  them  are  erroneous,  some  of  them  wicked,  others 
offensive  to  godly  ears,  many  of  them  temerarious  and  seditious,  and  the  greater 
part  of  them  notoriously  heretical,  and  even  now,  of  late,  by  the  holy  fathei's  and 
general  councils  repi'oved  and  condemned.  And  forasmuch  as  the  said  articles 
are  expressly  contained  in  the  books  of  the  said  John  Huss,  therefoi'e  this  said 
sacred  2  council  doth  condemn  and  reprove  all  those  books  which  he  wrote,  in 
what  form  or  phrase  soever  they  be,  or  whether  they  be  translated  by  others ; 
and  doth  detei'mine  and  decree,  that  they  all  shall  be  solemnly  and  openly 
burned  in  the  presence  of  the  clergy  and  people  of  tlie  city  of  Constance,  and 
elsewhere  ;  adding  moreover  for  the  premises.  That  all  his  doctrine  is  worthy  to 
be  despised  and  eschewed  of  all  faithful  Christians.  And,  to  the  intent  this  most 
pernicious  and  wicked  doctrine  may  be  utterly  excluded  and  shut  out  of  the 
church,  this  sacred  synod  doth  straitly  command,  that  diligent  inquisition  be 
made  by  the  ordinaries  of  the  places,  by  the  ecclesiastical  censure,  for  such 
treatises  and  works ;  and  that  such  as  are  found,  be  consumed  and  burned  with 
fire.  And  if  there  be  any  found,  who  shall  contemn  or  despise  this  sentence  or 
decree,  this  sacred  synod  ordaineth  and  decreeth,  that  the  ordinaries  of  the 
places,  and  the  inquisitors  of  heresies,  shall  proceed  against  eveiy  such  person 
as  suspected  of  heresy. 

AVherefore,  after  due  inquisition  made  against  the  said  John  Huss,  and  full 
information  had  by  the  commissaries  and  doctors  of  both  laws,  and  also  by  the 
sayings  of  the  witnesses  who  were  worthy  of  credit,  and  many  other  things 

(1)  They  shall  brin;;  you  before  their  councils,  they  shall  persecute  you,  and  cast  you  in  prison, 
and  bring  you  before  kings  and  presidents  for  my  name,  etc.    Liilie  xii. 

(2)  The  said  concilium  malignantium. 


THE    CRUEL    HANDLING    AND    DEGRADING    OF    JOHN    HUSS.  491 

openly  read  before  the  said  John  Huss,  and  before  the  fathers  and  prelates  of    Henry 
this  sacred  council  (by  which  allegations  of  the  witnesses,  it  appearetli,  that  the        ''• 
said  John  Huss  hath  taught  many  evil  and  offensive,  seditious  and  perilous  ~~A~n~ 
heresies,  and  hath  preached  the  same  by  a  long  time),  this  most  sacred  and  holy     14,^.* 

synod,  lawfully  congregated  and  gathered  together  in  the  Holy  Ghost,i  the  name L 

of  Christ  being  invocated  and  called  upon,  by  this  its  sentence  which  is  here  set 
forth  in  writing,  determineth,  pronounceth,  declareth,  and  decreeth  that  John 
Huss  was  and  is  a  true  and  manifest  heretic,  and  that  he  hatli  preached  openly 
erroi's  and  heresies  lately  condemned  by  the  church  of  God,  and  many  seditious, 
temerarious  and  offensive  things;  to  no  small  offence  of  the  Divine  Majesty, 
and  of  the  universal  church,  and  detriment  of  the  catholic  faith  and  church ; 
neglecting  and  despising  the  keys  of  the  church,  and  ecclesiastical  censures. 
In  the  which  his  error,  he  hath  continued  with  a  mind  altogether  indurate  and  The  ap- 
hardened  by  the  space  of  many  years,  much  offending  the  faithful  Christians  by  P^^l '"  . 
his  obstinacy  and  stubbornness,  when  he  made  his  appeal  unto  the  Lord  Jesus  deioga-  * 
Christ,  as  the  Most  High  Judge,  omitting  and  leaving  all  ecclesiastical  means,  'ory  to 
In  the  which  his  appeal  he  allegeth  many  false,  injurious,  and  offensive  matters,  h'^^jne^s  i** 
in  contempt  of  the  apostolic  see,  and  of  the  ecclesiastical  censures  and  keys. 

Whereupon,  both  for  the  premises  and  many  other  things,  the  said  synod  Verity 
pronounceth  John  Huss  to  be  a  hei-etic,  and  judgeth  him,  by  these  presents,  '^on- 
to be  condemned  and  judged  as  a  heretic ;  and  i-eproveth  the  said  appeal  as  foT"'^ 
injimous,  offensive,  and  done  in  derision  unto  the  ecclesiastical  jurisdiction  ;  heresy. 
and  judgeth  the  said  Huss  not  only  to  have  seduced  the  christian  people  by  his 
writings  and  preachings,  and  especially  in  the  kingdom  of  Bohemia,  neither  to 
have  been  a  true  preacher  of  the  gospel  of  Christ  unto  the  said  people,  according 
to  the  exposition  of  the  holy  doctors,  but  also  to  have  been  a  seducer  of  them, 
and  also  an  obstinate  and  stifihecked  person,  yea  and  such  a  one  as  doth  not 
desire  to  return  again  to  the  lap  of  our  holy  mother  the  church,  neither  to  abjure 
the  errors  and  heresies  which  he  hath  openly  preached  and  defended.  Wherefore 
this  most  sacred  council  decreeth  and  declareth,  that  the  said  John  Huss  shall 
be  famously^  deposed  and  degi'aded  from  his  priestly  orders  and  dignity,  &c. 

While  these  things  were  thus  read,  John  Huss,  albeit  he  was  for-  John 
bidden  to  speak,  notwithstanding  did  often  interrupt  them,  and  espe-  dMreth 
cially  when  he  was  reproved  of  obstinacy,  he  said  with  a  loud  voice :  |||.™^t'* 
"  I  was  never  obstinate,  but,  as  always  heretofore,  even  so  now  again  I  stinacy. 
desire  to  be  taught  by  the  holy  Scriptures  ;  and  I  do  profess  myself  to 
be  so  desirous  of  the  truth,  that  if  I  might  by  one  only  word  subvert 
the  errors  of  all  heretics,  I  would  not  refuse  to  enter  into  what  peril  or  They  con- 
danger  soever  it  were."     When  his  books  were  condemned,  he  said,  Jj^"^"  '^^ 
"  Wherefore  have  you  condemned  those  books,  when  you  have  not  ^vrittenin 
proved  by  any  one  article,  that  they  are  contrary  to  the  Scriptures,  or  hemian- 
articles  of  faith  ?     And  moreover  what  injury  is  this  that  you  do  to  ^°lf^' 
me,  that  you  have  condemned  these  books  written  in  the  Bohemian  ^'^'^y 
tongue,  which  you  never  saw,  neither  yet  read .''"     And  oftentimes  read, 
looking  up  unto  heaven,  he  prayed. 

When  the  sentence  and  judgment  were  ended,  kneeling  down  upon  Huss 
his  knees,  he  said  :  "  Lord  Jesus  Christ !  forgive  mine  enemies,  by  FoTmI^ 
whom  thou  knowest  that  I  am  falsely  accused,  and  that  they  have  used  enemies, 
false  witness  and  slanders  against  me ;  forgive  them,  I  say,  for  thy 
great  mercy's  sake.*"     This  his  prayer  and  oration,  the  greater  part, 
and  especially  the  chief  of  the  priests,  did  deride  and  mock,  ^^^^_ 

At  last  the  seven  bishops  who  were  chosen  out  to  degrade  him  of  manded 
his  priesthood,  commanded  him  to  put  on  the  garments  pertaining  on^the 
unto  priesthood ;  which  thing  when  he  had  done  until  he  came  to  the  p™/''^ 
putting  on  of  the  albe,  he  called  to  his  remembrance  the  white  vesture^  ments. 

(1)  Many  shall  come  in  my  name,  and  shall  deceive  many.     Mark  xiii. 

(2)  "Famously,"  publicly.— Ed.  (3)  "  Scarlet  robe."  Matt,  xxviii.  28.— Ed. 


492  HISTORY    OF    THE    BOHEMIANS. 

ifennj  whicli  Hcrod  put  on  Jesus  Christ  to  mock  him  withal.  So,  likewise, 
'      in  all  other  things  he  did  comfort  himself  by  the  example  of  Christ. 

A.  D.  When  he  had  now  put  on  all  his  priestly  vestures,  the  bishops  ex- 
horted him  that  he  should  yet  alter  and  change  his  mind  and  purpose, 
and  provide  for  his  honour  and  safeguard.  Then  he  (according  as 
the  manner  of  the  ceremony  is),  going  up  to  the  top  of  the  scaffold, 
being  full  of  tears,  spake  unto  the  peo])le  in  this  sort. 


1416 


His  ora-  '  These  lords  and  bishops  do  exhort  and  counsel  me,  that  I  should  here  con- 
the"  ""*°  ^^^^  before  you  all  that  I  have  erred ;  which  thing  to  do,  if  it  were  such  as 
people,  might  be  done  with  the  infamy  and  reproach  of  man  only,  tlicy  might  perad- 
venture  easily  persuade  me  thereunto ;  but  now  truly  I  am  in  the  sight  of  the 
Lord  my  God,  without  whose  great  ignominy  and  grudge  of  mine  own  con- 
science, 1  can  by  no  means  do  that  which  they  require  of  me.  For  I  do  well 
know,  that  I  never  taught  any  of  those  things  which  they  have  falsely  alleged 
against  me ;  but  I  have  always  preached,  taught,  written,  and  thought  contrary 
thereunto.  With  what  countenance  then  should  I  behold  the  heavens  ?  With 
what  face  should  I  look  upon  them  whom  I  have  taught,  whereof  there  is  a  great 
number,  if,  through  me,  it  should  come  to  pass  that  those  things,  which  they  have 
hitherto  known  to  be  most  certain  and  sure,  should  now  be  made  uncertain? 
Shoidd  I,  by  this  my  examjile,  astonish  or  trouble  so  many  souls,  so  many  con 
sciences,  indued  with  the  most  firm  and  certain  knowledge  of  the  Scriptures  and 
gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ  and  his  most  pure  doctrine,  armed  against  all 
the  assaults  of  Satan  ?  I  will  never  do  it,  neither  commit  any  such  kind  of 
offence,  that  I  should  seem  more  to  esteem  this  vile  carcase  appointed  unto 
death,  than  their  health  and  salvation.' 

At  this  most  godly  word  he  was  forced  again  to  hear,  by  the  consent 
of  the  bishops,  that  he  did  obstinately  and  maliciously  persevere  in  his 
pernicious  and  wicked  errors. 

Then  he  was  commanded  to  come  down  to  the  execution  of  his 
judgment,  and  in  his  coming  down,  one  of  the  seven  bishops  before 
rehearsed,  first  took  away  the  chalice  from  him  which  he  held  in  his 
hand,  saying ;  "  O  cursed  Judas  !  why  hast  thou  forsaken  the  council 
and  ways  of  peace,  and  hast  counselled  with  the  Jews  ?     We  take 
away  from  thee  this  chalice  of  thy  salvation."  But  John  Huss  received 
this  curse  in  this  manner :   "  But  I  trust  unto  God,  the  Father  omni- 
potent, and  my  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  for  whose  sake  I  do  suffer  these 
things,  that  he  will  not  take  away  the  chalice  of  his  redemption,  but 
have  a  steadfast  and  firm  hope  that  this  day  I  shall  drink  thereof  in 
Thede-    his  kingdom."     Then  followed  the  other  bishops  in  order,  who  every 
of  John    one  of  them  took  away  the  vestments  from  him  which  they  had  put 
Huss.      Qj^^  gg^^,-|^  Qj^g  ^^£  them  giving  him  their  curse.   Whereunto  John  Huss 
answered :  That  he  did  willingly  embrace  and  hear  those  blasphemies 
for  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     At  last  they  came  to  the 
rasing  of  his  shaven  crown  ;  but  before  the  bishops  would  go  in  hand 
with  it,  there  was  a  great  contention  between  them,  with  what  instru- 
ment it  should  be  done  ;  with  a  razor,  or  with  a  pair  of  shears. 
His  In  the  mean  season,  John  Huss,  turning  himself  toward  the  empe- 

unto  Ae  I'OJ'i  said:  "  I  marvel  that  forasmuch  as  they  be  all  of  like  cruel  mind 
emperor,  and  stomach,  yet  they  cannot  agree  upon  their  kind  of  cruelty."'"' 
The  Notwithstanding,  at  last  they  agreed  to  cut  off  the  skin  of  the  crown 
Huss"cut  of  his  head  with  a  pair  of  shears.  And  when  they  had  done  that, 
they  added  these  Avords  :  "  Now  hath  the  church  taken  away  all  her 
ornaments  and  privileges  from  him.     Now  there  resteth  nothing  else, 


with 
shears 


THE    PROTEST    OF    JOHN    HUSS    TO    THE    PEOPLE.  493 

but  that  he  be  delivered  over  unto  the  secular  power."     But  before    Hennj 
they  did  that,  there  yet  remained  another  knack  of  reproach ;  for 


they  caused  to  be  made  a  certain   crown  of  paper,  almost  a  cubit    A.  D. 
deep,  on  which  were  painted  three  devils  of  wonderfully  ugly  shape,    ^^^^- 
and  this  title  set  over  their  heads,  '  Heresiarcha.''     Which  when  he 
saw,  he  said  :  "  My  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  for  my  sake,  did  wear  a  crown 
of  thorns ;   why  should  not  I  then,  for  his  sake,  again  wear  this  light 
crown,  be  it  ever  so  ignominious  ?     Truly  I   will  do  it,  and  that  The  mar- 
willingly."    When  it  was  set  upon  his  head,  the  bishop  said :  "  Now  cons'tancy 
we  commit  thy  soul  unto  the   devil."     "  But   I,"  said  John  Huss,  =""^  <^?,"- 
lifting  his  eyes  up  towards  the  heavens,  "  do  commit  my  spirit  into  blessed 
thy  hands,  O  Lord  Jesus  Christ !  unto  thee  I  commend  my  spirit  xhe'^'^' 
which  thou  hast  redeemed."     These  contumelious  opprobries  thus  p^F^.^ 

.  .  il  with  the 

ended,  the  bishops,  turnmg  themselves  towards  the  emperor,  said :  inscrip- 
"  This  most  sacred  synod  of  Constance  leaveth  now  John  Huss,  who  sTupon 
hath  no  more  any  office,  or  to  do  in  the  church  of  God,  unto  the  of  huss^ 
civil  judgment  and  power."     Then  the  emperor  commanded  Louis, 
duke  of  Bavaria,  who  stood  before  him  in  his  robes,  holding  the 
golden  apple  with  the  cross  in  his  hand,  that  he  should  receive  John 
Huss  of  the  bishops,  and  deliver  him  unto  them  who  should  do  the 
execution ;  by  whom  as  he  was  led  to  the  place  of  execution,  before  The  pro- 
the  church  doors  he  saw  his  books  burning,  whereat  he  smiled  and  of  John 
laughed.    And  all  men  that  passed  by  he  exhorted,  not  to  think  that  h^e"was'"' 
he  should  die  for  any  en-or  or  heresy,  but  only  for  the  hatred  and  ill  led  to 
will  of  his  adversaries,  who  had  charged  him  with  most  false  and  un-  ofexecu- 
just  crimes.    All  the  whole  city  in  a  manner  being  in  armour,  followed  ^'''"' 
him. 

The  place  appointed  for  the  execution  was  before  the  gate  Gottlie- 
ben,  between  the  gardens  and  gates  of  the  suburbs.      When  John 
Huss  was  come  thither,  kneeling  down  upon  his  knees,  and  lifting  his 
eyes   up   vmto  heaven,  he   prayed,  and   said  certain    Psalms,    and 
especially  the  thirty-first  and  fiftieth  Psalms.     And  they  who  stood  The 
hard  by,  heard  him  oftentimes  in  his  prayer,  with  a  merry  and  cheer-  ot"jo^hn 
ful  countenance,  repeat  this   verse  :   "  Into  thy  hands,  O  Lord  !  I  ^^^^  ^^''" 
commend  my  spirit,"  &c.  ;  which  thing  when  the  lay-people  beheld  tiie 
who  stood  next  unto  him,  they  said  :   "  What  he  hath  done  before,  ^^°^  ^' 
we  know  not ;  but  now  we  see  and  hear  that  he  doth  speak  and  pray 
very  devoutly  and  godly."    Others  wished  that  he  had  a  confessor. 
There  was  a  certain  priest  by,  sitting  on  horseback,  in  a  gTcen  gown, 
drawn  about  with  red  silk,  who  said :  "  He  ought  not  to  be  heard, 
because  he   is  a  heretic :"    yet,   notwithstanding,  while  he  was  in 
prison,  he  was  both  confessed,  and  also  absolved  by  a  certain  doctor, 
a  monk,  as  Huss  himself  doth  witness  in  a  certain  epistle  which  he 
wrote  unto  his  friends  out  of  prison.^  Thus  Christ  reigneth  unknoAvn 
unto  the  world,  even  in   the  midst  of  his  enemies.     In  the  mean  At  the 
time  while  John  Huss  prayed,  as  he  bowed  his  neck  backwards  to  ^ohvT"^  ° 
look  upward  unto  heaven,  the  crown  of  paper  fell  off  from  his  head  "^^"g^/^® 
upon  the  ground.     Then  one  of  the  soldiers,  taking  it  up  again,  with  the 
said :  "  Let  us  put  it  again  upon  his  head,  that  he  may  be  burned  dow'iu  ^ 
with  his  masters  the  devils,  whom  he  hath  served." 

When,  by  the  commandment  of  the  tormentors,  he  was  risen  up 

(1)  Es  Epist.  Joan.  Huss.  31. 


494  HISTOKV    OF    THE    BOHEMIANS. 

Heyiry    from  tlic  placc  of  his  prayer,  with  a  loud  voice  he  said  :  "  Lord 
Jesu  Christ !  assist  and  help  me,  that  with  a  constant  and  patient 


A.D.    mind,  by  thy  most  gracious  help,  I   may  bear  and  suffer  this  cruel 
I'^l^'    and  iornominious  death,  wherunto  I  am  condemned  for  the  preaching 
of  thy  most  holy  gospel  and  word."     Then,  as  before,  he  declared 
the  cause  of  his  death  unto  the  people.     In  the  mean  season  the 
hangman    stripped   him   of   his   garments,    and   turning  his  hands 
behind  his  back,  tied  him  fast  unto  the  stake  with  ropes  that  were 
John       made  wet.     And  whereas,  by  chance,  he  was  turned  towards  the  east, 
fastened  Certain  cried  out  that  he  should  not  look  towards  the  east,  for  he 
stakff      ^^^^  ^  heretic  :  so  he  was  turned  towards  the  west.     Then  was  his 
John       neck  tied  with  a  chain  unto  the  stake,  which  chain  when  he  beheld, 
turned     suiiliug   lie    Said,   that  he  would  willingly  receive  the  same  chain 
the  west,  f"^^'  Jf'sus   Christ's  sake,  who,  he  knew,  was  bound  with  a  far  worse 
chain.     Under  his  feet  they  set  two  faggots,  admixing  straw  withal, 
and  so  likewise,  from  the  feet  up  to  the  chin,  he  was  enclosed  in 
Pardon     rouud  about  with  wood.     But  before  the  wood  was  set  on  lire,  Louis, 
again'to    dukc  of  Bavaria,  and  another  gentleman  with  him,  who  was  the  son  of 
Huss       Clement,  came  and  exliorted  John  Huss,  that  he  would  yet  be  mind- 
ful of  his  safeguard,  and  renounce  his  errors.     To  whom  he  said : 
"  What  error  should    I  renounce,  when    I  know  myself  guilty  of 
none  ?     For  as  for  those  things  which  are  falsely  alleged  against  me, 
I  know  that  I  never  did  so  much  as  once  think  them,  much  less 
The  last    prcach  them.     For  this  was  the  principal  end  and  purpose  of  my 
sion^oV     doctrine,  that  I  might  teach  all  men  penance  and  remission  of  sins, 
John       according  to  the  verity  of  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  ex- 
position of  the  holy  doctors  :    wherefore,  with  a  cheerful  mind  and 
courage,  I  am  here  ready  to  suffer  death."     When  he  had  spoken 
these  words,  they  left  him,  and  shaking  hands  together,  departed. 
The  Then  was  the  fire  kindled,  and  John  Huss  began  to  sing  with  a 

dom  of"  loud  voice  :  "  Jesu  Christ !  the  Son  of  the  living  God  !  have  mercy 
johT'^  upon  me."  And  when  he  began  to  say  the  same  the  third  time,  the 
Huss.  wind  drove  the  flame  so  upon  his  face,  that  it  choked  him.  Yet 
notwithstanding  he  moved  awhile  after,  by  the  space  that  a  man 
Precious  might  almost  say  three  times  the  Lord's  Prayer.  When  all  the  wood 
sight  of  was  burned  and  consumed,  the  upper  part  of  the  body  was  left 
isthe""^  hanging  in  the  chain,  Avliich  they  threw  down  stake  and  all,  and 
death  of   making  a  new  fire,  burned   it,  the  head  being  first   cut  in  small 

his  ,  . 

saints,  gobbets,  that  it  might  the  sooner  be  consumed  unto  ashes.  The 
of  iiisr  heart,  which  was  found  amongst  the  bowels,  being  well  beaten  with 
^^l^'^  staves  and  clubs,  was  at  last  pricked  upon  a  sharp  stick,  and  roasted 
staves,  at  a  fire  apart  until  it  was  consumed.  Then,  with  great  diligence 
sumed  gathering  the  ashes  together,  they  cast  them  into  the  river  Rhine, 
His'ashes  ^hat  the  least  remnant  of  the  ashes  of  that  man  should  not  be 
cas^tinto  left  upon  the  earth,  wdiose  memory,  notwithstanding,  cannot  be 
Rhine,     abolished  out  of  the  minds  of  the  godly,  neither  by  fire,  neither 

by  water,  neither  by  any  kind  of  torment. 

I  know  very  well  that  these  things  are  .very  slenderly  written 

by   me^  as   touching  the  labours  of  this  most  holy  martyr  John 

Huss,  with  whom  the  labours  of  Hercules  are  not  to  be  compared. 

For  that   ancient    Hercules   slew   a  few  monsters ;    but   this   our 

;l)  Probably  Johannes  Pizibram,  a  Bohemian,  as  Foxe  afterwards  suggests. — En. 


THE     EMPEROR    EXCUSETH    HIMSELF    OF    THE    DEATH    OF    HUSS.  495 

Hercules,  with  a  most  stout  and  valiant  courage,  hath  subdued  even    ^^e«'y 

the  world  itself,  the  mother  of  all  monsters  and  cruel  beasts.  This ! 

story  were  worthy  some  other  kind  of  more  curious  handling ;  but,    A.  U. 
forasmuch  as   I  cannot  otherwise  perform  it  myself,  I  have  endea-  • 

voured  accordino^   to   the   very  truth,  as   the  thing  was  indeed,  to  The 
commend   the   same   unto  all  godly  minds  ;  neither  have  I  heard  and  wit- 
it  reported  by  others,  but   I  myself  was   present  at  the  doing  of  "hi^s" " 
all  these  things;  and  as  I  was  able,  I  have  put  them  in  writing,  ^^°^^'- 
that  by  this  my  labour  and  endeavour,  howsoever  it  were,  I  might 
preserve    the    memory  of  this  holy  man  and  excellent   doctor  of 
the  evangelical  truth. 

What  was  the  name  of  the  author  who  wrote  this  story,  it  is  not  m.  John 
here  expressed.     Cochleus,  in  his   second  book  '  contra   Hussitas,"*  thought" 
supposeth  his  name  to  be  Johannes  Pizibram,  a  Bohemian,  who,  name.''"^ 
afterwards  succeeding  in  the  place  of  John  Huss  at  Prague,  at  last 
is  thought  to  have  relented  to  the  papists. 

This  godly  servant  and  raaytyr  of  Christ  was  condemned  by  the 
cruel  council,  and  burned  at  Constance,  a.d.  1415,  about  the  month 
of  July. 

How  grievously  this  death  of  John  Huss  was  taken  among  the 
nobles  ot*  Bohemia  and  Moravia,  hereafter,  Christ  willing,  shall 
appear  by  tlieir  letters  which  they  sent  unto  the  council ;  and  by  the 
letters  of  Sigismund,  king  of  Romans,  written  unto  them,  wherein 
he  laboureth  all  that  he  can,  to  purge  and  excuse  himself  of  the 
death  of  John  Huss.^  Albeit  he  is  not  altogether  free  from  that 
cruel  flict,  and  innocent  from  that  blood,  yet,  notwithstanding,  he 
pretendeth  in  words  so  to  wipe  away  that  blot  from  him,  that  the 
greatest  part  of  that  crime  seemeth  to  rest  upon  the  bloody  prelates 
of  that  council ;  as  the  words  of  the  king  do  purport  in  form  as 
foUoweth.^ 

The  Letter  of  the  Emperor  Sigismund,  to  the  Nobles  of  Bohemia. 

In  the  mean  time  as  we  were  about  the  coasts  of  the  Rhine,  John  Huss  went  The  em- 
to  Constance,  and  there  was  arrested,  as  is  not  to  you  imknown ;  who,  if  he  had  P"'or  ex- 
first  resorted  unto  us,  and  had  gone  up  with  us  to  the  council,  perhaps  it  had  himself  of 
been  otherwise  with  him.     And  God  knoweth  what  grief  and  sorrow  it  was  to  the  death 
our  heart,  to  see  it  so  to  fall  out,   as  with  no  words  can  be  well  expressed ;  jjy,," "' 
whereof  all  the  Bohemians,  who  were  there  present,  can  bear  us  witness,  seeing 
and  beholding  how  careful  and  solicitous  we  were  in  labouring  for  him,  inso- 
much that  we  many  times  with  anger  and  fury  departed  out  of  the  council ;  and 
not  only  out  of  the  council,  but  also  went  out  of  the  city  of  Constance,  taking 
his  part,  unto  such  time  as  the  rulers  of  the  council,  sending  unto  us,  said,  that 
if  we  would  not  permit  them  to  prosecute  that  which  right  required  in  the  coun- 
cil, what  should  they  then  do  in  the  place  ?     Whereupon  thus  we  thought  with 
ourselves,  that  here  was  nothing  else  for  us  moi'e  to  do,  nor  yet  to  speak  in  this 
case,  forasmuch  as  the  whole  council  otherwise  had  been  dissolved.     Where  is 
to  be  i\oted,  moreover,  that  in  Constance,  the  same  time,  there  was  not  one  clerk, 
nor  two,  but  there  were  ambassadors  from  all  the  kings  and  princes  in  Christen- 
dom :  especially,  since  the  time   that  (Petrus  de  Luna  giving  over)  all  those 
kings  and  princes  who  took  his  part,  came  to  us ;  so  that  whatsoever  good  was 
to  be  done,  it  was  now  to  be  passed  in  this  present  council,  &c.* 

(1)  Ex  Coclileo  de  Hist.  Huss.  lib.  4. 

(2)  Interea  (inquit)  nobis  adhuc  in  partibus  Rheni  existentibus,  pervenit  ad  Constantiam,  &c. 

(3)  Ex  regist.  Imp.  Sigismund.  ad  Nobiles,  &c. 


496  HISTORY    OF    THE    BOHEMIANS. 

Henry        Bv  tliis  it  may  appear  that  the  emperor,  as  partly  ashamed  and 

^-       Borry  of  that  which  was  done,  would  gladly  have  cleared  himself  thereof, 

A.  D.    and  have  washed   his  hands  with  Pilate  :   yet  he  could  not  so  clear 

1416-    himself,  but  that  a  great  portion  of  that  murder  remained  in  him  to  be 

noted,  and  well  worthy  of  reprehension  ;  as  may  appear  by  his  last 

words  spoken  in  the  council  to  John  Huss,  whereof  John  Huss  in  his 

epistles  complaineth,  writing  to  certain  of  his  friends  in  Bohemia,  in 

his  thirty- third  epistle,  as  by  his  words  here  following  may  appear. 

From  a  Letter  of  John  Huss  to  his  Friends  in  Bohemia. 

The  em-        I  desire  you  yet  again,  for  the  love  of  God,  that  the  lords  of  Bohemia,  joining 
peror  un-  together,  will  desire  the  king  for  a  final  audience  to  be  given  to  me.  Forasmuch 
to  John     as  he  alone  said  to  me  in  the  council,  that  they  should  give  me  audience  shortly, 
Huss.        and  that  I  shoidd  answer  for  myself  briefly  in  writing,  it  will  be  to  his  great 
confusion,  if  he  shall  not  perform  that  which  he  hath  spoken.     But  I  fear  that 
word  of  his  will  be  as  firm  and  sure,  as  the  other  was  concerning  my  safe  con- 
duct granted  by  him.       Certain  there  were  in  Bohemia,  who  willed  me  to 
beware  of  his  safe  conduct.    And  others  said  :  '  he  will  surely  give  you  to  your 
enemies.'    And  the  lord  MikestDweky  told  me  before  Master  Jessenitz,  saying, 
'  Master!  know  it  for  certain  you  shall  be  condemned.'  And  this  I  suppose  he 
spake,  knowing  before  the  intention  of  the  king.  1  hoped  well  that  he  had  been 
well  affected  towards  the  law  of  God  and  the  truth,  and  had  therein  good  intel- 
hgence :  now  I  conceive  that  he  is  not  greatly  skilful,  nor  so  prudently  circum- 
spect in  himself.     He  condemned  me  before  mine  enemies  did  ;  who,  if  it  had 
Pilate       pleased  him,  might  have  kept  the  moderation  of  Pilate  the  gentile,  who  said, 
d^raleTo"  '  ^  ^'"^  "°  cause  in   this  man  ;'  oi-,  at  least,  if  he  had  said  but  thus,  '  Behold, 
Christ,       I  have  given  him  his  safe  conduct  safely  to  return ;  and  if  he  will  not  abide  the 
than  this  decision  of  the  council,  I  will  send  him  home  to  the  king  of  Bohemia  with  your 
toTohn"^    sentence  and  attestations,  that  he  with  his  clergy  may  judge  him.'     But  now  I 
Huss.        hear,  by  the  relation  of  Henry  Leffy,  and  of  others,  that  he  will  ordain  for  me 
sufficient  audience ;  and  if  I  will  not  submit  myself  to  the  judgment  of  the  coun- 
cil, he  will  send  me  safe,  the  contrary  way,  &c. 

This  John  Huss  being  in  prison,  Avrote  divers  treatises ;  as  '  Of 
the  Commandments,'  '  Of  the  Lord^s  Prayer,'  '  Of  Mortal  Sin,'  '  Of 
Matrimony,' '  Of  the  Knowledge  and  Love  of  God,'  '  Of  three  Enemies 
of  Mankind,  the  World,  the  Flesh,  and  the  Devil,'  '  Of  Penance,'  '  Of 
the  Sacrament  of  the  Body  and  Blood  of  the  Lord,'  '  Of  the  sufficiency 
of  the  Law  of  God  to  rule  the  Church,'  &c.  He  wrote,  also,  divers 
epistles  and  letters  to  the  lords,  and  to  his  friends  in  Bohemia ;  and 
in  his  writings  he  did  foreshow  many  things  before  to  come,  touching 
the  reformation  of  the  church  :  and  seemeth  in  the  prison  to  have  had 
divers  prophetical  revelations  showed  to  him  of  God.  Certain  of  which 
his  letters  and  predictions,  I  thought  here  underneath  to  insert,  in  such 
sort,  as  neither  in  reciting  all,  I  will  overcharge  the  volume  too  much  ; 
nor  yet  in  reciting  of  none,  will  I  be  so  brief,  but  that  the  reader  may 
have  some  taste,  and  take  some  profit,  of  the  christian  writings  and 
doings  of  this  blessed  man  ;  first  beginning  with  the  letter  of  the  lord 
de  Clmii,  concerning  the  safe  conduct  of  John  Huss. 

A  Letter  of  the  Lord  John  de  Clum,  concerning  the  Safe  Conduct  of 

John  Huss. 

To  all  and  singular  that  shall  see  and  hear  these  presents,  I  John  de  Clum  do 
it  to  understand,  how  Master  John  Huss,  bachelor  of  divinity,  under  the  safe 
conduct  and  protection  of  the  renowned  prince  and  lord  Sigismund  of  Romans^ 


.'v    LETTER    OF    JOHN    HUSS    TO    THE    PEOPLE    OF    PRAGUE.  497 

always  Augustus,  and  tins;  of  Hiuigary,  &c.,  my  gracious  lord ;  and  under  the     Henry 
protection,  defence,  and  safeguard  of  the  I10I3'  empire  of  Rome,  having  the  letters        ^■ 
patent  of  tlie  said  my  lord,  king  of  the  Romans,  &c.,  came  unto  Constance  to     .    y. 
render  a  full  account  of  his  faith  in  puhlic  audience,  to  all  that  would  require  the    ^A^c 

same.  This  the  said  Master  John  Huss,  in  this  imperial  city  of  Constance,  under '— 

the  safe  conduct  of  the  said  my  lord,  king  of  Romans,  hath  been  and  yet  is 
detained.  And  although  the  pope  with  the  cardinals  have  been  seriously  required 
by  solemn  ambassadoi-s  of  the  said  my  lord,  king  of  Romans,  &c.,  in  the  king's 
name  and  behalf,  that  the  said  Master  John  Huss  should  be  set  at  liberty,  and 
be  restored  unto  me :  yet  notwithstanding  they  have  and  yet  do  refuse  hitherto 
to  set  him  at  liberty,  to  the  great  contempt  and  derogation  of  the  safe  conduct 
of  the  king,  and  of  the  safeguard  and  protection  of  the  empire,  or  imperial  ma- 
jesty. Wherefore  I  John  aforesaid,  in  the  name  of  the  king,  do  here  publish 
and  make  it  known,  that  the  apprehending,  and  detaining  of  the  said  Master 
John  Huss  was  done  wholly  against  the  will  of  the  beforenamed  king  of  Romans, 
my  lord;  seeing  it  is  done  in  the  contempt  of  the  safe  conduct  of  his  subjects, 
and  of  the  protection  of  the  empire,  because  tlie  said  my  lord  was  then  absent 
far  from  Constance,  and  if  he  had  been  there  present,  would  never  have  pei-- 
mitted  the  same.  And  when  he  shall  come,  it  is  to  be  doubted  of  no  man,  but 
that  he,  for  this  great  injury  and  contempt  of  this  safe  conduct  done  to  him  and 
to  the  empire,  will  grievously  be  m.olested  for  the  same. 

Given  at  Constance,  the  day  of  the  Nativity  of  the  Lord,  1414. 

In  this  instrument  above  prefixed,  note,  gentle  reader  !  three  things. 

First,  The  goodness  of  this  gentle  lord  John  de  Clum,  being  so 
fervent  and  zealous  in  tl;e  cause  of  John  Huss,  or  rather  in  the  cause 
of  Christ. 

Secondly,  The  safe  conduct  gi-anted  unto  the  said  John  Huss,  under  ^ 
the  faith  and  protection  of  the  emperor,  and  of  the  empire. 

Thirdly,  Here  is  to  be  seen  the  contempt  and  rebellion  of  these 
proud  prelates,  in  disobeying  the  authority  of  their  high  magistrate, 
who,  contrary  to  his  safe  conduct  given,  and  the  mind  of  the  emperor, 
did  arrest  and  imprison  this  good  man,  before  the  coming  of  the  said 
emperor,  and  before  that  John  Huss  was  heard.  Let  us  now,  as  we 
have  promised,  adjoin  some  of  the  epistles  of  this  godly  man  : 

An  Epistle  of  John  Huss,  unto  the  People  of  Prague. 

Grace  and  peace  from  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  you  being  delivered  from 
sin  may  walk  in  his  grace,  and  may  grow  in  all  modesty  and  virtue,  and  after 
this  may  enjoy  eternal  life. 

Dearly  beloved,  I  beseech  you  who  walk  after  the  law  of  God,  that  you  cast 
not  away  the  care  of  the  salvation  of  your  souls,  when  you,  hearing  the  word  of 
God,  are  premonished  wisely  to  understand  that  you  be  not  deceived  by  false 
apostles,  who  do  not  reprehend  the  sins  of  men,  but  rather  do  extenuate  and 
diminish  them ;  who  flatter  the  priests,  and  do  not  show  to  the  people  their 
offences ;  who  magnify  themselves,  boast  their  own  works,  and  marvellously 
extol  their  own  worthiness,  but  follow  not  Christ  in  his  humility,  in  poverty,  in 
the  cross,  and  other  manifold  afflictions.  Of  whom  our  merciful  Saviour  did  pre- 
monish  us  before,  saying :  '  False  Christs  and  false  prophets  shall  rise,  and  shall 
deceive  many.'  And  when  he  had  forewarned  his  well-beloved  disciples,  he 
said  luito  them  :  '  Beware  and  take  heed  of  false  prophets,  who  come  to  you  in 
sheep's  clothing,  but  inwardly  are  ravening  wolves  :  ye  shall  know  them  by  their 
fruits.'  And  truth  it  is,  that  the  faithful  of  Christ  have  much  need  diligently  to 
beware  and  take  heed  unto  themselves;  for,  as  our  Saviour  himself  doth  say: 
*  The  elect  also,  if  it  were  possible,  shall  be  brought  into  error.'  Wherefore,  my 
well-beloved,  be  circumspect  and  watchful,  that  ye  be  not  circumvented  with 
the  crafty  trains  of  the  devil.  And  the  more  circumspect  ye  ought  to  be,  for 
that  Antichrist  laboureth  the  more  to  trouble  you.  The  last  judgment  is  near  at 
hand  :  death  shall  swallow  up  many,  but  to  the  elect  children  of  God  the  kingdom 

VOL.  III.  K  K 


1416. 


Iv8  A    I.ETTKR    OF    JOIIX    HUSS    TO    HIS    BENEFACTORS. 

Henry    of  God  draweth  near,  because  for  them  he  gave  his  own  body.     Fear  not 

^-       death  ;  love  together  one  another ;  persevere  in  understanding  the  good  will  of 

A~n~  God  without  ceasing.     Let  the  terrible  and  horrible  day  of  judgment  be  always 

'    before  your  eyes,  that  you  sin  not;  and  also  the  joy  of  eternal  life,  whereunto 

.  you  must  endeavour. 

Furthermore,  let  the  passion  of  our  Saviour  be  never  out  of  5'our  minds ;  that 
you  may  bear  with  him  and  for  him  gladly,  whatsoever  shall  be  laid  upon  you. 
For  if  you  shall  consider  well  in  your  minds  his  cross  and  afflictions,  nothing 
shall  be  grievous  unto  you,  and  patiently  you  shall  give  place  to  tribulations, 
cursings,  rebukes,  stripes,  and  imprisonment,  and  shall  not  doubt  to  give  your 
lives,  moreover,  for  his  holy  truth,  if  need  require.  Know  ye,  well-beloved,  that 
Anticlnist  being  stirred  up  against  you,  deviseth  divers  persecutions.  And 
many  he  hath  not  hurt,  no  not  the  least  hair  of  their  heads,  as  by  mine  own 
example  I  can  testify;  although  he  hath  been  vehemently  incensed  against  me. 
Wherefore  I  desire  you  all,  with  your  prayers,  to  make  intercession  for  me  to 
the  Lord,  to  give  me  intelligence,  sufierance,  patience,  and  constancy,  that  I 
never  swerve  from  his  divine  verity.  He  hath  brought  me  now  to  Constance. 
In  all  my  journey,  openly  and  manifestly,  I  have  not  feared  to  utter  my  name 
as  becometh  the  servant  of  God.  In  no  place  I  kept  myself  secret,  or  used 
any  dissimulation :  but  never  did  I  find  in  any  place  more  pestilent  and  mani- 
fest enemies  than  at  Constance ;  which  enemies  neither  should  I  have  had  there, 
had  it  not  been  for  certain  of  our  own  Bohemians,  hj'pocrites  and  deceivers, 
,who  for  benefits  received,  and  stirred  up  with  covetousness,  with  boasting  and 
bragging  have  persuaded  the  people  that  I  went  about  to  seduce  them  out  of  the 
right  way.  But  I  am  in  good  hope,  that  through  the  mercy  of  our  God,  and 
by  your  prayers,  I  shall  persist  strongly  in  the  immutable  verity  of  God  imto 
the  last  breath.  Finally,  I  would  not  have  you  ignorant,  that  whereas  every 
one  here  is  put  in  his  office,  I  only  as  an  outcast  am  neglected,  &c. 

I  commend  you  to  the  merciful  Lord  Jesu  Christ,  our  true  God,  and  the 
Son  of  the  immaculate  Virgin  Mary,  who  hath  redeemed  us  by  his  most 
bitter  death,  without  all  merits,  from  eternal  pains,  from  the  thraldom  of  the 
devil,  and  from  sin. 

From  Constance,  the  year  of  our  Lord  1415. 

Another  Letter  of  John  Huss  to  his  Benefactors. 

My  gracious  benefactors  and  defenders  of  the  truth  !  I  exhort  you  by  the 
bowels  of  Jesus  Christ,  that  now  ye,  setting  aside  the  vanities  of  this  present 
world,  will  give  your  service  to  the  Eternal  King,  Christ  the  Lord.  Trust  not 
in  princes,  nor  in  the  sons  of  men,  in  whom  there  is  no  health.  For  the  sons 
of  men  are  dissemblers  and  deceitful.  To-day  they  are,  to-morrow  they  perish, 
but  God  remaineth  for  ever;  who  hath  his  servants,  not  for  any  need  he 
hath  of  them,  but  for  their  own  profit :  unto  whom  he  performeth  that  which 
he  promiseth,  and  fulfilleth  that  which  he  purposeth  to  give.  He  casteth  off 
no  faithful  servant  from  him,  for  he  saith ;  '  Where  I  am,  there  also  shall  my 
servant  be.'  And  the  Lord  maketh  every  servant  of  his  to  be  the  lord  of  all 
his  possession,  giving  himself  unto  him,  and  with  himself,  all  things;  that 
without  all  tediousness,  fear,  and  without  all  defect,  he  may  possess  all  things, 
rejoicing  with  all  saints  in  joy  infinite.  O  happy  is  that  servant,  whom,  when 
the  Lord  shall  come,  he  shall  find  watching!  Happy  is  the  servant  who 
shall  receive  the  King  of  Glory  with  joy!  Wherefore,  well-beloved  lords 
and  benefactors  ;  serve  you  that  King  in  fear,  who  shall  bring  you,  as  I  trust, 
now  to  Bohemia  at  this  present,  by  his  grace,  in  health ;  and  hereafter,  to  an 
eternal  life  of  glory.  Fare  you  well,  for  I  think  that  this  is  the  last  letter  that 
I  shall  write  to  you ;  who,  to-morrow,  as  I  suppose,  shall  be  purged  in  hope 
of  Jesu  Christ,  through  bitter  death  for  my  sins.  The  things  that  hap- 
pened to  me  this  night  I  am  not  able  to  write.  Sigismund  hath  done  all 
things  with  me  deceitfully.  God  forgive  him,  and  only  for  your  sakes.  You 
also  heard  the  sentence  which  he  awarded  against  me.  I  pray  you  have  no 
suspicion  of  faithful  Vitus. 


A    LETTER    OF    HUSS    TO    JOHN    DE    CLUM.  4f)J) 

A  Letter  of  John  Huss  to  the  Lord  John  de  Clum.  y- 

Most  gracious  benefactor  in  Christ  Jesu !  dearly  beloved !  yet  I  rejoice  not  A.  D. 
a  little,  that  by  the  grace  of  God  I  may  write  imto  your  honour.  By  j'our  1416. 
letter  which  I  received  yesterday,  I  understand,  first,  how  the  iniquity  of  the 
great  strumpet,  that  is,  of  the  mahgnant  congregation  (whereof  mention  is 
made  in  the  Apocalypse),  is  detected,  and  shall  be  more  detected ;  with  which 
strumpet  the  kings  of  the  earth  do  commit  fornication,  fornicating  spiritually 
from  Christ ;  and,  as  is  there  said,  sliding  back  from  the  truth,  and  consenting 
to  the  lies  of  Antichrist,  through  his  seduction  and  through  fear,  or  through 
hope  of  confederacy,  for  getting  of  worldly  honour.  Secondly,  I  perceived  by 
your  letter  how  the  enemies  of  the  truth  begin  now  to  be  troubled.  Thirdly, 
I  perceived  the  fervent  constancy  of  your  charity,  wherewith  you  profess  the 
truth  bodily.  Fourthly,  with  joy  I  perceived  that  you  mind  now  to  give  over 
the  vanity  and  painful  ser\dce  of  this  present  world,  and  to  serve  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  quietly  at  home ;  whom  to  serve,  is  to  reign  ;  as  Gregory  saith, 
'  He  that  served  him  faithfully,  hath  Jesus  Christ  himself  in  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  to  minister  imto  him,  as  he  himself  saith,  Blessed  is  that  servant, 
whom  when  the  Lord  shall  come,  he  shall  find  waking,  and  so  doing.  Verily  I 
say  unto  you,  that  he  rising  shall  gird  himself,  and  shall  minister  to  him.'  This 
do  not  the  kings  of  the  world  to  their  servants,  whom  they  do  love  only  so  long 
as  they  are  profitable  and  necessary  for  their  commodities,  &c. 

An  Epistle  of  John  Huss  to  his  Friends,  wherein  he  declareth  why 
God  sufFereth  not  his  to  perish  ;  bringing  divers  examples,  where- 
with he  doth  comfort  and  confirm  both  himself  and  others. 

The  Lord  God  be  with  you !  Many  causes  there  were,  well-beloved  in  God, 
my  dear  friends,  which  moved  me  to  think  that  those  letters  were  the  last, 
which  before  I  sent  unto  you,  looking  that  same  time  for  instant  death.  But 
now,  imderstanding  the  same  to  be  deferred,  I  take  it  for  great  comfort  unto 
me,  that  I  have  some  leisure  more  to  talk  with  you  by  letters.  And  therefore  I 
write  again  to  you,  to  declare  and  testify  at  least  my  gratitude  and  mindful  duty 
towards  you.  And  as  touching  death,  God  doth  know  why  he  doth  defer  it 
both  to  me,  and  to  my  well-beloved  brother  Master  Jerome,  who  I  trust  will  die 
hoUly  and  without  blame ;  and  do  know  also  that  he  doth  and  sufFereth  now 
more  valiantly,  than  I  myself,  a  wretched  sinner.  God  hath  given  us  a  long 
time,  that  we  might  call  to  memory  our  sins  the  better,  and  repent  for  the  same 
more  fervently.  He  hath  granted  us  time,  that  our  long  and  great  temptation 
should  put  away  our  grievous  sins,  and  bring  the  more  consolation.  He  hath 
given  us  time,  wherein  we  should  remember  the  horrible  rebukes  of  our  mer- 
ciful King  and  Lord  Jesus,  and  should  ponder  his  cruel  death,  and  so  more 
patiently  might  learn  to  bear  our  afflictions.  And,  moreover,  that  we  might 
keep  in  remembrance,  how  that  the  joys  of  the  life  to  come  are  not  given  after 
the  joys  of  this  world  immediately,  but  that  through  many  tribulations  the 
saints  have  entered  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  For  some  of  them  have 
been  cut  and  chopped  all  to  pieces,  some  have  had  their  eyes  bored  through, 
some  have  been  sodden,  some  roasted,  some  flayed  alive,  some  buried  quick, 
stoned,  crucified,  grinded  betwixt  millstones,  drawn  and  hailed  hither  and  thither 
unto  execution,  drowned  in  waters,  strangled  and  hanged,  torn  in  pieces,  vexed 
with  rebukes  before  their  death,  pined  in  prisons,  and  afflicted  in  bands.  And  xhe  tor- 
who  is  able  to  recite  all  the  tonnents  and  sufferings  of  the  holy  saints,  which  ments  of 
they  suffered  under  the  Old  and  New  Testament  for  the  verity  of  God ;  namely,  ^y^s'un-' 
those  who  have  at  any  time  rebuked  the  malice  of  the  priests,  or  have  preached  der  the 
against  their  wickedness  ?  And  it  will  be  a  marvel  if  any  man  now  also  shall  ^'"^  ^"^_ 
escape  unpunished,  whosoever  dare  boldly  resist  the  wickedness  and  perversity,  tament."' 
especially  of  those  priests,  who  can  abide  no  correction.  And  I  am  glad  that 
they  are  compelled  now  to  read  my  books,  in  which  their  malice  is  somewhat 
described ;  and  I  know  they  have  read  the  same  more  exactly  and  dihgently, 
than  the  holy  gospel,  seeking  therein  to  find  out  eiTors. 

Given   at  Constance,  on   Thursday,  the  twenty-eighth  day   of  June, 
Anno  1415. 

KK  2 


500         GODLY  LETTERS  OF  JOHN  HUSS  TO  THE  BOHEMIANS. 

Henry    Anothcr  Letter  of  John  Huss  to  his  Friends,  wherein  he  rehearseth 

'. what  Injuries  he  received  of  the  Council,  and  of  the  Deputies. 

A.  D. 

1416.  ^^  ™y  ^^^^^^  ^^  ^^^  y^^  s^'it  to  Bohemia,  keep  it  and  send  it  not,  for  hurt 
may  come  thereof,  &c. 

Item,  If  tlie  king  do  ask,  who  ought  to  be  my  judge,  since  that  the  council 
neither  did  call  me,  nor  did  cite  me,  neitlier  was  1  ever  accused  before  the 
council,  and  yet  the  council  hath  imprisoned  me,  and  hath  appointed  their 
proctor  against  me.' 

Item,  I  desire  you,  right  noble  and  gracious  lord  John !  if  audience  shall  be 
given  me,  that  the  king  will  be  there  present  himself,  and  that  I  may  have  a 
place  appointed  near  unto  him,  that  he  may  hear  me  well,  and  understand  what 
I  say ;  and  that  you  also,  with  the  lord  Henry,  and  with  lord  Wincelaus  and 
other  nobles,  if  you  may,  will  be  present,  and  hear  what  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
my  procurator  and  advocate,  and  most  gracious  judge,  will  put  in  my  mouth  to 
speak ;  that  whether  I  live  or  die,  you  may  be  true  and  upright  witnesses  with 
me,  lest  lying  lips  shall  say  hereafter  that  I  swerved  away  from  the  truth  which 
I  have  preached. 

Item,  Know  you  that,  before  witnesses  and  notaries  in  prison,  I  desire  the 
commissioners,  that  they  would  depute  unto  me  a  proctor  and  an  advocate,  who 
promised  so  to  do,  and  afterwards  would  not  perform  it.  Wherefore  I  have 
committed  myself  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  he  wiU  be  my  procurator  and 
advocate,  and  judge  of  my  cause. 

Item,  Know  you,  that  they  have,  as  I  suppose,  no  other  quarrel  against  me, 
but  only  this,  that  I  stood  against  the  pope's  bull,  which  pope  John  sent  down 
to  Bohemia,^  to  sanctify  war  with  the  sign  of  the  cross  and  full  remission  of 
sins  to  all  those  who  would  take  the  holy  cross,  to  fight  for  the  patrimony  of  the 
Romish  church  against  Ladislaus,  king  of  Naples ;  and  they  have  mine  own 
writing  which  was  read  against  me,  and  I  do  acknowledge  it  to  be  mine. 
Secondly,  they  have  also  against  me,  that  I  have  continued  so  long  in  excom- 
munication, and  yet  did  take  upon  me  to  minister  in  the  church,  and  say  mass. 
Thirdly,  they  have  against  me,  because  I  did  appeal  from  the  pope  to  Christ. 
For  they  read  my  appeal  before  me,  which  with  a  willing  mind,  smiling,  I 
confessed  before  them  all  to  be  mine.  Fourthly,  because  I  left  a  certain  letter 
behind  me,  which  was  read  in  the  chm-ch  of  Bethlehem,  which  letter  my  adver- 
saries have  very  evil-favouredly  translated,  and  sinisterly  expounded,  in  which 
I  did  write  that  I  went  out  with  a  safe-conduct.  Whereunto  you  yourselves 
can  say  and  bear  me  record,  that  I,  in  my  going  out,  had  no  safe-conduct  of  the 
pope,  neither  yet  did  I  know  whether  you  should  go  out  with  me,  when  I  wrote 
that  letter. 

Item,  If  audience  may  be  given  to  me,  and  that  after  the  same  audience  the 
king  would  suffer  me  not  to  be  returned  again  into  prison,  but  that  I  may  have 
your  counsels  and  those  of  others  my  friends ;  and,  if  it  please  God,  that  I  may 
say  something  to  my  sovereign  lord  the  king,  for  the  behalf  of  Christianity,  and 
for  his  own  profit,  &c. 

Another  Letter  of  John  Huss  to  his  Friends,  wherein  he  confirmeth 
the  Bohemians,  and  describeth  the  wickedness  of  that  Council. 

John  Huss,  in  hope,  the  servant  of  God,  to  all  the  faithful  in  Bohemia  who 
love  the  Lord,  greeting  through  the  grace  of  God.     It  cometh  in  my  mind, 
wherein  I  must  needs  admonish  you,  who  be  the  faithful  and  beloved  of  the 
The  Lord,  how  that  the  council  of  Constance,  being  full  of  pride,  avarice,  and  all 

council  abomination,  hath  condemned  my  books,  written  in  the  Bohemian  tongue,  for 
books  heretical,  which  books  they  never  saw,  nor  ever  heard  them  read.  And  if  they 
which  had  heard  them,  yet  they  could  not  understand  the  same,  being  some  Italians, 
derstand  ^""^^  Frenchmen,  some  Britons,  some  Spaniards,  Germans,  with  other  people 
not.  of  other  nations  besides  ;  unless,  peradventiu-e,  John,  bishop  of  Litomysl,  under- 

stood them,  who  was  present  in  that  council,  and  certain  other  Bohemians,  and 
priests,  who  are  against  me,  and  labour  all  they  may,  how  to  deprave  both  thfi 

(1)  He  meaneth,  belike,  that  he  should  move  the  kinginthesR  matters  contained  in  this  epistle. 

(2)  See  page  310.— Ed. 


GODLY  LETTERS  OF  JOHN  HUSS  TO  THE  BOHEMIANS.  501 

verity  of  God,  and  the  honesty  of  our  country  of  Bohemia;  which  I  judge,  in  iienry 

the  hope  of  God,  to  be  a  goclly  land,  right  well  given  to  the  true  knowledge  ''• 

of  the  faith ;  for  that  it  doth  so  greatly  desire  the  word  of  God,  and  honest  .  ^ 

manners.     And  if  you  were  here  at  Constance,  ye  should  see  the  giievous  141/ 
abomination  of  this  council,  which  they  call  so  holy,  and  such  as  cannot  en* ; 


of  which  council  I  have  heard  it  by  the  Switzers  reported,  that  the  city  of  ^^jf'^  ?^ 
Constance  is  not  able  in  thirty  years  to  be  purged  of  those  abominations  in  that  xhe  abo- 
coiuicil  committed.     And  almost  all  be  offended  with  that  council,  being  sore  mination 

grieved  to  behold  such  execrable  things  perpetrated  in  the  same.  °^  ""1,   , 

-iin         T  ir'  1/--1  •  •  11    !•  council  of 

When  1  stood  nrst  to  answer  before  mine  adversaries,  seeing  all  things  there  Con- 
done with  no  order,   and  hearing  them  also  outrageously  crying  out,  I  said  stance  de- 
plainly  unto  them,  that  I  looked  for  more   honest  behaviour,  and  better  order  ^"'  ^  ' 
and  discipline,  in  that  council.     Then  the  chief  cardinal  ^  answered :  '  Sayest 
thou  so  ?  but  in  the  tower  thou  spakest  more  modestly.'    To  whom  said  I :  '  In 
the  tower  no  man  cried  out  against  me,  whereas  now  all  do  rage  against  me.' 
My  faithful  and  beloved  in  Christ,  be  not  afraid  with  their  sentence  in  con- 
demning my  books.     They  shall  be  scattered  hither  and  thither  abroad,  like  John 
light  butterflies,  and  their  statutes  shall  endure  as  spider-webs.     They  went  ^"^s 
about  to  shake  my  constancy  from  the  verity  of  Christ ;  but  they  could  not  here  to 
overcome  the  virtue  of  God  in  me.     They  would  not  reason  with  the  Scripture  prophesy 
against  me,  as  divers  honourable  lords  can  witness  with  me,  who  being  ready  °^  "'**., 
to  suffer  contumely  for  the  truth  of  God,  took  my  part  stoutly  ;  namely,  lord  as  it  came 
Wenceslaus  de  Duba,  and  lord  John  de  Clum  :  for  they  were  let  in  by  king  ^  P^****. 
Sigismund  into  the  council.     And  when  I  said,  that  I  was  desirous  to  be  in-  cii  afraid 
structed  if  I  did  in  any  thing  err,   then  they  heard  the  chief  cardinal  answer  to  be  tried 
again :  '  Because  thou  wouldest  be  informed,  there  is  no  remedy  but  that  thou  g^^j*^^ 
must  first  revoke  thy  docti-ine,  according  to  the  determination  of  fifty  bachelors  tures. 
of  divinity  appointed.'     O  high  instruction! 

After  like  manner  St.  Katharine,  also,  should  have  denied  and  revoked  the  st.  Ka- 
verity  of  God  and  faith  in  Christ,  because  the  fifty  masters  likewise  did  with-  tha"ne, 
stand  her ;  which,  notwithstanding,  that  good  virgin  would  never  do,  standing  ,vhh"if"^ 
in  her  faith  unto  death :  but  she  did  win  those  her  masters  unto  Christ,  when  I  doctors, 
cannot  win  these  my  masters  by  any  means.     These  things  I  thought  good  to  thTm*^ h'^t 
write  unto  you,  that  you  might  know  how  they  have  overcome  me,  with  no  huss' 
grounded  Scripture,  nor  with  any  reason  ;  but  only  did  assay  with  terrors  and  could  not 
deceits  to  persuade  me  to  revoke  and  to  abjure.     But  our  merciful  God,  whose  j^is  fifty 
law  I  have  magnified,  was  and  is  with  me ;  and,  I  trust,  so  will  continue,  and  doctors, 
will  keep  me  in  his  gi'ace  unto  death. 

Written  at  Constance  after  the  feast  of  John  Baptist,  in  prison  and  in 
bands,  daily  looking  for  death ;  although  for  the  secret  judgments  of 
God,  I  dare  not  say  whether  this  be  my  last  epistle :  for  now  also 
Almighty  God  is  able  to  deliver  me. 

Another  Letter  of  John  Hiiss,  wherein  he  comforteth  his  Friends, 
and  willeth  them  not  to  be  troubled  for  the  condemning  of  his 
Books  :  and  also  declareth  the  wickedness  of  the  Clergy. 

Master  John  Huss,  in  hope,  the  servant  of  God,  to  all  the  faithful  who  love 
him  and  his  statutes,  wisheth  the  truth  and  grace  of  God. 

Beloved !  I  thought  it  needful  to  warn  that  you  should  not  fear  or  be  dis- 
couraged, because  the  adversaries  have  decreed  that  my  books  shall  be  burnt. 
Remember  how  the  Iraelites  biu-ned  the  preachings  of  the  prophet  Jeremy,  and  Good 
yet  they  could  not  avoid  the  things  that  were  prophesied  of  in  them ;  for  after  ''q^j^jj^J, 
they  were  burnt,  the  Lord  commanded  to  write  the  same  prophecy  again,  and  have  bee" 
that  larger ;  which  was  also  done,  for  Jeremy,  sitting  in  prison,   spake,  and  hurned  ot 
Baruch,  who  was  ready  at  his  hand,  wrote.    This  is  written  either  in  the  thirty-  "^^  '""^• 
fifth  or  forty-fifth  chapter  of  the  Vision  of  Jeremy.  It  is  also  written  in  the  books  Good 
of  tlie  Maccabees,  That  the  wicked  did  burn  the  law  of  God,  and  killed  them  "'ep  with 
that  had  the  same.     Again,  under  the  New  Testament,  they  burned  the  saints,  hooks  to 
with  the  books  of  the  law  of  God.     The  cardinals  condemned  and  committed  to  be  burned 
fire  certain  of  Saint  Gregory's  books,  and  had  burnt  them  all,  if  they  had  not  ^^  ^^'"^■ 

(I'j  This  cardinal  was  cardinal  Cambrensis. 


502         GODLY  LETTERS  OF  JOHN  HUSS  TO  THE  BOHEMIANS. 

Henry    been  preserved  of  God  by  the  means  of  Peter,  Gregory's  minister.  Having  tliese 
^-       things  before  your  eyes,  take  heed  lest,  through  fear,  you  omit  to  read  my  books, 
and  dehver  them  to  the  adversaries  to  be  burnt.     Remember  the  sayings  of  our 
\^\{l'    merciful  Saviour,  by  which  he  forewarneth  us.  Matt.  xxiv. :    'There  shall  be,' 
saith  he,  '  before  tlie  day  of  judgment,  great  tribulation,  such  as  was  not  from 
the  beo-inning  until  this  day,  neither  shall  be  afterwards  :  so  that  even  the  elect 
of  God  should  be  deceived,  if  it  were  possible.     But  for  their  sakes  those  days 
shall  be  shortened.'  When  you  remember  these  things,  beloved  !  be  not  afraid; 
for  I  trust  in  God  that  that  school  of  Antichrist  shall  be  afraid  of  you,  and  suffer 
you  to  be  in  quiet,  neither  shall  the  council  of  Constance  extend  to  Bohemia. 
John         For  I  think,  that  many  of  them  who  are  of  the  council  shall  die,  before  they 
Huss        gijall  get  from  you  my  books.     And  they  shall  depart  from  the  council  and  be 
toproplie-  scattered  abroad  throughout  the  parts  of  the  world  like  storks,  and  then  they 
sy  ot  the    shall  know  when  winter  cometh,  what  they  did  in  summer.     Consider  that 
Con"*^'^  °^  they  have  judged  their  head,  the  pope,  worthy  of  death,  for  many  horrible  facts 
stance.      that  he  hath  done.  Go  to  now;  answer  to  this,  you  preachers!  who  preach  that 
The  bias-  the  pope  is  the  god  of  the  earth ;  that  he  may,  as  the  lawyers  say,  make  sale  of 
phemous  ^|jg  ^^ly  things ;  that  he  is  the  head  of  the  whole  holy  church,  in  verity  well 
lawyers     governing  the  same ;  that  he  is  the  heart  of  the  church  in  quickening  the  same 
and  pa-     spiritually ;  that  he  is  the  well-spring  from  which  flow  all  virtue  and  good- 
touching  "isss  ;  that  he  is  the  sun  of  the  holy  church ;  that  he  is  the  safe  refuge  to  which 
the  sove-  every  christian  man  ought  to  fly  for  succour.     Behold  now  that  head  is  cut  off 
reignty  of  yi\^  ^]^q  sword ;  now  the  god  of  the  earth  is  bomid  ;  now  his  sins  are  declared 
e  pope,  ppgj^jy .  j^^^y  |.j^j^j.  -yvell-spring  is  di-ied  up ;  that  sun  darkened ;  that  heart  is  plucked 
out  and  thrown  away,  lest  that  any  man  should  seek  succour  thereat.     The 
council  hath  condemned  that  head,  and  that  for  this  offence ;  because  he  took 
One  si-     money  for  indulgences,  bishoprics,  and  other  such  like.     But  they  condemned 
monist      him,  by  order  of  judgment,  who  were  themselves  the  buyers  and  sellers  of  the 
condem-    game  merchandise.     There  was  present  John,  bishop  of  Litomysl,  who  went 
otherr       twice  about  to  buy  the  bishopric  of  Prague,  but  others  prevented  him.  O  wicked 
men  !  why  did  they  not  first  cast  the  beam  out  of  their  own  eyes?     These  men 
have  accursed  and  condemned    the  seller,   but  they  themselves,  who  were  the 
The  buyers  and  consenters  to  the  bargain,  are  without  danger.     What  shall  I  say, 

bishops  of  ti^j^j.  tjjgy  ^Q  ygg  this  manner  of  buying  and  selling  at  home  in  their  own  coun- 
cil noted  tries  ;  for  at  Constance  there  is  one  bishop  that  bought,  and  another  who  sold ; 
for  simo-  and  the  pope,  for  allowing  of  both  their  facts,  took  bribes  on  both  sides.  It  came 
°^*  so  to  pass  in  Bohemia  also,  as  you  know.    I  would  that  in  that  council  God  had 

said :  '  He  that  amongst  you  is  without  sin,  let  him  give  the  sentence  against 
pope  John;'  then  surely  they  had  gone  all  out  of  the  council-house,  one  after 
PopeJohn  another.     Why  did  they  bow  the  knee  to  him  always  before  this  his  fall ;  kiss 
made  a     his  feet,  and  call  him  '  The  most  holy  father,'  seeing  they  saw  apparently  before, 
pope,  be-   ^1^^^  j^g  ^^^g  ^  heretic,  that  he  was  a  man-killer,  that  he  was  a  wicked  sinner,  all  which 
kn'own  to  things  now  they  have  found  in  him  ?     Why  did  the  cardinals  choose  him  to  be 
be  a  mur-  pope,  knowing  before  that  he  had  killed  the  holy  father  ?     Wliy  suffered  they 
^^^^^'        him  to  meddle  with  holy  things,  in  bearing  the   office  of  the  popedom  ?  for  to 
this  end  they  are  his  counsellors,  that  they  should  admonish  him  of  that  which 
is  right.     Are  not  they  themselves  as  guilty  of  these  faults  as  he,  seeing  that 
they  accounted  these  things  vices  in  him,  and  were  partakers  of  some  of  them 
themselves  ?     Why  dtorst  no  man  lay  aught  to  his  charge,  before  he  had  fled 
from  Constance  ?  but,  as  soon  as  the  secular  power,  by  the  sufferance  of  God, 
laid  hold  upon  him,  then,  and  never  afore,  they  conspired  all  together  that  he 
should  not  live  any  longer.     Surely,  even  at  this  day  is  the  malice,  the  abomi- 
nation and  filthiness  of  Antichrist,  revealed  in  the  pope  and  others  of  this  council. 
Anti-  Now  the  faithful  servants  of  God  may  understand  what  oxir  Saviour  Christ 

Christ,  meant  by  this  saying :  '  When  you  shall  see  the  abomination  of  desolation,  which 
besin-  is  spoken  of  by  Daniel,'  &c.,  'whoso  can  understand  it,'  &c.  Surely,  these  be 
iieth  to  be  great  abominations  :  pi-ide,  covetousness,  simony,  sitting  in  a  solitary  place ; 
in^iri'^'^  that  is  to  say,  in  a  dignity  void  of  goodness,  humility,  and  other  virtues ;  as  we 
pope.  do  now  clearly  see  in  those  that  are  constituted  in  any  office  and  dignity.  O 
how  acceptable  a  thing  should  it  be,  if  time  would  suffer  me  to  disclose  their 
A  prophe-  "^^i^^ed  acts,  which  are  now  apparent ;  that  the  faithful  servants  of  God  might 
sy  of  John  know  them!  I  trust  in  God  that  he  will  send  after  me  those  that  shall  be  more 
Huss.       vahant;  and  there  are  alive  at  this  day,  that  shall  make  more  manifest  the 


GODLY    LETTERS    OF    JOHN    HUSS    TO    THE    BOHEMIAXS.  503 

malice  of  Antichrist,  and  shall  give  their  lives  to  the  death  for  the  truth  of  our  Henry 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  shall  give,  both  to  you  and  me,  the  joys  of  hfe  everlasting.        ^• 

This  epistle  was  written  upon  St.  John  Baptist's-day  in  prison  and  in  cold  .    ^ 

irons;  I  having  this  meditation  with  myself,  that  John  was  beheaded       "     ' 

in  his  prison  and  bonds,  for  the  word  of  God. 


14 IG. 


Another  Letter  of  John  Huss  to  the  Faithful  in  Bohemia. 

John  Huss,  in  hope,  the  servant  of  God,  to  all  the  faithful  in  Bohemia,  who  love 
the  Lord,  wisheth  to  stand  and  die  in  the  grace  of  God,  and  at  last  to  attain  unto 
eternal  life.     Amen. 

Ye  that  bear  rule  over  others  and  be  rich,  and  ye  also  that  be  poor,  well-be- 
loved and  faithful  in  God,  I  beseech  you,  and  admonish  you  all,  that  ye  will  be 
obedient  unto  God,  make  much  of  his  word,  and  gladly  hearing  the  same,  will 
humbly  perform  that  which  ye  hear.  I  beseech  you  stick  fast  to  the  verity  of 
God's  word,  which  I  have  written  and  preached  unto  you  out  of  his  law,  and  the 
sermons  of  his  saints.  Also  I  desire  you  if  any  man,  either  in  public  sermon,  or 
in  private  talk,  heard  of  me  any  thing,  or  have  read  any  thing  written  by  me 
■which  is  against  the  verity  of  God,  that  he  do  not  follow  the  same.  Albeit!  do 
not  find  my  conscience  guilty  that  I  ever  have  spoken  or  written  any  such  thing 
amongst  you. 

I  desire  you,  moreover,  if  any  man  at  any  time  have  noted  any  levity  either 
in  my  talk  or  in  my  conditions,  that  he  do  not  follow  the  same ;  but  pray  to  God 
for  me,  to  pardon  me  that  sin  of  lightness.  I  pray  you  that  ye  will  love  your 
priests  and  ministers,  who  be  of  honest  behaviour,  to  prefer  and  honour  them 
before  others ;  namely,  such  priests  as  travail  in  the  word  of  God.  I  pray  you 
take  heed  to  yourselves,  and  beware  of  malicious  and  deceitful  men,  and  espe- 
cially of  those  wicked  priests  of  whom  our  Saviour  doth  speak :  '  That  they  are 
under  sheep's  clothing,  and  inwardly  are  ravening  wolves.'  I  pray  such  as  be 
rulers  and  superiors,  to  behave  themselves  gently  towards  their  poor  inferiors, 
and  to  rule  them  justly.  I  beseech  the  citizens,  that  they  will  walk  every  man 
in  his  degree  and  vocation  with  an  upright  conscience.  The  artificers  also  I 
beseech,  that  they  will  exercise  their  occupations  diligently,  and  use  them  with 
the  fear  of  God.  I  beseech  the  servants,  that  they  will  serve  their  masters  faith- 
fully. And  likewise  the  schoolmasters  I  beseech,  that  they,  living  honestly, 
will  bring  up  their  scholars  virtuously,  and  teach  them  faithfully,  first  to  learn  to 
fear  God ;  then,  for  the  glory  of  God  and  the  public  utiHty  of  the  commonwealth, 
and  their  own  health,  and  not  for  avarice  or  worldly  honour,  to  employ  their 
minds  to  honest  arts.  I  beseech  the  students  of  the  university  and  all  schools, 
in  all  honest  things  to  obey  their  masters,  and  to  follow  them ;  and  that  with  all 
diligence  they  will  study  to  be  profitable  both  to  the  setting  forth  of  the  glory  of 
God,  and  to  the  soul's  health,  as  well  of  themselves,  as  of  other  men.  Together 
I  beseech  and  pray  you  all,  that  you  will  yield  most  hearty  thanks  to  the  right 
honourable  lords,  the  lord  Wenceslaus  de  Duba,  lord  John  de  Clum,  lord  Henry 
Lumlovio,  lord  Vilem  Zagecio,  lord  Nicholas,  and  other  lords  of  Bohemia,  Mo- 
ravia, and  Poland ;  that  their  diligence  towards  me  may  be  grateful  to  all  good 
men  ;  because  that  they,  like  valiant  champions  of  God's  truth,  have  oftentimes  A  note  for 
set  themselves  against  the  whole  council  for  my  deliverance,  contending  and  ^"  ""'''^ 
standing  against  the  same  to  the  uttermost  of  their  power ;  but  especially  lord  mark  and 
Wenceslaus  de  Duba,  and  lord  John  de  Clum.  Whatsoever  they  shall  report  to  follow. 
unto  you,  give  credit  unto  them  ;  for  they  were  in  the  council  when  I  there 
answered  many.  They  know  who  they  were  of  Bohemia,  and  how  many  false 
and  slanderous  things  they  brought  in  against  me,  and  that  council  cried  out 
against  me,  and  how  I  also  answered  to  all  things  whereof  I  was  demanded.  I 
beseech  you,  also,  that  ye  will  pray  for  the  king  of  Romans,  and  for  your  king, 
and  for  his  wife  your  queen,  that  God  of  his  mercy  would  abide  with  them  and 
with  you,  both  now  and  henceforth  in  everlasting  life.     Amen ! 

This  epistle  1  have  written  to  you  out  of  prison  and  in  bonds,  looking  the 
next  day  after  the  writing  hereof  for  the  sentence  of  the  council  upon  my  death ; 
having  a  full  trust  that  He  will  not  leave  me,  neither  suffer  me  to  deny  his 
truth,  and  to  revoke  the  errors,  which  false  wtnesses  maliciously  have  devised 
against  me.  How  mercifully  the  Lord  God  hath  dealt  with  me,  and  was  with 
me  in  marvellous  temptations,  ye  shall  know,  when  hereafter,  by  the  help  of 


504  CODLY    LETTERS    OF    JOHX    HCSS    TO    THE    BOHEMIANS. 

Jienry     Christ,  we  shall  all  meet  together  in  the  joy  of  the  world  to  come.     As  con 
^-        cei-nino-  Master  Jerome,  my  dearly  beloved  brother  and  fellow,  I  hear  no  other 
but  that  he  is  remaining  in  strait  bands,  looking  for  death  as  I  do ;  and  that 
for  the  faith  which  he  valiantly  maintained  amongst  the  Bohemians,  om-  cruel 

^"^  "'    enemies  of  Bohemia  have  given  us  into  the  power  and  hands  of  other  enemies, 
and  into  bands.     I  beseech  you  pray  to  God  for  them. 

Moreover,  I  beseech  you,  namely  you  of  Prague,  that  ye  will  love  the  temple 
of  Bethlehem,  and  provide,  so  long  as  God  shall  permit,  that  the  word  of  God 
may  be  preached  in  the  same.  For,  because  of  that  place,  the  de\'il  is  angn,-, 
and  against  the  same  place  he  hath  stirred  up  priests  and  canons,  perceiving 
that  in  that  place  his  kingdom  shoidd  be  disturbed  and  diminished.  I  trust  in 
God  that  he  will  keep  that  holy  church  so  long  as  it  shall  please  him,  and  in 
the  same  shall  give  greater  increase  of  his  word  by  others,  than  he  hath  done 
by  me,  a  weak  vessel.  I  beseech  you  also,  that  ye  ■will  love  one  another,  and 
withhcJdLng  no  man  from  the  hearing  of  God's  word,  ye  will  provide  and  take 
care  that  good  men  be  not  oppressed  by  any  force  and  violence. 
Written  at  Constance,  the  year  of  our  Lord,  1415. 

Another  right  godly  Letter  of  John  Huss  to  a  certain  Priest,  admo- 
nishing him  of  his  Office,  and  exhorting  him  to  be  faithfid ;  worthy 
to  be  read  of  all  Ministers. 

A  worthy      The  peace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  Szc.     My  dear  brother!  be  diligent  in 
lesson  for  preaching  the  gospel,  and  do  the  work  of  a  good  evangelist ;  neglect  not  your 
ters"and*'  vocation ;  labour  like  a  blessed  soldier  of  Christ.     Fir^t,  live  godly  and  holily. 
prelates.    Secondly,  teach  faithfidly  and  tiid}-.    Thirdly,  be  an  example  to  others  in  well- 
doing, that  you  be  not  reprehended  in  your  sayings  ;  connect  vice  and  set  forth 
virtue.      To  evil  livers  threaten  eternal  punishment ;    but  to  those  that  be 
faithful  and  godly,  set  forth  the  comforts  of  eternal  joy.     Preach  continually, 
but  be  short  and  fruitful,  prudently  understanding,  and  discreetly  dispensing 
the  holy  Scriptiu-es.     Never  affinn  or  maintain  those  things  that  be  uncertain 
and  doubtful,  lest  your  adversaries  take  hold  upon  you,  who   rejoice  in   de- 
praving their  brethren ;  whereby  they  may  bring  the  ministers  of  God  into 
contempt.     Exhort  men  to  the  confession  of  their  faith,  and  to  the  commimion 
of  both  kinds,  both  of  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ,  whereby  such  as  do  repent 
earnestly  of  their  sins,  may  the  more  often  come  to  the  holy  communion.    And 
I  warn  you  that  you  enter  into  no  taverns  with  guests,   and  be  not  a  common 
company-keeper.     For  the  more  a  preacher  keepeth  him  from  the  company  of 
men,  the  more  he  is  regarded.      Albeit,  deny  not  yet  your  help  and  diligence, 
wheresoever  you  may  profit  others.     Against  fleshly  lust  preach  continually  all 
that  ever  you  can ;  for  that  is  the  raging  beast,  which  devoureth  men,  for  whom 
the  flesh  of  Christ  did  suffer.     WTierefore,  my  heartily  beloved !  I  beseech  you 
to  fly  fornication ;  for  where  a  man  would  most  profit  and  do  good,  there  this 
vice  useth  most  to  lurk.     In  any  case  fly  the  company  of  young  women,  and 
St.  Au-     believe  not  their  devotion  ;  for  St.  Austin  saith  :  '  The  more  devout  she  is,  the 
Justine     more  proclive  to  wantonness ;  and,  under  the  pretence  of  religion,  the  snare 
ruTt^here    ^^^  venom  of  fornication  lurketh.'    And  this  know,  my  well-beloved !  that  the 
of  aU,  but  conversation  with  them  subverteth  many  whom  the  conversation  of  this  world 
of  the        could  never  blemish  nor  beguile.     Admit  no  women  into  your  house,  for  what 
sort  of      cause  soever  it  be,  and  have  not  much  talk  with  them  otherwise,  for  avoiding  of 
light  per-  offence.     Finally,  howsoever  you  do,  fear  God  and  keep  his  precepts ;  so  shall 
sons.         ^.^^  walk  wisely,  and  shall  not  perish  ;    so  shall  you  subdue  the  flesh,  contemn 
the  world,  and  overcome  the  devil ;    so  shall  you  put  on  God,  find  life,  and 
confirm  others ;  and  shall  crown  yourself  with  the  crown  of  glor}',  wliich  the 
just  Judge  shall  give  you.     Amen. 

A  Letter  of  John  Huss  containing  a  confession  of  the  infirmity 
of  man's  flesh ;  how  weak  it  is,  and  repugnant  against  the  Spirit : 
wherein  he  also  exhorteth  to  persevere  constantly  in  the  truth. 

Health  be  to  you  from  Jesus  Christ,  &:c.    My  dear  friend !  know  that  Paletz- 
came  to  me  to  persuade  me  that  I  shoidd  not  fear  the  shame  of  abjuration,  but 
(1)  This  Paletz  vas  the  chiefest  enemy  of  John  Huss,  and  procurer  of  his  death. 


GODLY    LETTEIIS    OF    JOHN    HUSS    TO    THE    BOHEMIANS.  505 

to  consider  tlie  good  wliicli  thereof  will  come.     To  whom  I  said,   '  The  shame     Henry 
of  condemnation  and  burning  is  greater  than  to  abjure;  and  why  should  I  fear        ''• 
then  that  shame  ?  but  I  pray  you  tell  me  plainly  your  mind.     Presuppose  that      .  ^ 
such  articles  were  laid  to  you,  which  you  yourself  knew  not  to  be  true:  what    ,   ".  ," 

would  you  do  in  that  case?  would  you  abjure  ?'     Who  answered  :   'The  case  is  L 

sore;'  and  began  to  weep.    Many  other  things  he  spake  which  I  did  reprehend. 
Michael  de  Causis'  was,  sometimes,  before  the  prison  with  the  deputies.    And 
when  I  was  with  the  deputies,  thus  I  heai-d  him  speak  unto  the  keepers :  '  We,  john 
by  the  grace  of  God,  will  burn  this  heretic  shortly,  for  whose  cause   I  have  Kuss 
spent  many  florins.'     But  yet  imderstand  that  I  write  not  this  to  the  intent  to  j?[r%*^s 
revenge  me  of  him,  for  that  I  have  committed  to  God,  and  pray  to  God  for  enemies, 
him  with  all  my  heart. 

Yet  I  exhort  you  again,  to  be  circumspect  about  our  letters,  for  Michael  hath 
taken  such  order,  that  none  shall  be  suffered  to  come  into  the  prison ;  no  nor 
yet  the  keepers'  wives  are  permitted  to  come  to  me.  O  holy  God  !  how  largely 
doth  Antichrist  extend  his  power  and  cruelty!  But  1  trust  that  his  power  shall 
be  shortened,  and  his  iniquity  shall  be  detected,  more  and  more  amongst  the 
faithful  people. 

Almighty  God  shall  confirm  the  hearts  of  his  faithful,  whom  he  hath  chosen  A  pro- 
before  the  constitution  of  the  world,  that  they  may  receive  the  eternal  erown  5J,Yn/  °^ 
of  glory.     And  let  Antichrist  rage  as  much  as  he  will,  yet  he  shall  not  prevail  Huss. 
against  Christ,  who  shall  destroy  him  with   the  spirit  of  his  mouth,  as  the 
apostle  saith ;  and  then  shall  the  creature  be  delivered  out  of  servitude  of  cor- 
ruption, into  the  liberty  of  the  glory  of  the  sons  of  God,  as  saith  the  apostle  in 
the  words  following :    '  We,  also,  within  ourselves,  do  groan,  waiting  for  the 
adoption  of  the  sons  of  God,  the  redemption  of  oiu  body.' 

I  am  greatly  comforted  in  those  words  of  our  Saviour :  '  Happy  be  you  when 
men  shall  hate  you,  and  shall  separate  you,  and  shall  rebuke  you,  and  shall 
cast  out  your  name  as  execrable,  for  the  Son  of  man :  rejoice,  and  be  glad,  for 
behold,  great  is  your  reward  in  heaven.'  [Luke  vi.]  O  worthy,  yea  most 
worthy  consolation  !  which,  not  to  understand,  but  to  practise,  in  time  of  tribu- 
lation, is  a  hard  lesson. 

This  nde  St.  James,  with  the  other  apostles,  did  well  understand,  who 
saith :  '  Count  it  exceeding  joy,  my  brethren,  when  ye  shall  fall  into  divers 
temptations ;  knowing  that  the  probation  of  j^our  faith  worketh  patience.  Let 
patience  have  her  perfect  work.'  For  certainly  it  is  a  great  matter  for  a  man 
to  rejoice  in  trouble,  and  to  take  it  for  joy  to  be  in  divers  temptations.  A  light 
matter  it  is  to  speak  it  and  to  expound  it ;  but  a  great  matter  to  fulfil  it.  For  The  ex- 
why  ?  our  most  patient  and  most  valiant  Champion  himself,  knowing  that  he  ample  of 
should  rise  again  tlie  third  day,  overcoming  his  enemies  by  his  death,  and  re-  '^'^'" 
deeming  from  damnation  his  elect,  after  his  last  supper  was  troubled  in  spirit, 
and  said :  '  My  soul  is  heavy  unto  death;'  of  whom  also  the  gospel  saith: 
'  That  he  began  to  fear,  to  be  sad  and  heavy.'  Who,  being  then  in  an  agony, 
was  confirmed  of  the  angel,  and  his  sweat  was  like  the  di-ops  of  blood  falling 
upon  the  gi-ound.  And  yet  he,  notwithstanding,  being  so  troubled,  said  to  his 
disciples :  '  Let  not  your  hearts  be  troubled,  neither  fear  the  cruelt)'  of  them 
that  persecute  you,  for  you  sliall  have  me  with  you  always,  that  you  may  over- 
come the  tyranny  of  your  persecutors.'  Whereupon  those  his  soldiers,  looking 
upon  the  Prince  and  King  of  glory,  sustained  great  conflicts.  They  passed 
through  fire  and  water,  and  were  saved,  and  received  the  crown  of  the  Lord 
God,  of  the  which  St.  James,  in  his  canonical  epistle,  saith :  '  Blessed  is  the 
man  that  suffereth  temptation ;  for  when  he  shall  be  proved,  he  shall  receive 
the  crown  of  life,  which  God  hath  promised  to  them  that  love  him.'  Of  this 
crown  I  trust  steadfastly  the  Lord  will  make  me  a  partaker  also  with  you  who 
be  the  fervent  sealers  of  the  tnith,  and  with  all  them  who  steadfastly  and  con- 
stantly do  love  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  suffered  for  us,  leaving  to  us  example 
that  we  should  follow  his  steps.  '  It  behoved  him  to  suffer,"  as  he  saith  ;  and 
it  also  behoved  us  to  suflTer,  that  the  members  may  suffer  together  with  the 
head.  For  he  saith  :  '  If  any  man  will  come  after  me,  let  him  deny  himseltj 
and  take  up  his  cross,  and  follow  me.' 

'  O  most  merciful  Christ !  draw  us  weak  creatures  after  thee ;  for  except  thou 

(1)  Michael  de  Causis,  another  bitter  enemy  o!  John  Huss. 


506  A  LETTEE  FROM  LONDON  TO  JOHN  HUSS. 

Henry  should  draw  us,  we  are  not  able  to  follow  thee.     Give  us  a  strong  spirit,  that  it 

^-  may  be  ready  ;  and  although  the  flesh  be  feeble,  yet  let  thy  grace  go  before  us, 

AD  ^^  ^^^^  "^'  ^"'^  follow  us ;  for  without  thee  we  can  do  nothing,  and  much  less 

141g'  ^^^^^  ''^to  the  cruel  death  for  thy  sake.     Give  us  that  prompt  and  ready  spirit, 

'—  a  bold  heart,  an  upright  faith,  a  firm  hope  and  perfect  charity,  that  we  may 

The  giye  our  lives  patiently  and  joyfully  for  thy  name's  sake.  Amen. 
John"^"  Written  in  prison  in  bonds,  in  the  vigil  of  holy  St.  John  the  Baptist,  who, 

Huss  to  being  in  prison  and  in  bonds  for  the  rebuking  of  wickedness,  was 

Christ.  beheaded. 

Among  divers  other  letters  of  John  Huss,  which  he  wrote  to  the 
great  consolation  of  others,  I  thought  also  here  to  intermix  another 
certain  godly  letter  written  out  of  England,  by  a  faithful  scholar  of 
WicklifF,  as  appeareth,  unto  John  Huss  and  the  Bohemians ;  which, 
for  the  zealous  affection  therein  contained,  seemeth  not  unworthy 
to  be  read. 

A  Letter  of  a  Scholar  of  Wickliff  to  John  Huss  and  the  Bohe- 
mians ;  dated  from  London. 

Greeting,  and  whatsoever  can  be  devised  more  sweet,  in  the  bowels  of  Christ 
Jesu.  My  dearly  beloved  in  the  Lord,  whom  I  love  in  the  truth,  and  not  I 
only,  but  also  all  they  that  have  the  knowledge  of  the  tmth  ;  which  abideth  in 
you,  and  shall  be  with  you  through  the  grace  of  God  for  evermore.  I  rejoiced 
above  measure,  when  our  beloved  brethren  came  and  gave  testimony  unto  us 
of  your  truth,  and  how  you  walked  in  the  truth  ;  I  have  heard,  brethren,  how 
sharply  Antichrist  persecuteth  you,  in  vexing  the  faithful  servants  of  Christ 
with  divers  and  strange  kinds  of  afflictions.  And  surely  no  marvel,  if  amongst 
you  (since  it  is  so  almost  all  the  world  over)  the  law  of  Christ  be  too,  too 
grievously  impugned,  and  that  red  dragon,  having  so  many  heads  (of  whom  it 
is  spoken  in  the  Apocalypse),  have  now  vomited  out  of  his  mouth  that  great 
flood,  by  which  he  goeth  about  to  swallow  up  the  woman ;  but  the  most  gra- 
cious God  will  deliver  for  ever  his  only  and  most  faithful  spouse.  Let  us 
therefore  comfort  ourselves  in  the  Lord  our  God,  and  in  his  immeasurable  good- 
ness ;  hoping  strongly  in  him,  who  will  not  suffer  those  that  love  him  to  be  un- 
mercifully defrauded  of  any  their  purpose,  if  we,  according  to  our  duty,  shall 
love  him  with  all  our  heart :  for  adversity  should  by  no  means  prevail  over  us, 
if  there  were  no  iniquity  reigning  in  us.  Let,  therefore,  no  tribulation  or  sor- 
row for  Christ's  cause  discourage  us :  knowing  this  for  a  siurety,  that  whomso- 
ever the  Lord  vouchsafeth  to  receive  to  be  his  children,  those  he  scourgeth :  for 
so  the  merciful  Father  will  have  them  tried  in  this  miserable  life  by  persecu- 
tions, that  afterwards  he  may  spare  them.  For  the  gold  that  this  high  artificer 
hath  chosen,  he  purgeth  and  trieth  in  this  fire,  that  he  may  afterwards  lay  it  up 
in  his  pure  treasury.  For  we  see  that  the  time  we  shall  abide  here  is  short 
and  transitory ;  the  life  which  we  hope  for  after  this,  is  blessed  and  everlasting. 
Therefore,  while  we  have  time,  let  us  take  pains  that  we  may  enter  into  that 
rest.  What  other  thing  do  we  see  in  this  brittle  life,  than  sorrow,  heaviness, 
and  sadness,  and,  that  which  is  most  grievous  of  all  to  the  faithful,  too  much 
abusing  and  contempt  of  the  law  of  the  Lord?  Let  us  therefore  endeavour 
ourselves,  as  much  as  we  may,  to  lay  hold  of  the  things  that  are  eternal  and 
abiding,  despising  in  our  minds  all  transitory  and  frail  things.  Let  us  consider 
Ex-  the  holy  fellowship  of  our  fathers  that  have  gone  before  us.     Let  us  consider 

th"^'fc?  °^  *^^  saints  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament.  Did  they  not  pass  through  this  sea 
martyrs,  of  tribulation  and  persecution  1  were  not  some  of  them  cut  in  pieces,  others 
stoned,  and  others  of  them  killed  with  the  sword?  some  others  of  them  went 
about  in  pelts  and  goats'  skins,  as  the  apostle  to  the  Hebrews  witnesseth. 
Surely  they  all  walked  straitways,  following  the  steps  of  Christ,  who  said :  '  He 
that  ministereth  unto  me,  let  him  follow  me  wheresoever  I  go,'  &c.  Therefore, 
let  us  also,  who  have  such  noble  examples  given  us  of  the  saints  that  went 
before  us,  laying  away,  as  much  as  in  us  lieth,  the  heavy  burden  and  the  yoke 


A  LETTER  OF  JOHN  HUSS  TO  HIS  FRIENDS   IN   BOHEMIA.  507 

of  sin  which  compasseth  us  about,  run  forward  through  patience,  to  the  battle     Henrv 
that  is  set  before  us,  fixing  our  eyes  upon  the  Author  of  faith,  and  Jesus  the         ^• 
finisher  of  the  same;  who,  seeing  the  joy  that  was  set  before  him,  suflfered  the      .    p. 
pains  of  the  cross,  despising  death.     Let  us  call  upon  him,  who  sufiered  such    ,  .',  „* 

reproach  against  himself  of  sinners,  that  we  be  not  wearied,  fainting  in  our L 

hearts ;  but  that  we  may  heartily  pray  for  help  of  the  Lord,  and  may  fight 
against  his  adversary  Antichrist ;  that  we  may  love  his  law,  and  not  be  deceit- 
ful labourers,  but  that  we  may  deal  faithfully  in  all  things,  according  to  that 
which  God  hath  vouchsafed  to  give  us,  and  that  we  may  labour  diligently  in 
the  Lord's  cause,  under  hope  of  an  everlasting  reward.  Behold  therefore,  brother 
Huss,  most  dearly  beloved  in  Christ,  although  in  face  unknown  to  me,  yet  not 
in  faith  and  love  (for  distance  of  places  cannot  separate  those  whom  the  love 
of  Christ  doth  effectually  knit  together),  be  comforted  in  the  grace  which  is  given 
unto  thee  ;  labour  like  a  good  soldier  of  Christ  Jesus ;  preach,  be  instant  in  word 
and  in  example,  and  call  as  many  as  thou  canst  to  the  way  of  truth  :  for  the  truth 
of  the  gospel  is  not  to  be  kept  in  silence,  because  of  the  frivolous  censures  and 
thunderbolts  of  Antichrist.  And,  therefore,  to  the  uttermost  of  thy  power, 
strengthen  thou  and  confirm  the  members  of  Christ,  who  are  weakened  by  the 
devil ;  and  if  the  Lord  will  vouchsafe  it,  Antichrist  shall  shortly  come  to  an 
end.  And  there  is  one  thing  wherein  I  do  greatly  rejoice,  that  in  your  realm 
and  in  other  places,  God  hath  stirred  up  the  hearts  of  some  men  that  they  can 
gladly  suffer,  for  the  word  of  God,  imprisonment,  banishment,  and  death. 

Further,  beloved,  I  know  not  what  to  write  unto  you,  but  I  confess  that  I 
could  wish  to  poui-  out  my  whole  heart,  if  thereby  I  might  comfort  you  in  the 
law  of  the  Lord.  Also  I  salute,  from  the  bottom  of  my  heart,  all  the  faithful 
lovers  of  the  law  of  the  Lord,  and  especially  Jacobellus,  your  coadjutor  in  the 
gospel,  requiring  that  he  will  pray  unto  the  Lord  for  me  in  the  universal  church 
of  Jesus  Christ.  And  the  God  of  peace,  who  hath  raised  from  the  dead  the 
shepherd  of  the  sheep,  the  mighty  Lord  Jesus  Chiist,  make  you  apt  in  all 
goodness,  to  do  his  will,  working  in  you  that  which  may  be  pleasant  in  his 
sight.  All  your  friends  salute  you  which  have  heard  of  your  constancy.  I 
would  desire  also  to  see  your  letters  written  back  to  us,  for  know  ye  that  they 
shall  greatly  comfort  us. 

At  London,  by  your  servant,  desiring  to  be  fellow  with  you  in  your 
labours,  Ricus  Wichewitze,  priest  unworthy. 

Another  Letter  of  John  Huss  to  his  Friends  of  Bohemia. 

The  Lord  God  be  with  you.  I  love  the  counsel  of  the  Lord  above  gold  and 
precious  stone  ;  wherefore  I  trust  in  the  mercy  of  Jesus  Christ,  that  he  will 
give  me  his  Spirit  to  stand  in  his  truth.  Pray  to  the  Lord,  '  For  the  spirit  is 
ready,  and  the  flesh  is  weak.'  The  Lord  Almighty  be  the  eternal  reward  unto 
my  lords,  who  constantly,  firmly,  and  faithfully  do  stand  for  righteousness  ;  to 
whom  the  Lord  God  shall  give  in  the  kingdom  of  Bohemia,  to  know  the  truth. 
For  the  following  of  which  truth,  necessary  it  is  that  they  retiu-n  again  into 
Bohemia,  setting  apart  all  vain  glory,  and  following  not  a  mortal  and  miserable 
king,  but  the  King  of  Glory  who  giveth  eternal  life. 

O  how  comfortable  was  the  giving  of  the  hand  of  lord  John  de  Clum  unto 
me,  who  was  not  ashamed  to  reach  forth  his  hand  to  me  a  wretch,  and  such  an 
abject  heretic,  lying  in  fetters  of  iron,  and  cried  out  upon  of  all  men  !  Now 
peradventure,  I  shall  not  speak  much  hereafter  with  you :  therefore  salute  in 
time,  as  you  shall  see  them  all,  the  faithful  of  Bohemia. 

Paletz  came  to  me  in  prison.  His  salutation  in  my  vehement  infirmity  was 
this,  before  the  commissaries:  that  there  hath  not  risen  a  more  perilous  heretic 
since  Christ  was  born,  than  were  Wickliff  and  I.  Also  he  said,  that  all  such  as 
came  to  hear  my  talk  were  infected  with  this  heresy,  to  think  that  the  sub- 
stance of  bread  remained  in  the  sacrament  of  the  altar.  To  whom  I  answered 
and  said:  'O  master!  what  a  grievous  salutation  have  you  given  me,  and  how 
greatly  do  you  sin !  Behold  I  shall  die,  or  peradventure  to-morrow  shall  be 
burnt ;  and  what  reward  shall  be  recompensed  to  you  in  Bohemia  for  your 
labour.' 

This  thing,  peradventure.  I  should  not  have  written,  lest  I  might  seem  to  hate 


508  VISION    AND    PROPHESIES    OF    JOHN    HUSS. 

Henry    him.     I  have  always  had  this  in  my  heart :   '  Trust  not  in  princes,'  &c.     And 

V-       again :  '  Cursed  be  the  man  that  trusteth  in  man,  and  maketh  flesh  to  be  his 

A  D     arm.'     For  God's  sake  be  you  circumspect  liow  you  stand  and  how  you  return. 

14  Ig'     Carry  no  letters  with  you.     Direct  your  books  not  all  by  one,  but  diversely  by 

divers  friends. 


The  Know  this  for  certain,  that  I  have  had  great  conflicts  by  dreams,  in  such  sort, 

^fTh^      as  I  had  mucli  ado  to  refrain  from  crying  out.     For  I  dreamed  of  the  pope's 

Huss  by    escape  before  he  went.     And  after  the  lord  John  had  told  me  thereof,  imme- 

dreams.     diately  in  the  night  it  was  told  me,  that  the  pope  should  return  to  you  again. 

And  afterwards  also  I  dreamed  of  the  apprehending  of  Master  Jerome,  although 

not  in  full  manner  as  it  was  done.     All  tlie  impiusonments,  whither  and  how  I 

am  carried,  were  opened  to  me  before,  although  not  fully  after  the  same  form 

and   circumstance.      Many  serpents    oftentimes    appeared    unto   me,    having 

heads  also  in  their  tail ;  but  none  of  them  could  bite  me,  and  many  other  things 

more. 

These  things  I  write,  not  esteeming  myself  as  a  prophet,  or  that  I  extol  my- 
self, but  only  to  signify  unto  you  what  temptations  I  had  in  body,  and  also  in 
mind,  and  what  great  fear  I  had,  lesf  I  should  transgress  the  commandment  of 
A  pro-       the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     Now  I   remember  with  myself  the  words  of  Master 
phecy  of    Jerome,  who  said,  that  if  I  should  come  to  the  council,  he  thought  I  should 
Jerome  of  never  return  home  again.     In  like  manner  there  was  a  good  and  godly  man,  a 
Prague,     tailor,^  who,  taking  his  leave  of  me  at  Prague,  spake  to  me  in  these  words  : 
'  God  be  with  you,'  said  he,  '  for  I  think  verily,  my  dear  and  good  Master  John, 
that  you  shall  not  return  again  to  us  with  your  life.  The  King,  not  of  Hungary, 
but  of  Heaven,  reward  you  with  all  goodness,  for  the  faithful  doctrine  which  I  at 
your  hands  received,'  &c. 

And  shortly  after  the  writing  hereof,  he  sendeth  also  unto  them 
another  prophetical  vision  of  his,  to  be  expounded,  touching  the 
reformation  of  the  church,  Avritten  in  his  forty-fourth  epistle,  the  con- 
tents whereof  be  these. 

Letter  of  John  Huss,  sent  to  the  Lord  John  de  Clum. 

I  pray  you  expound  to  me  the  dream  of  this  night.  I  saw  how  that  in  my 
church  of  Bethlehem  they  came  to  rase  and  put  out  all  the  images  of  Christ, 
and  did  put  them  out.  The  next  day  after,  I  arose  and  saw  many  painters,  who 
painted  and  made  more  fair  images,  and  many  more  than  I  had  done  before, 
Avhich  images  I  was  very  glad  and  joyful  to  behold.  And  the  painters,  with 
much  people  about  them,  said  :  '  Let  the  bishops  and  priests  come  now,  and  put 
us  out  these  pictures.'  Which  being  done,  much  people  seemed  to  me  in 
Bethlehem  to  rejoice,  and  I  with  them.  And  I  awaking  therewith,  felt  myself 
to  laugh,  &c. 

Pro-  This  vision  lord  John  de  Clum,  and  John  Huss  himself,  in  his 

phetia.  i^qqJj  ^f  Epigtles,  in  the  forth-fifth  epistle,  seem  to  expound,  and  apply 
the  images  of  Christ  unto  the  preaching  of  Christ  and  of  his  life ; 
which  preaching  and  doctrine  of  Christ,  though  the  -pope  and  his 
cardinals  should  extinguish  in  him,  yet  did  he  foresee  and  declare, 
that  the  time  should  come,  wherein  the  same  doctrine  should  be 
revived  again  by  others  so  plenteously,  that  the  pope  with  all  his 
power  should  not  be  able  to  prevail  against  it.  Thus  much  as  con- 
cerning this  vision  of  John  Huss,  whereunto  doth  well  accord  the 
prophecy  of  Jerome  of  Prague,  printed  in  the  coin  called  '  Moneta 
Hussi ;'  of  which  coin  I  have  myself  one  of  the  plates,  having  this 
superscription  following  printed  about  it ;  "  Centum  revolutis  annis 
Deo  respondebitis  et  mihi,"  that  is,  after  a  hundred  years  come  and 

(1)  This  tailor's  name  was  Andrew,  a  Polonian. 


A    LETTER    OF    HUSS    TO    HIS    FRIEND    MARTIN.  509 

gone,  you  shall  give  account  to  God  and  to  me.     Whereof,  God    ttenry 
willing,  more  shall  be  said  hereafter.  '. 

Furthermore,  in  the  forty-eighth  epistle  the  said  John  Huss,  seeming   A.  D. 
to  speak  with  the  like  spirit  of  prophesy,  hath  these  words  following :    ^'^^'^- 
"  Sed  spero,  quod  quae  dixi  sub  tecto,  pr?edicabuntur  super  tecta  f  Pro- 
that  is :  "  but  I  trust  that  those  things  which  I  have  spoken  within 
the  house,  hereafter  shall  be  preached  upon  the  top  of  the  house." 

And  because  we  are  here  in  hand  with  the  prophesies  of  John 
Huss,  it  shall  moreover  serve  well  in  place  here  to  record  his  words 
in  a  certain  treatise  by  him  written  :  "  De  sacerdotum  et  monachorum 
carnalium  abominatione ;"  wherein  the  said  John  Huss,  speaking 
prophetically  of  the  reformation  of  the  church,  hath  these  words 
following.' 

*  INIoreover,  hereupon,  note  and  mark  by  the  way,  that  the  church  of  God  Pro- 
cannot  be  reduced  to  its  former  dignity,  or  be  reformed,  before  all  things  first  phetia. 
be  made  new ;  the  ti-uth  whereof  is  plain  by  the  temple  of  Solomon.  Like  as 
the  clergy  and  priests,  so  also  the  people  and  laity ;  or  else  miless  all  such  as 
now  be  addicted  to  avarice,  from  the  least  to  the  most,  be  first  converted  and 
reclaimed,  as  well  the  people  as  clergy  and  priests.  Albeit  as  my  mind  now 
giveth  me,  I  believe  rather  the  first,  that  is,  that  then  shall  rise  a  new  people, 
formed  after  the  new  man,  which  is  created  after  God :  of  which  people  new 
clerks  and  priests  shall  come,  and  be  taken  ;  who  all  shall  hate  covetousncss, 
and  the  glory  of  this  hfe,  hastening  to  an  heavenly  conversation.  Notwith- 
standing all  these  things  shall  come  to  pass,  and  be  brought  by  little  and  little 
in  order  of  times,  dispensed  of  God  for  the  same  purpose.  And  this  God  doth 
and  will  do  for  his  own  goodness  and  mercy,  and  for  the  riches  of  his  great 
longanimity  and  patience ;  giving  time  and  space  of  repentance  to  them  that 
have  long  lien  in  their  sins,  to  amend,  and  fly  from  the  face  of  the  Lord's  fm-y, 
while  that  in  like  manner  the  carnal  people,  and  carnal  priests,  successively,  and 
in  time,  shall  fall  away  and  be  consumed  as  with  the  moth,'  &c. 

A  Letter  of  John  Huss  to  his  Friend  Martin. 

Master  Martin,  my  dear  brother  in  Christ,  I  exhort  you  in  the  Lord  that  you 
fear  God,  keep  his  commandments,  and  flee  the  company  of  women,  and  beware 
of  hearing  their  confession,  lest,  by  the  hypocrisy  of  women,  Satan  deceive  you; 
trust  not  their  devotion.  You  know  how  I  have  detested  the  avarice  and  the 
inordinate  life  of  the  clergy ;  wherefore,  throxigh  the  grace  of  God,  I  suffer  now 
persecution,  which  shortly  shall  be  consummate  in  me ;  neither  do  I  fear  to 
have  my  heart  poured  out  for  the  name  of  Christ  Jesus ;  I  desire  you  heartily, 
be  not  greedy  in  seeking  after  benefices.  And  yet  if  you  shall  be  called  to  any 
cure  in  the  country,  let  the  honour  of  God,  the  salvation  of  souls,  and  the 
travail  thereof,  move  you  thereunto,  and  not  the  having  of  the  living  or  the 
commodities  thereof.  And  if  you  shall  be  placed  in  any  such  benefice,  beware 
you  have  no  young  woman  for  your  cook  or  servant,  lest  you  edify  and  increase 
more  your  house  than  your  soul.^  See  that  you  be  a  builder  of  your  spiritual 
house,  being  gentle  to  the  poor  and  humble  of  mind,  and  waste  not  your  goods 
in  great  fare.  I  fear  also  if  you  do  not  amend  yoiu-  life,  ceasing  from  your 
costly  and  superfluous  apparel,  lest  you  shall  be  grievously  chastised,  as  I  also,  He  re- 
wretched  man,  shall  be  punished,  who  have  used  the  Uke,  being  seduced  by  P?^"'f^'^ 
custom  of  evil  men  and  worldly  glory,  whereby  I  have  been  wounded  against  gfj.^*^ 
God  with  the  spirit  of  pride.  And  because  you  have  notably  luiown  both  my  ments. 
preaching  and  outward  conversation  even  from  my  youth,  I  have  no  need  to 
write  many  things  unto  you,  but  to  desire  you,  for  the  mercy  of  Jesus  Christ, 
that  you  do  not  follow  me  in  any  such  levity  and  lightness,  which  you  have 

(1)  "Ex  istis  iilterius  adveite  incidentaliter,  quod  Dei  ecclesia  nequit  ad  pristinam  suam  digni- 
tatem reduci."  &c. 

(2)  Note  that  then  priests  were  not  married,  and  therefore  he  willeth  them  to  avoid  the  company 
of  women. 


510  JOHN    nuss    CONDEMNED    FOR    XO    ERRONEOUS    DOCTRINE. 

Henry  seen  in  me.  You  knew  how,  before  my  priesthood  (which  grieveth  me  now) 
^'-  I  have  dehghted  to  play  oftentimes  at  chess,  and  have  neglected  my  time,  and 
have  unhappily  provoked  both  myself  and  others  to  anger  many  times  by  that 
play.  Wherefore,  besides  other  my  innumerable  faults,  for  this  also  I  desire 
you  to  invocate  the  mercy  of  the  Lord,  that  he  will  pardon  me,  and  so  direct 
my  life,  that  having  overcome  the  wickedness  of  this  present  life,  the  flesh,  the 
world,  and  the  devil,  I  may  find  place  in  the  heavenly  country,  at  least  in  the 
day  of  judgment.  Fare  ye  well  in  Christ  Jesus,  with  all  them  who  keep  his 
the  chess.  ig^,_  ]\iy  gj-gy  coat,  if  )'ou  will,  keep  to  yourself  for  my  remembrance,  but  I 
think  you  are  ashamed  to  wear  that  grey  colour;  therefore  you  may  give  it  to 
whom  j'ou  shall  think  good.  My  white  coat  you  shall  give  the  minister  N.  my 
scholar.  To  George  or  else  to  Zuzikon  sixty  groats,  or  else  my  grey  coat,  for 
he  hath  faithfully  served  me. 

The  Superscription. 

I  pray  you  that  you  do  not  open  this  letter,  before  you  be  sure  and  certain  of 
my  death. 

The  Consolation  of  Master  Jerome  to  Master  Huss. 

My  master,  in  those  things  which  you  have  both  written  hitherto,  and  also 
preached  after  the  law  of  God,  against  the  pride,  avarice,  and  other  inordinate 
vices  of  the  priests,  go  forward,  be  constant  and  sti-ong.  And  if  I  shall  know 
that  you  are  oppressed  in  the  cause,  and  if  need  shall  so  require,  of  mine  own 
accord  I  will  follow  after  to  help  you,  as  much  as  I  can. 

John  By  the  life,  acts  and  letters  of  John   Huss  hitherto  rehearsed, 

Huss  con-  ]i  ig  evident  and  plain,  that  he  was  condemned  not  for  any  en-or  of 
for  no  er-  doctrinc,  which  they  could  Avell  prove  in  him,  Avho  neither  denied 
doctrine    their  popisli  transubstantiation,  neither  spake  against  the  authority  of 
he'wS"    *^^  church  of  Rome,  if  it  were  well  governed,  nor  yet  the  seven 
culpable,  sacramcnts,  and  also  said  mass  himself,  and  almost  in  all  their  popish 
opinions  was  a  papist  Avith  them  ;  but  only  of  evil  will  was  accused  of 
his  malicious  adversaries,  because  he  spake  against  the  pomp,  pride  and 
avarice,  and  other  wicked  enormities  of  the  pope,  cardinals,  and  pre- 
lates of  the  church,  and  because  he  could  not  abide  the  high  dignities 
and  livings  of  the  church,  and  thought  the  doings  of  the  pope  to  be 
Antichrist-like.     For  this  cause  he  procured  so  many  enemies  and 
false  witnesses  against  him,  who  straining  and  picking  matter  out  of 
his  books  and  writings,  having  no  one  just  article  of  doctrine  to  lay 
unto  him,  yet  they  made  him  a  heretic,  whether  he  would  or  no,  and 
brought  him  to  his  condemnation.     Tliis  can  hatred  and  malice  do, 
where  the  charity  of  Christ  hath  no  place ;  which  being  so,  as  thy 
charity,  good  reader,  may  easily  understand,  in  perusing  the  whole 
cochieus  course  of  his  story,  I  beseecb  thee  then,  what  cause  had  John  Coch- 
agatnst     l^^s  to  write  his  twclvc  books  against  John  Huss  and  Hussites  ?  in 
Hus's       ^liich  books  how  bitterly  and  intemperately  he  misuseth  his  pen,  by 
without    these  few  words  in  his  second  book  thou  mayest  take  a  little  taste ; 
which  words  I  thought  here  briefly  to  place  in  English,  to  the  end  that 
all  Englishmen  may  judge  thereby,  with  what  spirit  and  truth  these 
catholics  be  carried.     His  words  be  these  :'  "  I  say  therefore  John 
Huss  is  neither  to  be  counted   holy  nor  blessed,  but  rather  wicked 
and  eternally  wretched  ;  insomuch  that  in  the  day  of  judgment,  it 

(l)  Ex  Cochleo,  lib.  ii.  hist.  Hussitarum,  pag.  88.     "  Dice  igitur  Joan.    Hus.  neque  sanctum 
ceque  beatimi  habendum  esse,  sed  imjiiuni  poiiiis,"  ^-c. 


cause. 


THE    TRAGICAL    HISTORY    OF    JEROME    OF    PRAGUE.  511 

shall  be  more  easy,  not  only  ■with  the  infidel  Pagans,  Tm-lcs,  Tarta-  Henry 
rians,  and  Jews,  but  also  with  the  most  sinful  Sodomites,  and  the  " 
abominable  Persians,  who  do  most  filthily  pollute  their  daughters,  A.  D. 
sisters,  or  mother  ;  yea  and  also  with  the  impious  Cain,  killer  of  his  ^"^^^^ 
own  brother  ;  with  Thiestes,  killer  of  his  own  mother  ;  and  the  Les-  t 
trygones  and  other  Antliropophagi,  who  devour  man''s  flesh ;  yea  more 
easy  with  those  infamous  murderers  of  infants,  Pharaoh  and  Herod, 
than  with  him,"  &c.  These  be  the  words  of  Cochleus  ;  whose  railing 
books,  although  they  deserve  neither  to  be  read,  nor  ansv/ered,  yet, 
if  it  please  God,  it  Avere  to  be  wished  that  the  Lord  would  stir  up 
some  towardly  young  man,  that  hath  so  much  leism-e,  to  defend  the 
simplicity  of  this  John  Huss,  who  cannot  now  answer  for  himself.  In 
the  mean  time,  something  to  satisfy  or  stay  the  reader's  mind  against 
this  immoderate  hyperbole  of  Cochleus,  in  like  few  words  I  will 
bring  out  John  Huss  to  speak  and  to  clear  himself  against  this  slander: 
whose  words  in  his  book  '  De  Sacerdotum  et  Monachorum  abomina- 
tione  desolationis,'  pag.  84,  &c.,  I  beseech  the  reader  to  note:  "  Nam 
et  ista  scribens  fateor,  quod  nihil  aliud  me  in  illis  perurget,  nisi 
dilectio  Dom.  nostri  Jesu  crucifixi,"  &c. ;  that  is,  "  For  in  writing 
these  things,  I  confess  nothing  else  to  have  moved  me  hereunto,  but 
only  the  love  of  our  Lord  Jesus  crucified,  whose  prints  and  stripes 
(according  to  the  measure  of  my  weakness  and  vileness)  I  covet  to 
bear  in  myself,  beseeching  him  so  to  give  me  grace,  that  I  never 
seek  to  glory  in  myself,  or  in  any  thing  else,  but  only  in  his  cross, 
and  in  the  inestimable  ignominy  of  his  passion  which  he  suffered  for 
me.  And,  therefore,  I  write  and  speak  these  things,  which  I  do  not 
doubt  will  like  all  such  as  unfeignedly  do  love  the  Lord  Christ  cruci- 
fied ;  and  contrary  will  mislike  not  a  little  all  such  as  be  of  Antichrist. 
Also  again,  I  confess  before  the  most  merciful  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
crucified,  that  these  things  which  I  do  now  write,  and  those  that  I 
have  written  before,  neither  I  could  have  written,  nor  knew  how,  nor 
durst  so  have  written,  unless  he,  by  his  inward  unction,  had  so  com- 
manded me.  Neither  yet  do  I  write  these  things  as  of  authority,  to 
get  me  fame  and  name ;  for  as  St.  Augustine  and  Jerome  do  say,  that 
is  only  to  be  given  to  the  Scriptures  and  writings  of  the  apostles, 
evangehsts,  and  prophets,  and  to  the  canonical  Scriptures,  which  do 
abound  in  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit  of  Jesus.  And  whatsoever  is 
there  said,  is  full  of  verity  and  wholesome  utility,"  &c. 

And  here  place  also  wovJd  require  something  to  say  to  ^neas 
Sylvius,  to  Antoninus,  and  to  Laziardus,  who  falsely  impute  articles  to 
him,  which  he  never  maintained.  But  because  time  sutFereth  not,  I 
will  proceed  to  the  story  of  Master  Jerome  of  Prague. 

Cfje  tragical  and  lamentable  l^isitotp  of  tlje  famous  learned  cfl^an  anD 
0oOlp  JlUctpr  of  illl)ri.b%  Jiaa^ter  Serome  of  i^rague,  burneD  at 
Constance  for  Ifte  cau^e  anti  quarrel  a^  toa^  JEla^ter  3Ioljn  3(|u^iS. 

*  Forasmuch^  as  the  variety  of  men"'s   affections,   by  means  ofA.n.  uu 
hatred  of  persons   oftentimes    coming  between,  and    other    causes 

(1)  This  preamble  to  the  history  of  Jerome  of  Prague  precedes  the  account  of  that  illustrious 
martyr  in  the  Edition  of  1563,  p.  242,  where  the  narrative  is  divided  into  seven  short  cliapters, 
•written  by   an  eye-witness  of  his  arraignment  and  sufferings— Ed. 


512  THE    TRAGICAT.    HISTORY    OF    JEKOME    OF    PRAGUE. 

ii^nry   growing,  dotli  often  very  ili,  yea,  altogether  falsely,  accumulate  and 
gather  the   order  of  things   done,  far  otherwise  than,   in  deed,  they 


A.D.    ■yygj.g  done,  and  hath  used  and  accustomed  to  divulgate  their  feigned 

V^      doings  unto  posterity ;   therefore,   that   the  acts  worthy  of   rcmem- 

1416.    hrance,  in  these  our  days,  should  suffer  none  of  the  aforesaid  incom- 

modities  and  evils,  and  that  the  fervent   and   true  confession  of  the 

truth  which  this  worthy  man,  Jerome  of  Prague,  the  fervent  and  stout 
champion  of  the  gospel,  hath  sealed  with  his  blood  and  death, 
whereby  also,  as  another  Elias,  he  is  carried,  without  all  doubts,  in  a 
fiery  chariot  into  the  paradise  of  infinite  joys  and  pleasures ;  and 
that  the  order  of  his  death,  by  the  hasty  passing  away  of  time,  should 
not  escape  away  from  the  posterity  to  come,  and  that,  by  no  means, 
this  example  of  truth  and  glass  of  steadfastness,  and  perfect  imita- 
tion, might,  by  any  means,  be  taken  away :  I  have  determined  to 
gather  together,  albeit  with  a  rude  style,  the  acts  and  doings  of  the 
said  Master  Jerome,  as  he  went  unto  the  council  of  Constance  : 
which  I  myself  did  see,  and  also  heard  there,  and  also  were  reported 
unto  me  by  such  true  and  credible  men,  as  did  hear  and  see  the 
same  at  Constance,  to  the  intent  that  the  memory  of  this  most  worthy 
man,  being  the  author  of  truth,  may  hereafter  be  the  more  celebrated 
and  remembered.* 

These  things  hitherto  being  discoursed,  touching  the  life,  acts,  and 

constant  martyrdom  of   Master  John  Huss,  with  part  also  of  his 

letters  adjoined  to  the  same,  whose  death  was  on  the  sixth  of  July, 

A.D.  141.5,  now  remaineth  consequently  to  describe  the  like  tragedy 

and  cruel  handling  of  his  christian  companion  and  fellow  in  bands, 

Master  Jerome  of  Prague  ;  who,  grievously  sorrowing  the  slanderous 

reproach  and  defamation  of  his  country  of  Bohemia,  and  also  hearing 

tell  of  the  manifest  injuries  done  to  that  man  of  worthy  memory, 

Jerome     Master  John  Huss,  freely,  and  of  his  own  accord,  came  to  Constance 

tocoli'^     on  the  fourth  day  of  April,  141-5.     Who,  there  perceiving  that  John 

stance.     Huss  was  deuiecl  to  be  heard,  and  that  watch  and  wait  w^ere  laid  for 

him  on  every  side,  departed  until  the  next  day  to  Uberlingen,  a  city  of 

the  empire,  which  city  was  a  mile  off  from  Constance ;  and  from  thence 

he  wrote  his  letters  by  me  to  Sigismund,  king  of  Hungary,  and  his 

The  safe  barous,  aud  also  unto  the  council,  most  earnestly  requiring  that  the 

was^re-    ^^i"g  ^"^^  couucil  would  givc  him  a  safe  conduct  freely  to  come  and 

quired,     go,   and   that  he   would  then   come  in   open  audience  to    answer 

vain,  of    uuto  cvcry  man,  if  there  were  any  of  the  council  that  would  lay 

peror!^"    ^"7  Crime  to  him,  as  by  the  tenor  of  his  intimation  shall  more  at 

large  appear. 

When  the  said  king  of  Hungary  was  required  thereunto,  as  is 
aforesaid,  being  in  the  house  of  the  lord  cardinal  of  Cambray, 
he  denied  to  give  Master  Jerome  any  safe  conduct ;  excusing  him- 
self for  the  evil  speed  he  had  with  the  safe  conduct  of  "John  Huss 
before,  and  alleging  also  certain  other  causes.  The  deputies  also 
of  the  four  nations  of  the  council,  being  moved  thereunto  by  the 
lords  of  the  kingdom  of  Bohemia,  answered,  "  We  will  give  him.  a 
safe  conduct  to  come,  but  not  to  depart."  Whose  answers,  when 
they  were  reported  unto  Master  Jerome,  he  the  next  day  after  wrote 
certain  intimations  according  to  the  tenor  under-written,  which  he 
sent  to  Constance  to  be  set  upon  the  gates  of  the  city,  and  upon  the 


SAFE  CONDUCT  DENIED  TO  JEROME  OF  PRAGUE.  513 

gates  of  the  churches  and  monasteries,  and  of  the  houses  of  the  car-   Henry 
dinals  and  other  nobles  and  prelates  ;  the  tenor  whereof  here  followeth        ' 
word  for  word  in  this  manner.  A.  D. 

1415 

The  Intimation  of  Jerome  of  Prague,  set  up  in  divers  places  of  the    j^je 
Town  of  Constance.  '- 

Unto  the  most  noble  prince  and  lord,  the  lord  Sigismund,  by  the  grace  of 
God  king  of  the  Romans,  always  Augustus,  and  of  Hungary,  &c.  I  Jerome 
of  Prague,  master  of  arts  of  the  general  universities  of  Paris,  Cologne,  Hei- 
delberg, and  Prague,  by  these  my  present  letters  do  notify  to  the  king,  together 
with  the  whole  reverend  council,  and,  as  much  as  in  me  lieth,  do  all  men  to  ' 
understand  and  know,  that  because  of  the  crafty  slanderers,  backbiters,  and 
accusers,  I  am  ready  fi-eely  and  of  mine  own  will,  to  come  to  Constance,  there  to 
declare  openly  before  the  council,  the  purity  and  sincerity  of  my  true  faith, 
and  mine  innocency  ;  and  not  secretly  in  corners  before  any  private  or  parti- 
cular person.  Wherefore,  if  there  be  any  of  my  slanderers,  of  what  nation  or 
estate  soever  they  be,  who  will  object  against  me  any  crime  of  eiTor  or  heresy, 
let  them  come  forth  openly  before  me  in  the  presence  of  the  whole  council, 
and  in  their  own  names  object  against  me ;  and  I  will  be  ready,  as  I  have 
written,  to  answer  openly  and  publicly,  before  the  whole  council,  of  mine  in- 
nocency, and  to  declare  the  purity  and  sincerity  of  my  true  faith.  And  if  so 
be  that  I  shall  be  found  culpable  in  en-or  or  heresy,  then  I  will  not  refuse 
openly  to  suffer  such  pmiishment  as  shall  be  meet  and  worthy  for  an  erroneous 
person,  or  a  heretic. 

Wherefore  I  most  humbly  beseech  my  lord  the  king,  and  the  whole  sacred 
council,  that  I  may  have  to  this  end  and  purpose  aforesaid,  safe  and  sure  access. 
And  if  it  happen  that  I,  offering  such  equity  and  right  as  I  do,  before  any  fault 
be  proved  against  me,  be  an-ested,  imprisoned,  or  have  any  violence  done  unto 
me ;  that  then  it  anay  be  manifest  unto  the  whole  world,  that  this  general 
council  doth  not  proceed  according  to  equity  and  justice,  if  they  would  by  any 
means  put  me  back  from  this  profound  and  strait  justice,  being  come  hither 
freely  of  mine  own  mind  and  accord ;  which  thing  I  suppose  to  be  far  from  so 
sacred  and  holy  a  council  of  wise  men. 

When  as  yet  Master  Jerome,  through  such  intimations  copied  out  safe  con- 
in  the  Bohemian,  Latin,  and  German  tongue,  being  set  up  as  is  afore-  n"ed  fo*' 
said,   could  not  get  any  safe  conduct,  then  the  nobles,  lords,  and  Jerome. 
knights,  especially  of  the  Bohemian  nation,  present  in  Constance,  reTumeth 
gave  unto  him  their  letters  patent,  confirmed  with  their  seals  for  a  BoiTemia, 
testimony  and  witness  of  the  premises  ;  with  which  letters,  the  said  with  the 
Master  Jerome  returned  again  into  Bohemia  :    but,  by  the  treason  nies  of 
and  conspiracy  of  his  enemies  he  was  taken  in  Hirschau  by  the  officers  of  Bohe-^ 
of  duke  John,  and  in  Zultzbach  was  brought  back  again  to  the  pre-  ™'^- 
sence  of  the   duke.     In  the  mean  time  such  as  were  the  setters-  appr^-^ 
forward  of  the  council  against  Master  John  Huss  and  Master  Jerome ;  J'^^^^^g' " 
that  is  to  say,  Michael  de  Causis  and  Master  Paletz,  and  others  their  by  duke 
accomplices,  required  that  the  said  Master  Jerome  should  be  cited  by 
reason  of  his  intimations  ;  and,  certain  days  after,  the  citation  here 
under-written  was  set  upon  the  gates  and  porches  of  the  city  and 
churches,  which  followeth  here  in  this  manner : 

The  Citation  of  Jerome  of  Prague  to  the  Council  of  Constance. 

This  most  sacred  and  holy  synod  and  general  council  of  Constance,  faithfidly  Jerome 
congregated  and  gathered  together  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  representing  the  uni-  ^Jjg^'|,^^„_ 
versal  militant  church,  unto  Jerome  of  Prague,  who  writeth  himself  to  be  a  cii  when 
master  of  arts  of  so  many  universities,  and  pretendeth  those  things  which  are  he  was 
only  pertaining  unto  sobriety  and  modesty,  and  that  he  knoweth  no  more  than  '^'^"• 
VOL.  III.  L    L 


514  THE    TRAGICAL    HISTORY    OF    JEROME    OF    PRAGUE. 

Henry    he  ought,  &c.    Know  thou  that  there  is  a  certain  writing  come  unto  our  under- 

^-       standing  and  knowledge,  which  was  set  up,  as  it  were,  by  thine  own  person  upon 

.    „      the  gates  of  the  churches  and  city  of  Constance,  upon  the  Sunday,  when  there 

■,\tk     was  sung  in  the  church  of  God,  '  Quasi  modo  geniti ;'  wherein  thou  dost  affirm, 

.         that  thou  wilt  openly  answer  unto  thy  accusers  and  slanderers  who  shall  object 

^A^c     ^^y  crime,  eiTor  or  heresy  against  thee,  whereof  thou  art  marvellously  infamed 

:_  and  accused  before  us;  and  specially  touching  the  doctrine  of  Wickliff,  and 

other  doctrines  contrary  to  the  catholic  faith  :  so  that  thou  mightest  have  granted 
unto  thee  a  safe  conduct  to  come.  But,  forasmuch  as  it  is  our  part  principally 
and  chiefly  to  foresee  and  look  unto  these  crafty  foxes  who  go  about  to  destroy 
the  vineyard  of  the  Lord  of  hosts,  therefoi-e  we  do  cite  and  call  forth  by  the 
tenor  of  these  presents,  thy  person  manifoldly  defamed  and  suspected  for  the 
temerarious  affirming  and  teaching  of  manifold  errors  ;  so  that  within  the  term 
of  fifteen  days  to  be  accounted  from  the  date  of  these  presents,  whereof  five 
days  are  appointed  for  the  first  term,  five  for  the  second,  and  other  five  for  the 
third,  we  do  ordain  and  appoint,  by  canonical  admonition  and  warning,  that 
thou  do  appear  in  the  public  sessions  of  the  sacred  council,  if  there  be  any  holden, 
in  the  same  day,  or  else  the  first  day  immediately  following,  when  any  session 
sliall  be,  according  to  the  tenor  of  thy  said  writing,  to  answer  to  those  things 
which  any  person  or  persons  shall  object  or  lay  against  thee  in  any  cause  of 
thy  faith,  and  to  receive  and  have,  as  justice  shall  require.  Whereupon,  so 
much  as  in  us  lieth,  and  as  catholic  faith  shall  require,  we  offer  and  assign  to 
thee,  by  the  tenor  hereof,  our  safe  conduct  from  all  violence  (justice  always 
being  saved) ;  certifying  thee,  that  whether  thou  dost  appear  or  not,  the  said 
term  or  time  appointed  notwithstanding,  pi'ocess  shall  go  forward  against  tliee 
by  the  said  sacred  council,  or  by  their  commissary  or  commissaries,  for  the  time 
aforesaid  not  observed  and  kept ;  thy  contumacy  or  stubbornness  in  any  thing 
notwithstanding. 

Given  in  the  sixth  session  of  the  general  council,  the  seventeenth  day  of 
April,  under  the  seal  of  the  presidents  of  the  four  nations. 

Grumpert  Faber,  Notary  of  the  Gennans. 

After  Sigismund  king  of  Hungary,  with  the  rest  of  the  council, 

understood  by  the  aforesaid  duke  John,^  that   Master  Jerome  was 

taken,  they  were  earnestly  in  hand,  requiring  that  Master  Jerome 

should  be  brought  before  them  unto  the  council ;  which  duke  John, 

after  he  had  received  letters  of  the  king  and  the  council,  brought 

Jerome  is  Mastcr  Jcromc  bound  unto  Constance,  whom  his  brother  duke  Louis 

bound^^    led  through  the  city,  to  the  cloisters  of  the  friars  minor  in  Constance, 

unto  Con-  ^vherc  the  chief  priests  and  elders  of  the  people  (Scribes  and  Phari- 

stancG  by  *  i        i  \ 

duke  sees)  were  gathered  together,  attending  and  waiting  for  his  coming. 
He,  the  said  Master  Jerome,  carried  a  great  handbolt  of  iron  with  a 
long  chain  in  his  hand,  and  as  he  passed,  the  chain  made  a  great 
rattling  and  noise,  and  for  the  more  confusion  and  despite  towards 
him,  they  led  him  by  the  same  chain  after  duke  Louis  aforesaid, 
holding  and  stretching  out  the  same  a  great  way  from  him  ;  with 
which  chain  they  also  kept  him  bound  in  the  cloister.  When  he  was 
brought  into  the  cloister,  they  read  before  him  the  letter  of  duke  John, 
which  was  sent  with  the  said  Master  Jerome  to  the  council,  containing 
in  effect,  how  that  the  said  duke  John  had  sent  Master  Jerome  to  the 
council  (who  by  chance  was  fallen  into  his  hands),  because  he  heard  an 
evil  report  of  him,  that  he  was  suspected  of  the  heresies  of  Wickliff; 
that  the  council  might  take  order  for  him,  whose  part  it  was  to  correct 
and  punish  such  as  did  err  and  stray  from  the  trath  :  besides  many 
other  flattering  tales  which  were  written  in  the  said  letter  in  praise  of 
the  council.    After  this  they  read  the  citation  which,  v/as  given  out  bj 

!1)  Tliis  duke  Jolin  in  histories  is  commoiilj'  called  the  son  of  Clement. 


John. 


to 
1416. 


THE    CRUET-    HANDLING    OF    HIM    IN    PRISON.  515 

the  council  against  Master  Jerome,  whereof  we  have  spoken  before.    Ji<!>iry 
Then  certain  of  the  bishops  said  unto  him  :  "'  Jerome  !  why  didst        ' 
thou  fly  and  run  away,  and  didst  not  appear  when  thou  wast  cited  ?"    A.  D. 
He  answered  :  "  Because  I  could  not  have  any  safe  conduct,  neither    ^^^^ 
from  you,  neither  from  the  king,  as  it  appeareth  by  these  letters 
patent  of  the  barons,  which  you  have ;  neither  by  mine  open  intima- 
tions could  I  obtain  any  safe   conduct.     Wherefore  I,  perceiving  Jn"eT"" 
many  of  my  grievous  and  heavy  friends  to  be  here  present  in  the  '^^'' 
council,  would  not  myself  be  the  occasion  of  my  perils  and  dangers  ;  pive  him 
but  if  I  had  known  or  had  any  understanding  of  this  citation,  without  iafeiy^o 
all  doubt,  albeit  I  had  been  in  Bohemia,  I  would  have  returned  'i°™f'  "'"^ 

ircclv  to 

again."     Then  all  the  v/hole  rabble  rising  up,   alleged  divers  and  go. 
sundry  accusations  and  testimonies  against  him  with  a  great  noise  and 
tumult.    When  the  rest  held  their  peace,  then  spake  Master  Gerson, 
the  chancellor  of  Paris  :   "  Jerome,  when  thou  wast  at  Paris,  thou  Jerome 
thoughtest  thyself,  by  means  of  thy  eloquence,  to  be  an  angel,  and  hy\u^ 
didst  trouble  the  whole  university  ;  alleging  openly  in  the  schools  ^"^°"' 
many  erroneous  conclusions  with  their  '  corolaria,'  and  especially  in  menda- 
the  question  '  De  universalibus  et  de  idEeis,'  with  many  other  very  hTsVo- 
ofFensive  questions.""     Unto  whom  Master  Jerome  said  :  "  I  answer  i'^^°'=''- 
to  you,  Master  Gerson,  that  those  matters  which  I  did  put  forth 
there,  in  the  schools  at  Paris,  in  which  also  I  answered  to  the  argu- 
ments of  the  masters,  I  did  put  them  forth  philosophically,  and  as  a 
philosopher  and  master  of  the  university  ;  and  if  I  have  put  forth 
any  questions  which  I  ought  not  to  have  put  forth,  teach  me  that 
they  be  erroneous,  and  I  will  most  humbly  be  informed,  and  amend 
the  same." 

While  he  was  yet  speaking,  another  (as  I  suppose,  the  master  The  mas- 
of  the  university  of  Cologne,  upon  the  river  Rhine),  rising  up,  said :  univer?'^ 
"  When  thou  wast  also  at  Cologne,  in  thy  position  which  thou  didst  ^^'y  °' 
there  determine,  thou  didst  propound  many  erroneous  matters."  would  ac- 
Then  said  Master  Jerome  unto  him  :  "  Show  me  first  one  error  which  he^'llck^d 
I  propounded."  Wherewithal  he,  being  in  a  manner  astonished,  said  :  ^^"er. 
"  I  do  not  remember  them  now  at  the  first,  but  hereafter  they  shall 
be  objected  against  you."  And  by  and  by  the  third  man,  rising  up,  xh 
said  :  "  When  you  were  also  at  Heidelberg,  you  propounded  many 
erroneous  matters  as  touching  the  Trinity,  and  there  painted  out  a  ty  of  uei- 
certain  shield  or  escutcheon,  comparing  the  Trinity  of  Persons  in  Di- 
vinity to  water,  snow,  and  ice,  and  such  like."  Unto  whom  Master 
Jerome  answered  ;  "  Those  things  that  I  wrote  or  painted  there,  the 
same  Avill  I  also  speak,  write,  and  paint  here  ;  and  teach  me  that  they 
be  erroneous,  and  I  will  most  humbly  revoke  and  recant  the  same." 

Then  certain  cried  out :  "  Let  him  be  burned,  let  him  be  burned."' 
Unto  whom  he  answered :  "  If  my  death  do  delight  or  please  you, 
in  the  name  of  God  let  it  be  so."  Then  said  the  archbishop  of  Saltz- 
burg ;  "  Not  so,  Master  Jerome,  '  forasmuch  as  it  is  written,  I  will  not 
the  death  of  a  sinner,  but  rather  he  be  converted  and  live.' "  When 
these  and  many  other  tumults  and  cries  were  passed,  whereby  they 
did  then  most  disorderly  and  outrageously  witness  against  him,  they 
delivered  the  said  Master  Jerome,  being  bound,  unto  the  officers  of 

(1)  "Crucifige,  crucifige  eum." 

T      T      O 


e  mas- 
ter of  the 
universi- 


516'  THE    TRAGICAL    HISTOHY     OF    JEROME    OF    PRAGUE. 

Henry    the  city  of  Coiistance,  to  be  carried  to  prison  for  that  night ;    and 
so  every  one  of  them  returned  to  his  lodgings. 


A.  D.  Jn  the  mean  time,  one  of  the  friends  of  Master  John  Huss,  look- 
^41"'^  ing  out  at  a  window  of  the  cloister,  said  unto  him  ;  "  Master  Jerome." 
1416  Then  said  he,  "  You  are  welcome,  my  dear  brother."  Then  said 
Peter  unto  him ;   "•  Be  constant,  and  fear  not  to  suffer  death  for  the 


comfort'  truth's  salcc,  of  which,  wlien  you  were  in  times  past  at  liberty,  you 
notary''^  did  prcach   so  much  goodness."      Unto  whom  Jerome  answered  : 
"  Truly,  brother,  I  do  not  fear  death  ;  and  forasmuch  as  we  know  that 
we  have  spoken  much  thereof  in  times  past,  let  us  now  see  what  may 
be  known  or  done  in  effect."     By  and  by  his  keepers,  coming  to  the 
window,  threatening  him  with  strokes,  clid  put  away  the  said  Peter 
from  the  window  of  the  cloister. 
Vitus,  the      Then   came    there   one  Vitus  unto   Master   Jerome,   and   saith, 
on™fjohn  "  Master,  how  do  you  do  .''"     Unto  whom  he  answered,   ""  Truly, 
de  cium.  brother,  I  do  very  well."     Then  his  keepers  coming  about  him,  laid 
hold  of  the  said  Vitus,  saying,  "  This  is  also  one  of  the  number,"' 
and  kept  him.     When  it  drew  towards  evening,  the  archbishop  of 
Reigen  sent  certain  of  his  servants  who  led  away  Master  Jerome, 
Jerome     being  strougly  bound  with  chains,  both  by  the  hands  and  by  the 
bound^     neck,  and  kept  him  so  for  certain  hours.    When  night  drew  on,  they 
hand  and  carried  him  unto  a  certain  tower  of  the  city,  in  St.  PauFs  church- 
yard, where,  tying  him  fast  unto  a  great  block,  and  his  feet  in  the 
stocks,  his  hands  also  being  made  fast  upon  them,  they  left  him ; 
where  the  block  was  so  high,  that  he  could  by  no  means  sit  thereupon, 
but  that  his  head  must  hang  downward.     They  carried  also  the  said 
Vitus  had  Vitus  to  the  arclibisliop  of  Reigen,  who  demanded  of  him.  Why  he 
arch-*^      durst  be  so  bold  to  talk  with  such  a  man,  being  a  reprobate  of  all  men, 
ReigJn°^  and  a  heretic  ?  and  when  he  could  find  no  cause  of  imprisonment  in 
him,  and  that  he  said  he  was  Master  John  de  Clumps  friend  (taking 
Vitus       an  oath  and  promise  of  him,  that  he  should  not  go  about  to  endamage 
oat""    ^  the  council  by  reason  of  that  imprisonment  and  captivity),  he  dis- 
missed him  and  sent  him  away. 
Jerome,        Master  Jerome,  unknown  unto  us  whither  he  was  carried,  lay  in 
iiTthe"^   the  said  tower  two  days  and  two  nights,  relieved  only  with  bread  and 
fed'^with^  water.    Then  one  of  his  keepers,  coming  unto  Master  Peter,  declared 
bread  and  unto  him  liow  that  Master  Jerome  lay  hard  by,  in  bonds  and  chains, 
Peter'      and  how  he  was  fed.    Then  Master  Peter  desired  that  he  might  have 
mearto*^   Icavc  givcu  him  to  give  him  meat,  because  he  would  procure  the  same 
Jerome,    ^nto  him.     The  keeper  of  the  prison,  granting  his  request,  carried 
meat  unto  him.     Within  eleven  days  after,  so  hanging  by  the  heels, 
Jerome,    he  uscd  SO  Small  repast,  that  he  fell  sore  sick  even  unto  death.    When 
sickne'ss,  he,  living  then  in  that  captivity  and  prison,  desired  to  have  a  con- 
a^confes"'^  fcssor,  they  of  the  council  denied  that  he  should  have  any,  until  such 
sor.         time  as  by  great  importunity  he  obtained  to  have  one  ;  his  friends 
prisonthe  being  then  there  present  in  the  same  prison  and  tower,  wherein  he 
a^year"*^    then  lay  by  the  space  of  one  year,  lacking  but  seven  days. 

After  they  had  put  John  Huss  to  death,  then,  about  the  feast  of 
the  nativity  of  Mary  the  Virgin,  they  brought  forth  Master  Jerome 
whom  they  had  kept  so  long  in  chains,  unto  the  church  of  St.  Paul ; 

(1)  "  Et  tu  de  illis  es."    Luc.  xxiL 


HIS    FORCED    AB.TLKATION.  51' 


and,  threatening  him  with  death,  being  instant  upon  him,  they  forced    Henry 
him  to  abjm'e  and  recant,  and  consent  unto  the  death  of  Master  John 


Huss,  that  he  was  justly  and  truly  condemned  and  put  to  death  by  A.  D. 
them.  He,  what  for  fear  of  death,  and  hoping  thereby  to  escape  out  }^^ 
of  their  hands,  according  to  their  will  and  pleasure,  and  according  to    \^\(^ 

the  tenor  which  was  exhibited  unto  him,  did  make  abjuration,  and 

that  in  the  cathedral  church  and  open  session ;   the  draft  whereof, 
penned  for  him  by  the  papists,  here  ensueth. 

The  forced  Abjuration  of  Master  Jerome  of  Prague. 

I,  Jerome  of  Prague,  master  of  arts,  acknowledging  the  catholic  churcli,  and 
the  apostoUc  faith,  do  accurse  and  renounce  all  heresies,  and  especially  that 
whereof  I  have  hitherto  been  infamed,  and  that  which  in  times  past  John  Huss 
and  John  Wickliff  have  holden  and  taught,  in  their  works,  treatises,  and  sermons, 
made  unto  the  people  and  clergy ;  for  which  cause  the  said  Wicklitf  and  Huss, 
together  with  the  said  doctrines  and  en-ors,  are  condemned  by  this  synod  of 
Constance  as  heretics,  and  all  the  said  doctrine  sententially  condemned,  and  espe- 
cially in  certain  articles  expressed  in  the  sentences  and  judgments  given  against 
them  by  this  sacred  council. 

Also  I  do  accord  and  agree  unto  the  holy  church  of  Rome,  the  apostolic  seat 
in  this  sacred  council,  and  with  my  mouth  and  heart  do  profess  in  all  things, 
and  touching  all  things ;  and  especially  as  touching  the  keys,  sacraments,  orders, 
and  offices,  and  ecclesiastical  censures,  of  pardons,  relics  of  saints,  ecclesiastical 
libertj' ;  also  ceremonies,  and  all  other  things  pertaining  to  christian  religion  ; 
as  the  church  of  Rome,  the  apostolic  see,  and  this  sacred  council,  do  profess : 
and  specially,  that  many  of  the  said  articles  are  notoriously  heretical,  and  lately 
reproved  by  the  holy  fathers,  some  of  them  blasphemous,  others  erroneous; 
some  offensive  unto  godly  ears,  and  many  of  them  temerarious  and  seditious. 
And  such  also  were  accounted  the  articles  lately  condemned  by  the  sacred 
council,  and  it  was  inhibited  and  forbidden  to  all  and  singidar  catholic  men 
hereafter  to  preach,  teach,  or  presume  to  hold  or  maintain,  any  of  the  said 
articles,  under  pain  of  being  accursed. 

And  I,  the  said  Jerome,  forasmuch  as  I  have  laboured  by  scholastical  arts 
to  persuade  the  opinion,  '  De  universalibus  realibus,'  and  that  one  substance  of 
the  common  kind  should  signify  many  things  subject  under  the  same,  and  every 
one  of  them,  as  St.  Ambrose,  Jerome,  and  Augustine,  do  affirm,  and  likewise 
others ;  for  the  teaching  hereof  by  a  plain  example  I  described  as  it  were  a 
certain  triangle,  form,  or  figure,  which  I  called  the  shield  of  faith  :  therefore 
utterly  to  exclude  and  take  away  the  en'oneous  and  wicked  understanding 
thereof,  which,  peradventure,  some  men  may  gather  thereby,  I  do  say,  affirm, 
and  declare,  that  I  never  made  the  said  figure,  neither  named  it  the  shield  of 
faith  to  that  intent  or  pm-pose,  that  I  would  extol  or  prefer  the  opinion  of  uni- 
versalities above  or  before  the  contrary  opinion,  in  such  sort,  as  though  that 
were  the  shield  of  faith,  and  that  without  the  affirmation  thereof  the  catholic 
faith  could  not  be  defended  or  maintained,  when  I  myself  would  not  obstinately 
stick  thereunto.  But  this  I  said,  because  I  had  put  example  in  the  description 
of  the  triangle  or  foim,  that  one  Divine  essence  consisted  in  three  subjects  or 
persons  in  themselves  distinct ;  that  is  to  say,  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy 
Ghost.  The  article  of  which  Trinity  is  the  chief  sliield  of  faith,  and  foiuidation 
of  the  cathohc  truth. 

Furthermore,  that  it  may  be  evident  unto  all  men  what  the  causes  were  for 
•which  I  was  reputed  and  thought  to  stick  to,  and  favour  sometime  John  Huss ; 
I  signify  unto  all  men  by  these  presents,  that  when  I  heard  him  oftentimes 
both  in  his  sermons,  and  also  in  the  schools,  I  believed  that  he  was  a  very  good  Jerome  is 
man,  neither  that  he  did  in  any  point  gainsay  the  traditions  of  our  holy  mother  ™^*^^ 
the  church,  or  holy  doctors ;  inasmuch  as  when  I  was  lately  in  this  city,  and  ^^y  ^^^ 
the  articles  which  I  affirmed  were  showed  unto  me,  which  were  also  condemned  his  own 
by  the  sacred  council,  at  the  first  sight  of  them  I  did  not  beHeve  that  they  were  ™^^^'  ''"* 
his ;  at  least  not  in  that  form.     But  when  I  had  further  understood,  by  certain  pieaseth 
famous  doctors  and  masters  of  divinity,  that  they  were  his  articles,  I  required  them. 


518  THE    TRAGICAL    HISTORY    OF    JEROME    OF    PRAGUE. 

for  my  farther  information  and  satisfaction,  to  have  the  books  of  his  own  hand 
writing  showed  unto  me,  wherein  it  ^was  said  those  articles  were  contained. 
Which  books  when  they  were  showed  imto  me  written  with  his  own  hand, 
which  I  did  know  as  well  as  mine  own,  I  found  all,  and  every  one  of  those 
articles  therein  written  in  like  form  as  they  are  condemned.  Wherefore  I  do 
worthily  judge  and  think  him  and  his  doctrine,  with  his  adherents,  to  be  con- 
demned and  reproved  by  the  sacred  council,  as  heretical  and  without  reason. 
All  which  the  premises,  with  a  pure  mind  and  conscience,  I  do  here  pronounce 
and  speak  ;  being  now  fully  and  sufficiently  informed  of  the  aforesaid  sentences 
and  judgments  given  by  the  sacred  council  against  the  doctrines  of  the  said 
John  WickliiF  and  John  Huss,  and  against  their  own  persons ;  unto  which  judg- 
ment, as  a  devout  catholic  in  all  things,  I  do  most  humbly  consent  and  agree. 

Also  I,  the  foresaid  Jerome,  who,  before  the  reverend  fathers  the  lords  car- 
dinals, and  reverend  lords,  prelates,  and  doctors,  and  other  worshipful  persons 
of  this  sacred  council  in  this  same  place,  did  heretofore  freely  and  willingly 
declare  and  expound  mine  intent  and  purpose,  amongst  other  things  speaking 
of  the  church,  did  divide  the  same  into  three  parts :  and  as  I  did  perceive 
afterwards,  it  was  understood  by  some  that  I  would  affirm,  that  in  the  trium- 
phant church  there  was  faith :  whereas  I  do  firmly  believe  that  there  is  the 
blessed  sight  and  beholding  of  God,  excluding  all  dark  understanding  and 
knowledge.  And  now  also  I  do  say,  affirm,  and  declare,  that  it  was  never  my 
intent  and  purpose  to  prove  that  there  should  be  faith,  speaking  of  faith  as 
faith  is  commonly  defined,  but  knowledge  far  exceeding  faith.  And,  generally, 
whatsoever  I  said,  either  here,  there,  or  at  any  time  before,  I  do  refer,  and  most 
humbly  submit  myself  unto  the  determination  of  this  sacred  council  of 
Constance. 

Moreover,  I  do  swear  both  by  the  holy  Trinity,  and  also  by  the  most  holy 
gospel,  that  I  will  for  evermore  remain  and  persevere  without  all  doubt,  in 
the  truth  of  the  catholic  church.  And  all  such  as  by  their  doctrine  and 
teaching  shall  impugn  this  faith,  I  judge  them  worthy,  together  with  their 
doctrines,  of  eternal  curse.  And  if  I  myself,  at  any  time  (which  God  forbid  I 
should),  do  presume  to  preach  or  teach  contrary  thereunto,  I  will  submit  my- 
self unto  the  severity  of  the  canons,  and  be  bound  unto  eternal  pain  and  punish- 
ment. Whereupon  I  do  deliver  up  this  my  confession  and  tenor  of  my  profes- 
sion willingly,  before  this  sacred  general  council,  and  have  subscribed  and 
written  all  these  things  with  mine  own  hand. 

Jerome,  After  all  this  tliey  caused  him  to  be  carried  again  unto  the  same 
iJi^u'ra-'^  prison,  but  not  so  straitly  chained  and  bound  as  he  was  before ;  not- 
turn'ed^to  withstanding  kept  every  day  with  soldiers  and  armed  men.  And 
prison,  whcn,  afterwards,  his  enemies  who  were  appointed  against  him,  as 
Michael  de  Causis,  and  wicked  Paletz,  with  other  their  companions 
in  these  affairs,  understood  and  knew  by  the  words  and  talk  of  Mas- 
ter Jerome,  and  by  other  certain  tokens,  that  he  made  the  same  ab- 
Accused  juration  and  recantation,  not  of  a  sincere  and  pure  mind,  but  only  to 
cauJis  ^  the  intent  thereby  to  escape  their  hands,  they,  together  with  certain 
rmfthe  ft'i'^rs  of  Prague  of  the  order  of  Carmelites,  then  coming  in,  put  up 
carme-  ncw  accusatious  against  the  said  Master  Jerome,  and  drew  the  same 
The'car-  iuto  articles,  being  very  instant  and  earnest  that  he  should  answer 
camb?ay,  thcreuuto.  And  forasmuch  as  his  judges,  and  certain  cardinals,  as 
Certain  ^^^  Cardinal  of  Cambray,  the  cardinal  de  Ursinis,  the  cardinal  of 
other  car- Aquilegia,  and  the  cardinal  of  Florence,  considering  the  malice  of 
labour      tl^e  enemies  of  Master  Jerome,  did  see   the  gi-eat  injury  that  was 

delivery.  ^^^.^  ^^"^°  ^""^5  t^i^y  laboured   before  the  whole  council  for   his 
delivery. 

It  happened  on  a  certain  day,  as  they  were  labouring  in  the  council 
for  the  delivery  of  the  said  Master  Jerome,  that  the  Germans  and 
Bohemians,  his  enemies,  with  all  force  and  power  resisted  against  it, 


JEROME  BROUGHT  AGAIN  BEFORE  THE  COUNCIL.  519 

crying  out  that  lie  should  in  no  case  be  dismissed.     Then  started    Jiennj 


V. 


up  one  called  doctor  Naso,  who  said  unto  the  cardinals :  "  We  mar- 
vel much  of  you,  most  reverend  fothers,  that  your  reverences  will  A.  D. 
make  intercession  for  such  a  wicked  heretic,  for  whose  sake  avc  in 
Bohemia,  with  the  whole  clergy,  have  suffered  much  trouble  and 
mischief,  and  peradventm-e  your  fatherhoods  shall  suffer ;  and  I 
greatly  fear,  lest  you  have  received  some  rewards  either  of  the  king 
of  Bohemia,  or  of  these  heretics.""'  When  the  cardinals  were  thus 
rebuked,  they  discharged  themselves  of  Master  Jerome's  cause  and 
matter. 

Then  his  enemies  aforesaid  obtained  to  have  other  judges  appointed.  The 
as  the  patriarch  of  Constantinople,  and  a  German  doctor ;  forasmuch  of  con-'^'' 
as  they  did  know  that  the  patriarch  was  a  grievous  enemy  to  Master  ^.'^"" 
.Terome,  because  he  being  before  appointed  judge  by  the  council,  had  £?ives  sen- 
condemned  John  Huss  to  death.  death'' 

But  Master  Jerome  would  not  answer  them  in  prison,  requiring  to  \f^^^^^ 
have  open  audience,  because  he  would  there  finally  declare  unto  them  Huss.and 
his  mind  ;  neither  would  he  by  any  means  consent  unto  those  private  Prague." 
judges.     Whereupon  the  presidents  of  the  council,  thinking  that 
the  said  Master  Jerome  would  renew  his  recantation  before  the  said 
audience,  and  confirm  the  same,  did  grant  him  open  audience. 

In  the  year  of  our  Lord  1416,  the  twenty-fifth  day  of  May,  which  Jerome 
was  the  Saturday  before  the  ascension  of  our  Lord,  the  said  Master  aga^n ' 
Jerome  was  brought  unto  open  audience  before  the  whole  council,  to  |!„^°J^^if'"' 
the  great  cathedral  church  of  Constance,  where  by  the  commissioners 
of  the  council,  in  behalf  of  his  aforesaid  enemies,  there  were  laid 
against   him   anew,  a   hundred   and   seven  articles,   to  the   intent 
that  he  should  not  escape  the  snare  of  death,  which  they  provided 
and  laid  for  him  ;  inasmuch  as  the  judges  had  before  declared  that 
by  the  saying  of  the  witnesses  it  was  already  concluded  in  the  same 
audience.     The  day  aforesaid,  from  morning  until  noon,  he  answered 
unto  more  than  forty  articles,  most  subtlely  objected  against  him  ; 
denying  that  he  held  or  maintained  any  such  articles  as  were  either 
hurtful  or  false,  and  affirming  that  those  witnesses  had  deposed  them  False 
against  him  falsely  and  slanderously,  as  his  most  cruel  and  mortal  Tgainst 
enemies.     In  the  same   session  they  had  not  yet  proceeded  unto  Jerome. 
death,  because  that  the  noon-time  drew  so  fast  on,  that  he  could 
not  answer  unto  the  articles.     Wherefore,  for  lack  of  time  sufficient 
to  answer  unto  the  residue  of  the  articles,  there  was  another  time 
appointed,   which  was  the  third  day  after  the  aforesaid  Saturday 
before  the  ascension  of  our  Lord ;  at  which  time  again,  early  in  the 
morning,  he  was  brought  unto  the  said  cathedral  church,  to  answer 
unto  all  the  residue  of  the  articles. 

In  all  which  articles,  as  well  those  which  he  had  answered  unto  The 
on  the  Saturday  before,  as  in  the  residue,  he  cleared  himself  very  of  jer"i/e 
learnedly ;  refelling  his  adversaries  (who  had  no  cause,  but  only  of  j-^tl'ng'iiis 
malice  and  displeasure  were  set  against  liim,  and  did  him  great  wrong)  adver- 
in  such  sort,  that  they  were  themselves  astonied  at  his  oration,  and 
his  refutation  of  their  testimonies  brought  against  him,  and  with 
shame  enough  were   put  to  silence.     As  when  one  of  them  had 
demanded  of  him  what  he  thought  by  the  sacrament  of  the  altar,  he 

(1)  "Si  dimittis  huiic  non  es  amicus  Caearis. 


520  THE    TRAGICAL    HISTORY    OF    JEROME    OF    PRAGDE. 

Henry   answercd  :  "  Before  consecration,""  said  he,  "  it  is  bread  and  wine  ; 
^"      after  the  consecration  it  is  the  true  body  and  blood  of  Christ :"  adding 
A.D.    Avithal  more  words  according  to  their  catholic  faith.     Then  another 
1416.    i-isinrr  up :  "  Jerome,"  said  he,  "  there  goeth  a  great  rumour  of  thee, 
that  thou  shouldest  hold  bread  to  remain  upon  the  altar."     To  whom 
he  pleasantly  answered,  saying,  "  that  he  believed  bread  to  be  at 
the  baker's."     At  which  words  being  spoken,  one  of  the  Dominic 
friars  fumishly  took  on,  and   said ;  "  What !  dost  thou  deny,  that 
which  no  man  doubteth  of?"    Whose  peevish  sauciness  Jerome  with 
these  words  did  well  repress  :  "  Hold  thy  peace,"  said  he,   "  thou 
monk  I  thou  hypocrite  !"  And  thus  the  monk,  being  nipped  in  the 
head,  sat  down  dumb.     After  him  started  up  another,  who,  with  a 
loud  voice,  cried  out :  "  I  swear,"  said  he  "  by  my  conscience,  that 
to  be  true,  that  thou  dost  deny."    To  whom  said  Jerome  again,  speak- 
ing in  Latin  :  "  Heus  sic  jurare  per  conscientiam  tutissima  fallendi 
via  est."  That  is,  "  Thus  to  swear  by  your  conscience  is  the  next  way 
to  deceive."     Another  there  was,  a  spiteful  and  a  bitter  enemy  of 
his,  whom  he  called  by  no  other  name  than  dog  or  ass.   After  he  had 
thus  refuted  them  one  after  another,  that  they  could  find  no  crime 
against  him,  neither  in  this  matter,  nor  in  any  other,  they  were  all 
driven  to  keep  silence. 
False  wit-      This  done,  then  were  the  witnesses  called  for,  who  coming  in  pre- 
nesses.     g^j^^e  gavc  testimony  unto  the  articles  before  produced ;  by  reason 
whereof  the  innocent  cause  of  Jerome  was  oppressed,  and  began  in 
the  council  to  be  concluded.      Then  Jerome  rising  up  began  to 
speak ;  "  Forasmuch,"  saith  he,  "  as  you  have  heard  mine  adversaries 
so  diligently  hitherto,  convenient  it  is  that  you  should  also  now  hear 
me  to  speak  for  myself."     Whereupon,  with  much  difficulty,  at  last 
Audience  audicuce  was  given  in  the  council  for  him  to  say  his  mind ;  which 
Ki"e/to    being  granted,  he,  from  morning  to  noon  continuing,  treated  of  divers 
s'^eXfo'r"  ^^^  sundry  matters,  with  great  learning  and  eloquence.     Who,  first 
himself,    beginning  with  his  prayer  to  God,  besought  him  to  give  him  spirit, 
ability,    and  utterance,  which  might  most  tend  to  the  profit  and 
The  ora-  salvatiou  of  his  own  soul.     And  so  entered  he  into  his  oration.     "  I 
j«ome-    know,"  saith  he,  "  reverend  lords  !  that  there  have  been  many  excel- 
couHcii'^^  lent  men,  who  have  suffered  much    otherwise  than  they  have   de- 
served ;  being  oppressed  with  false  witnesses,  and  condemned  with 
Socrates,  wroug  judgments."     And  so,  beginning  with  Socrates,  he  declared 
how    he    was    unjustly    condemned    by    his    countrymen,     neither 
would  he  escape  when  he  might ;   taking  from  us  the  fear  of  two 
things,  which  seem  most  bitter  to  men,  to  wit,  of  imprisonment  and 
Plato.      death.     Then  he  inferred  the  captivity  of  Plato,  the  banishment  of 
Anaxago-  Anaxagoras,  and  the  torments  of  Zeno.     Moreover,  he  brought  in 
zeno.      the  wrongful  condemnation  of  many  Gentiles,  as  the  banishment  of 
Rupiiius.  RupiUus ;  reciting  also  the  unworthy  death  of  Boetius  and  of  others, 
of  whom  Boetius  himself  doth  write. 

From  thence  he  came  to  the  examples  of  the  Hebrews,  and  first 
Moses,  began  with  Moses,  the  deliverer  of  the  people,  and  the  lawgiver ; 
how  he  was  oftentimes  slandered  of  his  people  as  being  a  seducer 
Joseph,  and  contemner  of  the  people.  "  Joseph  also,"  saith  he,  "  for  envy 
Esaias.  was  sold  by  his  brethren,  and  for  false  suspicion  of  whoredom  was 
■^^^'-     cast  into  bonds."      Besides  these,  he  reciteth  Esaias,  Daniel,  and 


HIS    ORATION    BEFORE    THE    COUNCIL.  521 

almost  all  the  prophets,  who,  as  contemners  of  God,  and  seditious    Henry 

persons,  were  oppressed  with  wrongful  condemnation.     From  thence '. — 

he  proceeded  to  the  judgment  of  Susanna,  and  of  divers  other  be-    A.D. 
sides,  Avho  being  good  and  holy  men,  yet  were  they  unjustly  cast    ^'^^^' 
away  with  Avrongful  sentence.      At  length  he  came  to  John  Baptist,  '^^1^^°' 
and  so,  in  long  process,  he  descended  unto  our  Saviour,   declaring  Susanna. 
how  it  was  evident  to  all  men,  by  what  false  witnesses  both  he  and  Baptist. 
John  Baptist  were  condemned.     Moreover,  how  Stephen  was  slain  Christ. 
by  the  college  of  the  priests,  and  how  all  the  apostles  were  con-  The  apo- 
demned  to  death,  not  as  good  men,  but  as  seditious  stirrers  up  of  the  ^"^^• 
people,  and  contemners  of  the  gods,  and  evil  doers.     "  It  is  unjust," 
saith  he,  "  unjustly  to  be  condemned  one  priest  of  another :"  and  yet 
he  proved  that  the  same  hath  so  happened  most  unjustly  in  that 
council  of  priests.      These  things  did  he  discourse  at  large,   with 
marvellous  eloquence,  and  with  singular  admiration  of  all  that  heard 
him. 

And  forasmuch  as  all  the  whole  sum  of  the  cause  did  rest  only  in  The  false 
the  witnesses,  by  many  reasons  he  proved  that  no  credit  was  to  be  ^j"roml 
given  unto  them,  especially  seeing  they  spake  all  things  of  no  truth,  refuted. 
but  only  of  hatred,  malice,  and  envy.  And  so  prosecuting  the 
matter,  so  lively  and  expressly  he  opened  unto  them  the  causes  of 
their  hatred,  that  he  had  almost  persuaded  them.  So  lively  and 
likely  their  hatred  was  detected,  that  almost  no  trust  was  given  to 
their  testimonies,  save  only  for  the  cause  and  quarrel  wherein  they 
stood,  touching  the  pope's  doctrine.  All  men's  minds  here  were 
moved  and  bending  to  mercy  towards  him  ;  for  he  told  them  how 
that  he  of  his  own  accord  came  up  to  the  council,  and,  to  purge  him- 
self, he  did  open  unto  them  all  his  life  and  doings,  being  full  of  virtue 
and  godliness.  "  This  was,"  saith  he,  "  the  old  manner  of  ancient 
and  learned  men  and  most  holy  elders,  that  in  matters  of  faith  they 
did  differ  many  times  in  arguments,  not  to  destroy  the  faith,  but  to 
find  out  the  verity.  So  did  Augustine  and  Jerome  dissent,  not  only 
being  diverse ;  but  also  contrary  one  from  the  other,  and  yet  without 
all  suspicion  of  heresy." 

All  this  while  the  pope's  holy  council  did  wait  still,  when  he  would 
begin  to  excuse  himself,  and  to  retract  those  things  which  were 
objected  against  him,  and  to  crave  pardon  of  the  council.  But  he, 
persisting  still  in  his  constant  oration,  did  acknowledge  no  error,  nor 
gave  any  signification  of  retractation. 

At  last,   entering  into  the  praise  and  commendation  of  Master  jerome 
John  Huss,  he  affirmed  that  he  was  a  good,  just,  and  holy  man,  and  ^^deth 
much  unworthy  that  death  which  he  did  suffer  ;  whom  he  did  know  ^^^^^'^^' 
from  his  vouth  upward,  to  be  neither  fornicator,  drunkard,  neither  waiieth 
any  evil  or  vicious  person,  but  a  chaste  and  sober  man,  and  a  just  of'john' 
and  true  preacher  of  the  holy  gospel ;  and  whatsoever  things  Master  ^'^^^• 
John  Huss  and  WickliflT  had  holden   or  written,  especially  against 
the  abuse  and  pomp  of  the  clergy,   he  would  affirm  even  unto  the 
death,  that  they  were  holy  and  blessed  men  ;  and  that  in  all  points  of 
the  catholic  faith  he  doth  believe  as  the  holy  catholic  church  doth 
hold  or  believe.     And  finally  he  did  conclude,  that  all  such  articles 
as  John  Wickliff  and  John  Huss  had  written  and  put  forth  against 
the  enormities,  pomp,  and  disorder,  of  the  prelates,  he  would  firmly 


522  THE    TRAGICAL    HISTOIIY    OP"    JEROME    OF    PRAGUE. 

Henry    and  steadfastly,  without  recantation,  hold  and  defend  even  unto  the 

^-      death.     And,  last  of  all,  he  added,  that  all  the  sins  that  ever  he  had 

A.D.    committed,  did  not  so  much  gnaw  and  trouble  his  conscience,  as  did 

1416.    ^jjj^|.  Qj^iy  gin^  which  he  had  committed  in  that  most  pestiferous  fact, 

when,  in  his  recantation,  he  had  unjustly  spoken  against  that  good 

and  holy  man  and  his  doctrine ;  and  especially  in  consenting  unto 

Jerome     his  wickcd  Condemnation  :  concluding,  that  he  did  utterly  revoke  and 

hlss'^ei*  f^^"y  ^^^^^  wicked  recantation  which  he  made  in  that  most  cursed 

ing^         place,  and  that  he  did  it  through  weakness  of  heart  and  fear  of  death; 

johir'     and,  moreover,  that  whatsoever  thing  he  hath  spoken  against  that 

Huss.      ijlessed  man,  he  hath  altogether  lied  upon  him,  and  that  he  doth 

repent  him  with  his  whole  heart  that  ever  he  did  it. 

And  at  the  hearing  hereof  the  hearts  of  the  hearers  were  not  a 
little  sorry,  for  they  wished  and  desired  greatly  that  such  a  singular 
man  should  be  saved,  if  otherwise  their  blind  superstition  would  have 
suffered  it.     But  he  continued  still  in  his  prefixed  sentence,  seeming 
to   desire  death,  rather  than  life.     And    persisting   in    the  praise 
Huss  ne-  of  Joliu  Huss,  he  added  moreover,  that  he  never  maintained  any 
taine"d*'"  tloctriue  against  the  state  of  the  church,  but  only  spake  against  the 
any  doc-  abuses  of  the  clergy,  against  the  pride,  pomp,  and  excess  of  the  pre- 
against     latcs ;  forasmuch  as  the  patrimonies  of  the  churches  were  first  given 
church  of  for  the  poor,  then  for  hospitality,   and  thirdly  to  the  reparations  of 
Rome,      t]ie  churches  :  "  It  was  a  grief  to  that  good  man,"  said  he,  "  to  see 
spake       the  same  mispent  and  cast  away  upon  harlots,  great  feastings,  and 
their*     keeping  of  horses  and  dogs,  upon  gorgeous  apparel,  and  such  other 
naughty    tJ^ij^gg  unbeseeming  christian  religion.''''     And  herein  he  showed  him- 
self marvellous  eloquent ;  yea  never  more. 
Jerome         And  wlicu  liis  oratiou  was  interrupted  many  times  by  divers  of  them 
tosUenc"  carping  at  his  sentences  as  he  was  speaking,  yet  was  there  none  of 
all  those  that  interrupted  him  who  escaped  unblancked  ;    but  he 
brought  them  all  to  confusion,  and  put  them  to  silence.     When  any 
noise  began,  he  ceased  to  speak,  and,  after,  began  again,  proceeding 
in  his  oration,  and  desiring  them  to  give  him  leave  awhile  to  speak, 
■whom  they  hereafter  should  hear  no  more  ;  neither  yet  was  his  mind 
ever  dashed  at  all  these  noises  and  tumults. 
How  long      And  this  was  marvellous  in  him  to  behold ;  notwithstanding  he 
wJs°m^     continued    in  strait  prison  three  hundred  and  forty  days,   having 
prison,     neither  book,  nor  almost  light  to  read  by,  yet  how  admirably  his 
ceiient     memory   served  him,  declaring  how  all   those  pains  of  his    strait 
memory,  j^g^j^^ji^j^g  (jjfj  jjq^^  gQ  much  gricve  him,  as  he  did  wonder  rather  to 
see  their  unkind  humanity  towards  him. 

When  he  had  spoken  these  and  many  things  as  touching  the  praise 

of  John  WicklifF,    and  John  Huss,   they  who  sat    in    the  council 

whispered  together,  saying  :  "  By  these  his  words  it  appeareth  that 

he  is  at  a  point  with  himself."'''      Then  was  he  again  carried  into 

prison,  and  grievously  fettered  by  the  hands,  arms,  and  feet,  with 

great  chains  and  fetters  of  iron. 

Jerome         The  Saturday  next  before  the  Ascension-day,  early  in  the  morning, 

again  be-  liG  was  brought  with  a  great  number  of  armed  men  unto  the  cathedral 

comidf    church  before  the  open  congregation,  to  have  his  judgment  given  him. 

There  they  exhorted  him  that  those  things  which  he  had  before  spoken 

in  the  open  audience,  as  is  aforesaid,  touching  the  praise  and  com- 


THE   sentp:nce   of  his    ."JONDEMNATIOM.  523 

mendation  of  Master  John  WicklifF,  and  Master  Jolm  Huss,  confirm-    Henry 
ing  and  establishing  their  doctrine,  he  would  yet  recant  the  same.         " 
But  he,  marvellous  stoutly,  without  all  fear  spake  against  them,  and,    A.  D. 
amongst  other  things,  said  unto  them :  "  I  take  God  to  my  witness,    ^'^^^- 
and  I  protest  here  before  you  all,  that  I  do  believe  and  hold  the  articles  f^J'j"^^ 
of  the  faith,  as  the  holy  catholic  church  doth  hold  and  believe  the  same  ;  aii  the 
but  for  this  cause  shall  I  now  be  condemned,  for  that  I  will  not  con-  fue  catho- 
sent  with  you  unto  the  condemnation  of  those  most  holy  and  blessed  "^  church 
men  aforesaid,  whom  you  have  most  wickedly  condemned  for  certain 
articles,  detesting  and  abhorring  your  Avicked  and  abominable  life." 
Then  he  confessed  there  before  them  all  his  belief,  and  uttered  many 
thmgs  very  profoundly  and  eloquently,  insomuch  that  all  men  there  His  eio- 
present  could  not  sufficiently  commend  and  praise  his  great  eloquence  i"'^"'^'^- 
and  excellent  learning:  and  by  no  means  could  they  induce  or  persuade 
him  to  recant. 

Then  a  certain  bishop,  named  the  bishop  of  Londe,  made  a  certain 
sermon  exhortative  against  Master  Jerome,  persuading  to  his  condem- 
nation. 

After  the  bishop  had  ended  the  said  sermon,  Master  Jerome  said  His  pro- 
again  unto  them ;  "  You  will  condemn  me  wickedly  and  unjustly,  p^*^^^- 
But  I,  after  my  death,  will  leave  a  remorse  in  your  conscience,  and  a 
nail  in  your  hearts :  '  Et  cito  vos  omnes,  ut  respondeatis  mihi  coram 
altissimo  et  justissimo  Judice  post  centum  annos.""  That  is  ;  "  And 
here  I  cite  you  to  answer  unto  me  before  the  most  high  and  just  Judge, 
within  a  hundred  years."" 

No  pen  can  sufficiently  write,  or  note  those  things  which  he  most 
eloquently,  profoundly,  and  philosophically,  had  spoken  in  the  said 
audience,  neither  can  any  tongue  sufficiently  declare  the  same  ;  where- 
fore I  have  but  only  touched  here  the  superficial  matter  of  his  talk, 
partly,  and  not  wholly,  noting  the  same.  Finally,  when  by  no  means 
he  might  be  persuaded  to  recant  the  premises,  immediately,  even  in 
his  presence,  the  sentence  and  judgment  of  his  condemnation  was  given 
against  him,  and  read  before  him. 

The  Sentence  read  against  Jerome. 

In  the  name  of  God,  Amen.  Christ  om'  God  and  our  Saviour,  being  the  true 
vine,  whose  Father  is  the  Imshandraan,  taught  his  disciples,  and  all  other  faith- 
ful men,  saying :  '  If  any  man  dwell  not  in  me,  let  him  be  cast  out  as  a  bough 
or  branch,  and  let  him  wither  and  dry,'  &c.  The  doctrine  and  precepts  of  which 
most  excellent  Doctor  and  Master  this  most  sacred  synod  of  Constance  executing 
and  following  in  the  cause  of  inquisition  against  heretics,  being  moved  by  this 
sacred  synod,  through  report,  public  fame,  and  open  infamation,  proceeding 
against  Jerome  of  Prague,  master  of  arts,  lay-man.  By  the  acts  and  processes  of 
whose  cause  it  appeareth  that  the  said  Master  Jerome  hath  holden,  maintained, 
and  taught  divers  articles  heretical  and  eiToneous,  lately  reproved  and  condemned 
by  the  holy  fathers,  some  being  very  blasphemous,  others  offending  godly  ears, 
and  many  temerarious  and  seditious,  which  have  been  affirmed,  maintained, 
preached  and  taught  by  the  men  of  most  damnable  memory,  John  WicldifF  and 
John  Huss ;  which  are  also  written  in  divers  of  their  works  and  books.  Which 
articles  of  doctrine  and  books  of  the  said  John  Huss  and  John  WicklifF,  together 
with  their  memory,  and  the  person  of  the  said  John  Huss,  were  by  the  said 
sacred  synod  condemned  of  heresy.  Which  sentence  of  condemnation  this 
Jerome  afterwards,  during  the  time  of  inquisition,  acknowledged  in  the  said 
sacred  synod,  and  approved  the  true  catholic  and  apostolic  faith,  thereunto  con- 
senting ;  accursing  all  heresy,  especially  that  whereof  he  was  infamed,  and  con- 


A.D. 

1416. 


524  THE    TRAGICAL    HISTORY    OF    JEROME    OF    PRAGUE. 

Henry  fessed  himself  to  be  infamed,  and  that  which  in  times  past  John  Huss  and  Jolin 
^  Wicldiff  maintained  and  taught  in  their  works,  sermons,  and  books ;  for  which 
the  said  WickliiF  and  Huss,  together  with  their  doctrine  and  errors,  were  by  the 
said  sacred  synod  as  heretical  condemned.  The  condemnation  of  all  which  the 
premises  he  did  openly  profess  and  allow,  and  did  swear  that  he  would  persevere 
and  continue  in  the  vei'ity  of  that  faith ;  and,  that  if  he  should  presume  at  any 
time  to  hold  opinion,  or  preach  contrary  thereunto,  that  he  would  submit  him- 
self to  the  trial  and  truth  of  the  canons,  and  be  bound  to  perpetual  punishment. 
And  tliis  his  profession,  written  with  his  own  hand,  he  delivered  up  unto  the 
holy  council.  Many  days  after  his  said  profession  and  abjuration,  as  a  dog 
returning  unto  his  vomit,  to  the  intent  he  might  openly  vomit  up  the  most  pes- 
tilent poison  which  had  long  lurked  and  lien  hid  in  his  breast,  he  required  and 
desired  that  he  might  be  openly  heard  before  the  council.  Which  being  granted 
unto  him,  he  affirmed,  said,  and  professed,  before  the  whole  synod,  being  publicly 
gathered  together,  that  he  had  wickedly  consented  and  agreed  to  the  sentence 
and  judgment  of  the  condemnation  of  the  said  WickliiF  and  Huss,  and  that  he 
had  most  shamefully  lied  in  approving  and  allowing  the  said  sentence ;  neither 
was  he  ashamed  to  confess  that  he  had  lied ;  yea,  he  did  also  revoke  and  recant 
his  confession,  approbation,  and  protestation,  which  he  had  made  upon  their 
condemnation,  affirming  that  he  never  at  any  time  had  read  any  errors  or  heresy 
in  the  books  and  treatises  of  the  said  WicklifF  and  Huss ;  albeit  he  had  before 
confessed  it,  and  it  is  evidently  proved,  that  he  did  diligently  study,  read,  and 
preach  their  books,  wherein  it  is  manifest  that  there  are  contained  many  errors 
and  heresies.  Also  the  said  Master  Jerome  did  profess,  as  touching  the  sacrament 
of  the  altar,  and  the  transubstantiation  of  the  bread  into  the  body  of  Christ,  that 
he  doth  hold  and  believe  as  the  church  doth  hold  and  believe,  saying  also  that 
he  doth  give  more  credit  unto  St.  Augustine  and  the  other  doctors  of  the  chvu-ch, 
than  unto  WicklifF  and  Huss.  It  appeareth  moreover  by  the  premises,  that  the 
said  Jerome  is  an  adherent  and  maintainer  of  the  said  WicklifF  and  Huss,  and 
of  their  errors,  and  both  is  and  hath  been  a  favourer  of  them.  Wherefore  the 
said  sacred  synod  determineth  the  said  Master  Jerome,  as  a  rotten  and  withered 
branch,  not  growing  upon  the  vine,  to  be  cut  off  and  cast  out.  The  said  synod 
also  pronounceth,  declareth,  and  condemneth  him,  as  a  heretic  and  drowned  in 
all  kind  of  heresies,  excommunicate  and  accursed ;  leaving  him  unto  the  arbitre- 
Jerome  ment  and  judgment  of  the  secular  judge,  to  receive  just  and  due  punishment, 
left  to  the  according  to  the  quality  of  so  great  an  offence  ;  the  sacred  synod  notwithstand- 


Eecular 

without  peril  of  death. 


power.      i"g  entreating,  that  the  said  judge  would  moderate  his  sentence  of  judgment 


A  paper        Whicli  Sentence  so  given  before  his  face,  and  ended,  a  great  and 

de'vnsJput  ^^^§1  mitre  of  paper  was  brought  vmto  him,  painted  about  with  red 

upon  the  dcvils  ;  which  when  he  beheld  and  saw,  throwing  away  his  hood  upon 

Jerome     the  ground  amongst  the  prelates,  he  took  the  mitre  and  put  it  upon 

ifh'^pa-'''  his  head,  saying  :     "  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  when  he  should  suffer 

P'sts-       death  for  me  most  wretched  sinner,  did  wear  a  crown  of  thorns  upon  his 

head ;  and  I,  for  his  sake,  instead  of  that  crown,  will  willingly  wear  this 

mitre  and  cap."  Afterwards  he  was  laid  hold  of  by  the  secular  power. 

Jerome         After  that,  he  was  led  out  of  the  said  church  to  the  place  of  execu- 

te™to\he  ^i^^  •  ""'h^^  h^  ^^'^s  going  out  of  the  church,  with  a  cheerful  counte- 

secuiar     nance  and  a  loud  voice,  lifting  his  eyes  up  unto  heaven,  he  began  to 

Jerome     *^i"o  '■<  "  Crcdo  in  unum  Deum,"  as  it  is  accustomed  to  be  sung  in  the 

passeth     chm'ch.     Afterwards,  as  he  passed  along,  he  did  sing  some  canticles 

irig,  unto  of  the  church,  which  being  ended,  in  the  entering  out  of  the  gate   of 

t^d^rn.    the  city,  as  men  go  unto  Gottlieben,  he  did  sing  this  hymn,  "  Felix 

namque."     And  that  respond  being  ended,  after  he  came  to  the  place 

of  execution  where  Master  John  Huss  before  had  suffered  death  inno- 

He  cently,  kneeling  down  before  an  image  which  was  like  unto  the  picture 

of  Master  John  Huss,  which  was  there  prepared  to  bum  Master  Jerome, 

he  made  a  certain  devout  prayer. 


prayeth. 


THK    BURNIXG    OF    JEROME. 


While  he  was  thus  praying,  the  tormentors  took  him  up,  and  lift-    Henry 
ing  him  up  from  the  ground,  spoiled  him  of  all  his  garments,  and  left 


him  naked ;  and  afterwards  girded  him  about  the  loins  with  a  linen    A.  D. 

cloth,  and  bound  him  fast  with  cords  and  chains  of  iron,  to  the  said    ^'*^°' 

image  which  was  made  fast  unto  the  earth.     And  so  standing  upon  ■^""'^^ 

the  ground,  when  they  began  to  lay  the  wood  about  him,  he  sung  an  image 

"  Salve  festa  dies."     And  when  the  h}aiin  was  ended,  he  sung  again,  john" 

with  a  loud  voice,  "  Credo  in  unum  Deum,"  unto  the  end.  That  beinoc  2"^^' 

'  .  '  .  o  He  sing- 

ended,  he  said  unto  the  people,  in  the  German  tongue,  in  effect  as  ethathis 

folloAveth.     "  Dearly  beloved  children  !  even  as  I  have  now  sung,  so  Th™'"^' 

do  I  believe,  and  none  otherwise ;  and  this  creed  is  my  whole  faith,  j "rome*^ 

notwithstanding  now  I  die  for  this  cause,  because  I  would  not  consent  to  the 

and  agree  to  the  council,  and  with  them  affirm  and  hold  that  Master  jerome 

John  Huss  was  by  them  holily  and  justly  condemned ;  for  I  did  know  fg^^f.'^ 

well  enough  that  he  was  a  true  preacher  of  the  gospel  of  Jesu.  Christ."   ^°^y  °^ 

After  that  he  was  compassed  in  with  the  wood  up  to  the  crown  of  Huss. 
the  head,  they  cast  all  his  garments  upon  the  wood  also,  and  with  a 
firebrand  they  set  it  on  fire ;   which  being  once  fired,   he  began  to 
sing  with  a  loud  voice,  "■  In  manus  tuas,  Domine,  commendo  spiritum 
meum."     When  that  was  ended,  and  he  began  vehemently  to  burn, 
he  said  in  the  vulgar  Bohemian  tongue :    "  O  Lord  God,  Father  The  last 
Almighty  !  have  mercy  upon  me,  and  be  merciful  unto  mine  offences ;  je°rome. 
for  thou  knowest  how  sincerely  I  have  loved  thy  truth."     Then  his 
voice,  by  the  vehemency  of  the  fire,  was  choked  and  stopped,  that  it 
was  no  longer  heard,  but  he  moved  continually  his  mouth  and  lips,  as 
though  lie  had  still  prayed  or  spoken  within  himself. 

When  in  a  manner  his  whole  body  with  his  beard  was  burned  The 
round  about,  and  that  there  appeared  through  the  great  burning  upon  "r^^ 
his  body  certain  great  bladders  as  big  as  an  Qgg,  yet  he  continually  "^^^^i^- 
very  strongly  and  stoutly  moved,  and  shaked  his  head  and  mouth,  by 
the  space  almost  of  one  quarter  of  an  horn*.     So  burning  in  the  fire, 
he  lived  with  great  pain  and  martyrdom,  while  one  might  easily  have 
gone  from  St.  Clements  over  the  bridge  unto  our  lady-church :  he 
was  of  such  a  stout  and  strong  nature,     After  he  was  thus  dead  in 
the  fire,  by  and  by  they  brought  his  bedding,  his  straw-bed,  his  boots, 
his  hood,  and  all  other  things  that  he  had  in  the  prison,  and  burned  hu  ashes 
them  all  to  ashes  in  the  same  fire  ;  which  ashes,  after  the  fire  was  out,  j^e  rivlr 
they  did  diligently  gather  together,  and  carry  them  in  a  cart,  and  cast  ^*»'"^- 
them  into  the  river  Rhine,  which  ran  hard  by  the  city. 

That  man  who  was  the  true  reporter  hereof,  and  who  testified  unto  The  wu- 
us  the  acts  and  doings  about  the  condemnation  of  Master  Jerome,  thlVri- 
and  sent  the  same  unto  us  to  Prague  in  writing,  doth  thus  conclude.  *^'"- 
"  All  these  things,"  said  he,  "  I  did  behold,  see,  and  hear  to  be  done 
in  this  form  and  manner.     And  if  any  man  do  tell  you  the  contrary, 
do  not  credit  him ;  for  all  those  things  which  happened  unto  him 
Avhen  he  came  toward  Constance,  and  also  at  his  first  coming  unto 
Constance,  of  his  own  free  will,  and  afterwards  when  he  was  brought 
bound  unto  Constance,  as  is  aforesaid,  I  myself  did  see  and  perfectly 
behold ;  and,  for  a  perpetual  memory  thereof  to  be  had  for  ever,  I 
have  directed  the  same  unto  you,  not  lying  or  falsifying  any  point 
thereof;  as  He,  who  is  the  searcher  of  all  men's  hearts,  can  bear  me 


jS6  a    LETTKR    of    the    nobles    Of^    BOHEMIA 

Henrtj    witncss ;  wilHiig  rather  to  sustain  the  note  of  ignorance  and  rudeness 

'      of  style,  to  bear  witness  unto  the  truth,  than  I  would  by  any  means 

A.D.    be  compelled,  by  tickling  or  flattering  the  ears  of  the  hearers  with 

^'^^^-    feigned  and  cloked  speech,  to  swerve  or  go  aside  from  the  truth  of 

this  story." 

Thus  end  the  tragical  histories  of  Master  John  Huss,  and  Master 
Jerome  of  Prague,  faithfully  gathered  and  collected  by  a  certain 
Bohemian,  being  a  present  witness  and  beholder  of  the  same  ;  written 
and  compiled  first  in  Latin,  and  so  sent  by  the  said  Bohemian  into 
his  country  of  Bohemia,  and  again  translated  out  of  the  Latin,  with 
like  fidelity,  into  our  English  tongue. 

In  the  meantime,  while  Master  Jerome  was  in  this  trouble,  and  before 
the  council,  the  nobles  and  lords  of  Bohemia  and  of  Moravia  (but  not 
a  little  aggrieved  thereat)  directed  their  letters  unto  this  barbarous 
council  of  popish  murderers,  in  tenor  and  form  of  words  as  followeth. 

THE    LETTER  OF  THE    FIFTY-FOUR    NOBLES    OF  MORAVIA,  WRITTEN 

UNTO  THE  COUNCIL  OF  CONSTANCE   IN  DEFENCE  OF  MASTER 

JOHN    HUSS    AND    MASTER    JEROME    OF    PRAGUE. 

To  the  right  reverend  Fathers  and  Lords  in  Christ,  the  Lords  Car- 
dinals, Patriarchs,  Primates,  Archbishops,  Bishops,  Ambassadors, 
Doctors  and  Masters,  and  to  the  whole  Council  of  Constance,  we 
the  Nobles,  Lords,  Knights,  and  Esquires,  of  the  famous  Marquis- 
dom  of  Moravia,  wish  the  desire  of  all  goodness,  and  the  observa- 
tion of  the  Commandments  of  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ. 

Forasmuch  as  every  man,  both  by  the  law  of  nature,  and  also  by 
God's  law,  is  commanded  to  do  that  unto  another  man,  which  he  would 
have  done  unto  himself,  and  is  forbidden  to  do  that  thing  unto  another, 
which  he  would  not  have  done  unto  himself,  as  our  Saviour  saith,  "  All 
things  whatsoever  you  will  that  men  should  do  unto  you,  the  same  do 
you  unto  them,  for  this  is  the  law  and  the  prophets'"  [Matt,  vii.]  ;  yea, 
the  law  is  fulfilled  in  this  one  point,  "  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour 
as  thyself""  [Rom.  xiii.]  :  we,  therefore  (God  being  our  author),  having 
respect  as  much  as  in  us  lieth  unto  the  said  law  of  God,  and  the  love 
of  our  neighbour,  before  did  send  our  letters  unto  Constance  for  our 
dearly  beloved  friend  of  good  memory.  Master  John  Huss,  bachelor 
of  divinity,  and  preacher  of  the  gospel ;  whom  of  late,  in  the  council 
of  Constance  (we  know  not  with  what  spirit  being  led),  you  have 
condemned  as  an  obstinate  heretic ;  neither  having  confessed  any 
thing,  neither  being  lawfidly  convicted  as  were  expedient ;  having  no 
errors  or  heresies  declared  or  laid  against  him,  but  only  at  the  sinister, 
false,  and  importune  accusations,  suggestions,  and  instigations  of  his 
mortal  enemies,  and  the  traitors  of  our  kingdom  and  marquisdom  of 
Moravia.  And  being  thus  unmercifully  condemned,  you  have  slain 
him  with  most  shameful  and  cruel  death,  to  the  perpetual  shame  and 
infamy  of  our  most  christian  kingdom  of  Bohemia,  and  the  famous 
marquisdom  of  Moravia  (as  we  have  written  unto  Constance,  unto 
the  most  noble  prince  and  lord,  the  lord  Sigismund,  king  of  Romans 


TO    THE    COUNCIL    OF    CONSTANCE.  521 

and  of  Hungary,  the  heir  and  successor  of  our  kingdoms,  which  was    Jiemy 
also  read  and  published  in  your  congregations,  which  we  will  here  also 


have  enrolled),  and  have  bui-ned  him,  as  it  is  reported,  in  reproach    A.D. 
and  contempt  of  us.  1416. 


Wherefore  we  have  thought  good  even  now  to  direct  our  letters  t'"= 
patent  to  your  reverences  now  present  in  the  behalf  of  Master  John  John 
Huss ;  openly  professing  and  protesting,  both  with  heart  and  mouth,  de"ared 
that  he,  the  said  Master  John  Huss,  was  a  just,  good,  and  catholic  ^13"^ 
man,  and,  a  long  season,  worthily  commended  and  allowed  in  our  king-  mony 
doni  for  his  life  and  conversation.     He  also  preached  and  taught  us  nowes  of 
and  our  subjects  the  law  of  the  gospel,  and  of  the  holy  prophets,  and  ^°''^'"''''- 
the  books  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament,  according  to  the  exposition 
of  the    oly  doctors  approved  by  the  church,  and  left  many  monuments 
in  writing,  most  constantly  detesting  and  abhorring  all   errors  and 
heresies ;  continually  admonishing  both  us  and  all  faithful  Christians 
to  do  the  like ;  diligently  exhorting  all  men  as  much  as  in  him  lay, 
by  his  words,  writings,  and  travail,  unto  quietness  and  concord  :  so 
that  using  all  the  diligence  that  we  might,  we  never  heard  or  could 
understand,  that  Master  John  Huss  had  preached,  taught,  or  by  any 
means  affirmed  any  error  or  heresy  in  his  sermons,  or  that  by  any 
manner  of  means  he  had  offended  us,  or  our  subjects,  either  by  word 
or  deed ;  but  that  he  always  led  a  quiet  and  a  godly  life  in  Christ,* 
exhorting  all  men  diligently,  both  by  his  word  and  works,  as  much  as 
he  might,  to  observe  and  keep  the  law  of  the  gospel,  and  the  institu- 
tions of  the  holy  fathers,  after  the  preaching  of  our  holy  mother  the 
church,  and  to  the  edifying  of  men's  souls.     Neither  did  these  pre- 
mises which  you  had  so  perpetrated  to  the  reproach  both  of  us  and 
our  kingdom  and  marquisdom,  suffice  and  content  you,  but  that  also, 
without  all  mercy  and  piety,  you  have  apprehended,  imprisoned,  and 
condemned,  and  even  now,  peradventure,  like  as  you  did  Master  John 
Huss,  you  have  most  cruelly  murdered  the  worshipful  man.  Master 
Jerome  of  Prague ;   a  man  abounding  in  eloquence,  master  of  the  Defence 
seven  liberal  arts,  and  a  famous  philosopher ;  not  being  seen,  heard,  ofPrague! 
examined,  neither  convicted,  but  only  at  the  sinister  and  false  accusa- 
tions of  his  and  our  accusers  and  betrayers. 

Furthermore,  it  is  come  to  our  knowledge  and  understanding 
(which  we  do  not  without  great  grief  rehearse),  as  we  may  also  evi- 
dently gather  by  your  writings,  how  that  certain  detractors,  odious 
both  to  God  and  men,  privy  enviers  and  betrayers,  have  wickedly 
and  grievously,  albeit  falsely  and  traitorously,  accused  us,  our  king- 
dom and  marquisdom  aforesaid,  before  you  in  your  council ;  that  in  the 
said  kingdom  of  Bohemia,  and  marquisdom  of  Moravia,  divers  errors 
are  sprung  up,  which  have  grievously  and  manifoldly  infected  both 
our  hearts,  and  also  the  hearts  of  many  faithful  men  ;  insomuch  that 
without  a  speedy  stop  or  stay  of  correction,  the  said  kingdom  and 
marquisdom,  together  with  the  faithful  Christians  therein,  should  in- 
cur an  irreparable  loss  and  ruin  of  their  souls. 

These  cruel  and  pernicious  injuries  which  are  laid  unto  us  and  to 
our  said  kingdom  and  marquisdom,  albeit  most  falsely  and  slander- 
ously, how  may  we  suffer  ?  forasmuch  as  thiough  the  grace  of  God 

(I)  "  All  that  will  live  godly  in  Christ  shall  sufTer  persecution."    2  T:m.  iii. 


528  A    I.ETTEil    OF    THE    NOBLES    OF    BOHEMIA. 

Henry    (whcii  ill  a  manner  all  other  kingdoms  of  the  world  have  oftentimes 
wavered,  making  schisms  and  antipopes),'  our  most  gracious  kingdom 


A.  D.  of  Bohemia,  and  most  noble  marquisdom  of  Moravia,  since  the 
l'^^16.  ^ijjjg  i^Qj  (Jifi  receive  the  catholic  faith  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  as 
a  most  perfect  quadrant,^  have  always,  without  reproof,  stuck  upon 
the  church  of  Rome,  and  have  sincerely  done  their  true  obedience. 
Also  with  how  great  costs  and  charges,  and  great  travail,  with  what 
worship  and  due  reverence,  they  have  reverenced  the  holy  mother  the 
church  and  her  pastors,  by  their  princes  and  faithful  subjects,  it  is 
more  manifest  than  the  day-light  unto  the  whole  world  ;  and  your- 
selves, if  you  will  confess  the  truth,  can  witness  the  same  also. 

Wherefore,  that  we,  according  to  the  mind  of  the  apostle,  may 
procure  honest  and  good  things,  not  only  before  God,  but  before 
men  also ;  and  lest,  by  neglecting  the  famous  renown  of  the  king- 
dom and  marquisdom,  we  be  found  cruel  toward  our  neighbours ; 
having  a  steadfast  hope,  a  pure  and  sincere  conscience  and  intent, 
and  a  certain  true  faith  in  Clu-ist  Jesu  our  Lord,  by  the  tenor  of 
these  we  signify  and  declare  unto  your  fatherhoods,  and  to  all  faith- 
ful Christians  ;  openly  professing  both  with  heart  and  mouth,  that 
whatsoever  man,  of  what  estate,  pre-eminence,  dignity,  condition, 
degree,  or  religion  soever  he  be,  who  hath  said,  or  affirmed,  either 
doth  say  or  affirm,  that  in  the  said  kingdom  of  Bohemia,  and  mar- 
quisdom of  Moravia,  heresies  have  sprung  up  which  have  infected 
us  and  other  faithful  Christians,  as  is  aforesaid  (the  only  person  of  our 
most  noble  prince  and  lord,  Sigismund,  king  of  Romans,  and  of 
Hungary,  &c.,  our  lord  and  heir  successor,  being  set  apart,  whom  we 
trust  and  believe,  not  to  be  guilty  in  the  premises),  all  and  every 
such  man,  as  is  aforesaid,  doth  lie  falsely  upon  his  head,  as  a  wicked 
and  naughty  traitor  and  betrayer  of  the  said  kingdom  and  marquis- 
dom, and  most  traitorous  unto  us,  and  most  pernicious  heretic,  the 
son  of  all  malice  and  Avickedness.  yea,  and  of  the  devil  himself,  who 
is  a  liar,  and  the  father  of  all  lies.  [John  viii.] 
These  Notwithstanding  we,  for  this  present,  committing  the  aforesaid 

'^en'  injuries  to  God,  imto  whom  vengeance  pertaineth,  who  will  also 
thei^r^*^  abundantly  reward  the  workers  of  iniquity  [Deut,  xxxviii. ;  Psal. 
obedience  XXX.],  will  prosccutc  them  morc  amply  before  him,  whom  God  shall 
popefno  appoint  in  the  apostolic  see,  to  govern  his  holy  church,  as  the  only 
thl'n  was  ^^^  undoubted  pastor.  Unto  whom,  God  willing,  we  exhibiting  our 
lawful,  due  reverence  and  obedience  as  faithful  children,  in  those  things 
and  '  which  are  lawful,  honest,  and  agreeable  to  reason  and  the  law  of  God, 
abirto  '^^'i^l  make  our  request  and  petition,  that  speedy  remedy  may  be  pro- 
IiTd'the  ^'^^^^  fo'^  ^s,  our  said  kingdom  and  marquisdom,  upon  the  premises, 
law  of      according  to  the  law  of  oiu  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  institutions 


God 


Mark  of  the  lioly  fathers.  The  premises  notwithstanding,  we,  setting  apart 
and'iearn,  ^  ^^^^  ^^^  men's  Ordinances  provided  to  the  contrary,  will  maintain 
yo^^^  and  defend  the  law  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  devout,  humble 
men.        and  constant  preachers  thereof,  even  to  the  shedding  of  our  blood. 

Dated  at  Sternberg,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  1415,  upon  the 
day  of  St.  Wenceslaus,  martyr  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

(1)   He  meaneth  the  long  schism  spoken  of  before,  where  three  popes  were  striving  one  against 
another. 
,2)  A  quadrant,  being  four  square,  proverbially  signifieth  a  man  that  is  constant  and  immutable. 


A    TABLE    OF    CERTAIN    NOBLES    OF    BOHEMIA, 


5m 


A.D. 

1416. 


Round  about  the  said  letters  there  were  fifty-four  seals  hanging,  Henr^ 
and  their  names  subscribed,  whose  seals  they  were.  The  names  of  ^' 
which  noblemen  I  thought  it  good  here  to  annex  withal,  partly  for  the 
more  credit  of  that  which  hath  been  said,  partly  also  for  example's 
sake,  to  the  intent  that  our  noblemen  and  gentlemen  in  this  our  realm 
of  England,  now  living  in  this  clear  light  of  the  gospel,  may,  by  their 
example,  understand,  that  if  they  join  themselves  with  the  gospel  of 
Jesus,  zealously,  and  as  they  should  do,  yet  are  they  neither  the  first 
nor  the  most  that  so  have  done  before  them  :  if  not,  yet  the  truth 
may  here  remain  in  the  story  to  their  shame,  or  else  to  their  instruc- 
tion, seeing  so  many  noble  and  worthy  gentlemen,  within  the  small 
kingdom  of  Bohemia,  to  be  so  forward  in  those  so  dark  days,  and 
among  so  many  enemies,  two  hundred  years  ago,  to  take  part  with 
Christ;  and  yet  our  gentlemen  here  in  such  long  continuance  of 
time,  being  so  diligently  taught,  are  neither  in  number  nor  in  zeal  to 
them  to  be  compared,  but  will  still  take  part,  contrary  both  to  Christ, 
and  to  the  example  of  these  nobles,  whose  names  they  may  see  and 
read  here  following : 


1.  Alssokabat  de  Wisco- 

witz. 

2.  Ulricus  de  Lhota. 

3.  Joan,  de  Ksimicz. 

4.  Jossko  de  Sczitowcz. 

5.  PaerdusZwiranowicz. 

6.  Joan,  de  Ziwla. 

7.  Joan. de  Reychenberg. 

8.  Wildo  Skitzyny. 

9.  Diliko  de  Biela. 

10.  Kos  de  Doloylatz. 

11.  Joan,  de  Simusin. 

12.  Dobessimus  de  Tissa. 

13.  Drazko  de  Aradeck. 

14.  Steph.    de    Hmodor- 

kat. 

15.  Joan.  Dern    de    Ga- 

bonecx. 

16.  Barso   dictus   Hloder 

de  Zeinicz. 

17.  Joan.  Hmrsdorfar. 

18.  Psateska  de  Wilklek. 

19.  Petrus  Mog.  de  Sczi- 

towicy. 


20.  N.  Studenica. 

21.  N.  Brischell. 

22.  N.  de  Cromassona. 

23.  Arannisic  Donant  de 

Polonia. 

24.  Joan.  Donant  de  Po- 

lonia. 

25.  Joan,  de  Cziczow. 

26.  Wenceslaus  de  N. 

27.  N.  de  N. 

28.  N.  N. 

29.  Josseck  de  N. 

30.  Henricus  de  N. 

31.  Waczlas  de  kuck. 

32.  Henr.   de    Zreno- 

wicz. 

33.  Baczko   de    Con- 

vald. 

34.  Petr.  dictus  Nienick 

de  Zaltoroldeck. 

35.  Czenko    de    Moss- 

now. 

36.  N. 

37.  Zibilutz  de  Clezam. 


38.  Joannes    de     Pater- 

swald. 

39.  Parsifal    de     Namy- 

escz. 

40.  Zodoni  de  Zwietzick. 

41.  Raczeck  Zawskalp. 

42.  Jon  de  Tossawicz. 

43.  Diwa  de  Spissnia. 

44.  SteiFko  de  Draczdw. 

45.  Issko  de  Draczdw, 

46.  Odich  de  Hlud. 

47.  Wosfart   de    Paulo- 

wicz. 

48.  Pirebbor  de  Tyreze- 

nicz. 

49.  Rynard   de    Tyrcze- 

wicz. 

50.  Bohunko    de  Wratis- 

dow. 

51.  Ulricus  de  Racdraw. 

52.  Deslaw  de  Nali. 

53.  Bonesb  de  Frabre- 

nicz, 

54.  Eybl  de  Roissowan. 


After  these  things  thus  declared  and  discoursed,  concerning  the 
history  of  John  Huss  and  Jerome  of  Prague,  the  order  of  place  and 
country  next  would  require,  consequently  to  infer  and  comprehend  the 
great  troubles  and  perturbations  which  happened  after,  and  upon  the 
death  of  these  men,  in  the  country  of  Bohemia ;  but  the  order  of 
time  calleth  me  back,  first  to  other  matters  here  of  our  own  country, 
which  passed  in  the  mean  time  with  us  in  England,  Which  things 
being  taken  by  the  way  and  finished,  we  will  (Christ  willing)  after- 
wards return  to  the  tractation  hereof,  to  prosecute  the  troubles  and 
conflicts  of  the  Bohemians,  with  other  things  beside,  pertaining  to 

(1)  Thifi  nobleman  did  accompany  John  Huss,  and,  -with  certain  horsemen,  conduct  liim  to 
Constance. 


VOL.   Ill, 


M    M 


530  THE    VISION    OF    JOHN    HUSS    EXPOUNDED. 

fienry   the  lattcr  end  of  the  council  of  Constance,  and  to  the  choosing  of 

'  Pope  Martin,  as  the  order  of  years  and  time  sliall  require. 
A.  D.  *  But  first '  I  will  declare  a  certain  vision,  which  the  said  John 
J^l^l-  Huss  had  in  his  country  of  Bohemia,  before  his  martyrdom.  He, 
being  the  minister  in  the  church  of  Bethlehem,  had  a  vision  by  night, 
that  he  had  painted,  in  the  said  chm-ch  of  Bethlehem,  certain  pictures 
of  Christ  and  his  apostles ;  which  pictures  the  bishop  of  Rome,  with 
certain  cardinals,  came  and  defaced :  which  being  done,  within  a 
while  after,  it  seemed  unto  him  that  other  painters  came  in  place., 
renewing  and  repairing  the  said  pictures,  which  he  had  painted  before, 
of  Christ  and  his  apostles,  and  much  more  fair  than  he  had  done 
before.  The  number  of  which  painters  was  so  great  that  they 
gloried  against  the  pope  and  all  the  cardinals,  bidding  them  now  to 
come  and  put  them  out  if  they  could  :  which  thing,  with  all  their 
power,  they  were  not  able  to  do. 

This  vision  John  Huss  himself,  in  his  book  of  epistles,  expoundeth ; 
and  applieth  these  pictures  of  Christ  and  his  apostles,  unto  the 
preaching  of  Christ  and  his  apostles.  Which  preaching  and  doc- 
trine, though  the  pope  and  his  cardinals  should  extingu.isli  in  hwi, 
yet  did  he  foresee  and  declare  that  the  time  should  come  that  the 
same  doctrine  should  be  renewed  again  by  other  preachers,  so  plen- 
teously,  that  the  pope,  with  all  his  power,  should  not  be  able  to  pre- 
vail against  it. 

•  Thus  much  as  concerning  the  vision  of  John  Huss,  whereunto 
doth  well  accord  the  prophecy  of  the  same  Huss"'^  a  little  before  his 
death,  and  printed  on  the  coin,  there,  in  Bohemia,  called  '  Moneta 
Hussiana,""  having  this  subscription,  Centum  Revolutis  Annis 
Deo  Respondebitis  et  Mihi  ;  Anno  1415.  That  is,  "  One 
hundred  years  come  and  gone,  you  shall  give  account  to  God  and 
me.  Anno  1516;"  for  the  exposition  of  this  prophecy,  if  we  count 
from  this  year  of  John  Huss,  which  is  1415,  unto  the  year  of  our 
Lord,  3516,  in  which  year  Martin  Luther  first  began  to  write  against 
the  pope,  we  shall  find  the  number  of  a  hundred  years  fully  com- 
plete.* 

Vide  su-       Ye  heard  before,  how,  after  the  death  of  Thomas  Arundel,  arch- 
HeAry      bishop  of  Canterbury,  succeeded  Henry  Chichesley,  a.i>.  1414,  and 
k^'areh-  ^^^  twcuty-five  ycars ;  in  whose  time  was  much  trouble  and  great 
bishop  of  affliction  of  good  men  here  in  England ;  of  whom  many  were  com- 
bury"'    pelled  to   abjure,  some  Avere  burned,   divers  were  driven  to   exile. 
Whereof,  partly  now  to  treat  as  Ave  find  them  in  registers  and  histories 
recorded,  we  will  first  begin  with  John  Claydon,  currier,  of  London, 
and  Richard  Turming ;  whom  Robert  Fabian  doth  falsely  affirm  to 
be  burned  in  the  year  wherein  sir  Roger  Acton  and  Master  Brown 
suffered ;  who  indeed  suffered  not  before  the  second  year  of  Henry 
Chichesley  being  archbishop  of  Canterbuiy,  Avhich  was  a.d.  1416.' 
The  history  of  which  John  Claydon,  in  the  registers,  is  thus  de- 
clared. 

(1)  See  edition  1563,  p.  250;  and  the  Latin  edition  of  1559,  p.  67,  where  the  story  is  less  fully 
related. — Ed. 

(2)  See  page  508,  where  the  prophecy  is  attributed  to  Jerome.— Ed. 

(3)  Seepage  404.— Ed. 


JOHN    CLAYDON,    AXD    RICHAUD    TUHMIXG. 


iSl 


Cbe  i^i^tocji  of  3ioI)n  <SIIflpDon,  Curciec,  anD  of  ^tcpcD  Cucming, 


Henry 

r. 

A.D. 

1415 

to 
1416. 


John 
Claydon 
exami- 
ned 


The  seventeenth  of  August  one  thousand  four  hundred  and  fifteen, 
did  personally  appear  John  Claydon,  cumer  of  London  (arrested  by 
the  mayor  of  the  said  city  for  the  suspicion  of  heresy),  before  Henry 
archbishop  of  Canterbury,  in   St.  PauFs  Church  ;    which  John  (it 
being  objected  to  him  by  the  archbishop,  that  in  the  city  of  London, 
and  other  places  of  the  province  of  Canterbury,  he  was  suspected  by 
divers  godly  and  learned  men  for  heresy,  and  to  be  contrary  to  the 
catholic  faith  and  determination  of  the  church)  did  openly  confess, 
and  denied  not,  but  that  he  had  been  for  the  space  of  twenty  years 
suspected  both  about  the  city  of  London,  and  also  in  the  province  of 
Canterbury,  and  especially  of  the  common  sort,  for  Lollardy  and 
heresy,  and  to  be  contrary  to  the  catholic  faith  and  determination  of 
the  church  of  Rome,  and  defamed  of  the  same  all  the  time  aforesaid : 
insomuch,  that  in  the  time  of  Master  Robert  Braybrook,  bishop  of  ciaydon 
London  deceased,  he  was,  for  the  space  of  two  years,  commanded  to  prisVn^d 
the  prison  of  Conway  for  the  aforesaid  defamation  and  suspicion,  and  ^  Robert 
for  the  same  cause  also  he  was  in  prison  in  the  Fleet  for  three  years ;  brook, 
out  of  which  prison  he  (in  the  reign  of  king  Henry  IV.)  was  brought  London! 
before  the  lord  John  Scarle,  then  chancellor  to  the  king,  and  there 
did  abjure  all  heresy  and  error.     And  the  said  John  Claydon,  being 
asked  of  the  said  archbishop  whether  he  did  abjure  the  heresy  of 
which  he  was  suspected  before  any  other,  did  confess,  that  in  a  con- 
vocation at  London  in  PauFs  Church  before  Thomas  Arundel,  late 
archbishop  deceased,   he  did  abjure  all  such  doctrine,  which  they  ciaydon 
called  heresy  and  error,  contrary  to  the  catholic  faith  and  determina-  ^^^^  ^^ 
tion  of  the  church  ;  and  that  he  had  not  only  left  such  articles  and  Jured. 
opinions,  wherein  he  was  defamed,  but  also  did  abstain  from  all  com- 
pany that  were  suspected  of  such  opinions,  so  that  he  should  neither 
give  aid,  help,  counsel,  nor  favour  unto  them. 

And  moreover,  the  said  John  was  asked  by  the  said  archbishop, 
whether  he  ever  had  in  his  house,  since  his  abjuration,  in  his  keeping, 
any  books  Avritten  in  English.     Whereunto  he  confessed,  that  he 
would  not  deny,  but  that  he  had  in  his  house,  and  in  his  keeping, 
many  English  books  ;  for  he  was  arrested  by  the  mayor  of  the  city  English 
of  London  for  such  books  as  he  had,  which  books  (as  he  thought)  ^°°^^- 
were  in  the  mayor's  keeping.     Upon  which  the  mayor  did  openly  Thejudg- 
confess,  that  he  had  such  books  in  his  keeping,  which  in  his  judgment  uiema%r 
were  the  worst,  and  the  most  perverse,  that  ever  he  did  read  or  see ;  ^q„°"" 
and  one  book  that  was  well  bound  in  red  leather,  of  parchment, 
written  in  a  good  English  hand :  and  among  the  other  books  found 
with  the  said  John  Claydon,  the  mayor  gave  up  the  said  book  before 
the  archbishop.     Whereupon  the  said  John  Claydon,  being  asked  of  ciaydon 
the  archbishop  if  he  knew  that  book,  did  openly  confess  that  he  knew  stowed 
it  very  well,  because  he  caused  it  to  be  written  at  his  ovm.  costs  and  ^fly 
charges  ;  for  he  spent  much  money  thereupon  since  his  abjuration,  "pon 
Then  Avas  he  asked  who  wrote  it  ?     He  did  answer :  "  One  called  books. 
John  Grime.'" 


(1)  Ex  Regist.  Cant. 
51   M  2 


532,  THE    AKTICLKS    OF    CLAYDON. 

itenrif       And  further,  being  required  what  the  said  John  Grime  was,  he 

'—^  answered,  he  could  not  telK     Again,  being  demanded  whether  he 

A.D.  did  ever  read  the  same  book,  \iz  did  confess,  that  he  could  not  read, 
^^^^  but  he  had  heard  the  fourth  part  thereof  read  by  one  John  Fullar. 
14jg^    And  being  asked,  whether  he  thought  the  contents  of  that  book  to 


be  catholic,   profitable,  good,  and   true,    he  answered,   that   many- 
things  which   he  had  heard  in  the  same  book,  were   both  profi- 
oaydon    table,  good,  and  healthful  to  his  soul ;    and  as  he  said,  he  had  great 
16^]^"°'  affection  to  the  said  book,  for  a  sermon  preached  at  Horsleydown, 
that  was  written  in  the  said  book.   And  being  further  asked,  whether, 
since  the  time  of  his  said  abjuration,  he  did   commune  Avith  one 
Richard    Richard,  a  baker,  of  the  city  aforesaid,  he  did  answer,  yea  ;  for  the 
ba^ker!"^'  Said  Richard  the  baker  did  come  often  unto  his  house  to  have  com- 
munication with  him.     And  being  asked  whether  he  knew  the  said 
Richard  to  be  suspected,  and  defamed  of  heresy,  he  did  answer  again, 
that  he  knew  well  that  the  said  Richard  was  suspected  and  defamed 
of  many  men  and  women  in  the  city  of  London,  as  one  whom  they 
thought  to  be  a  heretic' 

Which  confession  being  made,  he  did  cause  the  said  books  to  be 
delivered  to  Master  Robert  Gilbert,  doctor  of  divinity,  to  William 
William  Lindewood,  doctor  of  both  laws,  and  other  clerks,  to  be  examined ; 
}^l^l]  and  in  the  mean  time,  David  Beard,  Alexander  Philip,  and  Balthasar 
b''tM\vs  ^^''"^'  ^^^^  taken  for  witnesses  against  him,  and  were  committed  to 
be  examined  to  Master  John  Escourt,  general  examiner  of  Canter- 
bury. This  done,  the  archbishop  continued  his  session  till  Monday 
next  in  the  same  place.  Which  Monday  being  come,  which  was  the 
twentieth  of  the  said  month,  the  said  Master  Escourt  openly  and 
publicly  exhibited  the  witnesses,  being  openly  read  before  the  arch- 
bishop, and  other  bishops ;  which  being  read,  then,  after  that,  were 
read  divers  tractations,  found  in  the  house  of  the  said  John  Claydon ; 
out  of  the  which  being  examined,  divers  points  were  gathered  and 
noted  for  heresies  and  errors,  and  especially  out  of  the  book  aforesaid, 
which  book  the  said  John  Claydon  confessed  by  his  own  costs  to  be 
written  and  bound,  which  book  was  intituled,  '  The  Lanthorn  of 
Light;'  in  which,  and  in  the  other  examined,  were  these  articles 
underwritten  contained : 

Articles  contained  in  an  English  Book,   entitled,  '  The  Lanthorn 

of  Light.' 

I.  First,  Upon  the  text  of  the  gospel,  how  the  enemy  did  sow  the  tares,  there 
is  said  thus  :  That  wicked  Antichrist,  the  pope,  hath  sowed  among  the  laws  of 
Christ  his  popish  and  corrupt  decrees,  which  are  of  no  authority,  strength,  or 
value. 

II.  That  the  archbishops  and  bishops,  speaking  indifferently,  are  the  seats  of 
the  beast  Antichrist,  when  he  sitteth  in  them,  and  reigneth  above  other  people 
in  the  dark  caves  of  errors  and  heresies. 

III.  That  the  bishops'  license,  for  a  man  to  preach  the  word  of  God,  is  the 
true  character  of  the  beast,  i.  e.  Antichrist ;  and  therefore  simple  and  faithful 
priests  may  preach  when  they  will,  against  the  prohibition  of  that  Antichrist, 

''^d  t  ^f^  ^^"^  without  license. 

of  Anti-         IV.  That  the  court  of  Rome  is  the  chief  head  of  Antichrist,  and  the  bishops 

Christ.      be  the  body  ;  and  the  new  sects  (that  is,  the  monks,  canons  and  friars),  brought 

(1)  This  Turming,  belike,  was  then  In  prison. 


HIS    SENTENCE    AND    CONDEMNATION,  533 

in  not  by  Christ,  but  damnably  by  the  pope,  be  the  venomous  and  pestiferous  Henry 
tail  of  Antichrist.  ^• 

V.  That  no  reprobate  is  a  member  of  the  church,  but  only  such  as  be  elected  .  ^ 
and  predestinated  to  salvation ;'  seeing  the  church  is  no  other  thing  but  the  ^A^r 
congregation  of  faithful  souls,  who  do,  and  will,  keep  their  faith  constantly,  as 

well  in  deed  as  in  word.  141fi 

VI.  That  Christ  did  never  plant  private  religions  in  the  church,  but,  while  L 

he  lived  in  this  world,  he  did  root  them  out.     By  which  it  appeareth  that 
private  religions  be  unprofitable  branches  in  the  church,  and  to  be  rooted  out. 

VII.  That  the  material  churches  should  not  be  decked  with  gold,  silver,  and 
precious  stones  sumptuously  ;  but  the  followers  of  the  humility  of  Jesus  Christ 
ought  to  worship  their  Lord  God  humbly,  in  mean  and  simple  houses,  and  not 
in  great  buildings,  as  the  churches  be  now-a-days. 

VIII.  That  there  be  two  chief  causes  of  the  persecution  of  the  Christians :  Two 
one  is,  the  priests'  unlawful  keeping  of  temporal  and  superfluous  goods ;  the  causes  of 
other  is,  the  unsatiable  begging  of  the  friars,  with  their  high  buildings.  [jon. 

IX.  That  alms  be  given  neither  virtuously  nor  lawfully,  except  it  be  given 

with  these  four  conditions :    first,  unless  it  be  given  to  the  honour  of  God  :  Four  con- 
secondly,  unless  it  be  given  of  goods  justly  gotten  :  thirdly,  unless  it  be  given  ^-''""^ '" 
to  such  a  person  as  the  giver  thereof  knoweth  to  be  in  charity ;  and  fourthly,  alms, 
unless  it  be  given  to  such  as  have  need,  and  do  not  dissemble. 

X.  That  the  often  singing  in  the  church  is  not  founded  on  the  Scripture, 
and  therefore  it  is  not  lawful  for  priests  to  occupy  themselves  with  singing  in 
the  churcli,  but  with  the  study  of  the  law  of  Christ,  and  preaching  his  word. 

XI.  That  Judas  did  receive  the  body  of  Christ  in  bread,  and  his  blood  in  That 
wine ;   in  which  it  doth  plainly  appear,  that  after  consecration  of  bread  and  ^^^^'^  re- 
wine  made,  the  same  bread  and  wine  that  was  before,  doth  truly  remain  on  jn  the 
the  altar.  sacra- 

XII.  That  all  ecclesiastical  suffrages  do  profit  all  virtuous  and  godly  persons  ™®"'" 
indifferently. 

XIII.  That  the  pope's  and  the  bishops'  indulgences  be  unprofitable,  neither 
can  they  profit  them  to  whom  they  be  given  by  any  means. 

XIV.  That  the  laity  is  not  bound  to  obey  the  prelates,  whatsoever  they 
command,  unless  the  prelates  do  watch  to  give  God  a  just  account  of  the  souls 
of  them. 

XV.  That  images  are  not  to  be  sought  to  by  pilgrimages,  neither  is  it  lawful 
for  Christians  to  bow  their  kiaees  to  them,  neither  to  kiss  them,  nor  to  give 
them  any  manner  of  reverence. 

For  the  above  articles,  the  archbishop  with  other  bishops,   and 
divers  learned  men  communing  together,  first  condemned  the  books 
as  heretical,  and  burned  them  in  fire  ;  and  then,  because  they  thought  The 
the  said  John  Claydon  to  be  forsworn  and  fallen  into  heresy,  the  ciaydon^ 
archbishop  did  proceed  to  his  definitive  sentence  against  the  said  burned. 
John,  personally  appearing  before  him  in  judgment  (his  confessions 
being  read  and  deposed  against  him)  after  this  manner  : 

In  the  name  of  God,  amen.     We,  Henry,  by  the  grace  of  God  archbishop  Tlie  sei»- 
of  Canterbury,  primate  of  all  England,  and  legate  of  the  apostolic  see,  in  a  ^'I'^g^"*^ 
certain  cause  of  heretical  pravity,  and  of  relapse  into  the  same;  whereupon  nntionoi' 
John  Claydon,  layman,  of  tlie  province  of  Canterbury,  was  detected,  accused  Claydon. 
and  denounced,  and  in  the  said  our  province  of  Canterbury  publicly  defamed 
(as  by  pubhc  fame  and  common  report  notoriously  to  us  hath  been  known), 
first,  sitting  in  judgment-seat,  and  observing  all  things  lawfully  required  in  this 
behalf,  do  proceed  to  the  pronouncing  of  the  sentence  definitive  in  form  as 
followeth.     The  name  of  Christ  being  invocated  and  only  set  before  our  eyes, 
forasmuch  as  by  the  acts  and  things  enacted,  producted,  exhibited,  and  confessed 
before  us,  also  by  divers  signs  and  evidences,  we  have  found  the  said  John 
Claydon  to  have  been,  and  to  be,  publicly  and  notoriously  relapsed  again  into 
his  former  heresy,  heretofore  by  him  abjured ;    according  to  the  merits  and 

(1)  This  is  true,  speaking  of  the  invisible  church. 


53-i  INQUISITION    RESPECTING    THE    LOLLARDS. 

Henry    (Icserts  of  the  said  cause,  being  of  us  diligently  searched,  weighed,  and  pondered 

^-       before,  to  the  intent  that  the  said  John  Claydon  shall  not  infect  others  with  his 

.       scab  :  by  the  consent  and  assent  of  our  reverend  brethren  Richard,  bishop  of 

"Tj ,  S    London,  John,  bishop  of  Coventry  and  Lichfield,  and  Stephen,  bishop  of  St. 

David's,  and  of  other  doctors,  as  well  of  divinity  as  of  both  laws,  and  also  of 

^A^r     other  discreet  and  learned  men  assisting  us  in  this  behalf,  we  do  .|udge,  pro- 

1_  nounce,  and  declare  the  said  John  Claydon  to  be  relapsed  again  into  his  heresy 

which  he  before  did  abjure  ;  finally  and  definitively  appointing  him  to  be  left 
unto  the  secular  judgment,  and  so  do  leave  him,  by  these  presents. 

Claydon  Thus  Jolm  Ckyclon,  receiving  his  judgment  and  condemnation  of 
ted"t°"the  the  archbishop,  was  committed  to  the  secular  power,  and  by  them 
secular  unjustly  and  unlawfully  was  committed  to  the  fire,  for  that  the  tern- 
The  law  poral  magistrates  had  no  such  law  sufficient  for  them  to  burn  any 
buremio'  such  man  for  religion  condemned  of  the  prelates,  as  is  above  suffi- 
denf  ciently  proved  and  declared.  But  to  be  short,  'quo  jure,  quaqua 
Thedeath  injuria,'  Johu  Claydon  notwithstanding,  by  the  temporal  magistrates 
tyrdom  of  ^ot  loug  after,  was  had  to  Smithfield,  where  meekly  he  was  made  a 
Claydon.  ^umt  offering  unto  the  Lord,  a.d.  1415. 

Robert  Fabian,  and  other  chronologers  who  follow  him,  add  also, 
that  Richard  Tunning,  baker,  of  whom  mention  is  made  before  in  the 
Claydon,  examination  of  John  Claydon,  was  likewise  the  same  time  burned 
bothniaf-  with  him  in  Smithfield.    Albeit  in  the  Register  I  find  no  sentence  of 
cmdingto  Condemnation  given  against  the  said  Turming,  neither  yet  in  the 
Fabian.    Story  of  St.  Alban's  is  there  any  such  mention  of  his  burning  made, 
but  only  of  the  burning  of  John  Claydon  aforesaid  :  wherefore  the 
judgment  hereof  I  leave  free  to  the  reader.     Notwithstanding,  con- 
cerning the  said  Turming  this  is  certain,  that  he  was  accused  to  the 
bishops,  and  no  doubt  w^as  in  their  hands  and  bands.     What  after- 
wards was  done  with  him,  I  refer  it  unto  the  authors. 
A.D.1416.      The  next  year  after  the  burning  of  these  two  aforesaid,  and  also  of 
John  Huss,   being  burnt  at  Constance,  which  was  a.d.  1416,  the 
prelates  of  England  seeing  the  daily  increase  of  the  gospel,  and  fear- 
ing the  ruin  of  their  papal  kingdom,  were  busily  occupied,  with  all 
their  counsel  and  diligence,  to  maintain  the  same.     Wherefore,  to 
make  their  state  and  kingdom  sure,  by  statutes,  laws,  constitutions, 
and  terror  of  punishment,  as  Thomas  Arundel  and  other  prelates  had 
done  before,  so  the  before-named  Henry  Chichesley,  archbishop  of 
Canterbury,  in  his  convocation  holdcn  at  London,  maketh  another 
constitution   (as  though  there  had  not  enough  been  made  before) 
against  the  poor  Lollards  ;  the  copy  and  tenor  whereof  he  sendeth 
abroad  to  the  bishop  of  London,  and  to  other  his  suffragans,  by  them 
to  be  put  in  strait  execution,  containing  in  words  as  foUoweth. 

Proclamation  of  Archbishop  Chichesley,  against  the  Lollards.^ 

Henry,  by  the  grace  of  God,  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  primate  of  all  Eng- 
land, and  legate  of  the  chief  seat;  to  our  reverend  brother  in  the  Lord,  Richard, 
by  the  grace  of  God,  bishop  of  London,  health  and  brotherly  love,  with  continual 
increase.  Lately,  in  our  last  convocation  in  St.  Paul's  Church,  in  London, 
being  kept  by  you  and  other  our  brethren  and  clergy  of  our  pro\'ince,  we  do 
remember  to  have  made  this  order  under  written,  by  yoiu:  consents  :  '  Whereas, 
among  many  other  our  cares,  this  ought  to  be  chief,  that  by  some  means  we 
may  take  those  heretics,  who,  like  foxes,  lurk  and  hide  themselves  in  the  Lord's 

(1)  Ex  Regist.  Chichesley,  fol.  217. 


THE    TROUBLE    OF    liAUTON    AND    CHAPEL    FOR    RELIGION.  Oo5 

vineyard ;  and  that  the  dust  of  negligence  may  be  utterly  shaken  from  our  feet,'    Henr^ 
and  from  the  feet  of  our  fellow-brethren ;  in  this  the  said  convocation  of  the       ^• 
prelates  and  clergy,  we  have  ordained,  that  our  fellow-brethren,  our  suffragans     a  t\ 
and  archdeacons  of  our  province  of  Canterbury,  by  themselves,  their  officials  or    \A\r 

commissaries  in  their  jurisdictions,  and  every  of  their  charges  in  their  country,  L 

twice  every  year  at  the  least,  do  diligently  inquire  of  such  persons  as  are  sus-  Twice 
pected  of  heresy ;  and  that  in  every  such  their  archdeaconries,  in  every  parish  every 
wherein  it  is  reported  that  any  heretics  do  inhabit,  they  cause  three  or  more  of  inquire 
the  honestest  men,  and  best  reported  of,  to  take  their  oath  upon  the  holy  Evan-  fur  Lol- 
gelists,  that  if  they  shall  know  or  understand  any  frequenting,  either  in  privy  ^„^(^.^^^ 
conventicles,  or  else  differing  in  life  or  manners,^  from  the  common  conversa-  privy  con- 
tion  of  other  catholic  men,  or  else  that  hold  any  either  heresies  or  errors,  or  venticies. 
else  that  have  any  suspected  books  in  the  English  tongue,  or  that  do  receive  any  Apainst 
such  persons  suspected  of  heresies  and  errors  into  their  houses,  or  that  be  English 
favourers  of  them  that  are  inhabitants  in  any  such  place,  or  conversant  with    "'^  **' 
them,  or  else  have  any  recourse  unto  them ;  they  make  certificates  of  those 
persons  in  writing,  with  all  the  circumstances  wherewith  they  are  suspected, 
unto  the  said  our  suffi-agans  or  archdeacons,  or  to  their  commissaries,  so  soon 
and  with  as  much  speed  as  possibly  they  can  ;  and  that  the  said  archdeacon, 
and  every  of  their  commissaries  aforesaid,  do  declare  the  names  of  all  such 
persons  denounced,  together  with  all  the  circumstances  of  them,  the  dioceses 
and  places,  and  secretly  vmder  their  seals  do  send  over  unto  us  the  same :  and 
that  the  same  diocesans  effectually  direct  forth  lawful  process  against  them,  as 
the  quality  of  the  cause  requireth ;  and  that  with  all  diligence  they  discern, 
define,  and  execute  the  same. 

'  And  if  perhaps  they  leave  not  such  persons  convict  unto  the  secidar  court, 
yet  notwithstanding,  let  them  commit  them  unto  the  perpetual  or  temporal 
prisons,  as  the  quality  of  the  cause  shall  require,  until  the  next  convocation  of 
the  prelates  and  clergy  of  our  province  of  Canterbury,  there  personally  to 
remain :  and  that  in  the  same  prisons  they  cause  them  to  be  kept  according  as 
the  law  requireth  :  and  that  of  all  and  singular  the  things  aforesaid,  that  is, 
what  inquisition  they  have  made,  and  what  they  have  found,  and  how  in  the 
process  they  have  behaved  themselves,  and  what  persons  so  convicted  they  have 
caused  to  be  put  in  safe  keeping,  with  what  diligence  or  negligence  of  the 
commissaries  aforesaid,  with  all  and  all  manner  of  other  circumstances  premised, 
and  thereunto  in  any  wise  appertaining ;  and  especially  of  the  abjurations  (if  in 
the  mean  time  they  shall  chance  to  abjure  any  heresies),  that  then,  in  the  next 
convocation  of  the  prelates  and  clergy  under  the  form  aforesaid,  they  cause  the 
same  distinctly  and  apertly  to  be  certified  to  us  and  oiu*  successors ;  and  that 
they  deUver  effectually  to  the  official  of  our  court,  the  same  process  to  remain 
with  them,  or  else  in  the  register  of  our  court  of  Canterbury ;  so  that  every  one 
to  whom  such  things  appertain,  for  the  further  execution  of  the  same  process, 
may  have  recourse  unto  the  same  official  with  all  effect.' 

We  therefore  command,  that  as  touching  the  constitution  brought  unto  yom- 
city  and  diocese,  you  cause  the  same  in  convenient  place  and  time  to  be  pub- 
lished ;  and  that  in  all  points  you  both  observe  the  same  yourselves,  and  cause 
it  also  of  others  to  be  diligently  observed :  commanding  furthermore,  all  and 
singidar  our  fel]ow-bretlu"en  and  suffragans,  that  they,  in  like  wise,  cause  the 
same  to  be  published  throughout  all  their  cities  and  dioceses,  and  both  diligently 
observe  the  same  themselves,  and  also  cause  all  others  to  do  the  same ;  and, 
what  thing  soever  you  shall  do  in  the  premises,  that  you  certify  us  betwixt  this 
and  the  feast  of  St.  Peter  ad  vincula,  next  coming,  that  you  duly  certify  us  of 
these  things,  by  your  letters-patent,  containing  the  same  effect,  sealed  with  your 
seals. 

Dated  at  our  house  in  London,  the  first  day  of  July,  Anno  1416. 

THE     TROUBLE    OF    JOHN    BARTON    AND     ROBERT     CHAPEL,     FOR 

RELIGION. 

During  the  time  of  this  convocation  in  the  year  above-said,  two 
priests  were  presented  and  brought  before  the  bishops,  noted  and 

(1)  You  should  be  hetter  oocupied  to  slake  off  the  dust  from  your  dusty  puli>its 

(2)  To  differ  from  the  common  sort  in  life  and  mauneis,  against  the  pope's  law. 


536  ARTICLES    OUTRUDEn    UPON    ROBERT    CHAPEL    TO    CONFESS. 

iTenry    defamed  for  heretics  ;  one  named  John  Barton,  unto  whom  it  was 
^' objected  by  Philip,  bishop  of  Lincoln,  that  he  had  been  excommuni- 

A.  D.    cated  about  six  or  seven  years  before,  upon  articles  concerning  religion  ; 

^^^^-  and  yet  neither  would  appear,  being  cited,  nor  would  seek  to  be 
reconciled  again  to  the  church.  Which  things  being  so  proved  against 
him,  he  was  committed  to  the  custody  of  the  aforesaid  Philip,^  bishop 
of  Lincoln,  and  so  to  be  holden  in  prison,  till  he  should  hear  further 
what  should  be  done. 

The  other  was  Robert  Chapel,  otherwise  named  Holbech,  chaplain 
some  time  to  the  lord  Cobham ;  unto  whom  likewise  it  was  objected, 
that  he,  being  under  the  sentence  of  excommunication  about  three  or 
four  years,  yet  notwithstanding,  to  the  contempt  of  the  keys,  did 
continue  saying  mass,  and  preaching,  and  sought  not  to  be  reconciled ; 
Chapel  denying  that  he  did  know  any  such  excommunication  given 
out  against  him.  Then  was  the  copy  of  his  excommunication,  first 
made  by  the  bishop  of  Rochester,  afterwards  denounced  by  the  bishop 
of  London  at  Paul  s  Cross,  brought  and  read  before  him  ;  and  so  that 
done,  that  session  broke  up  for  that  time,  which  was  about  the  latter 
end  of  May,  a.d.  1416. 
Chapel  The  twelfth  day  of  the  month  of  July  next  following,  the  said 
abiuretn.  (^jj^pg}  appeared  again  before  the  archbishop  and  the  prelates.  To 
whom  when  it  was  objected  as  before,  how  he  had  preached  Avithout 
the  bishop's  license  in  divers  places,  as  at  Cobham,  at  Cowling,  and 
at  Shorne  ;  at  length,  he,  confessing  and  submitting  himself,  desired 
pardon.  Which  although  it  was  not  at  the  first  granted  xmto  him, 
yet  at  the  last  the  bishop  of  Rochester,  putting  in  his  hands  the 
decree  of  the  canon  law,^  and  causing  him  to  read  the  same,  made 
him  to  abjure  all  his  former  articles  and  opinions  as  heretical  and 
schismatical,  never  to  hold  the  same  again,  according  to  the  contents 
of  the  aforesaid  canon.  Whereupon  the  said  Robert,  being  absolved 
by  the  authority  of  the  archbishop  (save  only  that  he  should  not 
intermeddle  with  saying  mass,  before  he  had  been  dispensed  from 
the  pope  himself,  for  irregularity),  was  enjoined  by  the  archbishop 
himself  for  his  penance,  standing  at  PauFs,  to  publish  these  articles 
following  unto  the  people,  instead  of  his  confession  given  him  to  be 
read. 

Articles  obtruded  upon  Chapel  to  confess. 

Imprimis,  I  confess  that  bishops,  priests,  and  other  ecclesiastical  persons, 
having  no  other  profession  to  the  contrary,  may  lawfully  have,  receive,  and 
retain  lands  and  possessions  temporal,  to  dispense  and  dispose  the  same  and  the 
rents  thereof,  to  the  behoof  of  themselves,  or  of  their  church  where  they  dwell, 
according  as  seemeth  good  to  them. 

II.  Item,  I  confess,  that  it  were  very  unlawful,  yea  rather  unjust,  that  tem- 
poral men  upon  any  occasion,  whatsoever  it  be,  should  take  away  temporal 
lands  and  possessions  from  the  church,  either  universal  or  particular,  to  which 
they  are  given ;  the  consideration  of  the  abuse  of  mortal  prelates,  priests,  or  other 
ministers  in  the  church  conversant  (who  are  mixt  together  good  with  bad), 
abusing  the  same,  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding. 

III.  Item,  I  confess,  that  peregrinations  to  the  relics  of  saints,  and  to  holy 
places,  are  not  prohibited,  nor  to  be  contemned  of  any  catholic ;  but  are  avail- 

(1)  This  Philip  seemeth  to  be  Philip  Repington  before  mentioned,  in  the  story  of  Wickliff. 

(2)  1  q.  7  cap.  '  Quoties,'  &c. 


PERSECUTION    IN    ENGLAND.  537 

able   to  remission  of  sins,'  and  approved  by  holy  fathers,  and  worthy  to  be  Henry 

commended.  ^' 

IV.  Item,  I  confess,  that  to  worship  the  images  of  Christ  or  of  any  other  a.  D. 
saints,  being  set  up  in  the  church,  or  in  any  other  place,  is  not  forbidden;  141  fj. 

neither  is  it  any  cause  inductive  of  idolatry,  being  so  used  as  the  holy  fathers 

do  will  them  to  be  worshipped ;  ^  but  rather  such  images  do  profit  much  to  the 
health  of  Christians,  because  they  do  put  us  in  remembrance  of  the  merits  of 

those  saints  whom  they  represent,  and  the  sight  of  them  doth  move  and  stir  up 
the  people  to  prayers  and  devotion. 

V.  Item,  I  confess,  that  auricular  confession  used  in  the  church  is  necessary 
for  a  sinner  to  the  salvation  of  his  soid,  and  necessary  to  be  done  by  such  a 
priest  as  is  ordained  by  the  church  to  hear  the  confession  of  the  sinner,  and  to 
enjoin  him  penance  for  the  same  f  without  which  confession  (if  it  may  be  had), 
there  is  no  remission  of  sins  to  him  that  is  in  sin  mortal. 

VI.  Item,  I  confess  and  firmly  do  hold,  that  although  the  priest  be  in  mortal 
sin,  yet  may  he  make  the  body  of  Christ,  and  minister  other  sacraments  and 
sacramentals ;  which  nevertheless  ai-e  profitable  to  all  the  faithful,  whosoever 
receive  them  in  faith  and  devotion  of  the  church.* 

VII.  Item,  I  confess,  that  bishops  in  their  own  dioceses  may  forbid,  decree, 
and  ordain,  upon  reasonable  cavises,  that  priests  should  not  preach,  without  their 
special  license,  the  word  of  God ;  and  that  those  that  do  against  the  same,  should 
suffer  the  ecclesiastical  censures. 

VIII.  Item,  I  confess,  that  private  religions,  as  well  of  monks,  canons  and  Private 
others,  as  also  of  the  begging  friars,  being  allowed  by  the  church  of  Rome,  are  "^^JJIJ""^ 
profitable  to  the  universal  church,  and  iti  no  means  contrary  to  God's  law,  but  able,  if  ye 
rather  are  founded  and  authorized  thereon.  comU  tell 

IX.  Item,  I  ])romise  and  swear  upon  these  holy  Evangelists,  which  I  hold  ^j-e."^^" 
here  in  my  hands,  that  I  will  henceforth  never  hold,  afiirm,  or,  by  any  means, 
teach  any  thing  contrary  unto  the  premises  either  openly  or  privately. 

After  the  setting  out  of  the  constitution  aforesaid,  in  the  days  of  Great  in- 
the  abovenamed  Henry  Chichesley,  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  great  !•„  Eng-° 
inquisition  hereupon  followed  in  England,  and  many  good  men,  whose  'a"^- 
hearts  began  to  be  won  to  the  gospel,  were  brought  to  much  vexation, 
and  caused  outwardly  to  abjure. 

Thus,  while  Christ  had  the  inward  hearts  of  men,  yet  the  catholic  chnst 
Antichrist  would  needs  possess  their  outward  bodies,  and  make  them  hearts  of 
sing  after  his  song.     In  the  number  of  whom,  being  compelled  to  ^3^"^),^;^ 
abjure,  besides  the  others  aforesaid,  was  also  John  Taylor,  of  the  bodies. 
parish  of  St.  Michael's  at  Quern  ;  William  James,  master  of  arts  and  ^°^^.^e 
physician,   who  had  long  remained  in  prison,  and  at  length,  after  who  ab- 
abjuration,  was  licensed  with  his  keeper,  to  practise  his  physic. 

Also  John  Dwarf,  so  named  for  his  low  statm-e,  who  was  sent  by  John 
the  duke  of  Bedford  to  the  aforesaid  Chichesley  and  other  bishops,    ^^  ' 
to  be  examined  before  them  in  the  convocation :  there  he,  at  length 
revolting  from  his  doctrine,  recanted  and  did  penance. 

In  like  manner  John  Jourdelay  of  Lincolnshire,  well  commended  John 
in  the  registers  for  his  learning,  accused  by  the  priests  of  Lincoln  for  abjure'th.^ 
a  certain  book  which  he,  contrary  to  the  former  decree  of  the  bishops, 
did  conceal,  and  did  not  exhibit  unto  them,  was  therefore  enforced  to 
abjure;  after  whom  was  brought  likewise  before  the  bishops,  one 
Katharine  Dertford,  a  spinster,  who  being  accused  and  examined  upon 
these  three  articles  concerning  the  sacrament  of  the  pope's  altar, 
adoration  of  images,  and  pilgrimage,  answered,  that  she  was  not  able, 

(1)  Mark  well  this  catholic  doctrine  of  the  pope's  church,  concerning  remission  of  sins! 

(2)  Mark  how  this  doctrine  joineth  with  God's  commandment  and  with  bis  word! 

(3)  Ergo,  by  this  doctrine  the  just  man  liveth  not  by  his  faith,  but  by  his  confession  auricular. 

(4)  How  can  these  priests  be  servants  of  Christ,  who  be  makers  of  Christ? 


THE    ABJURATION    OF    CERTAIN    PERSONS. 


Henry   Ijciiig  uiilcamed,  to  answer  to  such  liigh  matters,  neitlier  had  she  any 
further  skill,  but  only  her  Creed  and  Ten  Commandments :  and  so 


A.D.    was  she  committed  to  the  vicar-general  of  the  bishop  of  Winchester 
^•^16.    /f^j.  (-j^j^j  siig  ^as  of  the  same  diocese),  to  be  kept,  and  further  to  be 

examined  of  the  same.' 

Robert         -^t  thc  Same  sitting  was  also  brought  before  the  said  archbishop 

the  par-    gnd  his  fcllow  bishops,  by  the  lieutenant  of  the  Tower,  the  parson  of 

iiegge-     Heggeley  in  Lincolnshire,  named  Master  Robert,  who,  being  long 

luhied.''"  kept  in  the  Tower,  at  length,  by  the  king's  Avrit,  was  brought  and 

examined  the  same  time  upon  the  like  articles :  to  wit,  touching  the 

sacrament  of  their  altar,   peregrination,  adoration  of  images,  and 

whether  it  was  lawful  for  spiritual  men  to  enjoy  temporal  lordships, 

&c.     To  which  articles  he  answered  (saith  the  register)  doubly  and 

mockingly,  save  only  in  the  sacrament  he  seemed  something  more 

conformable  ;  albeit  not  yet  fully  to  their  contentation.    Wherefore, 

being  committed  to  the  custody  and  examination  of  Richard,  bishop 

of  Lincoln,  in  the  end  he  was  also  induced  to  submit  hunself. 

William        The  same,  Hkewise,   did   William  Henry  of  Tenterden,  being 

TenVer-"^  suspected  aud  arrested  for  company-keeping  with  those  whom  the 

den  exa-  bishops  Called  Lollards,  and  for  having  suspected  books. 

Besides  these,  divers  others  there  were  also,  who,  in  the  same  con- 
vocation were  convented,  and  revoked  their  opinions,  as  John  Galle, 
Book  of  a  priest  of  London,  for  having  a  book  in  English,  entituled,  '  A  Book 
law"*"^  of  the  new  Law."  Item,  Richard  Monk,  vicar  of  Cbesham  in 
Several  Lincolnshire,  who  submitted  himself  likewise.  In  this  race  and  num- 
touwed  ber  followed  moreover,  Bartholomew  Cornmonger,  Nicholas  Hooper, 
doctiine.  servant  to  the  lord  Cobham,  Thomas  Granter,  with  others  more, 
mentioned  in  the  aforesaid  register. 

Among  the  rest  who  were  at  this  time  troubled  for  their  faith,  was 

one  Radulph  Mungin,  priest,  who,  for  the  same  doctrine,  was  arrested 

and  sent  by  the  lord  chancellor  of  England  to  the  aforesaid  archbishop, 

and  by  him  committed  to  David  Price,  vicar-general  to  the  bishop  of 

London :  where,  after  he  had  endured  four  months  in  prison,  he  was 

by  the  said  David  presented  to  the  convocation,  against  whom  divers 

articles  were  objected. 

A  sub-    \     But,  for  the  better  explaining  of  the  matter,  first  here  is  to  be 

thereTby  Hotcd,  that  duriug  the  time  of  this  convocation   provincial,   pope 

tbe  pope  Martin  had  sent  down  to  the  clergy  of  England  for  a  subsidy  to  be 

%l\mt    gathered  of  the  church,  to  maintain  the  pope's  war  against  the  Lollards 

fufof  B^  (so  the  papists  did  term  them)  of  Bohemia,     Also  another  subsidy 

hernia.     ^^^  demanded  to  persecute  one  Peter  Clerk,  master  of  arts  of  Oxford, 

who,  flying  out  of  England,  was  at  the  council  of  Basil,  disputing 

on   the  Bohemians'  side.     And  thirdly,  another  subsidy  was  also 

required  to  persecute  William  Russel,  warden  of  the  grey  friars  in 

London,  who  the  same  time  was  fled  from  England  to  Rome,  to 

maintain  his  opinion  before  the  pope,  and  who  there  escaped  out  of 

Sus    prison,  &c.  of  whom  more  largely  hereafter  (Christ  willing)  we  shall 

Y.n%h.    entreat.     In  the  mean  time  mark  here  the  pretty  shifts  of  the  pope 

money,    to  hook  in  the  English  money,  by  all  manner  of  pretences  possible. 

Thus  Ralph  Mungin,  the  aforesaid  examinate,  appearing  before  the 

bishops  in  the  convocation,  it  was  articulated  against  him,  first  that  he 

(1)  Es  Resist.  H.  Cliichesley 


THOMAS    GRANTEr's    RECANTATION.  530 

should  affirm  and  hold,  that  it  was  not  lawful  for  any  Christian  to  fight    Henry 
and  make  war  against  the  heretics  of  Bohemia.  '. 

Item,  It  was  to  him  objected,  that  he  did  hold  and  say,  that  it  was  A.l). 
not  lawful  for  any  man  to  have  propriety  of  goods,  but  the  same  to  ^^^^- 
be  common ;  which  he  expressly  denied  that  ever  he  so  said  or  ^'j'Jcted 
affiimed.  Whereby  we  have  to  observe,  how  the  crafty  malice  of  asainst 
these  adversaries  useth  falsely  to  collect  and  surmise  of  men,  what  Mungin. 
they  never  spake,  whereby  to  oppress  them  wrongfully,  whom  by  plain 
truth  they  cannot  expugn. 

Moreover,  they  objected  against  him,  that  he  should  keep  company 
with  Master  Clerk  aforesaid,  and  also  that  he  dispersed  in  the  city  of  Triaio- 
London  certain  books  of  John  WicklifF  and  of  Peter  Clerk,  namely,  Ihe 
the  book  '  Trialogus,"*  and  the  gospels  of  John  WicklifF,  &c.  He  was  ^°l^l]^ 
charged,  moreover,  to  have  spoken  against  the  pope's  indulgences,  latedby 
affirming  that  the  pope  had  no  more  power  to  give  indulgences  than 
he  had. 

Upon  these  and  other  such  articles  objected,  the  said  Mungin, 
being  asked  if  he  would  revoke,  answered,  that  it  seemed  to  him  not 
just  or  meet  so  to  do,  who  did  not  know  himself  guilty  of  any  heresy. 
Thus  he  being  respited  for  that  time,  was  committed  to  prison  till  the 
next  sitting ;  who,  then,  being  called  divers  and  sundiy  times  after- 
wards before  the  bishops,  after  long  inquisition  and  strait  examination  Ralph 
made,  also  depositions  brought  in  against  him  so  much  as  they  could  conSn- 
scarch  out,  he,  notmthstanding,   still  denied,  as  before,  to  recant,  j^petuai 
Wherefore  the  aforesaid  Henry,  the  archbishop,  proceeding  to  his  prison. 
sentence  definitive,  condemned  him  to  perpetual  prison. 

After  whose  condemnation,  the  Sunday  next  following,  the  recan-  Thomas 
tations  of  Thomas  Granter,  and  of  Richard   Monk,  priests  above-  RicLrd 
mentioned,  were  openly  read  at  PauFs  Cross ;  the  bishop  of  Roches-  ^°"''- 
ter  the  same  time  preached  at  the  said  cross.     The  tenor  of  whose 
recantation,  with   his  articles    in    the   same    expressed,  hereunder 
foUoweth : 

Recantation  of  Thomas  Granter. 

In  the  name  of  God.  Before  you  my  lord  of  Canterbury,  and  all  you  my 
lords  here  being  present,  and  before  you  all  here  gathered  at  this  time,  I  Tho- 
mas Granter,  priest  unworthy,  dwelling  in  this  city  of  London,  feeling  and  un- 
derstanding that  afore  this  time  I  affirmed  open  errors  and  heresies,  saying, 
believing,  and  affirming,  within  this  city,  that  he  that  christian  men  call  pope, 
is  not  very  pope,  nor  God's  vicary  on  earth,  but  I  said  he  was  Antichrist.*  Also 
I  said,  believed,  and  affirmed,  that  after  the  sacramental  words  said  by  a  priest  in 
the  mass,  there  remain  material  bread  and  wine,  and  are  not  txu-ned  into  Christ's 
body  and  his  blood.  Also  I  said  and  affirmed,  that  it  was  not  to  do,  in  anywise, 
to  go  on  pilgrimage,  but  it  was  better,  I  said,  to  abide  at  home,  and  beat  the 
stools  with  their  heels  ;  for  it  was,  I  said,  but  tree  and  stone  that  they  sought. 
Also  I  said  and  affirmed,  that  I  held  no  Scripture,  catholic,  or  holy,  but  only 
what  is  contained  in  the  Bible.  For  the  legends  and  hves  of  saints,  I  held  them 
nought,  and  the  miracles  written  of  them  I  held  untrue.  Because  of  which 
errors  and  heresies  I  was  before  Mr.  Davie  Price,  vicar-general  of  my  lord  of 
London,  and  since,  before  you  my  lord  of  Canterbury  and  your  brethren  in 
your  council  provincial,  and  by  you  fully  informed,  who  so  said,  that  mine 
affirming,  believing,  and  teaching,  had  been  of  open  errors  and  heresies,  and 
contrary  to  the  determination  of  tlie  church  of  Rome.  Wherefore  I,  v.illing  to 
follow  and  sow  the  doctrine  of  holy  church,  and  depart  from  all  manner  of 
(1)  Note  the  doctrine  and  opinions  in  those  days,  where  theigospel  took  place. 


540  CERTAIN  GODLY  PERSONS  PERSECUTED. 

Henry    errors  and  heresies,  and  turn  with  good  will  and  heart  to  the  one  head  of  the 

V-       church  *  considering  that  holy  church  shutteth  not  nor  closeth  her  bosom  to 

.    _      him  that  will  turn  again,  and  tliat  God  willeth  not  the  death  of  a  sinner,  but 

■     ■    rather  that  he  be  turned  and  live  :  with  a  pure  heart  I   confess,  detest,  and 

'_  despise  my  said  errors  and  heresies;  and  the  said  opinions  I  confess,  as  heresies 

and  errors  to  the  faith  of  the  church  of  Rome,  and  to  all  universally  holy 
chm"ch  repugnant.  And  therefore  these  said  opinions  in  special,  and  all  other 
errors  and  heresies,  doctrines  and  opinions,  against  the  faith  of  the  church,  and 
the  determinations  of  the  church  of  Rome,  I  abjure  and  forswear  here  before 
you  all,  and  swear  by  these  holy  gospels  by  me  bodily  touched,  that  from  hence- 
forth I  shall  never  hold,  teach,  nor  preach  error  or  errors,  heresy,  or  here- 
Men  tied  sies,  or  false  doctrine  against  the  faith  of  holy  church,  and  determination  of 
to  the  t]jg  church  of  Rome,  nor  any  such  thing  I  shall  obstinately  defend,  nor  any 
Rome.  nian  holding  or  teaching  such  manner  of  things  by  me  or  another  person,  openly 
or  privily  I  shall  defend.  I  shall  never  after  this  time  be  receiver,  fautor,  coun- 
sellor, or  defender  of  heretics,  or  of  any  person  suspect  of  heresy,  nor  shall  I 
trow  to  him,  nor  wittingly  fellowship  with  him,  nor  give  him  counsel,  favour, 
gifts,  or  comfort.  And  if  I  know  any  hei'etics,  or  of  heresy,  or  of  such  false 
opinions  any  person  suspected,  or  any  man  or  woman  making  or  holding  privy 
conventicles,  or  assemblies,  or  any  divers  or  singular  opinions  from  the  common 
doctrine  of  the  church  of  Rome,  or  if  I  may  know  any  of  their  fautors,  com- 
forters, counsellors  or  defensers,  or  any  that  have  suspect  books  or  quiers  of 
such  errors  and  heresies  ;  I  shall  let  you,  my  lord  of  Canterbury,  or  your  officers 
in  your  absence,  or  the  diocesans  and  ordinaries  of  such  men,  have  soon  and 
ready  knowing :  so  help  me  God  and  holy  dame,  and  these  holy  Evangelists 
by  me  bodily  touched. 

After  this  recantation  at  the  Cross  thus  published,  and  his  sub- 
mission made,  the  said  Grantor  then  was,  by  the  advice  of  the  prelates, 
put  to  seven  years'"  imprisonment,  under  the  custody  and  charge  of 
the  bishop  of  London. 

After  this  followed  in  like  manner  the  recantation  of  Richard  Monk : 
also  of  Edmund  Frith,  who  was,  before,  butler  to  sir  John  Oldcastle. 
Theafflic-      Bcsides  tlicse  above  remembered,  many  and  divers  there  be  in  the 
troubieln  ^^id  register  recorded,  who  likewise,   for  their  faith  and   religion, 
Kent,      -yygpg  greatly  vexed  and  troubled,  especially  in  the  diocese  of  Kent, 
chiches-   in  the  towns  of  Romney,  Tenterden,  Woodchurch,  Cranbrook,  Stap- 
'^^'         helherst,  Beninden,  Halden,  Rolvenyden,  and  others ;  where  whole 
households,  both  man  and  wife,  were  driven  to  forsake  their  houses 
and  towns  for  danger  of  persecution  ;  as  sufficiently  appeareth  in  the 
process  of  the  archbishop  Chichesley  against  the  said  persons,  and  in 
the  certificate  of  Burbath,  his  official,  wherein  are  named  the  follow- 
ing sixteen  persons : 

Persons  ^'  White,  priest,  William  Everden,  William  Somer, 

persecut-  Tho.  Grenested,  priest,  Stephen  Robin,  Marion,  his  wife, 

^  j^iy  Bartho.  Cornmonger,  W.  Chiveling,  John  Abraham, 

John  Wadnon,  John  Tame,  Robert  Munden, 

Joan,  his  wife,  John  Fowlin,  Laurence  Coke. 
Tho.  Everden, 

These  being  cited  up  together  by  the  bishop,  would  not  appear ; 
whereupon  great  inquisition  being  made  for  them  by  his  officers, 
they  were  constrained  to  fly  their  houses  and  towns,  and  shift  for 
themselves  as  covertly  as  they  might.  When  Burbath  and  other 
officers  had  sent  to   the  archbishop,  that  they  could  not  be  found, 

(1)  One  heaO,  that  is,  the  unity  of  the  church. 


Kent. 


THE    SECOND    APPREHENSION    OF    LORD    COBHAM.  541 

then  he  directed  down  an  order  that  citations  should  be  set  up  for    Henry 
them  on  every  church  door,  through  all  towns  where  they  did  inhabit,  — ^~ — 
appointing  them  a  day  and  term  when  to  appear.    But  notwithstand-    •'^•^• 
ing,  when  they  yet  could  not  be  taken,  neither  would  appear,  the 
archbishop,  sitting  in  his  tribunal  seat,  proceeded  to  the  sentence  of 
excommunication  against  them.     What  afterwards  happened  to  them, 
in  the  register  doth  not  appear  ;  but,  like  it  is,  at  length  they  were 
forced  to  submit  themselves. 


THE    SECOND    APPREHENSION    OF    THE    LORD    COBHAM. 

Concerning  sir  John  Oldcastle  the  lord  Cobham,  and  of  his  first 
apprehension,  with  his  whole  story  and  life,  sufficiently  hath  been  ex- 
pressed before,  how  he,  being  committed  to  the  Tower,  and  condemned 
falsely  of  heresy,  escaped  afterwai-ds  out  of  the  Tower,  and  was  in 
Wales  about  the  space  of  four  years.  In  the  mean  time,  a  great  sum  of 
money  was  proclaimed  by  the  king,  to  him  that  could  take  the  said 
sir  John  Oldcastle,  either  quick  or  dead:  *who^  confederated  with 
the  lord  Powis  (who  was  at  that  time  a  great  governor  in  Wales), 
feeding  him  with  lordly  gifts  and  promises,  to  accomplish  their 
desire.* 

About  the  end  of  which  four  years  being  expired,  the  lord  Powis,  The  lord 
whether  for  love  or  greediness  of  the  money,  or  whether  for  hatred  of  pu^eth 
the  true  and  sincere  doctrine  of  Christ,  seeking  all  manner  of  ways  •''^*'- 
how  to  play  the  part  of  Judas,  and  outwardly  pretending  him  great 
amity  and  favour,  at  length  obtained  his  bloody  purpose,  *and  most 
cowardly  and  wretchedly  took  him,*  and  in  conclusion  brought  the 
lord  Cobham  bound  up  to  London  ;  which  was  about  the  year  of  our 
Lord  1417,  and  about  the  month  of  December;  at  which  time  there 
was  a  parliament  assembled  in  London,  for  the  relief  of  money  the 
same  time  to  be  sent  to  the  king,  whom  the  bishops  had  sent  out  (as  ye 
heard  before)  to  fight  in  France.  The  records  of  which  parliament 
do  thus  say:  That  on  Tuesday  the  fourteenth  day  of  December, 
and  the  nine  and  twentieth  day  of  the  said  parliament,  sir  John  Old- 
castle, of  Cowling  in  the  county  of  Kent,  knight,  being  outlawed  (as 
is  afore  minded)  in  the  King's  Bench,  and  excommunicated  before  by 
the  archbishop  of  Canterbury  for  heresy,  was  brought  before  thei 
lords  ;  and  having  heard  his  said  convictions,  answered  not  thereto 
in  his  excuse.  Upon  which  record  and  process  it  was  adjudged,  that 
he  should  be  taken  as  a  traitor  to  the  king  and  the  realm ;  that  he 
should  be  earned  to  the  Tower  of  London,  and  from  thence  drawn 
through  London,  unto  the  new  gallows  in  St.  Giles  without  Temple- 
Bar,  and  there  to  be  hanged,  and  burned  hanging. 

*  2  Thus,  after  long  process,  they  condemned  him  again  for  heresy 

(1)  For  these,  and  other  words  following  in  asterisks,  see  Edition  15B5,  p.  276.— Ed. 

(2)  This  interesting  narration  of  the  execution  of  the  lord  Cobham  is  from  the  first  edition  of 
the  Acts  and  Monuments,  page  276.  The  particulars  here  recorded  are  briefly  repeated  at  page 
281  of  that  edition,  with  the  following  variation:  "  In  this  manner,  he,  having  finished  the  course 
of  his  life,  commending  his  soul  unto  God,  and  praying  for  the  salvation  of  his  enemies,  after  he 
had  exhorted  the  people  to  the  study  of  the  pure  and  sincere  faith  and  religion,  he  slept  in  the 
Lord,  An.  1418."  In  the  year  1544,  John  Bale,  afterwards  bishop  of  Ossory,  published  a  full  account 
of  the  life  and  manyrdom  of  lord  Cobham,  under  the  following  title;  "  A  brefe  Chronyde  concern- 
yuge  the  Examinacyon  and  Death  of  the  blessed  Martyr  of  Christ,  Sir  Johan  Oldecastele  the  Lorde 
Cobham."  See  also  Wilkins's  Concilia. vol.  iii.— The  Registers  of  Archbishop  Arundel  at  Lambeth. 
— Harleian  MSS.  in  the  Brit.  Mus.  No.  420,  art.  69 ;  and  421,  art.  132,  &c.— Ed. 


'12  THE    EXECUTION    OF    LORD    COBIIAM. 

Henry    and  treason,  by  force  of  the  aforenamed  act ;  ^  he  rendering  thanks 
^'      unto  God,  that  he  had  so  appointed  him  to  suffer  for  his  name"'s  sake. 


but 
Clirist's. 


A.  D.  And,  upon  the  day  appointed,  he  was  brought  out  of  the  tower  with 
1418.  }^jg  Qxrns,  bound  behind  him,  having  a  very  cheerful  countenance.  Then 
was  he  Laid  upon  a  hurdle,  as  though  he  had  been  a  most  heinous 
traitor  to  the  crown,  and  so  drawn  forth  into  St.  Giles's-fields,  where 
they  had  set  up  a  new  pair  of  gallows.  As  he  was  coming  to  the  place 
of  execution,  and  was  taken  from  the  hiu'dle,  he  fell  down  devoutly 
upon  his  knees,  desiring  Almighty  God  to  forgive  his  enemies.  Then 
stood  he  up  and  beheld  the  multitude,  exhorting  them,  in  most  godly 
manner,  to  follow  the  laws  of  God  written  in  the  Scriptures,  and,  in 
any  wise,  to  beware  of  such  teachers  as  they  see  contrary  to  Christ  in 
their  conversation  and  living ;  with  many  other  special  counsels. 
Then  was  he  hanged  up  there  by  the  middle,  in  chains  of  iron,  and  so 
consumed  alive  in  the  fire,  praising  the  name  of  God,  so  long  as  his 
life  lasted.  In  the  end  he  commended  his  soul  into  the  hands  of  God, 
and  so  departed  hence  most  christianly,  his  body  being  resolved  into 
ashes.  And  this  was  done  a.  d.  1418,  which  was  the  fifth  year  of  the 
reign  of  king  Henry  V. ;  the  people,  there  present,  showing  great 
Not  the  dolour.  How  the  priests  that  time  fared,  blasphemed,  and  accursed, 
?e?vant,  requiring  the  people  not  to  pray  for  him,  but  to  judge  him  damned  in 
hell  because  he  departed  not  in  the  obedience  of  their  pope,  it  were 
too  long  to  write. 

This  terrible  kind  of  death,  with  gallows,  chains,  and  fire,  appeareth 
not  very  precious  in  the  eyes  of  men  that  be  camal,  no  more  than  did 
the  death  of  Christ,  when  he  was  hanged  up  among  thieves.  "  The 
righteous  seemeth  to  die""  (saith  the  wise  man)  "  in  the  sight  of  them 
which  are  unwise,  and  their  end  is  taken  for  very  destruction.  Un- 
godly souls  think  their  lives  very  madness,  and  their  passage  hence 
without  all  honour ;  but,  though  they  suffer  pains  before  men,""  saith 
he,  "  yet  is  their  expectation  full  of  immortality.  They  are  accounted 
for  the  children  of  God,  and  have  their  portion  among  the  saints.  As 
gold  in  the  furnace  doth  God  try  his  elect,  and  as  a  most  pleasant 
burnt  offering,  receiveth  he  them  to  rest."  The  more  hard  the  passage 
be,  the  more  glorious  shall  they  appear  in  the  latter  resurrection.  Not 
that  the  afflictions  of  this  life  are  worthy  of  such  a  glory,  but  that  it  is 
God's  heavenly  pleasure  so  to  reward  them.  Never  are  the  judgments 
and  ways  of  men  like  unto  the  judgments  and  ways  of  God,  but  con- 
trary, evermore,  imless  they  be  taught  of  him.  "  In  the  latter  time,"" 
saith  the  Lord  unto  Daniel,  "  shall  many  be  chosen,  proved,  and  puri- 
fied by  fire;  yet  shall  the  ungodly  live  wickedly  still,  and  have 
no  understanding  that  is  of  faith."  By  an  angel  fi-om  heaven  was  John 
earnestly  commanded  to  write  that  "blessed  are  the  dead  which 
hence  departed  in  the  Lord."  "  Right  dear,"  saith  David,  "  in  the 
sight  of  God,  is  the  death  of  his  servants." 

Thus  rested  this  valiant  christian  knight,  sir  John  Oldcastle,  under 
the  altar  of  God,  which  is  Jesus  Christ,  among  that  godly  company, 
who,  in  the  kingdom  of  patience,  suffered  great  tribulation  with  the 
death  of  their  bodies,  for  his  faithful  Avord  and  testimony,  abiding  there 
with  them,  He,  fulfilling  of  their  whole  nmnber  and  the  full  restoration 

(n  "  Aforenamed  act."  See  page  353  of  th.is  Volume.  "  A  new  and  cruel  law,  which,  at  that  time, 
was  made  by  king  Henry  V.,  against  the  Wicklifiites."     Edition  1563,  p.  2S1.— Kd. 


LORD    COBHAm's    IIISTOUY    CONCLUDED.  .')4'3 

of  his  elect.    The  which  He  grant,  in  effect,  who  is  one  God  eternal !    H,-nnj 
Amen.  !__ 


Thus  have  you  heard  the  whole  matter  concerning  the  martyrdom    A.  D. 
of  the  good  lord  Cobham,  as  we  have  gathered  it  partly  out  of  the  col-    ^'^^^- 
lections  of  John  Bale  and  others.*  As  touching  the  pretensed  treason  B^'"',*'''" 
of  this  lord  Cobham,  falsely  ascribed  unto  him  in  his  indictment,  rising  surmised. 
upon  wrong  suggestion  and  false  surmise,  and  aggravated  by  rigour 
of  words,  rather  than  upon  any  ground  of  due  probation,  suificiently 
hath  been  discoursed  before  in  my  defence  of  the  said  lord  Cobham, 
against  Alanus  Copus ;  where  again,  it  is  to  be  noted,  as  I  said  before, 
and  by  this  it  appeareth,  that  the  lord  Cobham  was  never  executed 
by  force  of  the  indictment  or  outlawry,  because  if  he  had,  he  should 
then  have  been  brought  to  the  bar  in  the  King's  Bench,  and  there  the 
judges  should  have  demanded  of  him,  what  he  could  have  said,  why  he 
should  not  have  died  ;  and  then  not  showing  sufficient  cause  for  the 
discharge  or  delay  of  execution,  the  judges  should  have  awarded  and 
given  the  judgment  of  treason  :  which  being  not  so,  it  is  clear  he  was 
not  executed  upon  the  indictment.    Besides,  to  prove  that  he  was  not 
executed  upon  the  indictment  and  the  outlawry,  the  manner  of  the 
execution  proveth  it,  because  it  was  neither  an  execution  of  a  traitor, 
nor  was  the  whole  punishment  thereof  pronounced  by  the  judge,  as  by 
due  order  of  law  was  requisite. 

Finally,  as  I  said  before,  here  I  repeat  again,  that  albeit  the  said 
lord  Cobham  was  attainted  of  treason  by  the  act,  and  that  the  king, 
the  lords,  and  the  commons,  assented  to  the  act :  yet  all  that  bindeth 
not  in  such  sort  (as  if  indeed  he  were  no  traitor)  that  any  man  may 
not,  by  search  of  the  truth,  utter  and  set  forth  sincerely  and  justly  the 
very  true  and  certain  cause  whereupon  his  execution  did  follow.  Which 
seemeth  by  all  circumstance  and  firm  arguments,  to  rise  principally  of 
his  religion,  which  first  brought  him  in  hatred  of  the  bishops ;  the 
bishops  brought  him  in  hatred  of  the  king ;  the  hatred  of  the  king 
brought  him  to  his  death  and  martyrdom.  And  thus  much  for  the 
death  and  execution  of  this  worthy  servant  of  Christ,  the  lord  Cobham. 

*  This  '  is  not  to  be  forgotten,  which  is  reported  by  many,  that  he 
should  say  :  that  he  should  die  here  on  earth  after  the  sort  and  manner 
of  Elias;  which,  whether  it  sprang  of  the  common  people  without  cause, 
or  was  foreshowed  by  himself,  I  think  it,  not  without  good  consider- 
ation. That  it  sprang  not  without  some  gift  of  prophecy,  the  end  of 
the  matter  doth  sufficiently  prove ;  for,  like  as  when  Elias  should  leave 
this  mortal  life,  he  was  carried  by  a  fiery  chariot  into  immortality ; 
even  so  the  order  of  this  man's  death,  not  being  much  unlike,  followed 
the  figure  of  his  departure.  For  he,  first  of  all,  being  lifted  up  upon 
the  gallows,  as  into  a  chariot,  and  encompassed  round  about  with  flam- 
ing fire  ;  what  other  thing,  I  pray  you,  did  this  most  holy  martyr  of 
Christ  represent,  than  only  a  figure  of  a  certain  Elias,  flying  up  into 
heaven,  who  went  up  into  heaven  by  a  fiery  chariot.^ 

Such,  gentle  reader,  are  the  fruits  of  Wickhff's  doctrine.    Now  let 

(1)  See  Edition  1563,  p.  281.— Ed. 

(2)  Among  the  many  rumours,  which  either  the  superstition  of  the  age,  or  the  subtlety  of  tlie 
lord  Cobham's  enemies  were  accustomed  to  circulate  respecting  him,  was  the  following ;  "  That 
at  the  time  of  his  execution  he  requested  sir  Thomas  Erpington  to  procure  protection  to  the  fol- 
lowers of  Wickliff,  and  the  maintainers  of  the  antipapal  doctrines,  in  case  he  (the  lord  Cobham) 
should  rise  from  the  dead  the  third  day."  See  Walsingham's  History,  page  400.  The  reader  will 
perceive,  in  this  absurd  charge,  a  distorted  version  of  the  above  narration.— Ed. 


544  REFERENCE    TO    THE    PARLIAMENTARY    ROLLS, 

Henry    the  papists  mark  and  consider  what  profits  or  fruits  their  papistical 

^'-      holiness  hath  brought  forth  unto  the  world.     If  we  would  measure 

A.  D.    every  man's  doctrine  by  his  fruits,  let  us  behold  this   man,  whom, 

1-HS-    too-ether  with  an  infinite  number  of  others,  this  most  optable  doctrine 

of  Wickliff  hath  brought  forth.     For  thus,  as  is  before  said,  Walden, 

who  otherwise  was  his  most  grievous  enemy,  reported  of  the  said  sir 

John  Oldcastle  :  That  he  did  never  understand  how  great  the  poison 

and  spot  of  sin  was,  but  only  by  reading  of  Wickliffs  books.  ^     This 

I  thought  good  to  recite  in  this  place,  because  of  Polydore  Virgil,  who, 

in  the  twenty-second  book  of  his  Story  of  England,  calleth  him  valiant, 

but  a  wicked  man.     But  if  Polydore  had  showed  himself  as  faithful 

in  the  writing  of  the  history,  as  the  lord  Cobham  was  distant  from 

impiety  and  wickedness,  he  would  never  have  spoken  those  words,  and 

would  have  defiled  so  noble  a  history  with  fewer  lies.* 

Moreover,  in  the  records  above  mentioned,  it  followetlu  how,  in 

the  said  parliament,  after   the  martyrdom   of  this  valiant  knight, 

motion  then  was  made,  that  the  lord  Fowls  might  "  be  thanked  and 

rewarded,  according  to  the  proclamation  made,  for  his  great  travail 

taken  in  the  apprehension  of  sir  John  Oldcastle,  knight,  heretic.*" 

Thus  stand  the  words  of  the  record ;  where  two  things  are  to  be 

noted  :  First,  how  sir  John  here  in  the  record  is  called,  not  traitor, 

Judas      but  heretic  only.     Secondly,  mark  how  this  brother  of  Judas  here 

for  M?    craveth  his  reward  for  betraying  the  innocent  blood.     Wherein  it  is 

reward,    not  to  be  doubtcd,  but  that  his  light  fee,  and  '  quid  vultis  mihi  dare' 

in  this  world,  will  have  a  heavy  reward  hereafter  in  the  world  to  come, 

unless  he  repented. 

*  In  D.  Johan.  Cobhami  equitis  aurati  et  Martyris  cineres.  Carmen 
I.  F.  in  felicem  memoriam.    Anno  1418. 

Stemmate,  pace,  toga  prasstans :  et  clarus  in  armis 

Miles,  eques,  martyr :  gemma,  monile,  decus  ; 

Militiaeque  dominique  potens  Cobhamius  Heros, 

Lux  patriae,  et  gentis  gloria  digna  suae  : 

Pertulit  infestas  acies,  tulit  aspera  multa, 

Bella  profana  gerens,  paelia  sacra  gerens. 

Haec  mente,  ilia  manu,  parili  cum  laude,  subibat 

Parte  etenim  victor  semper  utraque  stetit. 

Hinc  equitis  debetur  honos,  hinc  martyris  illi 

Gloria,  qua  victor  tempus  in  omne  manet. 

Victus  erat.     Quid  tum  ?  mens  quando  invicta  manebat, 

Pars  potior,  nullis  cedere  docta  malis. 

O  tibi,  te  dignus  rex,  si  Cobhame  tulisset 

Suppetias,  nee  te  destituisset  ope, 

Turmis  sat  fueras  istis,  turbisque  Cyclopum : 

Quas  tua  fregisset  dextra  labore  levi 

Hoc  sibi,  sed  Christus  quid  si  diadema  reponit  ? 

Tu  meliora,  quidem,  tempore  dignus  eras.*^ 

Furthermore,  in  the  said  parliament,'  it  was  enacted.  That  the 
church  and  all  estates  should  enjoy  all  their  liberties,  which  were  not 
repealed,  or  repealable  by  the  common  law:  meaning,  belike,  the 
excluding  of  the  jurisdiction  of  the  pope's  foreign  power,  which  hath 
always,  by  the  common  law,  been  excluded  out  of  this  realm. 

(1)  Walden,  in  his  preface  to  his  7th  book  of  Doctrine. 

(2)  These  verses  are  introduced  from  the  Latiu  Edition  of  1559,  page  97.— Eu. 

(3)  Anno  5.  Hen.  V.,  act.  17. 


CONTINUATION    OF    THR    HISTORY    OF    THE    BOHEMIANS.  545 


to 
1418. 


In  the  same  parliament  also,'  a  grievous  complaint  was  made  (by    Henry 

the  bishops,  no  doubt)  against  insurrections.     In  the  end  they  sus- 

pected  that  they  were  the  Lollards,  heretics,  and  traitors,  with  a    A.D. 
request  that  commissions  might  at  all  times  be  granted  to  inquire  of    ^'^^^ 
them.     Whereunto  answer  was  made.  That  the  statutes  therefore 
made  should  be  executed,  &c.     Thus  the  clergy,  '  Tanquam  leones 
rugientes,'  ceased  not  to  roar  after  christian  blood ;  and  whosoever  ^^  ^,,3 
was  else  in  fault,  still  the  clersry  cried,  "  Crucify  Christ,  and  deliver  ^^^'^^ 

•  .'  "  laid  to  the 

us  Barabbas  :"  for  then  all  horrible  facts  and  mischiefs,  if  any  were  LoUards. 
done,  were  imputed  to  the  poor  Lollards. 

Continuation  of  t^c  jftemocable  ti;Stocp  of  tfje  SBoIjemianiS ; 

WHEREIX  IS  PLAINLY  AND  TRULY  SET  FORTH,  WHAT  VEXATIONS 
AND  CONFLICTS  THEY  HAD  FOR  THE  RELIGION  OF  JOHN  HUSS 
AND  JEROME  OF  PRAGUE,  AND  OF  THEIR  VICTORIES  OBTAINED 
AND  GOTTEN,  BOTH  AGAINST  THE  PAPISTS,  AND  ALSO  AGAINST' 
THE  EMPEROR  SIGISMUND;  AND,  FINALLY,  THE  DEATH  OI< 
THEIR  VALIANT  CAPTAIN,   ZISCA. 

And  now  from  our  English  matters,  to  return  again  to  the  story  of 
the  Bohemians,  from  whence  we  have  a  little  digressed,  as  touching 
such  things  as  happened  after  the  death  of  John  Huss  and  Jerome  of 
Prague. 

When  the  news  of  the  barbarous  cruelty  exercised  at  Constance 
against  John  Huss  and  Jerome  of  Prague,  was  noised  in  Bohemia,  the 
nobles  and  gentlemen  of  Moravia  and  Bohemia,  such  as  favoured  the 
cause  of  John  Huss,  gathering  themselves  together  in  the  zeal  of  Christ, 
first  sent  their  letter  unto  the  council ;  expostulating  with  them  for 
the  injury  done  to  those  godly  men,  as  is  before  expressed ;  for  which 
letter  they  were  all  cited  up  to  the  council.  Unto  this  letter  Sigis- 
mund  the  emperor  maketh  answer  again  in  the  name  of  the  whole 
council ;  first,  excusing  himself  of  the  death  of  John  Huss,  which, 
he  said,  was  against  his  safe-conduct,  and  against  his  will ;  insomuch 
that  he  rose  in  anger  from  the  council,  and  departed  out  of  Constance, 
as  is  before  remembered.  Secondly,  he  requireth  them  to  be  quiet, 
and  to  conform  themselves  peaceably  unto  the  order  of  the  catholic 
church  of  Rome,  &c. 

Also  the  council,  hearing  or  fearing  some  stir  to  rise  among  the 
Bohemians,  did  make  laws  and  articles  whereby  to  bridle  them,  to 
the  number  of  twenty-four. 

Articles  decreed  in  the  Council  of  Constance,  against  the  Bohemians. 

I.  That  the  king  of  Bohemia  shall  be  sworn  to  give  obedience,  and  to 
defend  the  liberties  of  the  church  of  Rome. 

II.  That  all  masters,  doctors,  and  priests,  shall  be  sworn  to  abjure  the  doctrine 
of  WicklifF  and  Huss,  in  that  council  condemned. 

III.  That  all  they  who,  being  cited,  woidd  not  appear,  should  also  be  sworn 
to  abjure  ;  and  they  who  would  not  appear,  contemning  the  censure  of  the  keys, 
should  have  process  against  them,  and  be  punished. 

IV.  That  all  such  laymen  as  had  defended  the  causes  of  John  WicklifF  and 
John  Huss,  should  swear  to  defend  them  no  more,  and  to  approve  the  doings  of 
that  council,  and  the  condemnation  of  John  Huss. 

V.  That  all  such  secular  men  who  had  spoiled  the  clergy,  should  be  sworn 

to  restitution. 

(!)  .\nno  5.  Hen.  V.,  act  17. 

VOL.    III.  N    N 


546  COROXATION    OF    VOI'E    xMAHTIN. 

Henry        VI.  That  priests  being  expelled  from  their  benefices,   should   be  restoied 
^-       again. 
~\~\)~      VII.  That  all  profaners  of  churches  should  be  punished  after  the  canonical 
^A^■j    sanctions. 

VIII.  That  such  as  had  been  promoters  in  the  council  against  John  Huss, 
■lA-ifi     should  be  permitted  safely  to  retiu'n  into  Bohemia  again,  and  to  enjoy  their 

1-  benefices. 

IX.  That  the  relics  and  treasure  taken  out  of  the  church  of  Prague,  should 
be  restored  fully  again. 

X.  That  the  univei'sity  of  Prague  should  be  restored  again  and  reformed, 
and  that  they  who  had  been  the  disturbers  thereof  should  be  really  pimished. 

The  fa-  XI.  That  the  principal  heretics  and  doctors  of  that  sect  should  be  sent  up  to 
vourers  of  (.jjg  ggg  apostolic;  namely,  Johannes  Jessenetz,  Jacobellus  de  Misnia,  Simon  de 
Bohemia.  Tysna,  Simon  de  Rochinzano,  Christianas  de  Brachatitz,  Johannes  Cardinalis, 

Zdenko  de  Loben,  the  provost  of  Alhallows,  Zaislaus  de  Suiertitz,  and  Michael 

de  Czisko. 

XII.  That  all  secular  men,  who  communicated  imder  both  kinds,  should 
abjure  that  heresy,  and  swear  to  stop  the  same  hereafter. 

XIII.  That  they  who  were  ordained  pi-iests  by  the  suflS-agan^  of  the  arch- 
bishop of  Prague,  taken  by  the  lord  Zenco,  should  not  be  dispensed  with,  but 
sent  up  to  the  see  apostolic. 

Wicklirs  XIV.  That  the  treatises  of  John  Wickliff,  translated  into  the  Bohemian 
books 


traus- 


tongue,  by  John  Huss  and  Jacobellus,  should  be  brought  to  the  ordinary. 


lated.  XV.  That  the  treatises  of  John  Huss,  condemned  in  the  council,  should  also 

be  brought  to  the  ordinary. 

XVI.  That  all  the  tractations  of  Jacobellus,  '  De  Utraque  specie  de  Anti- 
christo '  (wherein  he  calleth  the  pope  Antichrist),  and  *  De  Remanentia  Panis 
post  Consecrationem,'  should  likewise  be  brought  and  burned. 

XVII.  That  all  songs  and  ballads  made  to  the  jirej^idice  of  the  council,  and 
of  the  catholic  persons  of  both  states,  should  be  forbid  to  be  sung  in  cities, 
towns,  and  villages,  under  great  and  extreme  punishment. 

XVIII.  That  none  should  preach  the  word  without  the  license  of  "the  ordi- 
dinary,  or  of  the  parson  of  that  place. 

XIX.  That  ordinaries  and  prelates,  having  jurisdiction,  should  not  be  stopped 
in  their  jurisdiction  by  the  secular  power,  under  pain  of  excommunication. 

XX.  That  all  and  singular  persons  shall  be  commanded  to  obedience,  under 
pain  of  excommunication  ;  and  that  whosoever  knoweth  any  person  to  favour 
any  Wicklevists,  or  their  doctrine,  or  that  keepeth  company  with  suspect  per- 
sons, he  shall  present  the  same  to  his  diocesans  or  his  officials. 

XXI.  That  the  confederacy  of  the  seculars  made  between  themselves,  or  any 
of  the  spiritualty,  to  the  prejudice  of  the  foresaid  council,  and  of  the  apostolic 
see  and  church  of  Rome,  in  favour  of  John  Huss,  Jerome  of  Prague,  and  others 
in  the  said  council  condemned,  shall  be  dissolved. 

Concili-  XXII.  That  the  rights  and  ceremonies  of  the  christian  religion,  touching  God's 
ummalig-  service,  images,  and  worshipping  of  relics,  shall  be  observed,  and  transgressors 
nantiura.   ^^  ^j^g  ^^^^  ^^  punished. 

XXIII.  That  all  and  singidar,  either  spiritual  or  secular,  that  shall  preach, 
teach,  hold,  or  maintain,  the  opinions  and  articles  of  John  WickliiF,  John  Huss, 
and  Jerome,  in  this  council  condemned  and  convicted  of  the  same,  shall  be 
holden  for  heretics ;  and,  falling  in  relapse,  shall  be  burned. 

XXIV.  That  all  secular  persons  being  monished  and  charged  by  the  ordi- 
naries, shall  be  bound  to  give  their  aid  and  furtherance  unto  them  touching  the 
premises. 

The  Bohemians,  notwithstanding  these  cruel  articles,  contemning 
the  vain  devices  of  these  prelates  and  fethers  of  the  council,  ceased 
not  to  proceed  in  their  league  and  purpose  begun,  joining  themselves 
more  strongly  together. 

In  the  mean  time  it  happened,  that  during  this  council  of  Con- 
stance, after  the  deposing   of  pope  John,  and  spoiling  of  his  goods, 

(1)  This  suffragan  was  a  good  man,  and  held  with  Huss 


THE    EMPEROR    KISSETH    HIS    FEET. 


which  came  to  seventy-five  thousand  pounds  of  gold  and  silver,  as  is    t-'enry 
reported  in  the  Story  of  St.  Alban's,  pope  Martin,  on  the  day  of  St. 


Martin,  was  elected;'  concerning  whose  election  gxeat  preparation  A. D. 
was  made  before  by  the  council,  so  that  besides  the  cardinals,  five  ^'^^^ 
other  bishops  of  every  nation  should  enter  into  the  conclave,  who    j^js 


there  together  should  be  kept  with  thin  diet,  till  they  had  founded  a 
pope.  At  last,  when  they  were  together,  they  agreed  upon  this  man,  o/popr^ 
and,  not  tarrying  for  opening  the  door,  like  madmen,  for  haste  they  xxni. 
burst  open  a  hole  in  the  wall,  crying  out,  "  Habemus  papam  Marti-  Election 
num,"  "  We  have  a  Martin  pope."  The  emperor  hearing  thereof,  MaiUn. 
with  like  haste,  came  apace,  and,  falling  down,  kissed  the  new  Je'i-or''"' 
pope's  feet.  Then  went  they  all  to  the  church  together,  and  sang  ^jf/gg"]. 
Te  Deimi. 

The  next  day  following,  this  Martin  was  made  priest,  who  was 
before  but  a  cardinal  deacon,  and  the  next  after  was  consecrated 
bishop,  and  sang  his  first  mass  ;  Avhereat  were  present  one  hundred 
and  forty  mitred  bishops.      After  this,  the  next  morrow,  the  new 
holy  pope  ordained  a  general  procession,  where  a  certain  clerk  Avas 
appointed  to  stand  with  flax  and  fire  ;  who,  setting  the  flax  on  fire, 
thus  said,    "  Ecce,  Pater  sancte  I    sic  transit  gloria  mundi."    i.  e. 
"  Behold,   holy   Father  !    thus  vadeth  the  transitory  glory   of  this 
world  .""     This  done,  the  same  day  the  holy  father  was  brought  up  xhe  coro- 
unto  a  high  scaffold,  saith  the  story  (I  will  not  say  to  a  high  moun-  "^''™  "^ 
tain,  where  was  offered  to  him  all  the  glory  of  the  world),  there  to  be  Martin. 
crowned  for  a  triple  king.     This  done,  the  same  day  after  dinner 
the  new  crowned  pope  was  brought  with  gi-eat  triumph  through  the 
midst  of  the  city  of  Constance,  where  all  the  bishops  and  abbots 
followed  with  their  mitres.  The  pope''s  horse^  was  all  trapped  with  red  The  pope 
scarlet  down  to  the  ground.     The  cardinals''  horses  were  all  in  white  back,°u?e 
silk ;  the  emperor  on  the  right  side,  and  a  prince  elector  on  the  left  0™^^"°'^ 
(both  playing  the  pope's  footmen),  went  on  foot,  leading  the  pope's 
horse  by  the  bridle. 

As  this  pageant  thus  with  the  great  giant  proceeded,  and  came  to 
the  market-place,  there  the  Jews,  according  to  the  manner,  offered 
to  him  their  law  and  ceremonies ;  which  the  pope  receiving,  cast 
behind  him,  saying,  "  Recedant  Vetera,  nova  sunt  omnia.'"  i.  e.  "  Let 
old  things  pass,  all  things  be  made  new,"  &c.^     This  was  a.  d.  1417. 

Thus  the  pope,  being  now  confirmed  in  his  kingdom,  first  begin- 
neth  to  write  his  letters  to  the  Bohemians,  wherein  partly  he  moveth 
them  to  catholic  obedience,  partly  he  dissembleth  with  them,  feigning 
that  if  it  were  not  for  the  emperor's  request,  he  would  enter  process 
against  them.  Thirdly,  and  finally,  he  threateneth  to  attempt  the 
uttermost  against  them,  and  with  all  force  to  invade  them,  as  well 
with  the  apostolic,  as  also  with  the  secular  arm ;  if  they  did  still 
persist,  as  they  began. 

Albeit,  these  new  threats  of  the  new  bishop  did  nothing  move  the 
constant  hearts  of  the  Bohemians,  whom  the  inward  zeal  of  Christ's 
word  had  before  inflamed.  And  although  it  had  been  to  be  wished, 
such  bloodshed  and  wars  not  to  have  followed ;  yet  to  say  the  truth, 

(1)  Ex  hist.S.  Alb.  ex  paralip.  Ursperg... 

(2)  'Meretrix  equitatis  super  bestiam.'    Vid.  Apocalyp. 

(3)  Why  then  doth  the  pope  keep  still  the  old  Jews'  ceremonies,  if  all  things  be  made  new  J 

X  N    2 


548 


THE    DEATH    OF    WEKCESLAUS. THE    STORY    OF    ZISCA. 


Henry 

r. 

A.D. 

1418. 


A  yearly 
memorial 
of  Huss 
and  Je- 
rome kept 
among 
the  Bohe- 


Wences- 
laus 

threaten- 
eth  Ni- 
cholas. 


Death  of 
king- 
Wences- 
laus. 


liow  could  these  Rabbins  greatly  blame  them  herein,  whom  their 
bloody  tyranny  had  before  provoked  so  unjustly,  if  now,  with  their 
glozing  letters,  they  could  not  so  easily  appease  them  again  ? 

Wherefore  these  aforesaid  Bohemians,  partly  for  the  love  of  John 
Huss  and  Jerome  their  countrymen,  partly  for  the  hatred  of  their 
malignant  papistry,  assembling  together,  first  agreed  to  celebrate  a 
solemn  memorial  of  the  death  of  John  Huss  and  Jerome,  decreeing 
the  same  to  be  holden  and  celebrated  yearly  ;  and  afterwards,  by 
means  of  their  friends  they  obtained  certain  churches  of  the  king, 
wherein  they  might  freely  preach  and  minister  the  sacraments  unto 
the  congregation.  This  done,  they  suppressed  divers  monasteries, 
Pharisaical  temples,  and  idolatrous  fanes ;  beginning,  first,  with  the 
great  monastery  of  the  Black  Friars,  eight  miles  from  Prague  ; 
driving  away  the  wicked  and  vicious  priests  and  monks  out  of  them, 
or  compelling  them  unto  a  better  order.  And  thus  their  number 
more  and  more  increasing,  under  the  safe  conduct  of  a  certain  noble 
man  named  Nicholas,  they  went  again  unto  the  king,  requiring  to 
have  more  and  ampler  chui'ches  granted  unto  them.  The  kmg 
seemed  at  first  willingly  and  gently  to  give  ear  to  the  said  Nicholas 
entreating  for  the  people,  and  commanded  them  to  come  again  the 
next  day. 

When  the  people  were  departed,  the  king  turning  himself  to  the 
noble  man  Nicholas,  who  tamed  still  behind,  said :  "  Thou  hast 
begun  a  web  to  put  me  out  of  my  kingdom,  but  I  will  make  a  rope 
of  it,  wherewithal  I  will  hang  thee."  Whereupon  he  immediately 
departed  out  of  the  king''s  presence,  and  the  king  himself  went  into 
the  castle  of  Vissegrade,  and  within  awhile  after,  into  a  new  castle, 
which  he  himself  had  builded  five  stones"'  casts  from  thence  ;  sending 
ambassadors  to  his  brother  to  require  aid. 

These  protestants  being  assembled  in  the  town  of  Prague,  holding 
their  conventions,  the  king  sent  forth  his  chamberlain  with  three 
hundred  horsemen  to  run  upon  them ;  but  he,  having  respect  unto 
his  life,  fled.  When  news  thereof  was  brought  unto  the  king,  all 
that  wTre  about  him,  being  amazed,  utterly  detested  the  fact ;  but 
the  king''s  cupbearer  standing  by,  said,  ""  I  knew  before,  that  these 
things  would  thus  come  to  pass."  Whom  the  king  in  a  rage  taking 
hold  of,  threw  him  doAvn  before  his  feet,  and  with  his  dagger  would 
have  slain  him  ;  but,  being  letted  by  those  who  were  about  him,  with 
much  ado  he  pardoned  him  his  life.  Immediately  the  king,  being 
taken  with  a  palsy,  fell  sick,  and  within  eighteen  days  after,  when  he 
had  marked  the  names  of  such  whom  he  had  appointed  to  be  put  to 
death,^  incessantly  calling  for  aid  of  his  brother  and  his  other  friends, 
he  departed  this  life  before  the  princes,  whom  he  had  sent  unto, 
were  come  with  aid,  when  he  had  reigned  five  and  fifty  years,  and 
was  about  the  age  of  seven  and  fiftv  vears.     a.  d.  1419. 


€:[)£  ^torp  of  ^i^ca,' 

Immediately  after  the  death  of  Wenceslaus,  there  was  a  certain 
nobleman  named  Zisca,  born  at  Trosnovia,   who,  from   his  youth 

(1)  See  the  marvellous  work  of  God's  judjjment,  in  (".efending  his  people. 

(2)  Out  of  j*:neas  Silvius.  _ 


WAR    BETWEKX    ZISCA    AXD    THE    EMPEROR    SIGISMUND.  549 

upwards,  was  brought  up  in  the  king's  court,  and  had  lost  one  of  his    Henry 
eyes  in  a  battle,  where  he  had  valiantly  borae  himself.     This  man,      ^' 
being  sore  grieved  for  the    death   of  John  IIuss,  and  Jerome  of  A.D. 
Prag-ue,  minding  to  revenge  the  injuries  which  the  council  had  done,    ^'^^^^ 
greatly  to  the  dishonour  of  the  kingdom  of  Bohemia,  upon  their 
accomplices  and  adherents,  gathered  together  a  number  of  men  of 
war,  and  subverted  the  monasteries  and  idolatrous  temples,  pulling 
down  and  breaking  in  pieces  the  images  and  idols,  driving  away  the 
priests  and  monks,  who,  he  said,  were  kept  in  their  cloisters,  like 
swine  in  their  sties,  to  be  fatted.      After  this  his  armv  being  in- 
creased, having   gathered  together   about  forty  thousand  men,  he 
attempted  to  take  the  castle  of  Vissegrade,  which  was  but  slenderly 
warded.     From  thence  the  said  Zisca,  under  the  conduct  of  Coranda,  zisca  set- 
went  speedily  unto  Pilsen,  where  he  knew  he  had  many  friends  of  sen^  ^'^" 
his  faction,  and  took  the  town  into  his  power,  fortifying  the  same  very 
strongly,  and  those  who  tarried  behind,  took  the  castle  of  Vissegrade. 

Then  the  queen  Sophia,  being  very  careful,  sent  letters  and  mes-  riie 
sengers  unto  the   emperor  Sigismund,   and  other  nobles  adjoined  ^e"ndeth 
unto  her,  requiring  aid  and  help ;  but  the  emperor  made  preparation  ^°''  '^'g's- 
against  the  Turk,  who  had  then  lately  won  certain  castles  of  him. 
Whereupon  the  queen,  seeing  all  aid  so  far  off,  together  with  Zenko 
Warterberge,  gathered  a  host  with  the  king's  treasure,  and  fortified 
the  castle  of  Prague,  and  the  lesser  city  which  joineth  vmto  the  castle, 
making  gates  and  towers  of  wood  upon  the  bridge,  over  the  river 
Multain,'  to  stop  that  the  protestants  should  have  no  passage  that 
way.     Then  it  liappened  that  at  the  isle  of  St.  Benedict,  one  Peter 
Steremberg  fought  an  equal  or  indifferent  battle  with  them. 

In  the  mean  time,  the  number  of  the  protestants  being  increased 
in  Prague,  they  fought  for  the  bridge.  In  which  battle  many  Avere 
slain  on  both  parts,  but  at  length  the  Hussites  won  the  bridge  and 
the  nether  part  of  lesser  Prague ;  the  queen"'s  part  flying  into  the 
upper  part  thereof:  where  they,  tui'ning  again  fiercely,  renewed  the 
battle,  and  fought  continually  day  and  night  by  the  space  of  five  days. 
Many  were  slain  on  both  parts,  and  goodly  buildings  were  rased,  and 
the  council-house,  which  was  in  a  low  place,  was  utterly  defaced  and 
burned. 

During  the  time  of  this  troublous  estate,  the  ambassadors' of  the  The  em- 
emperor  Sigismund  were  come ;  who,  taking  upon  them  the  rule  and  ^^^as 
governance  of  the  realm,  made  a  truce  or  league  with  the  city  of  :'^''°" 
Prague  under  this  condition,  that  the  castle  of  Vissegrade  being  sur-  with  the 
rendered,  it  should  be  lawful  for  them  to  send  ambassadors  to  the  pJague."^ 
emperor  Sigismund  to  treat  as  touching  their  estate,  and  that  Zisca 
should  surrender  Pilsen  and  Piesta  with  the  other  forts  which  he  had 
taken.  These  conditions  thus  agreed  upon  and  received,  all  the  foreign 
protestants  departed  out  of  the  city,  and  the  senate  of  the  city  began 
to  govern  again  according  to  their  accustomed  manner,  and  all  things 
■were  quieted.    Howbeit,  the  papists,  who  were  gone  out  of  the  town, 
durst  not  return  again,  but  still  looked  for  the  emperor,  by  whose 
presence  they  thought  they  should  have  been  safe.     But  this  their 
hope  was  frustrated  by  means  of  certain  letters  which  were  sent  from 
the  emperor,  wherein  it  was  written.  That  he  would  shortly  come  and 

(1)  The  "  Mnltain,"  the  Moldau.— Ed. 


550  WAR.    BETV/EEN    ZISCA    AND    THE    EMPEROH    SIGISMUND. 

Henry    rulc  tlic  kingdom,  even  after  the  same  order  and  manner  as  his  father 
^'      Charles  had  done  before  him.    Whereupon  the  protestants  understood 


A.  D.    that  their  sect  and  religion  should  be  utterly  banished  ;   which  was 
1419.    j^q(;  begun  during  the  reign  of  the  said  Charles. 

About  Christmas  the  emperor  Sigisraund  came  to  Brunn,  a  city  of 
Moravia,  and  there  he  pardoned  the  citizens  of  Prague,  under  con- 
dition that  they  would  let  down  the  chains  and  bars  of  the  city,  and 
receive  his  rulers  and  magistrates ;   whereunto  the  whole  city  obeyed, 
and  the  magistrates  thereof,  lifting  up  their  hands  unto  heaven,  re- 
joiced at  the  coming  of  the  new  king.     But  the  emperor  turned 
another  way,  and  went  unto  Uratislavia,'  the  head  city  of  Silesia, 
where,  a  little  before,  the  commonalty  of  the  city  had  slain,  in  an  in- 
surrection, the  magistrates,  whom  his  brother  Wenceslaus  had  set  in 
authority :  the  principals  whereof  he  beheaded.     The  news  whereof 
when  it  was  reported  at  Prague,  the  citizens  being  feared  by  the 
Prague     example  of  the  Uratislavians,  distrusting  their  pardon,  rebelled  out 
the  em-    of  hand ;   and  having  obtained  Zenko  on  their  part,  who  had  the 
peror.      government  of  the  castle  of  Prague,  they  sent  letters  into  all  the 
The  com-  realm,  that  no  man  should  suffer  the  emperor  to  enter,  who  was  an 
the  city    cuemy  unto  Bohemia,  and  sought  nothing  else  but  to  destroy  the 
aga^n^"^  kingdom :  who  also  bound  the  ancient  city  of  the  Prutenians  under 
sigis^       order  by  pledges,  and  put  the  marquis  of  Brandenburg   from  the 
Bohemian  crown ;  and  had  not  only  suffered  John  Huss  and  Jerome 
of  Prague  to  be  burned  at  the  council  of  Constance,  but  also  procured 
the  same,  and  with  all  his  endeavour  did  impugn  the  doctrine  and 
faith  which  they  taught  and  followed.     While  these  things  were  thus 
done,  Zisca,  having  given  over  Pilsen  by  composition,  was  twice 
assaulted  by  his  enemies,  but,  through  policy,  he  was  always  victor. 
The  places  Avhere  they  fought  Avere  rough  and  unknown,  his  enemies 
were  on  horseback,  and  his  soldiers  on  foot,  neither  could  there  be 
any  battle  fought  but  on  foot.     Whereupon,  when  his  enemies  were 
''oifc  of  ^^'§^hted  from  their  horses,  Zisca  commanded  the  women  who  custom- 
zisca.      ably  followed  the  host,  to  cast  their  kerchiefs  upon  the  ground,  wherein 
the  horsemen  being  entangled  by  their  spurs,  were  slain  before  they 
could  unloose  their  feet. 

After  this,  he  went  unto  Ausca,^  a  town  situate  upon  the  river 
Lucinitius,^  out  of  which  town  Procopius  and  Ulricius,  two  brethren 
papists,  had  cast  out  many  protestants.  This  town  Zisca  took  by 
force  of  arms  the  first  night  of  Lent,  rased  it,  and,  set  it  on  fire. 
He  also  took  the  castle  of  Litius,  which  was  a  mile  off,  whither 
Ulricius  was  fled,  and  put  Ulricius  and  all  his  family  to  the  sword, 
saving  one  only. 

Then,  forasmuch  as  he  had  no  walled  or  fenced  town  to  inhabit, 
The  city  he  chosc  out  a  certain  place  upon  the  same  river,  Avhich  was  fenced 
buiided.  by  nature,  about  eight  miles  from  the  city  of  Ausca.  This  place  he 
compassed  in  with  walls,  and  commanded  all  men  to  build  them 
houses,  where  they  had  pitched  their  tents,  and  named  this  city  Tabor, 
and  the  inhabitants,  his  companions,  Taborites  ;  because  their  city,  by 
all  like,  was  buiided  upon  the  top  of  some  hill  or  mount.  This  city, 
albeit  it  was  fenced  with  high  rocks  and  cliffs,  yet  was  it  compassed 

(1)  "  Uratislavia,'  Breslau.— Ed.  (2)  "Ausca,"  Austrachitz.— Ed, 

(S)  "Lucinitius,"  the  Lauschintz.— Ed. 


WAR    BETWEEN    ZISOA    AND    THE    EMPEROR    SIGISMUND.  551 

with  a  wall  and  vaumure,*  and  the  river  of  Lucinitius  fcnceth  a  great   Jfcnry 
part  of  the  town  ;   the  rest  is  compassed  in  with  a  great  brook,  which,         " 
running  straight  into  the  river  Lucinitius,  is  stopped  by  a  great  rock,    A.  D. 
and  driven  back  towards  the  right  hand  all  the  length  of  the  city,    ^'^-'^- 
and,  at  the  further  end,  it  joineth  with  the  great  river.     The  way 
unto  it  by  land  is  scarcely  thirty  feet  broad,  for  it  is  almost  an  island. 
In  this  place  there  was  a  deep  ditch  cast,  and  a  triple  wall  made,  of 
such  thickness,  that  it  could  not  be  broken  with  any  engine.     The 
wall  was  full  of  towers  and  forts  set  in  their  convenient  and  meet 
places.     Zisca  was  the  first  that  builded  the  castle,  and  those  that 
came  after  him  fortified  it,  every  man  according  to  his  own  device. 
At  that  time  the  Taborites  had  no  horsemen  amongst  them,  until 
such  time  as  Nicholas,  master  of  the  Mint  (whom  the  emperor  had 
sent  into  Bohemia  with  a  thousand  horsemen  to  set  things  in  order, 
and  to  withstand  the  Taborites,  lodging  all  night  in  a  village  named 
Vogize),  was  surj)rised  by  Zisca  coming  upon  him  suddenly  in  the 
night,  taking  away  all  his  horse  and  armour,  and  setting  fire  to  the 
village.     Then  Zisca  taught  his  soldiers  to  mount  on  horseback,  to 
leap,  to  run,  to  turn,  and  to  cast  a  ring,  so  that  after  this  he  never  led 
army  without  his  wings  of  horsemen. 

In  this  mean  time  Sigismund,  the  emperor,  gathering  together  the  sigir- 
nobles  of  Silesia,  entered  unto  Bohemia,  and  went  unto  Grsecium,^  and  ™tteth 
from  thence  with  a  great  army  unto  Cutna,  alluring  Zenko,  with  many  thecastie 

o  J  '  i>T»  ■,.    "^    oi  Prague. 

great  and  large  promises,  to  render  up  the  castle  ot  Prague  mito  hnn, 
and  there  placed  himself  to  annoy  the  town.     This  Zenko,  infamed 
with  double  treason,  returned  home.     The  citizens  of  Prague  sent  zisca 
for  Zisca,  who,  speeding  himself  thither  with  the  Taborites,  received  fhe'dtyof 
the  city  under  his  governance.     In  the  Bohemians"'  host,  there  were  Prague. 
but  only  two  barons,  Hilco  Crusina  of  Lutemperg,  ?jid  Hilco  Wal- 
destene,  with  a  few  other  nobles  ;  all  the  residue  were  of  the  common 
people.     They  went  about,  first,  to  subdue  the  castle,  which  was  by 
nature  very  strongly  fenced,   and  could  not  be  won  by  any  other 
means  than  by  famine:  whereupon  all  the  passages  were  stopped, 
that  no  victuals  should  be  carried  in.     But  the  emperor  opened  the  ^es^eged 
passages  by  dint  of  sword,  and  when  he  had  given  unto  those  who  were  mund.'^ 
besieged  all  things  necessary,  having  sent  for  aid  out  of  the  empire, 
he  determined,  shortly  after,  to  besiege  the  city.    There  were,  in  the 
emperor's  camp,  the  dukes  of  Saxony,  the  marquis  of  Brandenbui-g 
and  his  son-in-law,  Albert  of  Austria.    The  city  was  assaulted  by  the 
space  of  six  weeks.     The  emperor  Sigismund  was  crowned  in  the 
metropolitan  house  in  the  castle,  Conrad,  the  archbishop,  solemnizing 
the  ceremonies  of  the  coronation.     The  city  was  straitly  besieged. 
In  the  mean  time  the  captains  Rosenses  and  Chragery,  who  had  taken 
the  tents  of  the  Taborites,  being  overcome  in  battle  by  Nicholas 
Huss,  whom  Zisca  had  sent  with  part  of  his  power,  for  that  purpose, 
were  driven  out  of  their  tents,  and  Grsecium,  the  queen's  city,  was 
also  taken. 

There  is,  also,  above  the  town  of  Prague,  a  high  hill,  which  is  called 
Videchon.  On  this  hill  had  Zisca  strongly  planted  a  garrison,  that 
his  enemies  should  not  possess  it,  with  whom  the  marquis  of  Misnia 
skirmishing,  lost  a  great  part  of  his  soldiers.     For  when  the  Misnians 

(n  A  bulwark  or  outwork —Eb.  (2)  "  Graecium,"  Gratz.— Ed. 


552  WAR    BETWEEN    ZISCA    AND    THE    EMPEROR    SIGISMUND. 

Henry    had  gottcii  to  tlic  top  of  the  hill,  being  driven  back  into  a  corner 
^'      which  was  broken  and  steep,  and  fiercely  set  upon,  when  they  could 


A.  D.    no  loncer  withstand  the  violent  force  of  their  enemies,  some  of  them 
1421.    ^gj,g  slain,  and  some,  falling  headlong  from  the  hill,  were  destroyed. 
The  mar-  Whercupou  the  emperor  Sigismund,  raising  his  siege,  departed  into 
Sus'ni'a     Cutna ;  and  Zisca,  with  his  company,  departed  unto  Tabor,  and  sub- 
come       dued  many  places ;  among  which  he  subverted  a  town  pertaining  to 
sigis-      the  captain  of  Vissegrade.     During  this  time  the  castle  of  Vissegrade 
rarseth     was  strongly  besieged,  where,  when  other  victuals  Avanted,  they  were 
his  siege,  compelled  to  eat  horse-flesh.    Last  of  all,  except  the  emperor  did  aid 
them  by  a  certain  day,  they  promised  to  yield  it  up  ;  but  under  this 
condition :  that  if  the  emperor  did  come,  they  within  the  castle  should 
be  no  more  molested. 
The  em-       The  empcror  was  present  before  the  day,  but  being  ignorant  of 
fighuiig    the  truce  taken,  entering  into  a  strait  underneatli  the  castle,  was  sud- 
against     (^euly  sct  upon  by  the  soldiers  of  Prague,  where  he  had  a  great  over- 
the  over-  throw ;  and  so  leaving  his  purpose  unperformed,  returned  back  again. 
throw,      'pi^gpg  ^ypj.g  giain  in  that  conflict  fourteen  noblemen  of  the  Moravians 
and  Hungarians,  and  others,  a  great  number.     The  castle  was  deli- 
vered up  unto  tliera.     While  these  things  were  in  doing,  Zisca  took 
Boslaus,  a  captain  who  was  surnamed  Cigneus,  by  force,  in  a  very 
strong  town,  of  his,  and  brought  him  unto  his  religion  ;  who,  a  few 
years  after,  leading  the  protestants'  host  in  Austria,  was  wounded 
The  ah-    before  Rhetium,  and  died.     There  were  in  the  territory  of  Pilsen 
plhen^     many  monasteries,  of  which  Zisca  subverted  and  burned  five  ;  and 
subvert-   forasmucli  as  the  monastery  of  St.  Clare  was  the  strongest,  there  he 

pitched  himself. 

Zisca  Thither  also  came  the  emperor  with  his  army ;    but  when  Zisca 

theempe-  brought  forth  his  power  against  him,  he  most  cowardly  fled,  and  not 

"^"jy^      longf  after,  he  departed  and  left  Bohemia.    Then  Zisca  went  with  his 

army  unto  Pilsen  ;  but  forasmuch  as  he  saw  the  city  so  fenced,  that 

he  was  in  doubt  of  winning  the  same,  he  went  from  thence  to  Com- 

mittavia,  a  famous  city,  which  he  took  by  force,  burning  all  the  priests 

Zisca       therein.    Afterwards,  as  he  lay  before  the  town  of  Raby,*  and  strongly 

otifer  eye!  bcsiegcd  the  samc,  he  was  stricken  with  a  shaft  in  the  eye ;  having 

^otTo""'*^  but  that  one  before  to  see  withal.     From  thence  he  was  carried  by 

sake  his    physiciaus  to  Prague,  where,  being  cured  of  his  wound,  and  his  life 

^^^^'      saved,  he  yet  lost  his  sight ;  and  for  all  that,  he  would  not  forsake 

his  army,  but  still  took  the  charge  of  them.    a.d.  1421. 

Zisca  After  this  the' garrisons  of  Prague  Avent  unto  Verona,  Avhere  there 

(livers      was  a  great  garrison  of  the  emperor''s,  and  took  it  by  force,  many 

towns,      i^ging  slain  of  either  part.     They  also  took  the  town  of  Broda  in 

Germany,  and  slew  the  garrison  ;    and  afterwards  took  Cutna  and 

many  other  cities  by  composition.     Further,  as  they  led  their  army 

The        unto  a  town  called  Pons,  which  is  inhabited  by  the  Misnians,  the 

ret^r'e"*     Saxons  meeting  them  by  the  way,  because  they  durst  not  join  battle, 

they   returned  back.      After   all   this,   the   emperor  appointed   the 

princes  electors  a  day,  that  at  Bartholomew-tide  they  should,  with 

their  army,  invade  the  west  part  of  Bohemia,  and  he,  with  a  host  of 

Hungarians,  Avould  enter  into  the  east  part.     There  came  unto  his 

aid  the  archbishop  of  Mentz,  the  county  palatine  of  the  Rhine,  the 

(Ij  "  Raby,"  on  the  river  Wattawa. — Ed. 


ZISCAS    VALOUR. A    NOBLE    VICTORY    OF    ZISCA.  553 

dukes  of  Saxony,  the  marquis  of  Brandenburg,  and   many  other    ii>=nnj 
bishops  out  of  Almaine  :  all  the  rest  sent  their  aids.    They  encamped        ^' 
before  the  town  of  Sozius,  a  strong  and  well  fenced  place,  which  they    A.  D. 
could  by  no  means  subdue.     The  country  was  spoiled  and  wasted    1421. 
round  about,  and  the  siege  continued  until  the  feast  of  St.  Gallc. 
Then  it  was  broken  up,  because  the  emperor  was  not  come  at  his  The  em- 
day  appointed ;  but  he,  having  gathered  together  a  great  army  of  the  ^"j"',.- 
Hungarians  and  West  Moravians,  about  Christmas  entered  into  Bohe-  po«'er 
mia,  and  took  certain  towns  by  force ;  and  Cutna  was  yielded  unto  aglintnto 
him.     But  when  Zisca  (although  he  was  blind)  came  towards  him.  S°''^"v  . 

1  I'li'tT  ini3  i   Out, 

and  set  upon  lum,  he,  bemg  afraid,  and  many  of  his  nobles  slain,  afraid  of 
fled  :  but  first  he  burned  Cutna,  which  the  Taborites,  by  means  of  flictiL 
the  silver-mines,  called  '  The  Pouch  of  Antichrist."'     Zisca  pursuing  The 
the  emperor  a  day's  journey,  got  great  and  rich  spoil,  and  taking  the  aTu^  "^ 
town  of  Broda  by  force,  set  it  on  fire  ;  which  afterwards,  almost  by  '^''"'** 
the  space  of  fourteen  years,  remained  disinhabited.     The  emperor  Nobie 
passed,  by  a  bridge,  over  the  river  of  Iglaria  ;  and  Piso,  a  Floren-  z'isc^a'^  °^ 
tine,  who  had  brought  fifteen  thousand  horsemen  out  of  Hungary  to 
these  wars,  passed  over  the  ice ;  which,  by  the  multitude  and  number 
of  his   horsemen  being   broken,   devoured  and   destroyed  a  great 
number.     Zisca,  having  obtained  this  victory,  would  not  suffer  any  zisca  de- 
image  or  idol  to  be  in  the  churches,  neither  thouc^ht  it  to  be  borne  ?troyeih 
withal,  that  priests  should  minister  with  copes  or  vestments  :    for  andldois 
which  cause  he  was  much  the  more  envied  amongst  the  states  of  "hurches. 
Bohemia.     And  the  consuls  of  Prague,  being  aggrieved  at  the  inso-  The  mar- 
lency  of  John  Premonstratensis,  called  him  and  nine  other  of  his  c^rf";"  °^ 
adherents,  whom  they  supposed  to  be  the  principals  of  this  faction,  soUy  bo- 
into  the  council-house,  as  though  they  would  confer  with  them  as  falsely 
touching  the  commonwealth  :    and  when  they  were  come  in,  they  ventL'd,' 
slew  them,  and  afterwards  departed  home  every  man  to  his  own  house,  ^"'\''|i''^'^ 
thinking  the  city  had  been  quiet,  as  though  nothing  had  been  done,  sword. 
But  their  servants,  being  not  circumspect  enough,  washing  down  the 
court  or  yard,  washed  out  also  the  blood  of  those  that  were  slain, 
tlrrough  the  sinks  or  channels ;  which  being  once  seen,  the  people  Pnvy 


murder  at 


understood  what  was  done.     By  and  by  there  was  a  great  tumult ;  J^"gf" 
the  council-house  was   straightway   overthrown,  and   eleven   of  the  co™es 
principal  citizens,  who  were  thought  to  be  the  authors  thereof,  were 
slain,  and  divers  houses  spoiled. 

About  the  same  time  the  castle  of  Purgel,  wherein  the  emperor 
had  left  a  small  garrison  (whither  also  many  papists  Avith  their  wives 
and  children  were  fled),  was,  through  negligence,  burned,  and  those 
who  escaped  out  of  the  fire  went  unto  Pilsen.  After  this,  divers  of 
the  Bohemian  captains,  and  the  senate  of  Prague,  sent  ambassadors  to 
Vitold,  duke  of  Lithuania,  and  made  him  their  king.  This  did 
Zisca  and  his  adherents  gainsay.  This  Vitold  sent  Sigismund  Gori- 
butus  with  two  thousand  horsemen  into  Bohemia,  who  was  honom- 
ably  received  by  the  inhabitants  of  Prague.  At  his  coming  they 
determined  to  lay  siege  to  a  castle  situated  upon  a  hill,  which  was 
called  Charles''  Stone. 

Here  Sigismund  had  left,  for  a  garrison,  four  centurions  of  soldiers. 
The  tents  were  pitched  in  three  places.  The  siege  continued  six 
months,  and  the  assault  never  ceased  day  and  night.     Five  great 


554  WAIl    BETWEEN    ZISCA    AMD    THE    EMPEROR    SIGISMDXD. 

ii^nry    sUiigs  tlircw  Continually  great  stones  over  the  walls,  and  about  two 
^'       thousand  vessels,  tubs,  or  baskets,  filled  with  dead  carcases  and  other 


A.  D.    excrements,  \vcrc  cast  in  amongst  those  who  were  besieged  ;  which 

^•^^^-    thing  did  so  infect  them  with  stench,  that  their  teeth  did  either  fall 

Stench      quc,  or  Were  all  loose.     Notwithstanding  they  bare  it  out  with  stout 

hurtful  to  courage,  and  continued  their  fight  until  the  winter,  having  privily 

the  teeth,  j-gpgjygd  mediciue  out  of  Prague,  to  fasten  their  teeth  again. 

In  the  mean  time  Frederic  the  elder,  prince  of  Brandenburg, 
entering  into  Bohemia  with  a  great  power,  caused  them  of  Prague  to 
raise  the  siege  ;  and  Vitold,  at  the  request  of  Uladislaus,  king  of 
Poland,  who  had  talked  with  the  emperor  on  the  borders  of  Hungary, 
called  Coributus,  his  uncle,  with  his  whole  army,  out  of  Bohemia. 
Whereupon  the  emperor  supposed  that  the  protestants,  being  des- 
titute of  foreign  aid,  would  the  sooner  do  his  commandment ;  but  he 
Avas  far  deceived  therein,  for  they,  leading  their  anuies  out  of  Bohe- 
Another  mia,  subducd  the  borders  thereupon  adjoining.  It  is  also  reported 
policy  of  that  Zisca  went  into  Austria,  and  when  the  husbandmen  of  the  country 
'^'"'*'^^'  had  carried  away  a  great  number  of  their  cattle  by  water  unto  an  isle 
of  the  river  Danube,  and  by  chance  had  left  certain  calves  and  swine 
in  their  villages  behind  them ;  Zisca  drave  them  unto  the  river  side, 
and  kept  them  there  so  long,  beating  them,  and  causing  them  to  roar 
out  and  cry,  till  the  cattle  feeding  in  the  island,  hearing  the  lowing 
and  grunting  of  the  cattle  on  the  other  side  of  the  water,  for  the 
desire  of  their  like,  did  swim  over  the  river ;  by  means  Avhereof  he 
got  and  drave  away  a  great  booty. 

About  the  same  time  the  Emperor  Sigismund  gave  to  his  son-in- 
law  Albert,  duke  of  Austria,  the  country  of  Moravia,  because  it  should 
not  want  a  ruler.  At  the  same  time,  also,  Eric,  king  of  Denmark, 
and  Peter  Infant,  brother  to  the  king  of  Portugal  and  father  of  James, 
cardinal  of  St.  Eustace,  came  to  the  emperor  (being  both  very  expert 
men  in  the  aifairs  of  war),  who  did  augment  the  emperor's  host  with 
their  aid  and  power :  whereupon  they  straightway  pitched  their  camp 
before  Lutemperge,  a  town  of  Moravia,  and  continued  the  siege  for 
the  space  of  three  months.  There  was  at  that  time  a  certain  knight  at 
Prague  surnamed  Aqua,  who  was  very  rich  and  of  great  authority. 
This  man,  forasmuch  as  he  had  no  child  of  his  own,  adopted  unto  him 
his  sister''s  son,  named  Procopius  ;  whom,  when  he  was  of  mean  stature 
and  age,  he  carried  with  him  into  France,  Spain,  and  Italy,  and  imto 
Jerusalem ;  and,  at  his  return,  caused  him  to  be  made  priest.  This 
man,  when  the  gospel  began  to  flourish  in  Bohemia,  took  part  with 
Zisca,  and,  forasmuch  as  he  Avas  strong  and  valiant,  and  also  painful, 
he  was  gi-eatly  esteemed. 
Valiant  Tliis  Procopius  for  his  valiant  acts  was  afterwards  called  Procopius 
©n'ro^cV  Magnus,  and  had  committed  unto  him  the  whole  charge  of  the 
Magnus,  proviuce  of  Moravia,  and  the  defence  of  the  Lutemperges,  who, 
receiving  a  great  power  by  force  (maugre  all  the  whole  power  which 
lay  in  the  siege)  carried  victuals  into  the  town  which  was  besieged, 
and  so  did  frustrate  the  emperor"'s  siege.  The  emperor,  before  this, 
had  delivered  to  the  marquises  of  Misnia  the  bridge  and  town  of 
Ausca,'  upon  the  river  Albis,^  that  they  should  fortify  them  with  their 
garrisons.     Whereupon  Zisca  besieged  Ausca;   and  Frederic,   the 

(I)  "Ausca,"  Auche.— Ed.  (2)  "  Albis,"  the  Elbe.— Ed. 


A    NOBLE    ORATIOX    OF    ZISCA    TO    HIS    SOLDIERS.  555 

marquis  of  Misnia,  with  liis  brother,  the  landgrave  of  Thuringia,    Henry 
gathering  together  a  great  army  out  of  Saxony,  Thuringia,  Misnia,        ' 
and  both  the  Lusaces,  determined  to  rescue  and  aid  those  who  were  be-    A.  D. 
sieged.    There  was  a  great  battle  fought  before  the  city,  and  the  victory    ^^"^' 
depended  long  uncertain;  but  at  last  it  fell  on  the  protestants'  part,  victory  of 
There  were  slain  in  the  battle  the  burgraves  of  Misnia  or  Chyrpo-  testants. 
genses,  the  barons  of  Gleichen  and  many  other  nobles,  besides  nine 
thousand  common  soldiers ;  and  the  town  of  Ausca  was  taken  and 
utterly  rased. 

At  last,  dissension  arising  between  Zisca  and  them  of  Prague,  they  Battle 
of  Prague  prepared  an  army  against  him,  wherewith  he,  perceiving  him-  fh^uTof 
self  overmatched,  fled  unto  the  river  of  Albis,  and  was  almost  taken,  Prague 
but  that  he  had  passage  through  the  town  of  Poggiebras ;  but  they  of  zisca. 
Prague,  pursuing  the  tail  of  the  battle,  slew  many  of  his  Taborites. 
At  length  they  came  to  certain.hills,  where  Zisca,  going  into  the  valley, 
and  knowing  the  straits  of  the  place,  that  his  enemies  could  not  spread 
their  army,  commanded  his  standard  to  stand  still ;  and  exhorting  and 
encouraging  his  soldiers,  he  gave  them  battle. 

This  battle  was  very  fierce  and  cruel :  but  Zisca,  having  the  upper  noWc 
hand,  slew  three  thousand  of  them  of  Prague,  and  put  the  rest  to  flight,  zfsca?  ""^ 
and  straightways  took  the  city  of  Cutna  by  force  (which  they  of  Prague 
had  repaired),  and  set  it  on  fire :  then,  with  all  speed,  he  went  with 
his  army  to  besiege  Prague,  and  encamped  within  a  bow-shot  of  the 
town.  There  were  many  both  in  the  city,  and  also  in  his  host,  Avho 
grudged  sore  at  that  siege ;  some  accusing  Zisca,  others  them  of 
Prague.  There  were  great  timiults  in  the  camp,  the  soldiers  saying 
that  it  was  not  reasonable,  that  the  city  should  be  suppressed,  which 
was  both  the  head  of  the  kingdom,  and  did  not  dissent  from  them  in 
opinion  ;  adding,  that  the  Bohemians"'  power  would  soon  decay,  if  their 
enemies  should  know  that  they  were  divided  within  themselves ;  also 
that  they  had  sufficient  wars  against  the  emperor,  and  that  it  was  but 
a  foolish  device  to  move  wars  amongst  themselves.  This  talk  came 
unto  the  ear  of  Zisca,  who,  calling  together  his  army,  and  standing  upon 
a  place  to  be  heard,  spake  these  words. 

A  Notable  Oration  of  Zisca  to  his  Soldiers. 

Brethren!  be  ye  not  aggrieved  against  me,  neither  accuse  him  who  hath 
sought  your  health  and  safeguard.  The  victories  which  ye  have  obtained  under 
my  conduct  are  yet  fresh  in  memory,  neither  have  I  brought  you  at  any  time 
unto  any  place,  from  whence  you  have  not  come  victors.  You  are  become  famous 
and  rich,  and  I,  for  your  sake,  have  lost  my  sight,  and  dwell  in  darkness. 
Nothino-  have  I  gotten  by  all  these  fortunate  battles,  but  only  a  vain  name.  For 
vou  have  I  fought,  and  for  you  have  I  vanquished ;  neither  do  I  repent  me  of 
my  travails,  neither  is  my  bhndness  grievous  unto  me,  but  only  that  I  cannot 
provide  for  you  according  to  my  accustomed  manner :  neither  do  I  persecute 
them  of  Prague  for  mine  own  cause,  for  it  is  your  blood  that  they  thirst  and 
seek  for,  and  not  mine.  It  were  but  small  pleasure  for  them  to  destroy  me,  being 
now  an  old  man  and  bhnd ;  it  is  your  valiantness  and  stout  stomachs  which  they 
fear.  Either  must  you  or  they  perish ;  who,  while  they  seem  to  he  in  wait  for 
me,  do  seek  afler  your  lives.  You  must  rather  fear  civil  wars  than  foreign  ;  and 
civil  sedition  ought  first  to  be  avoided.  We  will  subdue  Prague,  and  banish  the 
seditious  citizens,  before  the  emperor  shall  have  any  news  of  this  sedition.  And 
then,  havino-  but  a  few  of  his  faction  left,  we  may,  with  the  less  fear,  look  for  it. 
better  than  If  these  doubtful  citizens  of  Prague  were  still  in  our  camp.  But, 
because  ye  shall  accuse  me  no  more,  I  give  you  free  liberty  to  do  what  you  will. 


556 


DEATH    OF    ZISCA HIS    EPITAPH. 


Henry    If  it  please  you  to  suffer  them  of  Prague  to  live  in  quietness,  I  will  not  be  against 
^-      it,  so  that  there  be  no  treason  wrought.     If  you  determine  to  have  war,  I  am 
also  ready.    Look,  which  ever  part  you  will  incline  unto,  Zisca  will  be  your  aid 
and  helper. 


A.D 
1422 


The 

hearts  of 
the  sol- 
diers al- 
tered by 
the  ora- 
tion of 
Zisca. 


Peace  be- 
tween 
Zisca  and 
Prague. 

The  em- 
peror glad 
to  be  re- 
conciled 
with 
Zisca. 


The 

death  of 
Zisca. 


The 

words  of 
Zisca  at 
his  death. 


When  he  had  spoken  these  words,  the  soldiers''  minds  were  changed, 
and  wholly  determined  to  make  wars,  so  that  they  ran,  by-and-by,  to 
take  up  their  armour  and  weapons,  to  run  unto  the  walls,  to  provoke 
their  enemies  to  fight  for  the  gates  of  the  city.  Zisca,  in  the  mean 
time,  prepared  all  things  ready  for  the  assault.  There  is,  a  little  from 
Pilsen,  a  certain  village  named  Rochezana.  In  this  place  there  was 
a  child  born  of  poor  and  base  parentage,  whose  name  was  John ;  he 
came  to  Prague,  and  got  his  living  there  by  begging,  and  learned 
grammar  and  logic.  When  he  came  to  man's  estate,  he  became  the 
schoolmaster  of  a  noble  man's  child ;  and,  forasmuch  as  he  was  of  an 
excellent  wit  and  ready  tongue,  he  was  received  into  the  college  of  the 
poor ;  and,  last  of  all,  being  made  priest,  he  began  to  preach  the  word 
of  God  to  the  citizens  of  Prague,  and  was  named  Johannes  de  Roche- 
zana, by  the  name  of  the  town  where  he  was  born.  This  man  grew 
to  be  of  great  name  and  authority  in  the  town  of  Prague.  Where- 
upon, when  Zisca  besieged  Prague,  he,  by  the  consent  of  the  citizens, 
went  out  into  the  camp,  and  reconciled  Zisca  again  unto  the  city. 

When  the  emperor  perceived  that  all  things  came  to  pass  according 
to  Zisca's  will  and  mind,  and  that  upon  him  alone  the  whole  state  of 
Bohemia  did  depend,  he  sought  privy  means  to  reconcile  and  get 
Zisca  into  his  favour,  promising  him  the  governance  of  the  whole  king- 
dom, the  guiding  of  all  his  hosts  and  armies,  and  great  yearly  revenues, 
if  he  would  proclaim  him  king,  and  cause  the  cities  to  be  sworn  unto 
him.  Upon  which  conditions,  when  Zisca,  for  the  performance  of  the 
covenants,  went  unto  the  emperor,  being  in  his  journey  at  the  castle  of 
Priscovia,  he  was  stricken  with  sickness  and  died.     a.  d.  1424. 

Is  is  reported,  that  when  he  was  demanded,  being  sick,  in  what  place 
he  would  be  buried  ;  he  commanded  the  skin  to  be  pulled  off  fi-om  his 
dead  carcase,  and  the  flesh  to  be  cast  unto  the  fowls  and  beasts,  and 
that  a  drum  should  be  made  of  his  skin,  which  they  should  use  in  their 
battles  :  affirming,  tliat  as  soon  as  their  enemies  should  hear  the  sound 
of  that  drum,  they  would  not  abide,  but  take  their  flight.  The  Tabo- 
rites,  despising  all  other  images,  yet  set  up  the  picture  of  Zisca  over 
the  gates  of  the  city. 


Zisca 
eleven 
times 
victor  in 
the  field. 


The  Epitaph  of  John  Zisca,  the  valiant  Captain  of  the  Bohemians. 

I,  John  Zisca,  not  inferior  to  an  emperor  or  captain  in  warlike  policy,  a  severe 
punisher  of  the  pride  and  avarice  of  the  clergy,  and  a  defender  of  my  country, 
do  lie  here.  That  which  Appius  Claudius,  by  giving  good  counsel,  and  M. 
Furius  Camillus,  by  valiantness,  did  for  the  P^omans ;  the  same  I,  being  blind, 
have  done  for  my  Bohemians.  I  never  slacked  opportunity  of  battle,  neither 
did  fortune  at  any  time  fail  me.  I,  being  blind,  did  foresee  aU  opportunity  of 
well  ordering  or  doing  my  business.  Eleven  times,  in  joining  battle,  I  went 
victor  out  of  the  field.  I  seemed  to  have  worthily  defended  the  cause  of  the 
miserable  and  hungry  against  the  delicate,  fat,  and  gluttonous  priests,  and  for 
that  cause  to  have  received  help  at  the  hands  of  God.  If  their  envy  had  not  let 
it,  without  doubt  1  had  deserved  to  be  numbered  amongst  the  most  famous  men. 
Notwithstanding  my  bones  lie  here  in  this  hallowed  place,  even  in  despite  of  the 
pope. 


POPE   martin's   bloody   bull.  557 

IQANNE2  2I2KA2  o  'Bairjfjt.ds,  rdip  ai(rxpoKfp8a>v   Upe'iov  ex6p6s,  dWd  ev     Hmry 

In  English. — John  Zisca,  a  Bohemian,  enemy  to  all  wicked  and  covetous  ~.    ,^ 
priests,  but  with  a  godly  zeal.  ,  !„,,' 


And  thus  have  you  the  acts  and  doings  of  this  worthy  Zisca  and 
other  Bohemians,  which,  for  the  more  credit,  we  have  drawn  out  of 
.^neas  Silvius ;  only  his  raiUng  terms  excepted,  which  we  have  here 
suppressed. 

All  this  while,  the  emperor,  Avith  the  whole  power  of  the  Germans, 
was  not  so  busy  on  the  one  side,  but  Martin  the  pope  was  as  much 
occupied  on  the  other  side  ;  who,  about  the  same  time,  directed  down 
a  terrible  bull,  full  of  all  poison,  to  all  bishops  and  archbishops,  against 
all  such  as  took  any  part  or  side  with  Wickliif,  John  Huss,  Jerome, 
or  with  their  doctrine  and  opinions.  The  copy  of  which  bull,  which 
I  found  in  an  old  written  monument,  I  wish  the  reader  thoroughly 
to  peruse ;  wherein  he  shall  see  the  pope  to  pour  out  at  once  all  his 
poison. 

The  Bull  of  Pope  Martin  directed  forth  against  the  Followers  of 
John  WicklifF  of  England,  of  John  Huss  of  Bohemia,  and  of 
Jerome  of  Prague. 

Martin,  bishop,  the  servant  of  God's  servants,  to  our  reverend  brethren  the  Pope 
archbishops  of  Salzburg,  Gueznen,  and   Prague,   and  to  the  bishops  of  Olu-  JIJ^''^'"'^ 
mitz,  Luthomysl,  Bamberg,    Misnia,   Patavia,   Uratislavia,    Ratisbon,  Cracow,  buiUoall 
Posnamen,  and  Nitrien,  and  also  to  our  beloved  children  the   inquisitors  ap-  bishops 
pointed  by  the  prelates  above  recited,  or  where   else   soever,  unto  whom  these  ^Lhopg 
present  letters  shall  come  :  greeting,  and  apostolical  benediction. 

Amongst  all  other  pastoral  cares  wherewith  we  are  oppressed,  this  chiefly 
and  specially  doth  enforce  us :  that  heretics,  with  their  false  doctrine  and  errors, 
being  utterly  expulsed  from  amongst  the  company  of  christian  men,  and  rooted 
out  (so  far  forth  as  God  will  make  us  able  to  do),  the  right  and  catholic  faith 
may  remain  sound  and  undefiled;  and  that  all  christian  people,  immovable 
and  inviolate,  may  stand  and  abide  in  the  sincerity  of  the  same  faith,  the  whole 
veil  of  obscurity  being  removed.  But  lately,  in  divers  places  of  the  world, 
but  especially  in  Bohemia,  and  the  dukedom  of  Moravia,  and  in  the  straits  ad- 
joining thereunto,  certain  arch-heretics  have  risen  and  sprung  up,  not  against 
one  only,  but  against  divers  and  sundry  documents  of  the  catholic  faith,  being 
land-lopers,  schismatics,  and  seditious  persons,  fraught  with  devilish  pride  and 
wolvish  madness,  deceived  by  the  subtlety  of  Satan,  and  from  one  evil  vanity 
brought  to  a  worse ;  who  although  they  rose  and  sprang  up  in  divers  parts  of 
the  world,  yet  agreed  they  all  in  one,  having  their  tails,  as  it  were,  knit  together ; 
to  wit,  John  Wickliff  of  England,  John  Huss  of  Bohemia,  and  Jerome  of 
Prague,  of  damnable  memory,  who  drew  with  them  no  small  number  to  miser- 
able ruin  and  infidelity.  For  when  those,  and  such  like  pestiferous  persons, 
did,  in  the  beginning  of  their  poisoned  doctrine, ^  obstinately  sow  and  spread 
abroad  perverse  and  false  opinions,  the  prelates,  who  had  the  regiment  and 
execution  of  the  judicial  power,  like  dumb  dogs  not  able  to  bark,  neither 
yet  revenging  speedily  with  the  apostle  all  such  disobedience,  nor  regarding 
corporally  to  cast  out  of  the  Lord's  house  (as  they  were  enjoined  by  the  canons) 
those  subtle  and  pestilent  arch-heretics,  and  their  wolvish  fury  and  cruelty, 
with  all  expedition  ;  but,  suffering  their  false  and  pernicious  doctrine  negligently, 
by  their  over-long  delays,  to  grow  and  wax  strong ;  a  great  multitude  of  people, 
instead  of  true  doctrine,  received  those  things  which  they  did  long,  falsely, 
perniciously,  and  damnably  sow  amono;  them ;  and,  giving  credit  unto  them, 
fell  from  the  right  faith,  and  are  entangled  (the  more  the  pity)  in  the  foul  errors 

(1)  All  these  be  errors  and  heresies,  for  that  they  speak  against  the  pride  of  prelates  and  their 
excessive  dignities. 


558  VOPE    MARTIN  S    BLOODY    BULL 

Henry    of  paganism:'  insomucli,  that  these  arch-heretics,  and  such  as  spring  of  them, 
^-       have  infected  the  catholic  flock  of  Christ  in  divers  climates  of  the  world,  and 

' parts  hordering  upon  the  same,  and  have  caused  them  to  putrefy  in  the  filthy 

dunfThill  of  their  lies.  Wherefore  the  general  synod  of  Constance  was  compelled, 
^^^"-  ^yitl^St.  Auoustine,  to  exclaim  against  so  great  and  ruinous  a  plague  of  faith- 
ful men  and  of  the  sound  and  true  faith  itself,  saying :  '  What  shall  the  sove- 
reio-n  medicine  of  the  church  do?  with  motherly  love  ^  seeking  the  health  of 
her  sheep,  chafing  as  it  were,  amongst  a  company  of  men  frantic,  and  having 
the  disease  of  the  lethargy.  What!  shall  she  desist  and  leave  oft' her  good 
pui-pose  I  No,  not  so.  But  rather  let  her,  if  there  be  no  remedy,  be  sharp  to 
both  these  sorts,  which  are  the  grievous  enemies  of  her  womb.  For  the  phy- 
sician is  sharp  unto  the  man  bestraught  and  raging  in  his  frenzy ;  and  yet  he 
is  a  father  to  his  own  rude  and  unmannerly  son,  in  binding  the  one,  in  beating 
the  other,  by  showing  therein  his  great  love  unto  them  both.'  '  But,  if  they  be 
neo-lio-ent,  and  suffer  them  to  perish,'  saith  St.  Augustine,  'this  mansuetude  is 
rather  to  be  supposed  false  cruelty.' 

And  therefore  the  aforesaid  synod,  to  the  glory  of  Almighty  God,  and  pre- 
servation of  his  catholic  faith,  and  augmenting  of  christian  religion,  and  for  the 
salvation  of  men's  souls,  hath  corporally  rejected  and  cast  forth  of  the  household 
of  God,  the  aforesaid  John  Wickliff,  John  Huss,  and  Jerome ;  who,  amongst 
other  things,  did  believe,  preach,  teach,  and  maintain,  of  the  sacrament  of  the 
altar,  and  other  sacraments  of  the  church,  and  articles  of  the  faith,  contrary  to 
that  the  holy  church  of  Rome  believeth,  holdeth,  preacheth,  and  teachcth  ;  and 
have  presumed  obstinately  to  preach,  teach,  hold,  and  beUeve  many  other 
besides,  to  the  damnation  of  themselves  and  others :  and  the  said  synod  hath 
separated  the  same,  as  obstinate  and  malapert  heretics,  from  the  communion  of 
the  faithful  people ;  and  hath  declared  them  to  be  spiritually  thrown  forth. 
And  many  other  things,  both  wholesome  and  profitable,  hath  the  same  council, 
as  touching  the  premises,  established  and  decreed ;  whereby  they,  who,  by  the 
means  of  those  arch-heretics,  and  by  their  false  doctrine,  have  spiritually 
departed  from  the  Lord's  house,  may,  by  the  canonical  rules,  be  reduced  to  the 
straight  path  of  truth  and  verity. 

And,  moreover,  as  we  to  our  great  grief  do  hear,  not  only  in  the  kingdom  of 
Bohemia,  and  the  dukedom  of  Moravia,  and  in  other  places  above  recited,  but 
also  in  certain  parts  and  provinces  near  adjoining  and  bordering  upon  the  same, 
there  be  many  other  of  the  sectaries  and  followers  of  the  aforesaid  arch-heretics 
and  heretical  opinions  ;  casting  behind  tlieir  backs  as  well  the  fear  of  God,  as 
the  shame  of  the  world,  neither  receiving  fruit  of  conversion  and  repentance  by 
the  miserable  destruction  of  the  aforesaid  John  Huss  and  Jerome ;  but  who,  as 
men  drowned  in  the  dungeon  of  their  sins,-  cease  not  to  blaspheme  the  Lord 
God,  taking  his  name  in  vain  (whose  minds  the  father  of  lies  hath  damnably 
blinded),  and  do  read  and  study  the  aforesaid  books  or  works,  containing  here- 
sies and  errors,  being  lately  by  the  aforesaid  synod  condemned  to  be  burned ; 
who,  also,  to  the  peril  of  themselves  and  many  other  simple  men,  and  against 
the  statutes,  decrees,  and  ordinances  in  the  synod  aforesaid,  and  the  canonical 
sanctions,  do  presume  to  preach  and  teach  the  same,  to  the  great  peril  of  souls, 
and  derogation  of  the  catholic  faith,  and  to  the  slander  of  many  others  besides  : 
We,  therefore,  considering  that  error,  where  it  is  not  resisted,  seemeth  to  be 
allowed  and  liked  :  and  having  a  desire  to  resist  such  evil  and  pernicious  errors, 
and  utterly  root  them   out  from  amongst  the  company  of  faithful  Christians, 
especially  from  the  afore-recited  places  of  Bohemia,  Moravia,  and  other  straits 
and  islands  joining  and  bordering  upon  the  same  (lest  they  should  stretch  out 
and  enlarge  their  limits),  we  will  and  conmiand  your  discretions,  by  our  letters 
apostolical,   the  holy  council  of  Constance   approving  and  allowing  the  same, 
tliat  you  that  ai-e  archbishops,  bishops,  and  others  of  the  clergy,  and  every  one 
of  you  by  himself,  or  by  any  other  or  others,  being  grave  and  tit  persons  to  have 
spiritual  jurisdiction,  do  see  that  all  and  singular  persons,   of  what  dignity, 
office,  pre-eminence,  state,  or  condition  *  soever  they  be,  and  by  what  name 
soever  they  are  known,  who  shall  presmne  otherwise  to  teach,  preach,  or  observe, 

(1)  All  are  pagans,  with  the  pope,  that  like  not  liis  superstitious  and  idolatrous  traditions. 

(2)  Great  diflerence  between  a  loving  mother,  and  the  frantic  whore  of  Babylon. 

\'i)     Wc  fools  thought  their  life  tobe  madness,  and  their  end  without  honour.'  [Wisd.  v.] 

(■1)  '  Kt  OS  ejus  ficus  OS  leonis.' — i.e.  'And  his  mouth  is  like  the  mouth  of  a  lion.'  [Apoc.  xiii.j 


1422. 


AGAINST    THK    PROGRESS    OF    THE    GOSPEL.  559 

touchine;  the  most  high  and  excellent,  the  most  wholesome  and  super-adinirable  Henry 
sacramer.t  of  the  blood  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  or  else  of  the  sacrament  of  ^• 
baptism,  confession  of  sins,  penance  for  sins,  and  extreme  unction;  or  of  any  ~7  TT" 
other  sacraments  of  the  church,  and  the  articles  of  the  faith,  than  that  which  the 
right  holy  and  universal  church  of  Rome  dotli  hold,  teach,  preach,  and  observe ; 
or  that  shall  presume  obstinately,  by  any  ways  or  means,  privily  or  apertly,  to 
hold,  believe,  and  teach  the  articles,  books,  or  doctrine  of  the  aforesaid  arch- 
heretics,  John  WicklifF,  John  Huss,  and  Jerome  of  Prague,  being  by  the  afore- 
said synod  of  Constance  with  their  authors  (as  is  said)  damned  and  con- 
demned; or  dare  presume  publicly  or  privily  to  allow  or  commend  in  any  wise 
the  death  and  end  of  the  said  arch-heretics,  or  of  any  other  their  receivers, 
aiders,  and  favourers,  in  the  favour  or  supportation  of  the  aforesaid  errors,  as 
also  their  believers  and  adherents :  that  then,  as  before,  you  see  and  cause  them 
and  every  of  them  to  be  most  severely  punished ;  and  that  you  judge  and  give 
sentence  upon  them  as  heretics,  and  that  as  arrant  heretics  you  leave  them  to 
the  secular  court  or  power.  Let  the  receivers,  also,  and  favourers  and  defenders 
of  such  most  pestiferous  persons  (notwithstanding  they  neither  believe,  favour, 
nor  have  devotion  towards  their  errors,  but  haply  shall  receive  or  entertain 
such  pestiferous  persons  because  of  carnal  affection  or  friendly  love,i)  besides 
the  punishment  due  unto  them  by  both  laws  (over  and  above  the  same  punish- 
ment), by  competent  judges  be  so  afflicted,  and  for  such  heinous  acts  of  theirs, 
with  such  severe  pain  and  punishment  excruciated,  that  the  same  may  be  to 
others  in  like  case  offending,  an  example  of  terror ;  that  at  lea.st  those  whom 
the  fear  of  God  by  no  means  may  revoke  from  such  evil  doing,  yet  the  severity 
of  this  our  discipline  may  force  and  constrain. 

As  touching  the  third  sort,  who  shall  be  any  manner  of  ways  infected  with 
this  damnable  sect,  and  shall,  after  competent  admonition,  repent  and  amend 
themselves  of  such  eiTors  and  sects  aforesaid,  and  will  return  again  into  the  lap 
and  imity  of  our  holy  mother  the  church,  and  fully  acknowledge  and  confess 
the  catholic  faith,  towards  them  let  the  severity  of  justice,  as  the  quality  of  the 
fact  shall  require,  be  somewhat  tempered  witli  a  taste  of  mercy. 

And  furthermore,  we  will  and  command,  that  by  this  our  authority  aposto- 
lical ye  exhort  and  admonish  all  the  professors  of  the  catholic  faith,  as  emperors, 
kings,  dukes,  prhices,  marquises,  earls,  barons,  kniglits,  and  other  magistrates, 
rectors,  consuls,  proconsuls,  shires,  countries,  and  universities  of  the  kingdoms, 
provinces,  cities,  towns,  castles,  villages,  their  lands  and  other  places,-  and  all 
others  executing  temporal  jurisdiction,  according  to  the  form  and  exigence  of 
the  law,  that  they  expel  out  of  their  kingdoms,  provinces,  cities,  towns,  castles, 
xnllages  and  lands,  and  other  places,  all  and  all  manner  of  such  heretics,  ac- 
cording to  the  effect  and  tenor  of  the  council  of  Lateran,  beginning,  "  Sicut  ait 
Ecclesia,"  &c. :  tiiat  those  who  publicly  and  manifestly,  by  the  evidence  of  their 
deeds,  shall  be  known  to  be  such  as,  hke  sick  and  scabbed  sheep,  infect  the 
Lord's  flock,  they  expel  and  banish,  till  such  time  as  from  us  or  you,  or  other 
ecclesiastical  judges  or  inquisitors,  holding  the  faith  and  communion  of  the  holy 
church  of  Rome,  they  shall  receive  other  order  and  countermand;  and  that 
they  suffer  no  such,  within  their  shires  and  circuits,  to  preach  or  to  keep  either 
house  or  family,  or  yet  to  use  any  handicraft  or  occupations,  or  other  trades 
of  merchandise ;  or  to  solace  themselves  in  any  way,  or  frequent  the  company 
of  christian  men. 

And  furthermore,  if  such  public  and  known  heretics  shall  chance  to  die 
(although  not  so  denounced  by  the  church),  yet  in  this  so  gi-eat  a  crime  let 
him  and  them  want  cln-istian  burial,  and  let  no  offerings  or  oblations  be  made 
for  them,  nor  received.  His  goods  and  substance,  also,  from  the  time  of  his 
death,  according  to  the  canonical  sanctions  being  confiscated,  let  no  such  enjoy 
theiu  to  whom  they  appertain,  till  that  by  the  ecclesiastical  judges,  having 
power  and  authority  in  this  behalf,  sentence  upon  that  his  or  their  crime  ot 
heresy  be  declared,  and  promulgated ;  and  let  such  owners  as  be  found  suspected 
or  noted  with  any  such  suspicion  of  heresy,  before  a  competent  and  ecclesiastical 
judge,    according   to    the    consideration   and  exigence  of  that  suspicion,  and 

(1)  Draconis  lex  sanfcuine  scripta.     The  pope's  religion  liath  left  all  sense  of  humanity. 

(•')  'Ft  vidi  bestiam  et  reges  terrae  et  exercitus  eoruni  pui,'iiantes  cum  illo  qui  sedebat  iii  equo, 
et  exercitu  eius  '  Apoc.  xiii.  '  Et  data  est  illi  potestas  in  onmeni  tribum,  et  populum,  et  luiguarD, 
ct  t'entem :'  i.  e.  '  And  power  is  given  him  over  all  tribes,  and  people,  and  tongues,  and  nations, 
&c.  [.A.poo.  xii;  ] 


560 


VOPE    MARTIN  S    BLOODY    BULL. 


Henry 

r. 

A.D. 

1422. 


Satan 
raisetli 
his 
cliains. 


according  to  the  quality  of  the  person,  by  the  arbitrement  of  such  a  judge,  show 
and  declare  his  proper  and  own  innocency  with  devotion  ;  as  beseemeth  in  that 
'  behalf.  And  if,  in  his  purgation,  being  canonically  intei-dicted,  he  do  fail,  or 
be  not  able  canonically  to  make  his  purgation,  or  refuse  to  take  his  oath  by 
-  damnable  obstinacy  to  make  such  purgation ;  then  let  him  be  condemned  as  a 
heretic.  But  such  as  through  negligence  or  through  slothfulness  shall  omit  to 
show  their  said  innocency,  and  to  make  such  purgation,  let  them  be  excom- 
municated, and  so  long  be  put  out  from  the  company  of  christian  men,  till  that 
they  shall  make  condign  satisfaction;  so  that  if,  by  the  space  of  one  whole 
year,  they  shall  remain  in  such  excommunication,  then  let  them,  as  heretics, 
be  condemned. 

And  further,  if  any  shall  be  found  culpable  in  any  point  of  the  aforesaid 
pestiferous  doctrine  of  the  arch-heretics  afoi-esaid,  or  in  any  article  thereof, 
whether  it  be  by  the  report  of  the  seditious,  or  else  well-disposed ;  let  them  yet 
be  punished  according  to  the  canons,  i  If  only,  through  infamy  and  suspicion 
of  the  aforesaid  articles,  or  any  of  them,  any  man  shall  be  found  suspected, 
and  in  his  purgation  canonical  for  this  thing,  being  interdicted,  shall  fail ;  let 
him  be  accounted  as  a  man  convicted  ;  and,  as  a  convicted  person,  by  the 
canons  let  him  be  punished. 

And  furthermore,  we,  invocating  and  putting  in  execution  the  canon  of  our 
predecessor  of  happy  memory,  pope  Boniface  VIII.,  which  beginneth  thus, 
'Ut  inquisitionis  negotium,'  &c.,  in  exhorting-wise  require,2  and  also  command, 
all  temporal  potentates,  lords,  and  judges  before  recited,  by  whatsoever  dignities, 
offices,  and  names  they  are  known,  that,  as  they  desire  to  be  had,  esteemed,  and 
counted  for  the  faithful  members  and  children  of  the  church,  and  do  rejoice  in 
the  name  of  Christ,  so  in  likewise,  for  defence  of  the  same  faith,  they  will 
obey,  intend,  and  give  their  aid  and  favourable  help  to  you  that  are  archbishops, 
bishops,  and  ecclesiastical  men,  inquisitors  of  all  heretical  pravity,  and  other 
judges  and  ecclesiastical  persons  by  you  hereunto,  as  aforesaid,  appointed  (hold- 
ing the  faith  and  communion  of  our  holy  mother  the  church)  for  the  searching 
out,  taking,  and  safe  custody  of  all  the  aforesaid  heretics,  their  believers,  their 
favourers,  their  receivers,  and  their  defenders,  whensoever  they  shall  be  there- 
unto of  them  required. 

And  that  they  bring,  and  cause  to  be  brought  (all  delay  set  apart),  the  afore- 
said pestiferous  persons  so  seeking  to  destroy  others  with  them,  into  such  safe 
keeping  and  prisons,  as  by  you  the  archbishops,  bishops,  clergy,  and  inqiiisitoi-s 
aforesaid,  are  to  be  appointed ;  or  else  unto  such  other  place  or  places,  as  either 
you  or  they  shall  command  within  any  of  their  dominions,  governments,  and 
rectories,  where  they,  by  catholic  men,  that  is,  by  you  the  archbishops,  bishops, 
the  clergy  and  inquisitors,  or  any  others  that  shall  be  by  you  appointed,  or  are 
already  appointed  by  any  of  you,  may  be  holden  and  kept  in  safe  keeping ; 
putting  them  in  fetters,  shackles,  bolts,  and  manacles  of  iron,  under  most 
straight  custody  for  escaping  away,  till  such  time  as  all  that  business,  which 
belongeth  unto  them,  be,  by  the  judgment  of  the  church,  finished  and  deter- 
mined, and  that  of  such  heresy,  by  a  competent  ecclesiastical  judge  (who  firmly 
holdeth  the  faith  and  communion  of  the  aforesaid  holy  church  of  Rome)  they 
be  condemned. 

The  residue  let  the  aforesaid  temporal  lords,  rectors,  judges,  or  other  their 
officers  and  pursuivants  take  amongst  them,  with  condign  deaths,  without  anj' 
delay  to  punish.  But  fearing  lest,  to  the  prejudice  and  slander  of  the  aforesaid 
catholic  faith  and  religion,  through  the  pretext  of  ignorance,  any  man  herein 
should  be  circumvented,  or  that  any  subtle  and  ci'afty  men  should,  imder  the 
veil  of  frivolous  excuse,  cloak  and  dissemble  in  this  matter ;  and  that  as  touch- 
ing the  convincing  or  apprehending  of  the  aforesaid  heretics,  their  receivers  and 
defenders,  favourers,  believers  and  adherents ;  and  also  of  such  as  are  suspected 
of  heresy,  and  with  such  like  perverse  doctrine  in  any  wise  spotted,  we  might 
give  more  perfect  instruction  :  therefore,  as  well  to  the  kingdom  of  Bohemia,  and 
parts  near  adjoining  to  the  same,  as  all  others  where  this  superstitious  doctrhie 
first  began  to  spread,  we  have  thought  it  good  to  send  the  articles  hereunder 

( 1 )  Note  apain  the  tenderness  of  this  loving  mother,  the  church  of  Rome. 

(2)  '  Et  faciat  omnes  pusillos,  et  magnos,  et  divites,  et  pauperes,  et  servos,  accipere  characterem 
in  manu  sua  dextra.'  i.  e.  '  And  he  shall  make  hoth  little  and  great,  rich  and  poor,  free  and  bond, 
to  take  his  character  in  their  hand,'  &c.  [Apoc.  xiii] 


THE    BLOODY    BUI. T,    AND    IXfelUISITlON    OK    POTE    .MAUTIV.  '!U 

written,  concerning  the  sect  of  those  arch-heretics,  for  the  better  direction  of  the     ii^nnj 
aforesaid  catholic  faitli.  *'• 

Touching  which  articles,  by  virtue  of  holy  obedience,  we  charge  and  com-  "  .^  j^ 
mand  you  and  all  other  archbishops  and  bishops,  all  manner  of  commissaries    i  p., 

and  inquisitors,  that  every  of  them,  within  tlie  diocese  and  limits  of  tlieir  juris "l^^— 

diction,  and  also  in  the  aforesaid  kingdom  and  dukedom,  and  places  near 
adjoining  (although  the  same  places  be  beyond  the  same  their  jurisdiction),  in 
the  favour  of  the  catholic  faith,  do  give  most  diligent  and  vigilant  care  about 
the  extirpation  and  correction  of  those  erroi-s,  arch-heresies,  and  most  pestiferous 
sects  aforesaid ;  and  also  tliat  they  compel  all  defamed  persons  and  suspected  of 
so  pestiferous  a  contagion,  whether  it  be  under  the  penalty  of  the  crime  con- 
fessed, or  of  excommunication,  suspension,  or  interdict,  or  any  otlier  formidable 
pain  canonical  or  legal,  when  and  wheresoever  it  shall  seem  good  unto  tliem, 
and  as  the  quality  of  the  fact  requireth,  by  an  oath  corporally  taken,  either  The  old 
upon  the  Holy  Evangelists,  or  upon  the  rehcs  of  saints,  or  upon  the  image  of '"""'itr 
the  crucifix,  according  to  the  observances  of  certain  places,  and  according  to  popi!,'Ji 
the  interrogatories,  to  make  convenient  answer  to  every  article  therein  written,  oath. 
For  we  intend,  against  all  and  singular  arciibishops,  bishops,  ecclesiastical  per- 
sons, or  inquisitors,  who  shall  show  themselves  negligent  and  remiss  in  the 
extirpation  of  the  leaven  of  this  heretical  pravity,  and  in  purging  their  terri- 
tories, dioceses,  and  places  to  them  appointed,  of  such  evil  and  wicked  men;  to 
proceed  and  cause  to  be  proceeded,  unto  the  deprivation  and  deposition  of  their 
pontifical  dignities ;  and  shall  substitute  such  others  in  their  places,  who  can 
and  may  be  able  to  confound  the  said  heretical  pravity ;  and  shall  proceed  to 
further  pains  against  such  by  tlie  laws  limited.  And  to  others  yet  more 
grievous  (if  need  require)  we  ourselves  will  proceed  and  cause  to  be  proceeded, 
according  as  the  fact  of  the  party,  and  the  filthiness  of  his  crime  committed, 
shall  deserve.  The  tenor  of  those  articles  whereof  we  have  made  mention  in 
this  our  own  writing,  is  in  words  as  follows  : 

The  Articles  of  John  Huss  to  be  inquired  upor>. 

I.  There  is  one  only  universal  church,  which  is  the  university  of  the  predes- 
tinate ;  as  shall  after  be  declared. 

II.  The  universal  church  is  only  one  ;  as  there  is  one  university  of  those  that 
are  predestinate. 

III.  Paul  was  never  a  member  of  the  devil,  although  he  did  certain  acts  like 
unto  the  acts  of  the  church  malignant. 

IV.  The  reprobate  are  not  parts  of  the  church,  for  that  no  part  of  the  same  speakin" 
finally  falleth  from  her,  because  the  charity  of  predestination,  which  bindeth  of  the  in- 
the  same  church  together,  never  faileth.  Jimrch 

V.  The  two  natures,  that  is,  the  divinity  and  the  humanity,  be  one  Christ.       the  article 

VI.  The  reprobate,  although  he  be  some  time  in  grace,  according  to  present  "s  true. 
justice,  yet  is  he  never  a  part  of  the  holy  church  ;  and  the  predestinate  is  ever  a 
member  of  the  church,  although  some  time  he  fall  from  grace  '  adventitia,'  but 

not  from  grace  of  predestination  ;  ever  taking  the  chin-ch  for  the  convocation  of 
the  predestinate,  whether  they  be  in  grace  or  not,  according  to  present  justice. 
And  after  this  sort,  the  church  is  an  article  of  our  belief 

VII.  Peter  is  not,  nor  ever  was,  the  head  of  the  holy  catholic  chmxh. 

VIII.  Priests  living  viciously  do  defile  the  authority  of  priesthood ;  and 
so,  as  unfaithful  children,  do  unfaithfully  believe  of  tlie  seven  sacraments,  of  the 
keys  of  the  church,  of  offices,  of  censures,  of  ceremonies,  of  the  worshipping  of 
relics ;  of  indulgences,  orders,  and  other  holy  things  of  the  church. 

IX.  The  papal  dignity  came  and  grew  from  the  emperor,  and  its  government  Thepapnl 
and  institution  sprang  from  the  emperor's  govermnent.^  fouchc.l. 

X.  No  man  can  reasonably  affirm,  either  of  himself  or  others,  that  he  is  the 
head  of  any  particular  church,  or  that  the  bishop  of  Rome  is  the  head  of  the 
church  of  Rome. 

XI.  A  man  ought  not  to  believe,  that  he  who  is  bishop  of  Rome  is  the  head 
of  every  particular  church,  unless  God  have  predestinated  him. 

XII.  None  is  the  vicar  of  Christ,  or  of  Peter,  unless  he  follow  him  in  manners 

(1)  This  article  seemetli  to  be  wrested  out  of  the  words  of  Jerome  of  Prague. 
VOL.   III.  O  O 


1422. 


"62  THE    BLOODY   RULL    AKD    INQUISITION    OF    POPE    MARTIN. 

Ilnitrij    and  conditions ;  seeing  that  there  is  no  other  following  more  pertinent,  nor 
''        otherwise  apt  to  receive  of  God  this  power  procuratory.     For  unto  the  office  of 
.    .       ji  vicegerent  of  Christ  is  required  the  conformity  of  manners,  and  the  authorit} 
of  the  institutor. 

XIII.  The  pope  is  not  the  manifest  and  tine  successor  of  Peter,  the  prince  of 
the  apostles,  if  he  live  in  manners  contrary  to  Peter ;  and  if  he  hunt  after 
avarice,  then  is  he  the  vicar  of  Judas  Iscariot.  And  likewise  the  cardinals  be 
not  the  true  and  manifest  successors  of  the  college  of  the  other  apostles  of  Christ, 
unless  they  live  according  to  the  manner  of  the  apostles,  keeping  the  command- 
ments and  councils  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

XIV.  The  doctors,  alleging  that,  if  a  man  who  will  not  be  amended  by  the 
ecclesiastical  censures,  is  to  be  delivered  to  the  secular  powers,  do  follow  in  this 
point  the  bishops,  Scribes,  and  Pharisees,  who  delivered  Christ  to  the  secular 
power,  saying,  '  It  is  not  lawful  for  us  to  kill  any  man '  (because  he  would  not 
obey  them  in  all  things) ;  and  that  such  be  greater  homicides  than  Pilate. 

XV.  The  ecclesiastical  obedience  is  such  an  obedience  as  the  priests  of  the 
church  have  found  out,  besides  the  express  authority  of  the  Scripture.  The 
immediate  division  of  human  works,  is,  that  they  be  either  virtuous  or  vicious  : 
and  if  a  man  be  vicious,  and  doth  any  thing,  then  doth  he  it  viciously ;  and  if 
he  be  virtuous,  and  doth  any  thing,  then  doth  he  it  virtuously.  For  like  as  vice, 
which  is  called  a  great  offence  or  mortal  sin,  doth  stain  all  the  doings  of  a 
vicious  man ;  so  virtue  doth  quicken  all  the  doings  of  a  virtuous  man. 

XVI.  A  priest  of  God,  livmg  after  his  law,  and  having  the  knowledge  of  the 
Scripture,  and  a  desire  to  edify  the  people,  ought  to  preach,  notwithstanding 
any  excommunication  pretended  of  the  pope.  And  further,  if  the  pope,  or  any 
other  magistrate,  doth  forbid  a  priest,  so  disposed,  to  preach,  the  priest  ought  not 
to  be  obedient  to  him.  For  every  one  that  taketh  upon  him  the  order  of  priest- 
hood, receiveth  in  charge  the  office  of  a  preacher ;  and  of  that  burden  ought  he 
well  to  discharge  himself,  any  excommunication  against  him  pretended  in  any 
wise  notwithstanding. 

XVII.  By  the  censures  ecclesiastical  (as  of  excommunication,  suspending, 
and  interdict),  the  clergy,  to  their  own  advancement,  cause  the  lay-people  to  aid 
them ;  they  multiply  their  avarice,  they  defend  their  malice,  and  prepare  the 
way  to  Antichrist.  And  it  is  an  evident  sign  that  such  censures  proceed  from 
Antichrist,  which  in  their  process  they  call  '  fulminationes ; '  that  is,  their 
thunderbolts,  wherewith  the  clergy  principally  proceed  against  those  that  declare 
the  wickedn-ess  of  Antichrist ;  who,  so  greatly  for  his  own  commodity,  hath 
abused  them. 

XVIII.  If  the  pope  be  evil,  especially  if  he  be  a  reprobate,  then  is  he,  with 
Judas,  a  very  devil,  a  thief,  and  the  son  of  perdition  ;  and  is  not  the  head  of  the 
holy  church  militant,  nor  any  member  of  the  same. 

XIX.  The  grace  of  predestination  is  the  band  wherewith  the  body  of  the 
church,  and  every  member  of  the  same,  are  indissolubly  joined  to  their  head, 
Christ. 

XX.  The  pope  or  prelate  that  is  evil  and  a  reprobate,  is  a  pastor  in  name, 
and  not  in  deed  ;  yea  he  is  a  thief  and  a  robber  in  very  deed. 

XXI.  The  pope  ought  not  to  be  called  the  most  holy  one,  for  his  office-sake ; 
for  then  ought  a  king  to  be  called  by  his  office  the  most  holy  one :  and  the 
hangman,  with  other  such  officers  also,  were  to  be  called  holy ;  yea,  the  devil 
himself  ought  to  be  called  holy,  forasmuch  as  he  is  God's  officer.^ 

XXII.  If  the  pope  live  contrary  to  Christ,  although  he  climb  up  by  the  right 
and  lawfid  election,  according  to  the  common  custom  of  men ;  yet,  notwith- 
standing, should  he  otherwise  climb  than  by  Christ ;  yea,  though  we  admit  that 
he  should  enter  by  the  election  principally  made  by  God.  For  Judas  Iscariot 
was  lawfully  elect  of  God,  Christ  Jesus,  to  his  bishopric,  and  yet  came  not  he 
the  same  way  he  ought  to  do,  unto  the  sheepfold.' 

XXIII.  The  condemnation  of  forty-five  articles  of  John  Wickliff,  made  by 
the  doctors,  is  um-easonable,  wicked,  and  nought ;  and  the  cause  by  them  alleged 
is  feigned  ;  that  is,  that  none  of  them  are  catholic,  but  every  one  of  them  here- 
tical, en-oneous,  or  slanderous. 

(i)  John  Huss  expoundeth  this  article  with  this  distinction;   '  Non  ratione  merlti,  «ed  ratione 
officii.' 
(2)  John  Huss  declareth  his  mind  touching  this  article  sufficiently  before. 


THE    BLOODY   BULL    AND    1 XQUISITION    OF   POPE    MAKTIX.  .'{jfj 

XXIV,  Not  for  that  the  electors,  or  the  most  part  of  them,  have  consented    iie„ry 
together  with  hvely  voice,  according  to  the  custom  of  men,  upon  the  person  of       V- 

any,  therefore  that  person  is  lawfully  elect ;  or,  therefore,  is  the  true  and  niani- 

fest  successor  and  vicar  of  Peter  the  apostle,  or  of  any  other  the  apostles  in  the    '^"  ^' 
ecclesiastical  office.     Wherefore,  whether  the  electors  have  either  well  or  evil  _11??1. 
made  their  election,  it  behoveth  us  to  beheve  the  same  by  the  works  of  him  that  Election 
is  elected.     For  in  this,  that  every  one  worketh  more  meritoriously  to  the  profit  ™^'^ft*i 
of  the  church,  he  hath  so  much  the  greater  authority  from  God  °      ^ 


successor 


XXV.  There  is  not  so  much  as  one  spark  of  appearance,  that  there  ought  of  Pfcttr, 
to  be  one  head,i  ruling  and  governing  the  cliurch  in  spiritual  causes,  which  {""tion" 
should  always  be  conversant  in  the  church  militant ;  for  Christ,  without  any 
such  monstrous  heads,  by  his  true  disciples  dispersed  through  the  whole  world, 
could,  better  a  great  deal,  rule  his  church. 

XXV^I.  The  apostles  and  faithful  priests  of  God  have  right  worthily,  in  all 
things  necessary  to  salvation,  governed  the  church  before  the  pope's  office  took 
place ;  and  so  might  they  do  again,  by  like  possibiHty,  imtil  Christ  came  to 
judgment,  if  the  pope's  office  should  fail. 

Let  every  one  that  is  suspected  in  the  aforesaid  articles,  or  else  otherwise 
found  with  the  assertion  of  them,  be  examined  in  manner  and  form  as  fol- 
loweth : — 

Imprimis :  Whether  he  knew  John  WickliiF  of  England,  John  Huss  of  Bo-  The  form 
hemia,  and  Jerome  of  Prague,  or  any  of  them,  and  how  he  came  by  the  know-  a'ld  man- 
ledge  of  them?  and  whether  during  the  lives  of  them,  or  any  of  them,  he  had  pope's "lu'l 
either  been  conversant  v;ath  them,  or  found  any  friendship  at  their  hands?  quisition. 

II.  Item,  Whether  he,  knowing  them,  or  any  of  them,  to  be  excommunicated, 
did  willingly  participate  with  them ;  esteeming  and  affirming  the  same  their 
participation  to  be  no  sin  ? 

III.  Item,  Whether  after  their  deaths,  he  ever  prayed  for  them,  or  aay  of  Heresy  to 
them,  openly  or  privily,  doing  any  work  of  mercy  for  them,   affirming  them  ^vickm 
either  saints,  or  else  to  be  saved?  or  Huss. 

IV.  Item,  Whether  he  thought  them,  or  any  of  them,  to  be  saints,  or  whether 
he  ever  spake  such  words,  and  whether  he  did  ever  exhibit  any  worship  unto 
them  as  unto  saints  ? 

V.  Item,  Whether  he  believe,  hold  and  affirm,  that  every  general  council, 
as  also  the  council  of  Constance,  doth  represent  the  universal  church  ? 

VI.  Item,  Whether  he  do  believe,  that  that  which  the  holy  coimcil  of  Con-  Heresy 
stance,  representing  the  universal  chiu-ch,  hath  and  doth  allow,  in  favour  of  the  1°' '°  ^^- 
faith  and  salvation  of  souls,  is  to  be   approved  and  allowed  by  all  the  faithful  council  of 
Christians ;  and  that  whatsoever  the  same  council  hath  condemned,  and  doth  Con- 
condemn,  to  be  contrary  both  to  the  faith  and  to  all  good  men,  is  to  be  believed,  ^^3^"'^^- 
holden,  and  affirmed,  for  condemned,  or  not  ? 

VII.  Item,  Whether  he  believe  that  the  condemnations  of  John  Huss,  John 
Wickliff,  and  Jerome  of  Prague,  made  as  well  upon  their  persons,  as  their 
books  and  doctrine,  by  the  holy  general  council  of  Constance,  be  rightly  and 
justly  made,  and,  of  every  good  catholic  man,  are  so  to  be  holden  and  affirmed, 
or  not? 

VIII.  Item,  Vvliether  he  believe,  hold,  and  affirm,  that  John  Wickliff  of 
England,  John  Huss  of  Bohemia,  and  Jei'ome  of  Prague,  were  heretics  or  not, 
and  for  heretics  to  be  nominated  and  preached  ?  yea  or  not :  and  whether  their 
books  and  doctrines  were,  and  be,  pei'verse  or  not ;  for  which,  together  with 
their  pertinacy,  they  were  condemned  by  the  holy  sacred  council  of  Constance 
for  heretics  ? 

IX.  Item,  Whether  he  have  in  his  custody  any  treatises,  small  works,  epi- 
Btles,  or  other  writings  in  what  language  or  tongue  soever,  set  forth  and  trans- 
lated by  any  of  these  heretics,  John  Wickliff,  John  Huss,  and  Jerome,  or  any 
other  of  their  false  disciples  and  followers  ?  that  he  may  deliver  them  to  the 
ordinaries  of  that  place,  or  his  commissary,  or  to  the  inquisitors  upon  his  oath. 
And  if  he  say  that  he  hath  no  such  writing  about  him,  but  that  they  are  in 
some  other  place,  that  then  you  swear  him  to  bring  tlie  same  before  his  ordi- 
narj'  or  other  aforenamed,  within  a  certain  time  to  him  prefixed. 

(1)  One  head  of  the  universal  church,  beside  Christ,  hath  no  foundation  in  all  Scripture. 

o  0  2 


SGi  THE    BLOODY    BULL    AND    INCiUlSITION    01'    POPE    MAKTIX. 

Henry  X.  Item,  Whether  he  know  any  that  have  the  treatises,  works,  epistles,  or 
^-  any  other  writings  of  the  aforesaid  John  Wickliif,  John  Huss,  and  Jerome,  in 
whatsoever  tongue  they  are  made  or  translated,  and  that  he  detect  and  manifest 
the  same,  for  the  purgation  of  their  faith  and  execution  of  justice. 

^^^^'  XI.  Item,  Especially  let  the  learned  be  examined,  whether  he  believe  that 
the  sentence  of  the  holy  council  of  Constance  upon  the  forty-five  articles  of  John 
VVicklittJ  aud  the  thirty  articles  of  John  Huss,  be  not  catholic,  which  saith  that 
some  of  them  are  notorious  and  heretical,  some  erroneous,  some  blasphemous, 
some  slanderous,  some  rash  and  seditious,  some  offensive  to  godly  ears  ? 

XII.  Item,  Whether  he  believe  and  affirm  that  in  no  case  it  is  lawful  for  a 
man  to  swear? 

XIII.  Item,  Whether  he  believe,  that  at  the  commandment  of  a  judge,  or 
any  other,  it  is  lawful  to  take  an  oath  to  tell  the  truth  in  any  convenient  cause, 
although  it  be  but  purging  of  an  infamy,  or  not? 

XIV.  Item,  Whether  he  believe  that  perjury  wittingly  committed,  upon  what 
cause  soever,  whether  it  be  for  the  safeguard  of  his  own  life,  or  of  any  other  man's 
life,  yea  although  it  be  in  the  cause  and  defence  of  the  faith,  be  a  sin  or  not? 

XV.  Item,  Whether  a  man  contemning  purposely  the  rites  of  the  church, 
and  the  ceremonies  of  exorcism,  of  catechism,  and  the  consecration  of  the 
water  of  baptism,  be  in  deadly  sin  or  not  ? 

XVI.  Item,  Whether  he  believe,  that  after  the  consecration  of  the  priest  in 
the  sacrament  of  the  altar,  under  the  figm-e  of  bread  and  wine,  be  no  material 
bread  and  wine  ;  but  in  all  points  the  same  very  Christ  who  was  crucified 
upon  the  cross,  and  sitteth  upon  the  right  hand  of  the  Father? 

XVII.  Item,  Whether  he  believe,  that  after  the  consecration  made  by  the 
priest,  under  the  only  form  of  bread,  and  besides  the  form  of  wine,  be  the  very 
flesh  of  Christ  and  his  blood,  his  soul  and  his  deity,  and  so  whole  Christ  as  he 
is  ?  and  in  like  wise,  whether,  under  the  form  of  wine,  without  the  form  of  bread, 
be  the  very  flesh  of  Christ  and  his  very  blood,  his  soul  and  deity,  and  so  whole 
Christ,  and  the  same  body  absolutely  under  every  one  of  those  kinds  singvilarly  ? 

Heresy  to      XVIII.  Item,  Whether  he  do  believe,  that  the  custom  of  houseling  of  the 

P'"*^!^"^    lay-people  under  the  form  of  bread  only,  observed  of  the  universal  church,  and 

kinds.       allowed  by  the  only  council  of  Constance,  be  to  be  used  ;  and  not,  without  the 

authority  of  the  church,  at  men's  pleasures,  to  be  altered?  and  whether  they 

that  obstinately  affirm  the  contraiy  to  this,  are  to  be  punished  as  heretics,  or  not  ? 

XIX.  Item,  Whether  he  believe  that  those  who  contemn  the  receiving  of 
the  sacraments  of  confirmation,  or  extreme  unction,  or  the  solemnization  of 
matrimony,  commit  deadly  sin  or  not  ? 

XX.  Item,  Whether  he  believe  that  a  christian  man,  over  and  besides  the 
contrition  of  heart,  being  licensed  of  a  convenient  priest,  is  bound  to  confess 
himself  only  to  a  priest,  and  not  to  any  lay-man,  be  he  ever  so  devout  or  good, 
upon  the  necessity  of  salvation  ? 

XXI.  Item,  Whether  he  believe,  that  in  the  cases  before  put,  a  priest  may 
absolve  a  sinner  confessing  himself  and  being  contrite,  from  all  sins,  and  enjoin 
him  penance  for  the  same  ? 

XXII.  Item,  Whether  he  believe,  that  an  evil  priest,  with  due  manner  and 
form,  and  with  the  intentionof  doing,  doth  verily  consecrate,  doth  verily  absolve, 
doth  verily  baptize,  and  doth  verily  dispose  all  other  sacraments  even  as  the 
church  doth  ? 

XXIII.  Item,  Whether  he  believe  that  St.  Peter  was  the  vicar  of  Christ, 
having  power  to  bind  and  to  loose  upon  the  earth  ? 

XXIV.  Item,  Whether  he  believe  that  the  pope,  being  canonically  elect 
(who  for  the  time  shall  be),  by  that  name  expi-essly  be  the  successor  of  Peter  or 
not,  having  supreme  authority  in  the  church  of  God  ? 

XXV.  Item,  Whether  he  believe  that  the  authority  or  jurisdiction  of  the 
pope,  an  archbishop,  or  a  bishop,  in  binding  or  loosing,  be  more  than  the 
authority  of  a  simple  priest  or  not,  although  he  have  charge  of  souls  ? 

Heresy  to  XXVI.  Item,  Whether  he  believe  that  the  pope  may,  upon  a  just  and  good 
pope's  in-  cause,  give  indulgences  and  remission  of  sins  to  all  christian  men,  being  verily 
dul-  contrite  and  confessed,  especially  to  those  that  go  on  pilgrimage  to  holy  places 

gences.      and  do  good  deeds  ? 

XXVII.  Item,  Whether  he  believe,  that  by  such  grant  the  pilgrims  that  visit 
those  churches,  and  give  them  any  thing,  may  obtain  remission  of  sins  or  not  1 


THE    liLOODV    nULI,    AND    INQUISITION'    OV    PO!'K    MARTIX.  565 

XXVIII.  Item,  Whetlier  he  believe  that  all  bishops  may  grant  unto  their  Heury 
subjects,  according  as  the  holy  canons  do  limit,  such  indulgences,  or  not?  f- 

XXIX.  Item,  Whether  he  believe  and  affirm,  that  it  is  lawful  for  faithfid 
Christians  to  worship  images  and  the  relics  of  saints,  or  not  ? 

XXX.  Item,  Whether  he  believe  that  those  religions,  which  the  church  hath 
allowed,  were  lawfully  and  reasonably  brought  in  by  the  holy  fathers,  or  not  ?     Heresy 

XXXI.  Item,  Whether  he  believe  that  the  pope,  or  any  other  prelate  for  ^°^ '° 
the  time  being,  or  their  vicars,  may  excommunicate  their  subject  ecclesiastical  images!" 
or  secular  for  disobedience  or  contumacy ;  so  that  such  a  one  is  to  be  holden 

and  taken  for  excommunicated,  or  not? 

XXXII.  Item,  Whether  he  believe,  that  for  the  disobedience  and  contumacy 
of  persons  excommunicated,  increasing,  the  prelates,  or  their  vicars,  in  spiritual 
things,  have  power  to  aggravate  and  to  re-aggravate,  to  put  upon  men  the  inter- 
dict, and  to  call  for  the  secular  arm  ;  and  that  the  same  secular  arm  or  power 
ought  to  be  obedient  to  the  censures,  by  their  inferiors  called  for  ? 

XXXIII.  Item,  Whether  he  believe  that  the  pope  and  other  prelates,  or  else 
their  vicars,  have  power  in  spiritual  things  to  excommunicate  priests  and  lay- 
men, that  are  stubborn  and  disobedient,  from  their  office,  benefice,  or  entrance 
into  the  church,  and  from  the  administration  of  the  sacraments  of  the  church ; 
also  to  suspend  them? 

XXXIV.  Item,  Whether  he  believe  that  it  is  lawful  for  ecclesiastical  persons,  These 
without  committing  sin,  to  have  any  possessions  and  temporal  goods  ?  and  whe-  pop^^  "ill 
ther  he  believe  that  it  is  not  lawful  for  lay-men  to  take  away  the  same  from  them  J'o'se"'^'^  ^° 
by  their  authority ;  but  rather  that  such  takers  away  of,  and  encroachers  upon,  nothing, 
ecclesiastical  goods,  are  to  be  pimished  as  committers  of  sacrilege,  yea,  althougli 

such  ecclesiastical  persons  live  naughtily,  that  have  such  goods  ? 

XXXV.  Item,  Whether  any  such  taking-away  from,  or  encroaching  upon,  Wealthy 
any  priest  rashly  or  violently  made,  although  the  priest  be  an  evil  liver,  be  sacri-  "icked- 
lege,  ornot?  _  maintain- 

XXXVI.  Item,  Whether  he  believe  that  it  is  lawful  for  lay-men,  of  what  sex  ed. 
soever,  that  is,  men  and  women,  to  preach  the  word  of  God,  or  not  ? 

XXXVII.  Item,  Whether  he  believe  that  it  is  lawful  to  all  priests  freely  to 
preach  the  word  of  God  wheresoever,  whensoever,  and  to  whomsoever  it  shall 
please  them,  although  they  be  not  sent  at  all  ? ' 

XXXVIII.  Item,  Whether  he  believe  that  all  mortal  sins,  and  especially  such 
as  be  manifest  and  public,  are  to  be  corrected  and  to  be  extirpated,  or  not  ? 

Furthermore,  we  will,  command,  and  decree,  that  if  any,  by  secret  informa- 
tion, by  you  or  any  other  to  be  received,  shall  be  found  either  infamed  or  sus- 
pected of  any  kind  of  the  pestiferous  sect,  heresy,  and  doctrine  of  the  most 
pestilent  men,  John  Wickliff,  John  Huss,  and  Jerome  of  Prague,  the  arch- 
heretics  aforesaid,  or  of  favouring,  receiving,  or  defending  the  aforesaid  damned 
men  while  they  lived  on  the  earth,  their  false  followers  and  disciples,  or  any  that 
believeth  their  errors,  or  any  that  after  their  death  prayeth  for  them  or  any  of 
them,  or  that  nominateth  them  to  be  amongst  the  number  of  cathohc  men,  or 
that  defendeth  them  to  be  placed  amongst  the  number  of  the  saints,  either  by 
their  preaching,  worshipping,  or  other  ways,  wherein  they  deserve  to  be  sus- 
pected ;  that  then  they,  by  you  or  some  of  you,  may  be  cited  personally  to 
appear  before  you  or  some  of  you,  without  either  proctor  or  doctor  to  answer  for 
them,  an  oath  being  openly  taken  by  them  as  is  aforesaid,  to  speak  the  plain  and 
mere  verity  of  the  articles  above  written,  and  every  of  them,  or  other  opportune, 
as  case  and  circimistance  shall  require,  according  to  your  discretion,  as  you  or 
any  of  you  shall  see  expedient  to  proceed  against  them,  or  any  of  them,  accord- 
ing to  these  presents,  or  otherwise  canonically,  as  you  shall  think  good. 

Also  that  you  do  publish  solemnly,  and  cause  to  be  published  these  present 
letters,  omitting  the  articles  and  interrogatories  herein  contained,  in  the  cities 
and  other  places  of  your  diocese,  where  conveniently  you  may,  under  our  autho- 
rity ;  and  there  to  denounce,  and  cause  to  be  denounced,  all  and  singular  such 
heretics,  with  their  abettors  and  favourers  of  their  heresies  and  errors ;  of  what 
sex  or  kind  soever,  that  do  hold  and  defend  the  said  errors,  or  do  participate 
any  manner  of  way  with  heretics,  privily  or  apertly  ;  of  what  state,  dignity,  or 

(1)  Tiie  pope  neither  preacheth  himself,  nor  yet  will  suffer  other  good  priests  to  preach.. 


THE    BLOODY    BULL    AND    INQUISITION  OF    PCPE    MARTIN. 


Henry 
V. 

A.D. 

1422. 

Papa 
spiral 
iiiinas  et 
casdes. 


Pope 
JlartinV, 
contrary 
to  jiope 
15011  ij'ace 
VIII. 


condition  soever  he  or  tlicy  be,  patriarch,  archbishop,  king,  queen,  duke,  or  of 
what  other  dignity,  either  ecclesiastical  or  secular,  he  be ;  also  with  their  advo- 
■  cates  and  procurators  whosoever,  that  are  believers,  followers,  favourers,  de- 
fenders, or  receivers  of  such  heretics,  or  suspected  to  be  believers,  followers, 
.  fautors,  defenders,  or  receivers  of  them,  to  be  excommunicated  every  Sunday 
and  festival  day,  in  the  presence  of  the  people. 

Furthermore,  that  you  diligently  cause  to  be  inquired,  by  the  said  our  autho- 
rity, upon  all  and  singular  such  persons,  both  men  and  women,  that  maintain, 
approve,  defend,  and  teach  such  errors,  or  that  be  favourers,  receivers,  and  de- 
fenders of  them,  whether  exempt  or  not  exempt ;  of  what  dignity,  state,  pre- 
eminence, degree,  order,  or  condition  soever.  And  that  such  as  you  shall  find 
in  the  said  your  inquisition,  either  by  their  own  confession,  or  by  any  other 
mean  to  be  defamed,  or  otherwise  infected  Vvith  the  spot  of  such  heresy  or  error, 
you,  through  the  sentence  of  excommunication,  suspension,  interdict,  and  priva- 
tion of  their  dignities,  parsonages,  offices,  or  other  benefices  of  the  church,  and 
fees  which  they  hold  of  any  church,  monasteiy,  and  other  ecclesiastical  places ; 
also  of  honours  and  secular  dignities  and  degrees  of  sciences,  or  other  faculties  ; 
as  also  by  other  pains  and  censures  of  the  chuixh,  or  by  ways  and  means  what- 
sover  else  shall  seem  to  you  expedient,  by  taking  and  imprisoning  their  bodies, 
and  other  coi-poral  punishments  wherewith  heretics  are  punished,  or  are  wont 
and  are  commanded  by  canonical  sanctions  to  be  used  ;  and,  if  they  be  clerks, 
that  you  by  degradation,  do  correct  and  punish,  and  cause  them  to  be  corrected 
and  ])unished,  with  all  diligence. 

Furthermore,  that  you  do  rise  up  stoutly  and  courageously  against  such  here- 
tics, i  and  the  goods  as  well  of  them,  as  of  the  lay-men,  according  to  the  canonical 
sanction  made  against  heretics  and  their  followers,  under  which  we  will  and 
command  them  and  their  partakers  to  be  subject.  And  also  such  persons  as  shall 
be  infamed  of  the  heresies  or  errors  aforesaid,  or  any  of  the  premises,  shall  be 
bound  to  purge  themselves  at  your  arbitrement :  but  the  others,  v/ho,  either  by 
witnesses,  or  by  their  own  confessions,  or  other  allegations  or  probations,  shall 
be  convicted  of  the  aforesaid  heresies  or  articles,  or  of  any  the  premises,  they 
shall  be  compelled  to  revoke  and  abjure  publicly  and  solemnly  the  said  articles 
and  errors,  and  to  suffer  condign  penance  and  punishment,  yea  even  to  perpetual 
imprisonment,  if  need  be,  for  the  same. 

And,  to  the  intent  that  they  shall  not  nourish  any  kind  of  heresies  hereafter, 
either  in  word,  deed,  or  gesture,  or  shall  induce  others  either  in  word  or  deed, 
privily  or  apertly,  directly  or  indirectly,  to  believe  the  same,  they  shall  be  forced 
to  put  in  sufficient  surety :  who,  if  it  so  chance  that  they  will  not  publicly  and 
solemnly  renounce  and  abjure  their  articles  and  errors,  and  take  at  yoiu*  hands 
condign  penance,  though  it  be  to  perpetual  or  temporal  punishment  according  to 
your  discretion,  neither  will  be  contented  to  put  in  sufficient  surety  that  they  will 
not  hereafter  hold  ornomish  these  errors  and  heresies,  neither  will  induce  others 
by  word  or  deed,  privily  or  apertly,  directly  or  indirectly,  or  by  any  other  manner 
of  colour  to  believe  the  same,  that  then  you  shall  proceed  against  them,  accord- 
ing to  the  quality  of  their  errors  and  demerits ;  yea,  and  if  you  see  it  so  expe- 
dient, as  against  heretics,  and  as  infected  with  heresy,  by  our  authority,  according 
to  the  canonical  sanctions  summarily,  and  simply  and  plainly,  '  sine  strepitu  et 
figura  judicii,'  and  of  office  (all  appellation  or  appellations  whatsoever  ceasing)  ; 
and  that  you  punish  the  same,  according  to  the  sanctions  and  traditions  canonical, 
yea,  if  need  be,  in  leaving  and  committing  them  to  the  secidar  power ;  and 
against  such  as  be  superiors  or  learned  doctors,  laying  the  censures  of  ecclesias- 
tical excommunication,  all  appellation  set  aside  :  also  invocating,  if  need  shall 
require,  aid  of  the  secular  arm.  The  constitution  as  well  of  our  predecessor 
pope  Boniface  VIII.  of  blessed  memory,  wherein  is  decreed  that  no  man  without 
his  city  or  diocese  (except  in  certain  cases),  or  in  places  being  one  day's  journey 
distant  from  thence  where  he  inhabiteth,  shall  be  called  into  judgment;  and  that 
no  man  do  presume  to  depute  judges  from  the  see  apostolic,  without  the  city  and 
diocese,  where  they  are  deputed  to  proceed  against  any ;  or  do  presume  to  com- 
mit their  authority  to  any  other  person  or  persons,  or  to  fetch  and  remove  any 
man  beyond  one  day's  journey  from  out  his  diocese  where  he  dwelleth,  or  at 
most  two  days'  journey,  if  it  be  in  a  general  council ;  as  also  all  other  constitu- 
tions of  any  bishop  cf  Rome,  touching  as  well  judges  delegate,  as  persons  not 
(1)  See  here  the  dragon  casting  out  whole  flooi!?,  to  swallow  up  the  saints 


A    FRUITFUL    KXHOllTATION    OF    THE    BOHEMIANS.  567 

to  be  called  to  judgment  beyond  a  certain  number  ;  or  else  any  other  edict,  in-    Hfuri/ 
dulgence,  privilege,  or  exemption  general  or  special,  granted  from  the  apostolic       ^• 
see,  for  any  person  or  persons  not  to  be  interdicted,  suspended,  or  excommuni-     .   y. 
cated,  or  cited  up  to  judgment  without  the  compass  of  certain  limits  ;  or  else     i.<9.>* 
whatsover  thing  otherwise  may  hinder,  stop,  or  impeach  your  jurisdiction,  power,  Inl- 
and free  proceeding  herein  by  any  means  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding.           Pope 

Given  at  Constance,  the  first  year  of  our  popedom,  uiiaocth 

the  acts 

This  bloody  and  abominable  commission  of  pope  Martin,  whicli  I  of  au^'  *" 
have  copied  out  of  a  certain  old  monument  remaining  in  the  hands  of  p'j?,'^^ 
Master  Hackluyt,  student  in  the  Temple,  seemeth  to  be  directed  and 
given  out  for  the  public  destruction  of  all  faithful  christian  men, 
about  the  latter  end  and  breaking  up  of  the  council  of  Constance, 
A.  D.  1418  ;  by  which  the  prudent  reader  hath  this  to  note  and  con-  >:'tj  iiow 
sider :  what  labour,  what  policy,  what  counsel,  and  what  laws  have  ,".;„.ist 
been  set,  what  ways  have  been  taken,  what  severity  hath  been  showed,  amu|',„,,, 
how  men's  power,  wit,  and  the  authority  of  the  whole  world,  have  a^'iimst 
conspired  together  from  time  to  time,  continually,  by  all  manner  of 
means,  to  subvert  and  supplant  the  word  and  way  of  the  Lord ;  and 
yet,  notwithstanding,  man  hath  not  prevailed,  but  all  his  force  and 
devised  policies  have  been  overthrown,  dispatched,  and,  with  the  coun- 
sel of  Ahithophel  and  Ammon,  have  been  brought  to  nought ;  and, 
contrary  to  the  fury  of  the  world,  the  gospel  of  Christ  hath  still  M|J^"''*^ 
increased.     Neither  yet  for  all  this  will  the  pope  cease  to  spurn  and  counsel 
rebel  still  against  the  kingdom  of  Christ  and  his  gospel,  against  which  a^ainsr"^ 
neither  he,  nor  yet  the  gates  of  hell,  shall  ever  prevail.     The  Lord  of  ciiribt. 
hosts  be  merciful  to  his  poor  persecuted  flock  !     Amen, 

Against  this  pestilent  bull  and  inquisition  of  pope  Martin,  the 
great  Antichrist,  I  thought  good  here  to  adjoin  and  annex  another 
contrary  writing  of  the  Bohemians,  bearing  the  name  and  subscrip- 
tion of  Procopius,  Conrad,  and  other  captains  of  the  Bohemians  ; 
which  seemeth,  not  long  after  the  death  of  Zisca,  to  be  written 
against  the  pestiferous  see  of  Rome  ;  the  tenor  whereof  here  fol- 
loweth. 

A  Fruitful  and  Christian  Exhortation  of  the  Bohemians,  to  Kings 
and  Princes,  to  stir  them  up  to  the  zeal  of  the  Gospel. 

May  the  Almighty  God  the  Father,  by  his  well-beloved  Son  Jesus  Christ,  by 
his  Holy  Spirit,  open  the  understanding  both  of  you  and  of  all  Christians,  and 
enlighten  your  hearts  with  the  light  of  his  doctrine  of  righteousness,  and  make 
you  to  continue  therein  surely  established  to  the  end !  This  we  desire  of  you 
for  your  salvation,  all  ye  honourable,  wise,  and  honest  noble  men  ;  and  all  the 
commonalty,  yea  rich  and  poor,  hear  and  consider  with  diligent  heed  the  words 
of  this  present  letter,  which  is  sent  unto  you  from  the  country  of  the  Bohe- 
mians, 

It  is  manifest  and  well  known  to  you  and  many  other  cities,  kings,  princes,  The  pope 
and  lords,  that  now  a  certain  number  of  years  there  hath  been  great  discord  ^■"^Jy,y 
betwixt  us  and  you ;  and  there  have  been  some  who  have  moved  you  by  letters,  their  let- 
and  provoked  you  to  make  war  against  us,  and  to  destroy  us.     And,  as  well  on  ^^^'^^^^^^^^ 
your  part  as  on  ours,  many  men,  as  well  noble  as  unnoble,  have  foolishly  lost  j^  g^j^^ 
tbeir  lives.    Yet  never  hitherto  have  ye  in  any  part  understood  our  faith  by  om 
own  confession,  neither  whether  we  be  able  to  prove  the  same  out  of  the  Scrip- 
tures, yea  or  no  ;  and  yet,  in  the  mean  time,  kings,  princes,  lords,  and  cities,  have 
sustained  great  damage.     And  hereof  we  greatly  marvel  that  you  do  so  much 
trust  and  believe  the  pope  and  his  priests,  who  give  you  drink  full  ot  poison, 
and  such  comfort  as  no  man  can  understand,  in  that  they  say  that  they  will 


oCS  A    FRUITFUL    FXIIOUTATION    OF    THE    nOIIlCMl AXS, 

Henry    givo  you  forgiveness  of  all  your  sins,i  and  great  grace  and  pardon,  to  this  end, 

''•        that  you  should  war  upon  us  and  destroy  us  :   whereas  their  graces  and  pardons 

J.    j-j     are  none  other  than  great  lies,  and  a  great  seducing  of  the  body  and  soul  of  all 

1400     them  that  believe  them,  and  put  their  trust  in  them.     This  we  woidd  prove 

. ^  unto  them,  and  overcome  them  by  the  holy  Scripture ;  and  we  would  suffer, 

The  pnpe  that  whosoever  is  desirous  to  hear,  the  same  should  hear  it.  For  the  pope  and  all 
the"vofld  '^^^  priests  herein  deal  with  you,  as  the  devil  wovdd  have  done  with  our  Lord 
with  vain  Jesus  Christ,  of  whom  Luke  writeth  [chap,  iv.].  That  he  brought  him  upon  a 

prninises   \i\cr\^  \{\\\   and  showed  unto  him.  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eve,  all  the  kingdoms 

of  thill "^'s        c  '  •  o       ^  -     '^         ^  o 

•wiiirh  he  that  are  in  the  compass  of  the  earth,  and  said  unto  him,  '  1  will  give  thee,'  &:c. 

cannot      So  the  devil  deceiveth  the  pope  and  all  the  priests,  with  the  riches  of  the  woi'ld, 

^'^^"         and  worldly  power;  and  they  think  they  can  give  grace  and  pardon  when  they 

will ;  and  they  themselves  shall  never  find  favour  before  Almighty  God,  except 

they  repent  and  make  amends,  because  of  their  great  deceiving  of  Christendom. 

And  how  can  they  give  that  to  others,  which  they  themselves  have  not  ?     So 

riie  devil  did  the  devil,  who  was  rich  in  promising,  and  poor  in  giving.     And  hke  as  the 

111(1  the     Jevil  is  not  ashamed  to  tell  a  lie,  so  all  they  are  not  ashamed  to  speak  that 

inproinis'  which  shall  never  be  found  true,  nor  be  proved  by  the  holy  Scriptures ;  because 

ing,  and    for  no  cause  they  stir  up  kings,  princes,  lords,  and  cities,  to  make  war  against 

giving"      "^'  ^^^  ^'^  ^^'^  ^"'^  *-^^^*'  ^''^  christian  faith  should  thereby  be  defended,  but 

because  they  fear  that  their  secret  vices  and  heresies  shall   be  disclosed  and 

made  manifest.     For  if  they  had  a  true  cause,  and  a  godly  love  to  the  christian 

faith,  they  would  then  take  the  books  of  the  holy  Scriptin-e,  and  would  come 

unto  us,  and  overcome  us  with  the  weapons  of  God's  word :  and  that  is  oin- 

chief  desire.    For  so  did  the  apostles  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  came  to  the 

Pagans  and  Jews,  and  brought  them  from  their  infielity  to  the  true  faith  of  our 

Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  and  this  they  did  in  the  spirit  of  meekness,  as  the  apostle 

Paul  writeth  in  Galatians  vi.  '  Brethren,  if  any  man  be  grieved,'  Src.    So  ought 

they  also  to  do,  if  they  perceived  that  they  were  just  and  we  unjust.     And  if  we 

would  not  abide  instruction,  then  they  might  take  to  them  kings,  princes,  lords, 

and  imperial  cities,  and  resist  us  according  to  the  commandments  of  the  holy 

Falsepre-  Scripture.     But  this  is  the  subtle  defence  of  all  the  bishops  and  priests,  that 

^he'i^a-"    '^^^y  ^^y  *^^''^  Master  Huss  and  Jerome,  who  were  burnt  at  Constance,  were 

lists.         overcome  by  the  holy  father  the  pope,  and  by  the  whole  council.     For  ye  must 

Huss  and  understand  that  they  were  not  overcome  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  but  unjustly,  with 

bywnin'g-  Wrongful  violence,  which  Ciod  may  yet  hereafter  grievously  punish  in  all  them 

ul  vid-     that  gave  their  counsel  and  aid  thereto.     And  tlicy  say,  it  ought  not  to  be 

ence.put  suffered,  that  we  should  be  heard  in  confessing  our  faith. 2     How  may  that  be 

.0  death.  '         ,        ,     ,      r.      •  •  ^-.i     •        1  1     1        i      -i  •     •  • 

proved  by  the  holy  Scripture,  since  Christ  heard  the  de\^l,  as  it  is  written  in 

Matt.  iv.  ?  and  they  are  not  better  than  Christ,  nor  we  worse  than  the  devil. 
If  they  be  just  and  have  the  truth  with  them  (as  they  say  they  have),  and  we 
be  unrighteous,  Vv'hy  do  they  fear,  since  the  truth  ought  not  be  afraid  of 
falsehood,  as  Esdras  writeth  in  his  second  book,  chap,  iii.  Zerubabel  declared 
that  truth  is  of  all  things  the  most  mighty,  and  overcometh  all  things.  For 
Christ  is  the  tnith  [John  xiv.],  'I  am  the  way,  the  truth,'  &c. ;  and  the  devil 
is  the  father  of  lies,  [John  viii.] ;  '  He  is  a  liar  from  the  beginning,  and  never 
abode  in  the  truth,  and  there  is  no  truth  in  him.'  Therefore,  if  the  pope  and 
his  priests  have  the  truth,  let  them  overcome  us  with  the  word  of  God.  But  if 
they  have  lies,  then  they  cannot  long  abide  in  all  their  presumption.  Where- 
Ajust  fore,  we  exhort  and  beseech  all  the  imperial  cities,  all  kings,  princes,  noble 
request  of  ^^^^\  ^ich  and  poor,  for  God's  sake  and  for  his  righteousness,  that  one  of  them 
the  liohe-  Write  hereof  to  another,  and  that  there  may  be  some  means  made,  how  we  may 
mians.  commune  with  you  safely  and  friendly,  at  some  such  place  as  shall  be  fit  both 
for  you  and  us ;  and  bring  with  you  your  bishops  and  teachers,  and  let  them 
and  our  teachers  fight  together  with  the  word  of  God,  and  let  us  hear  them, 
and  let  not  the  one  overcome  the  other  by  violence  or  false  subtlety,  but  only 
by  the  word  of  God.  And  if  your  bishops  and  teachers  have  better  proofs  of 
their  faith  out  of  tnc  holy  Scripture,  than  we,  and  our  faith  be  found  untrue, 
we  will  receive  penance  and  satisfaction,  according  to  the  gospel ;  but  if  your 
bishops  and  teachers  be  overcome  of  ours  by  the  holy  Scripture,  then  do  ye 
repent  and  hearken  to  us,  and  hold  with  us.     And  if  your  bishops  and  teachers 

(\)  Fair  words  do  make  fools  fain. 

'2)  Christ  heaiil  the  devil,  but  the  pope  wiil  not  hear  men  coiifoss  their  faith. 


ADDRESSED    TO    KINGS    AND    PRINCES.  5G9 

will  cease  from  their  spiritual  pride,  and  repent  and  make  satisfaction,  then  we  iiennj 
will  help  you  according  to  our  power,  and  will  compel  them,  either  to  join  with        ^• 
us,  or  else  we  will  expel  them  out  of  Christendom.     And  if  your  bishops  and 

teachers  will  say,  that  it  is  not  lawful  for  la3-men  to  hear  such  reasoning,  or  to  ^IZ.' 

be  present  at  it ;  that  may  you  understand  to  tend  to  no  other  end,  but  that  they  ^^~^- 


fear  they  should  be  overcome  and  put  to  shame  in  the  sight  of  you.     For,  if  Where- 
they  knew  that  they  shovdd  overcome  therein,  out  of  doubt  they  woidd  desire  ^°^'^  f***" 
that  every  man  should  hear  it;  and  thereby  their  glorj'  should  become  the  clergy 
greater,  and  their  fame  and  praises  shovdd  be  increased  upon  the  earth.     And  "'"  ■■'*"'''e 
if  your  bishops  and  teachers  coimsel  you  to  come  to  no  hearing  with  us,  then  "nc'e'with 
do  it,  whether  they  will  or  no ;  and  suffer  not  yourselves,  at  any  time,  to  be  so  the  laity, 
foolishly  seduced  with  their  foolish  pardons,  but  taiTy  at  home  in  your  houses 
with  your  wives  and  children.     And  let  the  pope  of  Rome  come  to  us  with  all 
his  cardinals  and  bishops,  and  with  all  his  priests,  with  his  own  person  and 
power,  to  war  with  us,  and  let  themselves  deserve  the  absolution  of  sins,  grace, 
and  pardon,  which  they  preach  to  you  (for  they  have  great  need  of  forgiveness 
of  sins,  grace  and  pardon),  and,  by  the  grace  of  God,  we  will  give  them  pardon 
enough  as  they  shall  need.     But  their  subtle  excuse  is  this ;  they  say,  that  it  The 
helongeth  not  to  priests  to  fight  with  bodily  weapons :  and  true  it  is,  that  v°v^'s 
belongeth  not  to  them  ;  but  it  belongeth  as  little  to  them  to  stir  up,  to  counsel,  excuse^^ 
and  to  fortify  others  thereto.      For  Paul  saith  in  Romans  i.,  and  Galatians  v.,  detected, 
that  all  that  do  such  things  are  worthy  of  everlasting  death. 

And  if  ye  will  not  determine  to  do  any  other  thing  than  to  fight  against  us,  Experi- 
then  will  we  take  the  Lord  to  our  help,  and  his  truth,  and  we  will  defend  it  to  qo^^-j, 
the  death,  and  we  will  not  be  afraid  for  the  excommunication  or  curse  of  the  blessing, 
pope,  or  his  cardinals,  or  of  the  bishops ;  because  we  know  that  the  pope  is  not  ■*^'"^''«  '!'« 
God,  as  he  maketh  himself,  that  he  can  curse  and  excommunicate  when  he  will,  cursed. 
or  bless  when  he  will ;  who  hath  now  these  many  years  ciu-sed  and  excommu- 
nicated us,  and  yet,  notwithstanding,  God  and  his  gracious  blessing  have  been 
our  help.     But,  peradventure,  ye  will  say,  that  though  we  see  that  bishops  and  Objec- 
priests  be  evil  and  wicked,   yet  we  cannot  lack  them;  for  who  shoidd  baptize ''""• 
our  children,  who   should  hear  confessions,  and  minister  the  holy  sacraments  ? 
and  then  also  we  should  be  within  the  excommunication  of  the  pope,  and  of  Answer, 
his  bishops.     Well-beloved !  ye   need  to  take  no  care  for  these  matters.     The 
excommunicating  of  the  pope  burteth  you  nothing.     Fear  ye  the  excommuni- 
cating of  God,  and  the  Lord  will  provide  for  those  things  well  enough.     If  ye 
■would  banish  evil  bishops  and  priests,  ye  should  have  good  priests  who  shoidd 
baptize  your  children,  hear  confessions,  and  minister  the  holy  mysteries ;  be- 
cause when  the  devil  is  banished,  then  place  is  made  for  the  Holy  Ghost :  so 
when  ill  bishops  and  priests  shall  be  banished,  then  place  shall  be  made  for 
good  priests  and  bishops.     Also,  your  bishops   and  priests   say,    that  we   are 
miscreants  and  heretics,  and  that  we  believe  not  on  purgatory,  nor  upon  the 
Virgin   Mar_v,  nor  upon  the  saints  ;  wherein  they  say  ill,  for  we  will  prove,  by 
the  holy  Scripture,  that  we  know  better,  by  God's  grace,  how  we  ought  to  be- 
lieve upon  purgatory,  and  upon  Mary,  the  mother  of  our  Lord,  and  upon  his 
well-beloved  saints,  than  they  can  tell  us.     Also  they  say,  that  we  will  not  be  The 
obedient  unto  the  pope.     Truly,  when  he  shall  become  holy  and  just,  then  we  j?j"^g  !jp. 
know  well  that  we  ought  to  be  obedient  to  him  in  all  things,  and  not  before,  cusation 
They  say,  also,  that  we  destroy  God's  holy  service,  in  that  we  destroy  monas-  ans 
teries,  banishing  thence  the  wicked  monks  and  nuns.     Truly  we  did  it,  thinking  ^  ' 
once  that  they  were  holy,  that  they  did  the  reverend  service  of  God  ;  but  after 
that  we  well  perceived  and  considered  their  life  and  works,  then  we  perceived 
that  they  were  false  lowly  hypocrites,  and  wicked  builders  on  high,  and  sellers 
of  pardons  and  masses  for  the  dead,  and  such  as  devoured  in  themselves  the 
sins  of  the  people.     And  whereas  they  said  that  they  rise  at  midnight  when 
other  men  sleep,  and  pray  for  the  sins  of  the  people — forasmuch  as  their  selling 
of  their  prayers  and  masses  for  the  dead  for  gifts,  is  no  better  than  hypocrisy 
and  heresy ;  therefore,  if  we  do  speak  against  them  and  destroy  their  monas- 
teries,  we  do  not  therein  destroy  the  service  of   God,   but    rather   the   ser- 
vice of  the  devil,  and  the    schools  of  heretics :  and  if  ye  knew  them  as  we 
know  them,  ye  would  as  diligently  destroy  them  as  we  do.     For  Christ  our 
Lord  did  not  ordain  any  such  order,   and  therefore  it  must  needs  come  to 
pass   that  shortly  it  shall  be  destroyed;    as  our    Lord  saith  in    the    Gospel 


answer- 


570  THE    COUNCIL    OF    BASIL. 

Henry    of  St.  Matthew- [chap,  xv.],  '  Every  plant  which  my  Father  hath  not  planted, 
^-       shall  be  rooted  up.'     We  desh-e  you  also,  that  ye  would  diligently  consider  the 
.    T^     articles  here  written,  wherein  your  bishops  and  priests  are  guilty. 
1422*        '^^^  ^^^^  article  is.  That  when  yovir  bishops  will  ordain  priests,  they  do  it  not 

'—  except  he  that  is  to  be  made  priest  have  sufficient  living,  either  of  inheritance 

Abuse  left  him  by  his  parents,  or  of  benefices:  whereas  notwithstanding,  Christ  woiUd 
religion  that  priests  shoidd  be  poor,  forasmuch  as  it  is  enough  for  the  scholar  to  be  as 
in  mak-  his  Master  is,  and  for  the  servant  to  be  as  his  Lord  is ;  and  the  bishops  will  that 
'"?  they  should  be  rich  upon  earth,  which  is  unjust  before  the  Lord. 

cardinals,  The  second  article  is,  '  That  bishops  take  money  of  such  as  are  to  be  or- 
^o.  dained ;  but  St.  Peter  did  therefore  sharply  rebuke  Simon   Magus,  when  he 

would  have  given  him  money,  as  it  is  written  in  Acts  viii. 
Abuse  of  "^^^  third  article  is.  That  they  that  come  to  be  priests,  enter  into  priesthood, 
popish  not  for  God's  service -sake,  because  they  mean  to  preach  and  increase  it  among 
in  takiDK  ^^^  christian  people,  so  as  the  people  may  be  edified  and  made  better,  but 
orders,  rather  for  an  idle  life,  and  that  they  may  eat  well  and  drink  well,  that  they  may 
be  honoured  and  reverenced  upon  earth.  For  every  one  waiteth  upon  his 
priest  as  a  thief  and  a  robber,  as  John  writeth,  chap.  x. 
Popish  The  fourth  article  is.    Of  excommunication,   which  the  pope   and  all  his 

cxcom-     priests  take  to  themselves,  and  therewith  fetter  and  bind  all  christian  people  as 
tioiT"^^    they  will ;  and  they  think  that  whosoever  they  excommunicate  or  curse,  he  is 
abused,     accursed  and  excommunicated  before  God.     And  we  will  prove  by  the   holy 
Scripture,  that  they  themselves  are  excommunicated  and  accursed  before  God, 
because  they  keep  not   the  commandment  of  the  love  of  God,  whereof  the 
apostle  writeth  in  1  Cor.  x\\.,  '  If  any  man  loveth  not  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
he  is  excommunicated  in  the  day  of  the  coming  of  the  Lord,'     For  they  can- 
not excommunicate  you,  who  are  already  bound  and  excommunicate  before 
God  and  his  saints  ;  and,  therefore,  why  fear  ye  their  excommunication  1 
The  The  fifth  article  is.  That  they  take  gifts  to  pray  for  the  dead,  and  to  say  mass 

pope's       for  their  souls.     This  is  a  wickedness  and  heresy  before  the  Loi'd,  and  all  they 
poiso'ned   ^^^^  contribute  to  them  to  this  end,  do  wickedly,  for  that  hereby  priests  become 
with  buy-  merchants  of  prayers  and   of  masses ;  and  herewith  is  all  the  church  of  Rome 
sellinp-'^     poisoned  and  defiled.     For  if  they  would  pray  for  the  dead,  and  say  mass  for 
their         their  souls,  yet  no  man  ought  to  hire  them  thereto,  forasmuch  as  they  ought  to 
praying     take  no  gifts,  neither  little  nor  great.     And  every  one  that  taketh  rewards  to 
in^,  and"  *^"^  ^"'^'  t°  redeem  souls  out  of  purgatory,  doth  therewithal  cast  his  own  soul 
all  th'jir     down  into  hell ;  and  they  that  give  any  thing  to    that  end,  do  altogether  lose 
doing  for  tj^j^j-  -vyliich  they  give.     And  with  such  devilish  subtlety  the  pope  with   all  his 
priests    have    deceived,    spoiled,    and    disherited  kings,    princes,    lords,     and 
knights,  and  good  householders,  and  many  others,  of  their  lawful  inheritances  ; 
because  their  ancestors  and  progenitors  gave  them  to  colleges,  monasteries  and 
churches,  that  they  might  make  memorials  of  them,  and  sing  or  say  prayers  or 
masses  for  their  souls,  that  they  might  be  redeemed  out  of  purgatory.'      And, 
with  such  goods,  bishops,  canons,  and   monasteries  have  made   themselves  so 
rich,  that  now  they  fall  at  variance  with  cities  and  princes :  *  and  whereas  they 
should  procure  peace   betwixt  cities  and  rulers,  there   they  are  the  first  that 
begin  war  ;  and  as  long  as  they  have  such  goods,  they  will  never  cease  to  be  at 
strife  with  lords  and  cities,   neither  will  they  begin  to  teach  you  the  true  foun- 
dation of  the  truth.  For  they  do  as  a  dog,  which  as  long  as  he  holdeth  a  bone  in 
his  mouth  and  gnaweth  it,  so  long  he  holdeth  his  peace,  and  cannot  bark ;  even  so,  as 
long  as  they  have  this  bone  of  pleasant  riches,  it  will  never  be  well  in  the  world. 
Wherefore,  all  kings,  princes,  and  imperial   cities  would  do   a  great  work    of 
godliness  and  mercy,  if  by  them  they  were  compelled  to  do  this,  as  the  dog  is, 
when  the  bone  is  taken  from  him. 
The  sub-        And,  thei'efore,  ye  noble  men,  kings,  princes,  lords,  imperial  cities,  and  all 
*\^'y  o*'     the  commonalty,  both  rich  and  poor,  if  ye  have  been  asleep,  yet  now  awake 
in  mak-     ^"<^  ^P^"^   7°^^  eyes,    and  behold  the  subtlety   of   the   devil,   how    he   hath 
ing  the      blinded  the  church  of  Rome,  and  take  again  that  which  is  yours,  and  not  theirs, 
rici!'^'^      And  if  you  will  make  a  good  memorial  for  your  souls,  then  do  as  the  wise  man 
saith  [Eccies,  xix.],  '  Lay  up  alms,'  &c. 

(1)  Fear  of  purgatory  hath  robbed  almost  all  the  whole  worW. 

(2)  So  long  as  priests  be  rich,  they  wUl  never  be  true  teachers.    . 


ARTICLES    AGAINST    POPISH    BISHOPS    AND    PRIESTS.  571 

The  sixth  article  is,  That  they  are  full  of  pride  and  of  high  mind  ;  which  is    Henry 
manifestly  known  by  their  long,  costly,  and  superfluous  garments,  wherein  they       ^■ 
walk  very  unlike  to  Christ  our  Lord,  who  had  a  garment  without  a   seam,  and     .    r^ 
to  the  well-beloved  John  Baptist,  who  had  a  garment  of  camels' hair  ;  and  they    1499' 

will  be  honoured  and  worshipped  ;  and  they  preach  and  say  that  priesthood ""' 

ought  to  be  honoured  (and  so  it  ought  indeed  to  be) ;  but  there  are  none  that  Popish 
do  so  much  slander  and  abase  it,  as  they  themselves,  vnih.  their  evil  works  and  Priests, 
gay  apparel,  and  with  their  evil  words,  wherein  they  pass  all  other  men.     St.  uieir  long 
Paul  saith  [1  Tim.  iii.],  '  Let  the  elders  that  govern  well,  be  honoured  with  and 
double  honour;  chiefly,  they  that  labour  in  the  word  and  doctrine  of  the  Lord.'  q^^'''^' 
Consider  what  he  saith,  *  They  that  govern  well.'  gowns, 

The  seventh  article  is,  That  they  are  covetous,  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest  ™o'''^  ''■'^ 
and  for  covetousness  they  preach  many  fooHsh  deeds  and  manifest  lies,  and  sell  PhUlsees 
the  holy  sacraments,  which  is  a  great  heresy ;  for  God  commanded  that  they  than 
should  give  freely.     St.  Paul  writeth  [1  Tim.  i.],  '  Covetousness  is  the  root  of  '^^'^^*- 
all  mischief,  whereunto  many  have  been  given ;  and,  therefore,  they  are  sepa-  .j.^^ ' 
rated  from  the  fiiith,  and  have  denied  the  truth.'  pope's 

The  eighth  article  is,  That  they  commonly  are  called  '  Notorious  whore-  church 
mongers.'     This  is  manifestly  seen  in  their  concubines  and  children,  who  walk  ^^°th'co- 
openly  in  all  men's  sight,  and  make  many  men's  wives  adulterous,  or  corrupt  vetous- 
their  daughters  being  virgins,  and  make  them  priests'  harlots,  and  ribalds.  "*hore-"*^ 

The  ninth  article  is.  That  they  are  full  of  devilish  envy ;  and  especially  in  all  dom. 
monasteries  they  have  great  envy  and  hatred  amongst  themselves,  because  when  The 
any  thing  is  given  or  disposed  to  one  monastery  or  college,  then  there  are  others  church 
that  hate  it,  and  envy  at  it,  and  would  more  gladly  have  it  themselves :  like  as  and  mo- 
among  dogs,  when  any  thing  is  given  to  the  one  and  not  to  the  other,  which  "^'ong^ 
the  other  seeing,  envieth  his  fellow,  and  the  other  likewise  will  rather  devour  with 
all  himself,  than  give  any  part  to  his  fellow.     Wherefore  it  were  well  that  they  devilish 
were  brought  from  that  great  sin  of  envy,  by  giving  nothing  unto  them ;  and  it     ^^' 
were  better  that  their  possessions  were  taken  from  them,  and  that  they  should 
do  that  which  the  Lord  spake  to  his  disciples,  saying,   '  Go  ye  and  preach  the 
gospel  to  all  men.' 

The  tenth  article  is,  That  they  are  idle,  and  chiefly  the  bishops,  canons,  and  The 
other  prelates,  who  will  not  labour  diligently  in  the  holy  Scripture,  wherewith  pope's 
they  might  cure  the  miseries  of  Christendom,  whereto  they  have  bound  them-  poisoned 
selves ;  and  they  eat  the  bread  thereof  in  idleness,  because  when  other  men  with  idle- 
watch  and  labour  to  maintain  themselves  and  their  little  ones,  then  are  they  Ogfjyf  "'^ 
with  their  lemans  ;  or  else  they  walk  in  some  city,  carrying  hawks  on  their  fists ;  cheer. 
or  else  they  sit  at  their  good  wine  with  their  concubines,  and  there  they  sing 
and  play  the  Lucians,  and  eat  of  the  best :  and  therefore  all  that  willingly  bring 
and  give  to  them,  shall  be  made  partners  of  that  curse  which  is  given  them  of 
God,  because  they  eat  their  bread  unjustly,  whereof  St.  Paul  writeth  [2  Thess. 
iii.],   '  He  that  laboureth  not,  let  him  not  eat.' 

The  eleventh  article.  That  they  are  notorious  liai's  ;  because,  to  the  end  that  Infamous 
they  may  please  men,  they  tell  many  tales  and  lies,  which  have  no  foundation  o^s^Ues" 
nor  proof  in  the  holy  Scripture.     Of  such  writeth  John  in  the  Apocal.  xxi. 

The  twelfth  article  is.  That  they  do  not  rightly  give  or  minister  to  the  people  Erreth  in 
the  body  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  they  give  it  not  as  God  hath  instituted  |n™  ^"ne '" 
it  and  commanded.     This  is  a  great  and  devilish  sin,  and  too  great  malapert-  part  of 
ness.     Herein  we  would  overcome  them,  with  the  testimonies  of  the  evangelists ;  "^^  sacra- 
I  say,  we  would  overcome  the  pope,  and  all  his  priests,  with  the  authorities  of 
Mark,  Luke,  and  Paul  [Rom.  xjii.],  and  we  would  suffer  that  kings,  princes, 
lords,  and  all  that  are  willing  to  hear,  should  hear  it. 

The  thirteenth  article  is.  That  they  sit  in  spiritual  judgment,  and  then,  many  The  _ 
times,  they  judge  according  to  favour,  and  not  according  to  the  righteousness  of  ^J^^^'^jfj^ 
God ;  that  they  take  bribes,  giving  sentence  for  him,  who,  in  God's  sight,  hath  charged 
tne  vvrongful  cause.     Woe  be  to  such  sentencers,  as  it  is  written  in  Isaiah  v.,  with  pai 
*  Woe  be  to  you  that,'  &c. 

The  fourteenth  article  is.  That  they  sit  hearing  confessions,  and  when  there 
come  to  them  usurers,  raveners,  and  thieves,  they  take  bribes  of  them  of  their 
ill-gotten  goods,  to  spare  them;  and  they  willingly  suffer  them  in  cities  and 
towns.  And  Ukewise  of  adulterers  and  other  notorious  whoremongers  and 
whores  :  and  they  neither  let  nor  stay  them  in  their  great  sins ;  to  the  end  that 


572 


THE    COUNCIL    OF    BASIL. 


Henry 
V. 

A.D. 
1422. 


The 

pope's 

church 

charged 

with 

usury. 


Men  ap- 
pointed, 
may 
preach, 
though 
the  pope 
forbid 
them 
When  the 
pope 
holdeth 
his  coun- 
cil, let 
men  look 
to  their 
wives  and 
daugh- 
ters. 


the  Scripture  may  be  fulfilled  in  theiti,  which  saith,   '  Gifts  and  the  love  of 
_  money  do  draw  to  hell,  and  do  blind  the  eyes  of  judges.' 

The  fifteenth  article  is,  That  they  receive  tithes  of  men,  and  will  of  right 
have  them,'  and  preach  and  say  that  men  are  bound  to  give  them  tithes.  And 
-  therein  they  say  falsely ;  for  they  cannot  prove  by  the  New  Testament,  that  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  commanded  it,  and  his  disciples  warned  no  man  to  do  so, 
neither  did  themselves  receive  them.  But  although  in  the  Old  Testament  it 
were  commanded  to  give  tithes,  yet  it  cannot  thereby  be  proved,  that  christian 
men  are  bound  thereto ;  for  this  precept  of  the  Old  Testament  had  an  end  in  the 
first  year  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  like  as  the  precept  of  circumcision.  Where- 
fore, beloved !  consider  and  see  how  your  bishops  seduce  you  and  shut  your 
eyes  with  things  that  have  no  proof.  Christ  saith  [Luke  xi.],  '  Give  alms  of 
those  things  that  remain;'  but  he  said  not.  Give  the  tenth  of  the  goods  which 
ye  possess,  but  give  alms.  But  when  they  hear  the  word,  they  may  say  as  the 
lawyer  said  to  Christ,   '  Master,  when  thou  sayest  so,  thou  givest  offence,'  [lb.] 

The  sixteenth  article  is.  That  they,  in  many  places,  lend  money  or  goods  to 
have  treasure  or  usury,  and  have  in  cities  and  towns  yearly  payments  and  per- 
petual revenues,  as  great  princes  and  lords ;  wherein  they  do  against  the  gospel, 
which  saith,  '  Do  not  ye  possess  gold  nor  silver.'  And  whereas  they  lend  for 
gain  and  usury,  against  that  speaketh  the  Lord  [Deut.  xxiv.],  '  Lend  not  on 
usury  to  thy  brother,' &c.  Yea,  honest,  discreet,  and  well-beloved  lords!  all 
the  aforesaid  articles  we  will  prove  against  the  pope  and  all  his  priests,  with 
many  testimonies  of  the  holy  Scripture,  which,  for  brevity's  sake,  we  have  not 
here  mentioned.  But  note  ye  chiefly  these  four  articles,  for  which  we  strive, 
and  desire  to  defend  them  to  the  death. 

Tlie  first  article  is.  That  all  public  and  customable  mortal  sins  ought  to  be 
forbidden  and  prohibited  to  all  priests  and  laymen,  according  to  the  command- 
ment of  the  holy  Scripture. 

_  The  second  article  is.  That  riches'  ought  to  be  taken  from  the  pope  and  all 
his  priests,  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest ;  and  they  ought  to  be  made  poor,  as 
the  disciples  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  were,  who  had  nothing  of  their  own, 
neither  possessions  in  this  world,  neither  worldly  power. 

The  third  article  is,  That  the  word  of  God  ought  to  be  free  for  every  man 
appointed  and  ordained  thereto,  to  preach  and  read  in  all  places  whither  they 
shall  come,  without  resistance  of  any  man,  and  without  any  inhibition  of  either 
spiritual  or  earthly  power,  openly  or  manifestly. 

The  fourth  article  is,  That  the  body  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ought  to  be 
delivered  to  every  Christian  as  our  Lord  hath  ordained  it,  and  as  the  holy  evan- 
gelists have  written.  We  have  also  understood  that  there  shall  be  a  council  in 
Basil ;  wherefore  let  no  man  be  exalted,  but  let  them  diligently  keep  their  wives, 
their  daughters,  and  their  virgins,  from  bishops,  priests,  and  monks.  And  do 
not  think  that  there  is  made  any  holy  assembly  of  bishops  and  priests  for  the 
common  commodity  and  profit  of  Christendom  ;  but  only  to  this  end,  that  they 
may  hide  their  secret  vices  and  heresies  with  the  cloak  of  hypocrisy,  and  let 
and  hinder  the  righteousness  of  God,  which  is  much  contrary  to  them.  And 
for  tliis  cause,  consider  ye  diligently,  that  they  will  not  make  a  holy  assembly, 
but  the  congregation  of  Satan.  And  take  ye  heed  that  it  be  not  done  as  some 
did  at  Constance,  who  took  money  of  bishops  and  prelates,  and  suffered  them 
to  sleep  with  their  wives.  Ye  well-beloved  and  honest  lords  !  if  ye  find'  any 
thing  in  these  aforesaid  articles  or  words  written  somewhat  sharply,  we  did  it 
not  to  offend  or  contemn  you,  but  to  the  end  that  ye  should  diligently  consider 
and  devise,  how  Christendom  is  so  ill  kept  and  led  by  the  priests  of  this  present 
age.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  keep  you  both  in  body  and  soul.  Amen.  In  the 
year  of  oiu:  Lord  1430.3 

Procopius,  Smahors,  Conrad,  Samssmolich ;  captains  of  Bohemia. 


Now  to  prosecute  tte  wars  of  the  Bohemians  agam.     After  Zisca 
■was  dead,  a.d.  1424,  whereof  we  did  treat  before,  there  was  great 

(1 )  He  meaneth  of  claiming  tithes  by  mere  necessity  of  the  old  law,  and  not  by  the  positive  law 
of  princes.  (2)  He  meaneth  the  immoderate  riches,  and  temporal  possessions. 

Ki)  Ex  vetustissimo  codice  manuscripto. 


WAR  BETWEEN  THE  EMPEROR  AND  THE  BOHEMIANS.         57^ 

lear,  sorrow,  and  lamentation  in  the  army,  the  soldiers  accusing  fortune    Henry 
which  gave  over  such  an  invincible  captain  to  be  overcome  with  death. 


Immediately  there  was  a  division  in  the  host,  the  one  part  choosing    A.  D. 
Procopius   Magnus  to  be  their  captain,  the  otlier  part  saying  tluot    ^"^^^^ 
there  was  none  could  be  found  worthy  to  succeed  Zisca :  whereupon  Tiie  army 
they,   choosing   out  certain  to  serve  the  wars,   named  themselves  divided. 
'  Orphans.'' 

Thus  the  Taborites,  being  divided  into  two  armies,  the  one  part 
retained  their  old  and  accustomed  name,  and  the  other,  by  means  of 
the  death  of  their  captain,  named  themselves  Orphans.     And  albeit 
that  oftentimes  there  was  dissension  between  them,  yet  whensoever 
any  foreign   power   came  towards  them,   they  joined   their  powers 
together  in  one  camp,  and  defended  themselves.     They  seldom  went 
unto  any  fenced  towns,  except  it  were  to  buy  necessaries,  but  lived 
with  their  wives  and  children  in  their  camp  and  tents.     They  had 
amongst  them  many  cars,  which  they  used  as  a  bulwark ;  for  when- 
soever they  went  unto  battle,  they  made  two  wings  of  them,  which 
closed  in  the  footmen.     The  wings  of  the  horsemen  were  on  the 
outside,  and  when  they  saw  their  time  to  join  battle,  the  waggon-men 
who  led  the  wings,  going  forth  unto  the  emperor's  standard,  and 
compassing  such  part  of  their  enemies  as  they  would,  did  close  them- 
selves in  together,  whereby  the  enemies  being  enclosed  so  that  they 
could  not  be  rescued,  they  were,  partly  by  the  footmen,  and  partly  The  order 
by  the  men  that  were  in  the  cars,  with  their  darts  slain.     The  horse-  andpoUcy 
men  fought  without  the  fortification ;   and  if  it  happened  that  they  army  of 
were  ojjpressed  or  put  to  flight,  by  and  by  the  cars,  opening  them-  used\i 
selves,  received  them  as  it  were  into  a  fenced  city ;   and  by  this  Jiis'^^jf"^"^ 
means  they  got  many  victories,   forasmuch  as  their  enemies  were  cease, 
ignorant  of  their  policies. 

These  two  armies  went  forth,  the  one  into  Silesia,  and  the  other 
into  Moravia,  and  returned  again  with  great  prey,  before  their  ene- 
mies knew  of  their  coming.  After  this  they  besieged  the  town  of 
Swietla  in  Austria,  where  the  Taborites  and  the  Orphans,  during  two 
nights,  continually  assaulted  the  walls  without  ceasing.  But  Albert, 
duke  of  Austria,  coming  ■with  his  host  to  aid  the  citizens,  they  fought 
by  the  space  of  almost  four  hours,  the  valiantest  warriors  being  slain 
on  both  parts.  At  length  the  battle  was  broken  off,  and  the 
Taborites  lost  their  cars,  and  Albert  was  put  out  of  his  camp  and 
tents.  Within  a  while  after,  Procopius  Magnus  came  again  and 
enclosed  the  city  of  Rhetium  in  Austria  with  a  notable  siege.  They 
of  Prague  were  in  his  army,  and  Boslaus  Cygneus,  of  whom  we 
spake  before,  was  slain  there  with  a  dart,  and  the  city  of  Rhetium 
was  taken  by  force,  sacked,  and  burnt.  The  burgrave  of  Malder- 
burg,  lord  of  the  town,  was  also  taken  and  carried  unto  Prague, 
where  he  died  in  prison. 

These  things  thus  done,  the  emperor  sent  for  the  nobles  of  Bo-  mund, 
hemia,  who  went  unto  him  unto  a  town  of  Hungary,  called  Presberg,  turned 
in  the  borders  of  Austria,  upon  the  banks  of  the  river  of  Danube ;  huss  and 
but  they  would  not  enter  into  the  town,  but  remained  without  the  beforT 
town  in  their  tents;  whither  the  emperor  going  out  unto  them,  faints 
communed  much  with  them,  as  touching  his  right  and  title,  and  the  f.*:^'/°'' 
recovering  of  his  father's  kingdom,  promising  if  there  were  any  cause  dom. 


174  THE    COUNCIL    OF    BASIL. 

Henry    wliicli  did  alienate  the  Bohemians"'  minds  from  him,  that  he  •would 
^'       take  away  all  the  occasion  thereof.   They  made  answer,  that  he  had 


A.  D.    made  Avar  upon  them  without  a  cause,  and  that  he  had  suffered  their 

l*^^--    countrymen,  contrary  to  his  promise,  to  be  bx;rnt  at  Constance  not 

Thedeath  beiuo-  heard,  and  the  kingdom  to  be  contumeliously  interdicted,  and 

'iiuss  and  the  nobles  of  Bohemia  to  be  condemned  by  the  church  of  Rome  a^ 

riweiT    heretics  ;  and  that  he  should  think  the  force  and  power  of  the  Bo' 

upon.       hemians  not  to  be  so  small,  but  that  they  would  provide  for  their 

own  honour.     Whereunto  the  emperor  answered  very  gently,  and 

offered  them  a  general  coimcil,  wherein  they  might  declare  their 

innocency,  if  they  would  submit  themselves  to  the  judgment  of  the 

universal  church :    but  the   Bohemians,  vdio  were  become   valiant 

victors  in  arms,  would  not  be  overcome  with  words ;  and  so,  nothing 

being  finally  concluded,  the  emperor  returned  home. 

A  cardi-        Then  pope  Martin,  perceiving  the  gospel  to  increase  daily  more 

i^uo  Ger-  aud  morc,  sent  the  cardinal  of  Winchester,  an  Englishman,  born  of 

Mi^s^wM  ^  noble  house,  into  Germany,  to  move  them  to  war  against  the  Bo- 

against     hcmiaus ;  whereunto  the  emperor  also  did  assist  him. 

hemians.       There  Avere  three  armies  provided.     In  the  first  army  were  the 

dukes  of  Saxony,  and  the  lower  cities. 

The  second  anny,  w^hich  was  gathered  of  the  Franconians,  was 
under  the  conduct  of  the  marquis  of  Brandenburg. 

The  third  anny  was  led  by  Otho,  archbishop  of  Treves,  wdiom 

the  Rhenenses,  the  Bavarians,  and  the  imperial  cities  of  Swevia  fol- 

God  res-  lowed.     Thcsc  anuics,  entering  into  Bohemia  in  three  several  parts, 

peopie^'^  afler  they  were  passed  the  wood,  joined  together  and  pitched  before 

newly      Misuia.      This    town,    a   certain  learned  and  eloquent   protestant 

convert"  -^ 

ed.  named  Prichicho,    the   night   before,  had  Avon  from    the  papists ; 

wherefore  the  army  was  determined  first  to  recover  that  city,  before 
they  would  go  any  fru'ther.     But  when  ncAvs  came  unto  the  host, 
how  the  protestants  had  gathered  an  army,  and  came  with  all  speed 
The        towards  them  ;  they  fled  before  they  saAV  their  enemies,  and  went 
nl'y  iiieth"  ^^^^^  Tacovia,  Icaviug  behind  them  their  warlike  engines,  Avith  a  great 
prey.     The  cardinal  was  not  yet  come  into  the  camp,  but  meeting 
them  in  their  flight  at  TacoA'ia,  he  marvelled  at  the  cowardly  flight 
of  so  many  noble  and  valiant  men,  desiring  them  that  they  would 
turn  again  unto  their  enemies,  Avho,  he  said,  Avere  far  weaker  than 
Like  cap-  they.     Whicli  thing  when  he  had  long  travailed  about  in  vain,  he 
soldier  ^  ,was  fain  to  be  a  companion  Avith  them  in  their  flight.     They  had 
scarcely  entered  the  wood,  when  the  Bohemians,  coming  upon  them, 
set  upon  the  rearward.     Then  Avas  their  flight  m.uch  more  disordered 
and  fearful  than  before,  neither  did  they  leave  flying,  before  the  Bo- 
hemians left  following.     Then,  all  impediment  or  let  being  taken 
EAvay,  they  vanquished  Tacovia ;    and,  having  obtained  great  store 
of  Avarlike  engines,  they  destroyed  Misnia.     And  Avhen  they  would 
have  returned  home  by  Franconia,  they  had  great  sums  of  money 
sent  unto  them,  that  they  should  not  waste  or  destroy  the  countries 
The  pope  of  Bamberg  and  Nuremberg ;  whereby  the  host  of  the  Bohemians 
^^afthe    "was  greatly  enriched. 

ume"*^  Sigismund  the  emperor,  having  news  of  these  things,  went  straight 

against     uuto  Nuremberg,  and  gathered  there  new  aid  and  help.     Also  pope 
mTans!  *  Martin  sent  Julian,  the  cardinal  of  St.  Angel,  into  Germany  with  his 


WAR    BETWEEN    THE    POPE    AND    THE    BOHEIMIANS.  575 

ambassagc,  to  make  war  against  the  Bohemians,  and  that  lie  should,    Uenry 
in  the  council  of  Basil,  which  doth  now  shortly  draw  on,*  be  president !_ 


in  the  pope's  name.  He,  entering  into  Germany,  went  straight  to  A.D. 
Nuremberg  to  the  emperor,  where  many  of  the  nobles  of  Germany  ^422. 
were  assembled. 

There  was  a  new  expedition  decreed  against  the  Bohemians, 
against  the  eighth  of  the  l^alends  of  July,  and  Frederic,  marquis  of 
Brandenburg,  was  appointed  general  of  that  war,  who  should  follow 
the  cardinal.  He  entered  into  Bohemia  by  the  way  that  leadeth 
unto  Thopa,  and  Albert,  prince  of  Austria,  was  appointed  to  bring 
his  array  through  Moravia. 

In  this  expedition  were  Albert  and  Christopher  of  Bavaria,  and 
Frederic,  dukes  of  Saxony ;  John  and  Albert,  princes  of  Branden- 
burg, with  their  father  who  Aras  general  of  those  wars ;  also  the 
bishops  of  Hyperbolis,  Bamberg  and  Eysten  ;  also  the  company  of 
the  Swevians,  which  they  called  the  company  of  St.  George,  and  the 
magistrates  of  the  imperial  cities,  the  bishop  of  Mentz,  Treves,  and 
Cologne,  sent  their  aids,  and  with  them  the  chieftains  of  their  pro- 
vinces. It  is  said  that  the  number  of  their  horsemen  was  above  The  num.- 
forty  thousand,  but  their  footmen  were  not  full  so  many,  for  the  po^s'^* 
Germans,  for  the  most  part,  do  use  to  fioht  their  battles  on  horseback,  ^"^y  ^ 

Also  Rhenatus,  prince  of  Lon-aine,  promised  to  come  to  these  the  Bohe- 
wars ;  but  being  letted  by  his  civil  wars,  forasmuch  as  he  went  about  ™^°^" 
to  vanquish  the  earl  of  Vandome,  he  could  not  keep  his  promise  ; 
and  the  county  palatine  of  Rhine,  who  did  aid  and  succour  the  earl 
of  Vandome,    could  not  ffo  against  the  Bohemians.     The  cardinal, 
staying  for  them,  deferred  his  journey  until  the  kalends  of  August. 
In  the  mean  time  Albert,  leading  his  army  out  of  Austria  (under- 
standing that  the  cardinal  was  not  present  at  the  day  appointed,  and 
seeing  himself  unable  to  encounter  with  the  Bohemian  power),  re- 
turned back  again.      After  this  the  cardinal  entered  into  Bohemia  cardinal 
with  a  huge  army,   and  destroyed  many  of  the  protestants'  towns,  ^^1^,"^)^ 
killing  men,  women,  and  children,  sparing  neither  old  nor  young :  Bohemia, 
notmthstanding   this  his   tyranny  was  exercised  in    the  uttemiost  slaughter. 
borders  of  Bohemia,  for  his  captains  feared  to  enter  far  into  the  land. 
The  Bohemians,  as  soon  as  they  had  heard  tell  that  their  enemy  was 
come,  made  ready  and  gathered  their  host  with  all  speed,  and  laid 
siege  to  a  tower  called  Stiltiverge,  and  brought  it  under  subjection. 

In  the  mean    season  there  fell  such  a  marvellous  sudden  fear  God 
amongst  the  papists  throughout  the  whole  camp,  that  they  began  most  ^^^^^^^ 
shamefully  to  run  away  before  any  enemy  appeared  in  sight.     The  the  pope's 
cardinal  Julian,  marvelling  at  this  most  sudden  fear,  and  what  shoidd 
move  so  great  an  army  to  flee,  went  about  unto  the  captains,  exhort- 
ing them  to  put  on  armour,  to  order  their  battles,  and  courageously 
to  abide  their  enemies,  saying,  they  did  not  fight  for  the  glory  of 
their  kingdom,  or  for  the  possession  of  lands,  but  for  their  lives,  and 
honour,  and  the  religion  of  Christ,^  and  for  the  salvation  of  souls. 

(\)  Tlie  History  of  the  Council  of  Basil  is  given  in  detail,  in  a  subsequent  page  in  the  chrono- 
logical order  of  events ;  the  council  of  Constance,  as  we  have  seen,  commenced  its  sitting's  in  1414, 
and  was  dissolved  in  1418.  In  1431,  the  council  assembled  at  Pavia,  from  whence  it  was  removed 
to  Sienna,  and  finally  met  at  Basil,  on  the  23d  of  June,  1431;  the  particulars  of  which  are  given, 
under  that  date. — Kd. 

(i )  Rather  for  the  religion  of  Antichrist.  This  cardinal  belike  loved  to  preach  rather  in  the 
camp  than  in  the  church. 


576  TlIK    COL'XCIL    OF    BASIL. 

Senry    "  How  igiiominious  a  tiling  is  it,"  saitli  he,  "  for  the  Germans  to  flee 
'■      in  battle,  whose  courage  and  valiantness  all  the  world  doth  extol?    It 


A.  D.    were  much  better  to  die,  than  to   give  place  to  any  enemies  before 
^'i^^-    they  are  seen ;  for  they  can  by  no  means  live  in  safety  within  the 
walls,  who  give  place  unto  their  enemy  in  the  field  ;  for  it  is  the 
weapon  that  defendeth  a  man  and  not  the  walls ;  and  except  they 
would  even  presently  defend  their  liberty  with  the  sword,  they  should 
The        shortly  be  in  greater  bondage,  more  miserable  than  any  death."    But 
army"    ^  this  cxhortation  was  all  in  vain,  for  fear  had  put  away  all  boldness ; 
awa  •  for  ^^^  ^^^^  cnsigus  wcrc  snatched  up,  and,  as  though  there  had  been  no 
fear.        ca])tain  in  the  host,  every  man  ran  headlong  away.     No  man  re- 
garded any  commandment,  neither  once  took  his  leave  of  his  captain, 
but,  casting  away  their  armour,  with  speedy  flight  they  ran  away,  as 
though  their  enemy  had  been  at  their  backs.     The  cardinal,  also, 
although  it  were  against  his  will,  was  forced  to  do  the  like. 

Thus  the  protestants,  by  the  fear  of  their  enemies  made  the  more 

bold  and  courageous,  pursued  them  through  the  woods,  and  had  a 

great  prey  and  spoil  of  them.     Notwithstanding,  Albert,  when  he 

heard  tell  that  the  cardinal  was  entered  into  Bohemia,  with  all  speed 

came  again  out  of  Austria  with  his  army,  and  besieged   the  strong 

town  of  Prezorabia.     But  when  he  understood  how  the  cardinal  Mas 

fled,  he  left  oflT  his  purpose,  and  returned  through  Moravia,  Avliich 

was  not  yet  subject  unto  him,  and  destroyed  above  fifty  towns  with 

fire  and  sword,  took  many  of  their  cities  by  force,  and  spoiled  them, 

Great      Committing  great  murder  and  slaughter,  and  so  afflicted  them  that 

^n^Boile"  they  took  upon  them  his  yoke,  and  promised  to  be  subject  and 

dlike*'^     obedient  to  him  under  this  condition  :  that,  as  touching  religion,  he 

Albert,     would   be   bound   to    do  that  which  the   council  of  Basil  should 

determine. 

A  letter        Then  was  there  an   ambassage  sent  out  of  Bohemia  unto  Basil, 

emperor  whcrc  Sigismuud  held  the  council,  who,  during  the  time  of  the  wars, 

Bohe-      had  kept  himself  at  Nuremburg.     When  he  should  take  his  journey 

mians.     m^jQ  Rome  to  be  crowned  emperor,  he  wrote  letters  unto  the  nobles 

of  Bohemia,  wiicrein  was  contained,  hovv'  that  he  was  a  Bohemian 

bom,  and  how  he  was  not  more  affectioned  to  any  nation  than  to  his 

own,  and  that  he  went  to  Rome  for  no  other  cause  but  to  be  crowned  ; 

which  his  honour  should  also  be  a  renown  to  the  Bohemians,  whom 

to  advance,  it  bath  been  always  his  special  care. 

Also,  how  that  through  his  endeavour  the  council  was  begun  at 
Basil ;  exhorting  all  such  as  were  desirous  to  be  heard  as  touching 
religion,  that  they  should  come  thither,  and  that  they  would  not 
maintain  any  quarrel  contrary  to  the  holy  mother  the  church ;  that 
the  council  would  lovingly  and  gently  hear  their  reasons ;  that  they 
should  only  endeavour  themselves  to  agree  Avith  the  synod  as  touch- 
ing religion,  and  reserve  and  keep  a  quiet  and  peaceable  kingdom  for 
him,  against  his  return  ;  neither  should  the  Bohemians  think  to  re- 
fuse his  regiment,  whose  brother,  father,  and  uncle,  had  reigned  over 
them  ;  and  that  he  would  reign  over  them  after  no  other  mean  or 
sort,  than  other  christian  kings  used  to  do. 
The  The  council  of  Basil  also  wrote  their  letter  to  the  Bohemians,  that 

m'ians      they  should  send  their  ambassadors  who  should  show  a  reason  of  their 
sent  for.    f^[i[]^^  promising  safe-conduct   to  go  and  come,  and  free  liberty  to 


THE    ORATION    OF    CARDINAL    JULIAN.  57T 

speak  what  they  would.     The  Bohemians  in  this  point  were  of  two    ni'nry 
opinions  ;  for  th€  protestants,   and  ahnost  all  the  common  people, 


said,  it  was  not  good  to  go,  alleging  the  examples  of  John  Huss  and    A.  D. 
Jerome  of  Prague,  who,  going  to  Constance,  under  the  safe-conduct    ^^'^^- 
of  the  emperor,  were  there  openly  burned.    But  the  nobility,  folIoM'-  safe-con- 
ing  the  mind  of  Maynard,'  prince  of  the  new  House,  said,  that  they  gi"!e'„ 
ought  to  go  to  the  council,  and  that  they  are  not  to  be  suffered  who  "'^™- 
had  invented  those  new  and  strange  opinions  of  faith,  and  that  new  amoiig' 
kind  of  religion,  except  they  would  render  account  of  their  doings  'vh^ther 
and  sayings   before  the  universal   church,  and  defend   those  things  to  go. 
which  they  had  openly  taught  before  learned  men.     This  opinion 
took  place,  and  an   ambassage  of  three  hundred  horse  was  sent   to  Three 
Basil,  the  chief  whereof  were  William  Cosca,  a  valiant  knight,  and  Bohe-'^'^ 
Procopius,  surnamed  Magnus,  a  man  of  worthy  fame  for  his  mani-  JJ^^^^'^^- 
fold  victories;  John  Rhochezana,  preacher  of  Prague,  Nicholas  Galli-  men, 
cus,  minister  of  the  Taborites,  and  one  Peter,^  an  Englishman,  of  bassag"? 
excellent,  prompt,  and  pregnant  wit.  a.d.  1433.    The  people  came  in  H^^ln^ 
great  number  out  of  the  town,   and  many  out  of  the  synod  and  '^'.'^/';; 
council,  attending  before  the  gates  to  see  the  coming  of  this  valiant  them  at 
and  famous  people  ;  others  gathered  together  in  great  numbers  into  ^^^"' 
the  streets  where  they  should  pass  through.     The  matrons,  maids, 
and  children,  filled  the  windows  and  houses  to  behold  and  see,  and  to 
marvel  at  their  strange  kind  of  apparel  and  stout  coiu-ageous  coun- 
tenances ;   saying,  that  it  was  not  untrue  which  was  reported  of  them. 
Notwithstanding  all  men  beheld  Procopius,  saying,  "  This  is  he  who  Proco- 
hath  overthi'own  the  papists   in  so  many  battles,  who  hath  subverted  famous 
so  many  towns,  and  slain  so  many  men,  whom  both  his  enemies,  and  ^,',"°"° 
also  his  own  soldiers  do  fear  and  reverence  ;""  also,  that  he  was  a  bold,  Germans 
valiant,  and  invincible  captain,  who  could  not  be  overcome  with  any 
terror,  labour,  or  travail. 

These  Bohemian  ambassadors  were  gently  received.  The  next 
day  after,  cardinal  Julian,  sending  for  them  unto  the  council  house, 
made  a  gentle,  long,  and  eloquent  oration  unto  them,  to  this  effect. 

The  Oration  of  Cardinal  Julian. 

He  exhorted  them  to  unity  and  peace,  saying,  that  the  church  was  the  spouse 
of  our  Saviour  Christ,  and  the  mother  of  all  the  faithful,  that  it  hath  the  keys  of 
binding  and  loosing,  and  also  that  it  is  white  and  fair,  without  spot  or  wrinkle, 
and  cannot  err  in  those  points  that  are  necessary  to  salvation  ;  and  that  he  who 
doth  contemn  the  same  church  is  to  be  counted  as  a  pi-ofane,  an  ethnic  and 
publican,  neither  can  this  church  be  repi-esented  better  by  any  means  than  in 
this  council.  He  exhorteth  them  also  to  receive  the  decrees  of  the  council, 
and  to  give  no  less  credit  to  the  comicil  than  unto  the  gospel,  by  whose  autho- 
rity the  Scriptures  themselves  are  received  and  allowed.  Also  that  the  Bohe- 
mians, who  call  themselves  the  children  of  the  church,  ought  to  hear  the  voice 
of  their  mother,  who  is  never  unmindful  of  her  children :  how  that  now,  of  late, 
thev  have  lived  apart  from  their  mother;  'albeit,'  said  he,  '  that  is  no  new  or 
strange  thing,  for  there  have  been  many,  in  times  past,  who  have  forsaken  their 
mother,  and  yet,  seeking  after  salvation,  have  returned  to  her  again;  that  in  the 
time  of  Noah's  flood,  as  many  as  were  without  the  ark  perished;  that  the 
Lord's  passover  was  to  be  eaten  in  one  house ;  that  there  is  no  salvation  to  be 
sought  for  out  of  the  church,  and  that  this  is  the  garden  and  famous  fountain  of 

(1)  This  Maynard  was  afterwards  a  great  back  friend  to  the  faithful  Bohemians. 

(2)  This  Englislmian  was  Peter  Paine. 

VOL.  IIT  P    1 


578  ARTICLES    WHEREIN    THE    BOHEMIAXS    DISSEKT, 

Henry    water,  wlieveof  whosoever  shall  drink,  shall  not  thirst  everlastingly  ;  that  the 

V-       Bohemians  have  done  as  they  ought,  in  that  they  have  sought  the  fountains  of 

this  water  at  the  council,  and  have  determined  now  at  length  to  give  ear  unto 

their  mother.     Now  all  hatred  ought  to  cease,  all  armour  and  weapon  to  be 

^^^^-  jjjj^i  apart,  and  all  occasion  of  war  utterly  to  be  rejected.  For  the  fathers  would 
lovingly  and  gently  liear  whatsoever  they  would  there  say  in  their  own  cause 
or  qiiarrel ;  requiring  only  that  they  would  willingly  receive  and  embrace  the 
good  counsels  and  determinations  of  the  sacred  synod  ;  whereunto  not  only  the 
Bohemians,  but  also  all  other  faithful  Christians,  ought  to  consent  and  agree,  if 
they  will  be  partakers  of  eternal  life.' 

The  Bo-       This  oration  of  the  cardinal  was  heard  and  very   well  allowed  of 

an™er^   thc  fathers,     Whereunto  the  Bohemians  answered  in  few  words : 

to  the      That  they  neither  had  contemned  the  church  nor  the  council ;  that 

oration,    the  sentence  given  at  Constance,  against  those  who  Avere  unheard, 

doth  diminish  nothing  of  the  christian  religion ;  that  the  authority 

of  the  fathers  hath  always  remained  amongst  them  inviolate ;  and 

that  whatsoever  thing  the  Bohemians  have  taught,  was  confirmed  by 

the  Scriptures  and  gospel ;  and  that  they  are  now  come  to  manifest 

their  innocency  before  the  whole  church,  and  to  require  open  audience, 

where  the  laity  may  also  be  present.     Their  request  was  granted 

them  ;  and  being  further  demanded  in  what  points  they  did  disagree 

from  the  church  of  Rome,  they  propounded  four  articles. 

Articles         First,  They  affirmed,  'J'hat  all  such  as  would  be  saved,  ought  of  necessity  to 
wherein    receive  the  communion  of  the  last  supper  under  both  kinds,  bread  and  M'ine. 
rniMs"  ^       The  second  article.  They  affirmed  all  civil  rule  and  dominion  to  be  forbidden 
dissented  unto  the  clergy  by  the  law  of  God. 

from  Uie  -pj^g  third  article.  That  the  preaching  of  the  word  of  God  is  free  for  all  men, 
Rome.       and  in  all  places. 

The  fourth  article.  As  touching  open  crimes  and  offences,  which  are  in  no  wise 
to  be  suffered,  for  the  avoiding  of  greater  evil. 

These  were  the  only  propositions  which  they  propounded  before 
the  council  in  the  name  of  the  v>'hole  realm.  Then  another  ambassador 
affirmed,  that  he  had  heard  of  the  Bohemians  divers  and  sundry  things 
offensive  to  christian  ears,  amongst  which  this  was  one  point :  that 
they  should  preach  that  the  invention  of  the  order  of  begging  friars 
was  diabolical. 

Then  Procopius  rising  up,  said,  "  Neither  is  it  untrue  ;  for  if 
neither  Moses,  neither  before  him  the  patriarchs,  neither  after  him 
the  prophets,  neither  in  the  new  law  Christ  and  his  apostles,  did  insti- 
tute the  order  of  begging  friars,  who  doth  doubt  but  that  it  was  an 
invention  of  the  devil,  and  a  work  of  darkness  ?"" 

This  answer  of  Procopius  was  derided  of  them  all,  and  cardinal 
Julian  went  about  to  prove,  that  not  only  the  decrees  of  the  patriarchs 
and  prophets,  and  those  things  which  Christ  and  his  apostles  had 
instituted,  were  of  God  only,  but  also  that  all  such  decrees  as  the 
church  should  ordain,  being  guided  through  the  Holy  Ghost,  be  the 
works  of  God.  Albeit,  as  he  said,  the  order  of  begging  friars  might 
a^'^otntec!  ^^^^  ^0  be  taken  out  of  some  part  of  the  gospel. 
hy  the  The  Bohemians  chose  out  four  divines  who  should  declare  their 

ans  and  articles  to  be  taken  out  of  the  Scriptures.  Likewise,  on  the  contrary 
ca^to°dis-  P^^'^'  there  were  four  appointed  by  the  council.  This  disputation  con- 
fute,      tinued  fifty  days,  where  many  things  were  alleged  on  cither  part, whereof. 


DEATH    OF    KING    HENRY    V.  579 

as  place  shall  serve,  more  hereafter,  by  the  grace  of  Christ,  shall  be    iiennj 
said,  when  we  come  to  the  time  of  that  council.  ' 


In  the  mean  season,  while  the  Bohemians  were  thus  in  long  conflicts    A.  D. 
with  Sigismund  the  emperor,  and  the  pope,  fighting  for  their  religion,    ^^-^- 
unto  whom,  notwithstanding  all  the  fulness  of  the  pope's  power  was 
bent  against  them,  God,  of  his  goodness,  had  given  such  noble  vic- 
tories, as  is  above-expressed,  and  ever  did  prosper  them  so  long  as 
they  could  agree  among  themselves.     As  these  things,   I  say,  were 
doing  in  Bohemia,  king  Henry  V.,  fighting  likewise  in  France,  albeit 
for  no  like  matter  of  religion,  fell  sick  at  Blois  and  died,  after  he  had  Death  of 
reigned  nine  years,  five  months,  three  weeks,  and  odd  days,  from  his  y",^  y 
coronation.     This  king,  in  life,  and  in  all  his  doings,  was  so  devout  c^'l'ed 
and  serviceable  to  the  pope  and  his  chaplains,  that  he  Avas  called  of  priesfs" 
many,  the  '  prince  of  priests  C  who  left  behind  him  a  son  being  yet  an  ^°l^X\<r 
infant,  nine  months  and  fifteen  days  of  age,  whom  he  had  by  queen  '^^^^  P°pe- 
Katherine,  daughter  to  the  French  king,  married  to  him  about  two  or 
three  years  before ;  the  name   of  which  prince,  succeeding  after  his 
father,  was  Henry  VI.,  who  was  left  under  the  government  and  pro- 
tection of  his  uncle,  named  Hmnplirey,  duke  of  Gloucester. 


The  Names  of  the  Archbishops  of  Canterbm-y  in  this  Fifth  Book 

Contained. 

54.  Simon  Islepe    .     .  17  years.  59.  William  Courtney  .  15  yean;. 

56.  Simon  Langham     .     2      ..  60.  Thomas  Arundel  .18 

57.  William  Wittlesey  .     5      ..  61.  Henry  Chichesley  .  29      .. 

58.  Simon  Sudbury  .     .     6 


END    OF    ROOK    THE     FIFTH. 


VV)i 


ACTS    AND    MONUMENTS. 


BOOK  VI. 


PERTAINING    TO 


'I'HE  LAST  THREE  HUNDRED  YEARS  FROM  THE  LOOSING  OUT 

OF  SATAN.> 


A  PREFACE  TO  THE  READER. 

According  to  the  five  sundry  diversities  and  alterations  of  the 
church,  so  have  I  divided  hitherto  the  order  of  this  present  church- 
story  into  five  principal  parts,  every  part  containing  three  hundred 
years ;  so  that  now  coming  to  the  last  three  hundred  years  (that  is, 
to  the  last  times  of  the  church,  counting  from  the  time  of  WicklifF), 
forasmuch  as  in  the  compass  of  the  said  last  three  hundred  years  are 
contained  great  troubles  and  perturbations  of  the  church,  with  the 
marvellous  reformation  of  the  same  through  the  wondrous  operation 
of  the  Almighty ;  all  which  things  cannot  be  comprehended  in  one 
book  :  I  have  therefore  disposed  the  said  latter  three  hundred  years 
into  divers  books,  beginning  noAv  with  the  sixth  book,  at  the  reign 
of  king  Henry  VI.  In  which  book,  beside  the  grievous  and  sundry 
persecutions  raised  up  by  Antichrist,  to  be  noted,  herein  is  also  to 
be  observed,  that  whereas  it  hath  of  long  time  been  received  and 
thought  of  the  common  people,  that  this  religion  now  generally  used 
hath  sprung  up  and  risen  but  of  late,  even  by  the  space  (as  many  do 
think)  of  twenty  or  thirty  years,  for  the  avoiding  of  which  fond  and 
vain  opinion  it  may  now  manifestly  appear,  not  only  by  the  Acts  and 
Monuments  heretofore  passed,  but  also  by  the  histories  hereafter 
following,  how  this  profession  of  Christ's  religion  hath  been  spread 
abroad  in  England  of  old  and  ancient  time,  not  only  for  the  space 
of  these  two  hundred  late  years,  from  the  time  of  WicklifF,  but  hath 
continually  from  time  to  time  sparkled  abroad,  although  the  flames 
thereof  have  never  so  perfectly  burst  out,  as  they  have  done  within 
these  hundred  years  and  more ;  as  by  these  histories  here  collected 
and  gathered  out  of  registers,  especially  of  the  diocese  of  Norwich, 
shall  manifestly  appear :  wherein  may  be  seen  what  men,  and  how 
many,  both  men  and  women,  within  the  said  diocese  of  Norwich  there 
have  been,  who  have  defended  the  same  cause  of  doctrine  which  now 

(1)  The  period  of  three  hundred  years,  to  which  the  events  here  recorded  pertain,  commenced 
with  the  opening  of  the  fifth  book,  at  page  724,  in  the  second  volume  of  this  edition. — Ed. 


THE    APPREHENSION    OF    WILLIAM    TAILOR.  581 

is  received  by  us  in  the  church.     Which  persons,  although  then  they    Jti>:nry 

were  not  so  strongly  armed  in  their  cause  and  quan-el  as  of  late  years ^^'  ■ 

they  have  been,  yet  were  they  warriors  in  Christ's  church,  and  fought    ^^-  ^• 
to  their  power  in  the  same  cause.     And  although  they  gave  back  -Al^ 
through  tyranny,  yet  judge  thou  the  best,  good  reader !  and  refer 
the  cause  thereof  to  God,  who  revealeth  all  things  according  to  his 
determinate  will  and  appointed  time. 


HENRY  THE  SIXTH.^ 

This^  young  prince,  being  under  the  age  of  one  year,  after  the 
death  of  his  father  succeeded  in  his  reign  and  kingdom  of  England, 
A.  D.  1422,  and  in  the  eighth  year  was  crowned  at  Westminster; 
and  in  the  second  year  after  was  crowned  also  at  Paris  (Henry 
bishop  of  Winchester,  cardinal,  being  present  on  both  occasions), 
and  reigned  thirty-eight  years  ;  and  then  was  deposed  by  Edward  IV., 
as  hereafter,  Christ  willing,  shall  be  declared  in  his  tune.^ 

Billiam  CaJlojL',  ^ctes^t. 

*There''  hath  been  no  region  or  country  more  fertile  or  fruitfid  for 
mart}TS,  than  our  only  region  of  England.  Whether  it  happeneth 
or  cometh  by  the  singular  gift  or  privilege  of  God's  divine  grace,  or 
else  through  the  barbarous  and  foolish  cruelty  of  such  as  at  that 
time  rided  and  governed  the  church,  it  is  uncertain.  Oxford  at  the 
present  was,  as  it  had  been,  a  continual  spring  of  christian  knowledge 
and  learning,  fi.-om  whence,  as  out  of  the  Trojan  horse,  there  hath 
come  forth  so  many  invincible  witnesses  of  Christ  and  his  truth,  who, 
with  their  singular  learning,  and  with  their  blood,  have  not  only  de- 
served praise  of  such  as  were  in  their  days,  but  also  of  all  such  as  shall 
come  after.* 

In  the  first  year  of  this  king's  reign  was  burned  the  constant 
witness-bearer  and  '  testis'  of  Christ's  doctrine,  William  Tailor,  a 
priest,  being  a  favourer  of  Wickliff,  under  Henry  Chichesley,  arch- 
bishop of  Canterbury. 

Of  this  William  Tailor  I  read,  that  in  the  days  of  Thomas  Arundel  wiiiiam 
he  was  first  apprehended,  and  abjured.     Afterwards,  in  the  days  of  ^^J  first 
Henry  Chichesley,  about  a.  d.  1421   (which  was  a  year  before  his  ^ j^LnS 
burning),  the  said  William  Tailor  appeared  again  in  the  convocation  ed. 
before  the  archbishop,  being  brought  by  the  bishop  of  Worcester, 
being  complained  of  to  have  taught  at   Bristol  these  articles  fol- 
lowing : 

First,  That  whosoever  hangeth  any  scripture  about  his  neck,  taketh  away  Articles 
the  honour  due  only  to  God,  and  giveth  it  to  the  devil  objected 

Secondly,  That  no  human  person  is  to  be  worshipped,  but  only  God  is  to  be 
adored. 

Thirdly,  That  the  saints  are  neither  to  be  worshipped  nor  invocated. 

(1)  Edition  1563,  p.  347;  Ed.  1570,  p.  780;  Ed.  1576,  p.  635 ;  Ed.  1583,  p.  658;  Ed.  1596,  p.  605; 
Ed.  1684,  vol.  i.  p.  748.— Ed. 

(2)  Ex  Scala  Mundi.     Ex.  Regist.  Cant.  (3)  See  Edition  1563,  p.  347.— Ed. 


582  EXAMINATION    AND    ABJURATION    OF    WILLIAM    TAILOR. 

Henry  Upon  tlicsc  articles  the  said  William  Tailor  being  examined, 
__!Z_  denied  that  he  did  preach  or  hold  them  in  way  of  defending  them, 
A.  D.  but  only  did  commune  and  talk  upon  the  same,  especially  upon  the 
1422.  second  and  third  articles,  only  in  way  of  reasoning,  and  for  argument's 
sake.  And  to  justify  his  opinion  to  be  true  in  that  which  Jie  did 
hold,  he  brought  out  of  his  bosom  a  paper  or  libel  written,  wherein 
were  contained  certain  articles,  with  the  testimonies  of  the  doctors 
alleged,  and  exhibited  the  same  unto  the  archbishop.  Who  then 
being  bid  to  stand  aside,  the  archbishop,  consulting  together  with  the 
bishops  and  other  prelates  what  was  to  be  done  in  the  matter,  de- 
livered the  writings  unto  Master  John  Castle,  and  John  Rikinghale, 
the  two  vice-chancellors  of  Oxford  and  Cambridge,  and  to  John 
Langdon,  monk  of  Canterbury  ;  who,  advising  with  themselves,  and 
with  other  divines,  about  the  articles  and  allegations,  on  the  Monday 
following  presented  the  said  articles  of  William  Tailor  to  the  arch- 
bishops and  prelates,  as  erroneous  and  heretical.  Whereupon 
William  Tailor,  being  called  before  them,  in  conclusion  was  con- 
tented to  revoke  the  same,  and  for  his  penance,  was  by  them  con- 
demned to  perpetual  prison. 

Notwithstanding,  through  favour,   they  were  contented  that  he 
should  be  released  from  his  carceral  endurance,  in  case  he  would  put 
in  sufficient  surety  in  the  king's  chancery,  and  swear  that  he  would 
never  hold  or  favour  any  such  opinions  hereafter.    And  thus  the  said 
William  Tailor,  appointed  to  appear  the  next  Wednesday  at  Lam- 
beth before  the  archbishop,   to  take  his   absolution   from  his  long 
excommunication  during  the  time  of  Thomas  Arundel,  appeared 
again  before  him ;  where  he,  lapng  aside  his  '  arunlousa,''  that  is,  his 
cloak,  and  his  cap,  and  stripped  unto  his  doublet,  kneeled  at  the  feet 
The  form  of  the  arclibishop.     Who  then,  standing  up,  and  having  a  rod  in  his 
caf  abso-  hand,  began  the  psalm  '  Miserere,'  &c.,  his  chaplains  answering  the 
in'the      secoud  vcrsc.     After  that,  was  said  the  collect,  '  Deus  cui  proprium,' 
church,     Sic.,  with  certain  other  prayers.     And  so  taking  an  oath  of  him,  the 
against    archbishop  committed  him  to  the  custody  of  the  bishop  of  Worcester, 
were  ex-'  to  whoiu  power  and  authority  were  permitted  to  release  him,  upon 
commu-   the  conditions  aforesaid.     And  thus  was  William  Tailor,  for  that 
time,  absolved,  being  enjoined  notwithstanding  to  appear  at  the  next 
convocation,  whensoever  it  should  be,  before  the  said  archbishop,  or 
his  successor  that  should  follow  him. 

In  the  mean  time,  while  William  Tailor  Avas  thus  in  the  custody 
of  the  bishop  of  Worcester,  there  passed  certain  writings  between  him 
and  one  Thomas  Smith,  priest  at  Bristol,  in  which  William  Tailor 
replied  against  the  said  Thomas,  concerning  the  question  of  worship- 
ping of  saints.  Upon  the  occasion  of  which  reply,  being  brought  to 
the  hands  of  the  bishop  of  Worcester,  William  Tailor  began  anew  to 
be  troubled,  and  was  brought  again  before  the  public  convocation  of 
the  clergy  by  the  said  bishop  of  Worcester,  to  answer  unto  his 
writings.  This  was  a.d.  1422,  the  eleventh  of  February;  unto 
which  convocation  the  said  William  being  presented,  his  writings 
were  read  to  him  ;  which  he  would  not,  nor  could  not,  deny  to  be  of 
his  own  hand  writing.  The  tenor  and  effect  of  whose  writings  only 
tended  to  prove,  that  every  petition  and  prayer  for  any  supernatural 
gift  ought  to  be  directed  to  God  alone,  and  to  no  creature.     Albeit, 


HIS    ARTICLES    DECLARED    TO    BE    HEREIICAL.  583 

in  this  his  writing,  he  did  not  utterly  deny  that  it  was  lawful  in  any   Henry 
respect  to  pray  to  saints  (and  bringeth  for  the  same  Thomas  Aquinus), 


but  only  in  respect  of  that  worsliip,  which  is  called  'cultus  latria; :''    ■^•^• 
and  he  further  so  prosecuteth  his  mind  herein,  that  he  seemeth  little 


or  nothing  to  differ  from  the  superstition  of  the  papists,  as  most  n^n°^'" 
plainly  appeareth  by  his  own  words,  saying,  ""  Nunquam  tamen  ne-  bailor 
gavi,  aut  negare  intendo,  merita  aut  sanctorum  suffragia  tarn  beatorum  ing  the 
quam  viantium,  tam  vivis,  quam  mortuis  ad  hoc  dispositis,  quantum  pTng*!,?" 
possunt,  suffragari,  vel  proficere ;  quia  hoc  est  elicibile  ex  Scriptura,  ^^'"'s- 
quae  non  fallit,  et  ex  consona  ratione,"  &c.     And,  moreover,  he  in- 
fen-eth  the  example  of  Moses,  who  prayed  unto  God,  alleging  the 
merits  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,   who  were  dead,  &c.     And 
furthermore,  passing  from  the  testimony  of  Jerome,  and  alleging  the 
example  of  Stephen,  he  saith,  "'■  Quod  nunc  magis  exauditur  pro  vene- 
ratoribus  suis,  quam  tunc  exauditus  est  pro  lapidatoribus."^     And  at 
length  he  cometh  to  this  conclusion,  proving  by  St.  Austin,  in  this 
manner,  "  Ne  igitur,  cum  impiis  et  idololatris  in  Veteri  Testamento, 
in  circuitu  ambulemus,  nvmquam  dcveniendo  ad  centrum,  sanum  est 
quod  faciamus  secundum  consilium  Apostoli  sic  diccntis,  '  accedamus 
cum  fiducia  ad  thronum  gratioe  ejus,  ut  misericordiam  consequamur, 
et  gratiam  inveniamus  in  auxilio  opportune,' ""  &c.     That  is,  *■'  And 
therefore,  lest  we  run  about  in  cu'cles  with  the  wicked,  and  with  the 
idolaters  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  never  come  to  the  centre,  there- 
fore it  is  wholesome  and  good  counsel,  that  we  follow  the  mind  of 
the  apostle,  saying,  '  Let  us  resort  with  boldness  unto  the  throne  of 
his  grace,  that  we  may  obtain  mercy,  and  find  grace  in  time  of  oppor- 
tune help,' "  &c. 

Thus  much  out  of  the  aforesaid  writings  of  William  Tailor  I  have  Fourarti- 
excerped,  to  the  intent  that   the  indifferent  reader,  using  his  judg-  the^our 
ment  herein,  may  see  how  little  matter  Avas  in  this,  wherefore  he  f^'iMfia^id 
should  be  condemned  by  the  papists.    And  yet  notwithstanding,  the  against 
same  writing,  being  delivered  by  the  archbishop  to  the  four  orders  of 
friars  of  London  to  be  examined,  was  found  erroneous  and  heretical 
in  these  points : 

L  That  every  prayer  Avhich  is  a  petition  of  some  supernatural  gift 
or  free  gift,  is  to  be  directed  only  to  God. 

IL  Item,  That  prayer  is  to  be  directed  to  God  alone. 

III.  Item,  To  pray  to  any  creature  is  to  commit  idolatry. 

IV.  Also,  another  opinion  there  was  much  like  to  the  other,  to 
make  up  the  fourth ;  so  that  although  all  these  opinions  agreed  in 
one,  yet,  to  make  up  a  number,  every  order  of  the  four  sorts  of  friars 
thought  to  find  out  some  matter  to  offer  up  to  the  archbishop  against 
him,  lest  one  order  should  seem  more  cunning  or  pregnant,  in  finding 
out  more  than  could  another ;  or  else  perchance  lest  any  of  them 
should  seem  to  favour  the  party,  in  bringing  nothing  against  him,  as 
the  rest  had  done. 

When  the  Saturday  was  come,  which  was  the  twentieth  day  of 
February,  upon  which  day  the  four  orders  were  appointed  to  declare 
their  censure  upon  the  articles,  in  the  chapter-house  of  PaiU's ;  first 
appeared  friar  Tille,  for  the  black  friars,  then  friar  Winchelsey,  then 

(1)  "  Cultus  latriae,"  that  is,  worship  which  is  o"ly  due  to  God. 

(2)  Augustin  super  Psal.  xxi. 


584  THE    BURNING    OF    WILLIAM    TAILOK. 

Henry    IViar  Low,  and  after  him  friar  Asliwel ;  each  friar  for  his  order  seve- 

^^-     rally  bringing  his  heresy,  as  is  above  specified. 

A.  D.         Thus  the  verdict  of  these  four  orders  being  given  up  to  the  arch- 

^"^22.    bishop,  and  severally  each  order  coming  in  with  his  heresy,  which 

was  the  twentieth  day  of  February ;  hereupon  cometh  down  a  writ 

from  the  king,  directed  to  the  lord  mayor  and  sheriffs  of  London, 

'  De  ha-retico  comburendo,'  dated  the  first  day  of  March,  the  first 

year  of  his  reign,  the  copy  whereof  remaineth  in  the  Records  of  the 

Tower,  beginning  thus  :   '  Rex  majori  et  vice-comitibus.''      Where- 

wiiiiam    upou  the  Said   William  Tailor,  condemned  as  a  relapse,  first  was 

graded^^  degraded,  and  afterwards  to  be  burned  ;  and  so  was  committed  to 

J"'^   ^ .    the  secular  power  :   who  then  being  had  to  Smithfield,  with  christian 

binned  in  I  .  .  o 

Smith-     constancy,  alter  long  imprisonment,  there  did  consummate  his  mar- 

^"^^-       tyrdom,  the  first  day  of  March,  1422. 

The  The  manner  of  his  degrading  was  all  one  with  the  degrading  of 

manner    Johu  Huss  before ;  for  the  papists  use  but  one  form  for  all  men. 

dation'^^"  First,  degrading  them  from  the  priesthood,  by  taking  from  them  the 
chalice  and  patin  ;  from  deaconship,  by  taking  from  them  the  gospel- 
book  and  tunicle  ;  from  sub-deaconship,  by  taking  from  them  the 
epistle-book  and  tunicle  ;  from  acoluteship,  by  taking  from  them  the 
cruet  and  candlestick  ;  from  an  exorcist,  by  taking  away  the  book  of 
exorcisms  or  gradual ;  from  the  sextonship,  by  taking  away  the 
church-door-key  and  surplice ;  and  likewise  from  bene't,  in  taking 
away  the  surplice,  and  first  tonsure,  &c.  All  which  they  orderly 
accomplished  upon  this  godly  martyr,  before  his  burning. 

3IoJ)n  Botence,  a  Cutnec* 

John  Florence,  a  turner,  dwelling  in  Shelton,  in  the  diocese  of 
Norwich,  was  attached  for  that  he  held  and  taught  these  heresies 
(as  they  called  them)  here  under-written,  contrary  to  the  determina- 
tion of  the  church  of  Rome. 

Imprimis,  That  the  pope  and  cardinals  have  no  power  to  make  or  constitute 
any  laws. 

Item,  That  there  is  no  day  to  be  kept  holy,  but  only  the  Sunday  which  God 
hath  hallowed. 

Item,  That  men  ought  to  fast  no  other  time,  but  the  '  Quatuor  temporum.' 

Item,  That  images  are  not  to  be  worshipped ;  neither  that  the  people  ought 
to  set  up  any  lights  before  them  in  the  churches,  neither  to  go  on  pilgrimage, 
neither  to  offer  for  the  dead,  nor  with  women  that  are  purified. 

Item,  That  curates  should  not  take  the  tithes  of  their  parishioneis,^  but  that 
such  tithes  should  be  divided  amongst  the  poor  parishioners. 

Item,  That  all  such  as  swear  by  their  life  or  power,  shall  be  damned,  except 
they  repent. 

A.D.1424,  On  Wednesday,  August  2d,  a.d.  1424,  the  said  John  Florence 
personally  appeared  before  William  Bernham,  chancellor  to  William, 
bishop  of  Norwich,  where  he,  proceeding  against  him,  objected  the 
first  article  touching  the  power  of  the  pope  and  cardinals  ;  to  which 
article  the  said  John  Florence  answered  in  this  manner:  "If  the 
pope  live  uprightly,  as  Peter  lived,  he  hath  power  to  make  laws ; 
otherwise    I  believe   he   hath  no   power.''     But   being   afterwards 

(1)  He  meaneth  they  should  not  claim  such  riches  by  any  exaction. 


THE    PERSECUTION    IN    SUFFOLK    AND    NOKFOLK.  585 

threatened  by  the  judge,  he  acknowledged  that  he  had  en-ed,  and    Henry 
submitted  himself  to  the  correction  of  the  church,  and  was  abjured  ;      ^^' 
taking  an  oath  that  from  that  time  forward  he  should  not  hold,  teach,    A.  D. 
preach,  or  willingly  defend,  any  error  or  heresy  contrary  to  the  deter-    ^^^^- 
mination  of  the  church  of  Rome  ;  neither  maintain,  help,  nor  aid,  any 
that  shall  teach  or  hold  any  such  errors  or  heresies,  either  privily  or 
apertly.  And  for  his  offence  in  this  behalf  done,  he  was  enjoined  this 
penance  following :     Three  Sundays,  in  a  solemn  procession,  in  the 
cathecb-al  church  of  Norwich,  he  should  be  disciplined  before  all  the 
people.'     The  like  also  should  be  done  about  his  parish-church  of 
She!  ton,   three   other  several  Sundays,  he  being  bare-headed,  bare- 
footed, and  bare-necked,  after  the  manner  of  a  public  peniteniary; 
his  body  being  covered  with  a  canvass-shirt  and  canvass-breechcs ; 
carrying  in  his  hand  a  taper  of  a  pound  weight :  and  that  done,  he 
was  dismissed. 

JiicprD  25eltoarO,  anD  ot{jcc^. 

Richard  Bel  ward,  of  Ersham,  in  the  diocese  of  Norwich,  was  accused  A.D.H.r,. 
for  holding  and  teaching  these  errors  and  opinions  here  under  written, 
contrary  to  the  detennination  of  the  church  of  Rome. 

Imprimis,  That  ecclesiastical  ministers  and  ordinaries^  have  no  power  to 
excommmiicate,  neither  can  excommunicate.  And  albeit  that  a  bishop  do 
excommunicato  any  man,  God  doth  absolve  him. 

Item,  That  he  held  the  erroneous  opinions  and  conclusions^  which  sir  John 
Oldcastle  held  when  he  was  in  prison,  and  affirmed  that  sir  John  Oldcastle  was 
a  true  catholic  man,  and  falsely  condemned,  and  put  to  death  without  any 
reasonable  cause. 

Item,  That  such  as  go  on  pilgrimage,  offering  to  images  made  of  wood  and 
stone,  are  excommunicated,  because  they  ought  to  offer  to  the  quick,  and  not  to 
the  dead ;  and  that  the  ecclesiastical  ministers  (that  is  to  say,  the  curates,)  do 
sell  God  upon  Easter-day,  when  they  receive  offerings  of  such  as  should  com- 
municate, before  they  do  minister  the  sacrament  unto  them. 

Item,  That  he  counselled  divers  women,  that  they  should  not  offer  in  the 
church  for  the  dead,  neither  with  women  that  were  purified. 

Item,  That  he  blamed  divers  of  his  neighbours  that  refused  his  doctrine,  saying  The 
unto  them,  '  Tridy  ye  are  fools  that  deny  to  learn  the  doctrine  of  my  sect ;  for  words  oi 
your  neighbom-s  who  are  of  my  sect,  are  able  to  confound  and  vanquish  all  gjgter.' 
others  that  are  of  your  sect.' 

Item,  That  the  saints  who  are  in  heaven  ought  in.  Jio  case  to  be  prayed  unto, 
but  only  God. 

Item,  That  the  said  Richard  keepeth  schools  of  Lollardy  in  the  English 
tongue,  in  the  town  of  Dychingham,  and  a  certain  parchment-maker  bringeth 
him  all  the  books  containing  that  doctrine  from  London. 

On  the  fifth  of  July,  1424,  the  said  Richard  Belward,  was  brought 
before  John,  bishop  of  Norwich,  sitting  in  place  of  judgment,  where 
the  aforesaid  articles  were  objected  against  the  said  Richard,  which 
he  there  denied ;  whereupon  the  bishop  appointed  him  another  day 
to  purge  himself,  the  Monday  next  after  the  feast  of  St.  Margaret : 
upon  which  day,  being  the  twenty-fourth  of  July,  in  the  year  afore- 
said, he  appeared  again  before  the  bishop,  and  brought  with  him  nine 

U)  The  manner  of  this  disciplining  was  with  a  white  rod  thrice  laid  upon  the  head  of  the 
penitentiary.  .  ^   j  j.j     , 

(2)  He  meaneth  the  wicked  bishops  of  that  time,  whose  curses  God  did  'loss. 
(Z\  This  proveth  sir  John  Oldcastle  to  be  no  traitor. 


586  THE    PERSECUTION    IN    SUFFOLK    AND    NORFOLK. 

Hcnrii    of  liis  ncighbours  to  purge  him  upon  those  articles,  and  there  did 
^^'     solemnly  purge  himself.     And  afterwards,   forasmuch  as  the  said 


A.D,  bishop  suspected  the  said  Richard  Belward  greatly  of  Lollardy,  he 
^'^'^'^-  commanded  him  there,  presently,  to  swear  upon  the  evangelists,  that 
from  that  day  forward  he  would  not  wittingly  preach,  teach,  or  defend, 
any  error  or  heresy  contrary  to  the  church  of  Rome,  neither  aid, 
assist,  favour,  nor  maintain,  privily  or  apertly,  any  manner  of  person 
or  persons,  who  should  hold  or  maintain  the  said  en-ors  or  heresies. 
In  the  presence  of  Master  William  Bernham,  John  Wadden,  Robert 
Serle,  and  John  Berne,  esquire,  and  other  of  his  neighbom'S  who  came 
unto  his  purgation. 

John  In  like  manner  John  Goddesel,  of  Dychingham,  parchment-maker, 

o/'oych-'  was  detected  and  accused  upon  the  same  articles,  and  thereupon 

ingham.   }jrought  before  the  bishop,  where  he,  denying  them,  purged  himself 

by  his  neighbours,  as  Richard  Belward  before  had  done,  being  sworn 

also  in  like  manner  as  he  was ;  and  so  was  dismissed  and  set  at  liberty 

until  A.D,  1428,  when  he  was  again  apprehended  and  accused,  and 

abjured,  as  shall  be  more  at  large  declared  in  the  history,  when  we 

Sir  Hugh  comc  to  that  year.     Sir  Hugh  Pie  also,  chaplain  of  Ludney  in  the 

priest,      diocese  of  Norwich,  was  likewise  accused  and  brought  before  the 

bishop  of  Norwich  on  the  fifth  of  July,  a.d,  1424,  for  holding  these 

opinions  following : 

That  the  people  ought  not  to  go  on  pilgrimage. 

Item,  That  the  people  ought  not  to  give  alms,  but  only  unto  such  as  beg  at 
Image  of  their  doors. 

the  cross  Item,  That  the  image  of  the  cross  and  other  images  are  not  to  be  worshipped ; 
worship-  '^"'i  ^^''^^  ^^  S'^i^  Hugh  had  cast  the  cross  of  Bromehold  into  the  fire  to  be 
ped.  burned,  which  he  took  from  one  John  Welgate  of  Ludney. 

Which  articles,  as  is  aforesaid,  being  objected  against  him,  he 
utterly  denied ;  whereupon  he  had  a  day  appointed  to  purge  himself 
by  the  witness  of  three  lay-men,  and  three  priests.  1  hat  so  done, 
he  was  sworn  as  the  other  before,  and  so  dismissed. 
»  D.1428.  After  this,  a.d.  1428,  king  Henry  VI.  sent  down  most  cruel  letters 
of  commission  unto  John  Exeter  and  Jacolet  Germain,  keeper  of  the 
castle  of  Colchester,  for  the  apprehending  of  sir  William  White, 
priest,  and  others  suspected  of  heresies,  the  tenor  whereof  hereafter 
ensueth. 

The  Copy  of  the  King's  Letters  directed  to  John  Exeter  and  Jacolet 
Germain,  Keeper  of  the  Castle  of  Colchester,  for  the  apprehending 
of  Sir  William  White,  Priest,  and  other  Lollards,  as  they  called 
them. 

Henry,  by  the  grace  of  God,  king  of  England  and  of  France,  lord  of  Ireland, 
to  his  well-beloved  John  Exeter,  and  Jacolet  Germain,  keeper  of  the  castle  of 
Colchester,  health : 

Ye  shall  miderstand  that  we,  ftilly  trusting  to  your  fidelity  and  circumspections, 
have  appointed  you  jointly  and  severally  to  take  and  arrest  William  White,  priest, 
and  Thomas,  late  chaplain  of  Setling,  in  the  county  of  Norfolk,  and  William 
Northampton,  priest,  and  all  others,  whatsoever  they  be,  that  are  suspected  of 
heresy  or  Lollardy,  wheresoever  they  may  be  fovmd  witliin  the  liberties  or  without, 
and  straightway,  being  so  taken,  to  send  them  unto  our  next  gaol  or  prison. 


A.D. 

1428. 


CATALOGUE  OF  THE   PERSECUTED  IN  SUFFOLK  AND  NORFOLK.  587 

until  such  time  as  we  shall  have  taken  other  order  for  their  delivery :  and  there-    H>'v,y 
fore  we  straightly  command  you,  that  ye  diligently  attend  ahout'the  premises,       ^^• 
and  fulfil  the  same  in  form  aforesaid.     Also  we  cliarge  and  command  all  and  ' 
singular  justices  of  the  peace,  mayors,  sheriifs,  bailifts,  constables,  and  all  other 
our  faithful  officers,  by  the  tenor  of  these  presents,  that  they  do  assist,  aid,  and  . 
counsel  you  and  every  of  you,  in  the  execution  of  the  premises,  as  it  shall  be 
comely  for  them.     In  witness  whereof  we  have  caused  these  our  letters  patent 
to  be  made. 

A\'itness  myself  at  Westminster,  the  sixth  of  July,  the  sixth  of  our 
reign. 

By  virtue  of  which  commission  we  find  in  old  monuments,  that 
within  short  space  after,  John  Exeter,  who  was  appointed  one  of  the 
commissioners,  attached  six  persons  in  the  town  of  Bungav,  in  the 
diocese  of  Norwich ;  and  committed  them  to  William  Day  and 
William  Roe,  constables  of  the  town  of  Bimgay,  to  be  sent  within 
ten  days  following,  under  safe  custody,  unto  the  castle  of  Norwich  ; 
whose  names,  through  the  antiquity  of  the  monument,  were  so  defaced, 
that  -we  could  not  attain  to  the  perfect  knowledge  of  them  all ;  only 
three  names  partly  remained  in  the  worn  book  to  be  read,  which  were 
these :  John  Waddon,  of  Tenterton.  in  the  county  of  Kent ;  Bar- 
tholomew, monk  of  Ersham,  in  the  county  of  Nortblk ;  a  cornleader 
(a  married  man),  William  Scuts. 

These  three  were  in  the  custody  of  the  duke  of  Norfolk,  at  his 
castle  of  Framlingham. 

Beside  these,  Ave  also  find  in  the  said  old  monuments  within  the 
diocese  of  Norfolk  and  Suffolk,  especially  in  the  toAvns  of  Beccles, 
Ersham,  and  Ludney,  a  great  number  both  of  men  and  women  to 
have  been  vexed  and  cast  into  prison  ;  and,  after  their  abjuration, 
brought  to  open  shame  in  churches  and  markets,  by  the  bishop  of  the 
said  diocese,  called  William,  and  his  chancellor,  William  Bernham, 
John  Exeter  being  the  register  therein ;  so  that  within  the  space  of 
three  or  four  years  (that  is,  fi-ora  the  year  1428,  unto  the  year  1431), 
about  the  number  of  one  hundred  and  twenty  men  and  women  were 
examined,  and  sustained  great  vexation  for  the  profession  of  the 
christian  faith  ;  of  whom  some  were  only  taken  upon  suspicion,  for 
eating  of  meats  prohibited  upon  vigil-days,  who,  upon  their  purga- 
tion made,  escaped  more  easily  away,  and  with  less  punishment ; 
■whose  names  here  follow  subscribed. 

A  Catalogue  of  good  Men  and  ^Vomen  that  were  taken  and  examined 
upon  suspicion  of  Heresy. 

Robert  Skirving,  of  Harl-  John  Middleton,  of  Hal-  Thomas  White,of  Beding- 

stone.  vergate.  ham. 

William  Skir\'ing.  John  Wayde,  of  Ersham.  Master  Robert  Beet,  of 

John  Terry,  of  Ersham.  Richard  Clark,  of  Seth-  Berry. 

John  Abtre,  of  Ersham.  ing.                               -  Richard  Page,  of  Clipsly. 

The  others  were  more  cruelly  handled,  and  some  of  them  were  put 
to  death  and  burned  ;  among  whom  we  do  specially  find  mention  made 
of  these  three :  Father  Abraham,  of  Colchester ;  William  White, 
priest ;  John  Waddon,  priest. 

The  residue  (for  a  great  number  of  good  men  and  women  were 
forced  to  abjure),  sustaining  such  cruel  penance  as  pleased  the  said 


588 


A  CATALOGUE  OF  THE  PERSECUTED  IN  SUFFOLK  AMD  NORFOLK. 


Henry 
VI. 

A.D. 

1428. 


l)isliop  and  his  chancellor  then  to  lay  upon  them.  The  names  of 
whom,  both  men  and  women,  here  follow  together  in  this  brief  cata- 
losfue  to  be  seen. 


John  Beverley. 

John  Wardon. 

John  Baker. 

Jolm  Middleton. 

John  Kynget. 

Margery  Backster. 

John  Skilley. 

John  Godhold. 

Thomas  Alheck. 

John  Pierce. 

Nicliolas  Canon,  of  Eye. 

Thomas  Pie. 

John  Mendham. 

John  Middleton. 

Thomas  Chatris. 

Thomas  Wade. 

Wilham  Tailor. 

John   Cupper,   vicar   of 
Tunstal. 

Sir  Hugh  Pie,  priest. 

Bartholomew  Tatcher. 

Thomas  James. 

John  Fouling. 

Bertram  Cornmonger. 

Thomas  Swerden. 

Alanus  Andrew. 

William  Wright. 

William  Everden. 

William  Tailor. 
^Avis,  the  wife  of  Thomas 
Moon,  and  her  daugh- 
ter. 

Richard    Fletcher,    of 
Beckles. 

Nicholas  Belward. 

Thomas  Grenemcrc. 

John  Clark. 

William  Bate. 

William  Scherming. 


William  Osboume, 
John  Rene,  of  Beckles. 
Baldwin    Cooper,    of 

Beckles. 
John  Pert,  Master  Moon's 

servant. 
Robert  Brigs. 
John  Finch. 
John  Wrophani. 
Thomas  Moon. 
Isabel  Chaplain,  of  Mar- 

tham. 
William    Masse,    of   Er- 

sham. 
JohnGoodwin,ofErshani. 
Henry  Latchcold,  of  Er- 

.sham. 
Henry  Boode,  of  Ersham. 
Richard    Home,    of  Er- 
sham. 
John   Belward,   sen.,   of 

Ersham. 
John  Belward,  jun.,  of 

Ersham. 
John  Spire,  of  Bungay. 
Rob.  Cole,  of  Turning. 
The  herd  of  Shepemedow. 
Isabel  Davy,  of  Costes. 
Sibyl,  wife  of  John  Gode- 

sel,  of  Dicham. 
John  Pyrj',  of  Bartliam. 
John  Bakjer. 
Margery  Wright. 
Thomas  Barrel,  and  his 

wife. 
John  Pert. 
Edmund  Archer. 
The  clerk  of  Ludney. 
Richard  Clark,of  Sething. 


Katherine,  wife   of  Wil- 
liam Wright. 

William  Collin,  of  South- 
creke. 

Richard  King,  of  Wind- 
ham. 

Thomas  Plowman. 

John  Fellis. 

Thomas  Love,  of  Roke- 
land. 

Richard    Knobbing,    of 
Beckles. 

RichardGrace,of  Beckles. 

John  Eldon,  of  Beckles. 

William  Hardy. 

William  Bate. 

John  Weston. 

Katherine  Hobs. 

John  Daw. 

Robert   Grigs,    of    Mar- 
tham. 

William  Calls,  priest. 

Thomas  Pert,  priest, 

Katherine  Davy. 

Jacob  Bodhome,and  Mar- 
garet, his  wife. 

John  Manning,  of  Mar- 
ton, 

John  Culling,  of  Beem- 
ster. 

Richard  Fletcher,  of 
Beckles,  and  Matilda, 
his  wife, 

John  Elden,  of  Beckles, 

Robert  Canel,  priest, 

Nicholas  Drey. 

William  Hardy,  of  Mund- 
ham. 

John  Poleyne. 


These  before-named  persons,  and  soldiers  of  Christ,  being  much 
beaten  with  the  cares  and  troubles  of  those  days,  although  they  were 
constrained  to  relent  and  abjure  (that  is,  to  protest  otherwise  with 
theu-  tongues,  than  their  hearts  did  think),  partly  through  correction, 
and  partly  through  infirmity,  being  as  yet  but  newly-trained  soldiers 
in  God's  field,  yet  for  the  good  Avill  they  bare  unto  the  truth,  although 
with  their  tongues  they  durst  not  express  it,  we  have  thought  good 
that  their  names  should  not  be  suppressed,  as  well  for  other  sundry 
causes,  as  especially  for  this :  either  to  stop  the  mouths  of  malignant 
adversaries,  or  to  answer  to  their  ignorance,  who,  following  rather  blind 
affection,  than  the  true  knowledge  of  times  and  antiquities,  for  lack 
of  knowledge  blame  that  they  know  not,  accusing  the  true  doctrine 
of  the  word  of  God  for  novelty,  and  carping  at  the  teachers 
thereof  for  new-broached  brethren ;  who,  if  they  did  as  well  foresee 
times  past,  as  they  be  unAvilling  to  follow  times  now  present,  they 


THE    PERSECUTION    IN    SUFFOLK    AND    NORFOLK.  689 

should  understand  as  well  by  these  stories  as  by  others  before,  how    Henry 
this  doctrine  of  the  gi-ace  of  God,  lacking  no  antiquity,  hath,  fi-oin         " 
time  to  time,  continually  sought  to  burst  out,  and  in  some  places  hath    A.D. 
prevailed,  although  in  most  places,  through  the  tyranny  and  malice  of_21^. 
men,  Christ's  proceedings  have  been  suppressed  and  kept  under  from 
rising,  so  much  as  men's  power  and  strength,  joined  with  craft  and 
subtlety,  could  labour  to  keep  down  the  same ;  as  here  by  these  good 
men  of  Norfolk  and  Suffolk  may  well  appear.     For  if  the  knowledge 
and  good-towardness  of  those  good  men  had  had  the  like  liberty  of 
time,  -with  the  help  of  like  authority,  as  we  have  now,  and  had  not 
been  restrained,  through  the  iniquity  of  time  and  tyranny  of  prelates,  it 
had  well  appeared  how  old  this  doctrine  would  have  been,  which  now  Bonner 
they  contemn  and  reject  for  the  newness  thereof:  neither  needed  ™/''*  ^^^ 
Bonner  to  have  asked  of  Thomas  Hawks,  and  such  others,  where  church 
tlieir  church  was  forty  years  ago ;  inasmuch  as  for  forty  years  ago,  this  age, 
and  more,  within  the  county  of  Norfolk  and  Suffolk,  was  then  found  forty '''^° 
such  plenty  of  the  same  profession  and  like  doctrine  which  we  now  ll'^H^ 
profess.    And  thus  much  for  the  number  and  names  of  these  persons,   he  was 

'^  '^  bom. 

Now  as  touching  their  articles  which  they  did  maintain  and  defend: 
First,  this  is  to  be  considered,  as  I  find  it  in  the  registers,  such  society 
and  agreement  of  doctrine  to  be  amongst  them,  that  in  their  asser- 
tions and  articles  there  was  almost  no  difference.  The  doctrine  of 
the  one  was  the  doctrine  of  all  the  others*  What  their  articles  were, 
partly  is  showed  in  the  leaf  before  ;  and  partly  here  followeth  to  be 
declared  more  at  large. 

Although  it  is  to  be  thought  concerning  these  articles,  that  many 
of  them  either  were  falsely  objected  against  them,  or  not  ti-uly  re- 
ported of  the  notaries  (according  as  the  common  manner  is  of  these 
adversaries,  where  the  matter  is  good,  there  to  make  heresy,  and  of  a 
little  occasion  to  stir  up  great  matter  of  slander,  as  they  did  before  by 
the  articles  of  John  WicklifF  and  John  Huss,   and  others)  :    so,  in 
like  manner,  it  seemeth  they  did  in  the  articles  of  these  men,  either 
mistaking  that  which  they  said,  or  misunderstanding  that  which  they 
meant,  especially  in  these  two  articles  concerning  baptism  and  paying 
of  tithes.       For  where  they,  speaking  against  the  ceremonial  and 
superflous  traditions  then  used  in  baptism,  as  salt,  oil,  spittle,  taper, 
light,   chrisms,   exorcising  of  the  water,  with  such  other  like,    ac- 
counted them  as  no  material  thing  in  the  holy  institution  of  baptism;  These 
the  notaries,  slanderously  depraving  this  their  assertion,  to  make  it  Sfseiy"^" 
more  odious  to  the  ears  of  the  people,  so  gave  out  the  article,  as  ^^^^^''^^ 
though  they  should  hold,  that  the  sacrament  of  baptism,  used  in  the  baptism, 
church  by  water,  is  but  a  light  matter,  and  of  small  effect. 

Ao-ain,  in  speaking  against  the  christening  which  the  midwives 
use  in  private  houses,  against  the  opinion  of  such  as  think  such  chil- 
dren to  be  damned  who  depart  before  they  come  to  their  baptism, 
they  are  falsely  reported,  as  though  they  should  say :  That  christian 
people  be  sufficiently  baptized  in  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  need  no 
water ;  and  that  infants  be  sufficiently  baptized,  if  their  parents  be 
baptized  before  them.  Which  thing  is  so  contrary  to  the  manifest 
Word,  that  it  is  not  to  be  thought  that  any  are  so  ignorant  of  the 
gospel,  that  they  ever  would,  or  did,  affirm  the  same. 


590  THE    PERSECUTIOX    IN    SUFFOLK    AXD    NORFOLK. 

Henry        Moreover  they  thouglit  or  said  peradventure,  That  in  certain  cases 

^^"     tithes  might  be  withhoklen  from  wicked  priests  sometimes,  and  be 

A.D.    conferred  to  better  uses  ;  to  the  behoof  of  the  poor.     Therefore  they 

^^'^^-    are  falsely  slandered,  as  saying  and  affirming,  that  no  tithes  are  to 

be  given  to  the  ministers  and  curates  of  the  churches. 

The  va-         And  likewise  for  matrimony,  wherein  they  are  reported  to  hold 

but  quar-  and  affirm,  as  though  it  consisted  only  in  the  mutual  consent  be- 

reipick-    ^^yjxt  the  man  and  the  Avoman,  needing  no  other  solemnizing  in  the 

public  church  ;  and  all  because  (as  it  is  likely)  they  denied  it  to  be 

a  sacrament. 

Other  articles  were  objected  against  them,  as  these  which  hereafter 
follow : 

Articles.        That  auricular  confession  is  not  to  be  made  unto  a  priest,  but  unto  God  only; 
because  no  priest  hath  any  power  to  absolve  a  sinner  from  his  sin. 

Item,  That  no  priest  hath  power  to  make  the  body  of  Christ  in  the  sacra- 
ment of  the  altar,  but  that,  after  the  sacramental  words,  there  remaineth  pure 
material  bread  as  before. 

Item,  That  every  true  christian  man  is  a  priest  to  God. 

Item,  That  no  man  is  bound,  under  pain  of  damnation,  unto  Lent,  or  any 
other  days  prohibited  by  the  church  of  Rome. 

Item,  That  the  pope  is  Antichrist,  and  his  prelates  the  disciples  of  Anti- 
christ, and  that  the  pope  hath  no  power  to  bind  and  loose  upon  earth. 

Item,  That  it  is  lawfid  for  every  Christian  to  do  any  bodily  work  (sin  only 
excepted)  upon  holy-days.^ 

Item,  That  it  is  lawful  for  priests  to  have  wives. 

Item,  That  tlie  excommunications  and  ecclesiastical  censures  given  out  by 
the  prelates,  are  not  to  be  regarded. 

Item,  That  it  is  not  lawful  to  swear  in  private  cases. 

Item,  That  men  ought  not  to  go  on  pilgrimage. 

Item,  That  there  is  no  honour  to  be  given  to  the  images  of  the  cnicifix,  of 
our  lady,  or  any  other  saint. 

Item,  That  the  holy  water,   hallowed  in  the  church  by  the  priest,  is  not 
holier  or  of  more  virtue  than  other  running  or  well-water,  because  the  Lord 
blessed  all  waters  in  their  first  creation. 
Death  of       Item,  That  the  death  of  Thomas  Becket  was  neither  holy  nor  meritorious. 
Becket.         Item,  That  relics,  as  dead  men's  bones,  ought  neither  to  be  worshipped  nor 
digged  out  of  their  graves,  nor  set  up  in  shrines. 

Item,  That  prayers  made  in  all  places  are  acceptable  unto  God.   • 

Item,  That  men  ought  not  to  pray  to  any  saint,  but  only  to  God. 

Item,  That  the  bells  and  ringing  in  the  church,  were  ordained  for  no  other 
purpose,  than  to  fill  the  priests'  purses. 

Item,  Tliat  it  is  no  sin  to  withstand  the  ecclesiastical  precepts. 

Item,  That  the  catholic  church  is  only  the  congregation  of  the  elect.^ 

These  were  the  articles  which  were  generally  objected  against  them 
all,  wherein  they  did  so  agree  in  one  uniform  faith,  that  whatsoever 
one  did  hold,  all  the  others  did  maintain,  and  hold  the  same.  By 
which  their  consent  and  doctrine  it  appeareth,  that  they  all  received 
it  of  some  one  instructor,  who  was  William  White ;  who  being  a 
scholar  and  follower  of  John  WicklifF,  resorted  afterwards  into  this 
country  of  Norfolk,  and  there  instructed  these  men  in  the  light  of 
the  gospel.  And  now,  as  we  have  declared  the  names  and  articles 
of  these  good  men,  so  it  remaineth  somewhat  to  speak  of  their 
troubles  (how  they  were  handled),  beginning  first  with  William 
White. 

(1)  In  case  of  necessity  urgent,  they  meant. 

(2)  In  this  article  is  meant,  that  the  wicked  be  in  the  church  but  not  of  the  chuTcli 


THE    BURNING    OF    V'lLLIAM     WHITE.  591 

This  William  White,  being  a  follower  of  John  WicldifF,'  and  a 
priest,  not  after  the  common  sort  of  priests,  but  rather  to  be  re- 

fnted  amongst  the  nmnber  of  them  of  whom  the  wise  man  speaketh, 
Ecclus.  xviii.]  '  He  was  as  the  morning  star  in  the  midst  of  a  cloud,"' 
&c. ;  this  man  was  well  learned,  upright,  and  a  well-spoken  priest. 
He  gave  over  his  priesthood  and  benefice,  and  took  unto  him  a  godly 
young  woman  to  his  wife,  named  Joan  ;  notwithstanding  he  did  not 
therefore  cease  or  leave  from  his  former  office  and  duty,  but  conti- 
nually labom-ed  to  the  glory  and  praise  of  the  spouse  of  Christ,  by 
reading,  Avi-iting,  and  preaching.  The  principal  points  of  his  doctrine 
were  these,  which  he  was  forced  to  recant  at  Canterbury. 

That  men  should  seek  for  the  forgiveness  of  their  sins  only  at  the  hands  of  God. 
That  the  wicked  living  of  the  pope,  and  his  holiness,  is  nothing  else  but  a 

devilish  estate  and  heavy  yoke  of  Antichrist,  and  therefore  he  is  an  enemy 

unto  Clirist's  truth. 

That  men  ought  iiot  to  worship  images,  or  other  idolatrous  paintings.  The 

That  men  ought  not  to  worship  the  holy  men  who  are  dead.  Romish 

That  the  Romish  church  is  the  fig-tree  which  the  Lord  Christ  hath  accursed,  aptly  re- 

because  it  hath  brought  forth  no  fruit  of  the  true  belief.  sembled 

That  such  as  wear  cowls,  or  be  anointed  or  shorn,  are  the  lance-knights  and  cursed 

soldiers   of  Lucifer ;   and  that  they  all,  because  their  lamps  are  not  bm'ning,  fig-tree. 

shall  be  shut  out,  when  the  Lord  Christ  shall  come. 

Upon  which  articles  he,  being  attached  at  Canterbury  under  the  arch- 
bishop Henry  Chichesley,  a.d.  1424,  there,  for  a  certain  space,  stoutly 
and  manfully  witnessed  the  truth  which  he  had  preached.  But  like 
as  there  he  lost  his  courage  and  strength,  so  afterwards  he  became 
again  much  more  stout  and  strong  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  confessed  his 
own  error  and  oflfence.  For  after  this,  going  into  Norfolk  with  his  said 
wife  Joan,  and  there  occupying  himself  busily  in  teaching  and  con- 
verting the  people  unto  the  true  doctrine  of  Christ,  at  last,  by  means 
of  the  king's  letters  sent  down  for  that  intent  and  purpose,  he  was 
apprehended  and  taken,  and  brought  before  William  bishop  of  Norwich, 
by  whom  he  was  convicted,  and  condemned  of  thirty  articles,  and 
there  was  burned  in  Norwich,  in  the  month  of  September,  a.d.  1428. 

This  William  White  and  his  wife  had  their  chief  abode  with  one 
Thomas  Moon  of  Ludney,     He  was  of  so  devoHt  and  holy  a  life, 
that  all  the  people  had  him  in  great  reverence,  and  desired  him  to     \ 
pray  for  them  ;  insomuch  that  one  Margaret  Wright  confessed,  that       ^ 
if  any  saints  were  to  be  prayed  to,  she  vrould  rather  pray  to  him  than 
any  other.     When  he  was  come  unto  the  stake,   thinking  to   open  The 
his  mouth  to  speak  unto  the  people,  to  exhort  and  confinn  them  man"^' 
in    the    verity,    one    of  the  bishop's   servants    struck  him    on   the  ^^^^^' 
mouth,  thereby  to  force  him  to  keep  silence.     And  thus  this  good  the^^^ 
man,  receiving  the  crown  of  martyrdom,  ended  this  mortal  life  to  the  exhorting 
great  dolor  and  grief  of  all  the  good  men  of  Norfolk ;  whose  said  p^|.^^"" 
wife  Joan,  following  her  husband's  footsteps  according  to  her  power, 
teaching   and    sowing   abroad   the   same  doctrine,   confinned  many 
men  in  God's  truth  ;  wherefore  she  suffered  much  trouble  and  punish- 
ment the  same  year  at  the  hands  of  the  said  bishop, 

(1)  En  Waldcno. 


592 


THE    DISCIPT.ININ'G    OF    PIE    AND    MENDHAM. 


Hevry 
VI. 

A.D. 
1428. 

Father 
Abra- 
ham, 
John 
Waddoii, 
priest, 
martyrs, 
and 
burned. 


About  the  same  time  also  were  burned  Father  Abraham,  of  Col- 
chester, and  John  Waddon,  priest,  for  the  like  articles. 

Concerning  those  who  abjured,  how  and  by  whom  they  were  exa- 
mined, what  depositions  came  in  against  them,  and  what  was  the  order 
and  manner  of  the  penance  enjoined  them,  here  it  might  be  set  out  at 
large ;  but,  for  avoiding  of  prolixity,  it  shall  be  sufficient  briefly  to 
touch  certain  of  the  principals,  whereby  the  better  understanding  may 
be  given  to  the  reader,  after  what  manner  and  order  all  the  others 
were  treated. 

First,  amongst  those  who  were  arrested  and  caused  to  abjure  in 
this  year  before  specified  (1428),  were  Thomas  Pic  and  John  Mend- 
ham  of  Aldborough  ;  who,  being  convicted  upon  divers  of  the  articles 
before-mentioned,  were  enjoined  penance  to  be  done  in  their  own 
parish  church,  as  by  the  bishop's  letter,  directed  to  the  dean  of  Rho- 
denhall,  and  to  the  parish  priest  of  Aldborough,  doth  more  at  large 
appear ;  the  tenor  whereof  here  ensueth  : 

Copy  of  the  Letter  of  the  Bishop^of  Norwich,  respecting  Thomas  Pie 
and  Thomas  Mendham. 

William,  by  the  sufferance  of  God  bishop  of  Norwich,  to  our  well-beloved  sons 
in  Christ,  the  dean  of  Rhodenhall  of  our  diocese,  and  to  the  parish  priest  of  tlie 
parish  church  of  Aldborough  of  the  same  our  diocese,  health,  grace,  and  bene- 
diction. Forasmuch  as  we,  according  to  our  office,  lawfully  proceeding  to  the 
correction  and  amendment  of  the  souls  of  Thomas  Pie  and  John  Mendham  of 
Aldborough  of  the  diocese  aforesaid,  because  they  have  holden,  believed  and 
affirmed  divers  and  many  errors  and  heresies,  contrary  to  the  determination  of 
the  holy  church  of  Rome,  and  the  universal  chvuxh  and  catholic  faith,  have 
enjoined  the  said  Thomas  and  John,  appearing  before  us  personally,  and  con- 
fessing before  us  judicially  that  they  have  holden,  believed,  and  affirmed  divers 
and  many  errors  and  heresies,  this  penance  hereunder  written,  for  their  offences 
to  be  done  and  fulfilled  in  manner,  form,  and  time,  hereunder  written,  according 
as  justice  doth  require  ;  that  is  to  say,  six  fustigations  or  disciplinings  about  the 
parish  church  of  Aldborough  aforesaid,  before  a  solemn  procession  six  several 
Sundays,  and  three  disciplinings  about  the  market-place  of  Harlstone  of  our  said 
The  man-  diocese  three  principal  market-days ;  bare  neck,  head,  legs,  and  feet ;  their 
net  of  the  bodies  being  covered  only  with  their  shirts  and  breeches ;  either  of  them  carry - 
penance.  J^o  ^  taper  in  his  hand  of  a  pound  weight,  as  well  round  about  the  church,  as 
about  the  market-place,  in  every  of  the  foresaid  appointed  days:  which  tapers, 
the  last  Sunday  after  the  penance  finished,  we  will  that  the  said  John  and  Tho- 
mas do  humbly  and  devoutly  offijr  unto  the  high  altar  of  the  parish  church  of 
Aldborough  at  the  time  of  the  offertory  of  the  high  mass  the  same  day,  and  that 
either  of  them,  going  about  the  market-place  aforesaid,  shall  make  four  several 
pauses  and  stays,  and,  at  everv  of  those  same  pauses,  humbly  and  devoutly  re- 
ceive at  your  hands  three  disciplinings.  Therefoi'e  we  straitly  charge  and  com- 
mand you,  and  either  of  you,  jointly  and  severally,  by  virtue  of  your  obedience, 
that  every  Sunday  and  market-day  after  the  receipt  of  our  present  commandment, 
you  do  effectually  admonish  and  bring  forth  the  said  Thomas  Pie  and  John 
Mendham  to  begin  and  accomplish  their  said  penance  ;  and  so  successively  to 
finish  the  same  in  manner  and  form  afore-appointed.  But  if  they  will  not  obey 
your  monitions,  or  rather  our  commandments  in  this  behalf,  and  begin  and  finish 
their  said  penance  effectually,  you  or  one  of  you  shall  cite  them  peremptorily, 
that  they,  or  either  of  them,  appear  before  us,  or  our  commissary,  in  the  chapel 
of  our  palace  at  Norwich,  the  twelfth  day  after  the  citation  so  made,  if  it  be  a 
court  day,  or  else  the  next  court  day  following,  to  declare  if  they  or  any  of  them 
have  any  cause  why  they  should  not  be  excommunicated  for  their  manifest 
offence  in  this  behalf  committed,  according  to  the  form  and  order  of  law,  and 
further,  to  receive  such  punishment,  as  justice  shall  provide  in  that  behalf.  And 
what  you  have  done  in  the  premises,  whether  the  said  Thomas  and  John  have 


THE  PENANCE  OF  BEVERLl'  AND  SKILLEY.  5,03 

obeyed  your  admonitions,  and  perfoiTned  the  same  penance  or  no,  we  will  that    He„rij 
you  or  one  of  you,  who  have  received  our  said  commandment  for  the  execution      ''^• 
thereof,  do  distinctly  certify  us  between  this  and  the  last  day  of  November  next 
coming. 

Dated  at  our  palace  of  Norwich,  under  our  commissary's  seal,  the  eighth 
day  of  October,  Anno  1428. 


A.D. 

142S. 


This,  gentle  reader  !  was,  for  the  most  part,  the  order  of  their  whole 
penance,  howbeit  some  were  oftentimes  more  cruelly  handled  ;  and 
after  their  penance  they  were  banished  out  of  the  diocese,  and  others 
were  more  straitly  used  by  longer  imprisonment,  whereof  we  will 
briefly  rehearse  one  or  two  for  example. 

Slofjn  SBcberlp,  alia^  SBattilD,  a  Eatjouver. 

John  Beverly,  alias  Battild,  a  labourer,  was  attached  by  the  vicar 
of  Southcreke,  the  parish  priest  of  Waterden,  and  a  lawyer,  and  so 
delivered  unto  Master  William  Bernham,  the  bishop's  commissary, 
who  sent  him  to  the  castle  of  Norwich,  there  to  be  kept  in  irons : 
where  afterwards,  being  brought  before  the  commissary,  and  having 
nothing  proved  against  him,  he  took  an  oath,  that  every  year  after- 
wards he  would  confess  his  sins  once  a  year  to  his  curate,  and  receive 
the  sacrament  at  Easter,  as  other  Christians  did.  And  for  his  offence 
he  was  enjoined,  that  upon  the  Friday  and  Saturday  next  after  he 
should  fast  on  bread  and  water,  and  upon  the  Saturday  be  whipped^ 
from  the  palace  of  Norwich,  going  round  about  by  Tomblands,  and 
by  St.  MichaeFs  church,  by  Cottlerew,  and  about  the  market,  having 
in  his  hand  a  wax-candle  of  two-pence,  to  offer  to  the  image  of  the 
Trinity  after  he  had  done  his  penance.  And,  forasmuch  as  he  con- 
fessed that  he  had  eaten  flesh  upon  Easter-day,  and  was  not  shriven 
in  all  Lent,  nor  received  upon  Easter-day,  the  judge  enjoined  him 
that  he  should  fast  Tuesday,  Wednesday,  and  Friday,  in  Whitsun- 
week,  having  but  one  meal  a  day  of  fish  and  other  white  meats ;  and, 
after  this  penance  so  done,  he  should  depart  out  of  the  diocese,  and 
never  come  there  any  more. 

Soljn  ^Mlep  Of  Bi]tton,  lEtiltei:,  anO  otfjer^. 

John  Skilley  of  Flixton,  miller,  being  apprehended  and  brought  The 
before  the  bishop  of  Norwich  on  the  14th  of  March,  a.  d.  1428,  for  of  jo"m 
holding  and  maintaining  the  articles  above-written,  was  thereupon  skuiey. 
convicted  and  forced  to  abjure ;  and  after  this  abjuration  solenmly 
made  (which  here,  to  avoid  tediousness,  we  omit),  he  had  a  most  sharp 
sentence  of  penance  pronounced  against  him,  the  effect  whereof,  being 
briefly  collected,  was  this  :  that  forasmuch  as  the  said  Skilley  was 
convicted  by  his  own  confession,  for  holding  and  maintaining  the  arti- 
cles before-written,  and  for  receiving  certain  good  and  godly  men  into 
his  house,  as  sir  William  White,  priest,  and  John  Wadden,  whom 
they  called  famous,  notorious,  and  damnable  heretics,  and  had  now 
abjured  the  same,  being  first  absolved  from  the  sentence  of  excommu- 
nication which  he  had  incurred  by  means  of  his  opinions,  he  was  en- 
joined for  penance  seven  years'  imprisonment  in  the  monastery  of 
Langley,  in  the  diocese  of  Norwich.    And  forasmuch  as  in  times  past 

tl)  "Whipped,"  alias  fustigati-d. 
VOL.  III.  Q  ^ 


sot  VF.ItSECUTlON'    IV    SUFFOLK    AND    NORFOLK. 

Wenrtj    he  used  upon  the  Fridays  to  eat  flesh,  he  was  enjoined  to  fast  on  bread 

'_   and  water  every  Friday  for  the  space  of  seven  years  to  come  ;  and 

A.  D.    tliat  by  the  space  of  two  years  next  immediately  after  the  seven  years 

H28.    expired,  on  every  Wednesday  in  the  beginning  of  Lent,  and  on  every 

Maunday-Thursday,he  should  appear  before  the  bishop,  or  liis  successor 

or  commissary  for  the  time  being,  in  the  cathedral  church  of  Norwich, 

together  with  the  other  penitentiaries,  to  do  open  penance  for  his 

offences. 

Besides  these  there  were  divers  others  of  the  same  company,  who 
the  same  year  were  forced  to  like  abjuration  and  penance.  And  so, 
to  proceed  to  the  next  year  following,  which  was  a.  d.  1429,  there 
ensueth  a  great  number  in  the  same  register,  who  were  examined,  and 
did  penance  in  like  sort,  to  the  number  of  sixteen  or  seventeen ;  in 
the  number  of  whom  was  John  Baker,  otherwise  called  Usher  Tunstal, 
Avho,  for  having  a  book  with  the  Pater-Noster,  the  Ave,  and  the  Creed, 
in  English,  and  for  certain  other  articles  of  fasting,  confession,  and 
invocation,  contrary  to  the  determination  of  the  Romish  church,  after 
much  vexation  for  the  same,  was  caused  to  abjure  and  sustain  such 
penance,  as  the  others  before  him  had  done. 

€{)e  ^torp  of  dEarger?  SBachj^tec  and  otfjcr^. 

Another  was  Margery  Backster,  wife  of  William  Backster,  Avright, 
in  Martham,  the  same  year  accused ;  against  whom  one  .loan,  wife  of 
Cliffland,  was  brought  in  by  the  bishop,  and  compelled  to  depose,  and 
was  made  to  bring  in,  in  form  following : 

A  woman  First,  That  the  said  Margery  Backster  did  inform  this  deponent,  that  she 
brought  should  in  no  case  swear ;  saying  to  her  in  English  :  '  Dame,  beware  of  the  bee, 
■witness  for  every  bee  will  sting ;  and  therefore  take  heed  you  swear  not,  neither  by  God, 
in  the  neither  by  our  lady,  neither  by  any  other  saint ;  and  if  ye  do  contrary,  the  bee 
court!       ^^il'  sting  your  tongue  and  venom  your  soul.' 

The  bee  Item,  This  deponent  being  demanded  by  the  said  Margery,  what  she  did  every 
will  sting,  ^jjy  g^j.  church;  she  answered,  that  she  kneeled  down  and  said  five  Pater-Nos- 
Against  ters,  in  worship  of  the  crucifix,  and  as  many  Ave  Marias  in  worship  of  our  lady, 
images.  \y},Qjn  Margery  rebuked,  saying,  '  You  do  evil  to  kneel  or  pray  to  such  images 
in  the  churches,  for  God  dwelleth  not  in  such  churches,  neither  shall  he  come 
down  out  of  heaven  ;  and  he  will  give  you  no  more  reward  for  such  prayer, 
than  a  candle  lighted  and  set  under  the  cover  of  the  font,  will  give  hght  by 
night  to  those  who  are  in  the  church  :'  saying,  moreover,  in  English :  'Lewd 
Wrights  of  stocks  hew  and  form  such  crosses  and  images,  and,  after  that,  lewd 
painters  gleer  them  with  colours.  And  if  you  desire  so  much  to  see  the  true 
cross  of  Christ,  I  will  show  it  you  at  home  in  your  own  house.'  Which  this 
deponent  being  desirous  to  see.  the  said  Margery,  stretching  out  her  arms  abroad, 
said  to  this  deponent:  'This  is  the  true  cross  of  Christ,  and  this  cross  thou 
oughtest  and  mayest  every  day  behold  and  worship  in  thine  own  house ;  and 
therefore  it  is  but  vain  to  run  to  the  church,  to  worship  dead  crosses  and 
images.' 

Item,  This  deponent,  being  demanded  by  the  said  Margery  how  she  believed 

touching  the  sacrament  of  the  altar,  said  that  she  believed  the  sacrament  of  the 

The  sa-     altar,  after  the  consecration,  to  be  the  very  body  of  Christ  in  form  of  bread.  To 

is  m)t"'    whom  Margery  said :  '  Your  belief  is  nought.     For  if  every  such  sacrament 

God.         were  God,  and  the  very  body  of  Christ,  there  should  be  an  infinite  number  of 

gods,  because  that  a  thousand  priests,  and  more,  do  every  day  make  a  thousand 

such  gods,  and  afterwards  eat  them,  and  void  them  out  again  in  places,  where, 

1        if  you  will  seek  them,  you  may  find  many  such  gods.    And,  therefore,  know 

for  certainty,  that  by  the  grace  of  God  it  shall  never  be  my  god,  because 


DEPOSITIONS    AGAINST    MARGKRY    BACKSTER.  59c 

it  is  falsely  and  deceitfully  ordained  by  the  priests  in  the  church,  to  induce  the  Henr'i 
simple  people  to  idolatry  ;  for  it  is  only  material  bread.'  VI- 

Moreover,  The  said  Margery  said  to  this  deponent,  that  Thomas  of  Canter-     . 

bury,  whom  the  people  called  Saint  Thomas,  was  a  false  traitor,  and  damned  in  ^,".,, 

hell,  because  he  injuriously  endowed  the  churches  with  possessions,  and  raised  ^"^-''• 


up  many  heresies  in  the  church,  which  seduce  the  simple  people ;  and,  there-  ThoTnas 
fore,  if  God  be  blessed,  the  said  Thomas  is  accursed;  and  those  false  priests  P'^^'^'^'.^ 
that  say  that  he  suffered  his  death  patiently  before  the  altar,  do  lie ;  for  as  a  slain,  not 
false  cowardly  traitor,  he  was  slain  in  the  church  door,  as  he  was  flying  away,    l^eforethe 

Moreover,  this  deponent  saith,  that  the  said  Margery  told  her,  that  the  cursed  f/ni'i's''"'^ 
pope,  cai-dinals,  archbishop,  and  bishops,  and  especially  the  bishop  of  Norwich,  flight. 
and  others  that  support  and  maintain  heresies  and  idolatry,  reigning  and  ruling 
over  the  people,  shall  shortly  have  the  very  same  or  worse  mischief  fall  upon 
them,  than  that  cm-sed  man,  Thomas  of  Canterbury,  had.     For  they  falsely 
and  cursedly  deceive  the  people  with  their  fbilse  mammetries  and  laws,  to  ex- 
tort monej'^  from  the  simple  folk,  to  sustain  their  pride,  riot,  and  idleness.     And 
know  assm-edly  that  the  vengeance  of  God  will  speedily  come  upon  them,  who 
have  most  cruelly  slain  the  children  of  God,  Father  Abraham,  and  William  Fatlier 
White,  a  ti-ue  preacher  of  the  law  of  God,  and  John  Wadden,  with  many  other  ^'^" 
godly  men  ;  which  vengeance  had  come  upon  the  said  Caiaphas,  the  bishop  of  wiiiiam 
Norwich,  and  his  ministers,  who  are  members  of  the  devil,  before  this  time,  if  vvhite, 
the  pope  had  not  sent  over  these  false  pardons  unto  those  parties,  which  the  {vajijen 
said  Caiaphas  had  falsely  obtained,  to  induce  the  people  to  make  procession  for 
the  state  of  them  and  of  the  church  ;  which  pardons  brought  the  simple  people 
to  cursed  idolatiy. 

Item,  The  said  Margery  said  to  this  deponent,  that  every  faithful  man  or  Against 
woman  is  not  bound  to  fast  in  Lent,  or  on  other  days  appointed  for  fasting  "'^    , 
by  the  church  ;  and  that  every  man  may  lawfidly  eat  flesh  and  all  other  meats  fasting 
upon  the  said  days  and  times ;  and  that  it  were  better  to  eat  the  fragments  left  ^^Y^- 
upon  Thursday  at,  night  on  the  fasting  days,  than  to  go  to  the  market  to  biing 
themselves  in  debt  to  buy  fish ;  and  that  pope  Silvester  made  the  Lent. 

Item,  The  said  Margery  said  to  this  deponent,  that  William  White  was  falsely  wiiite, 

condemned  for  a  heretic,  and  that  he  was  a  good  and  holy  man  ;  and  that  he  willing'  to 

willed  her  to  follow  him  to  the  place  of  execution,  where  she  saw  that  when  he  the^stake, 


woidd  have  opened  his  mouth  to  speak  unto  the  people  to  instruct  them,  a  is  stride 
devil,  (one  of  bishop  Caiaphas's  servants),  struck  him  on  the  lips,  and  stopped  his  ^q°"j|' 
mouth,  that  he  could  in  no  case  declare  the  will  of  God. 

Item,  This  deponent  saith,  that  the  said  Margery  taught  her,  that  she  should 
not  go  on  pilgrimage,  neither  to  our  lady  of  Walsingham,  nor  to  any  other  saint 
or  place. 

Also  this  deponent  saith,  that  the  said  Margery  desired  her,  that  she  and 
Joan  her  maid  would  come  secretly,  in  the  night,  to  her  chamber,  and  there 
she  should  hear  her  husband  read  the  law  of  Christ  unto  them,  which  law  was 
^vritten  in  a  book  that  her  husband  was  wont  to  read  to  her  by  night :  and  that 
her  husband  is  well  learned  in  the  christian  verity. 

Also  that  the  same  Margery  had  talked  with  a  woman  named  Joan  West, 
and  that  the  said  woman  is  in  a  good  way  of  salvation. 

Also  that  the  said  Margery  said  to  this  deponent,  '  Joan,  it  appeareth  by  your 
countenance,  that  you  intend  to  disclose  this  that  I  have  said  unto  you  ;'  and 
this  deponent  sware  that  she  would  never  disclose  it,  without  the  said  Margery 
gave  her  occasion.  Then  said  Margery  unto  this  deponent :  '  If  thou  do  accuse 
me  unto  the  bishop,  I  will  do  unto  thee,  as  I  did  once  unto  a  certain  friar,  a  Car- 
melite of  Yarmouth,  who  was  the  best  learned  friar  in  all  the  country.'  Then 
this  deponent  desired  to  know  what  she  had  done  to  the  friar.  Unto  whom 
Margery  answered,  that  she  had  talked  with  the  said  friar,  rebuking  him 
because'  he  did  beg,  saying,  that  it  was  no  alms  to  give  him  any  good  tiling, 
except  he  would  leave  his  habit,  and  go  to  the  plough,  and  so  he  should  please 
God  more,  than  following  the  hfe  of  some  of  those  friars.  Then  the  friar  re- 
quired of  the  said  Margery,  whether  she  could  teach  him  or  tell  him  any  thing 
else.  Then  the  said  Margery  (as  she  affirmed  to  this  deponent)  declared  to 
this  friar  the  gospel,  in  English  ;  and  then  the  friar  departed  from  her.  After 
this  the  said  friar  accused  the  said  Margeiy  of  heresy ;  and  she,  understanding  .j. 
that  the  friar  had  accused  her,  accused  the  friar  again,  that  he  would  have 

Q  q2 


confes 
siori, 


596  PERSECUxroN  ix  Suffolk  and  Norfolk. 

Henry    seduced  her ;  and  because  slie  would  not  consent  unto  him,  the  friar  had  ar- 
^'i-      cused  her  of  heresy.     And,  moreover,  she  said,  that  her  liusband  would  have 

killed  the  friar  there-for;  and  so  the  friar,  for  fear,  held  his  peace,  and  went 

\        his  way  for  shame. 
^'^^^-        This  Margery  also  said,  that  she  had  oftentimes  been  feignedly  confessed  to 
Apainst     the  dean  of  the  fields,  because  he  should  think  her  to  be  a  woman  of  good  life  ; 
auricular  ^nd  thei'efore  he  gave  the  said  Margery  oftentimes  money.     Then  this  depo- 
nent asked  her  whether  she  had  confesse'd  her  sins  to  a  priest  or  not.     And  she 
answered,  that  she  had  never  offended  any  priest,  and  therefore  she  would 
never  confess  herself  to  any  priest,  neither  obey  him ;  because  they  have  no 
power  to  absolve  any  man  from  his  sins,  for  that  they  offend  daily  more  griev- 
ously than  other  men ;  and  therefore  that  men  ought  to  confess  themselves  only 
unto  God,  and  to  no  priest. 
A.Tainst         Item,  That  the  said  Margery  said  to  this  deponent,  that  the  people  did  wor- 
iiiTajie       ship  devils  who  fell  from  heaven  with  Lucifer;  which  devils,  in  their  fall  to  the 
woisiiip.    earth,  entered  into  the  images  which  stand  in  the  churches,  and  have  long 
hn-ked  and  dwell  in  them ;  so  that  the  people,  worshipping  those  images,  com- 
mit idolatry.  -t^ 
,„  ;             Item,  She   said  moreover  to  this  deponent,  that  holy  bread  and  holy  water 
lioly          were  but  trifles  of  no  effect  or  force ;  and  that  the  bells  are  to  be  cast  out  of  the 
water  and  church,  and  that  they  are  excomnmnicated  who  first  ordained  them. 
l>r*ead.           Moreover,   that  she  should  not  be  burned,  although  she  were  convicted  of 
Lollardy,  for  that  she  had  a  charter  of  salvation  in  her  body. 

Also  the  said  deponent  saith,  that  Agnes  Berthem,  her  servant,  being  sent 
to  the  house  of  the  said  Margery  the  Saturday  after  Ash-Wednesday,  the  said 
Margery  not  being  within,  found  a  brass  pot  standing  over  the  fire,  with  a 
])iece  of  bacon  and  oatmeal  seething  in  it;  as  the  said  Agnes  reported  to  tliis 
deponent. 

There  were  also,  besides  this  deponent,  divers  others  sworn  and 
examined  upon  the  said  Margery,  as  John  Griraley  and  Agnes 
Berthem,  servants  to  William  Cliffland,  who  all  together  confirmed 
the  foniier  depositions. 

Thus  much  we  have  thought  good  to  note,  as  concerning  Margery 
Backster,  which  we  have  gathered  out  of  the  old  monuments  and 
registers.  But  what  became  of  her  after  this  her  accusation,  because 
we  find  no  mention  made  in  the  said  registers,  we  are  not  able  to 
declare. 

The  same  year  also  were  the  like  depositions  made  by  one  William 
Wright  against  divers  good  men,  as  here  followeth. 

First,  Tliis  deponent  saith,  that  William  Taylor  told  John  Piry  of  Ludney, 
in  the  house  of  John  Bungay  of  Beghton,  in  the  presence  of  John  Bungay, 
Robert  Grigges,  wright,  of  Martham,  and  John  Usher,  that  all  the  good  men  of 
Martham  who  were  favourers  and  helpers  to  that  good  man  William  White, 
are  evil  troubled  now-a-days ;  and  that  the  said  William  White  was  a  good  and 
holy  doctor ;  and  that  the  best  doctor  after  him  was  William  Everden,  who 
wrought  with  the  said  William  Taylor  of  Ludney,  by  the  space  of  one  month ; 
and  that  the  first  Sunday  of  the  same  month,  the  said  William  Everden  did  sit 
all  day  upon  the  table  at  work,  saying  to  the  said  William  Taylor,  that  he 
would  not  go  to  church  to  show  himself  a  scribe  or  a  pharisee  ;  and  the  second 
Sunday  he  put  on  gentlemen's  apparel,  and  went  to  Is^orwich,  to  hearken  how 
the  bishop  and  his  ministers  used  the  poor  Christians  there  in  prison. 

Also  the  said  William  Wright  deposed,  that  William  Taylor  of  Ludney  was 
one  of  the  sect,  and  went  to  London  with  sir  Hugh  Pie,  and  had  conversation 
oftentimes  with  sir  William  White,  having  often  conference  upon  the  Lollards' 
doctrine. 

Item,  That  Anise,  wife  of  Thomas  Moon,  is  of  the  same  sect,  and  favoured 


PERSECUTION    IN    SUFFOLK    AND    NORFOLK.  597 

them,  and  receiveth  them  often ;  and  also  the  daughter  of  Thomas  Moon  is  partly     Ucry 
of  the  same  sect,  and  can  read  English.  vi. 

Item,  That  Richard   Fletcher,  of  Beckles,  is  a  most  perfect  doctor  in  that     .    ^  " 
sect,  and  can  very  well  and  perfectly  expound  the  holy  Scriptures,  and  hath  a    ^'Jz' 
book  of  the  new  law  in  English,  which  was  first  sir  Hugh  Pie's.  i^'ioO. 

Item,  That  Nicholas  Belward,  son  of  John  Belward,  dwelling  in  the  parish 
of  Southelem,  is  one  of  the  same  sect,  and  hath  a  New  Testament  wliich  he 
bought  at  London  for  four  marks  and  forty-pence,  and  taught  the  said  William 
Wright  and  Margery  his  wife,  and  wrought  with  them  continually  by  the  space 
of  one  year,  and  studied  diligently  upon  the  said  New  Testament. 

Item,  That  Thomas  Gremner,  turner,  of  Dychingham,  is  perfect  in  that  sect 
and  law. 

John  Clark  the  younger,  of  Burgh,  had  the  bedding  and  apparel  of  William 
Everden  in  his  custody,  after  the  return  of  William  White  from  Burgh,  and  is 
of  the  same  sect. 

Item,  William  Bate,  tailor,  of  Sething,  and  his  wife,  and  his  son,  who  can  read 
English  very  well,  are  of  the  same  sect. 

■  Item,  William  Skirving,  of  SethiTTg,  received  Joan,  the  wife  of  WiUiam  'White, 
into  his  house,  being  brought  thither  by  William  Everden,  after  their  departure 
from  Martham. 

Item,  William  Osbourn  of  Sething,  John  Rave,  glover,  and  Bawdwin  Cooper 
of  Beckles,  are  of  the  same  sect. 

Item,  John  Pert,  late  servant  of  Thomas  Moon,  is  of  the  same  sect,  and  can 
read  well,  and  did  read  in  the  presence  of  William  White,  and  was  the  first  that 
brought  sir  Hugh  Pie  into  the  company  of  the  Lollards,  who  assembled  often- 
times together  at  the  house  of  the  said  Thomas  Moon,  and  there  conferred  upon 
their  doctrine. 

Item,  sir  Hugh  Pie  bequeathed  to  Alice,  servant  to  William  White,  a  new 
Testament,  which  they  then  called  the  book  of  the  new  law,  and  was  in  the 
custody  of  Oswald  Godfrey  of  Colchester. 

John  Perker,  mercer,  of  a  \'illage  by  Ipswich,  is  a  famous  doctor  of  that  sect. 
Also  he  said,  that  Father  Abraham  of  Colchester  is  a  good  man. 

Item,  The  said  William  Wright  deposeth,  that  it  is  read  in  the  prophecies  A  pro- 
amongst  the  Lollards,  that  the  sect  of  the  Lollards  shall  be  in  a  manner  destroyed ;  P'"-'^y- 
notwithstanding  at  length  the  Lollards  shall  prevail  and  have  the  victory  against 
all  their  enemies.    Also  he  said,  that  Tucke  knoweth  all  of  that  sect  in  SuHblk, 
Norfolk,  and  Essex. 

Besides  these,  there  were  many  others  the  same  year  troubled, 
whose  names  being  before  expressed  in  the  table  of  Norfolk-men, 
here,  for  brevity"'s  sake,  we  omit  further  to  treat  of,  passing  over  to 
the  next  year  following,  which  was  1 430.' 

John  Burrel,  servant  to  Thomas  Moon  of  Ludncy,  in  the  diocese  a.d  hso. 
of  Norwich,  was  apprehended  and  an'ested  for  heresy  the  ninth  day  of 
December,  in  this  year  of  our  Lord  1430,  and  examined  by  Master 
William  Bernham,  the  bishop's  commissary,  upon  the  articles  before- 
mentioned,  and  divers  others  hereafter  following  objected  against  him. 

Imprimis,  That  the  catholic  church  is  the  soul  of  every  good  christian  man. 
Item,  That  no  man  is  bound  to  fast  the  Lent,  or  other  fasting  da3's,  appointed  Lent  fa  f, 
by  the  church,  for  they  were  not  appointed  by  God,  but  ordained  by  the  priests ;  fish-days, 
and  that  every  man  may  eat  flesh  or  fish  upon  the  same  days,  indifferently, 
according  to  his  own  will,  and  every  Friday  is  a  free  day  to  eat  both  flesh  and  Pilgrim- 
fish  indifferently.  If.i"''-" 
Item,  That  pilgrimage  ought  not  to  be  made,  but  only  unto  the  poor.  Masses 
Item,  That  it  is  not  lawfid  to  swear,  but  in  case  of  life  and  death.  for^'he 
Item,  That  masses  and  prayers  for  the  dead  are  but  vain,  for  the  souls  of  the  J,r,?f,t^' 
dead  are  either  in  heaven  or  hell ;  and  there  is  none  other  place  of  purgatory  able. 

but  this  world. 

(1)  Ex  Regist.  Norw. 


598  PEKSECUTION    IN    SUFFOLK    AND    NORFOLK. 

Hrnry        Upoii  wliich  articles  he,  being  convicted,  was  forced  to  abjure,  and 

^'^-      suffered  like  penance  as  the  others  before  had  done. 
A.  D.        Thomas   Moon    of   Ludney  was  apprehended  and  attached  for 
^430^  suspicion  of  heresy,  against  whom  were  objected  by  the  bishop  the 
articles  before  written,  but  especially  this  article  :  that  he  had  fami- 
liarity and  communication  Avith  divers  heretics,  and  had  received, 
comforted,  supported,  and  maintained  divers  of  tliem,  as  sir  William 
White,     "White,  sir  Hugh  Pie,  Thomas  Pert,  and  William  Callis,  priests,  with 
Pie,  Pett,  j-,^j^j^y  xaoxe  ;  upon  which  articles  he,  being  convicted  before  the  bishop, 
priest's,     ^vas  forccd  to  abjiu-e ;  and  received  the  like  penance,  in  like  manner 

perse-  ,      p 

cuted.      as  beiore. 

Gri?ges         In  Hkc  manner,  Robert  Grigges,  of  Martham,  was  brought  before 

of  Mar-    ^\yQ  bishop  the  seventeenth  day  of  February,  in  the  year  aforesaid, 

for  holding  and  affirming  the  aforesaid  articles,  but  especially  these 

hereafter  following. 

Articles.  That  the  sacrament  of  confirmation,  ministered  by  the  bishop,  doth  avail 
nothing  to  salvation. 

That  it  is  no  sin  to  withstand  the  ordinances  of  the  church  of  Rome. 

That  holy  bread  and  holy  water  are  but  trifles,  and  that  the  bread  and  water 
are  the  worse  for  the  conjurations  and  characters  which  the  priests  make  over 
them. 

Upon  which  articles  he,  being  convicted,  was  forced  to  abjure,  and 
received  penance  in  manner  and  form  as  the  others  had  done  before 
him.  The  like  also  (albeit  somewhat  more  sharp)  happened  unto  John 
Finch  of  Colchester,  the  twentieth  day  of  September,  who,  albeit  he 
was  of  the  diocese  of  London,  being  suspected  of  heresy,  was  attached 
at  Ipsvvich  in  the  diocese  of  Norwich,  and  brought  before  the  bishop 
there,  before  whom  he,  being  convicted  of  the  like  articles,  as  all  the 
others  before  him,  was  enjoined  penance,  namely,  three  disciplinings 
at  solemn  procession  about  the  cathedral  church  of  Norwich  three 
Popish  several  Sundays ;  and  three  disciplinings  about  the  market-place  of 
JSTorwich  three  principal  market-days  ;  his  head,  neck,  and  feet,  being 
bare,  and  his  body  covered  only  with  a  short  shirt  or  vesture  ;  having 
in  his  hands  a  taper  of  wax  of  a  pound  weight,  Avhich,  the  next  Sunday 
after  his  penance,  he  should  offer  to  the  Trinity ;  and  that  for  the 
space  of  three  years  after,  every  Ash-Wednesday  and  Maunday- 
Thursday,  he  should  appear  in  the  cathedi-al  church  at  Norwich, 
before  the  bishop  or  his  vicegerent,  to  do  open  penance  among  the 
other  penitentiaries  for  his  offences. 

There  were,  besides  these  men  whom  we  have  here  rehearsed, 
divers  and  many  others,  who,  both  for  the  concordance  of  the  matter, 
and  also  because  their  articles  and  punishments  were  all  one,  we  have 
thought  good  at  this  time  to  pass  over ;  especially  forasmuch  as  their 
names  be  before  recited  in  the  catalogue. 


penance. 


$!icljai:ti  J^obeDen,  Moii^i* 

About  the  same  time,  even  the  same  year  1430,  shortly  after  the 
solemn  coronation  of  king  Henry  VI.,  a  certain  man  named  Richard 
Hoveden,  a  wool-winder,  and  citizen  of  London,  received  also  the 
croAvn  of  martyrdom  ;  which  man,  when  he  could  by  x\o  persuasions 


THE    EXAMIXATION    OF    NICHOLAS    CANOK.  599 


be  withdrawn  or  plucked  back  from  the  opinions  of  WicklifF,  was,  by    iienry 
the  rulers  of  the  church,  condemned  for  heresy,  and  as  Fabian  writeth,      *^' 
burned,  hard  by  the  Tower  of  London.  A.D. 

1431. 


BicfjolaiS  Canon,  of  <!Epe. 

Now  to  proceed  in  our  story  of  Norfolk  and  Suffolk,  in  following 
the  order  of  years,  we  find  that  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  1431,  one 
Nicholas  Canon,  of  Eye,  was  brought  before  the  bishop  of  Norwich 
for  suspicion  of  heresy,  with  certain  witnesses  sworn  to  depose  against 
him  touching  his  manners  and  conversation  ;  which  witnesses  appoint- 
ing one  William  Christopher  to  speak  in  the  name  of  tlieni  all,  he 
deposed,  in  manner  and  fonii  following : 

Depositions  against  Nicholas  Canon. 

First,  That  on  Easter-day,  when  all  the  parishioners  went  about  the  church  of 
Eye  solemnly  in  procession,  as  the  manner  was,  tlie  said  Nicholas  Canon,  as  it 
were  mocking  and  deriding  the  other  parishioners,  went  about  the  church  the 
contrary  way,  and  met  the  procession. — This  article  he  confessed,  and  affirmed 
that  he  thought  he  did  well  in  so  doing. 

Item,  The  said  Nicholas  asked  of  Master  John  Colman  of  Eye,  this  question  : 
Master  Colman,  what  think  you  of  the  sacrament  of  the  altar?'    To  whom  the 
said  Cohnan  answered :  '  Nicholas,  I  think  that  the  sacrament  of  the  ahar  is 
very  God  and  very  man,  the  very  flesh  and  very  blood  of  our  Loi'd  Jesus  Christ, 
under  the  form  of  bread  and  wine.'     Unto  whom  Nicholas  in  derision  said: 
*  Truly,  if  the  sacrament  of  the  altar  be  very  God  and  very  man,  and  the  very  if  thesa- 
body  and  blood  of  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ,  then  may  very  God  and  very  man  be  "anient 
put  in  a  small  room ;  as  when  it  is  in  the  priest's  mouth,  that  receiveth  it  at  flesh"^ 
mass.     And  why  may  not  we  simple  men  as  well  eat  flesh  upon  Fridays,  and  tlien  the 
all  other  prohibited  days,  as  the  priest  to  eat  the  flesh,  and  drink  the  blood  of  ^"^1^^'^ , 
our  Lord  every  day  indifferently  V — Which  article  the  said  Nicholas  denied  that  on  I'ri- 
he  spake  unto  Master  Colman,  but  unto  a  monk  of  Hockesney :  and,  further-  ''^J- 
more,  he  thought  he  had  spoken  well  in  that  behalf. 

Item,  That  on  Corpus  Christi  day,  at  the  elevation  of  high  mass,  when  all 
the  parishioners  and  other  strangers  kneeled  down,  holding  up  their  hands,  and 
doing  reverence  unto  the  sacrament,  the  said  Nicholas  went  behind  a  pillar  of 
the  church,  and  tiu-ning  his  face  from  the  higli  altar,  mocked  them  tliat  did 
reverence  unto  the  sacrament. — This  article  he  also  acknowledging,  affirmed 
that  he  believed  himself  to  do  well  in  so  doing. 

Item,  When  his  mother  would  have  the  said  Nicholas  to  lift  up  his  right  hand, 
and  to  cross  himself  from  the  crafts  an.d  assaults  of  the  devil,  forasmuch  as  he 
deferred  the  doing  thereof,  his  mother  took  up  his  right  hand  and  crossed  him, 
saj-ing,  '  In  nomine  Patris,  Filii,  et  Spiritus  Sancti.  Amen.'  Which  so  ended, 
the  said  Nicholas,  immediately  deriding  his  mother's  blessing,  took  up  his  right 
hand  of  his  own  accord,  and  blessed  him  otherwise ;  as  his  adversaries  report  of 
him. — This  article  the  said  Nicholas  acknowledged  to  be  tiiie. 

Item,  That  upon  AUhallows-day,  at  the  time  of  the  elevation  of  high  mass,  Nicholas 
when  many  of  the  parishioners  of  Eye  lighted  many  torches,  and  carried  them  [^'^^""!\ 
up  to  the  high  altar,  kneeling  down  there  in  reverence  and  honour  of  the  sacra-  ],is  back 
nient,  the  said  Nicholas,  carrying  a  torch,  went  up  hard  to  the  high  altar,  and  '"  "le 
standing  behind  the  priest's  back  saying  mass,  at  the  time  of  the  elevation,  stood  J',^^[,','^ 
uprightHpon  his  feet,  turning  his  back  to  the  priest,  and  his  face  towards  the 
people,  and  would  do  no  reverence  unto  the  sacrament.^ — -This  article  he  acknow- 
ledged, affirming  that  he  thought  he  had  done  well  in  that  behalf. 

All  which  articles  the  bishop's  commissary  caused  to  be  copied  out  word  for 
word,  and  to  be  sent  unto  Master  William  Worsted,  prior  of  the  cathedral 
church  of  Norwich,  and  to  other  doctors  of  divinity,  of  the  order  of  begging- 
friars,  that  they  might  deliberate  upon  them,  and  show  their  minds  between 
that  and  Thursday  next  following;  on  which  Thursday,  being  the  last  of 
November  in  the  vear  abovesaid,  the  said  Nicholas  was  again  examined  before 


600  THOMAS    BAGLEY    AND    PAUL    CRAW,    MARTYRS. 

Henry  Master  Bernham  and  divers  others,  upon  two  other  articles  which  he  had  con- 

~^^-  fussed  unto  John  Exeter,  notary,  and  Thomas  Genisten,  bachelor  of  divinity, 

.    .  and  others.     Whereof  the  first  article  was  this  :  That  the  said  Nicholas  Canon, 

l^'oi"  being  of  perfect  mind  and  remembrance,  confessed  that  he  doubted  whether,  in 

1_  the  sacrament  of  the  altar,  there  were  tlie  very  body  of  Christ  or  no. — This 

Anotlier  article  he  confessed  before  the  commissary  to  be  true. 

tion™'"^  Item,  That  he,  being  of  perfect  mind  and  remembrance,  believed  that  a  man 

Articles  ought  not  to  confess  his  sins  to  a  priest. — This  article  he  also  confessed  that  he 

objected,  doubted  upon. 

Now  remaineth  to  declare  what  these  doctors  aforesaid  concluded 
upon  the  articles ;  whose  answer  unto  tlie  same  Avas  this  : 

Judg-  First  of  all,  as  touching  the  first  article,  they  said  that  the  article  in  the  same 

ment  on    terms  as  it  was  propounded,  is  not  simply  a  heresy,  but  an  error. 

cies.  Item,  As  touching  the  second  article,  the  doctors  agree  as  in  the  first. 

Item,  As  touching  the  third  article,  they  affirm  that  it  is  a  heresy. 
Heresy  Unto  the  fourth  article,  they  answered  as  unto  tlie  first  and  second, 

to  doubt        Item,  The  doctors  affirm  the  fifth  article  to  be  a  heresy, 
the  sacra-      Item,  As  touching  the  sixth  article,  the  doctors  conclude,  that  if  the  said 
ment  be    Nicholas,  being  of  perfect  mind  and  remembrance,  did  doubt  whether   the 
fect^ody  sacrament  of  the  altar  were  the  very  perfect  body  of  Christ  or  no,  then  the 
of  Christ,  article  is  simply  a  heresy. 

Canon  Whereupon  the  said  commissary  declared  and  pronounced  the  said  Nicholas, 

declared  xipon  the  determination  of  the  said  doctors,  to  be  a  heretic  ;  and  thereupon 
forced  the  said  Nicholas  to  abjure  all  the  said  articles.  That  done,  he  enjoined 
the  said  Nicholas  penance  for  his  offences :  three  disciplings  about  the  cloister 
Penance  of  the  catliedral  church  of  Norwich,  before  a  solemn  procession,  bare-headed 
enjoined  ^jjd  bare-foot,  carrying  a  taper  of  half  a  pound  in  his  hand,  going  after  the 
manner  aforesaid,  like  a  mere  penitentiary  :  which  his  penance  the  judge  com- 
manded should  be  respited  until  the  coming  of  the  bishop  into  his  diocese,  and 
tliat  in  the  mean  time  he  should  be  kept  in  prison  ;  to  the  end  that  he  should 
not  infect  the  fiock  with  his  venom  and  poison  of  errors  and  heresies. 

Thus  we  have  briefly  discoursed  unto  you  the  great  trouble  and 
afflictions  which  happened  in  Norfolk  and  Suffolk  by  the  space  of 
those  four  years  before  mentioned,  having  clraAvn  out  briefly,  for  every 
year,  certain  notable  examples  sufficient  for  the  declaration  of  all  the 
rest,  forasmuch  as  their  opinions  being  nothing  different,  their  penance 
and  punishment  did  also  nothing  differ,  otherwise  than  by  those  par- 
ticular examples  may  be  plainly  seen. 

Cfjoma^  SBaglep,  ^litiu 

And  now  to  proceed  as  we  have  begun  with  our  former  stories, 
generally  we  find  in  Fabian's  Chronicles,  that  in  the  same  year  of  our 
Lord,  1431,  Thomas  Bagley,  a  priest,  vicar  of  Monenden  beside 
Maiden,  being  a  valiant  disciple  and  adherent  of  WicklifF,  was  con- 
demned by  the  bishops  of  heresy  at  London,  about  the  middle  of 
Lent,  and  was  degraded  and  burned  in  Smithfield. 

J^flul  Ccato,  a  2BDl)cmian,  i©actpt. 

The  same  year  also  was  Paul  Craw,  a  Bohemian,  taken  at  St. 
Andrew's,  by  the  bishop  Henry,  and  delivered  over  to  the  secular 
power  to  be  bm-nt,  for  holding  opinions  contrary  unto  the  church  of 


THE  STORY  OF  THOMAS  RHEDON,  MARTYR.  601 

Rome,  touching  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  the  worshipping    iienry 
of  saints,  auricular  confession,  with  other  of  WickliflP's  opinions.'  ^^' 

A.D. 

Cf)e  ^tDrp  of  €^omaiS  jHfjeDon,  a  Jrccncfjman  anD  Carmelite    ^'^^^- 
jrciar,  SBucnt  m  Sltafp,  for  tfje  J^rofe^.^mn  of  Cfjci^t.' 

We  have  declared  before,  how  this  cruel  storm  of  persecution 
which  first  began  with  us  in  England,  after  it  had  long  raged  here 
against  many  good  and  godly  men,  broke  out  and  passed  into  Bohe- 
mia, and  afterwards,  within  a  short  time,  the  fire  of  this  persecution, 
increasing  by  little  and  little,  invaded  Scotland,  and  from  thence  now 
with  greater  force  and  violence  this  furious  devouring  flame  hath 
entered  Italy,  and  sufFereth  not  any  part  of  the  world  to  be  free 
from  the  murder  and  slaughter  of  most  good  and  godly  men.  It 
happened  about  this  time  that  one  Thomas  Rhedon,  a  friar  of  that  Rhedon 
sect,  which  taketh  its  name  of  the  Mount  Carmel,  by  chance  came  j^nJoitaiy. 
with  the  Venetian  ambassadors  into  Italy.  This  man,  although  he 
was  of  that  sort  and  sect,  which  instead  of  Cliristians  are  called  Car- 
melites, yet  was  he  of  a  far  other  religion,  and  understood  the  word 
of  God,  judging  that  God  ought  to  be  worshipped  neither  in  that 
mount,  nor  at  Jerusalem  only,  but  in  spirit  and  truth.  This  man, 
being  a  true  Carmelite,  and  favouring  with  his  whole  heart  that  new 
sweet  must,'  of  Jesus  Christ,  with  earnest  study  and  deshe  seeking 
after  a  christian  integrity  of  life,  prepared  himself  first  to  go  into 
Italy,  trusting  that  he  should  find  there,  or  else  in  no  place,  some,  by 
whose  good  life  and  living  he  might  be  edified  and  instructed.  For 
Avhere  ought  more  abundance  of  virtue  and  good  living  to  be,  than  in 
that  place  which  is  counted  to  be  the  fort  and  fountain  of  all  religion  ? 
And  how  could  it  otherwise  be,  but  that  where  so  great  holiness  is 
professed ;  whereupon  all  men's  eyes  are  bent  as  upon  a  stage ;  where 
St.  Peter's  seat  is,  and  is  thought  to  be  the  ruler  and  governor  of  all 
the  church,  all  things  should  flourish  and  abound  worthy  of  so  great 
expectation  in  that  place?  This  holy  man,  having  these  things 
before  his  eyes,  and  considering  the  same  with  himself,  forsook  his 
own  country  and  city,  and  went  unto  Rome,  conceiving  a  firm  and 
sure  hope,  that  by  the  example  of  so  many  notable  and  worthy  men, 
he  should  greatly  profit  in  godliness  and  learning  ;  but  the  success  of 
the  matter  did  utterly  frustrate  his  hope,  for  all  things  were  clean 
contrary.  Whatsoever  he  saw,  was  nothing  else  but  mere  dissimu- 
lation and  hypocrisy.  Instead  of  gold,  he  found  nothing  but  coals  ;*  xhe 
and,  to  say'  the  truth,  he  found  nothing  else,  there,  but  gold  and  ^°^p^^ 
silver ;  for  instead  of  heavenly  gifts,  there  reigned  amongst  them  the  Rome. 
pomp  and  pride  of  the  world ;  in  place  of  godliness,  riot ;  instead  of  ah 
learning  and  study,  slothfidness  and  superstition.  Tyranny  and  corrupt 
haughtiness  of  mind  had  possessed  the  place  of  apostolic  simplicity ;  *•»"«• 
so  that  now  there  remained  no  more  any  place  or  liberty  for  a  man 
to  learn  that  which  he  knew  not,  or  to  teach  that  which  he  perfectly 
understood.  Finally,  all  things  were  turned  bottom  upwards;  all 
things  happened  unto  him  contrary  to  his  expectation,  wheresoever 
he  went.  But  nothing  so  much  offended  this  good  man's  mind,  as 
the  intolerable  ambition  and  pompous  pride  in  them,  whom  example 

(1)  Ex  Hector.  Boetio.  (2)  Ex  Antonino,  3  part.  Hist.  fol.  165.  (3)  "  lUud  novum 

mustuin;''  sweet  wine.    Lat.  Edition,  page  73.— Ed.  (4)  "  Coals,"  discord.— Eo. 


602  PIETY    REWARDED    WITH    PERSECUTION. 

Henry   of  humility  sliould  especially  commend  and  praise  to  the  -whole  world, 
^^"     And  albeit  that  he  saw  here  nothing  which  did  accord  and  agree  with 
A.  D.    the  rule  of  the  apostles,  yet  these  things  did  so  much  pass  all  measure 
1431.    a,nd  patience,  that  he  could  by  no  means  refrain  his  tongue,  in  so 
The  wick-  great  abuse  and  corruption  of  the  church,  seeing  such  ambitious  pride 
Lid^'pride  in  their  buildings,  in  their  apparel,  in  their  palaces,  in  their  dainty 
there"^°  fare,  in  their  great  trains  of  servants,  in  their  horse  and  armour  ;  and, 
finally,  in  all  things  pertaining  unto  them.     Which  things  by  how 
much  they  did  vary  from  the  prescribed  rule  of  the  gospel,  so  much 
the  more  was  this  good  man  forced  to  speak  :  albeit  he  did  well  un- 
derstand how  little  he  should  prevail  by  speaking  ;  for,  if  admonition 
would  profit  any  thing  at  all,  the  books  of  WickliflT  and  divers  others 
The  cor-  vverc  uot  Wanting.     The  famous  testimonies  of  John  Huss,  and  of 
w'm  ad"    Jerome  of  Prague,  and  their  blood  shed  for  the  same,  were  yet  pre- 
mit  no     sent  before  their  eyes ;    at  whose  most  effectual  exhortations,  they 
tion.        were  so  little  corrected  and  amended,  that  they  seemed  twice  more 
cruel  than  they  were  before.     Yet  all  this  could  not  fear  this  good 
man  Thomas,  but  that  in  so  necessary  and  wholesome  an  office  he 
would  spend  his  life,  if  need  should  be.     So  by  this  means,  he  who 
came  to  be  a  scholar  vmto  others,  was  now  forced  to  be  their  teacher. 
And  he,  who  determined  to  follow  other  men's  lives  and  manners, 
had  now,  contrariwise,  set  before  them  his  life  to  be  marked  and  fol- 
lowed :  for  he  lived  so  amongst  them,  that  his  life  might  be  a  rule 
unto  them  all ;  and  so  taught,  as  he  might  also  be  their  schoolmaster. 
For,  even  as  Paul  hath  foreshowed  unto  such  as  desired  to  live  godly 
in  Christ,  that  they  should  suffer  persecution,  such  like  reward  hap- 
pened unto  this  man.     He  gave  unto  them  the  fruit  of  godliness, 
Piety  re-  whicli  they  should  follow  :  they  again  set  upon  his  head  the  diadem 
with  per-  of  martyrdom.    He  showed  them  the  way  to  salvation  ;  and  they,  for 
secutioii.  ^i^g  benefit  of  life,  rewarded  him  with  death  :  and  whereas  no  rewards 
had  been  worthy  for  his  gi-eat  labours  and  travails,  they,  with  most 
extreme  ignominy,  persecuted  him  even  unto  the  fire.    For  when,  by 
continual  preaching,  he  had  gotten  great  envy  and  hatred,  the  rulers 
began  to  consult  together  by  what  means  they  might  circumvent  this 
man's  life.     Here  they  had  recourse  to  their  accustomed  remedies  ; 
for  it  was  a  peculiar  and  continual  custom  amongst  the  prelates  of 
the  church,  that  if  any  man  did  displease  them,  or  if  his  talk  was  not 
Heresy     according  to  their  mind,  or  by  any  means  hurtful,  or  a  hinderance  to 
where      their  lucrc  and  gain,  by  and  by  they  framed  out  articles  of  some 
none  la.    }iej.esy,  which  they  charged  him  withal.     And  like  as  every  living 
thing  hath  his  peculiar  and  proper  weapon  to  defend  himself  from 
harm,  as  nature  hath  armed  the  boar  with  his  tusks,  the  hedgehog  with 
his  prickles,  the  lion  is  feared  for  his  claws,  the  dog  for  his  biting, 
the  bull  fighteth  with  his  horns,  neither  doth  the  ass  lack  his  hoofs  to 
strike  withal :    even  so  this  is  the  only  armour  of  the  bishops,  to 
strangle  a  man  with  heresy,  if  he  once  go  about  to  mutter  against 
their  will  and  ambition  .;  which  thing  may  be  easily  perceived  and 
Popery     sccn  in  this  most  holy  man,  besides  a  great  number  of  others.    Who, 
with  po-   "^^liei"'  i^ow  he  began  to  wax  grievous  unto  them,  and  could  no  longer 
licy,  and  bc  suffcrcd,  what  did  they  ?     Straightwavs  flee  to  their  ovm  policies, 
with  ty-    and,  as  they  had  done  with  Huss,  and  Jerome  of  Prague,  even  so 
vanny.      y^Q^^i  t}jpy  about  to  practisc  against  this  man.     They  overwhelm  him 


ARTICLES    ATTRIBUTED    TO    THOMAS    RHEDON.  608 

■with  suspicion,  they  seek  to  entangle  liim  with  questions,  they  exa-    Henry 
mine  him  in  judgment,  they  compile  articles  against  him,  and  lay      ^^' 
heresy  to  his  charge  ;  they  condemn  him  as  a  heretic,  and  being  so    A.  D. 
condemned,  they  destroy  and  kill  him.    This  is  their  godliness ;  this    ^^'^^- 
is  the  peaceable  order  of  those  Carmelites,  whose  religion  is  to  wear 
no  sword  nor  shield,  notwithstanding  they  bear  in  their  hearts  malice, 
rancour,  vengeance,  poison,  craft,  and  deceit,  sharper  than  any  sword. 
With  how  great  care  and  policy  is  it  provided  by  law,  that  none  of 
these  clergymen  should  fight  with  sword  in  the  streets.?  when  in 
judgment  and  accusations  (Avhere  it  is  not  lawful  for  a  man  to  oppress 
his  brother)  there  is  no  murderer,  who  hath  more  ready  vengeance, 
or  that  doth  more  vilely  esteem  his  brother's  soul  than  they.     They 
shed  no  blood  themselves  ;  they  strike  not,  nor  kill ;  but  they  deliver 
them  over  unto  others,  to  be  slain.     What  difference  is  there,  I  pray 
you,  but  that  they  are  the  authors,  and  the  others  are  but  the  minis- 
ters of  the  cmel  fact  ?     They  kill  no  man  as  murderers  do.     How 
then  ?     Although  not  after  the  same  sort,  yet  they  do  it  by  another 
mean. 

The  articles  which  they  falsely  gathered  against  this  man,  are 
aflSrmed  by  some  to  be  these  : — 

That  the  church  lacketh  reformation,  and  that  it  shall  be  punislied  and 
reformed. 

That  infidels,  Jews,  Turks,  and  Moors,  sliall  be  converted  unto  Christ  in  the 
latter  days. 

That  abominations  are  used  at  Rome. 

That  the  unjust  excommunication  of  the  pope  is  not  to  be  feared ;  and  those 
who  do  not  observe  the  same,  do  not  sin  or  offend. 

But^  yet  there  lacked  a  minister  for  these  articles,  albeit  he  could 
not  long  be  wanting  at  Rome,  where  all  things  are  to  be  sold,  even 
men''s  souls.     For  this  office  and  ministry  there  was  no  man  thought 
more  meet  than  William  of  Rouen,  cardinal  of  St.  Martin's  in  the 
Mount,  vice-chancellor  of  the  court  of  Rome.     Eugene  at  that  time 
was  pope,  who  had  a  little  before  succeeded  pope  Martin  above-men- 
tioned ;  before  which  Eugene  this  godly  Rhedonensis,  the  Frenchman, 
was  brought,  and  from  thence  sent  to  prison ;  and  again,  after  his  im-  Rhedonis 
prisonment,  and  divers  and  sundry  grievous  torments,  he  was  brought  cmed  and 
before  the  judges.    The  w^olf  sat  in  judgment ;  the  lamb  was  accused,  jrousht 
Why  ?    because  he  had  troubled  the  spring.     But  here  need  not  pope 
many  words.    This  good  Thomas,  not  being  able  to  resist  the  malice    "^^"^' 
of  these  mighty  potentates,  had  offended  enough,  and  was  easily  con- 
victed and  condemned  to  be  burned;  but  in  such  sort,  as  first  of  all 
he  should  be  deprived  of  all  such  degrees  as  he  had  taken  of  priest- 
hood.    For  it  is  counted  an  unlawful  thing,  that  a  priest  should 
be  punished  with  profane  punishment,  when,  notwithstanding,  it  is 
lawful  enough  for  priests  to  put  any  layman  to  death,  be  he  ever  so  guilt- 
less.   How  religiously  and  earnestly  do  they  foresee  that  the  majesty  of 
the  priestly  dignity  should  not  in  any  case  be  hurt  ?     But  how  little 
care  have  they  that  their  consciences  be  not  hurt  with  false  judgments, 
and  oppressing  the  guiltless  ?     Wherefore,  before  he  should  come 
unto  punishment,  this  good  man  Thomas  must  be  degraded.     The 

(1)  Ex  Antonin.  3  part.  Hist.  fol.  165. 


604  THE    MARTYRDOM    OF    THOMAS    IIHEUON. 

Henry   order  and  manner  of  this  popish  degrading  is  partly  touched  upon  m 
^''      the  story  of  William  Taylor. 


A.  D.        After  it  had  pleased  the  bishops  to  degrade  this  man  from  the 
H.'H.    degrees  wheremth  before  they  had  consecrated  him,  and  thought  not 
He  is      that  sufficient,  by  and  by,  afterwards,  they  deprived  him  of  his  life 
aufome.  also,  aud  burucd  him,  four  years  after  he  came  to  Rome,*  a.d.  1436. 
Thomas        *  Thcsc^  dcgrccs,  because  ye  shall  not  be  ignorant,  are  not  such  as 
degraded,  .^^^  ^^  couutcd  amoug  the  differences  whereby  we  are  known  from 
others  ;  neither  among  the  '  propers'  which  are  always  agi-eeable  unto 
us,  but  among  those  common  accidents  which  we  both  may  have,  and 
,may  both  be  taken  away  from  us  at  the  will  and  pleasure  of  the 
bishops.    For  thus  we  are  taught  by  such  as  write  of  philoso])hy,  that 
there  is  an  apt  and  easy  motion  from  the  habit  to  deprivation,  but, 
contrariwise,  from  privation  unto  the  habit,  there  is  no  return.    Where- 
fore, gentle  reader,  it  is  not  to  be  marvelled  at,  why  that  he,  being 
now  become  a  layman,  should  die,  who  lived,  being  a  priest.     But 
this  thou  mayest  more  marvel  at,  what  folly  and  madness  was  in  those 
men's  minds,  who,  through  such  acts  and  doings,  would  set  tl^em- 
selves  forth  to  be  a  mocking-stock  unto  all  the  whole  world,  and,  not 
only  to  be  derided  of  men,  but  to  be  abominable  and  accursed  before 
God.*    And  thus,  through  the  cruelty  of  these  most  t}Tannous  prelates, 
this  blessed  martyr  died.    Albeit  it  is  not  to  be  thoiight  that  he  died, 
but  made  a  loss  of  this  body,  for  a  greater  gain  of  salvation  before 
the  just  judgment  of  God.     Neither  is  it  to  be  doubted  but  that  he 
liveth  eternally  in  heaven,  under  the  altar,  with  them  whose  blood  the 
Lord  will  revenge,  peradventure  too  soon  for  some  of  them  whom  the 
earth  hath  here  so  long  holden  unpunished. 
Divers  As  this  Thomas  above  mentioned  suffered  at  Rome,  so  were  divers 

marTyrs.   others,  in  Other  places  about  Germany,  executed  near  about  the  same 
time,  after  the  burning  of  John  Huss  ;  as  Henry  Grundfelder,  priest, 
of  Ratisbon,  a.d.  1420;  also  Henry  Radtgeber,  priest,  in  the  same 
city,  A.D.  1423  ;  John  Draendorfe,  of  noble  birth,  and  a  priest,  was 
burned  at  Worms,  a.d.  1424  ;  Peter  Thoraw,  at  Spires,  a.d.  1426  ; 
Matthew  Hager  also  suffered  at  Berlin  in  Germany,  not  long  after.^ 
After  the  death  of  pope  Martin,  who  reigned  fourteen  years,  suc- 
PopeEu-  ceeded  Eugene  IV.,  about  a.d.  1431.     Of  whom  Antoninus  thus 
^""^  ^^'  writeth,  that  he  was  much  given  to  wars,  as  his  conflicts  and  fighting 
with  the  Rom.ans  may  declare  ;  also  the  battles  between  the  Venetians 
and  the  Florentines. 

This  pope  began  first  to  celebrate  the  council  of  Basil,  which 
council  Martin,  his  predecessor,  had  before  intended,  according  to  the 
institution  of  the  council  of  Constance.  Notwithstanding  the  said 
Eugene,  perceiving  afterwards  this  council  of  Basil  not  to  favour  him 
and  his  doings,  and  fearing  some  detriment  to  come  to  him  by  the  same, 
afterwards  laboured,  by  all  subtle  practice,  to  dissolve  and  interrupt  the 
said  council,  and  from  Basil  to  translate  it  first  to  Ferrara,  then  to  Flo- 
rence, more  near  to  his  own  see  of  Rome.  Concerning  which  council 
of  Basil,  forasmuch  as  we  have  begun  here  to  make  mention,  it  shall 

(1)  In  the  appendix  ivill  be  found,  "  Canniiia  quadam  in  ejus  laudem  reperta,"  from  the  Latin 
Edition  of  1559,  p.  75.— Ed. 

(2)  See  Edition  15f)3,  p,  362.— Ed. 

(3)  Ex  Bale  Centur.  sept.     [Interesting  particulars,  relating  to  these  martyrs,  will  lie  g'.veii  lU 
the  appendix  from  a  Dutch  Martyrology  published  at  Dort  in  1657. — Ed.] 


THE    ORDER    AXD    MANNER    OF    THE    C0UNC:IL    OF    BASIL.  G05 

be  no  great  digression  out  of  the  way  to  discourse  something  thereof    Henry 
(the  Lord  so  permitting)  more  at  hu-ge,  so  much  as,  for  the  principal      ^'^- 
matters  thereof,  shall  seem  sufficient  or  necessary  to  be  known.  A.D. 

1131. 


€f|e  <©rDec  anD  Haannec  of  tlje  Council  of  %&i\{y 

WITH   A    BRIEF    RECAPITULATION    OF    THE    PRINCIPAL    MATTERS 
DECREED    AND    CONCLUDED    THEREIN,* 

With  a  full  Discourse  of  the  Disputation  holden  amongst  the  Bishops, 
upon  Eight  Conclusions  propounded  in  the  same  Council ;  collected 
and  translated  out  of  the  Two  Books  of  iEneas  Sylvius,  who  was 
there  present,  and,  at  that  time,  a  meetly  good  man,  and  afterwards 
was  made  Cardinal  and  Pope,  called  Pius  the  Second.^ 

In  the  thirty-ninth  session  of  the  council  of  Constance,  as  is  before 
mentioned,  it  was  decreed  and  provided  concerning  the  order  and 
times  of  such  general  councils  as  should  hereafter  follow.  The  first 
that  should  next  ensue,  to  be  kept  the  fifth  year  after  the  said  council 
of  Constance  ;  the  second  to  be  holden  the  seventh  year  after  that, 
and  so  orderly  all  others  to  follow  successively  from  ten  years  to  ten 
years.  Wherefore,  according  to  this  decree,  followed  a  general 
council  five  years  after  the  council  of  Constance,  celebrated  and  holden 
at  Sienna,  under  pope  Martin,  a.d.  1424;  but  it  soon  broke  up. 
After  which  council  the  term  of  seven  years  being  expired,  another 
council  was  holden  at  Basil,  a.d.  1431 ;  which  council  is  noted  to 
have  been  the  most  troublesome,  and  to  have  endured  longer  than 
any  other  council  before-time  celebrated  and  holden  in  the  church. 
This  council  continued  almost  the  space  of  seventeen  years  ;  wherein 
it  was  concluded,  as  before  in  the  council  of  Constance,  that  the 
general  councils  were  above  the  pope,  and  both  of  these  two  councils 
did  attribute  the  chief  authority  in  decreeing  and  determining  unto 
the  general  council ;  which  is  the  cause  that  the  contrary  part  doth 
derogate  so  much  from  the  authority  of  this  present  council. 

When  pope  Martin  V.  had  appointed  Julian,  cardinal  and 
deacon  of  St.  Angel,  his  legate,  to  celebrate  and  hold  a  general  coun- 
cil at  Basil,  for  the  reformation  of  the  church,  and  the  rooting  out  of 
heresies,  within  a  short  space  after,  pope  Martin  died  (a.d.  1431),  in  Death 
whose  seat  Eugene  IV.  succeeded,  Avho  confirmed  unto  the  said  car-  Ma?tf„* 
dinal  Julian  the  same  authority  which  his  predecessor  before  had  given 
him.  Unto  this  council  at  Basil,  being  begun,  came  the  emperor 
Sigismund,  who,  during  his  lifetime,  with  his  presence  and  authority, 
did  protect  and  defend  the  said  synod.  After  the  emperor's  death, 
pope  Eugene,  altering  his  former  mind  and  pui-pose,  would  transport 
the  council  unto  Bononia,^  and  thereby  hindered  the  success  of  the 
council  of  Basil.  And  first  he  held  a  contrary  council  at  Ferrara, 
and  afterward  at  Florence  :  for,  after  the  death  of  the  emperor  Sigis- 
mund, there  were  no  princes  nor  noblemen  that  had  any  care  or  regard 
of  the  council.    Eugene,  the  pope,  pretended  causes  as  touching  the 

(1)  Ex  yEnea  Sylvio.     Ex  Cochleo  in  Hist.  Hussit.     Et  ex  paralipom.  Abbat.  Urspeg. 

(2)  The  histor)  of  the  council  of  Basil  is  considerably  abridged  in  the  second  and  succeeding 
editions  of  the  Acts  and  Monuments  ;  the  more  complete  history  which  will  be  found  in  the  fol- 
lowint;  pa?es  is  supplied  from  the  first  edition,  namely,  that  of  1563,  &0H1  which  the  passages  in 
niterisks.  with  numerous  other  additions,  are  introduced. — iio. 

(V  '"Bononia,"  Bologna  in  Italy. — Eu. 


60G  THE    COUXCIL    OF    BASIL. 

Henry    Grecks  Avlio  shoulcl  coiiie  unto  the  council,  and  the  uniting  of  their 
^'      church  unto  the  West  church,  which  Greeks  woukl  in  no  wise  pass  the 


^-  ^-    Alps ;  also  as  touching  his  own  incommodity,  that  he  could  not  come 
^^^^-    unto  Basil,  being  so  long  a  journey,  and  that  all  his  men  might  have 
Pope       easy  access  unto  Bononia,  and  that  amongst  the  Germans  (who  in 
seeketiito  their  owu  country  are  so  intractable)  nothing  can  be  attempted  for 
the^coun-  their  reformation  :  whereupon  he  cited  cardinal  Julian,  and  the  fathers 
^'.;         of  the  council  unto  Bononia,  under  great  penalty.     They  again  cited 
sionbe-    the  pope,  that  either  he  should  come  himself  unto  the  council,  or 
council  ^  send  ambassadors  under  the  like  penalty.     For  this  cause  the  am- 
™pe'*^^    bassadors  of  Albert,  king  of  the  Romans,  and  of  the  other  princes  of 
Germany,  assembled  together  first  at  Nuremberg ;  and  when  they 
could  determine  nothing  there,  they  assembled  again  at  Frankfort  to 
appease  the  dissension  between  the  council  and  the  pope ;  for  it  was 
thought  that  the  electors  of  the  empire  might  best  assemble  and  meet 
in  tliat  place.    In  the  mean  time  the  emperor's  ambassadors,  and  the 
ambassadors  of  the  electors,  went  to  Basil,   and  having  conference 
with  the    ambassadors  of  the  other  princes  who  were  there,  and, 
sending  for  the  cardinal  of  St.  Peter's,  (an  excellent  man,  who  at  that 
time  tamed  ai  Constance,  to  see  the  end  and  issue  of  things,)  they 
did  earnestly  exhort  the  fathers  of  the  council,  that  they  would  em- 
brace and  receive  the  unity  of  concord  which  they  would  offer.    The 
request  of  the  princes  was,  that  the  fathers  would  transport  the  council, 
and  go  unto  another  place ;  which  only  thing  pope  Eugene  seemed 
always  to  seek  and  desire,  that  thereby  he  might  either  divide   the 
fathers  of  the  council,  or  take  away  their  liberty. 
The  pre-       Notwithstanding,  this  sacred  synod  thought  g-ood  neither  to  deny 
tte^'coun-  the  princes'  request,  nor  to  grant  that  which  pope  Eugene  required. 
thV^'"*^  During  this  doubt,  the  emperor's  ambassadors,  the  bishops  of  Patavia' 
pope's      and  Augusta  (being  much  required  and  stirred  thereunto),  appointed 
rcques .    ^  jjoj^jg  j^jjf[  valiant  baron  called  Conrad  Weinsperge,  by  the  king's 
commandment,  to  be  protector  and  defender  of  the  council  and  the 
fathers.     Whereby,  as  the  enemies  perceived  the  emperor's  mind  to 
be  alienated  from  the  pope,  so  the  fathers  of  the  council  understood 
his  good  will  towards  them,  forasmuch  as  he  would  not  have  sent  them 
a  protector,  if  he  had  not  judged  it  a  lawful  council ;  neither  again 
would  he  have  judged  it  a  council  in  Basil,  if  he  had  given  credit  to 
pope  Eugene.     But,  by  means  of  a  great  pestilence  which  began  to 
^ow,  the  assembly  that  should  have  been  holden  at  Frankfort,  was 
transported  unto  Mentz.  The  ambassadors  of  the  princes  also  thought 
good  to  go  thither,  if  they  might  find  any  means  of  unity,  whereby 
they  might  unite  and  knit  the  pope  again  unto  the  council. 
The  The  assembly  was  very  famous,   for  there  were  present  the  aicli- 

assem-*     bishops  of  Mcutz,  Cologuc,  and  Treves,  electors  of  the  sacred  em- 
M^^f't  P^^^'  ^"^^  ^^  ^^^  ambassadors  of  the  other  electors.    Notwithstanding, 
make '     the  arclibishop  of  Cologne  was  the  chief  favourer  of  the  council  in  this 
"°"^'      assembly,  who,  with  all  his  labour  and  diligence,  went  about  to  bring 
the  matter  unto  a  good  end.     Rabanus,  the  archbishop  of  Treves, 
showed  himself  somewhat  more  rough.  The  sacred  synod  also  thought 
good  to  send  thither  their  ambassadors,  and  appointed  out  the  patriarch 
of  Aquila,  the  bishop  of  Viceuza,  and  the  bishop  of  Argens  :^  divines, 

(1)  "  Patavia,"  Passaw  on  the  Danube.— Ed.  (2)  "  Argens,"  Strasbuig.— Ed. 


POPE    EUGENE,    A    HEUETIC.  607 

John  Segovius,  and  Thomas  de  Corcellis,  with  divers  others.     There   Henry 
was  no  man  there  present,  Avho  would  name  himself  the  ambassador  of .    ^^' 


Eugene;  albeit  there  were  many  of  his  favourers  and  friends  come  A.D. 
thither,  both  from  the  council,  and  also  out  of  Florence,  wlio,  albeit  ^^'^^- 
they  had  sworn  to  the  contrary,  yet  favoured  they  more  Eugene  than 
the  council,  *  whose  sect,  ^Villiam  of  Constance,  afterwards  called  the 
sect  of  Grisons.*  But  the  chief  Hercules  of  all  the  Eugenians  was 
Nicholas  Cusanus,  a  man  singularly  well  learned,  and  of  great  experi- 
ence. After  divers  consultations  had,  the  electors  of  the  empire,  and 
the  ambassadors  of  the  other  princes  of  Germany,  thought  good  to  give 
out  commandment  throughout  their  whole  nation  and  country,  that 
the  decrees  of  the  council  of  Basil  should  be  received  and  observed. 

Wliile  these  things  were  thus  debated  at  Mentz,  there  sprang  up 
a  certain  very  doubtful  question  amongst  the  divines  who  remained  at 
Basil,  whether  Eugene  might  be  called  a  heretic,  who  had  so  rebel- 
liously  contemned  the  commandments  of  the  church.  Hereupon  they 
gathered  themselves  together,  disputing  among  themselves,  by  the 
space  of  six  days,  in  the  forenoons  and  afternoons,  some  affirming,  and 
others  holding  the  negative  part.  Upon  this  their  disputation  there  Three 
arose  three  several  opinions,  some  affirming  that  he  was  a  heretic ;  touching 
others  not  only  a  heretic,  but  also  a  relapse.  The  third  sort  would  ^'^^  p°i"'- 
neither  grant  him  to  be  a  heretic,  nor  a  relapse.  Amongst  these 
divines,  the  chief  and  principal  both  in  learning  and  authority,  were 
the  bishop  of  Ebrun,  ambassador  of  the  most  noble  king  of  Castile. 
and  a  certain  Scottish  abbot ;  who,  as  two  most  valiant  champions, 
subdued  all  their  enemies,  so  that  all  the  rest  did  either  consent  unto 
their  arginnents,  or  give  place  unto  them,  so  that  their  determination 
took  place,  and  Eugene  was  pronounced  both  a  heretic  and  a  relapse. 
Eight  conclusions  were  there  determined  and  allowed  amongst  the 
divines,  which  they  called  'verities,''  the  copy  whereof  they  did  divulgate 
throughout  all  Christendom. 

When  the  ambassadors  of  the  council  were  returned  from  Mentz,  Jh^  am- 
and  certain  report  was  made  of  the  allowing  of  theii'  decrees,  the  return 
fathers  of  the  council  thought  good  to  discuss  the  conclusions  of  the  i^entz. 
divines  more  at  large.     Whereupon,  by  the  commandment  of  the 
deputies,  all  the  masters,  and  doctors,  and  clergy,  were  called  together, 
with  the  residue  of  the  prelates,  into  the  chapter-house  of  the  great 
church,  there  openly  to  dispute  and  discuss  Eugene's  heresy:  which  The 
thing  sorely  grieved  the  bishop  of  Milan,  fearing  lest  this  disputation  heresy 
woidd  work  the  deprivation  of  Eugene,  which,  as  he  said,  he  had  always  gi'""^^" 
letted,  for  fear  of  a  schism.    Wherefore  he  ceased  not,  by  all  manner  The 
of  ways,  to  labour  to  stop  and  trouble  the  matter,  exhorting  them  that  ^^^^^  °* 
were  absent,  by  his  letters,  and  encouraging  those  that  were  present,  ^^^^^^^.^ 
by  his  words,  to  the  defence  of  Eugene.     But,  at  last,  there  was  a  part,  for 
great  assembly  in  the  chapter-house,  some  coming  thither  to  dispute,  schism.* 
and  others  to  hear.     This  disputation  continued  six  days,  both  fore- 
noon and  afternoon,  amongst  whom  cardinal  Ludovicus,  archbishop 
of  Aries,  was  appointed  as  judge  and  arbiter  of  the  whole  disputation ; 
who,  besides  many  other  notable  virtues,  was  both  valiant  and  constant. 
Nicholas  Amici,  who  was  also  a  protector  of  the  faith,  a  famous  man 
amongst  the  divines  of  Paris,  demanded  of  every  man  what  his  opinion 
was.    John  Deinlefist,  public  notary,  ^v^ote  every  mans  sentence  and 


60S  THE    COUXCIL    OF    BASIL. 


^enry   judgment.  The  conclusions  of  the  divines,  wliich  were  the  ground  and 
foundation  of  their  disputation,  were  these,  here  following. 


A.D. 
1431. 


The  Conclusions  of  the  Disputation. 

I.  It  is  a  verity  of  the  catliolic  faith,  that  the  sacred  general  council  hath 
power  over  the  pope,  or  any  other  prelate. 

II.  The  pope  cannot  by  liis  own  authority,  either  dissolve,  transport,  or  pro- 
rogue the  general  council  being  lawfully  congregated,  without  the  consent  of  the 
whole  coimcil :  and  this  is  of  like  verity. 

III.  He  who  doth  obstinately  resist  these  verities,  is  to  be  counted  a  heretic. 

IV.  Pope  Eugene  IV.  hath  resisted  these  verities,  when  at  the  first,  by  the 
fulness  of  his  apostolic  power,  he  attempted  to  dissolve  or  to  transport  the  council 
of  Basil. 

V.  Eugene,  being  admonished  by  the  sacred  council,  did  recant  the  eiTors 
repugnant  to  these  verities. 

VI.  The  dissolution  or  translation  of  the  council,  attempted  the  second  time 
by  Eugene,  is  against  the  aforesaid  verities,  and  containeth  an  inexcusable  error 
touching  the  faitli. 

VII.  Eugene,  in  going  about  to  dissolve  and  transport  the  council  again,  is 
fallen  into  his  before- revoked  errors. 

VIII.  Eugene,  being  warned  by  the  synod  that  he  should  revoke  the  disso- 
lution or  translation  the  second  time  attempted,  after  that  his  contumacy  was 
declared,  persevering  in  his  rebellion,  and  erecting  a  council  at  Ferrara,  showed 
himself  thereby  obstinate. 

These  were  the  conclusions  which  were  read  in  the  chapter-house 
before  the  fathers  of  the  council :  upon  which  when  they  were  desired 
to  speak  their  minds,  they  all,  in  a  manner,  confirmed  and  allowed 
them.  Notwithstanding,  Panormitane,  archbishop,  disputed  much 
against  them,  as  did  the  bishop  of  Burgos,  the  king  of  Arragon''s 
almoner.  Yet  did  they  not  gainsay  the  three  first  conclusions,  but 
only  those  wherein  pope  Eugene  was  touched.  This  Panormitane,  as 
he  was  subtle,  so  did  he  subtlely  dispute  against  the  last  conclusions, 
endeavouring,  himself,  to  declare  that  Eugene  was  not  relapsed ;  and 
had  great  contention  with  the  bishop  of  Argens,  John  Segovius,  and 
Francis  de  Fuxe,  divines. 

The  Argument  of  Panormitane  for  the  Pope. 

Articles         He  divided  the  articles  of  the  faith  into  three  sorts ;  straitly,  as  in  the  Ci'eed ; 

of  faith     largely,  as  in  the  declarations  made  by  the  church  ;  most  largely  of  all,  as  in 

into  three  those  things  which  arise  of  the  premises ;  affirming  that  Eugene  did  by  no  means 

sorts.        violate  his  faith  in  his  first  dissolution  that  he  made,  because  it  is  not  contained 

in  the  Creed,  neither  yet  in  the  determinations  of  the  church,  that  the  pope  can 

not  dissolve  the  councils ;  and  that  it  seemeth  not  unto  him  to  rise  of  the  deter 

minations  before  made,  but  rather  of  the  decrees  of  the  council  of  Constance. 

And  further,  that  this,  as  a  case  omitted,  is  reserved  for  the  pope  to  be  discussed, 

forasmuch  as  in  the  chapter  beginning  '  Frequens,'  it  appeai'eth  that  the  place 

where  the  council  should  be  kept  ought  to  be  chosen  by  the  pope,  the  council 

allowing  the  same,  and  nothing  is  thereof  at  all  spoken.     And  if,  peradventure, 

Eugene  had  offended  in  the  first  dissolution,  notwithstanding,  he  ought  to  be 

holden  excused,  because  he  did  it  by  the  council  of  the  cardinals,  representing 

Panormi-  '•^^  church  of  Rome ;  whose  authority  he  said  to  be  such,  that  the  judgment, 

tane  pre-   thereof  should  be  preferred  before  aU  the  world.     Neither  had  there  been  any 

th'^''"d      sacred  council  found  to  have  pi-oceeded  against  Eugene  as  a  heretic;  and  that 

ment  of     is  an  evident  sign  that  the  council  hath  not  thought  him  to  have  swerved  from 

the  cardl-  the  faith,  neither  to  have  any  occasion  that  he  should  be  called  a  heretic  for  his 

fore  alt      eiTors  revoked ;  and  that  he  himself  hath  read  the  whole  text,  that  the  pope  did 

theworld.  not  revoke  the  dissolution  as  contrary  unto  the  faith,  but  as  breeding  offence. 


DISPUTATIONS    IN    THE    COUNCIL.  GOf) 

Also  that  the  last  dissolution  hath  no  such  cause  in  it,  forasmuch  as  likewise  he     Henry 
had  done  it  by  the  council  of  the  cardinals,  and  for  the  uniting  of  the  Greeks,      ^i- 
that  he  might  not  be  compelled  in  a  criminal  cause  to  answer  by  his  procurator,      . 
when  he,  being  letted  by  sickness,  could  not  come  personally :  that  is  to  say,    C^a^,' 
forasmuch  as  in  the  first  dissolution  Eugene  hath  fallen  into  no  error  of  faith, 
he  cannot  be  persuaded  that  he  can  be  called  a  relapse,  forasmuch  as  neither  in  The  pope 
the  first,  neither  yet  in  the  second  dissolution  did  he  violate  his  faith.  etlffhe' 

This  oration  of  Panormitane  was  more  praised,  than  allowed  of  of  the " 
all  men.      Notwithstanding  this  effect  it  wrought,  that  afterwards  hlT^^' 
this  word  "relapse"  was  taken  out  of  the  conclusions,  and  instead  f^^l'y?}}' 
thereof  this  word  "prolapse    put  in.     Neither  durst  Panormitane  J'''"!^- 
himself  altogether  excuse  Eugene  of  heresy,  but  defended  the  first  no  rJ"-"^^' 
dissolution  more  than  the  second,  yet  departed  he  not  without  answer;  proiajjse"' 
for  John  Segovius,  an  expert  divine,  rising  up,  answered  him  reve- 
rently, as  was  comely  for  such  a  prelate. 

The  Answer  of  John  Segovius. 

He  said,   he  granted  that  which    Panormitane  had   spoken  touching  the 
division  of  the  articles  of  the  faith  into  three  poinis,  because  it  made  for  this 
purpose.     For  if  those  things  are  to  be  holden  for  articles  of  faith,  said  he, 
which  may  be  gathered  of  the  detenninations  of  the  church,  it  were  manifest 
that   the  conclusions  whereupon   we  now  contend,  redound  and  come  of  the 
detenninations  of  the  church,  that  is  to  say,  of  the  council  of  Constance  ;  for  if 
therein  the  pope  be  made  subject  unto  the  general  council,  who  is  it  that  will 
say  that  the  pope  hath  power  over  the  council   which  is  above  him  ;  or  that 
Eugene  ought  to  remain  pope,  because  he  could  not  dissolve  the  council  which 
is  above  him,  without  the  consent  thereof?    Which  article  undoubtedly  he  hath 
violated  and  broken.     And  if  any  man  will  say  that  in  the  first  dissolution  this 
article  was  not  violated,  because  there  was  no  declaration  made  thereof,  let 
him  who  thinketh  thus,  understand,  that  the  bishop  of  Rome  ought  not  only  to 
know  the  plain  and  manifest,  but  also  the  secret  and  hidden  things  of  the  faith; 
for  he,  being  the  vicar  of  Christ,  and  the  head  of  all  others,  ought  to  instruct 
and  teach  all  men.     But  if  so  be  he  will  not,  then  he  shall  be  convicted  for 
being  dead,  because  he  continued  long  in  the  dissolution  after  the  declaration 
of  the  council,  neither  did  consent  unto  the  determination  of  the  church;  and 
therefore,   if  peradventure    he  did  not  err  in  the  faith   in  dissolving  of  the 
council,  yet  did  he  err  in  persevering  in  the  same,  as  it  manifestly  appeareth 
by  the  saying  of  Clement,  oftentimes  alleged  by  Panormitane,  wherein  it  is 
said  :  That  he  who  liveth  rebelliously,  and  neglecteth  to   do  good,  is  rather  ^he  pope 
a  member  of  the  devil  than  of  Christ,  and  rather  an  infidel  than  a  true  behever;  neglect- 
so  that  Eugene,  by  disobeying   the  church,  may  worthily  be  called  an  infidel.  \"°  '° , 
Neither  is  it  true  that  the  pope  hath  not  ofl!ended  in  the  faith;  forasmuch,  isamem- 
as  well  in  that  answer  which  beginneth  '  Cogitanti,'  as  also  in  the  answer  which  ^'^  ""f 
beginneth  'Sperant,'made  unto  the  pope's  ambassadors,,  these  words  are  mani-  but  of  the 
fest :  '  This    article  concerneth  faith,   and  we  had  rather   die,   than  through  devil. 
cowardliness   to  give  place.'     By  which  saying  it  is  evident  that  the  synod 
had  sufficiently  admonished  the  pope  what  he  did  against  the  faith,  and  there- 
fore it  seemed  that  afterwards,  when   Eugene  revoked  the  dissolution,  he  also 
revoked  the  error  of  faith  contained  in  the  same.    There  are  also  divers  ofl'enccs 
sprung  and  risen  up  through  the  error  of  faith :  for  some  say  that  the  poj)e 
is  under  the  council,   others  deny  it,  and  this  diversity  of  doctrine  bringeth 
offence.     Also  it  is  expressly  against  the  authoi'ity  of  the  council,  that  the  pope 
did  revoke  the  assertions  made  in  their  name. 

And  albeit  in  such  revocations  the  style  and  order  of  judgments  are  not  ob-  Councils 
served,  notwithstanding  it  doth  suffice  in  such  case  when  the  council  doth  pro-  hound  to 
ceed  against  the  pope,  in  which  case  only  the  truth  is  to  be  observed,  neitlier  ave^aw. 
is  the  comicil  subject  unto  any  positive  law,  that  it  ought  to  observe  any  terms 
or  judicial  orders.     Also  he  said  that  he  utterly  contemned  that  same  singular 
gloss  which  did  prefer  the  pope  before  all  the  woi-ld :  that  it  was   well  called 
sino-ular,  which  decreed  such  foolish  and  fond  things,  and  unwortlij'  to  be  followed 

VOL.  III.  K.  E, 


610  THE    COUNCIL    OF    BASIL. 

Henry    of  any  man  ;  and  that  lie  did  nrnch  marvel  at  Panormitane,  and  other  doctors 

yi-      of  those  days,  who,  while  they  went  about  to  extol  the  authority  of  the  glosses, 

j\  D     do  abase  the  same  by  adding  their  singularities  thereto ;  for  that  gloss  is  singu- 

1431*    '^^'>  which  is  alone.    But  who  would  not  more  esteem  a  gloss  constantly  written 

— '—  and  ageeable  in  all  places,  than  that  which,   in  any  one  place,  teacheth  any 

thing  which  may  seem  to  be  an  error ;  and  that,  as  touching  the  verity  and 
truth?  St.  Jerome,  a  grave  and  ancient  doctor,  is  contrary  to  this  gloss,  who 
doubteth  nothing  at  all,  but  that  the  world,  as  touching  authority,  is  above  the 
city  itself;  that  is  to  say,  Rome. 

Segovius  could  scarcely  finish  this  his  oration  without  inteiTuption ; 
for  Panonnitane  oftentimes  interrupting  him,  went  about  to  confute 
now  this,  and  now  that  reason.  Whereupon  the  bishop  of  Argens 
rising  up,  a  man  not  only  eloquent,  but  also  of  a  stout  courage, 
troubled  Panormitane  in  his  reasons  and  arguments,  and  put  him 
from  his  purpose  ;  yet  they  proceeded  so  far,  that  they  passed  the 
manner  of  disputation,  and  did  not  abstain  from  opprobrious  taunts. 

When  the  bishop  of  Argens,  asking  license,  chanced  to  say  that  the 
bishop  of  Rome  ought  to  be  the  minister  of  the  church,  Panormi- 
tane could  not  suffer  that  ;  insomuch  that  he  so  forgot  himself  that 
day,  and  liis  knowledge  (which  otherwise  was  great)  did  so  fail  liim, 
that  he  was  not  ashamed  to  say  and  affirm,  that  the  pope  was  lord 
over  the  church.     Whom  Segovius  answered  thus : 

The  Mark,   saith  he,   O  Panormitane,   what  thou  sayest ;  for  this  is  the  most 

pope  ap-    honourable  title  of  the  bishop  of  Rome,  wherein  he  calleth  himself  '  the  servant 

lord  of      of  the  servants  of  God.'     Which  is  gathered  upon  this  point,  when  Christ  said 

the  unto  his  disciples,  when  they  demanded  of  him  which  of  them  was  the  greatest. 

He  and     J'*^^'  know  he  answered  them  :  '  The  princes  of  the  people  have  rule  and  domi- 

the clergy  nion  over  them,  but  amongst  you  is  it  not  so,'  &c. ;  wherein  he  doth  utterly 

desire       prohibit  lordship  and  dominion.     And  Peter,  who  was  the  first  vicar  of  Christ, 

nion,  con-  said :  '  Feed  the  flock  of  Christ  which  is  committed  unto  you,  providing  for  them 

irary  to     not  by  compulsion,  but  willingly :'  and  immediately  after  he  saith;   'Not  as 

Serin-       lords  over  the  clergy.'  For  if  Christ  the  Son  of  God  came  not  to  be  ministered 

tures.        unto,  but  to  minister  and  to  serve,  how  then  can  his  vicar  have  any  dominion, 

or  be  called  'lord,'  as  you  Panonnitane  will  affirm  ?  forasmuch  'as  the  disciple  is 

not  above  his  master,  nor  the  servant  above  his  lord.'     And  the  Lord  himself 

saith ;  '  Be  ye  not  called  masters,  forasmuch  as  your  only  master  is  Christ,  and 

he  who  is  the  greatest  among  you,  shall  be  your  servant.' 

Panormitane  being   somewhat  disquieted   with  this  answer,  the 
council  brake  up  and  departed. 

The  The  next  day  there  was  a  general  congregation,  and  they  returned 

kin^s*^     all  again  unto  the  chapter-house  after  dinner,  where  the  archbishop 

amhassa-  of  Lyous,  the  king"'s  orator,  being  required  to  speak  his  mind,  after  he 

against     had,  by  divers  and  sundry  reasons,  proved  Eugene  to  be  a  heretic,  he 

Eugene,   -[jj^pj-jy  compkiucd,  dctcstiug  the  negligence  and  ignavy  of  those 

that  had  preferred  such  a  man  unto  the  papacy,  and  so  moved  all 

their  hearts  who  were  present,  that  they  all,  together  with  him,  did 

bewail  the  calamities  of  the  universal  churcL 

The  Then  the  bishop  of  Burgen.  the  ambassador  of  Spain,  divided  the 

Burgen.    conclusions  into  two  parts,  some  he  called  general,  and  others  personal, 

disputing  very  excellently  as   touching  the   three  first  conclusions  ; 

affirming,  that  he  did  in  no  point  doubt  of  them,  but  only,  that  the 

addition,  which  made  mention  of  the  faith,  seemed  to  be  doubtfiil 


A    GENERAL    COUNCIL    ABOVE    THE    POPE.  611 

unto  him.     But  upon  this  point  he  stayed  much,  to  prove  that  the    Henry 
council  was  above  the  pope ;  which,  after  lie  had  sufficiently  proved       ^" 
both  by  God's  law,  and  man's  law,  he  taught  also  by  physical  reason,    A.  D. 
alleging  Aristotle  for  witness.     He  said,  that  in  every  well  ordered  _li^_ 
kingdom   it   ought   especially  to  be   desired,   that  the  whole    realm 
should  be  of  more  authority  than  the  king ;  which  if  it  happened 
contrary,  it  were  not  to  be  called  a  kingdom,  but  a  tryanny :  so  like-  The 
wise  did  he  think  of  the  church,  that  it  ought  to  be  of  more  authority  abovfthc 
than  the  prince  thereof,  that  is  to  say,  the  pope.     ^Vliich  his  oration  pope. 
he  uttered  so  eloquently,  learnedly,  and  truly,  that  all  men  depended 
upon  him,  and  desired  rather  to  have  him  continue  his  oration,  than 
to  have  an  end  thereof. 

But  when  he  entered,  into  the  other  conclusions,  he  seemed  to 
have  forgotten  himself,  and  to  be  no  more  the  same  man  that  he  Avas ; 
for  neither  was  there  the  same  eloquence  in  his  words,  neither  gravity 
in  oration,  nor  cheerfulness  of  countenance  ;  so  that  if  he  could  have 
seen  himself,  he  would  peradventure  gi-eatly  have  marvelled  at  him- 
self. Every  man  might  well  see  and  perceive  then  the  power  and 
force  of  the  truth,  which  ministered  copy'  of  matter  unto  him,  so 
long  as  he  spake  in  the  defence  thereof.^  But  when  he  began  once 
to  speak  against  her,  she  took  away  even  his  natural  eloquence  from 
him.*  Notwitstanding  Panormitane,  and  the  bishop  of  Burgos, 
showed  this  example  of  modesty,  that  albeit  they  would  not  confess 
or  grant  the  last  conclusions  to  be  verities  of  faith,  yet  they  would 
not  that  any  man  should  follow  or  lean  unto  their  opinion,  who  were 
but  mean  divines ;  but  rather  unto  the  opinions  of  the  divines.  But 
the  king  of  Arragon's  almoner,  being  a  subtle  and  crafty  man,  did 
not  directly  dispute  upon  the  conclusions,  but  picking  out  here  and 
there  certain  arguments,  sought  to  let  and  hinder  the  council.  Against 
whom  an  abbot  of  Scotland,  a  man  of  an  excellent  wit,  disputed  very 
much;  and  Thomas  de  Corcellis,  a  famous  divine,  alleged  much 
against  him  out  of  the  decrees  of  the  sacred  council,  and  vdiXx  a  cer- 
tain modest  shamefacedness,  always  beholding  the  ground,  did  very 
largely  dispute  in  defence  of  the  conclusions. 

The  Conclusions   of  the  Disputations,  as  summed  up  by  -^neas 

Sylvius. 

But  now,  to  avoid  tediousness,  I  will  only  proceed  to  declare  arguments 
whereby  the  conclusions  were  ratified  and  confirmed,  not  minding  to  treat  of  the 
five  last  conclusions,  which  concern  the  person  of  Eugene,  but  onlj^  upon  the 
three  first,  whereunto  I  will  join  certain  probable  arguments,  gathered  out  of 
the  disputation  of  the  fathers.  In  the  first  conclusion  is  the  greatest  force,  and  First  ccr.- 
it  is  the  first  to  be  discussed ;  touching  which,  two  things  are  to  be  required  and  elusion. 
examined.  The  one,  whether  the  general  council  have  authority  over  the  pope. 
The  other,  whether  the  catholic  faith  command  it  to  be  believed.  As  touch- 
ing that  the  pope  is  subject  to  the  general  council,  it  is  excellently  well  proved 
by  the  reason  before  alleged  by  the  bishop  of  Burgos.  For  the  pope  is  in  the 
church,  as  a  king  in  his  kingdom ;  and  for  a  king  to  be  of  more  authority  than 
his  kingdom,  it  were  too  absurd :  ergo,  neither  ought  the  pope  to  be  above  the 

(1)  "  Copy  of  matter;"  a  pattern  or  standard  to  which  he  might  appeal,  or  from  which  he  might 
argue.— Ed. 

(2)  "  The  force  of  truth"  -which  appeared  also  in  /Eneas,  the  writer  hereof,  although  afterwards, 
whea  he  was  pope,  he  denied  the  same, 

(3)  Note  what  it  is  for  a  man  to  labour  against  his  knowledge. 

II  R    2 


612  THE    COUNCIL    OF    BASIL. 

Henry  churcli.  For  like  as  oftentimes  kings,  who  do  wickedly  govern  the  common- 
VI.  wealth,  and  exercise  cruelty,  are  deprived  of  their  kingdoms ;  even  so  it  is  not 
.  ^  to  be  doubted,  but  that  the  bishops  of  Rome  may  be  deposed  by  the  church, 
■     ■    that  is  to  say,  by  the  general  councils. 

Neither  do  I  herein  allow  those  who  attribute  such  ample  and  large  authority 


143L 


A  kins      unto  kings,  that  they  will  not  have  them  bound  imder  any  laws ;  for  such  as  so 
not  ot       j^  g,^y^  |jg  Ijjjj  flatterers,  who  do  talk  otherwise  than  they  think.  P'or  albeit  that 


iiioie  au- 


thority     thev  do  say,  that  the  moderation  of  the  law  is  alway  in  the  prince's  power;' 
than  his    j]^j^(  (|q  J  thus  understand,  that  when  reason  shall  persuade,  he  ought  to  digress 
■ing  om.  ^|,pj^^  (.jjg  rigour  of  the  law.     For  he  is  called  a  king,  who  careth  and  provideth 
for  the  commonwealth,  taketh  pleasure  in  the  commodity  and  profit  of  his 
subjects,  and  in  all  his  doings  hath  respect  to   the  commodity  of  tliose  over 
whom  he  ruleth ;  which  if  he  do  not,  he  is  not  to  be  counted  a  king,  but  a 
What  a     tyrant,  whose  property  it  is,  only  to  seek  his  own  profit;  for  in  this  point  a 
king  is.     Vmg  difiereth  from  a  tyrant,  that  the  one  seekcth  the  commodity  and  profit  of 
those  whom  he  ruleth,  and  the  other  only  his  own ;  which  to  make  more  mani- 
fest, the  cause  is  also  to  be  alleged  wherefore  kings  were  ordained. 
The  in-         At  the  beginning  (as  Cicero  in  his  Offices  saith)  it  is  most  certain,  that  there 
stitution    ^as  a  certain  time  when  the  people  lived  without  kings.    But  afterwards,  when 
ings.    jjjjj^g  g^j^^  possessions  began  to  be  divided  according  to  the  custom  of  every 
nation,  then  were  kings  ordained  for  no  other  cause,  but  only  to  exercise  justice. 
For  when,  at  the  beginning,  the  common  people  were  oppressed  by  rich  and 
mighty  men,  they  ran,  by-and-by,  to  some  good  and  virtuous  man,  who  should 
defend  the  poor  from  injury,  and  ordain  laws  whereby  the  rich  and  poor  might 
dwell  together.    But  when  as  yet,  under  the  ride  of  kings,  the  poor  were  often- 
times oppressed,  laws  were  ordained  and  instituted,  which  should  judge  neither 
for  hatred  nor  favour,  and  give  like  ear  unto  the  poor  as  unto  the  rich  :  whereby 
we  do  understand  and  know,  not  only  the  people,  but  also  the  king  to  be  subject 
to  the  laws.  For  if  we  do  see  a  king  to  contemn  and  despise  the  laws,  violently 
rob  and  spoil  his  subjects,  defile  virgins,  dishonour  matrons,  and  do  all  things 
licentiously  and  temerariously;    do  not  the  nobles  of  the  kingdom  assemble 
togetlier,  deposing  him  from  his  kingdom,  and  set  up  another  in  his  place,  who 
shall  swear  to  rule  and  govern  uprightly,  and  be  obedient  unto  the  laws? 
The  pope  Verily,  as  reason  doth  persuade,  even  so  doth  the  use  thereof  also  teach  us.     It 
be  subject  seemeth  also  agreeable  unto  reason,  that  the  same  shoidd  be  done  in  the  church, 
unto  the    that  is  to  say,  in  the  council,  which  is  done  in  any  kingdom.     And  so  is  this 
council,     sufficiently  apparent,  which  we  have  before  said,  that  the  pope  is  subject  unto 
the  council. 

But  now,  to  pass  unto  the  arguments  of  divinity,  tlie  foundation  of  the  matter 
which  we  do  treat  upon,  is  the  words  of  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  in  divers  places, 
'  Tu  es      but  especially  where  he  speaketh  unto  Peter :  '  Tu  es  Petnis,  et  super  banc 
^'^^''"^      petram  aedificabo  ecclesiam  meam,  et  portae  inferi  non  prsvalebunt  adversus 
ed.  earn ; '  that  is,  '  Thou  art  Peter,  and  upon  this  rock  will  I  build  my  church,  and 

the  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  it.'     Upon  which  words  it  seemeth 
good  to  begin  this  disputation,  forasmuch  as  some  were  wont  to  allege  these 
words,  to  extol  the  authority  of  the  bishop  of  Rome.    But  (as  it  shall  by-and-by 
appear)  the  words  of  Christ  had  another  sense  and  meaning  than  divers  of  them 
do  think;    for  he  saith,  'And  the  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  it.' 
Verily  this  is  a  great  promise,  and  these  words  of  the  Lord  are  of  great  import- 
ance. For  what  greater  word  could  there  have  been  spoken,  than  that  the  gates 
Sins  are.    of  hell  should  not  prevail  against  the  church  ?  These  gates  of  hell,  as  St.  Jerome 
of  hell*^^  saith,  do  signify  sins.     Wherefore,  if  sins  cannot  prevail  against  the  church, 
neither  can  any  malign  spirits  prevail  against  the  same,  which  have  no  power 
at  all  over  mankind,  but  only  through  sin.    And  for  that  cause,  where  it  is  said 
in  Job,  that  there  is  no  power  upon  the  earth  that  may  be  compared  unto  the 
power  of  the  malign  spirit :  whereby  it  followeth,  that  the  power  of  the  church 
is  above  all  other  power, 
the^pa-'         ^^  '^^Jt  filsO)  upon  the  same  saying,  reason  after  another  sort :  forasmuch 
pists'  opi-  as  the  gates  of  hell,  that  is  to  say,  sins,  cannot  prevail  against  the  church,  the 
nion,  that  church  thereby  is  declared  to  be  without  sin ;  which  cannot  be  spoken  of  the 

(11  These  kind  of  flatterers  come  now,  in  our  days. 


TilE    CHURCH    ONE    FLESH    WITH    CHRIST.  613 

pope,  who  is  a  mortal  man,  forasmuch  as  it  is  written,  '  Seven  times  in  the  day  Uenm 

the  just  man  doth  offend.'     If  the  church  he  without  spot  because  it  cannot  be  '■^• 
defiled  with  sin,  who  is  it  that  will  prefer  a  sinful  man  before  an  undefiled 


.. ,j        .,    ..V,        -v.,       .w       ^^^^^       ,,  ,^K       ^Av.*^.*         u.      01XJ1.U.A        iituiA        U«Vi\^lV        till        LllHACIllCU.  .  1^ 

church  ?     Neither  let  us  give  ear  unto  those  who  will  not  refer  these  words  of    ' 
Christ  imto  the  church,  where  he  saith,  '  Oravi  pro  te  Petre,  ut  non  deficiat        '^^" 
fides  tua;'  that  is  to  say,  '  Peter !   I  have  prayed  for  thee,  that  tliy  faith  should  the  popu 
not  fail  thee.'     For,  as  St.  Augustine  saith  in  the  exposition  of  the  Psalms:  ''^""o' 
'  Certain  things  are  spoken  as  though  they  seemed  properly  to  pertain  unto  the    ^j^^.- 
apostle  Peter,  notwithstanding  tliey  have  no  evident  sense,  but  when  they  are  pro  te, 
referred  unto  the  church,  the  person  whereof  he  is  understood  figuratively  to  P'^tr^,'  u 
represent,'     Whereupon  in  another  place,  in  the  questions  of  the  New  and  Old  ™Th"e* 
Testament,  upon  the  words,  '  Rogavi  pro  te  Petre;'  '  I  liave  prayed  for  thee,  church. 
Peter!'  what  is  doubted?  Did  he  pray  for  Peter,  and  did  he  not  pray  for  James 
and  John,  besides  the  rest?     It  is  manifest,  that  under  the  name  of  Peter  all 
others  are  contained.     For  in  another  place  of  St.  John,  he  saith :  '  I  pray  for 
them  whom  thou  hast  given  me,  and  I  will  that  wheresoever  I  am,  they  shall 
be  also  with  me.'     Whereupon  we  do  oftentimes,  by  the  name  of  Peter,  under- 
stand the  church,  which  we  do  nothing  at  all  doubt  to  be  done  in  this  place ; 
otherwise  the  truth  could  not  consist,  forasmuch  as  within  a  while  after,  tlie  faitli 
of  Peter  failed  for  a  time,  by  the  denial  of  Christ ;  but  the  faith  of  the  church, 
whose  person  Peter  did  represent,  did  always  persevere  inviolate. 

As  touching  the  bishops  of  Rome,  if  time  would  suffer  us,  we  could  rehearse  Bishops 
many  examples,  how  that  they  cither  have  been  heretics,  or  replenished  with  °^  Rome 
other  vices.     Neither  are  we  ignorant,  how  Marcellinus,  at  the  emperor's  com-  ^"jfj.  '^^^' 
mandment,  did  sacrifice  unto  idols,  and  that  another  (wliich  is  more  horrible) 
did  attain  unto  the  papacy  by  a  devihsh  fraud  and  deceit.'     Notwithstanding, 
the  testimon)'  of  Paul  to  the  Hebrews  shall  suffice  us  at  this  time,  who  saith 
that  *  every  bishop  is  compassed  in  with  infirmity,'  that  is  to  say,  with  wicked- 
ness and  sin.  Also  the  testimonies  of  Christ  himself  do  approve  that  the  church  The 
remaineth  always  without  sin ;  for  in  Matthew  he  saith,  '  I  am  with  you  even  church 
unto  the  end  of  the  world.'   Which  words  v/ere  not  only  spoken  to  the  apostles  ^jj,'  '°J,j 
(for  they  continued  not  unto  the  end  of  the  world),  but  also  unto  their  succes-  tiie  pope 


neither  would  Christ  then  signify  that  he  was  God,  dispersed  throughout  '* 


a  sin- 


ner. 


all  the  world,  as  he  is  also  perceived  to  be  amongst  sinners,  but  would  declare 
a  certain  gift  of  grace  through  his  assistance,  whereby  he  would  preserve  the 
holy  church,  consisting  amongst  his  apostles  and  their  successors,  always  im- 
maculate and  undefiled. 

And  again  in  another  place,  '  I,'  saith  he,  '  will  pray,  and  he  shall  give  you 
another  comforter,  that  he  may  remain  with  you  for  ever,  even  the  Spirit  of 
truth,  whom  the  world  cannot  receive,  because  the  world  seeth  him  not,  neither 
knoweth  him ;  but  you  shall  know  him,  because  he  shall  remain  with  you.' 
Which  words  being  spoke  unto  the  disciples  of  Jesus,  are  also  understood  to  be 
spoken  unto  their  successors,  and  so  consequently  unto  the  church.    And  if  the 
spirit  of  truth  be  continually  in  the  church,  no  man  can  deny  but  that  the 
church  ought  to  continue  undefiled.     By  the  same  authority  also  that  Christ  is 
called  the  spouse  of  the  church,  wlio  seeth  not  but  that  the  church  is  undefiled  ? 
'  For  the  husband  and  the  wife,'  as  the  apostle  saith,  '  are  two  in  one  flesh,'  and, 
as  he  doth  also  add,  'no  man  hateth  his  own  flesh.'  Thereby  it  cometh  to  pass.  The 
that  Christ  cannot  hate  the  church,  forasmuch  as  she  is  his  spouse,  and  one  flesh  church  is 
with  him,  and  no  man  can  hate  himself;  ergo,  the  church  doth  not  sin ;  for  if  °"jjj  ** 
it  did  sin,  it  should  be  hated,  for  sinners  the  Lord  doth  hate.  AVhich  authorities  Christ. 
being  gathered  together,  we  ought  with  the  apostle  to  confess  that  the  church 
of  God  hath  neither  spot  nor  wrinkle.^  Also  writing  unto  Timothy,  he  affirmeth 
the  chiu-ch  to  be  the  pillar  and  foundation  of  the  truth ;  whereupon,  in  this  song 
of  the  spouse,  it  is  said :  '  My  friend,  thou  art  altogether  fair  and  beautiful, 
neither  is  there  any  spot  in  thee.'  These  words,  peradventure,  may  abash  some, 
that  I  do  go  about  to  prove  the  church  to  be  without  sin.     For  as  the  church 
doth  contain  all  men  who  are  called  Christians,  who  also  do  agree  and  come 
together  in  one  belief  of  faith,  and  participation  of  the  sacraments,  I  do  fear  lest 
some  men  vnU.  think,  tlmt  I  do  affinn  all  men  to  be  without  sin ;  which  is  so  far 

(1)  He  meaneth  Silvester  II.  ^   .      ,     u     ■ 

(2)  The  church  is  without  spot  or  -sin,  is  to  be  understood  not  by  nature,  but  only  by  im 
putation. 


614 


THK    COUNCIL    OF    BASIL. 


llevry 
VI. 

A.D. 
1431. 

The 
church 

■without 
sin,  how 
to  be 
under- 
stood. 
An  error 
that  only 
theVirfri'i 
Mary  did 
persevere' 
constant, 
at  the 
time  of 
Christ's 
passion. 


The 

church 

compre- 

hendeth 

both  tlie 

evil  and 

good. 


from  my  meaning,  that  I  do  verily  think  the  contrary  to  be  most  true.  For  I 
suppose,  that  there  is  no  man  in  the  church,  being  clothed  in  this  mortal  flesh, 
without  sin.  Neither  do  these  things  vary  or  dissent  among  themselves;  for 
the  church  hath  this  gift,  that  albeit  every  part  and  member  thereof  may  sin, 
yet  the  whole  body  cannot  sin.  For  there  be  always  good  men  in  the  church, 
who,  albeit  they  be  subject  unto  human  fragility,  notwithstanding  they  have  so 
perfect  a  gift  of  sincere  and  pure  virtue,  that,  subduing  all  carnal  desires  and 
affections,  they  keep  themselves  a  pleasant  and  acceptable  sacrifice  unto  God. 
Neither  do  I  consent  or  agree  unto  the  opinion  of  divers,  who  affirm  that  the 
Virgin  Mary  only  persevered  in  faith  at  the  Lord's  passion.  Whereupon  divers 
have  not  been  ashamed  to  say,  that  the  faith  was  so  debilitated  and  weakened, 
that  it  seemed  to  be  returned  to  one  only  old  woman  ;  whose  opinion,  cr  rather 
madness,  St.  Paul  seemeth  openly  to  reject,  writing  thus  unto  the  Romans : 
'Do  ye  not  know,'  saith  he,  'what  the  Scripture  writeth  of  Elias,  how  inces- 
santly he  called  upon  God  against  the  childi'en  of  Israel,  saying,  O  Lord,  they 
have  slain  thy  prophets,  and  digged  down  thine  altars,  and  I  alone  am  left,  and 
they  seek  after  my  soul:  but  what  answer  received  he  of  God?  I  have  left 
unto  myself  yet  seven  thousand  men,  which  have  not  bowed  their  knees  unto 
Baal.'  What  other  thing  doth  this  answer  of  God  declare,  than  that  it  is  a 
foolish  opinion  of  those  who  think  the  church  of  God  to  be  brought  unto  so 
small  a  number  ?  We  ought  to  believe  the  words  of  Christ,  which  are  altogether 
repugnant  unto  those  men,  who  affirm,  that  the  Virgin  only  did  persevere  in 
faith.  For  Jesus  said  unto  his  Father :  '  O  holy  Father !  save  them  in  thy 
name  whom  thou  hast  given  me,  that  they  may  be  one  as  we  are  one.  When 
I  was  with  them,  I  kept  them  in  thy  name :  I  have  kept  them  that  thou  gavest 
unto  me,  and  none  of  them  perished,  but  only  the  son  of  perdition.  And  I  do 
not  desire  that  thou  shouldest  take  them  out  of  the  world,  but  that  thou 
shouldest  preserve  them  from  evil.' 

Behold,  Christ  prayeth  that  his  disciples  should  not  fall,  but  should  be  pre- 
served from  evil,  although  they  were  still  lying  in  the  world ;  and  he,  so  pray- 
ing, without  doubt  is  heard ;  for  he  saith  in  another  place  :  '  I  know  that  thou 
hearest  me.'  But  how  is  he  heard,  if  all  those  for  whom  he  prayeth,  swerved 
at  the  time  of  his  passion  ?  As  for  example,  by  what  means  did  Christ,  hanging 
upon  the  cross,  commend  his  dearly  beloved  mother  unto  John,  if  so  be  he 
were  either  then  swerved,  or  should  by-and-by  after  have  swerved  from  the 
faith  ?  Moreover,  did  not  the  centurion  by-and-by  cry  out  and  say  :  '  Truly 
this  is  the  Son  of  God?'  The  Jews  also,  who  at  that  time  were  far  distant  from 
Jerusalem,  might  both  be  called  faithful,  and  also  be  saved  by  their  faith ; 
seeing  that  (as  the  apostle  saith)  men  are  bound  unto  the  gospel  (even  when 
they  swerve  from  it),  after  it  is  once  known  and  revealed  unto  them.  But  let 
us  leave  these  men,  and  speak  of  that  which  is  more  likely,  and  let  us  judge 
that  there  hath  been,  and  is,  a  great  number  of  good  men  in  the  church ;  and 
by  them,  as  by  the  more  worthy  part,  let  us  name  the  church  holy  and  imma- 
culate, which  doth  comprehend  as  well  the  evil  as  the  good.  For  the  church 
is  compared  unto  a  net  which  is  cast  into  the  sea,  and  gathereth  together  all 
kind  of  fishes  [Matt,  xx.] 

And  again,  it  is  compared  unto  a  king,  which  made  a  marriage  for  his  son, 
and  sent  forth  his  servants  to  call  those  which  were  bidden  unto  the  wedding, 
and  they  gathered  together  good  and  evil,  as  many  as  they  could  find.  Where- 
fore their  opinion  is  erroneous,  who  affirm,  that  only  good  men  be  compre- 
hended in  the  church ;  which,  if  it  were  true,  it  would  confound  all  things, 
neither  could  we  understand  or  know  where  the  church  were.  But  forasmuch 
as  the  Scripture  saith :  '  No  man  knoweth  whether  he  be  worthy  of  love  or 
hatred,'!  their  opinion  is  more  to  be  allowed  and  truer,  who  include  all 
the  faithful  in  the  church  ;  of  whom,  although  a  great  part  be  given  to 
voluptuousness  and  avarice,  yet  some,  notwithstanding,  are  clean  from  deadly 
sin;  which  part,  as  it  is  the  most  worthy,  it  giveth  the  name  unto  the  church, 
to  be  called  most  holy;  which  is  oftentimes  done;  and  we  are  also  commanded 
to  sing  the  same  in  our  creed,  '  unam  sanctam  catholicam,  et  apostolicam  eccle- 
siam,'  that  is  to  say,  '  one  holy  catholic  and  apostolic  church  ;'  which  article 


<l )  This  saj-ingof  Ecclesiastes  ia  not  so  to  be  translated,  and  also  serveth  to  another  sense  than  is 
heie  meant. 


THE    POPE    MAY    EHU.  615 

the  synod  of  Constantinople  added  unto  the  rest :  wherefore  if  the  church  be     Hennj 
holy,  it  is  also  without  sin.     But  to  return  to  our  former  purjDOse,  this  word       ''^■ 
'  sanctum,'  which  signifieth  'holy'  (as  Macrobius,  alleging  Trebatius,  affirmeth),      , 
is  sometimes  taken  for  religious,  and  sometimes  for  clean  and  uncorrupt.     And    i"^'.,, 
after  the  same  manner,  we  call  the  church  holy,  which  the  apostle  Peter  calleth        '^ 
immaculate,  as  we  read  in  the  famous  epistle  of  Clement 

To  this  end  also  tendeth  that  which  is  spoken  by  St.  Paul,  that  '  Christ  is  the 
Head  of  the  church;'  for  if  the  church  should  wholly  sin,  she  should  not  agi-ee 
with  her  Head,  Christ,  who  is  in  no  point  defiled.     Tliis  also  Christ  himself 
would  signify  unto  us  in  Matthew,  when  he  commendeth  the  house  which  was 
biiilded  upon  the  strong  rock,  against  which,  neither  the  winds,  neither  the  Christ  the 
storms,  could  prevail.     'The  house  of  God,'  saith  the  apostle,   'which   is  the  ^°'^'^- 
church,  is  builded  upon  the  strong  Rock,'  '  which  Rock,'  as  the  apostle  declareth,  upmahe 
'  is  Christ.'     Who  then  is  so  unshamefaced,  that  he  will  affirm  the  church,  which  church  is 
is  founded  upon  Christ,  to  be  subject  to  sin  ?  and  will  not  rather  cry  out  with  ''"'''^*'^- 
the  prophet  and  say,  '  Domine  dilexi  deeorem  domus  tuEe  ;'  that  is  to  say,  'O 
Lord!  I  have  loved  the  beauty  of  thy  house.'      Hereupon  wrote  John  Chry- 
sostome  this  golden  sentence ;  '  The  church  never  ceaseth  to  be  assaulted,  never 
ceaseth  to  be  laid  in  wait  for;  but  in  the  name  of  Christ  it  hath  always  the 
upper  hand,  and  overcomes.    And  albeit  others  do  lie  in  wait  for  it,  or  that  the 
floods  do  beat  against  it,  yet  the  foundation  which  is  laid  upon  the  Rock  is  not 
shaken.'     St.  Hilary  also  saith :  '  That  it  is  the  property  of  the  church  to  van- 
quish when  it  is  hurt,  to  understand  when  it  is  reproved,  to  be  in  safety  when 
it  is  forsaken,  and  to  obtain  victory  when  it  seemeth  almost  overcome.'     Thus, 
by  many  reasons  and  testimonies,  it  is  proved  that  the  church  doth  not  err ; 
which  is  not  spoken  or  affirmed  of  the  bishops  of  Rome,  so  that  this  reason  doth 
make  the  pope  subject  unto  the  church ;  for  it  is  convenient,  that  the  less  perfect 
be  subject  unto  the  more  perfect.     There  be  also  many  other  testimonies  and 
reasons,  whereof  we  will  now  speak  more  at  large. 

'  If  authority  be  sought  for,'  saith  St.  Jerome  (for  I  willingly  occupy  myself  He  prov- 
in  his  sentences,  as  in  a  most  fertile  field),  '  the  world  is  gi-eater  than  a  city.'  '^"^  by 
What  then,  I  pray  you,  Jerome  !  is  the  pope  mighty'because  he  is  the  head  of  the  the  pope ' 
church  of  Rome  ?  His  authority  is  great ;  notwithstanding  the  universal  chiu-ch  *-°  he 
is  gi-eater,  which  doth  not  only  comprehend  one  city,  but  also  the  whole  world,  counc;'  "^ 
Hereupon  it  followeth,  that  if  the  church  be   the  mother  of  all   the  faithful,  if  the 
then  she  hath  the  bishop  of  Rome  for  her  son ;   otherwise,  as  St.  Augustine  church  be 
saith,  '  he  can  neveriiave  God  for  his  Father,  who  will  not  acknowledge  the  Jher™the 
church  for  his    mother;'    which   thing   Anacletus   understanding,  called  the  pope 
universal  church  his  mother,   as  the  \vi'iters  of  the  canons   do  know.      And™"^***^ 
Calixtus  saith,  '  As  a  Son  he  came  to  do  the  will  of  his  Father ;  so  we  do  the 
will  of  our  mother,  which  is  the  church.'     Whereby  it  appeareth,  that  by  how 
much  the  Son  is  inferior  to  the  mother,  by  so  much  the  church  is  superior,  or 
above,  the  bishop  of  Rome. 

Also  we  have  said  before,  that  the  church  was  the  spouse  of  Christ,  and  the  The 
pope  we  know  to  be  a  vicar ;  but  no  man  doth  so  ordain  a  vicar,   that  he  P''.'"^^^,, 
maketh  his  spouse  subject  unto  him,  but  that  the  spouse  is  always  thought  to  spouse, 
be  of  more  authority  than  the  vicar ;  forasmuch  as  she  is  one  body  with  her  the  pope 
husband,  but  the  vdcar  is  not  so.     Neither  will  I  here  pass  over  the  words  of  Jj^^JJ"'  ^° 
St.  Paul  unto  the  Romans :  '  Let  every  soul,'  saith  he,  '  be  subject  unto  the  thereof, 
higher  powers.'     Neither  doth  he  herein  except  the  pope.     For  albeit  that  he  ''"^t^gj^o 
be  above  all  other  men,  yet  it  seemeth  necessary  that  he  should  be  subject  to  be  head 
the  chm-ch.     Neither  let  him  think  himself  hereby  exempt,  because  it  was  said  of  Christ, 
unto  Peter  by  Christ:    *  Whatsoever  thou  bindest,'  &c.      In  this  place,   as  we 
will  hereafter  declare,  he  represented  the  person  of  the  church,  for  we  find  it 
spoken  afterwards  unto  them :  '  Quodcunque  ligaveritis  super  ten-am,  ligatum  Exposi- 
erit  in  ccelis;'  that  is,  'Whatsoever  ye  shall  bind  upon  earth,  shall  be  also  bound  1'^"^^°/. 
in  heaven.'     And  furthermore,  if  all  power  be  given  of  Christ,  as  the  apostle  cunque 
writeth  unto  the  Corinthians,  it  is  given  for  the  edifying  of  the  church,  and  not  ligaveri- 
for  the  destruction  thereof;  why  then  may  not  the  church  correct  the  pope,  if  '^' 
he  abuse  the  keys,  and  bring  all  things  to  ruin  ? 

Add  hereunto  also  another  argument.     A  man  in  this  life  is  less  than  the 
angels,  for  wc  read  in  Matthew  "of  John  Baptist,  that  he  which  is  least  in  the 


to  the 
sun. 


GIG  THE    COUNCIL    OF    BASIL. 

Henry    kingdom  of  lieaven  is  greater  than  he.  Notwithstanding  Christ  saith,  in  another 
yi-       place,  that  amongst  the  children  of  women,  there  was  not  a  greater  than  John 
Baptist.    But  to  proceed.    Men  are  forced,  by  the  example  of  Zacharias,  to  give 
^'Z.'    credit  unto  angels,  lest,Tthrough  their  misbelief,  they  be  stricken  blind  as  he 
^'*'^^'    was.     What  more  ?   the  bishop  of  Rome  is  a  man  :  ergo,  he  is  less  than  the 
angels,  and  is  bound  to  give  credit  to  the  angels.     But  the  angels  learn  of  the 
church,  and  do  reverently  accord  unto  her  doctrine,  as  the  apostle  writeth  unto 
the  Ephesians ;  ergo,  the  pope  is  bound  to  do  the  same,  who  is  less  than  the 
The '         angels,  and  less  than  the  church ;  whose  authority  is  such,  that  worthily  it  is 
church,     compared  by  St.  Augustine  imto  the  sun  ;    that  like  as  the  sun,  by  his  light, 
the  pope,   doth  surmount  all  other  lights,  so  the  church  is  above  all  other  authority  and 
compared  power.      Whereupon  St.  Augustine  writeth   thus :    '  I  woidd  not  believe  the 
gospel,'  saith  he,  'if  the  authority  of  the  church  did  not  move  me  thereunto:' 
which  is  not  in  any  place  found  to  be  spoken  of  the  bishop  of  Rome,  who,  repre- 
senting the  church,  and  being  minister  thereof,  is  not  to  be  thought  greater  or 
equal  to  his  Lord  and  Master.     Notwithstanding,  the  words  of  our  Saviour 
Christ  do  especially  prove  the  bishop  of  Rome  to  be  subject  to  the  church ;  as 
we  will  hereafter  declare.     For  he,  sending  Peter  to  preach  imto  the  church, 
said,  '  Go,  and  say  unto  the  church.'     To  the  confirmation  of  whose  authority, 
these  words  do  also  pertain;  '  He  that  heareth  you,  heareth  me  ;'  which  words 
are  not  only  spoken  unto  the  apostles,  but  also  unto  their  successors,  and  unto 
the  whole  church. 
The  Whereupon  it  followeth,  that  if  the  pope  do  not  hearken  and  give  ear  unto 

pope,  if     the  church,  he  doth  not  give  ear  unto  Christ,  and  consequently  he  is  to  be 
hearken     counted  as  an  ethnic  and  publican.     For,  as  St.  Augustine  afhrmeth,  when  the 
to  the        church  doth  excommunicate,  he  who  is  so  excommunicated  is  bound  in  heaven, 
is'an'^eth-  ^^^^  when  the  church  looseth,  he  is  loosed.     Likewise,  if  he  be  a  heretic  who 
iiic  and     taketh  away  the  supremacy  of  the  church  of  Rome,  as  the  decrees  of  the  council 
publican,  of  Constance  do  determine,  how  much  more  is  he  to  be  counted  a  heretic,  who 
taketh  away  the  authority  from  the  universal  church,  wherein  the  church  of  Rome 
and  all  others  are  contained? '  Wherefore,  it  is  now  evident,  that  it  is  the  opinion 
of  all  men  before  our  days  (if  it  may  be  called  an  opinion,  which  is  confirmed  by 
grave  authors),  that  the  pope  is  subject  unto  the  universal  church.     But  this  is 
Is  the       called  into  question,  whether  he  ought  also  to  be  judged  of  the  general  council, 
lud^e'd  ^^  ^°'"  ^^^^'^  ^^'°  some,  who  (whether  it  be  for  desire  of  vain  glory,  or  that,  through 
by  the       their  flattery,  they  look  for  some  great  reward)  have  begun  to  teach  new  and 
council?    strange  doctrines,  and  to  exempt  the  bishop  of  Rome  from  the  jurisdiction  of 
the  general  council.  Ambition  hath  blinded  them,  whereof  not  only  this  present 
schism,  but  also  all  other  schisms,  even  unto  this  day,  have  had  their  original. 
For  as  in  times  past,  the  greedy  desire  and  ambition  of  the  papacy  brought  in 
that  pestiferous  beast,  which,  through  Arius,  then  first  crept  out  of  hell,  into  the 
church ;  even  so  they  do  especially  nourish  and  maintain  this  present  heresy 
who  are  not  ashamed  to  beg.^     Of  which  number,  some  cry  out  and  say,  the 
works  of  the  subjects  ought  to  be  judged  by  the  pope,  but  the  pope  to  be  reserved 
only  unto  the  judgment  of  God.     Others  say,  that  no  man  ought  to  judge  the 
high  and  principal  seat,  and  that  it  can  be  judged  neither  by  the  emperor,  nor 
Diversity  by  the  clergy,  nor  by  any  king  or  people.     Others  aflirm,  that  the  Lord  hath 
of  judg-    reserved  to  himself  the  depositions  of  the  chief  bishop.  Others  are  not  ashamed 
touching  to  affirm,  that  the  bishop  of  Rome,  although  he  caiTy  souls  in  ever  so  great 
the  pope,   number  unto  hell,  yet  he  is  not  subject  to  any  correction  or  rebuke. 

And  because  these  their  words  are  easily  resolved,  they  run  straightways  unto 
the  gospel,  and  interpret  the  words  of  Christ,  not  according  to  the  sense  and 
meaning  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  btit  according  to  their  own  will  and  disposition. 
They  do  greatly  esteem  and  regard  this  which  was  spoken  unto  Peter,  '  Tu 
vocaberis  Cephas;' that  is,  'Thou  shalt  be  called  Cephas:'  by  which  word 
they  make  him  the  head  of  the  church.  Also,  '  I  will  .give  thee  the  keys  of  the 
kingdom  of  heaven,  and  whatsoever  thou  shalt  bind  upon  the  earth,'  &c.  '  I 
have  prayed  for  thee,  Peter,  that  thy  faith  should  not  fail.'  And  again,  '  Feed 
my  sheep;'  '  Cast  thy  net  into  the  deep;'  'Be  not  afraid,  for  from  henceforth 
thou  shalt  be  a  fisher  of  men :'  Also  that  Christ  commanded  Peter,  as  the 

(1)  It  is  to  be  feared  lest  the  church  hath  had  many  such  popes. 

(2)  These  are  the  canons,  and  the  school  divines,  and  the  begging  friars. 


THE    CHURCH    TAKEN    FOR    THE    OEXERAI,    COUNCIL.  617 

prince  of  tlie  apostles,  to  pay  toll  for  them  both  ;  and  that  Peter  drew  the  net    Hennj 
unto  the  land  full  of  great  fishes  ;  and  that  only  Peter  drew  his  sword  for       ^l- 
the   defence  of  Christ.      All  which  places  these    men  do  greatly  extol,   alto-     ,    .^ 
gether  neglecting  the    expositions  of  the  fathers,   which  if  (as  reason  were)     ,  Voi' 
they  would  consider,  they  should  manifestly  perceive,  by  the  authorities  afore-  ' 

said,  that  the  pope  is  not  above  them,  when  they  are  gathered  together  in 
council,  but  when  they  are  separated  and  divided.' 

But  these  things  being  passed  over,  forasmuch  as  answer  shall  appear  by  that 
which  hereafter  shall  follow,  we  will  now  declare  what  was  reasoned  of  by  the 
learned  men  upon  this  question.     But  first  we  would  have  it  known,  that  all 
men  who  are  of  any  name  or  estimation,  do  agree  that  the  pope  is  subject  to 
the  council ;  and,  for  the  proof  thereof,  they  repeat,  in  a  manner,  all  those 
things  which  were  before  spoken  of  the  church;  for   they  suppose   all  that 
which  is  spoken  of  the  church,  to  serve  for  the  general  council.     And  first  of  Things 
all  they  allege  this  saying  of  the  gospel,  'Die  ecclesia;,'  'Tell  it  unto  the  church,'  ^S^^e" 
in  which  place  it  is  convenient  to  understand,  that  Christ  spake  unto  Peter,  in-  church, 
structing  him  what  he  should  do  as  touching  the  correction  of  his  brother.    He  serve 
saith,  '  if  thy  brother  ott'end  or  sin  against  thee,  rebuke  him  between  thee  and  ?)ie°g^ene- 
him  alone.     If  he  give  ear  unto  thee,  thou  hast  won  thy  brother ;  but  if  he  do  rai  coun- 
not  give  ear  unto  thee,  take  with  thee  one  or  two,  that  in  the  mouth  of  two  or  '^'^• 
three  witnesses  all  truth  may  stand :  if  then  he  will  not  give  ear  unto  thee, 
'  Die  ecclesia?,'  '  Tell  it  unto  the  cliiuxh.'     What  shall  we  understand  by  the 
church  in  that  place  1     Shall  we  say  that  it  is  the  multitude  of  the  faithful,  dis- 
persed throughout  the  whole  world?     '  My  yoke  is  pleasant,'  saith  the  Lord, 
'and  my  burden  is  light.'     But  how  is  it  light,   if  Christ  command  us  to  do 
that  which  is  impossible  to  be  done  ?  for  how  could  Peter  speak  unto  the  church 
which  was  dispersed,  or  seek  out  every  Christian  scattered  in  every  town  or  city  ? 
But  the  meaning  of  these  words  is  far  otherwise,  and  they  must  be  otherwise 
interpreted ;  for  which  cause,  it  is  necessary  that  we  remember  the  double  person  Peter 
which  Peter  represented,  as  the  person  of  the  liigh  bishop,  and  a  private  man.  senJeth 
The  sense  and  meaning  of  his  words  are  so  evident  and  plain  of  themselves,  a  double 
that  they  need  no  supplement  or  alteration.     We  must  first  mark  and  see  what  ^P°^- 
this  word  '  ecclesia'  signifieth,  which  we  do  find  to  be  but  only  twice  spoken  of  nameth 
by  Christ ;  once  in  this  place,  and  again  when  he  said  unto  Peter, '  Tu  es  Petrus,  the 
et  super  banc  petram  eedificabo  ecclesiam  meam;'  that  is,  'Thou  art  Peter, and  ^ut twice 
upon  this  rock  will  I  build  my  church.'     Wherefore  the  church  signifieth  the 
convocation  or  congregation  of  the  multitude.    'Die  ecclesijB,'  '  Tell  it  unto  the  interpre- 
church;'  that  is  to  say,  'Tell  it  unto  the  congregation  of  the  faithfid;'  which,  tation  of 
forasmuch  as  they  are  not  accustomed  to  come  together  but  in  a  general  council,  ciesiee." 
this  interpretation  shall  seem  very  good  : '  Die  ecclesise,'  'Tell  it  unto  the  church,' 
that  is  to  say, '  Die  generali  concilio,'  '  Tell  it  unto  the  general  council.' 

In  this  case  I  would  gladly  hear  if  there  be  any  man  who  doth  think  these 
words  to  be  more  properly  expressed  in  any  prelate,  than  in  the  council,  when 
they  must  put  one  man  for  the  midtitude  ;  which  if  it  be  admitted  in  the  Scrip- 
tures, we  shall  from  henceforth  find  no  firm  or  stable  thing  therein  ?     But  if 
any  man  do  marvel  at  this  interpretation,  let  him  search  the  old  writers,  and  he 
shall  find  that  this  is  no  new  or  strange  interpretation,  but  the  interpretation  of 
the  holy  fathers  and  old  doctors,  who  have  first  illuminated  and  given  light  unto 
the  church ;  as  pope  Gregory  witnesseth  (a  man  worthy  of  remembrance,  both 
for  the  holiness  of  his  life,  and  his  singular  learning),  whose  words  are  these, 
written  in  his  Register  unto  the  bishop  of  Constantinople:  'And  we,'  said  he, 
*  against  whom  so  great  an  offence  is  committed  through  temerarious  boldness, 
do  observe  and  keep  that  which  the    Truth  doth  command  us,    saying.  Si 
peccaverit  in  te  frater ;  that  is,  If  thy  brother  do  offend  against  thee,  ^c.   And 
afterwards  he  addeth  moreover.  If  my  rebukes  and  corrections  be  despised,  it 
remaineth  that  I  do  seek  help  of  the  chm-ch.      Which  words  do  manifestly  The 
declare  the  church  here  to  be  taken  for  the  general  coimcil.  Neither  did  Gregory  ^^^Jj'j'' 
say,  that  he  would  seek  help  of  the  church  that  is  dispersed  abroad  in  every  for  the 
place,  but  of  that  which  is  gathered  together;  that  is  to  say,  the  general  council ;  general 
for  that  which  is  dispersed  abroad  cannot  be  had,  except  it  be  gathered  together.  '^"""'^^  • 

(1)  Hnw  foolishly  the  church  of  Rome  doth  wrest  the  Scriptures,  neglecting  the  expositions  of 
the  fathers. 


6IS 


THE    COUNCIL    OF    BASIL 


Henry 
VI. 

A.  D. 

1431. 


The 
council 
of  Con- 
stance 
decreeth 
the  pope 
to  be  un- 
der the 
council. 


Acts  of 
the  Apo- 
stles. 
Council 
of  Nice. 
Title  of 
the  coun- 
cil. 


The  con- 
stitutions 
of  the 
popes, 
u(;t  the 
laws  of 
the 
church. 


By  the 
church 
the  coun- 
cil is  un- 
derstood. 


Simon's 
obedience 
necessary 
in  the 
bishops 
of  Rome. 


Favour- 
ers of  the 
pope  go 
about  to 
maintain 
the  pro- 
fit of  one 
before  a 
common 
commo- 
dity. 


Also  pope  Nicholas,  reproving  Lotliarius  the  king  for  adultery,  said,  '  If  thou 
dost  not  amend  the  same,  take  heed  that  we  tell  it  not  unto  the  holy  church.' 
In  which  saying,  pope  Nicholas  did  not  say,  that  he  would  go  throughout  the 
world  to  certify  every  one,  man  hy  man ;  hut  that  he  would  call  the  church 
together,  that  is  to  say,  the  general  council,  and  there  would  publish  and  declare 
the  offence  of  Lotharius,  that  he  who  had  contemned  the  pope's  commandments, 
sliould  fear  the  reverence  of  the  general  council. 

I  could  recite  an  infinite  number  of  witnesses  for  the  same  purpose,  who  all 
tend  unto  one  end,  but  this  one  testimony  of  the  council  of  Constance,  shall 
suffice  for  them  all ;  *forin  that  place  where  sentence  is  given  against  Peter  de 
Luna,  these  words  are  mentioned :  '  Eaque  in  generale  concilio  locum  habere 
dicuntur;'  that  is  to  say,  'These  things  are  said  to  have  place  in  the  general 
coimcil :  by  which  words  we  understand,*  that  not  only  the  pope,  in  the  correc- 
tion of  his  brother,  is  remitted  unto  the  council,  when  he  cannot  correct  him 
of  himself;  but  also  when  any  thing  is  done  as  touching  the  coiTection  of  the 
pope  himself,  the  matter  ought  to  be  referred  to  the  council.  Whereby  our  in- 
terpretation appeareth  to  be  most  true,  which  doth  expound  the  church  to  be  in 
the  general  council.  Hereupon,  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  the  congregations 
which  were  then  holden  were  called  the  church.  Also  in  the  council  of  Nice, 
and  in  other  councils,  when  any  man  should  be  excommunicated,  ahvays,  in 
a  manner,  this  sentence  was  adjoined :  '  Hunc  excommunicat  catholica  et 
apostolica  ecclesia;'  that  is,  'The  catholic  and  apostolic  church  doth  excom- 
municate this  man.'  And  hereupon  that  title  is  given  unto  the  councils,  whereby 
we  do  say,  that  the  general  council  doth  represent  the  universal  church.  Where- 
fore the  laws  and  decrees  of  the  council  are  called  the  laws  of  the  church,  for 
that  the  church  doth  not  set  forth  any  laws  in  any  other  place,  but  in  the 
general  council ;  except  we  will  call  the  pope's  constitutions  the  laws  of  the 
church,  which  cannot  be  properly  said  but  of  the  council :  whereas,  albeit  all 
those  who  are  of  the  church  do  not  assemble  and  come  together,  yet  the  most 
part  of  them  are  accustomed  to  be  there  present,  and  in  those  who  come,  the 
whole  power  of  the  church  doth  consist.  Whereupon  we  read  in  the  Acts  of 
the  Apostles,  '  It  pleased  the  apostles  and  elders  with  all  the  church.'  For 
albeit  that  all  the  faithfiil  were  not  there  present  (because  a  great  number  of 
them  remained  at  Antioch),  yet,  notwithstanding,  it  was  called  the  whole 
church,  because  the  whole  power  of  the  church  consisted  in  the  council.  Thus, 
for  this  present,  it  is  sufficient  that  we  understand  by  the  church,  the  general 
council. 

And  now  to  return  unto  our  purpose,  let  us  hear  what  our  Saviour  saith  unto 
Peter;  '  If  thy  brother  do  offend  against  thee;'  unto  this  text  following,  'Tell 
it  unto  the  church ;'  and  let  us  understand  the  council  by  the  church.  Which  is 
greater  in  this  place,  he  who  is  sent  unto  the  council,  or  the  council  whereunto 
Peter  is  sent?  The  Verity  doth  remit  the  bishop  of  Rome  unto  the  general 
council.  And  why  so  ?  verily  because  the  bishop  of  Rome  should  not  disdain 
to  acknowledge  some  power  in  earth  to  be  above  him,  which  he  should  consult 
withal  in  matters  of  importance,  and  agree  unto  the  determinations  thereof. 
Whereupon  Peter  is  also  called  by  another  name,  '  Simon;'  which,  as  Rabanus 
in  his  homilies  writeth,  is  interpreted  in  the  Hebrew  tongue,  'obedience:'  that 
all  men  might  understand  obedience  to  be  necessary  even  in  the  bishop  of 
Rome. 

The  authority  of  the  council  of  Constance  might  suffice  us  in  this  point ;  but 
we  think  it  good  to  stay  a  little  upon  this  matter,  and  to  leave  no  place  open 
for  our  adversaries  ;  who,  while  they  go  about  to  maintain  the  unsatiable  wil- 
fulness of  one  man,  preferring  a  private  wealth  before  a  common  commodity, 
it  is  incredible  how  great  errors  they  do  stir  up.  Against  which,  besides  many 
others,  Zacharias  bishop  of  Chalcedon,  a  man  both  famous  and  eloquent,  did 
earnestly  strive ;  who,  in  the  great  and  sacred  synod  of  Chalcedon,  when  the 
sentence  of  the  bishop  of  Rome  was  objected  unto  him,  that  the  canon  of  pope 
Nicholas  and  other  patriarchs  was  above  the  council,  he  replied  against  it.  And 
Zosimus,  the  pope,  saith  thus,  as  touching  the  decrees  of  the  general  council  : 
'  The  authority  of  this  seat  cannot  make  or  alter  any  thing  contrary  to  the  de- 
crees of  the  fathers."  Neither  doth  he  here  speak  of  the  decrees  of  the  fathers 
who  are  dispersed  abi-oad  in  cities  or  wildernesses,  for  they  do  not  bind  the  pope  ; 
but  of  those  which  are  made  and  published  by  the  fathers  in  the  general  coimcil : 


A.D. 
14.31. 


THE    POPE    AN    ENEMY    TO    GEXEKAI,    COUNCILS.  61!J 

for  the  more  manifest  declaration  whereof,  the  words  of  pope   Leo,  the  most    Hej'iij 
eloquent  of  all  the  bishops  of  Rome,  are  here  to  be  annexed,  who  wrote  unto      ^-'• 
Anatholius,  that  the  decrees  of  the  council  of  Nice  are  in  no  part  to  be  violated 
and  broken :  thereby  (as  it  were)  excluding  himself  and  the  higli  patriarch. 

The  authority  also  of  Damasus  upon  this  sentence  is  more  manifest,  writing 
unto  Arelius  the  archbishop,   as  Isidonis  declareth  in  the   Book  of  Councils  ; 
whose  worthy  saying,  as  touching  the  authority  of  the  synod,  is  this  :  '  They  who 
are  not  compelled  of  necessity,  but  of  their  own  will  either  frowardly  do  any 
thing,  or  presume  to  do  any  thing,  or  willingly  consent  imto  those  who  would  do 
any  thing,  contrary  and  against  the  sacred  canons,  they  are  worthily  thought  and 
judged  to  blaspheme  the  Holy  Ghost.'     Of  which  blasphemy  whether  Gabriel,  The  pope 
who  calleth  himself  Eugene  be  presently  partaker,  let  them  judge,  who  have  abide" 
heard  him  say,  That,  it  is  so  far  from  his  office  and  duty  to  obey  the  general  general 
councils,  that  he  doth  then  best  merit  and  deserve,  when  he  contemneth  the  co'-mcUs 
decrees  of  the  council.  Damasus  addeth  yet  moreover,  '  For  this  purpose,'  saith 
he,  '  the  rulers  of  the  sacred  canons,  which   are  consecrated  by  the  Spirit  of 
God,  and  the  reverence  of  the  whole  world,  are  faithfully  to  be  known  and  un- 
derstood of  us,  and  diligently  looked  upon,  that  by  no  means,  without  a  necessity 
which  cannot  be   eschewed  (which   God  forbid),  we  do  transgress  against  the 
decrees  of  the  holy  fathers.'  Notwithstanding  we  daily  see,  in  all  the  pope's  bulls 
and  letters,  these  words,  '  Non  obstante  ;'  that  is  to  say,  '  notwithstanding,'  which  •  Non 
no  other  necessity  hath  brought  in,  than  only  insatiable  desire  of  gathering  of  pbstante' 
money.     But  let  them  take  heed  to  these  things,  who  be  the  authors  thereof  ^^J^^^ 

But  now,  to  return  again  unto  Damasus ;  mention  is  made  in  the  epistles  of 
Ambrose,  bishop  of  Milan,  of  a  certain  epistle,  which  is  said  to  be  written  by 
Damasus,  unto  the  judges  deputed  by  the  council  of  Capua,  where  he  declareth  The 
that  it  is  not  his  office  to  meddle  with  any  matter  which  hath  been  before  the  council 
coimcil.     By  which  saying  he  doth  manifestly  reprove  all  those  who  affirm  and  p  °g^ 
say,  that  the  bishop  of  Rome  is  above  the   council :  which,  if  it  were  true, 
Damasus  might  have  taken  into  his  hands  the  cause  of  Bonosius,  the  bishop,  to 
determine  which,   was  before  begun  by  the  council ;    but  forasmuch  as   the 
council  is  above  the  pope,  Damasus  knew  himself  to  be  prohibited.     Where- 
upon Hilary  also,  acknowledging  the  synod  to  be   above  him,  would  have  his 
decrees  confirmed  by  the  council.     Also  the  famous  doctor,   St.  Augustine,  in 
his  epistle  which  he  did  write  unto  Glorius  and  Eleusius,  and  Felix  the  gram- 
mai'ian,  declareth  the  case.     Cecilianus,  the  bishop,  was  accused  by  Donatus, 
with  others.     Melchiades,  the  pope,  with  certain  other  bishops,  absolved  Ceci- 
lian,  and  confirmed  him  in  his  bishopric.  They,  being  moved  with  those  doings, 
made  a  schism  in  the  parts  of  Africa ;  St.  Augustine  reproveth  them,  who 
having  another  remedy  against  the  sentence  of  the  pope,  did  raise  a  schism,  and 
doth  inveigh  against  them  in  this  manner :  '  Behold,  let  us  think  those  bishops 
who  gave  judgment  at   Rome,  not  to  have  been  good  judges :  there  remained 
yet  the  judgment  of  the  universal  church,  where  the  cause  might  have  been 
pleaded  even  with  the  judges  themselves  ;  so  that  if  they  were  convicted  not  to 
have  given  just  judgment,  their  sentence  might  have  been  broken.'     Whereby 
it  appeareth,  that  not  only  the  sentence  of  the  pope  alone,  but  also  that  of  the 
pope  with  his  bishops  joined  with  him,  might  be  made  frustrate  by  the  coimcil; 
for  the  full  judgment  of  the  universal  chm-ch  is  not  found  elsewhere  but  in  the 
general  council.     Let  not  any  man  doubt,  in  that  St.  Augustine  seemeth  here  The  full 
only  to  speak  of  bishops  ;  for  if  the  text  of  his  epistle  be  read  over,  he  shall  J'-^d^™''"' 
find  the  bishop  of  Rome  to  be  comprehended  amongst  the  other  bishops.     It  church  to 
was  also  prohibited  by  the  councils  of  Africa,  that  the  bishops  of  Rome  should  ]>^  f""'"l 
receive  or  hear  the  appeals  of  any  who  did  appeal  from  the  council ;  which  ^"o^^^ln 
altogether  declareth  the  superiority  of  the  council.     And  this  appeareth  more  Noappeal 
plainly  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  chap  xi.,  where  Peter  is  rebuked  by  the  '"''^ 
congregation  of  the  apostles,  because  he  went  in  to  Cornelius,  a  heathen  man,  fromtlie 
as  if  it  had  not  been  lawful  for  him  to  attempt  any  greater  matter  without  the  council  to 
knowledge  of  the  congregation :  and  yet  it  was  said  unto  him,  as  well  as  others,  """'  ^"l"^' 
'  Ite  et  baptizate,'  &c.  '  Go  and  baptize.'    But  Uiis  seemeth  to  make  more  unto  ^^'^"^ 
the  purpose,  which  St.  Paul  writeth  unto  the  Galatians,  where  he  saith,  that  he  strained 
resisted  Peter  even  unto  his  face,  'because  he  did  not  walk  according  to  the  to  obey 
verity  of  the  gospel,'  Gal.  ii.    V/hich  words,  if  they  he  well  understood,  signi*;,-  ggngrgl 
no  other  thing  by  the  verity  of  the  gospel,  than  the  canon  of  the  council  decreed  councii. 


620  THE    COUNCIL    OF    BASIL. 

Henry  amongst  the  apostles :  for  the  disciples  being  gathered  together,  have  so  dcter- 
^i-  mined  it.  Whereupon  St.  Paul  dotli  show,  that  Peter  ought  to  have  obeyed 
.    j^     the  general  council. 

^^'"-         But  now,  to  finish  this  dispiitation,  we  will  here  adjoin  the  determination  of 
the  council  of  Constance,  which  council  aforesaid,  willing  to  cut  off  all  ambi- 
guity  and  doubts,   and  to  provide  a  certain  order  of  living,  declared  by  a 
Decree  of  solemn  decree,  that  all  men,  of  what  estate  or  condition  soever  they  were,  yea, 
t''^  although  that  they  were  popes  themselves,  be  bound  under  the  obedience  and 

TOuiici  0  Qj.^]i„^j^ggg  Qf  the  sacred  genei-al  councils.  And  although  there  be  a  certain  re- 
stance,      straint,  where  it  is  said,  '  In  such  things  as  pertain  unto  the  faith,  the  extirpa- 
^'^^         tion  of  schism,  and  the  reformation  of  the  chm-ch,  as  well  in  the  head  as  in  the 
bound  to  members;'  notwithstanding,   this  amplificative  clause,  which  is  adjoined,  is  to 
obey  it.     jjg  noted  :  '  Et  in  pertinentibus  ad  ea ;'  that  is  to  say,  '  With  all  the  appurtenants.' 
Which  addition  is  so  large,  that  it  containeth  all  things  in  it  which  may  be 
Divers      imagined  or  thought.     For  the  Lord  said  thus  unto  his  apostles,  '  Go  ye  forth 
f'^^Tsed^'  ^"'^  teach  all  people.'     He  did  not  say  in  three  points  only,  but  teach  them  '  to 
for aiuho- observe  and  keep  all  things,   whatsoever  I  have  commanded  you.'     And  in 
rity  of       another  place  he  saith,  not  this  or  that,  but  'whatsoever'  ye  shall  bind,  &c., 
church      which  all  together  are  alleged  for  the  authority  of  the  church  and  general 
andcoun-  councils.  For  the  preferment  whereof  these  things  also  come  in  place  :  '  He  that 
th^^'omf  ^^'^'""^'■h  you,  lieareth  me.'     And  again,  '  It  is  given  unto  you  to  know  the  mys- 
steries  of  God.'  Also,  '  Where  two  or  three  be  gathered  in  my  name,'  &c. 
Again,  '  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask,'  &c.  '  O  holy  Father  !  save  them  whom  thou 
hast  given  me,'  &c.  'And  I  will  be  with  them  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world.' 
Also  out  of  St.  Paul  these  places  are  gathered:  'We  are  helpers  of  God,'  &c. 
'Which  hath  made  us  apt  ministers  of  the  New  Testament,'  &c.  '  And  he  ap- 
pointed some   apostles,   and  some  prophets,'  &c. :  In  all   which  places,  both 
Christ  and  the  apostles  spake  of  the  authority  of  many,  which  altogether  are 
alleged  for  the  authority  of  the  universal  church. 

But  forasmuch  as  that  church,  being  dispersed  and  scattered  abroad,  cannot 
decree  or  oi-dain  any  thing,  therefoi'e,  of  necessity  it  is  to  be  said,  that  tiie  chief 
and  principal  authority  of  the  church  doth  consist  in  the  general  councils  where 
Weighty   they  assemble  together.    And  therefore  it  was  observed  in  the  primitive  churcli, 
™^'I'^rt^     that  difficult  and  weighty  matters  were  not  treated  upon,  but  only  in  the  gene- 
only  in      ral  councils  and  congregations.     The  same  is  also  found  to  be  observed  after- 
general     wards ;   foi",  when  the  churches  were  divided,  general  councils  were  holden. 
counci  s.   ^^^^  jj^  ^i^g  council  of  Nice  we  do  find  tlie  heresy  of  Arius  condemned ;  in  the 
council  of  Constantinople,  the  heresy  of  Macedonius ;  in  the  council  of  Ephesus, 
the  heresy  of  Nestorius ;  in  the  council  of  Chalcedon,  the  heresies  of  Eutychius 
The  were  also  condemned ;  forasmuch  as  they  thought  the  judgment  of  the  bishop 

sufflci'ent  ^^  Rome  not  to  suffice  to  so  great  and  weighty  matters ;  and  also  they  thought 
to  judge  the  sentence  of  the  council  to  be  of  greater  force  and  efficacy  than  the  sentence 
heretics:  pf  t]jg  pope,  forasmuch  as  he  might  err  as  a  man.  But  the  coimcil,  wherein  so 
fir.  many  men  were  gathered  together,  being  guided  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  could  not 

err.  Also  it  is  a  very  excellent  saying  of  Martianus,  the  emperor,  which  serveth 
for  that  purpose,  whose  words  are  these  :  '  Truly  he  is  to  be  counted  a  wicked 
and  sacrilegious  person,  who,  after  the  sentence  of  so  many  good  and  holy  men, 
will  stick  to  withdraw  any  part  of  his  opinion.  For  it  is  a  point  of  mere  mad 
ness,  at  the  noontime  and  fair  daylight,  to  seek  for  a  feigned  light;  for  he  wlio 
having  found  the  truth,  seeketh  to  discuss  any  thing  furthei-,  seeketh  but  after 
vanities  and  lies.' 

Now  I  think  it  is  evident  enough  unto  all  men,  that  the  bishop  of  Rome  is 
Whether  under  the  council.  Notwithstanding  some  do  yet  still  doubt,  whetlier  he  may 
iiie  pope  also  be  deposed  by  the  council  or  not ;  for,  albeit  it  be  proved  that  he  is  under 
iiljwse'd  the  council,  yet,  for  all  that,  will  they  not  grant  that  he  may  be  also  deposed  by 
iiy  the  the  coimcil.  Wherefore,  it  shall  be  no  digressing  at  all  from  our  pui-pose,  some- 
what to  say  upon  that  matter;  and,  first  of  all,  to  speak  of  these  railers  who  are 
yet  so  earnest  for  the  defence  of  the  bishop  of  Rome,  who,  being  vanquished  in 
one  battle,  still  renew  another,  and  contend  rather  of  obstinacy  than  of  ignorance. 
They  would  have  here  recited  again  that  which  we  have  before  spoken,  as 
touching  the  pre-eminence  of  the  bishop  of  Rome,  or  the  patriarch.  And,  as 
there  are  many  of  them  more  full  of  words  than  eloquence,  they  stay  much  on 


council. 


THE  pope's  supremacy  uefuted.  621 

this  point,  where  Christ  said  unto   Peter,  'Tibi  dabo  chives  regni  ccolorum;'  Hennj 

'  I  will  give  thee  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  whatsoever  thou  shalt  ^^• 

bind  upon  earth  shall  be  bound  in  heaven ;'  as  though  by  those  words  he  sliould  a    t^ 

be  made  head  over  the  others.     And  again,  they  do  amplify  it  by  this,  '  Pasce  i^oi " 
oves  meas,'  '  Feed  my  sheep,'  which  they  do  not  find  to  be  spoken  to  any  other 


one  man. 


of  the  apostles.     And,  because  it  is  said  that  Peter  was  the  chief  and  the  mouth  pf'"^', '''''''' 
of  the  apostles,  therefore  they  judge  it  well  spoken,  that  no  man  shall  judge  the  re^ni 
chief  and  principal  see  ;  being  all  of  this  opinion  with  Boniface,  who  said,  that  cti'iorum;' 
the  pope  ought  to  be  judged  for  no  cause,  except  he  be  perceived  or  known  to  oves''^'^ 
swerve  from  the  faith,  although  he  do  carry  innumei'able  people  with  him  head-  mean ;' 
long  into  hell,  there  to  be  perpetually  tormented;  as  though  he  could  not  open  jT"'^*^^,""" 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  others,  if  any  other  could  shut  it  against  him;  neither  the  pope's 
that  he  coidd  feed  others,  if  he  himself  lacked  pasture.  suprema- 

But  we  count  these,  as  things  of  no  force  or  difficulty.     For  St.  Augiistine,  in  ''^' 
the  sermon  on  the  nativity  of  Peter  and  Paul,   saith  in  this  wise :  '  Our  Lord 
Jesus  Chi-ist,  before  his  passion,  chose  his  disciples,  as  ye  know,  whom  he  called 
brethren.     Amongst  those  Peter  alone,  almost  in  every  place,  represented  the  Peter  re- 
person  of  the  church.     And  therefore  it  was  said  unto  him,  Tibi  dabo  claves  P^'^'^<^"*s 
regni  ccelorum ;  that  is  to  say,  Unto  thee  will  I  give  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  son  of  the 
of  heaven.     These  keys  did  he   not  receive,  as  one  man,  but,  as  one,  he  re-  church, 
ceived  them  for  the  church.     And  in  another  place,  where  he  writeth  of  the 
chi'istian  agony,  he  saith ;  '  The  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  were  given  unto  The  keys 
the  church,  when  they  were  given  unto  Peter.     And  when  it  was  spoken  unto  p^'^" 
him,  Amas  me  ?  Pasce  oves  meas ;  that  is  to  say,  Lovest  thou  me  ?    Feed  my  church, 
sheep;  it  was  spoken  unto  them  all.'      And  St.  Ambrose,  in  the  beginning  of  and  not  to 
his  pastoral,  saith:  'Which  sheep  and  which  flock  the  blessed  apostle  St.  Peter 
took  no  charge  of  alone,  but  together  with  us,  and  we  altogether  with  him.'   By 
which  words  the  foundation  and  principal  arguments  of  those  flatterers  are  utterly 
subverted  and  overthrown  ;  for,  if  Peter  represented  the  person  of  the  church,  Pope  bo- 
we  ought  not  to  ascribe  the  force  of  these  words  unto  Peter,  but  unto  the  church,  nifaee 
Neither  do  I  see  how  that  can  stand  which  Boniface  doth  affirm,  for  it  is  far  ^"^^  • 
distant  from  the  truth,  except  it  be  understood  otherwise  than  it  is  spoken. 

But  it  may,  peradventure,  seem  a  great  thing  inito  some,  that  the  bishop  of 
Rome  is  said  to  be  the  head  of  the  militant  church  ;  for,  as  in  the  body  of  man, 
physicians  do  never  give  counsel  to  cut  off  the  head  for  any  manner  of  sickness 
and  disease,  although  it  be  ever  so  full  of  ulcers,  or  infected ;  so,  in  this  mysti- 
cal body  of  the  church,  the  head  ought  always  to  be  kept :  and,  albeit  it  be  ever 
so  wicked,  yet  it  is  to  be  suffisred  and  borne  withal.  But  now  convert  this  argu- 
ment.    If  it  were  possible,  in  the  body  of  man,  when  one  head  is  taken  away, 
to  find  another  to  put  in  its  place,  as  we  see  it  may  be  done  in  the  church ; 
should  not  heads  then  be  oftentimes  changed  for  divers  diseases  ?    Moreover,  if 
we  will  thus  reason,  that  the  head  of  the  chtnxh  shoidd  be,  in  respect  of  his 
body,  as  the  head  of  man  in  respect  of  the  body  of  man  ;  then  doth  it  necessarily 
follow,  that  the  head  being  dead,  the  body  must  also  die,  as  is  manifest  in  the 
body  of  man.     So  should  it  grow  into  an  absurchty  to  confess,  that  the  pope 
being  dead,  the  church  also  should  be  dead ;  which  how  far  it  dissenteth  from  Tlie 
the  truth,   it  is  most  manifest.     Therefore,  whatsoever  other  men  say,  I  am  ^'^'"'P.''*^ 
not  of  opinion  with  them  who  affirm  the  bishop  of  Rome  to  be  head  of  the  properly 
church,  except,  peradventin-e,  they  do  make  him  the  ministerial  head :  for  we  do  called  the 
read  that  Christ  is  the  head  of  the  church,  and  not  tlie  pope  ;  and  tliat  he  is  the  J',^^'*  "^ 
true  head,  immutable,  perpetual,  and  everlasting;  and  the  church  is  his  body,  church, 
whereof  the  pope  himself  is  also  a  member,  and  the  vicar  of  Christ ;  not  to  the 
destruction,  but  to  the  maintenance  and  edifying  of  the  same  body  of  Chi-ist. 
Wherefore,  if  he  be  found  a  damnable  destroyer  of  the  chm-ch,  he  may  be  de- 
posed and  cast  out,  because  he  doth  not  what  he  was  ordained  to  do ;  ^  and  we 
ouglit,  as  pope  Leo  saith,  to  be  mindful  of  the  commandment  given  us  in  the 
gospel ;  that  if  our  eye,  our  foot,  or  our  right  hand  do  offend  us,  it  should  be 
cut  ofl'from  the  body.     For  the  Lord  saith  in  another  place,  '  Every  tree  which 
bringeth  not  forth  fruit,  shall  be  cut  down  and  cast  into  the  fire.'    And  in  another 
place  also  it  is  said  unto  us,  'Take  away  all  evil  and  wickedness  from  among 
you.'     It  is  very  just  and  true  which  is  WTitten  in  the  epistle  of  Clement  unto 

(1)  They  dote  who  say  that  the  pope  cannot  be  deposed  for  any  other  cause  than  for  heresy. 


622 


THE    COUNCII,    OF    BASIL. 


Henry 

ri. 

A.D. 
1431. 

Fruitless 
branches 
to  be  cut 
off. 


The 

words  of 
Peter  to 
Clement. 


The  epi- 
stle of 
Clement 
to  James, 
doubted. 


The  pope 
to  be  both 
accused 
and  pu- 
nished. 


Whether 
lie  maybe 
deposed. 


He  is 

rather  to 
be  called 
the  vicar 
of  the 
church, 
than  of 
Christ. 


James  the  brother  of  our  Lord,  that  he  who  will  t)e  saved,  ought  to  be  separate 
from  them  who  will  not  be  saved. 

But,  for  the  more  manifest  declaration  hereof,  we  must  have  recourse  to  that 
which  is  spoken  by  the  Lord  in  the  gospel  of  John ;  '  I  am  the  true  vine,'  saith 
the  Lord,  'and  my  Father  is  the  husbandman,  and  ye  are  the  branches;  every 
branch  therefore  that  bringeth  not  fruit  in  me,  my  Father  will  cut  off.'  These 
words  were  spoken  unto  the  apostles,  among  whom  also  Peter  was  present,  whom 
the  Lord  would  have  cut  off,  if  he  brought  not  forth  his  fruit.  Also  St.  Jerome, 
upon  these  words  of  Matthew  :  '  Unsavoury  salt  is  profitable  for  nothing,  but  to 
be  cast  forth  and  trodden  of  swine.'  Whereupon  in  the  person  of  Peter  and  Paul 
he  saith  thus :  '  It  is  no  easy  matter  to  stand  in  the  place  of  Peter  and  Paul, 
and  to  keep  the  chair  of  them  who  reign  with  Christ.  This  unsavoury  salt,  (that 
is  to  say,  a  foolish  prelate,'  unsavoury  in  preaching,  and  foolish  in  offending,)  is 
good  for  nothing  but  to  be  cast  forth,  that  is  to  say,  deposed,  and  to  be  trodden 
of  swine,  that  is,  of  wicked  spirits,  which  have  dominion  over  the  wicked  and 
naughty  prelates,  as  their  own  flock  and  herd.'  Behold  this  testimony  of  Jerome 
is  plain  and  evident;  'Let  him  be  cast  out,'  saith  he.  He  expoundeth  and 
speaketh  this  of  the  prelate  who  usurpeth  the  place  of  Peter,  and  so  consequently 
of  the  bishop  of  Rome,  who,  being  imsavoury  in  preaching,  and  foolish  in  offend- 
ing, ought  to  be  deposed  (as  Jerome  affirmeth)  from  his  degree  and  dignity.'^ 
Neither,  as  some  do  dream,  is  he  to  be  deposed  for  heresy  only.  Isidore,  in  the 
Book  of  Councils,  rehearseth  a  certain  epistle  of  Clement,  the  successor  of  Peter, 
written  unto  James  the  apostle,  where  the  said  Clement,  refemng  the  words  of 
Peter  unto  himself,  saith  thus :  '  If  thou  be  occupied  with  worldly  cares,  thou 
shalt  both  deceive  thyself,  and  those  who  shall  give  ear  unto  thee ;  for  thou  canst 
not  fully  distribute  unto  every  man  those  things  which  pertain  unto  salvation : 
whereby  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  thou,  as  a  man,  for  not  teaching  those  things 
which  pertain  unto  salvation,  shalt  be  deposed,  and  thy  disciples  shall  perish 
through  ignorance.'  Notwithstanding,  in  another  place,  instead  of  this  word 
'  deposed, '  it  is  found,  '  thou  shalt  be  punished ; '  which  two  words,  if  they  be  well 
imderstood,  do  not  much  differ,  for  deposition  is  oftentimes  used  in  the  place  of 
punishment. 

But  peradventure  some  will  here  object,  that  this  epistle  is  not  to  be  judged 
Clement's,  because  it  is  said  to  be  written  unto  James,  who,  as  the  ecclesiastical 
history  affirmeth,  was  dead  before  Peter  was  put  to  death.  But  Clement  might 
think  that  James  was  alive,  when  he  wrote ;  who  were  far  distant  asunder,  and 
messengers  of  the  Christians  came  not  often  unto  Rome.  Moreover,  there  is 
mention  made  of  this  epistle  in  divers  places  of  the  decretals  as  most  true,  and 
therefore  it  shall  be  nothing  from  the  puq^ose  to  rehearse  other  sayings  out  of 
the  same  epistle ;  where  he  saith,  '  That  he  who  liveth  rebelliously,  and  refuseth 
both  to  learn  and  to  do  good,  is  rather  a  member  of  the  devil  than  of  Christ, 
and  doth  show  himself  rather  to  be  an  infidel  than  a  faithful  Christian.'  Upon 
which  words,  the  gloss  which  Panormitane  calleth  singular,  and  is  much  allowed, 
saith,  that  if  the  crime  or  offence  of  the  bishop  of  Rome  be  notorious,  whereby 
the  church  is  offended,  if  he  be  incorrigible,  he  may  he  accused  thereof.  If  then 
he  may  be  accused,  ergo,  also,  he  may  be  punished,  and,  according  to  the  exi- 
gency of  the  fault,  deposed ;  otherwise  he  should  be  accused  in  vain. 

Now  is  there  no  more  any  place  of  defence  left  for  our  adversaries,  but  that 
the  pope  may  be  deposed ;  which  defence  being  now  brought  to  an  end,  not- 
withstanding it  is  not  yet  evident  whether  he  may  be  deposed  by  the  council  or 
no  ;  which  we  now  take  in  hand  to  discourse.  And,  first  of  all,  the  adversaries 
will  gi'ant  this  unto  us ;  that  the  bishop  of  Rome  may  be  deposed  by  the  church, 
forasmuch  as  the  pope  being  the  vicar  of  the  church,  no  man  doubteth  but  that 
a  lord  may  put  out  his  vicar  at  his  will  and  pleasure  :  neither  is  it  to  be  doubted 
but  that  the  pope  is  more  tndy  called  the  vicar  of  the  church  than  of  Christ. 
But,  if  the  church  may  depose  the  pope,  ergo,  the  council  also  may  do  the 
same.  *  For,^  as  it  is  before  declared,  the  universal  church  doth  ordain  or 
decree  nothing,  but  when  it  is  congregated  or  gathered  together  in  general 
councils.  Then,  albeit  they  be  not  all  present,  it  is  sufficient  that  they  be  all 
called,  whom  reason  requireth  to  have  present. 

(1)  If  the  pope  be  unsavoury  salt,  he  is  to  be  cast  away. 

(2)  A  note  for  all  naughty  prelater.. 

(3)  See  Edition  1563,  p.  2li5.— En. 


WHEN    (OU.VCILS    MAY    BK    LAWFULLY    llOLDKX.  623 

But  hero,  of  one  doubt  risetli  also  auotlier;  for,  whereas  tlie  church  doth     iie„ry 
comprehend,  as  well  the  laity,  as  the  clergj',  a  question  seenicth  to  l)e  demanded      i^l- 
why  only  the  clergy  do  hold  the  councils,  or  that  the  laity  are  not  present  and 
have  a  voice  in  the  councils.    Some  one  also  may  suppose  that  which  is  sj)<)ken,    Vji\' 
'  the  church  cainiot  err,'  to  he  referred  inito  hoth  states,  and  hotli  kinds  of  men  _____ 
and  women,  that,  albeit  the  clergy  do  err,  the  laity  miglit  remain  firm  and  con- 
stant.    And  again,  if  the  men  happen  to  err,  some  women  might  remain  in  the 
faith ;  but  it  is  en-oneous  so  to  think.      For  we  ought  to  consider  the  church  to 
be  understood  two  manner  of  ways  :  the  one,  which  containeth  both  the  laity 
and  the  clergy;  the  other,  which  containeth  the  clergy  alone.     And  to  this 
second  church  it  pertaineth  to  teach,  purge,  illuminate,  direct,  correct,  feed,  and 
to  make  perfect,  the  first  part.     Wherefore  we  do  atlirm  tlie  universal  church, 
which  comprehendeth  all  faithful  Christians,  to  have  all  manner  of  authority 
and  power  granted  unto  it :  and  therefore,  that  the  bishop  of  Rome  is  subject 
thereunto,  and  maybe  deposed,  cast  out,  and  excommunicated,  if  he  do  not  rule 
and  govern  well. 

Wherefore,  whensoever  the  ffiilhful  Christians  are  gathered  togetlier  in  the 
Holy  Ghost,  to  celebrate  a  council,  albeit  they  be  not  all  there  present,  yet, 
because  they  are  lawfully  called,  the  fidness  of  the  power  dotli  consist  no  more 
in  the  pope,  but  in  the  council :  and  immediately  as  the  council  is  begun,  it  is 
straightways  above  the  pope.  Wherefore  thus  we  conclude,  that  whatsoever  is 
granted  or  pemiitted  to  the  universal  church,  the  same  is  also  granted  unto  the 
general  council. 

Whereupon,  if  the  imiversal  church  (as  no  man  can  deny)  may  depose  the 
pope,  the  general  council  may  also  do  the  same.*      Also  the  gloss,  which 
Panormitane  in  his  writing  doth  so  greatly  commend,  hath  tliis  sentence,  '  That 
the  general  council  is  judge  over  the  pope  in  all  cases.'     Likewise  the  most 
sacred  sjmod  of  Constantinople,  which  is  allowed  of  all  men,  doth  ajipoint  the 
bishops  of  Rome  to  be  under  the  judgment  of  the  council ;  and  the  council  to 
judge  and  dctenuine  of  everj'  doubtful  matter  or  question  that  doth  arise  con- 
cerning the  bishop  of  Rome.     Neitlicr  let  any  man  doubt  thereof,  because  this 
word  deposition  is  not  mentioned ;  for  it  is  said  '  of  every  doubtful  matter  or 
question  :'  for,  if  the  synod  do  judge  of  every  doubt,  ergo,  it  shall  also  judge 
whether  the  pope  shall  be  deposed  or  not ;  for  that  may  also  come  in  doubt. 
And  because  we  will  not  seek  examples  far  off,  John  XXIII.,  whom  all  the 
world  did  reverence  as  pope,  was  deposed  of  his  papacy  by  the  council  of  Con-  ^, 
stance  :  neither  yet  was  he  condemned  for  any  heresy ;  but,  because  he  did  joim  dc- 
ofl'end  the  church  by  his  manifold  crimes,  the  sacred  synod  thought  good  to  posed, 
depose  him ;  and  ever  since,  continually,  the  church  hath  proceeded  by  like  fp"'^'^'^ 
examj)le,  that  their  opinion  might  cease,  who  affirm  that  the  pope  cannot  be  heresy, 
deposed,  but  only  for  heresy. 

But  here  is  yet  one  thing  not  to  be  omitted,  that  certain  men  do  afiirni  the  Mniotlior 
general  councils  to  be  of  no  effect,  except  the  pope  do  call  and  apj)oint  them,  J^"""^p^ 
and  his  authority  remain  with  them.    Whereupon  they  said,  that  Dioscorus  did  congre- 
rebuke  Paschasius   the  bishop  of  Sicily,  and  legate  of  pope  Leo,  because  that  (Jated^ 
he  did  enterprise,  without  the  authority  of  the  apostolic  see,  to  call  a  council  at  ",,'j.  i,^". 
Ephesus.      They  also  allege  another  testimony  of  the  synod  of  ("halcedon  ;  thority  of 
where,  when  mention  was  made  of  the  council  of  t:p]iesus,  all  the  bishops  cried  "'^  P^f*- 
out,  saying,  '  We  ought  not  to  call  it  a  council,  because  it  was  neither  gathered 
by  the'apostolic  authority,  nor  rightly  kept.'     By  which  authorities,  they  who 
say  that  the  councils  cannot  be  holden  without  the  consent  of  the  pope,  do  think 
themselves  marvellously  armed.     Wliose  sentence  and  ojjinion,  if  it  take  place 
and  prevail  as  they  desire,  it  shall  bring  witii  it  the  great  ruin  and  decay  of  the 
charcli.    For  what  remedy  shall  we  find,  if  a  wicked  pope  do  disturb  the  whole 
chm-ch,  destroy  souls,  seduce  the  people  by  his  evil  example ;  if,  finally,  he 
preach  contrary  imto  the  faith,  and  fill  the  people  full  of  heresies,  shall  we  pro- 
vide no  stay  or  stop  for  him  ?  shall  we  suflf'er  all  things  to  run  to  ruin  and  decay 
with  him?'     Who  would  think  that  the  bishop  of  Rome  would  congregate  a 
council  for  his  own  correction  or  deposition  ?  for  as  men  are  prone  unto  sin,  so 
woidd  they  also  sin  without  punishment.     But  when  I  do  peruse  ancient  histo- 
ries, and  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  I  do  not  find  this  order,  that  councils  should 
be  gathered  only  at  the  will  of  the  pope ;  for  the  first  council  of  all,  after  Mat- 
(1)  Mark  wherefore  the  popes  will  have  no  general  councils. 


624 


THE    COUNCIL    OF    BASIL. 


HetiTy 
VI. 

A.D. 
1431. 


thias  was  substituted  in  the  place  of  Judas,  was  not  congregated  at  the  com- 
mandment of  Peter,  but  at  the  commandment  of  Christ,  who  commanded  the 
apostles  that  they  should  not  depart  from  Jerusalem,  but  look  for  the  promise 
of  the  Fatlicr. 

The  second  council,  as  touching  the  election  of  the  deacons,  Peter  alone  did 

The  first    not  congregate,  but  the  twelve  apostles  ;  for  it  is  written,  '  The  twelve  apostles, 
council  of      --&*'--  ,  .      ,     .  S  r  ' 

the  apo- 
stles 
The  se- 
cond. 
The 
third. 
The 
fourth. 


Councils, 
in  times 
past,  con- 


rors,  not 
by  popes. 


When  a 
council 
may  be 
liolden. 


calling  together  the  multitude,'  &c. 

The  third  council,  which  was  holden  as  touching  the  taking  away  of  circum- 
cision and  other  ceremonies  of  the  law,  was  gathered  together  by  a  general 
inspiration  :  for  it  is  written,  '  The  ajjostles  and  elders  came  together,'  &c. 

The  fourth  council,  where  certain  things  contained  in  the  law  are  permitted, 
seemeth  to  be  gathered  by  James ;  and  so,  discoursing  throughout  all,  there 
can  nothing  be  found  in  the  primitive  church,  whereby  it  should  appear  that 
the  authority  of  congregating  of  councils  should  pertain  only  unto  bishops  of 
Rome.  Neither  afterwards  in  the  time  of  Constantine  the  Great,  and  other 
emperors,  was  the  consent  of  the  bishops  of  Rome  greatly  required  to  the  con- 
gregated gi'Pgating  of  councils ;  and  therefore  it  is  written  thus  of  the  synod  of  Chal- 
iiy  empe-  cedon :  '  The  sacred  and  universal  synod  gathered  together  at  Chalcedon,  the 
chief  city  of  the  province  of  Bethunia,  according  to  the  grace  of  God,  and  the 
sanctions  of  the  most  godl)^  and  christian  emperor.'  Valentinian  and  Martian 
do  not  make  any  mention  of  the  bishop  of  Rome,  although  his  consent  was 
there 

Wherefore,  if  the  pope  would  resist,  and  would  have  no  council  congregated, 
yet,  if  the  greater  part  of  the  church  do  judge  it  necessary  to  have  a  council, 
the  council  may  be  congregated  whether  the  pope  will  or  no.  *  For  >  when  the 
clergy  is  generally  inspired,  the  judgment  of  one  man  must  needs  give  place, 
although  he  be  the  successor  of  Peter ;  neither  do  I  judge  this  always  to  be 
observed,  that  there  should  be  no  council  holden  without  the  authority  of  the 
pope.*  The  council  holden  at  Pisa,  was  not  congregated  by  the  authority  and 
consent  of  any  pope,  when  Gregory  did  condemn  it,  and  Benedict  cursed  it. 
The  same  also  may  be  said  of  the  council  of  Constance,  which  was  assembled 
by  the  authority  of  pope  John,  who  in  respect  of  the  Spaniards  was  no  true 
pope.  And,  if  the  coimcil  of  Pisa  were  no  tnie  council,  pope  John  was  no  true 
pope  ;  whereupon  his  consent  to  the  congregating  of  the  council  of  Constance 
was  of  no  effect.  Moreover,  it  is  more  than  folly  to  afhrm,  that  when  the  pope 
hath  once  given  his  consent,  if  it  should  be  called  back,  the  council  should  then 
cease,  for  then  it  is  no  more  in  his  power  to  revoke  his  consent.  And  of  neces- 
sity he  must  be  obedient  unto  the  council  whereof  he  is  a  member,  and  give 
place  unto  the  greater  part :  and  if  he  separate  himself  from  the  consent  of  the 
greater  part,  and  depart  from  the  unity  of  the  church,  he  maketh  himself  a 
schismatic. 

Now,  to  come  unto  the  second  conclusion  :  if  it  be  true,  as  it  is  indeed,  that 
the  pope  is  under  the  council,  how  can  the  pope  then  dissolve,  alter,  and  trans- 
port the  coimcil,  against  the  will  of  the  same  ?  for  with  what  countenance  can 
we  say,  that  the  inferior  hath  power  over  the  superior  ?     How  can  the  synod 
correct  the  pope,  if  the  pope  may  dissolve  the  synod  contrary  to  the  will  thereof? 
Admit  the  pope  be  libidinous,  covetous,  a  sower  of  war  and  discord,  and  a  most 
mortal  enemy  unto  the  church  and  the  name  of  Chi-ist,  how  can  the  council 
reprove  him,  if  he  have  authority  to  dissolve  the  council  ?     For  as  soon  as  ever 
the  bishop  of  Rome  shall  understand,  that  in  the  council  they  do  treat  or  talk  of 
his  correction  or  punishment,  straightways  he  will  seek  remedy  by  dissolving 
Saying  of  the  council.     For,  as  Macrobius  saith,  he  that  hath  liberty  to  do  more  than  is 
Macro-      fit  or  necessary,  will  oftentimes  do  more  than  is  lawful.     If  so  be  that  the 
bishop  of  Rome  may  exempt  himself  from  correction  by  dissohing  or  trans- 
porting the  council,  it  foUoweth  that  the  council  is  not  above  him.     Therefore 
we  must  either  deny  that  which  is  before  said,  that  the  pope  is  under  the  coun- 
cil, or  else  deny  that  the  pope  hath  power  to  dissolve  the  council,  contraiy  to 
the  will  and  determination  of  the  council. 
Whether        And,  as  this  first  conclusion  is  most  true,  so  are  all  other  conclusions  false, 
the  pope    which  seem  to  impugn  the  same.     Wherefore  the  second  conclusion  of  the 
solve  a      divines  is  also  manifest,  albeit  some  do  admit  it  in  certain  cases,  and,  in  others, 
council,     exclude  it  again.     For,  if  we  do  admit,  that  for  certain  causes  the  pope  may 

(1)  See  Edition  1563,  p.  290.— Ed. 


How  the 
pope  is  a 
schis- 
matic. 

He  can- 
not dis- 
solve a 
council 
against 
tlie  will  of 
the  same. 


DEFINITIOX    OF    THE    CATHOLIC    FAITH.  625 

dissolve  the  council  contrary  to  the  will  and  determination  thereof,  that  is  to     Henrg 
say,  to  make  the  pope  judge  of  the  council,  it  were  clean  contrary  unto  the  first       ^^■ 
conchision.  . 

Now  it  is  proved  that  the  council  is  above  the  pope,  and  cannot  be  dissolved     1401' 

by  the  pope  without  consent  thereof.     Now  we  must  further  see,  whether  it  be _ 

an  article  of  our  faith  to  believe  it ;  which  matter  hath  respect  unto  the  third 
conclusion.  For  there  have  been  many,  who,  albeit  they  did  confess  these  two 
conclusions  to  be  true,  yet  they  doubted  whether  it  were  a  verity  of  the  catholic 
faith  or  no.  Therefore  this  second  part  must  be  confirmed,  and  we  must  see 
whether  it  be  an  article  of  faith  that  the  pope  be  under  the  council ;  which 
being  proved,  it  shall  also  appear  to  be  an  article  of  faith,  that  the  pope  cannot 
dissolve  the  council  without  the  consent  thereof:  which  consequent  none  of 
the  contrary  part  hath  refuted.  First  of  all  therefore  we  must  inquire  what 
faith  itself  is,  that  we  may  thereby  the  better  understand  what  pertaineth 
thereunto. 

Faith,  as  the  divines  do  define  it,  is  a  firm  and  steadfast  cleaving  unto  things  Defini- 
believed  by  the  authority  of  him  that  speaketh.    If  then  we  beheve,  as  is  afore-  '■?"  "^ 
said,  that  the  pope  of  Rome  is  under  the  council,  some  authority  doth  move  us 
thereunto  :  so  is  it  the  faith  of  him  that  believeth  it.     But  the  question  is  not 
whether  it  be  an  article  of  faith  only,  but  whether  it  be  an  article  of  the  catho- 
lic faith.     Wherefore  we  must  again  inquire,  what  the  catholic  faith  is.     This  Defini- 
word  Catholic,  is  a  Greek  word,  and  signifieth  Universal.     The  catholic  faith,  ''""  "'" 
that  is  to  say,  the  universal  faitlr,  is  not  so  called  because  every  man  holdeth  it,  caUmiic 
but  because  every  man  ought  to  believe  it.     For  all  men  do  not  believe  that  faitli. 
God  is  incarnate,  but  every  man  ought  so  to  believe.     And  albeit  many  be 
against  this  faith,  yet  doth  it  not  cease  to  be  universal.     For  what  writeth  the 
apostle  unto  the  Romans  ?    '  If  some  of  them  have  not  believed,  doth  their  mis- 
belief make  the  faith  of  God  vain  ?  God  forbid.     Verily  God  is  true,  but  every 
man  is  a  liar.'  Rom.  iii.    Therefore  to  believe  that  the  pope  is  under  the  coimcil,  what  is 
is  a  point  of  the  catholic  faith,  although  some  think  the  contrary  :  for  we  are  catholic. 
bound  to  believe  it,  forsomuch  as  it  is  taken  out  of  the  gospel.     For  we  are  not 
bound  only  to  believe  those  things  that  are  noted  to  us  in  the  Creed,  but  also 
all  those  things  that  are  contained  in  the  holy  Scriptures,  whereof  we  may  not 
deny  one  iota.     And  those  things  which  we  allege  for  the  superiority  of  the 
general  council,  are  gathered  out  of  the  sayings  of  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ, 
and  the  epistles  of  Saint  Paul :  erc/o,  we  are  all  bound  to  believe  it.     And  to 
prove  that  these  things  are  taken  out  of  the  gospel,  the  council  of  Constance 
doth  witness,  which  groundeth  its  authority  upon  these  words,  '  Die  ecclesiie  ;' 
that  is  to  say,  '  Tell  it  unto  the  church ; '  and,  '  Where  two  or  three  are  gathered 
together  in  my  name,'  &c. ;  and,  '  Whatsoever  ye  shall  bind,'  &c.,  with  other 
such  like  texts. 

*Andi  Saint  Austin  saith  :  '  Quod  evangelio  non  crederet,  ni  autoritas  ecclesise 
se  commoveret;'  that  is  to  say,  that  he  would  not  give  any  credit  unto  the 
gospel,  except  the  authority  of  the  church  did  move  him  thereunto  :  in  this  place, 
naming  the  church  for  the  general  council.  For  the  church,  which  was  dis- 
persed in  everyplace,  did  not  ordain  the  receiving  of  the  Gospels  and  Scrijitiu-es ; 
but  the  chiu-ch  which  was  congregated  and  gathered  together  in  the  general 
council.  And,  thereby,  it  may  come  to  pass,  that,  hke  as  the  council  did  bind 
us  to  the  believing  of  them,  so  may  it  also  set  forth  the  things  unto  us,  to  be 
believed.* 

Whereupon  pope  Martin  IV.,  being  yet  at  Constance,  under  the  license  of 
the  council,  sent  out  his  bulls,  which  do  reckon  up  the  articles,  whereupon  they 
ou»ht  to  be  examined  who  had  fallen  into  any  heresy ;  amongst  which  articles 
he  putteth  this  ai'ticle : — Whether  he  doth  believe  the  sacred  general  council  to 
have  power  immediately  from  God,  and  that  the  ordinances  thereof  are  to  be 
received  of  all  faithful  Christians ;  which  if  any  man  would  deny,  he  should  be 
counted  a  heretic.  Wherefore,  when  the  sacred  synod  of  Constance  doth  set 
forth  this  verity,  as  touching  the  superiority  of  the  general  council,  what  should 
let,  but  that  we  also  should  confess  the  same  to  be  a  verity  of  the  catholic  faith  ? 
For  the  catholic  church,  being  congregate  at  Constance,  received  that  faith  ; 
that  is  to  say,  believed  it  by  the  authority  of  him  who  spake  it ;  that  is,  Christ 
and  his  saints. 

(1)  See  Ed,  1563,  p.  29r.— Ed. 

VOL.  in.  s  s 


G26 


THK    COUNCIL    OF    BASIL. 


Henry        To  this  purpose  also  serve  very  well  the  words  of  the  synod  of  Chalcedon, 

^^-      written  in  this  manner : — '  It  is  not  lawful  for  him  that  is  condemned  by  the 

A.  D.     whole  synod,  to  nominate  any  bishop.'     The  determination  pleaseth  all  men. 

1431.    This  is  the  faith  of  the  fathei's.     He  that  holdeth  any  opinion  contrary  unto 

~  this,  is  a  heretic.     And  again,  it  is  a  rule,  that  it  is  not  lawful  to  appeal  from 

words  of   the  elect  and  chosen  synod.    He  that  holdeth  any  opinion  contrary  to  this,  is  a 

the  heretic. 

Chaloe-"^      Mark  the  manifest  witness  of  this  most  sacred  synod,  which  said,  that  he  is 
do!i.  a  hei'etic,  who  holdeth  any  opinion  contrary  unto  the  council.     But  he  is  no 

heretic,  except  he  I'efuse  the  catholic  faith  :  ergo,  it  was  the  catholic  faith  to 
believe  that  it  was  not  lawfiil  to  appeal  from  the  sacred  council.  But  how  was 
the  same  any  point  of  the  catholic  faith  ?  Verily  forasmuch  as  the  sacred  synod, 
perusing  over  the  holy  Scriptures,  hath  received  this  conclusion  out  of  the 
words  of  Christ  and  other  holy  fathers.  And,  like  as  the  synod  of  Chalcedon 
took  their  conclusions  out  of  the  holy  Scriptures,  so  likewise  did  the  council  of 
Constance  this  which  we  now  reason  upon.  And  like  as  the  one  is  an  article 
of  the  catholic  faith,  so  is  the  other  also.  And  he  who  holdeth  any  opinion 
contrary  to  either  or  both,  is  a  heretic. 
Paiior-  Furthermore  they  seem  unto  me  to  dream  and  dote,  who,  confessing  them  to 

mitane      ijg  verities,  will  not  confess  them  to  be  verities  of  faith.    For  if  they  be  verities, 
nipped  by  I  pray  you  whereof  are  they  verities?  Truly  not  of  gi-ammar,  much  less  of 
his  own     logic  ;  and  from  astronomy  and  physic  they  are  far  distant :  neither  is  there  any 
ticm'°^'"   o'-'ie^  ™^ii  '^^1*^  ^  divine,  that  will  grant  this  verity,  whom  Scripture  doth  force 
imto  it  of  necessity,  if  he  do  believe  Christ,  or  his  apostles.     Therefore  this  is 
a  verity  of  the  catholic  faith,  which  all  men  ought  to  embrace  ;  and  he  who 
obstinately  resisteth   against  the  same,  is  to  be  judged  a  heretic,  as  the  third 
conclusion  doth  affirm.     Neither  let  any  man   think  it  hard  or  cruel,  that  he 
should  be  called  a  heretic,  who  goeth  about  to  derogate  any  thing  from  the 
power  of  the  general  council,  which  is  confirmed  by  so  many  testimonies  and 
authorities,   *when  he  is  counted  a  heretic,  who  taketh  away  the  supremacy 
from  the  church  of  Rome,  which  is  one   of  the   Greek  heresies  that  are  con- 
demned.*    Also   Panormitane  allegeth  St.  Jerome,   saying,   '  He  who  under- 
standeth   the  Scripture  otherwise  than  the  consent  of  the  Holy  Ghost  doth  re- 
quire, albeit  he  do  not  depart  from  the  church,  may  be  called  a  heretic' 

Whereupon  it  followeth,  that  he,  who,  upon  the  words  of  Christ,  saying  unto 
Peter,  'Die  ecclesias,'  i.e.  'Tell  it  unto  the   church,'  doth  not  understand  by 
the  church  the  general  council,  understandeth  it  otherwise  than  the  sense  of 
Tell  the     the  Holy  Ghost  doth  require,  and  thereby  may  be  noted  as  a  heretic.     And  to 
ti'aUs'to  P''ove  that  the  sense  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  otherwise  than  he  doth  judge  it,  the 
say,  the     council  of  Constance  doth  declare;  which,  interpreting  those  words,  '  Die  eccle- 
general     siae,' that  is,  '  Tell  it  unto  the  church,'  spoken  by  the  Holy   Ghost,   under- 
standeth them  to  be  spoken  of  the  general  council. 

By  these  and  many  other  weightier  reasons  the  three  aforesaid  con- 
clusions seemed  true  unto  the  divines,  and  through  them  they  also 
allowed  the  residue.  Now  have  we  sufficiently  said,  as  touching 
that  which  was  before  premised  ;  neither  do  I  think  any  man  now 
to  be  in  doubt  of  these  three  first  conclusions.  Now,  to  return  again 
unto  our  story,  it  is  our  purpose  to  declare  those  things  which  hap- 
pen after  the  conclusions  of  the  divines ;  for  there  are  many  things 
worthy  of  remembrance,  which  also  may  happily  be  profitable  unto 
posterity. 

*When'  the  matter  was  allowed  by  the  divines,  it  came  to  the 
examination  of  the  deputies,  whereof  three,  without  much  ado,  con- 
sented with  the  divines.  The  fourth,  who  was  named  the  common 
deputy,  admitting  the  three  first  conclusions,  seemed  to  stop  upon 
the  residue.  George,  bishop  of  Vicenza,  was  a  great  stop  to  this 
matter  ;  who,  being  newly  returned  from  Mentz,  and  not  being  pre- 
sent at  the  disputation  holden  at  the  chapter-house,  could  not  be 

(I)  Edition  1563,  p.  298.— Ed, 


PANORIIITAKE    REFUTKl).  627 

persuaded,    -without  a   new   convocation,    that    Eugene   shoukl    be    J^emy 
declared  a  heretic.     Aniedeus,   archbishop  of  Lyons,  favoured  liim        ' 
very  much,  not  for  his  opinion  (for  he  had  openly,  in  the  disputation    A.  D. 
of  the  chapter-house,  declared  Eugene  a  heretic  and  relapse),  but    ^^■^^- 
because  he  feared  the  deposition  of  the  pope  to  come  on  apace. 

There  were,  in  this  deputation,  many  who  not  only  now,  but 
always  had  favoured  Eugene's  part.  This  deputation,  lest,  accord- 
ing to  the  ancient  custom  of  the  council,  it  should  be  concluded  by 
three  deputations,  did  suspend  all  deliberations  ;  for  by  that  suspend- 
ing, they  brought  a  greater  stop  and  let  than  they  should  have  done 
by  denying,  and  so  protracting  the  matter  a  long  time.  For  this 
cause  the  messengers  of  the  other  deputies  were  sent,  through  whose 
exhortation  the  deputies  of  the  commons  did  revoke  there  suspension 
upon  the  three  conclusions.  Friday  drew  near,  on  which  day  they 
■were  accustomed  to  have  a  general  congregation,  and  a  final  conclusion 
of  their  business.* 

When  the  disputation  was  ended,  the  archbishop  of  Milan  and 
Panormitane,  with  the  residue  of  their  fellow  ambassadors  of  the 
king  of  Arragon,  and  the  duke  of  Milan,  armed  themselves  with  all 
their  power  to  let  the  matter,  exhorting  all  ^en  of  their  faction  to 
withstand  it  with  stout  and  valiant  stomachs  ;  *and,'  by  their  letters 
and  messengers,  they  called  back  others  who  were  gone  away.  The 
cardinal  of  Terraconia,  who  then  sojourned  at  Solodorus,  was  sent 
for ;  likewise  was  Ludovicus,  the  prothonotary  of  Rome,  who  was 
gone  unto  the  baths,  not  so  much  for  his  health's  sake,  as  because  he 
would  not  be  compelled  to  defend  Eugene  contrary  to  his  own  mind. 
There  were  many  of  the  other  bishops  of  the  Arragons  sent  for,  who 
came  all  back  again  the  day  before  the  congregation  should  be  holden, 
but  only  the  cardinal,  who  returned  after  the  congregation. 

As  soon  as  the  congregation  was  begun,  by  and  by,  the  ambas- 
sadors of  the  princes  were  present,  and,  as  though  they  had  before 
conspired  together,  they  all  agreed  in  one  mind  to  hinder  the  con- 
clusion as  much  as  in  them  lay.* 

And  first  of  all,  as  soon  as  the  congregation  was  assembled  together,  The 
the  bishop  of  Bergen,^  a  man  both  wise  and  eloquent,  exhorted  them  ^elgen" 
to  defer  the  conclusion,  and  to   tarry  for  the  ambassadors  of  other 
princes,  who  would  return  from  Mentz. 

After  him  Panormitane,  a  man  of  singular  learning,  and  chief 
ambassador  of  his  king,  with  a  grave  and  rhetorical  oration,  spake,  in 
a  manner,  as  followeth. 

The  Oration  of  Panormitane.^ 

'I  have,'  said  he, 'had  a  commandment  hy  the  prophet,  to  ciy  without 
ceasing ;  which  prophet  said.  Cry  out,  cease  not,  lift  up  thy  voice  as  a  trumpet.' 
If  that  in  any  matter  at  any  time  before  he  ought  to  have  cried,  this  matter 
specially,  which  is  now  in  hand,  lacketh  crying  and  roaring  out,  when  the  state 
of  the  universal  church  is  treated  upon,  either  to  be  preserved,  or  utterly  over- 
thrown ;  and  that  he  had  cried  so  much  in  this  manner,  that  he  doubted  not 
but  the  saying  of  David  was  fulfilled  in  him,  where  he  saitli,— '  Laboravi  da- 
mans, raucje  sunt  facta?  fauces  mese;'— '  I  have  laboured,  crying  out,  that  my 
jaws  are  become  hoarse.' 

(1)  EdiHon  1563,  jip.  238,  293— Ed.  (2)  More  probably  '  Burgos,'  seepage  GIO.— Ed. 

(31  Ed.  1583,  p.  677. -Ed. 


628 


I'HE    COL'NCIl-    OF    1!AS!L 


Henry 
VI. 

A.D. 
1431. 

Four 
things  to 
be  con- 
sidered in 
every 
request. 


Panormi- 
tane 
would 
have  diji- 
nity  to  be 
consider- 
ed, not 
voices. 


He  seem- 

etli  to 
delay  the 
process 
a^'ainst 
the  pope. 


The  third 
part  of  his 
oration. 


His  per- 
suasions. 


Notwithstanding  that,  he  would,  both  now,  and  as  often  as  need  should  re- 
quire, without  ceasing  still  cry  out,  and  especially  now  in  this  most  difficult  and 
weighty  matter;  wherein  he  required  the  sacred  council  gently  to  hear  both  him, 
and  the  ambassadors  of  other  princes ;  adding,  moreover,  four  things  to  be 
considered,  in  all  requests  made  of  any  man  ;  which  he  also  required  the  fathers 
now  presently  to  mark  and  consider  :  who  it  is  that  maketh  the  request?  what 
is  required?  why  itsliould  be  required?  and  what  effect  would  come  by  the  re- 
quest either  granted  or  denied?  As  toucliing  the  first  point  he  said;  the  most 
noble  kings  and  excellent  princes  with  their  prelates,  were  of  great  power.  And 
then  he  reckoned  up  the  king  of  Castile,  the  king  of  Arragon,  the  duke  of  Milan, 
and  the  bishops  of  the  same  princes;  rehearsing  also  the  merits  and  good  deeds  of 
the  said  kings,  and  also  of  the  duke  of  Milan.  But  when  he  came  to  make  men- 
tion of  the  prelates,  he  could  not  refrahi  himself,  but  began  to  wjix  somewhat 
hot,  saying,  that  the  greatest  number  of  prelates  were  on  his  part,  {"or  if  the 
bishops  and  abbots  were  counted,  it  were  not  to  be  doubted  but  the  greatest  part 
of  them  would  have  this  present  matter  deferred ;  and,  forasmuch  as  the  whole 
power  of  the  council  doth  consist  in  the  bishops,  it  is  not  to  be  suffered,  that  they 
being  neglected  and  contemned,  that  should  be  concluded,  which  pleased  the 
greater  part  of  the  inferiors.  For  the  keys,  said  he,  were  given  to  the  apostles,  and 
to  their  .successors,  who  are  the  bishops:  also  that  there  are  three  kinds  of  synods, 
episcopal,  provincial,  and  general,  and  none  of  all  these  without  bishops. 
Wherefore  the  manner  and  order  of  the  present  council  seemed  indecent,  where 
things  were  not  weighed  according  as  men  excel  in  dignity,  but  by  most  voices : 
notwithstanding,  according  to  the  most  famous  epistle  of  Clement,  the  bishops 
were  the  pillars  and  keys  of  heaven,  and  the  inferiors  had  no  determining  voice, 
but  only  a  consultative  voice  with  them.  Wherefore  there  would  be  a  great 
offence  in  this  behalf,  if  a  matter  of  faith  should  be  determined  without  the 
bishops ;  in  which  matter  not  only  the  bishops,  but  also  the  secular  princes  ought 
to  be  admitted.  And,  forasmuch  as  they,  in  the  name  of  their  princes,  desired 
to  be  admitted  to  the  examination  of  this  present  matter,  and  would  examine 
the  matter  more  fully,  he  complained  gi-eatly  how  unworthy  a  thing  it  was,  that 
they  should  be  contemned  or  despised. 

After  many  things  spoken  to  this  end  and  effect,  he  passed  over  to  the  second 
part  of  his  oration,  declaring  what  it  was  that  he  required  ;  not  gold,  nor  silver, 
neither  precious  stones,  neither  provinces  nor  kingdoms,  neither  a  thing  hard  to 
be  done ;  but  only  that  the  delay  of  the  sacred  council  was  required,  and  that 
the  fathers  would  stay  in  the  process  against  the  pope,  and  in  the  conclusion  and 
determination  of  matters  which  were  then  in  hand.  Neither  should  the  delay  be 
long,  but  only  until  the  return  of  the  ambassadors  from  Mentz,  who,  he  knew 
well,  would  return  very  shortly.  That  this  was  but  a  small  matter,  and  needed 
but  small  entreaty,  because  there  was  no  danger  in  it.  And  also  it  should  seem 
injurious,  not  to  tarry  for  the  ambassadors  of  the  princes  who  were  then  at 
Mentz,  when  they  were  not  absent  for  their  own  private  commodity,  but  about 
the  affairs  of  the  commonwealth,  and  the  commodity  of  peace ;  neither  had  he 
forgotten,  that  at  their  departure  they  had  desired,  that  during  their  absence 
there  should  be  nothing  renewed  concerning  the  matters  of  Eugene. 

Then,  immediately  adjoining  the  third  part  of  his  oration,  wherefore  this 
delay  was  required,  he  concluded,  that  it  was  not  required  for  the  j^rivate  com- 
modity of  any  one  man,  but  for  a  commonwealth ;  not  to  piu'turb  or  trouble  any 
thing,  but  for  the  better  examination  of  the  matter,  that  all  things  might  pass 
with  peace  and  quietness  ;  and  that  the  matter  might  be  so  much  the  more  firm 
and  stable,  by  how  much  it  is  ratified  and  allowed  by  the  consent  of  many. 
And  so  he  proceeded  to  the  last  part  of  his  argument,  requiring  the  fathers  that 
tliey  would  consider,  and  weigh  in  their  minds,  the  effect  that  woidd  follow,  if 
they  shoidd  grant  or  deny  this  request.  '  For,'  saith  he,  '  if  ye  shall  deny  this 
small  petition  of  the  princes,  they  all  will  be  aggrieved  therewith,  and  take  this 
repidse  in  ill  part.  They  will  say,  they  are  contemned  of  you,  neither  will  they 
be  obedient  unto  you,  or  receive  your  decrees.  In  vain  shall  ye  make  laws, 
except  the  princes  do  execute  them,  and  all  your  decrees  shall  be  but  vain  : 
yet  would  I  think  this  to  be  borne  withal,  if  I  did  not  fear  greater  matters  to 
ensue.  What  if  they  should  join  themselves  with  Eugene,  who  desireth  to 
spoil  you,  not  only  of  your  livings,  but  also  of  your  lives  ?  Alas !  what  slaughter 
and  murder  do  the  eyes  of  my  mind  behold  and  see !     Woidd  to  God  my 


THE    Pll.MSK    OF    LUDOVICUS.  629 

opinion  were  but  vain  !    Eut  if  you  do  grant  and  consent  unto  their  petitions,     Henri, 
they  will  think  themselves  bound  unto  you ;  they  will  receive  and  embrace  your       ^^• 
decrees,  and  whatsoever  you  shall  require  of  them  shall  be  obtained.     They     . 
will  forsake  your  adversary ;  they  will  speak  evil  of  him  and  abhor  him  ;  but    ^'}^' 
you  they  will  commend  and  praise  ;  you  they  will  reverence  ;  unto  you  they  will  • 

wholly  submit  themselves ;  and  then  shall  follow  that  most  excellent  fruit  of 
reformation  and  tranquillity  of  the  church.'  And  thus  he  required  the  matter 
to  be  respited  nn  all  parts.  At  last  he  said,  That  except  the  ambassadors  of  the 
princes  were  heard,  he  had  a  protestation  written,  whicli  he  would  command  to 
be  read  before  them  all. 

AVhen  Panormitane  had  made  an  end  of'  his  oration,  Ludovicus,  the  The 
prothonotary  of  Rome,  rose  up,  a  man  of  such  singular  wit  and  me-  Kvi-"'^ 
jnory,  that  he  was  thought  not  to  be  inferior  unto  any  of  the  famous  "^^^^^^ ^ 
men  aforetime  ;  insomuch  that  he  had  always  in  memory  whatsoever  tary.'"""' 
he  had  heard  or  read,  and  never  forgat  any  thing  that  he  had  seen ; 
*and  in  disputation,  he  did  not  repeat  the  principles  of  the  law,  as 
other  lawyers  do,  but  rehearsed  the  text  without  the  book,  as  if  he 
had  read  it  upon  the  book.* 

The  Oration  of  Ludovicus  the  Prothonotary. 

This  man,  first  commending  Panormitane,  said,  That  he  came  but  the  day 
before  from  the  baths,  and  that  it  seemed  unto  him  a  strange  thing  which  was 
now  brought  in  question,  wherein  he  desired  to  hear  other  men's  minds,  and 
also  to  be  heard  of  others,  and  that  those  prelates  who  were  at  Mentz  should  bo 
tarried  for,  to  be  present  at  the  discussing  of  this  matter,  in  the  name  and 
behalf  of  their  princes,  which  prelates  were  men  of  great  estimation,  and  the 
orators  of  most  mighty  princes. 

He  allowed,  also,  the   saying  of  Panormitane,  touching  the  voices  of  the  Bishops 
inferiors,  that  it  seemeth  not  to  be  against  the  truth,  that  only  bishops  should  ""'^ '" 
have  a  deciding  or  determining  voice  in  councils.     And,  albeit  some  in  this  dis-  determin- 
putation  do  think  that  which  is  written  in  Acts  xv.,  to  be  their  fort  or  defence  ;  jng  voice 
notwithstanding,  he  was  nothing  moved  therewith,  nor  took  it  to  be  of  any  c"is'^°'^"" 
effect,  albeit  it  was  said,  '  It  seemed  good  unto  the  Holy  Ghost  and  to  us,' 
where  both  the  apostles  and  the  elders  were  gathered  together ;  whereby  it 
appeared,  that  the  others  had  a  deciding  voice  with  the  apostles.     For  he  said, 
that  there  was  no  argument  to  be  gathered  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  whose 
examples  were  more  to  be  marvelled  at  than  to  be  followed ;  and  that  it  doth 
not  appear  there,  that  the  apostles  called  the  elders  of  duty,  but  that  it  is  only 
declared  that  they  were  there  present ;  Avhereupon  nothing  could  be  inferred ; 
and  that  it  seemed  unto  him,  that  the  inferiors  in  the  council  of  Basil  were 
admitted  to  determine  with  the  bishops  but  of  grace  and  favour  only,  because 
the  bishops  may  communicate  the  authority  unto  others ;  *  notwithstanding  in 
these  matters  which  are  graces,  if  one  say  the  contrary,  nothing  can  be  done.* 
He  alleged  for  testimony  the  bishop  of  Concen,  a  man  of  great  authority,  who 
would  not  suffer  any  incoi-jjoration  or  fellowship  of  the  meaner  sort,  and  there- 
fore neither  any  inferior,  neither  himself,  who  as  yet  was  not  made  bishop,  to 
have  any  decicling  voice  in  the  council.     Wherefore,  forasmuch  as  the  matter 
was  weighty  which  was  now  in  hand,  and  that  the  bishops  spake  against  it,  he 
required  the  council  that  they  would,  of  necessity,  stay  and  tarry  for  the  ambas- 
sadors of  the  princes  coming  from  Mentz. 

His  oration'  was  so  much  the  more  grievous,  in  that  many  were 
touched  with  his  words,  and  especially  in  that  point,  that  he  said  the 
apostles  were  not  to  be  followed  ;  for  that,  all  men  did  impugn  as  a 
blasphemy.     But  here  a  man  may  marvel,  that  a  man  of  such  excel- 

(1 )  It  is  no  marvel  why  he  alleged  no  more  or  better  matter  ;  for  of  naughty  leather  no  man  can 
make  a  good  shoe.  And  note  here  how  God  withdraweth  his  gifts,  when  men  dissemble  and  cloak 
the  truth. 


\ 

GSO  THE    COUNCIL    OF    BASIL. 

iJenry    Iciicj,  alleged  no  more  or  better  matter.     But  in  tliis  point  the  me- 
mory  of  the  man  is  to  be  pardoned,  who  did  not  willingly  speak  in 

A.  D.    this  matter,  and  desired  nothing  so  much,  as  not  to  obtain  that  which 

^^^^-    he  entreated  for. 

*  After'  him  the  bishops  Cathamensis  and  Bosianus,  who  were  also 
the  king''s  ambassadors,  after  a  few  words,  had  inclined  to  the  sentence 
and  mind  of  Panormitane,  at  that  time  the  archbishop  of  Milan,  a 
man  of  prompt  and  ready  wit  and  learning,  who  was  there  alone, 
ambassador  for  the  duke  of  Milan;  for  the  bishop  of  Albigania,  and 
Francis  Barbavaria,  were  not  yet  returned  from  Mentz.  He,  being  a 
follower  of  Jerome,  alleging  many  authorities  out  of  the  said  doctor, 
persuaded  greatly  to  have  the  matter  declared,  abhorring  all  haste, 
which,  he  said,  was  an  enemy  to  the  council.  And  specially  with  his 
countenance  and  gesture  he  declared  himself  to  be  greatly  against  the 
matter.  At  last  he  said,  that  except  he  were  fully  heard,  he  would 
make  protestation  in  the  name  of  himself  and  all  his  countrymen. 
After  him  followed  the  bishops  of  Dertusia^  and  Jerundia,  and  the 
elect  abbot  of  Mount  Segobria,  and  many  other  men  of  that  sect, 
Avho  altogether  allowed  the  sentences  and  determination  of  Panormi- 
tane. The  bishop  of  Parma  agreed  with  the  bishop  of  Milan  and  the 
king''s  almoner,  who,  flying  from  Basil,  because  of  the  plague,  unto 
Zosingen,  died  in  a  town  of  the  Switzers,  between  Lucerne  and  Basil. 
These,  with  Martinus  de  Vera,  ambassador  of  the  king  of  Arragon, 
did  confirm  and  stay  themselves  upon  the  saying  of  their  fellow  Pa- 
normitane. Then  the  other  Arragons  and  Castilians,  every  man 
willing  to  speak  for  himself,  said  :  that  they  did  all  agree  to  the  desire 
of  their  king.  The  matter  seemed  to  be  craftily  handled,  that  thereby 
they  might  spend  the  time  and  defer  the  conclusion.  When  a  great 
number  had  spoken  their  minds,  and  were  heard,  and  the  Castilians 
had  made  an  end,*  Ludovicus,  the  cardinal  Arelatensis,  a  man  of  mar- 
vellous constancy,  and  born  for  the  governance  of  general  councils, 
gathering  together  the  words  of  all  the  orators,  and  turning  himself 
first  to  the  Castilians,  he  spake  much  of  their  devotion  to  the  sacred 
council;  in  like  manner  he  spake  unto  the  Castilians  and  Lombards: 
afterwards,  he,  entering  upon  the  matter,  spake  in  this  wise  : 

,    The  Oration  of  the  Cardinal  Arelatensis. 

Most  reverend  fathers !  this  is  now  no  new  or  strange  business,  nor  begun  to- 
day or  yesterday.  For  it  is  now  many  weeks  ago  since  the  conckisions  were 
disputed  upon  amongst  the  divines,  and  sent  unto  Mentz,  and  into  all  other  parts 
of  the  world.  After  this  they  were  disputed  upon  six  days  continually,  and  fully 
discussed,  and,  after  that,  not  without  great  delay  approved  by  the  deputies ; 
Truth  and  as  the  truth  seeketh  no  corners,  so  all  things  were  done  pviblicly  and  openly, 
sceketh  neither  can  any  man  pretend  ignorance,  neither  are  the  prelates  or  princes 
iiers.  contemned  ;  for  we  called  all  that  were  present  at  Basil,  and  exhorted  all  the 
rest  to  be  present.  And  forasmuch  as  mention  is  made  of  the  most  noble  king 
of  Castile  ;  who  is  it  that  is  ignorant  that  the  king's  orators  were  there  present? 
The  bishops  of  Bergen  and  Ebrun,  men  of  singular  learning  and  eloquence,  and 
you  also  Panormitane  yourself,  who  here  represent  the  person  of  the  most  famous 
king  of  Arragon,  was  twice  present  yoiu-self  in  the  chapter-house,  and  disputed 
twice  most  subtilely,  and  twice  declared  your  mind,  what" you  thought  in  that 
matter.  What  do  you  desire  any  more  ?  Also  out  of  the  territory  of  the  duke 
of  Milan  there  was  present  the  archbishop  of  Milan,  who  albeit  he  be  no  am- 
bassador, yet  how  famous  a  prelate  he  is,  you  are  not  ignorant. 

(1)  See  Edition  15C3,  ji.  310.— Ed.  (2)  "  Dertusa,"  Tortosa  in  Spain.— Ed. 


WHO     HAVE    DETERMINING    VOICES    IN    COUNCILS.  C31 

When  he  had  spoken  these  words,  the  archbishop,  being  some-    u^^ry 

what  moved,  said  unto  him,  "  My  lord  cardinal,  you  supply  the  room ^ 

of  a  president  no  better  than  I  do  the  place  of  a  duke's  orator ;"  and  A.  D. 
began  to  taunt  him  Avith  many  words.  But  the  cardinal  (as  he  was  a  ^^"^^ 
man  most  patient,  and  would  not  be  provoked  to  anger  by  any  2433 
means),  said  as  followeth :  


I'he  Oration  of  Cardinal  Arelatensis  continued. 

This  is  it  that  I  have  even  now  desired.  For  if  the  archbishop  be  an  am- 
bassador, then  hath  the  duke  no  cause  to  complain,  who  had  his  orator  present 
at  the  discussing  of  those  matters.  I  pass  over  other  princes,  because  they  do 
not  complain.  Notwithstanding,  the  most  christian  king  of  France  had  there 
the  bishop  of  Lyons,  a  grave  and  sober  man,  as  his  ambassador  at  the  disputa- 
tion. As  for  other  princes,  I  see  no  cause  why  they  should  be  tarried  for,  who, 
knowing  the  council  to  be  congregated  for  such  matters  as  pertain  unto  faith, 
do  not  think  it  absurd  that  the  doubtful  matters  of  faith  should  be  declared  in 
the  council ;  whereunto,  if  they  had  been  willing  to  come,  they  would  have 
been  present  ere  this. 

*  Besides  '  that,  it  is  not  true  what  Panormitane  sayeth,  that  secular  princes 
ought  to  be  admitted  to  any  matter  of  faith,  and  especially,  if  he  understand  it 
to  decide  or  determine.  And,  albeit  that  Martianus  the  emperor  doth  say,  '  Nos, 
ad  fidem  conformandum,  volumus  interesse  synodo;'  that  is,  '  We  will  be  present 
at  the  council  for  the  confirmation  of  the  faith;'  which  words  Panormitane  doth 
so  often  allege,  yet  that  must  be  added,  which  he  himself  doth  add,  that  we 
may  have  the  perfect  understanding  of  his  words,  for  he  sayeth ;  '  Nos  ad  fidem 
confirmandem,  non  potentiam  exercendam  volumus  interesse  synodo  ;'  that  is, 
'  We  will  be  present  at  the  synod  or  council,  not  to  exercise  our  power  and 
authority,  but  for  the  confirmation  of  the  faith,' speaking  it  to  this  intent:  that, 
thereby  he  might  specially  take  away  all  fear  from  those,  who  thought  that  his 
presence  would  frustrate  the  council :  which  thing,  if  our  princes  now-a-days 
would  do,  the  matter  were  at  an  end.  But  our  princes  in  these  days,  when  by 
means  of  their  absence  they  cannot  threaten  themselves,  yet  will  they  put  men 
in  fear  by  their  ambassadors.     But  God  shall  provide  for  them.* 

Why  this  matter  should  need  so  much  discussing  as  some  will  have,  I  do  not 
understand ;   for  if  I  be  well  remembei-ed,  Panormitane  and  also   Ludovicus 
have  oftentimes  affirmed  in  this  place  even  the  very  same  thing  which  the  con- 
clusions signify.     And  if  any  of  them  now,  will  go  about  to  gainsay  it,  it  will  Didimus 
happen  unto  them  as  it  did  unto  Didimus,  *than  whom,  as  Quintilian   saith,  [«'l"T- 
'No  man  at  any  time  wrote  more,'*  to  whom,  when    on  a  time  he  repugned  ^J.^Jat'^as 
against  a  certain  history  as  vain  andfrivolous,  his  own  book  was  delivered  unto  in  hisown 
him,  wherein  the  same  was  written :  so  hkewise  these  two  men, 2  although  they  '^°°''- 
be  excellently  learned,  and  eloquent,  yet  may  they  be  [confuted  by  their  own 
writings.     Besides  this,  there  are   synodal  epistles  and  decrees  of  this  council, 
which  are  full  of  such  conclusions.     What  is  it  then  whereupon  any  difficulty 
can  be  raised  ?  what  is  it  that  may  be  impugned  ?  Shall  we  now  bring  that  again 
in  doubt,  which  hath  so  often  been  declared,  affinned,  and  decreed?    '  But,'  say 
they,  '  the  princes  and  ambassadors  are  absent,  who  are  bishops,  by  whose  pre- 
sence the  decrees  should  be  of  more  authority.'    Well,  they  are  not  only  absent 
who  are  gone   to  Mentz,  but  almost  an  infinite  number  of  others,  dispersed 
throughout  the  whole  world,  whom   if  we  should  tarry  to  look  for,  nothing  at 
any  time  should  be  decreed.     They  are  all  called  unto  the  council ;  they  might 
have  come  if  they  would.     To  those  that  are  present  power  is  given,  and  they 
ought  to  debate  these  matters.     If  any  man  will  say,  that  they  who  are  absent 
are  about  the  affairs  of  the  commonwealth,  truly  we  sent  them   not  thither, 
but  they  went  rather  against  the  will  of  the  council,  than  with  the  consent 
thereof. 

And  admit  that  they  had  been  sent  by  the  council,  yet  were  not  our  power  so 
much  restrained  but  that  we  might  refonn  the  church,  for,  otherwise,  there 

(\)  Ed.  1563,  pp.  301,  302.— Ed. 

(2)  He  meaneth  Panonnitane  and  Ludovicus  the  prothonotury. 


632 


THK    COUNCIL    OF    BASIL. 


Henry 
VI. 

A.D. 
1431 

to 
1438. 


Mark 
what 
worldly 
pomp, 
(iignity, 
and 
wealth, 
had 

brought 
tlie  pre- 
lates to  in 
those 
days. 


Truth 

luany 

tiuies 

clwelleth 

under  the 

rapsed 

cloaks. 


should  never  any  thing  be  done  in  the  council ;  forasmuch  as  always  some  are  sent 
out  by  the  coiuicil,  and  some  are  always  to  be  looked  and  tarried  for ;  and  tliere- 
fore  we  must  either  do  nothing  at  all,  or  send  out  no  prelates  from  the  council. 
Whereas  he  said  that  prelates,  and  especially  bishops  are  contemned,  that  is 
most  far  from  the  truth,  for  they  have  the  chief  and  first  places.  They  speak 
first,  and  give  their  voices  first  of  all,  imto  all  things ;  and,  if  so  be  they  do 
speak  learnedly  and  truly,  all  the  inferiors,  without  any  gainsaying,  do  soon 
follow  their  mind. 

Neither,  peradventure,  shall  it  seem  dissonant  from  the  truth,  to  say,  that 
there  was  never  any  synod  which  did  more  amplify  the  power  and  authority  of 
bishops,  than  this.  For  what  have  the  bishops  been  in  our  days,  but  only 
shadows  ?  Might  they  not  well  have  been  called  shepherds  without  the  sheep  ? 
What  had  they  more  than  their  mitre  and  their  staff,  when  they  could  deter- 
mine nothing  over  their  subjects?  Verily,  in  the  primitive  church,  the  bishops 
had  the  greatest  power  and  authority  ;^  but  now  is  it  come  to  that  point  that 
they  do  only  exceed  the  common  sort  of  priests  in  their  habit  and  revenues. 
But  we  have  restored  them  again  to  their  old  state  ;  we  have  reduced  the 
collation  of  benefices  again  unto  them ;  we  have  restored  unto  them  the  con- 
firmation of  elections ;  we  have  brought  again  into  their  hands  the  causes  of 
the  subjects  to  be  heard,  and  have  made  them  bishops  who  were  none  before. 
What  cause  is  there  then,  that  the  bishops  should  say  they  are  contemned  of 
the  council,  or  what  injurious  thing  have  we  at  any  time  done  unto  them  1 

But  Panormitane  saith,  that  forasmuch  as  most  bishops  are  on  his  part,  and 
few  against  him,  the  conclusion  is  not  to  be  determined  by  the  multitude  of  the 
inferiors.  But  let  Panormitane  remember  himself,  that  this  is  no  new  kind  of 
proceeding.  This  order  of  proceeding,  the  council  ordained  from  the  beginning, 
neither  hath  it  been  changed  at  any  time  since.  And  this  order,  Panormitane  ! 
in  times  past,  hath  pleased  you  well  enough,  when  the  multitude  did  follow  your 
mind.^  But  now,  because  they  do  not  follow  your  mind,  they  do  displease  you. 
But  the  decrees  of  the  coimcil  are  not  so  mutable  as  the  wills  of  men.  Know 
ye,  moreover,  that  the  very  same  bishops  who  do  consent  with  you  in  word,  do 
not  consent  with  you  in  mind,  neither  speak  the  same  secretly,  which  they  now 
do  openly.  They  do  fear  that  which,  you  told  them  at  home  in  their  country, 
that  except  they  would  follow  your  mind  they  should  displease  the  king.  They 
fear  the  power  of  the  prince,  and  to  be  spoiled  of  their  temporalties ;  neither 
have  they  free  liberty  to  speak  as  is  requisite  in  councils.  Albeit,  if  they  were 
true  bishops,  and  true  pastors  of  souls,  they  would  not  doubt  to  put  their 
lives  in  venture  for  their  sheep,  neither  be  afraid  to  shed  their  blood  for  their 
mother  the  church. 

But  at  this  present  (the  more  is  the  pity)  it  is  rare  to  find  a  prelate  in  this 
world,  who  doth  not  prefer  his  temporalities  before  his  spiritualties  ;  with  the 
love  whereof  they  are  so  withdrawn,  that  they  study  rather  to  please  princes 
than  God ;  and  confess  God  in  corners,  "but  princes  they  will  openly  confess. 
Of  whom  the  Lord  speaketh  in  his  Gospel;  '  Every  one,' saith  he,  '  that  con- 
fesseth  me  before  men,  I  will  confess  him  before  my  Father  v/hich  is  in  hea- 
ven. ^  And,  contrariwise,  the  Lord  will  not  confess  him  before  his  Father 
who  is  afraid  to  confess  the  Lord  before  men.  Neither  is  that  true  which 
Panormitane  saith,  that  most  bishops  are  on  his  part ;  for  here  are  many 
bishops'  proctors  whom  he  doth  not  reckon,  because  they  are  not  of  his  opi- 
nion. Neither  is  the  dignity  of  the  fathers  to  be  respected  in  the  council,  as 
he  saith,  but  only  reason  ;  nor  any  thing  more  to  be  looked  for  than  the  truth  ; 
neither  will  I,  for  my  part,  prefer  a  lie  of  any  bishop,  be  he  ever  so  rich,  before  a 
verity  or  truth  of  a  poor  priest.  Neither  ought  a  bishop  to  disdain,  if  he  be 
rude  or  unlearned,  that  the  multitude  doth  not  follow  him,  or  that  the  voice  of 
a  poor  learned  and  eloquent  priest  should  be  preferred  before  his.  For  wisdom 
dwelleth  oftener  mider  a  bare  and  ragged  cloak  than  in  the  rich  ornaments  and 
apparel. 

Wherefore,  I  pray  you,  my  lord  bishops !  do  not  so  much  contemn  your 


(1)  Mark,  O  ye  bishops'    {he  council  of  Basil  contendeth   for  you,    and   ye  will   not   under- 
stand it. 

(2)  This  was  a  true  rar.linal,  out  of  whose   mouth  the  verity   did  apeak,  who  feared  not  the 
threatenings  of  princes,  neitlier  soii.trht  any  worldly  glory  or  digrJty. 

(3)  Note  here  the  great  godliness  and  most  christian  saying  of  this  good  bishop. 


THE    NAMKS    OF    PKIKSTS    AXD    ELUEUS    EXPLAINED.  633 

inferiors ;  for  tiie  first  who  died  for  Christ,  who  also  opened  unto  all  otlicrs  the     Hmry 
way  of  martyrdom,  was  no  bishop  but  only  a  Levite.    As  for  that  which  Ludo-      Vl- 
xicus  and   Panormitane  do  allege,   touching  the  voices  of  bishops,  I  know  not 
where  they  have  it ;  wherefore  I  desire  them  that  they  would  tell  me  where 
they  have  found  it.     But  if  we  repeat  the  examples  of  old  councils,  we  shall 
find  that  the  inferiors  were  always  present  with  the  bishops.     And,  albeit  Lu-    , '^' 
dovicus  do  forbid  us  the  examples  of  the  apostles,  I   stay  myself  most  upon  ^£2_1. 
their  doings :  for  what  is  more   comely  for  us  to  follow,  than  the  doctrine  and 
customs  of  the  primitive  church?'    It  is  said,  therefore,  in  the  fifteenth  chapter 
of  the  Acts  of  tlie  Apostles,  *  It  seemed  good  unto  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  to  us ;' 
which  woi'ds,  '  to  us, '  are  refeiTed  unto  them  who  are  before  named,  the  apo- 
stles and  eldei-s.     Neither  this  word,  '  it  seemed  good  '  signifieth  in  this  place 
consultation,  but  decision  and  determination ;  whereby  it  appeareth  that  others 
beside  the  bishops  had  determining  voices.     In  another  place  also  of  the  Acts, 
when  the  apostles  should  treat  upon  a  weighty  matter,  they  durst  not  deter- 
mine by  themselves,  but  the  twelve  called  together  the  midtitude. 

Here  Ludovicus  saith,  that  it  doth  not  appear  the  apostles  called  others  of 
necessity. — But  I  say  unto  him,  how  knowest  thou,  that  they  did  not  call  them 
of  necessity?     But,  forasmuch  as  both  parts  are  uncertain,  nothing  doth  pro- 
hibit us  to  follow  the  apostles.     For,  seeing  that  all  things  are  written  for  our 
learning,  it  appeareth  that  the  apostles  would  give  us  example,  that  in  weighty 
matters  we   should  admit  our  inferiors.     And,  therefore,  in  all  councils  which 
were  celebrated  and  holden  afterwards,  we  find  that  priests  were  also  pi'esent; 
as  in  the  council  of  Nice,  which  of  all  others  was  most  famous,  Athanasius,  Athana- 
being  then  only  a  priest,  withstood  the  Arians  and  infringed  their  arguments,  >*''}»• 
albeit  there  were  also  other  priests.     And,  albeit  mention  be  made  of  three  a  priest." 
hundred  and  twenty-two  bishops,  yet  it  is  not  denied  but  that  the  inferiors  vanquish- 
were  there,  whom  I  think  to  be  omitted  for  this  cause,   for  that  they  were  ^j'^.j*^" 
almost  innumerable ;  for,  as  you  know  well  enough,  the  denomination  for  the  bisiiop. 
most  part  is  taken  of  the  most  worthy. 

In  the  synod  of  Chalcedon,  which  was  counted  one  of  the  four  principal  Theimme 
synods,  it  is  said  that  there  were  there  present  six  hundred  priests  ;    which  "*'  i'"'''.'.'' 
name  is  common  both  unto  bishops  and  priests.     In  other  councils  the  names  common 
both  of  bishops   and   priests   are   omitted,   and   mention   is  made  of  fathers  both  to 
only,  which  hath  the  same  signification  that  this  word  elders  hath  in  the  Acts  ^Jfj^'"''^ 
of  the  Apostles.     We  have  also  a  testimony  of  the  ecclesiastical  history,  how  priests. 
that  there  was  a  council  gathered  at  Rome  of  sixty  bishops,   and  as  many 
priests  and   deacons    against  the   Novations,  who  called  themselves  Cathary. 
Also,  when  Paul,''  the  bishop  of  Antioch,  in  the  time  of  Galienus  the  emperor,  paui,  bi- 
prcached  that  Christ  was  a  man  of  common  nature,  the  council  assembled  against  shop  of 
him  in  Antioch ;  whereunto  there  came  bishops  out  of  Cesarea,  Cappadocia,  •^'"""'''• 
out  of  Pontus,  Asia,  and  from  Jerusalem,   many  other   bishops,  priests  and 
deacons  ;   and   it  is  said,  that  for  that  cause    the  council  was  often  holden. 
And  at  last,  in  the  same  place,  under  Aurelius    the    emperor,  Paul  was  con-  Paul  tlie 
demned  by  all  christian  churches  wliich  were  under  heaven ;  neither  was  there  '^"^^'"^^1^ 
any  man  who  did  more  confound  the  said   Paul,  than   Malchion,  a  priest  of  ^.j 
Antioch,  who  taught  rhetoric  in  Antioch.     *But3  to  what  purpose  do  I  stand  so 
long  in  tliis  matter?  these  are  the  words  of  the  sixth  council  holden  at  Toulouse : 
'  After  all  the  bishops  be  entered  in  and  set,  let  the  priests  be  called,  wlio  are 
allowed,  for  any  cause,  to  enter  in.      Let  no  deacon  put  in  himself  amongst 
them,  but  let  such  as  are  allowed  enter  in  afterwards,  whom  the  order  of  council 
requireth  to  be  present.     And  then  the  bishops  being  set  round  in  a  ring  toge- 
ther,  let  the  priests  sit  behind  them,   except  such  as  the  metropohtan  shall 
choose  to  sit  with  him,  who,  also,  may  judge  and  determme  any  thing  together 
with  him.'     There  is  no  man  who  will  affirm  this  to  have  been  but  only  a  pro- 
vincial council.     For  the  council  speaking  of  itself,  saith :  '  quoniam  generale 
concilium  agimus,'  'forasmuch  as  we  do  hold  a  general  council.'     And  there 
were  also  present  sixty  bishops  out  of  Spain,  and  France.     But,  peradventure, 
the  words  of  the  council  of  Chalcedon  do  move  Panomiitane  and  Ludovicus ; 

(1)  Note  the  sincerity  of  this  good  bishop,  who  stayed  himself  upon  the  examples  of  the  primi- 
tive church,  and  not  upon  customs  and  popes. 

(2)  A   D.  2G0.— Ed. 

(.!)  Edition  1563,  p.  304.— Ed. 


634  THE    COUNCII,    OF    BASIL. 

Henry  where    the   bishops,  speaking  of  a  certain  congregation,  which   deposed   Fla- 

^l-  vianus  and  certain  others,  said :  Tlie  soldiers  did  depose  them  rather  than  we"; 

.    ,.  for  whatsoever  we  did,  we  were  compelled  by  fear  to  do  it,  and  the  clergy 

-■  1  r, ,'  themselves  subscribed  first ;  wherefore  they  cried  out  that  '  it  was  a  synod  of 

."^  bishops  and  not  of  clerks;'  which  words,  if  they  be  well  understood,   do  not 

lAQQ  exclude  the  inferiors. 

Of  two  things  the  bishops  complained  :  the  one,  that  they  had  no  liberty  in 


Constantinople  :  and  the  other,  that  the   clergy  subscribed  first :  both  which 
were  evil  examples  ;  wherefore,  if  it  be  denied  that  it  was  a  council,  yet  is  it 
called  a  synod  of  bishops,  and  not  of  clerks.     For  this  does  not  exclude  all  the 
■inferiors,  but  onlj'  such  as  have  taken  Bennet  and  Collet,'  whom  we  also  do 
'exclude,  observing  the  order,  which  the  council  of  Toulouse  commanded  to  be 
appointed;  twelve  men  for  the  examination  of  such  as  should  be  incorporated 
in  the  council.  Moreover,  it  is  not  said  in  that  place,  these  are  the  words  of  the 
council,  but  of  some  of  the  bishops  who  spake  there,  as  Panormitane  and  Ludo- 
vicus  do  here.*     But,  to  make  no  long  digression  from  the  matter,  we  have 
■  most  evident  testimonies  for  the  defence  of  inferiors;    for  the  chief  and  principal 
St.  Au-      Aristotle  amongst  all  the  divines,  St.  Augustine,   upon  the  words  of  Matthew, 
fipon'this  where  Christ  saith  to  Peter,   '  I  will  give  thee  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  hea- 
sentence,  Yen,'  saith,  That  by  those  words  the  judicial  power  was  given  not  only  unto 
'  Tibi  da-  Peter,  but  also  to  the  other  apostles,  and  to  the  whole  church,  the  bishops  and 
regni  coe-  priests.     If,  then,  priests  have  a  judicial  power  in  Ihe  church,  what  should  let 
lorum.'      that  they  have  not  also  a  determining  voice  in  the  councils?     The  famous  doc- 
tor, St.  Jerome,  doth  also  agree  with  St.  Augustine,  whose  words  are  these  upon 
the  Epistle  of  Paul  unto  Titus.    '  Before  difterence  was  made  in  religion  by  the 
instigation  of  the  devil,  or  that  it  was  spoken  amongst  the  people  :    I  hold  of 
Paul,  I  of  Apollos,  and  I  of  Cephas,'  the  churches  were  governed  by  the  com 
mon  consent  and  council  of  the  priests ;  for  a  priest  is  the  very  same  that  a 
Howbi-    bishop  is.'     Wherefore  all  bishops  ought  to  understand,  that  they  are  of  greater 
of^^reater  po^^^"  than  priests  rather  by  custom,   than  by  the  dispensation  of  the  truth  of 
power        God,  and  that  they  ought  to  rule  the  church  together.     Also  the  said  Jerome, 
than         in  his  epistle  unto  Damasus  upon  the  ecclesiastical  degrees,  saith  :  '  The  Lord,  is 
pries  s.      i-epresented  in  the  bishops,  and  the  apostles,  in  the  priests.'     And  this  we  do 
and  ^Iso  gather  out  of  Paul  unto  Titus,  who  niaketh  so  much  concordance  between 

priests  bishops  and  priests,  that  oftentimes  he  calleth  priests,  bishops ;  whereby  it  doth 
rule^t'oee-  evidently  appear,  that  priests  are  not  to  be  excluded  from  the  conventions  of 
ther.  bishops,  and  determinations  of  matters.  Albeit,  as  St.  Jerome  writeth  that 
bishops  are  only  by  custom  preferred  before  priests,  it  may  be  that  a  contrary 
custom  may  take  away  that  custom.  For  if  priests  ought  to  rvde  the  church 
together  with  the  bishops,  it  is  evident  that  it  also  pertaineth  imto  tbem  to 
decide  and  determine  the  doubtfid  matters  of  the  church. 

Wherefore  the  testimony  of  St.  Paul  is  evident ;  for  as  he,  writing  unto  the 
Ephesians,  saith,  '  If  Christ  instituted  his  apostles,  prophets,  pastors,  and 
teachers  to  the  work  of  the  ministry,  for  the  edifying  of  his  church,  until  such 
time  as  we  should  meet  hira,  for  this  purpose,  that  there  should  be  no  doubt  in 
the  diversity  of  doctrine :  who  doubteth  then,  but  that  the  governance  of  the 
church  is  committed  unto  others  together  with  the  apostles  ?  Let  these  our 
champions  now  hold  their  peace,  and  seem  to  be  no  wiser  than  they  ought  to 
be.  The  memorial  of  the  council  of  Constance  is  yet  fresh  in  memoiy,  where 
divers  of  us  were  present,  and  I  myself  also,  who  was  neither  cardinal  nor  bishop, 
but  only  a  doctor ;  where  I  did  see,  without  any  manner  of  doubt  or  difficulty, 
the  inferiors  to  be  admitted  with  the  bishops,  to  the  deciding  of  hard  and 
doubtful  matters.  Neither  ought  we  to  be  ashamed  to  follow  the  example  of 
that  most  sacred  and  great  council,  which  also  followed  the  examples  of  the 
council  of  Pisa,  and  the  great  council  at  Lateran,  wherein  it  is  not  to  be 
doubted,  but  that  the  priests  did  jointly  judge  together  with  the  bishops. 
Abbots  Moreover,  if  abbots,  as  we  do  see  it  observed  in  all  councils,  having  a  deter- 

not  iiisti-  mining  voice,  who,  notwithstanding,  were  not  instituted  by  Christ,  why  should 
Christ!'^    not  priests  have  the  same,  whose  order  Christ  ordained  by  his  apostles  ?    Here- 
upon also,  if  only  bishops  should  have  a  determining  voice,  nothing  should  be 
done  but  what  pleased  the  Italian  nation,  which  alone  doth  equiperate  or  exceed 

(1)  "  Bennet  and  Collet;"  the  orders  of  St.  Benedict  and  St.  Nicholas. — Ed. 


A.  D. 

1431 


THE    BISHOPS    OF    THE    PRIMITIVE    CHUKCH    POOU    MKIn'.  635 

all  other  nations,  or  at  least  is  equal  with  them,  in  number  of  bishops.     And    Henry 
howsoever  it  be,  I  judge  it  in  this  behalf  to  be  a  work  of  God,  that  the  inferiors  _  ^^■ 
should  be  admitted  to  the  determinations ;  for  God  hath  now  revealed  that  ^ 
unto  little  ones,  which  he  hath  hidden  from  the  wise. 

Behold  you  do  see  the  zeal,  constancy,  uprightness,  and  magnanimity  of      . 
these  inferiors.  Where  should  the  council  now  be,  if  only  bishops  and  cardinals    j  ..,o 

should  have   their  voice  ?     Where  should  the  authority  of  the  councils  be ? '- 

"WTiere  should  the  cathohc  faith  be  ?     Where  should  the  decrees  and  reforma-  ^^^^'y  ^ur- 
tion  be  ?     For  all  things  have  now  a  long  time  been  under  the  will  of  Eugene,  ^i^JJa-^"^ 
and  he  had  now  obtained  his  wicked  and  naughty  purpose,  except  these  infe-  tions  in 
riors,  whom  ye  now  contemn,  had  withstood  him.     These  are  they  who  have  "J'^'^^jof 
contemned  the  privation  made  by  Eugene.     These,  I  say,  are  they  who  have    ''^  '"'^ " 
not  regarded  his  threatenings,  spoil  and  persecution.      These  are  they  who, 
being  taken,  imprisoned,  and  tormented,  have  not  feared  to  defend  the  tinith  of 
the  council ;  yea,  even  these  are  they,  who,  albeit  they  were  by  Eugene  de- 
livered over  a  prej^,  yet  would  they  still  continue  in  the  sacred  council,  and 
feared  not  to  suffer  war,  famine,  and  most  cruel  pestilence.*    And,  finally,  what 
thing  is  it,  that  these  men  have  not  willingly  suffered  for  the  right  and  equity 
of  the  council  ?     You  might  have  heard  this  inferior  sort,  even  in  the  midst  of 
their  tribulations,  with  a  loud  voice  cry  out  and  say,   '  Albeit  that  all  men  be- 
come obedient  unto  that  subverter  of  the  church,  Eugene,  and  that  every  man 
do  depart  from  the  verity  of  the  faith  and  constitutions  of  the  fathers,  consenting 
unto  the  commandments  of  Eugene,  yet  we  and  our  brethren  will  be  constant,  o  zeal  of 
and  doubt  not  to  die  for  the  truth  and  traditions  of  the  lioly  fathers ;  which  faith, 
indeed  they  have  done.     Neither  could  they  be  feared  with  threatenings,  or  tije'^'ro,,.^ 
discouraged  or  altered  with  any  spoils,  neither  could  anj-  fear  or  hope  turn  ofmartjT- 
them  from  their  most  blessed  purpose.     And,  to  speak  somewhat  of  mine  own  ^°™- 
order,  whether  any  cardinals  have  done  the  Uke  or  no,  tliat  judge  you. 

As  for  the  bishops,  whom  Panormitane  alone  would  have  to  determine,  you  Eccles. 
see  how  few  of  them  are  on  our  pait;  and  even  those  who  are  here  present,  are  ^'"• 
not  able  by  virtue  to  overcome   iniquity :    they  fear  the  teiTene  power,  and 
commit  offence  with  their  haste.     *Have  ye  not  heard  this  day  the  voices  of 
the  prelates?*  &c.     Have  ye  not  heard  how  they  all  said,  they  would  consent  The  bi 
unto  the  king's  will  and  pleasure  ?     But  these  inferiors  are  they  who  have  had  ^j*"?^  ^^*^ 
truth,  righteousness,  and  God  himself,  before  their  eyes,  and  they  are  greatly  ly  power, 
to  be  commended  for  showing  themselves  such  men  unto  the  church  of  Gcd.  but  no 
But  why  do  I  defend  the  cause  of  these  inferiors,  when  some  will  also  exclude    °  ' 
those  bishops  who  are  but  bishops  by  name  and  title,  and  have  no  possession 
of  the  church,  from  our  company,  not  understanding  that  while  they  go  about 
to  put  back  those  men,  they  do  condemn  Peter  and  the  other  apostles,  who, 
as  it  is  e\-ident,  were  long  without  any  great  flock ;  neither  was  Rome  unto 
Peter,  nor  Jerusalem  unto  James,  at  any  time  wholly  obedient;  for  at  that 
time  no  great  number  of  people,  but  a  small  flock  believed  in  Christ. 

For,  I  pray  you,  what  is  that  we  should  require  of  these  bishops  ?  They  have  The 
no  flock;  but  that  is  not  their  faidt.  They  have  no  revenues ;  but  money  maketh  bishops  of 
not  a  bishop ;  and,  as  the  Lord  saith,  '  Beati  pauperes  spiritu,'  that  is,  '  Blessed  primitive 
are  the  poor  in  spirit.'     Neither  were  there  any  rich  bishops  in  the  primitive  church 
chxurch ;  neither  did  the  ancient  coimcil  reject  Dionysius,  bishop  of  Milan,  Euse-  p„oy  j„gjj_ 
bius,  bishop  of  Vercelli,  or  Hilary,  bishop  of  Pictavia,^  although  they  were  ever 
so  poor,  and  banished  without  a  flock.    But,  if  we  will  grant  the  truth,  the  poor 
are  more  apt  to  give  judgment,  than  the  rich ;  because  riches  bring  fear,  and 
their  poverty  causeth  liberty.     For  the  poor  men  do  not  fear  tyranny  as  our  The 
rich  men  do,  who,  being  given  over  unto  all  kind  of  vanities,  idleness,  and  sloth,  bi»hops 
will  rather  deny  Christ,  than  lack  their  accustomed  pleasures ;  whom  not  tlieir  "^e  "f  the 
flock,  but  their  revenues  make  bishops,  delighting  so  much  in  riches,  that  they  church. 
judge  all  poor  men  unhappy.  Bat,  as  Cicero  saith  '  Nothing  can  happen  better  ^^^^^t  they 
unto  a  wise  man,  than  mediocrity  of  substance.'  Whereupon  it  is  written  in  the 
gospel,  '  It  is  easier  for  a  camel  to  pass  through  a  needle's  eye,  than  for  a  rich 
man  to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven.' 

But  now,  to  return  to  a  more  fidl  declaration  of  Panormitane's  words,  I  deter- 

(!)  Note  the  terrible  persecution  of  those  r'.ays,  and  the  grea*  constancy  of  the  godly,  for  the 
truth's  sake. 
;2)  "  rictaria"  Poitiers.— En. 


636 


THE    COUNCIL    OF    BASIL 


Henry 
VI. 

A.D. 
1431 

to 
1438. 

In  mat- 
ters of 
faith  and 
religion, 
there 
ouglit  to 
be  no 
delays. 


mine  to  pass  over  two  points  which  he  propounded  in  the  beginning  of  his 
oration,  that  is,  'Qui  petant,'  and  'cur  petant;'  that  is,  'Who  make  the  peti- 
tion, and  for  what  cause  they  make  their  petition.'  We  grant  that  they  are  great 
men,  and  men  of  power,  and,  as  he  doth  affirm,  that  they  have  deserved  good 
of  the  church ;  neither  do  I  doubt  but  tliat  they  are  moved  thereunto  with  a 
sincere  affection.  But  whether  it  be  a  small  matter  that  is  required,  or  that  the 
same  effects  would  rise  thereupon  which  he  spake  of,  it  is  now  to  be  inquired. 
'A  delay,'  saith  he,  '  is  required;  a  delay  for  a  few  days  ;  a  small  matter;  a 
matter  of  no  importance ;  a  matter  easy  to  be  granted.'  Notwithstanding,  let 
Panormitane  here  mark  well,  that  he  requireth  a  delay  in  a  matter  of  faith. 
The  verities  are  already  declared  :  they  be  already  discussed  and  determined. 
If  now  there  should  be  but  a  little  delay,  it  would  grow  to  a  long  delay  ;  for 
oftentimes  the  delay  of  one  moment,  is  the  loss  of  a  whole  year :  hereof  we  have 
many  examples.  Hannibal,  when  he  had  obtained  his  victory  at  Cannae,  if  he 
had  gone  straight  unto  Rome,  by  all  men's  judgments  he  had  taken  the  city. 
But  forasmuch  as  he  did  defer  it  until  the  next  day,  the  Romans  having  reco- 
vered their  force  again,  he  was  shut  out,  and  deserved  to  hear  this  opprobry  : 

'  Vincere  scis  Hanibal,  uti  victoria  nescis.' 


The 
eighth 
year  of 
the  coun- 
cil of 
Basil. 
How 


tliey 

sought 

delays. 


'  Hannibal !  thou  knowest  victory  to  get, 
But  how  to  use  it,  thou  know'st  not  yet.' 

Likewise  the  Frenchmen,  after  they  had  taken  Rome  and  besieged  the  Capitol, 
while  they  greedily  sought  to  have  great  sums  of  money,  and  delayed,  the  time 
in  making  of  their  truce,  Camillus,  coming  upon  them,  did  most  shamefully  drive 
them  out  again.  But  what  need  I  to  rehearse  old  stories,  when  our  own  exam- 
ples are  sufficient  for  us  ?  Ye  know  yourselves,  how  often  these  delays  have 
been  hurtful  unto  you,  and  how  often  the  delay  of  a  few  days  hath  grown  to  a 
long  tract  of  time.  For  now  this  is  the  eighth  year  that  you  have  spent  in 
delays ;  and  you  have  seen,  that  always,  of  one  delay,  another  hath  sprung  and 
risen.  Wherefore,  I  do  require  that  Panormitane  should  consider,  that  the  con- 
clusion being  this  day  disturbed,  we  know  not  whether  it  will  be  brought  to  pass 
hereafter  again  or  no ;  many  impediments  or  lets  may  arise  and  spring.  Neither 
subTilely  ^o\\\  Panormitane  say,  that  this  delay  being  obtained,  he  would  afterwards  con- 
sent with  his  fellows  unto  the  conclusions, — for  he  denieth  that  he  hath  any 
commandment  thereunto ;  and  (which  is  more  to  be  considered)  he  saith  that 
the  ambassadors,  at  their  return  from  Mentz,  may  bring  such  news,  whereby 
these  conclusions  may  be  omitted :  as  though  any  thing  were  more  excellent 
than  the  truth. 

This  thing  doth  manifestly  declare,  that  they  do  not  seek  delays  for  the  better 
examination  of  the  matter,  but  to  impugn  the  conclusions  the  more  strongly. 
Neither  do  I  agree  with  Panormitane,  as  touching  the  effects  which,  he  said, 
should  arise  either  of  the  denial,  or  granting  of  the  requests ;  for  I  see  no  cause 
why  the  princes  should  greatly  require  any  delay.  There  are  no  letters  of  any  prince 
come  unto  us  touching  such  request,  neither  is  there  any  man  lately  come  from 
them,  neither  is  it  greatly  material  unto  them,  but  that  the  matters  of  faith 
should  be  determined.  But  this  is  a  most  pernicious  conclusion  which  Panor- 
mitane hath  made,  and  not  to  be  looked  for  at  the  hands  of  those  most  godly 
princes ;  where  he  saith,  if  we  do  please  them,  they  will  take  our  part.  If,  con- 
trariwise, they  will  decline  unto  Eugene,  and  wholly  resist  and  rebel  against  us. 
This  is  a  marvellous  word,  and  a  wonderful  conclusion,  altogether  unworthy 
to  be  spoken  of  such  a  man.  The  decrees  of  the  council  of  Constance  are,  that 
all  manner  of  men,  of  what  state  or  condition  soever  they  be,  are  bound  to  the 
ordinances  and  decrees  of  the  general  councils.  But.Panormitane's  words  do 
not  tend  to  that  effect,  for  he  would  not  have  the  princes  obedient  unto  the  coun- 
cil, but  the  council  to  be  obedient  unto  the  princes. 

Alas  !  most  reverend  fathers,  alas!  what  times  and  days,  what  manners  and 
conditions  are  these !  i  Into  what  misery  are  we  now  brought !  How  shall  we 
at  any  time  bring  to  pass,  that  the  pope,  being  Christ's  vicai-,  and  (as  they  say) 
another  Christ  on  earth,  should  be  subject  unto  the  council  of  the  Christians,  if 
the  council  itself  ought  to  obey  worldly  princes  ?     But  I  pray  you  look  for  no 

(I)  If  these  things  seem  so  untolerable,  what  shall  we  say,  when  they  make  the  pope  a  Goil. 


Decrees 
of  the 
council  of 
Con- 
stance. 


A  CHRISTIAN  EXHORTATION  TO  CONSTANCY  AND  MARTYRDOM.  G37 

sucli  things  at  the  princes'  hands.     Do  not  believe  that  they  will  forsake  their    7/^,^ 
mother  the  church.  Do  not  think  them  so  far  alienated  from  the  truth,  that  they      /A  ^ 
would  have  justice  suppressed.  

The  conclusions  whereupon  the  controversy  is,  are  most  true,  most  hoi)',  most    \^'. 
allowable.     If  the  princes  do  refuse  them,  they  do  not  resist  against  us,  but 
against  the  holy  Scriptures,  yea,  and  against  Christ  himself;  which  conclusions       *^ 
you  ought  neither  to  believe,  neither  was  it  comely  for  Panormitane  so  to  say.  * 

Panormitane  !  (by  your  license  be  It  spoken)  you  have  uttered  most  cmel  words, 
neither  do  you  seem  to  go  about  any  other  matter  than  to  inculcate  terror  and 
fear  into  the  minds  of  the  fathers;  for  you  have  rehearsed  great  perils  and  dan- 
gers, except  we  submit  om-selves  unto  the  princes. 

But  you,  most  reverend  fathers !    shall  not  be  afraid  of  them  that  kill  the  body 
(the  soul  they  cannot  kill),  neither  sliall  ye  forsake  the  truth,  although  you 
should  shed  your  blood  for  the  same.'     Neither  ought  we  to  be  any  wliit  more 
slack  in  the  quarrel  of  our  mother  church,  and  the  catholic  fiiith,  than  tliose 
most  holy  martyrs,  who  have  established  the  church  with  their  blood.  For  why 
should  it  be  any  grievous  matter  unto  us  to  suffer  for  Christ,  who,  for  our  sakes, 
hath  suffered  such  cruel  and  grievous  death  ?  who,  when  lie  was  an  immortal 
God,  void  of  all  passions,  took  upon  him  the  shape  of  a  mortal  man,  and  feared 
not,  for  our  redemption,  to  suffer  torments  upon  the  cross.     Set  before  your  A  cliris- 
eyes,  Peter  the  prince  of  the  apostles,  also  Paul,  Andrew,  James,  and  Bartholo-  f ''"]  '',^" 
mew,  and  (not  to  speak  only  of  bishops)  mark  what  Stephen,  Laurence,  Sebas-  to  con- 
tian,  and  Fabian  did.  Some  were  hanged,  some  beheaded,  some  stoned  to  death,  stancy 
others  burned,  and  others,  tormented  with  most  cruel  and  grievous  torments,  fyrJi^."^' 
suffered  for  Christ's  sake."''    I  pray  you,  for  God's  sake,  let  us  follow  the  example 
of  these  men.    If  we  will  be  bishops  and  succeed  in  honour,  let  us  not  fear 
martyrdom.      Alas !    what    effeminate  hearts    have  we ;  alas !    what  a    faint 
hearted  people  are  we.     They,  in  times  past,  by  the  contemjit  of  death,  con- 
verted the  whole  world,  which  was  full  of  Gentility  and  idolatry  ;  and  we,  through 
our  sluggishness  and  desire  of  life,  do  bx-ing  the  christian  religion  out  of  the 
whole  world  into  one  corner ;  and  I  fear  gi-eatly,  lest  the  little  also  which  is  left 
we  shall  lose,  through  our  cowardliness,  if,  by  following  Panormitane's  mind,  we 
do  commit  the  whole  governance  and  defence  of  the  church  unto  the  princes. 
But  now  play  the  stout  and  valiant  men  in  this  time  of  tribulation,  and  fear  not 
to  suffer  death  for  the  church,  which  Curtius  feared  not  to  do  for  tlie  city  of  Rome ; 
which  Mencotheus  for  Thebes,  and  Codrus  for  Athens,  willingly  took  upon  them. 

Not  only  the  martjTs,  but  also  the  Gentiles  might  move  and  stir  us  to  cast  off  Exp.m 
all  the  fear  of  the  death.    What  is  to  be  said  of  'Theremeus  the  Athenian  ?  with  i''-^*  "'^ 
how  joyful  heart  and  mind,  and  pleasant  countenance,  did  he  drink  the  poison  ?  dying  for 
What  say  you  unto  Socrates,  that  most  excellent  philosopher?     Did  he  either  t'"^''' 
weep  or  sigh,  when  he  supped  up  the  poison  ?     They  hoped  for  that  which  we  '"'^" 
are  most  certain  of:  not  by  dying  to  die,  but  to  change  this  present  life  for  a 
better.    Truly  we  ought  to  be  ashamed,  being  admonished  by  so  manj'  examples, 
instructed  with  so  great  learning,  yea  and  redeemed  with  the  precious  blood  of 
Christ,  so  greatly  to  fear  death. 

Cato  writeth  not  of  one  or  two  men,  but  of  whole  legions,  which  have  cheer- 
fully and  courageously  gone  unto  those  places  from  whence  they  knew  they 
should  not  return.  Witli  like  courage  did  the  Lacedemonians  give  tliemselves  to 
death  at  Thermopylae,  of  whom  Symonides  writeth  thus : 

•  Die  hospes,  Spartanos  te  hie  vidisse  jacentes, 
Dum  Sanctis  patriae  legibus  obsequimiu-.' 

'  Report  thou,  stranger !  the  Spartans  here  to  lie. 
Whiles  that  their  country's  laws  they  obeyed  wDlingly.' 

Neither  judge  the  contrary,  but  that  the  Lacedemonians  went  even  of  purpose  The  noble 
unto  death ;  unto  whom  their  captain  Leonidas  said,  '  O  ye  Lacedemonians !  Lacedi- 
go  forward  courageously,  for  this  day  we  shall  sup  together  with  the  infcnial 
gods.'     But  I,  most  reverend  fathers !  do  not  invite  you  unto  the  infemals,  as 

(1)  They  who  teach  this  doctrine,  are  heretics  and  schismatics:  but  blessed  are  those  heretics, 
for  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 

(2)  This  came  so  to  pass  twenty-three  years  after,  when  Christendoai  lost  Constantinople  and  all 
the  East  parts,  unto  the  Turks. 


638 


THE    COUNCIL    OF    BASIL. 


Henry 
VI. 

A.D. 
1431 

to 
1438. 

The 
blessed 
state  of 
the  life 
to  come. 
The 
worthy 
answer 
of  Theo- 
dorus. 


No  death 
to  be 
feared  for 
Christ's 
church. 


Kxample 
of  mari- 
ners and 
hunters. 


Example 
of  the 
eleven 
thousand 
virgins. 


he  did  his  Lacedemonians,  but  unto  the  celestial  and  everlasting  joys  of  paradise, 
if  that  you  can  suffer  death  for  the  truth's  sake,  and  patiently  abide  the  threaten- 
ings  of  these  princes,  if  there  be  any  threatenings  at  all.  1  call  you  unto  that 
eternal  glory,  where  there  is  no  alteration  of  state,  nothing  decayeth  or  fadeth ; 
where  all  good  things  do  perpetually  abound ;  where  no  man  wanteth,  no  man 
envieth  another,  no  man  stealeth  from  another,  no  man  violently  taketh  from 
another,  no  man  banisheth,  no  man  murdereth ;  and,  finally,  no  man  dieth. 
Where  all  men  are  blessed  and  happy,  all  are  of  one  mind  and  one  accord,  all 
are  immortal,  all  are  of  like  estate ;  and  what  all  men  have,  every  man  hath, 
and  what  every  man  hath,  all  men  have.  Which  things  if  we  well  consider, 
we  shall  truly  answer  Panormitane,  as  Theodorus  Cyrenensis  is  said  to  have 
answered  Lysimachus  the  king,  when  he  threatened  to  hang  him,  who  said :  '  I 
pray  you  threaten  these  horrible  things  unto  your  courtiers ;  as  for  Theodorus, 
it  maketh  no  matter  whether  he  rot  above  the  ground,  or  under  the  ground.' 
So  likewise  let  us  answer  unto  the  princes,  if  there  be  any  that  do  threaten  us, 
and  let  us  not  fear  their  torments. 

What  doth  a  longer  life  prevail  to  help  us  ?  No  man  hath  lived  too  short  a 
time,  who  hath  obtained  the  perfect  gift  of  virtue.  And,  if  the  death  which 
a  man  suffereth  in  the  quarrel  of  his  country,  seemeth  not  only  to  be  glorious 
amongst  the  rhetoricians,  but  also  happy  and  blessed ;  what  shall  we  say  for 
these  deaths  which  are  sustained  for  the  country  of  all  countries,  the  church  ? 
Truly,  most  reverend  fathers !  it  is  too  much  that  our  adversaries  do  persuade 
themselves  of  you,  for  they  judge  you  fearful,  sluggish,  and  faint-hearted  ;  and, 
therefore,  they  do  object  princes  unto  you,  because  they  think  that  you  will  not 
suffer  hunger,  thirst,  exile,  in  the  quarrel  and  defence  of  the  church.  But  I 
think  you  will  esteem  it  no  hard  matter,  for  the  obtaining  of  everlasting  life,  to 
do  the  same  which  ship-men  do  for  the  obtaining  of  transitory  riches :  to  put 
themselves  in  danger  of  the  sea  and  wind,  and  suffer  most  cruel  storms.  The 
hunters  lie  abroad  in  the  nights  in  the  snow,  in  the  hills  and  woods,  and  are 
tormented  with  cold ;  yet  have  they  none  other  reward,  but  some  wild  beast  of 
no  value  or  price.  I  pray  you  what  ought  you  then  to  do,  whose  reward  shall 
be  paradise?  I  am  ashamed  of  your  ignavy,  when  I  read  that  women,  yea 
even  young  maidens,  have  violently  obtained  heaven  through  their  martyrdom, 
and  we  are  made  afraid  only  with  the  name  of  death.  This  river  Rhine,  which 
runneth  along  by  the  city,  in  times  past  hath  carried  eleven  thousand  virgins 
unto  martyrdom.'  In  India,  as  Cicero  writeth,  when  any  man  was  dead,  his 
wives  (for  there  they  had  many  wives)  came  into  contention  who  should  be 
burned  with  him ;  and  she  whom  he  loved  best,  having  vanquished  the  others 
(all  the  rest  joyfully  following  her),  v/as  cast  into  the  fire  with  the  dead  carcase 
of  her  husband,  and  burnt.  The  others,  who  were  overcome,  departed  full  of 
heaviness  and  sorrow,  wishing  rather  to  have  died  than  live. 

The  which  courage  we  now  taking  upon  us  for  Christ's  sake,  will  answer 
Panormitane  even  as  the  Lacedemonians  answered  Philip,  who,  when  by  his 
letters  he  threatened  them  that  he  would  stop  all  that  which  they  went  about, 
they  asked  him,  whether  he  would  also  let  them  die !  Therefore,  as  you  are 
excellent  men,  so  use  your  virtue,  which  is  always  fi-ee,  and  remaineth  always 
invincible.  For  you  do  know  that  power  is  given  of  the  Lord,  and  strength 
from  the  Most  High ;  who  will  take  account  of  your  works,  and  examine  your 
thoughts  ;  unto  whom  ye  should  be  carefid  to  render  a  good  account,  judging 
rightly,  and  keeping  the  law  of  righteousness,  and  in  all  things  walking  accord- 
ing to  the  will  of  God,  and  not  according  to  the  will  of  men. 

And  whereas  the  ambassadors  of  Eugene  do  openly  preach  and  declare  a  new 
doctrine,  extolling  the  bishop  of  Rome  above  the  universal  church :  to  the  end 
that  ignorant  souls  be  not  snared,  ye  shall  not  cease  or  leave  to  publish  the  three 
first  conclusions ;  following  the  example  of  the  apostle  Paul,  who  would  in  no 
point  give  place  unto  Peter,  when  he  walked  not  according  to  the  gospel.  As 
for  the  other  matters  which  do  only  respect  the  person  of  Eugene  (because 
Panormitane  and  the  other  ambassadors  of  the  princes  shall  not  say  that  we  do 
pass  our  bounds),  ye  shall  defer  them  for  this  present 

When  cardinal  Arelatensis  had  made  an  end  of  this  oration,  *there'' 
was  a  great  noise,  crying  out  and  brawling  every  where ;  some  praised 

(1)  See  note,  vol.  iii,  p.  209.— Ed.  (2)  Edition  15C3,  p.  308.— Ed. 


GEEAT    UPROARS    AMOXGST    THE    FATHERS.  639 

nis  memory,  some  his  doctrine ;  others  saying,  that  he  alone  did  most    tiennj 
■worthily  rule  and  govern,  who  knew  how  to  confute  objections,  and,      ^^' 
as  it  became  a  president,  bare  himself  without  all  blame  or  reproach.    A.  D. 
But  the  Castilians,  when  they  saw  that  all  delay  was  denied  them,    ^'''^•'• 
with   great   noise  and    cry,    they   letted   the  concordances   of  the   ,^30 

twelve  men,  going  about  with  all  their  endeavour  that  the  protesta- '— 

tion  which  Panormitane  had  made,  should  go  before  the  reading  of  the 
concordances. 

This  matter  was  not  done  without  violence,*  for  the  president's 
commandments  were  not  regarded,  neither  was  the  accustomed  order 
observed  ;   for  sometimes  they  spake  unto  Panormitane,  sometimes 
unto  Ludovicus ;  no  man  was  suffered  to  speak,  but  in  haste  the 
bishops  brawled  with  bishops,  and  the  inferiors  with  their  fellows. 
All  was  full  of  contention  and  debate,  which  when  Ludovicus,  the  Lexns, 
patriarch  of  Aquileia,   perceived   (a  man  of  no  less  courage  and  of  Aqut'^ 
stomach,  than  of  nobility  and  birth,  being  also  a  duke),  for  the  zeal  of'^gpj.'^^ 
that  he  bare  unto  the  universal  church,  turning  himself  unto  Panor-  in  swe- 
mitane  and  Ludovicus,  the  prothonotary,  he  said,  "  Do  not  think  the  ^^^' 
matter  shall  so  pass  ;  you  know  not  yet  the  manners  of  the  Germans; 
for  if  you  go  forward  on  this  fashion,  it  will  not  be  lawfid  for  you  to 
depart  out  of  this  country  with  whole  heads.""     With  which  words 
Panormitane,  Ludovicus,  and  the  archbishop  of  Milan,  being  stricken, 
as  it  were,  with  lightning  from  heaven,  rose  up,  and  said,  "  Is  our 
liberty  thus  taken  from  us  ?     What  meaneth  it  that  the  patriarch 
doth  threaten  us,  that  our  heads  should  be  broken  ?""     And,  turning  The  eari 
themselves  unto  John,  earl  of  Diernstein,  who  then  supplied  the  pro-  stein"" 
tector''s  place,  they  demanded  of  him,  whether  he  would  defend  the 
council,  and  preserve  all  men  in  their  liberty,  or  no  ? 

The  citizens,  also,  and  senators,  were  present  to  provide  and  foresee  The 
that  no  offence  should  rise ;  for  the  citizens  observed  always  this  \-he%t 
order,  that  they  would  be  present  in  all  affairs  which  they  supposed  g  "/jj"* 
would  breed  dissension ;  foreseeing  specially,  that  no  tmnults  shoidd 
rise,  otherwise  than  with  words.  They  used  always  such  a  marvellous 
foresight  and  providence,  that  no  man  unto  this  day  could  have  any 
cause  against  them,  to  complain  for  their  violating  their  promise. 
Wherefore,  if  at  any  time  any  citizens  have  deserved  well  at  the 
hands  of  the  church,  surely  this  praise  is  to  be  given  unto  the  Basi- 
lians.  These  men,  together  with  John,  earl  of  Diernstein,  being 
present  in  the  assembly  of  the  fathers,  gave  a  sign  of  preservation  of 
their  liberty.  The  earl  (albeit  he  Avas  moved  at  the  strangeness  of 
the  matter,  for  he  would  not  have  thought  so  great  contentions  could 
have  risen  amongst  wise  men),  answered  by  his  interpreter.  That 
they  all  should  be  of  good  cheer,  for  the  emperor's  safe  conduct 
should  be  observed  and  kept  even  to  the  uttermost ;  neither  should 
the  patriarch,  nor  any  other,  be  so  hardy  as  once  violate  the  liberty, 
or  take  away  the  assurance,  granted  by  the  emperor.  Notwithstand- 
ing, he  desired  the  patriarch  that  he  would  call  back  his  words  again, 
and  not  to  speak  any  more  in  such  sort.  But  that  famous  father, 
*in  all  his  affairs  and  business  declaring  the  nobility  of  his  stock,* 
being  nothing  at  all  moved  or  troubled,  committed  his  whole  mind 
to  be  declared  unto  John  Bacheistein,  auditor  of  the  chamber,  a  man 
both  grave  and  eloquent,  whose  assistance  the  council  had  used  in 


640  THE    COUNCIL    OF    HASH,. 

Nevry    divcrs  aiTfibassades ;  who  affimied  tliat  the  patriarch's  mind  was  not  tc» 
^^'     threaten  any  man,  or  disturb  the  liberty  of  the  council,  but  to  move 


-^•^-    the  fathers  unto  constancy,  that  they  should  be  mindful  of  the  reforma- 

f        tion  which  they  had  promised  unto  the  whole  world,  and  not  to  say 

1438     one  thin"-  to-day,  and  another  to-moiTow  ;  for,  if  they  would  so  do, 

it  were  to  be  feared,  lest  the  laity,  seeing  themselves  deluded,  and 

despairing  of  refonnation,  should  rise  against  the  clergy. 

Therefore  he  admonisheth  the  fathers  to  foresee  and  provide  for  the 
peril,  that  they  should  not  depart  from  the  council,  nothing  being 
determined  or  done  ;  and,  finally,  he  desired  pardon,  if  in  his  words 
he  had  offended  either  against  the  council,  Panormitane,  or  any  other 
man.  Whereby  he  declared  it  to  be  true  which  is  commonly  said, 
Humility  "  That  Humility  is  the  sister  of  Nobility  :""  both  which  did  very 
noMity.  excellently  appear  in  this  man.  Yet,  for  all  this,  could  not  the 
humility  of  the  patriarch  stop  or  stay  their  noise  or  cries ;  for,  as  often 
as  mention  was  made  of  reading  the  ^  Concordatmii,'  great  noise  and 
rumours  were  still  made  to  stop  the  same. 

Then  Amedeus,  archbishop  of  Lyons,  and  primate  of  all  France, 
a  man  of  great  reverence  and  authority,  being  touched  with  zeal  for 
the  faith,  which  he  saw  there  to  be  stopped  and  suppressed,  said : 

The  Oration  of  Amedeus,  Archbishop  of  Lyons. 

Most  reverend  fathers  !   1  have  now  a  great  occasion  to  speak,  for  it  is  now 
seven  years  or  more  that  I  have  been  amongst  you,  yet  have  I  never  seen  the 
matter  at  that  point  which  it  is  now  at,  most  hke  unto  a  miracle ;  for  even  pre- 
sently I  do  behold  most  wonderful  signs  of  miracles :  for  it  is  no  small  matter 
that  the  lame  do  walk,  the  dumb  do  speak,  and  that  poor  men  preach  the  gospel. 
Bishops     Whereupon,  I  pray  you,  cometh  this  sudden  change?    how  happeneth  it  that 
home^'^  ^'  those  who  lie  lurking  at  home,  are  now  suddenly  started  up  ?  who  hath  given 
have  '        hearing  to  the  deaf,  and  speech  to  the  dumb  ?  who  hath  taught  the  poor  man 
tongues     |.Q  pi-each  the  gospel?     I  do  see  here  a  new  sort  of  prelates  come  in,  who,  unto 
fo/the       this  present,  have  kept  silence,  and  now  begin   to  speak.     Is  not  this  like  a 
pope.         miracle  ?     I  would  to  God  they  came  to  defend  the  truth,  and  not  to  impugn 
justice. 

But  this  is  more  to  be  mai-velled  at  than  any  miracle,  that  I  do  see  the  best 

learned  men  of  all,  impugn  our  conclusions,  which  are  most  certain  and  true ; 

and  they  who  now  reprove  them,  in  times  past  allowed  them..     You  are  not 

ignorant  how  that  Ludovicus,   the  prothonotary,   preached  these   verities  at 

Louvaine  and  at  Cologne,  and  brought  them  from  thence,  confirmed  with  the 

authorities  of  the  universities.*     Wherefore,  albeit  he  be  now  changed,  yet  is 

Constancy  the  truth  in  no  point  altered.     And,  therefore,  I  desire  you  and  beseech  you 

lacked  in    jj]]^  j|,jj|^  yg  ^yju  j^qj  gj^.g  g^r  unto  these  men,  who,  albeit  they  are  most  excel- 

this^coun-  lently  learned,  yet  have  they  no  constancy  in  them,  which  doth  adorn  all 

cil.  other  virtues. 

When  he  had  ended  his  oration,  Ludovicus,  the  prothonotary, 
rising  up,  said,  "It  is  most  true  that  I  brought  those  verities ; 
but  you  do  call  them  verities  of  faith,  which  addition  seemeth  very 
doubtful  unto  me."  When  he  had  spoken  these  words,  cardinal 
Arelatensis  required  that  the  Concordatum  of  the  twelve  men  should 
be  read,  and  many  whispered  him  in  the  ear,  that  he  should  go  for- 
ward, and  not  alter  his  purpose. 

Then  Panonnitane,  as  soon  as  the  Concordatum  began  to  be  read, 
rising  up  with  his  companions  and  other  Arragons,  cried  out  with  a 

(1)  ^ra^k  how  they  are  turned  back  who  sometime  favoured  the  trcth,  and  are  now  become 
liars  and  llalterers. 


GREAT    UPROAR    AMONGST    THE    FATHERS.  641 

loud  voice,  saying,  "  You  fathers  do  contemn  our  requests,  you  con-    Hc,ny 
temn  kings  and  princes,  and  despise  prelates  ;  but  take  heed  lest,      ^''- 
while  ye  despise  all  men,  you  be  not  despised  of  all  men.   You  would    A.  I), 
conclude,  but  it  is  not  your  part  to  conclude.     We  are  the  greatest    ^'^'•^^ 
part  of  prelates,  we  make  the  council,  and  it  is  our  part  to  conclude ;    ,|" 
and  I,  in  the  name  of  all  other  prelates  do  conclude,  that  it  is  to  be  — ^^ 
deferred  and  delayed."     With  this  word  there  si)rang  such  a  noise  urTesS^ 
and  rumour  in  the  council,  as  is  accustomed  to  be  in  battle,  with  the  !,*^''i^  ''""" 
sound  of  trumpets,  and  noise  of  horsemen  when  two  armies  join ;  ""^  ' 
some  cursing  that  which  Panormitane  went  about,  others  allowing  the 
same  ;  so  that  diversity  of  minds  made  divers  contentions. 

Then  Nicholas  Amici,  a  divine  of  Paris,  according  unto  his  office,  Nicholas 
said,  "  Panormitane !    I  appeal  from  this  your  conclusion,  to  the  aiw.'hff 
judgment  of  the  council  here  present ;  neither  do  I  affirm  any  thing  f^'*-  • 
to  be  ratified  which  you  have  done ;  as  I  am  ready  to  prove,  if  it  shaB 
seem  good." 

The  adverse  party  seemed  now  to  be  in  the  better  place,  for  they 
had  already  concluded.  The  other  party  had  neither  concluded, 
neither  was  it  seen  how  they  could  conclude  amongst  so  great  cries 
and  uproars.  Notwithstanding,  amongst  all  this  troublous  noise, 
•Tohn  Sego\'ius,  a  singular  divine  of  the  university  of  Salamanca, 
lacked  not  audience,  for  the  whole  council  was  desirous  to  hear  him  ; 
wherefore  all  men,  as  soon  as  he  rose  up,  kept  silence,  and  he,  per- 
ceiving that  they  were  desirous  to  hear  him  speak,  began  in  this  sort : 

The  Oration  of  Segovius. 

Most  reverend  fathers  !  the  zeal  and  love  of  the  house  of  God  forceth  me 
now  to  speak :  and  I  would  to  God  that  I  had  heen  either  blind  this  day,  not 
to  have  seen  those  things  which  have  happened,  or  that  I  had  been  deaf,  that 
I  should  not  have  heard  those  words  which  have  been  spoken.  Who  is  it  that 
is  so  stony  or  hardhearted,  who  can  abstain  from  tears,  when  the  authority  of 
the  church  is  so  spoiled,  liberty  taken  away  both  from  us  and  the  council,  and 
that  there  is  no  place  given  unto  the  verity  1  O  sweet  Jesu  !  why  hast  thou 
so  forsaken  thy  spouse  ?  Behold  and  look  upon  thy  people,  and  help  us,  if  our 
requests  are  just ! 

We  come  hither  to  provide  for  the  necessity  of  the  church ;  we  require  nothing 
for  ourselves,  and  our  desire  is  only  that  truth  might  appear.     We  trusted  now 
to  have  concluded  upon  the  verities,  which  were  sometimes  allowed  in  tlie 
sacred  deputations.     The  orators  of  the  princes  are  present,  and  require  the 
conclusions  to  be  deferred ;    but  we  be  not  unmindAil  of  those  things  wliich 
Ambrose  wrote  unto  Valentinian  the  emperor,  in  this  manner  :  '  If  we  shall  treat  Ambrci 
upon  the  order  of  the  holy  Scripture  and  ancient  times  past,  who  is  it  that  will  ^^  Valco 
deny  but  that  in  case  of  faith  (I  say,  in  case  of  faith),  the  bishops  ought  to  „uni. 
judge  upon  christian  emperors,  and  not  emperors  upon  hishops  ?  neither  do  we  How  far 
admit  their  petition  but  upon  most  urgent  causes  :  notwithstanding,  we  heard  bishops 
them  patiently  and  willingly,  while  they  did  speak,  even  so  long  as  tliey  would.'  "ulgecm- 
But  now,  if  any  on  our  part  would  speak,  by-and-by  he  is  interrupted,  troubled,  pcrors.  • 
and  letted.     What  honesty  is  this  ?  what  modesty  or  gravity  ?     Is  it  lawful  so 
to  do  in  the  council  ?     What  has  now  become  of  the  decree  of  the  council  of 
Toidouse  ?     Where  are  our  decrees,  which  do  not  only  prohibit  tumults,  but 
also  small  babblings  and  talk  ?     They  say,  it  is  because  we  contemn  them ;  but 
they  are  they,  who  not  only  contemn  the  council,  but  also  resist  the  same.    Tlie  He  excu- 
patriarch  spake  but  one  small  word  against  them,  and  that  of  no  evil  intent  or  p^^j^^i, 
purpose,  and  by-and-by  they  complained  that  their  liberty  was  broken  :    but 
they,  when  they  do  enforce  the  council,  when  they  forbid  the  president  to  speak, 
and  will  not  suffer  the  ordinances  to  be  read,  do  not  judge  that  they  do  any 
thin"^  contrary  to  the  liberty  of  the  coimcil.     They  say,  they  are  the  council 
themselves,  and  yet  they  entreat  the  council.     These  things  do  not  I  undcr- 

VOL.  III.  T  T 


G42  THE    COUNCIL    OF    BASIL. 

He^i'y    stand ;  for  if  they  be  the  council,  why  do  they  entreat  themselves?     If  they  be 

^^-      not  the  council,  why  do  they  not  suffer  the  council  to  speak  ?     Why  do  they 

.    y.      not  look  for  an  answer  of  him  to  whom  they  make  their  petitions  1 

.  ^„,'         Truly  this  is  too  much  violence,  and,  certes,  our  patience  is  also  too  much,  to 

suffer  such  excess  even  in  the  face  of  the  church.     *We '  are  they,  from  whom 

,  .qq     the  liberty  is  taken;  but  they  say,  that  the  inferiors  ought  not  to  judge  any 

'    thing,  and  that  we  ought  not  to  entreat  any  matter  with  the  least  part  of 

bishops,  albeit  we  be  the  greatest  part  of  the  council.     The  which,  if  it  were 

He  show-  true,  many  of  your  own  decrees  should  be  of  no  force,  and  specially  that  which 

•^''^  ^^^     ye  have  promulgated,  as  touching  provincial  and  episcopal  synods,  which,  albeit 

inents  of  it  did  not  please  the  prelates,  the  cardinal  of  St.  Angelo,  then  president  (associ- 

the  ad-     ated  scarcely  with  five  bishops  and  the  most  part  of  the  inferiors),  did  conclude, 

byTheir^  albeit  that  many  bishops  were  against  him  :  which  decree  notwithstanding,  you 

own  con-  do  account  of  great  force  and  strength ;  the  like  also  hath  happened  almost  in 

fession.     ^j]  decrees,  which  do  bridle  the  ambition  of  the  bishops. 

Moreover,  ye  have  for  example,  that  at  the  coming  of  Alexander,  abbot  of 
Vergilia,  who  was  the  first  that   came   to  this   place,  the  council   beginning 
when  there  was  no  bishop  as  yet  come,  as  Eugene  doth  confess :  wherefore 
that  which  these  men  say,  is  to  no  other  purpose,  but  only  utterlj'  to  subvert 
the  council.      But  that  is  sufficiently  answered  by  the  cardinal  Arelatensis. 
Moveth     Notwithstanding  this  one  thing  I  woiild  desire  to  obtain  at  the  bishops'  hands ; 
shopsby    *'^^*  ^^  ^^^y  wo'^Id  have  us  grant  that  they  succeed  the  apostles  and  have  the 
the  ex-      keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  that  they  would  also  grant  that  which  is  spoken 
ample  of  {jy  \}^q  apostle  :  That  Christ,  when  he  ascended  into  heaven,  did  institute  other 
apostles,  prophets,  evangelists,  pastors,  and  teachers,  to  the  ministry  and  edifi- 
cation of  his  church.  And,  as  the  bishops  do  succeed  the  apostles,  so  the  divines 
do  succeed  the  doctors,  and  the  priests,  the  pastors ;  and  all  others  in  their 
degrees :  and  that  our  Saviour  would  have  his  church  governed  jointly  by  them 
all.     Wherefore,  it  seemeth  vain,  that  which  these  men  speak,  as  touching  the 
excluding  of  the  inferiors.*     But  this  doth  most  of  all  grieve  me,  and  this  do  I 
most  marvel  at,  that  Panormitane,  a  man  of  singular  wit  and  doctrine,  did  con- 
clude without  any  discussing  or  deciding  of  the  deputies,  and  without  the  exa- 
mination of  the  twelve  men,  and  any  writ  or  order ;  which,  except  mine  eyes 
had  beheld  and  seen,  I  would  scarcely  believe,  if  any  other  man  should  report 
it  unto  me  of  him.     Neither  do  I  yet  know  whether  I  may  sufficiently  credit 
myself,  the  matter  seemeth  so  horrible ;  for  I  do  not  see  by  what  authority  his 
conclusion  doth  stand,  except  it  be  by  the   authority  of  his   king,   who,  he 
saith,  '  wiU  have  it  so.'     But  you,  most  reverend  fathers !  take  heed  that  ye 
bring  in  no  such  custom ;  for  so  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  in  all  matters,  a  few 
froward  prelates  shall  have  one  to  conclude  for  them.2     *For  *  it  is  more  dan- 
gerous than  the  pernicious  decree  which  ye  were  wont  to  call  '  Parvum,'  for 
that  the  legates  of  the  apostolic  see,  and  their  other  accomplices,  did  propound 
in  the  deputations,  having  a  certain  number  of  voices,  to  know  who  were  with 
them,  and  who  would  be  against  them.     But  this  is  done  in  confusion,  which, 
if  it  pass  impunished,  it  will  raise  up  greater  offence  than  that  did  ;  and  it  shall 
come  to  pass  that,  in  all  matters,  a  few  fioward  prelates  shall  have  one,  to  con- 
clude for  them.     Ye  know,  moreover,  that  it  is  only  the  president's  part  to 
conclude ;  and  that,  but  in  one  case  only,  the  conclusion  cometh  successively 
unto  another  :  that  is,  when  those  who  are  presidents,  will  not  conclude  according 
to  the  will  of  three  or  four  deputies,  or  the  concordance  of  twelve  men,  which, 
whether  it  have  now  happened,  you  yourselves  do  see,  and  Panormitane  himself, 
who  hath  made  the  conclusion,  doth  best  know.* 

And,  albeit  Panormitane  hath  proved  (as  he  thinketh)  by  strong  reasons,  that 
the  verity  ought  to  be  deferred,  yet,  notwithstanding,  1  do  require  you,  most  reve- 
Paul  rend  fathers !  to  follow  the  example  of  the  apostle,  who,  as  Arelatensis  hath  very 
would  well  declared,  would  not  give  one  hour's  respite  unto  Peter,  when  he  swerved 
fer  no^re-  ^^"""^  *^^^  ^"^^^^  ^^  *^*^  gospel.  The  faith  is  speedily  to  be  relieved  and  holpen  ; 
spite  neither  doth  any  thing  sustain  more  danger  by  delays,  than  faith  doth.  For  all 
^^f^  ^t  heresies,  except  they  be  rooted  out  at  the  first,  when  they  are  once  grown,  are 
hardly  taken  away.     Wherefore,  I  desire  you  speedily  to  help  and  aid  :   hoist 


awry. 


(1)  Edition  1503,  p.  310,  col.  2.— Ed. 

(2)  He  meaneth  Panormitane  ;  who  did  conclude  wittiout  the  examination  of  twelve  men. 

(3)  Edition  1563,  p.  SU,  ;ol.  1.— Ku. 


AN    EXHORTATION    TO    CONSTANCY.  643 

up  your  sails,  and  launch  out  your  oars.  Why  should  we  tarry  looking  for  eitlier    iienry 
the  prelates  or  the  princes  ?    *Therel  is  no  other  power  or  authority  to  be  souo-ht      ^^^ 
for,  where  the  Divme  Majesty  is  present.     They  of  Eugene's  sect,  preach  here-  ~ 

sies  in  every  place  :  yet  is  there  no  man  who  sayeth  imto  them,  that  they  should    V^lZ.' 
stay  or  leave  off.     But  against  you,  who  do  intend  to  publish  and  set  forth  the      * 
truth,  a  thousand  do  murmur  that  you  should  hold  your  peace ;  which  is  a  great      ^?q 
sign  and  token  of  your  sincerity.  ^'*'^"^' 

It  is  reported,  that  in  time  past  Benedict,  a  holy  monk,  did  visit  the  monas-  The  Ea- 
tery of  certain  holy  men,  and  did  see  there  an  infinite  nimiber  of  devils  contend-  ^relch* 
lag  with  the  holy  fathers,  and  striving  to  perturb  their  good  work.     By-and-by  heresies 
he  saw  one  devil  alone,  all  sad  and  heavy,  going  unto  a  fair,  where  were  a  great  ^''hout 
many  people  buying  and  selUng  ;  whereat  Benedict,  greatly  marvelling  that  the  '^'" 
holy  place,  appointed  for  prayer,  shoidd  be  so  full  of  devils,  and  the  place  that 
v/as  occupied  only  with  sm  and  perjury  should  be  kept  but  Avith  one  devil,  ad- 
jured him  to  tell  him  the  cause  thereof:  The  devil  answered,  that  the  holy  place 
needed  more  the  assaults  of  devils,  than  that  place  where  men  sinned  of  their 
own  wills  ;  for  there,  there  was  no  great  need  of  devihsh  deceit. 

The  hke  thereof  seemeth  unto  me  to  be  happened  unto  the  Eugenians.*  You  Anaxhor- 
are  now  in  conflict ;  I  only  desire  that  you  would  hasten  imto  the  victory.  *''''''" '° 
Regard  not  the  threatenings  of  those  princes,  neither  the  opprobries  of  those  ^y"^*^"' 
contumeHous  persons:  For  you  are  blessed,  saith  the  Lord,  when  men  curse  you 
and  persecute  you,  speaking  all  evil  against  you,  making  lies  and  slanders  upon 
you  for  my  sake ;  rejoice  and  be  glad,  for  great  is  your  reward  in  heaven.  AVhat 
is  it,  I  pray  you,  that  the  princes  do  so  much  object  against  us?  Is  not  our 
liord  God  able  to  take  us  out  of  the  furnace  of  hot  burning  fire,  and  deliver  us 
out  of  the  hands  of  those  princes  ?  I  beseech  you,  most  reverend  fathers  and 
loving  brethren !  have  no  less  hope  in  Jesus  Christ,  than  Shadi-ach,  Meshach, 
and  Abednego  had,  who  feared  not  that  old  king  Nabuchadnezzar;  and  let  the 
princes  know.  That  the  most  highest  nileth  over  the  kingdoms  of  men,  and 
giveth  them  imto  whom  he  pleaseth.2  God  beholdeth  all  things  from  above. 
He  is,  I  say,  in  the  midst  amongst  us. — Wherefore  are  ye  then  afraid  ?  Be  of 
good  courage,  and  show  yourselves  as  a  strong  wall  for  the  chm-ch  of  God. 
Suffer  not  the  faith  to  perish  under  yom*  hands.  The  Almighty  God  is  present 
with  you.  He  is  present  that  will  defend  you.  Fear  not  those  who  seek  only 
to  kill  the  body.  Do  justice  and  equity,  and  be  assured  that  he  will  not  deliver 
you  over  into  the  hands  of  the  backbiter  and  slanderer.  Agiiin  I  say  unto  you, 
show  yourselves  valiant  and  stout ;  defend  your  mother  the  church !  And  unto 
thee,  O  thou  president !  I  say,  that  thou  oughtest  rather  to  please  God  than 
man ;  for  if  thou  depart  thence  without  a  final  conclusion,  know  assuredly  that 
thou  shalt  render  account  in  the  strait  judgment  of  God. 

And  thus,  without  any  more  words,  he  sat  down  in  his  place.  In  the 
mean  time  many  grave  and  ancient  men  had  exhorted  Panormitane 
that  he  should  give  over  his  conchision.     The  bishop  of  Bergen  was  The 
very  instant  and  earnest  with  him,  that  he  should  make  unity  and  BergTn'' 
concord  amongst  the  fathers,  and  went  about  to  make  a  unity  with  all  po^corli 
men.     But  neither  the  fathers  of  the  council  were  determined  to  de- 
part without  a  conclusion ;  neither  was  Panormitane  minded  to  alter 
his  intent  and  purpose. 

*  The  ^  archbishop  of  Lyons  having  gotten  opportunity  to  be  heard,  The  arch- 
said  that  Panormitane''s  conclusion  was  of  no  force,  neither  needed  Ly,ws" 
anv  revocation,  because  it  was  of  no  force ;  notwithstanding  he  thought  o"''""- 
a  delay  would  be  profitable,  if  peradventure  that,  as  the  bishop  of 
Bergen  had  said,  a  concord  might  be  treated  upon  by  the  fathers. 
His  oration  was  not  very  acceptable  to  Panormitane^s  companions, 
who,  as  soon  as  they  heard  their  conclusion  to  be  nothing  regarded, 
they  contrariwise  affirmed,  that  it  was  of  force,  and  that  they  made 

(1)  Edition  1563,  p.  311,  cols.  1  and  2.— Ed. 

(2)  Mark  the  great  constancy  and  christian  zeal  of  V.v.?  mr.ii. 

(3)  Edition  I5G3,  p.  312.— Ed. 

T  t2 


644  THK    COUNCIL    OF    BASIL. 

Henry    the  councll :    whereupoii   there  was   so   great  noise  and  cry,  that 
^^'     nothing  coukl  be  heard  that  was  read.     On  that  day  there  was  great 


A.  D.  terror  and  fear  upon  all  good  men,  lest  the  adversaries  should  prevail, 
^^•^^  more  than  the  council.  The  matter  seemed  to  be  in  great  danger, 
-.400  lest  their  adversaries,  persevering  in  their  obstinacy,  would  prolong 
*-•  their  talk  until  night;  which  thing  alone,  they  seemed  to  go  about. 


Good  men 


feMed"**"  that,  thereby,  they  might  have  the  victory  that  day  :  but  God  did  help 

worid''^    his  church,  and  would  not  suffer  that  Eugene  should  more  prevail  in 

would      the  council  than  the  council  itself.*  All  things  Avere  disturbed,  neither 

befor^e      did  the  prclatcs  sit  in  their  seats,  as  they  were  accustomed,  but  as  every 

Christ,     ujan's  affection  led  him.     Some  went  to  the  cardinal  Arelatensis, 

some  unto  Panormitane,  andexhorted  them  as  if  they  had  been  princes 

or  rulers  of  armies.    *  Now  ^  it  drew  toward  night,  and  the  bishop  of 

Lausanne,  a  wise  and  circumspect  man,  and  Nicholas  Grossetanus, 

rising  out  of  then*  places,  foreseeing  rather  into  the  council,  than  unto 

themselves,  went  unto  the  cardinal  Arelatensis,  threatening  him,  if  he 

would  rise  without  a  final  conclusion.     Also  Francis  de  Fuxe,  and 

Andreas  Hispanus,  divines,  were  always  whispering  in  the  cars  of  the 

cardinal,  and  would  suffer  him  to  take  no  pause ;  also  Laurentius 

Rocella  was  importunate  upon  him,  saying,  "  Why  stoppest  thou,  now, 

president  ?  where  is  thy  mind  ?  where  are  thy  policies  ?  what  fearest 

thou  ?  why  dreamest  thou  ?""  *     But  he,  knowing  the  matter  to  be  in 

danger,  and  that  there  was  no  ready  way  to  make  a  conclusion,  thought 

How  men  to  usc  somc  policy  to  appcasc  the  tumult.   "Most  reverend  fathers!" 

t'ohear^  Said  he,  "we  have  now  received  letters  out  of  France,  which  declare 

news.      unto  mc  marvcllous  things  ;  that  there  are  incredible  news  sprung  up 

there,  which,  if  you  will  give  me  willing  audience,  I  will  declare  unto 

The  godly  you.""     By  this  mcaus  there  was  a  sudden  silence  throughout  the 

the  car'di-  '^hole  council,  and  by  this  marvellous  policy  he  made  all  men  atten- 

nai.         tive  to  hear.     When  he  saw  he  had  free  liberty  to  speak,  without 

either  fable  or  history  of  any  letters  sent,  he  opened  the  whole  order 

of  the  matter,  and,  as  it  is  requisite  in  an  orator,  came,  by  little  and 

little,  to  the  principal  point,  saying.  That  Eugene"'s  messengers  filled 

all  France,  preaching  a  new  doctrine,  and  extolling  the  authority  of 

the  bishop  of  Rome  above  the  general  council ;  against  whom,  except 

speedy  remedy  were  found,  it  would  come  to  pass  that  many  would 

give  credit  unto  them :  and,  therefore,  the   sacred  council  ought  of 

necessity  to  provide  remedy,  and  of  necessity  to  conclude  upon  the 

verities  which  were  examined,  that  thereby  the  temerity  of  the  Euge- 

nians  might  be  repressed ;  which  verities,  albeit  they  were  eight  in 

number,  yet  was  it  not  the  fathers'  intent  to  conclude  upon  them  all, 

but  only  the  three  first :  "  even  as  I  also,"  saith  he,  "  here  do  conclude, 

in  the  name  of  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost." 

When  he  had  finished  his  oration,  with  a  cheerful  and  merry  coun- 
tenance rising  up,  he  departed.     Some  of  them  kissed  him,  and  some 
of  them  kissed  the  skirts  of  his  garments.     A  great  number  followed 
him,  and  greatly  commended  his  wisdom,  that  being  a  Frenchman  born, 
Ghos"°'^  ^^  ^'^^^  t^^t  day  vanquished  the  Italians,  who  were  men  of  great  policy. 
r^ain^t^    Howbeit  this  was  all  men's  opinion,  that  it  was  done  rather  by  the 
tho  pope,  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  than  by  the  cardinal's  own  power.    The 

(1)  Editionises,  p.  312.— Ed.  . 


SORROW  OF  PANORMITANE  FOR  IMPUGNING  THE  TRUTH.        645 

others  of  the  contrary  faction,  as  men  bereft  of  their  minds,  hanging    Jfmry 
down  their  heads,  departed  every  man  to  his  lodging.    They  went  not         ' 
together,  neither  saluted  one  another,  so  that  their  countenances  de-    A.D. 
clared  unto  every  man  that  they  were  overcome.  Something  more  also    ^^"^^ 
is  reported  of  Panormitane,  that  when  he  came  to  his  lodging,  and  was    j^gg 
gone  unto  his  chamber,  he  complained  with  himself  upon  his  king,  — — '-- 
"who  had  compelled  him  to  strive  against  the  truth,  and  put  him  in  row  of 
danger  of  losing  both  his  soul  and  good  name  ;   and  that  in  the  midst  famj^f™ 
of  his  tears  and  complaints  he  fell  asleep,  and  did  eat  no  meat  until  ''"puen- 

1  •        1  •  n  (1         1         1       1       1         •  1  •  1        "^^^  tiuth. 

late  m  the  evenmg,  tor  very  sorrow  lor  that  he  had  neither  ignorantly, 
neither  unwillingly,  impugned  the  truth. 

After  this  there  was  great  consultation  amongst  the  Eugenians,  what  The 
were  best  to  be  done  in  this  matter.  *  The '  same  day  the  cardinal  of  Lyonr'' 
Terragona  returned,  a  man  of  excellent  wisdom  and  learning,  who,  at  '"^'^^  ^"" 
the  time  the  Armenians  did  come,  sequestered  himself  to  two  diets,  The  car- 
and,  forasmuch  as  he  could  not  be  present  at  the  general  congregation,  x"rra-°^ 
the  Castilians  and  Lombards  went  suddenly  unto  him,  devising  and  gon^- 
counselling  many  things  with  him.*     Some  thought  good  to  depart 
and  leave  the  council,  others  thought  it  meeter  to  tarry,  and  withal 
endeavour  to  resist  that  nothing  should  further  be  done  against  the 
Eugenians  :  and  this  opinion  remained  amongst  them. 

The  next  day,  being  Saturday,  the  fifteenth  day  of  April,  the  arch- 
bishop of  Lyons  and  the  bishop  of  Bergen,  calling  together  the  pre- 
lates in  the  chapter-house  of  the  great  church,  began  many  things  as 
touching  peace.     The  bishop  of  Bergen  persuaded,  that  there  should 
be  deputations  appointed  that  day,  unto  whom  the  archbishop  of  Lyons 
should  give  power  to  make  an  agreement.     Unto  whom  answer  was  Just  an- 
made,  as  they  thought  very  roughly,  but  as  others  judged,  gently,  but  thJ^coun. 
notwithstanding  justly  and  truly  ;  for  they  said.  There  could  be  no  <=■'• 
unity  of  concord  made  before  the  adversaries  confessed  their  fault, 
and  asked  pardon  there-for. 

On  the  day  following,  the  said  bishop  of  Bergen,^  with  the  other 
Lombards  and  Castilians,  went  unto  the  Germans,  and  from  thence 
unto  the  senate  of  the  city,  speaking  much  as  touching  the  prohibiting 
of  schisms.  The  Germans,  as  I  did  afterwards  understand,  refei-red 
themselves  to  those  things  which  the  deputation  should  determine. 
The  senate  of  the  city  (as  they  were  men  of  great  Avisdom,  who  would  Answer 
do  nothing  -without  diligent  advice  and  dehberation)  answered :  That  senate. 
the  matter  pertained  not  unto  them,  but  unto  the  council,  the  fathers 
whereof  were  most  wise  men,  and  were  not  ignorant  what  pertained 
unto  the  christian  faith ;  and  if  there  were  any  danger  to  ward  against, 
it  should  be  declared  unto  the  council,  and  not  to  the  senate.  For 
they  believe  that  the  elders  of  the  council,  if  they  were  premonished, 
would  foresee  that  there  should  no  huit  happen  :  as  for  the  senate  of 
the  city,  it  was  only  their  duty  to  defend  the  flithers,  and  to  preserve 
the  promise  of  the  city.— With  this  answer  the  bishop  of  Bergen  de- 
parted. 

In  the  mean  time  the  fathers  of  the  council  had  drawn  out  a  form  F.>nT.^of 
of  a  decree  upon  the  former  conclusions,  and  had  approved  the  same  cree  ap- 
in  the  sacred'deputations  ;  only  the  deputation  of  the  commons  thought  p™''"  • 
the  decree  to  be  more  amplified.     By  this  time  the  princes'  orators 

(1)  Edition  1563,  p.  3.12.-Ed.  '2)  "  Bergen,"  Durgos.-ED. 


046  '!'i:e  council  of  basil. 

Henry  wcie  returned  from  the  assembly  at  Mentz,  and  holding  a  council 
^^'  amongst  themselves,  they  had  determined  to  hinder  the  decree.  On 
A.D.  the  ninth  day  of  May,  there  was  a  general  convocation  holden,  where- 
1431  unto  all  men  resorted,  either  party  putting  forth  itself  unto  the 
j^*°g    conflict. 

'—      The  princes'  ambassadors  were  called  by  the  bishop  of  Lubeck,  and 

Conrade  de  Winsperge,  the  protector,  into  the  choir,  and  there  kept ; 
where  they  treated  of  a  unity,  and  by  what  means  it  might  be  had. 
And  there  they  tarried  longer  than  some  thought  to  do  ;  which  matter 
gave  occasion  to  bring  things  well  to  pass,  beyond  all  expectation,  for 
the  only  form  of  the  decree  was  appointed  to  be  concluded  that  day. 
Policy  of  Whereupon,  as  soon  as  cardinal  Arelatensis  perceived  the  congrega- 
the  car-    ^Jqjj  ^,0  bc  full,  and  that  the  twelve  men  had  agreed,  and  that  there 
Areiaten-  was  a  great  expectation  with  silence,  he  thought  good  not  to  delay  it 
"^'         for  fear  of  tumult ;  but  commanded  by-and-by  the  public  concor- 
dances to  be  read,  wherein  this  was  also  contained,  that  the  cardinal 
Arelatensis  might  appoint  a  session  whensoever  he  would.     Which 
being  read,  he,  being  desired  by  the  promoters,  concluded  according 
as  the  manner  and  custom  is.    The  ambassadors  of  the  princes,  being 
yet  in  the  choir,  as  soon  as  they  understood  how  the  matter  passed, 
being  very  much  troubled  and  vexed,  brake  off  their  talk,  imputing 
all  things  to  the  bishop  of  Lubeck,  who  of  purpose  had  kept  them  in 
the  choir,  and  had  protracted  the  time.     Whereupon  they,  entering 
into  the  congregation,  filled  the  church  full  of  complaints. 

First  of  all,  the  orator  of  Lubeck  complained  both  in  his  own 
name  and  the  name  of  the  protector,  as  touching  the  conclusion,  and 
required  that  the  council  would  revoke  the  same.  If  that  might  be 
granted,  he  promised  to  entreat  a  peace,  and  to  be  a  protector  between 
The  the  council  and  the  ambassadors  of  the  princes.  But  the  archbishop 
Turuon°^  of  Tumou  Said,  That  it  seemed  unto  him,  that  every  man  should  have 
free  liberty  to  speak  against  that  law  which  should  be  promulgated, 
until  the  session,  when  the  canons  should  be  consecrated  and  receive 
their  force ;  when  the  bishops,  in  their  pontificalibus,  after  the 
reading  of  the  decree  in  the  session,  should  answer  that  it  pleased 
them :  otherwise,  the  demand  which  was  made  by  the  promoters 
in  the  session,  was  but  vain.  And,  for  that  the  conclusions  were 
not  yet  allowed  in  the  session,  therefore,  he  said,  that  he  might, 
without  rebuke,  speak  somewhat  as  touching  the  same ;  and  that  it 
was  a  great  and  hard  matter,  and  not  to  be  knit  up  in  such  a  short 
time,  and  that  he  had  the  knowledge  thereof  but  even  now ;.  notwith- 
standing that  he,  being  an  archbishop,  ought  to  have  known  the 
matter,  that  at  his  retm-n  home,  he  might  inform  the  king,  and  also 
instruct  those  who  were  under  him.  And  that  he  and  his  fellows, 
before  any  session  should  be,  would  both  hear  and  be  heard  of  others. 
Neither  doth  it  seem  good  unto  him,  that  the  session  should  be 
holden,  before  report  were  made  of  those  things  which  the  ambassa- 
dors of  the  princes  had  done  at  Mentz,  which  would  peradventure 
be  such  as  might  alter  and  change  the  minds  of  the  fathers.  Then 
The  the  bishop  of  Concen,^  ambassador  of  the  king  of  Castile,  who  was 
concTn?^  ^^^  lately  returned  from  Mentz,  a  man  of  great  understanding,  but 
lacking   utterance,   grievously   complained    that   the  prelates    were 

(1)  "Concen,"  Cuenya  in  New  Castilt  — Ed. 


CONDUCT    OF    THE    POPES    FRIENDS    THEREIN.  647 

contemned.  "  Neither  had  it  been,"  said  he,  "  any  great  matter  if  they    iienry 
had  been  tarried  for,  who,  not  without  great  danger  and  expenses,      ^^' 


went  to  Mentz,  not  for  their  pleasure,  but  of  necessity."  And  after-  A.D. 
wards,  as  it  were  smiling,  he  said:  "  How  mad  am  I,  that  would  ^'^^^ 
have  the  prelates  to  be  tarried  for  until  they  return  from  Mentz,    ^^^^ 

when  they  are  not  tarried  for,  while  they  can  come  out  of  the  choir - 

of  the  church  !  Do  therefore  as  ye  list.  If  there  rise  any  offence 
or  mischief  hereupon,  neither  are  we,  the  ambassadors  of  Castile,  to 
be  blamed,  neither  can  any  man,  of  right,  impute  any  thing  to  our 
most  noble  king." 

Here  were  it  long  to  repeat,  with  what  rebukes  and  taunts  they  Mark 
inveighed  against  the  cardinal  Arelatensis;  but  especially  the  bishop  truth  *'^^ 
of  Milan  railed  most  cruelly  upon  him,  saying,  That  he  fostered  and  '"",^' 
maintained  a  rabble  of  sophisters  and  schoolmasters,'  and  that  he  had 
concluded  in  matters  of  faith  with  them ;  calling  him  also  another 
Cataline,  unto  whom  all  desperate  and  naughty  persons  had  refuge : 
that  he  was  their  prince,  and  ruled  the  church  with  them  ;  and  that 
he  would  not  give  ear  unto  the  ambassadors  of  the   most  noble 
princes,  or  to  the  most  famous  prelates  in  this  most  weighty  matter. 
— Albiganensis,  a  bishop,  and  a  man  of  great  nobility,  descended  of 
tlie  emperor's  blood,  albeit  he  had  never  alienated  his  mind  before 
from  the  council,  yet,  lest  he  should  seem  to  dissent  from  the  other 
ambassadors  of  the  princes,  he  made  the  like  complaint  touching  the 
contempt  of  the  prelates.     After  this  it  came  unto  Panormitane  to  The  fa- 
speak,  who,  as  he  had  a  greater  vehemency  in  speaking,  so  also  he  [{jfc"*^ 


COUIl- 


did  declare  a  more  angry  stomach  and  mind ;  for,  in  the  beginning  ^"^^'^'^ 
of  his  oration,  he  seemeth  not  to  go  about  according  to  the  precept  Panormi- 
of  orators,  to  get  the  good  will  of  the  hearers,  but  rather  their  hatred.  ^^' 
For  he  said,  "  Our  Saviour  showed  four  signs  in  the  gospel,  whereby  Four 
we  should  know  the  good  from  the  reprobate,  for,  '  He  which  is  of  k,f"w  the 
God,'  saith  he,  '  heareth  the  words  of  God ;  but  ye  hear  not  the  l^^^^]"" 
words  of  God,  because  ye  are  not  of  God.'     And  again,  '  He  that 
doth  evil  hateth  the  light ;'  and,  in  another  place  also,  '  By  their 
fruits  ye  shall  know  them;'  and  'A  good  tree  cannot  bring  forth 
evil  fruit.'     All  which  sayings  he  wrested  against  the  fathers  of  the 
council,  because  they  would  not  hear  the  words  of  God,  that  is  to 
say,  the  words  of  peace,  which  the  ambassadors  had  spoken ;  because 
they  fled  from  the  light  in  the  absence  of  the  ambassadors,  privily 
concluding ;  and  because,  in  their  deputation,  they  had  not  holden 
and  kept  the  holy  day,  but  had  concluded  thereupon  \;  also  because 
they  had  the  upper  hand  in  the  aforesaid  conclusion,  not  by  reason, 
but  by  deceit. 

As  touching  the  fruits,  he  said.  That  the  fathers  themselves  should 
meditate  and  consider  how  that,  if  their  fruits  were  not  good,  they 
also  themselves  were  not  good ;  and  that  he  did  see  another  council 
at  hand,  where  he  feared  lest  these  conclusions  should  be  revoked,  as 
the  fruit  of  an  evil  tree.     And,  therefore,  they  ought  not  so  sud-  wi.Ht  w 
denly  to  proceed  in  so  weighty  matters ;  and  that  he  would  be  yet  anii)iti..ii 
more  fully  heard  before  the  session,  as  well  in  his  own  name,  because  ^^j'/ ""' 
he  was  an  archbishop,  as  in  the  name  of  his  prince,  who  reigned  not 

(1)  O  marvellous  despite  and  contumely  in  a  bishop!  for  if  Arelatensis  had  kept  concubines,  he 
vuulii  have  praised  liim  :  but  to  maintain  learned  men  was  a  great  offence. 


to 
1439. 


C48  THE    COUNCIL    OF    BASIL. 

Henry    ovci'  onc   kingdom  alone,   but  over  many.     Also  he  said,  That  he, 
^^'     lieretofoie,  by  his  words,   deeds,  and  writino^s,  had  extolled  the  au- 
A.  D.    thority  of  the  council ;   and  that  he  feared,  lest,  by  these  means,  the 
^"^^^    authority  thereof  should  be  subverted.'     At  last,  he  required  pardon 
if  he  had  offended  the  fathers  of  the  council,  forasmuch  as  very 
sorrow  and  grief  forced  him  to  speak  so. 
Abbot  of       Then  the  abbot  of  Vergilia  would  have  made  answer  to  those 
'^'°'  '^'   things  which  Panormitane  had  touched,  concerning  his  deputation  ; 
but  Aretalensis  thought  good  that  all  the  contrary  part  should  speak 
Ludovi-    first,  among  whom,   last  of  all,   Ludovicus,  the   j^rothonotary,   the 
^rotiiono-  Homer  of  lawyers,  rose  up.     And  albeit  that  he  sjMike  unwillingly, 
tary.ia-    yet  whcu  he  had  begun,  he  could  not  refrain  his  words.     And  while 
to  seem    he  Went  about  to  seem  learned  and  eloquent,  he  utterly  forgot  to  be 
forgot't'o  good.     He  said.  That  the  council  ought  to  take  heed,  not  to  entreat 
be  good.    j,f  j^j^y  matter  of  faith  against  the  will  of  the  prelates,  lest  any  offence 
should  follow ;  for  that  some  would  say,  it  Avere  a  matter  of  no  force 
The  apo-  or  cffect.     For,  albeit  that  Christ  chose  twelve  apostles  and  seventy 
prind-     disciples,  notwithstanding,  in  the  setting  forth  of  the  Creed,  only  the 
fhered^^  apostles  were  present,  thereby,  as  it  were,  giving  example  that  the 
the  Creed,  matters  of  faith  did  pertain  only  imto  the  apostles,  and  so  conse- 
quently unto  bishops.     Neither  that  they  ought  hastily  to  proceed 
in  matters  of  faith,  which  ought  to  be  clearly  distinct,  forasmuch  as 
Peter  affirmeth  the  trial  of  faith  to  be  much  more  precious  than  gold, 
which  is  tried  by  the  fire  :  and,   if  the  bishops  be  contemned,  who 
are  called  the  pillars  and  keys  of  heaven,  the  faith  cannot  seem  to  be 
well  proved  or  examined.      But  at  length  he   confessed  that  the 
inferiors  might  determine  with  the  bishops,  but  denied  that  the  least 
part  of  the  bishops  Avith  the  most  part  of  the  inferiors  might  deter- 
mine any  thing.     From  thence  passing  to  the  matter,  of  faith,   he 
said.  That  those  verities  whereupon  question  was  then  had,  were 
articles  of  faith,  if  they  were  verities  of  faith.     And,  forasmuch  as 
every  man  should  be  bound  to  believe  those,  therefore  he  would  be 
better  instructed  and  taught  in  that  matter  which  he  should  believe 
as  an  article  of  faith  ;    neither  would  it  be  comely  for  the  council  to 
deny  him  his  request,  which,  according  to  the  rule  of  the  apostle, 
ought  to  be  ready  to  give  account  unto  every  man  who  shall  require 
it,  touching  the  faith  which  it  holdeth. 
Oration        After   cvcry  man  had  made  an  end  of  speaking,   the   cardinal 
oard^nai    Arclatensis,  calling  his  spirits  together,  made  an  oration,  wherein  he 
Areiateu-  answcrcd  uow  tlic  oue,  and  now  the  other.     And,  first  of  all,  he 

SIS  to  the  _         '  ,  .  1  fY"        1 

imperial   commendcd  the  desires  of  the  imperial  ambassadors,  who  offered  to 

dors. *"     treat  of  a  peace  and  unity;  but  neither  necessity,  nor  honesty,  he 

said,  would  suffer  those  things  which  were  concluded  to  be  revoked. 

To  the      He  answered  also.  That  the  petition  of  the  ambassadors  of  France  is 

iiOT-sof *   most  just,  in  that  they  required  to  be  instructed  touching  the  faith ; 

France.    ^-^^  ^^^  ^^  council  would  grant  their  request,  and  send  unto  them 

certain  divines,  who  should  instruct  them  at  home  at  their  lodgings. 

But  the  matter  was  already  concluded,  and  could  no  more  be  brought 

into  question ;  that  the  session  was  only  holden,  rather  to  beautify 

the  matter,  than  to  confirm  the  same.     And,  as  touching  that  which 

(1)  Look  if  it  be  not  spokeu  of  them  in  the  gospel,  where  mention  is  made  of  the  beast  which  ia 
fallen  into  the  ditch. 


THE    ARTICLES    OF    THE    APOriTLEs'    CREED.  (JiO 

the  bishop  of  Concen  so  greatly  complanieth  of,  he  doth  not  murli    ii'<«<i 
marvel ;  for  he  coukl  not  know  the  process  of  the  matter,  when  he      '^^' 
was  absent,  who,  being  better  instructed,  he  supposed  woukl  speak 
no  more  any  such  words,  forasmuch  as  a  just  man  would  require  no 
unjust  thing.    Also,  that  his  protestation  had  no  evil  sense  or  mean- 
ing, in  that  he  would  not  have  it  imputed  either  unto  him,  or  unto 
his  king,  if  any  otFence  should  rise  upon  the  conclusions.     Notwith-  wshopor 
standing,  it  is  not  to  be  feared,  that  any  evil  should  spring  of  good  ^°'^<^™- 
works.     But,  unto  the  bishop  of  Milan,  he  would  answer  nothing, 
because  he  saw  him  so  moved  and  troubled,  for  fear  of  multiplying 
more  grievous  and  heinous  words.     As  for  Panormitane  he  reserved 
him  unto  the  last ;  but  unto  Ludovicus  the  prothonotary,  who  desired  To  r.udo- 
to  be  instructed,  he  said.  He  willed  him  to  be  satisfied  with  the  words  ^"^"'*' 
which  were  spoken  unto  the  bishop  of  Turnon. 

Notwithstanding,  he  left  not  this  untouched  which  Ludovicus  had 
spoken,  concerning  the  Apostles' Creed.  "For,  albeit  that  in  the  setting 
forth  of  the  Creed  the  apostles  be  only  named,  yet  it  doth  not  follow," 
saith  he,  "  that  they  only  were  present  at  the  setting  forth  thereof: 
for  it  happeneth  oftentimes,  that  princes  are  commended  and  praised 
as  chief  authors  and  doers  of  things,  when,    notwithstanding,  they 
have  other  helpers ;  as  it  appeareth  in  battles,  which  although  they 
are  fought  with  the  force  of  all  the  soldiers,  yet  the  'victory  thereof 
is  imputed  but  unto  a  few.     As  in  these  our  days  they  do  ascribe  all 
things  which  the  army  doth  either  fortunately  or  wisely,  unto  Nicho-  Niciioias 
las  Picenius,  that  most  valiant  captain,  who  hath  obtained  so  many  aii'^iu"^' 
famous  victories  ;  albeit  that  oftentimes  others  have  been  the  inventors  ^'^"• 
of  the  policy,  and  workers  of  the  feat.     And,  therefore,  Ludovicus  Articles 
ought  to  know  and  understand,  that  they  are  not  only  articles  of  faith  ciee'tn.t 
which  are  contained  in  the  Creed,  but  all  other  determinations  made  |^'J  p'^'J  '" 
by  the  councils  as  touching  the  faith.     Neither  is  he  ignorant,  that  apo^ties. 
there  be  some  articles  of  the  Creed  which  we  now  use  in  the  church, 
that  were  not  put  to  by  the  apostles,  but,  afterwards  by  general  councils; 
as  that  part,  wherein  mention  is  made  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  the  Article 
council  of  Lyons  did  add ;  in  which  council,  also,  it  is  not  to  be  Holy"' 
doubted,  but'  that  the  inferiors  did  judge  together  with  the  bishops."  i^"by';,\'f 
But,  forasmuch  as  he  had   sufficiently  declared  that  matter  in  the  council  of 
congregation   before  passed,    he  would   stay   no   longer  thereupon.    ^'""'' 
But   coming  unto  Panormitane,  he  rehearsed  his  words,  "Qui  ex 
Deo  est,  verba  Dei  audit ;"     "  He  that  is  of  God,  heareth  God's  Panonni- 
word ;"  "  which  is  very  well  taken  out  of  the  gospel,  but  not  well  ap-  wdumied 
plied  unto  the  council,"  said  he  ;  for  he  firmly  believed,  that  his  ^^i^^V^*^^ 
predecessors  have  judged  the  Holy  Ghost  to  be  in  the  midst  of  the 
councils ;  and,  therefore,  the  words  of  the  councils  to  be  the  words 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  if  any  man  do  reject,  he  denieth  himself  to 
be  of  God."     Neither  doth  the  council  hate  the  light,  which  doth  all 
things  publicly  and  openly,  whose  congregations  are  evident  unto  all 
men;  neither  doth  it,  as  the  conventicles  of  the  adversaries,  admit  some, 
and  exclude  others.      Moreover,  the  thing  which  is  now  in  hand  was 
begun  to  be  treated  of  two  months  ago ;  and,  first,  the  conclusions 
were  largely  disputed  upon  in  the  divinity  schools,  and,  afterwards, 
sent  unto  Mentz,  and  other  places  of  the  woild. 

"  After  all  this  the  fathers  were  called  into  the  chapter-house  of  the 


650  THE    COUNCIL   OF    BASIL, 


Henry   grcat  cliurcli,  to  tlic  number  of  a  hundred  and  twenty ;  amongst 

^^'      whom  Panormitane,  who  now  complaineth,  was  also  present,  and, 

A.  D.    according  to  his  manner,  did  learnedly  and  subtilely  dispute,  and  had 

l'*31     liberty  to  speak  what  he  would.      LikeAvise  again  in  the  disputations, 

*"      every  man  spake  his  mind  freely,  and  in  the  disputation  where  Panor- 

^  mitane  was,  the  matter  was  three  days  discussed.     After  this  the 

twelve  men  did  agree  upon  it,  and  the  general  congregation  did  con- 
clude it :    neither  hath  there  been,    at   any  time,  any  thing  more 
ripely  or  exactly  handled  ;  both  openly,  and  also  without  any  fraud  or 
deceit.     And  whereas  the  deputation  did  sit  upon  a  holy  day,  there 
is  no  hurt  in  that ;  neither  is  it  any  new  or  strange  thing,  forasmuch 
as  they  have  often  holden  their  sessions  upon  festival  days,  when  the 
matter  hath  had  haste,  forasmuch  as  the  matter  of  faith  hath  no  holy 
Areiaten-  days."     And  further  he  said,  That  he  did  not  conclude  craftily  and 
eluded      deceitfu'lj-  in  the  congregation  aforesaid,  as   Panormitane  had  re- 
""the  re   poftcd,  but  publicly  and  openly,  at  the  request  of  the  promoters  : 
quest  of    neither  hath  any  man  any  just  cause  to  complain  of  him,  forasmuch 
moters"    as  whcu  he  was  made  president,  he  was  sworn  that  always,  when  three 
or  four  of  the  deputations  did  agree,  he  should  conclude  thereupon.* 
And,  forasmuch  as  he  had  already  concluded,  in  divers  causes,  touch- 
ing the  pope,  he  saw  no  cause  why  he   should  not  conclude   in   the 
matter  of  faith ;  for  that  he  was  a  cardinal,  and  did  wear  his  red  hat 
for  this  purpose,  that  he  should  shed  his  blood  in  the  defence  of  the 
faith.2     Neither  had  he  done  any  thing  now  against  the  pope,  for 
that  omitting  the  five  conclusions  touching  Eugene,  he  had  concluded 
but  only  the  general  conclusions ;   which  except  he  had  done,  the 
fathers  should  have  had  just  cause  to  complaint  against  him  (in  that 
they,  trusting  in  his  fidelity  and  faithfulness,  had  chosen  him  presi- 
dent), if  by  him  they  should  now  be  forsaken  in  this  most  necessary 
He  cause  of  faith.     And,  turning  himself  unto  the  people,  he  desired 

trthe^'^  the  fathers  to  be  of  good  comfort,  forasmuch  as  he  would  never  for- 
^'■^"i*^.  sake  them,  yea,  although  he  should  suffer  death  ;  for  he  had  given  his 
faith  and  fidelity  unto  the  council,  which  he  would  observe  and  keep; 
neither  should  any  man's  flattery  or  threatenings  put  him  from  his 
purpose  :  that  he  would  be  always  ready  to  do  whatsoever  the  coun- 
cil should  command  him,  and  never  leave  the  commandments  of  the 
deputies  by  any  means  unperformed.  As  touching  that  Panormitane 
had  extolled  the  authority  of  the  council,  he  said,  that  he  was  greatly 
to  be  thanked.  But  yet,  he  ought  to  understand  and  know  the  authority 
of  the  council  to  be  such  as  cannot  be  augmented  or  increased  by 
any  man's  praise  or  commendation,  or  be  diminished  by  any  opprobry 
or  slander.  These  things  thus  premised,  he  commanded  the  form  of 
the  decree  to  be  read. 

Then  Panormitane  and  those  who  took  his  part,  would  needs  have  a 
certain  protestation  to  be  first  read.  There  was  great  contention  on 
every  side.  Notwithstanding,  at  last,  Arelatensis  prevailed,  and  the 
form  of  the  decree  was  read  unto  this  word  '  Decernimus ;'  that  is  to 
say,  '  We  decree.''  Then  Panormitane,  rising  up,  would  not  suffer  it 
to  be  heard  any  further :  and  the  bishop  of  Catania  ciied  out,  saying, 

(1)  These  four  deputations  were  four  sorts  of  chosen   men,  who  did  discuss  and  determino 
those  tl}inB3  which  the  fathers  did  conclude  upon. 
(")  Verily  this  is  no  Babylonical  cardinal,  but  of  the  immaculate  spouse,  Jesus  Clinst. 


now    GOD    WORKETH    BY    OCCASION.  Col 

That  it  was  uncomely  that  Arelatensis,  -with  a  few  other  bishops  by  iirvry 

name,  should  conclude  the  matter.     The  like  did  also  all  those  who  ^^- 

favoured  Panormitane.     The  cardinal  of  Terragona,  also  (who,  until  A-  I^- 

that  time,  had  holden  his  peace)  did  grievously  rebuke  his  partakers,  ^"^"'^ 

that,  as  men  being  asleep  or  in  a  dream,  they  did  not  read  the  pro-  i.j^q 
testation  ;  and  commanded  by-and-by  one  of  his  familiars  to  read  it. 


man  may 

rmiue 


But,  like  as  the  adversaries  before  did  perturb  the  reading  of  the  ^^'^^^' 
concordances,  so  would  not  the  fathers  of  the  council  now  give  place  deteVn- 
to  the  reading  of  the  protestation.  Which  when  Albigaiiensis  did  i,avS' 
consider,  he  commanded  the  writing  to  be  brought  unto  him,  and  as  ^^,^';^^ 
he  began  to  speak,  suddenly  Arelatensis  rose  uf/;  with  a  great  number  h's  part. 
of  the  fathers,  to  depart ;  which  thing  pleased  the  cardinal  of  Ter-  tionY"" 
ragona  and  Panormitane  very  well,  for  they  hoped  that  they  alone,  ^u!  "'^' 
with  their  adherents,  shoidd  remain  in  the  church.  They  exhorted 
Arelatensis  to  revoke  the  conclusion,  and  to  make  another. 

There  was  in  that  congregation,  in  his  place,  George,  the  protho- 
notary  of  Bardaxina,  sitting  somewhat  beneath  his  uncle,  the  cardinal 
of  Terragona  ;  a  man  but  young  of  age,  but  grave  in  wisdom,  and 
noble  in  hmnanity,  who,  as  soon  as  he  saw  the  cardinal  Arelatensis 
rise,  determined  also  to  depart,  and  when  his  uncle  called  him,  com- 
manding him  to  tarry,  he  said,  "  God  forbid,  father,  that  I  should  tarry 
in  your  congregation,  or  do  any  thing  contrary  to  the  oath  which  I 
have  taken."  By  which  words  he  declared  his  excellent  virtue  and 
nobility,  and  admonished  our  men  who  remained,  of  those  things  they 
had  to  do.  His  voice  was  the  voice  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  word5  How  God 
more  necessary  than  could  be  thought.  For  if  he  had  not  spoken  by  occa- 
that  word,  the  fathers  of  the  council  had,  peradventure,  departed,  and  ^^°°- 
gone  their  way ;  and  the  others  remaining  in  the  church  had  made 
another  conclusion,  which  they  would  have  affirmed  to  havebeen  of  force, 
because  they  would  say  the  last  conclusion  was  to  be  received.  But  many, 
being  warned  by  the  words  of  the  prothonotary,  and  calling  to  remem- 
brance the  like  chance  of  other  councils  before,  called  back  again  the 
multitude  who  were  departing,  and  cried  out  upon  the  cardinal  and 
the  patriarch  to  sit  down  again,  and  that  they  should  not  leave  the 
church  void  and  quiet  for  their  adversaries.  Whereupon,  suddenly, 
all  the  whole  multitude  sat  down,  and  the  gates  were  shut  again. 

In  the  mean  time  Mattheus  Albiganensis,  a  bishop,  read  the  pro-  Aihiga- 
testation  to  none  else  but  to  himself,  for  it  could  not  be  heard  for  noise;  ''^l!^ll\^ 
which  being  ended,  the  Lombards  and  the  Castilians  confirmed  the  the  pro-" 
protestation.     When  the  cardinal  of  Terragona  said,  That  he  did  but  none' 
agree  to  that  dissension,  they  marvelled  at  that  saying ;  and  when  b^ar^im. 
some  smiled  and  laughed  at  him,  "  What,"  said  he,  "  ye  fools !  do 
ye  mock  me  ?  do  not  the  ambassadors  of  my  king  dissent  from  you  ? 
what  do  you  marvel  then,  if  I  do  say  I  consent  unto  their  dissensions .''" 
And  with  these  words  he,  and  abnost  all  the  Arragons,  Lombards, 
and  Castihans,  departed ;  all  the  others  tarried  still.     And  albeit  it 
was  somewhat  late  (for  it  was  past  two  in  the  afternoon),  Arelatensis, 
seeing  the  congregation  quiet,  commanded  the  affairs  of  private  persons  jhe  af- 
to  be  read,  as  the  manner  is;  which  being  ended,  he  commanded  also  the  \^l\°J 
public  affairs  to  be  read,  and  willed  the  conclusions  and  the  fonn  of  the  cu^e 
decree  to  be  read  again.  There  remained  in  the  congregation  the  ambas- 
sadors of  the  empire  and  of  France,  talking  together  of  then:  affairs. 


fairs  of 
the  coun- 


652  THE  COUNCIL    OF    BASIL. 

Henry    Notwitlistaiuling  tlic  Lishopof  Toumon  heard  mentioti  madeof  the  con- 
^^'      elusions,  and  turning  himself  to  the  bishop  of  Lubeck,'  said,  "  Lo  !  the 


A.  D.  matters  of  faith  are  now  in  hand  again  ;  let  us  go  hence,  I  pray  you,  that 
1431  ^yg  ijg  jjQt  an  offence  unto  others,  or  that  we  be  not  said  to  dissent  from 
,4«q    the  other  ambassadors.""     To  whom  the  bishop  of  Lubeck  answered, 

-'  "  Tarry,  father  !    tarry  here  ;    are  not  the  conclusions  most  true  ? 

Why  are  you  afraid  to  be  here  for  the  truth  ?"     These  words  were 

not  heard  by  many,  for  they  spake  them  softly  between  themselves. 

Notwithstanding  I  heard  it,  for  T,  sitting  at  their  feet,  did  diligently 

observe  what  they  said.     Arelatensis,  after  all  things  were  read  which 

Areiaten-  he  thought  necessary,  at  the  request  of 'the  deputies,  concluded ;  and 

eluded      so,  making  an  end,  dismissed  the  congregation.     Twice  it  is  declared, 

here,  as    ^fl'x\^^  how  great  difficulty  Arelatensis  concluded,  forasmuch  as  neither 

aho'be-    the  matter,  nor  the  form,  could  be  concluded  without  dissension ;  and 

w[rhout    the  conclusions  were  miraculous,^  and  past  all  men's  hope ;  but  were 

sent'^o"     obtained  by  the  industry  of  Arelatensis,  or  rather  by  the  special  gift 

thedepu-  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  *And^  therefore  it  is  reported  that  Pan ormitanc, 

*"'^'        afterwards,  going  out  of  the  church,  turning  himself  unto  his  friends, 

should  say,  in  the  Italian  tongue  ;  and,  in  our  tongue  '  Et  duse, 

meaning,  thereby,  that  his  part  had  either  been  twice  overthrown  or 

twice  deceived ;  for  he  spake  it  not  without  great  anger.* 

After  this,  it  was  determined  between  the  Lombards  and  the 
Arragons,  to  abstain  from  the  deputations  for  a  certain  time,  which 
they  did  not  long  observe ;  notwithstanding  the  deputations  were 
holden  very  quietly  for  a  certain  space,  neither  was  there  any  thing 
done  worthy  of  remembrance  until  the  fifteenth  day  of  May ;  during 
which  time,  all  means  possible  were  sought  to  set  a  concord  between 
the  fathers,  but  it  would  not  be.  When  Friday  was  come,  in  the  Ides 
of  May,  Nicholas  Amici,  promoter  of  the  faith,  was  called  into  the 
congregation,  and  briefly  rehearsed  those  things  which  were  done  the 
days  before,  and  declared  how  Arelatensis  might  appoint  a  session. 
Wherefore,  forasmuch  as  delay  in  matters  of  faith  was  dangerous, 
he  required  that  a  session  should  be  appointed  against  the  morrow 
after,  requiring  the  cardinal,  for  his  dignity's  sake,  in  that  he  was 
called  the  Principal  of  the  Church,  and  the  other  bishops,  that,  as 
they  had  promised  in  their  consecration,  they  would  not  now  shrink 
from  the  church  in  these  weighty  afiairs,  and  suffer  the  faith  to  be 
oppressed;  but  the  other  inferiors  he  required,  upon  their  oath  which 
they  had  taken,  to  show  themselves  faithful,  and  constant  herein. 
Then,  again,  there  fell  a  great  contention  upon  these  words ;  for 
Arelatensis,  as  he  was  required,  did  appoint  a  session,  and  exhorted 
The  all  men  to  be  there  present  in  their  robes.  The  bishop  of  Lubeck, 
Lubeck'  'risiug  up,  made  a  protestation  in  his  own  name,  and  also  in  the  name 
of  his  protector:  That  he  would  not  consent  that  there  should  be  any 
session,  if  it  should  in  any  part  derogate  from  the  agreement  had  at 
Mentz.  Georgius  Miles  also,  his  fellow  ambassador,  consented  to 
this  protestation.  When  the  protector  of  the  council,  appointed  by 
the  emperor,  understood  himself  to  be  named  by  the  bishop  of 
Lubeck,  he  marvelled  awhile  what  the  matter  should  be.    But,  being 

(1)  ^neas  Sylvius  being  present,  collected  this. 

(2)  jEneas,  you  did  not  so  praise  this  council  after  you  were  bishop  yourself. 

(3)  Ed.  1663,  p.  317.— Ed. 


IIEFERENCE    TO    THE    SYNOD    OF    CONSTANCE.  G.')3 


certified  by  an  interpreter,  he  answered  :  That  he  would  in  no  case  ^«'"5 

consent  unto  the  protestation  of  the  bishop  of  Lubeck,  and  that  he  ^^ 

did  not  know  any  thing  of  their  doings  at  Mentz ;  also  that  he  was  A- 1^- 

sent  by  the  emperor  to  the  sacred  council,  and  had  his  charge  which  ^^j^^ 
he  doth  well  remember,  and  would  be  obedient  thereunto.    After 
whom  the  bishop  of  Concen,  according  to  his  accustomed  manner, 


to 

l4oy. 


AcUUies, 
of  tlie 


made  his  protestation,  and  after  him  also  followed  Panormitane  ;  wiuiT- 
whose  words,  before  I  will  repeat,  I  desire  that  no  man  would  marvel  {^^j^u'. 
that  I  make  mention  so  often  of  Panormitane ;  for  it  is  necessary  to 
declare  the  matter,  in  order,  as  it  was  done. 

It  happened  in  these  matters,  even  as  it  doth  in  warlike  affairs  ; 
for,  as  there,  such  as  are  most  valiant  and  strong,  and  do  most 
worthy  feats,  obtain  most  fame,  as,  in  the  battle  of  Troy,  Achilles  The 
and  Hector;  so,  in  these  spiritual  wars  and  contentions,  those  who 
most  excel  in  learning  and  eloquence,  or  do  more  than  others,  ^."s^ 
should  be  most  renowned  and  named.  For,  on  the  one  part,  Panor-  ana  u'lo 
mitane  was  prince  and  captain  ;  and  on  the  other,  Arelatensis  :  but  his  JiThe' 
own  will  made  not  the  one  captain,  but  only  necessity,  for  it  behoved  '^'^""'•■''• 
him  to  obey  his  prince.  Notwithstanding,  he  was  not  ignorant  of 
the  truth  and  verity,  neither  did  he  resist  willingly  against  it ;  for  I 
have  seen  him  oftentimes  in  his  library  complain  of  his  prince,  that 
he  followed  other  men''s  counsel.  When  his  time  came  to  speak,  he 
said.  That  he  did  not  a  little  marvel,  why  the  protector  of  the  faith 
should  require  the  prelates  to  have  a  session,  which  was  nothing  per- 
taining to  his  office  ;  and  that  he  ought  not  to  usurp  the  president''s 
place.  And  again,  he  complained  touching  the  contempt  of  the  pre- 
lates, for  the  matter  did  presently  touch  the  state  of  the  apostolic 
see,  and  for  that  cause  the  see  ought  to  be  heard  before  any  session 
be  holden.  "  Neither  is  that  to  be  regarded,"  said  he,  "  which  the 
council  of  Constance  seemeth  to  have  decreed,  that  it  should  now  be 
spoken  of,  forasmuch  as  pope  John  was  not  heard  at  Constance, 
neither  any  man  else,  to  speak  for  the  see."  By  which  words  he 
seemed  both  to  contemn  and  bring  in  doubt  all  the  decrees  of  that 
most  great  and  sacred  synod  of  Constance.  Therefore  there  was  a 
great  tumult,  and  all  men  cried  out  with  one  voice,  saying,  that  the 
synod  of  Constance  is  holy,  and  the  authority  thereof  ought  to  be 
inviolate.^  But  he,  being  still  instant,  with  a  stout  and  haughty 
courage  affirmed,  that  the  matter  could  not  be  finished  without  the 
ambassadors  of  the  princes,  and  that  the  princes  ought  to  be  heard 
in  a  matter  of  faith.  And  again,  that  the  ambassadors  themselves 
cannot  consent,  forasmuch  as  in  the  colloquy  holden  at  Mentz,  they 
had  promised,  that  during  the  treaty  of  peace  by  them  begun,  they 
would  receive  and  allow  nothing  that  the  pope  should  either  do 
against  the  council,  or  the  council  against  the  pope ;  and  that  he 
doubted  not  but  that  the  three  first  conclusions  declared  Eugene  a 
heretic,  insomuch  that  it  was  evident  that  Eugene  did  vehemently 
resist  the  two  first.  And  therefore,  forasmuch  as  the  session  was 
not  yet  holden,  and  that  it  was  lawful  for  every  man,  before  that 
session,  to  speak  what  he  would,  he  desired  and  required  them,  most 
instantly,  that  there  might  be  no  session  as  yet  holden. 

'D  The  papists  extol  that  which  maketh  fur  their  purpose,  but  the  contrary  they  contemn, 
whether  it  be  Scripture  or  profane. 


to 
1439 


G54  THE    COUNCIL    OF    BASIL. 

Hr'>ry        Unto  whom  Arelatensis  answered,  That  it  was  not  to  be  doubted  but 
^^'     that  the  promoter  of  the  faith,  by  his  office,  migh',  call  the  prelates  to 
A.  D.    determine  a  matter  of  faith,  and  especially  forasmuch  as  the  deputa- 
l'*^^     tion  of  the  faith'  and  the  whole  council  had  so  given  him  in  command- 
ment. As  touching  the  prelates,  he  said,  that  albeit,  without  all  doubt, 
bishops  have  chief  authority,  yet,  notwithstanding,  it  is  accustomed  in 
AreMen-  j,Q^jj^j>j|g  jjqj-  ^q  make  any  conclusion  in  the  name  of  the  bishops,  but 
swers       -j^  j.j-^g  name  of  the  whole   council ;  and  the  universal  church  hath 
tane..       decreed  certam  laws  m  this  council  which  should  remain  inviolate. 
Neither  let  the  bishops  think  the  presence  of  the  inferiors  grievous 
unto  them,  when   oftentimes,  under  a  bare  and  torn  coat,  wisdom 
lieth   hid,  and   under   rich  vestures   and   ornaments  folly  lurketh. 
Bishops  ought  also  to  be  mindful  of  the  saying  of  Domitius,  who  (as 
How        St.  Jerome  reporteth)^  said,  "  Why  should  I  esteem  thee  as  a  prince, 
amrsin-    if  thou  dost  uot  regard  me  as  a  senator  ?"     For  the  bishops  ought 
doth  con-  *o  esteem  priests  as  priests,  if  they  wall  have  reverence  done  unto 
fute  his    them  as  bishops.     Neither  ought  the  princes  to  be  looked  for  to  the 
saries.      deciding  of  this  matter,  forasmuch  as  the  church  is  not  congregated 
in  the  name  of  the  princes,  but  in  the  name  of  Christ,  who  hath  not 
received  his  power  from  princes,  but  immediately  from  God  :  to  the 
defence  whereof  he  should  perceive  the  inferiors  to  be  no  less  encou- 
raged than  the  bishops,  for  that  he  did  well  understand  and  know, 
that  they  would  not  only  spend  their  temporal  goods,  but  also  their 
lives,  for  the  defence  thereof.     As  for  some  bishops,  rather  than  they 
will  lose  any  part  of  their  temporalties,  they  will  sell  the  liberty  of 
the  church  unto  the  princes,  and  make  them  judges  and  lords  over 
the  council.     As  touching  the  acts  at   Mentz,  he  doth  not  regard 
them,  forasmuch  as  (it  is  said)  they  counted  without  their  host ;  for 
he  saith,  he  doth  not  understand  how  this  can  be,  that  they  had 
decreed  neither  to  obey  the  pope,  nor  the  council.     The  one  or  the 
other  they  must  needs  be  obedient  unto  :  for  there  is  no  third  tribu- 
nal whereunto  any  obedience  is  due,  in  these  matters  which  concern 
the  faith  and  salvation  of  souls.     And,  finally,  that  the  church  would 
not  suffer  that  their  affairs  and  matters  of  faith  should  be  determined 
by  the  judgment  of  princes  ;  for  the  Holy  Ghost  is  not  subject  unto 
princes,  but  princes  unto  him :  and  upon  this  conclusion  he  would 
not  fear  either  the  loss  of  his  goods,  or  any  death  or  martyrdom.  And 
No  man    whereas  Panormitane  doth  now  show  himself  so  great  a  defender  of 
tharf       Eugene,  he  saith,  that  he  doth  not  a  little  marvel  at  it,  for  that  in 
Panormi-  times  past  uo  man  hath  more  published  Eugene''s  errors,  than  he ; 

tane  pub-  »  •    i     i    i  i       ^  i     i        i  i  ■  i 

lishedthe  by  wliosc  spccial  labou^r  and  counsel,  both  a  decree  monitory,  and 
Eugene,   also  the  suspcusiou,  were  admitted  and  set  out  against  Eugene.  And 
ww  he  ^Q^^  whereupon  this  sudden  change  should  come,  he  saith  that  he 
defend-    wRs  Utterly  iguoraut,  forasmuch  as  neither  Eugene  had  altered  his 
life,  neither  could  the  church  continue  in  so  great  a  schism.     Where- 
fore he  desired  ^Panormitane  diligently  to  consider,  whether  he  spake 
according  to  his  conscience  or  not :   "  For,"  saith  he,  "  the  conclu- 
.sions  which  now  shall  be  decreed,  are  most  general ;  neither  is  there 
any  mention  in  them  of  the  pope  ;  and  moreover  the  verity  of  faith 

(1)  This  deputation  of  faith,  was  the  company  of  chosen  men  which'  did  determine  matters 
of  faith.  (2)  St.  Jerome  unto  Nepotianus,  de  Vita  Clericali. 


CHEAT    UNITY    AXD    CONCORD    TIIEHEIN.  6i 


VI. 


is  contained  in  them  :  against  -which  if  Eugene  did  contend,  it  were    ^e""/ 
more  meet  that  the  pope  should  be  corrected  than  the  verity  omitted. 
And  thus  he  making  an  end,  all  were  warned  to  come  the  next  day 
unto  the  session.     The  protector,  also,  desired  the  sacred  council, 
that  none  should  be  suffered  to  bring  any  weapon  to  the  session  ; 

forasmuch  as  he  was  ready  to  observe  the  safe  conduct  of  the  empe- 

ror,  and,  together  with  the  senate  of  the  city,  to  prohibit  all  quarrellers  session 
for  doing  of  injury.  '  prociaim- 

As  soon  as  Saturday  was  come,  being  the  16th  of  May,  all  they 
whom  the  session  contented  and  pleased,  assembled  at  the  hour.    The 
ambassadors,  also,  of  the  princes,  were  come  together  into  the  choir  of 
the  chm-ch,  to  attempt  fiu-ther  what  they  could  do  ;  and,  sending  the 
bishops  of  Lubeclv  and  Concen,  and  the  dean  of  Tumon  (an  excellent 
learned  man),  they  offered  themselves  to  be  present  at  the  session,  if 
the  deposition  of  Eugene  might  yet  be  defen-ed  foiu-  months.     Who, 
when  they  had  received  a  gentle  answer  of  Arelatensis  and  the  other 
principals,  returning  again  unto  the  ambassadors,  they  found  their 
purpose  altered,  for  now  they  would  only  have  the  first  conclusion 
decreed,  and  thereupon  sent  again  unto  Arelatensis :    unto  whom 
answer  was  made.  That  the  chief  force  did  consist  in  the  two  other 
conclusions,   and  that  the  council  woidd  specially  determine  upon 
them.     If  the  ambassadors  would  not  be  present,  they  should  under- 
stand, that  the  concord  was  broken  by  them,  who  would  not  observe 
that  which  they  had  offered.     With  this  answer  they  departed,  and 
the  session  began  to  be  celebrated.     There  was  no  prelate  of  the 
Arragons  present  at  it,  neither  out  of  Spain  ;  and  out  of  Italy,  only  !„  an  n.v 
the  bishop  of  Grosseto,  and  the  abbot  of  Dona,  who,  for  their  con-  '^  *'"^''^ 
stancy  and  steadfast  good  will  toward  the  universal  church,  could  not  scarcely 
be  changed  from  their  purpose  :  but  of  doctors  and  other  inferiors,  irtes'"^'^' 
there  were  a  great  nmnber  of  Arragons,  and  almost  all  the  inferiors  of  (^,j "''' 
Spain  and  Italy  (for  the  inferiors  feared  not  the  princes,  as  the  bishops  nought 
did),  and  then  the  worthy  stoutness  of  the  Arragons  and  CastUians  modity  of 
appeared  in  the  inferior  sort,  who  would  not  shrink  away  from  the  versai" 
church  in  her  necessity.     Of  the  two  other  nations,  there  were  only  P^"'^'^'^  '• 
present  twenty  bishops.     The  residue  lurked  in  their  lodgings,  pro-  there  was 
fessing  the  faith  in  their  hearts,  but  not  in  their  mouths.    Arelatensis,  °°°'^' 
considering  beforehand  what  would  come  to  pass,  caused  prayers  to 
be  made,  and,  after  then-  prayers  made  unto  Almighty  God,  with  tears  prayers 
and  lamentations,  that  he  would  send  them  his  Holy  Spirit  to  aid  and  ^.?f^^ 
assist  them,  they  were  gi-eatly  comforted  and  encouraged.    This  con-  tears, 
gregation  was  famous ;  and,  albeit  that  there  were  not  many  bishops 
present,  yet  all  the  seats  were  filled  with  the  bishops'"  proctors,  arch- 
deacons, presidents,  priors,  priests,  and  doctors  of  both  laws,  which  I 
iudffed  to  be  about  the  number  of  four  hundred,  or  more  ;  amongst  Among 

«',°,  .  1  •  ^•  !_•  1  four  luin- 

whom  there  was  no  noise,  no  chidmg,  no  opprobrious  words  or  con-  dred  doc- 
tention,  but  one  exhorted  another  to  the  profession  of  the  faith,  and  ^""J'p^e. 
there  appeared  a  full  and  whole  consent  of  them  all,  to  defend  the  ^^^^J;^,^ 
church.     The  bishop  of  Marseilles,  a  noble  man,  read  the  decree,  not  onfi 
*who'  had  so  great  familiarity  with  the  bishop  of  Albiganensis,  that  '^'""''^ 
they  were  called  brethren ;  for  both  at  home  and  also  abroad  they 

(1)  See  Edition  1J63,  p.  319.— Ed. 


Go6  THE    COUKCIL    OF    BASIL. 

Henry    werc  always  seen  together.     Which  matter  was  so  much  the  more  to 
^^'     be  marvelled  at,  in  that  they  appeared  so  discordant  in  the  matters  of 
A.  D.    the  church,  forasmuch  as  Albiganensis  read  the  protestation  against 
^^^^    the  decree,  and  Massiliensis,  the  decree ;    both  these  readers  coming 
1439     out  of  one  house:  but,  as  some  suppose,  tlie  verity  did  abound  in 
— '-^-^  the  one,  and  dissimulation  in  the  other.     The  reading  of  the  decree 
was  very  brief  and  short ;  for  the  decree  itself  was  but  short,  notwith- 
standing it  *  was  attentively  hearkened  unto,  and   not  one  word 
interrupted.    When  it  was  ended,  '  Te  Deum  laudamus '  was  sung  on 
the  one  part,  and  on  the  other  side  '  Te  dominum  confitemur,'  and 
so,  by  course,  the  hymn  was  ended  with  great  joy  and  gladness ;  and 
so  the  session  dissolved,  which  was  in  number  the  thirty-third  session, 
and,  amongst  all  the  rest,  the  most  quiet  and  peaceable. 
Thethir-       The  Friday  ucxt  following,  being  the  22d  of  May,  the  princes" 
ty-thire    ambassadors,  without  all  men"s  expectation,  came  unto  the  general 
Tiie  am-  congregation,  by  that  their  doing  at  least  giving  their  assent  unto  the 
consent     sessiou  bcfore  passed  ;  in  celebrating  whereof,  if  the  fathers  had  erred, 
former     *^  ^^^  ^^^  bccu  lawful  for  the  princes  and  ambassadors  to  have  holden 
session,    the  council  with  those  fathers.     But  it  was  thought,  that  they  were 
touched  with  remorse  of  conscience,  and  even  now  detested  and 
abhorred  that  which  they  had  done  ;  as  it  was  not  hidden  to  the  am- 
bassadors of  the  empire  and  France.    For  the  bishop  of  Lubeck  said, 
That  the  caiise  of  his  absence  was,  for  that  he  was  appointed,  by  the 
emperor^s  commandment,  to  entreat  a  peace :  wherefore  it  was  not 
comely  for  him  to  be  present  at  any  business,  whereby  he  should  be 
vexed  or  troubled,  with  whom  the  peace  should  be  entreated.     Not- 
withstanding, he  did  much  commend  the  session  before  holden,  and 
believed  the  decree  therein  promulgated  to  be  most  good  and  holy, 
and  the  verities  therein  contained  to  be  undoubted ;  and  said,  That 
he  would  stick  thereunto  both  now  and  ever,  even  to  the  death.    But 
the  bishop  of  Tournon,  a  man  both  learned  and  eloquent,  speaking  for 
him  and  his  fellows,  said,  That  he  heard  how  that  he  was  evil  spoken 
of  amongst  some,  in  that  they  had  not  honoured  his  king  in  that  most 
sacred  session,  whom  it  became  specially  to  exalt  and  to  defend  the 
faith  ;  who  also,  for  that  cause,  above  all  other  kings,  was  named  Most 
Christian.    Notwithstanding,  he  said,  that  he  had  a  lawful  excuse,  in 
that  it  was  convenient  that  those  who  were  sent  to  entreat  peace, 
should  do  nothing  whereby  their  ambassage  should  be  stopped  or 
Jj""        letted.      Also  there  are  two  kinds  of  injustice,   said  he,  whereby 
injustice,  either   things  are  done  that   should   not   be  done,  or  things  that 
should  be  done,   are  not  done.     The  first  doth  not  always  bind, 
because  it  is  convenient  to  have  respect  of  time,  place,  and  person. 
But  the  last  doth  always  bind  ;  wherein,  he  said,  they  Avere  not  cul- 
pable.    But,  as  touching  the  first  point,  they  might  seem  unto  some 
to  have  erred,  because  they  were  not  present  at  the  session ;  but  yet, 
in  this  point,  they  had  sufficient  to  answer,  forasmuch  as,  if  they  had 
been  present  at  that  session,  they  should  have  been  unmeet  to  have 
entreated  any  peace  with  Eugene.     And,  therefore,  albeit  they  were 
wanting  at  so  holy  a  business,  in  that  point  they  followed  the  example 
of  Paul,  who,  albeit  he  desired  to  be  dissolved  and  to  be  with  Christ, 
yet,  for  the  further  profit  and  advancement  of  the  church,  it  was 
deferred.     So  likewise,  he  said,  that  they  had  now  done ;  for  that 


THE    CONGREGATION    IS    DISSOLVED.  657 

they  were  not  absent  because  they  tloubted  of  the  conclusions  (which  Henry 
they  judged  to  be  most  true  and  holy,  and  whereunto  they  would     ^^- 
stick,  even  unto  the  death),  but  because  they  would  not  be  unmeet    A.D. 
for  the  treaty  of  peace  for  which  they  came :  and  yet  that  which  they    ^'^'^^ 
had  not  done  in  their  own  persons,  they  had  fidfilled,  said  he,  by  their    ,4° 

servants  and  household,  Avhom  altogether  they  commanded  to  reverence ^- 

that  session. 

I  would  that  I  had  been  then  in  the  place  of  some  great  prelate  ; 
surely  they  should  not  have  gone  unpunished,'  who  thought  to  have 
played  bo-peep.     For  w^hat  doth  the  declaration  of  the  truth  hinder 
the  entreaty  of  peace  ?  or,  if  it  do  hml,  why  is  he  not  accounted  as 
great  an  offender,  who  consenteth  to  him  that  declareth  the  truth,  as  the  prin- 
he  who  doth  declare  it  ?    What  shall  we  need  any  further  testimony  .^  bassaTrs 
for  now  the  ambassadors  of  the  princes  have  declared  Eugene  to  be  an  ^"^ 'g^g 
enemy  unto  the  truth.     But,  to  pass  over  these  things,  it  is  sufficient  an  enemy 
that  Eugene  wTOte  afterwards  unto  the  king  of  France,  that  he  did  umh^ 
understand  the  bishop  of  Tournon  to  have  become  his  enemy. 

After  the  bishop  of  Tournon  had  made  an  end,  cardinal  Arelaten-  Areiaten- 
sis  gave  thanks  unto  God,  who  had  so  defended  his  church,  and,  after  mlnd^h 
great  storms  and  clouds,  had  sent  fliir  and  clear  weather  ;  and,  com-  ^^^^^^' 
mending  the  good  will  of  the  emperor  and  the  king  of  France  toward  dors. 
the  church,  he  also  praised  the  bishops  of  Lubeck  and  Tournon,  for 
that  oftentimes  in  the  council,  and  also  of  late  at  Mentz,  they  had 
defended  the  authority  of  the  council.     But  specially  he  commended 
this  their  present  doings,  that  they  had  openly  confessed  the  truth, 
and  had  not  sequestered  themselves  from  the  faith  of  the  chiu*ch. 

Afterward,  entering  into  the  declaration  of  the  matter,  he  said,  why  this 
that  he  was  at  Pisa  and  at  Constance,  and  never  saw  a  more  quiet  or  ^"as'ga- 
devout  session  than  this ;  affirming  that  this  decree  was  most  neces-  tiered, 
sary,  to  repress  the  ambition  of  the  bishops  of  Rome,  who,  exalting 
themselves  above  the  universal  church,  thought  it  lawful  for  them  to 
do  all  things  after  their  oya\  pleasure ;  and  that  no  one  man,  from 
thenceforth,  should  transport  the  council  from  one  place  to  another, 
as  Eugene  attempted  to  do,  now  to  Bononia,^  now  to  Florence,  then 
again  to  Bononia,  afterwards  to  Ferrara,  and  after  that  again  to 
Florence ;  and  that,  hereafter,  the  bishops  should  withdraw  their 
minds  from  the  carefulness  of  temporal  goods,  who  (as  he  himself  did 
see)  had  no  mind  at  all  on  spiritual  matters.  And,  therefore,  by  how 
much  this  session  was  most  holy  and  necessary,  by  so  much  more  the 
assent  of  the  ambassadors  was  most  laudable  and  acceptable  to  all  the 
fethers. — These  words  thus  spoken,  he  rose  up,  and  the  congregation 
was  dissolved.  *Now^  how  the  deposition  of  Eugene  did  pass,  the 
Book  following  shall  declare  at  large. 

Thus  endeth  the  First  Book  of  the  Commentaries  of  ^Eneas  Sylvius, 
touching  the  acts  of  the  council  of  Basil,  against  Eugene  and  his 
adherents. 

(1)  O  jEneas,  you  should  have  used  such  severity  when  you  were  pope. 

(2)  "  Bononia,"  Bologna.— Ed.  (3)  See  Edition  1563,  p.  320.— Ed. 


VOL.   III.  U    IT 


658  THE    COUNCIL    OF    BASIL. 

ri. 

- —  THE    SECOND    BOOK    OF    THE    COMMENTARIES    OF     .£NEAS    SYI VIUS, 
UPON    THE     ACTS     OF    THE     COUNCIL     OF     BASIL.' 


A.D. 
1431 

^  The  Lord  took  up  his  armour  and  shield,  and  rose  up  to  help  the 

church  ;  and  she,  receiving  help,  being  glad,  rejoiced  in  her  God, 
who  clothed  her  with  the  garments  of  salvation,  and  adorned  her  as  a 
beautiful  spouse  with  the  crown,  vouches,  and  vestui-e  of  justice. 

It  is  before  declared  in  the  former  commentaries,  in  what  state  the 
church  was,  in  these  our  days,  which  Eugene,  a  little  before,  being 
pope,  did  vex  and  trouble  as  the  wind  doth  a  reed.  Notwithstanding 
it  is  alwavs  true,  which  JohnChrisostome  hath  declared,  that  the  church 
doth  never  cease  to  be  impungcd,  and  to  be  lien  in  wait  for;  but  in 
the  name  of  Christ,  it  hath  always  the  victory  and  upper  hand.  And, 
albeit  that  some  do  lie  in  wait  for  it,  and  that  the  floods  do  strike 
against  it,  notwithstanding  the  foundation  which  is  laid  upon  a  rock,  is 
never  shaken.  Wherefore  iniquity  hath  deceived  Gabriel,  and  the  Lord 
hath  destroyed  him  in  his  malice ;  for  he,  being  thrown  down  head- 
long out  of  the  apostolic  see  by  the  sentence  of  the  council,  the  Lord 
becomes  the  refuge  of  the  church,  who  hath  given  a  pastor  unto  his 
flock,  who  will  visit  the  desolate  places,  seek  those  things  which  are 
scattered  abroad,  and  will  not  eat  the  flesh  of  such  as  are  fat,  but  will 
wisely  and  discreetly  nourish  that  which  doth  stand  and  remain  : 
which  thing,  that  all  Christians  may  the  more  plainly  understand,  I 
vnll  declare,  in  this  Book  which  followeth,  the  order  of  the  election, 
how  that  Amedeus,  the  most  wise  and  discreet  duke  of  Sebaudia,  was 
chosen  bishop  of  Rome.* 

Gabriel  Condulmarius  being  deposed  from  the  bishopric  of  Rome, 
The  as  we  have  already  declared,  the  principal  fathers  of  the  council,  being 
dothde-  called  together  in  the  chapter-house  of  the  gTcat  church,  consulted 
uporTthe  whether  it  were  expedient  that  a  new  bishop  should  be  created  out  of 
pope's      hand,  or  deferred  for  a  time.    Such  as  thought  good  that  the  election 

election.  o  o 

should  be  done  with  speed,  showed  how  dangerous  a  thing  it  was  for 
such  a  congregation  to  be  without  a  head ;  also  what  a  pestiferous 
sickness  was  in  all  the  city,  which  not  only  consumed  young  men 
and  children,  but  also  men  of  middle  age,  and  old  men  in  like 
manner ;  and  that  this  plague  came  first,  by  strangers,  unto  the  poor 
of  the  citv,  and  so  infected  the  rich,  and  now  was  come  unto  the 
fathers  of  the  council :  amplifying  moreover,  and  increasing  the  tenor 
thereof,  and  making  the  thing  worse  than  it  was,  as  the  manner  is. 
*A11  things  did  breed  fear.*  ''  Neither  doth  the  decree,"  said  they, 
"  any  thing  let  or  hinder,  wherein  it  is  pro'vided,  that  there  should 
be  delay  of  sixty  davs  after  the  see  is  void ;  for  that  is  to  be  under- 
stood when  the  see  is  void,  at  such  tune  as  there  is  no  council  holden  : 
must  be  neither  ought  we  to  tarry  or  make  any  delay,  lest  the  princes,  being 
after  the  pcrsuadcd  by  Gabriel,  should  resist ;  unto  whom  the  deposition  of 
voW.''  Gabriel,  and  tlie  election  of  some  other,  is  to  be  certified  all  under 
one  message."' - 

The  others,  who  thought  good  that  there  should  be  a  delay,  said, 

(1)  Faithfully  translated  into  English  ty  K.  W. 

(2)  Note  the  christian  zeal  of  these  men,  who  woula  refuse  no  danger  for  God's  cause. 


Sixty 
davs 


A    GREAT    PLAGUE    IN    BASIL.  659 

that  the  council  did  lack  no  head,  forasmuch  as  Christ  was  the  head    Henry 
thereof;  neither  did  lack  a  ruler,  forasmuch  as  it  was  governed  by  __!!fl_. 
the  presidents  and  other  officers :   and  that  no  mention  should  be    A.  D. 
made  of  any  pestilence  in  such  case,  seeing  that  unto  stout  and  strong    ^'^'^^ 
men.  death  is  not  to  be  feared,  neither  can  any  thing  daunt  or  fear    j.jgg 

those  who  contend  for  the  christian  faith.     As  for  that  pestilence, '- 

which  doth  now  increase  and  grow  in  the  city,  forasmuch  as  judgment 
is  now  given,  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  it  will  assuage,  which  was  thought 
to  have  come  for  the  neglecting  of  justice.  Also,  that  in  so  doubtful 
a  matter,  they  ought  rather  to  use  the  princes  against  their  will,  than 
to  neglect  them ;  and  that  it  is  not  to  be  feared,  but  that,  in  this 
case.  God  will  help  those  that  are  stout  and  valiant.  The  matter 
being  thus  discussed  amongst  them,  albeit  that  there  were  as  many 
minds  as  there  were  men,  yet  it  seemed  unto  them  all,  that  it  was 
most  profitable  to  choose  the  bishop  by  and  by,  but  most  honest  to 
defer  it. 

Hereupon  John  Segovius,  a  man  of  excellent  learning,  said  :  "Most  sogovius 
reverend  fathers  !   I  am  diversely  cbawn,  by  sundry  reasons,  to  this 
side  and  that.    But,  as  I  weigh  the  matter  more  deeply  in  my  mind, 
this  is  my  opinion,  that  to  come  to  a  speedy  election,  it  scemeth  good, 
to  speak  after  man^s  judgment ;  but  to  delay  it  for  two  months,  to 
speak  after  God''s  judgment,  it  seemeth  much  better.     *I  do  not  see 
how  that  which  is  provided  by  the  laws,  can  be  cut  off.*    I  do  judge, 
that  not  only  the  words,  but  also  the  meaning  of  our  decree,  ought 
to  be  observed.  Wherefore,  if  ye  will  give  any  credit  unto  me,  follow  Danger- 
rather  dangerous  honesty,  than  secure  utility  ;   albeit  that  indeed  hesty" 
utility  cannot  be  discerned  from  honesty.'"     This  opinion  of  delay  {Jefg,"*''' 
took  place  among  the  fathers,  and  they  determined  to  stay,  for  the  secure 
space  of  two  months.     In  the  mean  time  messengers  Avere  sent  unto  "  "  ^' 
the  princes,  to  declare  the  deposition  of  Eugene  by  the  synod,  and 
publish  it  abroad. 

During  this  time,  the  corrupt  air  was  nothing  at  all  purged,  but 
the  mortality  daily  increasing,  many  died  and  were  sick.  Whereupon 
a  sudden  fear  came  upon  the  fathers  ;  neither  were  they  sufficiently 
advised  what  they  might  do :  for  they  thought  it  not  to  be  without 
danger,  either  to  depart  or  to  tarry.  Notwithstanding  they  thought 
it  good  to  tarry,  and  also  they  caused  others  to  tarry  ;  that  since  they 
had  overcome  famine,  and  the  assaults  of  their-  enemies  on  earth,  they 
would  not  seem  to  shrink,  for  the  persecution  of  any  plague  or  sick- 
ness. But,  forasmuch  as  they  could  not  all  be  kept  there,  it  was 
politicly  provided,  that  the  council  should  not  seem  to  be  dissolved 
for  any  man's  departure.  And,  for  the  more  establishment  of  the 
matter,  there  were  certain  things  read  before  the  fathers,  which  they 
called  '  De  stabilimento,''  whose  authority  continued  long  time  after. 
When  the  dog-days  were  come,  and  that  all  herbs  withered  with  heat,  a  great 
the  pestilence  daily  increased  more  and  more,  so  that  it  is  incredible  f/ncg  j,, 
how  many  died.  It  was  too  hon-ible  to  see  the  corpses  hourly  carried  J^a^ii. 
through  the  streets,  when  on  every  side  there  was  weeping,  wailing, 
and  sighing.  There  was  no  house  void  of  mourning ;  no  mirth  or 
lauo-hter  in  any  place ;  but  matrons  bewailing  their  husbands,  and 
husbands  their  wives.  Men  and  women  went  through  the  streets, 
and  durst  not  speak  one  to  another.     Some  tarried  at  home,  and 

u  u  2 


660  A    (iUKAT    PLAGUE    IX    BASIL. 

Henry    otlicrs  tliat  wciit  abroad  had  perfumes  to  smell  unto,  to  preserve  theiT. 
against  the  plague. 


A.  I).        Tlie  common  people  died  without  number ;  and,  like  as  in  the 
^'^'^^    cold  autumn,  the  leaves  of  the  trees  do  fall,  even  so  did  the  youth  of 
,  .!?n     the  city  consume  and  fall  away.     The  violence  of  the  disease  was 
— -— -  such,  that  ye  should  have  met  a  man  merry  in  the  street  now,  and 
within  ten  hours  have  heard  that  he  had  been  buried.     The  number 
of  the  dead  corpses  was  such  also,  that  they  lacked  place  to  bury 
them  in ;  insomuch  that  all  the  cloisters  were  digged  up,  and  fillcfl 
with  dead  corpses,  and  great  holes  were  made  in  the  parish  churches, 
Avhere  a  great  number  of  corpses  being  thrust  in  together,  they  covered 
them  over  with  earth.    For  this  cause  the  fathers  were  so  afraid,  that 
there  appeared  no  blood  in  their  faces ;  and  especially  the  sudden 
Ludovi-    death  of  Ludovicus,  the  prothonotary,  did  make  all  men  afraid,  who 
protho^     was  a  strong  man,  and  flourishing  in  age,  and  singularly  learned  in 
ui'eTof     '^'^^^  laws,  whom  the  same  envious  and  raging  sickness  took  away  in 
the         a  few   hours.      By-and-by  after,  died   Ludovicus,  the  patriarch  of 
pague-     Aquileia,  a  man  of  great  age,  and  brought  up  always  in  troubles  and 
adversity,  neither  could  he  see  the  day  of  the  pope^s  election,  which 
he  had  long  wished  for.     Notwithstanding,  he  took  partly  a  consola- 
tion, in  that  he  had  seen  Gabriel  deposed  before  his  death.     This 
man"'s  death  was  grievous  unto  all  the  fathers  ;  for  now  they  said,  that 
two  pillars  of  the  council  were  decayed  and  overthrown,  meaning  the 
prothonotary  and  the  patriarch,  v/hereof  the  one  by  the  law,  and  the 
other  with  his  deeds,  defended  the  verity  of  the  council. 

About  the  same  time,  also,  died  the  king  of  Arragon''s  almoner  in 

Switzerland,  a  man  of  excellent  learning,  being  bishop  of  Liege. 

The  abbot  of  Vergilia  died  at  Spires,  and  John,  the  bishop  of  Lubeck, 

between  Vienna  and  Buda. 

The  ex-        Thcsc  two  last  rehearsed,  even  at  the  point  of  death,  did  this  thing 

of  tifose"  "^^orthy  of  remembrance.     When  they  perceived  the  hour  of  their 

who  died,  death  approach,  calling  unto  them  certain  grave  and  Avise  men,  they 

said,  "  All  you  that  be  here  present,  pray  to  God  that  he  will  convert 

such  as  acknowledge  Gabriel  for  high  bishop,  for  in  that  state  they 

cannot  be  saved ;'"'  and  professing  themselves  that  they  would  die  in 

the  faith  of  the  council  of  Basil,  they  departed  in  the  Lord.     In 

iTisL       Bohemia,  also,  departed  the  bishop  of  Constance,  who  was  ambassador 

of  Con-     for  the  council.     There  was  great  fear  and  trembling  throughout  all 

lUeth."      the  council.    There  had  been  also  in  the  council,  by  a  long  time,  the 

The        abbot  of  Dona,  of  the  diocese  of  Cumana,  a  man  poor  imto  the  world, 

itona,  a    ^^^^  Hch  uuto  God,  whom  neither  flatterings  nor  threatenings  could 

abbot       ^^"^^  away  from  his  good  pur|)ose  and  intent ;  choosing  rather  to  beg, 

in  the  truth  of  the  fothers,  than  to  abound  in  riches,  with  the  false 

flattering  adversaries. 

Whereupon,  after  the  lords  were  departed  who  gave  him  his  living, 

he,  remaining  still,  was  stricken  with  the  plague  and  died ;  likewise 

Henry,  chaplain  of  the  cardinal  Arelatensis,  died  within  three  days. 

Also  a  great  number  of  the  registers  and  doctors  died  ;  and  of  such 

^neas     as  fell  iuto  that  disease,  few  or  none  escaped.     One  amongst  all  the 

thorTere-  I'cst,  ^Encas  Sylvius,  being  stricken  with  this  disease,  by  God's  help 

deatiT^^'^  ^'^^^P^f^-     I'l"*^    "''*'^"'   the   next   night   after   that  his  friend  Julian 

hardly.     Romaiuc,  Avhom  he  tenderly  loved,  was  buried,  felt  the  sore,  and  lay 


COXSTAXCY    OF    ARELATENSIS.  6G1 

three  days  even  at  the  point  of  death,  all  men  being  in  despair  of  uoiry 
him  :  notwithstanding  it  pleased  God  to  grant  him  longer  life.  *Bnt/     ^^' 


alas  !  how  unstable  is  the  order  of  human  things  !   or,  how  deceitful    A.  I), 
is  the  world!  for  ^neas  who  could  not  die  in  his  own  body,  died    ^^^^ 
in  another  man.     For  within  a  little  while  after,  he,  returning  from    jA^q 
Tridentum,^  found  John  Pynanus,  a  man  born  at  Rouen,  to  be  dead  — — - 
of  a  venomous  ague,  through  negligence  of  the  physicians ;  with 
which  news  he  was  so  troubled  and  ravished  in  his  mind,  that  he 
seemed  to  have  lost  the  one  half  of  his  spirits,  neither  was  tliere  in 
him,  afterwards,  the  like  courage,  either  unto  his  study,  or  the  matters 
of  the  council,  insomuch  that  a  man  would  scarcely  have  said  that 
there  had  been  any  spirit  in  him  to  breathe  withal.    Notwithstanding 
every  man  must  be  contented  to  suffer  such  fortune ;  for  no  man 
went  untouched,  but  either  he  had  occasion  to  bewail  his  own  chance, 
or  some  friend  of  his.* 

At  that  time  when  the  pestilence  was  most  fervent  and  hot,  and 
that  daily  there  died  about  one  hundred,  there  was  great  entreaty 
made  unto  cardinal  Arelatensis,  that  he  would  go  to  some  other  town 
or  village  near  at  hand ;  for  these  were  the  words  of  all  his  friends 
and  household  :   "  What  do  you,  most  reverend  father  ?     At  least 
void  this  wane  of  the  moon  and  save  yourself;  who  being  safe,  all 
we  shall  also  be  safe  ;   if  you  die,  we  all  perish.     If  the  plague 
oppress  you,  unto  whom  shall  we  fly  ?     Who  shall  rule  us  ?   or  who 
shall  be  the  guide  of  this  most  faithful  flock  ?     The  infectfon  hath 
already  invaded  your  chamber  ;  your  secretary  and  chamberlain  are 
already  dead.    Consider  the  great  danger,  and  save  both  yourself  and 
us."     But  neither  the  entreaty  of  his  household,  nor  the  corpses  of  inviiui- 
those  who  were  dead,  could  move  him,  willing  rather  to  preserve  stancy 
the  council  with  peril  of  his  life,  than  to  save  his  life  with  peril  of  f"^gof'' 
the  council ;  for  he  did  know,  that  if  he  should  depart,  few  would  t^e  Mnii- 
have  tarried  behind,  and  that  deceit  should  have  been  wrought  in  latcnsis. 
his  absence. 

Wherefore,  like  as  in  wars  the  soldiers  fear  no  danger,  when  they 
sec  their  captain  in  the  midst  of  their  enemies,  so  the  fathers  of  the 
council  were  ashamed  to  fly  fi-om  this  pestilence,  seeing  their  president 
to  remain  with  them  in  the  midst  of  all  dangers.  Which  their  doings 
tlid  utterly  subvert  the  opinion  of  those  who  babbled  abroad,  that 
the  fathers  tarried  in  Basil,  to  seek  their  own  profit  and  commodity, 
and  not  the  verity  of  the  faith  ;  for  there  is  no  commodity  upon  earth, 
which  men  would  change  for  their  lives ;  for  that  all  such  as  do  serve 
the  world,  do  prefer  it  before  all  other  things.  But  these  our  fathers, 
showing  themselves  an  invincible  strong  wall  for  the  house  of  God, 
vanquishing  all  the  crafty  deceits  which  Gabriel  used,  and  overcoming 
all  diflaculties,  which  this  most  cruel  and  pestiferous  year  brought 
upon  them,  at  length,  all  desire  of  life  also  being  set  apart,  they  have 
overcome  all  dangers,  and  have  not  doubted,  Avith  most  constant 
minds  to  defend  the  verity  of  the  council  even  unto  this  present. 

*The3  time  of  the  decree  being  passed,  after  the  deposition  of 

(r  See  Edition  1563,  p.  322.  .,  ,    ,.      i..  u  a 

^2)  •'  Tridentum,"  Trent;  it  was  here  that  the  memorable  counfil  was  held,  which  commenced 

in  154S,  and  ended  in  1503.— Ed.  ,...,,      .u 

(3)  The  history  heing  more  fully  given  in  the  first  edition,  the  following  pages,  distinguished  with 

asterisks,  are  substituted  for  three  short  paragraphs  in  later  editions.     See  Edition  15C3,  pp.  323— 

827.— Ed. 


662  THE    COUNCIL    OF    BASIL, 

Menry    Gabriel,  it  seemed  good  unto  the  fathers  to  proceed  to  the  election 
of  another  bishop,  whereupon  they,  counselling  amongst  themselves 


to 
1439. 


A.  D.  touching  the  order  of  proceeding,  it  was  afterwards  concluded  in  the 
^■^■^^  deputations,  and  in  the  whole  congregation,  that  thirty-two  fathers 
should  be  chosen  out  of  the  body  of  the  council,  who,  taking  an  oath 
ordained  by  the  council,  should  enter  the  conclave  together  with  the 
cardinal  Arelatensis,  to  elect  and  choose  the  pope.  Notwithstanding, 
the  common  deputation  thought  good,  that  there  should  be  but  only 
twenty-four  chosen  for  that  election  besides  the  cardinal,  and  those 
also  shoidd  be  priests.  But  the  determination  of  the  three  other 
deputations  took  place :  wherefore  the  decree  was  made,  and  the 
conclave  prepared  with  all  speed.  Which  being  done,  they  proceeded 
to  the  nominating  of  the  thirty-tv/o,  that,  together  with  the  cardinal, 
should  elect  and  choose  the  pope.  This  was  about  the  first  of 
October. 

The  matter,  at  first,  was  very  difficult  and  hard,  some  of  them 
naming  one,  and  some  another  for  electors,  as  they  thought  good. 
At  last  William,  archdeacon  of  Metz,  a  famous  and  learned  man, 
opened  unto  them  a  certain  way  and  mean  :  "  There  are,"  said  he, 
"■  in  the  council,  three  fathers,  whose  fidelity  the  whole  council  I  think 
will  follow."  These  three  men  he  named  to  be  Thomas,  abbot  of 
Donduno,  of  the  diocese  of  Candiderace,  commonly  called  of  Greece ; 
John  de  Segovia,  archdeacon  of  Vissosa ;  and  Thomas  de  Corcellis, 
canon  of  Ambiane : '  all  divines,  whose  sobriety  and  vu-tue  being 
commended,  he  determined  that  they  three  should  be  the  principal 
electors,  and  that  unto  them  should  be  committed  the  election  of  the 
other  twenty-nine,  whom  they  should  privily  name  among  themselves, 
and  not  publish  till  the  day  before  they  should  enter  the  conclave. 
Which  thing  being  allowed  in  the  deputation  of  faith,  Francis  de 
Fuxe,  a  divine,  and  ^^neas  Senensis,  were  sent  unto  the  other  deputa- 
tions to  persuade  with  them.  But  they,  suspecting  some  fraud, 
would  not  give  ear  to  any  persuasion.  But,  forasmuch  as  there  was 
no  better  or  readier  way  found  by  the  other,  the  deputation  of  faith 
took  effect.  Certain  days  after,  they  appointed  the  said  Francis  and 
^"Eneas  to  go  again  unto  the  deputations,  with  this  addition,  that  if  it 
pleased  the  other  deputations,  the  three  fathers  would  take  unto  them 
another.  That  was  done  for  this  purpose,  lest  the  German  nation 
should  complain,  that  there  was  none  of  their  nation  with  the  three 
fathers :  for  divers  muniiured  and  said,  that  the  abbot  of  Scotia 
seemed  rather  to  be  a  Frenchman  than  a  German.  After  much  dis- 
cussing of  the  matter,  they  agreed  upon  this  point :  the  three  men 
aforesaid  were  appointed  and  chosen  for  three  electors  of  the  bishop 
of  Rome,  and  full  authority  was  given  unto  them,  to  choose  and  take 
unto  them  two  or  three  others,  as  they  should  think  good ;  who,  being 
so  elect  and  chosen,  should  have  like  power  and  authority  with  them 
(through  the  power,  authority,  and  commandment  of  the  sacred 
council),  to  nominate  and  choose  the  residue  of  the  electors  of  the 
bishop  of  Rome,  and  other  officers  necessary  for  the  conclave ;  so 
that  none  named  by  them  to  be  chosen  or  elected,  should  be  received, 
except  he  be  named  and  elected  by  the  greater  part  of  the  electors. 
It  was  also  enjoined  them,  that  they  should  nominate  and  choose  the 

'1  .  •  A-v.biar.e,"  Amien   —Ed, 


CESSATION    OK    THE    PESTILENCE.  66^ 

residue  of  the  electors  out  of  the  whole  body  of  the  council,  having    n,'„r,j 
respect,  as  much  as  might  be,  to  the  nations  and  deputations  being  in      '^'' 


the  council.     Whereupon  the  three  men  were  sworn  and  bound  to    A.  D. 
nominate  and  choose  apt  men,  having  the  fear  of  God,  and  not  to    ^^^^ 
reveal  or  disclose  those  which  they  had  chosen,  until  they  should  be    j^^g 
published  in  a  general  congregation,  or  that  they  were  commanded  by  — ^— ^- 
the  council  so  to  do,  and  to  keep  their  election  under  their  seats,  in 
some  safe  and  siu-e  place,  until  the  day  of  their  publication,  which  was 
the  thirteenth  of  October,  in  a  general  congregation.     It  seemed 
strange  unto  all  men,  that  a  matter  of  so  great  importance  should 
be  committed  unto  three  men.      Notwithstanding    virtue    overcame 
all,   and  excluded  all  kind  of  suspicion  of  fraud  and  deceit  from 
these  men. 

The  matter  being  thus  concluded,  Arelatensis,  contrary  to  all  men's 
expectation,  seemed  to  defer  the  election.  Whereupon  some  (as  the 
multitude  is  prone  to  backbite  and  slander)  did  backbite  and  slander 
him.  Others,  contrary  to  his  mind,  sought  to  hasten  the  election. 
Which  thing  when  he  understood,  contrary  to  his  old  accustomed 
manner,  which  never  used  to  regard  any  evil  words,  he  made  a  com- 
plaint of  these  matters  unto  the  deputies,  whereby  he  brought  to 
pass  that,  pm-ging  himself,  they  were  brought  into  contempt  and 
hatred,  who  had  spoken  evil  of  him,  and  thereby  did  so  much  the 
more  approve  and  confirm  his  fidelity  towards  the  council.  While 
these  things  were  thus  doing,  there  went  a  bruit  throughout  all  the 
world,  that  the  pestilence  was  ceased  at  Basil,  and  that  the  pope's 
election  went  forward  speedily :  whereupon  many  came  out  of  divers 
countries  to  behold  and  see  the  matter,  amongst  whom  there  were 
many  notable  prelates.  When  the  council  was  now  fuller  than  it  was 
accustomed  to  be,  and  that  all  men  almost  were  returned,  who  were 
fled  for  fear  of  the  pestilence,  the  three  men,  minding  to  perform  the 
commission  given  them  by  the  council,  associated  unto  them  Christian 
Gregreginus,  president  of  St.  Peter's  church,  in  the  diocese  of  Olmutz, 
in  the  heart  of  Germany ;  a  divine,  a  man  of  constant  mind  and 
judgment. 

The  twenty-eighth  of  October,  assembling  together  in  the  house  of  The  See- 
the friars  minors,  they  fulfilled  their  commission,  and,  according  unto  named  by 
the  commandment  of  the  council,  kept  it  sealed.  But  before  that  Jn'^^'^' 
was  done,  they  talked  with  divers  expert  and  wise  men  of  every 
nation,  by  whose  report  they  learned  and  considered  the  manners  of 
every  man  ;  and  so,  by  a  subtle  mean,  understood  how  every  man 
was  esteemed  in  his  country.  Many  also  came  unto  them  of  their 
own  A\alls,  who  were  desirous  either  to  praise  their  friend,  or  to 
reprove  their  enemy ;  whom  they,  being  desirous  of  the  truth,  that 
thcv  might  not  be  deceived  in  so  weighty  a  matter,  willingly  heard : 
so  that  there  was  no  mischief  done  in  the  council,  and  nothing  done 
abroad,  but  that  they  heard  and  understood.  These  men,  the  fourth 
calends  of  November,  being  called  by  the  council  to  report  what 
they  had  done,  came  unto  the  congregation,  where  all  they  who  were 
incorporated  Avere  assembled  ;  neither  was  there  any  man  absent  that 
might  be  there.  And,  forasmuch  as  the  three  men  had  not  declared 
the  matter  unto  any,  by  hoAv  much  the  matter  was  kept  secret,  by  so 
much  the  more  it  was  desired  of  all  men. 


664  THE    COUXCIL    OF    BASIL. 

Hevrxj        Then  tlicy  talked  together  amongst  themselves,  and  spake  much  of 


VI. 


the  three  men,  conjecturing  upon  the  nominating  of  the  electors ; 

li^'    ^°nie  saying  that  this  man,  and  others,  that  that  man,  should  be  an 

jjj      elector ;  speaking  as  aiFection  and  likeliliood  did  move  them  :  but, 

1439.   forasmuch  as  no  man  knew  any  certainty,  every  man  was  the  more 

"         ^  desirous  to  hear  the  conclusion.    Some  had  put  on  their  best  apparel, 

others  had  hired  new  servants, — some  had  committed  their  houses 

unto  their  friends,  because  they  thought  to  be  of  the  number  of  the 

electors.    It  came  to  pass,  I  know  not  how,  that  every  man  esteemed 

himself  above  his  ability,  whose  ambition  was  afterwards  more  mocked 

and  derided,  than  fulfilled. 

Cardinal  Arelatensis,  being  very  careful  in  this  weighty  business, 
and  being  occupied  with  other  affairs,  came  somewhat  later  unto  the 
congregation  than  time  required,  whose  long  tarrying  was  not  a  little 
marvelled  at  of  all  men.  When  he  Avas  set  down  in  his  seat,  having 
first  excused  his  long  tarrying,  he  said  :  "  This  day  a  weighty  matter 
is  entreated  as  touching  the  nomination  of  the  electors,  which  shall 
be  straight  opened,  whereupon  the  state  of  the  church  doth  depend. 
Mark  the  If  the  three  men  unto  whom  you  have  committed  these  affairs  have 
affecuon  douc  wcll,  I  grant  I  have  tarried  too  long ;  but  if  they  have  not 
fm^\f^  done  well,  I  am  come  too  soon  -T  which  words  he  pronounced  with  a 
fearful  voice,  and  a  pale  countenance,  even  of  the  abundance  of  his 
heart.  When  he  had  thus  spoken,  through  his  sad  countenance  and 
gesture  he  made  all  men  afraid,  and  showed  such  a  sadness  of  mind, 
that  many  wept  who  knew  the  state  that  he  was  in  by  his  counte- 
nance. For  this  same  good  father  feared  lest  those  three  men,  con- 
temning the  high  prelates,  had  chosen  the  most  part  of  the  inferiors, 
which  thing  was  the  more  to  be  suspected,  for  that  he  could  never 
know  any  thing  of  their  mind.  When  the  three  men  perceived  the 
cardinal  so  sad  (even  as  if  the  air  had  waxed  troublous),  they  prepared 
themselves  to  bear  out  the  storm.  Notwithstanding  all  men  were 
greatly  afraid,  lest  the  church  should  be  that  day  divided  again,  and 
lest  a  greater  tumult  would  follow,  than  that  which  was  before  passed, 
by  means  of  the  election  :  for  every  man,  according  as  his  affection 
led  him,  prepared  himself  either  to  the  commendation  or  dispraise  of 
the  three  men.  Which  things  being  understood  and  known,  the 
three  men  thought  it  good,  before  they  would  enter  into  the  decla- 
ration of  the  matter,  somewhat  to  speak,  to  pacify  the  minds  of  the 
audience  ;  knowing  that  after  a  wound  once  given,  no  man  would 
willingly  hearken  or  give  ear.  Scotus,  the  abbot,  spake  first,  and 
after  him  John  Segovius,  making  this  preface  beforehand : 

The  Preface  of  John  Segovius,  and  his  Associates. 

The  pie-        No  man  (they  said)  should  think  himself  contemned,  if  he  were  omitted ; 

faces  of  for  that  they  did  dihgently  foresee  and  consider,  what  men  they  should  receive 
unto  the  conclave,  and  whom  they  should  leave  out :  for  that  it  seemed  needful 
unto  them,  to  appoint  as  soher  and  discreet  men  without  the  conclave,  as 
within,  who  mijjht  defend  the  conclave,  and  prohibit  all  new  sects  or  uproars 
in  the  synod.  This  they  had  learned  of  the  precepts  of  the  most  famous  philo- 
sopher Plato,  who  commanded  the  governors  of  cities  so  to  rule  the  whole  body 
of  the  common  wealth,  that  whilst  they  do  defend  the  one  part,  they  leave  not 
the  other  void  :  v/hich  thing,  also,  did  admonish  them  to  nominate  the  electors 


the  three 
men. 


ORDER    IN    THE    ELECTION    OF    POPE.  665 

by  their  provinces,  that  some  should  not  seem  to  be  reverenced,  and  others  to     iiciry 
be  neglected.     And  in  their  election,  they  had  been  circumspect ;  and  in  all      ^'^■ 
others  which  were  nominated  by  themselves,  they  had  either  found  some  sin- 
gular  goodness,  or  nobility  joined  with  goodness,  or  else  some  singular  learning    Vli"!" 
joined  with  both.     Also,  as  touching  the  bishops,  they,  together  with  the  car- 
dinal,  were  unequal  with  the  number  of  the  apostles.     Also  then   they  had       *° 
nominated  seven  abbots,  five  divines,  and  one  from  amongst  the  most  famous 
doctors :  all  these  being  in  the  order  of  priesthood.     As  for  the  officers  whom  The  num- 
they  had  nominated,  they  were  famous  for  nobility  and  virtue  :  that  is  to  say,  i^"  of  the 
one  vice-chamberlain,  eight  keepers  of  the  conclave,  two  clerks  of  the  ceremo-  of  every 
nies,  two  promoters,  one  procurer-fiscal,  one  soldan,  whom  they  had  about  the  order, 
election  and  deputations,  as  it  was  enjoined  them. 

With  these  Avoids  they  did  somewhat  pacify  the  multitude,  and 
opening  the  tables  of  the  election,  which  John  Segovius  did  read,  the 
order  of  the  nations  was  omitted  therein ;  which  thing  was  greatly 
imputed  unto  the  three  men,  to  prefer  one  nation  before  another : 
for,  as  every  man  did  excel  in  dignity  and  priesthood,  so  Avas  he  first 
named  : 

'  For  I,'  continued  John  Segovius,  '  will  not  fear  to  observe  the  order  of  the 
nations  which  was  observed  at  Constance  ;  neither  do  I  fear  any  envy,  because 
I  will  neither  show  any  favoiu"  unto  those  who  are  preferred,  nor  do  any  injury 
unto  those  who  are  placed  after  :  for  neither  nobility  nor  authority,  hath  brought 
in  this  order,  but  time  itself;  for,  as  every  nation  did  first  receive  the  word  of 
God,  so  is  it  first  preferred.  For  the  early  or  late  conversion  of  my  elders,  is 
not  to  be  praised  or  dispraised  of  me  that  am  a  Christian  :  for  he  had  no  more 
reward  in  the  gospel,  who  came  early  in  the  morning  to  the  vineyard,  than  he 
who  came  late.' 

'  Notwithstanding,  the  Roman  empire,  and  the  see  of  Peter,  prefer  the 
ItaUan  nation.  Wherefore,  for  the  better  understanding  of  those  who  shall 
hear  the  same,  we  will  observe  the  order  of  nations.  But  this  must  first  be 
considered^  that  the  cardinal  Arelatensis  cometh  unto  the  election,  not  by  any 
favour  of  the  three  men's  nomination,  but  by  his  own  proper  right :  wherefore 
I  will  set  him  first,  out  of  the  order  of  the  nations.  The  like  place  also  should 
the  other  cardinals  have  had,  if  they  had  been  reconciled  unto  the  church,  or, 
not  being  spotted  with  Eugene's  heresy;  they  had  come  in  time.  The  first  and 
principal  of  all  the  electors,  was  the  cardinal  Arelatensis,  a  man  of  invincible  xhe  eloc- 
constancy  and  incomparable  wisdom,  unto  whose  virtue  I  may  justly  ascribe  tors. 
whatsoever  was  done  in  the  council :  for  without  him  the  prelates  had  not 
persevered  in  their  purpose,  neither  could  the  shadow  of  any  prince  so  have 
defended  them.' 

But  now,  to  proceed  to  the  nomination.  Out  of  the  Italian 
nation,  there  were  chosen  the  bishops  William  of  Vercelli,  George 
Augustensis,  John  Epurgimus,  and  Ludovicus  Fam-inensis,  all  men 
of  nobility  and  great  wisdom ;  also  abbots,  Alerianus,  the  abbot  of 
St.  Beningo,  and  James  of  Cecusia ;  of  doctors,  friar  John  de  Mont 
Conuto,  master  of  the  house  of  St.  Anthony  de  Rovcrsio  ;  friar 
Bartholemew.  In  these  men  was  appointed  the  election  of  the  Ita- 
lian nation. 

Of  the  French  nation  were  elected  John,  archbishop  of  Tarantaisc, 
who  took  upon  him  that  place  and  dignity  against  his  will ;  Francis, 
bishop  of  Seben ;  and  Barnard  Aquensis,  a  subtle  lawyer,  who,  for 
the  manifest  impediments  of  his  body  and  grievous  gout,  excused 
himself ;  in  whose  place  was  chosen  Ludovicus,  bishop  of  Marseilles. 
Also  Raymond,  abbot  of  Conquest ;  Nicholas  Tibot,  a  Norman  and 


666  THE    COUNCIL    OF    BASIL. 

Jicurij    a  divine  ;  John  de  Walle,  a  Briton  ;  and  Thomas  Corcellis,  who  was 
one  of  the  three  men  :  of  lawyers,  William,  archdeacon  of  St.  Hewes 


A.  D    of  Metz.    All  these  were  chosen  with  the  cardinal  Arelatensis,  to  the 

^^"^^    election  of  the  pope. 

j^3g         Out  of  the  German  nation,  which  is  the  gi-eatest  of  all  the  rest, 

'—  were  chosen  Frederic,  bishop  of  Basil ;  Conrad,  abbot  of  Lucella ; 

and  Thomas  de  Scotia,  who  was  one  of  the  three  men  apjiointed. 
Of  doctors,  Detzelaus,  archdeacon  of  Cracovia ; '  John  Wylor,  dean 
of  Basil ;  Henricus  de  Indeis,  of  CuUen ;  and  James  de  Saltzbur- 
gacan,  of  Ratisbone  ;  and  Christian,  who,  as  is  before  said,  was  taken 
into  the  number  of  the  three  men. 

Out  of  the  Spanish  nation  were  chosen  for  the  election  of  the  pope, 
eight  bishops  ;  as  the  bishop  of  Dertusia  ;^  George,  bishop  of  Nice  ; 
Ludovicus  Nicensis,  who  was  ambassador  for  the  king  of  Portugal. 
Also  abbots ;  as  Peter,  abbot  of  St.  Cuccophat,  and  Antonius  Arru- 
Jaris.  Of  doctors  ;  Barnard  Busco,  canon  of  Ilerda ;  Raymond 
Albioli,  canon  of  Tirasonen  ;^  and  John  Segovius,  who  M^as  one  of 
the  tln-ee  electors.  These  were  they  who  were  elected  to  the  nomi- 
nating of  the  pope,  out  of  the  four  nations.  As  for  the  Englishmen, 
they  were  not  received,  because  they  were  not  present,  and  none  could 
be  chosen,  but  such  as  were  present.  For  officer  about  the  conclave, 
was  elected  and  nominated,  Ludovicus,  bishop  of  Lausanne.  For 
keepers  of  the  conclave,  were  elected,  Porceanallus,  bishop  of  Belicen  ; 
Nicholas  Crossetanus,  John  de  Thaurenensis,  Francis  Abundance, 
all  abbots ;  Francis  de  Fuxe,  a  divine  ;  William  of  Constance,  canon 
of  Spire;  John  de  Turesella,  dean  of  Segrobrecen  ;  "*  and  Theodoric 
Nagel,  canon  of  Riegen.  For  clerks  of  the  ceremonies  were  appointed, 
ZEneas,  canon  of  Tridentum,^  and  Michael  Brenout,  canon  of  Bellua- 
■censis.  For  promoters,  they  were  elected,  who  had  before,  in  the 
council,  a  long  time  promoted  causes :  Hugh  Gerardi,  and  John 
'Slitzenrode.  For  procurer-fiscal  was  appointed  Robert  Magnani ; 
and  Peter  de  Atro,  for  the  soldan,  who  had  used  the  same  office 
before  in  the  council. 

These  men  being  thus  nominated,  and  the  tables  read  by  John 
Segovius,  as  is  before  said,  the  cardinal,  who,  until  that  present,  was 
amazed  and  afraid,  because  he  could  not  be  persuaded  that  such  an 
election  should  have  been  made,  was  relieved  and  took  courage  unto 
him.  For  when  he  saw  the  bishops,  and  a  great  number  of  abbots 
elected  and  chosen,  and  that  the  nations  were  equally  preferred  in 
the  council,  he  began  to  take  a  courage  unto  him,  and  his  face  to  receive 
its  accustomed  beauty  and  colour ;  and  making  an  oration  Avith  a 
cheerful  countenance,  he  did  exhilarate  the  whole  congregation,  which, 
he  being  sad,  could  not  otherwise  choose  but  to  be  also  heavy  and 
sad.  After  he  had  spoken  some  things  as  touching  the  election,  and 
greatly  commended  the  industry  and  diligence  of  the  three  men, 
which  they  had  at  all  times  showed  in  the  council,  but  now  especially, 
he  dismissed  the  congregation.  At  night,  all  the  electors  were  sent 
for,  unto  the  cardinal's  chamber;    where  they  conferred   amongst 

(1)  •'  Cracovia,"  Cracow.— Ed.  (2)  "  Dertusia,"  Tortosa.— Ed. 

(3)  "  Tirasonen,"  Tarazona  —Ed.         (4)  "  Seprobrecen,"  Segorbe,  in  Valencia.— rn 
(5)  "  Tridentum"  Trent.— Ed. 


THE    DISTRIBUTION    OF    LOTS. 

themselves,  toucliing  the  division  of  the  chambers,  and,  for  as  much 
as  there  was  great  difference  of  the  chambers,  it  was  appointed,  that 
they  should  be  divided  amongst  the  prehxtes,  according  to  their  dig- 
nities ;  as  every  man  was  most  ancient  of  dignity,  so  to  choose  the 
best  and  principal  place.  For  they  said,  it  was  not  to  be  suffered, 
that  the  cardinal  and  the  archbishop  should  come  to  a  lot  with  the 
doctors  and  inferiors,  whereby  it  were  greatly  to  be  laughed  at,  if  the 
cardinal  should  be  placed  beneath,  and  the  doctors  above.  And, 
forasmuch  as  the  prelates  were  the  greater  number,  they  all  agreed 
upon  the  same,  so  that  it  seemed  but  vain  to  speak  of  lots.  The 
doctors  also  thought  good  to  speak  for  themselves,  and  said,  that  the 
ancient  customs  ought  not  to  be  broken.  For  it  had  been  always 
used,  in  every  conclave,  that  the  chambers  should  be  divided  by  lots, 
and  that,  not  only  amongst  the  cardinals,  but  also  amongst  the  car- 
dinals and  others  :  for  at  Constance,  albeit  there  were  many  cardinals, 
yet  did  they  not  refuse  to  cast  lots  with  the  bishops  and  doctors. 
For  the  prelates  do  favour  themselves  too  much,  in  that  they,  being 
the  greater  number,  do  seek  to  have  the  victory  rather  by  voices,  than 
by  reason.  If  the  election  of  the  chambers  be  without  lots,  some 
collusion  is  to  be  feared,  and  schism  among  the  electors,  lest  they 
who  stand  beneath,  and  shake  for  cold,  might  envy  those  Avho  are 
placed  above. 

By  these  reasons  the  cardinal  being  persuaded,  consented  to  the 
mind  of  the  doctors,  and  after  him  the  good  bishop  of  Dertusia  pro- 
phesied. "  If  there  be  any  man,"  said  he,  "  unto  whom  the  lots 
would  be  hurtful,  it  is  I,  whom  the  lots  will  place  in  the  lowest  room. 
Notwithstanding  because  we  will  not  subvert  the  ancient  customs, 
neither  be  envious  against  the  doctors,  I  think  it  good  that  the 
matter  be  tried  by  lots."     And  upon  this  point  they  did  conclude. 

Immediately  there  were  certain  of  every  sort  of  the  electors  sent 
unto  the  conclave,,  with  the  cardinal  Arelatensis,  by  the  advice  of  the 
vice-chamberlain,  to  cast  lots  upon  the  chambers.  The  electors' 
names  were  written,  every  one  in  a  several  bill  by  itself,  and  put  into 
a  close  basket ;  and  when  they  came  unto  the  first  chamber  door, 
the  cardinal,  putting  his  hand  into  the  basket,  took  out  the  schedule 
that  came  next  to  hand,  and  reading  the  same,  delivered  it  unto  the 
vice-chamberlain,  and  the  vice-chamberlain  set  it  upon  the  chamber 
door ;  and  so  went  throughout  the  chambers  orderly,  so  that  when 
the  electors  should  enter  into  the  conclave  the  next  day,  they  should 
know  that  cell  and  chamber  to  be  appointed  for  them,  where  they 
should  find  their  names  set  up.  The  dean  of  Basil  had  the  first 
place,  and  the  bishop  of  Dertusia  the  last,  according  as  he  himself 
had  prophesied.  The  distribution  of  the  lots  in  this  case  was  very 
strange,  or  rather  a  divine  dispensation,  reproving  the  devices  of 
man,  in  that  a  doctor  was  first  placed,  and  a  bishop  last,  when  the 
prelates  had  determined  to  have  the  best  chambers  appointed  for 
themselves. 

The  next  day  following,  being  Friday,  the  thirtieth  of  October,  The  ^^^ 
there  was  a  general  congregation  holden,  and  the  deliberations  of  tL"" " 
the  next  deputations  concluded.     Immediately  there  followed  a  ses-  ^^: 
sion,  and  cardinal  Arelatensis  sung  the  mass,  where,  after  the  gospel  gated, 
was  sung,  Mark,  a  famous  divine,  made  an  oration  unto  the  electors. 


timi 

mass 
was  not 


to 
1439. 


668  THE    COUNCIL    OF    BASIL. 

Henry    and  rcckoniiig  up  the    manifold    crimes   of  Gabriel  who  was  de- 

^^'      posed,  he  endeavoured  himself  to  persuade  the  electors  to  choose 

A.D     such  a  man  as  should  in  all  points  be  contrary  unto  Gabriel,  and 

^^^^     eschew  all  his  vices:   that  as  he,  through  his  manifold  reproaches, 

was  hateful  unto  all  men,  so  he  who  should  be  chosen  should  show 

himself  acceptable  unto  all  men,  through  justice.     And  as  Gabriel 

The  vices  ^^s  covctous  and  full  of  rapine,  so  this  man  should  show  himself 

of  Ga-  .  ' 

biiei.        contment. 

The  church  was  full  of  people  on  every  part.  The  noble  matrons 
of  the  city  stood  between  the  uppermost  pillars,  beholding  the  con- 
gregation, and  considering  the  order  of  things  not  without  great 
devotion.  There  was  present  John  earl  of  Tierstain,  who  supplied 
the  place  of  the  emperor"'s  protector.  The  senate  of  the  city  was 
also  present,  and  many  other  noblemen,  to  behold  and  see  the  same 
strange  matter.  Silence  was  kept  on  all  parts,  and  the  citizens  were 
without  the  church  in  armour,  to  prohibit  that  there  should  be  any 
uproar  made. 

There  was  so  great  a  number  of  people  gathered  together  to  be- 
hold this  matter,  that  neither  in  the  church,  nor  in  the  streets,  any 
man  could  pass,  insomuch  that  there  was  great  press  even  within  the 
The  dec-  chuTcli.      Wlicn  the  Cardinal  Arelatensis   had  communicated,   the 
nmn^crte  othcr  clcctors,  according  to  their  order,  were  called  unto  the  altar,  to 
together,   commuuicate ;    then  the   archbishop  of  Tarantaise,  and   ten   other 
bishops    did    communicate.     After   them    seven    abbots,  then    five 
divines,  and  last  of  all  nine  lawyers,  who,  coming  unto  the  altar, 
and  kneeling  down,  received  the  sacrament.     It  was   a  worthy  sight 
to  behold  so  many  reverend  bishops,  so  many  famous  fathers,  showing 
their  hoary  heads  before  the  sacrament,  some  of  them   praying,  and 
others    pouring  out  abundant  tears.     After  all  this  was  done,  and 
the  general  congregation  finished,  all  the  prelates  put  on  their  robes 
and  vestments,  fit  for  the  session. 

Then  Ludovicus,  the  bishop   of  Lausanne,  going  up   upon  the 
scaffold,  read  three  things  there  by  order.     First  of  all  the  answer 
of  the  synod,  to  the    famous    libel    of  Gabriel,  which    beginneth, 
'  Moses,""     Secondly,  a  certain  limitation  touching  a  decree  lately 
set  forth  by  the  council  upon  elections.     And,  thirdly,  the  election  of 
the  three  men,  which  the  sacred  council  had  allowed. 
The  oath       Whicli  being  read,  the  fathers  were  demanded  whether  it  pleased 
efectois,    them  or  no :    whereunto  they  answered,  that  it  did  please  them. 
Then  the  bishop  of  Lausanne  required  that  the  form  of  the  oath 
should  be  read,  which  the  electors  should  take,  and  that  the  electors 
should  take  their  oath,  according  to  the  order  of  the  council.     Then 
the  cardinal  Arelatensis,  opening  the  book  of  Decrees,  read  the  form 
of  the  oath  in  the  audience  of  all  men,  and  by-and-by  being  re- 
quired so  to  swear,  said,* 
The  "  Most  reverend  fathers  I   I  promise,  swear,  and  vow,   before  my 

oathof  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (whose  most  blessed  body  I,  unworthy  sinner, 
have  received,  unto  whom  in  the  last  judgment  I  shall  give  an  ac- 
count of  all  my  deeds),  that  in  this  business  of  election,  whereunto 
now,  by  the  will  of  the  council,  we  are  sent,  I  will  seek  nothing  el&e, 
but  only  the  salvation  of  the  christian  people,  and  the  profit  of  the 
universal  church.      This  shall  be  mv  whole  care  and  study  that  the 


Arelaten- 


THE    CONCLAVK    MADE    SECURE.  OOl) 

autliority  of  the  geneml  councils  be  not  contemned,  that  the  catholic    fienry 

faith  be  not  impugned,  and  that  the  fathers  Avho  remain   in   the 1_ 

council,  be  not  oppressed.  This  will  I  seek  for ;  this  shall  be  my  ^^^^ 
care;  unto  this,  with  all  my  whole  force  and  power,  will  I  bend  ^'^'^^ 
m.yself;  neither  will   I  respect  any  thing  in  this  point,  either  for    i^i^x 

mine  own  cause,  or  for  any  friend,  but  only  God,  and  the  profit  of 

the  church.     With  this  mind  and  intent,  and  with  this  heart,  Avill  1 
take  mine  oath  before  the  council." 

His  words  were  lively  and  fearful,  *  moving^  the  minds  of  all  those 
that  stood  by.  Who  is  it  then  that  would  not  think  him  meet  for  the 
bishopric,  who  is  allowed  by  the  judgment  of  so  many  bishops  and 
priests;  especially  when  they,  before  receiving  the  sacrament,  had  taken 
their  oath  that  they  would  choose  none,  but  only  such  as  they  should 
think  meet  and  fit  for  the  dignity  and  office.  In  the  same  session 
also  the  vice-chamberlain,  the  keepers  of  the  conclave,  the  clerks  of 
the  ceremonies  and  the  promoters,  promised  by  another  to  execute 
their  office  truly ;  which  done,  about  three  of  the  clock  at  afternoon, 
the  people  being  yet  fasting,  '  Te  Deum""  was  sung  by  all  parties. 
That  ended,  they  went,  with  all  solemnity,  to  the  conclave.  When 
they  came  thither  the  electors  were  received  in,  and  all  the  rest  dis- 
missed and  sent  away.  Their  servants  also  that  were  appointed  unto 
them  were  let  in,  yet  was  not  the  door  of  the  conclave  by-and-by 
shut,  but  stood  open  until  nine  of  the  clock  at  night,  that  their  friends 
might  brinjj  tlicm  such  ihinofs  as  were  necessarv,  and  one  friend  to 
talk  with  another  till  that  time.  When  night  drew  on,  the  protector, 
with  certain  citizens,  went  in  to  see  how  every  man  was  placed ;  taking 
great  pleasure  to  behold  the  order  and  manner  thereof.  After  him 
went  in  the  bishop  of  Lausanne,  the  vice-chamberlain,  the  keepers  of 
the  conclave,  searching  every  chamber,  if  they  had  any  person,  or 
any  thing,  with  them,  contrary  to  the  orders ;  but,  finding  nothing, 
they  went  their  ways.  About  nine  of  the  clock,  as  is  before  said, 
the  gates  were  shut,  both  within  and  without,  and  strongly  barred 
and  chained. 

But  now  to  declare  the  order  of  the  election  in  the  place  where 
the  cardinal  and  the  bishop  of  Vicenza  were ;  seats  were  prepared 
for  the  cardinal  and  the  others ;  the  archbishop  of  Tarantaise  was 
set  on  the  right  hand  of  the  cardinal,  and  the  bishop  of  Tortosa  on 
the  left  hand,  and  so  all   the  other  electors  were  placed  according  to  TheoU.er 
their  degree  and  order,*  who  did  swear  and  take  their  oaths.     The  ^aketheir 
manner  of  their  election  was  after  this  sort.     Before  the  cardinal's  "•"''* 
seat  was  set  a  desk,  whereupon  there  stood  a  bason  of  silver,  into 
which  bason  all  the  electors  did  cast  their  schedules,  which  the  car- 
dinal, receiving,  read  one  by  one ;  and  four  others  of  the  electors 
wrote  as  he  read  them. 

The  tenor  of  the  schedules  was  in  this  manner :  "  I,  George,  bishop 
of  Vicenza,  do  choose  such  a  man,  or  such  a  man,  for  bishop  of 
Rome ;"'  and  peradventure  named  one  or  two.  Every  one  of  the 
electors  subscribed  his  name  unto  the  schedule,  that  he  might  thereby 
know  his  own,  and  sav  '  nay,'  if  it  were  written  contrary  to  that  which 
was  spoken ;  whereby  all  deceit  was  utterly  excluded.  The  first  scru- 

(1}  See  Edition  1503.  p.  327.— F.D. 


to 
1439. 


(TiO  THE    COUNCIL    OF     BASIL. 

irevr;/    tiny  thus  ended,  it  was  found  that  tliere  were  many  named  to  the 

^^'      papacy ;  vet  none  had  sufficient  voices,  for,  that  day,  there  were  seven- 

A.  D.    teen  of  divers  nations  nominated.     Notwithstanding,  Amedeus,  duke 

^■^"^^     of  Savoy,   a  man  of  singular  virtue,  sunnounted  them  all ;  for  in  the 

first  scrutiny  he  had  the  voice  of  sixteen  electors,  who  judged  him 

worthy  to  govern  the  church. 

duke  of  ^       After  this  (at  three  of  the  clock  in  the  afternoon)  there  was  a  dili- 

savoy.      ^p^^^  inquisition  had  in  the  council  touching  those  who  were  named  of 

the  electors,  and  as  every  man''s  opinion  served  him,  he  did  either 

praise  or  discommend  those  who  were  nominated.     Notwithstanding, 

A  scrtrti-  there  was  such  report  made  of  Amedeus,  that  in  the  next  scrutiny, 

pnvy^     which  was  holden  on  the  fourth  of  the  nones  of  November,'  the  said 

election    Amcdcus  had  twenty-one  voices,  and  likewise  in  the  third  and  fourth 

'  scrutiny,  twenty-one  voices.  And,  forasmuch  as  there  was  none  found 

in  all  the  scrutiny  to  have  two  parts,  all  the  other  schedules  were 

burnt.     And  forasmvich  as  there  lacked  but  only  one   voice  to  the 

Prayer     election  of  tlic  high  bishop,  they  fell  unto  prayer,  desiring  God  that  he 

ind'con^  would  vouchsafc  to  direct  their  minds  to  unity  and  concord,  worthily 

^■'"■'^        to  elect  and  choose  him  who  should  take  the  charge  over  the  flock  of 

God.     Forasmuch  as  Amedeus  seemed  to  be  nearer  unto  the  papacy 

than  all  others,  there  was  great  communication  had  amongst  them 

touching  his  life  and  disposition.    Some  said  that  a  lay-man  ought  not 

so  suddenly  to  be  chosen  ;  for  it  would  seem  a  strange  thing,  for  a 

secular  prince  to  be  called  unto  the  bishopric  of  Rome ;  who  would 

also  too  much  derogate  from  the  ecclesiastical  state,  as  though  there 

were  none  therein  meet  or  worthy  for  that  dignity.    Others  said.  That 

a  man  who  was  married  and  had  children,  was  unmeet  for  such  a  charge. 

Others  again  affirmed,  That  the  bishop  of  Rome  ought  to  be  a  doctor 

of  law,  and  an  excellent  learned  man. 

When  these  words  were  spoken,  others  rising  up,  spake  far  other- 
wise ;  that  albeit  Amedeus  was  no  doctor,  yet  was  he  learned  nnd 
wise,  forasmuch  as  all  his  whole  youth  he  had  bestowed  in  learning  and 
study,  and  had  sought  not  the  name,  but  even  the  ground  of  learning. 

An  Oration  in  favour  of  the  Claims  of  Amedeus  to  the  Popedom. 

Then  said  another  tliese  words  :  ^  '  If  ye  be  desirous  to  be  instructed  further 

Letlyin"  of  this  prince's  life,  I  pray  you  give  ear  unto  me,  who  do  know  him  thorouglily. 

Eugene     Truly  this  man,  from  his  youth  upward,  and  even  from  his  young  and  tender 

ashamed    jears,  hath  lived  more  religiously  than  secularly,  being  always  obedient  to  his 

of  his        parents  and  masters,  and  being  always  indued  with  the  fear  of  God,  never  given 

false  in-     j-q  j^j^y  yanitj^  or  wantonness;  neither  hath  there  at  any  time  been  any  child  of 

against      the  house  of  Savoy,  in  whom  hath  appeared  greater  wit  or  towardness ;  whereby 

Amedeus.  all  those  who  did  behold  and  know  this  man,  judged  and  foresaw  some  gi-eat 

matter  in  him,  neither  were  they  deceived.     For,  if  ye  desire  to  know  his  rule 

and  governance,  what  and  how  noble  it  hath  been,  iii'st,  know  ye  this,  that  this 

man  hath  reigned,  since  his  father's  decease,   about  forty  )'ears ;  during  whose 

time,  justice,  the  lady  and  queen  of  all  other  virtues,  hath  always  flourished. 

(1)  "Fourth  of  the  nones  of  November."  l"he  nones  were  the  days  after  the  calends;  so 
called,  because,  from  the  last  of  the  calends,  to  the  ides,  was  always  nine  days.  "The  nones," 
was  the  name  adopted  for  the  fifth  day  of  every  month  with  the  exception  of  March,  ]\ray,  .luly, 
and  October.  "  The  ides"  were  the  eight  days  reckoned  backwards  to  the  end  of  the  nones,  and 
fell  on  the  thirteenth  day  of  every  month,  with  the  above  exceptions,  when  they  occurred  on  the 
fifteenth  day. — Ed. 

(2)  Probably  yEneas  Sylvius  himself — Ed. 


AMEDEUS,    THOUGH    MARRIED,    TOMMENDED    AS    POPE.  ()71 

For  he,  hearing  his  subjects  himself,  woiUd  never  suffer  the  poor  to  be  oppressed,     nennj 
or  the  weak  to  be  deceived.     He  was  the  defender  of  the  fatherless,  the  advo-       ^''• 

cate  of  the  widows,   and  the  protector  of  the  poor.     There  was  no  rapine  or 

robbery  in  all  his  territory.    The  poor  and  rich  lived  all  under  one  law,  neither    '^'P' 
was  he  burthenous  to  his  subjects,  or  importune  against  strangers,  throughout 
all  his  country  :  there  were  no  grievous  exactions  of  money  throughout  all  his       }.? 
dominions.    He  thought  himself  rich  enough,  if  the  inhabitants  of  his  dominions  ' 

did  abound  and  were  rich ;  knowing  that  it  is  the  point  of  a  good  shepherd  to 
shear  his  sheep,  and  not  to  devour  them.  In  this  also  was  his  chief  study  and 
care,  that  his  subjects  might  live  in  peace ;  and  such  as  bordered  upon  him, 
might  have  no  occasion  of  grudge.  By  which  policies  he  did  not  only  quietly 
govern  his  father's  dominion,  but  also  augmented  the  same  by  others,  who  wil- 
lingly submitted  themselves  imto  him.  He  never  made  war  upon  any,  but 
resisting  against  such  as  made  war  upon  him,  he  studied  rather  to  make  peace, 
than  to  seek  any  revenge  ;  desiring  rather  to  overcome  his  enemies  viith  benefits, 
than  with  the  sword. 

'  He  man-ied  only  one  wife,  who  was  a  noble  virgin,  and  of  singular  beauty 
and  chastity.  He  would  have  all  his  family  to  keep  their  hands  and  eyes  chaste 
and  continent,  and  throughout  all  his  house,  honesty  and  integrity  of  manners 
were  observed ;  insomuch  that  even  in  a  secular  palace,  the  religion  used  in 
cloisters,  was  observed  and  kept.    When  his  wife  had  changed  her  life,  and  that  (""m- 
he  perceived  his  duchy  to  be  established,  and  that  it  should  come  without  any  ""^'"^'J' 
controversy  imto  his  posterity,  he  declared  his  mind,  which  was  always  religious  Arae(ie- 
and  dedicate  unto  God,  and  showed  what  will  and  affection  he  had  long  borne  "*■  P"!'*'" 
in  his  heart.    For  he,  contemning  the  pomp  and  state  of  this  world,  calling  unto  ^  '^''*' 
him  his  dear  friends,  departed  and  went  into  a  wilderness  ;  where,  building  a 
goodly  abbey,  he  addicted  himself  wholly  to  the  service  of  God,  and,  taking  his 
cross  upon  him,  followed  Christ.     In  which  place  he,  being  conversant  by  the 
space  of  many  years,  showed  forth  great  examples  of  holiness,  wearing  no  other 
garments  biit  such  as  could  withstand  the  cold,  neither  using  any  kind  of  dainty 
fare,  but  only  to  resist  hunger ;  watching  and  praying  the  most  part  of  the  night. 
Wherefore  this  prince  is  not  newly  come  unto  the  church,  as  some  do  suppose, 
but,  being  a  Christian,  born  of  progenitors  a  thousand  years  and  more  being 
Christians,  doth  now  serve  God  in  a  monastery. 

'  But,  as  touching  that,  also,  which  is  spoken  concerning  a  wife,   I  do  not  Having 
regard  it ;  when  not  he  only  who  hath  had  a  wife,  but  he  also  who  hath  a  \vife,  ""'^'  '*  "^ 
may  be  elected  and  chosen   pope.     For  why  do  the  doctors  dispute,  whether  good  „,'.,., 
a  maiTied   man   chosen   pope,  ought  to  perform  his  duty  towards  his    -wife,  to  be 
but  only  because  a  married  man  might  be  received   an d  chosen  ?  For,  as  you  p^ppg 
know  well  enough,  there  were  many  popes  that  had  wives;  and  Peter,  also,  was  have  been 
not  without  a  wife.     But  what  do  we  stand  about  this .'  for  peradventure,  it  had  ni'irried. 
been  better  that  more  priests  had  been  married ;  for  many  should  be  saved 
through  marriage,  who  are  now  damned  through  their  single  life.i  But  hereof  we 
will,'  saith  he,  'speak  in  another  place.    But  this  seemeth  unto  me  rather  to  be 
laughed  at,  than  vv-orthy  any  answer,  which  is  objected  touching  his  children ;  for  in 
what  can  children  (especially  being  of  great  age)  be  impediment  or  let  unto  the 
father,  being  a  bishop  ?  Doth  not  the  Scripture  say.  Wo  be  unto  him  that  is  alone ;  Eccles  iv. 
for  if  he  fall,  he  hath  none  to  help  him  up  again?  This  cannot  be  imputed  unto 
the  prince,  for  he  hath  two  sons,  both  comely  and  wise,  whereof  the  one  is  prince 
of  Piedmont,  the  other  earl  of  the  Genoese.    These  men  will  i-ule  the  country  of 
Savov  in  the  absence  of  their  father,  and  will  help  him,  if  he  have  need ;  for 
they  have  already  learned  to  rule  over  that  people.     I  pray  you,  what  hurt  is  it 
for  a  bishop  of  Rome  to  have  valiant  children,  who  may  help  their  father  against 
tyrants  ? 

O  most  reverend  fathers  !  the  more  I  do  behold  the  storm  of  this  most  per- 
verse and  fi-oward  time,  the  more  I  do  consider  the  vexations  and  troubles  v/hich 
the  church  is  now  tormented  withal,  I  do  so  much  the  more  think  it  profitable, 
yea  and  necessary,  that  this  man  should  be  chosen  prince  and  head ;  I  will  think 
that  God  hath  showed  his  mercy  upon  us,  if  I  may  see  him  have  the  govern- 
ance over  this  ship  ;  I  pray  you  consider  into  what  straits  we  are  now  driven, 
■«rith  what  perils  we  are  now  vexed  and  tossed?     What  prince  is  it  that  is  obe- 

(:)  Read  the  fifth  epistle  of  Ignatius,  and  you  shall  see  that  the  apostles  had  wives ;  and  Bapfista 
Mantuanus  maketh  mention,  how  that  Hilary,  bishop  of  Poitiers,  had  a  wife. 


672 


AMKDEUS,    DUKE    OF    SAVOY,    CHOSEN    POPE. 


Ilevry 

n. 

A.D. 

1431 

to 

1439. 

Schism 
in  the 
Church. 


Good  it 
were, 
that  tern 
poral 
domi- 
nions 
were  di- 
vided 
from  the 
church. 


(licntiinto  this  council  ?  for  some  will  not  confess  that  the  council  is  here,  neither 
receive  our  decrees ;  others  confess  it  in  their  words,  but  by  their  deeds  they 
"  declare  it  to  be  at  Florence.  For,  albeit  that  by  their  words  and  letters  they  do 
not  deny  that  the  church  is  here,  yet  do  they  procure  promotions  at  the  hands 
of  Gabriel,  who  is  deposed. 

'  This  is  the  state  of  the  church ;  witii  these  storms  and  tempests  the  ship  is 
shaken  and  bruised.  Wicked  children  have  risen  up  against  their  mother,  who, 
being  uiniiindful  of  their  mother's  labours  and  kindness  towards  them,  despise 
her,  contemn  her,  and  beat  her.  What  is  to  be  done  herein  ?  Shall  we  choose  a  bare 
man,  who  .shall  i-ather  be  derided  of  our  princes,  than  had  in  reverence  ?  The  days 
are  not  now.  that  men  have  respect  only  unto  virtue,  for,  as  the  satirical  poet 
writeth;  Virtue  is  praised,  but  is  coldly  followed.  A  poor  man  speaketh,  and 
they  ask.  What  is  he  ?  Truly  virtue  is  good,  but  for  our  purpose  it  must  be 
marked  and  looked  upon,  whether  it  be  in  a  rich  man,  or  a  poor  man :  you 
must  choose  a  governor,  who  may  rule  the  ship  not  only  by  counsel,  but  by 
power  also.  The  wind  is  great ;  wherefore,  except  the  counsel  be  good,  and  the 
power  strong,  the  ship  shall  be  broken,  and  all  put  in  danger.  The  memorial  is 
yet  fresh  before  oiu-  eyes,  that  the  princes  do  neglect  the  authority,  which  is  of 
no  force  or  power.  Is  there  not  great  valiantness  showed  in  this  point,  in  that 
you,  fearing  no  peril  or  danger,  either  of  life  or  goods,  have  so  long  contended 
for  the  truth  of  Christ?  But  the  most  mighty  and  high  God  looketh  down  from 
on  high,  and  will  resist  this  their  pride. 

*  I  have  often  consented  unto  their  opinion  who  said,  it  was  expedient  that 
the  temporal  dominions  should  be  divided  from  the  ecclesiastical  state ;  for  I 
did  think  that  the  priests  should  thereby  be  made  more  apt  to  the  divine  minis- 
try, and  secular  princes  more  obedient  to  the  clergy.  But,  forasmuch  as,  at 
this  present,  the  churches  of  the  world  are  possessed,  partly  by  Eugene,  and 
partly  by  other  tyrants,  we  must  provide  that  we  choose  such  a  one,  who  may 
recover  again  the  patrimony  of  the  church,  and  in  whom  the  office  of  Christ's 
vicar  may  not  be  contemned ;  through  the  shield  of  whose  power  their  contu- 
macy may  be  suppressed,  who  contemn  both  verity  and  reason.  Whereunto 
no  man  seemeth  unto  me  more  apt  or  meet  than  Amedeus,  duke  of  Savoy, 
who  holdeth  the  one  part  of  his  possessions  in  Italy,  and  the  other  in  France  ; 
unto  whom  all  christian  princes  are  allied  either  by  consanguinity,  or  joined  by 
amity  and  friendship,  and  whose  virtue,  how  famous  it  is,  I  have  already 
declared. 

'  Why  do  we  then  stay  or  doubt  to  choose  him,  than  whom  Gabriel  feareth  no 
man  more  ?  Let  him,  therefore,  perish  with  the  sword,  wherewithal  he  hath 
stricken.  There  is  no  man  who  can  more  pacify  the  church  than  he.  Do  ye 
require  devotion  in  a  bishop  1  there  is  no  man  more  devout  than  he.  Do  you 
require  2)rudence  ?  now  ye  understand,  by  his  former  life,  what  manner  of  man 
he  is.  If  ye  seek  for  justice,  his  people  are  a  witness  thereof;  so  that  whether 
you  seek  for  virtue  or  power,  all  are  here  present  before  you.  Whereupon  do 
ye  stay?  Go  to,  I  pray  you,  choose  this  man.  He  will  augment  the  faith,  he 
will  reform  manners,  and  preserve  the  authority  of  the  church.  Have  ye  not 
heard  these  troubles  of  the  church  to  have  been  before  spoken  of,  and  that  the 
time  now  present  should  be  an  end  of  all  ti'oubles  ?  Have  ye  not  heard  that 
about  this  time  there  should  a  pope  be  chosen,  who  should  comfort  Sion,  and 
set  all  things  in  peace?  and  who,  I  pray  you,  should  he  be  that  could  fulfil  these 
things,  except  we  choose  this  man  ?  Believe  me,  these  sayings  must  be  fulfilled, 
and  I  trust  that  God  will  move  your  minds  thereunto.  Notwithstanding,  do 
whatsoever  you  shall  think  most  good  and  holy.' 


Ame- 
deus, 
duke  of 
Savoy, 
chosen 
pope. 


When  lie  had  spoken  these  words,  the  greatest  number  of  the 
electors  seemed  to  consent  unto  him,  and  his  words  took  such  effect, 
that  in  the  next  scrutiny,  the  matter  was  finished  and  ended.  *About 
the  nones  of  November  somewhat  afore  noon,  a  collation  was  made,* 
and  the  scrutiny  being  opened,  it  was  found  that  Amedeus,  the 
most  devout  duke  of  Savoy,  according  to  the  decree  of  the  council, 
was  chosen  pope,  *twenty-six  voices  consenting  and  agreeing  upon 
him.*      Wherefore   suddenly,    there   was  great  joy  and   gladness 


THE    CORONATION    OF    AMEDEUS,    AS    POPE    FELIX   V.  673 

amongst  them,  and  all  men  highly  commended  their  doings.  *Where-    Henry 
by,'  on  the  notaries  and  witnesses  being  called  in,  a  great  writing     ^^' 
■was  made  on  the  election,  which  thing  thus  finished,  and  the  witnesses   A.  D. 
being  sent  away,  about  one  of  the  clock  in  the  afternoon,  there  Avas    ^'^^^ 
great  noise  made  against  the  windows  which  were  towards  the  street    ,  .^" 

side,  and  all  the  pillars  thereof  cut  down  with  axes.     And  when  the ■'- 

people  gathered  together  in  great  number,  marvelling  at  the  strange 
noise,  there  was  a  cross  of  silver  showed  unto  them. 

Then  all  the  city  came  into  the  street,  and  looking  up  to  the  win- 
dow desired  to  know  the  name  of  him  that  was  chosen.*  Then  the 
cardinal  Arelatensis  published  unto  them  the  name  of  the  elect 
bishop.  After  this,  about  three  of  the  clock,  all  the  prelates,  in 
their  robes,  pontificalibus,  and  mitres,  and  all  the  clergy  of  the  city, 
coming  unto  the  conclave,  the  electors  being  likewise  adorned,  they 
brought  him  unto  the  great  church,  where,  after  great  thanks  given 
unto  God,  and  the  election  again  declared  unto  the  people,  a  hymn 
being  sung  for  joy,  the  congregation  was  dissolved. 

This  Amedeus  aforesaid,  was  a  man  of  reverent  age,  of  comely 
stature,  of  grave  and  discreet  behaviour  ;  also  before  married.    Who 
thus  being  elected  for  pope  about  November,  was  called  Felix  V.,  Pope 
and  was  crowned  in  the  city  of  Basil,  in  the  month  of  July  following,  ^"''f  ^ ' 
There  were  present  at  his  coronation,  Louis,  duke  of  Savoy  ;  Philip, 
earl  Gebenensis  ;  Louis,  marquis  of  Salutz  ;  the  marquis  of  Rotelen ; 
Conrad,  of  Winsperge,  chamberlain  of  the  empire  ;  the  earl  of  Dier- 
stein ;  the  ambassadors  of  the  cities  of  Strasburgh,  Berne,  Friburg, 
Solatorn,  with  a  great  multitude  of  others  beside,   to  the  view  of 
fifty  thousand  persons.     At  this  coronation,  the  pope's  two  sons  did  Thenum- 
serve  and  minister  to  their  father.     Louis,  cardinal  of  Hostia,  did  people  at 
set  on  his  head  the  pontifical  diadem,  which  was  esteemed  at  thirty  1,3^11^  or 
thousand  crowns.     It  were  long  here  to  recite  the  whole  order  and  p^p? 
solemnity  of  the   procession,  or  the  pope''s  riding  about  the  city. 
First  proceeded  the  pope,  under  his  canopy  of  cloth  of  gold,  having 
on  his  head  a  triple  crown,  and  blessing  the  people  as  he  went.     By 
him  went  the  marquis  of  Rotelen,  and  Conrad  of  Winsperge,  lead- 
ing his  horse  by  the  bridle.     The  procession  finished,  they  went  to 
dinner,  which  lasted  four  full  hours,  being  excessively  sumptuous ; 
where  the  pope''s  two  sons  were  butlers  to  his  cup.     The  marquis  ot 
Salutz  was  the  steward,  &c. 

Of  this  Felix,  thus  writeth  Volateran  in  his  third  book.  That 
he,  being  desired  of  certain  of  the  ambassadors,  if  he  had  any  dogs  or 
hounds,  to  show  them,  willed  them  the  next  day  to  repair  unto  him, 
and  he  would  show  unto  them  such  as  he  had.  When  the  ambassa- 
dors, according  to  the  appointment,  were  come,  he  showeth  unto  them 
a  great  number  of  poor  people  and  beggars,  sitting  at  his  tables  at  meat, 
declaring  that  those  were  his  hounds,  which  he  every  day  used  to 
feed,  hunting  with  them  (he  trusted)  for  the  glory  of  heaven  to  come.^ 

And  thus  you  have  heard  the  state  of  this  council  hitherto,  which 
council  endured  a  long  season,  the  space  of  seventeen  years.  ^p'J,^ 

A  bout  the  sixth  year  of  the  council,  Sigismund  the  emperor  died,  mund. 

(1)  See  Edition  1563,  p.  330.— Ed. 

(2)  A  note  for  our  gentlemen  and  loids,  to  It-arn  how  to  hunt,  ?.nd  wh:'.t  do^'s  to  keep. 

VOL.  III.  X  X 


Death  of 


Henry   leaving  but  one  daughter  to  succeed  liim   in  his  kingd 
^^'     married  to  Albert  tlie  Second,  duke   of  Austria,  who 


Albert  II. 
emperor 


674  DEATHS    OF    THE    EMPERORS    SIGISIMUXD    AXD    ALBERT. 

doms,  whom  he 
first  succeeded 

A.  D.    in  the  kingdom  of  Hungary  and  Bohemia,  being  before  adversary  to 
^^^^     the  Bohemians,  and  afterwards  was  made  emperor,  a.d.  1438,  and 
1400    reigned  emperor  but  two  years,  leaving  his  wife,  who  was  Sigismund''s 
daughter,  great  with  child.  After  which  Albert  succeeded  his  brother 
Frederic  the  Third,  duke  of  Austria,  in  the  empire,   &c.,  whereof 
t)(^tu"f  ■  more,  Christ  willing,  hereafter, 
Albert.         Jn  the  mean  time  Eugene,  hearing  of  the  death  of  Sigismund 
above  recited,  began  to  work  the  dissolution  of  the  council  of  Basil, 
and  to  transfer  it  to  Ferrara,  pretending  the  coming  of  the  Grecians. 
Notwithstanding,   the  council  of  Basil,  through  the  disposition  of 
God,  and  the  worthiness  of  cardinal  Arelatensis,  constantly  endured. 
Albeit  in  the  said  council  were  many  stops  and  practices  to  impeach 
The        the  same,  beside  the  sore  plague  of  pestilence  which  fell  in  the  city. 
Basin/  during  the  said  council ;  in  the  time  of  which  plague,  besides  the  death 
of  the™*  of  many  worthy  men,  ^neas  Sylvius  also  himself,   the  writer  and 
council,    compiler  of  the  whole  history  of  that  council,  sitting  at  the  feet  of 
Sylvius    the  bishops  of  Tournon  and  Lubeck,  lay  sore  sick  three  days  of  the 
the''  "^     same,  as  is  above  touched,  and  never  thought  to  escape.     They  that 
pia^e  in  (Jied,  departed  with  this  exhortation,  desiring  men  to  pray  to  God, 
that  he  would  convert  the  hearts  of  them  that  stuck  to  Eugene  as 
pope,  against  that  council,  as  partly  is  before  noted,  and  now  repeated 
stant  zeal  again,  for  the  better  marking.     Arelatensis,  being  most  instantly  ex- 
tfnliTto  horted  by  his  friends  to  fly  that  danger,  could  by  no  means  be  entreated 
the  truth,  ^o  avoid,  fearing  more  the  danger  of  the  church,  than  of  his  own  life. 
Beside  these  so  great  difficulties  and  obstacles  to  stay  and  hinder 
this  council,  strange  it  was  to  behold  the  mutation  of  men's  minds, 
of  whom  such  as  first  seemed  to  favour  the  council,  afterwards  did 
impugn  it ;  and  such  as  before  were  against  it,  in  the  end  showed 
themselves  most  friends  unto  the  same.     The  chief  cardinals  and 
prelates,  the  more  they  had  to  lose,  the  sooner  they  slipped  away,  or 
else  lurked  in  houses  or  toAvns  near,  and  absented  themselves  for  fear; 
so  that  the  stay  of  the  council  most  rested  upon  their  proctors,  doc- 
tors, archdeacons,  deans,  provosts,  prior,    and   such    others  of  the 
inferior  sort.  Of  this,  ^neas  Sylvius,  in  his  one  hundred  and  eighty- 
third  epistle,  maketh  this  relation,  where  one  Casper  Schlick,   the 
emperor"'s  chancellor,    writeth   to  cardinal  Julian  in  these    words : 
The        "  Those  cardinals,"  saith  he,  "  who  so  long  a  time  magnified  so  highly 
prelates,   the  authority  of  the  church,  and  of  general  councils,   seeming  as 
truth!  °^  though  they  were  ready  to  spend  their  lives  for  the  same,  now,  at  the 
slide        sight  of  one   letter   from  their   king  (wherein   yet   no  death  was 
from  the   threatened,  but  only  loss  of  their  promotions),  slipt  away  from  Basil." 
^Fid"'    And  in  the  same  epistle,  he  deridingly  commendeth  them,  as  wise 
^;^/™      men,  that  had  rather  lose  their  faith  than  their  flock.     "  Albeit," 
carere  ^  saith  he,  "  they  departed  not  far  away,  but  remained  about  Solatorn, 
Promo-"    waiting  for  other  commandments  from  their  prince,"  (whereby  it  may 
cho"ke      appear  how  they  did  not  shrink  away  willingly)  "  but  the  burse," 
^Y         quoth  he,  "  bindeth  faster  than  tnie  honour ;  "  Quid  enim  salvis  in- 
famia  nummis .?"  that  is  to  say,  "  What  matter  maketh  the  name  of 
man,  so  his  money  be  safe  ?" 

(1)  iEneas  Sylvius,  epist.  183. 


THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    BOHEMIANS    RESUMED.  675 

Moreover,  in  one  of  the  sessions  of  the  said  council,  the  worthy    iii^nry 

cardinal  Arelatensis  is  said  thus  to  have  reported,  That  Christ  was : — 

sold  for  thirty  pence  :  "  But  I,"  said  he,  "  was  sold  much  more  dear ;  A.  D. 
for  Gabriel,  otherwise  called  pope  Eugene,  offered  threescore  thou-  /'^ 
sand  crowns,  whoso  would  take  me,  and  present  me  unto  him."    And    3439 

they  that  took  the  said  cardinal,  afterwards  excused  their  fact  by  —^ 

another  colour,  pretending  as  the  cause,  that  the  cardinaFs  brother,  thousand 
what  time  the  Anniakes  wasted  Alsace,  had  brought  great  damage  to  otrJredby 
the  inhabitants  there  ;  and  therefore  they  thought  (said  they)  that  ^"p^  f^'J" 
they  might  lawfully  lay  hands  upon  a  Frenchman,  wheresoever  they  the  b'e- 
might  take  him.     At  length,  by  the  bishop  of  Strasburg,   Rupert,  ireiTten- 
and  the  said  city,  the  matter  was  taken  up,  and  he  rescued  ;  wherein,  j^\'j|.'° 
no  doubt,  appeared  the  hand  of  God,  in  defending  his  life  from  the  and 
pestilent  danger  of  the  pope,  his  adversary.^  God's 

And  thus  far  having  proceeded  in  the  matters  of  this  aforesaid  \^^'^^l 
council  until  the  election  of  Amedeus,  called  pope  Felix  V.,  before  h^^^ser- 
we  prosecute  the  rest  that  remaineth  thereof  to  be  spoken,  the  order 
and  course  of  times  requireth  to  intermix  withal  the  residue  pertain- 
ing to  the  matters  concluded  between  this  council  and  the  Bohemians, 
declaring  the  whole  circumstances  of  the  embassage,  their  articles, 
disputations,  and  answers,  which  they  had  first  in  the  said  council, 
then  in  their  own  country  with  the  council's  ambassadors ;  also  with 
tlieir  petitions  and  answers  unto  the  same. 

Touching  the  story  of  the  Bohemians,  how  they,  being  sent  for,  ofuieBZ 
came  up  to  the  council  of  Basil,  and  how  they  appeared,  and  what  J^^";'^"* 
was  there  concluded  and  agreed,  partly  before  hath  been  expressed,  cmed. 
Now,  as  leisure  serveth  from  other  matters,  to  return  again  unto  the 
same,  it  remaineth  to  prosecute  the  rest  that  lacketh,  so  far  as  both 
brevity  may  be  observed,  and  yet  the  reader  not  defrauded  of  such 
things  principally  worthy  in  the  same  to  be  noted  and  known. 


A    FURTHER    COXTIXUATION    OF 

€:5e  MemoraWe  i^f^torp  of  tfje  SBo^cmian^, 

BEIN'G    A    BRIEF    EPITOME,    SHOWIXG    HOW   THEV  WERE    CALLED 
AND    BROUGHT    UNTO    THE    COUNCIL    OF    BASIL  ; 

Briefly  collected  and  gathered  out  of  the  Commentaries  of  iEncas 

Sylvius. 

*  Forasmuch  2  as  the  Bohemians,  as  is  before  said,  being  incensed 
for  the  death  of  John  Huss  and  Jerome  of  Prague,  persevered  still 
in  the  maintaining  of  their  opinions,  Julian,  cardinal  of  St.  Angelo, 
was  sent  ambassador  into  Germany  to  make  preparation  against 
them  ;  for  the  bishop  of  Rome  thought  that  nation  would  have  easily 
been  vanquished  by  the  Germans.  But  the  matter  came  far  other- 
wise to  pass;  for  the  Germans,  being  often  put  to  flight,  as  is  afore- 
said, they  put  such  a  terror  into  the  hearts  of  all  the  borderers,  that 
Germany  desired  nothing  more  than  peace.* 

The  Bohemians  then,  as  is  before  declared,  having  always  the 
upper  hand,  albeit  they  were  accused  by  the  new  bishop  Eugene,  yet 

(1)  Ex  Faralip.  Abbat.  Urspcr.  (2)  Sec  Edition  \M?.  )>  .ri3.     En. 


\   X 


to 
14,39. 


{)76  THE    HISTORY    OF    THE    BOHEMIANS    RESUMED. 

Henry  it  was  tliought  good  that  tliey  should  be  called  unto  Basil,  -where  the 
^^'  council  was  appointed.  Whereupon  cardinal  Julian  sent  thither 
A.D.  before  John  Pullumair,  doctor  of  the  law,  and  John  de  Raguso,  a 
1431  divine  ;  who,  coming  unto  Basil  in  the  month  of  August,  a.d.  1431, 
called  by  their  letters  unto  the  council,  John,  abbot  of  JNIulbrun,  and 
John  Gelhusius,  monk  of  the  same  cloister ;  which  men,  fur  dexterity 
of  their  wit,  and  their  experience,  and  knowledge  of  countries,  were 
very  meet  and  necessary  for  embassages. 
The  Bo-  Within  a  few  days  after,  Julian  also  came  thither,  as  he  had  ])ro- 
i'ln'^twrto  niised,  and  unmediately  sent  out  John  Gelhusius,  and  Hammon 
u!e'" '"  Offenbourgh,  a  senator  of  Basil,  first,  unto  the  emperor  Sigismund, 
cii.  being  at  Feldkirch,  and,  afterwards,  unto  Frederic,   duke  of  Austria, 

for  the  appeasing  of  the  wars  between  him  and  Philip,  duke  of  Bur- 
gundy. This  was  done,  to  the  intent  that  peace  being  had,  not 
only  the  ecclesiastical  prelates,  but  also  the  merchants,  might  have 
safe  access  unto  Basil,  and  so  bring  in  all  things  necessary  for  sus- 
tentation. 

They,  going  on  this  embassage,  received  letters  from  the  synod,  to 
be  delivered  unto  the  emperor  Sigismund,  whereby  the  Bohemians 
and  Moravians  were  called  vmto  the  council.  These  letters  he,  by 
and  by,  caused  to  be  carried  unto  Bohemia.  But,  forasmuch  as  he 
himself  went  into  Italy,  to  receive  the  imperial  crown  of  the  bishop, 
he  left  William,  duke  of  Bavaria,  as  his  deputy,  to  be  protector  unto 
the  council.  Furthermore,  when  the  synod  understood  that  our  men 
would  take  a  peace  with  the  Bohemians,  after  their  most  shameful 
flight,  they  sent  John  Niderius,  a  divine,  and  John  Gelhusius,  to 
comfort  the  people  who  joined  upon  Bohemia,  and  earnestly  to  move 
the  Moravians  and  Bohemians,  who  were  before  called,  to  come  unto 
the  council. 

They,  departing  from  Basil  about  the  end  of  October,  took  their 
journey  toward  Monachum,'  a  town  of  Bavaria  ;  where,  after  they  had 
saluted  William,  duke  of  Bavaria,  and  his  brother  Ernest,  and  Albert, 
the  son  of  Ernest,  and  had  declared  the  commission  of  their  embas- 
sage, and  had  showed  unto  duke  William,  how  that,  as  soon  as  he 
should  come  unto  Basil,  the  protection  of  the  covmcil  should  be  com- 
mitted unto  him  by  the  emperor ;  they  exliorted  Frederic,  marquis  of 
Brandenburgh,  and  John,  duke  of  Bavaria,  the  senate  of  Nuremberg, 
and  other  princes  and  lords,  partly  by  the  letters  of  the  council,  and 
partly  by  word  of  mouth,  that  they  should  by  no  means  take  any 
truce  with  the  Bohemians,  for  that  it  might  be  hurtful  unto  the  church ; 
and  said,  they  should  have  aid  out  of  hand.  They  desired  them  also, 
in  the  name  of  the  council,  That  if  the  Bohemians  would  send  their 
ambassadors  unto  Basil,  they  would  guide  them,  every  man  through 
his  country,  in  safety ;  which  they  promised  to  do.  It  is  incredible 
how  all  men  rejoiced  that  the  Bohemians  were  sent  for. 

After  this,  when  they  counselled  with  the  senate  of  Nuremberg, 
touching  the  sending  of  the  counciFs  letters  into  I5ohemia,  it  seemed 
best  first  of  all  to  inquire  of  the  rulers  of  Egra,  whether  the  Bohe- 
mians had  made  any  answer  to  the  former  letters  of  the  council  which 
they  had  sent.  The  rulers  of  Egra,  being  advertised  by  these  letters, 
sent  him  who  carried  the  counciFs  letters  into  Bohemia,  unto  Nurem- 

(1)  "  Monachum,"  Munich. — Ed. 


TERMS   ON  WHICH   THEY  OFFER    TO  Ai'l'EAR    BEFORE    THE  COUNCIL.  671 

berg.     He  reported  how  reverently  the  council  of  the  greater  city  of  H^nry 
Prague  received  the  letters,  and  how  he  Mas  rewarded  ;  whereupon 


they  conceived  great  hope  of  the  good  success  of  the  embassage.  A.  D. 

Therefore  the  ambassadors,  using  the  counsel  of  the  senate  of  Nu-  ^^^^ 

remberg,  and  divers  others,  sent  the  messenger  back  again  unto  Egra,  j^gg 
with  their  own  private  letters,  and  with  letters  of  the  council :  for 


there  was  no  better  mean  to  send  the  letters  to  Bohemia.     Much  '^^^°l 
travail  was  taken  by  them  of  Egra,  Frederic,  marquis  of  Branden-  ^^^  'a- 
burgh,  and  John,  duke  of  Bavaria,  in  this  matter;  for  that  they  were  come  to" 
very  desirous  that  peace  might  be  had  amongst  Christians.    The  copy  "u!  ™""" 
of  those  letters,  whereby  the  synod  did  call  the  Bohemians  unto  the 
council,  and  other  letters  exhortatory  of  the  ambassadors,  and  the 
Bohemians'  answer  unto  the  same,  for  brevity's  cause  we  have  here 
pretermitted.     The  Bohemians,  not  in  all  points  trusting  unto  the 
ambassadors,  required  by  their  letters  that  the  council's  ambassadors, 
with  the  other  princes,  would  come  unto  Egra,  where  their  ambassa- 
dors should  be  also  present,  to  treat  upon  the  safe-conduct,  and  other 
matters. 

The  day  appointed  for  the  meeting  was  the  Sunday  after  Easter,  The  am- 
which  was  the  27th  day  of  April.  Then  came  the  ambassadors  of  the  at  Egra.'^ 
council  unto  Egra,  with  the  noble  princes,  Frederic,  marquis  of  Bran- 
denburgh,  and  John,  duke  of  Bavaria,  with  other  nobles,  almost  to 
the  number  of  two  hundred  and  fifty-two  horse. ^  But  none  of  the  Bo- 
hemians were  present,  because  the  inhabitants  of  Pilsina,  and  the  lord 
Swamberg,  had  not  sent  their  safe-conduct.  When  they  understood 
this  by  their  letters,  they  brought  it  to  pass,  that  the  ambassadors  of 
the  Bohemians,  Nicholas  Humpelz,  secretary  of  the  greater  city  of 
Prague,  and  Matthew  Clumpezane,  president  of  Piesta,  should  be 
brought  forth  by  them  of  Egra  and  the  Elenbogenses  ;  and  so  they 
came  unto  Egra  with  nineteen  horse,  the  eighth  day  of  May.  The 
next  day  after,  Henry  Tocgye  received  the  Bohemian  ambassadors 
before  the  marquis  with  an  eloquent  oration,  taking  this  part  of  the 
gospel  for  his  theme,  "  Pax  vobis,"  that  is,  "  Peace  be  with  you." 
Then  they  propounded  what  great  injuries  they  had  liitherto  received 
at  their  hands,  which  was  the  cause  of  so  many  great  slaughters  on 
either  party,  and  that  they  were  glad  that  now,  at  length,  there  was 
some  hope  that  they  shoiUd  be  heard. 

After  this  they  conferred  as   touching  the  safe-conduct.      The  The  Bo- 
Bohemians  required  pledges,  and  that,  not  of  the  common  sort,  but  rJi^irr 
princes  and  nobles.     Which  thing,  forasmuch  as  it  did  not  content  p^^'ig'^s. 
the  ambassadors,  and  that  the  matter  should  so  be  put  oiF,  the  com- 
mon people  of  Egra  began  to  cry  out.  That  for  a  long  time  a  concord 
had  not  been  made  Avith  the  Bohemians  by  the  ecclesiastical  princes. 
Then  Frederic,  marquis  of  Brandenburgh,  and  John,  duke  of  Bavaria,  Princes 


bound  to 


bound  themselves  of  their  own  good  wills ;  the  like  also  did  William,  the  Bo- 
duke  of  Bavaria,  at  the  request  of  the  council.     Likewise  also  did  i^^roians. 
the  council  and  the  emperor  Sigismund.     Furthermore,  promise  was  The  Bo- 
made,  That  all  the  princes  and  cities  should  do  the  like,  through  re'q™;?"^ 
whose  dominion  they  should  come,  and  the  city  of  Basil  also ;   the  yp^'^^^P^' 
copy  of  which  safe-conduct  was  afterwards  sent  unto  Prague.   This  also  present. 

(1)  Fifty-two  horse,  Edition  1563,  p.  336.— Ed. 


C78  THE    HISTORY    OF    THK    BOHEMIANS    RESUMED. 

Nenrii    was  Tcquircd  by  the  Bohemians,  That  if  it  were  possible  the  emperor 
should  be  present  at  the  council. 


A.  D.  Tijjg  convention  at  Egra,  continued  twenty-one  days.  But  the 
^'^'^^  Bohemians,  albeit  they  heard  the  counciFs  ambassadors  make  great 
M39     promises,  yet  did  they  not  fully  give  credit  unto  them.    Whereupon 

; they  chose  out  two  ambassadors,  Nicliolas  Humgolizius,  and  John 

hcmians   Zaczcnscs,  who  should  go  to  Basil,  and  diligently  inquire  out  all 
ambUsa°-  things.      ThcsB  men,    Conrad,   bishop    of  Ratisbon,    and  Conrad 
dors.        Seglaver,  dean  of  Estein,  brought  unto  Cattelspurg,  where  the  mar- 
quis dwelt,  being  sent  out  by  the  synod  a  little  before,  to  inquire 
whether  the  Bohemian   ambassadors  would  come  or  not.     When 
they  were  come  to  Biberack,  one  being  over  curious,  inquired  of  one 
of  the  Bohemian  ambassadors,  of  what  county  he  was.    He  answered 
Good  jus-  that  he  was  a  Zaczen.     "  There,"  said  he,    "  are  most  execrable 
a  sLnde"  hcrctics  and  naughty  men,"  &c. ;  who,  for  that  slanderous  word,  as  a 
cenue-'^'^'  breaker  of  the  truce,  was  straightway  carried  to  prison,  and  there 
iiessofthe  ghould  havc  suffered  more  punishment,  if  the  Bohemian  ambassadors, 
-tmbassa-  and  the  abbot  or  Ebera,  had  not  entreated  tor  him.      VVnen  they 
*""*■        came  to  Basil,  they  were  honourably  received  with  wine  and  fish : 
they  tarried  there  five  days  and  a  half.     The  tenth  day  of  October 
they   came   unto   the   synod,    which  was   assembled   at   the   friars 
Augustine. 
The  am-       Thcsc  ambassadors,   when  they   were  returned  home  Avith   the 
oftiieBo-  charter  of  the  synod,  and  declared  those  things  which  they  had  seen, 
rc  ™ni"^   and  that  the  matter  was  earnestly  handled  without  fraud  or  deceit ; 
iiorae.      there  were  ambassadors  chosen  to  be  sent  unto  the  council,  both  for 
the  kingdom  of  Bohemia,  and  the  marquisdom  of  Moravia,  who 
coming  unto  Tusca,  were  brought  from  thence  with  thirty-two  horse, 
The  Bo-    and  divers  noblemen,  unto  Chambia.      From  thence  they  came  to 
eemi' up    Swenkendorph,  and  so  unto  Nuremberg,  where,  beside  their  entertain- 
]em7  ^°'\  ment  of  wine  and  fish,  twenty-two  horsemen  accompanied  them  unto 
bassadois.  Ulm ;  from  thence  they  of  Ulm  brought  them  unto  Biberack  and 
Sulgotia,  where  James  Tunches,  a  knight,  receiving  them,  brought 
them  to  Stockacum,  and  from  thence  the  bands  of  the  duke  of  Ba- 
varia brought  them  unto  SchafFhausen.     There  they,  taking  ship  the 
4th  of  January,  came  to  Basil  the  9th  of  the  same  month.     What 
were  the  names  of  these  ambassadors  of  the  Bohemians,  who  were 
brought  up  with  three  hundred  horse,  and  how  they  were  received  at 
oraiinn  of  Basil,  mention  is  made  before.     When  they  came  unto  the  syr.od, 
iialju-*^'  cardinal  Julian  made  an  oration,  That  whatsoever  was  in  any  place 
lian.        ii^  doubt,  the  same  ought  to  be  determined  by  the  authority  of  the 
council,  forasmuch  as  all  men  are  bound  to  submit  themselves  to  the 
judgment  of  the  holy  church,  which  the  general  council  doth  repre- 
sent.— Which  oration  was  not  allowed  of  all  the  Bohemians. 
Three  ar-       Then  Rochezauus  made  an  oration,  requiring  to  have  a  day  ap- 
the'^Bohe- pointed  when  they  should  be  heard,  which  was  appointed  the  16th 
day  of  the  same  month ;  upon  which  day  John  Rochezanus,  having 
made  his  preface,  began  to  propound  the  first  article,  touching  the 
communion  to  be  ministered  vmder  both  kinds,  and  disputed  upon 
the  same  by  the  space  of  three  days,  always  before  noon.     Then 
Wenceslaus,  the  Taborite,  disputed  upon  the  second  article,  touch- 
ing the  correction  and  punishing  of  sin,  by  the  space  of  two  days. 


iiiians. 


THEIR    AKTICLES    DEBATED.  679 

After   -".vliom    UlJeric,    priest   of    the    Orphans,   propounded    and   Henrs 


ri. 


lisputed  upon  the  third  article  by  the  space  of  two  days,  touching 

the  free  preaching  of  the  word  of  God.  A.  D. 

Last  of  all,  Peter  Paine,  an  Englishman,  disputed  three  days  upon    ^'^^^ 
the  fourth  article,  touching  the  civil  dominion  of  the  clergy,  and    -^^.^c) 

afterwards  gave  copies  of  their   disputations  in  writing  unto  the 

council,  with  hearty  thanks  that  they  were  heard.      The  three  last  founh  ar- 
did  somewhat  inveigh  against  the  council,  condemning  John  Huss  *"^^^" 
and  John  ^Vickliff  for  their  doctrine.    Whereupon  John  de  Raguso, 
a  di^^ne,  rising  up,  desired  that  he  might  have  leave  to  answer  in  his 
own  name,  to  the  first  article  of  the  Bohemians.     The  council  con- 
sented thereunto  ;  so  that  by  the  space  of  eight  days  in  the  fore- 
noon, he  disputed  thereupon.    But,  before  he  began  to  answer,  John,  oration 
the  abbot  of  Sistertia,  made  an  oration  unto  the  Bohemians,  that  aJji^jit'of 
they  should  submit  themselves  to  the  determination  of  the  holy  sisterca. 
church,  which  this  council   (said  he)  doth  represent.     This  matter 
did  not  a  little  offend  the  Bohemians.     John  Ragusinus,  a  divine, 
after  scholars''  fashion,    in  his  answer  spake  often    of  heresies  and 
heretics.     Procopius  could  not  suffer  it,  but,  rising  up  with  an  angry 
stomach,  complained  openly  to  the  council  of  this  injury.     ''  This 
our  countryman,"  saith  he,   "  doth  us  great  injury,  calling  us  often- 
times heretics.'"     Whereunto  Ragusinus  answered,   "■  forasmuch  as  John  Ra- 
I  am  your  countryman  both  by  tongue  and  nation,  I  do  the  more  ^^^etn 
desire  to  reduce  you  again  unto  the  church."     He  was  a  Dalmatian  l^f^^l^ 
born,  and  it  appeareth  that  the  Dalmatians,  going  into  Bohemia,  article, 
took  their  name  from  the  country  which  they  possessed.     It  came 
almost  to  this  point,  that  through  this  offence  the  Bohemians  would 
depart  from  Basil,  and  could  scarcely  be  appeased.     Certain  of  the 
Bohemians  would  not  hear  Ragusinus  finish  his  disputation. 

After  him  a  famous  divine,  one  Egidius  Carlerius,  dean  of  the  church  Epdius 
of  Cambray,  answered  unto  the  second  article,  by  the  space  of  four  to''the"se- 
days.     To  the  third  article  answered  one  Henricus,  surnamed  Frigi-  '^°^^- 
dum  Ferrum,  three  days  together.     Last  of  all  one  Johannes  Polo-  coWmjn 
marius,  master  of  the  requests  of  the  palace,  answered  unto  the  fourth  ^^^^ 
article  likewise  by  the  space  of  three  days,   so  that  the  long  time  j.  Poio- 
which  they  used  in  disputations  seemed  tedious  unto  the  Bohemians.  J^g""^ '° 
Notwithstanding  this  answer,   the  Bohemians  still  defended  their  fourth, 
articles,  and  especially  the  first,  insomuch  that  John  Rochezanus  did 
strongly  impugn  Ragusinus''  answer  by  the  space  of  six  days.     But, 
forasmuch  as  one  disputation  bred  another,  and  it  was  not  perceived 
how   that  by  this  means  any  concord  could  be  made,  the  prince 
William,  duke  of  Bavaria,  protector  of  the  council,  attempted  another 
remedy,  that  all  disputations  being  set  apart,   the  matter  should  be 
friendly  debated. 

There  were  certain  appointed  on  either  part  to  treat  upon  the  certain 
concord ;  who  coming  together  the  11th  day  of  March,  those  who  were  bothsuie" 
appointed  for  the  council,  were  demanded  to  say  their  minds.     "  It  ^j^^  t"^' 
seemeth  good,"  said  they,  "  if  these  men  would  be  united  unto  us,  matter. 
and  be  made  one  body  with  us,  that  this  body  might  then  accord, 
declare,   and  determine,   all  manner  of  diversities  of  opinions  and 
sects,  what  is  to  be  believed  or  done  in  them." 

The  Bohemians,  when  they  had  awhile  paused,  said,  "  This  way 


C80  THE    COUNCIL    OF    BASIL 


Henry   scemcd  iiot  apt  enougli,  except,  first  of  all,  the  four  articles  were 
exactly  discussed,  so  that  either  we  should  agi-ee  with  them,  or  they 


^■^-  with  us ;  for,  otherwise,  it  would  be  but  a  frivolous  matter,  if  they 
^'^^^  being  now  united,  again  disagree  in  the  deciding  of  the  articles." 
1439     Here  answer  was  made  to  the  Bohemians,  That  if  they  were  rightly 

—  united,  and  the  aid  of  the  Holy  Ghost  called  for,   they  should  not 

err  in  the  deciding  of  the  matter,  forasmuch  as  every  Christian  ought 

to  believe  that  determination ;    which  if  they  would  do,   it  would 

breed  a  most  firm  and  strong  concord  and  amity  on  either  part. — 

But  this  answer,  satisfied  them  not,  insomuch  that  the  other  three 

rose  up,   and  disputed  against  the  answers  which  were  given.     At 

that  time  cardinal  Julian,  president  of  the  council,  made  this  oration 

unto  the  Bohemian  ambassadors. 

Oration         "  This  sacrcd  synod,"  saith  he,  "  hath  now,  by  the  space  of  ten 

nlr"^*^'     days,   patiently  heard  the  propositions  of  your  four  articles ;"  and 

Julian,     afterwards  he  annexed,  "  You  have  propounded,"  saith  he,   "•  four 

articles  ;  but  we  understand  that,  beside  these  four,  you  have  many 

other  strange  doctrines,  wherein  ye  dissent  from  us.     Wherefore  it 

is  necessary,  if  a  perfect  unity  and  fraternity  shall  follow  between  us, 

that  all  these  things  be  declared  in  the  council,  to  the  end  that  by 

the  grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  is  the  author  of  peace  and  truth, 

due  provision  may  be  made  therein.     For  we  have  not  gathered 

these  things  of  light  conjectm-es,   but  have  heard  them  of  credible 

persons,  and  partly  here  are  some  present  who  have  seen  them  with 

their  own  eyes  in  Bohemia,  and  partly  we  do  gather  it  by  your  own 

Master     rcport :    for  Master  Nicholas,  who  was  the  second  that  did  pro- 

diatged^  pound,   amongst  other  things  alleged,   that  John  Wicldiff  was  an 

\>y  the      evanrrelical  doctor.     If  ye  believe  him  to  be  a  true   doctor,  it  fol- 

for  coin-    lowcth  that  you  must  repute  his  works  as  authentic ;  if  ye  do  not  so 

SXim^  think,  it  is  reason  that  it  should  be  opened  unto  us.     Wherefore  we 

wiciviiff.   (Jcsirg  yoy^  w^r^i  you  will  certify  us  upon  these  and  certain  other 

points,  what  you  do  believe,  or  what  credit  you  do  give  unto  them. 

But  we  do  not  require,  that  you  should  now  declare  your  reasons ; 

but  it  shall  satisfy  us,  if  you  will  answer  unto  every  article  by  this 

word,    '  credimus''   or,    '  non  credimus ;'  that   is,   '  we  believe,'   or, 

'we  believe  not.'     Which  if  you  will  do  (as  we  trust  you  will), 

then  we  shall  manifestly  perceive  that  you  desire,  that  we  should 

conceive  a  good  estimation  of  you.     If  there  be  any  thing  whereof 

you  would  be  certified  by  us,  ask  it  boldly,  and  we  will  give  you  an 

answer  out  of  hand ;  for  we  are  ready,  according  to  the  doctrine  of 

St.  Peter,  to  render  account  unto  every  man  who  shall  require  it, 

touching  the  fixith  which  we  hold." 

Pnuu-nt        Hereunto  the  Bohemian   ambassadors  answered   in   few   words, 

cardinal"  that  they  came  only  to  propound  those  four  articles,   not  in  their 

Julian.     Q^^  name,   but  in  the  name  of  the  whole  kingdom   of  Bohemia ; 

— and  spake  no  more.  Whereupon  William,  the  noble  protector  of 

the  council,  calling  unto  him  four  men  on  either  part,  treated  touching 

the  pacifying  the  matter ;  by  whose  advice  the  council  decreed  to 

The  am-  scnd  a  fkmous  embassage  Avith  the  Bohemian  ambassadors,  unto 

ret^urn""  Prague,  where  the  people  should  assemble  upon  Sunday.     But  they 

Z^ToT^    would  not  receive  these  conditions  of  peace  which  were  offered,  but 

mtnt.      made  haste  to  depart.     Whereupon,  on  ihe  \  4th  day  of  April,  there 


to 
1439. 


THE    COMING    OF    THE    LEGATES    TO    PRAGUE.  681 

were  ten  chosen  out  of  the  council,  to  go  with  the  Bohemian  ambas-    Me-m-y 
sadors  unto  Praefue.  ^^' 

It  were  too  long  here  to  declare  what  honour  was  done  unto  these    A.  D. 
ambassadors  all  the  way  in  their  journey,  and  especially  when  they    ^"^^^ 
came  into  Bohemia,  by  the  citizens  of  Prague,  when  a  great  number 
of  Bohemians  were  assembled  at  Prague  at  the  day  appointed,  both 
of  the  clergy,  nobility,  and  common  people. 

After  the  coming  of  those  ambassadors,  much  contention  began  to  Tiie 
rise  between  the  parties.    First  began  John  Rochezanus,  who  speak-  ^,1"""""^ 
ing  in   the  public  person  of  the  commonalty,  laboured  to  commend  pf^Jue '" 
aiid  prefer  the  four  verities  of  the  Bohemians  before  propounded ; 
charging  also  the  prelates  and  priests,  for  their  slanderous  obtrecta- 
tions  and  undeserved  contumelies,  wherewith  they  did  infame  the 
noble  kingdom  of  Bohemia  ;  complaining  also  that  they  would  not 
receive  those  christian  verities,  left  and  allowed  by  their  king  Wen- 
ceslaus  now  departed.     Wherefore  he  required  them  in  the  behalf  of 
the  whole   nation,  that  they  would  leave  off  hereafter  to  oppress 
them  in  such  sort,  that  they  would  restore  to  them  again  their  Joseph's 
vesture  ;  that  is,  the  ornament  of  their  good  fame  and  name,  whereof 
their  brethren,  their  enemies,  had  spoiled  them,  &c. 

To  this  Polomar  maketh  answer  again,  with  a  long  and  curious 
oration,  exhorting  them  to  peace  and  unity  of  the  church,  which  if 
they  would  embrace,  all  other  obstacles  and  impediments  (said  he) 
should  be  soon  removed  :  promising  also,  that  this  their  vesture  of 
honour  and  fame  should  be  amply  restored  again  ;  and  that  after- 
wards, if  there  were  any  doubtful  matters,  they  might  and  should  be 
the  better  discussed. 

But  all  this  pleased  not  the  Bohemians,  unless  they  might  first 
have  a  declaration  of  their  four  articles,  which  if  they  might  obtain, 
they  promised  then  to  embrace  peace  and  concord ;  which  peace  (said 
they)  began  first  to  be  broken  by  themselves,  in  that  the  council  of 
Constance,  by  their  unjust  condemnation,  burned  John  Huss  and 
Jerome  of  Prague,  and  also,  by  their  cruel  bulls  and  censures,  raised 
up  first  excommunication,  then  war,  against  the  whole  kingdom  of 
Bohemia. 

Hereunto  Polomar,  reclaiming  again,  began  to  advance  and 
magnify  the  honour  and  dignity  of  general  councils.  To  conclude, 
as  much  as  the  said  Polomar  did  extol  the  authority  of  the  councils, 
so  much  did  the  answer  of  the  Bohemians  extenuate  the  same;  saying, 
That  the  later  councils,  which  are  not  expressed  in  the  law  of  God,  General 
have  erred,  and  might  err,  not  only  in  faith,  but  also  in  manners,  mr" err, 
For  that  which  hath  chanced  to  the  green  wood,  may  also  chance  '"""'  ^^"'^ 
unto  the  dry.  But  of  others,  the  most  strong  pillars  of  the  militant 
church,  the  apostles  I  mean,  seem  all  to  have  erred,  and  the  catholic 
faith  to  have  remained  three  days  sound  and  uncorrupt  only  in  the 
Virgin  Mary.  No  christian  man,  therefore,  ought  to  be  compelled 
to  stand  to  the  determination  of  the  pope  or  the  council,  except  it 
be  in  that  which  is  plainly  expressed  in  the  law  of  God.  For  it  is 
evident,  that  all  the  general  councils  which  have  been  of  long  time, 
have  reformed  very  few  things  as  touching  the  faith,  peace  and  man- 
ners of  the  church,  but  have  always,  both  in  their  life  and  decrees, 
notoriously  swerved,  and  have  not  established  themselves  upon  the 


erred. 


C82  THE    COUNCIL    OF    BASIL. 

jienry    foundation,  wliicli  is  Ciirist.     Wherefore  the  said  Bohemiansj  pro- 
tested, that  they  would  not  simply  and  plainly  (God  being  their  good 


A.D.  Lord)  yield  themselves  to  their  doctrine,  nor  to  such  rash  and  hasty 
^■^^^  decrees  ;  lest,  through  that  their  hasty  and  uncircumspect  submission, 
1439    ^^y  should  bind  their  faith  and  life  contrary  to  the  wholesome  and 

—  sound  doctrine  of  our  Lord  Christ  Jesus.    In  short,  in  no  case  would 

they  enter  into  any  agreement  of  peace,  except  their  four  articles, 
which  they  counted  for  evangelical  verities,  were  first  accepted  and 
approved.     Which  being  obtained  (said  they),  if  they  would  conde- 
scend with  them  in  the  verity  of  the  gospel,  so  would  they  join 
together,  and  be  made  one  with  them  in  the  Lord,  &c.' 
The  am-       When  the  ambassadors  saw  the  matter  would  not  otherwise  be 
and^Bo"-"^^  brought  to  pass,  they  required  to  have  those  articles  delivered  unto 
iiemians   them  iu  a  certain  form,  which  thev  sent  unto  the  council  bv  three 

cannot        -r->    i  •  i  i  ""  "' 

agree.      Jiohemian  ambassadors. 

Afterwards  the  council  sent  a  declaration  into  Bohemia,  to  be 
published  unto  the  people  in  the  common  assemblies  of  the  king- 
dom by  the  ambassadors,  who  were  commanded  to  report  unto  the 
Bohemians,  in  the  name  of  the  council,  that  if  they  would  receive 
the  declaration  of  those  three  articles,  and  the  unity  of  the  church, 
there  should  be  a  mean  found  whereby  the  matter  touching  the 
first  article,  of  the  communion  under  both  kinds,  should  be  passed 
with  peace  and  quietness. 

They  propounded  in  Prague,  in  an  open  assembly  of  the  nobles 
and  commons,  the  declarations  of  the  three  articles  in  form  following : 

A  Declaration  of  the  Council  of  Basil  touching  the  three  last  Articles 
of  the  Bohemians,  already  alleged. 

Forasmuch  as  touching  the  doctrine  of  the  verity,  we  ought  to  proceed  soberly 
and  warily,  that  the  truth  may  be  declared  with  words  so  orderly  conceived  and 
uttered,  that  there  be  no  offence  given  to  any  man,  whereby  he  should  fall  to 
take  occasion  of  error,  and  (to  use  the  words  of  Isidore)  that  nothing  by  obscu- 
rity be  left  doubtful ;  whereas  you  have  propounded  touching  the  inhibition  and 
The  se-     Correction  of  sins  in  these  words,  '  AU  mortal  sins,  and  especially  open  offences, 
T"'/th"  *"^i&^'^  to  be  rooted  out,  punished,  and  inhibited,  by  them  whose  duty  it  is  so  to 
Bohemi-    do,  reasonably  and  according  to  the  law  of  God.'     Here  it  is  to  be  marked  and 
ans,  with  understood,  that  these  words,  '  whose  duty  it  is',  are  too  general,  and  may  be  an 
ration'^of  offence  ;  and  according  to  the  meaning  of  the  Scripture,  we  ought  not  to  lay  any 
the  coun-  stumbling  stock  before  the  blind,  and  the  ditches  are  to  be  closed  up,  that  our 
*^-  neighbour's  ox  do  not  fall  therein :  all  occasion  of  offence  is  to  be  taken  away. 

Therefore  we  say,  that  according  to  the  meaning  of  the  holy  Scripture,  and  the 
doctrine  of  the  holy  doctors,  it  is  thus  universally  to  be  holden,  that  all  mortal 
Punish-  ^^^'  especially  public  offences,  are  to  be  rooted  out,  corrected,  and  inhibited,  as 
ins  of  reasonably  as  may  be,  according  to  the  law  of  God,  and  the  institutions  of  the 
public  of-  fathers.  The  power  to  punish  these  offenders  doth  not  pertain  unto  any  private 
how  and  person,  but  only  unto  those  who  have  jmisdiction  of  the  law  over  them,  the  dis- 
hy whom,  tinction  of  law  and  justice  being  orderly  observed.^ 

Tiie  third  As  touching  the  preaching  of  the  word  of  God,  which  article  you  have  alleged 
tr'n^i"^  in  this  form,  ' That  the  word  of  God  should  be  freely  and  faithfully  preached  by 
mians.  the  fit  and  apt  ministers  of  the  Lord :'  lest  by  this  word  '  fi-eely'  occasion  might 
with  the  te  taken  of  disordered  liberty  (which,  as  you  have  often  said,  you  do  not  mean), 
tion  oft'he  ^^  circumstance  thereof  is  to  be  understood ;  and  we  say,  that  (according  to 
council,  the  meaning  of  the  holy  Scripture,  and  doctrine  of  tlie  holy  fathers)  it  is  thus 
universally  to  be  believed  :  That  the  word  of  God  ought  freely,  but  not  every 
where,  but  faithfully  and  orderly,  to  be  preached  by  the  priests  and  Levites  of  the 

(1)  Ex  Choclileo,  hist.  lib.  vii.  (2)  Note  here  the  pope's  addition. 


whom  it 
extend- 


DECLAUATIOKS    OF    THE    COUNCIL.  683 

Lord,  being  allowed  and  sent  by  their  superiors  unto  whom  that  office  apper-    Heyiry 
taineth  ;  the  authority  of  the  bishop  always  reserved,  who  is  the  provider  of  all      ^^- 
things,  according  to  the  institution  of  the  holy  Fathers.  ^  p 

As  concerning  the  last  article,  expressed  under  these  words,  '  It  is  not  law-    J432' 
fill  for  the  christian  clergy,  in  the  time  of  the  law  of  grace,  to  have  dominion        . 
over  temporal  goods ;'  we  remember  that  in  the  solemn  disputation  holden  in  the    i^oq 

sacred  council,  he  who  was  appointed  by  the  council  to  dispute,  propounded IL 

two  conclusions  in  this  sort:  Liberty  of 

First,  That  such  of  the  clergy  as  were  not  religious,  and  had  not  bound  them-  fngfhow 
selves  thereunto  by  a  vow,  might  lawfully  have  and  possess  any  temporal  goods :  far,  and  to 
as  the  inheritance  of  his  father  or  any  other,  if  it  be  left  unto  him ;  or  any  other  '  * 

goods  justly  gotten  by  means  of  any  gift,  or  other  lawful  contract,  or  else  some  eib] 
lawful  art. 

The  second  conclusion,  *  The  church  may  lawfully  have  and  possess  temporal  The 
goods,  moveable  and  unmoveable,  houses,  lands,  towns  and  villages,  castles  and  fpu^th  ar- 
cities ;  and  in  them  have  a  private  and  civil  dominion.'  Your  ambassador  who  dis-  the  Bo- 
puted  against  him,  granted  those  conclusions,  saying.  That  they  did  not  impugn  hemians. 
the  sense  of  this  article  being  well  understood,  forasmuch  as  he  understandeth  posTe^s""^* 
this  article  of  civil  dominion,  formerly  meant.  Whereby,  and  also  by  other  things,  sions  in 
it  may  be  understood,  that  those  words,  'to  have   secular  dominion,'  expressed  t^ecier- 
in  the  aforesaid  article,  seem  to  be  referred  to  some  special  manner  or  kind  of  hands. 
dominion.     But,  forasmuch  as  the  doctrine  of  the  church  is  not  to  be  treated  The  pa- 
upon  by  any  ambiguous  or  doubtful  words,  but  fully  and  plainly ;  therefore  we  P'*'^ 
have  thought  good  more  plainly  to  express  that,  which  according  to  the  law  of  i,ard  for 
God,  and  the  doctrine  of  the  holy  doctors,  is  universally  to  be  believed;  that  is  their  tem- 
to  say,  the  two  aforesaid  conclusions  to  be  true.  And  also,  that  the  clergy  ought  fj'/jfjjjins 
faithfully  to  distribute  the  goods  of  the  Church,  whose  administrators  they  are, 
according  to  the  decrees  of  the  holy  Fathers ;  and  that  the  usurpation  of  the  ad- 
ministration of  the  church  goods,  done  by  any  other  than  by  them,  unto  whom 
the  administration  is  canonically  committed,  cannot  be  without  guilt  of  sacrilege. 

'  Thus  the  sacred  council,'  said  they,  '  hath  diligently  gone  about,  according 
to  the  verity  of  the  gospel,  all  ambiguity  set  apart,  to  expound  the  true  sense  of 
the  three  aforesaid  articles.  Wherefore,  if  there  do  yet  remain  any  doubt, 
according  to  the  information  which  we  have  received  in  the  sacred  council,  we 
are  ready,  by  God's  help,  who  is  the  principal  Verity,  to  declare  the  truth  unto 
you.  If  ye  do  receive  and  embrace  the  declaration  of  the  said  three  articles, 
which  is  grounded  upon  the  verity  of  the  holy  Scripture,  as  you  are  bound,  and 
will  effectually  have  a  pure,  simple,  and  perfect  imity,  touching  the  liberty  of 
the  communion  mider  both  kinds,  which  you  desire  and  require,  which  also  you 
cannot  lawfully  have  without  the  license  of  holy  church;  we  have  authority 
from  the  general  council,  by  certain  means  to  treat  and  conclude  with  you, 
trusting  that  you  will  show  yoiurselves  as  you  will  continue.' 

These  things  thus  declared,  after  the  Bohemians  had  taken  de-  The  Bo- 
liberation,  they  said,  That  they  would  give  no  answer  unto  the  pre-  ta'k^a de- 
mises, before  they  understood  what  should  be  offered  them  as  touching  upon'^th^J* 
the  communion.     Wherefore  it  shall  be  necessary  to  declare  the  first  arti- 

cle 

matter,  as  it  was  written  in  form  follo^ving : 

A  Declaration  of  the  Council  of  Basil  touching  the  first  Article  of 
the  Communion. 

In  the  name  of  God  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  upon  the  sacrament  of 
whose  most  blessed  Last  Supper  we  shall  treat,  that  he  who  hath  instituted  this 
most  blessed  sacrament  of  unity  and  peace,  will  vouchsafe  to  work  this  effect  in 
us,  and  to  make  us  that  we  may  be  one  in  the  said  Lord  Jesus  our  head,  and 
that  he  will  subvert  all  the  subtleties  of  the  devil,  who,  through  his  envious 
craftiness,  hath  made  the  sacrament  of  peace  and  unity,  an  occasion  of  war  and 
discord;  that,  while  Christians  do  contend  touching  the  manner  of  communi- 
cating, they  be  not  deprived  of  the  fruit  of  the  communion.     Whereupon 


681 


THE    COUNCIL    OF    BASIL. 


Henry 
VI. 

A.D. 

1431 

to 

1439. 


This  is  to 
set  up  the 
churcli 
above  the 
Scrip- 
ture. 


The  holy 
com- 
munion 
requireth 
amend- 
ment of 
of  life. 

Holy 

things 
nothing 
profit  the 
wicked. 


The  reve- 
rend re- 
ceiving of 
the  sacra- 
ments. 


Eeceiv- 
ing  un- 
der one 
kind,  for 
avoiding 
two 
])erils. 
Error 
grounded 
upon 
error. 
Causes 
why  to 
minister 
under  one 
kind. 


St.  Augustine,  in  his  Sermon  upon  Infants,  in  the  decree  '  De  consecrat,'  dis- 
tinct. 2.  '  Quia  passus,'  saith  thus:  '  So  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  certified  us,  and 
willed  that  we  sliould  appertain  unto  him,  and  consecrate  the  mystery  of  our 
peace  and  unity  upon  the  table.  He  that  receiveth  the  mystery  of  unity,  and 
doth  not  keep  the  bond  of  peace,  doth  not  receive  a  mystery  for  himself,  but  a 
testimony  against  himself.'  This  we  thought  good  above  all  things  to  be  pre- 
mised, that  the  general  custom  of  the  church,  which  your  fathers  and  you  also 
in  times  past  have  observed,  hath  a  long  time  had  and  still  useth,  that  they  who 
do  not  consecrate,  communicate  only  under  the  kind  of  bread.  Which  custom 
being  lawfully  brought  in  by  the  church  and  holy  fathers,  and  now  a  long  time 
observed,  it  is  not  lawful  to  reject,  or  to  change  at  your  will  and  pleasin-e,  with- 
out the  authority  of  the  church.  Therefore,  to  change  the  custom  of  the  church, 
and  to  take  in  hand  to  communicate  unto  the  people  under  both  kinds,  without 
the  authority  of  holy  church,  is  altogether  unlawful ;  for  holy  church,  upon 
I'easonable  occasions,  may  grant  liberty  unto  the  people  to  commimicate  under 
both  kinds.  And  every  communion,  which,  being  attempted  without  the  autho- 
rity and  license  of  the  church,  should  be  unlawful,  when  it  is  done  with  the 
authority  of  holy  church,  shall  be  lawfid,  if  other  things  let  it  not ;  because,  as 
the  apostle  saith,  '  He  that  eateth  and  drinketh  unworthily,  eateth  and  drinketh 
his  own  damnation.' 

Whereupon  St.  Isidore,  of  the  second  distinction  upon  the  Consecration, 
writeth  thus  :  '  They  who  live  wickedly,  and  cease  not  daily  to  communicate  in 
the  chiu-ch,  thinking  thereby  to  be  cleansed,  let  them  learn  that  it  doth  nothing 
at  all  profit  them  to  the  cleansing  of  their  sins.'  And  St.  Augustine,  in  the 
same  distinction,  saith,  '  Holy  things  may  hurt  the  evil,  for  unto  the  good  they 
are  salvation,  but  unto  the  evil,  damnation.'  There  are  besides  this  many  other 
authorities.  The  apostle  Judas  was  amongst  those  who  did  first  communicate, 
but,  forasmuch  as  he  received  imworthily,  having  that  sin  of  treason  in  his 
heart,  it  did  profit  him  nothing ;  but  the  devil,  by  and  by,  exercised  the  more 
power  and  authority  over  hiin.  This  is  declared  by  a  great  reason.  Which  of 
you  is  it,  that  if  you  should  receive  your  lord  into  your  house,  would  not  with 
all  diligence  and  care  study  to  make  clean  and  adorn  his  house,  that  he  may 
receive  the  lord  honestly?  Much  more  he  that  shall  receive  the  Lord  and 
Saviour  into  the  house  of  his  soul,  ought  diligently  to  make  clean  and  deck  his 
soul,  to  cleanse  it  by  the  sacrament  of  penance,  with  sorrow  and  contrition  of 
heart,  humbly,  purely,  and  truly  confessing  his  sins,  and  receiving  due  satisfac- 
tion and  penance,  to  adorn  and  deck  the  same  with  the  purple  or  rich  array  of 
devotion,  that  the  heart  being  so  purged  and  adorned  with  fervent  desire,  he 
may  come  to  that  most  holy  sacrament,  whereby  God  reconcileth  all  the  world 
unto  him. 

Wherefore  the  most  sacred  synod  admonisheth,  exhorteth,  and  commandeth, 
that  all  priests  shoidd  diligently  exhort  and  admonish  the  people,  and  that  they 
shoidd  use  all  their  care  and  endeavour,  that  no  man  come  to  that  most  blessed 
sacrament,  except  he  be  duly  prepared  with  great  reverence  and  devotion,  lest 
that  which  is  received  for  the  salvation  of  the  soul,  redound  to  the  condemna- 
tion, through  the  unworthy  receiving  thereof. 

Moreover,  doctors  do  say,  that  the  custom  of  communicating  unto  the  people 
only  under  the  kind  of  bread,  was  reasonably  introduced  by  the  church  and 
holy  fathers,  for  reasonable  causes,  especially  for  the  avoiding  of  two  perils — 
error  and  irreverence.  Of  error,  as  to  think  that  the  one  part  of  Christ's  body 
were  in  the  bread,  and  the  other  part  in  the  cup ;  which  were  a  great  error. 
Of  irreverence,  forasmuch  as  many  things  may  happen,  as  well  on  the  part  of 
the  minister,  as  on  the  part  of  the  receiver :  as  it  is  said,  that  it  happened  when 
a  certain  priest  carried  the  sacrament  of  the  cup  unto  a  sick  man,  when  he 
should  have  ministered,  he  found  nothing  in  the  cup,  being  all  spilt  by  the  way, 
with  many  other  such  like  chances.  We  have  heard,  moreover,  that  it  hath 
often  happened,  that  the  sacrament  consecrated  in  the  cup,  hath  not  been  suffi- 
cient for  the  number  of  communicants,  whereby  a  new  consecration  must  be 
made,  which  is  not  agreeable  to  the  doctrine  of  the  holy  fathers ;  and,  also,  that 
oftentimes  they  do  minister  wine  unconsecrated  for  consecrate  wine,  which  is  a 
great  peril.  By  this  means  then,  it  shall  be  brought  to  pass,  that  if  you  will 
effectually  receive  the  unity  and  peace  of  the  church,  in  all  other  things  besides 
the  use  of  the  communion  under  both  kinds,  conforming  yourselves  to  the  faith 


UECKIVING    IN    KOTH    KINDS    PERMITTED    TO    THE    BOHEMIANS.  685 

and  order  of  the  universal  church,  you  that  have  that  use  and  custom,  shall    Henry 
communicate  still,  by  the  authority  of  the  church,  under  both  kinds ;  and  this      vi. 
article  shall  be  discussed  fully  in  the  sacred  council,  Avhere  you  shall  see  what, 
as  touching  this  article,  is  to  be  holden  as  a  universal  verity,  and  is  to  be  done     ,  jo,' 
for  the  profit  and  salvation  of  the  christian  people:  and  all  things  being  thus         '^ 
throughly  handled,  then,  if  you  persevere  in  your  desire,  and  your  ambassadors    taoq 
do  require  it,  the  sacred  council  will  grant  license  in  the  Lord  unto  your  mini-         '^' ' 
sters,  to  communicate  unto  the  people  under  both  kinds;  that  is  to  say,  to  such  Receiv- 
as  be  of  lawful  years  and  discretion,  and  shall  reverently  and  devoutly  require  J,"fjj"' 
the  same :  this  always  observed,  that  the  ministers  shall  say  unto  those  who  kintis, 
shall  communicate,  that   they  ought  firmly  to  believe,  not  the  flesh  only  to  be  permitted 
contained  under  the  form  of  bread,  and  the  blood  only  under  the  wine,  but  hemilns" 
luider  each  kind  to  be  whole  and  perfect  Christ. 

Tluis,  hitherto,  we  have  declared  the  decree  of  the  council.     As  Doubts 
touching  the  other  doubts  and  questions  which  were  afterwards  moved  uons  of 
by  the  masters  and  prelates  of  Bohemia,  the  ambassadors   of  the  n'^f^ns"""'' 
council  answered  thus  : 

First  they  said.  That  it  was  not  the  meaning  of  the  sacred  council,  Answer. 
to  suffer  the  communion  under  both  kinds  by  toleration,  or  as  the  s^o™of 
libel  of  divorcement  was  permitted  to  the  Jews  ;  forasmuch  as  the  ^9'^^ 
council,  intending  even  to  open  the  bowels  of  motherly  charity  and  srantcd 
pity  unto  the  Bohemians  and  Moravians,  doth  not  mean  to  suffer  it  ifemUns", 
with  such  kind  of  sufferance,  which  should  not  exclude  sin,  but  so  to  feranec"*^^ 
grant  it,  that  by  the  authority  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  of  his  J?"t  ''>' ' 
true  spouse  the  church,  it  may  be  lawful,  profitable,  and  healthful,  unto  thoriiy. 
those  who  worthily  receive  the  same. 

Also,  as  touching  that  which  was  spoken  by  the  said  Bohemians,  of  Punish- 
the  punishing  of  offences,  that  it  is  in  the  Scriptures,  how  that  God  offences 
oftentimes  stirreth  up  the  hearts  of  private  persons  to  the  correcting  ^""^'^"^r- 
and  punishing  of  sins,  and  so  it  should  seem  lawful  unto  the  inferiors 
to  correct  and  punish  their  superiors  :  they  answered,  alleging  the  text 
of  St.  Augustine  in  the  thirty-third  decree,  "  He  that  striketh  wicked  How  and 
men  in  that  they  are  wicked,  and  hath  cause  of  death  against  them,  otfenders 
is  the  minister  of  God :  but  he  who,  without  any  public  administra-  «"p'it 
tion  or  office,  murdereth  or  maimeth  any  wicked  thief,  sacrilegious,  punished. 
adulterous,  or  perjured  person,  or  any  other  offender,  shall  be  judged  codcom- 
as  a  homicide ;  and  so  much  the  more  sharply,  in  that  he  feared  not  "q'J,'^";''' 
to  abuse  and  usurp  the  power  not  granted  him  of  God."     And  truly  ence,  and 
this  city  would  take  it  much  more  grievously,  if  any  private  man  should  thoupii 
attempt  to  punish  an  offender,  and  set  up  a  gallows  in  the  street  and  {j.a''„'i.di^- 
there  hang  him,  than  if  one  man  should  kill  another  in  brawl  or  ^^^ry- 
quarrel.  They  alleged,  also,  other  texts  of  St.  Ambrose  and  St.  Jerome, 
agreeable  to  the  same.     They  said  that  no  man  doubteth  that  the 
law  of  God  is  duly  and  holily  appointed,  and  therein  is  simply  written, 
"  Thou  shalt  not  steal ;"  and,  notwithstanding,  by  the  commandment 
of  God,  the  childi-en  of  Israel  carried  away  the  goods  of  the  Egyptians,  xhe 
which  they  had  borrowed  of  them.  Also,  in  the  same  law  it  is  plainly  dkute'a? 
written,  "  Thou  shalt  do  no  mui'der."     Whereupon  St.  Augustine,  ^""^  "'^ 
in  his  first  book  '  De  Civitate  Dei,'  proveth  that  it  is  not  lawful  for  tians 
any  man  to  kill  himself;  and  when  he  maketli  example  of  Samson,  sln"'°^' 
he  answereth  with  these  words  :  "  When  God  commandeth,  and  doth  ^^^^^^ 
affirm  himself  to  command,  without  any  doubt,  who  is  he  that  will  himself 
call  obedience  sin  ?  or  who  will  accuse  the  obedience  to  God  .'^"  Here,  Tin.^"^ 


6i86  THE    COUNCIL    OF    BASIL. 

Wenry    in  tliis  proposition,  you  have  the  words  of  St.  Augustine  for  answer. 
^^'     But  let  every  man  well  foresee,  if  God  do  command,  or  that  he  do 


A.D.  intimate  the  commandment  without  any  circumstances,  and  let  him 
1431  prove  the  spirits,  whether  they  be  of  God.  But  in  such  cases  there 
j4^q    are  no  laws  to  be  given,  neither  are  they  much  to  be  talked  of;  for 

■ '—  thereby  there  should  easily  arise  occasion  to  make  sedition,  and  for 

ordfnary  the  inferiors  to  rise  against  the  superiors.  For,  when  any  man  had 
m^d-  stolen  any  thing,  or  killed  any  man,  he  would  say  that  he  was  moved 
ment  no  thcrcuuto  by  the  Spirit  of  God  :  but  without  manifest  proof  thereof, 
Taws  to  be  he  should  be  punished. 

q/!'!*^:.  Again,  they  said  that  there  were  certain  cases  wherein  the  laity  had 

Answer,  powcr  ovcr  the  clergy.  It  was  answered.  That  there  were  certain 
i^ity  hath  cascs  iu  the  law,  wherein  the  laity  had  power  over  the  clergy,  and 
power  oftentimes  over  cardinals.  For  if,  the  pope  being  dead,  the  cardinals 
clergy,  would  uot  cutcr  the  conclave  to  elect  a  new  pope,  the  king,  prince, 
^viferein.  Or  otlicr  lord  or  secular  power,  may  compel  them :  but,  in  these  cases, 
Thepope  })g  jg  j^qw  no  private  person,  but  useth  his  jurisdiction  by  the  autho- 
judged  rity  of  the  law.  The  like  is  to  be  understood  of  all  other  cases 
own 'law.   expressed  in  the  law. 

Objection.      They  said  further.  That  no  common  law  hath  any  right  or  justice, 
Answer,    cxccpt  God's  law  do  allow  the  same.     It  was  answered,  That  no  com- 
mon  law   hath    right  or  justice,  if  it  be  against    the   law  of  God; 
because  the  law  of  God  is  the  rule  of  all  other  laws.     But  there  is 
great  cunning  and  knowledge  in  applying  the  rule  to  that  which  is 
made  by  the  rule ;  for  oftentimes  it  seemeth  that  there  is  diversity 
in  the  thing  made  by  the  rule,  when  there  is  none  indeed ;  but  the 
default  is  in  the  applying,  because  the  rule  is  not  duly  applied  to  the 
thing  made  by  it. 
Objection.      As  touching  the  article  of  preaching  the  word  of  God,  it  was  moved 
that  oftentimes  some  prelates,  through  their  own  envy  and  malice,  with- 
out any  reasonable  cause,  do  inhibit  a  good  and  meet  preacher  that 
Answer,    preaclicth  catholidy  and  well.     Answer  was  made,  how  that  they  un- 
preiates"^  dcrstood  Well    euougli  that  the  abuse  of  certain  prelates,  who  did 
inhibiting  inordinately  behave  themselves,  gave  a  great  occasion  of  those  trou- 
preachers  blcs.     Also,  that  they  never  heard  of  any  such  complaints  in  those 
parties,  but  that  the  prelates  do  favour  good  preachers,  and  stir  them 
Remedy    up  to  prcach,  by  entreaty,  favour,  and  promotion.     In  all  such  cases 
"  there  are  remedies  already  provided  by  the  law  ;  for,  when  any  man 
is  so  prohibited  to  use  his  right,  he  hath  remedy  to  appeal :  and  if  he 
do  trust  his  appeal  to  be  just,  he  may  use  his  right,  all  violence  both 
of  the  spiritual  and  secular  power  set  apart ;  for  the  end  of  the  matter 
shall  declare,  if  he  had  just  cause  to  appeal.  Then  shall  it  be  declared 
that  the  superior  hath  done  evil  in  prohibiting,  and  the  plaintiff  justly 
in  doing,  and  the  superior,  for  his  unjust  prohibition,  shall  be  punished. 
But  if  he  be  justly  prohibited,  and  that  through  his  temerity  he  do 
contemn  the  just  commandment  of  his  superior,  he  is  worthy  to  be 
punished  with  condign  punishment. 
Objection.      Where  it  was  moved  concerning  the  third  article.  Whether  it  were 
Answer,    lawful  for  the  ecclesiastical  prelates  to  exercise  in  their  proper  person, 
secular      the  acts  of  sccular  dominion  :  hereunto  it  was  answered.  That  if  by 
ti?be'"ex-"  these  words,  "  acts  of  secular  dominion,""  are  understood  acts  which 
ercised  of  a  Gccular  lord  may  do  or  exercise,  then  it  is  to  be  said,  that  a  prelate 


Tirii    ARTICLES    OF    THE    DOHEMIAN'S    TREATED    UPON.  087 

way  lawfully  exercise  some  such  acts  in  his  proper  person,  as  to  sell,    ■^^'"y 

pawn,  or  pledge,  to  enfeoff  by  manner  and  form  ordained  by  law:  but 1_ 

there  are  some  acts  which  it  is  not  lawful  for  them  to  exercise  in  their    A.D. 
proper  person,  but  they  ought  to  have,  afterwards,  a  vice-gerent  or      f^ 
proctor  to  do  the  same  :  whereupon  there  is  prohibition  made  in    1439, 
the  law  in  the  rubric,  "  Ne  Clerus  vel  Monachus  secularibus  negotiis  t — ; — 

.....  ^  ^  the  cler- 

se  immisceat,  et  in  aliis  rebus/  gy,  after  a 

It  was  also  moved,  whether  that  coactive  power,  which  ought  to  be  fesp'^'ct, 
exercised  by  a  steward,  &c.  be  in  the  hands  of  an  ecclesiastical  pre-  '^'j'  ^J'^  *'' 
late.     Whereupon    John    Polomar   answered.    That   this    question  aiium.; 
pre-supposeth  another,   whereof  there  are  divers  opinions  amongst  Ans^wer"' 
the  doctors.  In  whose  power  the  dominion  of  the  church  should  be 
and  furthermore,  whether  the  actions  be  in  the  person  of  the  tutor  y^e 


Coactive 
power, 


thu 


it  be- 


or  proctor ;  or,  if  they  be  not  in  their  person,  they  be  notwithstanding,  lonseth 
by  the  Constitution  of  any  actor  or  proctor,  whose  exercising  of  those  cier'iy, 
actions  doth  give  authority  under  the  actor  or  proctor ;  with  other  ^"'^  ^°'^- 
difficulties,  whereof  it  is  not  needful  to  speak  at  this  present.  But 
forasmuch  as  he  was  urged  to  say  his  opinion,  he  said,  that  to  such  as 
had  either  leisure  or  pleasure  in  disputation,  and  would  argue  against 
him,  he  would  be  contented  to  give  the  choice,  to  take  which  part 
he  would :  but  his  opinion  was  rather  that  the  dominion  of  church 
matters  should  be  in  the  power  of  Christ ;  and  the  prelates,  with  the 
other  clergy,  are  but  canonical  administrators  in  manner  of  tutors,  but 
they  have  more  power  and  administration  than  tutors,  and  by  consti- 
tuting a  steward  or  vicegerent,  &c.  their  constitution  being  made,  the 
steward  or  vicegerent  hath  the  same  coactive  power  and  exercise  of 
jurisdiction. 

Also,  as  touching  the  fourth  article,  for  the  declaration  of  the  first 
conclusion,  it  is  agreed  that  these  words,  "  juste  requisita,"  i.  e. 
"  justly  gotten,"  alleged  therein,  determine  all  tilings  contained  in 
the  same. 

Also,  as  touching  the  second  conclusion,  where  the  sacred  canons  The 
and  holy  doctors  speak  thus :  "  The  goods  of  the  church,  the  sub-  of  tiie 
stance  of  the  church,  and  the  possessions  of  the  church ;"  and  divers  l^nwuoso 
other  opinions  there  be  amongst  the  doctors,  in  whose  power  the  P°^,!^'-j^^g 
rule  thereof  should  be ;  as  it  is  noted  in  the  Glossary,  cap.  "  Expe-  be  pro- 
dit."  12  Quaist.  1.  "  They  do  not  intend  to  constrain  any  man  to  ^''''^' 
any  of  those  opinions ;  neither  to  exclude  any  of  them ;  but  that 
every  man  should  have  liberty  probably  to  maintain  which  of  them 
he  thinketh  best." 

Moreover  the   Bohemians  said,  That  they  did  believe  that  the  The 
clergy  are  but  administrators  of  the  temporalties  of  the  church,  and  admlni-^ 
not  lords  thereof,  according  to  the  manner  of  speaking  of  the  Scrip-  ^'Jfi^J^-^ 
tures,  holy  doctors,  and  canons.    Also  the  Bohemians  said.  That  on  all  of  the 
occasions  which  should  hereafter  arise,  they  would  wholly  stand  to  raui^s 
the  determination  of  the  judge  agreed  upon  at  Egra,  with  one  consent,  "hurch. 
In  this  manner  did  the  ambassadors  make  answer  unto  the  Bohemians. 

At  last,  after  much  communication  had  to  and  fro,  a  concord 
and  unity  was  concluded  and  confirmed  by  setting-to  their  hands. 
The  Bohemians  promised  to  receive  the  peace  and  unity  of  the 
church,  and  the  declaration  of  the  three  articles.  This  was  done 
A.D.  1438,  about  the  feast  of  St.  Martin.    It  was  afterwards  agreed,  a.d.hss. 


68a 


THE    COUNCIL    OF    BASIL. 


Hfnrg 
VI. 

A.D. 
1431 

to 
11.39. 


The 
comrau- 
7iion  in 
both 
kinds  to 
be  gene- 
rally 
granted. 


To  have 
a  good 
and  law- 
ful pastor 
and 
bishop. 


Free  com- 
munion 
under 
both 
kinds  to 
be  per- 
mitted 
to  aU 
princes. 


both  by  the  ambassadors  of  that  council,  and  of  Bohemia,  that  what- 
.  soever  remained  should  be  determined  and  agreed  upon,  first  at 
Ratisbon,  afterward  at  Brunn,  in  the  diocese  of  Olmutz ;  then  at 
Alba  in  Hungary,  before  the  emperor  Sigismund.  But  the  matter 
could  not  be  ended  in  any  place. 

At  last  the  concord  was  confirmed  by  writing  with  their  seals  at 
Inglavia,  a  city  of  Moravia,  the  fifth  day  of  July,  in  the  presence  of 
the  emperor. 

Certain   Petitions  which  the  Bohemians  put  up,  last  of  all,  in  the 
sacred  Council  of  Basil,  a.d.  1438,  in  the  Month  of  November. 

Unto  the  most  reverend  fathers  in  Christ,  and  our  most  gracious  lords  :  We, 
the  ambassadors  of  the  kingdom  of  Bohemia,  do  most  humbly  and  heartily 
require  you,  that  for  the  perpetual  preservation  of  peace  and  concord,  and  for 
the  firm  preservation  of  all  things  contained  in  the  composition,  you  will  vouch- 
safe of  your  clemency  to  give  and  grant  unto  us,  all  and  singular  our  requests 
hereunder  written,  with  effectual  execution  of  the  same. 

First,  And  above  all  things,  we  desire  and  require  you,  for  the  extirpation  of 
divers  dissensions  and  controversies  which  will  undoubtedly  follow  amongst  our 
people  under  the  diversity  of  the  communion,  and  for  the  abolishing  of  infinite 
evils  which  we  are  not  able  to  express  as  we  have  conceived  them,  that  you  will 
gently  vouchsafe,  of  your  goodness  and  liberality,  to  give,  grant,  and  command, 
unto  our  kingdom  of  Bohemia,  and  marquisdom  of  Moravia,  one  uniform  order 
of  the  communion  unto  all  men,  under  both  kinds ;  that  is  to  say,  unto  the 
archbishop  of  Prague,  the  bishop  of  Luthonis,  Olmutz,  and  other  prelates  of 
the  kingdom  and  marquisdom,  having  charge  of  souls,  and  to  their  vicars,  and 
also  to  their  flocks  and  subjects  :  and  that  according  to  those  things  which  are 
contained  in  the  bidl  of  the  ambassadors,  and  in  the  compositions  made  in  the 
name  of  the  whole  council,  written  in  the  chapter,  '  Pro  firmitate,'  where  it  is 
thus  said,  '  Ajid  all  other  things  shall  be  done,  which  shall  be  meet  and  neces- 
sary for  the  preservation  of  the  peace  and  unity.'  For  this  done,  by  your 
benefit  the  whole  kingdom  shall  be  comforted  above  measure,  «and  established  in 
brotherly  love ;  whereby  a  uniform  subjection  and  obedience  shall  be  perpe- 
tually attributed  unto  the  holy  church. 

Item,  We  require  and  desire,  as  before,  for  the  avoiding  of  all  false  suspicion 
and  doubtfulness  of  many,  who  suppose  that  tlie  sacred  council  hath  granted  the 
said  communion  under  both  kinds  unto  us,  but  for  a  time,  as  neither  profitable 
nor  wholesome,  but  as  the  libel  of  divorcement ;  that  you  will  vouchsafe  (ac- 
cording to  this  chapter  alleged  in  the  compositions ;  '  First  they  said,  that  it  was 
not  the  intent  of  the  sacred  council,'  &c.)  wholesomely  and  speedily  to  provide 
for  our  safety,  and,  with  your  grant  in  this  behalf,  and  with  the  bulls  of  your 
letters,  to  confirm  that  chapter,  together  with  the  other  pertaining  to  the  office 
of  your  ambassadors. 

Item,  We  beseech  you,  as  before,  that  for  the  confirmation  of  obedience,  and 
for  the  discipline  of  all  the  clergy,  and  for  the  final  defence  and  observation  of 
all  things  determined  and  agreed  upon,  and  for  the  good  order  in  spiritualties, 
ye  will  vouchsafe  effectually  to  provide  for  us  a  good  and  lawful  pastor,  arch- 
bishops, and  bishops,  who  shall  seem  unto  us  most  meet  and  acceptable  for  our 
kingdom,  to  execute  those  offices  and  duties. 

Item,  We  require  you,  as  aforesaid,  that  your  fatherly  reverences  will  vouch- 
safe, for  the  defence  of  the  worthy  fkme  of  the  kingdom  and  marquisdom,  to 
declare  and  show  our  innocency,  in  that  they  have  communicated,  do  and 
hereafter  shall  communicate,  under  both  kinds  ;  to  give  out,  ordain,  and  direct 
the  letters  of  the  sacred  council,  in  manner  and  form  most  apt  and  meet  for 
such  declaration,  unto  all  princes,  as  well  secular  as  spiritual,  cities  and  com- 
monalties, according  to  the  compositions,  and  as  the  lords  the  ambassadors  are 
bound  unto  us  to  do. 

Item,  We  desire  you  that  in  the  discussing  of  the  matter  for  the  communion 
under  both  kinds,  and  of  the  commandment  thereof  given  unto  all  the  faithful, 
ye  will  not  proceed  otherwise  than  according  to  the  Concordatum  agreed  upon 
at  Egra :  that  is  to  say,  according  to  the  law  of  God,  the  order  of  Christ  and 


XnE    PETITIONS    OF    THE    BOHEMIAN'S.  689 

his  apostles,  the  general  councils,  and  the  minds  of  the  holy  doctors,  truly    Henry 
grounded  upon  tlie  law  of  God.  ^^^ 

Item,  We  desire  that  your  fatherly  reverences,  considering  the  great  affection     .    t^ 
of  our  people,  will  give  us  the  desired  Ubertj'  to  communicate  unto  the  ygunger    \\>{ 
sort  the  sacrament  of  the  supper.     For  if  this  use  of  communicating  should  be       . 
taken  awaj-,  which  our  kingdom,  being  godly  moved  by  the  writings  of  most     i  loq 

great  and  holy  doctors,  and  brought  in  by  example,  hath  received  as  catholic,  '. — '— 

and  exercised  now  a  long  tune  ;  verily  it  should  raise  up  an  intolerable  offence 
amongst  the  people,  and  their  minds  would  be  grievouslj-  vexed  and  troubled.     __ 

Item,  We  require  you,  as  before,  that,  for  like  causes,  jour  fatherly  reve-  spels  and 
reuces  would  vouchsafe  to  permit  at  least  the  gospels,  epistles,  and  creed,  to  be  epistles  to 
sung  and  read  in  the  chrjch  in  oiu*  vulgar  tongue,  before  the  people,  to  move  I^J^ruKTr 
them  unto  devotion  ;  for  in  our  Sclavonic  language  it  hath  been  used  of  old  in  the  tongue? 
church,  and  Ukewise  in  our  kingdom. 

Item,  We  require  you,  in  the  name  of  the  said  kingdom,  and  of  the  famous  incorpo- 
university  of  Prague,  that  your  fatherly  reverences  would  vouchsafe  to  show  ^"<^nt° 
such  diligence  and  care  toward  the  desired  reformation  of  that  tmiversity,  that  ed  to  uni- 
according  to  the  manner  and  form  of  other  imiversities  reformed  by  the  chiu-ch,  ^ersitles, 
prebends,  and  collations  of  certain  benefices  of  cathedral  and  parish  churches,  fuj  re- 
may  be  annexed  and  incorporated  unto  the  said  imiversitj-,  that  thereby  it  may  quest. 
be  increased  and  preferred. 

Item,  We  desire  you,  as  before,  as  heartily  as  we  may,  and  also  (saving  a  request 
always  your  fatherly  reverences)  require  j-ou,  and  by  the  former  compositions  ^*"'  °eces- 
we  most  instantly  admonish  you,  that  \vith  your  whole  minds  and  endeavours,  formation 
and  with  all  care  and  study,  your  reverences  wiU  watch  and  seek  for  that  long  and  dis- 
desired  and  most  necessary  reformation  of  the  church  and  christian  religion,  and  "P'"'^- 
effectually  labour  for  the  rooting  out  of  all  public  evils,  as  well  in  the  head  as 
in  the  members,  as  you  have  often  promised  to  do  in  our  kingdom,  in  the  com- 
positions ;  and  as  our  fourth  article,  touching  the  avoiding  of  all  public  evils, 
doth  exact  and  require. 

There  were  certain  answers  provided  by  the  council  to  these  pe- 
titions of  the  Bohemians,  which  were  not  delivered  unto  them,  but 
kept  back,  for  what  purpose  and  intent  we  know  not.     ^Vherefore. 
because  we  thought  them  not  greatly  necessary  for  this  place,  and  also 
to  avoid  prolixity,  we  have  judged  it  meet  at  this  present  to  omit 
them.     Thus  have  ye  heard  compendiously  the  chief  and  principal 
matters  treated  of  and  done  in  this  famous  council  of  Basil.     And 
here,  to  conclude  withal,  we  have  thought  good  to  declare  unto  you, 
for  the  aid  and  help  of  the  ignorant  people  (who  judge  many  things 
to  be  of  longer  time  and  continuance  than  indeed  they  be;  and, 
thereupon,  have  established  a  great  part  of  their  opinions),  how  that, 
towards  the  latter  end  of  this  council,  that  is  to  say,  in  the  thirty- 
seventh  session  of  the  same,  holden  the  17th  of  September,  a.d.  A.D.1439. 
1439,  the  feast  of  the  Conception  of  our  Lady  was  ordained  to  be  The'Con- 
holdcn  and  celebrated  yearly.     In  like  case,  also,  in  the  forty-fourth  ^r'il'dy^ 
session  of  the  same  coimcil,  holden  the  1st  day  of  July,  a.d.  1441,  brought 
it  was  ordained  that  the  feast  of  the  Visitation  of  our  Lady  should  be  church!^ 
celebrated  and  holden  yearly  in  the  month  of  July.     We  have  also  J^^moi' 
thought  it  good,  before  we  do  end  this  story,  to  annex  hereunto  cer-  ^  \^^'' 
tain  decrees,  profitably  and  wholesomely  ordained  in  the  said  council,  in. 
against  the  inordinate  giving  of  the  ecclesiastical  benefices  and  livings 
by  the  pope,  with  certain  other  constitutions  also,   fruitful  for  the 
behalf  and  edification  of  the  church. 

Diu-ing  the  time  that  the  general  council  at  Basil  was  so  diligent  vowsona 
and  careM  about  the  reformation  of  the  church,  this  one  thing  seemed  acm  te- 
good  unto  them,  to  be  prosecuted  and  followed  with  an  earnest  care  *°^ 

VOL.  III.  Y  Y 


690  THE    COUNCI.L    OF    BASIL. 

Hevnj  and  diligence  :  that  throughout  every  church,  apt  and  meet  ministers 
^^"     miglit  be  appointed,  who  might  shine  in  virtue  and  knowledge,  to  tlie 

A.  U.    glory  of  Christ,  and  the  healthful  edifying  of  the  christian  people ; 

1431  ^hereunto  the  multitude  of  expectative  graces  hath  been  a  great  im- 
pediment and  let,  in  that  they  have  been  found  to  have  brought 
grievous  troubles,  divers  disorders,  and  many  dangers  upon  the  eccle- 


to 

1439. 


low,  de-^  siastical  state.  For  hereby,  oftentimes,  scarcely  apt  or  meet  ministers 
thTcoun'*^  have  been  appointed  for  the  churches,  who  are  neither  knowTi  nor 
cU;  which  examined ;  and  this  expectation  of  void  benefices,  as  the  old  laws  do 
are^he'r'e  witncss,  dotli  givc  occasiou  to  desirc  another  man's  death,  which  is 
"^Expec-  greatly  prejudicial  unto  salvation  :  besides  that  innumerable  quarrels 
tative  and  contentions  are  moved  amongst  the  servants  of  God ;  rancour 
incorfve-  and  malicc  nourished ;  the  ambition  and  greedy  desire  of  pluralities 
that'^arise  of  bencficcs  maintained ;  and  the  riches  and  substance,  of  kingdoms 
by  vo^ ,   and  provinces  marvellously  consumed.    Poor  men  suffer  innumerable 

sons  of  i.  .  •'     .  „  _-,  rm  o 

benefices,  vcxations  by  nmnmg  unto  the  court  ot  Kome.  1  hey  are  ottentunes 
spoiled  and  robbed  by  the  way,  troubled  and  afflicted  with  divers 
plagues,  and  having  spent  their  patrimony  and  substance,  left  them 
by  their  parents,  they  are  constrained  to  live  in  extreme  poverty. 
Many  do  challenge  benefices,  who,  without  any  just  title  (yea  such, 
indeed,  as  ought  not  to  have  them),  obtain  and  get  the  same  ;  such, 
I  say,  as  have  most  craft  and  subtlety  to  deceive  their  neighboiu-,  or 
have  greatest  substance  to  contend  in  the  law.  It  happeneth  often- 
times, that  under  the  intrication  of  these  prerogatives,  antelations, 
and  such  others  as  do  associate  these  expectative  graces,  much  craft 
and  deceit  is  found.  Also,  oftentimes,  the  ministry  is  taken  away  from 
young  men  by  their  ordinary  givers,  while,  by  the  troubles  of  those 
contentions,  and  divers  discourses,  nmning  to  and  fro  by  means  of 
those  graces,  they  are  vexed  and  troubled ;  the  ecclesiastical  order  is 
confounded,  while  every  man"'s  authority  and  jurisdiction  is  not  pre- 
served ;  and  the  bishops  of  Rome,  also,  by  challenging  and  taking 
upon  them  too  much  the  office  of  the  inferiors,  are  withdrawn  from 
more  weighty  and  fruitful  matters  ;  neither  do  they  diligently  attend 
to  the  guiding  and  correction  of  the  inferiors,  as  the  public  utility 
doth  require.  All  which  things  do  bring  a  great  conftision  unto  the 
clergy  and  ecclesiastical  state,  to  the  great  prejudice  and  hinderance  of 
God's  true  worship,  and  public  salvation. 
Respect-  In  the  same  council,  also,  divers  other  constitutions  were  made, 
trovereies  ^^^  Unprofitable  for  reformation,  and  for  removing  of  certain  abuses 
b°ro''u  ht  ^^^  disorders  brought  in,  especially  by  the  bishop  of  Rome,  as 
to  Rome,  touching  causes  not  to  be  brought  up  and  translated  to  the  court  of 
Rome  ;  wherein  it  was  decreed,  that  no  actions  nor  controversies 
should  be  brought  from  other  countries  to  be  pleaded  at  Rome,  which 
were  beyond  four  days'  journey  distant  from  the  said  court  of  Rome, 
a  few  principal  matters  only  excepted.  Also,  that  no  frivolous  ap- 
peals should  be  made  to  the  pope  hereafter.  It  was,  moreover,  in 
the  same  council  decreed,  for  the  number,  age,  and  condition,  of  the 
cardinals,  that  they  should  not  exceed  the  number  of  four  and  twenty, 
besides  them  that  were  already ;  and  that  they  should  be  freely  taken 
out  of  all  countries  ;  and  that  they  should  not  be  of  kin  to  the  bishop 
of  Rome,  or  to  the  cardinals,  nor  yet  blemished  with  any  spot  or 
crime.    Also   for  '  annates'  or  first  fruits,  or  half  fruits,  it  was  there 


CERTAIN    CONSTITUTIONS    OF    THE    COUNCIL.  691 

provided  that  no  such  annates  nor  confirmation  of  elections,  nor  col-    ^p'-y 
lation  of  benefices,  should  be  paid  or  reserved  any  more  to  the  pope, 


for  the  first  year's  voidance.     All  which  things,  there  agreed  and   ■^•^• 
concluded  by  them,  were  afterwards  confirmed  and  ratified  by  the      ^^  ■ 
French  king,  Charles  VII.,  with  the  full  consent  of  all  his  prelates,    1439 
in  his  high  court  of  parliament  in  Bourges,  and  there  called  '  Prag-  ;^~^^ 
matica  sanctio,'  a.  d.  1438;  whereupon  great  utility  ensued  after- ^ije  pope's 
wards  to  the  kingdom  of  France,     Albeit  in  process  of  time  divers  fruits. 
friars  there  were,  who  %vrote  against  the  same.^ 

Amongst  many  decrees  of  the  said  council  of  Basil,  in  the  nine- 
teenth session  there  was  also  a  decree  made  touching  the  converting 
of  Jews,  and  young  novices  in  religion,  imto  the  cliristian  faith. 

Also,  that  all  ordinaries  should  yearly,  at  appointed  times,  provide  Act  for 
certain  men  well  learned  in  the  holy  Scriptvu-es,  in  such  places  where  version  of 
Jews  and  other  infidels  did  dwell,  to  declare  to  them  the  truth  of  the  '^^  •'^'^^• 
catholic  faith,  that  they,  acknowledging  their  error,  might  forsake  the 
same ;  unto  which  preaching  the  said  ministers  should  compel  them 
to  resort,  and  to  hear,  under  pain  of  excluding  them  from  occupying 
any  more    in   that  place ;    provided  that  the   said    diocesans  and 
preachers  should  behave  themselves  towards  them  mercifully  and 
with  all  charity,  whereby  they  "might  win  them  to  Christ,  not  only  by 
the  declaring  of  the  verity,  but  also  by  exhibiting  their  offices  of 
humanity. 

And,  to  the  intent  their  preaching  might  be  the  more  fruitful,  and  For  stu- 
that  the  preachers  might  be  the  better  instructed  in  the  tongues,  it  He'bfew,'' 
was  also,  in  the  same  council,  provided  and  commanded,  that  the.  ^^^'"' 
constitution  made  before  in  the  council  of  Vienna,  for  learning  the  chaidee. 
Hebrew,  Chaidee,  Arabic,  and  Greek  tongues,  should,  by  all  means, 
be  observed  and  kept,  and  ordinary  stipends  provided  for  them  that 
should  teach  the  same  tongues. 

Another  decree,  moreover,  in  the  twentieth  session  was  enacted, 
that  whosoever  was  known  or  publicly  noted  to  be  a  keeper  of  con- 
cubines, should  be  sequestered  from  all  fruits  of  his  benefices  for  the 
space  of  three  months,  which  fruits  should  be  converted  by  the  ordi- 
nary to  the  reparations,  or  some  other  utility  of  the  church ;  and,  if 
he  did  not  so  amend,  it  was  by  the  synod  decreed,  that  he  should  be 
clearly  deposed  from  all  his  benefices. 

Furthermore  the  said  synod  did  greatly  inveigh  against  those, 
who,  ha\dng  the  jurisdiction  of  the  church,  did  not  shame  to  suffer 
such  offenders,  for  bribes  and  money,  still*  to  continue  in  their  filthi- 
ness,  &c. 

By  these  decrees  of  the  council  above  specified,  it  is  to  be  seen, 
what  corruption  had  been  then  frequented  in  the  church  of  God, 
through  the  bishop,  and  com-t  of  Rome.  For  the  more  express  de- 
claration thereof,  we  thought  it  not  much  impertinent  here  to 
infer  the  words  of  one  Martin  Meyre,  writing  to  ^neas  Sylvius, 
touching  and  noting  the  said  cormptions  ;  the  tenor  of  whose  epistle 
here  ensuctli. 

(1)  Ex  lib.  Pragm.  Sanctionis. 


Y  Y 


692  MARTIN    MEYRK    TO    OARJ)INAL    -ENEAS. 

Henry 

^^-  An  Epistle  of  Martin  Meyre  to  iEneas  Sylvius,  translated  into 
English,  the  Latin  whereof  is  extant  in  the  former  Edition  of  this 
Book.' 

Unto  the  reverend  father,  the  lord  iEneas,  cardinal  of  Sienna ;  Martin  Meyre, 
chancellor  to  the  bishop  of  Mcntz,  wisheth  health. 

I  have  understood,  by  certain  of  my  friends'  letters,  that  you  are  ci-eated 
cardinal.  I  am  glad  for  your  part,  that  you  have  received  so  worthy  rewards 
for  your  virtues.  I  rejoice,  also,  for  mine  own  part,  that  my  friend  hath  attained 
unto  such  a  dignity,  wherein  he  may,  in  time  to  come,  both  help  me  and  my 
friends  :  but  this  is  a  grief  unto  me,  that  you  have  happened  upon  those  days, 
which  seem  to  be  troublesome  unto  the  apostolic  see.  For  there  are  many 
complaints  made  unto  my  lord  the  archbishop,  upon  the  pope,  that  he  will 
neither  keep  the  decrees  of  the  council  of  Constance,  neither  of  Basil,  neither 
yet  thinketh  himself  bound  to  the  covenants  of  his  predecessors,  and  seemeth 
utterly  to  contenm  our  nation,  and  to  seek  the  utter  ruin  thereof  For  it  is 
evident  that  the  election  of  prelates  is  every  where  rejected;  benefices  and  dig- 
nities, of  what  sort  soever  they  be,  are  reserved  for  the  cardinals,  and  chief 
notaries  ;  and  you  yourself  have  obtained  the  reservation  of  three  provinces  of 
Germany,  under  such  a  form  as  hath  not  been  accustomed  or  heard  of.  Advowsons 
or  gifts  of  benefices  are  granted  without  number;  yearly  stipends  and  half  the 
revenues  are  exacted  without  delay ;  and  it  is  evident  that  there  is  more  extorted 
than  is  due.  The  regiment  of  churches  is  not  committed  unto  such  as  best 
deserve  them,  but  unto  such  as  offer  most  money  for  them  ;  and  new  pardons 
are  granted  out  daily  to  scrape  and  gather  together  money.  Tithes  are  com- 
manded to  be  exacted  without  the  consent  of  our  prelates,  for  the  Turkish  war^ 
and  those  matters  which  were  accustomed  to  be  debated  and  determined  at 
The  coi-  home,  are  now  carried  unto  the  apostolic  see  of  Rome.  A  thousand  ways  are 
"^f  th°"  invented  and  devised,  how  the  see  of  Rome  may,  by  subtlety  and  craft,  extort 
church  of  and  get  gold  and  treasure  from  us,  even  as  it  were  of  the  Turks  or  barbarians ; 
Rome  de-  whereby  our  nation,  which  was  sometime  famous  and  valiant,  which  by  their 
^'^  ^  '  power  and  blood  conquered  the  Roman  empire,  and  was  once  the  lady  and 
queen  of  all  the  world,  now,  being  brought  unto  poverty,  is  made  a  hand-maid, 
and  become  tributary ;  and  being  now  in  extreme  misery,  hath  of  long  time 
bewailed  her  cruel  fortune  and  poverty.  But  now  our  nobles,  being,  as  it  were, 
awakened  out  of  their  sleep,  have  begun  to  consider  and  devise  with  themselves, 
by  what  means  they  might  withstand  this  calamity,  and  utterly  shake  off  this 
yoke  and  bondage,  and  have  determined  with  themselves  to  challenge  again 
their  former  liberty.  This  will  be  no  small  loss  unto  the  court  of  Rome,  if  the 
princes  of  Germany  bring  to  pass  that  which  they  have  devised.  Wherefore, 
as  much  as  I  do  rejoice  of  your  late  obtained  dignity,  so  much  also  am  I  moved 
and  grieved  that  these  things  happen  in  your  days.  But  peradventure  Gods 
determination  is  otherwise,  and  his  will  shall  surely  take  place.  You,  in  the 
mean  time,  be  of  good  cheer,  and  devise  according  to  your  wisdom,  by  what 
means ^  the  vehemency  of  these  floods  may  be  stayed.  Thus,  fare  ye  well. 
From  Hasthaffenberg,  the  last  day  of  August. 

The  au-  Concerning  the  avithority  of  this  general  council  of  Basil,  what  is 
tiirMun-  to  be  esteemed  of  it,  by  the  acts  and  fruits  thereof,  may  be  iindcr- 
c'l  of  stood  of  all  good  men.  Neither  was  it  of  any  man  doubted  in  the 
first  beginning,  so  long  as  the  pope  agreed  and  consented  unto  it. 
But,  after  the  pope  began  to  draw  back,  many  others  followed,  espe- 
cially of  the  richer  sort  of  prelates,  who  had  any  thing  to  lose ; 
whereof  suiRcicntly  hath  been  said  by  Arelatcnsis,  the  cardinal, 
before.  In  the  number  of  these  inconstant  prelates,  besides  many 
others,  was  first,  cardinal  Jidian,  the  first  collector  of  this  council,  and 

(1)  Ex  Orth.  Grat.  [The  Latin  will  be  given  in  the  Appendix.— En.l 

(2)  "  By  what  means,"  &e. ;  "  bv  what  means  the  flames  of  lire  m.iy  be  resisted."  See  Edition 
l.';(j3,  p.  346.  "  Quibus  repagulis  tluminis  impetus  coerceri  possit."  lb.  p.  345.  The  date  1457  is 
attached  both  to  the  Latin  and  English  copy  of  this  letter  in  the  aliovc  edition.— Ed  ] 


LKTTKR    OF    (ARDIN.M.    JULIAN    TO    POPE    EUGEKE.  693 

vicegerent  of  the  pope,  as  by  his  fervent  and  vehement  letter,  written    i^eii'y 

to  pope  Eugene  in  defence  of  this  council,  may  well  appear  ;  wherein '■ — 

he  most  earnestly  doth  expostulate  with  the  foresaid  pope  Eugene,    -^'P- 
for  seeking  to  dissolve  the  council,  and  declareth  in  the  same  many      ^ 
causes,  why  he  should  rather  rejoice,  and  give  God  thanks  for  the    1439. 
godly  proceedings  and  joy  fill  agreement  between  the  council  and  the 
Bohemians ;    and  so  exhorteth  him,  with  manifold  persuasions,   to 
resort  to  the  council  himself,  and  not  to  seek  the  dissolution  of  the 
same.     The  copy  and  tenor  of  Julian's  epistle  to  the  pope,  if  any 
be  disposed  to  peruse  the  same,  we  thought  here  good  to  set  down 
to  be  seen. 

The  Copy  of  an  Epistle  which  Julian,  Cardinal  of  St.  Angelo,  and 
the  Pope''s  Ambassador  into  Germany,  wrote  marvellous  boldly 
and  freely  unto  Eugene,  Bishop  of  Rome,  for  that  he  went  about 
to  dissolve  the  Council  of  Basil. 

Most  blessed  father !  after  the  devout  kisses  of  your  blessed  feet. 

Now  shall  the  whole  world  understand  and  know,  whether  your  holiness 
have  in  you  the  bowels  of  fatherly  love  and  charity,  and  the  zeal  of  the  house 
of  God  ;  whether  you  be  sent  to  make  peace  or  discord,  to  congregate  or  dis- 
perse ;  or  whether  you  be  that  good  shepherd  that  giveth  his  life  for  his  sheep. 
Behold  the  door  beginneth  now  to  be   opened,  whereby  the  lost  sheep  may 
retiu-n  again  unto  their  own  fold ;  now  is  there  good  hope  even  at  hand  of  the 
reconciliation  of  the  Bohemians.     If  your  holiness,  as  it  is  your  duty,  do  help 
and  further  the  same,  you  shall  obtain  great  glory  both  in  heaven  and  earth. 
But  if,  peradventure,  you  go  about  to  let  the  same  (which  is  not  to  be  expected 
at  your  hands),  all  men  will  reprove  you  of  impiety  ;   heaven  and  earth  will 
conspire  against  you ;  all  men  will  forsake  you.     For  how  is  he  to  be  followed, 
who,  with  one  word,  may  restore  peace  and  quietness  to  the  church,  and  re- 
fuseth  to  do  it  ?     But  1  conceive  a  better  hope  in  you,  how  that  your  holiness, 
without  any  excuse,  will,  with  your  whole  heart  and  mind,  favour  this  most 
sacred  council,  and  give  thanks  unto  Almighty  God  for  his  great  goodness,  that 
this  congregation  hath  not  departed.      Behold  the   ambassadors  of  this  sacred  The  am- 
council  are  returned  with  great  joy  and  gladness  from  Egra,  reporting  how  that,  bassadors 
through  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  they  have  finnly  concluded  with  the  am-  council 
bassadors  of  the  Bohemians  (that  is  to  say,  of  the  Pragueians,  Orphans,  and  are  re- 
Taborites,  amongst  whom  were  also  present  the  captains  of  their  enemies,  and  '"™<^'l 
specially  Procopius),  that  a  solemn  ambassade  of  all  the  estates  of  the  realm  Egra. 
should  come  unto  the  council  of  Basil,  after  a  safe  conduct  has  been  sent  unto 
them  by  the  said  council  in  form  conditioned,  which  shall  be  done  with  speed. 
This  sacred  congregation  is  marvellously  exhilarate  and  joyful,  for  those  our 
ambassadc»rs  affinn,  that  all  things  were  handled  with  such  charity  at  Egra,  and 
that  they  did  see  such  things  amongst  the  Bohemians,  that,  not  without  cause, 
they  do  conceive  great  hope  of  their  reconciliation. 

And  at  last,  gently  embracing  one  another,  even  with  tears  of  gladness,  they 
departed  from  Egra ;  the  Bohemians  requiring  our  ambassadors,  that  the 
matter  might  be  ended  with  all  expedition.  They  report  also,  that  many  things 
happened  in  that  treaty,  which,  if  any  man  heard,  and  did  not  weep  for  joy,  he 
might  well  think  himself  to  be  but  smally  afFectioned  unto  Christ.  As  for  three 
of  the  four  articles,  they  seem  not  to  make  any  great  difficulty  upon  them.  As 
touching  the  fourth,  that  is,  of  the  communion  under  both  kinds,  there  is  good 
hope  that  they  will  follow  the  judgment  of  the  council.  Wlio  is  it,  then,  that 
dare  counsel  your  holiness  to  persevere  any  longer  in  the  purpose  of  dissolu- 
tion ?  for,  if  the  council  had  not  been  appointed  at  all,  for  so  great  hope  and 
necessity,  it  ought  to  have  been  appointed  in  this  place.  How  worthy  of  praise 
and  commendation  should  your  holiness  act,  if  you  would  leave  Italy  and  all 
other  affairs,  and  come  hither  in  your  own  person  ;  although  you  should  need 
to  be  carried  in  a  waggon  or  litter.  The  keeping  and  defence  of  the  temporal 
patrimony  of  the  church  may  well  be  disposed  and  done  by  legates  and  vicars 


694 


CARDINAL    JULIAN    EXHOHTETH    POPE    EUGENE 


Henry 
VI. 

A.D. 

1431 

to 

1439. 


Tliis  is  the  true  i)atrimony  of  the  chuixh,  to  win  souls ;  for  the  church  is  not  a 
heap  of  stones  and  walls.  Christ  hath  not  made  you  a  keeper  of  castles  and 
forts,  but  a  pastor  of  souls.  Therefore,  you  should  do  that  in  your  own  person, 
which  is  most  necessary  and  acceptable  unto  Christ,  and  all  other  things  by 
your  substitutes.  For  so  did  the  apostles,  who,  to  the  intent  they  might  the 
more  freely  attend  to  the  preaching  of  the  word  of  God,  did  institute  seven  to 
serve  the  tables,  and  for  the  ministration  of  other  inferior  things.  I  hear  that, 
What  the  \yy  the  grace  of  God,  your  holiness  doth  daily  recover  and  amend ;  and  if  so  be, 
church  IS.  ^^  jj_  j^  ^^^^^  y^^j  ^^^  yjgjj  gome  churches  on  foot,  ye  may  also  come  liither  on 
horseback  ;  for  you  cannot  go  unto  any  thing  more  profitable  or  concordant  to 
your  office,  than  to  go  unto  the  place  where  innumerable  benefits  and  goodness 
may  spring.  Let  your  holiness  understand  and  consider  wherein  Christ,  whose 
vicar  you  are,  and  St.  Peter,  whose  successor  you  are,  and  the  apostles  and  holy 
bishops,  did  exercise  and  occupy  themselves ;  and,  as  you  do  succeed  them  in 
office,  so  succeed  them  in  manners.  But  if,  peradventm-e,  your  holiness  cannot 
come  hither,  I  do  counsel  you,  that,  for  so  great  a  benefit,  you  would  send  the 
more  part  of  the  reverend  lords,  cardinals  of  the  court  of  Rome,  and  command 
all  other  prelates  to  come  hither.  Do  not  let  or  hinder  those  that  are  willing 
to  come,  as  it  is  reported  you  do,  but  rather  allure  them  to  come  hither. 

Your  holiness  may  believe  me,  that  only  charity  moveth  me  to  counsel  you 
in  this  sort ;  be  ye  not  separate  from  your  members  :  nourish  your  children  as 
the  hen  doth  her  chickens  under  her  wings.     And,  if  so  be  that  you  will  do 
nothing  else,  yet  speak  this  only  woi  d,  '  Placet, '  that  is  to  say,  that  it  pleaseth 
you  that  the  council  of  Basil  shoidd  go  forward.     For  a  few  days  past  there 
came  news  hither,  for  which  your  holiness  ought  altogether  to  cease  from  your 
dissolution.     The  reverend  father,  the  archbishop  of  Lyons,  hath  written  unto 
the  council,  and  unto  me  also,  how  that  the  prelates  of  France  have  assembled 
together  in  the  city  of  Bourges,  and  there,  after  long  and  exact  examination, 
have  concluded,   that  the  council  is  lawfully  congregated  in  this  place  ;  and 
that  it  is  necessary  that  it  should  be  holden  and  celebrated  here  at  this  present; 
and  how  the  prelates  of  France  should  come  unto  it.     He  also  directed  hither 
the  cause  which  moved  them  so  to  conclude,   the   copy  whereof  I  suppose  is 
sent  unto  your  holiness  by  some  other.     Whereupon,  then,  doth  your  holiness 
stay  ?  You  have  gone  about  as  much  as  in  you  lay,  by  your  messengers,  letters, 
and  divers  means,  to  di-aw  back  the  prelates,  and  have  labom-ed  with  all  your 
endeavour  to  dissolve  the  council :  yet,  notwithstanding,   as  you  do  see,   it  is 
increased  day  by  day ;  and  the  more  it  is  forbidden,  the  more  are  all  men's 
minds  inflamed  to  the  contrary.     Is  not  this,  then,  to  resist  the  will  of  God? 
Why  do  ye  provoke  the  church  to  anger  ?    Why  do  ye  stir  up  the  christian 
people  ?     Vouchsafe  I  pray  you  so  to  do,  that  ye  may  get  the  love  and  favour 
of  the  people,  and  not  the  hatred ;  for  all  nations  are  greatly  offended,  when 
they  hear  these  your  doings.     Suffer  not  your  holiness  to  be  seduced  by  any 
man,  who,  peradventiue,  shall  inculcate  fear  unto  you  (whereas  there  is  nothing 
at  all  to  be  doubted),  or  that  doth  persuade  you  this  to  be  no  lawful  council. 
I  know  I  should  offend  your  holiness  if  I  shoidd  go  about  to  prove  the  con- 
trary, but  it  is  better  that  I  do  offend  you  a  little  in  words,  and  profit  you  in 
my  deeds  ;  for  a  physician  layeth  a  burning  corrosive  unto  the  disease,  and 
healeth  the  sore ;  for  the  medicine  cannot  profit,  except  it  be  sharp  and  bitter 
in  taste.     Under  this  hope  and  confidence,  I  will  not  fear  to  declare  the  tmth ; 
that,  it  being  known,  your  holiness  may  the  better  provide  both  for  yourself  and 
the  church.     It  dependeth  upon  the  council  of  Constance,  whether  this  council 
be  lawful  or  not.     If  that  were  a  true  council,  so  is  this  also.    No  man  seemeth 
to  doubt  whether  that  council  was  lawful,  and  likewise  whatsoever  was  there 
A  strong    decreed,  to  be  lawful ;  foi",  if  any  man  will  say,  that  the  decrees  of  that  council 
Gainst "'  are  not  of  force,  he  must  needs  grant  tliat  the  deprivation  of  pope  John,  which 
Eugene,     was  done  by  the  force  of  those  decrees,  was  of  no  effect.     If  that  deprivation 
were  not  of  effect,  neither  was  the  election  of  pope  Martin  of  any  force,  which 
was  done  he  being  yet  alive.      If  Martin  were  no  true  pope,  neither  is  your 
holiness,  who  was  chosen  by  the  cardinals  that  he  made  :  wherefore,  it  standeth 
no  man  more  upon,  to  defend  the  decrees  of  that  council,  than  your  .holiness; 
for,  if  any  decree  of  that  council  be  called  into  doubt,  by  like  means  may  all 
the  rest  of  the  decrees  be  revoked.    And  by  like  means  shall  the  decrees  of  any 
other  council  be  of  no  force  and  effect ;  for,  bv  like  reason,  as  the  faith  of  one 


Eugene 
provok- 
eth  the 
church. 


NOT    TO    DISSOLVE    THE    COUXCIL    OF    BASIL.  695 

council  is  weakened,  all  the  rest  shall  also  be  weakened,  according  to  St.  Au-    Henry 
gustine's  sa}-ing,  in  the  9th  Distinct,  capitulo,   'Si  ad  scripturas.'     Then,  saith       ^^■ 
he,  both  the  faith  and  all  other  sacraments  shall  be  put  in  doubt,  if  there  be     »   y. 
once  any  doubt  made  of  the  force  and  power  of  any  council  lawfully  congre-    i.'.,/ 
gated.      There    was   a   decree   made  in   the   council   of  Constance,    entitled 
'Frequens,'  whereby  it  was  ordained  that  the  first  coimcil  after  that,  should  be    i  ioq 

holden  ^vithin  five  years,  and  another,  within  seven  years  after  that  again. 

The  council  of  Constance  being  ended,  and  the  five  years  passed,  the  councils 
of  Pa\-ia  and  Sienna  were  holden,  after  which,  seven  years  being  also  nrn  over, 
this  council  is  begim  to  be  celebrated.  To  what  end  then  is  it  expressed  in  the 
bull  of  the  dissolution,  amongst  other  causes,  that  the  seventh  year  is  already- 
past,  when,  as  of  necessitj',  it  ought  to  be  passed  before  the  council  can  be 
celebrated  i  For  these  words,  from  seven  years  or  five  years,  signify,  according 
to  the  law,  that  all  parts  of  time  should  be  passed,  and  the  last  day  looked  for. 
Wherefore  it  behoved  that  seven  years  should  be  fiilly  complete,  before  this 
council  of  Basil  should  begin ;  like  as  five  years  were  fiilly  expu'ed,  before  the 
coimcil  of  Pavia  did  begin. 

But,  peradventiu-e,  some  man  Avill  say,  that  it  ought  to  have  begam  the  first 
day  after  the  seventh  j'ear  was  expired ;  for,  otherwise,  the  tenii  of  the  council 
is  passed.  But  hereunto  we  may  answer,  that  it  is  not  contained  in  the  chapter 
'  Frequens,'  that  except  it  were  holden  the  first  day,  it  should  not  he  holden  at 
all,  neither  can  it  be  gathered  either  by  the  words  or  meaning.  For  it  is  only 
required  that  it  should  be  holden  after  seven  jears  are  expired ;  but,  whether  it 
be  the  second  or  third  day,  or  the  third  or  four  month  after  the  seventh  year, 
it  doth  satisfy  the  chapter  '  Frequens.'  For,  when  the  first  day  is  come,  then 
beginneth  the  power  and  liberty  to  celebrate  the  council,  but  not  before :  but 
it  is  not  prohibited  to  celebrate  it  after ;  neither  doth  this  word,  '  In  quinquen- 
nium,' that  is  to  say.  against  five  years  next  foDowing,  which  is  alleged  in  the 
chapter  '  Frequens,'  and  seemeth  to  be  repeated  also  for  the  seven  years;  for 
it  is  not  miderstood  tliat  it  is  necessarj'  to  be  holden  the  first  day  precisely  after 
the  seventh  year,  but  because  it  should  not  be  understood  of  other  seven  years 
to  come.  For,  in  speaking  simply  of  seven  years,  it  is  understood  of  seven  years 
next  ensuing.  Admit  also  that  in  the  chapter  '  Frequens,'  any  of  these  words 
had  been  joined  with  these  immediately  following,  as  '  by  and  by,'  'out  of  hand,' 
'  immediately,'  or  '  straightways  after,'  or  such  other  words  :  yet  ought  they  to 
be  understood  with  a  certain  moderation  and  distance  of  time,  that  is,  as  soon  as 
might  be  convenient ;  as  these  words  are  expoimded  by  the  lawyers  and  doctors, 
for  they  are  enlarged  and  restrained  according  to  the  subject  and  divers  circum- 
stances of  the  matters  and  affairs.  For  it  is  not  by  any  means  likely  that  it 
was  the  mhid  of  those  who  made  the  decree,  that,  considering  the  long  joiu-ney 
and  hard  preparation  of  such  affairs,  and  also  the  manifold  impediments  which 
may  happen,  that  they  woidd  restrain  so  precise  a  time,  even  at  the  first  day, 
that  if  it  were  not  then  celebrated,  it  should  not  be  holden  at  aU ;  for,  by  such 
subtle  means,  it  should  also  be  holden  even  in  the  first  moment  and  very  in- 
stant after,  the  same  year. 

But,  forasmuch  as  words  are  civilly  tobeimderstood,  this  sense  or  understand- 
ing is  far  too  disagreeable.  For  if  any  man  will  say,  '  Then  it  is  commanded 
to  be  prorogued,'  that  is  also  forbidden  in  the  chapter  *  Frequens.'  He  that 
doth  so  argue,  doth  not  understand  himself  nor  the  force  of  the  words.  It  is 
not  prorogued,  if  it  be  begim  the  second  or  third  month  ;  but  it  is  rather  a 
continuation  or  execution  of  that  which  is  in  their  power.  For,  if  it  were  a 
prorogation,  then,  forasmuch  as  a  prorogation  doth  savour  of  the  nature  of  the 
first  delay,  it  could  not  be  begun  *  before  the  time  prorogued :  but  this  happeneth 
not  in  our  case ;  for,  albeit  it  were  not  begun*  in  the  first  month,  but  in  the 
second  or  third,  it  is  not  thereby  concluded  that  it  could  not  be  begun  in  the 
first :  but,  if  there  had  been  any  prorogation  made  till  the  second  month,  then 
it  could  not  have  been  begim  in  the  first.  As  for  example,  I  promise  to  give 
a  hundred  pounds  after  Easter  ;  before  Easter  it  cannot  be  required  ;  but,  by 
and  by  after  Easter,  it  may  be  required  :  and,  albeit  that  I  be  not  lu-ged  for  it, 
notwithstanding  I  do  not  cease  to  be  bound ;  and,  if  so  be  I  be  demanded  it  in 
the  second  or  third  month  after,  it  is  not  thereby  understood  that  there  is  any 
prorogation  made ;  neither  doth  it  follow,  but  that  it  might  have  been  demanded 
in  the  beginning,  which  could  not  have  been  done,  if  there  had  been  any 


696  CARDINAL    JULIAN    EXHORTETII    POPE    EUGENE. 

Henry    prorogation  made.     Also,  it  is  the  nature  of  prorogation,  to  be  made  before  the 
^1-      first  term  or  day  be  passed ;  for  otherwise,  it  is  no  prorogation,  hut  a  new  ap- 
pointment.     And  albeit  it  may  he  said,  that  then  it  may  be  long  delayed  ;  it  is 
\'^}y,'    answered,  that  in  this  point  we  must  stand  unto  the  judgment  of  the  church, 
"^       which,  considering  divers  circumstances,  would  think  the  time  meet.     For  the 
°       liberty  of  celebrating  councils,  was  instituted  for  the  profit  and  favoiu-  of  the 
church.     What  if  it  should  happen  that  when  the  time  cometh,  in"  the  place 
where  a  coimcil  should  be  kept,  there  be  a  great  plague  or  some  siege,  which 
should  continue  for  the  space  of  three  or  fovu'  months,  and  the  pope,  in  the  mean 
time,  doth  not  change  the  place,  according  to   the  form  of  the  chapter  '  Fre 
quens,'  and  that,  through  such  impediments,  the  prelates  did  not  come  the  first 
day  unto  the  place,  or,  if  any  were  coming,  that  they  were  taken  by  the  way, 
who,  if  they  had  not  been  taken,  had  been  present  at  the  first  day  in  the  place 
appointed  :  is  it  therefore  to  be  said  that  the  power  of  the  council  is  past  ?  or 
that  the  impediment  ceasing,  and  the  prelates  coming  thither,  the  council  can- 
not be  holden?     That  truly  were  greatly  absm'd  and  too  much  prejudicial  to  the 
church  of  God.     But,  in  this  our  case,  the  cause  is  probable  why  the  prelates 
did  defer  to  come  at  the  beginning  of  the  time  appointed ;  for  as  much  as  when 
Cause  of    the  time  drew  near,  pope  Martin  died  the  20th  of  February:  for  which  cause 
d'L'^of    '^^^  prelates  might  well  doubt  upon  some  impediment  of  the  council.    Also  they 
the^pre-    tarried  looking    that  some  should  come  thither  in  the  name  of  the  pope,  be- 
lates.        cause  they  would  not  tany  in  that  place  in  vain  without  a  president.     As  for 
the  legate  who  was  appointed  for  the   council,  whose  presence  all  men  tarried 
for,  until  he  would  prepare  himself  for  that  journey,  he  came  not  at  the  time 
appointed  unto  the  council,  but  went  unto  Nuremberg,  to  persecute  the  Bohe- 
mians ;  according  to  the  commandment  of  pope  Martin,  who  had  enjoined  him 
to  go  first  thither,  before  he  went  to  Basil. 

And  the  same  legate,  being  oftentimes  required  at  Nuremberg,  that  he  should 
go  to  Basil  to  hold  the  council,  answered,  that  he  would  not  go  before  he  had 
the  consent  of  the  new  bishop.  This  was  the  cause  of  the  prelates'  delay ; 
neither  is  it  greatly  to  be  imputed  unto  the  prelates,  who  suspected  that  pope 
Martin  would  not  have  holden  the  council,  and  feared  to  bring  themselves  into 
Council  of  trouble  :  and  good  cause  had  they  so  to  fear,  through  those  tilings  which  hap- 
Sienna.  pened  in  the  council  of  Sienna ;  for  there  ^vere  many  things  spoken  which 
caused  great  suspicion.  It  was  reported  unto  me,  that  many  had  said,  I  came 
unto  Germany  to  disturb  the  council. 

Also  this  was  pope  Martin's  mind  and  intent,  that,  albeit  the  council  was 
not  begun  at  the  beginning  of  March,  not\Tithstandiug,  the  authority  of  holding 
the  council  should  not  be  void.  For  he,  when  the  time  of  the  council  approached, 
willed  me  that  I  should  first  go  unto  Bohemia,  before  I  went  unto  the  council ; 
whereof,  also,  mention  is  made  in  the  bidl  of  the  consistory  dissolution. 

But  what  need  we  any  other  proof,  than  by  the  letters  of  your  hohness?  In 
which  your  letters,  dated  the  2d  of  the  calends  of  June,  and  delivered  unto 
me  long  after  the  time,  by  the  space  of  three  months,  you  do  command  me, 
that,  my  business  being  done  in  Bohemia,  I  should  take  my  way  to  Basil,  to 
hold  the  council,  and  there  to  foresee  unto  all  things,  as  it  was  enjoined  me, 
and  ordained  in  the  council  of  Constance.  The  same  also  you  repeat  in  the 
bull  of  the  dissolution  brought  unto  me  by  the  lord  Parentine  ;  the  words  whereof 
are  these  :  '  Unto  your  circmnspection !  Since  yoiu-  going  into  Gennany  no 
prelates  have  assembled  in  Basil  for  the  celebrating  of  the  council :  we  gave 
you  in  commandment  that,  in  the  mean  time,  you  should  be  diligent  about  the 
expedition  against  the  Bohemian  heretics,  which  is  committed  to  your  charge, 
and  afterwards  you  shall  come  imto  Basil,  the  place  appointed  for  the  council, 
and  there  rule  in  our  place  in  the  name  of  the  church.'  What  is  more  evident 
than  this  ?  If  any  thing  were  doubtful,  by  the  tenor  of  these  letters  it  were 
evidently  taken  aw^ay.  If  any  man  would  say,  that  neither  pope  Martin,  nor 
Eugene,  could  confii-m  the  council  by  writing  such  letters,  becavise  there  w-as 
a  prorogation  which  is  prohibited  by  the  chapter  '  Frequens :'  it  is  answered, 
that  there  is  no  prorogation,  but  execution  of  that  which  is  in  povv'er,  or  a 
declaration  that  it  is  not  necessary  to  hold  the  council  precisely  even  at  the 
beginning.  Also  it  is  no  proi-ogation,  for  a  prorogation  is  made  before  the  term 
is  expired  and  not  after ;  for  after,  it  is  rather  called  a  new  indiction  or  appoint- 
ment.   And  if  any  man  will  sav  that  there  can  be  no  new  indiction  made,  then 


NOT    TO    DISSOLVE    THE    COUNCIL    OF    BASIL. 

may  this  be  objected :  how  could  the  council  of  Bologna  be  newly  appointed  ? 
If  they  will  answei",  that  the  appointment  of  the  council  of  Bologna  was  of 
force,  because  the  coimcil  of  Basil  was  dissolved  by  your  holiness,  then  I  have 
my  intent;  for,  if  it  were  dissolved,  ergo,  it  was  a  council  before,  because  it 
presupposeth  the  habit.  If  it  were  a  council  before,  then,  as  hereafter  shall  be 
proved,  it  coidd  not  be  dissolved  without  the  consent  of  the  council.  What 
more  can  be  answered  hereunto  ?  For  the  greater  declaration  and  evidence  of 
the  matter,  the  abbot  of  Vergilia,  even  upon  the  same  day  of  the  time  appointed 
or  before,  gathering  together  the  prelates  of  the  great  church  and  many  other 
prelates  and  notable  men,  made  a  solemn  protestation,  how  the  time  was  come 
to  celebrate  and  hold  the  council,  and  that  he  was  come  mito  Basil  for  the 
same  purpose ;  requiring  them  that  they  would  confer  and  treat  together  upon 
matters  touching  the  council :  and,  hereupon,  there  is  a  public  instrument  or 
testimonial. 

Within  a  month  after,  the  ambassadors  of  the  university  of  Paris  came  thither, 
and  began  to  treat  of  matters  touching  the  council,  writing  also  unto  the  em- 
peror, and  to  the  other  princes  of  Germany,  that  they  should  send  unto  the 
council ;  which  letters  I  myself  did  see,  neither  doth  the  small  number  of  men 
let ;  for,  where  authority  is,  a  great  number  is  not  required,  according  to  the 
saying  of  Christ,  '  Where  two  or  three  are  gathered  together  in  my  name,  I  am 
in  the  midst  of  them :'  upon  which  authority  the  councils  are  grounded.  Now 
therefore,  your  holiness  doth  manifestly  see  the  said  objection  to  be  but  frivolous. 
For  to  what  end  shoidd  any  dissolution  be  made,  if  it  had  not  been  a  council  ? 
Wherefore,  it  is  not  to  he  doubted  but  that  it  was  a  lawfid  council,  and  canoni- 
cally  congregated.  And,  peradventm-e,  it  is  scarcely  found  where  anj'  council 
hath  been  confirmed  by  so  many  authorities  as  this ;  that  is  to  say,  by  the  two 
councUs  before  passed,  of  Constance  and  of  Sienna,  and  confirmed  by  two  bishops 
of  Rome. 

Besides  this,  I  have  heard  that  some  do  report  at  Rome,  that  I  could  not  call 
the  prelates  imto  the  council,  because  that  clause  was  not  added  in  the  bull  of 
pope  Martin.     I  greatly  marvel  why  this  should  be  objected,  especially  seeing 
that  not  I  alone  have  called  them,  but  I,  together  with  the  rest  who  are  here 
assembled  in  the  council.     It  is  a  marvellous  matter:  pope  Martin  gave  me 
authority,  by  the  advice  of  the  councU,  to  root  out  heresies,  to  pacify  kingdoms, 
to  reform  the  manners  of  every  state  of  Christendom,  and  yet  they  will  say  that 
I  cannot  cite  them.     Power  is  given  me  to  judge  and  to  condemn,  and  have  I 
not  also  power  to  cite  ?     The  law  doth  say ;  unto  whom  any  power  or  jurisdic- 
tion is  committed,  all  things  seem  to  be  committed  unto  him,  without  which  he 
cannot  exercise  his  jurisdiction ;  for  how  could  all  the  premises  be  done,  if  the 
prelates  or  others  should  not  come  hither  ?     Also,  why  is  it  said  in  the  chapter 
'  Ego  enim  de  jurejurando,'  'I  will  come  unto  the  synod  if  I  be  called,'  if  he 
cannot  be  called  ?     By  whom,  then,  is  it  presupposed  that  he  should  be  called, 
but  only  by  the  council,  or  by  him  who  ruleth  the  comicil  ?     Also  the  whole 
eighteenth  distinction  treateth  of  no  other  matter,  but  that  the  bishops  being 
called  unto  the  council,  if  they  come  not,  they  may  be  excommunicated  and 
suspended.     Let  these  men  read  the  Book  of  Councils  of  St.  Isidore,  and  they 
shall  find  how  that  in  many  councils  the  prelates  have  been  called  by  the  synod. 
Now  it  rcmaineth,  that  we  should  declare,  whether  the  dissolution  be  of  force 
or  no.     Wherein  I  do  again  fear  to  move  your  holiness  unto  anger,  but  charity 
forceth  me  thereunto ;  for,  peradventure,  your  hoUness  doth  think  the  dissolution 
to  be  effectual,  and  therefore  do  persevere  in  it ;  whereby,   forasmuch  as  many 
offences  may  arise,  my  conscience  doth  move  me  not  to  hold  my  peace.     First 
of  all,  the  chapter  '  Frequens,'  declareth  that  it  is  of  no  force ;  for  if  proroga- 
tion be  forbidden  and  prohibited,  which  is  a  small  matter,  much  more  is  disso- 
lution, which  is  a  greater,  for  it  is  a  greater  matter  to  take  away  than  to  defer ; 
for,  by  prorogiung,  a  thing  is  but  deferred,  and  by  diasolving,  it  is  utterly  taken 
away.   Also  these  men  sa}',  that  the  said  constitution  in  the  chapter  '  Frequens,' 
may  be  made  void,  for  that  as  soon  as  the  council  is  begun,  it  may  be  dissolved 
without  any  thing  done,  as  it  is  said  that  it  was  done  at  Sienna;  and  now  they 
say  also,  that  your  hoUness  hath  been  perversely  informed  touching  the  dissolu- 
tion.    They  say  also,  that  the  said  dissolution  doth  manifestly  tend  to  the  sub- 
version of  faith,  the  ruin  of  the  church,  and  the  trouble  of  the  christian  people  : 
therefore  it  cannot  be  done,  neither  obeyed. 


698  CARDINAL    JUMAN    EXHORTEH    POPE    EUGENE,   &C. 

Henry  They  say,  moreover,  that  the  said  dissolution  could  not  be  made  by  means 
^^-  of  a  certain  decree  of  the  council  of  Constance  in  that  behalf  provided ;  that 
.    j^      in  such  matters  as  pertain  unto  faith,  the  extirpation  of  sin,  and  reformation 

1^.^/     of  the  church  in  the  head  and  in  the  members,  all  men,  of  what  estate  or  con- 
dition soever  they  be,  yea  the  pope  himself,  should  be  bound  to  obey  the  statutes, 

la-iq     precepts,  and  ordinances,  of  every  general  council ;  and,  except  they  did  obey, 

L  the  council  had  power  to  punish  them.  Mark  how  these  things — to  have  power 

to  determine  upon  any  man,  to  command  him,  and  punish  him,  if  he  be  not 
obedient — are  signs  of  superiority,  in  those  matters  which  he  doth  decree,  com- 
mand, or  punish ;  and,  to  be  bound  to  obedience,  to  be  subject  and  obey  the 
same,  are  signs  of  inferiority  in  the  said  cases.  Ergo,  in  the  aforesaid  cases, 
seeing  that  the  pope,  as  they  say,  is  under  the  council,  which  also  hath  been ; 
in  that  for  one  of  the  said  three  cases  the  council  did  deprive  John,  and  for 
another  Benedict,  neither  could  the  pope  dissolve  the  council,  in  that,  he  that  is 
inferior  unto  the  council,  cannot  bind  or  compel  the  superior,  as  in  the  chapter 
'  Cum  inferior :'  otherwise  it  should  contain  in  it  a  contradiction,  that  he  is  bound 
to  obey,  and  is  not  bound  to  obey,  because  he  may  dissolve ;  for  how  should  he 
be  obedient  unto  the  ordinance  and  decree  of  the  council,  if  he  may  annihilate 
and  take  away  the  same  ordinance  and  decree  ?  This  council  is  congregated 
for  the  rooting  out  of  heresies,  for  the  making  of  peace,  and  for  the  reformation 
of  manners ;  and  in  the  first  session  it  did  ordain,  that  their  whole  intent  and 
respect  should  be  thereunto,  and  that  he  who  should  procure  to  let  the  council, 
to  prorogue  or  alter  it,  should  be  punished,  and  have  process  against  him,  as 
against  a  common  disturber  of  the  peace,  &c.  If  it  may  be  dissolved,  it  is 
evident  that  they  do  not  obey  the  said  ordinance ;  whereby  this,  also,  must 
of  necessity  be  granted,  that  if  it  may  be  dissolved,  the  decree  of  the  council 
of  Constance  is  of  no  force. 

This  is  also  proved  by  another  reason.  No  man  doubteth  but  if  any  con- 
troversy of  heresy  should  be  moved  against  any  bishop  of  Rome,  that  he  could 
not  dissolve  the  council :  for,  if  he  might  dissolve  the  council,  he  could  not  be 
judged,  which  were  contrary  to  the  chapter  '  Si  Papa,'  40  dist.  Ergo,  like  as  it 
is  in  heresy,  so  is  it  in  the  two  other  cases;  for  these  three  were  pacified  by  the 
council  of  Constance  :  for  thus  speaketh  the  council,  as  it  is  in  the  chapter,  '  Si 
Papa  in  illo  uno.'  And,  as  I  have  before  said,  the  council  of  Constance  allowed 
this  decree,  through  which  they  deprived  Peter  de  Luna,  for  making  a  schism, 
and  pope  John,  for  the  deformity  of  liis  life. 

And  albeit  there  be  certain  laws  that  say.  The  principal  seat  cannot  be  judged 
of  any  man ;  and  again,  no  man  judgeth  the  chief  seat ;  and,  no  man  saith  unto 
himself,  why  doest  thou  so?  There  is  to  be  understood  in  the  three  cases,  first, 
that  there  was  proviso  made  for  the  faith  in  the  chapter  '  Si  Papa;'  and  in  the 
other  two  points,  by  the  decree  of  Constance.  Otherwise  it  should  be  under- 
stood, without  any  exception,  that  the  first  seat,  &c.,  and  then  the  chapter  '  Si 
Papa,'  40  dist.,  and  the  said  decree  of  Constance  should  be  false.  If  the  chapter 
'  Si  Papa'  had  added  causes  of  heresies,  no  man  would  have  doubted  upon  these 
two  cases,  touching  the  said  sentence ;  so,  likewise,  no  man  ought  to  doubt  of 
the  decree  of  the  council,  that  it  was  made  by  the  authority  of  the  pope,  and 
representeth  the  universal  church.  And,  if  any  man  would  say,  that  in  all 
councils  the  authority  of  the  pope  is  excepted :  I  answer,  that  is  true,  when  the 
person  of  the  pope  is  not  specially  included.  But,  if  he  be  specially  included, 
he  cannot  be  excepted,  because  it  should  savour  of  contradiction.  Most  blessed 
father !  God  is  my  witness,  that  I  have  spoken  these  things  with  great  anguish 
and  sorrow  of  mind ;  hut  I  am  forced  so  to  speak,  that  your  holiness  may  cease 
from  the  said  dissolution,  lest  there  might  happen  infinite  evils  in  the  church 
of  God.  If  your  holiness  did  see  my  pure  mind,  my  upright  conscience,  and 
entire  affection  towards  you,  whereby  I  am  moved  to  write  these  things,  even 
for  very  love  you  would  embrace  and  kiss  me,  and,  without  doubt,  love  me  as 
your  own  son.  I  have  often  said,  and  now  do  say,  and  protest  before  God  and 
man,  that  you  will  be  the  cause  of  schism  and  infinite  mischiefs,  if  you  do  not 
alter  and  change  your  mind  and  purpose.  Almighty  God  preserve  your  holiness 
in  the  prosperity  of  a  virtuous  man  !  unto  whose  feet  I  do  most  humbly  recom- 
mend me. 

From  Basil,  the  fifth  day  of  June. 


EPISTLE    OF    .«NEAS    SYLVIUS.  699 

Thus  endetli  the  epistle   of  cardinal  Julian,  wTitten  unto  pope    ^"'rv 
Eugene  ;  wherein,  forasmuch  as  mention  is  made  how  the  Bohemians 


had  promised  to  send  their  ambassadors  unto  the  council,  and,  as  -^■^■ 
before  is  partly  touched  in  the  Bohemian  story,  of  their  coming  into  ^^ 
Basil  and  propounding  of  certain  articles,  wherein  they  dissented  from    1^39 

the  pope  ;  we  thought  it  not  any  thing  differing  from  our  purpose,  to 

have  annexed  a  brief  epitome,  declaring  the  whole  circumstance  of 
their  ambassage,  their  articles,  disputations,  and  answers,  which  they 
had  at  the  said  council  of  Basil,  with  their  petitions  and  answers  unto 
the  same:  faithfully  translated  out  of  Latin  by  F.  W. 

In  like  manner  -^'Eneas  Sylvius  also,  with  his  own  hand-writing, 
not  only  gave  testimony  to  the  authority  of  this  council,  but  also 
bestowed  his  labour  and  travail  in  setting  forth  the  whole  story  thereof. 
Notwithstanding  the  same  Sylvius  afterwards,  being  made  pope,  with 
his  new  honour,  did  alter  and  change  his  old  sentence.  The  epistle 
of  which  yEneas,  touching  the  commendation  of  the  said  council, 
because  it  is  but  short,  and  will  occupy  but  little  room,  I  thought 
hereunder,  for  the  more  satisfying  of  the  reader''s  mind,  to  insert. 

An  Epistle  of  ^neas  Sylvius  to  the  Rector  of  the  University  of 
Cologne,  in  defence  of  the  Council  of  Basil. 

To  a  christian  man  who  will  be  a  true  Christian  indeed,  nothing  ought  to  he 
more  desired,  than  that  the  sincerity  and  pm-eness  of  faith,  given  to  us  of  Christ 
by  our  forefathers,  be  kept  of  all  men  immaculate :  and,  if  at  any  time  any 
thing  be  wrought  or  attempted  against  the  true  doctrine  of  the  gospel,  the  people 
ought  with  one  consent  to  provide  lawful  remedy,  and  every  man  to  bring  with 
him  some  water  to  quench  the  general  fire;  neither  must  we  fear  how  we  be 
hated  or  envied,  so  we  bring  the  truth.     We  must  resist  everj-  man  to  his  face, 
whether  he  be  Paul  or  Peter,  if  he  walk  not  directly  to  the  truth  of  the  gospel : 
which  thing  1  am  glad,  and  so  are  we  aD,  to  hear  what  yoiur  university  hath 
done  in  this  council  of  Basil.     For  a  certain  treatise  of  yours  is  brought  hither 
imto  us,  wherein  you  reprehend  the  rudeness,  or  rather  the  rashness  of  such,  as 
do  deny  the  bishop  of  Rome,  and  the  consistoiy  of  his  judgment,  to  be  subject 
unto  the  general  council ;  and  that  the  supreme   tribunal   seat  of  judgment  The  tri- 
standeth  in  the  church,  and  in  no  one  bishop.     Such  men  as  deny  this,  you  so  '^""^j'  ^'^^t 
confomid  with  lively  reasons  and  truth  of  the  Scriptures,  that  they  are  neither  n^t  ;„  ^ue 
able  to  slide  away  Hke  slippery  eels,  neither  to  cavil  or  bring  any  objection  bishop, 
against  you. 

*  But,'  as  oui-  common  proverb  sayeth,  "Honours  change  manners," 
so  it  happened  with  this  Sylvius,  who,  after  he  came  once  to  be 
pope,  was  much  altered  from  what  he  was  before.  For  whereas  before, 
he  preferred  general  councils  before  the  pope,  now,  being  pope,  he  did 
decree  that  no  man  should  appeal  from  the  high  bishop  of  Rome,  to 
any  general  council. 

And  likewise  for  priests'  marriages ;  whereas  before  he  thought  it 
best  for  them  to  have  their  ^\^ves,  likewise  he  altered  his  mind  other- 
wise :  insomuch  that  in  his  book  treating  of  Germany,  and  there 
speaking  of  the  noble  city  of  Augsburg,  by  occasion  he  inveigheth 
against  a  certain  epistle  of  Huldericke,^  a  bishop  of  the  said  city, 
written  against  the  constitution  of  the  single  life  of  priests.  Whereby 
it  appeareth  how  the  mind  of  this  Sylvius,  then  pope  Pius,  was  altered 
from  what  it  was  before.* 

These  be  the  words  of  Sylvius. — Furthermore,  as  touching  the 

•l)  See  Edition  1563.  p.  3S4.— Ed.        (2)  For  thisepistleof  Huldeticke,  see  Vol.ii.  p.  11.-Ed. 


700  THE    COUNCIL    OF    BASIL    DISSOLVED. 

Henry    autliority  and  approbation  of  the  aforesaid  council,  this  is  to  be  noted, 
that  during  the  life  of  Sigismund,  the  emperor,  no  man  resisted  this 


A.  D.  council.  Also,  during  the  time  of  Charles  VII.,  the  French  king, 
1'*'^'  the  said  council  of  Basil  was  fully  and  wholly  received  through  all 
,400  France.  But,  after  the  death  of  Sigismund,  when  Eugene  was 
deposed,  and  Felix,  duke  of  Savoy,  was  elected  pope,  great  discords 


The  au- 


ihiriry'of  arosc,  aud  much  practice  was  An-ought,  but  especially  on  Eugene''s 
c'i'rof  Ba-  V^^^ '  ^^^^^'  being  now  excommunicated  by  the  council  of  Basil,  to 
sii  main-  make  his  party  more  strong,  made  eighteen  new  cardinals.     Then  he 

t'lined 

The  prac-  scut  his  orators  unto  the  Germans,  labouring  by  all  persuasions  to 
pope^Eu-  dissolve  the  council  of  Basil.     The  Germans,  at  that  time,  Avere  so 
^'"^T  u     flivided,  that  some  of  them  did  hold  with  Felix  and  the  council  of 
council.    Basil ;   others  with  Eugene  and  the  council  of  Ferrara ;  and  some 
were  neuters.      After  this,  the  French  king  being  dead,  who  was 
stirreth    Cliarlcs  VII.,  about  A.D.  1444,  the  pope  beginneth  a  new  practice, 
up  war.    ^^iqj.  i^^Q  q1(J  guise  of  Romc,  to  excite,  as  is  supposed,  the  dauphin  of 
France,  by  force  of  arms,  to  dissipate  that  council  collected  against 
him.     Who,  leading  an  army  of  fifteen  thousand  men  into  Alsace, 
did  cruelly  waste  and  spoil  the  country ;  and,  after  that,  laid  siege 
unto  Basil,  to  expel  and  drive  out  the  prelates  of  the  council.     But 
The        the  Helvetians,  most  stoutly  meeting  their  enemies,  with  a  small 
driven'"   powcr  did  vauquish  the  Frenchmen,  and  put  them  to  sword  and 
^Tew"^^    flight;  like  as  the  Lacedemonians,  with  only  three  hundred,  did  sup- 
Germans,  press  and  scatter  all  the  mighty  army  of  Xerxes  at  Thermopylae. 

Although  Basil,  by  the  valiantness  of  the  Helvetians,  was  thus 

defended,  yet,  notwithstanding,  the  council,  through  these  tumults, 

could  not  continue  by  reason  of  the  princes""  ambassadors,  who  shrunk 

away  and  would  not  tarry ;  so  that  at  length  Eugene  brought  to  pass, 

])artly  through  the  help  of  Frederic   (being  not  yet  emperor,  but 

labouring  for  the  empire),   partly  by  his  orators  (in  the  number  of 

Dissoiu-   whom  was  ^neas  Sylvius,  above  mentioned,  amongst  the  Germans), 

co°undi  of  ^^^^^  ^^^y  ^*^^^  content  to  give  over,  both  the  council  of  Basil,  and 

Basil.       their  neutrality. 

Frederic        This  Frcdcric  of  Austria  being  not  yet  emperor,  but  looking  to- 

tria,  great  wards  thc  cmpirc,  brought  also  to  pass,  that  Felix,  who  was  chosen  of 

fafhM-  to  the  council  of  Basil  to  be  pope,  was  contented  to  renounce  and  resign 

din  ^d"^   ■'^^^  papacy  to  Nicholas  V.,  successor  to  Eugene,  by  which  Nicholas 

the  said  Frederic  was  confirmed  at  Rome  to  be  emperor,  and  there 

crowned,  a.d.  1451. 

The  As  these  things  were  doing  at  Basil,  in  the  mean  season  pope 

^oll^e      Eugene  brought  to  pass,  in  his  convocation  at  Florence,  that  the 

Greeks     cmpcror  and  the  patriarch  of  Constantinople,  with  the  rest  of  the 

scendfirst  Grcciaus  there  present,  were  persuaded  to  receive  the  sentence  of  thc 

vope'l      church  of  Rome,  concerning  the  proceedings  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  also 

lii"-        to  receive  the  communion  in  unleavened  bread,  to  admit  purgatory, 

and  to  yield  themselves  to  the  authority  of  the   Romish  bishop. 

Whereunto,  notwithstanding,  the  other  churches  of  Grecia  would  in 

no  wise  assent,  at  their  coming  home  ;  insomuch  that  with  a  public 

execration  they  did  condemn,  afterwards,  all  those  legates  who  had 

consented  to  these  articles,  that  none  of  them  should  be  buried  in 

cliristian  burial :  which  was,  a.d.  1439.* 

(M  Ex  Casp.  Pcucer. 


CRUEL  CONDUCT  OF  MAINAUDUS.  70! 

And  thus  endetli  the  story,  botli  of  the  council  of  Basil,  and  of   Herir,j 
the  council  of  Florence  ;  also,  of  the  emperor  Sigismund,  and  of  the 


schism  between  pope  Eugene  and  pope  Felix,  and  also  of  the  Bo-    A.  D. 
hemians  ;  which  Bohemians,  notwithstanding  all  these  troubles  and    ^'^^'^- 
tumults  above-said,  did  right  well,  and  were  strong  enough  against  all  The 
their  enemies,  till  at  length,  through  discord,  partly  between  the  two  churches 
preachers  of  the  old  and  new  city  of  Prague,  partly  also  through  the  ^^l^f^  '^'"' 
discord  of  the  messengers  and  captains  taking  sides  one  against  the  doctrine, 
other,  they  made  their  enemies  strong,   and  enfeebled  themselves. 
Albeit  afterwards,  in  process  of  time,  they  so  defended  the  cause  of 
their  religion,  not  by  sword,  but  by  argument  and  disputation,  that 
the  bishop  of  Rome  could  never  yet  to  this  day  remove  the  Taborites 
and  city  of  Prague  from  the  communion  of  both  kinds,  nor  could  ever 
cause  them  to  keep  the  conditions,  which,  in  the  beginning  of  the 
council,  were  enjoined  their  priests  to  observe  ;  as  testifieth  Cochleus  :^ 
with  him  also  accordeth  Antoninus,  who  saith,  that  the  doctrine  of 
the  Bohemians  (which  he  termeth  by  the  name  of  Zizania),  did  take 
such  deep  root  with  them,  and  grew  so  fast,  that  afterwards,  neither  by 
fire  nor  sv/ord,  it  coidd  be  extinguished.^ 

Concerning  which  Bohemians,  briefly  and  in  a  general  sum  to  re- 
capitulate their  whole  acts  and  doings,  here  is  to  be  noted:  that  they, 
in  their  own  defence,  and  in  the  cj^uaiTel  of  John  Huss  and  Jerome  of 
Prague,  provoked  by  their  catholic  adversaries  to  war,  fighting  under 
Zisca  their  captain,  had  eleven  battles  with  the  pope's  side,  and  ever 
went  away  victors.^  Moreover,  in  the  History  of  Peucer  it  is  testified 
that  pope  Martin  V.,  sending  for  the  bishop  of  Winchester,  then 
cardinal,  had  levied  three  main  armies,  intending  to  overrun  all  the 
Bohemians ;  one  army  of  the  Saxons  under  the  prince  elector ;  the 
second  of  the  Francones,  under  the  marquis  of  Brandenburg;  the 
third  of  Rhenates,  Bavarians,  and  Switzers,  under  Octo,  archbishop  of 
Treves.*  With  these,  Sigismund  also,  the  emperor,  and  cardinal 
Julian,  the  pope's  legate  (who  at  last  was  slain  in  war,  and  being 
spoiled  of  all  his  attire,  was  left  naked  in  the  field),  joined  all  their 
force ;  who,  joining  together  five  times  (saith  the  story),  with  five 
simdrv  battles,  assailed  and  invaded  the  Bohemians ;  at  every  such  Marvei- 
battle,  five  times  the  said  adversaries,  stricken  and  daunted  with  a  faue/*'^ 
sudden  fear,  ran  away  out  of  the  field,  leaving  their  tents  with  all  "P"".  "^"^ 
their  implements  and  furniture  behind  them,  before  any  stroke  was  army. 
given  ;^  whereby  it  may  appear  that  the  holy  angels  of  God  do  fight 
for  them  who  embrace  the  sincere  doctrine  of  Christ's  gospel. 

Thus  the  Bohemians,  through  the  mighty  protection  of  Almighty 
God,  continued  a  long  time  invincible,  during  all  the  life  of  Zisca, 
and  also  of  Procopius,  till,  at  length,  through  discord  growing  between 
them  and  their  captains  Procopius  and  Mainardus,  they  were  subdued 
unto  their  enemies. 

And  here  by  the  way  is  not  to  be  omitted  the  wicked  and  cruel  cruelty 
fact  of  Mainardus,  who,  after  the  death  of  Procopius,  thinking  to  ardus'" 
purge  the  realm  of  Bohemia  of  those  chief  and  principal  soldiers,  ^^^'g^' 
who  had  been  long  expert  and  trained  up  in  wars,  found  means  for  a'  uemians. 

Hist.  Hussit.  lib.  viii.        ,  (2)  Anton,  iii.  part.  hist.  tit.  22,  cap.  10. 

(3)  Ex  Paral.  Abb.  Ursp.  in  Epitaphio  Joan.  Zisc.  (4)  Ex  hist.  Caspari  Peucer.  lib  v. 

(5)  God's  holy  angels  pitch  their  tents  about  them  that  fear  him,  Psa.  xxxiv. 


n).2  KICHAKD    WICHE    BURNliD. 


Hevry    prockmation  to  be  made,  as  though  he  would  war  against  other 
— ^-^  countries  of  their  enemies  bordering  about  them,  craftily  to  train  all 
^-  ^-    those  who  were  disposed  to  take  wages,  into  certain  bams  or  hovels 
prepared  for  the  same  purpose ;  and  so,  shutting  the  doors  upon 
them,  the  wicked  dissembler  set  fire  upon  them,  and  burnt  of  them 
divers  thousands,  and  so  brought  the  rest,  by  that  means,  under  sub- 
jection to  the  emperor  dm-ing  his  lifetime,  which,  after  that  continued 
Thou-      not  long;'  which  soldiers  if  they  had  fought  as  much  for  the  catholic 
the'ijo"-*^   liberties  of  the  pope  and  his  church,  as  they  had  fought  against  him, 
hemian    jj  jg  marvcl  if  the  pope  had  not  dignified  them  all  for  holy  martyrs. 
burnt.      But  they  that  kill  with  the  sword  (saith  Christ)  shall  perish  with  the 
sword.     Notwithstanding,  the  cruel  deceit  of  Mainardus  is  worthy  of 
all  men  to  be  detested.^ 

England        Duriug  this  busiucss  among  the  bishops  beyond  the  sea,  in  the 

cmefty!''  Hicau  time  our  bishops  here  also  in  England  were  not  unoccupied. 

Whether  it  be  the  nature  of  the  country  that  so  giveth,  or  whether 

the  great  livings  and  wealthy  promotions  of  the  clergy  do  draw  with 

them  a  more  insensible  untowardness  in  God's  religion,  hard  it  is  to 

Burning   Say :  tliis  is  manifest  to  all  them  who  will  read  and  mark  our  stories 

fng  in*^   from  time  to  time,  that  in  England  is  more  burning  and  slaying  for 

England,  religion  and  for  all  other  matters ;  more  bloodshed  among  us,  than  in 

any  other  land  or  nation  in  Christendom  besides. 

After  the  burning  of  Richard  Hoveden,  and  Nicholas  Canon,  and 
Thomas  Bagley,  priest,  above  recorded,  whom  the  bishops  condemned 
to  death,  a.d.  1431,  not  long  after,  about  the  year  of  our  Lord 
1439,  which  was  the  eighteenth  of  the  reign  of  king  Henry  VI., 
they  had  another  poor  man  by  the  back,  named  Richard  Wiche, 
priest,  mentioned  both  in  Robert  Fabian,  and  also  in  another  old 
English  chronicle  borrowed  of  one  Perminger.  What  his  opinions 
were,  they  do  not  express.  This  they  record,  that  this  Richard  Wiche 
was  first  degraded,  then  burnt  at  Tower-hill  for  heresy.  Some  do 
affirm,  that  he,  before  his  death,  revolted ;  but  that  seemeth,  by  his 
burning,  not  to  be  true.^ 

It  is  also  testified  of  him,  that  before  his  death  he  spake  (as  prophe- 
sying) that  the  postern  of  the  Tower  should  sink;  which,  also,  afterwards 
came,  as  he  saith,  to  pass :  wherefore  of  many  of  the  people  he  was 
Wiche,  counted  for  a  holy  man  ;  insomuch  that,  as  it  is  affirmed,  they  came 
death  *^  to  the  placc  where  he  was  burnt,  and  there  made  their  oblations  and 
prayers,  and  upreared  a  great  heap  of  stones,  and  set  up  a  cross  there 
by  niglit ;  so  tliat,  by  this  means,  a  great  clamour  ran  upon  the  church- 
men, and  especially  upon  such  as  put  him  to  death.  Then,  to  cease 
the  rumour,  the  king  gave  commandment  to  punish  such  as  went 
thither  on  pilgrimage :  the  copy  whereof  is  here  to  be  seen  as 
followeth. 

;i)  Ex  jEnea.  Sylv.  (2)  lb.  lib.  rte  hist.  Bohem.  cap.  16. 

(3)  Ex  Fabia.  par.  7.     Ex  antique  alio  Chronicho. 


tainted. 


THE    KINGS    WRIT. 


708 


The  King  s  Writ,  prohibiting  Pilgrimage  to  the  Tomb  of  Richard    B^rp 

Wiche.  — 

A.D. 
Rex  Vicecomitibus  London  et  Midd.  salutem.     Albeit  Richard  Wiche,  late    1440. 

clerk,  who  heretofore   long    since    heretically  did  hold,  teach,  and  publicly 

preach,  certain  heresies  and  erroneous  opinions  in  many  places  within  our  realm 
of  England,  and  for  the  same  many  years  now  past  being  judicially  convicted, 
did,  before  a  judge,  in  that  behalf  sutiicient,  abjure  all  heresy  generally,  and 
afterwards,  as  a  dog  returning  to  his  vomit,  did  presume  to  maintain,  teach,  and 
publicly  preach,  his  fonner  errors  and  heresies,  so  that  he  was  worthily  ad- 
judged a  relapse  :  and  again,  bemg  impeached  for  the  same  before  the  reverend 
father  in  God,  Robert,  bishop  of  London,  his  lawfid  ordinary,  was  called  forth 
to  judgment ;  and  being  before  him,  did  judicially  confess  his  errors  and  heresies. 
For  which  cause  the  reverend  father,  upon  mature  deliberation  by  him,  the  said 
reverend  father,  first  had,  with  the  advice  of  the  learned  in  the  law,  his  assistants, 
lawfully  proceeding  against  the  said  Richard,  did,  by  his  sentence  definitive, 
pronounce  and  adjudge  him  to  be  a  relapse,  and  did  degrade  him  from  the  order 
and  dignity  of  priesthood,  and  took  from  him  all  priestly  ornaments,  and  de- 
prived him  of  all  priestly  function  and  privilege  (according  to  justice),  and,  last  of 
all,  turned  him  over  to  the  secular  power  as  the  manner  is ;  and  afterwards  you, 
by  our  princely  commandment  and  waiTant,  did,  according  to  the  law  of  our 
realm,  for  his  last  punishment,  consume  the  body  of  the  said  Richard  to  ashes, 
being  a  relapse,  convict,  and  degraded,  as  a  notorious  traitor,  not  only  against 
God,  but  also  against  us  and  our  crown  and  dignity ;  all  which  notwithstanding, 
certain  our  subjects  (as  we  have  been  sundry  times  informed)  being  pricked 
forward  with  a  chabolical  spirit,  practising,  of  all  likelihood,  not  only  sedition, 
but  also  idolahy,  \vithin  our  realm,  are  not  afraid  pubUcly  to  affirm,  that  the 
said  Richard  was  altogether  innocent  of  heretical  pravity.  Nay  rather  they  do 
most  shamefully,  with  their  vain  de\nces,  and  wickedly  conceived  imaginations, 
blaze  abroad,  that  he  was,  and  died,  a  good,  a  just,  and  a  holy  man,  and  that 
he  doth  many  miracles :  whei-eas  indeed  no  such  miracles  be  done  by  him. 
Which  disordinate  persons  we  may  well,  and  upon  probable  causes,  repute  and 
deem  culpable,  not  only  of  heretical  pravity,  but  also  of  high  treason,  and  as 
rebels  to  our  person,  majestv',  and  violaters  of  the  peace  and  dignity  of  our 
realm,  as  withal,  breakers  and  trespassers  against  the  sacred  canons  of  the  church, 
who  dare  so  presumptuously  adventiu-e  to  worship  the  said  Richard  as  a  saint, 
whereas  it  is  not  lawfid  to  worship  any  manner  of  person,  be  he  ever  so  holy, 
before  he  be  canonized  by  the  authority  of  the  bishop  of  Rome  :  We,  therefore, 
being  very  carefid  for  the  good  preservation  of  our  peace,  and  desirous  to  abolish 
from  out  of  all  the  coasts  of  the  same  all  manner  of  idolatry,  do  charge  and  com- 
mand you,  that,  in  certain  places  within  your  liberties,  where  you  shall  tliink  most 
convenient,  you  cause,  forthwith,  proclamations  to  be  made  on  our  behalf,  straitly 
charging  that  no  person  from  henceforth  presume  to  resort  to  the  place  where  the 
said  Richard  was  executed,  under  colom-  of  a  pilgi'im,  or  for  any  other  cause  of 
devotion  whatsoever ;  nor  send  any  offering  thither,  nor  worship  him  hereafter 
openly  or  secretly,  or  adjudge,  esteem,  repute,  name,  or  talk  of  him  as  otherwise 
justified  or  innocent,  than  such  as  the  said  reverend  father,  by  his  definitive 
sentence,  hath  pronounced  him  to  be  :  upon  pain  and  penalty  to  be  taken  and 
reputed  for  a  heretic  or  a  favourer  of  heretics,  and  to  receive  condign  punish- 
ment proN-ided  for  heretics.  And  that  you  aiTest  all  and  every  person  whom  you 
shall  find  to  do  any  thing  contrary  to  this  our  proclamation,  and  the  same,  so 
arrested,  commit  to  our  prison ;  there  to  remain  until  we  shall  think  good  to 
send  countermand  for  their  deliverance. 

Witness  the  king  at  his  manor  of  Easthampstead,  the  fifteenth  day  of 
July,  in  the  eighteenth  year  of  his  reign. 

Per  ipsum  Regem. 

Like  writs,  and  to  the  same  effect,  were  directed  to  all  the  sheriffs 
through  all  the  realm,  bearing  all  one  and  the  same  date ;  by  vii'tue  of 
which  letters,  the  mayor  and  sheriffs  did  use  such  diligence,  that  shortly 
after,  that  concourse  and  seeking  of  the  people  was  left  off. 


704  AN    ANSWER    TO    ALANCS    <OPUS,    THE    SYCQPHANT. 

iic^'ry        After  the  burning  of  tliis  man,  which  was  about  the  month  of  June, 
'  ^'      in  the  same  year,  about  November,  a  convocation  was  called  by  Henry, 


A.  D.    archbishop  of  Canterbury,  wherein  was  propounded  among  the  clergy, 

^440.    to  consult  with  themselves  what  way  were  best  to  be  taken  for  the 

The        removing  away  the  law  of  '  Praemuniri  facias  ;'' '  for  so  were  the  hearts 

'^  suit  to  then  of  the  temporalty  set  against  the  ecclesiastical  sort,  that  where 


con 


fhe'iawof  ^^^7  vantage  might  be  given  them  by  the  law,  they  did  nothing  spare ; 
PiiEmu-    by  reason  whereof  the  church-men  at  that  time  were  greatly  molested 
cias. '       by  the  said  law  of  '  Praimuniri,''  and  by  the  lving''s  writs,  and  other  in- 
tlictments,  to  their  no  small  annoyance.  By  long  consultation  and  good 
advisement,  at  last  this  way  was  taken :  that  a  ]:)etition  or  supplication 
sliould  be  drawn  and  presented  to  the  king,  for  the  abolishing  of  the 
aforesaid  law  of  '  Prscmuniri  facias  ;""  and,  also,   for  the  restraining  of 
other  briefs,  Avrits,  and  indictments,  which  seemed  then  to  lie  heavy 
upon  the  clergy.     This  bill  or  supplication  being  contrived  and  exhi- 
bited, by  the  archbishops  of  Canterbury  and  of  York,  unto  the  king, 
standing  in  need  at  the  same  time  of  a  subsidy  to  be  collected  of  the 
clergy,  this  answer  was  given  to  their  supplication,  on  the  king''s  behalf: 
The        that,  forasmuch  as  the  time  of  Christmas  then  drew  near,  whereby  he 
^w'r'to"  ^^^^1  ^s  yet,  no  sufficient  leisure  to  advise  upon  the  matter,  he  would 
the  bill,    take  therein  a  farther  pause.   In  the  mean  time,  as  one  tendering  their 
quiet,  he  would  send  to  all  his  officers  and  ministers  within  his  realm, 
that  no  such  brief  of '  Prsemuniri"'  should  pass  against  them  or  any  of 
them,  from  the  said  time  of  Christmas,  till  the  next  parliament,  a.  d. 
1439.2 


A    BRIEF    ANSWER    TO  THE  CAVILLATIONS    OF  ALAN    COPE  S  CON 
CERNING    LADY    ELEANOR    COBHAM. 

In  my  former  edition  of  Acts  and  Monuments,^  so  hastily  raked  up 

at  that  present,  in  such  shortness  of  time,  as  in  the  said  book  thou 

mayest  see,  gentle  reader  !  declared  and  signified  ;  among  many  other 

A  brief    matters  therein  contained,  there  is  a  short  note  made  of  one  Eleanor 

answer  to  Cobliam,  duchcss  of  Gloucester,  and  of  sir  Roger  Only,  knight  (priest^ 

earning    it  should  havc  bccu  printed),  which  two  persons,  about  a.  d.  1440,  or 

iw^(fob^'  the  next  year  following,  were  condemned,  the  one  to  death,  the  other 

ham.       ^Q  perpetual  prison.     Of  this  little  short  matter  Master  Cope,  the 

pope^s  scout,  lying  in  privy  wait  to  spy  faults  in  all  men'^s  works, 

wheresoever  any  may  appear,  taketh  pepper  in  the  nose,  and  falleth 

again  unto  his  old  barking  against  me,  for  placing  these  aforesaid  per- 

(1)  Ex  Regist.  Henr.  Chichesley.  (2)  Ex  Regist.  Cant. 

(3)  The  quotation  from  the  first  edition  of  the  Acts  and  Monuments  to  which  Foxe  alludes,  is 
subjoined :— "  Within  short  time  after,  sir  Roger  Onley  followed  the  lord  Cobhani  and  sir  Roger 
Acton,  being  a  knight  of  like  nobility  and  order;  and  so  likewise  partaker  of  the  like  cause  and 
quarrel;  a  man  endowed  with  like  valiantness  and  godliness,  whom  we  do  read  in  certain  annals  to 
be  hanged  for  the  truth's  sake  in  the  year  of  our  Lord,  1441.  And  lest  that  this  rage  of  persecution 
should  not  wrap  in  all  and  every  sect  and  kind,  or  should  not  suliiciently  fulfil  all  points  of 
cruelty,  as  though  it  had  been  but  a  small  matter  hitherto  to  have  murdered  so  many  men,  they 
began  now  to  execute  their  cruelty  upon  women.  Of  the  which  sort  although  there  have  been 
many  who  have  followed  their  spouse  Christ,  by  torments,  banishments,  and  death,  yet  the  first 
in  this  number  which  cometh  unto  our  hands,  is  Eleanor  Cobham,  a  woman  notliingat  all  degene- 
rating from  her  stock,  kindred,  and  name  received  of  her  ancestors,  albeit  that  we  can  find  or 
understand  none  other  thing  of  her,  but  that  for  suspicion  of  heresy;  that  is  to  say,  for  the  love  and 
desire  of  the  truth,  she  was  by  the  papists  banished  into  the  Isle  of  Man  ;  as  Harding  and  Fabian 
do  write.  Whom  a  few  years  after,  there  followed  a  woman,  who,  for  her  obstinacy  and  virtue,  was 
greatly  to  be  commended  and  praised,  being  called  the  mother  of  a  certain  lady,  surnamed  Young, 
she  persevering  even  unto  the  lire,  with  a  stout  and  manly  courage,  for  the  confession  of  the  gospel 
was  burned  in  the  year  of  our  Lord,  141)0."    See  Edition  15B3,  p.  371. — Ed. 


AN    ANSWER    TO    ALANUS     COPUS,    THE    SYCOPHANT.  705 

sons  in  my  '  Book  of  Martyrs ;'  but,  especially,  he  think eth  to  have  great    Uenry 
vantage  against  me,  for  tliat  in  the  same  story  I   do  join  withal,  one        " 
Margaret  Jourdeman,  the  witch  of  Eye,  condemned  also  with  them    A.  I), 
at  the  same  time,  and  burned  for  practising  the  king''s  death  by  an    ^^"^^^ 
image  of  wax,  &c. 

To  answer  hereunto.  First,  I  say,  as  I  before  said,  that  I  profess  To  the 
no  such  title  to  write  of  Martyrs,  but,  in  general,  to  write  of  Acts  and  objection. 
Monuments  passed  in  the  church  and  realm  of  England ;  wherein, 
why  should  I  be  restrained  from  the  free  walk  of  a  story  writer,  more 
than  others  that  have  gone  before  me  ? 

Secondly,  Touching  my  commendation  of  sir  Roger  Only,  and  the 
lady  Eleanor ;  if  Master  Alan  be  therewith  offended,  I  answer,  that 
I  commended  them  for  savouring  and  favouring  of  the  truth  of  Christ's 
doctrine :  for  the  fact,  if  any  such  were  in  them,  I  do  not  commend 
them.  And  although  I  did  commend  them,  yet  neither  did  I  it  with 
any  long  tarrying  upon  it,  nor  yet  altogether  upon  mine  own  head, 
vrithout  some  sufficient  warrant  of  authority.  For,  why  may  not  I  as 
well  believe  John  Bale,  as  Master  Alan  believe  Mr.  Fabian  ?  espe- 
cially seeing  I  do  know,  and  was  privy,  that  the  said  John,  in.recognising 
his  Centuries,  followed  altogether  the  history  of  Leland  '  De  Catalogo 
vu-orum  illustrium  ;'  which  book,  being  borrowed  of  Master  Cheke,  I 
myself  did  see  in  the  hands  of  the  aforesaid  John  Bale,  what  time  we 
were  both  together,  dwelling  in  the  house  of  the  noble  lady  the  duchess 
of  Richmond.  Wherefore,  if  he  think  me  so  lewd  to  speak  without 
mine  authors,  he  is  deceived.  And  if  he  think  mine  authors  not  to 
be  believed,  then  let  this  Nomothetes,  or  jolly  Dictator,  come  forth 
and  prescribe  us  a  law,  what  authors  he  would  have  us  to  take,  and 
what  to  refiise.  For  else,  why  is  it  not  as  free  for  me  to  credit  John 
Bale  and  Leland,  as  for  him  to  credit  Robert  Fabian  and  Edward 
Hall  ?  especially,  seeing  they  had  seen  his  books  and  works  left  be- 
hind him,  whereupon  they  might  better  judge  ;  and  so  did  never 
these. 

Thirdly,  For  the  name  of  Roger  Only ;  if  Cope  deny  that  there 
was  any  such  name  in  stories  mentioned,  but  that  there  was  one  called 
Roger  Bolingbroke,  Sec,  hereby  it  may  appear,  that  either  his  prompter 
out  of  England  deceived  him,  or  else  that  he,  going  no  further  but  to 
Fabian  and  Hall,  lacketh  no  good  will  in  him,  but  only  a  little  matter, 
to  mtdce  a  perfect  sycophant.  And,  admit  the  said  name  of  '  Only"" 
could  not  be  found  in  those  writers,  yet  it  were  not  impossible  for  a 
man  to  have  two  names,  especially  if  he  were  a  religious  man ;  to  bear 
the  name  of  the  town  where  he  was  born,  besides  his  own  proper  sur- 
name. But  now,  what  if  I,  Master  Cope  !  can  avouch  and  bring  forth 
to  you  the  name  of  Roger  Only  out  of  sufficient  record,  which  you 
seem  not  to  have  yet  read  .'*  Have  ye  not  then  done  well  and  properly, 
think  you,  so  bitterly  to  flee  in  my  face,  and  to  bark  so  eagerly  all 
this  while  at  moonshine  in  the  water,  having  no  more  cause  almost 
against  me,  than  against  the  man  in  the  moon  ?  And  now  (lest  you 
should  think  me  so  much  unprovided  of  just  authority  for  my  de- 
fence, as  I  see  you  unprovided  of  modesty  and  patience),  write  you 
to  your  prompter  or  suborner,  wheresoever  he  lurketh  here  in  England, 
10  send  you  over  nnto  Louvain  the  book  of  John  Harding,  a  chronicler, 
more  ancient  than  either  Fabian  or  Hall,  printed  in  the  house  of 

VOL.  III.  Z  Z 


TOG  AN    ANSWER    lO    ALANUS    COPHS.    THE    SYCOPHANT. 

Henry    Ricliarcl  Graftoii,  A.  D.  1543 ;  where  turn  to  the  fol.  223,  fac.  b.,  line 
— ^ —  19,  and  there  you  shall  find  and  read  these  words. 

A.  D.  ^ 

1440_  "  Again,  the  church  and  the  king  cursedly, 
By  help  of  one  Master  Roger  Only,"  &c. 

By  which  words  you  must  necessarily  confess  Roger  Only  to  be  the 
name  of  the  man,  or  else  must  ye  needs  deny  the  author.  For  otherwise, 
that  Master  Roger  Bolingbroke  was  the  only  helper  to  the  duchess 
in  that  fact,  by  no  wise  it  can  stand  with  the  story  of  these  authors, 
who  say,  that  four  others,  besides  him,  were  condemned  for  the  same 
crime,  &c.'  And,  moreover,  though  the  said  sir  Roger  Only  was  no 
knight  (as  I  have  said  in  my  former  edition),  yet  this  ye  cannot  deny, 
by  the  testimony  of  them  that  have  seen  his  works,  but  that  he  was 
a  priest,  which  you  will  grant  to  be  a  knight's  fellow.  And  thus  much 
for  the  name  and  condition  of  Master  Roger  Only. 

Fourthly,  As  concerning  Margaret  Jourdcman,  whom  ye  call  the 
witch  of  Eye,  ye  offer  me  herein  great  wrong,  to  say  that  I  make  her 
a  martyr,  who  was  a  witch ;  when  I  here  profess,  confess,  and  ascer- 
tain,^ both  you,  and  all  Englishmen,  both  present,  and  all  posterity 
hereafter  to  come,  that  of  this  Margaret  Jourdeman  I  never  spake, 
never  thought,  never  dreamed,  nor  did  ever  hear,  before  you  named 
her  in  your  book  yourself.  So  far  is  it  off  that  I,  either  with  my  will, 
or  against  my  will,  made  any  martyr  of  her. 
Cope  Furthermore,  I  pi-ofess  and  denounce  in  like  manner,  that  neither 

^thout  ^^^^^  y^^^  ^^y  J^^^  ^^^  congrue'  occasion  in  my  book  so  to  judge, 
a  cause,  niucli  less  to  rail  on  me.  For  where,  in  express  words,  I  do  speak  of 
the  mother  of  the  lady  Young,  what  occasion  have  you  thereby  to 
slander  me  and  my  book  with  Margaret  Jourdeman  ?  which  Margaret 
whether  she  was  a  witch  or  not,  I  leave  her  to  the  Lord.  As  for  me, 
neither  did  I  know  of  her  then,  nor  did  I  mean  of  her  now :  but,  be- 
cause I  couple  her  in  the  same  story,  you  say.  To  this  I  say,  because 
she  was  the  mother  of  a  lady,  I  thought  to  join  her  with  another  lady 
in  the  same  story,  as  in  one  pew  together,  although  in  one  cause  I  will 
not  say.  And  yet,  notwithstanding,  I  do  so  couple  the  said  mother 
with  the  duchess,  in  such  distinct  difference  of  years,  that  you, 
Master  Cope  !  might  easily  have  understood,  or,  beside  you,  no  man 
else  would  have  thought  the  contrary,  but  that  Margaret  Jourdeman 
was  neither  here  in  my  book,  nor  yet  in  my  Memento.  For  the 
words  of  my  story  are  plain,  where  the  condemnation  of  the  lady 
Eleanor,  and  of  the  mother  of  lady  Young,  being  referred  to  the 
year  of  our  Lord,  1441,  I  do  also,  in  the  same  storj^  (through  the 
occasion  of  that  lady),  infer  mention  of  the  mother  of  the  lady 
Young,  declaring  in  express  words,  that  she  followed  certain  years 
after,  and,  in  the  end  of  that  chapter,  do  name  also  the  year  of  her 
burning  to  be  1490,  which  was  fifty  years  after  the  death  of  Only 
and  Margaret  Jourdeman ;  by  the  computation  of  which  years  it 
is  plain,  that  no  other  woman  could  be  noted  in  that  place,  but  only 
the  lady  Young''s  mother. 

But  Master  Cope,  continuing  still  in  his  wrangling  mood,  objecteth 
again,  for  that  in  my  calendar,  the  said  lady  Young's  mother  hath 

(1)  Vid.  Centur.  8.  Bal.  cap.  4.  (2)  "  Ascertain,"  assure.— Ed. 

vS)  "Corigrue,"  cotivt'iiicnt. —  F,d.  (4)  The  former  edition,  p.  371. 


AN    AN'SWEU    TO    Al.AXU.s    COPUS,    THE    SYCOPHANT.  707 

the  day.  in  tlie  catalogue,  next  after  the  death  of  Roger  Only  ;  which    Henry 
day  pertaineth  properly  to  Margaret  Jourdeman,  who  was  burned      ^'' 


the  same  day  in  Smithfield,  and  not  to  the  lady's  mother,  &c.        A.  D. 

What  order  was  taken  in  placing  the  names  and  days,  what  is  ^^'^^- 
that  to  me  .''  If  he  who  had  the  disposing  of  the  catalogue,  did 
place  them  so  in  months,  as  he  saw  them  joined  in  chapters,  not 
perusing  peradventure,  nor  advising  the  chapters,  that  doth  nothing 
prejudice  the  truth  of  my  story,  which  sufficiently  doth  clear  itself 
in  distinguishing  them  rightly  in  names,  and  also  in  years,  as  is 
before  declared. 

Fifthly    and    lastly :   Having   thus  sufficiently  answered  to  your  The 
circumstances  of  persons,  names,  and  times,  Master  Cope  !   I  will  temu'-™" 
now  enter  to   encounter  with   you   concerning  the  fact  and  crime  tf.^- 
objected  to  the  lady  duchess,  and  to  the  rest ;  with  this  protes-  Eleanor 
tation  before  premised  unto  the  reader :  that,  if  the  fact  be   true,  duchess 
and  so  done  as  is  reported  in  the  histories   of  Fabian,  Hall,  and  ^f,"'' 

r  T       T  T     1      •  1  1  1  pable  of 

Hardmg,  1  desire  the  reader  then  so  to  take  me,  as  though  I  did  treason 
not  deal  here-withal,  nor  speak  of  the  matter,  but  utterly  to  have  the  kfng 
pretermitted,  and  dispuncted  the  same.  But,  forasmuch  as  the 
deed  and  offence  laid  and  given  forth  against  these  parties,  may  be 
a  matter  made,  and  of  evil-will  compacted,  rather  than  true  indeed ; 
therefore,  I  do  but  only  move  a  question  by  way  of  history, 
not  as  defending,  nor  commending,  nor  commemorating  the  thing,  if 
it  be  true,  but  only  moving  the  question,  whether  it  is  to  be  judged 
true,  or  suspected  rather  to  be  false  and  forged;  and  so,  having 
briefly  propounded  certain  conjectural  suspicions  or  supposals  con- 
cerning that  matter,  I  will  pass  it  over,  neither  meddling  on  the  one 
side  nor  on  the  other. 

The  first  conjectivre,  Avhy  it  may  be  possible  that  this  act  of  treason,  certain 
laid  to  the  charge  of  the  duchess  and  Roger  Only,  against  the  king,  turesVhat 
may  be  untrue,  is  this :  that  the  said  Only  (otherwise  named  Boling-  f'e 
broke)  took  oath  upon  his  death,  that  they  never  intended  any  such  waTnot 
thing  as  they  were  condemned  for.  ^^^' 

The  second  conjecture:  for  that  the  lady  Eleanor  and  Only  seemed 
then  to  favour  and  savour  of  that  religion  set  forth  by  Wickliff ;  and 
therefore  it  is  like  enough  that  they  were  hated  of  the  clergy.  Further- 
more, what  hatred  and  practices  of  papists  can  do,  it  is  not  unknown. 

The  third  conjectm-e  :  for  that  the  said  Master  Roger  Only, 
falsely  noted  and  accused  of  necromancy,  wrote  a  book  in  pui-gation 
of  himself,  entitled, '  De  Innocentia  sua ;'  also  another  book  entitled, 
'Contra  vulgi  superstitiones,''  recorded  in  Centur.  8.  Bale,  cap.  4: 
whereupon  it  is  not  credible,  that  he  who  wrote  professedly  against 
the  superstitions  of  the  people,  was  overtaken  with  that  filth  of  necro- 
mancy himself. 

The  fourth  conjecture  :  because  this  accusation  against  the  duchess 
of  Gloucester,  duke  Humphrey's  wife,  began  not  before,  but  after 
the  grudge  kindled  between  the  cardinal  of  Winchester,  and  duke 
Humphrey,  her  husband. 

Another  conjecture  may  be  hereof,  for  that  if  the  duchess  had 
intended  any  such  heinous  treason  against  the  king's  life,  as  by  burn- 
ing of  a  wax-candle  to  consume  him,  it  is  not  likely,  neither  was 
there  any  such  need,  that  she  Avould  have  made  so  many  privy  to 

zz  9. 


708  AN    ANSWER    TO    ALANUS    COPUS,    THE    SYCOPHAXT. 

Hrnry   sucli  a  peiTiicious  counsel,  as  the  witch  of  Eye,  Master  Roger  Boling- 

^•^'  broke,  Master  Thomas  Southwell,  and  John  Hume. 
A.  D.  Sixthly,  It  is  not  to  be  supposed,  if  any  such  high  treason  had 
l"^**^-  been  wrought  or  pretended  against  the  king's  person  by  these,  that 
either  the  duchess  should  so  escape  with  bearing  a  taper  and  banish- 
ment, or  that  John  Hume  should  be  pardoned  his  life;  the  fact 
being  so  heinous,  that  neither  any  durst  ask  this  pardon,  nor,  if  it 
had  been  asked,  had  it  been  likely  to  be  granted. 

To  these  we  may  also  add  another  supposal,  rising  upon  the  words 
and  form  of  their  accusation,  as  it  standelh  in  Harding,  Polychroni- 
con,  and  others  besides,  wherein  they  were  accused  for  working  sor- 
cery and  enchantments  against  the  church  and  the  king.  Now,  what 
sorcery  can  be  wrought  against  the  church,  that  is,  the  whole  multi- 
tude of  Christians,  let  the  reader  judge ;  and,  by  the  truth  of  this, 
consider  also  the  truth  of  the  other,  which  Avas  against  the  king. 
Furthermore,  if,  by  this  church,  is  meant  the  cardinal  of  Winchester, 
as  like  it  is,  then  it  may  be  conjectured,  that  all  this  matter  rose  of 
that  cardinal,  who  was  then  a  mortal  enemy  to  the  house  of  Glou- 
cester, &c. 

Eighthly,  And,  that  all  this  was  done  and  wrought  by  the  said 
cardinal  of  Winchester,  the  Avitch  of  Eye  maketh  the  matter  the 
more  suspicious,  seeing  that  the  town  of  Eye,  as  Fabian  witnesseth, 
was  near  beside  Winchester,  and  in  the  see  of  that  bishop. 

Moreover,  forasmuch  as  Polydore  Virgil,  among  other  story 
authors,  being  a  man  as  may  be  supposed,  rather  favouring  the  cardi- 
nal's part  than  the  duke's,  made  no  mention  at  all  touching  this 
treason,  his  silence,  therefore,  may  minister  matter  not  only  to  muse, 
but  also  to  conjecture,  that  he  had  found  something  which  made  him 
to  mistrust  the  matter.  Otherwise  it  is  unlikely  that  he  would  have 
so  mewed  up  the  matter,  and  passed  it  over  without  some  mention. 

Finally,  and  briefly,  the  frequent  practices  and  examples  of  other 
times  may  make  this  also  more  doubtful,  considering  how  many 
subtle  pretences,  after  the  like  sort,  have  been  sought,  and  wrongful 
accusations  brought,  against  many  innocent  persons.  For,  not  to 
repeat  the  like  forgeries  against  the  lord  Cobham,  and  sir  Roger 
Acton,  &c,,  why  may  not  this  accusation  of  the  duchess  and  Only 
be  as  false,  as  that  in  the  time  of  king  Edward  V.,  which  was  laid 
to  the  charge  of  the  queen  and  Shore's  Avife,  by  the  protector,  for 
enchanting  and  bewitching  his  withered  arm  .''  which  to  be  false,  all 
the  world  doth  know,  and  but  a  quarrel  made,  only  to  oppress  the 
life  of  the  lord  Hastings,  and  the  lord  Stanley.  And  thus  mayest 
thou  see,  gentle  reader  !  according  to  the  wise  man's  saying,  '  Nihil 
novum  esse  sub  sole;  nihilque  dictum,  quod  non  sit  dictum  prius,'  &c. 

Although  these,  with  many  more  conjectures,  may  be  alleged  as 
some  part  of  the  defence  of  this  duchess,  and  of  her  chaplains  and 
priests,  yet,  because  it  may  still  not  be  impossible  for  the  matter  laid 
against  them  to  be  true,  I  leave  it  therefore  at  large,  as  I  find  it ; 
saying,  as  I  said  before,  that  if  that  be  true  which  the  stories  say  in 
this  matter,  think,  I  beseech  thee,  gentle  reader !  that  I  have  said 
nothing  hereof.  Only,  because  the  matter  may  be  disputable,  and 
not  impossible  to  be  false,  I  have  but  moved  thereof  a  question,  and 
brought  my  conjectures,  leaving  the  determination  and  judgment 


ARTICLES    AGAINST    THE    CARDINAL    OF    WIXCHESTKR.  70,0 

hereof   to   thy  indifferent  and  free  arbitrament.     And,   if  Master     Himnj  I 

Cope  be  so  highly  offended  with  me,  because  in  my  first  edition   .Ih_  \ 

of  Acts  and   Monuments  I  durst  name  the  lady  Eleanor  Cobham,    A.D. 
and  Roger  Only  ;  let  him  take  this  for  a  short  answer,  because  my    ^^40. 
leisure  serveth  not  to  make   long  brawls  with   him :  that  if  I   had  a  brief 
thought  no  imperfections  to  have  passed  in  my  fonner  edition  before,  Master '" 
I  would  never  have  taken  in  hand  the  recognition  thereof  now  the  ^^IvixL-  I 

second  time,  whereby  to  spunge  away  such  motes,  as  I  thought  would  tiki's.  I 

seem  great  stumbling  blocks  in  such  men''s  walks,  who  walk  with  no  ing  duke  I 

charity  to   edify,  but  with  malice  to  carp  and  reprehend,  neither  "hrej-s  ' 

admonishing  what  they  see  amiss  in  others,   neither  tanying  while  ^*'''<^-  | 

other  men  reform  themselves  ;  and,  finally,  finding  quaiTcls  where  no  I 

great  cause  is  justly  given.     And  here  an  end  with  Master  Cope  i 

for  this  time. 

THE  CONTENTION    BETWEEN  THE    RICH  CARDINAL    OF  WINCHES-  j 

TER,^  AND    HUMPHREY,    THE    GOOD    DUKE    OF    GLOUCESTER.  1 

Forasmuch  as  in  the  process  before,  mention  was  touched  con-  , 

cerning  the  grudge  between  the  cardinal,  called  the  rich  cardinal  of 
Winchester,  and  the  good  duke  Humphrey,  duke  of  Gloucester,  the 
king''s  uncle  and  protector  of  the  realm,  order  of  story  now  requireth 
to  open  some  part  of  that  matter  more  at  large  ;  wherein  this,  first, 
is  to  be  understood,  that,  long  before,  great  flames  of  grudge  and 
discord  did  burst  out  between  these  two  :  for,  as  the  noble  heart  of  1 

the  duke  could  not  abide  the  proud  doings  of  the  cardinal,  so  much  i 

again  the  cardinal,  in  like  manner,  sorely  envied  and  disdained  at  the  I 

rule  of  the  duke  of  Gloucester.     Notwithstanding  that  by  means  of  " 

the  duke  of  Bedford,  the  brasting  out  between  them  was  before  ap- 
peased and  cured  ;  yet  not  so,  but  that  under  imperfect  amity,  privy 
hatred  (as  sparkles  under  the  embers)  did  still  remain  :  so  that  the 
cardinal,  joining  with  the  archbishop  of  York,  attempted  many  things 
of  their  own  presumption,  contrary  to  the  consent,  not  only  of  the 
king,  being  then  under  age,  but  also  of  the  protector  and  governor  I 

of  the  realm.  Wherewith  the  duke,  like  a  true  hearted  prince, 
being  not  without  just  cause  offended,  declared  in  writing  to  the  king  • 

certain  complaints  contained  in  twenty-one  articles,  wherein  the  car-  ! 

dinal  and  archbishop  had  transgressed,  both  against  the  king,  and  his 
laws  ;  the  tenor  whereof,  more  at  large,  is  in  other  stories  expressed. 
The  brief  abstract  thereof  foUoweth  in  a  short  summary  here  to  be  ! 

seen.^  ' 

! 

Certain  Points  or  Articles  objected  by  Duke  Humphrey  against  tlic  ' 

Cardinal  of  Winchester.  j 

First,  He  complaineth  to  his  sovereign  prince  his  right  redoubted  lord  duke  winches-  i 

Humphrey,  his  uncle  and  protector  of  the  realm,  That  the  bishop  of  Winchester,  te"-  i)re- 
in  the  days  of  his  father,  king  Henry  V.,  took  upon  him  the  state  of  a  cardinal,  be'cardi-" 
being  denied  by  the  king,  saying,  that  he  had  as  lief  set  his  own  crown  beside  nal 
him,  as  see  him  wear  a  cardinal's  hat ;  and  that  in  parliaments,  he,  not  being  against 
contented  with  the  place  of  a  bishop  among  the  spiritual  perstms,  presumed  of  "the'  i 

above  his  order  :  which  the  said  duke  desired  to  be  redressed.  king.  ] 

II.  Item,  Whereas  he,  being  made  a  cardinal,  was  voided  of  his  bushopric  of  I 

ID  Henry  Beaufort. -Ed.  (2)  Ex  Polychron.  | 


710  AKTICLES    AGAINST    THE    C'ARDIXAL    OV    WINCHESTEl!. 

Henrtj    Winchester,  he  procured  from  Rome  the  pope's  bull,  unknown  to  the  king  ; 
^^-       whereby  he  took  again  his  bishopric,  contrary  to  the  common  law  of  this  realm, 
»   j^     incurring  thereby  the  case  of  Provision,  and  forfeiting  all  his  goods  to  the  king, 
14.10'    ^y  ^^^  ^^^  °^  '  Pi''T?'Tiuniri  facias.' 

L.      III.  Item,  He  complained  that  the   said  cardinal,  with  the  archbishop  of 

Intnid-  York,  intruded  themselves  to  have  the  governance  of  the  king,  and  the  doing, 
self  to'be  under  the  king,  of  temporal  matters :  excluding  the  king's  uncle,  and  other  tem- 
the  king's  poral  lords  of  the  king's  kin,  from  having  knowledge  of  any  great  matter, 
governor.  jy  Item,  Whereas  the  king  had  borrowed  of  the  cardinal  four  thousand 
eth'^the'^'  Pounds,  upon  certain  jewels,  and  afterwards  had  his  money  ready  at  the  day  to 
king  of  quit  his  jewels  ;  the  cardinal  caused  the  treasurer  to  convert  that  money  to  the 
li's  payment  of  another  army,  to  keep  the  jewels  still  to  his  own  use  and  gain. 

dT  "  ^'  ^^^™'  ^^  being  then  bishop  of  Winchester,  and  chancellor  of  England, 

eth  the     delivered  the  king  of  Scots  upon  his  own  authority,  contrary  to  the  act  of  par- 
king of     liament,  wedding  his  niece  afterwards  to  the  said  king.     Also,  where  the  said 
'^''"'       king  of  Scots  should  have  paid  to  the  king  forty  thousand  pounds,  the  cardinal 
procured  ten  thousand  marks  thereof  to  be  remitted,  and  yet  the  rest  very 
slenderly  paid. 
Plajeth         VI.   Item,  The  said  cardinal,  for  lending  notable  sums  to  the  king,  had  the 
chant^"^"   profit  of  the  port  of  Hampton,  where  he,  setting  his  servants  to  be  the  cus- 
tomers, wool,  and  other  merchandise,  were,  under  that  cloak,  exported,  not  so 
much  to  his  singular  advantage,  being  the  chief  merchant,  as  to  the  great  pre- 
judice of  the  king,  and  detriment  to  his  subjects. 

VII.   Item,  The  cardinal,   in  lending  out  great  sums  to  the  king,  yet  so 
deferred  and  delayed  the  loan  thereof,  that,  coming  out  of  season,  the  same  dia 
the  king  little  pleasure,  but  rather  hinderance. 
A  de-  VIII.  Item,  Where  jewels  and  plate  were  prized  at  eleven  thousand  pounds 

thTkfng  '"  ^^eight,  of  the  said  cardinal  forfeited  to  the  king  ;  the  cardinal,  for  loan  of  a 
little  piece,  got  him  a  restorement  thereof,  to  the  king's  great  damage,  who 
better  might  have  spared  the  commons,  if  the  simi  had  remained  to  him  clear. 

IX.  Item,  Where  the  king's  father  had  given  Elizabeth  Beauchamp  three 

hundred  marks  of  livelode,  with  this  condition :  if  she  wedded  within  a  year  ; 

the  cardinal,  notwithstanding  she  was  married  two  or  three  years  after,  )'et  gave 

her  the  same,  to  the  king's  great  hurt,  and  diminishing  of  his  inheritance. 

Taketh  X.  Item,  The  cardinal,  having  no  authority  nor  interest  in  the  crown,  pre- 

like'a''™  sumed,  notwithstanding,  to  call  before  him  like  a  king  :    to  the  king's  high 

king.        derogation. 

XI.  Item,  That  the  cardinal  sued  a  pardon  from  Rome,  to  be  freed  from 
all  disms,  due  to  the  king  by  the  church  of  Winchester :  giving  thereby  example 
to  the  clergy,  to  withdraw  their  disms  likewise,  and  lay  all  the  charge  only  upon 
the  temporalty  and  poor  commons. 

XII.  XIII.  Item,  By  the  procuring  of  the  said  cardinal  and  archbishop  of 
York,  great  goods  of  the  king's  were  lost  and  dispended  upon  needless  ambas- 
sades,  first  to  Arras,  then  to  Calais. 

XIV.  Item,  It  was  laid  to  the  charge  of  the  said  cardinal  and  archbishop, 
that,  by  their  means,  going  to  Calais,  the  two  enemies  of  the  king,  the  duke  of 
Orleans  and  duke  of  Burgundy,  were  reduced  together  in  accord  and  alliance  ; 
who,  being  at  war  before  between  themselves,  and  now  confederated  together 
again,  joined  both  together  against  the  king's  towns  and  countries  over  the  sea: 
to  the  great  danger  of  Normandy,  and  destruction  of  the  king's  people. 
A  traitor  XV.  Item,  By  the  archbishop  of  York  and  the  cardinal,  persuasions  were 
crown  iTioved  openly  in  the  king's  presence,  with  allurements  and  inducements,  that 
the  king  should  leave  his  right,  his  title,  and  the  honour  of  his  crown,  in  nomi- 
nating him  king  of  France,  during  certain  years ;  and  that  he  should  utterly 
abstain,  and  be  content,  in  writing,  with  '  Rex  Angliae '  only  :  to  the  great  note 
and  infamy  of  the  king,  and  all  his  progenitors. 

XVI.  XVII.   Item,  Tlirough  the  sleight  and  subtlety  of  the  said  cardinal  and 
his  mate,  a  new  convention  was  intended  between  the  king  and  certain  adver- 
saries of  France ;  also  the  deliverance  of  the  duke  of  Orleans  was  appointed  in 
such  sort,  as  thereby  great  cUs- worship  and  inconvenience  were  likely  to  fall, 
chaser  of  ^^^^^er  on  the  king's  side,  tlian  on  the  other. 

the  king's       XVIII.  Item,  That  the  cardinal  had  purchased  great  lands  and  livelodes  of 
lands.        tiip  king,  the  duke  being  on  the  other  side  of  the  sea  occupied  in  wars,  which 


TROUBLES    OF    HOMPHREY,  THE    GOOD   DUKE   OF    GLOUCESTER.  711 

redounded  little  to  the  worship  and  profit  of  the  king  ;  and,  moreover,  he  had     Henry 
the  king  bound  to  make  him,  by  Easter  next,  as  sure  estate  of  all  those  lands,       ^'i- 
as  could  be  devised  by  any  learned  counsel,  or  else  that  the  said  cardinal  should  ~~7~t\~ 
have,  and  enjoy,  to  him  and  his  heirs  for  ever,  the  lands  of  the  duchy  of  Lan-    1440* 
caster  in  Norfolk,  to  the  value  of  seven  or  eight  hundred  marks  by  the  year. 


XIX.  Item,  Whereas  the  duke,  the  king's  uncle,  had  often  offered  his  ser-  Perverse 
vice  for  the  defence  of  the  realm  of  France,  and  the  duchy  of  Normandy  ;  the  counsel  of 
cardinal  ever  laboured  to  the  contrary,  in  preferring  others,  after  his  singular  dinal.'' 
affection  :  whereby  a  great  part  of  Nonuandy  hath  been  lost. 

XX.  Item,   Seeing  the  cardinal  was   risen   to   such  riches    and  treasure.  The  car- 
which  could  grow  to  him,  neither  by  his  church,  nor  by  inheritance  (which  he  "j'"^!  f 
then  had),  it  was  of  necessity  to  be  thought,  that  it  came  by  his  great  deceits,  of  the 

in  deceiving  both  the  king  and  his  subjects,  in  selling  offices,  preferments,  live-  ting,  and 
lodes,  captainships,  both  here,  and  in  the  realm  of  France,  and  in  Normandy  :  ^  '^"''<^'^- 
so  that  what  hath  been  there  lost,  he  hath  been  the  greatest  causer  thereof. 

XXI.  Furthermore,  when  the  said  cardinal  had  forfeited  all  his  goods  by  He  pur- 
the  statute  of  Provision,  he,  having  the  nde  of  the  king,  and  of  other  matters  of  chaseth  a 
the  realm,  purchased  from  the  pope  a  charter  of  pardon,  not  only  to  the  de-  ^^^°^i 
feating  of  the  laws  of  the  realm,  but  also  to  the  defrauding  of  the  king,  who,  his  pree- 
otherwise,  might  and  should  have  had  wherewith  to  sustain  his  wars,  without  ™<ii"'i- 
any  tallage  of  his  poor  people,  &c. 

When  the  kmg  heard  these  accusations,  he  committed  the  hearing  prelates 
thereof  to  his  council,  whereof  the  most  part  were  spiritual  persons.  '"!'?'  "'"^ 
00,  what  tor  tear,  and  what  tor  lavour,  the  matter  was  wmked  at,  and  other. 
dallied  out,  and  nothing  said  thereunto ;   and  a  fair  countenance  was 
made  to  the  duke,  as  though  no  displeasure  had  been  taken,  nor 
malice  borne  in  these  spiritual  stomachs.      But,  shortly  after,  the 
smoke  hereof,   not  able  to  keep  in  any  longer  within  the  spiritual 
breasts  of  these  charitable  churchmen,  burst  out  in  flames  of  mischief.  Malice 
For,  upon  the  neck  of  this  matter,  as  witnesseth  Fabian,  Polychroni-  ''"'^^' ""' 
con,  and   Hall,  who  followeth  Polychronieon,  first  ensued  the  con- 
demnation of  lady  Eleanor,  the  duchess,  and  her  cliaplains,  as  ye  have 
heard  before :  whereby  the  said  duchess  may  appear,  more  of  malice 
than  of  any  just  cause  thus  to  have  been  troubled.     Also,  within  six 
years  after,  followed  the  lamentable  destruction  of  the  duke  himself, 
as  hereafter  more  is  to  be  declared. 

About  this  time,  or  not  long  after,  a.d.  1443,  the  steeple  of  Paul's  paui's 
was  set  on  fire  by  lightning,  and  at  last,  by  diligent  labour  of  helpers,  sero.nire 
the  fire  was  quenched.  ^y  ^}ji^^- 

And  after  the  condemnation  of  lady  Eleanor,  the  duchess  afore- 
said, within  few  years,   a.  d.  1445,    followed  the  death  of  Henry  x.B.uib. 
Chichesley,  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  by  whom  she  was  condemned  The  death 
in  St.  Stephen's  chapel  at  Westminster,  for  penance,  to  bear  a  taper  chiches-^ 
through  Cheapside  three  sundry  times,  and  afterwards  outlawed  to  the  }fi^},o7of 
Isle  of  Man,  under  the  custody  of  sir  John  Standi y,  knight.      This  camer 
Henry  Chichesley  builded  in  his  time  two  colleges  in  the  university  of  ""^^^ 
O.xford,  the  one  called  All-Souls''  College,  the  other  named  Barnard 
College. 

THE  STORY  AND  DEATH  OF    HUMPHREY,  DUKE    OF    GLOUCESTER. 

Proceeding  now  to  the  year  wherein  suflTered  Humphrey,  that  good 
duke  of  Gloucester,  which  was  a.d.  1447,  first  we  will  begin  in  few  a.d.ih?. 
words  to  treat'  of  his  life  and  conversation  ;  and  then  of  the  manner 


learning 


712  THE    TROUBLES    OF    DUKE    HUMPHREY. 

Henry  aiicl  causc  of  his  death.  As  toucliing  the  oifsprmg  and  descent  of 
*'^-  this  duke,  first,  he  was  the  son  of  Henry  IV.,  brother  to  king 
A.D.  Henry  V.,  and  uncle  to  king  Henry  VL,  assigned  to  be  the  governor 
T447.  f^ji([  protector  of  his  person.  Of  manners  he  seemed  meek  and 
gentle,  loving  the  commonwealth,  a  supporter  of  the  poor  commons, 
of  Avit  and  wisdom,  discreet  and  studious,  well  affected  to  religion, 
and  a  friend  to  verity ;  and  no  less  enemy  to  pride  and  ambition, 
especially  in  haughty  prelates,  which  was  his  undoing  in  this  present 
Duke  evil  world.  And,  which  is  seldom  and  rare  in  such  princes  of  that 
i^i"^  calling,  he  was  both  learned  himself,  and  no  less  given  to  study,  and 
'^""1-  also  a  singular  favourer  and  patron  to  those  who  were  studious  and 
for  his  learned.  And,  that  my  commendation  of  him  may  have  the  more 
credit,  I  will  produce  the  testimony  of  learned  writers,  who,  living  in 
his  time,  not  only  do  commend  his  famous  knowledge,  and  ripeness 
of  learning  in  him,  but  also  committed  and  submitted  their  works  to 
his  judgment,  to  be  examined.  Of  which  writers,  one  is  Petrus  de 
Monte,  writing,  "  De  \drtutum  et  vitiorum  differentia ;"  who,  in  his 
epistle  dedicatory,  beginneth  with  the  singular  commendation  of  this 
duke ;  and  afterwards,  speaking  "  De  optimarum  artium,  libera- 
liumque,  scientiarum  peritia,''  saith  thus  :  "  Cui  tu  quidem  omni 
conatu,  omni  ingenio,  atque  studio  incumbis ;  adeo  ut  nihil  tibi  sine 
librorum  lectione  jucundum,  gratum  aut  certe  delectabile  videatur," 
&c.  And  in  further  process  of  his  work,  thus  he  further  declareth, 
saying,  "  Delectaris  autem  non  una  tantum  arte  aut  scientia,  quan- 
quam  et  id  quidem  esset  satis ;  vermn  fere  omnibus,  earumque 
codices  magna  quadam  aviditate  legisti,"  &c.  Besides  this  Petrus 
de  Monte,  let  us  hear  also  the  judgment  of  another  writer  of  the 
same  age,  named  Lapis-castellius,  who,  likewise,  dedicating  to  the 
said  duke  Humphrey  his  book,  entitled  "  Comparatio  studiorum  et 
rei  militaris,"  amongst  divers  other  words  commendatory,  hath  the&e 
which  follow  :  "  Ad  te  potissimum  mitto,  quod  horum  te  optimum, 
et  sapientissimimi  judicem  fore  existimo,  qui  ut  ex  integerrimo  patre 
domino  Zenone  Bajocensi  Episcopo,  homine  tuee  laudis  cupidissimo, 
acccpi,  ita  in  his  humanitatis  studiis  invigilares,  ut  nullus  toto  terrarum 
orbe  princeps  nee  doctrina,  nee  eloquentia,  nee  humanitate  tecum 
comparandus  sit,"  &c.  Many  other  arguments  and  places  may  be 
brought  to  declare,  what  is  to  be  esteemed  of  the  learning  and 
studious  wit  of  this  noble  prince. 

Furthermore,  as  the  learning  of  this  prince  was  rare  and  memo- 
rable, so  was  the  discreet  wisdom  and  singular  prudence  in  him  no 
less  to  be  considered  ;  as,  for  the  more  manifest  proof  thereof,  I 
thought  here  good,  amongst  many  other  his  godly  doings,  to  recite 
one  example,  reported  as  well  by  the  pen  of  sir  Thomas  More,  as 
also  by  Master  William  Tindal,  the  true  apostle  of  these  our  later 
days,  to  the  intent  to  see  and  note,  not  only  the  crafty  working  of 
false  miracles  in  the  clergy,  but  also  that  the  prudent  discretion  of 
this  high  and  mighty  prince,  the  aforesaid  duke  Humphrey,  may 
give  us  the  better  to  understand  what  man  he  was.  The  story  lietli 
thus: 

In  the  young  days  of  this  king  Henry  VI.,  being  yet  under  the 
governance  of  this  duke  Humphrey,  his  protector,  there  came  to 
St.  Alban's  a  certain  beggar  with  his  wife,  and  was  walking  there 


THE    TROUBLES    OF    DUKE    HUMPHREY.  713 

about  the  town  begging  five  or  six  days  before  the  king's  coming    ni-'iry 
thither ;  saying,  that  he  was  bom  blind,  and  never  saw  in  his  life,  and 


was  warned  in  his  dream,  that  he  should  come  out  of  Berwick,  where  A.  D. 
he  said  he  had  ever  dwelled,  to  seek  St.  Alban ;  and  that  he  had  '• 
been  at  his  shrine,  and  had  not  been  holpen,  and  therefore  he  would  a  false 
go  and  seek  him  at  some  other  place ;  for  he  had  heard  some  say,  espied. 
since  he  came,  that  St.  Alban''s  body  should  be  at  Cologne :  and 
indeed  such  a  contention  hath  there  been ;  but  of  a  truth,  as  I  am 
surely  informed,  he  lieth  here,  at  St.  Alban''s,  saving  some  relics  of 
him,  which  they  there  show  shrined.  But,  to  tell  you  forth  my  tale, 
when  the  king  was  come,  and  the  to^vn  full,  suddenly  this  blind  man, 
at  St.  Alban''s  shrine,  had  his  sight  again,  and  a  miracle  solemnly 
rung,  and  '  Te  Deum"'  sung ;  so  that  nothing  was  talked  of  in  all  the 
town,  but  this  miracle.  So  happened  it  then,  that  duke  Humphrey 
of  Gloucester,  a  man  also  no  less  wise  than  well  learned,  having  great 
joy  to  see  such  a  mii-acle,  called  the  poor  man  unto  him  ;  and  first 
showing  himself  joyous  of  God's  glory  so  showed  in  the  getting  of  his 
sight,  and  exhorting  him  to  meekness,  and  to  no  ascribing  of  any 
part  of  the  worship  to  himself,  nor  to  be  proud  of  the  people's  praise, 
who  would  call  him  a  good  and  godly  man  thereby;  at  last,  he 
looked  well  upon  his  eyes,  and  asked  Avhether  he  could  see  nothing 
at  all  in  all  his  life  before.  And  when  his  wife,  as  well  as  himself, 
affirmed  falsely  "  no,"  then  he  looked  advisedly  upon  his  eyes  again, 
and  said,  "  I  believe  you  very  well,  for  me  thinketh  ye  cannot  see 
well  yet."  "  Yea  sir,"  quoth  he,  "  I  thank  God  and  his  holy  martyr, 
I  can  see  now  as  well  as  any  man."  "  You  can,"  quoth  the  duke, 
"  What  colour  is  my  gown  .f*"  Then  anon  the  beggar  told  him. 
"  What  colour,"  quoth  he,  "  is  this  man's  gown  'f  He  told  him 
also,  and  so  forth :  without  any  sticking  he  told  hun  the  names  of  all 
the  colours  that  could  be  showed  him.  And  when  the  duke  saw 
that,  he  bade  him  "  walk,  traitor,"  and  made  him  to  be  set  openly  in 
the  stocks :  for  though  he  could  have  seen  suddenly,  by  miracle,  the  oissimu- 
difference  between  divers  colours ;  yet  could  he  not,  by  the  sight,  so  jfuJashed.' 
suddenly  tell  the  names  of  all  these  colours,  except  he  had  known 
them  before,  no  more  than  the  names  of  all  the  men,  that  he  should 
suddenly  see. 

By  this  may  it  be  seen,  how  duke  Humplu-ey  had  not  only  a  head, 
to  discern  and  dissever  truth  from  forged  and  feigned  hypocrisy  ;  but 
study  also,  and  diligence,  likewise,  was  in  him,  to  reform  that  which 
was  amiss. 

And  thus  much,  hitherto,  for  the  noble  prowess  and  virtues,  joined  commen- 
with  the  like  ornaments  of  knowledge  and  literature,  shining  in  this  ^y*^°°  °^ 
princely  duke :  for  which  as  he  was  both  loved  of  the  poor  commons,  Hjim- 
and  well  spoken  of,  of  all  men,  and  no  less  deserving  the  same,  being 
called  the  '  good'  duke  of  Gloucester ;  so  neither  yet  wanted  he  his 
enemies  and  privy  enviers,  whether  it  was  through  the  fatal  and  un- 
fortunate luck  of  the  name  of  that  house,  which  is  but  a  vain  and 
jfrivolous  observation   of  Polydore,  and  Hall,'  who  followeth  him, 
bringing  in  the  examples  of  Hugh  Spenser ;  of  Thomas  of  Wood- 
stock, son  of  king  Edward  HI. ;  of  this  duke  Humphrey  ;  and,  after, 
of  king  Richard  HI.,  duke  likewise  of  Gloucester.     Or  whether  it 

(1)  Polyd.  Hist.  lib.  xxiii.    Hall  in  25  Hen.  VI.. 


i 


714  THE    TROUBLES    OK    DUKE    HUMPHREY. 

Henry    was,  that  tlic  natuvc  of  true  virtue  is  commonly  such,  that,  as  tlie  flame 
^^'      ever  beareth  his  smoke,  and  the  body  his  shadow,  so  tlie  brit^htness  of 


A.  D.    virtue  never  blazeth,  but  hath  some  disdain  or  envy  waiting  upon  it : 

1447.    Qj.  eigg^  whether  it  was  rather  for  some  divorcement  from  his  wife,  or 

for  some  other  vice  or  trespass  done  (as  seemeth  most  like  truth), 

which  God,  as  well  in  dukes"'  houses  correcteth,  as  in  other  inferior 

persons  ;  especially  where  he  loveth. 

But,  howsoever  the  cause  is  to  us  unknown,  this  good  duke  of 
Gloucester,  albeit  being  both  the  king's  sole  uncle,  and  having  so 
many  well-willers  through  the  whole  realm,  yet  lacked  not  he  his  Satan, 
His  ene-   lacked  uot  he  his  secret  maligners.     Of  whom,  specially,  was  Henry 
mies.       Beaufort,  cardinal,  bishop  of  Winchester,  and  chancellor  of  England  ; 
who,  of  long  time  disdaining  and  envying  the  rule  and  authority  of 
this  duke,  first  had  disposed  and  appointed  himself  to  remove  the 
king"'s  person  from  Eltham  unto  Windsor,  out  of  the  duke''s  hands, 
The  ma-  and  there  to  put  in  such  governors  as  him  listed.    After  that,  intend- 
working   "^g  the  dukc's  death,  he  set  men  of  arms  and  archers  at  the  end  of 
°*'  "?^      London-bridge,  and  fore-barring  the  highway  with  a  draw-chain,  set 
against     men  in  chambers,  cellars,  and  windows,  with  bows  and  arrows,  and 
'""■        other  weapons,  to  the  purposed  destruction  both  of  the  duke  and  his 
retinue,  if  God  had  not  so  disposed  to  turn  his  journey  another  way. 
Beside  other  manifold  injuries  and  molestations,  the  ambitious  car- 
dinal, seeking  by  all  means  to  be  pope,  procured  such  trouble  against 
him,  that  great  division  was  thereby  in  the  whole  realm ;  insomuch 
that  all  the  shops  within  the  city  of  London  were  shut,  for  feai-  of  the 
favourers  of  these  two  great  personages  :  for  each  part  had  assembled 
no  small  number  of  people.     For  the  pacifying  Avhereof,  the  arch- 
bishop of  Canterbury,  and  the  duke  of  Quember,  called  the  prince  of 
Portugal,  rode  seven  times  in  one  day,  between  those  two  adver- 
saries.    Such  were  then  the  troubles  of  this  tumultuous  division 
within  the  realm,  and  all  by  the  excitation  of  this  unquiet  cardinal. 
William        Over  and  beside  this  cardinal  afore-mentioned,  another  capital  ene- 
duife^of^'  ^^^y  *°  ^^  ^^^^  duke  was  William  de  la  Pole,  first  earl,  then  marquis, 
suttoik,    at  last  duke  of  Suffolk  ;  a  man  very  ill  reported  of  in  stories,  to  be  not 
orthT^^  only  the  organ  and  instrument  of  this  good  man*'s  death,  but  also  to 
Giouces-  ^6  ^^  annoyance  of  the  commonwealth,  and  ruin  of  the  realm.    For, 
ter's        by  him,  and  his  only  device,  was  first  concluded  the  unprofitable  and 
unprofit-  unhonourable  maiTiage  between  the  king  and  lady  Margaret,  daughter 
riage™""^  of  the  dukc  of  Aujou ;  whereas  the  king  had  concluded  and  contracted 
between    ^  marriage,  before,  with  the  daughter  of  the  earl  of  Armagnac,  upon 
Henry      conditions  SO  much  more  profitable  and  honourable,  as  more  convenient 
Margaret!  it  is  for  a  priucc  to  marry  a  wife  with  riches  and  friends,  than  to  take 
a  maid  with  nothing,  and  disinherit  himself  and  his  realm  of  old 
rights  and  ancient  inheritance :  which  so  came  to  pass.     And  all  this 
the  good  duke  did  well  foresee,  and  declared  no  less :  but  his  counsel 
would  not  be  taken.     Whereupon  followed  first,  the  giving  away  the 
duchy  of  Anjou,  and  the  city  of  Maine,  with  the  whole  country  of 
Maine,  to  Regnier,  duke  of  Anjou,  and  father  of  the  damsel,  called 
then  king  of  Sicily  and  of  Jerusalem,  having  thereof  no  penny  profit, 
but  only  a  vain  name  to  play  withal. 

Another  sore  enemy  and  mortal  plague  to  this  duke  was  the  queen 
herself,  lately  before  married  to  the  king ;   who,  being  of  haughty 


THE    TROUBLES    OF    DUKE    HUMPHREY.  715 

stomacli,  and  all  set  upon  glory,  of  wit  and  wiliness  lacking  nothing,    Henry 

and  perceiving  her  husband  to  be  simple  of  wit,  and  easy  to  be  nded, L_ 

took  upon  her  to  rule  and  govern  both  the  king  and  kingdom.     And    A.D. 
because  the  advice  and  counsel  of  Humphrey,  duke  of  Gloucester,  _i.11lL 
was  somewhat  a  stay  that  her  authority  and  regiment  could  not  so  ^^^ 
fully  proceed ;  and,  partly,  because  the  said  duke  before  did  disagree  enemy  t.. 
from  that  marriage,  this  manly  woman  and  courageous  queen  ceased 
not,  by  all  imaginations  and  practices  possible,  to  set  forward  his  The  ma 
destruction,  having  also  for  her  helper  herein  the  duke  of  Bucking-  woman^ 
ham,  Sec. 

These  being  his  principal  enemies  and  mortal  foes,  fearing  lest 
some  commotion  might  arise,  if  such  a  prince,  so  near  the  king"'s 
blood,  and  so  dear  to  the  people,  and  of  all  men  so  beloved,  should 
be  openly  executed  and  put  to  death,  they  devised  how  to  entrap  him, 
and  circumvent  him  unknowing   and   unprovided :    for    the    more  a  snaiv- 
speedy  furtherance  whereof  a  parliament  was  summoned  to  be  kept  tL'^inn'o 
at  Bury,  a.  d.  1447,  far  from  the  citizens  of  London,  as  William  pjj"y^ 
Tindal  in  his  Book  of  Practice  writeth ;  where  resorted  all  the  peers  ment  at 
of  the  realm,  and  amongst  them  the  duke  of  Gloucester,  thinking  no    ^^' 
harm  to  any  man,  and  less  to  himself.    Who,  on  the  second  day  of  the 
session  was,  by  the  lord  Beaumond,  high  constable  then  of  England, 
accompanied  with  the  duke  of   Buckingham  and  others,  arrested, 
apprehended,  and  put  in  ward,  and,  upon  the  same,  all  his  servants 
discharged  and  put  from  him ;  of  whom  thirty-two  of  the  principal, 
being  also  under  arrest,  were  dispersed  into  divers  prisons,  to  the 
great  murmuring  and  grievances  of  the  people.     After  this  arrest 
thus  done,  and  the  duke  put  into  ward,  the  night  after  (saith  Hall ; 
six  nights  after,  saith  Fabian  and  Polychron.),  he  was  found  dead  in  cruei 
his  bed,  the  24th  of  February,  and  his  body  showed  to  the  lords  and  martyr-'^ 
commons,  as  though  he  had  been  taken  naturally  with  some  sudden  <iom  of 
disease.     And  although  no  wound  in  his  body  could  be  seen,  yet  to  dukS  of 
all  indifferent  persons  it  might  well  be  judged,  that  he  died  of  no  tTr""'^'^^ 
natural  pang,  but  of  some  violent  hand.    Some  suspected  him  to  be 
strangled,  some  that  a  whole  spit  was  privily  forced  into  his  body ; 
some  affirm  that  he  was  stifled  between  two  feather  beds.     After  the 
death  of  this  duke,  and  his  body  being  interred  at  St.  Alban's,  after 
he  had  politicly,  by  the  space  of  twenty-five  years,  governed  this 
realm,  five  of  his  household,  to  wit,  one  knight,  three  esquires,  and  a 
yeoman,  were  arraigned,  and  convicted  to  be  hanged,  drawn,  and 
quartered.    Who,  being  hanged  and  cut  down  half  alive,  the  marquis 
of  Suffolk,  there  present,  showed  the  charter  of  the  king"'s  pardon,  and 
so  they  were  delivered.     Notwithstanding,  all  this  could  not  appease 
the  grudge  of  the  people,  saying.  That  the  saving  of  the  servants  was 
no  amends  for  the  murdering  of  the  master. 

In  this  cruel  fact  of  these  persons,  who  did  so  conspire  and  consent  judg- 
to  the  death  of  this  noble  man,  and  who  thought  thereby  to  work  God  upon 
their  own  safety,  the  marvellous  works  of  God"'s  judgment  appear  t^^o^^  ^^^o 
herein  to  be  noted ;  who,  as  m  all  other  like  cruel  policies  of  man,  so  ed  the 
in  this  also,  turned  all  their  policies  clean  contrary ;  so  that  where  the 
queen  thought  most  to  preserve  her  husband  in  honour,  and  herself 
in  state,  thereby  both  she  lost  her  husband,  her  husband  lost  his  realm, 
the  realm  lost  Anjou,  Normandy,  the  duchy  of  Aquitaine,  with  all 


"VIG  DEATH    OF    THK    CARDINAL    OF    WINCHESTER. 

n^'iry    her  parts  beyond  the  sea,  Calais  only  excepted  ;  as,  in  the  sequel  of  the 
matter,  whoso  will  read  the  stories,  shall  right  well  understand. 


Wanfleet 
bis 


A.  D.        The  next  year  following,  it  followed  also  that  the  cardinal,  Avho  was 

^^'^^-    the  principal  artificer  and  ringleader  of  all  this  mischief,  was  suffered 

Thedeath  of  God  uo  lonijer  to  live.     Of  whose  wicked  conditions,  beinsr  more 

of  the  .  .  ^  o 

cardinal,  largely  set  forth  in  Edward  Hall,  I  omit  here  to  speak.  What  he 
Beaufort.  ]jjj^^gg}f  gpake  on  his  death-bed,  for  example  to  others,  I  thought  not 
best  to  pretermit ;  who,  hearing  that  he  should  die,  and  that  there 
was  no  remedy,  murmured  and  grudged,  wherefore  he  should  die 
His  words  having  so  much  riches,  saying.  That  if  the  whole  realm  would  save 
dlath.  ^i^s  ^if'^'  1^^  ^'''^^  ^^^6  either  by  policy  to  get  it,  or  by  riches  to  buy  it ; 
adding  and  saying  moreover,  "  Fie,''  quoth  he,  "  will  not  death  be 
hired  ?  will  money  do  nothing  ?  When  my  nephew  of  Bedford  died, 
I  thought  myself  half  up  the  v/heel,  but  when  I  saw  mine  other 
nephew  of  Gloucester  deceased,  then  I  thought  myself  able  to  be 
equal  with  kings,  and  so  thought  to  increase  my  treasui^e,  in  hope  to 
have  worn  the  triple  crown,"  &c.'  And  thus  is  the  rich  bishop  of 
Winchester,  with  all  his  pomp  and  riches  gone ;  with  which  riches  he 
was  able,  not  only  to  build  schools,  colleges,  and  universities,  but  also 
was  able  to  sustain  the  king's  armies  in  war  (as  is  specified  in  stories) 
without  any  taxing  of  the  commons. 

In  whose  seat  next  succeeded  William  Wanfleet,  preferred  to  the 
'ho'lTof  bishopric  of  Winchester ;  who,  though  he  had  less  substance,  yet  hav- 
winches-  ij^g  ^  niiud  uiorc  godly  disposed,  did  found  and  erect  the  college  of 
Magrta-  Mary  Magdalen,  in  Oxford  ;  for  which  foundation  as  there  have  been, 
ilge'^" "  and  be  yet,  many  students  bound  to  yield  grateful  thanks  unto  God, 
buiided.    gQ  J  niust  uecds  confess  myself  to  be  one,  except  I  will  be  unkind. 

Among  the  other  mischievous  adversaries  who  sought  and  wrouijht 
the  death  of  Humphrey  duke  of  Gloucester,  next  to  the  cardinal  of 
Winchester  (who  as  is  said,  died  the  next  year  following),was  William 
God;s       de  la  Pole,  marquis  of  Suffolk,  who  also  lived  not  long  after,  nor  long 
Jil'e'nt  ^     escaped  unpunished.     For,  although  he  was  highly  exalted,  by  the 
marauds''  ^I'l^^'i'^s  of  tlic  quecn  (whose  marriage  he  only  procured),  unto  the  fivour 
ofsuffoik.  of  the  king,  and  was  made  duke  of  Suffolk,  and  magnified  of  the 
people,  and  bare  the  whole  sway  in  the  realm,  whose  acts  and  facts 
his  vain  glorious  head  caused  also,  by  the  assent  of  the  commons,  to 
be  recorded,  and  substantially  to  be  registered  in  the  rolls  of  the  parlia- 
ment, for  a  perpetual  renown  to  him  and  all  his  posterity  for  ever ; 
The  vain  y^t,  notwithstanding,  the  hand  of  God's  judgment  still  hanging  over 
glory  of    }{Ym_^  he  cujoycd  not  long  this  his  triumphant  victory  :   for,  within 
heart  for  three  years  after  the  death  and  ruin  of  the  cardinal,  the  voices  of  the 
htrnseu    wholc  commous  of  England  were  utterly  turned  against  him,  accus- 
TheX'ke  ^^E  ^^™i  i^^  ^hc  parliament  at  the  Black-Friars,  for  delivery  of  the 
accused    duchy  of  Aujou,  and  the  earldom  of  Maine ;  also  for  the  death  of  the 
com-       noble  prince  Humphrey,  duke  of  Gloucester.     They  imputed,  more- 
mons.      pygj,^  ^^  i^jj^^  ^1^^  i^gg  ^1"  ^j^  Normandy,  laying  unto  him,  that  he  Avas 

a  swallower-up  and  consumer  of  the  king's  treasure,  the  expeller  of  all 
good  and  virtuous  counsellors  from  the  king,  and  advancer  of  vicious 
persons,  apparent  adversaries  to  the  public  wealth ;  so  that  he  was 
called  in  every  man's  mouth,  a  traitor,  a  murderer,  and  a  robber  of  the 
king's  treasure. 

(1)  Ex  Edwar.  Hallo. 


DEATH    0I<-    THE    DUKE    01"    SUEFOl.K.  717 

The  queen,  albeit  she  tenderly  loved  the  duke,  yet,  to  appease  the    fienrtf 

exclamation  of  the  conunons,  was  forced  to  commit  him  to  the  Tower  ; 

where  he,  with  as  much  pleasure  and  liberty  as  could  be,  remained  for    A.  D. 
a  month,  which  being  expired,  he  was  delivered  and  restored  again    I'^-^Q- 
unto  his  old  place,   and  former  favour  with  the  king ;  whereat  the 
people  more  grudged  than  before.     It  happened  by  the  occasion  of  a 
commotion  then  beginning  amongst  the  rude  people,  by  one  whom 
they  called  Bluebeard,  that  the  parliament  was  for  that  time  adjourned 
to  Leicester,  the  queen  thinking  by  force  and  rigour  of  law  to  repress, 
there,  the  malice  and  evil-will  conceived  against  the  duke.     But  at 
that  place  few  of  the  nobility  would  appear  :  wherefore  it  was  again 
rejourned  unto  London,  and  kept  at  Westminster,  where  was  a  whole 
company,  and  a  full  appearance  with  the  king  and  queen,  and  with 
them  the  duke  of  Suffolk,  as  chief  counsellor.     The  commons,  not 
forgetting  their  old  grudge,  renewed  again  their  former  articles  and 
accusations  against  the  said  duke,  against  the  bishop  of  Salisbury,  and  The  duke 
sir  James  Fynies.,  lord  Say,  and  others.  When  the  king  perceived  that  accused. 
no  glossing  nor  dissimulation  would  serve  to  appease  the  continual 
clamour  of  the  importunate  commons,  to  make  some  quiet  pacification, 
first,  he  sequestered  from  him  the  lord  Say,  treasurer  of  England,  and 
other  the  duke's  adherents  from  their  offices.     Then  he  put  in  exile 
the  duke  of  Suffolk  for  a  term  of  five  years  ;  supposing,  by  that  space, 
the  furious  rage  of  the  people  would  assuage.     But  the  hand  of  God  Example 
would  not  suffer  the  guiltless  blood  of  Humphrey  duke   of  Glou-  °udg°''^ 
cester  to  be  unrevenged,  or  that  flagitious  person  further  to  continue.  J^'^fj^™'^ 
For  when  he  was  shipped  in  Suffolk,  intending  to  be  transported  into  revenged. 
France,  he  Avas  encountered  with  a  ship  of  war  belonging  to  the  Tower,  Jihead^^ 
Avhereby  he  was  taken,  and  brought  into  Dover-roads,  and  there,  on  the  ed. 
side  of  a  ship-boat,  one  struck  off  his  head:  which  was  a.  d.  1450. 

And  thus  have  ye  heard  the  full  story  and  discourse  of  duke  Hum- 
phrey, and  of  all  his  adversaries  ;  also  of  God's  condign  punishment 
upon  them  for  their  bloody  cruelty.  But  before  I  remove  from  the 
said  story  of  the  aforesaid  duke,  and  of  the  proud  cardinal  his  enemy, 
I  will  here  annex,  by  the  way,  a  certain  instrument,  by  the  king  and 
advice  of  his  council,  made  against  the  said  cardinal,  taking  upon  him 
to  enter  into  this  realm  as  legate  from  the  pope,  contrary  to  the  old 
laws  and  customs  of  this  realm  ;  as  by  the  words  of  the  said  instrument 
hereunder  in  Latin  may  well  appear.'  The  sum  and  effect  whereof 
in  English  is  this  : 

(1)  "In  Dei  nomine,  amen.  Per  prssens  publicum  instrumentum  cunctis  appareat  evideiiter, 
quod  A.  n.  1428,  indictione  septima  poutificatus  sanct.  in  Christopatris,  et  D.  nostri  D.  Martini,  etc. 

"  Ego  Richardus  Candry,  procurator  et  nomine  procuratorio  christianissinii  principis  domini  Hen 
rici,  Dei  gratia  regis  Anglia;  et  Francice,et  domini  Hiberni»,  domini  mei  supremi,  de  assensu  pari- 
ter  et  advisamento  iUustris  et  potentis  principis  Humfredi  ducis  Glocestriic,  comitis  Perabrochiae, 
protectoris  et  defensoris  regni  Anglis  et  ecclesi;B  Anglicanas,  et  ca;terorum  dominorum  nieorum 
de  consiUo  sure  regias  celsitudinis  ac  consilium  ejusdem  facientium  et  hao  vice  rcpraesentantium, 
dice,  allego,  et  in  his  scriptis  propono,  quod  dictus  christianissimus  princeps,  dominus  mens  su- 
premus,  suique  inrlytissimi  progenitores  dicti  regni  Angli?c  roges  fuerunt  et  sunt,  tam  speciali 
privilegio,  quam  consuetudine  laudahili  legitimeque  pra?scripta,  necnon  a  tempore  et  per  tempus 
(cujus  contrarii  memoria  horainum  non  existitjpacilice  et  inconcusse  ohservata,  sulRcienter  dotati, 
legitimeque  muniti,  quod  nullus  apostolica;  sedis  legatus  venire  debeat  in  regnum  suum  Angliae, 
aut  alias  suas  terras  et  dominia,  nisi  ad  regis  Angliie  pro  tempore  existentis  vocationera,  petitio- 
nem,  rcquisitionem,  invitationem,  seu  rogatum  :  Fueruntque  et  sunt  dicti  christianissimus  prin- 
ceps dominu'?  mens  supremus  ac  sui  inclyti  progenitores,  hujusmodi  reges  Anglifp,  in  possessione 
quasi  juris  et  facti  privilegii,  et  consuetudinis  prsedictorum,  absque  interruptione  quacunque,  toto 
et  omni  tempore  supradicto,  pacitice  et  quiete  Romanis  pontificibus,  per  totum  tempus  supradic- 
tum,  pr.-Emissa  omnia  et  singula  scientibus,  tolcrantibus,  et  iisdem  consentientihus  tam  tacite 
quam  e.xpresse,  ac  extra  omnem  et  iimnimodam  possessionem,  quasi  juris  et  facti,  legatum  hujus- 
luodi  (ut  prsfertur)  in  regnum  AnglicE  aut  alias  suas  terras  et  dominia  mittendi,  nisi  ad  vocatio- 
nem,   petitionem,  requisitionem,  et  rogatum  regis  AngliEc  pro  tempore  existentis.      Et   quia 


718  THE    BENEFIT    AND    INVENTION    OK    PKINTING. 

^v'l      Substance  of  the  King's  Writ  against  admitting  the  Pope's  Legate. 

A.  D.  In  the  year  of  our  Lord  1428,  as  the  kmg,  with  duke  Humphrey  lord  pro- 
1450.  tector,  and  the  rest  of  the  council,  were  in  the  duke's  house  in  tlie  parish  of  St. 
Bennet's  by  Paiil's-wliarf,  one  Richard  Candray,  procurator,  in  the  king's  name 
and  belialf,  did  protest  and  denounce,  by  this  public  instnunent :  that  whereas 
the  king  and  all  his  progenitors,  kings  before  him  of  this  realm  of  England, 
have  been  heretofore  possessed,  time  out  of  mind,  with  special  privilege  and 
custom  used  and  observed  in  tliis  realm  from  time  to  time,  that  no  legate  from 
the  apostolic  see  should  enter  into  this  land  or  any  of  the  king's  dominions, 
without  the  calling,  jietition,  request,  invitement,  or  desire  of  the  king;  and 
forasmuch  as  Henry,  bishop  of  Winchester,  and  cardinal  of  St.  Eusebius,  hath 
presumed  so  to  enter  as  legate  from  the  pope,  being  neither  called,  sent  for, 
required,  nor  desired  by  the  king ;  therefore  the  said  Richard  Candray,  in  the 
king's  name,  doth  protest  by  this  instrument,  that  it  standeth  not  with  the  king's 
mind  or  intent,  by  the  advice  of  his  council,  to  admit,  approve,  or  ratify  tlie 
coming  of  the  said  legate  in  any  wise,  in  derogation  of  the  rights,  customs  and 
laws  of  this  his  realm ;  or  to  recognise,  or  assent  to,  any  exercise  of  this  his 
authority  legatine,  or  to  any  acts,  attempts,  or  hereafter  by  him  to  be  attempted 
in  this  respect,  contrary  to  the  foresaid  laws,  rights,  customs,  and  liberties  of 
this  realm,  by  these  presents,  &c. 

And  thus  much  as  an  appendix,  annexed  to  the  story  of  duke  Hum- 
phrey, and  the  cardinal  of  Winchester,  extracted  out  of  an  old  written 
volume,  remaining  in  the  hands  of  Master  William  Bowyer. 

€fje  9Inbentton  and  SBenejit  of  feinting.' 

In  following  the  course  and  order  of  years,  we  find  this  aforesaid 
year  of  our  Lord  1450,  to  be  famous  and  memorable,  for  the  divine 
and  miraculous  inventing  of  printing.  Nauclerius,  and  Wym- 
selingus  following  him,  refer  the  invention  thereof  to  the  year 
1440.  In  Paralipomena,^  it  is  recorded  this  faculty  to  be  found, 
A.D.  1446.  Aventinus  and  Zieglerus  do  say,  a.d.  1450.  The  first 
inventor  thereof  (as  most  agree)  is  thought  to  be  a  German,  dwelling 
fii-st  in  Strasburg,  afterwards  citizen  of  Mentz,  named  John  Faustus, 
a  goldsmith.  The  occasion  of  this  invention  first  was  by  engraving 
the  letters  of  the  alphabet  in  metal ;  who  then,  laying  black  ink  upon 
the  metal,  gave  the  form  of  letters  in  paper.  The  man  being  indus- 
trious and  active,  perceiving  that,  thought  to  proceed  further,  and  to 
prove  whether  it  would  frame  as  well  in  words,  and  in  whole  sen- 
tences, as  it  did  in  letters.  Which  when  he  perceived  to  come 
well  to  pass,  he  made  certain  others  of  his  counsel,  one  John  Guttem- 
berg  and  Peter  SchafFerd,  binding  them  by  their  oath  to  keep  silence 
for  a  season.  After  ten  years  John  Guttemberg,  copartner  with 
John  Faustus,  began  then  first  to  broach  the  matter  at  Strasburg. 

reverendis.  in  Christo  Patri,  et  D.  D.  Henrlcus  Dei  gratia,  etc.  sancti  Eusebii  presbyter,  cardi  • 
nalis  sanctse  sedis  Romanse,  legatum  se  atiirmans,  more  legati,  insigniis  apostolicse  dignitatis 
utens,  absque  vocatione,  petitione,  requisitione,  invitatione,  aut  rogatu  christianissimi  domini 
nostri  regis  pradicti,  inclytum  regnum  Angliae  de  facto  est  ingressus,  protector  igitur  palam,  et 
publico  in  his  scriptis  nomine  et  vice  quibus  supra  ac  omnium  ipsius  domini  nostri  regis  subdito- 
rum,  quod  non  fuit,  aut  est  intentionis  pr<efati  christianiss.  principis,  domini  mei  supremi,  ac 
dictorum  dominorum  meorum  de  consilio,  in  derogationem  legum,  jurium,  consuetudinum,  liber- 
tatum  et  privilegiorum  dicti  D.  nostri  regis  ac  regni,  ingressum  hujusmodi  dicti  reverendiss. 
patris,  ut  legati  in  Angliam,  authoritate  ratificare,  vel  approbare,  seu  ipsum  ut  legatum  sedis 
apostolicae  in  Augliam,  contra  leges,  jura,  consuetudines,  libertates  et  privilegia  prsedicta  quovis- 
modo  admittere  seu  recognoscere  ;  aut  exercitio  legationis,  seu  hujusmodi,  aliquibusve  per  ipsum 
ut  legatum  sedis  apost.  actis,  seu  agendis,  attentatis,  seu  attentandis  adversus  prsmissa,  leges 
jura,  consuetudines,  libertates,  et  privilegia,  in  aliquo  consentire,  sed  dissentire;  sicque  disseutit 
dietus  dominus  noster  rex,  atque  dissentiunt  dicti  domini  mei  de  consilio,  per  prssentes,"  etc. 
(1)  Ex  typographia  per  Matthseum  Judicem.  (2)  Paralip.  Ab'batis  Ursp. 


THE    UENEFIT    AMD    INVENTION    OF    PRINTING.  719 

The  art,  being  yet  but  rude,  in  process  of  time  was  set  forward  by    Henry 

inventive  wits,  adding  more  and  more  to  the  perfection  thereof;  in  the 

number  of  whom,  John  Mentel,  John  Prus,  and  Adolphus  Ruscliius,  A.D. 
were  great  helpers.  Ulricas  Han,  in  Latin  called  Gallus,  first  brought  ^'^^^- 
it  to  Rome ;   whereof  the  epigram  was  made  : 

"  Anser  Tarpeii  custos,  vigilando  quod  alis 

Constrepei'es,  Gallus  decidit,  ultor  adest 
Ulricus  Gallus,  ne  quern  poscantur  in  usum, 

Edocuit  pennis  nil  opus  esse  tius."' 

Notwithstanding,  what  man  soever  was  the  instrument,  without  all  Printing 
doubt  God  himself  was  the  ordainer  and  disposer  thereof;  no  other-  oo'd^"'^ 
wise  than  he  was  of  the  gift  of  tongues,  and  that  for  a  singular  pur- 
pose.    And  well  may   this  gift  of   printing  be  resembled  to  the  Likened 
gift  of  tongues :    for  like  as  God  then  spake  with  many  tongues,  and  ^°^f^^t 
yet  all  that  would  not  turn  the  Jews ;  so  now,  when  the  Holy  Ghost  tongues. 
speaketh  to  the  adversaries  in  innumerable  sorts  of  books,  yet  they 
will  not  be  converted,  nor  turn  to  the  gospel. 

Now,  to  consider  to  what  end  and  purpose  the  Lord  hath  given  this 
gift  of  printing  to  the  earth,  and  to  Avhat  great  utility  and  necessity 
it  serveth,  it  is  not  hard  to  judge,  whoso  wisely  perpendeth  both  the 
time  of  the  sending,  and  the  sequel  which  thereof  ensueth. 

And  first,  touching  the  time  of  this  faculty  given  to  the  use  of  The  time 
man,  this  is  to  be  marked,  that  when  the  bishop  of  Rome,  with  all  e^when 
the  whole  and  full  consent  of  the  cardinals,  patriarchs,  archbishops,  printing 
bishops,  abbots,  priors,  lawyers,  doctors,  provosts,  deans,  archdeacons,  found. 
assembled  together  in  the  council  of  Constance,  had  condemned  poor 
John  Huss  and  Jerome  of  Prague  to  death  for  heresy,  notwithstand- 
ing they  were  no  heretics  ;  and  after  they  had  subdued  the  Bohemians 
and  all  the  whole  world  under  the  supreme  authority  of  the  Romish 
see  ;  and  had  made  all  christian  people  obedienciaries  and  vassals 
unto  the  same,  having  (as  one  would  say)  all  the  world  at  their  will, 
so  that  the  matter  now  was  past,  not  only  the  power  of  all  men,  but 
the  hope  also  of  any  man  to  be  recovered :  in  this  very  time  so  dan- 
gerous and  desperate,  where  man's  power  could  do  no  more,  there  the 
blessed  wisdom  and  omnipotent  power  of  the  Lord  began  to  work 
for  his  church ;  not  with  sword  and  target  to  subdue  his  exalted  adver- 
sary, but  with  printing,  writing,  and  reading :  to  convince  darkness  by 
light,  error  by  truth,  ignorance  by  learning.     So  that  by  this  means 
of  printing,  the  secret  operation  of  God  hath  heaped  upon  that  proud 
kingdom  a  double  confusion.     For  whereas  the  bishop  of  Rome  had  Double 
burned  John  Huss  before,  and  Jerome  of  Prague,  who  neither  denied  upon"the° 
his  transubstantiation,  nor  his  supremacy,  nor  yet  his  popish  mass,  pope  ty 
but  said  mass,  and  heard  mass  themselves  ;  neither  spake  against  his  ^""  '"^' 
purgatory,  nor  any  other  great  matter  of  his  popish  doctrine,  but 
only  exclaimed  against   his  excessive  and  pompous  pride,  his  un- 
christian or  rather  antichristian  abomination  of  life :  thus,  while  he 
could  not  abide  his  wickedness  only  of  life  to  be  touched,  but  made 
it  heresy,  or  at  least  matter  of  death,  whatsoever  was  spoken  against 
his  detestable  conversation  and  manners,  God,  of  his  secret  judgment, 
seeing  time  to  help  his  church,  hath  found  a  way,  by  this  faculty  of 
printing,  not  only  to  confound  his  life  and  conversation,  which  before 

{])  Carmen  Ant.  Campari. 


720  THE    BENEFIT    AND    INVENTION    OF    PRINTING. 

Henry    he  could  iiot  abide  to  be  touched,  but  also  to  cast  down  the  founda- 
tion   of  his  standing ;    that   is,  to   examine,   confute,  and  detect  his 


A.D.    doctrine,  laws,  and  institutions  most    detestable,  in  such  sort,  that 
^'*^^-    though  his  life  were  never  so  pure,  yet  his  doctrine  standing  as  it 
doth,  no  man  is  so  blind  but  he  may  see,  that  either  the  pope   is 
Antichrist,  or  else  that  Antichrist  is  near  cousin  to  the  pope;  and  all 
this  doth  and  will,  hereafter,  more  and  more  appear  by  printing. 
The  reason  whereof  is  this :  for  that  hereby  tongues  are  known, 
The  fruit  knowledge  groweth,  judgment  increaseth,  books  are  dispersed,  the 
of  pnnt-'  Scripture  is  seen,  the  doctors  be  read,  stories  be  opened,  times  com- 
ing-        pared,  truth  discerned,  falsehood  detected,  and  with  finger  pointed, 
and  all  (as  I  said)  through  the  benefit  of  printing.     Wherefore  I 
suppose,  that  either  the   pope  must  abolish  printing,  or  he  must 
seek  a  new  world   to   reign  over :  for   else,  as  this  world   standeth, 
printing  doubtless  Avill  abolish  him.     But  the  pope,  and  all  his  col- 
lege of  cardinals,  must  this  understand :   that  through  the  light  of 
printing  the  world  beginneth  now  to  have  eyes  to  see,  and  heads  to 
judge  ;  he  cannot  walk  so  invisible  in  a  net,  but  he  will  be  spied. 
And  although,  through  might,  he  stopped  the  mouth  of  John  Huss 
before,  and  of  Jerome,  that  they  might  not  preach,  thinking  to  make 
his  kingdom  sure ;  yet,  instead  of  John  Huss  and  others,  God  hath 
opened  the  Press  to  preach,  whose  voice  the  pope  is  never  able  to  stop 
with  all  the  puissance  of  his  triple  crown.    By  this  printing,  as  by  the 
gift  of  tongues,  and  as  by  the  singular  organ  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the 
doctrine  of  the  gospel  soundeth  to  all  nations  and  countries  under 
heaven ;  and  what  God  revealeth  to  one  man,  is  dispersed  to  many, 
and  what  is  known  in  one  nation,  is  opened  to  all. 
Good  The  first  and  best  were  for  the  bishop  of  Rome,  by  the  benefit  of 

ITthe^  printing,  to  learn  and  know  the  truth.  If  he  will  not,  let  him  well  un- 
pope.  derstand  that  printing  is  not  set  up  for  nought.  To  strive  against  the 
stream  it  availeth  not.  What  the  pope  hath  lost,  since  printing  and 
the  press  began  to  preach,  let  him  cast  his  counters.  First,  when 
Erasmus  wrote,  and  Frobcnius  printed,  what  a  blow  thereby  was 
given  to  all  friars  and  monks  in  the  world  ?  And  who  seeth  not 
that  the  pen  of  Luther,  following  after  Erasmus,  and  set  forward  by 
writing,  hath  set  the  triple  crown  so  awry  on  the  pope''s  head,  that  it 
is  like  never  to  be  set  straight  again  ? 

Briefly,  if  there  were  no  demonstration  to  lead,  yet  by  this  one 
argument  of  printing,  the  bishop  of  Rome  might  understand  the 
counsel  and  purpose  of  the  Lord  to  work  against  him,  having  pro- 
vided such  a  way  in  earth,  that  almost  how  many  printing  presses 
there  be  in  the  world,  so  many  block-houses  there  be  against  the  high 
castle  of  St.  Angelo  ;  so  that  either  the  pope  must  abolish  knowledge 
and  printing,  or  printing  at  length  will  root  him  out.^  For  if  a  man 
wisely  consider  the  hold  and  standing  of  the  pope,  thus  he  may  re- 
pute with  himself :  that  as  nothing  made  the  pope  strong  in  time  past, 
but  lack  of  knowledge  and  ignorance  of  simple  Christians ;  so,  con- 
trariwise, now  nothing  doth  debilitate  and  shake  the  high  spire  of 
his  papacy  so   much,  as  reading,  preaching,  knowledge,  and  judgment; 

(1)  So  preached  the  vicar  of  Croyden  in  the  days  of  king  Henry  VIII.,  at  Paul's  Cross,  saying, 
tliat  either  we  must  root  out  printing,  or  else  printing  will  root  out  us. 


THK    BENEFIT    AXD    INVENTION    OF    PIUNTING.  7-?l 

that  is  to  say,  the  fruit  of  printing,  whereof  some  experience  wc  see    He»r,j 
already,  and  more  is  like  (by  the  Lord's  blessing)  to  follow.     For      ^^" 


although,  through  outward  force  and  violent  cruelty,  tongues  dare  not  A.D. 
speak,  yet  the  hearts  of  men  daily,  no  doubt,  be  instructed  through  this  '^' 
benefit  of  printing.  And  though  the  pope  both  now  by  cruelty,  and 
in  times  past  by  ignorance,  had  all  under  his  possession,  yet,  neither 
must  he  think  that  violence  will  always  continue,  neither  must  he 
hope  for  that  now  which  he  had  then ;  forasmuch  as  in  those  fomier 
days  books  then  were  scarce,  and  also  of  such  excessive  price,  that  few 
could  attain  to  the  buying,  fewer  to  the  reading  and  studying  thereof; 
which  books  now,  by  means  of  this  art,  are  made  easy  unto  all  men. 

*  Herein '  also  appeareth  the  prophecy  of  the  Sibyls  to  be  fulfilled, 
who,  long  time  before,  had  prophesied,  that  flax  and  line  should  sub- 
vert and  overthrow  Antichrist,  God's  enemy.  Wherefore,  as  God, 
by  his  marvellous  providence,  for  the  advancement  of  his  glory,  gave 
the  understanding  of  this  art  or  science,  for  the  abolishing  of  igno- 
rance and  idolatry,  so,  as  in  these  our  days,  we  may  well  perceive  and 
see  how  that  the  pope,  that  Great  Antichrist  of  Rome,  could  never 
have  been  suppressed,  and,  being  suppressed,  could  not  have  been 
kept  under,  except  this  most  excellent  science  of  printing  had  been 
maintained ;  whereby  the  shameful  hypocrisy  of  the  papists  is  de- 
tected and  discovered  unto  the  whole  world,  and  God's  truth  and 
glory  manifestly  set  forth  and  advanced.* 

Ye  heard  before,^  how  Nicholas  Belward  bought  a  New  Testament 
in  those  days  for  four  marks  and  forty  pence,  whereas  now,  the  same 
price  will  well  serve  forty  persons  with  so  many  books. 

Moreover,  it  was  before  noted  and  declared  by  the  testimony  of 
Armachanus,  how,  for  defect  of  books  and  good  authors,  both  uni- 
versities were  decayed,  and  good  wits  kept  in  ignorance,  while  begging 
friars,  scraping  all  the  Avealth  from  other  priests,  heaped  up  all  books 
that  could  be  gotten,  into  their  own  libraries ;  where,  either  they  did 
not  diligently  apply  them,  or  else  did  not  rightly  use  them,  or  at  least 
kept  them  from  such  as  more  fruitfully  would  have  perused  them.  In 
this  then  so  great  rarity,  and  also  dearth  of  good  books,  when  neither 
they  who  could  have  books  would  well  use  them,  nor  they  that  Avould, 
could  have  them  to  use,  what  marvel  if  the  greediness  of  a  few  pre- 
lates did  abuse  the  blindness  of  those  days,  to  the  advancement  of 
themselves  ?  Wherefore  Almighty  God,  of  his  merciful  providence, 
seeing  both  what  lacked  in  the  chm-ch,  and  how  also  to  remedy  the 
same,  for  the  advancement  of  his  glory,  gave  the  understanding  of 
this  excellent  art  or  science  of  printing,  whereby  three  singular  com- 
modities at  one  time  came  into  the  world.  First,  the  price  of  all  Triple 
books  is  diminished.  Secondly,  the  speedy  help  of  reading  is  more  du^by 
furthered.  And  thirdly,  the  plenty  of  all  good  authors  is  enlarged;  panting. 
according  as  Aprutinus  doth  truly  report : 

'  Imprimit  ille  die,  quantum  noii  scribitur  anno  uno.' 

The  Press,  in  one  day,  will  do  in  printing. 
That  none,  in  one  year,  can  do  in  writing. 

By  reason  whereof,  as  printing  of  books  ministered  matter  of  read- 
ing, so  reading  brought  learning,  learning  showed  light,  by  the  bright- 

(1)  See  Edition  1563,  p.  3C2        d.  (2)  Vol.  III.  p.  ,W7.— Ed. 

VOL. in.  3  A 


722  THE    LAiMEXTAIil.K    LOSING    OF    CONSTAXTIXOPLE. 

iiennj    ncss  whercof  blind  ignorance  was  suppressed,  error  detected,  knA 

__.  finally,  God's  glory,  with  truth  of  liis  word,  advanced.  This  faculty  of 

A.  D.    printing  was  after  the  invention  of  guns,  the  space  of  one  hundred  and 

^^^•'^-    tliirty  years  ;    which  latter  invention   was  also  found  in  Germany, 

When      ^  jj_  1380.  And  thus  much  for  the  worthy  commendation  of  printing. 

guns  •'  '  " 

were  first 

invented.  THE    LAMENTABLE    LOSING    OF    CONSTANTINOPLE. 

A.  D.  1453,  Constantinus  Paleologus,  being  emperor  of  Constan- 
tinople, the  twenty-ninth  day  of  May,  the  gi-eat  city  of  Constantinople 
was  taken  by  the  Turk  Mahomet  after  the  siege  of  fifty-four  days  ; 
which  siege  began  in  the  beginning  of  April.  Within  the  city, 
"  besides  the  citizens,  were  but  only  six  thousand  rescuers  of  the  Greeks, 
and  three  thousand  of  the  Venetians  and  Genoese.  Against  these, 
Mahomet  brought  an  army  of  four  hundred  thousand,  collected  out 
of  the  countries  and  places  adjoining  near  about ;  as  out  of  Grecia, 
Illyrica,  Wallachia,  Dardanis,  Triballis,  Bulgaria,  out  of  Bithynia, 
Galatia,  Lydia,  Sicily,  and  such  others ;  which  places  had  the  name 
yet  of  Christians.  Thus,  one  neighbour,  for  lucre's  sake,  helped  to 
destroy  another. 

The  city  was  compassed  of  the  Turks  both  by  the  sea  and  land. 
Mahomet  the  Turk  divided  his  army  into  three  sundry  parts,  which 
in  three  parts  of  the  city  so  beat  the  walls  and  brake  them  down,  that 
they  attempted,  by  the  breaches  thereof,  to  enter  the  city.  But  the 
valiantness  of  the  Christians  therein  won  much  commendation  ;  whose 
duke  was  called  John  Justinianus,  of  Genoa.  But  forasmuch  as  the 
assaults  were  great,  and  the  number  of  the  christian  soldiers  daily 
decreased,  fighting  both  at  the  walls  and  at  the  haven  against  such  a 
multitude  of  the  Turks,  they  were  not  able  long  to  hold  out.  Besides 
the  annies  which  lay  battering  at  the  walls,  the  Turk  had,  upon  the 
sea,  his  navy  of  two  hundred  and  fifty  sail,  lying  upon  the  haven  of 
the  city,  reaching  from  the  one  side  of  the  haven's  mouth  unto  the 
other,  as  if  a  bridge  should  be  made  from  the  one  bank  to  the  other; 
which  haven  by  the  citizens  was  baiTcd  with  iron  chains,  whereby  the 
Turks  were  kept  out  a  certain  space.  Against  which  navy  seven 
ships  there  were  of  Genoa  within  the  haven,  and  three  of  Crete,  and 
certain  of  Chios,  which  stood  against  them.  Also  the  soldiers,  issuing 
out  of  the  city  as  occasion  would  serve,  did  manfully  gainstand  them, 
and  with  wildfii-e  set  their  ships  on  fire,  that  for  a  certain  space  they 
could  serve  to  no  use.  At  length  the  chains  being  burst,  and  a  way 
made,  the  Turk's  navy  entered  the  haven,  and  assaulted  the  city ; 
whereby  the  Turk  began  to  conceive  great  hope,  and  was  in  forAvard- 
Tyranny  uess  to  obtain  the  city.  The  assault  and  skirmish  then  waxing  more 
°4m^to-  ^^^^-i  Mahomet  the  tyrant,  stood  by,  upon  a  hill,  with  his  warriors 
ward  his  about  him,  crying  and  howling  out  unto  them  to  scale  the  walls  and 
'  enter  the  town :  otherwise,  if  any  reculed,'  he  threatened  to  kill 
them  ;  and  so  he  did.  Wherefore  a  great  number  of  his  soldiers,  in 
their  repulse  and  retire,  were  slain  by  the  Turk's  men,  being  sent  by 
his  commandment  to  slay  them :  and  so  they  were  justly  served,  and 
well  payed  their  hire. 

Although  this  was  some  comfort  to  the  Christians,  to  see  and 
behold,  out  of  the  city,  the  Turk's  retinue  so  consumed,  yet  that 

(1)  "  Reculc,"  to  recoil  or  rebel.— Ed. 


THE    LAMENTABLE    LOSING    OF    CONSTANTINOPLE.  723 

hope  lasted  not  long.     Shortly  after,  by  rage  of  war,  it  happened    Henry 
that  Justinian,  the  duke  above-named,  was  hurt ;  who,  notwithstand-      ^^' 


ing  that  he  was  earnestly  desired  by  Paleologus  the  emperor,  not  to    A.  D. 
leave  his  tower  which  he  had  to  keep,  seeing  his  wound  was  not  deadly    ^'^'^'^- 
dangerous,  yet  could  he  not  be  entreated  to  tarry,  but  left  his  stand-  cowardii- 
ing,  and  his  fort  dis-fumished,  setting  none  in  his  place  to  award  the  duke" 
same.     And  so  this  doughty  duke,  hm-t  more  with  his  false  heart  niln'" 
than  with  force  of  weapon,  gave  over  and  fled  to  Chios,  where,  shortly 
after,   for  sorrow,   rather  than  for  soreness  of  his  wound,  he  died. 
Many  of  his  soldiers,  seeing  their  captain  flee,  followed  after,  leaving 
their  fort    utterly  destitute  without  defence.     The  Turks,  under-  The  em- 
standing  that  vantage,  soon  burst  into  the  city  :  the  emperor  Paleo-  'coZilL 
golus  seeing  no  other  way  but  to  flee,  making  toward  the  gate,  either  *i"?P^'^^ 
was  slain,  or  else  trodden  down  with  the  multitude ;  in  which  gate  city  -won. 
eight  hundred  dead  men's  bodies  were  found  and  taken  up. 

The  city  of  Constantinople  thus  being  got,  the  Turks,  sacking  and  The 
ranging  about  the  streets,  houses,  and  corners,  did  put  to  the  sword  victory 
most  unmercifully  whomsoever  they  found,  both  aged  and  young,  °'""}'^ 
matrons,  virgins,  children   and  infants,  sparing  none.     The  noble       t 
matrons  and  virgins  were  horribly  used ;  the  goods  of  the  city,  the 
treasures  in  houses,  the  ornaments  in  churches  were  all  sacked  and 
spoiled ;   the  pictures  of  Christ  opprobriously  handled,  in  hatred  of 
Christ.     The  spoil  and  havoc  of  the  city  lasted  three  days  together, 
while  the  barbarous  soldiers  murdered  and  rifled  what  them  listed. 

These  things  thus  being  done,  and  the  tumult  ceased,  after  three  Their 
days  Mahomet  the  Turk  entereth  into  the  city ;  and  first  calling  for  J'yra"  ny. 
the  heads  and  ancients  of  the  city,  such  as  he  found  to  be  left  alive, 
he  commanded  them  to  be  mangled  and  cut  in  pieces.  It  is  also  (saith 
my  author)  reported,  that  in  the  feasts  of  the  Turks,  honest  matrons 
and  virgins,  and  such  as  were  of  the  king's  stock,  after  other  con- 
tumelies, were  hewn  and  cut  in  pieces  for  theu'  disport. 

And  this  was  the  end  of  that  princely  and  famous  city  of  Con-  constan- 
stantinople,  beginning  first  with  Constantine,  and  ending  also  with  caliTd^' 
Constantine,  which,  for  the  princely  royalty  thereof,  was  named  and  New 
ever  honoured,  from  the  time  of  the  first  Constantine,  equally  with 
the  city  of  Rome,  and  called  also  by  the  name  thereof  New  Rome, 
and  also  continued  the  space  of  eleven  hundred  and  twenty  years.    I 
pray  God  that  Old  Rome  may  learn  of  New  Rome,  to  take  heed  and 
beware  betimes. 

This  terrible  destruction  of  the  city  of  Constantinople,  the  queen  a  wam- 
of  cities,  I  thought  here  to  describe,  not  so  much  to  set  forth  the  clfris'te'^n- 
barbarous  cruelty  of  these  filthy  rake-hells  and  merciless  murderers  ;  ^om  by 
as  specially  for  this,  that  we,  being  admonished  by  the  doleful  ruin  tinopie. 
and  misery  of  these  om-  even  christened,  may  call  to  mind  the  plagues 
and  miseries  deserved,  which  seem  to  hang  no  less  over  our  own 
heads,  and  thereby  may  learn  betimes  to  invocate,  and  call  more 
earnestly  upon,  the  name  of  om-  terrible  and  merciful  God,  that  he, 
for  his  Son's  sake,  will  keep  us,  and  preserve  his  church  among  us, 
and  mitigate  those  plagues  and  sorrows,  which  we  no  less  have  de- 
served, than  these  above  minded  have  done  before  us.     Christ  grant 
it,  Amen ! ' 

'1)  Ex  Hist.  Wittenbergica  Peucer, 

3  A  2 


724  "  TIIK    HISTORY    OF    RKYXOLD    PEACOnC. 

JTenry 

^^-  ortje  ^^i.s'torii  of  JKejnolD  peacocfi,  2Bisljop  of  €{)icljejStet, 

A.D. 

1457,     AFFLICTKD  AND    TORMENTED    BY    THE    FALSE    BISHOPS  FOR    HIS 
GODLINESS,    AND    PROFESSION    OF    THE    GOSPEL.' 

*It  is  not  to  be  marvelled  at,  if  the  tyranny  of  these  men  did  so 
prevail,  and  overrun  the  lay-citizens  and  common  sort  of  priests, 
that  neither  the  mitre,  nor  the  anointing,  could  make  the  bishops 
themselves  to  live  in  safety ;  so  is  there  no  kind  of  decree  or  order, 
in  which  some  fruit,  as  clusters  of  the  vineyard,  doth  not  spring  and 
grow  up  unto  the  Lord  ;  as  amongst  priests,  monks,  friars,  lay-men, 
soldiers,  and  courtiers,  of  whom  we  have  somewhat  spoken  before ; 
the  order  of  the  bishops  only  was  behind,  being  yet  slow  and  barren 
in  bringing  forth  fruit.  Howbeit  it  is  not  to  be  doubted  but  that 
the  Lord,  even  amongst  them,  hath  his  remainder,  who  have  not 
bowed  their  knees  unto  Baal,  as  in  times  past  the  Pharisaical  people 
had  their  Nicodemus  and  Gamaliel :  although  that  these  kind  of 
people  are  very  rare  and  hard  to  be  found ;  and  few  of  them,  either 
for  fear  of  peril,  or  loss  of  substance,  dare  openly  profess  that  which 
they  do  think.  Amongst  the  rest  we  will  bring  forth  and  allege  this 
one  man,  Peacock,  first,  bishop  of  Chichester,  and  afterwards,  by  the 
title  of  St.  Asaph,  if  there  were  any  such  saint. 

This  man,  after  he  had  received  into  his  heart  some  sparks  of 
the  pure  and  sincere  religion  (all  be  it  that  he  did  not  greatly  attempt 
any  thing  against  the  bishops  in  this  troublous  time),  foreseeing  and 
providing  for  his  own  safe-guard  as  much  as  he  might,  yet  could  he 
not  so  lurk,  or  lie  hidden,  but  that  at  length  he  was  perceived. 
These  men  have  so  many  marks,  so  many  eyes,  so  many  suspicions, 
that  there  can  be  none  so  small  a  thing  which  may  pass  or  scape 
them ;  no  so  high  estate  or  dignity,  unto  which  these  men,  through 
their  cruel  and  unshamefaced  tyranny,  will  not  give  assualt :  in  so 
much  that  now  they  begin  not  only  to  be  feared  of  the  common 
people,  but  also  to  be  a  terror  unto  kings  and  princes.  Peacock 
was  taken  and  carried  straight  unto  Lambeth  ;  Thomas  Burschere, 
archbishop  of  Canterbury,  then  primate,  bearing  all  the  rule. 

Then  the  doctors  and  bishops  gathered  together  into  the  arch- 
'bishop''s  court,  in  which  convocation  the  duke  of  Buckingham  was 
present,  accompanied  with  the  bishop  of  Rochester,  and  the  bishop 
of  Lincoln,  where,  besides  many  other  articles,  the  presence  of  the 
,bread  in  the  sacrament  was  laid  unto  Peacock :  insomuch  that  the 
knot  of  amity  and  concord  which  was  ordained  by  Christ,  to  the 
great  comfort  of  the  church,  (I  know  not  by  what  means,)  through 
the  envy  of  Satan,  is  turned  into  a  matter  of  most  grievous  discord 
and  dissension  amongst  Christians.  Insomuch  that  there  hath  in  a 
manner  no  matter  continued  so  many  years  more  pernicious  or  hurtful 
unto  men's  salvation,  than  that  from  whence  the  chief  seed  or  offspring 
of  mutual  consolation  and  comfort  of  men's  life,  ought  to  be  taken  and 
sought  for. 

For  what  other  thing  doth  the  communicating  of  the  Lord's  body 
and  blood  declare  unto  us,  but  first  of  all  a  testimony  and  witness  of 

(1)  For  this  adrniraWe  preamble  to  the  history  of  Reynold  Teacock,  see  Edition  1S63,  pp.  3G3'-' 
367;  also  the  Latin  Editicn,  1559,  pp.  IOC— 114.— Ed. 


THE     BENEFIT    OF    THE     SACRAMENT    TO    THF    SOUL.  725 

his  benefits  towards  us,  and  of  our  amity  and  joining  with  him  ?   For    Hcmy 
we  do  understand  by  the  bread,  which  is  communicated  and  given         ' 
unto  every  man,   that  his  body   once   broken  was  given  unto  all    A.  D. 
and  every  one  of  us.  I'^^l. 

So  likewise  the  cup,  passing  through  us  all  in  order,  declareth 
that  the  blood  once  shed  for  us,  not  for  Himself  alone,  was,  as  it 
were,  bestowed  for  the  salvation  of  all  men.     Therefore,  lest  any 
man  should  think  that  His  passion  should  be  vain,  but  that  it  alone 
should  work  in  all  men  (as  many  as  do  believe  or  hereafter  shall 
believe),  absolute  and  perfect  peace  and  quietness,  and  eternal  re- 
freshing of  the  soul,  now  languishing  with  over-long  hunger.  There- 
fore, as  a  figure  and  remembrance  of  that  thing,  is  the  bread,  together 
with  the  cup,  set  before  us ;    which,  being  received  into  the  out- 
ward man,  it  is  easy  to  be  understood  what  the  sacrifice  of  his  body, 
applied  unto   us   by  faith,  worketh  in   our  inward  soul.     For   by 
faith  that  sacrifice   is  to  be  applied,  if  we  will  have  it  profit  us 
any  thing  at  all :   for,  except  the  meat  be  received,  it  engendereth 
no  nourishing.     Therefore  we   are   commanded  to   eat.     Even  so, 
where  faith  doth  not  receive  Christ,  there  is  no  hope  of  life  or  quiet- 
ness of  soul ;  the  body  is  quickened  up  with  eternal  life,  by  the 
bread  which  is  received,  albeit  that  the  bread  alone,  without  the 
cup,  is  not  of  so  great  effect ;  neither  otherwise  is  the  body  and 
blood  of  Christ  as  common  meat,  but  mystical  and  spiritual  food, 
wherewithal  our  bodies  are  not  fed,  but  our  spiritual  parts  and  mem- 
bers.    For  corporal  and  bodily  things  are  apt  and  fit  for  bodies,  and 
spiritual  things  for  the  spiritual  parts.    Therefore  I  call  this,  spiritual 
food  or  sustenance ;  for  as  much  as  whatsoever  effect  corporal  food 
worketh  in  the  sustentation  of  the  body,  the  same  doth  Christ  work 
in   our  spiritual  soul.     That  is  to  say :  he  feedeth  it,  refresheth, 
quickeneth,  maketh  it  joyful,  maintaineth  and  supporteth  it,  and  re- 
storeth  it  unto  everlasting  life ;  giveth  peace  unto  the  unquiet  con- 
science, reconcileth  the  Father"'s  wrath,  pacifieth  the  displeasure  of 
sin,  and  giveth  all  kind  of  abundance  of  heavenly  grace  ;  and,  finally,  How  _ 
whatsoever  force  and  power  the  meat  outwardly  received  hath  in  body  is 
the  visible  body,  the  like  power  and  strength  doth  the  Son  of  God;  "'^^'' 
perform  in  our  invisible   members,   if  he  be  received  with  faith. 
Thus,  not  without  cause,  he  is  called  food  in  the  mystical  Scriptures, 
Avhere  the  Lord  himself  prophesieth,  saying  :   "  Except  ye  eat  the 
flesh  of  the  Son  of  Man,  and  drink  his  blood,  you  shall  have  no 
life  in  you  f  in  which  place  the  bare  words  are  not  to  be  looked 
upon,   but  the  analogy  of   them  ;  tliat,   like  as   the   Son   of  God 
is  meat,  so  our  faith  shouid  be   the  mouth  and  the  belly.     How 
the  same  should  be  received,  it  is  already  declared  by  the  Jews,  who, 
seeking  salvation  by  righteousness   of  the  law,  and  by  works,  there- 
fore fell  away  from  God,  because  they,  being  filled  and  stuffed  up; 
with  other  meats,  have  not  eaten  the  flesh  of  the  Son  of  Man  ;  that 
is  to  say,  because  they  did  not  believe  upon  his  anointed.  The  same 
likewise  will  happen  unto    the    Turks,   whatsoever  works  they  do 
work  by  the  law  ;  as  unto  us  also  there  is  none  other  way  or  mean  of 
salvation  appointed  in  any  thing,  than  only  by  belief  in  Jesus  Clu-ist. 
There  be  many  kinds  of  meat,  but  one  only  which  bringeth  forth 
eternal  life;  for  the  Jews  have  their  meats  which  are   unsavoury 


726  WHAT    IT    IS    THAT    DOTH    JUSTIFY    US. 

Henry    letters,  whicli  they  do  yet  gnaw  upon.     The  Turks  also  have  their 
unsavoury    meats,    which  are  also  gathered    thereupon ;    which  do 


A.  D.  '  nothing  else  but  fill  and  stretch  out  the  belly  and  bowels,  and  engen- 
^"^57.    (jgj.  j^Q  lively  juice  ;  and  we  also,  playing  in  a  manner  the  Jews'" 
part,  have  our  dishes  filled  Avith  divers  and  sundry  ceremonies,  tradi- 
tions, rites,  superstitions,  and  works.     This  man  trusteth  much  in 
long  pilgrimages  ;  another  tarrieth  at  home,  devoutly  praying  unto 
saints ;  another  giveth  much  unto  the  high  altar,  and  to  building  of 
churches ;  another  getteth  him  a  holy  vesture,  wherein  he  thinketh 
himself  safe  from  all  evil  spirits.     There  be  also  some,  who  think  to 
help  themselves  much,  by  often   hearing    of  masses.     How  much 
confidence  do  many  put  in  pardons  bought,  or  in  confession  of  then* 
sins  unto  the  priest !     And  as  these  lets  are  gathered  no  where  else, 
than  in  the  secret  gardens  of  the  Scripture  ;  so  were  there  other 
accidents  more  near  unto  the  Scriptures  than  they,  which,  notwith- 
standing, for  so  much  as  they  are  nothing  else  but,  as  it  were,  the 
sauces  of  that  one  meat,  they  are  very  foolishly  taken  of  many  for 
the  meat  itself;  as  fasting,  praying,  watching,  alms,  and  such  other 
like  works  of  charity,  and  of  the  law,  which  being  used  as  sauces, 
have  their  sweet  savour.      For  there  is  but  only  one  meat  which  is 
effectual  unto  everlasting  life,  unto   such  as  do  eat  it,  which  is  the 
flesh  of  Christ  Jesus  ;    the  eating  whereof,  if  we  will  interpret  the 
allegory,  is  our  faith  taking  hold  of  Christ,  which  alone,  Avithout  all 
help,  doth  only  justify  us.     Where  this  faith  is  not  present,  it  is  sin, 
a  filthy  and  vile  thing,  and  a  defiled  cloth,  whatsoever  man's  holi- 
ness doth;  and  it  is  mere  folly,  whatsoever  the  wisdom  of  man  takcth 
in  hand,  or  goeth  about.     Finally,  the  unhappy  hunger  of  the  soul 
can  by  no  other  means  be  remedied  or  holpen,  but  only  by  this 
heavenly  food,  after  that  Christ  came  down  from  heaven,  who  Avas 
oflfered  up  for  us  by  his  death,  pacifying  all  things.     They  were  but 
A^anities  before,  whatsoever  man's  traditions  did  shoAv  unto  us.  There 
Avas  great  study  and  care  had   for  good  Avorks,  AvhereAvithal  every 
man  laboured  to  mitigate  and  assuage  his  hunger :  but  they  Avere 
all  vanities,  Avhatsoever  man's  poAvcr  or  the  elements  of  this  Avorld 
did  shoAv  unto  us :  the  soiil  Avas  Avounded,  and  could  not  cure  itself; 
it  lacked  another  kind  of  medicine.     The   thirst   Avas  great,   Avhich 
might  be  remedied,  but  could  not  be  satisfied  ;  it  might  be  Avatered  or 
quenched  Avith  blood,  otherwise  it  could  not  be  assuaged  with  any 
liquor  of  man's  invention.    Wherefore  the  Lord  doth  not  unaptly 
call  himself  '  meat,'  and  his  blood  verily  '  drink  :'  not  that  it  is  so 
in  deed,  according  to  the  outAvard  sense,  but  that  under  the  covered 
sense  of  this  sacrament,  he  might  declare  Avhat  our  faith  doth  Avork 
upon  him. 

Thou,  peradventure,  believest  in  Christ,  and  sayest  that  he  is  dead 
for  thee  ;  Avilt  thou  then  understand  and  know,  Avhat  effect  his  death 
doth  work  in  thee .''  Thou  comest  to  this  supper,  and,  first  of  all,  the 
bread  and  the  Avine  is  set  before  thee,  Avhich  doth  pass  into  thy  body. 
To  Avhat  end  is  that  done  ?  To  none  other  end,  but  only  that  they 
should  nourish  thee.  Therefore  art  thou  commanded  to  take  and 
eat. 

But  what  Avilt  thou  eat  ?  Truly  if  there  were  none  other  thing 
meant  in   it,  the  matter  were  not  of  great  importance.     But,  foras- 


THE    SACRAMEXT    IS    BUT    A    FIGL'RK.  721 

much  as  the  bare  elements  are  not  set  afore  thee,  but  under  the  He„nj 
name  of  the  Lord's  body  and  blood,  thou  mayest  well  judge  that ._ _f_ 
there  is  some  mystery  contained  herein,  which  may  admonish  or  warn  A.  D. 
thee.  But  what  mystery  thinkest  thou  is  contained  therein  ?  What  ^^•^^- 
other  canst  thou  judge,  than  that  thereby  thou  mayest  behold  and 
see,  as  it  were  in  a  seal,  what  the  body  and  blood  of  our  Lord,  being 
shed  for  thee,  doth  work  in  thy  soul  ?  even  the  very  same  effect  that 
the  bread  and  the  drink  do  work  in  the  external  body.  Therefore 
do  the  bread  and  wine  take  the  name  of  the  body  and  blood,  that 
by  the  one,  the  power  and  operation  of  the  other  may  the  better  be 
understood  and  known :  not  that  the  same  should  be  bread  according 
to  his  substance  which  is  the  body  of  Christ ;  but  that  we,  conferring 
the  power  and  effect  of  both  of  them  together,  may  be  admonished 
and  warned  by  the  bread,  whose  memory  it  is,  that  we  do  celebrate 
by  the  bread.  Wherefore  the  bread  and  Christ  do  wholly  differ  in 
the  predicament  of  substance,  while  that  they  do  understand  the 
quality  for  the  substance,  and  do  not  diligently  seek  out  the  power 
and  mystery  of  his  passion,  only  staying  themselves  upon  his  passion, 
and  passing  over  to  seek  out  the  power  and  operation  of  his  death,  in 
which  the  whole  principal  point  doth  consist :  in  the  other  part  there 
IS  not  so  great  profit  or  benefit  received  by  them,  who  either  behold 
or  handle  the  same.  Let  us  also  here  allege  the  figures  of  the  old 
law,  and  especially  such  as  are  compared  unto  memorials.  The  people 
of  Israel,  what  time  they  were  amongst  the  Egyptians,  the  same 
night  that  they  should  be  delivered,  were  commanded  to  kill  a  lamb, 
which,  without  all  doubt,  did  signify  that  Christ  should  come.  But 
how  ?  did  it  foreshow  the  same,  according  to  any  part  of  the  substance  ? 
No,  verily  :  for  there  is  no  man  that  will  say  that  Clu-ist  was  a  lamb 
indeed,  but  according  to  certain  qualities  and  properties  of  the  same. 
Therefore  were  they  commanded  to  take  a  young  lamb,  without  any 
spot.  What  is  more  simple  than  a  lamb  't  what  is  more  pure  than 
that  which  is  without  spot?  and,  finally,  what  can  be  more  like  unto 
Christ .? 

And,  contrariwise,  according  to  the  reason  of  the  substance,  what 
can  be  more  unlike  the  same  ?  Likewise  may  be  said  of  the  cow, 
with  other  sacrifices  and  oblations  of  the  Jews,  by  which  Christ  was 
foreshowed  by  certain  marks,  very  aptly,  when,  notwithstanding,  their 
substance  was  greatly  repugnant  and  contrary.  Why  do  we  then  in 
these  sacraments  so  greedily  seek  for  the  concordance  of  the  sub- 
stance, when  it  doth  not  gi-eatly  pertain  unto  the  purjiose  ?  For  the 
mystery  doth  not  lie  hid  in  the  matter  itself,  but  rather  in  more 
secret  notes  and  marks  of  things,  by  which  the  bread  and  the  body 
of  Christ,  the  wine  and  his  blood,  are  correspondent,  the  one  unto 
the  other,  by  a  mutual  analogy  ;  which  analogy,  when  the  christian 
mind  doth  consider  and  weigh  with  himself,  of  necessity  he  doth 
thereby  get  a  great  confirmation  and  establishing  of  his  faith,  toge- 
ther with  great  consolation  and  comfort  of  his  conscience ;  and, 
specially,  unto  such  as  be  afflicted  and  troubled  in  spirit,  and  do 
labour,  being  heavy  laden.  For  what  can  be  more  acceptable  or  more 
pleasant  unto  that  heart,  than,  where  he  doth  not  only  believe,  but 
also  seeth  plainly  set  forth,  as  it  were,  before  his  eyes,  his  sins  freely 
to  be  forgiven  him  ;  his  long,  great  hunger  to  be  satisfied,  as  it  were 


728       THE  STRENGTH  AND  POWER  OF  THE  DEATH  OF  CHRIST. 

Henry  at  a  banquct ;  and  to  be  converted  into  all  kind  of  fulness :  all  tlie 
^^  tumults  and  vexations,  which  gnaw  and  trouble  the  mind,  to  be  at 
A.D.  quietness;  all  fear  of  damnation  utterly  to  be  avoided;  and  most 
^^^T-  firm  and  steadfast  hope  of  salvation  to  be  come  in  place ;  and  that  he 
shall  now  enjoy  with  his  God  most  joyful  peace  and  quietness  ?  And 
that,  not  by  reason  of  any  of  his  own  merits,  neither  by  any  Avorks  or 
labours  achieved ;  not  because  he  had  fasted  so  long,  or  filled  up  so 
many  bushels  or  measures  with  prayers  ;  not  by  this  or  that  kind  of 
hurting  or  tormenting  his  body,  or  being  clothed  in  this  or  that 
colour,  or  being  conversant  in  any  kind  of  religion  :  but  freely, 
through  the  only  faith  in  Christ,  who  is  made  the  redemption  for  our 
sins,  that  He  alone  might  worthily  be  called  the  bread  of  our  life. 
Otherwise,  if  there  were  any  other  help  or  preferment  unto  salvation 
but  only  Christ,  then  were  not  he  the  only  bread  of  life  :  and,  as  this 
bread  which  came  down  from  heaven  is  freely  given  unto  us,  so  is  it 
the  only  bread,  neither  doth  it  require  any  other  food  or  sustentation  ; 
albeit  that  all  other  meats  do  require  bread. 

Thus,  christian  reader,  thou  scest  so  great  strength  and  power 
in  this  death  and  passion,  which,  albeit  it  be  invisible,  and  cannot 
be  perceived  with  our  bodily  senses  (howsoever  that  it  may  be 
noted  or  figured  out),  yet  the  Lord  could  by  no  means  more  aptly 
or  plainly  set  out  unto  us  so  secret  a  mystery,  than  by  this  kind  of 
sensible  sacrament.  What  is  more  familiar  or  common  unto  the 
world,  than  daily  bread  and  drink,  by  the  continual  use  whereof  the 
life  of  man  is  restored  and  maintained  ?  and  what  thing  comes  nearer 
to  the  declaration  of  this  unspeakable  mystery  than  they,  if  we  do 
behold  the  power,  strength,  and  properties  thereof,  and  not  the  sub- 
stance. Wherefore,  not  without  great  cause  and  deep  consideration, 
the  Lord  himself  did  give  unto  us  bread  and  wine,  which  we  should 
receive  for  his  body  and  blood  ;  not  for  any  necessity  in  the  things 
themselves,  but,  by  this  means,  providing  for  our  dulness  and  slowness, 
which  is  accustomed  to  be  led  by  none  other  means  than  by  the  out- 
ward senses  and  eyes  ;  that  thereby  he  might  the  more  fiimly  esta- 
blish our  faith,  and  make  our  consolation  and  comfort  in  him  the 
more  full  and  certain.  And  whereupon  now  is  this  great  frowardness 
sprung  up  amongst  Christians,  that  they,  envying  their  own  so  great 
felicity,  that  they  now  convert  and  turn  that  into  a  snare  of  their  own 
destruction,  which  is  given  us  by  the  Lord  to  be  our  only  comfort 
and  consolation  ?  Amongst  the  Greeks,  in  times  past,  the  celebrating 
of  this  communion  wa-s  called  '  Eucharistia  \  in  which  they  received 
the  benefit  of  salvation,  and  the  Lord  again  received  of  them  thanks- 
giving. But  Avhere  is  now  this  love,  thanksgiving,  and  charity, 
become  ?  when,  for  our  salvation,  received  of  the  Lord,  we  destroy 
our  brother,  we  shed  his  blood  whom  the  Lord  redeemed  with  his 
precious  blood ;  and  for  none  other  occasion,  but  only  for  that  which 
ought  to  teach  us  all  kind  of  meekness  and  gentleness  towards  all 
men.  I  grant  that  the  purity  and  sincerity  of  the  doctrine  is  to  be 
defended  ;  but  what  kind  of  defence  call  you  this,  when  men  are  first 
slain  and  put  to  death,  and  afterwards  we  seek  out  and  discourse,  in 
.the  synods,  parliaments,  universities,  and  schools,  whether  the  matter 
and  cause  be  true  and  certain  or  not  ?  And  the  matter  is  yet  before 
the  Judge  !     David  did  not  deserve  to  put  to  his  hand  or  help  to 


CRUEL    TIMES,    AND    PRACTICES    OF    THE    CHURCH.  729 

the  building  of  the  temple  of  God,  because  he  came  bloody  out  of  so   Henry 
many  battles  and  slaughters  of  men  ;  albeit  that  they  were  most  just  _.!jL_ 
battles,  and  that  he  took  them  not  upon  him  without  the  prescribed    A.  D. 
commandment    of  God.     Notwithstanding,   the   business   was   left  Jd£Il_ 
wholly  unto  Solomon  to  be  performed  and  finished,  who  succeeded 
his  father  in  peace  and  quietness.     So  likewise  let  us  feign  the  cause 
here  to  be  just  and  true ;  let  us  grant  that  it  cannot  be  proved  that 
Christ's  words  have  any  ambiguous  sense.    Notwithstanding,  by  mine 
opinion,  it  is  greatly  to  be  looked  upon,  and  taken  heed  of,  with 
what  lenity  and  gentleness  these  christian  princes,  and  these  holy 
builders  of  the  Lord's  temple,  do  execute  and  use  their  office  ;  and 
it  is  diligently  to  be  marked,  lest  that  thing  which  is  lawful  in  them, 
be  not  likewise  allowed  of  the  Lord.     How  many,  before  this  man 
Peacock,  and  how  many,  since  his  death,  have  there  been  devoured 
and  swallowed  up  by  the  bloody  bishops  !     Yet  do  I  not  here  dis- 
course whether  the  cause  were  just  and  true  or  no.     But  admit  it 
were  most  true,  yet  in  mine  opinion,  it  is  greatly  to  be  respected  and 
regarded  with  what  hands  they  do  come  to  the  building  of  the  holy 
temple  of  God.     Besides  that,  I  will  here  pass  over  and  speak  nothing 
how  unjust  and  false  their  cause  is. 

But  now  I  return  again  unto  Peacock,  of  whom,  notwithstanding, 
I  will  not  rehearse  all  things,  for  his  injurious  handling  is  long,  and' 
the  circumstances  thereof  very  long.  I  will  only  touch  the  principal 
])oints.  When  the  articles  were  laid  against  him,  and  that  they  had 
charged  this  catholic  bishop  with  the  grievous  and  heinous  name  of 
heresy,  they,  by  and  by,  made  haste  to  give  judgment.  For  these 
are  the  kinds  of  disputations  which  are  now  used  amongst  Christians: 
that  if  any  controversy  do  rise  in  the  church,  or  that  there  be  any 
disputation  about  any  ambiguous  sense  of  the  Scripture,  straightway 
it  is  converted  and  turned  into  a  matter  of  judgment;  so  that  learning 
hath  lost  her  liberty,  the  schools  are  changed  into  courts  of  judg- 
ment, where  it  is  not  looked  for  who  shall  vanquish  or  win,  but  whether 
of  them  shall  live.  Instead  of  the  adversary,  the  judge  sitteth  ;  and, 
in  place  of  the  pen,  the  sword  is  drawn  ;  which,  for  the  most  part, 
doth  not  fall  upon  him  who  is  worst  or  most  wicked,  but  upon  the 
most  inferior  and  weak  ;  and  this  may  be  their  liberty  which  is  used 
in  pleading,  that,  whereas  before  the  face  and  eyes  of  the  one,  death 
is  set ;  the  other,  although  he  be  not  overcome  with  reason,  yet  doth 
he  vanquish  and  overcome  by  power.  How  much  have  we  Christians 
gone  astray  in  these  days  from  the  footsteps  and  examples  of  the 
ancient  church !  What  more  cruel  time  of  heresies  was  there,  than 
even  in  that  age,  when  St.  Jerome  did  live  ?  I  will  not  here  report 
with  how  grievous  heresies  the  cluu'ch  was  infected.  Yet,  notwith- 
standing, they  were  not  driven  unto  this  severity  of  judgment,  if  any 
did  dissent  or  disagree  from  the  residue  :  for  there  was  no  need  ot 
it.  For  why  .-^  the  errors  Avere  so  manifestly  declared  and  tossed  in 
the  books  of  the  doctors,  in  which  the  reader  might  quietly  with  him- 
self judge,  which  was  confirmable  or  agreeable  in  either  part,  and 
what  contrariwise.  How  oftentimes  doth  St.  Jerome,  in  equal  and 
open  contentions,  provoke  his  adversaries  to  read  over  his  writings, 
epistles,  and  apologies,  as  unto-  places  abundantly  discussing  such 
matters ;  neither  suffering  his  own  liberties  to  be  taken  from  him, 


730  PAPISTS    OVERCOME    BY     FORCE. 

neither  taking  away  others.  ""  I  will  not,"  said  he,  "  that  he  should 
answer  me,  who  by  power  and  might  may  oppress  me ;  but  teach  me 
he  cannot.''  Notwithstanding  he  did  no  less  prevail  in  this  behalf, 
in  seeking  out  the  perils  and  dangers  of  opinions,  but  much  more 
happily  and  fortunately  satisfied  also  them  who  did  contend  ;  and 
confirmed  and  established  the  others  who  were  in  doubt.  How  little 
could  Helvidias,  Jovinianus,  and  Pelagius,  prevail  in  sowing  of  their 
opinions  and  heresies,  when  that  St.  Jerome's  works,  being  so  elo- 
quently written,  were  once  spread  abroad,  and  read  !  What  heresy 
was  it  so  largely  spread  over  all,  which,  as  soon  as  St.  Augustine's 
works  were  once  published,  did  not,  by  and  by,  keep  silence,  as 
tliough  the  voice  or  speech  thereof  had  been  utterly  taken  away ;  or, 
when  St.  Jerome  began  to  shine  in  the  church,  who  is  no  less  to  be 
feared  in  his  books,  than  any  judge  sitting  in  the  place  of  judgment. 
But  now  we  have  lost  all  those  learned  contentions  ;  or,  more  truly 
to  speak,  we  have  lost  such  heads  and  rulers  of  the  church  as  St.  Au- 
gustine and  St.  Jerome  were,  who  have  knowledge  and  understanding 
to  dispute  with  learning  and  eloquence.  But,  in  their  place,  there  is 
such  posterity  crept  in,  as  which,  with  mere  power  and  violence,  do 
for  the  most  part  defend  that,  which  they  cannot  judge  or  discern, 
when  they  are  not  able  to  accomplish  the  matter  by  learning.  Yet 
notwithstanding  learned  men  must  now,  mil  they,  nil  they,  speak 
and  answer  to  their  unlearned  law  :  or  else  let  them  learn,  by  the 
peril  and  danger  of  this  man  Peacock,  to  keep  silence  and  hold  their 
peace. 

For  how  do  they  vanquish  or  overcome  him  with  learning,  accord- 
ing to  the  example  of  their  elders .''  Do  they  overthrow  him  with 
eloquence,  or  confound  him  with  writing  ?  do  they  subdue  him  with 
arguments,  or  subvert  him  by  learning  or  judgment .''  or  else  do  they, 
as  St.  Jerome  saith,  set  foot  to  foot,  conferring  together,  and  bring 
to  light  the  secret  snares  of  errors  ?  or  do  they  convince  them,  when 
they  are  so  made  manifest,  and  violently  take  away  the  victory  from 
the  man,  although  he  do  never  so  much  resist  ?  Finally,  they  do 
either  force  him  to  silence,  or  put  him  to  shame ;  so  compassing  him 
round  about  with  snares  and  nets  of  reasons,  that  he  dare  not,  not 
once,  open  his  mouth  against  them  ;  but  also  he  cannot,  though  he 
would.  And  with  such  helps  and  means,  they  ought  to  proceed  in 
such  matters,  if  they  were  learned  men.  If  they  be  not  learned,  why 
have  they  the  rule  in  determining  controversies  in  the  church  ?  why 
is  the  poor  blind  suffered  to  judge  colours  ?  If  it  were  a  false  matter 
which  Peacock  did  sustain,  there  was  no  doubt  but  that  he  might 
easily  have  been  overcome,  if  any  learned  man  had  withstood  him 
with  apt  and  fit  arguments,  who,  by  the  dexterity  of  learning,  and 
by  the  force  and  power  of  the  Scriptures,  might  have  caused  the  truth 
and  goodness  of  the  matter  to  have  had  the  upper  hand  ;  such  as  in 
our  forefathers'  days  were  wont  to  root  out  errors. 

But  now,  it  may  thus  be  thought,  that  amongst  them,  either  they 
lacked  some  fit  champions  to  defend  the  truth,  who  might  be  equal 
unto  him  in  doing  the  business  ;  or  else  that  their  matters  seemed 
very  doubtful  unto  them,  in  which  they  durst  not,  in  equal  balance, 
contend  and  strive,  but  that  they  fly  straightway  to  judgment,  as 
imto  their  only  fort  and  defence,  where  they  do  not  contend  with 


THE    HISTORY    OF    REYNOLD    PEACOCK.  731 

learning,   but  with    tlireatenings  and  authority ;    wherewithal  it  is    ^lemi/ 
easy  to  vanquish  and  overcome  even  the  most  wise  and  karned  men.      ^^' 
When  Peacock  was  brought  before  the  judges  and  bishops,  although  he    A.  D. 
did  nothing  prevail,  notwithstanding  he  declared  many  things  worthy    ^"^^^^ 
of  a  good  divine,  and  armed  himself  with  all  kind  of  armour,  both 
for  the  defence  of  his  life  and  cause.     They,  on  the  contrary  nart, 
with  like  labour  and  pain,  laboured  and  travailed  for  their  dignity 
and  gain ;  and  so  much  the  more  earnestly,  because  they  had  now  , 

gotten  such  an  adversary,  whose  authority,  the  higher  and  greater  it 
was  in  the  church,  they  supposed  it  would  bring  the  greater  ruin  and 
decay  of  their  tyranny  and  estimation  unto  the  people.  They,  fearing 
this,  and  the  matter  being  as  it  were  even  now  brought  to  hand- 
strokes,  they  thought  good  to  use  all  kind  of  preparation  and  to 
show  their  power  and  strength,  all  that  ever  they  might.  Wherefore 
the  most  subtle  and  exquisite  sophisters,  philosophers,  divines,  and 
orators,  were  called  for,  besides  centurions  of  lawyers,  and  decretists, 
whose  use  and  help  in  these  matters  is  greatly  esteemed. 

First  of  all  the  matter  was  attempted  with  private  colloquies,  and, 
by  and  by  after,  a  terrible  form  of  judgment  Avas  appointed,  threat- 
ening present  death  unto  him.  To  these  terrors  often  were  adjoined 
threatening  exhortations,  and  quarrellings,  and  oftentimes  there  lacked 
no  flattering  promises,  as  cups  mingled  with  the  venomous  enchant- 
ment of  Circes.  And,  finally,  there  is  no  stone  left  unturned ;  they 
entreat  him  ;  desire  him  ;  they  earnestly  lay  upon  him  ;  they  require 
him  with  fair  means  ;  they  threaten  him ;  they  make  him  fair  pro- 
mises ;  they  flatter  him.  Moreover  they  grant  him  a  fiuthcr  time  to 
consult  and  repent,  whereby  the  delay  of  his  death  might  make  his 
life  the  sweeter  unto  him  :  they  bid  him  speedily  to  foresee  and  look 
unto  himself,  affirming  that  there  was  yet  great  hope  both  of  having 
his  life  and  dignity,  if  he  would  recant  and  forsake  his  opinions.* 

After  the  death  of  Henry  Chichesley  before  mentioned,  next  sue-  The  story 
ceeded  John  Stafford,  a.  d.  1445,  who  continued  eight  years.  After  Lid  Pea 
him  came  John  Kemp,  a.  d.  1453,  who  sat  but  three  years.  Then  '^°'^^- 
succeeded  Thomas  Burschere.  In  the  time  of  which  archbishop  fell 
the  trouble  of  Reynold  Peacock,  bishop  of  Chichester,  afflicted  by 
the  pope's  prelates  for  his  faith  and  profession  of  the  gospel.  Of  this 
bishop,  Hall  also,  in  his  Chronology,  toucheth  a  little  mention,  de- 
claring that  an  overthwart  judgment,  as  he  termeth  it,  was  given  by 
the  fathers  of  the  spiritualty  against  him.  "  This  man,"  saith  he, 
"  began  to  move  questions  not  privately,  but  openly  in  the  univer- 
sities, concerning  the  Annates  or  Peter-pence,  and  other  jurisdictions 
and  authorities  pertaining  to  the  see  of  Rome ;  and  not  only  put 
forth  the  questions,  but  declared  his  mind  and  opinion  in  the  same : 
wherefore  he  was  for  this  cause  abjured  at  PauFs  Cross."  Thus 
much  of  him  writeth  Hall.  Of  whom  also  recordeth  Polychronicon, 
but  in  few  words.  This  bishop,  first  of  St.  Asaph,  then  of  Chichester, 
so  long  as  duke  Humphrey  lived,  by  whom  he  was  promoted  and  much 
made  of,  was  quiet  and  safe,  and  also  bold  to  dispute  and  to  write 
his  mind,  and  wrote,  as  Leland  recordeth,  divers  books  and  treatises. 
But  after  that  good  duke  was  thus,  as  ye  have  heard,  made  away, 
this  good  man,  lacking  his  back-stay,  was  open  to  his  enemies,  and 


('32  THE    HISTORY    OF    REYNOLD    PEACOCK. 

Hmrtj  matter  soon  found  against  him.     Whereupon  he  being  complained 
of,   and   accused  by  privy  and  malignant  promoters  unto  the  arch- 


A.  D.    bisliop,  letters  first  were  directed  down  from  the  archbishop,  to  cite 
^'^^'^-    all  men  to  appear  that  could  say  any  thing  against  him.     The  form 
of  which  citation  here  ensueth. 

Copy  of  the  Citation  sent  by  Thomas  Bowcher,   alias  Burschere, 
Archbishop  of  Canterbury. 

Thomas,  by  the  permission  of  God  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  primate  of  all 
England,  and  legate  of  the  apostolic  see,  to  all  and  singular  parsons,  vicars, 
chaplains,  curates  and  not  curates,  clerks  and'  learned  men,  whatsoever  they  be, 
constituted  and  ordained  in  any  place  throughout  our  province  of  Canterbury, 
health,  grace,  and  benediction. 

We  have  received  a  grievous  complaint  of  our  reverend  fellow-brother, 
Reynold  Peacock  bishop  of  Chichester,  containing  in  it :  that,  albeit  our  said 
reverend  fellow-brother,  the  bishop,  delivered  unto  us  certain  books  written  by 
him  in  the  English  tongue,  by  us  and  our  authority  to  be  examined,  corrected, 
reformed,  and  allowed :  notwithstanding  many  (the  examination  and  reforma- 
tion of  the  said  books  depending  and  remaining  before  us  undiscussed)  have 
openly  preached  and  taught  at  Paul's  Cross  in  London,  and  in  divers  other 
places  of  our  province  of  Canterbury,  that  our  said  fellow-brother  the 
bishop  hath  propounded,  made,  and  written,  or  caused  to  be  written,  in  the  said 
'books,  certain  conclusions  repugnant  to  the  tnie  faith,  and  that  he  doth  obsti- 
nately hold  and  defend  the  same ;  by  the  pretence  of  which  preaching  and 
teaching,  the  state  and  good  name  and  fame  of  the  lord  Reynold  the  bishop, 
are  grievously  offended  and  hurt,  and  he  and  his  opinions  marvellously  bur- 
'dened.  Wherefore  we  charge  you  all  together,  and  severally  apart  do  command 
you,  firmly  enjoniing  you,  that  openly  and  generally  you  do  warn,  or  cause  to 
be  warned,  all  and  singular  such  persons,  who  will  object  any  thing  contrary 
and  against  the  conclusions  of  our  said  reverend  fellow-brother  the  bishop,  had 
or  contained  in  his  books  or  writings ;  that  the  twentieth  day  after  such  moni- 
tion or  warning  had,  they  do  freely,  of  their  own  accord,  appear  before  us  and 
our  commissaries  in  this  behalf  appointed,  wheresoever  we  shall  then  be,  in  our 
city,  diocese,  or  province  of  Canterbury,  to  speak,  propound,  allege,  and  affirm 
fully  and  sufficiently  in  writing,  whatsoever  heretical  or  erroneous  matter  they 
will  speak,  propound,  or  object,  against  the  said  conclusions  contained  in  his 
said  books ;  and  both  to  satisfy  and  receive,  whatsoever  shall  seem  meet  and 
right  in  this  behalf  by  the  holy  institution  and  ordinances. 

And  forasmuch  as  this  matter  depending  yet  undetermined  and  undiscussed, 
nothing  ought  to  be  attempted  or  renewed,  we  charge  you  that,  by  this  our 
authority,  you  inhibit  and  forbid  all  and  every  one  so  to  preach  and  teach  here- 
after. Unto  whom  also  we,  by  the  tenor  of  these  presents,  do  likewise  forbid, 
that,  during  the  examination  of  the  conclusions  and  books  aforesaid,  depending 
before  us  and  om-  commissaries  undiscussed,  they  do  not  presume  by  any 
means,  without  good  advice  and  judgment,  to  preach,  judge,  and  affirm,  any 
thing  to  the  prejudice  or  offence  of  the  said  lord  Reynold  the  bishop :  and  if  so 
be  you  do  find  any  in  this  behalf  gainsaying  or  not  obeying  this  our  inhibition, 
that  you  do  cite  or  cause  them  peremptorily  to  be  cited,  to  appear  before  us  or 
our  commissai'ies,  in  this  behalf  appointed,  the  tenth  day  after  their  citation,  if 
it  be  a  court  day,  or  else  the  next  court-day  following,  wheresoever  we  shall 
then  be,  in  our  city,  diocese,  or  province  of  Canterbury,  to  make  fiirther  de- 
claration, by  form  of  law,  of  the  cause  of  their  disobedience,  and  to  receive  such 
punishment  as  justice  and  equity  shall  determine  in  that  behalf;  and  that  by 
your  letters  you  do  duly  certify  us  or  our  commissaries,  what  you  have  done  in 
the  premises,  at  the  day  and  place  aforesaid ;  or  that  he  who  hath  so  executed 
our  commandment,  do  so  certify  us  by  his  letters. 

Dated  at  our  manor  of  Lambeth,  the  22d  day  of  Octobei",  a.  d.  1457,  and 
in  the  fourth  year  of  our  ti'anslation. 
Peacock 

aiipeartih      Tliis  citation  being  directed,  the  bishop,  upon  the  summons  thereof, 
belli.        was  biought,  or  rather  came,  before  the  judges  and  bishops  unto 


PEACOCK    APPEAEETII    AT    LAMBETH.  733 

Lambeth,   where  the   aforesaid  Thomas    the    archbishop,    with  his    Jiowv 
doctors   and    lawyers,   were    gathered    together  in  the  archbishop's 


court;  in  which  convention  also,  the  duke  of  Buckingham  was  A-D. 
present,  accompanied  by  the  bishops  of  Rochester  and  Lincoln.  "^^ 
Wliat  were  the  opinions  and  articles  against  him  objected,  after- 
wards, in  his  revocation,  shall  be  specified.  In  his  answering  for 
himself,  in  such  a  company  of  the  pope''s  friends,  albeit  he  could  not 
prevail,  notwithstanding  he,  stoutly  defending  himself,  declared  many 
things  worthy  great  commendation  of  learning,  if  learning  against 
power  could  have  prevailed. 

But  they,  on  the  contrary  part,  with  all  labour  and  travad  extended  Great  la- 
themselves,  either  to  reduce  him,  or  else  to  confound  him.     As  here  reduce" 
lacked  no  blustering  words  of  terror  and  threatening,  so  also  many  Peacock 
fair  flattering  words  and  gentle  persuasions  were  admixed  withal,  opinions. 
Briefly,  to  make  a  short  narration  of  a  long  and  busy  traverse,  here 
was  no  stone  left  unturned,  no  ways  unproved,  either  by  fair  means 
to  entreat  him,  or  by  terrible  menaces  to  terrify  his  mind,  tdl  at 
length,  he,  being  vanquished  and  overcome  by  the  bishops,  began 
to  faint,  and  gave  over.     Whereupon,  by  and  by,  a  recantation  was 
put  unto  him  by  the  bishops,  which  he  should  declare  before  the 
people.     The  copy  of  which  his  recantation  here  followeth. 

The  Form  and  Manner  of  the  Retractation  of  Reynold  Peacock. 

In  the  name  of  God,  Amen.  Before  you,  the  most  I'everend  father  in  Christ 
and  lord,  the  lord  Thomas,  by  the  grace  of  God  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  pri- 
mate of  England  and  legate  of  the  apostolic  see  :  I  Reynold  Peacock,  unworthy, 
bishop  of  Chichester,  do  purely,  willingly,  simply,  and  absolutely  confess 
and  acknowledge,  that  I,  in  times  past,  that  is  to  say,  by  the  space  of  these 
twenty  years  last  past  and  more,  have  otherwise  conceived,  holden,  taught,  and 
written,  as  touching  the  sacraments,  and  the  articles  of  the  faith,  than  the  holy 
church  of  Rome,  and  universal  church  ;  and  also  that  I  have  made,  written, 
published,  and  set  forth,  many  and  divers  pernicious  doctrines,  books,  works, 
writings,  heresies,  contrary  to  and  against  the  true  catholic  and  apostolic  faith, 
containing  in  them  eiTors  contrary  to  the  cathoHc  faith,  and  especially  these 
errors  and  heresies  hereunder  written.^ 

I.  First  of  all.  That  we  are  not  bound,  by  the  necessity  of  faith,  to  believe  Articles 
that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  after  his  death,  descended  into  hell.  formerly 

II.  Item,  That  it  is  not  necessary  to  salvation  to  believe  in  the  holy  catholic  peacock. 
church. 

III.  Item,  That  it  is  not  necessary  to  salvation  to  believe  the  communion  of 
saints. 

IV.  Item,  That  it  is  not  necessary  to  salvation  to  affirm  the  body  materially 
in  the  Sacrament. 

V.  Item,  That  the  universal  church  may  err  in  matters  which  pertain  unto 
faith. 

VI.  Item,  That  it  is  not  necessary  unto  salvation  to  believe  that  that,  which 
every  general  council  vloth  universally  ordain,  approve,  or  determine,  should 
necessarily,  for  the  help  of  our  faith,  and  the  salvation  of  souls,  be  approved  and 
holden  of  all  faithful  Christians, 

Wherefore  I  Reynold  Peacock,  %vretched  sinner,  who  have  long  walked  in 
darkness,  and  now,  by  the  merciful  disposition  and  ordinance  of  God,  am  re- 
duced and  brought  again  unto  the  light  and  way  of  ti-uth,  and  restored  unto  the 
unity  of  our  holy  mother  the  chiurch,  renounce  and  forsake  all  errors  and  here- 
sies aforesaid. 

Notwithstanding,  godly  reader,  it  is  not  to  be  believed  that  Peacock 

U)  Ex  Regist. 


734  THE    HISTORY     OF    REYNOLD    PEACOCK. 

Henry    did  SO  givc  ovcr  thcse  opinions,  howsoever  the  words  of  the  recantation 
pretend.     For  it  is  a  policy  and  play  of  the  bishops,  that  when  they 


A.  D.    do  subdue  or  overcome  any  man,  they  cany  him  whither  they  list,  as 
^^^'-    it  were  a  young  steer  by  the  nose,  and  frame  out  his  words  for  him 
beforehand,  as  it  were  for  a  paiTOt,  what  he  should  speak  unto  the 
people  ;  not  according  to  his  own  will,  but  after  tlieir  lust  and  fantasy. 
Neither  is  it  to  be  doubted  but  that  this  bishop  repented  him  afterwards 
of  his  recantation  ;  which  may  easily  be  judged  hereby,  because  he 
was  committed  again  to  prison,  and  detained  captive,  where  it  is  un- 
certain whether  he  was  oppressed  with  privy  and  secret  tyranny,  and 
there  obtained  the  crown  of  martyrdom,  or  no. 
Articles        The  dictionary  of  Thomas  Gascoigne  I  have  not  in  my  hands  at 
cock,'      present :  but,  if  credit  be  to  be  given  to  such  as  have  to  us  alleged  the 
ed'^by'""    hook,  this  We  may  find  in  the  eighth  century  of  John  Ball,  chapter  xix. ; 
Thomas    tj^at  the  Said  Thomas  Gascoigne,  in  the  third  part  of  his  said  dictionary, 
coigne.     Writing  of  Reynold  Peacock,  maketh  declaration  of  his  articles,  con- 
taining in  them  matter  of  sore  heresy.^    First,  saith  he,  Reynold  Pea- 
cock, at  PauFs  Cross,  preached  openly,  that  the  office  of  a  christian 
prelate,  chiefly,  above  all  other  things,  is  to  preach  the  word  of  God. 
That  man's  reason  is  not  to  be  preferred  before  the  Scriptures  of  the 
Old  and  New  Testament.     That  the  use  of  the  sacraments,  as  they  be 
now  handled,  is  worse  than  the  use  of  the  law  of  nature.    That  bishops 
who  buy  their  admissions  of  the  bishop  of  Rome,  do  sin.     That  no 
man  is  bound  to  believe  and  obey  the  determination  of  the  church  of 
Rome.     Also  that  the  riches  of  the  bishops,  by  inheritance,  are  the 
goods  of  the  poor.     Item,  that  the  apostles  themselves,  personally, 
were  not  the  makers  of  the  Creed;  and  that  in  the  same  Creed,  once, 
was  not  the  article,  "  He  went  down  to  hell."     Item,  that  of  the  four 
senses  of  the  Scriptm-e  none  is  to  be  taken,  but  the  very  first  and  pro- 
per sense.    Also,  that  he  gave  little  estimation,  in  some  points,  to  the 
authority  of  the  old   doctors.     Item,  that  he  condemned  the  wilful 
begging  of  the  friars,  as  a  thing  idle  and  needless.     This  out  of  Tho- 
mas Gascoigne.     Leland  also,  adding  this  moreover,  saith,  that  he, 
not  contented  to  follow  the  catholic  sentence  of  the  church,  in  inter- 
preting of  the  Scripture,  did  not  think  soundly  (as  he  judged  it)  of 
the  holy  Eucharist. 
Peacock        At  length,  for  these  and  such  other  articles,  the  said  Reynold  Pea- 
fn 'prison.  ^^'^^^  ^""'^^  condemned  for  a  heretic,  by  the  archbishops  and  by  the  bishops 
of  Rochester,   Lincoln,  and  Winchester,  with  other  divines  more. 
Whereupon  he,  being  driven  to  his  recantation,  was  notwithstanding 
detained  still  in  prison  ;  where  some  say,  that  he  was  privily  made 
away  by  death. 

Hall  addeth,  that  some  say  his  opinions  to  be,  that  spiritual  persons, 
by  God''s  law,  ought  to  have  no  temporal  possessions.  Others  write, 
that  he  said,  that  personal  tithes  were  not  due  by  God''s  law.  But 
whatsoever  the  cause  was,  he  was  caused  at  PauFs  Cross  to  abjure,  and 
all  his  books  burned,  and  he  himself  kept  in  his  own  house  during  his 
Poiydore  natural  life.  I  marvel  that  Polydore,  of  this  extremity  of  the  bishop's 
"°'^  '  handling,  and  of  his  articles,  in  his  history  maketh  no  memorial.  Be- 
like it  made  but  little  for  the  honesty  of  his  great  master  the  pope. 

(1)  Ex  Tho.  Gascoig.  \\\>  tie  Doctrina  Theolog.  part  iii. 


THE    EMPEROR    CROWNIlD    BY    THE     POPE.  735 

From  persecution  and  burning  in  England,  now  out  of  the  way  to    Henry 
digress  a  little,  to  speak  of  foreign  matters  of  the  church  of  Rome  : 


you  remember  before,  in  the  latter  end  of  the  council  of  Basil,  how    A.  D. 
Eugene  was  deposed. 

*The'  Germans  at  that  time  were  so  divided,  that  some  of  them 
did  hold  with  Felix,  and  the  council  of  Basil ;  others  with  Eugene 
and  the  council  of  Ferrara ;  and  some  with  neither.  It  happened 
also,  at  the  same  time,  a.  d.  1444,  that  the  dauphin  of  France,  set 
on,  as  it  is  supposed  by  some,  by  the  same  Eugene,  leading  an  army 
of  twenty-five  thousand  men  into  Alsace,  laid  siege  unto  Basil  to 
disturb  the  council,  having,  there,  a  great  conflict  with  the  Germans, 
not  without  great  slaughter  on  both  sides  ;  whereby  the  council  could 
no  longer  be  kept  in  Germany  for  the  poAver  of  pope  Eugene  and  his 
adherents,  but  only  in  France,  through  the  pragmatical  sanction  of  the 
French  king.  At  length  Eugene  brought  to  pass,  partly  through  the 
help  of  Frederic  (being  not  yet  emperor,  but  labouring  for  the  empire), 
partly  by  his  orators,  in  the  number  of  whom  was  ^Eneas  Sylvius 
above  mentioned,  amongst  the  Germans,  that  they  were  content  to 
give  over,  both  the  council  of  Basil,  and  the  neutrality.* 

Of  the  conditions  and  martial  afExirs  of  Eugene,  how  he  made  war  Eugene 
against  Sfortia,  a  famous  captain  of  Italy,  and  what  other  wars  he  Z^llnsi 
raised  besides,  not  only  in  Italy,  but  also  in  Germany,  against  the  city  ^"^^^^ 
and  council  of  Basil,  I  shall  not  need  to  make  any  long  rehearsal.  lUvers 
After  his  deposition  ye  heard  also  how  Felix,  duke  of  Savoy,  was  p^pj" 
elected  pope.  Whereupon  another  great  schism  followed  in  the  Feiix. 
church  during  all  the  life  of  Eugene. 

After  his  death,  his  next  successor  was  pope  Nicholas  V.,  who,  as 
you  before  have  heard,  brought  so  to  pass  with  the  emperor  Frederic  Empe- 
IIL,  that  Felix  was  contented  to  renounce  and  resign  his  papacy  to  [,°u  k^ngs 
Nicholas,  and  was  therefore  of  him  afterwards  received  to  the  room  of  J^an"',jg. 
cardinal  for  his  submission  ;  and  Frederic,  for  his  working,  was  con-  fore  they 
finned  at  Rome   to  be  full  emperor,  and  there  crowned,  a.  d.  1451.  edbythe 
For  emperors,  before  they  be  confirmed  and  crowned  by  the  pope,  are  p°p*- 
no  emperors,  but  only  called  kings  of  Romans. 

This  pope  Nicholas  here  mentioned,  to  get  and  gather  great  sums 
of  money,  appointed  a  jubilee  a.  d.  1450,  at  which  time  there  resorted 
a  greater  number  of  people  unto  Rome,  than  hath  at  any  time  before 
been  seen.  At  which  time  we  read  in  the  story  of  Platina  that  to  have 
happened,  which  I  thought  here  not  unworthy  to  be  noted  for  the 
example  of  the  thing.^     As  there  was  a  ffreat  concourse  of  people  idolatry 

•  1  TT      •  1     1     11    ,1       •  p  o       •  punished. 

resorting  up  to  the  mount  Vatican  to  behold  the  image  of  our  baviour, 
which  there  they  had  to  show  to  pilgrims,  the  people  being  thick  going 
to  and  fro  between  the  mount  and  the  city,  by  chance  a  certain  mule, 
belonging  to  the  cardinal  of  St.  Mark,  came  by  the  way,  by  reason 
whereof  the  people  not  being  able  to  avoid  the  way,  one  or  two  falling 
upon  the  mule,  there  was  such  a  press  and  throng  upon  that  occasion 
on  ihe  bridge,  that  to  the  number  of  two  hundred  bodies  of  men,  and 
three  horses  were  there  strangled,  and  on  each  side  of  the  bridge  many 
besides  fell  over  into  the  water,  and  were  drowned.  By  means  of 
which  occasion   the  pope  afterwards  caused  the  small  houses  to  be 

U)  Sec  EiHtion  15fi3,  p  369.— Ed.  (2)  Ex  Platina  de  vitis. 


736  ^NEAS    SYLVIUS    Tllf:    POPE. 

Henry    pluck'cd  clowii,  to  makc  the  way  broader.     And  this  is  the  frait  that 
Cometh  by  idolatry.' 


A.  D.         In  the  time  of  this  pope  one   Mattheus  Pahnerius  wrote  a  book 
^457.    '  X)e  Angelis,'  for  defending  whereof  he  was  condemned  by  the  pope, 
and  burned  at  Corna,  a.  d.  1448.^ 

After  Nicholas  V.  succeeded  CalLxtus  III.,  who,  amongst  divers 
other  things,  ordained,  both  at  noon  and  at  evening  the  bell  to  toll  the 
aves,  as  it  was  used  in  the  popish  time,  to  help  the  soldiers  that  fought 
against  the  Turks ;  for  which  cause,  also,  he  ordained  the  feast  of  the 
Transfiguration  of  the  Lord,  solemnizing  it  with  like  pardons  and  in- 
dulgences, as  was  Corpus  Christi  day. 
St.  Ed-         Also  this  pope,  proceeding  contrary  to  the  councils  of  Constance  and 
ca'Juer"'^  Basil,  decreed  that  no  man  should  appeal  from  the  pope  to  any  coun- 
bury  ca-   cil.    Bv  him  also  St.  Edmund  of  Canterbury,  with  divers  others,  were 

nonized.  ,        •^.     ,  "^ 

made  sanits. 

Next  after  this  Calixtus  succeeded  Pius  II.,  otherwise  called  ^neas 

Sylvius,  who  wrote  the  two  books  of  commentaries  upon  the  council 
Promo-  of  Basil  bcforc  mentioned.  This  iEneas,  at  the  time  of  the  writing 
chokeih  of  tliose  his  books,  seemed  to  be  a  man  of  an  indifferent  and  tolerable 
religion,   judgment  and  doctrine,  from  which  he  afterwards,  being  pope,  seemed 

to  decline  and  swerve,  seeking  by  all  means  possible  how  to  deface  and 

abolish  the  books  which  heretofore  he  had  written. 

Sentences  or  Proverbs  attributed  unto  this  Pope  Pius  II. 

The  divine  nature  of  God  may  rather  be  comprehended  by  faith,  than  by 
disputation. 

Christian  faith  is  to  be  considered,  not  by  what  reason  it  is  proved,  but  from 
whom  it  proceedeth. 

Neither  can  a  covetous  man  be  satisfied  with  money,  nor  a  learned  man  with 
knowledge. 

Learning  ought  to  be  to  poor  men  instead  of  silver,  to  noblemen  instead  of 
gold,  and  to  princes  instead  of  precious  stones. 

An  artificial  oration  moveth  fools,  but  not  wise  men. 

Suitors  in  the  law  be  as  birds  :  the  court  is  the  bait  ;  the  judges  be  the  nets  j 
and  the  lawyers  be  the  fowlers. 

Men  are  to  be  given  to  dignities,  and  not  dignities  to  men. 
The  office  of  a  bishop  is  heavy,  but  it  is  blessed  to  him  that  doth  well  bear  it 
Marriage       A  bishop  without  learning  may  be  likened  to  an  ass. 

"[  P"""-'*'^       An  evil  physician  destroyeth  bodies,  but  an  unlearned  priest  destroyeth  souls, 
by^^neas      Marriage  was  taken  from  priests  not  without  great  reason;  but  with  much 
Sylvius,    greater  reason  it  ought  to  be  restored  again. 

The  like  sentence  to  this  last,  he  uttereth  in  his  second  book  of  the 
Council  of  Basil  before  specified,  saying,  "  Pcradvcnture  it  were  not 
the  worst,  that  the  most  part  of  priests  had  their  wives,  for  many 
should  be  saved  in  priestly  marriage,  who  now,  in  unmarried  priest- 
hood, are  damned."  The  same  Pius  also,  as  Celius  reporteth,  dis- 
solved certain  orders  of  nuns,  of  the  orders  of  St.  Bridget  and  St. 
Clare,  bidding  them  to  depart  out,  that  they  should  burn  no  more, 
nor  cover  a  harlot  under  the  vesture  of  religion. 

This  Pius,  if  he  had  brought  as  much  piety  and  godliness  as  he 
brought  learning  unto  his  popedom^  had  excelled  many  popes  that 
went  before  him. 

1 ;  Ex  Platina,  (2)  Ex  Tritemio, 


LETTER  OF  POPE  PIUS  TOUCHING  THE  PEACE  OF  THE  CHURCH.  737 

It  shall  not  be  impertinent  here  to  touch,  what  the  said  ^neas,    Henry 
called  Pius  the  Pope,  writeth  touching  the  peace  of  the  chiu'ch,  unto         " 
Gasper  Scldick,  the  emperor''s  chancellor,  in  his  54th  epistle.  A.D. 

A  Letter  of  Pope  Pius,  touching  the  Peace  of  the  Church. 

All  men  do  abhor  and  detest  schism.     The  way  to  remedy  this  evil  Charles,  The  way 
the  French  king,  hath  showed  us  both  safe  and  brief ;  which  is,  that  princes  or  *?  ^?" 
tlieir  orators  should  convent  and  assemble  together  in  some  common  place,  schism  is 
where  they  may  conclude  upon  matters  amongst  themselves.     To  bring  this  to  ^y  ^^^ 
pass,  it  were  needful  for  writings  to  be  sent  again  to  all  kings  and  princes,  to  mincef  "'^ 
send  their  orators  to  Strasburg,  or  to  Constance,  with  their  full  authority,  there 
to  treat  of  matters  appertaining  to  the  peace  of  the  church.     Neither  would  it 
require  so  great  expenses  ;  forasmuch  as  we  see  the  year  before  three  hundred 
gilders  to  be  sufficient.     Constantine,  the  emperor,  bestowed  not  much  more  in 
the  congi-egation  of  the  council  of  Nice.     And  this  way  could  not  be  stopped  ; 
neither  could  the  pope  or  the  council  withstand  it,  or  make  excuse,  as  though 
this  might  not  easily  be  done  without  them.     For  why  ?  The  secular  princes 
may  convent  and  assemble  together,  will  they,  nill  they ;  and  yet  notwithstand- 
ing unity  may  there  be  concluded  ;  for  he  should  be  an  undoubted  pope,  whom 
all  princes  wordd  obey.   Neither  do  I  see  any  of  the  clergy  so  constant  to  death, 
who  will  suffer  martyrdom  either  for  the  one  part  or  the  other.^     All  we  lightly 
hold  that  faith  which  our  princes  hold ;  which  if  they  woidd  worship  idols,  we 
would  also  do  the  same,  and  deny  not  only  the  pope,  but  God  also,  if  the  secular 
power  strain  us  thereunto,  for  charity  is  waxed  cold,  and  all  faith  is  gone. 
Howsoever  it  be,  let  us  all  desire  and  seek  for  peace  ;  which  peace,  whether  it 
come  by  a  council,  or  by  assembly  of  princes,  call  it  what  you  will,  I  care  not, 
for  we  stand  not  upon  the  term,  but  upon  the  matter.     Call  bread,  if  you  will,  a 
stone,  so  j-ou  give  it  me  to  assuage  my  hunger.     Whether  you  call  it  a  council, 
or  a  conventicle,  or  an  assembly,  or  a  congregation,  or  a  synagogue,  that  is  no 
matter,  so  that  schism  may  be  excluded,  and  peace  established. 

Thus  much  out  of  the  epistle  of  Pius.  Thus  again  it  may  appear, 
of  what  sentence  and  mind  this  Pius  was  in  the  time  of  the  council  of 
Basil,  before  he  was  made  pope.^  For,  as  our  common  proverb 
saith,  "  Honours  change  manners  ;"  so  it  happened  with  this  Pius, 
who,  after  he  came  once  to  be  pope,  was  much  altered  from  what  he 
was  before.  For  when  before,  he  preferred  general  councils  before 
the  pope,  now,  being  pope,  he  did  decree  that  no  man  should  appeal 
from  the  high  bishop  of  Rome  to  any  general  council. 

And  likewise  for  priests'  marriage,  whereas  before  he  thought  it  best 
to  have  their  wives  restored,  yet  afterwards  he  altered  his  mind  other- 
wise, insomuch  that  in  his  book  treating  of  Germany,  and  there  speak- 
ing of  the  noble  city  of  Augsburg,  by  occasion  he  inveighed  against 
a  certain  epistle  of  Huldericke,  once  bishop  of  the  said  city,  written 
against  the  constitution  of  the  single  life  of  priests  :  whereby  it 
appeareth  how  the  mind  of  this  Pius  was  altered  from  that  it  was 
before.'     This  epistle  of  Huldericke  is  before  expressed  at  large.* 

Here  also  might  I  touch  something  concerning  the  discord  betwixt  Discord 
this  .-Eneas  Sylvius  and  Diotherus,  archbishop  of  Mentz,  and  what  p'ju^a^"^ 
discord  was  stirred  up  in  Germany  upon  the  same  between  Frederic  t^e  arch- 
the  palatine,   and  the  duke  of  Wittenberg,   with  others  ;   by  the  Men°z.° 

(1)  The  pope's  clergy  will  not  abide  the  fire,  either  for  prince,  or  pope. 

(2)  The  breath  of  this  pestilent  seat  corrupteth  all  that  sit  in  it,  whatsoever  they  were  before. 

(3)  yEneas  Sylvius,  now  puffed  up  with  worldly  pomp  and  glorj',  impugneth  the  truth  which  he 
did  before  both  know  and  profess. 

(4)  Vol.  ii.  page  11.— Ed. 

VOL.   III.  S    B 


738  GEORGE,    KING    OF    BOHEMIA,    CONDEMNED    FOH    HERESY. 

Henry    Qccasion  whcrcof,  besides  tlic  slaughter  of  many,  the  city  of  Mentz, 
^  ^'      which  was  free  before,  lost  her  freedom,  and  became  servile. 


The  feast 


A.  D.  The  causes  of  the  discord  betwixt  pope  Pius  and  Diotherus,  were 
l*^^^'  these  : — First,  Because  that  Diotherus  would  not  consent  unto  him  in 
the  imposition  of  certain  tallages  and  taxes  within  his  country.  Se- 
condly, For  that  Diotherus  would  not  be  bound  unto  him,  requiring 
that  the  said  Diotherus,  being  prince  elector,  should  not  call  the  other 
electors  together  without  his  license,  that  is,  without  the  license  of 
the  bishop  of  Rome.  And  thirdly,  Because  Diotherus  would  not 
permit  to  the  pope's  legates,  to  convocate  his  clergy  together  after 
A.D.H58.  their  own  lust.     This  pope  Pius  began  his  see  about  a.d.  1458. 

After  this  Pius  II.  succeeded  Paul  II,,  a  pope  wholly  set  upon  his 
belly  and  ambition,  and  not  so  much  void  of  all  learning,  as  the  hater 
of  all  learned  men.  This  Paul,  who  had  a  daughter  begotten  in  for- 
nication, because  he  saw  her  on  that  account  to  be  had  in  reproach, 
began  (as  the  stories  report)  to  repent  him  of  the  law  of  the  single 
life  of  priests,  and  went  about  to  reform  the  same,  had  not  death 
prevented  him.' 

After  this  Paid,  came  Sixtus  IV.,  who  builded  up  in  Rome  stews 
of  both  kinds,  getting  thereby  no  small  revenues  and  rents  unto  the 
church  of  Rome.  This  pope,  amongst  his  other  acts,  reduced  the 
of'the"""^  year  of  Jubilee  from  the  fiftieth  vuito  the  twenty-fifth.  He  also 
Uo^and  instituted  the  feast  of  the  Conception,  and  the  Preservation  of  Mary 
Preserva-  and  Anna  her  mother  and  Joseph.     Also  he  canonized  Bonaventure 

tioiiofour         1   o      T-i  ■      p  • 

Lady.       and  St.  r  rancis  tor  samts. 

Beads  By  this  Sixtus  also  were  beads  brought  in,  and  instituted  to  make 

i™"^       our  Lady^s  Psalter,  through  the  occasion  of  one  Alanus  and  his  order, 

whom  Baptista  maketli  mention  of  in  this  verse :   "  Hi  filo  insertis 

numerant  sua  murmura  Baccis  ;"  that  is,  "  These  men,  putting  their 

beads  xipon  a  string,  number  their  prayers."     This  Sixtus  the  pope 

made  two  and  thirty  cardinals  in  his  time,  of  whom  Petrus  Ruerius 

was  the  first,  who,  for  the  time  that  he  was  cardinal,  which  was  but 

two  years,  spent  in  luxurious  riot,  wasted  and  consumed,  two  hundred 

thousand  florins,  and   was  left  sixty  thousand  in  debt.     Wesellus 

Groningensis,  in  a  certain  treatise  of  his,  '  De  Indulgentiis  Papalibus,"' 

wi'iting  of  this  pope  Sixtus,  reporteth  this.  That  at  the  request  of  the 

aforesaid  Peter,  cardinal,  and  of  Jerome,  his  brother,  the  said  pope 

Sixtus  permitted  and  granted  unto  the  whole  fiimily  of  the  cardinal  of 

St.  Lucy,  in  the  three  hot  months  of  summer,  June,  July,  and  August, 

t       a  thing  too  horrible  to  be  spoken  ;  with  this  clause,  "  Fiat  ut  petitur ;"" 

that  is,  "  Be  it  as  it  is  asked.'"' 

Innocent       Ncxt  after  tliis  Sixtus,  came  Innocent  VIII.,  as  rude,  and  as  far 

He  con-    from  all  learning,  as  his  predecessor  was  before  him.     Amongst  the 

efJUt"meti  "oble  facts  of  this  pope,  this  was  one,  that  in  the  town  of  Polus  apud 

and  six     Equicolos,  he  caused  eight  men  and  six  women,  with  the  lord  of  the 

for  here-  placc,  to  be  apprehended  and  taken,  and  judged  for  heretics,  because 

*^'  that  they  said  none  of  them  was  the  vicar  of  Christ  who  come  after 

t\^l^Q{    Peter,  but  they  only  who  followed  the  poverty  of  Christ.     Also  he 

Bohemia,  condemned  of  heresy,  George,  the  king  of  Bohemia,  and  deprived 

demned.   him  of  his  dignity,  and  also  of  his  kingdom,  and  procured  his  whole 

(!)  Ex  Stanisla.  Rutheno.    Cent.  viii.  Bal. 


LONDON    RESCUKU    BY    PRINCE    EDWARD.  739 

stock  to  be  utterly  rejected  and  put  down,  giving  his  kingdom  to    ^py» 

Matthias,  king  of  Pannonia.  

A.D. 

Now  from  the  popes  to   descend  to   other  estates,  it  remaineth    ^'^^^- 
likewise  somewhat  to  write  of  the  emperors  incident  to  this  time, 
with  matters  and  grievances  of  the  Germans,  and  also  other  princes, 
first  beginning  with  our  troubles  and  mutations  here  at  home,  per- 
taining to  the  overthrow  of  this  king  Henry  and  his  seat,  now  follow- 
ing to  be  showed.     And  briefly  to  contract  long  process  of  much  Mischiefs 
tumult  and  business  into  a  short  narration,  here  is  to  be  remembered,  iand"after 
wdiich  partly  before  was  signified,  how,  after  the  death  of  the  duke  of  ^f  jhe®^'*^ 
Gloucester,  mischiefs  came  in  by  heaps  upon  the  king  and  his  realm,  ^uke  of 
For,  after  the  giving  away  of  Anjou  and  Maine  to  the  Frenchmen,  by  ter. 
the  unfortunate  marriage  of  queen   Margaret  above-mentioned,   the 
said  Frenchmen,  perceiving  now  by  the  death  of  the  duke  of  Glou- 
cester, the  stay  and  pillar  of  this  commonwealth  to  be  decayed,  and 
seeing,  moreover,  the  hearts  of  the  nobility  amongst  themselves  to  be 
divided,  foreslacked  no  time,  having  such  an  open  way  nito  JNor- 
mandy,  that  in  short  time  they  recovered  the  same,  and  also  got  Lands 
Gascony,  so  that  no  more  noAv  remained  to  England  of  all  the  parts  of  the 
beyond  the  sea,  but  only  Calais.     Neither  yet  did  all  the  calamity  of  ^g'^n"'^" 
the  realm  only  rest  in  this :  for  the  king,  now  having  lost  his  friendly 
uncle,  as  the  stay  and  staff  of  his  age,  who  had  brought  him  up  so 
faithfully  from  his  youth,  was  now  thereby  the  more  open  to  his  ene- 
mies, and  they  more  emboldened  to  set  upon  him  ;  as  appeared  first 
by  Jack  Cade,  the  Kentish  captain,  who,  encamping  first  on  Black-  Jack 
heath,  afterwards  aspired  to  London,  and  had  the  spoil  thereof,  the 
king  being  driven  into  Warwickshire.     After   the    suppression    of 
Cade,  ensued  not  long  after  the  duke  of  York,  who,  being  accom-  The  duke 
panied  with  three  earls,  set  upon  the  king  near  to  St.  Alban's,  where  against 
the  king  was  taken  in  the  field  captive,  and  the  duke  of  York  was  by  '^^  '^'"^• 
parliament  declared  protector  ;  which  was  a.  d.  1453.    After  this  fol- 
lowed long  division  and  mortal  Avar  between  the  two  houses  of  Lan- 
caster and  York,   continuing  many  years.     At  length  about  a.  d.  a.d.hss. 
1459,  the  duke  of  York  was  slain  in  battle  by  the  queen,  near  to  the 
town  of  Wakefield,  and  with  him  also  his  son,  the  earl  of  Rutland ; 
by  which  queen  also,  shortly  after,  in  the  same  year,  were  discom- 
fited the  earl  of  Warwick,  and  the  duke  of  Norfolk,  to  whom  the 
keeping  of  the  king  w^as  committed  by  the  duke  of  York  ;  and  so  the 
queen  again  delivered  her  husband. 

After  this  victory  obtained,  the  northern  men,  advanced  not  a  The 
little  in  pride  and  courage,  began  to  take  upon  them  gi-eat  attempts,  mJn  i"" 
not  only  to  spoil  and  rob  churches,  and  religious  houses,  and  villages,  [^"'^/yV 
but  also  were  frilly  intended,  partly  by  themselves,  partly  by  the  in-  Y_"s*°yf 
ducement  of  their  lords  and  captains,  to  sack,  Avaste,  and  utterly  to 
subvert  the  city  of  London,  and  to  take  the  spoil  thereof ;  and  no 
doubt  (saith  my  history')  would  have  proceeded  in  their  conceived 
greedy  intent,  had  not  the  opportune  favour  of  God  provided  a  speedy 
remedy.     For,  as  these  mischiefs  were  in  brewing,  suddenly  cometh  London 
the  noble  prince  Edward  unto  London  with  a  mighty  army,  the  27th  ^^^f^p'^f^^^ 
day  of  February,  who  was  the  son  and  heir  to  the  duke  of  York  Edward. 

(1)  Ex  historia  manuscripta,  cui  titalus,  '  Scala  Mundi,' 

3b2 


740  THE    TITLE    OF    THE    HOUSE    OF    YORK. 

Henry    abovc-mentioned,  accompanied  with  the  earl  of  Warwick,  and  divers 
more.     King  Henry,  in  the  mean  time,  with  his  victory,  went  up  to 


A.  D.    York  ;  when   Edward,   being  at  London,  caused  there  to  be  pro- 
^"^^^^    claimed  certain  articles  concerning  his  title  to  the  crown  of  England, 
which  was  the  second  day  of  March.     Whereupon  the  next  day  fol- 
lowing, the  lords  both  temporal  and  spiritual  being  assembled  toge- 
ther, the  said  articles  were  propounded,  and  also  well  approved.  The 
4th  day  of  the   said  month  of  March,   a.  d.  1461,  after  a  solemn 
general  procession  (according  to  the  blind  superstition  of  those  days) 
The  title  the  bishop  of  Exeter  made  a  senuon  at  PauFs  Cross,  wherein  he  com- 
ward'to    meudcd  and  proved,  by  manifold  evidences,  the  title  of  prince  Edward 
prov^d^"  to  be  just  and  lawful,  answering  in  the  same  to  all  objections  which 
PauVs      miarht  be  made  to  the  contrary. 

Cross  o  •' 

Hetaketh      Tliis  matter  being  thus  discussed,   prince  Edward,   accompanied 
posses-     \j'\i\\  the  lords  spiritual  and  temporal,  and  with  nuich  concourse  of 

sionoftne  l  __.  ^  .'  tt    n  ^      ^  i  i        f>   11 

crown,  people,  rodc  the  same  day  to  VVestmmster  Hall,  and  there,  by  tlie  tull 
consent,  as  well  of  the  lords,  as  also  by  the  voice  of  all  the  commons, 
took  his  possession  of  the  crown,  and  was  called  king  Edward  the 
Fourth. 

These  things  thus  accomplished  at  London,  as  to  such  a  matter 
appertained,  and  preparation  of  money  sufficiently  being  ministered  of 
the  people  and  commons,  with  most  ready  and  willing  minds,  for  the 
necessary  furniture  of  his  wars  ;  he,  with. the  duke  of  Norfolk,  and 
the  earl  of  Warwick,  and  lord  Fauconbridge,  in  all  speedy  wise  took 
his  journey  toward  king  Henry,  who,  now  being  at  York,  and  for- 
saken of  the  Londoners,  had  all  his  refuge  only  reposed  in  the 
northern  men. 
Fierce  When  king  Edward  with  his  army  had  passed  over  the  river  Trent, 

batti"""^  and  was  come  near  to  Ferrybridge,  where  also  the  host  of  king 
Henry  was  not  far  off,  upon  Palm  Sunday,  between  Ferrybridge  and 


between 
Henry 


and  Tadcaster,  both  the  armies  of  the  southern  and  northern  men  joined 
together  in  battle.  And  although,  at  the  first  beginning,  divers 
horsemen  of  king  Edward's  side  turned  their  backs,  and  spoiled  the 
king  of  carriage  and  victuals,  yet  the  courageous  prince  with  his  cap- 
tains, little  discouraged  therewith,  fiercely  and  manfidly  set  on  their 
adversaries  :  which  battle  on  both  sides  was  so  cruelly  fought,  that 
in  the  same  conflict  were  slain  to  the  number,  as  is  reported,  of  thirty 
thousand  of  the  poor  commons,  beside  men  of  name.  Notwithstand- 
ing, the  conquest  fell  on  king  Edward's  part,  so  that  king  Henry 

King       having  lost  all,  was  forced  to  flee  into  Scotland,  where  also  he  gave 

vh"con-   up  to  the  Scots  the  town  of  Berwick,  after  he  had  reigned  eight  and 

quered.     thirty  ycars  and  a  half 

The  claim  and  title  of  the  duke  of  York,  and  after  him  of  Edward 
his  son,  put  up  to  the  lords  and  commons,  whereby  they  challenged 
the  crown  to  the  house  of  York,  is  thus,  in  the  story  of  Scala 
Mundi,  word  for  word,  as  hereunder  is  contained. 

The  Title  of  the  House  of  York  to  the  Crown  of  England. 

Edward  the  Tliird,  right  king  of  England,  had  issue,  first,  prince  Edward : 
secondly,  William  Hatfield  :  thirdly,  Lionel :  fourthly,  John  of  Gaunt,  &rc. 
Prince  Edward  had  Richard  the  Second,  which  died  without  issue.  William 
Hatfield  died  without  issue.     Lionel,  duke  of  Clarence,  had  issue  lawfully  begot, 


THE  TITLE  OF  THE  HOUSE  OF  YORK. 


741 


Henry 
VI. 

A.D. 

1461. 


Philip,  his  only  daughter  and  heir ;  which  was  lawfiilly  coupled  to  Edmund 
Mortimer,  earl  of  March,  and  had  issue  lawfully  begot,  Roger  Mortimer  earl 
of  March,  and  heir ;  which  Roger  had  issue,  Edmund  earl  of  March,  Roger, 
Anne,  and  Alienor.  Edmund  and  Alienor  died  without  issue,  and  the  said 
Anne,  by  lawful  matrimony  was  coupled  unto  Richard  earl  of  Cambridge,  the 
son  of  Edmund  of  Langley,  who  had  issue  and  lawfidly  bare  Richard  Plantage-  Richard 
net,  now  duke  of  York;  John  of  Gaunt  gat  Henry,  who  unrightfully  entreated  P'^nta- 
king  Richard,  then  being  alive  Edmund  Mortimer  earl  of  March,  son  of  the  " 
said  Phihp,  daughter  to  Lionel.  To  the  which  Richard  duke  of  York  and  son 
to  Anne,  daughter  to  Roger  Mortimer  earl  of  March,  son  and  heir  to  the  said 
Philip,  daughter  and  heir  to  the  said  Lionel,  the  third  son  of  king  Edward  the 
Third,  the  right  and  dignity  of  the  crown  appertained  and  belonged,  afore  any 
issue  of  the  said  John  of  Gaunt.  Notwithstanding,  the  said  title  of  dignity  of 
the  said  Richard  of  York,  the  said  Richard  desiring  the  wealth,  rest,  and  pro- 
sperity of  England,  agreeth  and  consenteth  that  king  Henry  the  Sixth  shoidd 
be  had  and  taken  for  king  of  England  during  his  natural  life  from  this  time, 
without  hurt  of  his  title. 

Wherefore  the  king,  understanding  the  said  title  of  the  said  duke  to  be  just, 
lawful,  true,  and  sufficient,  by  the  adnce  and  assent  of  the  lords  spiritual  and 
temporal,  and  the  commons  in  the  parliament,  and  by  the  authority  of  the  same 
parliament,  declareth,  approveth,  ratifieth,  confirmeth,  and  accepteth  the  said 
title  for  just,  good,  lawfi.d  and  tme  ;  and  thereto  giveth  his  assent  and  agreement 
of  his  free  will  and  liberty.  And  over  that,  by  the  said  advice  and  authority 
declareth,  calleth,  stablisheth,  affirmeth,  and  reputeth  the  said  Richard  of  York 
very  true  and  rightful  heir  to  the  crown  of  England  and  France ;  and  that  all 
other  statutes  and  acts  made  by  any  of  the  late  Henries,  contrary  to  this  advice, 
be  annulled,  repelled,  damned,  cancelled,  void,  and  of  no  force  or  effect.  The 
king  agreed  and  consented  that  the  said  duke  and  his  heirs  shall  after  his 
natural  life  enjoy  the  crown,  &:c.  Also,  that  all  sayings  and  doings  against  the 
duke  of  York,  shall  be  high  treason,  and  all  acts  of  parliaments  contrary  to  this 
principal  act  be  void  and  of  none  effect,  &:c.i 

And  thus  much  for  the  reign  of  king  Henry  VI.,  who  now  lacked 
his  uncle  and  protector,  duke  of  Gloucester,  about  him.  But  com- 
monly the  lack  of  such  friends  is  never  felt  before  they  be  missed. 

In  the  time  of  this  king  was  builded  the  house  in  London,  called 
Leaden-hall,  founded  by  one  Simon  E\Te,  mayor  once  of  the  said 
city  of  London,  a.d.  1445. 

Also  the  standard  in  Cheap,  builded  by  John  Wells,  a.d.  1442  ; 
the  conduit  in  Fleet-street,  by  William  Eastfield,  a.d.  1438:  item, 
Newgate,  builded  by  the  goods  of  Richard  Whittington,  a.d.  1422. 

Moreover  the  said  Henry  VI.  founded  the  college  of  Eton,  and 
another  house,  ha\ang  then  the  title  of  St.  Nicholas,  in  Cambridge, 
now  called  King's  College.^ 

In  the  reign  of  this  Henry  VI ,  it  is  not  to  be  passed  over  in 
silence,  which  we  find  noted  in  the  parliament  rolls,  how  that  Lewis, 
archbishop  of  Rouen,  after  the  death  of  the  late  bishop  of  Ely,  had 
granted  unto  him  by  the  pope's  bulls,  during  his  life,  all  the  profits 
of  the  said  bishopric,  by  the  name  of  the  administrator  of  the  said 
bishopric.  Lewis,  the  aforesaid  archbishop,  showed  his  bulls  to  the 
king,  who  utterly  rejected  his  bulls.  Notwithstanding,  for  his  service 
done  in  France,  the  king  granted  to  him  the  administration  aforesaid, 
which,  to  all  intents,  at  "the  petition  of  the  said  Lewis,  should  be 
affirmed  to  be  of  as  great  force  as  though  he  were  bishop,  touching 
profits,  liberties,  and  hability. 

Neither  agam  is  here  to"  be  overpast  a  certain  tragical  act  done 


leaden- 
hall.   The 
standard,, 
the  con- 
duit in 
Fleet- 
street, 
and  New- 
gate :   the 
colleges 
of  Eaton 
and 
King's. 


The  king 

rejects 
the  pope's 
buUs. 


(1)  Ex  Scala  Mundi. 


(2)  lb. 


742  KING    EDWARD    IV.    BEGINS    HIS    REIGN. 

Henry    between  Easter  and  Whitsuntide  of  a  false  Briton,  a.d.  1427,  who 

'. —  murdered  a  good  widow  in  her  bed  (who  had  brought  him  up  of 

A.  D,    ahns,  without  Aldgate  in  the  suburbs  of  London)  and  bare  away  all 
^  °^'    that  she  had,  and  afterwards  he  took  succour  of  holy  church  at  St. 


George's  in  Southwark  ;  but  at  last  he  took  the  cross,  and  forswore 

Example  the  king's  land.'     And  as  he  went  his  way,  it  happened  him  to  come 

rod  and    by  the  Same  place  where  he  had  done  that  cursed  deed  ;  and  women 

ment       ^^  ^^^^  Same  parish  came  out  with  stones  and  channel-dung,  and  there 

made  an  end  of  him  in  the  High-street,  so  that  he  went  no  further, 

notwithstanding  the  constables  and  other  men  also,  who  had  him 

under  governance  to  conduct  him  forward  ;  for  there  was  a  great 

company  of  them,  so  that  they  were  not  able  to  withstand  them. 


EDWARD  THE  FOURTH.^ 

A.D.        King  Edward,  after  his  conquest  and  victory  achieved  against 

1461,    king  Henry,   retm-ned  again  to  London,  where,  upon  the    vigil  of 

St.  Peter  and  Paul,  beincj  on  a  Sundav,  he   was  crowned  kino-  of 

England,  and  reigned  twenty-two  years,  albeit  not  without  great  dis- 

quietness,  and  much  perturbation  in  his  reign. 

Queen  Queeu  Margaret,  hearins'  how  her  husband  was  fled  into  Scotland, 

Margaret  ,  .         ®  ^  . 

flees  the    was  also  fain  to  flee  the  land,  and  went  to  her  father,  duke  of  Anjou  ; 

land.        from  whence,  the  next  year  following,  she  returned  again,  to  renew 

war  against  king  Edward,  with  small  succour  and  less  luck.     For 

being  encountered  by   the   earl  of  Warwick,  about  November,  she 

was  driven  to  the  seas  again,  and  by  tempest  of  weather  was  driven 

into  Scotland. 

a.d.  1462.       In  this  year  we  read  that  king  Edward,  in  the  cause  of  a  certain 

widow  for  rape,  sat  in  his  own  person  in  Westminster-hall,  upon  his 

own  bench,  discussing  her  cause.* 

A.D.  1463.      The  year  following,  king  Henry,  issuing  out  of  Scotland  with  a 

Hen?yvi  Sufficient   power  of  Scots    and   Frenchmen,    came    into  the   north 

again  re-  country  to  recovcr  the  crown,  unto  whom  the  lord  Radulph  Percy, 

pulsed  st  .  •  ^  j-i  ,  *>  ' 

the  battle  aiid  lord  Radulpli  Gray  flying  from  king  Edward,  did  adjoin  them- 
Exham.  selves  :  but  the  Lord  so  disposing,  king  Henry  with  his  power  was 
repulsed  in  battle  at  Exham  by  the  lord  Mountecute,  having  then 
the  rule  of  the  north  ;  where  the  duke  of  Somerset,  lord  Hungcrford, 
lord  Ross,  with  certain  others  were  taken.  The  lord  Radulph  Percy 
was  slain,  the  residue  fled.  Albeit  the  history  of  'Scala  Mundi'  referreth 
this  battle  to  the  year  1464,  the  15th  day  of  May  :  in  which  month 
of  May  were  beheaded  the  duke  of  Somerset,  lord  Hungerford,  lord 
Ross,  lord  Philip  Wentworth,  lord  Thomas  Hussy,  lord  Thomas 
Findern,  besides  twenty-one  others  belonging  to  the  retinue  and 
household  of  King  Henry  VL  Queen  Margaret,  finding  no  resting 
place  here  in  England,  took  her  progress  again  from  whence  she 
came,  learning  in  her  own  country  to  drink  that  drink,  which  she 
herself  had  brewed  here  in  England. 


(1)  Ex  vetusto  rod.  cui  initium,  nomina  custodem,  &c.  Et  ex  Fabiana. 

(2)  Edition  1583,  p.  712.— Ed.  (3)  Ex  Scala  Mundi. 


THE    WARS    BETWEEN    YOEK    AND    LANCASTER.  743 

And  not  long  after,  the  next  year,  a.d.  1465,  on  the  day  of  St.  Edward 

Peter  and  Paul,  king  Henry  being  found  and  known  in  a  wood  by : 

one  Cantlow  (as  they  say),  was  arrested  by  the  earl  of  Warwick,  and    A.D. 
at  last,  of  a  king  made  prisoner  in  the  Tower  of  London.  ^^^^' 

In  this   mean  time,  king   Edward  after  the  motion  of  marriage  J^'"g 
for  him  being  made,  and  first  the  lady  Margaret,  sister  to  James  IV.,  taken, 
king  of  Scots,  thought  upon,  but  that  motion  taking  no  effect,  after-  a"d  com- 
wards  the    lady   Elizabeth,    sister   to  Henry  king  of  Castile,  was  ^^^'^^  *° 
intended  ;  but  she  being  under  age,  the   earl   of  Warwick  turning  Tower. 
then  his  legation  and  voyage  to  the  French  king,  Louis  XL,  to  obtain 
lady  Bona,  daughter  of  the  duke  of  Savoy,  and  sister  to  Charlotte 
the  French  queen,  and  having  obtained  the  same,  had  cast  favour 
upon  one  Elizabeth  Grey,  widow   of  sir  John  Grey,  knight,  slain 
before  in  the  battle  of  St.  Alban's,  daughter  to  the  duchess  of  Bed- 
ford, and  lord  Rivers  ;  and  first  went  about  to  have  her  to  his  con- 
cubine.    But  she,  as  being  unworthy  (as  she  said)  to  be  the  wife  of  The 
such  a   high  personage,  so   thinking  herself  too    good    to    be    his  sudden 
concubine,  in  such  sort  won  the  king\s  heart,  that  incontinent,  before  ™^^'^^® 
the  return  of  the  earl  of  Warwick,  he  married  her;  at  which  marriage  queen    \ 
Avere  no  more  than  only  the  duchess  of  Bedford,  two  gentlewomen,  beth. 
the  priest,  and  the  clerk.     Upon  this  so  hasty  and  unlucky  marriage  The  first 
ensued  no  little  trouble  to  the  king,  much  bloodshed  to  the  realm,  '^^'l'"s 

^  .  .         out 

undoing  almost  to  all  her  kindred,  and  finally  confusion  to  king  between 
Edward's  two  sons,  who  both  were  declared  afterwards  to  be  bastards,  Edward 
and  also  deprived  of  their  lives.     For  the  earl  of  W^arwick,  who  ^"^"1  '^'^^ 
had  been  the  faithful  friend  and  chief  maintainer  before  of  the  king,  Warwick. 
at  the  hearing  of  this  maniage,  was  therewith  so  grievously  moved  ra""/ ^' 
and  chafed  in  his  mind,  that  he  never  after  sought  any  thing  more,  ^f^g"^* 
than  how  to  work  displeasure  to  the  king,  and  to  put  him  beside  Edward. 
his  cushion.     And,  although  for  a  time  he  dissembled  his  wrath- 
ful mood,   till  he  might  spy  a  time   convenient,  and  a  world  to 
set  forward  his  purpose,  at  last,  finding  occasion  somewhat  serving 
to  his  mind,  he  breaketh  his  heart  to  his  two  brethren,  to  wit, 
the  marquis  Mountecute,  and  the   archbishop  of  York,  conspiring 
with  them  how  to  bring  his  purjjose  about.     Then  thought  he  also 
to  prove  afar  off  the  mind  of  the  duke  of  Clarence,  king  Edward's 
brother,  and  likewise  obtained  him,  giving  also  to  him  his  daughter 
in  marriage. 

This  matter  being  thus  prepared  against  the  king,  the  first  flame 
of  his  conspiracy  began  to  appear  in  the  north  country.  Where 
the  northern  men,  in  short  space  gathering  themselves  in  open  rebel- 
lion, and  finding  captains  of  their  wicked  purpose,  came  down  from 
York  toward  London.  Against  whom  was  appointed  by  the  king, 
William  lord  Herbert,  earl  of  Pembroke,  with  the  lord  Stafford, 
and  certain  other  captains,  to  encounter.  The  Yorkshire  men,  giving 
the  overthrow  first  to  the  lord  Stafford,  then  to  the  earl  of  Pem- 
broke, and  his  company  of  Welchmen  at  Banbury  field,  at  last, 
joining  together  with  the  army  of  the  earl  of  Warwick,  and  the 
duke  of  Clarence,  in  the  dead  of  the  night  secretly  stealing  on 
the  king's  field  at  Wolncy  by  Warwick,  killed  the  watch,  and  took 
the  king  prisoner,  who  first  being  in  the  castle  of  Warwick,  then 
was  conveyed  by   night  to  Middleham  castle  in  Yorkshire,  under 


744!  THE    WARS    BETWEEN    YORK    AND    LANCASTER. 

Edward  the  custocly  of   the  archbishop    of  York,  where  he,    having   loose 

^'     keeping,  and   liberty  to   go  on   hunting,  meeting  with  sir  William 

A.  D.    Stanley,    sir  Thomas    of  Borough,    and   other  his  friends,  was  too 

^^^^-    good  for   his  keepers,  and   escaped   the  hands  of  his  enemies,  and 

so  came  to  York,    where  he   was    well   received ;  from   thence   to 

Lancaster,  where  he  met  with  the  lord  Hastings,  his  chamberlain, 

well  accompanied  ;  by  whose  help  he  came  safe  to  London. 

After  this  tumult,  when  reconciliation  could  not  come  to  perfect 

peace  and  unity,  although  much  labour  was  made  by  the  nobility,  the 

Llnco"ii"  earl  of  Warwick  raiseth  up  a  new  war  in  Lincolnshire,  the  captain 

^ressed'   "^^ercof  was  sir  Robert  Wells,  knight,  who  shortly  after,  being  taken 

in  battle  with  his  father,  and  sir  Thomas  Dunocke,  were  beheaded. 

The  residue  casting  away  their  coats,  ran  away  and  fled,  giving  the 

The  earl   name  of  the  field,  called  Loosc-coat-field.    The  carl  of  Warwick  after 

wick  mid  this,  put  out  of  comfort  and  hope  to  prevail  at  home,  fled  out  of 

0^^-""^  England,  a.d.  1470,  first  to  Calais,  then  to  Louis,  the  French  king, 

renceflee  accompanied  with  the  duke  of  Clarence.     The  fame  of  the  earl  of 

France.    Warwick  and  of  his  famous  acts  was  at  that  time  in  great  admiration 

above  measure,  and  so  highly  favoured,  that  both  in  England  and 

France  all  men  were  glad  to  behold  his  personage.     Wherefore  the 

coming  of  this  earl,  and  of  the  duke  of  Clarence,  was  not  a  little 

grateful  to  the  French  king,  and  no  less  opportune  to  queen  Margaret, 

king  Henry's  wife,  and  prince  Edward  her  son,  who  also  came  to  the 

French  court  to  meet  and  confer  together  touching  their  affairs,  where 

a  league  between  them  was  concluded ;  and,  moreover,  a  marriage 

between  Edward  prince  of  Wales,  and  Anne,  the  second  daughter  of 

the  earl  of  Warwick,  was  wrought.     Thus  all  things  falling  luckily 

upon  the  earPs  part,  besides  the  large  offers  and  great  promises  made 

by  the  French  king,  in  the  best  manner  to  set  forward  their  purpose; 

the  earl  having  also  intelligence  by  letters,  that  the  hearts  almost  of 

all  men  went  with  him,  and  longed  sorely  for  his  presence,  so  that 

there  lacked  now  but  only  haste,  with  all  speed  possible  to  return ; 

he,  with  the  duke  of  Clarence,  well  fortified  with  the  French  navy,  set 

The  earl  forward  toward  England  :  for  so  was  it  between  them  before  decreed, 

wick^and  that  they  two  should  prove  the  first  venture,  and  then  queen  Margaret, 

of  cfa^^^  with  prince  Edward  her  son,  should  follow  after.     The  arrival  of  the 

rence  re-  earl  was  no  sooucr  heard  of  at  Dartmouth  in  Devonshire,  than  great 

England,  coucoursc  of  people,  by  thousands,  went  to  him  from  all  quarters  to 

receive  and  welcome  him  •,  who  immediately  made  proclamation,  in 

King       the  name  of  king  Henry  the  Sixth,  charging  all  men,  able  to  bear 

again  pro-  armour,  to  prepare  themselves  to  fight  against  Edward  duke  of  York, 

^\v^^^    usurper  of  the  crown.     Here  lacked  no  friends,  strength  of  men, 

furniture,  nor  policy  convenient  for  such  a  matter. 

When  king  Edward  (who  before  not  passing  for  the  matter,  nor 
seeking  how  either  to  have  stopped  his  landing,  or  else  straightways 
to  have  encountered  with  him,  before  the  gathering  of  his  friencls, 
but  passing  forth  the  time  in  hunting,  in  hawking,  in  all  pleasure 
and  dalliance)  had  knowledge  what  great  resort  of  multitudes  inces- 
constant   santly  repaired  more  and  more  daily  about  the  earl  and  the  duke,  he 
levity  of   began  now  to  provide  for  remedy,  when  it  was  too  late  ;  who,  trusting 
ofEng-    too  much  to  his  friends  and  fortune  before,  did  now  right  well  per- 
ceive what  a  variable  and  inconstant  thing  the  people  is,  and  especially 


THE    WEAK    STATE    OF    KING    EDWARD.  745 

here  of  England,  whose  nature  is  never  to  be  content  long  with  the  Edicani 
present  state,  but  always  delighting  in  news,  seeketh  new  variety  of        " 
changes,  either  envying  that  which  standeth,  or  else  pitying  that    A.D. 
which  is  fallen.     Which  inconstant  mutability  of  the  light  people,    ^'*^^' 
changing  with  the  wind,  and  wavering  with  the  reed,  did  well  appear 
in  the  course  of  this  king''s  story.     For  he,  through  the  means  of  the 
people  when  he  was  down,  was  exalted ;  now  being  exalted,  of  the 
same  was  forsaken.     Whereby  this  is  to  be  noted  of  all  princes,  that 
as  there  is  nothing  in  this  mutable  world  firm  and  stable ;  so  there  is 
no  trust  nor  assurance  to  be  made,  but  only  in  the  favour  of  God, 
and  in  the  promises  of  his  word,  only  in  Christ  his  Son,  whose  king- 
dom only  shall  never  have  an  end,  nor  is  subject  to  any  mutation. 

These  things  thus  passing  on  in  England  on  the  earfs  side  against  The 
king  Edward,  he,  accompanied  with  the  duke  of  Gloucester  his  brother,  heartTnd 
and  the  lord  Hastings,  who  had  married  the  earl  of  Warwick's  sister,  *''"*{' "[ 
and  yet  was  never  untrue  to  the  king  his  master,  and  the  lord  Scales,  Hastings. 
brother  to  the  queen,  sent  abroad  to  all  his  trusty  friends  for  furniture 
of  able  soldiers,  for  defence  of  his  person,  to  withstand  his  enemies. 
When  little  rescue  and  few  in  effect  would  come,  the  king  himself,  King 
so  destitute,  departed  to  Lincolnshire,  where  he,  perceiving  his  ene-  forsaken 
mies  daily  to  increase  upon  him,  and  all  the  countries  about  to  be  °^^^f  . 

■  .  ••  •  --.  people  in 

in  a  roar,  making  fires,  and  singing  songs,  crying,  "  King  Henry,  his  need. 
king  Henry,"  "  a  Warwick,  a  Warwick,"  and  hearing  moreover  his 
enemies,  the  Lancastrians,  to  be  within  half  a  day's  journey  of  him, 
was  advised  bv  his  friends  to  flee  over  the  sea  to  the  duke  of  Bur- 
gundy, who  not  long  before  had  married  king  Edward's  sister. 

Here,  peradventure,  might  be  thought,  by  the  common  judgment  whether 
and  policy  of  man,  that  king  Edward,  as  he  had  in  his  hands  the  lives  l\ml\i- 
of  king  Henry,  his  queen,  and  his  prince,  so  if  he  had  dispatched  '^''^„P/ 
them  out  of  the  way  when  he  might,  he  had  not  fallen  into  this  policy  be 
misery  :  but  because  he  took  not  the  vantage,  which  time  rather  than  ^  '^°"^"' 
godly  reason  gave  him,  therefore  that  sparing  pity  of  his,  turned  now 
to  his  confusion  and  ruin.     And,  certes,  I  suppose  no  less,  but  if  the 
same  case  had  fallen  in  these  om-  pitiless  days,  in  which  charity  now 
waxeth  utterly  cold,  and  humanity  is  almost  forgotten,  the  occasion 
of  such  a  time  should  not  be  so  neglected.  But  let  us  here  note  and 
learn,  how  godly  simplicity  always,  in  the  end  of  things,  gaineth  more 
than  man's  policy,  forasmuch  as  man  worketh  with  the  one,  but  God 
worketh  with  the  other. 

And  so  far  is  it  oflT,  that  the  event  and  success  of  things  be  governed 
by  man's  advised  policy,  or  unadvised  affection  in  this  w^orld,  that  that 
is  judged  to  be  weaker  which  flourisheth  in  man,  than  that  which  is 
cast  down  in  the  Lord ;  as  in  the  double  case  of  both  these  kings 
may  well  appear.    And  first,  let  us  consider  the  case  of  king  Edward,  The 
who,  being  so  beset  and  compassed  Avith  evils  and  distresses  on  every  cas"e  o^f 
side,  first  was  compelled  to  take  the  Washes  between  Lincolnshire  {^.o^^i^gs 
and  Lynn,  which  was  no  less  dangerous  to  his  life,  than  it  was  un-  consider- 
seeraly  for  his  estate.     Being  come  to  Lynn,  in  what  peril  w^as  he  King 
there,  through  the  doubtful  mutability  of  the  townsmen,  if  he  had  f^^^l^^ 
"been  known  to  his  enemies .''  and  how  could  he  but  be  known,  if  he  had  ^^.^^^^^ 
tarried  any  space .''     But,  though  men  and  friends  forsook  him,  yet 


746  THE    WARS    BETWEEN    YOKK    AND    LANCASTER. 

Edward  the  mcrcy  of  God,  not  forsaking  the  life  of  him  who  showed  mercy 

L_  unto   others,   so  provided,  that  at  the  same  present  there  was  an 

A.D.    English  ship,  and  two  hulks  of  Holland,  ready  to  their  journey.   Thus 
.  ^^70.    ]jiug  Edward,  without  provision,  without  bag  or  baggage,  without 
God  pro-  cloth-sack  or  mail,  without  store  of  money,  without  raiment,  save 
only  apparel  for  war ;  also  without  all  friends,  except  only  his  brother 
King       the  duke  of  Gloucester,  the  lord  Scales,  and  lord  Hastings,  with  a  few 
f^etl^    other  trusty  friends,  to  the  number  of  seven  or  eight  hundred  persons, 
shipping,  took  shipping  towards  Holland  ;  at  which  time  he  was  in  no  less  jeo- 
pardy almost  on  the  sea,  than  he  was  on  the  land.  For  certain  Easter- 
lings,  having  many  ships  of  war,  which  lay  roving  the  same  time  on 
the  sea,  and  had  done  much  damage  the  year  before,  as  well  to  the 
English  merchants  as  to  the  French  nation,  spying  the  king's  ship, 
King       with  seven  or  eight  gallant  ships  made  sail  after  the  king  and  his 
neZ^^^    company.     The  king's  ship  was  good  of  sail,  and  got  some  ground, 
the^^Ea^st  ^^^^^^  ^0*"  ™^ich,  of  the  Easterliugs,  that  she  came  to  the  coast  of 
eriings.     Holland   before  Alckmaer,  and  there  cast  anchor :    for  otherwise, 
being  an  ebbing-water,  they  could  not  enter  the  haven.    The  Easter- 
lings  with  their  great  ships  approached  as  near  as  they  could  possibly 
come  for  the  low  water,  purposing  at  the  flood  to  obtain  their  prey  ;  and 
so  were  like  to  do,  if  the  Lord  had  not  there  also  provided  Mounsieur 
de  Grounture,  governor  for  duke  Charles  in  Holland,  at  that  season 
God        to  be  personally  present  in  the  town  of  Alckmaer,  who,  hearing  of 
prov?-      the   jeopardy  of  the  king  being  there  at   anchor,  prohibited   the 
deth.       Easterlings,  on  pain  of  death,  to  meddle  with  any  Englishmen  who 

were  the  duke's  friends  and  allies. 
King  Ed-  Thus  king  Edward,  well  chastised  of  God  for  his  Avantonness,  both 
livered  by  sca  and  land,  but  not  utterly  given  over  from  his  protection, 
Easter^^  escaping  so  many  hard  chances,  was  set  on  land  with  his  company  ; 
lings.  -who,  there  well  refreshed,  and  newly  apparelled,  were  conducted  to 
the  Hamie. 


Charles         Dukc  Cliarlcs,  at  the  hearing  of  the  unprosperous  case  and  con- 
Burgun-    ditiou   of  king  Edward,  his  brother-in-law,  was  greatly  amazed  and 
Edward's  perplcxcd  iu  himself,  much  casting  and  doubting  what  he  should  do. 
in-Uw"^'    ^^^  being  then  at  war  with  the  French  king,  he  could  not  well  provoke 
the  English  nation  against  him,  without  his  manifest  gTievance  and 
decay  ;  neither  yet  could  he,  without  great  shame  and  obloquy,  leave 
the  king  his  brother  in  that  necessity.     Notwithstanding,  so  he  de- 
meaned himself  through  fair  speech,  pretending  to  the  Englishmen 
to  join  part  with  the  house  of  Lancaster,  being  himself  partly  de- 
scended of  the  same  family  by  his  grandmother's  side ;  that  he  both 
was  his  own  friend  openly,  and  the  king's  friend  covertly,  pretending 
that  he  did  not,  and  doing  that  he  pretended  not. 

When  tidings  were  spread  in   England  of  king  Edward's  flying, 

innumerable  people  on  all  hands  resorted  to  the  earl  of  Warwick, 

to  take  his  part  against  king  Edward,  a  few  only  excepted  of  his  con- 

EUzabeth  ^tant  fricnds,  who  took  sanctuary.    Amongst  whom  was  also  Elizabeth 

taiieth      liis  ^vife  who,  desperate  almost  of  all  comfort,  took  also  sanctuary  at 

sane-  ^j-  ;  '.i  .  fi  IT  in 

tuary.  Westminster,  where  she,  m   great  penury  forsaken,  was  delivered  or 

Edward  ^  fair  SOU  called  Edward,  that  without  all  pomp  was  baptized  like 

sane-'"  another  poor  woman's  child,  the  godfathers  being  the  abbot  and  prior 

tuary.  of  Westminster ;  the  godmother  Avas  the  lady  Scroopc. 


KING    HENRY    RESTORED    AGAIN    TO    HIS    KINGDOM.  747 

To  make  the  story  short,  the  earl  of  Warwick,  having  now  brought  Edivard 

all  things  to  his  appetite,  upon  the  twelfth  day  of  October  rode  to L_ 

the  Tower,  which  was  then   delivered  to  him,  and  there  took  king    A.D, 
Henry  out  of  the  ward,  and  placed  him  in  the  king''s  lodging.     The  — lIl 
25th  day  of  the  same  month,  the  duke  of  Clarence,  accompanied  with  P^""?^^- 
the  earls  of  Warwick,  Shrewsbury,  and  the  lord  Stanley,  with  a  great  out  of  the 
company,  brought  him,  in  a  long  gown  of  blue  velvet,  through  the  bu7^^' 
high  streets  of  London,  first  to  PauFs  church  to  offer,  then  to  the  palace  ^^^1°^^^ 
of  the  bishop  of  London,  and  there  he  resumed  again  the  crown  royal,  to  his 
A.D.  1471,  which  he  did  not  long  enjoy.  '"^  °™' 

After  this  followed  a  parliament,  in  which  king  Edward  with  all 
his  partakers  were  judged  traitors.  Queen  Margaret  with  her  son 
prince  Edward,  all  this  while  were  tarrying  for  a  fair  wind,  thinking 
long,  belike,  till  she  came  to  an  evil  bargain,  as  it  proved  after.  For 
king  Edward,  within  six  months  after  his  departure  out  of  England 
unto  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  whether  solicited  by  letters  from  his 
friends,  or  whether  by  his  adventurous  courage  incited,  made  instant 
suit  to  duke  Charles  his  brother,  to  rescue  him  with  such  power  as  he 
would  bestow  upon  him  :  for  he  was  fully  resolved  to  defer  the  matter, 
and  to  protract  the  time,  no  longer. 

The  duke,  damped  in  double  fear  in  such  a  dangerous  case,  not-  King 
withstanding  overcome  by  nature  and  affinity,   secretly  caused  to  be  ^'tlrnetii 
delivered  to  him  fifty  thousand  florins,  and  further  caused  four  great  again  into 
ships  to  be  appointed  for  him  in  a  haven  in  Zealand,  where  it  was  free 
for  all  men  to  come.     Also  the  same  duke  had  for  him  hired  fourteen 
ships   of  the  Easterlings  well  appointed,  taking  bond    of  them  to 
serve  him   truly  till  he  were  landed  in  England,  and  fifteen  days 
after. 

Thus  king  Edward,  being  furnished  but  only  with  two  thousand  King 
men  of  war,  with  more  luck  than  hope  to  speed,  sped  his  voyage  into  wfth^J^y 
England,   and  landed   at   Ravenspur,  on  the   coast   of    Yorkshire,  [^^"^g^^^ 
Although  there  was  no  way  for  the  king  with  such  a  small  company  soldiers 
of  soldiers  to  do  any  good,  yet,  to  use  policy  where  strength  did  R^4n-  " 
lack,  first  he  sent  forth  certain  light  horsemen  to  prove  the  country  'j^a^^n"** 
on  every  side  with  persuasions,  to  see  whether  the  uplandish  people  pprt. 
would  be  stirred  to  take  king  Edward's  part.     Perceiving  that  it  dissem- 
would  not  be,   king  Edward  flieth  to  his  shifts,  dissembling  his  pur-  p^Ufy  ^^ 
pose  to  be,  not  to  claim  the  crown  and  kingdom,  but  only  to  claim  f^f^^ 
the  duchy  of  York,  which  was  his  own  title  ;  and  caused  the  same  to 
be  published.     This  being  notified  to  the  people,  that  he  desired  no 
more  but  only  his  just  patrimony  and  lineal  inheritance,  they  began 
to  be  moved  with  mercy  and  compassion  towards  him,  either  to  favour 
him,  or  not  to  resist  him  :    and  so  jom-neying  toward  York,  he  came  He 
to  Beverley.     The  marquis  Montacute,  brother  to  the  earl  of  War-  ^°^^^*  '" 
wick,  was  then  at  Pomfret,  to  whom  the  earl  had  sent  straight  charge, 
with  all  expedition  to  set  upon  him,  or  else  to  stop  his  passage ;  and 
likewise  to  the  citizens  of  York  and  all  Yorkshire,  to  shut  their  gates 
and  take  armour  against  him.     King  Edward,  being  in  these  straits, 
proceeded  notwithstanding  near  to  York  without  resistance,  where  he  ^^  .^ 
required  of  the  citizens  to  be  admitted  into  their  city.     But  so  stood  repelled 
the  case  then,  that  they  durst  not  grant  it  unto  him,  but  on  the  con-  cuizens 
trary  sent  him  word  to  approach  no  nearer,  as  he  loved  his  own  ofYork, 


748  THE  WAES  OF  YORK  AND  LANCASTER. 

Edward  safeguard.     The  desolate  king  was  here  driven  to  a  narrow  strait,  who 

^^-  ..  neither  could  retire  back,  for  the  opinion  of  the  country  and  loss  of 

^-  ^-  his  cause  ;  neither  could  go  further,  for  the  present  danger  of  the 
^'^'^-  gity^  Wherefore,  using  the  same  policy  as  before,  with  loving  words 
Ed"^  d  ^^^  gentle  speech  he  desired  the  messengers  to  declare  unto  the 
changeth  citizens,  that  his  coming  w^as  not  to  demand  the  realm  of  England, 
His'genl  or  the  title  of  the  same,  but  only  the  duchy  of  York,  his  old  inheri- 
fai/^'"^  tance  ;  and  that  he  therefore  determined  to  set  forward  neither  with 
words,  army  nor  weapon.  The  messengers  were  not  so  soon  within  the  gates, 
but  he  was  at  the  gates  in  a  manner  as  soon  as  they. 

The  citizens,  hearing  his  courteous  answer,  and  that  he  intended 
nothing  to  the  prejudice  of  the  king,  nor  of  the  realm,  were  some- 
thing mitigated  toward  him,  and  began  to  commune  with  him  from 
the  walls,  willing  him  to  withdraw  his  power  to  some  other  place,  and 
they  would  be  the  more  ready  to  aid  him  ;  at  least  he  should  have  no 
damage  by  them. 

Notwithstanding  he  again  used  such  lowly  language,  and  delivered 
so  fair  speech  unto  them,  entreating  them  so  courteously,  and  saluting 
the  aldermen  by  their  names,  requiring  at  their  hands  no  more  but 
only  his  own  town,  whereof  he  had  the  name  and  title,  that  at  length 
the  citizens,  after  long  talk  and  debating  upon  the  matter,  partly  also 
Two  con-  enticed  with  fair  and  large  promises,  fell  to  this  convention  :  That  if 
ditions     he  would  swcar  to  be  true  to  king  Henry,  and  gentle  in  entertaining 
EdV^rd.   his  citizens,  they  would  receive  him  into  the  city. 
King  Ed-      This  being  concluded,  the  next  morning  at  the  entering  of  the 
ward  put  gate,  a  priest  was  ready  to  say  mass,  in  which,  after  the  receiving  the 
oath.        sacrament,  the  king  received  a  solemn    oath    to    observe  the  two 
Victory,    articles  before  agreed  upon.     By  reason   of  which  oath  so  rashly 
le^ury,    made,  and  as  shortly  broken,  and  not  long  after  punished  (as  it  may 
luin'^to  ^^^^^  ^^  thought)  in  his  posterity,  he  obtained  the  city  of  York  ; 
in  poste-  where  he,  in  short  time,  forgetting  his  oath,  to  make  all  sure,  set  in 
"*^'        garrisons  of  armed  soldiers.     Furthermore,  perceiving  all   things  to 
be  quiet,  and  no  stir  to  be  made  against  him,  he  thought  to  fore- 
slack  no  opportunity  of  time,  and  so  made  forward  toward  London, 
leaving  by  the  way  the  marquis  Mountacute,  who  lay  then  with  his 
army  at  Pomfret,   on  the  right  hand,   not  fully  four  miles  distant 
from  his  camp :   and  so  returning  to  the  high- way  again,   he  went 
King       forward  without  any  stirring  to  the  town   of  Nottingham ;    where 
ftiends'^^  came  to  him  sir  William  Parre,  sir  Thomas  of  Borough,  sir  Thomias 
resort       Mouutgomcry,  and  divers  else  of  his  assured  friends,  with  their  aids, 
at  Not-     who  caused  him  by  a  proclamation   to  stand  to  his  own  title  of  king 
tinghani.  jij^j^^j^^.^^^  jy_^  Saying,  That  they  would  serve  no  man  but  a  king. — 
Re-         At  the  fame  hereof  being  blown  abroad,  as  the  citizens  of  York  were 
t^rname  not  a  little  offended  (and  that  worthily),   so  from  other  towns  and 
of  a  king,  cities,  lords  and  noblemen   began  to  fall  unto  him,  thinking  with 
themselves  that  the  marquis  Mountacute  either  favoured  his  cause, 
Cometh  to  or  was  afraid  to  encounter  with  the  man.     Howsoever  it  was,  king 
Edward,  being  now  more  fully  furnished  at  all  points,  came  to  the 
town  of  Leicester,  and  there  hearing  that  the  earl  of  Warwick,  ac- 
companied with  the  earl  of  Oxford,  were  together  at  Warwick  with  a 
great  power,  minding  to  set  on  the  earl,  he  removed  from  thence  his 
army,  hoping  to  give  him  battle.    The  duke  of  Clarence  in  the  mean 


KING    HENRY    TAKEN    PRISONER.  749 

time  about  London  had  levied  a  great  host  coining  toward  the  earl  Edward 
of  Warwick,  as  he  was  by  the  earl  appointed.     But  when  the  earl      ^^'' 
saw  the  duke  to  linger  the  time,  he  began  to  suspect  (as  it  fell  out    A.  D. 
indeed)  that  he  was  altered  to  his  brethren's  part.     The  king,  ad-    ^'^^^- 
vancing  forward  his  host,  came  to  Warwick,  where  he  found  all  the  King 
people  departed.     From  thence  he  moved  toward  Coventry,  where  fo*meTh  t 
the  earl  was ;  unto  whom,  the  next  day  after,  he  boldly  offered  battle.  Warwick 
But  the  earl,   expecting  the  duke  of  Clarence's  coming,  kept  him  ^/'war-' 
within  the  walls.     All  this  made  for  the  king.     For  he,  hearing  that  ^^'|^^  "y- 
his  brother  the  duke  of  Clarence  was  not  far  off,  coming  towards  him  ventry. 
■with  a  great  army,  raised  his  camp,  and  made  towards  him,  either  to  '"'i; /'"''e 
treat  or  else  to  encounter  with  his  brother.     When  each  host  was  in  rence  co- 
sight  of  the  other,  Richard  duke  of  Gloucester,  brother  to   them  wT/ha 
both,   as  arbiter  between  them,  first  rode  to  the  one,  then  to  the  ^"^^ 
other.     Whether  all  this  was  for  a  face  of  a  matter  made,  it  is  un- 
certain ;  but  hereby  both  the  brethren,  laying  all  army  and  weapon  concom 
aside,  first  lovingly  and  familiarly  conmiuned ;  after  that,  brotherly  °^^^^' 
and  naturally  joined  together.      And  that  fraternal  amity  by  pro- 
clamation also  was  ratified,  and  put  out  of  all  suspicion. 

Then  was  it  agreed  between  the  three  brethren  to  attempt  the  The  eari 
earl  of  Warwick,  if  he  likewise  would  be  reconciled :  but  he,  crying  wickVe- 
out  shame  upon  the  duke  of  Clarence,  stood  at  utter  defiance.    From  ^^^^^^  to 
thence  king  Edward,   so  strongly  furnished,  and  daily  increasing,  ciied. 
taketh  his  Avay  to    London ;   where,    after   it  was  known  that  the  King 
duke  of  Clarence  was  come  to  his  brethren,  much  fear  fell  upon  the  ^^Ztx^ 
Londoners,  casting   with  themselves  what  was  best  to  do.      The  *"  i-o"- 
suddenness  of  time  permitted  no  long  consultation.     There  was  at 
London  at  the  same  time  the  archbishop  of  York,  brother  to  the 
earl  of  Warwick,  and  the  duke  of  Somerset,  with  others  of  king 
Henry's  council,  to  whom  the  earl  had  sent  in  commandment  a  little 
before,  knowing  the  weakness  of  the  city,  that  they  should  keep  the 
city  from  their  enemies  two  or  three  days,  and  he  would  follow  with 
all  possible  speed  with  a  puissant  army,  who,  according  to  their  com- 
mandment, defended  the  city  with  all  their  power ;  but  yet  to  little 
purpose.     For  the  citizens,  consulting  with  themselves  most  for  their  London- 
own  indemnity,  having  no  walls  to  defend  them,   thought  best  to  ''lirMWth 
take  that  way  Avhich  seemed  to  them  most  sure  and  safe,  and  there-  king  Ed- 
fore  concluded  to  take  part  with  king  Edward.      This  was  not  so  ^^"^  ' 
soon  known  abroad,  but  the  commonalty  ran  out  by  heaps  to  meet  King 
king  Edward,  and  to  salute  him  as  their  king.    Whereupon  the  duke  ""ncn- 
of  Somerset,  with  others  of  king  Henry's  council,  hearing  thereof,  ■""  ^^^ 
and  wondering  at  the  sudden  change  of  the  world,  to  shift  for  them-  Henry 
selves,  fled  away  and  left  there  king  Henry  alone ;  Avho,  the  same  ■''.'V^'" 
dav  being  caused  by  the  archbishop  of  York  to  ride  about  London  com- 
like  a  king,  was  before  night  made  captive,  and  reduced  again  to  the  prison.  " 
Tower. 

It  was  not  long  after  these  things  thus  done  at  London,  but  the 
coining  of  the  earl  of  Warwick  was  heard  of ;  who,  thinking  to  pre- 
vent mischiefs  with  making  speed,  came  a  little  too  late  and  missed 
of  his  purpose.  Li  the  eaiTs  army  were  John,  duke  of  Exeter, 
Edmund  earl  of  Somerset,  John  earl  of  Oxford,  and  the  marquis 
Mountacute,   the  earl's  brother.     The  earl  had  now  passed  a  great 


750  THE  WAKS  OF  YORK  AND  LANCASTER. 

Edward  part  of  liis  jouriiey,  when  lie,  hearing  news  of  the  world  so  changed, 

and  of  the  captivity  of  king  Henry,  was  not  a  little  thereat  appalled 

^-  D.    in  his  mind  :  wherefore  he  stayed  with  his  army  at  St.  Alban''s,  to  see 
_.llLil_  what  way  further  to  take.     And,  forasmuch  as  there  was  no  other 
Jj.'^^eari   remedy,   but  either  he  must  yield,  or  one   conflict  must  finish  the 
wick        matter,  he  removed  to  Barnet,  ten  miles  from  St.  Alban's. 
BMiiet.'"      Against  him  set  forth  king  Edward,  well  appointed,  with  a  strong 
army  of  picked  and  able  persons,  with  artillery,  engines,  and  instru- 
ments, meet  for  the  purpose ;  bringing  with  him  also  king  Henry. 
The         On  Easter-even  he  came  to  Barnet,  and  there  he  embattled  himself, 
s'arnet.    In  the  momiug  upon  Easter-day  the  battle  began,  and  fiercely  con- 
tinued almost  till  noon,  with  murder  on   each  side,  much  doubtful, 
till  both  parties  were  almost  Aveary  with  fighting  and  murdering. 
King  Edward  then,  desirous  to  see  an  end,  off  or  on,  with  a  great 
crew  of  new  fresh  soldiers  set  upon  his  wearied  enemies,  whereby 
the  earl's  men,  encouraged  with  the  words  of  their  captain,  stoutly 
fought :  but  they,  sore  wounded  and  wearied,  could  not  long  hold 
The  earl   out.     The  earl,  rushing  into  the  midst  of  his  enemies,  ventured  so 
wick'"^     fiir  that  he  could  not  be  rescued;  where  he  was  stricken  down  and 
brothir    ^^''^i"'  ^"^^  there  lay  he.    The  marquis  Montacute,  thinking  to  succour 
slain.       his  brother,  whom  he  saw  to  be  in  great  jeopardy,  was  likewise  over- 
thrown and  slain.     After  that  Richard  Ncvil  earl  of  Warwick  and 
his   brother  were  gone,  the  rest  fled,  and  many  were  taken.     The 
number  of  them  who  were  in  this  field  slain,  are  judged  about  ten 
thousand,  as  Polydore  Virgil  recitetli.     Fabian  numbereth  of  them 
that  were  slain  but  fifteen  hundred.     The  duke  of  Somerset  and  the 
earl  of  Oxford,  thinking  to  fly  to  Scotland,  returned  to  Jasper,  earl 
of  Pembroke,  in  Wales.      The  duke  of  Exeter  hardly  escaped  to 
Westminster,  and  there  took  sanctuary.     For  the  death  of  the  earl 
of  Warwick,  the  king  was  not  so  glad,  as  he  was  sorry  for  the  mar- 
quis Mountacute,  whom  he  took  to  be  his  friend.     The  corpses  of 
these  two  were  brought  to  the  church  of  PauFs,  where  they  lay  open 
in  two  coffins  two  days,  and  then  were  interred.^ 
Differ-  In  the  narration  of  this  history,  Polydore  Virgil,  whom  Hall  fol- 

tween^     lowetli  word  for  word,  doth  some  deal  differ  from  Robert  Fabian ; 
and^Fa^^  neither  do  I  doubt  but  both  these  had  their  authors  by  whom  they 
bian.        were  directed.       Notwithstanding    this    I    marvel,    that  Polydore, 
writing  of  so  many  things  which  he  never  saw,  doth  not  vouchsafe  to 
Polydore  cite  uuto  US  thosc  Writers  of  whom  he  borrowed.     And  more  do  I 
have    "  marvel  or  rather  lament,  if  it  be  true  what  I  have  heard,  that  he  not 
number''  o'^^J  iiamcth  no  author  unto  us,  but  also  burned  a  heap   of  our 
of  our       English  stories  unknown,  after  the  finishing  of  his,  in  the  days  of 
writers,    king  Hcury  VHI.     But  now  to  our  text  again. 
There-         All  this  whilc  Quccn  Margaret,  with  young  prince  Edward  her 
Queen^     SOU,  was  scarcc  come  over,  being  long  let  Avith  contrary  winds ;  Avho, 
im^'o^En^'  at  length,   in  the  month  of  April,  arrived  at  Weymouth  in  Dorset- 
land.       shire,  and  hearing  the  sorrowful  tidings  of  these  things  lately  hap- 
pened to  her  husband,  and  to  the  earl  of  Warwick  and  his  brother, 
and  of  the  prosperous  success  of  king  Edward,  was  so  dismayed,  dis- 
quieted, and  pierced  with  sorrow,  seeing  all  things,  contrary  to  her 
expectation,  so  to  frame  against  her,  that  she  feared  and  took  on  with 

(1)  Ex  Polyd.  et  aliis. 


KING    EDWARD    WARRETH    AGAINST    QUEEN    MARGARET.  751 

herself,    lamenting   her  husband,    bewailing    her  son,    cursing   her  Edward 

coming,  and  crying  out  of  fortune ;  as  tliough  blind  fortune  were  she '■ 

that  governeth  times  and  tides  (rewarding  just  punishments  to  unjust    '^•^• 
deservings  of  men),  and  not  the  secret  power  and  terrible  justice 
of  Almighty  God.     Such  Avas  then  the  impatience  of  that  queen.  Queen 
being  not  able  to  bear  the  vehemency  of  her  passion  (who  rather  forsorrol 
should  have  sorrowed  the  dolorous  death  of  duke  Humphrey,  whom  swoons. 
before  she  neglected,  but  now  she  lacked),  that  her  senses  failed, 
her  spirits  were  taken,   her  speech  decayed,  and,  life  almost  gone, 
she   fell   to    the  ground,  as  one  that  would  rather  die  than  live.* 
In  this  desolate  case  queen   Margaret,   learning  now  to  know  her 
friends  from  her  foes  when  it  was  too  late,  fraught  full  of  heaviness, 
without  solace  or  hope  of  remedy,  she  with  her  son  and  her  com- 
pany departed  for  her  next  refuge,  to  a  monastery  of  monks  called  Taketh 
Beauly  in  Hampshire,  there  to  take  sanctuary  and  privilege  of  the  ar^  " 
house. 

Yet  all  hearts  were  not  sound  nor  subdued  in  England,  especially 
Edmund  duke  of  Somerset,  with  lord  John  his  brother;  Thomas 
Courtney,   earl    of  Devonshire ;    Jasper,   earl   of  Pembroke ;    lord 
Wenlock  ;  John  Longscrother,  being  prior  of  the  knights  of  Rhodes 
in  St.  John''s.     These,  hearing  of  the  queen's  return,  with  speed  re-  Moved 
sorted  to  her ;  by  whom  she,  being  somewhat  quickened  in  her  spirits,  friends  to 
and  animated  to  war,  began  to  take  some  heart,  and  to  follow  their  '^^"''^'' 
counsel ;  which  was,  in  all  the  hot  haste,  to  renew  war  against  king  against 
Edward,  being  now  unprovided,  by  reason  his  army  was  now  dis-  w^rd.^'' 
persed,  and  chiefest  of  his  soldiers  w^asted.     Here  great  hope  of  vic- 
tory was  showed  ;  great  promises  made.   Although  the  queen's  mind 
was  (being  more  careful  for  the  young  prince  than  for  herself)   to 
send  him  over  into  France,  before  some  proof  or  trial  made  ;  yet 
following  the  contrary  counsel  of  them,  and  partly  cut  off  by  short- 
ness of  time,  which  required  haste,  she  began  with  all  expedition  to 
gather  power.    Likewise  Jasper,  earl  of  Pembroke,  posted  into  Wales 
to  do  the  same. 

King  Edward,  having  intelligence  of  all  these  doings,  first  sendeth  King 
out  certain  light  horsemen,  to  espy  abroad  through  the  west  parts  ^a^eth 
what  ways  his  enemies  did  take.     In  the  mean  time  he,  using  all  against 
celerity  to  meet  them  before  they  came  to  London,  gathered  a  power,  Marga- 
such  as  he  coidd  make  about  London,  and  first  cometh  to  Abingdon,  ^^^' 
from  thence  to  Marlborough,  hearing  that  the  queen  was  at  Bath, 
thinking  to  encounter  wdth  them  before  they  diverted  into  Wales  to 
the  earl  of  Pembroke,  whither  he  thought  (as  they  indeed  intended) 
that  they  would  take.     But  the  queen,  understanding  the  king  to  be 
so  nigh,  removeth  from  Bath  to  Bristol,  sending  word  in  the  mean 
while  to  the  citizens  of  Gloucester,  that  they  would  grant  her  leave 
safely  to  pass  by  their  city.     Which  when  it  could  not  be  obtained.  Queen 
with  her  army  she  departed  from  Bristol  to  Tewkesbury  ;  where  the  debarred 
duke  of  Somerset,  knowing  king  Edward  to  be  at  hand  at  his  very  e°^ceg. 
back,  willed  the  queen  there  to  stay,  and  in  no  wise  to  fly  backward,  ter. 
for  certain  doubts  that  might  be  cast.     Although  this  counsel  was 
against  the  consent  of  many  other  captains,  vA\o  thought  it  best 
rather  to  draw  aside,  while  the  earl  of  Pembroke  with  his  anny  were 

(1)  Ex  Polyd.  lib.  xiv. 


752  THE    WARS    OF    YORK    AND    LANCASTER. 

Edward  with  them  associated ;  yet  the  mind  of  the  duke  prevailed,  the  place 

^^'     was  prefixed,  the  field  pitched,  the  time  of  battle  came,  the  king  was 

A. D.    looked  for;  who,  being  within  one  mile  of  Tewkesbury,  with  like 

^^"^^^    industry  and  policy  as  his  enemies  had  done,  disposed  his  army  like- 

The  bat-  yvise  in  array.    This  celerity  of  the  king,  taking  the  time,  was  to  him 

Tewkes-  great  advantage  ;  who  otherwise,  if  he  had  deferred  till  they  had  con- 

^^'^^'      joined  with  the  earl  of  Pembroke,  had  put  the  matter  in  great  hazard. 

Such  a  matter  it  is  to  take  a  thing  in  time. 

Of  this  battle  Hall  thus  reporteth,  adding  more  than  Polydore, 
that  the  duke  of  Somerset,  although  he  was  strongly  intrenched,  yet, 
through  the  occasion  or  policy  of  the  duke  of  Gloucester,  who  had 
the  fore-ward  of  the  king's  part,  a  little  reculing  back,  followed  the 
chase,  supposing  that  the  lord  Wenlock,  who  had  the  middle-ward, 
would  have  followed  hard  at  his  back.  The  duke  of  Gloucester, 
whether  for  shame  rather  than  of  policy,  espying  his  advantage,  sud- 
denly turned  face  to  his  enemies.  Whereupon  the  contrary  part 
was  eftsoons  discomfited,  and  so  much  the  more,  because  they  were 
separated  from  their  company.  The  duke  of  Somerset,  not  a  little 
aggrieved  at  this  so  unfortunate  a  case,  returneth  to  the  middle- 
ward,  where  he,  seeing  the  lord  Wenlock  abiding  still,  revileth  him, 
and  calleth  him  traitor,  and  with  his  axe  striketh  the  brains  out  of 
his  head. 

This  much  addeth  Hall  besides  Polydore ;  but  showeth  not  his 

author  where  he  had  it.     Polydore,  writing  of  this  conflict,  writeth 

no  more  but  this  :  That  the  queen's  army,  being  overset  with  the 

number  and  multitude  of  their  enemies,  and  she  having  no  fresh 

soldiers  to  furnish  the  field,  was  at  last  overmatched,  and  the  most 

Queen      part  Averc  slain  or  taken.     In  which  battle  were  named  to  be  slain, 

takeTin*  the  carl  of  Devonshire,  the  lord  Wenlock,  lord  John  the  duke  of 

battle.      Somerset's  brother,  besides  others.     Among  them  that  were  taken 

was  queen  Margaret,  found  in  her  chariot  almost  dead  for  sorrow, 

prince  Edward,  Edmund  duke  of  Somerset,  John,  prior  of  St.  John's, 

with  twenty  other  kniglits  ;  all  which  were  beheaded  within  two  days 

Prince     after,  the  queen  only  and  the  young  prince  excepted  :  which  prince 

brought    Edward  being  then  brought  to  the  king's  presence,  it  was  demanded 

1°; 'li''       of  him  how  he  durst  be  so  bold  to  stand  in  battle  against  him.     To 

King.  ^  o 

this  Edward  Hall  addeth  more,  and  saith,  that  after  the  field  was 

finished  the  king  made  proclamation.  That  whosoever  would  bring 

prince  Edward  to  him,  should  have  an  annuity  of  a  himdred  pounds 

dm-ing  his  life,  and  the  prince's  life  should  be  saved.     Whereupon 

sir  Richard  Croftes,  not  mistrusting  the  king's  promise,  brought  forth 

his  prisoner,  &c.     And  so  the  king  demanding  of  the  prince  (as  is 

said)  how  he  durst  so  presumptuously  enter  this  realm  with  his 

Tiie  stout  banner  displayed  against  him,  he  answered,  saying.  That  he  came  to 

theprlnce  rccovcr  his  father's  kingdom  and  inheritance,  from  his  grandfather 

kingf      ^^^  father  to  him  descending ;  whereat  (said   Polydore)  the  king 

vnih.  his  hand  disdainfully  thrust  him  from  him.     Others  say,  that 

the  king  struck  him  on  the  face  with  his  gauntlet. 

Priuce  At  the  speaking  of  these  words  were  present  George  duke  of  Cla- 

fon"t?'''   rence,   Richard    duke    of  Gloucester,  and   the    earl,  lord   William 

^^^^ ,      Hastings  ;  who,  upon  the  same,  uncourteously  falling  upon  the  prince, 

slain.       did  slay  him.     Queen  Margaret,  being  brought  prisoner  to  London, 


THE    DEATH    AND    BURIAL    OF     KIXG    HENRY  VI.  753 

was  afterwards  ransomed  by  her  father,  the  duke  of  Anjoii,  for  a  Edward 
great  sum  of  money  which  he  boiTOwed  of  the  French  king,  and  for        ^' 
the  payment  thereof  was  fain  to  yield  unto  him  the  title  of  the  king-    A.  D. 
dom  of  Sicily  and  Naples,  &c.     King  Edward,  for  these  prosperous    ^'^^^- 
wars,  rendered  to  God  his  hearty  thanks,  and  caused  publicly,  through  Queen 
his  realm,  solemn  processions  to  be  kept  three  days  together. ,   And  ransomed 
thus  much,  and  too  much,  touching  the  Avars  of  king  Edward  IV.,  g°eatsum 
which  was  done,  a.d.  1471/  of  money. 

The  same  year,  and  about  the  same  time,  upon  Ascension-even,  processi- 
king  Henry,  being  prisoner  in  the  Tower,  departed,  after  he  had  °"^- 
reigned  in  all  thirty-eight  years  and  six  months.     Polydore,  and  death  of 
Hall  following  him,  affirm  that  he  was  slain  with  a  dagger  by  Richard  Henrjvi- 
duke  of  Gloucester,  the  king's  brother,  for  the  more  quiet  and  safe- 
guard of  the  king  his  brother.    In  the  history,  entitled,  '  Scala  Mundi,' 
I  find  these  words  :   "  Quod  in  turri,  in  vigilia  ascensionis  Dominicse, 
ibidem  feliciter  moriens,  per  Thamesiam  navicula  usque  ad  abba- 
tiam  de  Chertesey  deductus,  ibi  sepultus  est ;"  that  is,  "  That  king  j^^;^ 
Henry,  being  in  the  Tower,  upon  the  Ascension-even,  there  happily  Henry 
or  quietly  departing,  was  brought  by  Thames  in  a  boat  to  the  abbey  chertsey. 
of  Chertsey,  and  there  buried. 

Polydore,  after  lie  hath  described  the  virtues  of  this  king,  recordeth  Poiy- 
that  king  Henry  VII.  did  afterwards  translate  the  corpse  of  him  rrcTes™'" 
from  Chertsey  to  AVindsor,  and  addeth,  moreover,  that  by  him  cer- 
tain miracles  were  wrought :    For  which  cause  the  said  king  Henry 
VII.  (saith  he)  laboured  with  pope  Julius,  to  have  him  canonized 
for  a  saint ;  but  the  death  of  the  king  was  the  let,  why  that  matter 
proceeded  not.     Edward  Hall,  writing  of  this  matter,  addeth  more, 
declaring  the  cause,  why  king  Henry's  sancting  went  not  forward,  to 
be  this  :  for  that  the  fees  for  canonizing  a  king  were  of  so  great  a  a  king- 
quantity  at  Rome  (more  than  of  another,  bishop  or  prelate),  that  the  dea'rVare 
said  kinw  thous^ht  it  better  to  keep  the  money  in  his  chests,  than,  '" '^f 

O  o  r  .'  '  '  pope  s 

with  the  impoverishing  of  the  realm  to  buy  so  dear,  and  pay  so  much,  market. 
for  a  new  holy-day  of  St.  Henry  in  the  calendar,  &c.^    Which  if  it  be 
true,  it  might  be  replied  then  to  pope  Julius,  that  if  popes  be  higher 
than  kings  in  the  earth,  and  especially  in  heaven,  why  then  is  a  pope- 
saint  so  cheap  in  the  market-place  of  Rome,  and  a  king-saint  so  dear  .'' 
Again,  if  the  valuation  of  things  in  all  markets  and  burses  be  accord- 
ing to  the  price  and  dignity  of  the  thing  that  is  bought,  what  reason 
is  it,  seeing  the  sancting  of  a  king  beareth  a  bigger  sale  than  the 
sancting  of  any  pope  in  heaven,  but  that  kings  should  be  above  popes 
also  upon  the  earth  ?     Sed  extra  jocum,  as  I  do  not  doubt,  but  that 
king  Henry  was  a  good  and  a  quiet  prince,  if  he  had  not  otherwise 
been  abused  by  some  ;  so,  touching  the  ruin  of  his  house,  I  think  The  cause 
not    contrary,    but  it  came  not  without    the  just  appointment  ofofl^n"^ 
the   Lord,   either  for  that  Henry  of  Lancaster's   house  Avere  such  ^^^^H 
enemies  to  God's  people,  and  for  the  burning  of  the  lord  Cobham  Example 
and  many  others ;  or  else  for  the  unjust  displacing  of  king  Richard  ^^^f^^ 
IT. ;  or  else,  thirdly,  for  the  cruel  slaughter  of  Humphrey,  the  good  [l^^"^''' 
duke  of  Gloucester,  his  uncle  ;  whereof  sufficiently  hath  been  said 
before. 

During  the  time  of  these  doings,  being  about  a.  d.  1464,  there 

(1)  Ex  Polyd.  et  aliis.  (2)  Ex  Edv.  Hallo. 

VOL.    III.  S    C 


754  KIXG    EDWARD    VAXQUISHED    IX    NIXE    BATTLES. 

Edward  was  here  in  England  a  certain  friar  Carmelite,  who.  about  the  term  of 
"     Michael  the  Archangel,  preached  at  PauFs  in  London,  that  our  Lord 
A.  D.    Jesus  Christ,  being  here   in  this  present  -world,  -was  in  poverty,  and 
^^"^-    did  beg.    To  whose  opinion  and  doctrine  the  provincial  of  that  order 
A  sore     seemed  also  to  incline,  defending  the  same  both  in  his  reading  and 
preached  prcachiug,  with  other  doctors  more  and  brethren  of  the  same  order ; 
cross^.^'^^  unto  whom  also  joined  certain  of  the  Jacobites,  and  stiffly  did  take 
conten-    their  parts.     On  the  contrary  side,  many  doctors  and  also  lawyers, 
the" '"     both  in  their  public  lectures  and  preaching,  to  the  uttermost  of  their 
wh^thl'r   cunning  did  withstand  their  assertion,  as  being  a  thing  most  pestiferous 
Christ      in  the  church  to  be  heard.    Such  a  bitter  contention  was  among  them, 
beggar,     that  the  defendant  part  was  driven  for  a  while  to  keep  silence.  Much 
ornot.      ijj^g  ^Q  those  tiiiies  I  might  well  resemble  these  our  days  now  present, 
compar-   with  our  tumultuous  contention   of  forms  and  fashions  of  garaients. 
But  I  put  myself  here  in  Pvthagoras"'s  school,  and  keep  silence  with 
these  friars.     In  the  story,  moreover,  it  follovrcth,  that  this  beggarly 
question  of  the  begging  friars,  whether  Christ  did  beg  or  no,  went  so 
far,  that  at  length  it  came  to  the  pope"'s  ears,   Paul   IL,  who  was  no 
beggar  ye  may  be  sure  !  After  that  the  fame  of  this  doctrine,  mount- 
ing over  the  Alps,  came  flying  to  the  court  of  Rome,  which  was  about 
the  assumption  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  the  year  next   following,  a,  d. 
1465,  it  brought  with  it  such  an  evil  smell  to  the  fine  noses  there, 
that  it  was  no  need  to  bid  them  to  stir ;  for  begging  to  them  Avas 
worse  than  high  heresy.   Wherefore  the  holy  father  pope  Paul  IL,  to 
repress  the  sparkles  of  this  doctrine,  which  otherwise  perhaps  might 
have  set  his  whole  kitchen  on  fire,  taketh  the  matter  in  hand,  and  eftsoons 
directeth  dovni  his  bull  into  England,  insinuating  to  the  prelates  here, 
polfe's  de-  "  That  this  heresy,  which  pestiferously  doth  affirm  that  Christ  did 
termined  opcnlv  bcg,  was  Condemned  of  old  time  by  the  bishop  of  Rome,  and 
that     '   their  councils,  and  that  the  same  ought  to  be  declared  in  all  places  for 
^■^s'no     ^  damned  doctrine,  and  worthy  to  be  trodden  down  under  all  men's 
beggar,     feet," '    Scc.     This   was    in    the  same   year    when  prince    Edward, 
king  Edward's    son,   was  bom  in   the  sanctuary   at    Westminster, 
A.  T).  1465. 
King  Ed-      As  touchiug  the  rest  of  the  doings  and  affairs  of  this  king  (who  had 
quuhed"  Vanquished  hitherto  in  nine  battles,  himself  being  present),  how  after- 
innine     -wards  he,  through  the  incitement  of  Charles  duke  of  Burgundv,  his 

battles,  1         •      1  •  n  •  ■  11 

being  brother-iu-law,  ventured  into  France  with  a  puissant  armv,  and  how 
present  the  duke  failed  him  in  his  promise  ;  also  how  peace  between  these  two 
at^them  j-jj^gg  -^as  at  length  concluded  in  a  solemn  meeting  of  both  the  said 
kings  together  (which  meeting  is  notified  in  stories,  by  a  white  dove, 
sitting  the  same  day  of  meeting  upon  the  top  of  king  Edward's  tent)  ; 
also  of  the  mamage  promised  between  the  young  Dauphin  and  Eli- 
zabeth, king  Edward's  eldest  daughter,  but  afterwards  broken  off  on 
the  French  king's  part ;  moreover  as  touching  the  death  of  the  duke 
of  Burgundy  slain  in  war,  and  of  his  daughter  Mary,  niece  to  king 
Edward,  being  spoiled  of  her  lands  and  possessions  wrongfully  by 
Louis,  the  French  king,  and  married  after  to  Maximilian :  Further- 
more, as  touching  the  expedition  of  king  Edward  into  Scotland,  by 

(1)  "  Haeresim  illam  pestifere  asserentem  quod  Christus  publice  mendicavit,  esse  antiquitus  a 
Romanis  pontificibus,  cum  suis  concUiis  damnatam,  et  earn  pro  damnata  undique  declarandam  et 
conculcandani,"  ire.     Ex  Hist.  Scala;  Mundi,  fol.  ult. 


THE    BURNING    OF    JOHN    GOOSE.  755 

reason  of  king  James  breaking  promise  in  marrying  with  Cecilia,  the  Edward 
second  daughter  of  king  Edward,  and  of  his  driving  out  his  brother,  ' 
and  how  the  matter  was  composed  there,  and  of  the  recovery  again  of  A.  D. 
Berwick  ;  of  these  (I  say)  and  such  other  things  more,  partly  because  ^^'  ^- 
they  are  described  sufficiently  in  our  common  English  stories,  partly  *^"'" 
also  because  they  be  matters  not  greatly  pertaining  to  the  chui'ch,  I  Scotland 
omit  to  speak,  making  of  them  a  'supersedeas.'  Two  things  I  find  from\is 
here,  among  many  others,  specially  to  be  remembered.  promise 

The  first  is  concerning  a  godly  and  constant  servant  of  Christ,  named  riage. 
•Tohn  Goose,  who,  in  the  tune  of  this  Iving,  was  unjustly  condemned  ^jo^er- 
and  bm-nt  at  the  Tower-hill,  a.  d.  1473,  in  the  month  of  August,  ed. 
Thus  had  England  also  its  John  Huss  as  well  as  Bohemia.  Wherein  -^■°'^'2- 
moreover  this  is  to  be  noted,  that  since  the  time  of  king  Richard  IL,  Goose, 
there  is  no  reign  of  any  king  to  be  assigned  hitherto,  wherein  some  joh?/"^' 
good  man  or  other  hath  not  suffered  the  pains  of  fire,  for  the  religion  £""^^1" 
and  true  testimony  of  Christ  Jesus.    Of  this  said  John  Goose,  or  John  as  mucii 
Huss,  this,  moreover,  I  find  in  another  English  monument  recorded,  huss  in 
that  the   said  John  being  delivered  to  Robert  Belisdon,  one  of  the  J^fan"'^'^ 
sheriffs,  to  see  him  burnt  in  the  afternoon  ;  the  sheriff,  like  a  charit-  tongue. 
able  man,  had  him  home  to  his  house,  and  there  exhorted  him  to  deny 
(saith  the  story)  his  eiTors.     But  the  godly  man,  after  long  exhorta- 
tion heard,  desired  the  sheriff  to  be  content ;  for  he  was  satisfied  in 
his  conscience.     Notwithstanding  this,  he  desired  of  the  sheriff,  for 
God's  sake   to  give  him   some  meat,  saying.  That  he  was  very  sore 
hungered.    Then  the  sheriff  commanded  him  meat;  whereof  he  took  John 
and  did  eat,  as  if  he  had  been  towards  no  manner  of  danger,  and  said  take^thius 
to  such  as  stood  about  him,  "I  eat  now  a  good  and  competent  dinner,  before  he 
for  I  shall  pass  a  little  sharp  shower,  ere  I  go  to  supper.''  And  when  goeth  to 
he  had  dined,  he  gave  thanks,  and  required  that  he  might  shortly  be  dom. 
led  to  the  place,  where  he  should  yield  up  his  spirit  unto  God.' 

The  second  thing  herein  to  be  noted  is  the  death  of  George  duke  ^.|j^j™" 
of  Clarence,  the  king's  second  brother  ;  of  whom  relation  was  made  death  of 
before,  how  he  assisted  king  Edward  his  brother,  against  the  earl  of  ofcia"  ^ 
Warwick,  at  Bamet  field,  and  helped  him  to  the  crown ;  and  nov,%  ""^"'^^ 
after  all  these  benefits,  was  at  length   thus  requited,  that  (for  what 
cause  it  is  uncertain)  he  was  apprehended  and  cast  into  the  Tower, 
where  he,  being  adjudged  for  a  traitor,  was  privily  drowned  in  a  butt  of 
Malmsey.     "Wliat  the  true  cause  was  of  his  death  it  cannot  certainly  J/'pif"^® 
be  affirmed.     Divers  conjectures  and  imaginations  there  be  diversely  rence 
put  forth.    Some  partly  imputed  it  to  the  queen's  displeasure.  Others  inTimtt 
suppose  it  came  from  taking  part  in  the  cause  of  his  servant,  who  was  ggy^^'''"" 
accused  and  condemned  for  poisoning,  sorcery,  or  enchantment.  Ano- 
'ther  fame  there  is,  which  surmiseth  the  cause  hereof  to  rise  upon  the 
vain  fear  of  a  foolish  prophecy,  coming  no  doubt,  if  it  were  true,  by 
the  crafty  operation  of  Satan,  as  it  doth  many  times  else  happen  among  The  mis- 
infidels  and  gentiles,  where  Christ  is  not  known ;  where,  among  high  saifn'^*' 
princes  and  in  noble  houses,  much  mischief  groweth,  first  murder  and  ^°fj^'^ 
parricide,  and  thereby  ruin  of  ancient  families,  and  alteration  of  king-  prophe- 
tloms.    The  effect  of  this  prophecy,  as  the  fame  goeth,  was  this  :  that  *'^^" 
after  king  Edward,  should  one  reign  whose  name  should  begin  with  '^^^'P'^- 
G ;  and,  because  the  name  of  the  duke  of  Clarence,  being  George,  g. 

(1)  Ex  Polychron. 

3  c  2 


756  FALSE    PKOPHECIES    NOT    TO    BE    REGARDED. 

Edward  Lcgaii  witli  a  G,  therefore  he  began  to  be  feared,  and  afterwards  privily, 
;_  as  is  before  said,  was  made  away  with. 

A.D. 

1473. 


CERTAIN  NOTES  UPON  FALSE  PROPHECIES. 

Prophe-        By  these  experiments  and  mischievous  ends  of  such  prophecies,  and 

rathry°to  ^Iso  by  the  nature  of  them,  it  is  soon  to  be  seen  from  what  fountain 

be  be-      fyj.  author  they  proceed  ;  that  is,  no  doubt,  from  Satan,  the  ancient 

enemy  of  mankind,  and  prince  of  this  world ;  against  whose  deceitful 

delusions,  christian  men  must  be  well  instructed,  neither  to  marvel 

greatly  at  them,  though  they  seem  strange,  nor  yet  to  believe  them, 

Satan  can  though  they  happen  true.    For  Satan,  being  the  prince  of  this  world, 

for  a      '  in  such  worldly  things  can  foresee  what  will  follow,  and  can  say  truth 

enT'^^     for  a  mischievous  end ;  and  yet  for  all  that,  is  but  a  Satan.     So  the 

Devilish   dream  of  Astyages,  seeing  a  vine  to  grow  out  of  his  daughter,  which 

lies,  'ai-    should  cover  all  Asia,  and  fearing  thereby  that  by  his  nephew  he  should 

theyfeii   ^^^^  ^^^^  kingdom,  proved  true  in  the  sequel  thereof;  and  yet  notwith- 

truth,      standing  of  Satan  it  came,  and  caused  cruel  murder  to  follow,  first  of 

vet  urc  o  '  ' 

not  to  be  the  shephcrd's  child,  then  of  the  son  of  Harpagus,  whom  he  set  before 

followed,  j^-g  Q^^  father  to  eat.'    Likewise  Cyrus  was  prophetically  admonished 

by  his  dream,  to  take  him  for  his  guide,  whom  he  first  met  the  next 

mon'ow.     In  that  also  his  clream  fell  true,  and  yet  was  not  of  God. 

In  the  same  number  are  to  be  put  all  the  blind  oracles  of  the  idolatrous 

gentiles,  which  although  they  proceed  of  a  lying  spirit,  yet  sometimes 

they  hit  the  truth  to  a  mischievous  purpose.    The  like  judgment  also 

Merlin's    jg  ^q  jjg  myen  of  Merlin''s  prophecies.   The  sorceress  mentioned  1  Sam. 

ties.        xviii.,  raising  up  Samuel,  told  Saul  the  truth,  yet  was  it  not  of  God. 

In  Acts  xvi.  there  was  a  damsel  having  the  spirit  of  Pytho,^  who  said 

truth  of  Paul  and  Silas,  calling  them  the  messengers  of  the  high  God : 

and  yet  it  was  a  wrong  spirit.  The  unclean  spirits,  in  gi^nng  testimony 

of  Christ,  said  the  truth ;  yet  because  their  testimony  came  not  of 

God,  Christ  did  not  allow  it. 

Paulus  Diaconus  recordeth  of  Valentinian  the  emperor,  that  he  also 
had  a  blind  prophecy,  not  much  unlike  to  this  of  king  Edward,  which 
was,  that  one  should  succeed  him  in  the  empire  whose  name  should 
begin  with  B,  o,  and  S.  Whereupon  one  Theodorus,  trusting  upon  the 
prophecy,  began  rebelliously  to  hope  for  the  crown,  and  for  his  labour 
felt  the  pains  of  a  traitor.  Notwithstanding  the  effect  of  the  prophecy 
followed :  for,  after  Valentinian,  succeeded  Theodosius.  Wherefore 
christian  princes  and  noblemen,  and  all  Chrisfs  faithful  people  must 
beware  and  learn : 
Three  First,  That  no  man  be  inquisitive  or  curious  in  searching  to  know 

to'br      what  things  be  to  come,  or  what  shall  happen,  besides  those  things 
concern-   ^"^7  ^^hi^li  are  promised  and  expressed  in  the  Word, 
ins  false       Sccoudly,  To  understand  what  difference  there  is,  and  how  to  dis- 
cern the  voice  of  God  from  the  voice  of  Satan. 

Thirdly,  How  to  resist  and  avoid  the  danger  of  false  and  devilish 
prophecies. 

Many  there  be,  who,  not  being  contented  with  things  present,  curi- 

(1)  Ex  Just.  lib.  1. 

(2)  A  spirit  of  divination,  which  could  guess  and  foredeem  things  past,  present,  and  to  come 
which  knowledge  God,  many  times,  permitteth  to  the  devil. 


cies. 


FALSE    PKOPHECIES    NOT    TO    BE    KEGAUDED.  757 

ously  occupy  tlieii-  wits  to  search  what  is  to  come,  and  not  giving  thanks  Edu-ard 
to  God  for  their  life  which  they  have,  will  also  know  what  shall  bechance         ' 
them,  how  and  when  their  end  will  come,  how  long  princes  shall  reign,    A.  D. 
and  who,  after,  shall  succeed  them ;  and  for  the  same  get  unto  them    ^'^'•^- 
soothsayers,  astrologers,  sorcerers,  conjurers,  or  familiars.    And  these 
are  not  so  much  inquisitive  to  search  or  ask,  but  the  devil  is  as  ready 
to  answer  them,  who  either  falsely  doubleth  with  them  to  delude  them, 
or  else  telleth  them  truth,  to  work  them  perpetual  care  and  sorrow. 
Thus  was  pope  Silvester,  the  sorcerer,  circumvented  by  the  devil,  who 
told  him,  that  he  should  be  at  Jerusalem  before  he  died,  and  so  it  fell 
out.     For  as  he  was  saying  his  mass  at  a  chapel  in  Rome,  called  Je- 
rusalem, there  he  fell  sick,  and  within  three  days  after  died  :'  to  king 
Henry  IV.,  also,  it  seemeth  it  was  prophesied,  that  he  should  not  die 
before  he  went  to  Jerusalem  ;   who,  being  brought  to  the  abbot's  cham- 
ber  of  Westminster,  and  hearing  the  name  of  the  chamber  to  be  called 
Jerusalem,  knew  his  time  to  be  come,  and  died. 

By  such  deceitful  prophecies  it  cannot  be  lamented  enough  to  see 
what  inconvenience,  both  public  and  private,  groweth  to  the  life  of 
men,  either  causing  them  falsely  to  trust  where  they  should  not,  or  False 
else  wickedly  to  perpetrate  what  they  would  not ;  as  may  appear  both  deTiiish 
by  this  king,  and  also  divers  more.  So  were  Pompey,  Crassus,  and  pjophe- 
Csesar  (as  writeth  Cicero)  deceived  by  the  false  Chaldees,  in  declaring 
to  them  that  they  should  not  die  but  in  their  beds,  and  with  worship, 
and  in  their  old  age.  Of  such  false  trust  rising  upon  false  prophecies, 
St.  Ambrose,  in  his  book  of  Exameron,  writeth,  speaking  of  rain,  which 
being  in  those  parts  greatly  desired,  was  promised  and  prophesied  by 
one  certainly  to  fall  upon  such  a  day,  which  was  at  the  changing  of  the 
new  moon :  but  (saith  St.  Ambrose)  there  fell  no  such  rain  at  all, 
till,  at  the  prayers  of  the  church,  the  same  was  obtained.  Giving  us 
to  understand,  that  rain  cometh  not  by  the  word  of  man,  nor  by  the 
beginnings  of  the  moon,  but  by  the  providence  and  mercy  of  our 
Creator.^ 

Johannes  Picus,  earl  of  Mirandula,  in  his  excellent  books  written 
against  these  vain  star-tellers  and  astrologers,^  writeth  of  one  Ordela- 
phus,  a  prince,  to  whom  it  was  prognosticated  by  a  famous  cunning 
man  in  that  science,  called  Hieronymus  Manfredus,  that  he  should  Experi 
enjoy  long  continuance  of  health,  and  prosperous  life ;  who,  notwith-  f^,^g  p^^,. 
standing,  the  self-same  year,  and  in  the  fii'st  year  of  his  marriage,  de-  piiecies. 
ceased ;  and,  after  divers  other  examples  added  moreover  upon  the 
same,  he  inferreth  also  mention,  and  the  name,  of  a  certain  rich  matron 
in  Rome,  named  Constantia,  who,  in  like  manner,  departed  the  same 
year  in  which  she  received  great  promises  by  these  soothsayers  and 
astrologers,  of  a  long  and  happy  life,  saying  to  her  husband  these 
words  :   "  Behold,"  saith  she,  "  how  true  be  the  prognostications  of 
these  sooth-tellers  !"" 

If  it  were  not  for  noting  of  those  who  now  are  gone,  and  whose  This  mau 
names  I  would  in  no  case  to  be  blemished  with  any  spot,  I  could  afsJem^ 
recite  the  names  of  certain,  especially  one,  who,  taking  his  journey  in  ^]^'g'„y^' 
a  certain  place,  after  diligent  calculation  and  forecasting  of  the  success  and^^j^^ 
and  good  speed  of  his  journey,  was,  notwithstanding,  in  the  same  int'o  Eng- 

"  land- 

(1)  See  vol.  il.  p.  9j.     -»        (2)  Ex  Ambros.  in  Examer.  (3)  Lib.  ii.  cap.  ». 


758  CERTAIN    NOTES    TO    DISCEKN    PROPHECIES. 

Edward  joumey  apprehended,  and  brought  where  he  would  not ;  and  after  that 
'      never  enjoying  a  good  day,  in  a  short  time  he  departed.  In  Basil  this 
A.  D.    I  myself  heard,  of  one  who  knew  and  was  conversant  with  the  party, 
^^^•^-    who,  having  a  curious  delight  in  these  speculations  of  chances  and 
events  to  come,  by  his  calculation  noted  a  certain  day,  which  he  mis- 
trusted should  be  fatal  unto  him,  by  something  which  at  that  day 
should  fall  upon  him.     Whereupon  he   determined  with  himself  all 
that  day  to  keep  him  sure  and  safe  within  his  chamber :  where  he, 
A  peril-    reaching  up  his  hand  to  take  down  a  book,  the  book  falling  doAvn  upon 
teTfora    ^^'^  head,  gave  him  his  death''s  wound  :  and,  shortly  after,  he  died 
man  to  be  upou  the  Same.     Of  these  and  such  like  examples  tlie  world  is  full, 
times  and  and  yet  the  curiousness  of  men's  heads  will  not  refrain  still  to  pluck  the 
comef '°  apple  of  this  unlucky  and  forbidden  tree. 

Beside  all  this,  what  murder  and  parricide  come  by  the  fear  of  these 
prophecies,  in  great  bloods  and  noble  houses,  I  refer  it  unto  them  who 
read  and  well  advise  the  stories,  as  well  of  our  kings  here  in  England, 
as  in  other  kingdoms  more,  both  Christened  and  Turkish,  whereof 
another  place  shall  serve  as  well  (Christ  willing)  more  largely  to  treat, 
and  particularly  to  discourse.  To  this  pertain  also  the  great  in- 
convenience and  hindrance  that  gi'ow  by  the  fear  of  such  prophecies 
in  the  vocation  of  men,  forasmuch  as  many  there  be,  who,  fearing 
some  one  danger,  some  another,  leave  their  vocations  undone,  and 
follow  inordinate  ways.  As  if  one  having  a  blind  prophecy,  that  his 
destruction  should  be  in  the  day,  would  wake  and  do  all  his  business 
by  night  and  candle-light ;  and  so  forth  in  other  several  cases  of  men 
and  women,  as  every  one  in  his  own  conscience  knoweth  his  OAvn  case 
best. 

The  se-        The  secoud  thing  to  be  considered  in  these  prophecies,  is  rightly  to 
part':  how  tliscem  and  understand,  as  near  as  we  can,  the  difference  between  the 
prophe-    prophecies  proceeding  from  God,  and  the  false  prophecies  counter- 
to  be  dis-  feited  by  Satan.    For  Satan  sometimes  playeth  God''s  ape,  and  trans- 
cerned.     foj-mcth  himsclf  iuto  an  angel  of  light ;  bearing  such  a  resemblance 
and  colour  of  truth  and  religion,  that  a  wise  man  is  scarcely  able  to 
discern  one  from  the  other,  and  the  most  part  is  beguiled.     Concern- 
ing prophecies  therefore,  to  know  which  be  of  God,  which  be  not,  three 
things  are  to  be  observed : 

First,  Whether  they  go  simply  and  plainly,  or  whether  they  be 
doubtful  and  ambiguous  :  whereof  the  one  seemeth  to  taste  of  God's 
Spu-it,  such  as  be  the  prophecies  of  the  Scripture  ;  the  other  to  come 
otherwise,  having  a  double  or  doubtful  interpretation.  Although  the 
time  of  God's  prophecies,  as  also  of  miracles,  is  commonly  and  ordi- 
narily expired,  yet  if  the  Lord  in  these  days  now  extraordinarily  do 
show  any  prophecy,  by  the  simpleness  and  plainness  thereof  it  may 
partly  be  discerned. 

Secondly,  This  is  to  be  expended  :  whether  they  be  private,  tending 
to  this  family  or  that  family,  or  public.  For,  as  the  Scriptures,  so 
commonly  the  prophecies  of  God,  have  no  private  interpretation,  but 
general ;  forasmuch  as  the  care  of  God's  Holy  Spirit  is  not  restrained 
partially  to  one  person  more  than  to  another,  but  generally,  and  indif- 
ferently, respecteth  the  whole  church  of  his  elect  in  Christ  Jesus  his 
Son.    Wherefore  such  prophecies  as  privately  are  touching  the  arms  of 


REMEDIES    AGAINST    DEVILISH    PROPHECIES.  759 

houses  or  names  of  men,  rising  or  falling  of  private  and  particular  i^dwurd 
families,  are  worthily  to  be  suspected.  ^^' 

The  third  note  and  special  argument  to  descry  the  true  prophecies    ^-  D. 
of  God  from  the  false  prophecies  of  Satan  and  his  false  prophets,  is    ^'^"'^- 
this,  to  consider  the  matter  and  the  end  thereof;  that  is,  whether  they 
be  worldly,  or  whether  they  be  spiritual,,  or  whether  they  tend  to  any 
glory  or  state  of  this  present  world,  or  whether  they  tend  to  the  spiri- 
tual instruction,  admonition,  or  comfort,  of  the  public  church. 

Now  remaineth  thirdly,  after  we  know  what  prophecies  be  of  God,  The  third 
and  what  not,  that  we  be  instructed  next  how  to  eschew  the  fear  and  {'o^avow^ 
peril  of  all  devilish  prophecies,  which  make  against  us  ;  wherein  two  ^'^^  'i^"- 
special  remedies  are  to  be  marked  of  every  christian  man,  whereby  ffnirter 
he  may  be  safe  and  sure  against  all  danger  of  the  enemy.     The  first  S**^' 
is,  that  we  set  the  name  of  Christ  Jesus,  the  Son  of  God,  against 
them,  through  a  true  faith  in  him  ;  knowing  this,  that  the  Son  of  God 
hath  appeared  to  dissolve  the  works  of  the  devil.    And  again,  "  This 
is  the  victory,"  saith  the  Scripture,  "  that  overcometh  the  world,  even 
our  faith."  Whatsoever  then  Satan  worketh,  or  can  work  aoainst  us, 
be  it  ever  so  forcible,  faith  in  Christ  will  vanquish  it.    Such  a  majesty 
is  in  our  faith,  believing  in  the  name  of  the  Son  of  God. 

The  other  remedy  is  faithfld  prayer,  which  obtaineth,  in  the  name 
of  Christ,  all  things  with  the  Lord.  So  that  wicked  fiend,  which  had 
killed  before  seven  husbands  of  Tobias"'s  wife,  could  not  hurt  him 
entering  his  matrimony  with  earnest  prayer :  so  no  more  shall  any 
sinister  prophecy  prevail,  where  prayer  out  of  a  fiiithful  heart  doth 
strive  against  it.  Neither  am  I  ignorant,  that  against  such  temporal 
evils  and  punishments  in  this  life  inflicted,  a  great  remedy  lieth  also 
in  this,  when  Satan  findeth  nothing  Avherein  greatly  to  accuse  oiu* 
conscience.  But  because  such  a  conscience  is  hard  to  be  found,  the 
next  refuge  is  to  fly  to  repentance,  with  amendment  of  life.  For 
many  times  where  sin  doth  reign  in  our  mortal  bodies,  there  also  the 
operation  of  Satan  is  strong  against  us,  to  afflict  our  outward  bodies 
here  ;  but  as  touching  our  eternal  salvation,  neither  work  nor  merit 
hath  any  place,  but  only  our  faith  in  Christ.  And  thus  much  briefly 
touching  the  two  special  remedies,  whereby  the  operation  of  all  devilish 
prophecies  may  be  avoided  and  defeated. 

Now  many  there  be,  who,  leaving  these  remedies  aforesaid,  and  the  Man's 
safe  protection  which  the  Lord  hath  set  up  in  Christ,  take  other  ways  can  do 
of  their  own,  seeking  by  their  own  policy  how  to  withstand  and  escape  ""^i^nsf 
such  prophecies,  either  subtilely  in  eschewing  the  place  and  time,  or  the  devil. 
else  cruelly,  by  killing  the  party  whom  they  fear ;  whereof  cometh 
injury,  murder,  and  parricide,  with  other  mischiefs  in  commonwealths 
unspeakable.    To  whom  commonly  it  cometh  so  to  pass,  that  where- 
by they  think  most  to  save  themselves,  by  the  same  means  they  fall 
most  into  the  snare,  being  subverted  and  confounded  in  their  own 
policy,  for  that  they,  trusting  to  their  own  device,  and  not  unto  the 
Lord,  who  only  can  dissolve  the  operation  of  Satan,  the  Lord  so  No  power 
tumeth  their  device  into  a  trap,  thereby  to  take  them,  whereby  they  stTn^Mm 
think  most  surely  to  escape.     Examples  whereof  we  see  not  only  in  ^1^^;°"'^ 
Astyages,  king  of  the  Medes  aforesaid,  and  Cyrus ;  but  in  infinite  and  our 
other  like  events,  which  the  trade  of  the  world  doth  daily  offer  to  our  hiin. '° 


760  REMEDIKS    AGAINST    DEVILISH    VUOPHECIES. 

Edivard  ejcs.     So  quecii  Margaret  thought  her  then  cock-sure,  when  duke 
^'^'     Humphrey  was  made  away  ;  when  nothing  else  was  her  confusion  so 
A.  D.    much,  as  the  loss  and  lack  of  that  man. 

^'^'^^-        So,  if  king  Richard  II.  had  not  exercised  such  cruelty  upon  his 
uncle  Thomas,  duke  of  Gloucester,  he  had  not  received  such  wrong 
by  king  Henry  IV.  as  he  did.     Likewise  this  king  Edward  IV.,  if 
he  had  suffered  his  brother  George,  duke  of  Clarence,  to  live,  his 
house  had  not  so  gone  to  wrack  by  Richard,  his  other  brother,  as  it 
did.    What  befel  the  student  of  astrology,  in  the  university  of  Basil, 
ye  heard  before  ;  who,  if  he  had  not  mewed  hiipself  in  his  chamber 
for  fear  of  his  divination,  had  escaped  the  stroke  that  fell.     Now,  in 
avoiding  such  prophetical  events,  Avhich  he  should  not  have  searched, 
he  fell  into  that  which  he  did  fear.    These  few  examples,  for  instruc- 
tion''s  sake,  I  thought  by  occasion  to  infer,  not  as  though  these  were 
alone ;  but  by  these  few  to  admonish  the  reader  of  infinite  others, 
which  daily  come  in  practice  of  life,  to  the  great  danger  and  decay, 
as  well  of  private  houses,  as  of  weals  public. 
A  brief         Wherefore,  briefly  to  repeat  what  before  simply  hath  been  said 
of'trj*''^  touching  this  matter,  seeing  that  Satan,  through  such  subtle  pro- 
matter  of  phecies,  hath  vet  and  doth  daily  practise  so  manifold  mischiefs  in  the 
cies         world,  setting  brother  against  brother,  nephew  against  the  uncle, 
passed,    house  agaiust  house,  and  realm  against  realm ;  engendering  hatred 
where  love  was,  and  subverting  privily  the  simplicity  of  our  christian 
faith  :  therefore  the  first  and  best  thing  is  for  godly  men  not  to  busy 
their  brains  about  such  phantasies,  neither  in  delighting  in  them,  nor 
in  hearkening  to  them,  nor  in  searching  for  them,  either  by  soothsayer, 
or  by  conjuration,  or  by  familiar,  or  by  astrologer ;  knowing  and  con- 
sidering this,  that  whosoever  shall  be  desirous  or  ready  to  search  for 
The  devil  them,  the  devil  is  as  ready  to  answer  his  curiosity  therein.     For  as 
arst^er°in  oucc,  iu  the  old  time  of  Gentility,  he  gave  his  oracles  by  idols  and 
matters  of  priests  of  that  time  ;  so  the  same  devil,  althouirh  he  workcth  not  now 

(livma-       l-ii  1  n  •-,  •  1  1 

tion.        by  idols,  yet  he  craitily  can  give  now  answer  by  astrologers  and  con- 
jurers in  these  our  days ;  and  in  so  doing,  both  to  say  truth,  and  yet 
Curiosity  to  deccivc  men,  when  he  hath  said.     Wherefore,  leaving  off  such 
cie''s™to  te  curiosity,  let  every  christian  man  walk  simply  in  his  present  vocation, 
avoided,   referring  hid  things,  not  in  the  word  expressed,  unto  him  who  saith 
in  his^Avord,  "  Non  est  vestrum  scire  tempora  et  momenta  te  mporum," 
&c.     "  It  is  not  for  you  to  know  the  times,  and  seasons  of  times, 
which  the  Father  hath  kept  in  his  own  power,"  &c. 

Secondly,  In  this  matter  of  prophecies,  requisite  it  is  (as  is  said) 
for  every  christian  man  to  learn,  how  to  discern  and  distinguish  the 
true  prophecies,  which  proceed  of  God,  and  the  false  prophecies,  which 
come  of  Satan.  The  difference  whereof,  as  it  is  not  hard  to  be  dis- 
cerned ;  so  necessary  it  is,  that  every  good  man  do  rightly  understand 
the  same,  to  the  intent  that  he,  knowing  and  flying  the  danger  of  the 
one,  may  be  the  more  certain  and  constant  in  adhering  to  the  other. 

Thirdly,  Because  it  is  not  sufficient  that  the  deceitful  prophecies 
of  the  devil  be  known,  but  also  that  they  be  resisted,  I  have  also 
declared,  by  Avhat  means  the  operation  of  Satan's  works  and  pro- 
phecies is  to  be  overcome  ;  that  is,  not  with  strength  and  policy  of 
man,  for  that  there  is  nothing  in  man  able  to  countervail  the  power 
of  that  enemy.     Under  heaven  there  is  nothing  else  that  can  prevail 


AFFAIRS    OF    EUROPE.  761 

against  his  works,  but  only  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  Son  of  Edward 
God,  not  outwardly  pronounced  only  with  our  lips,  or  signed  on  our         ' 
foreheads  with  the  outward  cross,  but  inwardly  apprehended,   and    A.  D. 
dwelling  in  our  hearts  by  a  silent  faith,  firmly  and  earnestly  trusting   ^'^7^- 
upon  the  promises  of  God,  given  and  sealed  unto  us  in  his  name.  ^^^ 
For  so  it  hath  pleased  his  fatherly  wisdom  to  set  him  up,  to  be  both  strength 
our  righteousness  before  himself,  and  also  to  be  our  fortitude  against  ciufstian 
the  enemy,  accepting  our  faith  in  his  Son  in  no  less  price  than  he  jl^fj^'in 
accepteth  the  works  and  worthiness  of  the  same  his  Son,  in  whom  we  chnst. 
do  believe. 

Such  is  the  strength  and  effect  of  faith  both  in  heaven,  in  earth, 
and  also  in  hell :  in  heaven  to  justify,  in  earth  to  preserve,  in  hell  to 
conquer.     And,  therefore,  when  any  such  prophecy,  or  any  other 
thing  is  to  us  objected,  which  seemeth  to  tend  against  us,  let  us  first 
consider  whether  it  savour  of  Satan,  or  not.     If  it  do,  then  let  us 
seek  our  succour,  not  in  ourselves,  where  it  doth  not  dwell,  neither 
let  us  kill,  nor  slay,  nor  change   our  vocation  there-for,  following 
inordinate  ways :  but  let  us  run  to  our  Castle  of  refuge,  which  is,  to 
the  power  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  remembering  the  true  promise  of  the  oniy 
ninety-first  Psalm  :  "  Qui  habitat  in  adjutorio  altissimi,  in  protectione  able  to 
Dei  coeli  commorabitur ;'"  that  is,  "  Whoso  putteth  his  trust  in  the  J'he'jjower 
succour  of  the  Lord,  shall  have  the  God  of  heaven  to  be  his  pro-  °f  satan. 
tector."    And  then  shall  it  afterwards  follow,  as  in  the  same  Psalm : 
"  Ipse  liberabit  te  a  laqueo  venantium,  et  a  verbo  aspero  ;""  that  is, 
"  And  he  shall  deliver  him  from  the  snare  of  the  hunter,  and  from  all 
evil  words  and  prophecies,  be  they  never  so'sharp  or  bitter  against  him,"" 
&c.    And  thus  much,  by  the  occasion  of  king  Edward,  of  prophecies. 

Now,  having  long  tarried  at  home  in  describing  the  tumults  and 
troubles  within  our  own  land,  we  will  let  out  our  story  more  at  large, 
to  consider  the  afflictions  and  perturbations  of  other  parties  and 
places  also  of  Chrisfs  cluu-ch,  as  well  here  in  Eiu-ope  under  the  pope, 
as  in  the  east  parts  under  the  Turk,  first  deducing  our  story  from  the 
time  of  Sigismund,  where  we  before  left  off;  which  Sigismund,  as  sigis- 
is  above  recorded,  was  a  great  doer  in  the  council  of  Constance  ^pe'ror'.^ 
aofainst  John  Huss  and  Jerome  of  Prague.     This  emperor  had  ever  unprospe 

o  ^^  ,  rous  in 

evil  luck,  fighting  against  the  Turks.  Twice  he  warred  against  them,  his  wars. 
and  in  both  the  battles  was  discomfited  and  put  to  flight ;  once  about 
the  city  of  Mysia,  fighting  against  Bajazet,  the  great  Turk,  a.  d. 
1395,  the  second  time  fighting  against  Celebine,  the  son  of  Bajazet, 
about  the  to^vn  called  Columbacium.  But  especially  after  the  coun- 
cil of  Constance,  wherein  were  condemned  and  burned  those  two 
godly  martyrs,  more  unprosperous  success  did  then  follow  him,  fight- 
ing against  the  Bohemians,  his  own  subjects,  a.d.  1420,  by  whom  he 
was  repulsed  in  so  many  battles,  to  his  great  dishonour,  during  all  the 
life  of  Zisca,  and  of  Procopius,  as  is  before  more  at  large  expressed : 
who  was  so  beaten  both  of  the  Turks,  and  at  home  of  his  own  people, 
that  he  never  did  encounter  with  the  Turksafter.  Then  followed 
the  council  of  Basil,  after  the  beginning  whereof,  within  six  years,  this 
Sigismund,  who  was  emperor,  king  of  Hungary,  and  king  of  Bohemia, 
died  in  Moravia,  a.  d.  1437. 


762  ALBERT    AND    FREDERIC,    EMPERORS    OF    AUSTRIA. 

Edward 

IV.  ALBERT,    THE    EMPEROR. 

A.  D.        This  Sigismuncl  left  behind  him  one  only  daughter  Elizabeth,  who 
^^'^•'^-   was  married  to  Albert  duke  of  Austria,  by  reason  whereof  he  was  ad- 
vanced to  the  empire,  and  so  was  both   duke  of  Austria,  emperor, 
king  of  Hungary,  and  king  also  of  Bohemia.     But  this  Albert  (as  is 
afore  declared)  being  an  enemy  and  a  disquieter  to  the  Bohemians,  and 
especially  to  the  good  men  of  Tabor,  as  he  was  preparing  and  setting 
forth  against  the  Turks,  in  the  mean  time  died,  in  the  second  year  of 
his  empire,  a.  d.  1439,  leaving  his  wife  great  with  child;  who  lying 
then  in  Hungary,  and  thinking  herself  to  be  great  with  a  daughter, 
called  to  her  the  princes  and  the  chieftains  of  the  realms,  declaring  to 
them  that  she  was  but  a  woman,  and  insufficient  to  the  governance  of 
such  a  state ;  and  moreover  how  she  thought  herself  to  be  but  with 
child  of  a  daughter  ;  and  therefore  required  them  to  provide  among 
them  such  a  prince  and  governor  (reserving  the  right  of  the  kingdom 
to  herself),  as  would  be  fit  and  able  under  her,  to  have  the  regiment  of 
The  Turk  the  land  committed.     The  Turk,  in  the  mean  while,  being  elevated 
to  invade  and  cncouraged  with  his  prosperous  victories  against  Sigismund  afore- 
Hungary.  ^^j^^  began  then  more  fiercely  to  invade  Hungary,  and  those  parts  of 
Christendom.     Wherefore  the  Hungarians,  making  the  more  haste, 
consulted  among  themselves  to  make  duke  Uladislaus,   brother  to 
Cassimir  king  of  Poland,  their  king. 
The  But  while  this  was  in  working  between  the  Hungarians  and  Uladis- 

hLThl      ^^'^^  the  duke,  in  the  mean  space  Elizabeth  brought  forth  a  son  called 
SO"-         Ladislaus,  who  being  the  lawful  heir  of  the  kingdom,  the  queen  called 
pHnce^oT  back  again  her  former  word,  minding  to  reserve  the  kingdom  for  her 
Hungary,  gQ^  beiuff  the  truc  heir  thereof,  and  therefore  refused  maiTiage  Avith 
the  said  Uladislaus,  which  she  had  before  pretended.  But  Uladislaus, 
joining  with  a  great  part  of  the  Hungarians,  persisting  still  in  the  con- 
dition before  granted,  would  not  give  over ;  by  reason  whereof  great 
Division   Contention  and  division  kindling  among  the  people  of  Hungary,  Amu- 
cordtn     J'^^Ii,  the  great  Turk,  taking  his  advantage  of  their  discord,  and  partly 
Hungary,  suppressed  with  pride  of  his  former  success  against  Sigismund  aforesaid. 
The  Turk  with  his  wliolc  maiu  and  force  invaded  the  realm  of  Hungary  ;  where 
ag^aiitst'     Huuiadcs,  sumamed  Vaivoda,  prince  of  Transylvania,  joining  with  the 
uiadfJ'-'^^'  ^^^^  \^y^g  Uladislaus,  did,  both  together,  set  against  the  Turk,  a.  d. 
laus  slain  1444,  and  there  Uladislaus,  the  new  king  of  Hungary,  in  the  fourth 
Turks.      year  of  his  kingdom,  was  slain.   Elizabeth  with  her  son  had  fled  in  the 
mean  while  to  Frederic  the  emperor.  Of  Huniades  Vaivoda,  the  noble 
captain,  and  of  his  acts,  and  also  of  Ladislaus  (Christ  willing),  more 
shall  be  said  hereafter,  in  his  time  and  place. 


FREDERIC    THE    THIRD,    EMPEROR. 

After  the  decease  of  Albert  succeeded  in  the  empire,  Frederick  IH., 
duke  of  Austria,  a.  D.  1440  ;  by  whom  it  was  procured  (as  we  have 
before  signified)  that  pope  Felix,  elected  by  the  council  of  Basil ,  did 
resign  his  popedom  to  pope  Nicholas  V.,  upon  this  condition,  that  the 
said  pope  Nicholas  should  ratify  the  acts  decreed  in  the  said  council  of 
Basil.  In  the  days  of  this  emperor,  much  war  and  dissension  raged 
almost  through  all  christian  realms  in  Austria,  Hungary,  Poland, 


LADISLAUS,    THE    YOUNG    KING    OF    BOHEMIA.  763 

France,  Burgundy,  and  also  here  in  England,  between  king  Henry   Edward 
VI.  and  king  Edward  IV.,  as  ye  have  already  heard ;  whereby  it  had     ^^' 
been  easy  for  the  Turk,  with  little  mastery,  to  have  oveiTun  all  the    A.  D. 
christian  realms  in  Europe,  had  not  the  providence  of  our  merciful    ^'^^'^' 
Lord  otherwise  provided  to  keep  Aniurath,  the  Turk,  occupied  in 
other  civil  wars  at  home  in  the  mean  while.     Unto  this  Frederic 
came  Elizabeth  (as  is  afore  said)  with  Ladislausher  son  ;  by  whom  lie 
was  nom-ished  and  entertained  a  certain  space,  till  at  length,  after  the 
death  of  Uladislaus  aforesaid,  king  of  Hungary  (who  was  slain   in 
battle  by  the  Turks),  the  men  of  Austria,  through  the  instigation  of 
Ulric  Eizinger,  and  of  Ulric,  earl  of  Silesia,  rising  up  in  armour, 
required  of  Frederic  the  emperor,  either  to  give  them  their  young 
king,  or  else  to  stand  to  his  own  defence. 

When  Frederic  heard  this,  neither  would  he  render  to  them  a  sud- 
den answer,  neither  would  they  abide  any  longer  delay  ;  and  so  the 
matter  growing  to  war,  the  new  city  was  besieged,  where  many  were 
slain,  and  much  harm  done.     At  length,  the  emperor's  part  being  the 
weaker,  the  emperor,  through  the  intervention  of  certain  nobles  of 
Germany,  restored  Ladislaus  unto  their  hands,  who  being  yet  under 
age,  committed  his  three  kingdoms  to  three  governors,  whereof  John  cover- 
Huniades,  the  worthy  captain  above-mentioned,  had  the  ruling  of'nungary, 
Hungary  ;  Georgius  Pogiebracius  had  Bohemia ;  and  Ulric,  the  earl  Bohemia 
of  Silesia,  had  Austria,  which  Ulric,  having  the  chief  custody  of  the  "ptier  the 
king,  bare  the  greatest  authority  above  the  rest ;  a  man  as  full  of  am-  Austria. 
bition  and  t\Tanny,  as  he  was  hated  of  almost  all  the  Austrians,  and, 
shortlv  after,  by  the  means  of  Eizinger,  was  excluded  also  from  the 
king  and  the  court,  but  afterwards  restored  again,  and  Eizinger  thrust 
out.     Such  is  the  unstable  condition  of  those,  who  be  next  in  place 
about  princes.     But  this  contention  between  them  I  overpass. 

Not  long  after,  Ladislaus,  the  young  king,  went  to  Bohemia,  there  Ladis- 
to  be  crowned,  where  Georgius  Pogiebracius  (as  is  said)  had  the  jJJiung 
governance.     But  Ladislaus,  during  all  the  time  of  his  being  there,  p^p'^i* 
though  being  much  requested,   yet  Avould  neither   enter   into    the  coum  not 
churches,  nor  hear  the  service  of  those  who  did  draw  after  the  doctrine  doctrine'' 
of  Huss.     Insomuch  that  when  a  certain  priest,  in  the  high  tower  of  "^  ^"''*- 
Prague,  was  appointed  and  addressed,  after  the  manner  of  priests,  to 
say  service  before  the  king,  being  known  to  hold  with  John  Huss  and 
Rochezana,  the  king  disdaining  at  him,  commanded  him  to  give  place 
and  depart,  or  else  he  would  send  him  down  headlong  from  the  rock 
of  the  tower :  and  so  the  good  minister,  repulsed  by  the  king,  de- 
parted.    Also  at  another  time,  the  said  Ladislaus,  seeing  the  sacra- 
ment carried  by  a  minister  of  that  side,   whom  they  called  then 
Hussites,  would  do  thereunto  no  reverence.^ 

At  length  the  long  abode  of  the  king,  although  it  was  not  very 
long,  yet  seemed  to  the  godly-disposed  to  be  longer  than  they  wished ; 
and  that  was  not  to  the  king  unknown,  which  made  him  to  make  the 
more  haste  away  :  but,  before  he  departed,  he  thought  first  to  visit 
the  noble  city  Uratislavia  in  Silesia ;  in  which  city  the  aforesaid  king 
Ladislaus,  being  there  in  the  high  church  at  service,  many  great 
princes  were  about  him.  Among  whom  was  also  Georgius  Pogiebra- 
cius, who  then  stood  nearest  to  the  king,  unto  whom  one  Chilianus. 

(1)  Ex  .En.  Sylv. 


764  GEORGE    FOGIEBRACIUS  :    HIS    SAGE    ANSWER. 

Edward  playing  the  parasite  about  the  king  (as  the  fashion  is  of  such  as  feign 
^^-      themselves  fools,  to  make  other  men  as  very  fools  as  they),  spake  in 
AD.    this  wise  as  followeth  : 
1473. 

'  With  what  countenance  you  do  behold  this  our  service  I  see  right  well,  but 
•words  of    yoiu"  heart  I  do  not  see.     Say  then,  doth  not  the  order  of  this  our  religion  seem 
a  popish    unto  you  decent  and  comely  ?  do  you  not  see  how  many  and  how  great  princes, 
parasite  to  y^^  ^q  king  himself,  do  follow  one  order  and  uniformity  ?  and  why  do  you  then 
cius.         follow  rather  your  preacher  Rochezana,  than  these  ?  do  you  think  a  few  Bohe- 
mians to  be  more  wise  than  all  the  church  of  Christ  besides?  why  then  do  you 
not  forsake  that  rude  and  rustical  people,  and  join  to  these  nobles,  as  you  are  a 
nobleman  yourself?' 

Unto  whom  thus  Pogiebracius  sagely  again  doth  answer, 

*  If  you  speak  these  words  of  yourself,  saith  he,  you  are  not  the  man  whom 
swer  pro-  you  feign  yourself  to  be ;  and  so  to  you  I  answer,  as  not  to  a  fool.    But  if 
ceeding     you  speak  this  by  the  suggestion  of  others,  then  must  I  satisfy  them.     Hear 
v^  nlv^^'    therefore :    As  touching  the  ceremonies  of  the  church,  every  man  hath  a  con- 
wisdom,    science  of  his  own  to  follow.     As  for  us  we  use  such  ceremonies,  as  we  trust 
do  please  God ;  neither  is  it  in  our  arbitrement  to  believe  what  we  will  our- 
selves.    The  mind  of  man,  being  persuaded  with  great  reasons,  is  captivated, 
will  he,  nill  he ;  and  as  nature  is  instructed  and  taught,  so  is  she  drawn,  some 
in  one  way,  and  some  in  another.     As  for  myself,  I  am  fully  persuaded  of  the 
religion  of  my  preachers.     If  I  should  follow  thy  religion,  I  might  perchance 
deceive  men,  going  contrary  to  mine  own  conscience,  but  I  cannot  deceive  God, 
who  seeth  the  hearts  of  all ;  neither  shall  it  become  me  to  frame  myself  to  thy 
disposition.  That  which  is  meet  for  a  jester,  is  not  likewise  convenient  for  a  noble- 
man.    And  these  words  either  take  to  thyself,  as  spoken  to  thee,  if  thou  be  a 
wise  man;  or  else  I  refer  them  to  those  who  set  thee  at  work.'i 

After  the  king  Avas  returned  from  the  Bohemians  again  to  Austria, 
the  Hungarians  likewise  made  their  petitions  to  the  king,  that  he 
would  also  come  unto  them.  The  governor  of  Hungary  (as  ye  before 
have  heard)  was  Johannes  Huniades,  whose  victorious  acts  against  the 
uific       Turks  are  famous.     Against  this  Huniades,  wicked  Ulric  earl  of 
seeketh     Silesia,  did  all  he  could  with  the  king,  to  bring  him  to  destruction, 
ofHuni-  and  therefore  caused  the  king  to  send  for  him  up  to  Vienna,  and 
^^^^'       there  privily  to  work  his  death.     But  Huniades,  having  thereof  in- 
telligence, ofFereth  himself,  within  Hungary,  to  serve  his  prince  in  all 
affairs :  out  of  the  land  where  he  was,  it  was  neither  best  (said  he) 
for  the  king,  nor  safest  for  himself  to  come.     The  earl,  being  so  dis- 
appointed, came  down  with  certain  nobles  of  the  court  to  the  borders 
of  Hungary,  thinking  either  to  apprehend  him  and  bring  him  to 
Vienna,  or  there  to  dispatch  him.    Huniades  said  he  would  commune 
with  him  without  in  the  fields ;  within  the  town  he  would  not  be 
brought.     After  that  another  train  also  was  laid  for  him,  that  under 
pretence  of  the  king^s  safe-conduct  he  should  meet  the  king  in  the 
Huniades  broad  fields  of  Vienna.      But  Huniades,   suspecting   deceit,  came 
sparetii     indeed  to  the  place  appointed,  where  he,  neither  seeing  the  king  to 
my.         come,  nor  the  earl  to  have  any  safe-conduct  for  him,  was  moved  (and 
not  without  cause)  against  the  earl,  declaring  how  it  was  in  his  power 
there  to  slay  him,  who  went  about  to  seek  his  blood ;  but,  for  the 
reverence  of  the  king,  he  would  spare  him  and  let  him  go. 
Alb  b  -^*^*'  ^^"^K  ^^^^^  ^l^i^'  ^^^  Turk  with  a  great  power  of  fighting  men, 

sieged  by  to  the  number  of  a  hvmdred  and  fifteen  thousand,  arrived  in  Hungary, 
urk.  ^]^gj.g  jjg  i^^jj  siege  to  the  city  Alba.    But  through  the  merciful  hand 

(1)  Ex  jEn.  Sylv.,  in  Hist.  Boliem. 


THE    KIXG    PUTTETH    A    SON    OF    HUNIADES    TO    DEATH.  765 

of  God,  John  Huniades,  and  Capistranus  a  certain  Minorite,  with  a  [Edward 
small  garrison  of  christian  soldiers,  gave  him  the  repulse,  and  put  him       ^' 
to  flight  with  all   his  mighty  host ;    whereof  more,  Christ  willing,    A.  D. 
hereafter.'     Huniades,  shortly  after  this  victory,  deceased.    Of  whose    ^'^^•^- 
death  when  the  king  and  the  earl  did  understand,  they  came  the  more  i^e 
boldly  into  Hungary,  where,  being  received  by  Ladislaus,  Huniades''s  God"y° 
son,  into  the  town  of  Alba,  they  viewed  the  place  where  the  Turks  ™Huni- 
before  had  pitched  their  tents.     When  this  Ladislaus  heard  that  the  ^<^^^  and 
king  was  coming  first  towards  the  town,  obediently  he  opened  to  him  stranus 
the  gates.     Four  thousand  only  of  armed  soldiers  he  debarred  from  ?he  Turk. 
entering  the  city. 

In  the  mean  time,  w^hile  the  king  was  there  resident  in  the  city,  Debate 
the  earl  with  other  nobles  did  sit  in  council,  requiring  also  Ladislaus  uiri?'^" 
to  resort  unto  them  ;  who,  first  doubting  with  himself  what  he  mi^ht  ^n^  La- 

.  •  dislaus 

do,  at  length  putteth  on  a  privy  coat  of  mail,  and  cometh  to  them.  Huni- ' 
AVhether  the  earl  first  began  with  him,  or  he  with  the  earl,  it  is  not  l^^  * 
known.     The  opinion  of  some  is,  that  Ulric  first  called  him  traitor,  uiric, 
for  shutting  the  gates  against  the  kino:"'s  soldiers.     Howsoever  the  ^^i"'  ?*" 

o  o  o  o  ^     ^  ^  ^  Silesia 

occasion  began,  this  is  undoubted,  that  Ulric,  taking  his  sword  from  slain. ' 
his  page,  let  fly  at  his  head.  To  break  the  blow,  some,  putting  up 
their  hands,  had  their  fingers  cut  off.  The  Hungarians,  hearing  a 
noise  and  tumult  within  the  chamber,  brake  in  open  upon  them,  and 
there  incontinent  slew  Ulric  the  earl,  wounding  and  cutting  him 
almost  all  to  pieces.  The  king  hearing  thereof,  although  he  was  not 
a  little  discontented  thereat  in  his  mind,  yet  seeing  there  was  then 
no  other  remedy,  dissembled  his  grief  for  a  time. 

From  thence  taking  his  journey  again  to  Buda,  accompanied  with  The  cruci 
the  aforesaid  Ladislaus,  the  king,  passing  by  the  town  where  the  wife  la'tforTof 
of  Huniades  was  mourning  for  the  death  of  her  husband,  seemed  i^^'^g'^jjje 
with  manv  fair  words  to  comfort  her,  and  after  he  had  there  sufficiently  king. 
repasted  himself,  with  such  pretence  of  dissembled  love,  and  feigned 
favour,  that  they  were  without  all  suspicion  and  fear ;  from  thence  he 
set  forward  on  his  journey,  taking  with  him  the  two  sons  of  Huniades,  The  two 
Ladislaus  and  Matthias,  who  were  right  ready  to  wait  upon  him.  ^"^°*^ 
The   king,  being  come  to  Buda  (whether  of  his  own  head,  or  by  f^l^^^^' 
sinister  counsel  set  on),  when  he  had  them  at  a  vantage,  caused  both  and 
the  sons  of  Huniades,  to  wit,  Ladislaus  and  Matthias,  to  be  appre-  La^^i-  '^^' 
hended.    And  first  was  brought  forth  Ladislaus,  the  elder  son,  to  the  ^^^^:_ 
place  of  execution,  there  to  be  beheaded ;  where  meekly  he  suffered,  adess 
being  charged  Avith  no  other  crime  but  this,  published  by  the  voice  ^ocen"- 
of  the  crier,  saying,  "  Thus  are  they  to  be  chastened,  who  are  rebels  ^l^^^^° 
against  their  Lord."    Peucer,  writing  of  his  death,  addeth  this  more-  a  mira- 
over,  that  after  the  hangman  had  three  blows  at  his  neck,  yet  notwith-  token  at 
standing  the  said  Ladislaus,  having  his  hands  bound  behind  him,  after  of  L^dtl- 
the  third  stroke  rose  upright  upon  his  feet,  and  looking  up  to  heaven  'a"s- 
called  upon  the  Lord,  and  protested  his  innocency  in  that  behalf; 
and  so  laying  down  his  neck  again,  at  the  fourth  blow  was  dispatched.^ 
Matthias,  the  other  brother,  was  led  captive  with  the  king  into  Austria. 
The  rest  of  the  captives  brake  the  prison,  and  escaped. 

It  was  not  long  after  this  cruelty  was  wrought  upon  Ladislaus  (the 
king  being  about  the  age  of  twenty  and  two  years),  that  talk  was  made 

(1)  Ex  Hist.  Bohem.  Mn.  Sylvi.  (2)  Ex  Peucer.  Chron.  lib.  5. 


766  DESIGN    OF    LADISLAUS    TO    DESTROY    THE    BOHEMIANS. 

Edward   of  the  king"'s  nianiage  with  Magdalen,  daughter  to  the  French  king. 

^^'      The  place  of  the  maniage  was  appointed  at  Prague,  where  great  pre- 

A.  D.    paration  was  for  the  matter.     At  the  first  entrance  of  the  king  into 

^473.    ^}^e  city  of  Prague,  Rochezana,  with  a  company  of  ministers  such  as 

Prepara-    were  favouTcrs  of  John  Hubs,  and  of  sincere  religion,  came  with  all 

thekinVs  Solemnity  to  receive  the  king,  making  there  his  oration  to  gratulate 

LaiS^^^'  the  king''s  most  joyful  and  prosperous  access  into  the  same  his  own 

laus,        realm  and  country  of  Bohemia.    Unto  wliich  Rochezana,  after  he  had 

received'  cudcd  his  oratiou,  scarce  would  the  king  open  his  mouth  to  give 

mi^"^^    thanks  to  him,  or  any  cheerful  countenance  unto  his  company,  but 

A  fierce    fiercely  sccmcd  to  frown  upon  them.  In  the  next  pageant  after  these, 

against     canic  fortli  the  priests  of  the  high  minster,  after  the  most  popish 

sia^ns."^    manner,  meeting  huu  with  procession,  and  with  the  sacrament  of  the 

altar :  for  as  panacea,  among  physicians,  serveth  for  all  diseases,  so  the 

Thesa-    sacramcut  of  the  pope"'s  altar  serveth  for  all  pomps  and  pageants. 

crament    pjj.gj.  j^  must  He  upou  the  altar ;  then  it  must  be  holden  up  with 

altar  used  Jjands :  then  it  must  hang  in  the  pix ;  it  must  serve  for  the  quick  ; 

to  many     .  i        i     i        i        i        i        •  ■    •       i         •   i         • 

purposes,  it  must  also  help  the  dead ;  it  must,  moreover,  visit  the  sick  ;  it  must 
walk  about  the  churchyard ;  it  must  go  about  the  streets  ;  it  must 
be  earned  about  the  fields  to  make  the  grass  to  grow  ;  it  must  be  had 
to  the  battle  ;  it  must  ride  on  horseback  before  the  pope  :  and  finally 
it  must  welcome  kings  into  cities.  Wherein  these  catholic  fathers 
do  seem  somewhat  to  forget  themselves.  For  if  the  pope,  being 
inferior  to  the  sacrament  of  the  altar,  at  the  coming  of  kings  do  use 
to  sit  still,  while  the  kings  come  and  kiss  his  feet,  what  reason  is  it 
that  the  sacrament  of  the  altar,  which  is  (I  trow)  above  the  pope, 
should  meet  kings  by  the  way,  and  welcome  them  to  the  town  ?  But 
this  by  the  way  of  parenthesis :  let  us  now  continue  the  text. 

When  Ladislaus,  this  catholic  king,  who  had  showed  himself  before 

so  stout  and  stem  against  Rochezana  and  his  company  had  seen  these 

catholic  priests,  Avith  their  procession,  and  especially,  with  their  blessed 

sacrament  to  come  ;  with  all  reverence  and  much  devotion,  he  lighted 

down  from  his  horse,  he  embraced  the  cross  and  kissed  it,  and  with 

cheerful  countenance  saluted  the   priests  in   order.     All  this  while, 

his  young  M'ife  was  not  yet  come  out  of  Fi-ance,  but  legates  were 

sent,  after  most  sumptuous  wise  to  conduct  her.     Other  legates  also 

■were  sent  at  the  same  time  to  the  emperor  Frederic,  for  conclusion  of 

peace.     The  third  legation  was  directed  likewise  to  pope  Calixtus 

about  religion,  how  to  reduce  the  Bohemians  to  the  church  of  Rome.' 

A  great     The  author   of  this  story   (who  was  pope  Pius  himself)   declareth 

of"atho-'^  further  the  opinion  of  some  to  be,  that  king  Ladislaus,  at  the  same 

li';L^i"'f  ^  time,  had  intended  to  make  a  final  end  and  destruction  of  all  that  sect 

intenaeQ     .  '  •  r>    t    i        tt  i    t 

against  in  Bohciuia,  which  held  with  the  doctrine  of  John  Huss  and  Jerome, 
Hussites,  by  the  assembly  and  concourse  of  the  catholic  princes  and  popish 
prelates,  who  were  appointed  there  to  meet  together  at  that  marriage 
in  Prague.  For  there  should  be  first  the  emperor  Frederic,  Elizabeth 
the  king's  mother,  and  his  sisters  Elizabeth  and  Anna,  the  princes  of 
Saxony,  Bavaria,  Silesia,  Franconia,  the  palatine,  and  other  princes  of 
the  Rhine :  many  also  of  the  lords  of  France,  besides  the  pope''s 
cardinals,  legates,  prelates,  and  other  potestates  of  the  pope"'s  church  ; 
who   if  they  had  altogether  convented  in  Bohemia,  no  doubt  but 

(1)  Ex  ^nea  Sylvio  in  hist.  Bohem. 


THE    DOMINION'S    OF    KING    LADISLAUS.  767 

some  great  mischief  had  been  wrought  there  against  the  Hussites,  Edward 
against  whom  this  Ladislaus,  following  the  steps  of  Sigismund,  his 


grandfather,  and  Albert,  his  fither,  was  ever  an  utter  enemy.     But  A.  D. 
M'hen  man  hath  purposed,  yet  God  disposeth  as  pleaseth  him.  1-^1^. 

And  therefore  truly  it  is  Avritten  by  yEneas  Sylvius  in  the  same 
place,  saying,  "  De  regimine  civitatum,  de  mutatione  regnonmi,  de 
orbis  imperio,   minimum   est  quod  homines  possint  (tum  vero   de 
religionis  constitutione  multo  minus),  magna  magnus  disponit  Dens." 
That  is,  "  In  regiment  of  cities,  in  alteration  of  kingdoms,  in  ruling  covem- 
and  governing  the  world,  it  is  less  than  nothing  that  man  can  do  ;  it  jJU^pi^Js 
is  the  high  God  that  ruletli  high  things."'"'     Whereunto  then  I  may  and  king- 
well   add  this  moreover,  and  say  :  that  if  the  governance  of  worldly  not  in 
kingdoms   standeth  not  in  man's  power,  but  in  the  disposition  of  pjf^"er, 
God,  much  less  is  it  then  that  man's  power  can  do,  in  the  regiment  {^"''^q'^^^ 
and   governing   of  religion.     Example  whereof    in   this   purposed  vemance 
device  of  princes  doth  evidently  appear  :  for,  as  this  great  prcpara-  gion^.' 
tion  and  solemnity  of  marriage  was  in  doing,  and  the  princes  ready  ^ork^or* 
to  set  forth,  with  a  little  turn  of  God's  holy  hand  all  these  great  God  in 
purposes  were  suddenly  tivmed  and  dashed.    For  in  the  midst  of  this  his  poor 
business,  about  the  21st  day  of  November,  a.d.  1461,  this  great  pearhoV 
adversary  of  Christ's  people,  king  Ladislaus,  king  of  Bohemia  and  of  ^'^g 
Hungary,  and  prince  of  Austria,  sickened,  and,  within  six  and  thirty  laus. 
hours,  died  ;  some  say  of  a  pestilent  sore  in  his  groin,  some  say  of 
poison.     But  howsoever  it  was,  as  it  came    not   without  the  just  Blood  re- 
judgment  of  God.  revenging  the  innocent  blood  of  Ladislaus,  Hu-  cod. 
niades's  son,  wrongfully  put  to  death  before  ;  so,  by  the  opportune 
death  of  this  king,  the  poor  churches  of  Bohemia  were  gi-aciously 
delivered.      And  this  end  made   Ladislaus,  one  of  the    mightiest 
princes  at  that  time  in  all  Europe  ;  in  whom  three  mighty  kingdoms 
were  conjoined  and  combined  together,  Austria,  Hungary,  and  Bo- 
hemia;   which  countries  do  lie   south   east  from   England,  in  the 
farthest  parts  of  all  Germany,  toward  Constantinople  and  the  domi- 
nions of  the  Turks,  and  contain  these  principal  towns  in  them. 

THE    LARGE    DOMINIONS    OF    LADISLAUS. 


AUSTRIA 

1 

Kotzo. 

Agria. 

Raba. 

Orszaw. 

Vienna.* 
Melck. 

Lindenburg. 

Bossen. 
Sabaria. 

Neustadt  (nova 

Ci  vitas). 

HUNGARY. 3 

Gretz. 

BOHEMIA. 

St.  Hypolit. 

Ofen  Buda. 

Lintz. 

Strigonium. 

Prague. 

Stein. 

Kalachia. 

Plizen. 

Hainiburg. 

Varadein. 

Tabor. 

Kremsier. 

Nitria. 

Budweis. 

Karolsburg. 

Nicopolis,  Nova  et 

Kolm,  or  Koelu 

Teben. 

Vetus. 

Egra. 

(1)  Called  once  Pannonia  Superior.  To  Austria  be  adjoining  also  certain  provinces  and  earldoms  : 
as,  Stiria,  Carinthia,  Croatia ;  provinces.     Silesia  and  Tyrolentz ;  earldoms. 

(2)  Besieged  by  the  Turk,  a.d. 1533. 

(3)  This  Hungary  was  first  called  Pannonia  Inferior,  or  Poeonia.  After  the  coming  of  the  Huns, 
it  was  called  Ilungaria:  of  whom  came  Attila,  who  destroyed  Italy,  about  ad.  440.  Through 
Hungary  runneth  the  Danube,  having  on  the  west  side,  Austria;  and  Bohemia  on  the  east;  Servia, 
on  the  south  side ;  Polonia,  &c.  The  most  of  this  Hungary  is  now  under  the  Turk  ;  which  Turk 
first  came  into  Europe,  a.d.  1211. 


T68 


THE    DESCENT    OF    MAXIMILIAN,    THE    EMPEROR. 


Edward 
IV. 

A.D. 
1473. 


Kuttenberg. 

Leimiritz. 

Laim. 

Racownitz. 

Glataw. 

Bern,  or  Beraun. 

Bruck,  or  Most. 

Gretz,  or  Hradetz. 


Austi. 

Maut,  or  Myto. 

Hof. 

Jaromir. 

Dubitz,  or  Biela. 

Lantzliut. 

Gilgwey. 


Krupa. 

Krumaw. 

Pardubice. 

Chumitaum. 

Loket,  or  Teplitz. 

Hantzburg,  or  Zbraslau. 

Labes,  or  Ultawa. 


After  the  death  of  Ladislaus,  the  kingdom  of  Bohemia  fell  to 
Georgius  Pogiebracius  above  mentioned,  whom  pope  Innocent  VIII. 
did  excommunicate  and  depose  for  his  religion,  as  is  before  declared. 

Furthermore  the  kingdom  of  Hungary  Avas  given  to  Matthias,  son 
of  Huniades,  who  was  in  captivity  (as  is  said)  Avith  king  Ladislaus, 
and  should  have  been  put  to  death  after  his  brother,  had  not  the 
king  before  been  prevented  with  death,  as  is  above  recorded.  More- 
over, here  is  to  be  noted  that  the  said  king,  Ladislaus,  thus  dying 
without  wife  and  issue,  left  behind  him  two  sisters  alive,  to  wit, 
Elizabeth,  who  was  married  to  Casimir,  king  of  Poland ;  and  Anna, 
married  to  AVilliam  duke  of  Saxony  ;  Elizabeth  by  her  husband 
Casimir,  king  of  Poland,  had  Uladislaus,  who  at  length  was  king  of 
both  Bohemia  and  Hungary.  This  Casimir  was  first  married  to 
Beatrix,  Avife  before  to  Matthias.  Then,  being  divorced  from  her  by 
the  dispensation  of  pope  Alexander,  he  married  a  new  wife,  a  countess 
of  France,  by  whom  he  had  two  children,  Louis  and  Anna ;  Louis, 
who  Avas  heir  of  both  kingdoms,  Bohemia  and  Hungary,  Avas  slain 
fighting  against  the  Turks.  Anna  Avas  married  to  Ferdinand,  by 
whom  he  was  archduke  of  Austria,  king  of  Bohemia,  &c. 

MAXIMILIAN,  HOW  descended  prom  SIGISMUND. 


Elizabeth,   =  m.  to  Albert  the  Emperor, 
only  daughter 
left  by  him. 


T 


Ladislaus, 

King  of  Hungary,  Bohemia, 

and  Austria. 


Elizabeth. 


m.  to  Casimir, 
King  of  Poland. 


Anna.  z=m.  to  AVilliam, 
Duke  of  Saxony. 


Beatrice,   =  Uladislaus,  —   A  Countess  of  France 


his  first  wife. 


King  of 

Hungary  and 

Bohemia. 


his  second  wife. 


Ludovious, 
King  of  Bohemia  and  Hungary. 


1 
Anne,   =  m.  to  Ferdinand. 

Maximilian, 
now  Emperor. 


AVar  Ye  heard  before,  how,  after  the  decease  of  Ladislaus,  the  Hun- 

Ailnwas  garians,  by  their  election,  preferred  Matthias,  surnamed  Corvinus, 

and    .     who  Avas  son  of  Huniades,  to  the  kingdom  of  Hungary :   for  Avhich 

the  cause  dissension  fell  betAveen   Frederic  the   emperor  and  him,  for 

emperor.  ^^^^  ^^^  ^^:^^  Frederic  Avas  both  nominated  himself  by  divers  unto 

that  kingdom,  and  also  because  he  had  the  croAvn  of  Hungary  then 

remaining  in  his  hands,  Avhich  Elizabeth,  mother  to  king  Ladislaus, 

had  brought  to  the  emperor,  as  was  before  declared.     But  this  Avar 

between   them    was    ceased   by    the  intercession    of  the  princes   of 


GOD  DEFENDETH  THE  RELIGION  OF  THE  BOHEMIANS.         769 

Germany,  so  that  Matthias  ransomed  tliat  crown  of   Frederic  for  Edward 
eight  thousand  florins.  ^^- 

Not  long  after,  pope  Innocent  being  displeased  with  Georgius    A.D. 
Pogiebracius  (or  Bojebracius),  king  of  Bohemia,   for   favouring  of  .ilZli. 
John  Huss  and  his  religion,  that  is  to  say,  for  playing  the  part  of  a  ^^^js^ 
godly  prince,  did  excommunicate  and   depose  him,  conferring  his  ciu^s  by  * 
kingdom   on  Matthias.     But,  forasmuch  as    Frederic  the   emperor  depoTed^ 
would  not    thereto  consent,  and  especially  after  the  death  of  the  k^f^jj,^, 
aforesaid  George,   when  the   emperor  and  the   Bohemians,  leaving  for 
out    Matthias,  did   nominate    Uladislaus,   son   of  Casimir   king   ofof7ohn"° 
Poland,  and  of  Elizabeth,  to  be  king  of  Bohemia,  therefore  great  Libert 
war  and  trouble  kindled  between  him  and  Frederic  the  emperor ;  <^"'^<=  °^ 
■wherein   the    emperor  had  utterly  gone   to  ruin,   had    not  Albert   ^'"'"^' 
duke  of  Saxony,  rescued  the  emperor,  and  repressed  the  vehemency 
of  Matthias. 

The  noble  acts  of  John  Huniades,  and  of  this  Matthias,  his  son,  Thenowe 
were  not  only  great  stays  to  Hungary,  but  almost  to  all  Christendom,  jolfn^Ind 
in  repelling  back  the  Turk.     For  besides  the  other  victories  of  John  Hun'- d^ 
Huniades,  the   father   aforementioned,  this  Matthias  also,  his  son,  against 
succeeding  no  less  in  valiantness,  than  in   the  name    of  his  father,  Turks. 
did  so  recover  Sirmium,  and  the  confines  of  Illyrica,  from  the  hands 
of  the  Turks,  and  so  vanquished  their  power,  that  both  Mahomet, 
and  also  Bajazet,  his  son,  were  enforced  to  seek  for  truce. 

Over  and  besides,  the  same   Matthias  conducting  his  army  into  J^itza  re- 
Bosnia,  which  lieth  south  from  Hungary,  recovered  again  Jaitza,  the  The  sub- 
principal  town  of  that  kingdom,  from  the  Tm-ks'  possession  ;  who,  if  Ijce'or 
other  christian  princes  had  joined  their  helps  withal,  would  have  pro-  ^5'^"  '° 

^ ,  *^  ^  ,    .  *■  stop  good. 

ceeded  further  into  Thrace.  But  behold  here  the  malicious  subtlety  proceed- 
of  Satan,  Avorking  by  the  pope.  For  while  Matthias  was  thus  occu-  ^°°^' 
pied  in  this  expedition  against  the  Turks,  wherein  he  should  have 
been  set  forward  and  aided  by  christian  princes,  and  bishops;  the 
bishop  of  Rome  wickedly  and  sinfully  ministereth  matter  of  civil 
discord  between  him  and  Pogiebracius  aforesaid,  in  removing  him 
from  the  right  of  his  kingdom,  and  transferring  the  same  to  Matthias. 
Wliereupon  not  only  the  course  of  victory  against  the  Turks  was 
stopped,  but  also  gi'eat  war  and  bloodshed  followed  in  clu-istian 
realms,  as  well  between  this  Matthias  and  Pogiebracius,  with  his 
two  sons  Victorinus  and  Henricus,  as  also  between  Casimir,  Ula- 
dislaus, and  Matthias,  warring  about  Uratislavia;  till  at  length  the 
matter  was  taken  up  by  the  princes  of  Germany. 

Albeit,  for  all  the  execrable  excommunication  of  the  pope  affainst  Tiie 
Pogiebracius,  a  great  part  of  Bohemia  would  not  be  removed  fi-om  excom- 
the   obedience  of  their  king,  whom   the  pope  had  cursed,  and  de-  uoTnoT 
posed :  yet  Matthias  took  from  him  Moravia,  and  a  great  portion  ^^^J^^s'^/J,^' 
of  Silesia,  and   adjoined    it  to    his   kingdom  of  Hungary,    a.  d.  Bohemia. 
1474. 

Here  this  by  the  way  is  to  be  noted,  that  the  religion  in  Bohemia,  The  reu- 
planted  by  John  Huss,  could  not  be  extinguished  or  suppressed  with  tue  Bohe- 
all  the  power  of  four  mighty  princes,  Winceslaus,  Sigismund,  Albert  ^fended 
and   Ladislaus,  notwithstanding  they,  with  the  popes,   did  therein  ^y  ood 
what  they  possibly  could ;  but  still  the  Lord  maintained  the  same,  as 

VOL.  III.  3  D 


770  THE    pope's    DISPENSATIOX. 

Edward  ye  scc  by  tliis  Pogiebracius,  king  of  Bohemia,  whom  the  pope  could 


IV. 


not  utterly  remove  out  of  the  kingdom  of  Bohemia. 


A.  D,        This  forementioned  Matthias,  besides  his  other  memorable  acts  of 
1474.    cliivalry,  is  no  less  also  commended  for  his  singular  knowledge,  and 


the  four  Joye  of  learning  and  of  learned  men,  whom  he  with  great  stipends 
princes  in  procurcd  iuto  Paunouia ;  where,  by  the  means  of  good  letters,  and 
Mattwas  funiitm'e  of  learned  men,  he  reduced  in  short  space  the  barbarous 
a  great     rufjeness  of  that  country  into  a  flourishincr  commonwealth.     More- 

lover  of  .  y  ^  .  ,  . 

learning    ovcr  sucli  a  library  he  did  there  erect,  and  replenish  with  all  kind  of 
learned     authors,  scieuccs,  and  histories,  which  he  caused  to  be  translated  out 
his  noble  ^^  Greek  into  Latin,  as  the  like  is  not  thought  to  be  found,  next  to 
library.     Italy,  in  all  Europe  beside.     Out  of  which  library  we  have  received 
divers  fragments  of  Avriters,  as  of  Polybius,  and  Diodorus  Siculus, 
which  were  not  extant  before.^ 
commen-      The  Constant  fortitude  also  of  Georgius  Pogiebracius,   king   of 
Pogiebra-  Bohemia,  is  not  vmworthy  of  commendation ;  of  whom  also  pope 
cms.        pj^jg  iiij^ggif^  ij^  '  Descriptione  Europse,*'  doth  honestly  report  (as  a 
pope  may  speak  of  a  protestant),  in  these  words  writing,  "  Magnus  vir 
alioqui,  et  rebus  bellicis  clarus,'"'  &c. :  who,  although  pope  Innocent 
God's  fa-  did  execrate  him  with  his  childi'en,  yet  he  left  not  off  the  profession 
th"sons    of  the  verity  and  the  knowledge  which  he  had  received.  Moreover,  the 
bradlfs'^"  Lord  so  prospcrcd  his  sons,  Victorinus  and  Henricus,  that  they  sub- 
dued their  enemies,    and   kept  their  estate:    insomuch  that  when 
Frederic  the  emperor,  at  Vienna,  Avas  in  custody  enclosed  by  the 
citizens,  Victorinus  did  restore,  and  deliver  liimx  out  of  their  hands. 
Wherefore  the  emperor  afterwards  advanced  them  to  be  dukes.    Also 
God  gave  them  sometimes  prosperous  victory  against  Matthias,  as  at 
the  city  of  Glogau,  &c. 
The  death      After  the   decease  of  Georgius  Pogiebracius,   king  of  Bohemia, 
braciiSr  Frederic  the  emperor  assigned  that  kingdom,  not  to  Matthias,  upon 
uiadi       whom  the  pope  had  bestowed  it  before,  but  to  Uladislaus,  son  of  Casimir 
laus,        king  of  Poland,  and  of  Elizabeth,  daughter  of  the  emperor  Albert, 
son!™"^"  and  sister  to  Ladislaus.     For  which  Matthias,  being  discontented, 
king'^of     ^"^^  ^^^  ^^^^^  ^^^  emperor  had  denied  him  his  daughter  Kunegunda, 
Hungary,  wcut  about   to   excludc  Uladislaus  out   of   Bohemia,  and  also  pro- 
claimed war  against  Frederic.     But  before  he  accomplished  his  pur- 
posed preparation,  death  prevented  him,  who  without  issue  departed, 
A.  D.  1490. 

After  the  death  of  Matthias,  departing  w^ithout  issue,  Uladislaus, 
son    of  Casimir   king  of   Poland,  and   of  Elizabeth    daughter   to 
Albert  the  emperor,  and  sister  to  king    Ladislaus,  mamcd  his  wife 
uiadis-     Beatrix,  whom  Matthias  left  a  widow,  and  with  her  was  elected  king 
tainetha  of   Hungary,  with  this  condition  made  between  him   and  Frederic 
ti^rfrom  *^^^  emperor,  that  if  he   died  Avithout  lawful  issue,  then  the  king- 
pope        doms    of   Hungary  and    Bohemia    should    return   to    Maximilian, 
der.To"     son  to  Frederic.     But  Uladislaus  not  long  after  did  repudiate  his 
w"firat    ^^^^'^  Beatrix,   and  depriving  her  of  her  kingdom,  caused  the  said 
wife,  and  Beatrix  to  swear  and  to  consent  to  his  marrying  another  woman,  who 
anrther    was  the  daughter  of  the  French  king,  named  Anne,  procuring  from 
pope  Alexander  a  dispensation  for  the  same,  as  is  before  signified.  By 

(1)  Ex  Peuc.  lib.  V. 


DISCORD    AND    DISSENSION    IN    THE    CHURCH    NOTED.  771 

this  Anne,  Uladislaus  had  Lonis,  and  Anne,  which  Anne  afterwards  was  Edward 
married  to  Ferdinand.  ^^- 

Louis    succeeding  his  father,    had   both    the    said   kingdoms    of  A.  D. 
Bohemia  and  Hungary,  a.  d.  1492,  and  married  Mary,   sister   to    ^'^^^- 
the  emperor  Charles  the   Fifth.     Anne  as  is  said,  was  coupled  to 
Ferdinand,  &c. 

Of  Charles  duke  of  Burgundy  somewhat  was  before  touched,  who 
had  married  king  Edward's  sister ;  and  what  troubles  by  him  were 
stirred  up  in  France,  partly  was  before  notified.     This  Charles  after  war  be- 
he  had  besieged  the  city  Nuys,  or  Novasium,  the  space  of  a  whole  cl^ils 
year,  went  about  to  alienate  the  territory  of  Cologne  from  the  empire  ^^^^  "f 
to  his  own  dominion  :  wherefore  war  began  to  be  moved  between  him  dy  a^"' 
and  Frederic  the  emperor.     At  length,  through  communication  had,  fhe  em-" 
peace  was  concluded,  and  a  man-iage  appointed  between  Mary  the  p^'^°''- 
only  daughter  of  Charles,  and  Maximilian  the  emperor's  son,  a.  d.  a.d.h-s. 
1475.     Then  from  Nuys,   Charles  leadeth  his  anny  towards  Hel- 
vetia,  against   Renatus,   or  Reinhardus,   duke  of  Lotharing ;    then  Duke  of 
against  the  Helvetians,  where  he,   being  thrice   overcome,  first  at  dy  sSln 
Granson,  then  at  Moratum,  or  Muret,  in  the  higher  part  of  Helvetia,  ''''^'"'• 
at  last,  at  the  town  of  Nantz,  was  overthrown  and  slain,  a.  d.  1477.  A.D.i47r. 
The  procurer  of  which  wars  was  chiefly  Louis  XL,  the   French 
king,  to  the  intent  he  might  compass  the  dominion  of  Burgundy 
under  his  subjection ;   which,  afterwards,  by  open   wrong  and  privy  f^'y 
fraud  he  brought  about,  defrauding  Mary,  the  daughter  of  Charles,  of  charies 
of  her  rightful  inheritance ;  for  which  cause  the  Burgundians  were  the  gund'y," 
more  willing  to  join  her  in  marriage  with  Maximilian,  son  of  Frederic  J^^^j^xi 
the  emperor :  by   reason   whereof  the  title  of  Burgundy  was  first  miiian. 
joined  to  the  house  of  Austria. 

And  thus  have  you  the  miserable  vexations  and  contentions  among  warand 
our  christian  princes  here  in  Europe  described,  under  the  reign  of  810^" 
this  emperor  Frederic  IH.,  so  that  almost  no  angle  or  portion  of  all  c™°s(fa„ 
Christendom  (whether  we  consider  the  state  of  the  church,  or  civil  princes. 
government)  was  free  from  discord,  tumults,  and  dissensions.     This 
cankered  worm  of  ambition  so  mightily  creepeth,  and  every  where 
prevaileth  in  these  latter  ends  of  the  world,  that  it  sulFereth  neither 
rest  in  commonweals,  nor  peace  in  the  church,  nor  any  sparkle  of 
charity  almost  to  remain  in  the  life  of  men.     And  what  marvel  then  The  dis- 
if  the  Lord,  seeing  us  so  far  to  degenerate,  not  only  from  his  pre-  christians 
cepts  and  counsels,  but  almost  from  the  sense  and  bond  of  nature,  scourged 

J7  '  ^  '     |)y  the 

that  brother  with  brother,  uncle  with  nephew,  blood  with  blood,  can-  Turks. 
not  agree,  in  striving,  killing  and  fighting  for  worldly  dominions,  do 
send  therefore  these  cruel  Turks  upon  us,  so  to  scourge  and  devom- 
us .''  of  whose  bloody  tyranny  and  daily  spilling  of  christian  blood 
hereafter,  by  the  grace  of  Christ,  we  will  discourse  more  at  large, 
when  we  come  to  the  peculiar  consideration  of  the  Turkish  stories. 
In  the  mean  time  this  shall  be  for  us  to  note  and  observe :  not  so 
much  the  scourge  how  grievous  it  is,  but  rather  to  behold  the  causes 
which  bring  the  whip  upon  us,  which  are  our  oym  miserable  ambition 
and  wretched  wars  among  ourselves. 

And  vet  if  this  christian  peace  and  love,  left  and  commended  so  Discord 
heartily  unto  us  by  the  mouth  of  the  Son  of  God,  being  now  banished  chu^h, 
out  of  christian  realms,  and  civil  governance,  might  at  least  find  ""'s'^- 

3  D  2 


772  THE    SEE    OF    ROME    HATH    NO    BOTTOM. 

Edward  some  rcfugc  in  the  church,  or  take  sanctuary  among  men  professing 
^^"     nothing  but  religion,  less  cause  we  had  to  mourn.     Now  so  it  is,  that 
A.  D.    as  we  sec  little  peace  and  amity  among  civil  potentates  ;  so  less  wc 
^"^77.    ^^f[  jj^  ^^Q  spiritual  sort  of  those,  who  chiefly  take  upon  them  the  ad- 
ministration of  Christ's   church.     So  that  it  may  well  be  doubted 
whether  the  scourge  of  the  Turk,  or  the  civil  sword  of  princes  have 
slain  more  in  the  fields,  or  the  pope''s  keys  have  burnt  more  in  towns 
and  cities.  And  albeit  such  as  be  professed  to  the  church,  do  not  fight 
with  sword  and  target  for  dominions  and  revenues,  as  warlike  princes 
Ambition  do ;  yet  this  ambition,  pride,  and  avarice,  appeareth  in  them  nothing 
rice  o^    inferior  unto  other  worldly  potestates ;  especially  if  we  behold  and 
t'"^         advise  the  doings  and  insatiable  desires  of  the  court  of  Rome.  Great 
of  Rome,  arguuicuts  and  proof  hereof  neither  are  hard  to  be  found,  nor  far 
to  be  sought.    What  realm  almost  through  all  Christendom  hath  not 
only  seen  with  their  eyes,  but  have  felt  in  their  purses  the  ambition 
intolerable,  and  avarice  insatiable  of  that  devouring  church,  and  also 
have  complained  upon  the  gTievance  thereof,  but  never  could  be  re- 
dressed ?     What  exactions  and  extortions  have  been  here  in  England 
out  of  bishoprics,  monasteries,  benefices,  deaneries,  archdeaconries, 
and   all  other  offices  of  the  church,  to  fill  the  pope's  coffers  ?  and 
when  they  had  all  done,  yet  almost  every  year  brought  some  new  in- 
vention from   Rome  to  fetch  in  our  English  money ;  and  if  all  the 
floods  in  England  (yea  in  all  Europe)  did  run  into  the  see  of  Rome, 
yet  were  that  ocean  never  able  to  be  satisfied. 

In  France,  likewise,  what  floods  of  money  were  swallowed  up  in  this 
see  of  Rome  !     It  was  openly  complained  of  in  the  council  of  Basil, 
as  is  testified  by  Henry  Token,  canon  and  ambassador  of  the  arch- 
bishop of  Maidcnburg,  wTitten  in  his  book,  entitled,  '  Rapularium,' 
where  he  writeth  that  in  the  council  of  Basil,  a.  d.  1436,  the  arch- 
bishop of  Lyons  did  declare,  that  in  the  time  of  pope  Martin  there  came 
out  of  France  to  the  court  of  Rome,  nine  millions  of  gold,  which 
was  gathered  of  the  bishops  and  prelates,  besides  those  which  could 
not  be  counted  of  the  poor  clergy,  who  daily,  without  number,  ran 
unto  the  court  of  Rome,  caiTying  with  them   all    their  whole  sub- 
The  see    staucc.     The  archbisliop  of  Tours  said  also  at  Basil,  a.  d.  1439, 
iftuS  tl^^t  three  millions  of  gold   came  unto    Rome  in   his  time,  within 
into  an     ^jjg  spaco  of  fourtecu  years,  from  the  prelates  and  prelacies,  whereof 
that  hath  no  accouut  could  be  made,  besides  the  poor  clergy  who  daily  run  to 
torn."       that  court.     Let  the  man  that  feareth  God  judge  what  a  devouring 
gulf  this  is  :  a  million  containeth  ten  hundred  thousand. 

And  what  made  pope  Pius  II.  to  labour  so  earnestly  to  Louis  XL, 
the  French  king,  who,  as  is  aforesaid,  was  a  great  enemy  to  the 
house  of  Burgundy,  that  he  would,  according  to  his  fonner  promise, 
abolish  and  utterly  extinguish  the  constitution  established  before  at 
Conciii-    the  council  of  Bourges,  by  king  Charles  VII.,  his  predecessor,  called 
rianse.      '  Pragmatica  Sanctio,'  but  only  the  ambition  of  that  see,  which  had 
no  measure,  and  their  avarice,  which  had  no  end  ?    The  story  is  this  : 
King  Charles  VII.,  the  French  king,  willing  to  obey  and  follow  the 
council  of  Basil,  did  summon  a  Parliament  at  Bourges ;  where,  by 
Pragma-  the  full  couscut  of  all  the  states  in  France,  both  spiritual  and  tem- 
^ica  ane-  ^^j.^]^  g^  certain  constitution  was  decreed  and  published,  called  '  Prag- 
matica Sanctio ;'   wherein  was  comprehended  briefly  the  pith  and 


THE    GERMANS    COMPLAIN    OF    THE    POPE  S    EXACTIONS.  773 

effect  of  all  the  canons  and  decrees  concluded  in  the  council  of  Basil.  Edward 
Which  constitution  the  said  king  Charles  willed  and  commanded     ^^' 
through  all  his  realm  inviolably  to  be  observed  and  ratified,   for    A.  D. 
the  honour  and  increase  of  the  christian  religion,  for  ever.     This    ^'^^^- 
was  A.D.  1438.' 

It  followed  that  after  the  decease  of  the  foresaid  Charles  VII.,  PopePius 
succeeded  king  Louis  XL,  who  had  promised  before  (being  dauphin)  Jhar"^*"'' 
to  pope  Pius,  that  if  he  ever  came  to  the  crown,  the  aforesaid  '  Sanctio  j,f/j^^^ 
Pragmatica'  should  be  abolished.     Whereupon  pope  Pius,  hearing  sanctio' 
him  to  be  crowned,  did  send  unto  him  John  Balveus  a  cardinal,  with  aboMsh-'"' 
his  great  letters  patent,  willing  him  to  be  mindful  of  his  promise  '"*• 
made.     The  king,  either  willing,  or  else  pretending  a  will,  to  perform 
and  accomplish  that  he  had  promised,  directed  the  pope's  letters 
patent,  with  the  said  cardinal,  to  the  council  of  Paris  ;  requiring  them 
to  consult  upon  the  cause. 

Thus  the  matter  being  brought  and  proposed  in  the  parliament- 
house,  the  king''s  attorney,  named  Johannes  Romanus,  a  man  well 
spoken,  singvdarly  witted,  and  well  reasoned,  stepping  forth,  with 
great  eloquence,  and  no  less  boldness,  proved  the  said  sanction  to  be 
profitable,  holy,  and  necessary  for  the  wealth  of  the  realm,  and  in  no 
case  to  be  abolished.     Unto  whose  sentence  the  university  of  Paris,  Thecoun- 
adjoining  their  consent,  did  appeal  from  the  attempts  of  the  pope  to  Par*is  ap- 
the  next  general  council.     The  cardinal  understanding  this,  took  no  ^ro^'^'he 
little  indignation  thereat,  fretting  and  fuming,  and  threatening  many  pope  to 
terrible  things  against  them  :   but,  all  his  minatory  words  notwith-  rafcom^- 
standing,  he  returned  again  to  the  king,  his  purpose  not  obtained,  *^'^" 
A.D.  1438.-2 

Thus  the  pope's  purpose  in  France  was  disappointed,  which  also 
in  Germany  had  come  to  the  like  effect,  if  Frederic  the  emperor  had 
there  done  his  part  likewise  toward  the  Germans  ;    wlio,  at  the  same  The  com- 
time,  bewailing  their  miserable  estate,  went  about  with  humble  suit  the'ce?- 
to  persuade  the  emperor,  that  he  should  no  longer  be  under  the  sub-  {^e"empe 
jection  of  the  popes  of  Rome,  except  they  had  first  obtained  certain  ™^'  ^°^ 
things  of  them  as  touching  the  charter  of  appeals  ;  declaring  their  aid 
estate  to  be  far  worse  (although  undeserved)  than  the  Frenchmen  or  the 
Italians,  whose  servants  (and  especially  of  the  Italians)  they  are  wor-  p^''* 
thily  to  be  called,  except  that  their  estate  were  altered.     The  nobles  pope. 
and  commonalty  of  Germany  did  instantly  entreat,  with  most  weighty 
reasons  and  examples,  both  for  the  utility  and  profit  of  the  empire, 
to  have  the  emperor's  aid  and  help  therein,  for  that  which  he  was 
bound  unto  them  by  an  oath  ;  alleging  also  the  great  dishonour  and 
ignominy,  in  that  they  alone  had  not  the  use  of  their  own  laws,  de- 
claring how  the  French  nation  had  not  made  their  suit  unto  their 
king  in  vain  against  the  exactions  of  popes,  by  whom  they  were 
defended ;  who  also  provided  decrees  and  ordinances  for  the  liberty 
of  his  people,  and  caused  the  same  to  be  observed ;  which  thing  the 
emperor  ought  to  foresee  within  his  empire,  and  to  provide  for  his 
people  and  states  of  his  empire,  as  well  as  other  kings  do.     For  what 
shall  come  to  pass  thereby,  if  that  foreign  nations,  having  recourse 
unto  their  kings,  being  relieved  and  defended  by  them  fi-om  the  said 
exactions,  and  the  Germans,  and  states  of  the  empire  flying  unto  their 

(1)  Ex  Joan.  Mario  Belg.  de  Sohismat.  et  Concilio,  cap.  24.  (2)    Ex  Joan.  Mario. 


against 
op- 
ssion 
of  the 


774  THE    WICKED    POLICY    OF    ,ENEAS    SVI.VIUS. 

Edward  emperor,  be  by  him  forsaken,  or  rather  betrayed  and  deprived  of  their 
^^'      own  laws  and  decrees  ?    The  emperor,  being  moved,  and  partly  over- 


A.  D.    come  by  their  persuasions,  promised  that  he  would  provide  no  less 
^^^T-  for  them,  than  the  king  of  France  had  done  for  the  Frenchmen,  and 
to  make  decrees  in  that  behalf.     But  the  grave  authority  of  ^neas 
Sylvius,  as  Platina  writetli  in  the  history  of  Pius  11. ,  brake  off  the 
matter ;  *  whose '  talk  was  thus  unto  tlie  emperor.     Mark  here  the 
wicked   oration   of  a   wicked   and  traitorous   orator.      "  Amongst 
princes,'"  saith  he,  "  albeit  there  be  variance  and  discord  about  great 
and  weighty  matters,  yet  peace  may  sometimes  be  made  again  :  but 
between  the  prince  and  the  common  people  there  is  always  mortal 
hatred."     Wherefore  this  wicked  ^neas,  forasmuch  as  he  should  be 
shortly  the  successor  of  Calixtus,  concluded  upon  this  point,  saying : 
That  he  thought  it  much  better  to  accord  with  the  pope,  than  to 
follow  their  covetous  desires,  whose  minds  are  led  with  covetousness  and 
appetite,  rather  than  by  reason.     Behold  by  what  policy  and  engine, 
with  what  force  of  impiety  and  wickedness,  that  venomous  tongue 
hath  suddenly  envenomed  and  enchanted  the  emperor,  that  with  one 
word  he  hath   subverted  and  put  away  such  evident  truth,   such 
exquisite  justice,  and  such  manifest  utility  and  necessity  of  laws  and 
decrees,  which  xEneas  himself  was  present  at  the  making  of,  and  a 
long  time  allowed  the  same  unto  the  emperor,  and  put  them  in  exe- 
cution ;   besides  the  manifold  and  weighty  reasons  of  the  princes  and 
people  of  Germany,  who  were  admitted,  had  already  taken  place  and 
persuaded,  but  that  as  yet  they  were  not  performed.    This,  I  say,  he 
JDrought  to  pass  by  that  his  only  false,   seditious,   and  venomous 
oration,  that  he*  did  so  bewitch  the  emjieror,  that  he,  contemning 
the  equal,  just,  and  necessary  requests  of  his  subjects,  chose  the  said 
iEneas  to  be  his  ambassador  unto  Calixtus,  then  newly  chosen  pope, 
to  swear  unto  him  in  his  name,  and  to  promise  the  absolute  obedi- 
ence of  all  Germany,  as  the  only  country  (as  they  call  it)  of  obedi- 
ence,  neglecting  the  ordinances  and  decrees  of  their  country,  as 
before  he  had  done  unto   Eugene  IV,,  being  ambassador  for  the 
said  Frederic,  promising  that  he  and  all  the  Germans  Avould  be  obe- 
dient unto  him  from  henceforth,  in  all  matters,  as  well  spiritual  as 
temporal. 

Thus,  twice,  Frederic  of  Austria  contemned  and  derided  the  Ger- 
mans, and,  frustrating  them  of  their  native  decrees  and  ordinances, 
brought  them  under  subjection  and  bondage  of  the  pope ;    which 
partly  was  the  cause  that  seven  years  before  his  death,  he  caused  his 
son  Maximilian  not  only  to  be  chosen,  but  also  crowned  king  of  the 
Romans,  and  did  associate  him  in  the  ministration  of  the  empire, 
made  the  ^^^^  ^^^^^  ^^^^  death  (as  it  came  to  pass)  the  empire  should  be  trans- 
Germans  ported  into  another  family ;  suspecting  the  Germans,  whom  he  had 
subject     twice,  contrary  to  his  laws,  made  subject,  and  in  bondage  unto  the 
pope.""^   pope's  exactions  ;  first,  before  he  was  crowned  in  the  time  of  Eugene 
Aiben"'''  ■^^' '  ^^^^  again,  the  second  time,  after  his  coronation,  and  the  death 
and  Si-     of  pope  Nicholas  v.,  denyuig  their  requests;  by  whom,  afterwards, 
ftrivefor  i^  the  year  of  our  Lord  1463,  he  was  besieged.     Whereupon  Ger- 
doL'^of"'"  ii^any  being  in  this  miserable  poverty  and  grievous  subjection  under 
Austria,    the  pope's  tyranny  and  pollings,  with  tears  and  sighs  lamenting  their 

(1)  See  Edition  1563,  p.^370.— Ed. 


JOHN,     THE    NEATHERD    OV    FRANCONIA,     A    MARTYR.  775 

estate,  continued  so  almost  unto  Luther's  time  ;    as  the  histories  Edivard 

hereafter  following  do  testify.  '. 

And  here  ceasing  with  the  story  of  Frederic,  we  will  now  proceed    ^;^- 
to  the  reign  of  Maximilian,  his  son,  omitting  divers  things  else  inci-    ^^"- 
dent  in  the  time  of  this  emperor ;  as  first,  touching  the  unbrotherly 
contention  and  conflicts  between  this  Frederic  and  Albert  his  brother, 
and  Sigismund  his  uncle,  for  the  dukedom  of  Austria,  after  the  death 
of  Matthias  afore-mentioned.     Omitting  also  to  speak  of  the  long 
and  cruel  war  between  the  Prussians  and  Poles,  with  the  religious  wai-  be- 
sect  of  those  who  were  called  '  Teutones  fratres  sanctse  Marise,'  in  F^fn"is 
the  time  of  Uladislaus  :  omitting  also  the  strife  and  variance  for  the  ^'^°5"^ 
dukedom    of  Milan,    between    Frederic   the   emperor,   Alphonsus,  veneti- 
Charles  duke  of  Orleans,  and  Francis  Sfortia :    and  how  the  said  MUan".""' 
princedom  being  after  given  to  Sfortia,  great  wars  were  kindled  and 
long  continued  between  Sfortia  and  the  Milanese,  then  between  the  ween 
Milanese  and  Venetians,  and  after  between  the  Frenchmen  and  the  Frenci!^^ 
Milanese.      All  which  tumults  and  commotions,  as  not  pertinent  ^^"^^'if"*^ 
greatly  to  the  purpose  of  this  story,  I  refer  to  other  writers,  where  of  Milan. 
they  are  to  be  found  more  amply  discoursed. 

3|ofjn  t^e  l^catfjccd,  of  Jrcanconia,  a  JEartpr  5  anD  5^octor  2Jo[janne^ 

De  ©e^alia. 

This,  as  more  properly  belonging  to  the  story  of  the  church,  I 
thought  good  not  to  pass  over,  touching  such  as  Avere  condemned, 
and  suffered  the  pains  of  fire,  for  testimony  of  Christ  and  his  truth  ; 
of  whom  one  was  John,  a  pastor  or  neatherd,  who  was  a  keeper  of 
cattle :  the  other  was  Johannes  de  Wesalia,  although  not  burned, 
yet  persecuted  nearly  to  death,  under  the  reign  of  this  emperor, 
Frederic  III. 

And  first  touching  this  John,  the  neatherd,  thus  Avi-iteth  Sebastian  John,  the 
Munster :  That  the  bishop  of  Wiirtzbiu-g  condemned  and  burned  of  Fran'- 
for  a  heretic  one  John,  who  was  a  keeper  of  cattle  at  a  town  called  Xri^T^ 
Nicholas  Hansen,  in  Franconia,  because  he  taught  and  held  that  the 
life  of  the  clergy  was  ignominious  and  abominable  before  God,  a.d. 
1479. 

The  other  was  doctor  Johannes  de  Wesalia,  who  was  complained  John  de 
of  unto  Dietherus,  archbishop  of  Mentz,  by  the  Thomists,  upon  cer-  perse-"* 
tain  articles  and  opinions  gathered  out  of  his  books.     Wherefore  the  A.m4rs. 
said  Dietherus,  fearing  else  to  be  deposed  again  firom  his  bishopric, 
directeth  forth  commission  to  the  universities  of  Heidelbm-gh  and 
Cologne,  to  have  the  matter  in  examination  ;  Avho,  conventing  toge- 
ther the  year  above  mentioned,  called  this  doctor  de  Wesalia  before 
them,  making  him  to  swear  that  he  should  present  and  give  up  all 
his   treatises,    works,   and   writings,   whatsoever    he   had   made   or 
preached.     That  being  done,  they  divided  his  books  amongst  them- 
selves, severally  every  man  to  find  out  what  heresies  and  errors  they 
could.     His  articles  and  opinions  are  these  : 

I    That  all  men  be  saved  freely,  and  through  mere  grace,  by  faith  in  Christ.  His  arti- 

II.  Free-will  to  be  nothing.  ^'f„fj;f^ 

III.  That  we  should  only  believe  the  word  of  God,  and  not  the  gloss  of  any 
man,  or  fathers. 


776  EXAMINATION    OF    JOHANNES    DE    WESALIA. 

Edward       IV.  That  the  word  of  God  is  to  be  expounded  with  the  collation  of  one  place 
^^-      with  another. 

.    „  V.  That  prelates  have  no  authority  to  make  laws,  or  to  expound  the  Scrip- 
•,/yq'    tures,  by  any  pecidiar  right  given  unto  them,  more  than  to  another. 
1_       VI.  That  men's  traditions,  as  fastings,  pardons,  feasts,  long  prayers,  pere- 
grinations, and  such  like,  are  to  be  rejected. 

VII.  Extreme  unction  and  confirmation  to  be  reproved. 

VIII.  Confession  and  satisfaction  to  be  reprehended. 

IX.  Tlie  primacy  of  the  pope  also  he  affirmed  to  be  nothing. 

Certain  other  articles  also  were  gathered  out  of  him  by  his  adver- 
saries, but  in  such  sort,  that  they  may  seem  rather  to  follow  their 
own  malicious  gathering,  than  any  true  intelligence  of  his  mind ; 
■whereof  more  is  to  be  understood  in  this  process  hereafter. 

Thus  when  Wesalianus  was  commanded  to  appear,  there  con- 
vented  together  first  the  archbishop,  the  inquisitor,  the  doctors  of 
Cologne,  and  the  doctors  of  Heidelbuvgh,  with  the  masters  of  the 
same,  and  the  rector  of  the  university  of  Mentz,  the  dean  of  faculties, 
bachelors  of  divinity,  and  many  other  masters  of  the  same  university, 
canons,  doctors,  with  the  bishop"'s  chancellor,  and  his  counsellors ; 
besides  many  religious  prelates,  scholars,  with  a  doctor  of  Frankfort, 
the  somner,  and  beadles,  who  all  met  together  in  the  great  hall  of  the 
Minorites,  for  the  examination  of  this  Johannes  de  Wesalia. 
The  in-  Friar  Elton,  the  inquisitor,  first  sitteth  in  the  highest  place;  then, 
speaks,  after  him,  others  according  to  their  degree.  In  the  beginning  of  the 
examination,  first  the  inquisitor  beginneth  with  these  words : 

'  Most  reverend  father  and  honourable  doctors !  &c.  Our  reverend  father 
and  prince  elector  hath  caused  this  present  convocation  to  be  called,  to  hear 
the  examination  of  Master  John  de  Wesalia,  in  certain  suspected  articles  con- 
cerning the  catholic  faith.  But  something  I  will  say  before,  that  may  do  liim 
good,  and  desire  tliat  two  or  three  of  them  that  favom-  him,  or  some  other,  will 
rise  up  and  give  him  counsel  to  forsake  and  leave  his  eiTors,  to  recognise  him- 
self, and  to  ask  pardon  :  which  if  he  will  do,  he  shall  have  pardon  ;  if  he  will 
not,  we  will  proceed  against  him  without  pardon.' 

John  of        And  thus  Wesalianus,  being  cited,  and  brought  in  the  midst  be- 
hrought    twixt  two  Minoritcs,  being  very  aged,  and  having  a  staff  in  his  hand, 
prektes!^  was  sct  before  the  inquisitor  :   who,  beginning  to  answer  for  himself 
with  a  long  protestation,    could  not  be   suffered  to  prosecute  his 
oration,  but  was  cut  off,  and  required  briefly  to  make  an  end,  and  to 
tell  them  in  few  words,  whether  he  would  stand  to  his  opinions,  or 
His  an-    to  the  determination  of  the  church.     To  this  he  answered,  that  he 
sonabie^"  never  spake  any  thing  against  the  determination  of  the  church,  but 
said,  that  he  had  Avritten  divers  and  sundry  treatises,  in  which  if  he 
had  en-ed,  or  were  found  to  say  otherwise  than  well,  he  was  contented 
to  revoke  and  call  back  the  same,  and  to  do  all  things  that  were 
requisite.     Then  said  the  inquisitor,  "  Do  you  ask  then  pardon  .'*"'"' 
The  other  answered :   "  Why  should  I  ask  pardon,  when  I  know  no 
crime  or  error  committed  ?''"'     The  inquisitor  said  :  "  Well,  we  will 
call    you    to    the    remembrance    thereof,    and    proceed   to  the   ex- 
amination."" 
prweed^^      In  the  mean  time,  others  called  upon  him  instantly  to  ask  pardon. 
ingoriheThen  said  Wesalianus  :  "  I  ask  pardon."     Notwithstanding  the  in- 
tor.  quisitor  proceeded  to  the  examination,  reading  there  two  instruments, 


EXAMINATION    OF    JOHANNES    DE    WESALIA.  777 

declaring  that  he  had  authority  from  the  apostolic  see.     After  this,  Edu-ani 
he  cited  the  said  John  to  appear  to  his  examination.     Thirdly,  he  — — — 
commanded  him,  under  pain  of  disobedience,  in  the  virtue  of  the    ^'P' 
Holy  Ghost,  and  under  pain  of  excommunication   of   the  greater 


curse  (from  which  no  man  could  absolve  him,  but  only  the  pope,  or  gr^lter' 
the  inquisitor,  except  only  at  the  point  of  death),  to  tell  plainly  the  jj^g'^"^. 
truth  upon  such  things  as  should  be  demanded  of  him  concerning  his  pie. 
faith,  without  ambages,  and  sophistication  of  words.     And  so,  being 
demanded  first  whether  he  did  believe  upon  his  oath  taken,  that  he 
was  bound  to  tell  the  truth,  although  it  were  against  himself  or  any 
other :  To  this  he  answered,  "  Scio,""  that  is,  "  I  know."     Then  the  scio. 
inquisitor  biddeth  him    say,  "  Credo,"  that  is,  "  I  believe."      To  credo, 
which  he  answered  again,  "  What  need  I  say,  that  I  believe  that 
thing  which  I  know  ?"     There  the  inquisitor  something  stirred  with 
the  matter,  as  hot  as  a  toast  (as  they  say)  cried  with  a  loud  voice, 
"  Master  Johannes,  Master  Johannes,  Master  Johannes,  say  '  Credo,"" 
say  '  Credo  :''  "  then  he  answered,  '  Credo.' 

After  this,  being  demanded  whether  he  had  written  any  treatise, 
concerning  the  binding  of  human  laws,  to  one  Nicholas  of  Bohemia ; 
and  whether  he  had  written  any  treatise  on  the  ecclesiastical  power 
of  Indulgences  and  Pardons,  and  on  Fasting  and  other  treatises  ;  he 
answered.  That  he  believed  he  had  so  written,  and  had  conferred 
with  divers  learned  men  ;  also,  that  he  had  sent  to  the  bishop  of 
Worms  a  certain  treatise  on  Fasting. 

Many  other  interrogatories  were  ministered  unto  him,  whereof 
some  were  vain,  some  false.  Such  as  were  more  principal,  here  we 
Avill  briefly  touch,  leaving  out  superfluities. 

Being  demanded  whether  he  was  a  fautor  of  the  Bohemians,  he  His  opi- 
said,  he  was  not.     Also,  being  demanded  concerning  the  sacrament  'thrsawa- 
of  the  holy  body  and  blood  of  our  Lord,  whether  he  thought  Christ  '"^"'• 
there  to  be  contained  really,  or  only  divinely,  and  whether  he  did 
believe,  in  the  said  sacrament,  the  substance  of  bread  there  to  remain, 
or  only  the  form  thereof:  To  this  he  answered,  not  denying  but  the 
body  of  Christ  was  there  really  contained,  and  also,  that  with  the 
body  of  Christ,  the  substance  of  bread  did  remain. 

After  this,   he  was   demanded  his   opinion   concerning  religious  His  opi- 
men,  as  monks,  nuns,  or  bcguines,  whether  he  thought  them  to  be  monks 
bound  to  the  vow  of  chastity,  or  to  the  keeping  of  any  other  vow,  The""ow 
and  whether  he  said  to  the  friars  Minorites  any  such  word  in  effect,  of  chas- 
"  I  cannot  save  you  in  this  your  state  and  order."     This  he  con- 
fessed that  he  had  said,  how  that  "  not  your  religion  saveth  you,  but 
the  grace  of  God,"  &c. ;  not  denying  but  they  might  be  saved. 

Item,  Being  required  whether  he  believed,  or  had  written,  that 
there  is  no  mortal  sin,'  but  that  which  is  expressed  to  be  mortal  in 
the  canon  of  the  holy  Bible :  to  this  he  answered,  that  he  did  so 
believe  as  he  had  written,  till  he  was  better  informed.  Likewise, 
being  required  what  he  thought  of  the  vicar  of  Christ  on  earth,^  he 
answered.  That  he  believed  that  Christ  left  no  vicar  on  earth  :  for 
the  confirmation  whereof  he  alleged  and  said.  That  Christ,  ascending 
up  to  heaven,  said  "  Ecce  ego  vobiscum  sum ;"  "  Behold  I  am  with 

(1)  Mortal  sin  found  by  the  pope,  besides  that  which  is  expressed  to  be  mortal  in  the  Scripture. 

(2)  What  is  this  article,  hut  to  make  the  pope  a  God  !    Christ  left  no  vicar  on  earth. 


778  EXAAIINATION    OF    JOHANNES    DE    WESALIA. 

Edward  you : ■'  in  which  words  he  plainly  declared,  that  he  would  substitute 

'     under  him  no  vicar  here  on  earth :    and  he  said  moreover ;  "  If  a 

A.  D.    vicar  signify  any  man  who,  in  the  absence  of  the  principal,  hath  to 

^'^'^^-    do  the  works  of  the  principal,  then  Christ  hath  no  vicar  here  on 

earth." 

Pardons        In  like  manner,  concerning  indulgences  and  pardons,  such  as  the 

dufgences  church  dotli  usc  to  givc,  tlicy  demanded  of  him,  whether  they  had 

^ff°t°°   '^"y  efficacy,  and  what  he  thought  thereof:    who  answered  again, 

That  he  had  A\Titten  a  certain  treatise  of  that  matter,  and  what  he 

had  written  in  that  treatise  he  would  persist  therein,  which  was  thus : 

The  trea-  That  he  believed  that  the  treasure-box  of  the  merits  of  saints  could 

saints'      uot  be  distributed  of  the  pope  to  others,  because  that  treasure  is  not 

i^Mfon  ^^^^  hsre  on  earth ;   for  so  it  is  written  in  the  Apocalypse,  "  Opera 

earth.      enim  illorum   sequuntur  illos;"  &c.   that  is,  "  Their  works  follow 

them." 

Item,  That  their  merits  could  not  be  applied  to  other  men,  for  the 
satisfaction  of  their  pain  due  unto  them ;  and  therefore  that  the  pope 
and  other  prelates,  cannot  distribute  that  treasure  to  men. 

It  was  objected  to  him  moreover,  that  in  his  said  treatise  he  called 
pardons  and  indulgences,  '  pias  fraudes  fidelium,"'  that  is,  '  holy  frauds 
and  deceits  of  the  faithful."*^ 

Also,  being  demanded  what  he  thought  of  the  hallowing  and 
blessing  of  altars,  chalices,  vestments,  wax-candles,  palms,  herbs,  holy 
water,  and  other  divine  things,  &c.  He  answered,  That  they  had 
no  spiritual  virtue  and  power  in  them  to  drive  away  devils,  and  that 
holy  water  hath  no  more  efficacy  than  other  water  not  hallowed,  as 
concerning  remission  of  venial  sins,  and  driving  away  devils,  and 
other  effects,  Avhich  the  school-doctors  do  attribute  to  it. 

Item,  For  degrees  of  marriage  forbidden  in  the  Scriptures,  he 
believeth.  That  all  christian  men  under  deadly  sin  are  bound  unto 
the  same. 

Item,  That  he  believeth,  That  God  may  give  grace  to  a  man, 
having  the  use  of  reason,  without  all  motion  of  free  will.  Also  he 
thinketh,  that  St.  Paul,  in  his  conversion,  did  nothing  of  his  own 
free  Avill  for  his  conversion.  He  believeth  moreover.  That  God  may 
give  such  grace  to  a  man  having  the  use  of  reason,  not  doing  that 
which  in  him  is. 

Item,  He  affirmed,  That  nothing  is  to  be  believed,  which  is  not 
contained  in  the  canon  of  the  Bible. 

Also,  That  the  elect  are  saved  only  by  the  gi-ace  of  God. 
Besides  all  these,  moreover  he  was  charged  with  the  old  opinion 
of  the  Greeks,  which  they  did  hold  contrary  to  the  Roman  church, 
unto  the  time  of  the  council  of  Ferrara  above  mentioned,  concerning 
the  proceeding  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

The  Wednesday  next  folloAving,  three  doctors,  the  Suffi-agan,  Her- 
wicus,  and  Jacobus  Sprenger,  were  sent  unto  him,  with  persuasions 
to  exhort  him ;  and  when  he  would  not  stand  to  their  canons,  whereby 
they  went  about  to  refute  his  doctrine,  he  was  then  demanded  of 
Herwicus,  why  he  would  believe  rather  the  four  evangelists,  than  the 
gospel  of  Nicodemus  .'*  to  whom  he  answered.  Because  he  would. 

(1)  This  saying  was  taken  out  of  one  Cantor  Pariensis,  who  was  wont  to  say,  That  pardons  were 
holy  deserts,  because  that  laymen  there  were  provoked,  by  naughty  deserts,  to  give  good  alms. 


JOHANNES    DE    WESALIA    REVOKETH.  779 


Being  asked  again,  why  he  believed  the  four  evangelists  ?  he  said,  Edward 
Because  he  so  received  of  his  parents.     Then  being  demanded,  why      ^^' 
he  would  not  believe  the  doctors  ?  Because  (said  he)  their  doctrine  is    A.  D. 
not  canonical  scripture.^     Again,  it  was  to  him  objected,  why  he    ^^^^- 
would  be  credited  himself  when  he  preached,  seeing  he  would  not  be- 
lieve the  holy  doctors  ?  to  whom  he  ansv/ered  in  this  wise,  saying. 
That  he  did  preach  as  his  duty  was ;  but  whether  they  gave  credit  to 
his  words,  he  did  not  care. 

This  examination  being  ended,  after  these  articles  were  condemned  By  this 
by  the  inquisitor  and  his  assistants,  then  said  he  after  this  manner :  IIX"' 
"  As  you  do  Avith  me,  if  Christ  himself  were  here,  he  might  be  con-  ^^^^^^^ 
demned  as  a  heretic.""    After  this  they  sent  divers  to  him  to  have  might  be 
communication  with  him,  and  to  persuade  him,  sending  also  to  him,  g^""''™"' 
with  his  articles,  a  form  of  asking  pardon.     At  length,  within  three  or 
four  days  after,  he  was  content  to  condescend  unto  them,  and  to  sub- 
mit himself  to  their  holy  mother  church,  and  the  information  of  the 
doctors.     In  the  book  of  Orthuinus  Gratius,  and  in  Paralipomena, 
adjoined  to  Abbas  Urspergensis,  we  read  these  words  written  of  this 
Johannes  de  Wesalia :  ^  '  Except  only  the  article  of  the  proceeding  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  in  other  articles  it  seemeth  that  he  was  not  to  be 
chastened  with  so  sharp  censure,  if  respite  and  space  had  been  given 
him,  if  good  counsellors  had  been  about  him,  if  all  they  who  did  ac- 
cuse and  molest  him  had  not  been  '  de  via  realium,'  as  Thomists, 
that  is,  of  the  sect  of  Thomas  ;  which  Thomists  were  set  at  that  time  Discord 
against  the  other  sect  of  the  seculars,  who  were  called  Nominals,  and  ^^g^^and 
therefore  they  so  spited  this  doctor,  because  he  did  not  hold  with  their  Nomi- 
Thomas,  against  whom  otherwise  (had  it  not  been  for  that  cause),  they  " 
would  never  have  been  so  fierce  and  malicious  in  proceeding  against 
him.     I  take  God  to  witness,  who  knoweth  all  things,  that  this  pro- 
cess which  was  made  against  him,  for  his  revoking  and  burning  of  his 
books,  did  greatly  displease  Master  Engeline  of  Brunswick,  a  great 
divine,  and  also  Master  John  Keisersberg,  being  both  learned  and 
famous  men ;  but  namely  Master  Engeline  thought,  that  too  much 
malice  and  rashness  were  showed  in  handling  of  that  same  man,  and 
did  not  fear  to  say,  That  many  of  his  articles,  and  the  gi-eater  part 
thereof,  might  be  holden  well  enough ;  and  greatly  blamed  the  mad 
and  fantastical  dissension  of  the  Thomists,  seeking  by  all  manner  of 
ways  how  to  get  the  trimnph  over  the  secular  divines,'  &c.' 

Although  this  aged  and  feeble  old  man,  by  weakness,  was  con-  Doctor 
strained  to  give  over  unto  the  Romish  clergy,  by  outward  profession  of  wes"aiia 
his  mouth ;  yet  notwithstanding,  his  opinions  and  doctrine  declared  {,'jg°'^1'^ 
his  inward  heart,  of  what  judgment  he  was,  if  fear  of  death  present,  nions. 
had  not  enforced  him  to  say  otherwise  than  he  did  think.     Again, 
although  he  had  revoked  after  their  minds,  yet  we  read  no  such  form  of 
recantation  to  be  prescribed  to  him  to  read  openly  unto  the  people,  as 
the  use  is  here  in  England.     The  story  of  this  man  is  more  fully  to 
be  found  in  the  books  of  Orthuinus  Gratius,  &c. 

As  touching  the  reign  of  this  emperor  Frederic,  seeing  we  have 
comprehended  hitherto  sutficiently  the  most  principal  matters  in  his 

(1)  The  church  giveth  witness  who  were  the  writers  of  the  Scriptures ;  but  hath  no  authority 
above  that  which  is  written. 

(2)  Dempto  solo  articulo  de  processione  Spiritus  Sancti  in  alias  videtur  non  ita grave  censura,  &c. 

(3)  Ex  Oith.  Gtat. 


780  OUR  lady's  rosary. 

Edward  time  iiicurrent,  we  will  now  pass  forward,  the  Lord  guiding  us,  to 
'      Maximilian,  after  I  have  first  given  a  brief  memorandum  of  three 
A.  D.    valiant  princes  and  captains,  flourishing  in  the  same  time  of  this  Fre- 
^'^'^^-    deric  in  Germany,  of  which,  one  was  Albert  duke  of  Saxony,  who  for 
his  renowned  and  famous  acts,  was  called  by  public  voice,  '  Dextra 
manus  imperii,''  'the  right  hand  of  the  empire  ;'  another  was  Albert,, 
marquis  of  Brandenburgh,  to  whom  also  the  name  attributed  (named 
of  pope  Pius)  was  Achilles  Germanicus ;  the  third  was  Frederic,  earl 
Palatine,  surnamed  Victoriosus,  who  manfully  defended  the  freedom 
and  majesty  of  the  empire,  from  the  fraudulent  oppressions  of  the 
pope''s  tyranny. 
Theabo-       In  the  year  of  our  Lord  1484,  in  this  emperor''s  time,  died  pope 
of  pope"    Sixtus  IV.,  a  little  before  touched  ;  rather  a  monster  of  nature,  than 
sixtus.     ^  prelate  of  the  church.     Of  him  writeth  Platina,  that  unjustly  he 
vexed  all  Italy  with  war  and  dissension.     Agrippa,  writing  of  him, 
saith.  That  among  all  the  bawds  of  these  our  latter  days,  who  were 
builders  of  brothel-houses,    this  pope  Sixtus  IV.    surmounted   all 
others  ;    who  at  Rome  erected  stews  of  double  abomination,    not 
only  of  women,  but  also,  &c. ;  whereupon  no  small  gain  redounded  to 
his  coffers.     For  every  such  common  harlot  in  Rome  paid  to  him  a 
July  piece,  the  sum  whereof  grew  in  the  year,  some  while  to  twenty 
thousand ;  at  length  to  forty  thousand  ducats.'     Whereunto  accord- 
eth  right  well  the  epitaph  of  John  Sapidus,  which  in  the  end  hereof 
we  will  annex. 
The  wars       John  Carion  also,  speaking  of  this  bishop,  witnesseth  him  to  be  a 
Sixtus.     man   rather  bom  to   war  than  to  religion.     For  he  warred  against 
Vitellius  Tiphernates,  against  the  Florentines,  the  Venetians,  whom 
he  excommunicated,  and  did  not  absolve  till  he  died :  also  asrainst 
Columnensis,  against  Ferdinand,  king  of  Apulia,  and  duke  of  Cala- 
bria ;  also  against  other  nations  and  princes  besides.^ 
A  large         Of  the  Said  pope  it  is  recorded,  that  he  was  a  special  patron  and 
pope°to'^^  tutor  to  all  begging  friars,  granting  them  to  have  and  enjoy  revenues 
the  beg-    in  this  world,  and  in  the  Avorld  to  come  everlasting  life.     Amonff 
friars.      wliicli  friars  there  was  one  named  Alanus  de  rupe,  a  black  friar,  who 
ailthor  of  ^^^^^  ^hc  rosary  of  our  lady's  psalter  (so  they  term  it)  and  erected  a 
ourLady's  certain  new  fraternity  upon  the  same,  called  Fraternitas  Coronariorum, 

Psalter  •    •  •/      i  '     ^    ^  ^  ~ 

pertaining  to  the  order  of  the  Dominies  ;  of  which  order  Jacobus 
Sprenger,  one  of  the  condemners  of  Johannes  de  Wesalia  above-men- 
tioned, was  a  great  advancer,  and  especially  this  pope  Sixtus  IV., 
who  gave  to  the  said  fraternities  large  graces  and  privileges. 

Concerning  the  institution  of  this  rosary,  there  was  a  book  set  forth 
Then  had  about  A.  D.  1480,  in  the  bcffinninff  whereof  is   declared.   That  the 

the  •      .  ^  ^  . 

blessed  blesscd  Virgin  entered  into  the  cell  of  this  Alanus,  and  was  so  fami- 
Mary'two  ^^^^  ^^^^^  ^^i™5  ^^^^  uot  ouly  shc  did  espouse  him  for  her  husband,  but 
husbands,  also  kisscd  him  with  her  heavenly  mouth,  and  also,  for  more  familiarity, 

opened  to  him  her  paps,  and  poured  great  plenty  of  her  own  milk 
An  oid^     into  his  mouth.     For  the  confirmation  whereof,  the  said  Alanus,  this 

holy  babe  (saith  the  story),  did  swear  deeply,  cursing  himself,  if  it 

were  not  thus,  as  he  had  made  relation. 

This  fabulous  figment  when  I  read  in  the  Centuries  of  John  Bale, 

I  began  with  myself  to  mistrust  the  credit  thereof,  and  had  thought 

(1)  Ex  declamatione  Agrippao  ad  Lavaricnscs.     (2)  Ex  Joan  Laziardo,  lib.  hist,  univers.  c.  284. 


EPITAPHS    ON    POPE    SIXTUS     IV.  781 

not  to  trouble  the  reader  with  such  incredible  forgeries.     But,  as  the  E<i^'ard 

■  .  IV 

providence  of  God  worketh  in  all  things,  so  also  it  appeared  in  this, '. 

that  the  very  same  book  came  to  my  hands  at  the  writing  hereof,    A.  D. 
wherein  this  self-same  nan-ation  is  contained,  wherein   I  found  not 
only  this  to  be  true,  Avhich  in  John  Bale  is  expressed,  but  also  found 
in  like  manner  another  wonder,  as  prodigious  as  this  ;  where,  in  ano- 
other  place  not  flir  off,  it  is  storied  in  the  same  book,  how  that  about 
the  time  of  St.  Dominic,  there  was  a  certain  matron  in  Spain,  named 
Lucia,  who,  being  taken  captive  by  the  Saracens,  having  her  husband 
killed,  was  carried,  great  with  child,  into  the  Turkish  land.     When 
the  time  of  her  labour  came,  she  being  left  desolate  among  beasts  and 
hogs,  and  remembering  this  twice  holy  rosary  (first  instituted,  saith 
the  book,  by  St.  Dominic,  and  afterwards  renewed  by  Alanus),  cftsoons 
the  Holy  Virgin  was  ready  and  stood  by  her,  and  received  the  child 
at  her  travail,  supplying  all  the  parts  of  a  dihgent  midwife  ;  and,  The  de- 
moreover,  causing  a  priest  suddenly  to  appear,  she  gave  the  child  to  impLty 
be  christened,  calling  it  after  her  own  name,  Marianus.     And  so  was  phemy  *of 
she  wife  to  Alanus,  midwife  to  Lucia,  and  godmother  to  Marianus  !  "'e. 
Which  story  if  it  be  true,  then  is  the  pope's  canon  by  this  example  m^  reu- 
to  be  controlled,  which  pennitteth  midwives  in  time  of  necessity  to  ^^^^^^. 
baptize,  seeing  the  blessed  Virgin,  playing  the  part  herself  of  a  mid-  cem  me- 
wife,  durst  not  baptize  this  child  without  a  priest.     It  followeth  more  esse  opor- 
in  the  story,  that  by  the  help  of  the  said  blessed  Virgin,  this  Lucia,  *'^*' 
our  lady"'s  gossip,  after  her  purification,  was  restored  with  her  child 
safe  to  her  country  again  ! 

This  book,  being  in  Latin  and  printed,  beareth  this  title,  '  Rosacea 
augustissimse  Christiferse  Maria?  corona ;""  and  in  front  it  showeth  the 
name  of  Jodocus  Bisseliaus,  a  nobleman  of  Aquine.'     And  this  by 
occasion  of  pope  Sixtus,  which  Sixtus,  what  a  maintainer  of  blind 
superstition  he  was,  partly  by  that  before  spoken,  partly  by  the  end 
following,  it  may  be  seen.     For  we  read  in  certain  writers,  that  after 
this  pope  had  understanding  that  Hercules  Estensis,  duke  of  Ferrara, 
had  joined  peace  with  the  Venetians  against  his  will,  he  was  so  Death  of 
grieved  therewith,  that  for  rancour  of  mind,  within  five  days  after,  he  tus^iv.'" 
died  ;  whereunto  his  epitaph  following  giveth  sufficient  record.    About  ^"^th 
this  time  also  died  Platina,  a  man  not  unlearned,  but  yet  a  shameful  Piatina. 
flatterer  and  bearer  with  the  wicked  lives  of  the  popes. 

An  Epitaph  on  Pope  Sixtus. 

Non  potuit  saevimi  vis  iilla  extinguere  Sixtum, 
Audito  tandem  nomine  pacis  obit. 

Another  on  the  same  Pope. 

Sixte  jaces  tandem,  nostri  discordia  secli, 

Sa?\'isti  in  siiperos,  nunc  Acheronta  move. 
Sixte  jaces  tandem,  deflent  tua  busta  cinsedi, 

Scortaque,  lenones,  alea,  vina,  venus. 

Another. 

Gaude  prisce  Nero,  vincit  te  crimine  Sixtus, 
Hie  scelus  omne  simul  clauditm-,  et  vitimn. 

(1)  Ex  Latino  Codice  iir.presso,  cui  titulus,  '  Rosacas  Maria?  Corouse.' 


782  RICHARD,    DUKE    OF    GLOUCESTER,    MADE    PROTECTOR. 

Edward       But  leaving  here  pope  Sixtus  with  his  verses  and  vices,  let  us  now 

^^'      proceed,  as  we  before  promised,  to  enter  the  story  of  Maximilian, 

A.  D.    keeping  notwithstanding,  the  order  of  our  kings  here  in  England. 

^'^^^-    For  a  little  before  the  reign  of  Maximilian,  king  Edward  IV.  ceased 

Death  of  j^jg  \[^q_^  ^.d.  1488,  after  he  had  reigned  twenty-two  years. 

ward  IV.       In  the  time  of  which  king  Edward  this  also  is  not  to  be  forgotten, 

that  one  Burdet,  a  merchant  dwelling  in  Cheapside,  at  the  sign  of  the 

Crown,  which  is  now  the  sign  of  the  Fleur-de-luce,  merrily  speaking  to 

The  laws  kjg  gQi-,^  g^id  that  lie  would  make  him  inheritor  of  the  crown,  meaning 

realm      indeed  his  own  house ;  for  which  words,  king  Edward  causing  them 

s"rued"for  to  bc  inisconstrued,  and  interpreted  as  though  he  had  meant  the  crown 

*'^f    ,,    of  the  realm,  within  less  space  than  four  hours,  he  was  apprehended, 

pleasure,  judged,  drawn,  and  quartered,  in  Cheapside  ! 


EDWARD  THE  FIFTH. 


^  £)  This  king  Edward  left  behind  him  by  his  wife  Elizabeth,  two 
1483.  sons,  Edward  and  Richard,  and  two  daughters,  Elizabeth  and  Cecilia : 
which  two  sons,  Edward  and  Richard,  forasmuch  as  they  were  under 
age,  and  not  ripe  to  govern,  a  consultation  was  called  among  the 
peers,  to  debate  whether  the  aforesaid  young  prince  and  king,  should 
be  under  the  government  of  his  mother,  or  else  that  Richard,  duke  of 
Gloucester,  brother  to  king  Edward  IV.,  and  uncle  to  the  child, 
should  be  governor  of  the  king,  and  protector  of  the  realm.  There 
hath  been,  and  is,  an  old  adage,  the  words  whereof,  rather  than  the 
true  meaning,  wrested  out  of  Solomon  [Eccl.  x.],  "  Vee  regno  cujus 
rex  est  puer,"  &c.  ;  i.  e.  "  Wo  to  the  kingdom,  the  king  whereof  is 
a  child,"  &c.  But  if  I  may  find  leave  herein  to  thrust  in  a  gloss,  I 
would  add  this,  and  say:  "  Vai  illi  puero,  qui  sui  regni  rex  non 
est ;"  i.  e.  "  Wo  to  that  child,  which  is  a  king  in  a  kingdom  unruly 
and  ambitious."'"' 

There  was,  the  same  season,  among  other  noble  peers  of  the  realm, 

the  duke  of  Buckingham,  a  man  of  great  authority,  who  had  maiTied 

the  sister  of  king  Edward"'s  wife.     Because  the  duke,  being  so  nearly 

allied  to  the  king,  had  been  unkindly,  as  he  thought,  of  the  king 

entreated,  having  by  him  no  advancement,  nor  any  great  friendship 

showed,  according  to  his  expectation,  he  took  part  therefore  with 

Richard,  Richard,  duke  of  Gloucester,  both  against  the  queen  and  her  children, 

GiouceL  ^o  make  the  aforesaid  duke  the  chief  governor  and  protector.    Which 

ter,  made  thing  bciug  brought  to  pass,  by  the  aid,  assistance,  and  working  of 

the  duke  of  Buckingham,  the  queen  took  sanctuary  with  her  younger 

son  ;  the  elder  brother,  who  was  the  king,  remaining  in  the  custody 

vmin       ^^  ^^^  duke  of  Gloucester,   his  uncle ;  who,  being  now  in  a  good 

kingcom-  towarduess  to  obtain  that  which  he  had  long  looked  for,  sought  all  the 

him.        means,  and  soon  compassed  the  matter,  by  false  colour  of  dissembled 

ham!^'^^  words,  by  perjury,  and  labour  of  friends,  namely  the  duke  of  Buck- 

greatdoer  ingham  and  the  cardinal  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  that  the  other 

protector,  brother  also  should  be  committed  to  his  credit. 

Thus  the  ambitious  protector  and  unnatural  uncle,   having  the 


THE    LORD    HASTINGS    BEHEADED.  783 

possession  of  his  two  nephews,  and  innocent  babes,  thought  himself  Edward 
ahnost  up  the  wheel  Avhere  he  would  climb  ;  although  he  could  not      ^^' 
walk  in  such  mists  and  clouds,  but  his  devised  purposes  began  to  be    A.  D. 
espied  ;  which  caused  him  more  covertly  to  go  about  to  remove  from    1483. 
him  all  suspicion,  and  to  blind  the  people*'s  eyes.    But  before  he  could  Botiiking 
accomplish  his  execrable  enterprise,  some  there  were  whom  he  thought  chiurren'* 
first  must  be  rid  out  of  his  way,  as  namely  the  lord  Hastings,  and  intii.''pos- 

T       -I       ■,  ct        ,  1  1  "^  ■     ■        •'  1         •  .P'.,.      session  of 

the  lord  btaniey  ;  who,  as  they  were  sittmg  together  m  council  withm  the  pro- 
the  Tower,  the  protector  (the  matter  being  so  appointed  before) 
suddenly  rushed  in  among  them,   and  after  a  few  words  there  com- 
muned, he  suddenly  hasted  out  again  (his  mind  belike,  being  full  of 
mischief  and  fury,  was  not  quiet)  ;  who,  within  the  space  of  an  hour, 
returned  again  into  the  chamber  with  a  stern  countenance  and  a 
frowning  look,  and  so  there  sat  down  in  his  place.     When  the  lords  The 
were  in  great  marvel  and  muse  at  the  meaning  hereof,  then  he,  out  of  p^ JteJ-fov 
a  cankered  heart,  thus  began  to  bray,  asking  them  :  "  What  are  they  picketh 
worthy  to  have,  who  go  about  to  imagine  the   destmction   of  him 
being  so  near  to  the  king''s  blood,  and  protector  of  the  realm  .''"'''     At 
Avhich  question  as  the  other  lords  sat  musing,  the  lord    Hastings, 
because  he  had  been  more  familiar  with  him,  thus  answered,  That  they 
were  worthy  of  punishment,  whatsoever  they  were  :  which  when  the 
other  lords  also  had  affirmed,  "  That  is,""  quoth  the  protector,  "  yon-  The 
der  sorceress,  my  brother's  wife,""  meaning  the  queen  and  others  with  ^JJ^''" 
her  :  adding  moreover,  and  saying,  "  That  sorceress,  and  others  of  her  ^^f^'^ 
council,  as  Shore's  wife,  with  her  affinity,  have,  by  their  witchcraft,  faiseiyar- 
thus  wasted  my  body ;"  and  therewith  showed  forth  his  left  ami,  a  thrpro- 
wearish  withered  thing,  as  it  was  never  otherwise,  as  was  well  known.  ^g^^-Jj,,'" 

This  Shore's  wife  had  been  before  a  concubine  to  king  Edward,  his  ami. 
and  afterwards  was  kept  by  the  same  lord  Hastings.     Moreover,  here 
is  to  be  noted,  that  by  the  consent  of  the  said  lord  Hastings,  the 
cruel  protector  had  devised,  about  the  same  time,  the  kindred  of  the  Murder 
queen  innocently  to  be  beheaded  at  Pomfret,  of  mere  despite  and  J^^^i'^'-yj^^^j 
hatred.     Wherefore,  this  punishment  not  undeservedly,  by  the  just  of  God. 
hand  of  God,  fell  upon  the  lord  Hastings. 

It  followeth  then  more  in  the  story,  that  when  the  lord  Hastings 
had  heard  of  these  false  accusations  of  the  tyrant,  which  he  knew  to 
be  untrue ;  "  Certainly,  my  lord,""  said  he,  "  if  they  have  so  done, 
they  be  worthy  of  heinous  punishment."    "  Why,"  quoth  the  protec- 
tor, "  dost  thou  serve  me  with  if,  and  with  and  ?     I  tell  thee,  they 
liave  so  done,  and  that  I  will  make  good  on  thy  body,  traitor ;""  and 
therewith  giving  a  great  rap  on  the  board  (for  a  token  or  a  watchword), 
one  without  cried  '  treason,'  and  forthwith  the  chamber  was  fiill  of 
harnessed  men.    The  protector  then,  approaching  to  the  lord  Hastings,  Lord 
arrested  him  as  a  traitor.     Another  let  fly  at  the  lord  Stanley ;  who,  frwstef 
to  avoid  the  blow,  shrunk  under  the  table,  or  else  his  head  had  been  f°^  a^^ 
deft  asvmder ;  notwithstanding  he  received  such  a  wound,  that  the  Lord^ 
blood  ran  about  his  ears.     There  were  in  that  council  at  the  same  ^owided. 
time  the  archbishop  of  York,  and  doctor  Morton,  bishop  of  Ely  (by  Bishop 
whose  procurement,  afterwards,  king  Henry  VH.  was  sent  for  into  Mo"on. 
England,  and  he  made  archbishop,  after  that,  of  Canterbmy)  ;  these.  The  ty- 
with  the  lord  Stanley,  diversly  were  bestowed  in  divers  chambers.  \^^^,f. 
The  lord  Hastings  was  commanded  to  speed  and  shrieve  him  apace,  t^ctor. 


784  FRUITLESS    ATTEMPT    OF    THE    DUKE    OF    BUCKINGHAM. 

Edward  for  before  dinner,  the  protector  sware  by  St.  Paul,  that  he  shoukl  die. 
^'      And  so  incontinently,  without  further  judgment,  his  head  was  stricken 
A.  D.    off,  by  whose  counsel  the  queen's  kindred  were,  at  the  same  time  and 
^^^^-    day,  beheaded  at  Pomfret. 

After  this  tyrannous  murder  accomplished,  the  mischievous  pro- 
tector, aspiring  still  to  the  crown,  to  set  his  devices  forward,  first, 
through  gifts  and  fair  promises,  did  suborn  doctor  Shaw,  a  famous 
preacher  then  in  London,  at  PauFs  Cross  to  insinuate  to  the  people. 
The         that  neither  king  Edward  with  his  sons,  nor  the  duke  of  Clarence  were 
accu!et°h  lawfully  bcgottcn,  nor  the  very  children  of  the  duke  of  York ;  but 
his  own    begotten,  unlawfully  by  other  persons,  in  adultery,   on  the  duchess 
Dr.         their  mother,  and  that  he  alone  was  the  true  and  only  lawful  heii-  of 
impudent  tlic  dukc  of  York.     Moreovcr,  to  declare  and  to  signify  to  the  audi- 
Paui's- ^'  ence,  that  king  Edward  was  never  lawfully  married  to  the  queen,  but 
Cross.      his  wife  before  was  dame  Elizabeth  Lucy,  and  so  the  two  children  of 
king  Edward  to  be  base  and  bastards,  and  therefore  the  title  of  the 
crown  most  rightly  to  pertain  unto  the  lord  protector.     Thus  this 
false  flatterer  and  loud  lying  preacher,  to  serve  the  protector"'s  humour, 
shamed  not  most  impudently  to  abuse  that  holy  place,  that  reverend 
Wisd.  iv.  auditory,  and  the  sacred  word  of  God,  taking  for  his  theme,  "  Adul- 
tera3  plantationes  non  dabunt  radices  altas,"'"'  &c.,  which  he  most  im- 
Exampie  piously  did  apply  against  the  innocent  children,  and  right  heirs  of  the 
flattering  rcalui.  Wliereupou  such  grudge  and  disdain  of  the  people  with  worldly 
Fo  bL'^'^^"  wonder  followed  him,  that  for  shame  of  the  people  crying  out  of  him, 
ware.       in  a  few  days  after  he  pined  away. 

The  duke  When  this  sermon  would  take  no  effect  with  the  people,  the  pro- 
^n^am,'  tcctor.  Unmercifully  drowned  in  ambition,  rested  not  thus,  but  within 
another    a  fcw  davs  after  excited  the  duke  of  Buckingham,  first  to  break  the 

minister  o  ^ 

for  the      matter  in  covert  talk  to  the  mayor,  and  certain  heads  of  the  city,  picked 

tor'sTiry,  out  for  the  purposc :  that  done,  to  come  to  the  Guildhall,  to  move 

for  thf^  the  people  by  all  flattering  and  lying  persuasions  to  the  same,  which 

protector  shaiuelcss  Shaw  before,   had  preached  at  PauFs   Cross.     This  the 

hall."'      duke,  with  all  diligence  and  helps  of  eloquence  (being  a  man  both 

learned  and  well  spoken),  endeavoured  to  accomplish,  making  to  the 

people  a  long  and  artificial  oration,  supposing  no  less  but  that  the 

people,  allured  by  his  crafty  insinuations,  would  cry,  "  King  Richard !" 

"  King  Richard  !""    But  there  was  no  king  Richard  in  their  mouths  ; 

less  in  their  hearts.  Whereupon  the  duke,  looking  to  the  lord  mayor, 

and  asking  what  this  silence  meant,  contrary  to  the  promise  of  the 

one,  and  the  expectation  of  the  other,  it  was  then  answered  of  the 

mayor,   that   the    people,  peradventure,  well  understood  him  not: 

wherefore  the  duke,  reiterating  his  narration  in  other  words,  declared 

A  hard     again  that  he  had  done  before.     Likewise  the  third  time  he  repeated 

make  the  ^^^^  oratiou  again  and  again.     Then  the  commons,  who  before  stood 

tongue     mute,  being  now  in  amaze,  seeing  this  opportunity,  began  to  mutter 

against     softly  amoug  themselves,  but  yet  no  king  Richard  could  sound  in 

the  heart,  ^j^^j^,  jj^^^  savc  ouly  that  in  the  nether  end  of  the  hall,  certain  of  the 

duke's  servants,  with  one  Nashfield,  and  others  belonging  to  the  pro- 

A  stolen   ^^^^^^'  tlirusting  into  the  hall  among  the  press,  began  suddenly,  at 

consent    lueu's  backs,  to  cry  "  King  Richard,"  "  King  Richard  ;''■'  throwing  up 

Guild-      their  caps  :   whereat  the  citizens,  turning  back  their  heads,  marvelled 

i^^'i-        not  a  little,  but  said  nothing. 


RICHARD    THE    THIRD    CROWNED.  785 

The  duke  and  the  lord  mayor  with  that  side,  taking  this  for  suffi-  Edward 
cient  testimony,  incontinent  came,  blowing  for  haste,  to  the  protector      ^' 
then    lying   at    Baynard's   castle ;    where    the    matter   being   made    A.  D. 
before,  was  now  so  contrived,  that  forsooth  humble  petition  was  made,    l^^^s 
in  the  name  of  the  whole  commons,  and  that  with  three  sundry  suits,  Fje  of 
to  the  humble  and  simple  protector,  That  he,  although  it  was  utterly  ^/.^'"'"" 
against  his  will  to  take  it,  yet  would,  of  his  humility,  stoop  so  low,  as 
to  receive  the  heavy  kingdom  of  England  upon  his  shoulders.     At 
this  their  tender  request  and  suit  of  the  lords  and  commons  made  (ye 
must  know  how),  the  mild  duke,  seeing  no  other  remedy,  Avas  con- 
tented at  length  to  yield,  although  sorely  against  his  will  (ye  must  so  pocrisy'of 
imagine),  and  to  sulamit  himself  so  low,  as  of  a  protector  to  be  made  '^e  pic- 
king :  not  much  herein  unlike  to  our  prelates  in  the  popish  church,  nymg  the 
who  Avhen  they  have  before  well  compounded  for  the  pope's  bulls,  yet  tMce 
must  they  for  manner-sake  make  courtesy,  and  thrice  deny  that,  for  "^^"^^ 
which  they  so  long  before  have  gaped,  and  so  sweetly  have  prayed.        take  it. 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD,  THE  USURPER. 

And  thus  Richard  duke  of  Gloucester  took  upon  him  to  be  made  A.  •. 
and  proclaimed  king  of  England  the  year  aforesaid,  a.  d.  1483,  in  the  H83. 
month  of  June  :  who  then  coming  to  the  Tower  by  water,  first  made 
his  son,  a  child  of  ten  years  old,  prince  of  Wales,  and  John  Howard 
(a  man  of  great  industry  and  service)  he  advanced  to  be  duke  of  Nor- 
folk, and  sir  Thomas  Howard  his  son,  he  ordained  earl  of  SmTey,  Also 
William  lord  Berkley  was  appointed  earl  of  Nottingham.  Francis 
lord  Lovel  was  made  viscount  Lovel.  Lord  Stanley,  for  fear  of  his 
son,  was  delivered  out  of  the  Tower,  and  made  steward  of  the  king''s 
household  :  likewise  the  archbishop  of  York  was  set  free.  But  Mor- 
ton bishop  of  Ely,  was  committed  to  the  duke  of  Buckingham,  by 
whom  was  Avrought  the  first  device  to  bring  in  Henry  earl  of  Rich- 
mond into  England,  and  to  conjoin  marriage  between  Elizabeth,  king 
Edward"'s  daughter,  and  him,  whereby  the  two  houses  of  York  and 
Lancaster  were  united  together. 

After  the  kingdom  of  England  was  thus  allotted  to  king  Richard  King 
the  usurper,  as  in  manner  above  remembered,  he  tarried  not  long  for  frowned. 
his  coronation,  which  was  solemnized  the  month   next  ensuing,  the 
sixth  day  of  July. 

The  triumph  and  solemnity  of  this  usurped  coronation  being  finisli- 
ed,  and  all  things  to  the  same  appertaining,  this  unquiet  tyrant  yet 
could  not  think  himself  safe,  so  long  as  young  Edward  the  right  king, 
and  his  brother,  were  alive  ;  wherefore  the  next  enterprise  which  he 
did  set  upon  was  this :  how  to  rid  those  innocent  babes  out  of  the 
way,  that  he  might  reign  king  alone. 

In  the  mean  time,  while  all  this  rufRing  was  in  hand,  what  dread 
and  sorrow  the  tender  hearts  of  these  fatherless  and  friendless  children 
were  in,  what  little  joy  of  themselves,  what  small  joy  of  life  they  had, 
it  is  not  so  hard,  as  dolorous,  for  tender  hearts  to  understand.  As  the 
younger  brother  lingered  in  thought  and  heaviness,  so  the  prince,  who 

VOL.  III.  3  E 


786  MURDER    REVKNGED. 

Richard  was  clcveii   veai's  old,  was  so  out  of  heart,  and  so  fraucflit  with  fear. 


///. 


tliat  lie  never  tied  his  points,  nor  enjoyed  good  day,  till  the  traitorous 
-^•^-    impiety  of  their  cruel  uncle  had  delivered  them  of  their  wretchedness  ; 
which  was  not  long  in  despatching.     For  after  king  Richard,  their 


Jf^Roben  ^^"^1^1  ^^^^  fi'^"^^  attempted  to  compass  his  devilish  device  by  Robert 

Braken-  Bralccubury,  constable  of  the  Tower,  and  could  not  Avin  him  to  such  a 

mJ^  °  cruel  tact  (to  die  therefore),  then  he  got  one  James  Tyrell,  joining  with 

prince,  j^jj^^  John  Dighton,  and  Miles  Forrest,  to  perpetrate  this  heinous  mur- 

young  der.  Which  Dighton  and  Fon-est,  about  midnight  entering  into  their 

of  king"  chamber,   so  bewrapped  and  entangled  them  amongst  the  clothes, 

Edward  Jjeepinij  down  the  feather-bed   and  pillows  hard  unto  their  mouths, 

Tnurder-       ,      i       p,  .  i  m        i  i  ■  ^        -n     t     ^  •  i      •        i     • 

ed.  that  Avithm  a  wiule  they  smothered  and  stmed  them  piteously  m  then- 

bed. 
The  just       And  thus  ended  these  two  young  princes  their  lives,  through  the 
m™Tof    wretched  cruelty  of  these  forenaiued  tormentors,  who,  for  their  detes- 
«°'*mur"  ^^^^  ^^^^  bloody  murder  committed,   escaped  not  long  unpunished 
derers  of  by  the  just  hand  of  God.    For  first  Miles  Forrest,  at  St.  MartinVle- 
two""       Grand,  by  piece-meal  miserably  rotted  away  :  John  Dighton  lived  at 
Calais  long  after,  so  disdained  and  hated,  that  he  was  pointed  at  of  all 
men,  and  there  died  in  great  misery:  sir  James  Tyi-ell  was  beheaded 
Aisoupon  at  Tower  Hill  for  treason.    Also  king  Richard  himself,  within  a  year 
RkLrd.  !ind  a  half  after,  was  slain  in  the  field,  hacked  and  hewed  of  his  ene- 
mies'' hands,  torn  and  tugged  like  a  cur-dog. 
The  Furthermore,  the  said  justice  of  God's  hand  let  not  the  duke  of 

me"nt  of    Buckingham  escape  free,  who  was  a  great  maintainer  and  setter-up  of 
the^duke"  ^^^^  butchcrly  usurper :  for  less  than  within   a  year  after,  so  God 
of  Buck-  wrought,  that  he  was  himself  beheaded  for  treason  by  the  said  king, 
mg  am.    y,^^^^-^  ]^g  g^  uujustly  before  had  advanced  and  set  up. 
Dr.  Shaw,       I^  the  Same  catalogue  and  order  of  these  wicked  doers  afore  recited, 
and^Dr.    ^g  j^j^yg  ^Iso  to  comprehend  two  others,  as  well  worthy  of  memorial 
two  flat-   as  the  best,  or  rather  as  the  worst.     The  name  of  the  one  Avas  doctor 
p^e'ach-    Shaw  abovc  rehearsed ;  the  other  doctor  Pinky,   provincial  of  the 
*''^-         Austin  friars  ;  both  famous  preachers,  and  both  doctors  in  divinity  ; 
both  of  more  learning  than  virtue  (saith  the  story),  of  more  fame  than 
learning,  and  yet  of  more  learning  than  truth.     Shaw  made  a  sermon 
in  praise  of  the  protector,   before  his  coronation.     Pinky  preached 
after  his  coronation.     Both  were  so  full  of  tedious  flattery,  that  no 
God's       good  ears  could  abide  them.     Pinky,  in  his  sermon,  so  lost  his  voice, 
j^'ejft       that  he  was  fain  to  leave  off  and  come  down  in  the  midst.     Dr.  Shaw 
flatterin    ^^  '^'^  semiou  lost  liis  houesj^y,  and  soon  after  his  life,  for  very  shame 
preach-    of  the  world ;  so  that  he  never  durst,  after  that,  show  his  face  again. 
But  as  for  the  friar,  he  was  so  far  past  shame,  that  the  loss  thereof  did 
The  fiirst  little  touch  him.    Mention  was  made  a  little  before  of  doctor  Morton, 
joining     bisliop  of  Elv,  by  whose  means  the  device  was  first  broached,  for  the 
imusrs"    conjoining  of  the  two  houses  of  York  and  Lancaster  together.     This 
Lanca^"*^  device  Avas  first  broken  to  the  duke  of  Buckingham,  which  soon  after 
ter,         cost  him  his  life.     But  that  bishop,  more  crafty,  to  save  himself,  in- 
°^*  '^"^'  continent   fled  into   Brittany.     Notwithstanding,   the   device,  once 
broached,  was  so  plausible  and  took  such  effect,  that  message  was  sent 
over  the  sea  to  Henry  earl  of  Richmond,  by  his  mother,  and  by  the 
queen,  mother  to  the  lady  Elizabeth,  that  if  he  would  make  his  return, 
and  promise  to  marry  with  the   said  lady  Elizabeth,  king  Edward's 


BOSWORTH    FIELD.  TST 

daughter,  he  shoukl  be  received.     To  make  a  longer  discourse  of  this  Richard 
matter  Avhich  is  sufficiently  set  forth  by  sir  Thomas  More,  and  so     ^^^' 
ornately,  it  needeth  not.  A.D. 

Briefly  (to  contract  that  in  a  small  compass  of  words,  which  was    ^^^"^^ 
not  so  small  a  thing  in  doing),  after  that  the  earl  Henry,  with  such  ^an 
other  banished  men  as  fled  out  of  England  at  the  taking  of  the  duke  of  maketu 
Buckingham,  had  perfect  intelligence  by  his  mother,  and  by  the  queen  t'umto^ 
and  other  friends  more  out  of  England,  how  the  case  of  the  realm  ^'"'■''^  '''** 

o  '  journey, 

stood,  and  how  it  was  here  purposed  by  his  friends,  that  is,  that  he 
should  with  all  convenient  speed  hasten  his  return  over  into  England, 
promising  to  marry  with  lady  Elizabeth ;  he,  with  all  diligence,  as 
time  and  preparation  would  serve,  advanced  forward  his  journey, 
being  well  helped  and  furnished  by  Francis  duke  of  Brittany,  and  so 
shipped  his  men.  Albeit  his  first  voyage  sped  not ;  for  that  the 
winds  turning  contrary,  by  force  of  weather  his  ships  were  dispersed, 
and  he  repulsed  back  into  France  again.  His  second  voyage  was  Arrival 
more  prosperous,  who,  taking  the  seas  at  Harfleur,  in  the  month  of  eari  of"^^ 
August,  A.  D.  1485,  accompanied  only  with  two  thousand  men,  and  ^^^^^  ^^ 
a  small  number  of  ships,  arrived  at  Milford  Haven  in  Wales,  and  first  waies. 
came  to  Dale,  then  to  Haverfordwest,  where  he  was  joyfully  received, 
and  also,  by  the  coming  in  of  Arnold  Butler  and  the  Pembroke  men, 
was  in  power  increased.  From  thence,  he  removed  by  Cardigan  to 
Shrewsbiu-y,  and  then  to  Newport,  and  so  to  Stafford,  from  thence 
to  Lichfield,  his  army  still  more  and  more  augmenting  Like  as  a 
great  flood,  by  coming  in  of  many  small  rivers,  gathereth  more 
abundance  of  water;  so  to  this  earl,  divers  noble  captains  and  men 
of  power  adjoined  themselves,  as  Richard  Griffith,  John  ISIorgan, 
Rice  ap  Thomas ;  then  sir  George  Talbot,  with  the  young  earl  of 
Shrewsbury  his  ward,  sii"  William  Stanley,  sir  Thomas  Burchier,  and 
sir  Walter  Hungerford,  knights.  At  last  the  said  earl,  hearing  of 
the  king's  coming,  conducted  his  whole  army  to  Tamworth. 

King  Richard,  first  hearing  of  the  arrival  of  the  earl  Henry  in  the  King 
parts  of  Wales  after  such  a  slender  sort,  did  give  little  or  no  regard  gathe^reth 
unto  it.     But  after,  vmderstanding  that  he  was  come  to  Lichfield  ['g^gP"""^'' 
without  resistance  or  incumbrance,  he  was  sore  moved,  and  exceed-  counter 
ingly  took  on,   cursing  and  crying  out  against  those  who  had  so  Hemy. 
deceived  him  ;  and  in  all  post  speed  sent  for  John  duke  of  Norfolk, 
Henry  carl  of  Northumberland.,  Thomas  earl  of  Surrey,  with  other 
his  friends  of  special  trust.     Robert  Brakenbury  also,  Heutcnant  of 
the  Tower,  was  sent  for,  with  sir  Thomas  Burchier,  and  sir  Walter 
Hungerford,  with   certain  other  knights  and  esquires,  of  whom  he 
partly  misdoubted,   or  had  some   suspicious  jealousy.     Thus  king- 
Richard,  after  most  forcible  manner  well  fortified  and  accompanied, 
leaving  nothing  undone  that  diligence   could  require,  set  forward 
toward  his  enemies.     The  earl  by  this  time  was  come  to  Tamworth, 
to  whom  secretly  in  the  evening  resorted  sir  John  Savage,  sir  Bryan 
Sanford,  sir  Simon  Digby,  and  many  others ;  forsaking  the  ]3art  of 
king  Richard,  whom  all  good  men  hated,  as  he  no  otherwise  deserved. 
The  king,  having  perfect  knowledge  that  the  earl  was  encamped  at  ^Ij^^gj^, 
Tamworth,  embattled  himself  in  a  place  near  to  a  village  called  Bos-  laketh 
worth,  not  far  from  Leicester,  appointing  there  to  encounter  with  his  of  bos- 
advcrsaries.     Here  the  matter  lay  in  great  doubt  and  suspense  con-  '*'""''• 


788  '  1?0.S\V0RTH    FIELD. 

Richard  cerning  the  Lord  Stanley,^  who  was  the  earFs  father-in-law,  and  had 

_  married  his  mother,  to  what  part  he  woukl  incline.     For,  although 

^•^'    his  heart  Avcnt,  no  doubt,  with  the  earl,  and  had  secret  conference 
•    with  him  the  night  before,  yet  because  of  his  son  and  heir  George, 


lord  Strange,  being  then«in  the  hands  of  king  Richard,  lest  the  king 
shoidd  attempt  any  prejudicial  thing  against  him,  he  durst  not  be 
seen  openly  to  go  that  way  where  in  heart  he  favoured ;  therefore 
closely  kept  himself  between  both,  till  the  push  came,  that  his  help 
might  serve  at  a  pinch. 

The  number  of  the  earPs  part  exceeded  not  the  one  half  of  the 
side  of  king  Richard.    When  the  time  and  the  place  were  appointed, 
where  the  two  battles  should  encounter  and  join  together,  sore  stripes 
and  great  blows  were  given  on  both  sides,  and  many  slain.  If  number 
and  multitude  might  govern  the  success  of  battle,  king  Richard  had 
double  to  the  earl.     But  God  is  he,  not  man,  that  giveth  victory,  by 
what  means  it  seemeth  to  his  divine  providence  best.    In  what  order, 
and  by  what  occasion  this  field  was  won  and  lost,  the  certain  intelli- 
The        gence  we  have  not  certainly  expressed,  but  only  the  history  of  Poly- 
oJ'gi^     dore  Virgil,  whom  sir  Thomas  More  doth  follow  word  for  word ;  in 
mm"^^    which  story  it  doth  appear,  that  as  these  two  armies  were  coupling 
word  for    together,  king  Richard,  understanding  by  his  espials  where  the  earl  of 
taken  out  Richmond  was,  and  how  he  was  but  slenderly  accompanied,  and  see- 
dor^°vir-  ^"o  ^^™^  ^°  approach  more  near  unto  him,  rather  carried  with  courage, 
gii-  than  ruled  with  reason,  set  spurs  to  his  horse,  and  ranging  out  of  the 

compass  of  his  ranks,  pressed  toward  the  earl,  setting  upon  him  so 
sharply,  that  first  he  killed  sir  William  Brandon  the  earPs  standard- 
bearer,  father  to  the  lord  Charles  Brandon  duke  of  Suffolk,  then  after 
overthrew  sir  John  Cheney,  thinking  likewise  to  oppress  the  earl. 
But,  as  the  Lord  by  his  secret  providence  disposeth  the  event  of  all 
things,  as  the  earl  with  his  men  about  him,  being  overmatched,  began 
to  despair  of  victory,  suddenly  and  opportunely  came  sir  William 
Stanley  with  three  thousand  well  appointed  able  men,  whereby  king 
The         Richard's  men  were  driven  back,  and  he  himself,  cruelly  fighting  in 
death  of   the  thick  of  his  enemies,  was  there  slain,  and  brought  to  his  con- 
Richard.  fusiou  and  death,  which  he  worthily  deserved. 

In  the  mean  time  the  earl  of  Oxford,  who  had  the  guiding  of  the 
foreward,  discomfited  the  fore-front  of  king  Richard's  host,  and  put 
them  to  flight,  in  which  chase  many  were  slain,  of  noblemen  especially 
above  others:  John  duke  of  Norfolk,  lord  Ferrers,  sir  Richard 
RadclifF,  and  Robert  Brakenbury  lieutenant  of  the  Tower,  &c.  Lord 
Thomas  Howard  earl  of  Surrey  there  submitted  himself,  and  although 
he  was  not  received  at  first  to  grace,  but  long  remained  in  the  Tower, 
yet  at  length,  for  his  fidelity,  he  was  delivered  and  advanced  to  his 
recovered  honour  and  dignity  again. 

This  king  Richard  had  but  one  son,  who,  shortly  after  the  cruel 
murder  of  king  Edward's  sons,  was  taken  with  sickness  and  died. 
King  The  wife  of  the  said  king  Richard  (whether  by  poison  or  by  sickness) 
purposed  died  also  a  little  before  the  field  of  Bosworth,  after  whose  decease, 
EiiTa''"^  ^^^6  story  of  Polydore  and  of  sir  Thomas  More  aflfti-meth,  that  he 
beth  his  intended  himself  to  marry   the  lady  Elizabeth,   his  own  brother's 

brothers     ii,  ■,  •'     ■,  ir>T-»-i  i 

daughter,  daughter,  and  so  to  prevent  the  earl  oi  Richmond. 

(1)  This  lord  Stanley  was  he  who  v,as  hurt  at  the  Tower,  when  the  lord  Hastings  was  arrested. 


TRAGICAL    END    OF    RICHARD    THE    THIRD.  789 

Moreover,  as  touching  the  Lord  Stanley,  thus  reporteth  the  story,  Richard 

that  king  Richard  being  in  Bosworth  field,  sent  for  the  lord  Stanley ^ 

by  a  pursuivant,  to  advance  forward  with  his  company,  and  come  to  his    ^-  ^• 

presence  :  otherwise,  he  sware  by  Chrisfs  passion,  that  he  woidd  strike i_ 

off  his  son's  head  before  dinner.     The  lord  Stanley  sent  word  again,  \ilt\ey. 
That  if  he  did,  he  had  more   sons  alive.       Whereupon  the  king  ['J^^^,^"'^ 
immediately  commanded  the  lord  Strange  to  be  beheaded ;   which  Henrjs 
was  the  very  time  when  both  the  armies  were  within  sight,  and  were  tbrsakes 
ready  to  join  together.    Wherefore  the  king''s  counsellors,  pondering  Rj^Lrd 
the  time  and  the  case,  persuaded  the  king  that  it  was  now  time  to 
fight,  and  not  to  do  execution,  advising  him  to  delay  the  matter  till 
the  battle  were  ended.     And  so,  as  God  would,  king  Richard  break- 
ing his  oath,  or  rather  keeping  his  oath,  for  he  himself  was  slain  before  The  lord 
dinner,  the  lord  Strange  was  committed  to  be  kept  prisoner  within  marvff- 
the  king's  tent ;  who  then,  after  the  victory  gotten,  was  sought  out  ^''^^^y 
and  brought  to  his  joyful  father.     And  thus  have  ye  the  tragical  life  served. 
and  end  of  this  wretched  king  Richard. 

Henry,  the  earl  of  Richmond,  after  hearty  thanks  given  to 
Almighty  God  for  his  glorious  victory  obtained,  proceeded  to  the 
town  of  Leicester,  where  was  brought  to  him,  by  the  lord  Strange, 
the  crown,  and  put  on  the  earFs  head. 

In  the  mean  time  the  dead  cor|)se  of  king  Richard  was  shamefully  The 
carried  to  the  town  of  Leicester,  being  naked  and  despoiled  to  the  ,ts'^-J,f'^^ 
skin  ;  and  being  trussed  behind  a  pursuivant  at  arms,  was  carried  like  ^j^,^',;°j,^ 
a  hog  or  a  dog,  having  his  head  and  arms  hanging  on  the  one  side  of  dead 
the  horse,  and  the  legs  on  the  other  side,  all  sprinkled  mth  mire  and  "^"p'^" 
blood.     And  thus  ended  the  usm-ped  reign  of  king  Richard,  who 
reigned  two  years  and  two  months.^ 

(1)  Ex  Polyd.  et  Thonia  More. 


END    OK    VOL.   HI. 


LONDON: R.   CLAY,   PRINTER,   BREAD-STREET-HILL 


The  Editor  avails  himself  of  this  opportunity  of  acknowledging,  with  respect- 
ful thanks,  the  many  gi'atifying  communications  and  valuable  suggestions  with 
which  he  has  been  favoured  relating  to  the  Second  Volume ;  of  these  he  solicits 
a  continuance ;  and,  the  work  being  stereotyped,  he  will  not  fail  to  avail  him- 
self of  them.  He  regrets,  however,  that  the  rapidity  with  which  this  publication 
is  proceeding,  and  the  unavoidable  size  of  the  volumes,  necessarily  exclude 
from  the  Notes  much  valuable  information. 


FULHAM, 

April  20tli,  1837. 


ol.  ii.  p.  710,  intlie  notf,  for  '  piety,' read  '  tilting.' 


A    TRAGICAL    SCENE    AT    YORK.  2(7 

were  defended.    But  at  length  their  houses  were  set  on  fire,  mul  they  Richardi. 
destroyed  therein.  "a^D^ 

These  things  being  declared  to  the  king,  whilst  he  with  his  nobles    iis9. 
and  barons  were  at  dinner,  he  sendeth  immediately  Ranulfe  de  Glan-  ""^ 
vile,  the  lord  high  steward  of  England,  with  divers  other  noblemen 
to  accompany  him,  that  they  might  stay  and  rcsti-ain  these  so  bold 
enterprises  of  the  Londoners  :  but  all  was  in  vain,  for  in  this  so  great 
a  tumult,  none  there  was  that  either  regarded  what  the  nobility  said,  Thcsmaii 
or  else  any  whit  reverenced  their  personages,  but  rather  with  stern  tiie  nobi- 
looks  and  threatening  words,  advised  them,  and  that  quickly,  to  depart,  m'uitsami 
Whereupon  they,  with  good  deliberation,  thinking  it  the  best  so  to  do,  jv^'urrec- 
departed ;   the  tumult  and  insurrection  continuing  till  the  next  day. 
At  that  time  also  the  king,  sending  certain  of  his  officers  into  the 
city,  gave  them  in  commandment  to  apprehend  and  present  some, 
such  as   were  the  chief  of  the  maleftictors :    of  whom   three  were 
condemned  to  be  hanged,  and  so  were ;  the  one,  for  that  he  had  robbed 
a  Christian's  house  in  this  tmnult ;  and  the  other  two,  for  that  they 


country  again,  following  the  example  of  the  Londoners,  semblably 
did  the  like.     And  thus  the  year,  which  the  Jews  took  to  be  their 
jubilee,  was  to  them  a  year  of  confusion  ;  insomuch,  that  in  the  city 
of  York,  the  Jews  obtaining  the  occupying  of  a  certain  castle  for 
their  preservation,  and  afterwards  not  being  willing  to  restore  it  to  the 
Christians  again,  when  they  saw  no  other  remedy,  but  by  force  to  be 
vanquished,"first  they  offered  much  money  for  their  lives ;  when  that 
would  not  be  taken,  by  the  counsel  of  an  old  Jew  amongst  them,  Amjsera- 
every  one,  with  a  sharp  razor,  cut  another's  throat,  whereby  a  thou-  deserved 
sand  and  five  hundred  of  them  were  at  that  time  destroyed.    Neither  l^^joftho 
was  tliis  plague  of  theirs  undeserved  ;  for  every  year  commonly  their  Je«s. 
custom  was,  to  get  some  christian  man's  child  from  the  parents,  and 
on  Good  Friday  to  crucify  him,  in  despite  of  our  religion.' 

King  Richard,  after  the  death  of  his  father,  coming  unto  remem- 
brance'of  himself,  and  of  his  rebellion  against  his  father,  sought  for 
absolution  of  his  trespass ;  and,  in  part  of  satisfaction  for  the  same, 
agreed  with  Philip,  the  French  king,  about  Easter  next  ensuing,  to 
take  his  voyage  with  him  for  the  recovery  of  Christ's  patrimony, 

(1)  Ex  Chron.  Westm,  cui  initium,  "  jEneas  cum  Ascanio,"  &e. 


An  error  having  been  made  in  working  off  pages  277,  278,  and 
377,  378,  Vol.  II.  of  the  Royal  Paper  Edition,  cancel  leaves  are  given 
with  the  present  Volume,  which  cancel  leaves  the  Binder  will  please  to 
substitute  whenever  the  work  comes  into  his  hands. 


A    TUAGICAL    SCENE    AT    YORK.  277 

were  defended.    But  at  length  their  houses  were  set  on  fire,  and  they  Sichardi. 
destroyed  therein.  ^  ^ 

These  things  being  declared  to  the  king,  whilst  he  with  his  nobles    1189. 
and  barons  were  at  dinner,  he  sendeth  immediately  Ranulfc  de  Glan- 
vile,  the  lord  high  steward  of  England,  with  divers  other  noblemen 
to  accompany  him,  that  they  might  stay  and  restrain  these  so  bold 
enterprises  of  the  Londoners :  but  all  was  in  vain,  for  in  this  so  great 
a  tumult,  none  there  was  that  either  regarded  what  the  nobility  said,  Thesmaii 
or  else  any  wliit  reverenced  their  personages,  but  rather  with  stern  thf^nobu 
looks  and  threatening  words,  advised  them,  and  that  quickly,  to  depart.  TOuu"an",{ 
Whereupon  they,  with  good  deliberation,  thinking  it  the  best  so  to  do,  '"surrec- 
departed ;   the  tmnult  and  insmTection  continuing  till  the  next  day. 
At  that  time  also  the  king,  sending  certain  of  his  officers  into  the 
city,  gave  them  in  commandment  to  apprehend  and  present  some, 
such  as   were  the  chief  of  the"  malefactors :    of  whom   three  Avere 
condemned  to  be  hanged,  and  so  were ;  the  one,  for  that  he  had  robbed 
a  Christian's  house  in  this  tumult ;  and  the  other  two,  for  that  they 
fired  the  houses,  to  the  great  danger  of  the  city.    After  this,  the  king 
sent  for  him  who  from  a  Jew  was  converted  to  Christianity,  and  in 
the  presence  of  those  who  saw  where  he  was  baptized,  the  king  asked 
him  whether  he  was  become  a  Christian  or  not  ?     He  answering  the 
king,  said,  No,  but  to  the  intent  that  he  might  escape  death,  he  pro- 
mised to  do  whatsoever  the  Christians  would  have  him.     Then  the 
king  asked  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  other  archbishops  and  bishops 
being  present,  what  were  best  to  be  done  with  him  ?     Who  unad-  An  unad- 
visedly answering,  said,  "  If  he  will  not  be  a  man  of  God,  let  him  l^l^^t 
be  a  man  of  the  devil :"  and  so  revolted  he  again  to  Judaism.  an  arch- 

Then  the  king  sent  his  writs  to  the  sheritts  ot  every  county,  to 
inquire  for  the  authors  and  stirrers  of  this  outrage ;  of  whom  three 
were  hanged,  divers  were  imprisoned.     So  great  was  then  the  hatred 
of  Englishmen  against  the  Jews,  that  as  soon  as  they  began  to  be 
repulsed  in  the  court,  the  Londoners  taking  example  thereof,  fell 
upon  them,  set  their  houses  on  fire,  and  spoiled  their  goods.     The 
country  again,  following  the  example  of  the  Londoners,  semblably 
did  the  like.     And  thus  the  year,  which  the  Jews  took  to  be  their 
jubilee,  was  to  them  a  year  of  confusion  ;  insomuch,  that  in  the  city 
of  York,  the  Jews  obtaining  the  occupying  of  a  certain  castle  for 
their  preservation,  and  afterwards  not  being  willing  to  restore  it  to  the 
Christians  again,  when  they  saw  no  other  remedy,  but  by  force  to  be 
vanquished,"first  they  offered  much  money  for  their  lives ;  when  that 
would  not  be  taken,  by  the  counsel  of  an  old  Jcav  amongst  them,  Am^isera- 
every  one,  with  a  sharp  razor,  cut  another"'s  throat,  whereby  a  thou-  deserved 
sand  and  five  hundred  of  them  were  at  that  time  destroyed.    Neither  ^onofti'.e 
was  this  plague  of  theirs  undeserved  ;  for  every  year  commonly  their  Jews. 
custom  was,  to  get  some  christian  man's  child  from  the  parents,  and 
on  Good  Friday  to  crucify  him,  in  despite  of  our  religion.' 

King  Richard,  after  the  death  of  his  father,  coming  unto  remem- 
brance^of  liimself,  and  of  his  rebellion  against  his  father,  sought  for 
absolution  of  his  trespass ;  and,  in  part  of  satisfaction  for  the  same, 
agreed  with  Philip,  the  French  king,  about  Easter  next  ensuing,  to 
take  his  voyage  with  him  for  the  recovery  of  Christ's  patrimony, 

<V\  Ex  Chron.  Westm.  cui  initium,  "  jEneas  cum  Ascanio,"  &i'. 


278  EXACTIONS    FOR    THE    CRUSADES. 

Rickardi.  wliicli   tlicj  callcd   the    Holy  Land.      Whereupon   the   said   King 
^  P    Richard,  immediately  after  his  coronation,  to  prepare  himself  the 
II89!    better   for   his  joiimey,  set  to    sale    divers  of  his  manors,  whereof 
The  cove-  Grodfrey  Lucy,  then  bishop  of  Winchester,  bought  a  couple  for  two 
tous  gree-  thousand  marks ;  to  wit,  Wergrave  and  Melenge.     The  abbot  of 
bishops,    Bury  bought  another,  for  a  thousand  marks,  called  Middlesay.    Hugh 
^"eat^'"^  Puzas,  bishop  of  Durham,  bought  the  lordship  of  Seggesfield,  or 
lordships,  gedbcrga,  with  the  wapentake,  and  all  the  appurtenances  thereto 
belonging ;  he  bought  also  the  earldom  of  Northumberland,  whom, 
when  the  king  should  solemnize  after  the  manner  of  secular  earls, 
merrily  with  a  mocking  jest,  "  Lo,"  said  he,  "  of  an  old  bishop  1 
have  made  a  young  earl."     And  because  the  said  bishop  had  pro- 
fessed before,  by  a  solemn  vow,  to  visit  the  Holy  Land,  to  be  released 
of  his  vow,  he  compounded  with  the  pope  for  a  gi'eat  sum  of  money 
there-for  ;  and  moreover  gave  to  the  king  a  thousand  marks  to  remain 
at  home,  as  the  chief  justice  of  England.     *At  that  time  it  appeareth 
that  these  taxes,  tolls,  exactions,  and  subsidies,  either  were  not  known, 
or  not  so  much  had  in  use ;  by  reason  whereof  this  king  was  driven 
to  make  other  shifts,  by  selling  offices,  liberties,  and  privileges.*' 
sieiRiits    Over  and  besides,  the  king  set  out  all  that  he  had  to  sale,  such  as 
monkey,     woods,  castlcs,  towusliips,  lordships,  earldoms,  baronages,  *and,  as  he 
said  hunself,  he  would  have  sold  London  also,  if  he  could  have  found 
any  able  to  buy  it  ;*  ordaining  also  divers  new  bishops,   and  not 
without  some  advantages,  as  appeared,  to  his  purse  ;  feigning  more- 
over his  old  seal  to  be  lost,  that  they  which  had  lands  to  hold  might 
be  driven  to  renew  their  writings  again  by  the  new  seal,  whereby 
great  substance  of  money  was  gained. 
A  tenth         Above  all   this,  by  the  commandment  of  Pope  Clement  HL,  a 
through    tenth  also  was  exacted  of  the  whole  realm,  in  such  sort  as  that  the 
hind"*''     Christians  should  make  up  for  the  king  seventy  thousand  pounds,  the 
Jews  six  thousand  pounds.^     King  Richard,  after  his  coronation,  sent 
certain  carls  and  barons  unto  Philip  the  French  king,  in  the  time  of 
his  parliament  at  St.  Denis,  desiring  him  to  remember  his  promise 
made  for  the  recovery  of  Chrisfs  holy  patrimony  out  of  the  Saracens' 
muI'-  h  'i^"f^'^-     Unto  whom  he  sent  word  again,  in  the  month  of  December, 
avd  oon-   certifying  him  how  he  had  bound  himself  by  solemn  oath,  dc])osiug 
trave"to°  upou  the  evaugelists,  that  he,  the  next  year  following,  about  the  time 
uimV"'^   of  Easter,  had  certainly  prefixed   to  address  himself  towards  that 
journey ;   requiring  him  likewise  not  to  fail,  but  to  be  ready  at  the 
term  above  limited,  appointing  also  the  place  where  both  the  kings 
should  meet  together. 
A.U.I190.      In  the  year  next  ensuing,  a.d.  1190,  at  the  beginning  of  it,  being 
era°]raui  Twclftli-even,  fell  out  a  foul  northern  brawl,  which  tm-ned  well  near 
*"  i''^  ai  ^^  ^  ^^'^Y')  between   the  archbishop  newly  elected  of  the  church  of 
oimrrh  of  York  and  his  company,  on  the  one  side,  and  Henry,  dean  of  the  said 
church,  with  his  catholic  partakers,  on  the  other  side,  upon  occasion 
as  followeth  :   Gaufrid,  or  Geffrey,  son  of  King  Henry  II.  and  brother 
.to  King  Richard,  whom  the  king  had  elected  a  little  before  to  the 
archbishopric  of  York,  upon  the  even  of  the  Epiphany,  which  we 
call  Twelfth-day,  was  disposed  to  hear  evensong  with  all  solemnity  in 

(1)  This  and  the  succeeding  passage,  between  siiujlc  asleriskj,  are  from  the   liditiou  of  UC3, 
p.  PS.-JCu  (2)  Ex  Irctv.  fol.  134. 


fON'TENriON     AMOXG    CHURCHMEN.  ^IS 

the  injury  done,  and  satisfy  for  the  liann  received,  it  should  be  to    iiennj 
them  sufficient.    But  contrary,  one  Constautine,  a  gi-eat  man  tlien  in     ^^^' 
the  city  of  London,   in   much  heat  exciting  the  people,  gave  this    A.  D. 
sentence,  that  all  the  houses  of  the  abbot  of  Westminster,  but  espe-    ^--"- 
cially  the  house  of  the  steward,  should  be  cast  down  to  the  ground,  r^.^"^?,"^, 
In  fine,  that  which  he  so  imadvisedly  coimsclled,  was  as  madly  per-  heads. 
formed,  for  the  ftuious  people,  according  to  his  counsel,  did.     This 
tumultuous  outrage,  as  it  could  not  be  privy,  coming  to  the  know- 
ledge of  Hubert  de  Burgh,  lord  chief  justice  of  England,   above 
mentioned,  he  coming  with  a  sufficient  strength  of  armed  soldiers  to 
the  city  of  London,   sent  to  the  mayor  and  aldermen  of  the  city  to 
will  them  to  come  unto  him ;  who  so  obeying  his  commandment,  he 
required  of  them  the  principal  beginners  of  the  riot.    To  whom  Con- 
stantine,  there  being  present,  answered,  that  he  would  wan-ant  that 
which  was  done;  sorrowing,  moreover,  that  they  had  not  done  more  constan- 
than  they  did  in  the  matter.     The  justice,  upon  this  his  confession,  cXd  « 
commanded  him,  with  two  others,  without  any  further  tumult,  to  be  J^^riot* 
taken ;  and  so,  along  with  the  same  two,  he  was  hanged,  he  offering 
for  his  life  fifteen  hundred  marks. 

The  said  Hubert,  earl  of  Kent,  and  lord  chief  justice,  although  he 
was  a  faithfiil  and  trusty  officer  to  his  prince,  and  had  the  whole 
guiding  of  the  realm  in  his  own  hands,  the  king,  as  yet,  being  in  his 
minority,  yet  afterwards,  what  indignation  he  sustained  for  this  his 
severity  and  other  things,  both  of  the  nobles  and  of  the  commons, 
^nd  how  sharply  he  was  tossed  and  trounced  of  his  prince,  it  is  a 
wonder  to  see,  as  in  its  due  place  and  time  (by  the  Lord's  leave) 
hereafter  shall  appear.' 

As  mention  hath  been  made  of  the  wrangling  between  the  com-  Discord 
moners  of  London  and  Westminster,  both  time  and  occasion  bring  ?(lntion"" 
me  in  remembrance  something  to  speak  likewise  of  the  ecclesiastical  l^H, 
conflicts  among  churchmen ;  nothing  inferior  in  my  mind,  nor  less  men. 
worthy  to  be  noted  than  the  other.  For  so  I  read  m  Matthew  Paris, 
and  in  the  Flowers  of  History,  that  at  what  time  this  wTCstling  was 
among  the  citizens  for  the  sheep,  the  like  contention  kindled  and 
inflamed  between  Eustace,  bishop  of  London,  and  the  chapter  of 
Paul's,  on  the  one  side,  and  the  abbot  of  Westminster,  with  his 
covent,  on  the  other,  about  spiritual  jurisdiction  and  subjection ;  to 
wit,  whether  the  monastery  of  Westminster  were  exempted  from  the 
subjection  and  jurisdiction  of  the  bishop  of  London  or  not.  This 
controversy  at  last  coming  to  a  compromise,  was  committed  to  the 
arbitrement  of  Stephen,  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  Philip,  bishop  of 
Winchester,  Thomas  of  Merton,  and  Richard,  prior  of  Dunstable  ; 
and  at  length  it  was  thus  agreed :  that  the  monastery  of  Westminster 
should  be" utterly  exempted  fi-om  the  jurisdiction  of  the  bishop  of 
London,  and  that  Staines,  with  the  appurtenances  thereto  belonging, 
should  appertain  to  the  monastery  of  Westminster.  Also,  that  the 
manor  of  Sunbury  should  be  due  and  proper  to  the  church  of  St. 
Paul,  and  also  that  the  church  of  St.  Margaret,  with  all  the  lands 
belonging  to  the  same,  shoiUd  be  exempted  from  all  other  jurisdiction, 
but  of  the  bishop  of  Rome  only :  and  so  was  this  matter  decided. 
A.D.  1222.=' 

(1)  Ex  Matth.  Paris.  (2)  Ibid.;  ex  Flor.  Historiarum. 


376  iiorriblp:  tempest  in  engi.and. 

iienrij        Tlic  saiiic  ycai',  as  writeth  Mattliew  Paris,  horrible  tempests,  with 

. '. thundering  and  lightning  and  Avhirlwinds,  went  throughout  all  the 

A.  IX    land,  so  that  much  harm  was  done  ;  churches,  steeples,  towers,  houses, 
and  divers  trees,  with  the  violence  of  the  winds,  were  blown  up  by  the 


Horrible   roots.     In  Warwickshire,  a  certain  wife,,  and  eight  others  in  her  house, 

tempest  ■*  •*  o  7 

ill  Kiig-    were  slain.    In  Grantham,  the  church  was  set  on  fire  by  lightning  most 

terrible,  Avith  such  a  stink  left  behind,  that  no  man  could,  for  a  long 

time  after,  abide  it.     The  author  addeth,  that  manifest  marks  of  the 

tempest  did  remain  long  after  in  that  monastery  to  be  seen.     Some 

also  write  that  fiery  di'agons  and  spirits  were  seen  then  flying  in 

the  air. 

A.D.1223.      A.D.  1228,  Philip,  the  French  king,  died,  after  whom  his  son 

kin's^of     Louis  Succeeded  to  the  crown  ;   to  whom  King  Henry,  sending  his 

faise'to     iiiessage,  and  desiring  him  to  remember  his  promise  and  covenant 

iiis  pro-    made  of  rendering  again  the  lands  lost  in  Normandv,  could  obtain 

mist  .  ,  '' 

nothing  at  his  hands.     Whereupon  Richard,  earl  of  Cornwall,  also 

William,  the  king's  uncle,  earl  of  Salisbury,  with  divers  other  nobles, 

made  over  into  France,  where  they  recovered   Poictiers,   and  kept 

Gascony  under  the  king"'s  obedience.' 

A.D.1224.      In  the  same  year,  or  as  Fabian  giveth  it,  the  next  year  following, 

tirst         which  was  a.d.  1224,  by  virtue  of  a  certain  parliament,  it  was  granted 

fo^thlT'^    of  the  lords  and  barony  of  the  land,  that  the  king  and  his  heirs  should 

•^'"e-       have  the  ward  and  marriage  of  their  heirs,  which  then  Avas  called,  and 

afterwards  proved  to  be,  '  initium  malorum,''  the  beginning  of  harms. 

In  the  same  year,  according  to  Gisbum  and  other  Avriters,  the  said 

king,   holding  another  parliament  at  Oxford,  by  the  advice  of  his 

council  and  his  clergy,  did  grant  and  confirm,  under  his  great  seal, 

tAvo  charts  of  the  old  liberties  and  customs  of  this  realm,  for  ever  to 

be  kept  and  observed,  the  one  called   '  Magna  Charta,'  the  other 

'  Charta  de  Foresta  ;"*  the  contents  whereof  fully  in  the  beforenamed 

author  be  expressed.     For  this  cause  was  granted  again  by  the  whole 

parliament,  a  fifteenth  of  all  his  subjects,  as  well  of  laymen  as  also 

of  the  clergy. 

Here  is  to  be  noted,  that  these  liberties  Avere  afterwards  broken, 
and  confinned  again  by  the  said  king,  a.d.  1236. 

A.D.  1226  died  Pope  Honorius  III.,  a  great  adversary  of  Fre- 
deric the  emperor,  after  whom  succeeded  Gregory  IX.,  more  grievous 
than  his  predecessor.  In  this  year  also  died  Louis  VIII.,  the  per- 
jured French  king,  at  the  siege  of  AvigTion  ;  whom  the  pope  now,  for 
the  second  or  third  time,  had  set  up  to  fight  against  Reimund,  the 
good  earl  of  Toulouse,  and  the  heretic  Albigenses  of  that  country ; 
for  so  the  pope  calleth  all  those  Avho  hold  not  in  all  points  with  his 
glorious  pride,  usurped  power,  and  ungodly  proceedings.  The  origin 
of  it  Avas  this,  as  in  Matthew  Paris  appeareth.  In  the  days  of  Philip, 
the  French  king,  this  Reimund,  earl  of  Toulouse,  was  disdained  by 
the  pope  for  holding  Avith  the  Albigenses  ;  and  therefore,  by  the 
instigation  of  the  pope,  the  lands  of  the  earl  were  taken  from  him, 
and  given  to  Simon  Montfort,  and  instruments  were  made  upon  the 
same ;  but  when  the  said  earl  Reimund  Avould  not  be  removed  from 
the  right  of  his  possessions  by  unrighteous  dealing,  the  pope  setteth 
Philip  II.,  the  French  king,  to  make  open  Avar  against  him.    Wherc- 

(1)  Ex  Matth.  Paris  ;  Nich.  Trivet;  Flor.  Hist. 


TIIK    POPE  S    MALICE    AGAINST    EARI,    REIMUND.  S11 

upon  Louis,  the  French  king's  son,^  was  sent  with  a  great  power,  as    Hennj 
is  above  declared,  to  besiege  the  city  of  Toulouse ;  but  being  repulsed     ^^^' 
from  thence  by  the  marvellous  hand  of  God  fighting  for  his  people,    A.D. 
he  could  not  prevail,  and  so  returned  home,  after  he  had  lost  the  most    ^^^^- 
part  of  his  army  by  pestilence  and  other  calamity,  as  hath  been  before  T^e  pope 
described.    Thus  continued  the  good  earl  still  in  quiet  possession  till  war!" 
this  present  time,  a.d.  1226 ;  in  the  which  year  the  pope,  not  for-  a.d.i22c. 
getting  his  old  malice  against  the  earl,  and  no  less  inflamed  with  pope's 
insatiable  avarice,  directeth  down  his  legate,  Master  Romanus,  to  the  ^'^^^^^ 
parts  of  France,  for  two  several  purposes  ;  one  to  extirj^ate  the  earl,  asainst 
the  other  to  enlarge  his  own  revenues.    Thus  the  legate,  being  entered  tiLVearT 
into  France,  beginneth  to  summon  a  council,  willing  the  French  king,  ^'oiJe" 
with  the  archbishops,  bishops,  and  clergy  of  France,  to  appear  before 
him  at  Bitures ;  to  whom  eftsoons  repaired  six  archbishops,  with  the 
bishops  and  suffragans  of  nine  provinces,  to  the  number  of  a  hun- 
dred, besides  the  abbots,  priors,  and  proctors  of  all  the  covents  of 
France,   to  hear  the  pope''s  will  and  commandment.     But  because  Mark, 
there  was  a  discord  feared  to  rise,  saith  Matthew  Paris,  about  pre-  the'^r/giu 
eminence  of  sitting,  for  that  the  archbishop  of  Lyons  challenged  the  nature  of 
superior  place  above  the  archbishop  of  Sens,  also  the  archbishop  of  striving'"' 
Rouen  above  the  archbishop  of  Bitures,  and  above  the  archbishop  of  c^ef'^ 
Narbonne ;   therefore  the  session  was  holden  there  not  in  manner  p'^*^*-'- 
and  form  of  a  council,  but  of  a  certain  parley  or  consultation.     Thus  xiie  pope 
the  meek  and  holy  council  being  set,  and  the  pope's  majesty's  letters  right'pos^ 
read  and  declared,  appeareth  before  them  Reimund,  earl  of  Toulouse,  ^^**'"" 
of  the  one  part,  and  Simon  Montfort,  on  the  other  part.    This  Simon  from  the 
required  to  be  restored  unto  him  the  lands  and  possessions  of  the  ''^''"^"• 
said  Reimund,   which  the  pope  and  Philip,  the  French  king,  had 
given  to  him  and  to  his  father  before,  haying  good  evidences  to  show 
for  the  same,  confirmed  by  the  donation  of  the  pope  and  of  the  king; 
adding  moreover,  that  the  earl  Reimund  was  deprived  and   disin- 
herited in  the  general  council  at  Rome  for  heresy,  which  is  called  the 
heresy  of  the  Albigenses.     At  least,  if  he  might  not  have  the  whole 
yielded  unto  him,  yet  the  most  part  of  his  lordships  he  required  lo 
be  granted  him. 

To  this  the  earl  Reimund  answered  again,  offering  himself  ready  ^^eimund 
to  all  duty  and  office  both  toward  the  French  king  and  to  the  church  V^i^ot"^ 
of  Rome,  whatsoever  to  him  did  duly  appertain.     And  moreover,  J,°",J°"!'= 
touchinff  the  heresy  wherewith  he  was  there  charged ;  he  did  not  etii  for 
only  there  offer  himself,  in  that  council,  before  the  legate,  but  most 
hmnbly  did  crave  of  him,  that  he  would  take  the  pains  to  come  into 
every  city  within  his  precinct,  to  inquire  of  every  person  there  the 
articles  of' his  belief;  and  if  he  found  any  person  or  persons  holding  Aibigen- 
that  which  was  not  catholic,  he  would  see  the  same  to  be  corrected  suspe«e'd 
and  amended,  according  to  the  censure  of  holy  church,  to  the  utter-  of  heresy, 
most.     Or  if  he  should  find  any  city  rebelling  against  him,  he,  to  the 
uttermost  of  his  might  with  the  inhabitants  thereof,  would  compel 
them  to  do  satisfaction  there  for.     And  as  touching  himself,  if  he 
had  committed  or  erred  in  any  thing  (which  he  remembereth  not 

(1)  This  Louis  (afterwards  Louis  VIII.  of  France)  was  the  eldest  son  of  Philip  II.  To  him  "le 
barons  of  En-'land  offered  the  crown,  in  the  miserable  days  of  King  John.  John  died  a.d.  1216, 
and  Louis  was  defeated  on  the  19th  of  May  in  the  following  year,  by  the  Lord  Protector  Pembroke, 
ai-.d  compelled  to  evacuate  the  kingdom.— Ed. 


S78  DELIBERATIOXS    CONCERNIXG    EARL    REIMUND. 

Henry    that  hc   liad   clone),  he   offered  there  full    satisfaction  to  God  and 
^'^'     the  church,  as  became  any  faithful  cliristian  man  to  do ;  requiring. 


A.D.  moreover,  there,  before  the  legate,  to  be  examined  of  his  faith, 
^^^^-  But  all  this,  saith  Matthew  Paris,  the  legate  despised ;  neither 
could  the  catholic  earl,  saith  he,  there  find  any  grace,  unless  he 
would  depart  from  his  heritage,  both  for  himself,  and  for  his  heirs 
for  ever.  In  fine,  when  it  was  required,  on  the  contrary  part,  that 
he  should  stand  to  the  arbitrement  of  twelve  peers  of  France,  Rei- 
mund  answered,  that  if  the  French  king  would  receive  his  homage, 
which  he  was  ready  at  all  times  to  exhibit,  he  was  contented  there- 
with. For,  other\vise,  they  would  not,  said  he,  take  him  as  one 
of  their  society  and  fellow-subjects. 

After  much  altercation  on  both  sides  about  the  matter,  the  legate 
willeth  every  archbishop  to  call  aside  his  suffragans  to  deliberate  with 
them  upon  the  cause,  and  to  give  up  in  writing  what  was  concluded. 
This  being  done  accordingly,  the  legate  denounceth  excommunica- 
tion on  all  such  as  did  reveal  any  piece  of  that  which  was  there 
concluded,  before  the  pope  and  the  king  had  intelligence  thereof 

These  things,  thus  in  hudder  mutter  among  themselves,  concluded, 

the  legate  gave  leave  to  all  proctors  of  co vents  and  chapters  to  return 

home,  only  retaining  with  him  the  archbishops,  bishops,  and  abbots, 

and  certain  simple  prelates,  such  as  he  might  be  more  bold  withal,  to 

open,  and  of  them  to  obtain,  the  other  part  of  his  commission  ;  which 

was^  indeed,  to  obtain  of  every  cathedral  church  two  prebendships, — 

one  for  the  bishop,  the  other  for  the  chapter.     In  monasteries  also, 

after  the  like  sort,  where  the  abbot  and  covent  had  divers  and  several 

portions,  to   require  two  churches ;    one  for  the  abbot,   the  other 

for  the    covent ;    keeping   this  proportion,   that  how  much  sliould 

suffice  for  the  living  of  one  monk,  so  much  the  whole  covent  should 

find  for  their  part,  and  as  much  the  abbot  likewise  for  his.     And, 

forasmuch  as  he  would  not  seem  to  demand  this  without  some  colour 

of  cause,  his  reason  was  this  :  that  because  the  court  of  Rome  had 

long  been  blotted  with  the  note  of  avarice,  who  is  mother  of  all 

evil,  for  that  no  man  could  come  to  Rome  for  any  business,  but  hc 

must  pay  for  the  expedition  of  the  same  ;  therefore,  for  the  removing 

away  of  the  occasion  of  that  slander,  the  public  help  of  the  church 

must  necessarily  be  required. 

Mark,  The  proctors  and  parties  thus  sent  home  by  the  legates,  marvelling 

the'*"ac-  ^^''*'^  themselves  why  the  bishops  and  abbots  shoiUd  be  staid,  and 

ticeof      they  sent   home,    and  suspecting  no  less  than  as  the  matter  was 

F^rthy^'    indeed,  conferred  their  counsels  together,  and  devised  with  them- 

leaming.  ggjygg  ^q  ggj^^j  certain  unto  him  in  the  behalf  of  all  the  cathedral 

and  conventual  churches  in   France;   and  sent  to  the  said  legate 

this  message,  to  signify  to  him,  that  they  were  credibly  informed  he 

canie  with  special  letters  from  the  court  of  Rome  for  the  obtaining 

of  certain  prebendaries  in  every  cathedral  and  conventual  church ; 

which  being  so,  they  much  marvelled   that  he  would  not  in    the 

The        public  council  make  manifest  to  them  those  letters  which  specially 

ftf^e"    concerned  them,  as  much  as  the  others.     Wherefore,  their  request 

answer-    -^^^g^g  fQ  j^[qj  jj^  ^]^g  Lord,  that  no  such  offensive  matter  might  arise 

ing  to  the  .         .  '  .  .  T  1  •         1 

'egate.      by  him  in  the  French  church ;    knowing  this,   that  the  thing  he 
enterprised    could   not  be  brought  to  effect  without  great  offence 


A    COUNCIL    HELD    AT     1,ATERAN.  288 

the  said  Roger,  after  his  election  to  be  abbot,  must  needs  take  his  mchardi. 
consecration    at  the  archbishop's   hand,   the   archbishop  wouhl    not    ^  j^ 
grant  it  unto  him,  unless  he  made  profession  of  obedience,  according    ii37 
to  the  ancient  custom  of  his  predecessors.     Then  Roger,  consulting      to 
with  his  monks,  at  first  refused  so  to  do ;  but  at  length  was  con-    ^^'^^- 
tented,  so  it  might  not  be  done  in  the  archbishop's  church,  but  in 
any  other  church  where  he  would,  underwriting  this  clause  withal, 
"  salvis  utriusque  ecclcsiae  privilegiis  ;"  that  is,  "  saving  the  privileges 
of  both  churches."     To  this  the  archbishop  said  again,  first,  that  he 
should  make  his  due  and  canonical  profession,  and  that  he  should  not 
come  to  him  with  writing  or  underwriting,  but  should  say  in  his 
heart,  "  salve  sancta  parens,"  or  "  salve  festa  dies,"  not  "  salvis  privi- 
legiis," or  any  such  like  thing.     Whcreunto  when  the  Austin  monks 
in  no  case  would  consent,  nor  the  archbishop  otherwise  would  grant 
his  benediction,  Roger  the  abbot  was  fain  to  post  to  Rome,   and 
there  to  bring  the  archbishop  in  hatred  in  the  court  of  Rome,  and 
made  his  abbey  tributary  to  Pope  Alexander,     a.d.  1177. 

The  pope,  well  contented  with  this,  not  only  granteth  the  abbot  ^^  ^^^^_^ 
his  desire,   but  also,  in  contumely  of  the  archbishop,  dubbeth   the  abbot 
abbot  with  all  such  ornaments  as  to  a  prelate  appertain ;  and  so,  home 
A.D.  1178,  sent  home  the  abbot  triumphantly  with  his  ring  and  mitre,  J'riumph. 
and  other  ensigns  of  victory,  with  letters  also  to  the  archbishop, 
enjoining  him,  immediately  upon  the  sight  thereof,  to  consecrate  the 
abbot   in   his    own    church,    and   without    making    any   profession. 
Although  with  these  letters  the  arclijbishop  was  shrewdly  pressed, 
yet,  notwithstanding,  his  stout  heart  would  not  stoop  for  this ;  but 
he  laid  his  appeal  against  the  same,  and  so  the  consecration  for  that 
time  was  suspended. 

Then   Roger,  for  his  more   defence,  getting  the  king's  letters, 
travelled  up  the  second  time  to  Rome,  where  grievously  he  com- 
plained to  Pope  Alexander  of  the  archbishop.     At  the  same  time  a 
general  council  was  summoned  to  be  kept  at  Lateran,  where  Richard  pp^pj,;. 
the  aforesaid  archbishop  was  also  looked  for  amongst  other  bishops  to  um  Late- 
be  present,  who  came  as  far  as  Paris,  but,  being  there,  durst  approach  sub  Aiex- 
no  further,  and  so  retired  home  again ;  whereupon  the  pope  being  ^"^^p'^" 
oflTended  with  his  contempt,  without  any  more   delay,  exalted  the  «ogei^^^^ 
abbot  with  his  own  consecration,  and  invested  him  with  all  pomp  and  ^"aif,  to ' 
glory ;  howbeit,  providing  before  that  the  said  consecration  should  ]^""^^;^^_ 
redound  to  no  prejudice  against  the  liberties  of  the  mother  church  of  crated. 
Canterbury,  and  so,   upon  the  same,  wrote  to  the  archbishop  his 
letters  of  certificate,  with  this   addition   annexed,   "  salvo  jure  et 
dignitate  Cant,  ecclesise :"  that  is  to  say,  "  saving  the  liberties  and 
dignities  of  the  church  of  Canterbury." 

The  council  ended,  Roger  the  abbot  returneth  home,  although 
with  an  empty  purse,  yet  full  of  victory  and  triumph.  The  arch- 
bishop, again  thinking  to  work  some  grievance  to  the  Austin  monks, 
had  procured,  in  the  mean  time,  letters  from  Pope  Alexander  to  the 
bishop  of  Durham  and  the  abbot  of  St.  Alban's,  that  they  should 
cause  the  said  Roger,  abbot  of  the  Austin  monks,  to  show  unto  the 
archbishop  all  the  old  privileges  of  his  house ;  which  indeed,  being 
showed,  seemed  to  be  rased  and  new  written,  with  bulls  of  lead, 
not  after  the  manner  or  style  of  that  age,  nor  pretendmg  any  such 


284. 


Dlia-'ICULTIES    IN    CHOOSING    AN    AUCIIlilSHOP, 


Richiirdl. 

A.  13. 

to 
1190. 


Richard, 
the  arch- 
bishop, 
staid  by 
the  Iving. 


Tlie 
H  Ornish 
court  set 
men  at 
variance 
to  get 
their 
money. 


Monks  of 
Caiiter- 
Imry  sent 
for  by 
Henry  II. 
about 
choosing 
their 
arch- 
bishop. 


Sent  for 
to  the 
Jvinj;  a 
second 
time. 


The  king 
offended 
with 

Alan,  the 
prior,  and 
witl\  the 
stubborn 
monks  of 
Canter- 
bury. 


anti(juity  as  should  seem  to  reach  from  the  time  of  Austin,  but 
rather  newly  counterfeit. 

All  this  notwithstanding,  the  abbot,  bearing  him  bold  upon  the 
pope's  favour,  ceased  not  still  to  disquiet  and  overcrow  the  archbishop 
by  all  ways  he  could,  in  exempting  all  his  priests  and  laymen  belonging 
to  his  jurisdiction  from  the  archbishop's  obedience ;  forbidding  also 
that  any  of  his  should  come  to  his  chapters  or  synods,  or  fear  any 
sentence  of  his  curse  or  excommunication.  Whereupon  the  arch- 
bishop, about  the  month  of  November  the  same  year,  sailing  over  to 
Normandy,  where  the  king  was,  thought  to  take  his  journey  to  the 
pope  to  complain  of  the  abbot ;  but  being  stayed  by  the  king,  he 
was  not  suffered  to  pass  any  further,  the  king  labouring  what  he 
could  to  bring  them  to  agreement.  Nevertheless  the  pope  and  his 
"  Romans,"  saith  my  story,  "  caring  more  for  gold  and  silver,  than 
for  justice,  still  stirred  coals  of  sedition  and  debate  between  them.*"' 

In  the  year  ensuing,  which  was  a.d.  1184,  died  Richard,  the 
archbishop  aforesaid,  in  the  eight  and  thirtieth  year  of  King 
Henry  II.,  after  whose  decease  much  trouble  happened  about  the 
election  of  a  new  archbishop,  between  the  king  and  the  monks  of 
Canterbury.  And  now,  to  enter  here  into  the  story  of  Baldwin, 
above  mentioned :  first,  the  king  sent  to  the  monks,  that  they  should 
consider  with  themselves  about  the  election  of  their  archbishop, 
and  be  ready  against  the  time  that  he  would  send  for  them  to  the 
court.  Upon  this  the  covent,  gladly  assembling  together,  agreed  in 
themselves  upon  one,  whom  they  thought  chiefly  to  prefer;  yet 
naming  four  more,  that  if  the  king  should  refuse  one,  the  other  yet 
might  stand.  Now  the  practice  of  the  monks  was,  first,  to  keep 
the  election  in  their  own  hands  only,  as  much  as  they  could.  And 
secondly,  ever  to  give  the  election  either  to  some  prior  or  monk  of 
their  own  house,  or  to  some  abbot  or  bishop  who  sometimes  had 
been  of  their  company ;  Avhereby,  as  much  inconvenience  and  blind 
superstition  was  bred  in  the  church  of  England,  so  the  same  disliked 
both  the  king  and  the  bishops  not  a  little. 

As  this  past  on.  King  Henry  II.,  when  he  saw  his  time,  willed 
the  monks  of  Canterbury  to  be  cited  or  sent  for,  to  understand  what 
they  had  concluded  in  their  election.  Whereupon  the  monks  sent 
up  their  prior,  called  Alanus,  with  certain  other  monks,  to  Reading, 
where  the  king  then  lay,  about  the  month  of  August ;  who  at  first 
Avere  courteously  entertained,  but,  after  the  king  had  intelligence 
whom  they  had  nominated  and  elected,  they  were  sent  home  again 
with  cold  cheer ;  the  king  willing  them  to  pray  better,  and  to  advise 
more  earnestly  upon  the  matter  amongst  themselves.  Alanus,  the 
prior,  with  his  fellows,  thus  departed ;  who  coming  home,  in  conclu- 
sion, so  concluded  amongst  themselves,  that  they  would  remit  no  jot 
of  their  liberties  to  the  king,  without  the  pope's  consent  and  know- 
ledge. The  king  understanding  hereof,  sent  his  ambassadors  likewise 
to  the  pope,  for  the  fortifying  of  his  cause,  being  in  the  mean  time 
grievously  offended  with  the  prior,  saying,  that  he  was  proud,  and 
would  make  archbishop  whom  he  listed,  and  would  be  the  second 
pope  in  England,  &c. 


fl)  "  Aurum  et  artrontum  mag 
vebant."- — Ex  Historia  Gervasii. 


.  quam  justitiam  sitiontes,  seditiones  inter  eos  ct  litigia  commo- 


DUE  DATE 


MIX 


mui^ 


201-6503 


Printed 
in  USA 


COLUMBIA  UNIVERSITY  LIBRARIES 


0068379242 


p 


