Title: The Dialogues of Saint Gregory, surnamed the Great: Pope of Rome, the First
    of that Name, Divided into Four Books, Wherein He Entreateth of the Lives
    and Miracles of the Saints in Italy and of the Eternity of Men's Souls
Creator: Gregory I, Pope (c. 540-604) (original English translation by "P.W.", 1608;
    re-edited with an Introduction and Notes by Edmund G. Gardner)
Publisher: London: Philip Lee Warner, 1911
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: Explicit `NOT_IN_COPYRIGHT` possible-copyright-status confirmed directly
    against the Internet Archive item's own metadata, 2026-09-24, this
    session.
Source: Internet Archive item dialoguesofsaint00greg
    (archive.org/details/dialoguesofsaint00greg), fetched directly (curl, raw
    bytes) from the item's own _djvu.txt full-text file, 2026-09-24, this
    session.
Content note: Book II is the only surviving Life of St. Benedict of Nursia (his sieve and
    glass miracles, the founding of Monte Cassino, Totila's visit, his death)
    - the single earliest and most authoritative account of Benedict that
    exists, confirmed directly against this file's own contents (Book I ends
    and "The Second Book", headed "Of the Life and Miracles of St. Bennet
    [Benedict]", begins immediately after). The translation is the 1608
    rendering by an unidentified translator signing himself "P.W." (dedication
    dated "the first of January, 1608"), reissued here in 1911 "save for the
    spelling" verbatim from that 1608 edition, per Gardner's own Introduction
    (signed August 15, 1911), which also states the Latin text he cites is
    Migne's (PL 77).
Provenance note: The title page and decorative section-opening capitals throughout are badly
    OCR-garbled (a period ornamental typeface the OCR engine could not read);
    Gardner's own plain-prose Introduction and the body text are clean and
    legible. A library due-date card and catalog slip are retained at the
    file's own tail, unaltered. Body text otherwise unaltered including its
    own OCR errors; not independently spot-checked for OCR quality beyond the
    sections read this session (front matter, Introduction, the Book
    I/II/III/IV transitions, the opening of Book II).

1 


.''£*>  *i< 


THE 

DIALOGUES 

OF  SAINT-. 

GREGORY,1; 

/THE**      : 

GREAT 


/,JJ,1\.: 


"i>£ 


ii 


C  tit  VMM  tff 


HMtalrt)   ill .  ./fsJ§)    (flnUrnr. 


i 


—      x-r*- 


$>K"& 


NV  &3&\o^ 


€&c  Dialog:ue0  of 
%>t  ©rcprp  tbc  <£rcat 


HKXKDK    I     DKI.IVKKS    KI.S    KI'I.K 

.   /??  :    Kritish  Must  u>>. 


f*mf\K  SDtalogues   of  §>afnt 
7T      ©regorp,  surnameD  tt)e 

Vf   y  dSreat :  $opc  of  i&omc  vV 
^■■^  tt)e  jFtrst  of  ttjat  J15ame. 

DitriDeD  into  JTour  TBoofes,  toberein  be  em 
treatetb  of  tbe  ILtoes  anD  piracies  of  tbe 
faints  in  3!taip  anD  of  tbe  dEternitp  of  even's 
§>ouls.  CranslateD  into  out  OBnglisb  Congue 
tip  IP,  ©Dl.  anD  ptinteD  at  Iparis  in  mDctriii. 
Ee^eDiteD  toitb  an  JntroDuction  anD  Jftotes 
tip  OBDmunD  0.  ®atDner,  $$&.  ftHitb  Mm- 
trations  after  tfje  £Dlo  Rasters  annotateD  tip 


Jtondon:  0t)tltp  3Ue  aZKarner 

trii  Grafton  ^t.,15onD  $t,©&.  mDccccri 


The  binding  of  this  volume 
is  reproduced  from  a  fine 
Italian  example  dating 
from   the  XI  1th   Century 


•§75>5 


Contents 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS 

With  Notes  by  G.  F.  Hill xiii 

INTRODUCTION  xix 

C&e  JTicst  TBoofe 

CHAPTER 

I.  Of  Honoratus,  Abbot  of  the  Monastery  of  Funda  .          .  6 

II.  Of  Libertinus,  Prior  of  the  same  Abbey         ...  9 

III.  Of  a  Monk,  that  was  gardener  to  the  same  Abbey           .  13 

IV.  OfEquitius,  Abbot  in  the  Province  of  Valeria        .          .  15 
V.  Of  Constantius,  Clerk  of  St.  Stephen's  Church      .          .  23 

VI.  Of  Marcellinus,  Bishop  of  Ancona         ....  26 

VII.  Of  Nonnosus,  Prior  of  the  Abbey  in  Mount  Soracte      .  26 
VIII.  Of  Anastasius,  Abbot  of  the  Monastery  called  Suppen- 

tonia      .........  29 

IX.   Of  Bonifacius,  Bishop  of  the  City  of  Ferenti           .          .  31 

X.  Of  Fortunatus,  Bishop  of  the  City  of  Tuderti        .          .  38 

XI.  Of  Martirius,  a  Monk  in  the  Province  of  Valeria  .          .  45 

XII.   Of  Severus,  a  Priest  in  the  same  Province      ...  46 

Cbe  Second  15oofe 

2Df  tbe  life  ana  piracies  of  %t  IBznnzt 

I.   How  a  sieve    was    broken    and     made    sound    by     St. 

Bennet           ........  52 

II.  How  he  overcame  a  great  carnal  temptation           .         .  55 

III.  How  he  brake  a  glass  with  the  sign  of  the  Cross     .          .  56 

IV.  How    he    cured    a    Monk     that     had     an     idle     and 

wandering  mind     .......  61 

V.  How   by  prayer  he  made  water  to  spring    out    of  a 

rock  in  the  top  of  a  mountain          ....  62 

VI.   How    he    caused    an    iron    bill     to    come    again    into 

the  handle  from  the  bottom  of  the  water          .          .  63 


Contents 

CHAPTER  PAGE 

YIL   How  his  scholar  Maurus  walked  upon  the  water    .       64 
VIII.  How  he  made  a  crow  to  carry  a  loaf  far  off  that 

was  poisoned  ......       65 

IX.   How  he  removed  an  huge  stone  by  his  prayer       .        69 
X.  Of  the  fantastical  fire  of  the  kitchen     ...        69 
XI.   How  a  little  boy,  a  Monk,  was  slain  with  the  ruin 

of  a  wall,  and  restored  to  life  ....       70 

XII.  Of  certain  Monks  that  ate  meat  contrary  to  their 

rule       ........        71 

XIII.  How  the  holy  man  knew  by  revelation  that  the 

brother  of  Valentinian  the  Monk  had  eaten  in 

his  journey     .......        72 

XIV.  How    the    counterfeiting    of    king    Totilas    was 

discovered      .......        73 

XV.  How  the  holy  man  did  prophesy  to  the  same  king        74 
XVI.   How  he  dispossessed  a  clergyman  of  a  devil  .         .        75 
XVII.   How  he  did  prophesy  of  the  destruction  of  his 

own  Abbey     .......        78 

XVIII.   How  by   revelation  he  understood  of  the  stolen 

flagon  of  wine         ......        79 

XIX.  How   by  revelation   he   knew  that  a   Monk   had 

received  certain  napkins  ....        79 

XX.   How  he  likewise  knew  the  proud  thought  of  one 

of  his  own  Monks  ......        80 

XXI.   How  in  the  time  of  a  dearth  two  hundred  bushels 

of  meal  was  found  before  his  cell      ...        81 
XXII.   How,  by  vision,  he  gave  order  for  the  building  of 

the  Abbey  of  Terracina  .  ....        82 

XXIII.  How  certain  Nuns  were  absolved  after  their  death        84 

XXIV.  How  a  certain  Monk  was  cast  out  of  his  grave       .        86 
XXV.  How  a  Monk,  forsaking  his  Abbey, was  encountered 

by  a  dragon  ....  ...  86 

XXVI.  How  he  cured  one  of  a  leprosy    ....  87 

XXVII.   How  miraculously  he  provided  money  for  one  that 

was  in  debt    .......  87 

XXVIII.  How  a  cruet  of  glass  was  thrown  upon  the  stones 

and  not  broken       ......  88 

XXIX.  How  an  empty  barrel  was  miraculously  filled  with 

oil  ........  89 

XXX.  How  a  Monk  was  dispossessed  of  a  devil       .         .  90 
XXXI.  How  a  country  man  pinioned  was  by  his  only  sight 

loosed    .......  91 

XXXII.   How  a  dead  child  was  restored  to  life  ...  92 

vi 


Contents 


CHAPTER 

XXXIII. 
XXXIV. 


Of  a  miracle  wrought  by  his  sister  Scholastics 
How  and  in  what  manner  he  saw  his  sister's  soul 
going  out  of  her  body     ..... 

XXXV.   How  in  vision  he  saw  the  world  represented  before 
his  eyes  ;  and  of  the  soul  of  Germanus,  Bishop 
of  Capua        ....  ... 

XXXVI.   How  he  wrote  the  rule  of  his  order     . 
XXXVII.   How  he  foretold  the  time  of  his  death 
XXXVIII.  How  a  mad  woman,  lying  in  his  cave,  was  cured  . 

C6e  CbitD  15oofe 

I.  Of  Paulinus,  Bishop  of  the  City  of  Nola 
II.  Of  Pope  John    . 

III.  Of  Pope  Agapitus 

IV.  Of  Datius,  Bishop  of  Milan 
V.  Of  Sabinus,  Bishop  of  Camisina 

VI.  OfCassius,  Bishop  of  Narni 
VII,  Of  Andrew,  Bishop  of  Funda 
VIII.  Of  Constantius,  Bishop  of  Aquinum 
IX.  Of  Frigidianus,  Bishop  of  Lucca 
X.  Of  Sabinus,  Bishop  of  Placentia,  who  by  his  letcer 
made  the  river  of  Po  to  retire  into  his  channel 
XI.  Of  Cerbonius,  Bishop  of  Populonium   . 
XII.  Of  Fulgentius,  Bishop  of  Otricoli 

XIII.  Of  Herculanus,  Bishop  of  Perusium     ■. 

XIV.  Of  the  servant  of  God,  Isaac 

XV.  Of  the  servants  of  God,  Euthicius  and  Florentius 
XVI.  Of  Marcius,  the  Monk  of  Mount  Marsico    . 
XVII.  Of  a    Monk    dwelling    in    the    mountain    called 
Argentario,  who  raised  up  a  dead  man 
XVIII.  Of  Bennet  the  Monk. 

XIX.  Of  the  church  of  St.  Zeno  the  martyr,  into  which 
the  swelling  waters  came  not  any  farther  than 
to  the  door    ....... 

XX.  Of  Stephen,  a  Priest  in  the  Province  of  Valeria 
XXI.  Of  a    Nun,    that    with    her    only    authority  dis- 
possessed a  devil      .,...« 
XXII.  Of  a  Priest  in  the  Province  of  Valeria  that  held  a 
thief  at  his  sepulchre  , 

XXIII.  Of  the  Abbot  of  Mount  Preneste,  and  his  Priest   » 

XXIV.  Of  Theodorus,  Clerk  of  St.  Peter's  Church  in  Rome 
XXV.  Of  Abundius,  Clerk  of  the  same  Church 


PAGE 

94 
96 


96 

99 

99 
100 


105 
109 
109 
no 
in 
"3 
113 
116 
117 

118 
119 
120 
121 
123 
128 
133 

136 

13; 


140 
141 

142 

H3 

"45 

146 

H7 


Contents 

CHAPTKR  PAGE 

XXVI,  Of  a  solitary  Monk 148 

XXVII.  Of  forty  country  husbandmen,  that  were  martyred 
because  they  would  not   eat  flesh  sacrificed  to 
idols       .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .150 

XXVIII.  Of  a  great  multitude  of  captives,  that  were  slain 

because  they  would  not  adore  a  goat's  head        .      15 1 
XXIX.  Of  an  Arian  Bishop  strooken  blind       .  .  .      152 

XXX.  Of  a  church  of  the  Arians  consecrated  catholickly 

in  the  City  of  Rome       .....      153 

XXXI.  Of  Hermigildus,  the  son  of  Leuigildus,  King  of 
the  Visegoths,  put  to  death  by  his  father  for  the 
Catholic  faith  .  .  .  .  .  .155 

XXXII.  Of  certain   Bishops  of  Africk,  that  had   (for  the 
defence  of  the  Catholic  faith)  their  tongues  cut 
out   by  the  Arians  ;  and  yet  spake  as  perfectly 
as  they  did  before  .  .  .  .  .  .157 

KXXIII.  Of  the  servant  of  God,  Eleutherius      .  .  159 

XXXIV.   How  many  kinds  of  compunction  there  be    .  .      161 

XXXV.  Of  Amantius,  a  Priest  in  the  Country  of  Tuscania      163 

XXXVI.  Of  Maximianus,  Bishop  of  Syracusis     .  .  .164 

XXXVII.  Of  Sanctulus,  a  Priest  in  the  Province  of  Nursia     .      166 

XXXVIII.  Of  a  vision  which  appeared  to  Redemptus,  Bishop 

of  Ferenti      .  .  .         .  .  .  173 


Cbe  JTourtf)  15ook 

I.  That  carnal  men  do  the  less  believe  eternal  and 
spiritual    things,  because    those  of  which  they 
hear,  they  know  not  by  experience 
II.  That  an  infidel  liveth  not  without  faith 

III.  That  there  were  three  vital  spirits  created    . 

IV.  Of  that  question  of  Solomon  wherein   it  is  said  : 

That  the  death  of  a  man  and  beasts  is  all  one   . 
V.  Of  that  question  concerning  the  soul,  which  goeth 
invisibly  out    of  the    body  :   to    wit,    whether 
there  be  any  such  thing,  when  as  it  cannot  be 
seen       ........ 

VI.  That  as  the  life  of  the  soul,  whiles  it  remaineth  in 
the    body,    is    known    by   the    motion    of  the 
members  :  so  the  life  of  the  soul,  after  it  is  out 
of  the  body  in  Saints,  is  gathered  by  the  virtue 
of  miracles     ....... 

VII.  Of  the  departure  of  souls    . 

viii 


177 
179 
179 

180 


184 


186 

187 


Contents 

CHAPTER  PAGE 

VIII.  Of  the  departure  of  the  soul   of  a  monk  called 

Speciosus        .  .  .  .  .  .  .188 

IX.  Of  the  soul  of  an  Anchoret          ....  188 

X.  Of  the  departure  of  the  soul  of  an   Abbot  called 

Hope    .....         r          .         .  189 

XI.  Of  the  departure  of  the  soul    of  a   Priest  called 

Ursinus            .......  190 

XII.  Of  the  soul  of  Probus,  Bishop  of  the  City  of  Reati  192 

XIII.  Of  the  departure  of  a  Nun  called  Galla        .          .  192 

XIV.  Of  the  departure  of  Servulus,  sick  of  the  palsy        .  194 
XV.   Of  the  departure  of  a  Nun  called  Romula     .          .  195 

XVI.  Of  the  departure  of  the  virgin  Tarsilla  .  .      197 

XV^II.   Of  the  departure  of  a  young  maid  called  Musa      .      198 
XVIII.   How  certain  young  children  come  not  to  heaven, 
through  the  fault  of  their  parents  :  because  they 
bring    them    up    wickedly  :    as  is  shewed   and 
afterward     declared     by     the     example     of    a 
blasphemous  young  boy  .....      199 

XIX.   Of  the  departure  of  one   Stephen,  the  servant  of 

God     ........      201 

XX.  That  sometime  the  merit  of  the  soul  is  not  seen  at 
the  departure  :  but  is  after  death  the  more  truly 
declared         .......      202 

XXI.  Of  the  two  Monks  of  Abbot  Valentinus        .  .      202 

XXII.  Of  the  departure  of  Abbot  Suranus       .  .  .      202 

XXIII.  Of  the  departure  of  a   Deacon  of  the  church   of 

the  Marsori  ....... 

XXIV.  Of  the  death  of  the  man  of  God  that  was  sent  to 

Bethel ........      203 

XXV.  Whether  the  souls  of  just  men   be  received  into 

heaven  before  the  resurrection  of  the  body  .      204 

XXVI.  By  what  means  some  that  are  a  dying  do  prophesy. 
Of  the  death  of  a  certain  advocate :  Of  trie 
revelation  of  the  two  Monks  Gerontius  and 
Mellitus  :  Of  the  death  of  a  boy  called  Armen- 
tarius,  and  of  the  diversity  of  tongues        .  .      206 

XXVII.   Of  the  death  of  the  Earl  Theophanius  .  .      210 

XXVIII.  That  as  the  souls  of  just  men  be  in  heaven  :  so  we 
ought  to  believe,  that,   after  the  death  of  the 
bodies,  the  souls  of  wicked  men  are  in  hell        .      211 
XXIX.   What  reason  we  have  to  believe  that  corporal  fire 

can  hold  spirits,  they  being  without  bodies         .      212 
XXX.   Of  the  death  of  the  Arian  king  Theodoricus  .      213 

ix 


203 


Contents 

CHAPTER  PAGE 

XXXI.  Of  the  death  of  Reparatus  .  ....      214 

XXXII.  Of  the  death  of  a  courtier,  whose  grave  burned  with 

fire       ........      216 

XXXIII.  Whether  the  good  know  the  good  in   heaven :  and 

the  bad  those  that  be  bad  in  hell      .  .  .      217 

XXXIV.  Of  a  certain  religious  man,  who  at  his  death  saw 

the  Prophets  ......      219 

XXXV.   How  sometime  souls  ready  to  depart  this  world, 
that  know  not  one  another,  do  know  for  all  that 
what  torments  for  their  sins,  or  like  rewards  for 
their  good  deeds,  they  shall  receive.     And  of  the 
death  of  John,  Ursus,  Eumorphius,  and  Stephen      219 
XXXVI.  Of  those  souls,  which   through  error  seem  to  be 
carried   out   of  their  bodies.     Of  the  vocation 
and  revocation  of  Peter  the  Monk  ;  and  of  the 
death    and    resuscitation    of  Stephen.     Of  the 
vision  of  a  certain  soldier  :  and  of  Deusdedit, 
whose    house  was  seen  to   be  built  upon   the 
Sabbath   day  :  and  of  the  punishment  of  the 
men  of  Sodom        ......      223 

XXXVII.  That  the  souls  of  certain  men,  whiles  they  be  yet  in 
their  bodies,  do  see  some  spiritual  punishment : 
and  of  the  boy  Theodorus       ....      229 

XXXVIII.  Of  the  death  of  Chrisorius  :  and  of  a  certain  Monk 

oflconia        .......      230 

XXXIX.  Whether    there  be    any   fire    of  Purgatory  after 

death     ........      232 

XL.  Of  the  soul  of  Paschasius  the  Deacon  .  .         .      234 

XLI.  Why  in  latter  times  so  many  things  come  to  light 
concerning  men's  souls,  which  before  were  not 
known  .......      235 

XLII.   In  what  place  we  ought  to  believe  that  hell  is       .      236 
XLIII.   Whether  the  fire  of  hell  be  one  or  many      .  .      237 

XLIV.  Whether  they  always  burn  that  lie  in  hell    .  .      238 

XLV.   How  the   soul   is  said   to   be   immortal,  if  it   be 

punished  with  the  sentence  of  death         .  .      241 

XLVI.  Of  a  certain  holy  man,  who  was  afraid  at  the  time 

of  his  death  .......      241 

XLVI  I.  That  some  are  by  revelation  strengthened  not  to 
be  afraid  when  they  die  :  and  of  the  monks 
called  Anthony,  Merulus,  and  John  .  .      242 

XLVIII.  Whether  we  ought  to  observe  dreams  :  and  how 

many  sorts  of  dreams  there  be  244 


Contents 

CHAPTER  PAGE 

XLIX.  Of  a  certain  man  who  in  his  dream  had  long  life 

promised  :  and  yet  died  shortly  after         .         .      245 
L.  Whether  the  souls  receive  any  commodity,  by  the 

burial  of  their  bodies  in  the  church  .         .      245 

LI.   Of  a  certain  Nun  that  was  buried  in  the  Church  of 

St.  Lawrence,  which  appeared  half  burnt  .      246 

LII.   Of  the  burial  of  the  noble  man  Valerianus    .         .      246 
LIII.  Of  the  body  of  Valentinus,  which  was  thrown  out 

of  the  church,  after  it  was  buried     .         .  .      247 

LIV.   Of  the  body  of  a  dyer  buried  in  the  church,  which 

afterward  could  not  be  found  .         .         .      248 

LV.  What  thing  that  is  which,  after  death,  hath  force 
to  help  men's  souls  :  and  of  a  Priest  of  Centum- 
cellis,  who  was   by  the  soul  of  a  certain  man 
desired,  that  he  might,  after  his  death,  be  holpen 
by  the  holy  sacrifice.     And  of  the  soul  of  a 
Monk  called  Justus         .....      249 

LVI.  Of  the  life  and  death  of  Bishop  Cassius         .         .      252 
LVII,  Of  one  that  was  taken  by  his  enemies,  whose  irons 
at  the  time  of  the  sacrifice  were  loosed  :  and 
of  the    mariner    called    Baraca,  saved   by  the 
sacred  host  from  being  drowned  in  the  sea        .      253 
LVIII.  Of  the  virtue  and  mystery  of  the  healthful  sacrifice      255 
LIX.   How  we  ought  to  procure  contrition   of  heart  at 
the    time    of  the    holy  mysteries  :  and    of  the 
custody  of  our  soul  after  we  have  been  sorrow- 
ful for  our  sins        ......      256 

LX.  How  we  ought  to  forgive  the  sins  of  others,  that 

we  may  obtain  forgiveness  of  our  own       .         .      257 

EDITORIAL  NOTES 259 

INDEX 277 


XI 


3Ltet  of  ^lustrations 

With  Notes  by  G.  F.  Hill 


Patfs  in  GToIour 

St.  Benedict  delivers  his  rule.     British   Museum  (Arundel  MS. 

155,  fol.   133) Frontispiece 

The  manuscript  is  a  Latin  Psalter,  written  and  illuminated  most 
probably  at  Christ  Church,  Canterbury,  between  1012  and  1023,  in  a 
style  which  had  its  origin  at  Winchester.  The  miniature  of  St. 
Benedict,  which  shows  a  combination  of  outline  and  full  illumination, 
comes  between  the  Psalter  and  the  Canticles.  The  Saint,  enthroned, 
points  to  an  open  book  inscribed  "Ausculta,  o  fili,  precepta,"  which  a 
monk  holds  up  to  him.  His  brooch  is  inscribed  "  Iustus,"  the  fillet 
on  his  head,  "Timor  Dei"  ;  the  border  of  his  nimbus,  "Sanctus 
Benedictus  pater  monachorum  et  dux."  The  girdle  of  the  prostrate 
monk  who  kisses  his  right  foot  bears  the  words  "Zona  humilitatis." 
In  the  spandril  between  the  two  arches  which  form  the  background 
is  the  hand  of  God,  holding  a  stole,  inscribed  "  Qui  vos  audit  me 
audit"  and  "  Obedientes  estote  preposito  vestro."  The  miniature 
closely  resembles  another  in  the  Benedictional  of  St.  /Ethelwold. 

G.  F.  Warner,  Illuminated  Manuscripts  in  the  British  Museum  (1903), 
PL  7- 

The      Madonna     in     Glory,     with     St.     Gregory     and     St. 
Bernard  (?).     By  Pintoricchio.     San    Gimignano,  Palazzo 

Pubblico  .......       Facing  page       1 6 

This  picture  was  painted  in  151 1  for  the  church  of  S.  Maria 
Assunta  at  Monte  Oliveto  in  Barbiano,  the  final  payment  to  the  artist 
being  made  on  February  9,  15  12.  The  original  commission  specified 
that  the  two  Saints  should  be  Benedict  and  Bernard.  The  former 
has  been  replaced  by  a  Pope,  probably  Gregory  the  Great.  The 
Madonna  is  seated  on  white  clouds  in  a  mandorla  of  blue  edged  with 
white,  with  cherubs'  heads.  St.  Gregory  is  represented  without  any 
particular  attributes  ;  his  tiara  rests  on  the  ground  beside  the  mitre 
of  St.  Bernard,  who  wears  the  white  habit  and  holds  his  pastoral  staff. 
Landscape  background  of  the  kind  typical  of  Pintoricchio. 

C.  Ricci,  Pintoricchio,  transl,  by  F.  Simmonds  (1902),  p.  229. 

xiii 


illustrations 

Fa  a  tig  page 
St.  Scholastica.      By  Perugino.      San  Pietro,  Perugia  .  .     96 

This  is  one  of  a  number  of  half-figures  which  decorated  the  frame 
of  the  altar-piece  of  San  Pietro,  commissioned  on  March  8,  1496.  The 
Saint  holds  a  dove  and  a  book.  The  altar-piece  was  broken  up  in  the 
eighteenth  century  ;  the  central  panel,  representing  the  Ascension,  is 
at  Lyons  ;  the  lunette  in  St.  Gervais,  Paris  ;  the  predella  at  Rouen  ; 
St.  Scholastica  and  four  other  Saints  at  Perugia  ;  three  others  in  the 
Vatican. 

The  death  of  St.  Benedict.    By  Spinello  Aretino.     San  Miniato 

al  Monte,  Florence  .  .  .  .  .  .  .100 

The  sacristy  of  San  Miniato  was  finished  about  1387,  and  Spinello 
was  commissioned  by  Don  Jacopo  d'  Arezzo  to  fresco  its  waLls  with 
scenes  from  the  life  of  St.  Benedict.  The  frescoes,  which  show  the 
Giottesque  school  of  this  period  at  its  best,  were  still  unfinished  on 
June  11,  1387.  The  last  and  finest  scene  represents  the  death  of  the 
Saint ;  his  body  lies  on  a  bier,  surrounded  by  mourners,  and  a  bishop 
reads  the  office  over  him.  As  he  breathed  his  last,  two  monks,  one 
far  away,  the  other  in  his  cell,  saw  the  same  vision  of  a  ladder, 
covered  with  a  rich  carpet  and  lit  by  innumerable  lamps,  leading  from  St. 
Benedict's  cell  to  the  eastern  heaven,  by  which  way  the  Saint  mounted 
up  into  heaven.     This  vision  is  represented  above  the  death-scene. 

St.    Frigidianus    turning  the  course   of  the    Serchio.      By  Fra 

Filippo  Lippi.     Accademia,  Florence  (No.  42)  .  .116 

This  panel,  representing  San  Frediano,  bishop  ot  Lucca,  diverting 
the  course  of  the  Serchio,  is  one  of  the  three  compartments  of  the 
pTedella  to  a  picture  of  the  Madonna  and  Child  with  Angels  and 
Saints  now  in  the  Louvre.  It  is  a  good  deal  restored.  It  was 
originally  commissioned  by  the  Company  of  Or  San  Michele  in  1437, 
and  before  its  removal  to  France  was  in  the  sacristy  of  S.  Spirito. 
The  other  panel*  represent  the  Virgin  receiving  the  announcement  of 
her  coming  death,  and  St.  Augustine  in  his  study  in  meditation,  with 
the  three  arrows  sticking  in  his  breast. 

King  Totila  and  St.  Benedict.     By  Neroccio  di   Bartolommeo 

Landi.     Uffizi,  Florence  (No.  1304)  ....    134 

One  of  three  predella  panels,  attributed  variously  to  Neroccio, 
Francesco  di  Giorgio,  and  Vecchietta.  Totila  (Baduila),  king  of  the 
Ostrogoths,  who  had  attempted  to  deceive  St.  Benedict  by  sending  to 
him  a  servant  arrayed  in  royal  garments,  kneels  in  penitence  before 
the  Saint.  On  the  right  is  the  entrance  to  the  abbey  of  Monte 
Cassino  ;  behind  the  king  a  brilliant  retinue  of  pages  and  knights  ;  on 
the  hills  behind,  the  camp  of  the  Ostrogoths  ;  and  in  the  distance, 
columns  and  a  pyramid  which  indicate  Rome. 

plates  tn  f^alf-tone 

Boethius.     By  Justus  of  Ghent.     Barberini  Palace,  Rome         .   xviii 

Of  the  twenty-eigkt  ideal  portraits  of  philosopher^  heroes  and 
doctors,  painted  about  1476  by  Justus  (Josse)  of  Ghent,  for  the  library 

xiv 


3!llti0tration0 

Facing  page 
of  Federigo  of  Urbino,  fourteen  are  now  in  the  Louvre,  the  other*  in 
the  Palazzo  Barberini.  The  distinction  between  his  work  and  that  of 
Melozzo  da  Forli  has  been  much  disputed,  and  this  particular  figure  is 
claimed  by  Schmarsow,  in  his  work  on  Melozzo,  for  that  artist  ;  but 
the  general  opinion  seems  now  to  be  on  the  other  side.  Boethius 
seems  to  be  represented  as  the  author  of  the  de  institutiont  arithmetical 
and  traditional  founder  of  mediaeval  arithmetic,  reckoning  on  his 
fingers  ;  or  possibly  the  action  may  be  merely  that  of  a  philosopher 
checking  off  the  heads  of  an  argument.  The  eulogy  under  the  portrait 
was  "  L,  Boetio,  ob  cuius  commentationes  Latini  M.  Varronis  scholas 
non  desiderant,  Fed.  Urb.  princeps  pos." 

St.  Gregory  the  Great.    By  Justus  of  Ghent.    Barberini  Palace, 

Rome  ..........        6 

Another  of  the  twenty-eight  fancy  portraits  painted  for  the  library 
at  Urbino  (see  above).  The  Pope,  in  tiara  and  cope,  holds  a  book  ; 
Gothic  architectural  background.  The  eulogy  reads  :  "  Gregorio  in 
coelum  relato,  ob  morum  sanctitatem,  librorum  quoque  elegantiam 
testatam,  gratitudo  Christiana  memor  erexit." 

St.  Benedict.     By  Perugino.     Vatican  Gallery,  Rome      .         .     48 

From  the  same  altar-piece  as  the  St.  Scholastica  (see  above).  The 
Saint  holds  a  bundle  of  rods,  indicating  the  severity  of  his  rule,  and  > 
book. 

St.  Benedict  leaving  his  father's  house.     By  Spinello  Aretino. 

San  Miniato  al  Monte,  Florence      .         .         .         .         .     52 

A  scene  from  the  frescoes  in  the  sacristy  of  San  Miniato,  painted 
about  1387  (see  above).  The  Saint,  mounted  on  a  horse,  bids  farewell 
to  his  relations  ;  in  the  background,  the  town  of  Nursia  ;  on  the  right, 
two  traveller!. 

St.  Maurus.     By  Perugino.     San  Pietro,  Perugia      .         .         .60 
Another  relic  of  the  great  altar-piece  of  1496  (see  above). 

Maurus  saving  Placidus   from   drowning.     By   Giov.    Antonio 

Bazzi  (Sodoma).     Monte  Oliveto  Maggiore      .         .         .64 

From  the  series  of  thirty-one  frescoes  executed  by  Bazzi  between 
August  1505  and  August  1508.  It  was  revealed  to  St.  Benedict  in  his 
study  that  a  young  monk  named  Placidus,  who  had  gone  to  draw 
water,  had  fallen  into  the  river.  On  the,  left,  the  abbot  is  seen  in  his 
study  despatching  Maurus  to  the  rescue  ;  on  the  right,  Maurus, 
walking  on  the  waters,  brings  Placidus  to  land. 

The   women   sent   by  Florentius.      By  Giov.  Antonio   Bazzi. 

Monte  Oliveto  Maggiore         ......     68 

From  the  same  series  of  frescoes  as  the  preceding.  Florentius, 
having  failed  to  poison  St.  Benedict,  endeavoured  to  debauch  his 
disciples,  atad  "  took  seven  maidens,  all  naked,  and  sent  them,  into  the 
garden  to  dance  and  carol  lor  to  move  the  monks  to  temptation."     To 

XV  b 


3illu0tration0 

Facing  page 
the  seven  women  correspond,  on  the  other  side,  seven  monks  and  an 
ass  ;  St.  Benedict  looks  on  in  horror  from  the  balcony  above.  The 
story  goes  that  Bazzi  in  the  first  instance  followed  the  legend  exactly, 
and  painted  the  women  nude,  and  that  he  was  afterwards  obliged,  by 
the  indignation  of  his  employers,  to  add  clothes.  This,  however,  is 
refuted  by  the  fact  that  there  is  no  trace  here,  as  elsewhere,  of  anything 
being  added  in  a  second  painting  ;  such  additions  are  easily  detected  in 
a  fresco. 

The  meeting  of  St.  Benedict  and  King  Totila.     By  Spinello 

Aretino.     San  Miniato  al  Monte,  Florence       .  .  -74 

From  the  series  of  frescoes  in  the  sacristy  of  San  Miniato  mentioned 
a,bove.  .  The  .scene  js  practically  the  same  as  that  represented  by 
Neroccio  {see  above)  ;  but  the  composition  is  naturally  simpler,  and 
the  conception  more  dignified. 

St.  Placidus.     By  Perugino.     Vatican  Gallery,  Rome       .  .     80 

From  the  same  altar-piece  as  the  St.  Scholastica  [see  above).  St. 
Placidus,  with  hands  joined  in  prayer,  and  holding  a  palm,  is  a 
•characteristically  sentimental  Peruginesque  type. 

The   translation  of  St.   Herculanus.      By  Benedetto    Bonfigli. 

Accademia,  Perugia         .         .  .  .         .  .  .122 

Benedetto  Bonfigli's  chief  work  was  the  decoration  of  the  chapel  or 
the  Palazzo  del  Comune  at  Perugia  with  frescoes  representing  scenes 

"from  the  life t>f  St.  Herculanus  and  St.  Louis  of  Toulouse  (begun  in  1454 
and  continued  at  intervals  until  his  death  in  I496).  The  body  of 
St.  Herculanus,  having  been  found  uncorrupted,  after  it  had  been 
decapitated,  flayed  and  exposed  for  forty  days  at  the  order  of  Totila,  is 
here  being  carried  in  procession  by  the  clergy,  accompanied  by  lay-folk  ; 
on  the  right,  two  women  kneel  as  it  passes.     In  the  background,  the 

.buildings  of  Perugia. 

The  Madonna   and  Child   with   St.  Zeno  (and  St.   Laurence 
fustinian).       By     Girolamo    dai     Libri.       San     Giorgio, 
.Verona       ...  .......   140 

The  Virgin,  holding  her  Son,  is  enthroned  beneath  a  lemon-tree. 
On  the  left  is  St.  Laurence  Justinian,  holding  book  and  cross  ;  the  Child 
presents  a  girdle  to  him.  On  the  right  is  S.  Zeno,  with  book  and 
crozier,  from  which  is  suspended  a  fish,  his  symbol.  Below  are  three 
angels  making  music.  Painted  in  1526,  and  inscribed  "XXVI.  Men. 
Mar.  XXVIIII.  Hieronimus  a  Libris  pinxit."     Oil  on  canvas. 

Faith.     By  Giotto.     Arena  Chapel,  Padua       ....   186 

'  Painted  about  1306.  Faith,  who  wears  a  tall  mitre  and  veil,  rests 
the  shaft  of  her  cross  on  the  torso  of  a  fallen  idol,  which  she  spurns 
with  her  right  foot,  and  holds  a  scroll  inscribed  with  the  creed.  The 
key  of  heaven  hangs  from  her  girdle,  and  her  left  foot  tramples  upon 
cabalistic  books.     Above,  two  angels  bend  down  to  her. 

XVI 


3!Husttation0 

Facing  page 

St.  Gregory  appearing  to  the  dying  Santa  Fina.     By  Domenico 

Ghirlandaio.     San  Gimignano      •    .  .  .  .  .   198 

Painted  by  Ghirlandaio  before  1485  in  the  chapel  of  Santa  Fina  in 
the  Collegiate  Church  of  S.  Gimignano  ;  the  chapel  itself  was 
consecrated  in  1488.  One  of  Santa  Fina's  attendants  raises  her  head 
so  that  she  may  see  the  vision,  which  warns  her  of  her  approaching 
death. 


King    Theodoric   of  the   Ostrogoths.      By   Peter  Vischer   the 

Elder.     Franciscan  Church,  Innsbruck      .         .         .         .212 

Of  twenty-eight  bronze  statues  round  the  cenotaph  of  the  Emperor 
Maximilian  in  the  Franciscan  ohurch  at  Innsbruck,  two  were  supplied 
by  the  foundry  of  Peter  Vischer,  and  it  is  universally  admitted  that  these 
two  were  the  statues  of  Theodoric  and  Arthur  of  Britain.  The  latter 
is  sometimes  ascribed  to  Peter's  son,  of  the  same  name,  but  there  is 
general  agreement  that  the  Theodoric  is  the  elder  artist's  own  work. 
The  payment  for  the  statues  was  made  in  1  5 1 3.  Theodoric  rests  in  a 
somewhat  affected  attitude  on  his  battle-axe,  supporting  his  shield  with 
his  left  hand  ;  a  curious  contrast  to  the  swaggering  self-confidence  of 
the  King  Arthur. 


The  coronation  of  the  Blessed  Virgin.     By  Lorenzo  Monaco. 

Uffizi,  Florence  (No.  1309) 220 

The  picture  was  completed  in  February  141 3  for  the  high  altar  of  the 
Church  of  the  Monastery  degli  Angeli.  Removed  thence  in  the  sixteenth 
century,  it  was  rediscovered  at  Cerreto  in  1830,  and  has  been  in  the 
UffizL  since  1866.     It  was  restored  by  Franchi. 

In  the  centre  is  the  coronation  of  the  Virgin  by  her  Son,  among  a 
crowd  of  angels  ;  below  kneel  two  angels,  censing,  and  a  third  (mostly 
destroyed)  accompanies  the  choir  on  an  organ.  The  wings  contain 
eax:h  ten  saints.  On  the  left,  counting  from  the  left,  are  in  the  first 
row  Benedict,  Petar,  John  Baptist  ;  in  the  second  row,  Stephen,  Paul, 
James,  Matthew.  On  the  right,  counting  from  the  right,  in  the  first 
row,  Romuald,  Andrew,  John  the  Evangelist  ;  in  the  second  row, 
Laurence,  Bartholomew,  Augustine,  Giovanni  Gualberto.  Above  the 
middle,  in  the  pinnacle,  is  a  half-figure  of  Christ  blessing  between  two 
cherubim  ;  over  the  wings  is  the  Annunciation.  (These  are  not 
included  in  the  illustration.)  Of  the  si*  panels  of  the  predella,  the 
two  in  the  middle  represent  the  Nativity  and  the  Adoration  of  the 
Magi.  The  other  four,  counting  from  the  right,  show  (1)  Benedict 
reviving  one  of  the  brethren,  killed  by  a  falling  wall  during  the  building 
of  the  Abbey  of  Monte  Cassino  ;  (2)  Benedict  forced  to  remain  with  his 
sister  Scholastica,  whose  prayer  has  induced  a  storm  which  prevents 
him  from  leaving  her  ;  and  Benedict  sending  Maurus  to  rescue  Placidus 
from  drowning  ;  (3)  the  death  of  Benedict  ;  (4)  Benedict  curing  a 
monk  of  his  inability  to  continue  in  prayer;  and  Benedict  in  his  cave 
in  the  wilderness,  with  Romanus  letting  down  food  to  him  by  a 
string. 

O.  Siren,  Don  Lorenzo  Monaco  (1905),  pp.  77  fF. 

xvii 


^lustrations 

Facing  page 
The  Mass  of  St.  Gregory.      By  Andrea  Sacchi   (1600-1650). 

Vatican  Gallery,, Rome  .......  240 

The  Pope,  standing  before  the  altar  (on  which  is  his  tiara),  pierces  with 
a  knife  the  fragment  of  linen  cloth  from  the  shroud  of  St.  John  the 
Evangelist,  which  exudes  blood.  Two  deacons  assist,  one  of  them 
opening  a  cup  to  catoh  the  blood  as  it  falls.  The  ambassador  of  the 
Empress  Constance  and  two  soldiers  of  his  retinue  kneel  in  astonish- 
ment.    A  dove  hovers  round  the  Pope's  head. 

[/»  the  title  of  the  Plate  facing  p.  16,  "  St.  Benedict"  should  be 
printed"  St.  Bernard."] 


XV1U 


yustui  of  Ghent 


I  <  >  I   I  H1US 
[Barberini  Palace,  Rome) 


Ati<'>- 


3JntroUucttott 

C{)C  four  books  of  Dialogues  of  Saint  Gregory  the  Great, 
"concerning  the  life  and  miracles  of  the  Italian  Fathers 
and  the  eternity  of  souls,"  were  written  in  593,  three 
years  after  his  elevation  to  the  papacy,  at  the  request  of 
certain  monks  of  his  household. 

"My  brethren  who  dwell  familiarly  with  me,"  writes 
Gregory  to  Maximianus,  Bishop  of  Syracuse,  "  would 
have  me  by  all  means  write  something  in  brief  fashion 
concerning  the  miracles  of  the  Fathers,  which  we  have 
heard  wrought  in  Italy.  For  this  purpose  I  earnestly 
need  the  help  of  your  charity,  that  you  should  briefly 
inform  me  of  all  those  which  come  back  to  your  memory, 
or  which  you  have  happened  yourself  to  know.  For 
I  remember  that  you  related  certain  things,  which  I 
have  forgotten,  concerning  the  lord  abbot  Nonnosus, 
who  lived  near  the  lord  Anastasius  de  Pentumis.  1  be- 
seech you,  therefore,  to  put  down  this,  and  whatever 
others  there  are,  in  your  letters,  and  forward  them  to 
me  with  speed,  unless  you  yourself  are  coming  to  me 
shortly." x 

There  is  no  other  book  that  gives  us  so  vivid  a  pic- 
ture of  religious  life  in  Italy  during  the  sixth  century : 
the  century  that  witnessed  the  brief  epoch  of  Gothic 

1  Gregcrii  I.  Registrant,  Epitt.  iii.  5  (ed.  Ewald  and  Hartmann, 
I.  p.  206).  Cf.  Dialog,  i.  7,  8,  iii.  36.  The  title  "  lord  "  {domnus)  is 
given  to  an  abbot  in  accordance  with  the  Rule  of  St.  Benedict  (cap.  63): 
"  Abbas  autem,  quia  vices  Christi  agere  creditur,  Domnus  et  Abbas 


vocetur." 


xix 


3IntroDuct!on 

domination,  the  restoration  of  the  imperial  Byzantine 
power,  and  finally  the  invasion  of  the  Lombards,  that 
"barbarous  and  cruel  nation,"  writes  Gregory,  which, 
"drawn  as  a  sword  out  of  a  sheath,"  wrought  such 
unutterable  havoc  and  devastation  in  the  peninsula  that 
many,  with  Bishop  Redemptus,  held  verily  that "  the 
end  of  all  flesh  was  come."  *  It  is  the  century  that 
closed  the  period  of  classical  civilisation,  and  ushered 
in  that  dreariest  epoch  in  the  history  of  mankind  known 
as  the  Dark  Ages. 

Inevitably,  men  turned  from  the  spectacle  of  a  world 
"  fraught  with  so  many  miseries  and  divers  afflictions,"2 
to  prepare  in  the  solitude  of  the  cloister  for  the  end 
which  they  deemed  fast  approaching,  if  it  were  not 
already  come.  They  naturally  sought  eagerly  to  grasp 
such  phenomena  as  seemed  to  them  miraculous,  as 
visible  signs  that  God  had  not  utterly  abandoned  His 
creation,  and  to  find  proofs  that  the  soul,  at  least,  was 
immortal,  and  might  look  forward  to  a  better  life  here- 
after by  forgiveness  of  injuries,  and  by  offering  herself 
up  before  death  as  a  sacrifice  to  Him  that  had  made 
her.3  It  is  this  that  gives  pathos  even  to  the  apparent 
triviality  of  some  of  the  miracles  that  Gregory  records, 
and  deeper  significance  to  the  note  on  which  the  work 
ends. 

Three  great  figures  illumine  the  general  darkness  of 
the  sixth  century  in  Italy  :  Boethius,  the  last  philosopher 
of  the  classical  world  ;  Benedict,  the  organiser  or 
western  monasticism  ;  and  Gregory  himself,  the  chief 
agent  in  the  building  up  of  the  mediaeval  ideal  of  the 
papacy. 

The  Roman  senator,  Anicius  Manlius  Severinus 
Boethius,  whom  Gibbon  calls  "  the  last  of  the  Romans 
whom  Cato  or  Tully  could  have  acknowledged  for  their 
countryman,"  was  tortured  to  death  by  the  orders  or 

1  Dialog,  iii.  38.  2  Ibid.  iii.  38.  3   Ibid.  iv.  60. 

XX 


Jntrotiuctton 

King  Theodoric  the  Goth,  in  524  or  525.  Dante  was 
to  meet  him  among  the  glowing  spirits  of  great  teachers 
in  the  fourth  sphere  of  Paradise  :  "  In  the  vision  of  all 
good  there  rejoiceth  the  holy  soul,  who  unmasks  the 
world's  deceit  to  whoso  giveth  good  heed  to  it.  The 
body  whence  it  was  hunted  lieth  below  in  Cieldauro, 
and  it  from  martyrdom  and  from  exile  came  unto  this 
peace."1  Though  a  martyr  for  the  liberty  of  Rome 
rather  than  for  the  faith  of  Christ,  Botfthius  was  (as  we 
now  know  for  certain)  an  advocate  of  Christianity,  albeit 
from  the  philosophical  rather  than  the  religious  stand- 
point ;  but  his  famous  work,  De  Consolatione  Philosophiae, 
composed  in  his  prison  at  Pavia  under  the  shadow  of 
death,  attempts  to  "assert  eternal  Providence  and 
justify  the  ways  of  God  to  men  "  from  the  standpoint 
of  human  reason  alone.  It  is  somewhat  curious  that 
his  name,  which  rings  through  the  literature  of  the 
Middle  Ages  from  Alfred  to  Dante,  occurs  nowhere  in 
the  Dialogues,  although  his  fellow-victims  under  the 
tyranny  of  the  last  years  of  Theodoric's  rule,  John  the 
Pope  and  Symmachus  the  Senator,  are  mentioned  more 
than  once,  and  the  monkish  legend  of  their  persecutor's 
terrible  end  is  related  in  full.2 

Some  four  or  five  years  after  the  death  of  Bo(3thius, 
Benedict  of  Nursia  founded  the  great  monastery  of 
Monte  Cassino,  about  529.  Here  in  543,  fourteen 
years  later,  he  died.  Even  in  the  west,  Benedict  was 
naturally  not  without  precursors  ;  such  as  Martin  ot 
Tours,  Cassianus  of  Marseilles,  Cesarius  of  Aries, 
Equitius,  who,  "  by  reason  of  his  great  holiness  of  life, 
was  the  father  and  governor  of  many  abbeys  in  the 
province  of  Valeria,"  3  and  some  others  ;  but  it  was 
more  especially  the   work  of  the  great  Italian    monk, 

1  Par.  x.  124-129.     Cieldauro  is  the  church  of  San  Pietro  in  Ciel 
d'Oro  (the  Golden  Roof)  at  Pavia,  where  Boiithius  was  buried. 

2  Dialog,  iii.  2,  iv.  30.  3  Ibid.  i.  4. 

xxi 

w   1 


Introduction 

whose  face  Dante  so  ardently  desired  to  behold  unveiled 
in  Paradise,  to  elevate  this  western  monastic  life  into  a 
system,  with  fixed  laws  and  an  ideal,  like  the  object  of 
hope  according  to  the  scholastic  definition,  "  arduous 
but  not  impossible  of  attainment."  The  famous  rule, 
the  Regula  Sancti  Benedicti,  which  he  wrote  and  promul- 
gated from  Monte  Cassino  (based,  in  part,  upon  the 
eastern  rule  of  St.  Basil),  for  all  its  apparent  simplicity, 
is  one  of  the  few  great  constructive  works  of  the  sixth 
century.  Although,  from  the  standpoint  of  the  Divina 
Commedia,  Dante  makes  the  Saint  declare  that  his  regola 
remained  on  earth  solely  to  waste  the  parchment  on 
which  it  was  written,  per  danno  delle  carle,  it  became  the 
norm  according  to  which  generations  of  men  and  women 
throughout  the  western  world  devoted  themselves  to 
the  highest  spiritual  life,  and  became  "  kindled  by  that 
heat  which  gives  birth  to  flowers  and  holy  fruits."1 

The  second  book  of  the  Dialogues,  De  vita  et  miraculis 
venerabilis  Benedicti,  is  the  earliest  and  most  authoritative 
account  of  St.  Benedict  that  we  possess.  Indeed,  it,  to- 
gether with  his  Rule,  is  our  only  source  for  the  story  ot 
his  life  and  the  understanding  of  his  character.  As  has 
been  well  said,  it  is  "the  biography  of  the  greatest  Monk, 
vritten  by  the  greatest  Pope  (himself  also  a  Monk.)"2 

Gregory  was  born  probably  a  year  or  two  before  the 
death  of  St.  Benedict.  The  son  of  the  Roman  senator, 
Gordianus,  and  a  scion  of  the  noble  house  of  the 
Anicii,  he  inherited  vast  possessions  in  the  Roman 
Campagna  and  in  the  territory  of  Tivoli,  stretching 
almost  to  the  gates  of  Praeneste  (Palestrina),  and  a 
palace  on  the  Caelian  Hill.  His  childhood  was  passed 
amidst  the  disastrous  events  of  the  struggle  between 
Justinian's  generals  and  the  Goths,  when  Rome  was 
taken  and  retaken  again  and  again  by  the  Goths  and  the 

1  Par.  xxii.  46-48,  73-75. 

2  Hodgkin,  Italy  and  her  Invaders,  vol.  iv.,  p.  411. 

xxii 


3[ntroDuction 

barbarian  armies  of  the  Empire.  In  his  early  manhood, 
after  the  death  of  Justinian  and  the  recall  of  Narses  to 
Constantinople,  came  the  even  more  disastrous  invasion 
and  partial  conquest  of  Italy  by  the  Lombards.  "  Late 
and  long,"  he  writes,  "  I  put  off  the  grace  of  con- 
version, and,  after  1  had  been  inspired  with  celestial 
desire,  I  thought  it  better  to  be  clothed  in  the  secular 
habit."  *  In  573,  when  still  a  young  man,  he  was 
prefect  of  Rome.  A  few  years  later,  he  became  a  monk, 
turned  his  palace  into  a  monastery,  made  over  his  lands 
to  the  monks,  and  disposed  of  his  property  to  religious 
and  public  uses.  After  serving  as  apocrisiarius,  or  papal 
legate,  to  the  imperial  court  of  Byzantium,  for  Pope 
Pelagius  II.,  he  was,  on  the  latter's  death  during  the 
terrible  pestilence  that  devastated  Rome  at  the  begin- 
ning of  590,  elected  Pope,  and,  in  spite  of  his  resistance, 
was  compelled  to  accept  the  choice  of  the  Romans, 
which  (in  accordance  with  the  usage  of  the  times)  was 
confirmed  by  the  Emperor  Mauritius. 

This  is  not  the  place  to  tell  again  the  story  of 
Gregory's  pontificate.  Physically  a  complete  invalid, 
suffering  from  almost  incessant  pain,  he  held  the  see 
for  fourteen  years  (dying  on  March  12,  604),  with  an 
indefatigable  vigour  and  an  incessant  activity,  in  times 
of  wellnigh  unqualified  difficulty  and  gloom.  Con- 
vinced in  his  own  mind  that  the  end  of  the  world  was 
at  hand  (he  had  announced  it  to  the  people  in  his  first 
public  homily  as  Pope  in  St.  Peter's,  and  the  conviction 
abode  with  him  until  his  death),2  he  nevertheless  did  not 
neglect  even  the  care  of  temporal  things,  when  these 
were  forced  upon  him  by  the  duties  of  his  state  and  the 
pressure  of  the  times.  His  conception  of  the  temporal 
power  of  the  papacy,  and  the  relations  of  Church  and 
State,  was  poles  asunder  from   that  of  the  Popes  of 

1  Moralia,  Epistok  missoria  (to  Leander  of  Seville),  cap.  i. 

2  Homilia  I.  in  Evangelia  (Migne,  P.L.,  Ixxvi.  coll.  1077-1081). 

xxiii 


Sntrotwction 

Dante's  century,  and  essentially  the  same  as  that  of  the 
poet  himself.  Of  the  vast  territorial  possessions  of 
the  Church,  the  administration  of  which  he  thoroughly 
reformed,  he  regarded  the  Pope,  "  not  as  possessor, 
but  as  dispenser  of  the  fruits  for  the  poor  of  Christ,  on 
behalf  of  the  Church."1  Compelled  to  act  as  a  secular 
ruler  in  defence  of  Rome  against  the  Lombards,  he 
regarded  himself,  in  the  temporal  field,  as  the  subject 
of  the  State.  Like  Dante,  he  conceives  of  the  Church 
and  State  as  mutually  co-operating,  but  ruling  over 
different  spheres,  and  the  Emperor  is  God's  vicar  and 
representative  on  earth  in  all  things  temporal :  "  What 
"he  does,  if  canonical,  we  follow  ;  if  it  is  not  canonical, 
we  bear  it,  as  far  as  we  can  without  sin."2  In  the 
ecclesiastical  sphere,  on  the  other  hand,  he  is  uncom- 
promising in  asserting  the  supremacy  of  Rome  over  all 
other  Christian  churches.  His  work  of  converting  the 
English,  and  preparing  the  conversion  of  the  Lombards, 
need  not  be  told  here.  Gregory  was  the  creator  of  the 
spiritual  ideal  of  the  mediaeval  papacy,  even  as  Benedict 
had  created  that  of  western  monasticism. 

The  Dialogues  were  translated  into  Greek  by  one  of 
St.  Gregory's  successors,  Pope  Zaccharias  I.  (741-752)  : 
"  that  so  the  Grecians  might  be  instructed  in  the  rules 
of  good  living,"  as  Platina's  seventeenth-century  trans- 
lator puts  it.  With  a  similar  desire  for  the  edification 
of  the  English,  an  Anglo-Saxon  version  was  made, 
about  890,  by  Bishop  Werferth  of  Worcester,  at  the 
instigation  of  Alfred  the  Great.3  The  Dialogues  were 
among  the  most  popular  reading  of  the  Middle  Ages, 
and  early  translations  exist  in  almost  every  European 
language.     In  the  fourth  book,  we  find  the  first  rudi- 

1  De  Monarchic,  iii.  10. 

2  Epist.  xi.  29  (Ewald  and  Hartmann,  II.  pp.  299-300). 

3  Bischofs  Waerferth  von  Worcester  Ubersetzung  der  Dialoge  Gregors 
dcs  Grossen.     Ed.  Hans  Hecht.     Leipzig,  1900. 

xxiv 


31ntroDuction 

ments  of  the  mediaeval  conception  of  the  three  states 
of  souls  in  the  other  world.  The  story  of  the  vision 
seen  by  a  certain  soldier 1  is  practically  the  first  in 
the  west  of  those  more  or  less  fictitious  visions  of 
Hell,  Purgatory,  and  Heaven,  which  (inspired  so  many 
imitations  throughout  the  Middle  Ages,  from  Vener- 
able Bede's  legends  of  Fursaeus  and  Drythelm  to  the 
visions  of  Tundal,  Alberic  of  Monte  Cassino,  and  the 
monk  Edmund  of  Eynsham — the  long  series  which 
(speaking  superficially)  may  be  said  to  culminate  in  the 
Divina  Commedia.  Dante  himself  knew  the  Dialogues 
well.  His  account  of  St.  Benedict  in  the  sphere  of 
Saturn,  and  his  own  vision  of  the  nothingness  of  the 
world  in  his  ascent  to  the  Stellar  Heaven,  were  directly 
suggested  by  St.  Gregory's  words.2  From  Gregory, 
too,  came  his  doctrine  of  the  "  Mansions  of  Beatitude," 
albeit  its  significance  had  for  him  acquired  a  deeper  and 
intenser  note  by  the  passage  through  the  mystical  mind 
of  Bonaventura.  Echoes  of  the  Dialogues  may  likewise 
be  discerned  in  the  De  Monarchia  and  in  the  Letter  to 
Can  Qrande.  The  influence  of  Gregory's  earlier  work, 
the  Moralia,  or  Exposition  of  the  Book  of  Job,  is  also  very 
marked  in  many  passages  of  the  Divina  Commedia. 

The  translation  of  the  Dialogues,  here  offered  to  the 
reader,  was  published  at  Paris  in  1 608 — seventeen  years, 
that  is,  before  the  first  English  version  of  Boccaccio's 
Decameron.  It  was  dedicated  "  to  the  high  and  excellent 
princess  Anne :  by  God's  singular  providence,  Queen 
of  great  Britain,  France,  and  Ireland  "  ;  that  is,  to 
Anne  of  Denmark,  the  consort  of  King  James  I.  The 
translator  claims  to  be  the  first  thus  to  present  a  book 
to  her  :  u  For  whereas  divers,  of  divers  professions, 
have  directed  their  works  to  our  most  dread  Sovereign, 

1  Dialog,  iv.  36.     See  Notes. 

2  Cf.  Par.  xxii.  37-45,  Dialog,  ii.  8  ;    Par.  xxii.   133-153,  Dialog. 

»•  35- 

xxv 


3InttoDuction 

and  one  also  to  our  young  Prince  (your  dear  son,  and 
the  orient  object  of  our  country's  joy),  so  none  at  all, 
for  aught  that  I  can  learn,  much  less  that  professeth 
the  religion  of  St.  Gregory,  hath  hitherto  presented  any 
book  to  your  Princely  person."  His  "  epistle  dedica- 
tory" is  dated  "  the  first  of  January,  1608,"  and  signed 
"  Your  Majesty's  most  devoted  servant,  and  daily  orator, 
P.W."  This  "  P.  W."  has  not  been  identified  ;  the 
Jesuit  father,  Henry  James  Coleridge,  who  edited 
his  translation,  in  a  somewhat  modernised  form,  in 
1874,  suggested  that  he  was  "an  English  Catholic, 
desirous  to  interest  the  Queen  in  favour  of  the  ancient 
religion."  The  Dialogues  are  further  introduced  by  a 
lengthy  preface  "  to  the  courteous  and  virtuous  Chris- 
tian reader,"  and  followed  (with  an  independent  title- 
page)  by  "  A  short  Relation  of  divers  Miracles  wrought 
at  the  memories  or  shrines  of  certain  martyrs,  especially 
St.  Stephen,  the  Protomartyr  of  Christ's  Church,"  the 
contents  of  which  are  mainly  taken  from  the  City  of 
God  of  St.  Augustine  and  the  Life  of  St.  Bernard.  The 
present  re-issue  of  the  translation,  save  for  the  spelling, 
follows  verbally  the  edition  of  1608.  The  Latin  text 
cited  is  that  given  by  Migne  (P.L.  lxxvii.). 

The  Dialogues  of  St.  Gregory  have  exercised  a  certain 
influence  upon  Christian  iconography.  Spinello  Aretino 
at  San  Miniato,  Luca  Signorelli  and  Giovanni  Antonio 
Bazzi  at  Mont'  Oliveto  Maggiore,  Fra  Filippo  Lippi, 
Neroccio  of  Siena,  Benedetto  Bonfigli,  and  many 
other  Italian  masters  found  subjects  ready  to  their  hand 
in  its  pages  ;  while  the  pilgrim  to  Subiaco  and  the 
other  sanctuaries  of  the  Roman  Campagna,  hallowed  by 
the  footsteps  of  these  "  fathers  of  the  olden  time,"  will 
still  find  the  words  of  the  great  pontiff  of  the  sixth 
century  the  most  vivid  of  guides. 

EDMUND  G.  GARDNER 
August  15,  1 911 

xxvi 


Ct)e  ^Dialogues  of  £>amt  dBregorp, 
surname!)  tt)e  d5reat 

Cfje  first  ^oofc 


%ty  ^Dialogues  of  £>atnt  category 
tye  (Bxtat,  |0ope  of  laome 

Cfje  first  Moot 

IBtiUQ  upon  a  certain  day  too  much  over-charged  with 
the  troubles  of  worldly  business,  in  which  oftentimes  men 
are  enforced  to  do  more  than  of  duty  they  are  bound,  1 
retired  myself  into  a  solitary  place,  very  fit  for  a  sad  and 
melancholy  disposition  ;  where  each  discontentment  and 
dislike  concerning  such  secular  affairs  might  plainly  show 
themselves,  and  all  things  that  usually  bring  grief, 
mustered  together,  might  freely  be  presented  before  mine 
eyes.  In  which  place  after  that  I  had  sat  a  long  while,  in 
much  silence  and  great  sorrow  of  soul,  at  length  Peter, 
my  dear  son  and  deacon,  came  unto  me  ;  a  man  whom, 
from  his  younger  years,  1  had  always  loved  most  entirely, 
and  used  him  for  my  companion  in  the  study  of  sacred 
scripture  :  who,  seeing  me  drowned  in  such  a  dump  of 
sorrow,  spake  unto  me  in  this  manner  :  "  What  is  the 
matter  ?  or  what  bad  news  have  you  heard  ?  for  certain 
I  am,  that  some  extraordinary  sadness  doth  now  afflict 
your  mind."  To  whom  I  returned  this  answer  : 
"  O  Peter,  the  grief  which  continually  1  endure  is  unto 
me  both  old  and  new  :  old  through  common  use,  and 
new  by  daily  increasing.  For  mine  unhappy  soul, 
wounded  with  worldly  business,  doth  now  call  to  mind 
in  what  state  it  was,  when  I  lived  in  mine  Abbey,  and 

3 


Cbe  Dialogues  of  §>t  <£reprp 

how  then  it  was  superior  to  all  earthly  matters,  far  above 
all  transitory  and  corruptible  pelf,  how  it  did  usually 
think  upon  nothing  but  heavenly  things  ;  and  though  it  | 
was  enclosed  in  mortal  body,  yet  did  it  by  contemplation 
pass  far  beyond  earthly  bounds,  and  penetrate  to  the  very 
height  of  heaven  ;  and  as  for  death,  the  memory  whereof 
is  almost  to  all  men  grievous,  that  it  did  love  and  desire, 
as  the  end  of  all  misery,  the  reward  of  her  labours,  and 
the  very  entrance  to  an  everlasting  and  blessed  life.    But 
now,  by  reason  of  my  pastoral  charge,  my  poor  soul  is 
enforced  to  endure  the  burden  of  secular  men's  business, 
and  after  so  excellent  and  sweet  a  kind  of  rest,  defiled  it 
is  with  the  dust  of  worldly  conversation  :  and  when  it 
doth,  at  the  request  of  others,  attend  to  outward  affairs, 
no  question  but  it  returneth  back,  far  less  fit  to  think 
upon  those  that    be    inward,  spiritual,  and  heavenly. 
Wherefore,  at  this  present,  do  I  meditate  what  I  suffer, 
and  consider  what  my  soul  hath  lost  :  and  the  memory 
of  my  former  loss  doth  make  that  more  grievous  which 
I   do  now   endure.     For   do   you  not    behold  at  this 
present,  how  I  am  tossed  with  the  waves  of  this  wicked 
world,  and  see  the  ship  of  my  soul  beaten  with  the  storms 
of  a  terrible  tempest  ?  and  therefore,  when  I  remember 
my  former  state  of  life,  I  cannot  but  sigh  to  look  back, 
and  cast  mine  eyes  upon  the  forsaken  shore. 

"  And  that  which  doth  yet  grieve  me  more  is  because 
I  see  myself  so  carried  away  amain  with  the  boisterous 
blasts  of  this  troublesome  world,  that  I  cannot  now  scarce 
behold  the  port  from  whence  I  did  first  hoist  sail  ;  for 
such  be  the  downfalls  of  our  soul,  that  first  it  loseth  that 
goodness  and  virtue  which  before  it  possessed  ;  yet  so 
that  it  doth  still  remember  what  it  hath  lost ;  but  after- 
wards, carried  away  more  and  more,  and  straying  further 
from  the  path  of  virtue,  it  cometh  at  length  to  that  pass, 
that  it  doth  not  so  much  as  keep  in  mind  what  before  it 
did  daily  practise  :  and  so  in  conclusion,  it  falleth  out  as 

4 


<£regorp  anD  }g>eter 

I  said  before,  that  sailing  farther  on,  we  go  at  length  so 
far,  that  we  do  not  so  much  as  once  behold  the  sweet 
harbour  of  quiet  and  peace  from  whence  we  first  set  forth. 
Sometime  also  my  sorrow  is  increased,  by  remembering 
the  lives  of  certain  notable  men,  who  with  their  whole 
soul  did  utterly  forsake  and  abandon  this  wicked  world  : 
whose  high  perfection  when  I  behold,  I  cannot  also  but 
see  mine  own  infirmities  and  imperfection  :  very  many 
of  whom  did,  in  a  contemplative  and  retired  kind  of  life, 
much  please  God  :  and  lest  by  dealing  with  transitory 
business  they  might  have  decayed  in  virtue,  God's  good- 
ness vouchsafed  to  free  them  from  the  troubles  and  affairs 
of  this  wretched  world.  But  that  which  I  have  now  said 
will  be  far  more  plain,  and  the  better  perceived,  if  the 
residue  of  my  speech  be  dialogue  wise  distinguished,  by 
setting  down  each  of  our  names,  you  asking  what  you 
shall  think  convenient,  and  I  by  answer,  giving  satis- 
faction to  such  questions  as  you  shall  demand  at  my 
hands." 

IPCtCt.  I  do  not  remember  any  in  Italy,  that  have  been 
very  famous  for  virtue  ;  and  therefore  ignorant  I  am 
who  they  be,  that,  comparing  your  life  to  theirs,  you 
should  be  so  much  inflamed  to  imitate  their  steps  ;  for 
although  I  make  no  doubt  but  that  there  have  been  many 
good  men,  yet  do  I  verily  think  that  none  of  them 
wrought  any  miracles,  or  at  least  they  have  been  hitherto 
so  buried  in  silence  that,  whether  any  such  thing  hath 
been  done  or  no,  not  any  one  man  can  tell. 
(JptCgOtp.  If  I  should,  Peter,  but  report  only  those 
things  which  myself  alone  have  understood  by  the  rela- 
tion of  virtuous  and  credible  persons,  or  else  learned  by 
myself,  concerning  the  life  and  miracles  of  perfect  and 
holy  men,  I  should  sooner  in  mine  opinion  lack  day  to 
talk  in,  than  matter  to  speak  of. 

IPCtCt.  Desirous  I  am  that  you  would  vouchsafe  to 
make  me  partaker  ot  some  of  them  :  and  not  to  think 

5 


£be  Dialogues  of  ©t  <$reg;orp 

much,  if,  upon  so  good  an  occasion,  you  interrupt  your 
other  study  of  interpreting  the  scripture,  because  no  less 
edification  doth  grow  by  the  relation  of  miracles.  For  as 
by  the  exposition  of  that,  we  learn  how  virtue  is  to  be 
found  and  kept  :  so  by  recounting  the  miracles  of  holy 
men,  we  know  how  that  which  is  found  out  and  possessed, 
is  declared  and  made  manifest  to  the  world.    And  some 
there  are  that  be  sooner  moved  to  the  love  of  God  by 
virtuous  examples  than  by  godly  sermons  :  and  often- 
times, by  the  lives  of  holy  fathers,  the  heart  doth  reap  a 
double  commodity  ;  for  if,  by  comparing  of  his  own  life 
with  theirs,  he  findeth  himself  inflamed  with  the  love  of 
heaven,  although  before  he  had  haply  a  good  opinion 
of  himself,  yet  seeing  now  how  far  others  do  excel  him, 
he  becometh  also  more  humble,  and  is  brought  to  have 
a  more  lowly  conceit  of  his  own  actions  and  virtue. 
(jDtCgOtp*  Such  things  as  venerable  and  holy  men  have 
told  me,  I  will  now,  without  any  further  delay,  make 
you  partaker  of,  and  that  following  the  example  of  sacred 
scripture  :  for  sure  I  am  that  St.  Luke  and  St.  Mark 
learned  that  gospel  which  they  wrote,  not  by  sight  but 
by  the  relation  of  others  :  yet  lest  any  in  reading  should 
have  occasion  to  doubt  whether  such  things  as  I  write  be 
true  or  no,  I  will  set  down  by  what  means  and  of  whom 
I  have  learned  them  :  yet  in  some  of  them  you  have  to 
know  that  I  remember  not  all  the  particulars,  but  only 
the  matter  :  in  other  some,  both  the  matter  and  also  the 
words.     And  besides,  if  I  should  have  been  so  curious  as 
to  have  kept  in  mind  each  man's  particular  words,  many, 
uttered  after  the  country  manner,  would  have  made  the 
style  of  my  discourse  nothing  handsome  nor  seemly. 
Tnac  story  which  I  mean  first  to  begin  with,  I  had  by 
the  report  of  passing  reverent  men  and  of  great  years. 

Cbapter  HDne:    of  It)onoratu0,   atuot  of  tfte 

^OnaStCtp   Of  JTimDa.     <&  In   times  past  one  Ven- 
antius,  a  noble  man,  had  a  living  in  the  country   of 

6 


Justus  of  Ghent 


S  l  .   GREG<  >RY    THE   GREAT 
|  Barberini  Palace^  R\  n 


I 


J))onoratu0  of  JTunDa 

Samnium ;  the  farmer  whereof  had  a  son  called 
Honoratus,  who  from  his  very  childhood  by  the  virtue 
of  abstinence  did  thirst  after  the  joys  of  heaven  :  and 
as  in  other  things  he  led  an  holy  life,  and  refrained  from 
all  idle  talk,  so  did  he  much,  as  I  said  before,  subdue 
his  body  by  means  of  abstinence.  His  parents,  upon  a 
certain  day,  had  invited  their  neighbours  to  a  banquet 
which  consisted  altogether  of  flesh,  whereof  because 
for  the  love  of  mortification  he  refused  to  eat,  his  father 
and  mother  began  to  laugh  at  him,  willing  him  to  fall 
to  that  which  they  had  :  "  For  can  we,"  quoth  they, 
"  get  you  any  fisn  nere  m  these  mountains  ? "  (for  in 
that  place  they  used  sometimes  to  hear  offish,  but  sel- 
dom to  see  any.)  But  whiles  they  were  thus  jesting,  and 
mocking  at  their  son,  suddenly  they  lacked  water  : 
whereupon  a  servant  with  a  wooden  bucket  (as  the 
manner  is  there)  went  to  the  well  to  fetch  some  :  into 
which,  as  he  was  a  drawing,  a  fish  entered  in,  which  upon 
his  return,  together  with  the  water,  he  poured  forth 
before  them  all.  And  the  fish  was  so  great,  that  it 
served  Honoratus  very  well  for  all  that  day.  At  this 
strange  chance  all  were  stroken  in  admiration,  and  his 
parents  abstained  now  from  further  scoffing  at  his  virtue, 
and  began  to  have  him  in  reverence  for  his  abstinence, 
whom  before  for  that  very  cause  they  did  mock  and 
scorn  :  and  by  this  means,  the  fish,  brought  miracu- 
lously from  the  well,  discharged  God's  servant  from 
that  shame,  which  he  had  endured  through  their  uncivil 
jesting.  Honoratus,  proceeding  forward  in  virtue,  at 
length  was  made  free  by  the  foresaid  Lord  Venantius  : 
and  afterward,  in  that  place  which  is  called  Funda,  he 
built  an  Abbey,  wherein  he  was  the  father  almost  of 
two  hundred  monks  :  and  he  lived  in  so  great  holiness 
that  he  gave  good  example  to  all  the  country  round 
about.  Upon  a  certain  day,  it  fell  so  out,  that  a  stone 
of  an   huge   greatness,   which  was  digged  out  of  the 

7 


Cbe  Dialogues  of  <&t  ©rcgorp 

mountain  that  hung  over  the  top  of  his  Abbey,  tumbled 
down  by  the  side  of  the  hill,  threatening  both  the  ruin 
of  the  house  and  the  death  of  all  the  monks  within  : 
which  danger  the  holy  man  seeing  ready  to  come  upon 
them,  called  often  upon  the  name  of  Christ,  and,  putting 
forth  his  right  hand,  made  against  it  the  sign  of  the 
cross,  and  by  that  means  did  he  stay  it,  and  pin  it  fast 
to  the  side  of  that  steep  hill :  which  thing  Lawrence,  a 
religious  man,  affirmed  to  be  most  true.  And  because 
it  found  not  there  any  place  upon  which  it  might  rest, 
it  hangeth  at  this  time  in  such  sort,  that  all  which  now 
look  upon  it  do  verily  think  that  it  would  continually 
fall. 

j^0t0t»  I  suppose  so  notable  a  man  as  he  was,  and  who 
afterward  became  master  to  so  many  scholars,  had  him- 
self some  excellent  teacher  of  whom  he  was  instructed. 
(2Dt0gOtp.  I  never  heard  that  he  was  scholar  to  any  : 
but  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  not  tied  to  any  law. 
The  usual  custom  of  virtuous  men  is,  that  none  should 
take  upon  him  to  rule,  who  first  hath  not  learned  to  obey  : 
nor  to  command  that  obedience  to  his  subjects,  which 
before  he  hath  not  given  to  his  own  superiors.  Yet 
some  there  be  which  are  so  inwardly  taught  by  the 
doctrine  of  God's  holy  spirit,  that  although  they  have 
no  man  to  instruct  them  outwardly,  yet  do  they  not 
want  the  direction  of  an  inward  teacher  :  which  liberty 
of  life  notwithstanding  is  not  to  be  taken  for  an  example 
by  such  as  be  weak  and  infirm,  lest,  whiles  each  one 
doth  in  like  manner  presume  to  be  full  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and  contemn  to  learn  of  any,  they  become  them- 
selves erroneous  masters.  But  that  soul  which  is  full  of 
God's  holy  spirit,  hath  for  proof  thereof  most  evident 
signs,  to  wit,  the  other  virtues,  and  especially  humility, 
both  which  if  they  do  perfectly  meet  in  one  soul, 
apparent  it  is  that  they  be  testimonies  of  the  presence 
of  heavenly  grace.     And  so  we  read  not  that  John  Baptist 

8 


Ltbertmus  of  jTtmDa 

had  any  master,  nor  yet  that  Christ,  who  by  his  corporal 
presence  taught  his  Apostles,  took  him  in  amongst  the 
number  of  his  other  disciples,  but  vouchsafed  to  instruct 
him  inwardly,  and  left  him,  as  it  were,  in  the  sight  of  the 
world  to  his  own  liberty.  So  Moses,  likewise,  was  taught 
in  the  wilderness,  and  learned  by  the  Angel  what  God 
gave  him  in  charge,  which  by  means  of  any  mortal  man 
he  knew  not  :  but  these  things,  as  before  hath  been  said, 
are  of  weaklings  to  be  reverenced,  and  not  by  any  means 
to  be  followed. 

IPCtCt.  I  like  very  well  of  your  opinion  :  yet  I  beseech 
you  to  tell  me,  whether  so  notable  a  father  as  he  was,  left 
not  some  scholar  behind  him,  that  did  imitate  his  master's 
steps. 

Chapter  Ctoo :  of  iUbertmus,  prior  of  tfre  same 

3t)t)Cp.  ^  (^rCffOrp,  The  reverent  man,  Libertinus, 
who,  in  the  time  of  Totilas,  king  of  the  Goths,  was 
Prior  of  the  same  Abbey  of  Funda,  was  brought  up 
and  taught  by  him  :  of  whom,  albeit  the  certain  re- 
port of  passing  many  hath  made  his  sundry  virtues 
known  to  the  world,  yet  the  foresaid  religious  man, 
Lawrence,  who  still  liveth  and  that  time  had  very 
familiar  acquaintance  with  him,  hath  often  told  me 
many  things,  whereof  some  few,  which  now  come  to 
my  mind,  I  will  here  set  down.  In  the  same  province 
of  Samnium,  as  Libertinus  was  in  his  journey  about 
business  of  the  Abbey,  it  so  fell  out  that  Darida,  captain 
of  the  Goths,  with  his  army,  met  him,  by  whose  soldiers 
the  man  of  God  was  thrown  from  his  horse  ;  which 
injury  he  taking  very  patiently,  offered  them  also  his 
whip,  saying  :  "Take  this,  that  you  may  make  him  the 
better  to  go  "  ;  and  having  said  so,  he  betook  himself 
to  his  prayers.  The  army  marched  on  very  fast,  and 
quickly  came  to  the  river  called  Vulturnus,  where  they' 
began  to  beat  their  horses  both  with  their  lances  and 
also  to  spur  them,  till  the  blood  came,  and  all  this  to 

9 


£F)e  Dialogue  of  %>t  ®reprp 

make  them  take  the  water  ;  but  yet  no  beating  nor 
spurring  could  enforce  them  forward  :  for  they  were  as 
much  afraid  to  enter  the  river  as  though  it  had  been 
some  deep  downfall.  At  length,  when  they  were  all 
wearied  with  beating,  one  amongst  the  rest  said,  that 
the  reason  why  they  were  thus  punished  was  for  taking 
away  the  horse  from  God's  servant  :  whereupon 
returning  straightways  back,  they  found  Libertinus 
prostrate  at  his  prayers  ;  and  calling  upon  him  to  rise 
and  take  his  horse,  he  bade  them  go  on  a  God's  name, 
saying  that  he  needed  him  not  ;  but  for  all  that  they 
alighted  and  set  him  perforce  upon  his  own  beast,  and 
so  in  all  haste  departed,  and  returning  back  to  the 
river  they  passed  over  so  quickly  as  though  in  the 
channel  there  had  been  no  water  at  all  ;  and  so  it  fell 
out  that  God's  servant  having  restitution  made  him  of 
his  one  horse,  that  all  the  soldiers  came  likewise  to 
enjoy  the  use  of  their  own. 

At  the  same  time  one  Buccellinus  entered  Campania 
with  an  army  of  French  men,  and  because  it  was  com- 
monly said  that  the  Abbey  in  which  the  holy  man  lived 
had  great  store  of  money,  the  French  men,  very  greedy 
of  so  good  a  booty,  came  thither,  and  with  raging  minds 
went  into  his  oratory  (where  he  lay  prostrate  at  his 
prayers)  seeking  and  crying  out  for  Libertinus  ;  and  a 
strange  thing  it  was,  for  though  they  came  in,  and 
stumbled  upon  him,  yet  could  they  not  see  him,  and 
so,  deceived  through  their  own  blindness,  away  they 
departed  as  empty  as  they  came. 

At  another  time  likewise  upon  business  of  the  monas- 
tery, at  the  commandment  of  the  Abbot  who  succeeded 
his  master  Honoratus,  he  took  his  journey  to  Ravenna. 
And  for  the  great  love  which  he  bare  to  venerable 
Honoratus,  always  did  he  bear  about  him  in  his  bosom 
one  of  his  stockings.  Being  in  his  way  it  fell  so  out 
that  a  certain  woman  was  carrying  the  corpse  of  her 

10 


Ltbertmus  of  jfunDa 

dead  son  ;  who  no  sooner  saw  the  servant  of  God,  but, 
for  the  love  of  her  child,  she  laid  hold  upon  his  bridle, 
protesting  with  a  solemn  oath  that  he  should  not 
depart,  before  he  had  raised  up  her  dead  son.  The 
holy  man,  not  acquainted  with  so  strange  a  miracle,  was 
much  afraid  to  hear  her  make  such  a  request,  and 
willing  to  have  got  away,  yet  seeing  no  means  how  to 
effect  his  desire,  greatly  did  he  doubt  what  was  best  to 
be  done.  Here  it  is  worth  the  noting  to  consider  what 
a  conflict  he  had  in  his  soul :  humility  and  the  mother's 
piety  striving  together  :  fear  to  presume  upon  so  un- 
usual a  miracle,  and  grief  not  to  help  the  desolate 
mother.  At  length,  to  the  greater  glory  of  God,  piety 
and  compassion  overcame  that  virtuous  soul,  which 
therefore  may  truly  be  called  invincible,  because  it  did 
yield  and  was  conquered  ;  for  a  virtuous  soul  it  had 
not  been,  if  piety  and  compassion  had  not  overcome  it  : 
wherefore,  lighting  from  his  horse,  he  fell  upon  his 
knees,  lift  up  his  hands  to  heaven,  drew  the  stocking 
out  of  his  bosom,  laid  it  upon  the  breast  of  the  dead 
corpse  ;  and  behold,  whiles  he  was  at  his  prayers,  the 
soul  of  the  child  returned  into  the  body,  which  he 
perceiving,  took  it  by  the  hand  and  delivered  it  alive 
to  his  sorrowful  mother,  and  so  went  on  the  rest  of  his 
journey. 

IPCtCt.  What  is  to  be  said  in  this  case  ?  For  was  it 
the  merit  of  Honoratus,  or  the  prayers  of  Libertinus, 
that  wrought  this  miracle  ? 

<£>tCffOt£.  In  the  working  of  so  notable  a  miracle,  to- 
gether with  the  faith  of  the  woman,  the  virtue  of  both 
did  concur ;  and  therefore,  in  mine  opinion,  Libertinus 
had  power  to  raise  up  that  dead  child,  because  he  had 
learned  to  trust  more  upon  the  virtue  of  his  master  than 
his  own  :  for  when  he  laid  his  stocking  upon  the  child's 
breast,  no  doubt  but  he  thought  that  his  soul  did  obtain 
that  for  which  he  did  then  pray.     For  we  read  the  like 

ii 


£bc  Dialogues  of  St  (fcregorp 

of  Heliseus,  who  carrying  his  master's  cloak,  and  coming 
to  the  river  of  Jordan,  stroke  the  waters  once,  and  yet 
divided  them  not  ;  but  when  straight  after  he  said, 
Where  is  now  the  God  of  Hellas  ?  and  then  stroke  the 
river  with  the  same  cloak,  he  made  a  way  open  for  him- 
self to  pass  through.1  Whereby  you  perceive,  Peter, 
how  much  humility  availeth  for  the  working  of  miracles, 
for  then  the  merit  of  the  master  had  force  to  do  that 
which  he  desired,  when  he  called  upon  his  name  ;  and 
when  with  humility  he  did  submit  himself  to  his  master, 
he  wrought  the  same  miracle  which  his  master  had  done 
before  him. 

IPCtCt.  I  am  well  pleased  with  your  answer  :  but  is 
there,  I  pray  you,  anything  else  of  him  yet  remaining, 
which  may  serve  for  our  edification  ? 
(JPtCjJOtp.  Surely  there  is,  if  there  be  yet  any  that  list 
to  imitate  so  notable  an  example  :  for  I  make  no  doubt, 
but  that  the  patience  of  so  worthy  a  man  did  far  excel 
all  his  signs  and  miracles,  as  you  shall  now  hear.  Upon 
a  certain  day,  the  Abbot,  who  succeeded  Honoratus,  fell 
so  pitifully  out  with  venerable  Libertinus,  that  he  stroke 
him  with  his  fists  :  and  because  he  could  find  never  a 
staff,  up  he  took  a  footstool,  and  with  that  did  so  strike 
his  head  and  his  face,  that  they  both  swelled  and  became 
black  and  blue.  Being  thus  unreasonably  beaten,  with- 
out giving  any  words,  he  went  quietly  to  bed.  The 
next  day,  he  was  to  go  forth  about  business  of  the 
Abbey,  and  therefore,  when  matins  were  ended,  he  came 
to  his  Abbot's  bedside,  and  humbly  demanded  of  him 
leave.  The  Abbot,  knowing  how  greatly  all  did  honour 
and  love  him,  supposed  that  he  would  for  the  former 
injury  have  forsaken  the  Abbey  :  and  therefore  he  asked 
him,  whither  he  meant  to  go  :  to  whom  he  answered  : 
"Father,"  quoth  he,  "there  is  a  certain  matter  con- 
cerning the  Abbey  to  be  handled,  where  I  must  needs 

1  4  Kings  2. 
12 


€i)e  a^onfc  tfrat  toas  <£arDener 

be,  for  yesterday  I  promised  to  come,  and  therefore  I 
am  determined  to  travel  thither."  Then  the  Abbot, 
considering  from  the  bottom  of  his  heart  his  own 
austerity  and  hard  dealing,  and  the  humility  and  meek- 
ness of  Libertinus,  suddenly  leapt  out  of  his  bed,  gat 
hold  of  his  feet,  confessed  that  he  had  sinned  and  done 
wickedly,  in  presuming  to  offer  unto  so  good  and 
worthy  a  man  so  cruel  and  contumelious  an  injury. 
Libertinus,  on  the  contrary,  prostrate  upon  the  earth, 
fell  down  at  his  feet,  attributing  all  that  he  had  suffered, 
not  to  any  cruelty  of  his,  but  to  his  own  sins  and 
demerits.  And  by  this  means,  the  Abbot  was  brought 
to  great  meekness  ;  and  the  humility  of  the  scholar 
became  a  teacher  to  the  master.  Going  afterward 
abroad  about  the  foresaid  business  of  the  Abbey,  many 
gentlemen  of  his  acquaintance,  that  had  him  in  great 
reverence,  much  marvelled,  and  diligently  enquired  by 
what  means  he  came  by  such  a  swollen  and  black  face  : 
to  whom  he  answered:  "Yesterday,"  quoth  he,  "at 
evening,  for  punishment  of  my  sins,  I  met  with  a  foot- 
stool, and  gat  this  blow  which  ye  see."  And  thus  the 
holy  man,  preserving  both  truth  in  his  soul  and  the 
honour  of  his  master,  did  neither  bewray  the  fault  of 
his  father,  nor  yet  incurred  the  sin  of  lying. 
l£)0tCt.  Had  not  so  venerable  a  man  as  this  Libertinus 
was,  of  whom  you  have  told  so  many  miracles  and 
strange  things,  in  so  great  a  convent,  some  that  did 
imitate  his  holy  life  and  virtues  ? 

Chapter  Cftree :  of  a  certain  monk,  t&at  toas 
garoener  to  tfje  same  atrteg.    <I  (£regorp.  Felix, 

called  also  Corvus,  one  whom  you  know  very  well, 
and  who  not  long  since  was  Prior  of  the  same  Abbey, 
told  me  divers  very  strange  things,  some  of  which  I 
will  pass  over  with  silence,  because  I  hasten  to  other, 
but  one  there  is  which  by  no  means  I  can  omit.  This 
it  was. 

13 


€&e  Dialogues  of  %t  ©regorp 

In  the  same  Abbey  there  lived  a  certain  monk,  very 
virtuous,  who  was  the  gardener.  A  thief  likewise  there 
was,  that  used  to  climb  over  the  hedge,  and  so  to  steal 
away  the  worts.  The  holy  man,  seeing  that  he  did  set 
many  which  afterward  he  could  not  find,  and  perceiving 
that  some  were  trodden  down,  and  other  stolen  away, 
walked  round  about  the  garden  to  find  the  place  where 
the  thief  came  in,  which  when  he  had  found,  by  chance 
also  as  he  was  there,  he  lighted  upon  a  snake,  which 
he  willed  to  follow  him,  and  bringing  him  to  the  place 
where  the  thief  entered,  gave  him  this  charge  l  "In 
the  name  of  Jesus,"  quoth  he,  "  I  command  thee  to  keep 
this  passage,  and  not  to  suffer  any  thief  to  come  in." 
Whereupon  the  snake  forthwith,  obeying  his  command- 
ment, laid  itself  across  in  the  way,  and  the  monk 
returned  to  his  cell.  Afterward  in  the  heat  of  the 
day,  when  all  the  monks  were  at  rest,  the  thief,  accord- 
ing to  his  custom,  came  thither,  and  as  he  was  climbing 
over  the  hedge  and  had  put  one  leg  on  the  other  side, 
suddenly  he  saw  the  snake,  which  stopped  the  way,  and 
for  fear  falling  backward,  he  left  his  foot  hanging  there 
by  the  shoe  upon  a  stake,  and  so  he  hung  with  his  head 
downward,  until  the  return  of  the  gardener ;  who, 
coming  at  his  usual  hour,  found  the  thief  hanging  there 
in  the  hedge,  whom  when  he  saw,  he  spake  thus  to  the 
snake  :  "  God  be  thanked,  thou  hast  done  what  I  bade 
thee,  and  therefore  now  go  thy  way "  :  upon  which 
licence,  the  snake  by  and  by  departed.  Then,  coming 
to  the  thief,  he  spake  thus  unto  him  :  "  What  meaneth 
this,  good  brother  ?  God  hath  delivered  you,  as  you 
see,  into  mine  hands  :  why  have  you  been  so  bold  as 
so  often  to  rob  away  the  labour  of  the  monks  ? '"  and 
speaking  thus,  he  loosed  his  foot,  without  doing  him 
any  harm,  willing  him  also  to  follow  him  ;  who  brought 
him  to  the  garden  gate,  and  gave  him  those  worts  which 
he  desired  to  have  stolen,  speaking  also  to  him  in  sweet 

14 


Zbbot  4Eqintm0 

manner  after  this  sort  :  "  Go  your  way,  and  steal  no 
more  ;  but  when  you  have  need,  come  hither  to  me, 
and  what  sinfully  you  would  take,  that  will  I  willingly 
bestow  upon  you  for  God's  sake." 

J^)0t0t-  1  have  hitherto,  as  I  now  perceive,  lived  in  an 
error  :  for  never  did  I  think  that  there  had  been  any 
holy  men  in  Italy,  which  had  wrought  miracles. 

Chapter  JTout :  of  OBquitius,  3bt)ot  in  t&e  Iprotrince 

Of  ITaletia,  9  (SregOtp,  By  the  relation  of  vener- 
able Fortunatus,  Abbot  of  the  Monastery  which  is 
called  Cicero's  Bath,  and  also  of  other  reverent  men, 
I  have  come  to  the  knowledge  of  that  which  now  I 
mean  to  tell  you.  There  was  a  passing  holy  man  called 
Equitius,  dwelling  in  the  province  of  Valeria,  who,  for 
his  virtuous  life,  was  in  great  admiration  with  all  men, 
with  whom  Fortunatus  was  familiarly  acquainted.  This 
Equitius,  by  reason  of  his  great  holiness  of  life,  was  the 
father  and  governor  of  many  Abbeys  in  that  province. 
In  his  younger  years,  many  and  sore  carnal  temptations 
he  endured,  which  made  him  more  fervent  and 
diligent  in  prayers,  and  to  persevere  continually  in  that 
holy  exercise,  which  he  did,  craving  most  instantly  of 
God  to  afford  him  some  remedy.  Living  in  that  manner, 
it  fell  so  out,  that  in  vision,  upon  a  certain  night,  he  saw 
an  Angel  come  unto  him,  who  made  him  an  eunuch, 
and  so  delivered  him  from  all  those  carnal  motions  in 
such  sort  that  never  after  he  felt  any  more,  as  though 
he  had  not  been  any  man  at  all.  Trusting  now  upon 
this  great  grace  received  by  the  special  goodness  of  God, 
as  before  he  was  a  governor  of  men,  so  afterward  he 
took  charge  likewise  of  women,  and  yet,  for  all  that, 
did  he  continually  admonish  his  scholars  not  easily  to 
credit  themselves  herein,  nor  to  follow  his  example, 
nor  yet  to  trust  upon  that  gift,  which  they  had  not 
in  themselves,  lest  it  turned  to  their  own  ruin  and 
destruction. 

l5 


C6e  Dialogic  of  %t  (Sregorp 

At  such  time  as  divers  witches  were  here  in  this  city 
of  Rome  apprehended,  one  Basilius,  that  was  a  principal 
man  in  that  wicked  art,  put  upon  him  the  habit  of  a 
monk,  and  so  fled  away  to  Valeria  ;  and  coming  to  the 
reverent  Bishop  of  the  city  of  Amirtin,  he  desired  his 
help,  that  he  would,  for  the  good  of  his  soul,  commend 
him  to  Abbot  Equitius.  The  Bishop  went  with  him  to 
the  Abbey,  where  he  made  suit  to  the  servant  of  God, 
that  he  would  vouchsafe  to  receive  into  his  convent  that 
monk  which  he  brought,  whom  so  soon  as  the  holy  man 
beheld,  he  said  to  the  Bishop  :  "  This  man,  good 
brother,"  quoth  he,  "  whom  you  commend  unto  me, 
seemeth  in  mine  eyes  to  be  a  devil,  and  not  any  monk"  ; 
whereunto  the  Bishop  replied  and  said,  that  he  sought 
excuses  not  to  grant  his  petition.  "  Not  so,"  quoth 
the  servant  of  God,  "  but  I  do  denounce  him  to  be 
such  a  one  as  I  see  him,  and  because  you  shall  not 
think  that  I  will  be  disobedient,  what  you  command  I 
will  perform."  Whereupon  he  was  received  into  the 
Abbey.  Not  many  days  after,  God's  servant  travelled 
far  off  to  preach  unto  the  people  in  the  country  ;  after 
whose  departure  it  fell  out  that,  in  the  monastery  of 
virgins  which  was  under  his  charge,  one  of  them,  which 
in  respect  of  her  corruptible  carcase  seemed  beautiful, 
fell  into  an  ague,  to  be  afflicted  with  sore  fits,  and  not 
so  much  to  speak  as  pitifully  to  cry  out  in  this  manner  : 
"  I  shall  die  forthwith,  unless  Basilius  come  unto  me, 
and  by  his  skill  in  physic  restore  me  to  my  health." 
But,  in  the  absence  of  their  father,  none  of  the  monks 
durst  presume  to  enter  into  the  monastery  of  virgins, 
much  less  was  he  permitted,  that  was  yet  but  a  novice, 
and  whose  life  and  conversation  was  not  known  to  the 
rest  of  the  brethren.  A  messenger,  therefore,  with  all 
speed  was  dispatched  to  the  servant  of  God,  Equitius, 
to  let  him  understand  how  such  a  Nun  was  fallen  into 
a  terrible  burning  ague,  and  how  she  did  earnestly 

16 


Pintoricchio 


THE     MADONNA     IN     GLORY    WITH     ST.     GREGORY    AND    ST.     BENEDICT 

(San   Qimignano) 


desire  to  be  visited  of  Basilius  :  which  news  so  soon  as 
the  holy  man  did  hear,  in  an  anger  he  smiled,  and  said  : 
"  Did  I  not  say  beforehand  that  this  companion  was  a 
devil  and  not  a  monk  ?  Go  your  ways,  and  turn  him 
out  of  the  Abbey  ;  and  as  for  the  virgin  that  is  so  sick 
of  a  fever,  take  no  further  care,  for  hereafter  it  shall  not 
trouble  her  any  more,  nor  she  make  any  further  inquisi- 
tion after  Basilius."  The  monk  that  was  the  messenger 
returning  back,  understood  that  the  Nun  was  at  that 
very  hour  restored  to  her  health,  in  which  the  servant  of 
God,  Equitius,  far  distant,  affirmed  that  she  should  :  no 
question  but  by  special  miracle,  like  to  the  example  of 
our  Saviour,  who,  being  desired  to  visit  the  son  of  a 
lord,  did  by  his  only  word  restore  him  to  his  health,  so 
that  the  father  at  his  return  knew  his  son  to  be  restored 
to  life  at  that  very  hour  in  which  he  heard  so  much  from 
the  mouth  of  truth  itself.1  The  monks,  putting  their 
father's  commandment  in  execution,  turned  Basilius 
out  of  the  Abbey,  who  being  so  expulsed  did  often  say, 
that  he  had  by  his  incantations  hanged  Equitius  his  cell 
in  the  air,  and  yet  that  he  could  not  hurt  any  of  his 
monks.  This  wretch  not  long  after,  in  this  city  of 
Rome,  through  the  zeal  of  good  people,  for  his  wicked- 
ness was  burnt,  and  so  ended  his  life. 

Upon  a  certain  day,  one  of  the  Nuns  of  the  same 
monastery,  going  into  the  garden,  saw  a  lettice  that 
liked  her,  and  forgetting  to  bless  it  before  with  the  sign 
of  the  cross,  greedily  did  she  eat  it  :  whereupon  she 
was  suddenly  possessed  with  the  devil,  fell  down  to 
the  ground,  and  was  pitifully  tormented.  Word  in  all 
haste  was  carried  to  Equitius,  desiring  him  quickly  to  visit 
the  afflicted  woman,  and  to  help  her  with  his  prayers  :  who 
so  soon  as  he  came  into  the  garden,  the  devil  that  was 
entered  began  by  her  tongue,  as  it  were,  to  excuse  him- 
self, saying:  "What  have  I  done  ?    What  have  I  done? 

1  John  4,  53. 

17  B 


C&e  Dialogic  of  %t  ®regorp 

I  was  sitting  there  upon  the  lettice,  and  she  came  and 
did  eat  me."  But  the  man  of  God  in  great  zeal  com- 
manded him  to  depart,  and  not  to  tarry  any  longer  in 
the  servant  of  almighty  God,  who  straightways  went  out, 
not  presuming  any  more  to  touch  her. 

A  certain  noble  man  likewise  called  Felix,  of  the  pro- 
vince of  Nursia,  father  to  Castorius,  who  now  dwelleth 
here  with  us  in  Rome,  understanding  that  Equitius  had 
not  received  holy  orders,  and  yet  that  he  did  visit  many 
places  and  preach  unto  divers,  upon  a  day  very  boldly 
went  and  asked  him,  how  he  durst  presume  to  preach, 
not  having  received  holy  orders,  nor  yet  licence  of  the 
Bishop  of  Rome,  under  whom  he  did  live  ;  upon  which 
demand,  the  holy  man,  being  thus  compelled,  gave  him 
to  understand  by  what  means  he  had  obtained  licence  to 
preach  :  speaking  thus  unto  him  :  "  What  you  say  unto 
me,  myself  have  seriously  thought  upon  ;  but,  on  a 
certain  night,  a  young  man  in  vision  stode  by  me,  and 
touched  my  tongue  with  such  an  instrument  as  they 
use  in  letting  of  blood,  saying  :  '  Behold,  I  have  put 
my  word  into  thy  mouth,  go  thy  way  and  preach.' 
And  since  that  day,  though  I  would,  I  can  not  but  talk 
of  God." 

J£)0tCt.  Desirous  I  am  to  know,  what  manner  of  life 
he  led,  who  is  said  to  have  received  such  gifts  at  God's 
hand. 

(2>tC$0tp,  The  work,  Peter,  proceedeth  of  the  gift, 
and  not  the  gift  from  the  work,  otherwise  grace  were 
not  grace  :  for  God's  gifts  do  go  before  all  works  of 
ours,  although  the  gifts  by  the  works  which  follow  do 
increase  ;  but  to  the  end  that  you  may  understand  what 
lite  he  led,  which  was  known  to  the  reverent  man 
Albinus,  Bishop  of  Reatino  ;  and  many  there  be  yet 
alive,  which  might  very  well  remember  the  same.  But 
what  do  you  seek  for  further  works,  when  as  his  purity 
of  life  was  answerable  to  his  diligence  in  preaching  ?  for 

18 


abbot  <ZEqtritm0 

such  a  zeal  to  save  souls  had  inflamed  his  heart,  that 
albeit  he  had  the  charge  of  many  monasteries,  yet  did 
he  diligently  travel  up  and  down,  and  visit  churches, 
towns,  villages,  and  particular  men's  houses,  and  all  this 
to  stir  up  the  hearts  of  his  auditors  to  the  love  of  heavenly 
joys.     The  apparel  which  he  ware  was  so  base  and  con- 
temptible, that  such  as  knew  him  not  would  have  thought 
scorn  so  much  as  to  have  saluted  him,  though  himself 
had  first  offered  that  courtesy.     And  whithersoever  he 
went,  his  manner  was  to  ride,  but  that  upon  the  most 
forlorn  beast  which  could  be  found  ;  his  bridle  was  but 
an  halter,  his  saddle  no  better  than  plain  sheep's  skins. 
His  books  of  divinity  were  put  into  leather  bags,  and 
those  he  did  carry  himself,  some  hanging  on  the  right 
side  of  his  horse,  and  some  upon  the  left  :  and  to  what 
place  soever  he  came,  he  did  so  open  the  fountains  of 
sacred  scripture,  that  he  watered  their  souls  with  the 
heavenly  dew  of  his  sermons.    Whose  grace  in  preaching 
was  so  great,  that  the  fame  thereof  came  even  to  Rome 
itself:  and  as  the  tongues  of  flatterers  do  with  their 
glorious  words  kill  the  souls  of  such  as  give  them  the 
hearing,  at  the  same  time  some  of  the  Roman  clergy  did 
in  flattering  sort  complain  unto  the  Bishop  of  this  Apos- 
tolic see,  saying  :  "  What  manner  of  rustical  companion 
is  this,  that  hath  taken  upon  him  authority  to  preach, 
and,  being  without  learning,  presumeth  to  usurp  unto 
himself  the  office  of  our  Apostolical  Lord  ?  wherefore,  if 
it  please  you,  let  him  be  sent  for  before  your  presence, 
that  he  may  taste  of  the  severity  of  ecclesiastical  disci- 
pline."    And  as  it  falleth  out,  that  he  which  hath  much 
business  is  overcome  sometime  by  flattery,  if  that  pleasing 
venom  be  not  speedily  dispatched  from  the  soul,  at  the 
persuasion  of  his  clergy  the  Pope  gave  his  consent  that  he 
should  be  sent  for  to  Rome,  to  understand  what  talent 
and  gift  he  had  received  from  God.  And  so  one  Julianus, 
who  afterward  was  made  Bishop  of  Sabinum,  was  sent, 

19 


£f)e  Dialogic  of  §>t.  <$regotp 

having  yet  commandment  given  him  to  bring  him  up 
with  great  honour,  to  the  end  that  the  servant  of  God 
might  not  thereby  sustain  any  injury  or  detriment  in  his 
fame  :  who,  to  gratify  the  Pope's  clergy,  went  in  post  to 
the  Abbey,  and  finding  there  in  his  absence  certain  anti- 
quaries writing,  demanded  of  them  for  the  Abbot ;  who 
told  him  that  he  was  in  the  valley  at  the  bottom  of  the 
Abbey,  mowing  of  hay.  Julianus  had  a  man  very  proud 
and  stubborn,  and  such  a  one  that  he  could  scarce  rule 
him.  This  man  he  sent  in  all  haste  for  the  Abbot ;  who 
in  an  angry  mood  went  his  way,  and  coming  quickly  into 
the  meadow  where  beholding  all  that  were  there  cutting 
of  grass,  he  demanded  which  of  them  was  Equitius  ;  and 
when  they  shewed  him  where  he  was,  being  yet  far  off", 
he  fell  into  a  great  fear,  and  became  therewith  so  faint, 
that  he  could  scarce  go  upon  his  legs  :  trembling  in 
that  manner  he  came  to  the  man  of  God,  and  humbly 
bowing  down  his  head,  he  embraced  his  knees  and  kissed 
them,  telling  him  that  his  master  was  desirous  to  speak 
with  him.  After  God's  servant  had  saluted  him  again, 
he  willed  him  to  take  up  some  of  the  grass,  and  to  carry 
it  home  for  their  horse,  "  and  I  will,"  quoth  he,  "  straight- 
ways  come,  when  I  have  dispatched  this  little  work 
which  remaineth." 

In  this  meantime,  Julianus  much  marvelled  what  the 
matter  was,  why  his  man  tarried  so  long,  and  seeing  him 
at  length  to  come  laden  with  grass  upon  his  neck,  in  great 
rage  he  cried  out  to  him,  saying  :  "  Sirrah,  what  meaneth 
this  ?  I  sent  you  to  fetch  me  the  Abbot,  and  not  to 
bring  meat  for  mine  horse."  "  Sir,"  quoth  his  man,  "  he 
will  come  to  you  by  and  by":  and  forthwith  the  man 
of  God  came  in  base  apparel  and  a  pair  of  shoes  beaten 
full  of  nails,  carrying  his  scythe  upon  his  neck  ;  and 
being  yet  far  off,  his  man  told  him  that  he  was  the  Abbot. 
So  soon  as  Julianus  beheld  him  attired  in  that  base  sort, 
he  contemned  him,  and  devised  with  himself  how  to 

20 


abbot  Cquitius 

speak  unto  him  in  the  most  cross  and  crooked  manner 
he  could.  But  when  God's  servant  drew  nigh,  such  an 
intolerable  fear  came  upon  Julianus,  that  he  fell  a  trem- 
bling, and  his  tongue  so  faltered,  that  he  could  scarce 
deliver  the  message  for  which  he  came  :  whereupon  he 
fell  down  at  his  feet,  and  desired  that  he  would  vouch- 
safe to  pray  for  him  ;  and  withal  gave  him  to  understand, 
that  his  Apostolical  father  the  Pope  was  desirous  to  see 
him.  Upon  the  receipt  of  which  news  the  venerable 
man,  Equitius,  gave  almighty  God  most  hearty  thanks, 
saying  that  heavenly  grace  had  visited  him  by  means  of 
the  highest  Bishop  ;  and  straightways  he  called  for  some 
of  his  monks,  commanding  horse  to  be  made  ready  in 
all  haste  :  but  Julianus,  weary  of  his  journey,  told  him 
that  he  could  not  travel  so  soon,  but  of  necessity  must 
rest  himself  that  night.  "  I  am  very  sorry  for  that," 
quoth  the  holy  man,  "  for  if  we  go  not  to-day,  to-morrow 
we  shall  not "  :  and  thus,  by  reason  of  the  other's  weari- 
ness, he  was  enforced  that  night  to  remain  in  the  Abbey. 
The  next  morning,  about  the  dawning  of  the  day,  came 
a  post  with  a  tired  horse,  bringing  letters  to  Julianus, 
commanding  him  not  to  presume  to  molest  or  to  draw 
the  servant  of  God  out  of  his  monastery.  And  when 
he  required  the  reason  of  this  counter-command,  the 
messenger  told  him  that,  the  next  night  after  his  depar- 
ture, the  Pope  was  terribly  frighted  in  a  vision,  for  pre- 
suming to  send  for  the  man  of  God  :  whereupon  Julianus, 
rising  suddenly  out  of  his  bed,  and  commending  himself 
to  the  venerable  man's  prayers,  spake  thus  unto  him  : 
"  Our  father  desireth  you  not  to  .trouble  yourself  any 
further,  but  to  stay  in  your  monastery"  :  which  when 
God's  servant  heard,  very  sorry  he  was,  and  said  :  "  Did 
not  I  tell  you,  that  if  we  did  not  set  forward  on  our 
journey  by  and  by,  that  afterward  we  should  not  ? " 
Then  upon  charity  he  entertained  his  messenger  a  little 
while  with  him  in  his  Cloister,  and  though  by  all  means 

21 


C6e  Dialogues  of  $t  (Srcgorp 

he  refused,  yet  he  enforced  upon  him  a  reward  for  the 
pains  he  had  taken.  See  therefore,  Peter,  how  God  doth 
preserve  and  keep  them,  who  in  this  life  do  contemn 
themselves,  and  how  they  are  secretly  honoured  of  the 
citizens  in  heaven,  who  are  not  ashamed  outwardly  to 
be  little  esteemed  in  this  world  ;  and  on  the  contrary, 
in  the  sight  of  God  they  be  of  no  account,  who  in  the 
eyes  of  their  own  friends  and  neighbours  do  swell  through 
desire  of  vain  glory.  And  therefore  our  Saviour  Christ, 
who  was  truth  itself,  said  to  certain  :  You  are  they  that 
justify  yourselves  before  men,  but  God  knoweth  your  hearts,  for 
that  which  is  high  to  men  is  abominable  in  the  sight  of  God. 1 
Ip0t0t*  I  marvel  very  much  how  so  great  a  Bishop  could 
be  deceived  in  so  worthy  a  man. 

<&tZQQt1>*  Why  do  you  marvel,  Peter  ?  for  the  reason 
why  we  are  deceived  is,  because  we  be  men.  What  ?  have 
you  forgotten  how  David,  who  usually  had  the  spirit  of 
prophecy,  pronounced  sentence  against  innocent  Mephi- 
bosheth,  the  son  of  Jonathan,  when  he  gave  credit  to  the 
lying  words  of  his  servant  Siba  ?a  which  thing  notwith- 
standing because  it  was  done  by  David,  we  both  believe 
to  be  just  in  the  secret  judgment  of  God,  and  yet  by 
human  reason  how  it  was  just  we  cannot  perceive.  What 
marvel  then  is  it,  if  we,  that  be  not  prophets,  be  sometimes 
by  lying  tongues  abused,  and  otherwise  transported  than 
charity  and  justice  would  :  for  it  is  much  to  be  considered, 
that  every  Bishop  hath  his  mind  troubled  with  a  world 
of  business,  and  it  cannot  be,  when  the  mind  is  distracted 
about  many  things,  but  that  it  is  the  less  able  sufficiently 
to  examine  those  that  be  particular,  and  so  much  the 
sooner  is  he  deceived  in  some  special  case,  by  how  much 
he  is  busied  with  the  multitude  of  many. 
U?0tet\  It  is  most  true  that  you  say. 
(2DtC0Ot£.  But  I  must  not  pass  over  with  silence  that 
which  the  reverent  man  Valentinus,  some  time  mine 

1  Luke  16,  15.  2   2  Kings,  16  and  19. 

22 


Constanttus  tbe  Clerk 

Abbot,  told  me  concerning  Equitius.  For  he  said,  that 
his  body  being  buried  in  the  oratory  of  St.  Lawrence  the 
martyr,  a  certain  country  man  set  upon  his  grave  a  chest 
full  of  wheat,  little  considering  or  respecting  how  worthy 
and  notable  a  man  lay  there  buried.  Whereupon 
suddenly  a  miraculous  whirlwind  came,  and  overthrew 
-  that  chest  and  cast  it  far  off,  all  other  things  remaining 
still  in  their  former  places  ;  by  which  all  did  plainly  per- 
ceive of  what  worth  and  merit  that  man  was,  whose  body 
lay  there  buried. 

To  this  must  I  also  add  another  thing,  which  I  heard 
of  venerable  Fortunatus,  a  man  that  doth  much  please 
me  for  his  years,  life,  and  simplicity.  At  such  time  as 
the  Lombards  came  into  the  province  of  Valeria,  the 
monks  of  the  monastery  of  the  reverent  man  Equitius 
fled  from  thence  into  the  oratory,  to  the  holy  man's 
sepulchre,  into  which  place  the  cruel  men  entering,  they 
began  by  violence  to  pull  the  monks  forth,  either  to 
torment  them,  or  else  with  their  swords  to  kill  them. 
Amongst  whom  one  sighed,  and  for  very  bitter  grief 
cried  out  :  "  Alas,  alas,  holy  Equitius,  is  it  thy  pleasure, 
and  art  thou  content,  that  we  should  be  thus  miserably 
haled  and  violently  drawn  forth,  and  dost  not  thou 
vouchsafe  to  defend  us  ?  "  Which  words  were  no  sooner 
spoken,  but  a  wicked  spirit  possessed  those  savage 
soldiers  in  such  sort  that,  falling  down  upon  the  ground, 
they  were  there  so  long  tormented,  until  all  the  rest  of 
the  Lombards  which  were  without  understood  of  the 
matter,  to  the  end  that  none  should  be  so  hardy  as  to 
presume  to  violate  that  holy  place.  And  thus,  as  the 
holy  man  at  that  time  defended  his  own  monks,  so  did 
he  likewise  afterward  succour  and  preserve  many  more 
that  fled  unto  the  same  place. 

Ctmpter  JFtoe :  of  Constantius,  Clerk  of  t&e 

CfjUtCf)  Of  §t   §>tep&en,     Q  That  which  I  intend 
now  to  tell  you,  I  learned  by  the  relation  of  one  of  my 

23 


C6e  Dialogue*  of  %t  (Sttegorp 

fellow  Bishops,  who  lived  in  a  monk's  weed  many  years 
in  the  city  of  Ancona,  and  led  there  a  good  and  religious 
life.  Many  also  of  mine  own  friends,  who  be  now  of 
good  years  and  live  in  the  same  parts,  affirm  it  to  be 
most  true.  Near  to  the  foresaid  city  of  Ancona  there 
is  a  church  of  the  blessed  martyr  St.  Stephen,  in  which 
one  called  Constantius,  a  man  of  venerable  life,  did  serve 
there  for  clerk,  who  for  his  virtue  and  holiness  was 
famous  far  and  near,  being  one  that  utterly  despised  all 
worldly  things,  and  with  the  whole  power  of  his  soul 
thirsted  after  the  joys  of  heaven.  Upon  a  certain  day, 
it  fell  so  out  that  there  wanted  oil  in  the  church,  by 
reason  whereof  the  foresaid  servant  of  God  had  not 
wherewith  to  light  the  lamps  :  whereupon  he  filled  them 
all  with  water,  and,  as  the  manner  is,  put  a  piece  of 
paper  in  the  midst,  and  then  set  them  on  fire,  and  the 
water  did  so  burn  in  the  lamps  as  though  it  had  been 
very  oil  ;  by  which  you  may  gather,  Peter,  of  what  merit 
this  man  was,  who,  enforced  by  necessity,  did  change  the 
nature  of  the  element. 

Ij?0t0t»  Very  strange  it  is  that  you  say,  but  desirous  I 
am  to  know  what  humility  he  had  inwardly  in  his  soul, 
who  outwardly  was  so  wonderful  in  the  eyes  of  the 
world. 

(25tC0Otp.  Among  miracles  very  fitly  do  you  enquire 
the  inward  state  of  the  mind  ;  for  it  is  almost  incredible 
how  miracles,  wrought  in  the  sight  of  men,  do  with  their 
temptation  inwardly  assault  the  soul.  But  after  you  have 
heard  only  one  thing,  which  this  venerable  Constantius 
did,  you  will  quickly  perceive  what  an  humble  man  he 


was. 


JpEtCt.  Having  now  told  me  one  of  his  miracles,  it 
remaineth  that  you  do  edify  me  also  with  the  humility  of 
his  soul. 

<2DtC0Ot£.  Because  the  report  of  his  holy  life  was  very 
much  spread  abroad,  many  from  divers  countries  travelled 

24 


Constants  tfje  Clerk 

to  Ancona,  being  very  desirous  to  see  him  ;  and  amongst 
others  a  certain  country  fellow  was  come  far  off,  for  that 
very  purpose  :  at  which  time  it  so  chanced  that  the  holy 
man  was  standing  upon  a  pair  of  wooden  stairs,  busying 
himself  there  in  mending  of  lamps.  A  very  little  person 
he  was  of  stature,  with  a  thin  face,  and  to  the  outward 
view  contemptible.  This  fellow  that  came  to  see  him 
enquired  earnestly  which  was  the  man  for  whose  sake  he 
had  travelled  so  long  a  journey.  Those  that  knew  him 
forthwith  told  him,  pointing  to  Constantius.  But  as 
foolish  souls  do  measure  the  merits  of  men  by  the  quality 
of  their  bodies,  so  he,  beholding  him  so  little  and  con- 
temptible, by  no  means  could  be  persuaded  that  they 
told  him  truth  ;  for  in  the  country  fellow's  mind  there 
fell  out,  as  it  were,  a  great  contention  betwixt  that  which 
he  had  heard,  and  that  which  he  saw  ;  and  he  verily  per- 
suaded himself  that  he  could  not  be  so  little  in  his  eyes, 
who  was  so  great  in  his  former  conceit  ;  and  therefore, 
when  very  many  did  constantly  affirm  that  he  was  the 
man,  the  simple  soul  despised  him,  and  in  scoffing  manner 
said  :  "  I  verily  believed  that  he  had  been  a  goodly  great 
man,  but  this  fellow  hath  not  any  thing  at  all  in  him 
that  is  like  a  man."  Which  words  of  his  the  servant  of 
God,  Constantius,  hearing,  forthwith  left  his  lamps  which 
he  was  in  hand  with,  and  in  great  haste  came  merrily 
down  the  stairs,  embraced  the  country  clown,  and  of 
exceeding  love  held  him  fast  in  his  arms,  kissed  him, 
gave  him  great  thanks  for  having  that  opinion,  and  spake 
thus  unto  him  :  "Thou  only,"  quoth  he,  "hast  thine 
eyes  open,  and  dost  truly  behold  what  1  am."  By  which 
fact  we  may  easily  gather  what  an  humble  man  he  was, 
that  loved  the  country  fellow  the  more  for  contemning 
him  ;  for  injurious  words  and  contumelious  usage  try 
what  a  man  is  inwardly  in  his  soul  :  for  as  proud  men 
are  glad  of  honour,  so  those  that  be  humble  for  the  most 
part  rejoice  in  contempt  and  disgrace,  and  when  they 

25 


C6e  Dialogues  of  §>t.  ©tegorp 

behold  themselves  to  be  of  no  account  in  the  opinion  of 
others,  glad  they  are,  because  they  see  that  to  be  con- 
firmed by  the  judgment  of  others  which  inwardly  in 
their  own  souls  they  had  of  themselves. 
J^CtCt*  This  man,  as  I  perceive,  was  outwardly  great 
in  miracles,  but  yet  greater  by  his  inward  humility  of 
soul. 

Chapter  %>ix :  of  ^arcellinus,  16i0f)op  of  ancona, 

^  (JPtCgOtp.  Marcellinus,  also  a  man  of  holy  life,  was 
Bishop  of  the  same  city  of  Ancona  ;  who  was  so  sore 
troubled  with  the  gout,  that  being  not  able  to  go,  his 
servants  were  enforced  to  carry  him  in  their  hands. 
Upon  a  day,  by  negligence,  the  city  was  set  on  fire,  and 
though  many  laboured  by  throwing  on  of  water  to  quench 
it,  yet  did  it  so  increase  and  go  forward  that  the  whole 
city  was  in  great  danger  ;  for  it  had  laid  hold  of  all 
the  houses  that  were  next  it,  and  consumed  already  a 
great  part  of  the  town,  none  being  able  to  help  or  with- 
stand it.  In  so  pitiful  a  necessity  and  great  danger,  the 
Bishop,  carried  by  his  servants,  came  thither,  and  com- 
manded himself  to  be  set  down  right  against  those  furious 
flames,  and  in  that  very  place  whither  the  force  of  the 
fire  did  seem  most  to  bend  :  which  being  done,  the  fire 
marvellous  strangely  turned  back  into  itself,  and  as  it 
were  cried  out,  that  it  could  not  pass  the  Bishop  ;  and 
by  this  means  was  it  stopped  from  going  forward,  [and] 
went  out  of  itself,  not  being  able  to  touch  any  other 
buildings.  By  which,  Peter,  you  see  what  an  argument 
of  great  holiness  it  was,  for  a  sick  man  to  sit  still,  and 
by  his  prayers  to  quench  those  raging  flames. 
H?0t0t»  1  do  both  see  it  and  much  wonder  at  so  notable 
a  miracle. 

Chapter  ^etien :  of  Jftonnosus,  Iptior  of  tbe  abfcep 

in  Amount  §>0taCte,  «I  (StegOrp*  Now  I  intend  to  let 
you  understand  somewhat  of  a  place  not  far  distant, 
which  I  heard  of  the  reverent  Bishop  Maximianus,  and 

26 


Jf3onno0us  of  amount  ^oracte 

of  the  old  monk  Laurio,  one  whom  you  know  :  both 
which  are  yet  living  ;  and  as  for  Laurio,  he  was  brought 
up  under  that  holy  man  Anastasius,  in  the  Abbey  which 
is  hard  by  the  city  of  Nepi  ;  and  Anastasius,  both  by 
reason  of  the  nearness  of  the  place,  equal  love  of  virtue, 
and  like  profession  of  life,  was  daily  in  the  company  of 
holy  Nonnosus,  Prior  of  the  Abbey  which  is  in  mount 
Soracte.  This  Nonnosus  had  for  his  Abbot  a  very  sharp 
man,  whose  rough  conditions  notwithstanding  he  did 
always  bear  with  wonderful  patience,  and  did  in  such 
sweet  sort  govern  the  monks,  that  oftentimes  by  his 
humility  he  appeased  the  Abbot's  anger.  The  Abbey, 
standing  in  the  top  of  an  hill,  had  never  an  even  and 
plain  place  fit  for  a  garden  ;  one  only  little  plot  of  ground 
there  was,  in  the  side  of  the  mountain,  but  that  was  taken 
up  of  a  great  stone  which  did  naturally  grow  there,  so 
that  by  no  means  it  could  serve  for  a  garden.  Yet 
venerable  Nonnosus,  upon  a  day,  began  to  think  with 
himself  that  at  least  that  piece  of  ground  would  serve 
very  well  to  set  worts,  if  by  any  means  that  huge  stone 
could  be  taken  away  ;  but  then  he  likewise  thought  that 
five  hundred  yoke  of  oxen  would  not  be  able  to  stir  it ; 
whereupon,  despairing  of  all  human  help,  he  betook  him- 
self to  God's  goodness,  and  in  that  very  place  gave 
himself  to  prayer  in  the  quiet  time  of  the  night,  and 
behold,  on  the  morning,  when  the  monks  came  thither, 
they  found  that  huge  stone  removed  far  off,  and  a  very 
fit  plot  of  ground  left  to  make  them  a  garden. 

At  another  time,  the  same  holy  man  being  washing 
of  lamps  made  of  glass,  one  of  them  by  chance  fell  out 
of  his  hands,  and  brake  into  many  pieces  ;  who,  fearing 
the  great  fury  of  the  Abbot,  did  forthwith  gather  up  all 
the  fragments,  laid  them  before  the  altar,  and  there  with 
great  sighing  fell  to  his  prayers  ;  and  afterward,  lifting 
up  his  head,  he  found  the  lamp  entire  and  whole.  And 
thus,  in  these  two  miracles,  did  he  imitate  two  notable 

27 


Cfje  Dialogues  of  9t  (Stegorp 

fathers,  to  wit,  Gregory  and  Donatus  ;  the  first  of  which 
removed  a  mountain,  and  the  other  made  a  broken 
chalice  safe  and  sound. 

U?0t0t»  We  have,  as  I  perceive  now,  miracles  after  the 
imitation  of  old  saints. 

<&tZQ0Tp*  How  say  you  ?  are  you  content  also  in  the 
conversation  of  Nonnosus,  to  hear  how  he  did  imitate 
the  fact  of  the  prophet  Heliseus  ? 
1^0t0t»  Content  I  am,  and  most  earnestly  desire  it. 
<3tZQQX]i)t  Upon  a  certain  day,  when  the  old  oil  was 
spent,  and  the  time  to  gather  olives  was  now  at  hand, 
the  Abbot,  because  their  own  trees  took  not,  thought 
it  best  to  send  the  monks  abroad  to  help  strangers  in 
the  gathering  of  theirs,  that  for  the  recompense  of  their 
labour  they  might  bring  home  some  oil  for  the  necessities 
of  their  own  house.     This  determination  the  man  of 
God,  Nonnosus,  in  great  humility  did  hinder,  lest  the 
monks,  going  abroad  from  their  cloister  to  get  oil,  might 
lose  somewhat  in  the  devotion  of  their  souls.    And  there- 
fore, because  he  saw  that  their  own  trees  had  yet  a  few 
olives,  he  willed  those  to  be  gathered  and  put  into  the 
press,  and  that  oil  which  came  forth  to  be  brought  unto 
him,  though  it  were  never  so  little  ;  which  being  done, 
he  set  the  little  vessel  before  the  altar,  and  after  their 
departure  he  offered  his  prayers  to  God,  which  being 
ended,  he  called  for  the  monks,  commanding  them  to 
take  away  the  oil  which  they  brought,  and  to  pour  a 
little  thereof  into  all  the  vessels  which  they  had,  that 
each  of  them  might  have  some  of  the  benediction  of 
that  oil :  which  being  done,  he  caused  the  vessels,  empty 
as  they  were,  to  be  close  stopped,  and  the  next  day  they 
found  them  all  full. 

H^CtCt.  We  find  daily  the  words  of  our  Saviour  to  be 
verified,  who  saith  :  My  Father  even  to  this  time  doth  work, 
and  I  do  work} 

1  John  5,  17. 
28 


3na0ta0iu0  of  ^uppentonia 

Cbapter  OBigbt :  of  anastasius,  abbot  of  tbe 
Monaster?  calleo  ^uppentonta,  q  (fcregorp.  At 

the  same  time  the  reverent  man  Anastasius,  of  whom  I 
spake  before,  was  notary  to  the  church  of  Rome,  whereof 
by  God's  providence  I  have  now  the  charge  ;  who  desi- 
rous only  to  serve  God,  gave  over  his  office,  and  made 
choice  of  a  monastical  life  :  and  in  that  Abbey  which  is 
called  Suppentonia,  he  lived  many  years  virtuously,  and 
governed  that  place  with  great  care  and  diligence.  Over 
the  Abbey  there  hangeth  an  huge  rock,  and  beneath  it 
there  is  a  steep  downfall.  Upon  a  certain  night,  when 
God  had  determined  to  reward  the  labours  of  venerable 
Anastasius,  a  voice  was  heard  from  the  top  of  that  rock, 
which  very  leisurely  did  cry  out  :  "  Come  away,  Anas- 
tasius" ;  who  being  so  called,  straight  after,  seven  other 
monks  were  severally  called  by  their  names.  And  then 
the  voice  stayed  for  a  little  time,  and  then  called  again 
the  eighth  monk.  Which  strange  voice  the  Convent 
hearing  very  plainly,  made  no  doubt  but  that  the  death  of 
them  that  were  so  called  was  not  far  off ;  wherefore  not 
many  days  after,  before  the  rest,  Anastasius  himself,  and 
then  the  others  in  order,  departed  this  mortal  life,  as  they 
were  before  called  from  the  top  of  the  rock.  And  that 
monk  who  was  called  after  some  pausing  did  a  little  while 
survive  the  rest,  and  then  he  also  ended  his  life  :  whereby 
it  was  plain  that  the  staying  of  the  voice  did  signify  that 
he  should  live  a  little  longer  than  the  other.  But  a 
strange  thing  happened,  for  when  holy  Anastasius  lay 
upon  his  death-bed,  a  certain  monk  there  was  in  the 
Abbey,  that  would  needs  die  with  him,  and  therefore  fell 
down  at  his  feet,  and  there  began  with  tears  to  beg  ot 
him  in  this  manner  :  "  For  his  love  to  whom  you  are 
now  going,  I  beseech  and  adjure  you,  that  1  may  not 
remain  in  this  world  seven  days  after  your  departure"; 
and  indeed  it  so  fell  out,  that  before  the  seventh  day  was 
come,  that  he  left  this  mortal  life,  and  yet  was  not  he 

29 


C6e  Dialogues  of  %t.  <£regorp 

that  night  named  by  that  voice  amongst  the  rest,  so  that 
it  appeareth  plainly  that  it  was  only  the  intercession  of 
Anastasius  which  obtained  that  his  departure. 
l^Ct0t»  Seeing  that  monk  was  not  called  amongst  the 
other,  and  yet  by  the  intercession  of  that  holy  man  was 
taken  out  of  this  life  :  what  other  thing  can  we  gather 
hereof,  but  that  such  as  be  of  great  merit,  and  in  favour 
with  God,  can  sometime  obtain  those  things  which  be 
not  predestinate  ? 

tiDZZQOZp*  Such  things  as  be  not  predestinate  by  God, 
cannot  by  any  means  be  obtained  at  his  hands  ;  but  those 
things  which  holy  men  do  by  their  prayers  effect,  were 
from  all  eternity  predestinate  to  be  obtained  by  prayers. 
For  very  predestination  itself  to  life  everlasting,  is  so 
by  almighty  God  disposed,  that  God's  elect  servants  do 
through  their  labour  come  unto  it,  in  that  by  their  prayers 
they  do  merit  to  receive  that  which  almighty  God 
determined  before  all  worlds  to  bestow  upon  them. 
IPCtCt*  Desirous  I  am  to  have  this  point  more  plainly 
proved  :  to  wit,  that  predestination  may  by  prayers  be 
holpen. 

(JPtC0Ot£.  That  which  I  inferred,  Peter,  may  quickly  be 
proved  ;  for  ignorant  you  are  not  that  our  Lord  said  to 
Abraham  :  In  Isaac  shall  seed  be  called  to  thee  ;x  to  whom 
also  he  said  :  /  have  appointed  thee  to  be  a  father  of  many 
nations  ;2  and  again  he  promised  him,  saying  :  I  will  bless 
thee,  and  multiply  thy  seed  as  the  stars  of  the  heaven,  and  as 
the  sand  of  the  sea?  Out  of  which  place  it  is  plain  that 
almighty  God  had  predestinate  to  multiply  the  seed  of 
Abraham  by  Isaac,  and  yet  the  scripture  saith  :  Isaac  did 
pray  unto  our  Lord  for  his  wife  because  she  was  barren,  who 
did  hear  him,  and  Rebecca  conceived}  If,  then,  the  increase 
of  Abraham's  posterity  was  predestinate  by  Isaac,  how 
came  it  to  pass  that  his  wife  was  barren  ?  by  which  most 

1  Gen.  2  1,  12.  2  Gen.  27,  29. 

3  Gen.  22,  17.  4  Gen.  25,  21. 

30 


IBonifacius  of  JFerenti 

certain  it  is,  that  predestination  is  fulfilled  by  prayers, 
when  as  we  see  that  he  by  whom  God  had  predestinate 
to  increase  Abraham's  seed  obtained  by  prayer  to  have 
children. 

}p0tCt,  Seeing  reason  hath  made  that  plain,  which  before 
I  knew  not,  I  have  not  herein  any  further  doubt. 
(£)t00Otp*  Shall  I  now  tell  you  somewhat  of  such  holy 
men  as  have  been  in  Tuscania  ;  that  you  may  be  in- 
formed what  notable  persons  have  flourished  in  those 
parts,  and  how  greatly  they  were  in  the  favour  of 
almighty  God  ? 

IPCtCt,  Willing  I  am  to  give  you  the  hearing  ;  and 
therefore  beseech  you  to  proceed  forward. 

Chapter  Bint :  of  T5onifaciu0,  15isi)op  of  j?e= 

tZUtt  1&  (£>rCffOtp.  A  man  of  holy  life  there  was,  called 
Bonifacius,  Bishop  of  the  city  of  Ferenti,  one  that  with 
his  virtuous  conversation  did  well  discharge  his  duty. 
Many  miracles  he  did,  which  Gaudentius  the  Priest,  who 
yet  liveth,  doth  still  report :  and  seeing  he  was  brought 
up  under  him,  no  question  but  by  reason  of  that  his 
presence  he  is  able  to  tell  all  things  the  more  truly. 

His  Bishopric  was  passing  poor  (a  thing  which  to  good 
men  is  the  preserver  of  humility),  for  he  had  nothing  else 
for  his  revenues,  but  only  one  vineyard,  which  was  also 
at  one  time  so  spoiled  with  a  tempest  of  hail,  that  very 
few  grapes  did  remain.  Bonifacius  coming  in,  and  seeing 
what  was  happened,  gave  God  great  thanks,  for  that  he 
had  sent  him  further  poverty  to  his  former  necessity. 
And  when  the  time  came  that  those  few  grapes  which 
remained  were  ripe,  he  appointed  one,  according  to  the 
custom,  to  keep  his  vineyard,  commanding  him  carefully 
to  look  well  unto  it.  And  upon  a  certain  day,  he  willed 
Constantius,  who  both  was  a  Priest  and  his  nephew,  to 
make  ready,  as  before  they  were  wont  to  do,  all  the 
barrels  and  wine-vessels  they  had  :  which  thing  when 
his  nephew  the  Priest  understood,  he  marvelled  much 

31 


C6e  Dialogues  of  %t  ®regorp 

to  hear  him  command  so  mad  a  thing,  as  to  make  ready 
the  vessels  for  wine,  himself  having  no  wine  at  all  to  put 
in  :  yet  durst  he  not  enquire  the  reason  why  he  gave  that 
charge,  but  did  as  he  commanded,  and  made  all  the 
vessels  and  other  things  ready,  as  before  they  had  always 
used  to  do.  Then  the  man  of  God  caused  the  poor 
remnant  of  grapes  to  be  gathered  and  carried  to  the 
wine-press,  and  dispatching  all  others  away,  himself 
tarried  there  still  with  a  little  boy  whom  he  commanded 
to  tread  those  grapes,  and  when  he  perceived  that  a  little 
wine  began  to  run  forth,  the  man  of  God  took  it,  and  put 
it  into  a  little  vessel,  and  poured  somewhat  thereof  into 
all  the  other  barrels  and  vessels  which  were  made  ready, 
as  it  were  to  bless  them  with  that  little  quantity  :  when 
he  had  so  done,  he  called  straightways  for  the  Priest, 
commanding  him  to  send  for  the  poor,  upon  whose 
coming  the  wine  in  the  press  began  to  increase  and  run 
out  so  plentifully,  that  it  did  fill  all  the  pots  and  other 
vessels  which  they  brought.  When  they  were  all  served, 
he  bade  the  boy  to  leave  treading,  and  come  down  ;  then, 
locking  up  the  storehouse,  into  which  he  had  put  his  own 
vessels,  and  setting  his  own  seal  upon  the  door,  to  the 
church  he  went,  and  three  days  after  he  called  for  Con- 
stantius,  and  having  said  a  few  prayers,  he  opened  the 
door,  where  he  found  all  the  vessels  into  which  he  had 
before  poured  but  a  very  little  liquor  working  so  plenti- 
fully, that,  if  he  had  not  then  come,  they  had  all  run  over 
into  the  floor.  Then  he  straightly  commanded  the  Priest 
his  kinsman,  not  to  reveal  this  miracle  to  any,  so  long  as  he 
lived,  fearing  lest,  by  means  thereof,  the  outward  opinion 
of  men  might  through  vain  glory  inwardly  have  hurt  his 
soul :  following  therein  the  example  of  our  master  Christ, 
who,  to  teach  us  to  walk  in  the  path  of  humility,  com- 
manded his  disciples  concerning  himself,  not  to  tell  any 
what  they  had  seen,  until  the  Son  of  Man  was  risen 
again  from  death. 

32 


IBontfacius  of  JFerenti 

J^CtCt.  Because  fit  occasion  is  now  offered,  desirous  I  am 
to  know  what  the  reason  was,  that  when  our  Saviour  re- 
stored sight  unto  two  blind  men,  and  commanded  them 
to  tell  nobody  ;  yet  they,  after  their  departure,  madft 
him  known  throughout  all  that  country.  For  had  the 
only-begotten  Son  of  God,  iwho  is  co-eternal  to  his 
Father  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  a  desire  herein  to  do  that 
which  he  could  not  perform  :  to  wit,  that  the  miracle 
which  he  would  have  kept  secret,  could  not  yet  be 
concealed  ? 

(2DtC0Ot|?.  All  that  which  our  blessed  Saviour  wrought 
in  his  mortal  body,  he  did  it  for  our  example  and  in- 
struction, to  the  end  that,  following  his  steps,  according 
to  our  poor  ability,  we  might  without  offence  pass  over 
this  present  life  :  and  therefore,  when  he  did  that 
miracle,  he  both  commanded  them  to  conceal  it,  and 
yet  it  could  not  be  kept  in,  and  all  this  to  teach  his 
elect  servants  to  follow  his  doctrine  ;  to  wit,  that  when 
they  do  any  notable  thing  whereof  glory  may  arise  to 
themselves,  that  they  should  have  a  desire  not  to  be 
spoken  of,  and  yet  for  the  good  of  others,  contrary  to 
their  own  mind,  they  should  be  laid  open  and  known  : 
so  that  it  proceed  of  their  great  humility  to  desire  that 
their  works  may  be  buried  with  silence,  and  yet,  for  the 
profit  of  others,  it  should  fall  so  out,  that  they  can  not 
be  concealed.  Wherefore  our  Lord  would  not  have 
any  thing  done  which  he  could  not  effect  :  but  what  his 
servants  ought  to  desire,  and  what  also,  contrary  to  their 
minds,  was  convenient  to  be  done,  like  a  good  master 
he  taught  us  by  his  own  example^ 

H?0tCt»  I  am  very  well  satisfied  with  this  your  answer. 
t&tZQQtV*  For  as  much  as  we  have  now  made  mention 
of  Bonifacius,  let  us  prosecute  a  few  more  of  his  acts, 
not  yet  spoken  of.  At  another  time,  upon  the  feast-day 
of  St.  Proculus  the  martyr,  one  Fortunatus,  a  noble  man 
that  dwelt  in  that  town,  did  heartily  entreat  the  Bishop 

33  c 


Cbe  Dialogues  of  At  ©rcgorp 

that,  after  he  had  done  the  solemnity  of  mass,  he  would 
vouchsafe  to  come  unto  his  house,  to  bless  his  meat  and 
dine  with  him.  The  man  of  God  was  content  to  satisfy 
his  request,  so  charitably  was  he  invited  :  and  therefore, 
when  mass  was  done,  he  went  thither  :  but  before  the 
table  was  yet  blessed,  suddenly  (as  some  men  by  such 
means  get  their  living)  one  came  to  the  gate  with  an 
ape,  who  began  to  play  upon  an  instrument,  which  the 
holy  man  hearing,  was  discontented,  and  said  :  "  Alas, 
alas,  this  wretched  man  is  dead,  this  wretched  man  is 
dead.  Behold,  I  am  come  hither  to  dinner,  and  have 
not  yet  opened  my  lips  to  praise  God,  and  he  is  here 
with  his  ape,  playing  upon  his  instrument."  Then  he 
desired  them  to  give  him  some  meat  and  drink  :  "  Yet 
I  would  have  you  know,"  quoth  he,  "that  he  is  a  dead 
man."  When  the  unhappy  wretch  had  filled  himself 
and  was  going  out  at  the  gate,  a  great  stone  fell  from 
the  house,  and  brake  his  head.  Of  which  blow  he  fell 
down,  and  was  taken  up  half  dead,  and  being  carried 
away  the  next  day,  as  the  man  of  God  had  before  said, 
he  departed  this  life  ;  wherein,  Peter,  we  have  to  con- 
sider how  holy  men  are  with  fear  to  be  reverenced  :  for 
they  no  question  be  the  temples  of  God,  and  when  an 
holy  man  is  enforced  to  anger,  who  is  then  moved  but 
he  that  dwelleth  in  that  temple  ?  wherefore  we  have  so 
much  the  more  cause  to  fear  how  we  provoke  such  kind 
of  persons  to  wrath,  seeing  we  know  that  he  is  present 
in  their  souls,  who  hath  power  and  might  sufficient  to 
inflict  what  punishment  himself  best  pleaseth. 

At  another  time,  the  aforesaid  Priest  Constantius,  his 
nephew,  had  sold  his  horse  for  twelve  crowns,  which 
money  he  laid  up  in  his  chest  ;  and  being  abroad  about 
other  business,  it  so  happened,  that  certain  poor  people 
pitifully  begged  of  the  holy  Bishop,  that  he  would  vouch- 
safe to  bestow  something  upon  them  for  the  relief  of 
their  necessity.    The  man  of  God,  not  having  anything 

34 


15ontfaciu0  of  JFerenti 

to  give  them,  was  much  grieved  to  send  them  away- 
empty  :  whiles  he  was  thus  troubled,  suddenly  it  came 
to  his  mind  how  his  nephew  had  sold  his  horse,  and  that 
the  money  was  in  his  chest  ;  whereupon,  in  his  absence, 
by  virtuous  violence,  he  brake  open  the  lock,  took  away 
the  twelve  crowns,  and  bestowed  them  as  best  pleased 
himself  upon  the  poor  people.  Constantius,  returning 
home  and  finding  his  chest  open,  looked  for  his  money, 
and  finding  it  not,  he  began  to  exclaim,  and  with  great 
noise  and  fury  to  cry  out  against  his  uncle,  saying  : 
"  All  other  can  live  here  in  quiet,  only  I  can  not."  The 
Bishop,  hearing  him  crying  out  in  that  manner,  came 
unto  him,  as  also  the  rest  of  his  family  ;  and  when  he 
began  with  sweet  speech  to  mitigate  his  fury,  in  great 
anger  he  replied,  saying  :  "  All  other  can  live  with  you, 
only  I  can  not  be  suffered  to  be  in  quiet  :  give  me  my 
money,  which  you  have  taken  out  of  my  chest."  The 
Bishop,  moved  at  his  words,  departed  away,  and  went 
into  the  church  of  the  blessed  virgin  Mary,  where,  lifting 
up  his  hands  with  his  vestment  upon  them,  he  began 
standing  to  pray,  that  she  would  help  him  to  so  much 
money,  that  he  might  quiet  the  fury  of  the  mad  Priest : 
and  casting  suddenly  his  eyes  upon  the  garment  that  lay 
between  his  arms  stretched  out,  he  found  twelve  crowns 
lying  there,  so  fair  and  bright,  as  though  they  had  then 
newly  come  from  the  mint  ;  who  forthwith  going  out 
of  the  church,  cast  them  to  the  raging  Priest  with  these 
words  :  "  Lo,  there  is  your  money  which  you  have 
kept  such  a  stir  for  ;  but  know  you  that  after  my  death 
you  shall  never  be  Bishop  of  this  place,  and  that  for 
your  covetous  mind."  By  which  true  censure  of  his  we 
gather  that  the  Priest  provided  that  money  for  the  getting 
of  the  Bishopric.  But  the  words  of  the  man  of  God  did 
prevail :  for  the  same  Constantius  ended  his  life  without 
any  further  promotion  than  to  the  dignity  of  Priesthood. 
At    another    time,    two   Goths   came   unto   him   for 

35 


£fje  Dialogues  of  ft&  ©regorp 

hospitality,  saying  that  they  were  travelling  to  Ravenna  ; 
unto  whom  he  gave  with  his  own  hands  a  little 
wooden  bottle  full  of  wine,  enough,  haply,  for  their 
dinner  ;  of  which,  notwithstanding,  they  drank  until 
they  came  to  Ravenna,  and  though  they  stayed  some 
days  in  that  city,  yet  they  had  no  other  wine  than  that 
which  the  holy  man  bestowed  upon  them  :  and  so  like- 
wise they  continued  until  they  returned  back  again  to 
the  same  venerable  Bishop,  drinking  daily  of  the  same, 
and  yet  never  lacking  wine  to  serve  their  necessity  :  as 
though,  in  that  wooden  bottle  which  he  gave  them,  wine 
had  grown,  and  not  there  increased. 

Not  long  sithence,  there  came  from  the  same  country 
a  certain  old  man  that  is  a  clerk,  who  reporteth  divers 
notable  things  of  him,  which  must  not  be  passed  over 
with  silence.  For  he  saith  that  going  upon  a  day  into 
his  garden,  he  found  it  all  full  of  caterpillars,  and  seeing 
all  his  worts  spoiled,  turning  himself  to  them,  he  spake 
thus  :  "I  adjure  you,  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  to  depart  from  hence,  and  not  to  eat  any  more 
of  these  worts  "  :  after  which  words,  those  worms  did 
forthwith  so  vanish  away,  that  there  was  not  one  to  be 
found  in  all  the  whole  garden.  But  what  great  marvel 
is  it,  to  hear  such  things  reported  of  him  that  was  now 
a  Bishop,  being  then,  both  by  reason  of  his  orders,  and 
also  holy  conversation  of  life,  grown  into  favour  with 
almighty  God,  seeing  those  are  more  to  be  admired 
which  this  old  clergyman  said  that  he  did,  being  yet  but 
a  little  boy  ?  For  he  affirmeth,  that  at  such  time  as 
Bonifacius  dwelt  with  his  mother,  and  went  abroad,  that 
sometime  he  came  home  without  his  shirt,  and  often- 
times without  his  coat  :  for  no  sooner  did  he  see  a 
naked  man,  but  he  gave  away  his  clothes,  and  put  them 
upon  him,  to  the  end  that  himself  might  be  clothed  with 
a  reward  in  the  sight  of  God.  His  mother  rebuked  him 
often  for  doing  so,  and  told  him  that  it  was  no  reason 

36 


T5omfaciu0  of  JFetentt 

that,  being  poor  himself,  he  should  give  away  his  apparel 
to  other.  Upon  another  day,  going  into  the  barn,  she 
found  almost  all  her  wheat,  which  she  had  provided  for 
the  whole  year,  given  away  by  her  son  to  the  poor  :  and 
as  she  was,  for  very  grief  thereof,  beating  and  tearing  of 
herself,  the  child  of  God,  Bonifacius,  came,  and  with  the 
best  words  he  could  began  to  comfort  his  afflicted 
mother  ;  but  when  by  no  means  she  would  be  quieted, 
he  entreated  her  to  go  out  of  the  barn  where  the  little 
wheat  that  remained  was.  When  she  was  departed,  the 
virtuous  youth  fell  straightway  to  his  prayers  ;  and 
after  a  little  while,  going  out,  he  brought  his  mother 
back  again,  where  she  found  it  as  full  of  wheat  as  before 
it  was  :  at  the  sight  of  which  miracle,  she,  being  touched 
in  soul,  exhorted  him  to  give  as  he  pleased,  seeing  he 
could  so  soon  obtain  at  God's  hands  what  he  asked. 
His  mother  also  kept  hens  before  her  door,  which  a  fox, 
that  had  his  berry  not  far  off,  used  to  carry  away  :  and 
upon  a  certain  day,  as  the  youth  Bonifacius  was  standing 
in  the  entry,  the  fox,  after  his  old  manner,  came  and 
took  away  one  of  the  hens  ;  whereupon  in  all  haste  he 
ran  to  the  church,  and  prostrate  there  in.  prayer,  with 
loud  voice  he  spake  thus  :  "  Is  it  thy  pleasure,  O  Lord, 
that  I  shall  not  eat  of  my  mother's  hens  ?  for  behold, 
the  fox  doth  devour  them  up  " :  and  rising  from  his 
prayers,  he  went  out  of  the  church,  and  straightways 
the  fox  came  back  again  with  the  hen  in  his  mouth, 
leaving  it  where  he  found  it,  and  forthwith  fell  down 
dead  in  the  presence  of  Bonifacius. 
}pet0t.  It  seemeth  strange  unto  me,  that  God  vouch- 
safed in  such  small  things  to  hear  the  prayers  of  them 
that  put  their  trust  in  him. 

(£>t0JJOtp,  This  falleth  out,  Peter,  by  the  great  provi- 
dence of  our  Creator,  to  the  end  that  by  little  things 
which  we  receive  at  his  hands,  we  should  hope  for 
greater  :    for  the   holy  and  simple  lad   was   heard   in 

37 


C6e  Dialogues  of  %>t  (Sttegorp 

praying  for  small  matters,  that  by  them  he  should  learn 
how  much  he  ought  to  trust  in  God,  when  he  prayed 
for  things  of  greater  importance. 
IPCtCt*  What  you  say  pleaseth  me  very  well. 

Cfmpter  Cen :  of  JFortunatus,  15i0f)op  of  tbe  Cttp 

Of  CtlDCttt.  <J  tiDtZQOiy.  Another  man  also  there  was 
in  the  same  parts,  called  Fortunatus,  Bishop  of  Tuderti, 
who  had  a  most  singular  grace  in  casting  out  of  devils, 
in  so  much  that  sometime  he  did  cast  out  of  possessed 
bodies  whole  legions  ;  and  by  the  continual  exercise  of 
prayer,  he  overcame  all  their  temptations.  Julianus, 
who  had  an  office  here  in  our  church,  and  not  long 
since  died  in  this  city,  was  familiarly  acquainted  with 
him,  by  whose  relation  I  learned  that  which  I  will  now 
tell  you  :  for  by  reason  of  his  great  and  inward  famili- 
arity, often  was  he  present  at  such  miracles  as  he  wrought, 
and  did  divers  times  talk  of  him  to  our  instruction  and 
his  own  comfort. 

A  certain  noble  matron  there  was,  dwelling  in  the 
hither  parts  of  Tuscania,  that  had  a  daughter-in-law, 
which,  not  long  after  the  marriage  of  her  son,  was, 
together  with  her  mother-in-law,  invited  to  the  dedica- 
tion of  the  oratory  of  the  blessed  martyr,  St.  Sebastian  : 
and  the  night  before  this  solemnity,  overcome  with  carnal 
pleasure,  she  could  not  abstain  from  her  husband  ;  and 
though  in  the  morning  her  former  delight  troubled  her 
conscience,  yet  shame  drave  her  forth  to  the  procession, 
being  more  ashamed  of  men  than  fearing  the  judgment 
of  God,  and  therefore  thither  she  went  together  with 
her  mother-in-law.  And  behold,  straight  upon  the 
bringing  of  the  relics  of  St.  Sebastian  the  martyr  into 
the  oratory,  a  wicked  spirit  possessed  the  foresaid  matron's 
daughter-in-law,  and  pitifully  tormented  her  before  all 
the  people.  The  Priest  of  the  oratory,  beholding  her 
so  terribly  vexed  and  lifted  up,  took  a  white  linen  cloth 
and  cast  upon  her  ;  and  forthwith  the  devil  also  entered 

38 


JFortunatus  of  CuDctti 

into  him,  and  because  he  presumed  above  his  strength, 
enforced  also  he  was  by  his  own  vexation,  to  know  what 
himself  was.  Those  that  were  present  took  up  the  young 
gentlewoman  in  their  hands,  and  carried  her  home  to 
her  own  house.  And  for  as  much  as  she  was  by  the 
enemy  continually  and  cruelly  tormented,  her  kinsfolk 
that  carnally  loved  her,  and  with  their  love  did  persecute 
her,  cause  her  to  be  carried  for  help  to  certain  witches ; 
so  utterly  to  cast  away  her  soul,  whose  body  they  went 
about  by  sorcery  for  a  time  to  relieve.  Coming  into 
their  hands,  she  was  by  them  brought  to  a  river,  and 
there  washed  in  the  water,  the  sorcerers  labouring  a 
long  time  by  their  enchantments  to  cast  out  the  devil, 
that  had  possessed  her  body  :  but  by  the  wonderful 
judgment  of  almighty  God,  it  fell  out  that  whiles 
one  by  unlawful  art  was  expelled,  suddenly  a  whole 
legion  did  enter  in.  And  from  that  time  forward,  she 
began  to  be  tossed  with  so  many  varieties  of  motions, 
to  shriek  out  in  so  many  sundry  tunes,  as  there  were 
devils  in  her  body.  Then  her  parents,  consulting  to- 
gether, and  confessing  their  own  wickedness,  carried  her 
to  the  venerable  Bishop  Fortunatus,  and  with  him  they 
left  her  :  who,  having  taken  her  to  his  charge,  fell  to 
his  prayers  many  days  and  nights,  and  he  prayed  so 
much  the  more  earnestly,  because  he  had  against  him, 
in  one  body,  an  whole  army  of  devils  :  and  many  days 
passed  not,  before  he  made  her  so  safe  and  sound,  as 
though  the  devil  had  never  had  any  power  or  interest 
in  her  body. 

At  another  time,  the  same  servant  of  almighty  God 
cast  forth  a  devil  out  of  one  that  was  possessed  :  which 
wicked  spirit,  when  it  was  now  night  and  saw  few  men 
stirring  in  the  streets,  taking  upon  him  the  shape  of  a 
stranger,  began  to  go  up  and  down  the  city,  crying  out  : 
"  O  holy  Bishop  Fortunatus,  behold  what  he  hath  done  ; 
he  hath  turned  a  stranger  out  of  his  lodging,  and  now 

39 


Cfje  Dialogues  of  %t  <$reg;orp 

I  seek  for  a  place  to  rest  in,  and  in  his  whole  city  can 
find  none."  A  certain  man,  sitting  in  his  house  by  the 
fire,  with  his  wife  and  his  little  son,  hearing  one  to  cry 
out  in  that  manner,  went  forth,  and  enquired  what  the 
Bishop  had  done,  and  withal  invited  him  to  his  house, 
where  he  caused  him  to  sit  with  them  by  the  fire  :  and 
as  they  were  among  themselves  discoursing  of  divers 
matters,  the  same  wicked  spirit  on  a  sudden  entered 
into  his  little  child,  cast  him  into  the  fire,  and  forthwith 
killed  him  :  then  the  wretched  father,  by  the  loss  of  his 
son  in  this  manner,  knew  full  well  whom  he  had  enter- 
tained, and  the  Bishop  turned  out  of  his  lodging. 
1^0t0t»  What  was  the  cause,  that  the  old  enemy  pre- 
sumed to  kill  his  son  in  his  own  house  :  who,  thinking 
him  to  be  a  stranger,  vouchsafed  him  of  lodging  and 
entertainment  ? 

CDtCjJOtp*  Many  things,  Peter,  seem  to  be  good  and  yet 
are  not,  because  they  be  not  done  with  a  good  mind  and 
intention  ;  and  therefore  our  Saviour  saith  in  the  gospel : 
If  thy  eye  be  naughty  all  thy  body  shall  be  dar\}  For  when 
the  intention  is  wicked,  all  the  work  that  followeth  is 
naught,  although  it  seem  to  be  never  so  good  ;  and 
therefore  this  man  who  lost  his  child,  though  he  seemed 
to  give  hospitality,  yet  I  think  that  he  took  not  any 
pleasure  in  that  work  of  mercy,  but  rather  in  the  de- 
traction and  infamy  of  the  Bishop  :  for  the  punishment 
which  followed  did  declare  that  his  entertainment  going 
before,  was  not  void  of  sin.  For  some  there  be,  which 
are  careful  to  do  good  works,  to  the  end  they  may  ob- 
scure the  virtue  of  another  man's  life  ;  neither  take  they 
pleasure  in  the  good  thing  which  they  do,  but  in  the 
conceit  of  that  hurt  which  thereby  they  imagine  re- 
doundeth  to  others  ;  and  therefore  I  verily  suppose  that 
this  man,  which  gave  entertainment  to  the  devil,  was 
more  desirous  to  seem  to  do  a  good  work  than  to  do 

1  Matt.  6,  23. 
40 


JFottunatua  of  Cuoertt 

it  indeed  ;  to  the  end  that  he  might  seem  more  charit- 
able than  the  Bishop,  in  that  he  entertained  him  whom 
the  man  of  God,  Fortunatus,  had  thrust  out  of  his 
house. 

Ip0t0t.  It  is  verily  so,  as  you  say  :  for  the  end  of  the 
work  declared  that  the  intent  of  the  doer  was  not  good. 
(DtCgOtp.  At  another  time,  likewise,  one  that  had  lost 
his  eyesight  was  brought  unto  him,  who  craved  his 
intercession  and  obtained  it  :  for  so  soon  as  the  man  of 
God  had  prayed  for  him,  and  made  the  sign  of  the  cross 
upon  his  eyes,  straightways  he  received  his  sight.  Beside 
this,  a  certain  soldier's  horse  became  so  mad,  that  he 
could  scant  be  holden  by  many,  and  so  cruel  he  was, 
that  he  rent  and  tare  the  flesh  of  all  such  as  he  could 
reach  with  his  teeth.  At  length,  as  well  as  they  could, 
they  tied  him  with  ropes,  and  so  brought  him  to  the 
man  of  God  ;  who  putting  forth  his  hand,  made  upon 
his  head  the  sign  of  the  cross,  and  forthwith  all  his 
madness  departed,  in  such  sort  that  he  became  more 
gentle  than  ever  he  was  before.  Then  the  soldier, 
seeing  his  horse  so  miraculously  cured,  determined  to 
bestow  him  upon  the  Bishop  :  which  because  he  refused, 
and  yet  the  other  instantly  entreated  that  he  would  not 
reject  his  poor  gift,  the  holy  man  took  the  middle  way, 
and  yielded  so  to  the  soldier's  request,  that  yet  he  would 
not  take  any  reward  for  the  doing  of  that  miracle  ;  for 
he  gave  him  first  so  much  money  as  the  horse  was  worth, 
and  then  received  him  ;  for  perceiving  that  the  soldier 
would  have  been  grieved,  if  he  had  refused  his  courteous 
offer,  upon  charity  he  bought  that  whereof  he  had  then 
no  need. 

Neither  must  I  pass  over  with  silence  that  which  1 
heard  almost  twelve  days  since  :  for  a  certain  poor  old 
man  was  brought  unto  me  (because  I  loved  always  to 
talk  with  such  kind  of  men),  of  whom  I  enquired  his 
country  ;  and  understanding  that  he  was  of  the  city  of 

4i 


£fje  Dialogues  of  St  <$reprp 

Tuderti,  I  asked  him  whether  he  knew  the  good  old 
father,  Bishop  Fortunatus  ;  to  which  he  answered  that 
he  knew  him,  and  that  very  well.  "  Then  I  beseech  you," 
quoth  I,  "  tell  me  whether  you  know  of  any  miracles 
which  he  did,  and  because  I  am  very  desirous,  let  me 
understand  what  manner  of  man  he  was."  "  This  man," 
quoth  he,  "  was  far  different  from  all  those  which  live 
in  our  days  ;  for  he  obtained  at  God's  hands  whatsoever 
he  requested.  One  of  his  miracles  which  cometh  to  my 
mind,  I  will  now  tell  you. 

"  Certain  Goths,  upon  a  day,  travelling  not  far  from 
the  city  of  Tuderti,  as  they  were  in  their  journey  to 
Ravenna,  carried  away  with  them  two  little  boys  from 
a  place  which  belonged  to  the  said  city.  News  hereof 
being  brought  to  the  holy  Bishop  Fortunatus,  he  sent 
straightways,  desiring  those  Goths  to  come  unto  him  : 
to  whom  he  spake  very  courteously,  being  willing  by 
fair  speech  to  pacify  their  fierce  and  cruel  natures  ;  and 
afterward  told  them  that  they  should  have  what  money 
they  desired,  so  they  would  make  restitution  of  the 
children  :  (  and  therefore,  I  beseech  you,'  quoth  he, 
c  gratify  my  request  in  this  one  thing.'  Then  he  which 
seemed  to  be  the  chief  of  them  two  told  him,  that  what- 
soever else  he  commanded  they  were  ready  to  perform, 
but  as  for  the  boys,  by  no  means  they  would  let  them 
go.  To  whom  the  venerable  man  (threatening  in  sweet 
sort)  spake  unto  him  in  this  manner  :  '  You  grieve  me, 
good  son,  to  see  that  you  will  not  be  ruled  by  your 
father  ;  but  give  me  not  any  such  cause  of  grief,  for  it 
is  not  good  that  you  do.'  But  for  all  this  the  Goth, 
continuing  still  hard-hearted,  denied  his  request,  and  so 
went  his  way,  yet  coming  again  the  next  day,  the  holy 
man  renewed  his  former  suit  concerning  the  children  ; 
but  when  he  saw  that  by  no  means  he  could  persuade 
him,  in  sorrowful  manner  he  spake  thus  :  *  Well  I 
know  that   it  is   not   good  for  you   to  depart   in   this 

42 


jFortunatus  of  Cu&crtt 

manner,  and  leave  me  thus  afflicted.'  But  the  Goth, 
not  esteeming  his  words,  returned  to  his  inn,  set  those 
children  on  horseback,  and  sent  them  before  with  his 
servants,  and  straightways  himself  took  horse  and  fol- 
lowed after  ;  and  as  he  was  riding  in  the  same  city  by 
the  church  of  St.  Peter  the  Apostle,  his  horse  stumbling, 
fell  down,  and  brake  his  thigh  in  such  sort  that  the 
bone  was  quite  asunder  :  up  was  he  taken,  and  carried 
back  again  to  his  inn  ;  who  in  all  haste  sent  after  his 
servants,  and  caused  the  boys  to  be  brought  back  again. 
Then  he  sent  one  to  venerable  Fortunatus  with  this 
message  :  *  I  beseech  you,  father,  to  send  unto  me  your 
deacon  '  ;  who  when  he  was  come  unto  him  lying  in  his 
bed,  he  made  those  boys,  which  before  upon  no  entreaty 
he  would  restore,  to  be  brought  forth,  and  delivered 
them  to  him,  saying  :  c  Go  and  tell  my  Lord  the  Bishop  : 
Behold  you  have  cursed  me,  and  I  am  punished,  but  I 
have  now  sent  you  those  children  which  before  you  re- 
quired, take  them,  and  I  beseech  you  to  pray  for  me.' 
The  deacon  received  the  children,  and  carried  them  to 
the  Bishop  ;  whereupon  the  holy  man  forthwith  gave 
his  deacon  some  holy  water,  saying  :  '  Go  quickly  and 
cast  it  upon  him  where  he  lieth  '  ;  who  went  his  way, 
and  coming  to  the  Goth,  he  sprinkled  all  his  body  with 
holy  water  :  and  O  strange  and  admirable  thing  !  the 
holy  water  no  sooner  touched  his  thigh  but  all  the 
rupture  was  so  healed,  and  himself  so  perfectly  restored 
to  his  former  health,  that  he  forsook  his  bed  that  very 
hour,  took  his  horse,  and  went  on  his  journey,  as  though 
he  had  never  been  hurt  at  all  :  and  thus  it  fell  out,  that 
he  which  refused  for  money  and  upon  obedience  to  re- 
store the  children,  was  by  punishment  enforced  to  do  it 
for  nothing."  When  the  old  man  had  told  me  this 
strange  story,  ready  he  was  to  proceed  unto  other  ;  but 
because  I  was  at  that  time  to  make  an  exhortation  to 
some  that  expected  me,  and  the  day  was  well  spent,  I 

43 


Cfje  Dialogues  of  %t  (Stegorp 

could  not  at  that  time  hear  any  more  of  the  notable  acts 
of  venerable  Fortunatus  ;  and  yet  if  I  might,  never  would 
I  do  any  thing  else,  than  give  ear  to  such  excellent 
stories. 

The  next  day,  the  same  old  man  reported  a  thing  far 
more  wonderful  :  for  he  said  that  in  the  same  city  of 
Tuderti,  there  dwelt  a  good  virtuous  man  called  Mar- 
cellus,  together  with  two  of  his  sisters,  who,  falling  sick, 
somewhat  late  upon  Easter  even  departed  this  life  :  and 
because  he  was  to  be  carried  far  off,  he  could  not  be 
buried  that  day.  His  sisters  having  now  longer  respite 
for  his  burial,  with  heavy  hearts  ran  weeping  unto  the 
Bishop  ;  where  they  began  to  cry  out  aloud  in  this 
manner  :  "  We  know  that  thou  leadest  an  Apostolical 
life,  that  thou  dost  heal  lepers,  restore  sight  to  the  blind  : 
come,  therefore,  we  beseech  you,  and  raise  up  our  dead 
brother."  The  venerable  man,  hearing  of  their  brother's 
death,  began  himself  likewise  to  weep,  desired  them  to 
depart,  and  not  to  make  any  such  petition  unto  him  : 
"for  it  is  our  Lord's  pleasure,"  quoth  he,  "which  no 
man  can  resist."  When  they  were  gone,  the  Bishop 
continued  still  sad  and  sorrowful  for  the  good  man's 
death  ;  and  the  next  day  being  the  solemn  feast  of  Easter, 
very  early  in  the  morning  he  went  with  two  of  his  deacons 
to  Marcellus'  house,  and  coming  to  the  place  where  his 
dead  body  lay,  he  fell  to  his  prayers  ;  and  when  he  had 
made  an  end,  he  rose  up  and  sat  down  by  the  corpse,  and 
with  a  low  voice  called  the  dead  man  by  his  name,  say- 
ing :  "Brother  Marcellus  "  ;  whereat,  as  though  he  had 
been  lightly  asleep,  and  awaked  with  that  voice,  he  rose 
up,  opened  his  eyes,  and  looking  upon  the  Bishop,  said: 
"  O  what  have  you  done  ?  O  what  have  you  done  ? " 
To  whom  the  Bishop  answered,  saying  :  "  What  have 
I  done  ?  "  "  Marry,"  quoth  he,  "  yesterday  there  came 
two  unto  me,  and  discharged  my  soul  out  of  my  body,  and 
carried  me  away  to  a  good  place,  and  this  day  one  was 

44 


sent,  who  bade  them  carry  me  back  again,  because  Bishop 
Fortunatus  was  gone  to  mine  house."  And  when  he 
had  spoken  these  words,  straightways  he  recovered  of 
his  sickness,  and  lived  long  after.  And  yet  for  all  this 
we  must  not  think  that  he  lost  that  place  which  he  had, 
because  there  is  no  doubt,  but  that  he  might,  by  the 
prayers  of  his  intercessor,  live  yet  more  virtuously  after 
his  death,  who  had  a  care  before  he  died  to  please  al- 
mighty God. 

But  why  do  I  spend  so  many  words  in  discoursing  of 
his  wonderful  life,  when  as  we  have  so  many  miracles, 
even  at  these  days,  wrought  at  his  body  ?  for,  as  he  was 
wont  to  do  when  he  lived  upon  earth,  so  doth  he  now 
continually  at  his  dead  bones  dispossess  devils,  and  heal 
such  as  be  sick,  so  often  as  men  pray  for  such  graces  with 
faith  and  devotion.  But  I  mean  now  to  return  to  the 
province  of  Valeria,  of  which  I  have  heard  most  notable 
miracles  from  the  mouth  of  venerable  Fortunatus,  of 
whom  long  before  I  have  made  mention,  who,  coming 
often  to  visit  me,  whiles  he  reporteth  old  stories,  con- 
tinually he  bringeth  me  new  delight. 

Cfmptet  OBletien :  of  ^artirius,  a  6§onk  in  tbe 

IptOtrince  Of  Valeria.  <I  A  certain  man  lived  in  that 
province,  called  Martirius,  who  was  a  very  devout  servant 
of  almighty  God,  and  gave  this  testimony  of  his  virtuous 
life.  For,  upon  a  certain  day,  the  other  monks,  his 
brethren,  made  a  hearth-cake,  forgetting  to  make  upon 
it  the  sign  of  the  cross  :  for  in  that  country  they  use  to 
make  a  cross  upon  their  loaves,  dividing  them  so  into 
four  parts  :  when  the  servant  of  God  came,  they  told 
him  that  it  was  not  marked  :  who,  seeing  it  covered  with 
ashes  and  coals,  asked  why  they  did  not  sign  it,  and 
speaking  so,  he  made  the  sign  of  the  cross  with  his 
hand  against  the  coals  :  which  thing  whiles  he  was  in 
doing,  the  cake  gave  a  great  crack,  as  though  the  pan 
had  been  broken  with  the  fire  :   after  it  was  baked  and 

45 


Cfje  Dialogues  of  &t  <£regotp 

taken  out,  they  found  it  marked  with  the  sign  of  the 
cross,  which  yet  not  any  corporal  touching,  but  the  faith 
of  Martirius  had  imprinted. 

Chapter  Ctoetoe :  of  §)et)erus,  a  Jprtest  in  t&e 

Same  IprOtrittCe,  <J  In  the  same  country  there  is  a 
valley,  which  is  called  of  the  plain  people  Interocrina  ; 
in  which  there  lived  a  certain  man  of  a  rare  life,  called 
Severus,  who  was  a  parish  priest  of  the  church  of  our 
blessed  Lady  the  mother  of  God  and  perpetual  virgin. 
One  that  lay  at  the  point  of  death  sent  for  him  in  great 
haste,  desiring  him  to  come  with  all  speed,  and  by  his 
prayers  to  make  intercession  for  him,  that  doing  penance 
for  his  wickedness,  and  loosed  from  his  sins,  he  might 
depart  this  life.  So  it  chanced,  that  the  Priest  at  that 
time  was  busy  in  pruning  of  his  vines  ;  and  therefore  he 
bade  them  that  came  for  him  to  go  on  before  :  "  and  I 
will,"  quoth  he,  "  come  after  by  and  by."  For  seeing  he 
had  but  a  little  to  do,  he  stayed  a  pretty  while  to  make 
an  end  of  that,  and  when  it  was  dispatched,  away  he  went 
to  visit  the  sick  man  ;  but  as  he  was  going,  the  former 
messengers  met  with  him,  saying  :  "  Father,  why  have 
you  stayed  so  long  ?  go  not  now  any  further,  for  the 
man  is  dead."  At  which  news  the  good  man  fell  a 
trembling,  and  cried  out  aloud  that  he  had  killed  him  ; 
whereupon  he  fell  a  weeping,  and  in  that  manner  came 
to  the  dead  corpse,  where  before  the  bed  he  fell  prostrate 
upon  the  earth,  pouring  out  of  tears.  Lying  there  weep- 
ing very  pitifully,  beating  his  head  against  the  ground, 
and  crying  out  that  he  was  guilty  of  his  death,  suddenly 
the  dead  man  returned  to  life  :  which  many  that  were 
present  beholding  cried  out,  and  began  to  weep  more 
plentifully  for  joy,  demanding  of  him  where  he  had 
been,  and  by  what  means  he  came  back  again  ;  to  whom 
he  said  :  "  Certain  cruel  men,"  quoth  he,  "did  carry  me 
away  ;  out  of  whose  mouth  and  nostrils  fire  came  forth, 
which  I  could  not  endure  ;  and  as  they  were  leading  me 

46 


^>cticrus  tfje  priest 

through  dark  places,  suddenly  a  beautiful  young  man 
with  others  met  us,  who  said  unto  them  that  were  draw- 
ing me  forward  :  { Carry  him  back  again  ;  for  Severus 
the  Priest  lamenteth  his  death,  and  our  Lord,  for  his 
tears,  hath  given  him  longer  life.'  Then  Severus  rose 
up  from  the  earth,  and  by  his  intercession  did  assist  him 
in  doing  of  penance.  And  when  the  sick  man  that  re- 
vived had  done  penance  for  his  sins  by  the  space  of 
seven  days,  upon  the  eighth  with  a  cheerful  countenance 
he  departed  this  life.  Consider,  Peter,  I  pray  you,  how 
dearly  our  Lord  loved  this  Severus,  that  would  not 
suffer  him  to  be  grieved  for  a  little  time. 
K^CtCt.  They  be  marvellous  strange  things  which  you 
report,  and  which  before  this  time  I  never  heard  of:  but 
what  is  the  reason  that  in  these  days  there  be  not  any 
such  men  now  living  ? 

€>tC#0tp*  I  make  no  doubt,  Peter,  but  that  there  be 
many  such  holy  men  now  living  ;  for  though  they  work 
not  the  like  miracles,  yet  for  all  that,  may  they  be  as 
virtuous  and  as  holy.     For  true  judgment  of  one's  life 
is  to  be  taken  from  his  virtuous  conversation,  and  not 
from  the  working  of  miracles,  for  many  there  be  who, 
although  they  do  not  any  such  strange  things,  yet  are 
they  not  in  virtue  inferior  to  them  that  do  them. 
IpCtCt.   How,  1  beseech  you,  can  it  be  maintained  for 
true,  that  there  be  some  that  work  not  any  miracles,  and 
yet  be  as  virtuous  as  they  which  work  them  ? 
CDtCgOtJ?.  Sure  I  am  that  you  know  very  well  that  the 
Apostle  St.  Paul  is  brother  to  St.  Peter,  chief  of  the 
Apostles  in  Apostolical  principality. 
IPCtCt.   I  know  that  indeed,  for  no  doubt  can  be  made 
thereof :  for  though  he  were  the  least  of  the  Apostles, 
yet  did  he  labour  more  than  all  they. 
<$DtZQ0XJ).  Peter,  as  you  well  remember,  walked  with 
his  feet  upon  the  sea  ;  Paul  in  the  sea  suffered  ship- 
wrack.     And  in  one  and  the  same  element,  where  Paul 

47 


C6e  Dialogues  of  %>t  ®reg;otp 

could  not  pass  with  a  ship,  Peter  went  upon  his  feet ;  by 
which  apparent  it  is,  that  though  their  virtue  in  working 
of  miracles  was  not  alike,  yet  their  merit  is  alike  in  the 
kingdom  of  heaven. 

l^CtCt.  I  confess  that  I  am  well  pleased  with  that  you 
say,  for  I  know  most  assuredly  that  the  life,  and  not 
the  miracles,  are  to  be  considered  ;  but  yet,  seeing  such 
miracles  as  be  wrought  do  give  testimony  of  a  good  life, 
I  beseech  you,  if  any  more  be  yet  remaining,  that  you 
would,  with  the  examples  and  virtuous  lives  of  holy  men, 
feed  mine  hungry  soul. 

fytZQOty).  Desirous  I  am,  to  the  honour  of  our  blessed 
Saviour,  to  tell  you  some  things  now  concerning  the 
miracles  of  the  man  of  God,  venerable  St.  Bennet  :  but 
to  do  it  as  it  ought,  this  day  is  not  sufficient ;  wherefore 
we  will  here  make  a  pause,  and  to  handle  this  matter 
more  plentifully,  take  another  beginning. 


Cbe  OBnD  of  tbe  jfirst  IBook 


48 


/'.';  <:i  ■:,-,! 


ST.   BENEDICT 

(•I'citicaii  Gallery,  Roun 


€f)e  g>econti  ^oofc 

m  tije  3Ufe  and  piracies  of 
£>t.  mtnmt 


D 


CJje  g>econti  ^ook 

®f  tt)e  3Ufe  ano  ^trades  of 
£>t.  Bennet 

C{)CtC  was  a  man  of  venerable  life,  blesse#by  grace,  and 
blessed  in  name,  for  he  was  called  Benedicts  or  Bennet : 
who,  from  his  younger  years,  carried  always  the  mind  of 
an  old  man  ;  for  his  age  was  inferior  to  his  virtue  :  all 
vain  pleasure  he  contemned,  and  though  he  were  in  the 
world,  and  might  freely  have  enjoyed  such  commodities 
as  it  yieldeth,  yet  did  he  nothing  esteem  it,  nor  the 
vanities  thereof.  He  was  born  in  the  province  of  Nursia, 
of  honourable  parentage,  and  brought  up  at  Rome  in  the 
study  of  humanity.  But  for  as  much  as  he  saw  many  by 
reason  of  such  learning  to  fall  to  dissolute  and  lewd  life, 
he  drew  back  his  foot,  which  he  had  as  it  were  now  set 
forth  into  the  world,  lest,  entering  too  far  in  acquaintance 
therewith,  he  likewise  might  have  fallen  into  that  dan- 
gerous and  godless  gulf :  wherefore,  giving  over  his 
book,  and  forsaking  his  father's  house  and  wealth,  with 
a  resolute  mind  only  to  serve  God,  he  sought  for  some 
place,  where  he  might  attain  to  the  desire  of  his  holy 
purpose  :  and  in  this  sort  he  departed,  instructed  with 
learned  ignorance,  and  furnished  with  uniearned  wisdom. 
All  the  notable  things  and  acts  of  his  life  I  could  not 
learn  ;  but  those  few,  which  I  mind  now  to  report,  I 
had  by  the  relation  of  four  of  his  disciples  :  to  wit,  of 

51 


C6e  Dialogues  of  %>t.  <£reg;orp 

Constantinus,  a  most  rare  and  reverent  man,  who  was 
next  Abbot  after  him  ;  of  Valentinianus,  who  many  years 
had  the  charge  of  the  Lateran  Abbey;  of  Simplicius, 
who  was  the  third  General  of  his  order ;  and  lastly  of 
Honoratus,  who  is  now  Abbot  of  that  monastery  in 
which  he  first  began  his  holy  life. 

C&apter  HDne :  boto  fje  mape  a  broken  mtyz  tofjolc 

anO  0OUnD»  ^  Bennet  having  now  given  over  the 
school,  with  a  resolute  mind  to  lead  his  life  in  the  wilder- 
ness :  his  nurse  alone,  which  did  tenderly  love  him, 
would  not  by  any  means  give  him  over.  Coming,  there- 
fore, to  a  place  called  Enside  and  remaining  there  in  the 
church  of  St.  Peter,  in  the  company  of  other  virtuous 
men,  which  for  charity  lived  in  that  place,  it  fell  so  out 
that  his  nurse  borrowed  of  the  neighbours  a  sieve  to 
make  clean  wheat,  which  being  left  negligently  upon  the 
table,  by  chance  it  was  broken  in  two  pieces  :  whereupon 
she  fell  pitifully  a  weeping,  because  she  had  borrowed 
it.  The  devout  and  religious  youth  Bennet,  seeing  his 
nurse  so  lamenting,  moved  with  compassion,  took  away 
with  him  both  the  pieces  of  the  sieve,  and  with  tears  fell 
to  his  prayers  ;  and  after  he  had  done,  rising  up  he  found 
it  so  whole,  that  the  place  could  not  be  seen  where  before 
it  was  broken  ;  and  coming  straight  to  his  nurse,  and  com- 
forting her  with  good  words,  he  delivered  her  the  sieve 
safe  and  sound  :  which  miracle  was  known  to  all  the 
inhabitants  thereabout,  and  so  much  admired,  that  the 
townsmen,  for  a  perpetual  memory,  did  hang  it  up  at  the 
church  door,  to  the  end  that  not  only  men  then  living, 
but  also  their  posterity  might  understand,  how  greatly 
God's  grace  did  work  with  him  upon  his  first  renouncing 
of  the  world.  The  sieve  continued  there  many  years 
after,  even  to  these  very  troubles  of  the  Lombards,  where 
it  did  hang  over  the  church  door. 

But  Bennet,  desiring  rather  the  miseries  of  the  world 
than  the  praises  of  men  :  rather  to  be  wearied  with  labour 

52 


V      '-. 


■ 


Cbe  life  anD  piracies  of  %t  I5ennet 

for  God's  sake,  than  to  be  exalted  with  transitory  com- 
mendation :  fled  privily  from  his  nurse,  and  went  into  a 
desert  place  called  Sublacum,  distant  almost  forty  miles 
from  Rome  :  in  which  there  was  a  fountain  springing  forth 
cool  and  clear  water ;  the  abundance  whereof  doth  first 
in  a  broad  place  make  a  lake,  and  afterward  running 
forward,  cometh  to  be  a  river.  As  he  was  travelling  to 
this  place,  a  certain  monk  called  Romanus  met  him,  and 
demanded  whither  he  went,  and  understanding  his  pur- 
pose, he  both  kept  it  close,  furthered  him  what  he  might, 
vested  him  with  the  habit  of  holy  conversation,  and  as 
he  could,  did  minister  and  serve  him. 

The  man  of  God,  Bennet,  coming  to  this  foresaid 
place,  lived  there  in  a  strait  cave,  where  he  continued 
three  years  unknown  to  all  men,  except  to  Romanus,  who 
lived  not  far  off,  under  the  rule  of  Abbot  Theodacus, 
and  very  virtuously  did  steal  certain  hours,  and  likewise 
sometime  a  loaf  given  for  his  own  provision,  which  he 
did  carry  to  Bennet.  And  because  from  Romanus'  cell 
to  that  cave  there  was  not  any  way,  by  reason  of  an  high 
rock  which  did  hang  over  it,  Romanus,  from  the  top 
thereof,  upon  a  long  rope,  did  let  down  the  loaf,  upon 
which  also  with  a  band  he  tied  a  little  bell,  that  by  the 
ringing  thereof  the  man  of  God  might  know  when  he 
came  with  his  bread,  and  so  be  ready  to  take  it.  But  the 
old  enemy  of  mankind,  envyingat  the  charity  of  the  one 
and  the  refection  of  the  other,  seeing  a  loaf  upon  a  cer- 
tain day  let  down,  threw  a  stone  and  brake  the  bell ;  but 
yet,  for  all  that,  Romanus  gave  not  over  to  serve  him 
by  all  the  possible  means  he  could. 

At  length  when  almighty  God  was  determined  to  ease 
Romanus  of  his  pains,  and  to  have  Bennet's  life  for  an 
example  known  to  the  world,  that  such  a  candle,  set  upon 
a  candlestick,  might  shine  and  give  light  to  the  Church  of 
God,  our  Lord  vouchsafed  to  appear  unto  a  certain  Priest 
dwelling  a  good  way  off",  who  had  made  ready  his  dinner 

53 


Cfje  Dialogues  of  %t  <$regorp 

for  Easter  day,  and  spake  thus  unto  him  :  "  Thou  hast 
provided  good  cheer  for  thyself,  and  my  servant  in  such 
a  place  is  afflicted  with  hunger  "  :  who  hearing  this  forth- 
with rose  up,  and  upon  Easter  day  itself,  with  such 
meat  as  he  had  prepared,  went  to  the  place,  where  he 
sought  for  the  man  of  God  amongst  the  steep  hills,  the 
low  valleys  and  hollow  pits,  and  at  length  found  him  in 
his  cave  :  where,  after  they  had  prayed  together,  and  sit- 
ting down  had  given  God  thanks,  and  had  much  spiritual 
talk,  then  the  Priest  said  unto  him  :  "  Rise  up,  brother, 
and  let  us  dine,  because  to-day  is  the  feast  of  Easter." 
To  whom  the  man  of  God  answered,  and  said  :  "  1  know 
that  it  is  Easter  with  me  and  a  great  feast,  having  found 
so  much  favour  at  God's  hands  as  this  day  to  enjoy  your 
company  "  (for  by  reason  of  his  long  absence  from  men, 
he  knew  not  that  it  was  the  great  solemnity  of  Easter). 
But  the  reverent  Priest  again  did  assure  him,  saying  : 
"Verily,  to-day  is  the  feast  of  our  Lord's  Resurrection, 
and  therefore  meet  it  is  not  that  you  should  keep 
abstinence,  and  besides  I  am  sent  to  that  end,  that 
we  might  eat  together  of  such  provision  as  God's 
goodness  hath  sent  us."  Whereupon  they  said  grace, 
and  fell  to  their  meat,  and  after  they  had  dined,  and 
bestowed  some  time  in  talking,  the  Priest  returned  to  his 
church. 

About  the  same  time  likewise,  certain  shepherds  found 
him  in  that  same  cave  :  and  at  the  first,  when  they  espied 
him  through  the  bushes,  and  saw  his  apparel  made  of 
skins,  they  verily  thought  that  it  had  been  some  beast  : 
but  after  they  were  acquainted  with  the  servant  of  God, 
many  of  them  were  by  his  means  converted  from  their 
beastly  life  to  grace,  piety,  and  devotion.  And  thus  his 
name  in  the  country  there  about  became  famous,  and 
many  after  this  went  to  visit  him,  and  for  corporal  meat 
which  they  brought  him,  they  carried  away  spiritual  food 
for  their  souls. 

54 


£fje  Life  anH  apitade0  of  %t  TBennet 
C&apter  Ctoo  :  &oto  be  overcame  a  great  tempta^ 

tlOlT  Of  tf)e  fle0()»    ^  Upon  a  certain  day  being  alone, 
the  tempter  was  at  hand  :  for  a  little  black  bird,  com- 
monly called  a  merle  or  an  ousel,  began  to  fly  about  his 
face,  and  that  so  near  as  the  holy  man,  if  he  would,  might 
have  taken  it  with  his  hand  :  but  after  he  had  blessed 
himself  with  the  sign  of  the  cross,  the  bird  flew  away  : 
and  forthwith  the  holy  man  was  assaulted  with  such  a 
terrible  temptation  of  the  flesh,  as  he  never  felt  the  like 
in  all  his  life.     A  certain  woman  there  was  which  some 
time  he  had  seen,  the  memory  of  which  the  wicked  spirit 
put  into  his  mind,  and  by  the  representation  of  her  did 
so  mightily  inflame  with  concupiscence  the  soul  of  God's 
servant,  which  did  so  increase  that,  almost  overcome  with 
pleasure,  he  was  of  mind  to  have  forsaken  the  wilder- 
ness.    But,  suddenly  assisted  with  God's  grace,  he  came 
to  himself;  and  seeing  many  thick  briers  and  nettle- 
bushes  to  grow  hard  by,  off  he  cast  his  apparel,  and  threw 
himself  into  the  midst  of  them,  and  there  wallowed  so 
long  that,  when  he  rose  up,  all  his  flesh  was  pitifully 
torn  :  and  so  by  the  wounds  of  his  body,  he  cured  the 
wounds  of  his  soul,   in  that  he  turned  pleasure  into 
pain,  and  by  the  outward  burning  of  extreme    smart, 
quenched  that  fire  which,  being  nourished  before  with 
the  fuel  of  carnal  cogitations,  did  inwardly  burn  in  his 
soul  :  and  by  this  means  he  overcame  the  sin,  because 
he  made  a  change  of  the  fire.     From  which  time  forward, 
as  himself  did  afterward  report  unto  his  disciples,  Ke 
found  all  temptation  of  pleasure  so  subdued,  that  he 
never  felt  any  such  thing.      Many  after  this  began  to 
abandon  the  world,  and  to  become  his  scholars.     For 
being  now  freed  from  the  vice  of  temptation,  worthily 
and  with  great  reason  is  he  made  a  master  of  virtue  : 
for   which   cause,    in   Exodus,    commandment   is  given 
by  Moses,  that  the  Levites  from  five-and-twenty  years 
and  upward  should  serve,  but,  after  they  came  to  fifty, 

55 


Cftc  Dialogues  of  %t  <£rcprp 

that  they  should  be  ordained  keepers  of  the  holy 
vessels.1 

l[?Ct0t.  Somewhat  I  understand  of  this  testimony 
alleged  :  but  yet  I  beseech  you  to  tell  me  the  meaning 
thereof  more  fully. 

<£>tC0Ot£,  It  is  plain,  Peter,  that  in  youth  the  tempta- 
tion of  the  flesh  is  hot  :  but  after  fifty  years  the  heat  of 
the  body  waxeth  cold,  and  the  souls  of  faithful  people 
become  holy  vessels.  Wherefore  necessary  it  is  that 
God's  elect  servants,  whiles  they  are  yet  in  the  heat  of 
temptation,  should  live  in  obedience,  serve,  and  be 
wearied  with  labour  and  pains.  But  when,  by  reason  of 
age,  the  heat  of  temptation  is  past,  they  become  keepers 
of  holy  vessels  ;  because  they  then  are  made  the  doctors 
of  men's  souls. 

Ip0t0t»  I  cannot  deny,  but  that  your  words  have  given 
me  full  satisfaction  :  wherefore,  seeing  you  have  now 
expounded  the  meaning  of  the  former  text  alleged,  pro- 
secute, I  pray,  as  you  have  begun,  the  rest  of  the  holy 
man's  life. 

Chapter  Cftree:  ftoto  Rennet,  ftp  tbe  sign  of 
tfte  ftolp  cross,  ftrafee  a  Drinking^glass  in  pieces, 

^  <2>tCg0tp»  When  this  great  temptation  was  thus 
overcome,  the  man  of  God,  like  unto  a  piece  of  ground 
well  tilled  and  weeded,  of  the  seed  of  virtue  brought 
forth  plentiful  store  of  fruit  :  and  by  reason  of  the  great 
report  of  his  wonderful  holy  life,  his  name  became  very 
famous.  Not  far  from  the  place  where  he  remained 
there  was  a  monastery,  the  Abbot  whereof  was  dead  : 
whereupon  the  whole  Convent  came  unto  the  venerable 
man  Bennet,  entreating  him  very  earnestly  that  he 
would  vouchsafe  to  take  upon  him  the  charge  and 
government  of  their  Abbey  :  long  time  he  denied  them, 
saying  that  their  manners  were  divers  from  his,  and 
therefore  that  they  should  never  agree  together  :  yet 

1  Numbers  8,  24-26. 

56 


£fje  Life  anD  piracies  of  St  I6cnnet 

at  length,  overcome  with  their  entreaty,  he  gave  his 
consent.  Having  now  taken  upon  him  the  charge  of 
the  Abbey,  he  took  order  that  regular  life  should  be 
observed,  so  that  none  of  them  could,  as  before  they 
used,  through  unlawful  acts  decline  from  the  path  of 
holy  conversation,  either  on  the  one  side  or  on  the 
other  :  which  the  monks  perceiving,  they  fell  into  a 
great  rage,  accusing  themselves  that  ever  they  desired 
him  to  be  their  Abbot,  seeing  their  crooked  conditions 
could  not  endure  his  virtuous  kind  of  government  :  and 
therefore  when  they  saw  that  under  him  they  could  not 
live  in  unlawful  sort,  and  were  loath  to  leave  their  former 
conversation,  and  found  it  hard  to  be  enforced  with  old 
minds  to  meditate  and  think  upon  new  things  :  and 
because  the  life  of  virtuous  men  is  always  grievous  to 
those  that  be  of  wicked  conditions,  some  of  them  began 
to  devise,  how  they  might  rid  him  out  of  the  way  :  and 
therefore,  taking  counsel  together,  they  agreed  to  poison 
his  wine  :  which  being  done,  and  the  glass  wherein  that 
wine  was,  according  to  the  custom,  offered  to  the  Abbot 
to  bless,  he,  putting  forth  his  hand,  made  the  sign  of 
the  cross,  and  straightway  the  glass,  that  was  holden  far 
off,  brake  in  pieces,  as  though  the  sign  of  the  cross  had 
been  a  stone  thrown  against  it  :  upon  which  accident 
the  man  of  God  by  and  by  perceived  that  the  glass  had 
in  it  the  drink  of  death,  which  could  not  endure  the 
sign  of  life  :  and  therefore  rising  up,  with  a  mild 
countenance  and  quiet  mind,  he  called  the  monks  to- 
gether, and  spake  thus  unto  them  :  "  Almighty  God 
have  mercy  upon  you,  and  forgive  you  :  why  have  you 
used  me  in  this  manner  ?  Did  not  I  tell  you  before 
hand,  that  our  manner  of  living  could  never  agree 
together  ?  Go  your  ways,  and  seek  ye  out  some  other 
father  suitable  to  your  own  conditions,  for  I  intend  not 
now  to  stay  any  longer  amongst  you."  When  he  had 
thus    discharged    himself,    he    returned    back    to    the 

57 


C6e  Dialogues  of  %t  ®reprp 

wilderness  which  so  much  he  loved,  and  dwelt  alone 
with  himself,  in  the  sight  of  his  Creator,  who  beholdeth 
the  hearts  of  all  men. 

H?Ct0t»  I  understand  not  very  well  what  you  mean, 
when  you  say  that  he  dwelt  with  himself. 
(jDt£{J0tp»  If  the  holy  man  had  longer,  contrary  to  his 
own  mind,  continued  his  government  over  those  monks, 
who  had  all  conspired  against  him,  and  were  far  unlike 
to  him  in  life  and  conversation  :  perhaps  he  should  have 
diminished  his  own  devotion,  and  somewhat  withdrawn 
the  eyes  of  his  soul  from  the  light  of  contemplation  ; 
and  being  wearied  daily  with  correcting  of  their  faults,  he 
should  have  had  the  less  care  of  himself,  and  so  haply 
it  might  have  fallen  out,  that  he  should  both  have  lost 
himself,  and  yet  not  found  them  :  for  so  often  as  by 
infectious  motion  we  are  carried  too  far  from  ourselves, 
we  remain  the  same  men  that  we  were  before,  and  yet 
be  not  with  ourselves  as  we  were  before  :  because  we 
are  wandering  about  other  men's  affairs,  little  con- 
sidering and  looking  into  the  state  of  our  own  soul. 
For  shall  we  say  that  he  was  with  himself,  who  went 
into  a  far  country,  and  after  he  had,  as  we  read  in  the 
Gospel,1  prodigally  spent  that  portion  which  he  received 
of  his  father,  was  glad  to  serve  a  citizen,  to  keep  his 
hogs,  and  would  willingly  have  filled  his  hungry  belly 
with  the  husks  which  they  did  eat  :  who  notwithstand- 
ing afterward,  when  he  thought  with  himself  of  those 
goods  which  he  had  lost,  it  is  written  of  him  that,  re- 
turning into  himself,  he  said  :  How  many  hired  men  in 
my  father  s  house  do  abound  with  bread?  If  then,  before 
he  were  with  himself,  from  whence  did  he  return  home 
unto  himself?  and  therefore  I  said  that  this  venerable 
man  did  dwell  with  himself,  because  carrying  himself 
circumspectly  and  carefully  in  the  sight  of  his  Creator, 
always  considering  his  own  actions,  always  examining 

1  Luke  15. 

58 


Cbe  life  anD  piracies  of  St.  iBennet 

himself,  never  did  he  turn  the  eyes  of  his  soul  from 
himself,  to  behold  aught  else  whatsoever. 
P0t0r.  Why,  then,  is  it  written  of  the  Apostle,  St. 
Peter,  after  he  was  by  the  Angel  delivered  out  of 
prison,  that,  returning  to  himself,  he  said  :  Now  I  know 
verily,  that  our  Lord  hath  sent  his  Angel,  and  hath  delivered 
me  from  the  hand  of  Herod,  and  from  all  the  expectation  of  the 
people  of  the  Jews} 

CDtegOtp.  We  are  two  manner  of  ways,  Peter,  carried 
out  of  ourselves  :  for  either  we  fall  under  ourselves  by 
sinful  cogitation,  or  else  we  are,  by  the  grace  of  con- 
templation, lifted  above  ourselves  :  for  he  that  kept 
hogs,  through  wandering  of  his  mind  and  unclean 
thoughts,  fell  under  himself:  but  he  whom  the  Angel 
delivered  out  of  prison,  being  also  rapt  by  the  Angel 
into  an  ecstasy,  was  in  truth  out  of  himself,  but  yet 
above  himself.  Both  of  them,  therefore,  did  return 
unto  themselves  ;  the  one  when  he  recollected  himself, 
and  forsook  his  lewd  kind  of  life  ;  and  the  other  from 
the  top  of  contemplation,  to  have  that  usual  judgment 
and  understanding,  which  before  he  had  :  wherefore 
venerable  Bennet  in  that  solitary  wilderness  dwelt  with 
himself,  because  he  kept  himself,  and  retired  his  cogita- 
tions within  the  closet  of  his  own  soul  :  for  when  the 
greatness  of  contemplation  rapt  him  up  aloft,  out  of  all 
question  he  did  then  leave  himself  under  himself. 
Jpetet.  Your  discourse  doth  very  well  content  me  :  yet 
I  beseech  you  to  answer  me  this  question,  whether  he 
could  in  conscience  give  over  those  monks,  whose 
government  he  had  now  taken  upon  him  ? 
(StegOtp.  In  mine  opinion,  Peter,  evil  men  may  with 
good  conscience  be  tolerated  in  that  community,  where 
there  be  some  good  that  may  be  holpen  and  reap  com- 
modity. But  where  there  be  none  good  at  all,  that  may 
receive  spiritual  profit,  often  times  all  labour  is  lost,  that 

1    Acts  12,  I  I. 

59 


Cf)c  Dialogues  of  §>t.  (Srcgorp 

is  bestowed  in  bringing  of  such  to  good  order,  especially 
if  other  occasions  be  offered  of  doing  God  presently 
better  service  elsewhere  :  for  whose  good,  then,  should 
the  holy  man  have  expected,  seeing  them  all  to  perse- 
cute him  with  one  consent  ?  and  (that  which  is  not  to 
be  passed  over  with  silence)  those  that  be  perfect  carry 
always  this  mind,  that  when  they  perceive  their  labour 
to  be  fruitless  in  one  place,  to  remove  straight  to  another, 
where  more  good  may  be  done.  And  for  this  cause, 
that  notable  preacher  of  the  world,  who  was  desirous  to 
be  dissolved,  and  to  be  with  Christ,  unto  whom  to  live 
is  Christy  and  to  die  is  gain  : *  and  who  not  only  desired 
himself  to  suffer  persecution,  but  did  also  animate  and 
encourage  others  to  suffer  the  same  ;  yet  being  himself 
in  persecution  at  Damascus,  got  a  rope  and  a  basket  to 
pass  over  the  wall,  and  was  privily  let  down.  What 
then  ?  shall  we  say  that  Paul  was  afraid  of  death,  when 
as  himself  said,  that  he  desired  it  for  Christ's  sake  ?  not 
so  :  but  when  he  perceived  that  in  that  place  little  good 
was  to  be  done  by  great  labour,  he  reserved  himself  to 
further  labour,  where  more  fruit  and  better  success 
might  be  expected  :  and  therefore  the  valiant  soldier  ot 
Christ  would  not  be  kept  within  walls,  but  sought  for 
a  larger  field  where  he  might  more  freely  labour  for  his 
master.  And  so,  in  like  manner,  you  shall  quickly 
perceive,  if  you  mark  well,  that  venerable  Bennet  for- 
sook not  so  many  in  one  place,  that  were  unwilling  to 
be  taught,  as  he  did  in  sundry  other  places  raise  up  from 
the  death  of  soul  many  more,  that  were  willing  to  be 
instructed. 

J£)0t0t.   It  is  so  as  you  say,  and  plain  reason  teacheth 
it,  and  the  example  of  St.  Paul  alleged  doth  confirm  it. 
But  I  beseech  you  to  return  unto  your  former  purpose, 
and  to  prosecute  the  life  of  the  holy  man. 
(2DtC0Ot|).  When  as  God's  servant  daily  increased  in 

1  Phil.  I,  21. 
60 


p 


ST.  M  U'KUS 
(San  Pietro,  Perugia) 


Cbe  Life  ant)  piracies  of  %t  15ennet 

virtue,  and  became  continually  more  famous  for  miracles, 
many  were  by  him  in  the  same  place  drawn  to  the  ser- 
vice of  almighty  God,  so  that  by  Christ's  assistance  he 
built  there  twelve  Abbeys  ;  over  which  he  appointed 
governors,  and  in  each  of  them  placed  twelve  monks, 
and  a  few  he  kept  with  himself,  namely,  such  as  he 
thought  would  more  profit,  and  be  better  instructed  by 
his  own  presence.  At  that  time  also  many  noble  and 
religious  men  of  Rome  came  unto  him,  and  committed 
their  children  to  be  brought  up  under  him,  for  the  ser- 
vice of  God.  Then  also  Evitius  delivered  him  Maurus, 
and  Tertullius  the  Senator  brought  Placidus,  being  their 
sons  of  great  hope  and  towardness  :  of  which  two, 
Maurus,  growing  to  great  virtue,  began  to  be  his  master's 
co-adjutor  ;  but  Placidus,  as  yet,  was  but  a  boy  of  tender 
years. 

Chapter  JTout :  &oto  IBennet  tefotmeD  a  monk 
tbat  toouio  not  0tap  at  to  prayers.  <l  in  one  of  the 

monasteries  which  he  had  built  in  those  parts,  a  monk 
there  was,  which  could  not  continue  at  prayers  ;  for  when 
the  other  monks  knelt  down  to  serve  God,  his  manner 
was  to  go  forth,  and  there  with  wandering  mind  to  busy 
himself  about  some  earthly  and  transitory  things.  And 
when  he  had  been  often  by  his  Abbot  admonished  of  this 
fault  without  any  amendment,  at  length  he  was  sent  to 
the  man  of  God,  who  did  likewise  very  much  rebuke  him 
for  his  folly  ;  yet  notwithstanding,  returning  back  again, 
he  did  scarce  two  days  follow  the  holy  man's  admonition  ; 
for,  upon  the  third  day,  he  fell  again  to  his  old  custom, 
and  would  not  abide  within  at  the  time  of  prayer  :  word 
whereof  being  once  more  sent  to  the  man  of  God,  by 
the  father  of  the  Abbey  whom  he  had  there  appointed, 
he  returned  him  answer  that  he  would  come  himself,  and 
reform  what  was  amiss,  which  he  did  accordingly  :  and 
it  fell  so  out,  that  when  the  singing  of  psalms  was  ended, 
and  the  hour  come  in  which  the  monks  betook  themselves 

61 


£fje  Dialogic  of  %>t  <$tcgorp 

to  prayer,  the  holy  man  perceived  that  the  monk,  which 
used  at  that  time  to  go  forth,  was  by  a  little  black  boy 
drawn  out  by  the  skirt  of  his  garment ;  upon  which  sight, 
he  spake  secretly  to  Pompeianus,  father  of  the  Abbey, 
and  also  to  Maurus,  saying :  "  Do  you  not  see  who  it 
is,  that  draweth  this  monk  from  his  prayers  ?"  and  they 
answered  him,  that  they  did  not.  "  Then  let  us  pray," 
quoth  he,  "  unto  God,  that  you  also  may  behold  whom 
this  monk  doth  follow  "  :  and  after  two  days  Maurus 
did  see  him,  but  Pompeianus  could  not.  Upon  another 
day,  when  the  man  of  God  had  ended  his  devotions,  he 
went  out  of  the  oratory,  where  he  found  the  foresaid 
monk  standing  idle,  whom  for  the  blindness  of  his  heart 
he  strake  with  a  little  wand,  and  from  that  day  forward 
he  was  so  freed  from  all  allurement  of  the  little  black 
boy,  that  he  remained  quietly  at  his  prayers,  as  other  of 
the  monks  did  :  for  the  old  enemy  was  so  terrified,  that 
he  durst  not  any  more  suggest  any  such  cogitations  :  as 
though  by  that  blow,  not  the  monk,  but  himself  had 
been  strooken. 

Chapter  jFfoe :  of  a  fountain  tfjat  sprung  fortb  in 
tf)t  top  of  a  mountain,  ftp  the  ptapers  of  tbe  man 

Of  <£>0D.  ^  Amongst  the  monasteries  which  he  had  built 
in  those  parts,  three  of  them  were  situated  upon  the  rocks 
of  a  mountain,  so  that  very  painful  it  was  for  the  monks 
to  go  down  and  fetch  water,  especially  because  the  side 
of  the  hill  was  so  steep  that  there  was  great  fear  of  danger  : 
and  therefore  the  monks  of  those  Abbeys  with  one  con- 
sent came  unto  the  servant  of  God,  Bennet,  giving  him 
to  understand,  how  laborious  it  was  for  them  daily  to  go 
down  unto  the  lake  for  water  :  and  therefore  they  added, 
that  it  was  very  necessary  to  have  them  removed  to  some 
other  places.  The  man  of  God,  comforting  them  with 
sweet  words,  caused  them  to  return  back  again  ;  and  the 
next  night,  having  with  him  only  the  little  boy  Placidus 
(of  whom  we  spake  before),  he  ascended  up  to  the  rock 

62 


Cbe  JLife  anD  piracies  of  §t  iBennet 

of  that  mountain,  and  continued  there  a  long  time  in 
prayer  ;  and  when  he  had  done,  he  took  three  stones,  and 
laid  them  in  the  same  place  for  a  mark,  and  so,  none  of 
them  being  privy  to  that  he  had  done,  he  returned  back 
to  his  own  Abbey.  And  the  next  day,  when  the  foresaid 
monks  came  again  about  their  former  business,  he  said 
thus  unto  them  :  "  Go  your  way  to  the  rock,  and  in  the 
place  where  you  find  three  stones  laid  one  upon  another, 
dig  a  little  hole,  for  almighty  God  is  able  to  bring 
forth  water  in  the  top  of  that  mountain,  and  so  to  ease 
you  of  that  great  labour  which  you  take  in  fetching  it 
so  far."  Away  they  went,  and  came  to  the  rock  of 
the  mountain  according  to  his  direction,  which  they 
found  as  it  were  sweating  drops  of  water,  and  after 
they  had  with  a  spade  made  an  hollow  place,  it  was 
straightways  filled,  and  water  flowed  out  so  abundantly, 
that  it  doth  plentifully,  even  to  this  day,  spring  out 
and  run  down  from  the  top  to  the  very  bottom  of  that 
hill. 

Cfmpter  &ix :  fjoto  t&e  iron  beao  of  a  ML  from 
tbe  bottom  of  tfje  toater,  returnee  to  fte  fjanole 

again*  ^  At  another  time,  a  certain  Goth,  poor  of 
spirit,  that  gave  over  the  world,  was  received  by  the  man 
of  God  ;  whom  on  a  day  he  commanded  to  take  a  bill, 
and  to  cleanse  a  certain  plot  of  ground  from  briers,  for 
the  making  of  a  garden,  which  ground  was  by  the  side 
of  a  lake.  The  Goth  as  he  was  there  labouring,  by 
chance  the  head  of  the  bill  slipped  off,  and  fell  into  the 
water,  which  was  so  deep,  that  there  was  no  hope  ever 
to  get  it  again.  The  poor  Goth,  in  great  fear,  ran  unto 
Maurus  and  told  him  what  he  had  lost,  confessing  his 
own  fault  and  negligence  :  Maurus  forthwith  went  to 
the  servant  of  God,  giving  him  to  understand  thereof, 
who  came  straightways  to  the  lake  :  and  took  the  handle 
out  of  the  Goth's  hand,  and  put  it  into  the  water,  and 
the  iron  head  by  and  by  ascended  from  the  bottom,  and 

63 


€&e  Dialogues  of  %t  (Sregorp 

entered  again  into  the  handle  of  the  bill,  which  he  de- 
livered to  the  Goth,  saying  :  "  Behold  here  is  thy  bill 
again,  work  on,  and  be  sad  no  more." 

C&apter  %tttzn :  jjoto  ^aurus  toalfceo  upon  tbe 

toatCt.  ^  On  a  certain  day,  as  venerable  Bennet  was  in 
his  cell,   the  foresaid  young  Placidus,  the  holy  man's 
monk,  went  out  to  take  up  water  at  the  lake,  and  putting 
down  his  pail  carelessly,  fell  in  himself  after  it,  whom 
the  water  forthwith  carried  away  from  the  land  so  far 
as  one  may  shoot  an  arrow.    The  man  of  God,  being  in 
his  cell,  by  and  by  knew  this,  and  called  in  haste  for 
Maurus,  saying  :  "  Brother  Maurus,  run  as  fast  as  you 
can,  for  Placidus,  that  went  to  the  lake  to  fetch  water, 
is  fallen  in,  and  is  carried  a  good  way  off."     A  strange 
thing,  and  since  the  time  of  Peter  the  Apostle  never 
heard  of !     Maurus,  craving  his  father's  blessing,  and 
departing  in  all  haste  at  his  commandment,  ran  to  that 
place  upon  the  water,  to  which  the  young  lad  was  carried 
by  force  thereof,  thinking  that  he  had  all  that  while  gone 
upon  the  land  :  and  taking  fast  hold  of  him  by  the  hair 
of  his  head,  in  all  haste  he  returned  back  again  :  and  so 
soon  as  he  was  at  land,  coming  to  himself  he  looked 
behind  him,  and  then  knew  very  well  that  he  had  before 
run  upon  the  water  :  and  that  which  before  he  durst 
not  have  presumed,  being  now  done  and  past,  he  both 
marvelled,  and  was  afraid  at  that  which  he  had  done. 
Coming  back  to  the  father,  and  telling  him  what  had 
happened,  the  venerable  man  did  not  attribute  this  to 
his  own  merits,  but  to  the  obedience  of  Maurus  :  but 
Maurus  on  the  contrary,  said  that  it  was  done  only  upon 
his  commandment,  and  that  he  had  nothing  to  do  in 
that  miracle,  not  knowing  at  that  time  what  he  did. 
But  the  friendly  contention  proceeding  of  mutual  humi- 
lity, the  young  youth  himself  that  was  saved  from  drown- 
ing did  determine  :  for  he  said  that  he  saw  when  he  was 
drawn  out  of  the  water,  the  Abbot's  garment  upon  his 

64 


I 


€&c  iltfe  anD  piracies  of  St.  15cnnet 

head,  affirming  that  it  was  he  that  had  delivered  him 
from  that  great  danger. 

l^CtCt*  Certainly  they  be  wonderful  things  which  you 
report,  and  such  as  may  serve  for  the  edification  of 
many  :  for  mine  own  part,  the  more  that  I  hear  of  his 
miracles,  the  more  do  I  still  desire. 

C&aptcr  4£igf)t :  boto  a  loaf  toas  poisoneD,  ano 
catrieD  far  off  ftp  a  croto.  <§  ®rcgorp.  when  as  the 

foresaid  monasteries  were  zealous  in  the  love  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  and  their  fame  dispersed  far  and  near,  and 
many  gave  over  the  secular  life,  and  subdued  the  passions 
of  their  soul  under  the  light  yoke  of  our  Saviour  :  then 
(as  the  manner  of  wicked  people  is,  to  envy  at  that 
virtue  which  themselves  desire  not  to  follow)  one 
Florentius,  Priest  of.a  church  hard  by,  and  grandfather 
to  Florentius  our  sub-deacon,  possessed  with  diabolical 
malice,  began  to  envy  the  holy  man's  virtues,  to  back- 
bite his  manner  of  living,  and  to  withdraw  as  many  as 
he  could  from  going  to  visit  him  :  and  when  he  saw 
that  he  could  not  hinder  his  virtuous  proceedings,  but 
that,  on  the  contrary,  the  fame  of  his  holy  life  increased, 
and  many  daily,  upon  the  very  report  of  his  sanctity, 
did  betake  themselves  to  a  better  state  of  life  :  burning 
more  and  more  with  the  coals  of  envy,  he  became  far 
worse  ;  and  though  he  desired  not  to  imitate  his  com- 
mendable life,  yet  fain  he  would  have  had  the  reputation 
of  his  virtuous  conversation.  In  conclusion  so  much 
did  malicious  envy  blind  him,  and  so  far  did  he  wade 
in  that  sin,  that  he  poisoned  a  loaf,  and  sent  it  to  the 
servant  of  almighty  God,  as  it  wefe  for  an  holy  present. 
The  man  of  God  received  it  with  great  thanks,  yet  not 
ignorant  of  that  which  was  hidden  within.  At  dinner 
time,  a  crow  daily  used  to  come  unto  him  from  the  next 
wood,  which  took  bread  at  his  hands  ;  coming  that  day 
after  his  manner,  the  man  of  God  threw  him  the  loaf 
which  the  Priest  had  sent  him,  giving  him  this  charge  : 

65  e 


€f)e  Dialogues  of  %t  <£regorp 

"  In  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  take  up  that 
loaf,  and  leave  it  in  some  such  place  where  no  man  may 
find  it."  Then  the  crow,  opening  his  mouth,  and 
lifting  up  his  wings,  began  to  hop  up  and  down  about 
the  loaf,  and  after  his  manner  to  cry  out,  as  though  he 
would  have  said  that  he  was  willing  to  obey,  and  yet 
could  not  do  what  he  was  commanded.  The  man  of 
God  again  and  again  bade  him,  saying  :  "  Take  it  up 
without  fear,  and  throw  it  where  no  man  may  find  it." 
At  length,  with  much  ado,  the  crow  took  it  up,  and 
flew  away,  and  after  three  hours,  having  dispatched  the 
loaf,  he  returned  back  again,  and  received  his  usual 
allowance  from  the  man  of  God. 

But  the  venerable  father,  perceiving  the  Priest  so  wick- 
edly bent  against  his  life,  was  far  more  sorry  for  him  than 
grieved  for  himself.  And  Florentius,  seeing  that  he  could 
not  kill  the  body  of  the  master,  laboureth  now  what  he 
can,  to  destroy  the  souls  of  his  disciples  ;  and  for  that  pur- 
pose he  sent  into  the  yard  of  the  Abbey  before  their  eyes 
seven  naked  young  women,  which  did  there  take  hands 
together,  play  and  dance  a  long  time  before  them,  to  the 
end  that,  by  this  means,  they  might  inflame  their  minds 
to  sinful  lust :  which  damnable  sight  the  holy  man  behold- 
ing out  of  his  cell,  and  fearing  the  danger  which  thereby 
might  ensue  to  his  younger  monks,  and  considering  that 
all  this  was  done  only  for  the  persecuting  of  himself,  he 
gave  place  to  envy  ;  and  therefore,  after  he  had  for  those 
abbeys  and  oratories  which  he  had  there  built  appointed 
governors,  and  left  some  under  their  charge,  himself,  in  the 
company  of  a  few  monks,  removed  to  another  place.  And 
thus  the  man  of  God,  upon  humility,  gave  place  to  the 
other's  malice;  but  yet  almighty  God  of  justice  did 
severely  punish  his  wickedness.  For  when  the  foresaid 
Priest,  being  in  his  chamber,  understood  of  the  departure 
of  holy  Bennet,  and  was  very  glad  of  that  news,  behold 
(the  whole  house  besides  continuing  safe  and  sound)  that 

66 


Cbe  Life  anD  piracies  of  %t  15ennet 

chamber  alone  in  which  he  was,  fell  down,  and  so  killed 
him  :  which  strange  accident  the  holy  man's  disciple 
Maurus  understanding,  straightways  sent  him  word,  he 
being  as  yet  scarce  ten  miles  off,  desiring  him  to  return 
again,  because  the  Priest  that  did  persecute  him  was  slain  ; 
which  thing  when  Bennet  heard,  he  was  passing  sorrow- 
ful, and  lamented  much  :  both  because  his  enemy  died  in 
such  sort,  and  also  for  that  one  of  his  monks  rejoiced 
thereat ;  and  therefore  he  gave  him  penance,  for  that, 
sending  such  news,  he  presumed  to  rejoice  at  his  enemy's 
death. 

IPCtCt*  The  things  you  report  be  strange,  and  much  to 
be  wondered  at :  for  in  making  the  rock  to  yield  forth 
water,  I  see  Moses  ;  and  in  the  iron,  which  came  from  the 
bottom  of  the  lake,  I  behold  Heliseus  ;  in  the  walking  ot 
Maurus  upon  the  water,  I  perceive  Peter  ;  in  the  obedi- 
ence of  the  crow,  I  contemplate  Helias  ;  and  in  lamenting 
the  death  of  his  enemy,  I  acknowledge  David  :  and  there- 
fore, in  mine  opinion,  this  one  man  was  full  of  the  spirit 
of  all  good  men. 

CDtC0Otp.  The  man  of  God,  Bennet,  had  the  spirit  of 
the  one  true  God,  who,  by  the  grace  of  our  redemption, 
hath  filled  the  hearts  of  his  elect  servants  ;  of  whom  St. 
John  saith  :  He  was  the  true  light,  which  doth  lighten  every 
man  coming  into  this  world}  Of  whom,  again,  we  find  it 
written  :  Of  his  fulness  we  have  all  received.2  For  God's 
holy  servants  might  receive  virtues  of  our  Lord,  but  to 
bestow  them  upon  others  they  could  not ;  and  therefore 
it  was  he  that  gave  the  signs  of  miracles  to  his  servants, 
who  promised  to  give  the  sign  of  Jonas  to  his  enemies  :3 
so  that  he  vouchsafed  to  die  in  the  sight  of  the  proud, 
and  to  rise  again  before  the  eyes  of  the  humble  :  to  the 
end,  that  they  might  behold  what  they  contemned,  and 
those  see  that  which  they  ought  to  worship  and  love  :  by 
reason  of  which  mystery  it  cometh  to  pass  that,  whereas 
1  John  I,  9.  2  Ibid.  1,  16.  3  Matt.  12,  40. 

67 


C6e  Dialogic  of  %t  <£reg;orp 

the  proud  cast  their  eyes  upon  the  contempt  of  his  death, 
the  humble  contrariwise,  against  death,  lay  hold  of  the 
glory  of  his  ppwer  and  might. 

ll^CtCt.  To  what  places,  1  pray  you,  after  this,  did  the 
holy  man  go  :  and  whether  did  he  afterward  in  them  work 
any  miracles,  or  no  ? 

<&XZQQIJ).  The  holy  man,  changing  his  place,  did  not 
for  all  that  change  his  enemy.  For  afterward  he  endured 
so  much  the  more  grievous  battles,  by  how  much  he  had 
now  the  master  of  all  wickedness  fighting  openly  against 
him.  For  the  town,  which  is  called  Cassino,  standeth 
upon  the  side  of  an  high  mountain,  which  containeth,  as 
it  were  in  the  lap  thereof,  the  foresaid  town,  and  after- 
ward so  riseth  in  height  the  space  of  three  miles,  that  the 
top  thereof  seemeth  to  touch  the  very  heavens  :  in  this 
place  there  was  an  ancient  chapel  in  which  the  foolish  and 
simple  country  people,  according  to  the  custom  of  the  old 
gentiles,  worshipped  the  god  Apollo.  Round  about  it 
likewise  upon  all  sides,  there  were  woods  for  the  service 
of  the  devils,  in  which,  even  to  that  very  time,  the  mad 
multitude  of  infidels  did  offer  most  wicked  sacrifice.  The 
man  of  God  coming  thither,  beat  in  pieces  the  idol,  over- 
threw the  altar,  set  fire  on  the  woods,  and  in  the  temple 
of  Apollo,  he  built  the  oratory  of  St.  Martin,  and  where 
the  altar  of  the  same  Apollo  was,  he  made  an  oratory  ot 
St.  John  :  and  by  his  continual  preaching,  he  brought  the 
people  dwelling  in  those  parts  to  embrace  the  faith  of 
Christ.  The  old  enemy  of  mankind,  not  taking  this  in 
good  part,  did  not  now  privily  or  in  a  dream,  but  in  open 
sight  present  himself  to  the  eyes  of  that  holy  father,  and 
with  great  outcries  complained  that  he  had  offered  him 
violence.  The  noise  which  he  made,  the  monks  did  hear, 
but  himself  they  could  not  see  :  but,  as  the  venerable 
father  told  them,  he  appeared  visibly  unto  him  most  fell 
and  cruel,  and  as  though, with  his  fierymouth  and  flaming 
eyes,  he  would  have  torn  him  in  pieces  :  what  the  devil 

68 


¥i 


<    Q 


*    - 


im ■VUtiniii  'i*i%    'n-°-  ^S 


•W^. 


C6e  Life  anD  piracies  of  %t.  Rennet 

said  unto  him,  all  the  monks  did  hear  ;  for  first  he  would 
call  him  by  his  name,  and  because  the  man  of  God  vouch- 
safed him  not  any  answer,  then  would  he  fall  a  reviling 
and  railing  at  him  :  for  when  he  cried  out,  calling  him 
"  Blessed  Bennet,"  and  yet  found  that  he  gave  him  no 
answer,  straightways  he  would  turn  his  tune,  and  say : 
"  Cursed  Bennet,  and  not  blessed  :  what  hast  thou  to  do 
with  me  ?  and  why  dost  thou  thus  persecute  me  ? ' 
Wherefore  new  battles  of  the  old  enemy  against  the  ser- 
vant of  God  are  to  be  looked  for,  against  whom  willingly 
did  he  make  war,  but,  against  his  will,  did  he  give  him 
occasion  of  many  notable  victories. 

C&apter  Bine :  boto  tienerafcle  IBennet,  &p  fe 
praper,  remotieo  an  jjuge  stone,  «l  Upon  a  certain 

day,  when  the  monks  were  building  up  the  cells  of  the 
same  Abbey,  there  lay  a  stone  which  they  meant  to  em- 
ploy about  that  business  :  and  when  two  or  three  were 
not  able  to  remove  it,  they  called  for  more  company,  but 
all  in  vain,  for  it  remained  so  immovable  as  though  it 
had  grown  to  the  very  earth  :  whereby  they  plainly  per- 
ceived that  the  devil  himself  did  sit  upon  it,  seeing  so 
many  men's  hands  could  not  so  much  as  once  move 
it  :  wherefore,  finding  that  their  own  labours  could  do 
nothing,  they  sent  for  the  man  of  God,  to  help  them 
with  his  prayers  against  the  devil,  who  hindered  the  re- 
moving of  that  stone.  The  holy  man  came,  and  after 
some  praying,  he  gave  it  his  blessing,  and  then  they 
carried  it  away  so  quickly,  as  though  it  had  been  of  no 
weight  at  all. 

Cfmpter  €en:  of  tfje  fantastical  fire,  tabid)  burnt 

tfje  lUtCben.  €|  Then  the  man  of  God  thought  good 
that  they  should  presently  before  his  departure  dig  up 
the  ground  in  the  same  place  ;  which  being  done,  and  a 
deep  hole  made,  the  monks  found  there  an  idol  of  brass, 
which  being  for  a  little  while  by  chance  cast  into  the 
kitchen,  they  beheld  fire  suddenly  to  come  from  it,  which 

69 


€be  Dialogues  of  %t  ®rcgorp 

to  all  their  sight  seemed  to  set  the  whole  kitchen  on  fire  ; 
for  the  quenching  whereof,  the  monks  by  casting  on  of 
water  made  such  a  noise,  that  the  man  of  God,  hearing 
it,  came  to  see  what  the  matter  was  :  and  himself  behold- 
ing not  any  fire  at  all,  which  they  said  that  they  did,  he 
bowed  down  his  head  forthwith  to  his  prayers,  and  then 
he  perceived  that  they  were  deluded  with  fantastical  fire, 
and  therefore  bad  them  bless  their  eyes,  that  they  might 
behold  the  kitchen  safe  and  sound,  and  not  those  fantas- 
tical flames,  which  the  devil  had  falsely  devised. 

Cbapter  aEIetien :  bote  venerable  IBennet  retitocD 
a  bop,  crusted  to  Deatb  toitb  tbc  ruin  of  a  toall. 

€|  Again,  as  the  monks  were  making  of  a  certain  wall 
somewhat  higher,  because  that  was  requsite,  the  man  of 
God  in  the  meantime  was  in  his  cell  at  his  prayers.  To 
whom  the  old  enemy  appeared  in  an  insulting  manner, 
telling  him,  that  he  was  now  going  to  his  monks,  that 
were  a  working  :  whereof  the  man  of  God,  in  all  haste, 
gave  them  warning,  wishing  them  to  look  unto  them- 
selves, because  the  devil  was  at  that  time  coming  amongst 
them.  The  message  was  scarce  delivered,  when  as  the 
wicked  spirit  overthrew  the  new  wall  which  they  were 
a  building,  and  with  the  fall  slew  a  little  young  child,  a 
monk,  who  was  the  son  of  a  certain  courtier.  At  which 
pitiful  chance  all  were  passing  sorry  and  exceedingly 
grieved,  not  so  much  for  the  loss  of  the  wall,  as  for  the 
death  of  their  brother  :  and  in  all  haste  they  sent  this 
heavy  news  to  the  venerable  man  Bennet ;  who  com- 
manded them  to  bring  unto  him  the  young  boy, 
mangled  and  maimed  as  he  was,  which  they  did,  but 
yet  they  could  not  carry  him  any  otherwise  than  in  a 
sack  :  for  the  stones  of  the  wall  had  not  only  broken 
his  limbs,  but  also  his  very  bones.  Being  in  that 
manner  brought  unto  the  man  of  God,  he  bad  them 
to  lay  him  in  his  cell,  and  in  that  place  upon  which  he 
used  to  pray  ;  and  then,  putting  them  all  forth,  he  shut 

70 


€be  Life  anD  piracies  of  %t  15ennet 

the  door,  and  fell  more  instantly  to  his  prayers  than  he 
used  at  other  times.  And  O  strange  miracle  !  for  the 
very  same  hour  he  made  him  sound,  and  as  lively  as 
ever  he  was  before  ;  and  sent  him  again  to  his  former 
work,  that  he  also  might  help  the  monks  to  make 
an  end  of  that  wall,  of  whose  death  the  old  serpent 
thought  he  should  have  insulted  over  Bennet,  and 
greatly  triumphed. 

Chapter  Ctoetoe :  fjoto  bp  revelation  venerable 
15ennet  kneto  tbat  6fc  Q^onks  ban  eaten  out  of 

t!)e  Q^OnaStetp.  ^  Among  other  miracles  which  the 
man  of  God  did,  he  began  also  to  be  famous  for  the 
spirit  of  prophecy  :  as  to  foretell  what  was  to  happen, 
and  to  relate  unto  them  that  were  present,  such  things 
as  were  done  in  absence.  The  order  of  his  Abbey  was, 
that  when  the  monks  went  abroad  (to  deliver  any  mes- 
sage) never  to  eat  or  drink  anything  out  of  their  cloister  : 
and  this  being  diligently  observed,  according  to  the 
prescription  of  their  rule,  upon  a  certain  day  some  of 
the  monks  went  forth  upon  such  business  :  and  being 
enforced  about  the  dispatch  thereof  to  tarry  somewhat 
long  abroad,  it  fell  so  out  that  they  stayed  at  the  house 
of  a  religious  woman,  where  they  did  eat  and  refresh 
themselves.  And  being  late  before  they  came  back  to 
the  Abbey,  they  went  as  the  manner  was,  and  asked 
their  father's  blessing  :  of  whom  he  demanded  where 
they  had  eaten  :  and  they  said  nowhere.  "  Why  do 
you,"  quoth  he,  "tell  an  untruth  ?  for  did  you  not  go 
into  such  a  woman's  house  ?  and  eat  such  and  such  kind 
of  meat,  and  drink  so  many  cupsj*"  When  they  heard 
him  recount  so  in  particular,  both  where  they  had  stayed, 
what  kind  of  meat  they  had  eaten,  and  how  often  they 
had  drunk,  and  perceived  well  that  he  knew  all  whatso- 
ever they  had  done,  they  fell  down  trembling  at  his  feet, 
and  confessed  that  they  had  done  wickedly  :  who  straight- 
ways  pardoned  them  for  that  fault,  persuading  himself 

7i 


€f)e  Dialogues  of  %t  <£regorp 

that  they  would  not  any  more  in  his  absence  presume 
to  do  any  such  thing,  seeing  they  now  perceived  that 
he  was  present  with  them  in  spirit. 

Chapter  Cbirteen :  of  tbe  brother  of  l^alentinian 
tbz  sponk,  tobom  tbc  man  of  (Son  blameD  for  eating 

ilt  f)iS  JOUmep,  <&  A  brother  also  of  Valentinian  the 
monk,  of  whom  I  made  mention  before,  was  a  layman, 
but  devout  and  religious  :  who  used  every  year,  as  well 
to  desire  the  prayers  of  God's  servant,  as  also  to  visit 
his  natural  brother,  to  travel  from  his  own  house  to  the 
Abbey  :  and  his  manner  was,  not  to  eat  anything  all  that 
day  before  he  came  thither.  Being  therefore  upon  a  time 
in  his  journey,  he  lighted  into  the  company  of  another, 
that  carried  meat  about  him  to  eat  by  the  way  :  who, 
after  the  day  was  well  spent,  spake  unto  him  in  this 
manner:  "Come,  brother,"  quoth  he,  "let  us  refresh 
ourselves,  that  we  faint  not  in  our  journey"  :  to  whom 
he  answered  :  "  God  forbid  :  for  eat  I  will  not  by  any 
means,  seeing  I  am  now  going  to  the  venerable  father 
Bennet,  and  my  custom  is  to  fast  until  1  see  him."  The 
other,  upon  this  answer,  said  no  more  for  the  space  of 
an  hour.  But  afterward,  having  travelled  a  little  further, 
again  he  was  in  hand  with  him  to  eat  something  :  yet 
then  likewise  he  utterly  refused,  because  he  meant  to  go 
through  fasting  as  he  was.  His  companion  was  content, 
and  so  went  forward  with  him,  without  taking  anything 
himself.  But  when  they  had  now  gone  very  far,  and 
were  well  wearied  with  long  travelling,  at  length  they 
came  unto  a  meadow,  where  there  was  a  fountain,  and  all 
such  other  pleasant  things  as  use  to  refresh  men's  bodies. 
Then  his  companion  said  to  him  again  :  "Behold  here  is 
water,  a  green  meadow,  and  a  very  sweet  place,  in  which 
we  may  refresh  ourselves  and  rest  a  little,  that  we  may 
be  the  better  able  to  dispatch  the  rest  of  our  journey." 
Which  kind  words  bewitching  his  ears,  and  the  pleasant 
place  flattering  his  eyes,  content  he  was  to  yield  unto 

72 


£be  life  anD  piracies  of  %t  IBennet 

the  motion,  and  so  they  fell  to  their  meat  together :  and 
coming  afterward  in  the  evening  to  the  Abbey,  they 
brought  him  to  the  venerable  father  Bennet,  of  whom 
he  desired  his  blessing.  Then  the  holy  man  objected 
against  him  what  he  had  done  in  the  way,  speaking  to 
him  in  this  manner:  "How  fell  it  out,  brother," 
quoth  he,  "that  the  devil  talking  to  you,  by  means 
of  your  companion,  could  not  at  the  first  nor  second 
time  persuade  you  :  but  yet  he  did  at  the  third,  and 
made  you  do  what  best  pleased  him  ?"  The  good  man, 
hearing  these  words,  fell  down  at  his  feet,  confessing  the 
fault  of  his  frailty  ;  was  grieved,  and  so  much  the  more 
ashamed  of  his  sin,  because  he  perceived  that  though  he 
were  absent,  that  yet  he  did  offend  in  the  sight  of  that 
venerable  father. 

IPCtCt.  I  see  well  that  the  holy  man  had  in  his  soul  the 
spirit  of  Heliseus,  who  was  present  with  his  servant 
Giezi,  being  then  absent  from  him. 

Chapter  fourteen:  boto  tbe  Di00imulatton  of  king 
Cotilas  toas  Di0cot>eteD  anD  founD  out  ftp  tjencr= 

able  TBennet  <I  <$regOtp.  You  must,  good  Peter,  for 
a  little  while  be  silent,  that  you  may  know  matters  yet 
far  more  important.  For  in  the  time  of  the  Goths,  when 
Totilas,  their  king,  understood  that  the  holy  man  had 
the  spirit  of  prophecy,  as  he  was  going  towards  his 
monastery,  he  remained  in  a  place  somewhat  far  off,  and 
beforehand  sent  the  father  word  of  his  coming  :  to  whom 
answer  was  returned,  that  he  might  come  at  his  pleasure. 
The  king,  as  he  was  a  man  wickedly  disposed,  thought 
he  would  try  whether  the  man  of  God  were  a  prophet, 
as  it  was  reported,  or  no.  A  certain  man  of  his  guard  he 
had,  called  Riggo,  upon  whom  he  caused  his  own  shoes 
to  be  put,  and  to  be  apparelled  with  his  other  princely 
robes,  commanding  him  to  go  as  it  were  himself  to  the 
man  of  God  ;  and  to  give  the  better  colour  to  this  device, 
he  sent  three  to  attend  upon  him,  who  especially  were 

73 


Cfte  Dialogues  of  %t  ®regorp 

always  about'the  king  :  to  wit,  Vultericus,  Rudericus,  and 
Blindinus  ;  charging  them  that  in  the  presence  of  the  ser- 
vant of  God,  they  should  be  next  about  him,  and  behave 
themselves  in  such  sort  as  though  he  had  been  king 
Totilas  indeed  :  and  that  diligently  they  should  do  unto 
him  all  other  services,  to  the  end  that  both  by  such  duti- 
ful kind  of  behaviour,  as  also  by  his  purple  robes,  he 
might  verily  be  taken  for  the  king  himself.  Riggo,  fur- 
nished with  that  brave  apparel,  and  accompanied!  with 
many  courtiers,  came  unto  the  Abbey :  at  which  time  the 
man  of  God  sat  a  little  way  off,  and  when  Riggo  was  come 
so  near  that  he  might  well  understand  what  the  man  ot 
God  said,  then,  in  the  hearing  of  them  all,  he  spake  thus  : 
"Put  off,  my  good  son,  put  off  that  apparel,  for  that 
which  thou  hast  on,  is  none  of  thine."  Riggo,  hearing 
this,  fell  straightways  down  to  the  ground,  and  was  very 
much  afraid,  for  presuming  to  go  about  to  mock  so 
worthy  a  man,  and  all  his  attendants  and  servitors  fell 
down  likewise  to  the  earth,  and  after  they  were  up  again, 
they  durst  not  approach  any  nearer  to  his  presence  :  but 
returned  back  to  their  king,  telling  him  with  fear,  how 
quickly  they  were  discovered. 

Chapter  jfifteen :  fjoto  timetable  IBennet  propf^ 
sieD  to  king  Cotilas,  anO  also  to  tbe  IBisbop  of 
Camisina,  sue!)  tfnngs  as  toere  aftertoaro  to  fall 

OUt.  *I  Then  Totilas  himself  in  person  went  unto  the 
man  of  God ;  and  seeing  him  sitting  afar  off,  he  durst  not 
come  near,  but  fell  down  to  the  ground  :  whom  the  holy 
man  (speaking  to  him  twice  or  thrice)  desired  to  rise  up, 
and  at  length  came  unto  him,  and  with  his  own  hands 
lifted  him  up  from  the  earth,  where  he  lay  prostrate  : 
and  then,  entering  into  talk,  he  reprehended  him  for  his 
wicked  deeds,  and  in  few  words  told  him  all  that  which 
should  befall  him,  saying:  "Much  wickedness  do  you 
daily  commit,  and  many  great  sins  have  you  done  :  now 
at  length  give  over  your  sinful  life.     Into  the  city  of 

74 


Cbe  Life  anD  piracies  of  %t  Rennet 

Rome  shall  you  enter,  and  over  the  sea  shall  you  pass : 
nine  years  shall  you  reign,  and  in  the  tenth  shall  you 
leave  this  mortal  life."  The  king,  hearing  these  things, 
was  wonderfully  afraid,  and  desiring  the  holy  man  to 
commend  him  to  God  in  his  prayers,  he  departed  :  and 
from  that  time  forward  he  was  nothing  so  cruel  as  before 
he  had  been.  Not  long  after  he  went  to  Rome,  sailed 
over  into  Sicily,  and,  in  the  tenth  year  of  his  reign,  he  lost 
his  kingdom  together  with  his  life. 

The  Bishop  also  of  Camisina  used  to  visit  the  servant 
of  God,  whom  the  holy  man  dearly  loved  for  his  virtuous 
life.  The  Bishop,  therefore,  talking  with  him  of  king 
Totilas,  of  his  taking  of  Rome,  and  the  destruction  of 
that  city,  said :  "This  city  will  be  so  spoiled  and  ruined 
by  him,  that  it  will  never  be  more  inhabited."  To  whom 
the  man  of  God  answered  :  "  Rome,"  quoth  he,  "  shall 
not  be  utterly  destroyed  by  strangers  :  but  shall  be  so 
shaken  with  tempests,  lightnings,  whirlwinds,  and  earth- 
quakes, that  it  will  fall  to  decay  of  itself."  The  mysteries 
of  which  prophecy  we  now  behold  as  clear  as  the  day : 
for  we  see  before  our  eyes  in  this  very  city,  by  a  strange 
whirlwind  the  world  shaken,  houses  ruined,  and  churches 
overthrown,  and  buildings  rotten  with  old  age  we  behold 
daily  to  fall  down.  True  it  is  that  Honoratus,  by  whose 
relation  I  had  this,  saith  not  that  he  received  it  from  his 
own  mouth,  but  that  he  had  it  of  other  monks,  which  did 
hear  it  themselves. 

Chapter  §>irteen :  of  a  certain  clergyman,  tobom 
tienerable  iBennet  for  a  time  Dettoereo  from  a  uetnl. 

(Q  At  the  same  time  a  certain  clergyman,  that  served  in 
the  church  of  Aquinum,  was  possessed  :  whom  the  vener- 
able man  Constantius,  Bishop  of  the  same  city,  sent  unto 
many  places  of  holy  martyrs  for  help  :  but  God's  holy 
martyrs  would  not  deliver  him,  to  the  end  that  the  world 
might  know  what  great  grace  was  in  the  servant  of  God, 
Bennet :  wherefore  at  length  he  was  brought  unto  him, 

75 


C6e  Dialogues  of  St  ®regorp 

who,  praying  for  help  to  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  did 
forthwith  cast  the  old  enemy  out  of  the  possessed  man's 
body,  giving  him  this  charge  :  "  Go  your  way,  and  here- 
after abstain  from  eating  of  flesh,  and  presume  not  to  enter 
into  holy  orders,  for  whensoever  you  shall  attempt  any 
such  thing,  the  devil  again  will  have  power  over  you." 
The  man  departed  safe  and  sound,  and  because  punish- 
ment fresh  in  memory  useth  to  terrify  the  mind,  he 
observed  for  a  time  what  the  man  of  God  had  given 
him  in  commandment.  But  after  many  years,  when  all 
his  seniors  were  dead,  and  he  saw  his  juniors  preferred 
before  him  to  holy  orders,  he  neglected  the  words  of  the 
man  of  God,  as  though  forgotten  through  length  of  time, 
and  took  upon  him  holy  orders  :  whereupon  straight- 
ways  the  devil  that  before  had  left  him  entered  again,  and 
never  gave  over  to  torment  him,  until  he  had  separated 
his  soul  from  his  body. 

U^CtCt*  This  holy  man,  as  I  perceive,  did  know  the  secret 
counsel  of  God  :  for  he  saw  that  this  clergyman  was 
delivered  to  the  power  of  the  devil,  to  the  end  he  should 
not  presume  to  enter  into  holy  orders. 
(JDtCgOtp,  Why  should  he  not  know  the  secrets  of  God, 
who  kept  the  commandments  of  God  :  when  as  the 
scripture  saith  :  He  that  cleave th  unto  our  Lord,  is  one 
spirit  with  him  ? 1 

JpCtCt.  If  he  that  cleaveth  unto  our  Lord,  be  one  spirit 
with  our  Lord,  what  is  the  meaning  of  that  which  the 
Apostle  saith  :  Who  knoweth  the  sense  of  our  Lord,  or  who 
hath  been  his  counsellor?*1  for  it  seemeth  very  incon- 
venient to  be  ignorant  of  his  sense,  to  whom  being  so 
united  he  is  made  one  thing. 

€>t00Ot£.  Holy  men,  in  that  they  be  one  with  our  Lord, 
are  not  ignorant  of  his  sense  :  for  the  same  Apostle 
saith 3 :  For  what  man  knoweth  those  things  which  belong  to 
man,  but  the  spirit  of  man  which  is  in  him  ?  Even  so,  the 
1  Cor.  6.  2  Rom.  u,  34.  3  1  Cor.  2,  9-11. 

76 


C6e  life  anD  piracies  of  %l  IBcnnet 

things  which  belong  to  God,  no  man  knoweth,  but  the  spirit 
of  God.  And  to  show  also  that  he  knew  such  things  as 
belong  to  God,  he  addeth  straight  after  :  But  we  have 
not  received  the  spirit  of  this  world,  but  the  spirit  which  is  of 
God.  And  for  this  cause,  again  he  saith  :  that  eye  hath  not 
seen,  nor  ear  heard,  nor  it  hath  ascended  into  the  heart  of  man, 
those  things  which  God  hath  prepared  for  them  that  love  him, 
but  God  hath  revealed  to  us  by  his  spirit." 
IPCtCt*  If,  then,  the  mysteries  of  God  were  revealed  to 
the  same  Apostle  by  the  spirit  of  God,  why  did  he  then, 
entreating  of  this  question,  set  down  these  words  before- 
hand, saying  :  O  the  depth  of  the  riches  of  the  wisdom  and 
knowledge  of  God :  how  incomprehensible  be  his  judgments, 
and  his  ways  investigable  ?  And  again,  whiles  I  am  thus 
speaking  of  this  matter,  another  question  cometh  to  my 
mind  :  for  the  prophet  David  said  to  our  Lord  :  With  my 
lips  have  I  uttered  all  the  judgments  of  thy  mouth.  Where- 
fore, seeing  it  is  less  to  know,  than  to  utter  :  what  is  the 
reason  that  St.  Paul  affirmeth  the  judgments  of  God  to  be 
incomprehensible ;  and  yet  David  saith  that  he  did  not 
know  only  them,  but  also  with  his  lips  pronounce  them  ? 
(£)tC0Otp.  To  both  these  questions  I  have  already  briefly 
answered,  when  I  said  that  holy  men,  in  that  they  be 
one  with  our  Lord,  are  not  ignorant  of  the  sense  of  our 
Lord.  For  all  such,  as  do  devoutly  follow  our  Lord, 
be  also  by  devotion  one  with  our  Lord  ;  and  yet  for  all 
this,  in  that  they  are  laden  with  the  burthen  of  their 
corruptible  flesh,  they  be  not  with  God  :  and  so  in  that 
they  be  joined  with  him,  they  know  the  secret  judgments 
of  God,  and  in  that  they  be  separated  from  God,  they 
know  them  not :  for  seeing  they  do  not  as  yet  perfectly 
penetrate  his  secret  mysteries,  they  give  testimony  that 
his  judgments  be  incomprehensible.  But  those  that  do 
with  their  soul  adhere  unto  him,  and  cleaving  unto  the 
sayings  of  the  holy  scripture,  or  to  secret  revelations, 
acknowledge  what  they  receive  :  such  persons  both  know 

77 


C&e  Dialogues  of  %t  ®reprp 

these  things  and  do  utter  them  :  for  those  judgments 
which  God  doth  conceal  they  know  not,  and  those  which 
he  doth  utter  they  know  :  and  therefore  the  prophet 
David,  when  he  had  said  :  /  have  with  my  lips  uttered  all  the 
judgments  ;x  headdeth  immediately,  of  thy  mouth:  as  though 
he  should  plainly  say  :  Those  judgments  I  may  both  know 
and  utter,  which  I  knew  thou  didst  speak,  for  those 
things  which  thou  dost  not  speak,  without  all  question, 
thou  dost  conceal  from  our  knowledge.  Wherefore  the 
saying  of  David  and  St.  Paul  agree  together :  for  the 
judgments  of  God  are  incomprehensible  ;  and  yet  those 
which  himself  with  his  own  mouth  vouchsafeth  to 
speak,  are  uttered  with  men's  tongues :  because  men 
may  come  to  the  knowledge  of  them,  and  being  revealed, 
they  may  be  uttered,  and  by  no  means  can  be  kept  secret. 
Jp0tCt»  Now  I  see  the  answer  to  my  question.  But  I 
pray  you  to  proceed,  if  anything  yet  remaineth  to  be 
told  of  his  virtue  and  miracles. 

Chapter  ^>etoenteen :  fjoto  tbe  man  of  ®oD, 
Rennet,  tJiti  foretell  tfje  suppression  of  one  of  f)is 

Ottin  SlbutpS*  <I  €>regOrp*  A  certain  noble  man  called 
Theoprobus  was  by  the  good  counsel  of  holy  Bennet 
converted  :  who,  for  his  virtue  and  merit  of  life,  was  very 
intrinsical  and  familiar  with  him.  This  man  upon  a  day, 
coming  into  his  cell,  found  him  weeping  very  bitterly. 
And  having  expected  a  good  while,  and  yet  not  seeing 
him  to  make  an  end  (for  the  man  of  God  used  not  in  his 
prayers  to  weep,  but  rather  to  be  sad),  he  demanded  the 
cause  of  that  his  so  great  heaviness,  to  whom  he  answered 
straightway,  saying  :  "All  this  Abbey  which  1  have  built, 
and  all  such  things  as  1  have  made  ready  for  my  brethren, 
are  by  the  judgment  of  almighty  God  delivered  to  the 
gentiles,  to  be  spoiled  and  overthrown  :  and  scarce  could 
I  obtain  of  God  to  have  their  lives  spared,  that  should 
then  live  in  it."     His  words  Theoprobus  then  heard, 

1  Vs.  119,  13. 
78 


C6e  life  anti  piracies  of  St  15ennet 

but  we  see  them  to  be  proved  most  true,  who  know  that 
very  Abbey  to  be  now  suppressed  by  the  Lombards. 
For  not  long  since,  in  the  night  time,  when  the  monks 
were  asleep,  they  entered  in,  and  spoiled  all  things,  but 
yet  not  one  man  could  they  retain  there,  and  so  almighty 
God  fulfilled  what  he  promised  to  his  faithful  servant : 
for  though  he  gave  them  the  house  and  all  the  goods, 
yet  did  he  preserve  their  lives.  In  which  thing  I  see 
that  Bennet  imitated  St.  Paul :  whose  ship  x  though  it 
lost  all  the  goods,  yet,  for  his  comfort,  he  had  the  lives 
of  all  that  were  in  his  company  bestowed  upon  him,  so 
that  no  one  man  was  cast  away. 

Chapter  <£igbteen:  fjoto  Messeo  IBtnntt  feneto 
t&e  giDing:  atoap  of  a  flagon  of  toine.  <j|  Upon  a 

certain  time,  Exhilaratus  our  monk,  a  lay-brother,  whom 
you  know,  was  sent  by  his  master  to  the  monastery  of  the 
man  of  God,  to  carry  him  two  wooden  bottles,  commonly 
called  flagons,  full  of  wine  :  who  in  the  way,  as  he  was 
going,  hid  one  of  them  in  a  bush  for  himself,  and  pre- 
sented the  other  to  venerable  Bennet  :  who  took  it  very 
thankfully,  and,  when  the  man  was  going  away,  he  gave 
him  this  warning  :  "  Take  heed,  my  son,"  quoth  he, 
"  that  thou  drinkest  not  of  that  flagon  which  thou  hast 
hidden  in  the  bush  :  but  first  be  careful  to  bow  it  down, 
and  thou  shalt  find  what  is  within  it."  The  poor  man, 
thus  pitifully  confounded  by  the  man  of  God,  went  his 
way,  and  coming  back  to  the  place  where  the  flagon  was 
hidden,  and  desirous  to  try  the  truth  of  that  was  told 
him,  as  he  was  bowing  it  down,  a  snake  straightways 
leaped  forth.  Then  Exhilaratus  perceiving  what  was 
gotten  into  the  wine,  began  to  be  afraid  of  that  wicked- 
ness which  he  had  committed. 

Chapter  Jftineteen :  boto  tbe  man  of  (Son  kneto 
tbat  one  of  (us  e^onks  bao  recetoeD  certain  bano^ 

feetCf)ief0,    ^  Not   far   from    his   Abbey,  there  was    a 

1  Acts  27,  22-44. 

79 


£f)c  Dialogues  of  %t  ®regorp 

village,  in  which  very  many  men  had,  by  the  sermons 
of  Bennet,  been  converted  from  idolatry  to  the  true 
faith  of  Christ.  Certain  Nuns  also  there  were  in  the 
same  town,  to  whom  he  did  often  send  some  of  his 
monks  to  preach  unto  them,  for  the  good  of  their  souls. 
Upon  a  day,  one  that  was  sent,  after  he  had  made  an 
end  of  his  exhortation,  by  the  entreaty  of  the  Nuns  took 
certain  small  napkins,  and  hid  them  for  his  own  use  in 
his  bosom  :  whom,  upon  his  return  to  the  Abbey,  the 
man  of  God  very  sharply  rebuked,  saying  :  "  How 
cometh  it  to  pass,  brother,  that  sin  is  entered  into  your 
bosom  ?"  At  which  words  the  monk  was  much  amazed  : 
for  he  had  quite  forgotten  what  he  had  put  there  ;  and 
therefore  knew  not  any  cause  why  he  should  deserve 
that  reprehension  :  whereupon  the  holy  man  spake  to 
him  in  plain  terms,  and  said  :  "  Was  not  I  present  when 
you  took  the  handkerchiefs  of  the  Nuns,  and  put  them 
up  in  your  bosom  for  your  own  private  use  ? '  The 
monk,  hearing  this,  fell  down  at  his  feet,  and  was  sorry 
that  he  had  behaved  himself  so  indiscreetly  :  forth  he 
drew  those  napkins  from  his  bosom,  and  threw  them  all 
away. 

Chapter  Ctoentp :  fjoto  f)olp  IBennet  kneto  tfjc 
prouD  t&oug&t  of  one  of  to  aponfcs.  <l  Upon  a 

time,  whiles  the  venerable  Father  was  at  supper,  one  of 
his  monks,  who  was  the  son  of  a  great  man,  held  the 
candle  :  and  as  he  was  standing  there,  and  the  other  at 
his  meat,  he  began  to  entertain  a  proud  cogitation  in  his 
mind,  and  to  speak  thus  within  himself :  "  Who  is  he, 
that  I  thus  wait  upon  at  supper,  and  hold  him  the 
candle  ?  and  who  am  I,  that  1  should  do  him  any  such 
service  ? "  Upon  which  thought  straightways  the  holy 
man  turned  himself,  and  with  severe  reprehension  spake 
thus  unto  him  :  "  Sign  your  heart,  brother,  for  what  is 
it  that  you  say  ?  Sign  your  heart  "  :  and  forthwith  he 
called  another  of  the   monks,  and  bad  him  take  the 

80 


Pevugino 


-  I  .    PLA<  IDUS 
{Vatican  Gai/ery,  Rome) 


Cfre  Life  anO  piracies  of  %t.  TBennet 

candle  out  of  his  hands,  and  commanded  him  to  give 
over  his  waiting,  and  to  repose  himself :  who  being 
demanded  of  the  monks,  what  it  was  that  he  thought, 
told  them,  how  inwardly  he  swelled  with  pride,  and  what 
he  spake  against  the  man  of  God,  secretly  in  his  own 
heart.  Then  they  all  saw  very  well  that  nothing  could 
be  hidden  from  venerable  Bennet,  seeing  the  very  sound 
of  men's  inward  thoughts  came  unto  his  ears. 

Chapter  Ctoent^one :  of  ttoo  fwnDteD  im0f)el0  of 
meal,  founD  before  tf)e  man  of  (SoD's  cell.  <I  At 

another  time,  there  was  a  great  dearth  in  the  same 
country  of  Campania  :  so  that  all  kind  of  people  tasted 
of  the  misery  :  and  all  the  wheat  of  Bennet's  monastery 
was  spent,  and  likewise  all  the  bread,  so  that  there  re- 
mained no  more  than  five  loaves  for  dinner.  The 
venerable  man,  beholding  the  monks  sad,  both  rebuked 
them  modestly  for  their  pusillanimity,  and  again  did 
comfort  them  with  this  promise:  "Why,"  quoth  he, 
"  are  you  so  grieved  in  your  minds  for  lack  of  bread  ? 
Indeed,  to-day  some  want  there  is,  but  to-morrow  you 
shall  have  plenty  "  :  and  so  it  fell  out,  for  the  next  day 
two  hundred  bushels  of  meal  was  found  in  sacks  before 
his  cell  door,  which  almighty  God  sent  them  :  but  by 
whom,  or  what  means,  that  is  unknown  to  this  very 
day  :  which  miracle  when  the  monks  saw,  they  gave 
God  thanks,  and  by  this  learned  in  want,  not  to  make 
any  doubt  of  plenty. 

K^etet.  Tell  me,  I  pray  you,  whether  this  servant  of 
God  had  always  the  spirit  of  prophecy,  when  himself 
pleased,  or  only  at  certain  times  ?  - 
<&ZZQ01J).  The  spirit  of  prophecy  doth  not  always 
illuminate  the  minds  of  the  prophets  ;  because,  as  it  is 
written  of  the  Holy  Ghost  that  he  breatheth  where  he 
will,1  so  we  are  also  to  know  that  he  doth  breathe 
likewise  for  what  cause,  and  when  he  pleaseth.     And 

1  John  3,  8. 

8l  F 


Cbe  Dialogic  of  ©1  (Sregorp 

hereof  it  cometh,  that  when  king  David  demanded  of 
Nathan 1  whether  he  might  build  a  temple  for  the  honour 
of  God,  the  prophet  Nathan  gave  his  consent  ;  and  yet 
afterward  utterly  forbad  it.  From  hence  likewise  it 
proceedeth  that,  when  Heliseus  saw  the  woman  weep- 
ing, and  knew  not  the  cause,  he  said  to  his  servant  that 
did  trouble  her  :  Let  her  a/one,  for  her  soul  is  in  grief  and 
God  hath  concealed  it  from  me,  and  hath  not  told  me.2  Which 
thing  almighty  God  of  great  piety  so  disposeth  :  for 
giving  at  some  times  the  spirit  of  prophecy,  and  at  other 
times  withdrawing  it,  he  doth  both  lift  up  the  prophets 
minds  on  high,  and  yet  doth  preserve  them  in  humility  : 
that  by  the  gift  of  the  Spirit,  they  may  know  what  they  are 
by  God's  grace  :  and  at  other  times,  destitute  of  the  same 
Spirit,  may  understand  what  they  are  of  themselves. 
Jj?0t0t*  There  is  very  great  reason  for  that  you  say. 
But,  I  pray  you,  let  me  hear  more  of  the  venerable  man 
Bennet,  if  there  be  anything  else  that  cometh  to  your 
remembrance. 

Chapter  Ctoent^ttoo  :  boto,  fcp  Vision,  ticnerable 
IBtnnzt  Di0po0eD  tbe  builDing  of  tbe  3bt)ep  of 

Cataritia*  ^  (JDtCgOtp.  At  another  time  he  was  de- 
sired by  a  certain  virtuous  man,  to  build  an  Abbey  for 
his  monks  upon  his  ground,  not  far  from  the  city  of 
Taracina.  The  holy  man  was  content,  and  appointed 
an  Abbot  and  Prior,  with  divers  monks  under  them  :  and 
when  they  were  departing,  he  promised  that,  upon  such 
a  day,  he  would  come  and  shew  them  in  what  place  the 
oratory  should  be  made,  and  where  the  refectory  should 
stand,  and  all  the  other  necessary  rooms  :  and  so  they, 
taking  his  blessing,  went  their  way ;  and  against  the  day 
appointed,  which  they  greatly  expected,  they  made  all 
such  things  ready  as  were  necessary  to  entertain  him, 
and  those  that  should  come  in  his  company.  But  the 
very  night  before,  the  man  of  God  in  sleep  appeared  to 

1   I  Chr.  17,  2-4.  2  4  Kings  4,  27. 

82 


Cfje  life  and  piracies  of  %t  Rennet 

the  Abbot  and  the  Prior,  and  particularly  described  unto 
them  where  each  place  and  office  was  to  be  builded. 
And  when  they  were  both  risen,  they  conferred  together 
what  either  of  them  had  seen  in  their  sleep  :  but  yet 
not  giving  full  credit  to  that  vision,  they  expected  the 
man  of  God  himself  in  person,  according  to  his  promise. 
But  when  they  saw  that  he  came  not,  they  returned 
back  unto  him  very  sorrowfully,  saying:  "We  expected, 
father,  that  you  should  have  come  according  to  promise, 
and  told  us  where  each  place  should  have  been  built, 
which  yet  you  did  not."  To  whom  he  answered  : 
"  Why  say  you  so,  good  brethren  ?  Did  not  I  come 
as  I  promised  you  ?"  And  when  they  asked  at  what 
time  it  was  :  "  Why,"  quoth  he,  "  did  not  I  appear  to 
either  of  you  in  your  sleep,  and  appointed  how  and  where 
every  place  was  to  be  builded  ?  Go  your  way,  and  ac- 
cording to  that  platform  which  you  then  saw,  build  up 
the  abbey."  At  which  word  they  much  marvelled,  and 
returning  back,  they  caused  it  to  be  builded  in  such  sort 
as  they  had  been  taught  of  him  by  revelation. 
JPCtCt*  Gladly  would  I  learn,  by  what  means  that  could 
be  done  :  to  wit,  that  he  should  go  so  far  to  tell  them 
that  thing  in  their  sleep,  which  they  should  both  hear 
and  know  by  vision. 

(£>tC0Otp*  Why  do  you,  Peter,  seek  out  and  doubt,  in 
what  manner  this  thing  was  done  ?  For  certain  it  is,  that 
the  soul  is  of  a  more  noble  nature  than  the  body.  And 
by  authority  of  scripture  we  know  that  the  prophet 
Abacuck  was  carried  from  Judea  with  that  dinner  which 
he  had,  and  was  suddenly  set  in  Chaldea  ; x  by  which 
meat  the  prophet  Daniel  was  relieved  :  and  presently 
after  was  brought  back  again  to  Judea.  If,  then,  Abacuck 
could  in  a  moment  with  his  body  go  so  far,  and  carry 
provision  for  another  man's  dinner  :  what  marvel  is  it, 
if  the  holy  father  Bennet  obtained  grace  to  go  in  spirit 

1  Daniel  14,  32-38  (Vulgate). 
83 


£f)e  Dialogic  of  %t  (Sregorp 

and  to  inform  the  souls  of  his  brethren  that  were  asleep, 
concerning  such  things  as  were  necessary  :  and  that  as 
Abacuck  about  corporal  meat  went  corporally,  so  Bennet 
should  go  spiritually  about  the  dispatch  of  spiritual 
business  ? 

K^CtCt*  1  confess  that  your  words  have  satisfied  my 
doubtful  mind.  But  I  would  know  what  manner  of  man 
he  was  in  his  ordinary  talk  and  conversation. 

CtmpterCtoent^tbrcc:  of  certain  Bum  absotoeti 
after  tbeir  Deatf).  «I  (frreprp-  His  common  talk, 

Peter,  was  usually  full  of  virtue  :  for  his  heart  conversed 
so  above  in  heaven,  that  no  words  could  in  vain  proceed 
from  his  mouth.  And  if  at  any  time  he  spake  aught, 
yet  not  as  one  that  determined  what  was  best  to  be  done, 
but  only  in  a  threatening  manner,  his  speech  in  that 
case  was  so  effectual  and  forcible,  as  though  he  had  not 
doubtfully  or  uncertainly,  but  assuredly  pronounced  and 
given  sentence.  For  not  far  from  his  Abbey,  there  lived 
two  Nuns  in  a  place  by  themselves,  born  of  worshipful 
parentage  :  whom  a  religious  good  man  did  serve  for 
the  dispatch  of  their  outward  business.  But  as  nobility 
of  family  doth  in  some  breed  ignobility  of  mind,  and 
maketh  them  in  conversation  to  show  less  humility, 
because  they  remember  still  what  superiority  they  had 
above  others  :  even  so  was  it  with  these  Nuns  :  for  they 
had  not  yet  learned  to  temper  their  tongues,  and  keep 
them  under  with  the  bridle  of  their  habit  :  for  often  did 
they  by  their  indiscreet  speech  provoke  the  foresaid 
religious  man  to  anger  ;  who  having  borne  with  them  a 
long  time,  at  length  he  complained  to  the  man  of  God, 
and  told  him  with  what  reproachful  words  they  entreated 
him  :  whereupon  he  sent  them  by  and  by  this  message, 
saying  :  "  Amend  your  tongues,  otherwise  I  do  excom- 
municate you";  which  sentence  of  excommunication 
notwithstanding,  he  did  not  then  presently  pronounce 
against  them,  but  only  threatened  if  they  amended  not 

84 


C6e  life  anD  ^trades  of  St  TBennct 

themselves.  But  they,  for  all  this,  changed  their  con- 
ditions nothing  at  all  :  both  which  not  long  after  de- 
parted this  life,  and  were  buried  in  the  church  :  and  when 
solemn  mass  was  celebrated  in  the  same  church,  and  the 
Deacon,  according  to  custom,  said  with  loud  voice  :  "  If 
any  there  be  that  do  not  communicate,  let  them  depart " : 
the  nurse,  which  used  to  give  unto  our  Lord  an  offering 
for  them,  beheld  them  at  that  time  to  rise  out  of  their 
graves,  and  to  depart  the  church.  Having  often  times, 
at  those  words  of  the  Deacon,  seen  them  leave  the 
church,  and  that  they  could  not  tarry  within,  she  remem- 
bered what  message  the  man  of  God  sent  them  whiles 
they  were  yet  alive.  For  he  told  them  that  he  did  de- 
prive them  of  the  communion,  unless  they  did  amend 
their  tongues  and  conditions.  Then  with  great  sorrow, 
the  whole  matter  was  signified  to  the  man  of  God,  who 
straightways  with  his  own  hands  gave  an  oblation,  say- 
ing :  "  Go  your  ways,  and  cause  this  to  be  offered  unto 
our  Lord  for  them,  and  they  shall  not  remain  any  longer 
excommunicate "  :  which  oblation  being  offered  for 
them,  and  the  Deacon,  as  he  used,  crying  out,  that  such 
as  did  not  communicate  should  depart,  they  were  not 
seen  any  more  to  go  out  of  the  church  :  whereby  it  was 
certain  that,  seeing  they  did  not  depart  with  them  which 
did  not  communicate,  that  they  had  received  the  com- 
munion of  our  Lord  by  the  hands  of  his  servant. 
l£)CtCt.  It  is  very  strange  that  you  report :  for  how  could 
he,  though  a  venerable  and  most  holy  man,  yet  living 
in  mortal  body,  loose  those  souls  which  stood  now  before 
the  invisible  judgment  of  God  ? 

(£>tC0Otp*  Was  he  not  yet,  Peter,  mortal,  that  heard 
from  our  Saviour  :  Whatsoever  thou  shalt  bind  upon  earthy 
it  shall  be  bound  also  in  the  heavens  :  and  whatsoever  thou 
shalt  loose  in  earth,  shall  be  loosed  also  in  the  heavens  ? 1  whose 
place  of  binding  and  loosing  those  have  at  this  time, 

1  Matt.  16,  19. 
85 


£be  Dialogues  of  %>t  (Sregorp 

which  by  faith  and  virtuous  life  possess  the  place  of  holy 
government :  and  to  bestow  such  power  upon  earthly 
men,  the  Creator  of  heaven  and  earth  descended  from 
heaven  to  earth  :  and  that  flesh  might  judge  of  spiritual 
things,  God,  who  for  man's  sake  was  made  flesh,  vouch- 
safed to  bestow  upon  him  :  for  from  thence  our  weak- 
ness did  rise  up  above  itself,  from  whence  the  strength 
of  God  was  weakened  under  itself. 
Ip0t0t»  For  the  virtue  of  his  miracles,  your  words  do 
yield  a  very  good  reason. 

Cbapter  CtoentHour :  of  a  bop  tbat  after  bis 
burial  toas  cast  out  of  bis  graue.  <f  Gregory,  Upon 

a  certain  day,  a  young  boy  that  was  a  monk,  loving  his 
parents  more  than  reason  would,  went  from  the  Abbey 
to  their  house,  not  craving  the  father's  blessing  before- 
hand :  and  the  same  day  that  he  came  home  unto  them, 
he  departed  this  life.  And  being  buried,  his  body,  the 
next  day  after,  was  found  cast  out  of  the  grave  ;  which 
they  caused  again  to  be  put  in,  and  again,  the  day  follow- 
ing, they  found  it  as  before.  Then  in  great  haste  they 
went  to  the  man  of  God,  fell  down  at  his  feet,  and  with 
many  tears  beseeched  him  that  he  would  vouchsafe  him 
that  was  dead  of  his  favour.  To  whom  the  man  of  God 
with  his  own  hands  delivered  the  holy  communion  of  our 
Lord's  body,  saying  :  "  Go,  and  lay  with  great  reverence 
this  our  Lord's  body  upon  his  breast,  and  so  bury  him  ": 
which  when  they  had  done,  the  dead  corpse  after  that 
remained  quietly  in  the  grave.  By  which  you  perceive, 
Peter,  of  what  merit  he  was  with  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
seeing  the  earth  would  not  give  entertainment  to  his 
body,  who  departed  this  world  out  of  Bennet's  favour. 
l[?eter,  I  perceive  it  very  well,  and  do  wonderfully 
admire  it. 

Cbapter  Ctoent^fitoe :  boto  a  oponfe,  forsaking  tbe 
Qbbzy,  met  toitb  a  Dragon  in  tbe  toap,  <J  (Dregorp. 

A  certain  monk  there  was  so  inconstant  and  fickle  of  mind, 

86 


\ 


Cbe  Life  anD  piracies  of  %>t  IBtnntt 

that  he  would  needs  give  over  the  Abbey  ;  for  which 
fault  of  his,  the  man  of  God  did  daily  rebuke  him,  and 
often  times  gave  him  good  admonitions  :  but  yet,  for  all 
this,  by  no  means  would  he  tarry  amongst  them,  and 
therefore  continual  suit  he  made  that  he  might  be  dis- 
charged. The  venerable  man  upon  a  time,  wearied  with 
his  importunity,  in  anger  bad  him  depart  ;  who  was  no 
sooner  out  of  the  Abbey  gate,  but  he  found  a  dragon  in 
the  way  expecting  him  with  open  mouth,  which  being 
about  to  devour  him,  he  began  in  great  fear  and  trem- 
bling to  cry  out  aloud,  saying  :  "  Help,  help  !  for  this 
dragon  will  eat  me  up."  At  which  noise  the  monks  run- 
ning out,  dragon  they  saw  none,  but  finding  him  there 
shaking  and  trembling,  they  brought  him  back  again  to 
the  Abbey,  who  forthwith  promised  that  he  would 
never  more  forsake  the  monastery,  and  so  ever  after  he 
continued  in  his  profession  :  for  by  the  prayers  of  the 
holy  man,  he  saw  the  dragon  coming  against  him,  whom 
before,  when  he  saw  not,  he  did  willingly  follow. 

C&apter  Ctoentp^ir :  &oto  fjolp  "Sennet  cureD  a 

t)0P  Of  tfre  leptOSp.  ^  But  I  must  not  here  pass  over 
with  silence  that  which  I  had  by  relation  of  the  honour- 
able man,  Anthony,  who  said  that  his  father's  boy  was  so 
pitifully  punished  with  a  leprosy,  that  all  his  hair  fell  off, 
his  body  swelled,  and  filthy  corruption  did  openly  come 
forth.  Who  being  sent  by  his  father  to  the  man  of  God, 
he  was  by  him  quickly  restored  to  his  former  health. 

Cbaptet  €toentp=0etien :  fcoto  IBznntt  founO 
monep  miraculously  to  relieve  a  poor  man. 

t|  Neither  is  that  to  be  omitted,  which  one  of  his  dis- 
ciples called  Peregrinus  used  to  tell :  for  he  said  that,  upon 
a  certain  day,  an  honest  man,  who  was  in  debt,  found  no 
other  means  to  help  himself,  but  thought  it  his  best  way 
to  acquaint  the  man  of  God  with  his  necessity  :  where- 
upon he  came  to  the  Abbey,  and  finding  the  servant  of 
almighty  God,  gave  him  to  understand,  how  he  was 

87 


£be  Dialogues  of  %t  <$reprp 

troubled  by  his  creditor  for  twelve  shillings  which  he  did 
owe  him.  To  whom  the  venerable  man  said  that  himself 
had  not  so  much  money,  yet  giving  him  comfortable 
words,  he  said  :  "  Go  your  ways,  and  after  two  days  come 
to  me  again,  for  I  can  not  presently  help  you  " :  in  which 
two  days,  after  his  manner,  he  bestowed  himself  in  prayer : 
and  when  upon  the  third  day  the  poor  man  came  back, 
there  were  found  suddenly  upon  the  chest  of  the  Abbey, 
which  was  full  of  corn,  thirteen  shillings  :  which  the  man 
of  God  caused  to  be  given  to  him  that  required  but  twelve, 
both  to  discharge  his  debt,  and  also  to  defray  his  own 
charges.  But  now  will  I  return  to  speak  of  such  things 
as  I  had  from  the  mouth  of  his  own  scholars,  mentioned 
before  in  the  beginning  of  this  book.  A  certain  man 
there  was  who  had  an  enemy  that  did  notably  spite  and 
malign  him,  whose  damnable  hatred  proceeded  so  far, 
that  he  poisoned  his  drink,  which,  although  it  killed  him 
not,  yet  did  it  change  his  skin  in  such  sort  that  it  was 
of  many  colours,  as  though  he  had  been  infected  with  a 
leprosy  :  but  the  man  of  God  restored  him  to  his  former 
health  :  for  so  soon  as  he  touched  him,  forthwith  all  that 
variety  of  colours  departed  from  his  body. 

Cfmptcr  Ctoent^eigbt:  boto  a  cruet  of  glass  teas 
tbroton  upon  tbe  stones,  ant)  not  broken.  <J  At  such 

time  as  there  was  a  great  dearth  in  Campania,  the  man 
of  God  had  given  away  all  the  wealth  of  the  Abbey  to 
poor  people,  so  that  in  the  cellar  there  was  nothing 
left  but  a  little  oil  in  a  glass.  A  certain  sub-deacon 
called  Agapitus  came  unto  him,  instantly  craving  that 
he  would  bestow  a  little  oil  upon  him.  Our  Lord's 
servant,  that  was  resolved  to  give  away  all  upon  earth, 
that  he  might  find  all  in  heaven,  commanded  that  oil  to 
be  given  him  :  but  the  monk  that  kept  the  cellar  heard 
what  the  father  commanded,  yet  did  he  not  perform  it : 
who  inquiring  not  long  after  whether  he  had  given  that 
which  he  willed,  the  monk  told  him  that  he  had  not, 

88 


C6e  Life  anD  piracies  of  %t  IBennet 

adding  that  if  he  had  given  it  away,  that  there  was 
not  any  left  for  the  Convent.  Then  in  an  anger  he 
commanded  others  to  take  that  glass  with  the  oil,  and 
to  throw  it  out  at  the  window,  to  the  end  that  nothing 
might  remain  in  the  Abbey  contrary  to  obedience.  The 
monks  did  so,  and  threw  it  out  at  a  window,  under  which 
there  was  an  huge  downfall,  full  of  rough  and  craggy 
stones  upon  which  the  glass  did  light,  but  yet  continued 
for  all  that  so  sound  as  though  it  had  never  been  thrown 
out  at  all,  for  neither  the  glass  was  broken  nor  any  of 
the  oil  shed.  Then  the  man  of  God  did  command  it 
to  be  taken  up  again,  and,  whole  as  it  was,  to  be  given 
unto  him  that  desired  it,  and  in  the  presence  of  the 
other  brethren  he  reprehended  the  disobedient  monk, 
both  for  his  infidelity,  and  also  for  his  proud  mind. 

C&apter  Ctocmpmmc:  &oto  an  cmptp  fcarrct  teas 

fillCD  ttJItf)  Oil.  *$  After  which  reprehension,  with  the 
rest  of  his  brethren  he  fell  to  praying,  and  in  the  place 
where  they  were,  there  stood  an  empty  barrel  with  a 
cover  upon  it :  and  as  the  holy  man  continued  in  his 
prayers,  the  oil  within  did  so  increase,  that  the  cover 
began  to  be  lifted  up,  and  at  length  fell  down,  and  the 
oil,  that  was  now  higher  than  the  mouth  of  the  barrel, 
began  to  run  over  upon  the  pavement,  which  so  soon  as 
the  servant  of  God,  Bennet,  beheld,  forthwith  he  gave 
over  his  prayers,  and  the  oil  likewise  ceased  to  overflow 
the  barrel.  Then  he  did  more  at  large  admonish  that 
mistrusting  and  disobedient  monk,  that  he  would  learn 
to  have  faith  and  humility,  who  upon  so  wholesome  an 
admonition  was  ashamed,  because  the  venerable  father 
had  by  miracle  shown  the  power  of  almighty  God,  as 
before  he  told  him  when  he  did  first  rebuke  him  :  and 
so  no  cause  there  was  why  any  should  afterward  doubt 
of  his  promise,  seeing  at  one  and  the  same  time,  for  a 
small  glass  almost  empty  which  he  gave  away,  he  bestowed 
upon  them  an  whole  barrel  full  of  oil. 

89 


£f)c  Dialogues  of  9&  <£rcg;orp 
C&aptcr  Cfnrtp:  fjotu  15cnnct  Ddtocrco  a  a^onfc 

ftOltl  a  DCtilL  fl  Upon  a  certain  time,  as  he  was  going 
to  the  oratory  of  St.  John,  which  is  in  the  top  of  the 
mountain,  the  old  enemy  of  mankind  upon  a  mule,  like 
a  physician,  met  him,  carrying  in  his  hand  an  horn  and 
a  mortar.  And  when  he  demanded  whither  he  was  going  : 
"To  your  monks,"  quoth  he,  "to  give  them  a  drench." 
The  venerable  father  went  forward  to  his  prayers,  and 
when  he  had  done,  he  returned  in  all  haste,  but  the  wicked 
spirit  found  an  old  monk  drawing  of  water,  into  whom 
he  entered,  and  straightways  cast  him  upon  the  ground, 
and  grievously  tormented  him.  The  man  of  God  coming 
from  his  prayers,  and  seeing  him  in  such  pitiful  case, 
gave  him  only  a  little  blow  with  his  hand,  and  at  the 
same  instant  he  cast  out  that  cruel  devil,  so  that  he  durst 
not  any  more  presume  to  enter  in. 
Ij?0t0t»  I  would  gladly  know,  whether  he  obtained  always 
by  prayer,  to  work  such  notable  miracles  ;  or  else  some- 
times did  them  only  at  his  will  and  pleasure. 
(2>tC0Otp.  Such  as  be  the  devout  servants  of  God,  when 
necessity  requireth,  use  to  work  miracles  both  manner 
of  ways  :  so  that  sometime  they  effect  wonderful  things 
by  their  prayers,  and  sometime  only  by  their  power  and 
authority  :  for  St.  John  saith  :  So  many  as  received  him,  he 
gave  them  power  to  be  made  the  sons  of  God.1  They,  then, 
that  by  power  be  the  sons  of  God,  what  marvel  is  it,  if 
by  power  they  be  able  to  do  wonderful  things  ?  And 
that  both  ways  they  work  miracles,  we  learn  of  St.  Peter  : 
who  by  his  prayers  did  raise  up  Tabitha ;  and  by  his 
sharp  reprehension  did  sentence  Ananias  and  Sapphira  to 
death  for  their  lying.2  For  we  read  not,  that  in  the  death 
of  them  he  prayed  at  all,  but  only  rebuked  them  for  that 
sin  which  they  had  committed.  Certain  therefore  it  is, 
that  sometimes  they  do  these  things  by  power,  and  some- 
times by  prayer :  for  Ananias  and  Sapphira  by  a  severe 

1  John  I,  12.  2  Acts  9  and  5. 

90 


C6e  life  ana  piracies  of  ©t  Rennet 

rebuke,  St.  Peter  deprived  of  life  :  and  by  prayer  restored 
Tabitha  to  life.  And  for  proof  of  this,  I  will  now  tell 
you  of  two  miracles,  which  the  faithful  servant  of  God, 
Bennet,  did,  in  which  it  shall  appear  most  plainly  that 
he  wrought  the  one  by  that  power  which  God  gave  him, 
and  obtained  the  other  by  virtue  of  his  prayers. 

Chapter  CWrtponc :  of  a  country  feiloto,  tbat, 
toitb  tbe  onlp  sigfn  of  tU  man  of  ®oD,  toas  looscD 

ftOttt  f)i0  tanD0,  ^  A  certain  Goth  there  was  called 
Galla,  an  Arian  heretic,  who,  in  the  time  of  KingTotilas, 
did  with  such  monstrous  cruelty  persecute  religious  men 
of  the  Catholic  church,  that  what  priest  or  monk  soever 
came  in  his  presence,  he  never  departed  alive.  This  man 
on  a  certain  day,  set  upon  rapine  and  pillage,  pitifully 
tormented  a  poor  country  man,  to  make  him  confess 
where  his  money  and  wealth  was  :  who,  overcome  with 
extremity  of  pain,  said  that  he  had  committed  all  his 
substance  to  the  custody  of  Bennet,  the  servant  of 
God  :  and  this  he  did,  to  the  end  that  his  tormentor, 
giving  credit  to  his  words,  might  at  least  for  a  while 
surcease  from  his  horrible  cruelty.  Galla  hearing  this 
tormented  him  no  longer  :  but  binding  his  arms  fast 
with  strong  cords,  drave  him  before  his  horse,  to  bring 
him  unto  this  Bennet,  who,  as  he  said,  had  his  wealth 
in  keeping.  The  country  fellow,  thus  pinioned  and 
running  before  him,  carried  him  to  the  holy  man's 
Abbey,  where  he  found  him  sitting  before  the  gate, 
reading  upon  a  book.  Then  turning  back  to  Galla  that 
came  raging  after,  he  said  :  "  This  is  father  Bennet,  of 
whom  I  told  you  "  :  who  looking  upon  him,  in  a  great 
fury,  thinking  to  deal  as  terribly  with  him  as  he  had  with 
others,  cried  out  aloud  to  him,  saying :  "  Rise  up, 
sirrah,  rise  up,  and  deliver  me  quickly  such  wealth  as 
thou  hast  of  this  man's  in  keeping."  The  man  of  God, 
hearing  such  a  noise,  straightways  lifted  up  his  eyes 
from  reading,  and   beheld   both  him  and   the  country 

91 


€bc  Dialogues  of  %t  <£reprp 

fellow  ;  and  turning  his  eyes  to  his  bands,  very  strangely 
they  fell  from  his  arms,  and  that  so  quickly  as  no  man 
with  any  haste  could  have  undone  them.  Galla,  seeing 
him  so  wonderfully  and  quickly  loosed,  fell  straight  a 
trembling,  and  prostrating  himself  upon  the  earth, 
bowed  down  his  cruel  and  stiff  neck  to  the  holy  man's 
feet,  and  with  humility  did  commend  himself  to  his 
prayers.  But  the  venerable  man  for  all  this  rose  not 
up  from  his  reading,  but  calling  for  some  of  his  monks, 
commanded  them  to  have  him  in,  and  to  give  him  some 
meat.  And  when  he  was  brought  back  again,  he  gave 
him  a  good  lesson,  admonishing  him  not  to  use  any 
more  such  rigour  and  cruel  dealing.  His  proud  mind 
thus  taken  down,  away  he  went,  but  durst  not  demand 
after  that  anything  of  the  country  fellow,  whom  the  man 
of  God,  not  with  hands,  but  only  with  his  eyes,  had 
loosed  from  his  bands.  And  this  is  that,  Peter,  which 
I  told  you,  that  those  which  in  a  more  familiar  sort  serve 
God,  do  sometime,  by  certain  power  and  authority  be- 
stowed upon  them,  work  miracles.  For  he  that  sitting 
still  did  appease  the  fury  of  that  cruel  Goth,  and  un- 
loose with  his  eyes  those  knots  and  cords  which  did 
pinion  the  innocent  man's  arms,  did  plainly  shew  by 
the  quickness  of  the  miracle,  that  he  had  received  power 
to  work  all  that  which  he  did.  And  now  will  I  likewise 
tell  you  of  another  miracle,  which  by  prayer  he  obtained 
at  God's  hands. 

Cbaptet  CfnrtHtoo  :  froto  &P  ptapet  venerable 
15ennetraiseD  up  a  Dcao  cbtlD.  <I  Being  upon  a  day 

gone  out  with  his  monks  to  work  in  the  field,  a  country 
man  carrying  the  corpse  of  his  dead  son,  came  to  the 
gate  of  the  Abbey,  lamenting  the  loss  of  his  child  :  and 
inquiring  for  holy  Bennet,  they  told  him  that  he  was 
abroad  with  his  monks  in  the  field.  Down  at  the  gate 
he  laid  the  dead  body,  and  with  great  sorrow  of  soul 
ran  in  haste  to  seek  out  the  venerable  father.     At  the 

92 


C6e  Life  anD  piracies  of  S&  IBennet 

same  time,  the  man  of  God  was  returning  homeward 
from  work  with  his  monks  :  whom  so  soon  as  he  saw, 
he  began  to  cry  out  :  "  Give  me  my  son,  give  me  my 
son  !  '  The  man  of  God,  amazed  at  these  words,  stood 
still,  and  said  :  "What,  have  1  taken  away  your  son?" 
"  No,  no,"  quoth  the  sorrowful  father,  "but  he  is  dead  : 
come  for  Christ  Jesus'  sake  and  restore  him  to  life." 
The  servant  of  God,  hearing  him  speak  in  that  manner, 
and  seeing  his  monks  upon  compassion  to  solicit  the 
poor  man's  suit,  with  great  sorrow  of  mind  he  said  : 
"  Away,  my  good  brethren,  away  :  such  miracles  are  not 
for  us  to  work,  but  for  the  blessed  Apostles  :  why  will 
you  lay  such  a  burthen  upon  me,  as  my  weakness  can- 
not bear  ? '  But  the  poor  man,  whom  excessive  grief 
enforced,  would  not  give  over  his  petition,  but  swore 
that  he  would  never  depart,  except  he  did  raise  up  his 
son.  "Where  is  he,  then?"  quoth  God's  servant. 
He  answered  that  his  body  lay  at  the  gate  of  the  Abbey : 
to  which  place  when  the  man  of  God  came  with  his 
monks,  he  kneeled  down  and  lay  upon  the  body  of  the 
little  child,  and  rising,  he  held  up  his  hands  towards 
heaven,  and  said  :  "  Behold  not,  O  Lord,  my  sins,  but 
the  faith  of  this  man,  that  desireth  to  have  his  son  raised 
to  life,  and  restore  that  soul  to  the  body,  which  thou 
hast  taken  away."  He  had  scarce  spoken  these  words, 
and  behold  the  soul  returned  back  again,  and  therewith 
the  child's  body  began  to  tremble  in  such  sort  that  all 
which  were  present  did  behold  it  in  strange  manner  to 
pant  and  shake.  Then  he  took  it  by  the  hand  and  gave 
it  to  his  father,  but  alive  and  in  health.  Certain  it  is, 
Peter,  that  this  miracle  was  not  in  his  own  power, 
for  which  prostrate  upon  the  ground  he  prayed  so 
earnestly. 

l^CtCt*  All  is  most  true  that  before  you  said,  for  what  you 
affirmed  in  words,  you  have  now  verified  by  examples 
and  works.     But  tell  me,  I  beseech  you,  whether  holy 

93 


Cbe  Dialogues  of  %t  <£regorp 

men  can  do  all  such  things  as  they  please,  and  obtain 
at  God's  hands  whatsoever  they  desire. 

Chapter  CbirtHbrce :  of  a  miracle  torougftf  tip  f)is 

SiSter  ^>C()OlaStiCa.  $  (£>regorp.  Whatman  is  there, 
Peter,  in  this  world,  that  is  in  greater  favour  with  God 
than  St.  Paul  was  :  who  yet  three  times  desired  our 
Lord  to  be  delivered  from  the  prick  of  the  flesh,  and 
obtained  not  his  petition?1  Concerning  which  point 
also  I  must  needs  tell  you,  how  there  was  one  thing 
which  the  venerable  father  Bennet  would  have  done, 
and  yet  he  could  not.  For  his  sister  called  Scholastica, 
dedicated  from  her  infancy  to  our  Lord,  used  once  a 
year  to  come  and  visit  her  brother.  To  whom  the  man 
of  God  went  not  far  from  the  gate,  to  a  place  that  did 
belong  to  the  Abbey,  there  to  give  her  entertainment. 
And  she  coming  thither  on  a  time  according  to  her 
custom,  her  venerable  brother  with  his  monks  went  to 
meet  her,  where  they  spent  the  whole  day  in  the  praises 
of  God  and  spiritual  talk  :  and  when  it  was  almost  night 
they  supped  together,  and  as  they  were  yet  sitting  at 
the  table,  talking  of  devout  matters,  and  darkness  came 
on,  the  holy  Nun  his  sister  entreated  him  to  stay  there 
all  night,  that  they  might  spend  it  in  discoursing  of  the 
joys  of  heaven.  But  by  no  persuasion  would  he  agree 
unto  that,  saying  that  he  might  not  by  any  means  tarry 
all  night  out  of  his  Abbey.  At  that  time,  the  sky  was 
so  clear  that  no  cloud  was  to  be  seen.  The  Nun,  re- 
ceiving this  denial  of  her  brother,  joining  her  hands 
together,  laid  them  upon  the  table  :  and  so,  bowing 
down  her  head  upon  them,  she  made  her  prayers  to 
almighty  God  :  and  lifting  her  head  from  the  table, 
there  fell  suddenly  such  a  tempest  of  lightning  and 
thundering,  and  such  abundance  of  rain,  that  neither 
venerable  Bennet,  nor  his  monks  that  were  with  him, 
could  put  their  head  out  of  door  :  for  the  holy  Nun, 

1  2  Cor.  12,  8. 
94 


C6e  Life  anD  piracies  of  St  Rennet 

resting  her  head  upon  her  hands,  poured  forth  such  a 
flood  of  tears  upon  the  table,  that  she  drew  the  clear 
air  to  a  watery  sky,  so  that  after  the  end  of  her  devo- 
tions, that  storm  of  rain  followed  :  and  her  prayer  and 
the  rain  did  so  meet  together,  that  as  she  lifted  up  her 
head  from  the  table,  the  thunder  began,  so  that  in  one 
and  the  very  same  instant,  she  lifted  up  her  head  and 
brought  down  the  rain.     The  man  of  God,  seeing  that 
he  could  not  by  reason  of  such  thunder  and  lightning 
and  great  abundance  of  rain,  return  back  to  his  Abbey, 
began  to  be  heavy  and  to  complain  of  his  sister,  saying  : 
"God  forgive  you,  what  have  you  done  ?"  to  whom 
she  answered  :  "  I  desired  you  to  stay,  and  you  would 
not  hear  me,  I  have  desired  our  good  Lord,  and  he 
hath  vouchsafed  to  grant  my  petition  :  wherefore  if  you 
can  now  depart,  a  God's  name  return  to  your  monastery, 
and  leave  me  here  alone."     But  the  good  father,  being 
not  able  to  go  forth,  tarried  there  against  his  will,  where 
willingly  before  he  would  not  stay.     And  so  by  that 
means  they  watched  all  night,  and  with  spiritual  and 
heavenly  talk  did  mutually  comfort  one  another  :  and 
therefore  by  this  we  see,  as  I  said  before,  that  he  would 
have  had  that  thing,  which  yet  he  could  not  :  for  if  we 
respect  the  venerable  man's  mind,  no  question  but  he 
would  have  had  the  same  fair  weather  to  have  continued 
as  it  was,  when  he  set  forth,  but  he  found  that  a  miracle 
did  prevent  his  desire,  which,  by  the  power  of  almighty 
God,  a  woman's  prayers  had  wrought.     And  it  is  not 
a  thing  to  be  marvelled  at,  that  a  woman  which  of  long 
time  had  not  seen  her  brother,  might  do  more  at  that 
time  than  he  could,  seeing,  according  to  the  saying  of 
St.  John,  God  is  charity?  and  therefore  of  right  she  did 
more  which  loved  more. 

IPCtCt.   I  confess  that  1  am  wonderfully  pleased  with 
that  which  you  tell  me. 

1  I  John  4,  8. 

95 


£f)e  Dialogues  of  %t  <$regorp 

Cfmpter  C6irtp=four :  boto  iBennet  sato  tbe  soul 
of  Ws  lister  ascentJ  into  I^eatien,  <J  <£reprp. 

The  next  day  the  venerable  woman  returned  to  her 
Nunnery,  and  the  man  of  God  to  his  Abbey  :  who  three 
days  after,  standing  in  his  cell,  and  lifting  up  his  eyes 
to  heaven,  beheld  the  soul  of  his  sister  (which  was 
departed  from  her  body),  in  the  likeness  of  a  dove  to 
ascend  into  heaven  :  who  rejoicing  much  to  see  her 
great  glory,  with  hymns  and  lauds  gave  thanks  to 
almighty  God,  and  did  impart  the  news  of  this  her 
death  to  his  monks,  whom  also  he  sent  presently  to 
bring  her  corpse  to  his  Abbey,  to  have  it  buried  in  that 
grave  which  he  had  provided  for  himself:  by  means 
whereof  it  fell  out  that,  as  their  souls  were  always  one 
in  God  whiles  they  lived,  so  their  bodies  continued 
together  after  their  death. 

Chapter  £&irtp=£toe:  fjoto  &e  sato  tbe  tobole 
toorlD  representeD  before  W  epes :  ano  also  tbe 
soul  of  ®ermanus,  iBisfrop  of  Capua,  ascenoing 

tO  fyeatierL  ^  At  another  time,  Servandus,  the  Deacon, 
and  Abbot  of  that  monastery,  which  in  times  past  was 
founded  by  the  noble  man  Liberius  in  the  country  of 
Campania,  used  ordinarily  to  come  and  visit  the  man 
of  God  :  and  the  reason  why  he  came  so  often  was, 
because  himself  also  was  a  man  full  of  heavenly  doc- 
trine :  and  so  they  two  had  often  together  spiritual 
conference,  to  the  end  that,  albeit  they  could  not  per- 
fectly feed  upon  the  celestial  food  of  heaven,  yet,  by 
means  of  such  sweet  discourses,  they  might  at  least, 
with  longing  and  fervent  desire,  taste  of  those  joys  and 
divine  delights.  When  it  was  time  to  go  to  rest,  the 
venerable  father  Bennet  reposed  himself  in  the  top  of  a 
tower,  at  the  foot  whereof  Servandus  the  Deacon  was 
lodged,  so  that  one  pair  of  stairs  went  to  them  both  : 
before  the  tower  there  was  a  certain  large  room  in  which 
both  their  disciples  did  lie.     The  man  of  God,  Bennet, 

96 


ugino 


ST.     SCHOLASTICA 
(San  Pictro,   Perugia) 


Cfje  Life  anD  a@itacle0  of  %t.  TBennet 

being  diligent  in  watching,  rose  early  up  before  the  time 
of  matins  (his  monks  being  yet  at  rest)  and  came  to  the 
window  of  his  chamber,  where  he  offered  up  his  prayers 
to  almighty  God.  Standing  there,  all  on  a  sudden  in 
the  dead  of  the  night,  as  he  looked  forth,  he  saw  a 
light,  which  banished  away  the  darkness  of  the  night, 
and  glittered  with  such  brightness,  that  the  light  which 
did  shine  in  the  midst  of  darkness  was  far  more  clear 
than  the  light  of  the  day.  Upon  this  sight  a  marvellous 
strange  thing  followed,  for,  as  himself  did  afterward 
report,  the  whole  world,  gathered  as  it  were  together 
under  one  beam  of  the  sun,  was  presented  before  his 
eyes,  and  whiles  the  venerable  father  stood  attentively 
beholding  the  brightness  of  that  glittering  light,  he  saw 
the  soul  of  Germanus,  Bishop  of  Capua,  in  a  fiery  globe 
to  be  carried  up  by  Angels  into  heaven.  Then,  desirous 
to  have  some  witness  of  this  so  notable  a  miracle,  he 
called  with  a  very  loud  voice  Servandus  the  Deacon 
twice  or  thrice  by  his  name,  who,  troubled  at  such  an 
unusual  crying  out  of  the  man  of  God,  went  up  in  all 
haste,  and  looking  forth  saw  not  anything  else,  but  a 
little  remnant  of  the  light,  but  wondering  at  so  great  a 
miracle,  the  man  of  God  told  him  all  in  order  what 
he  had  seen,  and  sending  by  and  by  to  the  town  of 
Cassino,  he  commanded  the  religious  man  Theoprobus 
to  dispatch  one  that  night  to  the  city  of  Capua,  to  learn 
what  was  become  of  Germanus  their  Bishop  :  which 
being  done,  the  messenger  found  that  reverent  Prelate 
departed  this  life,  and  enquiring  curiously  the  time,  he 
understood  that  he  died  at  that  very  instant,  in  which 
the  man  of  God  beheld  him  ascending  up  to  heaven. 
l£)Ctet,  A  strange  thing  and  very  much  to  be  admired. 
But  whereas  you  say  that  the  whole  world,  as  it  were 
under  one  sunbeam,  was  presented  before  his  eyes,  as 
1  must  needs  confess  that  in  myself  I  never  had 
experience  of  any  such  thing,  so  neither  can  1  conceive 

97  G 


€be  Dialogues  of  %t  (Sreprp 

by  what  means  the  whole  world  can  be  seen  of  any  one 
man. 

$t0(JOtp.  Assure  yourself,  Peter,  of  that  which  I 
speak  :  to  wit,  that  all  creatures  be  as  it  were  nothing 
to  that  soul  which  beholdeth  the  Creator  :  for  though 
it  see  but  a  glimpse  of  that  light  which  is  in  the  Creator, 
yet  very  small  do  all  things  seem  that  be  created  :  for 
by  means  of  that  supernatural  light,  the  capacity  of  the 
inward  soul  is  enlarged,  and  is  in  God  so  extended,  that 
it  is  far  above  the  world  :  yea  and  the  soul  of  him  that 
seeth  in  this  manner,  is  also  above  itself;  for  being  rapt 
up  in  the  light  of  God,  it  is  inwardly  in  itself  enlarged 
above  itself,  and  when  it  is  so  exalted  and  looketh 
downward,  then  doth  it  comprehend  how  little  all 
that  is,  which  before  in  former  baseness  it  could  not 
comprehend.  The  man  of  God,  therefore,  who  saw 
the  fiery  globe,  and  the  Angels  returning  to  heaven, 
out  of  all  doubt  could  not  see  those  things  but  in  the 
light  of  God  :  what  marvel,  then,  is  it,  if  he  saw  the 
world  gathered  together  before  him,  who,  rapt  up  in 
the  light  of  his  soul,  was  at  that  time  out  of  the  world  ? 
But  albeit  we  say  that  the  world  was  gathered  together 
before  his  eyes,  yet  were  not  heaven  and  earth  drawn 
into  any  lesser  room  than  they  be  of  themselves,  but  the 
soul  of  the  beholder  was  more  enlarged,  which,  rapt  in 
God,  might  without  difficulty  see  that  which  is  under 
God,  and  therefore  in  that  light  which  appeared  to  his 
outward  eyes,  the  inward  light  which  was  in  his  soul 
ravished  the  mind  of  the  beholder  to  supernal  things, 
and  shewed  him  how  small  all  earthly  things  were. 
l^CtCt,  I  perceive  now  that  it  was  to  my  more  profit 
that  I  understood  you  not  before  :  seeing,  by  reason 
of  my  slow  capacity,  you  have  delivered  so  notable  an 
exposition.  But  now,  because  you  have  made  me 
thrughly  to  understand  these  things,  I  beseech  you 
to  continue  on  your  former  narration. 

98 


€be  Jlife  anD  piracies  of  %t.  15ennet 
Cbapter  Cbirt^str :  boto  bolp  IBennet  totote  a 

rule  fOt  biS  mOnfeS.  <U<$reptp.  Desirous  I  am,  Peter, 
to  tell  you  many  things  of  this  venerable  father,  but  some 
of  purpose  I  let  pass,  because  I  make  haste  to  entreat  also 
ot  the  acts  of  other  holy  men  :  yet  I  would  not  have  you 
to  be  ignorant,  but  that  the  man  of  God  amongst  so 
many  miracles,  for  which  he  was  so  famous  in  the  world, 
was  also  sufficiently  learned  in  divinity  :  for  he  wrote  a 
rule  for  his  monks,  both  excellent  for  discretion  and  also 
eloquent  for  the  style.  Of  whose  life  and  conversation, 
if  any  be  curious  to  know  further,  he  may  in  the  institu- 
tion of  that  rule  understand  all  his  manner  of  life  and 
discipline  :  for  the  holy  man  could  not  otherwise  teach, 
than  himself  lived. 

Chapter  Cbitt^setien :  boto  venerable  IBennet 
DiD  oropbesp  to  bis  monks,  tbe  time  of  bis  oton 

Oeatu*  fl  The  same  year  in  which  he  departed  this  life, 
he  told  the  day  of  his  holy  death  to  his  monks,  some  of 
which  did  live  daily  with  him,  and  some  dwelt  far  off, 
willing  those  that  were  present  to  keep  it  secret,  and  telling 
them  that  were  absent  by  what  token  they  should  know 
that  he  was  dead.  Six  days  before  he  left  this  world,  he 
gave  order  to  have  his  sepulchre  opened,  and  forthwith 
falling  into  an  ague,  he  began  with  burning  heat  to  wax 
faint,  and  when  as  the»sickness  daily  increased,  upon  the 
sixth  day  he  commanded  his  monks  to  carry  him  into  the 
oratory,  where  he  did  arm  himself  with  receiving  the 
body  and  blood  of  our  Saviour  Christ ;  and  having  his 
weak  body  holden  up  betwixt  the  hands  of  his  disciples, 
he  stood  with  his  own  lifted  up  to  heaven,  and  as  he  was 
in  that  manner  praying,  he  gave  up  the  ghost.  Upon 
which  day  two  monks,  one  being  in  his  cell,  and  the  other 
far  distant,  had  concerning  him  one  and  the  self-same 
vision  :  for  they  saw  all  the  way  from  the  holy  man's 
cell,  towards  the  east  even  up  to  heaven,  hung  and 
adorned  with    tapestry,  and    shining   with    an    infinite 

99 


€f)e  Dialogic  of  %t  <&xtQotv 

number  of  lamps,  at  the  top  whereof  a  man,  reverently 
attired,  stood  and  demanded  if  they  knew  who  passed  that 
way,  to  whom  they  answered  saying,  that  they  knew  not. 
Then  he  spake  thus  unto  them  :  "This  is  the  way,"  quoth 
he,  "  by  which  the  beloved  servant  of  God,  Bennet,  is 
ascended  up  to  heaven."  And  by  this  means,  as  his 
monks  that  were  present  knew  of  the  death  of  the  holy 
man,  so  likewise  they  which  were  absent,  by  the  token 
which  he  foretold  them,  had  intelligence  of  the  same 
thing.  Buried  he  was  in  the  oratory  of  St.  John  Baptist 
which  himself  built,  when  he  overthrew  the  altar  of 
Apollo  ;  who  also  in  that  cave  in  which  he  first  dwelled, 
even  to  this  very  time,  worketh  miracles,  if  the  faith  of 
them  that  pray  requireth  the  same. 

Cbaptet  £birtp=eigf)t :  Jjoto  a  mao  tooman  toas 

CUtCD  in  fe  CftOZ.  <f  For  the  tning  which  I  mean  now 
to  rehearse  fell  out  lately.  A  certain  woman  falling  mad, 
lost  the  use  of  reason  so  far,  that  she  walked  up  and  down, 
day  and  night,  in  mountains  and  valleys,  in  woods  and 
fields,  and  rested  only  in  that  place  where  extreme 
weariness  enforced  her  to  stay.  Upon  a  day  it  so  fell 
out,  that  albeit  she  wandered  at  random,  yet  she  missed 
not  the  right  way :  for  she  came  to  the  cave  of  the 
blessed  man  Bennet  :  and  not  knowing  anything,  in  she 
went,  and  reposed  herself  there  that  night,  and  rising  up 
in  the  morning,  she  departed  as  sound  in  sense  and  well 
in  her  wits,  as  though  she  had  never  been  distracted  in 
her  whole  life,  and  so  continued  always  after,  even  to  her 
dying  day. 

Ip0t0t.  What  is  the  reason  that  in  the  patronage  of 
martyrs  we  often  times  find,  that  they  do  not  afford  so 
great  benefits  by  their  bodies,  as  they  do  by  other  of 
their  relics  :  and  do  there  work  greater  miracles,  where 
themselves  be  not  present  ? 

(£)t00Qtp.  Where  the  holy  martyrs  lie  in  their  bodies, 
there  is  no  doubt,  Peter,  but  that  they  are  able  to  work 

ioo 


Q 
Z 
so 


h    5 


o    -5 


h 

< 


x 


S 

c<3 


C&e  life  ano  a^iracles  of  %t  I5ennet 

many  miracles,  yea  and  also  do  work  infinite,  to  such  as 
seek  them  with  a  pure  mind.    But  for  as  much  as  simple 
people  might  have  some  doubt  whether  they  be  present, 
and  do  in  those  places  hear  their  prayers  where  their 
bodies  be  not,  necessary  it  is  that  they  should  in  those 
places  shew  greater  miracles,  where  weak  souls  may  most 
doubt  of  their  presence.     But  he  whose  mind  is  fixed  in 
God,  hath  so  much  the  greater  merit  of  his  faith,  in  that 
he  both  knoweth  that  they  rest  not  there  in  body,  and  yet 
be  there  present  to  hear  our  prayers.    And  therefore  our 
Saviour  himself,  to  increase  the  faith  of  his  disciples, 
said  :  If I  do  not  depart^  the  Comforter  will  not  come  unto 
you : 1  for,  seeing  certain  it  is  that  the  comforting  Spirit 
doth  always  proceed  from  the  Father  and  the  Son,  why 
doth  the  Son  say  that  he  will  depart  that  the  Comforter 
may  come,  who  never  is  absent  from  the  Son  ?     But  be- 
cause the  disciples,  beholding  our  Lord  in  flesh,did  always 
desire  to  see  him  with  their  corporal  eyes,  very  well  did 
he  say  unto  them  :    Unless  I  do  go  away,  the   Comforter 
will  not  come:  as  though  he  had  plainly  told  them  :   If  I 
do  not  withdraw  my  body,  I  cannot  let  you  understand 
what  the  love  of  the  spirit  is  :  and  except  you  give  over 
to  love  my  carnal  presence,  never  will  you  learn  to  affect 
me  with  true  spiritual  love. 
l£>CtCt.  That  you  say  pleaseth  me  very  well. 
(StCjJOtp.  Let  us  now  for  a  while  give  over  our   dis- 
course, to  the  end  that  if  we  mean  to  prosecute  the 
miracles  of  other  Saints,  we  may  through  silence  be  the 
more  able  to  perform  it. 

1  John  1 6,  7. 


Cfje  cnD  of  t&e  ^cconD  IBoofe 


IOI 


%ty  Dialogues  of  £>t.  ®regorj> 


TBCing;  careful  to  entreat  of  such  fathers  as  lived  not 
long  since,  I  passed  over  the  worthy  acts  of  those  that 
were  in  former  times  :  so  that  I  had  almost  forgot  the 
miracle  of  Paulinus,  Bishop  of  Nola,  who  both  for  time 
was  more  ancient,  and  for  virtue  more  notable,  than  many 
of  those  which  1  have  spoken  of :  wherefore  I  will  now 
speak  of  him,  but  as  briefly  as  I  can.  For  as  the  life  and 
actions  of  good  men  are  soonest  known  to  such  as  be  like 
them,  so  the  famous  name  of  venerable  Paulinus  became 
known  to  mine  holy  elders,  and  his  admirable  fact  served 
for  their  instruction  :  who,  for  their  gravity  and  old  years, 
are  as  well  to  be  credited,  as  if  that  which  they  reported 
they  had  seen  with  their  own  eyes. 

Chapter  Dne :  of  %t  Ipaulinua,  15i0&op  of  tU 

Citg  Of  JftOla.  <I  When  as  in  the  time  of  the  cruel 
Vandals,  that  part  of  Italy  which  is  called  Campania  was 
overrun  and  sacked,  and  many  were  from  thence  carried 
captive  into  Africk  :  then  the  servant  of  God,  Paulinus, 
bestowed  all  the  wealth  of  his  Bishopric  upon  prisoners 
and  poor  people.  And  not  having  now  anything  more 
left,  a  certain  widow  came  unto  him,  lamenting  how  her 
son  was  taken  prisoner  by  one  that  was  son-in-law  to  the 
king  of  the  Vandals,  and  by  him  carried  away  to  be  his 
slave  :  and  therefore  she  besought  him,  that  he  would 
vouchsafe  to  help  her  with  a  ransom  for  the  redeeming 
of  her  son.     But  the  man  of  God,  seeking  what  he  had 

105 


C6e  Dialogues  of  §>t.  <$tegorp 

to  give  the  poor  woman,  found  nothing  left  but  himself 
alone,  and  therefore  he  answered  her  in  this  manner  : 
"  Good  woman,  nothing  have  I  to  help  thee  withal  but 
myself,  and  therefore  take  me,  and  a  God's  name  say  that 
I  am  your  servant,  and  see  whether  he  will  receive  me 
for  his  slave,  and  so  set  your  son  at  liberty  " :  which  words 
she  hearing  from  the  mouth  of  so  notable  a  man,  took 
them  rather  for  a  mock,  than  to  proceed  indeed  from  true 
compassion.  But  as  he  was  an  eloquent  man,  and  passing 
well  learned  in  humanity,  so  did  he  quickly  persuade  the 
doubtful  woman  to  give  credit  to  his  words,  and  not  to 
be  afraid  to  offer  a  Bishop  for  the  ransom  of  her  son  ; 
whereupon  away  they  travelled  both  into  Africk.  And 
when  the  king's  son-in-law  came  abroad,  the  widow  put 
up  her  petition  concerning  her  son,  humbly  beseeching 
him  that  he  would  vouchsafe  to  set  him  now  at  liberty, 
and  bestow  him  upon  his  mother.  But  the  barbarous 
man,  swelling  with  pride  and  puffed  up  with  the  joy 
of  transitory  prosperity,  refused  not  only  to  do  it,  but 
disdained  also  to  give  any  ear  to  her  petition.  This  way 
therefore  taking  no  success,  the  desolate  widow  tried  the 
next,  and  said  unto  him  :  "  Behold,  I  give  you  here  this 
man  instead  of  him,  only  take  compassion  on  me,  and 
restore  to  me  mine  only  son."  At  which  words  he,  casting 
his  eyes  upon  Paulinus,  and  seeing  him  to  have  an  honest 
and  good  face,  asked  him  of  what  occupation  he  was  :  to 
whom  the  man  of  God  answered  :  "  Trade  or  occupation 
I  can  none,  but  some  skill  I  have  in  keeping  of  a  garden." 
This  pleased  the  Pagan  very  well,  whereupon  he  admitted 
him  for  his  servant,  and  restored  the  widow  her  son,  with 
whom  she  departed  out  of  Africk,  and  Paulinus  took 
charge  of  the  garden.  The  king's  son-in-law  coming 
often  into  the  garden,  demanded  certain  questions  of  his 
new  man,  and  perceiving  him  to  be  very  wise  and  of  good 
judgment,  he  began  to  give  over  the  company  of  his  old 
familiar  friends,  and  conversed  much  with  his  gardener, 

106 


Paulmus  of  U3oIa 

taking  great  pleasure  in  his  talk.  Every  day  Paulinus 
brought  him  to  his  table  divers  sorts  of  green  herbs,  and 
after  dinner  returned  to  his  garden.  After  he  had  used 
this  a  long  time,  upon  a  day,  as  his  master  and  he  were 
in  secret  talk  together,  Paulinus  spake  unto  him  in  this 
manner  :  "  Consider,  my  Lord,  what  is  your  best  course, 
and  how  the  kingdom  of  the  Vandals  shall  be  disposed 
of,  for  the  king  is  to  die  shortly":  which  news,  because 
he  was  in  special  grace  with  the  king,  he  gave  him  to 
understand,  adding  that  his  gardener,  who  was  a  passing 
wise  man,  had  told  him  so  much.  The  king,  hearing  this, 
was  desirous  to  see  the  man  he  spake  of :  "  Your  Maj  esty," 
quoth  he,  "  shall  see  him,  for  his  manner  is  to  bring  me 
in  daily  fresh  herbs  for  my  dinner,  and  I  will  give  orders 
that  he  shall  do  it  in  your  presence  "  :  which  direction 
being  given,  as  the  king  sat  at  dinner,  Paulinus  came  in, 
bringing  with  him  divers  sallettes  and  fresh  herbs  :  whom 
so  soon  as  the  king  beheld,  he  fell  a  trembling,  and  send- 
ing for  Paulinus'  master  (who  by  the  marriage  of  his 
daughter  was  so  near  allied  unto  him),  acquainted  him 
with  that  secret  which  before  he  had  concealed,  saying  : 
"  It  is  very  true  that  which  you  have  heard,  for  the  last 
night,  in  a  dream,  I  saw  certain  judges  in  their  seats  sit- 
ting upon  me,  amongst  whom  this  man  also  sat  for  one  : 
and  by  their  sentence  that  whip  was  taken  from  me,  which 
for  the  punishment  of  others  some  time  I  had.  But  in- 
quire, I  pray  you,  what  he  is,  for  I  do  not  think  one  of 
so  great  merit  to  be  an  ordinary  man,  as  he  outwardly 
seemeth."  Then  the  king's  son-in-law  took  Paulinus  in 
secret,  and  asked  him  what  he  was  :  to  whom  the  man 
of  God  answered:  "Your  servant  I  am,"  quoth  he, 
"  whom  you  took  for  the  ransom  of  the  widow's  son  "  ; 
but  when  he  would  not  be  satisfied  with  that  answer,  but 
did  instantly  press  him  to  tell,  not  what  he  was  now,  but 
what  he  had  been  in  his  own  country,  and  did  urge  him 
very  often  to  answer  to  this  point  :  the  man  of  God, 

107 


Ct)C  Dialogic  of  %t  <$regorp 

adjured  so  strictly,  not  being  able  any  longer  to  deny  his 

request,  told  him  that  he  was  a  Bishop  ;  which  his  master 

and  lord  hearing  became  wonderfully  afraid,  and  humbly 

offered  him,  saying  :  "  Demand  what  you  will,  that  you 

may  be  well  rewarded  of  me,  and  so  return  home  to  your 

country."    To  whom  the  man  of  God,  Paulinus,  said: 

"  One  thing  there  is  wherein  you  may  much  pleasure 

me,  and  that  is,  to  set  at  liberty  all  those  that  be  of 

my  city "  :  which   suit    he    obtained,   for  straightways 

throughout  Africk  all  were  sought  out,  their  ships  laden 

with  wheat,  and  to  give  venerable  Paulinus  satisfaction, 

they  were  all  discharged,  and  in  his  company  sent  home  : 

and  not  long  after  the  king  of  the  Vandals  died,  and  so 

he  lost  that  whip  and  severe  government,  which  to  his 

own  destruction  and  the  punishment  of  Christians  by 

God's  providence  he  had  before  received.     And  thus  it 

came  to  pass  that  Paulinus,  the  servant  of  almighty  God, 

told  truth,  and  he  that  voluntarily  alone  made  himself  a 

bondman,  returned  not  back  alone,  but  with  many  from 

captivity  :   imitating  him  who  took  upon  him  the  form 

of  a  servant,  that  we  should  not  be  servants  to  sin  :  for 

Paulinus,  following  his  example,  became  himself  for  a 

time  a  servant  alone,  that  afterward  he  might  be  made 

free  with  many. 

K?0t0t.  When  I  hear  that  which  I  cannot  imitate,  I 
desire  rather  to  weep  than  to  say  anything. 
(2Dt00Otp*  Concerning  this  holy  man's  death,  it  remaineth 
yet  in  the  records  of  his  own  church,  how  that  he  was 
with  a  pain  of  his  side  brought  to  the  last  cast :  and  that, 
whiles  all  the  rest  of  the  house  stood  sound,  the  chamber 
only  in  which  he  lay  sick  was  shaken  with  an  earthquake, 
and  so  his  soul  was  loosed  from  his  body  :  and  by  this 
means  it  fell  out,  that  they  were  all  strooken  with  a  great 
fear  that  might  have  seen  Paulinus  departing  this  life. 
But  because  his  virtue  by  that  which  I  spoke  of  before 
is  sufficiently  handled,  now,  if  you  please,  we  will  come 

108  ' 


CM.  3Iofm,  tbe  IPope 

to  other  miracles,  which  are  both  known  to  many,  and 
which  I  have  heard  by  the  relation  of  such  persons,  that 
I  can  make  no  doubt  but  that  they  be  most  true. 

Chapter  Ctoo :  of  CM.  3Io6n,  tfje  Ipopc.  <J  in  the 

time  of  the  Goths,  when  the  most  blessed  man  John, 
Bishop  of  this  church  of  Rome,  travelled  to  the  Emperor 
Justinian  the  elder,  he  came  into  the  country  of  Corinth, 
where  he  lacked  an  horse  to  ride  upon :  which  a  certain 
noble  man  understanding,  lent  him  that  horse  which, 
because  he  was  gentle,  his  wife  used  for  her  own  saddle, 
with  order  that  when  he  came  where  he  could  provide 
himself  of  another,  his  wife's  horse  should  be  sent  back 
again.  And  so  the  Bishop  rode  upon  him,  until  he  came 
to  a  certain  place  where  he  got  another,  and  then  he 
returned  that  which  he  had  borrowed.  But  afterward, 
when  his  wife  came  to  take  his  back,  as  before  she  used, 
by  no  means  could  she  do  it,  because  the  horse,  having 
carried  so  great  a  Bishop,  would  not  suffer  a  woman  to 
come  any  more  upon  his  back,  and  therefore  he  began 
with  monstrous  snorting,  neighing,  and  continual  stirring, 
as  it  were  in  scorn,  to  shew  that  he  could  not  bear  any 
woman,  upon  whom  the  Pope  himself  had  ridden  :  which 
thing  her  husband  wisely  considering,  straightways  sent 
him  again  to  the  holy  man,  beseeching  him  to  accept  of 
that  horse,  which  by  riding  he  had  dedicated  to  his  own 
service.  Of  the  same  man,  another  miracle  is  also  reported 
by  our  ancestors  :  to  wit,  that  in  Constantinople,  when 
he  came  to  the  gate  called  Aurea,  where  he  was  met  with 
great  numbers  of  people,  in  the  presence  of  them  all,  he 
restored  sight  to  a  blind  man  that  did  instantly  crave  it : 
for  laying  his  hand  upon  him,  he  banished  away  that 
darkness  which  possessed  his  eyes. 

Cbaptet  C&ree :  of  ^>t.  %apttu0,  tbe  Jpope.  «I  Not 

long  after,  about  business  concerning  the  Goths,  the 
most  blessed  man  Agapitus,  Bishop  of  this  holy  church 
of  Rome  (in  which  by  God's  providence  I  do  now  serve), 

109 


C6e  Dialogues  of  %t  ®regorp 

went  to  the  Emperor  Justinian.  And,  as  he  was  travelling 
through  Greece,  a  dumb  and  lame  man  was  brought 
unto  him  for  help.  The  holy  man  carefully  demanded 
of  his  kinsfolk,  that  brought  him  thither  and  stood  there 
weeping,  whether  they  did  believe  that  it  was  in  his  power 
to  cure  him :  who  answered,  that  they  did  firmly  hope 
that  he  might  help  him  in  the  virtue  of  God  by  the 
authority  of  St.  Peter  :  upon  which  words  forthwith  the 
venerable  man  fell  to  his  prayers,  and  beginning  solemn 
mass,  he  offered  sacrifice  in  the  sight  of  almighty  God  : 
which  being  ended,  he  came  from  the  altar,  took  the  lame 
man  by  the  hand,  and  straightways,  in  the  presence  and 
sight  of  all  the  people,  he  restored  him  to  the  use  of  his 
legs  :  and  after  he  had  put  our  Lord's  body  into  his 
mouth,  that  tongue,  which  long  time  before  had  not 
spoken,  was  loosed.  At  which  miracle  all  did  wonder, 
and  began  to  weep  for  joy  :  and  forthwith  both  fear  and 
reverence  possessed  their  minds,  beholding  what  Agapitus 
could  do  in  the  power  of  our  Lord,  by  the  help  of  St.  Peter. 

Chapter  jTout:  of  Dattus,15i0f)opofspilan.  qin 

the  time  of  the  same  Emperor,  Datius,  Bishop  of  Milan, 
about  matters  of  religion,  travelled  to  Constantinople. 
And  coming  to  Corinth,  he  sought  for  a  large  house  to 
receive  him  and  his  company,  and  could  scarce  find  any  : 
at  length  he  saw  afar  off*  a  fair  great  house,  which  he 
commanded  to  be  provided  for  him  :  and  when  the 
inhabitants  of  that  place  told  him  that  it  was  for  many 
years  haunted  by  the  devil,  and  therefore  stood  empty  : 
"  so  much  the  sooner,"  quoth  the  venerable  man,  "  ought 
we  to  lodge  in  it,  if  the  wicked  spirit  hath  taken  possession 
thereof,  and  will  not  suffer  men  to  dwell  in  it."  Where- 
upon he  gave  order  to  have  it  made  ready  :  which  being 
done,  he  went  without  all  fear  to  combat  with  the  old 
enemy.  In  the  dead  of  the  night,  when  the  man  of  God 
was  asleep,  the  devil  began,  with  an  huge  noise  and  great 
outcry,  to  imitate  the  roaring  of  lions,  the  bleating  of 

1 10 


^atJinus  of  Cami0tna 

sheep,  the  braying  of  asses,  the  hissing  of  serpents,  the 
grunting  of  hogs,  and  the  screeching  of  rats.  Datius, 
suddenly  awaked  with  the  noise  of  so  many  beasts,  rose 
up,  and  in  great  anger  spake  aloud  to  the  old  serpent, 
and  said  :  "  Thou  art  served  well,  thou  wretched  creature  : 
thou  art  he  that  diddest  say :  I  will  place  my  seat  in  the 
north,  and  I  will  be  like  to  the  highest:1  and  now  through 
thy  pride,  see  how  thou  art  become  like  unto  hogs  and 
rats ;  and  thou  that  wouldest  needs  unworthily  be  like 
unto  God,  behold  how  thou  dost  now,  according  to  thy 
deserts,  imitate  brute  beasts."  At  these  words  the  wicked 
serpent  was,  as  I  may  well  term  it,  ashamed,  that  he  was 
so  disgraciously  and  basely  put  down,  for  well  may  I  say 
that  he  was  ashamed,  who  never  after  troubled  that 
house  with  any  such  terrible  and  monstrous  shapes  as 
before  he  did :  for  ever  after  that  time,  Christian  men 
did  inhabit  the  same  ;  for  so  soon  as  one  man  that  was 
a  true  and  faithful  Christian  took  possession  thereof,  the 
lying  and  faithless  spirit  straightways  did  forsake  it. 
But  I  will  now  surcease  from  speaking  of  things  done  in 
former  times,  and  come  to  such  miracles  as  have  happened 
in  our  own  days. 

Cbapter  JFtoe :  of  ^atrinua,  15isf)op  of  Cami0tna. 

tfl  Certain  religious  men,  well  known  in  the  province  of 
Apulia,  do  report  that  which  many  both  far  and  near 
know  to  be  most  true,  and  that  is  of  Sabinus,  Bishop  of 
Camisina  :  who,  by  reason  of  his  great  age,  was  become 
so  blind  that  he  saw  nothing  at  all.  And  for  as  much 
as  Totilas,  King  of  the  Goths,  hearing  that  he  had  the 
gift  of  prophecy,  and  would  not  believe  it,  but  was 
desirous  to  prove  whether  it  were  so  or  no,  it  fell  so 
out,  that  coming  into  those  parts,  the  man  of  God  did 
invite  him  to  dinner.  And  when  the  meat  was  brought 
in,  the  King  would  not  sit  at  the  table,  but  sat  beside 
at   the   right    hand   of  venerable    Sabinus  :    and  when 

1   Isai.  14,  13,  14. 
1 1 1 


C6e  Dialogues  of  %t  <$regorp 

the  Bishop's  man  brought  him,  as  he  used  to  do,  a  cup 
of  wine,  the  King  softly  put  forth  his  hand,  took  the 
cup,  and  gave  it  himself  to  the  Bishop,  to  try  whether 
he  could  tell  who  he  was  that  gave  him  the  wine.  Then 
the  man  of  God  taking  the  cup,  but  not  seeing  him  that 
did  deliver  it,  said  :  "  Blessed  be  that  hand."  At  which 
words  the  King  very  merrily  blushed,  because,  albeit 
he  was  taken,  yet  did  he  find  that  gift  in  the  man 
of  God  which  before  he  desired  to  know.  The  same 
reverent  man,  to  give  good  example  of  life  to  others, 
lived  until  he  was  passing  old  :  which  nothing  pleased 
his  Archdeacon,  that  desired  his  Bishopric  :  and  there- 
fore upon  ambition  he  sought  how  to  dispatch  him  with 
poison,  and  for  that  purpose  corrupted  his  cup-bearer, 
who,  overcome  with  money,  offered  the  Bishop  at  dinner 
that  poison  in  his  wine  which  he  had  received  of  the 
Archdeacon.  The  holy  man,  knowing  what  he  brought, 
willed  himself  to  drink  that  which  he  offered  him.  The 
wretch  trembled  at  those  words,  and  perceiving  his 
villany  to  be  detected,  thought  better  to  drink  it,  and 
so  quickly  dispatch  himself,  than  with  shame  to  suffer 
torments  for  the  sin  of  so  horrible  a  murder  :  but  as 
he  was  putting  the  cup  to  his  mouth,  the  man  of  God 
hindered  him,  saying  :  "  Do  not  take  it,  but  give  it 
me,  and  I  will  drink  it  myself,  but  go  thy  way,  and  tell 
him  that  gave  it  thee,  that  I  will  drink  the  poison,  but 
yet  shall  he  never  live  to  be  Bishop"  :  and  so  blessing 
the  cup  with  the  sign  of  the  cross,  he  drunk  it  without 
any  harm  at  all ;  at  which  very  time  the  Archdeacon, 
being  in  another  place,  departed  this  life  ;  as  though 
that  poison  had  by  the  Bishop's  mouth  passed  to  his 
Archdeacon's  bowels  :  for  although  he  had  no  corporal 
poison  to  kill  him,  yet  the  venom  of  his  own  malice  did 
destroy  him  in  the  sight  of  the  everlasting  Judge. 
Ip0tet,  These  be  strange  things,  and  much  in  our  days 
to  be  wondered  at  :  yet  the  life  of  the  man  is  such,  that 

I  12 


anDreto  of  JTuntia 

he  which  knoweth  his  holy  conversation  hath  no  such 
cause  to  marvel  at  the  miracle. 

Cfmpter  %ix:  of  Cassius,  IBis&op  of  Jftarm. 

^  tiDZZQOX'p.  Neither  can  I,  Peter,  pass  over  with 
silence  that  thing,  which  many  of  the  city  of  Narni, 
which  be  here  present,  affirm  to  be  most  true.  For  in 
the  time  of  the  same  Goths,  the  foresaid  King  Totilas 
coming  to  Narni,  Cassius,  a  man  of  venerable  life, 
Bishop  of  the  same  city,  went  forth  to  meet  him,  whom 
the  king  utterly  contemned,  because  his  face  was  high- 
coloured,  thinking  that  it  proceeded  not  from  any  other 
cause  than  drinking.  But  almighty  God,  to  show  how 
worthy  a  man  was  despised,  permitted  a  wicked  spirit 
before  his  whole  army,  in  the  fields  of  Narni,  where  the 
king  also  himself  was,  to  possess  one  of  his  guard,  and 
cruelly  to  torment  him.  Straightways  was  he  brought 
to  the  venerable  man  Cassius,  in  the  presence  of  the 
king  :  who  praying  to  God  for  him,  and  making  the 
sign  of  the  cross,  forthwith  he  cast  out  the  devil,  so 
that  never  after  he  durst  presume  any  more  to  enter 
into  his  body.  And  by  this  means  it  fell  out  that  the 
barbarous  king,  from  that  day  forward,  did  with  his 
heart  much  reverence  the  servant  of  God,  whom  before 
by  his  face  he  judged  to  be  a  man  of  no  account  :  for 
seeing  him  now  to  be  one  of  such  power  and  virtue,  he 
gave  over  those  proud  thoughts  which  before  he  had 
conceived. 

Chapter  ^euen :  of  anoreto,  IBls&op  of  JTunDa. 

(J  But  as  I  am  thus  busied  in  telling  the  acts  of  holy 
men,  there  cometh  to  my  mind  what  God  of  his  great 
mercy  did  for  Andrew,  Bishop  of  the  city  of  Funda  : 
which  notable  story  I  wish  all  so  to  read,  that  they 
which  have  dedicated  themselves  to  continency,  pre- 
sume not  in  any  wise  to  dwell  amongst  women  :  lest 
in  time  of  temptation  their  soul  perish  the  sooner, 
by  having  that  at   hand  which   is   unlawfully  desired. 

1.13  H 


£f)e  Dialog:ue0  of  <§t  #regorp 

Neither  is  the  story  which  I  report  either  doubtful  or 
uncertain  :  for  so  many  witnesses  to  justify  the  truth 
thereof  may  be  produced,  as  there  be  almost  inhabitants 
in  that  city.  When,  therefore,  this  venerable  man 
Andrew  lived  virtuously,  and  with  diligent  care,  answer- 
able to  his  priestly  function,  led  a  continent  and  chaste 
life  :  he  kept  in  his  house  a  certain  Nun,  which  also  had 
remained  with  him  before  he  was  preferred  to  that 
dignity  ;  for  assuring  himself  of  his  own  continency, 
and  nothing  doubting  of  hers,  content  he  was  to  let  her 
remain  still  in  his  house  :  which  thing  the  devil  took  as 
an  occasion  to  assault  him  with  temptation  :  and  so  he 
began  to  present  before  the  eyes  of  his  mind  the  form 
of  that  woman,  that  by  such  allurements  he  might  have 
his  heart  wholly  possessed  with  ungodly  thoughts.  In 
the  meantime  it  so  fell  out,  that  a  Jew  was  travelling 
from  Campania  to  Rome,  who  drawing  nigh  to  the  city 
of  Funda,  was  so  overtaken  with  night,  that  he  knew 
not  where  to  lodge,  and  therefore,  not  finding  any 
better  commodity,  he  retired  himself  into  a  temple  of 
the  god  Apollo,  which  was  not  far  off,  meaning  there 
to  repose  himself :  but  much  afraid  he  was,  to  lie  in  so 
wicked  and  sacrilegious  a  place  :  for  which  cause,  though 
he  believed  not  what  we  teach  of  the  cross,  yet  he 
thought  good  to  arm  himself  with  that  sign.  About 
midnight,  as  he  lay  waking  for  very  fear  of  that  forlorn 
and  desert  temple,  and  looked  suddenly  about  him,  he 
espied  a  troop  of  wicked  spirits  walking  before  another 
or  greater  authority  :  who  coming  in  took  up  his  place, 
and  sat  down  in  the  body  of  the  temple  :  where  he 
began  diligently  to  inquire  of  those  his  servants,  how 
they  had  bestowed  their  time,  and  what  villany  they  had 
done  in  the  world.  And  when  each  one  told  what  he 
had  done  against  God's  servants,  out  stepped  a  com- 
panion, and  made  solemn  relation,  with  a  notable 
temptation  of  carnality  he  had  put  into  the  mind  of 

114 


anDteto  of  jTunna 

Bishop  Andrew,  concerning  that  Nun  which  he  kept 
in  his  palace  :  whereunto  whiles  the  master  devil  gave 
attentive  ear,  considering  with  himself  what  a  notable 
gain  it  would  be,  to  undo  the  soul  of  so  holy  a  man ; 
the  former  devil  went  on  with  his  tale,  and  said  that  the 
very  evening  before  he  assaulted  him  so  mightily,  that 
he  drew  him  so  far  forth,  that  he  did  merrily  strike  the 
said  Nun  upon  the  back.  The  wicked  serpent  and  old 
enemy  of  mankind  hearing  this  joyful  news,  exhorted 
his  agent  with  very  fair  words,  diligently  to  labour 
about  the  effecting  of  that  thing  which  he  had  already  so 
well  begun,  that  for  so  notable  a  piece  of  service,  as  the 
contriving  the  spiritual  ruin  of  that  virtuous  Prelate,  he 
might  have  a  singular  reward  above  all  his  fellows.  The 
Jew  who  all  this  while  lay  waking,  and  heard  all  that 
which  they  said,  was  wonderfully  afraid  :  at  length  the 
master  devil  sent  some  of  his  followers  to  see  who  he 
was,  and  how  he  durst  presume  to  lodge  in  their  temple. 
When  they  were  come,  and  had  narrowly  viewed  him, 
they  found  that  he  was  marked  with  the  mystical  sign 
of  the  cross  :  whereat  they  marvelled  and  said  :  "  Alas, 
alas,  here  is  an  empty  vessel,  but  yet  it  is  signed"  : 
which  news  the  rest  of  those  hell-hounds  hearing, 
suddenly  vanished  away.  The  Jew,  who  had  seen  all 
that  which  then  passed  among  them,  presently  rose  up, 
and  in  all  haste  sped  himself  to  the  Bishop,  whom  he 
found  in  the  church  :  and  taking  him  aside,  he  demanded 
with  what  temptation  he  was  troubled  :  but  shame  so 
prevailed,  that  by  no  means  he  would  confess  the  truth. 
Then  the  Jew  replied  and  told  him,  that  he  had  cast  his 
eyes  wickedly  upon  such  a  one  of  God's  servants  ;  but 
the  Bishop  would  not  acknowledge  that  there  was  any 
such  thing.  "  Why  do  you  deny  it,"  quoth  the  Jew,  "  for 
is  it  not  so  true  that  yesternight  you  were  brought 
so  far  by  sinful  temptation,  that  you  did  strike  her  on 
the  back?"     When  the  Bishop,  by  these  particulars, 

TI5 


Cfje  Dialogues  of  §>t.  <£>rcgorp 

perceived  that  the  matter  was  broken  forth,  he  humbly 
confessed  what  before  he  obstinately  denied.  Then  the 
Jew,  moved  with  compassion  to  his  soul,  and  tendering 
his  credit,  told  him  by  what  means  he  came  to  the 
knowledge  thereof,  and  what  he  heard  of  him  in  that 
assembly  of  wicked  spirits.  The  Bishop,  hearing  this, 
fell  prostrate  upon  the  earth,  and  betook  himself  to  his 
prayers  :  and  straight  after  he  discharged  out  of  his 
house,  not  only  that  Nun,  but  all  other  women  that 
attended  upon  her.  And  not  long  after,  he  converted 
the  temple  of  Apollo  into  an  oratory  of  the  blessed 
Apostle,  St.  Andrew  :  and  never  after  was  he  troubled 
with  that  carnal  temptation  :  and  the  Jew,  by  whose 
means  he  was  so  mercifully  preserved,  he  brought  to 
everlasting  salvation  :  for  he  baptized  him,  and  made 
him  a  member  of  holy  Church.  And  thus,  by  God's 
providence,  the  Jew  having  care  of  the  spiritual  health 
of  another,  attained  also  himself  the  singular  benefit  of 
the  same  :  and  almighty  God  by  the  same  means 
brought  one  to  embrace  piety  and  virtue,  by  which  he 
preserved  another  in  an  holy  and  godly  life. 
ll^CtCt*  This  history  which  I  have  heard  worketh  in  me 
fear,  and  yet  withal  giveth  me  cause  of  hope. 
(£>t0jJOtp«  That  is  not  amiss,  Peter,  for  necessary  it  is 
that  we  should  both  trust  upon  the  mercy  of  God,  and 
yet,  considering  our  own  frailty,  be  afraid  :  for  we  have 
now  heard  how  one  of  the  cedars  of  Paradise  was  shaken, 
and  yet  not  blown  down,  to  the  end  that,  knowing  our 
own  infirmity,  we  should  both  tremble  at  his  shaking, 
and  yet  conceive  hope,  in  that  he  was  not  overthrown, 
but  kept  his  standing  still. 

C&aptet  <£ig&t :   of  Cqnstantiua,   'Bis&op   of 

3QUinurn*  fj  Constantius,  likewise  a  man  of  holy  life, 
was  Bishop  of  Aquinum,  who  not  long  since  died,  in 
the  time  of  Pope  John  of  blessed  memory,  my  prede- 
cessor :  many  that  knew  him  familiarly,  say  that  he  had 

116 


.?: 


3fi 
U 

w 
X 


O 

w 

U5 

P 

o 

PS 
h 


z 

p< 

3 


P 
Z 

5 
3 
2 


~<3 


JTrig:iDmnu0  of  Lucca 

the  gift  of  prophecy.  And  amongst  divers  other  things 
which  he  did,  religious  and  honest  men  then  present 
report  that,  lying  upon  his  deathbed,  the  citizens  that 
stood  about  him  wept  bitterly,  and  asked  him  with  tears, 
who  should  be  their  father  and  Bishop  after  him.  To 
whom  by  the  spirit  of  prophecy  he  answered,  saying  : 
"  After  Constantius,  you  shall  have  a  muleteer,  and 
after  a  muleteer,  a  fuller  of  cloth  :  and  these  men," 
quoth  he,  "  be  now  in  the  city  of  Aquinum  "  :  and 
having  spoken  these  prophetical  words,  he  gave  up  the 
ghost.  After  whose  departure  one  Andrew,  his  Deacon, 
was  made  Bishop  :  who  in  times  past  had  kept  mules 
and  post  horses.  And  when  he  died,  one  Jovinus  was 
preferred  to  that  dignity,  who  in  former  times  had  been 
a  fuller  in  the  same  city  :  in  whose  days  all  the  citizens 
were  so  wasted,  some  by  the  sword  of  barbarous  people, 
and  some  by  a  terrible  plague,  that  after  his  death  neither 
could  any  be  found  to  be  made  Bishop,  nor  yet  any 
people  for  whose  sake  he  should  be  created.  And  so 
the  saying  of  the  man  of  God  was  fulfilled,  in  that  his 
church,  after  the  death  of  two  that  followed  him,  had 
no  Bishop  at  all. 

Chapter  Jftme :  of  jTrigiDianua,  IBisbop  of  Lucca. 

^  But  I  must  not  forget  to  tell  you  what  1  heard  of  the 
reverent  man  Venantius,  Bishop  of  Luna,  some  two  days 
ago  :  who  said  that  there  was,  nigh  unto  him,  a  man  ot 
rare  virtue  called  Frigidianus,  Bishop  of  Lucca,  who 
wrought  a  strange  miracle,  which,  as  he  saith,  all  the 
inhabitants  of  that  place  do  speak  of,  and  it  was  this. 
Hard  by  the  walls  of  the  city,  there  runneth  a  river 
called  Anser,  which  divers  times  doth  so  swell  and 
overflow  the  banks,  that  it  drowneth  many  acres  ot 
ground,  and  spoileth  much  corn  and  fruit.  The  in- 
habitants, enforced  by  necessity,  seeing  that  this  did 
often  happen,  went  about  by  all  means  possible  to  turn 
the  stream  another  way  :  but  when  they  had  bestowed 

117 


C6e  Dialogues  of  %t  <$regorp 

much  labour,  yet  could  they  not  cause  it  to  leave  the 
old  channel.  Whereupon  the  man  of  God,  Frigidianus, 
made  a  little  rake,  and  came  to  the  river,  where  all  alone 
he  bestowed  some  time  in  prayer  ;  and  then  he  com- 
manded the  river  to  follow  him,  and  going  before,  he 
drew  his  rake  over  such  places  as  he  thought  good,  and 
the  whole  river,  forsaking  the  old  channel,  did  follow 
him,  and  kept  possession  of  that  which  the  holy  man  by 
that  sign  of  his  rake  had  appointed  :  and  so  never  after- 
ward did  it  hurt  any  more  either  corn  or  other  things 
planted  for  the  maintenance  of  men. 

Chapter  €en :  of  ^afnnus,  T5i0bop  of  piacentta, 

t|  The  same  Venantius  told  me  likewise  another  miracle, 
done  as  he  said  in  the  city  of  Placentia,  which  one  John, 
the  servant  of  God,  and  a  man  of  credit  living  now  here 
amongst  us,  and  who  was  born  and  brought  up  in  that 
city,  affirmeth  also  to  be  most  true.  For  in  that  town 
of  Placentia,  they  say  that  there  was  a  Bishop  of  won- 
derful virtue,  called  Sabinus  :  who  understanding  by 
one  of  his  Deacons,  that  the  great  river  of  Powas  broken 
forth,  and  had  overflowed  the  land  which  belonged  to 
the  church,  and  done  much  harm,  he  bad  him  go  unto 
the  river,  and  deliver  it  this  message  from  him  :  "  The 
Bishop  commandeth  you  to  retire,  and  keep  yourself 
within  your  own  bounds."  His  Deacon,  hearing  these 
words,  scornfully  contemned  to  be  employed  in  any  such 
business.  Then  the  man  of  God,  Sabinus,  sent  for  a 
notary,  and  willed  him  to  write  these  words  :  "  Sabinus, 
the  servant  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  sendeth  admoni- 
tion to  Po.  I  command  thee,  in  the  name  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  that  thou  come  not  out  of  thy  channel, 
nor  presume  anymore  to  hurt  the  lands  of  the  church." 
This  short  letter  he  bad  the  notary  write,  and  when  he 
had  so  done,  to  go  and  cast  it  into  the  river.  The 
notary  did  as  he  bad  him,  and  the  river  obeyed  the 
precept  of  the  holy  man,  for  straightways  it  withdrew 

118 


Cerfconma  of  IPopulonium 

itself  from  the  church-lands,  returned  to  his  own  chan- 
nel, and  never  presumed  any  more  to  overflow  those 
grounds.  By  which  fact,  Peter,  the  pride  of  disobedient 
men  is  confounded,  seeing  that  the  very  senseless  ele- 
ment, in  the  name  of  Jesus,  obeyed  the  holy  man's 
commandment. 

Cbaptet  OBletJen :  of  Cerbomus,  T5isbqpof  lpopu= 

lOntlim*  1$  Cerbonius,  also  a  man  of  holy  life,  Bishop  of 
Populonium,  hath  made  great  proof  in  our  time  of  his 
rare  virtue.  For  being  much  given  to  hospitality,  upon 
a  certain  day  he  gave  entertainment  to  divers  soldiers, 
which,  for  fear  of  the  Goths  (that  passed  likewise  by  his 
house),  he  conveyed  out  of  the  way,  and  so  saved  their 
lives  from  those  wicked  men.  Totilas,  their  impious 
king,  having  intelligence  thereof,  in  great  rage  and 
cruelty  commanded  him  to  be  brought  unto  a  place 
called  Merulis  (eight  miles  from  Populonium),  where 
he  remained  with  his  whole  army,  and  in  the  sight  of 
the  people  to  be  cast  unto  wild  bears  to  be  devoured. 
And  because  the  wicked  king  would  needs  be  present 
himself,  to  behold  the  Bishop  torn  in  pieces,  great  store 
of  people  were  likewise  assembled,  to  see  that  pitiful 
pageant.  The  Bishop  was  brought  forth,  and  a  terrible 
bear  provided,  that  might  in  cruel  manner  tear  his  body 
in  pieces,  so  to  satisfy  the  mind  of  that  bloody  king. 
Out  of  his  den  was  the  beast  let  loose,  who  in  great 
fury  and  haste  set  upon  the  Bishop  :  but  suddenly,  for- 
getting all  cruelty,  with  bowed  neck  and  humbled  head, 
he  began  to  lick  his  feet  :  to  give  them  all  to  understand 
that  men  carried  towards  the  man  of  God  the  hearts  of 
beasts,  and  the  beasts  as  it  were  the  heart  of  a  man.  At 
this  sight  the  people,  with  great  shouting  and  outcries, 
declared  how  highly  they  did  admire  the  holy  man  :  and 
the  king  himself  was  moved  to  have  him  in  great  rever- 
ence :  and  so  by  God's  providence  it  fell  out,  that  he 
which  before  refused  to  obey  and  follow  God  by  saving 

119 


£f)e  Dialogues  of  %>t  <$reprp 

the  Bishop's  life,  was  brought  to  do  it  by  the  miraculous 
meekness  of  a  cruel  bear.  Many  of  them  which  were 
then  present,  and  saw  it,  be  yet  living,  who  do  all  affirm 
this  to  be  most  true. 

Another  miracle  concerning  the  same  man  I  heard  of 
Venantius,  Bishop  of  Luna,  and  it  was  this.  Cerbonius 
had  in  the  church  of  Populonium  a  tomb  provided  for 
himself;  but  when  the  Lombards  invaded  Italy,  and 
spoiled  all  that  country,  he  retired  himself  into  the  island 
of  Helba.  "Where  falling  sore  sick,  before  his  death  he 
commanded  his  chaplains  to  bury  his  body  in  the  foresaid 
tomb  at  Populonium  :  and  when  they  told  him  how  hard 
a  thing  it  was  by  reason  of  the  Lombards,  which  were 
lords  of  the  country,  and  did  range  up  and  down  in  all 
places  :  "  Carry  me  thither,"  quoth  he,  "securely,  and 
fear  nothing,  but  bury  me  in  all  haste,  and  that  being 
done,  come  away  as  fast  as  you  can."  For  performing  of 
this  his  will  they  provided  a  ship,  and  away  they  went 
with  his  body  towards  Populonium  :  in  which  journey 
there  fell  great  store  of  rain,  but  that  the  world  might 
know  whose  body  was  transported  in  that  ship,  in  that 
twelve  miles'  space  which  is  betwixt  the  island  and  Popu- 
lonium, a  great  storm  of  rain  fell  upon  both  sides  of  the 
ship,  but  not  one  drop  within.  When  they  were  come 
to  the  place,  they  buried  his  body,  and,  according  to  his 
commandment,  returned  to  their  ship  with  all  speed  : 
and  they  were  no  sooner  aboard,  than  there  entered  into 
the  church,  where  the  Bishop  was  buried,  a  most  cruel 
captain  of  the  Lombards  called  Gunmar.  By  whose  sud- 
den coming  to  that  place,  it  appeared  plainly  that  the  man 
of  God  had  the  spirit  of  prophecy,  when  he  willed  them 
in  all  haste  to  depart  from  the  place  of  his  burial. 

Chapter  Ctoetoe  :   of  jFulgentiu0,  IBisbop  of 

HDttiCOli.  ^  The  very  same  miracle,  which  I  told  you 
concerning  the  division  of  the  rain,  happened  likewise  to 
the  great  veneration  of  another  Bishop.     For  a  certain 

1 20 


$)erculanii0  of  IPerustum 

old  Priest,  who  yet  liveth,  was  then  present  when  it 
happened,  and  saith  that  Fulgentius,  Bishop  of  Otricoli, 
was  in  disgrace  with  that  cruel  tyrant  Totilas  :  and  there- 
fore, as  he  was  passing  that  way  with  his  army,  the  Bishop 
did  carefully  beforehand  by  his  chaplains  send  him  certain 
presents,  by  that  means,  if  it  were  possible,  to  mitigate 
his  furious  mind.  But  the  tyrant  contemned  them,  and 
in  great  rage  commanded  his  soldiers  hardly  to  bind  the 
Bishop,  and  to  keep  him  safe  until  he  had  heard  his  ex- 
amination. The  merciless  Goths  executed  his  cruel  com- 
mandment :  and  setting  him  upon  a  piece  of  ground, 
they  made  a  circle  round  about  him,  out  of  which  they 
commanded  him  not  to  stir  his  foot.  Whiles  the  man  of 
God  stood  there  in  great  extremity  of  heat,  environed 
round  about  with  those  Goths,  suddenly  there  fell  such 
thunder  and  lightning,  and  such  plenty  of  rain,  that  his 
keepers  could  not  endure  that  terrible  storm  :  and  yet  for 
all  that,  not  one  drop  fell  within  the  circle,  where  the 
man  of  God,  Fulgentius,  stood.  Which  strange  news 
being  told  to  that  tyrannical  king,  his  barbarous  mind  was 
brought  to  have  him  in  great  reverence,  whose  torment 
before  he  desired  and  so  cruelly  thirsted  after  his  blood. 
Thus  almighty  God,  to  bring  down  the  lofty  minds  of 
carnal  men,  doth  work  miracles  by  such  as  they  most  con- 
temn :  that  truth,  proceeding  from  the  mouths  of  his 
humble  servants,  may  subdue  those,  which  of  pride  do 
extol  and  advance  themselves  against  the  doctrine  of 
truth. 

Cbapter  Cfnrteen :  of  ^erculanus,  IBisfjop  of 

IpetU.SilUtt.  <I  Not  long  since,  the  virtuous  Bishop 
Floridus  told  me  a  notable  miracle,  which  was  this.  "  The 
great  holy  man,"  quoth  he,  "  Herculanus,  who  brought 
me  up,  was  Bishop  of  Perusium,  exalted  to  that  dignity 
from  the  state  of  a  monk  :  in  whose  time  the  perfidious 
king  Totilas  besieged  it  for  seven  years  together,  and  the 
famine  within  was  so  great  that  many  of  the  townsmen 

121 


Cfje  Dialogues  of  %t  (Sregorp 

forsook  the  place  :  and  before  the  seventh  year  was  ended, 
the  army  of  the  Goths  took  the  city.  The  commander  of 
his  camp  dispatched  messengers  to  Totilas,  to  know  his 
pleasure  what  he  should  do  with  the  Bishop,  and  the  rest 
of  the  citizens  :  to  whom  he  returned  answer,  that  he 
should,  from  the  top  of  the  Bishop's  head  to  his  very  foot, 
cut  off  a  thong  of  his  skin,  and  that  done,  to  strike  off 
his  head  :  and  as  for  the  rest  of  the  people,  to  put  them 
all  to  the  sword.  When  he  had  received  this  order,  he 
commanded  the  reverent  Bishop  Herculanus  to  be 
carried  to  the  walls,  and  there  to  have  his  head  strooken 
off,  and  when  he  was  dead,  that  his  skin  should  be  cut 
from  the  very  crown  down  to  the  very  foot,  as  though 
indeed  a  thong  had  been  taken  from  his  body  ;  after 
which  barbarous  fact  they  threw  his  dead  corpse  over  the 
wall.  Then  some  upon  pity,  joining  the  head  to  the 
body,  did  bury  him,  together  with  an  infant  that  was 
there  found  dead.  Forty  days  after,  Totilas  making  pro- 
clamation that  the  inhabitants,  which  were  gone,  should 
without  all  fear  come  back  again  :  those,  which  upon 
extremity  of  hunger  departed,  returned  home  to  their 
houses,  and  calling  to  mind  the  holy  life  of  their  Bishop, 
they  sought  for  his  body,  that  it  might,  as  he  deserved, 
be  buried  in  the  church  of  St.  Peter.  And  whe)n  they 
came  to  the  place  where  it  lay,  they  digged,  and  found 
the  body  of  the  infant  that  was  buried  together  with  him, 
putrefied  and  full  of  worms  :  but  the  Bishop's  body  was 
so  sound  as  though  it  had  been  newly  put  into  the  earth, 
and  that  which  is  more  to  be  admired,  and  deserveth 
greater  reverence,  his  head  was  so  fast  joined  to  his  body 
as  though  it  had  never  been  cut  off,  neither  did  any  sign 
of  his  beheading  appear  at  all.  Then  they  viewed  like- 
wise his  back,  whether  that  were  also  whole  and  sound, 
and  they  found  it  so  perfect  and  well,  as  though  never 
any  knife  had  touched  the  same." 
IPfctCt.  Who  would  not  wonder  at  such  miracles  of  them 

122 


Benedetto  Boiifigli 


I  UK    I  k.W.M.A  I  !<>\    I  U     SI  .    HI-  R<  I  ILANUS 
wia,  Perugia  \ 


■ 


3l0aac  of  Spoleto 

that  be  dead  :  wrought,  no  question,  for  the  spiritual 
good  of  the  living  ? 

Cfmpter  Jf ourteen :  of  tbe  sertmnt  of  <£od,  3jsaac- 

9  <2Dt00Otp*  At  such  time  as  the  Goths  first  invaded 
Italy,  there  was,  near  to  the  city  of  Spoleto,  a  virtuous 
and  holy  man  called  Isaac  :  who  lived  almost  to  the  last 
days  of  the  Goths,  whom  many  did  know,  and  especially 
the  holy  virgin  Gregoria,  which  now  dwelleth  in  this  city, 
hard  by  the  church  of  the  blessed  and  perpetual  Virgin 
Mary  :  which  woman,  in  her  younger  years,  desiring  to 
live  a  nun's  life,  fled  to  the  church  from  marriage,  already 
agreed  upon  by  her  friends,  and  was  by  this  man  de- 
fended :  and  so,  through  God's  providence,  obtained  to 
have  that  habit  which  so  much  she  desired,  and  so,leaving 
her  spouse  upon  earth,  she  merited  a  spouse  in  heaven. 
Many  things  also  I  had  by  the  relation  of  the  reverent  man 
Eleutherius,who  was  familiarly  acquainted  with  him  ;  and 
his  virtuous  life  doth  give  credit  to  his  words.  This  holy 
man  Isaac  was  not  born  in  Italy  ;  and  therefore  I  will 
only  speak  of  such  miracles  as  he  did  living  here  in  our 
country.  At  his  first  coming  out  of  Syria  to  the  city  of 
Spoleto,  he  went  to  the  church,  and  desired  the  keepers 
that  he  might  have  free  leave  to  pray  there,  and  not  to  be 
enforced  to  depart  when  night  came.  And  so  he  began 
his  devotions,  and  spent  all  that  day  in  prayer,  and  like- 
wise the  night  following.  The  second  day  and  night  he 
bestowed  in  the  same  manner,  and  remained  there  also 
the  third  day  :  which  when  one  of  the  keepers  of  the 
church  perceived,  who  was  a  man  of  a  proud  spirit,  he 
took  scandal  by  that,  whereof  he  ought  to  have  reaped 
great  profit.  For  he  began  to  say  that  he  was  an  hypo- 
crite and  cozening  companion,  who  in  the  sight  of  the 
world  remained  at  his  prayers  three  days  and  three  nights 
together  :  and  forthwith  running  upon  the  man  of  God, 
he  strook  him,  to  make  him  by  that  means  with  shame 
to  depart  the  church  as  an  hypocrite,  and  one  that  desired 

123 


C6e  Dialogues  of  %t  ®reg;orp 

to  be  reputed  an  holy  man.  But  to  revenge  this  injury, 
a  wicked  spirit  did  presently  possess  his  body,  who  cast 
him  down  at  the  feet  of  the  man  of  God,  and  began  by 
his  mouth  to  cry  out  :  "  Isaac  doth  cast  me  forth,  Isaac 
doth  cast  me  forth."  For  what  name  the  strange  man 
had,  none  at  that  time  did  know,  but  the  wicked  spirit 
told  it,  when  he  cried  out  that  he  had  power  to  cast  him 
out.  Straightways  the  man  of  God  laid  himself  upon  his 
body,  and  the  cursed  devil  that  was  entered  in,  departed 
in  all  haste.  News  of  this  was  by  and  by  blown  over  the 
whole  city,  and  men  and  women,  rich  and  poor,  came  run- 
ning, every  one  striving  to  bring  him  home  to  their  own 
house  :  some  for  the  building  of  an  Abbey,  did  humbly 
offer  him  lands,  others  money,  and  some  such  other  helps 
as  they  could.  But  the  servant  of  almighty  God,  refusing 
to  accept  any  of  their  offers,  departed  out  of  the  city, 
and  not  far  off  he  found  a  desert  place,  where  he  built  a 
little  cottage  for  himself :  to  whom  many  repairing  began 
by  his  example  to  be  inflamed  with  the  love  of  everlasting 
life,  and  so,  under  his  discipline  and  government,  gave 
themselves  to  the  service  of  almighty  God.  And  when 
his  disciples  would  often  humbly  insinuate,  that  it  were 
good  for  the  necessity  of  the  Abbey  to  take  such  livings 
as  were  offered,  he,  very  careful  to  keep  poverty,  told 
them  constantly,  saying  :  "  A  monk  that  seeketh  for 
livings  upon  earth  is  no  monk":  for  so  fearful  he  was 
to  lose  the  secure  state  of  his  poverty,  as  covetous  rich 
men  are  careful  to  preserve  their  corruptible  wealth. 

In  that  place,  therefore,  he  became  famous  for  the  spirit 
of  prophecy  :  and  his  life  was  renowned  far  and  near,  for 
the  notable  miracles  which  he  wrought.  For  upon  a  day, 
towards  evening,  he  caused  his  monks  to  lay  a  certain 
number  of  spades  in  the  garden.  The  night  following, 
when  according  to  custom  they  rose  up  to  their  prayers, 
he  commanded  them,  saying  :  "  Go  your  ways,  and  make 
pottage  for  our  workmen,  that  it  may  be  ready  very  early 

124 


3fsaac  of  ^poleto 

in  the  morning."  And  when  it  was  day,  he  bad  them 
bring  the  pottage  which  they  had  provided  ;  and  going 
with  his  monks  into  the  garden,  he  found  there  so  many 
men  working  as  he  had  commanded  them  to  lay  spades  : 
for  it  fell  so  out,  that  certain  thieves  were  entered  in  to 
spoil  and  rob  it ;  but  God  changing  their  minds,  they  took 
the  spades  which  they  found  there,  and  so  wrought  from 
the  time  of  their  first  entrance,  until  the  man  of  God 
came  unto  them  :  and  all  such  parts  of  the  ground  as 
before  were  not  manured,  they  had  digged  up  and  made 
ready.  When  the  man  of  God  was  come,  he  saluted  them 
in  this  wise  :  "  God  save  you,  good  brethren  :  you  have 
laboured  long,  wherefore  now  rest  yourselves  ":  then  he 
caused  such  provision  as  he  had  brought  to  be  set  before 
them,  and  so  after  their  labour  and  pains  refreshed  them. 
When  they  had  eaten  that  was  sufficient,  he  spake  thus 
unto  them  :  "Do  not  hereafter  any  more  harm  :  but  when 
you  desire  anything  that  is  in  the  garden,  come  to  the 
gate,  quietly  ask  it,  and  take  it  a  God's  blessing,  but  steal 
no  more":  and  so  bestowing  upon  them  good  store  of 
worts,  he  sent  them  away.  And  by  this  means  it  fell 
out  that  they  which  came  into  the  garden  to  do  harm,  de- 
parted thence  not  doing  any  damage  at  all,  and  besides 
had  the  reward  of  their  pains,  and  somewhat  also  of 
charity  bestowed  upon  them. 

At  another  time,  there  came  unto  him  certain  strange 
men  a  begging,  so  torn  and  tattered,  that  they  had  scant 
any  rags  to  cover  them,  humbly  beseeching  him  to  help 
them  with  some  clothes.  The  man  of  God,  hearing  their 
demand,  gave  them  no  answer  :  but  secretly  calling  for 
one  of  his  monks,  bad  him  go  into  such  a  wood,  and  in 
such  a  place  of  the  wood  to  seek  for  an  hollow  tree,  and 
to  bring  unto  him  that  apparel  which  he  found  there. 
The  monk  went  his  way,  and  brought  closely  to  his  master 
that  which  he  had  found.  Then  the  man  of  God  called 
for  those  poor  naked  men,  and  gave  them  that  apparel, 

125 


Cfje  Dialogues  of  %t  ®regorp 

saying  :  "  Put  on  these  clothes  to  cover  your  naked 
bodies  withal."  They,  seeing  their  own  garments,  were 
wonderfully  confounded  :  for  thinking  by  cunning  to 
have  gotten  other  men's  apparel,  with  shame  they  re- 
ceived only  their  own. 

Again,  at  another  time,  one  there  was  that  commended 
himself  to  his  prayers,  and  sent  him  by  his  servant  two 
baskets  full  of  meat :  one  of  the  which,  as  he  was  in  his 
journey,  he  took  away,  and  hid  in  a  bush  till  his  return 
back  again  ;  and  the  other  he  presented  to  the  man  of 
God,  telling  him  how  his  master  had  sent  him  that,  heartily 
commending  himself  to  his  prayers.  The  holy  man  took 
that  which  was  sent  very  kindly,  giving  the  messenger 
this  good  lesson  :  "  1  pray  thee,  my  friend,  to  thank  thy 
master,  and  take  heed  how  thou  dost  lay  hand  upon  the 
basket,  for  a  snake  is  crept  in,  and  therefore  be  careful, 
lest  otherwise  it  doth  sting  thee."  At  these  words  the 
messenger  was  pitifully  confounded,  and  though  glad  he 
was  that  by  this  means  he  escaped  death,  yet  somewhat 
grieved  that  he  was  put  to  that  shame.  Coming  back  to 
the  basket,  very  diligent  and  careful  he  was  in  touching 
it ;  for  as  the  man  of  God  had  told  him,  a  snake  in  very 
deed  was  got  in.  This  holy  man,  therefore,  albeit  he 
were  incomparably  adorned  with  the  virtue  of  abstinence, 
contempt  of  worldly  wealth,  the  spirit  of  prophecy,  and 
perseverance  in  prayer  :  yet  one  thing  there  was  in  him 
which  seemed  reprehensible,  to  wit,  that  sometime  he 
would  so  exceed  in  mirth,  that  if  men  had  not  known 
him  to  have  been  so  full  of  virtue,  none  would  ever  have 
thought  it. 

Ij*)0t0t.  What,  1  beseech  you,  shall  we  say  to  that  ?  for  did 
he  willingly  give  himself  sometime  to  such  recreation  : 
or  else  excelling  in  virtue,  was  he,  contrary  to  his  own 
mind,  drawn  sometime  to  present  mirth  ? 
(JfrtCgOtp.  God's  providence,  Peter,  in  bestowing  of  his 
gifts,  is  wonderful :  for  often  it  falleth  out,  that  upon 

126 


31saac  of  ^poleto 

whom  he  vouchsafeth  the  greater,  he  giveth  not  the  less  : 
to  the  end  that  always  they  may  have  somewhat  to  mis- 
like  in  themselves  :  so  that  desiring  to  arrive  unto  perfec- 
tion and  yet  can  not :  and  labouring  about  that  which  they 
have  not  obtained,  and  can  not  prevail :  by  this  means 
they  become  not  proud  of  those  gifts  which  they  have 
received,  but  do  thereby  learn  that  they  have  not  those 
greater  graces  of  themselves,  who  of  themselves  cannot 
overcome  small  faults.  And  this  was  the  cause  that,  when 
God  had  brought  his  people  into  the  land  of  promise,  and 
destroyed  all  their  mighty  and  potent  enemies,  yet  did 
he  long  time  after  reserve  the  Philisteans  and  Chananites, 
that,  as  it  is  written,  He  might  in  them  try  Israel.1  For 
sometime  as  hath  been  said,  upon  whom  he  bestoweth 
great  gifts,  he  leaveth  some  small  things  that  be  blame- 
worthy, that  always  they  may  have  somewhat  to  fight 
against,  and  not  to  be  proud,  though  their  great  enemies 
be  vanquished,  seeing  other  adversaries  in  very  small 
things  do  put  them  to  great  trouble :  and  therefore  it 
falleth  out  strangely,  that  one  and  the  self  same  man  is 
excellent  for  virtue,  and  yet  of  infirmity  sometime  doth 
offend,  so  that  he  may  behold  himself  on  the  one  side 
strong  and  well  furnished,  and  on  another  open  and  not 
defended  :  that  by  the  good  thing  which  he  seeketh  for, 
and  is  not  able  to  procure,  he  may  with  humility  preserve 
that  virtue  which  already  he  hath  in  possession.  But 
what  wonder  is  it  that  we  speak  this  concerning  man, 
when  as  heaven  itself  lost  some  of  his  citizens,  and  other 
some  continued  sound  in  God's  grace  :  that  the  elect 
Angels  of  God,  seeing  others  through  pride  to  fall  from 
heaven,  might  stand  so  much  the  more  steadfast,  by  how 
much  with  humility  they  preserved  God's  grace  received  ? 
They,  therefore,  took  profit  by  that  loss  which  heaven 
then  had,  and  were  thereby  made  to  persevere  more  con- 
stantly in  God's  service  for  all  eternity.     In  like  manner 

1  Judges  3,  i. 
127 


C6e  Dialogic  of  %t  (Sreprp 

it  fareth  with  each  man's  soul,  which  sometime  for  pre- 
serving of  humility,  by  a  little  loss  it  attaineth  to  great 
spiritual  perfection. 
l[i)0tCt*   I  am  very  well  pleased  with  that  you  say. 

Chapter  jTifteen :  of  tbe  aenrant*  of  <£od 
(Buwciw  anD  j?lorenttu0,  <I  ®regorp.  Neither  will 

I  pass  over  that  with  silence,  which  I  heard  from  the 
mouth  of  that  reverent  Priest,  Sanctulus,  one  of  the  same 
country :  and  of  whose  report  I  am  sure  you  make  no 
doubt,  for  you  know  very  well  his  life  and  fidelity. 

At  the  same  time,  in  the  province  of  Nursia  there 
dwelt  two  men,  observing  the  life  and  habit  of  holy  con- 
versation :  the  one  was  called  Euthicius  and  the  other 
Florentius ;  of  which  Euthicius  bestowed  his  time  in 
spiritual  zeal  and  fervour  of  virtue,  and  laboured  much 
by  his  exhortations,  to  gain  souls  to  God  ;  but  Florentius 
led  his  life  in  simplicity  and  devotion.  Not  far  from 
the  place  where  they  remained,  there  was  an  Abbey,  the 
governor  whereof  was  dead,  and  therefore  the  monks 
made  choice  of  Euthicius,  to  take  the  charge  thereof: 
who,  condescending  to  their  petition,  governed  the  Abbey 
many  years.  And  not  to  have  his  former  oratory  utterly 
destitute,  he  left  the  reverent  man  Florentius  to  keep  the 
same  ;  who  dwelt  there  all  alone,  and  upon  a  day,  being 
at  his  prayers,  he  besought  almighty  God  to  vouchsafe 
him  of  some  comfort  in  that  place  ;  and  having  ended 
his  devotions,  he  went  forth,  where  he  found  a  bear 
standing  before  the  door,  which  by  the  bowing  down  of 
his  head  to  the  ground,  and  shewing  in  the  gesture  of  his 
body  no  sign  of  cruelty,  gave  the  man  of  God  to  under- 
stand that  he  was  come  thither  to  do  him  service,  and 
himself  likewise  did  forthwith  perceive  it.  And  because 
he  had  in  the  house  four  or  five  sheep  which  had  no 
keeper,  he  commanded  the  bear  to  take  charge  of  them, 
saying:  "Go  and  lead  these  sheep  to  the  field,  and  at 
twelve  of  the  clock  come  back  again  "  :  which  charge  he 

128 


JFlorentius  anD  OEutWaua 

took  upon  him,  and  did  daily  come  home  at  that  hour : 
and  so  he  performed  the  office  of  a  good  shepherd,  and 
those  sheep,  which  before  time  he  used  to  devour,  now 
fasting  himself,  he  took  care  to  have  them  safely  kept. 
And  when  God's  servant  determined  to  fast  until  three 
of  the  clock,  then  he  commanded  the  bear  to  return  with 
his  sheep  at  the  same  hour ;  but  when  he  would  not 
fast  so  long,  to  come  at  twelve.  And  whatsoever  he  com- 
manded his  bear,  that  he  did,  so  that  bidden  to  return 
at  three  of  the  clock,  he  would  not  come  at  twelve  ;  and 
commanded  to  return  at  twelve,  he  would  not  tarry  till 
three.  And  when  this  had  continued  a  good  while,  he 
began  to  be  famous  far  and  near  for  his  virtue  and  holy 
life.  But  the  old  enemy  of  mankind  by  that  means  which 
he  seeth  the  good  to  come  unto  glory,  by  the  same  doth 
he  draw  the  wicked  through  hatred  to  procure  their  own 
misery  ;  for  four  of  Euthicius'  monks,  swelling  with  envy 
that  their  master  wrought  not  any  miracles,  and  that  he 
who  was  left  alone  by  him  was  famous  for  so  notable 
a  one,  upon  very  spite  went  and  killed  his  bear.  And 
therefore,  when  the  poor  beast  came  not  at  his  appointed 
hour,  Florentius  began  to  suspect  the  matter  :  but  expect- 
ing yet  until  the  evening,  very  much  grieved  he  was  that 
the  bear,  whom  in  great  simplicity  he  called  his  brother, 
came  not  home.  The  next  day,  he  went  to  the  field,  to 
seek  for  his  sheep  and  his  shepherd,  whom  he  found  there 
slain  ;  and  making  diligent  inquisition,  he  learned  quickly 
who  they  were  that  had  committed  that  uncharitable  fact. 
Then  was  he  very  sorry,  bewailing  yet  more  the  malice 
of  the  monks  than  the  death  of  his  bear ;  whom  the 
reverent  man  Euthicius  sent  for,  and  did  comfort  him 
what  he  might :  but  the  holy  man  Florentius,  wonder- 
fully grieved  in  mind,  did  in  his  presence  curse  them, 
saying  :  "1  trust  in  almighty  God,  that  they  shall  in  this 
life,  and  in  the  sight  of  the  world,  receive  the  reward  of 
their  malice,  that  have  thus  killed  my  bear  which  did 

129  1 


Cbe  Dialogic  of  %t  (Sregorp 

them  no  harm";  whose  words  God's  vengeance  did 
straight  follow,  for  the  four  monks  that  killed  the  poor 
beast  were  straight  so  strooken  with  a  leprosy,  that  their 
limbs  did  rot  away,  and  so  they  died  miserably  :  whereat 
the  man  of  God,  Florentius,  was  greatly  afraid,  and  much 
grieved,  that  he  had  so  cursed  the  monks  ;  and  all  his 
life  after  he  wept,  for  that  his  prayer  was  heard,  crying 
out  that  himself  was  cruel,  and  that  he  had  murdered 
those  men.  Which  thing  I  suppose  almighty  God  did, 
to  the  end  that  he  should  not,  being  a  man  of  great  sim- 
plicity, upon  any  grief  whatsoever,  afterward  presume 
to  curse  any. 

K^0tCt»  What  ?  is  it  any  great  sin,  if  in  our  anger  we 
curse  others  ? 

<&IZQ0XJ).  Why  do  you  ask  me  whether  it  be  a  great 
sin,  when  as  St.  Paul  saith  :  Neither  cursers  shall  possess 
the  kingdom  of  God?1  Think,  then,  how  great  the  sin  is, 
which  doth  exclude  a  man  out  of  heaven. 
Ip0t0t.  What  if  a  man,  haply  not  of  malice,  but  of 
negligence  in  keeping  his  tongue,  doth  curse  his  neigh- 
bour ? 

<$tZQ0XJ)*  If  before  the  severe  judge  idle  speech  is 
reprehended,  how  much  more  that  which  is  hurtful. 
Consider,  then,  how  damnable  those  words  be,  which 
proceed  of  malice,  when  that  talk  shall  be  punished 
which  proceedeth  only  from  idleness. 
H?0t0t»   I  grant  it  be  most  true. 

<2Dt00Otp.  The  same  man  of  God  did  another  thing 
which  I  must  not  forget.  For,  the  report  of  his  virtue 
reaching  far  and  near,  a  certain  Deacon,  that  dwelt  many 
miles  off,  travelled  unto  him,  to  commend  himself  to 
his  prayers.  And  coming  to  his  cell,  he  found  it  round 
about  full  of  innumerable  snakes  ;  at  which  sight  being 
wonderfully  afraid,  he  cried  out,  desiring  Florentius  to 
pray  :  who  came  forth,  the  sky  being  then  very  clear, 

1  i  Cor.  6,  io, 
130 


JFlorenttus  anO  <But\)idm 

and  lifted  up  his  eyes  and  his  hands  to  heaven,  desiring 
God  to  take  them  away  in  such  sort  as  he  best  knew. 
Upon  whose  prayers,  suddenly  it  thundered,  and  that 
thunder    killed   all  those   snakes.      Florentius,  seeing 
them  all  dead,  said  unto  God  :  "  Behold,  O  Lord,  thou 
hast  destroyed  them  all,  but  who  shall  now  carry  them 
away  ?  "     And  straight  as  he  had  thus  spoken,  so  many 
birds  came  as  there  were  snakes  killed,  which  took  them 
all  up,  and  carried  them  far  off,  discharging  his  habita- 
tion from  those  venomous  creatures. 
I£)0t0t.  Certainly  he  was  a  man  of  great  virtue  and  merit, 
whose  prayers  God  did  so  quickly  hear. 
<2>t00Otp*  Purity  of  heart  and  simplicity,  Peter,  is  of 
great  force  with  almighty  God,  who  is  in  purity  most 
singular,  and  of  nature  most  simple.    For  those  servants 
of  his,  which  do  retire  themselves  from  worldly  affairs, 
avoid  idle  words,  labour  not  to  lose  their  devotion,  nor 
to  defile  their  soul  with  talking,  do  especially  obtain  to 
be  heard  of  him,  to  whom,  after  a  certain  manner,  and 
as  they  may,  they  be  like  in  purity  and  simplicity  of 
heart.     But  we  that  live  in  the  world,  and  speak  often- 
times idle  words,  and  that  which  is  worse,  sometime 
those  that  be  hurtful  :  our  words  and  prayers  are  so 
much  the  farther  off  from  God,  as  they  be  near  unto 
the  world  :  for  we  are  drawn  too  much  down  towards 
the  earth,  by  continual  talking  of  secular  business  :  which 
thing  the  prophet  Esaye  did  very  well   reprehend  in 
himself,  after  he   had   beheld   the   King  and   Lord  of 
armies,  and  was  penitent,  crying  out  :   Woe  be  to  me  for 
being  silent^  because  I  am  a  man  that  have  defiled  lips :  and 
he  sheweth  straight  after  the  reason  why  his  lips  were 
defiled,  when  he  saith  :  I  dwell  in  the  midst  of  a  people 
that  hath  defiled  lips}    For  sorry  he  was  that  his  lips  were 
defiled,  yet  concealeth  not  from  whence  he  had  them, 
when  he  saith,  that  he  dwelt  in  the  midst  of  a  people 

1   Isai.  6,  5, 

l2l 


C6e  Dialogues  of  %t  ©regotp 

that  had  defiled  lips.  For  very  hard  it  is  that  the 
tongues  of  secular  men  should  not  defile  their  souls, 
with  whom  they  talk  ;  for  when  we  do  sometime  con- 
descend to  speak  with  them  of  certain  things,  by  little 
and  little  we  get  such  a  custom,  that  we  hear  that  spoken 
with  pleasure  which  is  not  meet  to  be  heard  at  all,  so 
that  afterward  we  are  loath  to  give  that  over,  to  which 
at  the  first,  to  gratify  others,  we  were  brought  against 
our  wills.  And  by  this  means  we  fall  from  idle  words 
to  hurtful  speeches,  and  from  talk  of  small  moment  to 
words  of  great  importance  :  and  so  it  cometh  to  pass 
that  our  tongue  is  so  much  the  less  respected  of  God 
when  we  pray,  by  how  much  we  are  more  defiled  with 
foolish  speech,  because,  as  it  is  written  :  He  that  turneth 
away  his  ear  that  he  hear  not  the  /aw,  his  prayer  shall  be 
execrable}  What  marvel,  then,  is  it,  if,  when  we  pray, 
God  doth  slowly  hear  us,  when  as  we  hear  God's  com- 
mandments, either  slowly  or  not  at  all  ?  And  what 
marvel  if  Florentius,  when  he  prayed,  was  quickly 
heard,  who  obeyed  God  in  observing  his  command- 
ments ? 

}^0t0t.  The  reason  alleged  is  so  plain,  that  nothing 
with  reason  can  be  said  against  it. 

30t00Otp4  But  Euthicius,  who  was  companion  to 
Florentius  in  serving  of  God,  was  famous  also  for 
miracles  after  his  death.  For  the  inhabitants  of  that 
city  do  speak  of  many :  but  the  principal  is  that  which, 
even  to  these  times  of  the  Lombards,  almighty  God 
hath  vouchsafed  to  work  by  his  coat  :  for  when  they 
had  any  great  drougth  the  citizens,  gathering  themselves 
together,  did  carry  that,  and  together  with  their  prayers 
offer  it  in  the  sight  of  our  Lord.  And  when  they  went 
with  that  through  the  fields,  praying  to  God,  forthwith 
they  had  such  plenty  of  rain  as  the  dryness  of  the 
ground  required  :  whereby  it  was  apparent,  what  virtue 

1  Prov.  28,  9. 
132 


e@arciu0  of  amount  6@at0tco 

and  merits  were   in   his  soul,  whose  garment    shewed 
outwardly  did  pacify  the  anger  of  almighty  God. 

Chapter  ^irteen:  of  §^arctus,  tbe  a^onk  of 

00OUnt  Qpat0iCO.  <I  Not  long  since,  there  was  a 
reverent  man  in  Campania,  called  Marcius,  who  lived 
a  solitary  life  in  the  mountain  of  Marsico  :  and  many 
years  together  did  he  continue  in  a  narrow  and  straight 
cave  :  whom  many  of  our  acquaintance  knew  very  well, 
and  were  present  at  such  miracles  as  he  did,  and  many 
things  concerning  him  have  I  heard  from  the  mouth  of 
Pope  Pelagius  of  blessed  memory,  my  predecessor,  and 
also  of  others,  who  be  very  religious  men.  His  first 
miracle  was  that,  so  soon  as  he  made  choice  of  that  cave 
for  his  habitation,  there  sprung  water  out  of  the  hollow 
rock,  which  was  neither  more  nor  less  than  served  for 
his  necessity  :  by  which  almighty  God  did  shew  what 
great  care  he  had  of  his  servant,  seeing  miraculously, 
as  in  ancient  time  he  had  before  done  to  the  children 
of  Israel,  he  caused  the  hard  rock  to  yield  forth  water. 
But  the  old  enemy  of  mankind,  envying  at  his  virtues, 
went  about  by  his  ancient  slight  to  drive  him  from  that 
place  :  for  he  entered  into  a  serpent,  his  old  friend,  and 
so  thought  to  have  terrified  him  from  thence.  For  the 
serpent  alone  would  come  into  the  cave  where  he  lived 
also  alone,  and  when  he  was  at  his  prayers,  it  would 
cast  itself  before  him,  and  when  he  took  his  rest,  it 
would  lie  down  by  his  side.  The  holy  man  was  nothing 
at  all  dismayed  at  this  :  for  sometime  he  would  put  his 
hand  or  leg  to  his  mouth,  saying  :  "  If  thou  hast  leave 
to  sting  me,  I  hinder  thee  not  "  :  and  when  he  had  lived 
thus  continually  the  space  of  three  years,  upon  a  day 
the  old  enemy,  overcome  with  his  heavenly  courage, 
made  a  great  hissing,  and  tumbling  himself  down  by 
the  side  of  the  mountain,  he  consumed  all  the  bushes 
and  shrubs  with  fire  :  in  which  fact  by  the  power  of 
God  he  was  enforced  to  shew  of  what  force  he  was,  that 

133 


C6e  Dialo0tie0  of  %>t  tfttegorp 

departed  with  loss  of  the  victory.  Consider,  I  pray  you 
then,  in  the  top  of  what  mountain  this  man  of  God  stood, 
that  continued  three  years  together  with  a  serpent, 
without  taking  any  harm  at  all. 

IPCtCt.  I  do  consider  it,  and  do  tremble  at  the  very 
hearing  of  the  story. 

(2DtC0Otp.  This  reverent  man,  when  he  first  shut  him- 
self up,  was  determined  never  to  behold  women  any 
more  :  not  because  he  contemned  them,  but  for  that  he 
feared  lest  their  sight  might  be  the  occasion  of  sinful 
temptation  :  which  resolution  of  his  a  certain  woman 
understanding,  up  she  went  boldly  to  the  mountain,  and 
forgetting  all  modesty,  impudently  approached  to  his 
cave.  He  seeing  her  a  good  way  off",  and  perceiving  by 
the  apparel  that  it  was  a  woman,  he  fell  straight  to  his 
prayers,  with  his  face  upon  the  earth,  and  there  he  lay 
prostrate,  until  the  shameless  creature,  wearied  with  stay- 
ing at  his  window,  departed  :  and  that  very  day  after  she 
was  descended  the  mountain,  she  ended  her  life  ;  to  give 
all  the  world  to  understand  how  highly  she  displeased 
almighty  God,  in  offending  his  servant  with  that  her  bold 
enterprise. 

At  another  time,  many  of  devotion  going  to  visit  him, 
a  young  boy,  taking  little  heed  to  his  feet,  and  by  reason 
the  path  was  so  straight  upon  the  side  of  the  mountain,  fell 
down,  and  tumbled  until  he  came  to  the  bottom  of  the 
valley,  which  was  very  deep  :  for  the  mountain  is  so  high, 
that  huge  trees  growing  beneath  seem  to  them  that 
be  above  nothing  else  but  little  shrubs.  The  people 
present  were  at  this  chance  much  dismayed,  and  very 
diligently  did  they  seek,  to  see  where  they  could  find  his 
dead  body  :  for  who  would  have  thought  any  otherwise 
but  that  he  was  slain,  or  once  imagined  that  his  body 
could  ever  have  come  safe  to  the  ground,  so  many  rocks 
being  in  the  way  to  tear  it  in  pieces  ?  yet  for  all  this,  he 
was  found  in  the  valley,  not  only  alive,  but  also  without 

134 


(J 


z 

w 
ca 


o  C 

Z  -5! 

<  ^ 

►J  .„ 
- 


z 


aparcius  of  amount  e$ar0tco 

any  harm  at  all.  Then  they  perceived  very  well,  that  the 
reason  why  he  was  not  hurt  was  because  Marcius'  prayers 
did  preserve  him  in  his  falling. 

Over  his  cave  there  was  a  great  rock,  which  seemed  to 
hang  but  by  a  little  piece  unto  the  mountain,  and  there- 
fore daily  was  it  feared  that  it  would  fall,  and  so  kill  the 
servant  of  God.  For  preventing  of  which  mischief,  the 
honourable  man  Mascatus,  nephew  to  Armentarius,  came 
thither  with  a  great  number  of  country  people,  desiring 
him  to  leave  his  cave  so  long  until  they  had  removed 
that  rock,  to  the  end  he  might  afterward  continue  there 
without  any  danger:  but  the  man  of  God  could  not  by 
any  means  be  persuaded  to  come  forth,  bidding  them  not- 
withstanding do  what  they  thought  convenient,  only  he 
retired  himself  to  the  farthest  part  of  his  cell :  yet  none 
made  any  doubt,  but  that  if  so  huge  a  rock  as  that  was 
did  fall,  but  that  it  would  both  spoil  his  cave  and  kill 
himself.  Wherefore  they  laboured  what  they  might,  to 
see  if  they  could  remove  that  mighty  stone  without  any 
danger  to  the  man  of  God,  and  forthwith,  in  the  sight  of 
them  all,  a  strange  thing  happened :  for  that  rock,  severed 
by  their  labour  from  the  rest  of  the  mountain,  not 
touching  Marcius'  cave,  did  skip  clean  over,  and  avoiding, 
as  it  were,  to  hurt  God's  servant,  it  fell  far  off :  which 
thing  no  man  can  doubt  but  that  it  was  done  by  the 
hands  of  Angels,  at  the  commandment  of  almighty  God. 

At  such  time  as  this  holy  man  came  first  to  inhabit  that 
mountain,  and  had  not  yet  made  any  door  for  his  cave, 
he  fastened  the  one  end  of  an  iron  chain  to  the  stony 
wall,  and  the  other  he  tied  to  his  leg,  to  the  end  he  might 
go  no  farther  than  the  length  of  that  chain  did  give  him 
leave :  which  thing  the  reverent  man  Bennet  hearing  of, 
sent  him  this  word  by  one  of  his  monks:  "  If  thou  be 
God's  servant,  let  the  chain  of  Christ,  and  not  any  chain 
of  iron,  hold  thee  "  :  upon  this  message  Marcius  forth- 
with loosed  his  chain,  yet  did  he  keep  still  the  same 

*3S 


Cbe  Dialogues  of  §>t.  (Srcgorp 

compass,  and  go  no  farther  than  he  did  before.  Living 
afterward  in  the  same  cave,  he  began  to  entertain  certain 
disciples,  which  dwelt  apart  from  his  cell,  who,  having 
no  other  water  but  that  which  with  a  rope  and  a  bucket 
they  drew  out  of  a  well,  great  trouble  they  had,  because 
their  rope  did  often  break:  and  therefore  they  came  unto 
him,  craving  that  chain  which  he  had  loosed  from  his  leg, 
that  they  might  tie  the  rope  to  that,  and  fasten  the  bucket 
upon  it :  and  from  that  time  forward,  though  the  rope  was 
daily  wet  with  water,  yet  did  it  break  no  more  ;  for  having 
touched  the  holy  man's  chain,  it  became  strong  like  unto 
iron,  so  that  the  water  did  not  wear  it,  nor  do  it  any  harm. 
1^0t0t*  These  worthy  acts  of  his  do  please  me,  seeing 
they  are  strange,  and  that  very  much,  because  they  were 
so  lately  done,  and  be  yet  fresh  in  memory. 

Cbaptet  ^etienteen :  boto  a  e^onfc  of  amount 
argentario  raisco  up  a  Deao  man,  <I  ^rcgorp. 

Not  long  since  in  our  time,  a  certain  man  called  Quadra- 
gesimus  was  subdeacon  in  the  church  of  Buxentin,  who 
in  times  past  kept  a  flock  of  sheep  in  the  same  country 
of  Aurelia :  by  whose  faithful  report  I  understood  a  mar- 
vellous strange  thing,  which  is  this.  At  such  time  as  he 
led  a  shepherd's  life,  there  was  an  holy  man  that  dwelt 
in  the  mountain  of  Argentario:  whose  religious  conver- 
sation and  inward  virtue  was  answerable  to  the  habit  of 
a  monk,  which  outwardly  he  did  wear.  Every  year  he 
travelled  from  his  mountain  to  the  church  of  St.  Peter, 
Prince  of  the  Apostles  :  and  in  the  way  took  this  Quadra- 
gesimus'  house  for  his  lodging,  as  himself  did  tell  me. 
Coming  upon  a  day  to  his  house,  which  was  hard  by  the 
church,  a  poor  woman's  husband  died  not  far  off,  whom 
when  they  had,  as  the  manner  is,  washed,  put  on  his 
garments,  and  made  him  ready  to  be  buried,  yet  it  was 
so  late,  that  it  could  not  be  done  that  day  :  wherefore  the 
desolate  widow  sat  by  the  dead  corpse,  weeping  all  night 
long,  and  to  satisfy  her  grief  she  did  continually  lament 

136 


Cfje  ^onfe  of  amount  argentario 

and  cry  out.  The  man  of  God,  seeing  her  so  pitifully  to 
weep  and  never  to  give  over,  was  much  grieved,  and  said 
to  Quadragesimus  the  subdeacon  :  "  My  soul  taketh 
compassion  of  this  woman's  sorrow,  arise,  I  beseech  you, 
and  let  us  pray  " :  and  thereupon  they  went  to  the  church, 
which,  as  I  said,  was  hard  by,  and  fell  to  their  devotions. 
And  when  they  had  prayed  a  good  while,  the  servant  of 
God  desired  Quadragesimus  to  conclude  their  prayer; 
which  being  done,  he  took  a  little  dust  from  the  side  of 
the  altar  :  and  so  came  with  Quadragesimus  to  the  dead 
body  ;  and  there  he  began  again  to  pray,  and  when  he 
continued  so  a  long  time,  he  desired  him  not,  as  he  did 
before,  to  conclude  their  prayers,  but  himself  gave  the 
blessing,  and  so  rose  up  :  and  because  he  had  the  dust  in 
his  right  hand,  with  his  left  he  took  away  the  cloth  that 
covered  the  dead  man's  face  ;  which  the  woman  seeing, 
earnestly  withstood  him,  and  marvelled  much  what  he 
meant  to  do  :  when  the  cloth  was  gone,  he  rubbed  the 
dead  man's  face  a  good  while  with  the  dust,  which  he  had 
taken  up  ;  and  at  length,  he  that  was  dead  received  his 
soul  again,  began  to  open  his  mouth  and  his  eyes,  and  to 
sit  up,  and  as  though  he  had  awakened  from  a  deep  sleep, 
marvelled  what  they  did  about  him  ;  which  when  the 
woman,  that  had  wearied  herself  with  crying,  beheld,  she 
began  then  afresh  to  weep  for  joy,  and  cry  out  far  louder 
than  she  did  before  :  but  the  man  of  God  modestly  for- 
bad her,  saying  :  "  Peace,  good  woman,  and  say  nothing, 
and  if  any  demand  how  this  happened,  say  only,  that  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  hath  vouchsafed  to  work  his  pleasure." 
Thus  he  spake,  and  forthwith  he  departed  from  Quadra- 
gesimus, and  never  came  to  his  house  again.  For,  de- 
sirous to  avoid  all  temporal  honour,  he  so  handled  the 
matter,  that  they  which  saw  him  work  that  miracle,  did 
never  see  him  more  so  long  as  he  lived. 
K?0t0t.  What  others  think  I  know  not  :  but  mine 
opinion  is,  that  it  is  a  miracle  above  all  miracles,  to  raise 

137 


C&e  Dialogic  of  %t  <$regorp 

up  dead  men,  and  secretly  to  call  back  their  souls,  to  give 
life  unto  their  bodies  again. 

$tC(J0tp«  If  we  respect  outward  and  visible  things,  of 
necessity  we  must  so  believe  ;  but  if  we  turn  our  eyes 
to  invisible  things,  then  certain  it  is  that  it  is  a  greater 
miracle,  by  preaching  of  the  word  and  virtue  of  prayer, 
to  convert  a  sinner  than  to  raise  up  a  dead  man  :  for  in 
the  one,  that  flesh  is  raised  up  which  again  shall  die  :  but 
in  the  other,  he  is  brought  from  death  which  shall  live  for 
ever.  For  I  will  name  you  two,  and  tell  me  in  which  of 
them,  as  you  think,  the  greater  miracle  was  wrought. 
The  first  is  Lazarus,  a  true  believer,  whom  our  Lord  raised 
up  in  flesh  ;  the  other  is  Saul,  whom  our  Lord  raised  in 
soul.  For  of  Lazarus'  virtues  after  his  resurrection  we 
read  nothing  :  but  after  the  raising  up  of  the  other's  soul, 
we  are  not  able  to  conceive  what  wonderful  things  be  in 
holy  scripture  spoken  of  his  virtues  :  as  that  his  most 
cruel  thoughts  and  designments  were  turned  into  the 
bowels  of  piety  and  compassion  ;  that  he  desired  to  die 
for  his  brethren,  in  whose  death  before  he  took  much 
pleasure  ;  that  knowing  the  holy  scriptures  perfectly,  yet 
professed  that  he  knew  nothing  else  but  Jesus  Christ  and 
him  crucified  ;  that  he  did  willingly  endure  the  beating  of 
rods  for  Christ,  whom  before  with  sword  he  did  perse- 
cute ;  that  he  was  exalted  to  the  dignity  of  an  Apostle, 
and  yet  willingly  became  a  little  one  in  the  midst  of 
other  disciples  ;  that  he  was  rapt  to  the  secrets  of  the 
third  heaven,  and  yet  did  turn  his  eye  of  compassion  to 
dispose  of  the  duty  of  married  folks,  saying  :  Let  the  hus- 
band render  debt  to  the  wife,  and  likewise  the  wife  to  the 
husband  ;*  that  he  was  busied  in  contemplating  the  quires 
of  Angels,  and  yet  contemned  not  to  think  and  dispose 
of  the  facts  of  carnal  men  ;  that  he  rejoiced  in  his  infir- 
mities, and  took  pleasure  in  his  reproaches  ;  that  for  him 
to  live  is  Christ,  and  gain  to  die  ;  that  although  he  lived 

1  i  Cor.  7,  3. 
138 


IBmntt  t&e  6£on& 

in  flesh,  yet  was  he  wholly  out  of  the  flesh.  Behold  how 
this  blessed  Apostle  lived,  who  from  hell  returned  in  his 
soul  to  the  life  of  virtue  :  wherefore  less  it  is  for  one  to 
be  raised  up  in  body,  except  perchance,  by  the  reviving 
thereof,  he  be  also  brought  to  the  life  of  his  soul,  and 
that  the  outward  miracle  do  serve  for  the  giving  of  life 
to  the  inward  spirit. 

IfPCtCt.  I  thought  that  far  inferior,  which  I  perceive  now 
to  be  incomparably  superior  :  but  prosecute,  I  beseech 
you,  your  former  discourse,  that  we  spend  no  time 
without  some  spiritual  profit  to  our  souls. 

Cbaptct  Eighteen:  of  T6ennet  t&e  Q^onfe.  tj 

(S>tC{J0t£.  A  certain  monk  lived  with  me  in  mine  Abbey, 
passing  cunning  in  holy  scripture,  who  was  elder  than  I, 
and  of  whom  I  learned  many  things  which  before  I  knew 
not.  By  his  report  I  understood  that  there  was  in  Cam- 
pania, some  forty  miles  from  Rome,  a  man  called  Bennet, 
young  in  years,  but  old  for  gravity  :  one  that  observed 
the  rule  of  holy  conversation  very  strictly.  When  the 
Goths  in  the  time  of  King  Totilas  found  him,  they  went 
about  to  burn  him,  together  with  his  cell  ;  and  fire  for 
that  end  was  put  to,  which  consumed  all  things  round 
about,  but  no  hold  would  the  fire  take  upon  his  cell  : 
which  when  the  Goths  saw,  they  became  more  mad,  and 
with  great  cruelty  drew  him  out  of  that  place,  and  espying 
not  far  off  an  oven  made  hot  to  bake  bread,  into  those 
flames  they  threw  him,  and  so  stopped  the  mouth.  But 
the  next  day  he  was  found  so  free  from  all  harm,  that  not 
only  his  flesh,  but  his  very  apparel  also,  was  not  by  the 
fire  anything  touched  at  all. 

IPCtCt.  I  hear  now  the  old  miracle  of  the  three  children, 
which  were  thrown  into  the  fire,  and  yet  were  preserved 
from  those  furious  flames.1 

(25tC0Otp.  That  miracle,  in  mine  opinion,  was  in  some 
thing  unlike  to  this  :  for  then  the  three  children  were 

1  Daniel  3. 

J39 


Cf)c  Dialogues  of  %t  ®regorp 

bound  hand  and  foot,  and  so  thrown  into  the  fire,  for 
whom  the  King  looking  the  next  day,  found  them  walk- 
ing in  the  furnace,  their  garments  being  nothing  hurt  by 
those  flames  :  whereby  we  gather  that  the  fire  into  which 
they  were  cast,  and  touched  not  their  apparel,  did  yet 
consume  their  bands,  so  that  at  one  and  the  same  time, 
for  the  service  of  the  just,  the  fire  had  force  to  bring  them 
comfort,  and  yet  had  none  to  procure  them  torment. 

C&aptec  Nineteen :  of  rte  cfmrcf)  of  itoseD  Jzno 
t&e  #artpr :  in  tofjicb  tfje  toater  ascenDeD  frigfjet 
tfjan  tfje  Door,  anD  tbougb  it  toere  open,  pet  enteteo 

not  in»  ^  Like  unto  this  ancient  miracle  we  had  in  our 
days  another,  but  yet  in  a  divers  element :  for  not  long 
since  John  the  Tribune  told  me  that,  when  the  Earl  Pro- 
nulphus  was  there,  and  himself  also  with  Antharicus  the 
king,  how  there  happened  at  that  time  a  strange  miracle, 
and  he  affirmeth  that  himself  doth  know  it  to  be  true. 
For  he  said  that,  almost  five  years  since,  when  the  river  of 
Tiber  became  so  great  that  it  ran  over  the  walls  of  Rome, 
and  overflowed  many  countries  :  at  the  same  time  in  the 
city  of  Verona,  the  river  Athesis  did  so  swell,  that  it  came 
to  the  very  church  of  the  holy  martyr  and  Bishop  Zeno  ; 
and  though  the  church  doors  were  open,  yet  did  it  not 
enter  in.  At  last  it  grew  so  high,  that  it  came  to  the  church 
windows,  not  far  from  the  very  roof  itself,  and  the  water 
standing  in  that  manner,  did  close  up  the  entrance  into 
the  church,  yet  without  running  in  :  as  though  that  thin 
and  liquid  element  had  been  turned  into  a  sound  wall. 
And  it  fell  so  out,  that  many  at  that  time  were  surprised 
in  the  church,  who  not  finding  any  way  how  to  escape 
out,  and  fearing  lest  they  might  perish  for  want  of  meat 
and  drink,  at  length  they  came  to  the  church  door,  and 
took  of  the  water  to  quench  their  thirst,  which,  as  I  said, 
came  up  to  the  windows,  and  yet  entered  not  in  ;  and  so 
for  their  necessity  they  took  water,  which  yet,  according 
to  the  nature  of  water,  ran  not  in  :  and  in  that  manner  it 

140 


Girolamo  dai  Libri  A  nderson 

THE    MADONNA    AND   CHILD   WITH    ST.   ZENO  (AND   ST.    LAUREN<  E     [USTINIAN] 

(Sun  Giorgio^  I  eroita) 


lPrie0t  ^tepfjen  of  Unlzm 

stood  there  before  the  door,  being  water  to  them  for  their 
comfort,  and  yet  not  water  to  invade  the  place  :  and  all 
this  to  declare  the  great  merit  of  Christ's  martyr.  Which 
miracle  I  said  truly,  that  it  was  not  unlike  to  that  ancient 
one  of  the  fire  :  which  burnt  the  three  children's  bands, 
and  yet  touched  not  their  garments. 
J£)0t0t.  Marvellous  strange  are  these  acts  of  God's  saints 
which  you  tell  ;  and  much  to  be  admired  of  us  weak 
men,  that  live  in  these  days.  But  because  I  understand 
now,  by  your  relation,  what  a  number  of  excellent  and 
virtuous  men  have  been  in  Italy,  desirous  I  am  to  know 
whether  they  endured  any  assaults  of  the  devil,  and  did 
thereby  more  profit  in  the  service  of  God. 
ffitZgOZj).  Without  labour  and  fighting,  none  can  obtain 
the  crown  of  victory  :  whence,  then,  come  so  many  con- 
querors but  from  this,  that  they  fought  valiantly,  and 
resisted  the  assaults  of  the  old  enemy  ?  For  the  wicked 
spirit  doth  continually  watch  our  thoughts,  words,  and 
works  :  to  find  something  whereof  to  accuse  us  before 
the  eternal  Judge.  For  proof  whereof  I  will  now  let 
you  understand,  how  ready  he  is  always  to  entrap  and 
deceive  us. 

Cbapter  Ctoentp  :  of  a  Iprtest  callcD  Stephen,  in 
tbe  province  of  Valeria :  to&ose  stockings  tfje  oetnl 

toOUlD  batie  Otaton  Off.  *&  Some  that  are  yet  living 
with  me,  affirm  this  to  be  true  which  I  will  now  speak 
of.  A  man  of  holy  life  there  was,  called  Stephen,  who  was 
a  Priest  in  the  province  of  Valeria,  nigh  of  kindred  to 
my  deacon  Bonifacius  :  who,  coming  home  upon  a  time 
from  travel,  spake  somewhat  negligently  to  his  servant, 
saying  :  "  Come,  sir  devil,  and  pull  off  my  hose  "  :  at 
which  words,  straightways  his  garters  began  to  loose  in 
great  haste,  so  that  he  plainly  perceived  that  the  devil 
indeed,  whom  he  named,  was  pulling  off  his  stocking  : 
whereat  being  much  terrified,  he  cried  out  aloud,  and 
said  :  "  Away,  wretched  caitiff,  away  ;  I  spake  not  to  thee, 

141 


C6e  Dialogues  of  %t  <$reprp 

but  to  my  servant."  Then  the  devil  gave  over,  leaving 
his  garters  almost  quite  off.  By  which  we  may  learn, 
that  if  the  devil  be  so  officious  in  things  concerning  our 
body,  how  ready  and  diligent  he  is  to  observe  and  note 
the  cogitations  of  our  soul. 

I£>£t0t.  A  very  painful  thing  it  is  and  terrible,  always  to 
strive  against  the  temptations  of  the  devil,  and,  as  it  were, 
to  stand  continually  armed  ready  to  fight. 
<&tZQ0tJ).  Not  painful  at  all,  if  we  attribute  our  pre- 
servation not  to  ourselves,  but  to  God's  grace  ;  yet  so 
notwithstanding,  that  we  be  careful  what  we  may  for 
our  parts,  and  always  vigilant  under  God's  protection. 
And  it  falleth  out  sometime  by  God's  goodness,  that 
when  the  devil  is  expelled  from  our  soul,  that  he  is  so 
little  of  us  to  be  feared,  that  contrariwise  he  is  rather 
terrified  by  the  virtuous  and  devout  life  of  good  people. 

Chapter  Ctoent^one :  of  a  Bun  tbat,  ftp  frer  onlp 
commandment,  Dispossessed  a  Detoil.  «I  For  the 

holy  man,  old  father  Eleutherius,  of  whom  I  spake 
before,  told  me  that  which  I  will  now  tell  you  :  and  he 
was  himself  a  witness  of  the  truth  thereof :  this  it  was. 
In  the  city  of  Spoleto,  there  was  a  certain  worshipful 
man's  daughter,  for  years  marriageable,  which  had  a 
great  desire  to  lead  another  kind  of  life  :  whose  purpose 
her  father  endeavoured  to  hinder  :  but  she,  not  respect- 
ing her  father's  pleasure,  took  upon  her  the  habit  of  holy 
conversation  :  for  which  cause  her  father  did  disinherit 
her,  and  left  her  nothing  else  but  six  little  pieces  of 
ground.  By  her  example  many  noble  young  maids 
began  under  her  to  be  converted,  to  dedicate  their 
virginity  to  almighty  God,  and  to  serve  him.  Upon 
a  time,  the  virtuous  Abbot  Eleutherius  went  to  bestow 
upon  her  some  good  exhortation  :  and  as  he  was  sitting 
with  her,  discoursing  of  spiritual  matters,  a  country  man 
came  from  that  piece  of  ground  which  her  father  had 
left   her,  bringing  a  certain  present :   and  as  he  was 

142 


£be  Cbief  at  t&e  <£>rat)e 

standing  before  them,  suddenly  a  wicked  spirit  pos- 
sessed his  body  ;  so  that  straightways  he  fell  down  before 
them,  and  began  pitifully  to  cry  and  roar  out.  At  this 
the  Nun  rose  up,  and  with  angry  countenance  and  loud 
voice,  commanded  him  to  go  forth,  saying  :  "  Depart  from 
him,  thou  vile  wretch,  depart."  "  If  I  depart,"  quoth  the 
devil,  speaking  by  the  mouth  of  the  possessed  man,  "  into 
whom  shall  I  go  ? "  By  chance  there  was  at  that  time 
a  little  hog  hard  by  :  into  which  she  gave  him  leave  to 
enter,  which  he  did,  and  so,  killing  it,  went  his  way. 
l^CtCt.  I  would  gladly  be  informed,  whether  she  might 
bestow  so  much  as  that  hog  upon  the  devil. 
(2Dt0(JOtp.  The  actions  of  our  Saviour  be  a  rule  for  us, 
according  to  which  we  may  direct  our  life  :  and  we  read 
in  the  scripture,  how  the  legion  of  devils  that  possessed 
a  man  said  unto  our  Saviour  :  If  thou  dost  cast  us  forth , 
send  us  into  the  herd  of  swine  : 1  who  cast  them  out,  and 
permitted  them  to  enter  in  as  they  desired,  and  to  drown 
that  herd  in  the  sea.  By  which  fact  of  our  Saviour  we 
learn  also  this  lesson,  that,  except  almighty  God  giveth 
leave,  the  devil  cannot  have  any  power  against  man, 
seeing  he  cannot  so  much  as  enter  into  hogs,  without 
our  Saviour's  permission.  Wherefore,  necessary  it  is 
that  we  be  obedient  to  him,  unto  whom  all  our  enemies 
be  subject,  that  we  may  so  much  the  more  be  stronger 
than  our  enemies,  by  how  much  through  humility  we 
become  one  with  the  author  of  all  things.  And  what 
marvel  is  it,  if  God's  chosen  servants,  living  yet  upon 
earth,  can  do  many  strange  things,  when  as  their  very 
bones,  after  they  be  dead,  do  oftentimes  work  miracles  ? 

C&aptet  CtoentHtoo :  of  a  priest  in  tbe  province 
of  Ualetia,  tobo  DctaineD  a  tbicf  at  bis  gratis 

I]  For,  in  the  province  of  Valeria,  this  strange  thing 
happened  :  which  I  had  from  the  mouth  of  Valentius, 
mine  Abbot,  who  was  a  blessed  man.     In  that  country 

1  Matt.  8,  31. 
143 


Cbe  Dialogues  of  %t  <$regorp 

there  was  a  Priest,  who  in  the  company  of  divers  other 
clerks  served  God,  and  led  a  virtuous  and  holy  life  : 
who,  when  his  time  was  come,  departed  this  life,  and 
was  buried  before  the  church.  Not  far  off,  there 
belonged  to  the  church  certain  sheep-cotes  :  and  the 
place  where  he  lay  buried  was  the  way  to  go  unto  the 
sheep.  Upon  a  night,  as  the  Priests  were  singing 
within  the  church,  a  thief  came  to  the  said  place, 
took  up  a  wether,  and  so  departed  in  all  haste  :  but 
as  he  passed  where  the  man  of  God  was  buried,  there 
he  stayed,  and  could  go  no  farther.  Then  he  took  the 
wether  from  his  shoulders,  and  would  fain  have  let  it 
go,  but  by  no  means  could  he  open  his  hand  :  and 
therefore,  poor  wretch,  there  he  stood  fast  bound,  with 
his  prey  before  him  ;  willingly  would  he  have  let  the 
wether  go,  and  could  not  ;  willingly  also  have  carried 
it  away,  and  was  not  able.  And  so  very  strangely  the 
thief,  that  was  afraid  to  be  espied  of  living  men,  was 
held  there  against  his  will  by  one  that  was  dead  ;  for  his 
hands  and  feet  were  bound  in  such  sort,  that  away  he 
could  not  go.  When  morning  was  come,  and  the  Priests 
had  ended  their  service,  out  they  came  :  where  they 
found  a  stranger,  with  a  wether  in  his  hand.  And  at 
the  first  they  were  in  doubt,  whether  he  had  taken 
away  one  of  theirs,  or  else  came  to  give  them  one  of 
his  own  :  but  he  that  was  guilty  of  the  theft  told  them 
in  what  manner  he  was  punished  :  whereat  they  all 
wondered,  to  see  a  thief,  with  his  prey  before  him,  to 
stand  there  bound  by  the  merits  of  the  man  of  God. 
And  straightways  they  offered  their  prayers  for  his 
delivery,  and  scarce  could  they  obtain  that  he,  which 
came  to  steal  away  their  goods,  might  at  least  find  so 
much  favour  as  to  depart  empty  as  he  came  :  yet  in 
conclusion,  the  thief  that  had  long  stood  there  with  his 
stolen  wether,  was  suffered  to  go  away  free,  leaving 
his  carriage  behind  him. 

144 


Cbe  abbot  of  amount  W>xtntm 

]§)ZtZX*  By  such  facts  almighty  God  doth  declare,  in 
what  sweet  manner  he  doth  tender  us,  when  he 
vouchsafeth  to  work  such  pleasant  miracles. 

Cbapter  Ctoent^tbree :  of  tbe  abbot  of  amount 
!Prene0te,  ano  felPttegt  q  #te&otg*  Above  the 

city  of  Preneste  there  is  a  mountain,  upon  which  standeth 
an  Abbey  of  the  blessed  Apostle,  St.  Peter  :  of  the  monks 
of  which  place,  whiles  I  lived  in  an  Abbey  myself,  I  heard 
this  miracle  :  which,  those  religious  men  said,  they  knew 
to  be  very  true.  In  that  monastery  they  had  an  Abbot 
of  holy  life,  who  brought  up  a  certain  monk,  that  became 
very  virtuous,  whom  he  perceiving  to  increase  in  the 
fear  of  God,  he  caused  him  in  the  same  monastery  to  be 
made  Priest :  who,  after  his  taking  of  orders,  understood 
by  revelation  that  his  death  was  not  far  off;  and  there- 
fore desired  leave  of  the  Abbot  to  make  ready  his 
sepulchre,  who  told  him  that  himself  should  die  before 
him  :  "  but  yet  for  all  that,"  quoth  he,  "  go  your  way,  and 
make  your  grave  at  your  pleasure."  Away  he  went,  and 
did  so.  Not  many  days  after,  the  old  Abbot  fell  sick  of 
an  ague,  and  drawing  near  to  his  end,  he  bad  the  fore- 
said Priest  that  stood  by  him,  to  bury  his  body  in  that 
grave  which  he  had  made  for  himself :  and  when  the 
other  told  him  that  he  was  shortly  to  follow  after,  and 
that  the  grave  was  not  big  enough  for  both,  the  Abbot 
answered  him  in  this  wise  :  "Do  as  I  have  said,  for  that 
one  grave  shall  contain  both  our  bodies."  So  he  died,  and 
according  to  his  desire,  was  buried  in  that  grave  which 
the  Priest  had  provided  for  himself.  Straight  after,  the 
Priest  fell  sick,  and  lay  not  long  before  he  departed  this 
life  ;  and  when  his  body  was  by  the  monks  brought 
to  the  grave,  which  he  had  provided  for  himself,  they 
opened  it,  and  saw  that  there  was  not  any  room, 
because  the  Abbot's  corpse  filled  the  whole  place : 
then  one  of  them,  with  a  loud  voice,  said  :  "O  father, 
where  is  your  promise,  that  this  grave  should  hold  you 

145  K 


Cf)c  Dialogic  of  %t  <£rcg;orp 

both  ? "  No  sooner  had  he  spoken  those  words,  than 
the  Abbot's  body,  which  lay  with  the  face  upward,  did, 
in  all  their  sight,  turn  itself  upon  one  side,  and  so  left 
place  enough  for  the  burial  of  the  Priest  :  and  so  after 
his  death  he  performed  what  he  promised  alive,  con- 
cerning the  lying  of  both  their  bodies  in  that  one  grave. 
But  because  we  have  now  made  mention  of  St.  Peter's 
Abbey  in  the  city  of  Preneste,  where  this  miracle  hap- 
pened, are  you  content  to  hear  something  of  the  keepers 
of  his  church  which  is  in  this  city  where  his  most  holy 
body  remaineth  ? 

IPCtCt.  Most  willing  I  am,  and  beseech  you  that  it 
may  be  so. 

Chapter  Ctoentp^four:  of  £&eoDoru0,  deeper 
of  %t  IPeter'0  C&urcf),  in  tbe  Citp  of  Home. 

^  (£>tC0Otp.  There  be  yet  some  alive  that  knew  Theo- 
dorus,  keeper  of  that  church  :  by  whose  report  a  notable 
thing  that  befell  him  came  to  my  knowledge.  For  rising 
somewhat  early  one  night  to  mend  the  lights  that  hung  by 
the  door,  and  was  upon  the  ladder  (as  he  used)  to  pour  oil 
into  the  lamps,  suddenly  St.  Peter  the  Apostle  in  a  white 
stole,  standing  beneath  upon  the  pavement,  appeared  unto 
him,  and  spake  to  him  in  this  manner  :  "Theodorus,  why 
hast  thou  risen  so  early?"  and  when  he  had  said  so,  he 
vanished  out  of  his  sight :  but  such  a  fear  came  upon 
him,  that  all  the  strength  of  his  body  did  forsake  him, 
so  that  he  was  not  able  to  rise  up  from  his  bed  for  many 
days  after.  By  which  apparition  what  meant  the  blessed 
Apostle  else,  but  to  give  those  which  serve  him  to  under- 
stand by  that  his  presence,  that  whatsoever  they  do  for  his 
honour,  himself  for  their  reward  doth  always  behold  it  ? 
I[?0t0t.  I  marvel  not  so  much  at  his  apparition  :  as  that 
being  before  very  well,  he  fell  sick  upon  that  sight. 
(2Dt£0Otp,  What  reason  have  you,  Peter,  to  marvel  at 
that  ?  for  have  you  forgotten  how  the  prophet  Daniel, 
when  he  beheld  that  great  and  terrible  vision  at  which 

146 


atJunDni0  of  %t  Peter's  C&urcf) 

he  trembled,  speaketh  thus  of  himself:  /  became  weak, 
and  was  sick  for  very  many  days;1  for  the  flesh  cannot 
conceive  such  things  as  pertain  to  the  spirit,  and  there- 
fore sometimes  when  a  man's  mind  is  carried  to  see 
somewhat  beyond  itself,  no  remedy  but  this  earthly  and 
frail  vessel  of  ours,  not  able  to  bear  such  a  burthen,  must 
fall  into  weakness  and  infirmity. 

l£)etet.  Your  reason  hath  taken  away  that  scruple  which 
troubled  my  mind. 

Chapter  Ctoent^fitoe:  of  atmntitus,  deeper  of  tbe 
same  Cfmrcb  of  %t  JPeter.  «i  <£reprp.  Not  very 

many  years  since  (as  old  men  say)  there  was  another 
keeper  of  the  same  church,  called  Abundius,  a  grave  man, 
and  of  great  humility  :  who  served  God  so  faithfully,  that 
the  blessed  Apostle  St.  Peter  did  by  miracle  declare  what 
opinion  he  had  of  his  virtue.  For  a  certain  young  maid, 
that  frequented  his  church,  was  so  pitifully  sick  of  the 
palsy,  that  she  crept  upon  her  hands,  and,  for  very  weak- 
ness, drew  her  body  upon  the  ground.  Long  time  had 
she  prayed  to  St.  Peter  for  help  of  this  her  infirmity : 
who  upon  a  night  in  a  vision,  stood  by  her  and  spake 
thus  :  "Go  unto  Abundius,  and  desire  his  help,  and  he 
shall  restore  thee  to  thine  health."  The  maid,  as  she  made 
no  doubt  of  the  vision,  so  not  knowing  this  Abundius,  up 
and  down  she  crept  through  the  church,  enquiring  for  the 
man,  and  suddenly  met  with  him  whom  she  sought  for  ; 
and  asking  for  him  of  himself,  he  told  her  that  he  was 
Abundius.  Then  quoth  she  :  "Our  pastor  and  patron, 
blessed  St.  Peter  the  Apostle,  hath  sent  me,  that  you 
should  help  me  of  this  my  disease.'^  "  If  you  be  sent  by 
him,"  quoth  Abundius,  "then  rise  up"  :  and  taking  her 
by  the  hand,  he  forthwith  lifted  her  up  upon  her  feet : 
and  from  that  very  hour,  all  the  sinews  and  parts  of  her 
body  became  so  strong,  that  no  sign  of  her  former  malady 
remained.     But  if  I  should  recount  all  the  miracles  in 

1  Daniel  8,  27. 

'47 


Cbe  Dialogues  of  %t  <£reprp 

particular,  which  are  known  to  have  been  done  in  his 
church,  questionless  no  time  would  be  left  for  the  relation 
of  any  other ;  wherefore  I  will  speak  no  more  of  them, 
but  come  to  such  holy  men  as  have  been  famous  in  divers 
other  places  of  Italy. 

Chapter  Ctocnt^sir:  of  a  solitary  a^onfc  called 

Clf)Cna0*  fl  Not  long  since,  in  the  province  of  Samnium, 
there  was  a  reverent  man  called  Menas,  who  some  ten 
years  since  led  a  solitary  life,  and  was  known  to  many 
of  our  friends  :  and  for  the  truth  of  such  his  notable 
acts  as  I  shall  report,  I  will  not  name  any  one  author, 
because  I  have  so  many  witnesses  as  there  be  men  that 
know  that  province  of  Samnium.  This  holy  man  had 
no  other  wealth  to  live  upon,  but  a  few  hives  of  bees, 
which  a  certain  Lombard  would  needs  have  taken  away  : 
for  which  cause  the  holy  man  reprehended  him,  and  by 
and  by  he  fell  down  before  him,  and  was  tormented  of 
a  devil :  upon  which  accident  his  name  became  famous, 
both  to  his  neighbours  and  also  to  that  barbarous  nation  : 
so  that  none  durst  after  that  but  in  humility  come  into 
his  cell.  Oftentimes  also  there  came  certain  bears  out 
of  the  wood  which  was  hard  by,  to  devour  up  his  honey, 
whom  he  strook  with  a  little  stick  which  he  carried  in 
his  hand  ;  and  the  bears  so  feared  his  stripes,  that  they 
would  roar  out  and  run  away,  and  they  which  little  feared 
naked  swords  were  now  afraid  to  be  beaten  by  him  with 
a  small  wand.  He  desired  not  to  possess  aught  in  this 
world,  nor  to  seek  for  any  thing ;  and  his  manner  was, 
by  heavenly  talk  to  inflame  all  such  as  of  charity  came 
to  visit  him,  with  the  desire  and  love  of  eternal  life.  And 
if  at  any  time  he  understood  that  others  had  committed 
any  great  sin,  he  would  never  spare  them,  but  with 
true  love  to  their  souls  reprehend  them  for  their  faults. 
His  neighbours,  and  others  also  that  dwelt  farther  off, 
used  upon  a  custom,  every  one  upon  certain  days  in  the 
week,  to  send  him  their  presents  and  offerings,  to  the  end 

148 


arenas  tfje  §>olitarp 

he  might  have  somewhat  to  bestow  upon  such  as  came 
to  visit  him.  A  certain  man  there  was,  called  Carterius, 
who,  overcome  of  filthy  concupiscence,  violently  took 
away  a  Nun,  and  by  unlawful  matrimony  made  her  his 
wife  :  which  thing  so  soon  as  the  man  of  God  understood, 
he  sent  him  by  such  as  he  could  that  message  which  his 
fact  deserved.  The  man,  guilty  in  his  conscience  of  that 
wickedness  which  he  had  committed,  durst  not  himself 
go  unto  God's  servant,  fearing  lest,  as  his  manner  was, 
he  would  sharply  have  rebuked  him  :  and  therefore  he 
sent  his  offerings  among  others,  that  at  least  through 
ignorance  he  might  receive  what  he  sent  him.  But  when 
all  the  offerings  were  brought  before  him,  he  sat  still, 
viewing  them  all  in  particular,  and  laying  the  rest  aside, 
he  took  those  which  Carterius  sent,  and  cast  them  away, 
saying  :  "Go  and  tell  him  :  Thou  hast  taken  away  God's 
offering,  and  dost  thou  send  me  thine  ?  I  will  none  of 
thy  offering,  because  thou  hast  taken  from  God  that 
which  was  his."  By  which  fact  all  that  were  present 
fell  into  a  great  fear,  perceiving  that  he  could  certainly 
tell  what  they  did  which  were  absent. 
H?£t0C.  Many  such  men  as  he  was  might,  in  mine 
opinion,  have  been  martyrs,  if  they  had  lived  in  times 
of  persecution. 

3DtC0Otp.  There  be,  Peter,  two  kinds  of  martyrdoms, 
the  one  secret,  the  other  open  :  for  if  a  man  hath  a 
burning  zeal  in  his  mind  to  suffer  death  for  Christ, 
although  he  endureth  not  any  external  persecution,  yet 
hath  he  in  secret  the  merit  of  martyrdom.  For  that  one 
may  be  a  martyr  without  suffering  death  openly,  our 
Lord  doth  teach  us  in  the  Gospel :  who  said  unto  the 
sons  of  Zebedeus,  desiring  as  then,  through  infirmity  of 
soul,  the  principal  places  to  sit  upon  in  his  kingdom  : 
Can  you  drink  the  chalice  which  I  shall  drink  ?  and  when 
they  answered  that  they  could,  he  said  to  them  both  : 
My  chalice  verily  shall  you  drink^  but  to  sit  at  my  right  hand 

149 


Cbe  Dialogues  of  %t.  ®regorp 

or  /eft,  is  not  mine  to  give  you:1  in  which  words  what  is 
signified  else,  by  the  name  of  chalice,  but  the  cup  of 
passion  and  death  ?  And  seeing  we  know  that  James 
was  put  to  death  for  Christ,  and  that  John  died  when 
the  Church  enjoyed  peace :  undoubtedly  we  do  gather 
that  one  may  be  a  martyr  without  open  suffering  :  for 
as  much  as  he  is  said  to  have  drunk  our  Lord's  chalice, 
who  yet  in  persecution  was  not  put  to  death.  But  con- 
cerning those  notable  and  excellent  men  of  whom  1  have 
made  mention  before,  why  may  we  not  truly  say,  that  if 
they  had  fallen  into  a  time  of  persecution,  they  might  have 
been  martyrs,  when  as  by  enduring  the  secret  assaults  of 
the  devil,  and  by  loving  their  enemies  in  this  world,  by 
resisting  all  carnal  desires,  and  in  that  they  did  in  their 
heart  sacrifice  themselves  to  almighty  God,  they  were 
also  martyrs  in  the  time  of  peace  ?  seeing  that  now  in 
our  days  we  see  that  mean  men  and  of  secular  life,  yea, 
and  even  those  of  whom  one  would  have  supposed  that 
they  did  little  think  of  heaven,  have  by  occasion  of 
persecution  obtained  the  glorious  crown  of  martyrdom. 

Cbapter  £tocntp=set)en :  of  fortp  country  bus* 
banDmen  tbat  toere  slain  bp  tbe  lombaros,  be= 
cause  tbep  tooulD  not  eat  flesb  sacrificed  to  iDols- 

^  For  about  fifteen  years  since,  as  they  report  who 
might  very  well  have  been  present,  forty  husbandmen 
of  the  country  were  taken  prisoners  by  the  Lombards, 
whom  they  would  needs  have  enforced  to  eat  of  that 
which  was  sacrificed  to  idols  :  but  when  they  utterly 
refused  so  to  do,  or  so  much  as  once  to  touch  that 
wicked  meat,  then  they  threatened  to  kill  them,  unless 
they  would  eat  it  :  but  they,  loving  more  eternal  than 
transitory  life,  continued  constant,  and  so  they  were  all 
slain.  What  then  were  these  men  ?  what  else  but  true 
martyrs,  that  made  choice  rather  to  die  than,  by  eating 
of  that  which  was  unlawful,  to  offend  their  Creator  ? 

1  Matt.  20,  22-23. 
150 


C&e  lomfmrD  IPersecution 

Cfmpter  £toentp=eigf)t :  of  a  great  number  of 
prisoner  tbat  toere  slain,  because  t&ep  tooulO 

not  aDore  a  goat'S  fjeaO.  <j  At  the  same  time,  the 
Lombards,  having  almost  four  hundred  prisoners  in 
their  hands,  did,  after  their  manner,  sacrifice  a  goat's 
head  to  the  devil :  running  round  about  with  it  in  a 
circle,  and  by  singing  a  most  blasphemous  song  did 
dedicate  it  to  his  service.  And  when  they  had  them- 
selves with  bowed  heads  adored  it,  then  would  they  also 
have  enforced  their  prisoners  to  do  the  like.  But  a  very 
great  number  of  them  choosing  rather  by  death  to  pass 
unto  immortal  life,  than  by  such  abominable  adoration  to 
preserve  their  mortal  bodies,  refused  utterly  to  do  what 
they  commanded  them  ;  and  so  would  not  by  any  means 
bow  down  their  heads  to  a  creature,  having  always  done 
that  service  to  their  Creator  :  whereat  their  enemies,  in 
whose  hands  they  were,  fell  into  such  an  extreme  rage, 
that  they  slew  all  them  with  their  swords,  which  would 
not  join  with  them  in  that  sacrilegious  fact.  What 
marvel  then  is  it,  that  those  notable  men  before  men- 
tioned might  have  come  to  martyrdom,  had  they  lived 
in  the  days  of  persecution,  who  in  the  time  of  peace, 
by  continual  mortification,  walked  the  straight  way  of 
martyrdom  :  when  as  we  see  that,  in  the  storm  of 
persecution,  they  merited  to  obtain  the  crown  of  martyr- 
dom, who,  the  Church  being  quiet,  seemed  to  walk  the 
broad  way  of  this  world  ?  Yet  that  which  we  say  con- 
cerning the  elect  servants  of  God,  is  not  to  be  holden 
for  a  general  rule  in  all.  For  when  open  persecution 
afflicteth  the  Church,  as  most  true  it  is  that  many  may 
arrive  to  martyrdom,  who,  when  no  such  tempest  did 
blow,  seemed  contemptible,  and  of  no  account :  so  like- 
wise sometimes  they  fall  away  for  fear,  who  before 
persecution,  and  when  all  was  quiet,  seemed  to  stand 
very  constant  :  but  such  holy  men  as  before  have  been 
mentioned,  I  dare  boldly  say  that  they  might  have  been 

J51 


Cbe  Dialogues  of  %>t  ®rcgorp 

martyrs,  because  we  gather  so  much  by  their  happy 
deaths  :  for  they  could  not  have  fallen  in  open  perse- 
cution, of  whom  it  is  certain  that,  to  the  very  end  of 
their  lives,  they  did  continue  in  the  profession  of  piety 
and  virtue. 

K?0t0t»  It  is  as  you  say  :  but  I  much  wonder  at  the 
singular  providence  of  God's  mercy,  which  he  sheweth 
to  us  unworthy  wretches,  in  that  he  doth  so  moderate 
and  temper  the  cruelty  of  the  Lombards,  that  he 
suffereth  not  their  wicked  priests  to  persecute  the  faith 
of  Christians  :  when  as  they  see  themselves,  as  it  were, 
the  conquerors  and  rulers  of  Christian  people. 

Chapter  Ctoent^nine :  of  an  arian  15isf)op  tbat 
toas  miraculously  stroofcen  blind.  «I  ®regorp. 

Many,  Peter,  have  attempted  that,  but  miracles  from 
heaven  have  stayed  the  course  of  their  cruelty  :  and  one 
will  I  now  tell  you,  which  I  heard  three  days  since  of 
Bonifacius,  a  monk  of  my  Abbey,  who,  until  these  four 
years  last  past,  remained  amongst  the  Lombards.  An 
Arian  Bishop  of  theirs  coming  to  the  city  of  Spoleto, 
and  not  having  any  place  where  to  exercise  his  religion, 
demanded  a  church  of  the  Bishop  of  that  town  :  which 
when  he  constantly  denied  him,  the  Arian  prelate  told 
him,  that  the  next  day  he  would  by  force  take  posses- 
sion of  St.  Paul's  church,  which  was  hard  by  his  lodging. 
The  keeper  of  the  church,  understanding  this  news,  in 
all  haste  ran  thither,  shut  the  doors,  and  with  locks  and 
bolts  made  them  as  fast  as  he  could  :  and  when  it  was 
night  he  put  out  all  the  lamps,  and  hid  himself  within. 
The  next  morning,  very  early,  the  Arian  Bishop  came 
thither  with  many  in  his  company  :  meaning  by  force 
to  break  open  the  doors.  But  suddenly  by  miracle  the 
locks  were  cast  far  off,  and  the  doors  of  themselves, 
making  a  great  noise,  flew  open  :  and  all  the  lamps, 
before  put  out,  were  lightened  again  by  fire  descend- 
ing from  heaven  :  and  the  Arian   Bishop  that  came  to 

152 


Cbe  JDallotoing  of  §>t.  agatfm's 

enter  the  church  by  violence,  was  suddenly  strooken 
blind,  so  that  other  men  were  fain  to  lead  him  back 
again  to  his  own  lodging.  Which  strange  accident  when 
the  Lombards  there  about  understood,  they  durst  not 
any  more  presume  to  violate  Catholic  places  :  and  so  it 
fell  out  wonderfully,  by  God's  providence,  that  for  as 
much  as  the  lamps  in  St.  Paul's  church  were  by  reason 
of  him  put  out  :  that  at  one  and  the  self  same  time, 
both  he  lost  the  light  of  his  eyes,  and  the  church  re- 
ceived her  former  light  again. 

Chapter  Cbirtp :  fjoto  a  efwref)  of  t&c  artans  in 
Eome  teas  ballotoeu  accorDing  to  tfje  Catholic 

mantlet.  ^  Neither  is  that  to  be  passed  over  in  silence 
which  God  of  his  mercy  vouchsafed,  two  years  since,  to 
shew  in  this  city,  to  the  great  condemnation  of  the  Arian 
heresy  :  for  part  of  that  which  I  intend  now  to  speak  of, 
many  of  the  people  know  to  be  true  :  part  the  Priest  and 
keepers  of  the  church  affirm  that  they  saw  and  heard.  A 
church  ot  the  Arians,  in  that  part  of  the  city  which  is  called 
Subura,  remained  until  two  years  since  with  the  doors 
shut  up  ;  at  which  time,  being  desirous  thatiit  should  be 
hallowed  in  the  Catholic  faith,  we  brought  with  us  thither 
the  relics  of  the  blessed  martyrs  St.  Stephen  and  St. 
Agatha  :  and  so  with  great  multitudes  of  people,  singing 
of  praises  to  almighty  God,  we  entered  the  church  :  and 
when  the  solemnity  of  mass  was  in  celebrating,  and  the 
people,  by  reason  of  the  straight  place,  thrust  one  another, 
some  of  them  that  stood  without  the  chancel  heard  an 
hog  running  up  and  down  through  their  legs,  and  each 
one  perceiving  it  told  it  to  his  next  fellow  :  but  the  hog 
made  towards  the  church  door  to  go  forth,  striking  all 
those  into  great  admiration  by  whom  he  passed  ;  but 
though  they  heard  him,  yet  none  there  was  that  saw  him : 
which  strange  thing  God  of  piety  vouchsafed  to  shew,  to 
the  end  we  should  understand  how  that  the  unclean  spirit, 
which  before  possessed  that  place,  was  now  departed  and 

lS3 


C&e  Dialogues  of  §>t  (Sreptp 

gone.  When  mass  was  done  we  went  away,  but  the  night 
following  such  a  noise  was  heard  in  the  top  of  the  church, 
as  though  somebody  had  there  run  up  and  down  ;  and  the 
next  night  after  that  a  far  greater,  and  withal,  of  a  sudden, 
such  a  terrible  crack  there  was,  as  though  the  whole 
church  had  been  quite  falling  down  :  which  forthwith 
vanished  away,  and  never  after  was  the  church  troubled 
any  more  by  the  old  enemy  :  but  by  the  great  stir  which 
he  kept  before  his  departure,  he  made  it  apparent  that  he 
went  very  unwillingly  from  that  place,  which  so  long  time 
he  had  possessed. 

Not  many  days  after,  in  a  passing  fair  and  clear  day,  a 
cloud  miraculously  descended  upon  the  altar  of  the  same 
church  :  covering  it  as  it  had  been  with  a  canopy  :  and 
filled  the  church  with  such  a  kind  of  terror  and  sweetness, 
that  though  the  doors  were  wide  open,  yet  none  durst 
presume  to  enter  in.  The  Priest  also  and  the  keepers  of 
the  church,  and  those  which  were  come  thither  to  say 
mass,  beheld  the  selfsame  thing,  yet  could  they  not  go  in, 
although  they  felt  the  sweetness  of  that  strange  perfume. 

Likewise  upon  another  day,  the  lamps  hanging  with- 
out light,  fire  came  from  heaven  and  set  them  a  burning  : 
and  a  few  days  after,  when  mass  was  ended,  and  the 
keeper  of  the  church  had  put  out  the  lamps,  and  was  de- 
parted, yet  returning  back  again,  he  found  them  burning 
which  before  he  had  put  forth  ;  but  thinking  that  he  had 
done  it  negligently,  he  did  it  now  more  carefully  the 
second  time,  and  so  departed  the  church  and  shut  the 
door  ;  but  returning  three  hours  after,  he  found  them 
again  burning  as  before  :  to  the  end  that  by  the  very 
light  the  world  might  manifestly  know,  how  that  place 
was  from  darkness  translated  to  light. 
Ip0t0t»  Although  we  be  in  great  miseries  and  tribula- 
tions, yet  these  strange  miracles,  which  God  vouchsafeth 
to  work,  do  plainly  declare  that  he  hath  not  utterly  for- 
saken and  given  us  over. 

1 54 


King;  ©etmigtltius 

<2Dt0gOt£.  Albeit  I  was  determined  to  recount  unto  you 
only  such  strange  things  as  were  done  in  Italy,  are  you 
for  all  that  content,  to  the  further  condemnation  of  the 
said  Arian  heresy,  that  I  turn  a  little  my  speech  to  Spain, 
and  so  by  Africk  return  back  again  to  Italy  ? 
K?0t0t*  Go  whither  you  will,  willingly  will  I  travel  with 
you,  and  joyfully  return  home  again. 

Chapter  Cf)irtP=one :  of  i&mg  ©ermigilDus,  son 
to  LeuigilDus,  feing  of  tbe  U&egotfts :  tobo  toas, 
for  t\)t  Catboltc  fattb,  put  to  Dcatb  bp  bis  fatbec. 

*I  <2DtCg0t£.  Not  long  since,  as  I  have  learned  of  many 
which  came  from  Spain,  king  Hermigildus,  son  of  Leui- 
gildus,  king  of  the  Visegoths,  was  from  Arian  heresy 
lately  converted  to  the  Catholic  faith  by  the  most  reverent 
man  Leander,  Bishop  of  Seville,  with  whom  I  was  not 
long  since  familiarly  acquainted  ;  which  young  Prince, 
upon  his  conversion,  his  father,  being  an  Arian,  laboured 
both  by  large  promises  and  terrible  threats  to  draw  again 
to  his  former  error  :  but  when  most  constantly  his  son 
answered,  that  he  would  never  forsake  the  true  faith 
which  he  had  once  embraced,  his  father  in  great  anger 
took  away  his  kingdom,  and  beside  deprived  him  of  all 
wealth  and  riches  ;  and  perceiving  that,  with  all  this,  his 
mind  was  nothing  moved,  he  committed  him  to  straight 
prison,  laying  irons  both  upon  his  neck  and  hands.  Upon 
this,  the  young  king  Hermigildus  began  now  to  contemn 
his  earthly  kingdom,  and  to  seek  with  great  desire  after 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  :  and  lying  in  prison  fast  bound, 
he  prayed  to  almighty  God  in  hair-cloth  to  send  him 
heavenly  comfort :  and  so  much  the  more  did  he  despise 
the  glory  of  this  transitory  world,  by  how  much  he  knew 
himself  in  that  case  that  he  had  now  nothing  that  could 
be  taken  from  him. 

When  the  solemn  feast  of  Easter  was  come,  his  wicked 
father  sent  unto  him  in  the  dead  of  the  night  an  Arian 
Bishop,  to  give  him  the  communion  of  a  sacrilegious  con- 


Cbe  Dialogic  of  %>t  <£reprp 

secration,  that  he  might  thereby  again  recover  his  father's 
grace  and  favour  :  but  the  man  of  God,  as  he  ought, 
sharply  reprehended  that  Arian  Bishop  which  came  unto 
him,  and  giving  him  such  entertainment  as  his  deserts 
required,  utterly  rejected  him  ;  for  albeit  outwardly  he 
lay  there  in  bands,  yet  inwardly  to  himself  he  stood 
secure  in  the  height  of  his  own  soul.  The  father,  at  the 
return  of  the  Arian  prelate,  understanding  these  news,  fell 
into  such  a  rage  that  forthwith  he  sent  his  officers  of  exe- 
cution to  put  to  death  that  most  constant  confessor,  in  the 
very  prison  where  he  lay  :  which  unnatural  and  bloody 
commandment  was  performed  accordingly  :  for  so  soon 
as  they  came  into  the  prison,  they  clave  his  brains  with  an 
hatchet,  and  so  bereaved  him  of  mortal  life,  having  only 
power  to  take  that  from  him  which  the  holy  martyr  made 
small  account  of.  Afterward,  for  the  publishing  of  his 
true  glory  to  the  world,  there  wanted  not  miracles  from 
heaven  :  for  in  the  night  time  singing  was  heard  at  his 
body  :  some  also  report  that,  in  the  night,  burning  lamps 
were  seen  in  that  place  :  by  reason  whereof  his  body,  as 
of  him  that  was  a  martyr,  was  worthily  worshipped  of  all 
Christian  people.  But  the  wicked  father  and  murtherer 
of  his  own  son,  albeit  he  was  sorry  that  he  had  put  him  to 
death,  yet  was  not  his  grief  of  that  quality  that  it  brought 
him  to  the  state  of  salvation.  For  although  he  knew 
very  well  that  the  Catholic  faith  was  the  truth,  yet,  for 
fear  of  his  people,  he  never  deserved  to  be  a  professor 
thereof. 

At  length,  falling  sick,  a  little  before  his  death,  he 
commended  his  son  Recharedus,  who  was  to  succeed 
him  in  the  kingdom,  and  was  yet  an  heretic,  unto  Bishop 
Leander,  whom  before  he  had  greatly  persecuted  :  that 
by  his  counsel  and  exhortation,  he  might  likewise  make 
him  a  member  of  the  Catholic  Church,  as  he  had  before 
made  his  brother  Hermigildus  ;  and  when  he  had  thus 
done,  he  departed  this  life.     After  whose  death,  Rec- 

156 


€be  IBisbops  of  afticfe 

haredus  the  king,  not  following  the  steps  of  his  wicked 
father,  but  his  brother  the  martyr,  utterly  renounced 
Arianism  :  and  laboured  so  earnestly  for  the  restoring 
of  religion,  that  he  brought  the  whole  nation  of  the 
Visegoths  to  the  true  faith  of  Christ,  and  would  not 
suffer  any  that  was  an  heretic  in  his  country  to  bear 
arms  and  serve  in  the  wars.  And  it  is  not  to  be  ad- 
mired that  he  became  thus  to  be  a  preacher  of  the  true 
faith,  seeing  he  was  the  brother  of  a  martyr,  whose 
merits  did  help  him  to  bring  so  many  into  the  lap  of 
God's  Church  :  wherein  we  have  to  consider  that  he 
could  never  have  effected  all  this,  if  king  Hermigildus 
had  not  died  for  the  testimony  of  true  religion  ;  for,  as 
it  is  written  :  Unless  the  grain  of  wheat  falling  into  the  earth 
doth  die,  itself  remaineth  alone  ;  but  if  it  die,  it  bringeth  forth 
much  fruit}  This  we  see  to  prove  true  in  the  members, 
which  before  was  verified  in  the  head  :  for  one  died 
amongst  the  Visegoths  that  many  might  live,  and  of  one 
grain  that  was  sown  for  the  faith,  a  great  crop  of  faithful 
people  sprung  up. 

Ip0t£t»  A  wonderful  thing,  and  much  to  be  admired  in 
these  our  days. 

Cbaptcr  CfnrtHtoo :  of  certain  IBisbopsof^ftick, 
tofjo  fjati  tbeir  tonaucs  cut  out  tip  tbc  "FanDate, 
tbat  toere  arian  heretics;  for  tbc  Defence  of  tbc 
Catbolic  faitb;  ano  pet  spake  still  as  perfectly  as 

tbep  DtD  before.  *§  (SrCgOrp.  Likewise,  in  the  time 
of  Justinian  the  Emperor,  when  as  the  Vandals,  that  were 
Arian  heretics,  did  grievously  persecute  the  Catholic 
faith,  certain  Bishops,  continuing  constant,  were  openly 
examined  :  whom  when  the  king  of  the  Vandals  saw 
that  he  could  neither  by  any  words  or  rewards  draw  to 
embrace  his  heretical  religion,  yet  he  thought  that  by 
torments  he  might  do  it  :  and  therefore,  when  he  com- 
manded them  not  to  speak  in  defence  of  truth,  and  they 

1  John  12,  24. 

157 


€&c  Dialoguc0  of  %t  (Srcgorg 

refused  to  obey  his  precept,  lest  by  silence  they  might 
seem  to  give  consent  unto  wicked  heresy,  in  a  great 
fury  he  commanded  their  tongues  to  be  cut  out  by  the 
roots.  A  miraculous  thing,  and  yet  known  to  many 
old  men  :  they  did  as  perfectly  afterward  speak  in  de- 
fence of  true  religion,  as  they  did  before,  when  they  had 
their  tongues  safe  and  sound. 

Ip0t0t,  You  tell  me  of  a  marvellous  strange  thing,  and 
greatly  to  be  admired. 

(S)tC0Otp.  It  is  written,  Peter,  of  the  only  Son  of  the 
eternal  Father  :  In  the  beginning  was  the  Word^  and  the 
Word  was  with  Qod}  Of  whose  virtue  and  power  it 
straightways  followeth  :  All  things  were  made  by  him. 
Why  then  should  we  marvel,  if  that  eternal  Word  could 
speak  without  a  tongue,  which  made  the  tongue  ? 
li^CtCt*  What  you  say  pleaseth  me  very  well. 
(£>tC0Otp.  These  Bishops,  therefore,  flying  at  that  time 
from  the  persecution,  came  unto  the  city  of  Constanti- 
nople :  and  at  such  time  as  myself,  about  the  affairs  of 
the  Church,  was  sent  thither  unto  the  Emperor,  I  found 
there  a  Bishop  of  good  years,  who  told  me  that  he  saw 
them  himself  speak  without  tongues  :  for  they  opened 
their  mouths,  and  said  :  "  Behold  and  see  how  we  have 
no  tongues,  and  yet  do  speak  "  ;  for,  as  he  said,  their 
tongues  being  cut  off  by  the  roots,  there  seemed  as  it 
were  a  deep  hole  in  their  throat  :  and  yet,  though  their 
mouths  were  empty,  they  pronounced  their  words  very 
plain  and  distinctly.  One  of  which,  falling  afterward  in 
that  place  into  carnal  sin,  was  forthwith  deprived  of  that 
supernatural  gift  :  and  that  by  the  just  judgment  of  al- 
mighty God,  seeing  reason  requireth  that  he  which  was 
careless  to  preserve  the  continency  of  his  body  which 
he  had,  should  not  any  longer  utter  the  words  of  truth 
without  the  tongue  of  his  body  which  he  had  not.  But 
because  I  have  now  spoken  sufficient  for  the  condemna- 

1  John  i,  I. 
158 


<£leutf)criu0  of  ^polcto 

tion  of  Arianism,  therefore  I  will  return  to  entreat  of 
such  other  miracles  as  have  lately  fallen  out  here  in 
Italy. 

Cbapter  CWrtHbree :  of  tbe  0ertmnt  of  <£od, 

dBl0Utf)CtiU0.  1&  Eleutherius,  of  whom  I  made  men- 
tion before,  father  of  the  Abbey  of  the  Evangelist  St. 
Mark,  which  is  in  the  suburbs  of  the  city  of  Spoleto, 
lived  long  time  together  with  me  in  this  city  in  my 
monastery,  and  there  ended  his  days.  Of  whom  his 
monks  do  report  that  by  his  tears  he  raised  up  one  that 
was  dead  :  for  he  was  a  man  of  such  simplicity  and 
compunction,  that  no  doubt  but  those  tears,  coming 
from  his  humble  and  simple  soul,  were  of  force  to 
obtain  many  things  of  almighty  God.  One  miracle  of 
his  I  will  now  tell  you,  which  himself,  being  demanded 
by  me,  did  with  great  simplicity  confess.  As  he  was 
travelling  upon  a  certain  day,  and  not  finding  at  night 
any  other  place  to  lodge  in,  he  went  to  a  Nunnery, 
wherein  there  was  a  little  boy  which  the  wicked  spirit 
did  usually  every  night  torment.  The  Nuns,  giving 
entertainment  to  the  man  of  God,  desired  him  that  the 
said  little  boy  might  remain  with  him  all  night  :  where- 
with he  was  well  content.  In  the  morning,  the  Nuns 
diligently  enquired  of  the  father,  if  the  child  had  not 
been  sore  troubled  and  tormented  that  night  :  who, 
marvelling  why  they  asked  that  question,  answered  that 
he  perceived  not  any  such  thing.  Then  they  told  him 
how  a  wicked  spirit  did  every  night  pitifully  afflict  the 
child,  and  earnestly  desired  him  that  he  would  take 
him  home  to  his  own  Abbey,  because  their  hearts  could 
not  endure  to  behold  any  such  misery.  The  old  man 
yielded  to  their  request,  and  so  carried  away  the  boy 
home  to  his  own  monastery  :  where  he  remained  long 
time  safe  and  sound,  the  devil  not  presuming  to  touch 
him.  Whereupon  the  old  man,  seeing  him  to  continue 
so  well,  was  immoderately  glad  thereof,  and  therefore,  in 

159 


C6e  Dialogues  of  §>t.  <$regorp 

the  presence  of  the  monks,  he  spake  thus  :  "  The  devil 
did  dally  with  those  sisters  :  but  now  he  hath  to  do  with 
the  servants  of  God,  he  dare  not  come  near  this  boy." 
He  had  scarce  uttered  these  words,  when  as  in  that 
very  instant  the  poor  child  was,  in  the  presence  of  them 
all,  possessed,  and  pitifully  tormented  :  which  the  old 
man  beholding,  straightways  lamented  and  fell  a  weep- 
ing, and  persevering  so  a  long  time,  the  monks  came 
to  comfort  him  ;  but  he  answered  them,  saying  :  "  Be- 
lieve me,"  quoth  he,  "  none  of  you  shall  this  day  eat  any 
bread,  unless  this  boy  be  dispossessed."  Then,  with 
the  rest  of  the  brethren,  he  fell  prostrate  to  his  prayers, 
and  there  they  continued  so  long,  until  the  boy  was 
delivered  from  his  former  torments,  and  besides  so 
perfectly  cured,  that  the  wicked  spirit  never  after  pre- 
sumed to  molest  him  any  more. 

IpEtCt.  I  verily  suppose  that  he  sinned  a  little  in  vain 
glory  :  and  that  God's  pleasure  was,  that  the  other 
monks  should  co-operate  to  the  dispossessing  of  the 
devil. 

(£>tC(J0tp.  It  is  even  so  as  you  say  :  for  seeing  he 
could  not  alone  bear  the  burthen  of  that  miracle,  it  was 
divided  amongst  the  rest  of  his  brethren.  Of  what  force 
and  efficacy  this  man's  prayers  were,  I  have  found  by 
experience  in  myself :  for  being  upon  a  time,  when  I 
lived  in  the  Abbey,  so  sick  that  I  often  swooned  :  and 
was  by  means  thereof,  with  often  pangs,  continually  at 
death's  door,  and  in  such  case  that,  unless  I  did  con- 
tinually eat  something,  my  vital  spirit  was  going  away  : 
Easter  day  was  at  hand,  and  therefore  when  I  saw  that 
upon  so  sacred  a  vigil  I  could  not  refrain  from  often 
eating,  in  which  not  only  old  persons,  but  even  children 
use  to  fast,  I  was  more  afflicted  with  grief,  than  grieved 
with  mine  infirmity  :  yet  at  length  my  sorrowful  soul 
quickly  found  out  a  device,  and  that  was,  to  carry  the 
man   of  God   secretly  into  the   oratory,  and   there  to 

1 60 


Dtoers  Kinds  of  Compunction 

entreat  him  that  he  would  by  his  prayer  obtain  for  me 
of  God  so  much  strength  and  ability  as  to  fast  that  day  : 
which  fell  out  accordingly  :  for  so  soon  as  we  came  into 
the  oratory,  with  humility  and  tears  he  fell  to  his 
prayers,  and  after  a  while  (having  made  an  end)  he 
came  forth,  and  upon  the  words  of  his  blessed  prayers, 
my  stomach  grew  so  strong,  that  I  did  not  so  much 
as  think  of  any  meat,  nor  feel  any  grief  at  all.  Then  I 
began  to  marvel  at  myself,  and  to  think  in  what  case 
I  was  before,  and  how  I  felt  myself  now  :  and  when  I 
thought  upon  my  former  sickness,  I  found  none  of 
those  pangs  with  which  before  I  was  troubled  :  and 
when  my  mind  was  busied  about  the  affairs  of  the 
Abbey,  my  sickness  was  quite  out  of  my  memory  ;  yea, 
and  as  I  said,  if  I  did  think  thereof,  yet  feeling  myself 
so  well  and  strong,  I  began  to  doubt  whether  I  had 
eaten  or  no.  When  evening  was  come,  I  found  myself 
so  lusty  that  I  could  very  well  have  fasted  until  the 
next  day.  And  by  this  means,  having  experience  of  his 
prayers  in  myself,  I  made  no  doubt  but  those  things 
also  were  true  which  in  other  places  he  did,  though 
myself  was  not  then  present. 

}p0tCt»  Seeing  you  told  me  that  he  was  a  man  of 
great  compunction,  desirous  I  am  to  be  better  informed 
touching  the  efficacy  of  compunction  and  tears  :  and 
therefore  I  pray  you,  let  me  understand  how  many 
kinds  of  compunction  there  be. 

Cbapter  CWrtHout:  of  t&e  Dtoera  fctnDa  of  com= 

piinCtiOn.  <I  ®teptp.  Compunction  is  divided  into 
many  kinds  :  to  wit,  when  every  sin  is  of  penitent  men 
in  particular  bewailed  :  whereof  the  prophet  Jeremy,  in 
the  person  of  penitent  sinners,  speaketh  thus  :  Mine  eye 
hath  brought  forth  divisions  of  waters}  But  speaking  more 
properly,  there  be  especially  two  kinds  of  compunction  : 
for  the  soul  that  thirsteth  after  God  is  first  sorrowful  in 

1   Lamentations  3,  48. 

l6l  L 


C6e  Dialogues  of  %t  ®rcg;orp 

heart  for  fear,  and  afterward  upon  love.  For  first  it  is 
grieved  and  weepeth,  because,  calling  to  mind  former 
sins  committed,  it  feareth  to  endure  for  punishment  of 
them  everlasting  torments  :  but  when  long  anxiety  and 
sorrow  hath  banished  away  that  fear,  then  a  certain 
security  of  the  hope  of  pardon  doth  follow  :  and  so  the 
soul  is  inflamed  with  the  love  of  heavenly  delights,  and 
whereas  before  it  did  weep  for  fear  of  eternal  pain,  after- 
ward it  poureth  out  tears,  that  it  is  kept  from  everlasting 
joys.  For  the  soul  doth  then  contemplate  those  glittering 
quires  of  Angels,  that  heavenly  company  of  those  blessed 
spirits,  that  great  majesty  of  the  eternal  beholding  the 
face  of  God  ;  and  doth  lament  so  much  more  now, 
because  it  wanteth  that  everlasting  felicity,  than  it  wept 
before  at  the  fear  of  eternal  punishment.  Which  thing 
in  scripture  is  mystically  set  down,  in  an  holy  and  true 
history  :  for  there  we  read  how  Axa,  the  daughter  of 
Caleb,  riding  upon  an  ass,  did  sigh  :  and  when  her 
father  demanded  what  the  matter  was,  she  answered 
him  thus  :  Qive  me  your  blessing,  a  southern  and  dry  land 
you  have  given  me,  join  also  a  watery  :  and  he  gave  her  a 
•watery  ground  above  and  beneath}  For  Axa  then  rideth 
upon  the  ass,  when  our  soul  doth  subdue  and  govern 
the  sensual  motions  of  the  flesh  :  which  sighing  doth 
crave  wet  ground  of  her  father,  when  it  doth  with  con- 
trition and  sorrow  of  heart  desire  of  our  Creator  the 
grace  of  tears  and  weeping.  For  some  there  be,  upon 
whom  God  hath  bestowed  such  a  gift,  that  they  will 
speak  freely  in  defence  of  justice,  help  them  that  be 
oppressed,  give  alms  to  the  poor,  and  be  zealous  in 
religion,  but  yet  have  they  not  obtained  the  grace  of 
tears  :  these  be  they,  that  have  ground  towards  the 
south,  and  that  which  is  dry  :  but  yet  do  they  want 
that  which  is  moist  and  wet :  because,  albeit  they  be 
diligent  and  fervent  in  good  works,  yet  requisite  it  is 

1  Joshua  15,  19. 
l62 


amantms  of  €u0cania 

that  they  should  also,  either  for  fear  of  hell  or  the 
love  of  heaven,  bewail  the  sins  of  their  life  past.  But 
because,  as  I  said,  there  be  two  kinds  of  compunction, 
therefore  her  father  gave  her  that  which  was  wet  above 
and  also  wet  beneath  :  for  our  soul  doth  then  receive 
that  which  is  wet  above,  when  it  is  grieved,  and  doth 
weep  for  the  desire  of  heaven  ;  and  it  doth  then  possess 
that  which  is  wet  beneath,  when  it  is  afraid,  and  poureth 
forth  tears  for  the  fear  of  hell  fire  :  and  albeit  that  which 
is  wet  beneath  is  bestowed  upon  our  soul,  before  that 
which  is  wet  above,  yet  because  the  compunction  of  love 
is  the  more  excellent,  convenient  it  was  that  the  ground 
which  was  wet  above  should  be  first  named,  and  after- 
ward that  which  was  wet  beneath. 

l|5Ct0t»  Your  discourse  pleaseth  me  very1  well  :  but 
seeing  you  have  now  told  me  of  that  reverent  man 
Eleutherius,  and  his  great  grace  of  compunction, 
desirous  I  am  to  know  whether  there  be  now  any 
such  men  living  in  the  world. 

Chapter  Cfnrt^ftoc :  of  amantius,  a  Priest  in  tbc 
lprotrinceof£u0cania.  t[<$rcgotp.  Fioridus,  Bishop 

of  Tivoli,  a  man  (as  yourself  knoweth  very  well)  of  holy 
life,  and  worthy  to  be  credited,  told  me  that  he  had 
dwelling  with  him  a  certain  Priest  called  Amantius,  of 
marvellous  simplicity  :  who,  like  unto  the  Apostles,  had 
such  a  grace  given  him  of  God,  that,  laying  his  hand  upon 
them  that  were  sick,  he  restored  them  to  their  former 
health  ;  and  although  the  disease  were  very  great  and 
dangerous,  yet  upon  his  touching  did  it  forthwith  depart. 
Moreover  he  said  that  he  had  also  this  miraculous  gift, 
that  wheresoever  he  found  any  serpents  or  snakes,  though 
never  so  cruel,  yet  did  he  with  the  sign  of  the  cross  dis- 
patch and  kill  them  :  for  by  virtue  of  the  cross,  which  the 
man  of  God  made  with  his  hand,  their  bowels  did  break, 
and  they  suddenly  die  :  and  if  by  chance  the  snake  gat 
into  any  hole,  then  did  he  with  the  sign  of  the  cross  bless 

163 


€f)C  Dialogues  of  %t  (fctegotp 

the  mouth  thereof,  and  it  wrought  the  same  effect  ;  for 
any  might  straightways  find  it  there  dead.  Myself  having 
understanding  of  this  great  grace  bestowed  upon  him,  was 
desirous  to  see  him  :  and  when  he  was  brought  unto  me, 
I  caused  him  to  be  lodged  in  a  chamber  amongst  the 
sick  men  :  thereby  to  try  what  his  gift  was  in  curing  of 
diseases.  At  that  time,  there  was  one  amongst  them  be- 
side himself,  being  fallen  into  a  phrensy  :  who  one  night 
did  so  cry  out  like  a  mad  man,  that  with  his  noise  he  dis- 
quieted all  the  rest  that  were  sick,  so  that  they  could  not 
sleep  or  take  any  rest :  and  so  it  fell  out  very  strangely 
that,  one  being  ill,  all  the  rest  fared  the  worse.  But  as 
I  had  before  learned  of  the  reverent  Bishop  Floridus, 
who  was  at  that  time  there  present  with  the  said  Priest, 
and  afterward  also  plainly  understood  of  him  that  at- 
tended that  night  upon  the  sick  persons,  the  foresaid 
venerable  Priest,  rising  out  of  his  bed,  went  softly  to  the 
place  where  the  mad  man  lay,  and  there  prayed,  laying  his 
hands  upon  him  ;  whereupon  the  man  became  somewhat 
better.  Then  he  carried  him  away  unto  the  higher  part 
of  the  house,  into  the  oratory  :  where  more  plentifully 
he  prayed  unto  God  for  his  recovery  :  and  straight  after 
he  brought  him  back  again  to  his  own  bed  safe  and  sound, 
so  that  he  cried  out  no  more,  neither  troubled  any  of 
the  other  sick  persons.  By  which  one  fact  of  his,  I  had 
sufficient  reason  to  give  credit  to  all  the  rest  that  before 
had  been  told  me. 

iJ^CtCt.  A  great  edification  it  is,  to  see  men  working  such 
notable  miracles  :  and  to  behold,  as  it  were  upon  earth, 
heavenly  Jerusalem  in  her  citizens. 

Chapter  Ci)ittp;0ir :  of  apartmtanus,  IBis&op  of 

^ptaCU0i0.  *I  StCgOtp.  Neither  is  that  miracle  to  be 
passed  over  with  silence,  which  almighty  God  vouchsafed 
to  work  by  his  servant  Maximianus,  now  Bishop  of 
Syracusis,  but  then  the  father  and  governor  of  mine 
Abbey.    For  at  such  time  as  I  was,  upon  the  command- 

164 


^anmianus  of  ®pracusi0 

ment  of  my  Bishop,  sent  to  Constantinople  to  the  Em- 
peror, about  affairs  of  the  Church,  the  same  reverent  man, 
Maximianus  upon  charity,  with  other  of  his  monks,  came 
thither  unto  me  :  who  in  his  return  homeward  to  Rome, 
fell  into  a  great  tempest  upon  the  Adriake  sea  :  in  which 
both  himself  and  all  those  that  were  in  his  company,  after 
a  most  strange  and  miraculous  manner,  tasted  both  of 
the  indignation  and  favour  of  almighty  God.  For  the 
sea  did  so  rage  with  the  fury  of  the  winds,  that  they  had 
spent  their  mast :  the  sails  floated  upon  the  waves  :  and 
the  ship,  beaten  and  torn  with  boisterous  billows,  did  leak 
water  so  fast,  that  it  was  now  come  to  the  upper  deck,  in 
such  sort  that  the  ship  seemed  not  so  much  to  be  in  the 
waters,  as  the  waters  in  the  ship. 

The  mariners  and  passengers,  troubled  with  the  fear  of 
death,  not  as  a  thing  far  off,  but  even  present  before  their 
eyes,  void  of  all  hope  of  this  life,  prepared  themselves  for 
the  next  :  and  so,  mutually  giving  the  pax  or  kiss  of 
peace  one  to  another,  they  received  the  body  and  blood 
of  our  Saviour  :  commending  themselvestoalmightyGod, 
that  he  would  vouchsafe  mercifully  to  receive  their  souls, 
who  had  delivered  their  bodies  to  so  fearful  a  death  :  but 
God,  who  had  wonderfully  terrified  their  minds,  did 
more  wonderfully  preserve  their  lives.  For  the  same  ship 
although  full  of  water,  yet  did  it  hold  on  her  course  for 
eight  days  together,  and  upon  the  ninth,  it  arrived  at  the 
port  of  Cothronum  :  and  when  all  the  rest  were  safely 
gone  out,  then  last  of  all  the  reverent  man  Maximianus 
went  also  forth  :  and  no  sooner  was  he  upon  land,  than 
the  ship  sunk  in  the  haven  :  as  though,  by  their  departure, 
it  had  wanted  that  which  did  preserve  it  :  and  whereas 
before,  being  at  sea,  it  was  full  of  men,  and  carried  also 
abundance  of  water,  and  yet  sailed  onward  :  now  when 
Maximianus  with  his  monks  were  landed,  it  could  not  in 
the  haven  carry  the  waters  alone  :  whereby  God  gave 
them  to  understand,  that,  when  it  was  laden,   himself 

.6. 


€&e  Dialogues  of  %t  <£reprp 

with  his  divine  hand  did  govern  and  preserve  it  :  seeing 
when  it  was  empty  it  could  not  for  a  small  time  continue 
above  the  water. 

Chapter  Cbirt^setien :  of  Sanctulus,  a  priest  in 

tf)elPrOt)inceOf  JftUtSia.  «I  About  forty  days  since,  you 
saw  with  me  one  called  Sanctulus,  a  reverent  Priest,  who 
every  year  came  unto  me  out  of  Nursia  :  but  three  days 
ago,  a  certain  monk,  coming  from  those  parts,  brought  me 
very  heavy  news  of  his  death.  The  holy  life  and  virtue 
of  which  man  was  such,  that  although  I  can  not  but  fetch 
sweet  sighs  when  I  remember  it,  yet  now  I  may  without 
all  fear  report  and  publish  to  the  world  such  miracles  as 
1  have  learned  by  the  relation  of  very  virtuous  and  holy 
Priests,  that  were  his  neighbours  :  and  as  amongst  dear 
friends  familiarity  causeth  one  to  presume  much  in 
charity,  oftentimes  myself  did  so  courteously  urge  him, 
that  he  was  enforced  to  tell  me  some  small  miracles  which 
himself  had  done. 

Certain  Lombards  being  upon  a  time  pressing  of  olives 
to  make  oil,  Sanctulus,  as  he  was  both  merry  in  coun- 
tenance and  heart,  came  unto  them,  and  saluted  them 
pleasantly  :  and  shewing  them  his  bottle  which  he 
brought,  rather  willed  than  desired  them  to  fill  it  with 
oil.  But  they  being  infidels,  and  having  laboured  all  day 
in  vain,  and  not  pressed  out  any  oil  at  all,  took  his  words 
in  ill  part,  and  gave  him  very  bad  speech  :  but  the  man 
of  God,  notwithstanding  this,  spake  unto  them  yet  with 
a  more  merry  countenance,  and  said  :  "  It  you  desire  to 
do  me  a  good  turn,  you  will  fill  this  bottle  for  Sanctulus, 
and  so  he  will  depart  from  you  very  well  contented."  But 
they,  seeing  no  oil  to  run  forth,  and  hearing  him  yet  for 
all  that  so  earnest  to  have  his  bottle  filled,  fell  into  a  great 
rage,  and  railed  mightily  upon  him.  Then  the  man  of 
God,  seeing  that  no  oil  came  from  the  press,  called  for 
water,  which  he  blessed  before  them  all,  and  with  his  own 
hands  cast  it  upon  the  press  :   and  forthwith,  by  virtue 

166 


^anctulus  of  jftuma 

of  that  benediction,  such  plenty  of  oil  ran  forth,  that  the 
Lombards,  who  before  had  long  laboured  in  vain,  did  not 
only  fill  their  own  vessels,  but  also  his  bottle  :  giving  him 
thanks  for  that,  coming  to  beg  oil,  by  his  blessing  he  be- 
stowed that  upon  them  which  himself  had  demanded. 

At  another  time,  when  a  great  dearth  was  in  the 
country,  the  man  of  God  being  desirous  to  repair  the 
church  of  St.  Lawrence,  burnt  before  by  the  Lombards, 
he  hired  for  that  end  many  cunning  workmen  and  divers 
other  labourers,  who  of  necessity  were  daily  to  be  main- 
tained :  but  so  great  was  the  scarcity,  that  he  wanted 
bread  to  relieve  them  ;  whereupon  his  workmen  cried  out 
for  meat,  because  they  were  faint  and  could  not  labour. 
The  man  of  God,  hearing  this,  gave  them  comfortable 
words,  promising  to  supply  their  want ;  yet  inwardly  very 
much  was  he  grieved,  being  not  able  to  perform  what  he 
had  said.  Going  therefore  up  and  down  in  great  anxiety, 
he  came  to  an  oven,  wherein  the  neighbours  that  dwelt 
by  had  the  day  before  baked  bread  :  and  stooping  down, 
he  looked  in,  to  see  whether  they  had  by  chance  left  any 
bread  behind  them,  where  he  found  a  loaf  both  greater 
and  whiter  than  commonly  they  used  :  which  he  took 
away,  but  yet  would  he  not  by  and  by  give  it  to  his 
workmen,  lest  perhaps  it  belonged  to  some  other  body, 
and  so  might  as  it  were,  of  compassion  to  other,  have 
committed  a  sin  himself :  and  therefore  he  did  first  shew 
it  to  all  the  women  there  about,  enquiring  whether  it 
were  any  of  theirs  :  but  all  denied  it,  saying  that  they  had 
all  received  their  just  number  of  loaves.  Then  the  man 
of  God  in  great  joy  went  with  that  one  loaf  to  many 
workmen,  wishing  them  to  give  thanks  to  almighty  God, 
telling  them  how  his  goodness  had  provided  them  of 
necessary  food  ;  and  forthwith  he  set  that  loaf  before 
them,  whereof,  when  they  had  satisfied  themselves,  he 
gathered  up  more  pieces  of  bread  which  remained,  than 
the  whole  loaf  itself  was  before  in  quantity.     The  day 

167 


€&e  Dialoguc0  of  §>t  <$regorp 

following,  again  he  set  it  before  them,  and  again  the 
pieces  remaining  were  far  more  than  the  former  frag- 
ments :  and  so,  for  the  space  of  ten  days  together,  all 
those  artificers  and  workmen  lived  upon  that  one  loaf, 
and  were  very  well  satisfied  :  some  thing  remaining  every 
day  for  the  next,  as  though  the  fragments  had  by  eating 
increased. 

Jjj)0t0t.  A  strange  thing,  and  not  unlike  to  that  notable 
miracle  of  our  Saviour ;  and  therefore  worthy  to  be 
admired  of  all. 

(Jpt00Otp.  Our  Saviour  at  this  time,  Peter,  vouchsafed 
by  his  servant  to  feed  many  with  one  loaf,  who  in  times 
past,  by  himself,  fed  five  thousand  with  five  loaves  :  and 
doth  daily  of  a  few  grains  of  corn  produce  innumerable 
ears  of  wheat :  who  also  out  of  the  earth  brought  forth 
those  very  grains ;  and  more  than  all  this,  created  all 
things  of  nothing.  But  to  the  end  you  should  not  marvel 
any  longer,  what  by  God's  assistance  the  venerable  man 
Sanctulus  wrought  outwardly  :  I  will  now  tell  you  what, 
by  our  Lord's  grace,  he  was  inwardly  in  his  soul.  Upon 
a  certain  day,  the  Lombards  had  taken  a  Deacon,  whom 
they  kept  in  prison,  with  a  purpose  to  put  him  to  death. 
When  evening  was  come,  the  man  of  God,  Sanctulus, 
entreated  them  to  set  him  at  liberty,  and  to  grant  him 
his  life  :  but  when  he  saw  that  he  could  not  obtain  that 
favour  at  their  hands,  but  that  they  were  fully  resolved 
to  have  his  life  :  then  he  beseeched  them,  that  they  would 
at  least  commit  him  to  his  keeping  :  wherewith  they 
were  content,  but  with  this  condition,  that  if  he  scaped 
away,  that  then  himself  should  die  for  him.  The  man 
of  God  was  very  well  content,  and  so  he  received  the 
Deacon  into  his  own  charge  and  custody. 

The  midnight  following,  when  he  saw  all  the  Lombards 
fast  asleep,  he  called  up  the  Deacon,  willing  him  quickly 
to  rise  up  and  to  run  away  as  fast  as  he  could  :  "  and 
almighty  God,"  quoth   he,  "deliver  thee  out  of  their 

168 


§>anctulti0  of  fouxm 

hands."  To  whom  the  Deacon  (knowing  what  he  had  pro- 
mised) said  :  "Father,  I  can  not  run  away,  for  if  I  do,  out 
of  all  doubt  they  will  put  you  to  death."  Yet  for  all  this, 
Sanctulus  enforced  him  to  be  gone  with  all  speed,  saying  : 
"Up,  and  away:  and  God  of  his  goodness  defend  and 
protect  you  :  for  I  am  in  his  hands,  and  they  can  do  no 
more  unto  me  than  his  divine  Majesty  shall  give  them 
leave."  Upon  these  words  away  went  the  Deacon  ;  and 
he  that  had  undertaken  his  safe  keeping,  as  one  that  had 
been  deceived,  remained  behind. 

In  the  morning  the  Lombards  demanded  of  Sanctulus 
for  their  prisoner  :  who  told  them  that  he  was  run  away. 
"  Then,"  quoth  they,  "  you  best  know  what  is  convenient 
for  you  to  have."  "Yea,  marry,  that  do  I,"  answered 
the  servant  of  God,  with  great  constancy.  "Well,"  quoth 
they,  "  thou  art  a  good  man,  and  therefore  we  will  not  by 
divers  torments  take  away  thy  life  ;  but  make  choice  of 
what  death  thou  wilt."  To  whom  the  man  of  God 
answered  in  this  manner:  "Here  I  am,  at  God's  dis- 
position and  pleasure,  kill  me  in  such  sort,  as  he  shall 
vouchsafe  to  give  you  leave."  Then  all  the  Lombards 
that  were  present  agreed  to  have  him  beheaded :  to  the 
end  an  easy  and  quick  death  might  soon  dispatch  him. 
When  it  was  given  out  abroad  that  Sanctulus  was  to  die, 
whom  for  his  virtue  and  holiness  they  greatly  honoured, 
all  the  Lombards  that  were  in  those  parts  repaired  thither, 
being  glad  (such  cruel  minds  they  have)  to  behold  him  put 
to  death  :  and  when  all  the  army  was  gathered  together, 
they  brought  him  forth  to  execution,  and  the  strongest 
man  amongst  them  was  chosen  out,  to  cut  off  his  head 
at  one  blow. 

The  venerable  man,  beset  with  armed  soldiers,  betook 
himself  to  his  usual  weapons  :  for  he  desired  them  to  give 
him  a  little  leave  to  pray  :  which  when  he  had  obtained, 
he  cast  himself  prostrate  upon  the  earth,  and  fell  to  his 
devotions:   in  which  after  he  had  continued  for  a  good 

169 


£f)c  Dialogues  of  ^t.  ategotp 

space,  the  executioner  spurned  him  up  with  his  foot, 
bidding  him  rise,  kneel  down,  and  to  prepare  himself 
for  death.  The  man  of  God  rose  up,  bowed  down  his 
knee,  and  held  forth  his  head,  and  beholding  the  drawn 
sword  ready  to  dispatch  him,  these  only  words  they  said 
that  he  spake  aloud :  "O  Saint  John,  hold  that  sword." 
Then  the  foresaid  executioner,  having  the  naked  weapon 
in  his  hand,  did  with  all  his  force  lift  up  his  arm  to  strike 
off  his  head  ;  but  by  no  means  could  he  bring  it  down 
again,  for  it  became  suddenly  so  stiff  that  it  remained 
still  above,  the  man  being  not  able  once  to  bend  it  down- 
ward. Then  all  the  Lombards  who  came  to  feed  their 
eyes  with  the  lamentable  sight  of  his  death,  began  with 
admiration  to  praise  God's  name,  and  with  fear  to  reve- 
rence the  man  of  God  :  for  they  now  saw  apparently  of 
what  great  holiness  he  was,  that  did  so  miraculously  stay 
the  arm  of  his  executioner  above  in  the  air. 

Then  they  desired  him  to  rise  up,  which  he  did  ;  but 
when  they  required  him  to  restore  his  executioner's  arm 
to  his  former  state,  he  utterly  refused,  saying  :  "By  no 
means  will  I  once  pray  for  him,  unless  beforehand  he 
swear  unto  me,  that  he  will  never  with  that  arm  offer  to 
kill  any  Christian  more."  The  poor  Lombard,  who,  as 
we  may  truly  say,  had  stretched  out  his  arm  against  God, 
enforced  with  this  necessity,  took  an  oath  never  more 
to  put  any  Christian  to  death.  Then  the  man  of  God 
commanded  him  to  put  down  his  arm,  which  forthwith 
he  did  ;  he  commanded  him  also  to  put  up  his  sword, 
which  in  like  manner  he  performed.  All  the  Lombards, 
by  this  perceiving  him  to  be  a  man  of  rare  virtue,  began 
in  all  haste  to  present  him  with  the  gifts  of  such  oxen 
and  other  cattle  as  before  they  had  taken  from  others  : 
but  the  man  of  God  utterly  refused  all  such  kind  of 
presents,  desiring  them  rather,  if  they  meant  to  bestow 
anything  upon  him  worth  the  giving,  that  they  would 
deliver  unto  him  all  such  prisoners  as  they  had  in  their 

170 


Sanctulus  of  Jftursia 

keeping:  that  he  might  have  some  cause  in  his  prayers 
to  commend  them  to  almighty  God.  To  which  request 
of  his  they  condescended,  and  so  all  the  poor  captives 
were  discharged  :  and  thus,  by  God's  sweet  providence, 
one  offering  himself  to  die  for  another,  many  were 
delivered  from  death. 

U^CtCt*  A  strange  thing  it  was  :  and  although  I  have 
heard  the  same  story  by  the  relation  of  others,  yet  I  cannot 
deny,  but  so  often  as  I  hear  it  repeated,  it  seemeth  still 
unto  me  as  though  it  were  fresh  news. 
(£>t00Ot£*  There  is  no  cause  why  you  should  admire 
Sanctulus  for  this  thing  :  but  ponder  with  yourself,  if  you 
can,  what  manner  of  spirit  that  was,  which  possessed  his 
simple  soul,  and  did  advance  it  to  so  high  a  perfection  of 
virtue.  For  where  was  his  mind,  when  he  offered  himself 
with  such  constancy  to  die  for  his  neighbour  ;  and  to  save 
the  temporal  life  of  his  brother,  contemned  his  own,  and 
put  his  head  under  the  executioner's  sword  ?  What 
force  of  true  love  did  then  harbour  in  that  heart,  when 
he  nothing  feared  death  to  preserve  the  life  of  another  ? 
Ignorant  I  am  not,  that  this  venerable  man  Sanctulus 
could  scant  read  well,  and  that  he  knew  not  the  precepts 
of  the  law  :  yet  because  charity  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law, 
by  loving  God  and  his  neighbour,  he  kept  the  whole 
law  :  and  that  which  outwardly  lacked  in  knowledge,  did 
inwardly  by  charity  live  in  his  soul.  And  he,  perhaps, 
who  never  read  that  which  St.  John  the  Apostle  said  of 
our  Saviour,  to  wit,  that  as  he  yielded  his  life  for  us,  so  we 
likewise  should  yield  our  lives  for  our  brethren  :l  yet  that  great 
and  high  precept  of  the  Apostle  he  knew  more  by  action 
than  by  speculation.  Let  us  here,  if  you  please,  compare 
his  learned  ignorance  with  our  unlearned  knowledge  : 
where  our  kind  of  learning  is  nothing  worth,  his  is  of 
great  price  and  estimation  :  we,  destitute  of  virtue,  do 
speak  thereof,  and,  as  it  were  in  the  midst  of  plentiful 

1   i  John  3,  16. 
171 


£f)c  Dialogtte0  of  %t  $rcgorp 

trees  smell  of  the  fruit,  but  do  not  eat  thereof.  He  knew 
full  well  how  to  gather  and  taste  of  the  fruit  itself, 
although  he  lacked  the  smell  of  words  and  vain  speech. 
J£)0t0t,  What,  I  pray,  do  you  think,  is  the  cause  that 
good  men  are  still  taken  away  ;  and  such  as  for  the  bene- 
fit and  edification  of  many,  might  live  still  in  this  world, 
either  are  not  to  be  found  at  all,  or  at  least  very  few  can 
be  heard  of? 

(£>t0(JOtp.  The  malice  and  wickedness  of  them  that  re- 
main behind  in  the  world  deserveth  that  those  should 
quickly  be  taken  away,  who  by  their  life  might  much  help 
us  :  and  for  as  much  as  the  world  draweth  towards  an 
end,  God's  chosen  servants  are  taken  out  of  it,  that  they 
fall  not  into  more  wicked  times  :  and  therefore  from 
hence  it  cometh  that  the  prophet  saith  :  The  just  man  doth 
perish,  and  there  is  none  that  doth  ponder  it  in  his  heart :  and 
men  of  mercy  are  gathered  together,  because  there  is  none  that 
hath  understanding}  And  from  hence  also  it  proceedeth 
that  the  scripture  saith  :  Open  ye,  that  they  may  go  forth 
which  do  tread  it  under  foot.2  Hence,  likewise,  it  is  that 
Solomon  saith  :  There  is  a  time  of  casting  stones  abroad,  and 
a  time  of  gathering  them  together?  And  therefore  the  nearer 
that  the  world  draweth  to  an  end,  so  much  the  more 
necessary  it  is  that  the  living  stones  should  be  gathered 
together,  for  the  heavenly  building  :  that  our  celestial 
Jerusalem  may  arrive  to  the  full  measure  of  his  whole 
perfection.  And  yet  do  I  not  think  that  all  God's  elect 
servants  are  so  taken  out  of  the  world,  that  none  but  the 
wicked  remain  behind  :  for  sinners  would  never  be  con- 
verted to  the  sorrow  of  true  penance,  if  they  had  not 
the  examples  of  some  good  people  to  provoke  them 
forward. 

IPCtCt,  Without  cause  do  I  complain  of  the  death  of 
good  men,  when  as  daily  I  see  them  also  that  be  wicked 
in  great  numbers  to  depart  this  life. 

1   Isai.  57,  i.  2   Jerem.  50,  26.  3   Eccles.  3,  5. 

172 


EeDcmptu0  of  JTcrenti 

Chapter  C6ittp=eigf)t :  of  tfje  toision  of  EeDemptua, 
T5i0popoft6eCitpofJTerentL  fl  ®regorp.  Wonder 

nothing  at  this,  Peter,  for  you  knew  very  well  Redemptus, 
Bishop  of  the  city  of  Ferenti,  a  man  of  venerable  life, 
who  died  almost  seven  years  since  :  with  whom  I  had 
familiar  acquaintance,  by  reason  that  he  dwelt  not  far  from 
the  Abbey  in  which  I  lived.  This  man,  when  I  asked  him 
(for  the  matter  was  very  well  known  far  and  near),  told 
me  that  which  by  divine  revelation  he  had  learned  con- 
cerning the  end  of  the  world,  in  the  time  of  John  the 
younger,  who  was  my  predecessor.  For  he  said  that  upon 
a  certain  day,  as  he  was,  according  to  his  manner,  visit- 
ing of  his  diocese,  he  came  to  the  church  of  the  blessed 
martyr  Euthicius  :  and  when  it  was  night  he  would  needs 
be  lodged  nigh  to  the  sepulchre  of  the  martyr,  where 
after  his  travel  he  reposed  himself.  About  midnight, 
being,  as  he  said  himself,  neither  perfectly  waking,  nor 
yet  sleeping,  but  rather  heavy  of  sleep,  he  felt  his  waking 
soul  oppressed  with  great  sorrow  :  and  being  in  that  case, 
he  saw  the  same  blessed  martyr  Euthicius  standing  before 
him,  who  spake  thus  :  "  Art  thou  waking,  Redemptus  ?  " 
to  whom  he  answered,  that  he  was.  Then  the  martyr 
said  :  "  The  end  of  all  flesh  is  come  :  the  end  of  all  flesh 
is  come"  :  which  words  after  he  had  repeated  thus  three 
times,  he  vanished  out  of  his  sight. 

Then  the  man  of  God  rose  up,  and  fell  to  his  prayers 
with  many  tears  :  and  straight  after,  those  fearful  sights 
in  heaven  followed  ;  to  wit,  fiery  lances,  and  armies 
appearing  from  the  north.  Straight  after  likewise  the 
barbarous  and  cruel  nation  of  the  Lombards,  drawn  as  a 
sword  out  of  a  sheath,  left  their  own  country,  and  invaded 
ours  :  by  reason  whereof  the  people,  which  before  for  the 
huge  multitude  were  like  to  thick  corn-fields,  remain 
now  withered  and  overthrown  :  for  cities  be  wasted,  towns 
and  villages  spoiled,  churches  burnt,  monasteries  of  men 
and  women  destroyed,  farms  1  eft  desolate,  and  the  country 

173 


£bc  Dialoguc0  of  %t  ®rcgorp 

remaineth  solitary  and  void  of  men  to  till  the  ground, 
and  destitute  of  all  inhabitants  :  beasts  possessing  those 
places,  where  before  great  plenty  of  men  did  dwell.    And 
how  it  goeth  in  other  parts  of  the  world  I  know  not,  but 
here  in  this  place  where  we  live,  the  world  doth  not  fore- 
tell any  end,  but  rather  sheweth  that  which  is  present  and 
already  come.     Wherefore  so  much  the  more  zealously 
ought  we  to  seek  after  eternal  things,  by  how  much  we 
find  all  temporal  so  quickly  to  be  fled  and  gone.    Surely 
this  world  were  to  be  contemned,  although  it  did  flatter 
us,  and  with  pleasant  prosperity  contented  our  mind  : 
but  now,  seeing  it  is  fraught  with  so  many  miseries  and 
divers  afflictions,  and  that  our  sorrows   and  crosses  do 
daily  increase  and  be  doubled,  what  doth  it  else  but  cry 
unto  us  that  we  should  not  love  it  ? 

Many  more  things  yet  remain  of  the  worthy  acts  of 
God's  servants,  but  because  I  have  resolved  now  upon 
another  course,  I  will  now  pass  them  over  with  silence. 
ll^CtCt.  For  as  much  as  I  perceive  that  many  Christians 
do  doubt  of  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  after  the  disso- 
lution of  the  body  :  I  beseech  you  for  the  spiritual  good 
of  many,  to  set  down  some  reasons  for  proof  thereof:  or 
the  examples  of  some  souls  which  have  testified  the  same, 
if  you  remember  any :  to  the  end  that  those  which  be 
troubled  with  any  such  temptations,  may  learn  that  the 
soul  doth  not  die  together  with  the  body. 
<£>tC0Otp*  This  is  a  work  of  great  labour,  especially  for 
one  that  is  busied  with  other  affairs,  and  hath  other  things 
to  attend  unto  :  yet  if  any  profit  by  my  means  may 
redound  to  others,  willingly  do  I  prefer  that  before  mine 
own  will  and  pleasure  :  and  therefore,  God's  grace  assist- 
ing me,  in  this  fourth  book  following,  I  will  clearly  show 
that  the  soul  doth  live  after  the  death  of  the  body. 

C6e  ent)  of  tfce  CbitD  IBook 

174 


Cl)e  ^Dialogues  of  £>t.  Gregory 
%\)t  Jfourti)  ^OOfe. 


£>t  <&xt$ovps  ^Dialogues 

€f)e  JFourtf)  ^oofe 

Cbapter  £Dne :  bote  carnal  men  gtoc  tbe  less  creDit 
to  tbose  tbings  tobicb  tie  eternal  ano  spiritual: 
because  tbep  fenoto  not  bp  erperience,  tobat  tbep 

bear  OtberS  tO  Speak  Of.  <I  After  that  the  first  Parent 
of  mankind  was  for  his  sin  banished  from  the  joys  of 
Paradise,  he  fell  into  the  misery  of  this  ignorance  and 
banishment,  which  to  this  very  day  we  do  all  endure  : 
for  his  sin  was  the  cause  that  he  could  not  any  longer 
see  those  joys  of  heaven,  which  before  by  contemplation 
he  possessed  :  for  during  the  time  of  his  residence  in 
Paradise,  he  usually  heard  God  talking  with  him,  and  by 
purity  of  heart  and  heavenly  vision,  was  present  with  the 
quires  of  the  blessed  Angels.     But  after  his  fall  he  lost 
that  light  of  soul,  which  before  abundantly  he  enjoyed. 
From  whom  we  being  by  carnal  propagation  derived,  that 
live  now  in  this  dark  ignorance  of  banishment,  do  hear 
indeed  of  an  heavenly  country,  and  how  it  is  inhabited 
by  the  Angels  of  God;  and  that  the  souls  of  just  and 
perfect  men   do  there   keep  them  company.     But  yet 
such  as  be  carnal,  because  they  can  not  by  experience 
know  those  invisible  creatures,  doubt  whether  there  be 
any  such,  seeing  with  their  corporal  eyes  they  cannot 
behold  them  :  from  which  doubt  our  first  Parent  was 
altogether  free  :  for  although  he  was  exiled  from  the  joys 
of  Paradise,  yet  did  he  still  keep  in  memory  what  he  had 
lost,  because  he  had  before  beheld  the  same  :  but  these 

177  M 


Cfce  Dialogues  of  %t  (Stegorp 

men  can  not  by  any  means  call  to  mind  such  things  as 
they  hear  others  speak  of,  because  they  never  had  of 
them  any  former  experience  as  our  first  father  Adam  had. 
For  it  is  in  this  case  as  if  a  woman  big  with  child  should 
be  put  in  prison,  and  be  there  delivered  of  a  son,  which 
never  went  forth,  but  were  there  continually  brought  up  : 
for  if  his  mother  should  tell  him  of  the  sun,  moon,  stars, 
mountains  :  and  speak  of  the  fields,  the  flying  of  birds, 
and  running  of  horses  ;  her  child,  that  had  continually  been 
brought  up  in  the  prison,  and  acquainted  with  nothing- 
else  but  black  darkness,  might  well  hear  what  she  said, 
but  with  a  doubt  whether  it  were  true  or  no,  because 
experience  taught  him  not  any  such  thing.  Even  so, 
men  that  are  born  in  this  dark  world,  the  place  of  their 
banishment,  do  hear  that  there  be  wonderful,  strange, 
and  invisible  things  :  but  because  they  are  not  acquainted 
with  any  else  but  terrestrial  creatures,  which  only  be 
visible,  they  doubt  whether  there  be  any  such  invisible 
things  as  are  reported  of,  or  no :  for  which  cause  the 
Creator  himself  of  all  things  both  visible  and  invisible, 
and  the  only  begotten  Son  of  the  eternal  Father,  came 
into  this  world,  for  the  redemption  of  mankind  :  and  sent 
the  holy  Ghost  unto  our  hearts,  that  quickened  by  him 
and  his  grace,  we  should  believe  those  things  which  as 
yet  by  sense  or  experience  we  cannot  possibly  under- 
stand: and  therefore  so  many  of  us  as  have  received 
this  spirit,  the  heavenly  pledge  of  our  inheritance,  make 
no  doubt  of  God's  invisible  and  immortal  creatures  :  and 
whosoever  as  yet  is  not  settled  in  this  belief,  out  of  all 
question,  he  ought  of  reason  to  give  credit  to  the  words 
of  them  that  be  more  learned  and  holy,  and  believe 
them  that,  through  the  grace  of  God's  holy  Spirit,  have 
experience  of  those  things  that  be  invisible  :  for  he  were 
a  very  foolish  child,  that  thought  his  mother  lied,  when 
she  spake  of  light  in  other  places,  because  himself,  where 
he  was,  beheld  nothing  else  but  the  darkness  of  the  prison. 

178 


elan's  §>oul  anD  IBoOp 

K?0t0t.  That  you  say  doth  wonderfully  content  me  :  yet 
he  who  believeth  not  that  there  be  any  invisible  things, 
out  of  question  in  mine  opinion  is  an  infidel  :  and  he 
that  is  an  infidel,  in  that  thing  whereof  he  doubteth 
seeketh  not  for  faith,  but  for  reason. 

Cbaptct  Ctoo :  tfjat  an  infiDel  Itoetb  not  toitbout 

faitf).  ^  <&tZ#0tp.  I  speak  boldly  yet  truly,  that  an 
infidel  liveth  not  without  faith  :  for  if  I  demand  of  him, 
who  is  his  father  or  mother,  straightways  he  will  tell  me, 
such  a  man  and  such  a  woman  :  and  if  I  press  him 
further,  whether  he  doth  remember  the  time  when  he 
was  first  conceived,  or  the  hour  when  he  was  born  into 
this  world,  he  will  answer  me,  that  he  never  knew  or  saw 
any  such  thing  :  and  yet  for  all  this  doth  he  believe  that 
which  he  never  beheld,  seeing  he  believeth,  without  all 
doubt,  that  such  a  man  was  his  father,  and  such  a  woman 
his  mother. 

K?0t0t.  I  must  needs  confess,  that  I  never  knew  before 
this  time  that  an  infidel  had  any  faith. 
(£>t00Ot|?.  Infidels  have  faith,  but  not  in  God,  for  then 
they  were  not  infidels  :  but  worthily  are  they  by  the 
former  reason  to  be  blamed,  and  thereby  also  to  be  pro- 
voked to  embrace  true  faith  :  for  if  concerning  their 
visible  body,  they  believe  that  which  they  never  saw,  why 
do  they  not  also  believe  some  things  which  with  their  cor- 
poral eyes  they  cannot  behold  ? 

Chapter  Cbtec :  tbat  <£oo  createn  tbrec  feinos  of 

0piUtS  tOitf)  UfC  <§  For  that  our  soul  doth  live  after 
the  death  of  the  body,  reason  doth  teach  us,  assisted  and 
holpen  with  faith  :  for  almighty  God  created  three  kinds 
of  spirits  having  life.  One  altogether  spiritual  without 
body  :  another  with  a  body,  but  yet  which  dieth  not  with 
the  body  :  the  third  that  which  is  both  joined  with  the 
body,  and  also  together  with  the  body  doth  die.  The 
spirits  that  have  no  bodies  be  the  Angels  :  they  that  have 
bodies  but  die  not  with  them,  be  the  souls  of  men  :  those 

179 


€&e  Dialogues  of  %t  <$reprp 

that  have  bodies  and  die  together  with  them,  be  the  souls 
of  cattle  and  brute  beasts.  Man,  therefore,  as  he  is 
created  in  the  middle  state,inferior  to  Angels  and  superior 
to  beasts,  so  doth  he  participate  of  both  :  having  immor- 
tality of  soul  with  the  Angels,  and  mortality  of  body  with 
beasts,  until  the  day  of  doom  :  for  then  the  glory  of  the 
resurrection  shall  take  away  and  consume  the  mortality 
of  the  body  :  for  being  then  reunited  to  the  soul,  it  shall 
be  preserved  for  ever  :  as  the  soul  joined  to  the  body 
is  preserved  for  God.  Neither  shall  the  bodies  of  the 
damned,  lying  in  torments,  ever  perfectly  perish  :  for 
though  they  always  decay,  yet  for  ever  shall  they  con- 
tinue :  and  as  they  sinned  both  with  soul  and  body,  so 
living  always  in  body  and  soul,  they  shall  always  die 
without  end. 

l£)0tCt*  All  your  discourse  is  consonant  to  that  reason 
which  Christian  religion  teacheth  :  but  I  beseech  you,  if 
there  be  so  great  difference  betwixt  the  souls  of  men  and 
beasts  as  you  affirm,  why  doth  Solomon  speak  in  this 
manner  ?  /  have  said  in  mine  heart  of  the  sons  of  men ,  that 
God  would  prove  them,  and  shew  them  to  be  like  unto  beasts  : 
therefore  there  is  one  death  of  men  and  beasts,  and  their  state 
is  both  alike  :  and  prosecuting  afterward  more  exactly  that 
opinion  of  his,  thus  he  writeth  :  As  a  man  dieth,  so  do 
beasts  die:  all  things  breathe  alike,  and  man  hath  nothing  more 
than  beasts.  After  which  words,  he  addeth  also  this 
general  conclusion  :  All  things  are  subject  to  vanity,  and  all 
things  go  to  one  place  :  of  the  earth  they  were  made,  and  into 
the  earth  they  re  Mm  again} 

Chapter  JTour :  of  Solomon's  question,  to  toit : 
Cbe  Deatb  of  men  ano  beasts  \%  all  one.  q  Gregory. 

Solomon's  book,  in  which  these  sayings  are  found,  is 
called  Ecclesiastes  :  as  much  to  say  properly  as  The 
Preacher.  And  in  a  sermon  the  manner  is  to  have  an 
opinion  set  down,  by  means  whereof  the  tumultuous 

1  Eccles.  3,  17-20. 
180 


Solomon's  Ctuestion 

sedition  of  common  people  may  be  appeased  :  and  where- 
as divers  have  divers  opinions,  yet  are  they  all,  by  the 
Preacher's  arguments  and  reasons,  brought  to  unity  and 
agreement:  and  therefore  this  book  is  called  The  Preacher: 
because  in  it  Solomon  doth  as  it  were  take  upon  him  the 
person  and  words  of  the  unruly  vulgar  sort,  and  by  way 
of  inquisition  speaketh  those  things,  which  haply  ignorant 
men  through  temptation  do  verily  think  :  and  therefore 
so  many  questions  as  he  doth  by  way  of  enquiry  pro- 
pound, so  many  divers  persons  doth  he  in  a  manner  take 
upon  himself :  but  the  true  Preacher  doth,  as  it  were 
with  his  hand,  compound  all  their  doubts  and  disagree- 
ments, and  bring  them  all  to  concord  and  unity  of 
opinion,  when  as  in  the  end  of  his  book  he  saith  :  Let  us 
all  together  hear  an  end  of  speaking  :  Fear  Qod,  keep  his  com- 
mandments, for  this  is  every  man}  For  if  in  that  book  he 
had  not  by  his  discourse  taken  upon  him  the  person  of 
divers,  why  did  he  admonish  all  to  make  an  end  of 
speaking,  together  with  him,  and  to  hear  ? 

He,  therefore,  that  in  the  conclusion  of  the  book  saith: 
Let  us  all  together  hear :  doth  give  evident  testimony  of 
himself,  that  he  took  many  persons  upon  him,  and  that 
he  spake  not  at  all  as  of  himself:  and  therefore  some 
things  there  be  in  that  book,  which  are  moved  by  way  of 
disputation,  and  other  some  which  by  reason  give  satis- 
faction :  some  things  which  he  uttereth  in  the  person  of 
one  that  is  tempted,  and  who  as  yet  followeth  the 
pleasures  of  the  world  :  and  some  other  things,  in  which 
he  disputeth  them  according  to  the  rule  of  reason,  and 
to  draw  the  mind  from  vain  pleasure  and  delight  :  for 
as  there  he  saith  :  This,  therefore ,  seemeth  unto  me  good,  that  a 
man  should  eat  and  drink,  and  take  joy  of  his  labour2:  so  after- 
ward he  addeth  :  7/  is  better  to  go  unto  the  house  of  mourning, 
than  to  the  house  of  feasting?  For  if  it  be  good  to  eat  and 
drink,  it  seemeth  better  to  go  unto  the  house  of  feasting 

1  Eccles.   12,  13.  2   Ibid.  5,  18.  3   Ibid.  7,  2. 

181 " 


£bc  Dialogues  of  %t  ®rcg;orp 

than  to  the  house  of  mourning  :  and  therefore  by  this 
it  is  evident,  that  he  uttered  that  former  saying  in  the 
person  of  frail  men,  and  pronounced  this  latter  accord- 
ing to  the  rule  of  reason  :  and  therefore  doth  he  straight- 
ways  set  down  the  grounds  of  his  reason,  and  sheweth 
what  commodity  is  gotten  by  going  to  the  house  of 
mourning,  saying  thus  :  For  in  that  we  are  put  in  mind  of 
the  end  of  all  men,  and  the  living  man  thinketh  what  he  shall 
be}  Again  there  we  find  it  written  :  O young  man,  rejoice 
in  thy  youth  :2  and  yet  a  little  after  is  added  :  for  youth 
and  pleasure  be  vain  things. 

Seeing,  therefore,  he  doth  afterward  reprove  that  for 
vain,  which  before  he  seemed  to  allow  :  plainly  doth  he 
declare  that  he  spake  those  words  as  it  were  of  carnal  con- 
cupiscence, and  the  other  of  a  right  and  true  judgment. 
Therefore  as  he  doth,  in  the  first  place,  express  the  delight 
of  carnal  things,  and  pronounceth  it  to  be  good  to  cast 
away  all  care,  and  to  eat  and  drink  :  so  afterward,  with 
reason  and  judgment  doth  he  reprove  that,  when  hesaith 
that  it  is  better  to  go  unto  the  house  of  mourning,  than 
to  the  house  of  feasting  :  and  though  he  saith  that  a 
young  man  ought  to  rejoice  in  his  youth,  yet  doth  he 
utter  that  as  proceeding  from  the  resolution  of  a  carnal 
mind  ;  seeing  afterward,  by  definitive  sentence,  he  re- 
proveth  both  youth  and  pleasure,  as  vain  things.  Even 
so  and  in  like  manner,  doth  our  Preacher  set  down  the 
opinion  of  man's  suspicion,  as  it  were  in  the  person  of 
those  that  be  weak,  and  subject  to  temptation,  when  he 
saith  :  The  death  of  man  and  beasts  is  one,  and  their  condition 
both  alike  :  as  man  dieth,  so  they  also  die :  all  things  do  breathe 
alike,  and  a  man  hath  not  any  more  than  beasts :  who,  not- 
withstanding, afterward  putteth  down  his  own  opinion, 
proceeding  from  judgment  and  reason,  in  these  words  : 
What  hath  a  wise  man  more  than  a  fool,  and  what  a  poor 
man,  but  that  he  may  go  thither  where  life  is  ?z  He  there- 
1  Eccles.  7,  2.  2  Ibid,  1 1,  9.  3  Ibid.  6,  8. 

182 


Solomon's  duestfon 

fore  that  said  :  A  man  hath  no  more  than  beasts  :  said 
also  with  mature  deliberation,  that  a  wise  man  hath  not 
only  more  than  a  beast,  but  also  more  than  a  foolish  man, 
to  wit,  that  he  goeth  to  that  place  where  life  is  :  in  which 
words  he  doth  also  teach  us,  that  man's  life  is  not  in  this 
world,  seeing  he  affirmeth  it  to  be  elsewhere  :  wherefore 
man  hath  this  more  than  beasts,  because  they  after  death 
do  not  live  :  but  he  doth  then  begin  truly  to  live,  when 
by  mortal  death  he  maketh  an  end  of  this  transitory  life  : 
and  therefore  long  after  he  saith  :  Whatsoever  thy  hand  can 
do  ^instantly  work:  because  with  them  in  hell  whither  thou  go  est ^ 
there  shall  be  neither  work,  nor  reason ,  nor  knowledge  y  nor  wis- 
dom : 1  how  then  is  the  death  of  man  and  beasts  all  one, 
and  how  is  their  condition  and  state  alike  ?  or  how  hath 
not  a  man  more  than  beasts,  when  as  they  after  death  live 
not,  and  the  souls  of  men,  after  the  death  of  their  bodies, 
be  for  their  wicked  deeds  carried  to  hell,  and  do  not  die 
when  they  depart  this  life  ?  But  in  both  these  sayings, 
which  seem  contrary  each  to  other,  it  is  made  manifest 
that  the  Preacher  speaketh  the  truth  :  uttering  the  one 
of  carnal  temptation,  and  yet  afterward,  upon  delibera- 
tion and  according  to  truth,  resolutely  setteth  down  and 
defineth  the  contrary. 

ll^CtCt*  Glad  I  am,  that  ignorant  I  was  of  that  question 
which  I  demanded  :  seeing  I  have,  by  means  thereof, 
come  to  so  exact  an  understanding  of  that  which  before 
I  knew  not.  But  I  beseech  you  to  take  it  patiently,  if  I 
also,  like  to  this  our  Preacher,  take  upon  me  the  person 
of  weak  and  frail  men  :  that  I  may  the  better,  as  it  were 
by  their  demanding  of  questions,,  be  profitable  to  them 
in  their  weakness  and  infirmities. 

(£)t00Otp.  Why  should  I  not  bear  with  you,  condescend- 
ing to  the  infirmities  of  your  neighbours  ?  when  as  Paul 
saith  :  To  all  men  I  became  all  things^  that  I  might  save 
all  ;2  and  surely  you  are  the  more  to  be  reverenced,  for 
1  Eccles.  9,  10.  a  I  Cor.  9,  22. 

183 


€f)e  Dialogues  of  §>t.  <£>rcgorp 

condescending  to  their  weakness  upon  charity,  and 
therein  do  you  imitate  the  steps  of  an  excellent  preacher. 

Cfmptcr  JFitoe :  of  a  question  concerning  tbe  soul, 
tofjich  goctf)  iMrisiblp  out  of  tbe  tioDp :  to  toit, 
to&etfjer  tbere  be  anp  sucb  tfting,  seeing  it  can  not 

fre  Seen.  H  }petet.  It  chanced  so,  that  I  was  present 
when  one  departed  this  life.  Who  suddenly,  as  he  was  a 
speaking,  gave  up  the  ghost  ;  and  whom  before  I  heard 
talking  with  me,  in  an  instant  I  saw  dead  :  but  whether 
his  soul  went  out  of  the  body  or  no,  that  I  did  not  see  : 
and  it  seemeth  very  hard  to  believe  that  thing,  which  no 
man  can  behold. 

($)tCgOtp«  What  marvel  is  it,  Peter,  that  you  saw  not 
the  soul  departing  out  of  the  body,  seeing  you  behold  it 
not  when  it  remaineth  in  the  body  ?  What  ?  do  you 
believe  me  to  have  no  soul,  because,  whiles  you  now  talk 
with  me,  you  can  not  see  it  ?  The  nature  of  the  soul  is 
invisible,  and  therefore  invisibly  doth  it  depart  out  of  the 
body,  as  it  doth  invisibly  remain  in  the  body. 
H^etet.  That  the  soul  hath  life,  so  long  as  it  remaineth 
in  the  body,  easily  do  I  perceive  by  the  motion  thereof: 
for  if  the  body  were  destitute  of  the  soul,  the  members 
could  not  possibly  move  at  all  :  but  that  the  soul  liveth 
when  it  is  out  of  the  body,  by  what  motions  or  actions  I 
should  gather,  desirous  1  am  to  be  informed  by  you  :  to 
the  end  that  by  such  things  as  I  do  see,  I  may  know  that 
thing  which  I  can  not  see. 

(JptCgOtp.  Though  not  with  any  great  subtlety  of  dis- 
course, yet  confidently  do  I  affirm  it  to  be  most  true,  that 
as  the  power  of  the  soul  doth  quicken  and  move  the 
body,  so  the  power  of  God  doth  fill  all  things  which  he 
hath  created  ;  and  to  some  things  doth  he  give  life  by 
breathing  it  into  them  ;  to  other  things  he  vouchsafeth 
life  in  another  manner  :  and  upon  some  other  things  he 
bestoweth  only  a  being,  without  any  life  at  all.  Seeing, 
therefore,  you  doubt  not  but  that  God  is  the  creator  and 

184 


€&c  jftaturc  of  tfjc  %au\ 

preserver  of  all  things,  that  he  doth  fill  and  embrace  all 
things,  that  he  doth  excel  all  things,  and  also  maintaineth 
them,  that  he  is  incircumscriptible  and  invisible  :  so 
neither  ought  you  to  doubt,  but  that  he  is  served  with 
invisible  creatures,  seeing  they  that  serve  ought  to  be 
somewhat  like  unto  him  upon  whom  they  attend,  and 
so,  consequently,  that  we  ought  not  to  doubt,  but  for  as 
much  as  he  is  invisible  in  himself,  that  they  also  be  of 
the  same  nature  :  and  what  creatures  can  these  be  else  but 
his  holy  Angels,  and  the  souls  of  just  men  ?  Wherefore, 
as  you  know,  when  you  see  the  body  move,  that  the  soul 
remaineth  in  the  body,  and  you  gather  this  from  the  body 
which  is  lowest  :  so  ought  you  to  think  of  the  life  of  the 
soul  that  departeth  from  the  body,  deducing  a  reason 
from  God  who  is  the  highest  :  to  wit,  that  the  soul 
liveth  invisibly,  seeing  it  is  to  remain  in  the  service  of 
the  invisible  Creator. 

l^CtCt*  All  this  is  very  well  said  :  yet  our  mind  can 
hardly  be  brought  to  believe  that,  which  with  our  corporal 
eyes  we  can  not  behold. 

(J>tC(J0tp.  Seeing  St.  Paul  saith,  that  faith  is  the  substance 
of  things  to  be  hoped for, the  argument  of  things  not  appearing  .-1 
truly  are  we  said  to  believe  that  which  can  not  be  seen, 
and  by  no  means  to  believe  that  which  with  our  eyes  we 
do  behold  :  yet  in  few  words  to  bring  you  home  again 
to  yourself,  I  say,  that  no  visible  things  be  seen  but  by 
the  means  of  invisible  :  for  although  your  bodily  eye 
beholdeth  all  sensible  creatures,  yet  could  it  not  behold 
any  such  thing,  did  it  not  receive  force  from  that  which 
is  invisible  :  for  take  away  the  soul,  which  none  doth  see, 
and  in  vain  be  the  eyes  opened  to  look  upon  anything. 
Take  away  the  soul  from  the  body,  and  the  eyes,  out  of 
all  question,  may  remain  still  open  as  before.  If,  then, 
our  eyes  did  see  of  themselves,  how  cometh  it  to  pass, 
that  now  the  soul  is  gone,  they  see  nothing  at  all  ?    Learn 

1  Hebr.  ii,  i. 
185 


Cfje  Dialogues  of  §>t.  <£rcgorp 

then  by  this,  that  visible  things  themselves  are  not  seen, 
but  by  means  of  them  that  be  invisible.  Let  us  also 
imagine  that  we  saw  before  us  the  building  of  houses, 
huge  timber  and  stones  to  be  lifted  up,  great  pillars  to 
hang  upon  engines  :  what,  I  pray  you,  effecteth  all  this  ? 
the  visible  body  that  with  hands  draweth  and  moveth 
those  huge  and  massy  things,  or  the  invisible  soul  that 
giveth  life  to  the  body  ?  for  take  away  that  which  is  not 
seen  in  the  body,  and  straightways  all  those  things,  which 
before  did  move,  will  remain  without  any  motion  at  all. 
By  which  we  may  easily  gather,  that  nothing  can  be  dis- 
posed of  in  this  visible  world,  but  by  another  creature 
which  is  invisible  :  for  as  almighty  God  either  by  inspi- 
ration, or  by  replenishing  those  creatures  which  have 
reason,  doth  both  quicken  and  move  those  things  which 
be  invisible,  so,  in  like  manner,  those  things  which  be 
invisible  do  give  motion  and  sense  to  carnal  bodies  which 
are  visible. 

IPCtCt*  Willingly  overcome  with  these  reasons  alleged, 
I  confess  that  I  am  enforced  almost  to  think  that  these 
visible  things  are  nothing  :  whereas  before,  taking  upon 
me  the  person  of  weak  and  unlearned  men,  I  doubted 
whether  there  were  any  invisible  creatures  or  no  ;  where- 
fore your  whole  discourse  doth  very  well  please  me  :  yet, 
as  1  am  assured  of  the  life  of  the  soul  by  the  motion  of 
the  body,  so  desirous  I  am  to  know  by  some  sure  and 
certain  demonstrations,  that  the  soul  doth  also  live,  after 
it  is  departed  from  the  body. 

Chapter  §>ir:  tbat  as  tbe  life  of  tbe  soul  remain- 
ing in  tf)e  fcoDp,  is  gat&ereD  tp  tf)e  motion  of  t&e 
members :  so  tbe  life  of  tbe  soul,  after  oeatf)  in  fjolp 
men,  is  to  te  founo  out  fop  tbe  trirtue  of  miracles* 

*J  (Jpregorp*  Herein  most  ready  I  am  to  satisfy  your 
request ;  and  for  proof  of  this  point,  no  difficulty  do  I 
find:  for  think  you  that  the  holy  Apostles  and  martyrs 
of  Christ  would  have  contemned  this  present  life,  and 

186 


FA  111! 
{Madonna dell  Arena,  Padua) 


Departure  of  even's  ®ouls 

offered  their  bodies  to  death,  had  they  not  known  that 
their  souls  did  most  assuredly  live  for  ever?  You  confess 
that  you  know  the  life  of  the  soul  remaining  in  the  body 
by  the  motion  thereof:  behold,  then,  how  these  that  lost 
their  lives  for  Christ,  and  believed  that  souls  lived  after 
death,  be  renowned  for  their  daily  miracles.  For  sick 
persons  come  unto  their  dead  bodies,  and  be  cured  :  per- 
jured persons  repair  thither,  and  be  possessed  with  devils  : 
possessed  with  devils  visit  them,  and  are  delivered  :  lepers 
come,  and  be  cleansed  :  dead  folk  are  brought,  and  they 
be  raised  up  again.  Consider  then  in  what  sort  their 
souls  do  live  in  those  places  where  they  live,  whose  dead 
bodies  live  also  in  this  world  by  so  many  miracles.  If 
then  you  gather  the  life  of  the  soul  remaining  in  the 
body  by  the  motion  of  the  members  :  why  do  you  not 
likewise,  by  the  dead  bones  which  work  miracles,  infer 
that  the  soul  doth  live  after  the  death  of  the  body  ? 
Ureter,  No  solution,  as  I  think,  can  overthrow  the  force 
of  this  reason  alleged  :  by  which  we  are  constrained 
through  visible  things  to  believe  those  which  we  see  not 
and  be  invisible. 

Chapter  §>etien :  of  tbe  Departure  of  men's  souls; 

^  <£>reg;or|?.  A  little  before,  you  complained  for  that 
you  could  not  see  the  soul  of  one  when  it  departed 
out  of  his  body  :  but  that  was  your  fault,  who  desired 
with  corporal  eyes  to  behold  an  invisible  thing,  for  many 
of  us,  that  by  sincere  faith  and  plentiful  prayer,  have  had 
the  eye  of  our  soul  purified,  have  often  seen  souls  going 
out  of  their  bodies  :  and  therefore  now  I  think  it  necessary 
to  set  down  both  how,  and  in  what  sort,  men's  souls 
departing  out  of  their  bodies  have  been  seen  :  and  also 
what  wonderful  things  have  been  revealed  unto  them, 
at  the  time  of  their  departure  :  that  by  this  means 
examples  may  satisfy  our  wavering  and  doubtful  minds, 
which  reason  can  not  so  fully  persuade.  Wherefore  to 
begin.    I  remember  that,  in  the  second  book  of  this  work, 

187 


€f)c  Dialogues  of  §>t.  ®reprp 

I  told  you  how  venerable  Ben  net  (as  by  relation  of  his 
own  monks  I  learned)  being  far  distant  from  the  city  of 
Capua,  beheld  the  soul  of  Germanus  (Bishop  of  the  same 
place)  at  midnight  to  be  carried  to  heaven  in  a  fiery  globe  : 
who,  seeing  the  soul  as  it  was  ascending  up,  beheld  also, 
in  the  largeness  of  his  own  soul,  within  the  compass  of 
one  sunbeam,  the  whole  world  as  it  were  gathered 
together. 

Cbapter  Cigbt :  of  t&e  Departure  of  tbe  soul  of 

^peCIOSUS,  a  Cponfc.  fl  By  the  relation  also  of  the 
same  monks,  his  disciples,  I  understood  how  two 
noble  men  that  were  brethren,  and  very  well  learned  in 
humanity,  the  one  called  Speciosus,  the  other  Gregory, 
entered  into  religion,  there  to  live  virtuously  under  the 
direction  of  his  rule  :  whom  the  venerable  father  placed 
in  a  Monastery  of  his,  hard  by  the  city  of  Teracina. 
These  men,  whiles  they  remained  in  the  world,  were 
very  rich,  but  for  the  redemption  of  their  own  souls, 
they  had  given  all  to  the  poor,  and  led  their  life  in  the 
same  Monastery.  One  of  these  twain,  to  wit  Speciosus, 
being  sent  upon  business  of  the  Monastery  to  the  city 
of  Capua  :  his  natural  brother  Gregory  in  the  meantime, 
sitting  at  table  at  dinner  amongst  the  other  monks,  rapt 
in  spirit,  beheld  his  brother's  soul,  though  so  far  distant, 
departing  out  of  his  body  :  which  forthwith  he  told  unto 
the  other  monks,  and  straight  after  in  all  haste  took  his 
journey  to  Capua,  where  he  found  his  brother  newly 
buried ;  and  there  understood  how  he  died  at  that  very 
hour,  in  which  he  saw  his  soul  going  out  of  his  body. 

Cbapter  jftine :  of  t&e  soul  of  a  certain  Snc&oret. 

^  A  certain  religious  man,  and  one  of  great  credit  (at 
such  time  as  I  lived  in  the  Monastery),  told  me  that 
certain  sailing  from  Sicily  to  Rome,  as  they  were  in  the 
midst  of  the  sea,  beheld  the  soul  of  a  certain  servant 
of  God  carried  to  heaven,  who  had  been  an  Anchoret  in 
the  land  of  Samnium.     Landing  afterward  in  the  same 

188 


£be  Departure  of  abbot  ^ope 

place,  and  making  enquiry  of  that  thing,  they  understood 
that  holy  man  to  have  departed  this  life  upon  that  very 
day  in  which  they  saw  his  soul  ascending  to  heaven. 

Chapter  £en :  of  tbe  Departure  of  abbot  pope's 

SOUl.  ^  Whiles  I  lived  as  yet  in  my  Monastery,  I 
understood,  by  the  relation  of  a  very  reverent  man,  a 
certain  thing  which  I  will  now  tell  you.  A  venerable 
father  there  was,  called  Hope,  who  had  built  an  Abbey 
in  a  place  called  Cample,  distant  almost  six  miles  from 
the  old  city  of  Nursia.  This  man  almighty  and  merciful 
God,  by  temporal  affliction,  preserved  from  everlasting 
misery,  and  gave  him  great  grace  and  quiet  of  mind  : 
for  how  dearly  he  loved  him,  yea,  at  that  very  time 
when  he  sent  him  affliction,  was  afterward  made 
apparent  to  the  world,  when  he  vouchsafed  perfectly  to 
restore  him  to  his  former  health.  This  man  therefore 
was,  for  the  space  of  forty  years,  punished  with  such  a 
continual  blindness  of  his  eyes,  that  he  could  not  so 
much  as  behold  any  light  at  all.  But  because  none  in 
adversity  can  without  the  help  of  God's  grace  stand  : 
and  unless  the  same  merciful  father,  who  sendeth 
punishment,  giveth  also  patience  :  straightways  his 
chastising  of  our  sins  doth  by  impatience  more  increase 
them  :  and  so  it  pitifully  falleth  out,  that  our  sin  is  by 
that  very  thing  made  greater,  by  which  an  end  of  all  sin 
might  very  well  have  been  expected.  God  therefore 
seeing  our  infirmity,  together  with  affliction,  by  his 
sweet  providence  keepeth  and  preserveth  us  ;  and  is  in 
his  correction  which  he  sendeth  his  chosen  children  in 
this  world,  so  just  with  mercy/  that  they  may  become 
such  to  whom  afterward  he  may  justly  shew  mercy  : 
and  therefore,  though  he  did  lay  his  cross  of  blindness 
upon  this  venerable  man,  yet  did  he  not  leave  him 
destitute  of  inward  light :  for  as  his  body  was  wearied 
with  pain,  so,  by  the  providence  of  God's  holy  Spirit, 
his  soul  was  refreshed  with  heavenly  comfort. 

189 


£fje  Dialogues  of  %t  ®regorp 

At  length  when  he  had  continued  forty  years  in  this 
kind  of  blindness,  our  good  Lord  restored  him  to  his 
former  sight,  giving  him  also  to  understand  that  he  was 
shortly  to  leave  this  world  :  and  therefore  admonished 
him  to  preach  the  word  of  life  unto  all  such  Abbeys  as 
were  about  him  ;  and  that  for  as  much  as  himself  had 
received  the  light  of  his  body,  he  would  go  and  open 
unto  them  the  spiritual  light  of  the  soul  :  who  forth- 
with obeying  God's  commandment,  visited  the  foresaid 
Abbeys,  and  preached  unto  them  such  precepts  of  good 
life  as  himself  before  had  in  conversation  practised. 
Returning  after  fifteen  days  to  his  own  Abbey,  he  called 
his  monks  together,  and  in  their  presence  received  the 
Sacrament  of  the  body  and  blood  of  our  Lord,  and 
straightways  began,  together  with  them,  the  mystical 
hymns  of  the  Psalms  :  afterward,  falling  with  attention 
to  his  prayers,  whiles  they  continued  on  their  singing, 
he  gave  up  the  ghost  :  at  which  very  time  all  the  monks 
saw  a  dove  coming  out  of  his  mouth,  which  in  their 
sight  flying  forth  through  the  top  of  the  oratory  being 
then  opened,  ascended  up  into  heaven.  And  surely  it  is 
to  be  thought,  that  his  soul,  by  divine  providence,  did 
in  that  manner  appear  in  the  likeness  of  a  dove,  that 
almighty  God  might  thereby  shew  with  what  a  true  and 
simple  heart  that  holy  man  had  always  served  him. 

Chapter  Clemen :  of  tbe  Departure  of  a  IPnest's 

0OUl,  CalleO  ftJrSinUS.  <I  Neither  must  I  forget  that 
which  the  reverent  Abbot  Stephen  (who  not  long  since 
died  in  this  city,  and  whom  you  knew  very  well)  told  me 
to  have  happened  in  the  same  province  of  Nursia.  For 
he  said  that  a  Priest  dwelt  in  that  country,  who  in  the 
fear  of  God  governed  the  church  committed  to  his 
charge  :  and  although,  after  he  had  taken  orders,  he  did 
still  love  his  old  wife  as  his  sister,  yet  did  he  avoid  her 
as  his  enemy  :  and  never  would  he  permit  her  to  come 
near  him  upon  any  occasion,  abstaining  wholly  from  all 

190 


C6e  Departure  of  Orsinu0 

intercourse  of  familiarity.  For  this  is  a  thing  proper  to 
holy  men,  oftentimes  to  deprive  themselves  of  those 
things  which  be  lawful,  to  the  end  they  may  remain  the 
more  free  from  such  as  be  unlawful  :  and  therefore  this 
man,  not  to  fall  into  any  sin,  utterly  refused  all  necessary 
and  requisite  service  at  her  hands. 

When  this  reverent  man  had  long  lived  in  this  world, 
the  fortieth  year  after  he  was  made  priest,  by  a  great  and 
vehement  ague  [he]  was  brought  to  the  last  cast  :  his 
old  wife,  beholding  him  so  far  spent,  and  to  lie  as  though 
he  had  been  dead,  put  her  head  near  unto  him,  to  see 
whether  he  did  breathe  or  no :  which  he  perceiving, 
having  yet  a  little  life  left,  enforced  himself  to  speak  as 
well  as  he  could,  and  in  great  fervour  of  spirit  brake  out 
into  these  words  :  "  Get  thee  away,  woman  :  a  little  fire 
is  yet  left,  away  with  the  straw."  After  she  was  gone, 
his  strength  somewhat  increasing,  he  began  with  great  joy 
to  cry  out  :  "  Welcome,  my  Lords,  welcome,  my  Lords  : 
why  have  you  vouchsafed  to  visit  me,  your  unworthy 
servant  ?  I  come,  I  come  :  1  thank  you,  I  thank  you"  : 
and  when  he  did  often  repeat  these  and  the  like  words, 
his  friends  that  were  present  asked  him  to  whom  he 
spake,  to  whom  with  a  kind  of  admiration  he  answered  : 
"  What  ?  do  you  not  here  behold  the  holy  Apostles  ? 
Do  you  not  seethe  chief  of  them,  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul  ?" 
And  so,  turning  himself  again  towards  them,  he  said  : 
"  Behold  1  come,  behold  I  come  "  :  and  in  speaking 
those  words,  he  gave  up  his  happy  ghost.  And  that  he 
did  indeed  verily  behold  the  holy  Apostles,  he  testified 
by  that  his  departure  with  them.  And  thus  it  doth 
often  fall  out,  by  the  sweet  providence  of  God,  that  good 
men  at  their  death  do  behold  his  Saints  going  before  them, 
and  leading  as  it  were  the  way,  to  the  end  they  should 
not  be  afraid  at  the  pangs  thereof;  and  that  whiles  their 
souls  do  see  the  Saints  in  heaven,  they  may  be  discharged 
from  the  prison  of  this  body,  without  all  fear  and  grief. 

IO| 


C6e  Dialogues  of  ^>t  (Sregotp 
Cbapter  Ctoetoe :  of  tbe  soul  of  IProims,  15i0f)op 

Of  tm  Cttp  Of  EeatL  fl  Concerning  which  thing  I 
must  also  tell  you  that  which  the  servant  of  God,  Probus 
(who  now  in  this  city  liveth  in  an  Abbey),  gave  me  to 
understand  of  an  uncle  of  his,  called  also  Probus,  who 
was  Bishop  of  the  city  of  Reati.  For  he  said  that,  being 
grievously  sick  and  in  great  extremity  of  death,  his  father, 
whose  name  was  Maximus,  caused  many  physicians  to 
be  sent  for,  to  see  whether  by  their  skill  he  could  any 
ways  be  holpen  ;  who  all  upon  the  feeling  of  his  pulse, 
gave  sentence  of  speedy  death.  When  dinner  time  was 
come,  and  the  day  somewhat  far  spent,  the  venerable 
Bishop,  more  careful  of  their  health  than  of  his  own, 
desired  them  that  they  would  go  up  with  his  old  father 
into  the  higher  part  of  his  palace  ;  and  after  their  great 
pains,  to  refresh  themselves  with  a  poor  dinner.  Where- 
upon all  went  up,  and  none  remained  with  him,  but  a 
little  young  boy,  who,  as  Probus  saith,  is  yet  living. 
The  little  boy,  standing  by  his  bedside,  suddenly  saw 
certain  men  coming  in  to  the  man  of  God,  apparelled 
in  white  stoles,  whose  faces  were  far  more  beautiful  and 
bright  than  the  whiteness  of  their  garments  :  whereat 
being  amazed  and  afraid,  he  began  to  cry  out,  and  ask 
who  they  were  :  at  which  noise  the  Bishop  also  looking 
up,  beheld  them  coming  in  and  knew  them,  and  there- 
upon comforted  the  little  boy,  bidding  him  not  to  cry, 
or  be  afraid,  saying  that  they  were  the  holy  martyrs 
St.  Juvenal  and  St.  Eleutherius  that  came  to  visit  him  : 
but  he,  not  acquainted  with  any  such  strange  visions, 
ran  out  at  the  doors  as  fast  as  he  could,  carrying  news 
hereof  both  to  his  father  and  the  physicians  ;  who,  going 
down  in  all  haste,  found  the  Bishop  departed  :  for  those 
Saints,  whose  sight  the  child  could  not  endure,  had 
carried  his  soul  away  in  their  company. 

Chapter  Cbitteen :  of  tbe  Deatft  of  a  Bun 

CalleD  (£>al!a.    H  Neither  will  I  conceal  that  which  I 

192 


€&e  Departure  of  <£alla 

received  by  the  relation  of  those  that  are  grave  and  of 
good  credit.  In  the  time  of  the  Goths,  an  honourable 
young  maid  called  Galla,  daughter  to  Symmachus  the 
Consul,  was  bestowed  in  marriage  :  whose  husband, 
before  the  year  came  about,  departed  this  life  :  and 
though  both  plenty  of  wealth  and  her  young  years  were 
great  allurements  to  a  second  marriage,  yet  she  made 
choice  rather  to  be  married  spiritually  to  God,  in  which 
after  mourning  everlasting  joy  doth  follow  :  than  to 
become  again  subject  to  carnal  matrimony,  which  always 
beginneth  with  joy,  and  in  conclusion  endeth  with  sor- 
row. But  because  she  had  a  passing  high  colour,  the 
physicians  told  her  that,  unless  she  did  marry  again,  that 
she  would  through  abundance  of  heat,  contrary  to  nature, 
have  a  beard  like  unto  men  :  which  afterward  fell  so  out 
indeed  :  but  the  holy  woman  little  regarded  outward 
deformity,  which  inwardly  in  her  soul  was  enamoured 
with  the  beauty  of  the  heavenly  spouse  ;  and  feared  not 
if  that  in  her  became  foul,  which  she  knew  that  her 
celestial  spouse  did  nothing  love.  Wherefore  straight 
upon  the  death  of  her  husband,  casting  off  her  secular 
habit  and  attire,  she  rendered  herself  for  the  service  of 
God  to  that  Nunnery  which  is  by  the  church  of  the 
blessed  Apostle  St.  Peter  ;  where  she  lived  for  the  space 
of  many  years  in  prayer  and  simplicity  of  heart,  and 
bestowed  alms  plentifully  upon  needy  and  poor  people. 
At  length,  when  almighty  God  determined  to  bestow 
upon  her  an  everlasting  reward,  he  sent  her  a  cancer  in 
one  of  her  breasts.  Two  candles  she  had  usually  in  the 
night  time  burning  before  her  bed  ;  for  loving  light,  she 
did  not  only  hate  spiritual  darkness,  but  also  corporal. 
One  night,  lying  sore  afflicted  with  this  her  infirmity, 
she  saw  St.  Peter  standing  before  her  bed,  betwixt  the 
two  candlesticks,  and  being  nothing  afraid,  but  glad, 
love  giving  her  courage,  thus  she  spake  unto  him  : 
il  How  is  it,  my  Lord  ?  what  ?  are  my  sins  forgiven 

I93  N 


€6e  Dialogues  of  %>t  eregorp 

me  ? '  To  whom  (as  he  hath  a  most  gracious  coun- 
tenance) he  bowed  down  a  little  his  head,  and  said  : 
"Thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee  ;  come  and  follow  me." 
But  because  there  was  another  Nun  in  the  Monastery 
which  Galla  loved  more  than  the  rest,  she  straightways 
beseeched  him  that  sister  Benedicta  might  go  with  her  : 
to  whom  he  answered  that  she  could  not  then  come,  but 
another  should  :  "and  as  for  her,"  quoth  he,  "whom 
you  now  request,  thirty  days  hence  shall  she  follow 
you  "  :  and  when  he  had  thus  said,  he  vanished  out  of 
her  sight.  After  whose  departure,  she  straightways 
called  for  the  mother  of  the  Convent,  and  told  her  what 
she  had  seen  and  heard  :  and  the  third  day  following, 
both  she  and  the  other  before  mentioned  departed  this 
life  :  and  she  also,  whose  company  Galla  desired,  the 
thirtieth  day  after  did  follow  them.  The  memory  of 
which  thing  continueth  still  fresh  in  that  Monastery,  so 
that  the  Nuns  which  now  live  there  (receiving  it  by 
tradition  from  their  predecessors)  can  tell  every  little 
point  thereof,  as  though  they  had  been  present  at  that 
time  when  the  miracle  happened. 

Chapter  Jfourteen :  of  tbe  Departure  of  a  poor 
man,  mk  of  tbe  patep,  calleD  ^ertmlus.  *§  Here 

also  we  have  to  know  that  oftentimes,  at  the  death  of 
God's  servants,  heavenly  musick  is  heard,  to  the  end  that 
whiles  they  give  willing  ear  to  that  melody,  the  soul  may 
have  no  leisure  to  feel,  when  it  departeth  from  the  body. 
For  I  remember  that,  in  my  Homilies  1  upon  the  Gospel,  I 
told  how  in  that  porch  which  is  in  the  way  to  St.  Clement's 
Church,  there  lay  a  certain  man  called  Servulus,  whom 
I  doubt  not  but  you  also  do  remember  :  who,  as  he  was 
poor  in  wealth,  so  rich  in  merits.     This  man  had  long 
Deen  afflicted  with  sickness  :  for  from  the  first  time  that 
I  knew  him,  to  the  very  last  hour  of  his  life,  never  can 
I  remember  but  that  he  was  sick  of  the  palsy,  and  that 

1  Homelia  15. 
I94 


Cfje  Departure  of  Eomula 

so  pitifully,  that  he  could  not  stand,  nor  sit  up  in  his 
bed  :  neither  was  he  ever  able  to  put  his  hand  unto  his 
mouth,  or  to  turn  from  one  side  to  the  other.  His 
mother  and  brethren  did  serve  and  attend  him,  and 
what  he  got  in  alms,  that  by  their  hands  he  bestowed 
upon  other  poor  people.  Read  he  could  not,  yet  did 
he  buy  the  holy  scriptures,  which  very  carefully  he 
caused  such  religious  men  as  he  entertained  to  read  unto 
him :  by  means  whereof,  according  to  his  capacity,  though, 
as  I  said,  he  knew  not  a  letter  of  the  book,  yet  did  he 
fully  learn  the  holy  scripture.  Very  careful  he  was  in 
his  sickness  always  to  give  God  thanks,  and  day  and 
night  to  praise  his  holy  name. 

When  the  time  was  come,  in  which  God  determined 
to  reward  this  his  great  patience  :  the  pain  of  his  body 
strook  inwardly  to  his  heart,  which  he  feeling,  and  know- 
ing as  his  last  hour  was  not  far  oft,  called  for  all  such 
strangers  as  lodged  in  his  house,  desiring  them  to  sing 
hymns  with  him,  for  his  last  farewell  and  departure  out 
of  this  life  :  and  as  he  was  himself  singing  with  them,  all 
on  a  sudden  he  cried  out  aloud,  and  bad  them  be  silent, 
saying  :  "  Do  ye  not  hear  the  great  and  wonderful 
musick  which  is  in  heaven  ?  "  and  so  whiles  he  lay  giving 
of  ear  within  himself  to  that  divine  harmony,  his  holy 
soul  departed  this  mortal  life  :  at  which  time,  all  that 
were  there  present  felt  a  most  pleasant  and  fragrant 
smell,  whereby  they  perceived  how  true  it  was  that  Ser- 
vulus  said.  A  monk  of  mine,  who  yet  liveth,  was  then 
present,  and  with  many  tears  useth  to  tell  us,  that  the 
sweetness  of  that  smell  never  went  away,  but  that  they 
felt  it  continually  until  the  time  of  his  burial. 

Cbapter  jFtfteert :  of  tbe  Departure  of  a  Jf3un 

CalleO  HOlttUla.  fl  In  the  same  Homilies,  I  remember 
likewise,  how  I  told  a  certain  thing,  which  Speciosus,  my 
fellow-Priest,  doth  also  verify  to  be  most  true.  At  such 
time  as  I  entered  into  religion,  there  dwelt  in  this  city, 

195 


Cbc  Dialogues  of  §>t.  <£regorp 

near  to  the  church  of  our  blessed  Lady,  a  certain  old 
woman,  called  Redempta,  living  in  the  habit  of  a  Nun, 
a  disciple  of  that  Hirundina,  which  was  famous  for 
virtue,  and  led  an  eremitical  life  (as  they  say)  in  the 
mountains  by  the  city  of  Preneste.  This  foresaid  Re- 
dempta had  two  scholars,  which  wore  the  same  habit 
that  she  did :  the  one  called  Romula,  and  the  name  of  the 
other,  which  yet  liveth,  1  can  not  tell,  though  by  sight 
I  know  her  very  well.  These  three  together  in  one  little 
house  lived  a  poor  life,  yet  rich  for  piety  and  virtue  : 
and  of  these  twain  Romula  far  excelled  the  other  in  merit 
of  life  :  for  she  was  a  woman  of  marvellous  patience, 
passing  obedient,  a  great  observer  of  silence,  and  one 
that  with  great  zeal  bestowed  her  time  in  continual 
prayer. 

But  because  it  often  falleth  out,  that  they  whom  the 
world  think  to  be  perfect,  have  yet  in  the  eyes  of  al- 
mighty God  some  imperfection  (as  many  times  unskilful 
men  do  commend  seals  of  arms  as  excellently  well  en- 
graven, which  yet  the  cunning  workman  doth  better  con- 
sider, and  laboureth  to  make  more  perfect),  this  foresaid 
Romula  fell  into  such  a  pitiful  palsy,  that  she  was  fain  to 
keep  her  bed  :  where  she  lay,  deprived  almost  of  all  the 
use  of  her  members  :  which  great  cross,  notwithstanding, 
drew  her  not  to  any  impatience,  but  rather  the  sickness 
of  her  body  was  the  health  of  her  soul,  and  the  cause  of 
her  greater  increase  in  virtue  :  for  the  less  she  could  do 
in  other  things,  the  more  she  did  in  prayer  and  devotion. 
Upon  a  certain  night  she  called  for  Redempta  (who,  as 
I  said,  brought  them  both  up  as  her  daughters),  saying  : 
"  Come,  mother,  come,  mother  "  :  who  straightways  with 
her  other  disciple  rose  up,  and  (as  myself  and  many  more 
have  heard  it  from  their  own  mouths)  when  they  were 
about  midnight  by  her  bedside,  suddenly  there  came  a 
light  from  heaven,  which  filled  all  that  cell  :  and  such 
a  brightness  there  appeared,  that  it  put  them  both  into  a 

I96 


€f)e  Departure  of  Carsilla 

wonderful  fear,  and,  as  themselves  did  afterward  report, 
all  their  body  became  cold,  in  such  sort,  that  there  they 
stood  amazed  :  for  they  heard  a  noise,  as  it  were  of  many 
that  came  in,  and  the  cell  door  shaken  and  thrust  open, 
as  though  there  had  been  a  great  press  of  people  :  and 
as  they  said,  they  heard  a  great  company  come  in,  yet 
they  saw  nobody,  and  that  by  reason  of  great  fear  and 
much  light  :  for  both  fear  did  make  them  to  hold  their 
eyes  downward,  and  the  brightness  of  such  plenty  of  light 
did  so  dazzle  them,  that  they  could  not  behold  anything. 
Straight  after  that  light  followed  a  wonderful  pleasant 
smell,  which  did  greatly  comfort  their  fearful  hearts. 
Romula,  perceiving  that  they  could  not  endure  that 
abundance  of  light,  with  sweet  words  comforted  Re- 
dempta,  that  stood  trembling  by  her  bedside,  saying  : 
"  Be  not  affeard,  mother  ;  for  I  shall  not  die  at  this 
time  "  :  and  when  she  had  often  repeated  those  words,  by 
little  and  little  the  light  vanished  away,  but  yet  the  sweet 
smell  remained  still,  and  so  continued  both  the  next  and 
the  third  day  after.  Upon  the  fourth  night,  again  she 
called  for  that  her  mother,  and  when  she  was  come,  she 
desired  to  receive  the  Sacrament,  and  so  she  did  ;  and 
behold,  before  Redempta  or  her  other  disciple  departed 
from  her  bedside,  suddenly  they  heard  two  quires  sing- 
ing before  the  door  without  :  and  as  they  said,  they  per- 
ceived by  their  voices  that  the  one  was  of  men,  that 
began  the  psalms,  and  the  other  of  women  that  answered: 
and  whiles  these  heavenly  funerals  were  in  celebrating 
before  the  cell  door,  that  holy  soul  departed  this  life,  and 
was  carried  in  that  manner  up  into  heaven  :  and  the 
higher  those  two  quires  did  ascend,  the  less  did  they  hear 
that  celestial  musick,  until  at  length  they  heard  no  more  : 
and  beside  that  sweet  and  odoriferous  smell,  which  before 
they  felt,  vanished  quite  away. 

Chapter  ^irteen :  of  tbe  Departure  of  tbe  bolp 

trirgin  Car.Ollla,  <J  Sometime  also  for  the  comfort  of 

197 


Cbe  Dialogues  of  %t  (Sregorp 

the  soul  that  departeth,  there  appeareth  unto  it  the  author 
himself  of  life,  and  rewarder  of  all  virtue  :  for  proof 
whereof  I  will  here  report  that  which  I  remember  also 
to  have  spoken  of  in  mine  Homilies,  concerning  mine 
aunt  Tarsilla  :  who,  in  the  company  of  two  others  of  her 
sisters,  had  for  continuance  in  prayer,  gravity  of  life, 
singularity  in  abstinence,  arrived  to  the  top  of  perfection. 
To  this  woman,  Felix,  my  great-grandfather,  sometime 
Bishop  of  this  see  of  Rome,  appeared  in  vision,  and 
shewed  her  the  habitation  of  everlasting  light,  speaking 
thus  :  "  Come  with  me,  and  I  will  entertain  you  in  this 
dwelling  place  of  light."  Shortly  after,  taken  with  an 
ague,  she  was  brought  to  the  last  cast  :  and  as  when 
noble  men  and  women  lie  a  dying,  many  do  visit  them 
for  the  comfort  of  their  friends  :  so  divers  both  men 
and  women,  at  the  time  of  her  departure,  were  come, 
which  stood  round  about  her  bed  :  at  what  time  she, 
suddenly  casting  her  eyes  upward,  beheld  our  Saviour 
coming  :  whereupon,  looking  earnestly  upon  him,  she 
cried  out  to  them  that  were  present  :  "  Away,  away  : 
my  Saviour  Jesus  is  come  "  :  and  so,  fixing  her  eyes 
upon  him,  whom  she  beheld,  her  holy  soul  departed 
this  life  :  and  such  a  wonderful  fragrant  smell  ensued, 
that  the  sweetness  thereof  gave  evident  testimony  that 
the  author  of  all  sweetness  was  there  present.  After- 
ward, when  her  dead  body,  according  to  the  manner, 
was  made  ready  to  be  washed,  they  found  that,  with  long 
custom  of  prayer,  the  skin  of  her  arms  and  knees  was, 
like  a  camel's,  become  hard  :  and  so  her  dead  body 
gave  sufficient  testimony,  what  her  living  spirit  had  con- 
tinually practised. 

C&apter  §>etoenteen :  of  tfje  Departure  of  a  poung; 

maiD  CalleD  $PUSa.  *J  Neither  must  that  be  forgotten, 
which  the  servant  of  God  before  mentioned,  called 
Probus,  used  to  tell  of  a  little  sister  which  he  had,  called 
Musa  :    for   he  said  that  one  night  our  blessed  Lady 

198 


£be  Departure  of  Siusa 

appeared  unto  her  in  vision,  shewing  her  sundry  young 
maids  of  her  own  years,  clothed  all  in  white  :  whose 
company  she  much  desiring,  but  yet  not  presuming  to 
go  amongst  them,  the  Blessed  Virgin  asked  her  whether 
she  had  any  mind  to  remain  with  them,  and  to  live  in 
her  service  :  to  whom  she  answered  that  willingly  she 
would.  Then  our  blessed  Lady  gave  her  in  charge, 
not  to  behave  herself  lightly,  nor  to  live  any  more  like 
a  girl,  to  abstain  also  from  laughing  and  pastime,  telling 
her  that  after  thirty  days  she  should,  amongst  those 
virgins  which  she  then  saw,  be  admitted  to  her  service. 
After  this  vision,  the  young  maid  forsook  all  her 
former  behaviour  :  and  with  great  gravity  reformed  the 
levity  of  her  childish  years  :  which  thing  her  parents 
perceiving,  and  demanding  from  whence  that  change 
proceeded,  she  told  them  what  the  blessed  Mother  of 
God  had  given  her  in  commandment,  and  upon  what 
day  she  was  to  go  unto  her  service.  Five  and  twenty 
days  after,  she  fell  sick  of  an  ague  ;  and  upon  the 
thirtieth  day,  when  the  hour  of  her  departure  was  come, 
she  beheld  our  blessed  Lady,  accompanied  with  those 
virgins  which  before  in  vision  she  saw  to  come  unto  her, 
and  being  called  to  come  away,  she  answered  with  her 
eyes  modestly  cast  downward,  and  very  distinctly  spake 
in  this  manner  :  "Behold,  blessed  Lady,  I  come, behold, 
blessed  Lady,  I  come  "  :  in  speaking  of  which  words 
she  gave  up  the  ghost,  and  her  soul  departed  her  virgin's 
body,  to  dwell  for  ever  with  the  holy  virgins  in  heaven. 
Ureter*  Seeing  mankind  is  subject  to  many  and  in- 
numerable vices,  I  think  that  the  greatest  part  of  heaven 
is  replenished  with  little  children  and  infants. 

Cbapter  OEigbteen :  boto  certain  poung  cbilDren 
are  binDerco  from  beatien  bp  tbcir  parents'  toickcD 
eDucation :  as  is  sbetoeD  6p  tbe  erample  of  a 
blaspbemouspoungbop.  <I  (^regorp.  Although  we 

ought  not  to  doubt,  but  believe  that  all  infants  which  be 

199 


Cbe  Dialogues  of  %t  <$regorp 

baptized,  and  die  in  their  infancy,  go  to  heaven  ;  yet  no 
point  of  our  belief  it  is,  that  all  little  ones  which  can 
speak  do  come  unto  that  holy  place  :  because  some  little 
children  are  kept  from  heaven  by  their  parents,  which 
bring  them  up  wickedly  and  in  lewd  life.  For  a  certain 
man  in  this  city,  well  known  to  all,  some  three  years 
since  had  a  child,  as  I  think  five  years  old,  which  upon 
too  much  carnal  affection  he  brought  up  very  carelessly  : 
in  such  sort  that  the  little  one  (a  lamentable  case  to 
speak  of)  so  soon  as  anything  went  contrary  to  his  mind, 
straightways  used  to  blaspheme  the  name  of  God. 

This  child,  in  that  great  mortality  which  happened 
three  years  since,  fell  sick,  and  came  to  the  point  of 
death  :  and  his  father  holding  him  at  that  time  in  his 
arms,  the  child  (as  they  say,  which  were  then  present) 
beheld  with  trembling  eyes  certain  wicked  spirits  coming 
towards  him  :  at  which  sight  he  began  to  cry  out  in  this 
manner  :  "  Keep  them  away,  father,  keep  them  away  "  : 
and  crying  so  out,  he  turned  away  his  face,  and  would 
have  hid  himself  in  his  father's  bosom  :  who  demanding 
why  he  was  so  afraid,  and  what  he  saw  :  "  O  father," 
quoth  he,  "  there  be  blackamoors  come  to  carry  me 
away  "  :  after  which  words  straightways  he  blasphemed 
God,  and  so  gave  up  the  ghost.  For  to  the  end  God 
might  make  it  known  to  the  world  for  what  sin  he  was 
delivered  to  such  terrible  executioners,  he  permitted 
him  at  his  very  death  to  iterate  that  sin,  for  which  his 
father,  whiles  he  lived,  would  not  correct  him  :  so  that 
he  which  through  God's  patience  had  long  lived  a 
blasphemer,  did  at  length,  by  his  just  judgment,  blas- 
pheming end  his  life,  that  the  father  might  both  know 
his  own  sin,  and  also  how,  by  neglecting  the  soul  of  his 
little  son,  he  nourished  and  brought  up  not  a  little  sinner 
for  hell  fire.  But  now  to  surcease  from  further  speech 
of  this  sad  and  melancholy  matter,  let  us  prosecute,  as 
we  have  begun,  our  former  joyful  narration. 

200 


C6e  Departure  of  ^tepben 
Chapter  Nineteen :  of  tfje  Departure  of  t&e  man 

Of  <2POD  CalleD  ^>tepl)en+  J|  By  the  relation  of  the 
same  Probus,  and  other  religious  men,  I  came  to  the 
knowledge  of  such  things  as  in  my  Homilies  I  told  to 
mine  auditors,  concerning  the  venerable  father  Stephen. 
For  he  was  a  man,  as  Probus  and  many  more  affirm,  who 
had  no  wealth  in  this  world,  nor  cared  for  any,  loving 
only  poverty  for  God's  sake  :  in  adversity  always  did  he 
keep  patience  :  secular  men's  company  did  he  avoid  : 
and  his  desire  was  always  to  pray  and  serve  God  :  ot 
whom  I  will  here  report  one  excellent  virtuous  act,  that 
by  one,  many  other  which  he  likewise  did,  each  man 
may  ponder  with  himself.  This  man,  therefore,  having 
upon  a  time  carried  his  corn,  which  he  reaped  with  his 
own  hands,  into  the  barn,  being  the  only  substance  upon 
which  he  and  his  disciples  were  to  live  all  the  year  :  a 
certain  wicked  wretch,  pricked  forward  by  the  devil,  set 
it  all  on  fire  :  which  another  perceiving,  ran  in  all  haste 
and  told  it  to  the  servant  of  God  :  and  after  he  had  done 
his  message,  he  added  these  words,  saying  :  "  Alas  and 
woe,  father  Stephen,  what  an  ill  chance  hath  befallen 
you."  To  whom  straight  ways,  with  a  pleasant  counte- 
nance and  quiet  mind,  he  answered  :  "  Nay,  what  an  ill 
chance  and  misery  is  befallen  him  that  hath  done  this  : 
for  to  me  what  hath  happened  ? "  By  which  words  of 
his  it  appeareth,  to  what  great  perfection  he  was  arrived, 
that  took  so  quietly  the  loss  of  all  his  worldly  wealth, 
and  was  more  sorry  for  the  other's  sin  than  grieved  for 
his  own  loss  ;  and  more  thought  what  his  neighbour  had 
inwardly  lost  in  his  soul,  than  what  himself  had  out- 
wardly lost  in  his  substance.  When  this  man  lay  a  dying, 
many  came  to  visit  him,  and  to  commend  their  souls  to 
his,  that  was  now  leaving  this  world  :  and  standing  about 
his  bed,  some  of  them  beheld  Angels  coming  in,  but  yet 
were  not  able  to  tell  it  unto  others  then  present  :  others 
there  were  that  saw  nothing,  but  yet  such  a  great  fear  fell 

201 


£be  Dialogues  of  %t  Gregory 

upon  them  all,  that  none  could  endure  to  remain  in  that 
place,  when  his  soul  departed  the  body  :  and  therefore 
all  of  them,  terrified  and  wholly  possessed  with  fear,  fled 
away :  by  which  they  perceived  of  what  power  he  was, 
that  received  his  soul  going  out  of  this  world  :  seeing  at 
that  time  no  mortal  creature  could  endure  to  be  there 
present. 

Cbapter  Ctoentp:  boto  sometime  tbe  merit  of 
tbe  soul  is  not  so  ttulp  oeclareo  at  tbe  time  of  tbe 

Departure  as  aftertoarD.  <I  But  here  we  have  to  under- 
stand, that  sometime  the  merit  of  the  soul  is  not  so  truly 
known  at  the  time  of  the  departure,  as  it  is  afterward  : 
and  therefore  divers  holy  martyrs  have  suffered  many 
great  torments  at  the  hands  of  infidels  :  who  afterwards, 
at  their  dead  bones,  were  famous  for  signs  and  miracles, 
as  before  hath  been  noted. 

Cbapter   £toentp=one:  of  tbe  ttoo  ajonfes  of 

8bt)0t  l^aletltinUS*  ^  For  the  virtuous  man  Valen- 
tinus,  who  afterward,  as  you  know,  was  in  this  city 
Abbot  of  my  Monastery,  having  had  before  in  the  pro- 
vince of  Valeria  the  government  of  another  Abbey  :  into 
which,  as  he  told  me,  the  cruel  Lombards  entered  in,  and 
hung  up  two  of  his  monks  upon  a  tree,  who  in  that 
manner  ended  their  life.  When  evening  was  come, 
both  their  souls  began  in  that  place  to  sing  so  plainly 
and  distinctly,  that  they  also  who  had  killed  them,  hear- 
ing that  kind  of  musick,  became  wonderfully  afraid.  All 
the  prisoners  likewise  that  were  there  present  heard  it, 
and  afterward  witnessed  the  same  :  which  strange  melody 
God's  providence  would  have  known,  to  the  end  that 
mortal  men  living  yet  upon  earth  might  thereby  learn 
how  that,  if  they  serve  him  truly  in  this  world,  that 
they  shall  after  death  verily  live  with  him  in  the  world 
to  come. 

Cbapter  Ctnentpttuo  :  of  tbe  Departure  of  abbot 

%liranU$»  ^  At  such  time  as  I  yet  lived  in  the  Monas- 

202 


Cruelty  of  tt>c  lomtmtns 

tery,  I  understood  by  the  relation  of  certain  religious  men, 
that  in  the  time  of  the  Lombards,  in  this  very  province 
called  Sura  and  not  far  off,  there  was  an  holy  Abbot 
called  Suranus,  who  bestowed  upon  certain  prisoners, 
which  had  escaped  their  hands,  all  such  things  as  he 
had  in  his  Monastery  :  and  when  he  had  given  away  in 
alms  all  his  own  apparel,  and  whatsoever  he  could  rind 
either  in  the  monks'  cells  or  in  the  yards,  and  nothing 
was  left  :  suddenly  the  Lombards  came  thither,  took  him 
prisoner,  and  demanded  where  his  gold  was :  and  when 
he  told  them  that  he  had  nothing,  they  carried  him  to 
an  hill  hard  by,  where  there  was  a  mighty  great  wood  in 
which  a  certain  prisoner  that  ran  away  from  them  had 
hid  himself  in  an  hollow  tree.  There  one  of  the  Lom- 
bards, drawing  out  his  sword,  slew  the  foresaid  venerable 
Abbot,  whose  body  as  it  fell  to  the  ground,  suddenly 
all  the  hill  together  with  the  wood  did  shake,  as  though 
the  earth  by  that  trembling  had  said,  that  it  could  not 
bear  the  weight  of  his  holiness  and  virtue. 

Chapter  CtoentHbree :  of  the  departure  of  a 
Deacon  belonging  to  tfjc  cfwrcl)  of  tbe  aparsori 

Cfl  Another  Deacon  also  there  was  in  the  province  of  the 
Marsori,  a  man  of  holy  life,  whom  the  Lombards  had 
taken,  and  one  with  his  sword  had  cut  off  his  head.  But 
as  his  body  fell  to  the  ground,  he  that  slew  him  was 
possessed  by  a  devil,  and  so  he  fell  down  at  the  holy 
man's  feet,  shewing  thereby  that  he  was  delivered  to  the 
enemy  of  God,  because  he  had  so  cruelly  slain  the  friend 
of  God. 

IPetet*  What  is  the  reason,  I  beseech  you,  that  almighty 
God  suffereth  them  to  be  put  to  death  :  whom  after- 
ward he  doth  make  known  to  the  world,  that  they  were 
holy  men  and  his  dear  servants  ? 

Chapter  Ctoent??*fout :  of  tfjc  Deatfj  of  tfjc  man 
of  (2)oo,  tbat  teas  sent  to  T5etbel.  cj€>rcgorp.  Seeing 

we  find  it  written,  that  what  death  soever  the  just  man 

203 


Cf)C  Dialogues  of  %t  (fcregorp 

dieth,  that  his  justice  shall  not  be  taken  from  him  :  what 
hurt  cometh  to  God's  elect  servants  (walking  no  ques- 
tion the  way  to  everlasting  life),  if  for  a  little  while 
they  have  some  pitiful  end  ?  and  perhaps  it  proceedeth 
from  some  small  sin  of  theirs,  which  by  such  kind  of 
death  God's  pleasure  is  that  it  should  be  purged.  And 
hereof  it  cometh  that  reprobates  receive  superiority  and 
power  over  others,  who  at  their  death  be  so  much  the 
more  punished,  for  that  they  used  their  cruel  authority 
against  God's  servants :  as  the  foresaid  wicked  and 
wretched  man,  whom  God  suffered  not  to  triumph  over 
that  venerable  Deacon,  though  he  permitted  him  to  kill 
his  body  :  which  thing  to  be  true  we  learn  also  out  of 
holy  scriptures.  For  that  man  of  God  which  was  sent 
against  Samaria,  because  contrary  to  God's  command- 
ment he  did  eat  in  his  journey,  was  slain  by  a  lion  ;  and 
yet  in  the  same  place  we  read,  that  the  lion  stood  by  the 
man's  ass,  and  did  not  touch  his  dead  body.1  By  which 
we  perceive  that  his  sin  of  disobedience  was  by  that  his 
death  pardoned  :  because  the  same  lion  that  feared  not 
to  kill  him,  presumed  not  yet  to  touch  his  dead  carcass  : 
for  licence  he  had  for  the  one,  but  no  leave  was  granted 
for  the  other,  because  he  that  was  culpable  in  his  life, 
having  his  sin  of  disobedience  now  punished,  was  just 
by  his  death  ;  and  therefore  the  lion  that  before  slew 
the  body  of  a  sinner,  preserved  afterward  the  corpse  of 
a  just  man. 

1^0t0t»  Your  discourse  pleaseth  me  very  well:  yet 
willing  I  am  to  know  whether,  before  the  resurrection, 
the  souls  of  just  men  do  enter  into  the  kingdom  of 
heaven. 

Chapter  Ctoent^fitoe :  toljetber  t&e  souls  of  just 
men  be  recetoeo  into  beatoen,  before  tbe  general 
resurrection  of  our  fcoDies.  «I  <£regorp.  This  thing, 

speaking    generally    of  all  just   men,    can   neither    be 

1  3  Kings  13,  24-28. 
204 


Cfte  insurrection  of  tfje  TBoDp 

affirmed  nor  denied  :  for  the  souls  of  some  just  men, 
remaining  as  yet  in  certain  mansions,  be  deferred  from 
heaven  ;  by  which  stay  of  theirs,  what  else  do  we  learn, 
but  that  they  lacked  somewhat  of  perfect  justice  ?  And 
yet  is  it  more  clear  than  day  that  the  souls  of  them  that 
be  perfect,  do,  straight  after  death,  possess  the  joys  of 
heaven  :  the  truth  whereof  Christ  himself  assureth  us, 
when  he  saith  :  Wheresoever  the  body  shall  be,  thither  will 
the  eagles  be  gathered  together  ;  x  for  where  our  Saviour  is 
present  in  body,  thither,  without  all  question,  do  the 
souls  of  just  men  assemble  themselves  ;  and  St.  Paul 
saith  :  /  desire  to  be  dissolved  and  to  be  with  Christ.2  He, 
therefore,  that  doubteth  not  Christ  to  be  in  heaven,  how 
can  he  doubt  that  St.  Paul's  soul  is  in  the  same  place  ? 
which  Apostle  speaketh  also  of  the  dissolution  of  his 
body,  and  his  dwelling  in  heaven  in  these  words  :  We 
know  that  if  our  terrestrial  house  of  this  habitation  be  dis- 
solved^ that  we  have  a  building  of  God ;  an  house  not  made 
with  hands,  but  everlasting  in  heaven? 
l|?0ter.  If  just  men's  souls  be  already  in  heaven  :  what 
then  shall  they  receive  for  a  reward  of  their  virtuous  and 
just  life  at  the  day  of  judgment  ? 

(5)rC£0rp.  Whereas  now  their  souls  be  only  in  heaven, 
at  the  day  of  judgment  this  further  increase  of  joy  shall 
they  have,  that  their  bodies  also  shall  be  partakers  of 
eternal  bliss,  and  they  shall  in  their  flesh  receive  joy:  in 
which,  for  Christ's  sake,  they  suffered  grief  and  torments. 
In  respect  of  this  their  double  glory,  the  scripture  saith  : 
In  their  land,  they  shall  possess  double  things ; 4  and  it  is 
written  of  the  souls  of  the  just,  that,  before  the  day  of 
resurrection  :  To  every  one  of  them  white  stoles  were  given : 
and  it  was  said  to  them  :  that  they  should  rest  yet  a  little 
time,  until  the  number  of  their  fellow-servants  and  brethren 
were  complete?     They,  therefore,  that  now  receive  but 

1   Luke,  17,  37.  2    Philipp.  1,  23.  3   2  Cor.  5,  1. 

4  Isai.  61,  7.  5  Rev.  6,  1 1. 

205 


Cbc  Dialogues  of  %t  ®regorp 

one  stole,  in  the  day  of  judgment  shall  every  one  have 
two  :  because  now  they  rejoice  only  for  the  felicity  of 
their  souls,  but  then  shall  they  enjoy  the  endless  glory 
of  body  and  soul  together. 

IPCtCt,  I  grant  it  to  be  as  you  say  :  but  what,  I  beseech 
you,  is  the  reason  that  oftentimes  those  which  lie  a  dying 
do  prophesy  and  tell  of  many  things  to  come  ? 

Chapter  Ctoent^sir :  T5p  tobat  means  it  failed) 
out,  tbat  tbose  tobicb  lie  a  oping  oo  propbesp  of 
tbings  to  come :  anD  of  tbe  Oeatb  of  a  certain 
aouocatc :  of  tfmt  also  tofjicb  toas  rctocaleD  to  tbe 
monks  (^erontius  anD  S^ellitus  :  of  tbe  Deatb  of 
a  bop  called  3rmentarius,  anD  of  tbe  Otoersitp  of 

tongues.  *J  €>tegOtp.  Sometime  the  soul  itself,  by 
reason  of  the  spiritual  nature  which  it  hath,  doth  foresee 
some  thing  which  will  so  fall  out ;  and  sometime  souls, 
before  their  departure,  come  to  the  knowledge  of  future 
things  by  revelation ;  sometime  also,  when  they  are 
straightways  to  leave  the  body,  by  heavenly  inspiration 
they  penetrate  with  their  spiritual  eyes  the  secrets  of 
heaven.  For  that  the  soul,  by  reason  of  the  spiritual 
nature  which  it  hath,  doth  know  things  to  come,  certain 
it  is,  by  that  which  happened  to  a  certain  advocate  in 
this  city,  who  died  two  days  ago  of  a  pain  in  his  side. 
For  a  little  before  his  death,  he  called  for  his  boy,  to  give 
him  his  apparel,  that  he  might  rise  up  and  walk  :  who, 
supposing  him  not  to  know  what  he  said,  refused  to  do 
what  he  willed  him.  Whereupon  he  rose  up,  put  on 
his  clothes,  and  said  that  he  would  go  to  the  church  of 
St.  Sixtus,  which  is  in  the  way  called  Appia:  and  when 
not  long  after,  his  sickness  increasing,  he  departed  this 
life,  determined  it  was,  that  his  body  should  be  buried  in 
the  church  of  St.  Januarius  the  martyr,  which  standeth 
upon  the  way  called  Prenestina.  But  because  they  which 
had  the  care  of  his  burial  thought  it  too  far  off,  suddenly 
they  resolved  upon  a  new  course  :  and  so,  going  forth 

206 


prophecies  of  tfje  Dptng 

with  his  corpse  by  the  way  called  Appia,  not  knowing 
what  he  had  said,  they  buried  him  in  that  church  which 
before  he  had  mentioned  :  and  seeing  it  is  well  known 
that  he  was  a  man  given  to  the  world,  and  one  that 
sought  after  earthly  gain,  how  could  he  know  that  which 
fell  out,  but  that  the  force  and  spiritual  nature  of  his 
soul  did  foresee  what  should  become  of  his  body  ? 

That  those  also,  which  lie  a  dying,  do  oftentimes  by 
divine  revelation  foretell  what  shall  happen  afterward, 
we  may  learn  by  such  things  as  have  fallen  out  amongst 
us  in  clivers  Abbeys.  For  ten  years  since,  there  was  a 
monk  in  my  Monastery,  called  Gerontius,  who,  lying 
sore  sick,  saw  by  vision  in  the  night  time,  certain  white 
men  beautifully  apparelled  to  descend  from  above  into 
the  Monastery,  and  standing  by  his  bed-side,  one  of  them 
said  :  "The  cause  of  our  coming  hither  is  to  choose  out 
certain  of  Gregory's  monks,  to  send  them  abroad  unto 
the  wars":  and  forthwith  he  commanded  another  to 
write  in  a  bill  the  names  of  Marcellus,  Valentinian, 
Agnellus,  and  divers  others,  whose  names  I  have  now 
forgotten  :  that  being  done,  he  said  further  :  "Put  down 
also  the  name  of  him  that  now  beholdeth  us."  By 
which  vision  he  being  assured  of  that  which  would  come 
to  pass,  the  next  morning  he  told  the  monks,  who  they 
were  that  should  shortly  die  out  of  the  Monastery, 
adding  also  that  himself  was  to  follow  them.  The  next 
day  the  foresaid  monks  fell  more  dangerously  sick,  and 
so  died  all  in  that  very  order  which  they  were  named  in 
the  bill.  Last  of  all,  himself  also  departed  this  life, 
who  had  foretold  the  departure  of  the  other  monks 
before  him. 

Likewise  in  that  mortality  which,  three  years  since, 
lamentably  afflicted  this  town,  there  was  in  the  Monastery 
of  the  city  of  Portua,  a  young  monk  called  Mellitus,  a 
man  of  wonderful  simplicity  and  humility,  whose  last 
day  being  come,  he  fell  desperately  sick  of  the  common 

207 


Cbe  Dialogues  of  %t  <£reprp 

disease  :  which  when  venerable  Felix,  Bishop  of  the 
same  place,  understood  (by  whose  relation  myself  have 
learned  this  story),  very  careful  he  was  to  visit  him,  and 
with  sweet  words  to  comfort  him  against  death  :  adding, 
notwithstanding,  that  by  God's  grace  he  might  live  long 
in  this  world.  To  whom  the  sick  man  answered  that 
his  time  was  at  hand,  saying  that  there  came  unto  him  a 
young  man  with  letters,  willing  him  to  open  and  read 
them  :  which  when  he  had  done,  he  said  that  he  found 
both  his  own  name,  and  all  the  rest  of  them  which,  the 
Easter  before,  had  been  baptized  by  that  Bishop,  written 
in  letters  of  gold :  and  first  of  all  he  said  that  he  found 
his  own  name,  and  afterward  the  rest  of  them  that  were 
christened  at  that  time  :  by  which  he  made  no  doubt 
but  that  both  himself  and  the  rest  should  shortly  depart 
this  life,  and  so  it  fell  out,  for  he  died  that  very  day : 
and  after  him  followed  all  those  which  had  before  been 
baptized,  so  that,  within  the  space  of  a  few  days,  no  one 
of  them  was  left  alive.  Of  whom  no  question  can  be 
made,  but  that  the  reason  why  the  foresaid  servant  of 
God  saw  them  written  in  gold,  was  because  their  names 
were  written  in  heaven  in  the  everlasting  sight  of  God. 
And  as  these  men,  by  divine  revelation,  knew  and 
foretold  such  things  as  were  to  come  :  so  sometimes 
souls,  before  their  departure,  not  in  a  dream  but  waking, 
may  have  some  taste  of  heavenly  mysteries.  For  you 
were  well  acquainted  with  Ammonius,  a  monk  of  my 
Monastery,  who  whiles  he  lived  in  a  secular  weed  and 
was  married  to  the  daughter  of  Valerianus,  a  lawyer  in 
this  city,  continually  and  with  all  diligence  he  followed 
his  business :  by  reason  whereof  he  knew  whatsoever  was 
done  in  his  father-in-law's  house.  This  man  told  me, 
how,  in  that  great  mortality  which  happened  in  this  city, 
in  the  time  of  that  noble  man  Narsus,  there  was  a  boy  in 
the  house  of  the  foresaid  Valerianus,  called  Armentarius, 
who  was  very  simple  and  passing  humble  :  when,  there- 

208 


Propbecie0  of  tfje  Hoping 

fore,  that  mortal  disease  entered  that  lawyer's  house,  the 
foresaid  boy  fell  sick  thereof,  and  was  brought  to  the 
point  of  death :  who  suddenly  falling  into  a  trance,  and 
afterward  coming  to  himself  again,  caused  his  master  to 
be  sent  for,  to  whom  he  told  that  he  had  been  in  heaven, 
and  did  know  who  they  were  that  should  die  out  of  his 
house.  "  Such  and  such,"  quoth  he, "  shall  die,  but  as  for 
yourself,  fear  nothing,  for  at  this  time  die  you  shall  not. 
And  that  you  may  be  assured  that  I  have  verily  been  in 
heaven,  behold  I  have  there  received  the  gift  to  speak 
with  all  tongues  :  you  know  well  enough  that  ignorant 
I  am  of  the  Greek  tongue,  and  yet  will  I  speak  Greek, 
that  you  may  see  whether  it  be  true  that  I  say  or  no." 
Then  his  master  spake  Greek,  and  he  so  answered  him 
in  that  tongue,  that  all  which  were  present  did  much 
marvel.  In  the  same  house  there  was  a  Bulgar,  servant 
to  the  foresaid  Narsus,  who  in  all  haste,  being  brought  to 
the  sick  person,  spake  unto  him  in  the  Bulgarian  tongue  ; 
and  the  boy  that  was  born  and  brought  up  in  Italy, 
answered  him  so  in  that  barbarous  language,  as  though 
he  had  been  born  and  bred  in  that  country.  All  that 
heard  him  thus  talking  wondered  much,  and  by  experi- 
ence of  two  tongues  which  they  knew  very  well  that 
before  he  knew  not,  they  made  no  doubt  of  the  rest, 
though  they  could  make  no  trial  thereof.  After  this  he 
lived  two  days,  and  upon  the  third,  by  what  secret  judg- 
ment of  God  none  can  tell,  he  tare  and  rent  with  his 
teeth  his  own  hands  and  arms,  and  so  departed  this  life. 
When  he  was  dead,  all  those  whom  before  he  mentioned 
did  quickly  follow  after  ;  and  besides  them,  none  in  that 
house  died  at  that  time. 

K?Ct0t»  A  very  terrible  thing  it  is,  that  he  which  merited 
so  great  a  grace,  should  be  punished  with  so  pitiful  a 
death. 

tiDtZQOKV.  Who  is  able  to  enter  into  the  secret  judg- 
ments or  God  ?    Wherefore  those  things  which  in  divine 

209  o 


£fje  Dialogues  of  %t  ®regorp 

examination  we  cannot  comprehend,  we  ought  rather  to 
fear  than  curiously  to  discuss. 

Chapter  Ctoentp^e&en :  of  tbe  Deatb  of  tbe  Carl 

Cbeopf)aniU0.  fl  And  to  prosecute  what  we  have 
already  begun,  concerning  the  prophetical  knowledge  of 
those  that  die,  I  will  now  tell  you  that  which,  when  I 
was  in  the  city  of  Centumcellis,  I  understood  by  the 
relation  of  many,  touching  Theophanius,  Earl  of  that 
place.  For  he  was  a  man  of  great  mercy  and  compassion, 
and  one  that  did  many  good  works,  but  especially  he 
was  given  to  good  housekeeping  and  hospitality.  True 
it  is  that,  following  the  affairs  of  his  earldom,  he  spent 
much  time  about  earthly  and  worldly  business,  but  that 
rather  of  necessity  and  duty  than  according  to  his  own 
mind  and  desire,  as  his  virtuous  end  afterward  declared. 
For  when  the  time  of  his  death  was  come,  there  arose  a 
great  tempest,  which  was  likely  to  hinder  the  funerals  ; 
whereat  his  wife,  pitifully  weeping,  asked  him  in  this 
manner  :  "What  shall  I  do  ?  or  how  shall  we  carry  you 
to  be  buried,  seeing  the  tempest  is  so  terrible,  that  none 
can  stir  out  of  doors  ?"  To  whom  he  answered  thus  : 
"  Weep  not,  good  wife,  for  so  soon  as  I  am  dead  you 
shall  have  fair  weather"  :  and  when  he  had  so  said,  he 
gave  up  the  ghost :  and  straightways  the  air  became 
clear,  and  the  tempest  ceased.  After  this  miracle  one  or 
two  more  followed.  For  whereas  his  hands  and  feet  were 
with  the  gout  before  swollen  and  festered,  and  by  reason 
of  much  corrupt  matter,  did  savour  and  smell  :  yet  when 
he  was  dead,  and  his  body  after  the  manner  came  to  be 
washed,  they  found  his  hands  and  feet  so  sound  and 
whole,  as  though  they  had  never  been  troubled  with  any 
such  sores  at  all.  Four  days  after  his  burial,  his  wife 
was  desirous  to  have  the  marble  stone  that  lay  upon  him 
changed :  which  being  done,  such  a  fragrant  and  pleasant 
smell  came  from  his  body,  as  though,  instead  of  worms, 
spices  had  sprung  out  of  that  corrupt  carcass  :  of  which 

2IO 


Cbe  Deatb  of  Cbeopfmnius 

strange  thing  when  I  did  in  my  Homilies  make  public 
mention,  and  certain  incredulous  persons  doubted  there- 
of :  upon  a  day,  as  I  was  sitting  in  the  company  of  divers 
noble  men,  those  very  workmen,  which  had  changed  the 
tombstone,  came  unto  me  about  business  of  their  own  : 
whom  in  the  presence  of  the  clergy,  nobility,  and  common 
people,  I  examined,  touching  that  miracle  :  and  they  all 
affirmed  it  to  be  most  true,  saying  that  they  were  in  a 
strange  manner  replenished  with  that  sweet  smell :  and 
they  added  also  certain  other  things  concerning  his 
sepulchre,  that  made  the  miracle  greater,  which,  not  to 
be  over  long,  I  mean  to  pass  over  with  silence. 
li?0tCt.  1  perceive  now  that  my  former  question  is  suffi- 
ciently satisfied  :  yet  another  remaineth  which  troubleth 
my  mind,  and  that  is,  seeing  you  affirmed  before  that 
holy  men's  souls  which  depart  this  life  be  now  in  heaven, 
it  followeth  consequently  that  the  souls  of  the  wicked  be 
also  in  hell  :  and  yet  ignorant  I  am  whether  it  be  so  or 
no,  for  man's  imagination  cannot  conceive  how  the  souls 
of  sinners  can  be  tormented  before  the  day  of  judgment. 

Cbapter  Ctoent^eigbt :  tbat,  as  toe  belietie  tbe 
souls  of  just  anD  perfect  men  to  be  in  beatien : 
so  toe  ougbt  also  to  belietie  tbat  tbe  souls  of  tbe 
toickeo,  after  tbeir  Departure  from  tbe  boop,  be  in 

tell  ^  ©regorp.  If,  by  the  testimony  of  holy  scrip- 
ture, you  believe  that  the  souls  of  holy  and  perfect  men 
be  in  heaven  :  by  the  same  reason  ought  you  also  to 
believe  that  the  souls  of  the  wicked  be  in  hell  :  for  as 
just  men  do  rejoice  and  be  glad  at  the  retribution  of 
eternal  justice,  so  necessary  it  is  that  the  wicked  at  the 
same  justice  should  be  grieved  and  tormented  :  for  as 
heavenly  felicity  doth  glad  the  elect,  so  we  ought  to 
believe  that,  from  the  day  of  their  departure,  fire  doth 
afflict  and  burn  the  reprobate. 

Ureter.  With  what  reason  can  we  believe,  that  corporal 
fire  can  hold  and  torment  an  incorporal  thing  ? 

21  I 


C&e  Dialogues  of  %t  <$reprp 

Chapter  £tocntp-nine :  tfje  reason  tofjp  toe  ougbt 
to  belietie,  ttiat  corporal  fire  can  fjolD  ano  torment 
tfje  spirits  tbat  be  toitbout  boOies-  9  ®regorp,  if 

a  spirit  without  a  body  can  be  holden  and  kept  in  the 
body  of  a  living  man  :  why,  likewise,  after  death,  may 
not  an  incorporal  spirit  be  holden  and  kept  in  corporal 
fire  ? 

Ureter*  The  reason  why  an  incorporal  spirit  in  every 
living  man  is  kept  in  the  body,  is,  because  it  doth  quicken 
and  give  life  to  the  body. 

(£>rCgOrp,  If  an  incorporal  spirit,  Peter,  may  be  kept  in 
that  to  which  it  giveth  life  :  why  also,  for  punishment, 
may  it  not  be  kept  there,  where  it  continually  dieth  ?  And 
we  say  that  a  spirit  is  holden  by  fire,  to  the  end  that,  in 
the  torment  thereof,  it  may  both  by  seeing  and  feeling  be 
punished  :  for  the  soul  by  seeing  of  the  fire  is  afflicted, 
and  burned  it  is,  in  that  it  seeth  itself  to  be  burned  :  and 
so  it  falleth  out,  that  a  corporal  thing  may  burn  that 
which  hath  no  body,  whiles  that  an  invisible  burning 
and  sorrow  is  drawn  from  visible  fire,  and  the  incorporal 
soul  by  means  of  corporal  fire  may  be  tormented  with 
a  spiritual  and  incorporal  flame  :  although  out  of  the 
Gospel  we  also  learn  that  the  soul  is  not  only  tormented 
by  seeing  the  fire,  but  also  by  the  feeling  thereof :  for 
the  rich  glutton,  as  our  Saviour  saith,  was  buried  in  hell. 
And  he  giveth  us  to  understand  that  his  soul  was  kept 
in  fire,  in  that  he  telleth  us  how  he  did  beseech  Abra- 
ham, speaking  to  him  in  this  manner  :  Send  Lazarus,  that 
he  may  dip  the  top  of  his  finger  into  the  water  and  may  refresh 
my  tongue  :  because  I  am  tormented  in  this  flame}  Seeing, 
then,  truth  itself  assureth  us  that  the  sinful  rich  man  was 
condemned  into  fire,  what  wise  man  can  deny  that  the 
souls  of  the  reprobate  be  detained  in  fire  ? 
IPCter*  Both  reason  and  testimony  of  scripture  draweth 
my  mind  to  believe  what  you  say  :  but  yet,  when  I  think 

1  Luke  16,  24. 
212 


Peter  I 


KING    I  HEODORK  US    I  III.   I  IS!  Rl  "."I  H 
I  /run,  iscan  Church,  Innsbruck) 


€f)c  Deatb  of  l^ing:  C&eoDoricus 

not  of  them,  it  returneth  again  to  his  former  opinion  : 
for  I  neither  see,  nor  can  perceive,  how  a  corporal  thing 
can  hold  and  torment  that  which  is  incorporal  and  with- 
out body. 

(£)tC0Otp.  Tell  me,  I  pray  you,  whether  do  you  think 
that  those  Angels  which,  fell  from  heaven  have  bodies 
or  no  ? 

J^CtCt.  What  man  that  hath  his  wits  will  say  that  they 
have  any  bodies  ? 

(£)tC#0tp.  And  whether  do  you  think  that  the  fire  of 
hell  is  corporal  or  spiritual  ? 

IPCtCt.  1  make  no  doubt  but  that  it  is  corporal,  seeing 
most  certain  it  is  that  bodies  be  burned  therewith. 
(£>t£{J0tp»  And  as  certain  it  is  that,  at  the  day  of  judg- 
ment, our  Saviour  shall  say  to  the  reprobate  :  Qo  into 
everlasting  fire^  which  is  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his 
angels}  if,  then,  the  devil  and  his  angels,  though  with- 
out bodies,  shall  be  tormented  with  corporal  fire,  what 
marvel  is  it  that  the  souls  after  their  departure,  and 
before  they  be  united  again  to  their  bodies,  may  in  like 
manner  suffer  corporal  torments  ? 

I[i)0t0t*  The  reason  you  give  is  very  plain,  and  there- 
fore now  there  is  not  any  further  doubt  touching  this 
question,  that  doth  trouble  my  mind. 

Chapter  Cbirtp :  of  tbe  oeatb  of  ifting  C6eoDori= 
cu0,tof)otoa0  an  artan  Jjerettc.  «I  (Srcgorp.  Seeing 

with  such  difficulty  you  are  brought  to  believe,  I  think 
it  worth  my  labour  to  let  you  understand  such  things 
concerning  this  very  point,  as  I  have  received  from  them 
that  be  of  good  credit.  Julian,  who  died  almost  seven 
years  since,  and  had  a  worshipful  office  in  this  church  of 
Rome,  in  which  now  by  God's  providence  I  serve,  used 
often  to  visit  me  (living  as  yet  in  my  Monastery)  and  to 
talk  with  me  of  spiritual  things  for  the  good  of  both 
our  souls.     This  man,  upon  a  day,  told  me  this  story. 

1  Matt.  25,  41. 
213 


Cf)C  Dialogues  of  9t  <£reprp 

"  I  n  the  time  of  king  Theodoricus,"  quoth  he, "  my  wite's 
father,  being  then  in  Sicily,  was  to  return  into  Italy.    The 
ship  in  which  he  came  arrived  at  the   island  of  Liparis  : 
where  he  understood  that  there  dwelt  a  certain  solitary 
man  of  great  virtue,  whom  he  thought  good,  whiles  the 
mariners  were  occupied  about  mending  of  their  ship  and 
tackling,  to  visit,  to  talk  with  him,  and  to  commend  him- 
self to  his  prayers :  and  so  he  did  in  the  company  or  others. 
When  they  were  come  to  the  man  of  God,  amongst  other 
talk  which  they  had,  he  asked  them  this  question  :  'Do 
you,'  quoth  he,  'hear  that  king  Theodoricus  is  dead  ?' 
to  whom  they  quickly  answered  :  '  God  forbid  :  we  left 
him  alive  at  our  departure  from  Rome  ;  and  before  this 
present  we  never  heard  of  any  such  thing.'     Then  the 
servant  of  God  told  them  that  certainly  he  was  dead  : 
'  for  yesterday,'  quoth  he,  *  at  nine  of  the  clock,  he  was 
without  shoes  and  girdle,  and  his  hands  fast    bound, 
brought  betwixt  John  the  Pope  and  Symmachus  the 
Senator,  and  thrown  into  Vulcan's  gulph,  which  is  not  far 
from  this  place.'     When  they  heard  this  news,  care- 
fully they  wrote  down  the  time,  and  at  their  return  into 
Italy,  they  understood  that  king  Theodoricus  died  upon 
that  very  day,  in  which  his  unhappy  passage  out  of  this 
world  and  punishment  was  revealed  to  the  servant  of 
God."     And  for  as  much  as  he  had,  by  miserable  im- 
prisonment, been  the  death  of  Pope  John,  and  also  killed 
Symmachus,  justly  did  he  appear  to  be  thrown  of  them 
into    fire,    whom    before  in    this  life  he  had   unjustly 
condemned. 

Chapter  Cfjirtp^onc :  of  tbe  Dcatb  of  Ecparatus. 

^  At  the  same  time,  when  I  first  desired  to  lead  a  solitary 
life,  a  certain  old  man  called  Deusdedit,  passing  well 
beloved  of  the  whole  city,  and  one  also  that  was  my 
friend  and  familiar  acquaintance,  told  me  that,  in  the 
time  of  the  Goths,  a  certain  worshipful  man,  called 
Reparatus,  came  to  die  ;  who  lying  a  long  while  with 

214 


€f)C  Dcatf)  of  Ecparatus 

his  countenance  changed,  and  his  body  stiff,  many- 
thought  in  very  deed  that  he  had  been  dead  :  and  when 
divers  of  his  friends  and  family  wept  for  his  departure,  all 
on  a  sudden  he  came  to  himself,  to  the  great  admiration 
of  his  mourning  household.  Being  returned  thus  to 
life,  he  bad  them  in  all  haste  to  send  a  boy  to  the 
church  of  St.  Lawrence  in  Damaso  (so  called  of  him 
that  built  it)  and  quickly  to  bring  word  what  was  be- 
come of  Tiburtius  the  Priest.  This  Tiburtius,  as  the 
speech  went,  was  much  given  to  a  dissolute  and  wanton 
life  ;  and  Florentius,  who  at  that  time  was  a  Priest  in 
the  same  church,  remembereth  full  well  his  conversa- 
tion and  manner  of  life.  When  the  messenger  was 
gone,  Reparatus,  that  was  returned  to  life,  told  them 
that  in  the  place  where  he  was,  he  saw  a  great  wood-pile 
made  ready,  and  Tiburtius  brought  forth  and  laid  upon 
it,  and  there  to  have  been  burnt  with  fire.  "  Then  another 
fire,"  quoth  he,  "was  prepared,  which  was  so  high  that  it 
reached  from  earth  to  heaven  " :  but  although  they  de- 
manded for  whom  it  was,  yet  did  he  not  tell  them  :  for 
when  he  had  spoken  these  words  straightways  he  died  : 
and  the  boy,  which  was  sent  to  see  what  was  become  of 
Tiburtius,  returned  with  news,  that  he  found  him,  a 
little  before  his  coming,  departed  this  life.  By  which 
we  may  learn  that,  seeing  this  Reparatus  was  carried  to 
the  places  of  torments  to  see  them,  returned  afterward 
to  life  to  tell  what  he  had  there  beheld,  and  straight 
after  left  this  world  :  that  he  saw  not  all  these  things 
for  himself,  but  for  us  that  yet  live,  and  have  time 
granted  to  amend  our  wicked  lives.  And  the  reason 
why  Reparatus  saw  that  great  wood-pile  burning,  was 
not  that  we  should  think  that  the  fire  of  hell  is  nourished 
with  any  wood  :  but  because  he  was  to  make  relation 
of  these  things  to  them  that  remained  still  in  this  world, 
he  saw  that  fire  prepared  for  the  wicked,  to  be  made  of 
the  same  matter  of  which  our  fire  is,  tothe  end  that,  by 

215 


£f)e  Dialogues  of  %t  <$rcgorp 

those  things  which  we  know  and  be  acquainted  with,  we 
should  learn  to  be  afraid  of  those,  which  yet  we  have 
not  seen  nor  have  any  experience. 

Cbapter  CbirtHtot) :  of  tfje  Deatb  of  a  Courtier : 
tofjose  gratje  tjurneo  toitf)  fire.  <I  Maximianus, 

Bishop  of  Syracusis,  a  man  of  holy  life,  who  for  a  long 
time  in  this  city  had  the  government  of  my  Monastery, 
often  told  me  a  terrible  story,  which  fell  out  in  the  pro- 
vince of  Valeria.  A  certain  courtier,  upon  Easter  even, 
was  godfather  to  a  young  maid,  who,  after  the  fast  was 
ended,  returned  home  to  his  house  :  where  drinking 
more  wine  than  enough,  he  desired  that  his  god-daughter 
might  tarry  with  him  :  whom  that  night,  which  is  hor- 
rible to  speak  of,  he  did  utterly  undo.  In  the  morning, 
up  he  rose,  and  with  guilty  conscience  thought  good  to 
go  unto  the  bath,  as  though  the  water  of  that  place 
could  have  washed  away  the  filthiness  of  his  sin,  yet  he 
went  and  washed  himself.  Then  he  began  to  doubt, 
whether  it  were  best  to  go  unto  the  church  or  no  ;  fear- 
ing, on  the  one  side,  what  men  would  say,  if  he  went 
not  upon  that  so  great  a  festival  day  ;  and  on  the  other, 
if  he  did  go,  he  trembled  to  think  of  God's  judgment. 
In  conclusion,  shame  of  the  world  overcame  him,  and 
therefore  to  the  church  he  went :  where  yet  he  remained 
with  great  fear  and  horror,  looking  every  instant  that  he 
should  have  been  delivered  to  the  devil,  and  tormented 
before  all  the  people.  At  that  solemn  mass,  though  he 
did  wonderfully  shake  for  fear,  yet  he  scaped  free  from 
all  punishment  :  and  so  he  departed  very  joyfully  from 
church  :  and  the  next  day  after,  came  thither  without 
any  fear  at  all :  and  so  merrily  and  securely  he  continued 
for  six  days  together,  thinking  with  himself  that  either 
God  saw  not  that  his  abominable  sin,  or  else  that  mercifully 
he  had  pardoned  the  same.  Upon  the  seventh  day,  by 
sudden  death  he  was  taken  out  of  this  world.  And 
being  buried,  for  a  long  time  after,  in  the  sight  of  the 

216 


IftnotolcDgc  of  tbc  faints 

whole  town,  a  flame  of  fire  came  out  of  his  grave,  which 
burnt  his  bones  so  long,  until  it  consumed  the  very 
grave  itself,  in  such  sort  that  the  earth  which  was  raised 
up  with  a  little  bank,  appeared  lower  than  the  rest  of 
the  ground.  By  which  fact  almighty  God  declared  what 
his  soul  suffered  in  the  other  world,  whose  dead  body 
flaming  fire  consumed  in  this.  To  us  also  he  hath  left 
a  fearful  example,  that  we  may  thereby  learn  what  the 
living  and  sensible  soul  suffereth  for  sin  committed, 
when  as  the  sensible  bones  by  such  a  punishment  of  fire 
were  burnt  to  nothing. 

H?0t0t,  Desirous  I  am  to  know  whether  in  heaven  the 
good  know  the  good,  and  the  wicked  in  hell  know  one 
another. 

Chapter  Cbittp^tfjtee :  tfmt  in  fjeatoen  tbc  gooD 
fmoto  tbe  pot) :  ant)  in  bell  tbc  toicfeeti  fjatic  knoto- 
leoge  of  tbe  toiefceo.  <I  ®reprp.  The  truth  of  this 

question  we  find  most  clearly  resolved  in  those  words  of 
our  Saviour  before  alleged  :  in  which,  when  it  is  said 
that :  There  was  a  certain  rich  man,  and  he  was  clad  with 
purple  and  silk)  and  he  fared  every  day  magnifically :  and  there 
was  a  certain  beggar  called  Lazarus,  that  lay  at  his  gate  full 
of  sores,  desiring  to  be  filled  of  the  crumbs  that  fell  from  the  rich 
mans  table,  and  none  did  give  him,  but  the  dogs  also  came 
and  licked  his  sores ;  straightways  it  is  there  also  said, 
that  :  Lazarus  died,  and  was  carried  of  the  Angels  into 
Abraham  s  bosom :  and  the  rich  man  also  died,  and  was 
buried  in  hell :  who,  lifting  up  his  eyes,  being  in  torments,  saw 
Abraham  afar  off,  and  Lazarus  in  his  bosom,  and  he  cried 
saying:  Father  Abraham,  have  ^mercy  on  me,  and  send 
Lazarus  that  he  may  dip  the  tip  of  his  finger  into  water  for 
to  cool  my  tongue,  because  I  am  tormented  in  this  flame.  To 
whom  Abraham  answered  :  Son,  remember  that  thou  diddest 
receive  good  things  in  thy  lifetime,  and  Lazarus  likewise  evil.1 
By  which  words,  the  rich  man,  having  no  hope  of  salva- 

1  Luke  16,  19-25. 
217 


Cf)C  Dialogues  of  %t  ®tcg;otp 

tion  for  himself,  beginneth  to  make  suit  for  his  friends, 
saying  :  Father,  I  beseech  thee,  that  thou  wouldest  send  him 
unto  my  father  s  house,  for  I  have  five  brethren,  for  to  testify 
unto  them,  lest  they  also  come  into  this  place  of  torments.  In 
which  words  we  see  plainly,  that  the  good  do  know  the 
good,  and  the  bad  have  knowledge  of  the  bad.  For  if 
Abraham  had  not  known  Lazarus,  never  would  he  have 
spoken  to  the  rich  man  being  in  torments,  and  made 
mention  of  his  affliction  and  misery  past,  saying  :  that 
he  had  received  evil  things  in  his  life.  And  if  the  bad  did 
not  know  the  bad,  never  would  the  rich  man  in  torments 
have  remembered  his  brethren  that  were  absent  :  for 
shall  we  think  that  he  knew  not  them  that  were  present 
with  him,  who  was  so  careful  to  pray  for  them  that  were 
absent  ? 

By  which  we  learn  also  the  answer  to  another  ques- 
tion, which  you  demanded  not  :  and  that  is,  that  the  good 
do  know  the  bad,  and  the  bad  the  good.  For  Abraham 
knew  the  rich  man,  to  whom  he  said :  Thou  hast  received 
good  things  in  thy  life :  and  Lazarus,  God's  elect  servant, 
was  also  known  to  the  rich  reprobate,  whom  by  name 
he  desired  that  he  might  be  sent  unto  him,  saying :  Send 
Lazarus  that  he  may  dip  the  tip  of  his  finger  into  water,  and 
cool  my  tongue :  by  which  mutual  knowledge  on  both  sides, 
the  reward  likewise  to  both  parts  increaseth,  for  the  good 
do  more  rejoice,  when  they  behold  them  also  in  felicity 
whom  before  they  loved :  and  the  wicked  seeing  them, 
whom  in  this  world  not  respecting  God  they  did  love, 
to  be  now  punished  in  their  company,  tormented  they 
are,  not  only  with  their  own  pains,  but  also  with  the 
pains  of  their  friends.  Beside  all  this,  a  more  wonder- 
ful grace  is  bestowed  upon  the  Saints  in  heaven  :  for  they 
know  not  only  them  with  whom  they  were  acquainted 
in  this  world,  but  also  those  whom  before  they  never  saw, 
and  converse  with  them  in  such  familiar  sort  as  though 
in  times  past  they  had  seen  and  known  one  another : 

218 


ITfeions  of  tbe  ©tber  £OorlD 

and  therefore  when  they  shall  see  the  ancient  fathers  in 
that  place  of  perpetual  bliss,  they  shall  then  know  them 
by  sight,  whom  always  they  knew  in  their  lives  and 
conversation.  For  seeing  they  do  in  that  place  with 
unspeakable  brightness  (common  to  all)  behold  God, 
what  is  there  that  they  know  not,  that  know  him  who 
knoweth  all  things  ? 

Cbapter  CWrtp=four :  of  a  certain  religious  man, 
tbat  at  bis  oeatb  sato  tbe  IPropbets.  q  For  a  certain 

religious  man  of  my  Monastery,  that  lived  a  virtuous 
life,  dying  some  four  years  since,  saw  at  the  very  time 
of  his  departure  (as  other  religious  men  do  report,  that 
were  present)  the  Prophet  Jonas,  Ezechiel,  and  Daniel, 
and  by  their  names  called  them  his  Lords,  saying  that 
they  were  come  unto  him :  and  as  he  was  bowing  his 
head  downward  to  them  for  reverence,  he  gave  up  the 
ghost :  whereby  we  perceive  what  perfect  knowledge 
shall  be  in  that  immortal  life,  when  as  this  man,  being 
yet  in  corruptible  flesh,  knew  the  Prophets  whom  he 
never  saw. 

Chapter  £f»rtp*fft)e :  boto  sometime  souls 
reaop  to  Depart  tbis  toorlD,  tbat  fenoto  not  one 
anotber,  knoto  pet  tobat  torments  for  tbeir  sins, 
or  like  retoaros  for  tbeir  gooD  occos,  tbep  sball 
receive.  3nD  of  tbe  &eatb  of 31obn,  Orsus,  <£umor= 

pfriUS,  anD  ^tepben,  H  And  sometime  it  falleth  out 
that  the  soul,  before  it  departeth,  knoweth  them  with 
whom,  by  reason  of  equality  of  sins  or  rewards,  it  shall 
in  the  next  world  remain  in  one  place.  For  old 
Eleutherius,  a  man  of  holy  life,  of  whom  in  the  former 
book  I  spake  much,  saith  that  he  had  a  natural  brother 
of  his,  called  John,  who  lived  together  with  him  in  his 
Monastery,  who,  fourteen  days  beforehand,  told  the 
monks  when  he  was  to  die  :  and  three  days  before  he 
departed  this  life,  he  fell  into  an  ague,  and  when  his 
time  was  come,  he  received  the  mystery  of  our  Lord's 

219 


£f)C  Dialogues  of  %t.  Gregory 

body  and  blood  :  and  calling  for  the  monks  about  him, 
he  willed  them  to  sing  in  his  presence,  prescribing  them 
a  certain  anthem  concerning  himself,' saying  :  Open  unto 
me  the  gates  of  justice,  and  being  gone  into  them,  I  will  confess 
unto  our  Lord  :  this  is  the  gate  of  our  Lord,  just  men  shall 
enter  in  by  it  ;x  and  whiles  the  monks  about  him  were 
singing  this  anthem,  suddenly  with  a  loud  and  long 
voice  he  cried  out,  saying  :  "  Come  away,  Ursus  "  : 
straight  after  which  words  his  soul  departed  this  mortal 
life.  The  monks  marvelled,  because  they  knew  not  the 
meaning  of  that,  which  at  his  death  he  so  cried  for  :  and 
therefore  after  his  departure,  all  the  Monastery  was  in 
sorrow  and  affliction.  Four  days  after,  necessary  busi- 
ness they  had,  to  send  some  of  their  brethren  to  another 
Monastery  far  distant :  to  which  place  when  they  came, 
they  found  all  the  monks  in  great  heaviness,  and 
demanding  the  reason,  they  told  them  that  they  did 
lament  the  desolation  of  their  house  :  "  for  four  days 
since,"  quoth  they,  "  one  of  our  monks  died,  whose  life 
kept  us  all  in  this  place  "  :  and  when  they  inquired  his 
name,  they  understood  that  it  was  Ursus :  asking  also 
at  what  hour  he  left  this  world,  they  found  that  it  was 
at  that  very  instant,  when  he  was  called  by  John  who 
died  with  them.  Out  of  which  we  may  learn  that  the 
merits  of  either  were  alike  ;  and  that  in  the  next  world 
they  live  familiarly  together  in  one  mansion,  who  at  one 
time  like  fellows  departed  this  life. 

Here  also  will  I  tell  you  what  I  heard  from  the 
mouths  of  my  neighbours,  at  such  time  as  I  was  yet 
a  layman,  and  dwelled  in  my  father's  house,  which 
descended  to  me  by  inheritance.  A  certain  widow  there 
was  not  far  from  me,  called  Galla,  which  had  a  young 
man  to  her  son,  whose  name  was  Eumorphius  :  not  far 
trom  whom  dwelt  one  Stephen  called  also  Optio.  This 
Eumorphius,  lying  sick  at  the  point  of  death,  called  for 

1   Psalm  1 1 8,  19-20. 

220 


Z 


r. 


z 

o 

p4 

c 
u 


Vision*  of  t&e  Dtber  motto 

his  man,  commanding  him  in  all  haste  to  go  unto  Stephen 
Optio,  and  to  desire  him  without  all  delay  to  come 
unto  him,  because  there  was  a  ship  ready,  to  carry  them 
both  into  Sicily.  But  because  his  man  refused  to  go, 
supposing  that  through  extremity  of  sickness  he  knew 
not  what  he  spake,  his  master  very  earnestly  urged  him 
forward,  saying  :  "  Go  thy  way,  and  tell  him  what  I  say, 
for  I  am  not  mad,  as  thou  thinkest."  Hereupon  away 
he  went  towards  Stephen,  but  as  he  was  in  the  midst 
of  his  journey,  he  met  one  that  asked  him  whither  he 
was  going,  and  when  he  told  him,  that  he  was  by  his 
master  sent  to  Stephen  Optio  :  "  You  lose  your  labour," 
quoth  the  other,  "  for  I  come  now  from  thence  :  and  he 
died  this  very  hour."  Back  again  upon  this  news  he 
returned  to  his  master,  Eumorphius  :  but  before  he 
could  get  home,  he  found  him  dead.  And  so,  by  con- 
conferring  their  meeting  together,  and  the  length  of  the 
way,  apparent  it  was  that  both  of  them,  at  one  and  the 
self  same  instant,  departed  this  mortal  life. 
K?0t0t.  Very  terrible  it  is  that  you  say  :  but  what,  I 
pray  you,  is  the  reason,  that  he  saw  a  ship  at  his  depar- 
ture ?  Or  why  did  he  say  that  he  was  to  go  into  Sicily  ? 
(2DtC0Otp.  The  soul  needeth  not  anything  to  carry  it  : 
yet  no  wonder  it  is,  if  that  appeared  to  the  soul  being 
yet  in  the  body,  which  by  means  of  the  body  it  had 
oftentimes  before  seen  :  to  the  end  that  we  should  thereby 
understand  whither  his  soul  might  spiritually  be  carried. 
And  in  that  he  said  he  was  to  go  into  Sicily,  what  else 
can  be  meant  thereby,  but  that  there  be  in  the  islands 
of  that  country  more  than  in  any  place  else,  certain  gaping 
gulphs  of  torments,  casting  out  fire  continually  ?  and  as 
they  say  that  know  them,  daily  do  they  wax  greater,  and 
enlarge  themselves :  so  that  the  world  drawing  to  an  end, 
and  so,  consequently,  more  coming  thither  to  be  burnt 
in  those  flaming  dungeons,  so  much  the  more  do  those 
places  of  torments   open  and  become  wider.     Which 

221 


C6e  Dialogues  of  %t.  <£regorp 

strange  thing  almighty  God,  for  the  terror  and  amend- 
ment of  the  living,  would  have  extant  in  this  world,  that 
infidels  which  believe  not  the  unspeakable  pains  of  hell, 
may  with  their  eyes  see  the  places  of  torments,  which 
they  list  not  to  credit  when  it  is  told  them.  And  that 
both  the  elect  and  reprobate,  whose  life  and  conversation 
hath  been  alike,  shall  after  death  be  carried  to  like  places, 
the  saying  of  our  Saviour  doth  teach  us,  though  we  had 
no  examples  to  prove  the  same  ;  for  of  the  elect  himself 
saith  in  the  Gospel  :  In  the  house  of  my  Father  there  be 
many  mansions}  For  if  there  were  not  inequality  of 
rewards  in  the  everlasting  felicity  of  heaven,  then  were 
there  not  many  mansions,  but  rather  one  :  wherefore 
there  be  many  mansions,  in  which  divers  orders  and 
degrees  of  God's  saints  be  distinguished,  who  in  common 
do  all  rejoice  of  the  society  and  fellowship  of  their 
merits,  and  yet  all  they  that  laboured  receive  one  penny, 
though  they  remain  in  distinct  mansions  :  because  the 
felicity  and  joy  which  there  they  possess  is  one,  and  the 
reward,  which  by  divers  and  unequal  good  works  they 
receive  is  not  one  but  divers  :  which  to  be  true  our 
Saviour  assureth  us,  when,  talking  of  his  coming  to 
judgment,  he  saith  :  Then  I  will  say  to  the  reapers :  Gather 
up  the  cockle^  and  bind  it  into  bundles  to  burn?  For  the 
Angels,  which  be  the  reapers,  do  then  bind  up  in  bundles 
the  cockle  to  burn,  when  like  with  like  are  put  together 
in  torment :  as  the  proud  to  burn  in  hell  with  the  proud, 
carnal  with  the  carnal,  covetous  with  the  covetous, 
deceitful  with  the  deceitful,  envious  with  the  envious, 
and  infidels  with  infidels  :  when  therefore  those  that 
were  like  in  sinful  life,  be  condemned  to  like  torments, 
then  be  they  as  it  were  cockle  bound  together  in  bundles 
to  be  burnt. 

IPCtCt,  You  have  given  a  sufficient  reason  for  satisfac- 
tion to  my  demand  :  yet  I  beseech  you  to  inform  me 
1  John  14,  2.  2  Matt.  13,  30. 

222 


Visions  of  tbe  Dtber  OToriD 

further,  what  the  cause  is,  that  some  be  called  out  of 
this  world,  as  it  were  through  error  :  who  afterward 
return  again  to  life,  saying  that  they  heard  how  they 
were  not  the  men  which  were  sent  for  out  of  this  life. 

Chapter  Cfnrt^sir :  of  tbose  souls  tobicf)  seem 
as  it  toere  tbrougb  error  to  be  tafeen  out  of  tbcit 
boDies :  anD  of  toe  Deatb  and  retiring  of  a  monk 
calleo  Peter :  of  tfre  Deatf),  likewise,  anD  raising 
up  again  of  one  Stephen :  anD  of  tbe  strange 
tJision  of  a  certain  solDier,  q  ^rcgorp,  when  this 

happeneth,  Peter,  it  is  not,  if  it  be  well  considered,  any 
error,  but  an  admonition.  For  God  of  his  great  and 
bountiful  mercy  so  disposeth,  that  some  after  their  death 
do  straightways  return  again  to  life,  that  having  seen  the 
torments  of  hell,  which  before  when  they  heard  they 
would  not  believe,  they  may  now  at  least  tremble  at, 
after  they  have  with  their  eyes  beheld  them.  For  a 
certain  Sclavonion,  who  was  a  monk  and  lived  with  me 
here  in  this  city  in  my  Monastery,  used  to  tell  me  that 
at  such  time  as  he  dwelt  in  the  wilderness,  that  he  knew 
one  Peter,  a  monk  born  in  Spain,  who  lived  with  him 
in  the  vast  desert  called  Evasa  :  which  Peter  (as  he  said) 
told  him  how,  before  he  came  to  dwell  in  that  place,  by 
a  certain  sickness  he  died,  and  was  straightways  restored 
to  life  again,  affirming  that  he  had  seen  the  torments  and 
innumerable  places  of  hell,  and  divers,  who  were  mighty 
men  in  this  world,  hanging  in  those  flames  ;  and  that  as 
himself  was  carried  to  be  thrown  also  into  the  same  fire, 
suddenly  an  Angel  in  a  beautiful  attire  appeared,  who 
would  not  suffer  him  to  be  cast  into  those  torments  : 
but  spake  unto  him  in  this  manner  :  "  Go  thy  way  back 
again,  and  hereafter  carefully  look  unto  thyself,  how 
thou  leadest  thy  life  "  :  after  which  words  his  body  by 
little  and  little  became  warm,  and  himself,  waking  out 
of  the  sleep  of  everlasting  death,  reported  all  such  things 
as  happened  about  him  :   after  which   time  he  bound 

223 


Ctje  Dialogues  of  ^>t  ategorp 

himself  to  such  fasting  and  watching,  that  though  he 
had  said  nothing,  yet  his  very  life  and  conversation  did 
speak  what  torments  he  had  seen  and  was  afraid  of: 
and  so  God's  merciful  providence  wrought  in  his  tem- 
poral death  that  he  died  not  everlastingly. 

But  because  man's  heart  is  passing  obdurate  and  hard, 
hereof  it  cometh  that  though  others  have  the  like  vision, 
and  see  the  same  pains,  yet  do  they  not  always  reap  the 
like  profit.  For  the  honourable  man  Stephen,  whom 
you  knew  very  well,  told  me  of  himself,  that  at  such 
time  as  he  was  upon  business  resident  in  the  city  of 
Constantinople,  that  he  fell  sick  and  died  ;  and  when 
they  sought  for  a  surgeon  to  bowel  him,  and  to  embalm 
his  body,  and  could  not  get  any,  he  lay  unburied  all  the 
night  following:  in  which  space  his  soul  was  carried  to 
the  dungeon  of  hell,  where  he  saw  many  things,  which 
before  when  he  heard  he  little  believed.  But  when  he 
was  brought  before  the  judge  that  sat  there,  he  would 
not  admit  him  to  his  presence,  saying :  "  I  commanded 
not  this  man  to  be  brought,  but  Stephen  the  smith  "  : 
upon  which  words  he  was  straightway  restored  to  life, 
and  Stephen  the  smith,  that  dwelled  hard  by,  at  that  very 
hour  departed  this  life :  whose  death  did  show  that  the 
words  which  he  heard  were  most  true.  But  though  the 
foresaid  Stephen  escaped  death  in  this  manner  at  that 
time,  yet  three  years  since,  in  that  mortality  which 
lamentably  wasted  this  city  (and  in  which,  as  you  know, 
men  with  their  corporal  eyes  did  behold  arrows  that 
came  from  heaven,  which  did  strike  divers),  the  same 
man  ended  his  days  :  at  which  time  a  certain  soldier 
being  also  brought  to  the  point  of  death,  his  soul  was  in 
such  sort  carried  out  of  his  body,  that  he  lay  void  of  all 
sense  and  feeling,  but  coming  quickly  again  to  himself, 
he  told  them  that  were  present,  what  strange  things  he 
had  seen.  For  he  said  (as  many  report  that  know  it 
very  well)  that  he  saw  a  bridge,  under  which  a  black  and 

224 


Vtoions  of  t&e  flDt&er  ftHotlD 

smoky  river  did  run,  that  had  a  filthy  and  intolerable 
smell :  but  upon  the  farther  side  thereof  there  were 
pleasant  green  meadows  full  of  sweet  flowers,  in  which 
also  there  were  divers  companies  of  men  apparelled  in 
white :  and  such  a  delicate  savour  there  was,  that  the 
fragrant  odour  thereof  did  give  wonderful  content  to  all 
them  that  dwelt  and  walked  in  that  place.  Divers 
particular  mansions  also  there  were,  all  shining  with 
brightness  and  light,  and  especially  one  magnifical  and 
sumptuous  house  which  was  a  building,  the  brick 
whereof  seemed  to  be  of  gold,  but  whose  it  was,  that  he 
knew  not. 

There  were  also  upon  the  bank  of  the  foresaid  river 
certain  houses,  but  some  of  them  the  stinking  vapour 
which  rose  from  the  river  did  touch,  and  some  other  it 
touched  not  at  all.  Now  those  that  desired  to  pass  over 
the  foresaid  bridge,  were  subject  to  this  manner  of  trial : 
if  any  that  was  wicked  attempted  to  go  over,  down  he 
fell  into  that  dark  and  stinking  river ;  but  those  that  were 
just  and  not  hindered  by  sin,  securely  and  easily  passed 
over  to  those  pleasant  and  delicate  places.  There  he 
said  also  that  he  saw  Peter,  who  was  steward  of  the 
Pope's  family,  and  died  some  four  years  since,  thrust 
into  a  most  filthy  place,  where  he  was  bound  and  kept 
down  with  a  great  weight  of  iron  :  and  inquiring  why 
he  was  so  used,  he  received  that  answer,  which  all  we 
that  knew  his  life  can  affirm  to  be  most  true  :  for  it  was 
told  him  that  he  suffered  that  pain,  because  when  him- 
self was  upon  any  occasion  to  punish  other,  that  he  did 
it  more  upon  cruelty  than  to  shew  his  obedience  ;  of 
which  his  merciless  disposition  none  that  knew  him  can 
be  ignorant.  There  also  he  said  that  he  saw  a  Priest 
whom  he  knew  :  who  coming  to  the  foresaid  bridge, 
passed  over  with  as  great  security,  as  he  lived  in  this 
world  sincerely. 

Likewise,  upon  the  same  bridge  he  said  that  he  did 

225  p 


€f)c  Dialogues  of  §>t.  (Stcgorp 

see  this  Stephen,  whom  before  we  spake  of,  who  being 
about  to  go  over,  his  foot  slipped,  and  half  his  body 
hanging  beside  the  bridge,  he  was  of  certain  terrible 
men,  that  rose  out  of  the  river,  drawn  by  the  legs 
downward  :  and  by  certain  other  white  and  beautiful 
persons,  he  was  by  the  arms  pulled  upward  :  and  whiles 
they  strove  thus,  the  wicked  spirits  to  draw  him  down- 
ward, and  the  good  to  lift  him  upward,  he  that  beheld 
all  this  strange  sight  returned  to  life,  not  knowing  in 
conclusion  what  became  of  him.  By  which  miraculous 
vision  we  learn  this  thing  concerning  the  life  of  Stephen, 
to  wit,  that  in  him  the  sins  of  the  flesh  did  strive  with 
his  works  of  alms.  For  in  that  he  was  by  the  legs 
drawn  downward,  and  by  the  arms  plucked  upward, 
apparent  it  is,  that  both  he  loved  to  give  alms,  and  yet 
did  not  perfectly  resist  the  sins  of  the  flesh,  which  did 
pull  him  downward :  but  in  that  secret  examination  of 
the  supreme  judge,  which  of  them  had  the  victory,  that 
neither  we  know,  nor  he  that  saw  it.  Yet  most  certain 
it  is,  that  the  same  Stephen,  after  that  he  had  seen  the 
places  of  hell,  as  before  was  said,  and  returned  again  to 
his  body,  did  never  perfectly  amend  his  former  wicked 
life,  seeing  many  years  after  he  departed  this  world, 
leaving  us  in  doubt  whether  he  were  saved  or  damned. 
Whereby  we  may  learn,  that  when  any  have  the  torments 
of  hell  shewn  them,  that  to  some  it  is  for  their  com- 
modity, and  to  others  for  their  testimony :  that  the 
former  may  see  those  miseries  to  avoid  them,  and  these 
other  to  be  so  much  the  more  punished,  in  that  they 
would  not  take  heed  of  those  torments,  which  they  both 
knew  and  with  their  eyes  beheld. 

JPCtCt,  What,  I  beseech  you,  was  meant  by  the  build- 
ing of  that  house  in  those  places  of  delight,  with  bricks 
of  gold  ?  For  it  seemeth  very  ridiculous,  that  in  the 
next  life  we  should  have  need  of  any  such  kind  of 
metal. 

226 


DeusDeDtt  t&c  §>f)oema&er 

(KHfmt  10  meant  bp  tbe  builDing  of  tfje  bouse  in  tbose 
pleasant  places.  3nD  of  one  DeusoeOtt,  tofiose 
fjouse  toas  seen  to  be  built  upon  t&e  ^aturoap. 

^  (£>te$Otp,  What  man  of  sense  can  think  so  ?  but  by 
that  which  was  shewn  there,  whosoever  he  was,  for 
whom  that  house  was  built,  we  learn  plainly  what 
virtuous  works  he  did  in  this  world :  for  he  that  by 
plenty  of  alms  doth  merit  the  reward  of  eternal  light, 
certain  it  is,  that  he  doth  build  his  house  with  gold. 
For  the  same  soldier  who  had  this  vision  said  also, 
which  I  forgot  before  to  tell  you,  that  old  men,  and 
young,  girls,  and  boys,  did  carry  those  bricks  of  gold 
for  the  building  of  that  house  :  by  which  we  learn  that 
those  to  whom  we  shew  compassion  in  this  world,  do 
labour  for  us  in  the  next.  There  dwelt  also  hard  by  us 
a  religious  man,  called  Deusdedit,  who  was  a  shoe- 
maker, concerning  whom  another  saw  by  revelation  that 
he  had  in  the  next  world  an  house  a  building  ;  but  the 
workmen  thereof  laboured  only  upon  the  Saturday. 
Who  afterward  enquiring  more  diligently  how  he  lived, 
found  that  whatsoever  he  got  by  his  labour  all  the  week, 
and  was  not  spent  upon  necessary  provision  of  meat 
and  apparel,  all  that  upon  the  Saturday  he  bestowed 
upon  the  poor  in  alms  at  St.  Peter's  church:  and  there- 
fore see  what  reason  there  was,  that  his  building  went 
forward  upon  the  Saturday. 

l^etet.  You  have  given  me  very  good  satisfaction 
touching  this  one  point :  yet  desirous  I  am  further  to 
know,  what  the  reason  was  that  some  of  those  habitations 
were  touched  by  the  stinking  vapour,  and  some  were 
not  ;  and  what  is  meant  by  the  bridge  and  river  which 
he  saw. 

(£>te#0tp.  By  the  representation  of  these  things,  Peter, 
are  expressed  the  causes  which  they  do  signify.  For  the 
bridge,  by  which  he  beheld  God's  servants  to  pass  unto 
those  pleasant  places,  doth  teach  us  that  the  path  is  very 

227 


£&c  Dialogues  of  §>t.  ©regorp 

strait  which  leadeth  to  everlasting  life  :  »  and  the  stinking 
river,  which  he  saw  running  beneath,  signifieth  that  the 
filthy  corruption  of  vice  in  this  world  doth  daily  run  to 
the  downfall  of  carnal  pleasure.  And  that  some  of  the 
habitations  were  touched  with  the  stinking  vapour,  and 
some  were  not,  what  is  meant  else,  but  that  there  be 
divers  which  do  many  good  works,  yet  in  their  soul 
they  are  touched  with  the  delight  of  carnal  sins  ?  and 
therefore  very  great  reason  there  is,  that  in  the  next 
world  such  should  taste  of  a  stinking  vapour,  whom 
filthy  carnality  did  delight  in  this  ;  and  therefore  blessed 
Job,  perceiving  the  pleasure  of  the  flesh  to  be  stinking, 
pronounceth  this  sentence  of  the  wanton  and  carnal 
man  :  His  sweetness  be  worms.2  But  those  that  do 
preserve  their  heart  free  from  all  pleasure  of  carnal 
thoughts,  have  not  their  houses  touched  with  any  such 
stinking  vapour  :  and  here  we  have  also  to  note,  that 
he  saw  one  and  the  same  thing  both  to  be  a  vapour  and 
also  to  have  an  ill  savour,  because  carnal  delight  doth 
so  obscure  the  soul  which  it  hath  infected,  that  it  can 
not  see  the  brightness  of  true  light  :  for  the  more 
pleasure  it  hath  in  the  inferior  part,  the  more  darkness 
it  hath  in  the  superior,  which  doth  hinder  it  from  the 
contemplation  of  heavenly  mysteries. 
U?£tCt.  Is  there  any  text  of  holy  scripture,  to  prove 
that  carnal  sins  be  punished  with  stinking  and  bad 
savours  ? 

£Df  t&e  IPunisfmtent  of  tfte  men  of  §>oDom. 

^  (£>tegOtp*  There  is :  for  in  (genesis 3  we  read  that  our 
Lord  rained  fire  and  brimstone  upon  the  city  of  Sodom  : 
that  both  fire  might  burn  them,  and  the  stench  of 
brimstone  smother  and  kill  them  :  for  seeing  they  burnt 
with  the  unlawful  lovei'of  corruptible  flesh,  by  God's 
just  judgment  they  perished  both  by  fire  and  an  un- 
savoury smell  ;  to  the  end  they  might  know  that  they 

1   Matt.  7,  14.  2  Job  24,  20.  3  Gen.  19,  24. 

228 


£fje  Conversion  of  CfjeoDorus 

had,  by  the  pleasure  of  their  stinking  life,  incurred  the 
sorrows  of  eternal  death. 

I£)0t0t»  Concerning  those  things  which  before  I  doubted 
of,  I  find  myself  now  so  fully  satisfied,  that  I  have  not 
any  further  question  to  move. 

Chapter  Crjirt^setoen :  boto  tfje  souls  of  some 
men,  being  pet  in  tbeir  boOies,  Do  see  some 
spiritual  punishment:  anD  of  toat  tofjicb  6ap^ 
peneD  to  toe  bop  CbeoDorus.  q  ®regorp.  we  have 

also  to  know  that  sometime  the  souls,  whiles  they  are 
in  their  bodies,  do  behold  some  spiritual  punishment  : 
which  yet  happeneth  to  some  for  their  own  good,  and 
to  others  for  the  edification  of  them  that  hear  thereof. 
For  there  was  one  Theodorus  (which  story  I  remember 
that  in  mine  Homilies  to  the  people  I  have  also  spoken 
of)  who  was  a  very  unruly  lad,  and,  more  upon  neces- 
sity than  of  his  own  good  will,  in  the  company  of  his 
brother  entered  into  my  Monastery  :  and  so  little 
pleasure  he  took  in  spiritual  talk,  that  it  was  death  to 
him  to  hear  anything  tending  to  the  good  of  his  own 
soul,  for  he  was  so  far  from  doing  any  good  work,  that 
he  could  not  endure  to  hear  thereof :  and  he  would 
openly  protest,  sometimes  by  swearing,  sometimes  in 
anger,  and  sometimes  in  scoffing  sort,  that  he  never 
meant  to  take  upon  him  the  habit  of  a  religious  life. 
This  untoward  boy,  in  the  late  mortality  which  con- 
sumed the  greatest  part  of  this  city,  was  grievously 
strooken  :  whereof  he  lay  sore  sick  :  and  being  at  last 
come  to  the  point  of  death,  all  the  monks  repaired  to 
his  chamber,  to  pray  for  the  happy  departure  of  his 
soul,  which  seemed  not  to  be  far  off:  for  the  one  half  of 
his  body  was  already  dead,  and  only  in  his  breast  a  little 
life  remained,  and  therefore  the  nearer  they  saw  him  to 
his  end,  the  more  fervently  did  they  commend  him  to 
God's  mercy.  Whiles  they  were  thus  busied,  suddenly 
he  cried  out  to  them,  and  with  great  clamour  went  about 

229 


€f)e  Dialogic  of  §>t.  (Srcgorp 

to  interrupt  their  devotions,  saying  :  "  Depart  and 
away,  for  behold  I  am  delivered  over  to  a  dragon  to  be 
devoured,  and  your  presence  doth  let  him,  that  he  can 
not  dispatch  me.  My  head  he  hath  already  swallowed 
up  in  his  mouth,  and  therefore  go  your  ways,  that  my 
torments  be  not  the  longer,  and  that  he  may  effect  that 
which  he  is  about  to  do  :  for  if  I  be  given  him  to 
devour,  why  do  you  keep  me  here  in  longer  pain  ? ' 
At  these  fearful  words  the  monks  said  unto  him  : 
"  Why  do  you  speak  thus,  good  brother  ?  Bless  your- 
self with  the  sign  of  the  holy  cross''  :  to  whom  he 
answered  :  "  Willingly  I  would,  but  I  can  not,  I  am  so 
loaden  with  this  dragon's  scales."  Upon  these  words 
the  monks  fell  prostrate  upon  the  earth,  and  in  great 
zeal  with  tears  they  prayed  to  God  for  his  delivery  out 
of  the  enemy's  hands,  who  mercifully  heard  them,  for 
upon  a  sudden  the  sick  person  began  to  cry  out,  and 
say  :  "  God  be  thanked,  behold  the  dragon  that  had  me 
to  devour,  is  fled  away,  and  overcome  with  your  prayers, 
here  he  could  not  tarry.  Now,  I  beseech  you,  make 
intercession  for  my  sins,  for  I  am  ready  to  turn  unto 
God,  and  wholly  to  renounce  all  kind  of  secular  life"  : 
and  thus  he  that  was  half  dead,  as  before  was  said,  re- 
served now  to  a  longer  life,  turned  to  God  with  his 
whole  heart :  and  so,  after  he  had  put  on  a  new  mind, 
and  was  a  long  time  punished  with  affliction,  then  his 
soul  departed  from  the  miseries  of  this  mortal  life. 

Chapter  Cfnrt^eigbt :  oftbc  Dcatf)  of  C&r&orius  : 
anD  of  a  certain  ajionfeof  31conia.  <I  But  Chrisorius 

on  the  contrary  (as  his  kinsman  Probus,  of  whom  I 
made  mention  before,  told  me)  was  a  substantial  man 
in  this  world,  but  as  full  of  sin  as  of  wealth  :  for  he  was 
passing  proud,  given  to  the  pleasures  of  the  flesh, 
covetous,  and  wholly  set  upon  scraping  of  riches  to- 
gether. But  when  God  determined  to  make  an  end  of 
so  many  sins,  he  sent  him  a  great  sickness  ;  and  when 

230 


£f)e  Deatf)  of  Cfmsotms 

his  last  time  drew  near,  in  that  very  hour  in  which  his 
soul  was  to  leave  the  body,  lying  with  his  eyes  open, 
he  saw  certain  cruel  men  and  black  spirits  stand  before 
him,  pressing  upon  him  to  carry  him  away  to  the  pit  of 
hell  :  at  which  fearful  sight  he  began  to  tremble,  to 
wax  pale,  to  sweat,  and  with  pitiful  outcries  to  crave 
for  truce  :  and  often  with  faltering  tongue  to  call  for 
his  son  Maximus  (whom,  when  I  was  a  monk,  I  knew 
also  to  profess  the  same  kind  of  life),  saying  :  "  Come 
away,  Maximus,  with  all  speed.  Never  in  my  life  did 
I  any  harm  to  thee,  receive  me  now  in  thy  faith."  His 
son,  greatly  moved  at  these  outcries,  came  unto  him  in 
all  haste  :  and  his  whole  family  lamenting  and  crying 
out,  repaired  also  to  his  chamber  :  none  of  all  which 
beheld  those  wicked  spirits,  which  did  so  urge  and  vex 
him  :  but  by  his  trouble  of  mind,  by  his  paleness  and 
trembling,  they  made  no  doubt  of  their  presence  :  for  he 
was  so  affrighted  with  their  terrible  looks,  that  he  turned 
himself  everyway  in  his  bed.  Lying  upon  his  left  side, 
he  could  not  endure  their  sight  :  and  turning  to  the 
wall,  there  also  he  found  them  :  at  last,  being  very 
much  beset,  and  despairing  of  all  means  to  escape  their 
hands,  he  cried  out  with  a  loud  voice  :  "  O  truce  till 
to-morrow,  O  truce  till  to-morrow  "  :  and  crying  out 
in  this  sort  he  gave  up  the  ghost.  This  being  the 
manner  of  his  death,  certain  it  is  that  he  saw  this  fear- 
ful sight  not  for  himself,  but  for  us  :  that  his  vision 
might  do  us  good,  whom  God's  patience  doth  yet  with 
fatherly  long  sufferance  expect  to  amendment.  For 
what  profit  reaped  he  by  seeing  those  foul  spirits  before 
his  death,  and  by  craving  for  that  truce  which  he  could 
not  obtain  ? 

There  is  also  now  dwelling  amongst  us  a  Priest  of 
Isauria  called  Athanasius,  who  telleth  a  very  fearful  story 
which  in  his  time  happened,  as  he  saith,  at  Iconium. 
For  there  was  in  that  place,  as  he  reporteth,  a  Monastery 

231 


Cfje  Dialogues  of  §>t.  ®regorp 

called  Thongolaton,  in  which  there  lived  a  monk  that 
was  had  in  great  account :  for  he  was  of  good  conversa- 
tion, and  in  his  life  very  orderly  :  but,  as  the  end  declared, 
he  was  far  otherwise  than  he  outwardly  appeared :  for 
though  he  did  seem  to  fast  with  the  rest  of  the  monks, 
yet  did  he  secretly  take  his  meat :  which  vice  of  his  none 
of  the  other  monks  ever  understood.  But  at  length  it 
came  forth  by  this  means:  for  falling  grievously  sick, 
so  that  no  hope  of  life  remained,  he  caused  all  the  monks 
of  the  Convent  to  be  called  together,  who  all  willingly 
came,  verily  thinking  that,  at  the  departure  of  so  notable 
a  man,  they  should  have  heard  some  sweet  and  good 
exhortation  :  but  it  fell  out  far  otherwise,  for  with  great 
trouble  of  mind,  and  trembling  of  body,  he  was  enforced 
to  tell  them  that  he  died  in  a  damnable  state,  saying : 
"  When  you  thought  that  I  fasted  with  you,  then  had 
I  my  meat  in  secret  corners  :  and  behold,  now  I  am 
delivered  to  a  dragon  to  be  devoured,  who  with  his  tail 
hath  enwrapped  fast  my  hands  and  feet :  and  his  head  he 
hath  thrust  into  my  mouth,  and  so  he  lieth  sucking  and 
drawing  out  of  my  breath  "  :  and  speaking  these  words 
he  departed  this  life,  and  had  not  any  time  given  to 
deliver  himself  by  penance  from  that  dragon  which  he 
saw.  By  which  we  learn,  that  he  had  this  vision  only  for 
the  commodity  of  them  that  heard  it,  seeing  himself 
could  not  escape  from  the  enemy  which  he  beheld,  and 
into  whose  hands  he  was  given  to  be  devoured. 
1^0tCt.  Desirous  I  am  to  be  informed,  whether  we  ought 
to  believe  that  after  death  there  is  any  fire  of  Purgatory. 

Cbapter  €Wrtp=nme :  tofmber  tbcre  fee  anp  fire 
of  Ipurgatorp  in  tbe  nerttoorlD.  fl  (^regorp.  Our 

Lord  saith  in  the  Gospel :  Walk  whiles  you  have  the  light: l 
and  by  his  Prophet  he  saith  :  In  time  accepted  have  I 
heard  thee,  and  in  the  day  of  salvation  have  I  holpen  thee:2 
which  the  Apostle  St.  Paul  expounding,  saith :  Behold, 
1  John  12,  35.  2  Isai.  49,  8. 

232 


Cfjc  Doctrine  of  Ipttrgatorp 

now  is  the  time  acceptable;  behold,  now  the  day  of  salvation? 
Solomon,  likewise,  saith  :  Whatsoever  thy  hand  is  able  to  do, 
work  it  instantly :  for  neither  work,  nor  reason,  nor  know- 
ledge, nor  wisdom  shall  be  in  hell,  whither  thou  dost  hasten? 
David  also  saith  :  Because  his  mercy  is  for  ever?  By  which 
sayings  it  is  plain,  that  in  such  state  as  a  man  departeth 
out  of  this  life,  in  the  same  he  is  presented  in  judgment 
before  God.  But  yet  we  must  believe  that  before  the 
day  of  judgment  there  is  a  Purgatory  fire  for  certain 
small  sins  :  because  our  Saviour  saith,  that  he  which 
speaketh  blasphemy  against  the  holy  Ghost,  that  it  shall  not 
be  forgiven  him,  neither  in  this  world,  nor  in  the  world  to 
come?  Out  of  which  sentence  we  learn,  that  some  sins 
are  forgiven  in  this  world,  and  some  other  may  be 
pardoned  in  the  next  :  for  that  which  is  denied  concern- 
ing one  sin,  is  consequently  understood  to  be  granted 
touching  some  other.  But  yet  this,  as  I  said,  we  have 
not  to  believe  but  only  concerning  little  and  very 
small  sins,  as,  for  example,  daily  idle  talk,  immoderate 
laughter,  negligence  in  the  care  of  our  family  (which 
kind  of  offences  scarce  can  they  avoid,  that  know  in  what 
sort  sin  is  to  be  shunned),  ignorant  errors  in  matters  of 
no  great  weight  :  all  which  sins  be  punished  after  death, 
if  men  procured  not  pardon  and  remission  for  them  in 
their  lifetime  :  for  when  St.  Paul  saith,  that  Christ  is  the 
foundation  :  and  by  and  by  addeth  :  And  if  any  man  build 
upon  this  foundation  gold,  silver,  precious  stones,  wood,  hay, 
stubble  :  the  work  of  every  one,  of  what  kind  it  is,  the  fire 
shall  try.  If  any  man  s  work  abide  which  he  built  thereupon, 
he  shall  receive  reward ;  if  any  man's  work  burn,  he  shall 
suffer  detriment,  but  himself  shall  be  saved,  yet  so  as  by  fire? 
For  although  these  words  may  be  understood  of  the  fire 
of  tribulation,  which  men  suffer  in  this  world  :  yet  if 
any  will  interpret  them  of  the  fire  of  Purgatory,  which 

1  2  Cor.  6,  2.  2  Eccles.  9,  10.  3  Psalm  118,  1. 

4  Matt.  12,  32.  6    1  Cor.  3,  11-15. 

233 


Cbe  Dialogues  of  %t  ^rcgotg 

shall  be  in  the  next  life  :  then  must  he  carefully  con- 
sider, that  the  Apostle  said  not  that  he  may  be  saved  by 
fire,  that  buildeth  upon  this  foundation  iron,  brass,  or 
lead,  that  is,  the  greater  sort  of  sins,  and  therefore  more 
hard,  and  consequently  not  remissible  in  that  place  :  but 
wood,  hay,  stubble,  that  is,  little  and  very  light  sins, 
which  the  fire  doth  easily  consume.  Yet  we  have  here 
further  to  consider,  that  none  can  be  there  purged,  no, 
not  for  the  least  sins  that  be,  unless  in  his  lifetime  he 
deserved  by  virtuous  works  to  find  such  favour  in  that 
place. 

Chapter  jTottp :  of  tfje  soul  of  IPascfjasius  t&e 

H!)0aCOn.  *J  For  when  I  was  yet  in  my  younger  years, 
and  lived  a  secular  life,  I  heard  from  the  mouth  of 
mine  elders,  who  knew  it  to  be  true :  how  that  Pas- 
chasius,  a  Deacon  of  this  Roman  church  (whose  sound 
and  eloquent  books  of  the  holy  Ghost  be  extant  amongst 
us),  was  a  man  of  a  wonderful  holy  life,  a  marvellous 
giver  of  alms,  a  lover  of  the  poor,  and  one  that  con- 
temned himself.  This  man,  in  that  contention  which, 
through  the  exceeding  hot  emulation  of  the  clergy,  fell 
out  betwixt  Symmachus  and  Lawrence,  made  choice  of 
Lawrence  to  be  Bishop  of  Rome :  and  though  he  was 
afterward  by  common  consent  overcome,  yet  did  he  con- 
tinue in  his  former  opinion  till  his  dying  day  :  loving 
and  preferring  him,  whom  the  Church,  by  the  judgment 
of  Bishops,  refused  for  her  governor.  This  Deacon 
ending  his  life  in  the  time  of  Symmachus,  Bishop  of  the 
Apostolic  see  :  a  man  possessed  with  a  devil  came  and 
touched  his  dalmatic,  as  it  lay  upon  the  bier,  and  was 
forthwith  delivered  from  that  vexation.  Long  time 
after,  Germanus,  Bishop  of  Capua  (before  mentioned), 
by  the  counsel  of  physicians,  for  the  recovery  of  his 
health  went  to  the  baths :  into  which  after  he  was 
entered,  he  found  there  standing  in  those  hot  waters  the 
foresaid  Paschasius,  ready  to  do  him  service.    At  which 

234 


£f)e  %ou\  of  Ipa0cba0iu0 

sight  being  much  afraid,  he  demanded  what  so  worthy  a 
man  as  he  was  did  in  that  place  :  to  whom  Paschasius 
returned  this  answer  :  "  For  no  other  cause,"  quoth  he, 
"  am  I  appointed  to  this  place  of  punishment,  but  for 
that  I  took  part  with  Lawrence  against  Symmachus  :  and 
therefore  I  beseech  you  to  pray  unto  our  Lord  for  me, 
and  by  this  token  shall  you  know  that  your  prayers  be 
heard,  if,  at  your  coming  again,  you  find  me  not  here." 
Upon  this,  the  holy  man  Germanus  betook  himself  to 
his  devotions,  and  after  a  few  days  he  went  again  to  the 
same  baths,  but  found  not  Paschasius  there  :  for  seeing 
his  fault  proceeded  not  of  malice,  but  of  ignorance,  he 
might  after  death  be  purged  from  that  sin.  And  yet  we 
must  withal  think  that  the  plentiful  alms  which  he  be- 
stowed in  this  life,  obtained  favour  at  God's  hands,  that 
he  might  then  deserve  pardon,  when  he  could  work 
nothing  at  all  for  himself. 

IPetCC.  What,  I  pray  you,  is  the  reason,  that,  in  these 
latter  days,  so  many  things  come  to  light,  which  in  times 
past  were  not  known  :  in  such  sort  that  by  open  revela- 
tions and  manifest  signs,  the  end  of  the  world  seemeth 
not  to  be  far  off? 

Cbapter  jTort^onc :  tobp  in  latter  time0  00  manp 
tbinp  be  fcnoton,  concerning  men's  0ouis :  tobicb 
in  former  agc0  toerc  not  bearD  of.  q  ©regorp.  So 

it  is,  for  the  nearer  that  this  present  world  draweth  to- 
wards an  end,  so  much  the  more  the  world  to  come  is  at 
hand,  and  sheweth  itself  by  more  plain  and  evident 
tokens.  For  seeing,  in  this  world,  we  know  not  one 
another's  cogitations,  and,  in  the  next,  men's  hearts  be 
known  to  all,  what  fitter  name  can  we  give  to  this  world 
than  to  term  it  night,  and  what  better  to  the  next,  than 
to  call  it  day  ?  But  as,  when  the  night  is  almost  spent, 
and  the  day  beginneth  to  break,  darkness  and  light  be  in 
a  certain  manner  joined  together,  until  the  light  of  the 
day  following  doth  perfectly  banish  away  the  dark  rem- 

*3S 


£f)c  Dialogues  of  %t.  <£regorp 

nants  of  the  former  night :  even  so,  the  end  of  this  world 
is,  as  it  were,  mingled  together  with  the  beginning  of  the 
next,  and  with  the  darkness  of  this,  some  light  of  such 
spiritual  things  as  be  in  that  doth  appear  :  and  so  we  see 
many  things  which  belong  to  that  world,  yet  for  all  this, 
perfect  knowledge  we  have  not  any,  but  as  it  were  in 
the  twilight  of  our  soul  behold  them  before  the  rising 
of  that  sun  of  knowledge,  which  then  abundantly  will 
cast  his  beams  over  all. 

Jjj)0t0tt  I  like  very  well  of  your  speech,  yet,  in  so  worthy 
a  man  as  Paschasius  was,  this  doubt  doth  trouble  me, 
how  he  was  after  his  death  carried  to  any  place  of  punish- 
ment, seeing  the  touching  of  his  garment  upon  the  bier 
did  dispossess  a  wicked  spirit. 

(£>t0gOtp»  Herein  appeareth  the  great  and  manifold 
providence  of  almighty  God,  by  whose  just  judgment  it 
fell  out,  that  Paschasius  for  some  time  entertained  in- 
wardly sin  in  his  soul,  and  yet  in  the  sight  of  the  world 
wrought  miracles  by  his  body  after  his  death,  who  in  his 
lifetime  did,  as  they  know,  many  good  works  :  to  the  end 
that  those  which  had  seen  his  virtuous  life,  should  not  be 
deceived  concerning  the  opinion  of  his  great  alms  ;  and 
yet  himself  should  not  without  punishment  have  remis- 
sion of  his  sin,  which  whiles  he  lived  he  thought  to  be 
no  sin,  and  therefore  did  not  by  tears  wash  it  away. 
1^0t0t»  I  understand  very  well  what  you  say,  but  by 
this  reason  I  am  driven  into  such  straights,  that  I  must 
stand  in  fear  both  of  those  sins  which  I  know,  and  also 
of  those  which  I  know  not.  But  because  a  little  before 
you  discoursed  of  the  places  of  torments  :  in  what  part 
of  the  world,  I  beseech  you,  are  we  to  believe  that  hell 
is,  whether  above  the  earth  or  beneath  the  same  ? 

Chapter  j?ortp:ttoo :  in  tofmt  place  of  tbe  toorlD 
toe  ougfn  to  tielietie  tbat  bell  is.  <I  ®regorp.  Touch- 
ing this  point  I  dare  not  rashly  define  anything  :  for 
some  have  been  of  opinion  that  hell  was  in  some  place 

236 


mfjerc  ©ell  is 

upon  the  earth  ;  and  others  think  that  it  is  under  the 
earth :  but  then  this  doubt  ariseth,  for  if  it  be  there- 
fore called  hell,  or  an  infernal  place,  because  it  is  below, 
then  as  the  earth  is  distant  from  heaven,  so  likewise 
should  hell  be  distant  from  the  earth  :  for  which  cause, 
perhaps,  the  Prophet  saith  :  Thou  hast  delivered  my  soul 
from  the  lower  hell ;x  so  that  the  higher  hell  may  seem  to 
be  upon  the  earth,  and  the  lower  under  the  earth :  and 
with  this  opinion  that  sentence  of  John  agreeth,  who, 
when  he  had  said,  that  he  saw  a  book  sealed  with  seven 
seals  :  and  that  none  was  found  worthy ,  neither  in  heaven,  nor 
in  earth,  nor  under  the  earth,  to  open  the  book,  and  loose  the 
seals  thereof:2,  he  added  forthwith  :  and  I  wept  much  : 
which  book,  notwithstanding,  afterward  he  saith  was 
opened  by  a  lion  of  the  tribe  of  Juda.  By  which  book, 
what  else  can  be  meant  but  the  holy  scripture,  which 
our  Saviour  alone  did  open  :  for  being  made  man,  by  his 
death,  resurrection,  and  ascension,  he  did  reveal  and 
make  manifest  all  those  mysteries  which  in  that  book 
were  closed  and  shut  up.  And  none  in  heaven,  because 
not  any  Angel  ;  none  upon  earth,  because  not  man  living 
in  body  ;  not  any  under  the  earth  was  found  worthy  : 
because  neither  the  souls  departed  from  their  bodies 
could  open  unto  us,  beside  our  Lord  himself,  the  secrets 
of  that  sacred  book.  Seeing,  then,  none  under  the  earth 
is  said  to  be  found  worthy  to  open  that  book,  I  see  not 
what  doth  let,  but  that  we  should  believe  that  hell  is  in 
the  lower  parts,  under  the  earth. 

IPCtCt*  I  beseech  you  :  Is  there  one  fire  in  hell,  or, 
according  to  the  diversity  of  sinners,  be  there  so  many 
sorts  of  fire  prepared  in  that  place  ? 

Chapter  jTortH&ree :  tofietber  tfrcre  10  one  fire 
in  bell,  or  manp.  <I  (©rcgorp.  The  fire  of  hell  is  but 

one  :  yet  doth  it  not  in  one  manner  torment  all  sinners. 
For  every  one  there,  according  to  the  quantity  of  his  sin, 

1   Psalm  86,  13.  2  Rev.  5,  1-3. 

237 


€be  Dialogues  of  %t.  (fcregorp 

hath  the  measure  of  his  pain.  For  as,  in  this  world, 
many  live  under  one  and  the  same  sun,  and  yet  do  not 
alike  feel  the  heat  thereof:  for  some  be  burnt  more,  and 
some  less  :  so  in  that  one  fire,  divers  manners  of  burning 
be  found,  for  that  which  in  this  world  diversity  of  bodies 
doth,  that  in  the  next  doth  diversity  of  sins  :  so  that 
although  the  fire  be  there  all  alike,  yet  doth  it  not  in 
one  manner  and  alike  burn  and  torment  them  that  be 
damned. 

Ij?0t0t»  Shall  those,  I  pray  you,  which  be  condemned  to 
that  place,  burn  always,  and  never  have  any  end  of  their 
torments  ? 

Chapter  JTortHout:  tobetber  tbose  tbat  be  in 
bell  sball  burn  tbere  for  etier.  <I  <£regorp>  Certain 

it  is,  and  without  all  doubt  most  true,  that  as  the  good 
shall  have  no  end  of  their  joys,  so  the  wicked  never  any 
release  of  their  torments  :  for  our  Saviour  himself 
saith  :  The  wicked  shall  go  into  everlasting  punishment,  and 
the  just  into  everlasting  life.1  Seeing,  then,  true  it  is,  that 
which  he  hath  promised  to  his  friends  :  out  of  all  ques- 
tion false  it  cannot  be,  that  which  he  hath  threatened  to 
his  enemies. 

IPetet*  What  if  it  be  said  that  he  did  threaten  eternal 
pain  to  wicked  livers,  that  he  might  thereby  restrain  them 
from  committing  of  sins  ? 

(fi?te#0tp.  If  that  which  he  did  threaten  be  false, 
because  his  intent  was  by  that  means  to  keep  men  from 
wicked  life  :  then  likewise  must  we  say  that  those  things 
are  false  which  he  did  promise  :  and  that  his  mind  was 
thereby  to  provoke  us  to  virtue.  But  what  man,  though 
mad,  dare  presume  so  to  say  ?  For  if  he  threatened  that 
which  he  meant  not  to  put  into  execution  :  whiles  we  are 
desirous  to  make  him  merciful,  enforced  we  are  likewise 
(which  is  horrible  to  speak)  to  affirm  him  to  be  deceitful. 
l^etet*  Willing  1  am  to  know  how  that  sin  can  justly 

1  Matt.  25,  46, 
238 


Ctierlasting  punisfjment 

be  punished  without  end,  which  had  an  end  when  it  was 
committed. 

<£>t0gOt£*  This  which  you  say  might  have  some  reason, 
if  the  just  judge  did  only  consider  the  sins  committed, 
and  not  the  minds  with  which  they  were  committed : 
for  the  reason  why  wicked  men  made  an  end  of  sinning 
was,  because  they  also  made  an  end  of  their  life  :  for 
willingly  they  would,  had  it  been  in  their  power,  have 
lived  without  end,  that  they  might  in  like  manner  have 
sinned  without  end.  For  they  do  plainly  declare  that 
they  desired  always  to  live  in  sin,  who  never,  so  long  as 
they  were  in  this  world,  gave  over  their  wicked  life  : 
and  therefore  it  belongeth  to  the  great  justice  of  the 
supreme  judge,  that  they  should  never  want  torments 
and  punishment  in  the  next  world,  who  in  this  would 
never  give  over  their  wicked  and  sinful  life. 
J£)0t0t.  But  no  judge  that  loveth  justice  taketh  pleasure 
in  cruelty  :  and  the  end  why  the  just  master  commandeth 
his  wicked  servant  to  be  punished  is,  that  he  may  give 
over  his  lewd  life.  If,  then,  the  wicked  that  are  tor- 
mented in  hell  fire  never  come  to  amend  themselves,  to 
what  end  shall  they  always  burn  in  those  flames  ? 
(£>t0(JOtp.  Almighty  God,  because  he  is  merciful  and 
full  of  pity,  taketh  no  pleasure  in  the  torments  of 
wretched  men  :  but  because  he  is  also  just,  therefore 
doth  he  never  give  over  to  punish  the  wicked.  All 
which  being  condemned  to  perpetual  pains,  punished 
they  are  for  their  own  wickedness  :  and  yet  shall  they 
always  there  burn  in  fire  for  some  end,  and  that  is,  that 
all  those  which  be  just  and  God's  servants  may  in  God 
behold  the  joys  which  they  possess,  and  in  them  see  the 
torments  which  they  have  escaped  :  to  the  end  that  they 
may  thereby  always  acknowledge  themselves  grateful  to 
God  for  his  grace,  in  that  they  perceive  through  his 
divine  assistance,  what  sins  they  have  overcome,  which 
they  behold  in  others  to  be  punished  everlastingly. 

239 


£f)c  Dialogues  of  %>t  <£tcgorp 

IPCtCt,  And  how,  1  pray  you,  can  they  be  holy  and 
saints,  if  they  pray  not  for  their  enemies,  whom  they 
see  to  lie  in  such  torments  ?  when  it  is  said  to  them  : 
Pray  for  your  enemies.1 

(£>t0(JOtp*  They  pray  for  their  enemies  at  such  time  as 
their  hearts  may  be  turned  to  fruitful  penance,  and  so 
be  saved :  for  what  purpose  else  do  we  pray  for  our 
enemies,  but,  as  the  Apostle  saith,  that  God  may  give  them 
repentance  to  know  the  truth,  and  recover  themselves  from 
the  devil,  of  whom  they  are  held  captive  at  his  will  ? 2 
K?0t0t,  I  like  very  well  of  your  saying :  for  how  shall  they 
pray  for  them,  who  by  no  means  can  be  converted  from 
their  wickedness,  and  brought  to  do  the  works  of  justice  ? 
<2Dt00Otp*  You  see,  then,  that  the  reason  is  all  one, 
why,  in  the  next  life,  none  shall  pray  for  men  condemned 
for  ever  to  hell  fire  :  that  there  is  now  of  not  praying  for 
the  devil  and  his  angels,  sentenced  to  everlasting  tor- 
ments :  and  this  also  is  the  very  reason  why  holy  men  do 
not  now  pray  for  them  that  die  in  their  infidelity  and 
known  wicked  life :  for  seeing  certain  it  is  that  they  be 
condemned  to  endless  pains,  to  what  purpose  should 
they  pray  for  them,  when  they  know  that  no  petition 
will  be  admitted  of  God,  their  just  judge?  And  there- 
fore, if  now  holy  men  living  upon  earth  take  no 
compassion  of  those  that  be  dead  and  damned  for  their 
sins,  when  as  yet  they  know  that  themselves  do  some 
thing  through  the  frailty  of  the  flesh,  which  is  also  to 
be  judged  :  how  much  more  straightly  and  severely  do 
they  behold  the  torments  of  the  damned,  when  they  be 
themselves  delivered  from  all  vice  of  corruption,  and  be 
more  nearly  united  to  true  justice  itself:  for  the  force 
of  justice  doth  so  possess  their  souls,  in  that  they  be  so 
intrinsical  with  the  most  just  judge,  that  they  list  not 
by  any  means  to  do  that  which  they  know  is  not  con- 
formable to  his  divine  pleasure. 

1  Matt.  5,  44.  2  2  Tim.  z,  25-26, 

240 


THE    M  VSS  I  'I    M  .  GREGORY 

/,'..  an  Gallery,  Roirit  I 


£too  fanner  of  Deatbs 

IPCtCt.  The  reason  you  bring  is  so  clear,  that  I  cannot 
gainsay  it :  but  now  another  question  cometh  to  my 
mind,  and  that  is,  how  the  soul  can  truly  be  called 
immortal,  seeing  certain  it  is  that  it  doth  die  in  that 
perpetual  fire. 

Cbapter  j?ortp=fft)e :  fjoto  tbe  soul  is  saio  to  be 
immortal  anD  nctier  to  Die :  if  it  be  punisbeD  toitb 

tf)e  Sentence  Of  Deatf).  *&  C^regOtg.  Because  there  be 
two  manner  of  lives,  consequently  also  there  be  two 
manner  of  deaths.  For  one  kind  of  life  there  is,  by 
which  we  live  in  God,  another  which  we  received  by 
our  creation  or  generation  :  and  therefore  one  thing  it  is 
to  live  blessedly,  and  another  thing  to  live  naturally. 
The  soul,  therefore,  is  both  mortal  and  immortal : 
mortal,  because  it  loseth  the  felicity  of  an  happy  life : 
and  immortal,  in  that  it  always  keepeth  his  natural  life, 
which  can  never  be  lost,  no,  not  when  it  is  sentenced 
to  perpetual  death  :  for  in  that  state,  though  it  hath  not 
a  blessed  life,  yet  it  doth  retain  still  the  former  being 
and  natural  life  :  by  reason  whereof  it  is  enforced  to 
suffer  death  without  death,  defect  without  defect,  and 
end  without  end  :  seeing  the  death  which  it  endureth  is 
immortal,  the  defect  which  it  suffereth  never  faileth, 
and  the  end  which  it  hath  is  infinite,  and  without  end. 
l£)etet.  What  man  is  he,  though  never  so  holy,  that, 
cometh  to  leave  this  mortal  life,  hath  not  just  cause 
to  fear  the  unspeakable  sentence  of  damnation  ?  for 
although  he  knoweth  what  he  hath  done,  yet  ignorant 
he  is  not,  how  straightly  his  works  shall  be  examined 
and  judged. 

Chapter  jTortp^sir :  of  a  certain  bolp  man  tbattoas 
aftato  tofcen  jjc  came  to  Die,  <I  <£rcgorp,  it  is  even 

so,  Peter,  as  you  say.  And  yet  sometime  the  only  fear 
of  death  doth  purge  the  souls  of  just  men  from  their 
smaller  sins,  as  you  and  I  have  often  heard  of  a  certain 
holy  man  that  was  very  much  afraid  when   he  came  to 

241  Q 


£fce  Dialogues  of  %t  <$regorp 

die  :  and  yet,  after  he  was  dead,  appeared  to  his  disciples 
in  a  white  stole,  reporting  to  them  in  what  excellent 
manner  he  was  received,  when  he  departed  out  of  this 
world. 

Chapter  jfort^setien :  fcoto  some  tip  Otoine  retoe^ 
lation  are  DiscbargeD  from  fear  at  tbeir  oeatf), 
3nD  of  tbe  manner  boto  tbe  monks  antbonp, 
a^erulus,  anD  3|obn  oeparteu  tbis  life,  <I  Sometime 

also  almighty  God  doth  by  divine  revelation  strengthen 
the  minds  of  them  that  be  fearful,  to  the  end  that  they 
should  not  be  afraid  of  death.  For  a  certain  monk 
there  was,  called  Anthony,  that  lived  together  with  me 
in  my  Monastery,  who  by  daily  tears  laboured  to  come 
to  the  joys  of  heaven :  and  when  as  he  did  very  care- 
fully and  with  great  zeal  of  soul  meditate  upon  the 
sacred  scriptures,  he  sought  not  so  much  for  cunning 
and  knowledge,  as  for  tears  and  contrition  of  heart,  that 
by  means  thereof  his  soul  might  be  stirred  up  and 
inflamed  :  and  that  by  contemning  all  earthly  things, 
he  might  with  the  wings  of  contemplation  fly  unto  the 
kingdom  of  heaven.  This  man  upon  a  night,  by  revela- 
tion, was  admonished  in  this  manner  :  "  Make  yourself 
ready,  because  our  Lord  hath  given  commandment  for 
your  departure"  :  and  when  he  answered,  that  he  had  not 
wherewith  to  defray  the  charges  of  that  journey :  straight- 
ways  he  heard  these  comfortable  words  :  "  If  you  take 
care  for  your  sins,  they  be  forgiven  you  "  ;  which  thing 
though  he  had  heard  once,  and  yet  for  all  that  was  in 
great  fear,  another  night  he  had  again  the  same  vision  : 
and  so  after  five  days  he  fell  sick  of  an  ague,  and  as 
the  other  monks  were  praying  and  weeping  about  him, 
he  departed  this  life. 

Another  monk  there  was  in  the  same  Monastery, 
called  Merulus,  who  was  wonderfully  given  to  tears 
and  bestowing  of  alms  :  and  no  time  almost  passed  him, 
except  it  were  when  he  was  at  meat  or  asleep,  in  which 

242 


Cfrc  Deatf)  of  Certain  a^onfes 

he  did  not  sing  psalms.     This  man,  by  vision  in  the 
night,  saw  a  crown  made  of  white  flowers  to  descend 
upon  his  head  :  and  straight  after  falling  sick,  he  died 
with  great  quiet  and  joy  of  mind.    Fourteen  years  after, 
when    Peter,   who  now  hath   the  government  of  my 
Monastery,  went  about  to  make  a  grave  for  himself 
hard    by    Merulus'    sepulchre,    such    a    fragrant    and 
pleasant  smell,  as  he  saith,  came  out  of  it,  as  though 
it  had  been  a  storehouse  of  all  manner  of  sweet  flowers. 
By  which  it  appeared  plainly,  that  it  was  very  true,  which 
before  he  had  seen  by  vision  in  the  night. 

Likewise  in  the  same  Monastery  there  was  another, 
called  John,  who  was  a  young  man  of  great  towardness, 
and  one  that  led  his  life  with  great  circumspection, 
humility,  sweetness,  and  gravity.  This  man  falling 
sore  sick,  saw  in  his  great  extremity  by  vision  in  the 
night  an  old  man  to  come  unto  him,  who  touched  him 
with  a  wand,  saying:  "  Rise  up,  for  you  shall  not  die  of 
this  sickness  :  but  make  yourself  ready,  for  you  have 
not  any  long  time  to  stay  in  this  world  "  :  and  forth- 
with, though  the  physicians  despaired  of  his  health,  yet 
he  recovered,  and  became  perfectly  well.  The  vision 
which  he  saw  he  told  to  others,  and  for  two  years 
following,  as  I  said,  he  served  God  in  such  sort,  that 
his  great  devotion  surpassed  his  young  years.  Three 
years  since  another  monk  died,  who  was  buried  in  the 
churchyard  of  the  same  Monastery,  and  when  we  had 
ended  all  his  funerals,  and  were  departed,  this  John,  as 
himself  with  pale  face  and  great  trembling  told  us, 
remained  there  still,  where  he  heard  that  monk  which 
was  buried  to  call  him  out  of  the  grave  :  and  that  it 
was  so  indeed,  the  end  following  did  shew  :  for  ten  days 
after  he  fell  sick  of  an  ague  and  so  departed  this  life. 
IPCtCt.  Willingly  would  I  learn  whether  we  ought  to 
observe  such  visions,  as  be  revealed  to  us  by  night  in 
our  sleep. 

243 


Cfje  Dialogues  of  <£>t.  Gregory 

Chapter  jTortp^cigbt :  toftetber  Dreams  ate  to  be 
fcelietJeD  :  anD  boto  manp  too  of  Dreams  tfcere  be. 

*I  (DregOrp.  Concerning  this  point,  Peter,  you  must 
understand  that  there  are  six  kind  of  dreams.  For 
sometime  they  proceed  of  too  much  fulness  or  emptiness 
of  the  stomach  :  sometime  by  illusion :  sometime  both 
by  thought  and  illusion  :  sometime  by  revelation  :  and 
sometime  both  by  thought  and  revelation.  The  two 
first  all  by  experience  know  to  be  true  :  and  the  four 
latter  we  find  mentioned  in  holy  scripture.  For  if 
dreams  did  not  sometime  proceed  by  illusion  from  our 
secret  enemy,  never  would  the  wise  man  have  said  : 
Dreams  have  made  many  to  err,  and  hoping  in  them  have 
they  been  deceived :x  and  again  :  You  shall  not  be  sooth- 
sayers, nor  observe  dreams :  by  which  words  we  see  how 
they  are  to  be  detested,  that  are  compared  with  sooth- 
sayings.  Again,  if  dreams  did  not  sometime  proceed 
both  of  thought  together  with  illusion,  the  wise  man 
would  not  have  said  :  Dreams  follow  many  cares.2  And 
if  sometime  also  they  did  not  come  by  mystical  revela- 
tion, Joseph  had  never  known  by  dream  that  he  should 
have  been  exalted  above  his  brethren : 3  neither  the  Angel 
would  ever  in  a  dream  have  admonished  the  spouse  of 
our  Lady  to  fly  away  with  the  child  into  Egypt.4  Again, 
if  sometime  they  did  not  also  proceed  both  from  thoughts 
and  divine  revelation,  never  would  the  prophet  Daniel, 
disputing  of  Nabuchodonosor's  dream,  have  begun  from 
the  root  of  his  former  thoughts,  saying  :  Thou,  O  king, 
diddest  begin  to  think  in  thy  bed,  what  should  happen  in  times 
to  come  ;  and  he  that  revealeth  mysteries  did  shew  thee  what 
things  should  come:  and  a  little  after  :  Thou  diddest  see, 
and  behold  as  it  were  a  great  statua  :  that  great  statua 
and  high  of  stature  did  stand  against  thee,  &c.h  Wherefore, 
seeing  Daniel  doth  with  reverence  insinuate  that  the 

1  Ecclus.  34,  7.  2  Eccles.  5,  2.  3  Gen.  37,  5-10. 

4  Matt.  2,  13.  5  Daniel  2,  29-31. 

244 


Concerning:  Dreams 

dream  should  come  to  pass,  and  also  declareth  from 
what  cogitation  it  did  spring,  plainly  do  we  learn  that 
dreams  sometimes  do  come  both  of  thought  and  revela- 
tion together.  But  seeing  dreams  do  grow  from  such 
divers  roots,  with  so  much  the  more  difficulty  ought  we 
to  believe  them  :  because  it  doth  not  easily  appear  unto 
us,  from  what  cause  they  do  proceed.  Holy  men,  indeed, 
by  a  certain  inward  spiritual  taste,  do  discern  betwixt 
illusions  and  true  revelations,  by  the  very  voices  or 
representations  of  the  visions  themselves  :  so  that  they 
know  what  they  receive  from  the  good  spirit,  and  what 
they  suffer  by  illusion  from  the  wicked  :  and  therefore, 
if  our  mind  be  not  herein  very  attentive  and  vigilant,  it 
falleth  into  many  vanities,  through  the  deceit  of  the 
wicked  spirit  :  who  sometime  useth  to  foretell  many 
true  things,  that,  in  the  end,  he  may  by  some  falsehood 
ensnare  our  soul. 

Cbapter  Jfort^nine :  of  one  tobo  in  bis  Dream 
bao  long  life  promised  bim,  anO  pet  DieD  sbortlp 

after.  ^  As  not  long  since  it  is  most  certain,  that  it 
befell  to  one  that  lived  amongst  us,  who,  being  much 
given  to  observe  dreams,  had  one  night  in  a  dream  long 
life  promised  him  :  and  when  as  he  had  made  provision 
of  great  store  of  money  for  the  maintenance  of  his  many 
days,  he  was  so  suddenly  taken  out  of  this  life,  that  he 
left  it  all  behind  him,  without  ever  having  any  use 
thereof,  and  carried  not  with  him  any  good  works  to 
the  next  world. 

IPeter.  I  remember  very  well  who  ft  was  :  but  let  us, 
I  pray  you,  prosecute  such  questions  as  we  began  to 
entreat  of:  Doth  any  profit,  think  you,  redound  to 
men's  souls,  if  their  bodies  be  buried  in  the  church  ? 

Chapter  jTiftp :  ftftlbetber  tbe  souls  receive  anp 
commodity  if  tbeir  bodies  be  buricD  in  tbe  cburcb. 

^  ^rcgorj?.  Such  as  die  not  in  mortal  sin  receive  this 
benefit  by  having  their  bodies  buried  in  the  church  :  for 

245 


€H  Dialogues  of  %t  <£regorp 

when  their  friends  come  thither,  and  behold  their 
sepulchres,  then  do  they  remember  them,  and  pray 
unto  God  for  their  souls  :  but  those  that  depart  this 
life  in  the  state  of  deadly  sin,  receive  not  any  absolution 
from  their  sins,  but  rather  be  more  punished  in  hell, 
for  having  their  bodies  buried  in  the  church  :  which 
thing  shall  be  more  plain,  if  I  do  briefly  tell  you  what 
concerning  this  point  hath  chanced  in  our  time. 

Chapter  jFift^one :  of  a  certain  Bun  tfjat  toas 
burien  in  tbe  cburcb,  tofjicb  appeared  toitb  ber 

tJODp  Jjalf  tUttlt  <&  Felix,  Bishop  of  Portua,  a  man  of 
holy  life,  who  was  born  and  brought  up  in  the  province 
of  Sabina,  saith  that  there  lived  in  that  place  a  certain 
Nun,  which,  though  she  were  chaste  of  her  body,  yet 
had  she  an  ungracious  and  foolish  tongue  :  which 
departing  this  life,  was  buried  in  the  church  :  the  keeper 
whereof,  the  night  following,  saw  her  by  revelation 
brought  before  the  holy  altar,  where  she  was  cut  in  two 
pieces,  and  the  one  half  was  burnt  in  the  fire,  and  the 
other  was  not  touched  at  all.  Rising  up  in  the  morning, 
he  told  unto  others  what  a  strange  vision  he  had  seen, 
and  shewed  them  the  very  place  in  which  she  was  burnt, 
the  marble  whereof  appeared  with  the  very  marks  and 
signs  of  a  fire  upon  it,  as  though  that  woman  had  been 
there  burnt  in  very  deed  with  corporal  fire.  By  which 
we  may  plainly  see,  that  such  as  have  not  their  sins 
pardoned,  can  reap  small  benefit  by  having  their  bodies 
after  death  buried  in  holy  places. 

C&apter  jTiftp^ttoo  :  of  t&e  burial  of  17alerianu0. 

€fl  John  also,  an  honourable  man,  one  of  the  governors 
of  this  city,  and  one  that  is  of  great  gravity  and  credit, 
as  all  know,  told  me  how  one  Valerianus,  that  was  a 
gentleman  of  the  city  of  Bressa,  departed  this  life,  whose 
body  for  money  the  Bishop  was  content  should  be  buried 
in  the  church.  This  Valerianus,  even  to  his  very  old 
age,  led  a  light  and  wanton  life  :  refusing  utterly  to  give 

246 


Cfje  15oDp  of  yMtntinm 

over  sin  and  wickedness.  That  very  night  in  which  he 
was  buried,  the  blessed  martyr  Faustinus,  in  whose 
church  his  body  lay,  appeared  to  the  keeper  thereof, 
saying  :  "  Go,  and  bid  the  Bishop  cast  out  that  stinking 
carcass  which  he  hath  here  buried,  and  if  he  will  not  do 
it,  tell  him  that  thirty  days  hence  he  shall  die  himself." 
This  vision  the  poor  man  was  afraid  to  report  unto  the 
Bishop,  and  though  he  were  admonished  the  second 
time  to  do  it,  yet  he  refused  :  and  so  upon  the  thirtieth 
day,  the  Bishop  going  safe  and  sound  to  bed  (never 
fearing  any  such  thing),  suddenly  departed  this  life. 

Cbaptet  JTtftH&ree :  of  t()c  boop  of  ITalcntmus, 
tbat  toas  after  W  initial  cast  out  of  tf)C  clmrcf), 

CJJ  There  be  also  at  this  time  here  in  the  city  our  vener- 
able brother  Venantius,  Bishop  of  Luna,  and  Liberius, 
a  noble  man  and  one  of  very  great  credit  :  both  which 
do  say  that  themselves  know  it,  and  that  their  servants 
were  present  in  the  city  of  Genua,  when  this  strange 
thing  happened.     One  Valentinus,  who  had  an  office  in 
the  church  of  Milan,  died  there,  a  man  in  his  life  time 
given  to  wantonness  and  all  kind  of  lightness,  whose 
body  was  buried  in  the  church  of  the.  blessed  martyr 
Sirus.     The  midnight  following,  a  great  noise  was  heard 
in  that  place,  as  though  some  body  by  force  had  been 
drawn  out  from  thence  :  whereupon  the  keepers  ran 
thither,  to  see  what   the  matter  was,  and  when  they 
were  come,  they  saw  two  very  terrible  devils,  that  had 
tied  a  rope  about  his  legs,  and  were  drawing  him  out  ot 
the  church,  himself  in  the  mean  time  crying  and  roaring 
out :  at  which  sight  they  were  so  frighted,  that  they 
returned    home    again   to   their  beds  :    but  when   the 
morning  was  come,  they  opened  the  grave  in  which 
Valentinus   was  buried,  but  his  body  they  could  not 
find,  and  therefore  they  sought  without  the  church  to 
see  where  it  was,  and  so  found  it  thrown  into  another 
place,  with  the  feet  still  bound  as  it  was  drawn  out  of 

247 


£be  Dialogues  of  At  <$rcgorp 

the  church.  Out  of  which,  Peter,  you  may  learn  that 
such  as  die  in  mortal  sin,  and  cause  their  bodies  to  be 
buried  in  holy  ground,  are  punished  also  for  that  their 
presumption  :  the  holy  places  not  helping  them,  but 
rather  the  sin  of  their  temerity  accusing  them. 

Chapter  fiftp.fout :  of  tbc  boDp  of  a  tipcr  burictJ  in 
tbe  cburcb,  tobicb  aftcrtoarD  coulD  not  be  founts 

^  For  another  thing  also  which  happened  in  this  city, 
the  company  of  dyers  dwelling  here  do  testify  to  be 
most  true,  and  it  is  concerning  one  that  was  the  chief 
of  their  profession,  who  departed  this  life,  and  was  by 
his  wife  buried  in  the  church  of  St.  Januarius  the  martyr, 
near  to  the  gate  of  St.  Lawrence  :  whose  spirit  the  night 
following,  in  the  hearing  of  the  sexton,  cried  out  of  his 
grave,  saying  :  "  I  burn,  I  burn  "  :  and  when  he  con- 
tinued a  long  time  crying  so,  the  sexton  told  it  to  the 
dyer's  wife,  who  thereupon  sent  certain  of  his  own  pro- 
fession to  the  church,  to  see  in  what  case  his  body  was 
in  the  grave,  who  so  cried  out  in  that  pitiful  manner  : 
and  when  they  had  opened  it,  there  they  found  his  gar- 
ments safe  and  sound,  which  be  still  kept  in  the  same 
church,  for  a  perpetual  memory  of  that  which  happened  : 
but  his  body  by  no  means  could  they  find,  as  though  it 
had  never  been  buried  there  :  by  which  we  may  gather 
to  what  torments  his  soul  was  condemned,  whose  body 
was  in  that  sort  turned  out  of  the  church.  What  profit, 
then,  do  holy  places  bring  to  them  that  be  buried  there, 
when  as  those,  that  be  wicked  and  unworthy,  be  by 
God's  appointment  thrown  out  from  those  sacred 
places  ? 

}petet*  What  thing  is  there,  then,  that  can  profit  and 
relieve  the  souls  of  them  that  be  departed  ? 

Chapter  jTift^fitoe :  tobat  is  available  for  tbe  soul 
after  Oeatb  :  ant)  of  a  Ipricst  of  Centumccllis,  tobo 
teas  DesircD  by  a  certain  man's  spirit,  to  be  bolpen 
after  bis  Death,  bp  tbe  bolp  sacrifice :  anD  of  tbc 

248 


£f)e  IPriest  of  Ccntumcellts 
soul  of  a  monk  calleo  3ju0tti0.  *i  <£tcgorp,  if  the 

sins  after  death  be  pardonable,  then  the  sacred  oblation 
of  the  holy  host  useth  to  help  men's  souls  :  for  which 
cause  the  souls  sometime,  of  them  that  be  dead,  do  desire 
the  same  :  for  Bishop  Felix,  whom  we  spake  of  before, 
saith  that  a  virtuous  Priest,  who  died  some  two  years 
since,  and  dwelt  in  the  diocese  of  the  city  of  Centum- 
cellis,  and  was  pastor  of  the  church  of  St.  John  in  the 
place  calledTauriana,  told  him  that  himself  did  use  (when 
he  had  need)  to  wash  his  body  in  a  certain  place,  in 
which  there  were  passing  hot  waters  :  and  that  going 
thither  upon  a  time,  he  found  a  certain  man  whom  he 
knew  not,  ready  to  do  him  service,  as  to  pull  off  his 
shoes,  take  his  clothes,  and  to  attend  upon  him  in  all 
dutiful  manner.  And  when  he  had  divers  times  done 
thus,  the  Priest,  minding  upon  a  day  to  go  to  the  baths, 
began  to  think  with  himself  that  he  would  not  be  un- 
grateful to  him  that  did  him  such  service,  but  carry  him 
somewhat  for  a  reward,  and  so  he  took  with  him  two 
singing  breads  :  and  coming  thither  he  found  the  man 
there  ready,  and  used  his  help  as  he  was  wont  to  do  : 
and  when  he  had  washed  himself,  put  on  his  clothes, 
and  was  ready  to  depart,  he  offered  him  for  an  holy 
reward  that  which  he  had  brought,  desiring  him  to  take 
that  courteously,  which  for  charity  he  did  give  him. 
Then  with  a  sad  countenance,  and  in  sorrowful  manner, 
he  spake  thus  unto  him  :  "  Why  do  you  give  me  these, 
father  ?  This  is  holy  bread,  and  I  cannot  eat  of  it,  for 
I,  whom  you  see  here,  was  sometime  lord  of  these 
baths,  and  am  now  after  my  death  appointed  for  my 
sins  to  this  place  :  but  if  you  desire  to  pleasure  me, 
offer  this  bread  unto  almighty  God,  and  be  an  intercessor 
for  my  sins  :  and  by  this  shall  you  know  that  your 
prayers  be  heard,  if  at  your  next  coming  you  find  me 
not  here."  And  as  he  was  speaking  these  words,  he 
vanished  out  of  his  sight  :  so   that  he,  which  before 

249 


Cf)c  Dialogues  of  %t  <$tcprp 

seemed  to  be  a  man,  shewed  by  that  manner  of  depar- 
ture that  he  was  a  spirit.  The  good  Priest  all  the  week 
following  gave  himself  to  tears  for  him,  and  daily  offered 
up  the  holy  sacrifice  :  and  afterward  returning  to  the 
bath,  found  him  not  there  :  whereby  it  appeareth  what 
great  profit  the  souls  receive  by  the  sacrifice  of  the  holy 
oblation,  seeing  the  spirits  of  them  that  be  dead  desire 
it  of  the  living,  and  give  certain  tokens  to  let  us  under- 
stand how  that  by  means  thereof  they  have  received 
absolution. 

Here  also  I  cannot  but  tell  you  that  which  happened 
three  years  since  in  mine  own   Monastery.     A  certain 
monk   there  was,  called  Justus,  one  very  cunning  in 
physic,  and  whiles  I  remained  in  the  Abbey,  served  me 
very  diligently,  attending  upon  me  in  my  often  infirmi- 
ties and  sickness.     This  man  himself  at  length  fell  sore 
sick,  so  that  in  very  deed  he  was  brought  to  the  last 
cast.     A  brother  he  had,  called  Copiosus,  that  had  care 
of  him,  who  yet  liveth.     Justus  perceiving  himself  past 
all  hope  of  life,  told  this  brother  of  his  where  he  had 
secretly  laid  up  three  crowns  of  gold  ;  but  yet  they  were 
not  so  closely  conveyed,  that  they  could  be  concealed 
from  the  monks  :  for  they,  carefully  seeking,  and  tossing 
up  all  his  medicines  and  boxes,  found  in  one  of  them 
these  three  crowns  hidden.     Which  thing  so  soon  as  I 
understood,  very  much  grieved  I  was,  and  could  not 
quietly  digest  so  great  a  sin  at  his  hands,  that  lived  with 
us  in  community,  because  the  rule  of  my  Monastery 
was  that  all  the  monks  thereof  should  so  live  in  common, 
that  none  in  particular  might  possess  anything  proper  to 
himself.     Being,  therefore,  much  troubled  and  grieved 
at  that  which   had   happened,   I  began  to  think  with 
myself  what  was  best  to  be  done,  both  for  the  soul  of 
him  that  was  now  dying,  and  also  for  the  edification  and 
example  of  those  that  were  yet  living.    At  length  I  sent 
for  Pretiosus,  Prior  of  the   Monastery,  and  gave  him 

250 


Cbe  e^onk  Justus 

this  charge  :  "  See,"  quoth  I,  "  that  none  of  our  monks 
do  so  much  as  visit  Justus  in  this  his  extremity,  neither 
let  any  give  him  any  comfort  at  all :  and  when  his  last 
hour  draweth  nigh,  and  he  doth  desire  the  presence  of 
his  spiritual  brethren,  let  his  carnal  brother  tell  him  that 
they  do  all  detest  him,  for  the  three  crowns  which  he 
had  hidden  :  that,  at  least  before  his  death,  sorrow  may 
wound  his  heart,  and  purge  it  from  the  sin  committed : 
and  when  he  is  dead,  let  not  his  body  be  buried  amongst 
the  rest  of  the  monks,  but  make  a  grave  for  him  in  some 
one  dunghill  or  other,  and  there  cast  it  in,  together  with 
the  three  crowns  which  he  left  behind  him,  crying  out 
all  with  joint  voice  :  cThy  money  be  with  thee  unto 
perdition  '  ;  and  so  put  earth  upon  him."  In  either  of 
which  things  my  mind  and  desire  was,  both  to  help  him 
that  was  leaving  the  world,  and  also  to  edify  the  monks 
yet  remaining  behind,  that  both  grief  of  death  might 
make  him  pardonable  for  his  sin,  and  such  a  severe 
sentence  against  avarice  might  terrify  and  preserve  them 
from  the  like  offence  :  both  which,  by  God's  goodness, 
fell  out  accordingly.  For  when  the  foresaid  monk  came 
to  die,  and  carefully  desired  to  be  commended  to  the 
devotions  of  his  brethren,  and  yet  none  of  them  did 
either  visit  him,  or  so  much  as  speak  to  him  :  his 
brother  Copiosus  told  him  for  what  cause  they  had  all 
given  him  over  :  at  which  words  he  straightways  sighed 
for  his  sin,  and  in  that  sorrow  gave  up  the  ghost.  And 
after  his  death,  he  was  buried  in  that  manner,  as  1  had 
given  in  commandment  :  by  which  fact  all  the  monks 
were  so  terrified,  that  they  began  each  one  to  seek  out 
the  least  and  basest  things  in  their  cells,  and  which  by 
the  rule  they  might  lawfully  keep  :  and  very  much  they 
feared,  lest  some  thing  they  had,  for  which  they  might 
be  blamed. 

Thirty  days  after  his  departure,  I  began  to  take  com- 
passion upon  him,  and  with  great  grief  to  think  of  his 

251 


£fje  Dialogues  of  ttt.  <£regorp 

punishment,  and  what  means  there  was  to  help  him  : 
whereupon  I  called  again  for  Pretiosus,  Prior  of  my 
Monastery,  and  with  an  heavy  heart  spake  thus  unto 
him  :  "  It  is  now  a  good  while  since  that  our  brother 
which  is  departed  remaineth  in  the  torments  of  fire,  and 
therefore  we  must  shew  him  some  charity,  and  labour 
what  we  may  to  procure  his  delivery  :  wherefore  go 
your  way,  and  see  that  for  thirty  days  following  sacri- 
fice be  offered  for  him,  so  that  no  one  day  pass  in  which, 
for  his  absolution  and  discharge,  the  healthful  sacrifice 
be  not  offered  "  :  who  forthwith  departed,  and  put  my 
commandment  in  execution.  In  the  mean  time,  my 
mind  being  busied  about  other  affairs,  so  that  I  took  no 
heed  to  the  days  how  they  passed  :  upon  a  certain  night 
the  same  monk  that  was  dead,  appeared  to  his  brother 
Copiosus  :  who,  seeing  him,  enquired  of  his  state  in  this 
manner  :  "  What  is  the  matter,  brother  ?  and  how  is  it 
with  you?"  to  whom  he  answered  thus:  "Hitherto 
have  I  been  in  bad  case,  but  now  I  am  well ;  for  this 
day  have  I  received  the  communion  "  :  with  which 
news  Copiosus  straightways  coming  to  the  Monastery, 
told  the  monks  :  and  they  diligently  counting  the  days, 
found  it  to  be  that  in  which  the  thirtieth  sacrifice  was 
offered  for  his  soul  :  and  so,  though  neither  Copiosus 
knew  what  the  monks  had  done  for  him,  nor  they  what 
he  had  seen  concerning  the  state  of  his  brother,  yet  at 
one  and  the  same  time  both  he  knew  what  they  had 
done,  and  they  what  he  had  seen,  and  so  the  sacrifice 
and  vision  agreeing  together,  apparent  it  was  that  the 
dead  monk  was  by  the  holy  sacrifice  delivered  from  his 
pains. 

Ip0t£t.  The  things  you  report  be  passing  strange,  and 
yet  full  of  joy  and  comfort. 

C&amer  jTiftp=0ir :  of  tf)e  life  anD  Departure  of 

1Bi06op  Ca00iU0.  «I  ®regorp.  And  that  we  should 
not  call  in  question,  or  doubt  of  that  which  the  dead 

252 


IBaraca  tfjc  farmer 

report,  we  have,  for  confirmation  of  the  same  thing,  the 
facts  of  the  living.  For  Cassius,  Bishop  of  Narni,  a  man 
of  holy  life,  who  did  usually  every  day  offer  sacrifice 
unto  God  (and  whiles  he  was  at  the  mysteries  of  those 
sacrifices,  did  also  immolate  himself  in  tears),  received 
from  our  Lord  this  message  by  one  of  his  Priests.  "  Do 
that  thou  doest :  work  that  thou  workest  :  let  not  thy 
foot  cease,  let  not  thy  hand  cease,  upon  the  nativity  of 
the  Apostles  thou  shalt  come  unto  me,  and  I  will  give 
thee  thy  reward."  And  so,  seven  years  after,  upon  that 
very  day  of  the  Apostles,  after  he  had  ended  the  solem- 
nity of  Mass  and  received  the  mysteries  of  the  sacred 
communion,  he  departed  this  life. 

Chapter  jTift^setien :  of  one  tbat  toas  taken  bp 
W  enemies  anD  put  in  prison,  tobose  irons  fell 
off  at  tbe  time  of  tbe  sacrifice :  ano  of  one  15araca, 
a  mariner,  tbat  toas  ty  tbe  ftolp  sacrifice  DelitiereD 

from  OrOtotTing.  *R  That  also  which  I  have  heard  is 
known  to  many,  to  wit,  how  one  was  by  his  enemies 
taken  and  put  in  prison,  with  irons  upon  him  :  for  whom 
his  wife  caused  upon  certain  days  sacrifice  to  be  offered  : 
who,  long  time  after,  returning  home  to  his  wife,  told 
her  upon  what  days  his  bolts  used  to  fall  off :  by  whose 
relation  she  found  that  it  was  upon  those  very  days  in 
which  sacrifice  had  been  offered  for  him.  By  another 
thing  likewise,  which  happened  seven  years  since,  the 
very  same  truth  is  confirmed.  For  when  Agathus, 
Bishop  of  Palermo  (as  many  faithful  and  religious  men 
both  have  and  still  do  tell  me),  was,  in  the  time  of  my 
predecessor  of  blessed  memory,  commanded  to  come  to 
Rome,  and  in  his  journey  fell  into  such  a  tempest  at  sea, 
that  he  despaired  of  ever  coming  to  land  :  the  mariner 
of  the  ship,  called  Baraca  (who  now  is  one  of  the  clergy, 
and  serveth  in  the  same  church),  governed  another 
small  vessel,  tied  to  the  poop  of  the  former  ship  :  the 
rope  whereof  breaking  in  pieces,  away  it  went  with  man 

"-S3 


£f)e  Dialogues  of  %>t  <$regorp 

and  all,   and  amongst  the   huge  mountains  of  waters, 
quickly  vanished  out  of  sight.     The  ship  in  which  the 
Bishop  was,  after  many  great  dangers,  at  length  arrived 
all  weather-beaten  at  the  island  of  Ostica  :  and  when 
three  days  were  past,   and  the  Bishop  could  hear  no 
news    of  the  foresaid   mariner    that  was    so  violently 
carried  away  with  the  storm,  nor  see  him  in  any  part  of 
the  sea,  very  sorry  he  was,  and  verily  believed  that  he 
had  been  drowned  :  and  so  upon  great  charity  bestowed 
one  thing  upon  him  being  yet  alive,  which  was  not  due 
unto  him   until  he  was   dead  :  for  he  willed  that  the 
sacrifice  of  the  healthful  oblation  should  be  offered  unto 
almighty   God  for  the  absolution  of  his   soul:    which 
being  done  accordingly,  and  the  ship  new  rigged,  away 
he   departed  for   Italy,   where,  arriving  at  Portua,  he 
found  the  mariner  alive,  whom  he  verily  supposed  to 
have  been  drowned  :  upon  which  good  chance  altogether 
unlooked  for,  very  glad  he  was,  and  demanded  of  him, 
how  it  was  possible  that  he  could  escape  so  many  days, 
in  so  great  a  danger  and  so  terrible  a  tempest  :  who  told 
him,  how  in  that  storm  he  was  tossed  with  that  little 
ship  which  he  governed,  and  how  he  did  swim  with  it 
being  full  of  water  :    and   so   often  as  it  was  turned 
upside  down,  how  he  gat  upon  the  keel,  and  held  fast 
there  :  adding  also  that,  by  striving  and  labouring  thus 
continually  day  and  night,  at  length,  with  watching  and 
hunger,  his  strength  began  to  fail  him  :  and  then  he  told 
how,  by  the  singular  providence  and  mercy  of  God,  he 
was  preserved  from  drowning :  for  as  even  to  this  very 
day  he  still  affirmeth,  so  then  did  he  verify  the  same  to 
the  Bishop,  telling  him  in  this  manner.     "As  I  was," 
quoth  he,  "  striving  and  labouring  in  the  sea,  and  my 
strength  began  to  fail  me,  suddenly  I  became  so  heavy 
of  mind,  that  methought  I  was  neither  waking  nor  yet 
asleep :  and  being  in  that  case  in  the  midst  of  the  sea, 
I  saw  one  come,  who  brought  me  bread  to  refresh  my 

254 


e^psterp  of  tbe  ©olp  Sacrifice 

tired  body :  which  so  soon  as  I  had  eaten,  I  recovered 
my  strength  again  ;  and  not  long  after,  a  ship  passing 
by  took  me  in,  and  so  was  I  delivered  from  that  danger 
of  death  and  set  safe  a  land.  The  Bishop,  hearing  this, 
enquired  upon  what  day  this  strange  thing  happened, 
and  he  found  by  his  relation,  that  it  was  that  very  day 
in  which  the  Priest  in  the  island  of  Ostica  did  sacrifice 
for  him  unto  God,  the  host  of  the  holy  oblation. 
Ip0t0t,  That  which  you  report,  myself  also  heard  at  my 
being  in  Sicily. 

<£>t0£Otp.  I,  for  my  part,  do  verily  believe,  that  the 
reason  why,  by  God's  providence,  this  thing  falleth  out 
thus  apparently  to  them  that  be  living,  and  think  nothing 
thereof,  is  that  all  may  know  how,  if  their  sins  be  not 
irremissible,  that  they  may  after  death  obtain  pardon 
and  absolution  for  them,  by  the  oblation  of  the  holy 
sacrifice.  But  yet  we  have  here  to  note,  that  the  holy 
sacrifice  doth  profit  those  kind  of  persons  after  their 
death,  who  in  their  life  time  obtained  that  such  good 
works  as  were  by  their  friends  done  for  them  might  be 
available  to  their  souls,  after  they  were  out  of  this 
world. 

Cbaptet  JTiftp=eigf)t :  of  tf)C  Virtue  anD  mpstcrp 

Of  t6e  bOlp  Sacrifice  9  And  here  also  we  have 
diligently  to  consider,  that  it  is  far  more  secure  and  safe 
that  every  man  should  do  that  for  himself  whiles  he  is 
yet  alive,  which  he  desireth  that  others  should  do  for 
him  after  his  death.  For  far  more  blessed  it  is,  to 
depart  free  out  of  this  world,  than  being  in  prison  to 
seek  for  release:  and  therefore  reason  teacheth  us,  that 
we  should  with  our  whole  soul  contemn  this  present 
world,  at  least  because  we  see  that  it  is  now  gone  and 
past :  and  to  offer  unto  God  the  daily  sacrifice  of  tears, 
and  the  daily  sacrifice  of  his  body  and  blood.  For  this 
sacrifice  doth  especially  save  our  souls  from  everlasting 
damnation,  which  in  mystery  doth  renew  unto  us  the 

2SS 


Cbe  Dialogues  of  %t  <$reprp 

death  of  the  Son  of  God:  who  although  being  risen 
from  death,  doth  not  now  die  any  more,  nor  death  shall 
not  any  further  prevail  against  him :  yet  living  in  him- 
self immortally,  and  without  all  corruption,  he  is  again 
sacrificed  for  us  in  this  mystery  of  the  holy  oblation : 
for  there  his  body  is  received,  there  his  flesh  is  distri- 
buted for  the  salvation  of  the  people :  there  his  blood 
is  not  now  shed  betwixt  the  hands  of  infidels,  but 
poured  into  the  mouths  of  the  faithful.  Wherefore 
let  us  hereby  meditate  what  manner  of  sacrifice  this  is, 
ordained  for  us,  which  for  our  absolution  doth  always 
represent  the  passion  of  the  only  Son  of  God :  for  what 
right  believing  Christian  can  doubt,  that  in  the  very 
hour  of  the  sacrifice,  at  the  words  of  the  Priest,  the 
heavens  be  opened,  and  the  quires  of  Angels  are 
present  in  that  mystery  of  Jesus  Christ  ;  that  high 
things  are  accompanied  with  low,  and  earthly  joined  to 
heavenly,  and  that  one  thing  is  made  of  visible  and 
invisible  ? 

Chapter  JTift^nine :  fjoto  toe  ougbt  to  procure 
sorroto  of  fceart,  at  t&e  time  of  tbe  6olg  masteries : 
anD  of  tbe  custoDp  of  our  soul  after  contrition. 

^  But  necessary  it  is  that,  when  we  do  these  things, 
we  should  also,  by  contrition  of  heart,  sacrifice  ourselves 
unto  almighty  God  :  for  when  we  celebrate  the  mystery 
of  our  Lord's  passion,  we  ought  to  imitate  what  we  then 
do  :  for  then  shall  it  truly  be  a  sacrifice  for  us  unto  God, 
if  we  offer  ourselves  also  to  him  in  sacrifice.  Careful 
also  must  we  be,  that  after  we  have  bestowed  some  time 
in  prayer,  that,  as  much  as  we  can  by  God's  grace,  we 
keep  our  mind  fixed  in  him,  so  that  no  vain  thoughts 
make  us  to  fall  unto  dissolution,  nor  any  foolish  mirth 
enter  into  our  heart :  lest  the  soul,  by  reason  of  such 
transitory  thoughts,  lose  all  that  which  it  gained  by 
former  contrition.  For  so  Anne  deserved  to  obtain  that 
which  she  craved  at  God's  hand,  because  after  her  tears 

256 


jTotgtoeness  of  %im 

she  preserved  herself  in  the  former  force  of  her  soul  : 
for  of  her  thus  it  is  written  :  And  her  looks  were  not  any 
more  changed  to  divers  things}  She  therefore,  that  forgot 
not  what  she  desired,  was  not  deprived  of  that  gift  which 
she  requested. 

Cbaptet  ^>irtp :  tfrat  toe  ougfn  to  yaroon  otber 
men  tbeir  0in#,  tbat  toe  map  obtain  remission  of 

OUC  OtOn,  ^  We  have  also  further  to  know,  that  he 
doth  rightly  and  in  good  sort  demand  pardon  for  his 
own  sin,  who  doth  forgive  that  which  hath  been  done 
against  himself.  For  our  gift  is  not  received,  if,  before, 
we  free  not  our  soul  from  all  discord  and  lack  of  charity  : 
for  our  Saviour  saith  :  If  thou  offer  thy  gift  at  the  altar,  and 
there  thou  remember  that  thy  brother  hath  aught  against  thee, 
leave  there  thy  offering  before  the  altar,  and  go  first  to  be 
reconciled  to  thy  brother,  and  then  coming  thou  shalt  offer  thy 
gift.2.  Wherein  we  have  to  consider,  that  whereas  all  sin 
by  a  gift  is  loosed,  how  grievous  the  sin  of  discord  is, 
for  which  no  gift  is  received  :  and  therefore  we  ought, 
in  soul  and  desire,  to  go  unto  our  neighbour  though  he 
be  far  ofF,  and  many  miles  distant  from  us,  and  there  to 
humble  ourselves  before  him,  and  to  pacify  him  by  humi- 
lity and  hearty  good  will,  to  the  end  that  our  Creator, 
beholding  the  desire  of  our  mind,  may  forgive  us  our 
own  sin,  who  receiveth  a  gift  for  sin.  And  our  Saviour 
himself  teacheth  us,  how  that  servant,  which  did  owe 
ten  thousand  talents,  by  penance  obtained  of  his  Lord 
the  forgiveness  of  that  debt  :  but  yet  because  he  would 
not  forgive  his  fellow-servant  an  hundred  pence,  which 
were  due  to  him,  that  was  again  exacted  at  his  hands, 
which  before  was  pardoned.3  Out  of  which  sayings  we 
learn,  that  if  we  do  not  from  our  heart  forgive  that 
which  is  committed  against  us,  how  that  is  again  re- 
quired at  our  hands,  whereof  before  we  were  glad  that 
by  penance  we  had  obtained  pardon  and  remission. 
1  i  Kings  i.  IS.  a   Matt.  5.  23-24.  3  Matt.  18.  27. 

257  R 


Cbe  Dialogues  of  9t  <$regorp 

Wherefore,  whiles  time  is  given  us,  whiles  our  judge 
doth  bear  with  us,  whiles  he  that  examineth  our  sins  doth 
expect  our  conversion  and  amendment :  let  us  mollify 
with  tears  the  hardness  of  our  heart,  and  with  sincere 
charity,  love  our  neighbours  :  and  then  dare  I  speak  it 
boldly,  that  we  shall  not  have  any  need  of  the  holy 
sacrifice  after  our  death  :  if,  before  death,  we  offer  up 
ourselves  for  a  sacrifice  unto  almighty  God. 

«I  Ibcrc  cnD  tbe  Dialogues  of  ^aint  ®regorp. 


258 


Jl?otes,  $t. 


ISoofe  31 

Introduction,  p.  4.  Similarly  in  the  letter  addressed  to  Leander 
of  Seville,  prefixed  to  the  Mora/ia,  or  Exposition  of  the  Book  of  Job  (com- 
posed before  his  elevation  to  the  papacy),  St.  Gregory  had  written  : 
"Now  that  the  times  are  disturbed  through  multiplied  evils,  the  end 
of  the  world  being  at  hand,  we  ourselves,  who  are  believed  to  be 
devoted  to  the  inner  mysteries,  are  involved  in  external  cares." 
Cf  below,  Bk.  III.  chap.  38  ;  Bk.  IV.  chap.  4.1. 

Chapter  I.  p.  7.  Funda,  more  correctly  Fundi  (the  translator  is 
somewhat  casual  in  his  rendering  of  the  Latin. names  of  places),  is  the 
modern  Fondi,  in  the  province  of  Caserta,  between  Terracina  and 
Formia.  Cf  Horace,  Sat.  I.  5,  34-36.  Honoratus  is  celebrated  in 
the  Roman  Martyrology  on  January  16. 

Chapter.  II.  p.  9.  For  Totila,  see  below,  Bk.  II.  chap.  14.  He 
was  king  of  the  Ostrogoths  in  Italy  from  541  to  552. 

Ibid.  p.  10.  In  553,  after  the  death  of  Totila's  successor,  Teias, 
Leutharand  Butilin  (here  called  Buccellinus),  chiefs  of  the  Alamanni, 
who  were  subject  to  the  king  of  the  Franks,  invaded  Italy  in  support 
of  the  scattered  remnants  of  the  Goths.  Butilin  ravaged  Campania 
in  554,  until  defeated  and  slain  by  Narses  at  the  battle  of  Capua. 
See  Hodgkin,  Italy  and  her  Invaders,  V.  bk.  vi.  chap.  I. 

Chapter  IV.  p.  15.  The  province  of  Valeria  included  the  cities 
of  Reate  (Rieti)  and  Tibur  (Tivoli),  and  the  modern  province  of 
Aquila  (Abruzzi).  St.  Equitius  is  commemorated  on  March  7.  It 
is  uncertain  whether  the  monastery  quod  appellatur  Balneum  Ciceronis 
was  at  Tusculum,  or  (as  seems  more  probable  from  the  context)  on 
the  site  of  the  present  abbey  of  San  Domenico  Abbate  near  Isola  del 
Liri  in  the  diocese  of  Sora. 

Ibid.  p.  16.  Amiternum,  an  ancient  Sabine  town,  the  birthplace 
of  Sallust,  is  some  five  miles  from  the  modern  city  of  Aquila  ;  its 
site  is  occupied  by  the  village  of  San  Vittorino.  Two  letters  of 
Cassiodorus,  written  in  the  name  of  King  Theodoric,  refer  to  this 
Basilius,  who,  together  with  another  Roman  noble  named  Praetex- 
tatus,    was    imprisoned    for    practising    magical    arts,   but  made    his 

26l 


Botes 

escape.  Theodoric  ordered  that  he  should  be  recaptured,  and 
examined  by  a  board  of  five  persons,  one  of  whom  was  the  patrician 
Symmachus  (Cf.  Bk.  IV.  chaps.  13  and  30).  See  Hodgkin,  The 
Letters  of  Cassiodorus,  pp.  246,  247.  Baronius  places  these  events  in 
the  year  504  or  thereabouts.  Nothing  is  known  of  the  subsequent 
fate  of  Basilius,  to  which  St.  Gregory  refers  ;  he  is  evidently  not 
the  same  person  as  the  Basilius  mentioned  by  Boethius,  in  the  De 
Consolatione  Philosophiae,  as  one  of  his  accusers. 

Ibid.  p.  18.  Castorius  (or  Castus)  was  a  military  officer  (magister 
mi/itum),  who  shared  in  the  defence  of  Rome  against  the  Lombards, 
and  is  mentioned  with  high  praise  by  St.  Gregory  himself  in  a 
letter  of  595  to  the  Emperor  Mauritius  (Registrum,  Epist.  v.  36,  ed. 
Ewald  and  Hartmann,  i.  p.  317).  For  "Bishop  of  Reatino" 
(Reatinae  antistes  ecclesiae)  read  "Bishop  of  Reate  "  (Rieti).  The 
Bishop  of  Rome  mentioned  in  this  chapter  is  probably  Pope 
Symmachus  I.  (498-514),  for  whom  see  below,  Bk.  IV.  chap.  40. 

Ibid.  p.  19.  Julianus  is  described  in  the  Latin  text  as  being  then 
defensor  (of  the  Church  of  Rome).  The  Defenders  of  the  various 
Churches  were  ecclesiastical  lawyers,  clerics  appointed  to  look  after 
the  interests  of  the  Church.  See  Moroni,  Dlzionario  di  Erudizione 
storico-ecclesiastica,xx.  pp.  38  et  sea.,  and  St.  Gregory,  Registrant,  Epist. 
v.  26,  ed.  Ewald  and  Hartmann,  i.  p.  307. 

Ibid.  p.  22.  Valentinus  was  the  second  Abbot  of  Sant'  Andrea, 
the  monastery  into  which  St.  Gregory  converted  his  palace  on  the 
Caelian  Hill. 

Ibid.  p.  23.  The  Lombards  came  into  the  province  of  Valeria  in 
571,  three  years  after  their  first  appearance  in  Italy. 

Chapter  VII.  pp.  26,  27.  For  Maximianus,  Bishop  of  Syracuse, 
see  Bk.  III.  chap.  36.  The  "Abbey  which  is  hard  by  the  city  of 
Nepi  "  is  the  monastery  "  called  Suppentonia,"  mentioned  in  the 
next  chapter.  There  were  a  number  of  early  mediaeval  monasteries 
on  Mount  Soracte  ;  the  one  presided  over  by  Nonnosus  was,  perhaps, 
that  traditionally  associated  with  St.  Sylvester,  which  was  afterwards 
in  the  eighth  century  refounded  by  Carloman  the  Frank. 

Chapter  VIII.  p.  29.  Suppentonia  is  the  modern  Castel  Sant' 
Elia,  between  Nepi  and  Civita  Castellana.  Anastasius  is  com- 
memorated on  January  II. 

Ibid.  p.  31.  Tuscania,  more  properly  Tuscia,  is,  of  course,  the 
modern  Tuscany. 

Chapter  IX.  p.  31.  The  place  meant  is  apparently  Ferentinum 
(Ferentino),  near  Frosinone,  which,  however,  is  in  Latium  not 
Tuscany.      Bonifacius  is  commemorated  on  May  14. 

Chapter  X.  p.  38.  Tuder  is  now  Todi  in  Umbria.  For- 
tunatus  died  in  537,  and  is  commemorated  on  October  14.  The 
Julianus  here  mentioned,  nostrae  ecclesiae  defensor,   is   not  the  same 

262 


JftOtCS 

person  as  the  Julianus  connected  with  St.  Equitius  (Bk.  I.  chap.  4), 
who  previously  held  the  same  office  of  "  defender." 

Chapter  XII.  p.  46.  "  In  eo  etiam  loco  Interor'ina  vallis  dicitur, 
quae  a  multis  verbo  rustico  Interocrina  nominatur."  The  place  is 
apparently  Interocrea,  or  Intocrium,  the  modern  Antrodoco,  between 
Rieti  and  Aquila. 

IBook  3131 

Introduction,  p.  51.  St.  Benedict  was  born  at  Nursia  about  480. 
The  date  of  his  leaving  Rome  is  disputed  ;  it  was  probably  a  few 
years  before  500.  Constantinus  and  Simplicius  were  his  two  imme- 
diate successors,  the  second  and  third  Abbots  of  Monte  Cassino  ; 
Honoratus  presided  over  the  Abbey  of  Subiaco  in  St.  Gregory's  own 
days. 

Chapter  I.,  p.  52.  For  "  Enside,"  read  Enfde,  which  is  identified 
with  the  mountain-village  of  Affile,  between  Olevano  and  Subiaco. 

Ibid.  p.  53.  Sublacum,  or  Sublaqueum,  now  Subiaco,  in  the 
Apennines,  above  the  river  Anio.  Here  Nero  had  built  a  villa, 
with  three  artificial  lakes,  and  it  was  over  the  ruins  of  the  Emperor's 
"  sylvan  retreat "  that  the  order  of  the  Benedictines  thus  sprang  into 
being.  Cf.  Lanciani,  Wanderings  in  the  Roman  Campagna,  pp.  350- 
352.  The  "strait  cave,"  in  which  St.  Benedict  lived,  is  now  the 
famous  Sagro  Speco,  on  the  mountain-side,  high  above  the  town. 

Ibid.  p.  53.  The  name  of  this  Abbot  is  variously  given  as 
Theodacus  or  Adeodatus. 

Chapter  II.  p.  55.  These  thorns  and  nettles  are  piously  said  to 
have  turned  into  the  roses,  the  descendants  of  which  are  still  seen  in 
the  garden  of  the  monastery  of  the  Sagro  Speco. 

Chapter  III.  p.  56.  The  monastery  in  question  is  said  to  have 
been  at  Varia  (the  modern  Vicovaro),  near  Mandela.  In  the  second 
chapter  of  the  Rule  of  St.  Benedict,  we  read  that  the  Abbot  "  shall  be 
acquitted  in  so  far  as  he  shall  have  shown  all  the  watchfulness  of  a 
shepherd  over  a  restless  and  disobedient  flock  ;  and  if  as  their  pastor 
he  shall  have  employed  every  care  to  cure  their  corrupt  manners,  he 
shall  be  declared  guiltless  in  the  Lord's  judgment,  and  he  may  say 
with  the  prophet,  /  have  not  hidden  Thy  justice  in  my  heart ;  I  have 
told  Thy  truth  and  Thy  salvation;  but  jhey  contemned  and  despised  me." 
(Gasquet's  translation.) 

Ibid.  p.  60.  "That  notable  preacher  of  the  world."  This  is, 
perhaps,  a  misprint  in  the  edition  of  1608  for  "  word."  The  Latin 
has  simply  :  tile  quoque  egregius  praedicator. 

Ibid.  p.  61.  The  name  of  the  father  of  Maurus  is  variously 
written:  Equitius,  Evitius,  Euticius  ;  "Tertullius  the  senator"  is 
simply  Tertullus  patricius.  For  the  reception  of  children  into  the 
order,  cf.  chap.  59  of  the  Rule.     According  to  the  tradition,  Maurus 

263 


JftOtCS 

became  the  Benedictine  apostle  of  France,  and  died  in  584,  while 
Placidus  died  a  martyr's  death  in  Sicily  in  541,  a  few  years  before  the 
death  of  St.  Benedict  himself. 

Chapter  VI.  p.  63.  "  If  any  one  whilst  engaged  in  any  work, 
either  in  the  kitchen,  in  the  cellar,  in  serving  others,  in  the  bake- 
house, in  the  garden,  or  in  any  other  occupation  or  place,  shall  do 
anything  amiss,  break  or  lose  anything,  or  offend  in  any  way  whatsoever, 
and  do  not  come  at  once  to  the  abbot  and  community  of  his  own 
accord  to  confess  his  offence  and  make  satisfaction,  if  afterwards  it 
shall  become  known  by  another  he  shall  be  more  severely  punished." 
{Rule  of  St.  Benedict,  chap.  46,  Gasquet's  translation.) 

Chapter  VIII.  p.  68.  St.  Benedict  thus  founded  the  great  Abbey 
of  Monte  Cassino  in  528  or  529.  Dante  translates  St.  Gregory's 
words  in  the  Paradiso  (xxii.  37-45),  where  he  puts  them  into  the 
mouth  of  St.  Benedict  himself: 

"Quel  monte,  a  cui  Cassino  c  nella  costa, 
Fu  frequentato  gia  in  sulla  cima 
Dalla  gente  ingannata  e  mal  disposta. 
E  quel  son  io  che  su  vi  portai  prima 
Lo  nome  di  Colui,  che  in  terra  addusse 
La  verita  che  tanto  ci  sublima  ; 
E  tanta  grazia  sopra  me  rilusse, 
Ch'io  ritrassi  le  ville  circostanti 
Dall'  empio  culto  che  il  mondo  sedusse." 

Chapter  XI.  p.  70.  "The  son  of  a  certain  courtier"  is  hardly 
the  equivalent  of  cujusdam  curtails  films.  A  curia/is,  or  decurio,  was 
.•member  of  the  municipal  council  of  some  provincial  town.  See 
Hodgkin,  II.  pp.  577  et  seq. 

Chapter  XII.  p.  71.  "The  brother  who  is  sent  on  an  errand, 
and  expects  to  return  to  his  monastery  the  same  day,  shall  not  presume 
to  eat  outside  his  house,  even  though  he  be  asked  to  do  so  by  any 
one,  unless  he  be  so  ordered  by  his  abbot.  If  he  do  otherwise,  let 
him  be  excommunicated."  (Rule  of  St.  Benedict,  chap.  51,  Gasquet's 
translation.) 

Chapter  XIII.  p.  72.  This  Valentinian  is  probably  the  Abbot  of 
the  Lateran  mentioned  on  p.  52. 

Chapters  XIV.  and  XV.  pp.  73-75.  Totila  (Baduila)  became 
king  of  the  Ostrogoths  in  Italy  in  541,  when  Belisarius  had  won 
back  for  Justinian  and  the  Empire  all  the  peninsula  south  of  the  Po. 
His  interview  with  St.  Benedict  took  place  probably  in  the  following 
year,  542.  Of  his  four  Gothic  attendants  here  mentioned — Riggo, 
Vult,  Ruderic,  and  Bleda — the  last  two  are  also  known  in  history  as 
having  been  sent  by  the  king  to  besiege  Florence  in  this  same  year. 
(Cf.  Hodgkin,    Italy   and  her  Invaders,  II.    p.  433).     Totila  recon- 

264 


Jf2OtC0 

quered  almost  all  Italy,  except  Ravenna  and  Ancona  ;  he  captured 
Rome  twice  (546  and  549),  and  overran  Sicily  ;  but  in  552  was 
defeated  by  Narses  and  killed  in  the  rout  of  his  army.  It  was 
naturally  impossible  for  St.  Gregory  to  take  an  impartial  view  of 
the  Goths,  and  modern  historians  depict  Totila  in  far  more  favourable 
colours.  According  to  Dr.  Hodgkin,  he  was  "  upon  the  whole  one  of 
the  best  types  of  the  still  future  age  of  chivalry  that  the  Downfall  of 
the  Empire  can  exhibit." 

Chapter  XV.  p.  75.  "Camisina"  is  Canusium,  the  modern 
Canosa  di  Puglia.  The  Bishop  is  the  Sabinus  spoken  of  below, 
Bk.  III.  chap.  5.  Honoratus  is  the  Abbot  of  Subiaco  already  men- 
tioned on  p.  52. 

Chapter  XVI.  p.  75.  Constantius,  Bishop  of  Aquinum  (Aquino), 
is  commemorated  on  September  I. 

Chapter  XVII.  p.  78.  The  Abbey  of  Monte  Cassino  was  destroyed 
by  the  Lombards  of  the  duchy  of  Beneventum  in  589. 

Chapter  XIX.  p.  80.  "  No  one,  without  leave  of  the  abbot,  shall 
presume  to  give,  or  receive,  or  keep  as  his  own,  anything  whatever. 
...  All  things  are  to  be  common  to  all,  as  it  is  written,  Neither  did 
any  one  say  or  think  that  aught  was  his  own."  {Rule  of  St.  Benedict, 
chapter  33,  Gasquet's  translation.      Cf.  also  chapter  54.) 

Chapter  XX.  p.  80.  In  chapter  iv.  of  the  Rule,  among  the  instru- 
ments of  good  works,  we  read  :  "To  dash  at  once  against  Christ  (as 
against  a  rock)  evil  thoughts  which  rise  up  in  the  mind."  According 
to  the  Latin  text,  this  monk  cujusdam  defensoris  Jilius  juerat.  The 
Defensores  Civitatum  were  the  chief  municipal  authorities  of  the  pro- 
vinces, originally  instituted  to  protect  the  people  from  the  unjust 
extortions  of  the  imperial  officials.  Cf.  Hodgkin,  Italy  and  her 
Invaders,  I.  pp.  625-628. 

Chapter  XXII.  p.  82.  Tarracina,  the  Volscian  city  of  Anxur, 
now  Terracina,  the  last  town  of  the  former  Papal  States  before  crossing 
the  Neapolitan  frontier. 

Chapter  XXXI.  p.  91.  The  name  of  this  Goth  is  more  usually 
written  Zalla. 

Chapter  XXXIII.  p.  94.  According  to  the  tradition,  St.  Scho- 
lastica  died  on  February  10,  543,  and  St.  Benedict  a  month  later, 
March  21,  543.  Their  bodies  are  supposed  to  lie  together  under  the 
high  altar  of  the  abbey  church  at  Monte  Cassino  ;  but  this  is  a  little 
uncertain,  as  they  are  said  to  have  been  at  one  time  translated  (perhaps 
temporarily)  to  France. 

Chapter  XXXV.  p.  96.  This  Liberius  quondam  patricius  is  prob- 
ably the  Liberius  mentioned  in  the  letters  of  Cassiodorus  (Hodgkin, 
The  Letters  of  Cassiodorus,  pp.  178,  179)  as  a  Roman  noble  who  had 
been  Praetorian  Prefect  under  Theodoric.  The  monastery  is  referred 
to  in  St.  Gregory's  letters,  Registrum,  Epist.  ix.  162,  164  (Ewald  and 

265 


Bom 

Hartmann,  ii.  pp.  162,  163).  St.  Germanus,  Bishop  of  Capua,  died 
in  540  or  541,  and  is  commemorated  on  October  30. 

Ibid.  pp.  97,  98.  This  vision  of  the  whole  world,  and  St.  Gregory's 
explanation,  deeply  impressed  the  mediaeval  mind.  It  was  imitated 
by  Marcus,  the  Irish  Benedictine  who  wrote  the  Vision  of  Tundal 
(Fish  Tnugdali,  ed.  Wagner,  p.  52),  and  by  Dante  (Par.  xxii.  1 33—1 53). 
St.  Thomas  Aquinas  discusses  it  with  a  view  to  showing  that  St. 
Gregory's  words  do  not  imply  that  St.  Benedict,  still  living  in  the 
present  life,  saw  God  in  that  vision  per  essentiam,  in  His  Essence. 
(Summa  Theologica,  II.  ii.  Q.  108,  A.  5  ad  3.) 

Chapter  XXXVI.  p.  99.  "For  he  wrote  a  rule  for  his  monks, 
both  excellent  for  discretion  and  also  eloquent  for  the  style."  The 
Latin  runs  :  Nam  scripsit  monachorum  regu/am,  discretione  praecipuam, 
sermone  luculentam,  St.  Gregory  himself,  in  the  epistle  to  Bishop 
Leander  prefixed  to  the  Mora/ia,  professes  to  despise  "literary  style" 
(ipsam  loquendi  artem,  quam  magisteria  disciplinae  exterioris  insinuani)  ; 
"  for  I  deem  it  most  unworthy,"  he  says,  "  to  restrict  the  words  of 
the  heavenly  oracle  under  the  rules  of  Donatus  "  (Epistola  missoria  ad 
Leandrutn  Hhpalensem,  cap.  5).  For  the  style  and  Latinity  of  the  Rule, 
cf.  especially  E.  Wolfflin,  Die  Latinit'dt  des  Benedikt  von  Nursia  in  Archiv 
ftir  lateinische  Lexikographie  und  Grammatik,  ix.  Munich,  1896. 

TBoofe  313131 

Chapter  I.  pp.  105-108.  St.  Paulinus  (Meropius  Pontius  Anicius 
Paulinus)  was  born  at  Bordeaux  in  353  or  354,  of  a  noble  house  with 
vast  estates  in  Gaul,  Italy,  and  Spain.  In  middle  life  he  left  the 
world,  and  from  409  until  his  death  in  431  was  Bishop  of  Nola  in 
Campania  (a  province  of  which  he  had  been  governor  in  early  man- 
hood). Many  of  his  letters  and  poems  (he  had  been  a  pupil  of 
Ausonius)  have  been  preserved.  His  feast  is  on  June  22.  The  story 
here  told  by  St.  Gregory  presents  various  chronological  difficulties. 
The  Vandals  established  their  kingdom  in  Africa  between  429  and  439 
(in  which  latter  year  Gaiseric,  or  Genseric,  took  Carthage)  ;  their 
ravages  in  Italy  (culminating  in  the  sack  of  Rome  by  Gaiseric  in  455) 
did  not  begin  in  the  lifetime  of  Paulinus  ;  and  Gaiseric  himself,  who 
is  evidently  the  king  here  referred  to,  did  not  die  until  477,  more 
than  forty  years  after  the  death  of  Paulinus.  As  a  matter  of  fact, 
Alaric  took  Nola  in  410,  after  his  sack  of  Rome,  and  Paulinus,  then 
newly  appointed  Bishop,  was  made  prisoner.  "  Our  Paulinus,  Bishop 
of  Nola,"  writes  St.  Augustine,  "  who  from  one  most  wealthy  had 
become  voluntarily  poor  and  most  abundantly  holy,  when  the  Bar- 
barians sacked  Nola,  and  he  was  held  captive,  prayed  thus  in  his 
heart,  as  we  afterwards  learned  from  him  :  Lord,  let  me  not  be  tor- 
mented on  account  of  gold  and  silver,  for  Thou  knowest  where  all  I 

266 


jftotcs 

have  is  "  (De  Civitate  Dei,  i.  io).  Alaric  died  within  the  year.  It 
seems  not  impossible,  as  M.  Andre  Baudrillart  suggests  (Saint  Paulin 
Eveque  de  Note,  pp.  1 67-170),  that  the  foundation  for  St.  Gregory's 
story  is  some  tradition  connected  with  the  taking  of  St.  Paulinus  in 
410,  and  that  the  Vandals  have  been  confused  with  the  Visigoths, 
Gaiseric  with  Alaric.  There  is  no  evidence  that  St,  Paulinus  was 
ever  a  prisoner  in  Africa. 

Chapter  II.  p.  109.  For  "Justinian  the  elder"  read  "Justin 
the  elder  "  (the  mistake  is  not  the  translator's,  but  due  to  the  Latin 
text  that  he  used).  John  I.,  a  Tuscan  by  birth,  was  elected  Pope  in 
523,  in  succession  to  Pope  Hormisdas,  whose  reconciliation  of  the 
Roman  See  with  the  Eastern  Empire,  as  represented  by  Justin  I., 
had  weakened  the  power  of  Theodoric  in  Italy.  In  525  he  was 
compelled  by  the  Gothic  king  to  go  on  an  embassy  to  Justin, 
here  recorded  by  St.  Gregory,  with  a  view  of  persuading  the 
Emperor  to  adopt  less  vigorous  methods  against  the  Arians.  At 
Constantinople  he  crowned  the  Emperor.  On  his  return  to 
Ravenna,  Theodoric  threw  him  into  a  dungeon,  where  he  died  in 
May,  526.  He  is  the  last  Pope  whom  the  Church  of  Rome  venerates 
as  a  martyr.     Cf.  below,  Bk.  IV.  chap.  30. 

Chapter  III.  p.  109.  Agapitus  1.,  a  Roman  noble,  was  elected 
Pope  in  535,  when  Justinian,  the  nephew  and  successor  of  Justin, 
was  preparing  to  reconquer  Italy  from  the  Goths.  He  went  to 
Constantinople,  at  once  to  make  peace  (in  which  he  was  unsuccessful) 
and  to  procure  the  deposition  of  the  patriarch  Anthimus,  who  adhered 
to  the  Monophysitc  heresy  and  was  supported  by  the  Empress 
Theodora.  There  the  Pope  suddenly  died  in  April  536.  Dante 
(Par.  vi.  10-21)  makes  Justinian  represent  himself  as  converted  from 
the  Monophysites  by  the  words  of  Agapitus  : 

"  Cesare  fui,  e  son  Giustiniano, 

Che,  per  voler  del  primo  amor  ch'io  sento, 

D'entro  le  leggi  trassi  il  troppo  e  il  vano. 
E  prima  ch'io  all'opra  fossi  attento, 

Una  natura  in  Cristo  esscr,  non  piue, 

Credeva,  e  di  tal  fedc  era  contento  ; 
Ma  il  benedetto  Agapito,  che  fue 

Sommo  pastore,  alia  fede  sincera 

Mi  dirizzo  con  le  parole  sue. 
Io  gli  crcdetti,  e  cio  che  in  fede  sua  era 

Veggio  ora  chiaro,  si  come  tu  vedi 

Ogni  contraddizion  c  falsa  e  vera." 

Chapter  IV.  p.  no.  Datius,  Archbishop  of  Milan,  a  great 
champion  of  orthodoxy  and  an  active  ecclesiastical  politician,  was 
closely  associated  with   Pope  Vigilius  in  his  struggle  with   Justinian 

267 


U3otC0 

and  Theodora.  He  died  at  Constantinople  in  552.  This  legend 
probably  refers  to  his  earlier  visit  to  the  Byzantine  Court,  circa  544. 

Chapter  V.  p.  ill.  Sabinus,  Bishop  of  Canosa  in  Apulia,  has 
been  already  mentioned,  Bk.  II.  chap.  15.  This  story  shows  Totila 
in  a  different  light  from  that  in  which  he  usually  appears  in  Gregory's 
pages. 

Chapter  VIII.  p.  116.  The  Pope  in  question  is  usually  identified 
with  John  III.  (561-574)  ;  but  the  previous  reference  to  Constantius, 
Bishop  of  Aquino,  as  a  contemporary  of  St.  Benedict  {cf.  Bk.  II. 
chap.  16),  seems  to  point  to  John  II.  (533-535). 

Chapter  IX.  p.  117.  Frigidianus  or  Frigdianus  (in  Italian,  San 
Frediano)  was  an  Irishman.  He  died  in  588,  and  is  celebrated  on 
March  18  and  November  18.  For  "Anser"  read  Juser,  now  called 
the  Serchio. 

Chapter  X.  p.  118.  Placentia  is  the  modern  Piacenza,  in 
Lombardy. 

Chapter  XI.  p.  119.  Cerbonius  died  about  575.  Populonium, 
or  Populonia,  a  few  miles  from  Piombino  in  the  Maremma  of 
Tuscany,  was  an  important  place  in  antiquity  by  reason  of  the 
smelting  of  the  iron  from  Elba.     It  was  the  chief  Etruscan  seaport. 

Chapter  XII.  p.  120.  Otricoli  (Ocriculum)  is  near  Orte  in 
Umbria.  This  St.  Fulgentius  (d.  540)  is  not  to  be  confused  with  his 
contemporary,  St.  Fulgentius,  Bishop  of  Ruspe  (d.  533). 

Chapter  XIII.  p.  121.  The  capture  of  Perusia  (the  modern 
Perugia)  by  the  Goths  and  the  martyrdom  of  St.  Herculanus  (Sant' 
Ercolano)  took  place  in  549>  after  a  siege  of  three  years,  during 
which  the  city  was  gallantly  defended  by  a  Greek  imperial  garrison 
under  Cyprian.  According  to  the  legend,  when  the  defenders  were 
reduced  to  extremities,  Herculanus  ordered  a  lamb  or  an  ox  to  be 
fed  with  all  the  store  of  grain  that  remained,  and  then  hurled  down 
from  the  walls,  in  order  that  the  besiegers  might  suppose  that 
supplies  abounded,  and  abandon  their  hope  of  reducing  the  city  by 
starvation.  A  young  ecclesiastic,  either  accidentally  or  by  treachery, 
revealed  the  trick  to  the  Goths,  who  straightway  took  the  city  by 
storm. 

Chapter  XIV.  p.  123.  There  were  a  number  of  Syrian  monks 
in  Italy  during  the  sixth  century  (Herculanus  of  Perugia  is  said  to 
have  been  a  Syrian).  Nothing  more  is  known  concerning  this 
Isaac  of  Spoleto,  who,  if  he  lived  "  almost  to  the  last  days  of  the 
Goths,"  must  have  died  about  the  middle  of  the  century  (Teias, 
the  successor  of  Totila,  and  the  last  king  of  the  Goths  in  Italy, 
was  slain  in  553).  He  is  not  to  be  confused  with  two  other 
Syrians  of  the  same  name,  the  presbyter  Isaac  of  Antioch  (middle 
of  fifth  century)  and  Isaac  of  Nineveh,  the  Nestorian  bishop  of  that 
city  in  the  latter  half  of  the  seventh  century.     For  the  last-named, 

268 


Bom 

see  J.  B.  Chabot,  De  S.  Isaaci  Ninivitae  vita,  serif tis,  et  aoctrina  (Paris, 
1892),  and  a  more  recent  article  by  J.  P.  Arendzen  in  the  Catholic 
Encyclopedia,  vol.  viii.  (New  York,  1910).  The  Latin  Liber  de 
contemptu  mundi  is  a  kind  of  collection  from  the  writings  of  Isaac  of 
Nineveh  (translated  from  a  Greek  version  of  the  Syriac  original)  ; 
upon  this  is  based  an  Italian  work  of  the  fourteenth  century,  variously 
entitled  De  la  perfectione  de  la  vita  contemplativa  and  Collazione  deW 
Abate  Isaac,  erroneously  attributed  to  St.  Gregory's  Isaac  of  Spoleto, 
which  has  been  several  times  reprinted  (the  latest  edition  is  that  of 
Bartolommeo  Sorio,  published  at  Rome  in  1845,  together  with  the 
letters  of  Giovanni  dalle  Celle). 

Chapter  XV.  p.  128.  Euthicius  (better,  Eutychius)  died  about 
540  ;  Florentius  about  547. 

Chapter  XVI.  p.  133.  Marcius  is  called  Martinus  in  the  Latin 
text.  Mons  Marsicus  is  either  Monte  Marsicano  in  the  Abruzzi,  or 
the  mountain  of  the  same  name  near  Marsico  Nuovo  in  Basilicata. 
Pope  Pelagius  II.,  Gregory's  immediate  predecessor,  reigned  from  579 
to  590. 

Chapter  XVII.  p.  136.  Buxentum,  in  Lucania,  is  either  Pisciotta 
or  Policastro  on  the  coast  of  Calabria.  Monte  Argentario,  in  the 
Tuscan  province  of  Grosseto  (formerly  a  part  of  the  republic  of  Siena) 
is  famous  in  the  annals  of  the  order  of  the  Passionists. 

Chapter  XVIII.  p.  139.  This  monk  Benedict  (who,  of  course, 
is  not  the  same  person  as  his  more  famous  contemporary,  St.  Benedict 
of  Nursia)  is  commemorated  on  March  23. 

Chapter  XIX.  p.  140.  For  "Antharicus"  read  Autharicus. 
Authari,  king  of  the  Lombards,  reigned  from  584  to  590.  These 
great  floods  were  in  589.  Athesis  is  the  modern  Adige.  St.  Zeno, 
whose  feast  is  on  April  1 2,  was  Bishop  of  Verona  in  the  fourth 
century,  and,  according  to  the  legend,  delivered  the  daughter  of  the 
Emperor  Galienus  from  an  unclean  spirit.  Nothing  is  known  about 
his  having  suffered  martyrdom.  Cf.  Acta  Sanctorum,  Aprilis  Tom  II., 
pp.  68-78.  Two  books  of  Tractatus,  or  Sermones,  attributed  to  him 
are  in  Migne,  P.L.,  XI. 

Chapter  XXII.  p.  143.  Valentius  is  the  same  person  as  the 
Valentinus  mentioned  on  pp.  22,  202.  He  is  variously  called 
Valentinus,  Valentius,  or  Valentio. 

Chapter  XXIII.  p.  145.  Praeneste  is  the  mediaeval  Palestrina, 
near  which  St.  Gregory's  own  ancestral  lands  lay.  The  mountain, 
upon  the  side  of  which  the  city  stands,  is  crowned  by  Castel  San 
Pietro,  with  a  church  probably  occupying  the  site  ot  the  abbey  here 
mentioned  and  a  ruined  castle  of  the  Colonna. 

Chapters  XXVII.  and  XXVIII.  pp.  150-151.  Dr.  Hodgkin  (VI. 
p.  97)  conjectures  that  these  atrocities  were  not  committed  by  the 
Lombards  properly  so  called,  who  were  Arians,  but  by  their  barbarian 

269 


Bom 

auxiliaries,  Bulgarians,  Sarmatians,  and  Gepidae,  who  had  come  with 
them  into  Italy,  and  who  were  idolaters. 

Chapter  XXX.  p.  153.  The  church  in  question  is  Sancta  Agatha 
in  Subura,  now  known  as  Santa  Agata  de'  Goti.  It  had  been  built 
(or,  perhaps,  restored)  as  a  church  of  the  Arians  by  Ricimer,  the 
Visigothic  patrician,  shortly  before  472,  and  was  taken  for  Catholic 
worship  by  St.  Gregory  in  591  or  592,  and  dedicated  to  St.  Agatha, 
to  whom  he  had  a  special  devotion.  In  a  letter  written  early  in  594, 
St.  Gregory  commends  the  church  to  the  acolyth  Leo:  "ecclesia 
sanctae  Agathae  sita  in  Subora,  quae  spelunca  fuit  aliquando  pravitatis 
hereticae,  ad  catholicae  fidei  culturam,  Deo  propitiante,  reducta  est." 
(Registrant,  Epist.  iv.  19,  ed.  Ewald  and  Hartmann,  i.  p.  253)  ;  but 
makes  no  mention  of  any  miracle.  Subura  is  the  district  between 
the  Esquiline,  Quirinal,  and  Viminal  hills,  and  had  a  bad  repute  in 
classical  times.  Cf.  Horace,  Epod.  v.,  57.  For  "  St.  Stephen,"  read 
"  St.  Sebastian."  The  Latin  runs  :  "  introductis  illic  beati  Sebastiani 
et  sanctae  Agathae  martyrum  reliquiis." 

Chapter  XXXI.  pp.  155-157.  Leander,  Bishop  of  Seville  (to  whom 
St.  Gregory  dedicated  his  Moralia),  was  the  brother  of  Theodosia,  the 
first  wife  of  King  Leovigild,  the  mother  of  Hermenigild  and  Rechared. 
Hermenigild,  who  had  been  converted  from  Arianism  by  his  young 
wife  Ingunthis  (a  Catholic  Frank  princess),  was  associated  with  his 
father  in  the  kingdom,  ruling  at  Seville,  while  Leovigild  held  his 
court  at  Toledo.  He  rebelled  against  his  father  in  583,  and  was 
either  murdered  or  put  to  death  by  the  latter  (the  circumstances  are 
not  clear)  in  585.  Leovigild  died  in  586,  and  his  successor, 
Hermenigild's  brother  Rechared,  became  a  Catholic  in  the  following 
year.  St.  Leander  died  in  599,  and  was  succeeded  in  the  see  of 
Seville  by  his  more  famous  brother,  St.  Isidore,  the  great  apostle  of 
Latin  culture  and  Catholic  orthodoxy  among  the  Visigoths  of  Spain. 

Chapter  XXXII.  p.  157.  St.  Gregory's  chronology  is  here  at 
fault.  The  great  persecutor  of  the  Catholics  in  Africa,  King 
Hunneric  of  the  Vandals  (the  son  and  successor  of  Gaiseric),  reigned 
from  477  to  484,  in  the  time  of  the  Emperor  Zeno.  Justinian  did 
not  ascend  the  imperial  throne  until  527. 

Chapter  XXXVI.  p.  164.  Maximianus,  Bishop  of  Syracuse  and 
formerly  abbot  of  St.  Gregory's  abbey  of  Sant'  Andrea  on  the  Caelian 
Hill,  was  a  constant  friend  and  correspondent  of  the  latter  ;  he  died 
in  594.  St.  Gregory  was  sent  to  Constantinople  as  apocrisiarius  or 
papal  legate,  by  Pope  Pelagius  II.,  in  579,  and  stayed  there  until 
about  585.     While  there  he  composed  his  great  Moralia. 

Ibid.    p.   165.      "Cothronum"   is  Cotrone,  on   the  east  coast  of 
Calabria. 

Chapter  XXXVIII.  p.  173.  For  "  Ferenti "  (Ferentino),  cf 
Bk.  I,  chap.  9.      "John  the  younger"  is  apparently  Pope  John  III., 

270 


Botes 

who  was  Bishop  of  Rome  from  561  to  574.  The  Lombards  entered 
Italy  in  568.  Eutychius  is  the  more  usual  form  of  this  martyr's 
name. 

'Book  IV 

Chapter  I.  p.  178.  There  is  a  certain  resemblance  here  with 
the  famous  opening  of  the  seventh  book  of  Plato's  Republic ;  but 
Gregory,  in  spite  of  his  residence  at  Constantinople,  knew  hardly  any 
Greek,  and  the  analogy  is  probably  accidental. 

Chapter  III.  p.  180.  "  Man,  therefore,  as  he  is  created  in  the 
middle  state."     CJ.  Dante  in  the  De  Monarchia  (iii.  16). 

Chapter  VIII.  p.  188.  The  monastery  founded  by  St.  Benedict 
at  Terracina  has  been  already  mentioned,  Bk.  II.  chap.  22. 

Chapter  X.  p.  189.  Venerabilis  pater  nomine  Spes.  "  Cample"  is, 
perhaps,  Campello  sul  Clitunno,  nearer  Spoleto  than  Norcia. 

Chapter  XII.  p.  192.  For  "  Reati  "  (Reate)  read  "  Rieti."  A 
St.  Juvenal  was  Bishop  of  Narni  in  the  fourth  century,  but  he  was 
not  a  martyr  ;  St.  Eleutherius  (not  to  be  confused  with  St.  Gregory's 
friend,  the  Abbot  of  that  name),  Pope  and  martyr,  suffered  death 
under  the  Emperor  Commodus  in  189. 

Chapter  XIII.  pp.  192,  193.  The  Roman  patrician  and  Christian 
philosopher,  Quintus  Aurelius  Symmachus,  was  consul  in  485,  and 
afterwards  Head  of  the  Senate  ;  he  was  put  to  death  by  Theodoric  in 
525  {cf.  below,  chapter  30).  He  was  the  father-in-law  of  Boethius, 
and  Galla  was  therefore  the  sister  of  the  latter's  wife,  Rusticiana.  It 
was  to  this  Galla  {Ad  Gallant  viduam)  that  St.  Fulgentius  of  Ruspe 
addressed  his  treatise,  De  Censolatione  super  morte  mariti  et  de  statu 
viduarum  (In  Migne,  P.L.  LXV.,  coll.  311-323).  Another  Sym- 
machus, the  son  of  Boethius,  was  consul  in  522  ;  but  chronological 
considerations  make  it  clear  that  his  grandfather  is  the  person  whom 
St.  Gregory  means. 

Chapter  XIV.  p.  194.  The  story  of  Servulus  is  told  by  St. 
Gregory  in  his  15th  Homily,  (Homiliarum  in  Evangeliay  Lib.  I. 
Homilia  15.) 

Chapter  XV.  p.  195.     Homiliarum  in  Evangelia,  Lib.  II.  Homilia  40. 

Chapter  XV.  p.  196.  Praeneste,  or  Palestrina,  was  always  a  haunt 
for  hermits  and  ascetics  in  the  Middle  Ages.  For  a  later  instance, 
that  of  the  beata  Margherita  Colonna,  see  Maud  F.  Jerrold,  Vittoria 
Colonna,  pp.  32,  33. 

Chapter  XVI.  p.  198.  The  story  of  Tharsilla,  or  Tarsilla,  is  told 
at  greater  length  in  the  Homilies  (Lib.  II.  Homilia  38).  Tharsilla, 
Gordiana,  and  Emiliana  were  the  three  sisters  of  St.  Gregory's  father, 
Gordianus  ;  one,  Gordiana,  returned  to  the  world  and  married.  The 
Pope  Felix,  whom  St.  Gregory  describes  as  atavus  mens,  was  probably 
the  third  Pope  of  that  name,  who  was  Bishop  of  Rome   from  483  to 

271 


Botes 

492,  famous  for  his  struggle  with  the  patriarch  Acacius  of  Constanti- 
nople. He  was  a  married  man  before  taking  priest's  orders,  but  his 
exact  relationship  with  St.  Gregory  is  uncertain.  This  story  curiously 
suggests  the  apparition  of  St.  Gregory  himself  to  the  dying  Santa  Fina, 
painted  by  Domenico  Ghirlandaio  at  San  Gimignano. 

Chapter  XVIII.  p.  200.  He  refers  to  the  great  pestilence  that 
devastated  Rome  at  the  beginning  of  590,  during  which  he  was  elected 
Pope  on  the  death  of  Pelagius  II. 

Chapter  XIX.  p.  201.  In  the  Homilies  (Lib.  II.  Homilia  35), 
St.  Gregory  speaks  of  Stephen  as  "  pater  monasterii  juxta  Reatinae 
urbis  moenia  constituti."      Cf.  above,  Bk.  IV.  chap.  1 1. 

Chapter  XXI.  p.  202.     Cf  note  on  Bk.  III.  chap.  22. 

Chapter  XXII.  p.  203.  Sura  is  the  present  Sora  in  the  valley  of 
the  Liris  (included  in  the  modern  province  of  Caserta),  still  famous 
for  the  abbeys  in  its  neighbourhood. 

Chapter  XXIII.  p.  203.  For  "  Marsori  "  read  "  Marsi  "  (Eccksia 
Marsorum).     The  district  indicated  is  the  modern  Abruzzi. 

Chapter  XXV.  p.  205.  This  appeal  to  these  two  texts  in  Isaiah 
and  the  Revelation  of  St.  John,  for  evidence  of  the  resurrection  of  the 
body,  became  a  traditional  one  with  mediaeval  theologians.  Thus 
Dante,  answering  St.  James  as  to  the  object  of  the  Christian's  hope 
{Par.  xxv.  88-96)  : 

"  Le  nuove  e  le  scritture  antiche 

Pongono  il  segno,  ed  esso  lo  mi  addita. 
Dell'  anime  che  Dio  s'ha  fatte  amiche 
Dice  Isaia  che  ciascuna  vestita 

Nella  sua  terra  fia  di  doppia  vesta, 
E  la  sua  terra  e  questa  dolce  vita. 
E  il  tuo  fratello  assai  vie  piu  digesta, 
La  dove  tratta  delle  bianche  stole, 
Questa  rivelazion  ci  manifesta." 

Chapter  XXVI.  p.  206.  The  church  of  San  Sisto  is  on  the  Via 
Appia  within  the  city  ;  it  was  given  by  Honorius  III.  to  St.  Dominic 
in  the  thirteenth  century,  and  is  now  occupied  by  Dominican  nuns. 
The  Via  Praenestina  runs  from  the  Porta  Maggiore  (Porta  Praenestina) 
to  Palestrina. 

Ibid.  p.  207.  Portua  (more  properly  Portus,  the  Portus  Traiani)  is 
the  modern  Porto,  an  important  commercial  seaport  under  the  Empire, 
but  now  a  village  two  miles  from  the  sea. 

Ibid.  p.  208.  Patricii  Narsae  temporibus.  The  Narses  meant  is 
evidently  the  famous  Armenian  eunuch  who  reconquered  Italy  from  the 
Goths  and  governed  Rome  for  the  Empire  from  552  to  567  ;  not  the 
Narses,  a  contemporary  of  St.  Gregory,  to  whom  several  of  the  Pope's 
letters  are  addressed. 

272 


Bom 

Chapter  XXVII.  p.  210.  Centumcellae  is  the  present  Civita 
Vecchia.  "  Earl  "  is  the  translator's  equivalent  of  comes,  or  "count," 
the  chief  military  officer  of  a  district.  St.  Gregory  relates  this  story 
in  his  Homilies  (Lib.  II.  Homilia  36). 

Chapter  XXX.  p.  213.  Ju/ianus  hujus  Romanae  Eccksiac  secundus 
defensor  has  already  been  mentioned,  Bk.  I.  chap.  10.  He  was  the 
second  of  this  name  to  hold  the  office  of  "  defender."  Cf,  note  on 
Bk.  I,  chap.  4. 

Ibid.  p.  214.  Theodoricus  (Thiuda  reiks),  whom  we  call  Theo- 
doric  the  Goth,  was  born  in  454,  invaded  Italy  as  the  delegate  of  the 
Emperor  Zeno  in  489,  and,  by  his  capture  of  Ravenna  from  Odoaccr 
in  493,  founded  the  short-lived  Ostrogothic  kingdom.  In  500,  he 
came  to  Rome  as  a  pacific  and  beneficent  sovereign,  hailed  by  the 
Romans  as  a  new  Trajan,  pledging  himself  to  maintain  the  Roman 
laws  for  the  benefit  of  the  Roman  People.  He  restored  the  walls  and 
decreed  the  preservation  of  the  monuments  of  the  city.  "  King  of 
the  Goths  and  Romans  in  Italy,"  he  ruled  nominally  as  the  repre- 
sentative of  the  Emperor  at  Byzantium.  Himself  an  Arian,  Theodoric 
during  the  greater  part  of  his  reign  treated  Arians  and  Catholics  with 
the  same  impartial  justice  as  he  did  Goths  and  Romans  in  the 
political  field.  But  the  reconciliation  between  the  Byzantine  Court 
and  the  Holy  See  in  519,  the  consequent  tendency  of  the  Roman 
Senate  towards  Constantinople  rather  than  towards  Ravenna,  and  the 
increasing  bitterness  between  Arians  and  Catholics  both  in  East  and 
West,  gradually  alienated  the  King  from  his  Catholic  and  Roman 
subjects,  and  he  finally  degenerated  into  a  religious  persecutor  and 
suspicious  tyrant.  The  philosopher  Boethius  was  tortured  to  death 
by  his  orders  in  524  or  525  ;  Symmachus,  the  Head  of  the  Senate, 
was  executed  in  525  ;  and  Pope  John  I.  {cf.  above,  Bk.  III.  chap.  2) 
died  in  the  King's  dungeons  at  Ravenna  in  May,  526.  Theodoric 
followed  his  victims  to  the  grave  on  August  30,  526,  the  day  on  which, 
according  to  his  decree,  all  the  Catholic  churches  in  Italy  were  to 
have  been  surrendered  to  the  Arians.  At  some  uncertain  date,  his 
body  was  cast  out  of  his  magnificent  tomb  at  Ravenna  :  Agnellus  of 
Ravenna,  who  wrote  in  the  first  half  of  the  ninth  century,  states 
that  it  had  been  done  before  his  time  {Liber  Pontificalis,  in  Migne, 
P.L.  cvi.  col.  535)  ;  but  there  seems  no  foundation  for  the 
assertion  of  Fra  Salimbene,  the  thirteenth-century  chronicler  of 
Parma  (Cronica,  ed.  Holder-Egger,  pp.  209,  210),  that  it  was  St. 
Gregory  the  Great  himself  who  ordered  this  work  of  desecration  to 
be  carried  out.  The  crater  mentioned  in  this  unpleasant  legend  is 
either  that  of  Vulcano  or  Stromboli,  two  of  the  Lipari  islands. 

Chapter  XXXI.  p.  215.  San  Lorenzo  in  Damaso,  the  basilica  of 
St.  Lawrence  near  the  site  of  Pompey's  theatre,  was  founded  by  Pope 
St.  Damasus  (366-384). 

273  S 


Bom 

Chapter  XXXII.  p.  216.  "Courtier"  is  here,  as  before,  the 
translator's  equivalent  for  curia/is.  Cf.  above,  note  on  Bk.  II. 
chap.  1 1 . 

Chapter  XXXIII.  p.  219.  "  For  seeing  that  they  do  in  that  place 
with  unspeakable  brightness  (common  to  all)  behold  God,  what  is 
there  that  they  know  not,  that  know  him  who  knoweth  all  things :" 
Cf.  Dante,  Par.  xv.  55-63,  xxi.  82-102. 

Chapter  XXXV.  p.  219.  A  "  natural  brother  "  {germanus  ftater) 
means  a  brother  according  to  the  flesh,  not  merely  a  fellow-monk. 

Ibid.  p.  220.  Optio  was  not  Stephen's  name,  but  his  military 
rank.  The  right  reading  is  not  cut  cognomen  Optio  fuit,  "  whose  sur- 
name was  Optio,"  but  qui  in  numero  optio  fuit,  "  who  in  rank  was 
adjutant." 

Ibid.  p.  221.  This  allegorical  ship  is  possibly  the  ultimate  source 
of  the  boat  that  conveys  the  souls  of  the  redeemed  from  the  mouth 
of  the  Tiber  in  Dante's  Purgatorio. 

Chapter  XXXVI.  p.  223.  Evasa  appears  to  be  the  island  of 
Iviza  in  the  Balearic  Archipelago. 

Ibid.  pp.  223-226.  This  famous  and  important  chapter  may  be 
regarded  as  the  germ  of  the  later  mediasval  visions  of  Hell,  Pur- 
gatory, and  Heaven.  The  Bridge  is  the  "  Bridge  of  Dread,"  said  to 
be  of  Oriental  origin,  which  occurs  in  so  many  of  the  later  visions  of 
the  other  world  (though  not  in  the  Divina  Commedia  )  ;  this  is  its 
first  appearance  in  the  West,  the  Latin  version  of  the  Visio  Sancti 
Pau/i,  in  which  (though  not  in  the  original  Greek)  it  also  occurs, 
being  later.  The  sumptuous  house  of  gold,  which  is  being  built  for 
an  unnamed  person,  is  the  ultimate  source  of  the  empty  throne  seen 
preparing  (probably  for  St.  Bernard)  in  the  vision  of  Tundal  {Visio 
Tnugdali,  ed.  cit.,  p.  54),  and  for  Henry  VII.  in  the  Divina 
Commedia  {Par.  xxx.  133-138).  The  episode  of  the  priest,  who 
passes  safely  over  the  bridge,  is  dramatically  expanded  in  the  vision  of 
Tundal  (ed.  cit.,  pp.  15,  27). 

Ibid.  p.  227.  In  the  usual  version  of  the  Latin  text,  the  arrange- 
ment of  the  chapters  is  different.  The  story  of  Deusdedit  forms 
chapter  xxxvii.,  the  story  of  the  boy  Theodorus  being  included  with 
those  of  the  deaths  of  Chrysaorius  and  the  monk  of  Iconium  as 
chapter  xxxviii. 

Chapter  XXXVII.  p.  229.  The  story  of  Theodorus  (without  his 
name)  is  told  by  St.  Gregory  in  the  Homilies  (Lib.  II.  Homilia  38). 

Chapter  XXXVIII.  p.  230.     Chrysaorius  in  the  Latin  text. 

Ibid.  p.  232.  St.  Gregory  calls  this  monastery  in  Greek  Twr 
TdXitTioy,  that  is,  "of  the  Galatians." 

Chapter  XL.  pp.  234,  235.  Pope  Anastasius  II.,  whom  Dante 
(Inf.  xi.  7-9)  condemns  as  a  heretic,  died  in  November  498.  Two 
rival  conclaves  met :  the  one,  which  represented  the  majority,  was 

274  , 


Bom 

held  in  the  Lateran,  and  elected  the  Sardinian  deacon  Symmachus  to 
the  papacy  ;  the  other,  which  favoured  a  reconciliation  with  the 
Emperor  (Anastasius  I.),  in  S.  Maria  Maggiore,  chose  for  Pope  the 
Archdeacon  Laurentius,  who  was  a  Roman.  After  a  violent  struggle, 
an  appeal  to  the  arbitration  of  Theodoric  resulted  in  the  general 
recognition  of  Symmachus.  The  struggle  was  afterwards  renewed, 
until  Laurentius  finally  withdrew  in  505.  In  the  synod  (Synodus 
palmaris)  which  was  called  in  501  to  investigate  the  charges  against 
Symmachus,  the  famous  principle  of  the  Church  of  Rome  was  estab- 
lished :  Summa  sedes  a  nemlne  judicatur.  Cf.  Grisar,  Geschichte  Roms 
und  der  P'dpste  int  Mittelalter,  nos.  308,  309.  Paschasius  died  a  few 
years  before  the  death  of  Symmachus  (514.)  ;  he  is  venerated  as  a  saint 
on  May  31.  A  work  on  the  Holy  Ghost,  De  Spiritu  Sancto  libri  duo,  is 
attributed  to  him,  and  identified  with  the  "  rectissimi  et  luculenti  de 
Sancto  Spiritu  libri,"  of  which  St.  Gregory  here  speaks  (Migne,  P.L. 
Ixii.)  ;  but  its  authenticity  has  been  disputed,  and  it  is  included 
by  Augustus  Engelbrecht  among  the  works  of  Bishop  Faustus  o. 
Riez  {Corpus  Scriptorum  Ecclesiasticorum  Latinorum,  vol.  xxi.,  Vienna, 
1 891.)  A  letter  from  Paschasius  to  Eugippius,  the  biographer  of 
St.  Severinus,  is  extant  (In  Migne,  torn,  (it.,  and  ed.  Pius  Knoell  in 
Corp.  Script.  Eccles.  Lat.,  vol.  ix.  pars  2,  Vienna,  1886).  The  scene 
of  this  apparition  is  laid  by  St.  Gregory  in  Angulanis  thermis,  that  is, 
the  baths  of  Angulus,  or  Paterno,  near  the  modern  Castel  Sant' 
Angelo  in  the  Abruzzi.  This  story  of  Paschasius  is  cited  by  medieval 
writers  on  the  place  of  Purgatory  as  implying  that  souls  are  punished 
in  the  places  on  earth  where  they  committed  their  faults.  In  his 
Commentary  upon  the  Sentences  of  Peter  the  Lombard  (In  Lib.  IV. 
Sententiarum,  dist.  xx.  pars  i.  art.  i.  q.  6),  St.  Bonaventura  combats 
this  theory,  declaring  that  the  case  of  Paschasius  was  a  special  dispen- 
sation, and  not  according  to  the  general  purgatorial  rule  ;  for  "  it 
appears  altogether  incredible,  or  at  least  improbable,  that  all  the  souls 
who  sinned  in  Paris  should  be  punished  in  Paris." 

Chapter  XLIV.  p.  240.  This  doctrine  of  St.  Gregory's,  that 
the  faithful  do  not  pray  for  the  souls  of  those  whom  they  suppose  to 
be  in  Hell,  is  more  explicitly  stated  in  the  Moralia  (lib.  xxxiv.  cap.  19)  : 
"The  Saints  do  not  pray  for  the  unbelieving  and  impious  that  are 
dead,  because  they  shrink  from  the  merit  of  their  prayer,  concerning 
those  whom  they  already  know  to  be  condemned  to  eternal  punish- 
ment, being  made  void  before  that  countenance  of  the  just  Judge." 
This  is  curiously  inconsistent  with  the  popular  legend,  first  heard  in 
the  eighth  century,  that  St.  Gregory,  moved  by  the  tale  of  the 
justice  and  humility  of  Trajan  towards  the  poor  widow  whose  son 
had  been  slain,  prayed  and  obtained  that  the  soul  of  the  Emperor 
might  return  from  Hell  to  his  body  to  win  his  salvation.  This 
inconsistency    is    noticed    by    St.    Thomas    Aquinas,    who    discusses 

275. 


JI3otC0 

the  story  at  some  length  (Summa  Theologlca,  III.  supl.  Q.  71,  A.  5  : 
Utrum  suffragia  prosint  exhtentibus  in  Inferno).  Dante  speaks  of  the 
legend  of  Trajan  and  St.  Gregory,  in  two  famous  passages  (Purg.  x. 
73-93  ;  Par.  xx.  106-117). 

Chapter  XLV.  p.  241.  "Two  manner  of  deaths,"  duobus  etiam 
modis  mors  debet  intelligi.  Cf.  Rev.  xxi.  8  :  "  which  is  the  second 
death."  Thus  Dante  speaks  of  the  souls  of  the  lost,  che  la  seconda  morte 
ciascun  grida  (Inf.  i.  117). 

Chapter  XLV1II.  p.  245.  This  power  of  saints,  to  "  discern 
betwixt  illusions  and  true  revelations,"  is  emphasised  by  St.  Catherine 
of  Siena. 

Chapter  LII.  p.  246.  In  the  Latin  text,  this  John  is  described 
as  in  hac  urbe  locum  praefectorum  servans,  that  is,  vicar  of  the  prefect  or 
Rome.  Bressa  (Brixia)  is  the  modern  Brescia,  of  which  St.  Faustinus 
(martyred  in  the  second  century)  is  one  of  the  patron  saints. 

Chapter  LIII.  p.  247.  This  Liberius,  a  contemporary  ot  St. 
Gregory,  is  not  to  be  confused  with  the  Liberius  mentioned  in 
Bk.  II.  chap.  35.  The  office  that  Valentinus  held  was  ecclesiae 
Mediolanensis  defensor  (Cf.  Book  I.  chap.  4,  notes).  St  Syrus,  who 
is  specially  venerated  at  Genoa,  was  Bishop  of  Pavia,  and  was  martyred 
about  96. 

Chapter  LV.  p.  249.  "Two  singing  breads,"  duas  oblationum 
<oronas  ;   apparently,  two  unconsecrated  hosts. 

Ibid.  p.  250.  The  monastery  is,  as  usual,  St.  Gregory's  convent  of 
Sant'  Andrea,  on  the  Caelian  Hill.  In  the  Rule  of  St.  Benedict,  we 
read  :  "  The  beds  shall  be  frequently  searched  by  the  abbot  to  guard 
against  the  vice  of  hoarding.  And  if  any  one  be  found  in  possession 
of  something  not  allowed  by  the  abbot,  let  him  be  subjected  to  the 
severest  punishment"  (chap.  55,  Gasquet's  translation). 

Chapter  LVI.  p.  253.  Cassius,  Bishop  of  Narni,  died  in  558. 
The  story  of  his  death  is  told  at  greater  length  in  the  Homilies 
Lib.  II.  Homilia  37). 


276 


3nhtx 

Abundius,  keeper  of  St.  Peter's  Church,  147 
Acacius,  Patriarch  of  Constantinople,  272 
Agapitus,  St.,  Pope,  109,  no,  267 

subdeacon,  88 
Agathus,  Bishop  of  Palermo,  253 
Agnellus  of  Ravenna,  273 
Alaric,  King  of  the  Visigoths,  264,  265 
Alberic  of  Monte  Cassino,  xxv. 
Albinus,  Bishop  of  Rieti,  18 
Alfred,  King,  xxi.,  xxiv. 
Amantius,  priest  at  Tivoli,  163,  164 
Ammonius,  monk,  208 
Anastasius,  Abbot  of  Suppentonia,  xix.,  27,  29,  262 

Pope,  274 
Andrew,  Bishop  of  Funda,  113-116 

Bishop  of  Aquinum,  117 
Antharicus  (Autaris),  King  of  the  Lombards,  140,  269 
Anthimus,  Patriarch  of  Constantinople,  267 
Anthony,  layman,  87 

monk,  242 
Aquinas,  St.  Thomas,  266,  275 
Armentarius,  nobleman,  135 

boy  visionary,  208 
Athanasius,  Greek  priest,  231 

Augustine,  St.,  on  the  captivity  of  St.  Paulinus,  266 
Ausonius,  266 

Baraca,  manner,  253-255 
Basilius,  magician,  16,  17,  261,  262 
Bede,  Venerable,  xxv. 
Belisarius,  264 

277  T 


3lnDer 

Benedict  (Bennet),  St.,  of  Nursia,  xx.-xxii.,  xxv.,  48,  51- 
100,  135,  188,  263-266;  his  Rule,  xix.,  xxii.,  99,  263, 
264,  265,  266,  276 

Benedict  (Bennet),  monk  in  Campania,  139 

Benedicta,  nun,  194 

Blindinus  (Bleda),  Gothic  chieftain,  74,  264 

Boethius,  xx.,  xxi.,  262,  271,  273 

Bonaventura,  St.,  xxv.,  275 

Bonifacius,  Bishop  of  Ferenti,  31-37,  262 

St.  Gregory's  monk  and  deacon,  141,  152 

Buccellinus  (Butilin),  leader  of  the  Alamanni,  10,  261 

Carterius,  a  sinner,  149 

Cassianus  of  Marseilles,  xxi. 

Cassiodorus,  261,  265 

Cassius,  Bishop  of  Narni,  113,  252,  253,  276 

Castorius,  Roman  officer,  18,  262 

Cerbonius,  Bishop  of  Populonium,  119,  120,  268 

Cesarius,  St.,  of  Aries,  xxi. 

Chrisorius,  or  Chrysaorius,  230,  231,  274 

Constantinus,  successor  to  St.  Benedict,  51,  52,  263 

Constantius,  clerk  near  Ancona,  23-26 
ambitious  priest,  31,  32,  34,  35 
Bishop  of  Aquinum,  75,  116,  117,  265,  268 

Copiosus,  monk  under  St.  Gregory,  250-252 

Curiales,  70,  216,  264,  274 

Damasus,  St.,  Pope,  215,  273 

Dante,  xxi.,  xxii.,  xxiv.,  xxv.,  264,  266,  267,  271,  272,  274, 

276 
Darida,  Gothic  captain,  9 
Datius,  Bishop  of  Milan,  no,  in,  267,  268 
Defensors  Civitatumy  80,  265 

Defensores  Ecclesiae,  19,  38,  213,  247,  262,  273,  276 
Deusdedit,  friend  of  St.  Gregory,  214 

shoemaker,  227  (perhaps  the  same  person) 

Edmund  of  Eynsham,  xxv. 
Eleutherius  of  Spoleto,  123,  142,  159-161,  219 
St.,  Pope  and  martyr,  192,  271 

278 


3!ntier 

Equitius,  Abbot,  xxi.,  15*23,  261 

Eugippius,  275 

Eumorphius,  220,  221 

Euthicius  (Eutychius),  Abbot,  128-132,  269 

Euthicius  (Eutychius),  the  martyr,  173 

Evitius  (or  Equitius  or  Euticius),  father  of  Maurus,  61,  263 

Exhilaratus,  lay  brother,  79 

Faustinus,  patron  saint  of  Brescia,  247 
Faustus,  Bishop  of  Riez,  275 
Felix,  prior  of  Funda,  13 

nobleman  of  Nursia,  18 

III.,  Pope,  198,  271,  272 

Bishop  of  Porto,  246,  249 
Florentius,  enemy  of  St.  Benedict,  65-67 

solitary,  128-132,  269 

priest  in  Rome,  215 
Floridus,  Bishop  of  Tivoli,  121,  163 
Fortunatus,  Abbot,  15,  45 

nobleman  of  Ferenti,  33 

Bishop  of  Todi,  38-45 
Frigidianus,  Bishop  of  Lucca,  117,  118,  268 
Fulgentius,  Bishop  of  Otricoli,  120,  121,  268 

Bishop  of  Ruspe,  268,  271 

Galla,  daughter  of  Symmachu^,  192,  193,  271 
Roman  widow,  220 
(or  Zalla),  a  Goth,  91,  92 

Gaiseric,  King  of  the  Vandals,  105-108,  266,  270 

Gaudentius,  a  priest,  31 

Germanus,  Bishop  of  Capua,  97,  188,  234,  266 

Gerontius,  monk,  207 

Gordianus,  father  of  St.  Gregory,  xxii.,  271 

Gregoria,  nun,  123 

Gregory  the  Great,  Pope,  his  Dialogues^  xix.,  xx.,  xxii.  ; 
life  and  pontificate,  xxii.-xxiv.  ;  influence  of  his  Dialogues, 
xxiv.-xxvi.  ;  their  setting,  3-5  ;  his  talk  with  the  old  man 
of  Todi,  41  ;  his  knowledge  of  the  life  of  St.  Benedict, 
51  ;  his  consecration  of  Santa  Agata,  153,  270  ;  at  Con- 
stantinople, 158,  164,  165,  270;  friendship  with  Eleuth- 
erius,  1 59—16 1  ;  with  Sanctulus,  166  ;  his  Homilies,  194, 

279 


3fntier 

195;  his  family,  197,  198,  271,"  272;  his  treatment  of 
the  avaricious  monk,  250-252 ;  his  Mora/ia,  261  ; 
letters,  262,  265  ;  on  literary  style,  266  ;  alleged  desecra- 
tion of  Theodoric's  tomb,  273;  on  prayers  for  the  lost, 
275 

Gregory,  monk  of  Terracina,  188 

Gunmar,  Lombard  captain,  120 

Herculanus,  St.,  Bishop  of  Perugia,  121,  122,  268 
Hermigildus  (Hermenigild),  St.,  Prince  of  the  Visigoths,  155- 

157,  270 
Hirundina,  nun  at  Praeneste,  196 
Honoratus,  Abbot  of  Funda,  6-9,  10-12 
Abbot  of  Subiaco,  52,  75,  263,  265 
Hope,  Abbot,  189,  271 
Hormisdas,  Pope,  267 
Hunneric,  King  of  the  Vandals,  157,  270 

Isaac  of  Spoleto,  123-127,  268,  269 
Isidore,  St.,  270 

John    I.,  St.,  Pope  and  martyr,  109,  214,  267,  273 
II.,  Pope,  116,  268 

III.,  Pope,  173,  268,  270 

the  tribune,  140,  246,  276 

brother  of  Eleutherius,  219,  220 

a  young  monk,  243 
Jovinus,  Bishop  of  Aquinum,  117 
Julianus,  defender,  afterwards  Bishop,  19-21,  262 

the  second  defender,  38,  213,  262,  273 
Justinian,  Emperor,  xxiii.,  no,  157,  267,  270 
Justin,  Emperor  ("Justinian  the  Elder"),  109,  267 
Justus,  monk  under  St.  Gregory,  250-252 
Juvenal,  St.,  192,  271 

Laurio,  monk,  27 
Lawrence,  monk,  8,  9 
Lawrence,  antipope,  234,  235,  275 

Leander,  St.,  Bishop  of  Seville,  xxiii.,  155,  156,  261,  270 
Levigildus  (Leovigild),  King  of  the  Visigoths,  155-157,  270 

280 


3InDcr 

Liberius,  the  elder,  96,  265 
the  younger,  247,  276 
Libertinus,  prior  of  Funda,  9-13 

Marcellus  of  Todi,  44 

one  of  St.  Gregory's  monks,  207 
Marcellinus,  Bishop  of  Ancona,  26 
Marcius  (or  Martinus),  solitary,  133-136,  269 
Martin,  St.,  of  Tours,  xxi. 
Martirius,  monk,  45 
Maurus,  St.,  disciple  of  St.   Benedict,  61,  62,  63,  64,  66, 

263 
Mascatus,  135 

Mauritius,  Emperor,  xxiii.,  158 
Maximianus,  Bishop  of  Syracuse,  xix.,  26,  164,   165,  216, 

270 
Maximus,  father  of  Probus,  192 

son  of  Chrisorius,  231 
Mellitus,  monk  of  Porto,  207,  208 
Merulus,  monk  under  St.  Gregory,  242,  243 
Menas,  solitary,  148,  149 
Musa,  virgin,  198,  199 

Narses,  xxiii.,  208,  209,  272 

Nonnosus,  Prior  on  Mount  Soracte,  xix.,  26-28,  262 

Optio,  Stephen,  274 

Paschasius,  the  Deacon,  234-236,  275 

Paulinus,  St.,  Bishop  of  Nola,  105-108,  266,  267 

Pelagius  II.,  Pope,  133,  269,  270 

Peregrinus,  87 

Peter  the  Deacon,  3-6,  et  passim 

monk  of  Spain,  223,  224 

papal  steward,  225 

Abbot  of  St.  Gregory's  monastery,  243 
Placidus,  St.,  disciple  of  St.  Benedict,  61,  62,  64,  264 
Pompeianus,  Abbot,  62 

Pretiosus,  Prior  of  St.  Gregory's  monastery,  250-252 

281 


3lnDcr 

Probus,  Bishop  of  Rieti,  192 

his  nephew,  192,  198,  201,  230 
Pronulphus,  comes,  140 

Quadragesimus,  subdeacon,  136,  137 

Recharedus,  King  of  the  Visigoths,  156,  157,  270 

Redempta,  nun,  196,  197 

Redemptus,  Bishop  of  Ferenti,  xx.,  173 

Reparatus,  his  vision,  214,  215 

Riggo,  guardsman  of  Totila,  73,  74,  264 

Roman  us,  monk,  53 

Romula,  nun,  195-197 

Rudericus,  Gothic  chieftain,  74,  264 

Saeinus,  Bishop  of  Camisina,  in,  112,  268 

Bishop  of  Placentia,  118 
Salimbene  of  Parma,  273 
Sanctulus,  priest  of  Nursia,  128,  166-171 
Scholastica,  St.,  sister  of  St.  Benedict,  94-96,  265 
Servandus,  deacon,  96,  97 
Servulus,  poor  man,  194,  195 
Sirus  (Syrus),  St.,  247,  276 
Severus,  parish  priest,  46,  47 

Simplicius,  third  general  of  the  Benedictines,  52,  263 
Speciosus,  priest,  188,  195 
Stephen,  priest  in  Valeria,  141 

"Optio,"  220,  221,  274 

visions  concerning,  224,  226 

the  smith,  224 

Abbot,  190,  201 
Symmachus,  Pope,  18-21  (?),  234,  235,  262,  275 

Consul  and  Senator,  xxi.,  193,  214,  262,  271,  273 
Suranus,  Abbot,  203 

Tarsilla  (Tharsilla),  St.,  aunt  to  Pope  Gregory,  197,  198, 

271 
Teias,  King  of  the  Ostrogoths,  261 
Tertullius,  father  of  Placidus,  61,  263 
Theodacus  (or  Adeodatus),  Abbot,  53,  263 

282  ' 


31nDer 

Theodoricus,  King  of  the  Ostrogoths,  213,  214,  262,  267 

2?3>  275 
Theodorus,  keeper  of  St.  Peter's,  146 

boy  monk,  229,  230 
Theoprobus,  convert  of  St.  Benedict,  78,  97 
Theophanius,  Count  of  Centumcellae,  210,  211,  273 
Tiburtius,  priest  of  San  Lorenzo  in  Damaso,  215 
Totila  (Baduila),  King  of  the  Ostrogoths,  xxi.,  9,  73,  74,  91, 

in,  112,  113,  119,  121,  122,  139,  261,  264,  265 
Trajan,  Emperor,  275,  276 
Tundal,  Vision  of,  xxv.,  266,  274 

Ursus,  monk,  220 

Valentinianus,  Abbot  of  the  Lateran,  52,  72,  264 
Valentinus  (or   Valentius),  St.  Gregory's  Abbot,   22,    14;, 
202,  262,  269 

defender  of  the  Milanese  Church,  247,  276 
Valerian,  gentleman  of  Brescia,  246,  247 
Venantius,  nobleman  of  Samnium,  6,  7 

Bishop  of  Luna,  117,  118,  120,  247 
Vigilius,  Pope,  267 
Vultericus  (Vult),  Goth  chieftain,  74,  264 

Werferth,  Bishop  of  Worcester,  xxiv. 

Zaccharias  I.,  Pope,  xxiv. 
Zeno,  St.,  Bishop  of  Verona,  140,  269 
Emperor,  270,  273 


Printed  by 

BALLANTYNE  &  COMPANY  LTD 

AT    THE    BALLANTYNE    PRESS 

Tavistock  Street  Covent  Garden 

London 


THE  COLOURED  PLATES   IN  THIS    WORK   HAVE  BEEN   ENGRAVED 
AND     PRINTED    BY     HENRY    STONE     AND    SON,    LTD.,   BANBURY 


Date  Due 


— 


— 


. 


- 


-dA+r£-fr— 


*v 


itf 


^.  \A 


2  6 


[HOV 


Oft 


L.  B.  Cat.  No.  1 137 


28.4G860 


CLAPP 


3  5002  00340  9831 

Gregory 

The  dialogues  of  Saint  Gregory    surnamed 


BR    65    . G75    D5    1911 
Gregory    I,     ca.     540-604, 


The    dialogues    of    Saint 
Gregory 


