     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: The Odes and Psalms of Solomon, published from the Syriac version
      Creator(s): Anonymous (the Odes' own author is unknown; provenance,
                  date, and original language are disputed - see this
                  world's own syr.source.odes-of-solomon record)
                  Harris, J. Rendel (translator, editor)
       Full title: The Odes and Psalms of Solomon, published from the
                  Syriac Version, by J. Rendel Harris, M.A. Second
                  Edition, revised and enlarged, with a facsimile.
     Print Basis: Cambridge: at the University Press, 1911.
          Rights: Public Domain
    Rights basis: 1911 publication date, long out of US copyright. The
                  file's own front matter (Cornell University Library,
                  supplied by the Estate of Preserved Smith) states
                  directly: "There are no known copyright restrictions in
                  the United States on the use of the text."
        Source: archive.org/details/cu31924029308677 (Cornell University
                  Library scan, uploaded 2009-11-03); the item's own ABBYY
                  FineReader 8.0 OCR text layer (`..._djvu.txt`), fetched
                  directly 2026-09-09.
     Content note: FULL VOLUME, mixed structure - introduction, a critical
                  Syriac text edition with apparatus, an appendix
                  comparing odes quoted in the Coptic Pistis Sophia (given
                  in LATIN retroversion, not English), and a separate
                  running ENGLISH TRANSLATION-WITH-COMMENTARY section (the
                  translation of each Ode, Harris's own numbered verses,
                  followed by his prose discussion) - the section headed
                  "THE ODES OF SOLOMON" beginning after line 6520 of this
                  file is the one with citable English wording; the
                  Syriac-script portions elsewhere in the file OCR as
                  unreadable noise and must not be used.
              OCR QUALITY: the English translation-and-commentary section
                  OCRs well (spot-checked directly); the Syriac and the
                  Pistis-Sophia Latin-retroversion apparatus OCR poorly and
                  are not usable without independent correction.
              Provenance note: mechanical extraction only - the file's own
                  leading Cornell/Internet-Archive front matter is
                  retained unedited immediately below this header; no
                  wording in the OCR text itself has been touched.
     __________________________________________________________________

^Aif^mmmit.. 



,Si9Si«i»i«S5!fcir 



CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 




„ FROM 

The ^]state of 
Preserved Smitli 



Cornell University Library 
BS1 830.0s S9 1911 



Odes and Psalms of Solomon, published fr 



olin 




3 1924 029 308 677 




Cornell University 
Library 



The original of this book is in 
the Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924029308677 



THE ODES AND PSALMS 

OF 

SOLOMON 



CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS 

aonHon: FETTER LANE, E.G. 

C. F. CLAY, Manager 




ffiUinbutgl) : loo, PRINCES STREET 

ISerlin; A. ASHER AND CO. 

ILtvjig: F. A. BROCKHAUS 

iieto gork: G. P. PUTNAM'S SONS 

Bomtiag anS Calcutta: MACMILLAN AND CO., Ltd. 



All rights reserved 



* 



J.. * " . • « • 













'?iuJii(^[lSt^^ 




Facsimile: Odes of Solomon xxvi. 13 — 14, xxvii., xxviii. i — 4 



THE ODES AND PSALMS 

OF 

SOLOMON 

PUBLISHED FROM THE 
SYRIAC VERSION 



•/ 



BY 



J. RENDEL HARRIS, M.A. 

Hon. D.Litt. (Dubl.), Hon. LL.D. (Haverford), Hon. D.Theol. (Leiden), 
Hon. LL.D. (Birmingham), Hon. Fellow of Clare College, Cambridge 



SECOND EDITION 

REVISED AND ENLARGED 

WITH A FACSIMILE 



Cambridge : 

at the University Press 

1911 



nAnpoycOe eN nNeyMATi, AAAoyNTed saytoTc vpaAmoTc ka! y'^noic 
ka) ({JAdTc nNeyMATiKdvTc, $Aont6c k&I yAAAoNxec ti^ KApAf^ yMciN tC}5 

KYPIt<i. 

, Ad Ephes. v. 19. 

OY r*-? eCTiN H BdkCiAeiA toy 06OY Bpcocic ka! nocic, AAAi Aikaiocynh 

K&) eipHNH KAf x^-P*- eN nNeYMATi Ari^jJ- 

^i^ ^«»»2. xiv. 17. 



CONTENTS 



PAGES 

Preface to First Edition . ... vii 

Preface to Second Edition viii 

Bibliographical Notes ix — xii 

Brief Summary of Criticisms . ... xiii — xxxii 

Supplementary Note on recent Criticisms . . xxxiii — xxxvii 

Introduction ... .... i — 89 

Translation of the Odes ..... 90 — 140 

Translation of the Psalms ..... 141 — 156 

Syriac Text of the Odes and Psalms . ^ — mi 

Facsimile: Odes of Solomon xxvi. 13 — xxviii. 4 . To face Title 



PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION 

IT is not easy to produce a satisfactory edition of a work 
whicii has come down to us in a single document, especially 
when the document itself is late in date, and represents not the 
original text, but a version of the same, made by some unknown 
hand. Obscurities are sure to exist in a text so scantily attested 
and of such an uncertain tradition. In spite, however, of these 
inherent difficulties, I hope that the translation and editing of 
the.se new Odes of Solomon (with their associated and already 
known Psalms of Solomon) will be satisfactory ; for, although 
late in date, the text is very well preserved, and the translation 
from the Greek into the Syriac appears to have been carefully 
and conscientiously made. If we could come across some more 
traces of the newly-recovered work in the writings of the Fathers, 
or if, by good hap, we might find the lost Latin or a copy of 
the original Greek, much that is obscure in our presentation of 
the Odes would disappear. Meanwhile we have done our best 
with the material as we found it and as we were able to reinforce 
it : our thanks are due to scholarly friends who have assisted us 
with their keen revising eyes or their nimble emendating brains. 
My learned lady friends Mrs Lewis and Mrs Gibson have given 
me much assistance with the proofs : Mr Glover has criticised 
obscure passages and inadequate arguments : and Professor 
Nestle has made some brilliant suggestions for the betterment of 
the text, and traces of his skilled hand may be seen at several 
points, of which I note especially Ode 7. 12, Ode 38. 14, Ps. v. 16, 
Ps. vii. 4, and Ps. xvii. 31. I think it is very likely that a skilled 
Coptic scholar could also do something to improve either the 
text or the translation in those Odes which have been transferred 
to the text of the Pistis Sophia. 



RENDEL HARRIS 



Chetwynd 

Selly Oak 

October 1909 

o. S. 



PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION 

THE first edition of tliis book having been exhausted sooner 
than I had anticipated, I have decided not to delay the 
production of a new edition, which should, as far as possible, 
remove the errors of the former, and incorporate the results of 
the searching criticism to which the Odes and the manner of 
their presentation have been subjected. 

In response to a number of appeals, I have added a facsimile 
of the unique manuscript from which I have worked. Then, as 
far as conviction ruled, I have accepted a number of textual 
betterments from scholars in England, France and Germany. 
In the case of the Psalms of Solomon, I have added the readings 
of the curious fragment of these Psalms, preserved in a MS. in 
the Cambridge University Library, to which Dr Barnes has 
drawn attention. In the case of the Odes, the text and the 
translation and the theories connected therewith have been 
compared with those of Harnack-Flemming, Zahn, Ungnad- 
Stark, Batiffol-Labourt, Barnes, Bernard, Diettrich, Charles, 
Clemen, Gunkel, Haussleiter, Mead, Menzies, Nestle, Schulthess, 
Spitta and others. As the range of interpretation is very wide, 
and critical consent still seems to be somewhat remote, I have 
added a new section to review the work done on the Odes by 
the scholars referred to, and to give some estimate of its value 
in the most important cases. With these corrections and ex- 
pansions I hope the second edition will be as welcome as and 
not less useful than the first. 



RENDEL HARRIS 



Selly Oak 

February 191 1 



BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTES 

In preparing the second edition for the press, it will be 
convenient to give in the first place, a bibliography of the most 
important reviews and notices of the Odes, which I have come 
across : the list makes no pretence at completeness ; but it will 
serve to indicate the currents of opinion, and special attention 
will be given to those articles or reviews which are important for 
the resolution of the problems connected with the Odes, by 
marking them with an asterisk. 

Dr J. Vernon Bartlet in British Weekly for Feb. 25, 1909. (Announce- 
ment of Discovery of the Odes.) 
Rendel Harris in Contemporary Review for April, 1909, ^ An Early 

Christian Hymn-book.^ 
J. M. Leendertz in 'EX^ctw t; ^atriXiia. a-ov for May 6, 1909 (Utrecht). 

(Notice of Discovery etc.) 
Prof Nestle in Kirchlicher Anzeiger fur Wiirttemberg No. 49, 1909. 

(Notice of Discovery.) 
Louis Maries in Etudes par les Peres de la compagnie de Jisus for 

June 20, 1909. (Notice of Discovery and of Article by R. H. in 

Contemporary Review.) 
Rendel Harris. An Early Christian Psalter, London (Nisbet and Co.), 

1909. Contains the greater part of the Odes in English with a 

brief introduction. 
Rendel Harris in The Quest. 1910, pp. 288—305. Text of lecture on 

'An early Judaeo-Christian Hymn-book' given before the Quest 

Society. 
G. R. S. Mead in The Quest. 1910, pp. 561—570. Review of Rendel 

Harris' Odes and Psalms of Solomon. 
G. R. S. Mead in The Quest. 1910, vol. ii. pp. 166—169. Review of 

Harnack's Ein jiidisch-christliches Psalmbuch. 
Harnack in Sitzungsberichte der konig. preuss. Akademie for 1909. 

No. 51. Berlin. Notice of Discovery. 



X BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTES 

' Times'' Literary Supplement for Dec. 2, 1909. Brief Review, 

Schiirer in Theol. Literaturzeitung ior Jan., 1910, pp. 6, 7. Review 

Record for Htc. 17, 1909. (Brief Notice.) 

Nestle in Theol. Lit.-Blatt for Jan. 7, 1910. Review of the Odes. 

The Christian World for ]a.n. 13, 19 10. Review. 

W. B. Brash in The Methodist Times for Jan. 13, 1910. Review. 

Dr James Moffatt in British Weekly for Feb. 24, 1910. Review. 

The Athenaeum {or 'iz.n. 15, 1910. Review. 

R. S. Franks in the British Friend {or Jan., 19 10. Review. 

H. Ramette in Le Chretien Libre, pp. 457 — 460. Review. 

Expository Times {or Feb., 1910. Editorial Notice. 

Wohlenberg in Schleswig-LIolstein-Lauenburgisches Kirchen- u. Schidblatt 

for Feb. 12, 1910, No. 7. 
The Outlook for April 2, 1910. Review. (New York.) 
Evening Bulletin for April 13, igio. Account of Discovery. (Phila- 
delphia.) 
The Guardian for April 14, 19 10. Review o{ Early Christian Psalter. 
The Guardian for April 29, T910. Review of Odes and Psalms. 
Buonaiuti in Rivista Storico-critica delle Scienze Teologiche for March, 

1910 (pp. 188 — 200). (Rome.) 
Daily News for March 11, 1910. Brief Review. 
' Times' Literary Supplement for April 7, 1910. A Church Hymnal oj 

the First Century. Review (by Dr R. H. Charles). 
H. Hansen in Der Alte Glaube for April 8, 19 10. Review, with transla- 
tion of three selected Odes into German verse. 
British Weekly for April 27, 1910. Notice of Dr Harnack's book on 

the Odes. 
Great Thoughts for May 7, 1910. Review. 
*Harnack and Flemming, Ein judisch-christliches Psalmbuch aus dem 

ersten Jahrhundert : in Texte u. Untersuchungen ill. 5. 4. Leipzig 

(Hinrichs) 1910. 
Nairne in Guardian for June 3, 19 10, p. 778. Review. 
Dr Johannes Haussleiter in Theologisches Literaturblatt {or ]\ine 10, 1910. 

Der judenchristliche Charakter der Oden Salomos. 
J. M. Leendertz. Die Oden von Salome. Amsterdam (Portielje) 1910. 
Dr Johannes Leipoldt in Allgemeine Evangelisch-Lutherische Kirchen- 

zeitung for July 8, 19 10. Die Lieder Salomos. 
Dr David S. Schaff in the Presbyterian Banner (America) for June 2, 

1910. A Christian Hymn-Book of the First Century. 
Dr Barnes in Expositor for July, 1910, pp. 52 — 63. An Ancient 

Christian Hymn-Book. 
Dr Barnes in Journal of Theological Studies for July, 1910, pp. 573 sqq. 

The Text of th£ Odes of Solomon and pp. 615 sqq. Review of 

Harnack on the Odes. 



BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTES XI 

*G. Diettrich in Die Reformation for May 8, June 5, Aug. 7, and Aug. 14, 

1 9 1 o. Einejiidisch-christliche Liedersammlung aus dem apostolischen 

Zeitalter. 
J. A. Montgomery in Biblical World, xxxvi. 93 — 100. The recently 

discovered Odes of Solomon. 
A. Wabnitz in Revue de Theologie et des questions religieuses xix. 351 — 

367. Un Psautier judeo-chritien du 1"' siicle. 
Kennedy in Expository Times, July, 1910, p. 444. Review of Harnack 

on the Odes. 
Dr R. H. Charles in Revie^v of Theology and Philosophy for October, 

1910, pp. 220 — 223. Review of Harnack's book. 
R. H. Strachan in Expository Times for Oct., 1910. The newly recovered 

Odes of Solomon and their bearing on the Problem of the Fourth 

Gospel. 
Dr T. K. Cheyne in Hibbert Journal for Oct., 1910, pp. 208 — 212. 

Review of the Odes and Psalms and of Harnack's Jiidisch- 

christliches Psalmbuch. 
The Churchman for Oct., 1910. Review. 
R. Bultniann in Monatschrift fiir Pastoral Theologie Oct., 1910. 

Ei?i jiidisch-christliches Psalmbuch aus dem ersten Jahrhundert. 
*Batiffol and Labourt in Revue Biblique ioi Oct., 1910, pp. 484 — 500; 

and for Jan., 191 1, pp. i — 57. Les Odes de Salomon. (Not yet 

completed.) 
F. Spitta in Monatschrift filr Gottesdienst und kirchl. Kunst for 19 10, 

pp. 245 sqq. ; 273 sqq. 
F. Spitta in Zeitschrift filr die neutestamentlich^ Wissenschaft {Preuschen's 

Zeitschrift), Heft 3, 1910, pp. 193 — 290. Zum Verstdndnis der 

Oden Salomos. 
F. Spitta in Monatschrift fiir Pastoral Theologie for Dec, 1910, 

pp. 91 — loi. Die Oden Salomos und das neue Testament. 
W. Stark in Zeitschrift fiir wissenschaftliche Theologie lii. N.F. xvii. 4. 
*Prof W. A. Menzies in the Interpreter for Oct., 1910, pp. i — 22. 

The Odes of Solomon. 
Methodist Quarterly Review (American) for Oct., 1910. Review of the 

Odes and Psalms and of Harnack's Jiidisch-christliches Psalmbuch. 
Bousset in Theologische Rundschau for Nov., 19 10. Brief notice of 

Odes etc. 
M. J. Lagrange in Revue Biblique Internationale for Oct., 1910, pp. 

593 — 596. Notice and Review. 
Dr J. H. Bernard in Spectator for Oct. 22, 19x0. Notice of 

Discovery etc. 
Kirsopp Lake in Theologisch Tijdschrift for 1910, xlv. pp. 89 — 92. 

Review. 
*Dr J. H. Bernard m Journal of Theological Studies for Oct., 19 10. 



xii BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTES 

Methodist Quarterly Review (American) for Jan., 191 1. Review of 

Harnack. 
Clemen in Theologische Rundschau, pp. i — 19, Jan., 191 1. Die 

neuentdeckten Oden Salomos. 
*F. Schulthess in Zeitschrift fur die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft 

{Preuschen's Zeitschrift), Heft 3, 1910, pp. 249—258. Textkritische 

Bemerkiingen zu den syrischen Oden Salomos. 
*H. Gunkel in Zeitschrift fiir die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft (Preu- 
schen's Zeitschrift), Heft 3, 1910, pp. 291—328. Die Oden Salomos. 
*Wellhausen in Gottingische gelehrte Anzeigen for Sept., 1910, pp. 629 — 

642. Review. 
S. Reinach in Revue Moderniste Internationale for Dec, 1910, pp. 

457 — 458 (Geneva), a letter from S.R. d. propos des Odes de 

Salomon. 
H. Bohmer in Kirchliche Rundschau filr d. evang. Gemeinden Rheinlands 

und Westfakns for 1910, pp. 215 sqq. : 238 sqq. : 266 sqq. : 297 sqq. 
*Th. Zahn in Neue kirchliche Zeitschrift for 1910, pp. 667 sqq. : 

747 sqq. 
*Ungnad and Stark in Kleine Texteftir theologische und philosophische 

Vorlesungen und Uhingen. Bonn, 1910. Die Oden Salomos. 
B. Yldi!&.&'\n Deutsche Rundschau Jan., 191 1. Die Oden Salomos. 
H. Hansen. Die Oden Salomos in deutschen Nachdichtungen. Giitersloh 

(Bertelsmann) 191 1. 
Viteau and Martin, Les Psaumes de Salomon. Paris (Letouzey et 

Ane) 1911. 
* Arthur C. Headlam in Church Quarterly Review for Jan. 1911, 

pp. 272 — 302. Review. 
Meyer: Grosses Konversations- Lexicon, 6. Aufl. 22. Bd. Jahres-Supple- 
ment 1909 — 1910. 

p. 396. Harris, James Rendel. . . . 77/^ Odes of Solomon, 1909. 

p. 638. Oden Salomos, eine Sammlung von 42 Jiidischen Psalmen 
in christlicher Bearbeitung etc., etc. 
Salomon Reinach in Revue de I'Histoire des Religions, 19 10. (Annates 

du Mush Guimet.) Les Odes de Salomon. 



BRIEF SUMMARY OF RECENT CRITICISMS 

In the previous edition a first attempt was made to elucidate 
the various problems which were presented by the new book of 
Odes. The Psahns which were attached to them were treated 
in a rapid manner, as there did not seem any necessity to go 
over again in detail the various critical results at which scholars 
had arrived with regard to their origin. It is sufficient to say 
that no considerations have been adduced which should invalidate 
the reference of the Solomonic Psalms to the period of the Roman 
Invasion of Judaja by Pompey, and of the years that followed 
the desecration of the Temple'. With regard to these Psalms 
the critics have been moving in converging paths to a conclusion 
from which there is no appreciable dissent. With regard, however, 
to the Odes and their place in the history of literature and of 
religion, no signs of such convergence or consent are yet to be 
seen. On every side doubts are expressed as to the explanations 
which I proposed. If, for example, it was suggested that they 
were Judso-Christian in origin, the contradiction comes from 
two opposite sides, one school affirming that they are not Christian, 
the other that they are not Jewish. If, again, the suggestion is 
made that the time of their composition is the latter part of the 
first century A.D., the contentions have to be met that they are 
(i) nearly a hundred years earlier or (2) nearly a hundred years 
later than the time proposed. If I suggest that the Odes 
frequently betray a Johannine vocabulary, but at the same time 
decline to recognise actual loans from the Fourth Gospel, pre- 
ferring to believe that the vocabulary in question is the theological 
language of a time and school which are not very remote from 
the time and school of thought of the author of the Fourth 
Gospel, one has to face the objections, on the one side that the 
theology is not that of a Christian but of a Jewish mystic, 
on the other side that it is the regular Christian theology of the 
Church after it has been charged to saturation with the thought 

1 Prof. Cheyne, in the Hibbert Journal, expresses a hope that I shall see my way 
to the abandonment of the identification of Pompey with the great dragon, and to the 
desertion of the chronology which is marked by the allusions to his death on the 
Egyptian shore. I am not to be allured from so certain a piece of critical investiga- 
tion into the by-path? of ancient astrology. 



xiv BRIEF SUMMARY OF CRITICISMS 

and expressions of St John. On the one side there is the 
alluring hypothesis that we have discovered the missing link, 
from which the Fourth Gospel itself depends, on the other side, 
the Odes are by invisible links dependent from the feet of 
St John. Rarely has so much variety of opinion been provoked 
by the publication of a new document from the lost library of 
the Early Church : even the Teaching of the Apostles did not 
evoke so many nor so varied suggestions. Indeed, on looking 
over what has been said on the subject, up to the time of the 
preparation of this second edition, there does not seem to be 
anything about which everyone seems agreed unless it should be 
that the Odes are of singular beauty and of high spiritual value, 
and that they are probably of Syro-Palestinian origin. Well ! 
that is something gained, for it means that we are moving still 
further away from the old belief that the origins of the Fourth 
Gospel are to be sought in Alexandria and that every presenta- 
tion of the doctrine of the Logos must have passed through the 
moulding hands of Fhilo. 

Let us then see what has been said on the subject of the Odes 
by recent writers. We begin, both chronologically and for other 
reasons, with Dr Harnack : he was almost the first in the field', and 
for most of us who are engaged in historical and critical investi- 
gations into Christian origins and history, he is il maestro di color 
che sanno. Harnack's book betrays in its preface the thesis that 
he means to defend, that the Odes of Solomon are a Jewish 
Psalm-book composed near the beginning of the Christian era 
and worked over again at no very distant date by a Christian 
hand. That is, Harnack accepts most of my arguments that 
there is little or nothing in many of the Odes that is so distinctly 
Christian as not to be equally well described as Jewish, and in 
those cases where the Christian hand must be recognised it is 
the hand of an interpolator. Without conceding the absolute 
unity of the collection, for we both agree that this unity may be 
broken in one or two cases by possible later intrusions, Harnack 
affirms that the general and obvious unity of style, by which the 
compositions are characterised, must be qualified by regarding 
the Odes as emanating from one hand or school, and passing 

1 He was partly anticipated by Diettrich, the first of whose remarkable articles in 
Die Reformation was written and published before Harnack's work saw the light. 
We shall attend to these articles later on. 



BRIEF SUMMARY OF CRITICISMS "xy 

through another. Like myself, Harnack does not love the 
hypothesis of interpolations, but it is a hypothesis to which one 
must sometiines resort. In particular, at the time when one 
great religion is passing into another, and the books are, of 
necessity, passing over with the migrant people, it' is in the 
highest degree likely that Christian editions will be produced of 
favourite Jewish books. We have, in fact, proof positive of such 
transfers in the case of the Teaching of the Twelve Apostles and its 
dependence upon the Jewish Doctrine of the Ttvo Ways, and in the 
Christian additions "which can be dissected out of the text of the 
Testament of the Twelve Patriarchs. Something of the same 
kind, but perhaps not quite so early, has happened in the famous 
Christian expansions of the text of Jdsephus ; and, for a much 
less probable, but not impossible, parallel, we might refer to 
those attempts which have been made to dissect original Jewish 
writings out of the Apocalypse of John, in which case the 
hypothesis of Vischer that we should treat the expression ' God 
and the Lamb ' as an interpolated expansion of the Divine Name, 
has a seductive simplicity which, if I remember rightly, bewitched 
even Harnack himself, who confesses not to love hypotheses of 
interpolation. ' ' 

There is, however, not the least need to apologize for the use 
of such hypotheses, if the criticism of the text breaks down for 
want of' them. After all, it does not mean, in the present case, 
more than the substitution of two authors for one : it is not a 
case of multiplied redaction like that which is affirmed for the 
Pentateuch or Isaiah. Two authors are not too many for this 
little book ; if two are intelligible where one is unintelligible, 
by all means let us have two : only let us keep in reserve the 
caution that it will always be easy to prove a document to be 
Jewish when you have dissected out of it everything that- is 
Christian. 

Certainly I have no right, a priori, to object to the extension 
which Harnack makes of my first thesis, seeing that I had already 
set aside certain Odes which discussed the Virgin Birth and the 
descent into Hades, as belonging to a relatively later stratum of 
thought than the main collection ; and if one may resort to the 
hypothesis of interjection for whole Psalms, how can one 
reasonably object to the hypothesis of interpolation in selected 
Ps&lms ; the interpolator has been admitted into the argument 
o. s. c 



xvi BRIEF SUMMARY OF CRITICISMS 

on the greater scale, how can he be prohibited on the smaller 
scale? Is it likely that the man who issues a new hymn- 
book, with which he incorporates some compositions of his 
own, will carefully keep his editorial hands off the rest of the 
collection ? Such is not the method of the modern compilers of 
hymn-books, who have less reason to tamper with the texts that 
they appropriate than people' had in the rapidly changing beliefs 
of the early centuries. 

If Harnack is right, however, a curious phenomenon presents 
itself My hypothesis of a Judseo-Christian composer, who 
betrays few of the external- signs of Christianity, because of the 
elevation of his personal experience above the levels of ritual 
practices and dogmatic definitions, is replaced by Harnack by 
the hypothesis of a Jewish composer who is as free from definite 
traces of Judaism as my assumed writer was of the corresponding 
elements of Christianity. The man who had no Eucharist (so 
far as his language goes) is replaced by a man without a Passover. 
The man without a doctrine of penitence is replaced by a man 
who has no doctrine of sacrifice and no Day of Atonement. The 
man who moves so lightly amongst the early Christian orders, as 
not to refer to a bishop, while apologizing for his own priesthood 
and apparently confounding deacons with evangelists, has to be 
replaced by a Jew, who loves the Temple but has not a word 
to say of the associated priesthood and ritual ! At first sight this 
looks very unlikely, and it is made more so, by the necessary 
deduction that the assumed non-ritualistic, undogmatiCj mystical 
Jew suffered interpolation at the hands of an equally non-ritual- 
istic, undogmatic and mystical Christian. At first sight, I say, 
this seems to be an improbable collocation : but it is not really 
so : for we start with the assumption of a mystical writer whose 
affinities are not with priesthoods or sacraments : one mystic is 
hereby conceded and perhaps a school : at all events, the Fourth 
Gospel offers striking analogies of similar spiritual elevation and 
detachment. If, however, this mystical writer be conceded he 
must be either Jew or Christian, and there is no serious difiicultv 
in the use by a Christian mystic of a previously existing Jewish^ 
mystic. If such Jewish mystics existed, they must in many 
cases have passed over, or evolved into Christian mystics and 
this almost makes the apparent duality of the hypothesis "of 
Harnack into a unity again. The parts divided. are so nearly. 



BRIEF SUMMARY. DF CRITICISMS "xvu 

one, that they easily re-CQmpose intq a close and ultimate 
connexion. 

Having said so much, 1 hope I have made it clear that I am 
animated by no hostility towards Harnack's treatment of the 
subject. One cannot' read the book in which his theory is 
presented without admiration for the acuteness of its criticism, 
and the fertility of its ijlustration. Whether it be right or 
wrong, it is certainly a notable piece of work. Let us now 
take one or two cases in detail, in order that we may see the 
hypothesis in its actual application to the supposed interpolated 
Odes. 

In the middle of the 3rd Ode, Harnack marks an inter- 
polation in the 9th verse, as follows : 

8. I have been united to Him, for the Lover has found the 

Beloved : 
$. (And because I love him that is the Son, I shall myself become 

a Son) : 

10. For he that is joined to Him that is immortal, will also himself 

become immortal, 

11. And he who has pleasure in the Living One, will himself 

becorne living. 

Here Harnack's argument is that immortality comes from 
union with God, and that the allusion to the Son of God disturbs 
the sequence. He objects to my erasure of the plural points, so 
as to read ' Living One' for ' Life,' and thinks the parallelism is 
sufficient between Life and 'the Immortal.' Thus the Ode 
becomes Jewish and not Christian except in the interpolated 
sentence. But with regard to the erasure of the plural points, it 
should be noticed that they would almost certainly be added if 
absent, that the parallelism is improved by their absence, that 
the title 'the Living One' (0 fc5i^) is a characteristic early name 
for Christ.^ It is involved again in Ode 8. 24, where the 
parallelism shows that the terms 'the Beloved,' 'the one that 
lives,' and ' the one that was saved (!) ' all belong to Christ. 
Accordingly Zahn says of this passage, 

' " Wer an den Lebendigen Wohlgefallen hat." Der Parallelis- 
mus membrorum empfiehlt es, mit Harris das Pluralzeichen...zu 
■ ignorieren.' 

The' words 'has pleasure in,' if we have rightly understood 
the Syriac, should correspond to a Greek ewSo/ee'co which is again 



XVlll BRIEF SUMMARY OF CRITICISMS 

appropriate to a person, and as the account of the Baptism of 
Jesus shows, to a particular person. But if the expression ' the 
Living One' stands (especially when we remember the Johan- 
nine 'because I live ye shall live also,' and kindred passages), 
then it follows that Christ is referred to in the original Ode, or 
the alternative to this conclusion would be that the interpolation 
is more extended than a single verse. The latter alternative is 
very improbable. 

The concluding sentence of the Ode with reference to the 
' Spirit of the Lord which does not lie,' is rightly parallelled by 
Harnack with the nyjrevBrj<; de6<; of Tit. i. 2, where notice again 
that it is immortality that is the gift involved in God's veracity ; 
' the hope of eternal life is what God promised before the world 
began.' The Christian doctrine of immortality is that ' God has 
given unto us eternal life, and this life is in His Son ' ( i Joh. v. ii). 
I see no reason to erase the reference to the Sonship in the 
one case which might not be applied in the other: nor any 
breach of continuity in a reference to the Son in one case which 
might not be equally affirmed in the other. 

It would, of course, be unfair to discuss a great hypothesis 
like Harnack's from the standpoint of a single interpolation : 
the third Ode, for example, might be Christian and be at the 
same time, a thing apart : but in so far as common authorship 
in the main body of the Odes is conceded, the proof that one of 
them is Christian is a proof of the Christianity of the collection. 

There are other cases of interpolation in the remaining Psalms 
where Harnack affirms it, which need to be examined in detail. 
For the present, however, let us keep to this third Ode, and 
discuss it in the light of another hypothesis which has been 
brought forward. 

Professor Menzies of St Andrew's University has made a 
variation upon Harnack's original suggestions. He feels on the 
one hand the difficulty of resort to interpolation, and on the other 
hand the general strength of the argument that these Odes 
are fundamentally Jewish. Accordingly Menzies proposes in a 
striking article in the Interpreter to discard the theory of inter- 
polation, and explain the apparently Christian allusions from the 
standpoint of Judaism. Let the reference to the Son stand : but 
interpret the Son as the ideal Israel, in harmony with the doctrine 
of the Old Testament that Israel is God's first-born son, whom 



BRIEF SUMMARY OF CRITICISMS XIX 

He called out of Egypt, carried in the wilderness, &c. The third 
Ode now reads as follows : 

Because I love, Israel (the Son of God) 

I shall myself become an Israelite (i.e. a Son of God). 

The language is that of a Jewish proselyte, who has come, as 
the Talmud says the disciples of Hillel did, ' under the wings of 
the Shekinah.' Professor Menzies affirms that this note of 
proselytism is characteristic of the Odes, and in that way having 
turned the argument to his own account which I made of the 
proselytism of the writer, he describes the whole collection. by 
the name of Psalms of the Proselytes. The advantage of this 
new hypothesis is , obvious ; it gets rid of the resort to inter- 
polations and restores to the collection a substantial unity ; it 
mediates, between the Jewish mystics of Harnack and my own 
Judaeo-Christian proselyte author, by the suggestion of the Jewish 
proselytes, and it opens up before the imagination a field of 
spiritual life , in connexion with the propaganda of Judaism, 
which is almost entirely a terra incognita. 

As I want to do justice to Professor Menzies' argument, I 
will try to show how it may be made to illuminate certain other 
passages, and in particular, let us look a little closer into this 
same Ode. In the ea,rlier part of the Ode we find the following 
statement : 

Ode 3. V. 5. I love the Beloved and my soul loves Him ; 
V. 6. And where His rest is, there also am I. 
V. 7. And I shall be no stranger there, 

For with the Lord Most High and Merciful, there is 
no grudging. 

Evidently the writer is speaking of spiritual privileges into 
which he has been introduced by God's grace and' liberality. 
What is this divine Rest of which he speaks t It seems natural 
to refer to the terms in which God's dweUing in the Sanctuary 
is spoken of in the Old Testanient, such as Ps. cxxxii. 14, ' Here 
is my rest, here will I dwell, for I have desired it' : or Ps. cxxxii. 
8, ' Arise, O Lordj into thy resty thou and the ark of thy strength,' 
or to Isaiah Ixvi. i, 'What house will ye build -me, or what is 
the place of my rest?' God's i-est is, then, the Jewish temple^ ; 

' We might compare Isho'dad on John xiv. i ; ' He calls mansions.. -.the abiding 
rests; because all rests and enjoyments are ours in dwellings.' 



XX. BRIEF SUMMARY OF CRITICISMS 

artd.the writer of the Ode is. expressing :the privilege which he has 
obtained by his proselytism, of passing beyond the jniddle wall 
of partition, from the Court of the Gentiles to the Court of the 
Israelites. It is precisely the situation which St Paul describes 
in spiritual language in Eph. ii. ig, 

' Ye are no more strangers and sojourners, but fellow-citizens of 
the saints, and of the household of God. . .the whole building groweth 
to a7i holy temple in the Lord.' 

The reference to the Sanctuary, however it is to be explained, 
is a mark of the third Ode, just as it is in the much-disputed 
Ode which follows it. And if in the third Ode the Sanctuary 
(whether spiritual or literal) is the place of God's rest, in the 
fourth Ode, it is forcibly described as the place of God's heart. 
For it is God's promise to Solomon that ' my eyes and my heart 
shall be there continually' (2 Chron. vii. 16) which is re.sponsible 
for the curious expression, ' Thou hast given Thy heart to thy 
believers.' Here again we see that the Temple is in the view 
(whether near or far) of the writer. 

These instances will suffice to show the strength of Prof. 
Menzies' hypothesis. It enables us, as we have said, to~ avoid 
interpolation ; it emphasises the language of the proselyte which 
.had been previously detected in the Odes ; and it makes it 
unnecessary to explain away, as so many have done, the evident 
affection of the writer for the actual temple at Jerusalem^. 

I have discussed this particular Ode at length in order to give 
a clear idea of the theory of Prof. Menzies and the way it 
mediates between Prof Harnack's view and my own. The 
difficulty in accepting it lies in the fact that it does not explain 
many of the passages which Harnack had got rid of by the 
theory of interpolation. The simple case of the third Ode does 
not find parallels in the rest of the book. How, for example, 
would one read the Jewish proselyte into the following passage 
in which Harnack hadconceded a Christian element? 



1 This question of the reality of the allusions to the Temple comes up most 
definitely in the 4th Ode, where it has to be discussed. If we do not allow a real 
seferbnee to the Temple, as I am disposed to maintain, we must say with Zahri 
{Die bden Salomos, p. 753) 'Dadurch wird klar, dass er nicht an ein von Men- 
schenhanden bereitetes Gotteshaus mit Vorhofen und Altaren denkt, wie der alte 
Psalmist, sondern an ein geistliches Haus.' 



BRIEF SUMMARY OF CRITtClSMS ixxi 

Ode 31. (He opened His mouth and spake grace ind ijoy : - 
And He spake a new song of praise to His name: 
And He lifted up His voice to the Most High, 
And offered to. Him the sons that were with him. Cf. Joh. 

And His face was justified, for them had His holy Father F"-' '^^^'• 

given Him.) 
Come forth, ye tliat have been afflicted- 

Surely 'Harnack must be right in marking this passage as 
Christian : and unless the whole Ode is to be counted Christian, 
an interpolation must be assumed. There is no place for a 
Jewish proselyte here. 

It seems, then, that the amendment moved by Professor 
Menzies to Harnack's interpretation is not of sufificient scope to 
cover the difficult passages. In some respects it is a brilliant 
suggestion, but it is inadequate. In one feature it is, I 
believe, nearer to the truth than Harnack's own exposition, in 
that it realised the traces of proselytism which are in the Odes. 
These are hardly appreciated by Harnack. For example, he 
passes very rapidly by the allusions to the Creation that does 
not keep Sabbath (with its obvious consequence in the de- 
sabbatizing of proselytes). Harnack has brushed this argument 
on one side, too hastily as I think, and others have followed 
him. His argument is as follows: the words 'do not keep 
sabbath' in the illustrative sentence quoted from Justin haVe 
nothing corresponding to them in the Ode ; and therefore an 
anti-judaic polemic is not to be thought of. In fact the Ode is, 
like others, of Jewish origin. Upon which I remark, that the 
Sabbath is involved in the previous sentence that ' God rested 
from all his works,' and therefore a definite Sabbatic reference 
with regard to the motion of the luminaries was not required : 
arid further there is no doubt that the reference to the motion of 
Sun, Moon and Stars on the Sabbath day is one of the chief 
anti-judaic arguments of the early Church. For example; take 
Gregory of Nyssa, Testimonia adverstis Judaeos, 13, in a section 
headed ■jrepi rov a-a^^ari^eiv and we find that the argument 
against the Sabbath concludes with these words : 

TTW? ^e ^X-to? KOI (TeXijvr) koi dcrrpa rov 
capiafievov Spofiov i/creXei Kol tw aa^^drm ; 



Xxii BRIEF SUMMARY OF CRITICISMS 

The. writer is using up earlier material in the shape of anti- 
judaic testimonies : and the parallelism between this particular 
testimony and the language of the sixteenth Ode is so striking 
that we must convict the Ode of an anti-judaic tendency. 

Harnack fails also, as I did to some extent myself, to 
emphasise and interpret the repeated allusion to a circumcision 
that was spiritual and not carnal. It is not sufficient in such a 
connexion to say that circumcision of the heart is a common- 
place of the Old Testament and of the prophets. Why does 
the writer introduce it, not in the manner of exhortation, 
but as a personal experience, unless he is speaking more 
proselytoriini ? The ordinary Jewish mystic (supposing the 
species to have been discovered) is not likely to break out 
into song on this note. 

Then the references made by the Odist to his being of 
another race need a closer examination. In Ode 41 Harnack 
isolates the remarkable passage contained in vv. 8 — 10, as an 
interpolation; but while admitting that the passage reminds one 
of the ' new creature in Christ ' of whom Paul speaks, he makes 
the strange statement that the interpolator this time is a Jew. 
This Jewish interpolator is followed by a Christian interpolator 
in the passage from v. 12 to the end (' The Saviour who makes 
alive and does not reject our souls, the man who was humbled ' 
&c.). It would surely have been simpler to admit that the 
language was that of a proselyte, and not to make this fantastic 
variation from the original Jewish author to a second Jewish 
interpolator, followed in his turn by a Christian annotator. The 
solution is too cumbrous to be the real one : but this must not 
be allowed to prejudice our judgment in other cases, in which 
the dissecting knife appears to be used with extraordinary skill. 
Whatever the final judgment may be as to the value of Harnack's 
solution, there can be no doubt that it is criticism of a very high 
order. 

I now turn to a third hypothesis, in some ways more 
remarkable than either the doubtful one of Harnack or the 
rejected one of -Menzies. In the Journal of Theological Shidies 
for October 1910, Dean Bernard has launched the theory that 
these Odes are not Jewish (whether mystic or proselyte) nor 
Judaso-Christian, but sin^ply Christian ; that they are songs of 



BRIEF SUMMARY OF CRITICISMS xxili 

newly-baptized persons, or proper to be sung over such, and 
that they belong to a much later date than has been supposed. 
Bernard suggests 1 50 A.D., which is the time to which Zahn and 
others would refer them, but I gather from him privately that he 
thinks this date too early, and is rather disposed to press the 
close of the second century as their time of composition. In 
some respects this solution has points of contact with Professor 
Menzies, for Psalms of the Baptized is a Christian way of writing 
Psalms of the Proselytes, in the period when baptism was adult 
baptism, and in that sense every believer was a proselyte. 
Bernard's hypothesis, however, sweeps away all that Harnack 
has said on the subject, and a good deal of my own reasoning. 
For it is clear that if the date be far on in the second century, all 
references to a pre-Johannine school of Christian or of Jewish 
thought may be swept on one side. At such a date the paral- 
lelisms with St John are equivalent to quotations, and no other 
explanation needs to be made of them. We are not likely to 
find the missing link in the ancestry of St John's Gospel from a 
Christian semi-liturgical book of songs at the end of the second 
century. 

What, then, are the reasons from which Dr Bernard proceeds ? 
For it must be said at once that the case is argued with such 
learning and force as to make the article to which we refer the 
most remarkable that has yet appeared. The case is as follows. 
Bernard points out that a number of striking passages in the 
Odes can be at once illustrated from the early baptismal rituals. 
For example, it seems certain that in the early Syrian Church 
and in the closely associated Armenian Church, baptized persons 
were arrayed in white robes, and crowns, or garlands, were 
placed on their heads. The white raiment is well known, but 
the crowns, which are not a feature of Western religion, as far as 
it is known to us, have been lost sight of. It is these crowns, 
according to Bernard, that are alluded to in such passages as 
the first Ode, ' The Lord is on my head like a crown, and I shall 
not be separated from Him.' The same figure recurs in the 5th, 
9th, 17th and 20th Odes. The white garments are also exactly 
parallelled by the allusions in the Odes to the putting on of 
brightness or clothing oneself with light. In the Odes this 
bright raiment is spoken of as an exchange for ' the coat of skin' 
in the third chapter of Genesis ; and Dr Bernard shows that this 
o. s. d 



xxiv BRIEF SUMMARY OF CRITICISMS 

very allusion is found in the early descriptions of Baptism, as, 
for instance, in the following passage from Jerome, 

'Praeceptis Dei lavandi sumus, et cum, parati ad indumentum 
Christi, tunicas pelliceas deposueriraus, tunc induemur veste linea, 
nihil in se mortis habente, sed tota Candida.' (Ep. ad Fabiolam, 
LXIV. 20.) 

Dr Bernard goes on to argue that the Odes also contemplate 
Baptism when they refer to the ' Seal ' on the one hand, and to 
the ' Living Water ' on the other. With regard to the ' Seal,' 
Dr Bernard thinks he has a less strong case for identification 
with Baptism than with regard to the ' Living Water.' I think 
he entirely underestimates the value of his own argument, when 
he says that the references to the Seal are ' few in number, and 
their meaning is not as clear as is that of the Living Water.' 
The history of the ' Seal ' is obscure, nor can it easily be said 
when it passed from being a mark of ownership to a sacramental 
sign, but that it did become a talisman is certain, and there 
is much to be said for the belief that this talismanic virtue 
of baptism is reflected upon the language of the Odes. For 
example, in the Acis of Paul and Thecla the talismanic force of 
baptism is implied in Thecla's words to Paul, ' Give me only the 
sign of God, and no temptation shall touch me.' But this is 
exactly parallel to Ode 4. 7, 8, 

' Who is there that shall put on thy grace and be hurt ? For 
thy seal is known &c.' 

Another curious illustration may be taken from Cyprian's 
Testimonia (il. 10) where Cyprian explains that Goliath was 
killed by a blow on his forehead because his head had riot been 
sealed. ' By this seal we also are always safe and live^! 

There is, therefore, much to be said for Dr Bernard's conten- 
tion that the ' seal ' in the Odes does sometimes refer to baptism 
even if it should not turn out to be always used in this sense 

But it is just at this point that the difficulty of the inter- 
pretation lies : while it may be freely granted that the ascription 
of talismanic virtue to the waters of baptism is early, and that it 
becomes almost universal (as may be seen by its prevalence even 
to the present day), it must not be overlooked that the Seal and its 
talismanic value are also both pre-Christian. We need only tu 
V See also a similai; reference from Lagtantius on p. 8<j infra. 



BRIEF SUMMARY OF CRITICISMS XXV 

to the Psaims of Solomon in support of this statement. Thus in 
Psalms of Solomon. XV. 8, we are told that 'the sign of the Lord 
i§ upon the righteous for their salvation' ; and in the same way 
in XV. lo, 'the mark of perdition is upon the forehead (of sinners).' 
Granted that this may be based on the signing and sealing in 
the ninth chapter of Ezekiel, it is nevertheless clear that Ezekiel 
could be interpreted, and actually was interpreted, mystically 
before Christian baptism was even thought of. We must there- 
fore be on our guard against reading back a late baptismal 
gnosis into early Christian or Jewish records. 

An even more remarkable case for the need of caution occurs 
in Bernard's identification of the dragon with seven heads in 
Ode 22. 5. This dragon is supposed to be latent in the waters 
of baptism, as originally in the river Jordan, according to a 
passage in Job (xi. 18) where Leviathan will take the Jordan 
into his mouth; Bernard quotes appropriately from Cyril of 
Jerusalem, Cateckeses iii. 1 1 : 

hpdKwv r^v iv Tot? iiBacri Kara tov 'ico/3, o Se^^o/teros 
Toy ^lopSdvTjv iv rw aTOfian avTOv. 

To the various allusions to this dragon who lurks in the 
midst of the waters which Bernard collects from the Eastern 
Baptismal rituals, I add the following passage of Bar Salibi from 
his commentary on Matthew': 

' Baptizatus est...ut confringeret caput draconis spiritalis qui in 
aquis reptabat, quem etiam olim immersit per Pharaonem.' 

Here is again the dragon lurking in the water of Jordan whose 
head is broken when Christ is baptized : and I find that Bar 
Salibi has taken this passage from an earlier Syriac writer, 
Moses Bar Kepha; for in a MS. of that writer in my possession, 
in which the meaning of baptism is discussed, there occurs the 
following passage : 

.rtlnsacuao rCl=>ax=> r^-»^^X ^_A^tS1 

i.e. ' And again, it was in order that he might bruise, the htad 
of the spiritual dragon because he lurked in the waters: in the 

' /.c.in trans, p. 98. 



Xxyi BRIEF SUMMARY OF CRITICISMS 

same way as erst he typically drowned that dragon, by means of 
Pharaoh the Egyptian, in the Red Sea.' In this way Bernard's 
•argument is re-ihforced, so far as the belief is affirmed (especially 
the belief of Oriental Christians) that the devil lurks in the 
waters of baptisiti, and requires to have his head broken (i) by 
Christ, (ii) by the insufflation and chrism of the water. 

But here again caution would be wise ; for the dragon with 
seven heads is not a Christian conception arrived at by applying 
baptismal gnosis to the Old Testament; we see him again 
in the Psalms of Solomon, where by almost every critic he is 
recognised as the equivalent of Pompey and not of the devil or 
his counterpart the Leviathan of Job : he appears also in the 
Apocalypse certainly at a time anterior to the development of 
any. baptismal gnosis : and when we look more closely at the 
language of the twenty-second Ode, we get quite a different kind 
of dragon from the mystical one of Bernard {Draco aqiiatilis 
Bernardi). He is indeed a water-snake ; but his nearest zoologi- 
cal representative lies in quite another direction than the book 
of Job or even the ninety-first Psalm. For this dragon has a 
wicked poison which has to be eliminated, and when his heads 
have been broken, the roots have to be destroyed. So it is a bona 
fide hydra which is in the imagination of the Odist. One has 
only to recall the story of Hercules and the Lernaean Hydra, 
the battle with the hydra-heads, the searing of the roots, and the 
lavages wrought by the poison of the creature, to make it a fair 
suggestion that Bernard has mistaken the species, and that what 
he saw was really a Hydra spiritalis Harrisii, an older form 
zoologically than the ecclesiastical specimen to which Dr Bernard 
introduced us. The baptismal metaphors may turn out to have 
been borrowed from an earlier stratum of Christian thought, as 
well as from the Old Testament. 

Perhaps the most striking of Dr Bernard's illustrations will 
be found in . the quotations which he brings to bear on the 
obscurities at the beginning of the 24th Ode, where the abysses 
cry out with terror at the Baptism of the Lord. Dr Bernard 
observes that ' all Eastern Baptismal rites bring in the idea that 
the waters were terrified at the coming of Christ for Baptism.' 
The Scriptural basis for this belief is Ps. Ixvii. 17, 18, 'The 
waters saw thee and were afraid, the abysses were troubled.' 
Bernard gives many striking patristic and liturgical parallels 



BRIEF SUMMARY OF CRITICISMS ixxvii 

for these beliefs ; and, taken all together, they make a very 
strong impression. His whole argument must be carefully 
studied. I have only tcJuched on a few points in the briefest 
manner. 

If it should turn out that there is good ground for Dr Bernard's 
contention, the whole question of the date will have to be re- 
considered, and, in part, the history of the baptismal rite will have 
to be re-written. It will not follow, even then, that the date of the 
Odes is as late as Dr Bernard suggests. Take, for instance, the 
single point, which he so forcibly expounds, that the baptized 
in early ritual wore crowns. A reference to Hermas will show 
that there was a controversy in the early Church of the West 
as to whether baptized people should be crowned or not, and 
it is decided in the negative, because the crown belongs properly 
to the Martyrs. Thus in Similitude VIII (the great willow) the 
angel gives slips of willow to be planted by the believers, and 
scrutinizes the result of the planting. Those who put forth 
shoots and bring forth fruit are crowned with garlands of palm. 
Those who put forth shoots without fruit are not crowned ; but 
all alike have the white raiment and the seal. The meaning 
of this is that all baptized people are not crowned ; the crown 
belongs to the martyrs, ' those who have wrestled with the 
devil and overcome him.' And the suggestion arises that the 
garlanding of baptized people which Dr Bernard detects in the 
Eastern rituals was' discontinued in the West at a very early 
period, or never definitely adopted. 

Something of the same kind goes on with regard to another 
form of honour. The Odist speaks of becoming one of the men 
on the right hand, whatever may be covered by that term (cf 
Ode 19, ' They who receive in its fulness are the ones on the right 
hand '). And in the Visions of Hermas we have a scene in which 
he wishes to sit at the right hand of the Church, but is refused that 
position, because that place belongs to those who have actually 
suffered for the name. So Hermas (see the account in Vis. Ill) 
has to. sit on the left hand. It seems clear that there'has been 
a transfer of some kind of honour from the ordinary believers to 
the Martyrs. The case is like the previous one. 

I should not, therefore, be surprised to find that Bernard's 
case for a late dating of the Odes will have, even from his own 
point of view, to be revised. He will certainly be in diflficulties; 



xxviii BRIEF SUMMARY OF CRITICISMS 

over the interpretation of the references to the Sanctuary in the 
fourth Ode, which are too definite and too Jewish to be got rid 
of. Perhaps we shall see more clearly the essential Judaism 
of this Ode, if we examine a little more closely the proof of the 
unchangeableness of the Sanctuary which the Rabbis deduce 
from Exod. xv. 17. We shall be able to show that this passage 
of Exodus was actually in the mind of the writer, and that he 
is commenting on the following sequence : 

eiaayaycoi/ KaTai^vrevcrov avTovi 649 6/30? K\r]povofj,i.a<; aov. 
et? erobfJLOV KarotKrjTijpiov aov o KaTrjpTiO'co, K.vpie. 
dyiaafia, K-vpie, rjToifjLaa-av ai ')(eipi<; aov. 
K-vpioii ^aaiKevfov tov alwva Koi eV alwva Koi en. 

Let us see how Philo would comment on this passage : 
the treatise De Plantatione § 47 sqq. introduces the text as 
above : he begins with an explanation in terms of the Stoic 
philosophy, that the highest life is that which is in accordance 
with nature and that this is what is meant by being planted in 
the mountain of the Lord's inheritance. He then reverts from 
his philosophical speculations to the earlier doctrine that the 
sanctuary was made, as a reflexion from holy things, an imita- 
tion of an archetype ; after which he continues as follows : 

' But in order that no one should suppose that the Creator 
has need of any of the things that are made, he subjoins the 
following most necessary addition, " Reigning for eternity and 
beyond eternity," for a king is in need of no one, but his subjects 
are in everything in need of him ! ' 

It will be seen that this at once explains why the Ode which 
began with ' No man changeth thy holy place,' should go on with 
' Thou hast given us thy fellowship, it was not that thou wast in 
need of us, but that we are in need of thee.' 

Philo and the Odist are both working over the same Rab- 
binical gnosis on the fifteenth chapter of Exodus. And it is 
from the Jewish side of Philo's mind and not from the 
Hellenistic and philosophical, that the parallel is made. We 
see, then, that it is right to ascribe a Jewish background to the 
fourth Ode. In fact, the weak point of Bernard's argument lies 
just there, that the Jewish background of the Odes is too patent 
to. be neglected. The ultimate origin of the coats of light in 
place of coat's of skin must be Jewish ; the mere allegorisatibn 



BRIEF SUMMARY OF CRITICISMS xxix 

of Genesis by Christian hands is insufficient to explain a belief 
which, as I have shown, can be illustrated from the great Jewish 
and leading Gnostic teachers, and is perpetuated in the Kabbala 
and in folk-lore. A Christian allegorisation of Genesis cannot be 
responsible for all this. At the same time, it is well known that 
all the early Christian teachers used up Genesis by the way of 
gnosis and allegory in their teachings of redemption by Christ. 

In this way it will be seen that Jewish expositions are 
necessary to the right understanding of the references to the 
unchangeable sanctuary, whatever meaning be attached to it : 
even if a reference to Jerusalem's fortunes be denied or to any 
other temple, the explanation of the fixity of the sanctuary is 
to be sought in Jewish writers, as I think I have pointed out. 

While I am writing on this point a remarkable confirmation 
comes to light of the early belief in the pre-existence of the 
Sanctuary at Jerusalem, and its consequent inviolability, which 
I hold to underlie the language of the opening verses of the 
fourth Ode. In an odd quarter, too, the evidence allLided to 
riiakes its appearance. The last number of vi«//^n?/(3i' (Heft i. 
iQii) contains an account by the Carmelite father Anastase 
Marie, of Bagdad, of his recovery of the sacred books of the 
Yezidees from their hiding place in the mountain of ^injar, in 
the Mesopotamian plane between Mosul and Aleppo, about due 
south from Mardin. These Yezidees, commonly known as devil- 
worshippers, appear to have been originally devoted to the wor- 
ship of the Demiurgos as against that of the true God, and 
they represent the survival of an early Oriental sect, perhaps of 
Jewish origin. For however much they may disown the Jews 
in these newly-found documents, and affirm their racial priority 
to them, it is clear that they believed in the pre-existence of 
Jerusalem, as the following passage will show: 

Yezidi Black-book {Anihropos I.e. p. 37) : 

XVII. ' The Lord then descended to Jerusalem, and ordered 
Gabriel to bring a little earth from the four cardinal points of the 
earth^. He did so. To this earth he added air, fire and water, 
and thus created the first man. He gave him a soul, taken from 
his own almightiness. He ordered Gabriel to put Adam in Para- 
dise, etc' 
' Which four points are, according to early Fathers, latent in the four letters of 
the name of Adam. 



XXX BRIEF SUMMARY OF CRITICISMS 

Here the pre-existence of Jerusalem to the creation of man 
is clearly involved. We have an excellent parallel to the 
doctrine that ' thy holy place thou didst design before thou didst 
make (other) places'.' 

All of this makes a late date impossible, nor will the position 
of honour given to the Odes in the Pistis Sophia be explicable, 
unless the early date of the Odes be conceded, or unless 
Dr Bernard succeeds in lowering the date of the Pistis Sophia 
as well as that of the Odes. 

I have stated Bernard's case rapidly, with inevitable omission 
of many of his striking parallels and illustrations, and without 
trying to break the force of his criticism by drawing attention 
to its exaggerations. Dr Bernard does not seem to be aware 
(or was not aware, until I drew his attention to it) that his case 
had been anticipated. In a series of articles published in Die 
Reformation Dr Diettrich had anticipated Bernard in detecting 
references to baptismal customs and had equally anticipated 
Harnack in the assumption of a Jewish background for the 
Odes. In the first of the series of articles, published as far back 
as May 1910, Diettrich held that the later stratum was definitely 
Christian and the earlier was Essene ; but, after the first article 
was out, he had read Harnack's criticisms and. reviewed the 
whole matter more closely, coming to the conclusion that the 
later Odist was not an orthodox Christian but that he belonged 
to a little-known group of Eastern heretics whom Diettrich 
proposed to identify. It is unfortunate that the separate articles 
appeared in such an out-of-the-way corner, and that they were 
too summarily set aside as fantastic by those German critics 
who read them. Diettrich had the advantage, from his studies 
on the Nestorian Baptismal Liturgy, of recognizing any parallels 
that might exist between the Odes and the Ritual, just as 
Bernard was helped by Conybeare's publication of the Ritual 
of the Armenians. Moreover, his excellent Syriac scholarship 
contributes frequently to the right understanding of the meaning 
of some difficult passages. Whether Bernard and Diettrich have 
reached the final explanation of the parallels between the Odes 
and the Eastern Rituals is the matter that has now to be 
decided. In a recent criticism in the Theol. Tijdschrift Mr Lake 

1 Is it possible that the original language of the Ode was ' thy holy place thou 
didst design before thou madest man ' ? 



BRIEF SUMMARY OF CRITICISMS XXXl 

has thrown out, independently, the same suggestion as Diettrich 
and Bernard, that the Odes are not a case of ' Mystic' but of 
' Sacramental Mystic ' ; that is the problem that at present is 
before us. The remaining question, after this problem is solved, 
will be the residual Judaism of the Odes. If Bernard is right 
that the Odes are all Christian, and late as well as Christian, the 
Jewish background has to be denied or explained away: if 
Diettrich is right that the Odes are strongly coloured by 
Essenism, then much of Bernard's argument will be weakened ; 
the ' white robes ' in which the singer is assumed to be clad, will 
be Essene drapery, and the songs before sunrise, which Bernard 
refers to the Easter baptisms, will be illustrated from the well- 
known solar adorations of the ascetics of the Jordan valley and 
the Dead Sea. I reserve my own judgment as to whether such 
explanations are at all required. They may all be vitiated by 
over-subtlety. I do not, however, wish to spoil so interesting a 
debate by summing it up prematurely. 

Of the many other tracts and discussions which have 
hitherto appeared, it must suffice to refer briefly to two or 
three. 

The revision of the Syriac text by Schulthess in Preuschen's 
Zeitschrift is excellent, and contains some of the best things 
that have been said linguistically and with reference to the 
translation. I am pleased to find that, while recognizing the 
excellence of Flemming's translation (as I myself am forward 
to do) he points out that my renderings are not always to be 
rejected for Flemming's. Some of the differences between us 
were due to unfortunate misprints or transcriptions, which I 
have done my best to remove in the present edition. With 
Schulthess should be taken the valuable reviews of my book 
and of Harnack's by Wellhausen in the Gottingische gelehrte 
Anzeigen for September 1910. As was to be expected, the 
criticism of the text is searching and the interpretations pro- 
posed are acute. W. will not allow that the Odes are Jewish ; 
even the reference to the unchangeable sanctuary is to be 
treated as ideal, and the Odes furnish no definite historical date. 
They know nothing of the Law, but only of the yoke of Love. 
Their idea of God is as un-Jewish as possible ; the initiation 
by circumcision is replaced by that through the Spirit. The 
community to which the writer belongs is grounded on inward, 

O.S. 



XXxii BRIEF SUMMARY OF CRITICISMS 

rather than outward, fellowship. The transitions in the Odes 
from the speaking believer to the speaking Christ are illustrated 
by Bacchic parallels. While the Odes are as little to be classed 
as Gnostic as the Fourth Gospel itself, they show some Gnostic 
tendencies, and W. suggests that we might compare the Mandaean 
hymns, which I have not yet been able to do. 

A number of other criticisms lie before me. In the same 
number of Preuschen's Zeitschrift to which I have referred for 
Schulthess' discussion of the text of the Odes, there will be found 
an article by Spitta (one of several which he has written), in 
which, according to his metier, he dissects the Odes into Jewish 
and Christian elements, and arrives independently at conclusions 
not differing very widely from those of Harnack. This is 
followed by a very interesting article by Gunkel, who discards 
Harnack's hypothesis in favour of a reference to a heretical 
Christian sect, to which there was a secret initiation, as betrayed 
by the language of Ode 8, which Bernard explains by the 
theory oi disciplina arcani. Finally Preuschen himself promises 
to prove that the Odes are the work of the great Gnostical Mystic 
Valentinus. It is not difficult to imagine some of the arguments 
that will be brought forward. It is clear that it will be some 
time before these investigations are concluded and the final 
grains of truth gathered from the miscellaneous heap of opinions. 

Meanwhile, we ought not to lose sight of the spiritual value 
of the recovered document, which cannot be seriously affected 
by the variety of the solutions that may be offered as to the 
time and place of its production. Dr A. C. Headlam's article 
in the Church Quarterly Review, which has just come to my 
hands, expresses this duty, in a very able and sympathetic 
discussion. 



SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE ON RECENT 
CRITICISMS. 

In the pages that precede I have attempted to give some 
view of the critical debate that has been in progress with regard 
to the right interpretation and correct chronology of the Odes. 
It has been difficult to obtain a correct representation of what is 
really a moving picture. As I left the matter in the foregoing 
summary Dr A. C. Headlam's article in the Church Quarterly 
Review had just appeared and had delighted me by its apprecia- 
tion of the spiritual value of my book of songs, and by its just 
handling of many of the points that had to be decided. It also 
seemed to me to be very judicious in its estimate of what one 
may call the Baptismal Parallels of Dean Bernard, for while 
recognising much that was forcible in the criticism, Headlam 
also suggested that the elevated tone of the writer's experience 
implied a certain priority over the highly evolved Gnosis to 
which Bernard drew attention. The baptismal cult was, in fact, 
reposing upon an earlier stratum, and there was no need to 
chronologically- depress the Odes to the level, say, of the 
Nestorian Liturgy, As the Odes themselves would say, 
"That which is earlier shall not be changed by those that 
are younger than itself." Dr Headlam's actual language is as 
follows : f 

" The writer of the Odes is thinking primarily of th'e new life 
he is expenencing and not of Baptism. No doubt he had been 
baptized. No doubt Baptism may have provided language to' 
express his own spiritual experience, but it is not of Baptism that 
he is thinking. Further, in some cases this reference to Baptism isi 
forced and unreal. It would be far truer to say that language 
which is here as elsewhere used of the Christian life as a whole 
was quite naturally introduced into baptismal services and songs 
and so obtained a specialized. use. This particular development of 
' his theory on which Dr Bernard insists is probably more than^ 
doubtful." 



xxxiv SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE ON RECENT CRITICISMS 

There has also just reached me an article by S. Reinach in 
the Revue de I'Histoire les Religions {Annales du Musee Giiimet) 
for 1910, in which there is contained a brilliant survey of the 
question of the Odes, expressed with the acuteness and insight 
that one would naturally expect from such a quarter. I have 
no wish to re-analyse the analysis of M. Reinach, but there is 
one passage in which he appears to say something like what we 
just now quoted from Headlam. On p. 15 of the reprinted 
article which M. Reinach has kindly sent me, after discussing 
Bernard's hypothesis in detail, he says : 

"Dans I'hypothese oil les Odes de Salomon auraient etd 
adoptees par I'Eglise chrdtienne, ou par telle partie judaisante 
de cette Eglise, on comprendrait que cette litt^rature dont le 
merite n'est pas mediocre, etit exerce de I'influence sur le langage 
metaphorique usite pour le sacrement de bapteme." 

If I understand this rightly, it runs parallel to Dr Headlam's 
suggestion, but at the same time runs farther, into the terra 
incognita of the history of baptismal symbols, and into a branch 
of literature that corresponds to it, and is itself equally unknown. 
M. Reinach does not commit himself to any definite position, 
but makes a half promise that when the translators have come 
to some closer agreement as to the rendering, and the inter- 
preters are a little nearer to one another and to the meaning, he 
may return to the subject again. As far as 1 am concerned, he 
will be sure of a hearty welcome. 

It is clear that M. Reinach is right that we have to go 
a good way in the acceptance of the Bernard parallels ("les 
ressemblances si ing^nieusement signal^es"). Accordingly I 
pick up the threads of the argument again, and turn once more 
to the loom.. 

It was suggested a little way back that the treatment of the 
dragon with seven heads was too exclusively made from the 
standpoint of the Baptismal ritual, and that there was in the 
figure a pre-Christian origin (as shown by the Psalms of 
Solomon) and perhaps a pagan parallel of great antiquity, for 
which the closest correspondence would be found in the Lernaean 
Hydra of Hercules. This, at all events, helped us to explain 
the, destruction of the wicked poison of the dragon, and of his 
roots. Thus there would be more dragons involved than the 



SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE ON RECENT CRITICISMS ' XXXV 

Leviathan who would swallow up the Jordan, or the Pharaoh 
who pursues the Israelites in the Red Sea. 

To be quite fair td Bernard's hypothesis, we will show that 
the virus of the dragon in the midst of the waters was actually 
exorcised in the watiers of baptism, according to early Christian 
belief, and we shall also suggest that the dragon in the Jordan 
still exists in the local folk-lore. 

For the first of these points it is sufficient to refer to Cyprian 
Ep. Ixviii (Hartel, p. 764), where Cyprian says definitely : 

" diaboli nequitiam pertinacem usque ad aquam salutarem 
ualere, in baptismo autem omne nequitiae suae uirus amittere, quod 
exemplum cernimus in rege Pharaone " : 

here we have the baptismal parallel to the language of Ode 22 
" Thy right hand destroyed his wicked poison." Cyprian con- 
tinues with the argument that serpents and dragons lose their 
poison when they pass from dry places into waters : 

" nam si scorpii et serpentes qui in sicco praeualent, in aquam 
praecipitati praeualere possunt sua uenena retinere, possunt et 
spiritus nequam, qui scorpii et serpentes appellantur et tamen per 
nos data a Domino potestate calcantur, permanere ultra in hominis 
corpore, in quo baptizato et sanctificato incipit spiritus sanctus 
habitare." 

Perhaps this contribution to the history of the virus of the 
dragon may not be unacceptable to Dr Bernard. 

The second point, as to the existence of a folk-lore belief in 
the dragon that lurks in the Jordan, was gathered from my 
own experience. I was one day, when travelling in the East, 
planning to rid myself of the discomforts of travel by a bath in 
the Jordan, the river being at that time in flood. It was certainly 
a dangerous experiment, even for a good swimmer, and I was 
deterred from it by the natives who used, amongst other more 
valid arguments, the statement that there was a whale in the 
waters into which I proposed to plunge. The whale was, of 
course, the Biblical tartnin (Arabic tinm), and can be equated 
with serpent or dragon or sea-monster. The Palestinian folk-lore, 
therefore, retains the belief that there is a dragon in the Jordan. 
I have no means of deciding whether this belief is older, or 
younger than the belief of the baptismal rituals : but it .should 
certainly be connected with it. 



XXXvi SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE ON RECENT CRITICISMS 

In order to test Bernard's hypothesis more closely, for the 
value of a hypothesis depends on the number of things it 
explains, I propose to try whether it will help us to understand 
the very difficult thirty-eighth Ode. 

The opening of this perplexing and discontinuous Ode has 
perplexity and discontinuity of its own : 

"I went up into the light of truth as if mto a chariot: 
And the truth took me and led me and guided me across pits 

and gulleys : 
And from the rocks and the waves it preserved me : 
And it became to me a haven of salvation." 

Here we have a chariot flying across pits and ravines, after 
which we have, what is not usual in chariot riding, the risk of 
rocks and waves, and finally the chariot arrives — in harbour. 
This is perplexing. Is it impossible that the chariot can be 
a .ship ? 

The Syriac word (markeba) which we have translated 
" chariot " does sometimes mean "ship," as the lexicons will 
show (v. Payne Smith ad voc). This rendering is probably 
due to Arabic influence, for in Arabic markab means inter alia 
a ship (as a reference to the story of Sindbad the Sailor will 
show). Perhaps the Odes have been translated into Syriac at 
a later age than the. golden age of Syriac literature, and then 
the word we are discussing is an Arabism. Let us, then, 
translate it as ship. We are now on the way to the rocks and 
waves and haven at the close of the passage. The " pits and 
ravines " must now be marine and not terrene : they are the 
gaping and yawning depths of the sea sailed over : so we 
translate : 

" I went up into the light of Truth, as into a ship : 
And the Truth took me and led me and guided me over the 

hollows and yawning depths (of the sea) : 
From the rocks and the waves it preserved me : 
And it became to me a haven of salvation." 

That is certainly much more reasonable than going to sea in 
a chariot. The perplexity and discontinuity of the opening is 
gone. 

But what is the ship ? Does he mean the Ark ? If so, we 
are again in contact with a baptismal symbol, for the. earliest 



SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE ON RECENT CRITICISMS XXXVll 

figure borrowed from the Old Testament to illustrate baptism is 
the Ark of Noah, in which few, that is eight, souls were saved 
by water (i Pet. iii. 20). And Justin carries on the argument by 
quoting {Dial. 138) a passage which he says comes from Isaiah, 
to the effect that God says to Jerusalem, " At the flood of Noah 
I saved thee " : and this mystery of human salvation took place 
at the flood, says Justin. We should, therefore, naturally expect 
that a person who is writing a book of baptismal hymns would 
not neglect the typology of the Ark of the Flood. 

But here also the difficulty will be felt that the mode of 
criticism is perilously near the line of over-subtlety and unre- 
strained imagination. A poet who was working up baptismal 
symbols would probably not neglect Noah's Ark, but would he 
express himself so obscurely? and would the "disciplina arcani" 
cover such obscurity ? Perhaps Dr Bernard will tell us when he 
writes next on the subject. 



CORRFXTION 
P. 121,1. 33, for See Preface to this edition read See above, pp. xxv sq. 



INTRODUCTION 

The present volume contains an important addition to our 
knowledge of the literature which immediately anticipates or 
directly follows the time of Christ. It contains, on the one 
hand, a hitherto unknown version of the Psalms of Solomon, 
a collection which has often been studied, from the standpoints 
both of the higher and lower criticism, and which is, by common 
consent, referred to the middle of the first century B.C. ; and on 
the other hand it presents a new collection which I have called, 
for the sake of distinction, and in harmony with the references 
in ancient writers, by the name of the Odes of Solomon ; they 
are here edited and translated from a Syriac MS. in my own 
possession : and it will probably be no rash prediction to say that 
their value and antiquity will be at once recognized by students 
and critics, and that they will be assigned, either wholly or in 
part, to the first century of the Christian era. The reasons for 
this belief will appear presently, but, apart altogether from the 
question of a half-century more or less In the dating of a 
document, it lies outside controversy that the new Odes are 
marked by a vigour and exaltation of spiritual life, and 
a mystical insight, to which we can only find parallels in the 
most illuminated periods of the history of the Church. They 
differ, in this respect, by the whole breadth of the firmament, 
from the extant Psalms of Solomon, with which they are 
associated in our MS. In these there is little originality, and 
not much hope : the hard experiences through which Jerusalem 
passed at the hands of the Romans in the Invasion of Pompey 
have left a gloom over the sky even in the moments of temporary 
relief and in the time of exultation over the fall of the great 
oppressor: what life and light there is may be traced to the 
severe morality of the traditional Pharisees, and to the Messianic 
hopes for whose development their times of affliction were the 
appropriate and necessary nidus; and so far are they from 

o. s. I 



2 INTRODUCTION 

religious originality in the expression of personal or national 
experience, that many of the Psalms in question are little more 
than centos and expansions from the canonical Hebrew Psalter. 
In the Odes, on the other hand, we have few quotations or 
adaptations from previous writings, whether Jewish or Christian ; 
there is little that can be traced to the Old Testament, almost 
nothing that is to be credited to the Gospels or other branches 
of the Christian literature. Their radiance is no reflection from 
the illumination of other days : their inspiration is first-hand 
and immediate ; it answers very well to the summary which 
Aristides made of the life of the early Christian Church when 
he described them as indeed ' a new people with whom some- 
thing Divine is mingled.' They are thus altogether distinct 
from the extant Psalms of Solomon which are bound up with 
them in our MS. Whatever we may have to say of these latter 
is limited to the interest which arises in the discovery of an 
Eastern Version of a book whose Greek text is peculiarly difficult 
to edit, and whose original Hebrew text has altogether dis- 
appeared. We shall show that the new Syriac version is itself 
a translation of the Greek ; we shall point out in what ways, if 
any, it serves to the betterment of the Greek text, and whether 
it gives any assistance to the detection of the lost Hebrew text. 

Our chief interest, however, will be with the Odes. We 
shall discuss the quotations and fragments of these which are 
found in early Christian writers : we shall try to determine the 
limits of time within which the composition of the Odes must 
lie, as well as the locality or Church from which they emanate : 
we shall try to find out also how they became attached to the 
Psalms, and whether they were originally composed in Greek ; 
and we shall add a brief comrtientary and notes to the Odes as 
translated. In this way we hope to clear up some perplexities 
in the historical tradition, while leaving, no doubt, a number of 
unsolved problems to those who shall follow after us. 

The MS. from which our texts come is a paper one of quite 
The Syriac ^ late period : its age may be between three and 
■^s. four hundred years: but as it is imperfect both at 

the beginning and ending, and so has lost both its preface and 
colophon, we cannot tell how it was described by the person 
who made the copy, nor can we say anything definite about the 
date. It has been lying on my shelves for some time, perhaps 



DESCRIPTION OF MS. 3 

for as long as two years, along with a heap of leaves from various 
Syriac MSS. written on paper, which came from the neighbour- 
hood of the Tigris. In spite of its relatively late date, the text 
is a good one : it is carefully, if somewhat coarsely written, and 
is furnished with occasional vowels in the Nestorian manner, to 
which there have been added, probably by a later hand, sundry 
Greek vowels in the Jacobite manner. As we have said it is 
incomplete both at the beginning and the end : we can, however, 
make out pretty clearly what the original MS. was like. 

The book is arranged in quires of ten leaves : of the first 
quire three leaves are missing: these three leaves contained the 
first and second Odes and the beginning of the third Ode. The 
Odes then run continuously till the fourth quire, where they 
stop on the verso of the fourth leaf: thus the Odes occupy 
roughly thirty-four leaves. Then the extant Psalms begin : 
they occupy the remaining six leaves of the fourth quire (say 
six leaves plus), the fifth quire, and the sixth quire, of which the 
last leaf is gor\e,flus whatever was needed to complete the book 
from a seventh quire : and since the extant portion of the Psalms 
in our Syriac MS. takes us up to Ps. xvii. 38 there is not much 
to add from a seventh quire. Suppose we say that the Psalms 
occupied twenty-six leaves, and that three more leaves are 
required to complete the text, we have then approximately 

Odes = 34 leaves 

Psalms = 28 leaves 

or Psalms and Odes = 62 leaves'- 

Now let us turn to the accounts given us by ancient writers 
Psalms of the extent of the books in question : first of all 

and Odes ^g know that the 18 Psalms of Solomon once 

compared. , • , r^ 

stood m the great Codex Alexandrinus : for in 
the index to the MS. we find as follows: 

'ATroKd\vy^i<i 'laavvov 
KXrifievTOf l-rrt.cTToX.ri a 
KXj^/iei'TOs iirt(TTo\rj 
I ofiov ^i^Xia — 
'^aXfiol "2,0X0 fx.wvro'i or]'. 

^ I have made a slight correction here, following Harnack's estimate of the missing 
matter. 



4 INTRODUCTION 

Here the eighteen Psalms stand just outside the accepted 
Christian books of the N.T., in the very penumbra of canonicity. 
Next turn to the Synopsis Sanctae Scripturae which passes 
under the fi'ame of Athanasius : here we find as follows, after 
the enumeration of the Antilegomena of the Old Testament : 

avv eKeivoi<; Be Koi ravra ■>]pi,dfjLrivTat.' 
MaKKa^aiKa ^i^Xia S' 
YlToXefxalKci 
"^aXfiol Kal (phrj [1. coSai.]' ^o\ofji,u)VTO<; 

Zwcravva. 

\ 

Here we find the Psalms in the company of the Odes, and 
forming a part of the disputed writings of the Old Testament : 
from the supplementary manner in which they are introduced, 
following an unknown book on Egyptian history, we may 
perhaps describe their position as the penumbra of uncanon- 
icity, or, rather of deuterocanonicity. The Psalms and Odes 
are here (say in the sixth century) definitely grouped together. 

Next take the Stichometry of Nicephorus, the Patriarch of 
Constantinople in the beginning of the ninth century : here we 
find as follows : 

1. Three books of Maccabees. 

2. The Wisdom of Solomon. 

3. Ecclesiasticus. 

4. The Psalms and Odes of Solomon, containing 2100 

verses (o-rt'^ot ,^p'). 

5. Esther. 

6. Judith. 

7. Susanna. 

8. Tobit. 

Here we find our two books again grouped together, and 
very well placed amongst the Apocrypha of the Old Testarnent : 
they do not seem to have lost any dignity between the sixth 
and ninth centuries ; and they have been carefully measured 
after the manner of books which are likely to be transcribed 
and whose contents must therefore be estimated on some 
recognized scale. 

1 Zahn tries to justify the singular, by reference to the LXX. of i K. viii. 53 oi)k 
Idoi aSrri yiypaTTTixi, iv /3l;8^i((; rij^ ifSris; 



STICHOMETRY OF THE ODES S 

In the same connexion we have a list of books which is 
found attached to the Quaestiones et Responsiones of Anastasius 
the Sinaite, and is commonly known as the Catalogue of the 
Sixty Books. After the sixty canonical books, we have a list 
of nine deuterocanonical books, and then a list of twenty-five 
definitely apocryphal writings ; amongst these last we find 

8. AvaXrjyjrci Mwiitreo)?. 

10. HXlov dTroKaXvyfrit. etc. 

Here we cannot be certain whether Psalms means Psalms 
and Odes, nor is any estimate made of the extent of the 
composition. The book is not in such good company as it is 
in the Catalogue of Nicephorus. 

Assuming the correctness of the statement that the Odes 
and Psalms contain 2100 verses, let us now turn 

Stichometry. ' 

to the Greek texts of the eighteen Psalms, and see 
what the scribes say about their compass. The Vatican MS. 
(Cod. R of Gebhardt's edition of the Psalm^) says that the book 

contains o-xt ■yjrv' : the Copenhagen MS. (Cod. H) says e-Tn] ,a ; 
and the Paris MS. (Cod. P) says eTrrj TpoaKovra. Here, as 
Gebhardt says. Cod. P has misread ^ as A' ; so we have two 
statements as to the length of the book. One statement says 
verses, the other verses of Homer, but since that is what verses 
mean in a stichometric reckoning, there is no discrepancy 
here except in the numbers. If we imagine that the scribe 
of Cod. R has misread the sign for 900, ~^, as i/r, we haye 
950 verses for R, which agrees closely with the reckoning in 
Cod. H. Suppose we say then that the 18 Psalms equal 950 
verses. But then we are told by Nicephorus that the Psalms 
and Odes together make 2100 verses : we have then the ratio of 
Odes to Psalms 1150 to 950 or 23 to 19. Our estimate of the 
relative lengths in the Syriac was 34 to 28 or 17 to 14. The 
former estimate is 121 to i, the latter 1-21 to i, which is so 
exact as to make the verification that our new Odes are those 
of which Nicephorus and the other Canonists speak, so far as 
statistics can make the demonstration. 

It will be observed that Nicephorus has divided the Solomonic 
literature into two parts, the Canonical books, viz. : Proverbs, 
Ecclesiastes and Canticles, and the Antilegomena which include 



6 INTRODUCTION 

the Wisdom of Solomon, perhaps Ecclesiasticus, and the Psalms 
and Odes of Solomon ; that is, there are three canonical books 
of Solomon, and at least two sub-canonical books. We put 
it in that way, because there is evidence in some quarters 
that Ecclesiasticus was also reckoned amongst the books of 
Solomon. If, however, it is not so reckoned, we have five books 
of Solomon. 

Now let us turn to the Cheltenham Stichometry as published 
by Mommsen^- 

Here we have the Solomonic writings introduced as follows : 

Psalmi David CLI. ver. V. 

Salomonis ver. v D. 

profetas maiores ver. XVI. CCCLXX. numero IIII. 

This is a little perplexing ; at first sight it seems as if the 

Cheltenham list had only one book of Solomon, 

The five qj. several books reckoned as one, and that the 

eiTchurch. total extent of this book or books is 5500 verses. 

But, as Preuschen^ has suggested, the real reckoning 

for Solomon has got into the next line, and we should read 

Salomonis lib. V. ver. vTT. cccxx. 
profetas maiores numero IIII. 

If this restoration be correct, we should have the Cheltenham 
list in evidence for five books of Solomon, but without any clue 
to the identification of the five books, or any means of compari- 
son with the stichometry of the Psalms and Odes as given by 
Nicephorus. 

Now, that Preuschen is correct as regards the numbers may 
be seen from the fact that the figure 7320 agrees with the count 



which we find in Vulgate MSS.^ 


For here w 


Proverbs 


1740 verses 


Ecclesiastes 


800 


Canticles 


280 


Wisdom 


1 700 „ 


Ecclesiasticus 


2800 „ 


Total 


7320 



' Mommsen, Zur laleinischen Stichometrie in Hermes, Bd xxi. pp. 142 — igfi. 
Cf. Saaday in Sliidia Biblica-, iii. pp. 217 — 303. 

^ Preusclien, Analecta, p. 138 ff. ^ Sanday, I.e. p. 266. 



THE ODES AND THE CANON 7 

This justifies Preuschen's restoration, and shows that five 
books of Solomon were reckoned amongst the Canonical and 
deuterocanonical books, but the Psalms and Odes of Solomon 
are not amongst the five. For our purposes, therefore, we may 
dismiss the Cheltenham catalogue. The date of this catalogue 
is soon after A.D. 359, and it is North African in origin : we may 
say that at this date the Psalms of Solomon were not recognized 
in Carthage. 

The very same thing follows from the consideration of the 
list of Canonical Scriptures contained in the Acts of the 
Council of Carthage in 397, for the entry in the list of Canonical 
Books, 

Salomonis libri quinque 
can hardly be referred to any other grouping than that which 
we have already described. The tradition of the Church is 
steady that there are five books of Solomon. Thus we find in 
Innocentius, writing at the beginning of the fifth century, 

'prophetarum libri sexdecim, Salomo7tis libri quinque, 
Psalterium\' 
and in Cassiodorus, writing at the middle of the sixth century^ 
' Psalterium librum unum ; Salomonis libros quinque 
i.e. Proverbia, Sapientiam, Ecclesiasticum, Ecclesiasten, 
Canticum Canticorum ' ; 
and so in other places. Isidore of Seville, in the early part of 
the seventh century, divides the five Solomonic writings into 
groups of three and two respectively, and explains that the two 
which he detaches (Wisdom and Ecclesiasticus) were really the 
works of Jesus the son of Sirach, but have been credited to 
Solomon on the ground of style^ : 

' Duo quoque illi egregii et sanctae institutionis libelli, 
Sapientiam dico et alium qui vocatur Ecclesiasticus ; 
qui dum dicantur a Jesu fiho Sirach editi, tamen propter 
quandam eloquii similitudinem Salomonis titulo sunt 
praenotatiV 

1 Ad Exsiiperium[G2X^2cai, Bibl. vol. viii. pp. 561 ff.). 
3 De instit. div. lilt. c. xiv. 

3 Isidore, De ordine libb. S. Script., P.L. Ixxxiii. 155 ff. 

■> For the persistence of the tradition as to the five Solomonic books, see Nestle, 
Zeits(hrifif. altt. Whs. (1907), 27, 294 ff- 



8 INTRODUCTION 

There are no further references that I know of to the 
Psalms or Odes of Solomon in the lists of canonical books which 
have come down to us, unless there should be a cryptic allusion 
to them in the new book of Psalms written for Marcion, which 
the Muratorian Canon condemns (Saec. ii. — iii.), or the ilraX/iot 
IStmTiKol. which the Council of Laodicea (c. 360 A.D.) prohibits 
from being used in the Church\ In the latter case we have the 
opinion of John Zonaras in favour of the identification. But 
Zonaras in the twelfth century was probably, like ourselves, 
engaged in speculation. On the other hand, if we might describe 
yj/'aXfjiol ISoaiTiKol, as meaning Psalms of personal experience, the 
term would exactly suit our collection of Odes. 

Having now proved that we have the two books of Solomonic 
Lactantius Psalms and Odes in substantially the same compass 

and the Odes. ^j^^(- ^^^y ^ygrc known to the ancient Stichometers, 
we now pass on to consider what light is thrown on the matter 
by actual quotations from the book of Odes which are extant. 
We begin with a passage from Lactantius, which was first 
noticed by the learned Whiston^ In the Divine Institutes 
(Bk iv. c. 12) we have the following passage: 
S- ^^ 

' Salomon in ode undevicesima^ ita dicit : ^nfirmatus est 

-<-^ uterus Virginis et accepit foetum et gravata est, et facta 
^""^ est in multa miseratione mater virgo.' ' 

And in the Epitome of the Divine Institutes the passage is 
introduced by the words Apud Salomonein ita scriptuin est. These 
references to a 19th Ode betray a knowledge of the book from 
which the quotation was taken : on turning to the 19th Ode in 
our collection we find the very words quoted by Lactantius the 
actual Syriac text being as follows : 

1 Origen's Canon, as. contained in Euseb. iir. E. vi. 25, has an entry of three 
Solomonic books, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes and Canticles ; with regard to this last he 
says ''4^(r;Ua g.crfji,dTUV, 06 yap us Tra.paXaii^a.voml rives," ^(ruara pcr/idrwi/. But this is 
only an alternative title which Origen condemns ; it has no suggestion in it of other 
Songs or Canticles. [In the Latin Vulgate of Sixtus V (1590) the title was first 
Canticum and is everywhere in the headings of the pages pasted over as Cantica 
(Nestle).] Origen is expressly enumerating the twenty-two books of the Hebrew 
Canon. The alternative title for Canticles is actually found in the Synopsis of 
Chrysostom, in John of Damascus {Defide orihodoxa iv. 17) and elsewhere.' 

^ Authentick Records, i. 155. 

^ So in the Cambridge MS; Gg. 4. 24 and in all MSS. in the apparatus of Brandt's 
edition; but in the MS. Kk. 4. 17 of the same University the reference is wanting. - 



LACTANTIUS AND THE ODES 9 

.^.iIaO ptf'i^-i ivaiaaio 
. K'rtlJu^flo Klsau'ia rfAxXaivs r^j^r^ ^OOOQ 

The only discordance is in the first word of the passage, 
which is certainly wrong in the Latin\ and very difficult to 
interpret in the Syriac. It is clear, however, that Lactantius is 
working from a book of Odes arranged in the same order as 
ours : if he had both Psalms and Odes in his collection, then the 
Odes preceded the Psalms. And further, since Lactantius 
quotes in Latin, the book was extant in a Latin translation in 
his time ; for when Lactantius quotes Greek books, as in the 
case of the Sibylline verses, he quotes in Greek and does not 
offer a translation. From which it appears that by the begin- 
ning of the fourth century the Odes of Solomon must have been 
translated into Latin^ 

Ryle and James in their edition of the eighteen Psalms of 
Solomon drew attention, following Whiston, to this passage of 
Lactantius, and made the correct inference from it that there 
must have been more Solomonic matter at one time accessible 
to Christian scholars than the eighteen Psalms. And since the 
Ode quoted by Lactantius is undoubtedly Christian, they sug- 
gest that the original collection of Psalms of Solomon was 
fitted with an Appendix of Odes of Solomon, the added matter 
being approximately equal in length to the original collection, 
and either Christian or marked by distinctly Christian inter- 
polations. So far they were undoubtedly right, as our MS. 
incontestably shows. Only our book presents the matter of the 
Appendix in a different light : here it is the Odes that have the 
first place and the Psalms that are appended ; and possibly this 
was also the case with Lactantius' book of Solomon. We shall 
show, presently, that there is reason to believe that the two 
books came together in both orders, in different lines of tradition, 

1 I am inclined to believe it is simply a mistake for ' insinuatus. ' Just above 
Lactantius says, 'Descendens itaque de caelo sanctus ille spiritus dei sanctam virginem 
cujus utero se insinuaret elegit.' Harnack points out, by reference to Ronsch, Itala 
u. Vulgata p. 371 that the word infinnatus is only used of sick people in the time of 
Lactantius. The Ode expressly denies sickness to the Virgin. For further sugges- 
tions see notes to text and translation. 

2 We shall show later that there is some probability that Lactantius has been 
influenced by our fourth Ode in a passage of Div, Inst, iv. 27. 

o. s. ^ 



lO INTRODUCTION 

and that there was current not only a book of Odes and Psalms 
but also a book of Psalms and Odes\ 

And aow let us pass on to a more interesting question, the 
^, „, \ existence of extracts from the Odes of Solomon in 

The Odes and . , „ . 

the pistis that cuHous Gnostic book, preserved in the Coptic 

Sophia. ^^^ ^^j.g gxactly, Thebaic) language, and known 

as the Pistis Sophia. These extracts will be important, not 
only because they give us, in the form of a version, a good deal 
of matter that coincides with what we have recovered from the 
Syriac, but because they present this matter at an earlier time 
than that of Lactantius, from whom our first quotation was made, 
and the writer who made these quotations in the latter part of 
the third century was not only quoting from the Odes of Solomon, 
but from those Odes as forming a part of his accepted Biblical 
text. We shall endeavour to make these points clear, and also 
to show that in the Biblical text from which the writer quoted 
the Odes of Solomon were preceded by the Psalms of Solomon. 
If we can establish these points, the antiquity of the Odes will 
be made out, for it is on the one hand clear that they are 
traditional companions of the Psalms of Solomon for a con- 
siderable length of time and on the other hand it is quite 
improbable that a book written, say, as late as the end of the 
second century, should be a part of the accepted Egyptian 
canon in the latter part of the third century^. To get into the 
canon at all, in any of the great centres of Christian life, a 
book must have a measure of antiquity on its side : those 
books which secured such canonicity, Clement's Epistle, or 
Barnabas' Epistle or the Shepherd of Hermas, obtained their 
position by the presumption of antiquity, and even then were 
not easily rooted in the positions that they acquired, as the history 
of the Canon will show. Let us, then, try to establish the points 
to which we have referred above : and first with regard to the 
date of the Pistis Sophia from which the extracts have been 
made. 

The best investigation into the Pistis Sophia is the one 

• Note that the five apocryphal Psalms published by Wright from the Syriac in 
Proc. S. Bibl. Arch, for 1887 have nothing to do with our collection. 

^ [Harnack puts the point equally strongly: Die Oden Salomos p. g: ' dass iro-end 
eine Provinzialkirche ein nach der Mitte des j. Jahrhunderts entstandenes Schriftsttick 
in das A.T. aufgenommen hat, ist ganz unwahrscheinlich.'] 



THE ODES AND THE PISTIS SOPHIA II 

made by Harnack in Bd vii. of his Texte u. Untersuchnngen 
in 1891. His treatise is divided into five sections : (i) the 
relation of the Pistis Sophia to the N.T. ; (ii) the relation of the 
Pistis Sophia to the O.T. ; (iii) the biblical exegesis of the 
author; (iv) its general Christian and catholic elements; and 
(v) a discussion of the character, origin, time and place of 
production of the work in question. Under this last head 
Harnack comes to the conclusion that the book is of Egyptian 
origin, and that it was written in the second half of the third 
century ; that its Gnosticism is Ophite in character, and betrays 
an origin in a Syrian rather than an Egyptian school ; i.e., it is 
an imported Gnosticism developed on Egyptian soil, and that 
the actual school from which it emanated can be detected from 
allusions made by Epiphanius in his treatise on Heresies. He 
tells us of certain Gnostics who had a Gospel according to 
Philip, from which he makes a quotation which is quite in the 
manner of the Pistis Sophia, in which Philip appears as the 
principal scribe of the discourses ; they had also inter alia, books 
called the Longer and Shorter Questions of Mary : and as a 
large part of the Pistis Sophia is taken up with questions 
addressed to Jesus by Mary Magdalene and her women friends, 
it is natural to regard at least a part of the Pistis Sophia (as we 
call it) as coinciding with the books spoken of by Epiphanius. 
But since Epiphanius gives us an extract from the Longer 
Questions which cannot be identified with the Pistis Sophia 
(it is in fact, to judge from the extract, an obscene book, though 
it has many points of contact with the Pistis Sophia, which 
definitely contradicts its obscenity), we are led to the conclusion 
that the Pistis Sophia is identical, either wholly or in part, with 
the Shorter Questions of Mary. 

In discussing these Gnostic heretics, Epiphanius tells us that 
in his early youth he came under their influence in Egypt, and 
that he was mercifully preserved from entanglement with them. 
He read their books, understood the sense of them, and then, 
like the virtuous Joseph from the house of Potiphar, he made 
his escape from their seductions and denounced the sect to the 
bishops of the province, and had the heretics expelled from the 
city in which he had met them. (See Epiphanius, Haer. 26, 
c. 17, 18.) 

We thus succeed in locating in Egypt a group, or rather two 



12 INTRODUCTION 

related groups of heretics, who may be described as Ophites or 
as Sethites (Epiphanius uses several names to describe the 
same groups) ; to one of these bands of Egyptian heretics the 
Pistis Sophia may be referred : and we thus get a fairly accurate 
idea of the place, time and character of the people to whom the 
book must be referred. 

It must not be supposed that all of Harnack's arguments 
under these heads are valid. For instance on 

The Odes , , „ . . 

not Gnostic p. loi he shows that the Gnostic writer uses an 

and not Egyptian calendar, for he makes Tesus to be trans- 

Egyptian. °'^ ' . •' 

figured before His disciples on the 15th of the 

month Tybi, when the moon is full ; this suggests the use of 

an Egyptian calendar : and then he goes on to say that Egypt 

is also betrayed by the fact that the book quotes the Gnostic 

Odes of Solomon^, which are probably of Egyptian origin, and 

allude to the inundation of the Nile. It is instructive to enquire 

how the Odes of Solomon came to be suspected of Gnosticism, 

and of references to Egyptian events. 

Amongst the passages quoted by the Coptic writer from the 
Odes of Solomon there is one which can be identified at once 
with the sixth Ode in our collection ; it describes a great over- 
flow or inundation of the water of life, which has for its first 
objective point, if not its actual point of departure, the Temple 
at Jerusalem, and which flows out over all lands, bringing healing 
and strength. 

The Psalm is a very beautiful one, and thoroughly Christian. 
But because it happens to describe the breaking out of the 
waters by the Greek word diroppoia, which the Coptic has care- 
fully transliterated, and because this is a favourite word in the 
Pistis Sophia to describe a Gnostic Emanation, it has been 
assumed that the Ode was Gnostic and that the illustration of 
the efflux was borrowed from the rising waters of the Nile. 
In support of this it may be urged that the waters were fought 
by a professional class of water-restrainers, and that those who 

1 [As soon as Harnack came to the knowledge of the complete collection of Odes 
he withdrew the Gnostic epithet : see p. 103 note 2. 'Haretisch-Gnostisches ist auch 
nicht zu finden. Friiher, als man nur fiinf kannte und diese in der Beleuchtung der 
Pistis Sophia, habe ich, wenn auch nicht ohne Bedenken, an Gnostisches gedacht. 
Allein, wie auch Harris richtig gesehen hat — die voUstandige Sammlung zeigt, dass 
der Verfasser nicht zu den Gnostikein gerechnet werden kann (oder nur so, wie auch 
Johannes zu ihnen gehort). '] 



THE ODES NOT GNOSTIC 13 

drank of them were, according to the Coptic, a people who lived 
on the dry sand. It might, therefore, be maintained that this 
language suited Egypt better than Palestine. It is difficult, 
however, to see how Jerusalem comes in, if the scenery of the 
Ode is Egyptian, and it would have been better to express the 
matter more cautiously, as was done by Ryle and James in 
their first attempt on the problem of the Odes. Their lan- 
guage was as follows^: 'Ode iii. {i.e. the third of the quoted 
Coptic Odes) is also Christian, and the employment of the term 
diToppoia seems to stamp it as Gnostic. But we cannot see that 
there is anything unmistakably Gnostic in the doctrine. The 
imagery employed is that of Ezek. xlvii.^ and of our Lord's 
words concerning the living water : and , the thing described 
appears to be the preaching of the Gospel, which no human 
effort can avail to hinder, and which brings life and health to 
a thirsty heathen world. If our theory of these Odes is correct, 
we have here a hymn of the second century at latest, and one 
filled with Johannine phraseology and ideas.' 

Thus far Ryle and James ; and I think we must say that 
their judgment is a sound one. There is no reason to take 
diroppoia in a Gnostic sense, nor do the remaining Psalms of 
our collection encourage the belief in a Gnostic origin : they are 
as Gnostic as the New Testament, no more and no less. Of 
course I do not mean that the author of the Pistis Sophia will 
take this colourless view of diroppoia. His business is to write 
a book dealing with Gnostic philosophy, and with the Effluxes 
and Emanations that cause the different strata of the spiritual 
world : so he will naturally employ the word diroppoia in his own 
sense, and will build a castle of cloudy words upon it. But we 
have no reason to follow him in any such architecture nor even to 
accept his foundation. Consequently we do not regard Harnack's 
case as made out with regard to the Gnostic character of the 
Odes of Solomon. If Gnostics could write such beautiful praises 
of God as we have in our recovered volume, we can only say 
' Would God all the Lord's people were Gnostics ! ' But this 
they never were nor ever can be in the Valentinian, or Ophite 
or Sethian sense. With this deduction from the argument, 

1 I.e. p. 1 60. 

^ [This should not be so strongly stated : we shall see later that the real parallel is 
with the 35th chapter of Isaiah.] 



14 INTRODUCTION 

Harnack's general inferences from the Ode which we have been 
discussing are so just that we are tempted to examine his 
analysis a little. more closely. 

Let us, in view of the importance of the matters at issue, 
set down a translation of the sixth Ode" as it stands 

The sixth 

Ode not in Syriac, and see what Harnack says by way of 

^"°^''=-' interpretation. 

'As the hand moves over the harp, and the strings speak, 
so speaks in my members the Spirit of the Lord, and I speak 
by his love. For he destroys everything foreign, and every- 
thing that is bitter : thus it was from the beginning and will be 
to the end, that nothing should be His adversary, and nothing 
should stand up against Him. The Lord has multiplied the 
knowledge of Himself, and is zealous that those things should 
be known, which by His Grace have been given to us^ And 
the praise of His name He gave us : our spirits praise His holy 
Spirit. 

' For there went forth a stream and became a river great and 
broad : it flooded and broke up everything, and it brought 
[water] to the Temple : and the restrainers of the children of 
men were not able to restrain it, nor the arts of those whose 
business it is to restrain waters : for it spread over the face of 
the whole earth and filled everything ; and all the thirsty upon 
earth were given to drink of it : and thirst was relieved and 
quenched : for from the Most High was the draught given. 
Blessed then are the ministers of that draught who are entrusted 
with that water of His : they have assuaged the dry lips and 
the will that had fainted they have raised up : and souls that 
were near departing they have caught back from death ; limbs 
that had fallen they straightened and set up : they gave 
strength for their coming (?) and light to their eyes : for 
every one knew them in the Lord and they lived by the water 
of life for ever. Hallelujah.' 

The first thing that we notice when we transcribe the Ode is 
that the passage in the Pistis Sophia is only an extract ; nearly 
■half of the Ode has been neglected. Consequently the word 
airoppoia which is supposed to be the key to the character of 
the Psalm, is not in its opening sentence at all, but has been 

^ Cf. I Cor. ii. 12. 



THE ODES NOT GNOSTIC IS 

caught up by! the Gnostic writer out of the middle of it. It is 
certainly not the key-word. The "Psalmist (or Odist) is telling 
in very beautiful language the power of the Lord and the scope 
of His Gospel. There is nothing Gnostic about this living 
water : there is not, even, anything Ecclesiastic about it, though 
Harnack wished to interpret it of the water of Baptism^ : one 
might as well say the fourth chapter of John's Gospel was Gnostic 
and that when the Lord promised the Samaritan woman the water 
of life, he wanted to baptize her ! I submit that the interpretation 
of the Ode is affected (i) by regarding it in its entirety, (ii) by 
regarding it in connexion with the main body of the Odes : and 
that when this is done, the supposed Gnosticism of the Ode 
vanishes away. Harnack, in fact, did not positively commit 
himself on the point, and the greater part of his judgment is 
valid : thus on page 43 he says : 

' bas Lied ist ohne Zweifel christlichen Ursprungs und 
„. „. damit ist auch die christliche Herkunft der vier 

The Odes- 

probably ubrigeu Odcn, als zu einer Sammlung ,geh5rig, 

erwiesen.' I should not go quite so far, nor quite 
so fast as that. ' Ferner weist die Ode auf Agypten : denn 
offenbar hat der Verfasser das Bild der grossen Fluth von der 
Uberschwemmung des Nils genommen, der bis iiber die Hauser 
steigt, und das durstige Wustenland trankt' This, as I have 
said, is extremely doubtful : Harnack tries to make it easier by 
suggesting that i/ao? should be corrected to Xads, which would 
get rid of the Temple at Jerusalem, but it is not a necessary 
emendation. The Temple is, as we shall see elsewhere, very 
much in the field of view of the Odist. ' Endlich scheint mir 
auch der gnostische Ursprung sehr wahrscheinlich, wenn auch 
nicht sicher.' Here Harnack is wisely hesitant. 

Again on page 45 Harnack sums up the case for the five 
Odes incorporated in the Pistis Sophia : (i) that the composer 
found them in his collection of Old Testament writings ; 
(ii) that they are of Gnostic origin : but he adds at once that 
the Gnostic character does not stand out clearly, and that the 
Christian piety of the Ode is powerfully expressed and not 
discoloured by Gnostic language : a statement which is much 

1 [Harnack withdrew this interpretation in his complete study of the Odes. See 
p. 32. 'An die Taufe ist nicht zu denken !' Bernard, as we shall see, would retain 
and emphasise the baptismal allusion.] 



l6 INTRODUCTION 

strengthened when we read the Ode in its entirety and not 
merely the part excerpted in the Pistis Sophia. 

Further Harnack admits (p. 46) that if the Odes are Gnostic, 
their Gnosticism is separated by a deep gulf from that of the 
Pistis Sophia ; which is certainly a just statement : and that, since 
at the time of the composition of the Pistis Sophia the Odes 
must have been of considerable antiquity, we may perhaps refer 
them to the first half of the second century. With this I have 
little fault to find ; only I suggest that they may be 50 years 
earlier than Harnack's upper limit'. 

In order to understand more clearly what the writer of the 
Use of the Pistis SopMa has been doing with the matter that 

Odes in the he has borrowed from the Odes of Solomon, we 
IS js op la. jj^yg^ |.j.y ^q ggj- ^ bctter understanding of the 
Gnostic book itself At first sight this is a very repellent task, 
for the book appears to be mere useless jargon. Harnack 
evidently thought as much when he first began to study it, for 
he says : 

' In der That kann man kaum etwas Verwirrteres und 
Ermiidenderes lesen als diese mit den Ausgeburten der gnosti- 
schen Phantasie bedeckten Blatter, die bei fliichtigerem Studium 
zum Zwecke der Verbreitung des systematischen Blodsinns 
geschrieben zu sein scheinen.' 

The impression that the writer is busied with the propaga- 
tion of systematic imbecility is certainly the result of a cursory 
or preliminary study ; but there is method in the madness and 
meaning in the aberration, and after a while one begins to pick 
up threads of continuity and to see what the writer is aiming at. 
And then the underlying Christianity begins to assert itself 
through its Gnostic superincumbent weight. Let us see if we 
can get at the writer's argument. 

Jesus is sitting with His disciples, male and female, on the 
Mount of Olives. It is the twelfth year after the Resurrection ; for 

1 The same arguments are repeated by Harnack in his Chronologie der altchrist. 
Literatur, ii. 193, where he discusses the date of the Pistis Sophia and the related 
Gnostic writings in the Codex Brucianus. Here again he dates the Pistis Sophia in 
the second half of the third century, following the lines of his previous investigation. 
He remarks again on the use of the Odes of Solomon as an ancient book ranking 
with the Old Testament, but says they are of Gnostic origin : ' Die fiinf Oden 
Salomos, die das Euch neben den alt-testamentlichen Psalmen zitiert, sind selbst 
gnostischen Ursprungs, und werden doch wie alte Urkunden behandelt. Wir haben 
hier also einen Gnostizismus, der tiber einem alteren auferbaut ist. ' 



THE ODES AND THE PISTIS SOPHIA 17 

eleven years Jesus has been teaching His disciples the mysteries 
of the Kingdom of God : at the end of that time He has ascended 
to the place of the Prime Mystery (which is the Gnostic expres- 
sion for the Supreme God) ; this ascension took place while 
they were sitting with Him on the Mount of Olives. He was 
suddenly transfigured before them. A Light-Power, or Glory of 
the Supreme Being, descends from the twenty-fourth or highest 
mystery and surrounds Jesus with splendour. The disciples 
were amazed and terrified at the sight. While they gazed on 
Him, Jesus ascended into Heaven. After a while Jesus, out of 
compassion for their fears, for they thought the end of all things 
was at hand, descended again and appeared to the disciples. 
He begins to teach them further the secrets of the Kingdom. 
He explains to them their own miraculous births, the miraculous 
birth of John the Baptist, and His own incarnation. He tells 
them the story of His ascent through the various heavens and 
the orders of spiritual beings, ' thrones, dominations, princedoms, 
virtues, powers.' They proceed to interrogate Him on various 
points. The company consists of Peter, John, Andrew, Philip, 
Thomas, Matthew, James, Bartholomew and Simon the Kanaan- 
ite : Mary the Magdalene and Mary the Mother of Jesus, Martha 
and Salome are all mentioned. The chief place is given to the 
enquiring women, especially to Mary Magdalene, the lowest place 
to Simon Peter. Between Mary Magdalene and Peter there is 
something like a feud. Peter complains that the women talk 
too much and that the men don't get a chance : and Mary 
complains that Peter hates our sex and wants to suppress us. 
Jesus mediates gently between them : advises Mary to make 
place for the brethren ; but when the dispute breaks out again, 
Jesus definitely takes the side of the women, and Peter is sup- 
pressed \ The meaning of this is that there has been a conflict 
over the place of women in the ministry of the Church : it is 
even possible that the hostility of Peter may imply the attitude 
of the Roman Church towards the prophesying woman of the 
early centuries. At all events there has been an acute situation 

^ The crisis in the feud between the men and women will be found in P.S. i6i. 
' Progressa Maria dixit: mi domine, meus vovs est voepos omni tempore, ut progrediar 
omni vice : dicam solutionem verborum, quae dixit, dXXa timeo Petrum, quod aireiXu 
mihi et edit nostrum genus. Haec Se quum locuta esset, dixit ei primum /iucmj/jioj' : 
unumquemque qui impletus fuerit ircei/jiiaTt luminis, ut progressus proferat solutionem 
horum, quae dico, nuUus KioKvireiJ 

o. s. 3 



lo INTRODUCTION 

created, which has found its reflection in the Gnostic circles in 
which our book was produced. 

Jesus answers a number of enquiries as to the worlds through 
The sorrows which He has passed, and then we come to what is 
of Sophia. ^jjg kernel of the first part of the book, the account 

of the sorrows of Sophia, or, as she is called in the book, Pistis 
Sophia. Jesus relates how He found Sophia sitting below the 
thirteenth Aeon. She was mourning over her inability to rise 
further. Her path was blocked by fearful forms, named Trpo^oXal 
avOaSov'i or Emanations of the Self-willed. They and the rulers 
of the upper regions prohibit her advance and ascent. One of 
them had the face of a lion, half flame and half darkness. They 
chase poor Sophia back into Chaos. But in the midst of her 
affliction, she sees Jesus passing by, and to Him she addresses 
a series of Repentances and Hymns. Jesus relates these suc- 
cessively to His disciples. The method of the composition 
must now be carefully studied : we shall find the key in the 
lock. 

Sophia makes her penitence, let us say, from one of the 
canonical Psalms. But in using this, she carefully alters every 
possible term in a Gnostic sense : instead of God, she says 
Prime Mystery or Light of Truth ; instead of my adversaries, 
she says the Emanations of the Self-willed ; by a series of 
. substitutions of this kind she turns the Psalm 

Gnostic Tar- 

puTilso'hla '"^° ^ Gnostic Targum, in which you can only 
detect the original by the expressions which re- 
main unaltered and by the general tenor of the confession. 
When Jesus has reported to the disciples what Sophia has said. 
He turns to the disciples and asks, ' Who knows what Sophia 
said?' It is a game of guessing. Mary Magdalene or some 
other of the company springs forward, begs permission to speak, 
and then says, ' This is what your Light-Power (the Light-Power 
is a substitute for the Divine Name) prophesied through David 
in the 69th Psalm,' or whatever the portion of Scripture may be 
that has been selected for disguise. Jesus gives an approbation 
and a blessing to the successful guesser. Sometimes, to make 
the matter still clearer, the Gnostic Targum is gone over again in 
detail with the text and explained sentence by sentence, so that 
we have the matter treated three times over : viz. the LXX. text 
the Gnostic Targum, and the detailed commentary upon the 



GNOSTIC TARGUMS ON THE ODES 19 

text with the Targum. It is of the utmost importance that the 
method of the composition should be clearly grasped : if this is 
understood, the major part of the Pistis Sophia will become 
intelligible. To make this quite clear we will transcribe a short 
passage : here is an extract from one of the first prayers of 
repentance which Sophia utters' : 

Serva me propter dp-^ovra'i, qui oderunt me : nam tu scis 
afflictionem meam et cruciatum meum, et fractam meam vim, 
quam abstulerunt a me. Sunt coram te qui plantarunt me in 
haec mala omnia. X/sw iis icaTa voluntatem tuam. Vis mea 
prospicit e medio %aov? atque e medio tenebrarum. Exspectavi 
meam av^vyov, ut veniens pugnaret pro me, et baud venit. 
Atqu2 exspectaveram, ut veniens daret mihi robur, et hand 
repert eam. Et quum quaererem lucem, dederunt m.ihi cali- 
ginem : et quum quaererem meam vim, dederunt mihi vKrjv. 
Nunc igitur, lumen luminum, caliginem et vKrjv duxerunt super 
me TTpo/BoXao avdaSov;. Sunto iis insidiae et involvunto eas ; 
et retribuas iis, ut aKavSaXo^aia-iv, ne veniant in tottov sui 
avOaSovi;. Manento in tenebris, ne videant lucem. Contemplantor 
%aos omni tempore, neve intuentor in altitudinem. Adduc in eas 
suam vindictam et apt>rehendito eas tuum iudicium. 

Probably without the aid of the Virgin Mary, who in this 
case is the successful guesser, one could have identified the 
following verses of the 68th (69th) Psalm : 

19. €V6Ka T&v e')(dp53v fiov pvaai fie • 

20. cri) yap ycvco(TK€i,<; tov oveiBia-fiov fiov Koi Trjv ala-)(yvr]v 
fjbov Kal Trjv ivTpOTTrjv /xov. ivavnov aov Trdvrev oi 6\i^ovTe<; fj,e. 

21. oveiBicrfiov TrpoaeBo/crjcrev rj '^V)(rj fiov Kal TaXaiircoplav 
Kal vire/Meiva avXXvjrov/j.evov, Kal ovp^ VTrrjp^ev, Kal irapa- 
KuXovvra Kal ov'^ evpov. 

22. Kal 'iSiOKav et? to ^pwfid fiov ')(pXrjV, Kal el's rrjv Sii^av 
fiov eTTOTicrdv fie 6^o<;. 

23. yevrjdrfTW i] Tpdire^a avrwv evwiriov avTwv et? TrayiSa' 
Kal eh avrairoSotriv Kal et? aKavBaXop. 

24. aKOTKrdTjTcoaav 01 6(j)6aXfiol avTwv tov fir) ^Xeireiv Kal 
TOV vwTOV aiiTwv Std iravTo'; avyKafiyjrov. 

25. BK'xeov eV avTOv<! Trjv opyrjv aov. Kal 6 0vfi6<i t^? opyrji 
GOV KaTaXd^oi avTov<;. 

Now if we go over the Penitence of Sophia, with these texts 

' P. S. ed. Schwartze and Petermann, p. 50 of MS. 



20 INTRODUCTION 

from the Psalms, we shall easily pick up out of the Penitence the 
disjecta membra Psalmistae. 

I have italicized some of the words, which are either 
unchanged or almost unchanged. The rest, as I have said, 
is Gnostic Targum. 

The importance of the underlying equivalence of the 
Targum and text is evident. We are dealing with Biblical 
matter ; Psalm after Psalm is treated in this way, and some- 
times short passages of the Gospels are similarly treated. It is 
not even necessary that the discourse be limited to a single 
Targum. Sometimes two or three occur of short passages. 
For us, however, the important thing is that the Odes of 
Solomon are treated just like the Canonical Psalms, with which 
they stood in an equal honour in the Bible of the author of the 
Pistis Sophia. This position of unassailed honour and un- 
doubted confidence marks the antiquity and the prestige of 
the Odes of Solomon. And as there is no such thing as a 
Gnostic Bible, these Odes cannot be Gnostic Odes, as was at 
first surmised. 

It is clear, moreover, that in editing the portions of the Odes 
which occur in th-e Pistis Sophia we shall have to edit the 
Targums as well as the texts. We must print the excerpted 
matter in double form, and in cases where there is a detailed 
commentary, in triple form. And in this way we can finally 
make a Coptic apparatus to the Syriac text of the Odes. 

One curious result will be arrived at almost immediately. 
The second of the passages taken from the Odes 

The missing _ _, , r i 7-1 • 

first Ode of Solomou by the author of the Pistis Sophia is 

recovered. ^ ^ 

definitely stated to be from the nineteenth Ode. 
It does not find any place in our collection. Neither does it 
agree, except in its opening sentence, with its Targum. On 
the other hand the Targum does agree with the fifth of the 
Syriac Odes. It is easy to see what has happened. The 
Targum was made on the fifth Ode, but when the author 
came to transcribe the Ode on which he had been commenting, 
he took out of his Psalter another Ode with a similar opening. 
This must, then, be one of the missing Odes at the beginning of 
our book. And since it is numbered 19, it will be the first of 
our collection, and will have followed directly on the eighteen 
extant Psalms of Solomon. The Gnostic author had, therefore, 



RECOVERY OF FIRST ODE 21 

both the Psalms and the Odes in his Bible ; and the Psalms 
stood before the Odes, and not as in our MS. and perhaps in 
Lactantius' Bible, after the Odes : this is an important dis- 
covery, and the study of the text with its Targum has led to 
the recovery of part of the missing matter at the beginning of 
our MS. 

To make this clear I transcribe the Targum side by side 
with the Syriac text, in order to show their coincidence: 

The Hymn of Sophia as contained 

in the Gnostic Targum of 

the Pistis Sophia, 115, 116. The Syriac Odes of Solomon, 

Incepit v/AV€V€iv vis dXiKpivrp Ode 5, ad fin. 

luminis, quae in a-ofj^ia. "Y/xvivovcra For my hope is upon the Lord, 

8c meae vi luminis, quae est corona and I will not fear : and because 

eius capiti, cecinit v/tvov 8c dicens, the Lord is my salvation, I will 

Lumen est corona meo capiti et not fear : and he is a garland on 

haud ero absque ea, ut ne privent my head, and I shall not be moved: 

me 7rpb/3oXai au6a8ovs et, quum Even if everything should be 

motaefuerintvXaiomnes,egoh€ haud shaken, I stand firm, and if all 

movebor, et quum perierint meae things visible should perish, I 

v\ai omnes, ut maneant in chao, shall not die: because the Lord 

quas videbunt irpoPoXat avda8ovi, is with me and I am with Him. 

ego Se haud peribo, quod lumen est Hallelujah. 
mecum, atque etiam ego ero cum 
lumine. 

Remembering the method of composition of the Targum, 
there can be no doubt that it is the fifth Ode which is being 
commented on. It is equally clear that the Ode which is set as 
the text to the Targum and which is introduced as the 19th 
Ode of Solomon does not coincide with it. 

It runs as follows' : 

Dominus super caput meum sicut corona, neque ero absque 
eo (ea). Plexerunt mihi coronam veritatis, et ramos in me 
germinare fecit. Nam non similis est coronae aridae quae non 
germinat ; sed vivis super caput meum, et germinasti super 
caput meum : fructus tui pleni et perfecti sunt, pleni salute tua. 

Clearly this is not the right Psalm, except as regards the 

opening sentence. Probably the mistake arose in the first 

instance with the Targumist who copied a line out of a wrong 

Ode, and thus made the way for copying the whole Ode from a 

' Schmidt's rendering in Texte u. Untersuch. vii. 1. yj. 



22 INTRODUCTION 

wrong place. The inference is that we have recovered the 
missing first Ode. 

It is not uncommon in our book of Odes for the openings to 
be similar or to be repeated. The most striking example will 
be the short 27th Ode, which appears again almost bodily at the 
beginning of the 42nd Ode. The coincidences are important, 
as suggesting the same hand at different parts of the book. 

As our object is not so much the interpretation of the Pistis 
The Odes in Sopkia, as the elucidation of the Syriac Odes, we 
sTphiatoi- ™^^^ collect the matter which is quoted from the 
lected. Odes in the Pistis Sophia, in order that the texts may 

be compared. It will be convenient to do this in one place, rather 
than under the heading of the separate Psalms that may be 
quoted. For the text of the Odes, we have two translations, 
that of Schwartze-Petermann, and that which is emended from 
the original translation (Woide-Miinter) by Schmidt, and is 
given in Harnack's Texte u. Untersjichungen, Bd vii. We may 
quote these as S.-P. and W.-M.-S. . We print these translations 
side by side. It is to be observed that Schmidt did not revise 
the Gnostic Targums when correcting the text of the Odes for 
Harnack, no doubt because their importance was not sufficiently 
recognized. But he went on to publish a complete translation 
into German of the Pistis Sophia, as well as of other Gnostic 
books preserved in Coptic. We shall have to refer to this 
enlarged and emended translation, but I do not think it 
necessary to give the German text of the quoted and com- 
mented Odes in fulP- [A complete German revision has been 
made by Schmidt for Harnack's edition, and will be found pp. 
14 — 20.] 

ODE I. 
The text is introduced as follows : 

Respondens Se Maria, mater Jesu, dixit : Mi domine, tua vis 
luminis iirpoipTjTevae de his verbis olim per Salomonem in eius 
decima nona ode et dixit : 

' Thei'e has also been a French edition by Amelineau, which has been employed 
by Mead in his English edition of the Piiits Sofhia. But as Amelineau is 
impossible in his paleography, and, I believe, an unsafe guide in other respects, I do 
not refer to him. I am not engaged upon the Pistis Sophia, except indirectly. 

Schmidt's German edition appeared in 1905 under the auspices of the Prussian 
Academy of Sciences, with the title KopHsch-Gnostische Schi-iften. 



THE ODES IN THE PISTIS SOPHIA 



S.-P. p. Ii6. 
Dominus super meum caput 
sicut corona, neque eroabsque eo. 
Plexerunt mihi coronam dXrjdeias. 
Et fecit tuos K\a8ov5 germinare 
in me, quod non tulit coronam 
aridam, baud germinantem, dkXa 
vivis super meum caput et proger- 
minas super me : tui Kapiroi pleni 
sunt et perfecti, pleni sunt tua 
salute. 



W.-M.-S. pp. 37, 38. 
Dominus super caput meum 
sicut corona, neque ero absque eo 
(ea). ' Plexerunt mihi coronam 
veritatis, et ramos tuos in me 
germinare fecit. Nam non similis 
est coronae aridae, quae non ger- 
minat, sed vivis super caput meum, 
et germinasti super caput meum : 
fructus tui pleni et perfecti sunt, 
pleni salute tua. 



ODE s. 

The Gnostic Targum on the closing verses of this Ode has 
been already given : I repeat it- for completeness below : the 
Targum on the rest of the Ode, and the text corresponding to it, 
are also found in the Pistis Sophia, as indicated. The text is 
introduced as follows : 

Factum Se est, quum Jesus finisset dicere haec verba suis 
IJi,a9r)Tat,<;, progressa Salome dixit : mi domine, mea vis dvayica^ei, 
me ad dicendam solutionem verborum, quae dixit irtcrTK cro(f>ia. 
Tua vis €'n-po<j>r)Teva-€v olim per Salomonem dicens : 

S.-P. p. 114. W.-M.-S. p. 37. 

Manifestabo me tibi, domine, Gratias tibi agam, quia tu es 

quod tu es meus deus. Ne sine me, deus meus. Ne relinquas me, 



domine, amplius, quod tu es mea 
JAttis : dedisti mihi meum ius gratis 
[P tuum indicium] et servor a te : 
labuntor persequentes me, neve 
vidento me. Nubes caliginis ob- 
tegito eorum oculos atque nebula 
a.epo<;, esto caligo iis, neve vidento 
diem, ut ne prehendant me : esto 
impotens eorum consilium, et quae 
deliberarunt, veniunto in eos: me- 
ditati sunt consilium neve esto [P 
et non factum est] iis. vicerunt 
[P et vicerunt] eos validi, et quae 
pararunt collapsa sunt infra eos. 
Est mea eXTns in domino, et haud 
timebo, quod tu es meus deus, 



domine, quia tu es spes mea. 
Dedisti mihi indicium gratis, et 
liberatus sum a te. Cadant per- 
sequentes me, et non videant me. 
Nubes fumi tegat oculos eorum et 
nebula aeris obtenebret eos, neve 
videant diem, ne prehendant me : 
consilium eorum fiat inefficax, et 
quae consultarunt, veniant super 
eos : meditati sunt consilium, neve 
succedat illis. Et vicerunt eos 
potentes^ et quae praeparaverant 
malitiose, descenderunt in eos. 
Spes mea est in domino, et non 
timebo, quia tu es deus meus, 
servator meus. 



meus cru)T7]p. 

1 Schmidt, ' Und sie sind besiegt, obwohl sie machtig sind.' 



24 INTRODUCTION 

ODE s. 

The Gnostic Targum. S.-P. p. 113. 

Cecinit vfxvov et clamavit sursum ad me dicens : vfivevaw 
sursum ad te, lumen, quod volo venire ad te, vfiveva-oo tibi, lumen, 
nam tu es metis servator. Ne sine me in chao, libera me, lumen 
altitudinis, nam tu es, cui vfivevo). Misisti mihi tuum lumen a te 
et servasti me. Duxisti me in Totrovi superiores chaus. Colla- 
buntor [P delabuntor\ igitur in roirovi inferiores chaus irpo^oXai 
av6ahov<i, quae persequuntur me, neve veniunto in tottov; superiores 
tit videant me. Et magna caligo obtegito eas, et venito iis obscura 
caligo ; neve vidento me in lumine tuae vis, quam misisti mihi ad 
servandam me : ut ne prehendant iterum me ; et eorum consilium 
quod cxcogitarunt ad auferendam meam vim, ne fiat illis, et sicut 
[P KaTa modum, quo] dixerunt mihi, auferre meum lumen mihi, 
aufer suum quoque loco mei ; et dixerunt auferre meum lumen 
totum, neque poterant auferre id, quod tua vis luminis est mecum 
propterea quod consilium ceperunt sine tuo statute, lumen, 
propter hoc non potuere auferre lumen meum, quod eirKnevcra 
lumini, non timebo, et lumen est mens servator, neque timebo. 

S.-P. IIS, 116. 

'Tfivevovcra Se meae vi luminis, quae est corona eius capiti, 
cecinit vfivov Be dicens. Lumen est corona meo capiti, et hand ero 
absque ea^, ut ne privent me -irpo^oKai, avdaBov<; et, quuin inotae 
fuerint vXat, omnes, ego Se haud movebor, et quum perierint meae 
vkai omnes, ut maneant in chao, quas videbunt irpo^oKai, av6ahov<i 
ego Se haud peribo, quod lumen est mecum, atque etiam ego ero ctim 
lumine. 

ODE 6. 

The text of this Ode is introduced as follows : 

Progressus Petrus dixit : mi domine, de solutione verborum 
quae dixisti, tua vis luminis eTrpo(j>rirevae olim per Salomonem 
in eius a>Sat<;. 

S.-P. 131. W.-M.-S. Ic. p. 38. 

Egressa diroppoia facta est Egressa est emanatio et facta 

magnum flumen latum : attraxit est magnum flumen dilatatum. 
COS omnes, et conversam super Attraxit eos omnes et conversa est 
' Schmidt, 'und nicht werde ich von ihm weichen.' 



THE ODES IN THE PISTIS SOPHIA 



25 



templum haud potuerunt capere 
in clausis et in locis aedificatis, 
neque potuerunt capere earn rexvai 
capientium illos. Duxerunt earn 
super terram totam, atque pre- 
hendit eos omnes. Biberunt ver- 
santes super arenam aridam. 
Eorum sitis soluta est et ex- 
stincta, quum dedissent iis potum 
ab excelso. MaKupioi sunt SiaKovot 
potus illius, quibus concredita est 
aqua domini. Converterunt labia 
arida, sumserunt vigorem animi 
[P in me] hi, qui erant soluti : 
prehenderunt (i.e. confirmarunt) 
i/ruxo-s, eicientes halitum, ut ne 
morerentur : erexerunt fieXr] col- 
lapsa : dederunt robur suae Trap- 
p-Tjo-ia, atque dederunt lucem suis 
oculis, quod isti omnes cognovere 
se in domino, atque servati sunt 
aqua vitae usque ad aeternum. 



super templum'. Non potuerunt 
earn capere in locis munitis et 
aedificatis : neque potuerunt earn 
capere artes eorum qui inter- 
cipiunt (aquas). Duxerunt^ earn 
super omnem terram, et ipsa 
comprehendit eos omnes. Bib- 
erunt qui habitabant in arena 
arida : sitis eorum soluta est et 
exstincta, cum daretur illis potus 
ab Altissimo. Beati sunt diaconi 
potus illius, quibus credita est 
aqua domini. Converterunt labia, 
quae arida erant, accipiebant 
gaudium cordis, qui soluti erant : 
comprehenderunt animas, halitum 
inmittentes, ne morerentur. Re- 
stituerunt membra quae cecide- 
rant, dederunt robur parrhesiae 
eorum, et lucem oculis eorum. 
Nam omnes illi se cognoverunt in 
domino et salvati sunt per aquam 
vitae aeternam''. 



ODE 6. 

Tke Gnostic Targum. S.-P. pp. 128 — 130. 

Ego igitur et altera vis, exiens a me, necnon -if^x^ quam 
accepi a Sabaothe a'-^aOw, venerunt ducentes se invicem, factae 
S2tnt d-TToppota una luminis, existens lumen quam maxima. 
Vocavi Gabrielem desuper ab alwcnv atque etiam Michaelem 
per KeXevcriv mei patris, primi fivcrTr]piov introspicientis, dedi 
eis a-rroppoiav luminis, feci eos descendere in chaos, ut ^orjdma-i, 
■n-iarei ao^ia et uti ferrent vires luminis, quas abstulerunt ab ea 
•jrpo^okai avdahovi, ut auferrent eas ab illis et darent TnaTei 
(TO(f)ia ; et tempore, quo duxerunt airoppoiav luminis desuper in 
chaos, resplenduit quam maxime in chao toto et dilatata est m 
eius [P eorum] joiroi'i omnibus ; et quum vidissent magnum 
lumen diroppoi,a<; illius irpo^oXai av6a8ov<;, timuerunt super se 
invicem, atque diroppoia ilia extraxit iis vires omnes luminis, 
quas abstulerunt a inareb a-o(f>ia neque eToXixTjaav irpo^oXai, 

1 Schmidt, 'gegen den Tempel.' ^ Schmidt, 'er wurde...gefuhrt.' 
^ Sqhmidtj'Wasser ewigen Lebens.' 

o. s. 4 



26 INTRODUCTION 

avdahovi prehendere dtroppoiav luminis illius in chao tenebrarum, 
neque prehenderuM earn reyyv ctvOaBov; dominantis in irpo^oXa^. 
Et Gabriel et Michael attulerunt airoppoiav luminis in corpus uXi?? 
TTto-Tecu? a-ocjjia'; et iniecerunt in earn lumina eius omnia, quam 
[P quae] abstulerunt ab ea, atque accepit lumen totum aafia 
v\r}^ [P + eius] : atque etiam acceperunt lumen eius vires 
omnes, quae in ea, hae quae acceperunt suum lumen et cessarunt 
indigere luminis ; nam acceperunt suum lumen, quod abstulerunt 
ab iis, propterea quod dederiint lumen Us a me. Et Michael et 
Gabriel, qui BiijKovrjaav mihi, duxerunt d-rroppotav luminis in 
chaos daturam iis /jivarripia luminis : kis concredita est a-rroppoia 
luminis : hanc, quam dedi iis, intuli in chaos. Et Michael et 
Gabriel non sumserunt quidquam luminis sibi in luminibus 
7n(TT€Q)<: a-o(fiia^, quae abstulerunt a Trpo^oXat,'; avOaBov<;. Factum 
igitur est, quum diroppoia luminis intulisset in Tnanv aocpiav suas 
vires omnes luminis, quas abstulerunt [P abstulit s. abstulerat] 
a 7rpo/3oXat9 av6aSov^ facta est lux tota, atque etiam vires 
luminis, quae sunt in Trio-ret crocfiia, quas haud abstulerunt 
TTpo^oXau avOaSov;, hilares redditae sunt iterum et impletae 
sunt luminis, et lumina, quae iniecerunt in inaTiv a-o<piav, vivifi- 
carunt aco/j^a eius vX???, in qua nullum lumen, Aaec quae peritura 
est aut haec quae perit, et constituerunt eius vires omnes, quae 
erant solvendae, et dederunt iis vim luminis^ Factae sunt iterum, 
sicut erant ab initio. Atque etiam exaltatae sunt in aladfjiret 
luminis, et vires omnes luminis ao^ia<; cogtiovere se invicem per 
aiToppoiav luminis, et servatae sunt a lumine diToppoia<i illius. 

I have indicated some of the points where the Ode crops 
out : the broad stream of water has been replaced by an diroppoia 
of light, and this makes it difficult to follow the sequence of the 
Ode, satisfied thirst having been replaced by illumination. But 
the detailed commentary which follows will make it all clear. 

ODE 6. 

The detailed Commentary. S.-P. 131 135. 

Peter explains the meaning of a prophecy which the vis 
luminis had formerly made through Solomon. 

Audi igitur, mi domine, proferam verbum in irappr^aia Kara 
modum quo tua vis lirpo^r^Tivas per Salomonem : " d-^oppoia 
1 Schmidt, 'und sie nahmen sich eine Lichtkraft u.s.w,' 



THE ODES IN THE PISTIS SOPHIA 27 

egressa facta est magnimi fliimen latum" quod est drroppoia 
luminis dilatata est in chao, in roTroc<; omnibus Trpo/SoXcov avOa- 
Bov<; ; atque verbum iterum, quod tua vis dixit per Salomonem, 
" attraxit eos omnes, duxit eos super templum" quod est hoc, 
attraxit vires omnes luminis a 7r/3o/3oXat9 av6aBov<; quas abstule- 
runt in [a] Tncnei aocpia, et iniecit eas in tticttcv a-ojaav altera 
vice ; atque verbum rursus, quod tua vis dixit, " haud potuerunt 
capere earn \locd\ clansa neque loca aedijicatal' quod hoc est : 
wpo^oKat, avdaSovf haud potuerunt prehendere diroppoiav luminis 
in septis tenebrarum: chaus, atque verbum iterum, quod dixit : 
-' diixeritnt earn} super terram omnem, et implevit res omnes" quod 
hoc est : quum Gabriel et Michael duxissent eam [P earn super] 
(xajxa TncTTeo)'; crocjiLa'i, intulit in eam lumina omnia, quae 
abstulerunt ab ea Trpo/SoXai avOa^ovj atque splenduit [pr. factum 
est lumen] awfia eius vXr}'^ ; atque verbum, quod dixit : " biberunt 
versantes in arena arida" quod est, acceperunt lumen quae sunt 
omnia in Trto-ret ao^ia quorum lumen abstulerunt {i.e. abstulerant) 
prius^ {i.e. antehac); atque verbum quod dixit " sitis eorum 
soluta est et exstincta" quod hoc est : eius vires cessarunt 
indigere luminis, quod abstulerunt [P om. quod abstulerunt], 
quoniam dederunt {i.e. datum est) iis lumen [P + suum], quod 
abstulerunt ab iis. Atque iterum Kwra modum [P + quoque] quo 
dixit tua vis, " dederunt iis potum ^ ab excelso," quod hoc est : 
dederunt Uimen iis ex diroppoi.a luminis, quae exiit a me, primo 
fjLvcTTrjpia), et Kara modum, quo dixit tua vis : " fiaKapioi, sunt 
hiaKovoi potus illius" quod est verbum, quod dixisti : Michael et 
Gabriel, 8iaKovrjaavTe<;, duxerunt d-n-oppoiav luminis in chaos, 
atque etiam duxerunt eam sursum. Dabunt iis fivaTrjpia lumi- 
nis altitudinis, quibus concredita estcmoppoia luminis, atque etiam 
Kara modum, quo dixit tua vis: ^' verterunt labia arida," quod 
hoc est : Gabriel et Michael haud sumserunt sibi e luminibus Trto-- 
reea? cro^tay, quae eripuerunt Trpo0o\ai<; avdaBov;, aXXa iniecerunt 
ea in iricrTiv a-o(j)iav; atque iterum verbum, quod dixit: '' acceperunt 
vigorem*" in me qui sunt soluti" quod est hoc : aliae vires omnes 
TTiaTeax; aoipLa^, quas haud abstulerunt irpo^oXai avdaSov<;, valde 
praeditae sunt vigore' et impletae lumine a suo socio lumine, 
quod iniecerunt ea in illas. Et verbum, quod tua vis dixit : 

1 Schmidt, 'er wurde...gefuhrt.' ^ Schmidt, 'frliher genommen war.' 

3 Schmidt, 'es wurde...gegeben.' '' Schmidt, ' Herzensfreude. ' 

^ Schmidt, ' sind sehr frohlich geworden. ' 



28 INTRODUCTION 

" vivificarunt •v/ru%a9 eiicientes halitum, ut ne morerentur'' quod hoc 
est : quum iniecissent lumina in Trta-nv aocpiav vivificarunt crw/ta 
eius i/Xt?? a quo lumina sua abstulere prius, hoc, quod erat 
periturum. Atque iterum verbum, quod tua vis dixit : " con- 
stituerunt fieXr] quae collapsa sunt, aut ut ne collaberentur" quod 
hoc est : quum intulissent in cam eius lumina, constituere {i.e. 
erexere) eius vires omnes, quae erant dissolvendae ; atque etiam 
Ka-ra modum, quo tua vis luminis dixit : " dederunt robur eariim 
irapprjaia " ; quod hoc est : receperunt iterum illorum lumen 
atque factae sunt, sicut fuerunt prius : atque etiam verbum, 
quod dixit " dederunt lumen eomm oculis" quod hoc est : ac- 
ceperunt aladtja-tv in lumine et cognoverunt diroppotav luminis, 
quod pertineat ad altitudinem. Atque etiam verbum, quod 
dixit : " isti omnes cognoverunt se in domino" quod hoc est : vires 
omnes TrtcrTeo)? a-otpiwi cognovere se invicem per airoppoiav 
luminis : atque etiam verbum, quod dix.it," servati stmt aqua vitae 
tisque ad aeternum^" quod hoc est : servatae sunt per diroppoiav 
luminis totius : atque verbum, quod dixit : " attraxit eos omnes 
d-noppoia luminis et attraxit eos super tempkim'^" quod est : quum 
cmoppoia luminis accepisset lumina omnia 7r4o-T6&)?o-o(^(a?,et quum 
eripuisset ea a Trpo^okaK avdaBov;, iniecit ea in Tnariv aro(j)iav, 
atque conversa est, exiit a chao, ^ascendit in perfectionem [P vel 
" super te "] quod tu es templum ^ Haec est solutio verborum 
omnium, quae dixit tua vis luminis per oden Salomonis, Factum 
igitur, quum primum fiva-Trjpiov audisset haec verba, quae dixit 
Petrus, locutum est ei : evye, p.aKapt.o'i Petre, haec est solutio 
verborum quae dixerunt [i.e. dicta sunt]. 

ODE 22. 

This Ode is introduced as follows : 

Respondens he primum fivar'^piov dixit : Ke\evco tibi, Mathaee, 
ut proferas solutionem vp-vov, quern dixit TricrTi<} ao<f>t.a. Respon- 
dens Se Mathaeus dixit : de solutione vfivov quem dixit Trto-rt? 
cro(f>ia tua vis luminis eTrpo(j)'r}Tevaev olim in aiBrj Salomonis : 

S.-P. pp. 155, 156- W.-M.-S. p. 39. 

Qui deduxit me in locis ex- Is, qui duxit me deorsum e 

celsis super caelum, et duxit me locis altis, caelestibus, et duxit me 

' Schmidt, 'Wasser ewigen Lebens.' 

'' Schmidt, 'riss alles an sich, und zog (?) es liber den Tempel.' 

■'~^ Schmidt, 'und kam Uber Dich, der Du der Tempel bist.' 



THE ODES IN THE PISTIS SOPHIA 



29 



sursum iri locis quae in funda- 
mento inferiori: qui abstulit ibi 
haec, quae in medio, et docuit me 
ea, qui dispersit meos inimicos, et 
meos dvriStKovs, qui dedit mihi 
i^ovaiav super vincula ad solvenda 
ea, qui cTrarafe serpentem cum 
septem capitibns meis manibus. 
Constituit me super eius radicem, 
ut evellerem eius o-Trcpfia atque tu 
eras mecum, adiuvans me, in omni 
loco circumdedit me tuum nomen. 
Dextra tua perdidit venenum 
huius, qui dicit malum. Tua 
manus stravit viam tuis ttio-tois. 
Redemisti eos e Ta<j)OL<; et trans- 
tulisti eos e mediis cadaveribus. 
Sumsisti ossa mortua, induisti iis 
(Tiofia et qui haud movent se, 
dedisti eis ivepysiav vitae. Via 
tua facta est perniciei expers, 
atque tua facie duxisti [P tua 
facies, Duxisti] tuum almva in 
perniciem, ut dissolverentur omnes 
et fierent novi, et uti tuum lumen 
sit duplicatum [P fundamentum] 
iis omnibus. Construxisti tuam 
opulentiam per eos et facti sunt 
habitaculum sanctum. 



in loca, quae in fundamento in- 
feriori. Is, qui abstulit ibi haec, 
quae in medio sunt, et docuit me 
ea. Is, qui dispersit inimicos 
meos et adversarios meos. Is, 
qui dedit mihi potestatem super 
vincula ad solvenda ea. Is qui 
percussit serpentem septem capita 
habentem manibus meis : con- 
stituit me super radicem eius, ut 
exstinguerem semen ejus. Et tu 
eras mecum, adsistens mihi. Omni 
in loco circumdedit me nomen 
tuum. Dextra tua perdidit -vene- 
num male loquentis. Manus tua 
planavit viam fidelibus tuis. Liber- 
asti eos e sepulcris et transtulisti 
eos e medio cadaverum. Accepis- 
ti ossa mortua, induisti iis corpus, 
et, qui non movent se, dedisti eis 
ivepyeiav vitae. Via tua facta est 
expers perniciei, et etiam facies 
tua : duxisti aeona tuum in per- 
niciem' ut dissolverentur omnes 
et renovarentur. ^Et ut lumen 
tuum duplicaretur iis omnibus^, 
superstruxisti divitias tuas super 
eos, effecti sunt habitaculum 
sanctum*. 



ODE 22. 

T/ze Gnostic Targum. S.-P. 153 — 155. 

Pergens he adhuc Tria-Ti'i ao(f>ia, v/jLvevcre rursum ad me 
dicens : " v/Mvevm sursum ad te hoc. Tuo statute eduxisti me ab 
Miovi excelso, qid supra caelum, et deduxisti me ad Toirovi in- 
feriores, atque etiam tuo statuto liberasti me e to-ttok inferioribus, 
et per te abstulisti vXtjv ibi, quae est in meis viribus luminis, et vidi 
earn, atque tu dispersisti z. me mpo^oKa-i avdaBov;, quae affligebant 
me et erant inimici mihi, atque dedisti mihi e^ovcriav ut solverer 

^ Schmidt, 'Du hast Deinen Aeon liber das Verderben gefiihrt.' 
^"^ Schmidt, ■' und Dein Licht ihnen alien Fundament sei.' 
2 Schmidt, 'Du hast Deinen Reichtum auf sie gebaut.' 



30 INTRODUCTION 

e vinadis irpo^oXoiv Adamae, et eTraTu^di serpentem bdsilisaim 
cum septem capitibus. Proiecisti [P eiecisti] eum meis manibus, 
et constituisti me super eius vKr\v. Perdidisti earn, ut ne awepfxa 
suum surgeret inde ad hoc tempore, atque hi es qui eras mecum, 
dans mihi vim in his omnibus, et tuum lumen circumdedit me in 
TOTtoK omnibus, et per te reddidisti Trpo^oKai omnes av6aSov<; 
impotentes, quod abstulisti vim sui luminis ab eis ef direxisti 
meam viam ad educendam me ex chao, et transtuhsti me e tenebris 
vXiKaK et abstuHsti meas vires omnes ab iis, 'quarum lumen 
abstulere'. Iniecisti in eas lumen purum, et meis (jbeKeaiv omni- 
bus, quibus nullum lumen, dedisti lumen purum ex lumine 
altitudinis, et direxisti viam iis, et lumen tuae faciei factum mihi 
est vita, pernicie vacua. Duxisti me sursum super chaos, locum 
(tottov) chaus et perniciei, nt dissolverentur omnes vXai, quae in 
eo, quae sunt in tottw illo, et uti fiant novae meae vires omnes 
tuo lumine, et ut tuuin lumen sit in iis omnibus. Posuisti lumen 
tuae diroppoia': in me. Facta sum lumen purgatum." Hie 
iterum est secundus vfji,vo<; quern dixit wio-tk ao<f)ia. 

ODE 22. 

Tke detailed Commentary. 

Matthew then goes on to show in detail the parallelism 
between the Ode of Solomon and the hymn of the Pistis Sophia. 

S.-P. pp. 156 — 160. 

Haec, igitur, mi domine, est solutio vfivov quern dixit Trto-rt? 
a-o(j)ia. Audi igitur, dicam eam ingenue. Verbum quod tua vis 
dixit per Salomonem : " qui deduxit me e locis excelsis quae super 
caelum, atque etiam duxisti me sursum in locis, quae in funda- 
mento inferiori," ipsum est verbum, quod dixit itlo-tk ao(f>ia : 
v/j,v€v(o sursum ad te hoc. Tuo statuto duxisti me ex hoc alavi 
excelso, qui super caelum, et duxisti me in tottov? inferiores, 
atque etiam servasti me tuo statuto, duxisti me sursum in roTrot? 
inferioribus. Et verbum, quod tua vis dixit per Salomonem : 
" qui abstulit ibi haec, quae in medio, et docuit me ea,'' ipsum est 
verbum, quod dixit Triam a-oijyia : atque etiam per te abstulisti - 
vXrjv quae in media mea vi, et vidi eam : atque etiam verbum, 

'~^ Schmidt, 'deren Licht genommen war.' 
2 Schmidt, 'hast. .. reinigen lassen.' 



THE ODES IN THE PISTIS SOPHIA 3 1 

quod tua vis dixit per Salomonem : " qui dispersit meos inimicos 
et meos dvTiSiKovi," ipsum est verbum, quod dixit Tna-Tif a-o(l>ia : 
et tu es, qui dispersisti a me ■7rpo^oXa<; omnes avdaSov; quae 
afiBigebant me, et quae erant inimici mihi ; et verbum, quod 
tua vis dixit: " qui dedit mihi suam a-o^iav super vincula ad 
solvenda ea": ipsum est verbum, quod dixit ttio-tk a-ocfiia ; [+ et P] 
dedit milii suam (7o<l>iav ut solverer e vinculis irpo^oXav illarum ; 
et verbum, quod tua vis dixit : " qui eiraTa^e serpeniem cum. septem, 
capitibus meis manibus et constituit me super eius radicem,, ut 
evellerem eius cnrep^a" ipsum est verbum, quod dixit TriaTi<; 
(ro<j)ia : et eTraTa^av serpentem cum septem capitibus meis mani- 
bus et constituisti.me super eius vXrjv, perdidisti eum, ut ne eius 
airepfia surgeret inde ab hac hora ; et verbum, quod tua vis 
dixit : " et tu mecum eras, adiuvabas me" ipsum est verbum, 
quod dixit ttio-tk cro(f)ia : et tu eras mecum, dans vim mihi in 
his omnibus ; et verbum quod tua vis dixit : " et tuum nomen 
circumdedit me in omni loco" ipsum est verbum, quod dixit 
TTto-TW cro(j)ta : et tuum lumen circumdedit me in eorum locis 
omnibus; et verbum, quod tua vis dixit: " et tua dextera 
perdidit venemmi huius qui dicit malum" ipsum est verbum, 
quod dixit iruTTi'i aocjiia ; et per te factae sunt impotentes 
■n-po^oXai av6ahov<i, quod abstulisti lumen vis suae ab iis ; et 
verbum, quod tua vis dixit : " tua manus stravit viam tuis 
■Ki,<TTOi<i" ipsum est verbum, quod dixit inaTK ao<f)oa ; direxisti 
meam viam ad educendam me e chao, quod iiTiixrevffa tibi ; 
et verbum, quod tua vis dixit : " redemisti eos e Ta<f>oiii et 
transtulisti eos e mediis cadaveribus" ipsum est verbum, quod 
dixit TTtcTTf? ao<j)ia : et redemisti me e chao et transtulisti me 
e tenebris vXiKai<; quae ipsae sunt irpo^oXai caliginis, quae in 
chao, e quibus suum lumen abstulisti ; et verbum, quod tua vis 
dixit : " sumsisti ossa mortua, induisti eis aaifia, et hi, qui non 
■movent se, dedisti iis ivepr^eiav vitae" ipsum est verbum, quod dixit 
TTtcTTt? ao(f>ia : et abstulisti meas vires omnes, in quibus nullum 
lumen, et [om. et P] indidisti eis lumen purum, et meis fieXeatv 
omnibus, in quibus nullum lumen movetur, dedisti eis lumen vitae 
tua altitudine ; et verbum quod tua vis dixit : " tua via facta est 
pernicie vacua et tua fades" ipsum est verbum, quod dixit Tn,crTi<; 
ao<j)ia: et direxisti viam [+tuam P] mihi, et lumen tuae faciei facta^ 
mihi est vita, pernicie vacua ; et verbum, quod tua vis dixit: 

^ factum P. 



32 . INTRODUCTION 

" duxisti tuum alwva in perniciem, ut dissolverentur ut'fierent novi 
omnes" ipsum est verbum, quod dixit Tria-Ti<; (TO(f>ia: 'duxisti me, 
tuam vim, in chaos et in perniciem', ut dissolverentur vXai omnes, 
quae sunt [+ sursum P] in tottm iilo, et ut fierent novae meae vires 
omnes lumine'; et verbum, quod tua vis dixit, " ei timm lumen 
duplicatum [P fundamentum] est^ its omnibus" : ipsum est verbum, 
quod dixit iriari,^ ao^ia : et tuum lumen est in iis omnibus : et 
verbum quod tua vis luminis dixit per Salomonem : " posuisti 
'^tuam opulentiam^ in eo, et factus est habitaculum sanctum ": ipsum 
est verbum, quod dixit Trto-rt? cro^ia : firmasti lumen tuae atrop- 
poi,a<; super me, et facta sum lumen purum. Haec igitur, domine 
mi, est solutio vfivov, quem dixit jnaTK ao<^ia. 

ODE 25. 
The text of this Ode is introduced as follows : 
Respondens 8e primum /iva-rrjpiov dixit Thomae : KeXevto tibi, 
ut proferas solutionem vfjuvov, quem vfivevaev sursum ad me 
TTKjri'i (To4>ia. Respondens Se Thomas dixit : mi domine, de 
vfivto quem dixit Trtart? quod liberata est a chao : tua vis luminis 
iiT po<f)7jT€V(rev olim per Salomonem, filium Davidis, in eius coSat? : 

S.-P. p. 150. W.-M.-S. /.(. p. 39. 

Servatus sum e vinculis. Fugi Liberatus sum e vinculis. Fugi 

ad te, domine, quod fuisti mihi ad te, domine : quia fuisti mihi ad 

dextraservansme,atqueservansme dextram, salvans me. [Et salvans 

et adiuvans me, eKwXwo-as pugnan- me] et adiuvans me, prohibuisti 

tes contra me, neque apparuerunt, adversaries meos, neque se mani- 

quod tua fades mecum erat ser- festaverunt, quod tua facies mecum 

vans me tua x«P'ti. Affecta sum est, liberans me gratia tua. Accepi 

ignominia coram multitudine,atque contumeliam coram multitudine, 

proiecerunt me. Fui sicut plum- et eiecerunt me : fui sicut plumbum 

bum coram iis. Facta mihi est coram iis. Fuit mihi robur per te 

vis a te adiuvans me, quod posu- adiuvans me. Quia posuisti lu- 

isti lucernas. ad dexteram mihi et cernas ad dextram meam et ad 

ad sinistram mihi, ui: ne quidquam sinistram meam, ne neutra parte 

circa me esset luminis expers. luminis expers essem. Texisti me 

'Eo-KEiracras me sub umbra tuae sub umbra gratiae tuae et ''superavi 

misericordiae et fui super vestes vestimenta pellicea". Dextra tua 

1-1 Schmidt, 'Du hast raich, Deine Kraft, uber das Chaos hinaufgefuhrt und iiber 
das Verderben.' _ ,^ ; 

, ■ 2 Schmidt, 'ist ihnen alien Fundament (geworden).' 

■'"' Schmidt, 'Deinen Reichtum. ' 

^-* Schmidt, 'ich wurde iiberhoben den-aus Fellen gemachten Kleidern.' 



THE ODES IN THE PISTIS SOPHIA 33 

pelliceas. Tua dextra exaltavit exaltavit rae, et abstulisti infirmi- 

me et abstulisti infirmitaterri a' me : tatem porro a me. Fui corro- 

Factus sum validus tua veritate, boratus veritate tua, purgatus 

purgatus tua SiKmoa-vvr]. Remoti iustitia tiia. Procul remoti sunt 

sunt a me pugnantes contra me, a me adversarii mei, et iustificatus 

et iustificatus sum tua xPV'^'''°'''W-! sum iustitia tua, quia requies tua 

nam tua quies est ad aeternum est in saecula saeculorum. 
aeternitatis. 

ODE 25. 

Tke Gnostic Targum. (S.-P. 148, 149.) 

Pergens Se iterum in sermone primum fivarrjpiov dixit 
/j,adr]Tat,i; : Factum est, quum duxissem Triariv ao(f>cav sursum in 
chao, exclamavit iterum dicens: " Servata sum in chao, et soluta e 
vinculis caliginis. Veni ad te, lumen, quodfuisti lumen ex omni 
parte mihi servans me, et ddiuvans me. Et ■rrpo^oXa'; av0aSov<s quae 
ptcgnant contra me, iKa)}<.vcra<; tuo lumine, et haud potuerunt 
adpropinquare mihi, quod erat tuum lumen mecum, et servabatms. 
tua [P me in tua] airoppota luminis, quoniam <yap irpQ^oKat, 
\^ + aiidahov<i\ affligentes me abstulerunt meam vim a me, 
iniecerunt me in orcos (chaos Plur.) nullum lumen habentem. 
Fui sicut vKt) gravis coram lis: Atque post haec vis aTroppoiaf 
venit mihi a te servans me. Splenduit ad sinistram mihi et ad 
dextram. mihi ; et circumdabat me, ex omni parte mihi erat, utne 
tdlum fiepo<; quo fui, essem [P esset\ sine lumine, et pbtexit [P 
obtexistt] me lumine tuae ditoppoi.a'i et purgasti in me omnes 
meas i/Xd? malas, et fui super meas vXa? omnes propter tuUm 
lumen ^et tuam a-rroppoiav luminis. Ista exaltavit me^ et absttdit 
me irpo^oKai^ av0aSo'v<; 6Xi0ov&ai'i me. Atque fui confisa tuo 
lumini, nee non lumen purum [P lumini puro] tuae aTrpppoia^, 
et remotae sunt a me irpo^oXat avOaSov; quae affligebant me, et 
facta sum lux tua magna vi, quod tu servas omni tempore. 

ODE 25. 

The detailed Commentary. 

. Thomas explains that he will interpret openly the words 
of the Pistis Sophia, and proceeds to speak iv irapprjcria, as 
follows : 

'"' Schmidt, 'und Dein Lichtabfluss ist es, der mich erhbht...hat.' 
O. S. e, 



34 INTRODUCTION 

S.-P. 150—153. 
Verbum igitur, quod tua vis luminis dixit per Salomonem : 
" Servatus sum e vinculis. Fugi ad te, domine'' ipsum est 
verbum, quod dixit iriaTi'i a-o(f>ia : soluta sum e vinculis caliginis, 
veni ad te, domine [P lux] : et verbum, quod dixit tua vis : 
" Fuistt mihi dextra servans me et adiuvans me''; ipsum iterum 
est verbum, quod dixit iriari'i ao(f)ia : factus es lumen ex omni 
parte mihi et adiuvans me : et verbum quod tua vis luminis 
dixit " eK(oXvaa<i pugnantes contra me, et hand apparuerunt" 
ipsum est verbum, quod dixit '7riaTi<; ao^ia: et ■irpo^o\a<; avdaSov<; 
quae pugnant contra me, eVtoXuo-a? tuo lumine, et haud potuerunt 
adpropinquare mihi " : et verbum, quod tua vis dixit, " guod tua 
fades mecum erat servans me tua yapni]' ipsum est verbum, 
quod dixit Trtan<; (70J>ta : quod tuum lumen erat mecum ser- 
vans me tua diroppota luminis : et verbum quod tua vis dixit, 
"'^contemner eorum miiltitudine et proiecerunt me^" ipsum est 
verbum, quod dixit -n-to-Tt? ao^ia ; afflixerunt me irpo^oXai 
avdaSovi et abstulerunt meam vim a me, et contemta sum 
coram iis et proiecerunt me in chao expertem luminis. Et 
verbum, quod tua vis dixit : "/m stent plumbum coram iis," 
ipsum est verbum, quod dixit Trto-rt? cro</».a: quum abstulissent 
mea lumina a me, facta sum sicut vXtj gravis coram iis. Et 
verbum, [ + rursus P] quod tua vis dixit, " et facta mihi est vis a 
te adiuvans me'' ipsum [ + quoque P] est verbum, quod dixit 7r«7Tt? 
cro(j)ia: et post haec vis luminis venit mihi a te servans me": et ver- 
bum quod tua vis dixit : "posuisti lucernas ad dextram mihi et 
ad sinistram mihi, ut ne quidquam circa me esset luminis expers'' 
ipsum est verbum, quod dixit Trto-rt? cro<f>ia, Tua vis luminis 
[P + splenduit] ad dextram mihi et ad sinistram mihi et circum- 
dans me ab omni parte, ut ne quidquam circa me esset luminis 
expers: et verbum quod tua vis dixit: " eo-zceTratra? me umbra 
tuae misericordiae'' ipsum iterum est verbum, quod dixit ■n-i<TTi.<i 
ao(f>ia : et obtexisti me lumine tuae dTroppoi,a<;; et verbum quod tua 
vis dixit : '"'fui super vestes pelliceas^" ipsum iterum est verbum, 
quod dixit iricrTi'i ao<f>ia : et eiecerunt a me meas uXa? omnes 
malas, et ^elevavi eas'* tua lumine ; et verbum, quod tua vis dixit 
per Salomonem : "tua dextra exaltavit me et abstulit infirmitatem 

1-' Schmidt, 'ich wurde veraclitet im Angesichte vieler und hinausgestossen.' 
2~^ Schmidt, 'ich wurde iiberhoben den aus Fallen gemachten Kleidern.' 
'"^ Schmidt, 'ich erhob mich Uber sie.' 



ORIGINAL LANGUAGE OP THE ODES 35 

a me," ipsum est verbum, quod dixit itktti,^ iro^ia : et tua diroppoia 
luminis haec est, quae exaltavit me tuo lumine, et abstulit a me 
irpo^oXai; av6aSov<; O\i^ova-a<; me ; et verbum, quod tua vis 
dixit: "/actus sum validtis tua veritate etpurgatus tua SiKaioawy," 
ipsum est verbum, quod dixit itio-tk ao<f>ia : facta sum valida 
tuo lumine et sum lumen purgatum tua diroppoia : et verbum, 
quod tua vis dixit: " remoti sunt a me pugnantes mecum',' ipsum 
est verbum, quod dixit viaTif ao<\>ia: remotae sunt a me irpo- 
/3o\at av6aSov<i, hae quae affligebant me, et verbum quod tua 
vis luminis dixit per Salomonem : " et mstificatus sum tua XPV- 
a-TOTrjTi, quod tua quies est ad aeternum aeternitatis " : ipsum est 
verbum, quod dixit Trurrt? ao^ia : servata sum tua ■)(^pri<TTOTr)Ti 
quod tu servas unumquemque. Haec igitur, o mi domine, est 
solutio tota p,eTavoia<i quam dixit Trto-rt? aofjiia quum servata 
esset in chao et soluta est e vinculis caliginis. 

These, then, are the extracts and comments on the Odes of 
Solomon which are contained in the Pistis Sophia. 

We will now examine what light they throw on the original 
form of the text, and we will also enquire as to the 

Original , ^ 

laneuage of language in which the book was originally circulated. 
We begin by comparing the Odes quoted in the 
Coptic book with their Syriac equivalents. 

The presumption is that the Coptic is a direct translation 
from the Greek : the number of Greek words that are embedded 
in the Coptic at once suggests this, and it is natural to carry 
back these Greek words into the text from which the Coptic is 
derived. 

A little caution is necessary, for it will be remembered that 
Greek words are often used in the Coptic to redeem the 
language from its linguistic poverty, and it will also be found 
that the Coptic does not always directly transliterate a Greek 
word : it sometimes translates by another and more familiar 
Greek word. But with some reserve of this kind, the Greek 
elements in the text are sufficient evidence that the book was 
taken from the Greek to the Egyptian language ; and we know 
that the Psalms and Odes had a wide circulation amongst 
Greek-speaking peoples. The Pistis Sophia, in which the Odes 
are embedded, dates from the third century, and the author of 
the Pistis had, as we have shown, the Odes bound up with his 
Canonical Psalter ; at the time intimated there was no Coptic 



36 INTRODUCTION , 

[Thebaic] Bible from whicii the extracts could have been made ; 
so we may be sure the Odes were taken from a Greek Bible, 
and, with almost equal certainty, that the Pistis Sophia itself 
was a Greek book. Detailed examination leads to the same 
result 

Suppose we examine the parts of the sixth Ode which we 
have preserved both in Coptic and in Syriac : this is the Ode 
in which Harnack thought we could detect both Gnostic and 
Egyptian elements, the supposed Gnostic feature being the use 
of the word diroppoia, and the supposed Egyptian feature being 
a sudden inundation, which sweeps over, a whole country and 
defies professional attempts to regulate it. Near the end of the 
Ode is a beautiful passage describing the way in which the 
ministers of the water of life have assuaged the thirst of the 
world: they have given ease to dry lips, strength to paralysed 
wills and weak limbs. Then the writer adds 

" Members which had fallen they made straight and set 
up. They gave strength for their coming and light to 
their eyes." 
There is something awkward about this word ' coming ' : and 
when we turn to the Coptic we find 

" Restituerunt membra quae ceciderant. Dederunt 
robur "Trapprjcria eorum et lucem oculis eorum." 

This is almost as unintelligible as the former ; what does he 
mean by " strength for freedom of speech ' ? However we have 
found out that the Greek behind the Coptic read rfj 7rqt/3/3J?oria 
avToov; and it is not difficult to infer that the Syriac has 
rendered a Greek text t^ Trapova-ua avrwv. Now which of 
these is correct .? Neither of them makes good sense. But if 
we wpte 

rfi irapeaei avruv or t^ ■n-apoKvcrei uvtmv 
"they gave them strength for their paralysis," 

we can make the passage intelligible, and explain both the 
Coptic and Syriac readings'* . 

'The key to the passage is Is. xxxv. 3 = Hfeb, xii. 12; liTxiJiraTe . . .y6varai 
w.apa\e\vn4va (Is.), and cf. rd TcapaXeXv/iiva. ydvara duopSua-are (Heb.). 

For a similar confusion between TrapovHaand irapprtaia we may compare the words 
ofVafentinuSiqxioted in'-Clem. A\ex. Strem. ii. 22 : eh S^ icTi.v~i.ya.ebs- ov irappricta-n 
Sici ToO vlov 0(n'^j)u(r(S,- where Grabe, Spu. 2 conjectures ■wapovala. 



GREEK TEXT OF THE ODES 37 

This suggests that the Syriac as well as the Coptic has a 
Greek text behind it. We shall examine this point more in 
detail presently. 

We are not limited to the occurrence of the single Greek 
word Trapprja-ia (whether it be the right word or only a corrup- 
tion) ; nor to the favourite word dtroppoia which the Pistis 
Sophia has caught at, on account of its Gnostic associations. 

The Syriac tells us that the flood could not be restrained by 
the professional restrainers, nor by the arts of those who make 
the management of floods their business. The Coptic text 
tells us 

baud potuerunt capere in clausis et in locis aedificatis, 
neque potuerunt capere eam rexvai capientium illos. 

Here the Syriac is somewhat at variance from the Coptic, 
but it is clear that 'capere' stands for the Syriac 'restrain,' 
and that rexvai is the Greek word for the Syriac 'arts of the 
restrainers.' 

The Gnostic Targum has also worked in rex^ai in the 
following form : 

neque iroX/jirjcrav prehendere airoppoiav neque 

prehenderunt eam rexvy ■■■■.■■ 

Here 'prehendo' is the same as 'capio,' and stands for the 
Syriac ' restrain.' Texvai seems to come from the original 
Greek. I should have said that iroXfirja'av came from the same 
source, if it were not that the text and the comment have 
'potuerunt' in harmony with the Syriac. 

Another bit of the original Greek is picked up in the clause 
which answers to the Syriac, 

' Blessed are the ministers of that draught' 
Here the Coptic gives us, Ma/capioi sunt SiuKovot, potus illius, 
and the Comment, as well as the Targum, explains that the 
ministers are Michael and Gabriel, ol SiaKovrja-avTef. So that 
we can restore the words MaKapioi elaiv ol SiaKovoi ovtoi to the 
Greek. And so in other cases. 

But this raises the question whether the Greek is the last 
stage. Were the Odes written in Greek ? Or may we say, as 
for the eighteen Psalms, that they were translated into Greek 
from an original Hebrew ? The possibility must at all events be 
kept in mind. But we can only advance by slow stages. The 



38 INTRODUCTION 

next step should be to confirm the suggestion that the Syriac 
has been translated from a Greek base by discussing the case 
for the eighteen Psalms. 

Here we should naturally expect dependence on the Greek. 
The Syriac of Fo^ '* '^ now clearly made out, as Ryle and James 
d'^epenS'^he have shown, that the original Hebrew of these 
Greek. Psalms was done into Greek at a very early period. 

For the Greek version of the nth Psalm is used by the author 
of the book of Baruch in his fifth chapter, and this chapter is 
quoted at length by Irenaeus. So it would be unreasonable to 
put the Greek of the eighteen Psalms later than the middle of 
the first century, when it is employed by Baruch writing, 
probably, not later than the end of the first century. 

So the Greek of these Psalms is available for translation into 
Syriac at a very early date ; we have to determine from the 
evidence before us whether it was so translated from the Greek. 
Let us see whether the Syriac confirms any conjectures either 
in Greek or in Hebrew that the editors have thought necessary 
to the understanding or betterment of the text. It does not 
confirm Hilgenfeld's brilliant suggestion of opimv for opecov in 
Ps. ii. 30 : the Syriac has 'mountains' and agrees with the Greek 
tradition. In Ps. ii. 20 Gebhardt's emendation of KaTea-n-aaev to 
KaTeaTrda-Orj is confirmed by the Syriac jiaa^A^K'o, which is 
rather a free translation. In Ps. v. 4 Gebhardt conjectures 

ov yap Xij-^erai [rty] aKvXa Trapa dvSp6<; hvvarov 
and the word added is confirmed by the Syriac, which adds 
r<'-xJV> (a son of man, a man) : but then the Copenhagen MS. 
has ffKvXa dvOpasiro';, and the Syriac might just as well be a 
translation of this. 

In Ps. viii. 3 Hilgenfeld's emendation 

Kill eiira [ei/] rfj KaphLa fiov 

is not confirmed by the Syriac, which follows the MSS. in 
omitting iv. 

In Ps. X. I Fritzsche made a striking emendation to the first 
couplet, 

Ma«:apto? dvrjp ov 6 icvpio<s ejxvrjcrO'r) iv i\eyfiQ), 
Kot eKV/c\.a>9rj aTrb oBov irovqpa'i iv (idariyt 

by reading iKtoKvOr) for eKVKkmdr). 



SYRIAC TEXT OF THE PSALMS 39 

The Syriac confirms this conjecture, which Gebhardt has 
discarded in favour of a misunderstood Hebrew text. If this is 
not a successful emendation on the part of a scribe, the Syriac 
at this point takes precedence of the existing Greek texts : but 
that does not mean that it is not dependent on a Greek text. 
In Ps. xvi. 9 the Greek text 

TO, epya twv '^^eipcov fiov Karevdvvov ev tottm (tov 
is altered in the Syriac to evooTriov a-ov which seems a better, as 
well as an easier reading. 

In Ps. xvii. 1 6 [14] where Gebhardt has emended 
[/fa^w? Kal TO. eOvr] ev rat? iroXeai] tov adevovi avTO)v 
for TOW 6eov<; avrmv of Cod. R the Syriac reads ' to their gods ' 
with the rest of the Greek MSS. 

In Ps. xvii. 23 [21] Gebhardt emends 

et9 TOV Kaipov ov etXou av, 0eo? 
for the current Greek 

eh TOV Kaipov ov etSe? [tSe?, olSe?, otSa?]. 
The Syriac has Aur^r^V*», which answers most nearly to eZSe?. 
This is one of the places where Felix Perles found a trace of 
the original Hebrew, which had been corrupted from my to 
ny^^ i-e. from 'thou hast appointed' to 'thou hast known.' 
Most of the proposed emendations seem to me to be more 
ingenious than necessary. The Syriac, at all events, does not 
endorse them. 

In Ps. xvii. 32 [30] the Syriac renders ev iTria-r/fifp by ov.rilii^, 
which throws light on the same expression in Ps. ii. 6, where the 
Syriac seems to have left the words untranslated, but there 
Felix Perles conjectured that they stood for an original Hebrew 
''hil- The Syriac seems, while itself following the Greek in 
Ps. xvii. 32, to support this restoration of Perles for the Hebrew 

in Ps. ii. 6. 

In Ps. xvii. 37 [33] Gebhardt has added conjecturally the 

word Xaot? in 

/cot iroXXok [Xaots] ov avvd^ei eXTTiSas ek v/^epav iroXep^ov. 

The Syriac has ' and he shall not hope in a multitude for the 
day of war,' and so does not favour the emendation. So far, 
then, as these passages go, there is not much ground for taking 
the Syriac outside the grouping of the Greek MSS., and erecting 



40 INTRODUCTION 

it into a separate authority. There are one or two passages to 
be considered in which the Syriac gives us either an independent 
conjecture, or something nearer to the original text. 
In Ps. i. 6 the difficult 

Koi ovK fjve'^Kav 

Singular read- \ , 

s^ria"/"'^ of the MSS. is replaced by eis^.-u t<A.i, and the 

sentence connected with the previous etirav by 
omission of the intervening matter, so as to read 

' And they spake what they did not understand ' ; 

whether this was arrived at in the first instance by substituting 
eyvooKav for ijveyKav is not quite clear : but the whole treatment 
of the text is too drastic to allow us to believe that the Syriac is 
the original. Another suggestion is that the Syriac translator 
read koi ovk eyvcov, and took it for a 3rd person plural instead 
of a 1st person singular. 

In Ps. ii. 29 [25] the difficult 

Tov elireiv ttjv v-rreprj^aviav tov hpdKOVTo<i 

appears in the Syriac as 0-i5ai,soi which makes excellent sense, 
from whatever quarter it is derived. Perles conjectures that the 
original Greek was Taireivovv: it is just conceivable that the 
Syriac might stand for a translation of this. 
In Ps. ii. 41 [37] for 

eyXo^ijTo? Kvpio<; et? tov alwva ivwiriov SovXcov avrov 

the Syriac has the equivalent of vtto t&v SovXwv uvtov, and a 
glance at the previous line of the Greek will show that ivwirtov has 
been accidentally borrowed from there, so that we may replace 
vvo Twv on the faith of the Syriac, which at this point establishes 
a better Greek text. 

In Ps. iv. 25 [21, 22] for 

/cat TTapoopyicrav tov 6e6v koI napw^vvav 
e^apai avTov<i airo tj}? 7^? 

the Syriac reads 

KoX irapuip^iaav (_OV^ir<'] tov Oeov 
Kal irapapyoa-dr} [acn»t9\T^aj i^apat ktL 
Here the translator seems to have taken a slight liberty 
with his text, by translating the same word in two different 



SYRIAC "READINGS 4I 

ways-, unless we prefer the explanation that' Trapa^vvOr) stood in 
his copy, instead of irapapyiadr]. 
In Ps. viii. 23 [20] the clause 

diraiXea'ev kp')(pvTa'; avrow Koi irdvra ao<f)6v 

has for its last words 

' because he is wise in counsel ' ; 
it is, however, only a blunder in the Syriac text itself: read jao 
for -jA^^Q and you have the equivalent of the Greek. 

The same thing has happened in Ps. x. 9 [8], where the 
Syriac reads 

' The salvation of the Lord is upon the house of Israel 
for an eternal Kingdom ' : 

a very slight change restores r^A^o.^olso for r^^oaJLsn and 
gives us the Greek craxppoawrjv as in Codd. H (R). This must, 
in its turn, be corrected to ev^poa-vvrjv with Codd. J L C. 

Here the Syriac follows a corrupt Greek text, and has itself 
been corrupted. For more violent changes in the Syriac we 
may take the following : 

Ps. ii. 37 [33] 

evXoiyeire top 6e6v, 01 ^o^ovfievoi 

Tov Kvpiov ev eTriaTTJfirj- 

OTi TO eXeo? Kvpiov iirl tov<; (f>o^ov/j,evov^ 

avTov fiera Kpi/jLUTOf- 

The Syriac reads ev crxvf^ciTi for ev eTri<TTij/j,rj : but the 
parallelism shows that the Greek is right, and perhaps the 
Syriac r^JOi^sor^ should be corrected to redL^oxo. 

In Ps. V. 8 [6] for fi-ij ^apiivj}^ rrjv x^^P^ ""<"' *^' '?/*«'> the 
Syriac has 

' let not thy hand be delayed from us ' ; 

which appears to answer to 

ixfj Ppahivrfi rrjv %ef/3a erov dff ijfioijv, 

the error being due to a false transcription of the Greek. For 
the correctness of the Greek, we may compare Ps. Sol. ii. 24 and 

o. s. 6 



42 INTRODUCTION 

the Biblical parallels cited by Ryle and James [Judg. i. 35 : 
I Sam. V. 6 : Ps. xxxi. (xxxii.) 4]. 

In the difificult passage Ps. xv. 8, 9 [7] 
Xf/i09 Kol pofji(f>at,a koX ddvaro<; diro Sikulcov fiUKpav, 
^ev^ovTai yap to? SicoKo/xevoi iroXefiov airo ocnajv, 
the Syriac boldly says in the second clause, that 

' they shall flee as death flees away from life.' 
Perles compares Lev. xxvi. 36 

Kal (f>ev^ovTai, &>? (fjevyovTe'; airo iroKefiov 

which suggests that a-Ko has dropped from our text, and gives 
the original Hebrew. 

The Syriac variation is very vivid, but I am afraid it is an 
evasion of a difficult text : the parallelism would be spoilt by 
saying that ' death flees from the righteous, as death flees from 
life.' The Greek seems to be right as it stands, and to mean 
'they shall flee from the saints as fugitives of war [are wont 
to flee].' 

In Ps. xvii. 1 1 [9] Gebhardt edits 

ovK ^Xirjcrev avToiii; 6 deot. 
e^7]p€vv'rj(7€v TO a-Trepfxa avrcov 
Kal OVK d^fJKev avTwv eva. 

The Syriac has a series of imperatives, or of futures equivalent to 
imperatives : so that we ought to have in the Greek, if that were 
the original of the Syriac, 

OVK i\er)(TeK avTovj, ffe6<;. 

eTTiaKeyfrov [? e^epevvr^aov] to (nrepfia avrdiv, 

Kal OVK d^rjaeit; avrwv eva, 

and since the MSS. have e\er)aei, and two of them have 
e^epevvTjaov we may, by the Syriac, bring the Greek into closer 
agreement with what must have been its original form. 

So far, then^ our investigation has not taken us sensibly out 
of range of the Greek MSS. There are one or two obscurities 
still to be cleared up, but the above are the principal cases. Here 
is one microscopic, but significant error. In Psalm v. 16 the 
Syriac translator has definitely blundered over the word ov in 

Kal ov ecTTlv rj eX,7rls eVt ere, 
ov tpelo'erat ev Bofiari. 



RELATION OF SYRIAC TO GREEK 43 

Here he reads the first ov as a negative, and is obliged to 
discard the second. Cod. R also reads ovk for the first ov. 

We may, then, conclude that the Syriac translator of the 
Psalms has worked from a Greek text ; arid we will presently 
try to find out its nearest affinity amongst the existing MSS. 

In one or two cases the translator makes very successful 
paronomasiae in his translation, such as might almost deceive 
the very elect into a belief that he had recovered a play on 
words of the original Hebrew. 

For example in Ps. xi. 6, 7 [5] 

oi Bpvfiob eo'Kbacrav avroi'i ev rfj irapoSS avTwv, 
irav ^vKov evcoSiai dvereiXev avTolt 6 0e6<;. 

For the second line the Syriac reads 

As it does not seem possible that .jjl.tk' can be a direct 
translation of avereiXev we are almost obliged to believe that 
the writer has introduced a paronomasia : ' every tree of sweet 
breath God caused to breathe upon them.' It cannot be 
original, for as Perles points out\ Baruch read evireiXev (cf 
Bar. V. 8, irav ^v\ov evtoStat toJ ^laparjX TrpocrTcuyfiarL), and this 
can only be a variant of dvereiXev. 

Another similar case will be found in Ps. ix. 9 [5] 

o iroi.wv eKetjfjLocrvvTjv Orjiravpl^ec ^corjv 

avT(^ irapd /cvpiai, 
which the Syriac renders by 

As this ^nr^Lfls r<'i\saxflo cannot be a Hebrew form of 
speech, we are obliged to admit that the play on words is due 
to the ingenuity of the translator. 

Now let us see whether we can get a rough idea of the place 
which the Syriac text of the Psalms of Solomon 
Jhe^syriaf occupies amongst the Greek MSS. 
irps°ata'li^to The edition of Ryle and James is based upon 

Ms^"'"'' four MSS. of which the chief is the very beautiful 

Copenhagen MS. But since the other three (at 
Paris, Vienna and Moscow respectively) have been shown by 

' Zur Erkldrimg der Psalmen Salomos, p. 9. 



44 



INTRODUCTION 



Gebhardt to be derived from the Copenhagen MS., the text of 
Ryle and James is reduced to a single authority, for the other 
three may be neglected. 

To this MS. Gebhardt adds four more, one from the Vatican, 
two from Mount Athos, and one from Monte Cassino. We have 
thus eight MSS. as follows : 

C = Codex Casanatensis 1908. 

H = Codex Hauniensis 6: (the Copenhagen MS.)t 

J = Cod. 555 of the Monastery at Iveron. 

L = a MS. in the Monastery of the Laura. 

M=a, Moscow MS.: Library of the Holy Synod 147. 

P = Paris Gr. 2991 A. 

R= Vatican Gr. 336. 

V= Vienna: Theol. Gr. 11. 

The relations between these eight MSS. Gebhardt reduces 
to the following scheme : 




[V 

R /^ ^ ^^H h 

V /^ P 

C M 

Here z is the archetype : j, x, w are uncial MSS. which make 
connecting links between the existing texts, and v, u and h are 
similar links in the shape of ininuscule MSS. 

The first thing we notice is that in numbering the Psalms, 
H proceeds as follows : 

Psal. Sol. I = a' 

2 = ^' 

3 = ...thus missing one in the count. 

4 = 7' 

•■ •■• S = S' 

6 = 6' 

7 = 5-' 

8 = t' 

9 = ^' thus missing a numeral: 

after which the count is regular. 



GROUPING OF MSS. OF PSALMS 45 

This error in the numbering of Ps. 5 has led its copy V astray, 
which has no number by the first hand, but has a wrong 
number S' on the margin by a later hand. 

Now turn to the Syriac MS. ; we have 

Psal. Sol. I = Psalm 43 of the Syriac. 

2= 44 

3= 45 • 

4= 47 

&c. = &c. 

all the numbers being now one in excess. 

It will be seen that the Syriac numeration has gone wrong 
very nearly at the same place as Cod. H, and in correcting an 
error in one direction, the scribe has made a continuous line 
of errors in another direction. This suggests that Syr. and H 
are not very widely removed from one another. Now let us 
examine some special readings. 

In Ps. i. 3 we have 

R L Syr. for TroWrjv) 

J H TTOKVV ) ' 

In Ps. i. 4 we have 

R J L Syr. against H (BieXdoi). 
In Ps. ii. I we have L H Syr. for Kari^aXe ) 
R J for KaTe^aWe] ' 

this suggests that the Syriac comes on the diagram somewhere 
between x and w. 
In Ps. ii. 24 [22] 

iKavcoa-ov, Kvpie, rov ^apvveadai X^^P"' ""^^ 
eirl ^lepova-aXrj/i ev kiraiyai'yy edvdov. 

Here eTrayayrj is clearly right, but some MSS. have diraytoy^ : 
the Syriac has it correctly : thus the MSS. divide R J L and 
Syr. against H. 

In the same connexion it is somewhat perplexing to find 
both R and Syr. in what seems to be a common error, reading 
' Israel ' for ' Jerusalem.' One would' have expected the same 
reading to turn tip in J, but perhaps it was corrected by the 
scribe. If Gebhardt's diagram is correct, it looks as if R and 
Syr. might be the original reading and not an error at all. 

In Ps. iv. 3 R and the Syriac are together in reading 
a/jLapTccXcov against J L C H (dfiapTidov). 



46 INTRODUCTION 

In Ps. iv. lo [8] we have J L C H Syr, (vo/uov fiera ^oXov) 
against R (fiovov /xeTa SovXov). 

In Ps. viii. 24 [21] the Syriac seems to involve 
a with R against a? of J L C H. 

In Ps. viii. 26 [22] Syr. and R are again together in reading 
e/Miavev. 

In Ps. xvi. 12 the Syriac omits a clause by homoioteleuton, 
in company with L. 

In Ps. xvii. 8 [6] the Syriac reads dWdry/j-aTO(; with R J L 
against H {d\aXdy/jiaTo<;). 

In Ps. xvii. 23 [2 1 J the Syriac reads eiSe? with R J L against 
H and the rest. 

These are the most striking of the non-singular readings of 
the Syriac, and they show clearly that the version belongs to an 
earlier strain of text than Cod. H, and that its place is with the 
group R J L, being perhaps intermediate between J and L. The 
singular readings and free translations on the part of the Syriac 
give us no assistance in regard to the grouping of the MSS., 
and we must leave the matter in the approximate manner 
explained above. 

It must be clear from the foregoing that we cannot expect 
to get any nearer to the original language of the Psalms by 
means of the Syriac. The original Hebrew must be sought in 
the emendations to the Greek text made by Wellhausen, Geiger, 
Ryle and James, and Perles. [Dr Barnes has discovered in the 
Cambridge University MS. Add. 2012 (a volume containing 
two short works of Bar Hebraeus followed by a collection of 
prayers), the Syriac text of the Psalm of Solomon xvi. 6 — 13. 
The Psalm, which is wrongly numbered as the 59th in our 
collection, is actually numbered 58, which shows that the arrange- 
ment in our MS., viz. Odes and Psalms numbered continuously, 
beginning with Odes, is not unique. I have added the readings 
of this fragment. Cod. C, to the text.] 

Let us turn in the next place to the Odes, and see whether 

we can trace their linguistic history. Here we 

text of'tife^ have no Greek text extant, but we have the Coptic 

odes taken r • r^ ^ ^ t 

from the text ot ccitam Odes and there are Greek words 

Greek. i i i i i 

embedded ; we have also traces of a Latin version, 
which we may assume, provisionally, to have been made from 
the Greek ; and we have the Syriac version. 



SYRIAC ODES FROM THE GREEK 47 

In Ode 6, v. i6, we have tried to explain the variation between 
a Coptic = trappria-la and a Syriac = vapovala by reference to 
a misread Greek word. 

We can frequently detect Greek compounds in their awk- 
ward Syriac substitutes ; for example, in Ode 7, v. 26, ' excellent 
beauty of the Lord ' is an attempt to render the Greek /xeyaXo- 
irpeireia} . The constantly recurring- r^'-la.Aj r^tA, ' without cor- 
ruption,' stands for a^OapTO'i and a^Oapcria. 

A good instance is in Ode 9, v. 3, where the literal rendering 

' His thought is everlasting life, 

And without corruption is your perfection' 

probably stands for 

Kou, iv d^dapcna to Teko'i vfiwv, 

and should therefore be translated, 

' And your end is immortality.' 
A somewhat similar case is the frequently repeated ^nfiou r^-l 
which stands for the Greek d(j)dovo<;, d^d6v(0'i\ An interesting 
example will be found in Ode 11, v. 6, where we read that ' speak- 
ing waters touched my lips from the fountain of God without 
grudging' {i.e. abundantly). In the passage just quoted I was 
at first tempted to emend ' the speaking waters ' to ' waters of 
a flood,' but it is clear that this must not be done : the expression 
is the same as in Ignatius ad Rom. 7, vBap i^wv koX \aKow, 
which Lightfoot too hastily altered to ^wv koX aXkofievov and 
thus made a direct Johannine parallel. For ' talking water ' 
there are sufficient literary and folk-lore parallels. 

Lightfoot quotes from Jortin [Eccl Hist. i. 356] the reference 
to Anacreon 11 (13), 

Ba^VT](f>opoio ^OL^ov \dXov ■jrt,6vTe<; vBaip, 

for the expression 'talking water' and for the prophetic in- 
spiration that was supposed to be produced by drinking it : 
but objects to Jortin's inference that, as there was one of these 
' speaking ' fountains at Daphne, the famous suburb of Antioch, 

1 We may compare with the LXX. of Ps. Ixvii. (Ixviii.) 34 and the Peshitta. 

^ An interesting parallel to this series of translations will be found in Irenaeus 
(■247) where the Latin-text shows a doulile translation: 'sine invidia largiter ion&m 
hominibus.' 



SP INTRODUCTION 

The recurrence of the theme ' the fruit of the lips' suggests 
that this group of Psalms, should be credited to a common 
author. 

-The sixteenth Ode_ from which we just quoted is one of a 
group that begins with a similitude, something like those which 
we find in the Songs of Degrees in the Canonical Psalter. For 
instance we have : 

Ode 14. ' As the eyes of a son to his father, so are 
my eyes, O Lord, at all times towards Thee.' 

The parallel to this is Ps. cxxiii. 2, ' As the eyes of servants to 
the hands of their masters, and as the eyes of a maid to the 
hand of her mistress, so are our eyes to the Lord our God.' 
Very similar is Ode 15. 

'As the sun is a joy to them that, seek for its day- 
- break, so is my Joy the Lord,' with which we may 
compare Ps. cxxix. (cxxx.) 6, ' more than they that watch 
; for the morning.' 

Ode 16 begins something in the same way : 

' As the work of the husbandman is the ploughshare : 
and the work of the steersman is the guidance of the 
ship : so also my work is the Psalm of the Lord : my 
craft and my occupation are in His praises.' 

With these three Odes we may probably take Ode 28 : 

''As the wings of doves over their nestlings, and the 
mouths of their nestlings towards their mouths, so also 
are the wings of the Spirit over my heart.' 

Suppose we group these four together, viz. 14, 15, 16, 28: 
of these we have already 14 and 16 in the group 8, 12, 14, 16 : so 
the six Odes 8, 12, 14, 15, 16, 28, belong together and' have a 
common authorship. 

Next let us try the association and repetition of ideas : one 
of the harshest symbols employed by the Odes is the figure 
of milk from the breasts of God : we have the following coin- 
cidences : 

Ode 8. 'My own breasts I prepared for them that 
they might drink my holy milk and live thereby.' 
Ode 14. ' With thee are my breasts and my delight' 



UNITY OF AUTHORSHIP OF ODES St 

Ode 19 contains a parallel in extended form in 
which Christ is the cup that contains the milk from the 
breasts of the Father. 

With this we must probably take 

Ode 35. 'I was carried like a child by its mother, 
and he gave me milk, the dew of the Lord.' 

The same connexion between the milk and the dew of the 
Lord is found in Ode 4 

' Distil thy dews upon us and open the rich fountains 
that pour forth milk and honey.' 

Here then is a group of Odes, 4, 8, 14, 19, 35,^ which 
appear to belong together: but of these 8 and 14 are- in the 
previous group, which must now be enlarged to 

4, 8, 12, 14, IS, 16, 19. 28, 35. 

In this way then, we may form the Odes into groups, as 
a preliminary test for authorship. Here are some more sug- 
gestions for grouping. 

In Ode 6 we begin with 

' As the hand moves over the harp, and the strings 
speak, so speaks in my members the Spirit of the Lord.' 

From the use of an opening similitude, it may be suggested 
that this belongs with the similitudes in Odes already quoted : 
but the actual figure of the hand and the harp recurs : the very 
next Ode has 

Ode 7. ' They shall go forth to- meet Him and shall 
sing to Him with the harp of many notes ' : 

and this Ode also opens with a similitude. 
In Ode 14 we have 

'Open to me the harp of thy Holy Spirit, that with 
all its notes I may praise Thee, O Lord.' 

In Ode 26 

' His harp is in my hands and the Odes of His rest 
shall not be silent.' 
These four odes may be taken together, and attached to the 
previous group, which now contains 

4, 6, 7, 8, 1.2, 14, IS, 16, 19, 26, 28, 3S. 



52 INTRODUCTION 

Ode 7 and Ode lo are connected by the use of a curious 
expression, ' the traces of the Light ' ; thus 

Ode 7. ' He set over it the traces of His Light.' 
Ode 10. ' The traces of the Light were set upon their 
heart' 
Ode 4 and Ode 8 are connected by their reference to the 
seal of God which is set on His creatures : 

Ode 4. ' Who is there that shall put on thy grace and 
be hurt ? For thy seal is known.' 

Ode 8. ' On their faces I set my seal ' &c. 

Ode 3 and Ode 8 are connected by the fact that both of 
them speak of Christ as {a) the Beloved, {b) the Living One. 

Ode 3 and Ode 17 have a common feature in that they speak 
of believers as the members of Christ. 

Odes I, 5, 9 (?), 17 and 2o(?) contain the doctrine of the 
crown of life which does not wither. 

Odes 17, 21, 40 and 41 speak of the transfiguration of the 
face of the believer : e.g. 

Ode 17. 'I received the face and the fashion of a 
new person.' 

Ode 21. 'The exultation of the Lord increased on' 
my face.' 

Ode 40. ' My face exults with His gladness.' 

Ode 41. ' Let our faces shine in His light.' 

We have now, tentatively, grouped together Odes 

I. 3, 4, S. 6, 7, 8, gQ), 10, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 19, 
2o(i'), 21, 26, 28, 35, 40, 41. 

No doubt other coincidences and parallels may be detected : 
the net result of this is the recognition that the majority of the 
Odes come from a single hand, or if we prefer it, from the same 
school. The doubtful member, in my judgment, is Ode 19 which 
is far too grotesque to be by the same hand as the other 
compositions. It appears to me to be an imitation of the other 
Psalms that speak of the breasts of God. It is tritheistic as well 
as grotesque. There will be some short Psalms that do not 
readily furnish material for identification, but even these short 
Odes will sometimes be capable of grouping; thus the figure of 
the Cross in prayer is found in Ode 27, and reappears in a 



HISTORICAL ALLUSIONS 53 

longer composition Ode 42. It is very difficult, however, to 
believe that this 42nd Ode belongs to the main body of the 
collection. 

Setting aside such small compositions and such as are late or 
discordant, I believe it will be found that the internal evidence 
will throw nearly all the Odes together, and that those which 
are thus grouped will be found to be Christian compositions, 
although at first sight many of them might seem to be Jewish, 
or not definitely marked one way or the other. Their internal 
parallelisms enable us to say with confidence that they are 
either Christian or at least Judaeo-Christian compositions. 

Several of the longer Odes do not admit of grouping with 
the others : amongst these we note 

Ode 22, which contains an account of the victory over 
the dragon with seven heads. 

Ode 23, which records the descent from heaven of 
a mysterious letter, inscribed with the name of the 
Trinity. 

Ode 38, which records the preservation of the writer 
from various errors and deceits. 

Ode 39, which explains the dangers which attend the 
rapid rise of great rivers, and how the believers walk 
firmly on their waves, following the footsteps and example 
of Christ. 

These are also, in all probability. Christian ; but the question 
of their authorship must be reserved and examined in detail. 

We now proceed to examine the historical allusions in the 
book of Odes. 

The first thing that strikes us is the poverty of historical 

background compared with that in the extant 

allusions in Psalms of Solomon. In these known Psalms it is 

the Odes. . . , , . . , . . , . , 

impossible to miss the historical situation which 
provoked them : they were made under the stress of national 
exigency, and the troubles stand out from the Psalms with their 
dates on them. Pompey is written large over several of the 
Psalms, and when Rome is not expressly mentioned it is 
distinctly felt. The great dragon of the Psalms of Solomon is 
a classified specimen. We can tell him a mile away. 

Not only so, but when the history is recognized, the theology 



54 INTRODUCTION 

also becomes patent. The Pharisaism of the Psalms is trans- 
parently clear, and the Messianism that went with it. So that 
it was with justice that some critics labelled the compositions 
Psalms of the Pharisees. That does not mean that all these 
Psalms are necessarily by one hand nor that all of them are 
decidedly marked. Some of them are, in fact, cofourless, and 
in that sense, dateless : but the collection, as a whole, is 
identified, both historically and theologically. The case of the 
Odes is very different. If there are any national disasters 
behind the songs, they have been lost in the songs. There is 
not a sad note, and there is hardly a vindictive note in the whole 
collection. And on the theological side, the leading characteristic 
is experience, and not dogma : and experience is much harder 
to date than dogma, and shows fewer of the weather-marks of 
evolution. Sometimes, indeed, the expressions of the Odists 
rise to such a height that they catch from the object of their 
Faith something that is everlasting rather than evolutionary. 
It is difficult to date a man who has disclosed the fact that he is 
supremely happy and that God has made his face to shine with 
the light of heaven. The only way in which we could date such 
a phenomenon would be to say that, if he is not an isolated 
specimen, the songs must proceed from some time of general 
spiritual elevation ; and since it is historically verifiable, that 
the experimental time of the bloom of Church life is the first 
age (for one hardly expects to find people generally rejoicing 
with ' an unspeakable and glorified joy,' say, in the time of 
Constantine), then these hymns or odes must belong to the first 
days of the Church : but even that way of dating them is some- 
what indefinite. 

When we go in search of special historical details, we do not 

get a very rich harvest. The most important cases 
t^o^founT""^' "lUst be carefully examined. The first case is 
lanauary ^^'^ 4> which has a reference to a proposal or 

suggestion to change the Sanctuary of God from 
Jerusalem to some other position, and it is a noble protest from 
a standpoint, which at least in part is a Jewish standpoint, 
against the suggestion. The Ode begins as follows : 

' No man, O God, changes thy holy place : and it is 
not possible that he should change it and put it in 



HISTORICAL ALLUSIONS 55 

another place: because he has no power over it: for thy 
sanctuary was designed before thou didst make other 
places : that which is the elder shall not be altered by 
that which is younger than itself 

Now here it is clear that some change in the value of the 
Sanctuary at Jerusalem is threatened at the hands of man. The 
writer does not mean the same thing as the author of the 
seventh of the extant Psalms of Solomon, where he prays God 
not to remove His tabernacle from amongst them, lest the enemy 
should tread the inheritance of the Sanctuary. It is at the hands 
of man that the Sanctuary is threatened, and the writer is 
confident that the Lord himself has never changed and. never will 
change. 

His thoughts turn to the origin of the holy place. That 
holy place had a pre-existence and a corresponding eternity : 
it was a ' Sanctuary from the beginning.' Here we are certainly 
face to face with Jewish beliefs ; the writer of the Ode may be 
shown on other grounds to be a Christian, but on this point he 
is betrayed as having Jewish sympathies. And his views with 
regard to the Temple are not merely Jewish in a general sense, 
but highly evolved. 

The first theories of the Heavenly Sanctuary appear to have 
been almost Platonic in character : there was a pattern in the 
mount : according to that pattern or idea the visible thing was 
fashioned ; but the idea was eternal, and pre-existent. This 
Platonic idea Underwent change at the hand of later Rabbins, 
who came to teach that the actual Sanctuary had been created 
before other things, and had been caught away to Heaven and 
disappeared. 

Accordingly we find in the Apocalypse of Baruch, c. 4, that 
the Lord explains the doctrine of the Sanctuary to the prophet, 
in language which depreciates the earthly sanctuary : 

' Dost thou think that this is that city of which I said. 
On the palms of my hands have I graven thee .' It is not 
this building which is now built in your midst : it is that 
which will be revealed with Me, that which was prepared 
beforehand here from the time when I took counsel to 
make Paradise, and showed it to Adam before he sinned, 



56 INTRODUCTION 

but when he transgressed the commandment, it was 
removed from him, as also Paradise.' 

Here, then, we have the view of a first-century writer who is 
amazed at the desolation of Zion, and like our Odist, is con- 
cerned with the problem of the deserted Sanctuary: he concludes 
that it has been caught away, as Paradise was. The real city of 
God is that which was made at the beginning ; like Paradise, 
it was only here temporarily ; what is left is not the real thing. 

Now our Odist does not go so far in despair as the writer of 
the Apocalypse, of whom he may have been a contemporary. 
He believes the Sanctuary was made at the very beginning 
before other things, but still holds to the belief that Jerusalem 
is the Holy City and the Temple the true Sanctuary. He does 
not go so far even as the Epistle to the Hebrews, in drawing a 
distinction between the tabernacle which the Lord pitched, and 
that which was made by man. 

His position appears to be very closely that of the great 
Jewish Rabbis, who taught the pre-existence of the Sanctuary 
and its priority to the rest of the works of God, and who do not 
appear to have explained this pre-existence according to the 
theory of Ideas, for in that case where would the priority have 
been of the Temple amongst other works of God ? Their method 
of teaching can be seen from 

Bereshith Rabbah, 20 : 

' Seven things were created before the world : Thorah, 
Gehenna, the Paradise of Eden, the Throne of Glory, the 
Sanctuary, Repentance and the Name of Messiah.' 

Very nearly to the same effect is the dictum of Rabbi Meir 
in Pirqe Aboth vi. 10: 

' Five possessions possessed the Holy One, blessed is 
He, in His world and they are these : Thorah, one 
possession: Heaven and Earth, one possession: Abraham, 
one possession : Israel, one possession : the Sanctuary, 
one possession.' 

The Scriptural proofs of these statements are important : the 
case of the Sanctuary is proved as follows : 

' The Sanctuary, whence is it proved .'' Because it is 
written, " The place, O Lord, which thou hast made for 



HISTORICAL ALLUSIONS 57 

thee to dwell in, the Sanctuary, O Lord, which thy 
hands have established" (Exod. xv. 17): and it saith, 
" And he brought them to the border of his Sanctuary, 
even to this mountain, which his right hand had 
possessed " ' (Ps. Ixxviii. 54). 

That will suffice to show the nature of the Scripture proofs 
employed : and it is clear that the same beliefs were in the mind 
of the writer of our Ode. The question then arises as to the 
situation which provoked his expression of faith. 

In the case of the Apocalypse of Baruch, to which we have 
referred as a parallel, it is clear that it is the desolation of 
Jerusalem by Titus which is the historical background : and it 
is some similar situation which is reflected in this fourth Ode. 
Only the language in this latter case seems to imply that some 
deliberate suggestion or attempt had been made by man to 
move the Sanctuary : and against this the writer protests. The 
agent who makes or suggests the change cannot be the Roman 
conqueror : he might carry away the holy vessels, but that does 
not remove the Sanctuary, any more than it was moved in the 
days of Nebuchadnezzar. So it must be a suggestion coming 
from Jewish or quasi-Jewish quarters. And the difficulty lies in 
this : it is hardly possible that in the time of the last Jewish 
wars, any body of Jewish believers could have cherished the 
thought of a temple anywhere else than at Jerusalem. If the 
temple was gone, it was gone back to Heaven and to God : it was 
not to be sought elsewhere. It is not easy to believe that in 
A.D. 70 or in A.D. 135, under the hand of Titus, or at the time 
of Bar Cochba, the Jews would have thought of another temple. 

For this reason I suggest that the writer is referring to an 
attempt which had been made in earlier days to provide an 
alternative Sanctuary to that at Jerusalem. 

We know of at least three such attempts to change the 
Holy Place ; one, the Samaritan temple on Gerizim, another the 
Sanctuary at Assouan, whose officials were in friendly relations 
with both Jerusalem and Gerizim, the third the temple of Onias 
at Leontopolis in Egypt, said to be actually modelled on the 
temple at Jerusalem, and designed as a substitute for it. Of 
these the Sanctuary on Gerizim was destroyed by John 
Hyrcanus in B.C. 128 ; the Sanctuary at Assouan was wrecked 

o. s. 8 



58 INTRODUCTION 

by the Egyptians, after the retreat of Cambyses ; the temple of 
Onias actually outlasted the temple at Jerusalem, and was 
destroyed in A.D. 73 by the Roman general PauHnus in con- 
sequence of the fears of the Romans that this temple also might 
become a rallying point for sedition and revolt. And I have 
suggested that it is the destruction of this temple, and not the 
Jerusalem temple, that provokes the protest of the fourth Ode. 
Unless it can be shown that there is a probability that some one 
actually proposed building a new temple, soon after the great 
Jewish disasters, elsewhere than at Jerusalem, it seems to me 
that this is the likeliest solution : and it furnishes an exact 
historical date. 

There can be no doubt as to the writer's affection for the 
temple at Jerusalem : but he does not wail or lament : he is satis- 
fied with the unchangeableness of God and the immutability of 
His promises. If he had been a Jew, he could not have displayed 
such equanimity: compare, for example, the language of the 
Apocalypse of Baruch or of Fourth Ezra, to see how the real 
Jew would feel. It may be inferred that the writer of the 
Ode is a Judaeo-Christian. If his date was not, as I suggest, 
soon after A.D. 70, the only other possible date seems to be soon 
after A.D. 135V 

The importance of the temple at Leontopolis, in connexion 
with the desecration of the temple at Jerusalem by Antiochus 
Epiphanes, as a factor in the decentralization of the Jewish 
religion, is indicated by Harnack in his History of Dogma. 

' The spread of Judaism in the world, the secularization and 
apostasy of the priestly caste, the desecration of the Temple, 
the building of the Temple at Leontopolis, the perception 
brought about by the spiritualizing of religion in the Empire of 
Alexander the Great, that no blood of beast can be a means 
of reconciling God — all these circumstances must have been 
absolutely dangerous and fatal, both to the local centralization 
of worship, and to the statutory sacrificial system^.' 

In view of this luminous statement, it is not difficult to 

1 The desecration of the Temple by Pompey in B.C. 63 is not a possible situation ; 
for no serious interruption of the Temple Worship took place, and therefore no acute 
religious problem was provoked. Nor can our Odes be referred to so early a period. 
We have shown that they belong, almost entirely, if not absolutely, to the Christian 
period. 

'^ Harnack : I.e. i. 69 note, Eng. trans. 



THE UNCHANGEABLE SANCTUARY 59 

imagine the resentment of a Palestinian Jew against Leonto- 
polis, nor the expression of such resentment in song, when the 
offensive institution had been swept away. 

We shall get a good idea of the theological position of the 
writer amongst the early Christian sects and schools, if we 
contrast his position with (i) that of the Ebionites on the one 
hand, and (ii) that of the author of the epistle of Barnabas on the 
other^ Irenaeus tells us, for example, that the Ebionites per- 
severe in the customs of the law and in the Jewish mode of life, 
and adore Jerusalem as if it were the house of God\ Without 
pressing too closely the language of Irenaeus concerning the 
Ebionites, which may be Coloured by polemical exaggeration, 
there is certainly a common ground between the writer of the 
fourth Ode and the Ebionites, in their affectionate religious 
attachment to the ancient Sanctuary. 

Now turn to the sixteenth chapter of the very anti-judaic 
epistle which passes under the name of Barnabas. Barnabas 
begins by telling us that the poor wretches (sc. the Jews) are 
in error about the temple, which they take to be a house of God. 
They have almost consecrated God in a shrine, as the Gentiles 
do. He then quotes prophecies to show the vanity of the Jewish 
belief In the course of these quotations he has to explain 
Isaiah xlix. 17, 'Behold those that have destroyed this temple 
shall build it again,' and affirms that this is actually taking place 
at the hands of the Romans, who had wrecked the temple 
because the Jews had made war against them. But instead of 
drawing the Ebionite conclusion from this (to us) obscure 
historical allusion, he flies off to prove that the only real temple 
of God is a redeemed soul. It is clear that the writer of the 
fourth Ode, while accepting the spiritual interpretation of life, 
would never express himself like Barnabas. 

As Dr Taylor says", ' those who felt with Barnabas would 
have looked with disfavour upon the rebuilding of the temple 
at Jerusalem.' [For a further discussion of the Unchangeable 
Sanctuary see what is added in the preface.] 

There is another way in which we can see that the position 
of the writer of the fourth Ode is not that of the normal 
Christian of Gentile extraction. One of the commonest exercises 

^ Iren. (ed. Mass. 105). 

^ Pi'ri/e Aboth : ed. ii. p. 153. 



6o INTRODUCTION 

of the early Christian was the demonstration to the orthodox 
Jew by means of Testimonies from the Old Testament — that his 
religion was no longer acceptable to God. From the traces of 
these early collections of Testimonies which have come to light, 
it is easy to see that they involved special statements under the 
heads ' that the Jews were to lose Jerusalem,' and ' that the old 
temple should pass away and a new one take its place.' The 
new temple was to be a spiritual one, but whether the new 
temple was Christ or the believer, is not quite clear. The writer 
of the fourth Ode is prepared with spiritual interpretations of 
the older religion, he spiritualizes the priesthood (if it be the 
same hand as wrote Ode 20) and p'erhaps the rite of circum- 
cision (cf Ode 11), but he is not prepared to say that the old 
Sanctuary was to pass away. His position, therefore, is an 
intermediate one, not wholly Gentile, though with strong Gentile 
leanings, and, as we said above, much nearer to the doctrine of 
the Ebionites than to that of the epistle of Barnabas. 

In connexion with the foregoing argument, it may be 

proper to examine the references made in the Odes 

reference to ^° ^^^ prevalence of wars, and to determine whether 

wars which the Writer is speaking of actual wars or only of 

have occurred. r o j 

spiritual conflicts. When we read the eighteen 
Psalms of Solomon, the noise of war is common ; we can see 
the engines moved up for the siege, we can hear the thud of the 
battering rams. These Psalms open in affliction : ' instead of 
peace,' says the writer, ' there was heard the sound of war.' 

' Distress and the sound of wars,' so another Psalm begins, 
' mine ears have heard, the sound of the trumpet, and the noise 
of slaughter and destruction.' When this writer says war he 
means war, and there is no alternative. But the case is not 
so clear in the Odes. The references to war are few, and 
obscure. 

In Ode 8 we have : 

' The right hand of the Lord is with you, and He is 
your helper : and peace was prepared' for you, before ever 
your war was.' 



How shall we explain this allusion? Does it simply mean 
Predestined "^^^^ ^^^ Divine foresight had seen to the end of the 
Peace. man's spiritual troubles and had designed for him 



WARS SPIRITUAL OR CARNAL? 6l 

the happy issue out of them ? The objection to this is (i) that 
it is somewhat forced ; (ii) that the language is evidently ad- 
dressed to a community of persons who have passed through 
affliction together ; and are spoken of as those who have been 
despised, whose righteousness has now been exalted. But if it 
is addressed to a community, the distresses can hardly be 
spiritual : and it is possible, though I should not like to affirm 
it positively, that the persons addressed are those Judaeo- 
Christians at Pella, who escaped from the siege of Jerusalem 
by flight, in harmony with the evangelic precepts. The Ode 
to which we have been referring finds a striking parallel in 
Ode 9, where we have as follows : 

' For I announce to you peace, to you His saints : that 
none of those who hear may fall in war, and that those 

again who have known Him may not perish There 

have been wars on account of the crown. Put on 
the crown in the true covenant of the Lord. And all 
those who have conquered shall be written in His book. 
For their book is victory.' 

Is this spiritual or carnal warfare ? the concluding sentences 
sound like the language of the Apocalypse, ' To him that over- 
cometh,' and in that case, are spiritual. But the opening 
sentences sound like an exemption from actual strife and its 
dangers : and this might again be compared with the condition 
of the Judaeo-Christians at Pella. 

When we turn to Ode 29 we have again allusion to victory 
over one's enemies, and to war made by the word of the Lord. 
But as this Ode is definitely Christian, and its language is parallel 
to the vigorous expressions of Paul about the casting down of 
imaginations and the bringing of every thought into the captivity 
of obedience to Christ, we may be sure that the warfare and the 
victories are spiritual. Examine the following sentences : 

' From the mouth of death he drew me back, and 
I laid my enemies low, and He justified me by His grace : 
for I believed in the Lord's Messiah.' 

These are certainly spiritual statements : justification by 
grace through faith in Christ is the record of spiritual experi- 
ence, and the victories must be interpreted in the same sense : 
and so must the following : 



s 



62 INTRODUCTION 

Ps.cx. 2 'He gave me the rod of His power: 

1 Cor. that I might subdue the imaginations of the peoples : 

and the power of the men of might to bring them 
low: 
to make war by His word, 
and to take victory by His power : 
And the Lord overthrew my enemy by His word : 
and he became like the stubble that the wind carries 
away.' 

So far, then, as this 29th Ode is concerned, it is a Christian 
and a spiritual product, and relates to a warfare that is not 
carnal. 

We come now to a much more difficult Psalm of conflict, 
The fight with ^hc story of a triumph over a dragon with seven 

the Dragon. j^g^jg 

In the twenty-second Ode the Lord is praised because 

' He overthrew by my hands the dragon with seven 
heads : 

Thou hast raised me up over his roots, that I might 
destroy his seed : 

Thy right hand destroyed his wicked poison, &c. &c.' 

Then follows an account of the raising of an army of dead 
bodies, something like the scene in Ezekiel's valley of dry 
bones. 

The Ode is a striking one and attracted the attention of the 
author of the Pistis Sophia, who found in the dragon with seven 
heads one of the Emanations that threatened the upward pro- 
gress of Sophia. When Sophia escapes from these Emanations, 
she does it to the music of the ninety-first Psalm, in which it is 
promised that the believer shall tread on the lion and the dragon. 
And the Pistis Sophia says (p. 140): 

'Conculcabat irpo^oK'qv cum facie basilisci serpentis, cui 
septeni erant capita ; et conculcabat vim cum facie leonis et 
cum facie BpaxovTOii. Feci ina-nv aotpiav manere stantem 
super Trpo/BoXrjv avdaBovi, quae habet faciem basilisci ser- 
pentis, aii sunt septem capita! 

and (p. 147) 



THE DRAGON WITH SEVEN HEADS 63 

' Atque verbum quod tua vis luminis dixit per 

Davidem : meabis super serpentem et basiliscum 

super hos, qui sunt facie serpentis, et super hos, qui 
facie basilisci serpentis, qnibus septem sunt capita! 

And then the Ode of Solomon is quoted and commented on. 
The Pistis Sophia, therefore, has annexed this dragon with 
seven heads and given him a spiritual interpretation. We may 
say that the dragon was the cause of the quotation of the Ode. 
As far as natural history goes, he is a lay figure. But is this 
the original idea } We remember that in the eighteen Psalms 
of Solomon, the dragon is palpable and tangible : he is Pompey 
himself, and not a spiritual force or opposing influence. 

Then there is an even closer parallel to our Ode, in the 
almost contemporary twelfth chapter of the Apocalypse ; a 
dragon with seven heads and ten horns persecutes the woman 
who brings forth the man-child. And the same dragon appears 
to be intended in the seventeenth chapter, where it is ridden by 
the mystical Babylon that makes war with the saints. The 
dragon stands for the power of Antichrist^, exhibited especially 
in the adverse action of imperial Rome. This, then, is the nearest 
parallel to the situation in our Ode. 

Now the situation cannot be reduced to an actual war, as 
when Rome subdues Jerusalem under Pompey, for in these wars 
Rome always wins : so it must be some other form of conflict, 
either the passive resistance and triumph of the saints in times 
of persecution, or the conflict between truth and error, which 
results in the defeat of heretical teaching. 

The Odist refers to the conflict as a personal one carried on 
from place to place by himself: 

' Thou hast raised me up over his roots to destroy his 
seed : thou wast there and didst help me ; and in every 
place thy name was blessed by me: thy right hand 
destroyed his wicked poison.' 

This is the story, not of a persecution, but of a conflict 

1 Thus Irenaeus, in denouncing the Gnostic leaders, such as Simon Magus, and 
Carpocrates, calls them expressly the precursors of the dragon, who is by his magic 
going to cast down from Heaven the third part of the stars; that is, Simon and 
Carpocrates are rehearsals of the coming Antichrist. See Irenaeus (ed. Mass. 164). 



64 INTRODUCTION 

between truth and error : and the dragon with seven heads 
stands, not for a world-power nor an aggressive world-ruler, but 
for the Antichrist who is spreadmg the poison of false doctrine 
and must be confuted from city to city. A parallel situation 
would be the conflict between Peter and Simon Magus in the 
Clementine Homilies. Who this Antichrist is, in the mind of 
the writer, or what is the special form of error that is combated, 
we have not sufficient information to decide : and for that reason 
must leave the historical situation somewhat obscure. 

The next Ode to be discussed, in the hope of finding some 
points of contact with history, is the twenty-third : and it is the 
most difficult of all the Odes to interpret, and quite unlike any 
of the other compositions in the series. 

After some opening sentences, affirming that Joy, Grace and 
Love are the marks of the elect of God, we are in- 

The 

mysterious formed that a letter was mysteriously sent down 

letter 

from heaven to earth, as if it had been shot from a 
bow. People rushed to read it ; but it was talismaned by a seal, 
which none dared to break. Like the tables of the law, it was 
wholly written by the finger of God and the name of the Trinity 
was on it. 

A mysterious wheel (?) protects the letter from venturesome 
or hostile hands. This wheel with the sign upon it went 
down to the feet, along with the head. Perplexing as this 
language is, it appears to be explained of Christ's descent into 
Hades : for in Ode 42, where there is an account of Christ's 
under-world triumph, we are informed that death cast Him up, and 
let go the feet zvith the head. "Christ is the head, and the feet are 
those members of His who are imprisoned in Hades. This 
explains our statement about the head going down to the feet. 
It seems, then, that the mysterious letter has something in it 
relating to the Descensus ad Inferos. 

We may compare it with the little book in Apoc. v., which 
is sealed so that no one can open it, and read it : here there 
are seven seals, which are to be broken successively. Another 
suggestive parallel would be the letter in the Bardesanian 
Hymn of the Soul, which is sent to rouse the King's Son in 
Egypt 1. 

' See Ails of Tliomas for the Hymn, and the translation of it in Burkitt, Early 
Eastern Christianity. 



THE MYSTERIOUS LETTER 65 

This letter was also talismaned with a powerful seal : 

' This was my letter, sealed with the King's own seal 
on the cover, 

Lest it should fall in the hands of the fierce Baby- 
lonian Demons.' 

It flew rapidly as an eagle : 

' High it flew as the Eagle, King of the birds of the 
heaven, 

Flew and alighted beside me, and spoke in the speech 
of my country.' 

Such flying letters are not uncommon in Apocryphal litera- 
ture: one such is sent by Baruch to Babylon, and carried by an 
eagle. The machinery is not unlike that in our Ode. 

We have not, however, succeeded in finding a historical 
situation for this Ode and the implied document. , 

It does not seem to belong to the main body of the I 
collection ; it may, however, be connected with the forty- ' 
second Ode, and both of them may belong to a later period 
than the rest of the book. 

We referred above to the suggestions furnished in Ode 22 
„. . . of a conflict with Antichrist in the form of 

The deceiver 

and his bride, gome heretical teaching, whose poison was being 
widely diffused. This suggestion finds some further confirmation 
in Ode 38, where the writer refers to his pursuit of Truth and 
the protection which it gave him from the poisons and plagues 
of Error. He came across a mysterious Bridegroom and Bride, 
who are corrupting the whole world, and giving them to drink 
from a cup which, in Circean manner, makes away with their 
understanding. The Odist escapes by Divine Grace, and by 
his passion for Truth. But who are these that furnish the 
blandishments that our writer succeeds in resisting? It cannot 
be the language of a mere crusader in favour of celibacy, though 
we know there was a strong tendency in the early Church, 
especially in the East, to regard all married life as a form of 
corruption that was to be avoided. But here a mysterious 
Bridegroom and Bride spread a seductive table before the world, 
and after they have intoxicated their victims, they forsake 
them as soon as they have robbed them of their understanding. 
This can hardly be th? language of a general hostility to 
o. s. 9 



66 INTRODUCTION 

marriage. And it seems more natural to regard the seducers 
in the Ode as real people, who are bewitching the world. One 
thinks of 'thy wife Jezebel' in Apoc. ii. 20, of Simon Magus, 
and his ' lost sheep ' Helena, or some other of the many Anti- 
christs with whom the Church had to contend in the first and 
second centuries. The description in the Ode is too shadowy 
for a more exact identification. 

In one passage in the Odes the writer speaks of himself m 
language which suggests that he was by birth 
jeworGentiie? ^ Qg^^jje^ ^nd that he was looked upon by those 
to whom he had joined himself with astonishment. The Ode to 
which we refer is the forty-first, where in the midst of a noble 
strain of Christian exultation and confession of Christ and the 
great day that has dawned in Him, we find : 

' Let us exult with the joy of the Lord. All that 
see me will be astonished : for I am from another race : 
the Father of Truth remembered me.' 

The writer is explaining his position in a Christian com- 
munity as a Gentile amongst Jews. He explains his faith in 
a Saviour who 'makes alive and does not reject our souls.' 

The language suits the first century better than the second, 
and the Church in Palestine better than that in Asia Minor, 
Greece or Egypt. 

In another Ode, Christ Himself makes something like an 
Christ receives apology for the reception of the Gentiles. Thus in 

Gentiles. Qde lO: 

' I was strengthened and made mighty and took the 

world captive The Gentiles were gathered together 

who were scattered abroad. And I zvas unpolluted by my 
love They became my people for ever and ever.' 

There can be no doubt that this Ode is Messianic, and that, 
to put it in the lowest possible terms, it is explanatory of the 
coming in of the Gentiles. No such explanation, or, if we prefer 
it, apology, would be natural in Corinth or in Ephesus. It belongs 
farther East, and seems to me to savour, in any case, of the first 
century. Certainly the Gentile could not feel himself isolated, 



THE COAT OF SKIN 6/ 

nor have to be apologized for in the great Churches of the West, 
nor in the second century, when Gentile bishops began to appear 
in Jerusalem itself 

There is another direction in which the writers of the Odes 
The coat of show a curious contact with Judaism. 
^'""' It is well known that the teaching of the earliest 

Christians and of the philosophically minded Jews of the first 
century made a special study of the story of creation in the first 
chapters of Genesis, which they systematically allegorised. We 
have a statement of Anastasius the Sinaite that all the early 
Christian exegetes, from Papias onward, interpreted the Hexa- 
hemeron, or Six days of Creation, by reference to Christ and the 
Church'. And those who did not make this direct mystical 
reference, especially the great Alexandrines, followed Philo in 
a general allegorisation of the narrative. Many of these ex- 
planations, whether Jewish or Christian, are well known. But 
there is one case which is more obscure. The clothing of Adam 
and Eve with coats of skins at the time of their expulsion from 
Paradise was a point that required explanation, and taxed the 
ingenuity of Philo himself In his Questions upon Genesis he 
first apologizes for the homely occupation attributed to the Most 
High, and argues that at any rate simple leather garb is superior 
to purple and fine linen, and then he boldly breaks away from 
the literal explanation and says that the coat of skin simply 
means the human body, which is the receptacle for the Mind 
and the Life which God had already created. 

Now this interpretation is not confined to Philo'', for there is a 
steady stream of Rabbinical opinion which has coloured the 
folk-lore of Eastern Europe that Adam had before his fall 
a nature clothed in light, like God Himself ' whose robe is the 
light,' and that after his fall the light was replaced by the 
ordinary integument. It will be interesting to trace this belief, 
which agrees with that of Philo so far as to make the coat of 
skin to be the human body, and to see whether it has left its 
mark on early Christian circles of thought. 

The origin of the belief appears to be indicated by a various 

1 See Routh, Rell. i. 15. 

2 We find it, for example, ■ in the Encratite Cassianus in the second century, 
according to the testimony of Clement of Alexandria (Strom, iii. 14), X'™""' 5^ 
Sepfiarivovs TjyeiraL 6 KaffffLavbi to. trciyuara. 



68 INTRODUCTION 

reading of the passage, Gen. iii. 21, which is credited to a MS. 
belonging at one time to Rabbi MeirS viz. that instead of 

"liy riiJriD = coats of skin 
we should read 

liN nijnO = coats of light. 

We could then translate the passage, ' And for Adam and his 
wife Jahveh Elohim had made coats of light and had clothed 
them.' It is quite possible that this may be the origin of the 
Rabbinical conceit as to the 'Light-Body' of Adam. And 
the opinion is strongly reflected upon European folk-lore. It 
appears also in Gnostic circles : for we find in the Bardesanian 
Hymn of the Soul which is embedded in the Acts of Thomas, 
that the Prince who forgets the Imperial Palace whence he 
came, in his journey to Egypt to find the Pearl of great price, 
had left behind him in the homeland the robe of glory with 
which he had been adorned. The account tells us 

' They took off from me the glittering robe, which in 
their affection they had made for me, and the purple toga 
which was measured and woven to my stature.' 

He puts on the disguise of an Egyptian dress and forgets his 
race and his country. When the young Prince comes to himself 
in the far country, he gets possession of the pearl, and promptly 
strips off from him the filthy and unclean dress in which he was 
clad. On his way home, the robe came to meet him ; it fitted 
him closely and seemed to be a mirror of himself It was, in 
fact, his double, and had grown, with his growth, during his long 
absence. 

Prof Burkitt points out that this Heavenly Robe represents 
the Body Celestial, it is ' our house which is from heaven ' : 

' That which St Paul desired was no fixed " house " or 
"habitation" but a Heavenly Form. So here, too, the Robe is no 
article of clothing, but a Bright Form. The Syriac word means 
Tlie Bright or The Shining thing. It is "put off" and "put on" 
by the Soul 2.' 

Here, then, we have a companion to the belief in the Body of 

1 So in Midrash Rabboth : 

' In the Thorah of Rabbi Meir they found it written. Coats of light : these 
are the garments of the first Adam.' 
- JJurkitt, Early Eastern Christianity, p. -215. 



THE COAT OF SKIN 6g 

Light which belonged to Adam before he fell from celestial to 
terrestrial life. The two ideas, that of the pre-existent soul that 
has to leave heaven for earth, and that of the unfallen creation 
of God, whose environment is changed from a coat of light to a 
coat of skin, are evidently worked out on parallel lines. 

Now it is not difficult to recognise the traces of the clothing 
of the Old Adam and the clothing of the original Man, who 
is also the New Adam, in the New Testament. We have, for 
example, the instruction to put off the Old Man, and to put on 
the New Man, or to put on (it is the language of clothing) the 
Lord Jesus Christ. But what we want now to examine is 
whether there are any similar traces in our Odes. Is there 
any doctrine of a Light-Body or of a Skin-Body? Let us see. 
For instance, in Ode 25, we have 

' In me there shall be nothing that is not light : and I 
was clothed with the covering of Thy Spirit, and I cast i 
away from me fnj raiment of skin! -"' 

Here we have the very figure of the third chapter of Genesis, 
explained in a spiritual manner of the conversion and regenera- 
tion of the Soul. 

Something similar to this appears in Ode 21, 

' I put off darkness and clothed myself with light.' 

Very nearly the same idea is involved in Ode 11, 

' I forsook the folly which is spread over the earth, 
and I stripped it ofif and cast it from me : and the Lord 
renewed me in His raiment (cf Ps. civ. 2) and possessed 
me by His light.' 

And notice that this re-creating act of God is immediately 
followed by the statement of Paradise Regained : we are 
engaged in an allegory of the third chapter of Genesis. I think 
it will be admitted that the writer (or writers) of the Odes knew 
the allegorical explanation of the coat of skin with which Adam 
was clad. If this be conceded, then we must again recognise 
that we are moving in Jewish circles, for it is very unlikely that, 
at the early date required for our Odes, a Jewish conceit could 
have penetrated very far into the Gentile world. The ' coat of 



70 INTRODUCTION 

skin' is a significant proof of the Jewish or semi-Jewish author- 
ship of the Odes'. [It appears again in the Kabbala, as 
Mr G. R. S. Mead points out to me. Zohar ii. 229 b : ' When 
Adam was in the Garden of Eden, he was dressed in the celestial 
garment, which is a Garment of Heavenly Light. But when he 
was expelled from the Garden of Eden and became subject to 
the wants of this world, what is written? The Lord God 
(Elohim) made coats of skins to Adam and his wife and clothed 
them (Gen. iii. 21), for, prior to this, they had Garments of Light 
— Light of that Light which was used in the Garden of Eden.' 
For further allusion to the coats of light see Sepher HayyasJiar 
in Migne, Diet, des Apocryphes, torn. ii. coll. 1 102 — IISO.J 

This allegorical treatment of the particular case in question 
could not have continued very long in use in the Church, 
because of the complication with the story of the fig-leaves ; if 
the coat of skin is the human body, what are the fig-leaves } 
Evidently the allegory will have over-reached itself It will 
survive, however, in folk-lore and in Gnosticism. 

It may, perhaps, be objected that the interpretation of the 
coats of skins as equivalent to human bodies might just as well 
be Gnostic as Judaeo-Christian. For instance, we have quoted 
above the language of Cassian the Gnostic for this very belieP. 
But we have not only detected the equation of the coat of skin 
with the human body ; we have also found traces of the belief 
in a coat of light which has been lost when the coat of skin was 
acquired, and have connected this belief with a various reading, 
or a Rabbinical conceit, in the text of Gen. iii. 21. So that, 
while it is quite likely that some early forms of Gnosticism 
depend directly upon Palestinian teaching, we ought also to 
allow that the language of our Odes on this subject is very near 
to the source of the Gnosis, which is very nearly the same thing 
as saying that it is not Gnostic. We will illustrate this by 
showing another case of allegorisation of the text of Genesis, 

1 For the curious developments of this belief in an original light-body of Adam 
which are current in Eastern Europe, we may consult Dahnhardt, Natursagen ii. 225. 
The coat of light was held to be of the nature of horn, and this bright integument 
fell away when Adam and Eve sinned. All that remains of it is the human nails ! 

2 We might also have quoted Valentinus, the prince of the Gnostics ; for accord- 
ing to Irenaeus' account of Valentinus' cosmogony, the Demiurge first fashioned the 
dpBponros xo'^i^s from some invisible and fluid substance, and then clothed him in the 
'coat of skin' which is t6 aiVSijroc crapKtov (cf. Iren. ed. Mass. p. 27). 



PARADISE REGAINED 7 1 

which might be claimed as Gnostic, if it were not a recognised 
fact that the allegorising of these early chapters of Genesis is 
common to all the early Christian fathers. 

In Ode II we have a beautiful sketch of the recovery of the 
lost Paradise, and of the blessedness of those who 
RiSiJfed and ^re planted in that land (being considered as ' trees 
hlrbs"^"^ of righteousness, the planting of the Lord') or who 

live by the fruit of the trees (being considered as 
those who have returned to the privileges of the unfallen Adam). 
Incidentally it is stated that such persons ' have turned from 
wickedness to God's delights, and have turned back the bitter- 
ness of the trees from them, when planted in God's land.' 

The metaphor is confused ; on the one hand the believers 
are the trees, on the other hand they are the denizens of 
Paradise, who will have nothing to do with the bitterness of the 
trees. Disentangling the similitudes we see that the entry into 
Paradise goes along with an avoidance of certain bitter trees or 
products of trees. Can we find out what this means? 

The early interpreters of Genesis had to face a Divine 
injunction to eat of every tree in the Garden, with one single 
exception of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil. But 
this injunction raised the question as to whether all the trees, 
herbs and fruits were fit to eat. What about the bitter herbs ? 
The answer could only be, either that there were no bitter herbs, 
or else that they were to be avoided as uneatable, being made 
for some other uses. The author of the Ode to which we refer 
evidently takes the latter view : there are bitter herbs, but they 
are to be avoided. He does not think them useless, for nothing 
is useless in the Paradise of God. Now this doctrine of the 
avoidance of the bitter herbs had been credited to our Lord 
Himself, in a conversation between Himself and Salome, which 
has been preserved for us by Clement of Alexandria from the 
Gospel according to the Egyptians. The passage is strongly 
Encratite. Salome asks how long death is to rule over men, 
and receives the answer that it is as long as women bear 
children. ' Then,' rejoined Salome enquiringly, ' I did well in not 
having any children ? ' to which suggestion our Lord replies, 
' Eat every herb, but shun the bitter herb.' It is certain that 
this reply is based upon the language of Genesis, e.g. Gen. i. 29 
' Behold ! I have given you every herb, whose seed is in itself 



72 INTRODUCTION 

on the face of the whole earth and all the trees... to you they 
shall be for food': and Gen. ii. 9 'And the Lord God had 
brought forth from the ground every tree that was fair to the 
sight and pleasant to the taste,' &c. It is clear, then, that the 
language of Jesus in the passage cited from the Gospel accord- 
ing to the Egyptians, refers to the Garden of Eden. What, then, 
is meant by shunning the bitter herb? If we examine the 
passage in which Clement of Alexandria discusses the meaning 
{Strom, iii. 9), we shall find that he is opposing a school of 
Encratites, who said that the bitter herb was marriage. 
Clement, himself, who is Anti-encratite will have none of this : 
he challenges the opinion and affirms that marriage is not a sin, 
nor is there anything bitter about the rearing or producing of 
children. So he rejects the Encratite doctrine. In so doing, he 
has shown us that the doctrine existed and that it was a wide- 
spread interpretation. What shall we say, then, of the writer of 
our eleventh Ode? If he says that the saints restored to the life 
of Paradise have nothing to do with the bitter trees, must we not 
allow that he, too, is allegorising and that he holds Encratite 
views with regard to marriage ? Such views were wide-spread 
in the early Christian Church, and survived in Gnostic circles, as 
in the Old Syrian Church, and amongst the followers of Tatian, 
but I do not see that they need to be especially labelled Gnostic, 
since they spring quite naturally out of the allegorical treatment 
of the first chapters of Genesis, or attached themselves easily to 
that particular form of interpretation'. 

This case of the ' bitter herbs ' and the previous one of the 
'coat of skin,' are the closest points of contact of primitive 
teaching with Gnosticism. I do not see that we need to 
definitely attach the Gnostic label. 

We shall see presently that the writer of the main body of 
the Odes does not keep the Sabbath and gives very early 
Christian reason for his neglect of that Jewish duty. 

We may now go on to discuss the traces of Christian 
Scriptures in our book of Odes, and the dogmatic and eccle- 
siastical position of the writer or writers involved. 

1 Vi^e may compare the Acts of Thomas, where the King's son and his bride are 
persuaded by our Lord to renounce maniage, and 'the care of children, the end of 
whom is bitter sorrow.' The bride explains to her mother, 'I have not had intercourse 
with a husband, the end whereof is bitter repentance.' 



NEW TESTAMENT QUOTATIONS 73 

When we examine the Odes to see how far they are under 
Use of the influence of the Scriptures of the Old Testa- 

cnptures. ment, we find the problem is quite different from 

that which presents itself in the eighteen Psalms. In these the 
use of the Old Testament is patent both in language and in 
quotation, as one can see by examining the portions of the 
Psalms which are printed in uncial type by Ryle and James, in 
order to mark the coincidence of language with the Old Testa- 
ment. Moreover certain parts of the prophets, especially the 
latter part of Isaiah, have been closely studied and followed : 
and it is the recognition of this fact that has suggested to Felix 
Perles some of his most attractive emendations through the 
supposed original Hebrew'. 

But in the case of the Odes we are at a loss : we cannot tell 
what Greek lies behind the Syriac, except in a very few cases : 
and this makes linguistic identifications difficult and almost 
impossible: nor does the examination of the ideas which the 
writer expresses lead to a large harvest of coincidences with the 
Canonical Psalter or the Hebrew Prophets. Perhaps this is 
natural, in view of the originality of the writer, with whom it 
was easier to say inspired things than to report them. 

When we turn to the New Testament, the result is equally 
surprising : the name of the Gospel is not found, nor the name 
of Jesus : direct historical references are limited to those events 
which are recorded in the Creed, to which we may perhaps add 
an oblique allusion to Christ's power to walk on the waters, 
with a possible allusion to the Dove at the Baptism. Not a 
single saying of Jesus is directly quoted, though there seem to 
be one or two indirect references. For instance Christ's yoke is 
spoken of in Ode 42 (' my yoke was over those that love 
me') and there is one passage in Ode 22, which looks like a 
reflexion from the words ' on this rock I will build my church ' 
(Matt. xvi. 18)^: only in this case if coincidence were more 
than accidental, the Ode has the substitution of Kingdom for 
Church, which suggests for it priority over the Evangelic 
language. 

Setting aside for the moment the question of the use of 

1 Perles: Zur Erkldrung ckr Psalmen Salomos. Berlin, 1903. 

2 I.e. 'That the foundation of everything might be thy rock : and on it thou didst 
build thy Kingdom.' 

O. S. 1° 



74 INTRODUCTION 

Johannine writings, and of the Apocalypse, we find next to 
nothing from the Pauline Epistles : there is a sentence in 
Ode 3, 

'The Lord is zealous that those things should be 
known, which by His grace have been given to us,' 

which may perhaps be an echo of i Cor. ii. 12 'that we may 
know the things which are freely given us of God.' We have also 
some doubtful references to Rom. viii. 35, 36 in Ode i ('I shall 
not be separated from Him') and Ode 5 (' If everything should 
be shaken, I stand firm') and Ode 28 ('The sword shall not 
divide me from Him, nor the scimitar '), and there are occasional 
allusions to salvation and justification by Divine Grace. There 
are also frequent allusions, which have a Pauline ring, to Christ 
as the Head, to whom believers are the members. The figure 
is worked out so as to include the souls in Hades, who are 
Christ's ieet\ 

Frequent allusions to a living crown can be illustrated from 
I Pet. V. 4 and from Jac. i. 12 and Apoc. ii. 10, but no direct 
quotations can be established. They may all run back into 
'. a primitive Logion, ' I will give thee a crown of life.' 

The chief coincidences with the Apocalypse are in the title of 
Ode 3. II. 'the Living One' (Apoc. i. 17) given to Christ (but this was 
J, '^ ■ also at the beginning of the book of Sayings of Jesus''') : in some 
of the expressions of victory over spiritual enemies, and the 
possession of Paradise and its trees, as well as in the allusion to 
an opposing dragon with seven heads, and perhaps to the story of 
the Sealed Book. It is doubtful if any of these parallelisms can 
be pressed to the point of established quotation: the dragon 
with seven heads is, perhaps, the best case for an identification : 
but it will be remembered that dragons are a common feature 
of apocalyptical machinery in the period to which the Odes 
must belong. 

It is when we come to the Gospel and Epistles of John 

I that we find the community of ideas to be the most pronounced. 

/ We have clear statements that Christ is the Word, that He is 

' before the foundation of the world ; that He bestows living 

' As in Ode 42. 

2 U. 'These are the [wonderful] words which Jesus the Living One spake': 
a form of introduction which is imitated in the Coptic Book of Jeu. 



CHRISTOLOGY OF THE ODES 75 

water abundantly ; that He is the door of everything ; that He 
stands to His people in the relation of Lover to Beloved : that 
they love Him because He first loved them (for so we may 
interpret the language of Ode 3 : 'I should not have known 
how to love the Lord, if He had not loved me '), that their love 
to the Christ makes them His friends (Ode 8). These and 
similar phrases betray a Johannine atmosphere : but do they 
betray the use of the Fourth Gospel ? The problem is, on a 
wider scale, something like that which arises in the discussion 
whether Valentinus the Gnostic used the Fourth Gospel. Hip- 
polytus tells us in his Refutation of Heresies (p. 185) that 
Valentinus taught that ' God the Father was all love, but love 
is not love where there is no object of love. So the Father 
begat two emanations, vov'i and a\rj6eia^.' Now is that a case 
of the Fourth Gospel or not } The serious critic would hesitate 
to affirm it ; yet the language is very like that of our third 
Ode ; and it would probably be wise to hold the judgment 
in suspense with regard to the use of the Fourth Gospel in the 
Odes, especially when it is so difficult to trace any other Gospel 
quotation or incident, or Saying of Jesus. But I think it will 
be conceded that we are in a Johannine atmosphere. 

One coincidence has been detected between the Odes and the 
Ignatian Epistles, in the allusion to ' talking water ' ; but there 
is no need to assume quotation on either side, the language 
being sufficiently explained by the folk-lore of the time. 

The net result of these comparisons is to place the collection 
of Odes at a very early period in the history of the Christian 
Church. One or two of them had already been referred to the 
early part of the second century, on account of the almost 
canonical use made of them in the Pistis Sophia. The main 
body of the Odes, when studied, takes us in the same direction, 
only perhaps somewhat further. 

We come now to the question of the underlying doctrines 
Dogmatic of which Can be traced in the Odes. We have al- 
the Odes. j.g^jy alluded to Christ's pre-existence^ to His 

pre-eminence in the Churchy and to the spiritual union between 
Himself and believers^. We have also pointed out some refer- 

1 'K-^ivi] yip, (pTJcriv, rfv oXos, 17 &k ayairri ovK iiTTiv a.y6.ir7i, ihv ^r) J to 
ir/airiiixivov. ' As in Ode 28, Ode 41, &c. 

3 As in Ode 31, Ode 33, &c. * As in Ode 3, Ode 42, &c. 



•j6 INTRODUCTION 

ences to His yoke, and to the foundation of His Kingdom, and 
to His power to walk upon the stormy waters. 

One of the strongest expressions with regard to the nature of 
Christ will be found in Ode 41, where He is called ' the Son of 
the Most High, who appeared in the perfection of His Father, 
...the Word that was before-time in Him, the Messiah or Christ 
who is truly one, and was known before the foundation of the 
world.' In the words 'The Christ is truly one,' taken in 
connexion with the other statements as to His pre-existence, 
we have suggestions of controversy, over a division in the 
nature of Christ, of which, perhaps, the earliest known trace is 
in the first Epistle of John' (irav irvevfjia fj-rj ofioXoyei rov 
'Itjo-oOj') where the various reading, Xvei for firj ofioXoyei, if not 
primitive, is certainly very early. This Ode cannot come from 
a Docetic, nor can it easily be referred to an Adoptionist 
source^. 

An equally pronounced Christology may be detected in 
Ode 29 where the writer says, 

' I believed in the Lord's Messiah, 
And it appeared to me that He is the Lord.' 

We must not too hastily assume that all these statements 
come from one hand, and we must be prepared to find, along 
with variety of authorship (if that can be made out), a variety 
also of theological definitions. There are some Odes which are 
a little hard of explanation on orthodox lines, because they 
appear to use Adoptionist language'. But if this suggests 
subordination of Christ to the Father, in another Ode it is the 
Holy Spirit that is subordinate, for we are told (Ode 24) that 
' the Dove fluttered over the Messiah, because He was her 
head*.' Again in the Ode previously quoted (Ode 36} it 
appears to follow that the Holy Spirit was the Mother of 
Jesus, which we know to have been a feature of Ebionite belief. 
These variations suggest that theology had not fixed her land- 

' I John iv. 3. 

' Cf. Novatian, De Trinitate 30. Irenaeus (M. 206 et passim) : 'Non ergo alterum 
Filium novit evangelium nisi hunc qui ex Maria est, qui et passus est, sed neque 
Christum avolantem ante passionem ab Jesu.' 

* As in Ode 36. 

* In later ages this would be known as the heresy of Macedonius, but the language 
here is innocent of heretical intention. 



CHRISTOLOGY OF THE ODES 77 

marks nor laid down her definitions. On the other hand, it is 
clear that the Odes do not regard Christ as a mere man, but as 
a pre-existent being and as the Divine Logos. One Ode has 
the doctrine of the Trinity under a grotesque form worthy of 
the Middle Ages. But this Ode we are unwilling to class ; 
with the rest of the book. 

In regard to the points of early Christian belief which 
occur in the Odes, it is clear that the Crucifixion is definitely 
alluded to, less clearly the Resurrection ; but what surprises us 
is the extraordinary emphasis upon the Virgin Birth and the 
Descent into Hades. The former of these is in a state of 
evolution beyond the Canonical Gospels : the birth is explained 
as painless^, and unexpected : we are on the very verge of the 
details which occur in the apocryphal Gospels of the Infancy. 

The other Article of the Creed, the Descent into Hades, is 
also treated with picturesque detail, very much as in the Gospel 
of Nicodemus. Just as in the latter gospel^ Hades complains of 
the inward pain which he feels and which intimates an ap- 
proaching discharge of imprisoned souls, so in Ode 42 we are 
told that ' Hades saw me and was miserable : death cast me tip, 
and many along with me.' But the prayer of the Souls in 
Hades is very fine, and has no vulgar suggestions of Jonah and 
the Whale about it, such as we find in the byways of Patristic 
literature. 

It will, perhaps, be said that the advanced state of evolution 
of these two dogmas renders it impossible that the collection 
should be referred to the end of the first century^ There is, 

' Here, at all events, we are in the region of folk-lore; the Chinese legend of the 
birth and conception of Hou-tsi, the founder of the dynasty of Tchii, runs on the 
same line. His mother brought him forth as a tender lamb without efifort, without 
pain and without pollution. See amongst the Chinese Classics, the Shi-King III. ii. i, 
which has been Englished as follows : 

' Lo ! when her carrying time was done, 
Came like a lamb her first-born son, 
No pains of labour suffered she — 
No hurt, no pain, no injury.' 
Cf. Ev. Ps. Matihaei, c. 1 3 ' Nulla pollutio sanguinis facta est in nascente, nuUus 
dolor in parturiente.' 

^ Tischendorf, Evan. Apocrypha, p. 396 'Contremui perterritus pavore, et omnia 
officia mea simul mecum conturbata sunt.' 

B. H. Cowper, Apoc. Gospels, p. 305 'For lo ! I see that all I have ever swallowed 
are in commotion and my belly is in pain' 0onah ii. 2); which is taken from the 
Greek Descensus, see Tisch. I.e. p. 327. 

^ The Descent into Hades is a first century doctrine. Hamack says of it : ' the 
notion of a descensus ad /w/i'rMa... commended itself on the groimd of Old \ 



I 



78 INTRODUCTION 

however, an alternative suggestion, that the forty-second Ode, 
for instance, may be a later product : for it has not been demon- 
strated that all the Odes come from the same hand or time. 

The organic life of the Church can -hardly be detected in the 
book of Odes. The Church itself is not mentioned, 
Order and unlcss it should be in the reference to a Pure 

Virgin in Ode 33 who stands and proclaims the 
invitation of the Gospel. The figure of the Pure Virgin is well 
known^ to have been a common one in the first and second 
centuries, and has influenced the New Testament itself But 
the Pure Virgin may equally well be the Divine Wisdom who 
stands and calls menl 

There is also the implication of corporate unity in the figure of 
the Head and the members' : this may be directly derived from 
St Paul. Of Church officials there are only, {a) the writer of Ode 20 
who calls himself a priest of God and defines his priesthood as 
any mystic might, as the offering to God of the sacrifice of his 
thought, and {b) there are a body of persons engaged in carrying 
the water of life to the thirsty, who are called Blessed Ministers 
or Blessed Deacons (Ode 6) : we may compare the language of 
Perpetua concerning ' Tertius and Pomponius, blessed deacons who 
ministered to us,' who bribed the gaolers and obtained us relief 
But the writer of the Odes does not necessarily mean anything 
so highly evolved as the ministry of the African Church at the 
beginning of the third century. His ministers have a commission 
to preach the word and are counted happy in so doing. 

Of Sacraments the Odes do not seem to know much^ The 
only directions in which one could look for refer- 
sacraments. ^^^^^ ^^ Baptism would be (i) the Living Water, 
(ii) the allusion to the Seal. Of the former it is unnecessary to 
speak. It is frankly impossible that the living water which the 
thirsty are invited in the Scriptures to come and take freely can 

Testament prediction. In the first century, however, it still remained uncertain, 
lying on the borders of those productions of religious fancy which were not at once 
able to acquire a right of citizenship in the communities.' Hist, of Dogma, i. 202 
Eng. tr. ' ' ' 

' e.g. 2 Cor. xi. i, and cf. Hegesippus in Euseb. H. E. iv. 22. In the letter of 
the Churches of Lyons and Vienna (c. 12) the Virgin Mother is the Church (xai 
iveyiviTa TroXXj) X"-?^ '''V irapdivifi fi^riTpi). 

'^ Cf. Proverbs viii. i, 2. » As in Ode i, Ode 17, &c. 

* [Unless Diettrich and Bernard should be right that the whole of the hymns are 
charged with references to Baptism : see preface for details of the argument.] 



THE SEAL OF GOD'S OWNERSHIP 79 

be any outward affusion : but perhaps something ought to be 
said of the Seal, because although, in the New Testament, this 
is a term used of the gift of the Holy Spirit, it is often employed 
by Patristic writers to denote baptism and the baptized {e.g. in 
the epitaph of Abercius and elsewhere). 

In the Odes we have plenty of reference to seals : we have 
the abysses of Hades sealed up with the Lord's seal in Ode 24 : 
we have the mysterious Letter from Heaven sealed with a magic 
seal in Ode 23 ; and we have in Ode 4 a statement of the 
talismanic power of the Seal of God, which angels as well as 
men possess and which all creation knows and fears. And in 
Ode 8 the Lord says He has set His seal upon the faces of His 
people, just as we have in the Apocalypse (vii. 3, xiv. i). But 
in the Apocalypse, as Dr Swete points out, the seal is not 
sacramental. Perhaps it was a taboo-mark of some Jewish sect. 
If there is any scriptural reference in this doctrine of the 
Seal, it must be sought in Ezekiel ix., and the ink-mark which 
an angelic scribe is told to set on the righteous^ The seal is 
alluded to in the extant Psalms of Solomon (Ps. Sol. xv. 6) 
where we are told that ' the sign (<ri?/xetoy) of God is upon the 
righteous for Salvation.' It is, therefore, a pre-Christian con- 
ception. Here Perles very naturally compared Ezekiel ix. 6 
and supplied the Haggadic explanation from Shabbath 55% as 
follows : 

' God spake to Gabriel : Go and stamp on the fore- 
head of the righteous a mark of ink, that the destroying 
angels may have no power over him'' : and on the forehead 
of the hypocrites a mark of blood, that the destroying 
angels may acquire power over them.' 
From this talismanic sign (with which the archangels are 
here entrusted), there was developed, as is well known, the 
doctrine of the talismanic virtue of the sign of the cross in 
baptism. But this development (arising out of an interpretation 
of the use of the letter Tau as the sign in Ezekiel) is, I think, 
later than what we have in the Odes^ There does not seem, 
therefore, to be any definite allusion to Baptism. We can see 

1 In the East it is still common to seal with ink. 

2 Cf. Ode 4. 7, 8 'who is there that shall put on thy grace and be hurt? for thy 
seal is known.' 

3 We have it in Tert. Adv. Marc. iii. 22 where the letter Tau is explained to be 
'the very form of the Cross which was foretold to be the sign upon our foreheads.' 



86 INTRODUCTION 

the later interpretation very clearly in Lactantius, Div. Inst. iv. 
27, who says that the gods cannot approach those in whom 
they see the heavenly mark, nor hurt those whom the sign as 
an impregnable wall protects, which is very like Ode 4. 7, 8. 
Perhaps Lactantius has here a reminiscence of the Ode\ 

As to the Eucharist, I can find no allusion whatever : there 
are no references to the religious use of bread and wine ; the 
writers of the Odes seem to prefer milk and honey ; but these 
are not spoken of sacramentally, but mystically and alle- 
gorically. 

The allegorical use of the terms ' milk and honey ' is natural 
enough in view of the Old Testament descriptions of the Land 
of Promise : but it should be remembered that there are traces 
of a milk-and-honey sacrament in the early Church. For 
example in the Epistle of Barnabas'', we have a question 
raised as to the meaning of the milk and honey in the Old 
Testament. And after some preliminary allegorising to show 
that the believers in Jesus are themselves the good land, he 
asks, 'Why milk and honey?' And the answer is that 'the 
young child is first quickened with honey and then with milk.' 

Probably this refers in the first instance to a folk-lore custom 
in connexion with newly-born children, but it seems to have very 
early developed into a Christian sacrament for new converts, who 
had been born again into the Kingdom of God^. 

It does not, however, seem that the milk-and-honey passages 
in the Odes will bear the sacramental interpretation. The nine- 
teenth Ode, for example, has no suggestion of a recent conversion 
about it. The only one where it seems possible to make 
connexion with the new-birth is Ode 8, where the Lord says, 
' My own breasts I prepared for them that they might drink my 
holy milk and live thereby ' ; this might perhaps, in view of the 
previous reference to the ' seal upon the faces,' be interpreted 
sacramentally, but it does not seem likely. The baptismal 
sacrament, as we have shown, is not milk but milk and honey. 

1 'Sed quoniam neque accedere ad eos possunt, in quibus coelestem notam 
vidennt, nee 11s nocere, quos signum immortale munierit, tanquam inexpugnabilis 
murus.' 

2 c. 6. 

» Besides Barnabas, we may refer to TertnUian, De corona, u. 3 (inde suscepti 
lactis et mellis concordiam praegustamus) ; Adv. Marc. i. 14: Clem. Alex. Paed. i i 
p. 128: Coptic Canons, ii. 46, &c. ■ ■ • > 



THE LOST SECOND ODE 8 1 

The only allusion to wine is in the account of the Seducer 
in Ode 38, who lays plots for the elect and wishes, by an 
intoxicating cup, to rob them of their reason. So far as the 
enquiry has gone, the Odes are hardly to be quoted in the 
history of the Sacraments ; they ought, therefore, to belong 
to an early period of evolution in the organic life of the Church. 

There is still something to be said with regard to the 
The lost missing portions of our MS. The closing portions 

Second Ode. of jj^e 1 8 Psalms of Solomon are preserved for us 
adequately in the Greek, but the lacuna at the beginning of the 
Odes is serious, and involves the whole of the second Ode, and 
the beginning of the third Ode. 

It has occurred to me that perhaps a sentence from 
this second Ode may be preserved in Clement of Alexandria. 
For in his Protrepticus (p. 5) we have the following sentence: 
06 eK Aa^iS, Kal irpb aiirov, 6 tov @eov Xoyoii, Xvpav jxev Kal 
KiOdpav, TO. dyjrv')^a opyava, virepiBmv, Kocrfiov Be rovBe, Kal Stj Kal 
TOV ajXiKpov KO(Tp.ov TOV dvdpwTTOV, yjrvxv'^ Te Kal crMfia avTOv, 
ayio) TTvevfiaTi dpp.oadjjievo';, ^jrdXXei tw ©ew hia tov TroXvffxovov 
opyavov Kal irpoaahei TovT(p tw opydv<p, tm dvOpunrcp, 

"2,1) ydp el KiOdpa Kal avXo<; Kal vao^ e/to?. 

Thus according to Clement the Word of God made music of 
its own, earlier than David and upon a loftier instrument than 
his harp and lyre ; for its music was produced from the 
macrocosm of creation and the microcosm of the body and 
soul of man : to this instrument of many strings^ it sings and 
addresses the instrument itself, saying to it : 

' 'Tis thou my harp, and flute and temple art.' 

Now this is a quotation from some poetical composition, and 
we may infer that it is a fragment of an early Psalm or hymn. 
Accordingly Potter notes on it as follows : 

'Christi verba, ut videtur, a sacro hymno citata.' 

But if it is a hymn, there are two considerations which 
suggest that it came from the Odes of Solomon : first, it is one 
of the features of these Odes (often causing no little perplexity) 
that the singer makes his Psalm, either wholly or in part, in the 

'■ [More exactly noUs : and cf. next page.] 
O. S. II 



82 INTRODUCTION 

name of Christ : second, the reference to the harp or flute in 
describing Christ's music, and the representation of the mind of 
man as an opyavnv iroXvjxovov is thoroughly in the manner of 
the Odes. Thus in Ode 7 believers go forth to meet the Lord 
with a harp of many strings [literally, voices : = KiOdpa Trokv^mvot; 
exactly, as we have it involved in the passage quoted from 
Clement]. In Ode 14 the writer says : 

' Open to me the harp of thy Holy Spirit, 
That with all its notes I may praise Thee,' 

and the same spiritual music is in the opening of Ode 6, 

'As the hand moves over the harp... 
So speaks in my members the Spirit of the Lord.' 

Here it is the Spirit that plays upon the human instrument. 

So it is quite possible that Clement's little quotation may be 
part of the missing matter of our Odes. To which of them 
shall we refer it ? The first Ode is already identified, the third 
is almost complete, and it is unlikely that Christ should be the 
speaker in the opening of the third Ode, when he is not so in 
the closing portion. So the suggestion arises that the sentence 
comes from the second Ode. 

This is a speculation, and must not be taken too seriously, in 
view of the insufficiency of the evidence. But it can do no harm 
to record it, with the necessary Valeat quantum. [The obser- 
vation made above as to the coincidence in language between 
Clement and the Odes, makes it no longer necessary to speak so 
diffidently. Harnack passes the matter by too lightly with ' im 
besten Falle eine blosse Moglichkeit.'] 

It will, perhaps, be enquired whether the use of the Odes of 
Solomon by early writers can be detected in cases 

^ lie ^QcS ^ 

known to where there are no mtroductorv formulae or definite 

Irenaeus. ii • ttt i • 

allusions. We have just suggested that a frag- 
ment of the second Ode may be preserved in an anonymous 
quotation by Clement of Alexandria. Are there any similar 
traces to be identified in the early Patristic literature? The 
difficulty of making such identifications is well known. We had 
a case in the use of 'talking water' by Ignatius and by the 
writer of the Odes. Such an expression to us in the present 
day seems very striking; but a draught from a magical or 



IRENAEUS AND THE ODES 83 

medical spring is probably a common folk-lore way of obtaining 
inspiration, and need not imply any dependence of one of the 
coincident writers upon the other. 

Here is a somewhat similar case from Irenaeus, in which 
the evidence is rather in the direction of recognising a quota- 
tion on the part of that writer from the Odes. Irenaeus 
discusses' the question why God made man and why He chose 
the fathers and why He called the saints. He begins by the 
doctrine that God, for His part, had no need of man : ' non quasi 
indigens hominis, plasmavit Adam.' This sentiment of the 
Divine independence of His works is in our fourth Ode. It is, 
however, so common an expression in Greek philosophy and 
theology, that we should pay no attention to its occurrence in 
Irenaeus, if it were not that it is the key-note of the section and 
that he returns to it with an added amplification, which is also 
found in the fourth Ode. For he says that the less God needs 
man, the more man needs God and His fellowship : 

' in quantum enim Deus nullius indiget, in tantum 
homo indiget Dei communione.' 

Here we have the thought of fellowship with God, as the 
expression of man's need, which we have in Ode 4 : 

' Thoii hast given tis thy fellowship : 
It was not that thou wast in need of us, 
but that we were in need of thee.' 

A little lower down Irenaeus returns to the same thought : 
God distributed His prophets over the earth to habituate men to 
the reception of His Spirit and to fellowship with Himself: ' He 
Himself was in need of no man : diet on those that needed Him, 
He bestowed His fellowship.' 

Here we have the same thought, in closely coincident terms ; 
and since it is the fundamental thought of the chapter, we 
suggest that Irenaeus may be working from a text, and the text 
is a verse from the Odes of Solomon. The same sentiments 
recur in Bk V. c. ii. in the following form : ' Nihil enim illi ante 
dedimus, neque desiderat aliquid a nobis, quasi indigens: nos 
autem indigemus eius quae est ad eum comrminionis : et propterea 
benigne effudit semetipsum ' ; where the last clause may be 

^ Lib. IV. u. XXV. (p. ^43, Mass.). 



84 INTRODUCTION 

compared with what follows in the Ode : ' Distil thy dews 
upon us and open the rich fountains that pour forth milk and 
honey.' 

There is still, however, something abrupt in the transition 
from the discussing of the Holy Place and the Holy People to 
the general question of whether God has any need of man 
corresponding to the need which man has of God. We may 
detect the motion of the writer's thought in passing from one 
subject to the other in the following manner. 

From Irenaeus we see that while God has no need of man, 
man has need of communion with God. The language is, as we 
have shown, so closely parallel to that of our Ode as almost to 
amount to a quotation. But at an earlier time than that of 
Irenaeus the thought of communion with God was not detached 
from the thought of communion by means of a Holy Place, and 
by sacrifice offered there. 

We get this thought brought out clearly in the prayer of the 
priests in 2 Mace. xiv. 15 : 

' Thou, O Lord of the universe, ivho in thyself hast 

■ need of nothing, wast well pleased that a sanctuary of thy 

habitation shoidd be set amongst us: .so now, O Holy 

Lord of all hallowing, keep undefiled for ever this house 

that hath been lately cleansed.' 

Here the ' sanctuary of the Divine habitation ' is an earlier 
form of the Christian 'communion with God' which we find in 
Irenaeus. When, therefore, the writer of the Ode, who began 
by chanting the inalienable sanctity of the Temple, says that God, 
who did not need us, has given us His fellowship, he is still 
thinking of the fellowship that is associated with one special 
holy place. He cannot think that this form of communion is 
abandoned or made void. The opening verses of the Ode make 
it clear that this is his key-note. The parallel in the New 
Testament is in Paul's speech before the Areopagus (Acts xvii. 
24, 25), 'God dwelleth not in temples made with hands, neither 
is worshipped of men's hands, as though He needed anything! 
Our writer would say, ' He dwells in a Temple, because we need 
Him.' And as we have pointed out, the situation is for our 
writer Judaeo-Christian. 



ANTI-JUDAIC TRACES 85 

At the same time we see clearly that the writer is not really 
a Jew, though he is in a Jiidaeo-Christian environ- 
do« not''"'' ment. We see this in a number of ways, both direct 
tSltomsf'"'^'' and indirect. First we had his definite statement 
as to his being of a different race, which must 
surely mean that he is a proselyte, in the Christian sense, from 
among the Gentiles to a community of Judaean origin. Then 
we had his peculiar apologetics, in the person of Christ, for 
love to the Gentiles. But even more striking is his indirect 
argument against the necessity of the maintenance of the 
Sabbath. I have drawn attention to this under Ode 16, by 
pointing out that the sequence of thought in the words 

'He rested from His works: 
And created things run in their courses and do their works : 
And they know not how to stand and be idle: 
And His '"heavenly"' Hosts are subject to His word' 

contain the argument of Justin with Trypho for the non-validity 
of the Sabbath, on the ground that 

' the elements, crrot^eta {or more exactly, the heavenly 
bodies'), do not idle or keep Sabbath.' 

And Justin tells Trypho that he learnt this from the very 
old man to whom he owed his conversion, who taught him, in 
reference to the Sabbath and Circumcision, that he should 
remain as he was born. This is very early teaching on the 
subject of the leading Jewish practices. It does not necessarily 
mean the abandonment of the Sabbath by Jews. Our author 
stands where Justin stood, and both of them employ an argument 
of the more liberal-minded in the primitive Chutch. He is no 
more a Jew than Justin is. 

It will be asked whether he argues against circumcision as 
well as against the Sabbath. This is more difficult to answer. 
It depends upon the interpretation of the opening sentences 
of Ode II. If our alternative translation is correct, the writer 
refers to the work of Divine Grace which he has experienced as 
a circumcision of the heart, a figure of speech which is justified 
by the Old Testament references to Israel as ' uncircumcised in 
heart and ears^' and by the Pauline affirmation that 'we are 

1 Gal. iv. 9. 

^ Cf. Deut. A. 16, 'Circumcise your hearts and be not any more stiffnecked.' 



86 INTRODUCTION 

the true circumcision,' and that 'he is not a Jew who is one 
outwardly, nor is circumcision in the letter, but in the spirit.' 
In this sense our writer may be held to aiifirm that, although not 
an Israelite by birth, he is one of the spiritual Israel. And this 
would agree exactly with the other statements to which we have 
alluded. 

We found no allusions by which we could identify the 
Gospels used by the Odists. 

But if there are no references of a direct character to the 
Gospels, and only scanty allusions to the historical 

Trace of an 

uncanonicai incidents which make the framework of the Gospels, 

Gospel. 

there is one indirect reference to an early Apocry- 
phal Gospel, which is of the first importance. We have discussed 
under the twenty-fourth Ode the question whether the reference 
of the Ode is to the Baptism of Jesus or to some other un- 
known incident connected with His crucifixion, and have decided 
that the allusion to the fluttering of the Dove over the head of 
the Messiah must mean the events at the Baptism, although there 
was in the context matter which seemed to suggest the descent 
into Hades rather than the Baptism. The reason for this con- 
clusion lies in the coincidence of the expression of the Odist 
with the language employed by Justin Martyr in his dialogue 
with Trypho (c. 88). The Syriac of the opening verse is 
literally 

' The Dove flew upon [or over] the Messiah ' ; 

and this curious phrase answers exactly to the word which 
Justin twice uses in his account of the Baptism. The repetition 
of the word has long since provoked a suggestion on the part of 
the critics that we had here a fragment of Justin's actual gospel, 
and that it was not one of the canonical Gospels, though Justin 
himself refers his account to the Apostles of the Lord. And 
when it was observed that the same peculiar verb turned up 
elsewhere in Greek Patristic accounts of the Baptism, a very 
strong case was made out for the use of an actual document 
of an apocryphal, or, at all events, of a non-canonical character. 
When, therefore, we detect the same expression in the Syriac 
text of the Odes, the coincidence is so striking that we are 
justified in removing the allusions to the Baptism of Jesus from 
the matter credited to the canonical Evangelists, and assigning 



USE OF AN APOCRYPHAL GOSPEL 87 

it instead to a lost Gospel of a very early date. It will be 
convenient to collect' under one view the cases in which it may 
reasonably be held that the Greek word eirmTrivai is used of the 
Descent of the Dove (Justin Martyr : Dial. 88) : 

dva^vvTO'i avTov d-rro tov vSoto?, m? irepiaTspav to 
ayiov TTvevfia i-Tri-n-Trjvai, etr avrop eypa-\]rav 01 d-rroaroXoi 
avTov TovTov TOV X.picrTov rifji,wv. 

Ibid. : 

TO TTvevfia ovv to ayiov koo Bid roii? dv6panrov<;, 0)9 
•Trpoe^rjv, ev elfSet irepicrTepd'i eireiTTr] avTtp. 
Celsus (v. Origen contra Celsum i. 41): 

Xovofievm, (prjcri,, croi irapd tS 'Itodvvri [v. 1. 'lopBdvTj] 
(^aa/jLa 6pvido<; e^ dipo<i \eyei<s e-KiTrTrivat,. 

Origen {c. Celsum i. 40) : 

£^■^9 he. TOVTOi^ aTTO TOV KaTa M.aTOalov, Td')(a he Kal 
Twv XoiTTwv evayyeXicov, Xa^cov rd irepl T'rj<i eTTtTTTacrij? 
TO) aoJTTjpi, jSaTrTi^ofievai irapd tov 'Iwdvvov TreptaTepd^ 
hia^dWeiv ^ovXeTat. 

Origen {in Joan. torn. ii. 11): 

ore To5 crwfiaTiKai elhei axrel TrepiaTepd etpLTrraTai 
fieTCL TO XovTpov avrw. 

Orac. Sib. vii. 64 — 70 : 

'A, "^vpirj KolXr], ^oiviKWV viraTOV dvhpwv, 

Ot? eTrepevyofievr] KeiTaL Rr/pvTid'i dXfj,rj^ 

TXrjficov, ovK eyvcoif top aov ®eov, 09 ttot eXovcrev 

'lopBdvov ev vhaTeac7i, kol eiTTaTo irvev/ia eir avTw. 

AapK evBvcrdfievo';, Taj^yi; eiTTaTo Ti.aTpo'i €9 olkov;. 
To the foregoing coincidences from Greek sources, Resch 
adds a number of suspicious coincidences in Latin : 
Tert. adv. Valent. c. 27 : 

' Super hunc itaque Christum devolasse tunc in baptis- 
matis Sacramento Jesum per eiifigiem columbae.' 
Hilarius in Ps. liv. 7 : 

' Nam et in columbae specie Spiritus in eum volando 
requievit. . .ut volando requiescat.' 

' See Resch, Aussercanonische Paralleltexte zu Luc. p. 15. 



88 INTRODUCTION 

Hilarius in Matt. ii. 6 : 

' post aquae lavacrum et de caelestibus portis sanctum 
in nos spiritum involare.' 
Severi de ritibus baptismi, p. 24, ed. Boderianus (Resch, 
Agrapha, p. 363): 

' Et Spiritus sanctitatis in similitudinem columbae 
volans descendit mansitque super caput filii.' 

These references are not of equal value in the determination 
of the language of a primitive account, but taken together, they 
certainly make a very strong impression in favour of the belief 
in an uncanonical account of the Baptism, and it is to that 
account that the first line of Ode 24 must be referred. 

But what are we to say of the Spirit singing over the 
Messiah ? Is this also from the uncanonical source ? 

We may sum up the investigation as far as it has gone as 
follows : 

There can be no reasonable doubt of the antiquity of the 
recovered Book of Odes. That which seems to be the latest 
composition amongst them is attested already by Lactantius in 
the beginning of the fourth century as having the place in the 
collection which it occupies in our Manuscript. The portions 
of the Odes which have been transcribed by the author of 
the Pistis Sophia towards the end of the third century, are 
evidently taken from a book which was either canonical 
in the writer's judgment, or not very far removed from 
canonicity ; so that it is quite easy to carry the Odes back into 
the second century, and those who have studied the extant 
fragments of them before the recovery of our Manuscript have, 
in fact, referred them to the earlier part of the second century. 
Our own investigations have shown that the Odes agree in the 
extent of their composition with the statistical data for their 
measurement, preserved in the early Stichometries. We have 
also shown that they agree in sentiment with the beliefs and 
practices of the earliest ages of the Church. It came out 
clearly in the investigation that the writer, while not a Jew, was 
a member of a community of Christians, who were for the most 
part of Jewish extraction and beliefs, and the apologetic tone 
which is displayed, in the Odes, towards the Gentiles, as a 
part of the Christian Church, is only consistent with the very 



"CONCLUDING REMARKS 89 

earliest ages, and with communities like the Palestinian 
Churches where Judaism was still in evidence and in control. 
We think, therefore, that it will be admitted on all hands, that 
the discovery of this collection of Odes and Psalms is not only 
valuable for the fact that it presents us, for the first time, with 
the Syriac version of the extant Psalms of Solomon, but that 
the Syriac text of the Odes of Solomon is in itself a memorial 
of the first importance for rightly understanding the beliefs and 
experiences of the Primitive Church. 

We have expressed our belief that in part, at least, the 
collection belongs to the last quarter of the first century ; but if 
it should be objected that this is too early a date, it cannot be 
very many years in excess. Even if the writings do not fall 
within the actual time of the composition of the books of the 
New Testament, they scarcely fall outside the limits of the 
same, and we may, therefore, be sure that the Christian Church 
of to-day has been enriched by the discovery of a literary 
monument of the highest value. Apart, also, from all critical 
questions concerned with the little less or little more of a 
determined date, or with the ' Lo ! here ' or ' Lo ! there ' of an 
assigned locality, we have in our Odes the language of Christian 
experience upon the highest levels of the Spiritual Life, and we 
should have to go far afield to find such expressions of the 
Joy of the Lord as recur in almost every one of these Spiritual 
Songs. 

We have no means of knowing who it was that in the first 
instance ascribed them to Solomon, nor have we any clue at 
present to their actual authorship, but we may be sure that 
whatever Solomon did, or did not, in the composing of Odes, 
with which he has been credited to the number of one thousand 
and five, according to the insistent accuracy of the Jewish 
Chronicler, we may say of these new-found compositions, that 
not even Solomon at his very best could have been spiritually 
arrayed like one of these. 



o. s. 



ODE I. {Pistis Sophia ii6.) 

■"The Lord is on my head like a crown, and I shall not be 
without Him^- ^They wove for me a crown of truth, and it 
caused thy branches to bud in me. ^¥oy it is not like a withered 
crown which buddeth not : but thou livest upon my head, and 
thou hast blossomed upon my head. ''■Thy fruits are full-grown 
and perfect, they are full of thy salvation. 

Ode I. This Ode is not in our Syriac text, but in the Coptic version 
of the Pistis Sophia, where it is said to be the 19th Ode. I have identified 
it with the missing first Ode of our collection, on the supposition that 
in the collection of Solomonic Psalms known to the author of the Pistis 
Sophia, the eighteen Psalms of Solomon stood first, and not, as in the 
Syriac collection, in the last place. The question is discussed, more at 
length, under Ode 5. The argument of the Psalm is that God is the 
crown of the soul, whose supreme experience is the knowledge of His 
truth. This crown is of the amarant variety ; it fadeth not away. On 
the contrary, it buds and blossoms and is full of immortal fruit. The 
similitude is not uncommon in the book of Odes to which we have 
placed this Psalm as an introduction. [Diettrich and Bernard think the 
reference is to a crown put on the head of newly-baptized persons I We 
may also compare the crown offered to the worshipper of Mithra on his 
admission to the rank of miles. He sets it aside declaring Mithra to be 
his only crown^] 

ODE 2. {Deest.) 

ODE 3. {Priora destittt.) 
I put on : 2And his members are with him. And 



on them do I hang, and He loves me: 3for I should not have 
known how to love the Lord, if He had not loved me. *For 
who is able to distinguish love, except the one that is loved? 
5 1 love the Beloved, and my soul loves Him : ^and where His rest is 
there also am I ; ''and I shall be no stranger, for with the Lord Most 
High and Merciful there is no g^idging. «! have been united 

1 Or it. 

2 Bernard -./.T.S for Oct. 1910, p. 7. Diettrich : Die Reformation for May 1910, 
p- 3°7 "• ^ Cumont: Momiments, i. 318. 



THE ODES OF SOLOMON 9 1 

•"to Him"'S for the Lover has found the Beloved, ^and because 
I shall love Him that is the Son, I shall become a son^; ^°for 
he that is joined to Him that is immortal, will also himself 
become immortal ; '■''and he who has pleasure in the Living One'^>)'^^i^ 
will become living^ ''^This is the Spirit of the Lord, which 
doth not lie, which teacheth the sons of men to know His Ways. 
''^Be wise and understanding and vigilant. Hallelujah. 

Ode 3. This Psalm, of which the first verses have disappeared 
along with the leaves that contained the first two Psalms, is evidently a 
Christian product; the author is a mystic with a doctrine, or rather an 
experience, of union with the Son. With Him his whole nature has 
become mingled, as water is mixed with wine. In Pauline language, 
he has been joined to the Lord, and has become one spirit with Him". 
In Johannine language, because the Beloved lives, he himself lives also". 
He has, at least in hope and faith, attained immortality through union 
with the Living One. The name here given to Christ is very ancient, 
it has been detected by the Revisers of the English New Testament in 
the Apocalypse ('I am the Living One')', and it is found in the 
opening sentences of the Sayings of Jesus, recovered in recent years 

from Egypt: ('these are the words which Jesus the Living One 

spake'). [Cf also Ode 24. 14 where 'Him that liveth' is Christ.] 

Other Johannine touches are the doctrine that ' we love Him 
because He first loved us".' For the Psalmist tells us that 'he should 
not have known how to love the Lord if the Lord had not loved him.' 

It would be a mistake to suppose that we have here any direct 
(quotations or that the language necessarily involves acquaintance with 
the text of the New Testament. In translating the Syriac, I have not 
tried to distinguish the two words for love which are used : even if it 
could be inferred that the Greek had used dyaTr(G and cj>i\u), as in the 
2ist chapter of John's Gospel, it would be a mistake to indicate this in 
the translation by a subtlety which is now exploded. For the Syriac 
makes no such distinction, nor need we imagine it in the original 
Aramaic spoken by Jesus. When the Syriac translators turn back our 
Lord's words in John xiv. 21, 'He it is that loveth me, and he that 
loveth me shall be loved of my Father,' although the Greek word is 
consistently dyaTru), they use both the available Syriac words, without 
distinction, and where they do not distinguish we have no call to 
over-refinement. 

1 Mingled with (as water with wine) ; cf. i C or, vi. 17. " Or the Son. 

3 The MS. has 'in life.' Cf._ Apoc. i. 1 7^ * Or the living One. 

^ I Cor. vi. 17. ^ John xiv. 19. ' Apoc. i. 17. * i John iv. 19. 



.v.l 



92 THE ODES OF SOLOMOlsr 

-^ '';?P^ ^ ODE 4. 

^' - ^ 1N0 man, O my God, changeth thy holy place ; ^and it is not • 

[possible] that he should change it and put it in another place : 

because he hath no power over it : ^for thy sanctuary thou hast 

designed before thou didst make [other] places: *that which is 

the elder shall not be altered by those that are younger than 

itself. ^Thou hast given thy heart, O Lord, to thy believers : 

never wilt thou fail, nor be without fruits: ^for one hour of thy 

Ps. Ixxxiv. Faith is more precious than all days and years. ''For who is 

"■ there that shall put on thy grace, and be hurt? ^For thy seal 

,^^.-,_ I is known : and thy creatures know it : and thy [heavenly] hosts 

possess it: and the elect archangels are clad with it. ^Thou hast 

given us thy fellowship ; it was not that thou wast in need of us: 

but that we are in need of thee: ■'°distil thy dews upon us and 

open thy rich fountains that pour forth to us milk and honey: 

■ ■'■'for there is no repentance with thee that thou shouldest repent 

\of anything that thou hast promised : ■'^and the end was revealed 

before thee : for what thou gavest, thou gavest freely : ■'^so that 

thou mayest not draw them back and take them again : ■''*for 

all was revealed before thee as God, and ordered from the 

beginning before thee : and thou, O God, hast made all things. 

Hallelujah. 

Ode 4. This Psalm is one of the most important in the whole 
collection, on account of the historical allusion with which it commences. 
The reference to an unsuccessful attempt to alter the site of the 
Sanctuary of the Lord can only be explained by some unknown 
movement to carry on the Jewish worship outside the desolated and 
proscribed sanctuary, or by the closing of the Jewish temple at 
Leontopolis in Egypt, which was, perhaps, itself in the first instance 
built under the pressure of the situation which resulted in the 
desecration of the temple at Jerusalem by Andochus Epiphanes. As 
the latter explanation leans on fact, rather than on hypothesis, we may 
accept it provisionally as the real interpretation of our Psalm, which is 
thus dated soon after a.d. 73 when the temple of Onias was closed and 
dismantled by the Romans. The writer of the Psalm, if not of Jewish 
origin is, at least, Jewish in sympathy: he holds the Jewish belief 
that the Sanctuary at Jerusalem was older than the wodd in which it 
stood ; it was, according to Rabbinic teaching, prior to all other created 
things : thus we find in Bereshith Rabbah that ' seven things were 
created before the wodd, Thorah, Gehenna, the Garden of Eden, the 
Throne of Glory, the Sanctuary, Repentance and the name of Messiah.' 



THE ODES OF SOLOMON 93 

The proofs of these pre-existent creations can easily be made from the 
Scriptures : e.g. ' the Lord God had planted a garden in Eden from 
afore-time' (Gen. ii. 8)\ and so on. The matter is discussed with some 
detail in Pirqe Aboth vi. lo 'Five possessions possessed the Holy 
One, blessed is He, in His world : and these are they : Thorah, one 
possession ; Heaven and Earth, one possession ; Abraham, one posses- 
sion : Israel, one possession ; the Sanctuary, one possession : 

...The Sanctuary: whence [is it proved]? Because it is written. The 
place, O Lord, which thou hast made for thee to dwell in, the Sanctuary, 
O Lord, which thy hands have established (Exod. xv. 17) : and it saith. 
And He brought them to the border of His sanctuary, even to this 
mountain, which His right hand had possessed (Ps. Ixxviii. 54).' This 
Rabbinical belief has affected the mind of our Psalmist, who comments 
upon the fall of the Egyptian temple unsympathetically, and evidently 
has his heart set amongst the ruins of the Sanctuary at Jerusalem. He 
does not think the covenant between God and the people of Israel is 
disannulled ; all God's promises are irrevocable ; His gifts and callings 
are without repentance on His part. But there are no lamentations on 
the part of the writer over the ruins of Jerusalem ; the temple which is 
in his thoughts has not developed a wailing-place. God has sealed His 
own people with the marks of His ownership. All creation, and both 
worlds, recognise this seal. And He is able to pour out blessings on His 
chosen, comparable to the dew of heaven, and the milk and honey 01 
the earth. If we please, we may definitely call it a Judaeo-Christian 
Psalm : and it might very well have been composed by one of the 
refugees at Pella. It is not easy to see how it could have been written 
outside Palestine, nor by a purely Jewish hand. 

There are no Scripture references ; perhaps the nearest parallels are 
Rom. xi. 29 ('the gifts and calling of God are without repentance,' 
a/iera/ncXrjTa), and the adaptation of Ps. Ixxxiv. 11 in w. 6, where again 
the temple is in the mind of the writer. 

The 'thought that God does not need us, but we need God, is a 
common religious expression in this period, and is found constantly in 
Greek literature. We may compare the Apology of Aristides, c. i, and 
Irenaeus (ed. Mass. 244) ' ipse quidem nullius indigens : his vero qui 
indigent eius, suam praebens communionem,' which is very near 
indeed to the language of our Ode, and may almost be taken as a 
quotation. The opposite sentiment can be illustrated from Schiller : 

' Freudios war der grosse Weltenmeister, 
Fuhlte Mangel, darum schuf er Geister, 
Sel'ge Spiegel seiner Seligkeit.' 

Clement of Rome, Ep. i. ad Cor., c. 52, takes an intermediate position: 
'The Lord needs nothing... except our praise.' 

^ So Jerome: aprincipio. 



94 THE ODES OF SOLOMON 



ODE 5. 

U will give thanks unto thee, O Lord, because I love thee; 
20 most High, thou wilt not forsake me\ for thou art my hope: 
^freely I have received thy grace, I shall live thereby: ^my 
persecutors will come''' and not see me: ^a cloud of darkness 
shall fall ^on"' their eyes ; and an air of thick gloom shall darken 
them : ^and they shall have no light to see : that they may not 
take hold upon me. '^Let their counsel become thick darkness^, 
and what they have cunningly devised, let it return upon their 
own heads: ^for they have devised a counsel, and it did not 
succeed^: they have prepared themselves for eviP, and were 
found to be empty. ^For my hope is upon the Lord, and I will 
not fear, and because the Lord is m y_s alvatio n ^ I will not fear: 

J°and He is as a fflrland on my head and I shall not be moved ; 
even if everything should be shaken, I stand firm; ^''and if 

. all things visible should perish, I shall not die : because the 
Lord is with me and I am with Him. Hallelujah. 

Ode 5. The interest of this Psalm lies in the fact that at this point 
we begin to strike the region of coincidences with the Gnostic book, 
known as the PisHs Sophia. The Ode has been used, apparently, 
in the composition of two Odes or Prophecies of Solomon, quoted 
respectively by Salome and the Virgin. 

Salome recites nearly the whole of the Ode, with some slight 
variations and expansions : and it is possible that*one or two clauses 
may be missing in the Syriac and may be capable of restoration from 
the Coptic. 

The remaining portion of the Ode before us appears, at first sight, 
from the parallelism of the first sentence, to be the same as what is 
given in the Pistis Sophia as the recitation of the Virgin from the 19th 
Ode of Solomon. And this ascription and numbering led Ryle and 
James astray, to identify the matter in question with the sentences about 

' Or, as in the Coptic, do not thou forsake me. 

^ Or, as in the Coptic, let my persecutors come. 

5 Copt, weakness. * lit. and it became not to them. 

'' lit. evilly, as in the Coptic, which expands as follows : Et vicerunt eos potentes et 
quae paraverant malitiose, descenderunt in eos. Cf. the German of Schmidt : ' Und 
sie sind besiegt, obwohl sie mdchtig sind, und was sie boswillig (icaicus) bereitet haben, 
ist auf sie herabgefallen.' 

" Copt, quia tu es deus meus, salvator meus. 



THE ODES OF SOLOMON 95 

the Virgin quoted by Lactantius\ as from the 19th Ode of Solomon. 
We have, however, shown elsewhere that Lactantius' quotation is really 
in our 19th Ode, so that Lactantius does not appear in the discussion, 
having been found in another quarter. And we have suggested that 
the supposed 19th Ode of the Coptic writer is the first of our collection, 
and that it followed on the eighteen Psalms of Solomon. The mistake 
can be traced, by comparing, in the Pistis Sophia, the text and the 
Gnostic comment upon it ; it will be found that a wrong Ode has been 
copied out for the text of the Gnostic comment, in consequence of two 
Odes, the first and the fifth, having some similar sentences. The 
difference can be exhibited thus : 

Coptic Ode 19 Syriac Ode 5. 

[=our Ode i] 
' The Lord is on my head ' He is like a crown on my 

like a crown, and I shall not be head and I shall not be moved, 
separated from Him : a crown of Even if everything should be 
truth has been woven for me : my shaken, I stand firm : and if all 
branches were planted in me : for things visible should perish, I 
they did not bear a crown that shall not die : because the Lord 
was dried up, and without a shoot: is with me and I am with Him.' 
but thou livest upon my head : 
and thou growest upon me : thy 
fruits are full and perfect : they 
are filled with thy salvation.' 

The comment upon the foregoing Coptic Ode follows the text of 
the Syriac Ode, by an unconscious error of the writer who mistook one 
hymn for the other. 

It is clear, then, that the Coptic nineteenth Ode and the Syriac fifth 
Ode are two different Odes, as we have explained above. We thus 
recover the missing first Ode of our collection. 

Whether this fifth Ode is Christian or not, does not appear decisively 
at the first reading. It opens in a rather Jewish strain of praise, 
accompanied by prayer for the discomfiture of enemies. If there is a 
definite Christian feature, perhaps it is the garland upon the singer's 
head, which appears in several other Odes. In the 17th Ode, for 
example, we get the same figure, and here the theme is the praise of 
the Messiah for His triumph over Hades. This must, of course, be 
Christian. 

The crown is a crown of life, that is a living crown or garland : and 
this meaning is carefully brought out in the Coptic Ode, which explains 

' Psalms of Solomon, p. 160. ' Ode ii. [of the Coptic Odes] should be another 
fragment of that quoted by Lactantius, the tglh Ode. Here alone is a number 
given. The Virgin, be it noted, is the reciter here, and the Virgin is the subject of 
Lactantius' quotation.' 



g6 THE ODES OF SOLOMON 

that the crown does not wither, but (like Aaron's rod), it buds and 
bears fruit. We have similar allusions and explanations to the crown 
of life in the New Testament, as in i Pet. v. 4 ' a crown of glory, or 
glorious crown, which does not fade away.' The close of the Ode is a 
noble expression of trust in the Lord, amidst adverse circumstances, 
which one instinctively compares with the close of the eighth chapter 
of the Epistle to the Romans. It may be regarded as a Christian 
composition, on account of its affinity with other Odes that are certainly 
Christian, as well as on account of its intrinsic spiritual value. 



ODE 6. 

^As the hand' moves over the harp, and the strings speak, 
2so speaks in my members the Spirit of the Lord, and I speak 
by His love. ^For it destroys what is foreign, and every- 
thing that is bitter^: "^for thus it was from the beginning and 
will be to the end, that nothing should be His adversary, and 
nothing should stand up against Him. ^The Lord has multi- 
plied the knowledge of Himself, and is zealous Hhat these things 
should be known, which by His grace have been given to us^. 
6And the praise of His name He gave us*: our spirits praise 
HisJialy_Spirit^ ^ por there went forth a stream and became 
a river great and broad ; ^for it flooded and broke up every- 
thing and it brought [water] to the Temple'' : ^and the restrainers 
of the children of men were not able to restrain it, nor the arts 
of those whose business it is to restrain waters ; ^°for it spread 
over the face of the whole earth, and filled everything : "and all 
the thirsty upon earth were given to drink of it"; ''^and thirst 
was relieved and quenched : for from the Most High the draught 
was given. ''^Blessed then are the ministers of that draught 
who are entrusted with that water of His : ^^they have assuaged 
the dry lips, 'and the will that had fainted they have raised up ; 
■'^and souls that were near departing they have caught back 
from death': ''^and limbs that had fallen they straightened and 

' Or perhaps plectrum. 

^ Cod. and everything is of the Lord. ^""'' i Cor. ii. 12. 

* lit. His praise He gave us to His name. 

° i.e. the temple at Jerusalem. Schmidt : ' wandte sich gegeii den Tempel.' 
'"■' Schmidt : es tranken, die sich auf dem trockenen Sande befinden. Cf. Is. xxxv. i .- 
'"' Schmidt: ' Herzensfreude haben empfangen die Entkrafteten. Sie haben 
Seelen erfasst, indem sie den Hauch hineinstiessen, dass sie nicht stiirben.' 



THE ODES OF SOLOMON 97 

set up : ^^they gave strength for their feebleness^ and hght to 

their eyes : ''^for everyone knew them in the Lord, and they A^^^^ 

Hved by the water of Hfe" for ever. Hallelujah. 

Ode 6. In this Psalm again we are fortunate in having a large part 
of the Coptic text preserved to us : and, as is common in Coptic texts, 
some Greek words have been also preserved by it. But this very 
circumstance has led Ryle and James to a wrong supposition as to die 
existence of Gnostic elements in the Psalm. They recognize that it is 
a Christian Psalm but suggest, hesitatingly, that the use of the word 
amppoia may stamp it as Gnostic. It is quite unnecessary to pay this 
little tribute to Gnosticism. Neither here nor anywhere else is there 
anything definitely Gnostic in the book. And Ryle and James are 
right in saying, 'we cannot see that there is anything unmistakeably 
Gnostic in the doctrine^' They are also clearly right in saying that 
what is described in the Psalm is ' the preaching of the Gospel which 
no human effort can avail to hinder.' We must also recognize a 
reference to the waters in Ezekiel which go forth from the temple. But 
there is a suggestive difference in our Psalm from the parable in 
Ezekiel : in the Syriac text the stream appears to rise elsewhere than in 
the temple, and part of its function is to water the temple. It is a river 
deep and broad before it reaches the temple. If this be what is 
intended, then the restrainers who build dykes to keep waters out or 
cisterns to keep thein in are very likely the Temple officials themselves, 
who were often hard put to it to hinder the propaganda of the new 
rehgion within the limits of the Holy Place. 

The writer is exultant in his universahsm ; the stream of living 
water has gone out into all the earth . thirsty souls everywhere have 
been refreshed by it : dying souls have been revived. 

The writer is as universal as St Paul. But he is not so detached 
from Judaism as not to know that the living water was connected with 
the temple. Perhaps, then, he is a Judaeo-Christian of an enlightened 
type. Ryle and James suggest for him a date not later than the 
second century, and intimate the presence of Johannine phraseology 
and ideas. We think the date is too late ; the Johannine features do 
not appear to us to be directly due to the Gospel : if such a long 
composition had been under Johannine influence, it would have 
betrayed its ancestry more definitely. Neither here nor elsewhere does 
it seem possible definitely to convict the Psalms of having borrowed 
from St John. On the other hand there is one expression which 

1 Cod. ex errore 'for their coming.' ^ lit. by living water. 

' Harnack, who has missed the meaning of this liymn, called it a Gnostic baptismal 
hymn (Hist, of Dogma, i. 207 note). He admits now that it is not Gnostic, and it is 
doubtful if it has anything to do with baptism. 

o. s. 13 



98 THE ODES OF SOLOMON 

recalls a sentence in i Cor., where the writer says that God is zealous 
' that those things should be known, which have been given us by His 
grace': this is very hke i Cor. ii. 12, 'that we may know the things 
that have been freely given us of God.' Whether the coincidence 
should be pressed will depend to some extent upon the existence of 
further and similar echoes of New Testament speech. 

Near the close of the Psalm the Greek word wapp-qa-ia occurs in the 
Coptic ; but the Syriac ' coming ' suggests irapovo-i'a. Ilappijcria, as the 
Fistis Sophia shows, is one of the words which the Coptic transliterates : 
so we must retain it, or else find a Greek word which may be misread 
either as irapprjcria or irapovaCa. We have suggested that TrapaXi/o-is is 
the right word. This is confirmed by the preceding clause, ' Members 
that had fallen they straightened and set up.' Here the Coptic has 
erexere for the two Syriac words which we render by ' straightened and 
set up.' The Syriac has been translating a compound verb by two 
simple verbs ; and the original was evidently avtipOuxrav. AVe may now 
compare Is. xxxv. 3 and Heb. xii. 1 2 ; especially note ra irapaXtXvfi.iva 
ywara avopduiaraTe. We now see the meaning of the words which 
follow, 'they gave strength to their paralysis'; it is a reflexion from 
laxuVaTc, yovara napaXeXvfji.eva. The correctness of the reference 
to Isaiah may be further seen from the following words ' and light to 
their eyes,' which are a reflexion from ' then shall the eyes of the blind 
be opened.' It is clear then that the writer is working from Isaiah 
and not from Hebrews : and in that case the airoppoia of which the 
Fistis Sophia makes so much is the stream of water which, in the 
prophecy, makes glad the wilderness and the solitary place. We can now 
explain the variation between the Syriac and Coptic in v. 10. The 'dry 
sand' is the eprjfto^ Suj/wa-a of Is. xxxv. i, and the Syriac should be 'all 
upon the thirsty land drank of it.' 

[The Ode is translated into English by Barnes in £xposiior(J\ily igio). 
He suggests that we read 'wind' for 'hand ' in y. i as if the harp were 
an Aeolian harp ! Perhaps ' hand ' is wrong, as there is the trace of a 
connecting line before the actually visible Olaph. If it is not 'hand,' 
I suspect it is 'plectrum.'] 

ODE 7. 

^As the impulse of anger against evil, so is the impulse of 
joy over what is lovely, and brings in of its fruits without re- 
straint : ^my joy is the Lord and my impulse is toward Himi; this 
path of mine is excellent^: ^for I have a helper, the Lord^. *He 
hath caused me to know Himself, without grudging, by His 

1 a. my running : cf. Cant. i. 3. ^ go Schulthess. 

' B.-L. remove ■»<i.T.sa^ to the end of previous verse. 



THE ODES OF SOLOMON 99 

simplicity: His kindness has 'humbled His greatness^ ^He\ gr'^^ 
became like me, in order that I might receive Him: ^He was 1 
reckoned like myself" in order that I might put Him on ; ^and 
I trembled not when I saw Him: because He was gracious to me: 
^like my nature He became that I might learn Him and like my 
form, that I might not turn back from Him : ^the Father of 
knowledge is the word of knowledge : ''^He who created wisdom '^ ' 
is wiser than His works: "and He who created me when yet 
I was not knew what I should do when I came into being: 
'"^wherefore He pitied me in His abundant grace : and granted 
me to ask from Him and to receive from His sacrifice' : ''^ because 
He it is that is incorrupt, the fulness of the ages and the Father 
of them ^ 

"■^He hath given Him to be seen of them that are His, ''^in 
order that they may recognize Him that made them : and that 
they might not suppose that they came of themselves^: ''^for 
knowledge He hath appointed as its way. He hath widened it 
and extended it ; and brought it to all perfection ; ''''and set 
over it the traces of His light, and I walked '"therein^ from the 
beginning even to the end. ''^For by Him it was wrought, and 
He was resting in the Son, and for its salvation He will take 
hold of everything : ''^and the Most High shall be known in His 
Saints, to announce to those that have songs of the coming of the 
Lord; 2°that they may go forth to meet Him, and may sing to 
Him with joy and with the harp of many tones'*: ^''the seers 
shall come before Him and they shall be seen before Him, 
22and they shall praise the Lord for His love : because He is 
near and beholdeth, ^Sand hatred shall be taken from the earth, 
and along with jealousy it shall be drowned : '^'^for ignorance 
hath been destroyed, because the knowledge of the Lord hath 
arrived, ^sj^gy who make songs shall sing the grace of the 
Lord Most High ; ^Sand they shall bring their songs, and their 
heart shall be like the day: and like the excellent beauty' of 

i~i So Flemming: seine Grosse klein erscheinen lassen. 

^ lit. in likeness as myself. 

= Gk. eva-las : Nestle conjectures oia-ias : cf. Clem. £p. ii. aJ Cor. i. ■^ei\ri<T€v ex 
ToO fi.rj 6vTos eii-ai inias : and the verse of the Ode that precedes, ' when I came into 
being.' Also Ode 8. 16. For an opposite error see Cod. k in Mk. ix. 49. 

* For th? expression ' Father of the Ages,' cf. i Clem, ad Cor. xxxv. 2, Iv. 6, Ixi. •.:, 
and Is. xi. 6 (Heb.). 

' Ps. c. 3. ^ at- voices. 

' Gk. lieyaXowpiireia as in Ps. Ixvii. (Ixviii.) 34. 



lOO 



THE ODES OF SOLOMON 



the Lord their pleasant song: "and there shall neither be any 
thing that breathes without knowledge, nor any that is dumb: 
28 for He hath given a mouth to His creation, to open the voice 
of the mouth towards Him, to praise Him : ^^confess ye His 
power, and show forth His grace. Hallelujah. 

Ode 7. In this Psalm the writer dilates joyfully^ on the theme of 
the Incarnation ; and the combination of lowliness and wisdom that are 
involved therein. The condescension of Christ to human form is not 
only a sympathetic approach to human conditions, it is a divine 
welcome. He says 'Come unto me' by coming unto us. 'Like 
my nature He became that I might learn of Him.' 

But the incarnate Messiah is still the maker and sustainer of all 
things, in whom all things consist. The knowledge of this revelation 
produces praise and expectation, praise for those who sing His advent, 
expectarion for those who look for His triumphant rule among men. 
All evil is to pass away, and all hate. The saints who sing are already 
exulting in the new life which He has bestowed upon them^. 

For the argument with which the Ode opens we may compare 
Lactantius, de Div. Inst. iv. 26: 'is, qui humilis advenerat, ut humilibus 
et infimis opem ferret, et omnibus spem salutis ostenderet, eo genere 
afficiendus fuit, quo humiles et infimi solent, ne quis esset omnino, qui 
eum non posset imitari.' 

[The difficulty in translating v. 3 has been variously met : Flemming 
translates ' ein Heifer zum Herrn,' Zahn, (in Verhaltnis) zum Herrn : 
Batiifol and Labourt, as intimated, remove the words ' to the Lord ' to 
the end of the previous verse.] 

ODE 8. 
1 Open ye, open ye your hearts to the exultation of the Lord : 
2and let your love be multiplied from the heart and even to the 
lips, 3to bring forth fruit to the Lord, living '"fruif, holy '"fruit"'^ 
and to talk with watchfulness in His light. *Rise up, and 
stand erect, ye who sometime were brought low : ^tell forth ye 
who were in silence, that your mouth hath been opened. ^Ye, 
therefore, that were despised, be henceforth lifted up, because 
your righteousness hath been exalted. ''For the right hand of 

' The opening sentence about the ' impulse against evil' may be illustrated from 
Clem. Alex. Paed. i. 8, p. 140 iiriTo-i t(JJ aya8<f, xi ^i^fff' aya66s iarw, i] fuaoirovripla. 

^ The combination of 'seers' and 'singers' is peculiar, and belongs to a very 
early period in Church History ; it would be best illustrated by the saints in the begin- 
ning of Luke's Gospel, who were looking for redemption in Jerusalem, if we could 
imagine that peculiar religious society of prophets and singers continued and extended. 

' Ungnad-Stark, a holy life. 



^U^,-/-v^ 



THE ODES OF SOLOMON lOI 

the Lord is with you : and He is your helper : ^and peace was 
prepared for you, before ever your war was. 9 Hear the word 
of truth, and receive the knowledge of the Most High. ''OYour 
flesh has not known what I am saying to you : neither have Cf. Is. 
your hearts' known what I am showing to you. iiKeep my '"'''■ "*" 
seGret^ ye who are kept by it : i2keep my faith, ye who are 
kept by it. ^^^^j understand my knowledge, ye who know me 
in truth. ^'^Love me with affection, ye who love : ''^for I do not 
turn away my face from them that are mine ; ^^ for I know them, 
and before they came into being I took knowledge of them, and 
on their faces I set my seal: "i fashioned their members : my 
own breasts I prepared for them that they might drink my holy 
milk and live thereby, i^j ^ook pleasure in them and am not 
ashamed of them: ^^for my workmanship are they and the 
strength of my thoughts : ^°who then shall rise up against my 
handiwork, or who is there that is not subject to them? 
^H willed and fashioned mind and heart: and they are mine, 
and by my own right hand I set my elect ones : ^z^nd my 
righteousness goeth before them and they shall not be deprived 
of my name, for it is with them. 23^3]^^ j^^d abouncfiknd abide ''-^^-^ 
in the love of the Lord, ^^''and"' ye beloved ones in the Beloved : 
those who are kept, in Him that liveth : ^Sand they that are 
saved in Him^^that wassaved ; ^^and ye shall be found incorrupt 
in all ages to the name of your Father. Hallelujah. 

Ode 8. This Psalm again is Johannine in many of its ideas and 
expressions. But, even when this is conceded, it is difficult to prove a 
direct dependence on the Fourth Gospel. 

The Psalm is, like a number of others, marked by a sudden transi- 
tion of personahty from the Psalmist or Prophet to the Lord Himself: 
after the writer has addressed those who have been lifted up out of 
affliction and have found peace after war, he suddenly in prophetic 
manner, cries out, 'Hear the word of the Lord,' 'Receive the heavenly 
knowledge,' and then proceeds to speak in the person of the Lord. 
The same abrupt transitions are found in the canonical Psalter, and 
they appear to have characterized the Montanist inspirations. It will 
be remembered that Montanus describes his own spiritual exaltation in 
the words : ' Behold ! the man is as a lyre, and I sweep over him as the 
plectrum. The man sleeps and I wake. Behold ! it is the Lord, who 

' The MS. by an error of transcription reads, 'your raiment.' But perlmps the 
aiment means the human body ? 

2 C/em. Horn. xix. 20; and Clem. Alex. Strom, v. 10, apparently from a lost Gospel. 
' Fl. . Bittet ohne Unterlass. 



I02 THE ODES OF SOLOMON 

estranges the souls of men from themselves, and gives men souls.' 
The same address by the Lord in the first person is in the utterance of 
Maximilla, the Montanist prophetess, who said, 'I am chased as a 
wolf from the midst of the flock. I am no wolf ; I am word, and spirit, 
and power.' 

The language of Montanus finds a close parallel in the opening of the 
sixth Psalm, where the writer says, 'As the hand \or perhaps plectrum] 
moves over the harp, and the strings speak, so speaks in my members the 
Spirit of the Lord.' This might easily be claimed as a Montanist utterance, 
and I can imagine that on account of these and similar sayings, the whole 
Psalter might be claimed as a Montanist product. But the sentiments 
are simply Christian, on a high experimental plane; and we must not 
forget that one of the chief characteristics of Montanism is its attempt 
to perpetuate the life of the primitive Church. Towards the end of the 
Psalm the prophet returns abruptly to speech in his own name. There 
seems to be some breach of continuity in the discourse, as well 
as a change of personality. 

I do not know whether the allusion to an actual war, from which the 
saints have emerged or escaped, is to be taken literally. If it be a 
literal, and not a spiritual reference, the choice will he between the 
Jewish war under Titus or that under Hadrian ; in either case we 
should be in Judaeo-Christian circles. It is, however, quite possible 
that the ' war ' and the ' peace ' refer only to spiritual experiences. 

The injunction in v. 1 1 to keep the Lord's secret (/u.vo-Ti/pioi' kfx,ov) 
is frequently quoted in the Fathers. A striking instance will be found 
in Lactantius, Div. Instit. vii. 26: ' nos defendere hanc [doctrinam] 
publice atque asserere non solemus, Deo jubente, ut quieti ac silentes 
arcanum ejus in abdito atque intra nostram conscientiam teneamus... 
abscondi enim tegique mysterium quam fidelissime oportet, inaxime a nobis, 
qui nomen fidei gerimus.' The last sentence is very like the language 
of the Ode, ' Keep my secret ye who are kept by it ; keep my faith ye 
who are kept by it.' These Patristic quotations may be traced ultimately 
to a variant translation of Isaiah xxiv. 16, which has crept into some 
texts of the LXX from the Hexapla of Origen. But there are a number 
of cases where the citation is not directly from Isaiah, but from a saying 
of our Lord in an uncanonical Gospel. Thus in Clem. Alex. Strom. 
V. 10 we have ov yap (j>6ovwv, <j>r]cri, TraprjyyuXfv 6 Kvpios ev rivt €vayye\tw 
f).v(TTr]piov ifiov ijxoi nai tois uiots toC oikou /xov. Again in Clem. Horn. 
xix. 20 we have, (jLeixv-rj/xeda Tov Kvplov r]ij,<5v Koi StSao-KaXov, (us cvTcXA.ojuei'Os 
elirev tj/iaiv to. ix.v(rTrjpia i/xoX xai tois viols f).ov (^vXa^art. It seems that 
the Odist has been working from the same source as Clement of 
Alexandria and the Clementine Homilist : and if this be the case, the 
uncanonical Gospel of which he makes use is very likely the same which 
we shall find quoted in the 24th Ode. [Bernard thinks the reference is 
to the disdplina arcanii\ 



THE ODES OF SOLOMON 103 



ODE 9. 



^Open your ears and I will speak to you. Give me your 
souls that I may also give you my soul, ^the word of the Lord 
and His good pleasures, the holy thought which He has devised 
concerning His Messiah . ^For in the will of the Lord is your 
salvation', and His thought is everlasting life ; and your end 
is immortality''. *Be enriched in God the Father, and 
receive the thought of the Most High. ^Be strong and_be Is. lii. 7. '^ 
rede gmed by His grace^ ®For I announce to you peace, to you Cf. Ps. ^ 
His saints ; ''that none of those who hear may fall in war, and ^'""'^' ^' 
those again who have known Him may not perish, and that 
those who receive may not be ashamed. ^An everlasting crown 
for ever is Truth. Blessed are they who set it on their heads : 
^a stone of great price is it; and there have _been_wars_on_ 
ac count of the crown_. ''°And righteousness hath taken it and 
hath given it to you. " Put on the crown in the true covenant 
of the Lord. ''^And all those who have conquered shall be \ 
written in His book. ''^For their book is victory which is yours. 
And she (Victory) sees you before her and wills that you shall 
be saved. Hallelujah. 

Ode 9. This Psalm is, from a historical point of view, somewhat 
colourless. The only definite points are the allusions to the Lord's 
Messiah, or Christ : and a promise of peace and deliverance from war, 
which is made to the saints. Of the first of these allusions, we may say 
that while it makes the Psalm a Messianic one, this does not mean that 
it is not Christian. The promise of everlasting Hfe which follows must 
be the holy thought of God concerning the Christ. And this seems to 
definitely mark out the Psalm as Christian. 

What then are we to say of the wars and victory to which the Psalm 
refers ; are they spiritual or are they outward, or a mixture of both ? 
We shall have the same problem before us in other Psalms. From the 
fact that Victory is personified and writes a book, with which we may 
compare Apoc. iii. 5 (' He that overcometh shall be clothed in white 
raiment, and I will not blot out his name from the book of life '), we 
may perhaps conclude that the Victory spoken of is a spiritual one. 
This is in harmony with the references to redemption by grace and to 
the will of Victory that the saints should be saved. These are Christian 
expressions. On the other hand the promise that none of those who 

' Hi. life. ^ Or, and without corruption is your perfection. 



104 THE ODES OF SOLOMON 

obey the Lord's word shall fall in war might have been very strikingly 
illustrated in the case of the Christians who escaped to Pella. But 
even then the Psalm is a Christian one, and it remains an open question 
-whether outward allusions may not have been coupled with inward 
victories; 

The alternative rendering for the third verse suggests that the Syriac 
words answer to a Greek sentence, koI ev at^Oapcria to tc'Xos v[x.u}v. 

ODE lo. 

^The Lord hath directed my mouth by His word : and He 
hath opened my heart by His light : and He hath caused to 
dwell in me His deathless life; ^and gave me that I might 
speak the fruit of His peace : ^to convert the souls of them who 
are willing to come to Him : and to lead captive a good captivity 
for freedom. *I was strengthened and made mighty and took 
the world captive ; ^and it became to me for the praise of the 
Most High, and of God my Father. ®And the Gentiles^ were 
gathered together who were scattered abroad. '^And I was 
unpollutedf by my love ''for them^^ because they confessed me in 
high places : and the traces of the light were set upon their 
heart : ^and they walked in my life and were saved and became 
my people for ever and ever. Hallelujah. 

Ode 10. In this vigorous little Psalm Christ must Himself be 
accounted the speaker- through the mouth of His prophet; unless we 
should prefer to say that any of the opening sentences are spoken in 
the Psalmist's own name, and that after them there is an abrupt 
alteration of personality, such as we have already referred to. It is 
certain, however, that the one who gathers the peoples together by his 
love must be the Messiah: ('unto him shall the gathering of the 
peoples be^ '). And it can be no psalmist or prophet who declares 
that the Gentiles became his people for ever and ever. The one who 
goes forth to lead captivity captive is again the Christ : we have in the 
New Testament (Eph. iv. 8) the Messianic interpretation of Ps. Ixviii. i8, 
'He ascended up on high, he led captivity captive'; and the same 
explanation underlies the Ode before us. The Ode is, therefore, a 
Christian one : and its soteriology is universal in character. But we are 
still in the region where apologetic is necessary for the reception of the 

^ Christ has accepted the Gentiles. 

^ i.e. erasing the plural points, so as not to read 'by my sins.' Barnes suggests 
the emendation 'by their sins.' Wellhausen: ist naturlich /lauiai z\i s^iiechen, nicht 
hudii. 

' Gen. xlix. lo. 



THE ODES OF SOLOMON I05 

Gentiles, and where it does not suffice to quote a verse of the Old 
Testament and say that such reception was foretold. In our Ode 
Christ explains that the reception of the Gentiles has not polluted Him. 
Such language does not belong to the Hellenic world, nor, we think, 
to the second century. But it is quite natural in a Judaeo-Christian 
community in Palestine in the first century. 

The fact that prophets spoke in the person of God or of Christ was 
a common observation with the early fathers : a good illustration may 
be seen in Justin's Apology^, where Justin explains that the opening 
sentences of Isaiah ('The ox knoweth his owner... but my people doth 
not consider') are a case of the kind; and then goes on to explain that 
the words 'all day long I have stretched out my hands' are to be 
understood of the prophet speaking in the person of Christ. In the 
canonical Psalms also the same feature was easily traced, and those 
who composed the early books of Testimonies against the Jews con- 
stantly point out that the real speaker is not the prophet, but One 
whom he impersonates. It is inevitable that this impersonation should 
cause difficulties of interpretation, due to the obscurity of personality 
involved in the different parts of the prophecy or psalm. And we must 
not be surprised if we sometimes find it hard to tell in the text of our 
Odes who is to be regarded as the speaker. 

ODE II. 

■■My heart was cloven'' and its flovifer appeared ; and grace 
sprang up in it : and it brought forth fruit to the Lord, ^for the 
Most High clave ''my heart"" by His Holy Spirit and searched 
my affection'' towards Him: and filled me with His love. ^And 
His opening" of me became my salvation ; and I ran in His 
way in His peace, even in the way of truth : ''■from the be- 
ginning and even to the end I acquired His knowledge : ^and 
I was established upon the rock of truth, where He had set me 
up: ^and speaking waters^ touched my lips from the fountain 
of the Lord plenteously : ^and I drank and was inebriated 
with the living water that doth not die ; ^and my inebriation 
was not one without knowledge, but I forsook vanity and turned 
to the Most High my God, ^and I was enriched by His bounty, 

' I Ap. 37, 38. ^ Or, circumcised. 

' lit. clave me or circumcised me. Cf. Rom. ii. 29. 

* lit. revealed my reins : cf. Sap. Sol. i. 6: Ps. vii. 9: Ps. Ixii. (Ixi.) 1 : Apoc. ii. 23. 
' Or, circumcision. 

^ Cf. Ignatius ad Rom. 7 iiSwp ^Siv ko.\ 'KaXauv. Wellhausen : das redende Wasser 
flndet sich bei den Mandaern. <- » V.^ 

O. S. 14 




I06 THE ODES OF SOLOMON 

and I forsook the folly which is diffused' over the earth; and 
I stripped it off and cast it from me: '"'and the Lord renewed 
me in His raiment^ and possessed me by His light, and from 
above He gave me rest in incorruption ; ''■'and I became like the 
land which blossoms and rejoices in its fruits : ''^and the Lord 
was like the sun shining on the face of the land ; ''^He lightened 
my eyes, and my face received the dew ; and my nostrils" 
enjoyed the pleasant odour of the Lord ; ^* and He carried me 
to His Paradise; where is the abundance of the pleasure of the 
Lord; ''^and I worshipped the Lord on account of His glory; 
and I said, Blessed, O Lord, are they who are planted in thy 
land ! and those who have a place in thy Paradise ; ''^and they 
grow by the fruits of thy trees^. And they have changed from 
darkness to light. ''^Behold ! all thy servants are fair, who do 
good works, and turn away from wickedness to the pleasantness 
that is thine : ''^and they have turned back the bitterness of the 
trees from them, when they were planted in thy land ; ''^and 
everything became like a relic of thyself, and a memorial for 
ever of thy faithful works. 2° For there is abundant room in thy 
Paradise, and nothing is useless* therein ; ^^but everything is 
filled with fruit ; glory be to thee, O God, the delight of 
Paradise for ever. Hallelujah. 

Ode 1 1. This lovely Psalm is altogether personal and experimental ; 
the writer describes the visitations of Divine Grace, which he calls the 
cutting open" of his heart, and his establishment upon the rock of 
eternal truth. He is renewed by these visitations, as if he had been 
newly clad in light and had already reached the eternal rest. He 
becomes like a land that drinks in the dew of heaven, and brings forth 
fruit to God. He finds himself at last in the Paradise of God and 
amongst the fragrant trees of a new creation. He breaks out into 
exultant praise of the good things which God has prepared for them 
that love Him. 

There are no Scriptural references in the Psalm that can be claimed 
as quotations, however closely the language approximates to that of the 
ancient Scriptures. Perhaps the nearest parallel would be the promise 
m Apoc. ii. 7, that the one who overcomes, shall eat of the tree of life 
which is in the midst of the Paradise of God. ' 

' lit. cast. U.-S. . die auf Erden lagert. 

2 Cp. Ps. civ. 2. 3 lit. my breathing. 

^ Better with Fl. -. they grow according to the growth of thy trees. 

° Or, idle = 0/1765. Cf. 2 Pet. i. 8: om dpyois om aKdpTrovs. 

" perhaps the circumcising. 



THE ODES OF SOLOMON lO^ 

ODE 12. 

^ He hath filled me with words of truth ; that I may speak 
the same ; ^and like the flow of waters flows truth from my 
mouth, and my lips show forth His fruit. ^And He has caused Ps. H. 17. 
His knowledge to abound in me, because the mouth of the 
Lord is the true Word, and the door of His light ; '*and the 
Most High hath given it to His worlds, [worlds] which are 
the interpreters of His own beauty, and the repeaters of His 
praise, and the confessors of His counsel, and the heralds of 
His thought, and the chasteners of His servants^ ^For the 
swiftness of the Word' is inexpressible, and like its expression 
is its swiftness and force ; ^and its course knows no limit. 
Never doth it fail, but it stands sure, and it knows not descent' 
nor the way of it^ '''For as its work is, so is its end : for it is 
light and the dawning of thought ; ^and by it the worlds^ talk 
one to the other ; and in the Word there were those that were 
silent ; ^and from it came love and concord ; and they spake, 
one to the other whatever was theirs ; and they were penetrated 
by the Word ; ''"and they knew Him who made them, because 
they were in concord ; for the mouth of the Most High spake 
to them; and His explanation ran by means of it: ''■'for the 
dwelling-place of the Word is man : and its truth is ' love. 
^'^ Blessed are they who by means thereof have understood 
everything, and have known the Lord in His truth. Hallelujah. 

Ode 12. This Psalm rises to a high level of spiritual thought, but 
for that very reason its language is occasionally obscure. The writer 
describes his own inspiration and how his heart knd lips become- iilled 
with the words of God. Here, as elsewhere, God's fruit is found in the 
lips of the faithful, and we are often reminded in these Psalms of the 
expression which is borrowed in Heb. xiii. 15, from the prophet Hosea, 
about offering to God the ' fruit of Hps that confess to His name.' 
From the general thought of the words of God, the writer rises to the 
abstract idea of the Word of God, or Logos, which is the totality of 
God's revelation and which interpenetrates all things, so that even 
things that are .silent iind their speech in it. But especially this Word, 
which is both truth and love, finds its dwelling-place in man. Happy 

^ Or, works. 

^ Cf. Sap. Sol. vii. 34. Philo, De Mut. Nom. 42 Kovijiov yap 6 \6yos /cat yrTqvhv 
(j>'inxei, ^^\ovs ScLttov 0ep6)«eyos Kal TavTrj dig.TTUji'. 

^ Or by slight emendations, no man knoweth its length or breadth. 
* Or possibly, the aeons. 



I08 THE ODES OF SOLOMON 

are they that have come to know Him. Here, perhaps, we are nearer 
to Gnostic ideas, such as the doctrine of the Word and the Silence, 
than in any other part of the Psalter: yet there is nothing that can 
fairly be called Gnostic. We are also very close to the doctrine of the 
Logos as we have it in John, where the Logos becomes flesh and dwells 
amongst us: but it is not the Johannine thought of the Incarnation 
that is imitated or reproduced. The dwelling of the Logos with man is 
personal and not collective; and we cannot infer from this Psalm a 
direct statement of the doctrine of Incarnation, for the writer does not 
go beyond Inspiration; but his thought is noble, even if, as we have 
said, it is sometimes obscure, at least in a translation. 



ODE 13. 

■'Behold! the Lord is our mirror^: open the eyes and see 
them in Him : and learn the manner of your face : ^and tell forth 
praise to His spirit : and wipe off the filth from your face : and 
love His holiness, and clothe yourselves therewith : ^and be 
without stain at all times before Him. Hallelujah. 

S Ode 1 3. This strange little Psalm is an exhortation to holiness : 
we are to behold the Lord in the beauty of His holiness, but we are 
also to see ourselves reflected in God as in a mirror ; then we shall 
behold our natural face in an unexpected glass and know what manner 
of men we are : and in that glass we shall cleanse the dirt from off our 
faces, and attain to purity. We are reminded of St Paul's statement 
that we behold, as in a mirror, the glory of our Lord and are transfigured 
into the same image; though here the thought is not as high as in 
Corinthians, where holiness is found by the Vision of God rather than 
by the scrutiny of ourselves. 

We may also in this connexion refer to a remarkable passage which 
is found in a tract falsely ascribed to Cyprian, and known as De 
Montihus Sina et Sioti. We are reminded in this passage first that 
Christ is the Unspotted Mirror of the Father, as is said of Wisdom in 
the book called the Wisdom of Solomon^. Hence the Father and 
the Son see one another by reflexion. The writer then continues as 
follows : 

'And even we who believe in Him see Christ in us as in a mirror, 
as He Himself instructs and advises us in the Epistle of His disciple 

' Cf Clem. Alex. Paed. i. 9, p. 172 T6 iaoirTfav ry aiaxpv ou KaitAv, Sn SeiKfiei 
oiiTW oUs ianv. Cf. Jac. i. 24. Clem. Horn. xiii. 16 KoKi^ ia^drTpij! opf [ij ffii<l>p<m> 

^ Saf. Sol. vii. 26. 



THE ODES OF SOLOMON IO9 

John to the people: "See me in yourselves, in the same way as any one 
of you sees himself in water or in a mirror" ; and so he confirmed the 
saying of Solomon about Himself, that "He is the unspotted mirror of 
the Father.'" 

Here we have the doctrine of dual vision in a mirror, as though the 
mirror saw the observer as well as the observer the mirror ; in this way 
the Father sees Himself in the Son and the Son sees Himself in the 
Father: and then we are told of something said by John, speaking in 
the person of Christ, in a lost epistle, that we are to see Christ in 
ourselves as in a glass. This is something like the doctrine of our 
Psalm that we are to see ourselves in Christ. If we could really be 
sure of the correctness of the reference of the supposed Cyprianic tract 
to St John, we should have more confidence in saying that here also 
we are in the region of Johannine ideas: but, even in that case, there 
would seem to be no question of direct quotation from canonical 
Johannine writings\ 

ODE 14. 

^As the eyes 2 of a son to his father, so are my eyes, O Lord, 
at all times towards thee. ^For with thee are my consolations 
(lit. breasts) and my delight. ^Turn not away thy mercies 
from me, O Lord : and take not thy kindness from me. 
* Stretch out to me, O Lord, at all times thy right hand : and 
be my guide' even unto the end, according to thy good pleasure. 
^Let me be well-pleasing'' before thee, because of thy glory and 
because of thy name: ^let me be preserved from evil, and let 
thy meekness, O Lord, abide with me, and the fruits of thy love. 
''Teach me the Psalms of thy truth, that I may bring forth fruit 
in thee : ^and open to me the harp of thy Holy Spirit, that 
with all its notes I may praise thee, O Lord. ^And according 
to the multitude of thy tender mercies, so thou shalt give to me ; 
and hasten to grant our petitions ; and thou art able for all our 
needs. Hallelujah. 

' The passage in Ps. -Cyprian is so curious, that for convenience I transcribe the 
Latin: De Mont. Sina et Sion 13 : 'Ita inuenimus ipsum Saluatorem per Salomonem 
speculum inmaculatum patris esse dictum, eo quod sanctus spiritus Dei filius 
geminatum se uideat, pater in filio et filius in patre, utrosque se in se uident : ideo 
speculus inmaculatus. Nam et nos qui illi credimus Christum in nobis tanquam in 
speculo uidemus, ipso nos instruente et monente in epistula lohannis discipuli Sui ad 
populum: "ita me in uobis uidete, quomodo quis uestrum se uidet in aquam aut in 
speculum," et confinnauit Salomonicum dictum de se dicentem, "quis est speculus 
inmaculatus patris."' 

^ Ps. cxxiii. L. ^ Ps. xlviii. 14. 

* =(iia.fii<jTuv, walk before God, as Enoch, Gen. v. 24 etc.; cf. Peshitta. 



no THE ODES OF SOLOMON 

Ode 14. In this Psalm the canonical Psalter is somewhat more 
closely imitated than is generally the case with our collection. The 
opening sentences recall Ps. exxiii. 2, 'As the eyes of servants to the 
hands of their masters, and as the eyes of a maid to the hand of her 
mistress, so are our eyes to the Lord our God.' The prayer that the 
Lord will be 'my guide even to the end,' recalls Ps. xlviii. 14, 'This 
God is our God for ever and ever; He will be our guide even unto 
death.' But the Psalm is by no means a cento from the canonical 
Psalter, even though it does not contain anything that could, at the first 
reading, be definitely labelled as Christian. 

ODE 15. 

■•As the sun is the joy to them that seek for its daybreak 1, 
so is my joy the Lord ; '^because He is my Sun and His rays 
have lifted me up^; and His light hath dispelled all darkness 
from my face. ^In Him I have acquired eyes and have seen 
His holy day: '*ears have become mine and I have heard His 
truth. ^The thought of knowledge hath been mine, and I have 
been delighted through Him. ^The way of error I have left, 
and have walked towards Him and have received salvation from 
Him, without grudging. '^And according to His bounty He 
hath given to me, and according to His excellent beauty^ He 
hath made me. ^I have put on incorruption through His name : 
and have put off corruption by His grace. ^ Death hath been 
destroyed before my face : and Sheol hath been abolished by my 
word : ■'°and there hath gone up deathless life in the Lord's land, 
"and it hath been made known to His faithful ones, and hath 
been given without stint to all those that trust in Him. 
Hallelujah. 

Ode 15. This beautiful Psalm, like so many others in the collection, 
opens with a similitude : these openings are characteristic of the book, 
and betray a single writer. This does not mean that they do not 
sometimes imitate the opening of the canonical Psalms. In the present 
case the 130th Psalm seems to have furnished the key-note, viz. the 
watchers for the morning. It is an experimental Psalm of the first order: 
the Sun has risen upon the soul of the writer. Eyes, ears and heart 
have all been opened. Salvation has been realized: the comeliness of 
the Lord has been put upon Jiim: death has lost its terrors, the grave 
its power. 

Cf. Ps. cxxx. 6. 2 Q^^ made me rise up. 

^ =Gk. fieyaXoirp^ireia, 



THE ODES OF SOLOMON III 

There is one passage which is either obscure, incorrect or extravagant 
where the writer says that 'Sheol has been abolished by my word.' 
Unless there has been a transition of personality, this seems extravagant, 
and invites the correction 'has been abolished at His word.' In any 
case, I think the Psalm is a Christian one, though the positive or 
dogmatic identifications are not forthcoming, apart from the victory 
over death and the grave. 

ODE i6. 

^As the work of the husbandman is the ploughshare: and 
the work of the steersman is the guidance' of the ship: '^so also 
my work is the Psalm of the Lord : my craft and my occupation 
are in His praises^ : ^because His love hath nourished my heart, 
and even to my lips His fruits He poured out. ^For my love is 
the Lord, and therefore I will sing unto Him : ^for I am made 
strong ill His praise, and I have faith in Him. ^I will open my 
mouth and His spirit will utter in me ^the glory of the Lord 
and His beauty ; the work of His hands and the operation of 
His fingers : ^the multitude of His mercies and the strength of 
His word. ^For the word of the Lord searches out" all things, 
both the invisible and that which reveals His thought ; '"'for the 
eye sees His works, and the ear hears His thought. "He spread 
out the earth and He settled the waters in the sea: '^He 
measured the heavens and fixed the stars : and He established 
the creation and set it up : ''^and He rested from His works : 
■■^and created things run in their courses, and do their works : 
^^and they know not how to stand and be idle' ; and His 
'"heavenly"' hosts are subject to His word. ''^The treasure- 
chamber of the light is the sun, and the treasury of the dark- 
ness is the night : ''^and He made the sun for the day that it " 
may be bright, but night brings darkness over the face of the 
land ; ^^and their alternations one to the other speak^ the beauty 
of God : ^^and there is nothing that is without the Lord ; for He 
was before any thing came into being: ^°and the worlds were cf. Heb. 
made by His word, and by the thought of His heart. Glory '• ^' 
and honour to His name. Hallelujah. 

^ lit. traction. Schulthess suggests 'the mast.' (1. TO^Ti*.). 

2 lit. in His praises is my craft and in His praises my occupation. 

2 Or, searches out ; everything, the invisible and the revealed, (is) his thought. 

* Justin, Dial. 12. " Cod. complete; dui rearf^AX^iSn. 



112 THE ODES OF SOLOMON 

Ode i6. This Psalm is, in its closing sentences, specifically Christian, 
and it is clearly from the same author as those that have immediately 
preceded. The theme is the beauty of God's creation; especially the 
writer considers the heavens which are the works of God's fingers, he 
contemplates the 'spacious firmament on high' (Ps. xviii.). We frequently 
catch refrains from the story of Creation. But curiously the writer 
appears to avoid the mention of the moon: instead of saying that God 
appointed the sun to rule the day and the moon to rule the night, he 
says that 'the treasure of the light is the sun, and the treasure of the 
darkness is — the night': and he tries to work out this broken parallel 
by a further statement about the offices of the sun and the darkness. It 
would be, perhaps, too much to assume that he had some reason for 
neglecting the moon: but the omission is curious: (there is a similar 
omission in Sap. Sol. vii. i8). The Psalm is certainly a beautiful one, 
especially in its opening verses. These find an appropriate parallel in 
Clement of Alexandria, who tells us^: 'We do not force the horse to 
plough nor the bull to hunt, but we allure each species of animal to the 
craft that suits it. So we also invite man to the vision of the open 
heaven, and to the knowledge of God, because he is of celestial 

birth Plough, indeed, if ploughman thou be, but know God while 

thou ploughest: sail, if thou love to voyage the seas, but make thy 
appeal to the steersman on high.' 

The opening verses of this Ode find also a close parallel to Stoic 
thought in one of its loftiest expressions; for, according to Epictetus, 
the praise of God is the greatest of occupations: 'Seeing that most of 
you are Winded, should there not be some one to fill this place, and sing 
the hymn to God on behalf of all men?. ..Were I a nightingale, I should 
do after the manner of a nightingale. Were I a swan, I should do after 
the manner of a swan. But now, since I am a reasonable being, / must 
sing to God; that is my proper work : I do it, nor will I desert this my 
post, as long as it is granted to me to hold it: and unto you I call to 
join in this self-same hymn' (Epictetus, Discourses, i. i6). I am almost 
tempted to believe that our Odist knew this saying of Epictetus, and 
had Christianised it. It may well have been a popular religious 
quotation in the latter part of the first century. Stoicism and Christi- 
anity were, as is well known, very near neighbours; and this passage is 
one of the finest of Epictetus' sayings^. 

On examining the Ode more closely we detect an unmistakeable 
case of anti-Judaic polemic. The writer after describing the beauty of 

1 Clem. Alex. Protrepl. p. 80. 

2 T. R. Glover [Conflict of Religions, p. 165) refers to this saying of Epictetus and 
remarks that ' Stoicism was never essentially musical. Epictetus announces a hymn 
to Zeus, but he never stavLs the tune.' Certainly the language of the Ode is much 
loftier and more musical than that of Epictetus. 



THE ODES OF SOLOMON 113 

creation and the Lord's rest from His works, goes on to say something 
which shows that he does not mean to deduce the Jewish Sabbath from 
the statements in Genesis. 'Created things run in their courses, and 
do their works and know not how to stand or be idle.' Suppose we turn 
to Justin's Dialogue with Trypho, c. 22, where Justin is arguing with 
Trypho for the non-necessity of circumcision and the Sabbath : ' I will 
declare to you and to those who may wish to become proselytes,' says 
Justin, ' a divine word which I heard from the old man to whom I owe 
my conversion. He said, "you observe that the heavenly bodies do 
not idle nor keep sabbath^. Remain, therefore, as you were born, do 
not keep sabbath nor practise circumcision."' 

It is clear, then, that the i6th Ode means to say that the Sabbath is 
not kept by the Heavenly bodies; and as it goes on to say 'and the 
[Heavenly] hosts are subject to His word,' it follows that God is 
regulating the motions of the worlds on the Sabbath days as well as on 
the week-days: a point which Justin expressly makes in c. 29, 'God 
undertakes the regulation of the world on this day, exactly as on other 
days^.'. 

The writer then is a Christian of the type of Justin Martyr, who 
accepts the Gospel without the obligation of the Law, and makes a 
quiet intimation of the position which he takes towards the stricter 
Judaism. But we notice, further, that the argument which underlies 
his verse is older than Justin Martyr; it is contained in the reply of the 
ancient Christian whom Justin consulted on the question of sabbath 
and circumcision; he calls it a Divine Word or Oracle (Qfiov Xoyov). 
It may, then, have come from some early Christian handbook; but, 
whether this be the case or not, it is a dictum of the first century ; for 
the very old man who talked with Justin was not inventing a solution 
for immediate perplexities, but giving him a rule which prevailed in the 
Church to which he belonged. 

So it seems clear that the Ode is really Christian, and that its 
Christianity is of a very early type, to judge from the arguments 
involved in it. 

ODE 17. 

U was crov\ai£d_J3y_jiij^_Godjjnycrow^^ living: ^and I 
was justified in my Lord : my incorruptible salvation is He. 
^I was loosed from vanity, and I was not condemned: ''■the 
choking bonds were cut off by her' hands : I received the face 

' I.e. TO. a-TOLx^ta oiiK ipyet oidi aap^an^ei. 

^ 6 ffeos TTjii aiTTjv SiolKijaw rod k6(t/wv o/iolus Kal iv t«i5ti; rp ijtiipq. ireTroiriTa 
KaOdirep iv rats aXXais aTdaats. 
' Query his? 

O.S. ,g 



114 THE ODES OF SOLOMON 

and the fashion of a new person : and I walked in it and was 
saved ; ^and the thought of truth led me on. And I walked 
after it and did not wander: ^and all that have seen me were 
amazed : and I was regarded by them as a strange person : 
''and He who knew and brought me up is the Most High in all 
His perfection. And He glorified me by His kindness, and 
raised my thought to the height of ''His"' truth. ^And from 
thence He gave me the way of His precepts' and I opened the 
doors that were closed, ^and brake in pieces the bars of iron ; 
but my iron melted and dissolved before me; i° nothing ap- 
peared closed to me: because X_WM-Jhe__doo^_of_everything. 
"And I went over all[m^ bondmen to loose them ; that I might 
not leave any man bound or binding: ^^and I imparted my 
knowledge without grudging: and my prayer was in my love: 
13 and I sowed my fruits in hearts, and transformed them into 
myself: and they received my blessing and lived; ''*and they 
were gathered to me and were saved ; because they were to me 
as my own members and I was their head. Glory to thee our 
head, the Lord Messiah. Hallelujah. 

Ode 17. This Psalm is one that we alluded to above in connexion 
with ' the crown of life ' that has been put upon the writer's head. 
That it is a Christian Psalm is evident : the Messiah or Christ is 
definitely referred to, and he is spoken of as being to believers in the 
relation of the head to the members. But we have again in this Psalm 
the peculiar change of personality: this time it comes so imperceptibly 
that we might be tempted to doubt the reality of the transition, if it 
were not for the. abruptness of the return from it at the close of the 
Psalm. The breaking of the bars of iron must surely refer to the 
Messiah" : it need not be an allusion to the descent into Hades^ ; for the 
problem of liberation of souls is stated in general terms : all men are to 
be free; there is to be no more one that binds and one that is bound. 
The transformation of believers into Christ's nature is also referred 
to; 'I transformed them into myself they became my own members.' 

ODE 18. 

1 My heart was lifted up in the love of the Most High and 
was enlarged : that I might praise Him for His^ name's sake.' 

' lit. steps. 

^ So Zahn : Wer anders soUte das sein als Jesus der Messias? 
^ Batififol: Avec M. Harris, avec M. Harnack aussi, et contre M. Gunkel, je 
crois que ces vv. ne parlent pas de la descente du Christ aux enfers, 
* Cod. my. 



members were strengthened that they might not fall from 
trength. ^ Sicknesses removed from my body, and it stood 
I Lord by His will. For His Kingdom is true. ■*© Lord, 
le sake of them that are deficient do not remove thy word 
me ! 5 Neither for the sake of their works do thou restrain 
me thy perfection 1 ^Let not the luminary be conquered cf.joh. 
tie darkness ; nor let truth flee away from falsehood, 
u wilt appoint me to victory ; our Salvation is thy 

hand'. And thou wilt receive men from all quarters, 

thou wilt preserve whosoever is held in evils : ^Thou art 
jod. falsehood and death* are not in thy mouth: '"'for 
/ill is perfection ; and vanity thou knowest not, "nor does 
ow thee. '^And error thou knowest not, ^^ neither does it 
■thee. '*And ignorance appeared like a blind man'; and 
:he foam of the sea, ''^and they supposed of that vain thing 
it was something great ; ''^and they too came in likeness 

and became vain ; and those have understood who have 
m and meditated ; '"''and they have not been corrupt in 

imagination ; for such were in the mind of the Lord ; 
1 they mocked at them that were walking in error ; ''^and 

spake truth from the inspiration which the Most High 
:hed into them ; Praise and great comeliness^ to His name, 
elujah. 

DE 1 8. The writer of this Psalm speaks as a prophet, who has 
n the Divine visitation, and has felt its effect both on mind and 
in the dispelling of error and the healing of disease. He prays 
continuance of the heavenly gift for the sake of the needy people 
lom he gives his message. He has evidently been regarded by 
as a light and foolish person, whose talk is like the foam on the 
of the sea. But there are others who are inspired like himself, 
?ho mock at the unbelievers for their stupidity and ignorance. We 
the echo of some serious controversy upon religious matters, but 
ubject of the dispute is unknown. There are no definitely 
tian features in the Psalm. 

V, To Victory may thy right hand bring our Salvation. 
Perhaps Falsehood and the like. 

Ir by a slight change. And I appeared like a blind man without knowledge. 
'er, like chaff, reading y^^cc^ (so Schulthess). Cf. Ode 29. 10. 
rk. fieyaXoTrpitreta. 



Il6 THE ODES OF SOLOMON 

" \" 
ODE T9. 

■"A cup of milk was offered to me: and I drank it in the 
sweetness of the delight of the Lord. ^The Son is the cup, and 
He who was milked is the Father: ^and.the Holy Spirit milked 
Him: because His breasts were full, and it was necessary for 
Him that His milk should be sufficiently released ; ^and the^ 
Holy Spirit opened His' bosom and mingled the milk from the 
two breasts of the Father ; and gave the mixture to the world 
without th eir knowing: ^and they who receive in its fulness are the 

/ones on the right hand. ^[The Spirit]^ opened the womb of the 
Virgin and she received conception and brought forth ; and the 

.Virgin became a Mother with many mercies ; ^and she travailed 
and brought forth a Son, without incurring pain ; ^and because 
she was not sufficiently prepared^ and she had not sought a 
midwife, (for He brought her to bear), she brought forth, as if 
she were a man^ of her own will' ; ^and she brought Him forth 
openly, and acquired Him with great dignity, ''"and loved Him 
in His swaddling clothes", and guarded Him kindly, and showed 
Him in Majesty. Hallelujah. 

Ode 19. Fantastic as this Psalm is, it might at first sight have been 
discarded as being out of harmony with the lofty spiritual tone of the 
rest of the collection. But it happens to be attested by Lactantius, and 
in the MSS. of his Divine Institutes we have not only a quotation from 
the Psalm in regard to the painless delivery of the Blessed Virgin, but 
we have also the number of the Psalm given, either as 19 or 20. So it 
was found in the collection known to Lactantius. 

The harshness of the opening figure with regard to the bosom of 
the Father does not necessarily detach it from the rest of the collection ; 
for we have had already allusion to the breasts of God. Thus in 
Psalm 8, the Lord is represented as saying : ' My own breasts I 
prepared for them that they might drink my holy milk and live thereby.' 
The eighth and the nineteenth of our Psalms appear therefore to be 
connected together by a common authorship. For the figure of the 
breasts of God in the literature of the early Church we may refer to 
Clement of Alexandria who, in the Paedagogtis (lib. i. c. 6, p. 124), has 

' MS. her bosom. 

^ Lact. Div. Iiislit. iv. 12; Epit. Div. Iiistit. i;. 44. The original Greek was 
perhaps ^j-eKoXTriVS); ( = Aram. f]B3). FJemming: er umarmte .(?) 
•' Perhaps: and because there was not (pain) she was sufficient. 
^ Batiffol : as it were a man : 7'eading ws dvBptiiiTov for ws avdpuvos. 
'' Batiffol : by the will [of God] : cf. Joh. i. 13 ^fc 6e\ri/i,aTos. 
" Reading »ir^\~kia2i for rilnScv^.^ 



THE ODES OF SOLOMON 117 

a long discussion of the milk with which Christ's babes are nourished; 
Our nourishment, he says, is the Divine Word, it is ' the milk vf the 
Father, by which only the babes are fed.' Through the Word 'we 
have believed in God, to whose care-allaying breast we have fled.' And 
again (p. 125) 'to the babes, who seek for the Word, the breasts of the 
Father's kindness supply the milk' (toTs ^rjroCcrt vrjirtois toi' Aoyov ai 

TraTpiKal T^s <jii\.av6puiTriai OrjXai )(Oprjyov(Ti to yaXd). So Clement 

comes very near to the figurative language of the Ode, without its 
crudity of expression. The harshness of the figures employed and the 
tritheistic character of the theology may be paralleled in writers of the 
middle ages, whose repute in the Church is very wide. For Ls it not 
St Bernard who expounds the Evangelic statement that the' beloved 
disciple leaned on Jesus' breast in the words ' hausit de sinu Uriigeniff 
quod de paterno hauserat ille ' ? but if John imbibed from the breast of 
the Only-begotten what He had imbibed in like manner from the 
Father, we can only say that a very lofty theology is presented in a very 
harsh metaphor; but we cannot dismiss St Bernard as unworthy of 
further notice. And if it comes to tritheisrh, with which all the 
Christian Ages are more or less discoloured, where shall we find it 
more pronounced than in John Tauler's great sermon on fhe coming of 
the Bridegroom, where God the Father presides over the nuptials of 
Christ and the Church, and where the Holy Spirit acts as cup-bearer at 
the feast : a representation which is not so very remote from what we 
have in our Psalm, when wine has been substituted for milk. But I am 
afraid the matter is past apologetic. Further than this, we must admit 
that it is in many ways perplexing : the doctrine seems too highly 
evolved to allow us to reckon the Psalm to the same period of 
production as the rest of the book. When the writer speaks of milk 
from the two breasts of God, he evidently means the two covenants, or 
testaments. But that exegesis implies that the writer is no Marcionite 
rejecting an old covenant in the interests of a new, or else he wishes 
us to understand that he is no Jew, clinging to an old covenant to 
the neglect of the new covenant. And he seems to imply that the 
Christians whom he represents are distinguished from some other body 
of believers by being on the right hand of Christ. Is it the Jews from 
whom he wishes to be distinguished or is it the Marcionites? The 
Ode must be, at the earliest, a product of the second century. It is 
conceivable that the allusion to the Cup of Milk may cover an early 
Milk-Eucharist. Wine is nowhere mentioned in the religious language 
of our Psalter. 

Turn in the next place to the account of the Virgin Birth, which 
follows the parable of the cup of milk, and can almost be detached 
as a separate composition. It certainly presents the miraculous 
conception and birth in a form which has already undergone 
considerable development : that • the birth was painless was a very 



ii8 The odes of solomon 

early corollary to the statement that it was supernatural; in the 
commentary of Ephrem on the Gospel there was a statement that ' it 
was indecent that she who had been a habitation of the Spirit should 
bring forth with pains and curses"; and this must have been a very 
early reflection upon the statement of the Virgin Birth. But our writer 
goes much further than that : he dispenses with the usual aids to 
child-birth, and introduces details for which we find parallels in the 
Apocryphal Gospels of the Infancy. And it is frankly impossible that 
the doctrine of the Miraculous Birth should have become so highly 
evolved in the first century. So that the doubts raised by the first part 
of the Psalm are reinforced by a study of its latter half. As far then 
as this Psalm is concerned, it seems as if we must refer it to a later date 
than the majority of those which we have been discussing. We detected 
something like polemical tendency in the first half of the composition, 
as if the writer turned aside to rebuke either Jews or Marcionites : if 
we might assume tendency in the latter half, it must be directed against 
persons who did not believe in the Virgin Birth. Palestine and 
especially trans-Jordanic Palestine would furnish opponents of all the 
classes mentioned ; so that, if we should be obliged to depress the date 
to the second century, we have no reason to remove the composition 
to another locality than that which has already been suggested. 

ODE 20. 

^ I am a priest of the Lord, and to Him I do priestly service : 
and to Him I offer the sacrifice of His thought. ^For His 
thought is not like '"the thought of the world nor '"the thought oP 
the flesh, nor like them that serve carnally. ^The sacrifice of 
the Lord is righteousness, and purity of heart and lips. ''■Present 
your reins before Him blamelessly : and let not thy heart do 
violence to heart, nor thy soul to soul. ^Thou shalt not acquire 
a stranger by '"the price of thy silver"'^ neither shalt thou seek 
to devour thy neighbour', ^neither shalt thou deprive him of the 
covering of his nakedness ^ '^But put on the grace of the Lord 
/ without stint ; and come into His Paradise and make thee a 
Vgarland from its tree, ^and put it on thy head and be glad ; and 
recline on His rest, and glory shall go before thee, ^and thou shalt 
receive of His kindness and of His grace ; and thou shalt be 
flourishing" in truth in the praise of His holiness. Praise and 
honour be to His name. Hallelujah. 

■■ J. R. Harris, Ephrem on the Gospel, p. 31. 

^ Literally, by the blood of thy soul. I correct the Syriac, which is faulty, and' 
has repeated ' thy soul ' from the previous verse. i 

' Cf. Exod. xxii. 24. ^ Exod. xxii. 26. ^ m^ f^t. 



THE ODES OF SOLOMON II9 

Ode 20; This Psalm is a mixture of ethics and of mysticism, of 
the golden rule and of the tree of life. The writer, whether Jew or 
Christian, is wholly detached from external ritual ; he calls himself a 
priest of God, but explains that this means the thinking of God's 
thought, and that the sacrifice he offers is the pure heart and life. He 
might be an Essene, one of that strange company who did not frequent 
the temple because they had purer sacrifices of their own. He drops a 
few ethical maxims, such as we find in the Pentateuch, protests against 
the owning, of slaves (another Essene tenet) and against taking the 
neighbour's garment in pledge. Then he leaves morals and is away in 
search of the honey-dew and milk of Paradise. There glory waits the 
soul that enters into the Divine rest. 

It is a beautiful Psalm, but one could not say of it, taken by itself, 
that it was necessarily Christian ; though its affinities are with Psalms 
that are definitely Christian. For the sacrifices which the good man 
offers to God we may compare Lactantius, Div. histU. vi. 25 ' Donum 
est integritas animi ; sacrificium, laus et hymnus : si enim Deus non 
videtur, ergo iis rebus coli debet, quae non videntur. Nulla igitur 
alia religio est vera, nisi quae virtute et justitia constat.' 

In Clem. Alex. Strom, v. 11 the sacrifice is an ascetic life. 

ODE 21. 

^My arms I lifted up to the Most High, even to the grace of 
the Lord : because He had cast off my bonds from me : and my 
Helper had lifted me up to His grace and to His salvation : ^and 
I put ofT darkness and clothed myself with light, ^and my soul 
acquired a body' free from sorrow or affliction or pains. "^And 
increasingly helpful to me was the thought of the Lord, and His 
fellowship in incorruption : ^and I was lifted up in His light; and 
I served before Him, ^and I became near to Him, praising and 
confessing Him; ^my heart ran over and was found in my mouth: 
and it arose upon my lips ; and the exultation of the Lord in- 
creased on my face, and His praise likewise. Hallelujah. 

Ode 21. This Psalm is short, and somewhat obscure. The reason 
for this lies in the fact that the writer is assuming a mystical explanation 
of the ' coats of skin ' in the third chapter of Genesis, which are held to 
represent the ordinary human body which has replaced a body originally 
clad in light. See Ode 25 where the same idea of the acquisition 
of a Light-Body, and of its freedom from pain is more definitely ex- 
pressed- It is impossible to decide definitely from the reading of the 

1 lit. theie became members to my soul, etc. 



120 THE ODES OF SOLOMON 

Psalm whether it is Christian or Jewish : if the writer was a Christian, 
he was a very joyous Christian ; if he was a Jew, he knew the salvation 
of Israel that comes out of Zion, and had the dew of Heaven upon his 
vineyard. 

ODE 22. 

■■He who brought me down from on high, also brought me 
up from the regions below ; ^and He who gathers together the 
things that are betwixt is He also who cast me down : ^He who 
scattered my enemies and my adversaries: *He who gave me 
authority over bonds that I might loose them ; ^He that over- 
threw by my hands the dragon with seven heads^ : and thou 
hast set me over his roots that I might destroy his seed. ^Thou 
wast there and didst help me, and in every place thy name was 
a rampart to mel '^Thy right hand destroyed his wicked poison'*; 
and thy hand levelled the way for those who believe in thee : 
^and thou didst choose them from the graves and didst separate 
them from the dead. ^Thou didst take dead bones and didst 
cover them with bodies ; ^°they were motionless, and thou didst 
give '"them"' energy for life. "Thy way was without corruption, 
and thy face ; thou didst bring* thy world to corruption : that 
everything might be dissolved^ and then renewed, ''^and that the 
foundation for everything might be thy rock" : and on it thou 
didst build thy Kingdom ; and it became the dwelling-place of 
the saints. Hallelujah. 

Ode 2 2. In this Psalm we seem to be nearer to the known Psalter 
of Solomon than elsewhere. There is a pointed reference to a dragon 
with seven heads whose seed is to be destroyed, and whose wicked 
poison has found its antidote in the Divine power. We think at once 
of the description of Pompey as the great dragon in the second of the 
published Psalms of Solomon. But dragons generally are difiScult to 
identify. Who, for instance, is the dragon in Ps. Ixxiii. (Ixxiv.) 14 whose 
heads are broken ? Is it Tiamat the Babylonian cosmic monster or the 
Leviathan whom the faithful are to eat in the last day, or is it a real 
person ? In Ezekiel xxix. 3 it is Pharaoh of Egypt that is called the 
great dragon in the midst of the waters, but it might not be so easy to 
say which Pharaoh : any political monster may be a beast or a dragon : 

1 Cf. Apoc. xii. 3: and Pistis Sophia: see Introd. pp. 61 — 63. 

^ Rea3ing~i^'\Si with the Coptic, so Diettrich and others. 

' Copt, the poison of the slanderer. 

* Following a correction of Flemming. 

° Cf. 2 Pet. iii. II. e Cf. Matt. xvi. 18. 



THE ODES OF SOLOMON 121 

so in the present case we have to hunt around among the fallen gods to 
find him. There has evidently been a great slaughter of Jews for the 
writer uses the imagery of the Valley of Dry Bones in Ezekiel, in order to 
show that God can raise up His people from the gates of death : the ruin 
of all things becomes the occasion for a new Kingdom founded upon 
the rock. 

The Psalm is one of those which are transferred to the pages of the 
Pistis Sophia where it is recited by Matthew from an Ode of Solomon. 
It is suggested by Ryle and James that the opening sentences are of a 
Gnostic character, from the allusion to things above and things below 
and things between. But the whole tenor of our Psalms is foreign to 
Gnosticism, and I do not see any reason to introduce it as a factor in 
the interpretation. If the Psalm is really the expression of some person 
triumphing over a fallen tyrant, or of Israel personified in such a 
situation, we have to search the political crises for such a time of trial 
and recovery. It is not easy to find the solution. The Hadrianic 
wars are too late, and they were followed by no recovery on the part of 
the Jews in Palestine. Antiochus Epiphanes is too early, in every 
respect. The next cases to examine are those of Pompey and Titus. 
Pompey is already known as the dragon, and the destruction of the 
dragon is historical. Titus on the other hand is a triumphant dragon 
without a subsequent collapse : nor does there seem to be in his case a 
sufficient recovery of Judaism to justify the triumphant language of the 
Odist. The statement that God levelled the way for those who believe 
in Him seems to imply a return from exile, in greater or less degree ; 
but this also is not easy to justify from a historical point of view. 
[Bernard thinks the dragon is to be explained by Patristic gnosis of 
the defeat of the devil in the waters of Baptism, as in Cyril Cat. iii. 1 1 
and the Baptismal rituals. I add to Dr Bernard's references one from 
a MS. of Moses Bar Kepha on Baptism, in my own collection: 'Our 
Lord was baptized that he might trample on the head of the spiritual 
dragon that lurked in the water etc' The passage has been borrowed 
by Bar Salibi, Comni. in Matt. p. 98. See Preface to this edition.] 



ODE 23. 

''Joy is of the saints ! and who shall put it on, but they 
alone .-" ^ Grace is of the elect! and who shall receive it 
except those who trust in it from the beginning.' ^Love is of 
the elect ! And who shall put it on except those who have 
possessed it from the beginning .'' *Walk ye in the knowledge 
of the Most High without grudging : to His exultation and to the 
perfection of His knowledge. ^And His thought was like a 

o. s. 16 



122 THE ODES OF SOLOMON 

.letter; His will descended from on high, and it was sent like an 

*" arrow which is violently shot from the bow : ^and many hands 
rushed to the letter to seize it and to take and read it : ^and it 
escaped their fingers and they were affrighted at it and at the 
seal that was upon it. ^ Because it was not permitted to them to 
loose its seal : for the power that was over the seal was greater 

" than they. ^But those who saw it went after the letter that they 
might know where it would alight, and who should read it and 
who should hear it. ■'°But a wheel received it and came over it : 
11 and there was with it a sign of the Kingdom and of the Govern-- 
ment : ^^and everything which tried to move the wheel it mowed 

- and cut down : i^and it gathered the multitude of adversaries, 
andbfidge,^' the rivers and crossed over and rooted up many 

~ foFestsand^made a broad path. i^The head went down to the 
feet, for down to the feet ran the wheel, and (that which was a 
sign upon it. ■'s-phe letter was one of command, for there were 
included^ in 'it all districts ; ^^and there was seen at its [?] head, 
the head which was revealed, even the Son of Truth from the 
Most High Father, "and He inherited and took possession of 
everything. And the thought of the many was brought to nought, 
■■Sand all the apostates hasited and fled away. And those who 
persecuted and"Vere enragefi became extinct. 

■"9 And the letter was a great volume^ which was wholly 
written by the finger of God : ^^and the name of the Father was 
on it, and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, to rule for ever and 
ever. Hallelujah. 

Ode 23. This is the most difficult of all the Psalms in the collection, 
and I have almost despaired of being able to explain it. It describes 
the descent from heaven of a sealed document, with a message from 
God in it. The description is something like that of the little sealed 
book in the Apocalypse, which no one can open, except the triumphant 
Lamb^. If the allusion in the Apocalypse is to some previous document 
which the author has incorporated, perhaps the same thing may be true 
here. Some book may have been published, claiming Divine Authority. 
What can it have been ? A Gospel ? An Apocalypse ? It appeared 
suddenly, unexpectedly, and met with opposition rather than with 
universal acceptance. It came from the head and it went down to the 
feet. If we may use the language of a later Psalm in which the saints 

1 lit. covered. ^ lit. gathered. ^ Or tablet. 

^ Another parallel would be the letter sent from the home-land in Bardesanes' 
Hymn of the Soul in the Acts of Thomas. 



THE ODES OF SOLOMON 1 23 

in Hades are called the feet of Christ, we should say that the mysterious 
little book conveyed a message to those below from one above, and that 
it interpreted the region below to include the invisible world. Was the 
little book then a 'Descensus ad Inferos'? It is impossible to decide 
with certainty. It contained some pronounced statement concerning 
the Trinity, for we are expressly told that it had the name of Father, 
Son and Holy Ghost upon it. When any one writes in cipher, about a 
document which itself appears to have been written in cipher, for that is 
the natural meaning of a sealed book, we ought not to be surprised if it 
is not quite obvious, two thousand years later, what the writer meant or 
to what he was referring. 



ODE 24. 

■■The Dove fluttered over the Messiah, because He was her 
head ; and she sang over Him and her voice was heard : ^and 
the inhabitants were afraid and the sojourners were moved : 
^the birds dropped their wings, and all creepingthings died in 
their holes : and the abysses were opened 'which ha3^ -been, 
hidden; and they cried to "the Lord like „women in , travail): 
*and^o|food was given to themp^because(k did_not belong to 
them]; ^^and they sealed up) the abysses\_with the seal of)the 
Lord^- ^And they perished, in the thought, those that had 
existed from ancient times^; ^for they were corrupt from the 
beginning ; and the end of their corruption was life* : ''and 
every one of them that was imperfect perished : for it was not 
possible to give '"them"' a word that they might remain : ^and 
the Lord destroyed the imaginations of all them that had not 
the truth with them. ^For they who in their hearts were lifted 
up were deficient in wisdom, and so they were rejected, because 
the truth was not with them. ■'°For the Lord disclosed His way, 
and spread abroad His grace : and those who understood if^, 
know His holiness. Hallelujah. 

'"' Or perhaps, because that which was non-existent belonged to them. 

2-2 U.-S. ; unci es versanken die Abgriinde in der Versenkung des Herrn. 

'■"^ Fl. : und es gingen zugrunde durch diesen Gedanken sie, die vorher existiert 
hatten. 

U.-S. : und es gingen durch jenen Gedanken die zugrunde, die vor alters gewesen 
waren. 

*■ Or, was the life of all; and whatever of them, etc. ^ sc. the way. 



124 THE ODES OF SOLOMON 

Ode 24. The Psalm opens with a reference to the Baptism of the 
Lord, when the Holy Spirit descended in the form of a Dove on the 
head of the Messiah. The occasion was one of great dread to all 
created things, man and beast and creeping things shared the terror. 
The abysses, personified as living creatures, cried out in pain. They 
were sealed up and ended, as belonging to the order of non-existent 
things. Men also whose hearts were proud were rejected, when the way 
of the Lord was revealed and His holiness known. 

Li this Psalm with its reference to the abysses, and the things which ' 
are not and are brought to nought, we seem to be nearer to the world of 
Gnostic ideas : but it would be difficult to say that any of the catch- 
words or peculiar terms of Gnosticism are here. If we are right in 
referring the Psalm to the Baptism of the Lord, we are only furnishing 
one more proof of the extraordinary prominence given to that event in 
the early Church, for which it was the beginning of the Gospel : and 
we need not be surprised that the event should be treated in many ways, 
both theological and hymnological. 

If it is not the Baptism that is alluded to, it must be the Crucifixion, 
and in that case we must assume an unknown incident connected with 
the Crucifixion, comparable with the appearance of the Dove at the 
Baptism. In that case the plaint of the abysses is another allusion to 
the descent into Hades. 

But there is a special reason why I feel sure that the Baptism must 
be the incident to which reference is made : I think we can say that a 
written Gospel has here been employed, but not a Canonical Gospel. 
It will be remembered that Justin Martyr in his Dialogue with Trypho, 
c. 88, takes his account of the Baptism from a source which is either 
uncanonical : or, if canonical, is interpolated. When Jesus went down 
into the water, a fire was kindled in the Jordan, and when He came up 
from the water, the Holy Spirit, like a dove, fluttered upon Him (eirt- 
TTTrjvac ETT avTov (US ■Trepiarrepav to ayiov Trvtvfia) : and Justin says expressly 
that this was recorded by the Apostles of our Christ (eypaij/av ol 
diroa-ToXoL avTov tovtov tov XpcaTOv ijixuiv). This ' fluttering down ' of 
the dove is very near indeed to the language of our Ode. Its ultimate 
origin is probably to be found in the language of Gen. i. 3. 

It is well known that the account of the Baptism by Justin has been 
the centre of serious controversy, on account of the apocryphal 
expansions of the narrative, especially the reference to the Fire which 
appeared at the Jordan : and it has been argued, reasonably enough, 
that Justin cannot have used our Canonical Gospels, or at least must 
have used an uncanonical Gospel with them. The same difficulty turns 
up in the descent of the Dove, for the word iimrT-^vai, which recurs in 
Justin, must come from the written source which the author is using. 
A reference to Resch, Aussercanonische Parallele zu Luc. p. 15, will show 



THE ODES OF SOLOMON 1 25 

the wide diffusion of the account from which Justin is working'- The 
word iirnrT-^vai can be traced in Celsus and in Origen and in the seventh 
book of Sibylhnes, as well as in a number of Latin authors. The 
inference, therefore, is that a very early written Gospel is responsible for 
the detail : and it is this early Gospel that has been employed by the 
writer of the Ode. We conclude, then, that the reference is to the 
Baptism and that it is taken from a lost primitive Gospel. [If the 
Dove sang the words ' Thou art my beloved Son,' the Holy Spirit must 
be regarded as the mother of Jesus as in the Gospel according to the 
Hebrews. The same belief is involved in Ode 36.] 

There is, however, a possible suggestion that the Psalm may refer to 
the Descent into Hades, and to the Baptism, as events happening in 
close connexion. I mean that it is not out of the region of reasonable 
criticism to suggest that in the earliest times the Baptism of Christ was 
the occasion of His triumph over Hades. We find suspicious hints of 
this in the Descensus ad Inferos. Thus in c. xx^ we have a statement 
made by Seth concerning his father Adam that he will receive the oil of 
healing from Paradise in the last days : ' veniet enim amantissimus dei 
filius de caelis in munduni, et baptizabitur a Johanne in Jordane 
flumine, et tunc recipiet pater tuus Adam de hoc oleo misericordiae et 
omnes credentes in eum.' 

And in c. xxi we find Jesus talking to John the Baptist concerning 
his Descent into Hades: 'Ego Johannes vocem patris de caelo super 
eum intonantem audivi et proclamantem. Hie est filius meus dilectus, in 
quo mihi bene complacuit. Ego ab eo responsum accept quia ipse 
descensurus esset ad inferos J 

Here are two curious references connecting the Baptism and the 
Descent into Hades. And the question arises whether this 24th Ode 
may not look in the same direction. The evidence is, of course, 
inadequate, but the statement of the case may perhaps lead to the 
discovery of fresh evidence in the same direction. 

ODE 25. 

U was rescued from my bonds and unto thee, my God, 
I fled : 2 for thou art the right hand of my Salvation and my 
helper. ^Thou hast restrained those that rise up against me, 
*and I shall see him' no more : because thy face was with me, 
which saved me by thy grace. ^But I was despised and 
rejected in the eyes of many : and I was in their eyes like lead*, 

1 See Introd. pp. 84, 85.. 

" Tischendorf, Ev. Apoc. p. 425. ' /. them. 

■* Cf. Sap. Sol. ii. 16 tli Kip5t\Kav i^oylaBrnn.en aiiTif. 



126 THE ODES OF SOLOMON 

^and strength was mine from thyself and help. '^Thou didst 
set me a lamp^ at my right hand and at my left : and in me 
there shall be nothing that is not bright^: ^and I was clothed 
with the covering of thy Spirit, and thou didst remove from me 
my raiment of skin^; ^for thy right hand lifted me up and 
removed sickness from me: ''°and I became mighty in the truth, 
and holy by thy righteousness ; and all my adversaries were 
afraid of me; ''^and I became admirable by the name of the 
Lord, and was justified by His gentleness, and His rest is for 
ever and ever. Hallelujah. 

Ode 25. In this Psalm we are back again in the region of personal 
experience, and there is no allusion to any definite historical event. 
The writer, whether Christian or Jew, has been brought out of spiritual 
bondage into liberty : he has had to face contempt and scorn, but the 
Lord has filled him with brightness and covered him with beauty, and 
given him health of mind and body : his enemies have turned back, 
and his portion is with the justified saints of the Most High. It is 
possible that this Psalm may be meant to express the experience of the 
Messiah, emerging from His conflicts into victory : in that case it need 
not be the Christian conception of the Messiah, but it might con- 
ceivably be such a human representation as we find in the Psalms of 
the Pharisees {e.g. Ps. 17, which is our Ps. 60). But our collection, as 
to its first block of Psalms, is certainly of a later period than the 
Pharisee Psalms, so we ought to hesitate before ascribing the same 
Messianic ideas to the two parts of the hymnal. For the allusion to 
the 'coat of skin,' see Introd. pp. 66 — 70, and cf. Ode 21. 

ODE 26. 

T poured out praise to the Lord, for I am His : ^and I will 
speak His holy song, for my heart is with Him. ^For His harp 
is in my hands, and the Odes of His rest shall not be silent. 
*I will cry unto Him from my whole heart : I will praise and 
exalt Him with all my members. ^For from the east and even 
to the west is His praise : ^and from the south and even to the 
north is the confession of Him : ^and from the top of the hills 
to their utmost bound is His perfection. ^Who can write the 
Psalms of the Lord, or who read them? ^or who can train his 

' Ps. cxxxii. 17. 2 [{/_ ];gj,j_ 

" Cp. Clem, Alex. Paed. i. 6, p. ri? rrji ra/clas iKSvirifi^voi. t6i> x'tmi/o and Gen. 
iii. 21. 



THE ODES OF SOLOMON 12/ 

soul for life, that his soul may be saved, ''°or who can rest on 
the Most High, so that with His mouth he may speak ? "Who 
is able to interpret the wonders of the Lord? '"^For he(who 
could interpret "woufclj be dissolved and (would become^ that 
which is interpretec^. "'^Fofll suffices to know and to rest= : 
for in rest the singers stand, ^*like a river which has an 
abundant fountain, and flows to the help of them that seek it'. 
Hallelujah. 

Ode 26. This beautiful song of praise recounts the goodness and 
greatness of the Lord. All within the writer magnifies the great Name, 
but all within is insufficient to tell out what waits to be told. His 
praise is widespread to the utmost bound of earth and beyond the 
bound of the everlasting hills. The creature cannot express God's 
praise perfectly ; if he could, he would be no longer a creature : he 
would be the Word, and not the interpreter of the Word. So it suffices 
to know and to rest, while at our feet the river of grace rolls on, an 
unchanging flood : 

Labitur et labetur in omne volubilis aevum. 

It is impossible to say whether the Psalm, as detached from the 
rest of the collection, is Jewish or Christian. 

ODE 27. 

■■I stretched out my hands and sanctified my Lord*: ^for the 
extension of my hands is His sign : ^and my expansion is the 
upright tree {or cross). 

Ode 27. This tiny Psalm is Christian, and is based upon the early 
Christian fondness for finding the Cross everywhere in the outward 
world : in the handle of the labourer's plough, in the mast and yards of 
the seaman's ship ; and in the human body, when the man stands erect 
in the act of prayer with outstretched arms. There can, therefore, be 
no doubt that this is a Christian Psalm, and the figurative language 
which it employs is characteristic of the second century and not 
unknown in the first century. Justin Martyr, for example, sees the 

' Cf. Lactantius, Div. Inst, praef. : 'there would be no difference between God 
and man, if human thought could reach to the counsels and arrangements of that 
eternal Majesty.' 

^ Cf. Clem. Alex. Paed, i. 6 (p. 115) wan t] /ih yvSxn^ iv t$ (paricrfiaTi.- to Si 
ir^pas Tijs yvLiiaeus, i} dvAiravai^. 

' Cf. Lactantius, Dip. Inst. iv. 30 'Si quis aquam vitae cupiat haurire, non ad 
detritos lacus deferatur, qui non habent venam, sed uberrimum Dei noverit fontem, quo 
irrigatus perenni luce potiatur.' 

* U.-S. : und heiligte [sie] meinem Herrn. 



128 THE ODES OF SOLOMON 

Cross, in the outspread arms of Moses in the battle against Amalek ; 
but so does Barnabas also : and the same thought is involved in the 
conclusion of the Teaching of the Apostles, where an outspread cross 
in the sky is one of the signs of the Advent and answers to the Sign of 
the Son of Man in Matthew. So it is very likely that the figure in our 
Psalm is one of the oldest forms of Christian symbolic teaching. We 
shall find it used again in the 42nd Psalm which may, therefore, be by 
the same hand as the present one : otherwise it would be an imitation 
of it. 

Those who care to have a Gnostic example of the use of this wide- 
spread Christian figure, will find one in Schmidt, Unhekamtes 
altgnostisches Werk (I.e. p. 336): 'Die Haare seines Gesichtes sind 
die Zahl der ausseren Welten, und die Ausbreitung seiner Hande 1st 
die Offenbarung des Krauzes.' 

ODE 28. 

^ As the wrings of doves over their nestlings ; and the mouth 
of their nestlings towards their mouths, ^so also are the wings of 
the Spirit over my heart: ^my heart is delighted and exults: 
like the babe who exults^ in the womb of his mother^: ■*! 
believed ; therefore I was at rest ; for faithful is He in whom 
I have believed : ^He has richly blessed me and my head is with 
Him : and the sword shall not divide me from Him, nor the 
scimitar; ^for I am ready before destruction comes: and I have 
been set on His immortal' pinions : ^and immortal life has(come 
forth and given me to drink\ and from that life is the spirit 
within me, and it cannot die, for it lives. ^They who saw me 
marvelled at me, because I was persecuted, and they supposed 
that I was swallowed up : for I seemed to them as one of the lost ; 
^and my oppression became my salvation ; and I was their 
reprobation because there was no zeal in me*; ''° because I did 
good to every man I was hated, ''^and they came round me like 
mad dogs", who ignorantly attack their masters, ''^for their 
thought is corrupt and their understanding perverted. ''^But I 
was carrying water in my right hand', and their bitterness^ I 

1 Or, leaps. '- Cf. Luke i. 41. 

' lit. pinions without corruption. 

■• Reading , 'n"" t^. F1. : has kissed me. So U.-S. 

^ Perhaps because I was not a Zealot. ^ Ps. xxii. 16. 

' Query '"that I might put out their flame.'' 

8 As water is plural, Fl. would refer the bitterness to it; but Zahn says: 'das 
pluralische Suffix an dem Worte Bitterkeit ist selbstverstandlich nicht mit Fl. auf das 
Wasser zu beziehen.' 



THE ODES OF SOLOMON 1 29 

endured by my sweetness; ^*anfd"I did not perish, for I was not 
their brother nor was my birth like theirs, ^^and they sought for 
my death and did not find it : for I was older than the memorial 
of them ; ^^and vainly did they make attack upon me^ and those 
who, without reward, came after me" : ''^they sought to destroy 
the memorial of him who was before them : ''^for the thought of 
the Most High cannot be anticipated ; and His heart is superior 
to all wisdom. Hallelujah. 

Ode 28. This exquisite Psalm has the music in it of the ' Quis 
separabit?' of Romans viii. Nor sword nor scimitar divide the believer 
from the Lord. In some respects the Psalm appears to be Messianic 
in a Christian sense, for the writer concludes his exulting strain over 
enemies who had come round him like. mad dogs and had left him for 
dead, with the remark that it was not possible for them tO blot out the 
memory of one who existed before them, and who was of a different 
birth from theirs. He also speaks of their attacks as having been 
directed against his followers as well as himself Perhaps, then, the 
writer is speaking, in these verses, as if in the person of Christ. 

ODE 29. 

■•The Lord is my hope : in Him I shall not be confounded. 
2 For according to His praise He made me, and according to 
His goodness even so He gave unto me: ^and according to His 
mercies He exalted me : and according to His excellent beauty 
He set me on high : *and brought me up out of the depths of 
Sheol : and from the mouth of death He drew me: ^and thou 
didst lay my enemies low, and He justifiedjri.e by His grace. 
^For I believed in the Lord's Messiah' : and it appeared to me 
that He is the Lord ; ^and He showed him'' His sign : and He 
led me by His light, and gave me the rod of His power; ^that 
I might subdue the imaginations of the peoples ; and the power 
of the men of might to bring them low : ^to make war by His 
word, and to take victory by His power. '■"And the Lord over- 
threw my enemy by His word ; and he became like the stubble 
which the wind carries away; "and I gave praise to the Most 
High because He exalted ^me'^ His servant and the son of His 
handmaid. Hallelujah. 

1 The margin suggests, slaughtering me ; i.e. reading ■.^v^^^^ for the marginal 
.1^X1^} (cast lots). 

* Or, who came after me. To no purpose they sought, etc. 
^ Or, Christ. * Query me ? 

o. s. 17 



130 THE ODES OF SOLOMON 

Ode 29. Some one wrote this Psalm, who was a follower of the 
Christ and had recognised Him to be the Lord. Out of great conflicts 
he had been brought into the place of victory: his enemies had become 
like the straw before the wind : he has passed through deep distresses, 
which he speaks of figuratively as the pains of Sheol and the gates of 
death. But for the reference to the Lordship of the Messiah and to 
faith in Him, we might have imagined this Psalm to belong to the 
ancient Psalter: we shall be justified in regarding it as a Judaeo- 
Christjan composition. 



ODE 30. 

^Fill ye waters for yourselves from the living fountain of the 
Lord, for it is opened to you : ^and come all ye thirsty, and 
take the draught; and rest by the fountain of the Lord. ^For 
fair it is and pure and gives rest to the soul. Much more 
pleasant are its waters than honey ; *and the honeycomb of 
bees is not to be compared with it. ^ For it flows forth from the 
lips of the Lord and from the heart of the Lord is its name. 
^And it came infinitely and invisibly: and until it was set^ 
in the midst they did not know it : '^ blessed are they who have 
drunk therefrom and have found rest thereby. Hallelujah. 

Ode 30. The Psalm is an invitation to the thirsty, somewhat in 
the manner of Isaiah Iv. The water of life, which here is explained to 
be the teaching of the Lord, is flowing from an open fountain, whose 
waters, to use the language of the 19th Psalm in the canonical Psalter, are 
'sweeter than honey and the honeycomb.' The Ode is not so far removed 
from Old Testament thought and expression that we can positively call 
it a Christian composition. The writer is fond of the similitude of 
honey and the honeycomb : we find it, for instance, again in our fortieth 
Ode, where we have it for the opening similitude : 

'Like the honey that drops from the comb of the bees so is my 

hope on thee, O God.' 

But this Psalm, also, appears, at first sight, to be destitute of 
specific Christian colouring. 

The fountain, however, whose waters come without limit, and 
invisibly, corresponds to the unexpected appearance of Christ and 
Christ's teaching in the world, when there stood in the midst One 
whom they knew not. 

1 lit. given. 



THE ODES OF SOLOMON 131 



ODE 31. 

''The abysses were dissolved before the Lord : and darkness 
was destroyed by His appearance : '^error went astray and 
perished at His hand : ^and folly found no path to walk in\ and 
was submerged by the truth of the Lord. ^He opened His mouth 
and spake grace and joy : and He spake a new song of praise to 
His name : *and He lifted up His voice to the Most High, and 
offered to Him the sons that were with Him^. ^And His face 
was justified, for thus His holy Father had given to Him. ^Come 
forth, ye that have been afflicted and receive joy, a-nd possess 
your souls by His grace ; and take to you immortal life. '^And 
they made me a debtor when I rose up, me who had not been a 
debtor^ : and they divided my spoil, though nothing was due to 
them. ^But I endured and held my peace and was silent*, as if 
not moved by them. ^But I stood unshaken like a firm rock 
which is beaten by the waves and endures. '"'And I bore their 
bitterness for humility's sake: ''''in order that I might redeem 
my people, and inherit it, and that I might not make void my 
promises to the fathers', to whom I promised the salvation of 
their seed. Hallelujah. 

Ode 31. The Psalm is Messianic, and records how the Christ 
fulfilled the promises which, in a pre-existent state, He had made to the 
fathers. He has closed the abysses and banished error and vanity. 
'With a new song in His mouth. He appears before God with the children 
whom God has given Him. His similitude is the rock against which the 
waves had beaten in vain. It stands firm, whether the waves advance 
or retire. Here Christian speech comes near to the language of the 
Stoics. One thinks of Marcus Aurelius, and his advice to ' be like the 
promontory against which the waves continually break, but it stands 
firm and tames the fury of the water around it".' One thinks also of 
Ignatius, and his advice 'to stand steady like the beaten anvil'.' For 
the opening sentences about the destroying of the abysses, we must 
compare the language of the 24th Psalm of our collection, where the 
abysses cry out in pain at the time of the Baptism of the Lord. These 
Psalms are by the same Christian hand. 

'~^ lit. and folly, there was given her no path, 

* lit. in His hands. Cf. Is. viii. 18; Heb. ii. 13. 

^ 2 Cor. V. 21. Perhaps we should translate 'a criminal.' 

■* I Pet. ii. 23. ^ Rom. XV. 8; Luke i. 55. 

6 Medit. iv. 49. ' ad Polyc. 3. 



132 THE ODES OF SOLOMON 



ODE 32. 

^To the blessed there is joy from their hearts, and light from 
Him that dv/ells in them : ^and words from the Truth, who was 
self-originate' : for He is strengthened by the holy power of 
the Most High : and He is unperturbed for ever and ever. 
Hallelujah. 

Ode 32. Joy, Light, Inspiration, Strength and Calmness belong to 
the believer through Him that dwells within. 

ODE 33. 

■'Again Grace ran and forsook corruption, and came down in 
Him to bring it to nought ; '^and He destroyed perdition from 
before Him, and devastated all its order ; ^and He stood on 
a lofty summit^ and uttered His voice from one end of the 
earth to the other : *and drew to Him all those who obeyed 
Him ; and there did not appear as it were an evil person, ^but 
there stood a perfect virgin' who was proclaiming and calling 
and saying, ^O ye sons of men^ return ye, and ye daughters of 
men, come ye : ''and forsake the ways of that corruption and 
draw near unto me, and I will enter into you, and will bring 
you forth from perdition, ^and make you wise in the ways of 
truth : that you be not destroyed nor perish : ^hear ye me and 
be redeemed. For the grace of God I am telling among you : 
and by my means you shall be redeemed and become blessed. 
^°I am your judge; and they who have put me on shall not be 
'^^injured : but they shall possess the new world that is incorrupt : 
"my chosen ones walk in me, and my ways I will make known 
to them that seek me, and I will make them trust in my name. 
Hallelujah. 

Ode 33. Apparently this Psalm is Messianic, though Christ is not 
named. He must be the one that rises from the dead and sends forth 
his triumphant voice to the ends of the earth. A virgin also stands and 
proclaims, who must be either the Divine Wisdom (the language is 

' Gk. aiToipvrii, as in the oracular reply to the enquiry as to the Divine Nature, 
avTo<t>vTjs, ASldaKTOs, A|in)Ta)p, d.(TTV<p4\iKTos. See Lact. De Div. Inst. i. 7. 
^ Prov. viii. i. ■*. PrOv. viii. 1. * Prov. viii. 4, 



THE ODES OF SOLOMON 133 

very like that of the eighth chapter of Proverbs) or the Church^ She 
promises salvation by Divine Grace and immortality in a new world to 
those that walk in her ways. 

ODE 34. 

^No way is hard where there is a simple heart. '^Nor is 
there any wound where the thoughts are upright : ^nor is there 
any storm in the depth of the illuminated thought : *where one 
is surrounded on every side by beauty, there is nothing that is 
divided. ^The likeness of what is below is that which is above ; 
for everything is above : what is below is nothing but the 
imagination of those that are without knowledge. ^ Grace has 
been revealed for your salvation. Believe and live and be saved. 
Hallelujah. 

Ode 34. All the hard things are easy, where the soul itself is right : 
no storms invade the hidden place of communion with God. Evil itself 
becomes unreal, and that which is beneath exists not before that which 
is above. 

ODE 35. 

^The dew of the Lord in quietness He distilled upon me: 
^and the cloud of peace He caused to rise over my head, which 
guarded me continually; ^it was to me for salvation: every- 
thing was shaken and they were affrighted ; *and there came 
forth from them a smoke and a judgment; and I was keeping quiet 
in the order of the Lord : ^more than shelter was He to me, 
and more than foundation. ^And I was carried like a child by 
his mother : ^and He gave me milk, the dew of the Lord^ : ^and 
I grew great by His bounty, and rested in His perfection, ^and 
I spread out my hands in the lifting up of my soul : and I was 
made right with the Most High, and I was redeemed with Him. 
Hallelujah. 

Ode 35. The dew lies on the branch of the man that sings this 
Psalm : Divine Peace guards him like a sheltering cloud. The Lord is 
his sure defence in the day of evil. Mother's arms are his place and 
mother's milk his portion. ' No cradled child more softly lies than I : 
Come soon, eternity.' 

' Or Prov. i. 20. Cf. Clem. Alex. Paed. i. 6 (p. 123) tiXa. Sk n6vri ylverai /i'^rrip 
JlapOhof 'EKK\ri<riap i/ioi ipl\oi> aiiTrjv xaXeTv. See also Introd. p. 77. 
2~^ Or, and the dew of the Lord gave me milk. U.-S. 



134 THE ODES OF SOLOMON 

ODE 36. 

1 1 rested on the Spirit of the Lord : and f'the Spirif raised 
me on high : ^and made me stand on my feet in the height of 
the Lord, before His perfection and His glory, while I was 
praising '"Him'i by the composition of His songs, ^rj^g Spirif 
brought me forth before the face of the Lord : and, although 
a son of man, Ijwas _ named Jhe Illuminate, the Son of jjod; 
"^whiie I praised amongst the praising ones, and great was 
I amongst the mighty ones. ^For according to the greatness 
of the Most High, so He made me: and like His own newness 
He renewed me ; and He anointed me from His own perfection: 
^and I became one of His neighbours ; and my mouth was 
opened, like a cloud of dew; ''and my heart poured out as it 
were a gushing stream of righteousness, ^and 'my access ^to 
Him"'' was in peace ; and I was established by the spirit of His 
government. Hallelujah. 

Ode 36. This is a perplexing Psalm, from a theological point of 
view. It is almost impossible to determine whether the Psalmist is 
speaking in his own name, or in that of the Messiah ; or whether it is 
an alternation of one with the other. It seems almost a necessity, when 
the Holy Spirit is spoken of as a Mother, that the offspring should be 
the Son of God : and that such was the theology of certain early 
behevers we know from the fragment of the Ebionite Gospel, in which 
Christ speaks of being taken by the hair of His head by His mother, the 
Holy Spirit, and carried to Mount Tabor. If this be the right 
interpretation, then the Illuminated Son of God is Christ. But the 
latter part of the Psalm seems to be in too low a strain for this 
interpretadon : to be one of those who are near to God is certainly not 
orthodox theology, though it may conceivably be Adoptionist : and the 
heart that pours out righteousness and makes its offering in peace 
seems rather to be the language that describes one of the pious in 
Israel. 

ODE 37. 

■■ I stretched out my hands to my Lord : and to the Most High 
I raised my voice : ^and I spake with the lips of my heart; and 
He heard me, when my voice reached Him^ : ^His answer came 
to me, and gave me the fruits of my labours ; "^and it gave me 
rest by the grace of the Lord. Hallelujah. . 

'-' Or perhaps, my offering. 2 /;/. fell to Him. 



THE ODES OF SOLOMON 1 35 

Ode 37. A colourless Psalm, something like one of the shorter 
and more elementary Psalms of the Hebrew Psalter. The writer has 
cried to God : his prayer has been heard : his heart has appealed, 
and an answer has come. His work has been followed by Divine 
blessing. 

ODE 38. 

■■I went up to the light of truth as if into a chariot: '^and the 
Truth took me and led me: and carried me across pits and guileys; 
and from the rocks and the waves it preserved me: ^and it became 
to me a haven of Salvation : and set me on the arms of immortal 
life : ^and it went with me and made me rest, and suffered me 
not to wander, because it was the Truth; ^and I ran no risk, 
because I walked with Him ; ®and I did not make an error in 
anything because I obeyed the Truth. '^For Error flees away 
from it, and meets it not : but the Truth proceeds in the right 
path, and ^whatever I did not know, it made clear to me, all the 
poisons of error, and the plagues of death which they think to 
be sweetness: ^and I saw the destroyer of destruction, when the 
bride who is corrupted is adorned; and the bridegrQojTi who %^'''- ■''''' '^ 
corrupts and is corrupted ; ''"and I asked the Truth, ' Who are 
these ?'; and He said to me. This is the deceiver and the error: ijoh. 7 
"and theyvare alike in ):he beloved and(iri)his bride : and they 
lead astray and corrupt the '"whole"' world : '"^and they invite 
many to the banquet, ''^and give them to drink^o.f the wine of 
their intoxication, and remove^ their wisdom and knowledge, 
and '"so they ' make them without intelligence ; ^^and then they 
leave them; and then these go about like madmen corrupting : 
seeing that they are without heart, nor do they seek for it. 
'^And I was made wise so as not to fall into the hands of the 
deceiver; and I congratulated myself because the Truth went 
with me, ''^and I was established and lived and was redeemed, 
^^and my foundations were laid on the hand of the Lord : 
because He established me. ^^For He set the root and watered 
it and fixed it and blessed it; and its fruits are for ever. ''^It 
struck deep and sprung up and spread out, and was full and 
enlarged; 2°and the Lord alone was glorified in His planting 
and in His husbandry: by His care and by the blessing of His 
Jips, '^^by the beautiful planting of His right hand^ : and by the 

1 /zA they vomit up. '' Is. Ix. 2j, 



136 THE ODES OF SOLOMON 

discovery^ of His planting, and by the thought of His mind. 
Hallelujah. 

Ode 38. The Psalm opens with a beautiful description of the 
power of the truth over those that surrender to it. Truth becomes to 
them guidance in all difificult and rough and dangerous places. But 
the Psalm is not merely a Psalm of the Truth, it is a Psalm concerning 
Truth and Error. They appear to stand like Christ and Antichrist. 
We are tempted to believe that the writer had at one time been brought 
face to face with some special outbreak of erroneous teaching, one of 
the many Antichrists of the first century. There are some things which 
suggest Simon Magus and his Helena, who went about to mislead the 
faithful. It is, however, useless to try and define the situation more 
closely. Whatever form the attractions of Truth and Error took to the 
Psalmist, he tells us that he escaped the Circean blandishments, and 
sailed past the Sirens. His foundations were in the holy mountain ; 
his growth was in God and of God. God planted, God watered, God 
gave the increase. The Father was the husbandman. 

ODE 39. 
^ Great rivers are the power of the Lord^: ^and they carry 
headlong those who despise Him : and entangle their paths : 
''and they sweep away their fords, and catch their bodies and 
destroy their lives. ^For they are more swift than lightning 
and more rapid, and those who cross them in faith are not 
moved; ^and those who walk on them without blemish shall 
not be afraid. ^For the sign in them is the Lord ; and the sign 
is the way of those who cross in the name of the Lord ; ^put on, 
therefore, the name of the Most High, and know Him : and you 
shall cross without danger, for the rivers will be subject to you. 
^The Lord has bridged them by His word ; and He walked 
and crossed them on foot^: ^and His footsteps stand '"firm'^ on 
the water, and are not injured ; they are as firm as a tree that is 
truly set up. ''°And the waves were lifted up on this side and 
on that, but the footsteps of our Lord Messiah stand firm and 
are not obliterated and are not defaced. "And a way has been 
appointed for those who cross after Him and for those who 
adhere to' the course of faith in Him and worship His name\ 
Hallelujah. 

1 Or perhaps, reading T^d\om— it, with Schulthess, 'by the splendour of His 
planting.' 

2 Is. xliii. 1. ^ Matt. xiv. 25. 

^ 1 follow the correction of Flemming. * Cf. Matt. xiv. 38.- 



THE ODES OF SOLOMON 137 

Ode 39. When I first read this Psahin I thoUght that we had 
another historical landmark, in the allusion to some great accident 
connected with the sudden rise of one of the great Oriental rivers. But 
upon reflection, I have come to the conclusion , that the writer is 
speaking of disasters generally, under the natural figure of a rising and 
rushing river. In such times of flood the unbeHevers find no footing 
and are swept away : believers on the other hand walk the waters like 
their Lord and with their Lord. Perhaps there is a reference to 
Isaiah xliii. 2, 'When thou passest through the waters I will be with 
thee.' The same promise appears to be quoted in Psalms of Solomon 
vi. 5, 'When he passeth through rivers, yea, through the surge of the 
sea, he is not affrighted.' Their feet stand firm where His feet had 
stood unmoved. Here the background of the teaching is the account 
of our Lord's walking on the sea of Galilee. The reference is valuable S 
for we have hardly any other allusion to events recorded in the Gospel, 
beyond the Birth, Baptism and Crucifixion, to which we have already 
referred. The paucity of parallels to the New Testament in the new 
Psalter should be one of the strongest reasons for believing that, as 
regards the major part of the collection, we are dealing with very 
early material. 

ODE 40. 

^As the honey distils from the comb of the bees, ^and the 
milk flows from the w^oman that loves her children^; ^so also is 
my hope on Thee, my God. *As the fountain gushes out its 
w^ater, ^so my heart gushes out the praise of the Lord and my 
lips utter praise to Him, and my tongue His psalms. ®And my 
face exults with His gladness, and my spirit exults in His love, 
and my soul shines in Him : ^and reverence confides in Him ; 
and redemption in Him stands assured : ^and His inheritance" 
is immortal life, and those who participate in it are incorrupt. 
Hallelujah. 

Ode 40. One may say of the writer in the language of St Bernard: 
' Inebriabuntur ab ubertate domus tuae et torrente voluptatis tuae 
potabis eos (Ps. xxxv. 9). O quanta amoris vis ! quanta in spiritu 
libertatis fiducia.' Praise flows out of his life and from his lips as 
honey drops from the comb or milk from the breast. God's gladness 

' Moreover, if Peter's walking on the sea is involved in tlie reference of the Odist, 
it is not Mark's gospel that is being quoted, nor any of the canonical four except 
Matthew. 

" Cf. Clem. Alex. Paed. i. 6 (p. 119) ^iXoffT-ipyois Triydt^ovja /ioffrois. 

^ Following the emendation of Charles. 

O. S. 18 



138 THE ODES OF SOLOMON 

makes his face without to shine, and his soul within to be radiant. If 
mortality is not quite swallowed up of life, it is irradiated by it. There 
is assurance of faith and the confident hope of immortality. 



ODE 41. 

^All the Lord's children will praise Him, and will collect the 
truth of His faith. ^And His children shall be known to Him. 
Therefore we will sing in His love : ^we live in the Lord by His 
grace : and life we receive in His Messiah : *for a great.day has 
shined upon us: and marvellous is He who has given us of 
His glory. ^Let us, therefore, all of us unite together in the 
name of the Lord, and let us honour Him in His goodness, 
^and let our faces shine in His light : and let our hearts 
meditate in His love by night and by day. ''Let us exult with 
the joy of the Lord. ^All those will be astonished that see me. 
For from another race am I : ^for the Father of truth remembered 
me: He who possessed me from the beginning : ^°for His bounty 
begat me, and the thought of His heart : ''^and His Word is with 
us in all our way ; ''^the Saviour who makes alive and does not 
reject our souls : ^^the man who was humbled, and exalted by 
His own righteousness, ''^the Son of the Most High appeared in 
the perfection of His Father ; ''^and light dawned from the Word 
that was beforetime in Him ; ''^the Messiah is truly one' ; and 
He was known before the foundation of the world, ''^that He 
might save souls for ever by the truth of His name : a new song 
'"arises"' from those who love Him. Hallelujah. 

Ode 41. This Psalm, again, is Messianic, but certainly not in the 
prophetic sense. The writer knows that the Son of God is come. 
The glorious day of which prophets spoke has dawned : the dayspring 
from on high has become the noontide glory. Christ who was 
humbled is now exalted ; the Word, who existed before the foundation 
of the world, has appeared. The language finds its nearest parallel in 
the Johannine theology. 

It is not, at first sight, quite clear what the writer means by being 
sprung from another race'. Is it that he is of Gentile origin and 
persuaded to dwell in the tents of Shem ? That would agree well with 
the general Palestinian origin of the Psalms. In that case he has become 

' Cf. Ign . ad Magn. 7 eIs iariv 'IijiroOs 'S.piaris. 
' But see Inti'od. p. 66. 



THE ODES OF SOLOMON 1 39 

sufficiently Hebraized to sing Zion's songs in a Zionite manner : and to 
praise God night and day, where a Gentile would naturally have done 
it by day and night. 

ODE 42. 

^ I stretched out my hands and approached my Lord : '^for the 
stretching of my hands is His sign: ^my expansion is the 
outspread tree which was set up on the way of the Righteous 
One^ ^And P became of no account to those who did not 
take hold of me; and I shall be with those who love me. ^All 
my persecutors are dead ; and they sought after me who 
hoped in me, because I was alive : ^and I rose up and am with 
them; and I will speak by their mouths. '^For they have 
despised those who persecuted them ; ^and I lifted up over themi 
the yoke of my love ; ^like the arm of the bridegroom over the 
bride, i°so was my yoke' over those that know me : ^^and as the^ 
couch that is spread in the house of the ^'"bridegroom and bride"'^ 
■•^so is my love over those that believe in me. ^^ And I was not 
rejected though I was reckoned to be so. ''^I did not perish, 
though they devised '"if against me. ''^Sheol saw me and was 
made miserable : ''^death cast me up and many along with me. 
■■^P had gall and bitterness", and I went down with him to the 
utmost of his'' depth : ^^and the feet and the head he let go, for 
they were not able to endure my face : ^^and I made a con- 
gregation of living men amongst his dead men, and I spake 
with them by living lips : ^"because my word shall not be void : 
*and those who had died ran towards me : and they cried and 
said. Son of God, have pity on us, and do with us according to 
thy kindness, ^'^and bring us out from the bonds of darkness: 
and open to us the door by which we shall come out to 
thee. ^^Pqi- ^g ggg that our death has not touched thee. 
^* Let us also be redeemed with thee : for thou art our 

^ Zahn thinks the text of this verse has been altered, and suggests ^\*dl\ri:( 
ii^^uu^ -Tf ^"^ 'on which the Beloved was hanged.' 

" Christ speaks. 

' Matt. xi. 29. *"■* lit. bridegrooms. ° Cod. He. 

" Cf. Descensus ad Inferos 4 'They crucified him, and gave him gall and 
vinegar to drink. Be ready, therefore, to hold him firmly when he cometh. ' Flem- 
ming objects to the correction which I have made in the text, and says we should render 
'I was gall and bitterness to him.' So U.-S. Probably this is the right sense of the 
passage: but I am not quite satisfied. ' or its : sc. Sheol's. 



140 THE ODES OE SOLOMON 

Redeemer. 25 And I heard their voice ; and my name I sealed 
upon their heads : ^sfor they are free men and they are mine. 
Hallelujah. 

Ode 42. This Psalm concludes the collection of Odes ascribed to 
Solomon : what follows is the extant book of Solomonic Psalms. The 
collection up to the present point is marked in each case with a final 
Hallelujah. The remaining Psalms, with one accidental exception, are 
not marked this way. So we may add the editorial remark at the 
end of this Psalm, that ' the Odes of Solomon, the Son of David, are 
ended.' 

The concluding Psalm is Christian and Messianic : its main theme 
is the descent of Christ into Hades in order to liberate the imprisoned 
souls of the fathers : and it should be read along with the extant 
apocryphal books that deal with this subject. 

Almost the whole of the Psalm is ex ore Christi : the writer begins, 
as in the short 29th Ode, with the statement that his hfted hands make 
the figure of the Cross of the Righteous One. But he soon diverges 
into the harrowing of hell. The imprisoned souls cry out for release to 
Him over whom death, which binds them, has no power. A congregation 
of saints is gathered in the place of the dead. They become Christ's 
free men. Incidentally an expression is used of their relation to the 
Lord which appears to be employed elsewhere : they are called, not 
the members, but the feet of the Lord. Hades disgorges both the 
head and the feet : the head is, of course, Christ ; and the feet are the 
saints of old time'- [For z;. 18 we may compare Acta Thomae c. 156 
ov Tqv Oeav oiiK ■^veyKav oi tov Oavdrov ap;^ovT£S.] 

The Psalm is too highly evolved, in its imaginary treatment of the 
Descent into Hell, to be reckoned as belonging to the same period as 
the main body of the collection. Still it cannot be very much later, for 
its mystical language is in close agreement with many of the most 
beautiful of the Psalms before us : and the union of Christ with the 
Church, under the figure of the Bridegroom and the Bride, is expressed 
with great beauty. Incidentally the textual critic will find something 
suggestive for his New Testament apparatus. The writer speaks of 'the 
couch that is spread in the house of the bridegrooms,' marking the 
plural by dots in the usual Syriac manner : it is evident that he means 
'in the house of the bridegroom and the bride.' Perhaps, then, the 
curious Western reading of Matt. xxv. i, ' went out to meet the 
bridegroom and the bride,' may be due to a more accurate interpretarion 
of an Aramaic original than what we find in the received and edited 
texts. 

1 Cf. Ode 23. 



PSALM 43 = Psalms of Solomon i. 

^ I cried unto the Lord, when I was in affliction at my end ; 
and to God when sinners set upon me : ^for suddenly there was 
heard before me the sound of war : for He will hear me, because 
I am filled with righteousness : ^and I reckoned in my heart that 
I was filled with righteousness : in the day that I became rich 
and was with the multitude of my children. *Their wealth, 
however, has been given to the whole earth : and their glory as 
far as the ends of the earth. ^They were lifted up as high as the 
stars: and they said, ^speaking without knowledge.... '^ For their 
sins were in secret, and I knew them not : ^and their wickedness 
exceeded that of the nations that had been before them : and 
they defiled the sanctuary of the Lord with pollution. 

PSALM 44 = Psalms of Solomon 2. 

^In the insolence of the sinful man, he cast down with 
battering rams' the strong walls and thou didst not restrain him. 
^And the Gentile foreigners went up on thy altar, and were 
trampling on it with their shoes in their insolence. ^For the 
children of Jerusalem had polluted the Holy House of the Lord : 
and they were profaning the offerings *to God'' with wickedness. 
^Wherefore He said. Remove them, cast them away from me. 
And He did not establish with them the beauty of His glory: ^it 
was rejected before the Lord : and they were utterly torn in pieces. 
^Her sons and her daughters were in bitter captivity: and on 
their neck was put the sealed yoke of the Gentiles : ^according 
to their sins, so He dealt with them : for He suffered them to 
pass into the hand of him that was stronger than they : ^for He 
turned away His face from His mercy : young men and old men 

' Hi. great beams. '■'''■' lit- of God. 



142 THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON 

and their children together : ^because they also had worked evil 
together, that they might not hearken unto me : ^°and the heaven 
was mightily angered, and the earth rejected them : "because 
none in the earth had done therein like their doings : ^^and that 
the earth may know all thy righteous judgments, O God. ^^They 
set up the sons of Jerusalem for mockery within her, in the place of 
harlots ; and every one that transgressed^ was transgressing as if 
before the sun : while they made sport in their villainies, as they 
were used to do. ''^In the face of the sun they made a show 
of their villainies. And the daughters of Jerusalem were 
polluted according to thy judgments; ''^for they had polluted 
themselves in lustful intercourse. My belly and my bowels are 
pained over these things. ''^But I will justify thee, O Lord, in 
the uprightness of my heart ; because in thy judgments is thy 
righteousness, O God. ^^ For thou dost reward sinful men accord- 
ing to their deeds : and according to their wicked and bitter sins. 
^^Thou didst disclose their sins, in order that thy judgment 
might be known : ''^and Thou didst blot out their remembrance 
from the earth. God is a judge and righteous, and accepteth no 
man's person. ^°For the Gentiles reproached Jerusalem, in their 
wickedness, and her beauty was cut off from the throne of His^ 
glory. ^'And she was covered with sackcloth instead of 
beauteous raiment : and there was a rope on her head instead 
of a crown. ^^She cast off from her the dazzling' glory which 
God had put upon her : ^^and in contempt her beauty was cast 
away on the ground. ^^And I beheld and I besought the face 
of the Lord, and I said : Enough ! Thou hast made thy hand 
heavy, O Lord, upon Israel, by the bringing in of the Gentiles : 
25 for they have mocked and not pitied, in anger ; ^^and in 
reproach they are consumed, unless thou, O Lord, shalt restrain 
them in thy wrath. "pQ^jt ^^s not in zeal that they did '"this"', 
but in the lust of the soul : ^sthat they might pour out their 
wrath upon us in plundering us. But thou, O Lord, delay not to 
recompense them upon their own heads : ^^to cast down the pride 
of the dragon to contempt, ^o^^i^j j delayed not until the Lord 
showed me his insolence smitten on the mountains of Egypt : and 
despised more than him that is least on land and on sea : ^land his 
body coming on the waves in much contempt, and none to bury 

1 Or, passed by. ^ Gk. her. ^ q^. her diadem of glorv. 



THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON I43 

'"him"' 32gg(,ause He had rejected him with scorn, for he did 
not consider that he is a man. And the end he did not regard. 
^^For he said ; I will be lord of land and sea : and he knew not 
that the Lord is God, great and mighty and powerful, ^*and He 
is King over Heaven and over Earth : and He judges kingdoms 
and princes, ^^He who raiseth me up in glory and layeth low' 
the proud in contempt, not temporal but eternal ; because they 
knew Him ^nof. 

^^ And now, behold, ye great ones of the earth, the judgment 
of the Lord, for He is a righteous King, and judges what is under 
the whole heaven. ^^ Bless ye the Lord, ye who fear the Lord 
reverently : for the mercies of the Lord are on them that fear 
Him with judgment, ^^to separate between the righteous and the 
sinful, and to reward the sinful for ever according to their deeds: 
3^ and to be gracious to the righteous after their oppression 
by sinners : and to reward the sinful for what he has done that 
is right : ^"because the Lord is kind to those that call upon Him 
in patience, to do according to His mercy to His saints : so as 
to stand before Him at all times in strength. *^ Blessed is the 
Lord for ever by His servants. 

PSALM 4S = Psalms ok Solomon 3. 

■' Why sleepest thou, my soul, and dost not bless the Lord ? 
^Sing a new song to God and keep vigil in His watch. For a 
psalm is good ""to sing"' to God out of a good heart. ^The 
righteous will ever make mention of the Lord : in confession and 
in righteousness are the judgments of the Lord. ^The righteous 
will never neglect^ when he is chastened by the Lord : because 
his will is always before the Lord. ^The righteous stumbles and 
justifies God : he falls and I wait' what the Lord will do to him. 
^And he looks to see from whence his salvation comes. ''The 
stability of the righteous is from God their Saviour : for in the 
house of the righteous there does not lodge sin upon sin : 
^because He always visits the house of the righteous to remove 
the sins of his transgressions. ^And He delivers his soul, in 
whatever he has sinned without knowledge, by fasting and by 
humiliation : '■"and the Lord purifies everyholy man and his house. 

' Gk. Koi-iil^uv and so Syr. 

^ =Gk. &\fyapri(Tu: cf. Prov. iii. ii; Heb. xii. 5. ' Read, 'and he waits.' 



144 THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON 

"But the sinner stumbleth and cUrseth his own life, and the day 
in which he was born : and the birth-pangs of his mqther ; '"^ and 
he adds sin upon sin to his life : ^^he falls, and because his fall is 
grievous, he rises not again : for the destruction of the sinner is 
for ever : ^*and He will not remember him when He visits the 
righteous : ''^this is the portion of sinners for ever. '"^But those 
who fear the Lord shall rise to eternal life : and their life shall 
be in the light of the Lord, and he will not fail any more. 
[Hallelujah^] 

PSALM 46 (47) = Psalms of Solomon 4. 

^ Why sittest thou, O wicked man, in the congregation of the 
righteous : and thy heart is far removed from God ; and by thy 
wickedness thou provokest to anger the God of Israel, ^exceed- 
ingly by thy words, and exceedingly by thy '"outward"' signs, 
more than all men ? He who is severe in his words in his con- 
demnation of sinners in judgment, ^and his hand is the first to 
be on him, as though '"he acted"" in zeal : and he is guilty himself 
of all kinds of sinful crimes : *his eyes are upon every woman 
immodestly : and his tongue lies when he answers with oaths. 
^Li the night and in the darkness, as if he were not seen ; by 
his eyes he talketh with every woman in the cunning of 
wickedness : ^and he is quick to go into every house with joy, 
as if he had no wickedness. '^God shall remove those who 
judge with respect of persons : but He lives with the upright, in 
the corruption of his body and in the poverty of his life. ^God 
will disclose the deeds of those who are men-pleasers : in scorn 
and derision are his works: ^and let the saints justify the judgment 
of their God, when the wicked shall be removed from before the 
righteous : i^the accepter of persons who talks law with guile, 
^^and his eyes are on a house, quietly like a serpent, to dispel 
the wisdom of each one by words of villainy : ^^his words are 
with an evil intent, with a view to the working of the lust of the 
wicked : i^and he does not remove until he has scattered in 
bereavement, and has desolated the house because of his sinful 
lust. '"^And he supposes in his words that there is none that 
sees and judges : ^^and he is filled with this sinfulness ; and his 

' This is an addition by the scribe, under the influence of the Odes of Solomon 
which he has been copying. ' 



THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON I45 

eyes are on another house to devastate it with words of prodi- 
gality : and his soul is, like Sheol, never satisfied, ^^por all 
these things, let ^his portion"!', O Lord, be before thee in 
dishonour ; let his going out be with groans and his coming in 
with curses: "in pains, and in poverty and in destitution, O 
Lord, let his life be : let his sleep be in anguish and his waking 
in vexation : ^^Jet sleep be removed from his eyelids by night : 
let him fall from every work of his hands in dishonour ; ''^and 
let him enter his house empty-handed : and let his house be 
destitute of everything that can satisfy his soul : 2°and from 
his offspring let not one draw near unto him: 21 let the flesh of 
the hypocrites be scattered by wild beasts ; and the bones of 
the wicked be before the sun in dishonour : ^^let the ravens pick 
out the eyes of those who are men-pleasers : ^^ because they 
have laid waste many houses of men in dishonour : and have 
scattered them in lust : ^^and they remembered not God ; nor 
feared God in all these things ; ^s^nd they provoked God, 
and He was angered to destroy them from the earth ; because 
with crafty intent they had played the hypocrite with innocent 
souls. 26 Blessed are they that fear the Lord in their innocency : 
"and the Lord will save them from all the cunning and wicked 
men ; and He will redeem us from every stumbling-block of the 
wicked. ^^May God destroy all them that work fraud with 
pride^ : for a strong judge is the Lord our God in righteousness ; 
2^ let thy mercy, O Lord, be upon all them that love thee. 

PSALM 47 (48) = Psalms of Solomon 5. 

■■O Lord my God, I will praise thy name with exultation, 
amongst those that know thy righteous judgments. ^ For thou 
art gracious and merciful, and the place of refuge of the poor. 
3 When I cry unto thee, be not thou silent unto me. *For one 
does not take spoil from the strong man : ^or who shall take 
aught from what thou hast made, unless thou give it him ? 
6 Because he is man, and his portion is before thee in the 
balance : and he shall not add aught to better it apart from thy 
judgment, O God. ''In our afflictions we. call thee to our help : 
and thou hast not turned away our petition : for thou art our 
God. ^Delay not thou thy hand from us : lest we be strengthened 

' Syr. let him. ' lit. excess. 

0. S. 19 



146 THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON 

to sin: ^and turn not away thy face from us, lest we remove 
away from thee : but to thee we will come : '"'for if I should 
be hungry, O Lord, unto thee will I cry, O God : and thou 
wilt bestow. ''^For the fowl and the fish thou dost feed. 
When thou givest rain in the desert to cause the grass to 
spring up, ''^to prepare food in the wilderness for every living 
thing, and if they shall be hungry, unto thee will they lift 
up their faces : '•^kings and rulers and peoples thou dost 
provide for, O God : and the hope of the poor and the 
miserable, who is it except thyself, O Lord ? ^*and thou wilt 
answer him, because thou art kind and gentle : and his soul shall 
be satisfied when thou openest thy hand in mercy. ''^For the 
kindness of a man is with parsimony ; to-day and to-morrow ; 
and if it should be that he repeats his gift and does not grumble, 
' well P that is a wonder! ''^But thy bounty is plenteous in 
kindness and in wealth ; and there is no expectation towards 
thee that He will be sparing in gifts V "For over all the earth is 
thy mercy, O Lord, in kindness. ''^Blessed is the man whom the 
Lord shall remember in poverty : for that a man should exceed 
his measure means that he will sin. ''^Sufficient is a low estate 
with righteousness^: ^°for those that fear the Lord are pleased 
with good things : and thy grace is on Israel in thy Kingdom: 
'^^blessed be the glory of the Lord, for He is our King. 

PSALM 48 (49) = Psalms of Solomon 6. 

^Blessed is the man whose heart is prepared to call upon the 
name of the Lord : ^and when he shall' remember the name of 
the Lord, he will be saved, ^f^jg ways are directed from before 
the Lord : and the works of his hands are preserved by his God : 
^and^in"! the evil vision of the night his soul shall not be moved, 
because he is His : ^and his soul shall not be affrighted in the 
passing through the rivers, and in the tumult of the seas, spp^ 
he rose from his sleep and praised the name of the Lord, ^and 
in the quiet of his heart he sang psalms to the name of the 
Lord : and he made request from the face of the Lord con- 
cerning all his house: ^and the Lord hears the prayer of every 

^ The Gk. ov icrnv eiri ae has been misread oOk earip re. 

^ The Syriac has omitted a sentence of the Greek by a common transcriptional 
error. Add ^and lierein ig (he blessing of the Lord that a man be satisfied in 
righteousness"'. 



THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON I47 

one that is in His fear, and every petition of the soul that trusts 
in Him ; and the Lord fulfils it. ^Blessed is he who doeth mercy 
upon them that love Him in truth. 

PSALM 49 (50) = Psalms of Solomon 7. 

^Remove not thy tabernacle from us, Lord, lest those 
rise up against us who hate us without a cause : ^for thou hast 
put them away, O God, that their foot may not tread the 
inheritance of thy sanctuary. ^Thou in thy good pleasure 
chasten me and deliver us not over to the Gentiles. *For if 
thou shouldest send death, it is thou who givest it command 
against us ; ^for thou art the Merciful One, and wilt not be 
angry so as to consume us utterly. ^For because of thy Name 
that encamps amongst us, mercies shall be upon us : and the 
Gentiles shall not be able to prevail against us, ^for thou art our 
strength : and we will call upon thee and thou wilt answer us : 
^for thou wilt be gracious to the seed of Israel, for ever, and 
thou wilt not forget him': ^thou wilt establish us in the time of 
thy help, to show favour to the house of Jacob, in the day that is 
prepared for them. 

PSALM 50 (51) = Psalms of Solomon 8. 

■"Distress and the sound of war mine ears have heard, the 
sound of the trumpet, and the noise of slaughter and destruction : 
^the sound of much people like a mighty and frequent wind : 
like the tempest of fire which comes over the wilderness. ^And 
I said to my heart : Where will he judge him ? *I heard a sound 
in Jerusalem, the Holy City ; ^the bonds of my loins were 
loosed at the report^ : and my knees trembled, ^and my bones 
were moved like flax. '^And I said. They will make straight 
their paths in righteousness and I remembered the judgments 
of the Lord, from the creation of the heaven and the earth : and 
I justified God in all His judgments from the beginning^ ^But 
God laid bare their sins before the sun : and to all the earth 
was made known the righteous judgments of the Lord. ^For in 

' The Syriac has dropped the sentence : ' and we are under thy yoke for ever, and 
under the scourge of thy chastening. ' 

2 Gk. adds; and my heart, was afraid. ■* lit. from eternity. 



T4^ THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON 

secret places of the earth were they doing evil ; ■'°the son had 
connexion with the mother and the father with the daughter: 
■•^and all of them committed adultery with their neighbours' 
wives : and they made solemn covenants amongst themselves 
concerning these things: ^^they were plundering the House of 
God's Holiness, as if there was none to inherit and to deliver. 
■■3 And they were treading His sanctuary in all their pollutions, 
and in the time' of their separation they polluted the sacrifices, 
as common meat : ''^and they left no sins which they did not 
commit, and even worse than the Gentiles. ^^For this cause 
God mingled for them a spirit of error, and caused them to 
drink a living cup for drunkenness : ^^He brought him from the 
other side of the world, the one that afflicts grievously : '"^and he 
decrees war against Jerusalem and against her land : ^^and the 
judges of the land met him with joy : and they said to him : Thy 
path shall be ordered, come, enter in peace. ''^They levelled 
the lofty paths^ for his entering : they opened the doors against 
Jerusalem i and they crowned the walls. '^"And he entered like 
a father into the house of his children, in peace : and he set his 
feet '"there"' in great firmness : ^'' and they took possession of the 
towers and the walls of Jerusalem. ^'^For God brought him 
in assurance against their error: ^^and they destroyed their 
princes because he was cunning in counsel : and they poured 
out the blood of the dwellers in Jerusalem like the water of 
uncleanness : ^^and he carried off their sons and daughters, who 
had been '"born"' in pollution, ^^and had wrought their pollution 
even as also their fathers had done. ^^And Jerusalem defiled 
even those things that were consecrated to the name of God: 
"and God was justified in His judgments upon the nations of 
the earth, ^^and the saints of God were as innocent lambs 
in their midst. ^^God is to be praised who judges all the 
earth in His righteousness. 3° Behold, O God, thou hast shown 
us '"thy judgments"" in thy righteousness, ^land our eyes have 
seen thy judgments, O God : and we have justified thy name 
that is honoured for ever. 

s^For thou art a God of righteousness: who judgest Israel 
with chastening. ^si-urn thy mercy towards us and be 
gracious to us : 34and gather the dispersion of Israel, in mercy 

1. lii. blood. " lit. paths of elevation. s Hnrl nm 



THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON I49 

and in kindness : ^^for thy faithfulness is with us : and we are 
stiiif-necked, and thou art our chastener : ^^do not desert us, 
O our God ! lest the Gentiles should swallow us up, as though 
there were none to deliver : ^^and thou art our God from the 
beginning, and upon thee is our hope, O Lord : ^^and we will 
not depart from thee, for thy judgments are good ; ^^upon us 
and upon our children is thy good will for ever, O Lord God, 
our Saviour, and we shall not be shaken again, for ever. ■*°The 
Lord is to be praised for His judgments by the mouth of His 
saints : *^and blessed is Israel from the Lord for evermore. 

PSALM 51 (52) = Psalms of Solomon 9. 

■"When Israel went forth into captivity to a strange land, 
because they departed from the Lord their Saviour : ^then were 
they cast out from the inheritance that God gave them : 
amongst all the Gentiles was the dispersion of Israel, according 
to the word of God, ^that thou mightest be justified, O God, in 
thy righteousness over our wickedness : *for thou art a just 
Judge over all the peoples of the earth. ^For there will not 
be hidden from thy knowledge any one who doeth wicked- 
ness : ^and the righteousness of thy upright ones, O Lord, is 
before thee. And where shall a man be hidden from thy 
knowledge, O God } '^For we work by free-will and the choice 
of our own souls to do either good or evil by the work of our 
hands : ^and in thy righteousness thou dost visit the children 
of men. ^For he who does righteousness lays up a treasure of 
life with the Lord : and he who does wickedness incurs judgment 
upon his soul in perdition. 

^°For His judgments are in righteousness upon every man and 
his house. "For with whom wilt thou deal graciously, O God, 
unless with them that call upon the Lord? ^^For he purifies 
the sins of the soul by confession, ''^because shame is on us and 
our faces because of all these things. ''^For to whom will He 
remit sins except to those that have sinned ? ^^For the 
righteous thou dost bless, and dost not reprove them for any of 
their sins; for thy grace is on those that have sinned when they 
have repented. ''^And, now, thou art our God : and we are 
thy people whom thou hast loved': behold and have mercy, O 
God of Israel ; for thine are we : remove not thy compassions 

19—3 



I50 THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON 

from us, lest the Gentiles should set upon us ; ^^for thou hast 
chosen the seed of Abraham rather than all the Gentiles, '■^and 
thou hast put on us thy Name, O Lord : and thou wilt not 
remove for ever. ''^Thou didst surely covenant with our fathers 
concerning us : and we hope in thee, in the repentance of our 
souls. ^°The mercies over the house of Israel are of the Lord, 
now and evermore. 

PSALM 52 (53) = Psalms of Solomon 10. 

■"Blessed is the man whom God remembers with reproof: 
and He has restrained him from the way of evil by stripes: so as 
to be purified from his sin, that he may not abound '"therein"'. 
^For he who prepares his loins for beating shall also be purified : 
for He is good to those that receive His chastening. ^For the 
way of the righteous is straight, and His chastisement does not 
turn it aside. ^For the face' of the Lord is upon them that 
love Him in truth, and the Lord will remember His servants in 
mercy. ^For the testimony is in the law of the everlasting 
covenant : the testimony of the Lord is in the ways of the 
children of men, by ^His"^ visitations. ^Righteous and upright 
is our God in all His judgments : and Israel will praise the name 
of the Lord with joy. '^And the saints shall give thanks in 
the congregation of the people : and on the poor the Lord will 
have mercy, in the gladness of Israel. ^For God is kind and 
merciful for ever : and the congregations of Israel shall praise 
the name of the Lord : ^for of the Lord is the salvation upon the 
house of Israel, unto the everlasting kingdom ^ 

PSALM S3 (54) = PsALMs of Solomon n. 

■"Blow ye '"the trumpef in Zion, the certain trumpet of the 
saints : ^proclaim in Jerusalem the voice of the heralds, because 
God is merciful to Israel in His visitation. ^Stand up on high^, 
Jerusalem, and behold thy children, who are all being gathered 
from the East and the West by the Lord : *and from the North 
they come to the joy of their God : and from the far-away 
islands God gathereth them. ^ Lofty mountains has He humbled 
and made plain before them ; and the hills fled away before their 

1 Gk. mercy (fXeos). ^ Gk. gladness, eiippoaivTjv. 

'■' Baruch v. 5-;8. 



THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON 15I 

entrance: ^the cedar' gave shelter to them as they passed by : 
and every tree of sweet odour God made to breathe^ upon them : 
■^in order that Israel might pass by in the visitation of the glory 
of their God. ^O Jerusalem, put on the garments of thy glory ; 
and make ready thy robe of holiness. For God speaks good 
things to Israel, now and ever. ^May the Lord do what He 
hath spoken concerning Israel : and concerning Jerusalem : may 
the Lord raise up Israel in the name of His glory. May the 
mercies of the Lord be upon Israel, now and evermore. 

PSALM 54 (ss) = Psalms of Solomon 12. 

^ O Lord, save my soul from the perverse and wicked man 
and from the whispering and transgressing tongue, that speaks 
lies and deceit. ^For in the response of his words is the 
tongue of the transgressor^ : for he shows like one whose deeds 
are fair, and kindles fire among the people. ^For his sojourning 
is to fill* (set fire to) houses by his lying talk : for the trees of 
his delight he will cut down with the flame '^of his tongue^^ that 
does lawlessly. *He has destroyed the houses of the trans- 
gressors by war : and the slandering'' lips God has removed 
from the innocent, the lips of transgressors : and the bones of 
the slanderer shall be scattered far from those who fear the 
Lord. ^By flaming fire He will destroy the slanderous tongue 
from among the upright, and their houses. ^And the Lord 
shall preserve' the soul of the righteous who hateth them that are 
evil : and the Lord shall establish the man that makes peace in 
the house of the Lord. '^Of the Lord is salvation upon Israel 
His servant for ever : ^and the sinners shall perish together from 
before the face of the Lord : and the saints of the Lord shall 
inherit the promises of the Lord. 

PSALM 55 (56) = Psalms of Solojion 13. 

^ The right hand of the Lord has covered us : the right hand 
of the Lord has spared us : ^and the arm of the Lord has saved 

^ Gk. oi Spv/j-oi, the groves. 

' Gk. dv4Tei.\ev, caused to rise. Corr. the Syriac to ^■:[y<C (Schulthess). 

' The Greek of this passage is obscure. 

' The translator read e/iTXijffat for e/iirpijcyai. 

'-* Cod. om. ° ii(. whispering. 

' Better : ' and may the Lord preserve ' as in Gk. : and so in following clauses. 



152 THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON 

me from the spear that goes through and from famine and the 
pestilence of sinners. ^Evil beasts ran upon them: and with 
their teeth were tearing their flesh; and with their jaw- teeth ^ were 
breaking their bones. But us the Lord has delivered from all these 
things. ^But the wicked man was troubled on account of his 
transgression : lest he should be broken along with the evil men. 
5 Because dread is the fall of the wicked : but the righteous not 
one of these things shall touch. ^For one cannot compare the 
chastening of the righteous who have '"sinned^ ignorantly with 
the overthrow of evil men who sin knowingly. '^For the righteous 
is chastened'' so that the sinner will not exult over him. ^For 
the righteous He will admonish as His beloved son' ; and his 
chastening is like that of the first-born : ^for the Righteous One 
will spare His saints, and their transgressions He will blot out by 
His chastisement. For the life of the righteous is for ever. 
''°But sinners shall be cast into perdition: and their memorial 
shall no more be found. '''"But upon the saints shall be the 
mercy of the Lord. He will cherish all them that fear Him. 

PSALM 56 (S7) = P.SALMS OF Solomon 14. 

^The Lord is faithful to them that love Him in truth : even to 
them that abide His chastening: to them who walk in righteous- 
ness in His commandments : He has given us the Law for our 
life : ^and the saints of the Lord shall live thereby for ever. 
The Paradise of the Lord, the trees of life, are His saints : ^and 
the planting of them is sure for ever ; nor shall they be rooted 
up all the days of the heaven. For the portion of the Lord and 
His inheritance is Israel. *Not so are the sinners and evil men, 
those who have loved a day in the participation of sin : for in 
the brevity of wickedness is their lust ; ^and they did not 
remember God ; that the ways of the children of men are open 
before Him continually : and the secrets" of the heart He knoweth 
before they come to pass : ^therefore their inheritance is Sheol, 
and Perdition and Darkness : and in the day of mercy upon the 
righteous they shall not be found. ''For the saints of the Lord 
shall inherit life in delight. 

^ Or molars : rendering the Greek jiiXai literally, as Wellliausen has observed : 
it should have been - ^^ '■i^ 

^"'^ Or perhaps : For the righteous is chastened secretly. (See Ryle and James, 
ad loc. ) 

* Corr. 'He will cause the righteous to inherit Him.' * lit. secret places. 



THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON 1 53 



PSALM 57 (58) = Psalms of Solomon 15. 

■•In my affliction I called on the name of the Lord, and for 
my help I called on the God of Jacob : and I was delivered, 
^because thou, O God, art the hope and the refuge of the poor. 
^F"or who that is strong will, praise thee in truth? *and what is 
the strength of a man, except that he should praise thy name? 
^A new song with the voice in the delight of the heart: the 
fruit of the lips with the instrument attuned to the tongue : the 
firstfruit of the lips from a heart that is holy and just. ^He 
that doeth these things shall never be moved by evil : the flame 
of fire and the anger of sinners shall not touch them, '^when it 
goeth forth against the sinners from before the Most High to 
root up all the roots of sinners : ^because the sign of the Lord 
is upon the righteous for their salvation : death and the 
spear and famine shall remove from the righteous ; ^for they 
shall flee from them, as death flees from life : but they shall 
pursue after the wicked and catch them : and those who do evil 
shall not escape from the judgment of the Lord : for they will 
get before them like skilled warriors : ''°for the sign of destruction 
is upon their faces. "And the inheritance of sinners is Perdition 
and Darkness : and their iniquity shall pursue them down to the 
lower hell. ''^And their inheritance shall not be found by their 
children : ^^for their sins shall lay waste the houses of sinners: 
and sinners shall perish for ever in the day of the Lord's 
judgment: ''^when God visits the earth with His judgment. ''^And 
upon those who fear the Lord there shall be mercy therein ; and 
they shall live in the compassion of our God : and sinners shall 
perish unto eternity^ 

PSALM 58 (59) = Psalms of Solomon 16. 

■•When my soul declined a little from the Lord, I had almost 
been in the lapses of the sleep of destruction ; and when I -was 
far away from the Lord, ^my soul had almost been poured out 
to death, hard by the gates of Sheol along with the sinners : 
^and when my soul declined from the God of Israel, unless the 
Lord had helped me by His mercy which is for ever— l ^ He 

' lit. the time of eternity. 



154 THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON 

pricked me, like the spur of the horse, according to His 
watchfulness : my Saviour and Helper at all times is He : He 
saved me: ^I will praise thee, O God, because thou hast helped 
me with thy salvation : and hast not reckoned me with sinners 
for destruction. ^Withdraw not thy mercy from me, O God: 
and let not the remembrance of thee remove from my heart until 
I die : ^save me, O Lord, from the wicked sinful woman, and from 
every wicked woman who sets traps for the simple : ^and let not 
the beauty of a wicked woman lead me astray, nor any sin that 
is, ^and establish the work of my hands before thee : and 
preserve my walk in the remembrance of thee. ^°My tongue 
and my lips in words of truth do thou establish : anger and 
unreasonable passion do thou remove from me : ''''grumbling and 
little-mindedness in affliction do thou remove from me : for if I 
shall sin when thou hast chastened me, it is for repentance : 
^'^but by thy good-will establish my soul : and when thou shalt 
strengthen my soul, whatever has been given shall be sufficient 
for me : ''^for if thou strengthenest nie not, who can endure thy 
chastening in poverty ? ^*for a soul shall be reproved' in his flesh 
and by the affliction of poverty ; ^^and when a righteous man 
shall endure these things, mercy shall be upon him from the Lord. 

PSALM 59 (60) = Psalms of Solomon 17. 

^O Lord, thou art our King, now and for ever: for in thee, 
O God, our soul shall glory, ^^^d what is the life of man 
upon the earth ? for according to his time, so also is his hope. 
3 But we hope on God our Saviour: for the stronghold of our 
God is for ever according to mercy: *and the Kingdom of our 
God is over the Gentiles for ever with judgment. ^Thou, O 
Lord, didst choose David for king over Israel : and thou didst 
swear to him concerning his seed,±hat their kingdom should not 
be removed from before thee. ^But for our sins sinners rose up 
against us : and they set upon us, and removed me far away : 
they to whom thou gavest no command have taken by violence, 
■^and have not glorified thy honourable name with praises : and 
they have set up a kingdom instead of that which was their pride. 
^They laid waste the throne of David in exultation of their 
changed But thou wilt overthrow them, and wilt remove their 

' Or {see note to text) : thou wilt reprove. 
^ Reading d-WiyiiaTOi. 



THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON 



155 



seed from the earth : ^even when there shall rise up against them 
a man that was a stranger to our race. ■'° According to their 
sins, thou wilt reward them, O God : and it shall befall them 
according to their works. ''^ And thou wilt not have mercy upon 
them, O God. Command their seed, and do not leave a single 
one of them. '"^The Lord is faithful in all His judgments which 
He has done upon the earth. ''^The wicked man^ has devastated 
our land, so that there is none to dwell therein. They have 
destroyed both young and old and their children together. ''^In 
the splendour of his wrath he sent them away to the West, and 
the princes of the land to mockery without sparing. ''^In his 
foreign way the enemy exults, and his heart is alien from our 
God. ^^And Jerusalem did all things^ according as the Gentiles 
did in their cities to their gods. ''^And the children of the 
covenant took hold of them in the midst of the mingled Gentiles : 
and there was none amongst them that did mercy and truth in 
Jerusalem. ^^They that love the assemblies of the saints fled 
away from them : and they flew like sparrows who fly from 
their nests : ''^and they were wandering in the wilderness, in 
order to save their soul from evil : and precious in their 
eyes was the sojourning with them of any soul that was saved 
from them. 2° Over all the earth they were scattered by the 
wicked. Therefore were the heavens restrained that they should 
not send down rain upon the earth, ^^and the everlasting 
fountains were restrained, both the abysses, and from the lofty 
mountains : because there was none among them who did 
righteousness and judgment; from their ruler to the lowest of 
them they were sinning in everything. ^'^The king was in trans- 
gression, and the judge in wrath, and the people in sin. 
23 Behold, O Lord, and raise up to them their king, the Son of 
David, according to the time which thou seest, O God : and let 
Him reign over Israel thy servant, 24a,nd strengthen Him with 
power that He may humble the sinful rulers : ^^^and may purify 
Jerusalem from the Gentiles who trample her down to destruc- 
tion, 2^so as to destroy the wicked from my inheritance : and to 
break their pride like a potter's vessel : to break with a rod of 
iron all their firmness : "to destroy the sinful Gentiles with the 
word of His mouth : at His rebuke the Gentiles shall flee from 
before His face : and to confute sinners by the word of their 

^ Gk. avoiMot, not &ve/j.os. ^ Gk. = 6'(ra iirolria-ev 'lepovtraXi^ii. 



1 56 THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON 

heart: ^^that He may gather together a holy people that shall 
exult in righteousness : and may judge the tribes of the people 
whom the Lord His God sanctified : ^^and He shall not any more 
suffer sin to lodge amongst them ; and no more shall dwell 
amongst them the man that knoweth evil. 3° For He knoweth 
them that they are all the children of God, and He shall divide 
them according to their tribes upon the earth : ^^and the sojourner 
and the foreigner shall not dwell with them : for He will judge 
the Gentiles and the peoples in the wisdom of His righteousness : 
^^and He shall possess a people from among the Gentiles : and 
they shall serve Him under His yoke : and they shall praise the 
Lord openly over all the earth : ^Sand He shall purify Jerusalem 
in holiness, as it was of old time : ^^that the Gentiles may come 
from the ends of the earth to behold His glory : bringing her sons 
with them as an honourable gift ; those who were scattered from 
her, 35and to see the glory of the Lord wherewith He hath glorified 
her: and Hetherighteousking.taught of God, isoverthem: 36and 
there is no wicked person in His days amongst them, because they 
are all righteous, and their king is the Lord Messiah : ^^for He 
will not trust on horse nor on his rider ; nor on the bow : nor 
shall He multiply to himself gold and silver for war: nor shall 
He rely on a multitude in the day of war : ^^for the Lord . 

(Caetera desunt.) 



col PSALMS OF SOLOMON 1^7 

A\pa i*^ .^^OJK' .i-:i.^3° .rrf^xis ^s-1 rsTiaX, *.^«>*a*=3 
..^oeoi^'Wn _a.lK' ^ajo .K'crArS'.l .^^CUK' reliJa _OcrAA.a 

r«lliiio32 .co4<0.xi*.i\."1 rS'AvSO^jJua r^hxoshr^a rtshsas^ .^j^M 

.mxis.^ t<'Tfl.*r«' ^^ujss .11^^ .eoA\Maiix.A» rC'v** ^ ?!^ .rdJk.ire'.i 
.en rdi'i-sa.T on^jjAiu.^ K'v*»s>alo3S .^cin-w oiosA^K'.i ».^cn 
i<'crAr<' ^Jsa .^Ajss reLii^.it rC-^Lso oooo .k'oqAk' c nu-iT .i 

i*.\^ reA.t A!\p2a37 .ptiavso r<ljjLxx.tn .__ocnaJJS30 ..iT.t.i-a 

Aj>. vxfioj rsllo .rilaixA ri'-SOrcJjJoa rilacn.l oral (<l\tta.»l rfA 
.r«lAix..1o -tA^^ ri'-^i.siiSS .nil=iB.T rtlSOftiS rc'rf.i.^Jto 

Caetera desimt. 
" The translator read en as on. 

y Gk. Xaovs i6v(Sv. 

^~^ The Gk. is (fyipovre's Swpa tovs e^rjo-^evr/KOTas vioiis avT^s. The Syriac 

seems to render a Gk. e|o)o-6ieVTas, which is a better reading, though perhaps 
it may be a conjecture. 



17] PSALMS OF SOLOMON ,-U 

^i^-"' rC'-ia^ vyr^ CUii&o .re^JisaM.! r^^o.l& aocn ^ASiMii 

»._aeoi.t<X=s r<'oeo rt^iK' toV^b^" i._oeai2»3 dftoqa r^oi&^'M.i 

.r^^CLXL>.l\ .Ta.^.1 ,_j>0Q3 rS'ooo AvAi A!^ .ptLsa'-i pS'iaJ^ ^»30 

.r^A»CUV^isa=)P p«li*.io ,cna^r^ retio^a rdai-sa^ .^«ti^ liLts 
,_oca^5a\ ..^ocnl yixar^a rsl^iia ,v«^3 . rg'Axi^ML-i rdsa.^o 
A^. vrO^soJ.! .r<'c»Ar<' A\jp<' pS'vm.iI r^ll-ava ..T»0.ia cniai 

v^K" pi'icaaojt- AM-z.sa.\ .>^o^i* ^^ rtlAcUk. o.iaosa,!^ 
i^^jacniiajc* cniA r^lias rS'JV^a.xra ji>iT*a,A .r^iu.&.i reL^^ 
..^^iii:^ on^r^Sks .cn=ao^ Au^aa «Ao.^ Klsisi^ o.iacoai^^ 
re'AA.saa p^.'A^jjA cua&saAo'^ ocno.&rc' ;jo.iii ^ pCsa.sa.^ 

.so^ KlAa^^ .cnofii(<' rtL.i.:fl .z.Tn.-sa.i rtlsa^.i K'AiaHi- ,_Mio 
i*wi s 1 .ac\^ i<l\o ^^^ocndvixa rc'^V^M t^oa^.-f J1A.3..JC-I 

" The translator has referred iirXaviavTo to the sparrows. 
° For TrapotKt'as "/'tjx'7 *^hs translator read irapotKw. i/'i'X7s. Cf. note ' on 
previous page. 

P Gk. ev aireiBiia. 

1 Gk. etSes (JL). Gebhardt conjectures eiAou. '" = Gk. KaOapia-ai. 

^ Gk. adds ev (ro<^ta, €v Siicaiotruvj; ; probably by an eye-error to z/. 31. 

' Gk. vTToa-Tacnv. Cf. Ps. xv. 7. " vid. sup. Ps. xvi. 14. 

^ Gk. ov a<j>rjyrj(T€Tai. 



.\l PSALMS OF SOj.wi.iwj.> . . 

k'4\OA,L=a txsafloo .rfAvikntixsa rS'Txix.ta vn^axA cu^ax.^ rdia 
t^icnao T, -) .T.0.1.T caxso^OA. o.s\»tT^^ i — ocnioai -^ '. " 
.,_ocn:wi\ >-iAxo .^.__CUri' ACUmlOoA* * ^S AxiK'a .L^oai^i-O.*.."!" 
^ rd^-i^cu r<'i.a-\_ i_^»eaAsi. >cui.l .tSko' .Kls^ir^ (-=« 
.ri'otArS' i^^r^ .^oi.a>^ .^_^oni'ca\^ v^*r<"° .^V..T r«'Avr>TJt. 

.S» Kilo »_CkcmiJ3 jQ-iT.Ax rcllo »^^ea2i.i\ SCto-Si'^ .K'caArc' 

T<.'t\ \^ Aia-M .aai\^ d^l As ^ ^\r^ (<l\o^. .sTur^^^ 
i.-U- cnv-^^i.l' t<'vaft.xa''* .rC'.ijjL^rC ^__ooriJLl_ao KliLflso 
relAO r«lw\Cl=A r<l^ij<'.i oaZai.\o .rdsVaJM,! p^iW.lSw «_aJK' 
oqa ,Ti\O.S cnsAQ .r^ -ii.tia>.a icosii.zjsa rc'^^i&O.ia'^ .004; 

^__ocnl oocn ^*.T-M3r<'a'^ i^_ooQj«frAKLi^ ^.__ocp Avij'.i "W-i o.ta^. 
^_ocn&vixa rc'ocn ^\o .r^\.i\»'» rclsooiit. ^Ias Kn.>^*.l.l caiils 
^^K' »_c»cQ.iJS3 cini^'^ .>,li.iop«l=™ pc'ii.r.a r^lM.M'i T"^ i 

"^ Gk. dAXay/ittTos but the Copenhagen MS. aXaXay/iaros. 

f Gk. + o ^Eos. 

g Gk. iXetjaeii; Or eXcT/crai. 

■" The Gk. is iirjpevvr]o-e...Kal ovk ai/)i7Kc>'... which the Syr. has turned into 
imperatives. The meaning of ■ncm^ is obscure. 

' The Gk. is iv opyrj KaXXous avTov, for which the Syr. has read ev KaWa 
opy-^l avTOV. 

^ The translator read i-n-oirjcrtv [— iv] 'Icpovo-aXi^yic and omits oaa. 

' Reading toIs Oeois or roiis ^eow with JLH for which Gebhardt con- 
jectured Tov aOlvovs. 

™ This agrees with Gebhardt's reading ovk r/v iv auVoi? o ttokov iv 'lepov. 
a-aXrjft. IXeos Koi dKi^Oeiav. The Gk. MSS. vary between d iroiajv iv aia-to iv 
avToh if and 6 -Troidv iy avVots iv jxia-u). May it not, however, be thecase that 
the Syr. .^ojauisa stands for iv fx,icr(a iv avrois? For ▼^■Stje. the MS', has 
^n-Mt. (?). 



17] PSALMS OF SOLOMON .a.1 

i»^ •--I^ .>.l-»> j3.M'if<' r^Ll^ioKlss ^rtlat-aL.! Axoia^to^ Kllii^-i'' 

.^•scQ^^K'.T )ai.2>9 >.A no>nfi^ .t.z.^il A.xw^ ^.1 x^o . ».z.^J 

ritj^^ar^-rjo cnifiass '^rd.x.^i^ ^^__aA.i\^ l^'4 .^rs'iia.ia.oaia.ss 
>cna\^. ..^^cvocai .^xicna (^laj.it irLxSa.! a^^o'^ .cn^OJ^fioJsa.i 

'■"'■ A literal rendering of dXiyoij/vxia. 

^ Cod. c Jtvi,^ T.i::(T t Cod. c adds A 

, " Cod. c adds ^t<: 

"" The translator has omitted the difficult line [iit ™ ikey^ea-Oai] \pv)(r]v iv 
^€(pt (Ta.Trpia.% avTov ■ rj SoKi/xacria trov ; but perhaps iv to iXiy^^ccrdai is latent in 
_^^o\a\, for in Ps. xvii. 27 he renders koI IXiy^at by wcvi^irAo. I liave 
tidded the word i<jt_aj to make the text clear. Wellhausen suggests „_n=ia> 
(cf. Gk. 7] SoKi/xao-La crov) which makes the addition of riacaj unnecessary. 
Cod. c ends here. 

PSALM 17 (= Ps. 60). 
K'cn^p*' vv=>."i A.\^ .^>\.v\o r<ls.a3^ .^^l.=a acp AuK* t<^\sn^ 
A.:^ r<'.jt.ir«'i=ja »encu»»^ »__OJr<' rtlA.'sao^ .^z^J >ica=i^UL.^ 
^.1 ^Am^ .eniajjo" Ape* relx^en 'i-«^ ea.l.3\ vyri* .rSliwirc' 
i_^cQ\r<'.i co.i.tMOK'M A..^^ .^xioi^ r<'cnit<' Ai^ ^i.>va,jaa:M 

.AjPC'TQi* A.^ r<'_^li?3 .T'O.Tl iviSL^ rtf'-ii.SJ AvlK'^ .rf-li.T=i 
vv'~='3.Ti3 »7 r^l^ik.^^ rd.A.-i .ca^.11 A.i>. cnl ^ij:n.> ^iK'o 

cvajaaJ rc'i.»Aj.£i..= i^ootai ^is.& r^lAi ^__OJeT3 . >.iAn.uir<'o 

''-^ Gk. €ts Tov aiwva Kal £Ti = Heb. IJ)! d'pv'?. For the Syriac rendering 
V. supra, Ps. ix. 20 etc. 

>' Gk. o ;)(pdi'05 ^u)i5«- "^ Cod. oj^loa= 

'i Gk. jSatrt'Aeiov aijTov and so in v. "}■ 



f<J PSALMS OF SOLUMUJN L'" 

PSALM i6 (= Ps. 59)a 
^aOcd K'aeb ,\i\n .iSb. .r^*\.'sn ^rw AiVn >jc&i ivisoeot^ .1^^ 

.AjpS'iai..l ooerApS'° ^» ►*^ AviJ^iAxrs' s^o^ .t^-i^m >i. Ao.iX.n 

.003 *=s\ A.^i3 >.li.V>-990 »Jloia .cn^QTi.i>A r^-kS3oajlOA rC^CU3\ 

K'AxiviK' Aa ^»J0 .rS'AvxjTJ^ K'^j.^^M (JS3 r^isa^ vlxjaoia^ 

,a*re' .13.5^ ^.dA^K'oS [.JAuK".-!"^ r«'cn\u Aa r«lA ApC* .j<'Av\a^ 
rtlSisrirs ,^o.&floo >.ix\'° .v\.ii^o.T=> iA^ ,AxA\a)0 .'vyiJWSxi'^ 
.<i,j,S3 jijj'irtf'P "K'AxV.'sa r<A.i° K'Avsauo p«'\.\o'i .^s^K* K'iii.a 

» This Psalm is quoted in part in the Cambridge MS. Add. 2012 where it 
is introduced as follows : 

and is rightly numbered as Ps. 58. We may call the fragment Cod. c. 

'' The translation of the difficult opening verses is somewhat paraphrastic, 
but the Greek can be seen through the Syriac. 

<: Gk. Kvplov deov. "^ Cod. ^u.v>•»^ = Cod. bis "7ii>. 

f Inc. Cod. c. s-g Cod. c transposes. ^ Gk. d 6cos. 

'-' Cod. c om. ^ Gk. afjipova. ' Gk. d.ivaT-i)iTa.Tij> fte. 

" A paraphrase for koI iravTOs VTroKUjxivov dwo a/u.aprias d.vu}<f>e\.ov^. 

" = kviL-Kiov (Tov for Gk. iv TOTTO) aov. 

°-° A literal rendering of aXoyov. 

V Cod. c T.=i-'rti 

1 Cod. c adds T^il^euu *V'^ t^os* auA'a y^omy^ r^o 



15] PSALMS OF SOLOMON (J 

PSALM IS (=Ps. 58). 

r<'-i\ofisa.i Kljua^ ^1.30 rtf'i^flo.i A\ *«'^ ^i&^K'o ..3CUUk.*.-i 
.'"t^iitis vvl K'.ia.i'' ^xx:^.! T.*.^ a.i:sa3 .rs'cQ^K' acp Auk" 
r<'A»'iiSa\S .vraaJtA K'.IOJ.T rellp^ .re'.xJrS'irj.l cn\jM oxsao'^ 

».__ocnJLX.ix.° ^__oon,\^ ins'rql KL'sa^ijaa'^ 71.T0 (^ r^jA^u A^. 

kAo^. ^.>:Ta:^-i ^^r^o i^_ojp<' ^^o-^riio r<'Aas». ■iA\=» ^*s 
rtilaiii i-x-^ »^.!ii vyr^ .r<l»iio.T aii*.i ,-S3 .^^aais^J ptA 
i^^ftea'^r^ Aj». rdirusrCi K'AiK'i Al!^'° ^ 0,1 K* ..^ass.iai 

,_ocaiA»'ioja" .r<'Av.A\MA\ Aoj.z.\ r<l»3s.2>. »._aip<' .&o.ii.i 

^AmI.1 ^Lp** A:^o'S .eoij.ta pel^ir^ r^ca\r^ V>.flc>.1 ,A\»r<"4 
fH^Oi^'-^fi*^-' ._aMr<llo .ma r^.5aui . oociU r^Laisa ^ 

^—^ Gk. £1 fjiri eiofjioXoyijiTaa-OaL crol iv dXyjOcia. 

^ Gk. Kvpiov. "= Gk. vTToa-Taa-iv, cf. Ps. xvii. 26. <* Gk. 0eo{!. 

« Perhaps i<J^asn, i.e. Gk. Xot/tos. The MSS. have [aVo] \t;u,oi) which 
Gebhardt emended to aVo iroXe/tou. 

f Probably an error for r»Jiom> . ^ Gk. toC 6iov avrmv. 



\'Sa PSALMS OF SOLOMON [14 

vy*i<' cn^0.iT-Mo .(^'.'SXijj'i cnia.A.T vyre* .r<'_n.-».T\ i-*-^ 
...^ocnAv^'ia.x.o ,ma.Bau A.^ re'ja.^.Tt^ ooc\.*ki.T A.\^S3^ .K'i^o.rj.i 

.r^-*i.».i >cDCv:=nMi »^^^cni ^.i.i K'-x.ca.M A^.'' ^ ooaiv^o.i 

'^ Gk. O KVpiOi. 



PSALM 14 (= Ps. 57). 

.r^_ji.»»l re'.ll.i'K' r^-iiifl.l cafia^.iT-^ . ^Ls»_i ca.rs ».__0^r^_l 
r<Ao .)aVsk.\ pc'ivxio'' »__acnA\3^ia3 .,coa.ifln*j »^oa.Av*r<'.T 
rtfji-sn.T coAxi.'ss.i A\^^Q .(<LL.sax..i re'^ttwa^ ^^^oraia. »._^\in.SwAvi 
^^^Oim .r<Ac\.s..O rf-xA^M rf-i^cn rcAo* .A^K'TJaa^ cn^o^T^o 
i_»..\^ cf3^c\ia!>.Va .K'caAj.M.T r^lA-aAaa r^ltno,^ oa-MP**.! 
,_oooivMior<'.T .r<'oQir^A oiSk.iAxrC' p^Ao^ i^^acniv\i rs'AvsEi.rj.t 
rtlaX.i pfLlOO&fO .^Vj-^=> >coa»).tJ3 ^x^r^ t*^^ p>i'_T.lr<' via.l 
Aa.AjL .^_ocQi4\ifti pclico AAq.sq^ i._c>ocfti.T ^q.tij ^^sa .^.tI 
r<A (<'-D..L>'.-1\.l rC'-UL^.l rilSSCUi-rJO .r<L&O.JLMQ r<lj.T.= r<'a 

^ Gk. ippi^(afj.evrj, which seems to stand for y^3e-T.T-Tj. 



O. S. G 



13] PSALMS OF SOLOMON J*»> 

^o^o .r<l^cv<>A r<'-iH».i .rtf'n.'.'.iM^ r^T «M \ ri'-.vso i^ua^ 
ocn r€»\:s3^'^ .r^\:sa^ A\i-i-i r^'JSaix. .i2l:L rS'ia.^A r^xsn 
pe'-i.^M «^__a^:».=>r<llo^ .^iaL>^\ cn.-i:3.2k. A-.ri'inaj Aj^. r^Linia.^ 
r^T.:=a.t ,caa.oa.a»Ci .r<L.Ti»3.T tcnix^r^ ^o^ja ^S3 .nC.T-Mk^ri' 

'^""'^ Gk. €V 0Xoyi irapavd/iov ? ^ Gk. (Tuyxeai. *^ Cod. T^a\c\&ioo 

e Gk. adds iv diropia. ^ Gk. omits. ' Gk. ija-vxiov. ^ Gk. omits. 

PSALM i3(=Ps. 56). 
ca2k.i.io^ .^Ast. h\.Dai» rtLtisn.i cnusa.* ^^_^v>jaa& r^.<T^=n.i cniisa..*^ 

^cnxix-so .rS'^JLiS r^^Axu «^_oeaA^ J^cn'ir<'3 .rtfjlA^^l 

rtCik.xx.i^ ^^.l .^^i^^K"^ .r^xsn ^cT^ ^*crA& ^cn ^ ^.1 ^ 
\ \y~«S .rt^AcUk- >~^ vaA^ifui" rtfisaA.i.T .cnAu»-icut. A-\^:s9 
^cn ^^ K'.tm ^'.1 r<^ni:ivl .KLAOSk..! r<'^\a,^?n I CD ri'r i-).i 
rdi.l.T rdoi'.-H.T t<'A«O.Ti.S3 rdSljjLa. r^Al A.^=0^ .,.3inA\Ax<^ r^A 

.cnaiAxir^.T^ A.^»i^ .r^Aci^ cn\ K'.tmJ r<A.i vyK" r<l£L>ni 

^ Cod. 0003 

•> i.e. Gk. d(rej3-iji as in Codd. and not evcrel3rj's as Wellhausen conjectured- 

*= Perhaps for ■i='aau (= Gk. a-viJ,TrapaXrj/x(ji6fj). '' Cod. jTisan** 

" = Gk. iv irepia-ToXfi ? ^ Syr. begins verse here, I Gk, vovdeTija-n., 



\sa PSALMS OF SOLOMON L'^ 

.^^oiK* T^ K'Aui*»-i K-A^ivi^ ^sao „^^co OAK'S coAio»*A 
>nii- rS'Alsa-io^ i_oc»A lax-o vviisa relsoi K-'ia^^ .rCcnXnS' 
ia.o .ooeo ^iai. .ta. ._o«i*\^ 1\\ rCtiK-c^ .^^oeaiKta ^=?a 
A\»J .re'oiW .^_ocnl .*iL*if<"i rdsaxflaj K"-**^!! i<lafl.*B 
i_ococaAri'.-t coAvmCLsii-Ax.i rdii^aJaaJD .A_.r<'iJaj Vi^.l 
rell\a>rC >.aj.\o .>^iujCC=ix.A».i Klipelsa ^ii.ioK' *Jt^4»p<'^ 

li.a .A^K'iau Is^ ALso.-i ^.-wss re:*iJS3 .ins^i^ .e^\_s.\o 

.cnAvMCknjL.^.1 ca-suc^ ■A^pc'i w A pdavso ^tni .^oii.iore' 

.^)aiiAo f<lx-eo* A^r^viOA A^i- rtfLiVsas toocisau'i 

^ Gk. ciVdira^ (= Heb. mns). "^ Gk. ot Spvfi.oi. 

^ Gk. ai/£T£i\€v (= Syr. .u^ir^ ?). 

e-« Gk. ets Tov aliova Koi €ti. = Heb. lyi D^Jj'? ut supra, 
f— f Gk. as in note '=~'=. 



PSALM i2(=Ps. 55). 
^99 o .rtL^A^o r«l^*aen K'ia.^ ^^ >_3e.^j.A cn^& re'-.i.sa' 

.r«lji0COU i2L2w pi'iai^^ calzA ,cno^K' .rd.iL.si3.T ix^rdAaocoa^ 
."T^ras") K'icu .tMOsact .1.3^ ix^x..! om vyrC.i ix\^ r^a.M:=a 



^\"° .re.l\."l rS'.lisa.Soa rs'Avi rcr-Ls>!i.»A ^ ix^ 



om*si v:b3^ 



=» The Syriac translator has had difficulty, as every one else, with this 
passage : but it seems clear that he had a text very near to the Gk. wcnrep iv 
Xa<3 TTvp dvaiTTov KaWovrjv avrov. It secms natural to correct this to wcrirep iv 
a\a) TTvp dvdiTTov xaXa/tiji' with the Copenhagen MS. But the Syr. is clear for 
\a<3, and it suggests KaWovijv airov by the clause which it prefixes (■\»soc.a). 

^ i.e. ifXTT-Xrjaai (H) for ifJiTrpijaai (RJLC). f Gk. iKKOif/ai. 



lO, II] PSALMS OF SOLOMON OSa 

PSALM lo (= Ps. 53). 
r^M cnA\j!\^M ^ cuAiicol . rS'.'ti^llrj .rS'Avti.a.i r^itt^e\r^ ^ 

r<'.floa..sa.i.=3 v«..^ r<'Aio.ieafloS .rtlsawH-a ,cDO.tri ^\ r^.t\^n 

...^ o.icu r<txSauo7 .r<'^o.i.MLa r^Ux.'sa^ oosq t\ .m-ix-1 A«r<'v)a>o 

oajsafloaaia r£.»\:s3^ Trwi-l rC.i.ii.fla.sq A.2b.o .rtf'.iii^M p<'A<.i^^ 

ii^ocn f<i*i.S3.i^ .rsl.i.sa.1 cnsozA ^unTi A^r«'ifia<.l rC'ivx.cilAo 

^ Cod. ^A>o ^*^m-o— I . Gk. ef cXey/tu). 

•^ 1. eKwXvdi] as suggested by Fritzsche, for ckukXio^ij of the MSS. 

•^ Gk. adds o Kvptos. ^ Gk. to cXeos (= mnu, cf 14"). 

^ Gk. Kvpws rjfiwv. 

f Gk. Iv Kpi/xacriv avTov and adds eh tov aiiava. S Gk. o ^eos. 

•> Perhaps we should read ^mcv^cAin answering to the Gk. a-oitfipoavvqv. 

PSALM II (=Ps. 54). 

^\t iftt^Ti cwi^t^"^ .r<lzl':ui.l f<'i\ai.*.i*'^ r^Civia ^^*a3^ aia^ 
.caii^-cuaas A^r^'ifiou A.^ K'caAr^ ^aui.-i AA^ .K^'-jicin'w.i r^\n 
^o reLuJ.'Wsa ^.1 i^jii.a.\ iV>mo rtlsaova ^nLx.iorc' >»3aj33 

^ Gk, o-ij/Aao-tas. 



Cnsa PSALMS OF SOLOMON , [9 

Av.ir*' i.ii..no vvA\a.Ji.*.tv.30^ .^-.."T.Vf<'.T r<'.T..a..^_3 ■K'^jc^so 
^r<ij» r<^.l K'AvtaAno .r^h\An^^\ .va-^.l i*\^ ocn^ .i^Ti'i'i-i 
cnzSil.l rf-l».T .nrsLw oqa r<lAO.i^ .Ta.i>..1 Ocnc\ .r<L.iiO A<CU cni 
.cn^ASO T.Jf<'i=> A-Sk A^. K'^Ojo.i.lvs ^\^ '^>cnoJL».T^° .rill .1=3 rel= 

A\-S3^3 .''r«^Aio.i*:tcy»a3 r^lx^i.T cn^cn^M i*^ r^.^.1.=»3^^ .r<l*ijsa,i 
ii^ aisa^'* .^Acn .^_ocni^ Ai^. ^x^r^lio A ,co r<'A\A<cf»r3.i 

T»X. relnil.lA'^ . a!^*j.T ^AoA » T< r^ArC* .re'crii^M ^asjcl 

VvAxaa-A^*' -cx^u.-i ^M-SO As.. ^__ocTa\ Aur*' oa^ss*^ rcAo vvvasa 
AmK* rCttcno^^ .taaiAxip^" o.a^.1 rtlsn O.Vjj.i ^.aL.k' Asw T*^ 
cncnlptf' Tiwicv ,v*> .Axajjr^.T ocn vvsa^ ^mo i.^OTAr*' ocn 
p<A.l • ^^2" vyJSa*»"i jiui^ rtA .J.*> vOu.l.l A^^*a .AjK'ifla.."! 
co^-ivA Av-i-a.^ iv.iri'.T AJ^^a'^ . ptiaoia.^* ^•\»^ »__as3Vi 

Ai.sij-nK' rilsaina'^ .>i^^ K'.sa.i^ rtfAi.A>S pcAo .r<'_.i.r>3 
■ ^x^i.i cnA\aaL.i\=i v\=> ^XjinCQ.^a ^uo .^^V^ »^A\ca=ptA 
rf.x.cn'^ A_.r<'iiJa.*.T rs'Avia Aj^ t<'JSl.»»S ..^^ajK* t<*'V5>3.t2° 

^ Gk. adds Kvpiov. = Gk. adds kv i^a.yopiai's. 

'^ Gk. ei^Di/cts. •= Gk. -xpiqa-TOTrj^. 

' Gk. ora. s i.e. ou KaraTraiJo-cts, as in Cod. R. 

^ Gk. il<s Tov alSiva koI 4'ti = Heb. ^J)1 Dpy?. 



9] PSALMS OF SOLOMON SJSO 

.r^-:^ip«'.1 rAsn .•» vi >onai.>-i.a r^oolrt' jj.i.'Hre'o^ .K'oalrC'.i 
i_^enAvj_i.^ r^isaJiin^ r^xsar^ vy^" t<'ciAr<'.i tcnOfiOMO^ 

oqp Auk's A^^32 .^j,2)a\jA rC'TuaJW \f\^ax. ^o.ito .r<'cnur<' 
.rtfA\ O.I Tiara A-»r<'T Oi i \ AoK" »^_j^.l.T .K'^CUK.lt.l re'colr*' 
.•i-»pc'ifiii..i cni.-ia=3 TJAo3'^ .^UCUjo vrySiMl ^^ vrAcnrc'^s 
^iXo ^imo .^2^ vfv^CLi^aacn.i A^^'sa^^ .K'^oa.j^^ao r<ltaMH=3 
i^_oo\f<' ^i.=o r<'.:=ncn^ p^36 .AvJK" ^o.i-i AoKo .^-•A.Tia 
«,.^_cn\r«' AurS'o^'^ .jai^.i ^x\.i vyrc* rdsasa^ ^gs-Vil r^JSol.ts 
r^A ^va3^ ril*i.33 ^_J£sjjo acp vyA^.o .A^ j.ya ^ Aup*" 
,^»X3 A.^o ^a\^.3^ vy.i'.i .,_oJr<' ^^X-"! ^^^ •KfsA'sn autj 
.2k.<\AxAu r<\ .aaAfo .^doi^ K'oqIk' r<l>i.M 7i\s\ v^^-l=3^ 
.tcnoiaw.i KlMA^a icnoju.ia r<*i.»> oqa jjL:ixi>34° .>\^ 

" Gk. ifi.Mvav, (not as in Cod. R ift-iavev). 
° Cod. om. TO Kpi/J-a crov. 



PSALM 9 (= Ps. 52). 
Oxutir^ .T2k .rCAui&CM rtl^lrtll r<^ i-iT-> A^K'ifliLi a%S .t^' 
.scna.i ,eb r^A»oA<T» ^.» cuaAxx-r**^ i^_^cnaoia r<l.i.S3 ^ 
.AjK'ifla^.'l eoisars t^oqs Klsatsa^ »__ocqJass .rS'eair*'^ ...ocai 
.vvAtOA<.lV=3 r^crAr^ j>:i.i\Ax.l \\*a3 .re'otAr<'.i cnAuso vyK" 
.__ocn\A A-i. .r<lix«.i\ rtflli.i oqa Auk's Ai^4 .^,, ^ioAJ^ 

^ Gk. Kvpios. 



.^O PSALMS OF SOLOMON [8 

K'crAr^ ,-..1 r<li.^^ .)a.\.j>. ^JS9M >cnor>.l «^oealA=> i<'cnAreli 

.oocn ^A&!\g4*S9 r<'ca\(<'."i crucion Avts'^ .^Aon jLs>. * rtfJsaJLn 
cnA.aL3 cnl^acn^ oocn ^&.z..>.io'3 .jitAo i\T>.t ivA.-i ocn v^(<' 
pe'iai= vyr^ pc'.jjl-j.-i or^'.sa!^ rS'Auiflo^^.l pfjss.tso ^^_ocnh\ar<sa^ 
. rtSo-Siik. ^ T>^«0 O.ia.::^ rc'A.i rCaa^^M anay- ptlio'^ ■rtf'r^'gB^ 
>jix.r<'o .K'Axaxik^.l re'-uoi r^cniK' ..^^ocni .^iso KlJcn A!^=a'5 

A.^O Tiii.ioK' A.^ Klaia i.^K'.lo^^ hy^rdxxja ^rV.T rf-ii.'tpC'.i 

.crA ovsartfo .r^h\aXM.s KlSk.irS'.i oxiiu.i ,ena^ir<'o^^ .cQV.ir^ 

rc'iv»»'ior<' cuo.x.o^5 .p«1»Ajl=j Acu^. r^^ .vy»ior<' ».xa^^' 

oll^o ^nlx.ior^' A^ rel^'i^ cim^& .cnA<Qi \ s*bi\ kI'sqt:^.! 

.r«lsa.lx-=j icncuLs.i T^h\±.s^ KlarC' vpv.r*' .Nvo^ .m.<iax. 

aix\.t.^^ oriMK'o^' .rtf'r^lx.^.fls rs'iijt.ss jcnal^i ^oxaK'o 

As. rC^AnoA^a ca^hvtr^^ ri'ooAK'.i AV^w^ .paljLiori'.i Qa>iciz.O 

^i-^-^.i A_^.5>3^ ,^^cni 1 T I'i o.i.30r<'o^3 ^^_oroi\a,iiS^\_S3 

rClLss vy"^ )aix-'iorc'fl crx>'icvsa^.-l r«l:S3.i o.'Ut.re'o .^rSlALsija 

oocn.i «.__OJcn ,^_oen^i.ao .^__oeaAi.ri ArjoK'o^'* .r<'A\cU'ij».T 

....ocoaotisK' .^r^.l vyK* ^..oenAxorfJsaj^ o.t-i.Si q™^^ rCA^ortlaaAp 

'^ Cod. ex errore .^oi. n'^^ . «^ Gk. adds ev irapopy ut^l^. 

f Gk. adds /xcTa opKOv. g Gk. 70 OvmacrTijpiov Kvpiov. 

^ Gk. o'ivov oLKpoLTOv. ' Gk. iTrevKTi]. ^ Cod. ^(73oaUT^ 

'~' Gk. KOI TTOiVTa (Totjiov Iv jSovXrj. This requires that we correct \\ -n 
to .^cv=>o. 

m Cod. a=aiwo 



7, 8] PSALMS OF SOLOMON .aSO 

PSALM 7 (= Ps. so). 

rtlA.T .K'ca\r<' ^__ajr<' ^iiu.i.i .\\--g3^ •^^'^ »_op^_ijao."l ^ ^xL.rS' 
iiU.ii v^Lis^a AuK'3 .\^\x.:^a.a^ k'^o^t* ».__oeai\j >jl.o.1^ 

vyr^ V\i^ ruo rt^J-Sauijsi ocn ^K'.i A2^.99 .^t\ v oral 

.^Ai:^^ ^rfo vv^cA ri'ixLi ^iA»o7 .^x.ft:^'' aca Aup^'.t A!^'M 
.'^tcnOx^X^^ rdio ^qA.!)^! A^K'-iQa*.! ca2k.ivl »_a»»i\ h\ir^^ A.\^^ 
r<'..»a.A .aOAik^.i cn^xzil ^>jl=q\ vroi.ici2k..-i r d lDya ^xlo^r«"^^ 

* Cod. ^OOT-ilDOTl 

'' Cod. ex errore jaa^n, cf. Gk. crii ivjiKvi oir<3 :r€pi rjjxwv. 

■^ Gk. vff£pa<rincrT)7S. 

■* The Syriac has dropped the following sentence : koX j?/i€i5 v-n-o fvyoV crov 

[ets] TOV aiMi/a Kat //.aoTfya 7rai8€ia9 crou. ^ Cod. ^ma\^ 

PSALM 8 (=Ps. SI). 
r<Ljt.^io rOius" r<lla .>i."|r<' >.^.sax. r^sifl.l r<liaO rO— \or<" 
(^UfO-t vyp** pi'r^Lx.^Jto r^JSask..! relLa^ .rtlj.vare'.ta p^V^d.i 

r^lin* .ciA .^^r^'.T »..ak r^LSL»r^^ ■ > 1 \ \ ixiiOK'o^ .p^vrj^ia 
,^ >'i:=aaw >''i^ucr<'o^ .(<'&\x>.ts r^iu.>.v99 ToiLiorCl:! A\*>'aiiT. 

^i^.i^i<'o .p^A^CLa^.iVs ..^cnAujiop^ » o^i^j A\vsaK'o7 

a Cod. T^raiafl l' Syr. om. i4>op7j6r] i/ KapSia fiov. <= Gk. ^€ou. 



r<l»3 PSALMS OF SuLAjMyJly " l- 

reLxJV=> iA\*AvJ i-^is. ooAv-aiiOs'? .r«'A>caa.JaaJSa=a' rtl-iso^ 
asaXtt=Axr<'2' .VA»CUi*.TV=> rS'A^CUAfla.sa^ r ;^» » n°> ^° .col r«i\j*i."» 
Ir^ijai.* 1^ vvAiOJii^O PC'Avii!^ rci_.T.»>.l ,eno\ii.l i*^ 
cuooo.-i A\»i i<L*v»i.i ctiAvmOJJlA^ ,03 ri'-^-i=>^ .vvA\a^laa=J 

h Gk. Oeo^. 

' Gk. (TvixiJiiTpia. auTapK€ias. "^ Gk. to fj-erpwy. 

' Syr. omits by o/AotoreXcuTov the words Kal iv tovtw 17 cvXoyia To5 Kvpiov 
£ts irX.rjO'iJ.ovrjv iv StKaioo'ui'g. 



PSALM 6 (= Ps. 49). 
.r«'_.iia.i cnsajt^ p^insA cozvA .i^!>.;».-i reLxji-a.^ ,ona.ao!\^' 
^ ._^^HAvs3 en^*»"iot<'a3 .jai^^i pcL.'iss.t casax. i^.i^ .t^a^ 
cn^t-MO^'^ .cncnlrt'^ tcno.'wK'.i K'.viuk. ^i^^lSQO . r<L*i=Q ^i.vi 
^cn T a >o .000 caL.i.i A^^^n .>^&^t^^ r<L\ rtLjJiVa.i rC'^z^^ 
^n^ ^eoiA\4» p<ll r<lSQ,n<.1 r<lxx.0^c=iO .rc'A^oicaia re'iai^^S 
i.2>i\ cQa!\.i rc'iujkAiso^ .r<ii:s3.l ca^ojcA .M.a.x.0 cniiiz. ^ ^*\^ 

vyv=>^ .rCliiia ptf ' Asaaesao .ca= re'inaa.ss.T r<:xaj.i rS'AAre'.i,^ 



"^-^ The text is in confusion : we should read *ii\ui= , and add owaj 
after fiw.ii\^. The words ora osLtv^ -^V^" ^''^ missing in the Greek. 
•> Cod. T^tv=iiw=3 <: Gk. Tof) Oeov awToC. 

"1 Gk. adds Oeov. 
■= Cod. ^x errore ^^mriAjc 

f Cod. ex erw;'e repeats ojX in passing from one page to the next, 
o. s. F 



S] PSALMS OF SOLOMON "p 

A!i^'^ .oral AA<^ Aviri* ^^^^r** r<\r^ .^.1=i,!^.l )o."V=>3 Aa ^ .aflai 

.^i.lAiA vo^io ^^\or«Ls7 .re'cniK' .vyi'.'l ^ijs ial oi^^AxsaA 

vvaeoA\<= KlAa9 .''r^JV^.i ^jjojjAvi «<A.i^ .^isa vv:».in^ %iwaAvi,4» 
•^_^'° .p^A\r<li vv^oA rSlAr*' . vyl^a jujii rtiA.T . ^iss vy^rS" 
.A^^ ^r^O rS'coAr*' rC'ijjn:' vyA\a_\ r<L.i_'S3 ^°v.^r^ '*-'-^ 
AAxAa :va .Axjk" rCLaiia A\ik' r<tJCu\o V-l-^ r<'Au»i^" 
rS'AvloArcisa cta-x^^SaA .r^-a.fla«i..1 K'^u^OsaA K'ia.'vrs r<''0^io 
»-_os'a*'iJ vvAxal .^_cua.^i •^j<'o'^ .r«'Aia.*A» AaI rc'irs.ia 

r<:itoiAv=>s oco ionc' r<lSisa2k\o rd.i3"ioilo r<ljk.\sial'3 ^^ ocniapc' 

AupS" fc^rc* rClAK' . Aisq .'^K'-Xasj.IO pt'iMM^.i cn'Ufloo .K'cnArS' 
. r<L»jL.^Q rtf'.'gitna.B even ^3r<'.-i A^'sa ,cncULi^^o'4 .r^LtVSn 

ocn .. r^a -iML-^ao J^a* .,co r^.isoCL»xa .rt'-jtJK' iai i*^ 

"^^ i.e. /uv; /3pa8vvys, the Greek is /w.^ ySapwjjs (= TJaom "'^). 

''"'' A paraphrase for iva jj-rj 8i' avayjo/i/ djua/DTOj/xev. 

<= The Syriac here varies from the Greek {kol idv fi-rj eirto-Tpc'i/fjjs ij/^as, ovk 
a.<f>e^6iJi.Sa), whether by conjecture or by the tradition of a better text. It 
stands for koX jxrj OTrotrTpei/'iys a<^' -qfiiav, iva. fjLTj a^e^to/xc^a aTro aov. 

d Gk. irivrp-o';. Cf. Matt. v. 45. 

^-'^ A passage of some difficulty. The Syriac supports Ryle and James in 
their emendation [(rqn^pov xat] avpiov. And it certainly reads <j>€i8(S. But 
the emendation is unnecessary : Gebhardt's text is right or nearly so : iv 
(f)ei8oT KOL 77 avpiov : omit ?/, and translate : ' Human kindness is scant and of 
to-morrow : and if a man repeats a kindness without grumbhng, why ! 'tis a 
marvel.' f Sic cod, Lege ^t«o^.=30 (=Gk. ■s-Xovo-iov). 

^ Misreading Gk. ov as ov. 



.\i PSALMS OF SGZZr^^TZTT, — ^^ 

cnivxa ixfliM K'ooruo .cnAiiaX Ao.^J ,cnoxir^ ^n^'ioo'^ .l&o'^ 

[reUi^"^] rtfla-iftii. ,.__o^jjl1^ .rc'Vi.^ss rdxjsax. ^nsn rfAa^.l 

OV^.lA^K' rsl^o^ .r<'A\.\i.3 ,cnoi.vso .t<'T.^^.a rds-iK'.i 
ov\jp^0^5 .^oaJL& ^\cn=3 re'enir^ ^.sa ciLm.i r^Ao .r<'cn\reA 

.^cn 'i'°^t<L3 a.a.aaJ r<'Au^.A.&cn K'Av.s.JC-MuSa.s r<'AvSaJL=nA« 
i__oenA»a5aj-snAi3 reltiss ,sa ^u.i.i .iVjptf'A ^^^caxsao^^ 

^.la^.l Aa r<'cn\r«' saoK'^^ .rdAci^.l r<l\cv.z.&»3 Aa ^ ^i^o 

oeb peL.'i.'SS r<'ij.T v reli».is A\^ .K'^^oi^AvAxa rtU-saciW^ 

^_^cniA A^. v<^LsaA>i r<L»TS3 ».__ooeni^ K'AfCUn.ita i._CT»\r^ 

. vA ^jja.jjL'M.I ^aL> r^ 

^ Cod. «;«; errore ^ni°>fif). 

' Cod. om. ^>i\. The translation is a free paraphrase of kv ^uovwo-ci 
oTtKi'tas TO yrjpa's avTOV €19 d.vaX-q\^iv. 

■" Accidentally omitted in passing from one page to the next. 



PSALM S (= Ps. 48). 

^*^n-.."l ^K* iu^=> .K^.vsD v^ai, .4jLiT.rC ,cnAi<' i<*"i.sa^ 
caiao'U. ^A=jo .pa»»V330 >»jaa3 Aur^.i A^Lja^ .rcLoa.lt vv*li'-T 
r:i.\.T A\s34 .^133 j3aiM.4, pell vvA\cA rdi^rs' .1^3 rcliajjolsas 



4] PSALMS OF SOLOMON -uA 

co.VaK'o^ .KLii.T^ rc^.'i'VwX ftiiwaX >cna\sa=3 t^t na ocn 
rC'rd^^fla.a ■iiiji'a ocno .r^ II ^3.1 vy>r<' ,ooaL^ ^i.Tool 
rdl.-v K'^^r<' A.& A^^ >C0Q.'l' . s.^ .r<*'i'^-M.l K'^O-ajL^TJCl 

ocn vyrti* .r^^o.i4*.r> rc'^xa Ada As>.'».\ AAao^ r^A\ ti-i .i 
rdAr<l=j .artilfiajsaa.i ^Air<lA K'caiptf' ^ir^'' .rc'^vxta can Aul.l 

.relziAJL^ ■ .i»T ^ ^^K'.t ^^^cQj.iT.'fc. r^'cnXrC f^A^^ *^tcnaJL>i.i 
caL>.l KliflftM^ ..^^aii.iuo^ .,cnc\aii:^ r<lMio.rL=30 r<t.a^a.\^ 

^rc'^v^a A^i. tcncilJi^o" .rdV^ls rclAoOSaJ A\:a:a.l rd^r^Ls 
rusoa Au :tM.i r^hca^M T<''ix.sa\ .r^ctu vyr^ r<'Ata i\T-i 

i.i^s^ re'jso.T.i-'^ jiiA rdAa .relia-^.i rfAu^i.i r<li«iAa.^ 

.rcllo.^ KLlcna >Asai<r^o'5 .»^^.ia r<'v*»a a.i.i»3 ^vA.i rfAsosi 
r^^cxui^.i r<l\sas cn^asiM::a\ r^.i\»tr< r<hus A^ ,cncua.2>.o 
r^Cimh\ ^crA^ ^coa'^ .AajJL vyr^* cojc&j r^uL^^ss reAo 
cai!U:930 rC'AxjilAva otaixi^M .vU^a.Of) rc'"Uw— a rd*v») ^coiusa^' 
r^XM ,cno.&w K'Jiooa.ixao rCAxcviaJsasaao reCaril^a''' .r<'^>!\^ala 

rtf'iux. >J»*"tA>4»o'^ .rd^oAwa cn^oix^o rCAxii srn cniuz. i^__oocal 

"= Gk. 6V VTroKpiaeL ^wras ^£Ta oo-iwv. 
d Sic cod. but read f£i:\aiS,sica>o 

« The Gk. which has omitted Kptvovrai carried back the next words to the 
previous sentence and left the sentence ec irevia ktI. without a head, 
f Cod. ■I'iifiQo s Gk. adds ai'S/ao's. 

•> Gk. ivUrjcrev a-Kop-rriaai. ' Cod. om. 



b 



\1 PSALMS OF SOLOMON L4 

\<v-« e»ii*3^.i A\ *^ .rSL.i,so ^ pi'.iiAvss.i t<liuH rtlsacoJ r^'^ 

rc<^*re'^.l ii^sao^ .reC^iss^ col .lat^ rilisa.i '^rcT-iK' rci^flasio 
i^^OcnuOTa r<'cnXr<' 73.1x3 ^.'sa K'jai'.IXS K'i'ix-^ .oalfliaa r^i^rfJ 
A^sa^ .K'^vi^ Asi. re'AxiVjM rcLn.'.'.i\.i K'Avtaa K'Aui iiiy_ rill 

r^^^.V* rC'V-i ri'\ I'l.i )a».5a.ri .ca.x.^J j3'vao9 . eoA\.^"iax..l 
.rtfUfiui ia-^ Aa rtl2k.n5>3 rCl.ii>3a'° . rtLa.SkCVSa30 r^-saa^s 

Aj^ K'm^^ AflooK*©'^ .cQJSiK'.T ru-S-M-Ao .ea= .•vA-»A\r<'.T 
.ylCiu^ riL\a cn^Acv&sa r^Lx±s^ Ai^sao Aai'3 .jenaJLuA r^cn^ 
i^jto.i >Aosf<' i^.i^ pilAa"* .oqs >3LaA r^Aoj^.! i*^ r<li."t=3r<' 

^~^ aTTOySXcTTtt) for airo/SXcTrei. "^ Kvpw; for ^605. 

•^ An addition by the transcriber, due to reminiscence from the Odes. 



PSALM 4 (= Ps. 47^). 

.Ar^ifiOa.! cncnArdA AuK" v^VO vAavao .r<'caAt<'^ jXMTSia^ 

. yJrC' A^ ^ V^ vy^O^rt^ ^*r<'T>^0 .vOLAsas ^.>r<'T>^«^ 

" Either the numeration has gone wrong, or a Psalm 46 has been dropped. 
The Greek shows that the former must be the correct explanation. 
^ A marginal note says that one copy reads jaiuS 



3] PSALMS OF SOLOMON o\ 

.SencXi^T. "^rcil.i^s ^^^^ .K'ii^a >Vs^ rfdrS" rdj.'u^'^ rill 
r^isai aAi=s37 .rdiSax. mi^ ,.sa ^^^.tI .^^ni'.io .r<Ljx>i\ ocn 

K'.&'j.'.lvX ^*jlJSo\o39 ^^_ocQ*."iiiiw vyre' re'-sall^i rCL\ci2k.\ .:k.i&saX 
.f^'ji.n" .va.^.! aIj* p«'Aa.i.\ .2>.i&S)iio .rdicuw.i rt'.&^cvsa ^ss 
.K'^aii.iLi.isa.saa oral ^*ia.l ^<(<1a rsijijsa oqp )axfia=>.-i A^sa^o 
^t Aj^=3 ,cncv,2)9.iJ3 pacL'sal .,cnoQeLijA tcnasaAti vyK" .i as "ail 
■:■ icno.TiL^ ^ >iLk,\ r«L>i99 oca vyia'^' .rdojco^a 

1 The Syriac corresponds exactly to the Greek Koi/xt^iov. In spite of 
Ryle and James' advocacy of this difficult word, I think it must be a trans- 
lator's blunder. The Syriac itself suggests the emendation vvaiaiaj'n (and 
lowers the proud). 

■■ This looks like a corruption of f^nrari^ (= cJs dirtoknav) : but with 
the added i^^^ it makes good sense. 

^— = Cod. ^mai-a.'a A'^^-n 

' Gk. iv eTn(rTT]jji,rj (read as im, a^-^/jLari?). 

" The translator has misunderstood or misread the Greek. 



PSALM 3(=Ps. 45). 

.\.\~.sa .cn^oi-i-^-a li.x.^ix^rC'o i\sa\ .rC'coArdl '^ r^^.tu 

^ The translator or scribe has dropped the words ipaXari [tw Oew] nS 



eiA PSALMS OF SOLOMON L^ 

.cnivMCV.i3JL.^.-i coOJo-iAi j^a ojT^OJt.'^ ja.ficta.^r^'o i._aoas»Jt.av3 ^ 
A^ r<lLii_uo .rt'i^aaptl*.'! r^Lx.CLal ^*» reLano AviflaAA\r<'o^' 
ocn *T<'Av*»cv.a.jcA\.i rt'cux' otaisa "Ausi.ipi'^ .rdlAa. .ai*» car»i 
1.^ .sAut.K' ebi-acut- pe'ij>.,lr>'^^3 .re'ciArS' cqAs^. vJoirCi 
.A\iii3r<'o rtflji-ssa .cna^r*" Avis-io ^vm r<lif<'o^ .f<l:^if<' 
r^A^QXtAi t'sis .A-.K'iQa^ Aa_ i<L.i_» v\X*r^ A^Voorc' n°>{ir> 

.v\v\pi= i__ocarj K're'^A^ reL.VS9 AuK' wj<[^ rSllr^ .^ta^^^ 

,CUj.i Kliao^ A^iwoAvi.fX' f^Ao2° .re'Vk.^ r<lixiA>.i cnicnaciz. 
^ i>Av>o .^i^sa.i T<''io!^P A^ i.M.'sa.ra :»^ cni:^^ rslaiia" >i 

cfxAa>K'.t A.\^32 ia-as AvAo .^<'f<i.^^» r!''ii.-,3 rt^.Wj^ As^. 
r£\ t<'A»'V4»a .ocb r<lJtJr<' i=j.i .ajtAiAir^ ^^ "^ .r^Vw^ 

B We should reslore _OTOaE.on=i which answers to the Greek KaTaTraTijo-ei. 

^ Cod. oj-i^joo '-' Gk. jbtiTjoav So^ijs. 

>= Cod. ut videtur -»ro^-i:^-=3. ' Syr. om. /aetci /xiji/iVtus Kai. 

m 1. ,_oA3c.i<iiT\ (Well.) to agree with Greek iK^iai. 

" This answers to the unintelligible Greek tov Akv.v, which Geiger 
explained as a misunderstanding of imb in the sense of ISl'? (to destroy) ; 
and which Wellhausen explained by taking idx"? as a late Hebrew form for 
T'P^ = -|''pn^. Cf. Hos. iv. 7. ° Kv'pios for Qt6<i. 

p The Syriac evidently had opiwv, and not as Hilgenfeld suggested opUv. 



2] , PSALMS OF SOLOMON .ll 

.ri'enXrt's tcncO-ama ooeo ^« nsls&^^JM o .p«L.i.S3.i ^crxjt.."».nJSa 
.>A5>3 ^,_air«' o.Tx. axiMir^s" .iaipe' reUoo A^^W^ .r<'A»a\cv^s3 

reLioi-x^ cn^iso «»xi=3^ .K'Axiiji^ rdsas^ a^^r^a" .KL.'vsa 

K'iuua.i A\^5 .rS'.TMt^K' ^_^ca*l=>o rtflaioo rtlLi^^ .,cnosaMi 

aa^. rtfA.i A\^" i.^^lK' AvAnori' r^'.Sw'tK'o .dvisioi rCliSai. 
.^ocal^ rd:^ir<' >i..ii<.lo" .o:«a.^.l vyr<' mAsi. XJp^ Tj Aa 
rel^MO,^) ;plz.iOr<'.l ooiJLaA OSai.AK' .r^cn\r^ re^a^.tt vyxxy.l 
re'aen TJa.^ .K'ocn vsjL.i ^sa A^o'3 .re'ivln ^w .cisci^a 

c\t aoJA r^-jcjsajc. A-inol .oocn ^.la^. ^.^cucn :^r^^ vyr^ 
.v<^iX>.i vy»r^ ^relSoA^^r^ ;ialz.ior<'.i cniu-ao i.^_oooA<oAa^ 
tJaoTli .K'^O.jjiA'iz.i reLiAg^O-MLS ^<cnz&J trtflso^ ^Alcn.i aVm'^ 
.pelii-sa vya."i\t<' ^.1 rtf.iK'^^ .^icn Av. ^.:i-l^ «.sxjj'io 
A^^'7 .rtf'otArtf' vv^CUK.lt vvLld.Ts.l AAp»i .vnA.i cn^o^i^ 

<=">= A double translation to express d.iropitpaTc...ii.aKpd.v. 

^ Here the division of the sentences follows the Greek MS. : ovk eioSiOKev 
avrois TO kciWos rrjs So^tj's avToC " i^ovOivtoOrj ivwTnov tov 6iov. For the 
emendation (Hilgenfeld's) of the passage (ovk cvSokiu iv auTots- ro KaAXos i-^s 
8o|t;s auVov [so Syr., not av'r^s]) see Gebhardt in loc. The Syriac ^^f^ 
appears to be a rough translation of evo'Soj/cei'. 

= ^^arf n -"t^o (Wellhausen) to agree with the Greek -qTifiuiO-q. 

f The Syriac has twice ^auSii^ for daaira^, the Greek word which is 
found in Daniel as the rendering of mna : eio-aTra^ must mean ' together,' and 
the Syriac must have very nearly restored the original word employed by the 
Psalmist. 



.^ PSALMS OF SOLOMON [l, 3 



PSALM I (=Psalm43 ofMS.). 

Avajt»»A\r<'o3 .re'^OA>.i\ AvAssaAirS'i A^» i*^ ^lajsaij .rdaiu.i 

.riL!>.ir<'oQial .acaiA^K" i*^ «._aeniA»C«.^'* .r<*'i'.\ 3 .i r«'pel\atti= 
aJsaa'iAxAxrS'S .rtL;^ir<'.i oa^o.fiaA'^ r<l.=n.T^ i___ocoAujaaJt.Axo 

■:»<'A\oi<'-2>a\^=> r^'-.iio.i coi^acn^ ore'-.sa^o i ocax-sa.TB.i r^Isasiik. 

^ -^V" '^ superfluous, being repeated from the previous clause. 

^ Reading iaxaTOiv for €<T\a.Tov. 

<= Here the Syriac has dropped a sentence, corresponding to the Greek 
ov /ii; TiiauxTiv, ^Koi i^v^piaav iv tois dya^ots auTwi'. 

<• The Greek here has the difficult, if not unintelligible koI ovk ■^vijKav : 
the Syriac appears to have read this as koI ovk eyvoj/cav. We should perhaps 
correct cti>.n. fiXn to a^-n* t<^o 

= Cod. ex errore „_oo>i»3ii.o 

PSALM 2 (= Psalm 44). 

oocn ^&x>.isqo r<l>-iaka.i rclsosa^ v^ms.tjm A^. aaii»o^ A^Ax 

■> i.e. KartySaAf. For ■rs;:^rii^T^i.^ r^a(^ ■K^TiSi-^ , with great beams ; and 
cf. .(4^5 (?/' Thomas, pp. n5.ja, ctjSld 
''— •* Ttt ayia = the Sanctuary. 

o. s. E 



42] ODES OF SOLOMON j\ 

ODE 42. 
Gau'ior<' Ail. |.\^^re'.i rC-^^A rC-fiaxn ,^(\^xz&3 .,cn enif>K' 
jAci.Ti .^jnoQiA c\ivx:=Q^ .|.\ ^i-\wS3.i ,__aico h\o\ rCoenrC'o .>! 

vy'<'^ .>3ftM.T cni-x.! ^._^>oni\s AvxjajiK'o^ .»^^k»A ^x&.ii.t 

-Lsk. t-aOM KllAcn'^ .reLlAvij Av^a .m^Aosi r^-iOA.^ vv.rc'o'' 
rtlAo'4 .AxiaAxQore' ^r^ AvA'Avflopi' r<A^3 ^^ ^jjj2a»cn=i3.T ^AaK" 
r<'A\aj=aa'^ .Ax^o.iAtrC'o «jA\vm AciiX-'^ .».W. aii ^AK" A^.aaK' 
AtAvijJo .cn\ Auocn rtf'ii.^ao (<11m'7 . >.2i12^ <<'r<lJL^fiaA o •J.n^Atr^' 
KlTiio r<A_^io^^ .Kt^-^nciit. cars K'acn AuK'.i r<Lsa^ casa^ 
A\.idL^o'^ .».&o^i.& oi -iiMSaA cu*.^x.r«' rdl.i A\p±a .,Ai(<' 
K'Axa&tts «^_omsa2b. AvA.i.=nQ .,cnoA\.A:sa^ reiJLu.i K^Avz-cu^ 
,Ata\ cA^eoio^' .>.'sa^Ava A\^=j re'ocai kA.i A^^^ .r<'A\lM 
.'va-^b.et .k'ctAk'.i cists »x1cvm ov^aK'o a.ii.ao .oAxx^a.i ^.^ojos 
.><lAft.g.M.i r<'iafloK' ^ ^Aj3.&T<'o^^ . vvAtOSOxfios vyr<' ^^so^ 
p«Ai Tx^ J.*v*»^^ .vvA\aA jia^j cn.=3.i f<l2b.iA\ ^ ojAvAo 
Auk's A\^ .v^osk. ^j.jj Are* jj"iaA\i^ ...^^ass vA ^inAxsa 
^^ocQ*.i A *-, Avsox-io^ i^ocrAo Au>.^z. ^.i rtf^p*"^^ .^oi& oqp 
re'^cAXcn i__ooa*Av.r<' >.L.io .^^aJK" r^'irtlij Aa.i A\^^ .»=az. 
'^ Cod.; ut videtur, ^^thti, probably under the inHuence of the preceding 



reli ODES OF SOLOMON [40, 4 1 

ODE 40. 
>a.\ rf.aa^ rili^oo^ .tosev'n (^^a^=>9 r<'oa\i vyr*** .,«»-»'<' 
.ii^J con rell-oio^O .A.^A»Au cq=i rClLjj.io^ .cnrj r^ieoi 

^ Cod. cTii'imeuo : the emendation is by Charles. 
ODE 41. 

i-Mvi r^Liea *\ -^ .>cnciia cn^ol « cv^.l'^io^ .cn^ai:=a>en.i 

.3oa>.i acp ai*snh\Q .A icosrc' rf-si '^'^^ r^j930..>4 .cnjjLjjcsaa 
cnsix. A:^ rc'.TM.&K' ^V& Ax&cn rc'o^x.i^ .cnAuioax.^ ^^ ^ 
.cnicncvis ^ji^rtf' »^_jcnua^ .onito,a,\p3 >cna.<iai.io .rcl.iio.i 

^o:vi^ .r«i.sa.'sa*»<lao rtflAls ca=>o.M=> »^ ^AoA i^^^^ooAuo 

A\^ .A ^Vu.l ^x\.*rc'«^_oea\A »_^iin.iAu^ .reiiisa."! cn^.i ^ 

>jiA>4\rc'a .vyAJsaAxrC^.i r<'iua..^'3 ,;^^t «S i p<iA_ito.»j rtfAo 
rdxAjSSCLXs ,V*»A<r<' r<'.:M_>i.99.l oot.3^4 .cg.V.ji re'AxCViia.'lts 
.A\ocn ca=j y»^:^Il.i.:x^ >cn r^Ausa ^ .jjj.t p^iencoo'S ,,cna=it<'.i 

^ r^A«.TM r^Au*aax.Af .cnSaJL.i r^ivjtB ^qAa^^ pCAvx^J rtfUiJ.I^^ 

.«<->ajAcn .orA yi,3.ijL.aq.i ^\^r^ 



39] ODES OF SOLOMON A 

.co&vao cnio^K'o ca±nx.r^Q .r^\tx^ )aa> i*^ oco'^ .>A=>^ 
«<lL»o o^^o ji-fiore'o jisa.^'^ .^ocn >A-^ ,cao-ir^^o 

r^^a^ls^' .on^a^flo.-l K'^^'icLaso os^O^^^xa .cnijjAaaso 
r<l^:i:sa30 .cn^a«^.l rC^a.m i.% x ao "^ < • *nTi r«'iv->r<l< 



ODE 39. 
>cno.\^. ^ifionsa.i ^A*r<l\o^ rf_.v=»3."i caL^ rtf'-ii.x^ r<'A»0"icQ3' 

ca9ax.=] ^TTS.! ,_aJen."i r^-»j'iar<' Kl^ooo r<'A\T<'o^ .000 r<^\sn 
,_^oj-<v ^o . ,caUA!k..io r<lsa>V93.i oosax. Ax&oa axal^ .r<l>i.=a.l 

^._0^ .■«v-'^\ A»«»i r<'i\0'ical ..^ oocol .vw .Oocuo.tIaii rtflA.i 

^_S3 »^_ajr^ i.-a.^o vAcno .cnAi\'=a-B KL>i.93 »^_ajf<' ^x.\^ 

rd&sao r<l^£no'° .r<''iijc.=> ^^sa.i t<Lfltt.*..n vyK' ^oa>^<r^ 
rO*AZ.99 ^^i-^n.-i ^.1 cnAvaia^.0 . r<\ V \^ oocn ^aJ±aai^A\.:a 
h\Siixa»h\h\r^a" .JJiit^vsi r^\ '\t^ . iV'^ A\sq r<lAo .^xiK' ^sajis 
(^i\AAcrA ^i.SliL.1 ^_OJca\o .cniAvs ^i is .1 ^A<f<ll KluioK' 



•\^ ODES OF SOLOMON [38 

ODE 38. 
rS'lTX. ,J"»r».ia^ .K'AvaA'isoX.i vry^K' r<''i'vi,.i K'lcncuA iuAfis' 

>A K'ooD re'AaS ,oen rc'oen >cnaA\*r<' pc'ivr.."» A!\^ pdiJ^r^.i 
;pxsi.s ^j.L2l rdlo^ .^ocn vpAoaJSQ cn-^sas-i ooaJO.TAm 

.K'Ai— iiA* rcUiior^Ls ps'oen AtrV ^1 K'iii.^ .eni ^ocn t^:^ir<' 
.^^oal^i >.\ rc'ocn r^A.tx.'sa .cnl ^ocn .^:i^ rdA.i ;p.i:sal^o^ 
,m rc'A\aii.»j.i'^ ^T^db.i .^^aios r^.vii^o K'A^cu^^.T rtlisasaflo 

i>Ar<lx.a'° .AsLu^MO Aa.Mi.si.1 r<lJ&VMO rdiajjiusa.l K'^A^ 
.K'Axa tsy^ o r<lAi*^\'w cudo A i-sarc*© ^Acn ^^.^aJK* ^.i K'iixA 
^l3. > «, r ao r«:=al^ ^x^\,.»>o .cn^V&^o r^Cita^a ^j.sa.iAvS3o" 
.^_ocq1 ^i=)CTi*a'3 .r<'A<oAuLSaA r^reLl.^QtA ^•vbo'^ .coA 
^___ocno\i*ri *k ij ^i.a^di.S'ao »^_oenA\A*ai.i r<'i.'sa*» ^^ o^.xJ.i 

Av5>iik*»Avp<'o^5 „^ ^j^a ^^^ p^_^ o^^ .^-i\ ._^ca=) AvA 
Airs'.! Al^ss ^x^A h\^Xi,a .r<Li*L\,5>3 ,.Tit<:.=3 AvVai red.t rsiire' 

^ Sic cod. 

1= An obscure passage : the MS. appears to have ■,<:^evA^T> which might 
be resolved into ■rt^^£\iAu:\ (fear: so Fl.) or into ■rtiA\cuiuT> (sweetness- 
so U.-S.). 

<= Cod. ^naSi (the emendation is Nestle's). 



35—37] ODES OF SOLOMON jjA 

ODE 35- 
yi^ar^ re'-sal!..! rciox^a^ . Jli. Aii^K' K'AvjjLJirs rC-.iss.t caAua>i' 
A<oq3 rdiuicxaisS .^3t las >\ K'i^^in ^ocp.i .>.x*i ^sa Aik.\ 

'^"^^ tr^ i»Av.oS .Kli-vsi.T coia^Axa ^ocn rtflli. rtLirfo 
ca.5i3r<' ^ r<ijJj^ vyrS"©^ . rC'ivflar^iuc. ^S3 i.>^o >.\ r^ocp 
0Vi3id\t<'o7 .rtL.i.in.1 cnU^ rtfl^a* >1 ^co^o .^ocn ^^\^i\=a 
conlofiaa ,xir^ Avy^T°>o^ .caAA:93<\x.a ^Muvi^^rt'o en Ava en ccsia 
.r^-^aiAcn .endi^ai ^ai&^K'o .r^Lsn^xsi h\o\ ^^i^^K'o ■>y<>>a.i 
" Gunkel suggests t^uiTo 

ODE 36. 

ca-iA-Saox. )o."WJ .r^L^-i-ia.-t crusaoia >-i.^ Jlj^. >jAvsaii3rS'o^ 
>J^.li*3 .en^T>.M\.l rdiaoAxa r^Lir^ .jjiaxJa .1^ cnAu>cuix.^O 
dncasaivx.K' o^r^ r<lxjp<' in .ViO .rel*i.S3."! »TOCt^r<' po.Tn ^sa 
^10 . reXMiiizjsaa r<li(<' .«jkaz:=n .i^'^ .K'cqAk'.i cnis r<'T>cai 
ri'x SkCa .Klsa^ijsa.i i_*_^ en^oai vyrc'^ .p«'_i='io'i= r^liK* 
.en^aA.taz.:a ^ >.ijjLg.'sqo .>j^.tm en^.iAM vyrc'o .>j^.t=i^ 

.rel^CkVlen .enAxcaisj.vsa.l rd-Moia A»iiA\x.r:'cv rt:sAx^ >sicu> 

ODE 37. 

.♦.Li i\Ja-.in:' rdsa^vso ^ciAo . ,tjso ^oA tx^r^ ^ \r " ^.^ 

.cnixcA ».Li A^l .T^ ,j.2wSU.o .>.:iA.-i cn^cL&fia^ ^ \V •a ao^ 

.scoaO^ .>.ij3a^.l r^irtia >\ .acn^.l .i^ol r<'A^r<' cttsa.\A\a3 

.i<L.a.i\en .r^i-sa.l en^cuix\^3 r<l«ibjJ A 



V^ ODES OF SOLOMON [33- 34 

ODE 33. 
cos ^iujklo .Kli"! w\ ^nnT.O rc'^oau.j^ .so^ ^A ox^qai' 

ooi^Aflo ^ caLo fini.o r^-sai p<'_se*i j.:^ ;»jio3 .cnloom cnl^ 

iiisaa rtlirC'S .r^ri-i vyK* ,v*»A<K' r<\a .orA fti-Swiut.r<'.i 
rdxiK' >JL=^ .K'i.'wre'o Kliioo r^'xi^'SSM .r<'A>i*5a^ rfAAoAxs 

ii\^ mhxCLS^ .o.niaA^re'o »~scu>f>3ax.^ ..^o.-iarS'A^ rill Are* 

K'A >»icvz.a\.1 ._a.ienQ ..Aunc' reliK" »^_a.:Mj.i" .rdJLacA^ 
.r^.!LaM r«Li^ rC^.TM pCL'sa.Li-.i «^_cu.nJ r^'ArS' ,L__asaA^Au 

.r^LicAlcr) .>:ajcs »._aif<' A^Axpc'o 

^ Sic cod.: as Fl. suspected. 

^ Fl. suggests iei\Ti. I follow the MS. 

ODE 34- 
kA AK'^ .rtii^-z.^ rdaXM rel^K' Pt'Ax . t-c rtiUjiortf' ivA^ 

ocb cuoco^ .^u^\.i oeb.T cn^o.:a.l . •^^iat.i ^o.vss cna A\A 
rcAri' >i.t.»i AuA ^M^\ .oqs AsA i-i-^ ^O-SxAa \^V ^ 
Au.l^AxK' r<'A»aa.j.\^^ i^^oQ= ivA re'A\^.T..i ^A^reA i -.A «fv.>m 



31,32] ODES OF SOLOMON 



Clti 



ODE 31. 
^ r^&oxM Aajj^K'o .r<l;Mocn^ t<L*'t.w to.tii »»3 oir^Air*" 

A»A\a caiao.a3 .r<L*i.5>3.T eniix- ^Jsp du^^l^o rC^aAcn rdA 
.cnsazl r<'^:u> pe'i\*»a.a.i.A\ Altno .r^^o.iMO K'A^ciaj^ Al^no 
,_ajen relLla coA ^iao re'Jsa^'vsa i^aA caA_o )Q.*i»<'a4 
.aca< T^li&cn.i Aa^'m .ca&o^i^ jj.THrc'aS .0000 ,cno:urcL=3.i 
oIaoO o^iK'A^ri'.i ..^^Aioa 0.00.^^ .relz_>To ,cnA=>r<' coA 

.^At^^K* rfA.l Vfv>(<' .^Az.c\ ^ii^z.c\ ifia.Aiio ^.<1 r^iir^^ 
i^_oeni\oi.i:sa AvLa.floo'° .p^ia,*5aa.a30 rd-Vlii;^ ^^ re'.i^ivra.i 

f<L«oA.lcD ^_oca^i\.i r^laioaa 

=» Sic cod. 



ODE 32. 
am Kl^v^ot rtfAn oeoo .re'-Sa.i.sa.i r!ix.sJ3 oAxms ^xjw4>re'.i 



eo^ ODES OF SOLOMON [29, 30 

ODE 29. 

jixLfioK'a^ .>i?ni:Mi cn^o^re:!* ^oai vyrs*© .,.isa*it<' ,eoa2a*ji 
.>.-l:w\;^ r<'^a.S9.i ca.93Cl^ ^^c^ .Acu>-x..i oi m^qg.:^ ^^ 

cti\^ ,0.wQ^ .r<L*T2a cuooi.t A jVmA^k'o .r<'-»V5>3.T a xitt.x.'sas 
.cah\a.ih\i.iM^ pC'va^Am >A .scrl>o .or>icno.is >.iir>.io '^coii\r^ 
.a&^'»si\ rc'isj.^i rtliz.o.^k.o .r^^sasni^^ pg'AvaT.wsa lasT.K'.i^ 

rcl\ja.i..l r^msw vyr*" ri'oeno .cniuLsaa riL.T.50 »3J.i<^>.n\ 
enaiorCT A.\,?a .r<l5a*iiaA K'^vmO.s.x.^ Av=«ir.a" .r<U»oi eni 

^-=' We should perhaps read y£a\-r^ A 

ODE 30. 

.r^i^^JtJSi AzxBoCi KLi'eo-, »^^^iA oA^o^ . »_aa.\ J4^^^(<'.1 
.Tnjo am iiAx.1 A!^S33 .reL.i.sas cn2i.ctas»3 A^ cuxxi^^K'o 

^S33 Ai^S otiA r<:siUM^Av.=a r«rA rtf'^io.a.i.i K'Av^v^^o* 
.T^ r^AspS'o^ .cnsaz. f<L»i.S3i cnsA ,^o - n«\< rd^i.M.i mA»/ >e^<v. 
'<'^^^-^»=' ^oa.A»rC.-| t<'J33.v>-0 .rCVM^OS rido vyAxttiJss irii 

0. S. D 



28] ODES OF SOLOMON .1^ 

ODE 28. 
^iOfiA^-iaa (rT-saciaa .''^^caxi^^aia l^'' (<'_Jo.*.i p^i^^ vyri" 
;anaa^sa3 . ^a\ A.:»- rt'.uoi.i >A^Ar<' r<'_l^cn^ .,jcaiJS>3Qa i\cA 
.Ausa^cn'^ .oosaK'.i reLasi^a -ri'.i.t rcl.\o.^ vyri" .-ri'.io ^aA 
Au-auen.T aeo ocp ^2)x»ca.m A.\^ .AujLxi^ixK' r^co A.\^^q 
>l.^L&^ r<'.A rdaiuo .ocn cn^o\ >.z<io .».1&T.=3 ci&Ta.99S .cna 

«^_a^nAlo^ ■ Kll. J. jj r^A.t >cna.^i^3 A\:2aAi»^A\r^O .r<ll.T=rs' 

^^rC oi:S9.-i^r«'^ .>cn r<LxM.i A^-sq . ^Sasai t-^Lnl^jcss r^c\ 

f<ti5oa.\.\_o9 .rc'.ixaK' ,.» .T4* vyr«' »_oorA ^aVu^X^.I Aj^ 

^<ocn .la.^ r '^^^1 A\^'° .>A K'ocD ^A reLi-iA^.i A}^!33 
»^_aia3 .rc'"'in.a ir^ni^ vyre* >Joi.T»jO^^ .AvxiAvsbrf r^^SL^ 
,0D rcVajjLSa.i A^^^^ . i^ocix. 'iia Aj^ ^AiK" pC'Av^.i* p«iA.t=.1 
.Tuirc' rdi-sa ^.t rdiri'^^ i_^cfilAS..-t ,°>\ wT.sqo ^^_acnAu^.iAx 
r<Ao'4 ,A^<\,\ ^f-i iviiAj »__oeoA<OT»'T.2aAo .^ iirai -) h\*aaa 
,^o.T*L ii\^ r«A Artf i^^oooo.MK' Axaocn rslii AV^^m A>.T=n:' 

) \ ^ cvocn ■ •**'l\5 Av.ptlii*V»o'^ ^__ooaii^o.i ^Jsa h\.^ach 

^^.1 ocn.i ptliv^a.i .^.^^ 0000 tiA\.=3 ^^.1 ^-j-L.r^o^'' 

cnAvL^iAt ptfia.vjAvsa relA.T AJ^=a'^ .o.aaASal o.^-=j .^och^so.to 

.p^_.a\Aot3 .r^ssn^M Aa ^sjo oqp iiuss cti3.io . (<:sL>Tsa.i 

a Sic cod. : as Flemming suspected. 

t>— b = iTrl jyj iavTuiv voa-a-ia ■ cf. Luke XUI. 34. 

<= Schulthess suggests tiinL^^:> _ '^ Marg. ^»oq2j 



A^ ODES OF SOLOMON [26, 27 

ensajta re'-u-sos"^ Auoeoo" . ►\iinftii .^ooAa >!-»> olw.-io 

^ Cod. ■^<i.•tem^ 

ODE 26. 
AlajK-O^ .rdire" coL.i.i A\s3 r<L.val K-AuiCinx-Ax Au.irS"' ^ 
coiAvijaS .ocp cnA\ol ►ai.l A\50 .cnLi K'Aut*V> K'A^'UMt 
cnA»cA re'.s^r^* .otujlU.i rc'A^'iiiOl ^Viu r^O ..si'rds i»iv^ 
.>sa.ia3 ._pofA^ ^ ,cneu.»JVS9ir«'a 4».ajt.r<' .».aA cni& ^^ 
.,03 coL.i rc'AujcuajLA^ pe:^Vk.2o,\ reL5o:iik.o i*^ pdjjj.-tso ^»^ 
^o7 .r^^i.io^ ,cp caLi.i r^lisi^A r^jso.o^o r^j-sajo* ^iao 
.ooD cnX>.i oni\ "tafti. »^_oenA\ijjA r<l:S9.T:^o i^.5aO"i.i i^Lx^i 
.^crA re'io.T cuA-sa ops' .rsL.iia.T cn^'iA^sat .=i^v^.i a..iJsa^ 
0.1.513 or«''° .eoT^i tjai&^^.l .reliijA cnz&l ri'-ii.-l OXSa or<'9 
tf*-.*-" (\i.=>3" .cnsscxa ^ Aisu.-t .rfL'M^^.ss A.2k. .ULxl^^ca.l 
^\iA\A«,.so.-i oco i*^ A.\p»)^^ .r^j'VW.i en ^1093.1^ ^oX^^'"* 
.2^:^:50.1 i-x.\^ ji^i»'3 ,^^Ji4»Avia.T even ri'ocrua .K'iAxjtJ 

.r<l*Cc\Acn .coA 

^ Charles suggests ~ ^— 1 1^ (I will pour), which is an improvement. 

ODE 27. 

Ode 25, V. 10. Copt, 'remoti sunt.' 1. cmo^^ 
V. II. Copt. om. 



2S] ODES OF SOLOMON 

•"^^^^^^ AAuSoI rCocn A\A."i A \^»^ .rs'oen iiflQjj.i A ^. d 
w^oeoAAs ..itdopS' k'^slZmsq reL.i:s3a^ .i_oc\,iij.i vy*K' 

■^ Cod. A^:\ 



ODE 25 [=Pistis Sophia, pp. 148 — 153]. 

A^S3^ .,ea-W ^uai^ vvi»<vAo iia^aorC ^.sa A\_i^A_aA\K" 
^olardA iiA&3 .^., r^^.^s^aso rellnitxa..! rdjj-sx. Av*ocn.i 
v>^o^i&.i A^^ .,cno..>V3jn:' Kll ^o^o^ .,.ia.aa.\ ^j-saici 
AJ^AX.^^r<'^ .\f\h\o.a^^ >_i r<'ocn jji^.i ocn K'oen t.si^ 

^MJ^a >=> K'ocai rcAo . >.LsaJ3o r^o >ix:=a.> ^so ,A ^.mj» 
^ia.^K'o .>j&ea>ir<' vo„a:sa>.i A!^^^ .r^iijcsn iJccLal ,0.93 

Ode 25, V. 7. B.-L. read tC^^ for *^a 

V. 8. Copt. ' et texisti me sub umbra gratiae tuae et superavi vestimenta 
pellicea.' 



r<i^ Ot)ES OP SOLOMON [24 

msa^ K'oas h\^r< re'ifiK'o'' .oxA^ ^ocn rcL.Axpi'a .cn^la^ 

r^jjLaCtn.ao.1 ^\;^u K'rtL^CUKo'3 .col r<!afiix^SQO ca\ if»ocn rc'l^u 
.r<'p^-ju^j» r^Lii.^. ^iny ^u^o rs'Axaicoi dixTJ^j^o .oocn 
A^^ .pelL^-i A<a\ K'jtii Aujj^* .k'^*^^ f<L*»ior<' ^n.-in^k-o 
ri'oen K'if»f<'.T ^.vsao .r«t.i^j~^ drt^op^ rcli^i-A r^-so.v^s 

^^^vcniA ^jS cuji.ssK'^^ .ri'Kli^jje.l r^h\-\rtt.-a ^^ ^\1^3^f<'c\ 
r<'crAr<'.T cri^^^a rtt^^^^.l .rS'Avai K'^vua.i^ r<'A>i.^^ ^.T 

.r<L>cuicn . ^ I • 7 i\ s^'aiL.A a,.%\.?gi.S3l .r^x..iai3.i 

" Barnes suggests y^i\'r^, as if y<^'\ were repeated from the previous word. 

ODE 24. 
drfV93\0 .ctA K'ocn re'jt.i.T A!^^ . r<LM.AZ.S)9 Aa. AvmT^^ r^JO.*' 

(.i.s>~xj oocncv .cufla^A\r<'.T'^ (\w^&^r^ r^LMOcn^o .cooicuxa 
.^OonA ^co.Axre' rfAo'^ .^^jA-i'.i ^ - x-icw vyK' rC-aVSiA 
Q.S -i\o ^ .re'oeri »__ooriL.T rc'oqa rfA.i'^ AN-rp .rc'AAoArtfsa 
r<'^a.ZM.tn ,CQ= o.vpps'o .VeLiVsas 00^30.^=1 f<=nocn^ f»^ 

» = iwitTTri, c{. Gen. i. 3 (i'is>a-=v:D) b Cod. o.nn-\^T^o 

■= Cod. 1^:^ ut videtur. 



23] ODES OF SOLOMON A 

• vyjiore' i>ocn r<Lia.M r^A.i" .r^Li»t\ K'Axo.li.iri.aa ^oa>o 



;p.vsa.\.^ K'iAi.x.is .rc'.Va.ijL^ w^saA-Sk-l hy^^r^ v>^Q^i.&o 



oixL^o .vyar<lA )oi?7i\aa ri'Avaorfivx. pC'oenAxo^^ .^.im^o 
■ r^ all en .Ktzl'.ta.i pc'ijsai^ia Av*3 ^ocno .vv^o,^y.:n h\.xXs 

ODE 23. 

..^K* r<'_\i<' .cdxsjiai 0.1.330 .,m r^.xa.^ K'Aio.a.iX-^ ..Ta*iLV= 
.ocD t^JLa..^l T^^cu*^ .AviXiia ^ ooxl^ ^Li.^^.-t .^_ajcn 

^^ >CnOrdXJ3.1 »__0_iCO •^.J^ rtfliK' ,mn . V -1 \ 1 Oil_SJO 

.r<'a\i.^j^ v^,*^<' otocn cnoxaxMSao^ .cn^:^.V-i r^-Awaxio 
^» rS'lpiL^ vyK* iaAut-rCo .rtlsooi-so ^S9 Avjjj caii.= _k 
re'_..-t*r<' p^A^i.^^ Aj^ ►^en"io^ . r^ii^na re'.iAvx.sa.i r^h\xa 
^Jsa Ikayj^Ci'' .ca*\ajsi^a .a.iia.'salo °>^w ^ai .r<'^T<U.^j]o 
A^sa^ . on I \ ^1 r^JSJ^Kst (^c\ m.i.33 oJiu.io ^_^on^:^^ 
Ti^ r^-iiM .cri.^a^M re'ix.sol »._ocnl p^ood ■\^^i\i r<A.T 

o,i\r<'5 i ocaJLSn K'ooo i^^jsa r<l=aA\M .is. r^aca Aurs*.! 

r^-X.K' ^^_fti^."U.i .cboor^vu.i »._^co K'Axi^re'.i coiA\= ^.i 
^«.l rtfli^^J" .oil ■s'aiT. AlJSa.io .oA K'iii oj-sa.io .r<l>iz. 

Ode 22, V. 12. Here the Coptic texts have gone astray, under the influence 
of the Gnosticism in the mind of the writer, who brings in the ' light ' from the 
story of Pistis Sophia. The text of Schwartze is ' et uti lumen sit duplicatum 
iis omnibus'; and the Gnostic Targum is 'ut tuum himen sit in iis omnibus.' 
But Petermann notes that for 'duplicatum' we should read ' fundamentum.' 
This brings the text nearer to the Syriac, which may be taken as correct 
in these concluding sentences. The Coptic ' opulentiam ' for the Syriac 
' kingdom ' is an error which Schmidt has corrected in his German translation. 



\* ODES OF SOLOMON [2 1, 22 

ODE 21. 
."icutopc'.T A^Q^Q r^xsn^ cniiu\ .rC.sso'iJsal Aaaiir^ >^-"i.T' 

, ,T<\< A\aA rfJsn.TcD |A ooeno^ .K'icncu ^znlo rd^cutw 
rilLapc' Pt'.J^oK' pe'\.AK' .rclarilA «^__Ocnj Av^^ .-T-^ 
. re'^vss.l on^a.ZMSa >A ^ocn r^^jji.i^iJM ^r<'T>^*o'^ .r<CzM 

pCliK' jASJc^n :»^ cai rOK* .a^ia Av»ocoa^ . ><T)cL^r<' ^.m 

.r<l«aucn 

" Cod. ^^ 

ODE 22 [=/'w/z'j Sophia, pp. 154 — 160]. 

vyri" K'ianoK'.T r<li^o.x. ,.A ^crL>.-i ocb* .>J.'.1 tA.sLao 
Pci.^.ai..T re'.VxiAA ,s.Vr<'.=> .&4Jjao.i ocn^ .,_^cur^ r^vLr^.i 

K'ooD vyva v^x. i^rc* A^ao .>.j^i:i.^o ^.=a^ ^ocn 

vvSire* Av.cut.r^cv .'^r<'A«A= enA<i2al^ v\,ix^a^ ixVaw^ .^A 

^S3 ,__Aip^ ifu3\a°* ""^ ^-sa*oaiM.i ^^r<lA rf-M'iorc' 

ni'.sa'i-^ A\aiaaj9 .rih(Lsn ^_aj »._cup<' Au.i-^o .re''"i.a_n 

^ 1. T^'ano. Cf. Copt, et docuit me. 

•=— '' Copt, verunum hujus qui dicit [malum]. '^ Copt, liberasti. 

Ode 22. In V. 6 the Coptic 'in omni loco circumdedit me nomen tuum ' 
requires, as Schulthess points out, that we should emend wwt.=3 to »/wT>a. 
So too Diettrich. 



20] ODES OF SOLOMON .*».* 

• >\'W (<'ovuj j\;bi.s KLiO .^OCD Avjr^ni °>.co t<'oen r^l^.l 

h\y^c\ .K'iv^'iaAa'^ i\^Mr<'a'° .K'nili..^ re'.j.TMOrtf'_=3 duao 

<= Cod. i^mno^-i 



ODE 20. 

onio .r^K* »._^«Ai5a oqs cnAo .,Av_.r^ r^L.i.ia.T r^_ictiA^ 
vyK* T»^ h\am rtl\^ .cn^a.ZM;».i rC'-iaicui Klip*' .3Tn.=a 
»._aicn vyr*" rtlAarc' .cnAvaTusa r^TAoa vyr<' re'AarC .KlsoV^ 
.iCT3 r<'^aja^.l\ r<L<TJ:a.t cn.i.sio..i3^ .^^r^j'Vfla.a ■ ■ w, ^ "ii 

KIIak'o .^vy^saa^.t r«di.sa.\=>'^ r<Ui^0.l peUjaAx rfA^ . KlxJ^i 
.rCjaofiou r<lA.i r<L>V=>3.l cnAxftTLi^ ^.1 T^^A^ .coxflsio^.l 

^^O coAia.'saiM -n ^^ A.^x^i\a^ . r^^UMClja-x.^ vyjsa.va 
. cnAxcci ni W.I (<'&vjjaaju^3 r<'ivz.=i ._^.i^o .cn^oaiA^ 

»— ^ The MS. has vyeaj'a ri=n:\, which is clearly corrupt: but «^xsa is 
repeated by an eye-error from the previous line, and the correction of *i=n:\ 
to y^issnrt is obvious and easy. 



U ODES OF SOLOMON [l9 

.Ax.JK' .^..T>' rSLi rC'^O.xi^'Vioo .v0.a3<- r^ilsflCUt. jcnoox^K' 

vyK* Av*i.»»4<r<'a''* .vA t<l:»-.T* .»cn riA Are'.i A\s3 i<Ak'^3 
cnA^. ov'^floo'^ .r^J2a»s cn^cuios vy^o .r<'A\.^."»* r<A rC'io^. 

o,^i\i\r<' «<Aa^7 aaxuA^K'o ^2b..-T'.i ^xUK* cx^.TfO .ojsiAx.floK'o 
Aaj*.^^'^ .K'.sojiJM.i enAv«A.iA\3 Qctco.i A\^:a i__oooAiax»».'sa3 
cAVss f^.t ..^ aieno'^ .K'A^o.isA^s aooo ^A^cn^a.i ^A<r<' A^ 



ODE 19. 
r^b\A J. \..ijL-3 en^-t^-z.K'o . >A .a'i.ii^re' rtlsA-u.l r<Ll3a-& ' 
.a\.i»A\r(f.i 0CT30 ,cnoi\*r<' rC-fla^ p^ia^ .Kl*i.=a.i aa^asausa.ss.i 

AiwAv&'^ .crxnlM rC'.iAvz.i A\.<rcla.x&flo.i rt'oon r^.:^.:] Av.'sa crAo^ 
>cno.iAx ^iA<i relrtAu Av.^v.=QO rt^LicVnO.! r<^Moi oiao.^ 
.^_aJcnoS .^ji>^:i> i<A .i^ r^-MlSt-A rt'-AAou AxsooaO .r<'.ar<'.i 
K'AxioAva.i oifloi^ A\^^^^ .(<LlA.»L>.1 ^^^Olr^ otxi.\soa.x.rj ..-if" n 
r^'.^sauHa p<'AAoA\=) r«'_5ar<' A\acno . A\.A'C\ reli^.s Avaxajo 
l^'saci^ .ai\ ^r^A r^A.i r^xja A\.iLo AAriMCv^ .rc'r^'.I.^a 

^ Cod. 1^0. Diettrich and Flemming retain the MS. reading. 

*> Barnes suggests iiva^, which might answer to the 'infirmatus est' of 
Lactantius : but query, as the passage would still be uninteUigible. Batiffol- 
Labourt suggest an original eTreVriy. Cf. Gen. i. 2 : in which case we should 
have to add .^ before msa\^. 

O.S. c 



cu 

6 



'^] ODES OF SOLOMON 

viMa.x.0 .cnx\.ajo.i. cnia^ rCjaa^ijai a=io ^ n^ocn .i^.v.i oeno^ 

.ooen ^.^irxMri-.T rcr-A-HAx ^u^^o cnAvi\en.i reU.iorC ^^ .sea* 
TTSkA^r^-o .bA,A>i A*.1^ ^*.T n!d\T2l .re'A\i2k.T rsdicirn A«Ja\o9 

»_^otAa. Ai_ Av^Dco Atrc-o" .Axaoos .Ai^K' K'Jre' )o.t.5>i\.A.t 
iiflor*' .OA T-ini-A jaaajt.re' relVl i^^aipf ri'ij.ai\ txl.itr^'^ 

Aa^ .aiaiaAxn^a ,A^cA cxx.iaA^re'o'* . axuo A*.t nj'^a.io.rs 
^.r*i vA ri'AvuCiax.Ai'5 i^_^cTaT*i Klarfa nttarj.Tcn A oocn.i 

.r<l' Allan .r<LijLxz.=q r<l»i.S> 

" B.-L. suggest that A should be added. 

^~^ Something wrong here : perhaps oj^to ji^'n 

'- Marg. -.HiCOT*; . - i.e. one copy reads -.Tjiioi^ instead of -.niu'rti 

ODP: 18. 
>gjQ.xw3.i.r<'.i .i^^K'o r<l:a.<'i.=a.i ca=ia.jji.s >.a\ ^a^i^^rC*' 
.ckAam -SO »^__al^i p^A.i vyrc" >sa.icn aixsi-A<r<'^ . t-sox. .ixa 

^^ixittjj.-i ^aLk" A\^ r^lsal.T rC-.i-sa'* . cn^<\&\:99 .eia r<'i.ii..T 

rCl.\ Are" . Kl^OJtjj ^sa K'iical p^-ASU rtli^ . vfy.\.=WCUt. >AS>3 
.vvL>:a> ^ifiia& .^'sa.t.oohy k'^o.^v^^ .r^ixcii^i ^ rC'iix. xioi^J*^ 

..lx4»r<' i<'A«t»a.3.T ^^so A^*^ -iVjlAxo^ .iA»r«' A^ ^ Ana^o 

a Cod. jaoniiJ b-b Cod. .^^ (S3 



*a. ODES OF SOLOMON [l7 

rdire' AxMSq^ .col xsn\r^ rclaca\.\^ .ocn p^-vsa ii^^ ►sO.m^ 
>±aa^ jj^v^K*^ .cos >\ ^r<' rc'^ajsa^cno .cwAxwiT.Ava ^'^ 

tcnosaMTl r<'r<l\^Ojaai ^ .ooAv.^^— .T rdijjAo^o >eoo."»J.'f<'.T 

rt'iiN i-i-^ r«L.v*»'° . cnA\-iTt» -a rtflL^so r^v*»iv.=n '<^-"' 
r«^ir<lA >^&(<' ocn" . ooA\-iTM*Ba\ rel2>.9ax. rdJ.ir^O .,cn0.iii^ 
.r^Lza^OA. ^^r^a r^-i^ixx. jjAiso'^ . (^Isoin trlJLsa .3A\or<'o 
.>cno.tn%. ^ ocn jjLU^^rc'o'^ .msoxuK'o rx'^ia.X ^^K'o 

.cn^laoX ^.Ta^-^vie^a cn^oiikuo . .\\-i.:ga\o y\n'x\ ^j^Xn> 
r«i*.U rtL&ojCM.i i<'A>saAj» .ocn r<^T twt., rCienais rc'Avsaxfls '^ 
^.1 r<'A\4SO .T>oai K'ooQi.i r<lS30,A >^.T*giT. ^.i .ins '^ . oda 
.Tm.1 »._^caJL3CUio'^ .relik.irc'.i cisx'kre' A.^ t^iW r«l&OJuA 
^ iaX.i -yaxsa A\Ao'9 .^Jbaso r<'nA»<'.i cn^CL>r<L> .•»« ^ 
.K'oeoi aA.i ^."ui ^ r^ocn ,cnQ^r<' ooo.t '\ -^ . r<l*T=a 
K'l&uja^JL^ .caa,l.i K^AxiTM-wno .oocn cD&\\±)ia t^'^\v q^ 

.i<lAOjAcn .cnsax\ i<'ijx>(<'o 

ODE 17. 

r<'Av&>TiiB ^ >1 4\*iAvi.p<'3 .003 r<lLajj f<l\.i ^3 ,.iaia& 
rdS.K' .OKiwrcla cuafia&^K' >jaJU»4 . rf!,-! ujl.S3 .Auk* rd^o 
.^i^^r^o cos h\sAeaa .Auajool K'Ax.i** rtfAo-.i^."» K'A^oss.io 
.A\ is\ r<l(\ m^h^S3 hC^\t^<\ .,.i^V3.i K'iix.a re'AtaxuiJMO^ 



15. 1 6] ODES OF SOLOMON 



:«* 



\n 



vyK'o^ .pC_,i.S3 WM^T-r^ ^*a Aas.i .iA a>^& r^tz*: 

ODE IS. 
.cajsacu ^ ,. 1 «w 3?i ^ 1 \ . f^LJ ocn rC'^O.t.M r<!z.sajc.i r^v-^r«" 
lOoonAVo ).x.sax. cuocnn AA^^ .am r<»\jsn ,^o.iu rdi&cn 
iuixi^ .t^r^ ^^ r^l^OZM Aa rS'ijt. cnioscuo .>jasaxiir<' 
r<lJ'.ir<' t-1 icicn^ .rtlz.^.a.1] crusao-aA ^UaV-ua '■^V , s cti.3 
iuii^^K'o . K'^v^.T'.i r^h\jsxMsn tA ^ocn^ . cnivd Aui^xuLO 
^=30030 cn^oA A\\\r<'o . A<nnT. rt'^cu^^.l rCUiiorc'^ .cn.-ureta 

K'\-i , M rilSA Avxii^ .tJ.Ta.^ '^eoh\a^r^ Aiarsi*"^ vyre'o . »A 
Aiuj^r<' K'^cu.^a'^^ .cn^QTi\-i r^li^MA iuxVz.o .casox. .-us 
cn^iret-a jiifloo'° .,^3aa ^\^^r^ Aaxx.o .>^o^T^ )d.vs ^ 
.>cno.i:»i*ca:=a\ oj^rt^^re'o" .''rc'^aso rtlA.i rtflikM^ rc'^TJSi.i 

.r«l*o\Acn 

^~^ = /xeyaXoTrpeTreia. "^ = to Ovtjtov. '^~^ = ^(017 d^avaTos. 

ODE 16. 
r<lA^iT=3 0.11.1 cn.iJ.'b.o . .cb r<liJ3.£i rC'i^re'.T cn.tiL!k..i i^JtAt<" 
rSl.'ijso.i ocn rfiosswso ,.12^ ArS" rtfliACD^ .r^Alrc'.i cbii^^ 
AAgSa^ .^r^ aaAvjj."n.Av=3 ii»*\o.a.o f^aisnot<' .qoAvmit A\a 
.,cno'-ir<lSi r<'ocn (<fla^ ,^cx^jaiA rtf'.ra.Vk.o i.ajA tJtfi^ cnaOM.i 
» Schulthess emends to cwia^ 



Ae ODES OF SOLOMON [13, 1 4 

oAviinK'o'^ ^. ocQi rVoeo AuK'.T ^i.T-so .!*» A^ai .TA» allsao 

ooen .1-= ^^^Jre* .t.;!.:^.! ocnA Q,.^s.*a" . nilSi.^Aua ^^ 
Aj^cpio .r<lsaji.»j.i cn.'sscv.a ._^octi\ AJcq.i A.^:a . r<'A>cua.T-> 

r<llCO .1x3.1 ^*rClA ..^ OCQx=3a!^'^ .OOT r<l=>C\.u ODTTX-O -OCO 

.rdiaiion .cniii-a r«'_.'iio,\ c\^..t<o .>d.i.S3 Aa 0.2k..l0^ucrc' 

'^ Cod. add. in marg. 

ODE 13. 
.00= ^K" ovuo rtfliu^ aM^& .am riCji-sa «__^yv*».=a K'eo^ 

K'^ixa.x.^ oia.000^ i^ o.^A&K' ^cn.i^^K' rill.^-.K' ci.a..V_.a 

cno\o.z.>.<tD asouio i^__o.a,iLa k* ^ r<'A\jj^ ocv.z.o .caMoiA 
.coAxQi ^.= v.l.^^ ^r^js30..'sa (rii.i^ .^ocnAio^ .(Tia..x,aj=jaAo 

'*■ ^ ~ afJLdifXOl. 

ODE 14. 

.axoA\ r«rAo .r«r-*i.=fl ►ijsj v\j=a.MT i-sI^Aa r«rA3 ,n<rL%o 

vy.j..»3.-»o •iSkX.nc'S .vryixa^ As^ r<'A»i»».\ rC^sa.v^ .»,A ,oeD 
.r<r.x.x.= ^..w jii.aAxre'6 .v>^-a-i. A\^:s3o vvAu,aiix.A> A^ss 
vlx^K"^ .v^aou.i .ODOirilSiQ . ,A^a,\ rCcusA* r<;..'V»J vvA»CVj*iic\ 
v>5*.orT ri'iiuao^ .r<^r<^ v^ .tsii.rV.T .vyiix..! T<it(\i=n\ 



12] ODES OF SOLOMON .a^ 

.nc'ioncaX irl^azu ^si o.xu.c\ . vyJ.L're'.i rc'^*,:s_ asan .,■< I a'^ 
^x&Acno .reliii^ K'.iii^ ^la^.T . ^\x^jl. vyAiL^ »_ootA^ r<'cn'7 
r^iiynJ'.T ri'i'VSS O.^aoori'o'^ .vdaM r<'A\asa*a»al K'Axa.Xirj ^5J3 

T<:x.SoO.:3 ns'onXre' vA rei*=ax. .K'iKla rd-Vs] >i.t.Si\a r«'Ar<'''2i 

^ Sic cod. 
ODE 12. 

.>cna::aiiLi r^'jsa.i.sa cnacojc^ .coicncu.i r<l2».iiio .r<''v»'i.x. 
.cniuacvajc^.'i r<LiJL.i^.S30 .caL>.-i k'Axcuk;*.! rdJJ2a.^iAv.s>3 
r<lv«\^i:s>30 .cn^x!>.i^.-i r<'-j'i-nvi.^?30 . cn&vaxuk^n.i r^.i*.TQ.s3a 

r^lX-io^ .cn^cv.&.>iMO cn^a.Li.i£i .^K" r<li&cn oiuo^ vv*r^o 
^njxJSS r<Ar<' A.^ 'no^'SQ r<l\o .onix^cn ax>^r<' rd^^Aiio 

rCA\a3e>ji*73.i oQjjJ.to i-*A<_ K'icncu .coa^cuid'^ r^-i^co vi-^ 

^ Apparently the Ode has two different renderings of Xoyos, 

^ Sic cod. but read jnuottn 

"= It would be better to read aia^oop 



•^-* ODES OF SOLOMON [ll 

^ Read r^eui=3 
ODE II. 

.p<'-X..Tn cnwoin >l'il^ Vi-^ n£sa^xsa^ .ni'_»'i.Sai pi'lr^-A 
>.A ^ocno^ .cnncui ^J=a »„i \.sao .,^v>\o^ on^oX r<ll\cv 

.>jj.o^r<' ooa.T rtl^-.pc' .r<'iijt..i r«l^a.t. A_i- AxiiAxx.K'a^ 

.>.<^u^ rell.i r^jLu r^CiiJSa ^sa ^oio ^.•^^r<'o'' . yxsiOM 

.cn&xamosaa A<iiu».o^ .,co\r«' r<i50_.vso ^oA Axii^Air^o 

^.sno .cnicnOOa ».llao^ ait.a-i\ -i >J^.iu r«L>a:=Qo'° .>J.M 
r<UsAz..1 rtl^lK* vyrC ^ocno'' ■ A 3 » i^A.t k^LuLklr^ A^ 

.cafla^.-li°A vilrioK'ct'4 .f<^i.=a.-i retsoxflos orujL<i=> ,ivS)aJU 
r^liVSa^ i^.T^goo'S .K'.iTJSo.T cn=afl0<x=>.i r<'iA>aj».s rf-a-p*' 
(j.L.re'A t^l^i-^a «._^ocaiSCv\j.-i A«viar<'a .coh\MCLnx.h\ AXps 
.v/yarr..li&=> f<''iAxr< ^.^ocrA Aure*.! »._aJeno . vr<^i(<Lr> ..-^. -<^ 

^ We should probably read ,Mn^o 



9. lO] ODES OF SOLOMON , 

ODE 9. 

ix^ o Q\i , -) ^3 .cn.}XAx:=Q A^. .3.zu^t<'i K'dvxa.is K'A\a.Tjj,*ja 

.r<l=ir<' r^ca\r^L=3 oiAvjw'^ ^.^^%„i \.'ncut. >enoA\*r<' rd-Lajj 
■ cnA\Q-iiy^3 a.xii&^K'o o.l^.u^rc'^ .rtlsa*i.=a.i cn^^i^ oln^io 

w*\j.iA^ i^_aA»cnaj rtli ,,^_a.a.jaa3.i ^.^aicnaa ^^^o.t^kIi r<\ 

asoxBo^^ .cn^vscrx> .^Oi^Xo rC^Oo.it cn^iifiaio'° .oocn re'ViiA 
CVAl.l ^AirS* «__ocn\Aa'^ .Kl.i.5>9.T K'i.ix.'^ cnSOAXia r<lL.la. 

.r<L>ai\cn i^_^toiaA\4i.i p^-ia— o .aixjsa.io ^^^OAA r<l^vuo 

^~^ = eiayycXi'^u) yap Vfuv elprjvriv' cf. Is. lii. 7. *> Sic COd. 

ODE 10. 
i:9a^.t<'o .cn'icno.is ^aA jj^v&o .cn^lsas r^\:sa >2ao^ ^i^' 
.Gosaiz..! rS'irf-A AAsap<'.T A .=300*0^ .rc'Axosa rdA.i .cncXM) »rs 
r«'_ajt^\o .cnAicA re'Axrelsa^ f'^r*'' ^A.rc'.T rc'^ui&i Oxi^saX^ 
X ^.-it n Au2tJwA\r«'o AAx*»A»r!'* .r<'A«oireL»*.l nt'Avai^ ri'AvxaJt. 

r<A T<Lir<'o'' .aoco ^i.-uiss.-i rtlsaso^k. .T-uu&ri' a-XJ-^AxK"©^ 



^ ODES OF SOLOMON [8 

rerA'° .rci2a.vs3.i cnAv^.t* aVajjo .rc'iir-.i nil»ais<.A\a ausajc^ 
o,i>.:io^3 .c»i=3 ^^-i^ivsia.i ,_^a^a3 ,h\<x.y:si.»ca oi^'^ .ca.= 

^ oocaJ re'A.T yaXJi ^"sia i___oca.A p<lir<' .^.-i->.1 A.}^2a^^ 

,._a^,xj.T i^__ocni AvaiV >.L».t r^Li'.iA^o i^_o ctx»..2o .t oo Au.i3i<K' 

.^ oca= ^a,a.J__.r<'''-'^ .cn.=i .^ CV.urtll.1 >Aj.t r<lSL>.TJa r<Lnlu 

.^^OOQiAx.iK' ri'.va-2>- i*^^ »-J.*."» '^ ^^ oofira rf-lp^ ^co-s rCtio 

<\x.'s>3 or^* o-TS.^ As.oc\\ 73CXXU A.t.&cr> <\x:s3^ .,^iiz4j£q.i rcAxuCv 

. r<l.ijSa.T cn^vsaMia qojio o.^oorc'o'^ o.i^3^^ .am ^__oensi:»..T 
.^^OOfii^a ....^Ui^ducif r<*\ ,•! M r^lA.IO^^ .jii^^rC'.i aoa.3 

^ Cod. ex errore _a=ii.a=A; unless 'clothing' should mean the human 
body, the ' coat of skin.' 

•j = eiSoKijo-a as in Matt. iii. 17. 

<= Sic cod. d Cod_ Qi^icori: 



0. s. 



8] ODES OF SOLOMON JJ 

i*^ einso^^ .K'ixiM.i K'jsa.v^ ^xx<i=> ^ h\A^ma .coicncu.i 
.icuir^U cniaiaSk A.^^'sao .rC'^aa r^ocn jjlISQo .r^ocn ,«j.i\°k 
^xiar^A oi3.fla.=a.\ .,cnojt^:ins r£^)i^\:sa .^.la^o'^ .^irwsi •!& 

cn^\^.l' oA A\if\rC'.T A.^s>9 .rS'AvSk.Xi K'A i»-^ «Jn\ AxlauAxK'^ 

r^.*i.S>3.1 CnA<Q.-ai\ ^*'i.5»3V.=3.T ^J-LirS* .^^OJVSOU^^ .r<l*i.50.1 

r<'ocnp rtlsocu vyK"© .,^_^oti*m'=ov-=a ^^^ainio^^ .r«l5a*ii>3 

.ri'.x.i.M.T riAo r«'A\.^:»- rfA.l niAo .rdJt.a,J.i >ii.») ri'ocrxJ 
r^-saa&.-i r<An M^v^JSaA .cn^ial ^ca* tj-^ rd.»io„a^ 
.(n^cxa.!.^ ocxmo r<'A\OjA\VAA» oioptf"^ .mh\o.M^xM. .mh\ol. 

h— h = KiOdpa iroXiJ^covos. '~' = /xeyaAoTrpeVeia. 

ODE 8. 

K'lre'.a cuAviSa.\3 .K'Aio.^JiA r^'JKinJ'-a rilaX ^sa »__a^=o.*j 
. CO i en 0.1= K'Aioix^s cUsaiaAo . Klx-isja rSl*.** r<l*ii»a.i 
ooco.T __aJenS .©aasoAik' ^vrs.i ,^_cuco ccsa*cA>rc'o asjaxj* 
0, \ .YA ^rei'.f .^ aico^ i__A:iS»3aa A^^A^^<'.^ cii-SS ni'.As.ra 



2 



\ ODES OF SOLOMON [7 

ODE 7. 

i.nAv-asK' K'Axa.^a.T.sj^ .,<Tia.j~a.a)r^.i J-\-S3 jA^a^K* p^'aen^ 
A^'ga .cn^*VM :t^ Auw\ reiio^ . >enaxiaAr<'.i Aj^sa .,a>«,^r^ 
vyp^o .jcocu^pc'.l A'^»i r^aoi >.1aA vyK*^ .>.ll4J cv.oeo.1 
pc'iv.^Xj.'i ebcv_=>t<'9 .cqj..S3 vva.acopi' r^i.i A!5^.=a >A>'io^ 
oqa >j.^M .ptf'ilsa^M rS'in.i oco'° .r<'A\^T».T oeb ptflsa^iv^ 
^.T-sa -^M* .t<'oenr<' Kll .i.^ >Ji^M 0000^' .,cno.Tiu^ ^^ 
.rtf'rtU^a) caii4JLr> >Um r<lJcn A.\y'=n^^ .K'aenre' sjk ^ocn .-ia.^.1 
A3ls3'3 .cn^ML=3.-i^ ^:S3 Ann pc'o 00.1:93 relSk-ar^.T »A .scn^a 
i^onassKto pt'.sai^.i Kuisacix. .*(<lia4» K'A.i* ,<tioAup«' cu*cvcn.i 

AJ^io'5 S^ AJK" ca.\_*l.lS ^iA_*rS'A p^V-mAvJ.1 mA ^c«u,^4 

^.T ..__oia.fla.i r<A.io i^ ftip<' .t=l^i ootA »^ a2k..ioiucJ.i 

orx»A\^r<' .m.ta.£o ca«a^or<' T».^ K'Av^.lA^^ .ooco .___ocnsa.i 

^—2 = a.KwXvTvi';- 

^^^ Apparently an attempt to translate jio-qBov yap t^'^ ■'"o" Kvptov. 

•:-<= = d</>6d>'(os. "^ Sic cod. 

^ Ova-ia, for which Nestle proposes to read oiuia. 

f-f=a06apTos and cf. Rom. i. 23 .l=ujav=n ■«<iAr\ 

?-g = Tots iStots avTov as in Joh. i. 1 1. 

Ode 6, V. 17. The Syriac 'lived by,' answers to the Coptic 'were saved 
by' : the Greek being ecroD^rjcrav or tcrio^ovTO 8ia tov vSaros T17S ^(D^s. 



6] ODES OF SOLOMON O 

re'J.'cn^'^ «^_oca\A a*d\x.r<'o .)o.V3aA.5k rdl'soo .r<l;^ir<' tiA^ 

rt'^cv^oo a-jAxlrS'^3 .jcnciio cusoacn^K'.-i ^^ aicn .ret>iue.=o 

(•=•■» Hct pS'Auc^lo'4 .osiijari' K'ocn >'ix:S3.T r«:ii=-o .K'Axxla.* 
oo«n ^AiSkJ.i r<l'sa.icno'S .^rtf" o.T*»r«' t<'A«as3 ^w ji&saX ,000 

'^~^ Read t^oj- r^s^ii^ ^^^'n (ctti f-prjiiM Sifwa-y Is. XXXV. i) and cf. 
Copt, infra. 

"^~= Double translation of di/up^oxrai/ (cf. Heb. xii. 12). 
f"*^ = la-xva-av (Is. xxxv. 3). 

Ode 6, V. 8. I should suggest an emendation to the Syriac, ■^a^x.'r^ for 
-•ovjt^, but it is not borne out by the Coptic, which has in the Targum ' et 
duxit eos super templum,' and in the text 'et conversa est super templum.' 
'Duxit' would answer to the Syriac ^au^, but an object to the verb is 
wanting. Probably the missing word is fd=n. 

V. 9. The Coptic text suggests that a line has dropped in the Syriac : the 
comment has 'haud potuerunt capere earn [loca] clausa neque loca aedificata,' 
and the text has ' non potuerunt eum capere in locis munitis et aedificatis.' 

V. 10. There seems to be a slight displacement in the Syriac; for the 
Coptic Targum has 'biberunt versantes in arena arida,' and the text has 
'biberunt qui habitabant in arena arida.' 

v. 13. The Coptic shows some variation : the comment has 'acceperunt 
vigorem in me hi qui sunt soluti,' and the text has 'accipiebant gaudium 
cordis, qui soluti erant.' 

v. 16. The Syriac has Trapovcria where the Coptic has irapprjaia. Neither 
Greek word makes very easy reading. Perhaps the Greek was Trapea-et airriav 
or Trapakva-ei avTui/, in which case we translate 'they received strength for 
their paralysed state and light for their [darkened] eyes.' Cf. Is. xxxv. 3, 5. 



o 



en ODES OF SOLOMON [6 

• tAlCVVJjJ ni'Aa i.&0.1-i ..^A\r«'-j4 .ari-lia rcf-MK* v\A\Q..3i.i \ 

r^Ai ,^_jcyv.MJT ri'icno.l i._oco.l K'ocfal refAo^ ^.__air^ v>x*»-i 

Ail^sa'^ .A\a»Jr<' rcA rs'.iri' .ri'vwioa.l 7ia.»J :».= r«li .^k"©" 
•:• r^LtcAlcn . crisis ri'.iK'o ocp >:=a^. rcl»i.=>3.i 



ODE 6 [=/'w^2J Sophia, pp. 131 — 135]. 
rtLi^co^ Jiisa^a ptla-SJO .K'iAxxiia r<':T*r<' r^^ionio.T vyrs*' 

r<li.i .r<'Av.T*»)<A nil=a."t^O ^r>i=3 ^20 K'oen i*.^ rtli^co^ 
. cn.\ -)a,.ri.\ )aa.fij ^i.t-SO t<Ao . pCA.aa.ji.flo.i pCc\co,J 7i.T.»3 
OjA<ATijy-i.1 .^Acn ^.V'^l-l (\jCv .rf_.i.=>3 or3^2>..i4 ^^oor^^ 

K'icQi re'oeno relaA> i*-^ .a^i7 . ^,ji i ir. ^ w r<'.r..Tja oq.jjov\ 



a — a 



Perhaps -.t^<m:i (Schulthess) but I follow the MS. 
"^ Cod. r^-toj^ ■: Cod. -=(71.^^ 



Ode 5, V. 8. The Coptic expands the second clause thus : ' et vicerunt 
eos potentes, et quae paraverant raalitiose, descenderunt in eos.' 



4. S] ODES OF SOLOMON .1 

ODE 4. 
,coQ. i°>\wT i.i pfAo^ ..orArC rCxaau vviA^K* .aVjjJtW T-ln!' kA' 

'<'-***«'* .r^^oiA\r^ .•»sii.A\.-t ^0:113^ i\x^^h\r^ ii^ voc.icui^ 
r«l.i.sa '^V*-^ A\=jcrx.S .cni=n ^ii^s .^^jcn ^ .&i>i^uu r«A 

.>ij^Avio .v\A\o,aj!\^ Tt.a..\„i '**^ ai-sa^ ,r<lixx.o K'Avsncu 
vyoxa.L.uQ .vrvAu'va caA ^^.ti'o'^ .a en .^<.t> vr^A\*».i Ai^sa^ 
A\=j0Qi9 .aj\ '"oacn^ ^Agx3\ r^^^ rd^rsilw ^=ito .crA ^.-UMr^" 
^l^ixAiu ^iM pi'Arc' .^U^i ^ir^ ixfiaM.i rs'oeo »<!.\ .v\ii\Ci^h\ax. A 
r<'T*AiSk. vy^2^a.a:99 jj^x^o .vy.~fia.^i .As oooi'° .vyJ-^a 
.v\A\cv.\ ri'AxoAi i-L-i^^ A\.iA" .rfjt^.10 rc^-zA.** ,A ^.I'iss.i 
.vA ^ocn rdii.^ K'A^iijCv^^ . A\i.loAut.rtf' .i ^i.vsa A^ KVsA^Ai.t 
'^.fViiD^o AoA\A\^ AiN'sq p^li.i^^ .AvrjoQi h^^ A\=icti».i ii^poi.2ao 
.vrA rS'ocn rcLi.^ ri'oQiK' vyri" Tj..^ yaxsn Aa^* .^-i.Jrc' 
a\:ia.:^ r<L>T-^M oxJr^o .vy-xJSq.io ouJL.T-a ^sa r<'oci3 iAOXSno 

^ Perhaps ^^Aiuein jj *\T-n i> Cod. ^i>j;n.o 

"= Charles suggests ^^^w, ' thy hosts rejoice therein ' ; but the MS. is torn at 
the edge, and there was certainly another letter- 
''"'' Probably a double translation (? vTroa-TciXri^). 

ODE S [=Ftsiis Sophia, pp.. 113 — 117]. 
r<sa.isa^ .vA rdJK' tim-i.t A)i^^ .ri^\sn vA ^rS'JrS' K'.tasa^^ 
''Avajta.l ^i!^^^3 oep AvJr^ ,i -1 W.t . A^ss > Vn -it. At rtA 

a— a = 6^o/AoA.oy7;o-o/xat. ''"'' = Swpcai/ i\aj3ov cf. Matt. X. 9. 

Ode 5, V. I. The Coptic has 'for thou art my God,' instead of last clause. 



ODE I. 

[ = Pistis Sophia ii6 (tr. Schmidt): Texte u. Untersuch. Bd. vil. pp. 37, 38.] 
[Dominus super caput meum sicut corona, neque ero absque 
eo. Plexerunt mihi coronam veritatis, et ramos tuos in me germinare 
fecit. Nam non similis est coronae aridae quae non germinat ; sed 
vivis super caput meum. Et germinasti super caput meum : fructus 
tui pleni et perfecti sunt, pleni salute tua.] 

ODE 2. 
Deest. 

ODE 3. 
Priora desunt. 

*•* * * * * # # 

.reLi-vsai >MrSQ.\ ^«ocn .i-s* -ui^ rt'A^ .»X .•a.m.rao relir^ 
.r^Ai'SOjji JLi^^ .jjbAX.99 o.i=o4 .>X rfoen >iiji kA oqp o^ri 
ctA rdSOMiQ rclSaxMiA t<'_ir«' jajjcsa^ .^oui^^.l ocn pcAk' 
re'ocop^ i<Ao7 .yh\^ri p<!Lip^ Ap^ camliJ.i rt^^^K'o'^ .>JtJ^.i 

i»\^ oen'° .rs'i= rs'ocnpe'.i •re'irs ocq^ >A»ir<'.T A^-ga^ .niLsixwi 

• rc'ocni T<h\osn relA.i oeo Arf . ^r^lsb r<li."i ciorA .:^ai&vs91 

coMoi >cb (V.icn^^ .r<'ocai reli,** . rCai^ ^~J3 <= rdxjjcs.i^ oeno" 

__^UwiJ3 r<lx.lJLl.=3 nSl^Ajsa.! . rS'A^CvJAO rfA.T nil* i_5J3.T 

.rti^culcn .oixik.^^re'o 0.^.10 (Xsa^M^re"3 .mix^'-ioK' 

^ Cod. prima manu -oiai^flTOo, sed ipse correxit. ^ Cod. ■«<ixu=:i 

■^ = euSoKTjcrei/ (cf. Matt. iii. 17). 






o. s. 



I >', 













itfw*»4ttt'a«iw, 




